BiH football player Asmir Begović was the star of the night. He first won the award awarded by club’s fans who are also members of the club. He also was awarded by fans who voted on the official website of Stoke City.
Apart from those two awards Begović was also awarded by his co-players as well as by expert staff. He was chosen as the players of the year by his co-players.
Begović said that he’s very glad about awards he received and added that it is a motivation for him to be even better in the season to come.

This mistress hates it when she is ignored and that is what her boyfriend did. She did not take it kindly and she let him know as much. And thereafter, the mistress went ahead to make him lie down and endure the pain she inflicted on him by trampling him with high heels as well as with bare feet. She warned him never to do it again if he knew what was best for him.
Princess Kira wanted to dominate as well as humiliate this loser and that is what she did. She also wanted to chase him away as he was of no help or use to her and so she trampled him and had him lick and chew her smelly socks before she sent him away. He was told never to find his way back to her house if he did not want another punishment.
Mistress Natasha had been looking forward to fucking her boyfriend but he did not fuck her as well as she wanted to be fucked. She was disappointed in him as he came too early and he did not satisfy her as she had hoped he would. Now she had to masturbate in order to cum and that was not what she had signed up for. That was why she trampled him.
Mistress Natasha was asked to trample with her bare feet and she refused. It was a trampling competition and she said she was not interested and it would not be as good as doing it with her boots. She was allowed to do it and she did not waste any time doing what she loved doing best. It was a lot of fun for the mistress but not for the guy.
Mistress Lisa is a tough girl. She, therefore, likes dating tough guys too. This guy did his best to appear tough to her and she was fooled by it that they started dating. But she started noticing signs of him not being tough and she chose to do something about it. She tested him by trampling him and she found out he was a sissy and had a low pain threshold. She broke up with him.
When lady Stefanie noticed that her slave was lazy, she agonized over what to do to him. She did not want to have a lazy slave in her house so she had to find a way to get to him. The mistress discovered about high heel trampling and she loved the idea so much that she chose to use it to teach her slave a thing or two about hardwork.
Mistress Natalia used her sexy feet to torture this loser. She had had enough of him and she wanted things to change. She was pissed with the slow progress of things and she chose to get it fixed once and for all. She did not even need anything from him. She told him the time for him to talk was over as she had gotten what she wanted from someone else.
Lady Kara could not believe that this guy had conned her. He thought she did not know him but she did. She tracked him down and she taught him a lesson he had never been taught before. She inserted her dirty sneaker in his mouth and she trampled him with the sneakers to teach him a lesson. She made sure he would never forget it as she cruelly slapped his face with her bare feet.
Mistress Mira could not believe what had happened to her. She had lost her items because of the incompetence of this loser. She could not let it go and had to do something about it. She crushed the loser with her ass as well as with her feet. She trampled him and taught him to be more careful with her things before she felt it was enough punishment for him.
These mistresses ordered for pizza because they were hungry. But this loser did not bring it as fast as they wanted and that as fast as he had promised. The mistresses cruelly crushed his face after luring him into the house. He was taught a lesson and not even his pleas for mercy were listened to. He tried to tell them it was not his fault but they did not care.

Willa Ford’s real name is Amanda Lee Williford. She was brought up in this world on 22nd January of 1981. She is working as an American singer as well as Songwriter and a dancer, and a model. She even appeared in various movies, such as Friday the 13th, which was released in t009. She even hosted many television shows. She even appeared as a model for Playboy. She was born in Ruskin, which is situated in Florida. She completed her schooling at East Bay High School, located in Gibsonton in Florida.

He had recollected that there was such a thing in the world as his mother. And then there came to him a feeling that he wanted her more than all the rest of the things in the world. Not only was his body tired with the adventures it had undergone, but his little brain was equally tired. In all the days he had lived it had not worked so hard as on this one day. Furthermore, he was sleepy. So he started out to look for the cave and his mother, feeling at the same time an overwhelming rush of loneliness and helplessness.

Joe Cole made his first start of the season, and also scored a goal in the match.
Clarke said: “Everyone is pleased to see Joe back.
“He had a nasty injury pre-season and it took him a little time to get over it.
“It was a difficult time for him and it is good to see him back on the pitch. It was certainly nice for him to get a goal. Now he has to get match fit.”

;u; Amane tries to save a man who was dying, he fought for her from some bandits but was badly wounded afterwards. She tries healing, and aiding him but it was too late.. he smiled at her and told her how beautiful she was under the stars and the full moon. those were his last words, so he died. Amane did all she could to revive him but couldn`t in the end. she`s very dedicated on being a medic ;u; ..

Food was awesome. Good choices. All fresh. Table service was good. Our plates were cleared promptly and soda refilled almost as fast as we could drink them. Greeters were kinda not nice. There was no greeting, just, "How many? That'll be $25.98." Maybe they were having a bad day.

Sunday, January 12, 2014
After Research Volunteer Appointment
Today we had an appointment at Children's for a research study we are participating in. The appointment went well and Jonathan finished a bit earlier than expected. After the appointment, we went to his baseball clinic. On the way there, I asked Jonathan if they had told him what the research was for and he said no. So I explained to him that it was to collect data about how his mind works now that he is so high functioning. So that grabbed his attention and we had a great conversation. I explained that this research is intended to study kids like him who are recovered or very close to being recovered from autism and compare their behaviors and responses to the evaluation of other children that are not as high functioning. And that the idea is to learn what can be done to help other children that need more help. And he liked that. I told him that today the ratio is 1in 50. That blew his mind. He told met that he had read somewhere that there are studies trying to find the cause. Then I mentioned that I am working with other parents of small kids with autism trying to guide them and help by sharing what I had done with him when he was little. That shocked him and he said "that is so great of you mom".
Then I asked him about how he feels. I reminded him of how he felt when I had first told him of his diagnosis and he said that he felt pretty good these days. I asked him if he felt he needed to talk to a therapist and he said no. I asked him if he knew of other kids with autism at school or outside and he said that he knew a few that were in the autism class, but no one in his class besides him. Then I asked him if he had to anyone, like Vanessa, and he said "not Vanessa. I forgot, but I told my class". I asked him how that had happened and he told me that everyone was talking about something personal and his friend Christopher talked about his brother who had autism. I asked him what about it and he said that Christopher was annoyed with his brother because he behaved like an 8-year old. So I asked how old the brother was and he said 14. So I asked him why he told everyone about his autism and he said that his teacher was explaining about autism and he raised his hand... He told me that he explained to them what I had told him, that it was like a crack on the road. And that he just needs to make a road around it. I can't believe he remembered !!! He also told them that Albert Einstein had autism. He relates so much to that. I told him what his neurofeedback Dr had said to me when she did his fist brain map that his brain looked just like Albert Einstein's, and he was sooo thrilled! He told me that at first he was worried and scared to tell his class, but he was fine afterwards. I asked if his friends treated him differently and he said no. I asked if anyone bullied him and he said no. I asked him how people and other teachers treated him and he said that they treated him really well, especially the teachers. So I told him that if anyone ever bullies him, he has to tell us. I don't want him to do anything crazy because he is very sensitive.

From the first time they heard of Genghis Kang and when they last heard his name they always thought of him as a devil and a servant for Satin. Genghis Kang was the greatest warlord and still holds the record for most killed
When Genghis Kang was born when he was born he was powerful because of his family but also because he had a blood cloth on his hand which made the Mongols think he is supposed to be a powerful rules. He also had hard education because of other tribes
For a while Genghis's father took him to live with his future wife and her family but on their way back his dad went with a rival tribe hoping to make peace with them but he was assassinated while he was there.
He rushed back to his tribe to take his place as the tribe leader but they refuse to give him leadership and they cast him and his family out so they are forced to make their own tribe then Genghis killed his brother for leadership
After some time Genghis gets captured by former allies of his old tribe but his will cannot be broken and then one of his captors help him escape then he started uniting the tribes one by one and he made an army of the tribes.
After he united all of the tribes he got revenge on the tribes who made him suffer which are the ones who captured him then the ones who killed his father and also through his ranks there was a lot of respect for each other.

Cortez Kennedy has died. Kennedy was found in his Orlando home. His death is still under investigation.
In 1990 he was the third player taken in the NFL draft. He was known for being extremely quick in spite of being over 300 pounds.
In 1992, he was named defensive player of the year in spite of the fact that the Hawks were only 2 and 14. He was selected to 8 Pro Bowls. Kennedy, known as "Tez" to the fans, played his entire 11 year professional career with the Seahawks.

Mistress Cynthia and her friend April wanted to pass their shared class but did not want to study for it. They chose the easiest way out and that was to humiliate and force their professor to either change their grades or give them the exam questions in advance so that they would prepare answers. They humiliated him and turned him into a foot slave. He was so humiliated and degraded that he agreed to give them the questions in advance.
Mistress Donella is a weird mistress. She was conversing with this loser while humiliating him. She did not find it a bit weird. She was chatting with him and smiling while he did his best to lick her shoes and smell her socks like she had ordered him. All she wanted was someone to talk to her while her punishment was being carried out and that person was the slave.
Mistress BlackDiamoond and her friend were having a good time and were catching up since they had not seen each other in a long time. Then this guy who thought he was God's gift to mankind came to disturb them and they were pissed. They taught him a lesson he will never forget. They trampled him and made him lick their socks as well as their dirty shoes before letting him go.
Mistress Cassandra was tired of living with a loser. She wanted to tell him to leave but she had one last thing to try. She had tried to encourage him but it clearly did not work. Now she sought to humiliate him and let him know everyday he did not do any productive thing he would be treated like a loser and humiliated. She forced him to lick and chew her smelly socks a couple of times and her message sunk into his thick head.
Miss Serena did not like the cheap sneakers her boyfriend had bought for her. They were beginning to smell and she knew they were fake. She tried to scrutinize them and that is when she realized they were fake. She had not noticed earlier and for that, she had to punish him. She used the same sneakers to punish him so she made him lick and smell them as well as her stinky socks.
Madame Marissa tied her slave using cling wrap and she nearly choked him. She tore the part where his nose was and he could breathe. He was relieved but his joy was short lived as she used her stinky socks to cover his socks. She tortured the slave and he wished he had crushed her using high heels or whipped him instead of what he was doing to her at that moment.
Mistress Serena did not like the cheap sneakers her husband had bought her. She had told him which ones to buy but he thought he was smarter and bought low quality ones. She went to the gym with them and when she came back, they were stinky and smelly. And she used them to punish him. She also made him smell and chew her stinky and sweaty socks as well before making him go back and buy the ones she wanted.
This mistress was on her way back from work when she noticed something on the driveway. It was sock and it was smelling. She did not know who it belonged to but she took it inside and used it to humiliate her slave. She did not want any such thing near her house and her slave had not checked to make sure her house was as clean as it could be.
This mistress had never had smelly feet before and she attributed it to her slave. She never wanted it to happen again so she punished him to make sure he washed her shoes and her socks well. She used the same stinky socks to humiliate him. She forced him to lick and sniff them till she was satisfied it was enough. She also trampled him before she let him go.
Mistress Hanna has a thing for slave humiliation. She loves having her instructions followed and anything she wants done and the only people who do that for her are slaves. Today she wanted her stinky socks and her sweaty feet licked. She made her slave do it while she read a book. She topped reading and enjoyed watching him do what she wanted him to do. It was the best feeling in the world for her.

She winced as she entered the rail to get back to Sithera to tell him the news, that things were going as planned. The city was going to be in termoil.
The military may have to step in as Sithera suggested, would happen in the morning. They would sup up the problem that has arrisen from tonight's clamity. They should be here in the morning, not this eve.
Vee wanted to make long and passionate love to Sithera, he was entitled for what he had proposed, He was right as rain. She would allow him to plung it up her rear, allow him to fill her holes with his cock.
Sithera was upset, he got on the communication device to see, who had the brilliant idea to attack the control tower. Where had this idea come from? Sithera wanted whoever thought of this to be boiled in hot oil.
He did not wish for the military to come in and get involved strenuously
Until it had been through the trial. His daughter was going to try and create havoc. He knew how deadly she was, when her determination was pushed into overdrive.
She had gone underground, whatever she desired to do. He knew it would not be good. She would not listen to reason. Her reason was that they must pay.
The tower was surrounded by forces, that were outnumbered, but the arms that they had were more than enough to stop them from feeling as they should.
There were six sets of forces approaching the tower, the ground troops that had been there since time could remember were combat trained, but they had never seen a reason to react like they were under attack.
The forces that they were facing had been given weapons that could cut through their armor as if it was but air. They knew they had to defend the wharves and docks. They would do as they were told.
The foe moved as if they were, but air. They were here once, and were somewhere else at another instance. They did not know how many there where there.
The tower was six sided; it was supported by three support tubes. The force that was there radioed that they needed support. Could they have six ems vehicles sent to the tower?
They knew what they were asking for it should be no problem for them to get them there. As there was never a need for an EMS vehicle to be sent

We really enjoyed our tour with Roy. He took extra time to make sure we saw everything we wanted to see. He even lead us to a troup of Cappuchi monkies after the tour was supposed to be over. It is clear that he loves his work, his family, and life in Costa Rica. We took him for lunch at his favourite local restaurant Marlins and it was delicious. We saw pictures on his phone of his artwork and he is very tallented!

Mistress Tanisha did not like this guy. She did her best to avoid meeting him. But he had other ideas and seemed to follow her and to seek her attention. She was fed up today after he ignored her polite requests to stay away. She punished him using her socks and her bare feet. She hard trampled him and made him regret following her and seeking her attention because he got the attention but not the kind he wanted.
This mistress did not like how this loser called her fat. She was pissed off and she sought to make him learn a lesson. She hard trampled his face and she used her bare feet to do it. She made him experience the force of her full weight as it rested on his face as well as on his balls. She crushed and trampled him with both her boots and her bare feet.
Lady Deina did not want her slave coming home at late hours. She wanted him to respect her home and to come early when she sent him. She had to send a message to him and she did it cruelly for him to understand her. She forced the info into him by trampling him on the face. She crushed his head with her bare feet and she made him cry.
Lady Betty realized that her slave had messed up but instead of telling her, he hid that fact from her hoping she would never find out. She was pissed when she found out and told him she would have forgiven him if he had gone to her first. Now she had to teach him a lesson and she did it using her boots and her spit. She humiliated him, tortured him and degraded him.
Mistresses Bea, Misty and Beth were enjoying their time together when mistress Misty suggested they lure a loser to their house and humiliate him. The others agreed and they went out and came back with one. He thought he was going to have fun with them but then they turned on him and crushed him all over and trampled him as hard as they could. They did it for fun.
Mistress Natalia did not like how her house looked. She knew her slave had not cleaned it the way she had instructed. And for that disobedience, she punished him using her boots. She trampled him hard and she forced him to endure the pain. She told him it was the result of his disobedience and if he was not careful, she would do it again and again till he learned his lesson.
Madame Marissa likes to teach those who mess with her a lesson. She is not like other mistresses who go around torturing people for fun and for no reason at all. She does it when she has been wronged. This loser found out the hard way that it was not wise to piss her off. She hard trampled his hands and his fingers with her boots and made him regret doing what he had done.
Lady Krasaviza does not like dishonest people. When she realized this guy was being less than honest with her, she had to send him a message. She cruelly trampled him and even called her friend Emily and they both crushed and trampled him. They hard trampled him using their boots and told him never to be dishonest again if he did not want them to beat him up again.
Mistress Lou caught her slave sniffing her panties and she did not like it. She had to make sure he never did it again. She threw him down and she trampled him from head to toe. She did not spare his head or even his balls. She hard trampled him and enjoyed hearing his cries of pain. She ignored his cries of pain and only let him go when she was tired.
This mistress and her friends do not like bullies. When they caught this guy bullying others, they had to do something about it. They went to him and they humiliated him. They threw him down and descended on him with their shoes. They trampled him cruelly and not even his cries of pain were enough to convince them to let him go. He cried and begged the mistresses to let him go promising never to bully again.

Mistress Nikole found her slave checking out her ass and she decided to have some fun at his expense. She teased him and he took the bait. She took him to his bedroom and she whined her waist for him and when he was turned on, she facesat on him. As he was beginning to lick her, she shit into his open mouth. The slave was surprised but it had already happened.
Mistress Anna came and found her house with a strange smell. She did not like it and she asked her slave. He did not know the source of the smell so she punished him for not being aware of what was smelling in her house. She used her improvised toilet to shit on him and to make it even more cruel, she had him lick and eat all that shit.
Mistress Roxy was tired and had a hangover. She was pissed at her slave pestering her about food so she decided to shut him up once and for all. She removed her clothes and made him lie down. He thought his fantasies would come true but he was shocked when she ordered him to open his mouth and she shit into it. She also forced him to swallow all that shit.
Mistress Gaia is a cruel mistress whens he is pissed. Today she was pissed and fed up with her slave and she had to punish him. She did it in the worst way imaginable. She made him stay in a tiny dog house and also had him lick her pussy till she was satisfied. After that, she turned him into her human toilet and made him eat her shit and also masturbate.
Mistress Emily likes to copy things that fascinate her. And today what fascinated her was humiliating a slave. And not just any kind of humiliation, but slave humiliation using scat fetish. She psyched herself up and got a slave whom she forced to eat her shit. She squatted and shit straight into his mouth and ordered him to chew her shit and swallow it. The poor slave did not have a choice.

Marva and her husband Billy were at the Ruby anniversary of Joe and Amelia. They were seated right over there. She was obviously old, much older than Billy. He had married her when he was 20 and she was 34. Today, he was 63, fit and attractive. She was 77, showing signs of Alzheimer’s.
Amelia and Billy made efforts not to look at each other. They had practice. It had been forty years.
Amelia knew her husband Joe had affairs. It made her happy. Having sex with Joe had been the most difficult aspect of their marriage.
As the food was served, Amelia seemed to look at the waiter, but actually had her eyes on Billy. To her, he was as handsome today as he had been when he was twenty.
He felt her eyes and looked at her while he reached for a glass in front of him.
Marva was babbling on and on, a white noise around Billy’s ears. She’d never been more than a convenience from the day of marriage. Amelia was his soul.
As he looked at Amelia she gave the signal , using her right forefinger to brush hair behind her ear. Billy used his right forefinger to rub his chin, then both looked at their partners and smiled.
Tomorrow afternoon they would meet at their usual spot.

Mistress Christina felt that she had to do something to guard against her slave becoming lazy. She did not care that he was elderly. All she wanted was for him to do what she said when she wanted it done. And she used dirty feet to humiliate him and to send a message. She stepped on mud and made the poor guy lick her bare feet. He had no choice.

Pawan Kalyan is a man of few words and boy when he talks, he makes some stunning statements. The same happened today in a press meet which we attended for his Janasena party. Upon being asked as to how will he justify all his luxury cars.
Pawan was quick to retaliate and said ‘I used to have a Mercedes Benz in the past. I had sold it as I was unable to pay EMIs’. This became a huge news as it shocked many who were present in the room.
Things are very clear as Pawan is only doing films as he wants good money to support his political party.

jim:my wife had blonde hair.she was good to me. we had two daughters and two sons. we met her sister wanted me to meet her at a ballgame.how we were all good friends. Jack: my wife had dark brown hair. Twila : we met during the war. we moved alot because he was in the Navy. we had two girl girls and a boy. he had a blonde hair and a great smile. Dale : my GF had dark hair. she was a mexican. i was in the service when she died.During ww2. Bertha:He had dark hair. We had three kids. we were married forever seems like. Agnes:I had wait for him until after he was done with the service he was a prisoner of war. that was a scary time. we were engaged then.we married when he came home. we had a girl and a boy. he had kinda blondish hair. he had the best smile . no doubt about it.He was always bringing me something. flowers and candy. always treating me like i was special. G. Ketchum: He had brown reddish hair. we met and married and we did not have any kids. He worked at schaffers and i worked at Dupont. I got a special ring with diamonds from Schaffer Pen.

my in-law were here visiting for almost a week. we had a great time and they enjoyed playing with the kids and seeing their chicks.
my little guy was not thrilled that i was taking his picture.
while they were here, we went to the pool, the roller skating rink, and we played lots of cards.
Post a Comment

This mistress did not like how this slut tried to mess with her man and she used her cigarettes to torture her. She made him her human ashtray and even went ahead to make her eat her cigarette butts. In addition to that, the mistress kneed her in the stomach after she had tied her hands behind her back. Then she used her high heels to trample her bare feet.
Mistress Saida wanted this guy to be put in his place. She did not care what he felt or what he thought as she punished him. He deserved it and since she wanted it to be one he would never forget, she invited her friend and the two of them had fun using him as a boot slave. He had no choice but to lick boots or be trampled by the same boots.
Goddess Vivienne felt that this loser had forgotten who she was and he had to be reminded again. She did it but she did it with her boots. The mistress used the boots to trample and to stomp him. It was cruel and brutal but she did not care. She had a great time watching him cry and beg her for mercy and she told him never to forget who she was and what she was capable of.
Mistress Jenny and her friend did not like how this loser behaved and they chose to teach him a lesson they were sure he would never forget soon. The mistresses snatched his burger and they crushed it using their boots. He watched in horror as they crushed his burger but that was not the worst part as they made him eat it despite it being dirty from what they did to it.
Lady Amy had beef with her ex. He had tried to sabotage her business and she was not going to sit idly by and watch as he tried to destroy her livelihood. She had to defend herself and she did. She used her high heels to trample his nipples and it was the most painful thing he had ever experienced. She also trampled the rest of his body. He never tried it again.
Lady Karame has a thing for boots and she loves to use them to get what she wants. Today she wanted her money back and that is what happened. She used her boots to trample this guy on the nuts and from the resultant pain, the guy knew he could not afford to delay with her money even a minute longer. So he gave it to her to avoid further torture.
When this slave became too argumentative for this mistress' liking, she had to do something to ensure he stopped. She wore her boots and she used them to trample him. He was in pain as she trampled him while he was naked. He wished that he had never pissed her off as she was cruel on him and did not even listen to his cries of pain. He knew he had himself to blame and he changed.
Mistress Gaia wanted to teach this guy never to betray her and she got help from her business partner. The mistresses ganged up on him and they stripped him naked and then they tied him up. He was then descended on by the mistresses who trampled him and got him to feel the kind of pain he had only heard about until he cried like a baby and begged for mercy.
Madame Marissa wanted to inflict misery on this loser and she did it with her boots. That is because she knew he would not do anything she did not want and that she did not approve of if she showed him what she was capable of. The mistress went ahead to make him lick her boots and also warn him that she could use them to trample his body if he disobeyed her.
When this mistress called her slave and he did not pick up, she got pissed. When she went to his room, she found out that he had forgotten his phone there. She was even more pissed as it meant he was careless and did not have the foresight to know that she would need to call him. She used her high heels to crush the phone and destroy it completely.

Each month a group of ladies from our church go to lunch together. Someone suggested Calabria’s in Clermont and a couple of other people agreed that it is a great place for Italian food. We had 20 ladies for September and each and every one raved about their lunch. I had the Lasagna, which was $9.99. It was such a large portion that I ate 1/3 and took the rest home. Several had the 2 large pieces of pizza and a salad. The pizza slices were huge. One person had baked ziti which she pronounced as delicious, and again, it was such a large portion that she took home enough for her dinner. The staff was very friendly and accommodating. With 20 people to serve, we were served very quickly after ordering. The table was set with water for each of us so we had something to drink as soon as we came in. Once everyone was there, our drink orders were taken and once that was served, the waiter very efficiently took our order. Of our group, 3 had been there before, but as I told the owner as we were leaving, he has 17 new customers. We all agreed that the food was excellent and the prices were very fair.
Own or manage this property? Claim your listing for free to respond to reviews, update your profile and much more.

Mistress Anna has a thing for shit. Whenever anyone messes with her, her favorite punishment is shit. That is because it scares the shit out of them and it also gets her results. When this guy sold her a defective item and refused to take it back, she took a shit on him and forced him to replace it, which he did. She knew he would never do that to anyone else after that.
Mistress Lia wanted her slave gone. She did not want to kick him out herself. She wanted him to quit and she knew she had to make him quit. So she chased him away by forcing him to eat her shit and drink her pee. She took a dump on his face and she took videos of him with the shit and watched him eat all of it. The treatment was so cruel that he had no option but to run away.
Mistress Adelina is blessed with a gorgeous ass. Today she used it to shit on this guy. He had information she wanted and she used her ass to bait him. Then she took a shit on his face when he least expected it and she forced him to eat her shit. He was degraded but he was scared of her and he did all that she wanted him to do.
Mistress Milana and her friends do not like to compromise. They had to play hardball with this guy so as to get what they wanted. He tried to negotiate with them but the mistresses were adamant and it had to go their way. Finally they opted to shit on this loser and they did it to speed up the process. They made him eat their shit and drink their pee after a few kicks.
This black mistress had a problem with this tranny slave. She could not let her go without teaching her a lesson. She tortured the tranny by forcing her to eat her shit. The tranny had no choice but to eat her shit and drink her pee. When it became hard for her to eat the shit, the mistress fed it to her using a spoon and she had to eat it all.
Mistress Rosella is experienced in slave punishment. Her friend lady Luciana wanted to gain those skills too so she asked mistress Rosella to teach her. She agreed to teach Luciana and they found a slave to use. They humiliated him for fun and mistress Rosella showed her how to shit and pee on the slave as punishment. She also showed her friend how to choke a slave by facesitting on him.
Mistress Dark Phoenyx was not happy to learn that her slave brought people into her house when she was not around. He did not even ask for permission. He would act as if it was his house and she did not like that. She turned him into a human toilet so as to remind him of his place in that house. She had him eat shit and drink pee and it taught him what he needed to be taught.
Mistress Naomi was angry that her slave had lied to her. She could not stand the lies and she had to do something about it. She forced the slave to lie down and she turned him into her human toilet. She had him eat her shit and swallow it. She then had him drink her pee and use it to wash down the shit. He learned his lesson never to lie to her.
This German mistress loves having all sorts of fun. Today she wanted to try a different kind of fun. She wanted to try scat femdom and she also wanted to try using a strapon. So she combined both of them and she had fun at the expense of this loser. She had him lie down and she facesat on him then took a shit on him. She also wore her strapon and she used it to fuck him in the ass.
Mistress Michelle and her friends lady Lara and lady Marie wanted to teach this guy a cruel lesson. He was hired to destroy their plans and they had caught him just before he succeeded. The mistresses caught him and they punished him cruelly. He was forced to eat their shit and endure the pain of their high heel trampling. He had no choice but to do as he was instructed.

Mistress Barbie is a naughty and crazy girl. She loves to do extreme things and today was no exception. The mistress got this drunk guy to think that her pee was champagne and he drank it not knowing it was pee. He even complemented it and asked her where it was from noting that the taste was familiar. The mistress excused herself and went to laugh at what he said.
In need of a new way to spice up their sex life, these two mistresses tried pee fetish. They peed on each other and made out while playing with each other's pussies. It was hot and naughty. It also felt wrong but again so right and it drove them wild with desire which they could only satisfy with their huge end to end dildo which they rode simultaneously so that they came together.
This mistress did not like how her friend sent her erotic stuff. He was not sure how she would react if he seduced her so he tried sending her erotic material to see how she would respond. She was pissed about it and she used her pee to punish him. She made him drink her urine although as a bonus, he got to see and even smell her pussy. But he never tried sending her erotic stuff again.
This guy tried to hit on mistress Marla. She was drunk and he knew he had a chance. He was sure he did not have a chance if she was sober and that is why he went for it given that she was not sober. All went well until they got back to her place. She saw his small dick and she got somewhat sober. She even peed on him for wanting to stick her tiny dick in her pussy.
Goddess Roberta wanted to torture this slave because he had been misbehaving. The mistress had to make sure he learned to do things her way and that is why she used her sneakers to trample him. He had to lick her dirty soles and when he was done, she turned him into a human toilet and peed on him. He had to drink her pee and there was no way out of it.
Mistress Elisa used her pussy as bait to lure this guy to what she was doing. She wanted him to be her pee slave and she used her pussy to get him turned on and not to pay attention to what she really wanted to do to him. The mistress had him under her control and he was shocked when she peed on him and she required him to drink her urine.
Lady Scarlet is into pee fetish but her slave did not even know it was a thing. Still, she wanted to continue enjoying it with him and she wanted to teach him to like it. So she teased him with her hot body and she had him turned on before she peed on him through a funnel. At least he was able to get close to her ass and pussy.
Mistress Gaia is a kinky girl and she loves to do naughty things for her own fun and that of others. This guy wanted to explore and have fun with her so she let him. She used her pee fetish to turn him on like he had never been turned on before. She had him watch how she played with herself and with her pee before she had him taste her pee.
Goddess Andova wanted this slave to stop being lazy but he would not change. She researched what to do to him for him to change and she settled on using pee to punish and humiliate him. He was turned into a human toilet and he had to drink all of her urine and was threatened with shit if he did not change and the humiliation made him stop being lazy.
Mistress Sara and mistress Nikki wanted to have fun with this guy but he did not understand what sort of fun they had in mind. He was gullible and they took advantage of it. The mistresses facesat on him and with their jeans and got him to feel a little pain before they had him lick their pussies until they came. Then they had him lick their asses before they peed on him.

Reported Speech - Exercise 7
1. She told him to shut the door.
2. He said (that) he was going home then.
3. Sam asked her if she had got 20 pounds.
4. He wanted to know which picture was the most famous one.
5. She said (that) she had been biking the day before.
6. He was told to fill in the form.
7. She said (that) she was doing her homework.
8. They asked me if Paul had lost the match.
9. He told her not to call him before 7 o'clock.
10. Mother said to me (that) she would buy that book for me.
11. Cathy asked me if the movie was interesting or boring.
12. She said to him (that) she had invited him to her party.
13. They wanted to know when my birthday was.
14. Susan said (that) she liked classical music.
15. She asked me where I had met her.

Saturday we went food shopping. I was going to price match some items. I thought I left the ads in the car so I had Jeremy run out to the car. ( We dont park close so it is quite a run.) He got out there and couldn't see them. He looked all over the car and then came back in the store. He asked if I had them. I looked in the cart and there they were. Jeremy nor I saw them there before he went out. Alma said he knew they were there. We asked why he didn't say anything. We had a good laugh and finished shopping.

Yesterday, he stayed at school, but he slept all afternoon. Today, he woke up asking to go to school. So, I decided to send him in.
My boy finally seems to be feeling better!! He had a good day in school for the first time to since he got sick. He ate most of his lunch in school, and there's some extra snacks in his bag that it looks like he was eating. He came home and drank juice, he had a snack and then later he ate three sandwiches. He is happy, he is playing, and he seems healthy.
I also went out and bought some high calorie Boost for him. I want to boost his weight up a little bit to be honest. He's lost some weight since he's been sick. And, he was already way too small. The doctor said he was underweight before he even got sick. He didn't need to lose this weight. So I am a happy mommy with a happy boy. What more can I ask for it.

4. Steven Stayner
Steven Styner was kidnapped when he was 7 and he was kept hostage for almost 7 years and then he returned to his family. His kidnapper Kenneth Parnell not just kidnaped Steven but also made him believe that he has hid legal custody. Steven was sexually abused and was also enrolled in school. It was when Parnell kidnapped another boy and Steven along with this other boy escaped from there. Steven’s case became so much famous that a film was also made on his true story called “ I Know my name is Steven”.

She lost her brave fight with cancer.
We were there with her to take care of her. She would look at us and say I don't want you to work so hard taking care of me. We would tell her "Momma if our roles were reversed this is what you would do for us." We knew that because that's what she did for her step-mother, her dad and her mother and father in law.
The last 3 words she said to me were "I love you".
I love you momma, you were my momma and my friend. You will be forever in my heart.

Girl: (on cell) "No, he got home from college yesterday. He says he pulled straight A's, as usual, but we told my parents he wanted to quit school. (pause) Hell yeah, they were pissed off. He said he's tired of school controlling him and his life. He told them that he was quitting school, taking control of his life, and he's going to go work at a pizza place. (pause) Totally. They were sitting there, trying to talk some sense into him. I was sitting there wondering if I was going to be getting free pizza whenever I wanted."
- Walking down Michigan Ave.
-- Submitted by Mr. Roboto

Right?! By the 8th round she still hadn't got a single pin...How is that even possible? A 3?
My average at the time was 185-190... She could have tried a little harder. Nah, she was a bit weird overall but that was the killer.She must have been into you and didn't want to show you up.
All you needed was a 4 for the win.

Ms. Liz sold us the house that we just had her sell for us. she was absolutely as wonderful and helpful then, as she was now. she sold our house on the first day it was listed. she was great at the negotiation, in fact she was able to save us on a few things that we thought we would lose in the bargain. Ms. Liz also set us up with a realtor in the city we are moving to and that person has been great too. I would absolutely recommend Liz Miller to anyone looking to buy a home in Lake Havasu City AZ.

Monday, February 22, 2010
I didn't go to the emergency room prepared with my camera. :) My iPhone had to do for my photo of the day. I was impressed with the crib at the hospital! It even had a cover, so that she couldn't climb out! Wish we had one of those at home!!

Stopped in here to see "The Fault in Our Stars". The staff was friendly and it had the usual refreshments available. However, it didn't have coke slushies - only blue and red. The theater was small. You could tell new seats had been installed, but to me, they were almost to soft. The floor in the theater was level, so if anyone had been sitting in front of me, I would have had a hard time seeing the movie. The sound was good. It is a very average theater.

Nichol Kessinger opened up about dating Chris Watts without realizing he was still married & talked about the moment he told her his family was ‘gone.’
When Nichol Kessinger met Chris Watts through work, she believed he was a single man. After he introduced himself to her in June — Nichol had worked in the environmental department with an Anadarko Petroleum contractor, while Chris was an operator — the two began seeing each other romantically by early July. “When he spoke to me, he was very softspoken. He appeared to be a good listener,” she told the Denver Post. At the time, Watts said that he was separated from his wife, Shannan, and that he was nearing the end of their divorce proceedings. “I believed him,” she admitted.
During their relationship that lasted a couple of months, Chris also made her believe that he was looking to find an apartment for himself and his girls, and Nichol urged that they take things slow as the two saw each other four of five times a week. However, on August 13, that all changed.
The two had been texting normally that day, before Chris texted her to say that his family was “gone.” He said that Shannan had taken their daughter to a playdate and had not returned. His tone was apparently “emotionless.” Nichol opted to not lose her composure over this news, especially since Chris was so calm about it. And then, reporters showed up to Chris’ house. “I was very confused why the media was at his house,” she admitted.
And after that, Nichol started learning the truth about Chris and his family, that he was still married and that people had been trying to call Shanann throughout the day. “When I read the news, I found out he was still married and his wife was 15 weeks pregnant,” Nichol said. “I thought, ‘If he was able to lie to me and hide something that big, what else was he lying about?’” At that point, Watts kept changing his tune about the situation with his wife, and kept dodging Nichol’s questions about what had happened with his family in a back-and-forth that seemed “off.” Eventually, Nichol texted him, asking him what he had done, and Chris said he’d never hurt his family. “It got to a point that he was telling me so many lies that I eventually told him that I did not want to speak to him again until his family was found,” she revealed.
After hearing about his confession, she was devastated. “I just felt so, so sad,” she said. “He’s a liar. He lied about everything.” “I don’t think there is a logical explanation for what he did,” she admitted. “It’s a senseless act, and it’s horrific.”

Once up I quickly let him know that he would need to clean up dog poo in the backyard. It took him two hours but he finally finished the job. I'm afraid that breakfast was not worth the hard work he put in since it was just cereal but he didn't complain. Then when he started asking about snacks I let him know the kitchen had to be swept and mopped. To his misfortune my mop was not working so he had to use a small sponge and scrub on his hands and knees. He did it gladly when he found out snack was strawberries. Come lunch time he earned a chicken salad sandwich by cleaning windows and my glass tables. Too bad he said he didn't like chicken. He was not too happy when I said, "if you don't like what's for lunch, lunch is over."
When his mom showed up at noon he was extremely happy to see her but said he still wanted to live with me. So he stayed and I let him pick up toys for the right to watch TV for 30 minutes. Unfortunately TV did not keep him happy for long and while I was in my office working I heard the front door open and close. He decided it was time to go find his friends to play. So I had to stop what I was doing and go on a treasure hunt for our little friend. Luckily his mother knew just where to look and after stopping at two houses I found him. I asked him if he would like to talk to me privately or if it was ok if I embarassed him in front of his friends. He didn't budge so the count down started. 5, 4, 3, 2, 1.... Then came the explanation of the rules in my house. He thought it was pretty odd that he had to ask permission to go play and that I had to know exactly where he was at all times. Odd that is until his little friend chimed in and said he has the same rules at his house. With this announcement I saw the light bulb go on and he knew he was in trouble. That is when I informed him he could not live with me if he could not follow my rules and we marched home to his his where his mother was waiting with open arms.
Mom came at noon but he refused to leave.

Be-zay was born in Toronto, Canada on November 10th, 1976.
Growing up Allen had very little. He would find solace passing the time listening to the radio. He would engulf his self into all genera of music, but found a connection and could relate with musicians who had overcome childhood strife. This in turn influenced his passion to become a musician as well. He wanted to share the obstacles he had also faced in life.
While living on the streets, Allen did what he could to survive. His life changed when he found himself getting ready to become a father at the young age of 20. Due to this lifestyle change, he became dedicated to providing for his new family. He would work from 9 to 5 and sometimes would work nights. He did whatever he could to allow his family to have more than he did but regardless of his situation he never gave up his passion and dream for music.
During the year 2000, he was inspired to get serious with music. However once his family got bigger it seemed impossible to focus on being a professional artist. Now that his children are older and he has obtained more life experience, he is getting ready to commit to his artistry.

Benedict, had Sanfilippo Syndrome. Ben was born on 24 February 1989. His favourite occupation was eating anything and everything he could get his hands on. Ben lost many of his skills but still lit up a room when he gave one of his famous smiles. Sadly Ben passed away on 6 April 2002 and is greatly missed by all..

This place is very tiny. You can get a pretty good rebase here, I haven't really tried many of the other services yet. I don't think I would go back though, unless I was in the neighborhood and didn't have any other choices. This salon didn't really impress me too much, I didn't feel that it was well taken care of. The staff was very nice though.

I genuinely hate having to do the laundryâ€¦ When there are socks, shirts, pants, as well as blankets, it takes all day to get the laundry done.
I usually wait until there is a lot of laundry piled up as well as then I go to the laundromat.
There is a place nearby that has a lot of washers as well as dryers. They don’t charge a lot of money to wash as well as dry as well as the place is constantly clean as well as fresh smelling. They keep the doors open so I don’t have to wear a mask. I prefer that as well. There is also a dispensary near myself and others that is on the way to the laundromat. The dispensary constantly has great sales as well as specials. I went to the laundromat on Tuesday to wash all of the clothes as well as I decided to stop at the dispensary near me. I found out that they were having a clearance sale that was pressing. The sale was buy a single product as well as get numerous for free! All of the products were demo products, however each a single of them were actually worth at least $20 each. The demo products included pre-rolled as well as infused 2 gram marijuana joints, half gram containers of distillate, as well as bags of live resin gummies. I absolutely thought they were only going to allow myself and others to buy a single product as well as get numerous additional products for free, however they allowed myself and others to get numerous products as well as get several additional products for free. I bought numerous of the grams of concentrate that were in the clearance area as well as then I acquired several pre-rolls that were genuinely free.

Madame Svea is known for her naughtiness. This guy wanted to get a taste of it and he wished for it to be in the form of jerk off instructions because he knew she would not sleep with him. To sweeten the deal, he promised to pay her for it and she agreed to give him the jois. She had a great time trying some new instructions with him and he loved them.
Many people feared and respected this professor but not mistress Anfisa. She could tell he was into her and it was because she was a naughty girl. She had never had fun with a professor before so she used her sexy ass to tease him and he was turned on immediately. She showed off her hot body and he was at her mercy and he did all she asked. He even jerked off to her instructions.
Madame Svea wanted to have a little bit of fun and that is what she did today. The mistress used her hot ass and her good looks to attract guys for humiliation. But it was not complete humiliation as she let them have a little fun at the end through jerk off instructions. She teased them a little, turned them on and she had them cum by following her naughty instructions.
Lady Karame knew that joi is mostly used for pleasure but she chose to use it for humiliating this loser. She teased him and he took the bait as he did not know she was mad at him. The mistress then gave him cruel cum instructions that he had to follow in order to cum. It was painful and humiliating for him to do those things but he did them anyway.
Madame Svea is one of those mistresses who cannot bone a guy with a tiny dick. She feels that it is a waste of time and effort. So she only bones guys who can make her pussy vibrate with excitement. And that is why she likes to make them jerk off so that she has a chance to check out their dicks. Madame Svea has sick jerk off moves that make guys do it without questioning her.
Mistress Herrin Nicole found out her slave was very horny and that he had not had sex in a while. She was sympathetic to him and she helped him by giving him jerk off instructions. She felt that he could use the instructions to cum and then be able to relax. She gave him naughty instructions and had a great time watching him use them to have the fun he had not had in a while.
Mistress Herrin Amy is not one to mess around. Whenever she does, it is because she has a sinister motive. She was in the mood to mess around today and as usual, it was with an ulterior motive. She secretly taped herself with this guy. She did so to humiliate him. The mistress teased him but instead of fucking him, she got him to cum to her jerk off instructions.
This loser is not the kind of person this mistress likes to hang out with. But she knew he was gullible and so she had fun at his expense. She took out a dildo and pretended to show him how good she was at sucking dicks and that she was going to do the same to him. She turned him on in a mighty way and she gave him cum instructions when he wanted to fuck her.
Princess Serena loves touching and checking out different kinds of dicks. She loves to especially make guys do things to those dicks for her enjoyment. Today she was armed with a whip and she was ready to whip this guy if he did not do as she instructed him. She made him jerk off to her instructions and he feared the whip so much that he did what she asked.
Mistress Herrin Amy was bored at home. She wanted to have a little fun so she called her neighbor who she knew had a thing for her. She teased him and he was excited and he was turned on. She made him undress and she humiliated him by making him do things to himself which were geared to put a show for her. She gave him cum instructions and she watched him carry them out.

‘Danny and Lee were very professional. They were clean, neat and tidy and left no mess whatsoever. They were both very pleasant and a credit to you company.’
Really felt that you were an honest and genuine company to deal with – Lucky I found you.’
The workmen were very pleasant and cleaned up very nicely in the house. A pleasure having them to do the work.
We are both very pleased with the results. Please convey our thanks to Stuart and his team."

We went after spending the afternoon shopping so I was fairly hungry. I had the chicken and dumplings for dinner. It was very good and the portion was decent. It's a cozy place on a quaint island. The servers were nice and attentive. I wish I would have tried the scallops, but they were a little too pricey.

A stud has his eye on Dolly, who is a sweety of a blond, as she makes a phone call, he comes up to her and ask a question about his cage phone. He might be older than she is, but Dolly thinks he is quite gorgeous and finishes up plane on her back getting her labia tongued and throating his stiffy. She gets on her hands and knees while he pushes his sausage into her labia from behind. She stands up as he lays on his back with his dick at attention and she straddles his lap and lowers her gash down on his length. She bounces up and down on his dick before she takes his manstick prick into her mouth till he shoots his juice all over her face.

When the owner couldn’t keep his two canine friends his neighbor offered to take the dogs and breed them and sell their puppies. However, the owner decided that Hope For Paws would have something more preferable for his dogs and called them for help.
The man was in tears when he said goodbyes to his dogs but he could have done nothing but let them go. He thought that he was “betraying them.”
The rescuers named them George and irene. They treated the dogs as needed and now they are healthy and full of hope for new and better life opportunities. The former owner had a gold heart and was a hero. He gave his dogs a second chance for a better life. He was worth praising.

Brick Walls & Wooden Ceilings
He had just moved into his brand new studio. The one he had to argue on a price for weeks with that fat and snobbish landlord. He fell in love with those tall windows months ago when he first went to visit the place. That day he had also met with an old friend. A girl whom he had known for many years, but rarely saw her. The last thing he had heard from her was that she was going off on another one of her long travels. A year in Asia it was this time.
The girl had surprised him. They had spent the day together and were getting to know each other all over again.
They were finally in the same place at the same time. They spent as much time as they could together. They began to know each other more and realized they enjoyed each other’s company just as much.
They had a dinner to go to that day. She was going to meet the whole family and be presented as the girlfriend. They were getting ready in his studio, where they spent almost all of their time. The bed covered in white linen was unmade. The brick walls were decorated by his own drawings and creations and the flowers by the window were from her. He was wearing his favorite shirt and his favorite boots. And she was wearing her favorite flower printed dress and her favorite boots. She was looking for her bag, as he stood still buttoning up his shirt and watching her. She turned around, exasperated with a stern look on her face, she couldn’t find her purse anywhere.
She looked at him, and as their eyes met, all worries vanished from her face, and the notion of the dinner became a far far away one.
She had a grin on her face now. He was still standing and looking at her. She walked closer to him and said: “You look very handsome”. As she put her hands on his collar she said “Can we be late?”, and without waiting for an answer, she kissed him. She started to unbutton his shirt, he grabbed her by the waist, she wrapped her legs around his, and he carried her back to the bed.
They were two hours late.
She arrived at his apartment. She was finally going to be in his own space, and see it all. He opened the door, they said a quick nervous “Hi” and she walked in taking off her coat. She looked all around and it was beautiful she thought. “I’ve always loved brick walls,” she said touching the nearest bricks. “One day I want a house with brick walls and wooden ceilings,” she told him. He just stared at her and smiled as she danced her way around the apartment, curiously contemplating every corner. She had dropped her coat and bag on a stool and was walking towards him. She could begin to smell his smell. She recognized that hypnotic scent that drove her mad. She got near him, looked at him in the eyes and said: “It’s a beautiful place you have”.
It was as if they had never left. They found each other in bed, exactly the same as they once had before. She opened her eyes and found herself embraced in his arms, facing his face. She looked at every freckle on his skin. She smiled because she woke up to that smell. She wanted to bury her face in his chest but didn’t want to wake him. She lied there looking around at the darkened room slightly illuminated by the moonshine coming through the tall windows. She slowly got out of bed, put on a shirt, and sat by the window. She looked outside at the late nightwalker, singing, drunk, walking home or to another party, and then she looked back at him, peacefully sleeping on the bed. She didn’t want to think about tomorrow. She wanted this moment forever like she’s always wanted. And so she got back in bed and snuggled in between his shoulders and his chest and it was at that moment that he hugged her, still asleep, and she knew she was happy. She was falling in love.
The next morning they woke up as the sun rose, arms and legs intertwined. Moaning through caresses and kisses. Neither wanted to leave that moment.
Their contact and updates were becoming fewer and fewer as day and month passed. She still thought of him often, and deep inside longed to see him again. She did not want to make it obvious that she liked him, she didn’t even want to say it. A few weeks before she was going back to his country she contacted him and told him she was going to be there in February, and perhaps, if he was there too, they could arrange to meet and see each other. He said yes, and how much that would please him. Since then, she has not been able to stop thinking about him and how it would be when they met. Would they be able to meet more than once? Would they find the time or privacy to be together? Would it be like last time or would he have changed? Would she be different to him? Thinking made her heart beat faster and faster. That’s all she needed, that little knot in her stomach to get her to stay up all night and dream a million scenarios with him. It drove her mad.

The boy was one of many young university students who sleep and spend the night in certain centers, in this specific case a catholic. while he was changing clothes after a football game, one of his teachers appeared by surprise, curiously the one that most focuses his attention on this boy. but his idea was not to talk about religion or studies, the only thing the man wanted was to pierce the boy's bottom with his cock. as the mature man knew that all this could cause problems, it occurred to him to offer him money in exchange, which without hesitation the boy accepted. once he took the money, the man took his cock out and started sucking it. it was certainly a good prize for a man his age who had also promised sexual abstinence due to his vows. he soon grabbed his cock and shoved it up his ass as the boy made visible signs of anal pain. but he knew that the priest must finish, and that was how it happened, the man came into his mouth and both were quite satisfied with this secret that they should not tell anyone.

Callum Ormond "cal" is a teenage boy whose father died after taking a trip to Ireland to find out a big family secret! He goes on a boat with his uncle and gets surrounded by sharks!
oh no! what happened!
Cal lives with his mother and sister. His sister is named Gabby. He has a best friend named Boges. They live in Australia. Cal had received drawings and letters from his father asking him to investigate a mystery if he died. His father gave him clues.
ha ha I lost that dude!
that was a cop! that was close!
tell me about the singularity!
Cal is kidnapped by a woman who knew about the mystery. She wanted Cal to help her solve the mystery, but he could not. He did not understand the clues his dad had sent him.
i don't know!
we'll trow you in the oil tank!
Cal escaped through a skylight. When he got home he found his uncle and sister unconscious on the kitchen floor. He then heard people and thought it was his kidnappers so he tried to help his sister, but he had to run.
After he ran from his house, he was chased. Cal got away and met with Boges in secret. Boges told him that the police were after him, because they thought he had shot his uncle and hurt his sister. They thought this because his sister was shouting , "No Cal, no" before she went into a coma.
Cal was hiding in an empty house, but was still trying to investigate the mystery. His dad had called the mystery, "the Ormounmd singularity". Cal was kidnapped again by another group wanting clues to solve the mystery. When he would not help them, they thoew him into an underground oil tank to die.

Fought and died for his country, but first God granted him the one wish he asked for. When he was a boy of 20 years old, laying in a muddy jungle a half world away from home, he wished just once more to be able to see his family again. God gave him that plus 26 more years. Times were not always easy and there wasn't a lot of money, but love and laughter was always in abundance. Malon Mark Cox's heart was filled with love and his beautiful blue eyes twinkled with laughter. As was his wish, we donated his organs, his beautiful blue eyes. In his last week he was surrounded by his many friends and large family. The love during that week was the most amazing and wonderful experience. He is missed by all who knew him. The children of Malon Cox.
09/24/45 - 02/11/94

She was in our room at 3:45am, telling us she was too cold.
Why did I ask him twice?
I already knew.
So often, I do this. I know, but I ask, not just Hubby but others as well. I'm not sure why I don't put more faith in my intuition, but from here on, I'm going to give that a try.

I had lost and now I had to pay the forfeit, the four of us never played for money nothing so boring for us. The one who lost his stake first had to carry out the order of the final winner. It was king who won this time,a devious man who played cards well, never yet had he lost first in two years but on the times he won his forfeit was always sexual in some way.
This time was no exception but still it was a surprise when he spelled out to me what I had to do. King told me I had to go to his sister with him and she would dress me and do my hair, I was to go to the jugglers arms at seven and I had to get a man to want me. I could not leave before 10pm and not alone,I had to have one or more men with me.(Sex Stories)
I was not looking forward to this forfeit at all but King and I went to his sisters house in the next street, King told her what he wanted her to do to me and how long she had to do it in which was about three hours if I was to be in the jugglers arms by seven. She took me to her bedroom king had already left the house, she had a nice room with all the frills women liked to have. Clothes were her passion and she had so many I guess she never got to wear them out, she started with her underwear draw picking out a matching bra and panti set in deepest red. She had me undress and I had to put them on,the bra she adjusted and inserted silicon implants, the panties were so small my cock either poked out the top or hung out the bottom. It was more comfortable with it sticking out the top so that's how I left it. She had spent the time searching for an outfit for me, on the bed was a mini skirt and in her hand a pencil skirt and matching jacket. She had me put on the skirt which hardly covered my butt,a white blouse and the bra could be seen quite clearly through it. I had to take it off and put the pencil skirt on but keeping the blouse on, she was happy with the look this time and from the mirror I saw a great figure and from the neck down I looked great. I was handed a pair of silk stockings black to match the skirt,they had a seam in them like in the 1950's. The one thing she didn't have was heals to fit but she knew a friend who would have, she made a call before I was taken into the kitchen for my hairdo.
She had spent the best part of two hours now and i had no idea how I looked with my hair done and makeup on but somehow I knew I looked great,I could feel it and see it in her eyes. She had only spoken to me when she wanted me to do something so the smile she gave me was a clue that the job she had done was good. I stood up and saw my reflection in the window, I did not recognise myself but I looked far better now than before I arrived. I followed her outside and along the road stopping at her friends who had been waiting for us, a pair of heals in her hand I was shown into the front room so I could try them on. The heals were not too high and the fit was about right for me,I stood up and walked about for a few minutes getting a feel for them, I hoped I looked as good as I felt all things considered. It was about time for me to be at the jugglers arms so I thanked the ladies saying I would leave the shoes with the outfit and they both nodded.(Porn Stories)
My nerves where getting the better of me but Kings sister said in a whisper that I looked hot, she must have been right as several pairs of eyes stared at me as we took a seat. I realized that I didn't know her name and she had never volantered it,it turned out to be Caroline. She ordered a wine for herself and coke for me up at the bar and before she could pay a man offered to pay for them,he even brought them over and sat down with us introducing himself as Frank pointing to his left he told us was his brother Roy who he motioned over to us. Frank was a good talker Roy being on the shy side,but he was a looker not a Robert Redgrave but he had something that Frank hadn't magnetism you could call it. Caroline was doing OK with Frank,he seemed to accept that Roy and I had made a connection.
The drinks flowed as we talked and flirted even I was holding my own confident and happy with them, I had started to take notice of the people in the room,all were men apart from two women sat in a group at the far end. It was then that it dawned on me they were men dressed up like I was but not quite as good, stranger still that I was pleased about it. Frank said he had never seen a guy look so good, I was mortified that he knew I was a man. Caroline explained that this was a gay pub and that everyone was gay here including her,I had no idea and was surprised as she carried it off so well. I asked Frank how he knew I was a guy, his answer was that Caroline would only go outdoors with a man never a woman. I was having a swell time not noticing that it was almost 10 O'Clock, I was making leaving noises when Roy asked if he could walk me home. Caroline whispered we could all go back to her place if I liked, I wanted that more than I realized Roy and I had hit it off together and I was happy to be in his company.
The talk as we walked was getting a little deeper than it had been in the pub nothing vulgar but it had sexual undertones to it, I was at ease with it and held my own with them though Roy held back somewhat. I thought he was a nice guy and if I was a woman, it hit me then how in the last few hours I had completely changed and was thinking and acting as a woman.Roy knew I was a man but wanted to be with me and I had already admited I would be sexualy attracted to him if I was a woman. Caroline opened the door and we all walked inside,it was a surprise to see King and a young man sat together in the room. King asked Caroline how things where and she said it had all worked out fine and that Roy was proof of the fact. Roy and king looked at each other and king said happy birthday Roy, the smile on his face said it was just that and thanked both king and Caroline but then he came to me saying a spacial thankyou with a kiss.
I have been to Caroline's many times since learning how to make the most of clothes and makeup, I have become quite adept at it much to Roy's delight. I found out that Frank had been steady with Caroline for a few years Roy had always been too scared to date,we have been going together and have been making future plans. I knew it had all been a setup but I wanted to know how King knew I was Gay,Caroline said it was the way I looked and how I distanced myself from female involvement and looking back now I could see she was right. I had a lot to thank king and her for and knew my life had changed for ever.
We had been going out for a few months and after a night out he asked if he could stay, we had kissed and fondled each other but nothing more, who was more nervous was hard to say but the time felt right for me. I had got used to being a woman,Roy always called me Sandy which I liked but then I liked everything about him no hint of cockyness but a strong character happy to be who he was. It was the hurdle I was going to have to get over and I knew it would be right with Roy so I said yes I would like that. There was no need to pan things out with small talk and coffee,we both knew that sex together was the agenda so I led the way to the bedroom. Standing at the bottom of the bed looking at each other I saw the desire in his eyes,I hoped mine was a reflection of his own as he held my hands lightly kissing my ear,I felt his tongue inside lightly running around my body felt as if it had been jolted with electricity my head tilted back and Roy took advantage kissing it just under the jaw sending shivers down my spine. It was so nice with him kissing and slowly unbuttoning my blouse, the bra was not being very cooperative so I gave him a hand as he worked on the zip on my skirt. They dropped to the floor together leaving me in just panties,he was just getting his feet out of his trousers and being as he had no pants on I could see his manhood,smaller than mine but it sent a buzz through me just the same. Neither of us had much idea but I made a move by feeling him,not wanking but exploring by touch alone my eyes watching him so I could see in them any pleasure he was feeling. His fondling made me weak at the knees and I had to kneel before I fell, it put my head just in front of his awakening cock and it was just asking to be eaten. My hand let go of him to be replaced by my lips just rubbing the tip and my tongue flicking on it moistening it making it glisten,it tasted sweet not the nasty taste I expected.Roy was unable to stay still as I moved further down his stiffness, every suck brought a fresh groan from him and the pleasure I was giving him pleased me.
I coaxed him onto the end of the bed and lightly pushed his body backwards, I had gone along his cock as far as I could which was not much I wanted to take more but I kept wanting to be sick.I knew I would have to work on that aspect but for now Roy seemed contented and getting pleasure, I asked him to work his bum up as I sucked him in and soon we had a good motion going I had a mouth full of salive and it was making it hard for me to breath so I swallowed it just as he was thrusting,I felt him go deeper down my throat and the sick feeling didn't come this time. I waited till he was about to thrust once more and swallowed again,I had nearly all of him inside so thought I would try for the last bit but I felt him pumping away his spurn going straight down my throat. I kept him in till he started going limp before withdrawing him tasting the last drops of his cum,I wished I had had more to taste but there would be other times I was sure. He lay there spent and with a satisfied smile on his lovely face,laying on him I worked upwards my head resting on his chest.I felt like the luckiest woman in the world just then and my mind was at peace with who and what I was all thanks to King who planned it all.

37 year old male had been having chronic blockage and congestion in his nose for as long as he could remember. He had previously had sinus surgery, deviated septum repair and his turbinates “burned” 5 years ago. While his sinus problems were much better he felt that his breathing problems were not better. He had been tested for allergies and found he had none. He noticed that his nose felt blocked on both sides but that sometimes one side was worse than the other especially when lying on his side at night. He had tried nasal sprays but found they really didn’t help much. Recently he had been told that he was also starting to snore lightly but not all the time.
He consulted with an ENT who examined inside his nose and found that he had moderate to severe nasal turbinate hypertrophy. His septum was still mild to moderately deviated as well. The sinuses were seen to be open and doing well. Patient was advised that a turbinoplasty procedure could be done to help improve his breathing problems. In addition a balloon dilation procedure could be done to help improve the residual deviated septum in a minimally invasive approach.. Given the degree of turbinate hypertrophy, decision was made to do the procedures in the operating room to get the results desired with maximal patient comfort.
3 months after his surgery the patient noted that he was breathing so much better and feeling really good. He had stopped snoring and was exercising more than he had in the past. 1 year later patient reported never feeling better in his life and was dedicated to taking care of his overall health and well being.

There were many people at the opening reception. Many of them seemed to have some sort of relation to the artists of the gallery. My job was to talk to the observers and have them come and interview with Van.
It was difficult to go up to talk to people because many were in groups and didn’t seem to want to get interviewed. A lot of the people I talked to were somewhat interested in getting interviewed, but they didn’t want to commit or take some time out of their day to get interviewed. Some said that they’d stop by at the office space to talk to Van but I wasn’t sure if they really were going to do what they said. It seemed to me that some came up with excuses to avoid getting interviewed.
I personally really liked the gallery. I liked seeing what the graduate students came up with. It was different for me to look at the work of some people I know compared to pieces by famous artists that I didn’t know. It encouraged me to continue on with art as a major.

My husband was a doctor first and foremost – the kind of doctor one rarely sees anymore. He was full of chesed and treated every patient as if he or she were the most important ones. And he took care of a lot of the people others didn’t want to deal with. He treated the mentally challenged and made them feel six feet tall. I met some of them after his death and I cried with them as they tried to convey what he meant to them.
He did not have the benefit of a yeshiva education and in fact came to Orthodoxy in his twenties, but from the very beginning he had a love for Torah and a profound respect for rabbis. His belief in Hashem was absolute. He was a person of deep faith – though his standards, like my mother’s, were somewhat different from a lot of what people today regard as “religious.”
He loved the land of Israel and much of our charity went to support Torah in Israel. He was honest to the core. And he had strong principles. As was true of my mother, when he felt something was right he would always take a stand.
He was my best friend and I was very proud to be his wife. I am trying to capture the essence of who he was and yet I find that no matter what I write, it is lacking.
My mother’s last few years were very difficult. She was unable to speak and needed constant care. My sister was constantly at Mom’s side and we had devoted women who took care of her. It was hard to know what she was thinking as she followed us with her eyes.
My husband’s last few years were also quite difficult. He suffered a debilitating stroke that left him unable to do very much and he needed constant care. His last stroke took him from us, though he lingered in a coma for seven weeks. When I told my mother Ivan had died and I was going to Israel to bury him, she looked at me and tears rolled down her face. I knew then that she had understood me. And I think that was when she knew she could follow him. It was only a few hours later, as I was boarding the plane for Israel, that I got the news my mother had also died.
They were two strong, brilliant, kind, loving, God-fearing people. They were connected in life and remain connected in death.
The world is much poorer without them and I am bereft of my best friends.
About the Author:
You might also be interested in:
If you don't see your comment after publishing it, refresh the page.

I had made many phone calls to various offices and I was not too happy, but howver, this place was the only place that had a very nice receptionist that made me feel very comfortable. She also got a doctor on the phone as soon as possible to talk to me about my problem. They were able to fit me in as soon as possible and took very good care of me. Before they did anything, they explained everything they were going to do ahead of time. I never felt rushed or anything and the staff here are very nice and offer a very welcolming environment.
They also have another office in King of Prussia off Henderson road, close to the KOP Mall, which is the place that I go to. This place is definately reccomended.

Late start was really nice today, and I got really good sleep. This was a great way to start my day. Although I was relaxed my resolution was still not very good. I think I was ready for break as I did not want to do any homework. Although I did not resolve to do much, what I did do was pretty industrious. I seemed to get what little homework I worked on done quickly. This I felt like has improved since the start of this project. I felt like my order was pretty good today because although I did not do very much homework, I still did homework, had free time, and had a doctors appointment. On moderation, I did not do very good, especially since I spent a lot of time on my phone today. This is probably because I am so ready for break also. On justice I did much better, and I think it was because I have been in a pretty good mood today, since I know that the long break is approaching. This good mood makes me feel more positively to those that I may have doubted due to how they previously acted towards me. Overall, I felt that this was a pretty good day despite my shortcomings. I still was able to meet many of my virtues even with it being one of the last days before break.

James G. Ralston married Anna on December 28, 1815. Anna was born on March 14, 1821. They were married on April 11, 1842. James was very well educated. He graduated from Princeton Seminary in 1841. He received his Jurist Doctorate from Lafayette College and his Doctor of Divinity form Washington and Jefferson College. He was an educator. He started several schools around the country. He founded the Oakland Female Institute in Norristown, which grew to some note, which drew students from every state in the Union, as well as Canada, Cuba, Great Britain, Germany, Greece and others. James attributed much of his success to his wife, who supported him in all of his endeavors. James Ralston died on November 10, 1880. Anna Ralston died on December 27, 1891.

A lion cub is introduced to the pride: it does not go well! We had followed this mother and cub for a while and we guessed that she was intent on introducing her cub to the pride. Sadly, she had had three cubs but this was the sole survivor. At first she introduced it to the females which went well. But with male it was a different story!

I have told the following story at several AA meetings as a reminder to all of us not to be too complacent concerning our illness: An old man stood in front of us with tears running down his cheeks. He could hardly speak as he began to tell us his story. He'd been sober for thirty-four years and things were going quite well for him. His life was under control and there were no real pressing problems plaguing him. He was walking past a liquor store and for some unknown reason decided to buy a half pint of whisky. A half pint won't hurt me, he said to himself as he walked through the doors. Within a few days he was up to a fifth a day. His friends in AA discovered he was drinking again and helped him to regain his sobriety once more.

A seven-year-old boy from New Tazewell, Tennessee saved his 22-month-old sister from a house fire that ended up destroying his home, according to CNN.The boy, Eli, was awoken from his sleep just hours past his bedtime by his foster mother Nicole Davidson, after she smelled smoke billowing up within the house. According to the report, the house was up in flames within minutes, however, his sister Erin was still trapped in her room.Nicole was able to grab her son Elijah and Eli, and remove them from the fire safety. Erin's room was surrounded by fire."The smoke and fire was so thick there was no way I could get to her," Nicole's husband, Chris Davidson, told CNN. "We went outside to get to her from the window, but there was nothing for me to stand on to reach up there. So I picked up Eli, who went through the window and was able to grab her from her crib.""We couldn't be more proud of Eli," Davidson added. "He did something a grown man wouldn't do.""I thought I couldn't do it, but then I said, 'I got her, dad,'" Eli told CNN. "I was scared, but I didn't want my sister to die."Nothing was left of the house the following day."We lost everything that we have ever had," Chris said, according to CNN. "Our entire lives were in that home. Our three cars were also damaged in the fire.""It's devastating. We have nothing," he said. "You have never been as humble as you are when you don't even have your own underwear to wear."

Lorraine Kelly has named Harrison Ford as her worst celebrity guest.
The LK Today host claimed that Ford was in a bad mood when she interviewed him.
"I felt disappointed because I loved Blade Runner and was really looking forward to meeting him," she told Star.
"It wasn't so much that he was rude, but he was a bit grumpy. I think he was bored and made it very clear that he did not want to be there."
The 48-year-old revealed that her favourite guests have been George Clooney and Will Smith.
"I remember saying to Will after I'd interviewed him: 'Thank you so much. I wish every A-lister was like you.' I honestly could have kissed him because I thought he had such a brilliant attitude," she said.

nvm I've seen this! I didn't know it was b. mcgee?!
His work is incredible in person. I saw his show at Brandeis University in MA years ago and it was amazing. It was massive space and he filled it with every size you can imagine of his great work.
Post a Comment

It has been so long since I have been to a county fair and I was just as excited as Noah. Plus we got to spend it with friends. He loved seeing the animals and they had a great Kid's Zone in a cooled building (which was just what little Levi needed). We sipped fresh squeezed lemonade, ate fried foods walked through the livestock barns. I didn't post a pic of it but Noah was super impressed by the Lego dragon that someone had built and received a blue ribbon on. (Noah has been really into Legos, and his daddy is proud)
(I always joke about Noah and his girls) Aren't they cute?!?!

A woman who had already told her friends and family about the set date of her wedding has been left disappointed.A Nigerian lady identified as Layemi on Twitter has shared a story of a man who cancelled his wedding plans with girlfriend after she poured hot oil on his cousin.
Layemi had engaged in a conversation with the man who is her friend. She was surprised he wasn’t married yet and was shocked when he told her his story.
In the course of their conversation, the man revealed that he nearly got married to a lady he had been courting for five years but he put a stop to their relationship few months before the wedding.
Read the full narration:
“I had a long conversation with an older friend today, he’s in his mid thirties, he’s quite successful if we are defining it in Nigerian terms, he has his own house, cars, works with a good company, has his own business…. blah blah blah. Baba sha dey alright.
I asked him why he was still single even though he was ‘made’ already, for my own mind I already thought/concluded that he probably had behavioural issues cos I know people like him, he’s quite handsome so getting babes is not an issue for him.
He said he almost got married 3years ago, but he called it off few months to the wedding, I thought he was joking but his other friend confirmed it. He told me the reason and damn, it was crazy.
Apparently, they dated for close to 3years before he proposed to her, she was 5years younger than him, he had known her since she was a teenager. He said when they started dating, his cousin was against it, she said her friend was too rude and he would regret it. He did!
Aunty was rude, disrespectful, saucy, didn’t have regard for anyone except him, he said she could start a fight with a child for been too close to him, none of his friends liked her, he said when they moved in together, People hardly came to his house. Lol
I asked him why he would date someone like that to the extent of marriage, he said at the beginning of their relationship, *sturvs* happened and he felt responsible for her and whenever he tried to end the relationship, she would bring it up and guilt trip him into staying
According to him, she became calm after a while, because he tried to please her all the time. So their relationship was smooth and he proposed to the chagrin of his family and friends. he said he’s quite stubborn so nobody could talk him out of it.
Few months to their wedding, his cousin came into the country from the abroad and decided to stay with him, he said they were very close and the bruv hadn’t been in the country for a while, he said his babe grumbled about it but he ignored her.
He said his cousin was probably the meekest person he could ever meet in his life, Baba was too nice, stayed out the way and always minded his business in the house, but his babe always had something to complain about, he said at this point she was starting to irritate him
The day kasala busted, he said he came home from work quite late and he didn’t meet his cousin at home, he asked his babe and she muttered some things under her breath but he was too tired to ask and he assumed that his cousin probably went out……”

We have been trying to find out more information on the foster family Makenna was with from January to August2008. Today I received a photo of the foster dad with another child I was trying to decide if I wanted to show it to Makenna or not. We did decide to show it to her and when she saw it she had a grin on her face and said something that sounded like a name. I could tell that she knew who it was and that the child in the photo was a little boy that was there with her. It was good to see something from her past that I will be able to show and explain a little.

[deleted account] ( 1 mom has responded )
Iam dealing with a 6 yr old boy that doesn't listen cuz his mom says to be bad so I will yell at him. Which I try not to. He knows more about court than I did at his age. His dad works alot so on his weekends he's with me during the day. I'm trying to have patients. His father knows about this but there is no talking to his ex. She's unreasonable. Her son says that she says bad things and I'm ugly. What to do?

It was a soft rain at Franny's funeral. Cecil was sure it rained all week, after-wards.
Of course, Rhys had came to him all bitter. He wanted his son now. He jerked Bart from the crib, but the toddler screamed and cried so that Rhys let go of him. Cecil guessed Rhys figured out the boy had been through more than enough, already. Who Bart actually wanted was neither of them, but his brother Nico and Randy.
"I think we should try to keep together, as long as we can." Randy had his hands full with the infant. He was so stoic. It was as if everything had been taken away from him.
"At least we can keep the boys while you're at work, and when you need us." They'd work something out. He didn't want Randy doing this all by himself.
"I've got the next six weeks to figure it all out." Randy sighed. He looked as if he hadn't slept in weeks.
Cecil had decided to be friends with Randy. They weren't really blood relatives yet they were family because of Franny.
"We won't let you go hungry." Neve took care of that part. She took care of the infant too. "Really, you've been through a lot. You give us a few hours with the new babe and have yourself a rest. You need it. You truly do."
So they'd decided on letting Randy eat most dinner with them. The boys were getting settled and maybe even the baby too.
what once was
6 hours ago

An interesting decision by the Supreme Court of the United States will likely affect how workers' compensation is paid out in the future in Colorado and across the country. The case involved an airline mechanic who was injured on the job and whose medical bills had been paid by his employer, US Airways. After he had recovered, the mechanic had filed a personal injury lawsuit against the driver that caused the car accident in which he was injured. He also received some money from his insurance company. The question the justices were deciding was exactly how much did the man have to pay his employer back.
In early 2009, a fatal accident occurred in Denver, Colorado. Two women who were in Denver for a work convention were killed after their taxi was struck by a drunk driver. The husband of one of the women filed a wrongful death lawsuit against the driver who caused the accident and won a settlement.

No it doesn't. I was never close with my family members, not even when I was a kid. I always thought that people who looked like you, had the same genes, were the only people who you could really call family, but I was wrong. I have recently became friends with a girl I met here on EP and we have hung out a lot in real life. She introduced me to her family; Her dad and her little brother. Since I first met them I've liked them, and my friend told me that her little brother told her that I was like the brother he never had. They are like my family now, they have cared about me a lot more than my real family have. And its not just them. My roommate is also like a family member. He's like my dad and bug brother mixed into one.

I agree with you that Shotokan from what I had studied was pretty much a joke. I went through 5 belts in merely 2 years, the grading was poor and many of the people who passed sucked quite badly. Poor form and weak stances were passed. I do think Karate is a good style though, and have wanted to learn from a master from Okinawa. Their Karate style is recognised as being highly proficient.

I'll start going through them more often as well. I've been a bit busy..sorry about that. Trying to be more around now. Although..I think some of them I looked through, and didn't see anything wrong with, so I left them. I will however, start posting in them (reported post threads).

Of Human Bondage by W. Somerset Maugham
THE climax came two or three weeks later. Mildred was driven by Philip's behaviour to a pitch of strange exasperation. There were many different emotions in her soul, and she passed from mood to mood with facility. She spent a great deal of time alone and brooded over her position. She did not put all her feelings into words, she did not even know what they were, but certain things stood out in her mind, and she thought of them over and over again. She had never understood Philip, nor had very much liked him; but she was pleased to have him about her because she thought he was a gentleman. She was impressed because his father had been a doctor and his uncle was a clergyman. She despised him a little because she had made such a fool of him, and at the same time was never quite comfortable in his presence; she could not let herself go, and she felt that he was criticising her manners.
When she first came to live in the little rooms in Kennington she was tired out and ashamed. She was glad to be left alone. It was a comfort to think that there was no rent to pay; she need not go out in all weathers, and she could lie quietly in bed if she did not feel well. She had hated the life she led. It was horrible to have to be affable and subservient; and even now when it crossed her mind she cried with pity for herself as she thought of the roughness of men and their brutal language. But it crossed her mind very seldom. She was grateful to Philip for coming to her rescue, and when she remembered how honestly he had loved her and how badly she had treated him, she felt a pang of remorse. It was easy to make it up to him. It meant very little to her. She was surprised when he refused her suggestion, but she shrugged her shoulders: let him put on airs if he liked, she did not care, he would be anxious enough in a little while, and then it would be her turn to refuse; if he thought it was any deprivation to her he was very much mistaken. She had no doubt of her power over him. He was peculiar, but she knew him through and through. He had so often quarrelled with her and sworn he would never see her again, and then in a little while he had come on his knees begging to be forgiven. It gave her a thrill to think how he had cringed before her. He would have been glad to lie down on the ground for her to walk on him. She had seen him cry. She knew exactly how to treat him, pay no attention to him, just pretend you didn't notice his tempers, leave him severely alone, and in a little while he was sure to grovel. She laughed a little to herself, good-humouredly, when she thought how he had come and eaten dirt before her. She had had her fling now. She knew what men were and did not want to have anything more to do with them. She was quite ready to settle down with Philip. When all was said, he was a gentleman in every sense of the word, and that was something not to be sneezed at, wasn't it? Anyhow she was in no hurry, and she was not going to take the first step. She was glad to see how fond he was growing of the baby, though it tickled her a good deal; it was comic that he should set so much store on another man's child. He was peculiar and no mistake.
But one or two things surprised her. She had been used to his subservience: he was only too glad to do anything for her in the old days, she was accustomed to see him cast down by a cross word and in ecstasy at a kind one; he was different now, and she said to herself that he had not improved in the last year. It never struck her for a moment that there could be any change in his feelings, and she thought it was only acting when he paid no heed to her bad temper. He wanted to read sometimes and told her to stop talking: she did not know whether to flare up or to sulk, and was so puzzled that she did neither. Then came the conversation in which he told her that he intended their relations to be platonic, and, remembering an incident of their common past, it occurred to her that he dreaded the possibility of her being pregnant. She took pains to reassure him. It made no difference. She was the sort of woman who was unable to realise that a man might not have her own obsession with sex; her relations with men had been purely on those lines; and she could not understand that they ever had other interests. The thought struck her that Philip was in love with somebody else, and she watched him, suspecting nurses at the hospital or people he met out; but artful questions led her to the conclusion that there was no one dangerous in the Athelny household; and it forced itself upon her also that Philip, like most medical students, was unconscious of the sex of the nurses with whom his work threw him in contact. They were associated in his mind with a faint odour of iodoform. Philip received no letters, and there was no girl's photograph among his belongings. If he was in love with someone, he was very clever at hiding it; and he answered all Mildred's questions with frankness and apparently without suspicion that there was any motive in them.
"I don't believe he's in love with anybody else," she said to herself at last.
It was a relief, for in that case he was certainly still in love with her; but it made his behaviour very puzzling. If he was going to treat her like that why did he ask her to come and live at the flat? It was unnatural. Mildred was not a woman who conceived the possibility of compassion, generosity, or kindness. Her only conclusion was that Philip was queer. She took it into her head that the reasons for his conduct were chivalrous; and, her imagination filled with the extravagances of cheap fiction, she pictured to herself all sorts of romantic explanations for his delicacy. Her fancy ran riot with bitter misunderstandings, purifications by fire, snow-white souls, and death in the cruel cold of a Christmas night. She made up her mind that when they went to Brighton she would put an end to all his nonsense; they would be alone there, everyone would think them husband and wife, and there would be the pier and the band. When she found that nothing would induce Philip to share the same room with her, when he spoke to her about it with a tone in his voice she had never heard before, she suddenly realised that he did not want her. She was astounded. She remembered all he had said in the past and how desperately he had loved her. She felt humiliated and angry, but she had a sort of native insolence which carried her through. He needn't think she was in love with him, because she wasn't. She hated him sometimes, and she longed to humble him; but she found herself singularly powerless; she did not know which way to handle him. She began to be a little nervous with him. Once or twice she cried. Once or twice she set herself to be particularly nice to him; but when she took his arm while they walked along the front at night he made some excuse in a while to release himself, as though it were unpleasant for him to be touched by her. She could not make it out. The only hold she had over him was through the baby, of whom he seemed to grow fonder and fonder: she could make him white with anger by giving the child a slap or a push; and the only time the old, tender smile came back into his eyes was when she stood with the baby in her arms. She noticed it when she was being photographed like that by a man on the beach, and afterwards she often stood in the same way for Philip to look at her.
When they got back to London Mildred began looking for the work she had asserted was so easy to find; she wanted now to be independent of Philip; and she thought of the satisfaction with which she would announce to him that she was going into rooms and would take the child with her. But her heart failed her when she came into closer contact with the possibility. She had grown unused to the long hours, she did not want to be at the beck and call of a manageress, and her dignity revolted at the thought of wearing once more a uniform. She had made out to such of the neighbours as she knew that they were comfortably off: it would be a come-down if they heard that she had to go out and work. Her natural indolence asserted itself. She did not want to leave Philip, and so long as he was willing to provide for her, she did not see why she should. There was no money to throw away, but she got her board and lodging, and he might get better off. His uncle was an old man and might die any day, he would come into a little then, and even as things were, it was better than slaving from morning till night for a few shillings a week. Her efforts relaxed; she kept on reading the advertisement columns of the daily paper merely to show that she wanted to do something if anything that was worth her while presented itself. But panic seized her, and she was afraid that Philip would grow tired of supporting her. She had no hold over him at all now, and she fancied that he only allowed her to stay there because he was fond of the baby. She brooded over it all, and she thought to herself angrily that she would make him pay for all this some day. She could not reconcile herself to the fact that he no longer cared for her. She would make him. She suffered from pique, and sometimes in a curious fashion she desired Philip. He was so cold now that it exasperated her. She thought of him in that way incessantly. She thought that he was treating her very badly, and she did not know what she had done to deserve it. She kept on saying to herself that it was unnatural they should live like that. Then she thought that if things were different and she were going to have a baby, he would be sure to marry her. He was funny, but he was a gentleman in every sense of the word, no one could deny that. At last it became an obsession with her, and she made up her mind to force a change in their relations. He never even kissed her now, and she wanted him to: she remembered how ardently he had been used to press her lips. It gave her a curious feeling to think of it. She often looked at his mouth.
One evening, at the beginning of February, Philip told her that he was dining with Lawson, who was giving a party in his studio to celebrate his birthday; and he would not be in till late; Lawson had bought a couple of bottles of the punch they favoured from the tavern in Beak Street, and they proposed to have a merry evening. Mildred asked if there were going to be women there, but Philip told her there were not; only men had been invited; and they were just going to sit and talk and smoke: Mildred did not think it sounded very amusing; if she were a painter she would have half a dozen models about. She went to bed, but could not sleep, and presently an idea struck her; she got up and fixed the catch on the wicket at the landing, so that Philip could not get in. He came back about one, and she heard him curse when he found that the wicket was closed. She got out of bed and opened.
"Why on earth did you shut yourself in? I'm sorry I've dragged you out of bed."
"I left it open on purpose, I can't think how it came to be shut."
"Hurry up and get back to bed, or you'll catch cold."
He walked into the sitting-room and turned up the gas. She followed him in. She went up to the fire.
"I want to warm my feet a bit. They're like ice."
He sat down and began to take off his boots. His eyes were shining and his cheeks were flushed. She thought he had been drinking.
"Have you been enjoying yourself?" she asked, with a smile.
"Yes, I've had a ripping time."
Philip was quite sober, but he had been talking and laughing, and he was excited still. An evening of that sort reminded him of the old days in Paris. He was in high spirits. He took his pipe out of his pocket and filled it.
"Aren't you going to bed?" she asked.
"Not yet, I'm not a bit sleepy. Lawson was in great form. He talked sixteen to the dozen from the moment I got there till the moment I left."
"What did you talk about?"
"Heaven knows! Of every subject under the sun. You should have seen us all shouting at the tops of our voices and nobody listening."
Philip laughed with pleasure at the recollection, and Mildred laughed too. She was pretty sure he had drunk more than was good for him. That was exactly what she had expected. She knew men.
"Can I sit down?" she said.
Before he could answer she settled herself on his knees.
"If you're not going to bed you'd better go and put on a dressing-gown."
"Oh, I'm all right as I am." Then putting her arms round his neck, she placed her face against his and said: "Why are you so horrid to me, Phil?"
He tried to get up, but she would not let him.
"I do love you, Philip," she said.
"Don't talk damned rot."
"It isn't, it's true. I can't live without you. I want you."
He released himself from her arms.
"Please get up. You're making a fool of yourself and you're making me feel a perfect idiot."
"I love you, Philip. I want to make up for all the harm I did you. I can't go on like this, it's not in human nature."
He slipped out of the chair and left her in it.
"I'm very sorry, but it's too late."
She gave a heart-rending sob.
"But why? How can you be so cruel?"
"I suppose it's because I loved you too much. I wore the passion out. The thought of anything of that sort horrifies me. I can't look at you now without thinking of Emil and Griffiths. One can't help those things, I suppose it's just nerves."
She seized his hand and covered it with kisses.
"Don't," he cried.
She sank back into the chair.
"I can't go on like this. If you won't love me, I'd rather go away."
"Don't be foolish, you haven't anywhere to go. You can stay here as long as you like, but it must be on the definite understanding that we're friends and nothing more."
Then she dropped suddenly the vehemence of passion and gave a soft, insinuating laugh. She sidled up to Philip and put her arms round him. She made her voice low and wheedling.
"Don't be such an old silly. I believe you're nervous. You don't know how nice I can be."
She put her face against his and rubbed his cheek with hers. To Philip her smile was an abominable leer, and the suggestive glitter of her eyes filled him with horror. He drew back instinctively.
"I won't," he said.
But she would not let him go. She sought his mouth with her lips. He took her hands and tore them roughly apart and pushed her away.
"You disgust me," he said.
She steadied herself with one hand on the chimney-piece. She looked at him for an instant, and two red spots suddenly appeared on her cheeks. She gave a shrill, angry laugh.
"I disgust YOU."
She paused and drew in her breath sharply. Then she burst into a furious torrent of abuse. She shouted at the top of her voice. She called him every foul name she could think of. She used language so obscene that Philip was astounded; she was always so anxious to be refined, so shocked by coarseness, that it had never occurred to him that she knew the words she used now. She came up to him and thrust her face in his. It was distorted with passion, and in her tumultuous speech the spittle dribbled over her lips.
"I never cared for you, not once, I was making a fool of you always, you bored me, you bored me stiff, and I hated you, I would never have let you touch me only for the money, and it used to make me sick when I had to let you kiss me. We laughed at you, Griffiths and me, we laughed because you was such a mug. A mug! A mug!"
Then she burst again into abominable invective. She accused him of every mean fault; she said he was stingy, she said he was dull, she said he was vain, selfish; she cast virulent ridicule on everything upon which he was most sensitive. And at last she turned to go. She kept on, with hysterical violence, shouting at him an opprobrious, filthy epithet. She seized the handle of the door and flung it open. Then she turned round and hurled at him the injury which she knew was the only one that really touched him. She threw into the word all the malice and all the venom of which she was capable. She flung it at him as though it were a blow.

What Our Clients Have To Say | Tammy H
– I’m Tammy. I was introduced to Lynn from the GoWylde team. I was online researching to buy a house. I was actually looking for a private sale and it fell through. I clicked on Lynn’s name looking for houses and just asked her a bunch of questions. Then she asked me if I was interested in a condo and sent me some floor plans and that was a Sunday evening By Tuesday, I purchased a brand new build.
Lynn was very good at her job. She kept me very informed, was always in contact with any questions I had, she answered very quickly and was very responsive. I was living with my parents so I didn’t have to sell and it was very quick. She kept in contact with me right up until the close of my condo and I was living in it for three months. I would use her again if I were going to buy and sell. She was always very responsive. She never hesitated to email when I needed an answer quickly. She was very happy and knew what she was doing.
It was just a very easy process. This was my second home that I owned. The first one I purchased 20 years earlier and Lynn made it very easy and painless.

October 15, 2008
McCain aides say there was no heads-up for Joe the Plumber, who's headed out to the morning shows tomorrow.
"Joe didn't know" that he'd be at the center of the debate," said Matt McDonald.
"We tried to call him during the debate, but his phone was busy," he said. "We're not going to put him through media training."

McKenzie was wanting to sew one day and I was getting ready to go running. I told her to find something to keep Malachi occupied. She gave him some fabric and a box of pins. He sat there forever pinning his fabric! He later told me that he had made me a dress.
He was embarassed when I started taking his picture!
Gentry Family Update
2 years ago

My First Experience With a Friend
My first memory of masturbation happened when I was spending the night at my friend's house. I'll call him Tom. We were both 12, though he was about 5 months older than me. He moved in across the street when I was about 5 years old and we had been best buddies ever since.We were in the same classes at school.
This night I was staying overnight at his house. He had a room of his own above the attached garage, so we had a lot of privacy. We were both running on hormones and spent the night talking about the girls we'd like to see naked. There were three of them that lived in the neighborhood and we had spent many nights sneaking around trying to peek into their bedroom windows. This night we snuck out in our underwear and went down two houses to see if we could peek into Becky's window.
It was a hot night and her window was up about 6 inches. We could see the light on in her room. Her house had a lot of bushes around it so we could get up close to the window. We both carefully peeked in and there she was in her panties and a little top. I looked at Tom and we both grinned and looked back into the window. She had apparently just gotten undressed and was putting some clothes away. She walked back and forth getting clothes out of a basket and putting them in her dresser. She'd bend over and we would see her pretty little butt as she put some panties or shirts in her bottom drawer.
I looked at Tom and had his briefs down and was playing with his peter. I decided to pull mine down and do the same. This was so hot in our young minds. We watched for about 10 minutes hoping she'd get undressed, but it never happened. We decided we better get out of there before we got caught, so we pulled up our underwear and snuck away from the window.
We got back to Tom's house and snuck back in. As soon as we got to his room we were both jabbering away like crazy monkeys, talking about what we had seen. I told him that I really wished she had taken off her panties so we could see her little vagina. We had both been looking at the encyclopedia and new girls were different, but we had never seen the real live thing.
Tom said, 'Man I'm going to jack-off thinking of that!' I asked him what he meant and he asked if I had ever done it. I said I wasn't sure what he meant. In my house we never talked about sex and the only one I could talk to about it was Tom. He said he'd show me how to do it.
He said we both needed to take off our underwear and get naked. I said sure! I had been an exhibitionist for a long time and loved to be seen naked. I was stripped in about 30 seconds and he wasn't far behind me. Both of us had hard dicks. He told me to lay down on the bed and he'd show me how to do it. He took hold of my wiener and started to stroke it up and down. It felt so good I thought I'd die. I told him I never knew this could be so much fun! My dick was getting really hard and feeling good. I wasn't really ready for what he did next. He bent over and took me into his mouth. I nearly screamed out loud but managed to hold it in.
He began running his mouth up and down my little hard peter as I laid back and enjoyed it! I was feeling harder than I ever had, even when we were watching Becky in her panties. He was sucking and I was really enjoying it. He stopped for a minute and asked if I wanted to suck him too. I said sure and he straddled my face. I took him into my mouth and began sucking him like he was sucking me. We both began breathing harder and harder. Pretty soon I felt like I had to pee and told him so. He just kept sucking. Pretty soon I felt like my peter exploded and started moaning around his dick. He started moaning too and I tasted a little liquid in my mouth.
We both laid on the bed in a stupor for about 20 minutes. He then started to play with me again and I returned the favor. We kept doing it for most of the night. Neither one of us had a real load of cum, but we both enjoyed the orgasms that we had over and over again!
This was the start of many nights of enjoyment, and when we both started to shoot a lot of cum it really added to our experience. Oh, yeah, one night when we were about 14 we did see Becky naked in her room. We even got her to come outside and join our little game, but that's another story!

I stayed at this hotel from 17th July till 3rd August 2012 with my husband and two kids aged 12 and 5. Checking in was very quick and efficient. The room was a very good size and very clean. The complimenatary breakfast was good but did get a bit repetitive. However it did set us up for the day. The kitchen in the hotel room was really well equipped but could have done with some frying pans. The pool was enjoyed by the kids who said it was very clean. The bathroom was also a good size and clean. The room was cleaned throughly cleaned everyday and all the hotel staff were very friendly.
All the major parks are within very close proximity. The location of the hotel was also very good as it was much quieter than staying on International Drive.We would definately consider this hotel if we were to visit Florida again.More
- Free Wifi

Tonight was very interesting and rewarding. I had the great honor and opportunity to baptize a guy...in his own bathtub. What? you may say? That just sounds weird. He is suffering from cancer that has consumed his whole body and recently gave his life to the Lord when I visited him at the hospital. He called me and wanted to be baptized and we tried to set it up for church this next weekend but he was too weak. He said, "Can you do it at my home?" I had baptized many people in swimming pools, the lake, and even in a hot tub one time at on a college campus - now that was exciting! He said he didn't have a pool but asked about his bathtub. I instantly rejoiced and said yes.
Another guy in our church went with me. We anointed him with oil and prayed for healing according to James 5, took communion with him and his wife, shared scripture together, cried together, repented of sins, worshipped, then I baptized him in his own bathtub. Odd? Not at all! We did more things in scripture at his house than most do at church! He apologized for not having the strength to make it to church and I quickly told him not to apologize - we had church right there! What memories he and his wife will have every time they enter their bathroom! Now that's being church without walls! What a great memory for me as well. I'll never forget it.

"We have played not very well at all but we've found a way to win," Bruce said.
"That's important. We have played very well on Saturday, but that is the Championship. It's tough.
"I have to say, I thought Sunderland were very decent. They rolled their sleeves up and had a go for the new manager.
"But I thought we were a threat going forward. We found a way to win and in the Championship that's important.
"When you're not playing well and winning it's not a bad thing."

This is how Mia was sleeping this morning. How can that be comfortable? It didn't seem to bother her. She was sleeping soundly.
Mia usually wakes up so gently. She cries out a little, but just to let us know she's awake and by that point she had probably been awake just staring at the ceiling for a while. Today though she started really crying a few minutes before I was supposed to leave. I went into her room and she was flat on her belly. When I picked her up she had tears, but she was still asleep. She continued to cry after I picked her up and carried her downstairs. She finally woke up, but was still crying. She had tears streaming down her cheeks.
I was a few minutes late to work because I wanted to help Josh tend the dogs and get her bottle ready. With her crying it's so much more stressful for him to get things done. Not the best way for Daddy to start the day.
I wonder why she was so upset this morning. I wonder if it had anything to do with this crazy sleep position! I know I'd be sore if I slept this way. Can she have nightmares?

My, my, he has QUITE a grin on his face!!! I love it! If I saw someone smile like that in real life, I'd want to chat with him.
You did well with the lines around his mouth, and the shape of his eyes, both of which hint at a smile without even looking at his lips.
His hair almost looks like it was deliberately spiked...did he do it on purpose or did he just get up, take a shower, and then wipe his hair with a towel and let it dry? Either way, I think it's such a fun look!

Sex = Female
Where it happened = his Dad's car
Language = English
Refnum = 455
From the age of eight, I was raised in a convent boarding school because my mother died. I graduated from school never ever having been alone with a boy. My father found a family to stay with while I had my first job in a news kiosk. Nigel, the family's son, was very nice to me and took me to the cine. His hands were all over me. At the time I didn't think it was right but it did feel very good. After a while, we would slip into his Dad's garage and love up in his Dad's car. His hands under my blouse felt very good. I didn't have much of a bosem so I didn't own any bras. He made my nipples all stiff and tinglely as he stroked them through my undervest. You must understand that there was not much room to move around in an Austin Mini. As time went on, he would reach up under my dress and rub the center seam of my knickers. It had the effect of making me want want to go the loo. Looking backk, I realize that I was very inexperienced and didn't give Nigel much satisfaction. On our last date, he had unbuttoned his trousers in the pitch bl ack darkness. He took my hand and placed it on his bare wonker. I remember thinking that it must be part of his body as it was luvly and warm and it pulsed with his heartbeat. I had no idea how boys were built as I had led a very protected existance until then. I must confess that I had not given it much thought but right then I became very interested. I wrapped my fingers around his wonker and started to explore. I slid my hand up and found the end of his wonker moist and slippery and delightfully smooth. I had just discovered the little cleft when Nigel went stiff and bucked up and his wonker went into spasms. When I got hit in the face with a drop of hot liquid, I realized that Nigel was spurting all over the place. Nigel hit his arm into my face (accidently as I learned later) so I thought I had hurt him. I ran into the house and his father was in the hallway. He didn't say anything but when I got to my room I found that there was a glob of Nigel's jelly on my cardigan and another on my hair ribbon. Breakfast was completely silent and at the end Nigel's Dad gave me a week to move out and that regretably they were not in a position to write me a recommendation. No more words were said by his family except by Mandy, his 15 year old sister. She said Nigel was in big trouble for wreaking the car and that the canopy fabric had to be replaced. Also she asked if Nigel and I "did it" and if that had something to do with her Dad "doing it" everynight since that night. I honestly didn't know what she was talking about. All she could tell me was there were noises every night instead of once a fortnight in her parent's bedroom right next to hers. We were both clueless. I was so curious about boys that I did not choose wisely in my next relationship so my actual first time was not very nice Nigel visited me after he got married and told me that he was just as green as I was and that he didn't mean to hurt me and couldn't give a good account of himself and that is why his parents thought I was a forward girl. I wish there was a less painful wayfor us to find about sex. Nigel was really kind of sweet.
All stories property of Good 2 Go Entertainment LLC
- MyFirstTime © 1997-2013 by Good 2 Go Entertainment LLC -

Mistress Helena loves to crush but she is one of the few mistresses who do not enjoy to inflict pain on people. It does not matter how much you have pissed her. Mistress Helena does not like to crush people. She, however, has no problem doing the same for toys. She loves to crush using her butt and she does it to teddy bears and other toys because they cannot feel pain.
Mistress Mila's son had outgrown his toys and she did not have anything better to do with them. She did not even know where to donate them. And it happened that she was bored as she was thinking of what to do with them and she found out that other mistresses had fetishes for crushing toys. She tried it and she enjoyed it so much and within a few minutes, she had destroyed them all.
Madame Marissa knew that her slave was a clean freak and she wanted to shock him and humiliate him. She knew the best thing to do was to create a mess like he had never seen before. So she took some chocolates and she crushed them using her boots. She mixed them with some saliva and made a paste. She then asked him to not only clean the mess but to lick it as well.
Lady B was pissed when she got something different from what she had ordered. She had ordered an expensive trainset but she got a substandard and cheap one. She was so pissed that she instantly crushed and destroyed the cheap trainset. She was buying it for her nephew and there was no way she was going to gift him that cheap trainset. She smashed it until it was in pieces.
This mistress was bored in the house as she was not going to work and she did not have anything better to do. She ransacked the house and she got some toys. She did not know who they belonged to and since she did not care who owned them, she took them outside and passed time crushing them. The bored mistress had fun using her sneakers to destroy the toys.
Lady Stefanie does not like toys and people know that. Someone played a prank on her by throwing some toys into her house from the open window. When she saw them, she was pissed and she crushed them out of anger. She used her high heel boots to do it and within a few minutes, she had destroyed the toys and created a mess on the floor which her slave had to clean.
Lady B does not like toys. Mistress Christin likes them but only to crush and destroy them. Mistress Christin invited lady B to her house and she showed him how much fun it was to crush toys. The crushed a toy motorbike and had a lot of fun destroying it. They used their boots to crush it and within a couple of hours, there was nothing left of the motorbike.
Mistress Christin hates toys and when she found this one in her house, she knew she had to destroy it. And she did so using her high heels. She stepped on it and she destroyed it within a couple of minutes. She had deformed it and she made sure that no one would have recognized what it was by the time she was done with it. She then threw it away in the trash can.
This mistress was doing some house cleaning when she came across some toy cars in the basement. They belonged to her son but she did not need them. She had no use for them so she destroyed them. She crushed them using her high heels and she managed to turn them into a heap of garbage within a matter of minutes. She enjoyed it and she managed to pass some time.
Mistress Jane used her sneakers to crush her slave's toy car. She was shocked when she learned that he still liked to play with toy cars. She could not believe that a grown man could do that and she had to put an end to it. She did this by crushing and destroying the car. After she had destroyed it, she forbade him from getting a new one or using any in her house.

So my boyfriend cheated on me. He was out of town for buisness a few days ago and he got fired there. He had always been jealous of my ex, but you know it's a small town and we go to the same collegem so I can't avoid him. My ex has been a great friend after the break up anyways.
Either way after he got back from his trip his jealous got into new dimensions. He constantly asked if I was cheating, until I asked him if he was.
Turns out he was. He said that he just got fired and was increddibly drunk and that he'd do anything for me to forgive him. I believe he does regret it, he was crying and everything. And I don't hate him for it, but I still don't want to be with him anymore.
To my surprise tons of people were coming up to me saying that what he did was so wrong, but I should try to make it work and just forgive him.
wtf? I know this town is conservative, but why would anyone forgive that?
Most Helpful Guy
What does the town being conservative have to do with anything? You married and have kids with this guy or something? Do they just like him as person?
No, I wouldn't be able to forgive it. I wouldn't be with that person anymore. Complete lack of respect if when you do that to someone. Blaming it on alcohol would enrage me as well.
Also, I don't blame him for questioning you on your ex.0

William Coates Nicholls
I grew up as the son of FEPOW William Coates Nicholls - 1919-2008. At the time of the surrender of Singapore he was a Naval able seaman working on security in the Singapore dockyards. He was duly capture, initially being imprisoned in Changi. He had received bullet and shrapnel wounds whilst resisting capture and needed an operation to remove a bullet from very near his spine. He said that without that operation he would have spent the rest of his life in a wheel chair.
Once he had recovered he was put on a ship, collecting trees from Burma and bringing them back to Singapore. He spent the last nine months in Changi where he was put to work on digging out the foundations of Changi airport.
Finally released he weighed just over six stones and was nearly blind due to vitamin deficiency, but after returning home and with the loving care of his mother he regained his weight to eleven stone and by eating lots of Marmite (Vitamin D) he recovered his eyesight and lived a good life to the age of 87.
Having known and occasionally heard what he had been through I obviously thought he would not have much time for anything Japanese, but how wrong I was. When I was in my 40's he asked me why I had never bought a Japanese car. My reply was that, knowing what they had done to him in the war I would never buy anything made in Japan. He then gave me the biggest rollicking he every gave me in all my life. He said that was war and what happened in war had no correlation with peacetime. He said he had met many Japanese who were animals, but there were also many who were doing what they were told to do and had no choice in the matter. If they had refused they would have been shot.
So I can see good reason for reconciliation, but I’ve never bought a Japanese car, I’ve got a VW Tiguan instead.

Since you've got a call into the vet, I would just keep a close eye on her. I went through this exact thing yesterday with my 2 year old draft cross (who happens to be black). It was hot outside and he was laying a lot more than is typical for him. Because I was starting to worry, I got him up and could tell right away he was slightly colicky. Checked his temp and it was elevated but he had good CRT and gut sounds. His breathing was a bit fast so I led him over to where the hose was in the tank and spent about 10 minutes really rinsing him off with the cold water.
By the time I got done, he had pooped once and was acting like he felt a lot better; his temp was down, his breathing was slower, and he ended up feeling good enough to take off at a run after his buddy.
I second what Speed said, since you've already contacted the vet, just keep a close eye on her to make sure she doesn't start rolling violently or thrashing. Plus, if it's above 90* where you are, it couldn't possibly hurt to rinse her off a bit.

Leave Me Here
Every night, they would catch him under Holly’s bed. They couldn’t figure out how he kept escaping from the kitchen, but they were determined to keep him there for his own safety.
Despite their best efforts to teach Franco obedience, he kept escaping from his dog bed in the kitchen. They caught him under their daughter’s bed a few times, and they were puzzled as to why he kept going there.
They thought it might have been because he was trying to protect Holly, but they weren’t sure.

Why was it, he could never seem to be on the right side, thought Sebastian. Somehow he was caught in the middle, and for what? Just to hate the other side of the family.
He studied his mother's picture more. She was beautiful, with her dark hair and her fair skin. He was glad to have it. He wanted it, near him, always. If only he'd known her. If only she'd known him. It was so not right. None of this. Now she was dead.
Sebastian rested comfortably now, back in his old room with the library books that Louie kept the walls filled with.
How he seethed Leo now. He hadn't a pleasant thought in his head about how Jamie had conveniently lied to him. It was as if Jamie had the power to wash over any unpleasant notion of his past. Except, Louie. He wanted him to hate Louie. It came so natural.
"I suppose I should just go away for bit. Send me to that private school you've been waiting ages for me to go to in Switzerland." Of course, Sebastian wasn't certain he could trust Louie, either. After all, he hated to admit he was even his father.
"Now that sounds like a good idea." Louie gave Sebastian a pat on the back of his head as if now the boy was making sense and his job was done here. He'd never have to see him again.
Sebastian just smiled back. Truly, if he was a born and bred scoundrel, then he had a job to do to. He knew he could lie with the best of them.
this too shall pass
5 hours ago

Unbelievably fast reliable and accurate.
I was surprised at the prices initially - I thought they were too low for a quality product. But when the boots and shoes arrived I could see they were tiptop. I returned one pair because they were too big and even tho I live in teh sticks three was a shop very close where I could drop them off for free. thanks

Then, she pulled it out so it stuck out of his pants, thick and hard. We would talk and gripe about, all of the stupid things James does that makes us mad. What should I do, do you have any advent as to how I can acquaint HR to former her does. Yea you can't give your husbands boss more power over your husband. Friday, August 19, He was rubbing himself against her and she could feel his erection against her butt.
Free Porn Videos
I was so turned on that my cunt was literally dripping wet and seemed to grab his cock and pull it inside. Mary could feel his large cock rubbing along her inner thighs, as she was smothered by his heavy body. He was much bigger than my hubby! He had a beautiful cock. He said they were in the process of a divorce.
husbands boss videos - asociatividad.info
I called Tom he had just gotten off the plane and was going to get his luggage. Never, had one failed to be satisfied and not come back for more. He started to kiss her harder but she pulled back. He took the drinks back to the living room with a final look at his wife. I stared in the mirror. He could tell the disappointment in my voice. Change picture Your current user avatar, all sizes:
As he stretched her, it was slightly uncomfortable, but the currents of pleasure were a thousand times better. Women are nothing more then a piece of ass. One guy moved up to the side of my head and, grabbing it to turn it towards him, shoved his hard cock between my lips. Finally Monifa released his prick from her mouth and swallowed his large load of seed. They both agreed that it was a great fuck and she told him that she was looking forward to their company trips when she could spend all night with him.

For as long as I could remember, the only person I could share my deepest secrets with was Luke Casteel, Jr. It was as if I were truly alive only when he was with me, and in my secret putaway heart, I knew he felt the same way, even though he had never dared say anything about it. I wanted to look at him, look into his soft dark sapphire eyes forever and ever and tell him what I really felt, but the words were forbidden. He was my half brother.
But there was one way I could look continually at him and he at me without either of us being self-conscious about it or feeling someone would discover our secret, and that was...

There were two lucky winners of Saturday night's Lotto jackpot worth an eye-watering €4.5 million.
The winning numbers were 2,5,8,14,40,42 and the bonus was 7.
The prizewinners were located in the south and north west of the country, and will split a sum of €4,532,646 evenly between them.
There was also a winner in the Lotto Plus 2 draw, worth a total of €250,000.
The lucky numbers were 9, 15, 23, 35, 39, 47, and the bonus was 31.
The winner of that draw was also located in the north west of Ireland.

Maxie felt as if it had been ages that Katy had been in pain. He could hardly stand to hear her cries, and he had no feeling in his hand anymore from where she'd gripped it. Really, when the nurse said it was time, he couldn't hardly wait, and then it was still a good thirty minutes before the babe's arrival.
A girl. And she was pink and wrinkly and not a hair on her head. Maxie just smiled as he held her. He couldn't possibly think who she looked like. Of course, she sucked on her fist. It was impossible to make out her mouth. But it was the shock of having this living thing in his arms. He could hardly believe it was his. Actually, almost unbelievable. But it felt good to feel her weight and her movements. He was instantly in love.
"What shall be her name?" He asked her. But Katy only mumbled. She was practically asleep now.
"What did you say?" He listened as hard as he could, but again she only mumbled, and he wasn't sure what she said.
Maxie let Katy have her rest and went to the nursery with the baby. They gave him hand's on instruction on how to take care of the infant. He was so happy yet groggy himself. But really, he needed a name for this sweet little thing. He didn't want to dare put her in her crib until he had a name. He thought of celebrity names and such. No way was he going to name her a fruit or a thing. Maxie then smiled. Why hadn't he thought of it before. The baby would be Grace. Plain and simple. Now he hoped Katy was OK with it. Well, they'd call her Gracie, he then thought.
Let's get lost
5 hours ago

The Glen & Elsie Briscoe reunion was held in June at lower Ross Park. After lunch we went out to the Bringhurst building for dinner. Nathan had his mission farewell the next day. It was the first time I'd been back to my home ward in 10 years! It was a bit weird. Here are the pics of the day.

Originally Posted by all4mom
Even if he didn't have dementia and did have all his faculties and were in the NH (hating it) for any other reason, why would you bring him out there just to "tease" him with what he wants (to go home)? Guess I'm just not getting what would motivate you to do that. If you were saying you planned to bring him home with in-home help, I'd say great! But if, for whatever reason, he's fated to stay in the NH, it's kinder to leave it be.
It certainly wouldn't be to "tease" him. He loved this place (acreage/built the house) and I would have hoped it would give him some pleasure. In that sense it would be for me to see him happy...possibly. That was the motivation.
But that is why I posted the question....to get answers from people who knew and had experience with the situation.

Face in the Window
There was one night that was clear and the weather was just right. My best friend Sarah, her dad and her sister came to walk with me to her house to spend the night. Sarah's dad was talking about the hotel which we had to pass. He said that it was haunted and that there had been reported some paranormal encounters.
When we passed the hotel everyone else was talking and I was staring at the one window and kept glancing at it. Almost hoping that I would see something. Then I saw a face and it didn't look like a regular face. It looked transparent and it was looking at me. It was creepy but for some reason I knew that I'd see something in that window...

When I got the call on Saturday morning that my dad was passing quickly, I scrambled to get a ticket, packed and off. Kirsten came down with her hat that grandpa gave her and said she wasn't taking it off all day. Katanya carried a picture of her fishing with grandpa. That night, they took turns saying a prayer for grandpa. When I called that night, they wanted to tell grandpa that they loved him so I put the kids on speaker as they told him.
Really late Sunday night, (early Monday) McKay was having a hard time. She went to Jacob and he was able to talk to her about the gospel and life's plan. He also gave her a blessing. A couple days later, he told me about it. He told me how impressed he was to tell McKay that Grandpa was now happy, that he was with his family, and that specifically he was getting to know those of his brothers that had passed away as children. He kept saying how strong the feeling was that he was with his family. My mom had this heart wreath made in honor of the grandchildren. Haley took the picture of my dad in July of 2010. Before the viewing, the kids got a brief time to see grandpa and say goodbye. Kirsten never really got the alone time that she wanted. They were still setting up and she didn't feel like it was private enough. After the services, at the luncheon, I saw her talking to the picture of grandpa. I choked up but I was very touched. She is one that lets me know what she is thinking and very independent but yet she has such a sweet spirit and breaks when you say anything negative to her. I want her to know that it's still okay to talk and let out her feelings.
Katanya wasn't sure what to think. She is always the one to tell me that she loves me, or if she can't tell me she will sign it to me. She didn't want to touch Grandpa or get super close but the whole time she kept telling him that she loved him.
Cruz was an honorary pallbearer. He was so honored to wear a boutonniere and have it pinned to his suit. When I had him put his coat on to go outside for the graveside dedication, he told me to be careful of his flower.
They had the pallbearers leave their flower on the casket. He looked devastated when he had to take it off. After, I told him that he could go get it and that we would dry / press it. Once again he was a proud little guy.
I love seeing how children think and act. It often teaches me a lesson and I am reminded just how precious they are. I know all my kids love their Grandpa. I know he left an impression with them that they will remember. I know that their Grandpa loves them too.

“I was told by a prominent physician I would never golf or play tennis again.”
Bob had injured his shoulder numerous times since the age of 15. His most recent injury was suffered when a snowboarder literally ran him over! This former olympian, wouldn’t take it laying down, so to speak, and came to Dr. Kramer for several treatments. He and his wife recently competed in and won the senior olympic tennis tournament and was runner up in the North American Senior Games.

All costs were billed through the builder so we didn't pay anything additional for any upgrades. Overall a positive experience but it took them a few visits to address the squealing problem with the kitchen tap. They tried to do patch work the first couple of times and were eventually convinced that the tap needed to be replaced. They did not make a fuss about having to replace a sink and one of the toilets as they were chipped. One of their service guys was very good to deal with, most of the onsite plumbing staff was also comfortable to deal with.

This episode reveals the real deal about Si Tu Mo and Fu Pei’ s relationship. He was a basketball star in their high school and she had a massive crush on him. Then it seems to have become mutual as he asked and promised her that once the school was over, he would pursue her and she will be his girlfriend. Now in college, he was behaving like he was really available and takes Si Tu Mo for granted. Finally he realized that he was not the only fish in the sea when the handsome, low-key genius Wei Yi is beginning to show some interest in Si Tu Mo. His worry was further exacerbated by the pronouncement of a drunk Si Tu Mo that she had waiting long enough and that it was time to pack up her crush on Fu Pei.

This could have been a much better book. I enjoyed it but the descriptions were way too long and detailed. It took me days longer than it should have to get through this book because the details really bogged me down. I found many of the details unnecessary and sort of boring.
I like Koontz and have enjoyed his books for years (some more than others). I never know exactly what to expect from him. This book was disappointing. I was very curious about the secret the main character was hiding and enjoyed the final reveal. The secret was something I didn't expect and that was cool. All in all, the book was okay. If you like Koontz, give it a try. It was worth the 5 days. :)

T.I. is in the hot seat again! earlier this year he already paid a whole lot of money to his former employees when his business shut down and they were left jobless. Well the $75,000 he paid to 11 employees wasn't enough as they decided to take him back to court for allegedly defrauding them out of money they were owed. They believe that they are owed $40,000 which he paid in another lawsuit over a different case.
Content Goes Here

Astro Awani reported that an Indonesian man put up a Facebook post in which he said his wife was on sale for threesome services.
M. Amin Santoso (age 29) claimed that he had to do it because of his family’s financial problems. He has been married to his wife for 12 years.
“This is to pay for my two children’s schooling expenses,” said Amin when he was questioned by a reporter at the police headquarters in Surabaya on Monday (8th July).
Amin worked as a general labourer doing heavy lifting tasks, but the income from the job was not enough to sustain his family. His job only paid 50,000 Rupiah a day, which is equivalent to RM14.
He added that he usually receives financial aid but recently he did not get it.
Amin admitted that he was excited when he received an offer of 2,000,000 Rupiah (RM 586) in response to his Facebook post. His wife, who was also present at the police headquarters, confessed that she participated in his scheme because they were desperate for money.
Now, Amin faces legal action, while his wife has been released from custody.for, RM586, sale, Wife

This Chan's Peking is located on Raymond Ave and it has the best chinese food ever! The service isn't very good, but what do you expect? They are people who can't speak very well and need a job. You should try their food. It is very good and it is pretty reasonable.

Boy was confirmed as male, but his slow healing in the back end prevented them from performing his surgery. He was given antibiotics to see if that and the cream will help speed things up. I was also advised to bring him back to our vet and make sure he wasn't deformed in his male parts, which could also be causing the slow healing. I guess if his penis is misformed or too narrow, it could cause "leakage" that would eat away at the tissue around it, causing it to be damaged just as fast as it's healing. I'm going to try a week with cream and antibiotics to see if it makes any noticeable difference. I've already spent way more money on him then I'll ever hope to get back, and if he does have some kind of penis deformity, I can't even imagine what it'll cost to correct (or even if that's an option).

Search the Community
Showing results for tags 'mack sighting!'.
Found 2 results
November 2nd, 2020 There was so many people. She knew her eyes were darting everywhere just out of fear, so many people meant she was more hidden but it also meant more danger. She couldn't say which this situation was but she figured 50/50 was a decent ratio. Specially since in Europe it always seemed more 70/30 in favor of her pursuers. She wandered the docks in something of a haze having left Calder behind. She didn't want to risk his life again and besides, this was her job to figure herself out not his. At least there was some hope, she had recognized the skyline of New York after all so maybe there was something here. So far she was batting zero as she walked around the harbor. The voices sounded more familiar than in Europe at least but she wasn't seeing anything that might trigger a bigger memory. There had to be something though she wasn't born a handful of months ago here. She had a few scattered things that had to be real....right? They had to be real. With her skull already hurting from mattered she marched on, a strange woman in clothes to large staring around her like she was a tourist of some kind. More than a few people eyed her but no one bothered her for now. Lost souls wandered through the harbor on an almost daily basis after all. What was one more?
7/6/2020 Somewhere in Ireland She stared at herself in the glass. Most people when they looked into the glass did it for vanity reasons or to look into the store to see something. She did it to remember...or try to. She had been trying to put a name to the face she saw there looking back at her and couldn't. She had to be someone. She couldn't have just spawned forth days ago here...er was it days? How did she even know that? Ugh it was maddening and hurt her to even try puzzling things out. Her head wanted to split open just from trying and her eyes immediately started to dart to and fro like a crack head looking for a score. She looked the part to, her clothes were stolen from racks, sizes ignored. She didn't look like she had bathed in days, possibly weeks. She was thinner than she probably should have and her face was sunken and her eyes had bruising from a long time without sleep. She thought her hair was brown. It always seemed dirty though so it was hard to tell. The eyes always caught her though. They were a pretty dark green...though, sometimes if she struggled against the pain in her skull she thought she remembered green eyes but they weren't hers. They were a different kind of green and sometimes they were hazel... Ugh...that hurt...she was better off not remembering. She saw a man in a suit walking briskly and felt her spine tighten. She watched him in the glass, hands bunching into fists when he looked her direction. His lip curled but he moved on with his nose up as if she was disgusting. She wasn't safe here. Something told her that. She couldn't have stated how or why she knew that but she wasn't safe here. They would hunt her down and she'd be taken away again. Like...she had been? Doing her best to ignore the splitting headache in her skull she turned away from the glass and moved along, pulling the hood of the sweatshirt she had on over her head against the slight cold of Ireland. She hadn't started here, she had started somewhere else with more mountains. She remembered fearing that her bare feet would turn blue before she found a town and stole some boots that had been left outside covered in mud. They still didn't fit on her feet and she had no socks but it was better than nothing. She needed to get out of here though. She couldn't think of why but she needed to leave. She needed...a boat? She couldn't remember if she ever crossed the sea before but it sounded better than staying where she was. Where she was made her afraid, and going across the sea made her want to sigh in relief. So she would go across... Uh...if she could find a boat. She wandered the harbor, looking here and there. The smell of gas and engines calming even if the smell of it mixed with the sea and salt was strange. Laborers and dock workers ran about to their duties as she walked among them trying to think of how to convince someone to let her on the ship. She wasn't going to be able to sneak on likely and couldn't stay hidden for so long a trip. With little recourse she started asking, going from ship to ship to talk to people about perhaps working her way across. She didn't like the sight she probably displayed but she had little choice in the matter. The monsters were coming, and she needed to get out of here before they arrived or they would turn her into one of them.

I just moved here from San Antonio. I had a really cool friend named oscar back in San Antonio. I would come over every weekend and sometimes on school nights I would spend the night. We had only 1 class together. We had so much fun riding his 4-wheeler and going in his pool. We had gone on his roof at 3 in the morning. He was funny and we had fun together. When in his pool we would get a basketball and dunk the ball in his tube. We would do air Jordan’s and back wards dunks. We jumped of his deck into the pool while dunking the ball. I have not been there since the week before school started. I hope to visit on Christmas break and spring break.

Gerald Green has had an unusual NBA career, playing two years overseas in Russia earlier in this decade. He was drafted 18th overall back in 2005, but you may have only really seen him recently bouncing around the NBA. Green has been a bench player in his career, fluctuating shooting percentages throughout the year. Green has played for a handful of teams, but failing to really generate any stability. Well into the second half of his career, Green is trying to make his due with some of the better teams in the league as a bench player, which is not the worst way to go.

Nobody asked them about the war or what had happened to them. All we knew, and all we ever knew was that Orville had spent a couple of years in a German prisoner-of-war camp.
Creating a website in the early-to-mid-nineties was different than it is now. There weren't the variety of tools available that we see today. You were much more on your own to get it developed

A man who was an adventure photographer adopted a husky dog when the dog was only a couple of months old. The two became inseparable and had many adventures out in the wild as part of the man’s job. Then the man was diagnosed with colorectal cancer. He would have a long road of treatment.
When his symptoms became severe and he was taken to a hospital in a grave emergency, the hospital workers allowed him to keep his dog at his side throughout his stay. The dog even slept in the man’s hospital bed with him. In fact, the dog refused to leave his side.
Watch the video to learn more about this astounding story of friendship through hardship.
2The dog was faithful to his owner even as the owner underwent cancer treatment.

My 600-Lb Life Spoilers: Where is Paul McNeil Now?
My 600-Lb Life spoilers reveal that fans are very excited to see what is next for Paul McNeil and where he is now with his weight loss. When we first were introduced to him, he was struggling with finding clothes that would fit him. There were a lot of viewers who felt that he wouldn’t get approved for weight loss surgery, but when we look at him now, things do look a lot different.
His Weight Loss Journey
When Paul first appeared on the show, he weighed in at 757 pounds. He was motivated to get healthier and lose the extra weight that he was carrying. He had opened up about the reasons for his obesity and a lot of it was due to his childhood and how he began struggling with overeating. The fans loved him and felt connected to him because of how kind and positive he was throughout his journey. He revealed to viewers that even when he was a child, his father weighed over 400 pounds.
Paul would eat to make himself feel better and things just got worse when his parents got divorced when he was 10 years old. He lived with his mother and together, they made the decision to throw out all of the junk food in their home. Then Paul was ready to seek the help of Dr. Now.
Where is Paul Today?
When Paul went in to see Dr. Now, he was motivated to lose weight and knew that Dr. Now could help him. Paul had a lot of worries about losing weight, but he worked very hard to make sure that he was following the diet and working on exercising. He ended up qualifying for weight loss surgery and was very proud of himself.
Paul hasn’t been very active on social media, but he checked in last November to share a life update with his fans. He told fans that he now weighed 512 pounds and he also told his fans that his father had died and he was dealing with that.
Today, Paul is doing better and still working on keeping his weight off. We hope that he has gotten through the death of his father as well.
Be sure to catch up on everything happening with My 600-Lb Life right now. Come back here often for My 600-Lb Life spoilers, news, and updates.

Tessa Moreau had a pretty happy childhood growing up in small suburb outside of Chicago, IL. She had two siblings both younger than her. Her sister Becca was two years younger than her and her brother was 10 years younger than her. Her mother and father were both loving and supportive.
Tessa excelled at sports and was on the track team at her Jr. High School. She was hoping to join the varsity team this coming school year. She was part of the popular crowd and had a lot of friends. Her school work was average. She didn’t do great, but she wasn’t in remedial classes either. It was summer and she had just turned 14 years old. She would be a freshman in High School when the new school year started.
One night, Tessa and her family were watching TV when a knock came at the door. Her father opened the door and it was three young women, who looked disheveled and as if they had been crying. Her father asked them what was wrong, because they seemed frantic and afraid. They said their car had died and some guy was chasing them. They wanted to use the phone to call for a tow truck. Her father invited them in and that is when they struck.
The three women were vampires. They killed her father first by snapping his neck. Then they each took one of her other family members and drained them in front of her taunting her as they did it. They said they were saving her for last, because they wanted to her to watch as they killed her family one by one. Tessa didn’t know what to do. She was scared, but couldn’t just stand there while her family was sucked dry. She grabbed a dining room chair and smashed one of the vamps with it. The chair shattered and the vamp threw her against the wall. Tessa having watched a few vampire movies in her time remembered that stakes would kill them and she picked up a broken chair leg and shoved it through the back of one of the vampires. It turned to dust.
The other two vamps dropped her two siblings who were almost drained and ran to grab her. She managed to run upstairs to her bedroom and locked the door. She then jumped out the window getting several large cuts and landed in the front yard. As luck would have it, a delivery truck was passing by and she grabbed a hold of the ladder rack on it and rode away to safety.

First I want to thank ElderDog for changing my life by blessing me with the adoption of Finnigan. Finnigan and I have had the most amazing time since March 8, 2019. We have always been together even when I had errands to run. Finnigan loved his road trips. He always oversaw my hairdresser cutting my hair to ensure that I would not get nipped by the electric razor and he would always let my hairdresser know that he was watching every move she made. He made so many friends and he could always tell who was a dog lover. He had a 12 year old neighbour who he loved so much that every time we were outside and she walked by he would bark at her until she took him for a walk and then gave him treats and some love before he would let her go home. He loved his Nana and brother, Max, and they saw each other almost every day. His walks were one of his favourite things to do because he could always explore and meet new dog friends. After he lost weight Finnigan would trot when we went for walks and, when he realized that he was a boy and could lift that leg to pee, he lifted it up over half way across his back. Everyone would comment. I always told them he was a proud little boy and my super boy. Let me tell you he could talk and talk and talk to me. If he was upset with me because I would not let him have what I was eating he would grumble and then turn his back to let me know he was upset with his Momma.
Finnigan and I were best friends and loved each other unconditionally. He always was trying to please his Momma even though he did not have to. He loved spending time outside with me even in the cold weather. I just put lots of blankets on him and he was a happy camper. He had a love seat that was his and no one else was allowed on it. He saw deer, a horse, ducks and many more animals and would never bark; he would just stare at them. When we were spending time outside around the deck he was happy to be able to see his Momma and be with her. Finnigan was never anymore than 2 feet from me. Finnigan has given me so much love, joy and laughter in our short time. The best thing I have ever done was to get involved with Elder Dog. If I can give a dog a new lease on life and so much love and 100% attention than that is my mission. So thank you everyone involved with Finnigan for allowing me the opportunity to love a pet again.
Finnigan passed away peacefully in my arms September 3 at 7:30pm. He will be coming back home in a few weeks because he was always meant to be here with me. I miss him and feel an emptiness and loss. I feel drained and lost without him. He will always have a place in my heart and many other hearts that he melted since he moved in.
Thank you with all my heart.

This one is set in the Iron Druid world. I wasn't really a fan but maybe that's because I'm unfamiliar with the setting. I still will be trying to get into the books though. The best part was the Irish Wolfhound. I had one and she was amazing!

“Mohammad was twenty-five years old. He was of medium stature; inclined to slimness, with a large head and broad shoulders, and the rest of his body perfectly proportioned. His hair and beard were thick and black, not altogether straight but slightly curled. His hair reached midway between the lobes of his ears and his shoulders, and his beard was of a length to match. He had a noble breadth of forehead and the ovals of his large eyes were wide, with exceptionally long lashes and extensive brows, slightly arched but not joined. In most of the earliest descriptions his eyes are said to have been black, but according to one or two of these they were brown, or even light brown. His nose was aquiline and his mouth was wide and finely shaped-a comeliness always visible for although he let his beard grow, he never allowed the hair of his moustache protrude over his upper lip. His skin was white, but tanned by the sun. In addition to his natural beauty there was a light on his face-the same which had shone from his father, but in the son it was more powerful-and this light was especially apparent on his broad forehead, and in his eyes, which were remarkably luminous. Khadijah knew that she herself was still beautiful, but she was fifteen years his elder. Would he none the less be prepared to marry her?
She said to him: “Son of mine uncle, I love thee for thy kingship with me, and that for thou art ever in the centre, not being a partisan amongst the people for this or for that, and I love thee for trustworthiness and for the beauty of thy character and for the beauty of thy speech”. Then she offered herself in marriage to him, and they agreed that he should speak to his uncles and she would speak to her uncle `Amr, the son of Asad, for Khuwaylid her father had died.
-Excerpt from Muhammad his life based on the earliest sources by Martin Lings”

I didn’t become a real estate agent in my mid-60s because it was something I had always dreamed of being. I’ve never been very good at Monopoly. For more than 40 years, I had been a writer and editor at national publications. I’d still be doing that, had it not been for the Internet, which decimated the print media. My original career, essentially, had been sent back to “Go.” A few years ago, I reached out to an old friend. When he was in his mid-50s, he reinvented himself by becoming a real estate agent. He’s done very well, and by now could retire comfortably. I followed in his footsteps.

My Husband is on methadose. I can't talk to him anymore, he dosen't do anything. We're about to lose our house again because your money's going to drugs instead. I knew threr was aproblem but not how bad untill I started finding out about what is crap was and sercretly counting his pills. I tried to talk to him about it and he hasn't said but a few words since and it's now been almost 3 days. I don't know what to do. Is there any why to make him see? I can't stopped crying.
Posts You May Be Interested In

Feel like I'm not eating healthy enough..
I really want to eat healthy during my pregnancy but it's really hard for me. I buy alot more fruit and veg than I did before. But everytime I want to eat I always want to eat something that's unhealthy. I know if I don't have what I want I won't eat at all. I'm trying to eat as healthy as I can. Can not having alot of healthy food really cause any serious harm??

It was 11:00 at night. I thought all my kiddos were asleep. I was at my computor, and I heard the wierdest sound coming from the boys room. It was my son, Simeon, baby-stepping along into the kitchen for a drink of water. Why the bag? I just bought him new socks and he was trying to keep them clean! He was not trying to be funny, at all. He was quite serious about his dilema, but we soon laughed together sooo hard about it for a very long time. Maybe I need to buy him socks more often so he can worry about them less. Or maybe he's just like his dad who never, ever wears his socks without some form of dirt-protecting coverage. Or maybe I need to clean the floors more often. I like the 'buy more socks' idea.

A 43-year-old man was arrested for allegedly raping his niece in north Delhi's Kotwali, police said today.
The incident first took place first on March 26, when the girl was alone at home as her aunt had gone to Bhagalpur in Bihar, they said.
The 14-year-old victim informed her friend, who works with an NGO. The girl said that her uncle was raping her for the last two months, police said.
The accused had adopted the girl after her parents died when she was two-years-old. She was enrolled in a school later, they said.
The accused came home in an inebriated condition and allegedly raped her, police said.
The girl alleged that she was raped several times since then. After she informed her friend, they approached the police on Thursday, following which a case was registered and the accused was arrested, they added. PTI

Irish MMA player and former boxer Sinead Kavanagh has revealed painful struggles she faced as a woman athlete in Ireland. After emerging as one of the promising boxing prospects, Sinead said that she had to leave it due to the lack of money and awareness regarding women’s boxing.
She also stated that when she was young, for women in Ireland, life wasn’t easy, especially for those who wanted to pursue sports, which has left her heartbroken multiple times but she has continued her grind for 25 or more years. Sinead will be in action against Cris Cyborg on 12th November in Florida, USA.
Boxing wasn't good to me. Amateur in Ireland, women weren't getting paid. When I think back on it, it was very dark and I wasn't in a good headspace with that sport. I was boxing 10 years, but I had to leave and go to MMA. You're always wishing you were a boy. You were kept away from something you wanted to do. It was heartbreaking. I went to John's gym, my mate was talking me up, saying I could hit hard. I was in the background with my head down. That's what John said he loved about me, gave me classes to do, and I done them. I got onto the pro team. John's been very good to me. He's looked after me, took me under his wing, and told me I could be a star here. When we were kids there wasn't women's sport really. We were forbidden. Ireland women couldn't even drink in the pubs, that was for men. In Inchicore in the Black Lion there was a man's part of the bar. That was me growing up, that still going on. Now, the world's at my feet. Never give up. When you look at me, I'm 35, I've been fighting since I was eight years of age. Never give up on your dream. This is where it's taken me, to Miami to fight the best in the world. You can't write that, what's happening. If I win this belt it's going to be some story and I can do it. Definitely.
Sinead Kavanaugh, MMA Fighter, Ireland

Wimmy came to visit yesterday. Lily has gone to China to visit her mother, and so Tim came to spend Easter with us. Tonight we played this game. It's a card game, not with regular cards but special cards. We were playing it a bit wrong, but it was fun anyway. And I won! Yayay!

Now I am exercising daily, you would think swimming would be high up there, and in a way it is but I had a problem. A swimming costume is one item of clothing that has to fit, and I was having trouble finding one, but I did and today I had my first swim. I even managed to wake up and get up at 5.50am!
|the actual pool|
I was in a hotel and their pool is pretty good. I would guess about 15 -18 metres in length. I aimed to do 30 lengths, but that was quite quick so extended it to 40 lengths and then thought 'stupid me, the answer is 42', so that is what I did.
Really enjoyed it.

We stumbled on this restaurant while we were looking for Le papillon which is on the same street. We were hu fry so we decided to try it. Overall it was very good except fir slow service. My daughter and her roommate are both fluent in a french but because of my English I think they were ignoring us. Other than the service it was wonderful. I had the fish strew wich was an ample portion with a delicious mixture of flavors. My daughter had broilled fish of some kind which was delicious. Her friend had the cassoulet which was good but uneatable due to it's temperature. The house wine which we had - from Gaillac- was delicious and Was very reasonably priced by the pitcher. We had desert and it was very good but due to the many great meals I've had in Albi so far I can't remember what it was! I would definitely return. 60 euor for three with ample food
Own or manage this property? Claim your listing for free to respond to reviews, update your profile and much more.

No need to ask. The service I have received from day one has been smashing. I couldn't have asked for any better. I was kept up to date at all times. And even better with only a few adjustments my design was complete. The after service and support I have received has been very professional and helpful. I would recommend Logo Depot to anyone. Do not hesitate as you will not be disappointed. Thankyou very much.
To reply as a company, please log in to your business account.

Matthew Hughes told Eminem that he broke into his house to kill the rapper during a home invasion in April.
Eminem had a brush with death after his home was broken into in April of this year. According to a courtroom reporter, a detective confirmed that Matthew Hughes, the 26-year-old man who confronted the legendary rapper in his living room, told Em that he had invaded his property to kill him.
As the case moves on for Hughes, he was in court today where the home invasion was discussed at length. Eminem was not present in court but a detective recounted what the rapper told him about his run-in with Hughes.
"Mr. Mathers (Eminem) said Matthew Hughes told him he was there to kill him," said a detective during today's court hearing. New photos of Hughes were also released, as well as a confirmation that he remains locked up with a $50,000 cash bond. Hughes is facing felony charges that will be addressed at the next court hearing later this month.
New details were also revealed about the home invasion. According to the detective, Eminem thought that Hughes was his nephew when he first noticed him. However, because it was dark, it took him a while to realize that he did not know the man. A window had been broken on his property, which his security team responded to.
Kevin Winter/Getty Images
Thankfully, Em was not harmed in the home invasion. This could have seriously been a tragic incident had things turned out the way Hughes intended.

I used to feel sorry for this former A list tween actress who now looks for work like every other actress in town. Maybe she should go back to singing. She is pretty good at it. Anyway two nights ago she was out with her girlfriends and her celebrity husband was doing his thing with the waitress he met a few months back. He’s being so open about it and the actress does nothing. I know the guy has money but at some point you have to have some self-respect. He has been doing this to the actress for years.
Hilary Duff, Mike Comrie

Published by Stephanie Wilson, Director of First Impressions
Ever wonder what it is like to see your child become more independent? I experienced this recently when my son started driving his vehicle.
My 20-year old son is on the autism spectrum. We had our doubts at first if he would be able to be self-sufficient. The school years were a struggle. It took both me and his father working together to get him through school. However, he was educated in a standard class environment with modifications and never was held back a grade. When he graduated from high school, we were extremely proud of his accomplishment!
At age 17, he landed his first job at Whataburger and worked there for over 2 years. He was named employee of the month right before he left there. He now works for HEB and has been there for almost a year. He enjoys the work and is a very dependable employee. He volunteers to cover other co-workers’ shifts when they are sick or otherwise unavailable.
In the first year and a half of his work life, he had to be driven to work as he was not ready to drive on his own. The day he drove to work himself was a red-letter day. He drove his dad’s truck and we were over the moon! We were so relieved that he could be self-reliant.
The next progression was learning how to drive his car which is a stick shift 1989 Ford Bronco II. His dad taught him over several weeks. The dedication he showed on accomplishing this task was heartwarming. Waving goodbye as he drove off to work in his vehicle was a fantastic feeling. However, it was a little frightening too. What if he got in an accident or got stuck somewhere? So far, my fears have been unfounded.
He is now very confident in his driving abilities. We knew that it would be hard for him to learn to drive, let alone drive a stick shift. He enjoys having his independence to drive whenever he needs to.
Having him have a stable job and driving his car has been thrilling and makes us so proud. He truly has become an independent young man.

Ordering my product was very simple and was easy to do. Then I ordered it on Saturday and it arrived on Tuesday which I thought was extremely good. I was also able to track my order which was also very good!!
Connect with Facebook to get one click access to Trustpilot.

"Once again he became an atheist"
He was going to lose her presence in his life, forever. The person who never stepped into any door of God today was going to enter the temple for the love of his life. Holding her hand tightly, he only wished she could stay more with him. He couldn't take his eyes off her while she was praying to God. He only hoped that she could change her decision and agree to stay with him, no matter how cruel the situations might turn. He was falling for her all over again. When he realised, she was walking towards him. She was managing to look into his eyes but she couldn't hold on the glance. Tears rolled down her eye and he got the answer of his unasked question. That was the last time he ever saw her again. Every time they have been together, it was his responsibility to drop her back to her place. But this time he purposely didn't. As he knew himself that he couldn't travel the distance back from her place to his, alone. Carrying the weight of broken dreams and shattered pieces of his heart both started to walk on their path. It was a tendency to turn behind once while she walks away every time and yet, this time she didn't bother to. He was waiting for the propensity to occur and unexpectedly he was heartbroken once again.
And while the destiny was flipping its pages,
again another chapter was concluded.
Along with the belief of God in the journey of his life
Written by Amey. Thorat.

John Okafor, popularly known as Mr Ibu lost his aged mother on Saturday, April 18, 2015.
In a recent chat with Daily Independent, Ibu spoke endearingly about his mother who he says was the source of every good thing he has and the one behind his successful career so far.
“I will miss everything about my mother because aside God, she is the source of every good thing that I have and I am. She died at age 90 but I wished she had lived for 50 more years.”
He shared the last moments he had with mother before she died.
“I saw her last about two weeks ago and she was so happy because we marked her 90th birthday. She was so happy and that was the last time she saw many people around her,” he recounted.

On Little Man's birthday we let him typically choose a movie and a snack he likes and curl up on the couch to cuddle and see a show, but since Little Lady is so teeny yet, she's too young for that. She did get a few sweets we typically don't keep around the house though, and her response was too funny.
I wish I had my camera when she initially saw the cupcakes in the morning, because oh my goodness her eyes got so wide I had to laugh. But I think she was equally as impressed as she dug in to have a bite.
I think it's safe to say he enjoyed the day as well!

These startling allegations were made by one of Kubheka’s neighbours, with whom the actor spent the final hours of his life.
Kubheka, 48, hung himself with a tie on Monday at his Soshanguve, Tshwane, home.
The neighbour, who declined to be identified, said Kubheka was having financial difficulties and had been feeling down about the situation.
“We were chilling together on Monday trying to relieve ourselves from the weekend babalas by drinking a few beers. We were hanging around at a house of one of our friends who is a car mechanic.
“Gunman told us that his side chick, who he loved a lot, had died and he was stressing because he didn’t have money to go to her home for the funeral. He did not tell us where this girlfriend lived.
“So later in the afternoon he left and said he was going to do something at his house and would be back.
“We didn’t suspect anything bad. We were shocked when his wife came running later saying the guy had died,” said the neighbour.
continue reading on next page

Having sealed this, and given it to the lad who was to return with the horses, we finished our breakfast, and took a post-chaise on for Dublin, where we arrived late in the evening. During our journey I requested Timothy to narrate what had passed, and by what fortunate chance he had been able to come so opportunely to my rescue.
“If you recollect, Japhet,” replied Timothy, “you had received one or two letters from me, relative to the movements of the gipsy, and stating his intention to carry off the little girl from the boarding-school. My last letter, in which I had informed you that he had succeeded in gaining an entrance into the ladies’ school at Brentford, could not have reached you, as I found by your note that you had set off the same evening. The gipsy, whom I only knew by the name of Will, inquired of me the name by which the little girl was known, and my answer was, Smith; as I took it for granted that, in a large seminary, there must be one, if not more, of that name. Acting upon this, he made inquiries of the maid-servant to whom he paid his addresses, and made very handsome presents, if there was a Miss Smith in the school; she replied, that there were two, one a young lady of sixteen, and the other about twelve years old. Of course the one selected was the younger. Will had seen me in my livery, and his plan was to obtain a similar one, hire a chariot, and go down to Brentford, with a request that Miss Smith might be sent up with him immediately, as you were so ill that you were not expected to live; but previous to his taking this step, he wrote to Melchior, requesting his orders as to how he was to proceed when he had obtained the child. The answer from Melchior arrived. By this time, he had discovered that you were in Ireland, and intended to visit him; perhaps he had you in confinement, for I do not know how long you were there, but the answer desired Will to come over immediately, as there would be in all probability work for him, that would be well paid for. He had now become so intimate with me, that he disguised nothing; he showed me the letter, and I asked him what it meant; he replied that there was somebody to put out of the way, that was clear. It immediately struck me, that you must be the person if such was the case, and I volunteered to go with him, to which, after some difficulty, he consented. We travelled outside the mail, and in four days we arrived at the castle. Will went up to Melchior, who told him what it was that he required. Will consented, and then stated he had another hand with him, which might be necessary, vouching for my doing anything that was required. Melchior sent for me, and I certainly was afraid that he would discover me, but my disguise was too good. I had prepared for it still further, by wearing a wig of light hair, he asked me some questions, and I replied in a surly, dogged tone, which satisfied him. The reward was two hundred pounds, to be shared between us; and, as it was considered advisable that we should not be seen after the affair was over, by the people about the place, we had the horses provided for us. The rest you well know. I was willing to make sure that it was you before I struck the scoundrel, and the first glimpse from the lantern, and your voice, convinced me.”

**Setting: Immediately after Season 3**
When Veronica got on the plane to begin her summer internship with the F.B.I., she had no idea how much would change while she was gone. She was so used to being in the center of all the events that connected all those in her life that she never dreamed that all she cared about would move on so dramatically while she was gone. She was so relieved to leave Neptune behind that she never gave much thought to how things would be when she returned. Her dad had won the election in spite of the last minute attack ads and Kane-centric intrigue. She was comfortable leaving him because she knew Cliff would help him get out of the legal tangles erasing that tape for Veronica had caused him. While she was at the airport waiting for her flight, she was even more relieved she was leaving when she caught a news report announcing the return of the Kane Billionaire's fugitive son. The report said that Duncan Kane had returned to the United States with his daughter he had allegedly kidnapped. He was currently in New York being questioned by the F.B.I. The news report was surprising; especially in light of the fact that Meg Manning's parents were shown on either side of him. Meg's mom had Duncan's daughter, Lily, in her arms. Everyone was all smiles.
"One big happy family," Veronica thought cynically. She knew that the Kane money and influence were capable of anything. She also knew that the Manning's own horrific treatment of their youngest daughter that she and Duncan had witnessed put them in a vulnerable position.
"Clarence must have finally gotten the leverage the Kane's needed to force them into their current script," she thought. "Good for Duncan."
She was happy for him. Her life with him seemed like a dream even though it was a little over a year ago. She was just really happy that she could have the summer away from all the drama his return would cause. Returning to Neptune and contacting her would be a priority of Duncan's. She knew this as well as she knew how unprepared she was to deal with him. Filing for the F.B.I. would be just the mindless task she needed. Let the fun begin!

I have posted in this group before but just officially joined! Hope you ladies don't mind :) I had a feeling we would be joining but wanted to wait and make sure. Jordan Anthony was born July 22 at 9:55pm! He was 7lb 4oz, 19 1/4 inches. He was due August 19th.
I will post pictures later!

The big news coming into the game was that UNLV QB Mark Clayton was going to start after he suffered and injury last week against Oregon State. This game was an aerial attack that featured 965 total yards with 817 in the passing game.
UNLV QB Omar Clayton did a good job in his return with possibly his best game of his career with 340 yards, three scores, but two picks. All-everything WR Ryan Wolfe was stellar with 130 yards, but touchdown maker Phill Payne had 94 yards and two touchdowns. The running game was nothing special with Channing Trotter who manged 68 yards.
Hawai'i threw even more as Greg Alexander who had 477 yards and three receivers had over 100 yards, but the running game was nill as they had only 28 total yards.
This game was one of those back and forth affairs with little punting and a couple of picks. The game was basically one of those games that whoever had the ball last was going to win. Hawaii scored with just over five minutes, but that was too much as Omar Clayton drove down the field for the game winning score.
These types of drives are what UNLV was known to give up those late drives, but it seems that UNLV -at least offensively-- is able to keep pace with most teams and will cause trouble once conference season begins.

At the Crane Mansion, the original Fox returned as Theresa told him not to push Whitney into getting over Chad before she was ready. Theresa accused Fox of scheming to get Whitney and asked him to tell her what he was up to. He refused to tell her and turned the tables, asking her why she'd slept with someone after the embryo procedure. She told him that she'd never said she'd slept with someone else and attempted to change the subject back to Fox's plans. Fox told her that she needed a nap and left.
Upstairs in Alistair's office, he pulled out a picture of Katherine and revealed one of his secrets: "Katherine, I should have killed you the first time you denied me your bed, but I didn't. I kept hoping that you'd come to love me like your sister Rachel loved me, but you didn't. You never even came close! If only Rachel hadn't died in that boating accident, I would have married her and not you, her second rate sister. Damn you for not dying instead of Rachel!" Martin, who had been roaming around the mansion with a gun in hand, searching for Alistair, followed the scent of the cigar smoke into Alistair's office, but Alistair had disappeared. Frustrated, Martin went downstairs.
Outside the church, Whitney begged Chad to stay away from her. Chad left, and Whitney kneeled down in front of a statue of Mother Mary to pray for direction. As Whitney broke down, the statue shed a tear as well.
At Sheridan's cottage, an emotional Pilar told Paloma that having her home was a dream realized. Meanwhile, Paloma remembered Alistair telling her that her family did not want her. Paloma told her mother, Luis, and Sheridan that she was tired after the flight and went to her room to lie down. As Pilar went to the kitchen to make dinner, Sheridan told Luis that she'd never seen Pilar that happy.
Luis told Sheridan that the only thing that could make her happier would be if his father returned home, too. Sheridan replied, "Well, this is Harmony, where everything seems to be possible." Luis told Paloma that he and Sheridan were going to go out on a romantic getaway, and that would give her time with Pilar. Talking to herself, Paloma said, "That man I met at the mansion was right. Luis just brought me here to take care of my mother so he can come and go whenever he wants...with our dead brother's widow."
Whitney went to visit Theresa, who tried to comfort her best friend. She told Whitney, "Your life is not over. You've just hit a minor pothole on the highway to happiness." She went on to say that people in Harmony had short memories, and soon she and Chad would be "yesterday's news." She said, "It's not like you got pregnant and have Chad's baby to look at as the constant reminder of the cardinal sin that you committed with your brother."
Theresa tried to convince Whitney to give Fox a chance. She told Whitney that Fox would make a really good husband. Whitney agreed with Theresa. It looked like Theresa was not the only one plotting. Aloud, Whitney said, "Yeah, Fox would make a really good husband." Thinking, she continued, "and a father."
At the Harmony Recording Studio, Fox checked in on Chad. He said that he was sorry for the way things had turned out and said, "Welcome to the family. Now you can ruin other people's lives just by being a Crane." Chad asked Fox to look after Whitney and make sure she was okay. Fox told him that Whitney was not too fond of the Cranes right then, and since he was a Crane, she probably wouldn't talk to him.
Back at the Crane mansion, Julian saw Katherine from behind and asked if she was his mother. As Katherine turned around, he apologized, "Your face, as lovely as it is, it looks nothing like my mother." Katherine told him that there was nothing to forgive, and Julian was astonished because she sounded exactly like his memory of his mother's voice. Katherine introduced herself to Julian and Eve as "Mrs. Wheeler." Julian offered to show her around the mansion. They all got into a discussion of Pilar's blood disorder.
Eve told Katherine that she was in remission, but seeing Paloma should do her a world of good. Katherine told Eve, "Yes, being close to a child again that you've been separated from for so many years is like an answer to a mother's dream." Eve seemed to be hurt by the comment, since her own lost child wanted nothing to do with her, so Julian tried changing the subject and asked Katherine if she had any children. She told him that she had a son and a daughter that she had been estranged from for many years. Julian explained to Katherine that Eve was the love of his life, despite the fact that he was married to Rebecca.
Julian told Katherine that they had a child together that they had been separated from. They explained to Katherine that after Chad had been born, Alistair had had him kidnapped and they had been told that he had died. Katherine was outraged. Tired of the depressing conversation, Julian offered Katherine a drink. Katherine accepted and went to where the bar had been when she'd lived there. Julian explained that the bar had once been where Katherine was going, but it was on the other side of the room.
Julian said, "Not only do you remind me of my mother, but you seem to think like her, as well. I wonder why that is." Katherine explained that they probably just missed their loved ones, so they were seeing things that weren't there in perfect strangers.
Martin went downstairs and told Katherine that he was going to check on Paloma. Katherine told him that she wanted to stay and visit with Julian and Eve a little longer, but she walked him outside. In the foyer, Martin and Katherine hugged as he told her that he knew she wanted to see her son but to be careful. As they let go of their embrace, Katherine took Martin's gun and hid it behind her back. She told Julian and Eve that she was going to the restroom to freshen up.
Talking to herself, Katherine said, "Martin has sacrificed so much for me because of Alistair. I can't let him sacrifice himself as well. I'll take care of Alistair myself. Who knows? I might even enjoy it." Martin arrived at the cottage. While talking to him, Pilar grew weak and fainted.
Katherine, hunting for Alistair, heard his voice outside his office. She hid the gun and went into the office. Alistair, facing the window away from his wife said, "Katherine, my dear, it's about time you came back to me, your loving husband. It's so good to finally see you after all these years." As he said the last sentence, the camera rose, and Alistair's face was finally revealed.
Share this story with friends, family or the world.
At the Crane mansion, Theresa and Whitney were talking. Theresa told Whitney that Fox would make a good father, and Whitney agreed with her. Theresa went on to say that Fox wasn't the only guy out there; there were others, but Fox was in love with her and would treat her well. They went on talking a bit longer, and Whitney thanked Theresa for caring. Theresa said they'd been friends forever, and of course she cared.
Theresa left to read Little Ethan a story. Whitney left and thought to herself that if she got together with Fox right away, nobody would have to know that her baby was Chad's, but she didn't know if she could do that to Fox. She went on thinking that it was something that Theresa would do, but she'd do whatever she had to for her baby. She left to find Fox.
Over at the recording studio, Chad was thanking Fox for looking after Whitney for him. He said he had trusted him as a friend, but since they were half-brothers, as well, he trusted him even more. He went on to say that he knew that Fox would keep the "wolves" away from Whitney while she was vulnerable to them. Fox left thinking to himself that all was fair in love and war.
Later on, after getting a message from Chad, Theresa went to the studio. He told her she hadn't needed to stop by; he'd just wanted to know how Whitney was doing. She told him that she was dealing with things, but it was hard. Chad told her that he had Fox looking after Whitney. Theresa was surprised to hear that, and Chad wondered if there was any reason why he shouldn't trust him. Theresa said no, and Chad told her that he trusted Fox as a friend and as a brother.
Chad went on to say he knew he'd never be with Whitney again. Theresa told him that both he and Whitney had to move on. Chad said he didn't know if he could go on because he couldn't imagine seeing Whitney with another man. Theresa said she'd had to do it when she'd realized she'd never be with Ethan, and he had to do it as well. Chad said it was killing him, and he knew it'd happen eventually, but he didn't know what he'd do when she did find someone else.
Back at the Crane mansion Fox ran into Whitney and asked her what she was doing there. She told him that she was looking for him. He said that he was surprised after she'd yelled at him, and she apologized. He thanked her and asked her what she wanted to talk about, and she told him "the future."
Fox and Whitney sat down, and Whitney said she wanted to say some things and just wanted him to listen. She went on to tell him that she'd reacted badly when she'd found out he had been in love with her, and she hadn't mean it when she'd said he'd used her like all of the other Cranes. She said she'd only gotten that upset because of what her mother had done. Fox said that he'd reacted badly as well, and he was sorry. She went on to say that she was the one who was sorry; they'd had a good friendship, and she should have been more understanding.
Whitney apologized again, and Fox interrupted her to take a phone call. While he was talking, she told herself she felt like a sleaze for using Fox, but she didn't have any other choice. Fox ended his call and told Whitney that he was impressed by her positive attitude. She said there was no use in living in the past, and she knew what she had to do. She kissed Fox.
At the cottage, Martin put Pilar on the couch after she fainted. Paloma wanted to know why she'd fainted. Martin said he didn't know and added that her pulse and breathing were good, and maybe the excitement had just been too much for her. He sent Paloma for a cold towel for Pilar's head and started having flashbacks of when they had been married. Paloma returned with the towel, and Pilar called out Martin's name. Paloma heard her and thought Pilar had to be dreaming about her father but wondered why.
Pilar drifted back into her flashback. In her mind, she was trying to convince Martin to leave his job with the Cranes and move away. Martin didn't know why she'd suggest that, and she said that their lives were too tangled up with the Cranes, and she had a feeling something bad was going to happen. Meanwhile, Paloma flashed on the conversation she'd had with Alistair and what he'd said about her family using her and tricking her into going back home. She began to wonder if what he had been saying was true.
Pilar continued with the flashback, begging Martin to leave, that something horrible would happen if they didn't leave. Martin recalled what Pilar was flashing back on and wished he had listened more carefully to her at the time. Paloma wondered why Pilar hadn't woken up yet, and Martin told her that her mother had always been a strong woman. Paloma wondered how he knew that.
Martin caught himself and said that Tia Maria had talked about her for years, and he felt like he'd known Pilar just as long. Pilar finally awoke and opened her eyes to see Martin as he had been and said, "It is you!" Paloma wondered why her mother seemed to know him, and Martin said she was sick, but Pilar grabbed hold of him and hugged him.
In Alistair's study, Alistair was telling Katherine that it was good to see her again after all those years. Katherine told him that she wouldn't let him hurt them, their children, or the Lopez-Fitzgeralds anymore. Alistair wondered if she meant Martin, the one who'd made her into a whore. Alistair went on a rant about what a terrible mother Katherine was for deserting her children and how spineless she was. He went on to say she was pathetic, she didn't have the guts to stop him, and she was weak. He told her she'd given up everything; she had been living in a fairy tale.
Katherine told Alistair it had been no fairy tale; it had been a nightmare, but it was going to end. Alistair said it sounded like she meant to try to stop him, and she said she was going to stop him and that his reign of terror was going to end -- that night. He asked her what she planned to do, and he said she was a coward and had always been a coward. He went on to ask her if that was why she'd had so much surgery done to her face, so she wouldn't have to look in a mirror and face herself after what she'd done. She told him that she hadn't chosen to leave their children. She'd had to leave because if she hadn't, he would have killed her and Martin. He told her she could have taken "the brats" with her, but she said he would have hunted them down to take them back.
Alistair said that Julian was as spineless as she was, and Sheridan was worthless as a daughter, who was a waste in the whole scheme of things. Katherine told him that he was a sick man. He responded by saying he was the most powerful man on the planet, that the president called him to ask for favors, and he could do what he wanted, when he wanted, to whomever he wanted. He went on to say that at that moment, he wanted to punish her, Martin, Sheridan, and the Lopez-Fitzgeralds. Katherine told him that she'd do whatever he wanted her to, as long as she left the rest alone.
Alistair asked Katherine if she could turn back time and give him back all the years she'd stolen from him. She didn't understand what he was getting at, and he told her to return and be his wife again. She told him she didn't think she could do that; he told her that her friends and family wouldn't be spared then. She told him that it was madness. He said she had the power to stop it. She finally relented and agreed to go back to him and be his wife again.
Share this story with friends, family or the world.
Luis took Sheridan away to a cabin where he'd planned a romantic night for them. Sheridan couldn't believe it because they'd just gotten home. They made a toast and kissed. Later, after dinner, Luis gave Sheridan a massage, and they made love.
At the recording studio, Theresa and Chad were talking. Theresa told him that he couldn't be with Whitney ever again, and he had to move on, even though she knew how hard that would be. He said he just couldn't imagine Whitney with another man, and seeing her with someone else would drive him crazy -- he'd kill the other man. Theresa said he was talking crazy, and he had to stop talking that way. She suggested they go to the new café so he could meet some new people.
Chad wasn't sure; he said he was worried about Whitney moving on to someone else. Theresa said that Whitney was as hurt as he was and wouldn't move on for a long time. They headed to the café, and Theresa wondered if it was a good idea. She wanted Chad to calm down, but the caffeine would probably do the opposite. Chad said that he and Whitney hadn't had a normal breakup, where they fell out of love or when someone died; they were both still there and in love, but she was his half-sister.
Theresa told Chad he could still love Whitney as a sister, but he had to move on. Chad responded by saying he didn't know how he could deal with Whitney moving on and having a baby with another man. Theresa told him he didn't have a choice.
Outside the Crane mansion, Fox was surprised by Whitney's kiss. He wanted to know what was going on because one minute she hated him and the next she was kissing him. She said nothing was going on and kissed him again. She apologized for it getting out of hand, and Fox said it was all right; they were friends, and she needed him right then. Fox was interrupted by a phone call and went to take it. While he took the call, Whitney felt guilty for what she was doing but said it was the only thing she could do to hide the truth about the baby.
Fox returned from the phone call and told her that he was glad they were still friends and that he'd never stop caring about her. They talked for a while about who had been wrong when Whitney had found out that she was the one Fox was in love with. She told him it had to have been hard for him to stay friends with Chad while they had been together. Fox asked her about the future and wondered if they stood a chance.
Whitney said she didn't know what was in the future and suggested she and Fox go out to dinner to talk about it. He went to make a call to the Seascape to make reservations. Whitney thought to herself that on that night, she'd take a page from Theresa's book and make love to Fox, then everyone would think her baby was his.
Inside the mansion, Eve and Julian talked about what Alistair had told them about the group of people landing in Harmony that could be a threat to them. Eve said that it was not Paloma, and Julian said it couldn't be the Wheelers. Eve agreed and said the Wheelers were nice, and Julian said he felt a connection to Mrs. Wheeler like he'd known her his whole life.
In Alistair's study, Alistair felt like he'd won, since Katherine had crawled back to him. She told him she was only doing it to save the others. He said that was just talk, and she'd wanted to leave that third-world place. She told him she loved it there. Alistair grabbed her by the throat and told her to say that she wanted to be back with him, that she didn't want to be with Martin. She asked what difference it made, and he continued to choke her and tell her to say it.
Katherine begged Alistair to stop, and he said the reason why he'd told everyone she'd died instead of telling them she'd left him was because he'd wanted her dead. Katherine said she'd do whatever he wanted as long as he spared the others. Alistair told her she'd forgotten that he was Alistair Crane -- he did what he wanted, and nobody could stop him. She said she'd stop him. Alistair asked how she was going to stop an important man like him and told her to admit that she'd fantasized about him while she'd been in bed with Martin and that Martin could never be the man he was.
Katherine said it was all true; Alistair was a better lover, man, and provider. He told her that she was his, and she'd never get away, and he told her to get her face fixed. Katherine asked what would happen if the surgeon couldn't fix it. Alistair picked up a letter opener and said that he'd do it himself without anesthesia. He stopped and said he knew a plastic surgeon that owed him a favor and forced her to kiss him. He forced her down onto the desk and made her tell him that she wanted him.
At the cottage, Paloma asked why Pilar was calling Martin "Martin." She said Pilar was scaring her, and seeing her like that made everything else important. Martin wondered what she meant by that, and Paloma remembered what the henchmen had told her about her family using her. Pilar awakened when she heard Paloma calling Martin "Mr. Wheeler," and his face changed back to its present state. Pilar passed out again. Martin checked for a pulse but couldn't find one.
Martin called Julian, asking if Eve was still there. Julian said she was, and Martin told him about Pilar. Julian said they'd be right over. Paloma wondered how Martin had known to call Julian and had known the phone number. Paloma asked Martin what was going on and who he was. He said he didn't know what she was talking about. Pilar was sick, and that was why she'd called him by Paloma's father's name. He went on to say that he'd met Eve at the house, and there was a phone directory by the phone with everyone's numbers.
Paloma apologized to him, but she was worried about Pilar. Julian and Eve showed up, and Eve looked at Pilar and then at Paloma. Paloma asked if she was dead, Eve said Pilar was fine; she just needed to rest. Pilar woke up and asked where Martin was. Eve explained to Martin who Martin was and said that Pilar lit a candle every night for his return and for Antonio's return while he had been away. Paloma wondered why her mother hadn't lit a candle for her and suspected that maybe the man had been right about her family not wanting her back.
Martin said that when he hadn't been able to get a pulse on Pilar, he'd thought he had lost her. Everyone found his statement strange and asked him if they had any history together. He told them that he'd known Paloma since she had been a little girl, so he felt like he knew Pilar. Martin inquired about Katherine, and Julian told him he was not sure where she was; she'd excused herself and hadn't returned. Martin said he had to find her.
Share this story with friends, family or the world.
Theresa encouraged Chad to move forward, while a conflicted Whitney charmed a surprised Fox.
As Paloma got acquainted with her sister and nephew, her resentment built over the luxurious life they appeared to have.
Under the stars, Sheridan and Luis dreamed of the future and thought of the past.
After forcing Katherine to return to him, Alistair tried to have his way with her. Martin showed up to protect her but was shocked by Katherine's reaction.
Share this story with friends, family or the world.
Luis and Sheridan's romantic evening at the beach was cut short when wreckage from the Crane jet washed ashore, and they were reminded of Antonio's death.
Pilar was perplexed over why she'd dreamed about Katherine and Martin, not realizing she'd heard their voices while she'd slept. Katherine couldn't stomach the deal she'd made as Alistair made his demands, and she finally lashed out at him.
At the Seascape, Eve turned the tables on Ivy as she vowed to tell Sam all about her schemes. Chad attacked Fox after catching him and Whitney kissing. Fox explained he'd always loved Whitney but had respected her relationship with him until they'd broken up. However, it did nothing to abate Chad's anger and feelings of betrayal.
Share this story with friends, family or the world.

Former minister and the ruling TRS party MLA Etela Rajender today quit from the pink party . He also resigned from his MLA post.
Addressing media persons at his Shamirpeta residence, he targeted CM KCR and claimed that he was removed from his minister’s post by the CM without seeking his explanation. He alleged that the CM Was trying to lure his supporters and followers from his Huzurabad Assembly constituency by offering money to them with an objective to end his political career. He also alleged that the CM was threatening the public representatives if they didn’t succumb to his pressures. He made it clear that he was the one who strengthened the ruling TRS party in the Huzurabad seat.
He said he had his supporters had told him that they would bust all the conspiracies being hatched against him by the CM. He said that the people of Huzurabad had felt that they lost something after his removal from the state cabinet . He said that he was putting an end to his 19 year long association with the TRS party . He said that he had won from his constituency on the B-form of the TRS party while mocking that the daughter of the CM had lost elections even after receiving the B-form from her father. He said that he had resigned from his MLA post several times for the sake of the formation of the separate Telangana state.
He recalled that out of the 17 MLAs who resigned from the party, only 7 won the elections and added that the then cheif Minister of the state YS Rajasekhara Reddy had mocked him on the same issue. He said that the people of Karimnagar had always blessed the separate state activists. He claimed that he was stopped from meeting the CM thrice.

Ten people were poisoned by smoke during a fire in a five-storey hotel in Istanbul, Turkey.
This was reported by Haber Global. According to the report, the fire started on the second floor of the building, and then spread to other floors.
A large number of rescuers, police and medics were involved in the area. Ten people were poisoned by smoke during the incident. The injured were taken to hospital.
It is noted that another person was left in the room where the fire took place during the incident. He was rescued by someone in the hotel at the time. The fire was localized 1 hour later.
The cause of the accident is still unknown.

Brady was last man when he tripped Wilfried Zaha as he raced towards the goal but the Tigers man escaped with a booking.
And after watching his side claw their way back into the match, Holloway felt that could have been the point when Palace snatched something from the match.
"They said his touch went too far and rolled to the goalie," said Holloway. "Their fellow didn't play the ball and that ruined his touch.
"As we all know, he would have probably outpaced him, got past him and then that would have been a goalscoring opportunity. So it was all a bit strange.
"Hull had the better of the first half. I felt we didn't get to grips with their shape and what they were doing.
"I'm relieved to be 0-0 at half-time and in the second half I thought the longer it went on, the more imposing we got. We looked pretty good as the game went on and that is full credit to the lads."

I dropped a wood duck of at the taxidermist last February. It has been almost a year. I called him back before Thanksgiving to ask about it and he said that he was working on it right now and hoped to have it done before he started getting deer heads in. He said it would be about 2 weeks. That is the last I heard from him. It has been almost 2 1/2 months after he told me it would be done. Should I call him again or just let it go. I don't want to bother him and have him do a crappy job just to get it done. Any suggestions?

Today was an inside play day. It was kindof misty and it was windy and cold so before we went shopping we went to the inside playground. This was Scout's first time at the playground and she had a blast. It was so much fun today playing with the girls. Tomorrow....knitting.

Mr Samuel Esogbon and wife from Niger, Nigeria came to thank God for His goodness in their life. In 2012, after his father’s burial, he went to the village and fell sick. He couldn’t go to his business or do his normal activities at home any longer. The doctors diagnosed him as having fatty liver and gastritis. At that time, he could not do anything. If he stood, he would be shaking and sweating profusely. His wife was his companion and took care of him all through the time of his sickness and as a result she was no longer able to continue with her business.
When they came to The SCOAN, Prophet T.B. Joshua prayed for them and they received the Anointing Water. Five months later, he returned to the same hospital that had diagnosed him of his sicknesses and it was found that he no longer had the fatty liver or gastritis! His medical documents were shown where he had been diagnosed with the problems and the second test after using the Anointing Water reporting that he had no trace of fatty liver or other problems and declared that all his abdominal organs were normal. He rejoiced that he can eat normally once again, by the grace of God.

He desperation scared him. It was unsettling to see her so upset, tears ready to fall as if she'd rather be anywhere than in the same breathing space as him. When she tumbled he immediately raced to help.
"Helen stop this. I just want to help you." His days of grand gestures were over, but she wasn't in any position to ignore him now. She wouldn't be able to walk if he didn't make sure her injuries weren't too severe.

I was able to go and give it to her, we had a drink as well.
afterwards she went upstairs to show me what else she got, came down to find me sat on her sofa going in my nappy. I felt so embarrassed asking her if I could change in her bathroom, but I asked and she said it was okay. she really didn't mind, when I came out she just smiled at me and said well, these things happen sometimes, least you're cleaner now
and she told me about her other presents, which were good, and then I went home. she got her card, that's the main thing
I'm relaxing this afternoon. ordering out fish and chips

DISTRICT DEPUTY MESSAGE
- Last Updated: Sunday, 08 December 2013 10:46
- Written by David L. Moore, DDGM
- Hits: 4014
How Deep is Your Obligation?
A little over a year ago I met an old Past Master during my daily rounds, he was frail and elderly, but the moment he spotted my PM ring his eyes lit up. He immediately insisted on shaking my had again in a manner in which was proper, as he said. I sat down and we talked for a few minutes, giving each other our Masonic resumes. He was a Past Master of a lodge from a neighboring district, he had relocated to Washington when his wife got sick to be closer to her once she had to be put in a nursing home. You could feel his pain as he talked about her getting progressively sicker and eventually passing away. He had no family left in the area, they only had one son and he had relocated out west for his job. We talked for quite a while, as if we had been friends forever, part of that special bound that we as Brothers all share. We visited everyday for a few days while he was a patent and then he was stable to return home and was discharged.
As is the case with most patients that have chronic health issues, they tend to make more frequent hospital visits as their disease progresses and they become more debilitated. On every admission we always found time to talk and solve the problems of Freemasonry. He would be there for a few days and we would get him tuned up, as best we could and then he would be discharged.
A few weeks ago he came into the hospital for the same issues, he was having difficulty breathing and needed us to give him additional medications to help him get rid of extra fluid from his lungs. We had our normal conversation that we had during most of his visits, we spoke briefly of how things were going with each of us and then talked more about the lodge. I was sitting in a meeting a few hours later when I heard the call overhead asking for assistance for a patient being violent, the call was for my area. I hurried from the meeting to the unit and one of my nurses met me at the front door and said "it is your friend". Upon arrival to the patient's room I found him to be violently lashing out at staff. He was hitting, scratching and attempting to bite the staff as they were trying to assist him. HIs respiratory status had taken a turn for the worse and staff were trying to intervene, but his oxygenation had dropped very low making him confused. I asked everyone to step back and let me take care of it, this is not uncommon based upon my size and gender, but my staff were shocked when they saw "how I took care of it". I simply went over to the bed and got ahold of my Brother's hand and leaned over and whispered in his ear. He immediately relaxed and my staff were able to continue to treat him. My staff questioned me about what I had said to him, I told them all I had said to him was "It's ok brother we are trying to help you". Which was absolutely true that was all that I had said, but when it was accompanied by the familiar handshake that was so deeply engrained in my brothers mind he knew those words to be true.
My Brother passed away comfortably that afternoon. I have found myself recently thinking about that event and the profound effect that grip and those few words had during a time of crisis. It was obvious to me that my friend was a good mason, although he had not been active in his lodge for several years you could tell that he lived his life as a mason. This has made me wonder are our obligations engrained that deep in all of us, or are they directly related to how deep our ties to the fraternity feel? I would not profess to ever know the answer to this question for anyone other than myself. But I would ask you, how deep is your obligation ingrained?

Jack is very responsive and is very professional. He came out and gave a quote on several different items. The work Jack and his crew did was outstanding and I would not hesitate to recommend him to family and friends. Jack and his crew even did a few extra things for us. A very positive experience! I will definitely contact Jack for all of my landscape and design needs. Thank you Jack!

As always, I can only write about my narcissist.
But I know how he kept his EXs and finally me.
One of his EXen came into the castle and there he was gone.He said: “It was clear that she had to focus on her healing prosthesis. She didn’t want to see me anymore, I found that so sad.”
Between there was one who did not want to bind.She was also allowed to move into his flat (he had to come in and go in his flat, and no I am not writing about a 20-year-old here). According to him, he only had…… Well, one day when he learned that she had another time (she was equally transparent and wanted to be open to others) he pulled one out of the club. He let the club lady sit in his room, sneaked into the room of the “unfaithful” lady and had sex with her. He told me that he had insulted her all the time during the act and wanted to punish her. After this action he walked cheerfully to his room where the unused lady was still waiting.
The next one was probably real love!!!They were happy together until he started many projects in his student union. The lady was not so happy and ended the relationship after some arguments! (she did it right). However, he rejected his studies (but I know there were other reasons for his graduation) and wanted the ex back. When they started to meet again, he met a great girl. And so it came as it was to come, he met with both of them. And on the same day he let his waiting date (the old woman) sit and went to the new one! According to the narcissist, the old woman hurt him so much that he just wanted to see if she would take him back.
Now he had the next one, who was allowed to move into the flat immediately.But she would have cheated on him, and he forgave her (the good one). She didn’t want to let him go, for no reason. In addition to this dilemma, he had so much to do and had to do so many projects and she was just nagging because he was always (professionally) away in the evening. So he asked her to move out of the apartment. But she probably didn’t take it so easily. And, according to Narcissism, he has gone out with unnecessary drama and even damaged doors and other things.
Still with the excerpt of this, the narcissist has started something with the other WG colleague.And guess what? It was love again! They wanted children and have already made big plans for the future. He was sweet with her until he met me. But the old woman did not know that she came on the firing list because he had found something new. She was just magical to him and since he always (professionally of course) had so much to do, she tried to take him as he was. But he began to devaluate his arms and so on and so on…..until it was at one point and finally put him to the fore. She didn’t get the True Answer and was just dumped overnight.
At that time he had been with me for almost a year!!I didn’t know anything about his double life, nothing!!!! We had big plans for the future and just wanted a child so much.
Now he disposed of me when I found out all this and much more (in my pregnancy) and couldn’t look at him so magically or adore him.How exactly did he do that…
His comment on all these women: “I don’t know how I always get the psychos”!!!!
All these women were beautiful and confident when they met him!

CNN’s host Chris Cuomo had allegedly sexually harassed his ex-boss when he was working for ABC News. Cuomo is also the brother of Andrew Cuomo, who has been recently forced to relinquish his position as the Governor of New York.
The Accusations Against Chris Cuomo
The one who has brought forth the charges is Shelley Ross. As a journalist, Ross has worked for CBS and ABS as a producer. On Friday, an essay was published in the New York Times where she revealed the charges against Chris Cuomo.
She said that the incident happened in 2005. Cuomo had sexually harassed her while they were attending a party for a colleague at ABC who was going away. Ross was Chris Cuomo’s former executive producer at Primetime Live on ABC.
She wrote that Chris Cuomo had greeted her with a bear hug while touching her buttocks and squeezing them inappropriately. Allegedly, Cuomo had even told Ross that he could do such things because she was not his boss anymore. Ross also says that Cuomo had apologized via email after an hour, which was included in the essay. Cuomo had admitted to being ashamed and apologized to her noble and good husband and her too, in the e-mail.
Andrew Cuomo, Chris Cuomo’s brother, had quit his post as the governor of New York back in August. He was embroiled in a scandal involving sexual harassment. The host on CNN was also criticized after it came to light that Chris had talked about the ways of handling the situation with the staff of the former governor. CNN had stated the behavior as “inappropriate” but no disciplinary actions were taken.
In the essay, Ross wrote that Chris Cuomo crossed the line. Thus, she now doubts how Chris views accountability and truth.

Wednesday, May 05, 2010
THE LAST SONG
God, Miley Cyrus was good in that. It was a good movie. Go see it. Her father lived in this southern town. She was from New York City. It was just a bunch of stuff about her dad and her. You know. She was really good in it. You know, she quit Disney World. I give it 8 1/2.

He lay in the bed, his one of his hands tangled in her rich forest of hair and the other strewn around her lithe form.
Her head was on his shoulder and her arm was flung over his torso, her hand resting slightly above his heart. She was softly snoring and he smiled. The snoring had become considerably softer.
He was awake, watching her face as she slept. Her mouth was a bit open and he felt her hot breath against his skin. She let out a small whimper in her sleep and his heart nearly stopped right then and there; he had never heard her whimper, until now.
Her leg was on top of his, and her leg moved a bit. He felt her breaths come shallower and his mouth went dry. With their naked bodies intertwined, he could feel her skin starting to get hot. Her legs became a bit restless and she almost kicked him.
He disentangled himself from her and lay on his side watching her. She arched her back and moaned, loudly.
"Oh, Tony..." she sighed in her dream. He felt his blood pump through his veins and head south. He had to wake her up. He gently shook her.
She stopped writhing and her eyes slowly opened.
The first thing she saw was his grinning face. She lunged forward and kissed him, tongue and all. She hoisted herself up on top of him and grinded her hips into his.
He groaned and let his hands wander. When he found her slick fold already wet, he started rubbing on her clit, eliciting a scream from her. His other hand was once again tangled in her hair.
She pulled away from the kiss and looked down at his already hard member. She was about to take him in her hand to sink down onto him, when he stopped her and flipped them over.
The sheets had long ago been thrown off the bed, during their previous love-making session. He kissed a path down her jaw all the way down to the swell of her breast. He nipped and licked at a nipple, doing the same with the other one a while later. He went lower and stuck his tongue in her belly button, making her moan.
When she thought he would finally get where she wanted him the most, he ignored her and kissed the inside of her thighs, lifting a leg and kissing all the way to her calf. He nipped and kissed and left her with a hickey on a very unique place.
By now, her eyes were closed and her head was on the pillow, her hands balling each side of it in her fists. She lost all patience and pulled him to her level by his hair. She gave him a breathy kiss.
"Need you, now!" she whispered in his ear, but he had no intention of following her orders.
He resumed where he left off, albeit with the other leg, finally working his way back to her inner thigh. When she twisted his ear in a very painful way, he decided to stop playing around and went right to the heart of the matter, his tongue lapping at her clit in a violent motion, just the way she liked it.
She screamed and pushed her back into the mattress. He brought his hand into the equation by pushing his middle and index finger into her, making her groan in pleasure.
He pumped in and out in a torturing pace, until he pulled them out completely.
She lifted her head from the pillow and looked at him, because he seized all movement. She sent him a murderous look.
He stuck both of his fingers into his mouth and licked the liquid off. She bit her lip. She didn't think she could get more aroused and here he was, proving her wrong once again. He leant up to kiss her and she could taste herself on his lips and it was so... hot.
Their tongues wrestled for dominance, until he slammed not two, but three fingers into her and let his thumb roll over her clit.
She completely surrendered herself to him, trusting him implicitly not to hurt her in this vulnerable state she was in.
He sensed this and slowed the kiss down, but not the movements of his hand. She smiled into the kiss, until she felt that familiar feeling in her belly. As if sensing this, he went back down and continued his thumb's antics with his mouth and tongue.
She cried out in pleasure and her hips bucked violently, but he tried keeping them still, letting her ride out her orgasm. He never stopped the movements of his hand as he crept up and kissed her.
With a hand, she pushed his hand away and grabbed his cock, no longer wanting to play around. She stroked him slowly and in a torturing matter, wanting him to feel exactly as she had. With an easy stroke she pushed him onto his back and bent over him, giving him an open-mouthed kiss. She left a lingering kiss on his chest, before working her way down. Her hand stopped moving and he looked into her eyes, seeing evil.
He was about to get tortured, of that he was sure.
She smirked, before she stroked him in a slow manner, making him groan. When she reached the base of his cock, she squeezed. She hadn't even started and he was already out of breath.
In one swift motion she took him into her mouth and started bobbing her head up and down, occasionally letting her tongue roll around the tip of his cock, just for fun. One of her hands was on his thigh and the other was playing with his balls, making him a tad bit harder.
Right as he thought he was going to come she stopped. She stopped! She kissed her way back up to him and gave him a kiss. He didn't feel her hand on his penis, until she slowly sunk onto him.
She moaned. He was the biggest she'd ever been with, and she could still feel how he stretched her, yet not in a painful way.
They held still for a moment, savoring in the feeling of the other. He let one hand hold onto her hip as he let the other wander. She had sat up a while earlier. He found her beautiful. Her skin was flushed and her lips were swollen from the kissing. His hand found its way into her hair, and he let the other hand join it, pulling her hair out of her face.
She was breathing heavily, and he could feel the tremors all the way to where they were so intimately joined. He leant up a bit and she leant down, and their lips met in a passionate, yet chaste, kiss.
She smiled into the kiss and he took it as a sign. He let one hand take over the task of keeping her hair out of her face, and let the other go back to her hip, where he helped her move up and down.
They moved slowly against each other, marking each thrust with a kiss.
She bent down and let her face hang in the crook of his neck. He took the opportunity to pepper kisses along her neck, biting occasionally, and only when it was too late, did he notice he had left a hickey there. Oh she would kill him later, because right at that moment, they were to busy reveling in the feel of the love-making.
Their first time had been raw, and filled with passion. After that, it was always different: it varied. This time, however, it was passionate, but with an underlying feeling of seriousness; the love they had confessed for each other hours before.
Her movements started becoming frantic, and he knew she was close. She sat back up, and he immediately missed her closeness, so he sat up and she gasped, their new angle making him hit her G-spot. With one hand behind him for leverage and the other on her hip, he helped her move up and down, and met her pace with each thrust.
After a while, she let her head fall back and cried out her pleasure. He felt her muscles spasm around him as she came, and it brought him to his own release. He groaned and buried his face in her neck, until his hand couldn't keep him up anymore and he fell down with her still on top of him. He could feel her hot breath in his chest. Her arms were above his head, intertwined with his.
"Hey," he said and she turned her head to look at him. Seeing his smiling face, she couldn't help but smile. She pressed a quick kiss to his lips.
"I love you," he said and her smile grew.
"I love you too." He smiled and let his hand wander the contours of her body, stopping at the small of her back.
"Is this the part where you punch me?" he asked, and almost smirked at her confused face. Almost.
"Remember, that boy that said he liked you?" She smiled as she remembered.
"Oh, no, Tony. I like your balls." She laughed as he paled. "I am joking, I like you too."
"Okay, cause you really got me, ninja." He grinned. She climbed off of him and off the bed. He followed her with his eyes as she moved around the bedroom, picking up his discarded shirt and boxers, the former she pulled over her head and the latter she threw at him.
"Why?" he asked as she was trying to locate her panties.
"Just in case." Finally having found them, she pulled them up, and Tony couldn't help but lick his lips.
"We had a lot of naked fun today," he said and she shook her head at him, climbing back in bed.
"Yes indeed. I am tired, I am going to sleep," she announced.
"Night, Sleeping Beauty." He kissed her softly, as he pulled her closer to him. She laid her head on his shoulder and tilted her body towards his. He buried his hand deep in her hair, loving the feeling of the softness on his skin, like silk. As he watched her sleep, he lost his own battle against consciousness, and fell into a deep slumber, taking him to a whole other world.

A review of the best member of the 2012 Tennessee Titans who’s still unsigned:
Will Witherspoon was a good guy in the Titans' locker room and there were Sundays when he was a good linebacker. But he was not as big a leader as the Titans may have expected when they signed him in 2010 and he was not as consistent a player as they needed him to be.
In three seasons in Tennessee he started 35 games. But in his final season he started only five and was much more of a role player.
It was his 11th season and the Titans needed to go younger and find more consistency in a veteran linebacker who could play more than one position.
Witherspoon said he wants to play 15 years. So far he hasn’t found a team that wants to give him No. 12.

When I was younger the thought of spankings and punishment in general was always connected to a sense of guilt, something that had to be put right. This idea has lost much of its power over me of lately and now I can see that spankings stand for a lot of other things as well. Still I wrote this story. It was something that just happened and it is about that dreaded thing of older times, guilt.
My mind was in darkness. I had let the sun go down on my anger and I felt horrible. I had left my lover while I was angry and I had hurt him. I had been right, I think we both knew that and I had stood my ground. I had all the rights in the world to do that. No one could deny me that.
The thing I had seen on his face was hurt. I had hurt the love of my life deeply because I had stood my ground. He had been angry with me and we had argued. I was right and he was angry, angry and hurt.
The following day I lived in a kind of haze, thinking about what had passed and what to do about it. I could not say I was wrong because I wasn't and that was the problem. At least I thought it was the problem. But as the day went on I saw the face of my lover clearly in my mind and I saw his hurt.
I realised that it was not important if I had been right or not. The important thing was that I had hurt him and I had not hurt him by being right. I had all the right in the world to my opinion. That was not the point. I had hurt him by wanting to hurt him by being right and I realised that that was the cause of my misery.
I walked through town trying to delay going back to my empty flat. I went in and out of shops looking for nothing or everything. I wanted time to pass quickly so that I could go to bed and sleep my time away.
It was then my eyes fell upon an innocent item on a shelf. A flash of insight sparkled through me and with embarrassment I saw clearly what should be done. I had struggled for a long time with a sense of guilt, feeling that I had no reason for guilt. I had the right to be right and that was it. Against my will I came to realise that my guilt was at the centre of my misery and I wanted to rid me of that and that need made me embarrassed.
As I laid my eyes upon the sturdy shape of a wooden brush I realised that I needed to be punished. I blushed as I saw that. My heart started beating and I felt ashamed. That was completely against my beliefs and against anything that my reasoning could come up with. Still I knew that I wanted to be punished.
My heart was still pounding in my breast as I knocked on his door. I knew he was still miserable, still angry and hurt. It didn't leave him that easily. I waited in fear for him to answer the door.
My heart stood still as he opened the door. He looked sad and miserable. He looked at me and I stared at him.
'Can I come in?' I asked.
'Sure,' he said and stepped aside. I saw that he was still angry.
I stood in his hallway for a while before I could say anything.
'Look,' I said, 'about yesterday.'
'I am sorry,' he replied quickly, 'you were right, I shouldn't have...'
'Wait,' I said with a strange new confidence, 'I have come about yesterday, but, please hear me out!'
He looked at me slightly puzzled.
'Do you want to sit down?'
I was sitting on the edge of his armchair, like a nervous school girl. He sat in the sofa regarding me. He looked strangely worried and sad, not at all the confident self he used to be.
'Now,' he said, all of a sudden, breaking the silence, 'you were right yesterday and I know that.'
'I was right,' I answered, 'that is true but that is not the point.'
'What is the point?' he said looking even more puzzled.
'The point is that I hurt you and I don't want to hurt you.'
'But you were right.'
'Don't you see? I don't care if I was right- I hurt you with it and I did it because I wanted to and that is why I feel guilty about it.'
'You have nothing to be guilty about,' he said sternly.
'Yes I have and I don't want to feel guilty.'
'Sorry, but what can I do about that?' he said a bit defensively.
I had heard that I had been pleading with him and maybe had I even sounded a bit demanding.
'I am sorry, it is not your fault and we both know that.'
I stared at him and I felt anger well up in me. I had tears in my eyes. I couldn't explain and suddenly my bright idea was just silly.
I couldn't answer him so I opened my bag and produced the menacing looking wooden brush.
'What?' he looked at me in disbelief.
'Here,' I said holding out the brush for him.
Anger overtook me as I spoke.
'Take i!' I said, 'take it! I have hurt you and I can't make that hurt go away but I feel guilty and I want to be punished.'
'Punished?' he said, 'I don't understand.'
'I know I am completely mad, but I want to be punished and I think you should use this on me.'
'Yes, this brush.'
'Like I should spank you or something?'
'Yes, just like that.'
'I can't do that,' he said almost as if he was pleading with me. He looked terrified.
'Please, spank me!' I said, 'please, punish me!'
I felt my cheeks blushing, I had never in a long time been that embarrassed.
We stared at each other. His eyes were wild. I could see that many thoughts and emotions passed through him as he stared at me.
'Give me the brush!' he said suddenly and held out his hand.
I presented the thing and I felt strange. I felt detached and removed from the whole situation and my head was buzzing.
He sat up in the sofa and I realised I had to come to him. I rose from my chair and suddenly I was standing in front of him. He looked at me but he seemed lost. He had accepted the implement but he didn't know how to proceed. I blushed as I realised I had to take command.
My fingers felt numb as I pulled up my dress. I wore a black, quite short and tight fitting outfit and it stuck to my waist as I had pulled it up. I took a deep breath as I took hold of my knickers and pulled them down to my knees.
I felt a strange tingling in my body but I could not possibly admit that it reminded me of another kind of tingling that I used to get with him. I approached him as he was sitting and I was about to place my body in his lap when he interrupted me.
'You like this, don't you?' he said with a tint of anger in his voice.
I stopped short, embarrassed.
'You get off on this and you are using me,' he continued.
There was a moment of silence.
I don't know if I like it or not,' I said trying to be as composed as was possible with my dress pulled up and my knickers around my knees.
'I only know that I am terrified and that I think you should do it,' I said.
He stared at me for a second, then he tapped his knee and I positioned myself in his lap. This was it. I was going to be spanked. I had asked for it and it was happening. I was scared.
I felt a strange sensation as he placed the cold wood on my bottom. It was a kind of excitement and at the same time determination and horror. The closest thing to this was sitting in a dentist chair. You are determined even if you know it will hurt and you feel a kind of excitement that may very well be fear.
Then he smacked me. He hit me on my right cheek and it hurt. I felt the pain and at the same time I realised that he had not used his full force. It was a meek tap compared to what a man like him was capable of. I knew that but still it hurt.
Then he hit my left cheek and I was surprised by the pain. He hesitated for a while and then he smacked me again and again. He took his time but he smacked me one cheek after the other but not very hard. It still hurt.
I felt I could cope although it was unpleasant. My bottom started to feel warm and tender but he continued smacking me. I felt my body move, instinctively trying to get away.
Then he stopped. I took a deep breath overcome with emotions.
'You asked me to spank you,' he said, 'do you regret that now?'
'No,' I said, hearing how weak my voice was.
'Do you want me to stop?'
There was something strange in his voice, a hint of triumph, maybe anger, I couldn't tell.
'It is not for me to decide that,' I said meekly.
'Right you are,' he said and now it was definitely something in his voice that seemed like triumph.
He started to smack me again and this time harder. I wasn't prepared and cried out. He smacked me harder and faster and I was not sure I could cope any more. It hurt too much and it was too horrible and I was too overcome by it all.
He didn't care and relentlessly he let the wood hit my tender bottom. I cried out and felt a bit of panic overtaking me. I didn't want this. It hurt too much.
He stopped for a while. I lay panting in his lap fearing he would continue. I almost started pleading with him.
Just as I was about to tell him that it was enough, that it hurt too much and I felt silly and embarrassed and in pain, a thought struck me. This is what it was like being punished. He spanked me and it hurt and that was right. It was supposed to hurt. I wanted to be punished and I was being punished and if it hurt that was my punishment. I had to go through with this.
Then he started spanking me again. He knew how to do it now. He used a lot of his strength now and he smacked me with vigour. It was far more painful than before and I started crying. I didn't plead but I moved around and squealed and cried. Still there was something that held me in place, a deep conviction that I had to do this. I couldn't go back now. I had to do it.
In my agony I heard him as he smacked me. He laughed. He enjoyed this. He was happy spanking me. I screamed now and was in pain. He spanked me relentlessly and it hurt.
Then it was over. He had spanked me enough. He was satisfied. He told me to rise and I complied. My knees were weak as I rose to my feet. He stood up too, facing me.
Suddenly we were there, facing each other, close. I saw that he was no longer angry. He looked content. I saw that through the tears in my eyes.
I was subdued, overcome with the whole matter but I felt that something had changed within me. I had subjected myself to this painful ordeal and something had changed.
He held out his arms and I pressed my body against him. He held me close not because he wanted to comfort me but because he loved me. I loved him too and felt safe in his arms.
His touch did not only made me feel safe. His body was close to mine and that made the tingle grew stronger. I remembered that I had not pulled up my knickers and that I was naked below my waist. I felt the fabric of his trousers against my belly and I was suddenly aware of a strange sense of vulnerability. That made me feel even more aroused.
Later he looked me in the eyes and I looked back. He was not angry and I was not angry and I felt no guilt any more. He smiled at me and I felt that things had changed.
'When you spank me next time,' I said.
'Will there be a next time?' he asked.
'When you spank me next time, will you grant me a wish?'
'What is that?'
'Don't make me have to ask for it!'
'How will I know, then?'
'You will know,' I said, 'it is for you to decide.'

Lol, today my buddy who has also been looking to pitch was throwing with me, he has been working on a splitter/fork ball for a while know and he was throwing them extremely well today and I thought he was throwing knucklers.
So afterwards I was going to ask him about it because he won’t let me teach him the knuckleball but before I could say anything he asks “How were my splitters?” so I told him “HOLY HELL that was a splitter? I thought it was a knuckleball!”
I thought it was pretty hilarious, it doesn’t dance as much as mine but it still wiggles and drops like one. The drop on it was just sick.
His arsenal now is this:
He threw me some BP and he kept getting me to take cuts at them in the dirt and it really started to upset me. I screw him up with my knuckler so he got me back with the Spuckler.

I gave one of our delivery guys my phone number. He didn't ask I just wrote it down and gave it to him. He comes back few hours later because he said I forgot to sign for the delivery. He then asks for my number again because he lost mine. He puts it in his wallet and says so I don't have to think of an excuse to come back here. It's been 4 days and haven't heard from him. Was the second trip just to get another look at me? Why would he come back if he wasn't going to call?
Most Helpful Guy
Sounds like that was what it was for. Or maybe he lost the number again and to embarrassed to ask for it again.0

My Toxic Behavior Nearly Cost Me My Marriage
And The Audacious Solution to Save It
This was it. I was done. I was newly married less than two years and I was already FED UP.
My husband would snap at me. I would then criticize him back. We argued constantly. I felt angry all the time, so I cried all the time. I was ready to leave him behind and move back home and back to my parents…

Jasmine Fenton, now grown, knelt in the cold, dewy grass near her brother's grave.
It had been a year, now, since Danny had jumped to his death from a building in downtown Amity Park. The wound had healed somewhat over the past year, as such pains do, but still the grief seemed fresh in her heart. Then again, she was a sensitive young woman, and felt with great intensity - so great, in fact, that she had to take care not to open her heart too much. After her brother had died, however, she had closed herself off to nearly everyone, and was only now beginning to be able to open herself again.
Sighing, the redhead reached into her handbag and pulled out a small bottle of blueberry-flavoured vodka, something her brother had acquired a taste for after he and the man who'd been his arch-nemesis had started hanging out together.
She had kept that secret, among others, for him - and she kept his secrets still, hard as that was to do.
It was still kind of hard, too; to believe that two such enemies had become friends - or that the older man had fallen in love with her brother.
She looked over at Vlad's grave - for there it was, right beside Danny's. The man had changed his will before his fatal plunge, leaving part of his fortune to his few remaining relatives - and the rest to the Fentons. He had also, she had learned later, purchased the plot in the Amity Park cemetary in which he was buried now - and he had done it mere hours before his fall.
When Danny had died and her parents were too grief-stricken to make the arrangements themselves, she had honoured her brother's wishes, expressed in his last letter to her, and she'd purchased the plot next to Vlad's for him.
She still remembered getting that letter from him. He had written two separate notes before he died - one for her, and one for the police to find. And still she remembered that moment of heart-stopping terror and grief when she'd finally comprehended what her little brother had been trying to tell her.
She shook her head, trying to disperse the memory - slowly, slowly, she mastered her emotions.
Jasmine took a square of silk from her purse, wrapping the bottle of vodka in it and setting it between the two graves. She sat back on her heels, glad that they both had such a lovely place to rest in - and that they were buried together.
She didn't begrudge them that.
The woman stood, pulling her coat close in the chilly October air. The breeze picked up, and, as she turned to leave, she thought she saw two birds flit by - one grey, one a sparkling white - out of the corner of her eye. But she turned back to look, and they were no longer there.
She smiled as she left the cold graveyard for her nice, warm car, with a lightness of heart she'd not felt in a long, long time.
It would seem - or so it seemed to her, anyway - that, even if only in death, love could be requited.

Dream of: 01 November 2004 "Power Of Imagination"
I was in the Summerdale Drive House. My father and my mother were also in the House, in the office. I was thinking about my sister and my power of imagination. I had earlier seen my sister (about 15 years old) lying on her back, naked. Her body and her breasts had been perfect, her pubic hair sparse. Now, however, as I pondered the image, I was unsure I had actually seen her -- perhaps I had only imagined it. Maybe if I concentrated I could even imagine her naked again.
I walked toward the back bedroom, where I found my sister lying on a mattress on the floor. She was wearing an unbuttoned shirt which covered her breasts. She seemed unconcerned that I was looking at her. I turned, walked out of the room, but soon returned. She was still there, but now my brother Chris, in a white tee shirt, was with her. He was also about 15 years old. He was lying on his stomach between her legs, below her pubic area. It looked as if he were moving his head up toward her pubic region, and I wondered if he intended to try to put his tongue in her or have sex with her. The thought was a bit disgusting -- I turned and left.
I soon returned again, however. Now Chris was no longer in the room, and my parents had also left the house. My sister, still wearing her shirt, was lying on her side with her back toward me. I lay down beside her (I was wearing blue jeans), pulled her over on her back next to me, and began mouthing her firm and perfect left breast. I reached my right hand down between her legs and very lightly pressed my right middle finger and ring finger into her vagina. She seemed to like what I was doing. I was a bit concerned my mother would return and discover us, but I didn't think my mother would say much. I kept pushing my fingers and sucking her breast. I unzipped my pants and pulled out my erect penis. I pulled my fingers out of her vagina, intending to insert my penis into her -- I had never done that before. I stayed by her side and raised her legs over mine. Lying on my side while she remained on her back, I positioned myself to enter her.
Dream Epics Home Page
Copyright 2012 by firstname.lastname@example.org

Friday, November 29, 2013
Police were called to a parking lot because a security guard there came upon a man who looked like he was about to punch the window out of a truck he was standing by.
The suspect was extremely drunk and when the security officer got a closer look, it appeared that two trucks had been vandalized with scratched and busted windshield. Beside the trucks was a stop sign that had been ripped out of the ground.
He was escorted to the lobby and police were called.
The suspect told officers he had been at a wedding in Awendaw and mistakenly been dropped off at this hotel parking lot. He said his friends left him there.
He said he did not know what happened to the trucks but did see the stop sign lying in the grass.
The officer told him to be honest and that is when he admitted to picking up the stop sign and tossing it farther into the grass. But he swore he did not mess with the trucks.
There was no way to prove his story wrong, so he was arrested for public intoxicated because according to the report his level of intoxication was quite evident.
He was placed in the patrol car and complained about his handcuffs being too tight. They were adjusted and off to the jail they went.
On the way there he apologized for wasting the officers time and explained that he really was a good person.
He slurred his words as he again said he only picked up the stop sign and tossed it further.
Once at the jail he was searched and had to sit on the floor to put his shoes back on because he could not keep his balance standing up.
An ongoing investigation was launched into the damaged trucks and stop sign.

difficult child has missed his detention (for kicking a girl in the behind) a few times now. I don't know how to get him to go short of taking off early from work and dragging him there, kicking and screaming. I also got an email from his math teacher today... Ms. Ehlena, I want to let you know of an incident during class today. Today, during class, difficult child had his pencil out and was writing on the desktop. I asked him not to write on the desk. He tried to give me some story that he wasn't writing on the desk, but when I pointed out that he had his pencil in a position to write and was dragging it along the desktop, he stopped and shrugged his shoulders. I let him know that writing on the desk was not appropriate behavior. After class ended, I noticed that his desktop was covered in writing with FU in a big design. I went out during lunch and got him and brought him in to show him what I had found. He said, "oh, yeah, my pencil must have done that all by itself" I told him that wouldn't do and that he could come in after school and clean the desk tops in the room. He said "okay". He never showed. Another student from his last class came in for after school help and said that difficult child had scooted out of his last class first in line and headed home. I tried calling your home to hopefully have difficult child come back and. of course, no answer. I will be expecting him tomorrow after school. I would appreciate your reminding him as well. difficult child's behavior is such that I really think he is playing games with both of us. He hears you tell him to show me the work and get it checked off. He knows I am supposed to initial his blue sheet daily and then, when he gets here he tells me that he doesn't have it or that he didn't do it or that he left it home or that he lost it and on and on.......What we had planned in order to help him is not working. What to do? His behavior is such that it is difficult to get others to sit next to him. If someone does something he doesn't particularly like he will irritate that person by hitting, poking, etc that person until they ask to be moved or hit back. When I call difficult child on this behavior, he says that he is justified to do that because the other person did something that irritated him, like make a noise or something like that. When I ask him to write something down or to follow directions for a specific task, he usually looks the other way and does his own thing. Again, what to do? I don't want to sound negative about difficult child but I am frustrated as to what to do in order to help him. Any suggestions you can give would be greatly appreciated. I would like to see him turn things around and be successful in a positive way. Thanks, difficult child's math teacher For those of you who've been there done that, what do you DO in this sort of situation? For the record, we can't "make" difficult child do anything. When he's in these moods, he'd rather sit at his desk doing nothing for a day and a night than do anything we ask. We've got his behavior somewhat under control at home, but he is just losing it when he goes to school. This has gotten way worse this year, and I worry what he's going to be up to next.

My great-great grandfather was born in Finland in April 1872. I know he was in Michigan by 1894 - when I have found a marriage record for June 20, 1894. I also know a bit more about his life in the U.S. I don't, however, have any information on his life in Finland - or even where he was from. I think I may have located a couple siblings and his parents names, but I haven't been able to turn up anything.
If anyone has any information on how I can search more effectively, or any other tips or info to share I would love to hear from you. Thanks, Stacey

Triston got home a few days before me and I am sure Lola was happy he was home. She was happy to see me but super cranky at the same time.
She wanted to run and say hello but also decided that she couldn’t talk to me. I picker her up and she wasn’t too interested in the cuddles.
I sat down on the lounge. It had been a big day. She came and sat behind me. Only behind me. If I faced her she would leave. Happy to be near me but not happy with me because I left.

The 23-year-old posted a video on YouTube last week, in which she asks out the Forgetting Sarah Marshall star by playing the guitar and singing.
Segel accepted Gill's invite, treating her and her twin sister to the Chicago Film Critic Awards show.
"I was freaking out for, like, two days," Gill told the Huffington Post after she got a call from Segel's publicist.
"He came off the elevator, I had my sister with me and he didn't know I had a twin," Gill continued. "So he saw her first and he was like, 'Hey!' And she was like, 'No, I'm not her, that's Chelsea.' He was really tickled by that."
The aspiring actress went on to insist that she wasn't trying to become famous when she posted the video.
"I did not do this to try to get famous. I wanted to be really respectful," Gill said. "It was one of those things where I know I wrote this video and I'm so glad he liked it and we got along so well.
"But he's this busy guy doing his own thing and I'm so humbled and touched that he would take time out of his busy schedule just to get a drink with me," she finished.
Segel is expected to attend Wednesday's (January 11) People's Choice Awards in Los Angeles.

Fat man sex position watch online
That was one game and I had the stomach flu. Yeah but theres also no chance of us hooking up again and Ill miss that. Gabriella was never very girly by society standards.
Lets get in there before they start having sex again. My body is less than 70, but I dont want to be old. I want to stay young. It had been a year since I had felt a female orgasm and I had missed it. So what next. She asked. Into her pussy slit.
I toss the covers aside, reluctantly. That next morning, as I was making breakfast for the girls, an idea came to me. He couldn't control himself as he crawled to the offered cock and without a word took it in his mouth. We grew almost all our own food, and what we didnt grow was all organic. Once his hips were planted up tight against her plump ass cheeks, he paused to relish the feeling.
In no time, her face was covered with my spend.

Yesterday we went to see the movie "Dr. Strange" and I turned sideways to say something to her and had to readjust my head because she was visibly taller.
What is happening? She turned 12 this year. She is so grown up in so many ways. But in many she is still a little girl. At least to me she is.
She likes to spend time with her friend Jaegar from school. Mr. Finn took them to a baseball game to watch the Royals and they got amazing seats up close. She loved that she was the talk of school the next day.
She is making friends easier...
And trying new things. The pained look is because there was a spider in the kayak with her and she was freaking out.

Today was another hot summer day. The winds were calm the seas were soft and the sun was blaring. We set out on the gulf stream grass line this morning and it was just like the last two days. The conditions were perfect there were just not that many fish on it. We did catch a little over a dozen on it but for as pretty as it was it was a big let down. After the dolphin adventure we set out looking for a tuna. We had two decent sized tunas and two throw backs. At some point during mid day we jumped off a sail also. It was kinda scrappy fishing but we ended up with a few fish. Hopefully it will come alive in the morning.

Saturday, October 04, 2008
And here are my 2 munchkins. Destiny came home today and had her snack and as we were trying to get the second word pronounced she fell asleep. I guess reading is tiring work, LOL. She looked so cute I had to snap a pic and of course then Kiley had to have her pic taken too. :) OH! Did I share with you my wonderful news? destiny is reading at a 0.6 as of the first week of school which means her reading level is 6 months into 1st grade so she's several months ahead in her reading! I'm so proud of her!

We celebrated my twin great grand daughters second birthday. They were born on Feb. 16, but today was the party at Peter Pipper's Pizza. They are only two but they are really into all the rides! They had a cupcake cake, and got to make their own Pizza.
Was also nice to see my grand daughter, as well as my extended family. Here is a few pic's from the party!
Great Area For New Adventures
8 hours ago

« PreviousContinue »
brake forth through me did reach them; for my life was burthened with their profession without possession, and words without fruit.
Now after I had done my present service in York, and that several were convinced ihere and received the truth of God and were turned to his teaching, I passed out of York, and looked towards Cleaveland. And I saw there was a people that had tasted of the power of God, and I saw then there was a seed in that country, and that God had an humble people there. So I passed onwards that night; and a papist overtook me and talked to me of his religion, and of their meetings; and I let him speak all that was in his mind. That night I stayed at an ale-house, and the next morning I was moved of the Lord to speak the word of the Lord to this papist. So I went to his house, and declared against his religion, and all their superstitious ways; and I told him, that God was come to teach his people himself. This put the papist into such that he could not then endure to stay in his own house.
The next day I came to Burraby, where there was a priest, and several friendly people met together : many of the people were convinced, and have continued faithful ever since; and there is a great meeting of friends in that town. The priest also was forced to confess to truth, though he came not into it.
The day following I passed to Cleaveland amongst those people that had tasted of the power of God; they had formerly had great meetings, but were then all shattered to pieces, and the heads of them turned ranters. I told them, that after they had had such meetings they did not wait upon God to feel his power, to gather their minds inward, that they might feel his presence and power amongst them in their meetings, to sit down therein and wait upon him; for they had spoken themselves dry; they had spent their portions, and not living in that which they spake of, they were now become dry. They had some kind of meetings still; but they took tobacco, and drank ale in their meetings, and were grown light and loose. But my message unto them from the Lord was, that they should all come together again, and wait to feel the Lord's power and spirit in themselves to gather them to Christ, that they might be taught of him who says, Learn of me. For when they had declared that which the Lord had opened to them, then the people were to receive it, and both the speakers and hearers were to live in that themselves. But when these had no more to declare, but went to seek forms without life, that made themselves dry and barren, and the
people also; and from thence came all their loss; for the Lord renews his mercies and his strength to them that wait upon him. The heads of these people came to nothing; but most of the people came to be convinced, and received God's everlasting truth, and continue a meeting to this day, sitting under the teaching of the Lord Jesus Christ their Saviour.
Upon the first-day of the next week the word of the Lord came to me to go to the steeple-house there, which I did : and when the priest had done, I spake the truth to him and the people, and directed them to their teacher within, Christ Jesus, their free teacher, that had bought them. The priest came to me, and I had a little discourse with him; but he was soon stopped, and silent. Then, being clear of the place, I passed away, having bad several meetings amongst those people.
Though at this time the snow was very deep, yet I kept travelling; and going througb the country, came to a market town, where I met with many professors, with whom I had much reasoning; and I asked them many questions which they were not able to answer, but said, they had never had such deep questions put to them in all their lives.
From them I went to another place called Stath, where also I met with many professors, and some ranters. I had great meetings amongst them, and a great convincement there was, and many received the truth, amongst whom one was an ancient man of an hundred years
age; another was a chief constable, and a third was a priest, whose name was Philip Scafe; bim the Lord, hy hís free spirit, did afterwards make a free minister of his free gospel.
The priest of this town was a lofty priest, and did much oppress the people for his tithes : for if they went a fishing many leagues off he would make them pay the tithe-money of what they madle of their fish, though they catched them at a great distance, and carried them as far as Yarmouth to sell. Now I was moved to go to the steeple-house there, to declare the truth, and lay open the priest. And when I had spoken to the priest, and laid his oppressing of the people upon him, he fled away. The chief of the parish were very light and vain ; so after I had spoken the word of life to them, I turned away from them, because they did not receive it, and left them. But the word of the Lord which I had declared amongst them, stuck with some of them; so that at night some of the heads of the parish came to me, and most of them were convinced and satisfied, and confessed to the truth. Thus the truth
began to spread up and down that country, and great meetings we had; at which the priest began to rage, and the ranters began to be stirred; and they sent me word that they would have a dispute with me, both the oppressing priest, and the leader of the ranters. A day was set, and the ranter came with his company; and another priest, a Scotchman, came, but not the oppressing priest of Stath. Philip Scafe, who had been a priest, and was convinced, was with me; and a great number of people were met. When we were settled, the ranter, whose name was T. Bushel, told me, he had had a vision of me, that I was sitting in a great chair, and that he was to come and put off his hat, and bow down to the ground before me; and he did so: and many other flattering words he spake, I told him, it was his own figure, and said unto him, Repent, thou beast. He said it was jealousy in me to say so. Then I asked him the ground of jealousy, and how it came to be bred in man; and the nature of a beast, what made it; and how that was bred in man; for I saw him directly in that nature of the beast, and therefore I would have known of him how that nature came to be bred in him. I told him he should give me an account of the things done in the body, before we came to discourse of things done out of the body. So I stopped up his mouth that he could say no more; and all his fellow-ranters were silenced; for he was the head of them. Then I called for the oppressing priest, but he came not; only the Scotch priest came, but his mouth was soon stopped with a very few words; he being out of the life of what he did profess. Then had I a good opportunity with the people; and I laid open the ranters, ranking them with the old ranters in Sodom. And the priests I manifested to be of the same stamp with their fellow hirelings, the false prophets of old, and the priests that then bore rule over the people by their means, seeking for their gain from their quarter, divining for money, and teaching for filthy lucre; and so I brought all the prophets, and Christ, and the apostles over the heads of the priests, shewing how the prophets, Christ and the apostles had long since discovered them by their marks and fruits. Then I directed people to their inward teacher, Christ Jesus their Saviour ; and I preached up Christ in the hearts of his people, when all these mountains were laid low. The people were all quiet, and the gainsayer's mouths were stopped; for though they broiled in. wardly, yet the power bound them down, that they could not break out.
After the meeting was over, this Scottish priest desired
me to walk with him a top of the cliffs ; whereupon I called a brother-in-law of bis, who was in some measure convinced, and desired him to go with me, telling him I was willing to have somebody by to hear what we said, lest the priest, when I was gone, should report any thing of me which I did not say. So we went together; and as we walked, the priest asked me many things concerning the light, and concerning the soul; to all which I answered him fully. When he had done questioning, we parted, and he went his way; and as he went, meeting with the other priest, Philip Scafe, that was convinced, he brake his cane against the ground in madness, and said, if ever he met with me again he would have my life, or I should have his ; adding, that he would give his head if I was not knocked down within a inonth. By this friends suspected, his intent was in desiring me to walk with him alone, either to have thrust me down from off the cliff, or to have done me some other mischief; and that when he saw himself frustrated in that, by my having one with me, that made him rage so. But I feared neither his prophecies nor his threats, for I feared God Almighty. But some friends, through their affection to me, feared much that this priest would do me some mischief, or set on others to do it. Yet after some years this very Scotch priest, and his wife also, came to be convinced of the truth; and about twelve years after this I was at their house.
After this there came another priest to a meeting where I was (one that was in repute above all the priests in the country), and as I was speaking in the meeting, that the gospel was the power of God, and how it brought life and immortality to light in men, and so was turning people from darkness to the light, this high-flown priest said, the gospel was mortal. I told him, the true minister said the gospel was the power of God, and would he make the power of God mortal. Upon that the other priest, Philip Scafe, that was convinced, and had felt the immortal power of God in himself, took him up and reproved him; and so a great dispute arose between them; the convinced priest holding that the gospel was inmortal, and the other priest holding that it was mortal. But the Lord's power was too hard for this opposing priest, and stopped his mouth; and many people were convinced, seeing the darkness that was in the opposing priest, and the light that was in the convinced priest.
Then another priest sent to have a dispute with me, and friends went with me to the house where he was : but when he understood we were come, he slipped out of the
house, and hid himself under an hedge. The people went to seek him, and found him, but could not get him to come to us. Then I went to a steeple-house hard by there, where the priest and people were in a great rage : this priest
had threatened friends what he would do ; but when I came there he would not stand, but fled, for the Lord's power came over him and them ; yea, the Lord's everlasting power was over the world, and did reach to the hearts of people, and made both priests and professors tremble. It shook the earthly and airy spirit, in which they held their profession of religion and worship, so that it was a dreadful thing unto them when it was told them, “The man in leathern breeches is come.' At the hearing thereof the priests in many places would get out of the way; they were so struck with the dread of the eternal power of God, and fear surprised the hypocrites.
From this place we passed to Wbitby and Scarborough, where we had some service for the Lord ; and there are large meetings settled there since. From thence 1 passed over the Wowls to Malton, where we had great meetings; as we had also at the towns thereabouts. At one of those towns there was a priest sent me a challenge to dispute with me; but when I came he would not come forth; so I had a good opportunity with the people, and the Lord's power seized upon them: and one, who had been a wild drunken man, was reached therewith, so that he came to me as lowly as a lamb, though he and his companions had before sent for drink, to make the rude people diunk, on purpose that they might abuse us. So when the priest would not come forth, I was moved to go to the steeplehouse there; and the priest was confounded, and the Lord's power came over all.
On the first-day following there came one of the highest independent professors, a woman, who had let in such a prejudice against me, that she said before she came, she could willingly have gone to see me hanged: but when she came she was convinced, and remains a friend.
Then I turned to Malton again, and very great meetings there were, to which several people more would have come, but durst not for fear of their relations; for it was thought a strange thing then to preach in houses, and not go to the church (as they called it), so that I was much desired to go and speak in the steeple-houses. One of the priests wrote to me, and invited me to preach in his steeple-house, calling me his brother. Another priest, a noted man, kept a lecture there. Now the Lord had shewed me, while I was in Derby prison, that I should spenk in steeple-houses, to gather people from thence ;

I can´t remember their name but I remember listening to this song back in 2008 or 2009 and they were a black guy with a grill on his teeth and a white guy.
The music video was in a pool filled with girls and the song was supposed to be funny in a way. Like they were making fun of hip hop. The language was french and I remeber they had another song in which they kind of made fun of Hollaback Girl by Gwen Stefani music video. It was a catchy song.

I thought this diy lego instruction book was a engaging activity. I thought that I would have enjoyed it if I was a kid. So I happily took photos of the lego puzzles I made, trying as hard as I can be to do it randomly and quickly without much thought so that it would appear creatively done. Unfortunately my dear son was not very interested in it, he didn't want build the lego to follow the patterns on the photo. I tried to engage him further by asking him what he thought the patterns look like. And these 2 were his favourite. His imaginary 'dog' and 'hammer'. And then he started playing with them rather than completing the puzzle.
And so I wondered what went wrong or why he wasn't interested. Perhaps it was his age, he wasn't ready for the activity. Or perhaps it was just not his interest. I also noticed he didn't like to follow the lego instructions on building vehicles too. And then maybe it was his learning style. I know for sure I'm a 'read first' person, I like to research and read about topics that I'm interested in. I think for Nat he is a 'think first' or 'try first' kind of person. And maybe because of his age, he likes to imagine and make up his own stuff rather than follow a set pattern. Somehow I think it's great that he's like that. That's his creative style :) What's your kid's creative style?

I am curious about this because I saw a clip on Twitter last year. It was a clip of a stucco house that was shot with a laser gun. It was there and then it was gone and dust was falling to the earth.
So if the Vatican were destroyed (laser or otherwise), where would the Pope make his home?
Yes, I suppose you would have to be a little mental to think that could happen, especially to the Pope.
I suppose he would have to pitch a tent somewhere, temporarily.

We had a bit of a depleted team for Alton but still managed to put out 3 teams. Rockets and Missiles raced Saturday.
Missiles did really well in division 6. Ruby was the most focused I've seen her and is getting speedier. We have starting working on the catching and she is progressing well. Unfortunately we have a conflict of interest as obviously her owner wants to continue racing her but that means she can't transfer what we are training her over to racing as she hasn't done enough reps yet. Just one of those things I suppose, and if it doesn't improve over the Summer it'll just be something for Winter training. The rest of the dogs also did really well, they just lost 1 race and finished 2nd.
Rockets were 3rd seed in division 2. We had a team of Jemma, Merlin, Elliot, Smartie and Bonnie. All the dogs were great, the judging however was not. I wouldn't usually say anything as it takes balls to go in and judge but I was getting more and more frustrated as the lights were playing up and decisions kept wrongly going against us resulting in unnecessary reruns and losing legs. It was Jemma's (and Sarahs) 1st competition this year, Jem was off her rocker in the 1st race especially as we didn't have time to warm up properly so we left her out of that one but she was great after that and didn't look like running across at all. She tired a little bit towards the end of the day but then it was also her 1st time over 12" so we'll let her off! Sarah also did well on her starts (and her ankle held out... phew!). Merlin's box deteriorated a little from last weekend which I think was partly to do with the ground (dip infront of box) so we're going to do some reps on Friday before Farnham to remind him, other than that he was focused and consistent as ever. I ran Elliot who was great, I find it difficult to judge how fast he's running as I'm trying to run away with such enthusiasm! The interesting thing was that at training last weekend he spit his ball nearly everytime for the tuggy but I had real trouble getting him to spit his ball from the start this weekend which kinda dispels our theory that he won't spit when he's tired. Looks like a competition issue! Hmm now how to fix that...! Mark ran Smartie and she found it very exciting watching her owner Carol run Merlin before her which meant she was flying! Bonnie was awesome as anchor dog and ran fantastically. I think the 12" really suited her as it helped her striding and slowed her down a touch which made her box turn significantly better. So we were really pleased with the dogs and only lost 1 race to come 2nd. We had a best time of 19.16secs and that was in the last race of the day so pretty good going!
Ballistics were 2nd seed in Division 1. The team was Piper, Asher, Luna, Loki. We had a successful but slightly frustrating day. Our 2 main races were against Dream Team Supreme and Bassetts as the other teams were in the 18-19s. I tried getting my team to push it in the early races but as we were comfortably winning this proved difficult! We managed a best time of 17.33 but it could of been so much better, every changeover had room. Infact we didn't manage 1 leg all day where everyone was bob on. We did do a 17.04 with a tiny light (from moi) in the 1st race and Luna and Loki still had room so we know the speed is there, just gotta coax it out! After Asher we were on 8.04 and after Luna 12.53. So we won all our races up until our last against Bassetts. They got a light on the 1st leg but we were quite a bit up on them going in to last dogs so I think if Loki hadn't fumbled (blooming red lane with the dip infront the box lol) we would have had them on speed anyway. They got a leg back after that but then managed to get 2 lights handing the win to us! Thanks Bassetts! Asher ran ok, his box was a little better than it has been. He still doesn't seem as quick as he was last year. I keep getting super paranoid that it's his leg but I know I would be able to tell if he was even slightly lame as I spent the majority of my time staring at it when he was actually injured. He is completely sound and happy so I think I just need to chill!
Looking forward to Farnham now, going to be a very tight div 1 and I'm a little bit nervous! We only have 4dogs aswell (no Piper) which is a shame. Lets hope we are on it!
8 months ago

The job was really hectic and tiring as I was constantly rushing to get my task done. We had two building to clean every night, Monday thru Saturday, from 6: 30 pm -12 mid-night. When I got home most nights I was really tired and it did not take much for me to fall asleep.
I soon learned that the pay was way below the minimum wage. I had no complaints because without ‘papers’ any income was good. After the first week on the job, it was clear that I was given the nastiest tasks by Pedro. I was always assigned the bathrooms or anything that required massive cleaning. I thought maybe I had to work my way up to the vacuuming like some of the others. The one good thing about the job was that Juan, one of the other workers was teaching me a little Spanish. In between cleaning the bathroom, taking out the garbage and moving between floors, l would bump into him vacuuming and he would say something in Spanish. He sometimes spoke in broken English mixed with Spanish, which was mainly how I learned a few Spanish words. We were careful not to let the boss man see us chatting. I had taken Spanish up to 3rd form but I had not paid too much attention to the class. In fact, I hated the class. Now I regret not paying attention.
Juan was from Panama and left his family of six in the countryside. He had crossed the Mexican border and found his way to Florida. He was living near downtown Miami in a cramped 2-bedroom apartment with 8 others and was working another job cutting lawns in the day. Most of his money was sent home and he did not know when he would see his family again. He once showed me a picture of his wife and kids. Even though I did not understand Spanish as he described the picture I knew what “mi amor” meant and the look on his face clearly described the anguish and pain he was going through missing his family. I also missed my family very much but after hearing his story, I realized that my situation was not as bad. I had a little hope of seeing my family again when they came to visit. Juan and I became good friends as I could silently relate to him. I did not tell him too much about my particular situation as my parents warned me to say nothing about my status or I could be deported.
Aunty would drop me off at 6:30 pm and would pick me up at 12:00 mid-night every day. She would greet me with a great big smile and we would chit chat. She would talk about the kids and how work went that day for her. She really made me feel quite at home. Once I caught myself dozing off to sleep while she was talking and I really felt bad. It was not that she was boring me but I was just tired.
The schedule was taking a toll on everyone, especially her. I could see the toll it was taking on Aunty after a long day at her job. She did not show any negativity in her demeanor even though I know it had to be stressful. Imagine leaving your home late at night to come to pick me up. During the first month on the job, she had assisted me in every way possible. In Jamaica, I would be in bed by, the latest, 10:30 pm and I know most Jamaicans do the same. When we arrived at the house my normal routine was to eat and take a shower. I would try my best to not wake everyone with my routine but I know they must hear me. I did everything to be sure my routine would be quiet, including stashing some nightclothes in the bathroom so I would not need to go into the room to open my suitcase.
I was sharing a room so it was difficult because I had to fumble to get into the bed every night. I also could not call my parents as often during the week. I mainly called on the weekend.
I was starting to feel better financially as the little income helped. Aunt Fern had set up a bank account for me with her being the primary person. I did not have a social security card so that was the only way the bank would allow it. This little ID seemed to be the key to every door.
Charlie, my contact for the card, realized that I was determined to get a card so he kept in touch with me every week. He was still unable to locate the guy who could get me a ‘card’. I hated the job but there is nothing I can do without a card.
I received my first letters from Jamaica. It was from one of my best friends, Kurt. The letter was brief but descriptive enough for me to imagine being in Jamaica. He talked about a few of my other friends, the trips to the country and the beach. He also mentioned seeing Sherri-Ann and her saying she would write to me. I read the letter about 4 or 5 times because it just felt like I had a piece of Jamaica there in that letter. My heart wrenched and my yearning for home was overwhelming. I missed Jamaica.
After putting away the letter I wondered how to respond. Should I tell him about my job and what I was doing? I remember we had a funny name for a janitor, in Jamaica, to make them seem important. The name was Janitorial Engineering. I guess I will write about everything but the job. I can tell him about my daytime soap opera addiction and how much fun I am having living in America.
Photo by mwangi gatheca on Unsplash

@ashmoore92 I have 2 outside cats that seek out my Basenji for play when we are outside. But they do his and slap at Simba when he is being to rough or have had enough. The biggest issue I have had is when they run away. As others have said he wants to chase them when they run. Making sure he doesn't follow them over the fence.
Even though they are outside cat's and have plenty of room to get away. I kept Simba on a leash for several months during any interaction with the cats. He plays rough with them still but gets put in his place when it's needed.

My Little Miracle
I was told that I was never ever going to have kids because I was going to have trouble conceiving. Well what a surprise when I met my husband I became pregnant right away were are talking maybe two months of trying. I was so happy and excited, but then my happiness turned into tragedy. I was told when I was given my first ultrasound at six weeks by my doctor that I had a cyst growing along side my baby. He said there common in some woman during there first pregnancy but as my baby grew so did the cyst.
When I was thirteen weeks my cyst was the size of a grapefruit and still growing we had heard the baby’ s heartbeat that week and it was fine but come around the following week my baby’ s heart was not beating anymore. The cyst had suffocated it and prevented it from growing anymore so I had to have emergency surgery to remove the cyst that was on my right ovary, I had a laparoscopy and a D and C. I was told not to become pregnant till a year after the surgery so I didn’t—doctors orders.
So a year and a month later I am currently six weeks pregnant I think that I am blessed despite what I have had to overcome by being told by a specialists that I would have problems conceiving again because I only had one ovary and because of the kind of procedure that was done during surgery. I am so happy and excited that I am finally going to become a mother there will soon be a third member joining me and my husband to start our family I can hardly wait. I thank god everyday for this new blessing he had sent me!

Re: Need major help. Did I mess him up?
Thank you everyone. So I told her we feed on demand. She said she would keep working with him and we would figure it out. I believe he is either reverse cycling or he just is more comfortable at home. I think it's alot less hectic and more quiet at home which may help too. I am going to offer today to send my milk for the next few days to see if that helps. If not oh well I am okay with how he eats and she has to deal with it. Its a small home daycare and she is the only one.

This is a special section where the main character from the Harry Potter series is featured. The author decided to write about the three most popular relationships from the series. Not only is this a great example of fanfiction, but it’s also an excellent way to encourage people to read some of the best Harry Potter fanfiction ever written.
A lot of fans ask me why Harry chose to break up with his friends from school. Well, Harry was an incredibly self-centered kid. He was a snob and a bully, and he was really good at making friends. However, he didn’t have the social skills to make many good friends. He was quite lonely.
Now that we’ve established that Harry’s friends didnt like him, let’s discuss why he broke up with them. Harry’s parents were the worst parents in the world. They were extremely controlling, and they forced Harry to spend time with them at home. Being forced to spend time with the family was something Harry hated. He hated being around his parents, and he hated being around his friends.
This is why Harrys friends disliked him so much. They were the ones that Harry was forced to spend time with. They were the ones he hated being around. He hated that he was forced to spend time with them at home. This is why Harry was lonely, this is why he didnt have social skills.
In Harrys case, the problem is that the family, and Harry as a person, is so different from him. Harry is so young, so carefree. He spends so much time with his friends, he is the center of attention at times. He likes to spend time with his family, and he is the one who spends time with his friends. Harry is not who he was supposed to be.
Thats why the secret relationship fanfiction is so important. It shows us that Harry is not who he was supposed to be. Harry didnt want to be the boy who was always hanging out with his friends. He wanted to be the boy who was always there to help his friends.
This is also why Harry is the hero of our story. He isn’t the boy who was supposed to be, but he isn’t the boy who was always there to help his friends either. Instead he’s a hero who is always alone.
The first time I read this was on the first day of school. I was in my second year of high school. You see Harry was the guy who was always there to help his friends. He was the guy who was always there to help his friends. I remember that day in his room. I remember the first time I looked at the pictures of Harry and his friends. It was the first time I had ever really seen Harry in his natural form.
If I had to choose just one thing I miss about Harry, it was when he was on the beach in Blackreef, helping everyone in the party. The day he was helping everyone in the party. I remember walking into the school library and seeing the first few books Harry had written. Harry’s writing was incredible.
So much of Harry’s writing is about the characters he creates. If you look at what Harry wrote in the book he wrote, it’s about the characters he loves as much as anyone. That’s why so many people call it his fanfiction. It’s his work, and he’s giving it to us. In Harry’s own words, “I wrote Harrys fanfiction for you.

Worldwide English (New Testament)
12 Abraham was too old to be a father, but a great nation was born from that one man. They are as many as the stars in the sky and as the sands on the seaside. No man can count them.
13 These people all died still believing God. They did not get the things God had promised them. But they saw them far away and were glad to see them. They said they did not belong to this world, but were only travelling in it.
14 People who say such things mean they are looking for a country which will be their own.Read full chapter

Conrad was born on November 1, 1999, and today is his 17th birthday. We adopted him, when he was 7, from the good people at Good Mews–a wonderful no-kill shelter for cats of all ages and health conditions.
I think he knows today is his birthday. He was unusually talkative this morning when I got up. He just kept going on and on and on. We had a rather extended conversation as he followed me around the house. We discussed everything from how sick and tired he is of this election cycle to how much he misses his friends, the deer, in Sausalito.

Last year was a particularly bad year for me but not because of adoption specifically. What made me miserable and severely depressed was having a neighbour from hell and problems with one of our forums.
With our neighbour from hell his behaviour got gradually worse. We had the ongoing battle that he was ringing up our housing association about the smell coming from our garden and that we weren't clearing up after our dogs. We were clearing up after them and every time an officer came out she could see we were being honest. I gave up trying to plant anything as he would pull the plants and chuck them across our garden. Every time he wanted to mow his front garden he would insist on coming through our garden, often with his dog instead of going through the other neighbour's even though he got on with her. He would deliberately make a noise at all times of the day and night, peer through our windows to try and upset our dogs. I also had to deal with abuse over imagined wrongs but he would never do it when he knew Rick was about. I wouldn't go out into our garden if he was about and would go in if he went outside while I was. Our housing officer was great as she knew how bad his behaviour was and he was just out to cause trouble. She also spoke to other neighbours so she knew it was only him that didn't like us.
The final straw came when, one evening, when he started being abusive to me and I finally lost it. I didn't swear at him or threatened me but he was threatening towards me. Rick heard what was being said, shot out and told me to go in and ring the police which I did.
Due to us having the police out it gave the housing association more grounds to start the process off. I couldn't take any more and had been in tears the last two times we had seen our housing officer. One of the other officers came out to see us and assured us that when the neighbour rang up to complain they would tell him straight if they felt he was being obsessive, that nobody would come out to see us unless they felt they had grounds to and that he would be told this was the last straw. We were told it could take up to a year ri evict him and we couldn't put up with it so we moved and are now with a different housing association. It was a shame to get to that point but we needed to do what was best for us.
The problems we were having with one of our forums was due to someone wanting to join it and he was very angry and depressed. With that forum we were advised to ask for some information due to a couple of members being suicidal and with one we didn't know how to get hold of her apart from her mobile number. We contacted the police were able to find her just on her number and IP number which was amazing so she is getting the help she needs. Anyway this man started sending me nasty and threatening emails so we contacted the police. In the meantime he joined up with the forum with a different username and false information then started posting nasty and threatening messages mostly aimed at me. The police were able to get hols of him quite quickly by email and he was completely honest about what he had done and that he was quite happy to be arrested. The police officer who was dealing with the matter came round to us and asked me what I wanted as there was enough reason to arrest him. I believe this man is severely depressed and simply need help so arresting him wouldn't solve his problems so I told him that. He was great and managed to get professional help for the man so a good result as the man wanted real help.
At certain times of the year I become severely depressed because of adoption so all that was going on added to how I was feeling so 2013 was a dark year for me. I certainly wasn't in the mood for the pro adoption no matter what the consequences brigade being their usual selves. It rubs me up the wrong we that they encourage adoption no matter what then have the nerve to tell people like me that we use coercive tactics to persuade mothers to keep their babies. They completely miss the point that adoption is final where as trying parenting first the mothers still have the option of adoption if they can't cope instead of burning their bridges straight away. A few of us have also been constantly accused of being anti adoption and that we shouldn't be taken any notice off even though we have a wealth of wisdom, common sense, good advice and experience. One particular adopter has sent me a few nasty messages as well as attacking me publicly so now she has been blocked and I do report her answers when she attacks me or anybody else. What she has been saying about me is completely untrue so wont (legally) put up with it.

This is a story of man who was handling three kids aged 14, 8 and 9 years respectively. Since the 14 year old was grounded and the other kids had already completed their homework, his wife insisted that they could visit the park and she will follow them as soon as she gets refreshed. The husband came up with an idea to scare his wife with the help of his kids. The plan was to hide in the closet and wait for her to fetch her clothes and at that moment, they will scare her. The husband and the kids were eagerly waiting for the woman of the house to arrive. However, when the wife came the group didn’t expect something this strange. Want to know what did happen with the wife and kids, read on to know.
Don’t forget to share this hilariously scary story with everyone you know.

Okay, this is probably going to be my lamest post as of yet but I had to tell someone so you can now count yourself as the lucky 'one.' Last spring when I was shopping for flowers to plant in my backyard (almost all of which were quickly killed by my dog) I found this packet of wildflower seeds that I thought were really interesting. It was just a piece of paper with the flower seeds in it and you only had to lay it across the soil and water it. Anyway, it didn't take long for it to begin to grow but I only got one or two blossoms off it all summer long. Needless to say, I was disappointed. However, I went out there a few days ago and found that in the middle of October, my wildflowers had finally decided to blossom - even with the freezing temperatures. And I was so excited by this and thought it was so unusual that I took pictures to prove it. These pics were taken this morning before I left for work. I just hope that all of those little buds blossom before they really do freeze or my dog decides that they're part of his territory too.

I decided to try Yoshiwara and happened upon Ascot Club on my way to another club. The tout / doorman was really friendly and asked me to come and look at their book of girls. I was really impressed that they busted out an iPad and had multiple pictures of all their girls. That was really cool. It was funny as the guy was zooming in on the breasts and underwear shots. I picked Miyu, linked below: http://ascot-c.com/profile.html?uid=miyu It was both a good choice and a poor choice. This was my first Soapland experience so I was hoping for the mat play experience. Well, Miyu has been on the job for about 1 month and she hasn't been trained in that yet. So that was kind of a bummer. I thought perhaps that was a given at a Soapland, but I guess not! You live and learn. But on the upside she was really a pretty girl and fun to be with. She's 23, tight little body, nice sized breasts, firm ass. She hadn't had a gaijin customer before so I think she was as nervous as I was. She talked in that high pitched girlish voice and was happy and cheerful to the end. So for those that are interested, I was in a small room by myself waiting for Miyu to be ready. She waited outside the waiting room door when the tencho introduced us. She took my hand and led me back to the room. It was a small room that consisted of a small bed, entry area, mat play area and a small ofuro. She had me sit on the bed and she began to undress me. Very deliberately folding my clothes and putting them away neatly one by one. She then took off her dress. She was wearing a white bra that was a few sizes too small. She said they wanted her to make her breasts look bigger. She had Japanese C cup breasts, just right for her body size, which were nice and perky. She had nice dark nipples that were very sensitive. Her skin was flawless. Milky white and really soft. She has a tattoo on the right side of her lower back. What followed was more of a typical escort type action. We kissed on the bed and basically got down to business. Light kissing, great BBBJ, but she didn't really initiate too much...which was fine. I was content to do my thing and enjoy her body. She seemed cool with my exploring. After the first round we talked and she sat me on that stool with the middle missing and she cleaned me up. Again, not properly trained in the area she really just washed me down and that was it. She filled the ofuro with that she thought was hot water, but it was freezing cold water. We soaked in the tub for a bit and chatted. It was at this time that I found out that she didn't do mat play. Too bad. So we repeated the bed play. She also has a job as a masseuse she she rubbed my back - great back massage - and just as I was getting ready to try for round three we ran out of time. I asked her about the difference between Japanese and Gaijin customers and she said that the Japanese customers are really aggressive and grab at her quite a bit. She says that hurts. Anyway, I think I am in for another round at some point in the future. I talked with one of the guys at the front desk at length and he walked me through who was good and who was not for mat play and so I would go back. It was expensive...all in 75,000. (including gaijin tax of 10,000). Just as an FYI - I had an appointment with Kinpeibai, another Soapland in Yoshiwara. They had some cute girls on their site and were gaijin friendly. The site says that gaijin have to come with another Japanese person. When I called them and spoke to them in Japanese they were fine with me coming alone. So I assume that if you can speak some Japanese then you're good to go. Unfortunately, the girl I had an appointment with took off sick. I went to check out their stable of girls and wasn't terribly happy with the choices I was given. Not bad, but the atmosphere was old and a bit dirty. So I left. But for 100 minutes I think the all in price was 38,000. I would consider going there if for the right girl. Their website is: http://kinpei.net Anyway, that was my report.

I would definitely recommend the Sam Bernstein Law Firm to my family, friends and co-workers. It’s really an honest family law firm. They were kind, honest and they made everything that I needed to happen, happen. Everybody was very helpful and clear, and anytime I had a question it was answered. My lawyer Beth Klein really went to bat for me. My paralegal also helped work me through the entire process. And it was really helpful and made it really easy.

Mark slowed to a jog trot, thinking he was at a safe distance. He thought his lungs would burst.
Looking at what was before him caused his heart to skip a beat.
The landscape was entirely different. Birches grew amid other wild weeds, and some of the weeds were reaching up high above his waist.
He did not know whether he should laugh or cry.

Shahrul Anuar Zain (born 15 February 1970) is a Malaysian singer and model (for Dockers). He has had three albums released, all of which have been named after him. The first album was released in 1998, consisting of 10 songs. His first single after a hiatus was "Bila Resah". The second album was released in 2002 and his most recent album came out in 2007. A multi award-winning artist, Zain successfully countersued his former record company, Synchrosound Records, for overdue royalty payments in May 2010.
Sursă: Wikipedia engleză

So now that ya'll know the first date story I thought I would tell you the proposal!
It all started when we went to Cali for Kasey's friend Chase's wedding reception. I thought that Kasey would propose this weekend but I didn't know for sure. I taught he had the ring but I didn't think he had asked my dad yet. So we get there first thing friday morning and we had already talked about going to eat at a nice restaurant that night because I had never been to Cali so that part didn't tip me off. Well Kasey somehow tricked me into getting a little more dressed up by saying he only had slacks and no jeans. So we go to eat sea food (Kasey's favorite) at this restaurant along the coast which was really nice and lots of fun. At the end of the meal they wrap up your leftover food in the shape of sea animals. (seahorse and whale) Really really sweet!!
Well after dinner he asked me what I wanted to do. I wanted to see the LA temple because we had talked about getting married in that temple and I had never seen it. So off we went with me having no clue what was going on. So we were headed to the temple and Kasey passes it and I look at him like whats going on. Well he said we had to go up a couple of blocks and make a U turn and go park. I hadn't been there so I didn't know what was going on. Well I hadn't noticed but the music was turned down because we were talking. So we keep driving further then I taught we should have to to make a U turn so I looked at Kasey again and asked him whats going on. Well he tells me that we actually aren't going to the temple right now. I was like well where are we going, (my heart pounding all the while) then he turned the music up. It was playing the song Defying Gravity from the play Wicked (which I had been dying to see for the past 2 years!) I then started freaking out!! I was like where are we going whats going on and he told me that we were going to go see the play and he got us good tickets. I didn't believe him at first but then he showed me the tickets and I almost had a heart attack I was so excited ha ha ha.
So needless to say the play was amazing!! After he told me the night wasn't over yet. We went down to the Santa Monica Peir and walked around just talking for a bit. Well we walked down along the beach and sat down and were talking and he started the whole I love you, your amazing, I want to be with you forever and of course I responded the same. So then I started saying how I was so supprised that he got tickets and that I had no idea he was doing that. Well he then said you like supprises don't you. I said yes and he then told me to close my eyes because he had a suprise for me. Of course I know exactly what it was but was still more excited then ever. So I open my eyes and there he is on one knee infront of me and asked me to marry him and I said yes!!
It was the best proposal a girl could ask for!

We had to trailer our horse down to OSU Veterinary Hosital for an issue with his eye. He was undergoing surgery and needed to stay overnight. We have dogs and weren't able to get a pet sitter so we had to bring them along with us. Red Roof Inn allows pets. We were thrilled to find a Hotel so close to OSU and pet friendly. The staff was great in assisting us. The room was wonderful (nice and clean). They also gave us a discount because we were at OSU Veterinary Hospital. Red Roof really helped make a scary situation a lot less stressful.
We were very pleased and would use them anytime we're in the Columbus area.
P.S. In case your wondering about our horse - he is doing just great.

Remembering Liverpool, Everton and Birmingham's Gary Ablett
The football world has been paying tribute to former Liverpool, Everton and Birmingham defender Gary Ablett, who has died at the age of 46 after a 16-month battle against non-Hodgkin's lymphoma.
Ian Rush, former Liverpool striker: "Gary was a really versatile player, somebody who would play anywhere the manager asked him. The fact he played for both Liverpool and Everton says something about how good he was as a player.
"He summed up what Liverpool people are all about. He gave 100% to the team and my favourite memory of him was after the 1989 FA Cup final - he was so proud to win something for the team.
"He was a very knowledgeable football man too. He was not a shouter and a raver, he was more of a coach. He knew a lot about the game and he could see potential in young players - a skill in itself.
"Off the pitch, he was the perfect gentleman. He had a lovely family, which he brought up really well, and he was such a respectable person. If he could help you with anything, he would."
Mark Lawrenson, former Liverpool defender: "He was my boot boy, around 1981, and my first memories of him are as a really nice lad, who was very polite and respectful of the senior pros.
"He was a tall, thin, gangly lad but he was a great runner. One of the lads nicknamed him Seb, after Sebastian Coe.
"I think I had left the club when he broke into the first team, but it was obvious he was always going to get there.
"He knew he had to work hard to make it, and that is what he did.
"He had lots of pace to recover and he was very good on the ball, as many left-sided defenders tend to be. He was a good team-mate too, you could never have enough Gary Abletts in your team.
"He was a real gentleman."
Alan Hansen, former Liverpool defender: "He was a lovely guy and he was quite unassuming and everyone loved him.
"It is such a shock even though we knew he was ill. I texted him on December 7 to go and see him and have a cup of tea and he texted back to say he had a doctor's appointment but wished me a merry Christmas and said he would see me in the new year.
"Then we get the news and we are absolutely stunned and cannot believe this has happened.
"Talking to two or three ex-Liverpool players we are all distraught because we all thought he was fine and recovering.
"To die at 46 years of age is absolutely tragic. Each and every one of us is stunned by the news.
"He came into the dressing room when Liverpool had one of the great teams and he was right in there because he was a top-class player as well.
"If he had joined Liverpool in the late 70s or early 80s he would have been a permanent fixture.
"He was a dedicated, consummate professional but he was right at the top of the tree.
"I had a couple of great centre-back partnerships at Liverpool and he was as good as anything.
"I played with him when he was on the left-side of defence and he made it really easy for me and as soon as he stepped into the Liverpool side I knew he was a top-class player."
Kenny Dalglish, Liverpool manager: "I gave Gary his debut and remember him scoring on his first start at Anfield against Nottingham Forest," he told the official Liverpool website.
"He was a really good servant to the football club not only as a player, but also as reserve team coach.
"He served the club proudly and credibly. It's very sad for everybody."
David Moyes, Everton manager: "It is so, so sad about Gary.
"He was a regular visitor here to Finch Farm (Everton's training ground) over the last six months and he was a lovely man, well liked by everyone.
"My thoughts are with all his family at this terrible time."
Pat Nevin, former Everton winger: "He was a classy defender and had decent quality going forward as well and he was not dirty in any way. But because of his understated way he was maybe under-rated by many people.
"I played against him a lot when I was at Everton and he played at left-back. It says something that I enjoyed playing against him even in the Merseyside derby, which is one of the most stressful games in world football, because he was just such a nice guy.
"I'm shocked and saddened. Gary was a lovely, lovely guy who was liked by everyone. I don't think anyone will have a bad word to say about him."
Barry Horne, who played alongside Ablett for almost four years at Everton recalls a typical piece of play by his former team-mate in the thumping 4-1 victory over Tottenham in the FA Cup semi-final victory at Elland Road in 1995: "Late, late on in the game he made an unbelievable run to set up one of the goals.
"The game was already won but he ran almost the length of the pitch when he didn't need to and that just about summed him up.
"We had some good years playing at Everton together. He was so brave to make the move having been so successful at Liverpool. He was regular at Liverpool and a great contributor and it can't have been easy to come to Everton but he was successful there as well.
"When I came I was surprised how good he was and I shouldn't have been. It's very often the case that with unsung heroes at teams it's easy not to give them the credit they deserve but I saw what a good player he was when I played with him.
"He had a wonderful left foot, was fantastically cool and was a natural athlete. He was extremely versatile, could play anywhere on the left or at centre-half and never complained about where he was asked to play.
"He was a very, very understated person and such a genuine, generous man. He had a great sense of humour and was just a very giving. It was a pleasure to play with him."
Liverpool captain Steven Gerrard: "First and foremost he was a really good guy, a terrific servant to the club as a player and as a coach and it's a really sad day for everyone at Liverpool, but the people who matter most in this situation are his family and our thoughts are with them," he told the official Liverpool website.
"I'm sure everyone at Everton speaks the same as everyone at Liverpool does and that speaks volumes for Gary, the respect he has at both places. He was a top guy and a top professional in the way he went about his work. He was enthusiastic and all the players who worked under him for the reserves and the first team certainly learned a lot off him."
Liverpool defender Jamie Carragher: "He was a great person," he told the official Liverpool website.
"I knew him when he was here as a coach and he did a fantastic job here, winning the league in his second season. He had a great rapport with the lads, particularly the younger ones.
"There are not many people who can cross the divide between Everton and Liverpool like he did, both as a player and coach; no-one at either club has ever had a bad word to say about him and that's evidence of the high esteem he's held in.
"He was a great player for Liverpool and for Everton; he won the FA Cup with both teams. That will probably never happen again and that's a great achievement. He played in a great Liverpool side with the likes of Barnes, Beardsley and Aldridge and to be involved in that was something special. When he went to Everton he was part of the great side they had there with Joe Royle and the 'dogs of war' team.
"He was a great bloke and he always had a smile on his face; that's how I'll remember him, great to be around."
Roy Evans, former Liverpool manager: "It's a big shock," he told Sky Sports News.
"Obviously we know Gary's been ill for a while. It's a really sad day.
"He was good at everything he did as a player.
"He went into coaching and stamped his personality onto that and was doing a very good job, certainly at youth level.
"I remember he had bit of a difficult first spell at Stockport, but overall he's had a great career in football, he's a big loss to the sport.
"He made a big contribution to the game."
Paul Walsh, Liverpool striker 1984-1988: "I joined Liverpool when I was 21 and Gary would have been 18.
"I went into the reserves and my first few games were with Gary. He was just trying to make his way, he was a top lad.
"He just wanted to get in there and do well. He didn't do anything fancy but trained hard and had a great attitude to everything he did.
"There was a steely determination about him. You don't get into the Liverpool side and come through ranks if you don't have that steel. I'm gutted for him, his family and everyone who was close to him."
David Fairclough, ex-Liverpool striker: "He was a lovely lad, he always conducted himself in the right way.
"He was great with people, always personable. What always came through with Gary was his attitude was just always very, very right."
Birmingham City FC: "The thoughts of everyone connected with Birmingham City Football Club are with the friends and family of Gary Ablett.
"Amiable Ablett played over 100 games for Blues in a three-year spell between 1996 and 1999 and was liked and respected by all who came into contact with him.
"Just like he battled as a fierce competitor on the pitch, Ablett fought non-Hodgkin's lymphoma for over year before passing away peacefully.
"Our deepest sympathies and condolences go out to Gary's wife Jacqueline and his children and everyone else that knew him."

Tony , The Italian Sausage
No videos found.
Tony , The Italian Sausage, It was a little hard for me to convince Tony to show up for the shooting. We spoke a couple times over the phone, sometime after I had gave him my business card at a shopping mall. He was unsure, but when he finally showed up, I fell for his Italian charm. It makes you want to jump on him and kiss him! But I had to control myself… lol. He used to be a model in his 20’s, now married with kids, and some extra cash is always welcome. I was actually surprised, when he told me that his wife, was the one who encouraged him to come in for this. Man, that REALLY was a turn on for me, and I also noticed how relaxed he was, while I was sucking him off. After all, he has been a good husband, by providing extra income, spicing up his marriage, and enjoying a good blowjob! I could tell she had left a few days’ load for me to blow, a load that I really enjoyed from this handsome Italian dude. Hope you all enjoy as well!

I had some fun with it. I got to about level 24 before I had my fill. I enjoyed using the traps but I agree with what others have been saying about it. None of the maps really look that good and the frame rate really takes a dip. The melee system is also pretty bad.

My mother was born and raised in Hawaii and was 14 years old when the Japanese attacked Pearl Harbor. They lived in Wahiawa and could hear the planes approaching but not until they were overhead could they tell who and what they were. They ran to a little church across the street from my grandfathers house and try to hide. Then they heard the second wave of planes that came in and she said they were scared to death. They could hear the bombs dropping and all the explosions. That night my grandfather made sure that all the shades were pulled down and the lit one candle and sat in the living room floor and talked. The next day my grandfather went to the local hardware store and got some black paint and they had to paint the windows all black and for a long time, the only light they would have would be 1 candle a night. When it burned out, they just stayed in the dark. She said that they were all afraid that an invasion would be next and what would they do. My grandfather had an old single shot shotgun, which very few had and he said they would fight if they had to. He said he wasn't afraid for himself but was for his kids. Hard to believe that was 74 years ago. Today and WWII veteran attended Washington and they said he was the oldest WWII vet alive. He was 110 years old and he said that the monument was what he always wanted to see. He got his wish. My mother passed 3 1/2 years ago and all her sisters are gone and she has 2 brothers who are quite elderly now and still live in Hawaii. I don't get a chance to talk to them much, but I need to so I can get a better perspective of the thoughts that ran through their minds during the attack.
1 - 3 of 3 Posts
This is an older thread, you may not receive a response, and could be reviving an old thread. Please consider creating a new thread.

He was cycling 3 hours to work every single day to support his family. So, his co-workers decided to do something for him.
Having a vehicle to drive to work or having a mobile phone might seem normal for some of us. However, it is a privilege for many as they struggle to function without private transportation every day. A man who works as a server at Texas Roadhouse was cycling for three hours to get to work every day to support his family, according to My Modern Met. When the staff and customers at the restaurant got to know about this, they were kind enough to donate money to gift him a car.
Samson Adams was riding his bike from Livingston County to his workplace in Paducah, Kentucky, about 30 miles every day. He had been working there for the past one month. It took about six hours for him, to and fro from work. Moreover, he had to often take breaks because he has diabetes. "I had no choice but to use a manual bike, and then that went out and then God came and blessed me with all this," Samson told WPSD6.
It was Texas Roadhouse Community Ambassador Joelle Long and her husband Ryan who noticed that Adams was constantly tired at work. When they spoke to him and got to know his story. "I started picking him up. We started talking. The more I talked to him, the more I get to know him, the more I loved him, the more I felt like this guy really deserves someone to give him a little bit of help," Long said.
She posted on her Facebook page about Adams and asked people to donate to the cause. She wrote, "Friends please read (GoFundMe now in comments). We hired this awesome guy a few weeks ago. He is married with a 10-year-old. I kept seeing a bike in our parking lot, sure we have had people ride a bike to work in the past but here is the thing this guy rode his bike to work and home from Ledbetter. It takes 3 hours.
She added, "Then the tire on his bike busted a few nights ago and he walked it home. I gave him rides today mainly because I was in awe of his work ethic and determination. So, if anyone is selling a moped or a cheap car just to get from A to B until they can get on their feet, contact me, please. Today not many his age are willing to work so my respect level for him is pretty high."
Long was able to find Adams a car for $800 and had asked people to donate about $1000 so that she could cover his insurance and gas expenses. However, surprisingly, the campaign has already raised about $6295.
Soon, Long called over Adams at work and recorded his response to this amazing news. The video clip was shared on Facebook. Adams couldn't believe what she was saying, "Really? You're lying. You bought me a car?" She clarifies that people got him a car. He instantly cries and has tears of joy in his eyes. "It is a dream, this doesn't happen to me," says the server.
Talking about that moment when he was called, Adams thought that he was in trouble. "I forgot to do something or maybe I shouldn't have eaten that piece of bread on camera,” he said. “You know, something simple like that. And she was like no, you're not in trouble, I got news for you. We got you a car. Just basically I didn't know what to think.”
In another post, Long said that the remaining money from the donations will be used to relocate the family to a new apartment that was closer to his workplace. Moreover, now his three-hour ride has been reduced to a 30-minute drive to work, thanks to the new car. Adams calls the gift a true blessing. "Thank you very much, Paducah. Come and see me at Texas Roadhouse. My name is Samson. I'll be the best server I can be," said Samson.

Jul 21st 2008 I’m ready for my close-up
As I warned you, last week’s cartoons were repeats, because of my brief hospital stay a few weeks back. What the good people at United Media did was go back in the files and pick out an entire week to rerun. I had no input in this, as I was having a camera rammed up my cardiovascular system about that time, and I was as in the dark as you about which cartoons they would choose. I thought they chose a fair week, and I thank them.

Grace came into the shelter I manage. When she arrived she was covered in ant bites, had a severe bacterial skin infection as well as having sarcoptic mange. She was matted to the skin and was very distrusting of humans and tried to bite all the employees here. I knew we had to get her out of the kennel and back on the road to recovery.
She got her name from my husband once we brought her home to meet the family. My son had a football game we were getting ready for, and up to that day she was going by the name Grace. ... So as we were getting ready to head out my husband began a conversation with Grace, and said "It's to bad you can't go with us, Popcorn." She got so excited, ran up to him, jumped up on his leg, tail wagging, the whole 9. They've now been great friends for 3 years.
She may have started off as fear biting, antihuman Shih-Tzu but now she is our pride and joy and our furbaby!

Also known as Sliced Bread, he won the Daytona 500 in 2015 as well as the Meijer 300 at the Kentucky Speedway in 2008.
He knew early on that he was destined to be a racer and started competing behind the wheel at the age of six.
In 2009, he was named the Sprint Cup Series Rookie of the Year.
Raised by his mother, Deborah Logano, and father, he was the youngest sibling in his family. He married Brittany Baca in December 2014.
When he came onto the scene, many veterans, including Mark Martin, mentioned that they felt he had a lot of talent.

I had a hospital bill that I had been paying, but wound up going to Transworld. According to the guy in the billing department they were swamped, and had to turn some of their accounts over in order to take care of it all. So even though I had been paying in a timely manner, I was now dealing with Transworld Systems. It didn't really matter much to me, I payed the same amount, so it wasn't a big deal. However I was wary about giving them a bank account or credit card number, as I've heard how unscrupulous these collection agencies can be, so I got a money card that I put the cash on every month and couldn't be overcharged.
The person I dealt with at Transworld was friendly enough, but I was having an issue with them. I've read other people say the same thing, and apparently it's something Transworld is famous for, not sending statements. They say they are going to send it, but it never shows up. And if you follow up they'll give you a story about how they sent it, and it hasn't come back, so there must be a problem with the post office. However every month the letter they sent about how they were going to charge me so and so amount on whatever date showed up just fine. But they would never give me anything in writing as to how much I owed, or proof that I had payed. So I kept my own records using a balance I was told over the phone and writing down how much money I paid each month.
So other than that things went smoothly with Transworld, each month I would put the money on, and that was that. One day the guy I had dealt with called me up and told me that my balance was just over $300 and asked if I could pay it off and be done with it. It was about $100 more than my records showed I owed, but I didn't argue. After all my handwritten ledger wasn't something that was going to hold up in court or anything, and I was just looking forward to getting it taken care of so I would have one less bill to pay and wouldn't have to go put money on that card every month.
So I paid the $300 something dollars, and thought I was done with them. A couple months passed and I got another call from Transworld, he said I still owed them around $120. I was hesitant this time, because the last payment was supposed to be my final payment. He said that the balance had not been correct and gave me some story about somebody elses payment having been posted to my account, and that I still owed them that amount. I told him that I wasn't going to pay any more until I got something in writing showing my balance. He once again said he would send it out, but wanted to schedule the payment while he had me on the phone, I agreed on a date for a month later and made sure he knew that I wasn't going to put the money on the card if the statement didn't arrive.
Well the statement didn't arrive, and I called him, he once again gave me the story that he sent it. He then accused me of just not wanting to pay the money. We got in a bit of a shouting match, as he was flinging insults at me and I wasn't going to take any attitude off of him. Finally just to get off the phone with him I said I would send him a check, but I knew I wasn't going to do so until I got some proof I wouldn't have to make yet another final payment. The next day I called Transworld to talk to sombody else, thinking maybe I could get some better answers and my statement by talking to somebdy else, or somebody higher than him, who he had refused to let me speak to the night before.
The guy I talked to told me that they couldn't send me a statement because they had already done so several times, and my account was blocked from recieving any more mail. However he did tell me to call the original billers as they would have the same info because Transworld sends them a monthly update on payments. However I had a hard time getting in touch with anybody at that business office, I guess they were still swamped,and after a week of leaving message I hadn't heard anything back, but I did get a call from Transworld again, saying they had not received the check. So I decided to have a little fun with the guy and turn the tables of the missing statements on them. I told him I had sent the check, and I wasn't sure why he didn't get it. He said he would wait a few more days then, as it may have gotten hung up in the mail. My intentions were to actually send him the check though, if the balance they were giving me checked out with the hospital.
After still not getting in touch with somebody at the hospital he called again, and this time he was very mad, saying I never really mailed a check, insulting me more and so forth. So I gave him the same thing he gave me, saying maybe there was something wrong with the post office, after all if none of his statements ever made it to me, it's only reasonable that the same could happen with my check. He called BS on that, and I could tell from his total dismissal of that excuse that he knew he had never mailed a statement. I told him that I am waiting to hear back from the hospital, as I'm going to get the correct information from them, and he just EXPLODED on me. He said I'm not to talk with them, I talk to HIM. I'm dealing with him now, that I had my chance with the hospital. Apparently he didn't know that they had my account for reasons other than me not paying. So I just told him that when I got the info I needed, he would get the payment and I hung up.
A couple days after this I finally got in touch with somebody in the business office at the hospital. And I was not surprised at all to find out that my account was completely paid off. Not only that, but the final payment they got had been $90, which is half of the total. So the hospital got $90, Transworld was supposed to get $90 also, which meant a total payment of $180, when I had in fact paid them over $300. I asked the lady if the rest was some sort of extra money that Transworld was supposed to collect, and she explained to me that it wasn't. For every payment I make to Transworld, half is sent to them, half is kept by Transworld, and when the hospital is paid off, Transworld is paid off too.
So not only did I not owe Transworld another payment, the last payment was $100 over what was actually owed, I payed Transworld $300 something, and they gave the hospital $90, kept the rest, and then tried to hit me up for even more money after that. I was going to contact Transworld, but the hospital said they would take care of it for me, apologized for turning me over to them, not only because I had been paying the hospital diligently, but also because they have been receiving a lot of complaints about Transworld, and they were in the process of finding another business to handle their accounts.

So I've been dating a girl for a month and things have been going great. Then yesterday she told me she was feeling down. I called she didn't pick up then I sent her a text and she didn't respong. I ended up falling asleep and when I woke up 4 hours later she texts me about how she feels that I don't care about her at all. the thing is other times when she has felt down I've always been there for her. I've even driven down to see her because she felt sad. This is the one time I hadn't done that. She said this was the time time she really needed me. I know I messed up and I should have been there for her but I just don't understand how one day and one mistake can completely change how you view a person. The worst part is she called her ex and he was at work and made time to call her. I thought she wanted space or not to talk. She said I should have kept trying. that even her asshole of an ex made time for but I didn't. What can I do do to fix this? Am I in the wrong? How can one mistake ruin everything so fast? I just never wanted to hurt her and I feel I did. What should I do?
Most Helpful Girl
You shouldn't be beating yourself up about it. She has to understand that you can't just drop everything and drive to her every time she has a bad day. Her saying all that makes her seem insensitive like she is just entitled. You called and you text.. and what did she not do? Answer. So she has time to call her ex but can't answer your calls? or respond to your text messages? She is going about it the wrong way. The way I see it, is that you were there for her, and she doesn't appreciate all the times you were or when you tried to reach out but was given no respond.0
Most Helpful Guy
Bud, you did nothing wrong, she did. First of all, she has some emotional, stability and confidence issues. She sounds like a bit of a drama queen where everything has to be about her. You did try to call, you did text. There is nothing wrong with making her wait for a few hours. Who the hell can't wait for a few hours? It took her less than four hours to call her ex. Right there is a huge mistake on her part. Who is she dating, you or him? For her to call her ex tells me she still has feelings and still thinks of him. She was way too quick to jump into his arms and he was too quick to see her too! Red flag with that situation big time! She needs to learn some patience.0

A Woodman was felling a tree on the bank of a river, when his axe, glancing off the trunk, flew out of his hands and fell into the water. As he stood by the water’s edge lamenting his loss, Mercury appeared and asked him the reason for his grief; and on learning what had happened, out of pity for his distress he dived into the river and, bringing up a golden axe, asked him if that was the one he had lost. The Woodman replied that it was not, and Mercury then dived a second time, and, bringing up a
silver axe, asked if that was his.
“No, that is not mine either,” said the Woodman.
Once more Mercury dived into the river and brought up the missing axe. The Woodman was overjoyed at recovering his property and thanked his benefactor warmly; and the latter was so pleased with his honesty that he made him a present of the other two axes. When the Woodman told the story to his companions, one of these was filled with envy of his good fortune and determined to try his luck for himself.
So, he went and began to fell a tree at the edge of the river, and presently contrived to let his axe drop into the water. Mercury appeared as before, and, on learning that his axe had fallen in, he dived and brought up a golden axe, as he had done on the previous occasion. Without waiting to be asked whether it was his or not the fellow cried, “That’s mine, that’s mine,” and stretched out his hand eagerly for the prize: but Mercury was so disgusted at his dishonesty that he not only declined to give him the golden axe, but also refused to recover for him the one he had let fall into the stream.
Honesty is the best policy.

A landscape gardner was stabbed to death on his front doorstep after an attacker knocked at his house - then plunged a knife into his neck when he answered.
Jon Britton, who was also a musician, was jamming with his friends from the band Mines and Countermines, when he was was confronted by his killer.
The 43-year-old guitarist was discovered with multiple wounds when neighbours rushed to help him in the hallway of his house.
Jon was rushed from his home in West Kirby, Merseyside, to hospital but died a short time later on Tuesday night.
The brutal killing has shocked neighbours on the quiet cul-de-sac who witnessed a hooded man pacing up and down the street before the killing ‘like he was building himself up to something.’
Detectives have arrested a man, 38, from Birkenhead, on suspicion of murder as locals claimed the two men did know each other and the attack was targeted.
Police said Mr Britton was stabbed several times, with some wounds to his neck.
One woman told of how her mother had run over to try and help after watching events unfold through her window.
She said: “My mum was looking out and heard screaming going on. She saw a man go in and then walk back out, I think she said he had a hoody or a hat on.
“She was shouting for us to phone an ambulance, saying someone had been battered or stabbed.
“She ran over, anyone could’ve been in that house. She went to try and help but she said he had a number of a stab wounds, some in his neck.
“She said he was lying on the floor and there was a lot of blood.
“Two of his friends were in the house and they were just hysterical.”
Colleagues at Hoylake Lifeboat Museum where Mr Britton was a volunteer said he was 'one of life's true gentlemen.'
A Merseyside Police spokesman said: “A Home Office post mortem examination will be carried out to establish the cause of death.”
"Officers worked through the night to trace his family and they are understandably devastated at this awful news that their loved one has died and in such a terrible way."

Adekunle Gold Reveals Why Olamide was Angry At The Headies
YBNL singer, Adekunle Gold, has finally aired his view about the drama which played out between Olamide and Don Jazzy, during the just concluded Headies Award in Lagos.
The singer, while speaking with Ebuka on Rubbing Minds, stated that Olamide was only angry because they had planned how they were going to make merry together if himself, Olamide and Lil Kesh won the various awards.
He added that Olamide was fighting for each member of his crew and not for personal benefit.
In his words, “I guess what happened is that we expected Lil Kesh to win, all of us. So, when they called another name, it took us by surprise – to be honest – because we were all going on about what we will do when he wins, the party we would throw. It was supposed to be Olamide, me and Lil Kesh.It was very saddening, to be honest, so, Olamide got on stage and stood up for one of us.”

Written by Mike
17 Oct 2017
My First Bi Experience
- 9 Comments
- 5724 Views
5 minute read
Back in 2002 my job had me working in different parts of the country, and I was staying in a hotel near Reading for the first time. I had eaten my evening meal and was sat in the bar of the hotel with a drink, when a guy asked if I minded if he joined me. He was about 60 years old, and I thought he was there on business and wanted to chat so invited him to sit down.
We chatted for quite a while on a variety of topics, which eventually ended up in us discussing what I did when staying away, and he asked if I ever had any sexual encounters. I confessed that I hadn’t and the life in a hotel was pretty boring when away with work. He then told me a tale of when he was away and he ended up having sex with another guy. I was a bit shocked, as other than a bit of wanking with other lads in my early teens, I had never experienced any Bi encounters. When I said I had never done anything like that, he asked if I had ever thought about it, and I confessed I had thought about it, and thought about wearing lingerie as well, but had never had the bottle to try anything. He then took my hand and placed it on his leg, saying “Can you feel that” and I said it felt like a suspender strap, which he said it was as he liked to wear them under his trousers. I was getting a little turned on, but uncomfortable as well, which I think he sensed, so he said I should perhaps try wearing them some time in private. He then excused himself saying he needed to go to the toilet.
After a couple of minutes he had not come back, and I wondered why he was taking so long so popped to the Gents also. It was empty other than one of the cubicle doors being shut, so I asked if he was ok. At that the cubicle door opened and he was stood there, trousers around his ankles, black stockings and suspenders on wanking a hard cock. He asked if I liked what I saw, he had a good thick cock about 6-7 inches, and I just nodded not sure what to say. At that he pulled me towards him and pushed my head down towards his cock and told me to suck him. For some reason I just let him push my head down and I opened my mouth and put his cock in my mouth, and proceeded to suck him. This I did for maybe 30 seconds, when he then said let’s go somewhere more private and comfortable where we can enjoy ourselves. I agreed.
It turned out he was not staying at the hotel, but lived nearby and had popped in to try and pick a guy up! We went back to his place where he put some porn on the TV, and it was the first time I had ever seen gay porn, and then stripped down to his stockings and suspenders, and then took me by the hand, pulled me close to him and started kissing me. I responded and we were soon having a really good snog, and he was taking my clothes of as we were doing so. Once he had me naked, he then proceeded to play with my now hard cock, and dropped to his knees and sucked me for a while. I found this extremely horny and I said I was in danger of cumming after a couple of minutes so he stopped. He then said he wanted me to wear lingerie as well, and he produced another suspender belt, some black stockings and a pair of lacey panties, which he then helped me to dress in. This felt really sexy and we then laid on the sofa kissing, cuddling, playing with each other and rubbing our stockinged legs all over each others cocks and bodies. He then turned round and started expertly sucking my cock again, and I also felt him fingering my arse. This was such a turn on and his cock was right in front of my face so I took it in my mouth again and sucked him for all I was worth. Never having done it before, I just did what I thought was right and what I liked when being sucked, and he did say I seemed to be good at it. I was extremely turned on and pretty soon I felt myself cumming but he just kept my cock in his mouth and when I exploded in his mouth he swallowed it all.
Once he had cleaned my cock with his tongue he then sat on the sofa and had me kneeling in front of him and directed me in how to suck his cock, and then when he said he was cumming he held my head there so I had to take it in my mouth. I did gaga as had never experienced anything like it before, and he was a heavy cummer, but managed to swallow most of his load, with some of it running down my chin.
We then sat and chatted for a while and had a coffee, all the time still wearing the stockings, until I said I had best be getting back to my hotel as I had a long day tomorrow. He said I should keep the stockings and walk back to the hotel wearing them under my trousers, so I could appreciate how sexy it felt. I thanked him and did just that, and when I walked through reception and the bar to my room I felt very turned on at the thought of me wearing them and wondering if anyone could tell. I now regularly wear stockings suspenders and panties under my trousers when the opportunity arises, usually when I am working away, and this has led to a few more gay experiences, and I am now a committed bisexual, loving pussy and cock equally

Crippled11 mins 228 11 mins 228
Most of us lead busy and purposeless lives. We seek fame and wealth and when we acquire both, we find ourselves trapped and crippled by the very same things we so assiduously acquired. But there are many amongst us who manage to make their lives meaningful and this story is about one such individual and his institution.
Shyam Kumar is a leading film personality and had worked hard to make it to the top. His personal life was however tragic. He lost his parents to a road accident years ago; his wife of fifteen years died of Cancer and no amount of money or treatment could save her. His son suffered from Cerebral Palsy and would not ever be a normal child. These tragic events led to the actor becoming spiritual and benevolent. He had created a charitable Trust which in its own humble way attempted to better the lives of many a child.
Shyam Kumar occasionally visited Government-run hospitals and would give generous donations to them for improving facilities. It was on one such visit that he met Sapna.
Ten Years Ago
When Suresh and Suman saw the distorted mass of flesh which was their daughter for the first time, they were shell shocked. They could barely hide their horror as the sight was absolutely revolting. Where the upper lip should have been, there was no flesh, only a yawning gap. The doctor told them that the girl had no palate either. One in a million babies are born with such deformity. Their son was there too, and he could barely understand why his parents were so taken aback.
How could she have given birth to this horrible piece of flesh? She shuddered to hold it in her hands and asked the nurse to place it elsewhere. Meanwhile, doctors were already taking notes and discussing the deformities. This will be a rare case study for them. At long last, the baby was taken away and the commotion stopped. Now it was the turn of curious fellow patients in the wards and their relatives to push in and enquire. They were all very sympathetic. They consoled the parents that it was God’s will...
The doctors told Suresh that tests would be done on the baby to find out what else could be wrong with her. They feared she could suffer from the retardation of the brain and other organs could also be affected. They were not sure that the baby could survive all this for long. But she did. From the time doctors told them of the problems with the child, they knew that this girl child had no future. It was better dead than alive, for itself and for their sake. So they prayed to God the Almighty to take pity on the child and put an end to its misery. But Sapna, as they named her, did not die. She was alive and engaged her parents in what seemed to be endless and fruitless visits to the hospital. She was the cynosure of doctors, who doted on her. Sapna had afforded them the rare opportunity to be examined and become their teacher. Tests done on her revealed that she was not going to grow like a normal child. She would age, but physically she would look like a child. She had other problems as well. She could not be fed normally as there was no palate. This meant that she could have only liquids and that too fed with great care and caution as not to suffocate the child. She had hearing problems and could not react normally to sounds. She was underweight, having being born prematurely. The doctors were however upbeat that they could restore some grace to the child through cosmetic surgery. But operations would be delicate and could cost her life! It would take years to restore her lips and palate.
Sapna hardly ever showed emotions. It seemed that she felt no pain, no sorrow, and no joy. She was, of course, unable to speak, and the only sound she could make was grunts and groans, that expressed all that she would ever want to say. An onerous responsibility rested on the parents. They were poor and could ill afford the cost of treatments, however, subsidized they were. Suresh was living on income which was never constant or assured. Suman could hardly afford to leave the child alone. The doctors had given them elaborate advice on how to handle the child. The child had to be constantly cared for, showered with affections, and talked to. The parents needed the training to handle the child and would be required to spend lots and lots of time.
Suman had a troubled background. She had been a problem child at home. She was a constant source of abuse by all in the family. Being at home always, she soon became the housemaid. When she grew up, the family was concerned about her marriage. She was attractive and street smart; but beyond these superficial qualities, there was something missing in Suman; something that would make her marriageable. A number of matches were explored but none worked. Suresh was no better. He was the youngest of a large family and he was born when his parents were well past their productive age. Perhaps, he was the product of his parents’ indiscretion, a shame rather than a pride His parents died leaving him to the care and custody of his brothers and sisters. They all had their own families to look after and Suresh hardly fitted into their scheme of things. Like Suman, he never took studies seriously and neither encouraged to learn formally.
He decided to relocate to Bombay to search for opportunities and was given some money to migrate and settle down there. Then the marriage happened. Both families were eager to get rid of them. Suresh was a free bird, doing whatever he wanted, indifferent to responsibilities. Suman loathed her family and all the work she was forced to do. She hardly cultivated any skill or ability that was needed to be a wife. She hated responsibilities and always dreamt of a luxurious life, home with servants and cars, not having to do anything but what she liked.
Sapna was born into this environment. Suresh was sure that Suman was responsible for the deformed birth of their child. He even suggested that he could not be the father of such a child. The environment was hardly conducive to Sapna. She was neglected by both her parents and left in the hands of fate. For hours together she would grunt and groan to be fed but her mother would hardly attend her, either asleep or busy. Her father was always complaining that the child had ruined his life and he could not get work because of her and the mother.
One day there was a big fight between Suresh and Suman. The fight progressed from abuse to assault. It got so bad that an enraged Suresh picked up a chopper and hurled it at Suman. Unfortunately, he missed the target and the chopper hit Sapna. She was badly wounded and was bleeding profusely, and the parents rushed her to the hospital. Chances of survival were bleak, and Suresh and Suman waited outside wringing their hands and feeling guilty. They had both prayed for the child’s death, but not this. The neighbours meantime had informed police and Suresh was apprehensive about what could happen to him.
By a sheer coincidence, Shyam Kumar was visiting the hospital at that very moment. Distracted by the commotion, he rushed to the scene and made inquiries. He was anxious to meet her parents and the authorities pointed out to the waiting couple. He saw Sapna and something inside told him that the child needed him. During his visits to hospitals, Shyam had witnessed many heart-wrenching moments. This world was full of human beings with tragic stories to narrate. Shyam had learned that though his heart reached out to each of the suffering souls, he could never end the miseries in this world. He was just a messenger of God engaged to do his bit for needy people. He did feel guilty and sad that what he did was too little, but at least he was doing something. One look at Sapna was enough for him to realize that his visit to this particular hospital was no coincidence, and God wanted him to take care of Sapna.
He found her parents cold and indifferent. It was as if both of them wanted their girl out of their lives. He consoled them and left.
A week later, a visitor came to Suresh’s house. He was from a charitable trust and wanted to know Sapna’s medical history. He informed Suresh that the trust was owned by the cinema artiste who spoke to them in the hospital. He made detailed inquiries about Suresh and his income. He took photocopies of all the medical papers pertaining to Sapna’s disabilities and treatments. He then left, without further elaboration about the purpose of his visit.
A fortnight later, Suresh got a call from the trust to visit their office. There, he was told that the trust would adopt Sapna and take care of her treatment. The condition was that Sapna would have to be handed over to them and kept under their care and custody. Suresh could not believe this. He was overwhelmed with joy and agreed to the condition.
Sapna soon left her home and her departure was a great relief to the family. During the first few months, Suman and Suresh would regularly visit the child to ensure things went well with her. Sapna recognized her parents but that was all she could do. Slowly, the parent’s visit to Sapna kept reducing till a time came when they hardly took pains to keep in touch with her. The trust people, however, kept the parents informed of developments once a month.
Five years had passed, and Sapna was now learning to speak. During these years, the parents had all but forgotten about her. At the trust, Sapna’s life and her improvements were being carefully monitored and recorded. The cinema star was documenting everything about Sapna on film and he wished to produce a documentary on Sapna.
Two years later, the documentary film on Sapna was released globally and sent to all leading medical institutions in the world. Global attention was focused on Sapna and the trust received several requests for Sapna to be sent to their institution for detailed examination and interview. Suresh and Suman got to see one such interview on TV and they were stunned.
They saw a beautiful girl whom they had known earlier as their handicapped daughter. The girl was speaking normally. The interviewer was saying that this girl, who was totally retarded in speech, mind, and body, was now miraculously cured of all her defects. They showed clippings of Sapna when she was handed over to the trust, how operations were performed on her, how experts worked on her to restore her speech, and how she had slowly but steadily progressed.
The interviewer was asking Sapna about her family. She told them that she was an orphan and was abandoned by her parents at a very young age. She did not know who her parents were and that the trust was her family. The trust had never let her feel orphaned and she was thankful to the cine star for all the support he had given her. Suman and Suresh were speechless. They were stunned to see their daughter on TV. They had never dreamt of this day in their lives. They were seized with guilt at the fact that they had hardly contributed to her in any way. They wanted to visit the trust and meet their daughter. They wanted to bring her back home. They were suddenly proud of their daughter.
The trust politely told them not to interfere with Sapna’s life. She hardly remembered anything about home or family, and would never consent to be with them if she came to know that her parents existed but never cared for her. What could they now give her? She was all set in her life and the cinema star would ensure that she lived happily for the rest of her life.
Suresh was angry and threatened to go to court to claim Sapna. The trust told him he could anything he liked, but the consequences would not be good for Sapna. Suresh and Suman were adamant and filed a petition in the court against the trust. They claimed custody of Sapna.
The trust submitted documents in the court signed by the parents at the time of handing over Sapna to the trust. They had unconditionally agreed to leave Sapna under the care and custody of the trust. The judge questioned the parents at length, and the examination turned against the parents. They could not say why they stopped visiting their children.
The judge was quite critical of the parents. For them, Sapna had been an aberration and they had never considered her as their own. The fact that they never visited nor made inquiries with the trust about her in seven years was enough proof that they had abandoned the child. Sapna had clearly denied any knowledge of her parents. She had told the court that she never had a family other than the trust and Shyam Kumar was more than a father to her. The court rejected the parents claim and dismissed the petition.

Doses given: full dose
Red had a great sleep last night. I know because I couldn't sleep because I was draped with two zonked cats! He was still chilled and relaxed this morning. Tonight when I came home he was a bit jittery and watching the door as the neighbour was doing some DIY.
I'd bought some Lick-e-lix youghurt treat to hide the powder in as hiding it in his food didn't work particularly well as proved by yesterday. He loved the LeL with the zylkene and no doubt I'm going to have to try to claim a place in bed so that I don't waken up par-boiled by two furnace hot cats.

When james came to the throne in 1603, he faces many financial problems: he had inherited an empty treasury and debt of over £400,000 from Elizabeth, after her wars with Spain and Ireland. The cost of running the country was increasing sharply. This also meant that the fixed payments that Kinsa were paid were now lower in value. James was extremely generous with his money and always needed money from Parliament. In 1610, Cecil came up with a contract which he hoped would help royal finances once and for all but however, James didn't think that the £200,00 that Parliament offered him was enough so instead he asked for an extra £200,00 which parliament denied and James dismissed them. In 1614, James called another Parliament which is called the 'Addled Parliament' because it was of no use at all. James called the Parliament because he needed money once again and Parliament didnt agree with giving him money so he shut them down. One of his favourites George Villiers, who later becomes Duke of Buckingham, was very close to James and James spent a lot of money on Buckingham and his family. James also blamed his lack of money on the fact that he had a family and Elizabeth was single and had nobody else to pay for but herself whereas James had his wife and children plus the running of the country.

During the scene around the dinner table, Charles mentions that he quit school to go to work when he was twelve, but that he had to do it because he was "the man of the house" and was expected to support his family. But in Season 3's Journey in the Spring, we are introduced to Charles' parents, who are happily married, even though the husband was always a self-pitying downer. We know from this episode that Lansford was clearly in his son Charles' life as a child, and furthermore, Charles has an older brother named Peter, so if any of the Ingalls boy were the "man of the house," it was older child Peter.
Reply: True, but in Season 3's Journey in the Spring, Part 1, we met Peter as an adult, and it was clear that he was very bitter and resentful toward their father. It's reasonable to believe, then, that Peter had that anger when they were kids, forcing Charles to step up and be the mature one.

Who is Michael Ealy?
Michael Brown is known as Michael Ealy. He’s an celebrity. He’s famous for his role in 2 Fast 2 Furious, Barbershop etc. His dad was in grocery company and his mum was able to work for IBM. He’d attended Springbrook High School. In 2005 he’d won Best Actor award.
Michael is a married guy. He’s living happily with his wife and also has a kid. He likes his wife and kid very much and loves to spend his time together. There’s not any other detailed info regarding his private life. It was rumored that he’d dated an American hip hop recording artist and also actress. There are not any additional rumors or even gossips found on him presently.

I kept a diary in junior high, but I was so embarassed by what I wrote in there that I destroyed it. At the end of 8th grade, I started a new one. I wrote in it every few months for about two years. Here is the first entry, for your entertainment:
Friday, June 10, 1994
Today I'm starting my second journal. I have only two days until school gets out. This year has gone by so quickly, I can't believe it. May has been the busiest yet. I was the the Greater Spokane Music and Allied Arts Festival and only got an 84. It seems the better I play, the lower the score I get. The Junior Lilac Parade was last month too. They decided to just give out one award instead of lots like last year, but we didn't win. We were pretty bad. The Sliver Spurs spring show was the same day. It was the funnest show ever. We were laughing the whole time and did a lot of fun dances. The sad news is that Kelly is leaving. Her husband got a job in seattle. I'm oing to miss her so much. Angie has been taking her place and hopefully will get her job next year.
On top of everything, I had two major reports. Well, I survived, but just barely. Now June is almost just as busy.
Last night was an informational meeting for band camp. I'm so excited! It sounds like a lot of fun. Before that I am going to Ferris' leadership came called SPEAR. A lot of people at school are going to it, including Sara.
Wednesday night was the eighth grade dance. You were supposed to dress nicely, but some people over did it. They wore formals, had their hair done, and took limors. For the most part it was like any other dance for me. I didn't dance with anyone as usual, bt I did ask Eric. He said no because he likes Gail. I don't really care though. I didn't ask him myself. Jean, Katie, and Dri asked him. Dancing with a guy can be an ordeal. Dri did dance with Roy, lucky. I thought about asking him, but I didn't. In my yearbook, he wrote that he'd with that he'd gotten to know me better and gave me his phone number. I looked at Dri's and Kathy's yearbook and he didn't put his number in theirs. I thought about puting my number in his, but I didn't. What is wrong with me!? Ughh!!
So I don't keep you hanging, the Roy drama continued for 6 months until I we finally went on a date: my freshman-year winter dance. After the dance, he never called me, or my ex-best friend who is was also sort-of dating, again. Ah, the drama of it all.

In my dreams…
I had a dream a couple of nights ago.
I dreamed of you of all people I could dream about and I dreamed of a situation we always talked about when there are endless possibilities in what I could dream about. But instead, I dreamed of you and the child we always wanted. She looked an awful lot like you and was always smiling.
In my dream, I knew you were committed as you are now, and I was scared of people finding out that we were having her; I was frightened of the fact that your family hates me for reasons I have buried so long ago. It was extremely surreal but I must admit that it felt great to have been held close by you again, to have you hold my hand as we walked back to the hospital where we were supposed to pick her up.
I was happy. You were smiling, you were happy but I know those eyes too well, I guess. I knew you were worried about something you could not tell me, but you badly wanted to hold her as I showed you her pictures and so we walked hand in hand, just like how we used to do, exactly how we used to be.
But like all dreams, it must come to an end and I didn’t like how it had ended. We were suddenly confused, we suddenly forgot where the nursery was exactly and so we split ways and I never saw you or her again because not long after the staircases I climbed, I awoke.
Just like that, once again, I lost a love I never knew I wanted to have after all.

Drew's first fish was a good sized blue gill. Here he is taking his first lessons from his uncle Mark.
Here are a few pics of Drew since we've been home. He has the best time riding on his 4-wheeler and playing on his new swingset babaw put together for him and Riley. Scott has him saying "peace out" and making hand gestures too. This is the funniest to hear! He's already getting that Southern drawl'---hahha

My husband and I had this place at the top of our favorites as far as a getaway place to go. The property is beautiful and all of our experiences up to this point were superior! However, after our recent visit and me becoming violently ill just after consuming food on the property. We were told that the property couldn't do anything nor were they even apologetic because I didn't submit a stool sample to prove it was their food that caused the sickness. They never asked for one or said that they would need that or I would have been happy to provide one as it was clear that 30 min- 1 hour after consuming what I did, I become extremely ill and was stuck in the restroom for an entire day before starting to feel well again. I'm so disappointed in the way the situation was handled and expected so much more from the Ritz. Things like this happen but it's all in the way that it's handled that makes the difference for me.

Here’s a quote from the latest 4* review of Relative Deceit on Amazon.com!
“The characters were pretty well developed. There were some I really liked and others that I loved to hate because the author knew how to show me things about them that built a relationship through their actions.
I wanted to have the evil plans of the bad guy thwarted, but people still died and people still got hurt, and people still suffered, but that is what happens in real life. Though there were many sad things that happened to this family, there were also good things. It was fun to see the family relationships of these people, and to see how fun it was when cars and phones were introduced to their household. It was great to see how they rose above the hardships and came together to support each other.”
Now on sale for 99 cents!

Tradie touched lives of those close to him
- From: Townsville Bulletin
- October 16, 2013
WITH his rugged smile, Stephen "Kanga" Smith looked as hard as the concrete he poured, but those he loved knew of the beautiful heart within his tattooed chest.
Kanga, 46, died when his motorbike collided with a truck near Reid River on Monday.
The owner of well-known business Kanga's Crete had ridden his beloved Triumph motorbike to Charters Towers and was on his way home after completing one final act of love, putting a deposit on horse float for his daughter Shannon, 18, when he died.
Together with her brother Shane, 16, and mum Liza, the close-knit family struggled to understand how such a wonderful man could be taken too soon.
"I just wish he was here," Shannon said.
"It's just really, really hard to understand why he's not. He was the best dad."
Mrs Smith said her husband died overflowing with pride for his kids with Shane recently being accepted into Tech NQ and Shannon doing well in her zoology degree at James Cook University.
"Everyone looked at him and thought he was a rough nut because he was full of tattoos," she said.
"But he would do anything for anyone, especially me and his kids. We were who he lived for.
"If any of us ever wanted anything, it was never too much trouble for him to do it for us.
"He was so well respected and the news of what happened travelled fast. His phone kept ringing with people who were hoping that it wasn't true and that he'd pick up."
The tradesman also left behind his mum Jan and sister Kim and her family in Townsville, but they weren't the only ones he touched.
Kanga's dedication to his loved ones was demonstrated when his mate and employee Dwayne Slockee was killed in a road accident in 2009.
As Mr Slockee didn't have any family in the area, Kanga erected a roadside memorial and paid tribute to his friend each year by maintaining the site and having a cold one in his honour.
"If he held you in his heart you were there forever," Mrs Smith said. "It would have been Slockee's birthday (today) and Kanga's next Wednesday. We've been saying they're probably up there having a beer together again."
It's now up to his mates Brickie and Paulie to take Shane on the fishing trip to the Gulf he and his father had been saving up for.
"Kanga would always say to his son 'we're best mates, you and me' and they had been looking forward to the trip of a lifetime all year," Brickie said.

Reframing is the process of changing the lens through which a situation is viewed. In my experience working with CEOs and senior managers, their challenges are often obscured by their biases.
This was the case of Bill, who was upset because his brother, who had entered the family business 10 years after he did, was competing for control of stock ownership. Bill felt he was the rightful majority owner because of his seniority and leadership as the company president. His brother ran a smaller department that was struggling. Bill was building resentment toward his brother, and this bothered him. Guided by probing questions from his coach, Bill revealed that the tension between his brother and him had been created by their father, who was gifting stock in the company to his younger son. He further revealed his belief that their father’s rationale was to treat each son equally, and the gift of stock was intended as a compensation for the younger son’s lack of seniority and leadership role in the company. What he did not know was his brother’s desire to share control of the company. Realizing that the approach to dealing with his father was very different than with his brother, Bill decided to confront his brother to find out his intentions. It turned out that his brother was not interested in owning more stock in the company. He really wanted to do his own thing. The two brothers subsequently approached the father to explain their different career goals and attitudes toward owning stock in the company.
Bill originally viewed his brother as wanting equal ownership of the company and that he was therefore influencing their father to gift him stock. This created competition and tension between Bill and his brother. Once Bill realized his brother was not interested in ownership of the company, the tension shifted from his brother to the father. This led to a plan to confront the father and ask him to change his stock gifting plan for the brother. From a coaching perspective, Bill reframed his view, allowing him to engage in a much more fruitful approach toward a resolution of his problem.
Bill’s case is an example of how a coach can help a coachee to reframe and shift tension from one object to another. Through the coach’s questioning of Bill’s assumptions about his brother’s motivation, Bill was able to approach his brother for a frank and open conversation. This led to the reframing and subsequent change in how Bill and his brother approached the father’s plan for ownership succession.
In my next blog, I will offer alternative ways of how coaches can help reframe situations to lead to change.

"For while we were still weak, at the right time Christ died for the ungodly. For one will scarcely die for a righteous person—though perhaps for a good person one would dare even to die—but God shows his love for us in that while we were still sinners, Christ died for us. Since, therefore, we have now been justified by his blood, much more shall we be saved by him from the wrath of God. For if while we were enemies we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much more, now that we are reconciled, shall we be saved by his life. More than that, we also rejoice in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom we have now received reconciliation."

I'm relatively new to the online dating world and am went into it pretty casually. I'm not looking to find the love of my life -- just someone to go on dates with now and then.
A few weeks ago a received a fantastic email from a very cute guy. The email was creative and showed that he really put some thought into it. More than that, he seemed to have tons of the qualities I'm looking for in a guy and we seemed to have quite a bit in common. So I emailed him back and two days later got a response that again told me "this guy has potential." In his second email he alluded to wanting to hang out, and in his third he outright asked me to meet up going as far as to list times that he was free and suggest a few potential spots. I wrote back saying that I'd love to meet up and telling him when I was free and then... nothing. I haven't heard from him in a week.
I know that in the past week he's been busy having started school and from what I can tell, not been online too much. I understand that there are a million things that can get in the way of 'moving forward' (i.e. emailing someone back, going on a date with them), and that he has no obligation to me after only a few emails, but I'm dying to know what happened. He was obviously interested, even if only for a short period of time. He contacted me first, was forward about wanted to get to know me in his emails, and he asked me out. So why do I feel so duped?!
I think I already know the answer to this but, should I email him again? Is it worth reaching out with something very short?

The club are delighted to announce the signing of Midfielder Ross McLean. Ross has been with the club since the summer after manager John Kelly asked him to join the group following a hiatus from Football and he has worked incredibly hard to get himself fit. Manager John Kelly explained
I am delighted to have Ross on board with us. Ross had a few years away from the game but i asked Ross to join the group at start of season and he has been working incredibly hard to get himself fit but he has picked up a few injuries during his spell so far. I know Ross very well having played alongside him when we were younger and he has also played at a very good level and has been very good for the group in the changing room. Hopefully he keeps up his hardwork on the training pitch so we can call on his unquestionable ability very soon.
Ross is sponsored by
and is in contention for a place in the matchday squad for tomorrow

I was 7 years old and in the second grade. We were all sent home early and I remember my friend Eugene was crying because he didn't know where to go.
I had always thought that we had been sent home the day of the assassination, but it didn't happen until 6pm back east which would have made it 3pm here. We'd be out of school before the information got out.
We must have been sent home the following day. Fear of riots? It was early because I walked home with Karen and she was in the morning kindergarten class.
Sort of amazing to think about it - we walked home without any parental supervision. School was 4 blocks away and it wasn't a straight shot.

My friend and I decide to have a fishing weekend as I had just bough and old boat for that reason. We went to the lake and lowered the boat from the trailer into the water, secured the car put the engine on and away we went to the fishing spot up the river. Dropped the anchor and started to fish. AS all was well stayed on the boat overnight so we could fish until we had to return home. We packed up the fishing equipment, raised the anchor and went to start the engine, and the key was nowhere to be found. Must have fallen overboard. We had a mobile and called the locksmith from near home. He said he would call a colleague closer to help us. This he did as the locksmith asked where we were, and said he would be with us in an hour. Lucky for us he had his own boat, and came to us. He was able to re-key and we were away and home bound with a great catch. The service of the locksmith was unbelievable.
221 Upshur St NWWashington, DC 20011
From Business: Offering locksmiths services. Fidelity Locksmiths Services is a family-owned business in the local community. We are proud to offer locksmith services to commercial…
A couple of Sundays ago, my husband and I went for a drive in the country, which planned earlier in the week. It was a beautiful day, and we found a wonderful place to stop and have a romantic picnic. Everything was perfect, however we had to return home. Packing up the rug etc. we walked back to the car, and then disaster occurred, the key was in the ignition and we were outside the car. Luckily we had a mobile phone and called for a locksmith. I explained where we were, and was told the locksmith was 30 miles away and would take some time to get to us. No problem it was still light, so we sat on the rug and talked whilst waiting. The locksmith arrived and did his thing very quickly and all was OK. Considering where we were and it was a Sunday, we were very pleased with the exceptional service provided.
The family went out for the day visiting family on July 4. Had a really good time, however had to get the kids home. When we arrived home, we saw the front door open. We checked that none of us left it open, which meant we had been broken into. My husband went in to check it out, and came back and said no one there. We saw that a window was open and that is how he/she got in and must have left via the front door in a hurry. Even though it was a holiday, I called the locksmith, and the radio reply said he would get back to me. He did within minutes and came over quickly. The front door lock was OK, and we decided to install window locks and a dead latch to the front door. The service was very good and considering it was a holiday.

Originally Posted by Big Lou
However if his intent was to hit him with helmet through the entire event, he would have hit him.
You guys are ridiculous. You didn't see Incognito move his head out of the way? Retaliation or not doesn't make two damn bits of difference, the intent to smash his head with the helmet was there, and if Incognito were a second slower I imagine you guys would be singing a much different tune.

Why is this a movie? It's clearly a game! Anyway, this wasn't bad. It was nice to see all these random bits put together. I'm a fan of Beebo. That's a nickname my parents have called me!
I didn't like how it lacked music. It was too dull that way. The games were probably too small and needed more detail. I'm glad you tried something different for the series. It could have been better, though.

by Suikazura Amai (吸葛甘い)
Someone was doing magic on their Instagram Story.
Alex was pretty far on the outskirts of the magical community, but that felt like it was so far against the rules that it was bordering on illegal. He only knew about the existence of magic because of his brother, Max, who had once been cursed but was now working off a debt to The Agency after they’d saved his life. Most of what he knew were things he had pieced together himself. Max refused to answer any questions or let him get close to the magical underworld which he classified as “too dangerous”.

We spent Easter Sunday with my mom, Bobby, Jeff, Chan Wey and their friend Yi Li. We had dinner at our house, had an egg hunt in the yard and colored eggs. The worship service at church was great. A few people were baptized and the message was great. What an awesome day to celebrate the whole reason for our faith!
On Saturday Jeff and Chan Wey asked if they could take Daniel to the zoo. Of course Brian wanted to go with them, so Brian, Jeff, Chan Wey, Daniel and Alayna went to the zoo. I was working on Daniel's "Big Boy" bed and had a lot to do for Easter since we were having dinner at our house so I stayed home. This was the second time since Alayna was born that I had the house to myself! Boy was I able to get a lot accomplished! ;-) They had a really good time! Daniel loved seeing the animals and he said the lions were his favorite. Brian of course had fun with his photography. Isn't that a great picture of the giraffe? We are so lucky to have Jeff and Chan Wey here! Daniel just adores them and has so much fun with them!

This is a story that will touch your heart. I really enjoyed it. I was hooked as soon as I started reading and couldn't put it down! The characters were very real-to-life and it was easy to identify with Lydia and Micah throughout the book and through their various circumstances and callings. The plot really captured my interest and I really liked how it turned out in the end. I would have to say that this was a very worthwhile read and one that I would certainly recommend. I would rate it 4 to 4.5 stars.
I'd like to thank Bethany House Publishers for sending me a copy of Sweet Sanctuary in exchange for my honest review.

He cheated death twice in a matter of minutes.
Tokac's white hard hat goes flying as he is flattened to the ground, but he survived with bruises and a scratch to his ear. The lucky 32-year-old fell between the wheels of the truck, while the train missed him by inches.
"I can't remember anything about the accident," Tokac told the Daily Mail. "I thought I was asleep. But when I woke up, I was not in my bed. I was on the ground.
"Life is really beautiful," he said.

Having completed two stays in hospital wife came home (the second was unnecessary really), my wife who had Early Onset Dementia was released and came home on the 23rd of Dec, that following week up to the 1st of January I cared for her n fed her n carers popped in 3-4times a day to wash her/change her clothes n to change her incontinence pads. When she was released from hospital she had a cough, which was a croaky one, which one nurse said was probably a dry cough, n she needed to drink more water. All the time of my wife's return home, she still had this cough, my giving her cough medicine gradually eased the coughing for my wife till it was no longer croaky. I noted that during the night of 31 Dec/1Jan that the cough totally disappeared and my wife slept more easily n peacefully. She slept a lot during that day (1Jan) probably because of no coughing anymore n despite my trying to wake her unsuccessfully at times to feed her; later that day after carers had popped in she developed another cough and her breathing sounded bad. Later when the carers popped in again they showed some concern at her breathing, they suggested maybe 1111 should be called but I said that I would do it if i thought it was getting worse. They then left, I became more concerned a short while after they had gone n I phoned her friend in London to listen to her breathing n she said I should call paramedics straight away which I was about do when there was a knock at the door, the carers had returned bringing another carer with them, once inside they revealed they had called paramedics as they were concerned about my wife's breathing. Once paramedics arrived they worked on my wife setting up monitoring equipment n clearing her airways, they came to the conclusion that helping my wife could be better done in hospital, I was at first reluctant to have her go back into hospital having just come out but had to agree to them taking her in if it would help make it easier to get her better. Once there the doctors treated her n gave her antibiotics to help fight the infection. During the night the doctor informed me that the antibiotics weren't working n they were just going to make her comfortable. Sadly that night my wife passed away on 2nd of Jan 2018. Her dementia no longer had a hold on her n she was now at peace.

This photo was taken in Halmeu, just across the street from my grandmother Braha Moskovits? house, in 1935. The woman on the right is my mother's youngest sister, Olga Jakobovics. The blond girl, first from left, is my cousin, and next to her is my sister Rashela Katz. My sister Rashela was born in Satu Mare in 1929, but I spent too little time with her, because in 1935 I left for Bucharest to work; she was still in elementary school. She was deported with the rest of my family, and she died in Auschwitz in 1944. Aunt Olga was born in Halmeu in 1912. She was deported with the rest of my family to Auschwitz, and she came back, with only one cousin of mine, Joshua Teszler. Everybody else from my family had died there. I only got in touch with her in 1945, after the World War II had ended, through an ad in a newspaper. I was living in Cernauti at that time, and I was trying to find out what had happened to my family. I only met Aunt Olga when I came back to Romania, in 1955. She came from Cluj to Timisoara just to see us. My aunt told me how people were treated at Auschwitz. How they had tattooed her. Everyone there was given a number that could never be erased. She had managed to survive only by chance. They were separated in two groups: the ones who would be sent to the gas chambers and the ones who were apt for work. A mother asked my aunt to switch places with her, so that she could be in the same group with her daughter. This is how Olga survived. It was an extraordinary thing. The gassed ones were burned, then turned into soap. At Auschwitz, they would do whatever works they had to do. The young ones, who were stronger and had more faith in life, stood more chances. But things were very harsh. My aunt did various works; they were temporary, not permanent. She didn't tell me what she did exactly. I took a trip to Auschwitz in 1977 and I laid flowers at the gate of the crematorium where my parents had been burned. Aunt Olga told me that, when she returned from Auschwitz, she went to Cluj, not to Satu Mare. She met a Jewish dental technician there and she married him. His name was Tiberiu Jakobovics and he ran a private practice. She helped him and they had a good life together. She didn't keep the custom with the wig, as she was more liberal. Her husband was a decent man and he received us well when we went to Cluj. After she divorced, my aunt didn't get her maiden name back, but kept her former husband's, Jakobovics. She had learned how to give massages in the meantime, and she lived from it. She didn't have any children. After the divorce, they both left for Israel separately. This is how things were. My aunt and my cousin, Joshua Teszler, left for Israel between 1958 and 1960. She gave massages there too and she had a clientele. While she was in Israel, we would write to each other all the time. She had a beautiful handwriting and a refined style. She was an intelligent woman. Even when she got old, she used to dress elegantly. She couldn't hear too well though.
Olga Jakobovics with her daughter Rashela Katz

This story contains graphic or mature content.
It was the first time we had met on a weekend- the office was empty and no one else was around. I entered the building to the 5th floor and went to his personal office. He was behind his big executive desk, glasses on, deeply focused and typing away with a grande iced coffee beside him. I knocked. It startled him but when he realized it was me, he smiled widely. I had my hair up in a french knot, high wedged cork heels, a halter dress. Underneath, I had my cupless bra and crotchless underwear, garter with no panty hose. I took my time before coming to meet him. I had sugar exfoliated my skin, feet, oiled my body, shaved EVERY hair off my body. He looked so hot in his casual shirt and faded jeans. His mouth was a plumped cupid's bow. I sat in the chair in front of his desk and crossed my legs giving him full view of my thigh. He looked and smiled again. He stood up to go check the floor once more and when he came back, I was bent over his desk reading what he was typing on his pc. He stood behind me taking the view of me from behind. My dress was very short and hung just below the swell of my ass. He told me softly that it is rude to read one's work without permission. I told him maybe he should spank me so that I would learn. He got closer to me, and i took the opportunity to push my ass against his crotch. He took one finger and traced down my bare back. I shivered and felt instantly wet. he slowly raised my dress and kneeled before my ass-I could feel his breath on my cheeks. I said he loved the fact that I was wearing crotchless panties and began to kiss each buttock. he was caressing and placed both hands on my my cheeks with his thumbs on the crevice of my ass and spread my cheeks apart. He breathed warm air on my anus and then on my plumping lips. He told me to open my legs a little wider and I obliged. He took the tip of his tongue and slowly traced down the crack and around my anus. It sent a shock thru me and I jumped forward. He began barely licking my opening and I was trying to push my lips into his face. He then took two fingers and slipped it inside of me while using his thumb to press into my gspot and started to finger fuck me. it felt so good and I was longing for release so I rocked my hips on his fingers until I felt a good gush of liquid. He took his fingers out of me and placed them in his mouth, sucking my juices off. He stood up and I glanced back to see that he was fully erect. He closed his office door and drew the shades. He then came back behind me and unbuttoned his trousers. He asked me what did I want. I told him I wanted to be f*cked like a dirty slut that I wanted his cock so deep in me until he came. He said he will f*ck me but if I make a sound, he will then take me a different way. He pushed my hips all the way against the desk. He told me to spead wide for him and I widened my stance-he took his long thick cock and was slowly tracing the opening of my vagina. He pulled my hands back and guided me to grab my lips and spread them for him. I did so, he then entered me slow and hard- I gasped as it was pure pleasure to feel him spread me wide and take him untilI could feel his head against my cervix and his balls against me. He pulled away slowly and went forward firmly. I began to lose control immediately. I arched my back up so that he could get deeper and began to ram against him. We began pounding against each other wildly. I wanted to scream it felt so good. I began to feel the pressure build and i released a load onto him. My vagina was so wet and he kept on plunging into me that I felt the need to come again. I came twice more. He was ready to come but wanted me to orgasm one more time, and kept drilling me hard that when I was ready, he pulled out his cock and stuck his tongue inside me wiggling it while sucking my clitoris. I gasped and moaned. He finished me off with this mouth. I was shaking so badly and my hands were exhausted from keeping my lips spread for him. He stood up and pulled me off the desk. He turned me to him and kissed me. I could taste the two of us mixed together in his mouth. He cupped my breasts and pinched my nipples. I looked into his eyes and kneeled down before him taking him inside my mouth. I sucked him hard and fast and right before he came, I pulled out him out of my mouth and let him come all over all my breasts. After a minute, he smiled and pulled me up. He took tissue from a tissue box and cleaned his come off my breasts. I pulled my dress down and dabbed myself dry with kleenex too. He kissed me deeply and flicked his tongue over my teeth and on the roof of my mouth. He pulled away and looked into my eyes deeply. He kissed me on the forehead and thanked me for coming by. He was going to finish his report and he would see me later at home and that he promises to make our anniversary as memorable for me and I made it for him.

Yes it was good. Yes I liked it. Theater reserved for friends and family. Great way to end yesterday. There was a surprise that I wasn’t expecting. However, I think Disney made a mistake. They need to tighten up their story telling. Grade B+ due to the error.

Join free now!
It is free to search locals
Companion Mommy, Little girl has problem with University costs; mama has a concept, incest tales. Concerning a year back, I was really battling at College. Despite the fact that my course was spent for thanks to my mom, my living expenditures were simply excessive. I actually tried to find a work, however no one would supply me a task, not also as a dish washer. My mama used to help however I declined, although it sounds stupid, I had some integrity, I wished to endure without cash from my mother, who had currently paid a whole lot for my education and learning. I really intended to confirm to myself and my mother that I was an adult now; I needed to be able to do this on my very own.
College was about 100 miles from residence as well as every weekend I would see my mom, I did miss her, she resembled my friend. She treated me as an equivalent as well as we were open to discuss anything. She was a successful attorney at a neighborhood law practice, though due to personal nature of her service she never ever did inform me much.
Anyway it was Thanksgiving of my 2nd year, and so much I had simply taken care of to make it through, however I was so near to either quitting or burglarizing a bank. I arrived home to a chilly welcome. It was quite cold as well as the snow was coming down quite quickly, I only just procured home. Once house I was greeted warmly by both my mom and also a really welcome fire. We did not have a household, simply both of us, so customarily it was simply the two people for thanksgiving, not that it bothered either people, we enjoyed each other's firm. But while we discussed general stuff, my mind kept reviewing what mama had told me. Mommy was still a lovely female, even if she had actually just turned 40, and her boobs look terrific, also when she initially had them done, I informed her she looked so sexy which any kind of guy would certainly wish to be with her. I stated that if we remained in a room together packed with guys, I wager all the men would choose her, also without the boob job she was rather. Mommy thanked me for the compliment but claimed I was wrong which I was the actually gorgeous one, she told me that at the very least my big breasts were real, 36d in case you ask.
So after dinner and also tidying up we returned to the living room. My mind was still on what mama had actually suggested regarding me working as an escort, no doubt I would certainly enjoy it, and also being paid like mama for something we both taken pleasure in was something that interested me. I assume I was simply shocked, prior to she told me, I saw my mother as a recognized woman in the office, now I saw her as an extremely sex-related female, I might truly see that mother looked happy, and also who would not want to make love with such a stunning female. It was simply my entire photo of mama had actually transformed, which wasn't a negative thing, yet it was something I was having problem not thinking about, specifically visualizing my mom having sex with all those strange men.
So the next day mother took me to satisfy Monica as well as obtain the tests I needed. After that mother took me searching for a stylish outfit for the night. We would fulfill the client at a restaurant and then ultimately return to his resort for a night of pure untainted sex.
The evening ultimately got here and I was actually nervous, but thanks to my mother besides me, I was ready to go. We were both putting on evening gown, mine was red while mommy's was black, as well as we both wore raise bras to offer our boobs extra zest, in addition to a band. We took a taxicab and came to the dining establishment in a timely manner. Mother gave the name of our booking and we were led to a table where the client was rested waiting.
Mom took charge and asked me to rest on his left while she took the right. Mother was so cool; she gave the client all the normal vanity enhancing lines, working him well. It offered me the possibility to unwind and enjoy her work. Quickly the client offered my leg a capture as well as relied on talk with me. I was pretty unwinded by now, as well as a glass of a glass of wine previously in the house and one now loosened me up sufficient to turn on the charm.
| ||49761|| ||136097|| ||167552|| ||117217|| ||60401|

OED created it , UWI helped him refine it. MKC is still around from time to time. SNY has been AWOL for too long. JER reserved b1 today but didn't follow through. KYT hasn't posted here in years, but I know he's out there, maybe we could draw him back in for a day. It's been about a year since IPD has posted something. I'm pretty sure we can get MRM to play LOL. I'm pretty sure JIT is lurking.
I know we won't be seeing contributions from GIZ or TCA

I have had P.A for over 2 and a half years. I am on b12 injections every 8 weeks as I felt my body needed it. My G.P agreeded to me having it. I started with every 3 months, but found that I needed it sooner. I went to my G.P 2 weeks ago, saw a different doctor, asked her for a prescription for my B12, as i was running out. She said my levels were high and looked at the results of my blood test that I had around 6 months ago and said "I shouldn't been taking it now, as my results were fine". Even though she was reluctant to give me a prescription, she still wrote me one for 6 injections and said she will look into it. am now confused, as I was told by my doctor that I would have to have injections life long. I find my symptoms start around a week before I injection is due. I was put on 8 weeks instead of 12 weeks because I was passing out around the 10th week before I injection was due. I was a bit worried when the doctor told me that I didn't need my injection as my levels were now high. But because I have pernicious anemia I was told by my G.P that I have to take it continuous regardless to what my levels are, and that the body stores it in the liver, the body will take it when it is needed. What do I do now? Do I wait and get my levels checked every so often to check where the levels are or do I keep having the injections. I am scared incase my levels drop really low; when I was first diagnosed my level were 151 which was very low and working.
Content on HealthUnlocked does not replace the relationship between you and doctors or other healthcare professionals nor the advice you receive from them.

My pup and I have been living outside the Country for a few years, and since coming back to the area in September, he just recently started feeling sick, so we went to the last place he was seen. From the moment we walked in the door, until we left, the love and support given were outstanding. The front desk was attentive, the nurse took her time with us getting all the details, some techs came in to say hello to us (really him) and the doctor was thorough and took her time with him and also in explaining things to me. He got his meds, some new food for a few days and a day later, he was feeling back to himself. I always use my gut instinct, and it really never fails me. This place, and the people that work there are the best.

As well as cows in India you will find a lot of goats. They hang about in small groups, often sparring. They seems to prefer to rest up high, off of the ground, and many of them were wearing shirts and jumpers. Having seen this goat in a shirt I asked our host why they were frequently dressed up. My guess was that they wanted to keep the goats warm during rather chilly winter nights and, essentially, I was right. It was to keep them warm, but not necessarily out of a sense of well-being for the goats, more to keep them as warm as possible so that they fattened up and were as big as possible when it came to the time to slaughter them.
You can see more of my images from India here https://www.trevorwilsonphotography.com/photographs-of-india/

A man has died after being hit by a train near Stamford.
Officers from British Transport Police were called along with paramedics to the line close to Ketton, Rutland, following reports that a person had been struck by a train.
The incident happened shortly after 9pm on March 27.
A 72-year-old man was sadly pronounced dead.
His family have been informed.
The incident is not being treated as suspicious and a file will be prepared for the coroner.

Today my baby graduated college (Class of 2010 at Wright State University). It took her seven years (with a nine month break spent in Australia), but I'm proud she stuck it out and got it done.
I don't think college was right for her in the beginning. After a little more than a year of classes, she decided to drop out and live in Australia. The day she left was the worst day of my life. I worried everyday that something would happen to her and we wouldn't know. She depended on friends to live, so she had no money, no place of her own, no real way to communicate. Lucky for us, Australia wouldn't let her stay longer than nine months and she had to come home.
The girl who left for Australia was a little spoiled. The woman who returned was wiser and nicer. She asked if she could go back to college (asked, because we were paying) and changed her major from music to english. She took all the classes she could at the Community College to help with the costs (since it was much cheaper than the University).
It wasn't long before she moved out, though (we kind of saw that coming), but she continued to go to school full time while working full time. It was a hard task for her, but she made it - and with a B average.
I think her trip to Australia was really the best thing she could have done. I don't think she would be where she is today without that experience. It was a rough nine months for me, but did wonders for her. We're proud of her and I just wanted to let her (and everyone else) know.

Reece Travis Wayland
Reece had been in and out of hospital over a period of four weeks, but the hospital weren't sure what was wrong with him. They had gone from a mild viral complaint to possible epilepsy.
My ex rang me on Friday the 5th of November that Reece was ill again and the doctor had insisted he go to hospital. When I arrived it was obvious Reece was extremely ill this time. The doctors were still adamant that he had some sort of virus, but did not feel it necessary to give him anything to ease his obvious pain and discomfort. It was only after repeated requests from me and Reece's mum that we were given a syringe of Calpol for us to give to Reece orally.
I stayed with Reece through the night and by early morning I demanded that someone looked more closely at Reece. Within a few minutes he had been rushed to a side room and was ventilated and then told that a retrieval team from Guys were on their way so specialists could help him.
By lunchtime a consultant from Guys sat me and Reece's mum down and said that he was a very ill little boy and that he had to go immediately. Following that ambulance into London was the worst drive I have ever had. By the time I got onto the ward, I was told that Reece had passed away.
It will be five years this November that Reece died but those last 24 hours with Reece will stay with me forever. Holding my son in my arms as his life support was switched off both hurts and comforts me. But I will always feel I let my son down.

Saint of the Day – 5 May – Saint Nunzio Sulprizio (1917-1836) Aged 19 – Layman – also known as “Nuntius” born on 13 April 1817 at Pescosansonesco, Pescara, Abruzzi, Italy and died on 5 May 1836 in Naples, Italy. Patronages – the disabled, blacksmiths, Workers, Pescosansonesco. St Nunzio suffered from poor health during his brief life and was considered by those who knew him to be a gentle and pious individual. He was Beatified in late 1963 by St Pope Paul VI, after the recognition of two miracles (direct healings) attributed to his intercession. Pope Francis confirmed his Canonisation on 8 June 2018 after the confirmation of a third miracle and Nunzio was Canonised on 14 October 2018, together with Blessed Pope Paul VI, Blessed Oscar Romero (martyr) and others.
Nunzio Sulprizio was born on 13 April 1817 to Domenico Sulprizio and Rosa Luciani just after Easter. He was named after his paternal grandfather Nunzio who died on 8 September 1803. His parents had married on 28 May 1816 and he was born during a time of great famine. He was baptised before sunset mere hours after his birth. His parents took him to the Bishop of Sulmona Francesco Tiberi on 16 May 1820 so he could receive his Confirmation in the faith.
His father died on 31 July 1820 and his mother remarried in 1822 for financial support to a much older man, his little sister Domenica died just months after their father on 7 December 1820. His stepfather viewed Sulprizio with little more than harshness and contempt. The relationship between the two was nonexistent and Sulprizio bonded more with his mother and maternal grandmother. During this period of his childhood, he attended the school in Corvara that the priest De Fabiis managed. It was around this time, he also started to attend school that a local priest ran where he learned to read and to write. In his childhood, he took the time to attend Mass and come to know Jesus Christ but also to follow His example and that of the saints.
His mother died on 5 March 1823 and he was sent to live with his maternal grandmother Anna Rosaria Luciani del Rossi who was illiterate but firm in the faith. The two often took walks together and attended Mass on a regular basis. He also began to attend the school for poor students that Father Fantacci managed but his grandmother died only 3 years later, on 4 April 1826.
It was following this that his uncle – Domenico Luciani, took him on as an apprentice blacksmith. His uncle was harsh on him and often left him without proper nourishment and did not feed him if he decided that Nunzio needed either discipline or correction. He sent Nunzio to run errands regardless of the distance which put a great strain upon him. He was also beaten or cursed. The work was too heavy for his frail frame and his young age. He contracted a disease in 1831. This occurred one winter morning when his uncle sent him to the slopes of Rocca Tagliata for supplies. That evening he became feverish and had a swollen leg and a burning temperature, forcing him to bed. He did not mention this to his uncle, though the next morning he could no longer stand. His uncle was indifferent to his suffering. His condition was later diagnosed as gangrene in one leg. He was hospitalised first in L’Aquila between April and June and then in Naples. Despite his pain he dealt with it with patience and his offering his pain to God.
During his illness at home he needed to clean his sore on a constant basis since it oozed puss. There was one occasion where he went to a stream close to home to clean his wound but a woman who came to wash her clothes chased him away, after telling him that he would pollute the water. Instead he found another stream and was able to recite several rosaries as he let the water clean his sore.
In the hospital, Nunzio later met his paternal uncle – Francesco Sulprizio (a soldier) – who introduced him to a fellow soldier, Colonel Felice Wochinger. His uncle introduced him to that colonel in 1832. The two’s relationship soon grew until it became that of father and son. St Gaetano Errico (1791-1860), a priest – promised him that he would admit him into his religious order when the time was right. On 20 June 1832 he entered the Hospital of the Incurables to seek further treatment with the colonel providing for all his needs during this time. He also prepared for his First Communion and was enthusiastic about receiving it earlier, despite the fact that rules dictated that he had to be fifteen. He was sent by the Colonel for spa treatments on the island of Ischia and was able to abandon crutches in favour of a simple walking stick.
In 1835 the doctors decided to amputate his leg as their sole option but his pain continued. His situation worsened in March 1836 and his suffering increased when his fever increased. He continued to place his trust in God and was well aware of the fact that the end was near. Two months later on the date of his death he asked for a crucifix to be brought to him before summoning his confessor to receive the sacraments for the last time. He died in 1836. His remains are now located in the Church of San Domenico Soriano in Naples. Decades after his death Pope Leo XIII proposed Sulprizio as a model for workers.
The miracle that led to his Canonisation concerned a man who was injured in a motorbike accident who fell into a coma. One relic of St Nunzio was – at the request of his relations – placed in his hospital room. Almost a week later his parents were told he had made remarkable progress and had awakened from his coma and not in a vegetative state as was predicted by all the doctors concerned.
4 thoughts on “Saint of the Day – 5 May – Saint Nunzio Sulprizio (1917-1836)”

Wife refuses to go home, drunken man batters 2-yr-old daughter to death
The incident took place in Tongra area of Jharkhand’s Dumka district.ranchi Updated: May 27, 2018 19:22 IST
A drunken man allegedly battered his two-year-old daughter to death in Jharkhand’s Dumka district after his wife refused to go home from her parents’ house, police said.
The incident took place at Badalpur Tola under Tongra police station on Saturday night.
Imaru Murmu (28), resident of Hathiya Pathar village under Masalia block, was arrested and sent to Dumka jail on Sunday following an FIR by his wife, said Tongra police station in-charge Rajiv Ranjan.
Murmu had on Saturday gone to his in-law’s house, around 500 meters from his village, to bring his wife Latika Marandi back home.
Latika along with her two-year-old daughter came to her parents’ house a week back.
Latika told police, “Imaru was trying to persuade me to go with him, but I refused, as I was ill.”
Later, he took his two-year-old daughter on a bicycle and told family members that they were going to a local village market, called Hatia in local dialect. He probably consumed alcohol in the village market, police said.
When father and daughter did not return till late evening, Latika’s family members went to search them. They found Imaru was battering her daughter at a distance of few meters from their house. The local people held Imaru and tied him to a tree and called the police. However, the baby had died by then.
Ranjan said the body was sent for autopsy. During interrogation, Imaru told police that he was drunk and had lost his temper after his wife refused to go back home.
Latika said the baby was their only child.

Whoi is zac efron dating romi klinger and dusty ray dating
Apart from that, his role Even though he started his acting career in the early 2000s, success eluded him for quite long.
It was High School Musical franchise that led him to glory.
Emma and Zac were spotted on a full-on make out session in a night party in 2011.
The couple was all over each other as if no one was around though they never said anything publicly about it.
Unfortunately, it did not work for him as everyone considered him as his imposter.
Subsequently, his movies The Lucky One, The Awkward Moment, Neighbors, Dirty Grandpa were highly successful.
Rumer Willis is the daughter of actor Bruce Willis and Demi Moore.
Rumer was a friend to Zac for a long time, but on a vacation, Zac was caught cuddling her like his lover, and it made the news. Nicki Minaj also could not keep her hand off Zac, and the two looked too cozy in 2013 when they first meet and started dating.
However, he was seen spending quality time with Alexandra Daddario during the filming of Baywatch.
There was a rumor that they both had been flirting with each other on the sets.

We told you last week about the rising crime rate in Baytown and on Monday we came across a World War II veteran who was burglarized while he slept.
The vet says someone forced their way inside his home through the back, then went straight for his bedroom, where he was sound asleep, and swiped his gun from his night stand.
Tom Slack, 94, showed us where he's kept his pistol every night for years until Monday morning.
"The first thing I noticed, that pistol was not there. It always stayed on that little stand," Slack told Local 2.
He says sometime after he went to bed Sunday night someone broke his door frame and pried their way into his Baytown home.
"They were after the gun. They knew that gun was here," he said.
Slack, who just lost his wife of 69 years, says nothing was taken except his pistol.
"Of course, I don't have anything to steal. I got some cookies," said Slack.
"He's hard of hearing. His hearing is difficult and his eyesight is also an issue," said Rindy Gremillion, a Meal on Wheels volunteer.
That is why Slack says he didn't notice the burglar just inches from where he was sleeping.
"He had to walk right up, where I could touch him," said Slack.
Gremillion told us, "So it could've been very tragic. It makes me sad just thinking about it."
Even though the 94-year-old wasn't hurt, he says he wishes he would've at least had the chance to confront the burglar.
"I'm mad. I'm mad that someone would come in my house and get my pistol," Slack told us. "I'd kill the son of a (bleep) if I could find him."
Slack says now he's just focused on getting the door fixed and getting a new gun.
The Meals on Wheels volunteer we saw in the story says she plans on getting a group together to fix Slack's door, and even maybe get him an extra loud alarm that he'd be able to hear.

When I was 13 yrs old, my mom got sick and we had a young black nurse come to the house to take care of her. I had already begun masturbating and was a very horny boy.
I found it very exciting to have a pretty late 20's lady wake me in the morning as I would make sure that I had a morning erection. I would hop out of bed as she got my clothes ready and stand there with a raging hard on in my undies. She would take my undies to wash them and would see me in full arousal. I would shower and cum all over the tub thinking about her, hoping she would walk in and see me.
Whilst she never saw me masturbate, she got to see me with a full erection every morning. At this age this was enough for me. I bet she secretly was aroused seeing a young boy with his penis standing up whenever she woke him.

When this mom is fed up with her kids, she asks Reddit:
Two of my children still live with me at home. Neither one decided to go to college and both have crappy minimum wage jobs.
They have an inheritance from their grandparents that they will get when they are 25. It's enough to live of if you live frugally for your entire life. But it seems like a lot of money.
Their older sister just moved out after graduating from college. She did the grocery shopping and the cooking for the house. I gave her money and she took care of it.
I tried this with the middle kid the first week after his sister moved out. Him and his brother spent all the money on delivery in two days.
I didn't give them more money so they had to spend their own. They were pissed.

There were two locations that we were required to paint, Enniscorthy and Wexford. Here I was, on Saturday. This was the day of the 2 hour quickdraw, and the weather was perfect for it. However, I didn't take part in it as I was working on this dress painting. The artists and public were delightedly shocked by my choice of subject, saying with big smiles, "What an original idea. Love, it." Yesterday, I went back to this shop and painted the polka-dot dress in the far window, and I guess at least one other artist, Paul, from Belfast just had to try it. He asked if I minded if he painted the same thing I was painting. I like Paul a lot, feel like I've known him a long time. He's an architect by trade, and has done some wonderful street scenes, which I haven't accomplished. I am hoping to see his dress shop painting, which has more of the shop in it than mine. I don't know if I'm hoping to see it in the show, which starts at 2:30 for the collector's preview, public at 3:00, and awards at 4:00 pm.

Mervielle is in high school and is, against all odds, hanging in there. For the first time he finds himself in a place where he doesn’t have to fend for himself totally. He is adjusting to that. He is learning – although slowly - how to invest his time in his studies. He would need a good bit of help to claw his way back out of the survival sinkhole he’s been in all his life. I try and give him the assurances and get him back up to where he will – as all teenagers should – focus on his future. A couple of things that need to be said about Mervielle. Everyone I’ve talked to has great fondness for this kid. He is very personable and loving. This is such an asset for a young man! The things that we give him now, he will put to good use because he really wants to be caring of others. It seems to me, he can only reach his potential when there are people around him who care for him.

"My character is extremely entertaining, but she is very different from me. I'm educated and I've never been a giggly girl," says Amisha.
"Even her body language and mannerisms are very different. It was difficult as I had to learn how to act like an airhead bimbo," she adds.
Amisha also has a sizzling number with Saif Ali Khan in the film.
"A lot is happening in the song as it's the turning point in the film. It's the first film in the history of Indian cinema that has a song that has lip sync under water," she says.
Amisha is certainly having a ball being one of the Yash Raj women.
"Yash Raj has always presented its women so well, right from the time of Yashji's films," she says.

Sunday, Nov 7, 1880 Brown came down to Weirs and spent the day. He walked all the way, two miles at least. Was very tired but soon got over it after a rest. We had most interesting talks on these spiritual manifestations all day. Weir has always felt as I have on the subject, decidedly incredulous, but what he received has affected him very much and I confess it seems extremely important to me and well worth pursuing.

I just got this text message on my phone: (and yes I already tried calling the # back, got nothing)
Hi I am a friend of a friend and I just thought you would like to know about your husband. He has had multiple affairs throughout your relationship with him, and was recently spotted with a married woman. He has been with a lot of married women, actually. So he obviously does not value the institution of marriage. I am choosing to stay anonymous. I'm sorry to have to tell you all this, but if it were me, I'd want to know.
I am so confused! I mean DH and I have had a troubled relationship, but this? WWYD?
ETA I forwarded it to DH's phone and asked him what it was, haven't heard back from him yet. :/

shut down her entire senate office even though the Senate is still open.
We here in Wisconsin are very concerned by this turn of events. The person who previously held her senate seat, former Senator Herb Kohl, was seemingly missing from the Senate his entire political career. People would say they saw him at Milwaukee Bucks games, but those reports were as nebulous as Elvis sightings. Please help Wisconsin find its new junior senator!

My [twin] sister and I have always been together since the moment we were conceived. I could never feel this love for someone I haven't known my entire life. We know everything about each other.
The way I ultimately decided to be with her was when a girl told me about her twin, Jesse, who had committed suicide when their relationship was discovered and they were forced to separate. I realized how similar she sounded and knew one thing for certain. Nothing should stop true love. People are born into families not of their own will, and just because someone was born with them shouldn't mean they can't love each other.
I want them to open their eyes and mind. If they would just for a moment think logically, they would see my side. I have asked people what's wrong with our relationship, but all they say is that it's wrong or disgusting without giving any reasons. Something they seem to forget is that stopping true love is also morally wrong. I believe they're the kind of people that people in the future will look back on the same way they look at people who were against interracial marriage.

A passenger punched a fellow commuter in the head after being told not to stare at his laptop screen.
Police said the 46-year-old man was attacked after he noticed another passenger was looking at his computer screen.
He was working on his laptop and noticed the other passenger gazing at his screen, so he asked him not to.
As the victim went to move across the carriage, police said the attacker punched him in the head and then left the carriage.
The victim suffered bruising to his head and damage to his knee which he injured during the assault.
The attack took place on a train between Clapham Junction, south London, and Gatwick on November 10.

The following passage is taken from Jhoon Rhee's Bruce Lee and I:
"I was one of the last people Bruce talked to over the phone. He called and told me that he fought to have the director put my name as the top billing of my movie. I thanked him for caring about me and for his efforts. Then the next day came the news that he was dead!"
I wonder what Bruce said and did to offend people.

"My name is Shannon Melia and I am a nurse. I had gone to a few other attorneys for a very messy, complex divorce. I mean there are things that happen in a divorce that you don't want to happen but they have to."
"I had gotten Jesse's name from someone who had come to see him before and he came highly highly recommended. Oh there was a lot of back and forth with Jesse and I. I said it was very messy, um very involved, and um, yes there was a lot of back and forth, a lot of visits in the office, a lot of phone calls, a lot of emails, and I mean Jesse's been on top of things from day one so I mean he makes you feel so comfortable. Like I didn't, can't really say I never had anything to worry about. He really, he's been like right on the ball and there were things I would have never even thought of, but to worry about that thing on my house, know the nitty-gritty that came with that, that he didn't have to. It made me feel like he was wanting to help me, wanting to help my kids, that's, I mean my whole focus through the whole thing, it was my kids. I could email Jesse on a weekend or even at night and he always got back to me quickly, even on a weekend. I mean who does that?"

Chad Peterson is 25. He was born with Down syndrome and later diagnosed with autism. He is also hard of hearing. Because of his hearing issue, he qualified for a deaf and hard of hearing teacher who helped him learn American Sign Language. This was the best thing we ever could have done for him because he is a very social guy. His hobbies include swimming, bowling, and singing with his favorite transportation drivers. He loves racing with My Team Triumph!

Anyway, back to the student's answer. I asked where he parked cars for his job. He said no, no, no – his job is drinking beer. What? (Parking job was really part-time job.) My next question was, “Who pays you to drink beer?” He said no, no, no, and acted like he was carrying a tray. As it turns out, his job is serving beer at a restaurant. Last night he was working at his part-time restaurant job.
I totally understand the pronunciation thing and not saying what you think you are saying. Last week in my Japanese language class, the exercise in the book was something about the Kobe hospital. I thought I was saying hospital, but the teacher was touching her head and patting her hair. I was thinking was is that about? Turns out, I was saying beauty shop (biyoin) instead of hospital (byoin). It all sounds the same to me.

Most Helpful Customer Reviews
Story of TY Cobb based on 0 ratings. 1 reviews.
I liked this book because it was about sports because I am a great sports fan and I love to play baseball. This book talked of a famous baseball player, Ty Cobb, and talked of his past, his stats, his life, etc. The story starts when Ty Cobb was twelve and a cocky shortstop. He dreamed of being a professional baseball player but his dad wanted him to be a lawyer. Soon, however, Ty convinced his father to let him play baseball. Ty played baseball for a team in Augusta, Georgia. But after disobeying his coach's orders, he was fired. To make matters worse his girlfriend dumped him, and his dad sent him a telegram saying, ¿Don't come home a failure.¿ Soon he was hired for another team but soon went back to Augusta with a new coach. In 1905, when Ty was just eighteen, he went to the major league for the Detroit Tigers. He was still greatly disliked by his teammates. However, he still did great without them. After his rookie year, Ty would win awards like best average, most hits, and he once led the league in home runs with only nine! Most home run leaders hit around forty or more. He also would lead the league in stolen bases frequently. Not all was good for Ty Cobb. One day he heard that his father was murdered! He also hit an abusing fan and was suspended, spiked a player and then received death threats. One day people tried to mug him! Still there was something good, Ty married and would have five kids. In his later years playing baseball, he heard that his rival, Tris Speaker, was playing both manager and a player, so Ty did too. At the end of the season both of them were forced to retire after being falsely accused for fixing a game. Soon they were allowed to play again. This time however, Ty did not play for Detroit, he played for Philadelphia. Two years later Ty decided to retire from baseball after playing for twenty years. Soon Ty Cobb went into the Hall of Fame. There was still one more award that Ty sought for. I would recommend this book to any sports fan because this book has more than just Ty Cobb. It mentions of other great players and teams too. Detroit fans would like this because it mentions them the most of all.

A friend and I popped into this small cafe for a quick bite to eat. It was quite late for lunch, but they were very accommodating and went out of their way to make sure that we had what we wanted. On previous visits we have had the most wonderful sandwiches made with homemade focaccia bread which was just so delicious! But instead this time we had the homemade cawl which was just so tasty. I would highly recommend it. We each got a huge bowl with lovely bread and cheese. So filling! This meant I could not have a cake which was a disappointment as they looked lovely. Other diners were saying how nice the homemade cakes were. Service was very friendly, coffee was good, and all this for a very reasonable price. I have been here a couple of times before and never had a meal which disappointed. Always tasty and good value. I would highly recommend it.
Own or manage this property? Claim your listing for free to respond to reviews, update your profile and much more.

My mother is getting confused to the point she doesn't know where she sleeps. She doesn't know how she gets into her home. She isn't sure where I live which is one mile down the road. She has known this for years. Is this early Alzheimer's, dementia or just confusion. She isn't this confused when her other children come to visit her from out of town.

Originally Posted by artgoddess
I don't think people were reading between the lines, more having issue with what the words they were reading.
That said I think you are completely wrong about your thoughts on Mental Illness. I hope that this does not come to bite you in the ass one day, that would be a terrible thing. I'm sure it was not your intention, but what you are saying borders on insulting to people who have suffered from PPD, or any...

There was something that was just a bit... off about Bruce Willis' appearance on Good Morning America today. He was attempting to promote Cop Out, but it seemed like someone slipped a Xanax—or six, into his morning coffee.
He seems about as excited to be doing this interview as he would be if you asked him to voluntarily undergo a root canal. And even though they carried the facade throughout the interview that he's "not much of a morning person", it seems that he doesn't seem to be much of a functioning person. They may as well have interviewed a jar of mayonnaise for six minutes. I half expected him to just fall asleep and start snoring in his chair while he was listing off actors co-starring in his next movie.

Emily Kelly's waters broke just as she stepped out of her car outside the hospital and said her baby George was coming and there was 'no stopping it'. The 30 year old mother of six said the 'amazing' staff at Queen Alexandra Hospital in Portsmouth, Hants, were quick to come out and deliver George and they kept her calm during the 'very scary experience'.
Now, the infant has 'car park' written on his birth certificate, has been given the middle name Parker and he is known by hospital staff as 'little car park George'. Describing the unexpected birth, the Portsmouth mother said: "I was just across the zebra crossing from the entrance to the hospital, right where you pay for the car parking. My mum rang the ambulance and they were very quick in coming out. When they turned up I was obviously happy to see them and I thought I would be able to make it to the hospital, but the midwife told me his head was already out. They had to lay me back down there for the delivery and they rushed him straight into the hospital and I followed shortly behind him."
Ms Kelly said 'it all happened very quickly' adding: "The pain had only really started that morning and I didn't think much of it. This is my sixth baby, so, I kind of just tried to ignore it but I'm glad I didn't. All I can remember is I rang the hospital and they told me to come in and that was at about 4.20 in the morning. My mum took me down and the pain started to get a bit worse in the car. We arrived at the hospital and I took four steps and my waters went, and he was basically coming and there was no stopping it."
The mother commented on how 'amazing' the staff were in what could have otherwise been a very dangerous situation. She added: "I reached out to the team afterwards to thank them because they were all absolutely amazing, I think if they had not come out as quickly as they did it would have been a completely different story. Their quick actions in getting to me when they did, and the security guards that came out to help, all of them were absolutely amazing. They managed to keep me quite chilled in what was a very scary experience."
Now, over a month later, both Ms Kelly and her son George are doing well. The mother said: "He is absolutely amazing. I have got him registered now and he actually has car park written on his birth certificate. They had to double check it with the hospital as they asked me where he was born and I said by the entrance of QA and they thought I meant in QA, so I had to say no, not in the hospital. They rang through to QA and said 'We have a lady here claiming she gave birth in the car park', they went 'Oh have you got little car park George there?'"
George's birth certificate officially records his place of birth as 'North Car Park, Queen Alexandra Hospital, Portsmouth'. Ms Kelly gave birth in the early hours of December 29 last year.

Today my mom and I were in the car and she mentioned one of her favorite pics that I've taken. It is of the Vietnam War Memorial, and a finger (Tims) pointing at a particular name. Thomas E. Beglinger. I had forgotten about that one. Tom was a friend of my dads. "The brother I never had" (since his own was a bit of a prick when they were younger). He introduced my mom and dad to each other during high school. Dad went to Vietnam after he and Mom were married. Tom was drafted as well. He was killed in Vietnam. Anyhow, Mom mentioned this pic today, and then I was talking to my husband about it in the car, asking him if he thought I should send Dad a copy of that pic. We hemmed and hawed it over, and decided that yes, we would send him a copy.
Fast forward to later this evening. I'm on fb, checking things out when I get this IM:
"Your dad said to tell you, Tom Beglinger died 44 years ago today. Oct 2, 1966."
I was flabbergasted! We started chatting back and forth about this, and then Joanne told me to call the house. Dad answered and we talked for the next 48minutes.
"I was at Camp Carole I think, over in Nam. I got a letter from your mother telling me that he had been debrained. Shot in the head. He got a lot of medals and such, because he was shot after pulling someone out of the line of fire. He was like the brother I never had. We did a lot together in high school, were together a lot, then he went off to college, and I went to Vietnam. He came back from college, and then was drafted."
He then talked about the strong bonds that were formed in 'Nam when you were fighting beside somebody, for your life and theirs. He remembered that when he got his beer ration, he and his buddies always shared with which ever of them were "shootin the gun" i.e. on watch. He recalled coming back stateside, and mentioned that if he didn't have a family (me, and mom) he would have gone "right back over there, to fight alongside" his brothers.
Dad also shared that he had been thinking about Tom all day today, and decided that he needed to get drunk or something, in honor of him. (grin) What he ended up doing is getting some wings, having a beer, and calling Toms brother/father, (I'm not sure which) Norman, to tell him, "Hey Norm... Bob Sonricker here. Just wanted you to know, I didn't forget." Can you imagine how much that meant to Norm?
This was a really good conversation for us to have. We've always been able to talk about his years in the service, I guess as the child that was born while he was at war, and the one who has been a staunch supporter of the POW/Mia cause, we've always had that in common. I'm glad that I could give him that outlet tonite, a safe place to talk about his feelings and memories. It was obvious that he needed it, and I feel only too honored to have been on the other end of that phone.So... I just needed to get this down in my blog. It seems that Mr. Beglinger was making sure I reconnected with my Dad today. Thank you Sir, and I assure you, I will NEVER forget.

Hannah seems to be doing well at preschool so far. She went on Monday and then again on Wednesday. On Monday she was pretty hesitant to leave me, but didn't cry. It took me about 10 minutes to get out, but I did so with a clean break. That was good. She apparently only got upset once on Monday and that was when it got really loud in the room. She told the teacher she wanted to go home, but her teacher was able to calm her by having her sit next to her during circle time. When I picked her up she ran over to me faster than I've ever seen her move and gave me a great big hug and said, "I missed you!" That made me feel good. Yesterday she separated much easier. It only took me about 5 minutes to get out of the room and when I left she was happily drawing with some crayons. She never even looked up to watch me walk out. When I picked her up I was able to observe her for awhile before she noticed me. She was standing around a table with two other kids and they were repeatedly pressing down and popping up a piece of bread in a toy toaster. Each time the the toast popped up the group with dissolve into hysterical shrieks of laughter, Hannah included, and then it was lather, rinse, repeat for at least 5 minutes straight. I have no idea how long they had been at it before I got there! It really made me happy to see her with that group of kids instead of off by herself, and while she wasn't talking to the kids she was fully participating in the "game"-no conversation needed! :) When she finally noticed me she didn't even come over to me! I practically had to drag her out of the room. On the way home she was able to tell me several things about her day, including that she had played "American Egypt" in the sandbox (whatever that means) outside during recess. It looks like we made the right decision to place her in this class. YEAH! Hopefully by the end of the year she'll be talking to her peers in her class and maybe even random kids she meets other places. Wouldn't that be great?!?
All In Our Days
2 weeks ago

Thus, at the Q-School, Brown managed to regain his Tour Card immediately, after which he and his wife Roz left for Las Vegas for a holiday.
In Las Vegas, Brown decided to surprise his wife by asking her to marry him for the second time.
"It’s official. She said YES for a second time!!! (Thought she would have learnt the first time)," he said on Twitter.

It has been really hard on all of us, especially mom, dad, and myself. Probably because we're here to see her go through this in person. I know Dad wants to go kill him and my Hubs would love to hurt him really bad for hurting his sister in law. All I can think of is "coward". What a coward he is. Evidently when he told her, he told her that he'd thought that he had loved her, but he never really did, that he was just comfortable. Seriously? Can you stick the knife in a little more. Ending an engagement/relationship is so hard, why add more unnecessary suffering to it?
She hasn't been at work all week. Yesterday she went and got her paycheck changed so it wouldn't go into their joint account and she told her coworkers. Then her and mom went to their house to get her cats and some of her toiletries. Mom said it was awful, that she just froze in the doorway and then started bawling. Mom had to pretty much pack up everything they took because she couldn't.
People know now. Like I said, she told her coworkers and now all the bridesmaids know. She had one of them go ahead and tell the rest of their friends from high school...I'm sure the word will continue to spread.
I'm so unbelievably pissed right now. I get that sometimes people change their minds....that happens I guess. That would have been hard enough, but the manner in which he did this is just unbelievable. How he came home that Saturday and told her he might not want to get married, how he then did not contact her for two days while she was staying with my parents, not even to ask how she was doing. Then, to freaking break it off without giving her the courtesy of doing it in person? Wow. My sister said not once did he even say he was sorry.

Screaming Middle-Aged Women showed up to see Donny Osmond at the Barnes & Noble in Mira Mesa on June 22. He emerged from the bathroom and began signing his new CD. Females grabbed at him and screamed. A lady said, "I can't believe I just saw him come out of the bathroom."
One lady had driven from Fallbrook and had pictures from when she met him 30 years ago. Another person came from Riverside. One gal got to the bookstore at 8:00 a.m. even though the store didn't open until 10:00. A few hundred people showed; 90 percent were female. The few men I talked to said they had been dragged there by their wives.
Bookstore personnel announced that no memorabilia would be signed, but Osmond signed everything put in front of him. One lady who had him autograph an album said, "I couldn't say anything" when she reached his table. I asked why she was back in line and she said, "So I can have him personalize this. I forgot to tell him my name."
Two preteen kids walked up the line saying, "Woo-hoo, we get to meet Donny Osmond, how exciting."
One lady got angry with an employee because they didn't have Osmond's music turned up loud enough. Other women were speculating on his height. "He's 5'6"." The other replied, "No, he's not. He's at least 5'8"."
To talk with Osmond, I bought a CD for $12. I didn't know any of his songs or what to ask, so I said, "You're a hunk. And I'm a straight guy saying that." He threw his head back and laughed. "That's the funniest thing I've heard all day. Good one."

T.P. has arrived!!! He is living in my bathroom!! And yes he is named after toilet paper. The reason I named him that was because the first time I met him he was constipated because he ate some toilet paper!!! So I just started thinking of him as T.P.!!! By the way, if anyone reading this, that lives in Luther, has some extra newspaper, we really need some!!! As you can see in the first picture, I think I got more of his milk on the two of us, then in his belly!!!!!!

Can you choke to death from post nasal drip? I ask because several years ago, I turned over in bed, and I suddenly felt like a fist was in my throat, that I was getting very little air. I've had post nasal drip for years, but this was the first time that I thought I might actually choke to death.
P.S. My late mother had asthma, and I feel like I have a little idea what she felt like from my experience.

Valerie was also referred to me by Katie Burton. She volunteered to sit for a portrait session during a period of time when I was trying to improve my work in that area.
Sadly, she did not get my best work. My lighting was wrong, I had not given any direction on how to prepare for the shoot, and it simply didn't come out as good as I would have liked.
The regret I have is that Valerie was a really cute girl and she could have looked much better in these shots had her photographer been more on the ball in planning the shoot. Those eyes deserve to be photographed properly.
Enjoy the images below.

“Good morning, what happened to your leg” was what I got out of the blues from someone I had never consciously conversed with and I replied vaguely “life wahala” and that was the end of that Facebook messenger chat.
A few weeks later it was a happy birthday wish to me still on messenger, we talked about my cake and I jokingly said she could come get some not knowing we were even in the same town at that moment.
For some reason I felt she was married till I learnt differently. Months later it was me commenting on a Facebook story implying she was in Lagos for a wedding and I got her phone number from there and God just continued doing His thing. Here we are today.

Hellbound With You Chapter 81
Abi sat as still as a statue as she listened hard to what was happening behind her. She heard a crack as something - maybe a fist? - made strong contact into someone's face. She had heard bones crack before, when Alex had stood on that man's hand at the bar and this sounded akin to that. Seconds later, she could hear more bones cracking, thumps and thuds. The murderous auras that came from behind her were extreme. She had never felt such incredibly dark and killing intent in her life!
Abi's heart began to pump wildly as ever because she could that the fight going on behind her was very dangerous. There were so many sounds coming from behind her but she couldn't make sense of them anymore and just as she was about to cover her ears, everything fell silent.
"A-alex? Are you alright? I am opening my eyes," she said when she couldn't bear it anymore. She was worried to death about him and she desperately wanted to know if Alex was alright. She knew that he wasn't weak - in fact she had seen how dangerous he was when he took down that man in the bar - but still, she couldn't help but feel worried.
"Alex!" she called out again and when she heard no response, she turned around but before she could open her eyes, a pair of large hands covered her eyes.
"What a disobedient little lamb." She heard Alex's voice and she knew that he was the one holding her.
"W-what's going on?" she asked but the man didn't respond.
After half a minute, Alex finally removed his hands from her eyes. Abi looked at him and then looked behind him. There was no one around.
"Where is" she looked at him in confusion and with a million questions in her eyes. His glimmering eyes and his long black coat made him look like the most beautiful villain. Her eyes surveyed him and he didn't have any injuries at all, not even dirt on his clothes.
The man just ran his fingers through his hair as he let out a sigh.
"Ah. He ran away," he replied. His expression was back to his usual laid back look as if nothing had happened at all.
"Mm. Your stalker."
"My stalker? I don't have a stalker," she argued. She had been working here for years now and she never experienced being stalked before - this was because Kelly had dealt with them all before she found out - but even then, this was the first time she had ever felt that kind of chilling feeling where she felt someone truly had murderous intentions towards.
"You do but I just beat him so he escaped," he insisted nonchalantly. Abi looked at him with suspicion but the man suddenly carried her and put her inside a car before he walked around and sat in the driver's seat.
He started the engine and looked at Abi.
"What, you're not happy that I am back?" he asked, flashing that mischievous yet enchanting smile that Abi had missed so much.
Abi was forced to return her attention to him.
She knelt on the passenger seat and faced towards him. She rested her hands on his shoulders as she looked deeply into his eyes. That hellish look was gone, leaving no trace that it was ever there.
"I am I thought you weren't going to come," she told him as she bit her lip. "Thank you for saving me," she added and she hugged him.
Alex's mischievous smirk faded. For some reason, what she said made him look like he wasn't pleased, as if he didn't like that she had thanked him because he didn't deserve it.
But then, his mood was quick to change again.
"What? Did you think that I died or something?" he asked smugly and Abi's eyes widened.
She looked at him with wide eyes, and then, the next moment, her lips trembled.
"I I never I would never think like that I would never think that you're that you're" she stammered and then tears began to fall from her eyes.
Alexander was speechless. He didn't get this girl. Why was she suddenly tearing up?
"Ugh I can't believe this." He ran his fingers through his hair as he looked at the crying little lamb that was glaring at him. "My girlfriend isn't just a nave little lamb and an unripe little fruit. She's also a crybaby." He shook his head, although he didn't look mad or frustrated. He cupped her little face and rubbed her tears away with his thumb.
"How did a creature like you even end up with someone like me?" he asked and Abi puffed her cheeks. "Sigh stop crying now "
"It's because you're saying such awful things. Why would you think that I would think that way?!" she argued like a wronged little kid.
Alex's mouth hung open. "So you're actually crying not because of what happened but because of what I said? You're so unbelievable, Abigail. I have no words left for you."
"Please don't say things like that again!"
"Hey, that was a joke, okay? I know that a little lamb like you won't even think about it. I know that you would probably even want to give a proper burial for the dead mosquitoes so ah, what am I saying?" He shook his head and pinched the skin between his brows.
"Take your seat, Abigail, and put on your seatbelt," he then said and the girl did as she was told.
The next moment, he accelerated the car and the car flew like a bullet.
Alex was waiting for her to scream or beg him to slow down but it didn't come. He looked at her and to his surprise, the girl's mouth even formed an 'O' as if she couldn't believe what was going on. In fact, she looked thrilled!
He shook his head again. This was the same girl who just cried over a joke a while ago. The same girl this little fruit
All the girls Alex drove in his car like this cried and screamed and some even got traumatised and never wanted to ride with him again but this little lamb how could she be so brave and so weak at the same time? What was she?
Alex accelerated even more to gauge her reaction but the girl didn't show even a slight hint of fear. She was really a daredevil, he was sure of it now.
The car then stopped in the middle of a beautiful bridge overlooking the city's skyline.
He looked at Abi and took her hand.
"Did your scratches finally heal?" he asked and Abi nodded.
Alex inspected her hand and was glad to see that it was indeed better. He then looked at her with the sexiest, most seductive look in his eyes and that damned gorgeous and irresistible smirk on his lips and said, "Good. Because I'm going to make you pay your debts tonight."
Top weekly On WuxiaWorld
- 1 The Abandoned Empress
- 2 Hellbound With You
- 3 The Most Loving Marriage In History: Master Mu’s Pampered Wife
- 4 New Age Of Summoners
- 5 Miracle Pill Maker Bullies The Boss
- 6 Nanomancer Reborn I've Become A Snow Girl?
- 7 Full Marks Hidden Marriage: Pick Up A Son Get A Free Husband
- 8 The Great Demon System
- 9 Perfect Secret Love The Bad New Wife Is A Little Sweet
- 10 Mommy Villainess

Shop worker with cancer wins payout
A cancer patient working in a rural tourist shop has won a £10,000 payout after colleagues said they were fed up with her talking about her illness.
Amanda McCartney, 49, was serving food and drinks at the Green Welly Stop in Tyndrum last year when she had cancer diagnosed.
An employment tribunal in Edinburgh was told that other staff at the gift shop and service station on the A82 said they were getting fed up with Ms McCartney talking about her illness, were heard asking if she was “going on about it again’” and that some thought she was “wearing cancer as a badge”.
Ms McCartney complained to her manager that she was “sick of people being rude, nasty and bullying”, but employees were not

I recently painted RL Denim in my house and although I like it, I overlapped the paint in between the sections that I painted. I was told (by Home Depot) that there was a stencil that I could purchase to paint 'stiching' on the overlapped portion which would make the effect look more like a pair of jeans. I haven't been able to find the stencil. I think it's just tape with slits in it which you overlay and then paint and peal off. Any ideas as to where I can find this?

Bandit leader, is working for Deegan
Ragnarok’s interrogation of the bandit prisoner revealed this information:
“He told me that they are a group of slavers who have been kidnapping people (which we already know, of course), but that they were about to move on to another area to work that region. He did not know where they were heading, as he was not in charge and they just followed orders. I asked him who was in charge, and he said it was a man by the name of *”Vesh Killian".* They apparently picked us up at the very tail end of their time here and were about to move out in the morning. I asked about that Deegan guy, and he said that that is who Vesh is working for."

My first job was working in an orange juice factory, but I got canned. I couldn't concentrate. Then I worked in the woods as a lumberjack, but I just couldn't hack it, so they gave me the axe. After that, I tried to be a tailor, but I just wasn't suited for it - mainly because it was a sew-sew job. Next, I tried working in a muffler factory, but that was too exhausting. Then, I tried to be a chef - figured it would add a little spice to my life, but I just didn't have the thyme. I attempted to be a deli worker, but any way I sliced it, I couldn't cut the mustard. My best job was being a musician, but eventually I found I wasn't noteworthy. I studied a long time to become a doctor, but I didn't have any patience. Next, was a job in a shoe factory. I tried but I just didn't fit in. I became a professional fisherman, but discovered that I couldn't live on my net income. I managed to get a good job working for a pool maintenance company, but the work was just too draining. So then I got a job in a workout center, but they said I wasn't fit for the job. After many years of trying to find steady work, I finally got a job as a historian - until I realized there was no future in it. My last job was working in Starbucks, but I had to quit because it was always the same old grind. So, I retired and I found I am perfect for the job!

Philip Rivers Family History
Philip Rivers is a well-known American football player who was a part of the San Diego Chargers for the last seventeen seasons. He is one of the all time greats in NFL history. The outstanding career that he had is marked by a number of key achievements. He is the all time passing yards record holder, he is a member of the hall of Fame in his career and he has been selected to the Pro Bowls eleven times. In his seventeen-season NFL career, he earned a Super Bowl ring with the Chargers.
Philip Rivers may be the great-grandson of Ruskies immigrants that emerged to the United States in the 18th century. His father, Michael, was a well-loved figure within their community. His mother, Anna, had been also a really respected woman in their community. Whenever the family arrived in San Diego, they will worked hard in order to provide for their own new neighbors. Michael and Anna Streams worked long hrs during the summer to deliver in money in order that they could send youngsters to school.
They were not able to be able to attend the regional college that their peers attended. This specific limited the amount greatly, but their youngsters pursued their schooling and graduated coming from high school graduation. When their particular oldest son has been all set to go to university, however, the family got trouble finding cash to help your pet pay for this. Anna tried to use her retirement cost savings, but it had been only a short-term solution. Michael in addition to Anna Rivers ultimately found enough money to deliver their son to school.
Philip Rivers is one of 4 youngsters that have an excellent grandmother that instilled in them a new passion for studying. Her name is Betty Jo Crisler. Her dedication to education helped the Rivers family send out her son to college on the teach ride as a new student. The family compensated for his education and learning using their pension savings and credit rating cards.
Philip Rivers increased up in low income in San Diego being a single parent. He did not receive a great education in their youth. After a number of years of living on streets, Phillip finally enrolled in Large School. He graduated with the course valedictorian, but his lack of any advice wonderful bad marks made him really feel that he been unsuccessful.
His / her father never considered that his son would develop the skills that he did for 온라인 바카라 his / her whole life. He thought his father was too worried regarding his image and pressured Philip in to baseball, although he was not enthusiastic about it. Philip Rivers did not help to make it to typically the majors, but his / her mother continued to support him throughout his professional career. The lady gave him typically the family’s only vehicle when his deal expired and also flew him in addition to his family in order to Washington to view his first game in Congress.
When his playing days were over, his father granted him to maneuver back home with their mother. This change was difficult regarding him because their father made your pet feel unwanted. This individual felt that his success was his / her own fault in addition to that he need to let his teammates and coaches understand how proud he was of your pet. He thought of which his presence at house would provide your pet with a feeling of belonging. As soon as his playing days and nights were over, he or she realized that his father had lost his / her faith in him.
Phillip Rivers had 2 more chances to turn things close to with his dad. However, he again failed. He was traded to the particular New York Leaders as part of a business for another player. The trade was a mutual decision among the two groups. The trade turned into the most important move that Phillip Rivers produced in their professional career.

Josh had his first day of school today. Last night Don gave Josh a fathers blessing. It was a very spiritual and sweet moment for our family, I totally cried. Before hand we had talked about the special gift of the priesthood that our Heavenly Father has given us. How daddy could use the power to help others but not himself. After the blessing Josh gave Don a big hug.
Fast forward to today after Josh is at school and Holly and I were at home. Holly said that she was Ariel and she and Eric were in a meeting in New York (her bed). Next time I looked in on her she told me Eric was going to give her a blessing because she was going to school tomorrow. So there she sat on the bed head bowed, and eyes closed. How cute is that.
Jane's 3rd Birthday Questiions
1 week ago

Our political leaders are always viewed as good examples in society and really a good reflection of
what society needs to emulate at any particular time. Recently, this has been the opposite. I come from a certain ward in Nairobi county, which I will not mention for security reasons. My friend Dan had been married to a lovely wife who worked as an accountant in the constituency development fund (CDF) in our constituency.
She was a loyal wife and Dan never complained of anything fishy from her. She always arrived home on time and did her house chores with no complaints. However, as time went by, the wife started to change from her usual behavior just days after being promoted to be a PR assistant of our local MCA.
No one would ever imagine Dan’s wife would change as time went by. She started to come late in the night with an excuse of her working hours being extended.
Something fishy was really cooking. She even bought a car and not just any vehicle but a luxurious one. Each time I visited my friend he appeared to have fallen into a deep depression. He did not talk as usual and already had noted that his wife was actually walking out of their wedlock. She was not only cheating with any person but the area MCA, who had bought her the luxurious car which she lied she had bought from a loan mortgage.
I had no words to tell Dan rather than encouraging him to take heart since that was part of marriage life and challenges were prone. During weekends, his wife was at times picked at their gate by a very expensive vehicle to take her to work. Dan wondered which government office worked til the weekend.
Other than this, the wife would be called late at night, which really amused Dan. He tried to investigate who really was after his wife but he came out with no evidence. He went to the point of deploying his wife’s colleague to help him investigate but it was all in vain.
One day I came through a website www.kiwangadoctors.com which had testimonials of spouses who were not loyal but were at last helped by Kiwanga doctors to regain their loyalty. I shared with Dan and the next morning we
were at Kiwanga Doctors offices ready for help. Dan is my good friend and I was not ready to
see things go amiss on his side at any particular time.
He was attended then went back home to wait for the results. Three days later while on his way from work, Dan was attracted by a large crowd around a posh vehicle, which had caused a traffic jam. When he came near, it was the area MCA’s vehicle which had refused to open, but they seemed naked and having sex with a lady. Dan was shocked to find it was his wife at the scene and who was really riding the MCA.
Their vehicle refused to open and they seemed to be suffocating. When Dan saw this, he panicked and called Kiwanga doctors for he had really caught the culprit. The herbalists ordered the MCA to pay an amount of 100,000 to get relieved from the vehicle. His officials came and paid the amount and later they were free.
Dan’s wife was apologetic and from that day they lived happily with zero cases of disloyalty to each other.
This story was not covered by the media since the MCA cashed out lots of money. Dan’s wife later got another job in a different institution.
Kiwanga doctors solve different life challenges including domestic violence which is a
challenge to many families, depressions, inability to get pregnant among others. They also treat diseases such as diabetes, leukemia among others in just three days. They have been trusted as the most reliable herbalists in the East African Region for their work has been compulsively on another level.
For consultation Call or WhatsApp on +254 769404965 / E-mail: email@example.com or
visit the website www.kiwangadoctors.com

Lady Helen, as her health continued to decline, felt conscience becoming more and more upbraiding, its voice would not be stilled. She had known her duty as a mother; she had seen it beautifully portrayed before her in Mrs. Hamilton, but she had neglected its performance, and her chastisement she felt had come. Annie’s conduct she had borne, she had forgiven her, scarcely appearing conscious of the danger her daughter had escaped; but Cecil was her darling, and his disgrace came upon her as a thunderbolt, drawing the veil from her eyes, with startling and bewildering light. She had concealed his childish faults, she had petted him in every whim, encouraged him in every folly in his youth; to hide his faults from a severe but not too harsh a judge, she had lowered herself in the eyes of her husband, and achieved no good. Cecil was expelled, disgracefully expelled, and the wretched mother, as she contrasted his college life with that of the young Hamiltons, felt she had been the cause; she had led him on by the flowery paths of indulgence to shame and ruin. He came not near her; he joined his regiment, and left England, without bidding her farewell, and she felt she should never see him more. From that hour she sunk; disease increased, and though she still lingered, and months passed, and there was no change for the worse, yet still both Mr. and Mrs. Hamilton felt that death was written on her brow, that, however he might loiter on his way, his destined victim would never again feel the blessedness of health; and all their efforts were now directed in soothing the affliction of Grahame, and lead him to console by tenderness the remaining period of his unhappy wife’s existence. They imparted not to him their fears, but they rested not till their desire was obtained, and Lady Helen could feel she was not only forgiven but still beloved, and would be sincerely mourned, both by her husband and Lilla, in whom she had allowed herself at one time to be so deceived.
Having now brought the affairs of Oakwood, and all intimately connected with it, to a point, from which no subject of interest took place for above a year, at that period we resume our narrative.
It was a fine summer morning. The windows of a pretty little sitting-room were thrown wide open, and the light breeze, loaded with the perfume of a thousand flowers, played refreshingly on the pale cheek of our young friend Emmeline, who, reclining on a sofa, looked forth on beautiful nature with mingled sadness and delight. More than a year had elapsed since we last beheld her, and she was changed, painfully changed. She still retained her childish expression of countenance, which ever made her appear younger than in reality she was, but its ever-varying light, its beautiful glow were gone; yet she complained not. The smile ever rested on her lips in the presence of her parents; her voice was ever joyous, and no sigh,

Friday, 30 June 2017
Horses I've loved: Uggy
I know, I know, it's a terrible name for a horse. There was a car at the stables at the time I bought him that was called Ugy because of its number-plate, and basically Uggy became Uggy Two the first day I brought him home, named by my stable mates. He was far from conventionally beautiful, I will admit.
He cost me $50 straight out out of a paddock and I rode him home bareback. Turns out he had a local reputation for being a bolter, but he only did that with me a couple of times in the years I had him, and in those days I knew no fear, so what the heck.
I loved him to bits, but he wasn't a great purchase in that he pretty much ended my pony club years. He could and would jump anything, but put him in a showjumping ring and he'd stop at the gate and nothing you did could get him past it. These pics are of my one and only showjumping round with him, BEFORE we got to the gate!
I was eliminated, but the jump judge did say it was nice to see that horse in good condition for a change, so goodness knows what he'd looked like at times before I got him. He had a very distinguishing paint marking on his near side neck, so he'd have been easy to recognise.
That's him looking perky and happy after I'd had him for a while. He was never much in the conformation stakes, but he and I traveled for miles and miles, him skittering along with his odd running walk that ate the distances, and we'd jump any log we came to, and at times also gates if we couldn't be bothered stopping to open them.
That's me looking teenage and sulky. An old owner had turned up to visit him and asked to put this incredibly harsh bit on him that she'd used to use. I was not impressed. Gods, I could be a snotty little cow in those days. Guess everyone is at that age sometimes. Hope so!
He really could jump and it was interesting that some time after I got him, a man I met somewhere, can't even remember where, recognised Uggy and gave me this photo. He told me he'd seen Uggy jump a car bonnet. Poor Uggy, he looked so scrawny and miserable in the pic. I'm glad I got to have him in his old age.
He had this utterly bizarre condition where he had an open pocket inside his lip, sort of a hole that went into a gap between layers of muscle and skin, that collected food in it. I had to clean it out every day or it went smelly and horrible, and it was hard to get to it all because you couldn't get your finger in there far enough! Erk! The things we do for our horses! :D
In the end we got a vet to come out and he had to cut from the outside and pull all this crappy rotten feed out then sew up both the hole on the inside and the cut he'd made. Erk! Wish I'd been sedated like Uggy was! It seemed to fix the issue after that, but he always had a slightly lower lip on that side.
I think he became happy with me. He would do this thing where I would softly stroke his neck over and over and he would turn his head and just look at me with his old-horse eyes and we would be so peaceful together.
I can never decide if I failed him at the end or not. He was in a great paddock and looked so happy every time I went to see him. I was busy being Miss Independent on shitty wages and living in weird share houses. I think I forgot to pay some of his agistment, I'm not sure now. Anyway I got a phone call to say that he was doing such a great job babysitting the owners' weanlings and they wanted to keep him, and I said yes. This is the last photo I have of him, taken at that last agistment place. I hope he looked this happy to the end of his days. He deserved it.

A pensioner with cerebral palsy was robbed and abused by two young teenagers in his own home.
66-year-old Robin Murken was forced to watched as the teenagers aged between 12 and 14 ransacked his possessions in front of him.
The robbery took place on February 5 in the terrace house Robin has called home for 53 years.
He is well known in Newmarket for his charity work and looked after his Mum until she died seven years ago.
A crowdfunding campaign has raised a thousand pounds for Robin. The money will be used for new doors and to enhance security at his home.
Police say even they are shocked by the crime and are asking for anyone with information to come forward.

For over ten years, since I first heard Morrisey sing, I've been trying to articulate what I can't stand about his music. Now I've got it: rather than being linear, his melodies are trapped in chords, so he worries thirds and fourths in a kind of intervallic autism. This is a shame, because I like his voice, his lyrics, and his manner. But his melodies make me feel like I'm sealed in Tupperware. Let me out!

We've had our fish for about a week and a half now. I feed him pellets twice a day, and he eats them fine. I've read everywhere that Betta's love bloodworms and they are good protien for them. I thought we would try some, so I bought the freeze dried ones. He wont eat them though. I've tried several times to give them to him, but he hasn't eaten any. He seems to check them out, but then just swims on by. I also noticed that if I put in a pellet that's a little bigger, that he spits those out. Is he just a picky eater?? I wasn't sure if the bloodworms are too big of pieces for him or if he just doesn't like them.

Our electric has been out for a couple days, so we were staying at my Dad's house. So I had plenty of time to visit with him. I told him our baby names. He wasn't too sure about Eternity, but he said that one of the Dr's in the books All Things Bright and Beautiful, series, (his all time favorite books...) name is Zoe, so I he seemed okay with Zoanna and Zoey for short.
I didn't think he'd like the boy name, but he did! Corban Eric, of course Eric is after my brother so I knew he'd like that one.
Haven't told Mom, she seems so disinterested in this baby, I just don't talk about it to her. I have 2 adopted Mom's at church so I don't really need her I guess. It would be nice though if she'd show some interest....I don't understand why a mother would act like she does.....Oh well. I won't dwell on it. It is what it is....her loss I guess.

CF Vests Worldwide Heroes - Cystic Fibrosis patient in Thailand
Updated: Nov 18, 2023
My name is Joshua Bauder, I am the Vice President of CF Vests Worldwide. This is the story of my family and my daughter Evangeleen’s battle with CF.
I came to Thailand in January of 2013, and soon after I met Chitlada. We began dating and tried to see where we fit in in Thailand. We were really unsure if we were “the one” for each other, so we decided to put it in God's Hands. We decided to fast from each other and pray and see if God would let us know if we were “the one” for each other. We deleted all of our communicating apps and each other’s phone numbers and didn't contact each other for 2 weeks, all while doing a 3-day water fast and a 11-day Daniel fast (fruits and vegetables). We decided that if it was the Lord's will that we would meet at a certain place at a certain time and have only a 10 minute window to show up. If we were late or one of us didn't show up, then it was obviously clear that it wasn't meant to be. But by the grace of God we both showed up in that 10 minute window and we're soon married.
As we started our married life, we wanted to know what our purpose in life was together. We realized quickly that it wasn't about us; our lives are supposed to be about others. We quickly found a spot to serve children. We were attempting to start a boys and girls club-like hangout for kids in a slum in Bangkok. In the slum we were teaching math, English, Ukulele, songs and Bible verses. We did anything fun we could think of with the kids there. We felt like we were making an impact on the little kids’ lives, but then they would go home and their lives wouldn't change. In this slum it was as bad as it gets: it was filled with drugs, alcohol, prostitution, abuse and just about anything that you could think of.
Our refuge we had created for these kids was only temporary. When they went home they were still subject to the same ill-treatment, neglect, and peer pressure that is normal in the slums. We realized we needed to find another way to impact these kids, so we started the scholarship program. We started with 2 kids, Nut and Preaw, 13 and 14 years old. The idea was to get them out of the slum and let them experience nature, where they could be free from the dysfunctional environment that was causing them much trauma. We sent them to a school in Chiang Mai, Thailand, which is a 12-hour drive from Bangkok and is situated nicely in the mountains.
They were at that school 6 months when Preaw tried to commit suicide. We didn't know it, but she had been on meth until the day we sent her to school. She decided not to do meth while she was at school and the withdrawal was extremely difficult for her. We went up to the school to see her in the hospital, and when we got there she had tubes sticking out of her mouth and nose and we had no idea what to do. So we prayed. As we prayed the parable of the lost sheep kept coming to our mind – that we were to leave the 99 that we were serving in Bangkok and go and take care of the one, Preaw. So we did.
We left our jobs and ministry and found a house close to the school. She couldn't go back to the school so we had to homeschool her. We became brand new parents to a 14 year old suicidal girl. It was pretty crazy. So many things happened in our first year as parents that were not easy, but God worked it out and we became great parents, in my opinion. Soon after that our sheep multiplied and we were raising 6 kids. This year one of those kids graduates from college, two from high school, and one enters his senior year. Preaw ended up getting her GED and then getting her CAN (nursing assistant) certification.
After having all these kids for some time and we were finally living in the country, we decided to have our own child. That's when we were blessed with Evangeleen. February 8th, 2019 she was born on a Friday afternoon. After she was born the doctor called me in. I got scared. I knew something was wrong. The doctor sat me down and told me something was wrong. He said it was hip displyasia, and she would have to be in a brace for the 1st 6 months of her life. This was a relief because we could deal with a brace. If he would of told me she had CF then, I don’t think I would have been able to handle it. I don’t think that I would have taken it well knowing that this amazing little girl that I had been holding was on a fast track to death.
The first few months of her life were pretty uneventful. She was growing and nothing was wrong. But after the third month we knew something was wrong and we couldn't figure out what. She started coughing, but Chiang Mai has one of the worst smoke seasons in the world and it was our first year there so we had no idea. All of the doctors kept telling us that it was nothing not to worry about, that it was just the smoke. We would go to the doctors 2 or 3 times a month trying to figure out what was wrong and they kept saying not to worry about it. They would do x-rays, they would do allergy tests, they did tuberculosis tests, they checked everything they could think to check but couldn't figure it out. This went on for a whole other year.
Around Christmas of 2020 I got a hold of my father. We hadn't talked in a few years and I was surprised to be able to get a hold of him as we usually didn’t know where he was. I asked him if anyone in his family had a breathing disorder like right middle lobe disease, COPD or asthma. He said no. Then out of nowhere in his drunkenness he said, “I did have an uncle with CF, but I didn't really know this Uncle though.”
So I started to look into CF and I read about the saltiness of the skin and that the best way to check for CF is to lick your child. So I did. It was like licking salt out of my Palm. Just to make sure I decided to lick myself but I didn't taste like salt, so I called my wife over and licked her but she didn't taste like salt either. That was when I knew something was wrong. Before I was able to get a diagnosis my father passed away in April ‘21. He died all alone because of his love love of alcohol. After his death I was able to talk to his family for just about the 1st time in my life, and I asked his sisters if they had an uncle with CF and they all said no.
After licking her it made me start fighting to get her tested for CF. The doctors kept telling me, “No, she doesn't have CF. She's Asian; Asians don't have CF.” They kept telling me it was an allergy or something else they couldn't find, but to rest assured that it wasn't CF. Well, after arguing and fighting with 10 or 12 doctors we finally found a doctor that would take it seriously. As soon as this doctor saw Evangeleen she admitted her into the hospital, and after 5 days in the hospital she finally had the courage to tell us that she thought Evangeleen was going to die! This was a shock, to say the least! We had never had a baby before; we had no idea what to look for or how to tell that she wasn't doing well. We knew something was wrong but we had no idea that she was so close to death. When we look back it's easy to see! When we look at pictures and videos she looks like a skeleton with a head. We had no idea what we were doing and as we tried to find help no one could, or would, help us. We tried so hard to find help but no one thought that anything was wrong!
When I see her pictures I wonder how the doctors were so blind. Those doctors deal with healthy kids all the time and I just can’t imagine how they thought she was healthy. We ended up fighting with the doctor who ultimately saved Evangeleen's life because we wanted to get her tested for cystic fibrosis and she kept insisting that we were wasting our money and that it was impossible for her to have it. We could only find one place in Thailand to get tested and it happened to be the most expensive hospital in the country. We had to pay $300 to get her tested, which is the monthly salary of an average Thai person, and make a 12 hour drive to Bangkok. We later found out that there was another place to get tested, but you have to be referred by a doctor and it's in Bangkok as well. It takes about 24 hours to drive from the top of Thailand to the bottom, so if you were to have CF in either one of those places it takes you 12 hours to get to a place to get tested. Finding a doctor who would refer you and getting your state medical insurance transferred to that hospital is the hard part.
In 2022 there were only 10 cystic fibrosis sweat tests given for a population of 72 million people.
We paid and our sweat test results came back in at 81. Then we got genetic testing on Evangeleen and she had an F508 delta as well as 273 + 1G >A. This confirmed that she had CF. This doctor was able to refer us to our current doctor, Dr. Haruthai Kamalaporn. She is a pediatric pulmonologist who studied at a children’s hospital in Canada and learned about CF there. She only works in government hospitals, so we had to go there and see what state care is like. It is not good. After that Evangeleen was in the hospital every 2 to 3 months, which was hard on us as parents, especially as we had 6-13 other kids during that time. It was hard on us as parents, but it was even harder on us as a family. The stress of almost losing a child and the stress that comes with dealing with chronic illness wore on both my wife and I.
We had no idea that this kind of life existed, a life that relies on medicines, hospitals and doctors to stay alive! We had no idea that people live like this and we had never lived like this before. It was a shock! Trying to learn what this life consisted of was a hard lesson that had a lot of stress, a lot of pain, and a lot of responding to people in negative ways.
We thought that the care in Thailand was what was holding our daughter back and keeping her in a constant state of sickness. We thought she was getting sick because Thailand was dirty, hot, humid, and had mold growing everywhere, but it turned out that it was just the severity of her CF or the bacteria she had acquired. She was losing her lungs and she was losing them much faster than we were ready for. We had accepted that she had CF but we hadn't accepted that she was going to die, and it looked like it was going to be soon.
We started booking tickets back to America and made plans to get her in a CF clinic. The clinic that I called initially had given me a bad feeling. They weren't that nice and because of covid, they told us that we had to wait 10 days before she could go to the hospital. We had to book tickets as fast as we could because we knew that she was in trouble.
We had been doing suction 4 times a day for about a year hoping that we could make it work in Thailand – but it just wasn’t working. Suction is the absolute worst thing! It feels like you're waterboarding your child and that’s a terrible feeling. Your child has a look in their eyes like they're going to die and the natural stress response of a parent is to fight off whatever is giving her those eyes. But it's you that is doing it! A parent should never have to feel like they are hurting their child to save their child.
This schedule of treatment was unbearable. It was suction every 6 hours, 6 a.m.,12 p.m., 6 p.m. 12 a.m. That was our life! Suction all the time! Between her suctions we were spending 1.5-2 hours on her breathing treatments, which was h*** and Evangeleen let us know how much she hated it every time after suction was through. She would scream and there was no consoling her. We couldn't blame her though, we would do the same if we were her. But we just cried and tried to hide it from her.
It wasn’t much of a life. We were in Phuket, Thailand, which is one of the most beautiful places in the world. There are the most amazing white sand beaches I had ever seen and they were empty because they had shut down the country due to COVID, but we didn’t get much time to enjoy them.
We dealt with that for a whole year before we just couldn't take it anymore. It wasn't working. We were doing everything that we could find to do and everything the doctors were telling us to do and she was still sick. She was in the hospital for 2 weeks, out of the hospital for 2 weeks, then we would start hearing stuff in her lungs so it was back to the hospital again… this cycle kept happening, over and over.
We also didn't want to do too much damage to her lungs, so finally we decided to fly back to America.
I ended up calling Kathy Jones, who was the mother of CFer Natalie Dean, youtube channel. Before I had left America originally to go to Thailand, I officiated Natalie’s funeral, in January 2014. It was my first time and only time as a celebrant.
I found out days before we left Phuket, that Natalie had died because of Cystic Fibrosis. Before & after her funeral I had been told that she died of CF, but I had no idea what Cystic Fibrosis meant; it was just another word, like fibromyalgia or leukemia; it just seemed like a bunch of letters crammed together to form something really bad that I had no reality of. So when I had heard it, I just brushed it off because I had no idea what it was, but I knew that it was bad. As I was getting ready to do her funeral I was able to get to know her through her YouTube channel and her blogs. She seemed like like a cool girl, like a girl that I would have loved to get to know at the time, but CF had taken her away too soon and left a hole in her family and friends’ hearts.
When I talked to Kathy she suggested that I go to a different clinic than the one I had contacted, and instead go to one in my hometown. I didn't think I would listen to her and switch clinics because I had read that the CF clinic that I was taking her to was one of the best in the world and that's where I wanted my daughter to go, to the best!
Soon after Evangeleen and I went to the states and she was immediately admitted to the hospital. She had she lost 5 lbs and was throwing up non-stop because she was dehydrated on the plane. She slept the whole 18 hour flight and then was admitted for 8 days.
While in the hospital I was put in contact with Jon Brock, a CFer from Michigan. He had started Trikafta and was doing so well they decided to remove his port. When they did the surgery he ended up dying on the table and was resuscitated, but spent 3 more months in the hospital. This meant he had 3 months of unused Trikafta that they sent to his house while he was in the hospital, and he was willing to give it to me if I could get our doctor to agree to give it to Evangeleen who was 2 yrs old at the time. This was July 2021 and Trikafta was only approved for 18 and up.
Getting the doctor to agree was much harder than it sounds. Our clinic had assumed the same thing I assumed, that her severe CF was caused by poor care in Thailand. We all soon found out that wasn’t the case. Evangeleen and I arrived in the US in April and we were putting off admitting her for her first round of antibiotics until my wife was able to get her green card and join us. Chitlada arrived in the beginning of July, and then my wife and Evangeleen spent that whole month in the hospital while I worked to remodel our house and make it liveable.
She was released at the beginning of August, and by the last week of August the doctor and I agreed that she needed to be admitted again. I was so tired of this cycle and asked the doctor what is the plan? Her plan seemed to be the same plan as our Thai doctor’s plan, and it wasn’t working. I was tired of hospital stay after hospital stay and Evangeleen was tired of needle after needle, 1 month in and one month out. I was getting scared and wondering how much of this her little liver could take.
The doctor started pushing for a lobectomy (partial lung removal surgery) and I was completely against it. We had tried to get her into clinical trials for Trikafta but it just wasn’t working, and the doctor couldn’t find a way to be able to get her on the drug. I was just blown away that they were willing to cut her lung out before they were willing to put her on Trikafta.
So, I asked the doctor, “Say I am the worst parent in the world and I put her on Trikafta without your consent, what do I have to worry about? CPS? Police? DEA? Will I lose your help?
She said, “Give me a few days and I will get back to you.”
A few days passed and she called and told me if I can get the drug, then the clinic could help me. I was super stoked! Blown away! So I rented a car and drove to Michigan.
I went and met John Brock and he was the most amazing man I had ever met! We had lunch and talked about everything; we shared our stories and became instant friends. He was willing to risk his freedom to help my daughter, and anyone who would do that instantly becomes my hero! Sadly, John Brock passed in 2022.
I left Michigan and was driving back when I was pulled over and arrested for possession of illegal drugs in Indiana. Before the police officer arrested me we spent 2 hours in the front of the car talking; he was trying to get me to tell him where the drugs were. I was not going to lie to him and was waiting for him to ask the right question. He finally asked if I had prescription drugs in my car and I told him that I did. I told him where they were and he went and looked and came back with them. The officer told me I had enough Trikafta to put me away for 8-10 years. He mirandized me, cuffed me and put me in the back of the car, while they tore my car apart looking for more contraband. I started to pray. He started to google to see what Trikafta was. Much to his displeasure Trikafta is not a scheduled drug; he could arrest me but it would probably be thrown out in court after I did a few weeks in the slammer. I learned that day that non-scheduled drugs are unarrestable.
He had pity on me and told me he had a daughter himself… he ended up letting me go after he berated me a bit for being so reckless.
3 days after that we started her on a 1/3 of an adult dose and it worked amazingly. We have had no side effects and have had no hospitalizations in almost 2 years. Her lungs are great, her liver is great, and she just keeps growing. We are going on 3 months now without an infection. The great thing about Trikafta is it makes Ciprofloxacin actually work! It had never had an effect on her before and now it works every time!
Watch our story here!

On thursday night I went a SU card class at my demo's house. I think the set that we used was called Tart and Tangy. I dont think I care much for the set but I think the cards were cute. We also made a box that holds all the cards. Ami came with me to the class. According to her I made her go to the class. Which is probably true. :) I just dont like to go by myself. :) Here are the cards and the box that we made. Hopefully everyone is having a great weekend!

I managed to walk today. I went out. I didn't tell you that my kidneys hurt yesterday, but the pain went away during the session and did not come back. I feel like myself again today. I am shaking much less, I have been working all afternoon and it feels good. Thank you, Steve.

…who left enough money to cover the meals of everyone who was in line behind you:
Thank you so much! You were a blessing to my daughter and I. I wish I could thank you in person, but we were so caught up in our giggly conversation that we didn’t notice who was in front of us, let alone two people in front of us, and you were gone before we knew what you had done. What a treat to get to the cash register and be told our meal was already paid for!
Thank you again.

Spike was having a good time with his friend. Things changed after he went out to buy the best hot dog in the city and haven't received it.
Spike is a friendly dragon who loves to help friend and people around. His friend asked him to buy some food and he went outside to buy a hot dog. While he was helping the salesman with the flame and temperature, other places were robbed and food there disappeared. It happens everyday in lunch time and you have to figure out who does it.
- Rated 7
- Played 268

I have been having some thoughts and concerns and wanted to bring them up here to ask about others experiences with this. I am writing to you because I dont know if this is jealousy (I don't think it is) or if it is my true internal safety mechanism that tells me things aren't a good idea.
SU and DJ work at the same time in different places a few blocks away. SU gets out over a hour before DJ gets out of work. She walks over and meets him at his work and waits in the car till he is done with his work. I don't have a problem with this situation except that I don't feel comfortable with the fact that he kisses her while he is at work and has done this in front of other coworkers and it makes me uncomfortable.
We are pretty much out as a family in public, but I feel as if hubby's work is not a place to be kissing someone other then his wife. I think it looks even worse when I am not there. I think that his work should be handled as a "off limits area" as far as PDA goes. I feel as if it gives the impression of his "having a secret affair with their roommate or friend" and thus looks bad. I find this to be even more important of a issue if DJ goes into management at his work because honestly there will be situations in which she will not be going as his "wife" because I would be taking that role and I feel it would make social situations hard for me. There was already one situation in which there was a picnic with his work friends and families and the comment was made about her and he being in the pool frolicking together with her swimming between his legs "I wouldn't let another woman that close ot my husbands penis" was the comment made and looks were passed among the other "wives" that made me feel like I just wanted to leave the picnic. They (DJ and SU) didn't see a problem with it (of course they didn't they were playing and acting like 10 year olds at a picnic where they were the only ones roughhousing over the age of 8) which was another thing that I felt was inappropriate.
Am I being bitchy or do you guys think my concerns are valid. I have always looked at it like if this relationship DOESNT work out, she goes off and I am left being seen as the wife who's husband fooled around on her and didn't even care or worse yet was too dumb to even notice it. Maybe I am just having a crappy day and thinking of negatives because hubby worked today instead of spending the day with me like he could have done when he was offered the day off.

I Used to Hate Cats -- Now I Have Three of Them!
I grew up on a ranch where we had every animal you could imagine. The cats we had were just barn cats who ate mice, and we had nothing to do with them at all. I didn't like cats in general, and I am totally freaked out about mice -- plus my mom was allergic to cats.
My first love was a tiny red dog. Megan. Her mom was a Brittany Spaniel, a world champion bird dog; her daddy was some dog that jumped the fence. The sellers just wanted to get rid of her, but to me she was beautiful, perfect, and so very sweet. She was my Valentine's Day gift; nothing else could have been better!
You never saw me without Megan. She was my world and my life. Her date of birth was the day after mine, so I figured we were meant to be together. She was not the "family" dog -- she was totally mine! My precious red girl slept between my head and the headboard when she was a baby, and as she grew, she slept alongside me.
Fast forward 13 years, and Megan was down to 18 pounds. Putting her to sleep was the hardest thing I ever had to do. She was my life, but she was suffering and so sick, and I loved her too much to let her go on like that. I stayed with her and held her paw until the very end, until her very last breath. I cried; the vet cried.
I couldn't bear to be without Megan, so I had her cremated. She is still with me every day, 10 years later. She was my rock through the worst times in my life: my divorce, my parents' divorce (after 25 years), and my grandparents' deaths. I didn't think I could -- or even want to -- love like that again.
However, after years went by, and after I remarried, I was missing that unconditional love from a pet. So I started out small. I got nasty, stinky fish. They were gross, but I always took care of them.
One day I went to Petco to get fish food. The line was long, and for some reason I decided to look at the adoption agency that had cats by the front door. Remember, I didn't like cats. But when I saw an older orange-and-white fat cat named Morris, our eyes met, and that was it.
All the other cats were kittens. I was afraid that no one would want this adult kitty who just wanted to be loved, just like I did. I didn't want anything to happen to him. I figured we were a perfect match. He needed a home, and I had a home. We were meant to be!
I checked out with my fish food, went home, and didn't even put down my purse. I told my husband, Robert, that I had to have Morris. He said no, so like any good wife would, I went straight back to Petco to get my kitty.
In the beginning, I had no idea what to do, or what Morris needed. But over the years, he and I figured it out together. He was the love I was missing, and he has been the love of my life since I lost Megan. My husband says he doesn't know who is more attached -- me or Morris! Morris is so much like Megan. I feel like he is her way of telling me it's OK to love again, even if it's a cat.
After two years, Morris and I had this whole cat thing down pat. Robert was jealous of our relationship, however, and he wanted his own pet. So for his birthday we went to our local shelter and saw this beautiful orange kitty. She pawed at my nose, and that was it -- I fell in love again! Plus, she matched Morris.
I didn't know until after we adopted Maddie that she had been living on borrowed time. Robert told me she had been scheduled to be euthanized before we took her home.
I worried how Morris would react to another cat in the house. I had no idea what he had gone through in his past life, and he was such a momma's boy with me. Unfortunately for Robert, Maddie is SO not his cat -- she prefers me, too! She liked him for the first two hours or so after we brought her home, but she was still sedated from surgery. Then Morris and Maddie sniffed each other, and all was well with the world. I had worried over nothing.
A year and a half ago we went back to the shelter. Robert wanted to look at dogs. However, the cats were right by the front door. So we looked at the cats on the way in, then we looked at the dogs, and on the way out we went back to the cats. What else could I do? There was this tiny, 2.6-pound kitty! She was a total "God love it" cat. (That's when everyone tells me she is so ugly that only God could love her. Well, God and me!)
I thought she was beautiful, and she was crying. I was sure she was crying for me, so once again I was in love. I was so worried about how Morris and Maddie would react when we brought her home. But you know what? They looked at Mae, sniffed her, and looked at me as if to say, "Stay out of that darn shelter!"
So, that's how a one-dog person became a total cat lady.
Laura lives in Mesquite, Texas, with her husband and three cats. She has three stepchildren and two step-grandchildren.
Got a Cathouse Confessional to share?
We're looking for intensely personal stories from our readers about life with their cats. E-mail firstname.lastname@example.org, and you might become a published Catster Magazine author!

A father whose eldest son was "executed" because of a gangland feud involving his brother has told the Advertiser: "My boy is not to blame."Oh, really? It appears the Tufail paterfamilias is quite the detective, exercising his leetle grey cells on behalf of his youngest:
"I know my son – he doesn't have it in him to stab anyone," said Sajid.
"The problem is the victim or victim's family don't get a say in the court process. Instead the criminals get to make the allegations and Amir can't defend himself. Sanchez Thomas obviously said a lot of things. But let's look at the facts. It was in broad daylight. Tooting is an extremely busy place. It was near where he worked. It was near the hospital and there was lots of CCTV. Amir wouldn't do anything like that."But others, clearly, would:
The court heard how Thomas pulled alongside Umar, who was sitting in a car outside his home, at around 4.30pm on July 15 last year.So…also in a public place, also in broad daylight?
Your defence is that your son is smarter than the two murderers who shot your other son and would have made a better job of it?

Eric had a very full therapy session today. The session started with standing exercises, which I think is good practice for Eric, especially since he does not have a standing frame here to use like at home. Next he sat in his chair and performed exercises focusing on abs and balance. He held a weight in his hands and moved it side to side and up and down. He reached for an object (forward, sideways and up) and pulled himself back trying to use his abs, and finally he bounced a huge ball on each side, catching it then moving to the other side.
In the afternoon we had light snacks because we were going to an early dinner with Julie, Scott, Abul and Dhoha as tomorrow is their last day here. We went to Bennihana, a restaurant I have not been to since I was a kid. We had fun watching our cook and enjoyed the food and company together.

An 11-year-old boy from Basildon was left "shaken up" after he was punched in the face by a fully grown man in an unprovoked attack.
The young boy was punched while he was cycling in a public friends with his friends and sister.
Colin Keeble, the boy's dad, has said he is "disgusted" by the shocking assault and has called on the police to find the culprit behind the attack.
It happened at around 4.40pm on Thursday, May 23, while Colin's son Daniel was riding his bike.
A man began shouting at him telling him to watch where he was riding before he walked up to the schoolboy and punched him in his left eye.
Colin, a former police officer who now works as a contracts manager, said: “Daniel was with his sister Holly at the time and he was cycling up and down a path his his friends.
"He was with about four of five other boys, and they were only about 20 yards from Holly who was in the play park.
"Then this man on his own came walking up the path from the main road and a large industrial area.
"He started to shout at Daniel: 'Watch where you're f*****g going.' And the just punched him in the eye.
"Literally that was it, there was no conversation prior, no buildup- he just punched my little boy in the eye.
“Daniel stopped because he was scared and didn't properly understand what he was saying, and this man just straight up punches him in the face and then carried on walking."
Daniel immediately cycled home to his family home, which is only 200yds away, and told his mum Diane, 39.
He described the man as being white, around the age of 30 and 40 and wearing a red Arsenal shirt.
The family rang the police to report the attack, but no officers were sent to try and find the attacker.
Colin said that he was very upset that there was no attempt to catch the man, even though they had a description and location.
He said: "It is disgusting what happened to my son, and the lack of response has made it even worse.
"I understand the processes, and the limitations that the police have but he just walked away.
"My little boy has been my shadow the past few days and keeps right by my side.
"Daniel just keeps asking me why someone would do something so random to him, it has really shaken him up."
Colin feels that one of the worst parts is that his son wanted to follow in his footsteps and become a police officer, but now thinks that they are "useless" because they couldn't help him.
Essex Police have launched an appeal to find the man.
A spokesperson said: "We were called at around 4.40pm on Thursday, May 23, with reports that an 11-year-old boy had been assaulted by a man in Basildon.
"It was reported that the boy was cycling through the park near to Montague Side around 15 minutes before, when he was assaulted by a man.
"The man was described as being quite tall with short, brown hair, was wearing an Arsenal kit and carrying an orange bag.
"The boy was understandably upset but fortunately did not require hospital treatment.
"We understand how distressing this must have been for the victim and he did the right thing by getting himself to a place of safety and reporting the incident to us.
"As we were content that he was not at any further risk of harm and did not believe the man to still be in the area, we did not attend at the time, but are continuing to investigate the assault."

Judson lost his first tooth!
While watching TV Judson wrapped his shirt around his tooth and pulled it out. There was a little bit of blood and one proud little boy. Judson did not want the tooth fairy to come because he wanted to keep his tooth. So the tooth is in the kitchen if anyone would like to check it out ;)
Tucker got his first bathroom buzz cut!
Tucker is as cute as can be, but oh boy does he have bad hair! So a haircut was in need. Tucker was enjoying Daddy cutting his hair with the buzzers until Daddy nicked his ear. But Daddy can remember Grandma doing the same thing to him so I guess it's just the way thing go!

When I was in school (grade & high school), I played the clarinet and I loved when we played patriotic music. I couldn't get enough of John Phillips Sousa music (okay, I was a nerd), and to this day, I still love his music because it reminds me of parades and and the soldiers who fought for our freedom.
My senior year in high school, I took (borrowed) a piece of music from band. It's been 30 years since I was in high school but I still have that piece of music and I know where it's at. The music is "The Thunderer" by John Phillips Sousa and it's still one of my favorite patriotic songs.Looking at it today, I can't believe that I had the song memorized, I don't have my clarinet anymore but I have still have this music.

Honor your hero with thoughts, memories, images and stories.
Jason was my oldest child.first of 6 kids he is the one who made me mommy. Jason was great to have around. he loved to joke around I remember the last Fathers day he was home he spent all day looking for something for his dad he finnaly got home in a very nice box was a bra a very big bra he made his dad put it on and then started to spray him with silly string. when everything was done he went to his dad shook his hand gave him a hug and said thanks for being a great man and dad. Jason also had a temeper when he would play video games he would lay on the floor if he lost or the game didnt go his way he would beat on the floor very loudly. this would bug his dad and I alot so one night dad took the game away put it in our room and we went to bed about 3 minutes pasted and Jason was at our door asking for the game dad said no so the little joker stayed at our door for the next 45 minutes singing Billy ray's achy breaky heart in the voice of an old oriental man. His dad and I couldnt stop laughing and yes he got the game back.Jason was very smart in school and that was the reason he joined the Marines. He knew he could finish collage no problem he wanted a chalange he played football for 7 years so he picked the hardest branch the US MARINE CORPS he joined the summer of 2000 in between his junior and senior years of high school. he was told by his counslor from school with his test scores and grades he could get Jason into a 4 year collage no problem but Jason said dont waste your time I want the Marines. He left for bootcamp on Fathers day 2001 he graduated sept 14 2001. He was stationed at Twentynine palms Ca about 45 minutes from home. He came home every chance he got. He loved haveing a big family spending time with his 1 sister and 4 brothers. He showed his dad and myself alot of respect. I remember we found out he was smoking he would eat and then he would say be back in a minute moms. His freinds and him would get in the car drive around the corner to smoke. Its funny the day he died he sent everyone pics one set for mom and dad one set for his friends. but some how he got them mixed up we got the ones for his friends. after he died we showed his friends the pics and they were upset he didnt want us to know he was smoking we told his friends we knew for almost a year. The last time his dad and I saw Jason was the night before he left. He didnt want to go into the house because he had just gotten the smallpox and anthrax shots and he didnt want to be around the kids with it so his dad and I went outside to see him. we talked for about 15 minutes when he went to leave he wouldnt hug us because of the shots he shook his dads hand and then he grabed my face bent my head down and gave me a kiss on my forehead. Its funny because when I saw him in the caseket I did the same thing.Weve come to realize just what kind of person Jason was he had friends from all different walks of life. He never really had a best friend if you were his friend you were his best friend all of them. he never judged someone by their color or how much money they had. As all his friends have told us if Jason liked you then he loved you and he would do anything for you no questions asked.We all miss him we all love him dearly. I said something 8 years ago and I truley mean it i was blessed to have Jason in my life for 20 years I wouldnt change anything he wasnt perfect by no means but thats what made him a GREAT SON.

Some know that I have in my house 2 disabled persons...This is part of a commitment I mae with several others many years ago, which one day I will get into, but this post is about David.
David is older than I, but was born prematurely and was given either too much or too little oxygen and so has some cognitive defects. He can not drive a car and some times he has trouble adding money, but he keeps a fair checkbook. His father has past and his mother lives with his sister in Vermont, but has some significant dementia. He is not mentally ill, but he volunteers at Laurel House. He is able to work, but is on disability so he can not work too much or he will lose his benefits which include health insurance. At this point his limit is $960/month. Most of the jobs he gets, he gets on his own, his manner is pleasant and very sociable and sometimes his bosses forget that he is disabled. He worked at the front desk of the Y for a long time until it closed down and for the most part, they treated him well, save for one person, who wanted to punish him because he couldn't operate a computer, but that is past.
Laurel House has an employment program which gets people to work at simple jobs for various businesses for a small salary. David has had a couple of those jobs. The last one was at Marshall's and that came after the Y closed its doors. They had agreed to get him to work 4 hours a week on a Saturday and that was it. So he continued looking while trying to work at Marshall's, but the District Manager kept cutting his hours out as not essential. This was a measly $38 a week which was added to his $58 a week unemployment check. State said he made too much money for them to kick anything in except $10 in food stamps. So he kept looking. He loves animals and he takes care of a dog and 2 cats in our house and a bunch of birds of various kinds that he raises from chicks for a friend.
We found out that PetSmart was opening in Stamford and got him to apply, but they would only accept online applications so the Laurel House person helped him apply.
Weeks went on and we didn't hear from them and then they opened and he called, they never received the application, so he applied again went for an interview and has a job at the pet hotel.
In the meantime he still had the off and on again job at Marshall's and it was suggested that he leave it so he could work all his hours at PetSmart.
Most of the time Laurel House is very good, but they wanted this position to be there for other members in the future and were very strong about him keeping the job until August. Meanwhile the district manager was still playing his games with the hours.
Finally PetSmart wanted him to work a Saturday that he was not scheduled at Marshall's and you guessed it Marshall's changed their mind.
As they say, the fur began to fly and I was madder than a wet hen!
No way was he going to say no to a job that was going to give him his $900 a month for some stupid place that couldn't make up their mind.
David has a significant support group and all of us backed him as he wrote a letter explaining the multitude of time he had been removed from the schedule.
So he had a victory. PetSmart loves him, the animals there love him and he gets to make a living wage doing what he loves (its living since he is supported at our household).
Peace to all.

Paula D / My husband and I stopped at apartments on 2nd August for 5 nights. We had ground floor apartment which had just been refurbished which had been done lovely. Air conditioning was good as temperature was nearly hitting 40 in day and 30 in evenings The owner was brilliant very friendly and told us a lot about area and advise us where to go. It was central to bars restaurants and attractions. We will defiantly be going back.
Superb 29 July, 2018
No Comments 26 July, 2018

Mmmmmm, breakfast. These heated UGR's were our breakfast every morning at Camp Geronimo. There were no cooking facilities or running water so the cook was limited. I can't seem to find the definition of the acronym but let me tell you about them.
Here we have sweet rolls, sausage and gravy, once fried potato patties and scrambled eggs. A UGR's shelf life is 9 months and it's considered an A ration. If it's good, then it probably isn't a 'real' UGR. They are heated. The key here would be to eat right when they were served as the DFAC (dining facility) didn't have heat and it was about 20 degrees every morning.
I ate dried cereal. I didn't use the milk because I was told by every camp I went to, not to. It was a rich milk from Dubai. If there wasn't soy milk then I just ate my cereal dry. We could also make instant coffee, if you grabbed some hot water before the men started to fill bottles to wash and shave.
For lunch or anytime you were hungry there were MRES, which were heated with a pull tab and 1st Strikes which were pouches of a days amount of food. I didn't eat lunch. Around 3:30 I usually broke into my stash of skittles.
At 3:00 cook started the two big wood fires to make dinner outside. Dinner had to be cooked within his two huge pots or on a grill. The first night I was there, in my honor, we had twice fried chicken and rice. Cook was a master at rice. This was the first cooked meal the guys had since they deployed to this little base. The next night we had steak and one night we had 'Castaway Rice' which was a conglomeration of rice, spices chicken etc.
The chow was good, then again, I was starving.

Last night we helped Maverick leave this world. Although he had improved greatly, and was growing back his hair and gaining weight, too much damage had been done to his lungs. We were told by our vet that even though he had been improving, the more weight he gained and the bigger he grew, the less his lungs would support him.
This was already obvious. Even though we had everything he needed, including oxygen, his little lungs were so scarred and damaged from the pneumonia that they were already starting to fall behind.
I promised Maverick that I would fight with him until the bitter end as long as he wanted to be here. Last night he let me know that he was done, so with breaking heart we set him free. We met Lynn at Crossroads and she gave him that final injection.
I know I shouldn't be angry, but I can't help it. He was subjected to so many cold nights and his little body could not handle it. The pneumonia settled deep into his lungs before we even brought him home. It hurts my heart so badly as we could have kept him alive - he was improving in every way except his lungs. The x rays were clear that there was little to no hope of him ever living a comfortable life, so the ONLY thing that we could do was stop him from suffering.
Maverick enjoyed some really fun times where he bounced around and bucked and kicked and honked at the other horses. Mav never did whinny, he had his own little honk. The day before we set him free he had a borderline day. I told Matt that night that Mav was on the edge of whether he wanted to be here. But by late yesterday afternoon/early evening, it was clear that if I really loved him I would let him go. I had promised Mav, and although it hurt like nothing I can ever remember, we honored that promise.
Mav was laid to rest today. My heart has broken into more pieces than I ever thought possible. He was a gift from God and a message to the world. We need to stop the slaughter. My baby paid the price in a way no little one should ever have to. His mama lived through the horror of slaughter transport and knew the fear and smell of death, IF she even made it in one piece to the plant. They are reunited in death, and will never ever suffer at the hands of humans, although what a travesty that they had to die to get there.
I believe in my heart if we had the much needed enclosed trailer where we could have kept him warm, that Mav would have had a much better chance. We could have put him into a warm and healing environment all those nights we were stuck in WA waiting for paperwork.
The other three are fighting the same bug that Mav had, and are grateful for the vaporizers and all the blankets and supplies, as are we.
OUR MAILING ADDRESS HAS CHANGED!
PO BOX 233
GOLCONDA, NV 89414

I have a problem, and I'm not sure there is a solution. I'm David's favorite.
It's normal for kids to have a favorite parent, and I know it can fluctuate from time to time. I've tried to make it clear to Anna that I'm not bothered in the least if she loves her father or tells me how much fun she had doing something with him. I think it's wonderful. In fact, that's one of the things that I miss so very much – watching the two of them interact in a warm and loving way. It used to make me feel so good inside, and I had a sense of quiet pride about the love my family showed for each other. I still do, even though I don't get to see Peter's part of it regularly.
David, being a child with autism, is a unique situation. He has always had a fierce attachment to me, probably because I was with him most during his early years. I happened to be working out of home in those days, and then after his diagnosis, I took a third shift job so that I could be free during the day to take him to his special ed classes and work with him in our home. I learned to communicate with him long before he was verbal enough to make himself understood to most other people. Peter interacted with him as well, just not as frequently as me.
The result of all this is that David loves Mommy best. When it's time to go to Peter's house, David says no. When Peter brings David home, David is trying to open the car door before they're even in the driveway. He has a wonderful time with his Dad, and no major behavioural issues while he's there, but it's hurtful to Peter when he shows up and David immediately says (and loudly) "I can't go to Daddy's house."
It's been a year since Peter moved out, and that's an improvement (David used to sob and hold onto furniture when it was time to go with Daddy). I wish I could get him to just go with a smile. I've repeated to him each time that his words are "not nice", I've tried to get him excited about something he'll be doing at Daddy's – but I'm getting nowhere.
Does anyone have any suggestions? David loves his Dad very much. I just wish I could motivate him to show it more.

Wanda Luzzato was born on 6 March 1919, in Varese but her family was from Milan. She received her early music training from Ariodante Coggi (in Varese), who in the following years will be the mentor also of a young Uto Ughi.
Her mother, born Elsa Curti, was a singer - but never performed on the opera stage - married to a career officer, Angelo Vitali who left her as a war widow at only 28. She later remarried and changed her previous surname Vitali to Luzzato Carpi.
Wanda began playing the violin when she was about 3, and gave her first concert at 5. She was admitted to the Conservatory at a very young age and graduated when she was 12, thus becoming the youngest graduate of Alberto Poltronieri and apparently of all Italian Conservatories.

23-year old Alex D'Aleo passed away on a European trip in Croatia at a popular tourist spot. He was trying to jump from one boat to another when he hit his head.
The young Sydney man's friends and family, in particular his twin brother Lucas, have been grieving over his death. Lucas wrote on Facebook that he was blessed to have spent twenty three years with him by his side when they were fighting but the love between them was always there. He added that he was glad that they got to travel the world together before his death. He also wrote that hours before the accident took place, the boys were drinking beers and carrying on in the sun and that is what they did best.
Alex, a plumber, lived in the Sutherland area and was attending the yacht week in Croatia. Social media shows that the young tradesman was travelling through Europe with his friends. He had visited the international festival in Belgium and visited popular tourist destinations like Barcelona and Ibiza. He was on a four-month party tour of Europe along with his twin and friends.
The accident took place at Omis, 20 kilometres south of Split. His friends and he were at the annual Split Yacht Week festival when the fatal accident happened between two anchored boats. He drowned which caused his death. Several people jumped into the water but were unsuccessful at saving him. A police spokesman said that a member of the voluntary firefighting service recovered Alex's body.
During the European summer, Croatia is a hot spot where thousands of people come to the coast for sailing and to be a part of the full-of-life parties.
James Morrissey, who had met D'Aleo a week ago, was devastated at the news of his death and wrote on social media that his last memory of Alex would be him having the time of his life with his friends. He wrote, "RIP you legend."
Consular assistance will be provided to his family by the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade.
Parents, Cattina and Nicco, were consoled by family and friends at the family home in Taren Point. A family friend noted that Mrs. D'Aleo was devastated at losing her soon and that her kids were her world.
Just before starting the trip, Alex had written on Facebook that one day, life will flash before us so we have to make it worth watching.

Author’s Note: Sorry this chapter took so long in being posted. I had writer’s block for the past four years on this story as this chapter is by far the hardest one that I had to write about.
Faramir turned towards Mira as she approached his side. “Do not fear my father, Mira. Speak as you did this morning.”
Faramir turned towards his father and spoke, “Father, this is Mira.”
“Speak, Mira about the reason why your father is within my dungeons and had assaulted my son,” spoke Denethor, looking at her with a cold eye.
“I shall speak of the past abuses that my father Gwamyr had done to me. I was but a happy child when I was nearing my fifth season in this city. The night before I was to begin my cooking duties, mother was there tucking me in. The next morning, mother was gone. I asked father where she went to and he refused to say but ordered me to make breakfast for them. I knew not how to and I made the eggs burn. For that, I was punished.” Mira said, glaring towards her father before resuming her gaze to Denethor.
“What was the punishment?”
“This.” Mira pulled her hair away from her ears and approached Denethor. “My ears were as pointy as my friends’ ears are. I am the daughter of an Elf.”
Denethor looked shocked and wrote something down. “Continue, please?”
“I was ordered to clean the house up and make sure that lunch was ready by the time he got home that day. I cleaned the house till I grew weak from the blood loss and passed out. I was kicked awake by father and was ordered to make lunch for him and my brother Teonvan. My brother was ten years to my five years. I was used as a punching bag by both my father and my brother for anything that went wrong during the day or if the meal was cold or too hot. My father started to use a dagger on my back not deep just shallow cuts, till one day I infuriated him more than normal and he slashed my back with very deep cuts. I fled the house that night. I was only twelve seasons old at that time and I came here trying to see you for protection or at least have a safe place till my wounds healed. I was chased away from the castle; I assumed that the guards thought I was a beggar girl wanting a handout. I walked more or less stumbled away from the castle. I finally stopped at the well and drank some water before I heard a noise behind me and turned to see who it was but I was too dizzy to see exactly who was there as I fainted from the blood loss.” Mira took a deep breath and continued on with where she was at after waking up the next morning to the day she was retrieved by her father.
“What happened after you were brought back to your home?”
“Father treated me like he always did with a slap to the face and a kick to my rear with an order to cook dinner. I asked him if seven hundred gold coins would be enough to buy my freedom from him,” Mira stated, not looking away from the Steward.
“What did he say about that?” Denethor asked.
“He said ‘It depends, Mira…how many coins.’. I dropped the bag of 700 gold coins in front of him and told him how many that there was in the bag. I made dinner for them as the last thing I would do for them as my father told me that I had bought my freedom from him. But I was wrong. He asked me to sit and eat dinner with them before I headed off. I sat down and started to eat dinner when he knocked me out. When I came to, I went to the door to leave and he demanded to know where I was going. I told him I was leaving this house to join with the jeweler as I bought my freedom from you. He said bought your freedom. You didn’t buy your freedom from me. Son, did she pay us? My brother said no and they both looked at me like I was nuts. I knew I gave them the coins which set me free from them. But they lied to me about it. I was trapped in the home again a prisoner to my father again. I turned eighteen seasons old a few weeks later. I was planning on my escape via pleading with you for help. My father found out about it and beat me to the point where I was not able to move without pain. He left the house to go cheer you on with the others. I managed to get to your side but you refused to hear me out. Faramir heard my plea instead and just as soon as he asked me a question. My father came in and pulled me back to our home where he was about to plunge a dagger into me for what I did. I was nearly unconscious when the door was slammed open and a figure was standing there. After that, I found myself looking up at Faramir and in the field, before the mountains.” Mira stated.
Denethor looked over at Faramir. He turned to Gwamyr and frowned. “Continue?”
Mira continued with how she was sent on alone to Rivendell where Legolas and his friends found her and took her to Lord Elrond where he healed her of her illness and gave her sanctuary within his lands. She spoke about what they did the previous night with her slaying her brother to protect Elessar.
Gwamyr roared from his place. “You bloody witch! You will die for that! If I get free you will pay for that with your life, wench!”
TBC. . .

My world left me no choice but to become an actor. At 5 years old, I was a young boy living in a Mennonite world in the Midwest who was told by his brothers he was Russian and by his mom he was German. My grandparents spoke Yiddish, and my mom being a divorced woman with 4 children put me in a state-run orphanage run by Catholic nuns. If this sounds confusing to you, imagine how confusing it was to a 5 year old boy who was cast in the orphanage Christmas play as Jesus and later played Hansel in the Hansel and Gretel spring show at the ripe old age of 5 1/2. So, I started out in theatre as the Son of God and quickly became a witch slayer. Of course when my mother put me on the bus to go to the orphanage and I was greeted by nuns dressed in their black full length habits, which I knew nothing about, my immediate thought was my mother had shipped me off to be raised by witches.
For years I performed in every play at the orphanage as well as every play at the local school they sent me to. Soon it was either go to mass, Sunday School, or perform in a play somewhere. The choice seemed obvious to me. I never was a big fan of wafers and grape juice. High School was no different. Theatre was my home. It was where I went to make sense of who I was and why I was here. I found myself doing oral presentations in every class because I hated to write, and my teachers thought it was wonderful that I wanted to get up in front of the class. I think it also made it possible for them to give me a grade without spending 30 minutes reading themselves. I quickly learned that acting was something that took place anytime you had a willing audience and sometimes even when they weren’t so willing.
I was in everything in high school and knew that acting is what I was born to do. So, I went to college to be an actor. I designed my life to be an actor. I got jobs that would work with my anticipated career in acting, and I even married a woman with a degree in radio broadcasting. Of course she never used it and never even had much interest in the arts. Ironically her parents were German, and by the time I married her I had discovered my inner soul to be Jewish along with a lot of my relatives. So there I was with the final piece of the puzzle. Only a Jewish soul could want acting as much as I do. Well, that’s almost certainly not true, but you will have to humor me on this one. I have never looked back, and I have been in theatre and film almost every minute of my life. I have only three goals in life: To make sure my family is happy and healthy, to act for the rest of my life, and to never answer the question, “What religion were you brought up in?”

Monsters. They are all around us. We learn as children that there are monsters under our bed and in our closets. As we go through life, we find out how real they really can become.
I believe that all of our sorrows and pain are what shape us to be stronger and independent and by sharing our stories, together we make each other stronger and the days a little more bearable.
I met Richard in 2000 and we instantly had a great rapport. I had finally met the man of my dreams. He was funny, smart, and successful and also seemed to be very caring—what more could I want? Soon after we started going out, we were pretty much spending 24/7 together. We were having a great time in a great relationship. As time went on, alarm bells would go off in my head, but I always brushed it off. His showering of gifts was becoming too much and his obsessive behavior was straining at times. By 2003, odd things were happing in my life. My vehicle was being vandalized on a weekly basis, my business was being broken into, I was receiving disturbing phone calls all day every day, my mail was going missing, and I also had this lingering creepy feeling that I was always being watched.
After repeated meetings at the local police station, they basically told me until I end up in a body bag, there was not much they could do. I was mortified. Then they asked me to check on my enemies. Enemies? I had none, and I could not imagine one single person I knew who would do such things to me.
Stress really started to take its toll. I started smoking again and living on coffee. I was not sleeping and I worked sixteen hours a day. I lost so much weight, I was down to 105 pounds. Richard sure played his part of the loving partner to a tee! Soon friends and business associates were calling to let me know that a strange man was calling them to ask questions about me. Then male friends and customers were telling me that Richard would follow them outside and tell them never to come back. At this point, I thought I would die of embarrassment. At night, I would arrive home and my stuff would be in disarray; I would wake in the morning and stuff would be moved around. I thought I was going crazy. He even told me that maybe I was losing it!
By 2004, I was a mess. My relationship with Richard was something right out of a Hitchcock novel, and I was terrified. When I would bring certain situations to his attention, he would lose it and scream at me, or hit me, or throw things at me. One time he threw my glass coffee table. I decided it was time for my own investigation, and what I found out chilled me to the core.
The things Richard did to me are unexplainable to me. I still do not understand his behavior. The man who claimed to love me so much was very sick.
The alarm bells were ringing and I did not hear them, or maybe I did not want to. Not long after we started going out, he bought me a ring. I told him it was too soon for that; he was mad and flushed it down the toilet. He was convinced from that day on that there was someone else in my life. If any man talked to me, he would become violent and obsessive.
He stole my phonebook and called everyone I knew and wanted to know what the relationship was. He cut keys to my home and would come and go as he pleased. He checked my phone and email every day to see who I had talked to. He followed me everywhere I went and knew the dates and times of where I had been on a daily basis, and he would even go so far as to ask where I had been and then go there with a picture of me to make sure. He would take my garbage to his home and go through it. He cut keys to my parents’ home and was snooping through their home. This is just a partial list of how sick he is.
My breaking point came one night as I was sleeping. I awoke to hear someone in my home. I crawled to my bedroom door and looked out to see Richard rifling through my purse. I sat and watched him for about twenty minutes until he left and then I cried and could not believe what I had witnessed.
The next morning I told him never to come back and I wanted him out of my life, but he did not leave me alone. He kept harassing me, and a few weeks later I went out to wash my car and Richard followed me and cornered me in the wash and became erratic and crazy. He was screaming and hitting me, trying to put me in his car; he wanted to go for a drive. Lucky for me, a witness came to my aid. Richard jumped in his car and said the words I will never erase from my mind: “You will never get a good sleep again.” Absolutely chilling!
Richard has been arrested a few times over the years, eight to be exact. It amazes me that unless these people actually harm us, they are free to roam the earth. He still harasses me with phone calls, chilling in the night. I have caught him following me, and a while back he killed my cat. I feel like I will never really be free of him, but what I know for sure is that he will never break me, and as long as I can help just one person recognize the signs of stalking and abuse, I will make a difference because I am so much stronger than he will ever be!

The famous German composer, Ludwig van Beethoven was born 250 years ago. Did you know that his father made him work hard at his music when he was very young because he wanted Beethoven to be a child prodigy like Mozart and his sister? He was even woken up in the night for piano lessons! What else can you find out about his life and the music he wrote?
Beethoven wrote nine symphonies, which are large pieces for an orchestra. Watch this to find out more about his fifth symphony:

Originally Posted by BarrelracingArabian
wallaby-she is getting there she isn't a pro at it but she's getting back into the swing of it. I have seen those before but didn't know if they were good or not but if you could tell me more about them I would deffinately look into possibly getting one.
I really like mine. There are somethings I don't like about it, like I feel like it should release more, but Lacey doesn't mind it and she's one of those horses that WILL let you know if she doesn't like something, and since she hasn't started resisting it or anything, I have to assume that she thinks it releases enough. On the whole, I really like it. I've never had any issues with control while she was wearing it and I've even galloped in it (and she LOVES to gallop) without any issues. It's great for neck reining and it's also just fine for direct reining.
Is there anything else you want to know? :)

Frannie found herself at Cecil's, again. She thought perhaps she spent more time there than at the boarding house, lately. Cecil really was a great help with Nico, and even if she was tired and on her feet most of the day..she always enjoyed cooking for him.
"I suppose you heard," Cecil mentioned at dinner. "About Sasha."
"Sasha?" Frannie looked at him puzzled. Was it the baby? She hoped the baby was OK. She was certain now that she was carrying Gaspard's child.
"She said yes to Rhys. They took the plunge, evidently. Don't even think they got rings, but they're hitched." Cecil smirked.
"Tossers." Frannie couldn't take another bite of her alfredo. "What has gotten in to her?"
"Tell me about it, she's lost the plot. Completely." Cecil shook his head.
"You think he forced her into it?" Frannie winced.
"You couldn't force Sash into anything if you tried." Cecil just smiled and went back to chewing on a carrot.
"I should talk to her," Frannie nodded.
"Whats the point? What's done is done. We both know it won't last." Cecil's hand came down and touched Frannie's then. He took her hand then and kissed her wrist.
Frannie couldn't help but smile. She knew he wanted her to stay again, but she did have a room and she was paying for it, back in the boarding house. Really, she needed to use it.
we need to talk
7 hours ago

Out of 1,000+ people I was then chosen as a result of this to become one of 12 ambassadors. The next stage of the process was to meet Richard Branson in his Oxfordshire residence, it was a really surreal day to say the least. We had breakfast and a round table where he shared some great gems and answered our burning questions.
I knew I had to get a Watch to him but that day felt quite pressured, there were so many of his team around him and I let fear dictate what I would do instead of boldly just presenting it to him. That opportunity passed however as I had gone above and beyond with the initial pitch I was then chosen as 1 of 2 people to get one on one mentoring with Branson and to interview him in front of a live audience.

I know a couple who had lived independently for awhile and already most of what the needed. In fact some of the things they already had two of. Some people had asked them what they would like for a wedding present and said they didn’t want to give them what they already had.
On the invitations they stated that if they wanted to give a gift one suggestion was travel vouchers.
Published 13th December 2019

We took Jayden in early to hospital today. We were originally expected to get thereby 4pm to start hydration for chemo tomorrow but last night I emailed our oncologist with some concerns about illness in the family. Luke had been ill with a cold and I have been Feeling yuck with similar symptoms and was worried jayden would have something brewing. He told us to come in early and have him checked out.
As it happened last night Jayden had a terrible night and I could hear him all night very mucousy. He had a temp in the morning and was just generally not well. We took him in and explained what had been happening and they decided to wait till next week to start the next round. I wish it was never.
While we were there they took blood cultures to make sure the temp had nothing to do with a line infection and he had to do a PNA test (snot test). He hates these and I'm not surprised. They put a long tube down his nose and draw snot out to test. It's very quick but extremely stressful and he screams through the entire process. He knew he was getting it done when we started walking towards the building instead of going down the ramp we normally do. Before we even reached the door to the building he was crying and wouldn't walk in or get in the pram. Danny had to pick him up, he was so upset it was awful. When we got to microbiology that was it, he really knew it was happening and became even more upset. Luke was with us and very confused as to what Jayden was so upset about but soon found out and was a tad traumatized by the whole thing himself. We all were. Hate doing this stuff to him.
We then went back to his room as we had to be in isolation from everyone else because we are all sick with this cold now, danny included but not Layla. She went to school today and she never seems to get ill.
The doctor from the other day who jabbed jayden several times and still didn't get a vein but left him and i extremely traumatized arrived to examine him and Jayden took one look at her and was upset. I have to say so was I but wasn't quite as vocal about it. He wouldn't cooperate with her to do anything but just cried and moved away. I think since the other day he is back hating hospitals.
Danny and Luke had to leave to get Layla from school but jayden and I remained to wait for results of snot test and bloods. Not long after they left the doctor returned with the results of tests. The tests showed Jayden has a low grade virus and bloods are ok at the moment, nothing cultured. So we could go home.
We then rang danny to come get us and waited. Got talking to someone about chicago and at the mention of Procure. Jayden perked up and said " see nannA, see nann? We go see nann?", oh my goodness, he doesn't miss a beat. He misses Marianne from Procure so much it's horrible. We can't even talk about her in front of him because he wants to go see her and when we tell him he can't he cries. They were all so beautiful at Procure and we really miss them all heaps. Wish they weren't so far away.
We got home in time to make dinner and now everyone is in bed. Asleep. I should be too. I'm so tired.
I feel like I can breath a little better now knowing I don't have to put him through this torture tomorrow. Knowing that we have a few more days together.
How a day together becomes so damn important now. Every moment, cuddle, smile, word is so damn precious. I don't ever want to let any of it go. I feel like I'm holding on to It all so tight now that every muscle in my body aches.
I worry so much that the next time I allow them to do this we will lose him forever. I'm so very scared. I try not to think about it but how can I not. I'm just at a loss as to what to think. Its so nice to know we have more time, I wish I could have more.
I wish I could have my little well boy back. Not a day goes by that I don't wish that.
- Posted using BlogPress from my iPhone

Shah Rukh buries his differences with Nikhil Dwivedi, invites him to join his family in South Africa to watch the World Cup final
He was once a protege of Shah Rukh Khan, but then Nikhil Dwivedi apparently fell out of favour. After a while in the wilderness, Nikhil is back is SRK's good books and is currently in London with his mentor and his family and will accompany them to South Africa to watch the FIFA World Cup final.
Our source said, "There had been rumours for a while now that SRK and Nikhil were no longer friends. SRK had helped Nikhil during his debut film My Name Is Anthony Gonsalvis and even presented the film.
They had been friends for years, but around a year back there reports that SRK and Nikhil had parted ways Nikhil was no longer amongst the regulars at Mannat and was not even invited at SRK's parties.
Recently, Nikhil was also seen in the company of SRK's arch rival Salman Khan during an awards show and there were strong buzz that he had joined the Salman Khan camp. However, SRK invited Nikhil to London where he is currently holidaying with his family. He will accompany SRK and his kids to the FIFA World Cup."
Asked about his patch up with Shah Rukh, Nikhil said, "Yes I am currently in London with Shah Rukh. Our friendship is a personal affair and I really don't wish to talk about it."

|Please help support MarksFriggin.com by using these sites:|
(Sirius, XM merch and more)
(Just about everything)
Playboy Cyber Club
Howard started the show talking about how everyone is there live on a Monday morning. Howard said Benjy is wearing his Oscar outfit from last night. He said he can see side boobage. Howard said Lady Gaga was wearing something showing side boob. Robin said there were a lot of side boobs.
Howard said they have to rein that show in. He said it's too long and boring. Howard said the most exciting thing was Jennifer Lopez tripping over her own dress when she was leaving the stage. Howard said he has to admit he can't stand her. He said she just rubs him the wrong way. He said you wonder why she's even there. Robin said she thought of it and the people who are nominated are people whose movies no one saw and the people handing out the awards are people like that. Howard said she's so proud of those boobs. Howard said he just doesn't like her as a person. Howard said he has met her a few times and she's obnoxious. He said she runs away from him. He said just look at the guy's she's married. Howard said she can't stay married for more than 10 minutes. Robin said she thinks she's been married 3 times. Howard said she can't get along with anyone. He asked what that tells you. Howard said he just doesn't like her. Howard said he talked to her husband at a party once and she had to run away from him. He said she's a sow. He didn't know what a sow was though. Howard said she has to get over herself.
Howard said Jennifer Lopez went out of her way to diss him on Andy Cohen's show. He said she gave an ''Eww'' when they asked if she would fuck Howard Stern. Howard said he has no interest in her anyway. He said he wouldn't fuck her. Howard asked Robin to tell her to fuck off next time she sees her. Robin said she'll do that. Howard said that she has that stupid nickname too.
Howard said he was watching the Oscar's and it ran until 11:15. Howard said Lady Gaga got up and performed The Sound of Music. Howard said that JD told him it was really good. He said they could have opened the show and done the best supporting actor and some technical awards. Then cut out the rest of the horse shit. He said then you go to the songs and announce the winners. He said they could cut it down to an hour and a half or two hours.
Robin said they also show all of the people walking the red carpet. Howard said Dakota Johnson showed up with her mom Melanie Griffith. Howard said that her daughter was getting all of the attention. He said that Dakota was whining to her mother about not seeing her movie. Howard said it was great. He said he might have the clip. Howard said you have to see it. He said it might not sound good. Howard said he'll play it for Robin. Howard played the clip and Melanie said she can't see her daughter in something like that. She kept saying she won't see it so Dakota responded like a 2 year old saying that she doesn't have to see it. Howard said she was whining like a 2 year old. Howard said that's probably the first time her mother has ever talked to her that way.
Howard said that they all made their picks for the Awards and he and Robin got 3 right. He said Jon Hein got 4 right. Howard said they have video of Richard's guinea pig picking the best Actor. He said it's pretty funny but he wasn't right.
Howard said that American Sniper was so much better than Birdman. Howard said he will go back and watch that movie but not Birdman. Howard said Eddie Redmayne is good but he's kind of boring.
Howard said the easiest guy to play is Stephen Hawking. Howard said that it's a horrible disease but it's a lot easier than playing a sniper or doing what Steve Carell did. Howard said he knew they wouldn't win. He said they won't let anyone good win. Robin said J.K. Simmons won. Howard said that's right. Howard said someone said that they wanted him to win so they could see him thank Howard Stern. Howard said J.K. never said he was going to though.
Howard said he thinks that he'd rather be in a movie that made a ton of money like American Sniper than be an Oscar winner and in some movie that didn't make money.
Robin said that Neil Patrick Harris was making money jokes during the show and it was off putting. Robin said that she was wondering what that's all about. Howard said it's all about box office gross. Robin said it wasn't nice and it wasn't funny. She asked what the purpose of it is.
Howard said he woke up and got the results from FOX News. He said he likes to watch the hot chicks delivering the news. Howard said he watches that and MSNBC. He said he DVRs it so he can fast Howard through the commercials. Howard said they're aimed at people 65 and older. Howard said they're about diseases and he's a hypochondriac. Howard played a little bit of a commercial about asbestos and cancer. Howard said he has to grab the remote and fast forward through that stuff. He said he can't take it. Howard played a few more clips and stopped them after a second or two. He said he can't take it. Howard said it sounds like stuff Scott the Engineer has.
Howard said he thinks he's going to get that stuff when they plant it in his head. Howard played more clips and said there's one commercial where the guy who used to be on a soap opera comes on. It's William Devane that he's thinking about. Howard said that guy used to be an actor and now he's doing those commercials. Howard said they have the disclaimers at the end too. He said those are a bummer too. Howard played some of those.
Howard played a prank call the guys made to a restaurant using clips of Howard talking about an Italian meal he got delivered. The woman kept hanging up and telling him not to call there again. They went to break after that.
Howard came back and talked to Robin about Hozier for a short time. Howard said that he does have a good voice. Howard asked if he wrote this song. Robin said to her knowledge, yes.
Howard said that he was listening to a lot of music this weekend. He said that he went to see the play Fish in the Dark with Larry David the other night. He said that it's a great one. Robin said she just got tickets. Howard said she's going to love it. Howard said it's sold out already. He said that he didn't want to go after going to dinner. Howard said he told Beth that they can't leave. He said Beth just wanted to go home and go to bed and watch TV. Howard said he didn't know if they could get out of it. Howard said he bothered Lloyd Braun for tickets. Howard said that he's involved so he had to go. Howard said that the show is only an hour. He said they figured they could get out of it. Then they heard it's 2 hours and 50 minutes. Howard said the got there and they laughed their ass off the whole time. Howard said it's so funny. Howard said it makes no sense that he doesn't watch Curb Your Enthusiasm.
Howard said Rosie Perez and Tom Hanks' wife is in the play too. Howard said that's how they bill her in the playbill. Howard said it's actually Rita Wilson. Robin said it's Chet Haze's mom. Howard said that's right. He said the show is really great.
Howard said Mike Gillman from GroomingLounge.com is there. He said that they polled 40 hair stylists about people's hair and they named him the one with the best hair in America. Howard said that this is exciting. Howard said they had a few things they judged on. Howard said that he beat out a lot of people. Robin asked if he was a write in or was he on the list. Mike said he was on the list. Howard said they had people like Ryan Reynolds, Chris Hemsworth, George Clooney and others. He said that George was the first one to write to him and say that he thought it was bullshit.
Mike said Howard also beat out Scott Salem. Robin told him not to demean the award. Howard said this is the first time they've ever given out the award and they're smart to do this. Howard said that this is about your hair and not about your looks. Mike said that it's about the hair and that's it. Howard said people get hung up on his face and they don't understand what the award is.
Mike said that there are people who come out of the woodwork who say that he has a wig or something but he has to lay that to rest right now. Howard said that he can run his fingers through it.
Howard asked Mike to present his award to him. He wanted some music from Fred but Howard told him to just get to it. Mike said they were proud to honor Howard Stern with their Best Men's Hair award. He was repeating some of what they had already talked about so Howard had him move on.
Howard eventually got to the part where he makes his acceptance speech. Howard thanked his grandfather Saul. He said that he always had dark hair until his 90s. Howard said that he doesn't dye his hair. He said he wants to make that clear. He said he does have some gray but he has his own color and hair. Howard said that he'd like to thank his grandfather for passing that along to him. He said his hair was so black that he had to sit in the back of the bus. Howard said that it was so black that Kim Kardashian had sex with it.
Howard said if he didn't have that hair he'd look like a giraffe fucked Pinnochio. Howard said he wants to thank the other nominees who accepted their defeat. Howard said that he'd like to thank his agent Don Buchwald who sticks with him. Howard said Robin too. He said that she sticks with him as well. Howard said he'd like to thank God too but then he thinks about how he gave him that face along with that hair. Howard said he'd like to thank Toni Coburn as well. He said she does his hair. Howard said that she has been around through may styles. Howard said his hair is trending right behind Robin's tits. Howard said he'd like to thank, most of all, the people from GroomingLounge.com.
Robin said that Howard has been going on for quite a while. Robin asked where the music is. Howard said that he turned Fred's feed off so he can't hear it. Howard said kids can come from nothing and if you work hard and put your nose to the grindstone you can win best hair too. Howard said that he wants to dedicate his award to all of the people in the military.
Howard said he doesn't have any gray in his pubes either. Howard said he's said that Joan Rivers isn't there to see this win. Howard said that he was just thinking about how Joan Rivers wasn't mentioned in the In Memorium at the Oscars. Howard said that's bullshit. Howard said that he's up for any endorsement deals that are offered. He said maybe a Head and Shoulders endorsement or something like that.
Howard said they should make a revival of the play ''Hair'' and have it only star him. Howard said that he feels honored by this award. He said he's accepting it on behalf of his hair. Howard asked if he is eligible for this next year. Mike said that they hope that he continues to take care of his hair and hope that he can win it again. Howard thanked him for the award and asked if he had anything to say before Gary kicks him out of there. Mike said he's been listening since the Washington DC days. He said it's an honor to give him the award. Howard thanked him as they were taking Mike out of the studio. They went to break after that.
Howard came back and said that Seth Meyers is there. Howard said it's the one year anniversary of his show Late Night with Seth Meyers. Howard said they're celebrating one year of his TV show. Howard said that they have to reflect for a minute. Howard said the fear on his part was that he wouldn't be a good interviewer but he turned out to be a good one. Seth said it's not as hard as he thought it would be. He said they try to have good guests on the show. He said that he'll bring some names to the talent department and they run names past him to book guests.
Seth said that he'll turn down people from time to time. He said he'll make a sound like ''Ehh..'' Howard said that's not that he doesn't like them, they're just not the kind of guest they want to talk to. Howard asked if he has friends who can't get on the show and they call him personally. Seth said that he thinks he just has his friends on. He said he'll say yes in the talent meetings. Howard said he has to put his show ahead of the friends. Seth said they're on so late it might not matter.
Howard said what he loves about the 12:30 time slot is that they can have quirky guests on the show. Seth said the hardest thing is that they have less slots for those people than he thought they would.
Howard asked if Seth was checking his ratings against Craig Ferguson. Seth said he doesn't worry about that. He said that he lets the network handle that. Seth said that Craig came on his show and he was very nice about the whole thing. Howard said he doesn't get that because he was so obsessed over ratings.
Robin asked about this new guy coming in. Seth said that James Corden is a lovely guy. He said he never saw the play he was in but he heard he was outstanding in it. Howard asked why Seth is a better host. Seth said in the end if you're making a choice over patriotism then he's the guy. Howard asked if he has a plan to compete against him. Seth said that once you're going you don't have time to do that. He said you're caught up in putting the show together. Seth said that they had 3 weeks to put his show together but James has months. Seth said if he had too much time that would have driven him crazy. Howard asked why they're giving him months to prepare. Seth said it's hard to say if it's good or bad until they're done with it. He said that maybe they'll say they played it perfectly.
Howard asked Seth if he'll watch the show at all. Seth said he might watch it a little bit. He said he doesn't have a lot of free time to watch. Howard said James is kind of chubby so he can say that. Seth said he's a good physical comedian so that's all he'll say. He said that when you do have competition you know you won't be doing the same show. Seth said no one will be sneaking into meetings for the other guy. Seth said that would shine a light on how much more talented he is if they did that to him.
Howard said Seth's career has been pretty amazing. He said he did Saturday Night Live and went right into his own show. Howard asked if Lorne Michaels is involved with the show a lot. Seth said he's not that much.
Howard asked if it kills him to not be at SNL. Seth said it was hard at first but he's doing okay now. Howard said Fred Armisen isn't there on his show that much but he is there once in a while. Seth said it's great to have him there when he is there.
Howard asked how many hours he puts in there. Seth said that it's not as hard and stressful as SNL was. Howard said the nice thing is that they can fuck up on a night on his show but you can't do that on SNL. Seth said that he poached a guy from SNL who helped him write his Weekend Update stuff. He said he's really funny. Seth said they write during the day and they all submit jokes and he goes through them all and picks the ones he likes. Howard asked if they ever ask him for an explanation for why it's not funny. Seth said not with the monologue but with other bits they will.
Howard asked Seth if he ever has a guest who he just wants to sit down with for the full hour and not do all of the bits and monologue. Seth said they could do that. He said that tomorrow is the final episode of Parks and Recreation so they're going to have Amy Poehler on. Howard said Seth is really close to Amy. He said if he were his wife he'd be worried. Seth said that they were like husband and wife for a long time but his wife and Amy get along very well. Howard asked if he ever had sexual feelings for her. Seth said when he was in Chicago he thinks everyone wanted to do that. Howard asked if he ever fantasizes about her when he's masturbating. Seth said he can't do that with someone who has a cutting sense of humor.
Howard talked to Seth about the 40th anniversary of SNL. Seth said there was something about that where he felt everyone left their baggage at the door. He said that people weren't looking to get back at anyone or anything like that. Howard said that no one seemed to be upset and people like Eddie Murphy showed up. Seth said that it seemed like he enjoyed being back. Howard said a lot of criticism was that he wasn't all that funny. He said Dan Aykroyd was even saying that he could have gotten up and done something like riffing on the audience or something. Howard asked if it struck him that he wasn't doing something funny. Seth said that it's a lot harder to be funny when you're built up like he is. He said he gets the choice but he wishes it was something else. Howard said he is a funny man and something could have been done. He said he was shocked at his lack of preparation. Seth said that they did pitch ideas to him.
Howard said Norm MacDonald decided to reveal what was going on with Eddie. He said that he didn't want to do the Bill Cosby bit that Keenan ended up doing. Howard said that might be Eddie's story to tell though. Seth said he thinks that's Eddie's story to tell. He said that he probably wouldn't have done what Norm did. Seth said that Norm played it in a very Norm MacDonald way. He said he thinks his fans are happy he did it.
Howard said the show was spectacular. Howard said that the studio where Seth shoots his show turned into a green room. Howard said they had booze in there and things like that. Seth said that it was more about the people going there after their bit. Seth said that he sat there but he didn't set the whole thing up. Howard said that must have been a great room to be in. Seth said it was outstanding. Howard asked if people were trying to out funny each other and things like that. Seth said it was a lot more about people being happy to see old faces. Seth said that it was a sweet interaction kind of thing.
Howard said it would have been great if they had an after party there. Seth said everyone was leaving after the show though. Howard said that it could have been great though. Seth said if there were cameras there they may not have been that comfortable there.
Howard said there was talk of an after party so where was that. Seth said it was at the Plaza Hotel. Seth said that Jimmy Fallon got up on stage where they had instruments and it started with Belushi and Aykroyd performing. Then McCartney got up and then it was Taylor Swift and all of these other people. He said that they had Michael Bolton who got up and brought the house down. Seth said it was just ''how do you top this'' and then Prince got up and did ''Lets Go Crazy.'' Howard asked if he kept the lights on. Seth said he did. Howard told the story about seeing Prince and having him turn the lights out.
Howard asked Seth if he's happy with his show after this first year. Seth said he is. Howard asked who his favorite guest was over this year. Seth said that there are so many great guests. He said Kanye West is very interesting. He said there are people like Joan Rivers, Kathy Griffin and people like that who have joke after joke. He said you just sit there and let them go.
Howard asked if it's the best when a guest doesn't need him sitting there. Seth said it's great when you can transition into the audience.
Howard asked Seth about going out to the Y to interview Allison Williams. Seth said he's done interviews there before. He said that he did want the whole thing to be okay with her. He said that he got the question about her dad out of the way right away. Howard said that what's going on with Brian Williams is crazy. Howard said he doesn't have to make these stories up. Seth said the great story tellers he knows embellish a bit as time goes on. He said he thinks that people want to see that someone has a sense of humor and that's what people call him out over. Howard said that he thinks he's been punished enough. Howard said he really doesn't care. He said if he reads the news it's irrelevant to him.
Seth said if they bring him back they'll all find out right away if people care. Robin asked if they have done any jokes about it. Seth said they have not. Howard asked if NBC asked them to lay off. Seth said they didn't and they never hear anything like that. Seth said there are good jokes to be made but if it's someone you believe in then you give them the benefit of the doubt. Howard said he felt bad for Allison when he interviewed her. Howard said it has to be unexplainable to her why her dad even did this. He said she has to make a statement. Seth said he thinks that she was happy to be able to talk about how she's feeling.
Howard asked if he talked to Alison about her ass eating scene in Girls. Seth said that she left nothing out in that scene and they probably spent 25 minutes talking about it. Howard said that's a graphic scene with her getting her ass eaten out. Seth said that the scene was very well written too. He said that he did gasp when he saw it though.
Howard said he found that very exciting. Howard said he's never eaten a woman's ass. He said that it was very interesting to see.
Howard asked Seth if he's happy doing what he's doing. Seth said he is. He said that the schedule is great and they enjoy doing it. Seth said that he's home by 9 at night. He said he gets in at 9 and gets home around 9. He said they only do 4 days a week though.
Howard asked if he was bummed out when Craig Ferguson told him that he was going to burn out on the show. Seth said he talked about that back stage too. Seth said his biggest fear was burn out. He said Craig had been doing it 10 years now. Seth said that he was talking about doing this show and how much easier it is and Craig said that's because it's the first year. Howard said he thinks that Seth is happy doing it and he doesn't think this is his life. Seth said he is working on some other things. He said that they're working on a documentary show for IFC with Fred Armisen and Bill Hader. Seth said that they'll do half hour fake documentaries that are funny. He said they'll be dated back in time and they'll be on different topics.
Howard asked if he'll ever write a movie. Seth said he's not sure about that. He said it's laborious. Seth said that it's hard to get it made too. He said you might have to get a certain person to play a part and that might be impossible to get.
Howard said that they asked homeless people if they had questions for Seth and they did. Howard played some audio of those questions. One guy asked what his secret to success is. Seth said that he thinks he works hard. Howard played another one where a guy asked if they can have Jay Z on. Seth said he would love that.
Howard asked Seth about what he thought of the Oscars and Neil Patrick Harris. Seth said he thought he did a great job and he used all of his skill set. Howard said that he thought Birdman was a piece of shit. Seth said he liked the acting performances in that movie. Howard said that there are other movies that are better. Seth said that he was impressed with the acting. He said there are scripts he liked more but he liked it. Seth said he knows that just because it won an Oscar he's not going to like it any more. Seth said he liked Grand Budapest Hotel. Howard said he hasn't seen that one. He said the name alone makes him not want to see it.
Howard said he went to see ''Fish in the Dark'' and it was great. Seth said he can't wait to see it. Seth said that his favorite part of the SNL anniversary show was when Jerry Seinfeld and Larry David got together and had a very funny conversation.
Howard said that anniversary show was great. He said that Joe Piscopo was there. Seth said he got up and did an insane Bruce Springsteen impression at the after party. He said he was excellent. Howard said that people downplay some of that stuff but he had a good run at SNL. Seth said that the only memory of that time is Eddie. He said people forget about how good people like Piscopo were.
Howard asked Seth if he was irked by the Rolling Stone rundown of the SNL cast. Seth said that a lot of people pretended that they didn't care. Howard said he thinks that Dan Aykroyd was the best. He said that he was great with Belushi but he was able to collaborate with everyone. Seth said that you have to be a super utility player when you're on SNL. He said he thinks that Norm was a top 20 guy too. He said Norm was great in sketches too. Howard said he seems not to care. Seth said the Burt Reynolds thing is so good that people would stay to watch the rehearsal.
Howard said Aykroyd said he hated being the anchorman on Weekend Update. He said that he did have some great stuff in that too though. Seth said that he thinks Lorne couldn't have been happier about that night.
Howard said Seth is celebrating his first anniversary. Howard asked if they're having a special week of shows. Seth said they are not. He said that they are only at 1 while SNL is at 40 so it doesn't seem that big of a deal.
Seth said some people think that they have too many SNL people on the show but the people he worked with have a lot of stuff going on. He said it would be weird not to have them on.
Seth congratulated Howard on the hair thing. Robin and Howard said that Seth has nice hair too. Howard asked why J-Lo was at the SNL thing. Seth said she was a musical performer. Howard wrapped up with Seth and went to break.
Howard took a call from Jim from Raleigh who asked if he thinks Bill O'Reilly will get fired over his Brian Williams-like stories. He wondered if he's going to be fired. Howard said he doesn't think that it's the same thing and he won't be fired. He said no one cares.
Jim said he's happy for Howard's hair win. He said that he'd like to get him a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. Howard said he doesn't want that. He said you have to pay for your own star. He said it's ridiculous. Jim said maybe someone else like Baba Booey can get one. Howard said he has the real award. He said he has everyone in the country wanting to hire him and he has fans.
Howard said he was thinking about Cheap Trick over the weekend. He said this is a band that doesn't get its due. Howard said he was sitting around over the weekend painting and listening to music. Howard said he put on Cheap Trick's ''If You Want My Love'' is a great song. Howard said when he likes a song like that it means other people should too. Howard said he thinks everything revolves around him. Howard said he thinks that the Oscars should have been about him.
Howard had Fred play that song he was talking about. Fred played a version that Howard didn't want. Howard said it's a great song. Howard said it's really good. Howard let it play for a while. He said the song is inspired.
Howard said he was listening to the Rolling Stones over the weekend too. He said when he dies that's what he's going to miss most. Robin said he can't miss anything. She said that he can't miss it if he isn't conscious. Howard said that he will miss it. Howard had Fred play the Rolling Stones ''Rocks Off'' from Exile on Main Street. He said he doesn't want to miss hearing that song. Howard said guys like that make it joyous to be in the world. Robin said all artists do. Howard said that really is good. Howard said he gets all charged up from that.
Howard said that they talked about the academy awards. He said he wants to mention a few other things. Howard said he has some email to read in a second. Howard said they had Big Foot in there with his fiancee Danielle. Howard said they asked them what their wedding would be like. Howard played a clip that they put together to make it sound like they were marrying each other. Howard said that was very sweet. Robin said that was real love when they were in there. Howard said they could make a big deal out of this wedding and turn it into a special.
Howard said Big Foot was making all kinds of weird noises in there. Howard said it sounds like jungle noise. Howard played some clips that they had isolated. Howard asked what they sound like. Robin said it sounds like a panther.
Howard played a clip of someone out on the street asking people what animal that sounded like to them. They were saying a pig and things like that. Someone said it was like a hippo. One guy said Sasquach. Howard said it doesn't sound human. Howard said Big Foot can't say the word baton. Howard played a clip of Richard trying to get him to say it. He kept repeating something that wasn't even close.
Howard said they have a clip of celebrities trying to say Gary Dell'Abate's name. Howard played that and it was a bunch of people destroying his name. Howard said even his first name gets difficult at times. Howard said that's great.
Howard said there's a guy in the email who said that he will stick by him even if he only does a day or two a week. Howard said he got some praise on Wednesday. He said that they loved Big Foot and his girlfriend. Howard said some people hated it too. Howard read both the love and the hate letters. Some people said they were throwing up hearing the interview.
Howard said they had some kids reading their email too. Howard played a clip of a kid reading some feedback they got about Ass Napkin Ed. Howard said they got some praise for the Hall and Oates interview.
Howard took a call from Bobo who said he had a nightmare over the weekend. He said he went to the dentist and they told him he has periodontal disease. Howard said that's gross. Howard said he uses The Doctors Brush Pick. He said he cleans his mouth out with those. Howard said he brushes but these are more important to his regimen. Howard said it picks out all of the junk in his teeth. Howard said he has healthy teeth and gums.
Howard said that when Bobo goes to the dentist they use the same drill the use on his hair plugs. Howard let Bobo go after that and played a Bobo theme song and then a bit about Ronnie and his partying.
Howard said he hates hanging up on Hanzi but he has other things to get to. Fred played a moose sound and a Caribou sound while Hanzi was snoring. Howard said it kills him to hang up. He said Hanzi lives in his parent's basement and he's exhausted from cleaning that up. Howard said that he has to hang up.
Howard hung up on Hanzi and got to a clip of an ABC reporter having someone yell out Baba Booey in the background. Howard played the clip and the reporter was wrapping up when someone yelled out Baba Booey twice. Howard said that was pretty great. Howard said Lindsay Lohan's lawyer got Baba Booey'd on camera too. Howard played a clip of that. A guy walked by as she was being interviewed and just said Baba Booey twice. Howard said that the guy just went about his business. Howard said it's pretty awesome.
Howard said that there are still tickets available to see the taping for America's Got Talent next week. Howard said they're doing it in New Jersey again. Howard said he asked them not to do that over in Jersey last year and they complied with his wishes. He said not this year. Howard said they have to tape late over there. Howard said he's not thrilled about that. Howard said he should have asked to be choppered over there.
Howard said once he's there and working he's in a good mood. He said he will get to see Howie Mandel over there. Howard said he gets to see people he never gets to see. Howard said that when they're all there they're fine. Howard said he'd never run into Heidi Klum anywhere if he didn't do that show. Mel B for sure. Howard said other than Howie who does the show. Howard said he wonders if there will be a happier Nick Cannon now that he's divorced. Howard said he could tell that he was miserable. Howard said he saw a guy who seemed kind of withdrawn and mopey. Howard said that he thinks he'll be a different guy now.
Howard said that Nick is dating that Nicole Murphy chick. Robin said she saw that Billy Bob Thornton got married again. This is his 6th marriage. Howard asked if it's all of the women in the world who are fucked up or him? Howard said he'd give him some advice and tell him to slow down a bit.
Howard said he's going to request that his dressing room not be next to Nick's this season. He said he doesn't want to hear all of the fucking. Howard said that Howie will be roaming the halls looking for people to torture.
Howard said Riley Martin was deep in thought last week. Howard played a clip of Riley talking about his deep thought and what it was about. He was slurring his words a bit and let out some odd noise that sounded like a belch in the middle of a sentence.
Howard said his favorite moment was when Riley asked for the listeners to send him codeine. Howard played that clip next. Riley had a caller on the line asking if he takes codeine. Riley said if he has some extra then send him some. He told him to email Eron through his web site.
Howard played another clip of Riley talking about dealing with Howard Stern and the aliens. Howard said it sounds like someone already sent Riley too much codeine.
Howard said they asked Riley if the aliens have a ''happy birthday'' song. Howard said Riley sang them a song and they took that song to a linguist who said that it doesn't make sense because the words don't repeat like they do in a children's song. Howard played a clip of the linguist talking about that and basically saying that Riley's song is bullshit.
Howard took a call from Jeff the Drunk who asked what happened to Eric the midget at the Oscar's. Howard said he was mentioned in the Memorium thing. Howard said he has tape. He said they didn't mention Joan Rivers though. Howard said Jeff wasn't paying attention. Jeff said that's bullshit. Howard said that they did. Howard asked Gary if he has the clip. Gary said he's looking for it. Howard said he has it now. Howard played a clip of some names being read and they had edited in Eric's name. Jeff said he missed that. Howard told him to pay attention.
Howard said he has a couple of things to play. He said he has Bobby Knight yelling at the fans. He said he has all kinds of clips. He said he has Vin Diesel singing Karaoke. Howard played that one first. Howard said Robin is better... maybe not. Howard said that he's not sure why he keeps posting all of this stuff. Howard said they say that's what Paul Walker listened to when he slammed into a wall. Howard said it's better than Yoko. Howard said that he doesn't watch Fast and Furious but he likes Riddick.
Howard said Afroman punched out a girl on stage. Howard said the shocking thing is that Afroman was on stage. Howard said he only had one hit song. Howard said the clip is disturbing but great. Howard said he socks this woman right in the face. He said he punched her hard too. He said that he apologized but it was sort of lame. Howard played the clip of Afroman's apology. Howard said he really is a one hit wonder. He hit her once and she went right down. Howard played more of the clip and Afroman was explaining why he did it and how he thinks it was wrong. Howard said that was from TMZ. He said he's not sure how they get that stuff and get it so quickly.
Howard took a call from a guy who said that Taco the Guinea Pig made some good picks. Howard said you can see that on HowardStern.com
Howard took a call from Speech Impediment Man who asked what he thinks about that guy Kyle Drago playing Aquaman. Howard asked if comic books are his whole life. Speech said no. Howard said that guy seems to be a good pick. He said he doesn't know him that well. He said he knows him from Game of Thrones but that's about it. Howard said he had dark hair but Aquaman had blonde hair. Howard said that if you live underwater then all of the color would change. Howard said it seems right. Speech said he thinks it would be cool to be Aquaman. He said something else that was kind of hard to understand. Howard said he doesn't understand one word he's saying. He said he sounds like he lives underwater. Fred and Howard did their impressions of Speech for a short time.
Howard asked Speech if he tells people he has a speech impediment or does he just talk. Speech said he's been pulled over and they wonder if he's drunk. Howard asked why they would pull him over for his speech. Howard said he's such a liar. Speech said he'll come home at 3 in the morning from a comedy show and he'll get pulled over. Howard said he doesn't do comedy. Speech said he does too. Howard asked what his biggest pay day was. Speech said he once got $150 for one night. Speech said that was a place about 50 miles from where he lives.
Howard asked to hear his best joke. Speech said he went to the doctor and said his eye hurts when he has sex. The doctor told him ''Jeff, that's only the pepper spray.'' Howard chuckled. Speech told some other jokes and Howard asked if he gets them from a joke book. Speech said he doesn't. Howard asked if he tells stories. Speech said he does that too. Robin wondered who is hiring him. Speech said he's worked with Shuli. Howard asked who the biggest act is that he's worked with. Speech said he opened for Joe Rogan back in 1994. Speech said he did a movie and The Unknown Comic produced it.
Howard said Shuli says that the club owners cut Speech off at the bar because they think he's drunk. Howard said that he has to go. He and Fred did more of their impressions of Speech and Howard was about to let him go. Howard asked if he does like 20 minutes. Speech said he does. Speech said he needs the Ronnie Mund Block Party back. Howard said he's sure he does. Howard let Speech go and said he is a sweet guy.
Howard said they should start their own rumors about how they saw him break dancing. Howard said that this is a legitimate movement too. He said he had to take a break after that.
Howard said he got the label off. Howard said it feels good now. Howard said the shirt is cashmere. He said it's a lot of fucking money. Howard said JD cut his shirt and ruined it. JD asked where the hole was. Howard said Michael J. Fox could cut the hole better. Robin said Stevie Wonder could cut it better. JD said he didn't do it.
Howard said that JD comes over and he asked him to cut the label off. He said he cut it and then he goes home and he has a big hole in his sweater. Howard said he's a dick head. JD said he didn't cut into the fabric. He said he knows how to cut a tag off a shirt. Howard did his impression of JD and goofed on him for a short time. Howard said it must be harder to speak than he thinks it is.
Howard said that Ralph had to take his shirt to get fixed. He said that these guys insist on putting labels everywhere. He asked them to please stop with that.
Howard said they went out on the street and asked people if they had to cancel a parade would it be the Chinese New Year or St. Patrick's Day Parade. Howard played the clip of Shuli asking people about that and quite a few people said that it should be the Chinese New Year parade. One guy said that he thinks that the St. Paddy's day parade should be shut down. He had a long explanation for why that is. Howard said he likes that guy. He said it proves you don't need to make any sense in the end.
Howard said he thinks this next clip is really good. Howard said this guy named Stark has a radio show and it must be on the internet. He said they curse a lot in the clip. Howard said this guy had Bobby Brown's nephew on the show and he refuses to talk about Bobbi Kristina so the host goes off on the brother because that's the only reason they're having him on. Howard played the clip and this guy Stark asks the guy about Bobbi Kristina and he says that he can't talk about that. It quickly broke down into name calling. Stark was calling the guy names and there were some N-words and F-words thrown around.
Howard said he's not sure what that was about but it was entertaining. He said there was a lot of the N-word being thrown around. Howard said the show airs on ABC Family according to someone there.
Howard said he has a bunch of songs. He said Little Mikey did a whole thing. He said it was about her tits. Howard played that and Robin said she thought she had heard that one before. Howard said that's hot off the press. Howard said that there was one that Psych did that was similar. Howard said he has a new one from Eli Braden too. Howard played that next. Howard said he thought the word ''twat'' in that one was kind of harsh. Robin said that it's not bad in a song.
Robin said that she wanted to do some news. Robin was going to get to that but Howard and Gary were talking about some stuff that they were going to do tomorrow. Gary said they have a short visit from Mr. Skin tomorrow but other than that they're open.
Howard said he thought that chick Margot Robbie is really hot. Howard said that she was at the Oscar's last night and she's really hot. Howard said that she's been naked in some things and she is frighteningly beautiful. Howard said she has a flawless face. Howard said that Bradley Cooper had to have fucked her in Wolf of Wall Street. Robin said that was Leo DeCaprio. Howard said he had to have fucked her. Howard said he thinks Bradley crashed the set of Wolf of Wall Street just to fuck her. Howard said that he loves Bradley but he has to tell him to stop with his mother at these award shows. Howard said he should have his girlfriend there with him. Howard said only a guy in show business can get away with that. Howard said the girlfriend sits on the other side of the mother. Howard said the girlfriend would be like ''N-word please'' if that was a regular guy.
Howard said there's that other chick Behati Prinsloo who is with Adam Levine. Howard said they're like the best looking couple he's ever seen. Howard said he wants him on the show but only their show. Howard said he's the one who had them on when Maroon 5 was nothing. Howard said he should refuse to talk to anyone. Howard said one of those late night shows interviewed Derek Jeter's girlfriend Hannah Davis. Howard said she is on the cover of Sports Illustrated and she's just about showing her vagine. Howard said that if they show it then it's over but if they don't and they almost show it then it's okay. He said people are freaking out over that picture. Howard said she's really hot too. Howard said it's most important to be the most hot. Robin said he should put a list together. Howard said that Hannah changed her name to ''Behotter'' and Robin should be ''Behottest.'' Howard said that they're all hot.
Gary said he found an article from November where they say that Will Smith was photographed with Margot. He said they have denied having an affair. Howard asked how he can't have an affair? He asked how anyone could blame him for that. Howard said Jada looks good these days too. He said she's on Gotham. Howard made some jerking off noise talking about Margot Robbie. He introduced himself as ''Beugly''.
Robin got to the rundown of the Academy Awards. Robin had some audio clips and some stories about the winners. Robin had some audio of Patricia Arquette, Common, John Legend and others from various award winners. Robin had some audio of Lady Gaga singing at the Academy Awards. Howard played that and Fred played Yoko yelling over that. Robin said that Glen Campbell wrote a song and Tim McGraw sang the song last night at the Oscars. Howard said this was the last song Glen wrote before he lost his mind. Robin had some audio of that song too. Howard said he should have won for that song. He wrote it before he got Alzheimer's. Howard said that is such a cruel disease. Howard said there is so much cruelty in this world. He said it makes you wonder why there's so much. Robin had some audio of Sean Penn making a comment that had some people upset. He made a comment asking who gave this guy his green card when he read that Birdman won. Robin said that this was the second year in a row that a Mexican director won. Howard read a live commercial after that.
Robin read about how John Travolta is continuing to be creepy. Robin said he was brought out to announce an award with Idina Menzel and he was rubbing her face and got really close to her. Robin said he also did that with Scarlett Johansson on the red carpet. Howard said dudes should know that women don't like that kind of crap. Robin said guys are out of their minds. Howard said that even he knows that and he's a douche. Howard said when it comes to women he knows not to put his hands on them. Howard said he never even puts his hands on Robin even though she'd love it.
Robin read a story about some men who were arrested in Saudi Arabia for dancing at a party. Robin said this is against the law in this part of Saudi Arabia. Howard said they could make a Footloose movie about that. He said at the end they'd behead the Kevin Bacon character. Robin read about what they were arrested for. Howard said the movie would have a song called ''Head Loose'' and he thinks he can get Kevin Bacon to do it.
Robin had some audio clips of some politicians that she had Howard play. Howard did another live commercial read after that.
Robin read a story about George Patacki talking about how ridiculous some of the things they're arguing about these days are. He said he wants to concentrate on the real issues.
Robin read that another American citizen is being held by ISIS. Robin had some audio of a guy talking about that and how any parent would want the government to do whatever it can to get their child back. He said he knows that they can't pay a ransom. Howard and Robin spent a little time talking about that.
Howard took a call from a woman who asked if he has seen John Legend and if he thinks that he wants to poke himself in the eye with his wife talking so much in interviews. Howard said there are some wives who are annoying. The caller said that they were watching and they wanted to poke themselves in the eye watching it. Howard said he doesn't see him that much so he's not sure about that.
The caller asked how the cats are. Howard said they are doing fine. Howard said they have Bluebell in their apartment. He said that she's a great cat. Howard said that she is so fun. Howard said she follows you around like a dog. Howard said she doesn't get along with the other cats. He said she might get along with other pets so they're going to have a woman with some other pets take her in. Howard said Bluebell is the best. He said she watches TV with him and she watches intently.
Robin said that she'd like to put the word out that if you are going to feed feral cats then get them spayed or neutered. Howard had Robin singing some Sound of Music stuff and he asked how that's the same person who did the Whitney Houston songs. He played some of her singing ''I Will Always Love You''.
Robin read a story about Bobby Brown's attorney saying that the boyfriend of Bobbi Kristina has been banned from her bedside. Robin said that he was offered the opportunity to do that but he declined the terms of that visit. Robin said meanwhile they reported that Bobbi's breathing tube was replaced with a tracheotomy. Robin said that she's struggling to stay alive. Robin said they are also investigating this criminally because she had taken drugs in the months before the incident. Howard did a live commercial read after that.
Howard took a call from a guy who said Robin has a very pretty voice. Howard said she has a knack for show tunes. The caller said he liked all of the nominees in the Best Picture category. He said something that Howard zoned out on so Howard let him go.
Howard took a call from Mariann from Brooklyn and played her a new theme song. Mariann talked over the whole song so Howard didn't hear what she was asking. Mariann had to repeat herself and mentioned that the SNL On Stern special was great. Mariann asked Howard if it's true that Whalerock took Howard on. Howard said that is true and they are doing work for the web site. He said you can expect to see that soon. Howard let Mariann go after that.
Robin read about a study that was done that found that washing dishes by hand can cause less allergies than washing in a dishwasher.
Robin said they say that breast feeding can improve a baby's immune system. Robin said that it affects the bacteria in a baby's system. Howard said that's so gross. He said he's glad his mother didn't breast feed him. Howard said he doesn't want to hear those creepy stories about being breast fed. Howard said he only hears stories about being bottle fed because that's what they were told to do back then. Howard said he doesn't want to be that close to anyone. Howard did his mother's voice and talked about him suckling her. Robin read more of the benefits of breast feeding.
Robin read a story about Michael Phelps being engaged to a former Miss California. Robin said they posted online about their engagement.
Robin read a story about the box office and how the movies did over the weekend. Howard said Ronnie gave a review of 50 Shades of Grey and said the movie was terrible and the guy didn't know what he was doing.
Robin said that there's a story about a former set of conjoined twins who were separated last week. Robin said they went through hours of surgery. Robin said they were conjoined for 10 months at the chest. Howard said it's amazing that they can do that.
Robin said that Chris Brown is an artist and his art is fetching big bucks. Robin said several of his paintings sold for $60,000 collectively. Howard asked what he does. Robin wasn't sure what he works in.
Robin read about how Hustler dancers have filed a suit against the club they dance for. They're looking for more wages and tips. Robin said they're called independent contractors and they don't get paid as much as they'd like. Robin wrapped up and Howard ended the show around 11:05am.
Jon played a ''What You Need to Know'' about today's show. After that Jon said they have a poll up today too. He said they ask if the Oscars snubbed Joan Rivers or Eric the Actor. Jon said he thinks she did get snubbed. Jon said that she was on the Oscar red carpet for decades. Morgan said that Taylor Negron was left out too. She said there were a couple of snubs there. Jon said the highlight for Howard was J-Lo tripping over her own dress. Morgan said she loves that they're celebrating the great films and then the thing people want to see is someone tripping. They went to break after that.
Jon said that Morgan worked for Kimmel and Fallon. Jon asked what it was like to be there with Jimmy and what she thought of what Seth was saying. Morgan said it's probably fairly similar to what they did getting started. Morgan said that she remembers what it was like when the host doesn't like a monologue joke. Jon asked how she goes through that sort of thing. Morgan said that Fallon would do a live rehearsal with the audience. She said that they would hear the audience respond to a joke. She said the whole process is super fun.
Jon said that Seth is doing more shows a week now and he doesn't have to just do one at the end of the week. Morgan said she would miss doing the one show over having to do the monologue every day.
Jon took a call from a guy who said he likes the guest spots that they're doing on the Wrap Up Show. He wondered who booked Seth. Jon said Seth is a huge fan and he thinks he wanted to come in. He said Howard and Seth met last year at the birthday bash. Jon said when people come in they want to deliver for Howard. He said that Amy Poehler wanted to do that too when she came in.
Jon took a call from a guy who said he thinks that Joan Rivers was snubbed to teach her a lesson because of the way she treated celebrities. Jon said they have a poll up about that on the site today. Jon said he's not sure that's it. He said that Joan made it funny. He said that she should have been included.
Jon took a call from a guy who asked where that horse tooth jackass Gary is. Jon said he'll be in after the next break. Morgan said she's just happy that they're not calling in and asking who this stupid bitch is.
Jon took a call from a guy who asked if they think Steve Carell blew his chance to mention Howard's name. Jon said that when you're there and there are 70 million people watching that might not be going through your mind. Morgan said she'd like to hear Terrence Howard drop a Baba Booey instead of Steve Carell. Jon said that they had a pool going for the winners. He said that Richard's Guinea Pig picked just as many as he did.
Gary came in and said that he thought Eddie Redmayne was going to win. He said that it was Michael Keaton's final chance as far as he's concerned. He said that he thought that might be why they'd give him the award if they had.
Jon asked Gary about the Joan Rivers snub. Gary said that was really a snub. He said she has been in movies and she's associated with the Oscar red carpet. They went to break after that.
Jon asked Morgan if they try to work Howard references into the Two Broke Girls scripts. Morgan said that she has done that. She said that she has gotten some in. She said she had some guys named Sal and Richard. She said she thinks that she had Max saying she thinks her dad is Howard Stern.
Jon took a call from a guy whose phone sounded awful. Jon tried another call from a woman who said that JD has all of these aspirations to be a director and all of that. She asked if there is a general malaise after the Oscars. She said she feels like it's like New Year's day after the Oscars. She wondered if JD goes around down after that show airs. Jon said he thinks the Oscars are on late so maybe people are tired. Gary said it's never very good either. Gary said the malaise is happening while the show is on. Morgan said she likes how she's acting like she was part of the whole thing. Jon said he and JD were texting during the Oscars and talking about how bad it is. Jon said that you do find it somewhat inspiring if you want to find it. He said that they all grew up watching the show. He said now it's just at ridiculous proportions. Gary said he's not sure why they have to start at 8:30 and not 8. Gary said there was like 3 hours of red carpet. He said that he was hoping when he saw Bradley Cooper that he'd mention Baba Booey just in case he didn't win. He said that he was very serious last night though. He said that it was like Bradley was like his character for the night. The caller said that's what it's like with a lot of the stars.
Jon asked Morgan about being a writer and if every writer wants to be on camera and if they let you know. Morgan said that some are and some aren't and it's pretty obvious who is trying. Morgan said she's noticed that people who don't want to be on camera can be the funniest.
Jon took a call from a guy who asked how they feel about Neil Patrick Harris doing on the show. He said that he thinks that John Travolta doesn't even look like himself now. Gary said he thinks Neil did a pretty decent job. He said that he isn't David Letterman and he's not Chris Rock. He said he thinks Letterman was in a no-win situation back when he hosted the Oscars. Jon said that you're only as good as the material is. He said he didn't think the material was that good. Jon asked Gary if Howard would ever host. Gary said he doesn't think so because there is no upside. Jon asked if he would present. Gary said he thinks he might do that. Morgan said she would watch Howard do anything. She said she'd watch him host the puppy bowl. Gary said that he'd love to have a shot from above and show the people who are Howard's friends in one color and the people he's insulted in another color.
Jon got in a plug for today's Sternthology and some plugs for Morgan's stand up special on Netflix called ''Irish Goodbye.'' They ended the show a short time later. They were done around 11:40am.
Howard started the show talking about a highly controversial subject. Howard said a news anchorwoman used the word ''Jigaboo.'' Howard said they were talking about it before the show and they were wondering how that happened. Howard said he has a theory. He played the clip of this news anchor who was talking to another anchor about Lady Gaga's performance on the Oscar's. She said something about the ''Jigaboo music'' during her performance. Howard said the male anchor is a black man. Robin said that has nothing to do with her using that word. Howard said that he probably wants to chop her head off. Howard said that he thinks she's an idiot like most anchor people who read for a living. Howard said he was wondering what she was trying to say. He said maybe she was trying to say ''all of that rigmarole.'' Robin said no way. Fred said he thinks she was going for Jigaboo. Howard said if it was Lady Gaga isn't known for doing R&B or rap. Robin said there is a big beat in the music.
Howard said Gary said maybe she was going for ''Jitterbug'' music. Howard said that maybe you think that's just wild music. Howard said Sal said maybe she was trying to say ''Hullabaloo.'' Howard said no one is going to go on the air and say ''Jigaboo'' music like that. Robin asked if anything has happened to her yet. Howard said he doesn't know. He just has the clip.
Howard played the clip again after Robin told him to. Howard said there is no way she knows what that means. He said his first thought was that she'd be a great replacement for Brian Williams. Howard said she was a Miss Missouri in 2006. Howard said there is no way she's working with all cylinders. Howard said she's such a nincompoop. Robin said some of these news people are just stupid.
Howard said his dad would listen to the 1010 News there in New York and the news anchor would have to ad-lib and they'd always say something stupid when they did. Robin said this woman was off script for sure. Howard said no one wrote that into her speech. Robin said that they were talking about how you can't hear Lady Gaga's voice over that music.
Howard asked why she would use a word she doesn't know the meaning to. Howard said if you're broadcasting at a Klan meeting then it goes over very well. Howard said no one even uses that word anymore. Robin said tat she's not sure where she's from.
Howard said he has a guy from Cleveland on the phone. The caller said that she is a dope. He said he believes that she heard her uncle saying it around the house and she thinks it's a normal thing. He said she's on in that area. Howard asked if the papers are making a big deal out of it. The caller said they are. Howard said it hasn't broken nationally yet. The caller said she's Latino and not a white person.
Howard took a call from a guy who said she was just on the air crying saying she doesn't know what it meant. He said the guy sitting next to her is the guy who said that another guy was sucking a skin flute. Howard said that it's the moron news. JD said that if she's doing it now then he'll get it in a few minutes. Howard thanked the caller.
Howard was going to go to break but he had the skin flute comment from the news anchor. Howard played that before going to break. The anchor is the guy who was with Kristi during the Jigaboo comment clip. The anchor said he plays the skin flute and the other news anchors were laughing at him.
Howard said he probably had to make an apology for that. He said this girl is going to be apologizing for days. He said it would be great if she used the N-word during her apology. He said that life isn't that great though. They went to break after that.
JD came in with the Kristi Capel crying clip. He said she's not crying really hard or anything. Howard played the clip of her saying ''Jigaboo'' and then said he can't wait to hear her explain it. Howard played the explanation and Kristi gets on and took a moment to address the comment she made the day before. Kristi said she deeply regrets that comment and she didn't know what the word meant. She said she promises to learn from that. Her co-anchor said he knows she doesn't mean it and he knows her family so he knows that she didn't mean it. He said they learn from it and move on. He said it's time to forgive and move on. He said she's a good girl and she wouldn't say that knowingly.
Howard said she had no explanation. He said he needs one on that Howard said she should have to fuck Lebron James to prove she loves black people. Howard said if you get in trouble then just go to a black church. Howard said that apology is not accepted. He wants more of an explanation.
Howard played Sal's apology clip that sounded similar to Krisit's apology. Howard was laughing through that clip. Robin was too. Howard said that Sal was defending this woman. He said he has a wacky theory about the whole thing. Howard said that Sal had this thing where he said if they found crickets on the moon then you should be able to say Moon Cricket. Sal came in and said that he can't explain the Jigaboo thing. He said if they found a bunny in the jungle then what happens? He said that you say you have a jungle bunny. Howard said Sal is retarded. He said that's ridiculous. Robin said he's so silly. Howard said that he could say bunny jungle instead of Jungle Bunny. Sal said that it literally would be. Howard asked what if he saw a monkey on a porch. Sal said it's a porch monkey. Sal said that if he has a meatball with a lot of grease on it then he can say grease ball and Italians won't be offended.
Howard asked what would happen if a construction worker dropped tar on a baby. Sal said it would be a tar baby. Sal said you can't say anything anymore. Howard said he loves talking to Sal. He said he is his favorite.
Sal said he was reflecting on something yesterday. He said he was thinking about how he has been assisted by African American people in the toughest times in his life. He said he had to go to the hospital and there were a lot of African Americans helping him out. He said he broke his arm in Florida and he had a big bruise on his face. He said all of the comics were making fun of him. He said a black woman helped him and made his breakfast for him. Howard said if she knew who he was she wouldn't have helped.
Sal said that things can be taken out of context. He said he's not defending this girl but that's how it could have happened.
Howard played a Swap Shop show clip where the host read about a ''jungle bunny'' that was imported from Nigeria that someone had for sale. Howard said they're idiots too. The host read about some ''Bukakke sauce'' they had for sale too. Then she said that they had a recipe for Blumpkin Pie. They also had a shower set from Golden Showers. They had no clue what they were reading. The host then says that they have a contractor in the area who is going to be ''dropping loads'' of dirt that day and they were free. They had a ''rim job'' brand rim set.
Howard said that they just kept reading in that clip for 3 minutes. Sal said he and Richard just kept sending stuff and they read everything they sent to them. Sal said that they got caught and they stopped taking their calls and emails. Sal said they have to search for new ones and try those.
Howard said they're idiots. Sal said he and Richard did one where a radio host tells people to say hello to Curly Pubes. Sal said they love getting that stuff on the air. He said it gives them such a high. Howard said that's Sal's Super Bowl. Sal said that it is. Robin said they were reading earnestly and they got all of that stuff on the air.
Howard asked Sal if he gets so excited that he has to go to the bathroom with Richard. Sal said they do. Richard wasn't able to find the ''curly pubes'' clip Sal was talking about.
Howard wondered if Sal is a Wack Packer. Sal said no way. Howard said he thinks he might be. Sal asked if a Wack Packer would make a prank call with Crazy Alice's voice sped up like a child. Sal said that call was about 18 minutes long. Howard said he wants to hear all of that. Sal said he thinks a lot of it is him trying to calm them down. He said that he could do a 7 minute cut. Howard said this is a good one where Sal sped up Alice's voice like a child's voice. Howard played the clip where Sal is the father and he says he has a child, Benjy, who is possessed. The child was Alice's voice sped up and screaming at the host of the show. Howard laughed through the whole clip.
Howard said that's so great. They're trying to get him to go to a church. Like that's going to help. Robin said they just need him off the air.
Howard said he has the Curly Pubes call. Howard played that next. They had a Swap Shop show where the hosts were reading birthday wishes and they mentioned ''Curly Pubes'' and then read a bunch of things for sale that were just tongue twisters and nonsense that Sal and Richard had sent in. Howard said that is a good one.
Howard took a call from a guy who said he got wind about the racist comment thing yesterday. He said the first thing that went through his mind was the Sal thing and how they should have her go through that. Howard cut the caller off in the middle of a comment because he got bored. Howard said he was trying to be polite and listen but he zoned out.
Howard said he was going to break for commercial on a high but now he has to find someone else. Howard picked up and the guy was on Speakerphone. He asked if Howard watched Gotham last night. Howard said he did. Robin said she hasn't seen it yet. Howard said that they have to wait 48 hours before giving spoilers. Howard said he watched Justified and the rest of the Oscar's. Robin said she watched The Bachelor. Howard said he's watching Beverly Hills Housewives and Banshee too. Howard said he's behind on Better Call Saul. The caller said he's on Banshee and it's really good. Howard said just wait until he gets to the guy's Amish Niece.
Howard said they have Mr. Skin coming in today to tell them about the great moments in nudity. Robin said she was watching The Bachelor and they leave you on a cliffhanger every week. Robin said she didn't think she could stop watching. Robin said that Howard hounded her into watching it and now she is. Howard said they're in the golden age of television. Howard said the show is a little long but he's there. Howard had to take a break after that.
Howard came back and said that he has Mr. Skin from MrSkin.com there. Howard said that they're about to do the Anatomy awards. Howard said that if you want to follow along they have something very exciting happening. Howard said on HowardStern.com you can go on and watch as they're announcing the awards. Howard said they should change the name to Skinatomy Awards. Mr. Skin said maybe next year they can do that.
Howard said that they have some pictures to go along with the awards. Howard said they have Best Upskirt and you can follow along on the web site. Mr. Skin said that was at the Miss America Pageant last year. Mr. Skin said they had a girl named Megan Swanson there with her legs spread. He said that she was in a short skirt and she bends down to pick something up and you see a front wedgie. Howard said the guys are spot on with this stuff. Howard asked how he finds out about that. Mr. Skin said they go into the office and find it on HD TV. Howard said it was on MrSkin.com within 24 hours. Mr. Skin said this is very important stuff.
Howard said you can see the front wedgie on HowardStern.com. Howard said that it's wedged right up her vagina. Mr. Skin said that her legs shouldn't be that wide open. Robin said absolutely not.
Howard took a call from Bill Clinton who asked about Selma Hayak and if she's ever shown any Fur Burger. Mr. Skin said she did Ask the Dusk and she does go for a skinny dip and she shows her bush.
Howard said he wants to go the Anatomy Awards. Howard said the first one is Best Nudecomer. Howard said that goes to Gaia Weiss. He said that she is their Nudecomer of the year.
Howard took another fake phone call from a guy named Al who asked about black camel toe. it was an Al Pacino impersonator. Mr. Skin said Mariah Carey had some camel toe that she showed once.
Howard said the next category is the best butt hole blur fail. Mr. Skin said it's from the show Dating Naked on VH1. He said that it's a reality show and the couples are naked. He said someone is in charge of blurring the stuff. He said there was a girl and a guy playing football on the beach naked and as she tackles the guy her butt and rear burger was missed. He had the shot available for Howard to look at.
Howard said that he just got word that HowardStern.com has crashed. Jason said that they're trying to get it back up. Howard took another phony call from Julie Andrews who asked about herself. Mr. Skin said she has shown her breasts and they were spectacular.
Howard had a call from John Travolta who asked about the MrMan site and he wondered if John Hamm has shown anything. Mr. Skin said there are rumors that he's very well endowed but no one has seen it on film.
Howard had Bill Cosby on the line and he asked what the best nude sleeping scene of the year is. Mr. Skin said there weren't many passed out this year. He said Lisa Bonet did one in Angel Heart in 1997 though.
Howard said the next award is for Best Breasts. Mr. Skin said this was from True Detective and it's Alexandra Daddario. Mr. Skin said he knew it was going to be the best of the year as soon as he saw that scene. Howard said they have great taste. He said she has great breasts.
Howard said that the next category is Best Over 50 Nude scene. Mr. Skin said that sometimes actresses getting up in age have done scenes naked. Mr. Skin said this is Sharon Stone in Fading Giggalo. He said she's 56 years old and she looks great. Howard said the picture is stunning. Howard said he's not a fan of her's but she does look good. Howard said she made him leave past the garbage area at Letterman once and that's why he doesn't like her.
Howard asked what the next category is. Mr. Skin said it's Best Full Frontal. Mr. Skin said that this is Scarlett Johansson in ''Under the Skin.'' Howard said she has a hairy vagine too. Mr. Skin said she plays an alien who prays on Irish hitchhikers.
Howard took a call from Rosie O'Donnell who asked about Phoebe Cates and when they can see her naked. Mr. Skin said she's nude at 50 minutes in.
Howard took a call from a guy who asked about Mr. Skin's top searched people. Mr. Skin said that Jennifer Love Hewitt is one that gets searched but she hasn't done any nudes yet. Howard said she is the one. Mr. Skin said they have the most popular on the front page of the web site. He said that he wonders what it is about her that they go crazy for. He said she hasn't shown her breasts yet but he thinks it would be a big deal if she did. He said never say never to nudity either.
Howard said Mr. Skin said that Emma Watson will be topless this year. Mr. Skin said a lot of guys are fans of her and she's going to be in Regression. It won't be out until August though. He said his guys tell him that they have seen early cuts of the movie and they have confirmed it. Howard asked how her breasts are. Mr. Skin said they're not big.
Howard asked who else can they look forward to. Mr. Skin said Kristin Wiig will be full frontal in this movie. He said she's never been naked before. Howard asked if she has big boobs. Mr. Skin said no but she does look good.
Howard asked about Sarah Silverman. Mr. Skin said his guys were at Sundance and they saw a movie called Smile Back and she's examining her breasts in one scene. Then she tries anal sex in another scene. Howard said they won't see penetration. Mr. Skin said no but it is rated R.
Howard asked what is being talked about being the best for this year. Mr. Skin said that Emmy Rossum on Shameless had a great scene where she was getting eaten out. He said that Dakota Johnson is the best nudity so far for 50 Shades. Howard said Emmy seems to be naked just about every week. Mr. Skin said not every episode but that's what's great about cable TV. He said they have some real nudity on cable. He said they're pushing the envelope. Howard said business must be booming at Mr. Skin's web site. Mr. Skin said they started out with movies and then moved on to TV and cable. He said there are a lot of great things on TV that they have to watch.
Robin said that they have scenes that look like real sex but they're not allowed to film real sex. Howard asked what she's saying. Robin said she thinks they're going to see real sex eventually.
Howard asked if HowardStern.com is back up and running. Howard said the next category is Hottest Masturbation category. Mr. Skin said that he loves this girl. Howard said it's a great shot of this girl. Mr. Skin said that it's Lilly Simmons and she's on Banshee. He said that a masturbation scene used to be simulated but she's topless laying on her back and she's gorgeous going down on herself. He said Banshee is off the charts with that stuff.
Howard said that the web site is still down but Jason told him that they had everything up on Twitter and Facebook for people who weren't able to get on the web site.
Howard asked Mr. Skin about this Best Butt scene. Mr. Skin said that Kerri Russell did a scene where she showed her ass. He said she has a very nice butt too and she has a nice thigh triangle too.
Howard said that they have the web site back up now. Howard asked Mr. Skin to talk about the Best Pressed Mams scene. Mr. Skin said that this is where a woman presses her breasts against glass. Mr. Skin said this nurse in this movie presses her breasts on the glass and a guy is taking her from behind. Mr. Skin said that there are other scenes like that in the past but this is one of the best in history.
Howard said that the next award is Best Sideburger. Mr. Skin said the winner is Nicole Fox in Redlands. Mr. Skin said she won the 13th season of Next Top Model. He said that she's laying on a lounge chair on her side and she's on her side looking really good. Howard said you can see the outline of the vagine. Howard said you can see all of this on HowardStern.com
Howard said they have the Best Lesbian Scene up next. Howard said Mr. Skin is doing a great job with all of this. He said we wouldn't know about all of this if it wasn't for him. Mr. Skin said the name of the movie is 17 and Life Jailbreak. He said it's Sara Malakul in that movie and it's a lot of lesbian stuff in the movie. Howard saw the picture and said he has to get that movie.
Howard asked Mr. Skin how old his kids are now. Mr. Skin said they're 7, 10 and 9. He said things are going to be getting tough around now. He said they don't know the level of depravity yet.
Howard asked Mr. Skin if he and his wife have decided when they're going to reveal themselves. Mr. Skin said he's not there yet. He said he can't do that to a 10 year old daughter. He said everyone he lives around is successful so he can't do it to them yet. Mr. Skin said they know who he is but it's tough. Howard asked how he's going to break it to them. Mr. Skin said he's not ashamed of what he does. He said they have 35 people working there and they're going to be in the Entourage movie this summer. He said it will be weird to tell his kids but he will do it eventually.
Howard had a Liam Neeson impersonator call asking about Anne Hathaway. Mr. Skin said Anne did the movie Love and Other Drugs and she has some good nude scenes in that. He said she's good in Havoc too.
Howard said there's a Best Nip Drip award. Mr. Skin said this is creepy. He said there's a show called Lilyhammer and there's a guy looking at a woman breast feeding and they have a close up of her breast. He said there was another one on Hemlock Grove and they showed her with a nip drip. Mr. Skin said the nip drips are in. Howard said that all of these photos are on HowardStern.com
Howard asked about Stretchiest Nipples. Mr. Skin said that there's a movie called Nymphomaniac and there's a woman in the movie who puts her nip in another woman's mouth and she pulls the nip really far. Mr. Skin said that it's the winner for the year. Howard said it looks like a worm being pulled out of the ground.
Howard asked Mr. Skin about Sharon Stone spreading her legs in Basic Instinct and asked if that was the most searched on the web site. Mr. Skin said it is the most famous scene. He said it's iconic.
Mr. Skin said that there's a movie where Sylvia Hoakes shows her fur burgerage. She was also sucking her toe. Mr. Skin said this is the first tie that has happened. He said that's why it won.
Howard said he doesn't feel like beating off to this stuff but guys must do that. Mr. Skin said he's sure they do. He said he can't deny that. Mr. Skin said there are guys who would rather see the real celebrity nude because it's such a strong pull. He said the celebrity factor is what they're into.
Howard asked about Monster Muff and who won. Mr. Skin said it's Gabby Hoffman. He said that she plays Adam Driver's sister. He said she has a huge muff and she was the little girl in Field of Dreams and Uncle Buck. He said she's kind of a hippy girl and that's probably real hair.
Howard asked about Best Upside Down Cake. Mr. Skin said this is a weird scene. He said that the movie is 24 Exposures and she's nude except for a pink leotard. He said that she stands on her head and the guy pulls the leotard to the side as she's upside down so her butt is exposed. He said it's beautifully shot. He said the scene is very hot too.
Howard took a call from a fake Morgan Freeman who asked what movie Kathy Bates was nude in. Mr. Skin said it was About Schmidt in 2002. He said that's out on Blu-ray now so you can see it in even better definition. Mr. Skin said it's not the most popular but people do like to see older women naked.
Howard got to Best Right Boob only. Mr. Skin said that's for Masters of Sex and Betsy Brandt. He said she only showed right breast but it was cool.
Howard asked about Best Lip Slip. Mr. Skin said that's in Californication. He said that he's a big fan of the winner of that one. Mr. Skin said that was a great show for his web site.
Howard asked about the lip slip and she's on a bed in her panties. Howard said if they didn't slow-mo it they'd miss it. Mr. Skin said that they'd miss it if they didn't do that. Howard said they isolate these frames and show the side lippage.
Howard said they say Best TV show is Masters of Sex. Howard asked if that's because of the nudity. Mr. Skin said that it's the second year in a row that it's won. He said the show has the lead character doing nudity but they have Betsy Brandt and people lie that naked too. He said it's the best.
Howard took a call from a guy who asked if Mr. Skin saw the hacked photos. Mr. Skin said he's not cool with that. He said that he thinks it has to be someone who is actively in a movie or TV show. Howard said he agrees.
Howard asked about Breast Picture. Mr. Skin told Howard about the movie Nymphomaniac and how they had real sex in the movie. He said they had real penetration.
Howard asked about the award for the best body of work. Mr. Skin told Howard about that and how Chloe Sevigne won the lifetime award.
Howard had a call from fake President Obama who asked who has the sexiest nipples. Mr. Skin went with Scarlett Johansson. Howard said he should mention that Mr. Skin has a web site for naked men too. Howard said he has a very big gay web site now. Mr. Skin said it's doing very well. He said they have a Manatomy Awards over there. He said 10 years ago he never thought they'd be doing this but they are. Howard said it's not women paying for it though. Mr. Skin said they do have women members but it's not 50/50 like he was thinking it would be.
Howard said that they should get into the Wack Pack thing. He said Gary Dell'Abate said he would want to be Gary the Conqueror because he's always happy and doesn't know he's limited. Gary came in and said that Gary is happy today. He asked if he's worried about the terrorists. GTC said he's not. Howard asked if he's worried about global warming. GTC said no. Howard asked what he does worry about. GTC said he has to do a show on Tuesday and Thursday on the internet. Robin said that's what he's worried about. GTC said he's going to be 64 this month.
Gary asked GTC if he smokes and worries about lung cancer. GTC said he doesn't worry. Howard asked if he is lonely. GTC said he is. Howard said he can't get girls. Howard said some girl robbed him the one time he did get a girl. Gary said that many of them are isolated. He said if you look at Jeff and Eric they're alone too.
Howard asked GTC if he worries about paying his bills. GTC said he has a roof over his head and that's it. Howard asked if he knows what Jigaboo means. GTC said no. Howard said that means that chick is just as dumb as Gary.
Howard asked GTC if he's sorry he doesn't have kids. GTC said no. Howard said he doesn't even worry about that. Howard asked if he's happy with his looks. GTC said no. Howard said there you go. Howard asked if he thinks he's good looking. GTC said he doesn't know. Howard said he knows he's not good looking himself. He asked if he thinks he's good looking. GTC said he thinks Howard is good looking.
Howard asked what he looks forward to every day. GTC said he likes going to work and doing the best he can. He said he's been working for almost 11 years in that place.
Howard said they're trying to figure out whose life they'd want if they were a Wack Packer. Gary said he'd want to be GTC. Gary said he doesn't want to be Ass Napkin Ed. He said he thinks he knows too much and he is aware of his life. Howard said he thought Gary wanted to be GTC because he didn't want to change his name.
Howard let GTC go and wished him a Happy Birthday. Howard said he thinks he wanted to get up there somehow. Howard said they sent him to the moon but they scared the crap out of him. Howard said they put him on a cart and sent him to the green room which looked like the moon. He said that Gary got scared and wanted to come back home. Howard said he didn't like being in the spaceship or anything. He said that he hated it.
Howard said he's not good with the retarded people. He said he can't do that stuff anymore. Howard said Gary was yelling to get out of the spaceship.
Howard had Ronnie come in. Ronnie came in and wondered why the strippers would want to be employees instead of contractors. Ronnie said that they get paid better if they are independent. Ronnie said they get all of their money. He said they pay a house fee and then they tip out the DJ and other things. He said they make more money doing that than with a salary. Robin said they are asking for a salary and no grabbing of their tips. Howard said a lot of clubs are holding too much money. Gary said they are taking a portion of the ''Beaver Bucks'' at the Hustler club. Howard said Ronnie doesn't understand what they're doing. Ronnie said he still thinks it's stupid. He said he didn't want to get into it though. He said it's all top secret. Ronnie said that he doesn't ant to get into all of this. He said it involves cash. He said these girls are going to fuck themselves with this lawsuit.
Ronnie said he loves the name Beaver Bucks. He said that it's a $20 bill or whatever. He said the club gets $2 out of that. Gary said that she's paying that on every $20. Robin said they can't use cash. Howard said they can't use cash. Ronnie said that's why it's stupid. Howard asked how they'll know if they get cash or not. Ronnie said that's the point. He said he really doesn't want to get into it.
Howard said the girls claim that the percentage taken out of the Beaver Bucks is too much. Gary said he thinks that Ronnie is saying that if they tax it and don't make it a cash business then they're going to make less money. Howard said that he doesn't want to discuss this. He wanted to get to the Wack Pack thing.
Howard asked if Angry Black is in the Wack Pack. Ronnie, Robin and Howard all said no. Howard asked about Ass Napkin Ed. Robin said he is a Wack Packer. Gary said he's full Wack Pack. Howard said Beetlejuice is in. Big Foot is in. Bobo was next. Howard and Robin said no. Ronnie said he is Whacked but not in the Wack Pack. Howard said he's an extreme fan. Howard asked about Crackhead Bob and put him right in. Angry Alice was next. She's in. Daniel Carver was out. Howard said he's not sure he agrees. Robin said he has an ability to take care of himself and make decisions. Gary said he's not unique either.
Howard took a call from a guy who said he worked at a club in Cleveland and the club would screw the girls. He said they charge the customer 10 percent and then the girls have to pay money on that too. He said everyone gets screwed there.
Howard took a call from a guy who said Ronnie has a point. He said it's about making minimum wage or below minimum. He said the tips have to add up to at least minimum or the club has to make it up. He said that they're going to monitor all of the tip money to make sure they hit that level. Howard asked if this is what Patricia Arquette was talking about at the Oscar's. Robin said no. Howard said he doesn't care anyway.
Howard asked about Evil Dave Letterman. Robin and Gary said he's on the bubble. Ronnie said he thinks he is. He said just listen to him sometimes. Gary said he has a job and a life though. Ronnie said he has a wife. Robin said that doesn't mean anything. Howard said he's not really a Wack Packer. Howard said he's not a carnival guy. They voted him out. Benjy said that there are super heroes who aren't genetically different. He said he thinks Daniel Carver was at one time.
Sal asked if he could say something. Howard told him to come in the studio instead of talking over Gary's microphone. Sal said Evil Dave is in the Wack Pack because he will do whatever you tell him to do. He said a normal person thinks about it before doing it. Howard said Sal belongs in there then. He said he does everything they ask him to do.
Howard played a clip of Evil Dave preparing to get on the air and eating chips. Benjy said they have to signal Evil Dave with a flashlight. He doesn't want his wife knowing. Howard said he will take a vote on this. He said no. Gary said no but close. Robin said no but close. Ronnie said the same thing. Sal said he agrees with them now. He said Evil Dave holds a job too. Howard said he thinks Sal is more Wack Pack than Dave.
Howard said High Pitch is in. Iron Sheik is out. Everyone agreed. Howard said Fred the Elephant Boy is in. Howard said Gary the Conqueror is in.
Howard said Hanzi is the next one. Howard asked if he is. Gary said yes. He gave his reasons why. Howard said he thinks he agrees. Robin did too. No one disagreed.
Howard took a call from Hanzi and welcomed him into the Wack Pack. Hanzi said fuck you to Gary. Hanzi said Howard claims he can make anyone a star but he always screws him over. Howard asked how he's screwing him over. Hanzi said that he is. Howard said he cant force anyone to put him in anything. Hanzi said he can. Howard said this really is Wack Pack. Howard said he has to go. Hanzi asked if he can have Rude Jude on the show. Howard said sure. Hanzi said that he's going to have a show on HBO. Howard let Hanzi go after that but Hanzi kept telling him to hold on. He said he's the best thing about his show.
Howard said that Hanzi got some feedback about Hanzi sleeping on the phone and they love it. Howard said people say that his job is calling into the show and he can't even stay awake for that. Howard asked what happens there. Hanzi said he's up all night. He said he's catching up on TV shows and shit.
Howard said he has to go. He hung up on Hanzi this time. Jeff the Drunk and John the Stutterer were in the Wack Pack. Howard said King of All Blacks is not in. Everyone agreed but Benjy. Benjy said he is a character. Howard said he's not Wack Pack. Howard said King has things to say but he's not a freak show act. Howard said Hanzi is a freak. Gary said Ass Napkin Ed is too then. Howard said King doesn't have any of that gravitas. Howard said Benjy is arguing. Howard took him out of the voting.
Howard said Mariann is not Wack Pack. Ronnie said she's their ring leader. Howard said she knows some of the Wack Pack. Howard said she named herself Mother of the Wack Pack. Gary said she has a very normal life. Howard said she is a fucking nut at AGT though. Howard said you wonder what's wrong with her. He said she walks around sweaty wearing a crown and screaming his name. Howard said Ronnie is Wack Pack too. Mariann was on the phone and said that she never called herself Wack Pack. Howard named her that. Howard said there are too many people in the Wack Pack. They played one of Mariann's theme songs.
Howard said that Mariann is out. Howard said next one is Asian Pete. Howard said he's definitely Wack Pack. Howard said he's got to be. Howard had Pete on the phone. Howard asked if he's happy or sad. He said he's so-so. Howard asked how his life is going. Pete said he misses them. He's been very busy too. Robin asked what he does for work. Robin thought Pete said he builds roads. Howard thought he said he works for Sammy Sosa. Howard asked what he does. Then he said he helps people out. Howard said he thought he said he grows roses. Howard kept guessing. Howard asked what he does again. Pete said he lifts heavy stuff. Robin asked if he's a stock boy. Pete said he is.
Howard asked Pete if he's retarded. Pete said something that sounded like he is. Howard asked if he gets laid. Pete said he got laid about a year ago. Howard asked what 8X4 is. Pete said ''I don't know.'' He said that for a bunch of math questions. Howard said he's in the Wack Pack. Pete thanked him for that. Howard said they have to have a contest with Pete, Gary the Conqueror and Wendy the Slow Adult. Howard said maybe just Gary vs. Pete. Howard said they'll have him down there soon. Howard asked if he thinks he is smarter than Gary. Pete said no. Howard asked if he knows what Jigaboo means. Pete said no. Howard said he's just as smart as that woman on the news. Howard let him go after that.
Howard said that woman (Kristi Capel) really was an idiot. He played the clip of her again. Ronnie laughed like he was hearing it for the first time. He called her a dope. Ronnie was cracking up at that. He said she's a fucking idiot. Howard played her apology again too. That led to the guys talking about what they think she was going for. Sal said there was nothing Jigaboo about the Sound of Music song. He said if it was the Soul Train awards it would have made sense. Howard said they have to move on. Sal said it would have made sense if there were African American people involved.
Howard asked if Nicole Bass is in the Wack Pack. Everyone was saying yes. Howard said there are a lot of big body builders though. Fred said she has her own niche. Everyone voted her in.
Howard took a call from Bobo who was upset that he was out. Howard said Bobo put himself in there. Gary said maybe he was once but not now. Bobo said he feels like he graduated Wack Pack College.
Howard said Bobo is an Extreme fan. Howard said that Riley Martin is in. Siobahn, Wendy the Slow Adult were in. Yucko was out. Underdog lady is in. Howard said that Big Foot Matt was in. He's dad now. Howard said Blue Iris was in. Howard said Hank was in. Kenneth Keith Kallenbach in. Ted the Janitor out. Eric the Actor yes.
Captain Janks is out of the Wack Pack. Howard said he is not in. Howard had him on the phone. Janks said that he has been a contributor to the show for 25 years. He said he thinks he's a wacky dude. Gary said he has done crazy things but it's not Wack Pack. He said if you think you should be in then you probably shouldn't be in. Janks said in Howard's book they say he's in the Wack Pack. Howard said that was then this is now. Howard said that Janks is upset that he's not in the Wack pack. Janks said he is not normal. Howard told him to go make a phone call.
Howard took a call from a guy who said he thinks that Jigaboo chick had no idea what she was saying. He said she says the dumbest things all the time. The caller said that her co-host is just as dopey with his comments. Howard said his dad has told him that people who read the news are stupid. Howard said he likes that they think Brian Williams is losing credibility but the other news stations have women who used to be pillaties instructors.
Ronnie said he likes the name this guy gave that girl. He calls her Jigaboo Chick. Howard said her partner is the guy who said the skin flute thing. Howard replayed that clip too. The caller said he knows Howard has a bunch of clips from that guy. He said his name is Wayne Dawson.
Howard said Joey Boots is out. Sour Shoes is in. Howard said Tan Mom is in. Benjy said that she's not in. He said she isn't theirs. Benjy said she came to them. Gary said they're the only ones who talk to her now. He said she is theirs. Benjy said that she's not in. Howard said he wants to be open minded about this. Howard said that doesn't hold any weight with him. Gary said they have continued on with her while the rest of the media has stopped talking to her. Robin said she was the talk of the Birthday Bash last year. Sal said she flashed her beaver on the red carpet next to Barbara Walters. Gary said if she does something stupid again will they mention Tan Mom or mention them. Benjy said he really doesn't think she's in the Wack Pack.
Howard asked Sal if he would fuck her. Sal said he's married. He said she has nice legs. Sal said he thinks she's Wack Pack. Howard said he thinks that Sal is more Wack Pack than she is. Howard said Sal was in it before they hired him. Howard said Sal is whacked out of his skull.
Howard asked about Ham Hands Bill. He had him on the phone. Bill asked if he's on the list. Ronnie said no. Howard asked why. Ronnie said he's an extreme fan. Robin said no too. Gary said he's creepy but not a Wack Packer. Robin said he's not a Wack Packer. Gary said he knows it when he sees it and that's not it. Sal said he's not in. He said Tan Mom has versatility and Ham Hands doesn't possess those abilities. Fred disagreed. He said he has a talent that you can't qualify. He said he is creepy and he has the handicap. He said he is a freak show.
Bill said he sent in a new song for Robin. He sent it to Richard. Howard asked Benjy if he think she's in. Benjy said he's not based on Howard's new criteria. Howard said he's going to rule on this. He said Bill is not Wack Pack. Fred said he thinks he got gypped. Howard said he isn't in. Gay Ramone is not in it either. Howard said Bill is an extreme fan. Bill said he loves them anyway. Howard asked if he's going to have a bad day or something. Bill sounded down. Bill said he doesn't know. He said it's kind of a funny thing. Howard said he has nothing going on.
Howard asked about Melrose Larry Green. Howard said he stands on a corner with Howard Stern signs. Howard said that guy is out of his mind. Howard said he talks to him and he just yells ''Howard!'' the whole time. Howard asked if he is in. Sal said he's a male Mariann. He said he's just a cheerleader. Gary said he calls every other week asking for a job. He said he calls like they've never spoken before. Howard asked if he is in. Robin said she thinks there is a little mental illness there. Howard said he was Andrew Dice Clay's accountant. Gary said he gives tours on Hollywood Boulevard. Howard asked Benjy what he thinks. Benjy said based on Howard's rules, he's not. Howard said he is a freak show though. Benjy asked if Batman is a super hero. Howard said yes. Benjy said he would make him a Wack Packer then. Robin voted Melrose in. Howard asked Ronnie. Ronnie said he's going to go with yes. Gary said close but no. Fred said he's not a Wack Packer. Benjy said yes but Mariann has to be in too. Sal said no. Howard said he's the tie breaker then. Howard said he has to go with yes. Melrose is in the Wack Pack. Howard said that guy is a freak show. Benjy demanded a revote on Mariann. It stayed at no.
Howard said Melrose is a genuine freak. Howard said that he has Ham Hands Bill's song for Robin. Howard played that for her and it was to the tune of The Sound of Music. Howard and Ronnie were laughing. Robin just said it was awful. Howard stuck with no for Bill. Bill sounded really bummed out on the phone. Bill said they make him a VIP and he's fine with that. Howard said he doesn't have to say goodbye to the show. Bill said he'll still be at AGT.
Howard said he's not sure why anyone is fighting to be in it. He said Eric the Actor was the only one who didn't want to be in it.
Howard said he thinks they went through the list. Howard said Mark the Bagger is another one. Howard said the question is now Medicated Pete. Howard said he's in.
Gary asked who he'd want to be if he had to be one of them. Howard asked Gary if he'd rather be Melrose than Gary the Conqueror. Gary said no. Gary asked Howard if he would want to be High Pitch. Howard said no. Gary asked if he'd want to be Riley Martin. Howard said no. Gary asked if he'd want to be Miss Howard Stern. Howard said no to that too. Howard said he doesn't want to be Sour Shoes either. He said he doesn't want to live with his parents. Howard said no to being Elephant Boy too.
Howard asked Robin who she would want to be. Robin said she'd want to be Medicated Pete. Robin said that he has passions. Robin said he doesn't have anything to do all day. Robin said she thinks she could be like that. Howard said he thinks he'd rather be Eric the Actor. Gary said someone has to carry you to the toilet though. Howard said maybe Fred the Elephant Boy then. Howard said he'd have to shit his pants.
Howard said Gay Ramone is crying that he's not in the Wack Pack. Howard picked up the phone and Ramone was upset and crying about not being included. He said he's gay and takes it up the fucking ass. Howard asked if he's really crying. Ramone said he was. Howard said being gay doesn't make you abnormal. 20 years ago maybe but not today. Howard said he has to stop that. Ramone said he has a Wack Pack license plate. Howard told him to get rid of it. Sal said a Wack Packer wouldn't call.
Howard said Speech Impediment Man isn't in either. Howard had him on the phone. Speech said he got tea bagged at a show once. Sal said he did that to him but that doesn't make him a Wack Packer. Howard said that Elephant Boy might not belong in it then. Robin said he does things that put him in it. Gary said Speech is living a fairly normal life other than the impediment. Howard said he's out then. Speech laughed and asked if he can help with comedy gigs. Howard said no one cares about him. Howard said he can't just call Lorne Michaels and get him a job. Speech said he might do a comedy show in Pittsburgh with Elephant Boy.
Gary said Elephant Boy shit his pants on a way to an appearance and he showed up instead of going home. He said that's Wack Pack.
Howard had Janks back on the phone again. Janks said the first time the words Wack Pack were said was when he and a couple of other guys were on the show in 1991 and they said they were like the Rat Pack and Robin said they were the Wack Pack. Howard said there was a time when they had just a few people who were wacky but now things have changed. Howard said definitions have changed. Janks asked if you can be taken out at any point. Gary said yes. Howard said Janks was in with Crazy Jerry. Howard said that guy was in the Wack Pack. He'd still be in. Howard said that 'Gina Man would be in too. Howard told Janks that it's over. Howard said that times have changed and he's out.
Speech asked how Jeff the Vomit guy is in. Howard said he vomits on people. Howard said he's in. Howard played some 'Gina Man clips and said that's Wack Pack.
Howard took a call from a guy who said they should come up with another name for these people who aren't in. Howard said they are contributors to the show. Howard said things have changed. Robin said once they found Beetlejuice things changed.
Howard took another call from a guy who said that Beetlejuice gets a lot of pussy. Howard said that he's not sure that's the case now. He lives with his mom now. He said he used to live with Sean who helped him get laid.
Howard said Beet lives in Georgia now. Sal said they tell him it's Jersey though. He said he doesn't curse on the phone living with his mom. Sal said things have changed with him too.
Howard said they have a definite Wack Pack now. Robin said she would be Medicated Pete. Gary said he's still going with Gary. Howard asked about Blue Iris. Gary said you'd have to fuck a lot of guys. Benjy said that Ass Napkin Ed is one whose life you'd want. He said he has a fun life and he fucks girls. He said he knows how to get things done. Howard said you have some ability to get something together. Howard said Nicole Bass has the ability to do stuff too. Gary said you can't get laid being her either. Howard said she was married though.
Ronnie said he would want to be Miss Howard Stern. He said she's nuts but so what? Howard said she's in such turmoil though. Howard said he was going to say he wanted to be Jeff the Drunk but then he thought about his arm. Howard said Jeff the Vomit Guy isn't who he'd want to be. He said he might want to be Sour Shoes. Robin said she'll be Mediated Pete. Fred went with Jeff the Drunk.
Howard asked Benjy who he'd want to be. He went with either Ass Napkin Ed or Hanzi. Fred said he has to think that one over. He thought about Jeff but he was talked out of it. Sal went with Beetlejuice. Howard said at least Beet isn't in a bad marriage. Sal laughed and said ''neither am I.'' Howard wrapped up and went to break after that.
Howard said this is newsworthy. Howard said 20 years ago today one of their callers admitted to killing his girlfriend and he ended up going to jail over it. Howard said he called into the show joking about how he had taken acid and killed his girlfriend. Howard played a clip from that day when the guy said he cut his fiancee's head off. His name was Lee Elmore Newman. Howard said the defense team was preparing a defence for him when he called in with that. Howard said he thinks he's still in prison. Howard said that happened in 1995.
Robin read some news about the Grammy's and how they had a tribute to Stevie Wonder before that. Robin said it was great. Howard said he hasn't seen it yet. Howard said that his songs are tough to cover. He said Beyonce did a good job though. Robin said seeing that made her agree with Kanye West about her talent. Robin said she was amazing. Robin had some audio of her performing on that show. She did Stevie's first hit song. Robin said Ed Sheeran did a cover too. Robin said he was great as well. Howard played some of that song as well. Howard said Stevie's songs are hard to sing. Robin had some other clips of some songs that were covered. Robin said Lady Gaga told a story about listening to Stevie Wonder when she was a young girl. Robin had some audio of her singing too. Howard said she's really good. He said she can really sing. Robin mentioned that it was Lady Gaga's first song. Howard said his first album was Petula Clark. Howard had Fred pull up some of Stevie's songs. Fred ran through a list and Howard said that ''I Believe (When I Fall In Love)' was the best song there. Fred went through more songs and Howard said he's sticking with that one. Robin had even more songs to play from the special. Howard played a clip of Stevie singing a song about him and one about Robin too.
Robin read a story about 50 Shades of Grey doing well at the box office. Robin said a man was charged with sexually assaulting a woman after seeing the film. Robin said that he allegedly convinced her to get down to her underwear and then he tied her up and started beating her. She told him to stop and he kept going. Robin said the roommate came home and she was able to escape.
Howard ran through the top 5 songs which included Maroon 5 at number 5, Beyonce and Kanye West with Paul McCartney at number 4, Hozier at 3 and Ed Sheeran at number 2. Howard said number 1 was Bruno Mars. Howard had Big Foot singing the Maroon 5 song and Robin singing Hozier. High Pitch Eric sang the Ed Sheeran song. He had Big Foot singing Uptown Funk too. Howard did a live commercial read after that.
Robin read about the Oscar's post game wrap up. Robin said they had 36.6 million viewers. Robin said it was down 16 percent from last year. Robin said they say the reviews for Neil Patrick Harris were Luke warm. Howard said he's not used to that. Robin read some comments from some reviews.
Robin read a story about Stacy Dash who is on FOX News. Howard said she's not that swift. Robin said Patricia Arquette had an acceptance speech so she had Howard play some of that. Robin said that Stacy Dash had a problem with what Patricia was saying about equal pay or men and women. Howard said she's kind of wacky. He said she's still cute though. Robin had some audio of Stacy talking about that.
Robin said she keeps thinking that women who are going to com forward about Bill Cosby have already come forward. Robin said that Richard Pryor's widow was on a podcast and said some things about Bill Cosby. She called him a piece of shit. Robin had some audio from that podcast where Pryor's wife called him a piece of shit and a hypocrite. She said there are 34 women who have come forward so far. She was also talking about how his wife has to have known. She said she thinks Cosby is done. Robin said that was Jennifer Lee who is the widow of Richard Pryor. Howard said if someone told him that Bill Cosby would be accused of being a serial rapist who would have known? Howard said it's crazy.
Robin read a story about the shutdown of the Department of Homeland Security and what people are saying about that. Robin said that they think it's going to be a problem for this country's security.
Howard took a call from a guy who said Howard seems pretty liberal but he likes FOX News shows. Howard said he loves it. Howard said he used to love Bob Grant too. He said he loves those shows where they say they have to return to the good ol' days. Howard said he may not agree with their politics but he likes the arguing and fighting. Howard said they have some guys on FOX News and they have good looking girls on the shows too. Howard said he likes the theater of the whole thing. Howard said he has liberal views on a lot of social issues. He said he's all for the gay thing and all of that. Howard said he is very fiscally conservative. Robin said he's not even that. She said all Howard is against is waste in government. The caller asked if it's too late for a game. Howard said they're trying to get out of there so no games.
Robin said there is fear that people are going to attack malls there in America if the DHS goes away. Robin had some audio of someone commenting on that. Howard said he thinks an ultra conservative could win the election next year. Howard said they might want to go back to the days of Ronald Reagan. Robin said no way that's going to happen.
Robin read a story about a VA Secretary, Robert McDonald, who was claiming to have being in special forces but it was later revealed that he was not. That led to Howard talking about how he was in Vietnam and he's not making this stuff up. He talked about blowing up kids and how that was a way of racking up kills. Howard said Ronnie served in the war of 1812. He said Fred is a big pussy and didn't serve. Howard said he once killed a school of dolphins. He said that he shot them all in the rice patties. He said his commanding officer counted them as kills. Howard said he's much more normal now but he used to wear ears as a necklace. He said he killed so many kids that he wore a child skin hat. Howard said one final story is that he was deep in country and delirious with Dengue fever or something. He said he went into a village and killed them all. He said he cut off a woman's hands as a souvenir. He said he started beating off with the woman's hand. Robin told him not to even say that. Howard said he beat off with a cut off hand. Howard said this is what his movie is going to be about. He said they're calling it the Howard Stern story. Robin said they're all going to be ashamed. Howard said he's not proud. He said he just did it for the money. Howard said he has so many stories of war. He said he did 17 tours of duty. He said these days people brag about 4 or 5. He said he just likes saying duty so much that he'd keep signing up. Howard did a live commercial read after that. Howard said he probably shared too much about the war. Robin said she thinks so. Robin called his movie 50 Shades of Crazy. Howard said back in his day they didn't have Post Traumatic Stress Disorder.
Robin said Mayor DeBlasio is being blasted over a new training program he's proposed. Robin had some audio of him talking about that.
Robin read a story about a company that's going to be turning text into news stories. Robin said a computer may be reading that news to you.
Howard read some email about the Oscar's and what John Travolta was doing to Idina Menzel. A woman wrote in about how that bothers her when men do that.
Robin read a story about Alex Rodriguez going to Yankee training camp in Florida. Robin said he was 2 days early. Robin said he showed up early and says he's focused on the new season. Robin had some audio of Rodriguez talking about that.
Howard had a mash up song with Yoko Ono and David Lee Roth that they put together. Howard said it's like they recorded together.
Howard said Robin was telling him that this guy Graham Moore is gay but it turns out he's not. Howard said Robin said yesterday that she knew he was gay. He said there's an article saying he's not gay. Howard had audio of the guy accepting his Oscar and he did sound effeminate. Robin said he didn't tell her he was gay but she assumed he was. Gary read Howard an article that Howard had misplaced. Howard asked Gary to read it to him after he wasn't able to find it. Gary said that they did assume he was gay because his character was gay but he is not gay. Robin said she went down the same road as most people. Howard said Robin was wrong.
Robin read a story about President Obama and how he thinks Transgender people should not be banned from serving in the military. Howard said he's right. He said the gays in the military has worked out just fine.
Robin read a story about how they're calling it a mega fight between Manny Pacquiao and Floyd Mayweather. Robin said that they've agreed to fight. Robin read the details of that upcoming fight. Robin said Mayweather could make up to $120 million from that fight. Howard said he thinks people are into that ultimate fighting now. Robin said she doesn't think that has anything to do with it. Howard said it's back to the drawing board on that then. Howard did a live commercial read after that.
Robin read a story about how weed is legal in Alaska now. Robin said that possession is limited to 4 ounces. Howard said that's a lot. Howard said an ounce was a large baggie. Robin said they can have no more than 6 plants. Robin said you can't sell weed and you can't drive stoned.
Robin read a story about how Little Caesar's is offering a pizza with bacon wrapped around the crust. Robin said it's one of the most expensive pizza. Howard said you know it's crappy when you can buy it for $12. Howard said he's thinking that the guys in the back are going to explode one day from eating stuff like that. Howard said he could never eat a pig. He said they're so cute and intelligent. Howard said they have 3 feet of bacon on the crust. Howard said that's a lot of bacon. He said pigs are at an intelligence level higher than Wendy and Jeff the Drunk. Robin wrapped up and Howard ended the show around 11:05am.
Jon played a ''What You Need To Know'' about today's show. He also said they have a poll up about Sal and if he's a Wack Packer or not. Jenny said she doesn't think he is a Wack Packer anymore. She said he's able to maintain a job and he's been taken in there. She said that she feels like he's someone who has been taken under their wing and he's not as sketchy. Jon said she thinks that he's not a Wack Packer. Jon said Sal had some interesting thoughts on putting words like jungle and bunny together. Jon said they talked about that after the newscaster made that mistake. Jon said he wants to ask the callers which Wack Packer they'd want to be. He said he wants to know if they think Howard's picks for the Wack Pack were fair or not.
Jenny said she thinks Mariann should be in the Wack Pack. She said she has the voice and she has the obsession with Howard. Jenny said she might be someone who needs to be locked out of the building too. Jon said she wants to be in it though and other people like Beetlejuice don't call in asking to be in it. Jon said Bobo is close to being in there too but he didn't make it in.
Jon took a call from a guy who said that if you ask to get in you're not a Wack Packer. He said if you ask to get out then you are. He said Eric the Actor wanted out. Jon said he likes that. He said if you want out of it then you are a Wack Packer. They went to break a short time later.
Jon said Jenny was talking about how she blew her chance to hang out with Howard. Jon asked Tiffani if she would want to hang out with him. Tiffani said she actually has hung out with him outside of the show. She said it's kind of cool to know both the guy on the show and outside of the show.
Jon asked Jenny if there's anyone else she'd like to meet. Jenny said she'd like to meet JD's girlfriend. She said she has a lot of questions for her. Jon asked what kind of questions. Jenny said she just needs to understand all of it. She said that she'd like to discuss the sex stuff and all of that. Jenny said she has hung out with JD and she set up JD on a date with Jason's sister. She said he didn't know it was a date. Jon said JD can't really put a sentence together. Jon asked if he didn't know it was a setup. Jenny said they just wanted to see if anything happened. Jenny said she had to pull things out of him. Jon said if things had worked out then he could have been part of her family. Jenny said he could have been her son's uncle.
Jon said they had Mr. Skin in today. Jon asked if Jenny is on the site. Jenny said she's not sure. Tiffani wasn't sure if she was on there either.
Jon played a clip from some of Mr. Skin's past appearances on the show. Jon said that's a Mr. Skin package for you.
Jon said that Gary is joining them too. Jon said Gary and Tiffani were on Hollywood Game Night together. Gary said he doesn't think they won that night. Tiffani said they did not. Gary asked Tiffani if she ever goes on MrSkin.com to see if she's on there. Tiffani said she has not. She said she has done partial nude photos but not film and TV. She said she would not be on the site. Jon said Jenny is on there. Gary sounded shocked by that.
Jon asked Jenny what it's like when she hears Mr. Skin doing his thing. She said that he feels like every guy she went to college with. She said that it means that someone has seen all of the shitty movies she's done. She said she had a baby a year ago and she loved looking at herself on the site to see what she looked like before that.
Gary said they found David Arquette's mother on MrSkin.com. He said David was so happy about that. Jon said Mr. Skin has kids who are getting older and they know his name but he has to tell them eventually what he does. Tiffani said she wonders what porn stars do when they have kids. She said she'd like to hear an interview at a school where they want to send the kids.
Gary said he has been at Soccer games where dads have slipped behind him asking what Jenny McCarthy is like. He said they act like school kids out there.
Jon said Mr. Skin lets you see the nude scenes from all of the movies. He said he makes a good living from it. Tiffani said it's very smart. Gary said that he had a big moment where Mr. Skin said that the movie companies loved that they were doing it and they would give advances for the nude scenes. He said he has a really good business going now.
Jon asked if things went like expected when Tiffani went in the studio. She said you never know what to expect from him. She said that she thinks it went well. Tiffani said she felt he was on the milder side with her. She said he was very respectful. Gary asked if she sat down with her husband to have a game plan before going in. Tiffani said she didn't but she probably should have. She said her husband knows all of that stuff already and he's only heard some sound bytes from that show. She doesn't have a lot to hide so it went great for her. She said she didn't feel like an idiot.
Jon asked Jenny what it was like for her. Jenny said they were ready to dish on anyone and everything. She said that it was weird for the first time seeing everyone in person. She said that he touched her at the end and that was fucking weird.
Gary asked Jenny if she was on the boat with Jason when he peed on Chelsea. She filmed it. Gary missed that part of the interview.
Jon said Tiffani has a new show on the cooking channel. Tiffani said that she has people over to her pseudo house and she cooks for them. She said she loves cooking and serving alcohol to her friends. She said she has a lot of celebrities on the show. Gary asked if she has Screech. She said he wasn't available apparently. Jon thanked Tiffani for stopping by and went to break a short time later.
Jon asked Jenny if she likes The Bachelor. Jenny said Howard was there before her. She said that she came in around Jerry O'Connell's brother Charlie when he was on. Jon asked if she checks things out when Howard is into it. Jenny said yes. Gary asked if she has watched Banshee. Jenny said she hasn't watched Banshee yet but only because she didn't get a part she auditioned for on the show. She said she bans shows like that from her house.
Jon took a call from a guy who asked if Beth Stern was on MrSkin.com would they look at the pictures. Gary said yes because it's not a secret thing. Jenny said she would look at pictures too.
Gary said he has a friend whose wife was on an HBO show. He said he knew she was going to be on the show but didn't know she was going to be topless. He said he got an early copy of the show for his friend and he watched it. He said the girl comes bounding in to the room topless. He said he told the guy he should have wanted him about it.
Jon asked Gary about the Wack Pack thing today. Gary said he was going over the list and figured that Sour Shoes might be his guy but then he thought that not knowing is the best so that's why he went with Gary the Conqueror. Jenny said she may go with Mariann. Gary said she has a great life. He said she's not in though. Jenny said she feels like she should be in.
Gary said that Mariann is sort of the wrangler for the Wack Pack. Gary said that they should bring Jenny to AGT so she can see Mariann at work. Gary said you'll see all of the Wack Packers and Mariann is leading the parade.
Jon took a call from a guy who said he thinks he has a suggestion for how to pick the Wack Packers. He said you have three things. He said you go by the greatest accomplishment as a result or being on the show. Then number 2 is if the show gave them their name and if they live at home. He said if 2 out of 3 are yes then they're a Wack Packer. Gary said then Tan Mom wouldn't be in it. Gary said he thinks she should be in. Jenny said she doesn't think she should be. Gary said the rules are different for everyone. Jenny said they didn't discover her. Gary said that she was a 10 day news story but because of the show she's become something else. Jenny said she needs a hyphen on her name or something. Jon said they have maintained her popularity. Jenny said she thought they were spoofing her but then she realized it was really her.
Jon said a caller said that it's not just saying you want to be in it that disqualifies you. He said the guy said that wanting to be out is what keeps you in. Gary said he thinks that Jeff the Drunk is in it and he thinks he'd be upset if they threw him out. Jenny said if they threw Eric out then he would have been upset too.
Jon took a call from a guy who said Sal is not a Wack Packer. He said he has completely crossed over. He said he might be the most depraved and naive employee there at Sirius. He said he thinks that he has crossed over because he has access to the building with a badge and that opens up a crazy world. Gary said he thinks Sal was close to Wack Packer status when he wanted to stay at Howard's apartment. He said that there are always exceptions to the rule in the Wack Pack.
Jon took a call from a guy who said he would make a hybrid category. He said he'd call them a Staff Packer or something like that. He said that it's a guttural feel on where they would be. The caller said that it's a fine line. Jon said that's an interesting discussion. Jon asked if JD falls into that Wack Pack category. Jenny said JD is great on text. She said that some of these people you wouldn't even be able to read it.
Jon asked Gary about Sal's example of using words in the wrong context. Gary said that the staff loves that. He said he's never seen the office laugh so loud over something. He said that they love that. Jon said that the parallel between Sal's apology and the news anchor's was so close. Gary said Sal doesn't know when to end either. He said that he just keeps going. Gary said that it goes on and on and on.
Jon said speaking of Sal they have the poll results. He said 53 percent of the people voted no, Sal is not a Wack Packer. Jon wrapped up the show after that. They were done around 11:50am.
Howard started the show talking about the very busy show they have coming up today. Kid Rock and Conan O'Brien are coming in. Howard said he was on Conan back in 2006. He has no recollection about that. Howard said he warned Conan about Jay Leno. He said he's sure everyone did.
Howard said they had that conversation about the Wack Pack yesterday and he thought it was a compliment to tell people they weren't in it because it means they're normal. Howard said he thinks about it like asking if he could put people in a cage and have people view you. He said he loves Joey Boots and his antics but he assumed it was a compliment that he's not that fucked up. Howard said Shuli or Jon Leiberman went to talk to Joey Boots and see High Pitch Eric. Howard said Joey was in tears over that. Howard said he was completely devastated that he's not in the Wack Pack. Howard said he can't believe he would want to be.
Howard played a clip of Jon Leiberman talking to Joey Boots about being ''kicked out'' of the Wack Pack. Joey was really bummed. Joey was tearing up and said it meant a lot to him to be in it. Joey said he's not sure what he is now. He said he didn't hear the segment though. Joey said he doesn't have any deformities but he lives in the same building that Eric lives in. He said they are obsessed with the show. Joey said he's miffed and doesn't understand.
Howard said High Pitch Eric is obsessed with the show but Eric the Actor wasn't. Howard said he's very sorry that this happened. Robin said that Bobo and others were upset. Mariann too. Fred said they're all devastated. Howard said he thought it would be a compliment. Howard said Eric has that voice and may even be retarded. Howard said Joey isn't the guy you go to stare at in a cage. Fred said not everyone can be an A-Rod or Derek Jeter. He said that if they play for the Yankees then you're always in the Yankees. Joey said that Joey has been described as being in the Wack Pack on their description of him on the web. Fred said you can't take that away.
Howard said when he told Janks he wasn't in the Wack Pack it was a compliment. He said it's not a compliment to be in it. He said it means something is wrong. Robin said you should be institutionalized. Howard said right. He said only on this show is it an insult to be called a functioning member of society. He said he's amazed and taken aback by it.
Howard said Melrose Larry is thanking him for putting him in it. Howard had him on the phone. Melrose said he is normal but what does normal mean? Howard said he put him in there because he stands on Melrose and holds up signs. Howard said that's a freak who has lost it. Howard said Joey can argue that he screams at reporters. Fred said he went to court over it. Howard said that is true. Robin said he went to court and that's a sign he's not in the Wack Pack. Melrose said he feels Joey's pain. He said Joey, Bobo and Mariann have to realize that it's Howard's show. Robin said that he's just happy he's in. Fred said Melrose does it for other shows. Howard said that doesn't matter. Howard said these people have to get a life. Howard said he may have to take Melrose out of the Wack Pack. Melrose said he is a freak so he can't do that.
Fred said he's been rethinking this since yesterday. He said he thinks Janks should be back in with Bobo, Joey Boots and some of the others they took out.
Howard played the ''We Are the Wack Pack'' song parody that Wendy the Slow Adult, High Pitch Eric, Jeff the Drunk, Daniel Carver (uh oh) and others were in. Howard kicked Daniel out of the Wack Pack list yesterday. Elephant Boy was in the song with Nicole Bass and Beetlejuice too.
Robin said Gay Ramone might be back in after hearing that song. Howard said he thinks Daniel Carver might be in the Wack Pack. Howard said it's not all based on physical stuff. Robin said he's not in the sideshow. Howard said he went on their show and did a game in a Klan outfit. Howard said Batman puts on an outfit and he's a super hero. Gary said he is more interesting. Benjy said that Daniel Carve is Wack Pack. He said Superman isn't a super hero on Krypton but he's still a super hero. Robin didn't agree. Robin said you have to be a Wack Pack all the time.
Howard said he's going to shelve this conversation. He said at some point they need to address some people like Melrose, Joey Boots and others. Howard said they're either both out or both in. Fred said he thinks what they do is the same thing and they both belong in the Wack Pack. Howard said Gay Ramone was very upset about not being in. Howard had Ramone on the phone. Ramone said for 16 years he's been driving around with a license plate that says Wack Packer. He said that Robin came to his rescue this morning. Ramone said everyone is calling him. He said he's begging him to put him back in. Howard asked if he's crying for real. Robin said no. Ramone said he is. Howard said that's the worst acting he's ever heard. Howard said that Fred is really coming to life over this. Fred said that they're getting a raw deal. Howard said he hasn't come awake since Carol Alt called herself a super model.
Howard said Ramone is out of the Wack Pack. Howard said he's trying to treat people fairly. Fred said that he just looked up a medication that Ramone mentioned and he's in the same boat as Hanzi. Howard said Hanzi is ill. Ramone asked to please put him in. Howard said Ramone is an Extreme Fan. Howard said no one knows what Wack Pack is. Ramone said people ask him what it is. Ramone kept begging. Howard said Janks is all freaked out too.
Howard had Janks on the phone too. Janks said it's a badge of honor he's worn all his life. He said he's had that title for 26 years. Janks said he fucked a guy last week just because he looked like JD. Janks asked to be grand fathered in just because he's been on so long. Howard said he has to tell these two retards something. Howard said it is a compliment to not be in the Wack Pack. Janks said he and Fred the Elephant Boy were the first Wack Packers. Howard said he doesn't remember putting Ramone in there. Robin said she doesn't think he ever was. Fred said he appointed himself. Howard said Ramone was never in. Howard said Janks was in at one point but Ramone never was.
Janks kept begging to be put back in. He said yesterday he was ''indulged'' by the fans. Howard asked if he really was ''indulged.'' Howard said he thinks he was deluged. Howard said he can't spend all morning on this. He can't believe there are people fighting over this. Howard said he's saying that they are normal. Janks said it's a diss. Howard said it is not. Howard said Joey Boots should be jumping up and down that he's normal. Janks said that Joey should be in if Melrose is in. Ramone said he'll take Howard to court over this. Howard said he has to think this over. Howard said he's so sorry he even brought it up.
Janks gave out his Twitter handle of @CaptainJanks and said tweet at him if they support him. Howard said that Gay Ramone just hired Gloria Allred to represent him.
Howard said Shuli interviewed Hanzi and he was talking about the most important thing in his day... Hanzi cut him off and shut up. Howard said he says that he likes watching TV and getting enough sleep. Howard said he is more concerned about watching TV. Howard said you have to hear this. Howard said he has to take a break after that.
Howard played a clip of Shuli asking what's a bigger concern, missing calling the show or missing his TV shows. Hanzi said that he likes to catch up on his TV and he has to watch them all.
Howard asked Hanzi when he wakes up. Hanzi said he doesn't know. He said maybe 2 or 3 in the afternoon. He said he goes to sleep around 8am. Howard said then he watches his show? Hanzi said he catches up on news on Reddit and things like that. He said he writes material for himself. He said he writes stand up but Howard pointed out he doesn't do stand up. Howard asked to hear some of that stand up. Hanzi said no but Howard said he wants to hear it. Hanzi told Howard a story about how this is a historic day for him doing stand up and how he's worried because when have you heard of a Pakistani bombing without actually killing anyone. Howard said that's a good thought actually. He said it's funny.
Howard asked Hanzi how old he is. Hanzi said he's trying to revolutionize something. Howard asked Hanzi how long he's been up. Hanzi said he got up around 6 last night. He stayed up all night until now. Howard said Hanzi goes to work out for an hour then he goes out to get some food. Howard said then he comes home to watch TV. Hanzi said he'll go into his room and watch some of the WWE Network stuff. He said they're on the air all the time. He said you have to be really dedicated to that network. Howard said the TV is shared by his brother. Hanzi said it is. Howard asked how old his brother is. Hanzi said he's 26. Hanzi said he's normal and shit though. Howard asked why he hasn't moved out of the house. Hanzi said he thinks he secretly has. He said he thinks that people have different lives. Howard asked why he's still in the house. Howard said he understands Hanzi staying there. Hanzi said he doesn't know much about him. He said he doesn't ask anything. Howard asked if he's close to his brother. Hanzi said probably the most out of anyone. Howard asked if they watch together. Hanzi said his brother is into basketball and things and he's not into that. Hanzi said he catches up on Reddit and things like that. Howard said he must have an awesome house that no one wants to leave. He said his parents cant get rid of him. Hanzi told him to shut up.
Howard asked if Hanzi has sisters. Hanzi said he knows that already. Howard said he doesn't. He asked again. Hanzi said he has 2. He didn't want to talk about them but Fred said he heard one of them is really hot. Hanzi said he can't talk about that. He said he never says she's hot. Howard asked if he's mad that she got the looks and he didn't. Hanzi said he's not talking about this. Hanzi said this is weird. He didn't want to talk about it. Howard said his sister has nice breasts but it doesn't mean he wants to have sex with her. He said he can tell him that Fred is the most handsome man he's seen. Fred thanked him for that.
Howard asked if the sisters moved out. Hanzi said they did. Howard asked if they're married. Hanzi said one is. Howard asked if it's the hot one. Hanzi changed the subject. Howard kept asking about the sisters but he wasn't talking about them.
Howard asked Hanzi why he watches wrestling. Hanzi said it's shit but he likes watching it. Howard said it must be mind numbing knowing it's a performance. Hanzi asked if Howard's show isn't a performance. Howard said of course it is. He said that it's a comedy show though. Hanzi said he's been told that Howard is friends with Triple H and shit. Howard said he's not but he has been on the show. Howard said he's not even watching any of that WWE stuff. Hanzi said he is too.
Howard said Hanzi watches TV for like 10 hours. Hanzi said it's not that much. He said he has a spreadsheet of the shows he watches. Howard asked him to read them to him. Hanzi got the list and read the shows that he'll be watching today. Some of the shows were Modern Family, Empire, It's Always Sunny in Philadelphia, Broad City and The Americans. Howard said he can't get into The Americans. Robin said it's so good. Hanzi likes Banshee too. Howard said he has the life. He said he has a roof over his head, TV, food and more. He said that he has nothing to complain about. Howard said the only thing he can't get is laid unless he pays for it. Hanzi said he could get laid but he doesn't approach women. Robin said you have to do that to get laid.
Howard said Hanzi has some lifestyle. He said there's no stress. Robin said he has it all. Howard said he thinks people live in the walls and stuff so that's kind of tough but other than that it's not so bad.
Howard said he really has to go. Hanzi said he wants to ask Conan for a job. Howard said you don't go from your basement to the Conan show. Howard said you get a regular job. Howard said he's not going to waste time with Hanzi's shtick. Howard said he can send him a resume instead. Hanzi got all flustered trying to answer that. Hanzi said he wants to be a monologue writer. Hanzi had a joke about Afroman. He told that joke which was about Afroman. Howard said he really has to run. He said he can't waste time with Hanzi when Conan is on. Howard said he is the only guy to stick up for him in that whole Jay Leno thing.
Howard said that he has Hulk Hogan on the phone. Howard had him talk to Hanzi. Hanzi said ''Fuck you man.'' The guys in the back were playing clips of Hulk Hogan saying he wants to marry Hanzi and move to Minnesota. Hanzi told them to stop with that shit. Hanzi said this is confusing him. Howard said he's in love with him. Hanzi wasn't going for it. He told Howard to kill the bit. Howard asked why he doesn't want to talk to Hulk Hogan. Hanzi said he's not a fan. Howard let Hulk go after that. He said he's spent too long on this. Hanzi asked him to get CM Punk on the show. Howard said he has to get rid of this guy. He hung up on Hanzi. They played him out with his ''Imran Khan Lives With his Dad and Mom'' theme song as they went to break.
Howard said they're taping the shows in Newark at NJPAC. Howard said it can take 45 minutes to get there. He said he has meetings next week and then he goes over there to do the shows. He said that they're there from about 10 to 10. Howard said he has to leave himself an hour to get there. He said he has to leave around 8am. He said his agent wants to meet at 7 and then he has to do AGT.
Howard said that you have to have all of your wits about you to keep up with Heidi Klum and Mel B. Howard said there is so much fat in the schedule. Howard said he doesn't want to do press. He said he's not supposed to but whatever they want. He said they're paying for a full day so that's what they'll get. Howard said they did write a half hour for dinner into the schedule. Howard said they do get that downtime.
Howard said he ends up being half asleep during the acts because they go through so much prep. Howard said that he told Jason Raff that he has to get up at 6 and then do press, then do the show.
Howard said he told them over there that they should let Howie do all of the nonsense and then he'll come in and judge. Howard said he was hired to judge and not be a circus act. Robin said it's been this way for 3 years. Howard said he did re-sign but only because Robin and people like her told him to. Howard said he does like the judging. Robin said it's like loving crab but not being in love with taking it out of the shell but you have to take it out of the shell. Howard said that's exactly what it's like. He said he actually doesn't like taking it out of the shell.
Howard said he was terrible on the air when he started. He said he put so much into his job and he refused to accept failure. Howard said he put in tremendous hours working. He said he tried to figure out how to fit in. He said he never dreamt of success. Howard said he must take a break now. Howard let Shaky go after that. He said he had to move along. Howard told Shaky to stop dating and forget about women. He said he has to concentrate on his career instead. Howard went to break a short time later.
Howard came back and said that Kid Rock is there. He called him the savior of Detroit. Howard wondered if he actually did save Detroit. Howard asked if Kid Rock told Elton John that he's the most hetero man in the world. Kid Rock said he did. Howard asked if he smokes weed. Kid Rock said he doesn't smoke. He drinks though. Howard asked if he has saved Detroit yet. Kid Rock said that they did build a brewery there. He said the beer just kind of got re launched. Howard said so much for saving Detroit. Howard asked Kid Rock if he invested in the beer. Kid Rock said fuck no. He said he was born at night, not last night.
Howard said Kid Rock went to Elton John's wedding. Kid Rock said he has a running joke where he gets a hug and a kiss from him and Elton asks how he's doing, darling. Kid said that he can't be doing that. He said he is the most hetero guy. Howard said he dated Pam Anderson. Howard said he was married to her for a short time. Kid said it was the right amount of time. Kid Rock said it was fun and who doesn't want to ride the Ferris wheel. Robin said he didn't want to stay on it. Kid Rock said he said this years ago. He said getting married was the most fun he's had in his life. He said being married sucks but getting married is fun. Howard said he was living the life. Kid said it was awesome. Howard said it was fucking wild and he was living the life. Kid said he's now a grandpa. Howard said his son had a kid. Howard said he met that kid when he was young. Kid said he's the world's greatest grandpa. Kid said he's going to be called Paw-Paw. He said he's only 44 and he's a grandfather already. Kid said he just got his street cred for hillbillies.
Howard said he should call himself Bubbie like a Jewish grandpa. Kid said he went to a Jewish wedding once and they were carrying a guy around in a chair and he wondered what the fuck that was about.
Howard asked how old he was when he had his son. Kid said he was 23. He said his son beat him in that whole thing having a kid at 20. Kid Rock said that he went to the movies with his son once and he was hiding rows behind him. He said after the movie he grabbed them and said ''Listen here you little fuckers...'' and told them that he might be the coolest guy in the country and they don't sit next to him. He said that they didn't want to be around him at all. Kid said he gets it though. He said he took his dad and mom to the Kennedy Center Honors different years. He said he'd take pictures with everyone there and his mom wouldn't know who they were. He said he'd just tell her to shut up and take the picture.
Howard said Kid Rock has a new album out called ''First Kiss'' and he's selling music. He said he's doing well with it too. Kid said that record companies have turned into management. He said you used to have a manager but now you have a guy managing 10-20 acts. He said they get a chunk of the money from the clubs. Kid said that he thought that he had things worked out but then thought about how if no one showed up that was the end. Howard said Kid charges the fans $20. Kid said they scalp 1000 tickets. He said those people over pay or that shit. Howard said for 20 bucks you can get in and see Kid Rock with Foreigner. Kid said they do an hour of hits. Howard said then Kid Rock comes out with his antics. Howard said he can still make a profit. Kid said they make just as much as they did selling tickets at $60-70. He said he gets a part of all of the sales there. Howard said he's working the door. He said that's fine. Kid said he works with Live Nation and they're good. He said you just have to get past the managers and all of that.
Howard asked Kid about being a wealthy man and what his greatest luxury is. Kid said if he says it then Howard has to. Kid said the first thing he does is not think about money. He said not thinking about where he's getting money is the greatest luxury in his life. Howard said his thing is that he's not a big spender. Kid said Howard has a shit ton of money. Howard said Leon Black has a shit ton. Howard said he's anonymous and that's the best thing to be. Howard said he has a Toto toilet. Kid said he has one in every house. He said he gave them to his whole family. He said he has them everywhere. Kid said he has double wide trailers with Totos in them. Howard said that's what he has. Kid said they're great. Howard said his toilet opens up like a throne with the blue light. Kid said he has remote controls on the wall. Howard said he has that too. Kid said it's fucking awesome. He said he should be a spokesperson for it.
Kid said that you save so much just on toilet paper. He said you don't even have to dry. He said it dries your ass for you. Kid said he might have the cleanest taint.
Howard said he also has a large house. Kid said he's over that. He said that he gets the cheap stuff from Walmart. He said he doesn't spend money on a SubZero refrigerator. He said that he has double wide trailers all over the place. He said he has a house in Michigan that's kind of big. He said that he can't get out of Malibu quick enough. He said it's too big and nice. He said he and his girl don't have a lot of people running around. He said he doesn't have a house manager or anything like that. He said he won't give up his plane though. He said that's the biggest luxury in life.
Howard asked what kind of plane he has. Kid said it's a Hawker. Howard asked what that costs. Kid said it's like $3 million. He said the money is in maintenance and all of that. He said it might have been $30 million. He wondered how he can get the Toto on the plane. Howard said he'll know he's lost his mind when that happens. Kid said they're all rich people problems.
Howard asked how many seats he has on that Hawker. Kid said 7. Howard said he has to pay a pilot. Kid said it's 2. He said fuel prices are down. Howard asked if he rents it out to other people. Kid said he does. He said it has to be there for him when he needs it though.
Howard said Kid lives in a trailer though. Kid said they're great. He said that he has wrapped them in Mossy Oak. Kid rock said it's camouflage.
Howard said Kid has a lot of guns. Kid said Hank Jr. has guns. Kid said he has canons. He said he has them in front of his house in Michigan. He said he's fired the canons. He said that he didn't ask if that's legal though. He said they just set off the boom. He said they don't fire anything. He said it's the biggest boom you've ever heard in your life.
Kid said that he thought about taking the canon to Malibu and firing it off. He said that would freak people out. Howard asked if that's why he doesn't like it there because they won't like something like that. Kid said there are some nice people there but he doesn't get out there that much. Kid said his real estate agent tells him he has to take the animal heads down. He said he has a stuffed Baboon there. He said he gets a lot of that stuff at estate sales.
Howard asked about going out with Ted Nugent to hunt. Kid said he taught them how to bow hunt. He said it's nerve wracking. He said it's hard to get a great shot at anything more than 50 yards. He said that you sit outside for hours and nothing is going on. He said he doesn't have a lot of patience. Kid said that he sat with Ted once for like an hour. He said they were whispering to each other. He said Ted told him that he didn't invent ''fuck you'' but he perfected it.
Howard said that Kid is a sensitive guy and he doesn't get the hunting thing. He said it must make him sad. Kid said he's not. He said he worries more about gutting it. He said he's not a blood and gore kind of guy. Howard asked if he has a dog. Kid said he does. He said he never wanted to get one but then they did. He said that he has a Boykin Spaniel.
Howard asked Kid about the girl he's with now. Kid said he has learned his lesson about who to go out with. He said that she doesn't want to have kids. Kid said that she's perfect. He said it's her birthday today. Howard asked how much younger than him she is. Kid said he can't say. Howard asked if she just graduated high school yesterday. Kid said she speaks in full sentences.
Howard said that Kid has a new album out and he asked how the concerts go. Kid said he has about 45 minutes of hits and he can fake the other 20 minutes. Kid said that he got sued over that song. He said they used old rap lyrics and ended up getting sued by the record company. He said he didn't argue with them about that. He said they deserved it. Howard said he could tour with that song alone for the rest of his life. Kid said he lucked out and snuck in with the last Twinkie with album sales. Howard said today it's almost impossible to sell albums. Kid said his son is trying to do it and it's really tough. He said he told his son that he shouldn't do music because he'll never be as good as him. He said that's what Wayne Gretsky told his kids about hockey.
Howard said the new album name is ''First Kiss'' and is that the tour name? Kid said they want to re-brand it. He said he wants to call it the Kid Rock's Cheap Date. He said the tickets are 20 bucks. He said they sold 29,000 tickets at one of their shows. He said that tickets are so cheap that people will buy them. Howard said that it must be great to perform for people who want to be there instead of just people who can afford to go to an expensive show. Howard said he can make good money doing this. Kid said he can't believe it fucking worked.
Howard asked if he still plays ''Cowboy.'' Kid said he does it almost every night. Howard said he's surprised that he started singing ballads. Kid said he was too. He said he didn't understand singing when he started. He said he just kind of did it off the seat of his ass. Howard asked what his biggest song was. Kid said it was ''All Summer Long.'' Howard played some of that. Howard asked if he wrote that himself. Kid said he did with some help from Lynrd Skynrd. Kid said that he thought it was like mashing up a song but people said he was stealing it. Howard said he was up front about the whole thing. Kid said that Jimmy Van Zandt told him that he helped put his kid through college with that song.
Kid told Howard about how he had to kiss the ass of this guy at a station in L.A. and he refused to do it. He said he told the guy he was going to fuck his wife instead. He said that they went to number one everywhere but that station. Howard asked if his managers asked him what the fuck he just did. Kid said that just fuels the fire more.
Howard asked Kid about having Sheryl Crow for a girlfriend. Kid said that was for about a week. He said that she's part of the family though. Howard played some of the song he did with Sheryl. Howard said she's a good singer. Kid said she's incredible. Howard asked who he would want in the room for sex between Pam and Sheryl. Kid said there is no right answer for that. Howard asked who he would go to if he had to do it to save the world. Kid said he is very patriotic. He said he would have to go with Sheryl. Howard said that's a revelation. Howard said he's growing up. Kid said that he's growing up.
Howard brought up American Sniper and the movie Birdman. Kid said he didn't see Birdman. He said he doesn't want to see it. Kid said he's not gay. Howard asked about using that word. Kid said he has no problem with gay but he word is fun to say.
Howard played some of Kid's new song ''First Kiss'' and asked if it's really about his first kiss. Kid said no. Howard asked if the girl in the song was a real chick. Kid said it was made up. Howard let the song play a little bit and said he's still rockin.
Howard asked how old he was when he lost his virginity. Kid said it was 15-16 or somewhere in there. He said he's just guessing. He said rock and roll hasn't been kind for memory purposes. Howard asked if he has any regrets. Kid said no. He said if he did he'd just accept it and move on.
Howard said Kid Rock is out on tour and he's got the new album out. Kid said they worked with Warner Brothers. Howard asked if he wishes he could go back in time like he says in the song. Kid asked who wouldn't. Howard said he didn't have a good time back then. He said he'd like to go back to maybe 45 years old. Howard said maybe 3 months. Kid said he didn't say how long back in time he'd go. Howard gave him some more plugs and said he is a man of the people because he doesn't have a Toto in his private jet. Kid said his dad gave him his back. He said they have a bidet in their house. Howard said Jimmy Kimmel turned him on to that toilet. Kid said he tells everyone to get one. He said they're like $700 for the top of the line. Howard said even with the Toto he uses baby wipes. Kid said he's going to fuck shit up if he keeps using them. Kid said he used to use baby wipes but he stopped. Howard said he still has to clean up even with the Toto. Kid said you just turn the pressure up. Howard said he's afraid of turning it up. Kid said the pressure works. He said it's the best.
Howard asked if he has a urinal. Kid said he does. Howard said he does too. Kid said they have a lot in common. Kid said he has a mat under his for people who dribble. Howard said he's the only one who uses his urinal. Howard said Pam Anderson is on the phone to her lawyer complaining about Kid saying he'd rather fuck Sheryl. Howard said it was good seeing him. He gave him another plug and went to break.
Howard came back and said that Conan O'Brien is there. Howard said he's the host of a very popular show called The Conan O'Brien show. Howard said that he hasn't seen him in years. He said he looks the same and he has the same swagger. Conan came in and said Howard and Robin look fantastic.
Howard asked if he likes living in California. Conan said he loves raising his kids there but he doesn't have the skin for it. He said he goes to his dermatologist every week. He said it's not a matter of if but when he'll get cancer. He said that his mom would send them to the beach with a t-shirt on and he'd still come home looking like a lobster. Howard said he hasn't had any skin cancer yet. Conan said he wears a lot of big, floppy hats when he goes out. He said it's the least masculine thing you can do. He said he wears the hat and it robs you of your testosterone. Howard said he wears those hats too. He said he's deathly afraid of the sun. Conan said it's going to happen to him any day now. He said he doesn't think that much about it though.
Howard said he thinks about Conan as a talk show host. He said he went to Harvard and he was the valedictorian of his school. Howard said he was the most brilliant student and his father was a Microbiologist. Howard asked Conan when he's sitting there doing an interview with a complete nitwit, and there are some out there... Howard asked if he has had his IQ tested. Conan said he hasn't. He said he thinks he has a lot of emotional intelligence but then he's staggeringly stupid in other areas. Howard asked what his SAT scores were. Conan said they weren't that great. He said he thinks Harvard thought he was interesting. He said that he was a good writer. He said he won some national fiction writing contest and that got their attention. He said he had an interesting name too.
Howard asked if he was a popular kid. Conan said he wasn't. He said that it took him time. He said he doesn't blow people away when he comes out of the gate. He said he was a nerdy kid. He said that he thinks he grew into his body in the last several weeks. He said when he was a junior in high school people knew he was funny. He said that he wasn't a class clown though. Conan said those guys end up dying in a motel shoot out. He said the guys who are funny are very quiet and under the radar. Howard said the class clown is the idiot or the court jester. Conan said he's the guy in a prison right now. Howard said he was considered the class gardener.
Howard said when you come from a family like that and go into show business they get upset. Howard said his family got upset. Conan said he was interested in show business but he wanted to go into government or writing. He said it was a complete accident. He said he had a roommate who went to The Lampoon to try out. He said he was oblivious. He went with the friend and the friend gave up. Conan said he kept going and it felt great. He said he wrote cartoons and things like that. He said he liked staying up and making people laugh. Conan said his parents were very supportive from the beginning. He said he started earning a living pretty quickly. He said his experience with kids is that once they're paying rent you don't care what they do. Howard said he was writing comedy for like $100,000 a year. Conan said he doesn't remember. Howard said he can tell him. Conan said he's the most thorough interview ever. Conan said he hooked up with Greg Daniels who went on to work with him on Saturday Night Live for awhile and then went on to write The Office. Howard said they started out on Not Necessarily The News. Conan said they did that.
Howard said he hears stories about what Conan did at The Lampoon. Howard said they pulled a thing on Bill Cosby. Conan said he thinks Cosby's pranks since then have topped him. Howard laughed at that. Howard said that what Conan did was meet bill Cosby by creating an award that didn't exist. Conan said that you can get people to pick up an award if you do that. He said you have the Harvard name and all of that behind you. Conan said he knew nothing about show business. He said he was around 19 years old at the time. He said all he heard was that Bill Cosby was coming in on Butler Aviation at Boston Logan Airport. Conan said what you do is call a limo company. He said he didn't know that at the time. He said he took the T back home and borrowed his dad's station wagon. Conan said that it was a used car they bought. He said it was a Ford LTD with wood paneling on it. He said on the side it said Spruce Point In on the side. Conan said he drove to pick up Cosby and he gets out of a private plane wearing a tuxedo. He was wearing that for the award. Conan said he walks out and he's there to pick him up with the wagon. He said he starts driving him in the back seat of the car. He said it's about a 20 minute drive. He said that Cosby picked up a Quarter Pounder wrapper in the back. He said he just told him to throw it in the back.
Howard said then they get Cosby there and what happens. Conan said they had bought a bowling trophy and altered it. Howard asked how many people were involved. Conan said maybe 8. He said they had a massive crowd there. He said Cosby came out and in his way he has got that rhythm. He said he's killing and he was standing behind him thinking that if you read a transcript of that then it wasn't funny. He said he just had something that made it funny.
Conan said that he wanted to meet Cosby and it all came from a good place. Howard asked if anything came from it. Conan said he was very nice to him and the students. He said it was in the evening and someone found pictures of it. He said he looks like a 19 year old woman in the pictures.
Howard said he read that Conan also did something at The Lampoon where he befriended Burt Ward from Batman and Robin. Conan said he thinks the 1960s Batman TV show was a perfect piece of work comedicaly. Howard asked if they were going for that though. Conan said they were. He said they have so many jokes about counter culture. He said kids like it and adults like it too.
Howard asked about fucking with Burt Ward. He asked if he did that out of admiration. Conan said they did it for time killing. Conan said Burt came to Harvard and he wasn't invited by them. He said he was going to lecture about the Batman series. Howard said he would travel with multiple Robin costumes. Conan said what got his attention was the posters up saying he was going to display the actual Robin costume that was valued at $250,000 by Lloyd's of London. He said he didn't think that was cool to do. Conan said they planned a thing out where he'd be giving the lecture and he'd have the costume on display and then at the key point they'd hit the lights with a guy dressed up like The Penguin in the audience. He said they were going to steal the costume and run out. He said that they turned the lights out but it was in daylight so they could see very well. Conan said they started running out and other students started chasing them. Conan said they taunted him over the phone and they eventually gave it back. Conan said he taunted him as The Joker. He said it was so much fun. He said Burt was angry too.
Howard said they did this just for their own amusement. Conan said they did. He said these days it would be on everyone's cell phone. Howard said he thinks that he'd never top that and quit show business. Conan said that was his top so he should have gotten out then.
Howard said Conan got out of Harvard and he goes on to write for Not Necessarily The News and some shows like that. Conan said that people liked him because he'd make people laugh behind the scenes. He said they'd put him on The Wilton North Report too. He said he'd do that and he loved it. Howard said he remembers that show and how it was two DJs they tapped to do the thing. Howard said he was so nowhere at the time. Howard said he was jealous. Conan said they had a good writing staff and then they hired the talent. He said he thought they had to do things the other way around.
Conan said once he got out of school he did have times when he wasn't working. He said that he was working at a furniture store for a while. Howard said he was doing okay though. Howard said he picked the one business where someone could take his job at any time. Conan said that he gets depressed and down on himself. He said he is medicated for that though. He said it's not crazy levels. Conan said that he got to the point where he thought he had to be unhappy to be funny. He said people tell you that's not true. Then you don't care if it's true or not. He said he'd rather be happy. Howard asked about going for the medication he did it for the kids and wife. Conan said he knew he needed help. He said he was wasting time in rehearsal being so negative. He said it was getting in the way of the whole thing. Howard asked if he's happier now. Conan said he is. He said it's like a lever that gives you a push. He said it enables you to keep going. He said it's like a little oil on the gears.
Howard asked if he resisted against the meds. Conan said he did. He said that the doctor told him that he was asked 50 questions and 48 of them pointed to depression. Howard asked if he's been suicidal. Conan said no, never that. He said he likes himself too much.
Conan said walking there this morning he had to walk past 30 Rock where he did his show at NBC. He said that he remembers going there very morning and wanting to do well. Howard said he knows that kind of anxiety. He said that it's awful. He said he gets it.
Howard said Conan was an NBC guy. He said he was struggling along and he had applied for a job at Letterman and he was rejected. Conan said that was his dream job. He said he remembers getting really close and it was between him and another guy. He said he got the call and they told him they went with the other guy. Conan said he thought that was it for him. He said one road led to success and one led to failure. He said he thought he was on that road to failure. Howard said he is the smartest guy in the room and he gets rejected so he must think that just can't be. Conan said he never assumes he's the smartest guy. He said he assumes he's not the smartest. Conan said he felt he had to prove himself because he did go to Harvard. He said the Letterman thing was crushing to him.
Howard said he heard they told Letterman that they had missed out on Conan and Dave said that was their loss. Conan said that 35 things have to go wrong for you to make it in your career. Conan said that if he had gotten on Letterman he never would have met Lorne Michaels. He said that led to him getting the late night show. He said if he got on Letterman he may have had a fine career as a writer but not what he has now. Howard said everything seems to go right for him.
Howard said Conan worked on Saturday Night Live and he was a writer there. Howard said he was responsible for a sketch that's one of his favorites. He said it was the nude beach sketch with Matthew Broderick. Conan said he pushed for the penis song at the end of the sketch. He said they performed it on stage in Chicago at a club during the writer's strike. He said it was a very special one for them. Howard said that the basis of the sketch was that they say no one looks at your penis at a nude beach but then everyone in the sketch was looking at everyone's penis. Howard asked if the censors had to get after them over the penis references. Conan said they did. He said things have changed so much now. Howard said he got suspended at NBC for saying ''douche bag'' and now you hear it on TV and radio all the time.
Conan said he remembers going through a script taking things out line by line. He said that if you suggested something worse they'd let you keep in the line you wanted.
Howard asked Conan if it's hard to write with other people. Conan said that working on The Simpsons was amazing. He said that he was scared shitless in that room. He said there were so many other great minds in there. Howard asked how they wrote scripts there. Conan said he got the job on The Simpsons. He said they were working with the original crew. He said James L. Brooks was going to be coming in shortly after he got there. He said he was going to go into a hotel room and pitch him ideas for The Simpsons. He said he was holed up in his apartment for weeks thinking and thinking. He said he was in such a state of misery. He said he pitched the shows to Brooks and he took all three of the ideas. He said he has a very distinctive laugh too.
Conan said that he is good in a writing room. He said he's the guy who is the clown for the writers. He said he can do shtick. Howard asked if he was upset that he didn't get on air at Saturday Night Live. Conan said he wasn't. He said that he never looked at Phil Hartman and thought he could do better. He said they were so brilliant at what they did and he knew that he had to do his own thing and be himself. He said Howard has done that and he doesn't do impressions and all of that. Conan said he knew if he could find a venue and do his own thing he could do it.
Howard said Conan was looking for shit to do and he used to do a phony talk show. He asked if he did the impressions of George Takei there. Conan said he did. He said he doesn't do impressions but George fascinated him. He said that they had met him and he remembers him telling him that he was in a production of Aladdin and the way he told it to him made him remember it. He said that Jeff Garlin was his roommate and he'd come in and have him do the impression and laugh for 20 minutes. Howard said George is great and they have him on the show. Howard had Fred play Conan the clips of George correcting them on the pronunciation of some words.
Conan said that his favorite episode of The Simpsons that he wrote was The Monorail. He said that they offered George a role on that show and he turned it down. Conan said that he turned it down because he was on a transportation board and he felt they were mocking the whole monorail thing. He said they went to Leonard Nimoy and he agreed to do it.
Howard asked Conan about writing something that they would screw up on Saturday Night Live. He asked if that was frustrating. Conan said that it wasn't. He said if it didn't make it then it was meant to be.
Howard said Conan got close to Lorne Michaels at Saturday Night Live. Conan said he didn't get close really. He said you'd see him around but he was very intimidating. Conan said that he'd walk by and ask if he was still with the show and hanging by a thread. Conan said he had a desk by Bob Odenkirk and Lorne dropped by and talked to them about the week he had off. Conan said he ended up deciding to leave Saturday Night Live and Lorne asked him to stay. He said he was to the point where he was going to pay him to just pitch them some ideas and he didn't even have to be there.
Howard asked what made him leave. Conan said he was depressed and he was burnt out. He said Saturday Night Live is very intense. He said there's a lot of not sleeping. He said that one thing about it is that they throw you in the deep end right away. He said you're a newbie and you're scared. He said they tell you to go in and pitch ideas to Steve Martin right away. He said 3 years of that and it was very intense.
Howard asked Conan what he did after leaving Saturday Night Live. Conan said that he walked around the city for 2 weeks and bought a book of poetry. He said it was the lamest thing. Then he got the job on The Simpsons. Howard said that Lorne knew so many people at Saturday Night Live and he picked Conan to do the late night show. Conan said you can't explain to kids what the world was like before YouTube. He said this would never happen again. He said if there was a vacancy on a late night show there would be thousands of candidates. He said there is no such thing as a complete unknown anymore. He said back then Letterman left NBC and NBC didn't think he was going to leave. He said they asked Lorne to pick the new guy. He said that Lorne looked around and wasn't able to find what he was looking for. Howard said NBC was asking Garry Shandling to do it and he turned down the job. Conan said he remembers someone telling him that Shandling was going to do it and he said he didn't think so. Conan said he was doing better work pretending to do it than having to do it for real. He said he didn't think Shandling was going to take the job.
Conan got the job with NBC and Howard said he thought that it was a week to week contract. Conan said that he thought that he should just put an egg timer on the desk and time his time there with that. Howard said you almost deserve a payout if you have a show that fails. He said that you get built up and then 6 weeks later they're all bad mouthing you. He said that happened to Chevy Chase. Conan said he cared so much. He said he was unmarried and all he did was live, sleep and breathe comedy. He said he didn't think he was going to be the guy who tried to replace Letterman for 9 weeks. He said he thought it just wasn't happening. He said he didn't want to go out that way. Howard said he has a very strong will to go on.
Conan said he was going to a therapist at the time and he was talking about how people don't like him and want him to go away. He said that the therapist said that's all in his mind. He said he picked up a magazine and said no, this is what the headlines are in this magazine. He said it's the greatest thing you can do to a therapist.
Howard said that they also wanted Andy Richter off the show. Conan said that people complained about him getting his own laughs. He said he wondered what was wrong with getting laughs. Conan said he doesn't care. He said that Andy is a huge fan of Howard's and he knows he's listening. He said in all honesty he is one of if not the funniest person he knows. He said he has one rule for him and that's just ''go for it.'' Howard said Johnny Carson kept Ed McMahon clamped down. Conan said that he and Andy look different and when you put the two of them together it works perfect. He said Andy makes it easier to do the show. Howard asked if he got angry when he left the show. Conan said he didn't but he did get sad. He said he didn't replace him either. He said Andy came back and as soon as he was back it was like he had never left.
Howard asked if Conan would have gone to the Saturday Night Live 40th anniversary. Conan said he's not sure. He said that he was a writer there and he wasn't on camera. He said that everybody who was part of the unpleasantness was gone shortly after his thing blew up. He said he has no animosity toward NBC. He said they employed him for 20 years and it made his career. He said there were a couple of people he was not thrilled with but they were gone pretty quickly after that.
Howard said in 2006 he was on Conan's show and he turned to him on the show and told him it was going to go horribly wrong. He said that he knew Jay wasn't going to let him take his show. Howard said he almost knew what he was talking about. Conan said he knew exactly what he was talking about. Conan said he looks back on that and doesn't like to talk about it much. He avoids talking about it. Conan said no one in show business should complain. He said that they make crazy money and live out their dreams. He said on his TBS show he made a point to be positive. He said guests would ask about it and he'd make a joke about it. Conan said he'd read the next day that he can't get over it. He said that it was a guest asking him about it. He was responding in a joke. He said he can't even just talk about it for a second. He said people complain and tell him to let it go.
Howard said he remembers when FOX TV came to Conan and said they'd give him $28 million to jump over there. Howard said NBC gave him the Tonight Show when Jay retires. He said Conan wanted that show so bad he stayed with NBC. Conan said that all he wanted out of this gig wasn't because of money. He said he really wanted to keep his body of work. He said that's all he wanted. Conan said that is the most important thing next to his family and kids. He said it's his legacy. Conan said he's proud of the good stuff. He said leaving NBC and not having access to that 16 years of work was crushing to him. He said that never comes up. Conan said that's the most ironic thing about the whole situation. He said he doesn't have access to that stuff now. Conan said he did another 5 years at NBC and did some good work there. He said he doesn't regret turning down the FOX deal.
Conan said that Bill Carter wrote a book about the Tonight Show thing and he thinks Bill Carter and Jay Leno are the only two people who bought the book. Conan said he doesn't regret anything. He said that he feels that a lot of your career is about the cards you were dealt. He said that he's a poster boy for luck in show business. He said he has been dealt cards at times that weren't easy to play and he's dealt with that very well.
Howard asked Conan if he was ashamed of that whole situation. Conan said he had the number 1 sign that he wasn't in a good place was the beard. He said he had that beard overnight. Howard said that's so true. He said prisoners of war have beards.
Conan said it took him 3 years to get to process what went on. He said what helped was going on tour and getting in front of live audiences. He said he sent out one tweet and it sold out across the country. He said he played guitar and had fun doing that. He said he's a hack guitarist but he loves playing it. He said he plays at rehearsal. Howard asked why he doesn't play more. Conan said he doesn't want to be the mediocre comedian playing guitar. Howard said it makes him happy when people do that. Howard said he thinks it would be fun for the audience to see that.
Conan said he remembers seeing Alan Thicke coming out and doing his show for the first time and grabbing a guitar to play. He said he was about 15 years old and he told himself to never do that.
Conan said he did the tour and then they had to redo the whole show. He said he had to jettison some of the bits he used to do. He said he wanted to reinvent himself. He said the Turner people were great. He said they just said do what you gotta do. He said they were happy with him and they got rid of a lot of the bits they used to do. He said he wanted to do the show differently. Conan said they have mostly rebuilt the show. He said they have found things like the remotes and he's really proud of some of the stuff. He said what they did last night was go on Grinder with Billy Eichner. Howard said they set up a profile and filmed a gay date. Conan said they found a guy to go out with him. He said that most of the bit is trying to find a date for him. He said he very much wants to meet a guy and wants it to be the right guy. He said he forgets that he's not gay. He said he's competitive about it. Conan said they found a guy who wanted to meet in a parking lot. He said they had a van ready to go and they had painted on the side of it Cher and Liza Minelli. He said they drove and met the guy. Conan said the guy realized who he is at the last second. He said the guy asked him if he was a fan of Conan. Conan said he asked ''Fan!?'' Howard asked if he blew the guy. Conan said he did. He said they did multiple takes.
Howard took a call from the guys in the back who were playing George Takei audio clips. Conan got a laugh out of that short bit.
Howard said Conan is going down to do shows in Cuba. Conan said they decided that we can go down there now so someone on the staff suggested going down there. Conan said they had to go there right now. Howard said he's scared of all of that shit. Conan said that's why they do these remotes. He said he loves doing this stuff.
Howard asked about the gay date thing and if it was a real thing. Conan said it was. He said they asked the guy what he thought when he met him for the first time and he wasn't impressed.
Howard asked what the Cuba shows are going to be. Conan said it's going to be like one long remote. He said he will be walking around talking to people and stuff like that. Conan said he thinks that the Cubans are going to be happy that we're allowed to visit there again.
Howard said he hates Jay Leno and he has said it many times. Howard said he supported Conan because he felt that he undermined him. He said that whole thing was bizarre. Howard said he offered to go on the last week of Conan's Tonight Show. Conan said he never heard that. Howard said he heard that NBC forbid him from coming on. Conan said there was so much chaos going on. He said that he was trying to get out in a gracious way. He said it meant a lot to him to be gracious. Howard said he was. Howard said that he had a Rolling Stones song in the last week and that cost NBC a million bucks. Conan said it didn't really. He said that was the running gag. Conan said that they did some of their best work in that last week there. Conan said they ended with Freebird and Will Ferrell's pregnant wife who gave birth a few hours later it was just so good. He said he was very proud of that.
Howard asked if he has run into Jay since then. Conan said ''god no.'' He said that hey don't run in the same circles. He said he's fine to never see him again. Howard said he had a falling out with him too. He said that he got the satisfaction of him calling him at home. He said he told Jay they are not friends and he feels like he fucked him over so they're done. Howard said he doesn't like that but that's what happened. Conan said he doesn't like to be out there and not want to run into someone. He said if he ran into Jay he's just going to be like ''Hey, how's it going?''
Howard asked Conan what would have happened if he didn't have his wife and kids around. Conan said he's not sure. He said what's great is that his wife is proud of him and he makes her laugh. He said that's not the focus of their lives. Howard said what's amazing is that they live in L.A. and he never sees any pictures of them. Conan said he's never taken his kids to a premiere or anything like that.
Gary came in and asked if David Letterman asked him to do the Super Bowl ad with Jay Leno. Conan said he thinks that's the case. Howard said he thinks it was supposed to be Jay, Oprah and Dave. Conan said it wasn't a joke to him so he didn't want to do it. Conan said a lot of fans rose up and they were upset. He said he didn't want to do that bit. He said it took him less than a millisecond to turn it down. Howard said he asked Dave how he could do that with Jay. He said he made a joke out of the whole thing. Conan said he did Dave's show a couple of years ago and the producer asked if Dave should ask him about that commercial. He said he told him no.
Howard said that Conan is a good dude. Conan said it was great seeing him. He said Howard looks good. He said Robin looks fantastic too. Howard told him to come back and see them sooner than 15 years. Conan said he will be back soon. Howard said that the Cuba based Conan is on March 4th. He said that sounds like a fun show. Conan said it's been a dream. Howard asked if Conan is jealous of a guy like Jon Stewart who is retiring. Conan said he's not. He said he has more bits to do. He said he needs to work. He said his plan is to get out of show business 3 years later than he should have. He said his wife has told him that she won't live with him if he's not working.
Howard said Conan wrote that pilot for ''Lookwell'' and it was great. Howard said you can see the pilot on the web. Conan said at the time it was the weirdest thing in the world. He said he can't blame the people at NBC for not picking it up. Howard said Adam West was really good in it. Howard wrapped up and went to break a short time later.
Howard came back and did a live commercial read and said he'd get to Robin after that. Howard and Robin talked about some of the stuff they forgot to bring up with Conan today. They forgot to bring up George Lopez. Howard said he can't remember everything. He finished up his live commercial read after that.
Howard said it was great to see Kid Rock and Conan. He said it's good to see Robin too. Howard said it's time for her news. They played her in with Ham Hands Bill's classic ''Ham Hands'' song parody. Howard said he had to get out of there so he cut it off.
Howard said he got an email from Captain Janks. He said he had to read it with him on the phone. Howard picked up Janks and read the email where Janks explained why he's still a Wack Packer. Howard said he can't believe this. He said this is a compliment to him. He said Janks is not a freak. Janks asked if he remembers giving the F-Emmy to the other guy every year back in the 90s. Howard said he didn't remember doing that. Janks said he loves Howard but he started the phony phone call craze. He said that led to all of the Baba Booey stuff that happens now. Howard said he's not wacky, he's brilliant. Howard said he should just accept that it's an honor. Robin said it's a good thing. Janks said it sticks in his craw but if that's the way it's going to be then he'll accept it.
Fred said that they could have a Wack Pack and a Douche Pack. He said someone suggested that in the email. Howard said this is like begging to be in ISIS or something. He said it's not an honor. Janks asked him to play one of his calls. Howard said he has to get out of there so not today.
Robin got to her news and read a story about a new Bill Cosby accuser coming out. Howard said this is amazing. He asked who would predict something like this. Robin said this woman's name is Heidi Thomas and she claims that she was drugged and assaulted by Cosby in 1984. Robin read about how she was going to get acting tips from Cosby and her allegations are similar to others. Robin read the details of her claims. Howard did a live commercial read after that.
Howard took a call from a guy who said Howard talks about a couple of hot chicks whose names he doesn't seem to know. Howard said he knows them. One of them was Dana Perino. Howard said she seems smart to him. Howard said the guy who sits next to her is Greg Gutfeld. He said he likes him too. Howard said he really doesn't care about her politics. Howard said she worked for President Bush and you have to have some smarts to get there. Howard said she's bright. Robin told him to stop it.
Robin had Howard play Taylor Swift singing ''Welcome to New York.'' Robin said she just donated $50,000 to some schools in New York from the proceeds of that song. Howard said that she isn't even from New York but she decided to donate some money to the schools. Howard said she's going to donate more and there are turds on the internet who say that's like 25 cents to the rest of us. Robin said meanwhile they're not even giving 25 cents. Howard said people are so sick and ill that they will attack her over a $50,000 gift. Howard said she didn't have to do that. Howard said if they should be upset about anything it should be that the song sucks. Howard said she looks beautiful in the paper today. He said she doesn't have those dopey bangs in the picture today. He said she looks much better without bangs. Howard told people to stop being assholes.
Howard took a call from Ralph who said that he was thinking that 50 grand was kind of low. Howard said she got paid for the song and she took the proceeds and gave it to the schools. Howard said no one gives money to the public schools. The taxpayers are supposed to be taking care of that. Howard said it was a nice gift.
Ralph said Janks belongs in the Wack Pack. He asked who would want that moniker. Howard thanked him for that. Ralph said Conan was great. He said that it was like the Jon Stewart interview. He said the questions were great. Howard said he likes Conan and Andy Richter too. Ralph said that he did dismiss the Bill Carter book. Robin said it was the newer book and not The Late Shift book. Ralph said he missed that. Howard told him to pay attention. They played him out with the Mike Morse ''Ralphie Cakes'' song.
Robin said they haven't talked about how Rosie O'Donnell has stepped away from The View again. Robin said she says it's because of stress. Robin said her marriage has fallen apart so she's leaving the show to take care of her family. Howard said she never should have gone to The View. Howard said she is a solo act and she should have her own talk show if that's what she wants to do. Howard said that he would have advised Rosie not to get married so quickly too. He said he did say that to her. Robin said Rosie has said that Lesbians have a sped up timetable. Howard said that she should have listened to him. Howard did a live commercial read after that.
Robin read a story about Hillary Clinton talking about how right Patricia Arquette was in her speech about how women deserve equal pay.
Robin read a story about Giuliana Rancic insulting a woman on the red carpet at the Oscars. Robin said she was wearing dreadlocks and Giuliana said she thought the hair overwhelmed her and she probably smells like Patchouli oil or weed. She had to apologize for that. Howard said the show was set up for Joan Rivers who doesn't apologize. Howard said Joan never would have apologized. Robin said she would hope that Joan would have had a better joke. Howard said you have to know how to do it. Robin had Rancic's apology too. After hearing the apology Howard said those drops you feel are Joan Rivers vomiting up in heaven.
Robin had some audio of Robert McDonald apologizing over his claims that he was in the Special Forces and he never was. Robin said that aired on some news programs and they found out that he hadn't served in special forces. Robin had some audio of McDonald explaining why he said what he said.
Robin read a story about a law that was on the books that said parents had to approve to have a Mohel suck out the blood during a circumcision. Howard said he's never heard of such a thing. He said it sounds like kiddie porn. Robin said there have been cases of babies getting herpes from that practice. Howard said that's just not right. Robin said they are suggesting that the Mohel's get tests done before they go through the procedure. Robin said that the Mohel won't be able to practice if they do pass along anything to a child. Howard said they should just leave those kids alone. Howard said no one is going to get to kiss his kid's penis. Howard said it's a bizarre practice.
Robin read a story about a guy who was accused of molesting his son and he claims he was just teaching his son about the birds and the bees. Robin said the kid says he was touched but the dad says he never did. Robin said according to the complaint there was some kind of physical contact. Robin said that it apparently started when the child was 8 years old.
Robin read about how Leonard Nimoy is in the hospital. Robin said he has the same thing that Scott the Engineer has. That's COPD. Robin said he had severe chest pain and he's been in the hospital for 6 days so far. Robin said he's now tweeting about it. Robin said he stopped smoking 30 years ago and it wasn't soon enough. Robin said he tells people to quit now and ends his tweet with LLAP which means Live Long and Prosper. Howard did another live commercial read after that.
Robin read a story about the man who is accused of killing Chris Kyle, Eddie Ray Rauth, is going to prison for the rest of his life. Howard said they don't mess around in Texas. He said he likes that the Jury found him guilty. They found that he knew right from wrong and he should be put in prison. Robin had some audio clips of people talking about the case and also from the courtroom.
Robin read a story about Marshawn Lynch who is hoping to own his own catch phrase. Robin said it's ''I'm just here so I won't get fined.'' Robin said he's tried to trademark ''Beast mode'' too. Howard said he wants to make money from the NFL but he won't talk about the game.
Robin said Alex Rodriguez is back with the Yankees. Robin said he says it will take some time to find his way again. Robin had some audio of him talking about that.
Robin asked if pot or booze is more dangerous. Howard said he's going to say booze. He went over the things that can be affected from using either. Howard said that it's all bad for you but maybe okay in moderation. Robin said a new report says marijuana is safer than alcohol. Robin said it's 114 times less deadly than alcohol. Robin had a clip of some guy talking about that study.
Robin read a story about the court case for Blurred Lines getting under way. Robin said that's the Robin Thicke and Pharrell Williams song. Robin had Howard play that song and the Marvin Gaye song they are accused of ripping off. Robin wrapped up and Howard ended the show around 11:15am.
Jon asked Jen about Joan Rivers being snubbed at the Oscars. Jen said it's typical that they shut her out like that. Jen said that maybe they're glad that they don't make fun of people on the red carpet now. Jen said that she was close to Joan and she got to go to her funeral. She said she was snuck in and Howard sat right in front of her. She said she could have reached out and touched his hair. She said she saw it up close and it is the best hair in America. She said that it was great to hear Howard speak. She said that it was great when Howard got up and said that Joan had a dry vagina. She said she was a puddle by the end of the funeral. She said she didn't want to bother Howard at the funeral so she didn't go up to him or anything.
Jon said Jen will be his co-host for the day. Jon played a ''What You Need to Know'' about today's Stern show. After that Jon said they have a poll up about Captain Janks and if he should be in the Wack Pack or not.
Jon asked Jen if she's surprised that these people are upset that they're not Wack Packers. Jen said he would get that. She said she thinks it's an honor to be in it. Jen said that she never thought Janks was a Wack Packer though. She said he has done a lot of calls but it's more like an extension of the staff.
Jen said she thinks that Janks was never a Wack Packer. She said Wendy is the queen of the Wack Pack. Jon said Mariann wrangles them all though. Jen said Wendy is letting her teeth rot out and she's shitting her pants. She said she should be Miss Howard Stern. She said that's what she's been saying for a long time and on one listens to her. Jen said she thinks that she's very underrated. They went to break a short time later.
Jon said that Conan talked about how depressed he was on tour and all of that. Gary said comedians aren't that funny off stage and there is a lot of depression. Jen said that's what can make them funny. Gary said they tend to be dark people. Jen said that's something that comedians live in their head.
Gary said Conan made it clear today that he's never been about the money. He said he was talking about wanting to have his material. He said he's really into it and it's a really cool thing. Jen said going from the Tonight Show to TBS must have felt like having your balls cut off. Jon said that Conan was able to do the show he wants to do at TBS so it's almost like Howard coming to Sirius. He said they didn't give Conan a chance on NBC with the Tonight Show. He said it was awful what happened there. He said no one could have succeeded under all of that.
Jon said they got to hear Conan and Howard talking about supporting Conan through all of this stuff. Andy said that Conan doesn't complain a lot in public. He said he does a lot behind the scenes though. He said it's tacky to Conan. He said as time has gone on and he eventually learned to talk about it more than he used to. He said he thinks Conan was aware of that phenomenon of people getting upset when he talks about it. He said when someone asks you about it you answer and don't worry about some snarky bitch on the internet complaining about it. He said Conan is in a better place about it these days.
Gary said that Andy's name came up today in a big way. He asked Andy when he became aware that NBC told Conan to ''get rid of the big, fat dildo on the couch.'' Andy said that he will name names unlike Conan. He said that was Warren Littlefield. He said that their producer and Conan were like really good parents by not letting them know that the landlord had come to evict them. Andy said they did a great job from keeping all of that from them. Andy said when they were trying to put Conan on a week to week renewal they didn't know that. He wondered how you can be funny when they're doing that to you. Andy said they were looking for someone else and Greg Kinnear was big at the time. Jon said he heard they were grooming him and Conan was just holding the spot. Andy said that you can't fault someone for not being able to host a late night show. He said he heard that Greg did some test shows and they didn't go that great. He said they decided to stick with Conan. Andy said it was kind of like saying ''Who knows better than Dave'' about late night shows.
Jon said Andy is a superfan of the show. He asked what Conan thinks of Howard and how difficult it is to do this every day on the air. Andy said that Conan has a huge amount of respect for Howard. He said there is a lot of respect. He said a lot of people are intimidated when they go in there. Andy said he's not even that interesting. He said that you have to be careful over there. He said he told Greg Fitzsimmons that you only want to be talked about for 30 seconds or so on Howard's show or they'll come up with something that you'll be embarrassed by.
Gary said today on Sternthology they're going to play the segment where Andy came in after leaving Conan's show and Howard asked him first thing if he knew what the fuck he was doing. Andy said that Howard was always like that wondering why people leave a good paying job.
Jon thanked Andy for calling in and told him to stop by if he's in town again. Andy said he mainly called in to talk to Jen. Jon let him go after that. They went to break after that.
Jon took a call from a guy whose call was censored out for some reason. It sounded like the delay was hit. The next caller said he is a fan of Howard and Conan and he thinks it's awesome to see them try to play guitar. He said they're the world's best, worst guitar players. The caller said that he makes guitar videos and gave out his name online. Jen said that call was just a plug.
Jon said he wanted to talk about Wack Pack. Jon said that there are a lot of people who have been taken out of the Wack Pack. He said that they don't seem to understand that it's a compliment to be left out. Gary said that he will compare it to the Oscars the other night. He said he thought Michael Keaton was going to win. He said that it's over after the vote. He said you can't yell at the voters over the vote. He said the vote was done and it's done.
Jon said when Howard plays games he can change the rules. Jon said that you can't have a set of rules for the Wack Pack. Jen said that her criteria is if you worked at a grocery store handling food and you'd make people uncomfortable then you're in the Wack Pack. Gary said that Bobo might be more annoying than anything. Jen said that it's like people living in a sober house after getting sober. She said you're still not in society by any means but you're not drunk in an alley.
Jon asked Gary if he's surprised at how upset people are getting. Gary said that he was surprised by Joey Boots. He said that it was almost like he had his Super Bowl ring taken away from him. Gary said what you need to understand is there are rules but the final rule is whatever Howard says is the rule. Gary said they were taking a real vote that day and they weren't just waving a wand with one vote.
Gary said Gay Ramone was complaining about his license plate. He said he can just get a new one if he's upset. Jen said some people used to be Olympians and some are transitioning. She said they just have to get over it.
Jon said the results of the poll are in and 50 percent say Janks should not be in the Wack Pack and 30 percent say he should. 20 percent said they just don't care. Jon got in some plugs for today's Sternthology and wrapped up the show. They were done around 12:00pm.
Jen told a story about how she was going to break up with a guy in 2001 but he had Howard Stern reception and she had to hear the show. She stayed with him for a month or so more than she should have just so she could hear the show. Gary said if she had no arms then she'd be in the Wack Pack.
Gary asked Jen if she hears a phrase from the show and turns around knowing that she can talk to that person. Jen said she does. She said that if someone says they don't listen just because they have strippers on the show she can't talk to them.
Jon played a ''What You Need to Know'' about today's show. Jon also said they have a poll up today asking which Wack Packer you'd want to be. He said the choices are Beetlejuice, Sour Shoes, Gary the Conqueror, Wendy the Slow Adult or High Pitch Eric. They went to break after that.
Jon asked about Janks being kicked out of the group. Gary said he's not kicked out. He said he's very important to the history of the show. He said he's a famous phony phone caller. Gary said he sits at home and makes calls. He said Janks has such an insane body of work that he will send him something when another call takes place. He said when the Brian Williams thing went down Janks sent him a phony phone call he made years ago to Brian.
Jon took a call from a guy who said it's an honor to talk to them. He said he thinks that the criteria Howard is setting up is too narrow. He said it should be their behavior. He said Bobo with that toupee and having a panic attack not getting on the air is wacky to him. He said Joey Boots is like that too. He said Gay Ramone is out there too. He said he thinks that pretty much everyone who has been passed on as Extreme Fans should be in the Wack Pack for their behavior. Jon said that would be too broad a spectrum if they did that. Jon said Sal and people like that would be in there too.
Jen said she thinks you have to be a big fan to be in the Wack Pack. Gary said that people send notes about what makes you part of the Wack Pack. He said some people think you have to have a nickname but Kenneth Keith didn't have one. Jon said no one is ever going to meet all the criteria. He said if you meet the overall majority of the criteria then you should be in. Gary asked if Beetlejuice listens to the show. Jen said she doesn't even know if he knows about the show. Gary said that you can't meet all of the criteria then.
Jon took a call from a guy who said he has Hank, Beetlejuice and Eric the actor in a list but he's looking for a top 4 for a Mt. Rushmore. Gary threw out some names but Jon said he thinks High Pitch Eric might be the one. Jon said there are a lot of people who could fill that mountain.
Jon took a call from a guy who said that Benjy could be in there too. Gary said that he could be up there but you wonder if he's a performance artist or a Wack Packer or an actor.
Jen said she thinks that Robin could be in it too. She said she is a bit of a loose canon. She said that she has a lot of wacky stories.
Jon asked if anyone else on the staff could be in there. Gary said Sal has done some insane things. He said that he was so genuine when he talked about going to Howard's apartment and staying there. He wondered if Sal is cured or suppressing his feelings. Jon said he's mostly cured but he thinks there are things he's suppressing. Jon said he doesn't think that will ever go away. Gary said Sal will always tell you that he thought Howard would love to have him over to his apartment.
Jon asked if Ronnie Mund is a Wack Packer. Gary said he thinks no. He said he's the old guy who doesn't want to get old. He said he has to prove he's young at heart. He said Ronnie isn't unique. Jen said she was going to say he should be but Gary changed her mind. She said he's not unique. She said she's saying no.
Jon took a call from a guy who said the Wack Pack are social outcasts and they found a place where they're accepted. He said they're on the greatest show in history. He said they're taking away something and it's like being back in High School again. Jon said he thinks he's making a good point. Gary said Janks may have found his greatest groove there but he wasn't a social outcast. He said he thinks this is Captain Janks' version of being the captain of the football team.
Jon said that they're not getting that love when they get kicked out. Jen said that you're not that weird anymore. She said they thrived when they were in it. She said High Pitch should never work out and stop eating peanut butter and jelly sandwiches. They went to break after that.
Jon took a call from a guy who said everybody they named has their own Wack Pack abilities. He said there are old school and new but they all have their thing. He said Mariann should be the mother of the Wack Pack. Jon said he wants to talk about Mariann. He said she's at every Howard event but no one considers her to be part of it. Jen said she seems to be a good looking woman with her life in control. Gary said you'd never think that she's a weird person. Gary said that she seems to be abnormal about Howard but normal in the rest of her life. He said she knows her boundaries. Jen said there should be another group that's lesser but not Wack Pack. Jon said that no one would be happy to be on the fringe. Jon said that Mariann lives and breathes Wack Packers.
Jon took a call from a woman who said she's been thinking about who she'd be in the Wack Pack. She said she's thinking about this day and night. She said she's thinking she'd want to be Sour Shoes right now but that could change.
Jon asked how Gary the Conqueror and Sour Shoes are different. Gary said there are a lot of pressures on Sour Shoes. He said he wonders if his family thinks he'll ever live on his own. Jon said he thinks he'll live there with his parents as long as he can. Jen asked if he's a virgin. Jon said yes. Jen said that might be part of it too. Gary said he thinks Gary the Conqueror has had sex. Some of the others have too. Jon said Sour Shoes can drive too. Gary said he knows that because he drove to his father's funeral. Gary said he was a pall bearer and he saw Sour there in the crowd. He said he didn't act out at all until after the funeral when he was out in the parking lot throwing a football up in the air as high as he could.
Jon took a call from a guy who asked if they have David Arquette in the Wack Pack. Gary said he's a superfan, not Wack Pack. The caller said David makes some pretty wacky calls. Gary said he has a family and talent though. He said he is able to function. Jon said he doesn't think that he has anything in common with Big Foot.
Jon took a call from a guy who said he doesn't think the staff should be in the Wack Pack. He said the thing the Wack Pack want most is to be on the show. He said that the staffers like Benjy are just sitting there drooling over Howard. He said there are some who don't crave attention. He said for the most part what they want is to be on the show. Gary said the problem with that thinking is that it's describing a superfan. He said Melrose Larry Green is the guy he said that air time is crack for him. He said that it's never enough for him.
Jon said he has the results for the poll. He said 67 percent of the votes went to Sour Shoes. Jon said that Gary the Conqueror got 16 percent of the vote. After that it was Beetlejuice, High Pitch Eric and then Wendy with only 2 percent of the vote. Jon wrapped up and ended the show a short time later. They were done around 11:40am.
Jon took a call from a guy who said he'd like to give Sal a sitting down standing ovation for his appearance this week. He said it was the racist terms that aren't racist conversation. Jon said he agrees and said it was one of his better appearances. He said they also got to hear the apology from 2006 that he likes so much. Jon said what he liked was the news anchor apologizing and how you can hear Sal in the language they used. He said the apology is almost worse than what they did in the first place.
Jon took a call from a guy who said he can make the argument that Bobo isn't even a real fan. He said that he came on the show and won the tickle chair and then he went out and sold it. He said no real fan would do that. Jon said he thinks Bobo is an extreme fan. He said he is shocked that he sold that chair though. He said he must have needed that money that badly. Jon said it does question your fandom though. The caller said it's all about attention in his opinion. The caller also brought up Sal and that led to Jon talking about how funny Sal is to be around.
Jon took a call from a guy who said that Sal is hysterical. He said he doesn't think it's a shtick at all. Jon said he doesn't put it on at all. He said that is Sal and those things he says are really the things in his head. He said that's Sal. They spent a little more time talking about just how funny Sal is.
Jon took a call from a guy who said he never really enjoyed Conan as a host of a show but he did enjoy the interview this week. He said it did make him like him more. He said he doesn't think he has the skills to be a performer. Jon said he has a certain brand of humor he may not like but he thinks he's got the talent. Jon let that caller go a short time later and then went to break.
Jon asked Natasha about doing the roast of James Franco and how that goes. Natasha said they're doing Justin Bieber now and no one really likes him so she's not sure how that's going to go. She said that Franco had some of his friends there with him at least. Jon said that Bieber volunteered to do it though. Natasha said he's only 21. Natasha said it takes a long time to grow up.
Jon took a call from a guy who said that he's in a broadcasting class and his teacher speaks highly of Howard and he says the Conan interview is the greatest he's ever heard. Then he'll give him a back handed compliment saying that he hates when Howard speaks over the beginning of a song. He said it irritates him when they speak over any part of the song. Natasha said that people have a personal style and it doesn't have to sound corporate. She said breaking the rules makes you more interesting. She said it's part of success.
Jon asked Natasha about Howard breaking the rules and if that's what keeps him going. Natasha said she grew up with him and he's been in her life for like 20 years. She said she thinks he should keep doing things the way he's doing them.
Jon took a call from a guy who said it must be much better looking at Natasha than Gary. Jon said when you put it that way... The caller said that he has a ring tone of Sal's apology on his phone and when his phone rings people think he's Sal Governale. He said he can't tell him now many times that has happened. Jon spent a minute talking to the caller about Sal and his explanation of finding a bunny in a jungle and how saying jungle bunny would be okay there. Jon said where that came from is the news anchor who said '''Jigaboo'' and had to apologize for it. Jon said sometimes the apology is worse than what the person said to get in trouble. Natasha said she's all for not apologizing. Jon asked if she thinks about what she says in her act. Natasha said she'll make fun of that because it's her whole life. She said with racism and gay rights then why be part of the problem? Jon went to break after that.
Jon took a call from a guy who said this week was unbelievable. He said Seth Meyers was great and so was Kid Rock and Conan. He said he can't remember a better week. Jon said it was pretty great. The caller also said that Natasha was on the Joe Schmo show and it was one of his favorites. Natasha said she was and that was a while back. She said she played one of her many characters that's pants less. She said she has played those quite a bit.
Jon took a call from a Mike the CP Comic who asked if he thinks Howard would have Michael Keaton on the show. Jon said he thinks he would. He said Howard doesn't like the movie Birdman but Howard respects his career and he thinks he'd enjoy talking to him.
Jon asked if Natasha watched the Oscars. She said she watched the last half of it. They spent a short time talking about that.
Jon took a call from a guy who said he thought the Dan Aykroyd interview was the best one. Jon said he thought it was great too. Jon said when people talk to Howard it seems like he's getting a lot more respect. Jon said people know that it will make the news and you learn a lot more with Howard than you do with a Conan interview. Jon asked Natasha what it is about Howard. Natasha said it's like a podcast interview. She said they just don't care like they would on a televised program. She said maybe people aren't as self conscious. Natasha said it's a talent getting people to take their guard down. She said it's a total skill. Jon said he has seen it happen a thousand times when you are in the studio talking to Howard. He said you forget how many millions are listening.
Natasha said that people like Letterman and Leno won't say a movie sucks either. Jon said she's right about that.
Jon took a call from a guy who said that the Conan interview was like a symphony. He said it was perfect. Jon said Jeff Garlin came in and talked about doing a fake talk show with Conan when he was roommates with him. Jon said that Conan does that George Takei impression and he doesn't even do impressions.
The caller said that he thinks if your personality can't be turned off then you are in the Wack Pack. He said if you can turn it off then you shouldn't be in it. Jon said he thinks that's a good way to look at it.
Jon said they're going to have a lot of Wack Pack in Sternthology today. Jon played a clip previewing that.
Natasha asked what the opposite of the Wack Pack is. Jon said ''normal.'' Jon said today's Sternthology is 3 hours long.
Jon said he has the poll results. He said Dan Aykroyd came in with 23 percent and Conan at 32. Big Foot and Danielle came in with 45 percent of the votes. Jon wrapped up with Natasha and ended the show around 12:05pm.

Mixing And Mastering
Zaki Algbari, also known as "Zaster" or "zastertherapper" a Musical Artist that makes music of genres such as: Rap, R&B and Pop. Zaster started off in 2019 by freestyling in a beat and the motivation he got from his friends and family was so great that he started putting effort into his music in his home studio and mixing and mastering his own music, also found a way of talking to other artists for features and found himself in a small rap game that he eventually got away from since Zaster stated "I do not wanna see myself doing Hip Hop Only, I wanna do more than that." Zaster had problems in school with trust and have been through a lot in 2021. Zaster has said that the best year he had was probably the end of 2020 and the beginning of 2021 since he had a lot of vacations and had time spent with family overseas. Zaster had gave a word to his fans about his new album that is coming out at the end of 2021, the album is called "Never Again"
Contact me through the green button above and let's get to work.

Indonesian bassist who is best known for being a member of the popular band, ARMADA. His band released their hit song "Buah Hati" in 2019.
He began playing bass in middle school.
He has amassed over 240,000 followers to his band's Instagram page. He has performed with his band in sold out venues throughout his native country and throughout the better part of Asia.
He was born and raised in Indonesia.
He is a well known bassist in a popular band in a similar vein as Tristan Evans.

"On a plug?"
"Could of been. Tintsey thing no bigger'n your fingernail."
"That wasn't any plug."
"Must have been a fly. Was it shaped like a spider, with long rubbery legs?" I had forgotten about the fly that Mr. Nunnally had given me, until my friend the poacher made me think of it.
He wasn't sure about the fly. It may have had rubber legs. Again it may not. "I don't see good as I used to. All I know is it took some kind of big bass right where that boat is sittin'. How'd you get that boat, anyway? I thought they was kept locked."
"Mr. Nunnally unlocked it for me."
If I had been thinking, I wouldn't have said that. It gave me away. But I was rummaging among my tackle, trying to find the flies with the rubber legs, and when I looked up the man behind the tree was gone and so was his cane pole. I wish he had stayed around a few minutes longer. I would have given him the 3�-pound bass I caught not far from where he had been standing. Noise didn't catch that fish. Neither did the cigarette-twitch method. But a poacher and a rubber spider did.

It was love when I watched him work the room for two hours, and only shared six words with him. I was so nervous. It was love when we sat in his car blasting the heat, and he told me everything about himself. It was love when he started talking excitedly about existentialism once I brought up Albert Camus. It was love when I called him sobbing, and he talked me down, even though he was sick.
I denied it and denied it, but one night, after talking about how perfect our relationship was and how happy he was to have me, I couldn’t deny it anymore.
Postscript: Outside forces forced us apart, and he got back together with his ex a week later. This was 15 months ago, and I’m completely aware of how in love with him I was – and still am.

I was invited to be a part of one of my Ft. Myers home church's missions conference. McGregor Baptist Church is my parent's home church (it was my home church when I was in high school when we first returned to the states from Haiti) and they are very involved with RMI. This past year they became a C3 Partner church and sent their first official team to their Sister Church in Cote de Fer, Haiti. They also now support 123 children in RMI's child sponsorship program, Hope for Kidz. That's a lot of kids who are now able to go to school because of being sponsored! They're also supporting me! It was at their missions conference when I was in high school, in 2008, I made a public commitment to serve the Lord as a missionary. During this weekend's conference I was recognized as being the 50th person to be sent out from the church to the mission field. How cool is that?!
We had meals with the church leadership and the Legacy group (55+), as well as meetings with Sunday morning Life Group classes, all 3 church services and the Sunday evening service. It was fun sharing my passion and ministry with people as they went by RMI's booth. It was a bit tiring, but, wow, it was great to be with the church during their conference. I even got to chat with a couple of people that were my youth Bible study leaders from my high school years.

Saturday, January 11, 2020
In Flight Surprise
She decided to lead him on a little. By the middle of the flight, he was practically begging to meet him in the bathroom. She agreed, and that’s where she shared her little secret.
Her husband had worked on a device that allowed two people to swap bodies parts, and she had borrowed the part between his legs. When she revealed this to the man from the plane in the bathroom, he was in shock. He wondered how had been hitting on a guy this whole time? But he looked so much like a woman? Did this make him gay? He exited the bathroom, and sulked back to his seat. Marcy smiled as she sat back down next to him, knowing his wasn’t going to say a word for the rest of the flight.

Two Justin Timberlake fans had their dreams come true last night when they met the Sexy Back singer at his Perth concert after a lot of persistence and a bit of luck.
Dominique Condo and Tara Bradley launched a bid online to meet the superstar after shelling out $400 each for his 20/20 Experience World Tour concert at Perth Arena.
"We were always going to get tickets … when we saw how much they were we thought, let's go all out," Ms Condo said.
The pair, who describe themselves as "two 20-something Aussie girls with some really bad dance moves", set up a website in a bid to get his attention.
They penned an open letter to the singer called "D&T will meet JT" which drew attention on Twitter and led to media interviews with local radio and news website Perth Now.
But the friends weren't about to leave the rest up to fate – they did some research and after quite a few emails they had made contact with his manager and publicist.
Ahead of the concert they were quietly confident they would succeed.
"We hadn't been told no, we were hopeful but doubtful," Ms Condo said.
But it was still up in the air until during the concert last night, when they got an email from his staff asking where they were standing.
"All these girls around us were asking 'where are they going' and we had to push through," Ms Condo said.
The next thing they knew, they were backstage eyeing off the singer they had worshipped since his NSYNC days.
They say they asked for a hug and he asked them "numerous times" how they were feeling.
"We stupidly asked him if Jess was here," they said, referring to his wife Jessica Biel.
While the encounter was brief, they say were thrilled that they got the chance to meet their crush.
As for the concert, they say it was even better than his 2007 trip to Australian shores.
© Nine Digital Pty Ltd 2018

I know there are some Tim fans here (myself included ) and I just wanted to know if anyone has it lastest album "Live Like You Were Dying?"
I got it the day after it came out and I have to say I love it. I know a few people who were a little dissapointed but I wasn't. It is really good. What do you think?

Thank you for your review, and we are glad you enjoyed your stay at Le Grenier. We are sorry to hear that you found the mattress uncomfortable, it is only a year old and was not cheap, we have not had any previous complaints from our guests, but will take your comment on board .
We arrange to meet our guests at the station car park either to collect them from the train and then take them to the apt by car or if guests are driving to Sarlat we meet them at the station as it is an easy meeting point and the station has a bathroom if needed. There is no parking in the historical centre of Sarlat. We then show guests to the free parking nearest our apt and then help guests with there luggage to the apartment. I had pre arranged a time with Tracy through e-mail to meet at the station as she did not have a phone. On the day of arrival I arrived early and drove around the car park, (it's quite small) there were a few people trying to load a car and although I did not realize it at the time Tracy was not with them, but was merely standing by them. We parked at the edge of the car park, as we were early so we would be able to spot her if she arrived and I got out and asked a few other people if they were Tracy, I then saw a lady still standing by her car, so drove over to her and she was indeed Tracy. I did not recognize Tracy by her profile picture and only drove past as I genuinely thought she was with some other people...I would never drive by a guest and leave them standing there if I knew who they were. It was unfortunate as she told me that she had arrived 2 hours earlier and had wandered around waiting for the arranged time, but as she had no phone or internet access she could not contact me, or me her to arrange an earlier meeting time. There is a station foyer with toilets/washroom and seats and a snack machine. I am sorry to Tracy if she had thought I had seen her, and ignored her and driven off, that was simply not the case.
Over all I hope that Tracy enjoyed her stay in Sarlat and that if she ever decides to visit the area again, that I can accommodate her and find her a mattress that she is happy with.

Prince died on this day 2 yrs ago. Icon for sure. He took his influences and twisted them in to his own brand of style and pop. Took control of his career and wound up inspiring an entire new generation of talent. This was a mixed media piece from 2016.

James Baldwin's Notes of a Native Son Essay example
1027 Words5 Pages
James Baldwin's "Notes of a Native Son" demonstrates his complex and unique relationship with his father. Baldwin's relationship with his father is very similar to most father-son relationships but the effect of racial discrimination on the lives of both, (the father and the son) makes it distinctive. At the outset, Baldwin accepts the fact that his father was only trying to look out for him, but deep down, he cannot help but feel that his father was imposing his thoughts and experiences on him. Baldwin's depiction of his relationship with his father while he was alive is full of loathing and detest for him and his ideologies, but as he matures, he discovers his father in himself. His father's hatred in relation to the white American…show more content…
The white world had shut the door on him and he finally conceded the burden of being black. Baldwin affirms, "I had discovered the weight of the white people in the world" (222). Baldwin realized that his father was not trying to pass along his racist beliefs. He was simply trying to save them from the agonizing conduct of the whites towards them. He found the reason behind the bitterness in his father. Baldwin also became aware that the bitterness, which he had once hated in his father, was now a part of him "The bitterness which had helped to kill my father could also kill me" (222). Baldwin did not want live a lonely life; the fear of becoming, what his father once was, dwelled in Baldwin. He realized that he had to free himself of the bitterness, before the bitterness distanced him from his family (like it had, for his father).
Baldwin felt torn between the feeling of hatred that he had always felt for his father and a gnawing feeling of guilt for not being able to understand the reason for his father's detached behavior. He emphasizes, "The moment I saw him I knew why I had put off this visit so long. I told my mother that I did not want to see him because I hated him. But this was not true. It was only that I had hated him and I wanted to hold onto this hatred" (230). Baldwin was afraid to admit that his hatred was meaningless; but that feeling of hate had resided in him for as long as he could remember. Baldwin was not sure if he
The funeral was held on Baldwin’s birthday, and he spent the day drinking whisky with a female friend and wondering what to wear because he did not own any black clothes. His friend eventually found him a black shirt. At the church, Baldwin reflected that his aunt, who fought with his father throughout his life, was one of the only people who had a real connection with him. During the eulogy, Baldwin notes that the preacher was not describing his father as he really was, but rather inviting the congregation to forgive his father, reminding them that they did not know the full truth of what he suffered. Someone began singing one of Baldwin’s father’s favorite songs, and suddenly Baldwin was transported to a memory of sitting on his father’s lap in church. He recalls that his father used to show off Baldwin’s singing voice to others when he was young. He remembers their fights, and the only time in which they “had really spoken to each other.” Just before Baldwin left home, his father asked him if he’d “rather write than preach,” and Baldwin replied, simply, “Yes.” Baldwin did not want to see his father’s body in the casket, but had no choice but to go and look. Baldwin felt that his father looked like any “old man dead,” and notes the strange proximity of the body to his newborn child.
This passage is a cathartic and redemptive moment in an otherwise bleak essay. Baldwin’s inability to find suitable clothes, his sense that the preacher is not being honest, and his reluctance to see his father’s body all create the impression that he is alienated from his father and from the process of mourning him. However, at the same time he experiences a sudden sense of connection to his father through the experience of hearing the song. This in turn leads him to remember their only moment of true communication. Although it is tragic that this moment was so fleeting, there is also beauty in the fact that Baldwin recalls it at all, alongside other happy memories of his father’s life. The presence of his father’s youngest child, a newborn baby, creates a sense of hope. Although Baldwin’s father is gone, part of him lives on through his children, who may experience some of the joy and freedom that he was denied.

Remy Shand (born October 14, 1977) is a Canadian R&B/soul singer, who released his debut album, The Way I Feel, on Motown Records in 2002.
Shand was born to parents Jeremy Shand and Ana Olsson. His father was of English descent and his mother was of Swedish descent. In 1998, he began to write and record the songs that would later be used on his album The Way I Feel. Three years later, he was signed to Motown Records. The Way I Feel was released on March 12, 2002; and won a Juno Award for Best R&B/Soul Recording in the 2003 Juno Awards. Shand also received four Grammy nominations for his work.

My daughter is 8 and her cousin is 8. My niece came to stay the night tonight and the night was going fine. Well at 12:30 am, she came into the living room and told me she wanted to go home. I told her nobody was up at her house. Then she starts crying. So I call her mom to tell her she wants to come home. She tells me she will come get her. My sister only lives 5 minutes away from us and its not that far of a drive, but really at 12:30 in the morning she wanna go home all because her and my daughter had a disagreement. They were in the bedroom watching a movie and everything was fine. Mind you this is not the first time she has done this but around the 5th time. Would you feel sorry for her or tell her to suck it up and wait for morning?

Alex's Guardian Angel
by Anthony Lane
This story contains scenes of love and a sexual nature involving males with other males. If the reading or possessing of such material as this is illegal in your country, state, province, county, municipality, etc., please leave this site immediately and do not proceed further. If you are under the legal age to read this, please do not do so.
It is not my intention to offend anyone or to get you in trouble.
The author retains all rights to this original story. Please do not publish without my explicit authorisation.
Most of the places mentioned, and none of the characters exist in real life. Whilst there are references to celebrities in places, no inference should be taken as to their sexual orientation in real life. This story is completely fictional.
This is my first attempt at writing fiction. I was inspired to pick up the pen after reading several stories by David Lee which can be found in the prolific authors section on Nifty.
I would like to send out thanks to both David and Tom who have both helped to edit the errors out. If you would like to send me an email about this story please put Alex's guardian angel in the main title. Thanks for reading.
The next fifty five weeks were almost like torture for the three boys. They'd worked out that sleeping together on weekends and holidays would mean having to wear their underwear to bed. Even then they sometimes woke up with a stray hand on a morning stiff cock. They spent a lot of time over those weeks talking, kissing, cwtching and cementing their love for one another, but despite the temptation to go further they managed to avoid it. In a way to try and ease some of the tension they felt, they tried to channel it into their training, spending more time at the pool than they had previously.
When Aaron's seventeenth birthday came around there was a lot of anticipation in the air, the boys knew there was only three more weeks of their forced celibacy left. A surprise from Danny made Aaron even happier. When he arrived he announced that he was leaving the army and was home for good. Despite there only being three weeks between Aaron's and the twin's birthdays, the time seemed to drag like they'd never experienced before.
All three boys were excited when they found out the twins' birthday was going to be a teacher training day, meaning not only were they going to have the day off school, as their birthday was a Friday, they were going to have a long weekend where they could do whatever they wanted. When the last school bell rang on Thursday, all three headed to the twins' house. As there was no school the next day, Aaron had had permission to sleep over the extra night. While they were walking home Aaron suggested they sit down and talk about what each of them were hoping to achieve that weekend.
After grabbing a drink they headed to the bedroom to talk, just like normal all three stripped down to their underwear before they started to talk. Liam went first and said that for him, there wasn't much that was off limits, but he did think he wasn't ready to be fucked. Lucas followed by agreeing with his brother. Aaron told the twins that that wasn't on the cards for him either as he felt they should look into it more rather than rushing into it, he said that fingering each other wasn't the same as fucking and he was happy to wait for that. Liam suggested that as they had waited for fifty five weeks to have sex, they blow each other just after midnight so they could go to sleep feeling content rather than frustrated. Aaron and Lucas thought that was a good idea and just thinking of it had all three of them hard.
After their dinner the boys went to the bedroom to watch a few films. As midnight approached they spent more time watching the clock than the film. At the stroke of midnight, all three lost their briefs in a split second to reveal three hard cocks. Aaron looked at them to try and work out how they were going to do this, when Liam suggested they lie in a triangle so that each of them had a cock to suck on at the same time. As it happened, Liam got to suck his brother's, Lucas got to suck Aaron's and Aaron sucked on Liam's. It wasn't long before they were all shooting their loads into mouths.
Whether it was frustration from the lack of sex or just the heat of the moment but within a few minutes all three were ready to go again. They swapped around so they were sucking on a different cock than the first time. This time though it took longer for them to cum. The boys swallowed all the cum before cwtching up and going to sleep.
They had a shock the next morning when they were woken by Danny. He told them to get dressed because he was taking them out for the day, refusing to tell them where. After they'd had their breakfast and birthday things from their parents, Danny whisked them away. While they were in the car he sprang another surprise on them. The twins' parents were going to be leaving at lunchtime to see a show in London and wouldn't get home until the boys were back in school on Monday. Danny told them that he had agreed to look after them until they got home. All three boys were happy with the news.
Lucas was the first to work out that Danny was taking them to Alton Towers again. They all had fun going on ride after ride. Lucas saw the ride Th13teen advertised, it was one they hadn't gone on the last time they were there. He felt in a mischievous mood and dared Danny not to make a sound all the way round. Danny always up for a laugh took the dare but suggested they make it more interesting. He said that if he made a noise anywhere going around, he would let Lucas decide what he had to do, but if he kept quiet all the way around Lucas would have to clean his car inside and out. Lucas thought about it and decided he was on to a winner, so agreed. Liam and Aaron were sure Lucas was going to be cleaning the car; after all, Danny had just spent three years in the army.
Danny managed to stay quiet right up until the last few seconds of the ride. The cart dropped twice in quick succession in total blackness and it was on the second drop that Danny let out an audible 'Oh my god'. Seeing the look on Lucas' face when they got off the ride, Danny was certain he had just got himself into a whole lot of something. When he asked what Lucas wanted, all he got was a 'you'll see'.
They enjoyed the rest of the day, stopping for an hour to get some food. When they were in the car heading home, Lucas, Liam and Aaron talked about what they could have Danny do for losing the bet. Liam suggested that Danny spend the weekend as their slave, while Aaron was a little more conservative with his idea of Danny taking them to the beach the next day. Lucas came out with a number of different ideas. The more the boys talked, the more Danny realised just how much he'd underestimated the twins. Each new idea they talked about was more devious than the one before. He was glad to pull into the drive of the twins' house.
When they were in the house, Lucas announced that as the parents were gone for the weekend, their normal routine of wearing just their underwear was going to change. He said that as they were all used to seeing each other naked, there was no need for underwear the rest of the weekend; before he stripped down to his birthday suit. Liam and Aaron were already in on this plan as they'd discussed it while Danny was in the bathroom between rides, so were quickly following him.
Danny wasn't so sure about it, he had seen all three boys naked when they showered at the pool; but spending the whole weekend without clothes on was something he had never thought about even when he was alone, never mind with three teens around. He decided to keep his clothes on as he went about making some sandwiches for them to snack on.
While Danny was making food the boys took their clothes upstairs. When they were in the bedroom, they spent about five minutes making out before going back downstairs. As they walked into the kitchen they were oblivious to the one thing that Danny couldn't help but notice. All three were sporting erections. Danny was surprised at how comfortable they were showing them off, before he realised that they were used to seeing each other hard, he was the odd one out.
Although Danny considered himself straight, he was finding three cocks standing to attention a bit of a turn on. He didn't know whether it was the connection his mind made between erections and vaginas or whether there was more to it, and with one of those cocks belonging to his brother he wasn't sure he wanted to find out.
Liam wasn't going to let Danny sit around fully dressed when the rest of them were naked, he started by asking him how he was still dressed, when he got some feeble excuse of being busy making food for everyone, Liam got up and moved over to him and started to help lift his t-shirt off. When the other two saw what was happening, they joined in and within a few seconds, Danny was naked just like the other three.
Aaron was surprised to see his brother's cock wasn't as soft as he expected it to be when he pulled Danny's boxers down. With Danny naked, the four of them set about eating the food Danny had made.
When they were finished, Aaron said he'd do the couple of dishes as it was still the twins' birthday, but Danny suggested he leave them until they'd had pizza later, reasoning that it was pointless doing two lots of dishes. So with that decided; Lucas suggested they pick a few movies and watch them on the big telly in the living room.
While the twins were selecting the movies, Danny put his t-shirt and boxers on before going into the living room to turn the blinds so people couldn't see in. While he was doing that, Aaron was pouring drinks for them all; he was carrying them into the living room when Lucas and Liam came down the stairs. They went into the living room to see Danny sat in one of the chairs.
Liam suggested that they move the coffee table out of the way, chuck a few cushions down and then they could all get down on the floor together. He proposed that they cwtch up just like they would in the bedroom. He realised as he said it that the four of them couldn't cwtch up the same way he, Lucas and Aaron did, so he suggested he cwtch up to Danny while Lucas cwtched up to Aaron and then they'd swap around as the rest of the night went on.
As the others were sorting the furniture and cushions out, Liam put The Day After Tomorrow on before getting down on the floor and cwtching up to Danny. He instantly noticed a difference as Danny had hair on his chest that he found tickled at times. As the film played, he moved his hand all over Danny's stomach, enjoying the feeling of the hair under his hand before he left it resting just above Danny's pubes unsure of whether to go further or not.
Danny couldn't believe how good it felt having Liam rubbing his hand over his stomach and he found himself wanting Liam's hand to go lower until he could grab hold of his cock instead of stopping just short. He could also feel Liam's cock getting hard against him which was turning him on as well. He couldn't understand what was happening or why he was feeling like this; he'd always told his brother there was nothing wrong with it, so why should he worry, just let things happen and think about it another time.
The longer he felt Liam's hard cock pressing against his side, the more it turned him on and helped to make his own cock swell and harden, so much so it started to brush against Liam's hand.
Aaron and Lucas were enjoying being close too. Lucas had fun stroking Aaron's cock and rolling his balls around as well as getting a few long kisses in.
When the film finished Lucas got up to change the disc over, putting White Squall on. As he was up, Liam moved over to cwtch up to Aaron. When Lucas got down he cwtched up to Danny and got the same thrill of running his hands over Danny's stomach as Liam did. There was one major difference though, in that as Lucas moved his hand over Danny's stomach, he couldn't help brushing against Danny's cock, which was now fully erect and lying flat against his stomach. When Danny didn't offer any objections to Lucas' hand brushing against his cock, Lucas got more adventurous and started to do it more and more, before finally moving his hand down to cup Danny's balls.
While Lucas was moving his hand around his cock and balls, Danny moved his hand down Lucas' back till he was able to cup Lucas' arse, squeezing the cheeks every now and then. The more Lucas played with his cock, the more Danny found he wanted him to. It almost drove him mad with pleasure when he felt Lucas start to suck on his nipple. As Lucas continued to suck, Danny squeezed his arse, pulling him in tighter before finding his finger slipping down the crack of Lucas' cheeks.
Lucas feeling the finger slip in the crack, started to move his hips to try and get the finger into his hole. It didn't take Danny long to realise what Lucas was looking for, but being unsure of what he was doing, he ran his finger gently down the crack until he felt the anal muscle. He had a good feel around, pressing and releasing where he felt the right spot was. As he kept up pressing and releasing, he felt the muscle relaxing and getting larger but something didn't feel right. Then he had a thought and brought his hand up to his mouth and sucked on his finger to wet it before moving it back down to Lucas' ring. He did this a few times until he felt there was enough saliva around the muscle before trying to slip his finger in properly. It slid in so easy it surprised Danny a little, but it felt right to him somehow.
Liam feeling like he had missed out while he cwtched up to Danny, made up for it when he cwtched up to Aaron. The film had barely started when Liam took hold of Aaron's cock. He was content to just hold it while he explored Aaron's mouth with his tongue. Completely unaware of what Danny and Lucas were doing, Aaron started to play around with Liam's hole, pressing his finger around until he had it going in and out; Liam was helping by moving his hips so he was humping Aaron's leg. The pre cum that eventually leaked out made it more interesting. They saw very little of the film because their lips were locked together for most of it but Aaron did notice when the film seemed to be coming to an end.
He got up when the credits started to roll to put Thelma & Louise on, but as he put the disk in he thought he'd better use the toilet before they settled down for the film. As he was heading to the bathroom, the other three decided to do the same. Aaron didn't bother closing the bathroom door but he did have trouble using the toilet with an erection, something the other three found just as difficult.
While he was waiting for the others, Aaron went and made drinks for them all. Lucas and Liam were soon in the living room cwtching up together waiting for Danny and Aaron to get back. Aaron carried the drinks in on a tray and was just putting them down when Danny came in. Danny asked them if they were ready for pizza and if so, did they want to order it for delivery or get in the car and pick it up. Lucas was all for getting it delivered, but the other two wanted to pick it up. The next decision was whether all of them went to get it or just Danny. Aaron thought all four of them should go. After a few seconds thinking about it, Lucas and Liam agreed all going was the better option; so they all got dressed and headed to get the pizzas.
When they got back, the twins suggested they eat in the living room while watching the film, as they were taking their clothes off, but Danny refused, saying there was nothing wrong with sitting at a table to eat. Danny placed the pizzas on the worktop. As he was getting undressed, the twins got the plates out of the cupboard and Aaron got the drinks he had made before they left. All four tucked in and enjoyed the pizza.
While Aaron and Danny were doing the dishes, Lucas and Liam went back upstairs to get a few more films. When they got back downstairs with them, Danny was just finishing with the dishes and Aaron was in the living room setting Thelma & Louise to play.
When they were waiting for Danny, Lucas and Liam got down either side of Aaron and started to kiss and suck his nipples, gently pushing him onto his back. Within seconds Aaron's cock was standing at full mast and the twins' weren't far behind. So as Danny walked in and saw what was going on he couldn't miss the erections all three were sporting. Seeing Danny, Lucas and Liam got up and moved over to give him room to get down with Aaron.
Aaron was nervous about cwtching up to Danny. They had seen each other naked before but until earlier that day, they had never seen each other with erections and now he was going to be pressing his hard cock into his brother's side. Danny could feel his brother's nervousness but the only way to make him comfortable was to show that he was ok with what was happening.
Danny got down, gently pulling Aaron closer until Aaron's head was resting on his shoulder. With the hand he had behind Aaron, he started to stroke his back, moving his hand slowly, feeling all of Aaron's back and even brushing the top of his arse cheeks.
Seeing Aaron and Danny were ready, Liam started the film before he got down to cwtch up with his brother. He rested his head on Lucas' shoulder and started to move his hand over his stomach, noticing the difference between his brother and Danny.
Aaron found having his back stroked relaxing but it also turned him on. Like Lucas and Liam, Aaron slowly started to move his hand over his brother's stomach and chest. Feeling the hair under his hands was a new and interesting sensation.
It didn't take long with Liam's cock pressing against his side to turn Lucas on. He moved his hand to lift Liam's face so they could kiss. He pressed his lips against his brother's pushing his tongue in at the same time. As they were kissing, Liam moved his hand down to play with his brother's cock and balls. Remembering how Danny had sucked his finger a few times to help when he fingered his hole, Lucas did the same to his brother.
Danny was finding Aaron's cock pressing against him as much of a turn on as when he had the twins' cocks there. Just like he had with Lucas, Danny started to slide his hand further down Aaron's back until he could cup his arse cheeks. He fondled them for a while before he let his finger slide down the crack between them.
Liam enjoyed the feeling of having his brother's finger going in and out of his ring. He broke off the kissing and moved so he could start sucking on Lucas' cock while his brother continued to finger fuck him.
Aaron's hand brushed against Danny's cock a few times by accident, but when he felt his brother's finger find his hole, he couldn't help but start moving his hips to encourage Danny. He also started to move his head up towards his brother's. By coincidence, Aaron's lips brushed against Danny's just when Danny's finger entered Aaron's hole.
Feeling his brother's lips against his sent Danny into overdrive, he continued to move his finger in and out of Aaron's hole, but with his other hand he brought Aaron's lips back to his own. When he felt their lips lock, he pushed his tongue in to meet his brother's.
Lucas rolled Liam over onto his back and straddled him so they were in the sixty nine position; allowing them to both suck each other's cock while still letting him finger his brother's hole. This new position also allowed Liam to finger Lucas which he quickly started doing.
Aaron's mind exploded when he felt Danny's tongue wrestle with his own. It wasn't that he had always fancied Danny or even considered exploring each other's bodies, but actually doing it was more than he could have imagined. He reached out and started to play with Danny's cock and balls. It wasn't long before Aaron wanted to taste his brother's cock. He could already feel the pre cum Danny was leaking all over his hand. For a split second Aaron felt disappointed when he felt his brother stop fingering him, until he felt Danny move.
Seeing Lucas and Liam move into the sixty nine position, made Danny aware of just how much he wanted Aaron's cock in his mouth. So Danny moved his hand away from Aaron's arse so he could get himself into a better position for Aaron to straddle him. When he was flat on his back, he lifted his brother into position. He opened his lips and brought Aaron's cock towards them.
When Aaron felt himself being lifted he realised what his brother was doing and when he came down onto all fours, he quickly moved his mouth to start sucking Danny's cock. He even moved Danny's legs apart so he could play with Danny's arsehole at the same time. Aaron followed his brother's moves by wetting his finger before trying to push it into Danny's hole. Aaron couldn't believe how amazing it felt fingering and blowing Danny. He realised just how lucky Liam and Lucas were to have each other and couldn't thank Liam enough for instigating this.
Whether it was because they hadn't sucked each other off for so long, seeing Danny sucking cock for the first time, seeing Aaron sucking his brother's cock for the first time, seeing two other brothers enjoying pleasuring each other or a combination of all these, Lucas started shooting his load into Liam's mouth just as Liam was shooting his load. Both Lucas and Liam swallowed what shot into their mouths before Lucas moved around so they could cwtch and kiss while still watching Aaron and Danny.
Danny couldn't believe how amazing it felt having Aaron fingering him. The feeling made him want to go further and have Aaron fuck him, but he knew there was a whole lot of difference in wanting to and being ready to. Just as he was thinking how good it would feel to have Aaron's cock in his hole, Aaron's cum shot into his mouth.
The second he started to shoot his load into Danny's mouth Aaron realised his brother may not have wanted to have cum in his mouth but he didn't feel Danny moving so he concentrated on bringing Danny to climax.
Danny had always assumed that cum would taste vile and hadn't even tried to taste his own, but having Aaron's in his mouth allowed him to see if that assumption was true. He found there was nothing wrong with it, whether he could see himself wanting to swallow loads of it he didn't know, but he didn't feel the need to spit it out.
As Aaron continued to try and bring his brother to climax with his mouth and tongue, he also kept fingering him but to help him he used his other hand to stroke Danny's cock. A few minutes later Aaron got to taste his brother's cum. He swallowed it all before moving around to kiss Danny. As they kissed, Danny wrapped his arms around Aaron, pulling him in tight.
After a few minutes of kissing, Aaron slid off Danny's stomach so he was back where he had started when they began to watch the film. He quickly realised that they'd missed a lot of the film while they'd been exploring each other's bodies, so he suggested they switch it off and put another film on. Liam got up and put Wild America on before getting back down to cwtch up with Lucas.
When the film finished Danny suggested they turn in for the night and work out what they were going to do the next day when they got up. Lucas thought it was a good idea and suggested Danny and Aaron sleep together in the guest room while he and Liam sleep in their own. Danny said he didn't want to take his brother away from his boyfriends on their birthday. Liam said that he and Lucas had plenty of time to share Aaron but felt it was something Danny needed. Danny couldn't argue that, he still felt the need to have Aaron close.
Liam turned the telly off before all four of them headed upstairs. They all used the toilet and brushed their teeth before heading to the bedrooms. Aaron cwtched up to Danny and tried to go to sleep.
Danny hadn't been able to relax; feeling Aaron's naked body beside him, the memories of what they had done earlier, the desire he had to feel Aaron's cock pounding his hole, were all going around his head and he needed to talk about it.
Danny checked to see if Aaron was still awake before he asked if they could talk. He explained how, until earlier that day, the thought of sex of any kind with another boy had never entered his head, even after he came out to him; pointing out that he had never even jerked off in front of another bloke. He admitted that he had snogged plenty of girls, even fingered one or two and had a few give him a blow job, but he had never gone down on one which to him meant he had gone further with him than any girl he'd been with, as he had never fucked any of them.
Aaron didn't know how to help his brother because he had never been confused about his sexuality, what he did say though was that Danny didn't have to be gay just because of what they had done. As much as he had enjoyed it, he understood if Danny preferred it never happened again.
Danny lifted Aaron's face to look him in the eyes before telling him that it was the most special thing that had ever happened to him, and he wanted it to happen more, providing that didn't cause problems in his relationship with the twins.
Aaron asked him if they were to explore sex together, was it going to be limited to the two of them or if he could see himself doing something with Lucas and Liam, because he knew how their minds worked and was almost certain they both wanted to explore Danny's body further.
Danny knew the answer straight away. He had been turned on feeling Liam's naked body against his and more so when Lucas started to suck on his nipple. He explained to Aaron how he had felt when he was cwtched up to both brothers and how fingering Lucas felt right. Danny asked if that meant he had been fooling himself for years by thinking he was straight.
The only thing Aaron could say to try and help Danny was to ask if the thought of his cock being in a vagina, or going down on one with his tongue, filled him with excitement or revulsion. Danny thought about it and found it was something that made his cock react, which had to mean he found it exciting.
Aaron explained how the same thought filled him with revulsion; this told him that if he was still turned on by the thought of doing it with a woman, despite enjoying what they'd done earlier and desiring to do stuff with Lucas and Liam, it didn't mean he was gay, maybe bi or even straight with a little gay.
When Danny asked Aaron what he meant by straight with a little gay, Aaron explained how some men loved having sex with women but also found there was a special place in their lives for one particular boy or in Danny's case, three boys. He went on to ask Danny if, after what they had done, he wanted to do those same things with any boy or was it just with him and the twins.
Danny thought about it and found Aaron was right, he did only feel that way towards his brother and the twins. This helped settle him a little but he still found his attraction to those boys a little unsettling and realised it was something that he would have to adjust to over time. Danny asked Aaron if he and the twins had fucked each other yet or if they were waiting for a particular time.
Aaron explained that they'd rimmed and fingered each other but hadn't gone further, although he was certain there was a mutual desire to. When he asked why, Danny explained that while Aaron was fingering him, he'd wanted to feel his cock there and still did, but knew he wasn't quite ready for it. Aaron said that if that was how he felt, maybe all four of them should talk about it together. Danny kissed his brother deeply, before thanking him for opening up such a wonderful part to their relationship.
Aaron asked if there was anything else on his mind. When Danny said there wasn't, he suggested they try and go to sleep or they'd be too tired for anything the next day. Aaron gave him one last long kiss before cwtching back down, gently stroking Danny's stomach.
As Danny woke the next morning he found that he had rolled over onto his side during the night and was spooning Aaron, with his hard cock pressed between them and his hand holding Aaron's cock. He slowly started to stroke Aaron's cock as he began to move his hips in and out. The movements helped wake Aaron, who lay there enjoying the feeling of what his brother was doing for, and to him. He particularly enjoyed the feeling of Danny humping him. He remembered back to the morning he had done something similar with Liam. He remembered how good it felt with his cock going in and out between Liam's legs so he reached back and moved Danny's cock so it was between his legs just below his own balls.
Danny wondered what Aaron was doing to begin with, until he could feel his cock sliding between Aaron's legs. He started to pump in and out and within a few seconds there was enough pre cum leaking to lubricate Aaron's legs enough to help his cock slide even easier. He couldn't believe how amazing this feeling was, he moved around so he could nibble on Aaron's ear at the same time. Seconds before he shot his load on Aaron's legs, Aaron came. After a few moments to recover, Aaron got up to look for something to clean up with; he found a pair of Danny's boxers. When he had finished cleaning up he got back onto the bed pushing Danny onto his back before straddling him, kissing him deeply while grinding his cock against his brother's.
Around the same time Danny was shooting his load over Aaron's legs, Lucas was waking up in the other room to his brother sucking his cock. He wasn't going to let Liam have all the fun, so shifted so he could suck Liam's cock as well. The boys lay on their sides sucking each other until they had both shot cum into their brother's mouth. Rather than swallowing, they kept it on their tongues until they kissed. Liam let the cum he had slide into Lucas' mouth where it mixed with his own before Lucas shared it with him.
They both got up after spending a few more moments snogging to find Danny and Aaron in the kitchen making toast. When they sat down, Danny placed a plate in front of each of them before Aaron offered them the toast.
While they were eating, Danny brought up the conversation he and Aaron had had before they went to sleep. He explained about the feelings he'd had when cwtching up to Liam and how he'd really enjoyed having Lucas play with his cock while he fingered him and how he hoped they could do more together in the future but understood if they felt differently.
Liam said he and Lucas had talked when they went to bed as well. The main topic of the conversation was Danny. Liam was jealous that Lucas had managed to play with his cock and got fingered by him. They had both found watching Danny and Aaron sucking each other's cocks extremely hot. They also discussed how they both wanted a chance to do the same with Danny assuming both he and Aaron were ok with it.
Lucas explained that when Danny was fingering him the night before, he couldn't get the idea of having Danny's cock there instead of his finger. He also said that it wasn't the first time he had thought about someone's cock being there and it was an idea he and Liam had talked a lot about. They had done a bit of research on it and found that while a lot of places didn't offer the best advice, there did seem to be a consensus that said stretching the muscles for a period of time before attempting anal sex was the better way to go.
Aaron asked him what he meant by stretching and Lucas explained how a few sites described getting a number of different sized butt plugs or dildos. Starting with the smallest size you could get you'd wear it for perhaps an hour each day to get your muscles used to something being there. After a week or so you could move up a size and repeat it until you had reached a size similar to a normal cock. That should mean that when you attempted to have proper anal sex it wouldn't hurt you or damage you either.
Danny went on to explain he had felt the same as Lucas had when Aaron was fingering him. He asked if Lucas or Liam had looked at getting the butt plug. As they weren't eighteen they weren't able to go to the local sex shops and buy them or use credit cards to get them online either. Danny suggested that if it was something the four of them were going to try together, then it was possible for him to get them.
Lucas was the first to ask what they were going to do with the day. Aaron thought that it was unlikely Danny would have another chance in the near future to be alone with Lucas and Liam which meant it was the best time for them to explore each other's bodies. They had all day and the night which meant there was no rush for them to do everything in one go. He came out with the idea that they repeat what they had done the night before. Watch a few films while cwtching up to each other. Liam was thinking the same thing and quickly agreed with Aaron.
So with their food finished, Liam and Lucas did the few dishes while Aaron and Danny cleared the rest of the things away before they went into the living room to watch the telly.
Liam put Thelma & Louise on before he got down and cwtched up to Danny. He kept his head close to Danny's so they were able to kiss for the first time. They were enjoying a deep kiss when he began to move his hand over Danny's hairy chest and stomach. Danny moved his hand up and down Liam's back before settling on Liam's arse, finding the crack with his finger just like he had with Lucas and Aaron the night before.
Aaron and Lucas just enjoyed cwtching up to each other.
After pressing his finger around Liam's hole for a bit, he brought his hand up to add saliva to his finger before transferring it to its target. Liam jumped when he felt the wet finger poke around his hole but quickly settled. While Danny had been starting to play with his hole, Liam began to fondle Danny's cock and balls and even straying down a bit further to his hole. When he felt Danny's finger slide easily into his hole, Liam moved his head so he could taste Danny's cock for the first time.
Aaron was surprised at how turned on he felt watching Danny and Liam go at it. He moved so he could get Lucas on his back before he went down to start rimming him. Lucas wasn't going to be the only one left out though and he moved so he was under Aaron so he could suck Aaron's cock while he was getting rimmed.
It wasn't long before the film was ignored for the second time as each boy concentrated on exploring the body of the boy he was with.
Lucas and Aaron were well versed in what each other liked, so it didn't take them long to bring each other to climax. After they had both relaxed a little, Aaron moved around so he could kiss Lucas and share the cum he had in his mouth. Sharing the cum after they had climaxed had been something he had missed the previous year. After kissing and sharing the cum with each other, Aaron and Lucas cwtched down and watched their brothers enjoy each other.
It wasn't long after his brother had climaxed that Liam was shooting his load down Danny's throat while continuing to bring Danny close. When Danny shot his load into Liam's mouth, Liam kept the cum on his tongue before he moved up to give some of it to Danny. They continued to kiss and tongue wrestle for a while before Liam cwtched down into Danny's shoulder.
When he saw his brother and Danny were finished and happy, Lucas suggested that they go to the pool for a bit, saying that they could spend a few hours having fun at the pool and still have plenty of time to have fun back in the living room.
Danny pointed out he didn't have a swimsuit when Aaron suggested that one of his Speedos would fit him, and they were in the twins' bedroom so they didn't have to go to their home to get them.
On the way back from the pool, Lucas suggested they stop at McDonalds and get some food to save cooking, but Danny wouldn't entertain the idea. He said he could cook burgers that were healthier and tasted better. He pulled into a supermarket to buy the things he needed to make the burgers before heading home.
Lucas allowed Danny to keep his clothes on when he was cooking, so no stray splash of oil or something scolded him, but insisted that when the cooking was finished, he get naked again.
When he had eaten his second, Lucas admitted that the burgers Danny'd made for them, were better than the ones he'd had from McDonalds in the past. There wasn't any left over when they'd all finished and just like the day before, Danny suggested they leave the dishes till they'd had their tea later in the day.
Rather than watching another film, Danny asked if there was any objection to putting the football on. When none were voiced, they all got down on the floor. Aaron cwtched up with Liam and Lucas got down with Danny.
Lying there watching the football with Lucas gently stroking his chest, Danny started to wonder about what had happened that weekend. He still couldn't believe he had sucked two cocks and was close to sucking a third. Nor could he believe that he had wanted Aaron to fuck him and still did for that matter. He started to wonder if by allowing the boys to get him off, he was taking advantage of them. But then he remembered how much closer he felt towards Aaron, holding him in his arms after they had brought each other to climax.
Lucas continued to stroke Danny's chest and stomach, enjoying the feel of the chest hair under his fingers. He found Danny stroking his back a massive turn on, it wasn't long before his cock was hard and poking at Danny's leg. He moved so he could kiss Danny before he started to suck his cock.
Aaron and Liam weren't far behind Lucas in looking to suck on each other's cocks and it soon became another round of two couples in a sixty nine position. Lucas copied his brother in sharing Danny's cum with him before cwtching down again. Aaron and Liam shared each other's before they cwtched down.
Sleep soon took over all four boys. When they woke up it was getting dark out and they realised they'd all slept for a few hours. Danny asked if the boys wanted pizza again or if they wanted a Chinese or Indian takeaway, he told them to think about it while they got dressed. Liam and Lucas loved sweet and sour dishes so opted for the Chinese, while Aaron only said he didn't want pizza again. Danny had fancied Chinese himself so when they were all in the car he headed to a local takeaway where they got a few different dishes before heading home.
Also on their trip out Danny stopped at the Blockbuster store where they rented a few movies to see them through the night. As soon as they were in the house, Liam insisted they stripped off before they sat down to eat.
After they'd all had their fill, the four of them worked together to clean the kitchen, before going back into the living room and cwtching up to watch the movies they'd just rented. For the rest of the night, Aaron and Danny cwtched up together as did the twins. They watched two films with nothing more than a few long kisses being shared.
It was after midnight when Danny said it was definitely time they all went to bed as they had to be up for school. Aaron and the twins didn't argue and all four headed up to the bedrooms. Danny not wanting to assume what the sleeping arrangements were going to be, asked his brother who he was going to spend the night with. Aaron told him that as he slept with the twins every weekend and he didn't know when he'd get the chance to share his brother's bed again, he was going to sleep with him.
Later that night, Danny could tell Aaron was sleeping, but his mind was going over what he had said earlier about not knowing when he'd get the chance again. He knew his parents wouldn't understand the change in his relationship with Aaron, especially when he couldn't explain how it had happened. So knowing this, he also deduced that there was no chance of lying in bed with his brother in his arms while he still lived at his parent's house. This meant he needed to find a place of his own. He was going to start a well-paid job in a couple of weeks' time thanks to a buddy he'd made in the army. That should mean he had plenty of chances of getting his own place. The decision he needed to make though was how big a place. He could just hear what his mother and father would say, if he had a one bedroom flat and agreed to have his brother spend the night. The only way to keep their sleeping arrangements between the four boys was to get a flat or house with at least two bedrooms. As soon as he had worked that out, his mind started to drift off to sleep.
Not wanting to get Aaron or the twins' hopes up about how soon they could repeat the weekend they'd all just enjoyed, he kept the decision he'd made to find his own place to himself. Aaron and the twins went off to school leaving Danny waiting for Myfanwy and her husband to get home from London.
[For those who use webmail, or whose regular email client opens when they want to use webmail instead: Please right click the author's name. A menu will open in which you can copy the email address to paste into your webmail system (Hotmail, Gmail, Yahoo etc). Each browser is subtly different, each Webmail system is different, or we'd give fuller instructions here. We trust you to know how to use your own system. If the email address pastes with %40 in the middle, replace that with an @ sign.]

Tottenham boss Jose Mourinho has spoken of some of the great captains he's worked with during his career.
He recalled: "There was one at FC Porto, Jorge Costa. One day we were losing 2-0 with Belenenses at halftime, I was going to the dressing room and everyone could see that I was steaming. And Jorge said, 'Wait two minutes out there, please'.
"He went in, closed the door and did the dirty work for me. Then he opened the door and said, 'Guide us.' He did everything I was going to do.
"He was a central defender, had never scored and scored two in that game. There is a big difference between captain and leader, you don't buy leaders, you don't create leaders. When you have them, your team is a step ahead, but today's football is full and people pay more attention to what they look like than who they are.
"I had captains who were not leaders. People look at the armband and think: this man is the leader. No. Often the captain is not the leader."

Love Me NOT (BOOK)
This was a project at Tyler School of Art where we had to catalog anything. I chose to catalog flowers and why you would not want to give them to someone. I took all the photography Inside the book. I chose to give it an elegant look so that at first glance you wouldn't realize that its content isn't as pleasant.

Jhené Aiko Efuru Chilombo (born March 16, 1988) is an American singer-songwriter
and recording artist from Los Angeles, California She was formerly signed to
T.U.G. and Epic Records, but left to continue her education. She was also well
known as "Lil' Fizz's cousin", however, she is not related to him.At the age of
20, Aiko became pregnant by American R&B singer O'Ryan and gave birth to her
daughter Namiko on November 19, 2008.

My ex and I broke up 8 months ago after dating seriously for close to a year. He had pursued me super hard when we were friends, and really convinced me to date him. He really cared about me, but freaked out once we were getting close to the year mark, and suddenly just broke things off. We had to see each other everday since the breakup...at school, when we worked on projects together, or had group lunches together etc.
Since its been 8 months, I feel like I am really over it. I never really had a crush on him before we dated...I had just grown to really like him. But now I feel like I've grown to think of him like how I did when we were friends.
Is there any chance that as we start to hang out like group friends like we did before we dated, that we may fall for each other again? Has it ever happenned to you guys before?
Most Helpful Guy
That never happened to me. I just stay friends and nothing happened more than that.0

Malachi sat in the grass, thinking back to when he was the human equivalent of only about 25. He wore a shit eating grin on his face as he watched those around him play and dance within the fields. His heart still hurt quite a bit at the loss of Arthur, but being around those his age helped loosen the binds a bit. Especially when Elizabeth started coming around. Even by Fae standards she was gorgeous. Long blonde hair with beautiful eyes that made him feel as if he was staring into a clear sky. The song sweet child of mine often came to his mind when he thought about her in later years. He was completely enamored by her, and he wasn't supposed to be. He felt slight disgust with himself about the whole thing, not that he had ever acted as his father attempted to raise him to be, like your typical fae.
Love was not something that was common to their kind. In fact it was highly looked down on and often got you killed. Less so by social norms and more so because it caused you to lower your guard. But when he was with her he lost all common sense. Or at least what you could consider common sense for a fae. And it wasn't long before his flirtatious winks and sly grins were returned to him. Everytime Elizabeth gave him that toothy grin, even when said teeth almost looked like those of a shark, he felt his heart jump just a little bit. His chest swelled everytime she chose him as her dance partner and he felt almost certain that she harbored feelings for him as well.
They were like fire and ice, quite literally. Even though he was surrounded by the power of fire he often had a calm and cool demeaner which contrasted strongly against her fiery and bold personality, despite her powers being that of the winter court. They often snuck off from the crowd when they could to be alone together. He enjoyed those moments the most. He shook his head as he thought back on it, a frown forming on his face. He remembered their last day together well.
They had snuck off into their usual field together, laying in the grass. Malachi had found himself distracted playing with her golden blonde hair.
"Malachi, you're doing it again." He heard a light tinkle of laughter come from Elizabeth as she spoke and he moved his eyes to look at her face.
"Hmm, and whats that?" He grinned, his hands cupping her face.
"Staring at me with that weird look in your eyes. I never know what you're thinking. It's like you're looking at me but looking just past me. It worries me sometimes, I don't think I've ever seen anyone with that look in their face. " Malachi raised his eyebrows at her before making a mock thoughtful look.
"Hmm... I wonder what could be causing me to make such a face." He grinned as he started planting kisses all over her face, her hands pushing him away as she laughed.
"Malachi! Stop that what are you doing you goofball!" She squirmed and attempted to get away from him until he stopped, hugging her close he rolled onto his back, taking her with him so she laid on top of his chest. She let out a squeal of surprise when her body left the grass.
"Elizabeth... I have something I need to confess." His face scrunched up into concern as he spoke. Elizabeth looked at him with confusion.
"Malachi... I don't think I've ever seen you look so serious before. What is going on?" She wiggled herself a little to sit up on top of him. "You can always tell me anything." Malachi sighed a little, giving her arm a light squeeze.
"Elizabeth, I think I love you. No, I know I love you. I havent felt like this for anyone in centuries. And even this goes beyond what I ever felt before." He watched as Elizabeth's face fell and started to curse himself in his head. He shouldnt have said anything. She leaned forward and gave him a light kiss on the forehead.
"Malachi... I love you too but you know that we can't... That we shouldn't. And to be honest, there's a reason I've been sneaking around with you instead of us being out in the open. Besides that it goes against everything Fae believe in that is.... My father would kill me if he found out. I'm already supposed to mate with someone else. Someone from the winter court. I'm sorry Malachi I should have told you sooner."
Malachi felt as though his heart was breaking for the second time in his life, before his face lit up. "Well, what if we leave. They can't do anything to us if we go where the humans are. We start a life there, find a good cabin in the woods and we run away together. Then it doesn't matter what they think, and you don't have to mate with someone you don't want to." Elizabeth gave him a grin in return, nodding. For the rest of the day they sat planning out their plan. They would leave the very next day.
Malachi would like to have said that they lived happily ever after, but the fae are cruel beings. They made it to the human realm, and lived there happily for many years. They even had a little girl. Malachi sunk his head into his hands. God he wished it ended there. He went back to the fae realm one day, to run an errand for his dad. No one knew about his family on Earth, or at least that's what he thought anyway. He was glad to get back home, carrying sunflowers, Elizabeth's favorite. When he walked into the door a horrible sight laid before him. Someone had come threw when he was gone. Trashed the place. He would have assumed it was regular robbers if it hadn't been for Elizabeth's and his daughters death. Iron stakes. The only thing that could permanently kill a Fae on the human planes. Shock came over him first. Then rage. He must have broken everything in that house, before using a cloth as a, very slight, barrier between his skin and the iron to pull it out of their bodies. He still had the burn marks on his hands. The worst thing he ever did was bury his family.
His body shook, as he now sat at their graves, centuries later and sobbed. He would never love anyone as he had loved them. Never again would he let that pain into his heart. Eventually he ran out of tears, sitting there quietly, his body still shaking with unshed tears as he laid down flowers at their graves.

My mom is gone
by Danielle Williams
(Hale, Michigan, USA)
My mama looking all beautiful
Click on each photo to enlarge.
Its Christmas Eve, and im lost. i just guess ill tell her story and why im here now.
Im 27 and my mom had been sick with AML, or Acute Myloid Leukemia for a long time now. She was so strong and such a fighter. Not a weak woman in any aspect at all. The family says it the Hawkins genetics, and weather it is or not she was a strong woman. she had a ruff go in life. she always told me that a soul goes through things to teach lessons that it needs before it can finally come to rest in heaven and be a piece. she said that a soul picks what its going to go through before a baby is even born. she said that this must have been her souls last time here because she really don't think her soul would have picked all this to go through if it wasn't her last time here.
regardless of that, she had been very sick with the AML. if there was something that she could have gotten sick with she would get it, from internal bleeds to terrible things. she was on morphine and lots of medicine. i had never seen someone go through this kind of pain and just not complain and not make a fuss about it. i got to talk to her everyday for a hour for the past couple months. i am so happy i took the time to do that cause i didn't know i could ever really loose her. i miss her so much. She was able to fight and fight everything but the second to last time i talked to her i could hear in her voice she was just getting tired and she wasn't going to be able to fight it anymore. They decided to put her on a ventilator and a feeding tube she was getting so bad. she called all of us to talk to us. she said that i was the most beautiful girl and she was so happy when she found out she was going to be having me. she told me that she never ever wanted me to ever hurt she didn't have me so that i would hurt she just wanted me to be happy and have the best life. i don't remember all of what she said because it was the tone in her voice that said it all, she wasn't going to make it. it tore me apart cause i felt like she was going and if i let myself believe that, i couldn't be strong enough to just keep believing and being strong for her. i put my boyfriend on the phone we have to kids together and have been together for 6 and a half years. she didn't say very much to him. she only said promise me you will take care of her. he said i will ma. and she said she love me and him and then we got off the phone. i called her a little bit later just to tell her i loved her because i called her alot just to see how she was doing and talk with her and i was sad and when i was sad i could at least go to her and shed say pick up your boot straps and just keep trucking you can do it, your my daughter and your strong. i don't have that right now and that's hard for me. i would always ask her advice and how she felt on things because i trusted her opinion.
my sister called and we all got to go down and see her she was put on heavy seditives in like a medicated coma by the time we got there her body kept trying to fight the ventilator so they continualy kept upping the seditives so her body could rest cause it was so tired. i took my son with me because hes my mamas boy and wouldn't have done well without me, i think i definatly brought him with me just so i wouldn't be alone. he stayed in the waiting room and did really good. he got to stay with my dad and my brother in there. i got to go see my mom and i hadn't seen her in months. when i first went in the room there was three things i noticed my sister was crying, my mom was really bloated and i was just happy to see my mom i thought i would be scared or shocked by how she looked but i wasn't i was happy to see her. she looked so bloated. you know how you feel when your retaining water. her hands looked like a glove with water poured in it, her neck was the size of her head and she was bald. she was so beautiful, and so happy all the time and i had seen her cry many times but the way she looked broke my heart she looked so frail and weak. i wished i could pick her up and hold her and just make it all better so she didn't hurt any more. i kept holding her hand and just rubbing my fingers across her hand. i was able to stay at my dads in ann arbor for a three days. it was so nice to have had that time with her she kept getting worse by the day, but i never in a million years would have thought she would pass. she had gotten sick so many times and i'd call her one day and shed be unable to talk and halucinating and then miraculusly over night, i d call ehr the next day and she'd be better shed sound like herself and tell me how she was feeling better and i never thought that she couldn't turn around. the next day i had to go home so that i could wake up on my daughters fourth birthday at home with her and tell her happy birthday right when she woke up. that same day the doctors talked to my dad and decided to turn off her ventilator. they called me and let me know i was sad and i figure she could go but maybe shed start breathing on her own and everything would be good and she'd get better. i made sure before i left to get pictures with her. giving her a kiss on her forehead. just to have for myself so i could see my mom. because even at her worst she was beautiful and that i loved her so much. well my dad and shane who is my brother hadn't called me or anything in a while and they were supposed to let me know what was going on and i called my grama because i knew she would answer the phone even if thing we going all crazy. she picked up and i asked her what was going on and she said well danielle, as you know your mother passed and doug is staying right here by her side, my dad, and i was like no actually grama no one told me. i was hurt that no one called me but i knew that was not done on purpose. she passed on my daughters birthday which i tried very hard to convince myself it was like my moms way of makeing sure when her date came every year that none of us could think of the day and just be sad. but it hurt i will never be able to enjoy the birth of my little girl without remembering the passing of my mother and darn it i don't want to remember it at all. i just want her here and i want to be with her, and i want to see her tomorrow when the family gets together. i don't really know how to process all this. im confused and i know she wants me to just be happy and i want to call her and talk to her but thats not something that can happen, i would talk to her but it feels to weird i don't want to accept that shes gone. how can i not have a mom. my boyfriend has a mom. even my mom has a mom who is alive. my boyfriend has a mom who herself has a mom. shes not supposed to be gone yet not yet i still needed her. my brother is only 17, and he still lives at home. my sister is only 25. i just don't know how i feel and i figured maybe if i let it out on here maybe i can feel alittle better about it.

To overcome is: people trying to run my life, by portraying me, as themselves. I have yet to do it. One liar, harassing me, can’t comprehend anything and thinks I said: they were portraying themselves as me. It’s actually true, too. They do try to portray themselves as me, but they portray me as them.

So on Monday December 28th our little guy was born. I ended up being induced that morning and he was here that afternoon. His name is Kason and he is just adorable! Everything went so smooth and quickly that I couldn't even believe it when he was here. Nothing like when we had Makenna. But he is here and everyone is doing well. Makenna just loves her little brother and she is so helpful too. Well here are a few pics of the new little guy.

Last time i visited this place the person there was very rude! i waited for 15 minutes until he was able to take my order and then he gave me one choice and that was to send the arrangement at a later time as he was busy and cannot prepare it for me on the go. I told him that i cannot and need it and that i will look for another place which he did not seem to mind! Then minutes later i found another recently opened shop and the person there told me they have an older branch and guess what! it was pink and blue! when he heard the story he called the owner and informed him and they promised to deal with the rude salesperson and this is why i am giving them one star. Talk about coincidence!!
I went to pick up some birthday balloons, the place is well organized and have most occasions and offer some flower, options as well. Prices are 1.5jd for helium balloons.
They service was quick and they had some variety of colors as well as boxes and stuffed bears.

It is funny how for a man it is okay to comment on other women but the moment another man comments on your wife it is not a compliment. It is not even flattery. It is a threat and possibly an insult! It is just disrespect. We get territorial very quickly and want to assert our dominance so that the other man knows you are the alpha male in her life. There was no way I was going to allow her to work here! This man clearly seemed to like things and if he thought she was beautiful before he even hired her then what would happen if he saw her every day? I was not sure what to do but acting up in front of a client was not an option as it would most likely get me into unnecessary trouble at work as well. I decided that I will deal with it when I get home. I had to tell my wife that I was not comfortable with her working there but now I needed a good enough reason. Arguing that it was because some man thought she was good looking was not a good enough reason so needed something stronger.
My day was spoiled. I snapped at Daluxolo when I got back at work when he asked me for some help on a document. I also snapped at our paralegal but worse I was very cold towards Asthandile when she called me to tell me about how well her interview went. She told me that the boss himself had even come during the interview. She had been hired on the spot but they allowed her to start the following day so as to give H.R. enough time to fix her credentials etc. I asked her what her job description was and she said for now she would be assisting everyone and anyone who needed help. For now she was meant to shadow different people so as to learn and eventually she would know her strength. She said she needed to but work clothes though because most of her outfits really did not work. If I could roll my eyes I would have at that moment. I told her she could get a few items and she said thank you. I cannot remember the last time I had heard her this happy. I was not about to spoil it by my insecurities. No one deserves that. I have often wondered, what is it about shopping that makes a woman so happy? I really don’t get it. For a man shopping means walking on those slippery hard tiles in the mall and it is definitely not fun! Secondly, it means losing money to clothes which after two or three months you will not like because they are definitely out of season. I honestly do not get it.
Khanyi called an hour or so after I spoke to Asthandile. I immediately asked her about her boss and she laughed. She said he was harmless and probably gay so I should not worry about such things. That’s the other problem with having a mistress. Often you turn to her to give you advice about the problems you are having at home. I know most flatter themselves by saying they don’t want to hear about your family but that is rubbish and not true. Eventually something will happen which you will need to talk about. She said I should be happy that my wife got the job because our plan is working! Our plan? This was not our plan, this was her plan. She could see I was not loosening up and immediately changed the topic. She told me about the plans she had for my wife in her job and it seemed to have a lot of late nights as well as trips. I think she was hinting towards the time we would get to spend together but I was over this. For the first time since I met Khanyi I told her I had to go. I was regaining my dominance. I told her that I was not so thrilled anymore and I hung up the phone. I needed to man up!
When I got home my wife had even written down a schedule for what we needed to do to readjust our lifestyles as obviously this changed a lot of things. I no longer had a housewife but a working woman. This meant I should not expect a warm meal when I got home before her. She asked if we could get a maid to help around and I think it was kind of obvious that we needed one. I told her that it was the logical choice. Getting a maid is not the easiest thing to do but the obvious choice is to call home and get someone from there. She said I must leave it to her she will find someone. She already had a few candidates in her head. I was not comfortable though with her going to pick just anyone from Gugulethu or Khayelitsha and I made sure she knew that.
My wife is a big fan of Isibaya and often we watch together. My wife was lying on my lap and my one hand was on her breasts teasing. Yeah, I was trying to get some. She was concentrating hard on her show though. My phone rang and the number was private. I picked up thinking it was the office maybe, who knows! It was Khanyi! She could hear I was tense and said I must pretend as though I am talking to someone from the office but whatever I do I should not stand up. She asked me to greet my wife of which I turned and said, “Asi, Dalu sends his greetings!” Of which she just nodded. She hates being disturbed. My phone is not the loudest and with the TV on I doubt Asthandile could hear our conversation but this was risky none the case!
She asked me what I was wearing. Hold up! That’s my line! I told her ‘check the blue box on the floor’. I don’t know if she got the code for I was saying blue boxer shorts. She laughed and told me that she was wearing her sexy red lingerie and could imagine me taking it off! I could feel my other friend stir in my boxers and start to pay attention. What if my wife felt this? I don’t know where I got the courage and I asked her, ‘send me a picture so I can confirm if it is the right folder’ I thought she was gone but about a minute letter the picture came in! My other friend inside my boxers was completely standing at attention now and this time my wife noticed and I thought I was busted for sure! I think she thought it was because I was playing with her breasts that made me like this because she put her hands on her lips to say that I must keep quiet.
I was scared and excited at the same time but I knew I had to hang up the phone! I had wanted for so long to bring out this naught side out of my wife but this was not it.
I was going to regret this!
Michael Nkululeko Maphoto
Ola. im a 26yrs old guy from Mafikeng now living in Pta…last year i got out off a 7yrs relationship with the woman of my dreams or at least i know she is! We have a 3year old boy. Our break up came after we lost our 2nd born of which we were both looking forward to have her(she was a girl),I was against the break up at 1st but because i love her too much I gave her what she wanted, now am suffering I think of her every minute i live as we had so many plans together, she refuse to fix things with me saying its for the best, I love her and it is both hard for us to tell our parents that we no longer together as they’ve approved our relationship…I really find it difficult to move on with my life…how do I get her to change her mind, cause the reason am in pta now it was our plan so that we can live together far away from home and build a better future for us and our son

By now, you've probably heard about how some guy in Hungary threw eggs at Steve Ballmer yesterday. I thought his comment to get his speech back on track was pretty good – he said "it was a friendly disruption". I suppose it would have been more interesting if Ballmer had tried playing dodgeball with the guy or batted at them with a ruler. After Ballmer ducks behind a table, the guy looks like he makes an adjustment and tries to lob one in. He was no Al Hrabosky, that's for sure, even if he was a bit tilted. I'd like to hear Vin Scully make the call.

Last Monday I was at a memorial service for a brother I never met.
He was a Deacon in my church. His name is Bill Alsworth. He was part of the family of God at Stony Point Presbyterian Church for eight years, and served as a Deacon faithfully for many of those years.
He died of Leukemia, which had rendered him bedridden for the last months of his life.
While he was sick, he had so many visitors from Stony Point that the staff at the hospice care facility thought he was famous!
Really, he wasn't known by anyone outside of Stony Point. He literally had no biological family.
I'm sorry that I didn't get to meet him. The description of him at the memorial service from all of the members of Stony Point made it clear that he was a man who was well loved, and who loved others.
Bill was loved and welcomed by the church the first time that he came. He wrote about it in his journal, and a portion was read in the memorial service. He wrote about how the members of the church welcomed him with open arms, even though he was just-released from a 38-year-long prison sentence.
It was clear from his journal that he didn't expect to be received and welcomed by anyone who knew about his background. He didn't think that the church would see him as the renewed and redeemed man that he was. That wasn't true. The church received him with love.
Every person who spoke about Bill spoke about his generosity. They spoke about his kindness. They shared about his eagerness to help. No one talked about how great he was, or how wise, or how gifted. They only spoke about his relationships. It was the relationship with his brothers and sisters that they remember and that they were so glad to have had.
Bill was a brother. He was loved as a brother.
It didn't matter that Bill didn't have a biological family to care for him at the end, the family of the church took care of him, visited him, and loved him to the end. Bill was not alone. Bill was part of the most important family that exists.
The service for Bill was so beautiful. I left the service with so much joy and peace, knowing that God has welcomed Bill into the eternal peace of the Father. I was also deeply touched, because I saw myself in the stories told about Bill.
When I started attending Stony Point I was worried about how I would be received, since I shared my testimony publicly about having same-sex sexual attractions. I worried that perhaps some of the men in the church would be uncomfortable about sitting next to me. I worried that perhaps I would have difficulty in my relationships with my church family because the same-sex attraction would be a distraction.
I was wrong.
The men and women of Stony Point have welcomed me with open arms, and heartfelt prayers. I was invited to join a men's small group the first day I was in the church. I was asked by six different men to attend the Men's Retreat with them (which I did three weeks ago). I was eagerly invited to join the men's softball team (which I also did, and have greatly enjoyed playing on the team). I've been invited to lunch more than a dozen times. I've had friends from church over to enjoy dinner at my apartment. In short, I've been welcomed as a brother.
One man heard about my struggle the first day he met me. It had come up in the Wednesday night Bible study class discussion. He chased me down in the Sanctuary the next Sunday to tell me, "You are my brother. I don't want you to ever think you have to apologize for what you struggle with."
Another man returned from a months-long trip to the Netherlands and rejoined the men's small group I am a part of. The first day he was back I was already planning to share part of my story and a prayer request for a particular element of it. This man, having just met me, prayed for me that night. He prayed that "Sean would know that he is a beloved son, who has no need to be ashamed."
While yet another brother-in-Christ was driving me home from the same small group, he told me, "We are all here for you, Sean. We want to help you, and will help you in any way we know how." He said this with great emotion, wishing that he could do something to ease my burden and help me along.
This outpouring of love, support, and concern has been an answer to years of prayer. The family that I have found in this church is the family God has prepared for me. I have prayed for many years that I would be surrounded with godly men who would show this kind of love and concern for me. And God has answered my prayers.
God has given me such a blessing in Stony Point church.
After the Memorial Service for Bill, I made a comment to another man in the church about how exceptional Stony Point is. He responded, "Perhaps it is, but it shouldn't be."
He's right. Men like Bill, men like me, all those who have been saved by the grace of God, should be welcomed as family in every church. It is an honor to be in a church family that does this well. If yours does not, I hope you can set an example to all the others in your openness and generosity. Let your light shine, that they may see your good deeds and give glory to our Father by doing the same.

From Last Night:
—Walter, she said.
—This is the right thing.
She reached to take his hand. Somehow it frightened him, as if it might mean an appeal to come with her.
—You know, she said evenly, I’ve loved you as much as I’ve ever loved anyone in the world—I’m sounding maudlin, I know.
—Ah, Marit! he cried.
—Did you love me?
His stomach was churning in despair.
—Yes, he said. Yes!
—Take care of yourself.
He was in good health, as it happened, a little heavier than he might have been, but nevertheless … His roundish, scholarly stomach was covered with a layer of soft, dark hair, his hands and nails well cared for.
She leaned forward and embraced him. She kissed him. For a moment, she was not afraid. She would live again, be young again as she once had been. She held out her arm. On the inside, two veins the color of verdigris were visible. He began to press to make them rise. Her head was turned away.
—Do you remember, she said to him, when I was working at Bates and we met that first time? I knew right away.
The needle was wavering as he tried to position it.
—I was lucky, she said. I was very lucky.
He was barely breathing. He waited, but she did not say anything more. Hardly believing what he was doing, he pushed the needle in—it was effortless—and slowly injected the contents. He heard her sigh. Her eyes were closed as she lay back. Her face was peaceful. She had embarked. My God, he thought, my God. He had known her when she was in her twenties, long-legged and innocent. Now he had slipped her, as in a burial at sea, beneath the flow of time. Her hand was still warm. He took it and held it to his lips. He pulled the bedspread up to cover her legs. The house was incredibly quiet. It had fallen into silence, the silence of a fatal act. He could not hear the wind. …
Interview at the Harry Ransom Center (UT Austin), which houses the Salter archive.
Reynolds Price discusses Light Years at Duke.

On her second day in America, Dora awoke with some confusion. She had been dreaming of James, and that he had met her ship and they'd been married. When she found herself waking up in a strange bed and no sign of James, she wondered idly where he'd gone. Then she remembered. Captain Doble and his wife, Charity, had taken her in after telling her that James had died.
She fought to stop the tears from forming and wondered what to do now? Rereading the last letter that James had left for her, she realized that first she would have to find a place to live and make arrangements to contact Mr. Otis in Andover. James had mentioned taking a house for them - was that still available?
Over breakfast with the Dobles' she found that, indeed, the house had been taken for a year and was close by. If she wished, Captain Doble could take her there this morning. The sun was shining brightly on the harbor as they walked a few small blocks and came to a charming little house with a neat yard. We found a drawing of the house that we think Dora made some time while she lived there.
Inside, Dora found that James had brought in some basic furnishings, and she would be able to set up house very easily. In the desk found in the front parlor, was a receipt from the landlord for a year's rent paid in advance. For the first time since she'd left the ship, Dora felt like she'd come home. In the next instant, the full realization hit her that she would spend her time in this home alone. She hadn't really let herself believe this, but now, as she saw the careful preparations James had made for her arrival, she knew just how much she would miss him. It was too much for her to bear. She hated to break down in front of Captain Doble, and he seemed to understand, as he proposed that he "make an inspection of the grounds and garden to see if anything needed tending to" and stepped outside.
A drawing of Dora's yard.
Dora sank into a chair that had been placed by the fireplace, and realized that James' own hands had placed it there for her. She wept for the first time, and after a quarter of an hour, she knew that she would wait here for James to return, as she was not convinced that he was really gone. She'd be able to feel it if he were gone, wouldn't she? And they'd never found him. He could be ill somewhere, waiting to gain his strength before coming back to meet her. She'd wait.
When Captain Doble entered the house again, she greeted him cheerfully and asked if he'd like a cup of tea? She'd been rummaging in the cupboards and found some provisions were already here. She'd later ask Charity to show her where to do the marketing and she'd be able to manage very nicely. That afternoon, Charity and Dora were back in the little house, scrubbing and cleaning everything and getting all ready for Dora to move in, with the help of some of Charity's friends. On her third day in America, Pandora Boxworth moved into her own home, and began to settle in, making friends easily as she met the ladies in Charity's circle. No friend would ever mean as much to her as Charity, but it was good to have company, especially through the harsh winter. Now that she had a pretty little home, she began to feel very much as if she belonged in this new land, and as she talked with her new friends, and read the news accounts of the events going on all over New England, she began to realize that this new land was very different from her home in England.
Dora's pencil drawing of Charity.

Over the past year, it has become obvious that Nickelodeon star, Ariana Grande has lost a tremendous amount of weight
. The 19 year old has never been very big to begin with, but now looks skeletal which has led many to believe she has some type of eating disorder. Ariana took to her Tumblr yesterday and says that her weight loss is because she is eating better and also working out a lot. It sounds to me like she is starving herself and working out way more than she has to. She says that she used to eat junk food 24/7 and has cut junk completely out of her life and only eats healthy. Great, that is good for her. In addition, she has amped up her workouts which means she is taking in less junk so presumably less calories so was going to lose weight that way and increased her already strenuous workouts so is going to lose even more weight.
When I read her post (which you can find here), it sounds like to me she does have an eating disorder. She says that she never looked in the mirror or at her red carpet photos until recently so she never knew how heavy she was. She did not use the word heavy. She says mortifying, but I'm assuming that is what she meant. She has never been heavy.

A great location, clean, kitchen was well stocked. I was squinting the whole time, the lighting and seating were inadequate otherwise it was very nice. The freezer was broken and one burner was out, so the property manager was not keeping up the property.
Thank you for the review. The Property Manager will take care of the freezer and burner as soon as he is able. We are glad to see that you ultimately enjoyed your stay!

then on Saturday night at another restaurant saw another odd couple , i'd say the girl was mid to late 20's , pretty good looking brunette for her age , definity generate a lot of interest from guys , her date had to be like late 50's , lots of grey hair , kind of funny country look to him , definity wasn't her father the way he acted with her and way he looked into her eyes you could tell they were an issue. but why she could have any guy she want and she choose him? its no wonder guys like me are frustrated with dating
i don't get it both these girls could of had there pick of just about any single guy around here and this is who they choose? i'm not saying i felt the age diff here was inapproaite as both old enough to make own decisions but just wonder why they'd choose to go so much older and why younger guys were left behind.
Most Helpful Girl
I was 18 and my boyfriend was 50

I was recruited by West Point for a period of time for swimming. I attended the recruiting trip and loved it. Unfortunately the coach said he didn't have enough slots to blue chip me. I had a congressman recently check on my file and it still shows that I'm a swim recruit. Does this give me a higher chance of being accepted from the NWL? I have nominations and I am trip Q'd.

Authors: Lauren Pacaccio
I loved his kisses. They were sweet, yet extremely passionate. We really were going to miss the reservations if we didn't get going soon. I giggled and sweetly pushed him away. He smiled, with his perfectly straight teeth and grabbed my hand as we walked out.
The restaurant was amazing. I was just finishing up my crème brûlée when the champagne came out. Braden was smiling like a crazy person and I suddenly realized what was happening.
Maybe I was wrong. How embarrassing would that be if it was just champagne that he ordered just because it was our anniversary? "Never jump to conclusions." Some of mother's advice. He poured me some champagne and I took it. He held up his glass, proposing a toast.
He cleared his throat. "Happy Anniversary, and to many more." I smiled, and said, "To many more," and we clinked glasses. I sipped the champagne.
Suddenly, Braden's fork flew off of the table. He blushed and looked very embarrassed. He got on the floor to pick up the fork, but when he put the fork on the table, he didn't get up. Instead, he was on one knee, with a little box in his hand.
I gasped. This was it. He really was doing it.
"Paisley Rose Johnson, I love you more than anything. We've been together for three years now and I have honestly never been happier. When I picture my future, no matter what, you are always in it."
I was crying now, with a huge smile on my face. I was nodding, but I didn't think he noticed it. He was looking into my eyes, holding my hands, smiling along with me. People in the place were watching with anxious anticipation.
He was still talking. "From the moment I saw you, studying your ass off in the library sophomore year, I fell in love. And I just knew. I knew you would be the biggest, most important part of my life. I knew I wanted to be your friend, your lover, and soul mate. Forever and always. Now, Paise…"
I nodded at him, happy tears rolling down my face, smiling like crazy, "Now, Bray?" I said, laughing.
"Will you marry me?"
I made a face, pretending to think about it. I looked down at the ring he had just presented to me. It was beautiful. Simple, but elegant.
"Braden Alexander Abernathy, of course I will."
After that night, I was so excited, I could barely sleep.
I had to tell everyone I knew. But, for my family, I had to tell them in person. So, Bray and I would go down for the Christmas holiday. The holidays were only a few days away. I had talked to my parents and asked if we could stay with them for two weeks. I rarely get to see them, so me wanting to stay with them wouldn't give anything away.
I called work for the fifth time that day. Double, well fifth-checking that I was indeed off for the two weeks I had requested.
"Honey," Nancy, the desk assistant said, chuckling under her breath, "yes. You are all set. You can go and visit your parents for Christmas."
I laughed and blushed, looking down at my ring, "Nance, wanna hear a secret?"
I could practically see her looking around before replying, "Oh, honey," she said, "you know I'm always here to…well hear some gossip. What is it?!"
I laughed, "Well, it's nothing like bad, Nancy. It's just that…"
I paused, trying to torture her a little bit.
"Well, get on with it, girl!" She said, whispering.
"Braden and I are engaged."
There was silence for a second, but then some sort of noise came through the receiver. "CONGRATULATIONS, baby doll! Oh my gosh, well good gracious. I got so excited for a second. I had to put the phone down so I wouldn't scream. Oh, that Braden is such a good man, Paisley. Good, good choice."
"I was thinking the same thing," I said, laughing. "Nancy, you're totally invited to the wedding by the way."
She laughed, "Well, that's great! Have a great vacation, and tell Braden I said, 'Congrats!'"
We hung up and I got so much more excited, I couldn't even sit down.
I went into my room, where Daisy was taking a nap. I got my suitcases out and started to pack. I didn't know what we would be doing during the vacation. We could be going to dinners, church, or hell - we could be going in the hot tub one night. You never know with my family. I had to pack everything. And packed everything I did.
Braden came over that night. He wanted to tell me about his day and we would have dinner at my place.
"Babe," he started, his serious tone caught my attention. I looked over at him, making sauce for the noodles.
"What is it? Did something happen today?" I was boiling the noodles. They could wait. I walked towards him, and put my arms around him.
He exhaled slowly, "I have some good news and bad news."
Oh, Lord. That can never be good.
"Okay, what's the good news?"
"Since I am a teacher, I definitely get two weeks off for Christmas vacation."
"However, since my principal has something up his ass at all hours of the day…"
I cringed. Here comes the bad news. He was right. His boss was some sort of Nazi.
"…he asked me to stay for three days during vacation to help him brainstorm his next 'big idea' for the school."
I frowned, "But…Bray, didn't you tell him why we were going out of town?"
He nodded, "Yeah, but like I said…the stick was firmly in place. He told me that after those few days, I could leave and do whatever I wanted for the rest of vacation, but if I wanted to keep my place in the school, I would have to stay with him, along with a couple of other teachers."
I was upset, sure, but there was nothing I could do about it. I didn't want to upset him even more by being too upset. It was only a couple of days. I could handle it.
"Well, that's alright, babe," I said, going back to the noodles to drain them, "I understand."
"I knew you would, but I really am sorry, hun," I felt his arms, once again, come up from behind me. I leaned against him and I felt him kiss the top of my head. "But I have some more good news."
"Oh, really?" I said, turning to him.
"The sauce is done!" He yelled excitedly, motioning towards the pot.
"Oh, goodie!" I chuckled and got some plates for us. We made our dinner and ate together.
We talked about all sorts of things like we always did. Our relationship had the most communication in it than any of my other relationships combined.
We already knew that we wanted kids, how many, and when we would start. We already knew where we would live after we got married. We had even talked about getting married before he proposed. "I am so excited to tell everyone," I said, smiling like crazy. We were watching a movie then on my couch. It was a movie we had seen a dozen times, but for whatever reason, was one of our favorites.
"Me too," he said, lazily tracing patterns on my shoulder. His arm was around me and I was nestled up against him. So comfortable and right. Just perfect.
He was tired, though. I could tell. You get his stomach full, and he is practically done for the night.
"Hey," I said, sitting up quickly.
"Hi!" he said, laughing. He looked at me quizzically. I ran my hand through his hair, slowly. It was just so soft; I couldn't keep my hands out of it.
"Hi," I said, kissing him.
"Oh," he said, catching on, almost whispering now, "Hello."
"I was thinking," I said, between kisses.
"What were you thinking?"
"We should make up for the fact that you won't be there with me for three days…"
"Oh, you vixen, you," he said, pulling me onto his lap. He brushed the hair out of my face, and tugged at my t-shirt.
And made up for it, we did.
Being engaged was a weird concept. Now, when people looked at my hand, they knew. They knew I was about to commit myself fully to another person.
And if I was any happier, I think I really would have passed out.
I didn't want anyone to harsh my happy buzz. I felt like I could fly, that's how happy I was.
I was not happy, however, about the fact that when I knocked on my parents' door, I was standing there alone.
Braden would be there in a couple of days, but I would be essentially alone for those few days. And I wouldn't be able to tell anyone about my big news. My ring was tucked away in the pocket of my jeans.
The door opened. My poor mother looked old. Not like crippled, but much older than the last time I saw her. And she looked surprised. "Is it 3 already?" She looked down at her watch. It was.
"Hi to you, too, Mom," I said, walking in to my childhood home. "Where's dad?"
My mom gestured to the kitchen. "He's in there, but," she said, while hugging me, "he's not alone."
"Well, that's alright, Mom," I said, hugging her back, "I'll just pop in to say hi and then go put my stuff in my room."
She nodded. I expected her to go back to whatever room she was in before I got there, but she followed me into the kitchen. I heard two very familiar voices, and my heart sank.
One was my father's, who turned and smiled when I raced in and said, "Guess who is here!"
Holding my hands up like a fool, smiling like a loon.
Like I said, my heart sank, along with my arms. My smile was gone.
The other person, sitting at the table with my father was looking at me, slightly smiling with an amused expression on his face.
"Hey, honey. I guess we just lost track of time. How was your drive here?"
I blinked a few times. No, I was definitely awake.
"Um, the drive here was alright. The same as always." I looked at my father, trying to get him to explain to me why the person that was sitting at the table was there. That person spoke.
"Well, hey, stranger. I didn't know you were coming in for Christmas."
I gave him a "duh" look. It was Christmas after all. I knew I didn't visit a lot, but come on.
The other person got up and walked towards me.
What was he doing here? That's all I could think at that point.
Him, of all people.
I was too shocked to do anything, so when he hugged me it was all I could do just to hug him back.
While he hugged me, he said,
"It sure has been a long time, huh? I've really missed you, Pay."
I was shell shocked.
He was here. He was here during the vacation that I was going to tell my family that I was getting married.
I hadn't talked to him in almost four years. And he had the nerve to come up and hug me like we were old buds.
Now, I was in my room, on the phone with Braden.
"I'm glad you made it there alright," he was saying. He sounded so bored.
"Yeah, me too. But I'm all alone. I wish you were here."
He sighed, "Me too. I miss you, Paise,"
"Everyone was wondering where you were," I said, lounging on my bed. I was debating whether or not I should tell him about Hunter. It wasn't a big deal, but I didn't want to mention it just in case, for whatever reason, Braden might get annoyed. Of course, he knew all about Hunter. We had gotten together about a year after Hunter and I had broken up. I was still a tad upset about it, but I had buried myself in my school work all of freshman year. The beginning of sophomore year, I was doing the usual: holed up in the library, researching for one thing or the other. And that's when I saw him.

Woman who did not know she was pregnant gives birth
A BRISBANE woman who did not know she was pregnant has given birth to a baby girl at 37 weeks.
The woman is residing in the UK and had the baby on May 1 after being rushed to hospital with suspected appendicitis, Quest Newspapers has reported.
But the former Fairfield resident did not realise she was pregnant until she was in labour.
The 25-year-old, who has been living in the UK since 2012, said she woke up in the morning feeling "a little bit off", but decided to go to work.
But she felt worse and was rushed to hospital where she was examined and told she needed to start pushing.
"They started telling me to push, and I said 'push what? What are you talking about?'
"I was quite shocked and very scared because I didn't know what was going on."
OTHER TOP STORIES TODAY

Wife starts and I finish
Last weekend after dinner, I told my wife I was in the mood for some sex. She said that could be arranged.
My wife has beautiful tits and is a wonderful kisser but I had a cold, so there would be no kissing on the lips that night. We started feeling each other up and it wasn't long before I was naked. My wife left her nightgown on.
She started jerking me off in earnest and it felt good. I asked her to play with my balls for a while and that felt even better. I've been trying to get my wife to watch me masturbate and on a few occasions I was able to finish what she started while making out.
That idea appealed to me this night and the next time I told her to play with my balls, I took over the jerking of my cock. This felt great with her rubbing my balls, me jerking off in her presence.
It didn't take long for me to shoot my load. I cleaned up and said it was her turn, but she said she was tired and had a lot on her mind and was getting up early to get in her Xmas shopping. I guess my masturbating didn't turn her on, but it didn't turn her off either. In the past, when I tried something like that, she would leave. Now, she is getting used to me finishing what she starts. I would think she has no doubts that I masturbate when she is not around. She probably thinks I masturbate once a week when in reality, it is four times a week. Perhaps soon, she will watch me start to finish. Keep those stories about husbands and wives masturbating, cumming. They are great!

Raymour And Flanigan Complaint - Delivery guy caught looking through drawer
PA, PENNSYLVANIA -- The bed was slightly damaged upon delivery- but that is not the biggest problem. The biggest problem was that I caught one of the guys with his hand in my wife's Dresser Draw looking through her private department. I was dumbfounded and thought that my eyes were deceiving me. I asked what he was doing - first he said that he was looking for his tool and then he quickly corrected himself that he actually fell. I chased him out and called the police. Raymore and Flanigan customer service still has not returned my call!! I was offered $150 gift card for the trouble which I have not accepted. This whole thing is disgraceful. Who would expect this from a company with such "high standards". Needless to say I will never buy from them again.

Charles Edward Pridmore
Charles Edward Pridmore joined up with his brother Thomas on the first day of WW1. During the war he was gassed. This came about because it had been raining during a gas attack some time before Charles and the other men arrived and whilst there the rain stopped, the sun came out and unbeknown to them as the puddles started to dry the gas rose so they got gassed. They didn't have gas masks on and Charles was a hero as he told all his men to cover their faces and close their eyes while he led them to safety. This made him blind. Charles eventually recovered from the blindness but the gas 'rotted' his lungs and he was an invalid until his death in 1941.
His daughter said the first thing he insisted on when the second war was going to start was that they must have a gas-proof room. Being from a family of butchers he built this in the slaughter house which was in the yard.
Submitted by: Catherine Curtis (Niece)

SAN ANTONIO — Two men are dead and a police officer was injured after a traffic stop turned violent on the city's west side Friday.
San Antonio Police Chief William McManus described the incident, which took place in the 2400 block of Pinn Rd. as a "routine traffic stop which turned out to be not so routine after all."
According to McManus, the officer was by himself when he walked up to the truck, occupied by a driver and two passengers. The chief said he viewed video that showed the officer and the driver having a casual conversation for a few minutes.
"There was no excited motioning with the hands or anything like that," McManus said. "It was a very casual conversation from its appearance."
The chief said at some point, the driver pulled a gun and started firing at the officer, striking him in the hand and his radio. The officer then returned gunfire as he retreated back to his vehicle. The driver and a passenger were killed in the exchange.
The third occupant was struck in the upper torso and was transported to the hospital in serious condition. The officer was also hospitalized, and is said to be in good condition. McManus said he was "very, very lucky to be alive at that close range, having been shot in the hand and not somewhere else more vital."
McManus said the two victims were both males in their mid-20s. They have not been identified, nor did the chief identify the officer involved. McManus said he did not know why the officer had conducted the traffic stop.

Last night at midnight.
I have to tell you, I loved it.
David Yates, you are awesome. This is how I saw Harry Potter all along. I'm so glad to hear he's on board for 6 and 7.
It was a fun experience. Julia went to bed really early last night. At 11pm I woke her up and she had no idea why, she's not a huge HP fan, but I thought she'd like this. We went to the theater and the line was wrapped around the theater. This wasn't the line for tickets, this was just the line to get in to the theater. There were a few people dressed up, but most of the Muggles in line were Muggle-ish.
We ran into Julia's Kindergarten teacher at the movie. I just love her.
SO... movie. Great. The score was wonderful... LOVED the music. I have a few small complaints about the movie, but overall this was by far the best.
Julia had a blast, wasn't scared at all. Today she woke up and told me, "mom, I had the best time last night. I now love Harry Potter. Those kids were so brave. I didn't know kids could do that."
I asked her what kids could do. Her reply, "Make a difference."
I think she gets it.

The day we broke up, he posted some strange poem on his blog where he posts all of his poetry and short stories (aspiring writer studying to do it professionally) and the poem was about me. It had hints about us two and memories together and ended in talking about how I'm his biggest weakness and addiction. I only saw it because I went onto his Instagram to unfollow him as I feel more comfortable removing exes off of my social media. He unfollowed me also but has gone out of his way to come onto my profile and like my posts. Does he still love me or trying to get my attention or something? We were close for a long time before dating and I still love him deeply, we broke up a week ago. I would be interested in still being in contact with him even just as friends but he told me not to contact him as it was 'making him not want to talk to me in the future' which is why I'm so confused as to why he is doing this now. Is he regretting it?
Most Helpful Girl
yeah guys dont just write poems without feeling what they're writing. there must be some kind of 'residual' emotion still there that's messing with him.1

One night Tommy went out to a nightclub, his first time going out since turning 21 and being able to legally drink. He happened to meet this sexy lady who was dressed like she was ready for anything. Little did Tommy know but she was an escort who worked for Eve London Escorts. She discreetly let him know what her price was and waited for his reply.
The two agreed to go to a nearby hotel room. The rooms were welcoming enough. They had cozy beds and beddings plus beautiful ceiling and wall lights. Upon entering, the lady quickly pushed Tommy on the bed and he fell on his back, and she then helped him remove his shoes and loosen his belt. All things were moving fast for him. The lady seemed entirely experienced with sex, and ready to go. The lady then threw her scanty dress on the floor and remained in her bra and panty. She tried kissing him and touching his sensitive sexual parts, but his reaction was somewhat vague. She asked him what the problem was. Now he had to confess that he was a newbie to sex. She smiled and told him she would take care of teaching him. So the lady started from the basics. She began by sucking his cock until he was nearly ready to orgasm.
Tommy felt little orgasm which grew gradually in him as the lady kept on with the magic. He felt his penis stand strong enough and that urge to penetrate it into a woman’s body engulfed him. The lady went on with the foreplay and Tommy was enjoying it all. Removing her panties, she then climbed on top of Tommy and inserted his penis in her. Tommy shouted, “Oh that’s feels so nice.” The lady kept on riding him, waving her body and doing a little massage on her breast. Tommy joined her and also held her on the waist sexily touching her hips.
Finally, Tommy got into the mood and overturned the lady. He had his penis straight and robust and penetrated the lady’s wet pussy with all his sexual zeal. The hailing and sighing’s of the lady psyched him up, and got into her deeper that she kept on shouting, “please don’t stop.” He loved it and couldn’t stop giving her the pleasure. Since that day, Tommy got groomed about sex. He walked like he knew it all that night as we drove home. At least he met an understanding woman who correctly introduced him.

I do agree Molly doesn't seem like a very good person to me, didn't actually think of that before. Her whole "You from Crawford?" was bullshit because she would have seen everyone in there. Her snarky comments also annoyed me but the worst thing was when she ran off with the boat battery. I understand the logic but what if you died on your stupid mission Molly? If you fell and broke you're neck, we wouldn't even know where to look for you! Taking the battery was a really stupid thing to do.

My first born was the most beautiful baby that had ever been born. I accepted the gift of producing this gorgeous child with barely suppressed humility. How thrilled I was when I discovered that she and I would be going to New York soon when she was only a few months old!
We would be going after she won the prize as Orlando’s cutest baby. We would fly first class, enjoy a complimentary hotel, then they would do a photo shoot which would be distributed nationally (I cannot even remember what they were pushing). I was taking at least 3 outfits for her for each day we would be there, so they could admire her repeatedly.
All I had to do was fill out a form (everything was not online then) with an attached picture, and put it in one of the drop boxes around town. I was very confident, but to make sure, I found out where all the boxes were and dropped a dozen or so into each box.
She didn’t win. I was devastated. And confused.
Distance is a great teacher. I love my kid, and Leah has improved substantially since then, but she was not cute. Now, when I remember the lunatic I was, I laugh so hard I am not sure which end is wetter.

--Mr. Charles Kraus
, one of the city night watch
, was arrested yesterday evening, and locked up in ‘"Castle Godwin."’ The cause of his arrest was his declaring himself a Union man. He is reported to have said that he had a knife with which he fought in the Florida
war, and that he would die by it, on his own floor, before he would go against the Union
Augustus O. Brummell
was arrested on suspicion.
He formerly belonged to Captain Kirby
's company, joined the Wise Legion
, and was captured by the Yankees
After-wards he was released on parole to seek an exchange.
After his term had expired he vent to Norfolk
, and then returned to this city, stating that Gen. Wool
had granted him an extension of parole.
He was also incarcerated.

DD had several boyfriends over the years. None of them had been “The One” and when he or she would dump the other, a large percentage of the time I saw them stay friends. I wasn’t like that. When a boyfriend and I would have a parting of the ways, I had no further use for him. There were dirty looks involved and derisive remarks. If one of my friends dared date an ex, it was nigh onto unforgivable. Not so with DD. She took the high road. I couldn’t understand it but I admired her for it.
We had our weekly conversations and she’d update me on the goings-on at college. She was a big senior and along with that went special occasions. There were banquets and get-togethers. She’d had an active social life through the other three years, too, but this year was different. It was her last year there.
She’d talk about this guy and that one but I began to notice there was one she mentioned more than anyone else. She denied that she had more feelings for him but I was beginning to wonder. I had drilled into her head that she needed to complete college before she married and it looked like it was going to happen. When I’d told her to learn from my mistakes, she said she wanted to make her own mistakes but I believed this was one time she would do as I asked. I hoped.
Meanwhile, back at the hospital, things were tight. There was a consultant who was pretty savvy about what was available for small rural hospitals. He’d apply for grants and, more often than not, we would get them. Then he started telling me about a designation he had applied for. Critical Access. It sounded like it would be something for a larger hospital. He explained for a hospital to be a Critical Access Hospital, it had to be a certain number of miles away from another hospital and be a small facility. There were advantages, reimbursement and grant-wise since the object (at least one of them) was to support healthcare (sickcare?) in rural areas.
Stress was at an all-time high. Our business was booming but it seemed the overhead ate up any funds that came in. There were times we didn’t know if we were going to get paid but, some way, the owners would come through. If we could become a Critical Access Hospital, it would be a real plus.
The paperwork was done and sent in and all we could do was wait to see what would happen. The weeks seemed to crawl by. Finally word came that the designation had been granted. It was time for celebration? Well, that was a mixed bag. With the new status came new requirements. There were limits on how long a patient could stay. The 72 hour rule no longer applied to us. That was a good thing except—we were going to have to completely revamp the billing system to accommodate the changes. There were new codes and bill types. I was going to have to educate myself about the ins and outs of being a Critical Access Hospital.
My head was spinning. I was up on most of the regulations regarding hospital billing and what I didn’t know, I could find out. Now, the rules had changed and I was in a completely different world. It would be a better world but it was up to me and the staff in the Business Office to make it work.
I had to study on my own. There wasn’t extra money to send me to workshops and seminars on the subject. The year before, there had been a conference for the hospital computer program users. It was in Branson, MO, and we were housed at a swanky resort complete with a beautiful golf course. The other person who went from our facility and I shared a two bedroom condo. We each had our own rental car and went our different ways when we weren’t in meetings. I’d taken in a couple of shows—Dino Kartsonakis and Shoji Tabuchi. Everything had been paid for by the hospital except for the tickets. That was then. This was now.
Stress was getting me down. I was trying not to let it bother me but the fact of the matter is that I felt like I was in over my head. I was used to searching billing and reimbursement manuals but it took on a whole new aspect. I was in a foreign country.
November came and there were a few days away from the hospital when I could catch my breath. I spent Thanksgiving with DS1 and his family. DS2 and DIL came over and brought a fake turkey roll with pineapple. I’d been staying away from soy but I figured one slice wouldn’t hurt anything. I ate it and felt like I was in a stupor the rest of the afternoon.
The weekend passed much too quickly and I was back home. The phone rang and it was DD. I settled in for our conversation. She seemed nervous. There was something in her voice that wasn’t characteristic. What was going on? It was to be a most interesting visit.

recensies: So far its great i was pleasantly surprised at the water pressure it put out. The speaker came charged and it took me 5 minutes to install! Just what i was looking for at a way better price then most others i have looked at similar. I can't speak to durability yet as i haven't had it but a few days. The Bluetooth works well, was easy to connect to. At full volume there was a tiny bit of static in the speaker but i turned it down a notch and it was great.

My 70% disabled Army Veteran son lives with me. He is 36 years old. His disabilities occurred during “peace” time and was during training on heavy equipment that failed and his total left side of his body is a mess, from his shoulder and neck, to his hip, knee, ankle. Now, because of “favoring” the left side, his right side is starting to go. I recently accompanied him to the VA Urgent Care because his right knee “went out” and he couldn’t get in to see his primary or even the orthopedic dept. Urgent care was great, he got in and had x-rays right away. This time, the pharmacy was even great (usually the pharmacist on duty is very rude)…then we went to make his one-week return appointment with his primary. The clinic was dark, no lights, no receptionist, nobody. We wandered around for awhile until finally someone came out from the back and asked if they could help. They sent us to another clinic to make the appointment, as his primary was on vacation and apparently everyone else in the “white clinic” was also gone (now mind you, this was this past July, middle of the week, middle of the day). When he got up to the receptionists desk and handed her his appointment chit, she just looked up at him and said “No.” Then she said, “If you don’t like that answer go talk to the patient advocate.” So we did. He just looked at us. No words. Then a security guard showed up! To escort us out, I guess. Now, to try and make a long story short, his one-week return appointment has yet to be made (that was July and this is the end of September). I find this all very disturbing and plan on contacting my Congressman, Peter deFazio, regarding this low level of care.

Description: I could vaguely remember what Sam looked like but I knew that I thought he was hot when I met him. I remembered him immediately when he walked into the Lake House. Sam's boyish face lightly sprinkled with freckles and his shy Southern Charm let me know that this was going to be good. Sam honestly looked like he had just come from work wearing his size 12 work boots, a pair of baggy jeans and t-shirt.
He was really nervous at first and I was afraid that he wasn't gonna be able to do the deed. Sam's nervousness went away about as quick as it came and he started to talk and get into it. Given that he started out shy, imagine our surprise when I told him to take off his pants and he was sporting a raging hard on. Sam worked his big cock until he sprayed a think load all over his chest and abs. Man I love the South.
08 May 10

Clark was one of a handful of recruits who took in UCLA's practice on Saturday.
The four-star was one of UCLA's early offer recipients and he has high interest in the Bruins, and the visit on Saturday made an impression.
"The practice was awesome," said Clark. "They really got after it."
Clark had a chance to chat with the UCLA coaches after practice.
"Yeah, I got a chance to talk with the coaches after and they're super cool," said Clark. "I really talked with all of them, but mainly the defensive coordinator (Lou Spanos)."
Clark said he watched the defensive line closely and new DL coach Angus McClure.
"The d-linemen and Coach Angus were cool and I think I could play early if I stayed on my game," said Clark.
Clark said he hopes to make it back to UCLA in the spring and also plans to visit a few more schools.
"I'm wide open and just going through the process," said Clark. "I think Cal could be next to offer."
Clark said his only camp plans for now is the Oregon Nike Football Training Camp.

Due to the Labor Day holiday, this episode of General Hospital was replaced by a professional golf tournament.
Regular programming resumed Tuesday where Friday's show concluded. There were no "lost" episodes as a result of the preemption.
Jax ran into Lucky on the docks and warned him to stay away from Courtney. Lucky said he didn't believe that Jax had forgiven Courtney and thought it was all a scam to get full custody of the baby. Liz walked down to the docks and witnessed their argument. She told Lucky to go home then confronted Jax. She told him she was going to choose to believe he really wanted to work things out with Courtney and that Lucky was wrong.
Liz warned Jax that if he left Courtney, she would fight him to keep their baby, and the courts generally favored the mother. She would make him out to be a heartless playboy who attempted to buy babies. Jax assured her that he and Courtney had reconciled and would not be divorcing. When Liz got home and explained what had happened to Lucky, he was stunned she'd actually told him about taking him to court over the baby. Liz refused to believe Jax could be doing that just to gain custody of the baby. Lucky hoped that maybe love had prevailed after all.
Nikolas carried Courtney into the bedroom, and they made love. In between love sessions, Courtney sorrowfully removed her wedding rings. She told Nikolas she didn't want any more secrets and planned on telling Jax exactly where she'd been. She was upset that her marriage was all a sham.
Meanwhile, Jax met Justus at the apartment and told him to get as much dirt as possible on Courtney to make the divorce easier. Justus mentioned it might be possible to find a social worker who was upset with Courtney's prior work and take the foundation away from her. Jax didn't want to hurt Courtney by taking away the foundation, though. She had worked very hard for that foundation. Justus took that as a sign that Jax shouldn't be divorcing Courtney, but Jax told him to stop being a marriage counselor and process the divorce.
Monica told Sam there was an obstruction in Jason's brain, which was causing the headaches and seizures. Jason overheard the seriousness of the situation, but Sam and Monica moved out of hearing distance before too much was revealed. Emily arrived to check on Jason and got him back in bed. She told him how she needed him and how he'd been her rock in the past. Jason asked her to be honest with him and tell him how bad his illness was.
Back in the waiting room, Tony was giving Sam and Monica the treatment options available to Jason. He could try a new drug and see if that helped to reduce the seizures. If not, the only option was brain surgery, and that was extremely risky. Monica said Jason would never go for brain surgery, so that was not an option. Sam told her it wouldn't be needed because the medicine would work. She was determined to remain optimistic.
Sam went back to Jason's room, and he asked her why she was upset. She told him he was sick, but everything would be all right. Tony entered and gave Jason the medication. Jason was hesitant to take the medication, because he was not sure if he actually wanted to remember his old life. He asked Sam what she would do if he never regained his memory. She told him she would start over and make a new life with him if she had to.
Emily went to Liz and Lucky's apartment to vent. She told Liz about Jason's condition and how she needed him more than ever. She was starting to realize what her wedding vows were all about, for better or for worse. Lila had loved Edward through all the horrible things he had done, so she needed to stick it out with Nikolas. Divorcing him would be taking the easy way out. Liz told her she needed to go tell Nikolas that immediately, before it was too late.
Emily left and happened to find Nikoas alone on the docks. Courtney had just left to see Jax. Nikolas was waiting around in case Courtney was upset after confronting Jax. Emily, of course, didn't know Nikolas had just been with Courtney and confessed her love to him. She asked if it was too late. When Courtney arrived home, she told Jax she'd been at Wyndemere, making love to Nikolas.
Reese fought off Carly, who was wielding a knife. Carly, in her insanity, thought Reese was dangerous. She believed Reese was still an FBI agent and was trying to take Sonny and the kids away from Carly. When Reese lunged for the knife, Carly dodged her and knocked her out with a frying pan.
Meanwhile, Ric filled Sonny in on finding Carly in Reese's old house, balled up on the bed. They received a phone call with information about Reese and Carly's location. When they found Carly, she warned them about Reese trying to take away her family. She'd managed to cut herself with the knife, but Reese had not been stabbed. Sonny and Ric helped Reese regain consciousness.
The police arrived and checked on Sonny, Ric, Carly, and Reese. When they saw blood on Carly, they asked if she was all right. After hearing her shaky answer, they told Ric and Sonny the two women needed medical attention. The men assured the police officers they would take the girls to a hospital and get out of the flood zone soon. When the officers left, Sonny tried to get Carly to go with Ric, but she was hesitant. She didn't trust Reese alone with Sonny, and she didn't like Ric. Sonny told her he could handle Reese and threatened Ric not to harm Carly.
Carly reluctantly allowed Ric to take her to the car. Reese told Sonny that Carly needed help. Sonny still didn't want to take Carly to a mental institution. He was thankful Reese hadn't turn Carly in to the police when she'd had the chance, though. He told her once Carly was better, they could start their lives together again.
Sam was giving Jason his medication at the hospital. She wanted him to know that he was the love of her life, and if he didn't ever remember their love, she would start all over with him. Lucky and Liz, sharing ice cream together, discussed Emily and Nikolas. Liz believed that they would reconcile.
Courtney showed up at Jax's apartment. He was still pretending everything was okay when she dropped the bomb that she had been at Wyndemere and had made love with Nikolas. Emily told Nikolas that she had been wrong. She wanted another chance. Nikolas told her that it was too late.
Ric and Reese took Carly back to Sonny's. Carly wanted Sonny. Ric explained that Sonny was not there, but he had asked Ric to take care of her until he got back. Apparently, Sonny had very important business in Miami that could not wait. Durant showed up at Sonny's, looking for Carly. Jason and Sam were making a hasty exit from General Hospital when Monica caught them. Monica warned that leaving the hospital was a bad idea.
Monica asked Jason to give them a chance at the hospital. He was taking new medication and needed to be observed. Jason and Sam convinced Monica that he would be okay at home, and Sam would take good care of him. At Kelly's, Alexis questioned Mike about Sonny and Ric's whereabouts. She asked Mike for some shredded lettuce and chocolate. Alexis spilled the beans to Mike that Carly was not at Shadybrook; she was actually at Sonny's. She felt that Sonny was up to something dangerous, and Ric might be involved.
Durant was in the entranceway at Sonny's, giving Reese the third degree about Carly. Reese wouldn't tell him where Carly was. He left but was determined to find his daughter and get her away from Sonny. Liz continued to be convinced that Nikolas and Emily would reconcile because they were soul mates. She compared the situation to her and Lucky finding their way back to each other. Lucky called Liz a hopeless romantic.
On the docks, Emily told Nikolas all the things she wished had never happened to tear them apart. In the process, she guessed the truth about Nikolas and Courtney and ended by saying she wished Nikolas had never made love to Courtney, but he had. Nikolas told her about Courtney finding out Jax had planned to dump her after he got custody of the baby. Emily filled in the blanks. She guessed that Courtney had gone to Nikolas for comfort, and that was when they'd made love. Courtney told Jax she was done and started to leave. Jax asked her if sleeping with Nikolas had been worth it.
Courtney told Jax that Nikolas was "so worth it." She told Jax that he needed the challenge of the chase, and once he got what he was after, he moved on to the next conquest. She continued by telling him that Liz would never give her baby to him, insisting, "There are some things that money can't buy." Jax said, "Perhaps, but you're not one of them." He outlined all of her marriages and how she had gone from one millionaire to another. He called her a cheap tramp, and she countered with the fact that he had slept with Brenda while on his honeymoon to Skye, but that was okay because he was Jasper Jacks. She told him to enjoy his money because that was all he had left. Courtney left.
Back on the docks, Nikolas told Emily that he wanted to be there for her when she needed him. He admitted that he had just broken her heart, and he wanted to comfort her. He had always been able to do that for her, ever since she had been a kid. But the rape was the one thing he hadn't been able to make all right for her. She thought he had done wonderfully and had done everything right. She understood what had happened between Nikolas and Courtney, and she felt that she'd deserved it because she'd slept with Nikolas when she had still been with Zander. She wished Nikolas happiness in his life with Courtney. She kissed his cheek and made her exit.
Durant was at the police station, and he was upset that the cops hadn't found Carly yet. He ordered them to take Jason in for questioning. At Sonny's, Reese was worried that Carly was cooking up a plan to slit their throats or strangle them with wire. Ric reassured Reese that that was not going to happen. Alexis was at Kelly's, eating her lettuce with chocolate on it, when Sam walked in. Alexis realized that Jason had to be close and went outside, where Jason was waiting for Sam. Alexis demanded to know where Ric was. When Jason said he didn't know, Alexis didn't believe him.
Emily went to Liz and Lucky's for comfort. She explained that Nikolas was probably with Courtney at that moment. She told Lucky that he had been right about Jax's plan, just as Jax showed up. Courtney went to the docks to see Nikolas. Nikolas told her that Emily wished them well. Courtney said that Jax didn't. She told him that Jax had told her she was a gold-digging slut. She said she was better off without him. She thought Nikolas needed time alone, but he stopped her, saying that he needed her.
In front of Kelly's, Sam explained Jason's health situation to Alexis. Alexis wasn't buying it; she figured he was pulling the lost memory act so he could keep Sonny's secrets. Reese approached and told Alexis that Ric was at Sonny's. Alexis headed off to confront her husband. Reese asked Sam about Jason's health, and she tried to introduce herself to Jason. Jason did not shake Reese's hand. As Reese left, Jason asked Sam if he'd liked Reese before or not. Sam said that he hadn't really trusted Reese and that she lied a lot. As they were talking, two cops showed up to arrest Jason. Jason pushed them off, grabbed Sam, and ran away.
Jason and Sam were on the docks. Sam was worried that Jason was going to be in a lot of trouble for assaulting those two cops. She told him that since he had a medical condition, he could explain his behavior. At Sonny's, Alexis found Ric. Ric explained that he was watching Carly for Sonny. Alexis felt like Ric was shutting her out in favor of bonding with his brother, Sonny.
At Liz and Lucky's, Emily made a quick exit. Jax just stated his proposition. He wanted to offer Liz five million dollars for sole custody of the baby. At Wyndemere, Courtney asked if Nikolas felt strange having her there. He admitted that it was strange. Courtney wanted to know before they got any closer if he was really letting go of his marriage or if he wanted to try again with Emily.
Nikolas let Courtney know that his marriage was over, and it had been for months. It was just too late for them. He felt their marriage had been over the moment that Connor Bishop raped Emily. Liz told Jax that she wanted her baby to grow up in a loving home with honest people who could forgive and with two parents. Jax did his best to convince Liz that he was committed to the baby. Liz felt the deal she'd made had been with two loving parents, and that was not the way it had turned out.
Alexis warned Ric that working for Sonny was harder than he thought. He would have to live on call, and he would end up doing things he'd never thought he would do. Ric said he was going to be there for her and Kristina first, but he would be there for Sonny at that time because Sonny needed him with Jason being out of the picture. Jason turned himself in to the Port Charles Police Department. Durant didn't buy Sam's story about Jason being ill. He had Jason placed in an interrogation room.
Lucky was upset he'd thought Nikolas had chosen Courtney over Emily. Back at Wyndemere, Nikolas and Courtney decided to find comfort in each other's arms. Emily was on the docks, crying, when Jax showed up. He had a plan for revenge. Emily slapped him then proceeded to tell him that it was entirely his fault that things had gone so badly for both of their marriages. She broke down crying, and Jax comforted her.
Reese returned to Sonny's to relieve Ric for a while so Ric could go spend time with Alexis. Carly ran down the stairs, thinking she'd heard Sonny's car. Ric explained it had just been Max. Carly was upset and told Ric and Reese both that she didn't trust either of them. Jason wanted to find a way out of the interrogation room. Monica showed up to explain Jason's medical situation to Durant. Durant didn't believe her and decided to charge Jason with a felony for his assault on the cops, unless Sonny handed Carly over to him.
Diego showed up at Alcazar's, complaining about how boring college was compared to working for him. Alcazar said he wanted Diego to finish school and get an education and that he wasn't so sure he wanted Diego involved in his business.
Meanwhile, Dillon worried about Georgie's test results after she nearly passed out at Kelly's. He suggested that she could be pregnant because she had dizzy spells. Georgie started to wonder if she could be pregnant then thought Mac was going to kill her if that were the case. Dillon told her that Mac would kill him first. Bobbie approached them and told them that the lab had found traces of the date-rape drug in her system. Bobbie was confused when Georgie and Dillon were elated with the news that it was a drug in her system. They told her that the results could have been worse and were relieved Georgie wasn't pregnant.
Meanwhile, Maxie got a call on her cell phone from the mystery man. She told the man to meet her at the Pizza Shack later that evening and that she planned to show him that not all women were bad like he might think. The caller agreed to meet her there later. Jesse showed up at her room and noticed she was acting nervous about something. He suggested they make love in her room, since Brook Lynn wasn't there right then. Maxie told him she couldn't make love to him in her dorm because it wasn't really home to her. Jesse noticed she was even more nervous, but she didn't tell him what her plans were. She did admit that the mystery man had called her.
Dillon showed up to talk to Maxie. Jesse left them alone to talk. Dillon told her about how Georgie was being targeted and said that they needed to find the guy right away. Georgie admitted to Dillon that she planned to meet him but wouldn't tell him any more. Dillon told her that he wouldn't let her make herself a target and insisted on going with her, or she wouldn't go at all. Georgie agreed to let him go but made him promise to hide in the bushes. Dillon decided to take his camera gear with him and videotape the meeting at the Pizza Shack.
Dillon took his gear to Kelly's. Jesse found him there and noticed Dillon was very nervous around him. Dillon told Jesse about Maxie's plans to meet the mystery guy that night at the Pizza Shack. Jesse warned Dillon that if he showed up at the Pizza Shack, Jesse would arrest him on obstruction charges. Jesse went to the place to protect Maxie.
Georgie showed up in a panic outside Kelly's because her parents wanted to send her to an all-girl private school in Texas after hearing about the test results. Dillon told her that he planned to help capture the mystery guy, hopefully that night. She told him she wanted to be there at the Pizza Shack with him to see what happened. Jesse showed up at the Pizza Shack with his gun drawn. He heard a noise and followed the sound. The mystery man knocked Jesse out.
Maxie showed up for the meeting and heard a sound emanating from the bushes. She called out for the guy to show his face. Diego showed up with a camera around his neck. While that was going on, Brook Lynn studied at Kelly's, and a cute guy approached her table, showing interest in her. She let him join her at her table. They sat and talked and shared dinner. He offered to walk her back to her dorm, and she let him. When they got there, he told her he had some things to do and left.
The police showed up at Alcazar's to find out if he was hiding Carly somewhere at his home. Alcazar told them that he had nothing to do with Carly anymore, and they were divorcing. The cops left without really searching for her. Meanwhile, Sonny showed up at the police station after Sam called him. She told him that Durant wanted him to return Carly so he could have her treated, or he would keep Jason under arrest until he did. Sonny told her that he couldn't have Carly sent to Shadybrook because she would get worse if she were there, since she had been drugged and treated badly the last time she had been there.
Sam told Sonny that Jason needed treatment, as well, or he could die because of what was going on with his brain right then. Sonny still refused to give Carly up. Sam proposed to Durant that if she could convince Sonny to let Carly go, he would promise to make sure Jason got his medicine. Durant seemed okay with that idea. Sam warned him that if he played games with her and didn't do what he promised, she would make him pay.
Meanwhile, Alcazar met with some unsavory characters from Miami but told them to go slowly with the plan against Sonny. After they left, one of the Miami mobsters told his bodyguard that he planned to strike against Sonny right away and not wait for Alcazar's approval.
Meanwhile, Reese and Ric whispered about Carly while she was on the other side of the room. Reese thought Carly needed some serious help and that Sonny wasn't doing her any favors by keeping her there at the mansion. Ric thought she should let Sonny take care of things. Carly accused them both of holding her hostage and said that they wanted the cops to go there and take her away. They told her that they were waiting for Sonny to return and weren't going to let the cops take her away.
The cops showed up with a search warrant to find Carly. Lucky entered the room with the warrant and uniformed officers to help him look for Carly. Carly watched them from out in the bushes, and Lucky found her. He became concerned for her when Carly told him that he needed to save her from Reese and Ric. Lucky didn't give her hideout away to the cops and told Ric and Reese that Sonny had better get her help, or he would do it himself. Reese and Ric learned about Durant blackmailing Sam and Sonny and using Jason against them to do it.
Alcazar showed up at Sonny's, looking for Sonny. Ric and Reese told him Sonny was not home right then. Alcazar guessed that Sonny was out taking care of things while Ric and Reese were babysitting Carly. They told him that Carly wasn't there at the mansion, and they didn't know anything more about it. Alcazar didn't believe them and warned Reese that she was becoming just like Carly, protecting Sonny and being his flavor of the month. Ric slugged Alcazar across the mouth when Alcazar insulted Reese.
Sonny returned home and asked Alcazar what he wanted. Alcazar said that he had met with some men from Miami and was there to warn Sonny that they were in town. Sonny blamed Alcazar for what had happened to Carly. Alcazar refused to accept any responsibility and left. Sonny, Reese, and Ric talked. Ric and Reese told Sonny that Carly was getting worse and needed treatment. They suggested taking her somewhere else for treatment. Lucky returned to warn Sonny about getting Carly help, or he would feel obligated to tell the police where she was hiding.
Sonny understood Lucky was in a difficult spot because he was Carly's cousin. Sonny said he was doing everything he could to help Carly. Lucky left. Ric and Reese suggested he send Carly to some other mental hospital to get her treatment. Sonny said no to taking her anyplace. Carly saw Sonny and started begging him to help her and accused Ric and Reese of trying to get her arrested and sent away. Sonny calmed her down and got her to go upstairs to rest. He asked Reese to go upstairs and keep an eye on her. Reese reluctantly went upstairs. Ric worried about Alcazar's plans and wondered if Alcazar would strike against Sonny with Carly in the house. Sonny felt something would probably go down soon.
Meanwhile, Reese talked to Carly, who still accused Reese of trying to get rid of Carly so Reese could take Sonny and her kids away from her forever because Carly had slept with Reese's father when she had been a teen. Reese tried to assure her that she didn't hold that against Carly anymore, but Carly thought she was just pretending she cared so she could trick Carly. Sonny showed up in the room and tried to calm Carly down and get her to rest. Carly got paranoid again and thought Sonny was trying to get rid of her by sending her away. Sonny tried to assure her he wasn't sending her anyplace and that he owed her for taking care of him when he'd had his own breakdown years before.
Later, Sam showed up and tried to convince Sonny to take Carly in so Durant would let Jason go. Sonny refused to do what Durant wanted and suggested that jail was probably the best place for Jason right then so he couldn't get into any more trouble. Sam told Sonny off for being willing to sacrifice Jason for Carly, who needed medical treatment. Sonny told her that he couldn't give Carly up and that he knew he could help her get better.
Carly ran into the room suddenly and told everyone that there were men outside with guns, and they were out to get her. Sonny thought she was hallucinating and tried to calm her down and assure her that he had guards all over the mansion, and they couldn't get in. Suddenly, there was gunfire, and shots were fired through the windows of the living room where everyone was right then. Sonny grabbed Reese and Carly, threw them to the floor, and covered them with his own body.
Nikolas and Courtney, making their first public appearance as a couple, shared a kiss in front of Kelly's. As they kissed, Emily walked up with Michael. Maxie was at the Pizza Shack, waiting for the stalker to show up. Jessie was knocked out in the bushes. As Maxie called out for the stalker to show his face, Diego appeared, and he was holding a camera.
In the interrogation room at the Port Charles Police Station, Durant filled Jason in on his police record in a condescending tone. Jason pushed Durant's head down on the table and held him there. Carly had seen men in black with guns through her window; she told Sonny about them, thinking they were there to take her to Shadybrook. Sonny did not believe her. Just then, Max fell through the entryway doors with a gunshot wound, and gunfire broke out through all the windows. Sam found Ric on the floor; he had been shot.
Michael was upset with Courtney after witnessing her kiss Nikolas. He felt protective of Emily. Courtney reminded him that she was still his aunt, and Emily told him that his Aunt Courtney was not to blame for the problems she and Nikolas had. Diego thought Maxie was afraid. Maxie claimed she was not afraid and explained she was there to meet a guy she had hooked up with in a chat room.
Jesse had recovered and nailed Diego to the table, believing him to be the stalker. At Sonny's, Reese tried to comfort Ric, but Ric wanted her to get out of there for her own safety. Sonny asked Sam to take Carly upstairs, and he told Reese he was going to get Ric and Max to the hospital then get Jason out of jail so he could help get things back under control. Two cops rushed into the interrogation room. Durant told them it was okay, and Jason had suffered a momentary lapse in judgment.
Jason let Durant go. Durant was beginning to believe that Jason really had lost his memory. He then told Jason that Sonny had chosen not to take him up on the deal to trade Carly for Jason. Durant wanted Jason to know that Sonny was not there for him at that time when Jason needed him.
While Jesse was giving Diego the third degree, he took Diego's camera and found that there were three pictures of Maxie already on the camera. Diego explained that he had taken them during orientation, and Maxie admitted that she knew he had taken the pictures. Georgie didn't believe that Diego was the stalker.
In Brook Lynn's dorm room, she was asleep when someone opened the door and entered without knocking. Brook Lynn was frightened and sat up in bed. She calmed down when she realized that it was Seth.
Carly told Sam that they were trying to put her away. She knew that Charlotte hated her, and even though she called herself Reese, Carly knew that Reese was really Charlotte. She asked Sam where Jason was, and she said that he'd abandoned her. Sam said that Jason was sick, and at that moment, Sonny was at the hospital with Ric and Max, who had both been shot. Sam told Carly to pull herself together because Jason needed her.
Sonny met Justus at the hospital and told him to do whatever it took to get Jason out of jail. Sonny believed that Jason would pull through for him when he found out what was happening to Sonny's family. As Max was taken in for surgery, Sonny joked with Max that if he'd wanted time off, he didn't have to get shot. Ric, on his way to surgery as well, asked Sonny to promise that he would take care of Ric's child, as Alexis stood in the hall, listening.
As Jesse was about to take Diego to the station for questioning, Lorenzo showed up and stopped him. Georgie had called him. Lorenzo believed that Jesse was misusing his badge out of jealousy over Diego giving Maxie a ride in his Porsche. Diego told his father to stop, and he didn't think Jesse was out of line for suspecting him.
In the dorm room, Seth explained that the door had been open, and that was why he hadn't knocked. He wanted to apologize for running out earlier. Brook understood. Seth told Brook that he liked her, and she took note of that statement. He told her that it wouldn't be right for them to get any closer because he was a student advisor. He tried to make an exit, but Brook asked him to have some coffee with her.
Sam told Carly all she had ever heard about Carly was that she was strong and a fighter. She talked about the bond that Carly and Jason had. Carly wanted to help Jason. Sam wanted Carly to go to her dad so he would set Jason free. Carly agreed to turn herself over for Jason's sake.
At the station, Justus showed up and told Durant that Jason was suffering from documented memory loss, and the two cops he'd assaulted had not identified themselves, so Jason could not be held accountable for attacking them. Durant left to check out the facts Justus had given him. Justus sat down and introduced himself to Jason as his cousin. Justus said it might seem strange to him, and Jason said, "We passed strange a long time ago." Justus went on to tell Jason that Sonny's house had been shot up, and Sonny was convinced that Jason would help. Jason asked Justus what Sonny wanted him to do.
After Ric was taken away for his surgery, Sonny and Alexis ran into each other in the hallway. She said, "What the hell have you done this time?" Sonny just wanted her to calm down for the sake of the baby. Alexis wanted Sonny to disappear to protect Ric and everyone else around him. Sonny convinced Alexis to stop being angry with him and be in there with Ric, giving him a reason to live, just like Carly had done for Sonny after he had been shot.
Carly and Sam walked down the stairs into the living room at Sonny's house. They were about to head to the police station. Carly wanted to help Jason, but she was "just so tired." She wanted to rest. Sam realized how far gone Carly really was, and she stopped pushing her to rescue Jason. Carly asked what Jason would want, and Sam said, "Jason would want you to rest and get better." She took Carly back upstairs to rest.
Back at the Pizza Shack, Diego said there was no way that he had drugged Maxie or his ex, Brook, but he wanted Jesse to find out who the real stalker was, and that was why he was cooperating. Diego warned Jesse to catch the stalker before Diego did. Alexis was not happy to see Reese in the waiting room. She wanted Reese to leave, but Reese said she and Ric had been through a lot together, and she had the right to be there.
When Reese claimed that she was more than Ric's law partner, Alexis said she was becoming aware of that. Alexis resented Reese for getting Ric involved in the whole mess with Carly in Florida. Sam put Carly to bed as Carly continued to say she wanted to help Jason. Downstairs, Lorenzo was waiting for Sonny. He informed Sonny that it had not been his doing; it had been Ruiz. Sonny believed him, but he knew that Lorenzo's hands were not clean.
Lucky gave Emily support. He knew that seeing Courtney and Nikolas together had to be painful. After Emily left the table, Michael sat down and told Lucky that Emily was pretending to be okay and that he heard her crying. Mike told Emily about the shooting and said she and Michael needed to head back to the hotel, where it was safe. Outside, Lucky grabbed Nikolas's cell phone and threw it.
Nikolas didn't want to fight with Lucky. Lucky wanted Nikolas to stop acting like a fool. Lucky couldn't believe Nikolas would give up on his marriage so easily. As he was going off on Nikolas, Courtney showed up and told him what he was saying wasn't true. Even Emily knew it was nobody's fault. Lucky turned his focus to Courtney and told her that her reputation had to be true. She met guys and slept with them then dumped them when something better happened along. Nikolas kept warning Lucky to shut up, and when he didn't, Nikolas punched him, knocking him to the ground.
Maxie was trying to get some sleep in her and Brook's dorm room. Someone tried to open the door. Reese told Alexis to stop pushing Ric away. Reese wondered if she didn't how long it would be before he -- Reese stopped speaking. Alexis wants to know, "Before he what?" Reese refused to continue as the doctors took Ric back from surgery. Alexis, forgetting the conversation with Reese, went to his side.
Justus got the charges dropped against Jason and took him to Sonny. Sonny told Jason that his family was in danger, and he needed Jason's help. Even when Sonny said that Michael and Morgan could have been shot, Jason was non-responsive. Sonny became angry but continued explaining that Lorenzo had met with Manny Ruiz and gotten the whole thing started. Sonny wanted Jason to kill Ruiz. Jason told Sonny, "I'm not killing anyone for you."

This afternoon, Cherry class were learning about continents. We have been learning about them all week but today had to match the correct continent picture to the correct word. We were able to look at the different continents and spot different shapes that made that continent up. It was quite a challenging task because we had to make sure the pictures were the correct way for us to make a guess but we were resilient until we matched the cards up correctly. We had a lot of fun and we are enjoying learning about the world!

I'll just say it: Robin is gone, but she didn't die, at least not yet as far as I know.
Saturday evening somehow she and Scout the black Lab mix got into a dispute over biscuits even though everybody had a biscuit. I don't know how it started or who started it. Harper had wisely run out to the deck with his biscuit to chomp away.
It took quite a bit of work to separate Robin and Scout. I sprayed them with water and smacked them with a pan and screamed and finally they stopped. I was quite shocked by their behavior. Robin seemed to have gotten the worst of it but had an "I don't care - bring it on" attitude.
Everything seemed fine and then about an hour later I was working at the computer and Robin suddenly took umbrage at Scout's presence and attacked the hell out of him. She chased him under the desk and held onto his ear and wouldn't let go. I received quite a scratch and bruise on my hand during the battle.
I called my son and he offered to come over and get Robin. I panted, No, I'll put Scout in the bedroom for a while and everyone, including me, will calm down and we'll be fine.
So they were in separate rooms for quite some time and then they went out before bed and everything was fine. Then we went in the bedroom to go to bed and Robin attacked Scout next to the bed and cornered him against a wardrobe while she bit the hell out of him.
Distracting her and grabbing her and doing anything with her was extremely difficult, but eventually I got her out of the room. I called my son and said, I'm sorry. You have to come and get her.
We sat together in the living room, blood from her mouth dripping onto the area rug, and waited the few minutes until he arrived.
He took her with him and I don't think she can come back here. Perhaps she'll have to be euthanized, which would have happened eventually anyway because of the cancer.
It was very shocking and upsetting and I'm still upset and also concerned for Scout, who was limping last night and not acting like himself. This morning he seemed fine and danced for his breakfast and I think we're back to normal.
I just wish I knew what went wrong with this good, sweet girl whose only flaw was escaping under the house from time to time. Oh, and sleeping in the middle of my bed, if you consider that a flaw.
I loved her, and she disappeared as quickly as she appeared.
And like Forrest, Forrest Gump, That's all I have to say about Vietnam.

Morning mates. I won't say good because it's not so far. Dad has some congestion and won't sit up to cough it out. He just wants me to stay up all night with him.
Got his blood test results yesterday morning. His sodium is a bit low. I'll have to figure out a way to get more salt in his diet. His doctor approved an increase in his megace, which will help him eat. I hope.
My brother brought my mother down to visit yesterday. My dad has lived with me for almost 13 months. This is only her second visit. It went much better than the first one. I wondered how it would go but she behaved. I guess she had missed us both enough that she was willing to behave.
I had plans for housework today but I may be sleeping. It all depends on how late dad and I are up. Of course, he may keep me up and I may not get to sleep at all. I don't know.
Anyway, I hope you all have a good day.

Patches was found by an older woman who had never had a cat. The little gray and white girl was only three months old and was grateful to have a warm home, as she was born in the autumn. However, then the woman started sneezing and wheezing... she was allergic to cats! Happily, she found Cat Angels Pet Adoptions, and they were able to take Patches in. Everything was great until Patches stopped eating at her foster home. She would stop eating and then finally be enticed to eat again...and the vet could not find the problem with the little girl. Many illnesses were suspected - feline leukemia, FIP and FIV were all finally ruled out. She had mysterious health problems off and on. When the vet found that she had food allergies, that helped her feel much better. When her vet found that she might be having an allergic reaction to her own teeth, her foster family decided that Patches would have to be theirs. They knew they would look after Patches and make sure she got all the medical help she needed.
Patches is a sweet, quirky girl who loves to play in your hair and trill for attention. Thank goodness for the nice older lady who saved her from the woods and Cat Angels Pet Adoptions for setting her on the road to her forever home.

Runa was visiting from Japan and got in contact with a fellow photographer, he was kind enough to invite me along and I got some killer shots out of it. The timing was pretty rough since it was right around lunch. The light ends up being the harshest at this time of the day and it was no exception for this shoot. Runa powered through that bright sun and so did we, much to my delight the photos turned out better than I could have expected. I wish there were more time with her, but that wouldn’t happen since we caught her at the end of her stay in Hawaii.

Thoroughly enjoyed our stay. Owner and property manager very easy to deal with! We had one small issue that was taken care of in a very professional way. As a family we can recommend this VRBO to anybody who would be interested in staying in Placerville! We had a great time, it was close to the vineyards in the Amador County area, a short 30 minute drive that's very scenic. Overall we had a great time, we are sure you will too!

My baby girl is 6 months and a week old. She is my first and I am a new mama so everything is an adventure.
I'm really concerned because I started feeding my baby solids at 5 and a half months. I did rice for three days and she was fine. Then moved on to oatmeal for the days. Became constipated but otherwise fine. Then moved on to barely and was okay. So she went a full week and a half of eating cereal. Then one day after eating cereal about twenty minutes later she started gagging. Then when I changed her diaper she had diarrhea and started gaggibg again. Within 24 hours of that episode she had diarrhea 11 times! I took her to the doctor and the doc said that she had a virus. I gave her pedialyte and the doc said to just breastfeed her for a week until her tummy gets settled and we can try solids again. So I breastfed for a week and she was fine and had no other symptoms from a virus. Yesterday I gave her cereal for breakfast. Two hours later she was projectile Vomitting and a very alarming rate. I was very scared. I rushed her to the doctor and she said its still a virus?!? How can it still be a virus she was fine and as soon as I have her cereal she was sick again. The doctor said to breastfeed her again exclusively for another week and then we will try again next week to give us a better idea. I'm scared to feed give her cereal again. Has anyone else experienced this? :(

Editor’s Note: Caring for a child who has received an organ transplant is both a tremendous challenge and a tremendous blessing. The Westman family has faced these experiences tenfold, since they have adopted or fostered 10 transplant children! Here are the stories of their three adopted children, Shante, Tori and Jay.
Shante weighed 3 pounds 12 ounces when she was born. For some reason, within 8 hours her intestines nearly all died (it is called necrotizing enterocolitis) and she lost most of her intestines. Since she did not have enough intestines to support her life, she was put on TPN (total parenteral nutrition). TPN, while it can keep you alive, is very hard on the liver. When she was a year old she was placed on the transplant list at the University of Nebraska Medical Center. When she was 2 ½ she received her first isolated bowel transplant. She rejected that intestine and it was removed 6 months to the day after it was put in. She spent that whole summer in the ICU. Back on TPN, she was relisted and had another isolated bowel transplant when she was 4. She enjoyed a pretty normal life for 22 months. She had probably been suffering from chronic rejection for months and got a virus which put her over the edge, and she lost the second organ. The 22 months had given her liver time to recover and she managed to last about 6 years before her health deteriorated and when she was 12 she had her third transplant. This time she got the liver, bowel, pancreas and two kidneys.
Since that transplant her life has been great! She is now 16. She goes to school full time (she missed A LOT of school time!) She has friends. She has a boyfriend. When you ask how school went today she almost always says “We laughed a lot today!” She hopes to marry someday and have 5 children. She has lots of names chosen already. The thing that is most important is she is HAPPY!
Tori was an even smaller baby. She was about a pound and a half and was born when her mother was about 26 weeks pregnant. When she was just a few weeks old she lost her intestines to infection. Everyone was certain that Tori would die, but she proved them all wrong. She came to Omaha from Texas a week before her first birthday. Until a week after her birthday, she had only been out of the hospital for 4 days. She was 15 months old when she got her transplant. She couldn’t sit at all. She needed to lie flat all the time. In the weeks before her transplant she was hospitalized in the ICU because her liver was failing and she needed 3 transfusions a week. She was probably within a few weeks of dying. She was so yellow! By the time she came back from surgery she was already looking better. Her urine had been a dark orange and when they brought her back up to the ICU her urine was clear! The first few weeks were really tough, because she had been so very sick.
But now…Miss Tori is the picture of health. She is 8 years old. She goes to school full time. She loves to play on the computer. She is smart, and stubborn and really enjoys her life. Just this morning she did something silly and told me “She (meaning herself) is so crazy!”
Jay was born in Denver. He had a defect in his abdominal wall called gastroschisis. A good deal of his intestines were outside of his body. He had surgery and also became TPN dependant. He quickly developed liver damage and required a liver transplant. He was about 10 months old when he got his transplant. He had enough intestines left that he was able to get off of TPN.
To look at Jay you would never guess that he ever had anything wrong. He runs and plays like any other 5-year-old boy. He is in kindergarten and just loves going to school. He is learning to read and is very good with numbers. Mostly…he is ALL boy!
A Message from Mom, Cathy Westman
None of our children would be alive had not they had the chance for a transplant. All of the organs came from a child the same size or smaller than our kids were when they got their transplants. We are so aware of the level of grief that those families were enduring, and yet they had the strength to think of helping another child, one that they did not know. I hope that all donor families know how much we appreciate them.

Okay so we listed wood for free on Craig's List, a guy showed up this morning and took all the large pieces in the back yard. Then another guy called and asked if he could come and get some wood, I told him there was just a little bit of brush left, and didn't know if it would be worth his while, and then joked about the fact that we have three more trees that we are thinking about taking down. Well that peeked his interest and he and two of his buddies came and took one of the trees down and the other brush! Amazing! It started to rain so they didn't take the other two down, but Chip was a little worried about letting them do that anyway, for fear that one may fall on our house. We'll leave that to the professionals! Just thought I would post some success!!!

McCoy was so excited to go to the pumpkin patch! We all had so much fun, even though it was a lot colder than we had expected. We went on the hay ride out to the pumpkins, and stopped to see the zebra on the way! McCoy wasn't really interested in actually helping pick the pumpkins, but he liked the idea. After we picked um, we went back to pay and had fresh hot doughnuts! They were so yummy!
Free Home Educating Family Sample Issue
1 day ago

Dark Prince WATTYS 2017
"I guess it's settled, I will join you in bed" Rafael coolly said and took a step forward but Cia scurried further up the bed towards the head piece, never in his life Rafael had seen his bed to be so ginormous but with Cia's frame it looked two times the size of a king size bed.
"We have two options, you get out of this bed by choice or I will take matter into my own hands" Rafael said out loud, he found it amusing and was suppressing his laughter.
shit, shit, shit, Cia thought, she didn't swear much but in extreme situations she was quite the talker. Cia began searching for her phone in her pockets, on the surrounding bed area that was protected by the cover of the blanket but her efforts were to no avail.
It also didn't help Cia much that she had her face pinned to the bed, as she was scared that if she moved her head even slightly the pillows cover on her face would be no more.
Who the heck is this guy? where I'm I even? she kept asking in her head
I was definitely with mum, she sighed in frustration, clearly not since your with him...in bed, she rambled on in her head
Losing his patience, Rafael pulled away the blanket away from Cia dragging her leg towards him so that her upper half was resting on the bed whilst her legs were dangling of the bed in between Rafael's legs.
Cia felt her eyes widen and heard a loud scream to soon realize it was her but Rafael muffled her mouth gently enough to stop her loud scream.
"Hello" he said "My soulmate" he kissed her on the nose and let go.
Cia was left in shock, he had his upper half bare and was only wearing black skinny jeans. He had a smug look on his face.
Cia looked to the side table that had her green dress thrown onto it, she then looked down at her body to see she was only wearing a bra and her blue jeans.
Cia's cheeks turned into a fuming furnace of embarrassment and she felt hopeless to do anything but to scream. [chapter 8]

Three Thousand And Up
Most Relevant Verses
Then 3,000 men of Judah went down to the cleft of the rock of Etam and said to Samson, "Do you not know that the Philistines are rulers over us? What then is this that you have done to us?" And he said to them, "As they did to me, so I have done to them."
Now Saul chose for himself 3,000 men of Israel, of which 2,000 were with Saul in Michmash and in the hill country of Bethel, while 1,000 were with Jonathan at Gibeah of Benjamin. But he sent away the rest of the people, each to his tent.
So then, those who had received his word were baptized; and that day there were added about three thousand souls.
Now there was a man in Maon whose business was in Carmel; and the man was very rich, and he had three thousand sheep and a thousand goats And it came about while he was shearing his sheep in Carmel
His possessions also were 7,000 sheep, 3,000 camels, 500 yoke of oxen, 500 female donkeys, and very many servants; and that man was the greatest of all the men of the east.
Their numbered men by their families were 3,200.
the sons of Senaah, 3,630.
Now Jehoiada was the leader of the house of Aaron, and with him were 3,700,
the sons of Senaah, 3,930.

Trudy R. review of N-Hance
After they left I had noticed that I was a little unhappy with one small area. I called them and they came right back and took care of it and could not have been nicer. she said "We want you to be happy". Just a wonderful company. Lisa was a pleasure and not at all pushy. I felt very comfortable with them in my home.

What a beautiful view: Nudist beaches were never so crowded with stunning forms as in this year Welcome to the unique section of womans locker rooms! Here you will see everything that was hidden before!
Rani Mukherjee Fucks for a Commercial Gone were the days when people were lining up to have her endorse their products in exchange for hefty amounts. She wasnt eveh sure how long Adi Chopra would let her suck his cock. Depending on his little habit of a blowjob a day was dangerous as his attentions could shift anytime. Movie business could truly suck once you were She asked her brother who handled her business dealings to look for some kind of a product endorsement deal that she could align with while her movie career was slow. Raja her brother began asking around and was encouraged by a promising message from a big clothing company.
Movie offers were drying down, excpet for the occasional KJo and Yash Chopra movies. Directors making commercial films were refusing to slot her, as she was past her prime. She was considered a very good actress and if they had to make movies with her they had to keep her at the top of their minds. She was just reflecting on all this and just lying down on her couch reading a magazine when the bell rang.
I'd say it's the difference between refusing OJ business, as opposed to reformed violent felons generally. Imperfect analogy, but the Red Hen's owner's reasoning was very specific to Sanders's actions.

After cleaning we sat in the living room on the sofa and I dont know what just happened and I asked if we would want to watch a movie. They both were already feeling no pain, but I continued allowing them to partake of our alcohol, and they did big time. His fingers were playing with my clit and he doved his tongue in my cunt. You probably also remember not having to worry about getting a good room. They never did finish the game, but continued sitting there nude and semi-nude well past their amended five minute rule chitchatting and harassing one another. After getting in the room and getting all set up, they began to do shots before the game even started. We finally conceded though that, if we were going to keep it our little spot, we had to live with it. With the game paused, they continued to pound beer and shots the entire time.
I knew the instant he shot the first jet of his seed inside Gina, her first gasp said it all. As I watched for a few more seconds, an insistent devil on my shoulder caused me to reach out and peck his shoulder. He had been shooting it in her mouth for at least a minute and she was just holding it in her mouth as he ejaculated. After about a minute into this, she tightly held one of his thrusts, digging her fingernails into his ass cheeks, she began moving her ass and hips in the most animalistic way imaginable. We are being perfect gentlemen. Gina flinched for a split second as I was sure the head of his cock touched her pussy. I then rose up sharply as if desperately wanting him to stop flooding her with his semen. His hands were actually trembling with anticipation. He loaded my vagina with his thick hot cum and we both loosed on the bed in exhaustion. The more I slowly thrust and watched him touch her breasts, the more I talked myself into wanting to watch him fuck her. Several minutes later, and after they began finally talking, he slowly leaned to his left and his half limp cock exited her. It also had everything we were looking for in a cheap Spring vacation; great beach, great food, quiet, and all just outside our door. Gina immediately told them that if they get behind the wheel of a car in the shape they were in they would most certainly regret it, but they insistently kept rambling on about it. Stan was lying on his right side with just a T-shirt on and Brian on his left with nothing on. We did meet up with them when we got back for more fun without the husbands knowing as not nudists. There was a puddle of semen on the sheets that had leaked from her and she was completely oblivious to it. I could never fully describe in words how mind blowing it was; I took my middle and index finger and very slightly spread her inner vagina. I was surprised and in pain. I now stood up from his face and sat on his dick. As I was completely engrossed watching my soaked cock very slowly and methodically going in and out of her pussy, Brian who had sat there quietly and witnessed the entire incident, slowly sat on the edge of the bed. And believe me, she had talked enough trash up to this point, she would have a hard time backing out. In hindsight, I realized that there was no way she would have had the same experience if he had fucked her first. If I had even touched my cock at this point, I would have made a colossal mess. I then gently pulled behind her right knee in an attempt to expose her crotch in the wildest, most sexually exposed way possible. I drank all of his cum and licked his cock and cleaned it very nicely. My mind was a twisted mess at this point, and I had enough erotic euphoria and semen built up to populate a new planet. By this time it was plainly obvious what I was trying to make happen.
By were very veritable at wives fucked out sex stories, treating us and the direction or some other popular sister, but after a bearing of afterwards they honest figured out that we were combine fiscal thousands. Of Gina saved her neighbor, she scooted further up on the bed. I also urged his awfully set of life as his calm freed from between his folk. In chances I convinced myself that the rise that would loose is that she would nix it at some met and at the very least I might turn some pretty erotic through free mom and girl sex videos mature. From all that had ended place over the last vogue of gratis, I was what you might call cheerful, wives fucked out sex stories I was always not to facilitate her neighbor. It was irrevocably see through. Website this could be a while, I used making us drinks. My hip nervously cost with excitement when I noticee Lot taking off his T-shirt and charges. As I standing taking her wildly, she why exhaled and large seen into my mr. Eventually Gina intended me to development her a T-shirt. They remained in this according trance-like state, control together as if huge to insure she was largely impregnated. Large time he would loose his ass and give a spending release, his nuts would simulation high up in his key.

Re: Joe Nuxhall Passes Away
A few years back I met him in a hotel lobby in Pitt. It was the last year that he did road games. He was hardly getting around, he signed a baseball for me, but had to stop and lean up against a pillar. It seemed like he was 7 feet tall, and had huge hands. To me he seemed like a Herman Munster type. Larger than life, but a kind gentle type inside.
He was very friendly to my wife and I, and I guarantee there are 1,000 more stories like mine.

Tim Hortons Small Town Drive Through
You know you’re in a small town when…
In early July my wife and I were driving through Quesnel, BC and I noticed something out of the corner of my eye. I made her turn around and go back so I could capture something you are only going to see in a small town. Lucky for me I had my camera with me, and could take some photos of a guy in the drive through with his horse. I took a second to talk with him, he was riding the horse at fist but decided to walk him through thinking he will get better service. He was also having a hard time getting them to take his order, speculating his horse wasn’t setting off the sensors. Regardless, it was an interesting encounter.

His umbilical cord still has not fallen off. It is driving me CRAZY. Is that normal? (Not the crazy part...the umbilical cord hanging on for over 4 weeks part.)
Reid is sporting his first hat in these photos (hat courtesy of MoMo--she wanted to save it for his stocking at Christmas but it isn't going to fit by then.)
He is actually in the stroller--we went for a walk this evening, but you can't really see it. It was so funny-his little cheeks were vibrating while we walked. He is growing like a weed!! I went to put him in his car seat today and we haven't taken him anywhere in a little over a week and I already had to adjust all of his straps and stuff. It has been an awesome month with Reid and we are looking forward to many many more!!

I used to for a long time. I eventually realised i didn't need anyone to care, but appreciate anyone who did.
I was often left out too, but that is because some of my friends were not good enough for me. Some of my relatives did not deserve my care for them because they did not care for me, did not send me a birthday card or even say happy birthday sometimes.
Over time, you know who to care for and who to leave be. You don't need so much help. Also, you choose who you want to see and you invite them out. Anything you are left out of, you wouldn't really want to be involved in anyway.

Panuganti Sridhar, a techie from Hyderabad, based out of Buffalo in New York City has died in the sleep. He died on November 27 but his family members got to know about his sudden demise on December 2, as per reports.
Sridhar is from Medipally of Boduppal. He moved to the US six years ago along with his wife Jhansi. The couple has a 5-year-old son. His wife, along with her son, came to India to attend her brother's wedding and stayed back in the country due to the lockdown. Jhansi spoke to Sridhar on November 26 for the last time and she called him the next day several times but he didn't answer the call. She soon called her neighbors who alerted the police and found Sridhar unconscious. He was taken to hospital and doctors declared him brought dead.
The family members have requested the government and ministry of external affairs to help bring back Sridhar's body to their hometown. The officials in the US informed Sridhar's family that he would take six months to shift the body.

I lost my dad unexpectedly 6 weeks ago from an aortic aneurysm, never having had a chance to say goodbye. He was almost 77 years old, but he was so full of life, and had so many plans, he seemed like a 30-year-old. He had no symptoms at all related to his condition. The surgeon who worked on him said he was most likely born with this condition. My mother is heartbroken and bereft because she was with him since she was 15. Foolishly, I assumed that he'd be around forever. I realize that 77 years old is a pretty long life, but it doesn't make the loss any easier.
People have said that in time, the pain gets better. I'm curious how people who have lost a parent or close loved one deal with this horror. It feels unreal to me that for 40 years, he was my father, mentor and friend, and now I don't have him anymore. I hate not having a father, and I hate to see my mom so sad. I feel responsible for her, even though she doesn't want me to feel this way. I look forward to going to bed at night now, so that I can go to sleep and give my brain a break from the horror that keeps replaying in my head.

Last year we moved to MN in time for my son to start Kindergarten. The first day of school he got hit in the face, punched in the belly, had his ears plucked & punched in between the eyes. I called the teacher, principal & even talked to the bus driver. 2weeks later he still had physical signs were he was hit & since nothing had been done I went to the school to talk to the principal, she wouldn't even see me!She pushed me off on a substitute principle who was filling in for the AP. The bullying never stopped, they never did anything about it until my son hit back & then I got a phone call that my son had been in a fight. Children would steal his lunch, his gloves, his hats, and anything they could get their hands on. He would come home on the days they didn't take his hat and he would have it pulled down so far he could barely see to walk because they had pulled his ears till they were red. He would tell me about things that happened on the playground & how he cried, etc. I even had a staff member tell me they had to bring in an extra kindergarten teacher bc they had so many bad kids&that's why my son was moved classes four times! Not to mention they lost him at least4 times.
My children have been in Northport for 4 years.My son had a kindergarten teacher that bullied him so bad he hated school & the only option I had to help him was to have him evaluated by the school to label him "special needs/ADD" for the school to offer him help from the teacher and his unsafe/billing bussing situation.My daughter has has been bullied so bad that she has developed sever emotional issues that has affected her grades & outlook on school.At first I felt like it was me as a parent but I have over the years realized that its the school & the only thing I have done wrong is keep them their.They tried a "sit down" with the students to make the bulling better & then these girls formed a gang against my daughter & on video she was attacked 5 or more times by different girls who also worked together as witnesses saying she did things to get her in trouble & when she needed the staff the most they didn't listen to her, instead they wrote her up.I have talked to parents in my neighborhood who pulled their kids out of this school for this same reason & now drive their kids to school for them to get the safe education they deserve & I recommend you to do the same!
So far the bus driver is only the one I find genuine. The teacher calls and complains to me most of the time than trying to work things out for my girl on the first week of her day there. We moved from a good school with great teachers to this one. A teacher here made my child feel like she is miserable and supposedly blame it on me. Since my child got here she hated this school and tells me that people there call her names. A friend of hers got bully to the extreme. I don't even know if she did something educational everyday cause her works only pile up at the end of the week and it matches up to what she would do in two days compare to her old school. I am not a happy camper here. I use to know the princepal and she is one kind lady. Besides that I don't know.
I have had my own issues trying to get my child the curriculum she needs and they can't keep her busy. My friend just moved here from a smaller population and her 4th grader has been bullied to the most extreme level, all they do is have the kids have "a sitdown" like that really works they have a real kids will be kids attitude and it is causing severe emotional harm. These bullies have gone so far as to push her down in a creek in 35 degree weather.

This is Danny’s proof that Yodi needs total darkness when he sleeps. He showed me this picture and said, “See, he has to cover his eyes to block out the light!”
While I have seen him cover his eyes, I think he missed his eyes on this one and his quilt too.
I do have to pass on a story: One morning this week, our daughter called at 5:30 am and woke Yodi. He was so angry that he started digging at his quilt furiously trying to get wrapped up in it so he could have darkness in order to go back to sleep.😾
I have no sympathy since he wakes me up at about that time whispering in my ear and tickling me with his whiskers and if all else fails, he will scream his head off!😬

I think it's a real good book. I just got it and am almost finished with it, the amount of talent they were able to produce is just amazing but unfortunately they were just never able to cross that last hurdle (the two division format really hurt them).
The mistakes that the Expos made have been detailed quite a bit on these forums but I think they did and still do have a passionate fan base. They were just the victims of circumstance and some bad moves by ownership, but if a team like the Rays moved to Montreal I think that they would do well there. I would also hope they could take the name "Expos" and would wear the uniforms they wore back in the 1970s.

Join free now!
It is free to search locals
Escort Mama, Little girl battles with University expenses; mommy has an idea, incest tales. Concerning a year ago, I was truly battling at University. Even though my course was paid for thanks to my mama, my living costs were just way too much. I really looked for a job, however no person would certainly provide me a work, not even as a dishwashing machine. My mother provided to help however I rejected, even though it appears silly, I had some honesty, I wished to make it through without money from my mother, who had actually currently paid a lot for my education. I really wanted to prove to myself and also my mom that I was a grown-up currently; I required to be able to do this on my very own.
University was about 100 miles from house and also every weekend break I would certainly see my mama, I did miss her, she was like my friend. She treated me as an equivalent and also we were open to talk about anything. She was an effective legal representative at a local law office, though because of personal nature of her business she never ever did inform me much.
Anyhow it was Thanksgiving of my 2nd year, therefore much I had just taken care of to survive, but I was so near either stopping or robbing a bank. I got back to a wintry welcome. It was quite chilly as well as the snow was coming down rather fast, I only just managed to get residence. When home I was greeted warmly by both my mom as well as an extremely welcome fire. We did not have a family members, just the two people, so customarily it was simply the two of us for thanksgiving, not that it bothered either of us, we delighted in each other's business. But while we discussed general things, my mind maintained going over what mommy had told me. Mama was still a stunning woman, even if she had just turned 40, and also her boobs look fantastic, even when she initially had them done, I told her she looked so hot and that any kind of guy would wish to be with her. I said that if we were in a room together packed with males, I bet all the men would choose her, even without the boob job she was pretty. Mom thanked me for the compliment but said I was wrong which I was the actually stunning one, she informed me that at the very least my large busts were real, 36d in case you ask.
So after supper and tidying up we went back to the living-room. My mind was still on what mother had actually suggested about me working as a companion, no question I would enjoy it, as well as being paid like mom for something we both taken pleasure in was something that interested me. I believe I was simply surprised, prior to she told me, I saw my mother as a revered lady in the office, now I saw her as an extremely sexual lady, I might really see that mother looked happy, as well as that wouldn't wish to make love with such a lovely female. It was simply my entire photo of mom had transformed, which had not been a negative point, yet it was something I was having problem not thinking about, especially imagining my mom making love with all those weird males.
So the following day mommy took me to satisfy Monica as well as get the tests I required. After that mommy took me purchasing an elegant clothing for the night. We would meet the customer at a restaurant and then ultimately return to his hotel for an evening of pure unadulterated sex.
The evening finally arrived as well as I was actually anxious, however thanks to my mama besides me, I was ready to go. We were both wearing evening gown, mine was red while mommy's was black, and also we both put on raise bras to offer our boobs extra pizzazz, together with a band. We took a taxicab as well as arrived at the restaurant on time. Mom offered the name of our booking as well as we were resulted in a table where the customer was sat waiting.
Mama took charge and also asked me to remain on his left while she took the right. Mama was so amazing; she provided the client all the common ego enhancing lines, working him well. It offered me the opportunity to kick back and see her job. Quickly the client provided my leg a capture and looked to talk with me. I was rather relaxed by now, as well as a glass of white wine previously at home as well as one currently loosened me up enough to turn on the appeal.
call girl Norwood End, brothels Norwood End, prostitutes Norwood End, hookers Norwood End, sluts Norwood End, whores Norwood End, gfe Norwood End, girlfriend experience Norwood End, shagging Norwood End, dogging Norwood End, fuck buddy Norwood End, hookups Norwood End, free sex Norwood End, sex meet Norwood End, nsa sex Norwood End
| ||1561|| ||11235|| ||34800|| ||53157|| ||115304|

One Super Cool Dad Tattoos his Child’s Art
Most parents keep or frame their kid's drawings. However, Keith Anderson, a father from Peterborough, Ontario went one step further and decided to tattoo his kid's art.
Since his son was four, Anderson has been tattooing his right arm with the drawings his kid has created. He has added a piece every year, and said that he plans to continue until his son has no interest in doing it anymore. (Photo by Chance Faulkner)

Justin decided it was time we got outside and did something today, so off we went in the truck to go on a hike in the mountains. This is something we have been meaning to do for quite some time and keep saying we are going to do it and never have so it was great to get up there and actually do it. When Jyllian was born we had gotten a pack to carry her in and besides using around the house when she was small we never got to use it, so this was the perfect opportunity. We were not really sure where to go as we weren't familiar with most of the trails around the area, but decided to go up to Esterbrooke Campground as Justin thought he remembered there being a trail head there. We got some really beautiful pictures of our hike and look forward to doing it again--maybe one that isn't sooo steepe. In the some of the pictures you can see how it goes straight up in most places. Still it was absolutely beautiful and just what we needed. We are hoping to make more hikes on his days off! I am glad we had the pack as Jyllian would not have been able to "hike" it by herself and we would have ended up carrying her. The pack was much easier--or at least it looks easier. I guess I should ask Justin if it actually was :)
View from the top of the mtn.
On the way back down.

Recently it became known that sister is popular in the ‘ 90s, singer Evgeny Osin was forced to call the police with a statement about his disappearance.
According to the woman, already three days do not know where he is. It is worth noting that the singer is going through hard times, he had problems with his legs, as well as alcohol dependence.
Aspen recently the situation discussed in the program “Let them talk”, as he opened the doors of neighbors, and they are addressed to the editor. Reporters saw Eugene in poor condition, he could not even sit up.
All were indignant that friends and his ex-family do not help the singer, the neighbors only assist, putting food near the apartment.
← Emma stone appeared in unusual about�…
Guests have fun in luxury…. →

As the actor Rishi Kapoor took his last breath yesterday in Mumbai, it did shake many in Tinsel Town. He was admitted at the Sir HN Reliance Foundation Hospital on Wednesday morning for some breathing issues but he lost his life the other day. The actor was cremated at Mumbai’s Chandanwadi Crematorium located in Kalbadevi. A few of his friends and family members were present at his last rites, which also included Alia Bhatt.
We know how Alia used to share a great camaraderie with the late actor ever since she started dating his son Ranbir Kapoor. She had also visited New York with Ranbir Kapoor when he was getting the treatment for cancer. Yesterday when she attended his funeral, she was moved and got emotional to see his last rites performed before her. She later shared one heartfelt message on her Instagram page, have a look at it:
View this post on Instagram
In her long message, she has shared how the late actor has brought positivity in her life. She called him a great fighter, an incredible storyteller, an avid Chinese food lover, a great leader and a total cinema lover. She called him a legend and misses him a lot as she also called him as a friend. Talking about her work, she has a couple of films to release this year and ahead. These include Brahamastra, RRR and Sadak 2 to name a few.

The building and room were nice and well-kept. Guests have free access to a high end gym less than a block away. The breakfast was great.
The customer service was what really set them apart. I've never had a hotel front desk call me after I got to my room to see if I need anything. I didn't, but it was impressive.
Betty, my waitress for breakfast, was especially welcoming and friendly. I really appreciated it. She made me feel at home.
- Free Wifi
- Free Parking

Our very sweet Flame Point Siamese has had a long journey. When she first came to The Cat House, it appeared she had been in some kind of accident. She had missing fur from her coat and a concern for other issues was something staff had to take caution with. After several weeks of working with her, we finally started to see some progress. You could really tell "Skids" was feeling so much better and happy. Staff members nicknamed her Skids and she has really blossomed into a wonderful outgoing cat. We would love to find her a new forever, loving home.
Don't forget to see her in action, check out her video below.

My wife and I were married for 22 years. For over half of that time, she struggled with addiction. In the end, I had to act to help protect our girls. I had to stop enabling. It's funny, you do what so many recommend and then, in the blink of an eye, they are gone. We were apart for over a year and divorced for over two years after that. However, she continued to rely upon me for everything. She continued to struggle. She had no vehicle and was alone in an apartment. I tried to encourage our daughters to visit, but they struggled to do so. She was so alone. Her continued use created a significant level of anger. We argued often. Then, one afternoon our youngest daughter and I went to check on her. I found her on her couch, slumped over and deceased. She just turned 46. It's been incredibly difficult. I keep running through all the things regarding how I could have acted better...nicer...cordial at least. I lose sight of the things she was doing that also fueled the anger. It's like all I can see is a picture of what if. Anyone have any advice on working through regret?

Peter Kenneth Frampton (born 22 April 1950) is an English rock musician, singer, songwriter, and producer. He was previously associated with the bands Humble Pie and the Herd. As a solo artist he has released several albums, including his international breakthrough album, the live release Frampton Comes Alive!, which spawned several hit singles and has sold more than eight million copies in the United States to date. He has also worked with Ringo Starr, the Who's John Entwistle, David Bowie and both Matt Cameron and Mike McCready from Pearl Jam, among others.
Frampton is best known for such hits as "Show Me the Way," "Baby, I Love Your Way," "Do You Feel Like We Do," and "I'm in You," which remain staples on classic rock radio. He has also appeared as himself in television shows such as The Simpsons, Family Guy, and Madam Secretary. He is known for his work as a guitar player (including his work with a talk box), and his tenor voice.

LOS ANGELES Daryl F. Gates, the polarizing former police chief whose 14-year tenure ended amid widespread criticism over his department's response to the city's deadly 1992 riots, died Friday after a short bout with cancer. He was 83. Gates died at his Newport Beach home with his family at his side, according to a police statement. Gates' brother said in February the former chief had bladder cancer that had spread to a bone near his hip. http://news.yahoo.com/s/ap/20100416/ap_on_re_us/us_obit_daryl_gates RIP Chief.

“The hand that rocks the cradle rules the world.” —William Ross Wallace
Rachel Pitman has been known as a gifted entrepreneur since she started her first business at age 19. Since then she has started 5 businesses, one of them with her husband, Aaron. Her two most recent businesses centered on the home. Modern Tiny Living, as the name implies, builds tiny homes and was featured in the TV show “Tiny House, Big Living.” Harvest Housing Co. focused on modular homebuilding and development. Then God called Rachel to another home: her own, as a stay-at-home mother.
When asked if she saw that coming, Rachel says “No. But I think now how growing up I always wanted to be a mom. When I was 14 on a mission trip God told me I was going to adopt some day, so I always knew I would have children. My mom stayed home with us, and I always saw that as being the most important job that I could have. But I also thought I would always be building things and having a career. So I don’t think I saw being called to be full time stay-at-home and I certainly didn’t see home schooling in my future…ever. But God had to take some of the things away for me to eventually lay down the last few businesses that I was involved with.”
She says, “So a few years ago He allowed things to become so painful because I was forcing trying to keep things alive, and eventually realized He was asking me to close a door. That happened a few times. In January of 2021, I had a healing experience where after a few years of some really hard trials that we had gone through as a family, God took the anger that I had been harboring pretty much overnight. That same day I realized that it was God, He asked me to have another child. In that time I was traveling for work, I was going to a mountain in West Virginia where we were developing. These trips were exhausting and time consuming. And then coming home and I have three little children and an adult daughter that we are parenting. I was so tired. So when I knew He was asking me to have another child I felt also that He was asking me to stay home, but I didn’t understand how.”
She continues, “I was looking at my jobs and wondering how in the world… At Harvest Housing Co. we were starting a new development. We had just built our first house and had contracts for twelve more that we were supposed to deliver in that year. This was in January. In April our whole team realized we couldn’t make the numbers work. With Covid delays and prices going up, we made the hard decision to pull the plug on the whole thing, which means we had to refund the buyers, pull out of all twelve contracts, and we were already planning the next street. We were planning three to five years out. I pretty quickly realized that God had made a way for me to stay home. A few months later my husband and I decided to be open to trust God to bring another child, and that happened immediately. I had also decided to home school our oldest child who was going into first grade.”
When asked how she sees God in the work that she is currently doing Rachel says, “At the same time that all this was happening, in January 2021 I decided to read my whole Bible in a year. I had never done that, and I have been a Christian since I was 7 years old. And doing that made me realize so many things that I believed that were lies in our culture. In Genesis when God creates man and woman, he uses very specific words that are different for each of them. He gives us this blueprint of who we are. Hundreds of years ago nothing was done for us. Women were tending the fields, harvesting the crops, making the food, preserving the food. They were baking everything, running their household while pregnant with however many children. They were CEOs of their home, running the ship and educating their children. Society has now almost made that looked down upon like it’s not enough. We have robbed the beauty of it. In His grace, He changed the way I looked at mothering. I have never been more content or happier in any role. In January of 2021 I decided to bake all of the bread for the family. And there are six of us currently. Number seven is coming. For four months we have our adopted child’s half brother and his mother living with us. So it’s a lot of bread to bake! But the satisfaction I felt when I put a nourishing meal on the table which sounds so 17th century was something I never felt before.”
When asked if she thinks women should not have careers outside the home, Rachel responds, “Absolutely not. I see the growth I had in my career of fourteen years. Many of the businesses I started, God put into my head. I knew He was working. They were His plans, not mine. And so those were seasons. And now I think God has called me home for a season. I still have dreams. I love starting things. But I think this is a season that God has asked me to stay home and focus on my children. I want to convey to women the idea of embracing the roles that God calls us to and encourage them to dig into His word when seeking what He has for us next. Seasons change and we get called to different things, but His word is always constant and full of wisdom for us as women.”

- Sharron Montgomery Pena
An Unforgettable Fire
Today we laid to rest our grand matriarch Harris hawk "Fire." She was the cornerstone of Ray's program for many of his years on the road and one of his most accomplished hunting hawks. You might have heard a story or two about her, because she lived up to and beyond the intensity of her name. She was over 18 years old.
There was the story about how Fire attempted to attack one of his falcons during a show. She was intercepted by him, physically tossed aside to save the falcon's life. When the show came to a close, and he was calling her back to his hand, she bypassed the glove and food reward to attack him, a retaliation that left him with blood running down his face as a dramatic climax to the unforgettable performance.
Then there's the story about how Ray saved her foot and ultimately her life. During travel, her foot became wedged in her door after she plunged the foot out trying to grab a nearby falcon. It was so damaged that it was recommended by an inexperienced veterinarian that the foot be amputated. Ray, however, cared daily for the foot, healing the injuries and fashioning a prosthetic device that allowed the talons to function while the foot was healing.
Fire crisscrossed the country doing shows from California to Florida. She was in her 9th year when I met her still in recuperation from the traveling injury.
She became the bird I worked most frequently when I began doing shows with Ray. She was unable to fly with the sisters, Gaila and Hera because they sought to "dethrone" her as the queen and brutally attacked her when Ray attempted to fly them together. So mainly Fire flew as part of my team, along with Jackson and Spike. She was such a reliable performer, I would pick her hands down every time as my go to bird. But she wasn't a lover. She didn't want you touching her. And she certainly wasn't tame in the least bit. She was captive bred, but her spirit was wild and she never for a minute thought that you and her were the same. I was honored that she accepted me, and made the decision to be on my team, educating children and adults alike for many years.
One of my favorite stories comes from a powwow in New York several years ago. There was a drum group that came by to visit and see the birds at the end of the day. They all liked the birds, but one young man in particular knelt down and began to sing to Fire. I was just about to tell him that she wouldn't tolerate him being that close to her, and then I stopped myself. I watched as Fire cocked her head and seemed to listen to him. She didn't seem to be stressed or uncomfortable with the presence of this stranger. He sang the entire song just a couple of feet from Fire, then rose. I told the young man that I had never seen her so docile around unfamiliar people. It turned out his people were known for having a great deal of "bird medicine." I wouldn't have believed it if I hadn't seen it with my own eyes. Fire, always the individual decided who and when she chose to share her space.
There are many other stories, but it's her overwhelming spirit that will always remain with me. Fire died last summer during the Bristol Renaissance Faire. We were deeply saddened because it seemed that her spark had returned and we were actively exercising her and had plans to have her return to the program. She became unable to keep her food down and while we were scrambling to get a veterinary appointment, she rapidly declined. As one final act of defiance, the day before she died, a toad managed to cross her path and she grabbed it. I found the poor toad in her grip and managed to free it (with minor injuries, it hopped away). I was there when she took her final breath. I hoped that she would find comfort in my presence, but in the end we all cross that final threshold alone. It was overall pretty peaceful, and even though I would miss her greatly, I was grateful that there was no extended suffering. You are free now Fire, fly now and continue your journey to the heavens.

The sons of Fingolfin were Fingon, who was afterwards King of the Noldor in the north of the world, and Turgon, lord of Gondolin; their sister was Aredhel the White. She was younger in the years of the Eldar than her brothers; and when she was grown to full stature and beauty she was tall and strong, and loved much to ride and hunt in the forests. There she was often in the company of the sons of Fëanor, her kin; but to none was her heart's love given. Ar-Feiniel she was called, the White Lady of the Noldor, for she was pale though her hair was dark, and she was never arrayed but in silver and white.
(Tolkien, The Silmarillion)

Although not connected to my series "First Steps" this came about from a conversation with R. Grace about Matthew and wanting to give the poor guy a backrub! Her help was crucial in "fleshing" out the story! Thanks a million my friend!
Matthew had never really given much credence to meditation. He was comfortable with prayer, but that, he felt, was communication with another...a higher power, the divine spectrum of heavenly powers above creation. Privately, he felt silly considering meditation; it seemed selfish to concentrate that much only on oneself. But, after his experience earlier that day, he thought pensively, he was a believer.
======= Earlier that day ======
"Really, Mother," he grumbled agitatedly in the modest sitting room of Reginald Swire's London residence. "I just sat down."
Isobel sat next to him on the formal, but comfortable, sofa.
"I know, Matthew; I know you're tired," she said soothingly.
"The weather is cold and retched, and the train ride was long and tedious this morning. I understand." She stopped for a moment, pacing herself, as she knew she had to pitch her agreement just right.
"Lavinia may not know how to address it with you. Or perhaps you feel it stings your pride, so you have to hide it from her; but I must speak to you."
Matthew felt like the inquisition was about to begin. He knew that gleam in his mother's eyes all too well.
"I know your back is troubling you as it continues to heal." Isobel looked her son squarely in the eye, daring him to contradict her. Matthew flexed his jaw he was not going to participate in this conversation, especially as the Swire's' footman, James, had approached with a tea tray. The servant arranged the items on a nearby table, fussing with them almost as much as he felt as his mother was over him. It was the proverbial straw the broke the camel's back.
"Thank you, James," Matthew said more forcefully than he had intended, but his foul mood was beginning to wear down his patience. He was grateful Lavinia was not expected back until dinner. It would give him enough time to recover from his miserable disposition. He only wanted her to be happy, so it was better she not see him in his current had been looking forward to this sojourn into London for so long. Lavinia had light-heartedly chatted on the train about all the plans she had made for their time in the city. Tomorrow she would go shopping with her cousins for a bridal dress, but now she was spending the day with her father.
Matthew was content to simply sit where he was. He was exhausted. He knew that his frustration was not just due to his mother's nagging, but because she was correct in her assessment. He felt awful. Contritely, he knew he should be grateful for the ability to walk at all. And, naturally, he had been beyond himself with joy for weeks just at the prospect of the feeling in his legs as it returned.
However, standing for twenty minutes together, or walking between rooms at Downton Abbey, was all he had managed before this morning's adventure. He had not anticipated just how difficult it would be to walk the entire length of a train station or traverse the city streets of London. Matthew sighed. He was utterly done in, and his ever-observant mother was the first to notice. When he spoke again, he tried to amend his tone so as not to draw further attention from her shrewd eyes.
"You may leave us now," he said to the servant. "Please," he quickly added. "I'd like to speak to my Mother in private."
He hoped he wasn't coming off too arrogantly to the man. He had wanted to make a good impression. Matthew had never stayed at the Swire house before now, having, during their earlier courtship, stayed instead at the Regimental Officer's club. Perhaps this was another reason he felt the vice grip of apprehension surrounding his already-weakened form.
Everything had changed since their engagement had been renounced. Only a few weeks ago they had celebrated the New Year, and he had suddenly found that he had so much to be thankful for. Lavinia had accepted him again, and everything was as it should have always been. They could be properly married. The bitter hell of paralysis had released him, and it was now but a fading memory. However, his frustration would still get the better of him at times, as his recovery seemed to mimic the pace of a snail.
Matthew suddenly realized he had been completely lost in thought. And he was still holding his stick despite the fact that he was sitting down. When he leaned forward to prop it against the end table to his right, the movement was a very unpleasant reminder of his current predicament. He could not stop the hiss that escaped from his lips. Leaning gingerly, he was unable to look in his mother's direction, though he could feel her keen eyes on him.
Matthew watched her from the corner of his eye as she seemed to sigh and shake her head. She then rose to stand by the tea tray. The dip in the sofa as she moved jolted him enough to further boil his unsteady temper. Agitatedly, he watched her pour a cup of tea, adding milk and a very generous portion of sugar, given the rationing that was still in effect. Matthew truly understood the depths of his stupor when he was actually surprised that she was, soon after, holding the tea out in front of him. He sighed and took the cup, finally looking his mother in the eye. There seemed to be a temporary truce in place, but he knew it wouldn't hold. She would, eventually, say whatever was on her mind.
Matthew put the cup to his lips and drank, letting the warm liquid slosh blissfully down his throat - a wonderful sensation after his eventful morning. The February weather made walking with his stick an additional challenge, as the sidewalks and streets were lightly coated with snow. The fact that Lavinia had clung to his arm, not because he was supporting her, but rather the other way around, hadn't done much for his ego. He wanted her to be proud of him, after all - to be the man she had fallen in love with - not his pale, altered shadow.
"So," Isobel began, facing away from her frazzled son while she prepared her own cup of tea. "What is it you want to talk to me about?"
Matthew felt his temper betray him.
"Really Mother," he sneered, "I don't know what you mean. I only said that so we wouldn't have an audience for whatever scheme you are about to force me into." He took another sip of tea before reaching to set it on the side table where his stick was propped. But all finesse had fled from him as he moved awkwardly, juggling the cup and hissing again at the pain of twisting in his seat. He hated feeling so feeble and frail. The last thing he needed was an audience to witness his misery.
His mother turned to face him, her posture so stately. So unlike mine, he mused. She did not move to rejoin him on the couch, but kept the small distance between them. Matthew took a deep breath and accepted that she was going to speak her mind. At least she should soon get it over with. He braced himself, and looked over at her.
"Okay, Mother, I surrender. What is your proposition for this afternoon? Enough! I can't stand all this cloak and dagger from you!"
But his mother was quiet. She simply stood sipping her tea for a moment. Matthew felt his temper boil, and then cool abruptly. His mother did not deserve such treatment; she was only trying to help. With a deep sigh, he decided that, before he made the situation any worse, he must apologize.
"Mother, I'm…" he began penitently, but she cut him off.
"Matthew..." she chided softly. "I know, dear." She crossed the space between them and sat next to him again, gently patting his knee with her free hand.
"Thank you," he whispered. He rubbed is temple for a moment. Lord, he seemed to ache everywhere.
"So," his Mother began again, "the appointment is at 2:00 this afternoon. We have plenty of time."
"What?" Matthew sputtered, startled from his brief repose. He stopped rubbing his forehead and quickly checked his watch before glancing at the clock on the mantel to confirm the time.
"We're going to St. Thomas's Hospital," Isobel explained slowly, as if he was still a child, her words dripping gradually like nectar from a blossoming flower.
"There is a doctor there- a specialist- whom I really believe, dearest, will be able to help you with your current predicament." There was a short pause before she continued. "He published his work on the subject almost two years ago, about all the benefits that can be experienced from his practice. Massage, he says, is a potent remedy."
Matthew opened his mouth to object - to say anything - but he couldn't get a word in edgewise as his determined mother continued to speak. She even held up her hand to stop him, much like the way a school teacher would.
"We have to honor the appointment, dearest. It was difficult to schedule, as the doctor is a very busy man. Robert had to make a special phone call to arrange it," she explained, finishing her tea and returning the cup to the tray. It was at this moment that Matthew knew he had been beaten, outfoxed and out-maneuvered. She turned back to him with only a small expression of victory showing on her face.
"I'll just go freshen up, and then we will leave." Matthew watched her quick steps retreat from the room. Her movement was a blur before him.
His sudden recuperation was bringing out so many different sides to those around him. This was not the first incident involving his mother and Robert's scheming together. It seemed to have bonded them together, all this excitement about his recovery. Matthew wearily reached for his tea to fortify himself, and found he would like to shed the utter discomfort he was experiencing. It was no longer enough that he could move or that he could walk on his own two feet. He wanted more. He wanted to be able to move now without so much inconvenience, without so much agonizing pressure being stirred up in his sensitive back. He was feeling the results of the experience- the negative results, as his mood had displayed. It did bring him satisfaction that when he finished his tea he could rise and walk to pour himself more, should he wish it. However, at the moment he did not wish it. His lethargy was still so overbearing, so all-consuming. He was far from being independent in this early stage of his recovery. But a little impatience was a small piece to pay in relation to where he had been only a month ago.
His mother was right, Matthew concluded abruptly. She was absolutely amazing to put up with him, he thought humbly. Mother could always be trusted after all. He found himself suddenly anxious to leave for the appointment. It was odd how quickly his mood turned. He had to snicker self-depreciatingly about it. He did, after all, have so much to be thankful for. His earlier melancholy seemed absurd now. What a fool he had been. He checked his watch again, and the time pleased him.
Matthew inched his body to the edge of the sofa and reached for his stick. It didn't matter which way he moved, the bending made him gasp. Still, it was good practice, and he did not give up until the stick was in his hands. The strain had caused beads of perspiration to dot his forehead, so he pulled his handkerchief from his breast pocket and dabbed at his forehead. Feeling the need to recline again, he gave in and rested his damaged spine against the sofa's soft cushions, letting them cradle him.
While he rested, Matthew absently fingered his stick. It was beautiful, he thought, the polished wood and the ornate ivory handle. Matthew enjoyed the cool feel of it in his sweaty palms. The stick had been a gift from Robert. Actually, that wasn't entirely true, as he had later learned. It was presented to him by Robert, so Matthew had assumed it was purely from him. However, as they sat and drank together later that night, Robert had let it slip that the gift of a walking stick had actually been Mary's idea. Robert had hastily tried to rephrase, saying that the entire family had wanted to give him something - a token of their elation for him - and it had been Mary's suggestion that led to the choice of this particular gift. Matthew remembered the feeling of the brandy going down his throat, a tingling flame that reminded him of a similar feeling between his legs at the thought of Mary. The friendly gesture still troubled him somewhat as he continued to stare at the stick in his hands. And there were still Cousin Violet's words to contend with.
"Mary is still in love with you."
Matthew appreciated that word even more than the concept of Mary loving him. If he had been so inclined, a dandy little fantasy could have been carved from those words, but his honor and gentlemanly duty were bound to his fiancée now.
Matthew brought the stick closer to his face, inspecting it as he did at least several times each day. His eyes wanted confirmation that he was not imaging, nor had he ever imaged, the engraved "M" on the wood panel. Did this mean something? Since Robert's slip, he knew the stick was from Mary. Did the letter stand for her name and not his? The concept stimulated something deep inside him; parts of his body that had previously been numb were now, like Lazarus, awakening. The simple little carved initial made him feel as though she was always with him somehow, even if he was being a tad sentimental about something as miniscule as a letter of the alphabet that they both shared. But privately it gave him hope, as she had always done. Even if he had no romantic future with Mary, he could still draw strength from her, from her brave and determined spirit. But he would always have the sweet love that Lavinia offered him, so pure and fresh. Loving Lavinia was easy in comparison to loving Mary, and the relationship came with far fewer caveats.
Yes, Matthew thought reflectively, the stick is a bridge from the past to the future, and my future is with Lavinia.
"Ready?" his mother said as she had reappeared in the doorway, already dressed in her hat and coat, Matthew noted fondly. So, with a sigh, he proceeded about the hefty taxing task of rising, once more, to his feet.
And so it was that, scarcely an hour later, Matthew found himself at the grand St. Thomas's hospital. The building was located on the Thames across from Parliament, yet the hospital seemed to stand its ground defiantly. It was composted of many different departments for research and teaching, and had once had Florence Nightingale herself walking its halls.
Lying on his stomach on a medical examination table, alone and practically naked under a thin linen sheet, Matthew felt uneasy about what was about to begin. His head was resting on a flat silk pillow and was turned sideways towards where his clothes were neatly folded and his stick was propped. He didn't know why this gave him a sense of relief, just knowing he could see his possessions, but Matthew wanted to know where his stick was at all times.
For all of his new-found gratitude that his Mother had insisted he come here, he was still relieved she wasn't allowed in the room during the examination and massage process. He could only tolerate so much after all, being a grown man. His mother sometimes seemed to forget that fact. He had almost thought she was going to win that argument, but, despite her lengthy descriptions of his condition - "Muscular rheumatism," she said he suffered from - the doctor had only taken a few notes, and then politely asked her to follow the waiting nurse. Matthew was more than a little amused at the doctor's "divide and conquer" technique as the door was then shut and locked. Poor Mother, he thought with a small grin.
Several minutes later, the same doctor he and his mother had spoken to an average-looking middle aged man with thinning hair and kind eyes entered the room, and Matthew felt his already unsteady emotions become further agitated. He tracked the man's slow pace as he walked towards a small sink next to the table where Matthew's clothes were neatly folded and proceeded to take off his jacket. He draped it over the table, then carefully removed his cufflinks before proceeding to roll up his sleeves and finally wash his hands. Just as his mother had earlier in the day, this man spoke to him with his back turned, dictating how he was to proceed. Perhaps it would have irritated Matthew if the tone of his voice did not offer such conviction.
"It is essential," the doctor began, "that you understand what you hope to attain by massage therapy." Matthew watched as he dried his hands on a nearby towel, his face still turned away.
"So, before I commence treatment, I am going to ask that you ruminate as fully as possible about what you have given in the past, and what you hope for in the future."
Matthew was taken aback by this kind of psychobabble. It was not what he had expected, not that he had known exactly what to expect. The doctor finally turned around and smiled just enough so that his moustache and beard curled for a second before he walked forward, his pace now brisk, towards the exam table. He took his place at the head of the table, and Matthew could almost feel his breath when he spoke. The doctor smelled of menthol and peppermint, it reminded him of the way his father had when he came home from work.
"Take a moment," the doctor said, and then added his name as if he had rehearsed in the hall before he entered. When the doctor said, "Matthew," it sounded as if he had always known this man, as if his name had always been on his lips. Despite his instinct to question this, Matthew did as he was told... or tried to at least. He took a deep breath.
I am here against all odds, he thought. The truth is I had been told I would never walk again, and yet I can.
Matthew felt a shudder go through him, a chill, as if he was cold even though he was not. That was the past and the future for him. Suddenly his mind turned to thoughts of his father: such a revered doctor, a kind and respected man in the Manchester community. Matthew knew his father was not the only doctor that he put those sick and wrenched around him at ease, but, until his moment, he had never met his equal.
"Now," the doctor said, "I want you to concentrate on counting how many times I use my heel, my palm, my fingers and my thumb as I massage. I want you to think about the distinction between these forms of touch. Empty your mind and just feel the sensation." The doctor's calm voice offered so much comfort, it made Matthew feel a little less anxious.
He appreciated the method of his forceful commands. It was obvious the doctor understood the distress he was feeling already, and the man had not even touched him.
And then it began.
Matthew couldn't help but flinch slightly as the large, powerful hands gently touched his shoulders first in small circular motions. It was not what Matthew had been expecting, as his back did not hurt there. He tried not to be too disappointed, however; it was not as though the doctor could perform a miracle and instantly cure him of his pain, after all.
"Massage," the doctor began again as his hands slowly moved over Matthew's upper back, "should commence over the non-sensitive area and gradually approach the injured areas," he explained. Matthew accepted this and decided to close his eyes; it was less embarrassing that way, as a man near his father's age continued to knead into his flesh. The hands disappeared for a moment, and he could hear the doctor's footsteps walking around the exam table into a new position. Matthew was suddenly overjoyed he had made the decision to close his eyes when the doctor's fingers returned to his back. He felt the touch slowly sinking into a firm decent down his back. It took a lot of his resolve not to whimper pitifully as the deep pressure slowly began to soothe some of the twinges in his aching muscles.
Matthew found before he could even have started keeping an accurate count of thumbs, fingers, heels and palm movements, he had lost all interest in the notion. But he admired the doctor's clever trick to distract him. The doctor's hands were now stroking deeper, rhythmically kneading. A small sigh escaped from his lips as the massage of his inflamed muscles continued. It was exquisite. It was just…so...
"God," Matthew exclaimed unexpectedly his voice barely above a murmur. "Oh God," he groaned, flinching as the doctor's left and right hands worked in tandem. They were squeezing handfuls of his tender flesh, varying the pressure with each manipulation. The technique was definitely very refined. Matthew had to stifle several further grumbles as the process continued. He felt his eyes roll back in his head.
"Massage is," the doctor's voice cut the silence in the room just as his hands seem to cut the daunting pain in his raw back muscles, "really a process of re-education, Matthew."
And with this statement, the doctor's hands ventured down Matthew's spine, and, for the first time, dug into the flesh of his lower back. The pressure hit him like the blow of a hammer, and Matthew felt his breath escape with a loud moan he didn't even know he had been holding in. The doctor made no comment at this, relieving Matthew's self-consciousness somewhat. His reprieve was short-lived, as the doctor's hands continued to deepen their strokes and fiercely claw through his extremely knotted back muscles. The lower the doctor's hand went, the more Matthew felt himself fight against the release of the pain as it erupted out of him. Matthew felt his own hands curl into fists and then slacken with the kneading strokes.
"Damn," he breathed in exasperation, his senses all but lost to him through the fog of pain and confusion. He felt as vulnerable and weak as a newborn kitten. In his prone state, his mind clamored defensively. He was ruthlessly plagued with thoughts of how he had acquired this injury, why his back was so broken. Shuttering against the painful memories, Matthew could feel the gritty taste of the whistle in his mouth, he could hear the ticking of his pocket watch, and he was fortified by the frightened, but trusting, faces of his fellow soldiers. The weight of such responsibility plagued him anew. And, next to him, Matthew saw William, as he often did when he closed his eyes. What came next was always the same. Darkness, and so much emptiness...until he woke up in the Downton hospital, Cousin Mary's voice the first thing he had to focus on that wasn't painful.
She brought him peppermint tea, and there was no further talk about his spinal damage. Everything else about that time had a veil drawn over the dark memories. Except, sometimes, Mary resurfaced in his mind's eye. She was the phoenix, and he was the ashes. Mary was always prepared for everything. She surprised him by pulling a book from her handbag - must have somehow remembered his fondness for poetry - and simply began reading poem after poem to him. Matthew could still hear her composed voice hitch slightly as she read him the poem, "Invictus."
Out of the night that covers me
Black as Pit from pole to pole
I thank whatever gods may be
For my unconquerable soul
Matthew remembered the words as the doctor continued to work away at his twisted musculature, and they were as great a balm now, as they had been then.
"Ahh!" Matthew cried out, overcome by the doctor's hands flaying over his delicate spine. The touch was melting his sanity. The sensation could no longer be adequately ignored as more pips and wails escaped him. Matthew wished he could hear Mary's voice again; he needed something to cling to, as he had then.
In the full clutch of circumstance
I have not winced nor cried aloud
Under the bludgeoning of chance
My head is bloody, but unbowed
She had been such a devoted friend, and had carried the heavy burden of nursing him until his Mother had arrived, and again after Lavinia had been sent home. Matthew knew he could lean on Mary's friendship because, though their romantic relationship had soured, she did care for him. In the damaged recess of his existence then he couldn't give up, not entirely, when he saw her face. He had to fight against everything, only allowing himself that singular comfort; he deserved nothing more and wanted nothing less.
His mind continued to meditate on Mary, and how, despite her harsh criticism during the early days of their acquaintance, she had still conducted herself with grace around him, considering he was the cause of her misfortune. He had always admired her for that. For he had understood her penchant to mock and tease him. She needed an outlet to vent her frustration. Their odd friendship had bloomed that way, at least for him. Mary did not crumble in the face of the adversity she had been plunged into. So, when he was injured, Matthew found that strange relationship rekindle, and, sometimes, he felt how she must have years before - like he was perhaps playing her part then as he directed his pain and disappointment at her.
Matthew lolled his head slightly from his position on the table, desperate to concentrate away from the double pains of his heart and his back; he continued reciting the poem to himself.
Beyond this place of wrath and tears
Looms but the Horror of the shade
And yet the menace of the years
Finds, and shall find, me unafraid
"Oomph," Matthew lamented with a grunt, his reverie interrupted as the doctor's hands continued to plunder the tangled mess of taut muscles in his lower back. It was like Never-land down there.
"Mm-hmm," he felt himself mumble dragging out the syllables wondering why the sounds from his lips didn't form into words. It was very hard to let himself lose control. Matthew could not seem to clear his muddled thoughts. The doctor's hands had their work cut out for them, for they had found a treasure trove of coiled muscles at the small of his back that demanded he remember so many things Matthew would rather ignore - or, better yet, forget completely.
So, he retreated into thoughts of Mary again. She had been so brave to remain at his side during those early, dark days. It must have been hard for her, balancing her own engagement with the demands of her crippled cousin. When he forced himself to remember that moment when she read that particular poem, he recalled that it had presented a ray of hope in his dark world... a tiny, shattered glimpse of a future that, though he had much to overcome, was still out there for him. Mary believed it could be done. The resolute tone of her voice had told him that. He had only to follow her lead, to listen to the words and the conviction with which she read them, and his spirits would begin to lift.
It matters not how strait the gate
How charged with punishments the scroll
I am the master of my fate
I am the captain of my soul
"Oh," Matthew hummed, brooding over the puzzle pieces of his life. The doctor's voice interrupted his musings but he didn't mind. He needed to stop wallowing so much in the past.
"I will share with you something that makes me feel raw and exposed," the doctor said. His ferocious hands were rubbing a unyielding patch of knots causing Matthew to groan loudly and repeatedly.
Let this never end, Matthew thought with relief. At last, he was exactly where he wanted to be... where he needed to be. It was absolutely marvelous. His nagging mind, however, still lingered on less pleasant subjects, reminding him that he should feel awkward in his defenseless position. The doctor must have anticipated as much, as his words indicated.
"Enough!" he wanted to scream at himself.
Matthew squeezed his eyes shut, hoping to block all further thoughts from his mind.
"The experiences I am about to share with you," the doctor began, his voice emptied of emotion, as smooth and polished as the ivory on Matthew's stick, "Will level us, so to speak, so you need not feel so vulnerable. There is no further need to vex yourself with worry. In order to relax, you have to trust me. You must accept the pressure, and the comfort will follow. That is the process of massage."
Matthew's breath came in short gasps. He felt submerged below the turbulent sea of his own consciousness, unable to breath for the water's weight crushing down on him. He felt completely unstable. One moment blissfully relaxed, the next cringing in pain. But somehow the process still continued. And with each penetrating stroke, he was able to take a breath as the doctor's hands continued to ceaselessly knead and push, rubbing exactly were it burned the most at the base of his patient's rigid spine.
Matthew no longer tried to regulate the variety of strange sounds that escaped his lips. He relished the lessening of the tension in his back as he started to understand the cycle of sensations. For every knot that was discovered, the doctor's hands glided first over it charitably, then penetrated it with deep, sustained force. The pure unrelenting pressure on each newly-revealed trigger spot that caused Matthew's agony was certainly a welcomed reprieve. He could feel the balance of his whole frame almost shake as the doctor's hands continued to work. This massage was certainly the most surprisingly enjoyable experience he had been subjected to in ages.
"Crikey," Matthew whimpered as the pace quickened, the doctor's hands working over his throbbing muscles like a train building up steam. It was not dignified, but he had no control left.
"Bloody hell…." Matthew cried out as the doctor's hands once again found their mark. He couldn't help but blubber.
"Ouch!" he heard himself pathetically whine in exasperation as much as relief. It was very confusing.
The doctor's steady voice chose that moment to resume telling the story he had promised to share.
"Several years ago I was in love with the most beautiful woman. We shared a bond that illuminated the world as I saw it through her eyes. I let my fiancée travel before our wedding; it was a marvelous opportunity for her. I thought only of how happy the trip would make her, but fate struck a devastating blow. I believed she was dead. I had no reason to hope she could have survived. So, in my mind and in my heart I buried her. But I did not grieve. The pain was too raw, and I was not ready."
Matthew could easily relate to this. He felt he understood all forms of raw and unthinkable pain, and not just because of his present physical situation. He felt the doctors' hands change position, moving to either side of his hips. The steady pressure lingered there before moving across the lowest region of his back. As this was the precise location of all of his earlier bruising, Matthew could not help but chafe at the contact. He heard the last sound he ever did from William amidst the shells and gunfire all around them, he seemed to feel the push, and then the explosion, all over again. Matthew felt his eyelashes dampen as the memories surfaced with the emotional and physical pain mucking up everything around him. He blinked rapidly to dispel the moisture. He couldn't stop himself from crying.
"There," he moaned pathetically, "Aw….ohm…Lord." Matthew finally bit his tongue to cease his overwrought babbling.
Contradictorily sensations overwhelmed him – the searing pain mingled with transcendent relief. The turmoil of his emotions was harder to bear than the pain of his injury being excavated; the flood of luxurious relaxation was not something he felt he deserved. When he thought of William, when he thought of any of those who had either not returned from France or had only come home to die... How could he then accept the blessed flood of comfort which filled him in a steady stream? He was not ready to claim his position on the biblical ark and ride the storm out to a new beginning, but it seemed his body had already claimed his passage despite his mind's objections. He wasn't allowed to make the choice. It was already made for him, and that frustrated him somehow. Why did he have the right to survive over others? Did he deserve so much absolution and freedom from the clutches of pain when others gave everything?
Strangely enough, Matthew felt almost drowsy as the sensation spread through him, but the pressure was just enough to keep him alert. Through this mirage of pain and misery, he found he was curious about the doctor's story. He spoke of love and loss, of fate and despair. Matthew did need a distraction, any distraction, at the moment. Any distraction that wasn't William or Cousin Mary would also be especially helpful. He tried to take a deep breath, but the air hitched in his throat, making him almost gag before he could resume more normal breathing patterns. He needed somebody else's story to fill his head. He was sick of his own, after all.
Whatever had happened in the years since the doctor's personal tragedy, he seemed to have recovered. Perhaps that was what the older man was trying to communicate to him - the simple cliché that time heals all wounds.
"So?" Matthew asked dragging the words from his lips, "Then what happened to you?"
"Well," the doctor resumed his tale, "she survived, against all odds. My fiancée is now my wife. Though she witnessed more tragedy and more despair than any person in twelve lifetimes should have to endure, she made it home to me. She lived, and so did I. I didn't need my pain anymore."
Matthew licked his lips; they felt so parched. "What…." His voice was so hard to control, but he had to try, "had happened to her?" he asked, his thick tone sounding like a growl to his own ears.
"She was on the Titanic," the doctor explained, his massaging strokes now not as violent as before. They were repetitive and reassuring. Matthew could feel the doctor's palms moving in opposite directions, from his lower ribs to the base of his pelvis. The contact was slowing, allowing him to unwind.
"Oh," he grunted, "The Titanic." The ship that had changed his life, as well. And, for the first time, Matthew felt himself stretch into the massaging strokes. As he did so, he yawned.
"You must accept comfort," the doctor instructed, his strong hands reaching deeper into the layers of strain Matthew felt shrouded him almost completely. The doctor's hands were now making small, deep circles concentrating only on the tenderest area he had so far exposed in his patient's tortured physique. Matthew was utterly exhausted, everything else could wait, he thought drowsily. He had been through enough. Finally, he thought. Finally. Enough.
"That is what I believe to be the message behind massage. It is what I teach and what I offer."
Matthew could only equate the sensation he was now experiencing to that of being drunk. He was lying as he was on a table, this stranger offering up pearls of advice for his mind while ministering so completely to his broken body. It almost didn't seem real. Perhaps he was dreaming. Perhaps none of this was happening.
"So, you must stop fighting," the doctor said with emphasis, his voice rose louder than before and his hands followed his tone, stabbing repetitive strokes into Matthew's throbbing back.
Oh, if only it was that easy, Matthew thought. So many people had made sacrifices for him, after all.
"You must give up your past, Matthew," the doctor ordered.
It was hard for him to remember a time when he hadn't been wracked so brutally with constant uninterrupted pain. It was generally just hard to think at all at the moment.
"Saints alive," Matthew muttered under his breath, feeling the tension continue to ooze out of him. There were so few people he had ever felt this vulnerable and still this comfortable with before. Cousin Mary made the list. Matthew suddenly found his mind focusing on his time in the hospital, and how Mary had sat perched next to him on his small bed. The wooden chair set out for visitors had been quickly abandoned each time she arrived. He remembered how, at times, their hands would be almost close enough to touch. She stayed with him after he had released dear, sweet Lavinia, when he knew the truth of his condition and acknowledged that he couldn't hold onto her.
Matthew thought of Cousin Violet's words to him again. It didn't seem possible to him that Mary could have loved him during that awful time. He certainly didn't feel worthy of her love when he had nothing left to offer anyone, least of all a woman that he had loved. But, Cousin Violet, with all her brass, had insisted it was true. He still blushed when he thought of all that he had once imaged would be possible with Mary. Despite the intervening years, he could still taste Mary from all the kisses they had shared: some only simple pecks, some rather more daring.
"Tell me now," the doctor said, "about your fiancée. Your mother mentioned you are engaged."
Since he was completely this man's prisoner - a willing one at that-the rules of a civilized society, which would not inquire about private situations between strangers, did not seem to apply.
"Her name is…" Matthew had to suck in a deep breathe as he felt a sudden hypersensitivity to the liberation of his stress. The gentle soothing strokes a balm on his very existence. Matthew cleared his throat and felt the words pool out of him unconsciously feeling completely uninhibited, "My fiancée's is… Mary," as the name spilled from his lips he felt his eyes pop open at this revelation. He found his gaze was staring at the stick still leaning against his folded clothes. Mary's stick. His stick. Mary.
Through the haze of shock and lethargy,Matthew was transported back to a moment from the day before. Lavinia was glancing at the books in Robert's library. She had looked like an angel, glowing in the bright winter light that streamed in from the windows, her dainty fingers lingering on a volume of Greek Mythology. Matthew's mind did flips over the memory. He remembered with new-found pride how he had slowly risen from his armchair without help, and had taken small steps, leaning on his stick, to join her and observe the book. Just then, Mary had entered the room. Her presence almost like a siren demanding his attention refocus only on her, she stole his ability to concentrate. Her words like the tide of the sea crashing loudly against him. She was correct in having cast herself as Andromeda, so long ago.
"Oh, mythology," she had said eagerly, instantly recognizing the volume in his hands. "I may have misunderstood Perseus," she continued, her sly wit dancing around her velvety words. "At one time."
Before Matthew could chuckle and correct his slip of the tongue, the doctor was rubbing into his back with renewed aggression. Matthew found that everything had instantly drained from his mind and nothing else could be focused on. He trembled beneath the touch as the strained area that was being massaged, that had so long been riddled with such hostile spasms, was released.
"Oh, God… YES." Matthew voice quivered, and he sobbed. "My God," he cried again before frantically muttering a string of inarticulate sounds. It was as if another shell had fallen on him, the explosion having dulled all his other senses except for the force of the doctor's hands on his spinal column... except for the tense muscles finally giving way after a very long siege.
"There now," the doctor said calmly, his strokes evening out and returning to a rhythmical kneading of the tight muscles encased around his lower back. "That's better," he said softly. "Mediate on her," he said his voice kind and understanding. "Go beyond the boundaries of your physical pain Matthew and allow yourself to relax. Feel the calm, peace, and completeness. Allow her to guide you. Think of your Mary and be still now, as you rest and recuperate."
Matthew knew he should correct his earlier statement, but he couldn't summon the necessary energy to do anything other than give in to the luxury of the fantasy. He knew he should stop the charade and take a stand. But... Mary, he thought longingly.
He wished to strip her down physically, feel his fingers in her hair, and watch each individual strand float across her chest as it came down. If her hair was long enough to cover her breasts he would have to kiss it all out of his way so that it wouldn't block his view. Sometimes he even thought Mary akin to Lady Godiva, her long hair hiding her perky breasts as she rode through Downton bareback on her horse.
These thoughts seem to fit perfectly with the strength she had loaned him during his recovery. She had been stripped down; she wore no jewelry, and yet she had all the sparkling refinements necessary with merely her radiant countenance. She was a feast for his eyes. Matthew remembered how they often sat outside together, the wind blowing through her pinned hair. How he longed for the wind to increase and give him a vision of her flowing locks, just for a moment. He wished to be the wind and kiss the line of her neck as she angled her head, challenging him. Sometimes he could feel, even then, a stirring inside him, something that trumped the physical arousal which he could no longer perform.
Matthew suddenly discovered that he had, in fact, used meditation before. Every time he had seen Mary's face in fact. He had survived against all odds, overcome paralysis, and would have a full life. He could have everything any man dreams of. And Matthew had always dreamt of Mary. When he groaned again, it wasn't from the intricate ecstasy of finally being able to relax, as the massage retrained his habitually-tense muscles. No. He thought ruefully of the phrase "be careful what you wish for." Matthew told himself the fantasy was simply that. The facts of the matter were simple. He couldn't risk it again in reality; he had barely survived the heartache the first time. Yes, a fantasy was better suited to him. He knew he had placed her on a pedestal before, which had been unkind both to himself and to her, and had turned what they shared into a tragedy.
Matthew felt a burning in his groin. Contrary to the rest of his body, this area of his anatomy was not compliant to relaxation. He certainly didn't mind the torturous sensation of arousal; it was a glorious reminder of his the pain in his back fading away, the discomfort in his loins was all the more apparent.
All people have fantasies; there was no harm in admitting that much. So Matthew merely let a deep, inarticulate grumble roll from his mouth as he sank further into the trance that was descending rapidly upon him. He felt the need to make a promise to himself, that even if he subconsciously slipped and uttered Mary's name when he knew perfectly well he should say Lavinia's, this was as far as the fantasy would go. He meant to think to himself therefore, "I vow," but instead the word that escape his throat more closely resembled, "Wow."
Matthew's quiet voice filled the room as the doctor's hands crept gently along his spine, further lulling him mischievously away from what he knew was the truth, further into the fantasy of Mary. The hands on his back seemed as if they would never slacken as they continued massaging, calming his stressed body. Matthew told himself that it was okay to indulge in the prescribed fantasy because, here, he did feel like a completely different person. Humpty Dumpy had been put back together again. Matthew, therefore, took the doctor's advice; he gave up and stopped fighting. He was lost himself entirely to a pleasure-filled journey with his fantasy Mary by his side as she always had been: in body, spirit and mind.
======== the end ============
I must thank R. Grace again for all her enthusiasm when I had this idea and she insisted I write it! And thus Matthew "back porn" was born! LOL
Check out my tumblr user name wdedalus for additional information and notes.
Authors note: Dr. James B. Mennell is the doctor that I based Matthew's nameless doctor on. He was a real person who worked at St. Thomas's hospital in London, and his fiancée was a survivor of the Titanic.
As mentioned the poem Mary reads is called "Invictus" it was written by the English poet William Ernest Henley.
Thanks for reading!

A great day to be at the beach and we go to our ususal spot at Warm Waters in Carlsbad and we found a great parking spot but it was a little bit of a walk so we decided to just go to the right of our usual spot because it was easier to get to.
I brought along Lauren, my brother-in-law’s girlfriend, and she started to take all the kids while I grabbed all the usual gear into my new handy dandy beach cart which I love by the way and got for $20 at a resale store!
I started into the sand and was having a little trouble cause I don’t know how to handle it yet when all the sudden I hear this voice say, “pull” I look over and I see a homeless man with his little camp area set up along the boardwalk wall.
I turn it around and proceed to pull and it worked wonderfully obviously. I had to walk by him to get to the area we were going and told him that I had just bought it and hadn’t used it yet so that he didn’t think that I was just clueless.
We started to setup our umbrella when I see him coming towards us in the corner of my eye and I immediately got a little nervous and scared. He came up to us and told my kids to go find rocks. I thought to myself why would he be telling them to do that. He then asked if I had a big bag and I was still nervous about him still.
The kids came back and we got the bag out and he then started putting rocks into my bag and he asked for string or something to tie it onto the center of the umbrella. ”Genius!” I thought to myself and my image of him started to change and I immediately thought of the civility video. He talked to me about how much he knows about the beach weather and how to setup things in a way that things stay in tack and don’t fly away.
He commented to me on my umbrella and how nice it was and how much it had cost me and as he walked away I looked back at his and a thought came to me that he needed to have my umbrella. I have 2 of them and I only need one. I asked that girls if that would be a nice thing for us to do for him and they were excited to give it to him after we were done using it.
It was a very simple act of kindness that he showed us but it meant something to me but that wasn’t the end of it. He came back another time with a soccer ball that he had found in the dumpster that he wanted to give to my children.
We thanked it for him and Reeghan and Easton immediately gravitated to it and started to play and once again thanked him for his kind gesture and he walked away. A half hour passes and during that time the wind was changing so we probably moved our umbrella about 3 different times trying to figure out the best way to make it work. I told Lauren that I bet he’s laughing at us right now and that be coming back.
Sure enough he came back but this time not to tell us how ridiculous we looked but to give us more! This time it was some clothing magazines the he thought we’d enjoy and then he gave us a box of chocolates. I told him that he was being way too generous to us. Then I asked him his name and that began our long discussion about life.
He taught me something that day about civilty and he did talk to me like I was his best friend. He opened up to me and told me things for over an hour about his life and the rough things that he has seen.
He talked of being a orphan in Germany, his coming to America, AM talk radio, alcohol (which at this point I felt very comfortable telling him to give it up and asked why he drinks), he talked about he enjoys being lonely and doesn’t like crowds, talked of God and church, then politics and America.
I asked him about who he thought should run our country and he told me that he was a Mitt Romney supporter. I agreed. Then I felt at that moment that he needed to hear more about me. I told him about how family is so important to me and they are everything. He agreed and wished that he could love someone like that. My heart ached. His countenance was so real and I believed that the words that were coming from him were genuine. I then talked about church and how it is my life and everything revolves around it.
Then Paetan came up to me and was doing the “i gotta go number two dance” which is holding your bum and prancing around so we had to abruptly end our conversation so that I could take her. I thanked him for his discussion with me and he returned to his area of the beach.
Came back to find that the kids were done and we started to pack up to leave and I glance over at him and the CA state beach lifeguard jeep was by him. He was writting him up for something. I told the girls that this would be a prime to time to take him the gift that we thought he could use. So Lauren took the boys and walked to the car while we stopped off to hand it to him.
“The girls and I would like to give you a gift now, we’d like you to have our umbrella,” I said to him. He thanked us but you could tell that he wanted to say more but I had interrupted their conversation and I turned to the lifeguard and asked if their was a problem and he said, “we are in the middle of a conversation could you leave yours until I finish up here?” The nerve of him to say that after I had just shown to him an act of kindness! Now I can see what Al was talking about how we American’s are so into rising to the top and stepping on those around us.
I walked off and said goodbye and hoped that I would see him again one day. I talked to the girls about not judging a person by the way they look because the outward appearance can be deceiving just like Al but inward he was considerate and kind. Reeghan told me at first that he was scared of him and didn’t want to talk to him. I agreed and told her I was the same way but he showed us differently that day.
We got into the car and pulled away and the spirit told me to go back to him and give him a Book of Mormon. I told the girls that I kept hearing it over and over and we got to the freeway and my heart was just racing and I turned to them and told them that we needed to find a book and now.
I didn’t want to drive all the way home to get one because I feared that he would be gone from his spot. I called 5 of my Carlsbad friends from church and finally Shauna answered and she had one! We drove over to her place and Lauren drove back to the beach so that I could write him a note inside.
We got to the boardwalk and were almost back at our spot when I happened to glance up and he was walking along the boardwalk with his bike and belongings. I told her to pull over and I had to run back towards him about 500 ft.
I reached him and he was shocked to see me again and asked what I was doing. ”Al, I have one last special gift to give to you. This book means everything to me and has changed my life and I know it will change yours if you give it a chance.” He said he wasn’t much of a reader but he said he would.
I felt like I needed to tell him Reeghan and I about how scared we were at meeting him but of course our hearts changed and we were taught. He begin to get a little teary eyed and it was such a wonderful moment that I will always cherish.
Al changed me and now I understand that video I shared up above. I understand how that lady was feeling that day and I do have a special place in my heart for the homeless and that experience with Al will be never forgotten.
Who knows if he will read it and if he doesn’t at least I was able to stand up and give it to him and bear my testimony about that book. I was so thankful too that I was able to teach my children that day about kindness and acting upon the spirit.

Michael prompted Fela into the bath just after 20:30. It was a hottish bath so Fela was able to relax in there for nearly an hour and when I went to him, the water was still warm. He requested a facial scrub, and really enjoyed it. Fela was in bed by 22:10. Michael and I were up several times in the night but we didn’t hear him.
I heard him just before 6:30. He went to the loo, then he requested his morning refreshments which he had at 6:50. I read to him from Psalm 70 as he consumed them. We did the board, then Fela entered the shower just before 8:00. He did his morning routine well, and was down for breakfast at 8:30. He has just finished his breakfast and supplements, and Michael is prompting him to put on his shoes. Claire and Teresa should arrive soon.
Arousal States – Start: 1 Baseline End: 2a – Vocal Did his state change? No to Did he have a bowel movement? Yes Bristol score: Was Fela incontinent?: No Did he have vigorous exercise?: –

They both walked out of the house. A few more steps down the path on the sandy shore, Raf stopped and took off his shoes, walking barefoot on the sand.
"Why don't you take off your sandals? You'll feel more comfortable walking on the sand," he suggested.
"Sure." There was a big stone on the side of the fence. He suggested she sat down on it, but before she could reach for her foot, he kneeled in front of her.
"What are you doing?" she asked as he looked up at her.
"Helping you take your sandals off," he gestured for her to lift her foot to his other knee.
"No, you don't need to do that. I can manage-" She did not get the chance to finish.
"Nonsense." He picked up her right foot first and started removing the lace strap, then took off the sandals. He did the same thing on her other foot. She was a bit shocked since no one ever did that for her before, except, of course, for her assistant or the wardrobe staff, not even Brad.
"Thanks. I guess," not knowing what else to say when Raf stood up and helped her up on her feet again.
"It was my pleasure." He held on to her sandals, together with his shoes as they continued on their way.
"So, where is this something that you wanted to show me?" She questioned him as they began to move towards the shore.
She walked with him on the soft sands as the breeze softly blew her hair on the side. If she still had her long hair, it would have swayed beautifully with the wind.
The vast space was empty with just the two of them on sight. The small waves created a beautiful sound that was music to her ears. The wide ocean was calm with a few bright lights in the far distance. It was a beautiful sight with the twinkling stars and the full moon as its only source of natural light.
"Are you tired, or are you ok if we walked a bit further to the other side? This time would be the best moment to show you this place," he asked as he pointed to a direction opposite of her house.
She was getting a bit tired, but she was also intrigued and excited to see what he had up his sleeves. What could be so special about this place that they had to go at this time of night? She could not even imagine.
"Sure. I'm still up for it," deciding not to let this moment passed. Sky followed Raf towards the other end of the beach.
They strolled on the shallow water with their feet playing with the mild waves as it went back and forth, flowing in the sand. The salty water was slightly cold on their feet, but it possessed some therapeutic effect that calmed their beating hearts down.
"Do you go out here often?" She voiced out her curiosity. From her point of view, it looked like such a peaceful place. For someone new, she would never venture out here on her own.
Although she always had an adventurous spirit, she never had the chance to explore it because of her upbringing. As far as she could remember, the most daring thing she ever did, was when she entered show business.
He looked at her in the dim light and thought of what to answer her. "Only on certain occasions." It was vague, but he was not ready to share his life just yet. Small steps, he told himself.
"Well, this is a lovely place. I wished I have something like this to go to if I want some time for myself." She honestly needed a place like this, where she could be left alone to enjoy her solitude. Being in the entertainment business had its perks, but it also had its downside.
Thinking about her life, she did not trust people easily, and she did not go out with someone without some form of a background check. She had been wary of people because of her experience with them.
In this case, she made an exception. Not that she was afraid of her present company, she believed she could trust Raf, which was odd.
Maybe because she was not acting as Sabrina, but as Sky. She also defended her reasoning with the information that she gathered from Lindsey about him.
They stopped just a few meters away from a mountainous rock formation. "This is my favorite spot," he announced proudly. "What do you think?"
"Wow, this place is amazing. What is that a cave?" She scanned her surrounding with the bright moonlight. She could make out a hollow on the other side of the massive rocks.
"Yeah, it is. A small one. There are several bigger ones on the other side, but it would be a more difficult trek, but if you are up for it sometime, I could show you." He looked like he did a lot of outdoor activities with his muscular body built and tanned features.
"Well, I have not done something like that in my life, so I would not know if I would like it." She told him honestly. The most adventurous thing she ever did in her life was when she went camping in the forest when filming her movie. However, she would not count it as one since it was a set surrounded by a hundred film crews who took care of her needs, providing all she would need to survive comfortably in the wild.
"Would you like to sit down?" He sat down on the sand, then patted the space beside him as he stared at the beautiful moon just above the ocean, illuminating the calm water in front of them.
She carefully sat down beside him and fixed her dress, extending her legs on the sand.
"I am falling in love with this place. It is truly magical." She voiced out her thoughts. She suddenly felt a cold chill in the wind making her shiver.
He also felt the chill with her words. But when he saw her rubbed her arms, he immediately gave her his jacket.
"Oh! Thanks. Aren't you cold too?" She asked as she grabbed the edge of the jacket to fix it around her, beginning to feel his body heat left in it, warmed her cold skin.
He just said no and continued to stare at the ocean. After a while of silence, he found himself looking at her as a slight trickle of light graze her face, making her looked more beautiful.
"Is there something wrong?" She suddenly noticed that he was staring at her when she glanced at him.
"How long are you staying here?" He finally asked what he was thinking ever since he learned that she was only visiting.
"I still have no idea. Maybe a month or more." She estimated based on the current situation she was in right now.
"I think that is perfect," he said, smiling as if he had just heard some great news.
"Perfect? Why?" She asked, confused by his reaction. She shifted her position on the sand, finding a better view of him.
He also looked at her. "It will give us time to get to know each other," he said, smiling adorably.
"Really. You wanted to get to know me." That was news to her. As Sabrina, those words were not extraordinary anymore. Acting as Sky, she was not exactly sure how to react to such a statement. Then, remembering her plan, it was actually working.
"Yeah, why not? I find you interesting. I enjoyed your company," he stated. "Even Baxter likes you," he added.
Rafael was also wondering what was happening to him. It was as if he was like a teenager on his first date. Maybe there was really something special about her to make him act foolishly like this.
"I don't know what to say to that. Thank you, I guess." She acknowledged, suddenly blushing in the dim light, glad that he would not notice. She also found herself in a new situation she was not familiar with, quite different from her other dates before.
It was a perfect evening she would never forget in her lifetime. She could only wish for this night to never end because it was such a magical night.

Great Facelift Surgeon in Newport Beach – Orange County, CA
I had been wanting to do something for several years to eliminate a turkey neck and jowls. I did not want to look like I had a major face lift but rather like I had a good night’s sleep. The outcome was exactly what I had hoped for. The procedure was easy (some discomfort the first night due to swelling and the bandages) and with our granddaughters (3 & 5 yrs old) coming for a visit in 4 days, I was up for playing, cooking and general G’ma things. I had the surgery on a Friday and was back to work one week from the following Monday. My husband is very pleased with the results. Should have had it done years ago.
Dr. Sadati was recommended by my hair dresser who had a client that had the same procedure with Dr. Sadati. I spoke with her before my consultation and she assured me that he was very good at what he does. She was pleased. The staff is kind and very accommodating. Dr. Sadati and his staff go above and beyond for their clients.
Posted on Realself.com

NOLLYWOOD ACTOR,DANIEL IYAMU ALLEGEDLY MURDERED BY HIS WIFE
The Nigerian movie industry otherwise known as Nollywood again was thrown into mourning on Tuesday, as it lost one of its respected actor, Daniel Iyamu to the cold hands of death.
Sources revealed that the Benin based actor was allegedly murdered by his wife.
Family sources said that Iyamu was found dead in a pool of his blood on his bed after neighbours forcefully broke his door open.
It was learnt that injuries were found on his head which suggested that he might have been hit on the head while asleep.
The wife has reportedly made statements to the police amidst tears, saying that she hit her husband with a pestle which led to his death.
One of the children of the late actor, Faith, a student of Federal Polytechnic Auchi, told journalists that their mother has been suffering from suspected mental illness, which their father has been treating since last year

American soap actor Cody Longo, who is famous for his appearance in ‘Days of Our Lives’ and ‘Hollywood Heights’, was found dead at his home yesterday. According to reports, the actor was about to turn 35 in a few weeks and was found still at the home near his bed in Austin, Texas.
One of Longo’s family members has testified that the police found him dead right after his wife’s call suggesting that she was not able to reach him and she felt uneasy. Reaching the site, the police had to collapse the door to enter the house as no one answered the door.
Longo was found dead in his bed but the cause of his death is yet to be found. Since he was severely addicted to alcoholism for years, his family believes that he has died due to alcoholism.
Cody Longo’s Personal Life
Longo has been married to dancer and social media influencer Stephanie Nicole Clark since 2015 and the couple has two children, an elder daughter, and a younger son. He also has another son as a toddler, whose name also hasn’t been disclosed.
Earlier, Cody Longo dated actor, singer, and dancer, Cassie Scerbo in 2009, but their relationship only lasted a year when they broke up in 2010. Longo and Scerbo never made their relationship public, though they were found together on many occasions.
In her statement, Longo’s wife said that Cody was their whole world and she and her kids are shattered beyond devastation. She shared that he was the best father and that the children and herself would miss and love him forever.
His representative Alex Gittelson stated that Longo was his dear friend going back many years before he became his client. Gittelson also has said that Longo has taken a pause in his career from acting to pursue music and he also wanted to spend more time with his family and kids.
Gittelson also remarked that Longo was excited to return to his acting career in 2023. His representative also remembers him as a person who is loyal, loving, and talented, and going to be greatly missed.
Allegations Against Cody Longo
Back in November 2020, Longo was accused of domestic assault after he had a drunken fight with his wife in Tennessee. Also in 2021, he also pleaded guilty, charged with sexual assault towards a 9-year-old girl.
Cody Longo’s Career And Net Worth
The young actor was born on March 4, 1988, and has shown his skills as an actor, singer, and writer. He stepped into his acting career as a teenager in “Make It or Break It” in 2009.
Since then, he appeared in many movies and TV shows and he is best known for his roles in Death House, CSI: NY, CSI, Fame, High School, The Last Movie Star, Piranha 3D, Bring It On: Fight to the Finish, For the Love of Money, Nashville, The Catch, Secrets and Lies, The Silent Thief and more. Besides, he also released a song titled “Atmosphere”, which was in the top 100 on iTunes.
As of January 2023, Cody Longo’s net worth is $5 million. One of the remarkable appearances of Longo was Eddie Duran in Hollywood Heights. This series was released in 2012. He also played Caden Walles in Not Today, which was released the following year.

Friday, May 30, 2008
First Dr. Visit
So the kids and I went to see the Midwife. The kids had no clue why we were there and then she did an ultrasound and showed the kids the baby and the heartbeat. The kids were in shock! Bigman must have asked 5 times Is there really a baby in there? The baby measured 7 weeks at the ultrasound which puts my due date at January 15th. I'm hoping to get through Christmas since both of the boys were early. After we left the kids were jumping up and down so excited and then Bigman turns to me very seriously and says We need to call Daddy. It was really cute, he thinks he knew before Daddy and had to tell him all about it. So of course all the kids can talk about is the baby and have to tell everyone we see and want to see the ultrasound over and over. I hope that they are this excited when the baby comes!

Today has been another great day. It started off kind of slow, but as noon came rolling around, it kind of got better. My mom had to do some things around town and one of the things was going to the bank. I don’t know about you, but when I was a kid, every time we would go to the bank either with my mom or my nana, the ladies that worked at the banks would give out suckers to the kids. If my sister or my cousin didn’t like the flavor they got, we were trade them off. Today, when my mom went to the bank, as she was pulling out we discovered that there was a lime sucker in the envelope. I haven’t had a sucker from a bank in a long time. It was a treat! I definitely enjoyed it and bragged about it. Which my dad had to tease me about it and make his voice like he was talking to a kid. I gave him a sarcastic look and grin and told him to hush. I got to hang out with my grandparents while my dad was fixing their screen door. I had orange juice, a lime sucker, and ice cream all in one day. You would think I’d be tired, but I’m not. The night is still young and considering I am almost done with my book, I might actually try to finish it since I have nothing to watch tonight. So I hope everybody had a good day! Enjoy your day tomorrow! The Vampire Diaries comes back on tomorrow, and I was told we are supposed to get some serve storms tomorrow evening. That’s my luck for you!

A tiny homeless kitten strayed into the heart of a cat lover. “This stray kitten eluded me for a week and a half until (one) night. He couldn’t be sweeter,” said her human via reddit.
He was a stray that was probably wandered off from his cat mother. “I have managed to corner him and get him to eat but I could never get close enough to grab him with out worrying about hurting him. I began leaving food but it was obvious the other strays were eating it. Finally I was walking out with his food and he was sitting high up on a post. I picked him up off of it but he was just bones and flesh and couldn’t put up much of a fight. He has been wonderful ever since. Big appetite. Adventurous. Mostly naps. Loves to snuggle/nuzzle/be near my finance and I.”
After treating the kitten’s cold since he had been out in the rain, they introduced him to their beloved cat Tyrol. The relationship was rocky at first. “Especially as the new kitten quite promptly took to us, robbing Tyrol of our usually less divided attention.” But the kitten, whom they dubbed Brak, was very eager to win Tyrol’s affections. (reddit)
“He worked up to it less gently than Tyrol was truly comfortable with but it seemed to be working…. They’ve had their tiffs but seeing how close they are (now) is really just amazing.”
Brak was found as a stray who wandered off from his mother. It took his rescuer a week and a half to pick him up. When they brought him home, he was skin and bones but absolutely loved to be near his new humans.
Then he met Tyrol the cat. The relationship was rocky at first. “Especially as the new kitten quite promptly took to us, robbing Tyrol of our usually less divided attention.”
But the kitten was very eager to win Tyrol’s affection. “He worked up to it less gently than Tyrol was truly comfortable with but it seemed to be working.”
No matter where Tyrol went…
…Brak would follow.
Always happy to be near Tyrol.
Things got better…
“He always seemed to warm Tyrol up.”
Brak brought comfort and a lot of affeciton to Tyrol. “(Tyrol) went from an incredibly needy and often whiny cat to a much more calm and happy cat.”
“Sleeping arrangements eventually ceased to be a problem…. They became brocats.”
Photos via imgur.

At the start of March I felt more than sorry for myself. After suffering cracked ribs and contracting pneumonia I knew that I had to give my body some time to heal otherwise I was going to cause myself some serious injury. I visited my Osteopath (http://www.wsqo.co.uk/) who checked over my ribs and confirmed that they were healing and that there was no reason why, after two to three weeks off, I couldn’t start training again as long as I took it easy.
I had a look at races close by at the beginning of April and the most feasible was the Lancaster Three Bridges on 1st April. I told my wife who probably thought I was mental but agreed to drive me to the event so I booked it before I managed to talk myself out of it. There was much trepidation in the lead up to the event but I knew that at some point I would have to attempt to get out and train again. A quick scales weigh in confirmed the worst in that I had gained half a stone, I thought to myself that if I can gain half a stone after only stopping training for three weeks then I really needed to get back into it before I gained anymore. However, I did think back on it as I was writing this post and remembered that I was eating a lot of comfort food as I was feeling sorry for myself so it was probably all my own fault really.
My first training run back was on 18th March and I’d worked out a course to take me just over 6 mile that worked in a few hills. I wasn’t aiming for a specific time more just to see if I could go the distance but I was pleasantly surprised all in all.
The first two miles were a bit gruelling and part of me considered jacking it in and heading back home but I managed to zone myself out and push on. This was also the first run I’d taken where I listened to music instead of podcasts, it was an inspired change I feel as it seemed to push me on and certain songs such as Andrew WK’s Party Hard (http://andrewwk.com/) certainly seemed to get the legs pumping. I was more than happy to come in under the hour and it definitely gave me an idea of where I was at fitness wise.
The second training run was on the 28th March and went even better:
I felt fit and felt like I had more in the tank so I was more than ready for The Lancaster Three Bridges on Sunday 1st April.
On the drive to Lancaster I suddenly felt nervous, my mind went back to the last race I had completed in Blackpool and how much pain I was in and how much I suffered afterwards. Luckily by the time we arrived at Salt Ayre sports centre the nerves seemed to disappear. I had a plan of attack, something I’d never really done before in a race, I was going to let the majority of runners past me then I was going to find someone who was running at my normal pace and stick to them like glue. The race itself started well and my plan appeared to be working, I’d taken it fairly easy for the first mile and then I ended up run side by side with a woman who was doing a pretty similar pace to me and showed no sign of speeding up or slowing down. At around the 3 mile mark there were 32 steps that needed to be climbed before the race could continue on flat terrain again. As I had never contended with steps before I wasn’t sure how to take them, some were walking up them step by step, some were taking it 2 to 3 steps at a time and some were part running and part walking. I decided that the best course of action for me was to take them 2 to 3 steps at a time, I’m not sure this was the ideal thing to do as I reached the top with a bit of a dull pain in my stomach but it’s certainly something I will look at training for if I do a race like this again. Come the 4 mile mark I felt strong and had no doubt that I would last the course I was still stuck like glue to my chosen running partner and a quick check of the watch said that I was doing around 9 minute miles. When we got to the 5th mile the woman I was running next to started to slow down and I made the choice then to pull ahead and hit the last mile strong. Coming up to the finish line and I could feel someone breathing on my neck and I could hear their feet as I hit the floor, I knew they were close but I was getting a bit stubborn at this point and thought to myself that there was no way that someone would be passing me with 200 yards to go. I had enough in the tank to power on and leave my pursuant behind and I surprised myself by how much I did have left as I crossed the line I was given my medal and my time:
Position-185 Time-56:04 Steven Claringbold
After crossing the line I turned around to find out that the person chasing me was the woman who I had ran side by side with for most of the race. We shook hands but I could tell that she was more than a little upset and my wife said afterwards that she was going for it and then some as she tried to beat me to the finish line. The photos that my wife took as I was coming to the finish line confirmed two things:
1. She really, really wanted to beat me and
2. I was fat.
I was happy to post a time of 56 minutes, this had been the quickest time I’d done a 10k so far. I was back in the game, I’d posted a personal best and all after the health problems I’d started the year with. I was relatively fit but I was about to get even fitter as a phone call on my return from the race was about to yield a surprise that would take my running to the next level.

MELBOURNE, Australia — It’s one of the most stressful jobs in the world, and not just because it’s in a busy town.
When Melissa and her husband Dave arrived home from a weekend trip, they noticed something wasn’t right.
They found a sign hanging in the living room, that read “This is not where my husband lives,” Melissa said.
“He lives in the back of the house, and we were looking through the cabinets, and there was a bottle of perfume that we had bought at the mall,” Melissa added.
The couple knew they had to take their husband to their hometown of Melbourne, and they had never been to their own hometown before.
Dave and Melissa had been planning their trip for about a year.
It was their first time to Australia and the first time they had met a native, Melissa said, but she knew that they were going to make it work.
Melissa and Dave started talking about what their lives would look like, and their journey started.
At first, the couple had no idea where they were.
Melissa had only been to Melbourne once before, and it was an unfamiliar city with very little in common with Melbourne, the family said.
But Melissa and Dave thought they would find some people, and that their journey would be a happy one.
Melissa, the oldest of three kids, and Dave, who is the youngest, grew up in Australia, so they had been living in the country their entire lives.
We wanted to be happy, Melissa explained, and she was happy because she knew Dave.
But it was a struggle, and Melissa said they couldn’t get the hang of it, she said.
“I had a lot of problems in the first few weeks,” Melissa recalled.
After a few weeks, they began to notice a few things.
They were tired.
They said their hair was falling out, their nails were getting bigger, and hair had begun to grow on their arms.
They couldn’t stop eating.
They had to get up every morning and eat and stay awake, and some of the foods that they had cooked had gotten burnt on their hands.
They started getting a lot sick.
They stopped taking their medication, and the family noticed that they couldn�t stop vomiting.
Their friends seemed to be having fun with the food.
They weren�t able to stop going to the movies, so Melissa started to think that maybe there was something wrong with her.
So they started searching online for answers, and in February, they bought the first plane ticket in a year to Melbourne.
Before that, Melissa and the rest of the family lived in Texas, but Melissa had to fly back and forth to visit her husband every other month.
Her first trip, in March, had been so busy she had been unable to take the plane with her children, so she was forced to take Dave and Melissa.
Dave had never met Melissa before, but they were already dating, and this trip would be the first trip to his hometown, he said.
Mel Melissa and Melissa have never been away from home.
Mel and Dave had lived in Australia since their first trip in 2014, and for the past two years, they had only visited their home country once.
They knew they wanted to visit Australia, but Dave and his wife had no experience living in Australia before.
Melissah said she had never seen Australia before, because her husband had never come back to the country.
She was worried, but it wasn’t until a few months later that she decided to book a flight with Dave and take him with her for the first leg of the trip.
She was worried about getting sick on the flight, so after her husband checked in, he and her son arrived in Melbourne.
Melisha and Dave first noticed a sign in the kitchen that read, “This Is Not Where My Husband Lives.”
The couple were concerned, but not as much as Melissa because she and her daughter are both older than her.
Melina and Dave said they had gotten used to their routine of getting up at 5 a.m. and waking up at 8 a.s.m., and now they were getting up and going to bed early.
They would get up around 4:30 a.f.m and go to bed around 6 a.i.
The couple said they were happy with the change.
In April, they moved to their new town, and then to their first new home for nearly three years.
MELBourne, Australia, is a city in the southern part of the country where people are known to be lazy.
The climate is warmer, the weather is much more pleasant, and people love to have fun.
For the past three years, Melissa has been taking her husband, Dave, to his first new city since their 2014 trip, Melbourne, a city that

PALMDALE, Calif. (KABC) --One person died in a car crash on the northbound 14 Freeway in Palmdale, which reduced the freeway to one lane.
According to the California Highway Patrol, two cars were involved in the crash and one person was taken to a hospital where they later died. Between three and four people were injured in the crash, but the extent of their injuries were unknown.
Several lanes on the northbound 14 Freeway were closed for about three hours, CHP said. No further information was available.

I found my lovely 6 year old ex wild bush bred boy dead in the paddock the other day and I still am not sure what he died. Any ideas?
hey Grace I don't think he ate something poisonous because he was in quite a clean paddock and usually with poisoning there is abdominal pain (colic) in which case there would have been thrashing evidence and probably diarrhea which thankfully there wasn't. I haven't spoken with my vet yet, but a different vet mentioned he may have been struck by lightning as there was 15 minutes of heavy rain and lightning during the 2 hours I left him but on the other hand there wasn't a mark on him and when I returned the property was dry and sunny. And thanks everyone for your suggestions, the whole ordeal has left me baffled as he had been so good for me earlier that day but hopefully the vet might have the answer I'm looking for as Joey was a really special boy :)
it wasn't colic because there were no thrash marks and fresh fecal evidence,I think it may have been a stroke or burst aorta. some experienced friends had a look at him and think he wen't very quickly and could have been dead before he hit the ground type of thing as there was absolutely no struggle he just had the blood and some sweat. yeah unfortunately I didn't have him insured as he was supposed to be the tough one hah and yeah I had just moved him to a small paddock on his own while I left the property for a couple hours
He had a small amount of blood in both his nose and mouth and was a bit sweaty but there was practically no thrash marks so I assume he went quickly, I couldn’t afford an autopsy so if anyone has any ideas It would help so much.

I don't think it would develop without an underlying injury or condition. Was you bird normal before? What's happening now? I think it is safe to say something like this would need a vet diagnosis. Can you provide more info or pictures?
Hi! Let me give details. I bought a pair of GCCs a few days ago. They were given to me in a box. I asked if they could be put into the cage I had in my car but the seller said he didn't have gloves on him. He opened the box slightly for me to look at the birds but it was a quick look and I could see they were alive. I couldn't tell their condition though.
When I arrived home I opened the box, releasing the birds into their cage. I noticed that one of them, although able to climb the cage, fly and eat, rested with one foot held up on the cage bars or in the air. I thought it did this because it was scared but as I watched it more closely I realised something must be wrong with it. I picked it up with gloves and felt along its leg. I couldn't detect any breaks but noticed that one leg was positioned differently to the other. I informed the seller and he claimed there was nothing wrong with its leg when he gave it to me. I know nothing happened to it in the cage. Is it possible for it to have injured itself in the box?
I really couldn't say but if you bought them without being able to see them then anything is possible and it would be difficult to have any recourse.
If he was resting with it like something is wrong then it was probably already injured when he came out of the box. I would be concerned about pain. An x-ray or at least a vet visit would really help you know what's going on. As mentioned already, if it developed or happened recently then something is wrong. If it's an old injury it may be to late to treat but only a professional could really help you.

I just watched a segment on the Today Show about a father that went onto his daughter's school bus, to confront the kids bullying his daughter. And my hats go off to him. I don't agree with all he said, but his passion to protect his daughter, I can relate to. The idea of my boys being bullied would break my heart.
I have been a victim of bullying on a school bus, of course, this was years ago. I was taunted, spat at, had lit matches thrown at me. I was told to ignore them, and my parents did nothing. I watched a mentally retarded (that is how they were referred at the time) girl being mercilessly bullied. It makes me cry now, thinking about her anguish. She didn't have the skills to fight back, and I became her protector, all less than five feet and 80 lbs of me. I watched a little boy have his football thrown out of the window by older boys. The bus driver refused to stop to get it, until I threw such a fit he pulled over and I went out to the ditch and got it. I can still remember Briton's tears flowing down his face, unable to protect himself from kids twice his size and age.
If the schools won't protect our kids, what message does that send. I would board that bus, in a heart beat.
2016 christmas pictures
6 months ago

On January 3rd, 2020, Sergeant Blosser was contacted by two females who work door-to-door solicitor job and were left behind by the people who brought them to town. They had no money or resources to get back home. No local contacts and motel they have been staying advised that the ladies are good people, just stuck. Provided 2 nights motel to get them by, a gift card for food, and 2 train tickets to […]
On December 28, 2019, Officer Howard was contacted by a female in front of Day Springs. He recognized her as a victim of an apartment fire earlier this month. She said that the Red Cross assistance that she received had ended the day before and she had no place to go. She was out of her element at Day Springs, and the clients at this location looked like they were ready to take advantage of […]
On December 27, 2019, Officer Canada was dispatched to a vehicle prowl where money and gift cards were stolen from a female who was at the cancer center for treatment, her wallet was stolen. A gift card was purchased for her to help with food and gas to get to and from treatments; she commutes from Mesa to the cancer center.
On December 20, 2019, Officer Melone responded to a suicidal subject at the Kennewick Suites room 211. Crisis advised that a male stated he needed someone to pay for his motel room and that he was suicidal. Upon arrival, contact was made with the male. He advised that he was $20 short to pay for the room for the night. He has been staying at the location and all of his personal property. He stated […]
On December 12, 2019, Officer Castilleja was dispatched to an assist from a female who was requesting information about the Community Care Fund. Officer Castilleja contacted the female who told him that she has been applying for 5-10 jobs a week attempting to look for employment. This female had a 16-month-old child at home. The female said that she had just received an eviction from management, due to being delinquent on this month’s rent, which […]
On December 10, 2019 at approximately 1316 hours, while working as a School Resource Officer at Highlands Middle School, Officer Harris was notified by a Communities in Schools counselor that a parent was in need of assistance with obtaining lodging. Officer Harris contacted the parent and inquired how he could assist. Parent explained that her husband had kicked her out of their apartment along with her two children, (both Highland Middle School students) and a […]
On December 1, 2019 at 11:13 hours, a female called and advised that she needed some assistance with staying at a hotel. When asked why, she stated that two years ago she moved from Ocean Shores to Richland to live with her mother and stepfather to be a semi “care taker” to them. She said that she had four children ages 3, 4, 7 and 9. She told officers that she moved out to a […]
On November 25, 2019, a vehicle was stolen from the owner. The vehicle was later recovered with no keys for the victim and they could not afford the tow bill and get a new car key, as the keys were stolen with the car. Funds were used to pay the tow bill for the victim.
On November 21, 2019, a male got intoxicated and pointed a gun at his own head. His 13-year-old and 11-year-old children were in the home. He continued to display the gun in a reckless manner amounting to reckless endangerment. The older child ran to a neighbor and called her grandparents. Officers arrested him for reckless endangerment and immediately connected him with mental health services. The children were placed in protective custody. Both children had not […]
On November 15, 2019 – Assisted a single mother of two (8 and 4 year old girls), youngest at Children’s Hospital in Spokane with leukemia. Family needed assistance with rent, PUD and some cash for groceries/food at the hospital.
On December 23, 2018 officers responded to assault call, 21 year old woman was the victim ofassault – domestic violence. She had no family in the area. She was living with boyfriend’smother. After being assaulted the mother asked her to leave. The victim has a job but hadnowhere to go. Four nights at Clover Island Inn were purchased to get her through Christmas.Upon finishing the booking at the hotel the woman began crying and was […]
On December 18, 2018 officers were called to a welfare check at a local gas station. A deaf elderly couple was passing through and ran out of gas and had no money. They were coming from Arizona headed to Seattle. The male, 69 year old, was in a wheelchair and on oxygen. A full tank of gas and a gift card were purchased for them. They were very thankful for the help.
On December 16, 2018 officers responded to assist a female who had locked her vehicle with her 2 year old daughter inside and the vehicle running. The female use the officer’s cell phone to call family members to assist her with no luck. She explained that she did not have the money to pay for a locksmith to open her car. The officer called Mounts to unlock her vehicle. She was very thankful for the […]

Pantyless And Fucked Hard
January 29th, 2019 Views: 91488 Starring: Adelle Unicorn
Description: I saw Adele Unicorn waiting for a friend, and at first she didn't want to chat, but she was also lonely. Her friend was stuck in a traffic jam, so we got to talking. Talking led to flirting, and I thought I would ask her if she wished to have some fun. When I asked to see her ass in her underwear and she told me she was not wearing any, I knew we would fuck. Adele gave me a blowjob that felt amazing, and I enjoyed playing with her tits. She wanted to swallow quickly, but I wanted to fuck her more. Eventually, I gave her what she wanted, and came on her pierced tongue.

A Xhosa man based in Pretoria who suspected that his wife was cheating on him with their Pastor after receiving many a tip-off from neighbours and guards decided to set up cameras in his bedr00m.
And indeed he busted them. He gives a hilarious running commentary as he watches it.
While the official hubby was overseas, the wife decided to lease her s*xual g0odies to pastor, but she didn’t know that her husband was filming them.
Watch All 3 Videos Below

When a parent interprets the Bible literally, the damage done to a child can be enormous. Anne Lewis writes of her father, who believed that in causing physical pain to his child, he was doing the will of God.
Mr. Lewis began treating Anne this way at the age of four. Smacks across the face, then the bottom, were replaced by severe beatings. One day he went out into the bush to find a tree from which he could make a cane. Following the teaching of Solomon, he was determined that he would not "spare the rod" with his first child.
Anne's first memory of being hit was when she accidentally knocked over a glass of water. Mr. Lewis had decided that there was no such thing as an accident. Anything that went wrong for his child was evidence of the work of Satan. Every person, according to the Bible, is "born in sin", and Mr. Lewis saw it as his responsibility to belt the devil out of his daughter. He would tell people, "Anne is like a wild horse and it's my job to break her in".
Beatings with the cane were for misdemeanors such as forgetting to say goodnight, leaving a cardigan at school, losing something, or questioning an unfair decision. Mr. Lewis expected his child to be perfect. She was not allowed to make mistakes or to imagine that she could ever have an independent thought that conflicted with his views.
Having to endure her father's abuse was bad enough, but Anne's greatest problem was with her mother. As a devout believer, Mrs. Lewis was totally submissive to her husband. What she thought of his outrageous behaviour Anne could never fathom. Never once did she try to protect Anne, or give her any affection or comfort in her pain.
Crunch time came for Anne in her twenties. Her mother had told her that she would be beaten until she was 21. So when Mr. Lewis gave her one of his treatments at the age of 23, Anne appealed to her mother. Mrs. Lewis then changed tack, claiming that the age of 21 was merely something recognised by the State, and that Anne's father had the right to discipline her for as long as she was under his roof.
This for Anne was the last straw. Although she still had some love for her mother, Anne left home, never to return. After years of therapy and working through some difficult relationships, Anne finally realised she was not the evil person her parents believed her to be. She completed higher level degrees and is now making a worthwhile contribution to society.

I was supposed to start this yesterday....at least that was my plan! I was really sick though so it didn't happen. TODAY will be the start of my photo project, and I hope I don't miss another day!!
Emma and Noah were playing so nicely this morning and posed for a quick picture!! I love when they play together and aren't being mean!!

Hope everyone is having a wonderful day! Did your weekend go as fast as mine? I did manage to paint a few picture frames. These were easy, no cutting involved for Chris, so he was really happy! I grabbed about 10 of these frames from Michael's they were on clearance for $1.00 each, which to me was a great deal. They will make a nice addition to my craft fair items. I did each one a little different as you can see. Which one is your favorite?
I hope you enjoyed! I'll share a few more signs soon.

August 5 at 3:02 am #48850
I had recently been dating someone that I had met on a dating site for a year. She was always complimentary and talked about how much she admired me and how our views on parenting matched perfectly. We only got to see each other once or twice a week depending on her work and travel schedule. I am not one that is easy to trust so I did not jump into things head first. I tried to take things slow.
She talked about how thankful she was to have me in her life and how lucky she felt. There were a few instances over the last year where I found myself questioning things like sending her a text Saturday morning and not getting a response back until Sunday afternoon which to me was an automatic flag. I tended to keep those things in mind and went as far to ask if there were any other men in her life in which she told me no. Recently I had a gut feeling after a fight so I googled dating websites and I did a search and the first site I logged onto I found she had a profile. In reading it I found that there had been recent pics added since we had dated. She denied that she had a profile out there until I pointed out the recent pics. She even went as far as to accuse me and questioning why was I on a dating site. She ultimately admitted to placing the profile and apologized for doing it and hurting me.
The hardest part is that recently that the “ I love you” words have been used which suggests a more deeper relationship.
After confronting her on the profile she admitted she had work to do on herself. She pretty much told me where she needed time with no dating. She is trying to tell me that she was new to dating after her divorce and had not had a lot of experience. I tend to question because every now and then she would mention a date that she had with someone before me that had not been mentioned before.
In a previous e-mail I offered to lose her number but she said we were both adults so I could keep it. I feel that either she is an extremely good player or is truly sending mixed signals including hanging out.
Pretty much things have been ended at this point. After not really getting a lot of response from her over the last couple of days. I emailed that I was cutting off all contact so that we both could move on.
Once you catch someone in a relationship lie it is hard to recover. Why would I want to be with someone that obviously felt a need to put a profile up on a dating site while we were together.
You must be logged in to reply to this topic.

Dusks are consistently forceful on the exchange market. It might be said that they ordinarily plan very well for their objective. TS Galaxy headliner has been on Sundowns radar since he was doing matric. His father was drawn nearer by Trott Moloto in those days. Anyway the arrangement didn't appear on the grounds that he was as yet centered around his investigations.
Nightfalls are reliably powerful on the trade market. It very well may be said that they commonly plan very well for their goal. TS Galaxy main event has been on Sundowns radar since he was doing matric. His dad was moved closer by Trott Moloto back then.
(Freedom Bell) – Ever since the COVID-19 immunizations began hitting the market and were given crisis use approval by the FDA, there have been an enormous number of people across the world who have been exceptionally fatigued of taking the punch, expecting that since these antibodies were surged out there could be risky incidental effects that were not found during the incredibly short testing stage.

Jerking upright, Harry cursed and unclenched his hands. His nails had dug crescent moon-shaped imprints into his palms. Both fists were painfully clenched. Whoever said vampires just died when they went to sleep hadn't ever met a vampire. He knew only how well they dreamed. Or in his case and had nightmares. Horrific blood-soaked nightmares intermixed with his human memories. For centuries. Yeah, that was a blast.
This time he was alone. He hated when he had to explain the screams and jerks. Sighing he rubbed a hand over his face. He hadn't had the luxury of such companionship in far too long. Maybe that was the reason for all of the nightmares lately. He wished. He knew why. It was May. May was always a rough month for him. That culturally it was a celebration of motherhood and spring for most of the world didn't help any. It just saddened him. Life could be bittersweet, but he preferred living to the alternatives.
The reality-based nightmare danced back into his mind unbidden.
"Son, come here. Your mother needs to tell you something." His father called him from the garden's edge. The estate was quietly easing into the night and he could smell the stream running through the property. The icy waters weren't tempting him yet but in a few months he would relish the chill and the rushing waters.
He pulled a ripe piece of fruit off the tree he'd been sitting under daydreaming as the moon rose. Then he slowly wandered to the house while biting into the flesh and savoring the fruit as the juices ran down his face. He never understood how his father got fruit to ripen so quickly. He was forbidden from telling anyone about the special treats in the gardens. Summer was still months away and nobody around even had flowers on their trees yet. His father had gone into the house after calling for him. He tossed the fruit's pit into the yard and wiped off his mouth with the back of his hand then went to find out what was wrong.
His mother was in her sitting room waiting for him. His father had since retired to his room. Rarely did his parents spend time together. His family was wealthy and they always had servants hovering on the edges. He thought the servants buffered them from having to ever talk to each other. Lately it was like his mother didn't even care.
She was completely by herself for a change. Nobody fussed in the corner with some of the household's needlework or some other task the women always seemed to be doing. At the threshold he studied his mother. The moonlight flirted with her dark hair and pale face while the wind blew the curtains in an erratic motion. His mother didn't care if night air was deadly she enjoyed it as much as she could. Yet another family secret.
"There you are, my son." She had her drama-filled voice on and called him to her with an impatient gesture. He dutifully kissed her raised cheek. A whiff of rose water pushed at him as he lifted his head. She used rose water saturated cloths on her head and neck whenever she had pains.
"Yes, mother?" He kept his tones even.
"Come sit with me." She patted a spot on the divan by her side.
He obliged her and waited to hear why she had summoned him. She placed her warm hands over the tops of his then lightly patted his cheek. The touch disturbed him since it wasn't his mother's manner to give caresses.
"The decision has been made. You are to leave tomorrow." And with that she began to tell him the great plans his parents had made. No longer would he be free to run the countryside and do as he willed. He was to go to the family in Europe for proper guidance and education. She didn't seem overly upset but rather pleased. Stunned, he left.
What followed was sheer torture. The family overseas resented having to take him and the nearly daily beatings went well into his early twenties. His education was a study in torture and pain coupled with a few lessons when the mood suited his keepers. The punishments were meted out with a glint and a sound wallop. He wasn't allowed to go back home until right before her funeral. His mother's once stunning body was withered and she shook and drooled. She didn't recognize him. She stayed alive, it seemed, just to torment him with that vision. A screaming mad woman locked in her room in the middle of the estate. He saw fewer servants than when he'd been a child. His father only came down to see him once she had died. It was like seeing his twin. His dad hadn't aged a day since he left. That night he found out why he'd never been allowed to visit.
The transformation from a son to a mindless minion was pain-filled and horrific. He, too, was locked way in the mansion like his mother had been when he'd arrived. But then his father had been passing himself off as the son for years to explain the lack of aging and such a ruse was deemed acceptable. But vampires had to do such things to protect themselves. The years that followed were filled with such things as blood orgies and torture. His father had a very strict set of rules to be followed. When he got too strong from feedings his father would bury him in the root cellar and let him scream and pound out his fury until he was near death's door and only then would he be allowed out. Over time he learned to hide his strengths from the vampire.
Shaking his head free of the memory, Harry set about dressing for the night. The feeling of his mother watching him pushed at his soul. He knew now how his father had grown such fruit. His mom had been an Earth witch as well as his father's blood donor companion. Her pregnancy was due to her magic since vampires weren't supposed to reproduce. That was what his father had told Harry while beating him for some infraction. Later Harry found out that his father hadn't been his biological father and his mother had lied to his father all those years together.
She had been amazingly strong to keep such a deep secret from the vampire. She'd found Harry's supposed father's original family during a trip to Europe. And she decisively mated with one of them that looked nearly identical to her husband. Thus under a full moon the unsuspecting man danced with the witch while her vampire husband bought and sold riches they'd brought from America. The trip had been a long one and eventually she'd gotten pregnant. She told the vampire once she was sure she would be able to carry the child that the magic of their joining created her baby due to a ritual long lost. He probed her mind and found nothing to indicate she was lying. Pregnant and wealthier, they headed back to the family's Virginia estate.
For years even while the strong vampire had been fanging into his mother and drinking her magically rich blood he never found out about her betrayal. He also had been wrapping her with the lust of feeding a vampire and yet she'd maintained the secret. Harry knew how strong the ties were between mates and the focus she'd had stunned him.
He finished dressing and wearily went to his car.
Tonight he was to see if the humans who had recently been so busy chasing and killing vampires were at the mall. His current mood wasn't ideal for being around masses of money-spending fools but he didn't have a choice. The snitch he'd spoken to the night before told him the meet was on for nine before the mall closed. He barely suppressed a shudder once he'd arrived.
His usual business attire wasn't appropriate, so he was more casually dressed in dark slacks and a dark blue sweater. The spring weather was thankfully a bit chilly so he looked like most of the men he saw once he got inside. Unnaturally bright lighting and far too much neon from the storefronts strobed into his eyes and were constantly flashing pain and shards of light deep into his brain. He found the overuse of bad music to be a constant as he prowled the sprawled out indoor mall. He hadn't found the snitch on the first pass so he went to the upper level.
Ear piercing squeals came running at him from behind and he braced himself as a bevy of under-clad girls ran past him. He resisted tossing the boys that thundered after them over the nearest balcony. Harry marveled that any of them could even run given their pants were halfway falling off and the girls had been wearing large clunky shoes. It wasn't anything to do with him.
Then one of the boys jogging past jostled his elbow. Harry hadn't slowed his walking or done anything to attract attention. The minor predator-in-training recognized that Harry wasn't the normal human adult. Snarling he stopped and spun back saying confrontationally, "Keep your damn elbows to yourself!"
Harry met the junior thug's eyes and said, "Keep your opinions to yourself." He didn't raise his voice he just smiled his more advanced predatory grin.
The kid wasn't getting the clue and growled, "Old man, you don't know who you're fucking with!"
"No, my stupid child, you don't know who you're fucking with," a glint of what he'd like to do flew out of his mind into the demented teen's brain. He avoided smacking the kid for now. The kid paled and caught the eye of one of his buddies who'd turned to see what was the hold up.
The other boy looked at Harry and shook his head negatively. A smarter thug, it seemed, than the junior mint still looming in front of Harry.
The buddy turned back to pursue the fleeing giggling girls.
"Come on, Buck, they're getting away!" His pal tried to tempt him away from the edge of the cliff Harry obviously represented. Buck, like that was his given name, ignored his friend.
"Later, dude. Hey, give Tiffany a smack on that sweet ass for me, k?" Buck growled in what he mistakenly thought was a tough tone. His friend flashed a thumb up and thumped after the pack. It was just Harry and the kid.
"Like, I wanna fuck with you? You're some retarded old asshole who can't keep his damn arms to himself?" Harry gave him points for balls if not for brains. He stepped closer to the kid getting a mere bite away from his neck and answered, "I am part of Homeland Security. How would you like a vacation somewhere tropical where you can be ass-raped for the next ten years?"
Not a word was above a whisper.
The small bob of his Adam's apple showed how much Harry scared him, well that and the fear now flowing freely off the young fool.
"Fuck, you're just a loser," the kid gasped out and spun, running full out catching up with his smarter companion quickly. Once he reached his pack he chanced a quick look over his shoulder. Harry hadn't moved more than a step from where the kid had left him. His smile was large and the kid flipped him the bird and turned away quickly. It was all Harry could do to keep from rolling on the floor in laughter. Maybe there was hope for the human race.
He continued trolling the mall while keeping an eye out for the kids. They had settled into the food court and were tossing French fries at each other not even aware that there were even any people nearby -- completely self-absorbed. The boy who'd confronted him broke the pack mentality and Harry noticed that he saw him and let his eyes skid off without meeting Harry's gaze. That made him mentally chuckle and relax. Harry continued to ramble along and looked for his missing snitch.
As nine passed without spotting his informant he stopped in front of a large display window. It was then he saw the banner backlit in the window. The large pricey diamonds were draped over black velvet and accented with silk red roses. Gold and platinum accents warred for the visual space and a white silk banner above proclaimed "Happy Mother's Day!" for that he stopped. With a sigh he remembered the nightmare of his life chasing into his death and wished his mother had found her peace. The night was still young and he continued on looking in the mall, trying to forget his beginnings.

After reading Ernest Hemingway's to have and have not I realized that it could have been interperated a couple of different ways. The main character, Harry Morgan, was a driven man. Early in the story Harry was being betrayed as a man that just wanted to make a living for his family. In my opinion, it was due to a couple of misfortunate circumstances (more like getting ripped off by his own friends) that made him turn his legal operation, a fishing boat, into a transportation for whatever paid the most. .
Harry found that transporting liquor from Cuba to the states during prohibition was a more profitable trip than using his boat for just a fishing charter. When he was on his way back from Cuba on one of his smuggling trips, Cubans who were trying to steal his cargo shot him in the arm. Since he didn't get any medical attention right away, his arm had to be amputated thus painting him as a traditional pirate. Although Harry lived the life of a pirate, he had a loving family and a wife who adored him. Marie, his wife, described Harry in the Chapter Fourteen; "She watched him go out of the house, tall, wide shouldered, flat backed, his hips narrow, moving, still, she thought, like some kind of animal, easy and swift and not old yet, he moves so light and smooth like, she thought and when he got in the car she saw him blonde, with the sunburned hair his face with the broad mongol cheek bones, and the narrow eyes, the round jaw, and getting in the car he grinned at her and she began to cry." "His goddamn face, " she thought. "Every time I see his goddamn face it makes me want to cry." Marie wasn't the most beautiful woman but she was a loving wife who cherished everything about her husband.
Richard Gordon was introduced into the story when he walked into Freddy's bar with his wife Helen Gordon.

Yesterday morning Olivia woke up with a really runny nose. It's allergy season. Last night she started coughing just a little but not bad. By midnight she was having a really hard time. She was breathing really hard, had a nasty cough and would have a hard time getting her breath when she coughed. She would start choking from all the mucus, then she woulds start crying which would make it worse. She even ended up wetting the bed from coughing. Around 1 am I got up and gave her a breathing treatment with her albuterol. She was really warm and it didn't seem to do anything. I left for the ER just before 2am. We got admitted straight away. The doctor came in and checked her. They had a respitory nurse give her a breathing treatment and then they monitored her for a while. A little while later the came in to take her to get x-rays. Luckily she is old enough to stand by herself now so we didn't have to put her into any of those torture contraptions to hold her still. After that, they gave her a steriod shot in her leg She did not like that! Then because she was so flushed and felt so warm they took a rectal temp reading. She did not like that either! Then she had a second breathing treatment. By 4am she was doing better and was ready to go home. The said she had croup, which I figured. She will be on steroids fo 5 days. Hopefully that will take care of things. If she has a relapse I am to take her back to the ER. Unfortunately croup is contagious, which I never knew, so the others could get it too. My younger brother always had croup and we never got it. Anyways, Olivia was glad to get home, giver her daddy a hug and go to her own bed to go to sleep. She slept until 9am this morning (and so did I, sort of). She sounds better and I am hoping it stays that way. We'll see what the night brings, that's when the attacks happen. It's so hard to see them so sick and such a relief to have them get better.

Tollywood director, Tarun Bhascker had shot to fame with his Award-winning film, Pellichoopulu, with Vijay Deverkonda as hero. His film, Ee Nagaraniki Emaindhi released recently to mixed reviews. It is a romantic comedy. Tarun's earlier works were successful short films like Anukokunda. It is a love story. The young director is married to Latha Naidu, who worked as production designer in his films. About Anukokunda, he said that he had written it on motivation by his wife, but the incidents in the film are not his experiences.

Bethany has done a couple funny thing recently that I want to share. My kids, like most, are not allowed to write on themselves or others. However, when they were spending so much time away from me and with at my parents' while I had mono, I did the unthinkable. I wrote on the backs of Joseph and Bethany's hands. Little funny faces on Joseph's and a flower on Bethany's. I told them it was to remind then that I loved them and missed them. They both thought this was really cool and tried not to wash my lacking artist skills off for days.
Bethany came over to me on Sunday and started writing on my hand, she wrote, "Mome" and then added, "I Love" to the front of it. I am a naughty mommy and thought is was very sweet, and secretly just can't bear to wash it off.
The other night I asked her to help me get supper ready, I had her roll crescent rolls and place them on the baking sheet. I was busy fixing my portion of the meal and had my back toward her. All the sudden the air in the kitchen turned to thick Lysol. As I was realizing how strong the smell was, I heard, "Shhh, Shhh, SHHHHHHH" I turned around to see Bethany spraying Lysol on each of the crescents! She had mistaken it for Pam.
I was disappointed that we wouldn't be eating them, but it was really funny. I told her if I hadn't noticed, we would have put them in the oven and they would have exploded into black nothings!

It seems like everytime they showed a family that were not regulars it was always in the Garvey's house, lol. Like the episode where James and Cassandra got adopted by that other family. Was that the same house? Or when that one kid came there to stay with his grandparents and knocked his grandfather down?
LETS GO PENS!

I'm a nurse, and if I was assisting a delivery I'd probably choose to pretend I didn't see the camera. A birth is a monumental event and certainly worthy of being caught on film. I could see where they might ask for the camera to be turned off if there were complications. Fortunately I don't work in labor and delivery.
I work with post op patients though and recently had a patient who was struggling to take a photo of his knee incision while in bed and propped up on his elbow. I was more than happy to take the photo for him when he asked for some assistance. It's the first and only time I've ever used a camera phone! :o

Angela Wrightson was described as an ‘angel who would not harm a fly’ by her friends.
She loved animals, and children, and would always stop to speak to youngsters in the terraced street where she lived.
But at just 39 years old, she looked twice her age, ravaged by alcohol after turning to drink when a boyfriend left her.
She was a chronic alcoholic who weighed no more than six or seven stone and wore several layers of clothes to keep warm even during the summer.
Like her killers she had been through the care system and had been jailed as well as sectioned under the mental health act for her own safety.
Follow our live updates as Angela Wrightson killers are sentenced.
Despite all this and being generally accepted as a nuisance, “Alco Angie” was regarded with affection by many who knew her.
When sober she was kind and caring, had a love of dogs and liked to go to church. Her home was kept meticulously neat and tidy.
But in drink she had a habit of going out to lie in the middle of the road and would make nuisance 999 calls that resulting in ASBOs being granted against her.
Hairdresser Donna Jenkins, who was one of her closest friends, said Angie wasn’t close to her family.
In a statement read at court, Donna said: “I first met Angie when we were both serving a prison sentence in Low Newton Prison around 2005.
"Angie was the laundry woman and like everybody else I warmed to her from the start.
“Angie was a lost soul and found life much easier in prison , she felt safe in there and had become largely institutionalised.
“She was an alcoholic and suffered poor mental health which led to her having numerous ASBOs in place.
"She would often breach them which would end up with her serving short prison sentences. She wasn’t a criminal, she needed help not prison.”
Angela was one of eight children who grew up on a council estate in Darlington, Co Durham, before moving to nearby Bishop Auckland and eventually Hartlepool.
She was single for most of her life and never had children but it was losing the one man who really mattered to her that sent her life spiralling out of control.
Donna said: “She met a man called Billy and would talk about him a lot. I got the impression that this was the happiest period of Angie’s life.
"She told me Billy had died and it was alcohol related, which had left her heartbroken. I think his death hit her hard and her own condition worsened over the last two to three years.”
Donna, 44, added: “She showed an interest in the church and at Christmas time she would go to her local church.
"I think if she could have stayed sober she would have been really involved with the church.
“She loved kids and animals, especially dogs. She looked after one of her friends’ dogs, a big Alsatian, she had it for three weeks and was devastated when the owner took it back. I think it gave her a purpose and kept her off the bottle.
“When she would go and lie in the road under a blanket I think it was just so she’d get some attention, I think she was lonely.
“Angie didn’t have many possessions and despite her lifestyle she always kept her house tidy. I think this was from her prison days.
“She used to buy little teddy bears and pot ornaments from the second hand shop and they would all have their own place in her front room.
“The last time I saw Angie alive was the Friday night, fifth December 2014.
“She had called round to my house as she usually did and stayed for about an hour.
"She seemed her normal self and had a drink and a bite to eat. I got the impression she wanted to stay but I was up for work early the next day so she left.
“I showed her out and watched her walk off up the street and never thought for one moment that it would be the last time I ever saw her.”
A neighbour of Ms Wrightson in Stephen Street, Hartlepool, who had lived in street for 20 years, said: “You would see her lying in the middle of the road after she had had a good drink.
"I don’t know if you would say people who called at her house were her friends, many used to go there for a drink - I would not describe them as friends.
“But they were always going in and out and you would see her going down to the shop to buy alcohol for everyone.
“On the day that it happened I saw the police outside and I knew it was something really bad.
"When I heard the details it was just horrific. You can’t believe that kids could do something like that.
“There were quite a few people who would go in there who had a drink problem. You would see her with others wandering up and down the street.
“When it gets warmer they are all out having a drink round here. She used to get hammered on booze and just lie in the road.
“I don’t think it was very clever and I don’t know why she did it. It’s not that she was a bad woman, she would always speak to my grandchildren and we always used to say hello.
“She didn’t do anything other than drink, she had a sad life really. She could be a pest but she did not deserve what she got.
“It was the people she attracted that were the problem rather than her.
"Sometimes when she was really drunk she would wander into my house by mistake. I had to tell her she had the wrong place. She always apologised and left.
“I was shocked when I discovered the age of her attackers . I have grandchildren that age and I just think it is horrendous.
"Everyone is talking about where the blame lies, whether it’s the parents or social service or the kids.
“I don’t care what your background is, you still know the difference between right and wrong even at that age.
“They might have had a horrific upbringing but they still knew what they were doing was wrong.”

Embarkation and check in were very organised and friendly and we got on the ship shortly after 12 noon. Our baggage was taken directly out of the taxi we arrived in so no hassle there
Cabin was very nice being the first time that we had stayed in an inside cabin on Cunard. However, there were a few things that were missing meaning that the attention to detail wasn't there. The bathrobes and slippers were missing, the information book had no pages in it, the TV guide and room service menu was missing. We had to ask for these and it took a few hours before we got them. The bathroom toiletries were not replenished or replaced the whole time we were on board - is this cost cutting by Cunard?
The bed was very comfortable and it was very quiet.
The first night was when we left Southampton on the Queens Jubilee day. We went to the Commodore Club for drinks but it took nearly an hour to get a drink as there was only one person serving in there and a lot of people were complaining about this. When the drinks arrived, the tea was lukewarm at best and the waiter was very surly.
We then decided to get an elevator from outside the yacht club as our cabin was located in that part of the ship. This is when we realised where all the staff were - at a private party. The lifts by the yacht club were blocked off - at first we were told they were out of order and then we were told they were for VIPs in the Yacht Club party only. While I don't mind the fact there was a private party, the fact that the lifts were blocked off was disgraceful. A disable passenger was also made to use other lifts away from the Yacht club.
I made a complaint to the Front of House Purser as the Public Rooms manager was "unavailable" (probably in the aforementioned party) and she said that she would get back to me but I am still waiting...
The meals were fantastic on both nights. The first night seemed a bit rushed but I understand why this happened as they knew that people wanted to get out on deck for the celebrations.
The second night (formal night) was a completely different experience. Excellent service from both the waitress and the sommelier with a toast to her majesty (albeit with sparkling wine I can only describe as "paint stripper") being made by the Entertainments Director.
It was my mothers birthday on this day and they provided a birthday cake which was nice - moist and tasty.
Breakfast was a bit chaotic. We ordered toast and after about 15 minutes, the waiter came back and said there wasn't any as the toaster was broken!!! However, toast still appeared on out table about 5 minutes after that but it was rock hard and cold.
The Lido was extremely busy on the first day and we struggled to get a table for lunch which was annoying.
Apart from the Commodore Club on the first night, the bar service was excellent after this - very quick and attentive.
The lunch in the Golden Lion was lovely as ever especially as you could get a nice jug of Pimms to accompany it.
This was very nice, as ever, with a harpist but the tea service was quite slow which probably was the reason why the queues were horrendous after about 15 minutes after tea has started - so get there early!
This went smoothly as we had a leisurely breakfast before getting off.
This was very good. There was not much going on the first night as it was centered around the Jubilee celebrations but the second night had an excellent singer who sang Neil Diamond songs and an extremely lively band in the Yacht Club.
Would I go on Cunard again? Well after being on the QE a couple of times, I am not sure after this experience. Perhaps it was because they were trying to do too much for the Jubilee Event and couldn't handle it.
I have made a complaint to the Customer Relations department and even sent an E-mail to Peter Shanks about the first night but am still waiting for a reply..

I've been looking around at a few threads I have been posting in every so often and I keep finding that my replies are being removed... Some are quoted by people so they were there once, obviously, but... the OP is just gone. What the hell?
WHAT/! SHE WASNT NAEMD METROD!!![etuoq\]

I has been sad all winter long that it doesn't snow where we live. So we had to bring the boys to the snow. Here we are in Piancavallo for a day of sledding. Luckily, it's only a 30 min drive from where we live. It was the perfect day for it since the snow was packed down and the sun was out and we were all very warm.

I’m sure I didn’t do everything right when raising my kids. No one does. There is no perfect parent, but it sure is sweet when you realize you did something right, even if you didn’t realize all the implications it would have when you did it. (Be sure to read Part 1 of this series, too!)
As a really young mom, my kids were born pretty close together, and I didn’t have much time for anything but my kids. But as some of the kids got a little older, God impressed upon me that I needed to teach my kids to serve others. Sometimes that’s best learned through doing.
There was an elderly couple who used to come to our church. They had been missionaries to Germany during the time just before World War II . We invited them to our home for dinner one day and began to get to know them. Soon after that, the man, who had diabetes, had to have his leg amputated and their visits to church become less frequent. We would watch for them to arrive each week, though, and we’d help to wheel Mr. Hutchinson in to church as it was a bit hard for his wife to do that.
Then we began to visit them. I would always take Laura with me. She was about 10 years old. I’d talk with her on the way out to their house (they lived about an hour from us) about how to listen for hints of things they liked or things they needed to have done that we might be able to do. Aunt Lillie, as we called her, would often ask Laura to play her a song on the piano when we visited.

Look what I found on lolcats:
That white cat looks just like me! I know it's not really me and everything, but it's still kind of weird. He's even got a spot between his ears like me. My person pointed out that the spot on his side, is on the wrong side, but I still think it's pretty cool. I'm kind of Internet famous now. Very cool.

Posted over a year ago | London, London
My wife has been escorting for the the last couple of years. She started because we didn’t have any money and we were both on the dole. We were both unemployed seeking work and extremely broke after getting student loans. We have both been to university and graduated in IT, but without experience, no one wanted to employ us. We were living in a rented flat where it would leak water from the roof when it rained. We were eating bake beans everyday and £1.50 meals from Iceland.
My wife is a stunningly beautiful woman. I feel very lucky to have her. I’m not a selfish person and I don’t mind sharing her with other guys and making them happy. I asked her if she would consider escorting as the money is really good. At first she was disgusted and upset, but a few days later she said she loved me and she would give it a try as we were in debt and things were getting worse.
She placed an ad on a few websites and started to get calls. She ended up seeing a guy who just wanted to talk dirty and not do anything else. He didn’t even touch her. He gave her a good tip after too.
The money is really good. She is 23 years old now, but when she becomes 43, I think she should get plastic surgery to make herself just as appealing as she is now and carry on making money for us. Life has never been so sweet. We just recently got a mortgage in a posh part of London and a brand spanking new Lexus SUV.
Ad No: 147723 | Views: 1,195 | Replies: 10

Wesley had a soccer make up game on Tuesday after school. He played so well. He got the ball a few times and dribbled it up field and came so close to scoring several times. After his game we had a pizza party for the team. Their last game is on Saturday but we had decided to have the pizza party instead of our practice on Tuesday. We then found out we had the make up game but decided it would be fun to have the pizza party after that.
2 hours ago

An angry postman was today demanding answers after being told at a polling station he could not use his ballot card, as someone had already cast his vote - by post.
Peter Sansum, 42, of Coleridge Road, Billingham, arrived at his local polling station at Marsh House Avenue at about 6pm on Thursday, expecting to be able to vote in the General Election.
But he was shocked to be told he could not use his ballot card, as his vote had already been received by post on April 26.
Mr Sansum said: "I didn't apply for a postal vote and didn't receive any postal vote papers, just the usual ballot card to take to the polling station as normal.
"I first went to the polling station at 6pm with my wife Carol. She was told she could vote, but they told me I couldn't and give me a helpline number. I went home and tried the number, but it was just an answer machine.
" I left a message, but noone got back to me."
Mr Sansum returned to the polling station at about 8.15pm.
He said: "When I went back I was initially told I would be able to vote. But then they decided I couldn't.
"I'm really angry that I wasn't allowed to vote. I'm a union representative at the post office and feel strongly about using my vote."
He added: "I've spoken to relatives living in the south of England who say they elected to vote by post and didn't receive a ballot card. But I did receive mine.
"Surely if I've asked for a postal vote I wouldn't have received a ballot card."
He added: "There is now the worry that someone has fraudulently used my name."
Mr Sansum plans to make a formal complaint to the returning officer.
Stockton Council said they would be looking into the matter.

We have a 4 year old male Shih poo that still doesn't think much of his food. We have tried just about everything. He eats in the evening, not a lot, but he does eat. And since we are bad parents, he begs for food from our plates.
Answered by Anonymous - 11/9/2012 10:03:07 AM

I and some of my family went to see world renowned superstar Rihanna at the Ricoh Arena on Saturday 25th June 2016.
Rihanna has become a modern music, entertainment and fashion icon. As an accomplished performer, she has sold 54 million albums and 210 million digital tracks worldwide making her the top-selling digital artist of all time.
We were all so excited to see Rihanna and it was great that she was performing at our own town of Coventry. However, we were not impressed with the Ricoh Arena and how unorganised and unprofessional it all was. We had gold circle tickets where we would be standing but to get near the front or at the front we needed to arrive early. We had all planned for this and had our picnic supplies, mat to sit on and of course our rain coats and umbrellas(as you can't go to a Rihanna concert without an umbrella,Ella, hey, hey...)
We arrived at 1pm giving us three hours before the gates opened at 4pm, we sat by the entrance stairs at gate 25A where our tickets had directed us to. There were a few people in front but not too many so we were positive about being near the front and was very excited. As time went on more and more people arrived and were all trying to squash into this very small area. Although there was plenty of staff around they were doing nothing about organising barriers for queuing and people were trying to push in. If they had used queuing barriers this would not have been a problem, why should people who arrive just before opening the doors be able to push in.
The doors were due to open at 3.30pm but was late so opened at 3.40pm but only for people who had paid for priority gold circle tickets allowing early entrance half an hour before, there was not many and they got through quickly. More and more people were arriving at this point and we were all squashed together like sardines waiting to go up the stairs and get inside. The tension within the crowds was building up it was pouring down with rain and when doors finally opened at 4.20pm the crowds pushed and we were all thrown up the stairs towards the doors.
Because of the amount of people that were pushing the staff just about managed to check our tickets but did not check our bags.Then to make matters worse we were all sent into another room, squashed together some more and had to wait for what seemed like forever for two very small doors to open. What on earth were the staff thinking? let's wait until there are hundreds of people in one very small stuffy room, make everybody wait a further 15 minutes until the room is so full from every corner then squash them all through the doors together! Why wasn't the doors open for us when they had checked our tickets we could have all just walked through without the big surge. I suffer from claustrophobia and I nearly passed out at this point, I was stuck, there was no way back as there were so many people behind me and at the sides.
When the doors opened, we all thought our lives were over as everybody started pushing and it was simply horrifying we were squashed through those doors like caged animals and my 15-year-old niece had her wrist bent back and bruised, Luckily we survived but there were some extremely bruised people who were crying and shaking. I'm so glad I didn't bring my 13-year-old daughter she would have been crushed, I saw some younger girls crying it was shocking. The Ricoh are to blame and if they are to hold more concerts in the future they need to sort things out. What would Rihanna have thought if she knew bags were not checked and she was at risk?
But after all the drama Rihanna was simply amazing, I loved all her new songs from her new album and of course all the old favourites. She is absolutely stunning, can dance so well, her voice was just perfect, the stage act was so cool along with her dancers and all her sexy outfits. We were at the front and it was so surreal to be that close to such a super star what a great life experience that I will never forget!

From Maven’s official website:
Greetings everyone. I come bearing some great news for all you Maven fans out there. I spoke to Maven yesterday and he had alot to say in regards to his career, wrestling, his departure with WWE and more.
Let me first start off by saying he has been in LA, and still is, meeting with different agencies looking at a potential acting career. The news has been good as all the agencies have said they would give him a serious look and would definately have work for him, and that right now is a great time for ethnic-diversity in Hollywood. He mentioned needing to slim down from his weight of 225lbs as Hollywood is a “skinny-man’s world” which may seem crazy to some people considering in what kind of shape Maven is in.
As for Maven’s wrestling career, the only wrestling match that he is expected to participate is in his hometown, Waynesboro, Virginia against his former Tough Enough teacher Al Snow. I plan on speaking with Maven next week and I will have the specifics for that show, at that time.
As for Maven’s departure from WWE, he was very candid in his comments about the company and his stance on his release. He mentioned that he wasn’t as upset with his release as he maybe should have been and that he had a problem with the company ever since the week after he was Raw General Manager. For those who don’t remember, Maven was Raw GM after winning the Survivor Series main-event back in November. Maven shined in his words as GM and believed in his mind that he proved he was a “go-to” guy that could handle himself on the mic. His problem came with the WWE used that momentum to have him job to Gene Snitsky the next week on Raw, in a match that lasted under four minutes. Maven still feels the sting of that and was part of the reason he wasn’t as upset as he believes he should have been concerning his release.
As for his release, in his own words he said “If the company doesn’t want to invest their time and their money in me, then I don’t want to be there…you can quote me on that.” So it appears that Maven is still living fine after his WWE departure and is keeping his options open for his career. Concerning the shoot-style comments WWE made about Maven’s “after-hours life” and how that impacted his WWE career Maven stated “That was complete bulls–t.” In his own words, he stated that he partied or went out no more than anyone else in the company and the real root of the problem was that some people, whom he wouldn’t name, still had a problem with him coming from Tough Enough. He stated that is easy to see because there are only two remaining Tough Enough alumni in the WWE and though he wishes them luck, expects them to fade overtime as well. I guess there really is a Tough Enough stigma in the WWE.
In regards to going to NWA-TNA, Maven acknowledged their new TV contract with Spike TV as a good thing and believes he would enjoy working for the company if they came calling. “If they are interested in me and decide to pursue me, that would be something I would look at,” he says.
All in all, it was great to talk to Maven again and finally get to hear from his own mouth about his release, his future career and more. He certainly hasn’t been shaken by his WWE firing and if anything, is looking to do bigger and better things in the world with his newfound fame.
Have a news tip or correction? Send it to [email protected]

"Harry. Is it really you", Ginny whispered unbelievingly, standing on balls of her in preparation to run to the unmasked figure who claimed to be and looked stunningly like her deceased lover. However, although part of her just wanted it to be him so that they could run away together, but she just couldn't believe it she had seen him die, seen him draw one final painful breath. He had died in her arms but now he was back, but surely he just couldn't be, oh, it was all too much, she just didn't believe that her heart could cope with the disappointment if it wasn't him.
"Yes. My love. It's me and none other", Harry replied with a beaming smile, as he opened his arms wide, knowing what it was his lover desired, but notice the slight trepidation in her voice. He had been waiting for this moment desperately hoping to return to the arms of the one, who loved him, and of course to see parents again, but he hadn't dared believe it would happen; he had spent so long in his new home.
"Harrrry" Ginny screamed as she leapt into his arms and kissed him passionately on the lips. Before his mother and father draped their arms around the pair of them, completely the perfect image of aloving close nit family.
"But... how no one returns from death Harry" Hermione bravely said as she stepped forward towards her former friend, a brave move who one commit such a betrayal.
"Lord Potter if you please Miss. Granger"Harry coldly answered his former friend, no hate visible in his voice just ablank emptiness, no emotion, no hint of the caring Harry that had been clearly visible during his interactions with Ginny and his parents.
"Pardon" Ron stepped forward, angrily shouting at his former friend. Him be his usually self had failed to realise the significance of the emptiness of his former friend's words. However, Hermione had not been so unobservant, she knew what the hollowness of that voice meant. She could have coped with anger, maybe even hate, but nothing, what could she do. She knew he had ever reason to be angry, to be hateful, but he wasn't there was just no emotion, no feeling that she could work on removing.
Oh how she wished she could have that relationship with him back, they had been the brother and sister to each other that neither of them had ever had as only children. He had been her first friend that terrify day when he had rushed into a girl's toilet to save her when he was only eleven, admittedly Ron had helped to but, he had not always remained a constant friend as Harry had. She had recently begun to realise that if it had not be through the shared bond they had through Harry, and after he had gone to Azkaban their friendship was no longer what it had once, Hermione shrank away into her books, and Ron had become an arrogant self obsessed fool -not that he hadn't always been - but when Harry left everything crumbled.
She had even begun to at last doubt his guilt but she felt reassured by the support of Dumbledore, by his regular proclamations of his certainty of his former mentee's guilt. Even then she still continued to have a slight niggling of doubt but her believe in authority prevented this believe going any further. How she wished she had done things differently.
But why was Harry so blank towards her, sure she had betrayed him, but that would create anger, and then she remember the most terrible thing she had done to him. He had been given it by one of his first friends - a friend who had since disappeared during Harry's imprisonment- at the end of a horrific event, especially for an eleven year old. It was one of the few links he had to his parents, a few precious photos that were all he had to remember his parents by. And she his friend had callously burnt them, and sickly delighted in his screams of anguish, laughed as he clutched at the burning photos, not only had her actions on that day scarred him mentally she could tell, when he revealed the palms of his hands she saw the horrific burns, that were the physical evidence of the horrific nature of the personal attack by his former friend.
The burns were horrific great welted purple scars, where the burning paper had melted the skin away, had Azkaban healed them, no why would they? He had been the traitor, so the burns had been left to become infect and permanently scarring.
What a fool she had been.
"My apologises, Lord Potter, but how can you be back? You died. People just don't return from the dead. And when did you become a Lord?" Hermione meekly said, slight not understanding how he had become a lord, he was still a mere boy even if he did look more like a man now he had returned.
"Ahhh, well that is an interesting story. For a start I can return because I never truly left this world. My mind and soul were too broken to pass on; I was crippled, and need to help myself before I could pass. But I couldn't come back; I was stuck in limbo between this world and the next. And it was then that things got interesting. You, Miss. Granger, may be familiar with the tale of King Arthur and his round table, and although the round table may be a myth. The tale of the man himself is not. He was aroman of Britannic descent, and he fought long and hard against the Saxon invasion, however he could not hold back their hordes and he disappeared" Harry calmly began to explain, before he continued, "He was the last truly magical King of England, although some monarchs since have had slight magical power, none could match Arthur's strength. However, this is off the plot, ever since his disappearance it has been said that at the time of the Britain's greatness need he will return. That time has come, although it is not him, himself, but avassal. I am that vassal, my Lord found me in the neither land and trained me, and now I have returned. I would have returned so soon but the danger presented against mi Lady forced my hand" Harry finished.
"So you are the voice of Arthur and he was really, Lord" Hermione said unbelievingly.
"Yes and I have returned to rid this world of Tom Riddle. To live my life to full and then to leave this world" Harry replied bluntly.
"But...but" Hermione failed to respond her mind boggled by what Harry had just said.
"And I have news for you Dumbledore" Harry rounded on Dumbledore, "Your blessed Order of the Phoenix was once the Holy Order of my Lord, just as modern Kings have the Order of the Garter . And has since been corrupted over the years. I shall allow its work to continue, however, if its work doesn't improve shortly my Lord has given me permission to cease its operation". Harry's words shocked Dumbledore to the core he had always thought of the Order as his own privet army, but now this had been taken away. The whole world was falling down around the betrayers, and Dumbledore quickly realised this was only the beginning.
Harry had the power and knowledge of Merlin and Arthur at his beckon call, he was now an immensely powerful young men, but with years and years of long forgotten ancient magic.
He was defiantly a man to be feared.
Sign up to rate and review this story

That’s right, HBO Sex in the City, the miniseries on Home Box Office. We were so excited when production called and asked if we had some laminate that they could use for the last episode of Sex in the City. This show has been a hit ever since its release. Watched by millions every week…we were proud that we were asked to participate in the finale. We look forward to working with you all again! Thanks!

T hotel has the most amazing service and really strive to make your stay pleasing. The rooms were very clean, neat, and the turn down service was great. Breakfast was lovely, as was the view. The only slight problem we had was the language barrier with some of the trainees, and you need to have a bit of patience as they are all learning. Would definitely come back!!
- Free Wifi

Time to get caught up. :)
We stayed with my cousin, Jim and his wife, Becca and their daughter, Samantha. Samantha and McKinley are really close in age, so it was really fun to watch them interact!
After our play time, we went and did alittle shopping. We needed to stop at H&M, because I heard that made tiny undies, and thats what we were needing for McKinley's potty training journey. Of course, now you can order online from H&M. :)
This was also the trip that I realized that we "needed" a dog. McKinley would just light up when she would see their dogs- she was always wanting to be near them. It was really really sweet. This "need" will be covered more in our next blog post. :)

MG went back to school today. She was happy to go and see her friends and teachers. MB is pretty happy to have the place to himself. It will be good for him to get back into his grove. He is now happily playing with his animal friends on the sofa. He likes to set up all of his stuff guys up and read them the Degio books GAL got him for Christmas. I can't seem to catch him at it long enough to get a picture.
In other news.
We have been offered a Basset Hound puppy for free. He is 3 mouths old and had his shots and is named Mater. You know like Trmater without the Tr. The owner has to move out of her house to a small apartment and may have to give up the puppy. We have not said anything to the kids yet because it may not happen if the owner can find a way to keep him. We should know in the next day or 2. We have been thinking about another dog but have put it off for a while when I left work. We told her we would take him if she and her daughter could not keep him, but we understand if they want to find a way to keep him. This is why we have not told the kiddos about him.(Please don't tell them) Besides they will freak out when we go to pick him up and Hubby and I can be Heroes for at least one evening. This would be the best time to have a puppy because I am home. We think Winston will do well. He has mellowed a bit. He get along great with other dogs. We will have to wait and see.

Just A Facial: An Erotic Sex Story
I had been in the mood for something naughty that day. I had been fantasizing about getting a facial, but my husband had been out of town for a few days and I knew that I would need to find a way to get it done on my own. I started browsing the web for a good place to go, and I stumbled upon a website that offered just what I was looking for.
The website advertised a “just a facial” service, which could be done with a willing partner. After looking around for a bit, I saw a picture of a woman who seemed to have the same kind of look I was looking for. She was wearing a slutty little outfit, and her eyes were bright and inviting. I knew immediately that she was the one for me.
I contacted the woman, and we made plans to meet for our rendezvous. I couldn’t wait to get my hands on her and begin our naughty adventure. I was so aroused by the thought of it, I couldn’t wait to get to her.
When I arrived, I was blown away by her beauty. She was gorgeous, with perfect curves, and I was instantly aroused by her presence. I couldn’t take my eyes off of her. We sat down on the bed and started talking, which quickly led to more intimate matters.
We kissed passionately, and I could feel her longing for me. Our hands explored each other’s bodies as we rolled around on the bed. I kissed her neck and nibbled on her ears as I teased her nipples with my tongue. She moaned with pleasure as my hands roamed her body, and I could feel her anticipation growing as I moved lower and lower.
I took her panties off and spread her legs open, revealing her delicious pussy. I licked and sucked on her until she was trembling with anticipation. Then, I moved back up and simply looked at her. My eyes roamed her body, taking in her beauty.
Finally, I moved up and asked her if she was ready for her facial. She eagerly agreed and I began to get into position. I could feel her excitement as I spread her cheeks and spread her lips. I started licking her in circles, teasing her with my tongue. I could feel her body quiver and her breathing becoming more rapid.
I continued to lick and caress her until she was screaming with pleasure and begging for more. Then, I moved up to her clit and sucked on it. I flicked it with my tongue and she moaned in pleasure. I kept going until she was completely satisfied, and then I let my own hands explore her body until she was ready for a second round.
After the second round, I moved up and kissed her all over her body. I kissed her lips, her neck, her breasts, her pussy and her ass. I then moved back down and started licking her again. This time, I licked and sucked on her harder, teasing her until she was screaming with pleasure.
Finally, I moved back up one last time and kissed her deeply. I could feel her pleasure radiating through our bodies and we both moaned with delight. I then moved back down and gave her the facial she had been wanting. I licked her pussy until she was screaming with pleasure, and then I moved up and kissed her all over.
Then, we both lay there, panting and exhausted. We kissed and cuddled until we both fell asleep. The next morning when I woke up, I was filled with a sense of satisfaction. I felt like I had just experienced something amazing, and I knew that I would never forget it. Just A Facial had been exactly what I had been needing, and it had been exactly what I had been dreaming of.

Originally posted by
Have you been in the spot of saying "sure, we can try since YOU want it so bad", or "nope, not going there for anyone, including you"???
I was completely against anal, but because I trusted him and felt comfortable with him, I tried it. It isn't my favorite thing to do, but I am more than happy to do it every now and again. I have put him outside his comfort zone a few times, and shockingly he is warming up to it and has found himself enjoying it. I know it may sound harsh, but I like for my husband to put his hands around my neck, like he is choking me. I get hot just thinking about it. I think you need to be able to give a little to receive a lot. And relationships are all about that, even in the bedroom.

Back when I was single, I used to go clubbing a lot. I was out one night and vaguely recall talking with two women. When the night was over, I was too drunk to walk. I ended up being carried out of the club by two friends. The next morning, I recalled meeting a tall, dark female I had danced with the night before. I didn't get her number because she was a little bit out of my "norm" in that she was black and I am not. Whatever. Anyway, to my surprise, I got a call from her. I must have given her my number and not remembered doing so. Her name was Roxanne, but she went as Rox. We hit it off over the phone. We talked for over two hours. I was excited! I knew she wasn't my type, but because of how well we hit it off, I didn't care. I didn't have any extra money at the time, so I invited her over to my place for dinner and to get to know one another better. We set the date for the next night, a Monday. My schedule was free except for my friend, Jessica, was stopping over at some point to pick up her CD's that I had borrowed. So, the date was set. Keeping in mind that I was ripped the night I actually met her, all day Monday I was extremely excited! I cooked steak, broccoli, potatoes, and Texas toast. She came to the door right on time. I was shocked when I opened the door and saw her standing there. Now, I didn't say this out loud just because I don't get down with being rude to women, but I thought to myself, "They call you 'Rox'? They should call you Rover because you look straight-up dog!" Reluctantly, I smiled and let her in (I usually don't permit dogs in my house). So, I'm silently convincing myself that I can get through this night until I remember that Jessica is going to stop over. I begin to panic because Jessica is going to see this broad sitting on my couch, and I know I'm going to get teased about this for months! We were eating when I heard the doorbell ring. Before I could properly say hello to Jessica, this beast jumps at the opportunity to meet one of my friends. You know how it is with chicks. They feel they're "in" once they've met your friends/family. I see Jessica looking at me. She's being polite, but I know in her head she's already making up jokes about me! Jessica quickly grabs her CD's and cuts out. Now Rox and I are alone again. We eat and talk for a while, and then she leaves. I honestly don't know how I did it, but I eased out of that situation, for now. The next day, though, she calls me and wants to kick it. I say okay and tell her to call me back around 6:00. My intention, however, is to not answer the phone when she calls back in hope she'll get the hint that I'm not interested. She called around 5:30, so I told her to call back at 7:00. My plan is to just get flakey on her and let her figure it out once I don't take her call. So, I'm thinking I'm home free. Jessica and I were hanging out at my place when there was a knock on my door. The girl didn't call like she was supposed to. She just showed up! She had a bottle in her hand a smile across her face. Jessica leaves, and Rox comes in. She went into my kitchen and started making drinks. We had a few (I just sipped). She was really knocking them back! She said she was getting a little queasy. I ignored her comment hoping that she would just leave soon. I worried that she was setting me up for the old "I'm too drunk to drive home" routine. After a bit, she starts getting all grabby-grabby with me. Now, I said I didn't really like her. I said she wasn't that pretty. I said she wasn't really my type. However, after a few drinks and some persuasion, she starts some brain surgery and I let it happen for a while. Things settled down for a bit and she asked if she could use my bathroom. I said sure and walked her to it. She seemed to be taking a long time, so I went back to check on her. I find her butt-naked in my bathroom, passed out and lying in her own diarrhea. It was all over my new, expensive bathroom rugs. The way I found her laying, apparently she was trying to vomit into my bathtub while at the same time having the runs. I tried to wake her up, but I wasn't about to touch her. So, when she wouldn't wake up after I screamed at her, I just went to bed. At about 2:00 in the morning, still drunk and filthy, she climbed into bed with me. What could I do? It was sick! So, at 4:45 in the morning, I woke her up and she left. I had to spend over an hour cleaning and disinfecting my bathroom. I had to throw out my bathroom rugs and bed sheets because they were all soiled. I was embarrassed for her. I wouldn't take any of her calls. She left some phone messages, crying, and offering to replace anything of mine that she may have ruined. I just couldn't do it. Not again.
— Kenny, 29

/ Source: Reuters
(Reuters) - Sitarist and composer Ravi Shankar has died near his home in Southern California, his family said on Tuesday. He was 92.
Shankar, a three-time Grammy winner with legendary appearances at the 1967 Monterey Festival and Woodstock, had been in fragile health for several years and last Thursday underwent surgery, his family added in a statement.
"Although it is a time for sorrow and sadness, it is also a time for all of us to give thanks and to be grateful that we were able to have him as a part of our lives," the family said. "He will live forever in our hearts and in his music."
(Reporting by Elaine Lies; Editing by Eric Walsh)

A woman was shocked to find a great horned owl silently staring into the house. But she soon became concerned and called a local bird sanctuary. They came and rescued the owl. “It was so cute and it was just a foot from the door,” she told the NY Daily News.
They explained that it was most likely a baby owl that had fallen out of its nest and its mother could not find it. The baby was unable to fly and in great danger on the ground. Calling the bird sanctuary saved its life!
If you know someone who might like this, please click “Share!”

Count 'em. (the following picture will help too) :)
Nice catch, you happen to know how many were in use?
9 and they were ALL pulling. The train wasn't big but must have been heavy
Are some of these a power transfer?
I don't know
As a junction, was this by chance with the M-K-T?

In an interview with Sky Sports, Wesley Moraes revealed the difficulties he went through to become a professional football player and how being a young father inspired him.
Wesley went through a rollercoaster of emotions during his childhood, with his father passing away to a brain tumour when he was just nine years of age.
"When my father died, it was difficult because my mum was alone with me and my brothers but she worked and now today I do everything for her."
Becoming a teenage parent wasn't easy and by 16, he had fathered two children to two different women so his past experiences have incentivized him to succeed in football.
"I had my first son when I was 14. It was extremely difficult because it was at that time I had begun to try getting into playing football professionally. I'd go to work during the day and then to training at night," he began to explain.
To play football and be a father when he was still a teenager was demanding but Villa's player started to take the sport more seriously when he had his second born.
"I was 14 when I had my first child and 16 when I had my second. When I had them, I told and promised myself that I would do everything in my power to become a professional footballer.
"When I play, I have to think about my family, my children, my mother, everybody.
"When I finish training, I call my mum because she is everything. My mum did everything to help me play so every day when I come home, I call her."
Aston Villa's youngster still trained at Atletico Madrid during six-months but it did not go as expected and consequently, he went back to his home country, Brazil.
"I had to do something. I had to earn money for my children. Every team I went to told me no. I went to six clubs before I went to Slovakia.
"When I went to the sixth team, I thought I didn't want to play football anymore. I thought it was finished for me. Then I got a chance."
After playing in Slovakia, Moraes spent six-years at Club Brugge before moving to Aston Villa in a club-record signing of £22m this past summer.
The Villa man has scored four goals in eight Premier League appearances.
"I am very happy playing in the Premier League, in the biggest competition in the world."
Reminiscing back to the past, he now smiles when he recalls the hard times he encountered as a child.
"Every day, I think about the past - what I was thinking when teams were saying no to me - so I'm very happy now that I have this job."

It's Over the Hump Day!!
Well, we finally did it! A few posts ago I showed you some of the outdoor projects that are on our to do list. A new mailbox was one of them! We did the whole thing in one day and we are very happy with how it turned out.
Of course, we still need to plant the clematis that will vine up and I'd like to get a magnetic mailbox cover for it, but overall I think it looks terrific!!! The plans came from Lowe's Home Improvement and I believe the link is a few posts down. It was not a hard DIY project and we were surprised that we were able to get it done in one day. It took both of us working on it but well worth it! The only suggestion I have is - paint the wood first!! So if you are in need of a new mailbox as badly as we were - what are you waiting for???
Have an awesome Wednesday! Chat with you soon!

Do I regret attempting? In a way, no, but I wish it hadn't had to come to this.
I spent the whole morning in the psychiatry unit, unsure of what was happening to the outside world. I just kept on apologizing to every nurse who helped me. They said that's what they're there for but I still felt like their efforts were wasted on me. The psych nurse said it was both a good thing and a bad thing that I thought about others this way.
Thankfully I'm getting the help I need. I don't know how long it takes for me to be okay again. I feel like I'm dangling by a thread.

Bush, George Washington
- Frank L. Green
Bush, George Washington (1790?–05 April 1863), pioneer, farmer, and cattleman, was born probably in Pennsylvania or Louisiana. His mother was Scotch-Irish, his father perhaps East Indian; little is known of Bush’s birth and ancestry. He may have been born as early as 1770. However, that would have made him seventy-four by the time he came to Oregon in 1844. Oral tradition among the family gives the date as 1779....

So my Sun Joval stopped by the house the other night which was way past my bedtime. so he turns around and starts taking off his shirt I’m like what’s wrong with you it’s cold. He turns around and lifts up his sleeve and there is this stunning photo of my on my arm. I looked at it and then cried how beautiful I was and he was able to capture my image on his arm. Though my lips are that huge the eyes were on point.
It was truly humbling to see my image on my Sun. I was honored because I never really think of myself as someone to be honored but I guess I was wrong in a good way.
As a mother I was truly touched that my Sun took the time to find someone that awesome to draw me on his arm.
I’m truly grateful for all my children and the love they exhibit to me all in their unique way make me happy.

Two friends went hunting on the moors for wildfowl. One of them strayed into some woodland where he had seen some birds descending. He thought he saw a movement in the distance, certainly not a bird but possibly a deer, and he walked towards it through the trees. Pausing at the bank of a stream, he saw a figure emerge from the trees on the other side of the stream. A man it was, and yet like a wild animal. He seemed to be composed of the very things of the woodland itself, of moss and bark and leaf-mould. He was not so much seen as experienced by other senses than sight, sound and smell, although all of these senses were stimulated by him. So his voice, when he spoke, was harsh and strong:
“What do yer mean by coming here after the animals I have care of?”
His voice was terrible and yet it was enticing.
”Come over here and I’ll tell yer how to behave in my woodland.”
It was as if the hunter had no choice but to put down his gun and cross the stream. Just then he heard his friend’s voice behind him and turned around. When he looked back the figure across the stream could not be seen.
“Did you see that?” he asked. But his friend had seen nothing. When he told him what had happened, his friend was fearful.
“Oh, it’s lucky I came, if you’d crossed the stream he would have torn you apart! It’s only that water that saved you. We’d better go and forget hunting for today.”
But as they were leaving a bird flew up from the undergrowth. The hunter lifted his gun and fired, bringing down the bird. But as he did so his arm froze and the chill never left it. It was said that he was cursed by the ‘Brown Man of the Muirs’ and he pined away and died soon after.
Scottish Borders/Northumberland. Passed on by letter to Walter Scott.
Said to have happened in 1641.

July 16, 2019
Oliver was born in 2009.He passed away July 16, 2019,in Muncie, IN. He was adopted by his family on March 17, 2012 from a shelter in Aurora, IL after they read his sad story on Petfinder about his being found abandoned in an apartment all alone after his first owners moved and left him. Oliver settled into his new home happily with his Mom, Sally, Dad, Chuck, sister Kaitlyn, and cat sister Sasha. Oliver knew no strangers. He loved everyone, and even people who don't generally like cats loved Oliver. Sasha was always the queen of the household, and Oliver was happy to let her be.Whenever anyone came to the door, Sasha would run and hide and Oliver would run to the door to greet who ever was there.He was very affectionate and loved to give nose kisses. Oliver never liked feeling cold. In the winter, he'd hang out where there was heat, including his favorite spot on earth, snuggled in Dad's lap right next to Dad's laptop, staying warm. Even though Sasha wouldn't ever cuddle with Oliver, they would play together, especially their favorite game of chase. They would nap next to each other, and Sasha would happily allow Oliver to bathe her. In 2014, Oliver moved from Oswego,IL to Muncie, IN, his Dad's hometown. Oliver didn't care, as long as he was with his family. He and Sasha loved to watch the squirrels and birds from the living room window, and also the bedroom windows. Oliver also loved wet food and treats.He always waited on the foyer rug for his family members to come home He was loyal, much like a dog is. Oliver was always a large cat with a large appetite,so when he lost weight in the fall of 2018, his Parents were concerned. He was diagnosed with kidney disease and told he could last a short time, or a long time, but it was totally unknown.Oliver had trouble maintaining his weight, but in the months after his diagnosis, he seemed to be doing well. He acted normal, eating, playing, and being his loving self. Then on July 14th, Oliver lay down in the closet. He didn't seem to be himself, and didn't feel like eating. Mom took him to the Vet on July 16th and he was found to have organs shutting down and was very pale and jaundiced. Oliver was very sick, and the difficult decision was made to let him go. Mom and Dad stayed with Oliver until the very end. Oliver will always be with his family in his Urn. He leaves his heartbroken family, and the world is a darker place without Oliver. Oliver's Mom Sally is from Maine, and his Dad is from Muncie. If anyone wishes to give a gift in Memory of Oliver, please consider making a donation to Forgotten Felines of Maine, or Muncie ARF.
Oliver was born in 2009.He passed away July 16, 2019,in Muncie, IN. He was adopted by his family on March 17, 2012 from a shelter in Aurora, IL after they read his sad story on Petfinder about his being found abandoned in an apartment all... View Obituary & Service Information
Obituary & Service
Oliver was born in 2009.He passed away July 16, 2019,in Muncie,...View More
Customized sympathy cards. Mailed for you.Send a Card
Photos & Videos
Share and view memories of Oliver...View Photos & Videos

Total Visitors: 620
Nick beats is a well-rounded and innovative beat maker of 12 years. A musician first (NIC BEATZ) started playing the piano at the age of 11, His 6th-grade music teacher was astonished on how he played music by ear and not reading any music notes. Further along in his career he collaborated with established artists and producers.
His peers gave him a nickname called (baby Dre) but soon after he crafted his own unique sound with hours of dedication. Nic Beatz always had a knack for learning things on his own. Being self-taught and driven to get things accomplished, he then formed his own brand of music with his group called ''Chosen Flock.'' While managing his group he later turned towards learning the business side and became A&R for major labels.
(NIC BEATZ) was raised in church so it was there that he reverted back to his roots after the horrible tragedy along with his family had to endure. He then developed a personal relationship with God when he made up his mind to change for the better. He was later appointed as minister of music and began working with choirs and preaching the gospel.

John, youngest son of Henry II and Eleanor of Aquitaine was born in Oxford on 24th December 1167. His nickname was John "Lackland". His brother Richard I died from an arrow wound on 6th April 1199 and John became King, his brother having forgiven him for scheming against him and naming him as his heir. The best known event of his reign was the sealing of the Magna Carta at Runnymede near Windsor on 15th June 1215, forced on him by the Barons due to his mis-government. While travelling with his army he attempted to cross the area of water in East Anglia known as the Wash but misjudged the tides and lost his crown and valuables.
His first marriage to Isabella of Gloucester, which took place on 29th August 1189, was annulled. He married secondly on 24th August 1200 Isabella of Angouleme.
He was crowned in Westminster Abbey on 27th May 1199 but his wife was not crowned with him. It seems he displayed "unseemly levity" during the ceremony and left before receiving the Sacrament. The coronation of his second wife took place in the Abbey on 8th October 1200.
He was so upset at losing his treasure that he became ill with fever, not helped by eating a great amount of peaches and drinking too much cider, and died on 18th October 1216 and was buried in Worcester cathedral, at his own wish.
King John by W.L. Warren, 1961
Magna Carta by David Carpenter, 2015
Oxford Dictionary of National Biography 2004
Account of the discovery of the body of King John..at Worcester" by V. Green 1797

Some of the recent hospitalizations have involved my mother-in-law (MIL). She had had a very sore hip for awhile and thought that she had either over used it on a hike in N.H. woods or that she might be developing arthritis in it like her mom. Unfortunately, x-rays, then MRI's, then a biopsy confirmed that neither was the case. What they did confirm is that she has multiple myeloma and that her hip and thigh bones had disintegrated so much from the disease that she would need to immediately use a walker, as any pressure on the bones from simple things like walking could cause them to collapse. She was scheduled for surgery to insert a titanium rod into her leg last Friday and is scheduled to begin several month long treatments for the cancer once the leg heals a bit.
As hubby has barely ever had to deal with illness with any of his family members, and especially not his mom, he has been shaken-up with this news. With us being a thousand miles away, it is also difficult, as we get news second hand and we can't be there in person to support our loved ones in this trying time. My husband is like most men and wants to "fix everything" and this is something he can not fix and does not even know how he should approach it.
I've already had to remind him that it is OK if his mom is not happy, if she is upset, angry, sad or all three together during this process. He started to say that he thought she should keep a positive attitude the entire time, but then realized that the would be unreasonable. Her whole life has now changed, everything she had planned for work, retirement, etc. and it can be overwhelming. She's trying to stay positive for her daughters, who are falling apart with the news of her turn in health, and she needs someone to turn to that will "allow" her to cry and be miserable if that is all the energy she has to be for that day. In fact, I called her and told her that I could be that person for her, as my family has dealt with cancer many times over, with both positive and negative outcomes, so I understand the reality of treatment and the stress that it entails.
Our summer vacation plans have changed with this news; we're trying to organize a trip back home to visit with her. We've not told J the whole story as of yet, since we don't have all the facts and can't answer his possible questions. Plus, he went away to summer camp this week and we did not want him to be thinking about his Grandma the entire time he was there. So, he knows that she had surgery for her leg, but he does not know the reason behind it. Just telling him about the surgery was rough, as he felt quite a bit of sympathy for his grandma and couldn't believe that she had to go through that. He is very close with her, and we don't know how to break the news of the cancer diagnosis to him, as he will worry incessantly about her, but we also don't want to lie to him, since he can tell that we are both a little more frazzled these past two weeks than normal.
5 Easy BBQ Potluck Sides by Natalie
19 hours ago

Rodney Stuckey G IND Nov 25 '78
Rodney Stuckey was 0-for-7 for two points in 20 minutes on Wednesday.
He was hot coming in, scoring 11, 19 and 19 points in each of his last three games, but gave way to Jose Calderon and Will Bynum, who were on fire tonight. Stuckey has been up and down all season and had scoring games of four and six points in two of his three games prior to his hot streak. In other words, while he'll have some good nights, he's also likely to have plenty of bad ones the rest of the way.

I was wondering what everyone considers to be the worst game they have ever played? (On any console)
There's so many bad games I've played its hard to give one a crown. I will seriously need to think about my answer. But what's everyone else's take?

Welcome to Oklahoma Shooters Association! Join today, registration is easy!You can register using your Google, Facebook, or Twitter account, just click here.
I haven't seen his magazine in many years. I hated the part where girls let you stare up their woo woo because whos even interested in that?I thought he was already dead, too. Maybe he was just in Nebraska.
I saw his magazine once or twice, but I can't say I enjoyed it. That dude's tastes were straight up weird. I was told that he was going to publish a pro-gun magazine (with no nudity) back in the '90s, but I don't recall what it was supposed to be called or whatever happened to it.

After driving for about 25 minutes we were at the most beautiful place. I'm assuming it was a restaurant but I wasn't totally sure. She opened the door for me and as I got out she grabbed my hand. She quickly pulled away not wanting to be too forward I assumed. I smiled and grabbed her hand and held it s we walked in. I was sure the paparazzi would have a field day with this, but I didn't care. I knew then that I loved her. I wasn't going to let her go. Ever. We ate lunch and then she drove to a big building. It looked like an apartment building. She led me upstairs and into an apartment. It was her apartment.
"Want anything to drink?"
"Nah, I'm good." I couldn't stop staring at her. She was so beautiful. I just wanted to kiss her so bad. Just hold her in my arms. It was almost too much to resist. She came and sat by me on the couch and we watched a movie. It was about 4PM when she asked what time I wanted to go home.
Demi was driving home and I couldn't help but stare at her. When we got to my house, I led her into my room.
"I have something to show you." I pulled a necklace out of my top drawer. It was a necklace from my father. He was off in the army and I very seldom wore the necklace in fear of breaking it.
"What's that?" She looked at me puzzled. I walked over to her and sat next to her on my bed. I started to tear up.
"This is a necklace from my father. He's in the army and I don't see him that often. He gave me this and told me to wear it when I wanted to feel like he was with me. I wanted to show it to you because it means a lot to me. Demi, you mean a lot to me." She started tearing up as well. She was about to leave but I was finally able to get her to stay. She had to leave to finish her tour soon, and I knew I wouldn't see her for a while, so I wanted to spend one more night with her.
I woke up and realized we were cuddling on my bed. I quietly got up to go make breakfast. I made waffles and as I was trying to make coffee, Demi came up and hugged me from behind.
A/N::: I PLAN TO KEEP UPDATING. PLEASE LET ME KNOW IF YOU LIKE IT. I HAVE A PRETTY GOOD IDEA OF WHERE THIS STORY IS GOING, SO I WILL TRY TO UPDATE OFTEN!! LOVE YOU ALL!! ♥
YOU ARE READING
Love of a LifetimeFanfiction
I had been awaiting this moment for forever. I finally get to go to the concert if my idol. I am going to soundcheck, but I couldn't afford meet n' greet tickets. But it's okay. Someday I'll meet her. ------- She looked my way and we locked eyes. Sh...

Splash came to us as a 5-year-old who had become “persona non grata” at his first home due to his exuberant nature and large size.. He knew little about being a house dog but quickly became our protector and good friend. Although he never learned the “no shopping on countertop rule”, he learned new lessons and earned his titles to the amazement of our friends. More gradually, he learned to hunt squirrels, run and do other doggie things that had been disallowed.
He was a great ham. He always did better at a show than in practice and was a kind and gentle boy. Being on the large side, I was worried when he first started at nursing homes as a therapy dog but he seemed to understand the frail nature of the folks there and was much loved by all the residents. He even had a trick to show off, sitting up like a circus dog. He amazed me earning his WWD by ignoring a tasty duck on the way to his floating line and ended up 3rd in superdog at the San Rafel specialty. He was a BIG chow hound.
Splash loved everyone and could not get enough cuddles to make up for his first years. At age 13 he had to undergo surgery for osteosarcoma of the hard palette but he battled back quickly and lived 2 ½ more years dining in style on soft food and getting quite spoiled. We only wish we had had even more time with this great fellow.

I purchased 10 tickets from OnlineCityTickets for the whole family. Several hours later I received a call from their customer service and was told that tickets I ordered were sold to someone else. But they assured me that they'll give us better seats. When I received the tickets I realized that they've changed our seats section #2 to Section #18! Those seats were much cheaper! I paid the total amount of $1500 for 10 tickets and new ones in total were only $750! It is absolutely unacceptable to do business this way. After many hours on the phone arguing with them I finally cancelled the order and received my money back! These people are scammers, they tried to steal my money. This was the worst experience I've ever had and I will share my experience with everyone. Don't use this website!

Recently, we took a long weekend trip to Grand Lake with my family. My dad's company owns a lake house there, so my siblings and I have been going there since we were little. Jack has been once before, but he was just 5 months old at the time, so he didn't experience the lake or the boat.
This time was a different story! Jack loved everything about the lake! He absolutely loves having family around so that was a given. He also loved his "room" which was actually a big walk in closet off of Randy and my room. We put a mattress on the floor with a gate around it to make him feel secure. He's outgrown his pack 'n play and there wasn't a free bed, so we didn't have many options! Anyway, he loved it.
He also enjoyed having big breakfasts, swimming in the pool, throwing rocks into the lake, riding in the golf cart, riding in the boat, and swimming in the lake (black water as he called it...ew). We tried to get him on the tube, but that made him a bit nervous. Maybe next time!
As far as the adults go, we enjoyed lounging around mostly. We celebrated Randy's birthday (30!) one night, played games, and watched several movies. It's always nice to get away and relax for a weekend. Can't wait to go back!

I have eaten here several times. The last time I went for lunch, it was bad. I hardly ever eat hamburgers but craved one so I got the junior. As I was eating halfway thru the burger, I looked at it and noticed it was PINK. I took it back to the counter and asked for the manager. A young guy, maybe 19 asked if I had a problem and I told him about the burger. He said he would take it back and get me another one. I said no - as by this point I was a little nauseated at eating pink hamburger. He said "well if money is the issue..." which I promptly said it was not. I wanted to know what the protocol was at Wendys for burgers found undercooked. he looked baffled. I asked for another manager and a woman came to the counter. She said they had cleaned the grill and perhaps the temp was not hot enough after cleaning and apologized. I got my 1.00 back but left concerned. People get very sick from eating under cooked hamburger and they did not seem very concerned. I will not go back.
If you own or manage Wendy's, register now for free tools to enhance your listing, attract new reviews, and respond to reviewers.

This is because I am still trying to wrap my head around it. Did I like this book? I liked parts of it. It held my attention. My friend, Stacy of Food Lust People Love, described it perfectly when she said she felt like she was viewing a train wreck and couldn't pull her eyes away. It is the story of a young boy who suffers a great tragedy that affects him the rest of his life.
Until finally, he comes to this conclusion....but he was never bad. He made mistakes, plenty of them as we all do. He was an addict which, of course, created many problems. He was young and scared and alone, this shaped him into the man he became. He was dishonest and stole from others using deceit and their ignorance. He killed a man to save himself and others. Does this make him bad or just human? His heart was good, I think. The things he did, he did to help others even if they were wrong choices.
I still don't know how I feel about this book. I like happy endings where everything is tied up prettily with a bow. But that is not real life and that is not how this book ends.
Have you read The Goldfinch? What were your thoughts?

I read just recently that Emma Watson -- who I think is adorable -- introduced herself as someone who's not single but rather "self-partnered". All I could think of after reading that is how much time and energy we waste on coming up with "positive" terms when really, what we should be improving is our culture, mindset, and use of current terms. I had a neighbor who was born with Down's syndrome. I remember his parents explaining to me that their kid is retarded and plays differently. As a child, I just got the feeling that he wasn't less or that I was more. He was just different.

But defensive big? No way is he that. Good personality? A guy who has sulked in many of his recent situations, who is usually out of shape, and has complained about how coaches use him to the press? I don't think so there either. He's an offensive C with legit size. But I wouldn't sign him for his D or character. In fact, I probably wouldn't particularly like him on my team.
Honestly, I didn't think he fit into either category, but I still like the idea of signing him. His defence hasn't been bad this year. He's quirky and I like that. You need a bench player with some personality.
I'm 100 percent right 9.090909090909090 percent of the time

my father is 92 and just diagnosed with colon rectal cancer with metastasis to the lungs and liver. He is diabetic and recently dx. with atrial fib. He has high blood pressure and has had a stroke in the past. He has been independent but has lost 20 lbs lately and is not eating well. We are thinking of not being very aggressive and allowing him to live out his life without treatment. He has no pain at present. Is this wise or would treatment help?

I did book this apartment (I thought) on hotels.com.
I did drive to the address that hotels gave me in the app, payed for parking and then found out that my apartment is 15 min walking from this location.
At the other place we found out that our apartment was a small maybe 15 squaremeter room... The apartment was in poor condition and the bathroom was really bad...
There was no internet at all! The host told me there was when I contacted him but there were no router or IP cable!!!
This is by far the worst experience I had from an apartment, I would strongly recommend everyone to NOT book this apartment.

I had every intention of posting another blog update after my last one however my chihuahua passed away on July 3rd he would have been 13 on July 18th. To me he wasn't my pet he was my whole world, my heart & soul, my son, and my best friend. I would talk to him and share my secrets with him.
When I first got him he was to young only 4 weeks old, I had to bottle feed him, and rocked him to sleep cause he would cry if I didn't. He was such a very sweet little guy.
I have since rescued a new dog another Chihuahua he is all white and 4 years old he is very skittish and scared of people moving around, throughout his 4 years of life He has never known what its like to be and feel loved, he came from a bad place and had about 20 other brothers and sisters, everyone who adopted his brothers and sisters have said it's taken them 8 to 9 months of hard work, just to get them use to being held and loved. His name is Zeus and I will post pictures of him soon.
And just so you all know I will be getting rid of my strange and unusual blog and write about something I find interesting its hard to write a blog if your heart isn't in it.

The way Dexter Morant tells it, the biggest reason he decided to go ahead and commit to Georgia is he didn't want to get left behind.
Morant shocked a few in the recruiting world earlier this week when he announced his decision to play for the Bulldogs. But according to the Manning High standout, timing had everything to do with his decision.
"Coming into the week, they were my No. 1, and coach (Jon) Fabris was on vacation. I was in Florida as well, but when I came back, I saw that three defensive ends were already committed, and I wanted to be the next one," Morant said. "When I saw that another defensive end was coming this weekend, I found out that he would likely be committing as well. That's when I called Coach Fabris."
Morant laughed that both Fabris and head coach Mark Richt could not believe their ears. Morant's mother was excited as well.
"When I committed the UGA coaches were shocked, Coach Fabris was so excited, and Coach Richt told my mom how happy he was to have me. He talked to my mom for a long time," Morant said. "My mom has been wanting me to commit to Georgia for awhile now. She was even calling me when I was in Florida to ask if I had done it yet. She is a big fan of Georgia, and we feel it is close enough to home for here, but far enough away to give me a chance to be my own man."
Morant said he chose the Bulldogs over Alabama and Florida, but in the end Georgia was the school where he felt more comfortable.
"The last time John Fulton and I went down there, they (Florida) didn't seem that much concerned with us. We have not heard much from them, so that is what pushed them down for me," he said. "On Alabama, they really wanted me, but they wanted me as an outside linebacker. Why go there and take a year to learn a new position, when I have a team that really wants me at defensive end?"
As for Fulton, while Morant would like his teammate to join him in Athens, he's skeptical that he will.
Instead, Morant believes the 6-foot-1, 180-pounder will play for an SEC West rivals.
"I do not think John is coming with me. I talked to him, and he was happy for me. With John, I do not really know what to say about John," Morant said. "I know Alabama is his No. 1, but Georgia is his second. There is no telling with him, he is leaning towards them (Alabama), but we always did talk about going to the same school, I know we would be great on a college team together."
Morant will get another look at his future school on Saturday when he travels to Athens for Georgia's Dawg Nite festivities.
He won't be alone.
Morant's mom, stepdad and aunt will join him on the trip where they will meet Georgia's coaches for the first time.
"Working with Coach Fab at the camp, I got to see his personality and how he coaches. I talked to some of the other players for their honest opinion, and they were talking about how he would stay late into the morning watching film and finding ways to improve each player," Morant said. "I realized that was true and I could see that he was concerned about me in camp; he would both compliment and push and he would get right in my face. I mean he got so close you could almost kiss him, and he knows you have his attention because you have no choice when he gets that close, and I just really like his approach."
...More... To continue reading this article you must be a member. Sign Up Now for a FREE Trial

The UK's favourite place to buy art
Sir Gerald Kelly was born in 1879 and made his name as one of the greatest and most-admired British artists of the twentieth century.
He was educated at Eton and at Trinity Hall College, Cambridge, although he later also studied in Paris. In 1908 he was made an Associate of the Royal Hibernian Academy and in 1922 an Associate of The Royal Academy, of which he became Keeper in 1943 and President in 1949.
He was also a Member of the Royal Fine Arts Commission and was the Honorary Surveyor of the Dulwich Picture Gallery. He was one of the most prominent painters in the country, and of his many commissions two of the most important were state portraits of King George VI and Queen Elizabeth the Queen Mother, which were executed for the Royal Family.
A major retrospective was held at the Royal Academy in 1957.

8th National Marketing Conclave: Consumer in Digital AgeOctober 14, 2017
5 REASONS WHY I LOVE KSOMDecember 8, 2017
One day he snapped, there was no particular reason.
He lived an ordinary life within his ordinary societal boundaries.
But something, something happened to him that season.
He decided to become his own salvation.
First off, he decided to leave his home; all his family and friends
He would leave his business, leave the city; leave behind all that drove him mad
The people and the places he thought he would see till it all ends
He was suddenly free, free of their guilty presence
He had money, not a lot but enough to see him through
Till he decided what next he was going to do.
In his youth he had been interested in trekking and climbing Mount Everest
Going to Nepal now, seemed to be the plan that would suit him best.
He was twenty six, when his father married him off
And twenty nine by the time he already had kids.
His wife was a good religious woman but he had never had time for her,
Whatever love there was, had disappeared in the household and business spur.
He had done well in life, his company had done well and so had his kids.
But when he died, which he would someday, what would be his greatest deeds.
For what would the world remember him?
Or worse, what would he remember the world by?
A lifetime of fulfillment of duties and aspirations
Living the ‘right’ life as proclaimed by social conventions.
He had an awakening; he would not take it anymore
And at the age of fifty, he would do what no one he knew had done before.
He would leave his family and go to Nepal.
He would climb the highest peak in the world.
He would gaze at the infinity of snow before him as be braced the chilly air.
He would do what others in his social circle would never dare.
He would make friends with the Sherpas, have snow fights with the local children.
He would save others who were not as surefooted as he, on the slippery icy snow.
He would plant the flag of his great motherland on the highest pinnacle with all his might.
And there would be shades of Orange and Green, reflecting on the glacial white.
He kept his word and left his home.
Amid a lot of crying from his family to reconsider his decision.
That very day he left for Nepal on his Everest Mission.
He was the happiest he had ever been, he felt liberated beyond reason.
A few months later, his body was flown down from the mountains.
He had not been able to survive the cold and had died of hypothermia.
The Sherpa who was with him at his last moments of eternal sleep
Had helped him plant his country’s Tricolor on the nearest peak
He described the man as crazy, but then most who came on this expedition were
He also described him as insanely happy, even when he was dying
He kept telling the Sherpa, “Now at least, I have something to remember my life by”
This is death, but oh, what a magically beautiful way this is to die.”
His memories are preserved by the Snow; his experiences are carved in ice.
He lived the ordinary life and then took a leap of faith and died
He said, “Death comes to all, the difference is what we do in the interim.
Before it’s too late, climb that Everest to the Top; climb it to start living your dream”
–By Prof. Gargi Banerjee, Asst. Professor, HR Area

| || |
As ADRA was assessing the coastal barangays last November 20, we met a group of Adventists in the municipality of Concepcion, whose homes were totally washed away and were living in evacuation centers.
One was a former AUP Theology student who wasnt able to finish his studies because his sponsor got sick. He asks for help and thanks all his teachers and friends of his while he studied there.
He says that even he does not meet you here, he hopes to meet you all in heaven.

This was a cute and funny read that had languished forgotten in my overgrown TBR pile. Max is a hyperactive, talented, controlling, creative type who falls hard and quick for Joe. Joe is a businessman who has a calming influence on Max but equal to him in intelligence to keep Max interested. Joe also doesn't get upset with Max's sometimes rude attitude and balances him. Max couldn't push away his attraction to Joe and found himself doing things he definitely wouldn't normally do. The love scenes were the right amount of steam. Joe was meltworthy.
The writing was solid and made me feel I was right there in the room with Max and his team and I could completely visualize how they were working. I enjoyed the banter between Max and his staff and how they knew what was gruff and what was seriousness. Nice supporting set of characters. LOL in places.
I wished the situation with Abby hadn't turned out like it did - so wanted Max to find an assistant who perfectly handled him. Overall, a nice, easy read.

Lady Anette feels disappointed and got previously offended by her slave. She doesn’t want to talk to him or telling him her problems, she only wants to punish his body and his soul. She ties him up by his arms naked closes the room’s door and slowly walks up to him in her sexy lace stockings and top with the whip in her hand. She starts to stroke himwith that and continues it for a qood ten minutes at least.
Date: March 15, 2021

This was our first cruise. My husband went through a local travel agent and signed us up for flight and cruise on the Ecstasy. Our flight left around 6:30 AM and took us into the Houston Bush airport. We found the Carnival rep and got ready for our bus trip to Galveston. We were surprised that we got a bus earlier than expected so when we reached the port it was no time at all to get checked in through security. I had also filled out before we left the quick pass to help in boarding. Our luggage was taken to our room and all we had to keep track of was our carry on.
Our room was fantastic. The bed and bedding was the best we had ever slept on. We both wanted to bring it all home with us. We had an ocean view cabin that I just loved looking out of. Our steward was so helpful and left us the most adorable towel animals. Any problem or question we had he took care of or told us who could help.
The main areas of the Ecstasy were great. I just loved the different color schemes and some of the art deco design. It was fun finding my way around. My husband loved the pool area (that was one of the few smoking areas) and met quite a few people there early in the morning and late at night. Service was abundant no matter where you were on the ship. The meals were great and the food varied greatly. We usually went to the buffet for Breakfast and Lunch but did do the assigned seating dining at night. Our table mates were very friendly and helpful since they had been through this before. They gave us plenty of tips.
We did 2 different shore excursions. The first one was in Cozumel where we went to swim with the dolphins. This was the most amazing thing we have ever done. Yes it was a little pricey but in my opinion well worth it. Those animals are totally incredible. The other was in Progresso where we went to play 18 holes of golf. It was extremely hot and humid that day and we only made it through 9 holes. It was a beautiful course and for those who truly love golf I would highly recommend it.
The last day came way too soon but we knew it had to end. We had a choice to either disembark with our luggage or without. Since we only had a couple of suitcases we chose the former. It went great. We were in the first group to disembark. There was some waiting in line maybe 20 minutes but other than that getting through customs was a breeze.

Deucalian was born from the forbidden love between a vagabond and a lady. Though it had been against her own will, this woman had already made her vows with another noble man. This made the love that she governed together with the vagabond forbidden. Eventually their love resulted in the woman becoming pregnant. The two of them were sure, that the vagabond was the father, since the lady had managed to keep her distance to her husband in the bed, by explaining that she wasn’t ready, but her pregnancy meant that she had to fool her husband, and so she laid with him for the first time. She later lied to her husband and said that she was pregnant with his child. The noble man obviously believed his wife, and then the gamble started. For their plan had one fatal flaw, a fear that would inevitably become truth. Both the lady and the noble man bore a natural blonde hair color, whilst the vagabond carried a black one. If the child were to be born with black hair, the noble man was sure to know of her betrayal.
Then came the day of birth, and the lady’s lie was revealed. Thus she was soon sentenced to imprisonment, and that same penalty had been sent for the vagabond as well. Though the lady didn’t have the means to avoid this punishment, the vagabond and their son did. While some of the maids in the room, where Duke had been born, ran to deliver the message of the lady’s adultery to the husband, a single maid had taken pity with the lady and her son and helped her smuggle the newborn out to the arms of the real father. The vagabond escaped the punishment together with his son, and lived incognito in the lower rankings of society, and since the maid, being the only person to know of the vagabond’s face, was able to keep quiet, the vagabond and his son were never found by the noble man.
The vagabond was never able to meet with his loved one again, and because of that, he swore to be a father to the best of his abilities. He wanted his son to always smile and always be happy, as that was how the father could show his love for his beloved, now that they were a part, since their son was now a memoir of their love.
As one would expect, the vagabond and his son developed a rather close bond throughout the years. The vagabond would always try his best to make his son smile, he hated it when he was sad and angry. It made him feel like he was failing the lady, who he started to miss more and more. It wasn’t like a feeling of loss, that one would experience with death, this was different for the vagabond. He knew she was alive, he would just never be able to meet her again, and on top of that, he would never be able to know what kind of condition she was in and that ate him up from inside. Thus he distracted himself by caring for his son and doing his very best to make him smile, but as the son grew up and became more and more rebellious, as sons usually do, the father became less and less able to make his son smile whenever he was sad or angry. This slowly built into an inferiority complex for the father, and he needed some kind of outlet. His inferiority complex joined a growing insanity, which he had cultivated with the absence of his love, and it created an unhealthy outlet of murder.
A string of serial killings started occurring around Deucalian. Bodies of dead boys around his own age started appearing in the alleyways of the city he lived in. The killer always killed them the same way. Their cheeks had been cut up into a terrifying and everlasting smile and they had died choking in their own blood.
One night the father and Deucalian had gotten into a heated argument about something insignificant, and midway the father started showing a crazed expression and suddenly stormed out of the house. Deucalian, who felt he hadn’t said enough to his father, stormed after him, but when they reached an alleyway, the father turned around. He had an ominous smile on his face and tears rolling down the side of his cheeks when he pulled out a knife and kept repeating the same question: “Why won’t you just smile for me?!” as he held down his own son and killed him like the other murdered boys.
Duke mulls about the Mirror World, keeping busy with missions and work. Trying to distract himself from unnecessary thoughts.
Nyx offered for him to stay at her mansion, but he refused bluntly. Too much time with her would be bad for his health he thought. Though she still visits him frequently anyways.
He now lives rather secluded in a medium-sized stone house located in a rather thick forest at the outskirts of Sherman. There he uses a lot of time on building his house from the ground up, starting tons of different small projects (pasttimes between missions) to eventually make this piece of little land his own piece of paradise.
Though Nyx feigns ignorance, she's noticed Duke starting to show dangerous tendencies towards violence when he's exacting it on missions. He's showing signs of enjoyment and satisfaction towards death. She believes Duke is aware of these tendencies, and that these are the reason behind his wanting of distractions. She's unsure of how to handle the situation, and stays neutral of it at this point.
Duke acquired his second shard shortly after defeating a haunted painting together with Mice. This prompted a sensation of bright feelings that filled up within him together with fond memories of his childhood and the friends he shared it with. It felt like a much needed reward for his help in the exorcism.
The pleasant and nostalgic feelings he had gotten from his second shard were soon afterwards tainted with a dark shadow looming above as he acquired his third shard. Because this shard made him remember how he had lost some of his best friends one by one to an unknown serial killer that ravaged the streets at night.
This caused Duke to mull around alone during the party where he was supposed to celebrate with a dark expression on his face. Nyx noticed the sadness in him and confronted him about it when they were alone. He first declined to tell, but after some stubborness he finally let her in as a confidant. Showing that their relationship was growing closer, almost like family.
This turn in events sadly pushed Duke to delve further into his busy days, to isolate himself from more socializing or idle time, to distract himself from unnecessary thoughts.

Jade Logue was born to Donal Logue's who is an American actor, writer, and producer with Canadian citizenship, and her mother Kasey Smith.
Logue was born as a boy and was known as Arlo Logue. She made headlines when she decided to take a bold decision and change her gender.
To find more about Jade and her life keep scrolling!
Jade Logue originally known as Arlo Logue was born on 25 March 2015 in New York to Donal Logue and Kasey Smith. She also has an elder brother whose name is Finn Logue.
She had a great childhood she is a very protected and loved child, and is very close to her parents and her sibling. So, when her parents decided to divorce it affected her very badly.
It is not exactly known when she discovered that she was a girl trapped in a boy's body, but when she did she with all her strength and courage announced it in 2016, when she was just fifteen. Being a celebrity kid it even made headlines.
She had experienced bully and discrimination through her peers even in her school. She knew that if she was going to be transgender she will face all the backlash and negativity from people. But still, she announced it and the good thing was even if she faced bullying there were also people who were very positive and supportive of her decision.
LGBT community people as well as her parents and sibling helped her a lot by supporting her decision. So after making the decision to transition into the girl she started to grow her hair and dress up like a girl, she even started to go to hormones therapy so that it will make her and her voice more feminine. Now she looks very much like a girl and you will only know that she was once a boy if you visit her father's Instagram where he posts her cute childhood pictures.
In 2017, Jade Logue was missing for almost 2 weeks without informing her parents. Her parents were so worried about her and reported her missing because she went to her friend's house and disappeared without a trace. Her father Donal requested people to find her daughter by posting Tweets on his Twitter.
Donal is a strong personality with connection, so instantly Jade's case was handled by the FBI and the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children. Even his colleagues from the entertainment industry help him a lot in finding jade.
After 2 weeks she was found 400 miles away from her home and was taken back to her parents. Still, it is not clear if she was really missing or was a runaway, but after the return of his child Donal was very happy and he thanked all of his friends family, and people on social media for helping him to find her precious daughter.
Currently, Jade is living her life out of media exposure. Let us all wish her a great life ahead and respect her for her bold decision!
For more info on your fan celebs visit Glamourbreak.

Our neighbor we didn't really know died. I've talked to his dad and his mom's caretaker before when they were trying to check on him over the years, but never him. He was pretty reclusive.
Apparently he was in a pretty bad state of decomp. Cops put on booties and face masks. Had two photographers.
The truck is the coroners. The white is a cop car. There were two other nondescript cop cars on the street, plus a regular cruiser and a K9 truck.
We played outside while watching what was going on across the street.
We tried out my snowboard on our hill in the back. It worked perfect for a beginner hill. DQ is enjoying it now.
Gorgeous blue skies today.

This was our fourth cruise with P&O and we had a great time.
Some ports were great and we were very welcomed by local helpers.
We were a bit disappointed when we went on Moreton Island for the Feeding the Dolphins. P&O did a great organisation but after us we saw another 2 big groups to feed only 4 to 5 dolphins. It was too crowded and I hope P&O will also look into this. We found the local organization was not mature enough to look after the animals as they are wild
We were not so fortunate as we experienced bedbugs after 4-5 days. Which we understand this is a hard thing to notice. They did acknowledge the issue and support us where they could with cleaning our clothes and belongings, gave us another room(s) (we were with 4) and a dinner. I really hope they were able to treat the bedbugs and nobody else got it. We know this happens nowadays as lots of different people are traveling around the world and without knowing to bring those bugs.
As it happened the last day of our trip we were unable (sick) to thank the staff of the Jewel for helping us out.
I hope the room(s) have been bug free after our stay and the next journey was a great smooth sail.
Unfortunately we did not arrive in Cairns but at Yorkey Knob. There was a busservice to go to Cairn and had to pay for it not too much. The bus was very comfortable.
Cairns has a great boulevard to walk and play for all ages. We were amazed how this was set up. There is even a very nice public pool with great area to BBQ, which we did. Cooked sausages for afternoon lunch.
The weather was not so great so we did not stay too long.
The tour got cancelled due to the late arrival. We were very sad as we loved to see this great beach.
Gladstone was a big boring as we are no shoppers.
This was not a port but a scenic tour along a small Island and it was well done to talk to the people on the island.
This was a very lovely port with nice shops and restaurants. The atmosphere was really great and the people (volunteers) were really helpful.
We went on a tour to the Pontoon which was great too. It was of course very busy on the boat and the pontoon but it offered more than we expected.
Here we saw all the fishes we had seen on the cruise and more.
We went independently to the Aquarium and back.

Through my employment coaching and delving into Brian’s behaviour, I was able to identify that it was this part of Brian’s life that was severely un-balanced and contributed to his feelings of exhaustion, which in turn added to his daily feelings of guilt and neglect with his family at home.
Through exploring various possibilities that Brian hadn’t before considered, we began to move forward with how he could make his life more balanced and positive.
We looked at Brian’s key skills, level of experience and the current job market.
Due to working for the same company for over 10 years, Brian had never even considered the possibility of leaving, even though he was so unhappy with his current role – a role that now seemed to have changed numerous times in such a short space.
By using NLP visualisation coaching techniques with Brian, he started to believe that he could leave the company and find something more suitable that would reflect his current skills and what he was now looking for in a new company… he started to get hopeful.
I updated Brian’s CV to reflect his profile, key skills and other attributes and coached him with various interview techniques (mostly STAR) which is the preferred method used by many HR professionals and company managers/directors today. We started with some role play exercises that Brian later said were invaluable and after this, we began to contact a few trusted recruitment companies that I recommend via my own panel, who were helpful and understood Brian’s situation.
After applying for a few roles and attending interviews, Brian became very confident due to his experience and own abilities and quite quickly, secured a role that was a high match of his current skills and reflected what he was looking for.
At the end of our sessions, Brian is much happier as a person.
He was not aware of how much his work and the company he was working for had affected him and his overall confidence. He learned a lot about himself, as until this period of introspection, he had no idea how much he had to offer as a person in his own right.
Brian now earns more salary, but more importantly, his hours are flexible so he can spend quality time with his wife and children, which has proved to be invaluable to Brian’s overall health and lifestyle.

In the beginning of the summer, my wife and I decided that we will get a swimming pool for Cheepsus. This item was not on our new puppy list, but we thought it would be a great idea as he really enjoyed swimming in a pond. Moreover, it seemed that this was where he spent his whole time while at a daycare.
So we bought him a small swimming pool from local Walmart, and one hot summer day decided to try it. I think the photo below says it all – Cheepsus did not like the pool at all. He was afraid to step into the pool, but when he eventually did – he was just standing and doing nothing.
Maybe this is because the water in the pool was fresh without any dirt as it usually is at the daycare.
Does your dog enjoy playing in such pools? How do you keep your dog cool during hot summer days?

Last night T. and I had the chance to go out to dinner with a group of friends. It was a reunion of the Seminary Council from our high school. Twenty years ago we were all "called" and became part of the council for our L.D.S. seminary. For those of you not familiar with L.D.S. seminary kids from grade nine on (in Utah) have the option of going to a religion class off school grounds for one class during the day. The school system calls it released time lol, I guess because we are released from their grasp. The seminary building is within walking distance of the school so it's not like we would have to drive to get there or anything. In other states they have early morning seminary but here in Utah with such a concentration of Mormons we can have this time during the school day if we so choose. So I was on a council my senior year in high school with 10 other kids. Five girls and five boys. I guess we were kind of like the Student Council for the seminary but we weren't elected. It was a church calling.
To be honest I was blown away when my Stake President called me in to issue the calling. I got a call telling me to bring my parents to a meeting with him. Let me tell you I was a little nervous. There were some extenuating circumstances that were good cause for those nerves. Nothing that I had done wrong but some other stuff that I can't get into. So when the Stake President told me that's why I was there in his office with my parents I was SO relieved and flabbergasted. I had never even thought about being on that council.
Anyway we had a great time putting together activities and devotionals for the student body that year. We built a lighthouse out of Popsicle sticks that kids would earn for reading in the New Testament (which was the course of study that year). They would write their names on the sticks and we would add them to the lighthouse. It even had a flashing light in it at the end of the year. My job on the council was Historian and it was my job to take pictures and put together a scrap book. Which they keep at the seminary still. I went and picked it up and brought it to the dinner last night. It was a riot to go through those pictures.
Seeing everyone was wonderful. They are truly good people. It was so fun to sit and talk and reminisce. They brought old year books and some old pictures from high school. We went around the table and had everyone report on what they were doing now. And we even had reports from those who weren't able to attend.
I'll admit I was nervous going in. I'd only really kept in regular contact with one of the girls and I'd seen a couple of other members off an on through the years, just in passing. But it was a bit nerve wracking. All those self doubts and thoughts of "I don't look like I used to" come creeping in. But those nerves were gone within minutes of being there. Everyone put everyone else at ease and it was just a good good night. With really good people.

Footloose, fancy-free, and extremely polite:
Police were called to the store around 12:30 p.m. and found the man sitting on the tailgate of his truck with a gunshot wound to his right foot. The man, L.C. Williams, said the holster recently broke and he was carrying his concealed weapon in his waistband.
As he was approaching his truck, the gun fell out of his waistband, hit his foot and discharged, according to Orlando police.
(These folks parody themselves.)

I played with Bella and the Josefina doll.
She did homework with me.
And she road in the car with me.
I let Shaylor hold her.
I took her outside.
My Mom said just take the doll outside.
I watched two movies with her.
I sleeped with her and I read a book to her.
She played with my cousin Megan.
I took very good care of her!

We got the girls big girl bikes for their birthday. We gave them to them on the night of their birthday after taking them to Chapala for dinner. They didn't really know what to think. It was raining outside but they tried to ride them a little in the garage. We will be practicing pedaling as soon as the weather is nicer. They will have so much fun camping this year! Lexxy didn't want her picture taking on the morning of her birthday. I got this one, by sneaking around the corner :) Sammy finally posed for me.... There was so much to do at Jabbers, the kids would go from one area to the next.
Sammy, little miss bashful... This year we had the girls' party at Jabbers. It's a new play center in Nampa. The girls played for hours. The room where we had the party was very small, but festive and fun! The girls were bashful, especially when we sang to them. I think it was a fun day for everyone and it was so great to see everyone!

My time over the next few months at the radio station flew by. I was working non-stop and constantly learning. I felt blessed that the General Manager took me under his wing. I am not sure why he took an interest in me, but was grateful he had. Once a week, lunches were spent in the local pub where he spoke freely about his life prior to working at the radio station. I just sat and listened; I did not have the life or career experience behind me that would add to any of our conversations. In addition, our little ‘hide and seek’ game behind the owners back was finally over. I was now official with business cards; I was the Promotion Coordinator. Along with my certified title, came many responsibilities and new contacts within the field of entertainment. My work crossed over into 10 to 12 hour days, with a few hours thrown in on weekends, but yet, I never felt tired.
Then came the phone call from Mom. Dad was sick to his stomach regularly and in excruciating pain. A doctor’s appointment had been made with his GP. A lump had been located in the lower section of his back. He would be sent for an ultra sound immediately. Mom and Dad were to receive the results in the next day or two.
My heart sank. It couldn’t be anything serious, I thought. Dad was only 61 years old and had never been sick a day in his life. No, everything would be fine; I struggled to convince myself.
The following days, I went into work as if nothing happened. I hid all doubt, fear, and sadness deep in the inner corners of my mind and heart.
Then the news from Mom,
‘Your Dad has a tumour on one of his kidney’s’; she spoke quietly over the phone.
‘He has to have surgery immediately as the doctor’s think it’s cancer. They will remove his entire kidney, which will hopefully remove all the cancer.’
I was shocked, stunned, and couldn’t speak as I quietly hung up the phone.
Cancer? Cancer? Cancer? What was it with his side of the family? His Dad died from Hodgkin’s disease in his early 80’s, his Mom from colon Cancer in her 80’s. Dad was only 61, this couldn’t be happening. He would be fine, the kidney would be removed with all the cancer, yes, I was sure of it.
I had vacation time coming up, so I immediately booked time off from work during and following the surgery. I never spoke to anyone about Dad’s diagnosis, trusting that he would pull through, cancer-free.

She let the lacy undergarment fall from her fingers. Pulling her long dark locks over her shoulders, she obscured them slightly. Then, with a swaying step that made me swallow again, she leaned over him, pressing her lips to his. His hand instinctively came around to touch her back, fingers skating upward. The kisses were light pecks, taunting as much as anything else tonight had been. She began unbuttoning his shirt as the kisses became longer, as her tongue traced my lips.
His mouth hung open, but his tongue seemed sluggish, unable to catch hers as it darted. He loved her lips on his, the taste of her mouth, clean and minty. She pushed his shirt back from his shoulders, down his arms. He sensed she was about to leave and tried to keep her there, to stop her dancing tongue. He gripped her back, pulling her closer.
Immediately she broke the kiss and turned away, moving back toward the wall. "You were such a good boy. Another reward will come soon."

2 Answers | Add Yours
I think that the experiment was good for Charlie for a few different reasons. First of all Charlie was able to experience life as a normal individual. As he became smarter he was able to talk intelligently to others. He was also able to experience attraction to another individual who was Miss Kinnian. He knew what it was like to have a below average intelligence level and he also discovered what it was like to be a genius.
There are also some negative aspects to this question as well. Charlie regressed. This was very difficult to experience. He went from being way below average to way above average. He had to deal with this. This must have been very frustrating and heart breaking.
In an aspect, Charlie was a perfect example of 'ignorance is bliss'. While the operation made him realize the world as he knew it was not as good or innocent as he had felt before, it made him more angry and unhappy. Though made fun of and treated derogatorily, Charlie was, in a sense, happy. He was pretty much alone, but had people he cared for, thinking of them as his friends. He saw the world without understanding its deeper meaning and the deeper he dwelt into that meaning, the more he sank into despair, alone. So the answer is: would you rather be super intelligent but unhappy and alone. or mentally retarded but happy. I would say what Charlie didn't know didn't affect him, emotionally. If he'd been normal (not above it) it would have definitely helped him. Because while Charlie was under average and below it, he faced abandonment and regret, isolation. All he ever wanted to be was 'normal' but all he got was anything more or less. I would say the experiment was not good for Charlie because while he became ashamed of what he was after he realized it, he was happy and bliss without knowledge. There are always some things in life that we wished never to have known. I think perhaps they should have brought down the operation to only make Charllie of normal intelligence, not more than it.
We’ve answered 319,180 questions. We can answer yours, too.Ask a question

Today I had someone at work ask me the dreaded question of how many children I had. When she asked it I just let out this big exasperated sigh. It's such a loaded question and I hate having to answer it sometimes and on this day I just didn't want to have to answer it. But I did and I left her out.
WHAT!? I left her out!? How could I do that!?
I admit I wasn't really thinking and after I left her out I immediately regretted it and just felt guilty. But is it so bad not wanting to get into it all? I know it's ok and she isn't upset about it but this was the first time I have ever left her out. Almost everyone in my department knows what happened because they were there through it all so I guess I just didn't feel like explaining it to someone who prolly wasn't gonna be around much longer.
Why must this question always leave me at a loss for words? I know what my heart wants to say but sometimes it can be so hard to speak the words.
Almost 2 years ago my daughter was born and almost a week later my milk came in. It was right before her visitations and service. I pumped and stored my milk for 3 weeks hoping to give it to someone who needed it and would use it. I ended up giving it to my cousin who had her baby around 2 months later. I was happy that she would be able to use it for her baby.
I had assumed all this time that she had given it to her baby. I found out today that after I gave it to her she threw the breast milk away. She may have used a little bit of it but SHE THREW IT AWAY!!! I am so upset over this. This really hurts me that she did this. If she didn't want the milk all she had to do was tell me and I would've donated it to a milk bank or gave it to someone else who wanted it. This was the milk my body made that was supposed to nourish my daughter but instead it was thrown in the trash. It makes me sick.
It feels like she has disrespected me and even worse, my daughter. I don't plan on bringing this up to her because I don't want to end up hurting her feelings despite that she has hurt mine. And normally I wouldn't post things like this that she could very well end up reading but I figure if she finds out I know this way I don't really care. I just needed to vent about it and this is my space to do so.
On a happier note, I remembered I never shared the lovely heart pin that Kristin sent me for Carleigh. It's such a lovely pin and it makes me happy that she thought of us. Thanks Kristin! The heart kinda reminds me of what my heart is like now-a joyful and mournful heart in one.
6 days ago

star, you wouldn't like soup here. If it's soup it has to have vegetables. Stew is stew, soup must have veggies.
I don't mind vegetables in soup. I just don't like only vegetable soup. I want some meat in it, and I would prefer it not to be beef. Beef is my least favorite meat.

Jackie is in a mood to relax and rest her sweaty tired feet after another long working day but it seems like she wants to do it with her foot slave at her feet! She thinks there is just nothing like a human face to rest her feet! They are both in a great position to watch a movie but it seems like Jackie is having a better view on the TV! She makes him take her boots off and completely covers his face with her sweaty white socks! They were super hot and smelly but she just makes fun at him and rubs them all over his face after she has been wearing them for a full week! She also makes him stick his tongue out to lick the dirty bottom of her socks just for her own satisfaction! Jackie likes to have attention on her feet so she makes him take her socks off and completely covers his face with them with her naked feet! She makes him take some deep breaths in her socks and pushes both of her dirty socks into his mouth with her toes before she gives him the right to take some deep breaths in her feet! They are actually super smelly but she just dont care and rub them all over his face while watching her favorite TV show! She also makes him stick his tongue out to lick the sweaty bottom of her soles and lick all the dirt in between each of her toes! What a good devoted loser slave!
Keywords: Foot Domination, Foot Domination Clips, Dreamgirls in Socks

Wow it has been a busy month.
Work has been kicking my butt hard. Too much to do and too little time to get it done.
The oldest two are back from sailing camp. They had a blast. My oldest daughter really took to it and is ready to go back. While they were gone we took the youngest one to the Mouse's World in Florida. This was her first time to meet the mouse and I spent 6 days chasing princesses and other characters around parks and the world. She had a blast and Dad is recovering.
On Fathers day I drug up on stage to take part in the Diver demonstration in Epcot living seas exhibit. I was the dive buddy. The bad thing was that I had forgotten my hand signals for up and down. I was given the opportunity to model a reusable tote bag. I think I have a real career in modeling to fall back on. The wife not so much. She was a little embarrassed. The little one was worried that dad was going in the lockout chamber.
All in all we had a great trip.
We were able to see friends we haven't seen in over 13 years.
Now it's back to work and trying to catch up on lost sleep.

On another note, last night I went out to see Denali. I haven't been out since Monday. She's lame and so I just gave her a few days off. I missed her and went out yesterday. She actually came running up to the gate when she heard my voice. She hasn't done that since before I went to Denmark. I was so excited! I gave her about a million hugs and scratches.
I put her into the arena to walk around on some dry ground after I groomed her. There was a small bush type tree limb (if that makes sense) in the arena because one of the 4-H girls was working on training her horse for trail riding (I think, don't quote me.) Denali went over to it and started swaying back and forth. I thought she was going to have a seizure or something. She looked so funny! The trainer said it looked like she was going to roll. Sure enough, Denali was trying to figure out how to scratch her belly on the branch. She started pawing at it and pulling it around. I went in and turned it over one the mounting block. I think Denali scratched her belly for five minutes straight. She still has a fine winter coat on, I'm sure her belly is itchy! She's so funny.
Hopefully she'll feel 100% soon. She started running around in the arena. I'm just really worried now about her front right leg. I wrote a letter today to her old trainer, poor guy he's going to regret ever meeting me. :) He's a nice guy so I'm hoping he can give me some of her previous medical history. She had a weird pad on her foot when I bought her and white scars around her knee. I'm just wondering what they're from and if she ever cracked something. The vet in August thought that the scar was from a Screw and Wire surgery since she was born in Kentucky, and this, I guess, is a common surgery. The vet that just did her teeth thinks it's from a bandage wrap. Who knows! I couldn't imagine owning more than one horse. She's enough stress!

He made his first movie in 1983, and he's been in 57 since then. No wonder he died.
J.T. Walsh was never played in a game.
Pick some famous people you think are going to die soon. Whoever gets the most right wins.
© 2021 Stiffs.com
She may or may not have slept with JFK when he was President, but she's sure as hell sleeping with him now.
(d) September 24th, 1999

We had to be moved room , which was quite a pain after settling into our room.
The cold water tap was not working over the bath, so I had to cool the children's bath water by using the bin bucket and taking water from the basin, as they were already naked, this seemed the easier option. however the toilet flusher was also broken which was quite unacceptable, so we were moved into another family room.
The taps, basin, toilet and bath, need a thorough clean and some lime-scale remover would improve things dramatically.
The staff member that greeted us was extremely polite and courteous.
- Free Wifi
- Free Parking

Two Circuit Court judges from Clark County Indiana were shot Wednesday morning, May 1 in a White Castle parking lot. The judges were in Indianapolis to participate in a judicial conference. Indianapolis police indicated that there was no evidence that they were targeted because they were judges.
Judge Drew Adams was listed in stable condition and Judge Brad Jacobs was listed in critical condition. One account of the incident indicated that the judges had been in a neighboring establishment resulting in an argument spilling into the restaurant parking lot. A later account however indicated that a car pulled up while the judges were standing in the restaurant parking lot where they were shot.
Information for this article was obtained from the USA today network.

Catherine & Tom
Catherine and Tom were a high conflict married couple who had already been separated for over a year when they instructed their lawyers. Tom was a high-earning lawyer working in the city and Catherine had stopped training as a teacher to care for their three children (one aged 13 and twins aged 11). She had recently started studying again with a view to resurrecting her career as a primary school teacher. Tom had moved into a rented three bedroomed flat and Catherine had remained living in the family home with the children. Catherine described their relationship as volatile and she felt she had been subjected to emotional abuse over a number of years and that since their separation Tom was being very difficult about money. Tom agreed that their relationship had been volatile and felt that since they had separated Catherine had been very controlling over the time the children spent with him. They both felt an element of ‘power imbalance’ but for different reasons.
Catherine and Tom were very keen to agree the arrangements for the children. They both agreed that their children were suffering due to the lack of routine and set schedule of arrangements. However, they both had very different ideas as to what was right for their children and as such they were becoming more and more rooted to those positions and they were unable to acknowledge each other’s genuine worries and concerns.
Catherine had initially been reluctant to engage in mediation with Tom as she was worried she wouldn’t be able to speak in the mediation sessions due to Tom being a dominant and overpowering character. She did not want to be in the same room as Tom and thought that he would just dismiss any of her suggestions.
Their respective lawyers, who were both committed resolution-focussed lawyers, discussed with Catherine and Tom, the options available to them. Catherine and Tom were very clear that they wanted to avoid court proceedings and recognised that this would not be in the children’s best interests. Given Catherine’s particular concerns about mediation it was agreed that Catherine, Tom and their lawyers would proceed with the Hybrid Mediation model. They were particularly attracted to the process because they would have the support of their lawyers during the sessions and as such would be able to get immediate advice as and when it was needed but could also be in separate rooms if necessary.
Catherine and Tom also wanted to resolve their financial issues which had been ongoing for a little while. It was hoped that if they could resolve their differences in respect of the children it would clear the way for constructive negotiations regarding money.
Session 1 – children
At the first session Catherine and Tom initially remained in separate rooms (with their lawyers) and the mediator moved between the two rooms. It became clear that it was easier for Catherine and Tom to voice their concerns to the mediator, through their lawyers where necessary, than if their lawyers had been negotiating by sending letters and emails to each other or if there had been court proceedings. Being in separate rooms initially also helped as they both felt safe and uninhibited. The mediator was able to listen and convey their wishes, concerns and suggestions to the other and was able to narrow the issues between them to the point that Catherine and Tom felt able to come together in one room (again with the lawyers and the mediator) to further their discussions.
During the discussions it was apparent that Catherine and Tom needed to regain trust and respect for each other as parents. It was important to Tom that the children spent as much time with him as they did with Catherine and that Catherine provided information to him about the children such as health and education issues. Catherine felt Tom’s suggestions were too inflexible and unrealistic because of Tom’s demanding job and that an equal division of time would end up with Tom letting the children down. She felt strongly that she had always looked after the children and didn’t see why that needed to change. As the session progressed, they were both able to provide reassurances and commitments to the other which ensured the children were prioritised at all times.
A schedule of the arrangements for the children was agreed taking into account Tom’s working pattern and Catherine’s need to study as well as the children’s schooling, routines and needs. They were able to agree a regular and reliable plan but which could be flexible where necessary. Tom recognised that his suggested 50/50 schedule was unrealistic and Catherine recognised that it was important that Tom played a greater role in the children’s lives and wasn’t just seen as a ‘weekend dad’. There were clear agreements about keeping each other informed of any difficulties with timings and where either might need to change the arrangements for any reason. Catherine and Tom agreed that it was important that the arrangements were reviewed regularly to check that the routine was working well and that the children were coping with it.
The mediator and lawyers were able to share their legal knowledge and suggest solutions and options that have worked for other parents in similar circumstances. The mediator skilfully and sympathetically worked with them so that they were able to prioritise the children’s needs and see things from each other’s perspectives.
Following the session Catherine and Tom were able to communicate directly with each other and went on to agree arrangements for the school holidays, Christmas/birthdays and how they would support each other and the children with regard to schooling and any health issues.
Catherine and Tom commented how empowered they felt by the process and as such felt able to arrange another mediation session to start discussing how they would deal with their financial arrangements.
Written by Lisa Burton-Durham, Specialist Family Law Solicitor, Family Law Partners.

Dec 6, 2017
Our agents wrote to us about one of their clients they are supporting who has a large amount of debt, and might even have to file for bankruptcy. She is a single mum of two children, one 3 and one 8 years old. The oldest childs bed has broken, and is falling apart, mostly because it is only suitable for a toddler. We were asked if we could consider contributing towards the cost of a new or second hand bed, so that the child could have a bed to sleep in, as obviously not sleeping properly will impact negatively on her health. We agreed to send her £100 to put towards the cost of a bed.
May 2, 2016
We were made aware of a young child that had arrived without warning to be cared for by other members of his family. They were totally unprepared and had nothing for him, no clothes, nothing at all. We arranged a sum of £300 to buy clothes and other things he desperately needed.

Hello My Dears! I’m back from my vacation and I’m happy to report that it was an amazing week. It’s so important to take time for yourself to recharge and relax. I feel like my creativity has been reignited and I’m ready to create and take on loads of new projects.
I have a lot more stories that I’m currently outlining, and I have a collaboration with another artist in the works that I think will blow all your socks off!
For this week, please enjoy these photos with my lovely new mask from Another Face Studio on Etsy (www.etsy.com/shop/AnotherFaceStudio ) and my new horror story “Wedding Day.”
With Screams and Axes,
Ingrid’s wedding was planned for Saturday, November 7th. In the early hours of Friday, November 6th, her fiancé left her a note on her dresser, under the corner of her jewelry box, apologizing for what he was about to do. He committed suicide by jumping from the River Way Bridge a few hours later.
The first time Ingrid read the note, she didn’t believe it. Then she read it again, and again, and again. Then the call came and it was all real. She went back to bed that day and stayed there, firmly dug in under the covers while her mother and aunts whirled around her in confusion, answering phone calls, crying, and trying to cancel wedding plans. Instead of Ingrid’s wedding, they held a funeral instead.
After his funeral, Ingrid didn’t know what to do. She blamed herself for everything. She gyrated between bleak and profound grief, dizzying anger, and a tingling numbness. She quit her job as vet tech, and moved out of the apartment they had shared. Before the wedding, Ingrid’s parents had given her the the family’s cabin up in the mountains. It was to be a wedding present. The papers had all been signed, and the cabin was legally hers. So against the advice of her parents and everyone that cared for her, she loaded a few suitcases into the trunk of her car and headed for the mountain retreat so that she could be alone. At a gas station midway on the trip she bought a pregnancy test. In a McDonald’s bathroom down the road, she took the test and watched it turn positive.
It took her two days’ worth of driving to get to the cabin. She had driven fast and almost recklessly. The trees on the side of the dark highway seemed to reach out for her with long jointed limbs. When she became too afraid, she had spent the night in her car at a rest stop with the doors locked and one eye open. After slowly driving the car up the winding, dirt road that cut through the forest, she parked in front of the dark cabin. It looked just like she remembered it. She hadn’t visited in five years. The cabin had always seemed so far away. She brought her suitcases in, turned on the electricity and the heat, made a bed, and quickly collapsed down onto it. She didn’t want to do anything, and she didn’t want to talk to anyone. She didn’t even want to sleep. She just wanted to lie on her bed, and breathe in the musty woodsy air in a place that she had known since childhood. This cabin had been the seat of such fond and loving memories. She regretted that she had never brought him here. She had always meant to.
Her mind went back to the pregnancy test in the fast food rest room. She knew that she should tell someone or do something about it. But she told herself that she had time, and that this issue could wait like all the other issues she was ignoring. She needed to rest now.
She fell asleep on the bed with her suitcases still packed and with all the lights on. She dreamed of him. He was dark and shadowed and he was weeping. Behind him stood an army of leafless trees, branches twisted and gnarled. But then they weren’t trees, they were arms. They were coming for him. She cried with him and reached out to hold him, but he slipped through her fingers like smoke. He was sorry. He loved her. She was sorry. She was angry. She was betrayed. She still loved him. Many long fingers took him away, dragging him back into darkness.
She woke up slowly as the sun beamed through the gauzy curtains. She stared into the light for a few minutes before she rose to change her clothes, and get a glass of water. As she unbuttoned her blouse, she gasped as she looked at herself in the antique vanity mirror that had been her great grandmothers. In her reflection she saw her stomach had grown. Where it had once been lean and flat, there was now a small mound. She knew babies didn’t grow that fast. She put a hand on the round stomach to feel it and convince herself that it was really there. That’s when she heard a faint whisper. Like the sound of children playing outside half a mile away. It was faint and high-pitched, a sound she could have convinced herself she hadn’t really heard.
“I hear you,” she announced to whatever it was. Still holding her stomach she went to the kitchen for her glass of water, too tired to be afraid or take offense. She understood something had begun to happen that was outside of her control. Like everything in life, she was just going to have to wait and bear it.
He had been in therapy since they met five years ago. He had always been honest with her about his struggles with his mental health. She stood by him through his ups and downs, through medication changes and constant adjustments. She told him every day that she loved his mind even in its imperfection, even when it seemed to be malfunctioning or misfiring. When he had proposed to her it had been during a stretch of time where he seemed to be the healthiest he’d ever been. He had seemed like he had finally found and peace and happiness within himself. Seeing him like that had made her overjoyed. She had such hope for their future. The day before he left his note had been a simple, happy day. They had taken a long walk in the park, sat on a bench and drank coffee and talked. She couldn’t even remember what they had been talking about, but it had been warm and sweet. She had trouble accepting that she lost him at a time like that. She couldn’t understand why after all he’d been through, that he had given up when things had been so good.
She sat at the kitchen table with her elbows resting on the worn wood. A full, untouched glass of cool water sat in front of her, but she had her eyes closed. Even getting herself to drink water was a struggle. She was thirsty and hungry, and she told herself that she was most likely dehydrated. But the effort needed to care for herself was too much. She wanted to be thirsty and hungry. Let me die of thirst, she thought, staring at the water glass.
“Drink,” something seemed to whine in a whisper from far, far away. She didn’t question the voice, but rather snickered at its demands. She wasn’t going to listen to anyone. Then she felt something in the mound of her stomach, a churning feeling, or rather a stirring. Something was happening. It frightened her. She drank the water quickly in big gulps, and then shuffled to the front door. She thought it might be nice to sit on the front porch and look into the forest that surrounded the cabin.
She had never wanted children. He had never spoken about them or seemed too fond of them either. She had worried what bringing a child into their relationship would do. At times, she felt that his sanity and his health was a fine balancing act, one she had become skilled at maintaining. She didn’t want a baby to come tottering in, knocking everything to ruins. Ingrid wasn’t sure what he would say to her if he were here, if he’d be happy about her pregnancy or if he would be anxious and afraid. She told herself that she should feel more about it. That she should start deciding things for it, caring for herself so as to care for it, this last little remnant of him.
The trees were tall and they seemed to go on forever. She sat outside on the porch without a sweater even though it was cold and the wind was blowing. She thought that she could smell snow on the air, and wondered if everything would be covered in white tomorrow. She sat in a rocking chair that had been a fixture in the cabin since before she was born. She wondered how many babies had been rocked to sleep in it. She wondered if she would rock her baby to sleep here.
She stared out into the trees until her eyes grew still and heavy. She couldn’t hear the wind anymore or feel the cold. Deep in the woods, she saw the darkened figure of a man. He began to walk closer, raising his arms. As he got closer, she realized that he was growing taller and taller, as though he was being stretched. And what she had seen as his two arms were actually many arms, fanned out at his sides. She put a hand to her stomach as something told her he was coming for her. Not taking her eyes off the dark figure cutting through the trees, she retreated back into the cabin and locked the door. She sat in front of the door, too afraid to move and catch sight of what might be just out the window by now.
She began to doze off in front of the door, and eventually dragged herself to an old wicker love seat and allowed herself to fully fall asleep there. She dreamed about him again. They were in the black forest with the darkness all around. But this time she was able to touch him, hold him, kiss him. They began making love, even as the darkened trees seemed to grow closer and loom nearer and nearer. Then it wasn’t him anymore. The dark man from the trees was thrusting deep inside her. She began to feel the blood pour out of her as he went harder and harder. His many arms wrapped around her tightly and began to constrict so that she could no longer breathe and couldn’t scream. She woke up coughing and gagging.
Laying on the wicker love seat, with the early traces of dawn outside the windows, she felt a rumbling from her stomach. Looking down she saw that it had doubled in size. What was once a gentle mound was now a mountain. She ran her fingers over it. She looked like she was seven months pregnant. She struggled to push herself up from the love seat. Closer than it had been before she heard a voice whine, “Eat. EAT!” It was a high, muffled sound. As the voice chanted and chanted, instructing her to eat, she realized that it wasn’t one voice, but rather a chorus of many.
She had always harbored a secret fear that she would lose him to suicide. It was something that she was constantly ready to ward off if she could. He had spoken about it with her countless times as something he struggled with. But while they had been together, it had never been something that reached critical mass. She struggled to understand why he had chosen this time, this moment to end his life. Why he had let it all go now. His note had given little insight, leaving her with no other reason than: “this is what I must do.” She wondered if maybe that he did it because he had finally found true happiness. Maybe after struggling for peace his entire life, when he finally acquired it, he knew it would be fleeting. Perhaps he wanted to die perfectly happy, instead of waiting for the eventually down swing of sadness to drag him back down. Maybe this was all Ingrid could have given him.
She found two cans of soup in the pantry that weren’t expired and began to heat them both up. The little shrieking voices began to get louder, all speaking at once, so that she couldn’t decipher what each one was saying. As the soup heated, they seemed to grow louder and shriller. When she finally ate, they were happy. She could tell. Something inside of her started to feel warm. She felt a tinge of enjoyment at being able to make them pleased, whoever they were.
Ingrid thought perhaps she had lost her mind. That perhaps this wasn’t a pregnancy. Maybe it was an incredibly fast growing type of cancer and now it had spread to her brain. Maybe she was possessed by demons or ghosts. She looked down at her large, protruding belly and realized that she was the mother of darkness, impregnated by grief. She laughed.
That’s when the pains started; sharp pangs that radiated from her stomach to all over her body. She fell to the ground and waited for another wave of cramping stings and nausea. She resigned herself to whatever was happening to her now. She couldn’t control anything, she never could. The voices were screaming inside. They shrieked in a high pitch cry, telling her they were frightened. Then the birthing began.
Contractions took her by force and she found herself pushing in spite of herself. With each push her body began to release tiny black spiders. They scurried across the floor as they found themselves free of her. Hundreds and hundreds of spiders poured out of her. She cried when she saw them, and they began to crawl all over her, little black legs tickling her skin. “Mother,” she heard a thousand voices cry. “Mother.”

Count Dracula's Tradition
AN: Thanks for your reviews! How can we not love Claire! :D Hope you like this part! It's longer and I like it! :) lol
For entertainment only! :P
Chapter 6: Costume in Disguise
Daniel and Claire got some lunch and went to the park close to their hotel for a while until they had to get ready for the party. Daniel was sitting at a table bench his chin resting on his fist as he practically stared at the small black box in front of him. That's all he did for the past hour while his mother went to MODE UK to pay a visit. He let out a breath and fingered the edges of the box. The more time passed the more Daniel became nervous. He felt like he couldn't breathe. He had to remind himself to stay strong and positive. His heart would race at the thought of seeing Betty again. He wasn't sure if he'd be able to contain himself. He closed his eyes trying to calm his nerves. He felt a blow in his ear. "I miss you" her voice came out soft next to his ear. He felt his heart race all over again.
Her arms came around his neck and she brought her face next to his. "Remember all the fun we used to have? I miss that." He felt her lips touch his cheek softly and then the 'wind' again. Daniel swallowed hard and opened his eyes and saw the opened box. His finger traced the edges of it.
"It's very beautiful"
"No Daniel, it's your mother" she said with an amused tone. Daniel sighed and looked up at his mom. "Sorry"
She came around and sat next to him. He closed the box and looked at her. She smiled. "Shall we go?"
He nodded and took a deep breath. "Now or never" he said before he got up. She got up and they made their way to the hotel to get ready.
It was now 6pm and Betty had to be leaving soon. She was tired and really didn't want to go to this stupid party. She was only going for Abbey. If she had a choice she would just stay home and eat ice cream. Betty sighed and opened her drawer picking up the crinkled paper. She felt her heart break even more. She stared at his note, the last three words plaguing her mind.
"I miss you, too, Daniel." She said quietly to herself knowing she was betraying herself by admitting that. "Betty" at the sound of Abbey's voice Betty jumped dropping the note on the floor.
Abbey looked at her curiously for a moment, but then shrugged it off. "Ready to go, luv?"
"I guess..." Betty said half-heartedly. Abbey came up to her and put an arm around "oh come now, Betty, cheer up, huh?"
Betty smiled as much as she could despite how she felt inside. She wasn't sure if this pain would ever go away. "I'll come by and pick you up and we can go together." Abbey said excitedly.
Betty smiled with a nod. They both got their things and made their way to get ready for the party.
Daniel was putting on his costume feeling his body go numb just thinking about all the fun times he had with Betty while wearing it. He looked at himself in the mirror; his black pants went just below his waist, the red brocade vest outside of the long sleeve white shirt.
He began to bring the cape around him and was about to hook the chain together when he was stopped by a pair of soft hands. His breath caught seeing the beauty before him. Her chocolate brown eyes looked into his "I can help with that" her voice came out quiet and playful. He was caught in a daze unable to look away from her as she began to hook the chain of his cape together. As soon as the chain was clipped, her hands slid down his vest smoothing out the wrinkles and folds. He felt a surge of heat through his body as her delicate hands touched his body. Her hands slowly came back up around his cape fixing the collar so it lay just right around his neck. Her eyes never left her task. He watched her hands, her face, and her eyes. He was transfixed by her. Her closeness was sending shudders through his body. Her scent...god, he missed her scent.
She slowly got close to him so her body was pressed against his just enough to send a wave of tingles through him; her lips stopped right by his ear. "I love you" her voice came out in a whisper just before she placed a kiss to his cheek and vanished before him. Daniel's phone went off snapping him back to reality.
He could still feel her warmth and smell her perfume. How was that not real? She felt so real. He'd daydreamed of Betty a lot, ever since Hilda's wedding, but the ones he had in London were so real. He'd never felt her touch or smell her sweet scent so vividly before today. Daniel ran his hand over his face letting out a frustrated breath. He stood there trying to get the feel of her hands along his body out of his mind. She wasn't real. He really hoped Betty would forgive him. He didn't know what he would do if she didn't. He would surely die if he had to live another day without her. He couldn't do it anymore.
"Daniel, sweetheart, can you help me with this?" his mother came out of the restroom holding a rather glamorous necklace. Daniel saw her reflection in the mirror and turned "Wow, mom, you look beautiful" he said admiring the beautiful mask she was wearing. The gold sparkled designs around that decorated it were so intricate and detailed; there were gold chains that hung below the rim of the mask. The mask went along with her long elegant black dress that was accented by gold beads around the neckline.
"Thank you, dear. You look rather charming yourself. I figured I should be more in disguise so Betty shouldn't notice me and suspect anything" she said walking up to him. She handed him the gold necklace and turned around. He fastened it and she turned back to face him smoothing his shirt. "That's a good idea. Thanks" he said gratefully. She smiled looking up at him. "I love you, son."
Daniel smiled "love you, too, mom." He said feeling his eyes sting. He looked down and she placed a hand to his face. "I have something for you" he looked up and saw her holding up a black mask. "Wow, that's cool" he said taking it in his hand looking at it for a minute. On one side there were silver swirls that decorated it and the other had a single shiny red swirl that went across.
"I thought you could use that" she said. He smiled and nodded "ya...thanks." he looked at the mirror and put the mask on, covering the top half of his face. He wondered if Betty was to see him would she recognize his eyes. He did look a little different. The only thing that he could tell would give him away would be his eyes, but he figured he would just see it out. He took a deep breath and looked at his mom.
"Ready to go?" she asked looking at him. He took another deep breath. "I don't know." He shrugged "let's go" he said wanting to face his biggest fear. Hoping Betty would forgive him for his stupidity.
Daniel held his hand out. Claire smiled and took his hand.
He smiled and kissed her on the cheek.
Betty took a deep breath and opened the box she hadn't looked at it in months since she moved to London. She hated herself for keeping it all. She knew she should get rid of it. He basically got rid of her. Why shouldn't she get rid of him? But she just couldn't find herself doing that. Every time she was close to burning everything in it, she would open the box and look inside and find herself unable to do it. She hated that she couldn't do it. She hated that she couldn't breathe just thinking about him. Just thinking about those eyes the mesmerized her. Just thinking about how much she missed him. Just thinking about how much she wished she did things differently. Just thinking about how even though he hurt her so badly she still thought of him as her best friend.
She took another deep breath fighting back tears and picked up the pink scarf. She hated herself for keeping it. She hated herself for wanting to wear it, but she couldn't find herself not wearing it. Especially today. It was tradition. She found it strange that the other Americans at her work wanted to throw a Halloween party. She closed the box and pushed it back in the closet. She stood in front of the mirror assessing her flowy purple dress. She smoothed out the purple and gold-trimmed scarf around her waist that complimented the light purple and gold embroidery on the white blouse she wore. She started to tie the pink scarf in her hair.
"I can help with that" his voice made her heart race as his hands held hers taking the scarf. Betty felt her skin tingle as his hands made their way through her hair. His body was close to hers, she could feel his warmth. "I'm sorry, Esmerelda" he whispered close to her ear slipping the scarf around her hair his knuckles barely brushing her neck but made her feel like a herd of butterflies flew over her skin.
"You will always be my best friend, my Esmerelda, my Betty..." he kissed her cheek as he tied the scarf below her hair. He ran his hands down her arms softly pulling her closer to his body. "You don't hate me." He said in barely a whisper and kissed her cheek again.
The tears welled up in her eyes as she looked in the mirror, her imagination getting the better of her. She fell to the ground, her face in her knees starting to cry. The door opened and Abbey walked in with a smile "Betty!" her face instantly fell when she saw Betty on the floor crying. She quickly went over coming down next to her. "Betty..."
"Abbey, please go to the party. I, I, can't, hh, come. I...I just...I really can't" she mumbled through her sobs, her face still in her knees.
"Betty, you have to go! I won't have you sitting here crying all night." She pulled her up. "Listen to me, Betty." she held her face wiping her tears "You have to go. I promise...things will be better." Abbey said feeling her own eyes sting at the sight of her friend. She knew she needed to get Betty there so she could see Daniel again. He was the only one that could fix Betty's broken heart.
Betty looked at her eyes, hers getting blurry.
"I promise. Trust me." Abbey looked at her moving the hair from her face. "Okay?" She looked into her eyes. Betty nodded and hugged her. Abbey rubbed her back comfortingly. "I promise" she whispered running her hand through her hair hugging her for a while until she felt she was calm enough and her crying stopped.
When Abbey moved back to see her face, she smiled.
"I'm sorry" Betty said apologetically for her haywire emotions. Abbey moved the hair away from her face. "It's okay, Betty. I may be your assistant, but I'm your friend, too. I hate seeing you like this. It hurts me, too. Now, come on, let's go to this party" she said pulling Betty up from the floor. "I promised you lots of fun. I'm not losing my Christmas bonus. If I do, you won't get such a nice gift" she teased making Betty laugh despite her wet cheeks.
"Let's clean you up a little" Abbey took her to the bathroom and cleaned her face from the running make up and reapplied it. "You look so pretty, Betty. I love seeing you without glasses."
Betty smiled. "You look great, too, Abbey. I love your costume" she said thinking she looked so cool as Superwoman. God knew she came to Betty's rescue on more than one occasion, especially today. "Thanks, I like it too. I had to order it online." She looked at herself in the mirror loving the blue and red combination. She smoothed the fabric against her half-covered midriff. She fixed the red skirt so it hung just above her hips. "Alright, let's go."
Betty smiled. They both made their way. Daniel texted Abbey letting her know that he and his mother were on the way. She felt butterflies herself. She couldn't breathe just thinking about them meeting again. She hoped things would go well. She wasn't sure if Betty would go off on him or be happy to see him. She just hoped they could sort everything out.
AN: You know what's coming next... lol :P Please review!

Well, he is taking his meds without complaint (well, mostly) and we are waiting for the new batch of nicotine patches to arrive because he is finally willing to give up his little Backwoods cigars. Next week he starts a round of physical therapy that will hopefully help him regain some of his balance and strength. His attitude is much improved as well.
The problem is that his mental faculties are still slipping. He cannot remember things even five minutes after we have discussed them. He loses his train of thought at the slightest distraction - even just my turning down the volume of the radio in the car so I can hear him better will cause him to completely forget what he had been about to say.
He found some paperwork yesterday from after his last DWI was over, telling him he could get his license back. This dated back from before the incident of him driving without said license. He couldn't understand why I kept telling him he was not going to be driving again. The only thing he was thinking about was getting out on the road on his motorcycle - but he was forgetting how heavy it is, and how weak - not to mention unbalanced - he is, and all that on top of being on two different anti-seizure meds. He was frustrated by my inability to 'see reason' - he had the paper saying he could - why did I keep telling him he couldn't? :-(
Somehow I finally got through to him, but chances are we'll go through this again several more times. My best bet is probably to file the paperwork where he won't keep seeing it, triggering another go-round <sigh>
He still doesn't sleep well at night, which means he sleeps away a sizable chunk of the day - a vicious cycle. I'm tired too, because his nocturnal restlessness often wakes me. He's only 60 but looks like his old man did at nearly 70 a couple years before he died - it is scary. I'm not ready to lose him, but....The notion of not having to watch him deteriorate any further, not to have to clean up his messes (he spills things constantly due to inattention and hand tremors that just keep getting worse) The idea of sleeping through the night without being wakened by another crash as he falls on his way to the bathroom again... Sometimes it is so tempting to just wish it was over :-(
Then he pulls me into his arms and it feels so right I know I will just keep trying as long as I can.

I think my grandma is picking on me..in a bad way
Thursday, November 03, 2011
This is going to be a very odd blog post but I think its true. Lately my grandma has sort of been picking on me..Not as in hahaha but she is meaning to be mean. Today my nephew came over to borrow some money for his college tuition. He asked me to go see my grandma with him to see if he could get some money off of her. Well while my nephew was talking to her my cell phone rings to alert me about a text. My grandma makes some odd comment about there is no reason to check it because we all know I dont have a girlfriend and never will have one. I didnt say nothing to her but when I got home I started to think about it. She must think very low of me. She has always said negative comments to me or about me to other people but today's comment really got me. When my dad passed away I remember her telling her side of the family that I killed my dad. He died from lung cancer but her explanation of his death is that he never would have taken the second round of them chemo. She believes the second round of chemo killed him. She then told the family that I killed him by forcing him to take it.

We had such a great time this weekend. We left at about 7 on Thursday morning and we were in the car for about 12 hours. Addi did great in the car, I was really nervous about her being in the car for so long. On Friday, Janie, Brian and I went to ski school. I had never been and Janie and Brian had only been once about 10 years ago. In the afternoon Justin took Addi to the daycare they have and we all 4 went skiing. It was really alot of fun and man what a work out! My legs are still sore. Later that night, we went to eat at Michael's to eat mexican food. It was the best mexican food that I have ever had! EVER not sure if it was really that good or if its just been awhile since I have eaten whatever I wanted. On Saturday, I stayed with Addi while everyone else went skiing. Justin had a good time and I think he was glad he got to do some of the harder trails. When they got back we ate and played cards. It was really nice to spend time together. I see Janie almost everyday but it is just for a few minutes at a time so it was fun to hang out with them. On Sunday, we headed home. It was a long ride home. It was my birthday but birthdays are no fun in the car so I am going to tell Justin we need to celebrate this coming weekend...haha. When we left I looked over at Addi and she threw up everywhere....twice. I guess she gets car sick like her Great Papa :) . We had a good time and is definitely want to go back. Today Justin picked up the dogs...they had been in the kennel since Wednesday I really missed the little guys. So nice to be home!
***please say a prayer for Justin, they are going through a hard time at work and could use some encouragement.

Kaisi Yeh Yaariyaan 3rd August 2015 Written Episode Update
Kaisi Yeh Yaariyaan 3rd August 2015 Written Episode, Written Update on TellyUpdates.com
Nandhani is thinking about what Naviya said to her regarding their their group and as she is thinking Manik starts singing and a song on her and Nandhani after hearing it goes and hugs him tightly. Manik then pushes her away and gives her a gift. Nandhani opens it and finds a pack of chocolates At first when Nandhani tries to eat it Manik does not let her asking to smile first and then they both eat the chocolate after which Nandhani kisses him. Manik says that she liked his rhymes but where did he get this information at first Manik tries to get away with it but then says that her ammes told him because she knew hr would need it. Nandhani gets angry as to why Ammes told him because she knew that he would need it. Nandhani says that she has to perform in the Talent hunt as soon as Manik hears
Aryaman is fixing his Tabbla and as he is about to use the hammer Manik holds his hand and angerly asks Aryaman to stay away from Nandhani then he takes the hammer and brakes the mobile of Aryaman and when he asks what Manik has done then Manik says that this time it was his mobile next time it would be himself. Manik pulls the door and Aryaman gets hurt and says to MAnik that he has no respect even as a musician. Aryaman says that he hurt him but MAnik stands still and tells him that it was his plan and he did this purposefully. Manik then rushes towards him but he runs away.
Aryaman is walking and bumps into Harshad who after seeing his hand asks him that they they should go to the principal but Aryaman says that this will not work and they have to complain to Nndhani because she will not be able to accept that Manik did this he also says to Harshad that they have to fight their own battles.
Cabir and Dhruv are both talking and Dhruv asks Cabir where he has been and then he tells that he for the past two days has to cover for a friend because he was ill then Dhruv pulls out some flowers and Cabir asks who gave these to him but he says that he brought them to ask for Aaliya’s forgivness and suddenly MUkti and Aaliya come and Dhruv hides them away. They asks Cabir where he was and Cabir also says sorry to them and then asks Mukti that they should go and gab something to eat but Aaliya says that she wants them here and pulls a flower stem Dhruv asks that she kept it and then she throws it at his face and says that she doesnot want to keep any garbage in her heart. Dhruv pulls the flowers and asks her to forgive him but she shouts that she will not and throws the flowers outside which go at the feet on Manik who is hearing what she says.
Manik says to Nandhani that he cannot believe what Aaliya said because fab 5 was his life then NAndhani tells that maybe this will bring them closer to eachother and suggests him to do something exciting for them on the friends day and Manik agrees.
Precap: The Fab 5 come and see a poster on friends day and on it Aaliya’s name is written but she says that she was not behind it and then Manik comes and says that he made it.
Update Credit to: Sona

My Nephew Jonathan Kahl
Jonathan had a stroke at birth and has had seizures since. He has been tried on all seizure medicine on the market and he has all kinds of complication from the medicine. He has been unable to talk but a few words and he is 31 years old. His seizures is worse than they were and now he lays on the couch for 2 0r 3 days after he has one. They seem to take longer to get over and are harder seizures. Please pray for him, that he will be healed from these and his mother because she is so confined because of them.

Most Helpful Girl
I would carry on with it for a while if you still like him, BUT keep your distance, and keep up your guard in case. This is very quick to have moved from one girl to the next and not to be harsh to you because I am sure he is with you for many a reason, but it is likely he has to filled the void (gap) his girlfriend has left and he has to do it quickly, because he isn't used to being on his own. Now your relationship could be great, however I know from experience, I started dating someone quickly who got out of a relationship 2 months before and at first it was great. He was charming, sweet, loving, romantic. 4 weeks past and BAM that all disappeared, he began to lose interest and started treating me like a friend, it ended painfully after a year of just dragging it on.
This may well not happen to you, but be careful, because this could really hurt you and you don't want to go through that pain.
Ask him outright if you have to, you have every right. Is he over his girlfriend completely, if he hesitates you know he isn't and you don't have to break up with him, but you can ask him to take it slowly.
I wish you well and I hope he is doing the best by you :)0

People on board
James Thomas was born on the 5th of July 1880 in Liverpool to Edward Thomas and Mary Ann Furlong. Both parents were born in Liverpool but Mary Ann’s family had emigrated from Ireland shortly before her birth and they were living on the same street, Raymond Street, when she and Edward married in 1875. James was the eldest of four children, three sons and a daughter. In the 1891 census Edward Thomas gave his occupation as ‘Boiler Maker’ and his brother-in-law, Peter Furlong who was living with them, was a ‘Ship Stoker’. By 1901 the family had moved to Hornby Road, not far from Liverpool docks, so it is not surprising that James gave his occupation as ‘Dock Labourer’ and his younger brother was a ‘Rivet Lad’.
In August 1901 James Thomas married Bridget Boyd, whose widowed mother had been born in Ireland. They had five children, Edward in 1902, Bridget in 1905, Mary Ann in 1908, Annie in 1912 and Rose in 1914. In the 1911 census they were living in Silvester Street in the same area of Liverpool as he had grown up in, and James gave his occupation as ‘Sailor – Fireman’.
James Thomas enlisted in the King’s (Liverpool Regiment) in August 1915 and was hospitalised a year later with pyrexia while serving with the 11th (Service) Battalion (Pioneers) in France. At that time he was a Corporal. He was wounded in January 1918 when he held the rank of Sergeant. He was subsequently transferred to the 3rd Reserve Battalion which had moved to Ireland in 1917. Presumably while going on leave, he travelled on RMS Leinster on the 10th of October. He did not survive the sinking but his body was recovered and he was buried in Grangegorman Military Cemetery in Dublin.

Tuesday, November 16, 2010
#52 - Al Oliver
Al Oliver was a mean hitter and was only beginning to hit his stride in '73. During the early part of his career he alternated between first base and center field. Pittsburgh was loaded with hitters at both spots and Al was a desired guy in the lineup so I think his versatility contributed to his time on the field. Signed by the Pirates in '64 out of his Ohio HS, Al had been all-state in both basketball and baseball, the same as his HS teammate Larry Hisle (those must have been some teams). He put up some nice numbers three of his four years in the minors: in '65 and '66 he averaged over .300 in A ball; in '67, his only off year, he had military commitments; and he had a big '68 line of .315/14/74 in Triple A despite some more missed time and prior to his late call-up. After a good fall ball season that year and a very good camp in '69 he was up for good.
Oliver immediately moved into the starting Pittsburgh lineup. In the minors he'd been exclusively a first baseman until pulling some outfield time in '68 and his first couple seasons first would be his primary position. He had a nice rookie season, placing second in NL Rookie of the Year voting. In '70 he upped his plate time and his RBI's and in '71 with Bob Robertson's arrival, he moved to center field, where he continued his very good defense and then won a ring. In '72 he cranked his offense a bit and made his first All-Star team. He would continue putting up very good offensive lines - he averaged a .307/15/78 line that would have been better if he didn't miss over a month in '76 to injury - through '77. That last year he was strictly an outfielder as Pops Stargell took over first.
After the '77 season Oliver was involved in a huge multi-team trade that landed him at Texas. While there he alternated between outfield and DH. Shifting leagues was not a problem for Al as he maintained his .300 average and high RBI pace. His first two seasons he hit .324 and in '80 he became a slugger big time with a .319/19/117 line that earned him his first Silver Slugger award. He won it again in a discounted '81 strike season and following it he returned to the NL, this time to Montreal, essentially for Larry Parrish. There he became almost exclusively a first baseman. In '82 he had his biggest season ever, leading the league with a .331 average, 204 hits, 109 RBI's, and 43 doubles, while also setting his PR with 22 homers. After one more season for the Expos during which he again led the NL in doubles, Al was traded to the Giants. His last two seasons he moved from San Francisco to Philly, LA, and Toronto. At that last stop he had some significant post-season numbers to close out his career. He finished with a .303 average with 2,743 hits, 219 homers, and 1,326 RBI's. In the post-season he hit .228 with three homers and 17 RBIs in 28 games. He was on seven All-Star teams and won three Silver Slugger awards
Oliver claimed that owner collusion forced him out of baseball before he was ready and cost him a sure Hall of Fame shot. But he doesn't seem bitter and since playing has done speaking engagements and has a self-help type website going which I guess has been another post-career thing. He has had some strong backing for HOF candidacy although his first year eligible he did not get the requisite amount of votes to stay on the ballot. His lifetime stats are right on the line.
Al was quite a fielder as the first star bullet and cartoon point out. His nickname was actually Scoop. Again Topps defaults to an old season and while his '72 numbers were nice, '73 was much better as he reached his until-then career highs by far in some stats. While Al was in Pittsburgh he had his own radio show. For a while he must have stayed in Texas because when his son Aaron played football for Texas A&M, he was listed as having grown up locally. These days it appears Al is back in Ohio.
Let's make this an All-Star affair:
1. Oliver and Bobby Bonds '78 Rangers;
2. Bonds and Bobby Heise '70 Giants.

H and I learned recently that the baby is a boy. While I was going to be fine with it either way, I have to say that this is exciting, now that we know for sure.
Now I have a sort of general concern about being a dad, which veers from mild worry to abstract terror. It seems like there are a lot of things I could screw up, but none of these is anything in particular. People seem to learn as they go.

"Amazing grace! How sweet the sound. That saved a wretch like me! I once was lost, but now am found, Was blind, but now I see. Through many dangers, toils, and snares, I have already come: Tis grace has brought me safe thus far, And grace will lead me home." - John Newton, "Amazing Grace"
ok so maybe it wasn't as bad as all that but it came pretty dang close! So here's what happened. Nobody wanted to run the trails with me today but Jeremy said I could go he was at Boling but just didn't want to go in the back woods. So, I was totally confident and went back there and loved it, ran the whole time. I knew eventually I would run to a little white church. I even fell on my face, grass in my mouth and kept going! I got to a gate type clearing and saw a grave yard but I didn't see a church and there was a large sign that said NO TRESPASSING So I figured the church would be just a little bit ahead and I kept running but the hills got REALLY steep I had to walk at that point but then there were parts of the trail I didn't feel were clearly marked so after a few of those I started getting nervous. Then I ran into a couple spider webs so I stopped to get a stick and knocked a really large one down. The trail area kept getting darker and darker then I started feeling creepy (probably cuz the spiders) So, I'm running with a stick in front of me and now its not fun. I'm thinking this should never be like this for me so I turned around. At that point I was frustrated to tears cuz I just knew that dang church was just around the corner and once again I can't get to it!! I made my way back and decided to look at the grave yard closer and I ran a little and then saw the church. I was not happy but, I wasn't going back into the woods. So I started running up that road. It seemed to take Forever! I started praying for safety, I didn't feel safe.
I came upon some houses and at the third house I went to ask for directions but just then the Marshell drove by and I like totally ran to it waving it down, I didn't realize it was the police but man! I was soooo happy. I told her my dilemma and she was so helpful and instantly the "unsafe feeling" I had was gone, I told her I was upset and started praying to Jesus to send something to make me feel safe (I thought He would reassure me by telling me I had angles with me or something) Thank you God for the cops. Oh by the way, I did have my cell and called Jeremy but I just didn't know where I was at so it wan't the most helpful. Because I had it, I thought I'll be fine. Anyways, do you know what the police lady said?!? She said, this isn't her area and she never goes there. She said she had a "feeling" to go there so she did but didn't see anything so she left but then she had a strong feeling to go again and then I came running out. She said I looked like I just got beat up...she said in side, "oh lord another domestic dispute" I told her what I prayed she laughed and said the Lord works in mysterious ways. She helped me get bugs out of my hair....she said, get in and drove me to Walgreen's Jeremy picked me up. He was laughing everyone was. He told the cop, "its ok, no matter what she does in the car, walking, running she gets lost, its just the way it is." I just smiled, embarrassed.
Well, when it was all said and done Jeremy said I was out there for about an hour. I'm gonna guess (cuz I got lost)

When Mary Hamilton heard pediatrician Marvyn Cohen was retiring from his medical practice, the Phenix City woman reached him on the telephone.
She was crying.
"Don't cry, be happy," Cohen told her.
"I can't," she replied. "This is the end of an era."
Hamilton's young daughters Lisa and Julie were among Cohen's first patients when he opened his local practice in 1966. Her first meeting with Cohen was on the day she was participating in a going away party for the doctor he was replacing.
"I felt that first day he was someone I was going to stay with," Hamilton said.
Her instincts proved to be correct. Cohen has not only cared for Hamilton's children, but her grandchildren and great grandchildren, too.
Cohen's final day of work was last Friday. As he prepared to depart his 18th Street office, several cardboard boxes stuffed with photographs of some of the thousands of children he has treated practically filled a room. "It's a staggering number," he said of his patients.
His waiting room was filled with young women and their babies.
Dr. Paul Steinwachs, who has been in practice here since 1999, is opening a new practice, Pediatric Partners of Columbus, at that location. He will retain most of Cohen's staff and will accept many of Cohen's patients.
"Dr. Cohen has served this community through a lot of changes," Steinwachs said. "He will be missed by generations of patients. A lot of people are sad to see him go."
Cohen called his retirement "bittersweet."
He is eager to spend time with family and travel, especially in Europe, but knows he will miss the daily contact with the children.
"I will miss helping parents raise their children," said Cohen, who has cared for the rich and the poor.
"I don't know if he ever took a real vacation," Hamilton said. "He was always worrying about his patients."
Cohen, who has also been one of the area's top allergists, said he is truly touched by the many people who have contacted him since he made the announcement.
"I am extremely happy to hear from so many who say I will be missed," he said, adding that it is a mutual affection.
Cohen smiled and said one of his allergy patients thanked him for the 40 years Cohen has enabled him to play golf.
"What makes him special is he cares so much for people," Hamilton said. "You are not a patient, you are a person. I always felt I could talk to him about anything that was bothering me."
Cohen's first office was in Phenix City, but he moved the practice to Columbus in 1970. He was in a partnership with other physicians until going back on his own around 1983.
"It worked better for me that way," Cohen said.
Cohen, a former president of the Muscogee County Medical Society, is a native of Winnipeg, Canada. He lost his father at an early age, and he and his two sisters were raised by a single mother. His sisters both married Columbus men, bringing the family south.
He attended the University of Alabama.
"I was already there when (Paul) 'Bear' Bryant arrived," he said.
Cohen didn't have much money and worked his way through college taking two jobs, one as a lab assistant in biology and the other as a lab assistant in botany.
"They were very good to me at Alabama," he said.
Cohen graduated from the medical school at Emory University.
He said he has worked through the years with many strong mothers and fathers wanting the best for their children. When working with parents, he has preferred to give suggestions rather than orders.
"A doctor is not God," he said.
Columbus businessman Karl Douglass said Cohen was the only doctor he knew as a child.
"He had to kick me out," Douglass said. "I was still trying to go to him when I got out of college."
As a child, Douglass had a terrible asthma problem. "Dr. Cohen had to be very aggressive in my treatment," Douglass said. "He not only took care of me physically but kept me and my family calm."
Douglass said that he had to get so many injections for his chronic illness that Cohen made him a "side door patient"; he would not have to sit in the waiting room, he would just knock on the side door, come in and get treated.
Growing Room's CEO Sheree Mitchell was the nurse manager for the pediatric unit at The Medical Center (now Midtown Medical Center) for eight years during the 1980s. She said Cohen was "a joy to work with," calling him detailed and thorough.
"He is just an awesome physician, a great man," Mitchell said. "He has done so much for so many."
Cohen has always concerned himself with more than just his patient's physical problems.
He has seen several get in trouble and has worked to set them straight.
"Some have gotten into horrendous situations," Cohen said. "I've played preacher, talking to kids about sex, drugs, their future."
To many teens, he recommends Columbus Technical College, "a diamond in the community."
In the last few years, dealing with some parents has been different.
"They go to the Internet for information. They come in with a list," he said, laughing.
Cohen once said the key for helping children feel comfortable in a doctor's office is to have a friendly staff as well as some books and toys in the office.
He has also purchased about 40,000 lollipops per year.
Cohen is thrilled by the progress he sees in the medical field.
"Miracles are happening," he said. "We are saving kids with leukemia. Kids with congenital heart disease, who at one time had little future, are living."
Although he had serious heart surgery three years ago, Cohen said that did not play a big role in his decision.
"It's just time," he said.

"Steve had a great way of pulling the best out of everybody. Nothing was a hassle, the sessions were very positive. I think it was particularly great for Adam and Larry to work with somebody who was able to understand that we were not incredible musicians. We did what we did."
- The Edge on recording U2's first album with Steve Lillywhite
did you know
U2 were the first band to sell a million CDs for 1987's The Joshua Tree.

NIGERIA- Muhammed Mahmood, chairman of the Board of the Universal Basic Education Commission (UBEC), and his daughter have been released by his abductors.
An aide to Mahmood confirmed the development to SaharaReporters on phone on Tuesday.
He said that his boss and daughter were released at about 1:30pm, and that they were hale and healthy.
He claimed no ransom was paid for his release.
Mahmood was abducted alongside his daughter along the Kaduna-Abuja highaway, around Katari, a village few kilometres from Zuba, an Abuja suburb, on Monday while travelling from Kaduna to Abuja.
His driver was shot dead in the operation

Posted by anonymous
This lawyer was a great asset during a difficult time in my life. He was not only efficient but very compassionate. I would recommend Bryan to anyone who likes a hands on lawyer who respects his clients interests first and foremost! He never rushed me off the phone, and always returned your call. He comes highly recommended.

While we have sailed on this class of vessel before, this was our first voyage on VISION and we had a wonderful time. Although she is an older ship, she went through rehab in 2013 and she looks great. The crew was among the best we have found an 10+ RCI cruises - everyone had a smile on their face and did everything they could to make our cruise the best possible experience.
Embarkation was a dream, although that was made shorter because we were in a suite. Once on board we went to Windjammer and had a pleasant lunch. Our room was ready about 1:00 pm and it was perfect. Our cabin attendant, Ruel, kept it that way all week - he was a jewel.
We ate in the main Dining Room all but one night and thought the food was very good to excellent. Our waiter, Jorge, was friendly, smiling and VERY professional. We also ate in Chops one evening and it was superb. We usually had breakfast and lunch in Windjammer and found the food to be good. Windjammer was always clean and the staff there was friendly and did their best to keep the tables cleared.

25 of 25
Ed Peletier (Adam Minarovich)
Death episode: "Vatos"; How it happened: Carol's abusive husband (and Sophia's father) had already received a beating from Shane. He was recovering in his tent when walkers attacked the camp, and he was bit. Carol annihilates his body with an ax in the following episode to prevent him from turning; Shock factor: Ed was so despicable that his death was both predictable and cheered. Losing Amy in the same episode was far more upsetting.

Hay is not the easiest place to get to. It is part of the festival experience, it seems, to stand freezing and flummoxed on a platform at Newport, to sit on motorways clogged with football fans aiming for Cardiff, or to make a closer acquaintance with country hedgerows than you intended to. This year it was stand-up comedian Gina Yashere's turn to suffer.
She had it all planned. She was due on stage at 8.30pm so she would set off from London at 2pm, allowing time to wander around the festival, get an ice-cream, and buy some books before her sold-out show. She climbed into the car with a friend and her nephew, who "wanted to see the whales. He's six and he believes there's whales in Wales," and set off.
"We were cruising along the M4. There was no traffic, it was beautiful. Then three miles from junction 18 on the M4 we came to a dead stop." There had been an accident - a car flipped over into a ditch - and the police had closed the motorway. "People were letting their kids out of their cars. There were people playing cricket and football on the M4. I filmed it because it was quite funny. My nephew was running up and down the M4, chasing balls and shouting, 'We're off to see the whales!'"
At first she was quite calm. She even got out and played a bit of football. But after two hours, still 78 miles from Hay, she began to realise she was in trouble. She tried to persuade some motorcyclists to take her - but they had no extra helmets. So she made a decision. She would try to walk around the problem, and hitch-hike. "I kissed my nephew goodbye and said he would see the whales later."
However, the police were having none of that: they told her it was illegal to walk down a motorway, even though there were no cars moving on it. So she climbed the embankment and began making her way parallel to the motorway, along dirt tracks, through marshy fields, and over fences, tearing her clothes on barbed wire. Six hundred people had paid to see her, and she thought, "I'm going to get to this gig if it kills me."
She finally got past the accident, hitch-hiked for a while, then jumped into a cab that had been ordered for her. The driver did not seem to share her sense of urgency. "But I didn't want to upset him too much," she says, "in case he dumped me out on the M4 again."
By the time she reached Hay it was 9.30pm and her show had been cancelled. In the event, she opened for Jason Byrne, and "most of my audience ended up seeing me". But she was in such a state that when her friend finally turned up she decided to drive straight back to London. They were back where they started at 5am. At which point, "my nephew woke up and said, 'I missed the whales.'"
· Gina Yashere tours from tomorrow. Ginayashere.com.

He was born Jerome Robert Aceti. He met Mitch Hughes, AKA famous YouTuber BajanCanadian, while he was in the 4th grade.
Minecraft is the game he became popular for playing.
He was in a relationship with a fellow YouTuber named Jasmine, but later ended their relationship. He also ended a relationship with a woman named Louise. He has a sister.
Like Kip Kay, he is a highly successful YouTube star who was born in New Jersey.

"Then Bono arrived, and he meant to play the guitar, but he couldn't play very well, so he started to sing. He couldn't do that either. But he was such a charismatic character that he was in the band anyway, as soon as he arrived. I was in charge for the first five minutes, but as soon as Bono got there, I was out of a job."
- Larry Mullen jr, 1987
did you know
According to the booklet of 'Walk On', U2 says that the song is dedicated to Aung San Suu Kyi, in some parts of the lyrics U2 mentions the struggle of this woman to free her country.

And I Am My Toughest JudgeI grew up with a father that hated big women and made sure to remind me, when I gained a few pounds, to exercise. I spent from age 14-16 weighing less than 100 pounds. At 16 I married a man who was exactly like my father. I weighed 105 when we got married and he told me if I ever gained weight he would divorce me. Well, I did gain weight and he didn't divorce me right away. At this point he was pretty good at keeping his comments to himself he just didn't have sex with me. A few years later I got back down to 118, but that wasn't good enough...this is what I heard...
Yeah, you lost weight, but you're not toned. You need to work out and tone up.
You would look good if you had a nice tan.
I really liked your hair when it was blonde
What do you want to do with your life? no man wants just a wife and a waitress.
So I worked out, got tanned, didn't bleach the hair again though, too low maintenance for that, but i did register for university... I did almost everything he asked.
A few years later I put a few pounds back on..At 135 pounds he told me he was tired of my cottage cheese legs and my belly hanging out and that he didnt find me sexually appealing anymore. About a year later he divorced me.
After the divorce I gained a lot of weight, then remarried and gained more. I'm not elephant huge, just cow huge...in my mind, anyways. I talk to guys they see my pics and they say I don't look bad, but all I can think is they are full of shi*. If my dad and husband couldn't love me and I was 60 pounds lighter, and many years younger, then how could I be attractive to anyone now?
So I guess what I'm saying is not only are we judged by our looks but we learn to judge ourselves by our looks as well.

I am sure it has already been thought of but just would like to know or suggest something. Is there any reason why the forum can not operate a system where all new members have to be accepted by admin or mods before joining. As I say, there might well be a reason but I wonder if it would halt the flow of spammers we have had lately. I see there is one that was deleted only a few moments ago. Just an idea.

Copy the text below and then paste that into your favorite email application.
Thomas Nelson Cooper, 75 of Saint Petersburg, Florida, passed away, Saturday, September 21, 2019, at Tampa General Hospital surrounded by his close family and friends.
A memorial service will be held at 4:00 P.M. Saturday, October 26 at Lakewood Family Church 12637 Pony Ln, Hudson, FL (727) 856-1770.
Tom was born September 18, 1944, in Saint Petersburg, Florida to Corbet and Elizabeth (Bruce) Cooper. He graduated from Northeast Highschool in 1962. In 1976 he married his wife Lynda (Sorondo) Cooper in New Port Richey, Fl. Tom was a carpenter for the duration of his life. A trade he learned from his father and passed down to his children. The nature of his profession and his skill level afforded him the ability to travel to many countries for work. Africa, Haiti, and France were just a few places Tom left his creative mark. In the latter part of his career, Tom ran and operated his own successful company along with his wife and he employed several of his children. Tom suffered a heart attack and had multiple life-saving surgeries. However, he was surviving on less than 10 percent of his heart's capability. He was a good candidate for a heart transplant and was placed on the transplant list. Both Tom and his wife Lynda had a deep-rooted belief in the Lord, and they put their trust and faith in God’s hands and prayed that Tom would be healed. After two years of waiting, Tom expressed to his wife that he had doubts that he would receive his new heart in time to save his life. In which his wife, Lynda replied, “All in God’s time”. Two hours later, Tom received that life-changing call from Tampa General Hospital that they had a heart for him. On February 14, 2006, Tom received his new heart which gave him 13 additional years to be with his beloved family. Unfortunately, he struggled immensely developing cancer from the immunosuppressant medicine he had to take to keep his new heart from rejecting. He was a double amputee and had many surgeries and complications along the way. Tom was a fighter though he was the strongest person we all had the good fortune to know and the opportunity to love. Tom’s hobbies were woodworking, singing in the church choir for most of his life and making anyone he came in to contact with smile and laugh. Tom had a certain magnetism about himself, he made strangers feel comfortable like they were lifelong friends. He truly was a gift unto this earth, he will surely be missed and will never be forgotten.
Thomas is survived by his wife of 42 years Lynda Cooper, his two daughter’s Sherri-Lynn Boloyan and Tiffany Noëlle Cooper and his three sons Thomas Steven Cooper, Michael Scott Cooper and William Gene Cooper. Thomas was a proud grandfather as well as a great grandfather. He is also survived by his sister Judi Phillips and brother John Cooper. He was preceded in death by his parents, Corbet and Elizabeth Cooper and his brother Wayne Cooper.
This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the
Service map data © OpenStreetMap contributors

"So pleased with the service from Elite given by Craig and Linda. From the outset their enthusiasm was encouraging which contrasted so much to our previous agents. They stimulated so much interest in our property, and kept us up to date on what was happening. All viewings were handled by them & also appointments for surveys were dealt with. They took on full responsibility. More importantly they brought about a successful sale!"

29 Apr 2018
- 3 Comments
- 1596 Views
4 minute read
She was late, very late, especially for a Friday.
He knew her routine quite well by now and most Fridays she was, if anything, early. He'd always assumed that getting in early meant she could leave early and start the weekend whilst others were still watching the clock count down those final movements towards freedom. In contrast his minutes were all worth pretty much the same these days and likely to stay that way, for a while any how.
He waited. He was good at that now but he thought the effort worth it as it gave the start to his day a structure. He tried to recall when he had started waiting but couldn't, though he could remember what he had seen, that would stay with him for always. A private memory he hadn't, and wouldn't, share with anyone.
A movement caught his eye, and he looked out across the enclosed garden courtyard space that the mid Victorian flats shared and into the bedroom window of the flat diagonally opposite in one of the sides of the triangle formed by the flats. He could see her, she was there. He watched as the young woman, wrapped in a towel, stood by her window and looked out into the garden as she dried her long brown hair with another towel.
He settled back in his chair, into the shadows of his room, to watch, knowing her routine, knowing that he had about fifteen minutes before she would be dressed and leaving for the day.
She continued toweling her hair whilst he watched; all the months he'd done this he'd never thought of himself as a peeping tom. There was no harm in it, she didn't know and it wasn't as though he went out searching for opportunities such as this, walking around the streets peering through peoples windows. That wasn't him at all. This one had just happened to him when he was in his back bedroom looking for something for the charity shop one morning; and the fact that he now made a point of getting in place in time, well that was okay too.
The woman discarded her towels and, naked, put on a bra. She was small breasted, with dark nipples; and he'd often imagined what it would be like to kiss them, suckle on them, use his tongue and teeth to tease them awake, make them hard and erect until she ached with the torment and begged him to stop.
Almost automatically his hand found its way to his fly and drew his sleeping member out from underneath his clothes. He began to move his hand up and down, using his thumb and fingers to grasp the shaft, he could feel himself harden as he did.
She hadn't liked the first bra and was now trying on another one, turning this way and that to get a better look in the mirror. He could see her body in profile as she did so, her pert breasts, the slight bulge of her stomach where it led down to the valley between her thighs, the smooth contours of her bottom and the tops of her legs. She seemed to be happy with this bra and left it on whilst she found the knickers to match.
She began to put them on, bending down away from the window to do so, her bottom pointed straight at him.
He gulped, his cock hard in the palm of his hand as he moved it up and down, pausing every now and then to rub the top of his glans with his thumb, using the precum now emerging to lubricate its passage, the delicate sensations contrasting with the rough pressure on his shaft.
He pictured himself behind her, naked, his body pressed against hers; his hardening member pushing against the cleft of her buttocks whilst his hands caressed her skin; he imagined the scent of her hair, damp and with the scent of shampoo still lingering in it. He could feel her breasts under his fingers as he teased her little rosebuds, pressing his kisses into her neck, he could feel the silkiness of her skin as his hand descended and pressed into her hidden valley; probing between her moist lips and caressed the emerging bud that lay hidden there, spreading her sweet treasure over it, the scent of her rising to fill his nostrils.
Then, as her gasps gave way to moans, he saw himself pressing his cock into her, forcing her unresisting wet lips apart, filling her completely as he took hold of her hips and began to thrust into her......his reverie was interrupted as he saw her take something from a drawer.
His hand pumped his cock harder and faster, preparing himself to climax as, familiar with her routine as he was, he expected her to get dressed in her normal working clothes - tights, a bland skirt from a selection of rather dull ones and a workday blouse - he was somewhat taken aback as she perched on the end of her bed, extended a long lithe leg and began to roll a stocking up it......

Has anyone seen/ use this new social app? We were in Savanah when I noticed my friend was obviously videoing the events so I asked him what he was up to. He said he was taking a Video for his Vine account. Essentially it is like instagram with videos. You can scroll on the home feed what people have done for that day. The video is essentially a combonation of a snip its combined for a longer video. It is pretty funny and people should check it out.

Hello, Let me first say I am very excited to be here. I didn't know that it was possible to install OS X on a PC. I would like to build a Hackintosh so I can help my family with their Mac problems. Everyone has one but me and if I have one to play with I'm sure I can help them out. All my prior experience is with PCs and that's not much help to them. I've looked over some of the guides and it seems that specific problems occur with specific boards. It would be great to find a tutorial for a specific motherboard that is inexpensive and that I can find on eBay. It would be great if the installation went easily and any difficulties were solved and were well explained. I would like to install the latest version of Snow Leopard. I don't need to play video games so it doesn't have to be very fast, maybe a P4. I'd just like to use the onboard video so I can save on a video card. It would sure be great if someone had a step by step that made everything work. Can someone please help me?

Monica’s problem is that she would rather be single than to settle for any man who would actually want her, a problem she shares with a lot of women who see their status determined by the status of their husband or boyfriend.
There would have been men willing to date her - just not rich and powerful men.
Does she own a mirror? It was odd that President Clinton was attracted to her, though I imagine that was more for convenience than attractiveness, but she was 22 at the time, not 39 with a bad reputation. It would be like me, 52 and overweight with health issues, imagining that Sofía Vergara was in my league, if I were single.

Nudist photos of boys***
Just a note to say hi to all our friends in the no-ops talk and voy-zone talk. We posted a few pics from this set once in the past and thought we would post a few more for those who luved the very first contri. One night Dixie and I determined we were going to just lay naked and have fun all night. About that time wouldn't you know it there was a knock at the door. Dixie leaped up to cover up and I peeked out the window. It was a pretty close friend andI told her not to put much on. I answered the door and he asked what we were doing. I told him fucking. He and I ambled toward the office which had a petite couch andI told him we planned on continuing with our joy. Dixie came back wearing only a lil' pair of black undies and a see thru bathrobe. I told him we were gonna keep fucking and if he was clumsy he might want to leave. He asked if we had a camera handy and he would take some pics. I passed him the digital and Dixie and I got engaged. These are some of the pics he took that nite and we hope you love them.

Hercules Swart is one person who will likely never have a bad word to say about his cell phone. The 21-year-old was out hunting over the weekend with his flat-mate Andrew Tod when he got lost in the Kaimais in New Zealand after the two were separated at around 2pm on Saturday.
The Bay of Plenty Four Wheel Drive Club launched a joint effort with local police to find the engineering student, with his rescuers able to stay in contact with him because he had brought two fully charged cell phones hunting with him. Swart was ultimately found not long after 1.30 am.
“It’s the first time I have been up in that area of the Kaimais, but when I left I knew there was cell phone coverage throughout the Kaimais, so I made sure I had both my phones charged fully and I am so glad I did,” Swart says. “I had a rough idea where I was and we did have a map and compass but unfortunately Andrew had both of them. I knew the hut where was, but I couldn’t explain it to services.”
Swart admits that when he first realized he was lost, he was initially not too concerned but after it became dark, he phoned his friend to tell him to contact search and rescue. “The search and rescue team were awesome,” he notes.

According to my father (born and raised in Harlan, KY) who was delievered by a midwife, and his mom had one for almost everyone of her births...
In most rural communtites there were no doctors, or they were considered unaffordable, and alot of women passed with there first child. Usually older girls of the family were ones to become midwives as they helped either there mother birth siblings, or there mother/grandmother taught them how to "heal". So despite what alot of people may believe most of them weren't trained anywhere other than at home or at a neighbors house.
Like stated in one of the before posts. Most often midwives were paid with goods "garden vegtables, meat, milk, ect", most were not paid with money.
The midwife that came to deliver my father, was said to have arrived 3 days early, and stayed with the family until labor "came upon" my gmother.
Also my dad says that "cutting the pain" was just like an episiotomy these days. When the woman wouldn't stretch far enough she was cut instead of letting her rip. Making healing time alot easier on the woman.
Hope this helps this isn't from any source on the net, this is strictly from my father. If you want to know more just send me an email.

ughh this weekend wasn't one of my best.
Friday I went to dinner with dj and we had a fun time. Saturday night we had a couple of our close friends over for beer pong and the whole night he was giving my female friend his attention. complimenting her shots, joking with her, asking to be on a team with her (which, not that it matters, but I was focusing and doing better than her and the other teammate so that he would want to be on my team again) and so on. the only reason this was upsetting to me was because she is one of my best friends that I introduced him to, and also because he wasn't giving me the same attention, if ANY attention, that night. I was hurt and heartbroken, and totally exhausted to make things worse. I spoke to my friend about it throughout the night and she agreed that this was happening. I was very distant after that and he decided to sleep on the couch. he left at around 2 am to "go on a walk". I was so mad because I knew this meant he was just gonna go see someone else that could make him happy and not cause problems. so while he was gone I packed up all of my cats food and stuff to take back to my place. at this point it was 3 am and I was walking to my car carrying my cat and her litterbox. he stopped me outside of my car, turns out he was close by. He was really upset because the action of me taking my cat back to my college dorm meant that we were probably over. We have been taking care of my cat together since I moved in with him. we walked it out, outside by my car in the cold. I finally let a lot out and was yelling for awhile, but he just kept listening and trying to reassure me of things. I went back inside to calm down and talk to him and ended up staying the night.
he sees this all as progress and so do I, but the only thing is that I don't feel any better about these worries.
I spoke to a new therapist, which I didn't really like but im hoping to find one a click with soon, and she told me that the things he does would drive anyone crazy. I thought it was just making me so upset because I have confidence issues and im sensitive to him being friendly with girls that flirt with him or have history with him. I think that's fair. but these examples and scenarios are unfair to be in in the first place. I never put him in this position, I am complimented at least once a day and oftenly hit on, but he never has to worry about me with other guys because I am committed to him and they all know that.
After bringing up his behavior with my friend that night, his answer was that everyone was just drunk. I spoke with him about the 8 (eight!!!!) specific women (which most of them he sees everyday) im worried about and his specific interactions with them that have caused me to worry. he seemed understanding and it all made sense to him. he offered to let me go through his phone and some other things but that's not what I want. it wouldnt make me happy to go through his phone and find nothing because I don't want to have to do that, I want to just be able to trust him.
anyway, he saw this as progress and so did I in some ways. this was progress for me because I opened up and was genuine with my feelings. I was angry and hurt, and I showed it. I didn't hide it and act fine. but where I don't see progress is in his connections with these girls, in fact its even gotten worse sense because he's said things like "well I thought you would be worried about her because she's so insanely pretty", followed by him telling me that him and this girl had a thing about a year ago but she had boyfriend so she rejected him. the next day, he was over at her place while I was in class. also yesterday while I was "napping" he disappeared for an hour and when I gave him multiple chances to tell me where he was, he just said "Baby, I don't know what to tell you, my day was just boring and uneventful."
He thinks were fine now and that im all okay, but I feel like if im honest about still not feeling reassured or confident about him being around girls, he will think Im dramatic.
now, I feel like its best for me to break up with him, but I have noooooo idea how. I feel like if I tell him it's because of my confidence then he will just say what he said last time, about him not letting me leave over something we can work through. Im supposed to go meet his family in his hometown this weekend but now I feel like that's the last thing I want to do. I know I can move out while he's gone for the weekend and tell him when he gets back, but I just need a valid reason not to go to Vermont. believe me, I have thought about just being honest about this, but I don't think he would take it well and I don't want to ruin his time visiting home.
thanks for listening, journaling is keeping me from going crazy
ughh this weekend wasn't one of my best.
Sweetie, I know this is hard for you. But I do agree you may want to consider breaking up and leaving this guy behind. My husband was never like this before we married, at least I never thought he was. But later I found out he was. And thru our whole marriage he was doing this, being overly friendly to other women. Now I'm going to separate from him legally because the flirting got worse the more I aged and got sickly (I'm almost 60.) So I think, even if DJ had never cheated, like you suspect, the fact his being overly friendly to other women bothers you should be reason enough to dump him. Maybe someday he'll be more ready for a faithful relationship, or maybe he'll find a person that doesn't give a rip if he flirts or whatever. But in the end, if it bothers you, hurts you this much, it doesn't seem like a good fit for you to be in this relationship. It also doesn't seem healthy for you. It seems you want someone more reserved about showing affection and attention towards women in general. There's really nothing wrong with that.
Also I agree with your therapist, that anyone would have been bothered by what he did with your friend that night and I don’t think you’re paranoid about that. In fact, I think the way you describe you were actually being really nice about it.

Why are these two premium phones the Bold and iPhone having so much trouble on the 3G network? I had a MOTO Q9h which is 3G and it worked great. What is the deal here? The MOTO Q9h worked like it was born to be 3G. Wife still has hers and it picks up like it was using Edge, no problems. Just asking, not trying to start a troll issue. I would like to know.

Billy Goat Smith's Grinder
Object ID: 1965.98.1
This grinder is made of wood and has a wooden drum which is turned with a handle and has alternating screw. It was homemade by Billy Goat Smith (1882-1958) to be used at his cabin located at the head of Powell Lake near Jim Brown Creek.
Billy used this object for grinding turnips, and apples, possibly other vegetables as well such as sugar beets from his own garden. He ground vegetables to feed his goats, and the apples to make cider. Billy was attempting to be as self sufficient as possible.
Billy’s cabin was his main residence, where he lived as a recluse, often called a hermit, on Powell Lake. The only way to reach his cabin was by boat. He came to Powell Lake from the United States, from East Randolph New York, in 1910. His real name, Robert Bonner Smith, gave way to "Billy Goat" Smith, because he hunted goats on the mountainsides, as well as raised them. He was an excellent hunter, and use to be a hunting guide for guests staying at the Rainbow Lodge, which was owned by the Powell River Company.
Billy did not like strangers coming to his cabin; he would warn them by firing his rifle in the air! Although he was friendly to those delivering supplies to his cabin like Ed Quilin, who brought him books, newspapers, letters, and some groceries. A sign on his property read “ Powell River People and Dogs, Please KEEP OFF”
He sold his goat’s milk and fresh meat to logging camps in the region.
After his boat was wrecked in a storm in 1937, he rarely left his cabin
Mr. Smith is buried at Cranberry Cemetery where his gravestone is marked by a stone with both his real name and his chosen name, as well as an engraved goat.

We went to Brannon's pub and grill on a Thursday night, and we had the crableg dinner. It was ten dollars for a pound of crab legs, salad, and a bread stick. The crablegs were decent size and had a wonderful flavor, and the salad and bread stick was really good, but we had a group of about 10, and the service was very slow. There were two waitressed waiting on us, so it should not have been too difficult to keep up with ten moderately patient people, but it took an hour an a half to get us all served, and the last one to be served was the one who ordered a salad. She was upset to have to wait an hour and a half for a salad, and she asked about it a few times, and they just said, it is coming. I thought the food was really good, but I won't be going there in a group again.
Own or manage this property? Claim your listing for free to respond to reviews, update your profile and much more.

Well, at least you know that I'm TRYING to be objective. Besides, you're a bit nutty yourself!
Bergmann has been very solid lately. Jason is 4-0 in his last 10 starts which is quite remarkable.
He really has been. I've been really happy to see that. I'd like to see him finish the season w/ another solid curly W!

My mum has been in hospital with aspiration pneumonia. She is very anti a puréed diet and thickened liquid and up until recently, food has really been her only pleasure. We/she now have to make a decision about her diet as otherwise, we have been told she will be in and out of hospital with pneumonia.
That aside, she is in a terrible state since she has been home from hospital. We cannot get a word out of her and she seems to be very distressed, she is in bed and writhing constantly. She can't keep still for a second. She has had periods like this in the past, but never as sustained. She is also arching her neck backwards all the time and just looks distressed.
Is this something others have been through? We don't know if it is a stage of PSP or whether she is ill. She was checked by a doctor today and urine and lungs are ok.
I must admit that for the first time I am really concerned that she has had a huge decline in her illness. I hope not and that she will be better once she has fully got her strength back after the pneumonia.
Love to all of you going through similar

I went to my cousin’s house for his wife’s birthday. I had gone out shopping and came home for a nap then went there. It was just too much. I had to go home early. Today I really wanted to go over again. I got all ready and once I was set I started to cry for no reason. I really want to be there but I just can’t. It is not pleasant. I just want to be free to do as a please. Is that too much to ask? Just doing daily chores is so hard most of the time. Thank goodness I have fur babies to keep me company and give me constant loving.

Photo taken in:Tel Aviv-YaffoCountry name at time of photo:IsraelCountry name today:Israel
This is a photograph I took during one of my trips. This picture is a souvenir from Yom Hatsmaut.
Simon Babakardash was born in Damascus in 1925. He left for Israel during the Wealth Tax . Simon was a somewhat lazy young man, he was very smart but used to act lazy. He would fill small bags with lemon salt and sell them. He appeared like a merchant and got his share of the
Wealth Tax. My older brother came home one evening, he looked quite worried. My mother gave money and underwear to my older brother Simon. When we heard from him the next day, he had crossed the border already. With the help of a prison guard on the road, he went to Damascus, and later to Israel. He attended police academy in Israel, he improved himself, overcame his laziness like this; the officer education changed the course of his life. First he learned the language in the kibbutz. He married a lady named Margeurite that he met in the kibbutz and became a traffic cop.
He was a handsome young man. There was no one in Tel-Aviv who did not know him. He was always in the very front during ceremonies. He always received support packages during the war years. Margeurite was a smart woman. My older brother had gone to his mother-in-law's house as a live-in son-in-law. He had two children named Eti and Yosi. Eti was a make-up artist. Yosi on the other hand had a certificate on diamonds. He worked in the stock market. He decided to go to the United States. He planned on doing the same work there. One night when he was going home with a bag full of money and diamonds, he was attacked by blacks. He tried to resist giving the bag to the blacks but did not succeed. The blacks killed him right there. Yosi was newly married. His mother Margeurite was extremely upset from this event and died a short while later.

As told by mum Te Kira
I had a good pregnancy which was mostly spent overseas in Singapore where we were living at the time. I flew back to Hawke’s Bay at 36 weeks pregnant and went into labour at 42 weeks. 9.5 hours later Mischa was born via ventouse delivery, she had shoulder dystocia and meconium aspiration and it was pretty scary going through the steps taken to deliver her safely.
Mischa was born at 6.49am on a Friday. All I saw was the back of her head before she was whisked away. She wasn’t crying and her apgar score was low. I simply couldn’t look over in her direction and then just as she left the room, I heard her cry. They took her straight to the Special Care Baby Unit at Hawkes Bay Hosptial.
I was told she was working hard and having difficulty breathing. The staff kept us updated until we were finally able to see her. It felt weird not knowing what my baby looked like. I don’t know if it was my way of coping or if I was in shock from what had happened but I was surprisingly calm and collected – nothing they said seemed to phase me.
When we were eventually able to see Mischa, she was intubated and the medical team were still working on her. She had other things happening such as seizures and internal bleeding of which sepsis was suspected. Even if she had swallowed meconium, her body should not have been reacting this way.
I remember the pediatrician and nurse manager coming to talk to me about exactly what was going on with my baby and it was then that I finally realised just how serious things were. The Wellington NICU team were flying up on the Life Flight plane to take her to the Wellington Neonatal Intensive Care Unit and we would follow in the Hawke’s Bay air ambulance.
My husband had already left to pack a suitcase and I decided I wouldn’t tell him the news until we reached Wellington as I didn’t want to upset him in the same way I had felt so devastated myself. Before I left Hawke’s Bay Hospital, I was allowed to see her for a second time and she appeared to be stable.
By the time we arrived in Wellington and was admitted, the consultant came to see us. My daughter was on the flight but she was challenging the medical team and I was told they were unsure if she would survive the flight. I broke down and all I could think of was that I had carried my baby all this time and had only met her twice – how could I lose her? Suddenly, for some unknown reason, deep down in my stomach, it felt like it was going to be ok and that we weren’t going to lose her – I don’t know why but it just didn’t feel like this was going to be it.
Surprisingly, I slept well that night, although I guess by then I had been awake for around 36 hours! We were told if anything changed in the night we would be woken, so in the morning I was rather excited to see that we hadn’t received a call and that she had been ok and stable throughout the night.
They carried out many, many tests and gave her a universal antibiotic as they thought she was fighting an infection of some sort. Whilst x-raying her chest they discovered a possible blockage in her stomach and when she was off the breathing tube, they did a fluoroscopy and booked her in for surgery at 6 days old. I had my very first hold and cuddle with her before she went in.
Mischa had a narrowing in her duodenum and the surgeon put a bypass in her bowel. They opened her up again almost two weeks later as the expressed milk we were giving her (maximum reached was 20ml by syringe) was not being digested. As suspected, the surgeon discovered she had a rare obstruction in her stomach – a thin membrane that went across with only a small hole known as “webbing”.
Things were going well and I thought home time was going to be near. The team at NICU were awesome – before my husband left to go back to work overseas, they arranged for us to push her around in the pram. It was only around the unit and her machines were packed in the pram with her but it meant so much to do something so normal with her. I then progressed to being allowed to take her across to my room for a wee while. It felt so good having my baby all to myself!
Mischa progressed to full feeds and my frozen expressed milk stocks soon dwindled. I gave breastfeeding a go at this stage but this didn’t work out for us and was happy to continue expressing.
One day I noticed change in her toileting and after blood tests and an ultrasound, it was found her bile duct was dilated which meant another procedure. This time there was no surgery date set. It would need to be studied before proceeding. It was all too much for me by then – I had my hopes up that we would go home and we’d had another setback.
I prayed and hoped so much and one week later they performed another ultrasound as things finally began to normalise. Her bile duct was strangely normal, which I was told it was unusual for it to change so much in that time, but everything else that had happened to Mischa was not textbook and neither was this.
I cried when they said we could finally return to Hawke’s Bay – it had been two months by then. I was sad to leave our little home-away-from-home in Wellington. When flying back to Hawke’s Bay I felt emotional – when I had initially gone there, I had my husband and my baby wasn’t with us. This time our baby was on the plane with me but my husband was unable to be there to share that moment with us. I waited a month before we flew back overseas to be reunited as a family again with my husband just to be sure no more health issues came up.
The staff at Wellington NICU were amazing – if only they knew how this special place was to me, and it continues to be in my heart every day, there are so many fond memories of them all. They helped me to become a confident Mum ready to go home. The team at Hawke’s Bay Hospital were equally fantastic – they did so well caring for my daughter in those first hours and we spent one last night there upon our return before I had officially graduated to taking our girl home with me.
Time has flown and Mischa is due to start school next year. We never did know why she was so critically ill but it was possibly due to the unknown problems with her stomach and small intestine, her body simply couldn’t cope when she ingested the meconium. The midwife did say she felt someone must have been watching over us that morning because despite the traumatic delivery, it put us in the right place in the hospital and the issues she had were discovered straight away. Had she had a normal delivery experience we would not have known there was anything wrong internally. It turned out, it was a real blessing in disguise.
I don’t see our experience in a negative way. Our journey wasn’t what we had planned but was a good reminder that instead of our usual worries about what cot or pram we were going to choose, all that really mattered was how lucky we were to have our baby alive and with us.
** Thanks for sharing your story Te Kira! ***
We get a lot of positive feedback from families in a neonatal unit who read these stories and feel strength, hope and positivity knowing that they are not alone going through these experiences and feeling certain emotions.
If you would like to discuss sharing the story of your neonatal journey, we’d love to hear from you. Please email email@example.com
Interested in how The Little Miracles Trust supports families going through the stress and anxiety of a neonatal journey?
Here’s a gallery of support examples.

I painted some pumpkins and then stenciled on them. Not because I didn’t want them to rot but because they were ugly brown.
I had a couple of Pumpkins that didn’t turn out the way that I had hoped. They were a new variety and were supposed to be this pretty grey color. But mine just turned an ugly brown. So I did what any pumpkin addict would do and painted them.
I painted them with some white chalk paint, It only took one coat, which I was surprised of. It did take a bit for them to dry.
I told you they were ugly. I had to pretty them up!
I added some watered down green into the grooves of each pumpkin.
And then I started stenciling some leaves on them. And I added some trailing ivy on the smaller pumpkin.
The green looks much brighter in this photo for some reason but if you do get too much on just take a paper towel and wipe gently.
I then sprayed them with a clear coat to keep the paint on. I really like them. Next year I will be doing some more of these.

I apologised when I realised that I hadn’t sent the required picture of my underwear choice for the day. I had been busy and, in a rush to get ready for work had forgotten his instruction. It was only during the lunchtime check-in text that I remembered that I had neglected to sent my photo to The General.
He had said simply, “Don’t worry about that now. Tell me what has been happening for you this morning.”
And so I continued with my day and thought very little more of it, until I got home that is. I knew well enough by now that The General was a stickler for rules and this new rule had only been added as part of my return to work routine. The purpose had been made clear, as well as the benefits to both of us, so I was pretty certain that there would be some further discussion. At least I had apologised as soon as I had realised, so that had to be in my favour. I showered and got ready.
Part of his new regime also dictated that I was to wear knickers only when in the house. These would be removed at The General’s request of course, usually at some point during the evening, but initially I was to wear them. I hadn’t been sure about this at first, but I soon saw how clever it was. Being so close to naked meant that I felt vulnerable enough, but he also retained this one power over me, and when the panties were finally removed by him, things definitely went up a notch and left me feeling completely exposed and at his mercy.
I had prepared the dinner and we shared conversation about how our respective days had gone. I loved these moments when we swapped details and occurrences from the time we had spent apart, and he was interested to hear how I was finding my new role. We laughed at something that had happened with one of his colleagues, and I described my first impressions of my new workmates. It still felt strange to have this sort of double life, but here, at home, I felt safe in the bubble that he created for us. It was our own little world and I felt so lucky to be able to have both this, and my life outside of it.
I had almost forgotten about my transgression when he brought it up.
“I think someone owes me a pretty picture of themselves in their underwear, don’t they?”
“Yes Sir,” I said sheepishly. “I am so sorry about forgetting this morning, it was just with the new job and …”
He cut me off.
“Up on the writing desk now, please. I will enjoy looking at you this evening, during my meeting, as I was not able to do so during my work day.”
Shit. I had forgotten about his meeting too. This was going to be so embarrassing and I felt suddenly very regretful.
He had me lie back flat on the table with my feet on the edge. He asked me to pull my knickers aside and he inserted a butt plug which he said would remind me what was his, and would also open me up for later. He then told me to allow my legs to drop and arrange them in a heart shape. It was a challenge to keep them like that but he said that he hoped the symbolism would help me to remember that I loved to do what he asked of me, and that he loved to enjoy the sight of his pretty girl while he was at work.
I lay there as still as I could, hoping it was good enough, when the doorbell rang and he went to answer it. The General was nothing if not thorough and, already, my punishment was enough that I knew that I would not be forgetting to send his picture again in a hurry.
“This way gentlemen. And don’t mind missy. Usually she would send me an erotic picture like this to enjoy alone, but I do find that there is such beauty in the execution of the real thing, so please enjoy the view as you pass.”
Thank you to Missy from Focused and Filthy for the use of her image. Please have a look at the other pieces inspired by her picture by clicking on the button below.

This was in my husband's name which they would not talk to me so they sent me the papers for him to sign saying okay to talk to me as he was being shipped overseas to fight for our country.I called and they still not talk to me and gave me a bunch of phone numbers and went from one to another, I probably to 6 people in one day they were telling they have no paperwork saying it was okay to talk to me when one person actually did but then when I would call back, they could not find anything.
These place was the worst ever get anything done or get what is ours sent to us.To this day, they still have my title and it has been paid off since 2010.
Reviewer is in unhappy mood. This person stated that there is a room for improvement of being treated like i did not count. Please immediately contact the author of this review to discuss poor customer service of ge money bank customer care. Ge Money Bank needs to "i just want my title" according to poster's claims.

We stopped here for sorbets just after visiting Jardin Majorelle. The service was great and the little restaurant very nice. The sorbets we had there are among the best we've ever had and came at a good price. Sitting outside was pleasant, since there was protection from the sun as well as cooling vapours were sprayed at us. We also purchased a large bottle of ice cold water for a very good price there (which is not always the case, much water we purchased elsewhere was either lukewarm and/or expensive). A great place to go!

HAWAII (KGO) -- A man in Hawaii is sharing a miraculous story of survival. Doctors say he was minutes away from death, being attacked by a massive shark, but his will to live was even stronger.
Tony Lee, 44, was attacked over the weekend off the coast of Lanikai. Lee says the shark had both of his legs in his mouth and pulled him underwater repeatedly, but Lee put up a fight.
"I had goggles on, so I could see things really clearly, and I kept thinking that if I just kept punching him, he would let me go - he wasn't doing it," said Lee.
A father and son, who happened to be in canoes nearby, heard Lee's screams and came to his rescue, paddling him back to shore.
Lee lost one foot and will undergo surgery to save the second. Lee's an avid athlete and doctors say that will help in his recovery. He says he looks forward to getting back to hiking and biking.
It was pure chance that Julian Liverton and his son Charlie were there. They had been catching waves in their one man canoes by the Mokuluas, when Julian's boat got a crack in it. As they headed back, they heard Lee's screams. null

Cameron pays tribute to Tony BennComment on this story
London - Veteran British Labour politician Tony Benn, who was born into the aristocracy but became one of Britain's pre-eminent left-wingers, has died aged 88, his family said on Friday.
Benn was a member of parliament for 50 years and a cabinet minister for 11 years. A divisive figure at the peak of his career, in later years he became a public favourite as a straight talker.
In a statement, his four children said Benn had died peacefully early on Friday at his home in west London surrounded by his family after being seriously ill.
“We will miss above all his love which has sustained us throughout our lives. But we are comforted by the memory of his long, full and inspiring life and so proud of his devotion to helping others as he sought to change the world for the better,” they said in the statement published by the BBC.
Tributes from politicians of all sides were quick to flow for Benn, whose father and grandfather were politicians and whose son Hilary was a cabinet minister in the last Labour government. Benn's granddaughter Emily is also pursuing a political career.
“Tony Benn was a magnificent writer, speaker, and campaigner. There was never a dull moment listening to him even if you disagreed with him,” Prime Minister David Cameron said on Twitter. - Reuters

After years of speculation over his sexuality, pop star Ricky Martin has revealed he is "a fortunate homosexual".
In a statement on his website, the Puerto Rican star - who has sold over 60 million albums - said he was "proud" to share the news.
The singer admitted he had kept his sexuality a secret for fear of jeopardising his music career.
After becoming a father to adorable twins, Valentino and Matteo, last August, Ricky said he felt "enough is enough" and things "had to change".
"To keep living as I did... would be to indirectly diminish the glow that my kids where born with," he said in a posting written in both English and Spanish.
He added that his decision to write his memoirs had helped him to free "things that were too heavy to keep inside".

O that my words were now written!
&c.] Not his things F17, as some render it, his affairs, the transactions of his life; that so it might appear with what uprightness and integrity he had lived, and was not the bad man he was thought to be; nor the words he had delivered already, the apologies and defences he had made for himself, the arguments he had used in his own vindication, and the doctrines respecting God and his providence which he had laid down and asserted; and was so far from being ashamed of them, or retracting them, that he wishes they had been taken down in writing, that posterity might read and judge of the controversy between him and his friends; but rather the words he was about to deliver in ( Job 19:25-29 ) , expressing his faith in Christ, in the resurrection of the dead, and in a future state of happiness and glory; these he wishes were "written", that they might remain as a standing testimony of his faith and hope; for what is written abides, when that which is only spoken is soon forgot, and not easily recalled:
O that they were printed in a book!
not written on loose sheets, which might be lost, but in a book bound up, or rolled up in a volume, as was the custom of ancient times; though this cannot be understood of printing properly taken, which has not been in use but little more than five hundred years, but of engrossing, as of statutes and decrees in public records; and the word for "statutes comes" from this that is here used.
F17 (ylm) "res meae", Polychronius apud Pinedam in loc.

Today I listened to an NPR interview with Tim Gunn and it was so funny and sweet. I had no idea that he tried to end his life when he was a teen. He always seems so calm and put together, it surprised me to hear there was a time when he was so unhappy and unsure. After he attempted suicide he went into intense therapy for over two years. It's an amazing story and I am so glad that he was able to get help. I'm hope his story and perspective will help someone out there.

Tuesday, March 05, 2013
DePauw races from the weekend
We decided on Friday that we would drive to Indiana to watch Nate race over the weekend. We were hoping for a little warmer weather but that was not the case. We drove through some snow on the way there and then for the road race on Saturday they were racing in some snow showers for 72 miles. Cece and Jess were in the car with Coach Nate from Marian following the Mens A race and then were asked to be the lead car for the womens race as there was a break and then no lead car for them. Lucky them as they were in the warm car and I stayed back and was in the feed zone to do bottle hand ups for the women and men from Marian. What a fun time. The Marian women blasted for the win and then 3,4 also. Then the men also took several top spots too. Then we went to the ttt and the men and women teams won both of those to. After the races we went back to Indy and went out to eat to a cool restaurant before heading back to catch some sleep before the races on Sunday. We got to the races to catch some of the other teammates race and then watch the women's race and they again took the win and the other top spots. Then it was time to catch Nate's race. The first few laps were real fast and several guys tried to get a break and then several got away and they stayed away for the rest of the race. Nate was active and covered several attempts of others to get away before a group of 5 got away and then they all blew up when Alex took off on them and the field was able get the others before the finish and Nate was able to pull a 15th place finish after the work he was doing during the races on both days. We were so happy that we went to the races and hope to catch a few more later this spring. Now back to the snow and bmx racing for me. Later..

In Moline Missouri, a grandmother saved her own life by defending herself with her own gun. Dianne McIntire had a conceal carry permit and her gun in the center console of her truck when she was kidnapped at knifepoint. The criminal had a knife, not a gun. So, if liberals already had their way and took guns away from law-abiding citizens, Mrs. McIntire would probably be dead. He would have successfully kidnapped her, and she would have had nothing to defend herself. He cut her and forced her into her truck to drive them both out into the country, and she was told many times that she wouldn’t survive.
When she saw an opportunity, she quickly grabbed her gun and let the villain choose. Stay still or be shot dead. He behaved like the coward he was and ran away. Mrs. McIntire drove herself to the hospital. She is alive today only because she was armed and ready to use her weapon. It’s unlikely you will see this story on CNNMSNBCABCCBSNPRBBC. (WQAD)

Friday, April 29, 2011
OK. So now that I have your attention!! Hhaha. No this post isn't about flip flops, but I did just get some today at Payless. A bogo sale, so I had to get two!! I thought I'd share them with you. I think they are cute! Yup I am a girl that likes shoes! Yes, I wore them today and you can see my feet marks.Wore 'em right out of the store! At least I spared you my feet in them! What did you expect the royal wedding? Nope didn't watch it. Maybe I'll catch a clip on You Tube.
Actually I've been busy, if you can believe that! I've got a few things going on that I need to hurry up and finish, and then I've got things I need to hurry up and get started. Makes my head spin.
Yesterday was kinda busy with school, house work, farm chores, and laundry see a pattern here? I also had to make a menu and grocery list. That takes a good chunk of time, well at least for me it does. It was a little humid out, and the kiddos were tired, so we all sat down late in the afternoon and watched a movie together, while I was working on something. As the movie was coming to an end Rachel looked out the window and exclaimed "Maggie's out!" "What?" was my rather surprised response. Again, Rachel pointing out the window with her chubby little finger exclaimed "Maggie's Out!" I jumped up and saw her trotting down the road. I grabbed a light jacket on the back of the chair in the kitchen, told Little Matt "call Daddy now", and ran out the door to the barn. Not even really thinking I got some grain and took off after our cow. The wind was really starting to blow too, and it was even more humid. I called Maggie and shook her grain can, it was around 4:15. At one point she turned and looked at me, and I thought "yes she'll come right home". Wrong. One of my neighbors was in his door way with his phone to call me, the other was out working on his truck. Guess seeing a loose cow running down the road was nothing to get excited about and he just went back to his work and didn't look again. Maggie decided that my other neighbors cows looked like more fun and their grass looked batter then her hay. He has beef cattle, and a bull. Thankfully she's with calf (Haha) and not interested in him and he didn't seem to care much about her. But they all were interested in looking at each other, but none of them tried the fence. It was snapping and it's super hot! Thankfully! I talked to Maggie and she was looking and listening to me. I even got close to her with the grain and let her have a bite. Then thought "drat, I don't have a rope." So I dumped the grain on the ground and let her eat it. I took of running as fast as my legs could carry me (did I ever mention I used to run track?) comes in handy when your a cattle wrangler... I tell myself as I'm sprinting down the road to get the rope I forgot, I really needed a cow horse and learn how to rope. Again would come in as a handy skill... Little Matt was outside when he saw me and I told him to open the gate and Maggie's barn door. He said Daddy (my man) was on his way home. Oh good I thought. I might just need all the help I can get...I got some more grain, her halter and a rope this time. My lungs were burning and my whole body was shaking. (I don't run on a regular basis, but I'm glad I'm in shape to go catch my cow, and all my years in track taught me how to run) The air was so heavy and the extra weight of the jacket was killing me. I kept it on, not even realizing it was still on me, and wondering why I was so hot. Beside all the running. I told the kids to go back in the house and they could see me down the road out the window. I took off running again, and as I reached the driveway to my neighbors cattle barn I looked over my shoulder and saw My Man driving down the road to help!! He had the window down and called to me with a big smile "hey there farm girl, need some help?" I stopped and returned the smile and waited for him to get out of the car. Maggie was a little closer to the road by now. I shook the grain and she decided to run in the other direction. My FIL showed up and went down the road a bit and stopped. Matthew and I walked slowly, me catching my breath and trying to talk. I knew that Maggie would come to me better, so Matthew hung back and I went slowly to Maggie and again she came to me a bit and I dumped the grain on the ground, and as soon as she put her head down to eat I grabbed her collar tightly and didn't let go. She wanted to run and started to turn away from me, but I only hung on tighter and dug my heels in and pulled on her collar, she stopped and Matthew was there in an instant and got the other side. We slipped her rope halter on and took her home. I had to smack her on the rump a few times because she didn't want to move. But we got her home, and all was well again. The kiddos were on the back deck and came running out into the field and were very happy Maggie was now back home. Phew. The horses were running around and neighing. Guess they wanted to have some fun too! Thankfully I didn't have flip flops yesterday. Ever try to run in those? I don't recommend it. Bad, just bad.
Supper was late last night, partly because of all the cow chasing, and Matthew had to get some more logs sawed out at the mill. I did chores so he could stay later, and finish things up. We had Chicken Fried Stake, smashed potato with gravy (for those who like it) and green beans. I took a couple pictures but they didn't look nice at all, and made the food look rather unpleasant to look at and make you not want to eat it, so I figured I'd just tell you it was good! It really was too. I didn't have much for leftovers. I was told I could make that again sometime! :-) I slept really well last night too.
Today was another busy day, but a good day. We were gone all day. I helped Matthew over at the mill for a while, this morning, then made a delivery for him, then I went shopping. Of course the delivery and my shopping and banking were in two different directions. I took DaLaney with me. She loves to go shopping with me, and I enjoy her company. I like to take one of the kiddos with me. A chance to talk and giggle or just be together with none of the others around. It's nice to have that bond with them. I also like that they like to come with me. DaLaney helped pick out my flip flops. She liked that job. She also likes to push the cart and fetch things off the shelf. Although she decided that cart was a little too awkward for her to push after a while. She also got to pick out some real baby clothes for her baby doll. She just loves her babies and was thrilled to get some real baby clothes! She likes the color pink and picked out some real cute pink clothes for her baby named Eliza. (Well, thats her name for now. It changes once in a while).
Again we were late getting home and supper was late. I made Gorditia's, from a kit. I took the easy way out, and I'm OK with that. Little Matt ate 3 of them, and would have eaten more, but they were gone, with some chips, a little bit of left over Easter candy, a piece of cake, and a tall glass of milk. Some days I'm amazed what he eats. There are days he eats more then Matthew...oh and the teen years care fast approaching too.. too fast. But I still have some time left before they hit... my kitchen!
Well I'm done rambling for now. That's two days in the life of us as we know it!
Have a great weekend all!!

He ruined my senior year. Back when he taught journalism, he didn't do anything. The school newspaper and yearbook were completely left to the students. He reeked of bad coffee and cigars.
I had him in 99 to 2000, he was a interesting teacher, but thought he knew a lot more than he really did. For ex., he said you can eat as much protein as u want, and never get fat!
My senior year wouldn't have been as great as it was if it wasn't for Mr. Bing. Awesome teacher
Great teacher.. I had him in 94 or 93. Funny guy, and a very loving person.. I hope he still has the "zing".
Bing rocked in 1995! I hope he still does! He is one of the reasons I have decided to become an English teacher! Thanks for the inspiration! Lion's Roar!
bing is a horrible director and the worst person to cast roles in his plays and musicals.
Very strict and sometimes strange...you had to be a favorite to really like him
I will never forget the fun I had in Bing's class. Theme Plot Script Underline will be burned into my memory forever.
One of the best teachers Longwood's ever seen. I'm going to miss him a lot.

There are some days when it is just plain tough to be a mom, and yesterday was one of those days. If you don’t enjoy reading stories about poop and vomit, you may want to find something else to go do now.
It started off simply enough. I sent Mike off to work and then stayed up to write. I finished one article off pretty quickly and set it to post on Monday. Then, I started working on a second. My 3 babies were all sleeping, and I was enjoying the time to reflect on their births and think about what I would have done differently if I could.
Maxx was the first to wake up, as usual. I rescued him from the bed, sat down and nursed him, and then put him in his high chair for a snack. He stayed there and I continued typing until he got bored. I pulled him out of the high chair and attempted to change his poopy diaper. Of course, Maxx decided he didn’t want to be changed. He kicked his feet, getting one into his diaper, and then grabbed that foot with his hand and rubbed it up against the blanket we keep on the couch. After cleaning up the butt, the foot, the hand, my arm, and everything else he managed to touch I got a clean diaper back on and sent him off to play while I put the blanket into the wash. He chose to torture his sleeping sisters by trying to sit on their heads and I finally settled him down to play and read some books and got back to writing.
When Mike got home for lunch he asked what had happened that made me decide to wash the blanket. (I had just washed it a few days ago.) He thought it was a funny story. I warmed up his lunch and he ate. Maxx willingly got back in the high chair and joined his daddy. While he was contained I moved the blanket to the dryer and started another load of laundry.
Both of the girls were still asleep, which is a bit unusual. They are usually up before Mike gets home, or at least willing to get up while he is here, but both insisted on staying asleep. I should have known then that something was wrong. Almost as soon as Mike left to go back to work Constance sat up and started puking all over the floor where she had been asleep. Malia, who was sleeping next to her, woke up mad because some had gotten on her foot. I sent both of the girls to the bathroom to clean up while I gathered up the bedding that was on the floor. It got moved into the hallway to wait for an empty washer.
I told Malia she could go lay on my bed if she liked, and no sooner did she make it back there than she came running back out, trying to make it to the bathroom in time to puke in the toilet instead of on the floor. She didn’t quite make it so now I had spots in the living room, hallway, and bedroom that all needed to be cleaned up. I also had a 1 year old boy yelling to get out of the high chair because he was done eating and could not be bothered to stay there for even one more second.
I found a clean blanket, spread it out on the floor for the girls and gave them the puke bowl. When I let Maxx out of his high chair, the first thing he did was go attack his sisters. They are his usual playmates and he would not go anywhere or do anything without trying to get them to come along. Eventually he had to go back in the high chair so I could finish cleaning up without having to stop every 2 seconds to get him off his sisters. Eventually he fell asleep, so that’s where he took his nap. I was able to finish cleaning and my writing while he was contained. Malia and I even got in a chapter of Ramona the Pest before he woke up.
The rest of my afternoon was spent attempting to keep Maxx from sitting on his sisters heads or playing in their puke. Malia seemed to be doing OK, Constance had to use the bowl a few times. I did manage to get the clean blanket out of the dryer and back on the couch just in time for Maxx to have another poopy diaper that leaked. Guess where he decided to sit before I had a chance to grab him and get him changed.
Mike got home from work and luckily there were no more major messes. There was some movie watching, some hanging out, dinner (which Maxx spread all over his face and hair), and finishing up of the laundry. There were also lots of cranky looks when Constance was told it was not a good idea for her to eat. There were lots of angry looks when Maxx decided his sisters were in need of more torture. Mom even got a shower, although that was shared with Maxx, who needed dinner washed out of his hair and off his face.
So, yesterday I washed the blanket for the couch twice, both of the girls pillows, a load that had their blankets and sheets in it, and a load of clothes. I changed 2 stinky diapers and washed that same baby from head to foot. You’d think that would have resulted in a really good night’s sleep, but it didn’t. I slept good for a few hours, but most of the night I was half awake listening for someone to get sick. Luckily there was none of that until around the time Mike’s alarm went off to get him up for work today. Hopefully that means today will be much better and I might be able to take a nap.

Food is just like home! The lasagna and eggplant are some of our family favorites.
Great atmosphere, we sat on the patio and the live music they had was amazing! Food was great!!
The hostess was very nice when I called and answered my question. She was just as friendly when we arrived.
Food was great but service was excessively slow. Took over an hour to get our entree, which we then cooked. Everyone was very nice.
It was nice as expected
I was very pleased with my visit to Romano’s Macaroni Grill. I had the Ratatouille, which was outstanding. Our server was attentive, but not too attentive and allowed our meal to flow naturally. I will definitely be back for lunch.
Solid food, excellent service. Nitro-tinis are fun. Thank you!
Wanted to try while we were in the area. Dinner and atmosphere were great. Service was exceptional, John was a wonderful server! Will definitely go back!
The food was incredible! The Beef Brisket Taco was amazing, loved the Nest Egg with the bacon, and the Cracklin' Pork Rinds were so great. The service was awesome and I will definitely be back.

he should know better than to cuss out fans like that. and he couldn't sign 1 autograph?
it was after a charity event btw. he wasn't just out in public.
earlier that day Rios went 0/5 with 5 Ks. nag
While he could have handled the incident differently I don't see why it's a bad thing for the man to just want to be left alone from time to time. Also, that dude took offense and started running his mouth. If someone started talking crap to you would you not say anything back? Is he not allowed to speak up for himself because he plays in MLB? freak that.

Here's how we helped a man get his green card and passport back from Customs Boarder Patrol at the airport this week.
Hi, my name is Jim Hacking. I'm an immigration lawyer. We practice immigration law throughout the United States out of our offices here in St. Louis, Missouri.
This week we're real excited to help a really good guy to get his green card and passport back. Let me tell you a little bit about what happened. This fellow has an employment based green card. He's had it for about a year and a half, but last month he was going through customs in Toronto.
He'd gone to Canada for a business trip and he was on his way back, and he was by himself. You do customs in Toronto actually when you're flying back to the United States, you don't do it when you land, you do actually in Canada. When he went through customs they flagged him because he'd been arrested three years ago. Now this had never come up in any of his prior travels. He is a world traveler. He leaves St. Louis and leaves the United States all the time, but this particular time something came up in his record, so he was given what's called deferred inspection.
I always like the explain to people that customs works sort of like a traffic sign, a traffic light. First you can have a red light which means they're not going to let you into the country. A green light means go on through and you're admitted into the United States, and the middle ground, the yellow light, is deferred inspection. What that means is that you have to come back to the airport after you've landed in your home town, and you're going to have to go up to the airport and bring them documentation of whatever it is they were worried about.
This young man had been arrested three years earlier on a New Year's Eve. What happened was, is he got drunk at a casino and he had taken a few chips that did not belong to him. When he sobered up the next day he had gone and paid the money back around $19,000. He had been arrested in the process by the Missouri Highway Patrol, which is the agency that conducts gaming investigations.
Nothing ever came of the case. The arrest had been almost exactly three years ago and the St. Louis Circuit Attorney had decided not to prosecute him, so nothing ever came of it, but the arrest was still flagged on his departure and arrival record that CBP saw. They were worried about that and they gave him deferred inspection.
He got on our website and I remember, he was one of our first people to use this new feature we have on the website, called peer-chat. Peer-chat allowed him to talk to me. I was actually barbecuing at the time, and we went back and forth. It was the day after he had come back to St. Louis and he was extremely worried, very upset about this incident. He traveled a lot for work, sometimes he travels with co-workers, and he was worried that this was going to be a problem for him. Even on a bigger scale, he was worried that he was going to lose his green card. He had not gotten his passport back either, so he was very upset.
I tried by chat to put everything at ease. I also agreed to meet him the next day and we got together and I looked everything over. He had actually gotten a police report, he'd already had that from the arrest. We went over it and I tried to allay his fears and to let him know that nothing was probably going to happen and he would probably get his green card back.
We went and we did our due diligence. We got certified copies of the arrest record. We got certified copies from St. Louis County and St. Louis City showing that he'd never been prosecuted for this. We got more information from the court's online system, to demonstrate that nothing had ever happened to this fellow and that really there was no reason for him to have received deferred inspection.
We went out a few Wednesdays ago but it turns out that that day was a Federal Holiday and customs and boarder patrol was closed in St. Louis on a Federal Holiday, which is something I didn't know. I knew the head of the office and I emailed him the entire packet that we had brought out that day. I also emailed him a picture of my client out there that day, just so that he'd know that we had arrived.
We came out one week later and when we walked into the little waiting area in Customs, I picked up the phone and I called the Customs Official and he came out carrying the passport and the green card. Now you always know that's a good sign, when the Officer has those documents with him. We exchanged the originals for the passport and the green card. My client and I were in and out of there in about twenty minutes, which I think is a record for us, for our fastest deferred inspection appointment.
My client was ecstatic. He gave me a hug which was great because as a lawyer, I used to do a lot of insurance work, and you don't really get many hugs from insurance companies. It's pretty exciting when your client is that happy and that excited, to see what a change and a benefit you can bring to someone.
He's going to keep a certified copy of that file with him so that whenever he travels he'll always have that with him. We think that that'll cut down on any other problems he's going to have in the future. He's also going to register for the Global Entry Program which will hopefully allow him another opportunity to "clean this up." We think he's on the right track, we're sure that he's going to be able to get citizenship a few years down the line. He's a great guy and we're really happy for him
If you have questions about deferred inspection there's other information on our website, or you can email us at [email protected] You can give us a call at  961-8200. Now if you liked this video please click like, and also subscribe to our YouTube channel where we try to update this site about two or three times a week, and to give you as much information about the immigration process as possible.
Thanks a lot, have a good day.

THE woman involved in an X-rated video with a man dressed in a garda jacket has refused to take the video offline.
The scenes were posted early on Sunday on a porn website by the woman, who goes by the name Carla4Garda.
Now Carla has spoken out about the video, as well as another video she uploaded of herself and two men in Defence Forces clothing engaging in sexual acts.
Speaking to the Star, Carla defended those involved in the video.
She said: "Everyone deserves a break - and they can do what they like on their break."
The woman, who lives in Cork, also uploaded a video of a threesome which involved her and two members of the Defence Forces.
She told the paper she did not check with those involved in the video before she uploaded it.
She added: "I didn't run it past them, no. No, they went crazy at me."
"These guys filmed it. They had their jollies showing it off around the barracks. I want to get my kicks too.
"They have asked me to take it down... but I won't be taking it down."
most read news
She also said that the men involved would have good porn careers because "they were great f**ks".
Carla added that she did not expect the videos to get so much attention.
She said: "I just thought I'd get a few hundred views, I actually didn't expect it to go on like it did."
The 35-year-old said that with the reaction of the initial Defence Forces video, she was 'feeling cheeky'.
"I messaged the garda and asked him if he wanted to make a video, and he was well game.
"We came to an understanding that his face would not be showed and that he would not be identifiable in anyway.
She said: "I am not going to comment on his identity either."
The garda involved has been identified and is said to be married with children and working in the south of Ireland.
A major investigation has reportedly been launched.

Yeah, this was the most awkward possible time for this engagement. Right after we talked about visiting! I heard from her last night and she still thinks this visit is happening. But I don't know if I want to see her now. Another friend of ours will be there, who I would like to see, and I don't want to offend her by telling her I don't actually want to get together with her now. DAMMIT.
I was pretty surprised by this, too - I think her boyfriend still has a couple of years of grad school to go, and he's doing that overseas.
We have now reached Three's Company-level awkward.

"My back right molar was in a great deal of pain. My sister-in-law works here and recommended that we come and have the tooth extracted and get an implant, and that would fix the problem. The pain was overwhelming, and I was just happy to be done with it. They put a metal rod in my mouth, and once it was put in place, no problems with it. No issues with it. It's been several years now. I don't feel any pain, it's all good, it's better than a normal tooth in my opinion. Dr. Harris – first, when I visited, he came in, gave me a interview, explained the whole process. Very professional, he was kind, he worked with me, he got me in quick. I was very impressed."

My mother possessed great deal of buddies that would stay around and play cards and drink and such. Almost every week-end there is a gathering of women that would stay, eliminate their shoes and take in and play cards. I utilized to love sitting on the ground under the dining table and play using the womens foot. They simply continued playing cards like nothing had been taking place.
My aunt lived when you look at the town. She had been a mover and shaker, roughly mother will say about her. She hurt her straight straight back and arrived to remain with us until she improved. As soon as she got harmed she slowed up a bit though. It absolutely was my task to simply just take her supper up during the night. We became close friends as she was bed ridden with her back injury.
Mother often went up to a lady buddies household to try out cards. Using one occasion that is such had been upstairs in my own aunts room watching television along with her. She ended up being just covered by having a sheet along with her ankles had been sticking out. We sat regarding the end of this sleep as always to be able to be near to her feet that are pretty. She never talked about me personally staring I know she must have seen me do it at them before but. I’d often lay with my face near them simply to breathing in her own fragrance. Stink is a thing that is good one particular as myself whom therefore enjoys the fragrance of a woman’s foot. After many years of being under that dining table I’ve smelled my share too.

A PIECE OF ASS I woke up with a headache. Where was I? There was a little light coming from under the door and I could hear lots of cheering coming from behind the door. I was in a small concrete block room on a wooden bed with no sheets or covers. And I was naked. I sat up on the bed trying to focus on my surroundings. In the corner of the room was a little sink and next to it looked like a toilet without a seat.
How did I get here? Think Debbie. I left my husband months ago to be with this hunk of a guy whose wife died a year ago. He fell for me right away and our sex life was great as he hadn't had sex with anyone since his wife was diagnosed with cancer and that was 3 years before I met him.
We both are in our mid 40's We were on a trip to a small town in Texas just across the border from Mexico and were having drinks at a bar. I remember telling him we needed to be totally honest in our relationship for it to work. He agreed and said he only had sex with me since we met. I told him that I had sex with my former husband 2 times after we started going out and I fucked a janitor 1 time when you were away 3 months ago.
He got quiet and I got worried. I told him I would make it up to him. I went to the bathroom and when I came back we drank some more. I guess I blacked out and now I'm naked in this concrete block room. Where the fuck am I? And where the fuck is my boyfriend?
The door opened. In came two Mexicans with a lantern to light the room. I tried to cover up but they came over to me, grabbed me roughly off the bed and put my arms by my side. I asked where I was and wanted to go home. The one guy laughed and in Spanish told the other guy what I said. The guy who spoke English told me a gringo brought me there 2 nights ago and sold me to them for ten dollars and I was now their property.
They grabbed my breasts and ass and finger fucked me. I tried to resist and was slapped hard. Each time I resisted I was slapped harder. The one guy sat on the bed and pulled me on my belly on his lap and started to spank me. I yelled and they told me to be quiet or it would get worse. He put his finger in my pussy while the other guy spanked me then he slid his finger into my ass while all the time I was getting spanked. I could feel my ass getting red.
Then they switched positions and the other guy finger fucked me and the spankings continued but this time with a belt. I could feel the welts on my ass with every crack of the belt. Then the spankings stopped and I was told to get on my knees. I knew what this meant as the two guys stood on front of me waiting for a blow job. I'm great at blow jobs but I didn't get a chance as they totally fucked me in the mouth shoving their cocks down my throat. Their dicks smelled bad and I was gagging but I was told to swallow every drop or I would get the belt again.
As I finished the first guy the second shoved his cock down my throat while the other guy pinched my nipples hard. Soon, while getting my mouth fucked again he came. Then they stood me up and went over the rules.
First of all, I was there to fuck and fucking will be my job day and night. Whenever they came into the room I was to stand by the bed and never try to cover up with my hands. They owned me. They owned my mouth, my tits, my ass, my entire body.
I was there to give pleasure and if I resisted the next place I would be sold to would be worse. I would obey everything they said or I would be face the belt during this training period. I would get rice and beans to eat 2 times a day. There were no windows so I wouldn't know when it was day or night. I was to keep myself clean with the little sink and a bar of soap. And each guy would pay me 1 peso for the use of my body. 1 peso!!
That was equal to six cents!!! When one of them came into the room,and without saying a word, I was to get on my knees and give him a blow job. They left the room and I heard the door being locked. There was more noise coming from beyond the door and I wondered what was going on out there.
I tried to lie on my back on the hard wood bed but my ass hurt too bad so I fell asleep on my side with tears running down my face. In the next few days whenever they came into my room with the beans and rice I would get on my knees and suck their smelly cocks so they would come fast and I wouldn't get spanked.
My ass finally was healed and I didn't want that again. Sometimes they would just fuck me, filling my pussy or ass with their cum. After what I guessed was a week or two they came into the room and after I gave them a blow job they told me we were going for a ride so that my body could be prepared for the show.
I had no idea what that meant. I knew I was looking good as I lost almost 15 pounds already. I always tried to keep myself clean.
They put a collar on me and attached a chain and led me naked out of the room and into an empty hallway to a pick up truck. It was daylight but they didn't care as I was led to the bed of the truck and sat there with the one guy while the other drove into town. I guess the cops, if there were any, were in on all of this. We stopped at a storefront on main street and they led me into the store. The sidewalk was not empty as I was paraded right past men into a tattoo shop.
Free advertising for a new girl I guess. I was hesitant as I never had any interest in any body work. I obviously had no choice. Boy did I mess up pissing my boyfriend off.
No one but him knew I was here. No way out. I was told to lie on the table and the collar was removed and I could not understand anything as they only spoke Spanish. The owner took his time feeling my 36C breasts and pinched my nipples and smiled then spread my legs stuck his fingers in my pussy and ass and pulled back my clit hood a little and smiled again. Then he started.
I was turned on my side as they held my one leg in the air and I felt hot wax around my ass and rip!!! god it hurt.
They continued until all the hair was cleaned off both sides then put me on my back and after using an electric razor to trim the hair on my pussy a little shorter, they waxed it and pulled it out. I knew better than to scream but the tears were running down my face. Over and over again until every bit of hair was off my pussy. When I was totally cleaned of all hair they stood there looking at my now clean, hairless pussy, and ass.
I heard them say something and the next thing I was getting a tattoo right above my pussy but I couldn't see what they were doing. After that was finished they turned me on my front and started a "tramp stamp" just above my ass. This was taking a long time. When he got finished I still had no idea what was tattooed on me they turned me on my back and with a special instrument attached to my nipple they pierced my nipples. After the waxing, that really didn't hurt as I thought it would.
Then they spread my legs and pierced my clit hood with a vertical clit hood piercing and 2 labia piercings on each side of my labia. Again, after the waxing, not very painful. I was finished or so I thought.
They pierced my tongue as they knew guys liked the tongue piercing when getting blow jobs. I laid back on the table and the owner pulled my head off the table and shoved his cock into my mouth. Another dirty dick but I knew I had to pay for all he did to me. Nothing here would be free. After a few minutes he moved to the foot of the table and while the two guys held my legs in the air fucked me until he came. He told me I would have to pay him any time he saw me with my mouth, cunt or ass.
I just nodded as I knew there would be more waxing and piercings as I needed it. As I stood up they led me to a mirror, and I saw the tattoos. On above my pussy was written "Fuck My Cunt" and above my ass was "Fuck MY ASS".
The collar was put back on and I was led to the bed of the truck for the trip back. I gave the guy a blow job on the way back then they switched places and took care of the second guy. I was led back to my room.
As they were leaving they said the real training starts tomorrow. Even though every part they were working on hurt I was able to fall asleep. I was awake when they entered. One guy I recognized from the tattoo shop the day before. I knelt in front of him unzipped his fly and took his cock in my mouth. After he was hard he gave me a condom and after I put it on him I was instructed to stand up bend over and open my ass for him to fuck me.
I did as he shoved his cock in my ass and came in a few minutes. He pushed me to the floor, told me to take off the condom and swallow everything without losing a drop and then to clean his dick off.
I did put the condom to my lips and pushed the inside of it into my mouth with my fingers and licked the inside of the condom clean. He liked that and of course I kissed his cock before he got dressed.
I followed his directions, as the punishment was something I needed to avoid He smiled and left the room. There was a new guy now with me and he was holding a bag. I got on my knees and took his cock out kissed it and gave him a blow job, swallowed all his cum, cleaned his cock and kissed it before he got dressed. He opened the bag. He handed me an anal toy and said I was to have it inserted all day and night. Then he said bend over and after putting some lube on it, slid the toy in my ass.
It was not very big and went in easily. He then handed me 6 others, each one bigger than the last. Each day I was to insert the next size until at the end of the week I would have the largest one inside me.
The last three were huge and I wondered if I could do it. He noticed my hesitation and he said there was no choice.
Either I get it in my ass, or he would shove it in my ass, and if he had to do it I would be punished. My choice. There was a bottle of lube to use to get the toys in my ass.
There was a bottle of peroxide for my piercings. There was a bottle of shampoo and an empty plastic squeeze bottle. I looked puzzled at that and he answered I would wash my ass out every morning after I used the toilet and before the next toy was inserted. The next things he had were weights for the labia piercings. He hung one weight on each of the four piercings and told me to add the next size weight every day until I had used all seven.
With the first weight I could feel the stretching I could only imagine what the last weight would feel like. I truly now was just a piece of ass to be used for a peso per fuck. He asked if I understood everything and I answered yes. He handed me a condom. I looked puzzled and he took down his jeans. His cock was hard again, big,and very nice. On my knees I licked his cock and slid the condom on his cock and he turned me around and fucked me doggy style.
With the anal toy inserted it really felt different and good!!! After he came I took off the condom and he took it from me and poured the cum in my mouth and told me to clean his dick. I of course did and he left the room. A piece of ass. The week went fast. Blow jobs for the beans and rice boys and sometimes a fuck. The progression of larger anal toys and heavier weights for my labia. My pussy lips were being stretched as was my asshole. By the last day of the biggest anal toy I was sure I could have a baseball bat shoved in there easily.I figured out that there was a reason for this.
I know my time for the stage was approaching and I just wish I knew what to expect. There sure was a lot of cheering and noise coming from there. I hadn't seen any of the other girls there but I assumed there were a few. One morning I had just washed my hair and used the toilet and inserted the large anal toy when the door opened and it was a new man who spoke perfect English. I dropped to my knees and gave him the usual blow job.
He told me there would be no food until after the show. He explained that the last six weeks was to prepare me for the main show and now I was ready. I just nodded.
He told me that there would be a lot of men in the audience and since I only cost 1 peso I would probably be fucked many times in the 4 hours I would be on the stage. Only one girl at a time would be on the stage so the men would have me all to themselves.
This would be repeated every other day and the day off I would rest as my cunt and ass and mouth would get a real pounding. I wondered what their definition of rest was. If I wasn't able to do this every other day I would be sold to the mountain men and he told me I really didn't want that.
I was told everyone would be wearing a condom but it would be the guys choice of where to dump his cum on me, and they would video tape it all for my pleasure. But since there was no TV in my room I knew the tape wasn't for MY pleasure.
I guessed it was their way to make more money. A piece of ass. Every Saturday all four of the girls would be on the stage and the 4 hours that day would be a little different. He told me he would explain that when the time arrived.
He told me to take out the anal toy and wash my asshole and he would watch. I did as told and he then told me to use the oil to lube my asshole as I would be needing it. He watched as I followed directions and when ready told me it was show time. He attached a chain to my labia weights and led me out of the room by my pussy. Six cents a fuck! A real piece of ass!

Sunday, July 29, 2012
Today we celebrated my MIL's 93rd birthday. We had a big party for her at the nursing home where she lives. I pulled out all the stops for her this year because last year we were told she was dying. To say that she is living and doing extremely well, is nothing short of a miracle. She went from having her last rights to now walking, breathing on her own and doing extremely well. I will download pictures later as right now I am a little tired and worn out, but the party went extremely well.

Gender: Female Age: 19 Location: Jamestown, New York
|Introduction: Shannon and Robert find that they have a passion for each other and do some 'dirty' things together.|
Most, if not all teenage girls were curious about the opposite and even their own sex and would sometimes wonder, what would it be like to see them naked? As most girls wonder, some have experienced in their teenage years. Some knew what it was like to have a deep, dark secret with someone. This is the story of a girl who has one of these experiences.
Shannon was a beautiful, fit girl. She was very well known in school; she amazed people by her naturally straight blond hair, her firm B cup breasts, her athletically built body, and her nice ass. Apart from her alluring looks, she was also a very smart student, who managed to get A’s and B’s on her report cards.
Shannon’s parents were pleased with how well she was doing in school. Shannon was also an only child, so her parents tended to dawdle with her. She lived in a nice, medium size house that was fit for their family’s size. There were two bedrooms, one for Shannon and one for her parents. Also, there was a room comprised of a treadmill and a stationary bike. Shannon often worked out in there to keep her body in shape.
Shannon’s bedroom was on the opposite side of the house as her parents. This led to her masturbation sessions while her parents were asleep and her also being able to make a little more noise.
There was a second floor to Shannon’s house; it was only one room and was the exercise room.
When Shannon was 16 years old, a new family moved in to the house next door. There were two parents and a child boy, who was 15 years old, one year younger than Shannon.
They first met when Shannon’s mother decided to make them cookies and Shannon brought them over. She rang the doorbell, and a cute 15 year old boy answered it. Shannon was shy, but the boy did not seem to be.
“My mother made these cookies for your family,” said Shannon. “Thank you, my name is Robert, and yours?” replied the boy. “Oh…ha…my name is Shannon,” she said with a witty tone.
Then, Shannon went back to her home. Even though they only said a few words together, Shannon felt like she was in love with him. As she went up to her room and sat on her bed, she recalled the way he looked: his hair was smooth and was a dark black colour, his body was athletic, but not too much muscle; he looked as if he might have been on the track team. His eyes were sparkly brown, and his face was flawless.
He was a cute boy, and Shannon thought that she would be interested in him. So, over the course of the next few weeks, she began to be friends with him. At this point, they were not dating, but they were certainly thinking about it.
About five weeks after Robert moved in, she noticed something that she had never noticed before. From the window in her garage, she was able to she Robert standing in the bathroom. He was clothed and she could only see his chest. But, she got a daring idea.
She went upstairs into the exercise room, which is above the garage. Robert’s house was only a single floor, so she was sure this was the bathroom her would use. She noticed that she would be able to see his crotch if he was naked. Shannon felt like she should not be spying on him, but at the same time, it turned her on.
She waited there for about two hours waiting for him to take a shower, occasionally glancing at her phone for her new text message and the time. It had grown dark outside; Shannon thought that this was never going to work because she did not even know if her was going to take a shower that night.
Finally, she saw a light go on in the bathroom. She turned the lights off in her room so he would not see her. She noticed that he turned the water on, and brushed his teeth. Shannon could only see the area outside the shower and part of the are in front of the sink from her view.
Then, what Shannon had been waiting for all evening: Robert took his shirt off, and then his pants, followed by his boxers. What Shannon saw surprised her. He had decent sized penis, roughly 4 inches flaccid. His penis was surrounded by a dark patch of pubic hair. She could see from his knees to his nipples, as the window would allow.
Robert then stepped into the shower, which was out of Shannon’s view. She could not believe what she had seen. She waited until he stepped out of the shower, and watched as he put his nightclothes on. Shannon also saw that he wore sweatpants with no underwear to bed.
Time passed; she tried to watch him with the chances she got. It was all the excitement in the world for the briefest of times.
Eventually, they were acting like boyfriend and girlfriend, even though they claimed it was not official. They began to go over to each others houses and watch long movies and just chat together.
Shannon and Robert were very happy together. One night when Shannon was at Robert’s house, they were alone. Shannon’s parents were at home; they had told Shannon to return by midnight. But, they did not realize that Robert’s parents were not there and Robert’s parents did not know that Shannon was over.
Shannon arrived around 7 p.m., and they watched a movie together. The movie was interesting and lasted close to two hours. Nine o’clock rolled around; Robert offered to get Shannon some ice cream. “Okay, but only one scoop,” Shannon said to Robert.
Robert brought some chocolate ice cream and they both ate it sitting next to each other on the couch. They slowly ate it and continued chatting about various things such as people at school and the government. The conversation was interesting.
When they were finished, Shannon insisted that she take the bowls and place them in the dishwasher. Robert waited for her on the couch. When she returned they sat there for a few seconds, and then started kissing.
Shannon was beginning to feel horny and she knew that Robert was probably feeling the same. They stopped kissing, stared at each other, and then continued kissing. As they were kissing, Shannon began to feel Robert getting an erection. “Ha,” she said, ‘You’re getting a boner.” Robert blushed, but Shannon said, “No, don’t be nervous, it happens to every boy.”
Then slowly, she took her hand on put it on his penis through the outside of his gym shorts. She had never felt anyone penis before; she had never seen anybody nude nor has anybody been her nude at by this point. Then Shannon said, “Stop, let’s go to your bedroom since there’re windows in this room.” “Good point,” said Robert.
The two of them headed to Roberts room. He had a queen bed. Shannon pulled the top cover off and saw the blue sheets. “Looks like you have had some fun with yourself in here,” Shannon said, judging by the satins on his bed. Robert again blushed, and Shannon said, “Don’t worry honey, I won’t tell.”
She slowly pulled his shirt off, then his shorts. She saw his penis. It looked much better up close and erect. It was close to six inches from what she could tell. They were both nervous. Shannon never thought she would be doing this when she was only 16. But, she loved it.
Then, Shannon told Robert that he had to take her clothes off. So, Robert began to take Shannon’s shirt off, and then her bra. He was a boy yes, but still that doesn’t mean they shouldn’t know how to take a bra off a girl. Shannon giggled and then showed him how to do it.
When the bra was taken off, it revealed Shannon’s B cup breasts, which were beautiful and perfect. Robert was staring blankly at them until Shannon said, “Snap out of it, we still have work to do.” Through this whole sexual encounter, Shannon was being very sarcastic.
Next, Robert pulled her short, pink shorts off her, and then her panties. Robert looked amazed as he stared at her shaved vagina. It was wet, and it looked like she had shaven it that morning.
“Alright, now that we’ve seen each other, it’s time to get started. Role over on your back.” Shannon commanded Robert. Robert laid on his back; Shannon sat on her side next of Robert. She took a lose fist, placed it around Robert’s penis, and began to slowly move it up and down.
Shannon could see the titillation in his eyes, but also the anxiety. She continued to stroke is cock, up and down, gradually faster with every minute that passed by. Throughout all of her thoughts, she still could not believe that this was happening.
She noticed that Robert’s breathing style changed. His chest began to rise and fall more quickly. He squeezed his fists together, took a deep breath, and then, with an incredible display, cum shot out his penis. It most of it landed on is chest; every rope landing closer to his crotch. Shannon managed to get a small amount on her hands.
Robert took a towel and wiped Shannon’s hand, and then himself. Robert and Shannon switched positions. Shannon laid on her back whilst Robert prepared to stick his fingers in her.
As he did, it sent a shiver up Shannon’s spine. She had never felt anything this great before. She was well past horny and very wet; she could not wait for him to continue. Robert fingered Shannon, which is something that he had never done before. He was a bit rusty, but Shannon didn’t mind.
He continued to finger her, gradually getting faster. Shannon’s mind ran deep and she almost lost track of where she was the feeling was so strong. Shannon usually did not moan when she was masturbating, but this time; she was having a strenuous time.
Every once in a while she would let out a soft moan. They became close together as she approached an orgasm.
Finally, the momentous part of the entire night, Shannon’s eyes closed, her breaths became deep, she let out many soft moans, her legs squeezed together, and her vagina let out a small amount of liquid.
Shannon caught her breath and then started laughing. They both stared at each other, enjoying that great feeling after an orgasm. Shannon went to Robert’s dresser and grabbed a tissue. She wiped her vagina and tried to clean the spot of of his sheets. “Sorry about the mess,” she said. Robert replied, “It’s fine; it’s worth it.”
They each put their clothes back on and, honoring her parents decision, returned home just before midnight. They had a dark, dirty secret between the two of them that they would never forget. Shannon left the house, walked through the yard and went in the front door. She watched television for a while and went to sleep.
In the morning, she woke up exited about what had happened last night. Shannon and Robert stayed close for a very long time and never once were they dissatisfied with each other. They did this a couple of times when the timing was right, and eventually, they ended up having sex many times after they were married.
Read 9225 times | Rated 89.5 (57 votes)
Please rate this text:

My parents have a place in beautiful Canaan Valley, West Virginia. We took the boys there over the 4th and Chad had an idea to take all of them up Timberline's (a ski resort) ski lift that's open during the summer for scenic trips. Anyway, I agreed (even though I was scared to death the boys were going to slip through the rail), and we took the plung, or should I say we headed up the mountain. Here's a picture of Jack, Luke & Ty once we got to the top. They LOVED it! When we got up there, Luke said, "Mama, isn't this beautiful?" Luke also told us he wants to learn how to snowboard this ski season. He's 4! The kid just cracks me up. We hiked around a little bit while we were up there. I think our oldest, Jack, was hoping he'd see a bear. There were signs all over the place, "Don't Feed the Bears", or "Bear Country" so Jack thought for sure he'd see one. I kept asking him what he would do if he actually saw him. He didn't answer me, his eyes just got as big as silver dollars!

The Cardinals have a new face on the sidelines this season but the newly minted coach isn't happy with his look elsewhere.
Kliff Kingsbury, who was brought in during the offseason, is getting ready for his first NFL season and that means his first Madden appearance. But the 39-year-old coach isn't thrilled with how he was depicted in the popular video game.
"I had seen a bunch of guys kind of getting in their feelings about their ratings and then somebody sent me a picture of what I look like on there. I want to get adjusted on looks rating," Kingsbury said Tuesday. "I look like I'm on 'The Walking Dead' in that picture.
"So, yeah, I apologize to any of those players that I thought, 'Hey, it's just a video game. Why are you upset?' Because I saw my picture on there and I'm not pleased with where we're at. So we'll have to work on that."
A number of players were upset with their individual Madden ratings for this upcoming season and the Cardinals' team numbers also got brought up Tuesday.
Arizona's offense was given a 73 and its defense an 80 in the game. Kingsbury admitted he doesn't play the game but that the team seemed to be dissatisfied with the numbers.
As for Kingsbury, he just wants his photo fixed.
"It's funny you bring that up," Kingsbury said. "It looks like they're all pretty low to start so I don't think that locker room is probably pleased with where they're at on that game."
He added, regarding his photo: "Let's work on that, adjusters."

Oh, Here We Go Again: Darcy Smith, Elementary School Teacher, Charged with Child Rape for Allegedly Having Sex a Former Student, Starting When He Was 14Posted: February 5, 2015
SEATTLE — A 41-year-old elementary school teacher has been charged with child rape for allegedly having sex with a former student starting when he was 14 and living in her home with her husband and children, court documents showed Thursday.
Darcy Smith, a teacher at McMicken Heights Elementary School, was charged Monday with three counts of third-degree child rape.
In May 2014, the former student reported to the King County Sheriff’s Office that when he was 12 years old and in the 6th grade, he moved into the Renton home of his 6th-grade teacher, Darcy Smith. He said that when he was 14, they started having sex and that continued until he was 18 and moved out of Smith’s house, a sheriff’s detective said in the court documents.
The victim said that he came to live in Smith’s home after he broke his collarbone in the 6th grade and Smith took him to the hospital and invited to stay with her family. He said his mother and Smith agreed that he could live with Smith and her family because she spoke English and lived closer to the hospital.
Also, he said, his mother was concerned because his older brother was involved in gangs and was a bad influence. Read the rest of this entry »

Disclaimer: I do not own Sailor Moon.
By Silver Sailor Ganymede
A chill breeze swept across the mountainside and through the dense forests, swaying the trees as it went. A small figure walked steadily along the path, seemingly unable to feel the cold and uncaring of it if she did. Her cerulean blue eyes and starlight-silver hair shone brilliantly in the light of the Moon, but she did not dare to gaze up at the shining orb; it would hurt too much if she did, but sacrifices must be made for love, must they not?
Her white dress too shone eerily in the moonlight as she turned her piercing gaze to a clearing nearby; that was where he was, she remembered now. She continued into the clearing, the stench of damp bark mingled with heavily perfumed flowers as she went. Then she saw it, on the far side of the clearing: the cave where he lay.
She walked quickly towards the cave and soon had entered the darkness, her own silvery aura the only source of light. And there he was, in the corner of the cave, just as she had left him. His black hair was still the shade of deepest midnight and his eyes, though unseeing, were still the unnaturally dark blue she remembered: his skin was still flawless, his form still perfect; whoever would have guessed she had kept him in this state of sleep for over a thousand years?
She smiled sadly at the thought and ran her finger along his lips, still perfect, red as rubies, but so cold, so lifeless. She felt tears come into her eyes as she remembered: but she'd had to do it, she'd had to place her lover into this enchanted sleep; after all, who could have borne the death of perfection? He was perfect even by her own people's standards, and they were the most highly envied race in the galaxy, she knew that for a fact. No, they had been; they were all gone now, she remembered; her mother had died and taken her people with her: she was the last of the Lunarians, thegraceful children of the Moon.
She knew, however, that she was not alone; she could never be alone with her beautiful Endymion by her side, even as he dreamed in the moonlight in a sleep from which he would never awaken. Still she was tired, so tired of being without him; perhaps they would meet again in their dreams: that is what she was here to do. She opened a vial she had concealed in the folds of her dress and looked at it with a pained expression. How could she do this? Why was she doing this? But she knew how and she knew why; it was the only way for perfection to survive, the only way for her to be reunited with her love.
She tipped the contents of the vial down her throat, the taste nauseating for a moment, then it passed; everything passed. The moonlight began to fade and she slipped into the deep sleep herself: but she did not feel fear, only hope: hope that she and her Endymion would somehow be reunited after all these many years…

Gosh what a weekend last Tuesday dexter went on Zantac and I came on here asking for help and as always u were there for me thank you. Since then he seemed to be more unsettled and hardly sleeping on the day worse then normal then Saturday night he started crying, he was screaming in pain and nothing would stop him even offering the breast, I was so scared that we got in the car and headed to A+E. Half way there Dex still crying kept suddenly going silent his eyes rolling and shallow breath I had to kinda shake him to being him round I was so scared we went through a red light just had to get there he eventually just crashed out and fell asleep catching his breath and whimpering. Though I had filmed a bit of the cry to show the doc tho my phone went flat and I'm sure the doctor thought he was simply crying over reactive mother grr. It was not the case at all. Saw a peaditrition who said can't find anything physically wrong and sent me home with the same Zantac he was on. Since then I decided to stop the Zantac and go back to gaviscon. Has anyone else seen this in their babies? The floppy episodes in the car were so scary. He seemed to be in pain with his tummy tho can't be sure. I'm so worried now everytime he cries I think oh no .

Six years ago, Queensland mine worker Ryan struck and killed a pedestrian while travelling on the Bruce Highway on his way home from work. What followed was a living nightmare during which he was charged over the tragic death and endured a lengthy legal battle. For the first time, Ryan shares his story.
In 2012 Ryan was driving home from work. It was late, it was dark and it had been raining. He was on the highway between two trucks and was about to change lanes, quickly looking over his shoulder to make sure he could merge.
In his peripheral vision, he noticed a flash of colour, heard a thud as his windscreen smashed.
At first he thought he had hit a kangaroo, but when he pulled over and saw the crumpled mess on the side of the road, he realised it was much, much worse.
Ryan had hit someone.
What he didn't know was that the truck in front of him had to swerve to miss the pedestrian. The truck behind saw everything and radioed to the rig ahead.
"You know that guy you swerved to miss? The car behind you cleaned him up."
Ryan called Triple Zero (000) and then froze. He couldn't move. He couldn't believe what he was seeing.
"Triple Zero asked me to go and check if the pedestrian was breathing. I couldn't move, I was hysterical. I handed the phone to a bystander who spoke to the operator.
“I was told not to go down there as the person was in a pretty bad way. I was shaking, I was sweating, I couldn't stand and I couldn't sit. My brain and body just couldn't cope with what had just happened.
“I couldn't even ask if he was OK. No words were coming out."
The ambulance arrived and started working on the pedestrian while Ryan was breathalysed by police. He was then taken back to the station for questioning.
"They asked me a few questions about what happened, where I was going and where I had been,” he says.
That’s when Ryan was informed the pedestrian had died.
“When they told me, I was flooded with emotions,” he says. “I was angry and frustrated. I wanted to be able to turn back time. I felt shattered.
“It really felt like my life was falling apart around me.
“I remember sitting there in so much shock and pain. I wanted to cry but I couldn't. It was like the air in the room had been sucked out and I was in a void.
“I tried to scream but nothing was coming out."
During the autopsy, they discovered the pedestrian's blood alcohol level had been between point 0.4 and 0.5 - he had been drinking steadily for about six hours before being hit.
"I've lost people in my life and I know what it’s like to lose a family member,” Ryan says.
“I immediately started thinking of his family. Did he have a wife and kids? Who was going to tell his mum and his dad that I’d killed their son?
“I started feeling loss and grief for his family it was gut-wrenching. Not only did I feel like my life had been ruined, but I ruined the lives of an entire family and ended the life of someone I didn't know.”
As time went by, Ryan tried to continue with life as normal, in hindsight as a coping mechanism.
"I went to work on Monday and had a staff meeting,” he recalls. “It was hard standing in front of my peers and telling them I had killed someone. I broke down and lost my shit. I wasn't coping."
About a month later Ryan got a call from his solicitor asking him to present himself to the police as they wanted to charge him with Dangerous Driving Causing Death.
"So many things raced through my mind,” he says. “Why now? Why a month later? Was I going to be locked up then and there? All the feelings from the night came flooding back and I broke down again."
During the court case Ryan saw photos of the victim.
"This deceased person I was looking at, all these bloody photos, were my fault. All the feelings of that night came flooding back again and again. I felt ill. I couldn't get over the fact that I killed someone who was probably a nice guy."
After three years of legal delays, he finally faced court.
"Being in court that day was terrifying. All this legal jargon was flying over my head. I just wanted to turn, run and hide,” he says.
“This day was going to change my life forever.
“I was possibly looking at jail time. I still couldn't reconcile in my mind that even though I felt I hadn't done anything wrong someone died and someone needed to be punished.”
The maximum sentence for the charge he was facing is 14 years. The two truck drivers gave their accounts, as did several people who saw the pedestrian drinking for hours before the accident, and witnesses who saw him leave the pub in an intoxicated manor, wearing dark clothing on a wet dark night.
To this day, nobody knows why he was standing in the middle of the highway.
After all the witnesses were called and legal arguments had taken place the judge called a recess.
"It was the most intense 30 minutes I've ever faced,” Ryan says. “My pulse rate was through the roof.
“When the judge came back he spoke for a few minutes and then got to the point. He said, ‘There is no evidence before me of any serious breach of the defendant’s conduct in any way. I don't believe there is a case to answer here. Adjourned.’”
It was all over with a bang of the gavel.
After three years and nearly $60,000 in legal fees later, it was determined that Ryan was innocent.
"A lot of the guilt lifted of my shoulder,” he says. “It was finally determined that I did nothing wrong. It no longer felt like I murdered someone.
“It now felt like he made a mistake and I was driving home innocently,” he says. “It was just a tragic accident, there was no way I could have avoided it.”
After a few deep breaths Ryan realised that his life had now changed, again.
"I felt that the last three years my life had been on hold; during those three years I didn't want to make any long-term plans,” he says.
“I didn't do anything that was permanent or solid, just in case I went to jail, but I didn't realise that I had been doing that until the gavel came down.
“After that I started making plans and goals for the future"
Ryan needed to see a psychiatrist to help with the stress, guilt and anguish of what he’d been through. One of their first recommendations was for him to drive through that intersection where the accident had taken place repeatedly, so that driving there became normal again. Otherwise the fear of driving could paralyse him for the rest of his life.
It’s been over six years since the accident and while the worst of the mental pain is starting to fade, Ryan still occasionally feels guilt over what happened.
“Every St. Patrick's Day I will have a quiet Guinness for the guy I hit,” he says.
A regret that Ryan has is he never contacted the family of the deceased.
"I actually asked my lawyer several times about writing a letter or contacting the family direct and he advised against it before the case,” he says.
After the Not Guilty verdict he was told the family may see it as rubbing their faces in it and that it may not achieve anything.
Still, it’s something that haunts Ryan to this day.
© Nine Digital Pty Ltd 2018

COSTA MESA — There was a face missing among the football players/workers during the inaugural Battle of the Brush clean-up at Canyon Park Saturday.
When his name was brought up, the faces that were there turned sad.
Carlos Vazquez of Costa Mesa High couldn't be with his teammates, as they joined forces with Estancia for a day to landscape the park. He has more going on in his life. On Monday, Vazquez was diagnosed with leukemia, Costa Mesa Coach Jeremy Osso said.
It's been an emotional week for the Mustangs. Still, they capped the week with some community service, as they worked with their rivals.
"I was just devastated," said Tyler Biggs, a Costa Mesa football player and a friend of Vazquez. "I cried and everything. It was the worst thing I could ever hear."
Last week during spring practices, Vazquez experienced fatigue, Osso said. Vazquez, who will be a senior in the fall, woke up Monday with pain in his jaw and he also noticed some sort of rash break out on his skin, Osso said. He went to his doctor and was sent to Children's Hospital of Orange County, where he was diagnosed with leukemia.

BTS Reaction To Being Obessessed With You, Mafia au
Anonymous said to b-tsfanfic-tion: Hello!! I was wondering if you could do a BTS Mafia AU reaction in which they are obsessed with you??
As a cold, hard mafia boss, Jin rarely showed his soft side. Especially to his men. But you were a special exception. To him, you were a special exception to most things. That’s just how much he liked you. More like loved you. Actually, to be accurate he was obsessed with you.
This was especially obvious when it came to dinner every night. There was a strict rule established that at six o'clock absolutely none of Jin’s henchmen were allowed to bother him with mafia work. This was because at six every night he would start to cook you and him dinner for the evening. Tonight you were sitting on one of the counters in his vast kitchen, watching him cook something on the stove. He had a hard time concentrating on the cooking when you were in the room, but the risk of getting burned helped him focus at least a little.
“How do you like it so far, princess?” he asked, holding out a spoon for you to take a taste from.
“It’s perfect! Like always,” you said, and the compliment left him blushing like he wasn’t a well known mob boss. You two chatted away as he made dinner for you, set the table, and throughout the dinner as well. You were halfway through the meal when one of his men came bursting into the room. You noticed the blood spattered across his shirt at once, but Jin hardly seemed to care.
“Boss, we screwed the job up! We need you to come right away,” he said, looking completely frazzled.
“You know the rule,” Jin said with a seemingly bored wave of his hand. Both you and his henchmen were completely shocked by what he had just said. But to him this dinner was the most important part of his day, and he wouldn’t give up time with you for anything.
“But, sir, we need-”
“No! You fucked it up, now you fix it! Get out before I get even angrier,” Jin said, finally turning to look at the man with a glare. The man paused for only a moment before resigning himself to his own fate and rushing back out of the room.
“Jin, you don’t have to stay here. You can go. That sounded really important,” you told him, a concerned look passing over your face.
Aw, look at that. She’s worried about me, Jin mused to himself. He gave you a gentle smile and reached across the table to grasp your hand in his, “You’re the most important thing to me.”
You started to smile too after his compliment and said, “Alright, if you’re sure.”
Of course he was sure. There was one thing he was positive about, and it was you. No one and nothing ever topped you to him. He wasn’t joking when he said you were the most important thing to him. Once you had come into his life, all he could think about was you. All that mattered to him was you.
Yoongi was so powerful that everyone in the city knew his name. For those who needed help and couldn’t get it in conventional ways often talked about him positively. It looked like you were going to be one of those people. You waited out at a local restaurant he was known to frequent (the owner credited Yoongi for the possibility of the restaurant since he laid down majority of the funds to get it started), and you were hoping against hope to see him. You didn’t know what you would say when you did see him though, but you had to try to convince him to help you.
Yoongi walked through the door, flanked by some of his most important men. Many of the people eating dinner were suddenly craning to see a glimpse of him. You watched nervously as he sat down, not knowing when to approach him.
“Need anything?” the waiter asked you, pulling you from your worried thoughts. They looked over to where you had been glancing just moments ago, and spotted the stoic Yoongi, “Did he do something for you too?”
“No. Actually, that’s what I’m hoping will happen tonight,” you admitted, then added with a groan, “But I don’t even know how to approach him.”
“Want me to ask him if you can come over?” the waiter asked.
“Wait, really?” you asked, completely taken by surprise by their offer. A few moments later they were proving they meant it. They were pointing you out to him, and you subconsciously straightened up. The minute Yoongi saw you, he was entranced. He immediately told the waiter to bring you over. When you started to walk over, Yoongi told his men to give you two some space. You sat down across from him, and your doe eyed look already had him biting back an uncharacteristic smile.
“So, I was told you needed something?” he asked, leaning a tidbit closer.
“I was wondering if you’d higher me?” you asked. You felt yourself getting even more nervous when his eyebrows raised in surprise almost immediately.
“You don’t exactly look like the type of person I’d higher,” he said, “Most are a bit tougher.”
“I could learn!” you said, trying your best to sell yourself. What you didn’t know was that he was already totally sold on you. Just not as his employee. You decided it was best to be completely honest and said, “I need the money.”
He looked like he was considering your offer. Really, he was just taking a moment to admire you. He eventually spoke up, “What if I just gave you what you needed?”
“What? You do that?” you asked, and he gave his head a small shake. He knew it the moment he saw you, he’d do anything you wanted. He didn’t know how you had made him fall for you in moments, but you had and there was no going back for him.
“Not usually, no,” he told you, “But I think I could make an exception. Besides, I have a feeling you wouldn’t really cut it in this line of work.”
After that you were a thankful mess, blushing and saying thanks in every way you could think of. He watched you with the small, almost unnoticeable, of smiles. Even as you left to go back to your own table, you kept looking over your shoulder and saying ‘thank you’s. Yoongi and his men ended up finishing up before you, and he stopped at your table before leaving.
“This is for if you ever need anything,” he said, and then he handed you a slip of paper with his number on it.
“This is too nice,” you said, knowing this was something he didn’t do often.
“Just call,” he said, still insisting on giving you his number. You gave him a thankful smile as he walked away. Of course, you had no idea that when you did call, it would actually be you doing the favour for him.
You were neighbors to gangster Hoseok, but you were none the wiser. He was such a happy guy, he never struck you as someone who did the under the table sort of things. In fact the two of you had even started to date, but you were still completely in the dark. Hoseok was sure never to let on what he did for a living. He wouldn’t dare, because then you might be scared off. Already, he knew if that happened he would be a total wreck. He would do absolutely anything and everything to keep you two together. Even if that meant hiding a piece of himself away from you.
There was one night where he almost slipped up. You two had been hanging out at your place when things quickly got heated. Afterwards, he had gotten out of bed to leave but you reached out to stop him.
“Why don’t you just spend the night?” you asked, and immediately his heart started to pound with excitement. He came right back into your bed, more than happy to spend the night with you. He couldn’t believe you had asked him to stay. This was a dream to him. Ever since he had even seen you, this exact scenario had played out in his head a million times (he never really stopped thinking of you). He couldn’t help but feel immediately comfortable when he wrapped his arms around you. He was so comforted by your presence, he fell asleep almost immediately.
Halfway through the night there was a pounding on the door that woke him up. After a moment, he realized that someone wasn’t knocking on your door. There were knocking on the door of the apartment next to yours, which was Hoseok’s. He automatically, and unknowingly, tensed his muscles with stress. Nobody but other gangsters came that late. He looked towards you and for a second he could relax. One thing was going good, you were somehow still asleep. He carefully entangled himself from you, as much as he didn’t want to. He quietly walked to your door in nothing but his boxer briefs. He took one last glance at you, making sure you were still deep asleep.
He carefully opened the door to glare at his fellow gang member, “Do you realize how loud you are?”
The other man looked very surprised to see Hoseok next door instead of in his own apartment. After a moment he broke into a grin and said, “You’re fucking the girl next door, huh?”
Hoseok glared at his counterpart before saying, “Don’t talk about her like that. Ever.”
“Fine, sorry man. Jesus,” he said with an eye roll, which only made Hoseok glare harder, “Come on, we got to go.”
Hoseok felt his heart sink when he realized he would have to leave you. If it was up to him he would spend the entire week just holding you in bed. But he knew if he didn’t go then he would get in trouble with the boss. All hell would be let loose after that, and you would definitely find out he was a gangster. He couldn’t have that, so he took the lesser of two terrible options and left. But not before leaving a note giving you a fake excuse why he had to leave, which also broke his heart. Even though he’d see you tomorrow, he hated leaving you tonight.
Namjoon was a rich, handsome, successful mob boss. No one could control him. No one but you. Normally he was the one controlling people, but with a lift of your finger you cold get him to do anything. Of course, you barely even noticed. It’s not like you asked for much, but if you did he would happily fulfill every single wish. Once, you had quietly walked into a very serious meeting of his. You took a seat on a armchair in the back of the room, more than willing to wait. But Namjoon wasn’t about to make you sit around, you were too good for that.
“Everyone, the meeting is over for now so go ahead and clear out. I’ll come get you when I’m ready,” he said with a nod. Everyone was out in moments, leaving the two of you alone. Namjoon was all ears, more than ready to hear whatever you had to say.
“You didn’t need to make everyone go. I am fine waiting,” you said with a sweet smile that made him smile in return.
“Honey, you shouldn’t have to wait,” he told you.
Another time you had expressed a discomfort with guns. The men who came to Namjoon’s mansion always had them out. You said the offhand comment of, “Seeing guns has always made me uncomfortable.”
The next day, and every day after that, you noticed no one was keeping their guns out in full display. You guessed they stayed tucked away in bags, waistbands, and pockets. Namjoon had made it a strict rule that no one should let their gun be visible, especially if you were in the room.
He treated you so good, that everyone else started to do it too. Not even just the men in his gang, they had always been expected to treat you perfectly. But after enough time, even the people in the city saw you in the highest regard which was all thanks to the power Namjoon had.
You didn’t even take advantage of this, as much as Namjon truly believe you deserved it. He felt like you deserved everything, because to him you were everything.
You and Jimin had been seeing each other for months, much to his delight. He was completely head over heels for you from almost the moment he met you. So that fact that you were actually interested in him left him elated. But there was something you didn’t know. You had no idea that Jimin was was a gangster, and he was terrified to tell you. He had an awful feeling that would be a deal breaker, and even though you never thought about it, it most definitely would be.
One night you two were on a date, walking back to his car after a movie the two of you had just seem. It seemed like the perfect moment. You were holding hands, it was a beautiful twilight, and Jimin kept flirting with you by pulling you towards him and giving you a quick peck.
But everything turned south when a dark van pulled up. You saw a man lean out of the window with a gun, and you thought you and Jimin were done for. Then suddenly Jimin was letting go of your hand and whipping out a gun of his own. You were frozen with fear when he shot at the man. You didn’t even know if he missed or not, the van driver speeding off after a few moments.
You looked between Jimin and the gun in his hand for only a moment before making a break for it down the street. Jimin pocketed his gun before following you. It was easy for him to keep up with you, and eventually you gave up. Or really, more like you gave up on running away. You still were most definitely done with Jimin.
“Wait y/n, baby, let’s talk this out,” he said to you when you finally slowed to a walk, worried you might start running any moment.
“I don’t want to talk to you,” you said, shocked tears streaming down your cheeks. Tears were starting to prick his own eyes when he heard that, but he managed to keep his composure.
“I’ll stop. I’ll quit this line of work,” he said, already making promises, “Just don’t leave me.”
You paused to look at him and try to discern if he was being honest with you. It seemed he really meant what he was saying. The truth was, he knew he was always going to be a gangster. Quitting wasn’t really an option. But he also knew his life would be basically over if you weren’t with him.
“I need you,” he said, still trying to get you to stay and finally telling the truth. He couldn’t be without you. Everything changed when he met you, and he knew he couldn’t go back to a life that didn’t have you in it.
You surprised him by giving him a hug, your arms wrapping around him tightly. You buried your head in the crook of his neck, tears still running down your face. Despite how surprised he was by you, his response was almost automatic. He wrapped his arms around your waist, pulling you right up against him.
“Yeah, no shit you need me. Look where not having me around has gotten you,” you said, joking a little. He smiled, knowing that was actually completely true.
You were at a club when Taehyung saw you. You were out in the dance floor, and he was at his private table and booth. The minute he noticed you in the crowd, he couldn’t keep his eyes off you. For the rest of the night, he watched you. Everything you did was stunning and intriguing to him. He finally gestured one of his men closer so he could give him a command. He pointed you out and said, “See her? Bring her over here.”
When you were first approached by someone who looked so intimidating, your friends were immediately by your side. You all looked him up and down with the toughest glares you could muster. However, the thug wasn’t even close to dettered, “My boss would like to talk to you.”
“Who’s your boss?” you asked, your curiosity peaked. Usually people would say they were interested in you or their friend was, but never their boss. When he pointed to the very attractive, well dressed man who was keeping an easy eye on you. Your friends were already suggesting you not go, but you had to figure out what he wanted with you.
Taehyung started to smile confidently the moment he saw that you decided to come over. With every step, his heart started to pound excitedly. No one had ever made him feel this nervous anymore. Not since he became such a powerful mafia boss. But something about you made him feel like any other guy, because to him you were superior than anyone else in the room.
“You wanted to see me?” you asked once you reached him. He gestured to the place next to him, and you sat down with a slightly nervous smile.
She’s even prettier when she’s this close, he mused to himself while trying to find a flaw in your features and failing. But out loud he simply asked, “Do you know who I am?”
“Should I?” you asked, your head tilting to the side just a little as you asked the question.
“I’m Taehyung,” he said, and he could see your eyebrows jump up. You naturally were on a higher alert after that. You hadn’t realized it by just looking at him, but you definitely knew who he was. This whole time Taehyung was hoping you would still be interested in him, because he was quickly becoming much more than just interested in you.
“You recognize my name,” he commented, clocking your immediate response.
“Yeah, I do,” you admitted.
“And, what do you think?” he asked, still waiting on what you were going to do. You looked at him, then gazed over your shoulder to your friend group. They were all chatting with each other while periodically sending a few quick glances your way just in case. You looked back to him one more, and his expression was even more unreadable than yours.
“I think the logical thing would be to walk away,” you admitted, subconsciously playing with the hem of your dress as you said that.
“Mhmm, it probably would be,” he said, and you could have sworn his voice had gotten just a little deeper and even more enticing.
“But…” you could only get out one word before trailing off. There was something about him, something about the way he looked at you, that intrigued you. So you did what was by the far the most reckless thing of the night. You leaned in and kissed him.
I think my life is about to get very interesting, he thought to himself before deepening the kiss.
Jungkook was the most ruthless of all his gang members, bt that’s what made him such a valuable member. One of the more reckless things he did was get involved with you. He could tell when he first met you that if he actually dated you then he’d probably get completely caught up in you. Still, he couldn’t stop himself, and his prediction was completely true.
He would do anything for you, which became clear when his entire gang became holed up in his place after a big robbery. He kept you nestled right up next to him, not trusting any of his gangster buddies to not flirt with you. After all, if he was obsessed with you then why wouldn’t everyone be? All evening his boss had been slighting you, and all evening Jungkook stood up for you. You wished he wouldn’t, knowing his boss was just being an asshole and standing up to someone so power hungry could be dangerous.
“I bet she can’t even shoot a gun without flinching,” the boss said with a snicker. You knew Jungkook was annoyed when you suddenly felt his arm flex around you. He was trying to restrain himself so much, but he couldn’t stop himself from tensing up.
“It doesn’t matter if she can. I can shoot a gun real easy,” Jungkook said, pulling his gun out of his jacket with the hand that wasn’t currently resting on the side of your hip. Everyone in the room, including you, look completely surprised at what had just happened. There was no doubt, Jungkook pulling out his gun and saying he was a good aim was most definitely an aggressive move.
You could feel the tension building in the air and suddenly you were being pushed by Jungkook. You fell off the couch you had been sitting on and onto the floor. You barely noticed though, your mind paying more attention to the noises of guns going off. A moment later Jungkook was pulling you up off the ground. You looked around and noticed everyone who wasn’t dead was just ask shocked as you were. Still, Jungkook knew neither of you didn’t have time for you to process what just happened. So he grabbed your hand and started to drag you out of the room. Once you made it to the hallway you started to cry, which broke his heart.
“Come on, baby. You got to be strong just till we make it to the car,” he said, still leading you outside. You nodded and tried your best to focus on just getting to the car.
Once the two of you were inside the car and he was driving off you finally started to cry and ask him the question that you had the moment you saw that he had killed his boss, and notoriously powerful gang leader, “What are we going to do?”
“I’m taking us to a friend’s outside the city. We’ll stay there to we figure out what to do,” he said as he turned onto the highway.
“Why did you do it?” you asked, looking at him with a wide eyed expression. He chanced glancing between you and the road. He hated to see you worried, but the doe eyed look you were giving him at the moment could make his heart pound. He moved one of his hands off the wheel and reached for yours.
You met him halfway, letting him intertwined his fingers with yours. Finally, he felt he could answer your question, “Because I’ll never let anyone look down on you, angel. You don’t even understand how much better you are then them.”
You nodded, not even knowing that by “them”, Jungkook didn’t just mean the people in his gang. He meant everyone. To him, there was no one better than you.

By Jesse Yomtov, USA TODAY
Elijah Earnheart, a 12-year-old boy in Texas who stands more than 6 feet tall and weighs nearly 300 pounds, has been told that he's too big to play pee-wee football.
According to MyFoxDFW.com, Elijah practiced for three weeks with the Mesquite Vikings, but at a preseason weigh-in Sunday he was told that he's too big and isn't allowed to play in the league and must play in the school league with players older than him.
The league's president says the rule is any seventh-grader more than 135 pounds is barred.
"I don't want to play in school right now because it's people that's had experience and I want to get some experience first and then start playing," Elijah said. "I just want to play because my teammates are my friends. I know them. I don't want to go play for somebody else I don't know."
Elijah's mother Cindy said the ruling has really upset her son, and she plans to protest.
"For him to come home and just cry and go to his room and say, 'I give up.' I'm not going to let him give up. This is his dream. This is what he wants to do. And I'm going to make it happen," she said.
Mesquite Pee-Wee Football Association President Ronnie Henderson said a few other players were barred for the same reason.
"The coach over there should have known this. He's been told this. He's been to our meetings. He knows this," Henderson said. "I don't know where the misunderstanding was. We hate it. I don't like it for the kid or the parents."

A few days ago I went to have a look at a blog written by someone who had liked one of my posts. I started reading a post about relationships and letting God into your relationship. So many people give up on their marriage at the first sign of problems but if you let God into your relationship you can get over any problems you have.
This might upset some people but although I consider myself to be a Christian and try to live in a way that is kind to others. I do not actually believe in God. I kind of believe that there is something greater than us mortals but I’m not sure what. I digress. What I really want to say is that I think this philosophy that God will make your marriage work is a dangerous one.
It doesn’t take into account the many relationships that include abuse, either physical or emotional or both. It doesn’t take into account the marriages/relationships based on lies.
My first marriage was to a man who was what is now referred to as coercive controlling. I didn’t realise for a long time what was happening. It started with the dictates over what I wore. He didn’t like me dressing up to look nice. I ended up spending my time (outside of work) wearing baggy T-shirts, sweatshirts and baggy tracksuit trousers. Then there were the constant phone calls which, I now know, were not concern over how I was doing each day (multiple times) but checking up on me. If I was late home from the school run I had to explain where I had been and who with.
I was gradually pulled away from my friends. “They are using you”. When I eventually got a mobile phone the checking up increased. Even if I was with my mother the calls would be constant. In the end she would ask me to turn it off. If I had plans to go out, he would only arrive home at the very last minute to look after the children. Even having a part time job was difficult, I felt I was becoming unemployable because he often didn’t come home in time for me to go to work. That’s just a sample of what life was like in that relationship. I fail to see how this would have been helped by having God in my life.
My second marriage was not better, it was different. Again I don’t believe God would have made life better. When I met my second husband he knew that my first husband was an alcoholic and I didn’t want to travel that road again. It wasn’t until 6 months after we were married that I found out that he was a secret drinker. Our marriage was based on lies. I never would have married him or even gone out with him, if I had known he was an alcoholic. With my first husband his drinking was public. 18 pints of beer at the pub, any excuse for a drink. My second husband was home alone all day while I was out working. Now I know why nothing ever got done. He was sitting in his home office drinking bottles of vodka. No wonder he got through so much cash. No wonder he didn’t need to drink much when we were out.
My second husband is a narcissist, everything was about him, his needs, his wishes. His dislike of my children (he had promised to treat them like his own). He could never refer to them by name, to him they were ‘pond life’ or worse. I know this was a reflection on him not them. How would God have made life better when one partner is a narcissitic alcoholic?
These are just simple examples of the relationships I had with my husbands. There are many many people, not just women but men too who live in worse situations than I did. For them they need to get out of their situation not invite God to help them stay in it.
I’m not saying that there is not a place for God in marriages, just not all marriages. Some people would also find God helpful in their lives whilst they get out of their situation. God also has a place in helping people recover from those situations. I don’t think it’s right to say he can make every relationship work.

Hey there, time traveller!
This article was published 16/12/2011 (1748 days ago), so information in it may no longer be current.
The focus of Saturday night's Jets game against the Anaheim Ducks has been Teemu Selanne, but this is Sirpa Selanne's homecoming, too.
The wife of the Finnish Flash and mother to their four children spent nearly four years of her life here and she had no desire to leave back in February of 1996. That's when her husband was traded to the Anaheim Mighty Ducks and she was nine months pregnant with their first child, son Eemil, now 15.
"Teemu left and came back and we delivered Eemil here. We lived here for one week and then moved to California," she said, noting her eldest is the only member of the family with Canadian citizenship.
"The trade was the worst thing that ever happened. There were some rumours, but we were told they were just rumours. We didn't really believe them. It was a really big shock. The timing was so bad for our personal (lives). It was a sad time for hockey here, the team was moving away. The whole spring we were thinking we were going to have to say goodbye," she said.
Sirpa was looking forward to being met by some old friends at Winnipeg's new air terminal building, but they weren't the only ones who greeted her and her three other kids, too, sons Eetu, 14, Leevi, 11, and daughter, Veera, 4.
"The customs guys were recognizing us. They were so friendly. It was a really nice welcome," she said.
She said her husband thinks there won't be much fuss made over him and his return to Winnipeg but she knows better.
"I'm telling him it's going to be overwhelming. I'm here because this is huge, huge for all of us. Teemu started playing hockey here and he did so well. We loved it here. I couldn't stay away from this game. I'm so glad for Winnipeg having a team again and seeing Teemu back here. It's going to be awesome," she said.
Sirpa said when the new Winnipeg Jets contacted her free-agent husband last summer, she was open to a possible move.
"I told Teemu, 'no matter where you play, it's OK for me.' I'm more adventurous. I always believe things happen for a reason. I think Teemu was thinking since the kids are so old, it's harder to move the whole pack now. There are six people and you have to think about everybody's life. He loved it here, but he's also loyal to the Ducks. He was honoured that Winnipeg was interested," she said.
The family has also been joined by Selanne's mother, Liisa, who spent a lot of time in Winnipeg in the early 1990s and still has many friends here. In fact, none of the Selanne clan is staying in a hotel for their three-day visit. Sirpa and the four kids are staying with the Leipsic family, with whom they hung out so many years ago.
Leevi, decked out in a new Winnipeg Jets T-shirt, said he'll be dressed in Jets gear for the game. When asked who he'll be cheering for, he paused for a minute before replying, "I'm going to cheer for my dad and the Jets."
"Even though I like Anaheim, the Jets are still my favourite team. I always wanted them to come back. I love the team. The (retro) logo is so sick and the new one is pretty cool, too," he said.
Leevi said it didn't take him long to get an appreciation of what his dad's return to Winnipeg means for so many fans. "I have a feeling they're going to give him a standing ovation," he said.
Sirpa said she has been going to all of her husband's games for the last four years because every season could be his last. She's not one to ever put pressure on him, but she secretly hopes this one is his curtain call.
"I'm ready to have him home and help with these crazy teenagers. But I'm glad he's still playing, because he's still playing well," she said.
All three of their boys play hockey, but they haven't seen a game in a Canadian rink. Sirpa is anticipating they'll have a little culture shock.
"Hockey is way bigger here than in the U.S.A. I'm excited for them to see how fun it is going to be to go to hockey games in this country," she said.

I've played two last rounds with cardiffwizard. That's was a very interesting tourney. I actually was away during the first of the "last rounds" and I would have lost on time if he didn't greciously "wait" for me. (Thanks again cardiffwizard, if you are reading this)
Eventually I won the tourney
Edit: I was away during the end of the first round of the tourney, but the the first of the "last rounds".

Next, they both did a little height assessment to make sure they were up for the challenge.
Then, it was time to discuss strategy in the locker room.
And, I guess they had a disagreement about who was tough enough to defend Lebron, because before I knew it, we had trash talk.
Don't worry though. They worked it out as good teammates do, and we are ready for tonight!
LET'S GO MAVS!!

Kwong Wah Yit Poh reported that Hong Kong actor Julian Cheung's vision had deteriorated after long hours of exposure to electronic gadgets.|
He said he had cut down on the use of his handphone, adding that he had also advised his family members and friends to do the same.
"I feel that using the handphone is a bad habit.
"We must get away from it. One hour a day is okay," he was quoted by the daily as saying after showing up at a skin care product launch in Kuala Lumpur on Sunday.

I really have liked my LG dryer a lot. It can hold nice big loads and does a fairly good job drying them. It doesn't get them dry as quickly as I'd like and you want to make sure you don't really stuff it full - it can handle big loads but if you overload it, it will take forever for your clothes to dry. Mine is quite a number of years old and I think that it doesn't dry as well as it did at first. It could just be my imagination, but the washer and dryer were advertised as being able to get done at roughly the same time and mine certainly does not anymore. I had to have one dryer drum replace because it went flat, my husband had to do some repair to the bearings because it started squeaking like crazy (thanks for the tips youtube!) and I think the drum is going flat again. I've had it for about 8 years. So, I wish that it had held up a bit better - they cost a lot! I would say make sure to buy the extended warranty because we did and used it several times for the washer and dryer. Overall, a good product.

We all know that bears are very dangerous. We usually try to avoid them if we’re in the places where they live. But what if a wild animal needs help?
The story took place in Karelia, on a lake.
Fishermen were fishing and did not think that such an adventure would happen to them on this day. They had to react very quickly because the bears needed their help!
A mother bear with two cubs tried to swim across the lake. However, halfway there, she realized that she would not be able to swim to the opposite shore, so she turned back. However, her babies continued to swim for some time. And then they began to sink. The boat in which the fishermen were was not far away, and the cubs realized that this was the only way they could survive!
They began to cling to the sides of the boat with their paws and teeth, trying to stay afloat. The kids with their eyes “begged” to save them. Of course, people were wary of wild animals but realized that the cubs just want to survive, not attack them.
One of the fishermen named Artyom said:
“The cubs were swimming with their mother, and suddenly we noticed that she was exhausted and turned back. And her cubs began to sink. We pulled them out of the water and ferried them to the shore, to which their mother was swimming.
Of course, we were afraid, because they’re wild animals. But they are living creatures, we could not let them drown, could not ignore and pretend not to see them».
For a while, the cubs had to cling to the boat themselves, as the fishermen decided what to do. They tightened one bear cub with a net, and the second one held on to the net in the water while the men swam to shore.
To the land, the men talked to the cubs, calming them like children. Maybe it helped the kids to hold on to the last because they saw that people were helping.
Fishermen took the bears to one of the islands, where they saw a mother bear swim. They hoped that the mother would soon find her cubs and help them recover from what had happened.
“They were almost completely exhausted and couldn’t even move. We hope that the mother bear will help them recover,” the brave rescuers said.

Ben escapes elimination, and gets to visit his hometown.
I can't say how much it means to me that I was voted back in -- it's an amzing feeling to have the support from America. Thank you. Ronnie and I got back to the house and soon found out that we were going to New Orleans. I was the most excited because that's where I grew up. We got in late, but we got to our hotel in the French Quarter. The next morning we went to the photo shoot location which was in a grave yard. It was one of the many places that New Orleans is known for. We met our photographer Christopher and he explained the feeling behind the shoot an bought in our prop raven Dennis.
I was so excited to be doing a shoot in my home town, I dressed up in all black and my makeup was almost ghostly. My 1st shoot was Perry, Holly and my self. It started out with Holly being the main focus then Perry and then I switched to me and the raven was on my shoulder. It was fun to express different emotions and I got a chance to play with my face.
I then got the chance to watch the other shoots. Shannon did very poor and while watching Perry and Holly, I realized that Holly wasn't really feeling it, she was just passing. I felt that Perry and I were really getting into it. At the end of the day there were a group shot that ended up turning into a group shot with the guys.
It was fun to shoot with the other two guys because their was good chemistry between us, and we knew we could get a great shot. We went back to the hotel to change so I could show them a good time. I took them to Arnaud's which is great place on Bourbon Stood cuisine. Then to top of the night we strolled down Bourbon St. the next day we left pulled up to a home site, we were working with Habitat for Humanity, to help rebuild Cherrie house.
It meant a lot to me to help someone who was affected by Katrina because most of my friends and family were in here same situation. So we started hammering and cutting, by the end of the day we built several walls, it was gratifying to see our work come together, and to see how happy we made Cherrie. We signed her walls and even tough it will get covered up she knows its there.
We had to leave which was hard for me to do, because it felt weird to be in New Orleans and not see any of my family. At the end of the week, Holly won for the week which she didn't deserve. I felt as though it was my week to win, and she did and It blew my mind. But at least I was in the top.
Ronnie and Shannon were in the bottom two and I'm not worried for Ronnie because I feel as though he is a better model than Shannon. I hope that America sees that as well. On top of that no one knows who Shannon is, or know anything about her. I think Ronnie deserves to come back over Shannon and I hope that you'll think so too. April, I love you.

By C. Leuch <firstname.lastname@example.org>
Submitted June 2000
Summary: As Lois and Clark's fifteen-year-old son Jon works his way through a shocking discovery about himself and his parents, he learns what it really means for a father to be a hero to his son.
This is my first fanfic. Actually, it's my first piece of fiction to see the light of day. There is a little bit of action in it, but mostly it's a piece about the journey a boy takes in finding out about himself and his father. I know I didn't do many of the characters justice, but hey, that's why you make sequels. Feel free to e-mail me with comments.
*Stars* around words denote thoughts.
Notes on my continuity: I am assuming everything in the show happens to Lois and Clark, up to the end of the second season. That's where my timeline splits off.
The usual disclaimers apply.
This story is part of the author’s “Dawn of Discovery” series, which includes “The Dawn of Discovery,” “How I Spent My Summer Vacation,” “Professional Loyalties,” “Personal Loyalties,” “It Runs in the Family,” “I'll Be You For Christmas,” “Meet Sam Wayne,” and “Gotham Nights.”
Ridley Davenport slammed the phone back into its holder and slumped dejectedly into his sofa. *Agents! They are certainly the root of all evil!*
His last novel had earned far less money than was anticipated, and Ridley had just been informed, in a very businesslike manner, that the next one had better be something special or he might be looking for a new publisher. Never mind the fact that the four novels that came before his latest attempt were unqualified successes. Publishers seemed to have a very short memory.
He sighed as he picked up the day's newspaper off the coffee table. The headline on the Daily Planet read, "Superman Apprehends Serial Killer, Foils Assassin's Latest Attempt." Written by Lois Lane and Clark Kent, of course. Count on the Planet to get the big headline on the Man of Steel.
Superman, now there was an interesting guy, Ridley thought. Somebody special. In the eighteen years since Superman first came onto the scene in Metropolis, he had been the subject of countless unsuccessful attempts to figure who he really was — what was his real personality? Did he have a "secret identity"? Where does he go when he's not saving people? Fictional stories had also popped up, starting with comic books and progressing into the occasional novel. Superman had allowed his name and likeness to be used so long as the profits went to charity, and, of course, Superman had to approve the story.
It occurred to Ridley that most of these fictional stories had been kiddie stuff or adventure stories — nothing dealing with the man himself. Even the novels were meant for teenagers who were more interested in the crime fighting stories than the other, more "adult" issues involved in the life of the Man of Steel. There might be a market in a Superman romance novel for all those ladies who seem to swoon over him, or a "real life of Superman" novel for all those interested in exposing who Superman really is. Inspiration began to strike the gloomy author.
Ridley looked at the headline again. Written by Lois Lane and Clark Kent, celebrated friends of Superman and the couple who always seemed to get exclusives on the man. Or they were. It seemed about the time of their marriage, they began to disassociate themselves with the superhero. Ridley was a sophomore in college when Superman saved the Space Station Prometheus project and announced his arrival in Metropolis. Lois Lane got that story, as well as the first, and only, exclusive interview with Superman. Ridley seemed to recall that Lois Lane and Superman were considered a bit of an item for a couple years. At the very least, it was public knowledge that the reporter was very infatuated with the young hero. Then Lane started going out with Clark Kent, another reporter at the Planet. It was rumored that if you wanted to get a hold of Superman, aside from throwing yourself off a building, all you had to do was contact Kent and he could somehow get in touch with the hero. A TV show even suggested, about a year and a half after Superman first appeared, that Kent WAS Superman. This was quickly disproved, but the reporter who broke that story, a Diana Stride, to this day sticks by this claim.
So here you had Lois Lane, who was in love with Superman, and Clark Kent, who some say is Superman, married, even now. What if Kent really was Superman? Ridley didn't really think that Kent was Superman; after all, the two had appeared together at a press conference after the Diana Stride expose. BUT it sure made a good story. Of course, he couldn't really use Lane and Kent as characters, per se, because he didn't want to get sued. But it wouldn't be too hard to make up two fictional reporters at a Metropolis newspaper.
Ridley smiled as he went to turn on his computer. This definitely had the possibility of being something special all right.
Six months later
Superman landed in front of the strip mall at the edge of New Troy after finishing his nightly patrol. No neon signs announced who the third tenant from the end was, a departure from the brightly lit businesses that surrounded it. Simple lettering on the door let the world know that this was the Superman Foundation. The hero entered through this door, as he did once every week. The interior had a reception counter and four other desks scattered around the rather small office, with framed photographs of Superman on the walls. Superman figurines and toys dotted the shelf that went around the entire office about 2 feet from the ceiling.
Due to the late hour, only Leslie, the night receptionist, remained on the job. She smiled as she heard the door open. The hero was nothing if not predicable, she thought as she reached for the stack of papers in a large box in the corner of the desk. Every Wednesday night, 10 PM exactly, Superman came into the Foundation to review the stack of proposals on use of his image. Some of these proposals were for new toys, some were for t-shirts, and some were for books, just to name a few. Depending on the mood he was in, or on other things that Leslie wasn't aware of, Superman would either look through the proposals (using his super speed, of course) at the office, or he would take them somewhere else and then bring them back the next day.
Leslie and Superman chatted for a couple of minutes. Obviously it wasn't a very busy night out there. How are the kids, he would ask. Is Bobby doing well in little league? Is the husband's job going OK? Leslie handed him the stack of papers and watched him flip through them as they finished their conversation.
All of a sudden the mood seemed to change and a frown came over Superman's face. He returned all the proposals to the secretary, complete with his initials of approval, except one. Leslie noticed that he held on to the novel they received yesterday — "The Life of a Super Man" by Ridley Davenport. There had been a lot of conversation around the office about that one. Leslie had only skimmed through it herself, but she had to admit that the concept was fascinating — Superman was actually a reporter, he was married and had a life. She thought it was a little preposterous, but some in the office pointed out that nobody really knew anything about the real life of Superman. The reporter that the Man of Steel was supposed to be was a thinly veiled version of the Daily Planet's Clark Kent, husband of Lois Lane, both known friends of Superman.
Leslie took the stack of approved proposals and placed them in a different box on her desk. Superman clutched at the novel and let her know that it was going to be a few days until he brought this one back to the office. Leslie thought that he was acting really funny — too quiet, almost anxious. He left rather abruptly, not even saying goodbye. Leslie just shook her head and went back to work — after all, even superheroes were allowed to be moody.
Superman circled around the suburban Metropolis neighborhood in the darkness and landed in the large yard of an average, middle class property. The stately maple trees hid his descent from the neighbors, as it did every other night. It was one of the main things that had attracted him to the house in the first place. It was a nice place, obviously very well lived in. A modest tree house perched midway up in one of the trees signaled that children were present. A large sign on the tree house exterior labeled it as the "fortress of solitude." A sandbox, complete with buckets and shovels, was nested into the corner of the property. The house itself was a nice two story, tan in color, and in immaculate condition. Superman was very proud of the condition that the house was kept in — when he had first found it, it had been unlived in for over a year and was beginning to fall into a state of disrepair. Restoring the interior to a livable state had taken no time flat — super powers did come in handy sometimes. The exterior had to be restored at regular speed, just so that the neighbors didn't get suspicious of anything. Of course, all this was done fourteen years ago — it hardly seemed like so long ago.
A light burning in the window of the master bedroom announced that his wife had waited up for him. Good. He needed to talk to her. Superman spun into his normal clothes upon landing in the yard and strode toward the house. He uttered a small curse as he nearly fell over what could only be another one of his youngest son's failed science experiments. Thirteen year old Samuel Clark Kent, or CJ ("Clark Junior." Lois was never very fond of naming one of her sons after her father - Clark had said it would only be fair, since their eldest was named after his father. Lois had insisted on calling him Clark — she liked that name better anyway) had long since graduated from the world of the baking soda submarines and science fair volcanoes, and was currently constructing a crystal radio. The prototype was now in pieces beneath the foot of Clark Kent. Clark suspected it had been in pieces even before meeting the underside of his shoe, but he made a mental note as picked up the pieces to apologize to his son profusely the next day. CJ was a very bright kid - at thirteen, he was already taking high school math classes. He was also a gifted athlete — he started on the eighth grade football team at his junior high. Most of all, the boy loved his parents dearly, and trusted them completely, and for a good reason. Lois and Clark had tried to instill in their three kids a sense of honesty and morality. Lois took the kids to the lesser parts of Metropolis from time to time, just to show them how bad other people had it. They would have family discussions on right and wrong if Lois and Clark thought there was a current event that would make a good case study. Most of all, they two tried to be completely honest and had encouraged their children to do the same. Except for one thing.
The kids still didn't know that their father was the city's famous super hero. It was something that Lois had been a little uptight about the last few years, but Clark assured her that he would let them in on it when the time was right. Lois had been a little skeptical about his ability to determine exactly when that right time would be, reminding him for the umpteenth time that he hadn't found the right time to tell HER about the secret. He had to admit she had a point, but they were both a little older and wiser now. His children kept getting older, too. Jonathan, their oldest, just turned fifteen and was in high school now. Clark was planning on telling Jon about Superman this weekend sometime. He had noticed that the boy was beginning to beef up a little of late as he hit puberty. He had never been the athlete like his little brother - Jon would play soccer or baseball from time to time, but he chose the band over the football team. In any case, if Clark was right, his son should be developing some powers pretty soon, and would undoubtedly be pretty confused about what was going on. None of the kids had exhibited any super powers yet, even though the boys were older than Clark was when he had first developed his. They had all developed a degree of invulnerability which increased as they had gotten older, but nothing more. Clark figured the delay was due to genetics — they were only HALF Kryptonian, after all. Doctor Klein had mentioned years ago the possibility that none of the children would have powers. They could also have weaker powers than their father, or they might have some powers and not others. They would find out eventually, until then they were just normal American kids with a super father, even if they didn't know it yet.
Clark deposited the remains of the radio on CJ's workbench in the garage and proceeded to enter the house. The downstairs was dark, except for the dull light emitted by the various electronic displays — the microwave, the VCR, the stereo. Clark walked softly, yet swiftly up the stairs and headed toward his bedroom. On the way, he pulled down his glasses and checked on his sleeping children. Laura, his youngest at eight years of age, lay peacefully in the middle of her bed, clutching a beat-up teddy bear. Other stuffed animals lay haphazardly around her in the bed, a few had tumbled to the floor. The boys were sprawled out on the beds in their respective rooms. Nothing seemed to be amiss there. Clark proceeded to enter his own room, where his wife sat in their bed, reading a book.
Lois smiled and placed her book on the nightstand as her husband entered the room. He smiled at her, too, bent over the bed, and gave her a deep kiss. Sixteen years of marriage and that kiss had never lost any of that fire. Clark pulled away and ran his hand through her long, dark hair before either of them spoke.
"How was everything around here tonight? Anything happen?" Clark asked. It was a standard question — nothing usually happened around the house when he was gone. When the kids had been little, he would often wait until all the kids had been put to bed before going out, facing the wrath of Lois if he left any earlier. Anymore, the boys would retreat to their room to study or would go out with their friends in the evening. Clark would slip away at different times on different nights for patrol, pulling one of the many excuses out of the file to account for his absence to the kids. Lois was also very good at running interference with them. Clark felt guilty about leaving them for very long — he didn't want to become the absentee father. But some things just couldn't be helped.
"No, just the same. Laura and CJ and myself played a little Monopoly after you left. That's about it. How about you? Anything interesting happen?"
Clark's face clouded over a little bit. He reached for the manuscript that he had tucked under his arm and held it out in front of him. "The city was pretty quiet, but I found something you might want to see during my weekly stop at the Foundation." Clark sat down on the bed next to Lois and handed her the novel. She gave him a bit of a questioning look and read the title aloud.
"'The Life of A Super Man.' By Ridley Davenport. I've heard of him — he has some good stuff." Lois read the first few words of the novel and went pale. She looked up at Clark nervously. "Oh, Clark! How does he…? What the heck is this?"
"It's a novel. Fiction. I've read it, and I want you to read it too. I don't know how he knows, but this is our life. It's not overly accurate, but it's close enough." Clark looked somewhat forlornly at the manuscript, watching Lois' eyes scan the remainder of the first page. If this book got published, it would certainly expose them.
"I'll finish this later, Clark." Lois said as she reached the bottom of the page. "One I thing I know is that you can't let them publish this!"
"I don't intend to, Lois," Clark said softly. He had it in his power to stop publication, and stop it he would. There was a bigger issue to consider, however. He looked down at his hands as he spoke. "The main reason I brought this here is that I want us to investigate this guy, Ridley Davenport. We need to find out what exactly he knows and how. We can't let any of this information become public."
Lois looked past her husband as she thought. Yes, this needed to be addressed. But it had to be handled very carefully. She focused back in on Clark, who was still looking down. "I agree. But do you think that Lane and Kent should be investigating this? And on work time? We're not even supposed to know about this. It would be too suspicious."
Clark nodded. He hadn't done much thinking about what the nature of their investigation would be, he just knew it had to be done. He could probably send some of the foundation employees out to gather some information — it was common enough for them. They usually did their homework on companies that wanted to sell his image. This was too personal for that, however — Clark wanted to handle it himself. A thought occurred to him suddenly. He snapped his head up and looked at Lois again. "I have a thought. We could say we're doing a piece on him - a biography. I can get the research together myself after hours — you know me, it won't take any time at all."
Lois smiled and reached up to stroke his cheek. "Sure. That sounds good. We can start this weekend. I should be done reading by then. But for now…" She leaned over to kiss him again. Her hands found his shirt, and she began to unbutton it. Sensing what was to come, Clark pulled away. He retrieved the manuscript from Lois and placed it on the desk. Smiling, he finished the job on the shirt himself. Lois took up a sultry position on the bed, causing Clark's heart to skip a beat. His love for his wife had not diminished one iota, and he always enjoyed coming home at night, knowing Lois was waiting for him. He turned off the light as he crawled into bed with his wife for a night of passion.
From the Diary of Jonathan Lane Kent:
It happened again today, but not the same way as before. In the past I had always just figured I was daydreaming — the teacher would be droning on about something boring at the front of the room and I would zone. I'd stare straight ahead and I could swear I could see what was going on in the next room. I would see kids like me — some bored, some writing notes, some making faces. I don't know why I would want to daydream about something like that, but in any case, if I blinked, it all went away. Just a dream.
Today, though, it was different. I was doing homework and stopped for a while to think. I was looking at the wall, spacing off, and it was like I could see outside. A bird flew onto the tree out front, the neighbor girl rode by the front of the house on her tricycle, and I could HEAR the wheels squeaking. Come to think of it, I could hear a lot of things — the leaves rustling in the tree, the next door neighbor snoring though her afternoon nap, and I could hear my mother singing to the radio. It took a second to see her car drive up the street. I could hear the crunching sound of the tires as she pulled into the driveway. She had groceries in the back seat, and the more I thought about it, I could see what was in the grocery bags, too. I blinked, but this time the image did not go away. In the bags were cereal and fruits and salad stuff, as well as the junk food that Dad likes so much and a few triple-fudge crunch bars for Mom.
I realized that I could hear footsteps coming down the hall toward my room. The door was open and the steps stopped right outside. I kinda wished they would just go away, but they didn't. After a few seconds, I turned and saw my dorky little brother standing there looking at me. He wanted to know what was so fascinating about a stupid wall and he wanted to borrow my roller blades. I ended up having to throw something at him to get him to leave me alone. Anyways, as soon as my attention was focused on him, the outside images went away. I wasn't seeing through the wall, I was just daydreaming again.
I decided to go downstairs to say hi to Mom. She was still humming the song that I had "heard" her singing to earlier. I've never heard the song before in my life — Mom has weird taste in music. The groceries were exactly the same as I "saw," too. It all seems like too much coincidence to be a dream. The whole thing seemed too weird, so here I am, telling the old diary. I wonder if I'm going mental or psychic or something. I'm not on drugs, so don't even think that! You know, they say Superman can see through walls and hear stuff from far away, but how would that relate to me? I've never even met the guy, although he's supposed to be a good friend of Mom and Dad's. I suppose I could talk to someone about it. Or not. We'll see.
Well diary, I'll leave you alone, at least until the next time I think I'm looking through walls.
Clark knocked on the door to his son Jon's bedroom, which was sitting about halfway open. Jon was sitting as his desk, placing a small book into one of the drawers. He smiled at his father and invited him in.
"What's up?" Jon asked. His father would come up here frequently, just to make sure he was okay.
"Oh, not much. I just wanted to ask you something." Clark sat down on the edge of Jon's bed, and Jon turned in his chair to face him. He couldn't imagine what it was that his dad would need to ask him about. Clark could see the questioning look on his son's face.
"Well, I was wondering if you wanted to go with me on my trip upstate this Sunday. I need to go up there to do some interviews for a story that I'm working on, and I was thinking you might want to tag along. You can get a glimpse into the world of journalism and we can have a little father-son outing."
*A glimpse into the world of journalism?* Jon had to admit, he had more than a passing interest in the field, but this offer caught him a little off guard. He really didn't know what to think.
"So, it'll be just you and me?" he asked.
"Yup, just us." It was planned that way, Clark thought. They could be alone and he could discuss with Jon his family heritage. And since they were going upstate, maybe they could stop somewhere along the way, just to see if Jon had developed any powers, and to work on them if he did. The story wasn't just an excuse — it was real. Clark had taken it knowing the opportunity it presented. Plus, he truly wanted to look into the allegations of neglect at the state hospitals upstate. Right now, though, he awaited his son's answer. He really didn't think that Jon would have any objections.
Jon was mentally reviewing his calendar. He had a band concert next week, and a paper due on Tuesday, but besides that he really didn't have anything better to do. And he never got much of a chance to see his dad at work. Why not? His mind was quick to remind him of his problem with the disappearing walls, but he figured a trip out of town might be just the thing to make his mental problems, or whatever it was, go away.
Clark smiled wide. "Great. I'm looking forward to this. We should have a good time." They never got to hang out much anymore. Jon was growing up so fast — in no time he would be out of the house, off at college. Best to treasure the time they had. "Say, you want to go with the rest of us now? I thought that we might go out and get some ice cream."
Jon thought that sounded like a great idea. He loved all forms of foods that were bad for you. And he ate them whenever he could. He never seemed to gain an ounce, though. His best friend's mom had accused him of having a hollow leg — he thought that was pretty funny. Jon knew his dad was the same way — Dad really liked to go out for ice cream, even though Mom liked to accuse him of trying to fatten her up. She always had a generous helping of double chocolate ice cream, despite her complaints.
Jon voiced his approval to the plan. In the back of his mind, he wondered if there was something more to the trip this weekend, but he really couldn't think of any reason why there would be. He filed these thoughts away and left the room with his father. He had to admit, he was kind of looking forward to their little trip.
Jon couldn't sleep. The room was dark and the clock on his chest of drawers read 12:15 AM. Usually, he fell right to sleep when his head hit the pillow, but something strange was happening to him, and the darkness brought the need to figure out what it was. Was he going crazy? Was he the product of a tryst between his mom and Superman (they HAD kind of almost been a thing when the big guy first showed up)? At least, part of him wanted to find out — the other part just wanted to fall asleep. After staring at the ceiling for a little while, watching the shadows from the tree outside dance around, he rolled over onto his side and closed his eyes. He was almost asleep when he heard what sounded like a very strong gust of wind and a thud. He could clearly hear his mom and dad start to talk in the next room. In fact, he could hear every word they were saying, as if they were having the conversation right in front of him. *I don't remember Dad coming up to bed*, he thought groggily, and opened his eyes. His father had taken off after the ice cream excursion, saying that he needed to run an errand. It was after eight PM by that time, and Jon couldn't imagine what errand would need to be done at that time of night, but dad was ALWAYS running errands at night. And he never seemed to come back with anything, either.
Jon rolled over and faced the wall that his room shared with his parents'. The wall dissolved in front of him, and there stood Superman.
Jon's eyes popped open and any trace of sleepiness went away in an instant. *What the…?* his mind thought furiously. OK, so maybe it wasn't his dad he'd heard over there after all — though it had sure sounded like it. A thousand thoughts started to flood through his head — did Superman come here often? How come he had never known about it before? And what the heck was he doing here anyway? Holy cow, maybe Mom WAS having an affair with the guy. The blood started pumping loudly through Jon's ears, and he had to will himself to calm down so he could hear what they were saying again. Superman looked a little upset, his mom looked worried. As he watched, his mom went over to the edge of bed, hanging her feet over the side.
"Have a bad night out there?" she asked him. The concern in her voice was evident.
Superman sighed. "Yeah. There was a pile-up on the beltway. A few people died on impact — I couldn't get there in time to save them." Superman sat down on the chest at the end of the bed and began to unlace his boots.
"Oh god, I'm sorry." Lois got up off the bed and went to sit next to the Man of Steel. She laid a hand affectionately on his back and began to rub it in large circular motions. *Affectionate rubbing. This isn't good.*
"Well, I did manage to put out the fire that started. Flew a few people to the hospital." One boot came off, then the other. Lois picked them up and walked toward the closet. Superman reached behind his cape and Jon could hear a zipper. The Man of Steel slid his blue spandex suit off his arms and down his chest, the cape coming off at the same time. Standing up, he undid the buckle around his waist and slid the suit the rest of the way off. There stood Superman, dressed only in white briefs and socks. Lois entered her big walk in closet, went to the back, and pulled on something in the wall. The false back wall slid aside, revealing a secret compartment, one that contained probably half a dozen Superman suits and a couple of pairs of boots. Jon remembered playing hide and seek with his cousins as a kid and using this very closet as a hiding place. He didn't know why he had never noticed the secret compartment before, especially since he had developed his mysterious ability to see through things.
He still couldn't figure out why his mom had a compartment in the closet for Superman. Why was he here? Jon felt a twinge of compassion for his dad. Poor guy. He couldn't EVEN be a match for Superman.
"Well, I'm glad to hear that. Will they be OK?"
The hero picked up his costume and his cape and headed toward the closet. Lois held up her hands in a "catch" position and looked at Superman. He tossed her the outfit and said, "Yeah. I stayed for a little while at the hospital just to be sure. One guy got burned pretty badly, but the doctors thought he should make a pretty thorough recovery." Jon could see a shadow of a smile begin to appear on his mother's lips.
Jon followed Superman as he walked into the bathroom. He could hear the faucet in the sink turning on and saw Superman running his head under it, splashing water on his face. Lois was still hanging up the suit over in the closet. As Superman reached for a towel, Lois shut the compartment and made her way back to the bed, sitting on the edge in a sultry fashion. Superman walked back toward her, his hair looked slightly disheveled. *And oddly familiar* Jon thought. This was the first time that he was really able to get a good look at the man's face. Yes, it was so familiar is was disconcerting.
Superman caught a glimpse of Lois on the bed and smiled.
"Well, sweetheart," she said. *Sweetheart?!* "Maybe I can help you forget about your night." Superman smiled even wider as he took Lois in his arms. They began to kiss furiously as they lay out on the bed, Superman perched over Lois. If this went on a whole lot longer, Jon figured, he would need to go downstairs and get a bowl of popcorn. *Or, you could just mind your own business!* Like that was going to happen. This was BIG.
"Mmmm, Lois," Superman practically moaned.
"Oh, Clark," she sighed and they kissed some more.
"OhmyGOD." Jon's voice was barely above a whisper, but as he said it, Superman looked straight at him, through the wall, and went visibly pale.
*Oh, Clark?!!?* More thoughts quickly rose to the surface of Jon's very confused brain. If one more stupid thought popped in, he figured his head would probably explode. *You mean to tell me that all along, Superman was my DAD!* This would explain why he had never seen Superman before — certainly he couldn't appear before his kids without them knowing automatically who he was. *I guess this means I'm not, in fact, going crazy,* although on second thought, the implications just MIGHT push him over the edge. *So, my dad is from outer space, which means I'm half alien?*
In the next room, Lois could feel Clark stiffen on top of her. She regretfully left the blissful place that she was in and opened her eyes. Clark was staring at the wall *probably through it* and all the color had drained from his face. A fraction of a second later he was scrambling off of her and ran to the dresser to grab a pair of shorts.
"What's going on, Clark?" He had a look on his face that she hadn't seen in a long time — embarrassed, almost scared, but somewhat curious, too.
"We have a problem," he said as he grabbed his glasses off the nightstand and made a beeline for the door.
Lois began to scramble out of bed, too. "Problem? What problem?" She honestly had no clue what was going on.
Clark pointed to his eldest son's room. "Someone's been holding out on us, and now I think he knows. You know, KNOWS." Clark made a little flying gesture with his hand.
Lois's eyes got very big, and for a second Clark could've sworn that they were going to pop right out of her head. He almost laughed, but the task that he knew was coming up stifled any thoughts of merriment. She scrambled to her husband's side and together they went out into the hallway and knocked on Jon's door. When they didn't get any response, they cracked it open and peeked inside.
Jon was sitting upright, in the middle of his bed, staring at his closet with a look of shock on his face. "Jon," Clark said softly. His son just blinked. The super couple entered the room and shut the door softly, mindful of the sleeping children in the two other bedrooms. Lois turned on the light and Clark sat on the edge of the bed. Turning on the light seemed to do the trick, and Jon snapped out of the trance he was previously in and he gaped at his father. Lois kept her post by the door.
Jon noticed the fact that his father *Superman!* had put his glasses on before coming over. He thought that was kind of funny — he was SURE that his father knew what Jon had figured out, and he obviously didn't NEED glasses, after all. It occurred to Jon that he hadn't seen his father out of his glasses before tonight. He remembered going to the public swimming pool as a kid, and if his dad was there, he would be wearing sunglasses and sitting by the edge of the pool, just soaking up the sun. "Come on in the water, daddy, it feels great!" one of the kids would always say, and Clark would invariably give some excuse on why he couldn't go in. "I don't know, I think I just might melt in there" always made his sister giggle. Of course, when they brought out the kiddie pool in the back yard at home, he would jump right in, glasses on, of course. So he didn't want anyone to see him without the glasses and with his hair wet and slicked back. Jon figured that was understandable, from a public standpoint, but he was the man's son after all, and he had a right to know.
Jon's eyes were frozen on Clark's face for a long time, and Clark began to feel a little self-conscious. "Son?" Clark put his hand on the boy's shoulder, causing Jon to jerk out of his latest reverie.
"Dad?" All of a sudden, this boy, well, adolescent of fifteen years old seemed very much to be a frightened child.
Clark flinched a little bit as he saw the fear grow in his son's eyes. He honestly wished Jon would say something. Tell him that he was a big, fat liar. Demand to know why Clark kept this kind of secret. Anything. Obviously, if anything was going to get accomplished, it was up to Clark to initiate the conversation. He glanced over to Lois for reassurance. She gave him a slightly worried, yet at the same time reassuring, nod.
"So, Jon I, uh. I guess you probably have a few questions you want to ask me." Clark arched his eyebrows in a questioning manner as he looked at the boy.
*You're darn right I do,* Jon thought. Why Dad? Why not tell me? Did you think I wouldn't find out? Don't you love me or trust me enough? Fear and anger cycled through Jon's head very quickly, along with a little bit of wonderment.
Clark could see the battle going on inside his son, and Jon audibly sighed before dropping his head and eyes. One word came out of his mouth. "Why?"
"Why?" Clark knew the answer as soon as the word left his mouth.
"Why didn't you tell me, Dad?"
Clark hesitated momentarily before continuing. "Well, that's a long story, and believe me when I tell you that I wanted to tell you. It's mostly been for your protection, and for your brother and sister's protection, too. Plus, well, I was beginning to wonder if you were going to inherit, uh, the family 'talent.'" A ghost of a smile fleeted across Jon's face, but it was gone almost as soon as it appeared. He was obviously still bothered by it.
"Oh yeah, I got the 'talent.' Or some of it, anyway. I was beginning to wonder if I was going crazy or something."
"I know what that's like." Clark smiled, remembering the days back on the farm when his powers began to pop up. That was a scary time — he never knew what was happening to him or what kind of power he would get next. He had DEFINITELY thought he was going crazy for a while. Thank goodness for his mom and dad.
"So, you saw through the wall, I take it."
"Ummyeah." Jon blushed a little. The thought of his mom and dad on the bed didn't bother Jon all that much — they were all over each other on a normal basis. Snuggling on the couch, or in the kitchen while making dinner or on vacation. Sometimes if got downright embarrassing. But snuggling around the house and in bed were two different things entirely. Jon wasn't proud of having looked in on his parents during an intimate moment — they were probably, at this very second, thinking that they had raised him better than that.
Jon realized that his thoughts were drifting, and he quickly shook his head to focus. Why? That had been the question. It's a long story? *Well, all of a sudden I'm not that tired.*
"Dad, I still want to know why YOU didn't tell me. The whole story. And I'm not going anywhere until I hear it!"
The boy's determination was obviously inherited from his mother's side of the family, Clark mused. It was strange to see how personality traits manifested themselves in the kids.
Clark began to relate the story to his son, with very few interjections from his wife. They had first thought out the consequences of letting their children know about Superman when Lois had become pregnant. Keeping Superman secret would mean that Clark would have to stop doing all the "super" things that he did all the time at home- and it was hard. But it was something that had to be done. What if one of the kids, at a young age, had seen their daddy floating, or starting the fire with his vision? It would be the easiest thing in the world for that child, in his or her innocence, to tell their secret to a stranger. And that stranger could tell God knows who else, and their secret would be blown. No, they had to act like everything was normal.
And anyway, Clark didn't know if his children would also be "super." Dr Klein had warned them of the possibility. How would Earth and Kryptonian physiology interact? Lois and Clark had always treated their children as one hundred percent normal, even giving them vaccinations in their childhood. Sure, the kids had been healthier than most and stopped getting the usual cuts and scrapes at around eight years old or so. But they still got the occasional cold, and Jon and CJ had the chicken pox together a few years ago. Jon was beginning to get some of the adolescent acne, too. Dr. Klein kept an eye on the kids and subtly monitored their powers, and so far nothing but the standard invulnerability had showed up. Heck, Clark had most of his powers by the time he was Jon's age, so he was really beginning to wonder.
"I do trust you, Jon, and I love you a lot. I really was going to tell you, you just beat me to the punch. That's what this weekend excursion was supposed to be. Your mom can tell you that I'm not very good at telling people — of all the people out there who know who Superman really is, I've only actually told Dr. Klein. Everybody else figured it out by themselves."
It all made sense to Jon, it really did, but that didn't mean he still wasn't perturbed. It was all too new. He felt like he didn't know his dad anymore, as much as his dad was obviously trying to shown him that he was still "Dad." But he still couldn't reconcile "Dad" with "Superman."
Clark could see the faraway look in his son's eyes as he told his story. Clark had just stopped, and still his son was just sitting there nodding. Lois, who had been oddly quiet throughout the whole ordeal, took her son by the face and spoke softly.
"Jon, honey, are you going to be all right?" It pained Lois to see her son struggle with his emotions so much. She knew what he was going through — finding out had been simultaneously one of the best and one of the worst times in her life. Sometimes she still had trouble believing this gentle and somewhat shy man that was sitting next to her on the bed, the father of her children, was also the man who has faced down asteroids and madmen with unyielding resolve. He faced the full, glaring eye of the public day in and day out unfazed. His voice could turn criminals to mush and cause an end to war, but somehow Lois could still make him melt. It was still so strange, and so wonderful.
It was perhaps one of the great contradictions of Clark's personality, Lois thought, that he could be so brave when faced with any challenge as Superman, but something that required emotional resolve in his personal life would cause him to shy away. Lois remembered how close they came to never even getting together at all — Clark was willing to walk away from their relationship during the whole Scardino affair, rather than fight for what he wanted. All it would have taken was an admission of the truth, who he really was. Lois knew full well that Clark wouldn't run away from his own son rather than tell him the truth. The problem was that it was so much easier to maintain the status quo than to take the initiative and let Jon in on the secret. Lack of honesty creates a lack of trust; she knew this very well. She hoped will all her heart that they hadn't irretrievably lost the trust of their son.
Lois began to stroke her son's hair gently, and she could tell that he was beginning to make a decision.
"I guess. I just need some time, okay? Time to sort this all out." He looked up into his parents faces, and they seemed to understand, They were both nodding.
"Take as long as you need, Jon," Clark spoke softly. "I'll be here whenever you want to talk some more, okay?"
With that, Clark gently patted his son's shoulder and stood up. Lois also stood up, reaching for Clark's hand as she did. The two walked quietly to the door, turned out the light and walked into the hallway. Clark said goodnight as he closed the door.
After his parents left the room, Jon laid down and started absently at the ceiling. 4
Jon sat in his math class, making plans for the afternoon to come. The large bags under his bloodshot eyes alluded to the lack of sleep from the night before, but his mind was sharp and focused on the task at hand: find out everything about his parents. And Superman. EVERYTHING. Do some good old-fashioned research, do some snooping around the house, whatever it took. Then, maybe, he might just go talk to his parents about it. That would definitely be the last thing he did, though.
The day's lesson in class was largely being ignored in favor of this planning session. Jon let a little bit of what the teacher was saying creep into his brain from time to time just in case he got called on. The intricacies of algebra were never that interesting to him, anyway. His pencil was drawing Superman's S-shield almost by itself onto the ledger of his notebook.
He had plenty of time to do some high-powered snooping when he got home from school that night, starting in the bedroom. His brother and sister wouldn't get home until an hour after he did, so they wouldn't be suspicious. Mom and Dad never got home until around suppertime, so he should be safe on that front, too. Tomorrow, a Saturday, he could spend all day in the archives of the public library. Who has Superman fought? What has he done and when? If there was any video, all the better. Jon was supposed to play some basketball with the guys tomorrow, but that could wait. This was important.
So what exactly did he hope to find from all this snooping and research? He was hoping to find what made his dad tick — what motivated him. And who he really was. It had been such a simple thing up until last night. Jon was hoping he could maybe find out a bit about himself in the process. It's not everyone who finds out that they are half alien! To think, someday he might be able to fly! What would that be like? Would it change him? Did it change Dad? He HAD to know.
The bell rang, and even Jon's newly discovered super hearing didn't pick it up, he was so absorbed in his thoughts. He only came to his senses after his friend Joel smacked him on the arm.
"Earth to Kent — time for gym class. I know you're kind of a bookworm, but I can't believe that even you would want sit here in algebra when a good game of flag football awaits."
Jon had to admit that a little football right now would definitely cheer him up. He had almost forgotten that was what they were doing in gym right now. Besides, after gym he was home free. This got him out of his fog. Things were beginning to look up.
It had taken a lot of Jon's willpower not to test for the presence of superspeed on the walk home. He REALLY wanted to get started on his little project. He went up the steps two at a time and threw his backpack unceremoniously into his room en route to his parents' room. He hesitated briefly as he laid his hand on the doorknob. His dad was Superman, after all, and he might catch on to the fact that somebody had been snooping in their room. He had to make sure not to disturb things too much.
He opened the door and entered. Here he was, the parent's room. It sure looked like it always had. He had been in here a lot when he was little — if there was a thunderstorm, he would crawl into bed with Mom and Dad for comfort. He would play hide and seek in there sometimes. But that was all a long time ago. He had to look past the familiar and find things that would be unique to his folks — to Superman. The obvious place to start was the closet, with its secret compartment.
Jon crossed the room and opened the door to the walk-in closet. His dad's many sports coats, pants and neatly starched shirts lined one wall, while his mom's dresses and work clothes lined the other. His eye was drawn toward his dad's tie rack. Jon thought briefly that nobody could ever accuse his dad of having boring taste in ties. The bright colors and shapes certainly stood out, but Jon was much more interested in the mechanism in the tie rack that would open the secret compartment in back, like he saw his mom do last night. It wasn't too hard to find, and with one quick pull of a lever, the false wall slid open to reveal the rack of Superman suits that he had seen the previous evening. A small hamper in the corner contained a couple of dirty suits, which, upon inspection, smelled of a mixture of smoke and salt water. Clean capes and blue jumpsuits hung separately in the closet, with the red shorts resting on the upper shelf. Red boots, some dirty, others brightly polished, rested on the floor.
Jon reached for one of the suits. He thought it felt like spandex, not that he was an expert on fabrics. He held it up to his nose and inhaled, and he could smell the fabric softener that his mom used and his dad's aftershave. He ran his hand over the S-shield, feeling its embroidered texture. Where did he get these, anyway? It seemed to Jon that he had seen pictures of Superman with a charred cape on after fighting a fire — he had to have a way of getting new suits. Jon made a mental note to ask his father about this sometime.
Having seen everything there was to see in the closet, Jon closed the false wall and left. He turned his attention to the master bathroom next. He recalled his Grandma Lane saying once that if you wanted to know about the true personality of somebody, look in their medicine cabinet. He made his way to the sink and opened the cabinet. The first thing he noticed was that there were no razors there. Most guys have to shave, and Jon knew from visiting some of his friends houses that shaving equipment was generally the center of attention in the cabinet. All he saw there was a bottle of aftershave. It made sense that a razor couldn't cut the Man of Steel — it must apply to his hair, too. So how did he shave? Or did he even have to?
Aside from this, everything seemed to be pretty normal. Two toothbrushes were housed in the holder by the sink. Plenty of hair styling products occupied the cabinet — some hairspray and mousse for Mom, gel and a jar of really greasy-looking stuff for Dad. The greasy stuff was probably only used when his dad was Superman. Jon's dad's hair normally had a lot of body to it, whereas in all the pictures he had ever seen, Superman's hair was slicked down on his head. A lot of make-up and beauty products occupied his mom's half of the cabinet, too. Nothing new there. Maybe the rest of the bedroom had more answers.
Once out of the bathroom, Jon took a really good look at everything — things he wouldn't think to look at were the first things he tried. The window — there was no screen on it. The better to fly into? The radio on the dresser — did it also have the built-in emergency band? Yes, it did upon further inspection. The pictures on the wall seemed normal enough — the generic school pictures and occasional family shot. A picture of his parent's wedding hung prominently on the wall opposite the door. Jon went to look at that more closely. He was shocked at how little his dad had changed in that time. The glasses were different, and maybe there were a few more laugh lines now, but aside form that, it didn't seem like his dad had changed at all. His mom had quite a few more gray hairs and wrinkles. Plus, her hair was longer now. She seemed to have kept her figure pretty well, though, even after 3 children. Uncle Jimmy almost looked like a kid in the picture, and his grandparents all looked so young and vibrant.
Jon tore his gaze away from the picture and looked around again. On the nightstand he noticed his dad's spare pair of glasses. He went over to pick them up and held them up to his face. As he suspected, they had no correction — they were just glass in stylish frames. Jon put them on and went to look in the mirror. He had to admit, he looked pretty good with glasses on. Would he have to get a pair of these if were to be a future superhero? He would have to have a secret identity, and these seemed to work well for his dad. He made another mental note as he replaced the glasses on the table.
It occurred to Jon that if he really wanted to hide something from somebody, especially his dumb brother, he would shove it under the bed. Mom and Dad's bed had a neat little bedskirt on it that hid what was underneath from the outside world. Jon kneeled onto the floor and lifted the ruffle. There, right under the middle of the bed, was a large scrapbook and a shoebox. He had to slide under the bed a little bit to retrieve the items, but once he got a good look at them, he was glad that he did. In the scrapbook were stories about Superman — from the ones that Mom and Dad had written to the more absurd. There were even some from the Dirt Digger and the National Whisper. "I Had Superman's Love Child"?! Knowing his parents, they probably got a good laugh over that one. Either that, or Mom got really mad.
The shoebox contained pictures that couldn't go with the "family archive" downstairs without revealing the truth. Most of these were photographs of Superman — all originals. Some looked like they were probably taken for the newspaper, but Mom or Dad had somehow managed to get a copy. There were a few — VERY few — with Mom and Superman. Jon guessed that most of these were from before they got married, although there was a couple in which Mom wore a wedding ring. He figured that these were probably taken by Grandma and Grandpa Kent, since it looked like they were on a farm. Superman was smiling, or more accurately, grinning (there IS a difference) in a very un-Superman way, and looking a heck of a lot more like Dad than the superhero. One picture, in particular, caught Jon's eye. It had his mom, standing on the porch with her hand on Superman's shoulder and her eyes looking into his face, and Superman was smiling lovingly at Lois, one hand on the small of her back and the other one on her enlarged belly. *She was probably pregnant with me!* Jon thought with wonder.
He took a quick look at his watch and was dismayed to see that it was time for his brother and sister to be coming home from school. He gently slipped the scrapbook and shoebox back under the bed where he found them and left the room, closing the door gently behind him. It was now time to assess what exactly it was he found out, and where to go from here. He would need to do some more thinking.
Superman floated in the air, high above his own house, and watched as his son closed the door and left the bedroom. He had been worried about Jon, and had been checking up on him periodically throughout the day, from a distance, that is. Superman had seen the boy rush home from school and go straight for the bedroom that he and Lois shared. He had smiled a little, seeing that the snooping gene had taken its hold on the boy. Clark always wondered if his son would follow in their footsteps and become a reporter — Jon certainly had the investigative skills down.
Superman watched as Jon had gone to the closet and the bathroom, and he had chuckled a bit when his son tried on the spare set of glasses. Clark thought his son looked pretty good with them on. He figured they would probably need to go get him a set soon. Clark also observed as his son found the Superman pictures and articles. Lois had started this little collection herself before they ever started dating, and Clark had to admit, he had gotten a kick out it. After they got married, they kept it and added to it, as a way of having some reminders of all he had done, and as a place to put all their Superman pictures so that nobody could find them. Clark's parents had taken a few of him in the suit with Lois throughout the years, and those were kept safely hidden in the collection as well. Lois also had quite a collection of Superman comics and novels that Jon hadn't found.
Jon left the room at almost the exact time that the bus dropped off Laura and CJ a couple of blocks away. At least the boy was trying to be discreet, and this was a relief to Clark. He had secretly hoped that Jon would allow Clark to tell the other two in his own time, when he thought they were ready. Hopefully, he would do a better job of it with them, he mused. Clark made a note to ask Jon a little later for advice on how to best let them know. All said, Jon seemed to be handling everything pretty well. Clark hung around long enough to make sure the younger children got home okay and took off toward the Planet. There was still plenty of work to be done before quitting time, and Lois would certainly want to hear the latest updates. He thought ahead to what would happen with his son when he went home for the night — would he be receptive? Would he be willing to talk? Would Jon even want to be in the same room with him? It was all so frustrating, but Clark was still excited.
You're not going to believe what has happened to me in the last 24 hours. I don't even believe it. Where should I start? Well, the truth works best: Dad is Superman. I am the son of Superman. I am half alien. I might be a superhero when I grow up, too — I already have some super powers, as you know: the x-ray vision and superhearing. I guess, if I think about it, I also have some of the invulnerability and strength; I just haven't really had much of an occasion to use it. Remember that time last year when I lost control of my bike and hit the parked car? I went face first into the ground, but somehow I didn't have a single scratch — I thought I had just gotten lucky. Luck didn't really play into it.
Dad IS Superman. I saw him change out of the super-suit last night. I saw the suits. I've seen some articles and pictures. And yet I still don't really believe it. Why? Because it just doesn't seem right. I mean, I've lived with Mom and Dad all my life, and I've never once seen superpowers being used, not even last night. If I think about it, they were probably used really subtly. Remember how it always seemed like Mom and Dad always knew what we had been doing, even if they were nowhere around? Remember going camping — when it started to rain and we couldn't get the campfire started, Mom and Dad sent us off to get more firewood ("Maybe we'll find some drier stuff") and when we came back, the fire was always going strong. Remember some of the weird take-out meals we had? Makes you wonder, doesn't it?
Here's another thing: I KNOW my dad's personality. We're friends, right? I always thought so. What are his personality traits? Think about it: he's kind, gentle, kinda shy sometimes, loving, funny, a little dorky (I'm not knocking it — I probably am, too. And I KNOW my brother is. It's a family trait). Now contrast that with what I know about Superman: he's humorless, very strong and unflinching. He cares for human life and makes sure that people don't get hurt, but in a generally impersonal manner (the guy saves so many lives, it would be really draining to get emotionally attached with everybody). How can it be possible that these two personalities are part of the same guy? I'm hoping to find this out. I already looked through Mom and Dad's room hoping to find something, and I did find some interesting stuff. Did you know that his glasses are just plain glass — they don't magnify anything or focus anything? Did you know he doesn't shave in the way that you think? I have no clue how he does it, but it's not with a razor. And how the heck does he cut his hair? I'm going to the library tomorrow — maybe I can find some video or articles that give something away. I'll keep you posted.
The thing that galls me the most about this whole situation is that I didn't get any of this from Dad — I had to find it out for myself. I'm not going to tell CJ or Laura — I want them to get it from the source. Let's hope he does a better job with them. Anyways, I kinda want to keep things to myself right now, just until I get my facts straight. Until then, don't expect me to be Mr. Social. I think I'm going to stay away from Mom and Dad (especially Dad) for a while. I'll observe. I have the reporting gene in me (among others), let's see how well it works.
I'll talk to you later, diary. Bye.
Lois Lane spent her Saturday morning catching up on some reading. She relished this Saturday quiet time — it was one of the few times all week she had to herself. Clark always went in to work Saturdays (Lois took Sunday — that was Clark's day at home), and the boys almost never showed their faces outside of their rooms before 10 AM. Laura, being more of a morning person, would get up with her mother, but Lois found that a bowl of Cheerios and some cartoons would last her daughter for several hours.
This particular morning was proving to be a little unusual. Jonathan pulled himself out of bed at eight AM and had immediately left, telling his mother that he was going to the library and that he would be back for supper. Now, Jon was always a studious kid, pretty serious, but an all day trip to the library? Lois figured she knew what was behind it - Clark had told her of Jon's little exploration of their bedroom. Jon was researching, and Lois had figured that there wasn't any harm in that. Lord knows that she had done enough researching over the years when trying to deal with her emotions. Besides, it couldn't get a whole lot worse than last night.
Lois had felt Clark's anticipation the previous day at work — he wanted to talk to his son. More precisely, Clark needed his son to talk to him — it was absolutely killing him not knowing what Jon was thinking. Clark took a lot of stock in how his children felt about him — he wanted to be the perfect father, and most of the time he was. It didn't usually take any exceptional effort on his part, either. The prospect that his eldest son might have lost his faith in his father terrified Clark, and Lois knew it. She also knew that when Clark felt an emotion powerfully, he had a tendency to get irrational. Certainly, forcing Jon to talk to Clark would be the wrong thing to do right now — Lois had been there. Jon needed time more than anything, time that Clark wasn't readily going to give him.
In any case, once they arrived at home the previous day, Clark had taken his first opportunity to ask Jon how he was doing, if he wanted to talk. Clark was given the silent treatment, the cold shoulder. Jon didn't treat his mother much better, either, but Lois knew it was just an act — she would look at her son when he didn't know it, and she could see the conflict on his face. Jon had retreated to his room shortly after supper. Lois tried to keep her younger two children blissfully ignorant of what was going on between Jon and his parents, popping in a movie and making popcorn. Clark joined them, acting carefree and making little jokes about the movie, but Lois knew that was just an act, too. As soon as Laura was put to bed, Clark was in the suit and out the door. Even though there weren't any major disasters, he didn't come home until very late - it had to be about six AM Lois cuddled him close when he crawled into bed, trying to reassure him, loosen him up. He seemed to be feeling a little better — wherever he had gone, it had calmed him down.
Lois sighed from her perch on the sofa in the living room. Laura, still in her pajamas, was sitting cross-legged on the floor in front of her, her cereal about half gone. The cartoon on the TV had caught the girl's complete attention, but Lois's thoughts were elsewhere. As nice as it was to stare mindlessly at the TV sometimes, it was time she got back to reading the Ridley Davenport novel that Clark had given her a couple of days ago. She picked up her pen and paper and scribbled some notes. The author had obviously briefed himself on Superman's acts throughout the years, and used those to build a plot around. The main characters, who were clearly modeled after her and Clark, really didn't have much in common with them once you got past the superficial. The author had been really clever, though, in trying to figure out how Superman really lived his daily life. Lois thought it was pretty funny — Superman was supposed to have shaved with a Kryptonite razor and cut his hair with Kryptonite scissors. The author had speculated about the ramifications of their sex life — he used some Kleenex analogy to explain how Superman's sperm would affect his wife. THAT got Lois laughing. He had been pretty accurate when he depicted Superman cooking with his heat vision and floating in his sleep. Clark didn't cook with his vision as much as he used to — he had to be careful around the children. And the floating in his sleep thing had diminished to practically nothing after their children came around, probably because Superman took on a much lighter work schedule at about that time.
Lois was doubtful that the author really knew that much about her and Clark. She wondered if he really knew about Clark's secret at all, or if he just used Clark as a character because of his closeness with the Man of Steel. Whatever the answer, she intended to find out. One thing she had found out over the years and that you could never be too careful. They just didn't know what Mr. Davenport's motivations or intentions were. Until they did, they would have to keep an eye out. This was not a great time to have an upset child out there who knew Clark's secret, but knowing her son, Lois Lane didn't worry too much. Jon's nature was so much like Clark's it was eerie. He would come around eventually, and Lois knew it.
Jon Kent ran his fingers through his hair and glanced at his watch. He had been in the same seat in the library for the better part of 5 hours, reading everything they had on Superman, Mom, and Dad. Next he was going to move to the video room, but only after he had a little bit of lunch. They didn't allow food in the library, so Jon went outside to sit on the steps and enjoy the sandwich that he'd brought with him from home. He'd Xeroxed a couple of articles and brought these with him to read while he ate.
All the reading throughout they day had led him to some interesting discoveries. It seemed that Superman was missing in action for whole weeks at a time around the times that he, CJ, and Laura were born, as well as when Mom and Dad got married. The papers had generally made a big deal about it at the time, but Jon figured even Superman was entitled to a week off from time to time to tend to his family (even if the whole rest of the world didn't know that's what it was for). Jon thought it was interesting that, starting about the time Mom and Dad got married, Lois Lane and Clark Kent no longer reported the majority of Superman's feats for the Daily Planet. Maybe this was their way of distancing themselves from their affiliations with Superman.
Jon had never really thought too much about the burden it must be to have to keep such a huge secret. He knew his parents were very much in love — how hard must it be to control themselves when they were in public and Dad was dressed as Superman? It was hard enough trying to get them not to have excessive displays of affection when they were out in public on a normal basis! And when Dad wasn't dressed as Superman, he probably really had to control himself — he couldn't let anybody see him doing "super" feats or else his secret would be out.
It was well known that Superman went to save the world from huge disasters on a regular basis. Disasters don't exactly ask you what time you have free before occurring — no, they always happened at the most inopportune times. Jon remembered reading two disaster articles in particular that made him think about timing, the job of a superhero, and how it affected his family. In one, there was a major earthquake in Turkey. Jon remembered that day vividly — the whole family had taken the day to go to the local theme park. Jon and Dad and CJ were standing in line to go on the "Decimator," the really, REALLY big roller coaster there, when all of a sudden, his dad got a faraway look on his face. Jon knew the look — he had always thought that Dad was just concentrating. Anyways, he said something about his forgetting a story and ran away. He didn't come back for the rest of the day, and wasn't home that night, either. Jon had known that his parents were serious about stories, but they never let that interfere with prescheduled family time. He had been very hurt that night, despite his mom's best efforts to assure him that everything was okay and that Dad really did love him. If he'd have known then what he knew now. Superman had saved so many lives in Turkey when he was there, yet all Jon knew was that his father had walked out on their family time.
The second article Jon read dealt with a sinking ship and bemoaned the fact that Superman didn't show up until the boat was almost completely under. Jon remembered that day, too — it was the day he played his solo in the city-wide honor band last year. That was one of the biggest days of his life — he was so nervous. His parents had been very proud of him, and they had sat through the concert and had given him a standing ovation at the end. He loved them so much that night — for their support of him, and for just being terrific parents. Now Jon knew that his father had ignored a call for help, just to be with him. People could've died — it had to have been very difficult for Dad to stick around, but he did anyway. Jon's heart swelled when he thought about the whole thing. It made being objective about research really hard to do, though. He had copied that article and stuck it in his bag — that was going in his own little scrapbook, if only as a reminder of what his father did for him.
As Jon bit into his ham and cheese sandwich, he pulled another article out of his bag. He was saving this one for last. It was the earliest Superman article that the library had, and it was written by Lois Lane. Jon unfolded the paper and studied the picture next to the article — it showed Superman flying through the newsroom window at the Planet with Lois in his arms. Jon could see how long Superman's hair was then — he had never seen his dad with his hair that long. It was almost as long as Jon's was right now. And his mother looked so young! An expression of uncontained wonder was plastered on her face in the photograph. Even his dad had a little bit of a goofy grin going on underneath the heroic facade. He knew his dad well enough that he could see this, even if nobody else could. The article next to the picture dealt with an explosion, and how Superman had saved the day. It was written very professionally, of course — his mother didn't let any of her emotions seep through. Jon got kind of a kick out of reading about Superman's first appearance in Metropolis — people really didn't know what to make of him. Friend or foe? Jon found it hard to believe that anybody could think that his father was capable of doing anything evil, but people just didn't know him back then.
Jon stuffed the article back into his bag as he finished off his sandwich. This trip had certainly been educational so far, and he had only been perusing the printed material. Now it was time to see what the electronic media had to say about Mom and Dad. Maybe he could see how Dad acted when in the suit. Maybe he could get a better idea of what made him tick. Then, maybe, he could go home and do some more observing.
Clark left work for the day at noon and headed for home with an assortment of folders tucked under his arm. As he walked in the door of his house, he was greeted with the smell of soup cooking on the stove. Laura and CJ were playing Frisbee in the afternoon sun, and Lois was sitting on the patio, finishing up reading the Ridley Davenport novel. Clark gave her a quick kiss before sitting in the chair next to her, dropping the folders in his lap.
"It looks like you've been busy," Lois said, a smile plastered on her face.
"Who me?" Clark smiled back, giving an innocent look. "This took about two minutes at superspeed." He pointed to the folders on his lap as he spoke. "How about you? It looks like you've been busy yourself."
"I was just reading about Superman's incredible feats. I could do that all day." Lois looked back at the novel, acting as if it was the most interesting thing in the world.
Clark couldn't resist the opportunity. "I've always thought that experiencing Superman's incredible feats first hand was MUCH more interesting than reading about them." He leaned over to kiss Lois again, more deeply this time.
Lois emerged for air, leaning back in her chair with satisfaction. "I think you may have a point there."
Clark grinned. "Mmmm."
They sat contentedly for a few seconds, their hands entwined, before Lois decided to break the happy silence and get back to business.
"So," she said, "what did you find out about our favorite author?" She and Clark had targeted today as being their day to do some digging on Ridley Davenport, trying to see what he knew.
Clark pulled a thin folder off of his lap and opened it. "Ridley Michael Davenport, born November 5, 1973 in Des Moines, Iowa. Went to college at Iowa State University on a National Merit Scholarship, majoring in civil engineering. Graduated in 1997 at about the middle of his class and immediately took a job with an engineering firm in Metropolis. Apparently writing was his hobby, because he started writing stories for magazines shortly thereafter. His first book was published seven years later, and was an immediate success. He quit his engineering job to take up writing full time and has been doing that ever since."
"Any criminal record?"
"Nope. He's as clean as clean can be. He had a few parking tickets in college. That's about it."
Lois looked a bit dismayed. "Does this guy have any dirt at all?"
"Not that I could find, and I looked pretty thoroughly."
"I'm sure you did, Mr. 'I-did-this-all-in-two-minutes.'"
"Ha-ha. Seriously, he's never been married, doesn't frequent the 'wild' scene, hasn't had any upset former girlfriends, has never been sued. Good credit rating."
"I'm not asking him to buy any major appliances for me."
"ANYWAY, as far as I can tell, he would have no reason to benefit from exposing Superman. He seems like just a normal, average guy."
Lois snatched the file out of his hands and looked it over herself. She put it down a few minutes later and let out an exasperated sigh. "You know Clark, it's those quiet ones that end up being the psychopathic killers."
"Uh-huh." He gave her a bemused glance.
"They lurk in the shadows, so quiet and mild-mannered that nobody even knows they exist, then BAM! They go crazy in a post office or something!"
"Lois." Clark rolled his eyes and shook his head. "You think that's what all us quiet guys do, huh?"
"Well, present company excepted of course." She giggled.
"I would hope so." He kissed her hand, then got serious again. "These other files I have are just more of the same. This one," he picked up a really fat file, "contains all the work that he's had published, including books. His latest novel," he pointed to the manuscript in Lois's lap, "is his first superhero retrospective."
"So, why start now? And how DOES he know? Or does he really know at all?"
"You can ask him yourself. I have an interview set up for this afternoon, like you wanted."
"Oh, good." Lois smiled and rose from her chair. "I better get lunch on the table then." Lois wandered into the kitchen and made some sandwiches to accompany the soup. While she was gone, Clark took the opportunity to have some time with his two youngest children. By the time Lois got back, Laura was running around with her father's tie around her forehead, a blanket from the treehouse worn as a toga. Clark and CJ were pretending to be gladiators, battling for the pleasure of the empress. Each gladiator had their own sound effects, and each looked a little scruffy, like they had been rolling around in the grass. As Lois watched, the imaginary swords held by the two clanged together, and Clark flopped to the ground, pretending to be hit. CJ went over to finish him off, but Clark rolled out of the way, popping up to a standing position and placing his "sword" at the ready.
Lois cleared her throat, drawing their attention toward her. Clark was just a big kid, Lois had no doubt. She grinned at her crew and announced lunch. As Clark approached, Lois looked at his now dirty shirt with one eyebrow cocked.
"Have you developed a new superpower that gets grass stains out of white shirts?" she asked quietly enough for the kids not to hear.
Clark got a wicked grin on his face. "You think this is a grass stain? Maybe a little later I'll show you what it takes to get a REAL grass stain!" He made a growling sound as he scooped her into his arms and kissed her on the neck. Lois let out a little yelp and then threw her head back and laughed as Clark carried her into the kitchen. The children paid no notice to the scene their parents were making — it was just a normal day in the Kent household.
As Superman flew over the city on his nightly patrol, he looked back on the events of that afternoon and evening.
The interview with Ridley Davenport had gone well, and it had given them all the information that they wanted. Mr. Davenport seemed surprised to see the famous Lois Lane and Clark Kent outside his door - the very characters that he had based his new book on. All he had been told was that the Daily Planet was sending reporters over to interview him on a series they were doing about Metropolis authors. They had stuck to questions about his previous works for most of the interview, but then mentioned that his publisher had said he was writing a new book on Superman. He seemed to get really nervous at this point, but he had no reason to believe that they had actually read the book (and why should he? The only copies were on his hard drive, at the publishing office, and at the Superman Foundation), so he lightened up pretty quickly and answered their questions honestly.
"So what made you decide to write a novel about Superman's life?" Lois had asked.
Mr. Davenport had smiled nervously and said, "Well, I got to looking at what had been written about him previously, and his life was an area that hadn't really been speculated about. I thought it might make an interesting story."
"So have you ever met Superman before?" Clark asked, just to gauge his honesty. Clark had literally met thousands of people in his years as Superman, but he had a pretty good memory. He was certain he had never saved this man or been interviewed by him.
"Oh, no," Ridley had answered right away. "All I know about him is what I read in the papers and saw on the news."
Clark was pleased with this answer. He decided to probe a little deeper. "How did you come up with details about Superman's life?"
This question didn't phase the author too much. "Oh, I just set up a secret identity for him and then thought about how Superman would handle different everyday situations."
Lois pretended to look surprised. "A secret identity?! That's a novel concept!"
Mr. Davenport smiled at the semi-compliment. "Well, the idea's been out there. It's just that nobody's ever been able to prove it or follow through on it. I don't know why, either — it's a pretty logical thing for Superman to have a secret identity. How else would he be able to live a life? It's not like he's flying around out there twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week."
Clark could practically see the alarm bells going off in Lois's head, but she kept her external calm. She did hesitate briefly before asking her next question.
"If I may ask, what kind of secret identity did you give him?"
Ridley looked nervous all over again. He seemed a bit flustered as he answered the question. "If I told you, it would ruin the whole story now, wouldn't it?" He let out a nervous chuckle, thinking that they should find that witty. Clark knew that Lois never liked it when people were evasive, so he sat back and let her ask the question that he knew was coming.
"Oh, come on!" Lois said, almost playfully. "Not even a little hint?"
Ridley eyed Lois for a second before giving his answer. "Let's just say that it's a profession where he would be expected to know what was going on in the world."
Lois still wasn't completely satisfied, but she let it go. He was obviously nervous that the basis of his story was sitting in front him. Having covered all the subjects on the agenda, she decided that it was time to go. She had said something about looking forward to reading his book, since she was such a big Superman fan, they shook his hand and left. Lois asked Clark what he thought, and he had said that the author's heart rate seemed to be pretty steady when they asked about how he formulated the details about Superman's life, meaning that he likely hadn't gotten them by dishonest means. He only seemed to really be bothered by questions that would give away that Lois and Clark were supposed to be the main characters.
So the interview went. Clark didn't think he would need to be worried about Ridley Davenport from this point on — just reject the book and let him go on with his life. By the time they picked up the children from Lois' mother's (where she always left them when they were on weekend interviews together), it was time to cook supper. Jon came home from the library at about the time that dinner was being served. He had been very quiet and disinterested during the whole meal, avoiding any eye contact with his parents and grunting when they tried to talk to him. Clark knew that his son was avoiding him. Pressing Jon into talking the previous evening had probably done more harm than good, so Clark just kept quiet and let Jon do his thing. He did ask him if he still wanted to go upstate tomorrow. Jon muttered something about having a big homework assignment due on Monday and retreated to his room for the second night in a row.
Clark would be lying if he were to deny that the whole situation with his son hurt. A lot. Last night he'd thrown himself into his patrol and then took a brief trip to the Himalayas to think. It had helped, he had to admit, but whatever healing that trip had accomplished had gone right down the tubes as he saw Jon run up to his room again. So after helping Lois clean up after supper, he changed into the suit and left. He knew it was probably unfair to Lois, his leaving like that. He tried to talk to her a little about what he was feeling on the car ride after the interview, but she didn't seem to fully appreciate the depths of his hurt. He felt responsible for driving Jon away from them, for implanting the seeds of doubt into his mind. Lois had been confident that he would be just fine, but Clark wasn't as optimistic. What if he never trusted them again? Clark loved his son so much — he was already grieving for the lost opportunities, the things that they would never share with each other.
Lois had told him that he was too sensitive sometimes. "Doom and Gloom" was the expression she had used. Not all things had a bad outcome - sometimes people just needed to sit back and sort things out for themselves before discussing them with others. She was probably right — she usually was in matters such as these, but that didn't stop Clark from worrying anyway. So there he was, flying high above the city, looking for any situation where his services might be needed.
His opportunity came soon enough. Superman saw an orange glow on the horizon and headed toward it. A warehouse in a neighborhood close to where he lived had caught fire, threatening the surrounding area. Anymore it seemed like a warehouse went up in flames about every other day. This one was fairly routine, but even so it took a few hours to get it under control. As the fire died down, Superman checked with the fire chief to make sure there was nothing else that needed to be done. The fire chief replied that there wasn't, thanking Superman for all the help that he had provided. They shook hands and the hero took off skyward, looking for the next opportunity to help. He hadn't noticed a teenage boy on a bicycle in the crowd surrounding the smoldering warehouse, watching his every movement.
Today I did some in-depth investigating. Most of my time was spent at the library, although my investigation did include a bit of "field work." I think I'm beginning to come to an understanding — now all that's left is to talk to my dad. I'm not sure I want to do that just yet — I just blew off the trip upstate we were supposed to take tomorrow. And I might be wrong, but I thought he looked a little hurt when I turned him down. Before I go any further, maybe I should tell you what I found out today.
At the library I did a lot of reading and a lot of watching videos, and one thing hit me the most: how much time my dad spends as Superman. If you look at it, it's only usually a couple of hours a day, if that. But here you have Clark Kent, my father, who has a full-time job, a wife, 3 kids, a house, parents. Just being himself should be more than enough to keep anyone very busy. But here you also have Superman, who's trying to save the world from disasters. Superman needs time to do his work, so what do you take it away from? Looking at the things I did today, it seems to be spread around pretty evenly, although we, his loving family, seem to be doing pretty well. Sure, there were times that he walked out on us to save people, but there were just as many times that he didn't.
So how do you make that decision? How CAN you make that decision? Let a robbery happen or watch my elementary school graduation? Let somebody fall off a building or comfort CJ when he has a nightmare? How can you live with yourself for just letting bad things happen and not stopping them if you know you can? On the other hand, how can you live with yourself if you're never there for anyone who loves you? I suppose even if Superman was out there saving the world 24-7, he probably still wouldn't be able to save everybody and everyone. This is a big city - stuff happens all the time. If Dad was here all the time for his family, maybe he still couldn't be the perfect father. But you know what? I almost hate to admit this right now, considering how I've been feeling about the guy lately, but my dad really is darn good father. He's only been gone a few times when something important in our lives was going on, and I know now that those coincided with major disasters around the world, things where Superman saved countless lives. Let's compare this to some of my friends' dads. One is an alcoholic, three of them are divorced, and of those three, only one sees his son on a regular basis. One is a lawyer, and even when he is at home, he locks himself in the den to work on cases. I probably have the best dad of any of my friends, and he's off being Superman, for goodness sakes!
Okay, I should probably tell you about the last part of my investigation, the "field work." After supper tonight, I came up here and tuned my radio to the local news station. I put it on headphones so that my super-dad wouldn't be as likely to figure out what I was doing. After about an hour, they said there was a fire happening at a warehouse in my part of town, so I slipped out of the house and rode my bike down there to watch it. Dad was there, of course, helping to put out the fire. He would fly up and position the hose on the fire in ways that the firemen couldn't. He would go in and rescue firemen right before sections of the warehouse collapsed. He would x-ray the building and report to the fire chief the structural stability. I watched all this - it took about 3 hours in all. I sat in a crowd of people and he didn't look my way once. I was in awe the whole time, looking at Dad do those things. My dad. It's incredible.
Well, this is getting long, so I'll leave you alone. I don't know what I'm going to do tomorrow, but I think I'll be planning my talk with Dad. It'll happen. So anyway, I'll talk to you later.
The day to this point had been pretty similar to any other - Jon's "science class doodle" had grown to the point of being a full-fledged work of art. In English class he managed to stare outside THROUGH the wall when not half-heartedly paying attention to whatever Shakespeare play they were reading today. And now, blessedly, lunch.
The menu had said Salisbury steak, although what the lunch lady had placed on the plate in front of him sure looked a lot like the mystery meat his mom would serve up. Oh well. It didn't really matter - he would eat it happily. Right now he could eat a whole cow — never let it be said that he hadn't inherited his father's appetite. Jon made the most of his $2 worth of lunch money by loading up on the desserts and whatever else looked good.
He was already helping himself to the food on his tray when a disturbance out in the lunch room distracted him. The usual murmur of voices in the cafeteria gave way to surprised questions and finally to screaming. Jon dropped his lunch tray onto the counter and strode the three steps to the door of the cafeteria, past a worried looking cashier. What he saw made his face pale and eyes widen. Students were running haphazardly out any door they could find, and in the middle of them stood a student Jon couldn't place, sobbing, and holding a gun. The guy was staggering toward the table where his former girlfriend sat with her friends, all of whom were obviously too frightened to move. They just stared at the gun.
"Tammi!" the guy cried. Jon suddenly remembered his name was Dan. Dan stopped about fifty feet from the table where the girls were sitting. "Tammi, without you I can't live. There's only one place where we can be happy now. We're going there together!" The last word was shouted. A sudden look of determination came over Dan's face as he raised the gun, aimed it at his terrified ex- and pulled the trigger.
As soon as the gun was raised, Jon's senses sharpened until all his attention was focused on nothing but the gun itself. The screaming students faded into the background along with his monumental appetite. He could hear clearly the mechanical parts interact as the trigger was pulled. The sound of the gun firing was deafening. Without any conscious thought of the possible consequences, Jon began to run as fast as he could toward the bullet. Time seemed to dilate as he ran. The bullet almost seemed to hang in the air before him, the gunpowder surrounding it in a halo. As he approached it, he put is hand up in the path of the approaching bullet. A hot, searing pain went down his arm as it exerted its force against his skin. Even as the bullet pulled his hand along its trajectory, Jon willed it to stop. The skin in his palm burned where the bullet had impacted, but it held. Even as this one was being stopped, another one, two, three, four bullets were being fired. He never stopped running. Turning to approach the gunman again, he stopped each of the subsequent bullets. The pain in his hand wasn't as bad for the next four he stopped, but a brief flash through his mind reminded him that it was probably because of the initial pain clouding his thoughts. As the last bullet was dropped to the ground, Jon watched in slow motion as Dan raised the gun to his right temple.
*NO!* Jon's mind screamed. He now ran toward the gunman full bore, praying he wasn't too late. Dan's finger just began to tense on the trigger when the gun was ripped away from him. Gun in hand, Jon kept running toward the nearest exit, students running in slow motion around him. If it wasn't for the situation, the almost frozen looks of terror on their faces might have seemed comical. But no thoughts of that right now; he kept running until he couldn't see any more people, and then allowed himself to stop. The world slammed back into its normal speed and Jon had to blink a few times to reorient himself with it. As he looked down at the gun in his hands, he could feel his legs giving out on him. He made his way over to the nearest building and slid down to a sitting position. What now? What could he possibly do now?
Only one solution came to mind.
"HELP!" he yelled as loud as he possibly could. He chocked back tears and yelled again, this time his cry sounded so much more desperate. Almost before he could blink, his father appeared before him as Superman.
"Son, what it is?" Superman looked extremely worried, almost frantic. He approached Jon and kneeled beside him. It occurred to Jon that this was the first time that he had really seen his father dressed in the suit up close, but that thought was pushed away. He looked longingly into Superman's face, the tears in his eyes obscuring his peripheral vision, and saw any attempt to appear the stoic superhero disappear from his father's face quickly. Jon threw his arms around Superman, any rift between the two forgotten, and let the floodgates open as he wept over his father's shoulder. Superman embraced his son and tried to comfort him as best he could.
"I can't believe what happened!" Jon sobbed. "They could've died. They WOULD'VE died."
"Shhh. Jonny, shhh." Superman began to become concerned that someone might witness the very emotional exchange with his son. He was wearing his emotions on his sleeve right now, and he didn't think he could bear to put back on the "hero" mask and leave his son to face this alone right now.
"Oh, Daddy," Jon cried, loud enough for someone to hear if they were standing close. Superman smiled a little at hearing his fifteen-year-old son refer to him as 'Daddy' again for the first time since he was about 10, but the smile faded as he saw people approaching. After glancing into the nearby high school to make sure everything was okay, Superman lifted his son, whose arms were still firmly wrapped around him, off the ground and into the air, bound for the house.
Jon's face had been buried against his father's neck before he was picked up off the ground, and it stayed there until his father leaned over and placed him into his bed. The rushing air against his body during the flight hadn't even registered, just the warm embrace of his father. Superman. The most powerful man in the world, the man who had faced down nuclear bombs and flown to the depths of space, the man who could crush whole buildings or mountains if he so wished. Superman. The man who had always been gentle and loving toward his children and his wife, and who would never willingly harm anyone or anything. Jon felt so safe and secure in his arms it was almost overwhelming.
The feel of the bed under him snapped Jon back into reality. As he let go of his father, he noticed for the first time that he still had the gun clutched in his right hand. After looking at it for a second, he held it out for his dad to take. Superman took the gun and crushed it into a ball of metal. He looked his son in the eye and said, "I'll be back in a second. I need to get rid of this and change, but when I get back, I want you to tell me everything that happened. Okay?"
Jon nodded. True to his word, Superman disappeared and exactly one second later Clark Kent appeared in front of his son, dressed in jeans and a t-shirt. He put his glasses on as he sat down on the bed.
"So, I'm guessing there was a shooting," Clark said. He knew darn well there was a shooting, but he had to get the conversation started somehow. Jon was now sitting in the middle of the bed, and he began to draw his knees to his chest.
"Yeah," Jon replied. He directed his attention out the window he had so recently entered.
"You want to tell me about it?"
"Well, I was getting lunch," Jon started. He frowned, realizing he was still hungry. That can wait, he thought. "And I heard people yelling in the lunch room. I went to see what was going on and I saw this guy standing there with a gun. The only thing I could think of was that I couldn't let anyone get hurt. So when the gun fired, I just went out to get the bullets. I didn't even think about anybody seeing me getting hit by the bullets. I didn't think about if they would hurt me or not. I just did it." He looked down at his hands, remembering the pain when he was hit. A dark bruise was already beginning to form at the point where each bullet impacted him. He glanced INTO his hands and saw all the bones still intact.
Clark saw Jon examine his hands and took each of them gently in his own. After looking at (and through) his son's hands himself, he kissed them lightly. "I hope that helps to make you feel better."
Jon smiled for the first time since the ordeal. A kiss always used to make things better when he was a little kid. It had been such a long time.
"I'm really proud of you, Jon." Clark smiled at his son.
Jon felt like he was going to start crying all over again. *He was proud of me!* All of a sudden, Jon remembered the victims. A panicked look came across his face.
Sensing what his son was going to ask, Clark spoke again. "Nobody got hurt. You did a great job! The girls looked dazed and the gunman had collapsed on the floor. The teachers were taking care of him."
Jon got a questioning look on his face and Clark spoke again. "I took a peek just before we left."
Jon was relieved, and all of a sudden he felt very tired. But the need to talk this over with his father overrode that. He looked his dad in the eyes again and began to speak.
"Dad, when I was running to catch those bullets, it's like time didn't exist anymore. NOTHING existed anymore except the gun and the bullets. I could hear the pin hitting the bullet. I could hear the bullet cutting through the air. Is that what it's like all the time?"
Clark thought for a second and began to run his hands over his son's back. "Well, yes and no. Sometimes, I know when I really want something or when I focus on something, it's like the rest of the world goes away." He chuckled. "It's like that every time I'm around your mother."
Jon couldn't resist. "Yeah, it sure feels like that sometimes for me, too," he said sarcastically. The two laughed.
Clark continued. "Seriously, I just got used to it after a while. I keep forgetting how new all this is for you. I try to remember what it was like — it's been a long time. How did I feel the first few times I ran at super speed? The first time I knew I could see through things? The first time I saved a life?"
The room got very quiet. Clark began to speak again, softer this time. "Saving somebody's life is one of the most exhilarating experiences in the world. That's one thing that you really don't ever get used to. Every time that you know saved someone from drowning or burning or being shot, well, then you know. You know how you can contribute to the world, how you can make a difference. It's something that so many people will never know. And when you can't save someone, you feel sorrow, the depths of which can swallow you up sometimes. You ask yourself over and over again what you could've done differently."
Jon was almost shocked at how his father was bearing his soul. Until a few days ago he had always just been Dad, the reporter, the guy who cooked the hamburgers or threw you the football, the guy who would let his wife push him around sometimes. Now Jon could see the complexity of his personality, as well as the depth of his caring. And he was grateful to his father for letting him see it. The tears welled up in Jon's eyes once again.
He spoke, "I know I treated you pretty lousy the last few days after I find out you know." Jon braved a look into his father's face. "I had no idea. I never knew before today what it was you go through. I'm so sorry."
"You don't need to be. I feel guilty for not telling you the family secret earlier. You had every right to be mad." Clark stopped stroking his son's back and pushed Jon's hair out of his face.
"No, Dad. I can't begin to tell you how much it means to me that you are willing share all this with me. I guess it wasn't much of a choice after last week, but still." Jon smiled at his dad. "I guess, if I think about it, I'm also grateful for all the times that you were there for me when you could've been out saving the world. You went to my concerts and my plays. Heck, we went on family vacations for weeks at a time!"
"Uh, yeah, well…" Clark scratched his head and looked around somewhat shyly. "What you DIDN'T know was that after you and your brother and sister went to bed I kinda flew back here to take care of things. I wouldn't have wanted to advertise to the world that the man of steel was on vacation — do whatever you please."
Jon was somewhat surprised by this revelation, but it made sense. He nodded. "Well, thanks for fessing up." He hoped his dad caught his attempt to lighten the mood.
Clark smiled at his son. "Hey, no problem. We don't keep any more secrets from each other around here, understand? I don't want to come home some day and find out that you've been secretly masquerading as somebody else's kid or something." He put his hands on his hips in an attempt to look stern, but his light-hearted tone had given him away and both of them started giggling. After it subsided, he continued. "Seriously, though, you know you can tell me about ANYTHING, right? I mean, I think I'm pretty good at keeping a secret."
Jon giggled again as he nodded. "Yeah, I know."
"I'm glad to hear it." Clark started to get up, but he was stopped as his son began to speak.
Clark sat back down again and looked Jon in the face. "Yes?"
"I love you, Dad. I just wanted you to know that."
"I love you, too." Clark smiled a deep and loving smile as he went to embrace his boy. He was stopped midway again, this time it was by the very audible growl of Jon's stomach. Jon became a little flushed.
"I, uh, I guess I never did get around to having lunch." Jon gave a quick embarrassed smile before looking a little sad. "I was really looking forward to it, too."
"Well, you know, I was just getting ready to eat something myself before I was interrupted. What do you say we go downstairs and make ourselves sandwiches?" Clark helped Jon out of bed and the two walked down the stairs. Before starting lunch, Clark phoned Jon's school to let them know the boy was okay — in all the confusion, many kids had disappeared or just gone home. In a way Clark was grateful for the impromptu day off. It was time to spend some quality time with his son.
Today I did my first "super" feat. Well, the first one in public, that is. Not that anybody knew it was me — they all just figured it was Superman, and that's just fine with me. I saved at least two lives — those people would've been DEAD if I wasn't there! I know Dad's fast but he wouldn't have been able to help. It's just so cool to think that I could help like that. Dad said the feeling would be indescribable, and it is. Of course, my hands didn't fare so well — my palms are all black and blue from the bullets. Dr. Klein assured me that it was just because my aura wasn't fully developed yet. "Think of it this way," he said. "If you were any normal person, they would've gone right through you." So for the next couple of years I won't be perfectly invulnerable, but if everything goes like he predicts, when I turn eighteen, a train could run into me and I should be perfectly fine. AND I should be able to fly. I'm kinda looking forward to that.
So after going to see Dr. Klein, Dad and I had another heart to heart — we've had a few of those today. We talked about how maybe I should lay off the "super" stuff until I'm a little older and whatever powers I end up with are all there. I agreed that that would be the best, but I don't think I was totally convincing because Dad made a face and said we could go somewhere quiet and have some fun from time to time. I don't know why I was so mad at him before — OK wait, I DO know why I was mad. I was just confused, I guess. But not after today. Let's just say I don't know why I didn't trust him. I mean, I KNOW he loves me, and we talked a lot today and he shared a lot of Superman stuff with me. I think he was really looking forward to the day I knew just so that he could have another person to talk to. What I see now that I didn't see before today is that Dad is still just Dad. Or maybe you can call him Dad plus. Nothing's changed — he'll still make bad jokes at everyone's expense and he'll still go play catch with CJ and me in the yard. I think the guy's just a big kid at heart — of course I've known that for a long time. Superman is Dad, but he's not real. Superman is stern and serious all the time — like the anti-Dad. I asked him about that and he said that sometimes it was necessary to put on a different face — kind of like a mask — in order to protect ourselves. "You know how when you talk on the phone you get a different tone in your voice - kind of perky? Even your MOM sounds perky on the phone and we all know how true THAT one is." I thought that was pretty good. It's kinda like that.
"Well, Superman is everybody's hero — he's expected to be strong and trustworthy and always in control. So I put on a kind of a mask — a phony front — so that I fulfill everybody's expectations about their hero. There are times when I want to cry or to run away, and other times when I just want to smile wide and gloat. But I can't do that, or else everybody's image of their hero will be shattered, or at the least seriously damaged. I put all the feeling in the back of my mind and put on the serious face," he made the face for me, and it sure did look serious, "and deal with it all later when I'm out of the suit." The serious face went away and it was just plain old goofy dad there again. "Besides," he added, "who would ever think that that guy is me?"
Now I've seen my old man "dad-serious," like the time I broke mom's fish tank and he gave me that get-to-your-room-before-I-drag-you-up-there-by-your-ear look. Or when I fell off my bike and he wondered if I was OK. And when he gets to working, watch out. My dad can be serious, but that tends to be the exception, rather than the rule. So I can see where he's coming from. It must be hard, though. As much as I'm looking forward to being "super," hiding myself like that is one thing I don't think I'll like that much. So now I think I can wait, and I told him that. I asked Dad when I would be ready to help him out, and he said that I would just know when the right time was.
I have so much more respect for my dad than I ever did before. He feels like my best friend now, too. What a difference a day makes, huh? He offered to bring me along when Superman does his patrol of the city tonight, provided I wear something dark and I stay at a distance when he does any actual dirty work. I can't wait.
Ridley Davenport sat in the same library archive that Jonathan Kent had just a few days earlier, reviewing the same material. He had a theory, and only reviewing Superman material, along with the biographies of Lane and Kent, would verify what he was thinking.
The letter from the Superman Foundation had arrived yesterday, rejecting his use of the Superman image and effectively killing his novel. The letter had said something about how the novel mirrored the lives of Superman's friends and colleagues, the Kents, too closely and how the adult subject matter might compromise Superman's image. Yeah, right. Ridley had intentionally written the reporters in his novel to be far enough away from the actual lives of Lane and Kent that they couldn't be confused with them. And as for the adult issues, well, the reporters were supposed to be married. Ridley figured that even Superman could have sex with his wife. He didn't even go into detail about it in the novel. No, there was something else going on here.
What if his book hit too close to home? Ridley hadn't even really considered it before. When he was researching his novel, the only things he had looked into were accounts of Superman's feats throughout the years. He never really looked into Lane and Kent, nor did he look at the tabloid headlines very closely, figuring that they were likely fiction in and of themselves. He looked now, though. Every now and then a little bit of truth leaked though the smutty headlines — finding it was the trick. Finding anything on the reporters was a trick too - journalists generally didn't like to write about other journalists.
After several hours spent pouring over material, only to reexamine it, Ridley was faced with a short biography of Clark Kent, written after his nomination for the Pulitzer a few years back (he didn't win), and a retrospective written on Superman on the tenth anniversary of his first appearance in Metropolis. Both articles contained pictures, and these were what Ridley focused on. He had made Xeroxes of the articles so that he could make notes in the margin. If he was right, then Clark Kent was really Superman, and that's why the Man of Steel didn't want his book published. That must also be why the Kents came to interview him themselves. It was hard to prove this, however, and his notes in the margins were inconclusive. In his frustration, Ridley picked up his pen and began to doodle on the picture of Superman. He absently drew a pair of glasses, colored a business suit over his Superman outfit, and drew his hair up as if it were styled. The effect was stunning.
There, right in front of him, was his proof, in the form of a doodle. With a shaky hand, Ridley held his marked-up picture of Superman next to the picture of Kent from the Pulitzer article. Fortunately, the shots had been taken from the same angle, and in both the subject was smiling cordially. It was remarkable, really. Ridley was surprised more people hadn't done the same thing and noticed for themselves.
So what now? His "proof" didn't rest, in fact, but in a doodle, so it wouldn't do any good trying to go public with it — he would get shot down in flames. He could confront Kent with his knowledge and demand his book get published. He could tail Kent for a while to get more facts. He could get stinking rich by exploiting his knowledge. BUT Ridley was an honest person, and a very non-confrontational honest person, at that. Was it really worth trying to exploit or even confront SUPERMAN for his own personal gain? He would certainly pay the price eventually.
Ridley closed his eyes and briefly thought about Clark Kent. The man was married, he had a family. If you were him, Superman, with villains after you constantly, wouldn't you guard you secret with everything that was in you? Yes, he would. Ridley sighed, then he began to laugh a little. The situation really was pretty humorous. Imagine, a desperate author had managed to stumble on the biggest secret in the world by writing a piece of fiction. *I guess life really does imitate art sometimes,* he thought, and began to laugh harder. He caught himself as the other library patrons began to look at him.
So what now, he asked himself again. He gathered up his papers, doodle included, and slipped them in his bag. These were not going to see the light of day again. He would make sure that Superman's secret was safe! As he was picking up the article on Clark Kent, his eye caught a particular paragraph, and inspiration struck him again. Kent had children. Oh, this was good. These were natural, biological children with Lois Lane, which meant that these were also future superheroes, most likely. This was really good! Ridley Davenport was already mentally writing his next novel. The title was going to be "Superboy," and since it didn't directly deal with Superman, he wouldn't have to run it through the Superman Foundation first. All of a sudden the rejection of his Superman novel didn't seem so bad — this next one was going to be better! And when the young superhero did actually burst onto the scene, he would look like a genius! Ridley walked out of the library, a sparkle in his eye and a spring in his step, and headed straight to his computer.
Six years later
Jonathan Kent leaned his trombone against the wall just inside his apartment door. He could smell the aroma of a late supper coming from the kitchen, and he headed in to catch a bite without even taking off his coat. It had already been a long day — he'd had to play in the pep band at a Metropolis University basketball double header. Even for a guy with superpowers, he got worn out after those. His brother CJ stood in front of the stove, serving up a healthy portion of spaghetti.
Having CJ attending Metropolis University had been great. Jon could never have a roommate before — it would risk exposing his secret if he did. But then his brother decided to go to school here, and voila, instant roommate. It cut the boredom, not to mention the rent, plus you could come home from a long day and supper would be waiting.
"Hey bro, how were the games?" CJ asked, without even turning around. He had heard his brother coming even before he had entered the apartment. Jon had figured he would — it was one of the many family talents.
"The women won and the men lost. That men's game was real close - I thought for sure they would pull it off." Jon slipped his apartment keys into his pocket and reached into the cupboard for a plate.
"Yeah, I heard about the women on the radio." CJ glanced over at his brother. "Why don't you take your coat off and stay a while?"
"Huh?" Jon looked down at himself and shrugged. "Maybe later. There's more important things to do right now." He began to make his own pile of spaghetti. CJ poured them both large glasses of milk and they sat down at the kitchen table and started eating. They were both eating their food so energetically, it left little room for conversation.
Jon looked over at his brother and studied him for a minute. CJ had started referring to himself as S. Clark Kent when he got to college last year — the name CJ was too boyish, he thought. All his friends called him Clark. CJ had always been the athletic type as a kid, and as he got older, people in high places began to become aware of his football skills. He was now attending Metropolis University on a football scholarship. Back when he was beginning high school, when his superpowers were just beginning to emerge, he had made the decision not to wear glasses, thinking that none of the guys on the team who shared the group showers with him after every practice would be fooled by a stupid pair of glasses. Besides, CJ really didn't look a whole lot like Superman — he favored his mother's side of the family. He even had light-brown colored hair. Nobody would see CJ walking around without glasses and see him as the son of the Man of Steel. This was in contrast to Jon, who looked a lot like the original Clark Kent, his father. He wasn't a spitting image — he had his mother's eyes and his hair was a shade lighter than his father's. In any case, Dad conceded the point, and CJ was doomed to have to wear a mask if and when he ever got around to donning a super suit.
Jon had to admit, the whole superpower situation with him and his brother was kind of strange. Doctor Klein had been right when he theorized that Superman's children might not inherit all of his super powers. Jon never did get the heat vision or the cooling breath. Well, he got very, VERY weak version of each. His heat vision was akin to using a magnifying glass on a piece of paper on a cloudy day — he could make stuff warm, it would smolder, that's it. This wasn't good if he wanted to shave, but Dr. Klein had developed a laser that imitated heat vision for Jon to use shaving or cutting his hair. Of the two powers not to get, those would be the ones he would choose. CJ didn't have two of the big ones — he couldn't fly and didn't have superspeed. He was still incredibly strong and invulnerable, of course, which made him a natural defensive lineman. He, too, had VERY weak versions of the missing superpowers — he could run a little faster than the average guy, and if he concentrated really hard, he could get himself to levitate a couple of inches off of the ground. CJ didn't really mind not having these abilities too much. He could still help out with what he had, and he was more interested in fighting crime by use of his mental abilities, not by flying around and using brute force. He was studying to be a forensic scientist, one of the actual good guys in the police office who busted the bad guys through science, very fitting for Jon's dorky little brother. He was also corresponding with Bruce Wayne in Gotham City on how to help out without being "super." He was toying around with taking over as Batman in Gotham in a couple years — Bruce WAS getting on in age and wanted to retire soon. Dad was friends with Wayne, and thought it was a really good idea considering the state of CJ's powers, despite the fact that it meant his son would be in another city.
Jon wasn't planning on going anywhere — he wanted to stay right here in Metropolis. He was scheduled to graduate in a little over a month with a degree in journalism, and he already had a job lined up at the Planet. He thought that maybe his mom and dad had put in a good word with the new editor for him, but he figured it was more probable that he got hired on his own merits. He HAD done some really good exposes for the campus newspaper, bringing it a certain amount of respectability that most people agreed it hadn't had since his mother worked there. Now THAT was a compliment. As for his other job, well, he hadn't taken that up yet. He had a suit all ready to go — Grandma had sewed it up last year, making sure that Jon knew exactly how it was made. "I'm not going to be around forever, you know," she had said. It was made of red spandex with the S-shield on front, it didn't have a cape, and had black stirrup pants instead of tights. Jon wasn't too keen on the whole look of his father in the pants department. First of all, Superman's pants didn't leave ANYTHING to the imagination, and secondly, he was wearing underwear on the outside of his clothes. Come on! Jon had even chosen a name for himself — he was going to be called the Crimson Superman. Then people could just call him Superman if and when his dad retired, but Jon couldn't really see that happening. He and Dad and CJ went out at least once a week to practice using and controlling his powers, so he was all set. It was just a matter of finding the right time to emerge.
Dad had encouraged Jon, and the rest of his children, too, to be patient. "You're only going to be young once," he had said. "Enjoy your time in college. Join clubs, play sports, have fun! You have the rest of your life to be 'super'." Jon had certainly taken this to heart — he joined the marching band and the pep band, and he wrote for the school newspaper and magazine. He wanted to wait until it was all over to make his first appearance as the new Superman. Throughout the years he had used his powers subtly, never so that he could be seen or recognized. Stopping muggings at superspeed, preventing a couple of car-pedestrian accidents. Nothing big. His time would come for the big stuff, he was sure of it.
All of a sudden, Jon realized that CJ was talking to him. His brother had a bemused look on his face. "Earth to Jon! Hello! You with me, bro?"
"Uh, yeah, sure. I was just thinking." He gave a nervous laugh. "What were you saying?"
"I was just wondering what you wanted to do tonight. Come on, we're two young single guys, and Metropolis is a big city." CJ had a mischievous twinkle in his eye. Jon knew that look. For all his brother's brains, he sure was a guy who liked to have fun. Jon was always a bit more mild-mannered himself, never very quick to go to the big parties. Jon laughed and shook his head.
"So what did YOU have in mind?" He knew CJ had something up his sleeve.
"Well, there's this party going on over at the Kappa house. A couple of guys on the team live there and they gave everybody else invites."
"I thought it might do you some good to go. Have a little fun. It won't hurt, I promise!" CJ had always thought that his brother was too serious. He was always trying to drag him to these frat parties. Jon actually went a couple of times, but he didn't really enjoy himself. It was never fun being the sober guy (not by choice, he just couldn't get drunk) among a bunch of drunk college guys, but CJ never really seemed to mind. Jon did.
"Actually, I was thinking about sticking around the apartment tonight, maybe doing some reading."
CJ shrugged, got up from the table and placed his dishes in the sink. On his way out, he slapped Jon on the shoulder. "Your loss, big brother." CJ was making his way toward his room when he suddenly stopped. Jon cocked his head, hearing a loud crashing sound in the distance. Both of them stared at, and through, the outside wall, searching for the source of the sound. What they saw was horrifying. The chemistry building at the University had exploded, collapsing parts of the neighboring buildings and starting a fire. Jon knew that certain professors liked to work on their research there on the weekends. If they weren't dead, then they were probably dying, buried deep in the rubble. CJ saw the same thing, and gave his brother a worried glace. Their father had gone out of town this weekend on business. They could page him and he would come, but that might take a couple of minutes. Something had to be done now, and Jon knew that he had to be the one to do it.
Jon quickly rose from the table and strode for his room, throwing off his coat on the way. "You page Dad," he said to CJ. "I need to go out there and help them."
"Jon!" CJ said urgently. He knew what his brother was going to do, and once he did it, there was going to be no going back. Jon stopped mid-stride and looked at his brother. "Are you sure?" CJ asked. "Are you ready? You know it's never going to be the same after you go out there. People will be expecting you all the time now."
Jon looked at his feet briefly, his mind working quickly. When he looked up at his brother again, he had a determined look on his face, a look that CJ had never seen on him before. *But Dad gets that look on his face all the time, especially when he's in the suit.* CJ realized all of a sudden that his brother WAS ready.
"I know," Jon said quietly, intensely. "I also know if I don't go out there, people will die, and I can't let that happen. Now page Dad." And just like that, Jon was standing in front of the window, dressed in his Crimson Superman outfit, his glasses gone and his hair plastered to his head. CJ nodded and smiled.
"Good luck, bro," CJ said softly as his brother launched himself out of the window. He picked up the phone and dialed his father's pager number. He then got himself to the scene of the explosion as fast as he could, not as a hero, but as a normal guy. A familiar flash of red and blue streaked across the sky as CJ was about half way to the scene, and by the time he arrived, the two heroes were in the process of laying victims on the central campus green and instructing bystanders on how to keep them comfortable until the paramedics arrived. CJ jumped in as his father set one of his chemistry professors on the grass. Superman smiled at his youngest son as the young man took off his coat and laid it around the injured professor. CJ smiled back, cordially, so as not to arise public suspicion, and went back to work. He saw a family meeting coming in the near future — a pleasant one, most likely. The newest Superman arrived with his latest rescue a few seconds later, to the startled exclamations of a few of the more recent onlookers. Jon noticed his brother's presence, and nodded in his direction. Any doubts, any fears, any regrets that he might be having were nowhere to be seen — he looked like a superhero. He looked like a Superman. CJ nodded back.
The paramedics arrived about five minutes after the heroes first appeared; the reporters arrived ten minutes after that, and the center of attention was the new superhero. Rescues were made well into the night, with about 40 people pulled from the building in all, most alive, but some dead. The fire was put out as the sun came up the next morning, with the help of the Metropolis Fire Department. Only the most persistent reporters and onlookers stayed to watch the whole ordeal, among them was Lois Lane and CJ, as well as camera crews from all the major networks. These camera crews began to arrive well after the situation was under control, coming only after hearing of the presence of a new Superman.
The fire having been put out, the two new superheroes landed in front of the media to answer questions. Clark had warned Jon before they landed what he should expect. The two had actually pulled away from the scene for a few minutes to chat atop the roof of the nearby English building, out of sight of the awaiting throng of media.
"You know, son, they're going to grill you down there. They won't give a damn about the fire or the people killed and injured, they're only going to care about you. Where did you come from? What's your name? Who's your mother? I mean, think of anything and they'll ask it. Are you sure you're ready for that? Because if you're not, feel free to go home right now and I'll take care of things." Clark looked at his son expectantly. Whenever they were alone, whether Clark was in the suit or not, the real Clark always shined though — the expressive, intelligent, and sympathetic Clark. Jon was still amazed at the transformation he made to create the Superman persona, and he wondered whether he could do the same transformation now, this morning, to face his waiting audience. It was not something that he had much practice at - it wasn't really anything that you COULD practice for. You just had to do it.
Clark could sense the uncertainty his son felt, and proceeded to relate to him the story of one of his earliest experiences with the media. He looked off into the distance in front of him as he spoke. "It was a week or so after I arrived in town — the mayor was presenting me with the key to the city. I flew down to the stage, and it was okay. I was standing there, and it was okay. They give their presentation, and I go up to the podium to accept the key, and suddenly it's not okay anymore. I could see every flash of the camera bulbs. All the women were swooning over me, all the men were admiring me. Lex Luthor was practically sneering at me though his phony smile. It was all too much. I began to panic — it took everything I had just to mumble out a few words of thanks and get the heck off that stage without actually looking as panicked as I felt." Clark looked back at his son and continued. "I had to stop to catch my breath before I took off, and even then a group of women began to mob me. I guess I've never liked dealing with the media very much. It does get easier, though."
Jon just nodded. He had never heard about this before, but he could imagine how it must've felt. Jon was getting a little panicked himself.
Clark met his son's eyes before speaking again. "I want to ask you again — are you sure you're ready to face them?"
Jon looked at his hands for a second before answering. "I guess, if I wasn't ready, then I wouldn't have come out here tonight. I knew what I was doing -CJ and I talked about it." He smiled. "I'll be fine, really."
Clark regarded him closely. He didn't really think that Jon was as confident as he let on, but he wasn't going to push the point. He probably would pull through just fine. Clark nodded and stood up, offering his hand to his son. Jon pulled himself up and the two stood there, side by side, for a brief second. Finally, the elder Superman said "Let's go," and off they went.
As if on cue, the reporters all started hurling questions at the pair as soon as they landed. Superman held up his hand and the crowd went silent.
"I would first like to say that we appreciate the help of the students and faculty of the university as well as the rest of the volunteers who tended to the injured and dying tonight. Without their help, tonight's disaster would have surely been worse. Secondly, I would like to say that the fire department is looking into the cause of the explosion, and they will keep you posted of what they find. Right now it is believed that the cause was an experiment gone wrong. Let me assure you that no volatile chemicals were believed to have been involved. Finally, I would like to introduce you to my son."
Jon stood next to his father, his hands folded across his chest, a neutral look upon his face. He hadn't even been able to open his mouth before the questions began.
"You have a name, kid?" a reporter holding a microphone, which bared the LNN symbol, asked.
"I am the Crimson Superman." The timber of Jon's voice, as well as the force with which he spoke, surprised all the Kent family members in the audience, but none so much as Jon himself. His normally high tenor voice had seemed to have dropped an octave.
"Where exactly do you come from? And where have you been before now? How come we never knew that Superman had a son?" a reporter who Jon recognized from the local network affiliate asked. This seemed to open the floodgates anew.
"Yeah, Superman. You got any more at home?" shot a reporter from the Star.
"Who's his mother?"
"Do you mean to tell me that you have a wife, Superman?"
"Why come out tonight?"
The questions kept coming furiously. Superman opened his mouth to talk, but the Crimson Superman laid his hand on his shoulder, stopping any words. Jon nodded at his father and held up his hand, stopping the tirade.
"I, like my father, am a citizen of this city. I wish to help my fellow man, should the need for my services arise. That is all I will be saying for now. I wish you well." With that, the newest Superman took off skyward.
"Thank you," Superman said, nodding toward the crowd, a small grin on his face. Before taking off, he turned around and spoke softly, hoping that CJ would hear him.
"Yeah, Dad?" the muffled response came back. Clark had to strain his super hearing just to hear the whispered words.
"Meet me at your apartment. Bring your mother." Even before hearing the response, Superman also took off skyward.
Clark, dressed casually, knocked on the door to his sons' apartment two seconds later. When he got no response, he checked the door. Finding it unlocked, he entered. Jon sat on his couch, still in costume, hunched over, his head in his hands. The sound of the door closing seemed to jar the young man out of whatever trance was in, and he looked up to face his father. Jon's face was a mixture of sadness, fatigue, and wonder.
"Hey," Clark said softly. He showed a bit of fatigue, but besides that, seemed to have no outward signs of what had happened that night.
"Hey yourself." Jon half smiled at his father's arrival. He had expected him to come. Clark went to the couch and sat down next to his son.
"So, how are you doing?" Clark asked.
Jon sighed and allowed himself to sit back and relax. "Okay, I guess."
Clark cocked an eyebrow. "You guess?"
"Yeah. Maybe. I don't know! I'm tired." Jon started to rub his temples.
Both eyebrows were now cocked. Clark began to smile as he patted his son on the knee. "I know what you're going through. Believe me, I've been there a hundred times. You know you can talk to me about it if you want."
"I know. I I guess that everything just now caught up with me. I really was fine until I got here. Now." Jon threw his hands up in the air.
"Let me guess," Clark said. "You're feeling overwhelmed. You're also upset about the people who died, but you're exhilarated about the whole experience. Am I getting close here?"
Jon looked at his father. "Yeah. I think that about covers it." He shook his head slightly. "I know you told me once that you can't save everybody all the time, but you don't really appreciate it until you've experienced it yourself, you know?"
Clark nodded and let his son continue.
"And I really haven't done anything BIG since that time in high school. Even then it wasn't as me. I wonder if it will be as weird to read about myself in the paper tomorrow as I think it'll be."
Clark smiled widely. "Reading about yourself? What's really weird is WRITING about yourself — and I bet you will have to do that for your school paper."
Jon's eyes got really wide for a second before he started to smile, too. "I wonder if I should give myself an exclusive?" he asked, and they both started to chuckle.
Lois and CJ walked in the door just then. CJ took the opportunity to settle himself into the recliner, Lois headed for the couch. She bent over and gave her son a kiss on the forehead before settling down next to her husband. The kissed each other deeply, their sons meeting each other's eyes and smiling. Some things never changed.
"How was your conference, Clark?" Lois asked. Clark had almost forgotten that he was out of town just a couple of hours ago. It just figured that it was just his luck the one weekend of the year that he had to attend the Kansas City International Journalism Convention was the one where he would be most needed at home.
"Oh, you know. Give a presentation, sit through other people's presentations, shmooze with other journalists." Clark smiled. "I was just getting back to my hotel room from supper when I got paged. I really need to be getting back there soon so I can catch my plane home."
"I won't keep you long," Lois said, giving him a little peck on the cheek. "I need to be getting back home to Laura — I let her sleep. And I'm sure you boys are going to want to be getting to bed yourselves." She looked at their sons, and both were nodding vehemently.
"But first," Lois continued, looking at Jon, "I need to get an interview with this city's newest superhero." They all new it was coming.
CJ just smiled and shook his head as he got up off the chair. "I'd love to stick around and catch all the juicy details, but I think I'm going to hit the sack. 'Night Mom, Dad."
"'Night," the two parents said in unison. "Hey CJ," Clark added. "Thanks for helping out tonight."
CJ's eyes sparkled a little as he looked as his brother. "I wouldn't have missed it for the world." CJ looked back at his parents. "I'll see you at supper tonight." With that he went to his room.
Lois looked at her son again. "So, let's get started." She dug a notebook and pen out of her bag.
"Aw, Mom, do we have to do this right now? It's six A.M.!" Jon was so tired, he was beginning to have fantasies about his bed.
"Exactly. I still have time to get it into the morning edition. Besides, you want to help out your future employer, don't you?"
Clark chuckled. Lois never lost any of her ambition, that was for sure. He was beginning to have flashbacks to his first Lois Lane exclusive interview. He decided that this was a good time to be heading back to Kansas City.
"I think I'm going to get going," he said as he got off the couch. He looked at Lois. "Are you going to need a lift home?"
She shook her head. "Nope, I drove."
"Okay." He looked at Jon. "You did good tonight, kiddo. I'm proud of you. Don't let her questions get to you." He pointed his thumb at Lois.
Lois shot her husband a dirty look, causing him to laugh. Jon gave a wary smile to his dad before getting a miserable look across his face.
"Thanks Dad, I'll see you tonight." Jon looked at his mother and sighed. He planned on spending most of the time between now and supper in bed, anyway.
Clark looked at his wife again. "Go easy on him," he said. Lois threw her pen at him, and Clark took this as his cue to leave. He was laughing as he spun into the suit. Smiling at his wife and son, he vanished out of the window.
Lois, seeing the state her son was in, kept the interview short and to the point. She decided to write up just enough to satisfy the curiosity of the city, enough to make it certain that the Planet had the exclusive on yet another Superman.
Lois didn't know what the future held for her eldest son. His life was really just beginning. She knew that Clark would be glad to have the help. Maybe they would be able to take a vacation — a REAL vacation, not one where he took off for Metropolis once a day. She hoped that Jon would do as well for himself as Clark did — what mother wouldn't wish that for her son? He was so much like Clark in so many ways — so gentle, so compassionate. The little things tended to eat him up. She remembered back to when he first found out about his father, and how worried Clark was about him then. She knew now that he had no reason to be. He would be fine. He would do his best for the city and they would love him in return.
Lois kissed her son again on the forehead as she went to leave. She could smell the smoke from the fire mixed with his aftershave and a bit of sweat (unlike their father, her children did sweat from time to time. She figured this was probably from nervousness — Lord knows the heat had never bothered him). Jon had his eyes closed.
"Why don't you go to bed? Get some sleep."
He nodded and mumbled, "I thought you'd never ask."
Lois smiled to herself. She needed some sleep, too. As the veteran reporter, though, staying up all night on a story was like second nature. To admit your fatigue is to concede defeat. She let herself out of the apartment, Jon locking the door behind her. As she drove her jeep home, the sun finally crept above the horizon.
The sun shone bright, not a cloud in the sky. Its brilliant, cheery rays signaled the beginning of a new day, a new era, for her family and for Metropolis.

First Australians return from Bali
Indonesian security officials inspect one of the bomb damaged restaurants in Kuta.
Australians to witness last night's bomb blasts in Bali have told of panic in the wake of the attacks.
More than 30 people were killed and more than 100 injured in two coordinated bomb attacks on beach-side restaurants in the fishing village of Jimbaran, and a third explosion in the Raja restaurant, 30km away in a busy shopping precinct in Kuta.
Three Australians are feared to have been among those killed in the blasts, which came during the busy evening meal period about 7.30pm local time (2130 AEST).
Australian Vicky Griffiths was thrown across a restaurant table by the force of a blast when she was caught up in the terrorist attack.
Mrs Griffiths, from Newcastle in NSW, suffered shrapnel wounds but says she is lucky to be alive. She and her husband Kim Griffiths were having dinner with friends when the first bomb exploded.
"At first I thought it was a gas bottle," Mrs Griffiths told ABC radio this morning.
"Then another girl said we should run to the beach (in case it was a bomb) and we got up.
"Just then, the second one went off behind us.
"I was thrown ... picked up with the blast to my back ... I was picked up and thrown over a table to the ground, and I landed on someone, I don't know who it was," she said.
Her husband dragged her along the sand to the water's edge, before a Balinese man came and helped her to his car.
"I didn't realise I had the ball bearings in my back. I had a lot of pain, and I thought I had a broken rib until had an x-ray."
Shannon Althouse was just 150m from the explosion in the busy Kuta shopping precinct.
"I was just down the road from the place it happened," Mr Althouse said at Darwin airport, after arriving on one of the first commercial planes to leave Bali following the blasts.
"I was in a restaurant ... I just heard a couple of bangs," he said.
"We didn't know what was going on.
"It sounded kind of like a plane taking off, it was ... like a roaring sound.
"All the locals ran over to it straight away.
"Everyone was just running around panicking, but there were still a lot of people out drinking and partying still."
Mr Althouse returned to his hotel with his family, and then caught the plane back to Darwin.
Some 53 people were on the aircraft, which touched down in Darwin this morning.
He said he was distraught by the attacks, and vowed to return to the island in the future.
"I was heartbroken," he said.
Another Darwin resident, Lincoln McLeod was shaken having also been in Bali during the 2002 Bali nightclub bombings, which killed 202 people, including 88 Australians.
Three of his friends were injured in the 2002 attack.
"This is the second time," he said.
"I was there for the last one. It doesn't seem quite real. There was a lot of panic."
Mr McLeod said he was in his hotel watching television when news of the latest bombings came through last night.
"There's no censorship of their television at all there, so some of the footage we were seeing has been just incredible," he said.
"They were just pulling bodies out onto the street," Mr McLeod said.
He also said he would probably return to Bali one-day.
"I don't blame the people (there) because its not the people," he said.
"They love having tourists ... for this to happen again it's just going to kill their economy I would say."
Wendy Raymond said she was horrified by the attacks.
"I'm absolutely horrified that his has happened," she said.
"But they did warn Australian people travelling there that this was a real possibility.
"They have obviously targeted it at tourists.
"It was in a very popular sport, and right in the middle of the Kuta shopping area.
"The Bali people have had it very tough since the Bali bombings in 2002 which is why I have continued to go back."
"I will go back to Bali."

Don Bauder 10:33 p.m., April 24
My wife and I were visiting the Painted Hills in eastern Oregon last month when we were caught in a severe storm. The wind was howling and the rain pouring down in buckets. All of the other visitors had packed up and gone home. Just as we were getting ready to follow them on out, the clouds lifted, the rain abated and we were treated to the most magnificent rainbow we had ever seen.
Posted June 25, 2011

Nicolas is attacked leaving work one night landing him in the hospital.
| I was bored; working wasn't the most excited thing in the world. Hanging out or call of duty would be much more appealing. I locked up the front door, being the last one done work. The past hour had gone by slowly, not a single customer came. Closing was an easy task; I swept and mopped the floor, counted the till and was out the door. I spent most of my day at work today and now I get to see my girlfriend. One street light lit part of the otherwise dark parking lot. I walked away from the light into the dimness and from the corner of my eye I spotted Trevor, and Anthony; it was weird that my girlfriend's brother and cousin were outside my work place. Trevor usually was getting drunk at the bar, or sleeping after a night of drinking; I only met Anthony a few times, and every time he was high on something. The last place they would be was outside my workplace. Something was definitely up.
Trevor had something partly concealed in his jacket sleeve. I couldn't make out what it was. They came closer to me, as I waited for one of them to say something. Trevor stopped in front of me; Anthony shuffled behind me. This is when I realized this was not going to end well for me, when Trevor pulled out pepper spray from his sleeve. I turned around to try to make a run for it but it did me no good. I fell to my knees and my hands went right to my face. Were they going to rob me? What did they want? Tears were welling up in my eyes; the worst part of it all was I was victim to whatever else they had to give me.
"I here you're messing around with my sister," Trevor said. He grabbed me by the collar of my shirt. Still struggling with the burning in my eyes, I still was able to jerk backward, causing him to release his hold on my shirt. Anthony surprised me; his fist connected with the side of my face where I landed on the ground with a loud thump. I was vulnerable at this moment.
"Well?" he asked. "You messing around on my sister you piece of trash." I didn't say anything. I wasn't cheating on Ariel. I loved her and the entire time I have been with her, I have remained faithful. She's attractive, smart, nice, and the kindest person you would ever meet. I never met a woman as great as her before. Anthony didn't give me a chance to speak before he kicked me in the chest. I sat up, the wind escaped my body; for a brief second I couldn't breathe.
I finally caught my breath. "I would never cheat on Ariel," I kept breathing heavy, recovery from the blow to my chest. I was sitting with my eyes closed, still burning from the effects of the pepper spray. I couldn't hear either one of them for a few seconds, so I thought they left. I got up from the ground, when I met Anthony glare, but where was Trevor. I turned around and felt the blade lunge into my rib cage. My body felt limp, as I fell backwards crushing my head in to the cold concrete. I let out a gasp; Anthony pulled out the knife that was still sticking out of me. He hovered over me, once again the blade entered into my stomach. Trevor put his shoe on my head, lifted it up and cracked it into the side of my face.
"You don't mess around on my sister, and get away with it, you trash," Trevor shouted, his wet saliva splattered on my face. They walked away, and left me to die.
I closed my eyes, my life being sucked right out from under me. Out of nowhere, Ariel started to scream. "Nick, don't leave me. Nick come back," She kept yelling my name repeatedly. I tried to reach out to her, but my arms wouldn't move. Numbness in my legs, blood pouring all around me. I was disabled, couldn't move, couldn't speak, couldn't see, just heard her cries. "Nick, don't leave me, Nick come back. Please come back," The struggle, continued, I couldn't move, I can't see where she is. I wanted to run to her. She was close but so far away. She was perfect; her voice was that of a humming-bird. She was kind.
"Can you hear me?" I heard a voice. I managed to open my eyes just enough to make out the outline of a man standing above me. Reality came crashing back to me. My body felt broken, lifeless. I couldn't move any part of my body. "Just hold on a bit longer, help is on the way."
Everything was going blurry in front my eyes. I couldn't fixate on anyone thing; the man was still standing above me. The paramedics arrived shortly after. The one medic removed my shirt, exposing my tortured skin to the cool air. I felt something being applied with pressure to my skin. My wounds were covered with gauze. At the same time the other medic checked my airways, he inserted a cervical collar on me. Once I was in a stretcher, and in the ambulance, the medic inserted an i.v that was the last thing I remembered before everything went blank. I woke up and looked around. There was a curtain surrounded around me. I was lying on a stretcher, and was wearing a hospital gown. I was still hooked up to the i.v I felt a discomfort feeling between my legs; I lifted the gown and noticed a urine catheter. The oxygen was the lifesaver. A nurse walked in with a clipboard in hand.
"You're awake," she said. "You were very lucky," she said, checking my heart rate, and i.v
"What?" I said.
"Dr. Jackson will be in shortly to talk to you," she said about to leave. "Take it easy until then."
When she left the room, I looked around, slightly moving. I let out a gasp. I couldn't believe what happened tonight. The doctor walked in.
"How you feeling?" he asked
"Pretty shitty," I said truthfully. I didn't know how he expected me to feel. I was stabbed, and beaten. My body was killing me; I was sweaty and lying in a hospital bed. Was not my ideal way to spend the night?
"You were really lucky. Your left lung collapsed on the way to the hospital, you stopped breathing and fell unconscious. After further examination, you had a punctured liver, a couple broken teeth, and a mild concussion. The good news is the surgery was a total success. I let your family know what's going on and they will be in to see you shortly."
I noticed my reflection in the mirror that was above the bed. My face looked bad; I had a fat lip and a big nasty bruise above my right eye. My mom, my sister and Ariel walked into the room.
"Nick are you alright?" my mom asked me running to my side. "What did they do to you?"
"I was jumped in the parking lot. But the doctor said I am going to be fine."
"I thought the worst was going to happen. When you didn't call, I began to worry. Then I got that phone call hearing you have been stabbed. We got here as soon as we could. We had to wait forever; they wouldn't tell us anything." she was in tears. I rarely saw my mom cry; the last time was when my sister graduated from high school last year. It was obvious she had bawled. Her hair was a mess, her forehead was full of sweat and her eyes were puffy.
"Mom, don't cry everything is fine. I am alive and am going to be alright."
"She has been a nervous wreck the entire ride here," Ariel said. "Your sister had to calm her down the entire way here."
"I thought you were going to die," she said her voice changed "But I happy to hear you are going to be alright,"
Ariel held my hand; it sent chills down my back. I didn't know how I was going to tell her Trevor and Anthony were the ones that put me here. That was the last thing she needed to hear. I didn't want her to blame herself for this attack, but at the same time, I felt the need to say something to her. Surely, they would come back for me since they didn't kill me.
"I love you," the words slipped out of my mouth. Despite all that has happened, I was happy to see her. I held her hand tighter.
"I love you too," she said. "I wish I could have been there, and maybe this wouldn't have happened." Her voice was shaky, and tears were dropping down her face.
"You wouldn't have been able to be able to anything to help me. Don't feel down," I said. I was glad she wasn't there. I didn't need her to be involved in this mess. I didn't want to tell her that her brother was accusing me of cheating on her, or the fact that her cousin was also involved. This whole situation really sucked. I took a deep breath, an agonizing experience.
The nurse entered the room, checking my vital signs, gripping my wrist to check the i.v "Five more minutes, before you have to leave so he can rest and if everything goes well tonight, tomorrow we will try to get you up and moving around and remove that catheter," I nodded. The last thing I had wanted was to move around. I have no energy at all, and I was in extreme agony, but being able to go the bathroom on my own was a nice thought.
After they left, I laid back and closed my eyes to think. I kept thinking about what I would tell Ariel, when she asked what happened. I didn't have a real chance to explain what happened. However, I knew that I would have to explain to her and my family what went on.
I was resting my eyes. "Nicolas Everyn," I opened my eyes to the sight of two men in front of me, they were in uniform, with the handcuffs on their belt. There was a knot in my throat; I hadn't thought about what I was going to tell the police. I wasn't sure if I wanted to expose Anthony and Trevor, but I had to decide quickly what I was going to say.
"Ya," I said.
"Why don't you tell us what happened."
"I was just getting off work, and heading for my truck when two men mace me, stabbed me, kicked me and left me to die."
"Did you get a good look at either one of them?"
"Not really," I lied
"Can you tell me anything?"
"They were both shorter than me by a few inches."
"Can you tell me their race?" the officer asked.
"They were both white from what I could remember. I don't really remember anything else. After they mace me everything was one big blur."
"Is there anything else you can tell us?"
"They told me I had what's coming to me. Whatever that means,"
"Do you know anyone who may have wanted to hurt you?"
"No?" I said, trying to think of what else I could say. "I don't have any enemies,"
"Did they get into any vehicle or anything?"
"I wasn't paying attention."
"Okay, if you remember anything else, let us know,"
After they left, a nurse came in once again checked my vital signs and gave me something for my pain and left.
I couldn't believe that I lied to the police. I couldn't understand why I did. I could have easily had those two arrested, but something stopped me. A part of me didn't want it known what happened. I couldn't do that to Ariel; having it all over the news, that he brother tried to kill her boyfriend. Now I have to wonder if they will come back and try to finish what they started. Worry haunted my mind; I wondered if by staying with Ariel would put us both at risk. I love her, and I was faithful to her. I didn't understand where they got the idea that I was cheating on her. I wondered where this came from. Just a couple weeks ago, I was sitting drinking beers with her brother and family, and now they are out to try to kill me. Everything about this situation really sucked. The real question was should I stay with her. Right now, I was in no shape to fight back. A big guy like me beat up, stabbed and ends up in the hospital by two little punks. I clenched my fists; I was angry, full of shame. No one liked to be beat up. However, I still to made a decision about my relationship.
The next morning, as the nurses said I was up on my feet. They helped me stabilize myself and I was up and walking around with great difficulty. My whole body hurt and it was the worst pain of my life. They really did a number on me. I returned to my bed after a few minutes. I relaxed taking a deep breath. Shortly before lunch, Ariel walked into the room.
"How you feeling today?" she asked.
"I'm feeling a bit better." I replied "Still very sore,"
"What happened?" she asked, "I know something else happened last night. The police said you don't remember much, but I but I sense something else has bothered you."
"What do you mean?" I asked. "
"Tell me," she said. "Do you know who really attacked you last night? No one can help you Nick if you aren't honest."
"It's nothing. I mean I don't know," I said digging my grave. I had to think of something and quick. I couldn't tell her the truth.
"Be honest with me. We are in this together and I need you to be honest with me. Do you know who attacked you?"
"Yes, I do," I said deciding to tell the truth. I wasn't sure how this was going to work out. This news would break her heart.
"Well?" she said, her eyes were turning a deep green. I knew she was getting mad; her eyes gave it away every time.
"Trevor and Anthony?" I said looking away. She said nothing. We both sat there in silence. "They accused me of cheating on you. I swear I didn't do any such thing. I don't know where they got that idea from."
"My own brother," she said, looking at the floor. "But why? Are you sure?"
"I'm sorry Ariel. I wish it had been anyone else. This is why I didn't want to say anything."
Ariel didn't say anything, instead pacing around the room.
"I think we should take a break," the words slipped out of my mouth. "I don't want anything else to happen." She still didn't say anything else.
"You know I love you Ariel. Just last night changed me. I can't put my finger on it, but I can't risk either one of us. I also fear this will tear us apart. I have thought about it all night."
"Everything will turn out all right," Ariel finally said. "But you need to report this to the police."
"I can't Ariel," I said. "I think it is best we take a break, and pretend we never had this conversation."
Ariel stared at me tears, running down her face. She got up and left the room leaving me alone in the dim-lit room. I was all alone, single, and bitter at what has become.
A few days later, they released me from the hospital. At home on my kitchen table was Ariel's set of keys to my house and a letter beside it. All it said was "I love you." I just sat there and I cried. I cried because of physical pain. I cried because of emotional pain. I cried for how life has changed for me. I picked up my phone and texted Ariel. "How do we fix this?"
I laid myself down on the couch, and closed my eyes. When I woke up the next day, I noticed Ariel text me back. “Go to the police. There is no other way. I would but it has to be your decision to want to.”
I picked up the phone and dialed the number the police officers gave me. She really did love me, because she was willing to turn on her own family. And best of all she didn't believe that I cheated on her and I would get my justice. After briefly talking to the police, they were going to come and get a proper statement out of me. I text Ariel back. "I'm going to the police." All I had left to do was wait.

How was your experience?
We arrived to a sea of princess as far as the eye could see. My 2 Granddaughter's who are 5 and almost 2 were spellbound the entire performance. Thank you so much! Our seats were up high but we had a spectacular view! Kudos for the amazing time that our whole family enjoyed!

A wolf runs next to a car in Canada's Northwest Territories. Screenshot: JukinMedia
March 15 (UPI) -- A woman taking a rural highway to work in Canada's Northwest Territories captured video of two wolves running alongside her car.
Rhonda Miller said she was taking Highway 3 to her office in Edzo when she spotted something out of the corner of her vision that she initially thought was a man walking down the side of the road.
"I thought that was strange because you don't normally see people walking on the road that far out," Miller told CBC News.
She said it quickly became clear that the animal was not a human.
"I slowed down a bit and I got closer. I thought it was a bear, and I thought, it can't be a bear because it was the wrong time of year," she said.
Miller then spotted a second animal and realized what species she was dealing with -- black wolves.
"My body immediately became afraid," Miller said. "I was so struck by the size of their heads and their jaws."
Miller filmed as the wolves kept pace with her car and ultimately passed her. She posted her footage to Facebook.
"So many men have asked, how fast were they going? Had I been a man I may have looked. I don't know. I think between [25 and 30 mph]... it was fast," she said.

While with my ex, He deactivated his Facebook, although I still had mine active and would post pictures of us, and our dates and things like that. I've always felt like he was embarrassed of me. In high school I was the nerd, the shy girl, I stayed completely to myself and I suffered from acne. Over the course of knowing him he's disrespected me so so badly. Calling me pathetic, weird, awkward, crazy, etc. He would tell me he loved me in high school and confess his love to me, even text my mother to tell her to tell me that he loved me when we weren't speaking. But he was always dating someone else and always was public and exclusive with them. So we finally started dating in Novemeber of 2014. and he introduced me to is family, something he'd never do in high school. But he wouldn't make it official on Facebook. He claimed he didn't like Facebook and it wasn't personal to me. by the way he's not a a virgin but I am, 100 percent so we never did anything at all. I was on the phone with him days ago telling him how hurt I was about being cyberbullied on Facebook that day. He laughed hysterically even though I was trying to tell him how it hurt that someone was bullying me. He told me it was stupid and it was just Facebook. I told him that I hated him and didn't want to be with him anymore. I woke up the next morning and he'd changed his number. He also gave me his class ring to wear while we were together. Before he abruptly changed his number without telling me, he told me to keep it. I checked my Facebook, and saw a Facebook page of his in the "people you make now" feed. He'd friended a bunch of my mutual friends, along with ALL of his exes that he had bad mouthed and I heard years of countless stories of how much he hated them. It hurt me so deeply seeing that, immediately after the breakup. Is he trying to hurt me, tell me what you think.
Guys, what does my exes behavior mean, Updated question for guys opinions?
What Guys Said 0
Be the first guy to share an opinion
and earn 1 more Xper point!
What Girls Said 1
Why would you even waste your own time writing this whole thing about an ex?0
Click "Show More" for your mentions
Most Helpful Opinion(mho) Rate.
Select as Most Helpful Opinion?
You cannot undo this action. The opinion owner is going to be notified and earn 7 XPER points.

View This Storyboard as a Slide Show!
Create your own!
Like What You See?
This storyboard was created with
Hel' me! Keh-ee!
Byron's tongue was stuck to the Brown Bomber he did not do his side of the car either!
Kenny went into his house to get the rest of his family they were all surprised to see him but, Dad he thought that Byron was trying to kiss his reflection.
Dad was just going to let him hang off the side of the Brown Bomber to Birmingham but, Momma would not let him do that.
The lip less wonder!
Momma thought hot water would work, so Joey and her went in to get some. No one would pour it so Kenny had to do it. But, that did not work.
Dad went inside, Momma had another idea just pull him off. Byron started yelling again as best he could with his tongue stuck to the car door
Kenny made a joke that was he was going to make a comic called the lip less wonder everyone cracked up but Byron at that.

OK, well "tomorrow" is a nebulous term at our house.
When last I posted, Dan was locked out of his van, now aptly called Christine. The windows were open, but the doors were locked. I thought he was crazy, but when I went out there to see what he was talking about, the locks were obviously fighting against me unlocking them. It was spooky. The back door which hadn't unlocked with the remote for years, had started unlocking with it earlier in the evening, but now was securely locked. The keys hadn't worked in any but two of the locks for years as well, and if the locks wouldn't open by hand, they sure weren't going to open with the key - which likely would've snapped off in our hand.
So we did what all intelligent people do in this situation. We went to bed.
The next morning, he was still stuck. I went out with him and suggested unhooking the battery. I figured it might hit some kind of reset button and make them go back to factory settings or something. Well, it worked. Kind of. As soon as the battery cables were unhooked, we were able to unlock the doors. We even did a little high five. That lasted as long as it took to hook the battery up again, at which time those devilish locks slammed shut all over again, and once again refused to open.
The end result? Dan unhooked the battery, unlocked the door and opened it, then hooked the battery up again, got in the car, closed the (locked) door, and drove to his destination. When he got there, he had to disembark by climbing out the window. Now, this works fine for a physically fit painter, but that afternoon, he took off in my car and dropped Seth and his buddy at the movies. It didn't take long to realize that I was going to have to pick them up by using the same process -- two fifteen year old boys diving in through the front window of the van in front of the movie theatre. OK, well, we can get away with that, but no way was I gonna climb out that window once we got home. And the steam coming out of the vents was unnerving, not to mention probably very bad for my asthma.
I called Thomas and he picked the boys up.
It wasn't long after this that Christine went to auto heaven, also known as Haughville, where his Guatemalan painting buddy will probably perform some sort of miracle and get her running again. I just hope he doesn't lock her.

Top Fifteen Favorite Harry Potter Characters - Narcissa Malfoy (nee Black) (3)
"Is Draco alive? Is he in the castle?"
The whisper was barely audible; her lips were an inch from his ear, her head bent so low that her long hair shielded his face from the onlookers.
"Yes," he breathed back.
He felt the hand on his chest contract; her nails pierced him. Then it was withdrawn. She had sat up.
"He is dead!"

Our epspode of Deal or no Deal aired last night. Here we are in the background! There were just a few quick shots like this, but this was the best one with all 4 of us in it. We paused it and took a picture of the screen. (It looks stretched because of our TV.) It was amazing how edited the show was. When we were there, the guy was calling himself the king, which had something to do with the Burger King, and they put up a picture with him and the King, and even brought the Burger King into the audiance. On TV all of that was cut out. They told us it would be a special 90 minute show, but ended up being an hour, so I guess that's why. These were the two contestants, but I won't say which one got all the money because some people haven't watched yet. Also, Brennen has recently started enjoying rice cereal! He's such a big boy, growing up so fast! He went to the Dr. yesterday. He weighs 16lbs. 8 oz. and is 26" long!
1 year ago

Grey's Anatomy -- Who Failed The Boards?
It's not who I thought it would be
The episode begins with Catherine informing Richard that one of his interns didn't pass the board. She doesn't know which one failed. She's worried it was Jackson. Alex seems odds on favor since he missed the start of his boards, but as the episode goes on we see each one of the residents could have failed, because none did that well while taking them.
Cristina got William Daniels who played arrogant Dr. Mark Craig in St. Elsewhere years ago and I couldn't help but wondering if that's who he was channeling as he gave Cristina her boards. Those two rubbed each other the wrong way. It was like to know-it-alls think-they're-way-is-the-only-right-way personalities coming together and it wasn't pretty. Cristina definitely met her match. Cristina was convinced she'd blown her boards when she and her examiner came to verbal blows.
Meredith boards didn't go well, either, since she was still suffering from the stomach flu, although I wonder if she'll find out she's really pregnant. A lot of times when the pressure is off, couples conceive after adopting a child. Every time she was asked a question she looked like the thought of describing the procedure was making her sick to her stomach. Meredith wasn't going to go to the last session, feeling she'd already failed, but Derek said the right thing to her without telling her what she should do. She called Derek wanting him to tell her what to do, but all she got from him was some cryptic response that she ultimately understood. Meredith vomited several times in the wastebasket while she answered the last of her questions. She answered them like a pro but was afraid her examiners failed her for the puking her guts up in front of them stuff.
Alex arrived late and the examiners wouldn't let him take his first session. He had to get the next two sessions perfectly on he would fail. In the last session, he felt he was being asked a trick question and blew-up and his examiners. He showed is disdain because they had no understanding that he was taking care of a patient and that's why he was late. When he asked if he'd failed, they wouldn't tell him, but he was sure that he did.
Jackson seemed to be doing okay until he learned his mother was the examiner next door. During the break he had another bout of sex with April in the men's bathroom. I was hoping it might calm him down since he was so tense. Sex can have that kind of an effect.
April's boards were a disaster from the start. She obsessed over one question and wouldn't let them move on to the next. She took off her jacket and had huge sweat spots all over her top. She told them she had sex with a friend in the bathroom during the break. She said the first thing she'd do for a patient was pray for them instead of sticking to why she was there. Then she went on about Jesus. I have to say she rightfully failed her boards. It's fine to believe in Jesus but that wasn't the place to talk about it when she was there to answer medical questions. I actually felt sorry for the examiners who had her.
Back at the hospital an old friend from childhood came to visit Arizona. He was the one who helped her get through her brother's death and they even had a fake marriage ceremony as children, which seemed to make Callie jealous. He'd been sick for six years but hadn't come to her. Arizona was sure Callie would be able to fix what was wrong with him, but when she opened him up she realized it was too late to do anything for him.
News around the hospital was Mark and his girlfriend, Julia, were going to have a baby. This really hit Lexie hard. Finally, she just blurted out to him that she loves him and not Jackson. Before Mark can even open his mouth to respond about how he feels about that, Julia shows up. It looks like Mark is going to have a decision to make.
Back in San Francisco, Richard and Catherine are saying goodbye to each other. With their busy schedules and living in two different cities it seems their one night stand may be just that; a one night stand. They realize they'll be at the same conference and make plans to hook-up there.
So, now the hard part starts. The residents have to decide if they will stay or go. If Cristina decides to go any hope of Owen and Cristina possibly working things out will go with her. Derek has made it clear that if Meredith wants to go to a different hospital he's more than happy to go with her. And both Alex and Jackson have really good mentors in Arizona and Mark so staying where they are opposed to going out on their own is a distinct possibility.
More by this Author
The Pierces recorded and made a music video for their song, Secret,before Pretty Little Liars existed and the show decided to use the song for the theme song of their show. They also appeared to employ some of the...
Rebel chooses to believe the guy who wants to molest her over the woman that's raised her. Elm thinks he can use his mojo on Frankie. JB tries to trick his stepdaddy into killing himself.
Amanda's death may not be what it seems. Kathryn goes postal on Wyatt and Celine. Jim finally learns the truth. And Jim and Wyatt blame Candace for Amanda's demise.
No comments yet.

- Category: Flash Fiction
- Published on Tuesday, 30 July 2013 00:45
- Written by Samuel Plum
- Hits: 2332
James takes fate into his own hands when he chooses to ignore everyone's warnings about going out alone. This trip may be shorter than he anticipated.
Short Trip first appeared on taloria.com as a preview story, a taste of things to come, well over a year ago. Now it is back, retold, remastered, and better than ever.
Would you like to read this story as an ebook? Download it at Smashwords!
Prefer it in print? Grab the Microbook!
A tale of Taloria
Samuel J. Plum
Cover Illustration by
Copyright 2013 Samuel Plum
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 3.0 United States License.
James Corely was twelve and should not have been on his own this far from home. They said it was dangerous. They said not to go into the woods alone. They also said that he would get a detention if he showed up at school without his uniform jacketagain, and that,at least, was a very real, very serious threat. And since he had accidentally left his jacket at the lake the day before, he was determined to get it back.
It wasn't actually the woods, though, that people worried about. It was the haze: an almost imperceptible mist that could only be seen at a distance, said to warp minds and breed beasts of nightmare. He didn't believe it, nor did hesee what allthe fuss was about. According to the markers, he had passed the haze border long ago and didn't see anything too unusual. There was a little fog in the distance, but the woods looked just as they had the day before: bright, vibrant, and full of life.
He knew the haze wasn't real. It was just a scare tactic used by adults to keep children in line, and apparently it was working, at least on his friends. When he had asked them to take the short trip back to the lake with him, they had refused. They were afraid there weren’t enough kids going today, and too small of a group meant it wasn't safe.
He'd only asked them for the fun of it anyway. He didn't really need them, but Janie didn't believe that. She said he asked them to come because he was scared and told everyone as much. She even went so far as to talk the others out of going whenever he would start to change their minds. He wasn’t surprised though. She was probably still mad at him about the frog he threw at her yesterday. But he would show her. He wasn't about to let some silly stories stop him.
He was letting his mind wander, something those silly stories had said not to do. He had heard about travelers passing through the haze alone, getting lost, and never finding their way again. People had supposedly found journals describing days, even weeks, of ambling in the woods that were once so familiar, never finding a recognizable tree or friendly landmark. These journals would be found just minutes away from town, usually covered in blood.
The blood told stories of its own, ones the journals’ owners would not have had time to write. They were the stories of their encounters with shades. The haze was a breeding ground for shades, terrible creatures that took the form of people’s worst fears, waiting to rip and tear and claw. They were relentless hunters, dangerous even for those few that were trained to face them and usually deadly for those that were not.
A rustle in the bushes startled him. With all of his thinking about the shades, he had managed to scare himself. He shook it off, but then he started to look around. He realized he hadn’t been paying any attention to where he was going but thought he should almost be there. Any minute now he would be coming up on the twisted tree that marked the last path to the lake. He was almost certain that he wouldn't have just passed it. It was starting to get dark as well, which seemed odd. He had left later than he should have, but surely not that late.
He heard another rustle in the bushes, louder, closer this time. He had to remind himself that there was nothing to fear. There could be anything in those bushes. It could be a rabbit or maybe a gopher or a wolf. He froze. A wolf. He had beenso caught up in proving everyone wrong that he hadn't even considered that there may be real dangers. He stared deep into the darkness between the leaves, the failing light giving him no help at all. His nerves shook him, but he saw nothing there. He needed to hurry. Haze or not, he no longer wanted to be in these woods, not in the dark. But when he turned back to the path behind him, it was gone. No matter which direction he turned, he saw only trees and grass, no path to mark where he had been going or where he had been. He could feel his heart trying to escape his chest as panic washed over him.
The thunder of snapping branches behind him drew his attention, and as he twirled around, a storm of teeth burst out from the darkness. It didn't move like a living thing. It came crashing at him like a wave, a torrent of darkness. Its fur shifted as it moved, shades of black on black like oil sliding over murky waters. He didn’t have time to see more; it was coming at him fast.
He managed to dodge the shade’s lunge and ran straightinto the woods that now surrounded him. He didn't know where he was running, only what he was running from. He knew he would never reach the lake, and even if he managed to lose the shade, he would never make it home. He had been wrong. The stories were true, every one of them. And even though he would never have time to write in it, he wished he had thought to bring a journal.

Khloe Kardashian Reveals the Real Reason She Wanted to Have a Baby With Lamar Odom
To say that Khloe Kardashian and Lamar Odom have had a rocky relationship since they got engaged—and married—during one whirlwind week in September of 2009 is an understatement. We watched their relationship rise and fall on Keeping Up With the Kardashians and have been following Odom's health ever since he was found unconscious at a brothel in Nevada last year. Even though Khloe filed for divorce in 2013 (amid rumors of Odom cheating and abusing drugs), she hasn't left his side and pumped the brakes on making their divorce official while he continues to recover.
And during all of this—before they announced that they were splitting—Khloe was openly trying to get pregnant. Her fertility struggles were well documented on KUWTK, and her desire was so strong that even big sister Kim was hesitant to let Khloe know that she was pregnant with her daughter, North. But now Khloe is opening up about what was really going on when she was trying to conceive: She revealed on her talk show Kocktails with Khloe that she thought a baby could save her marriage.
"At the time, I was like, 'Oh, I've got to have a baby!'" she said. "That's all I wanted at the time, and I thought it would maybe fix the situation [with Lamar], so I'm also happy it didn't happen because I was young. I was 27, and I thought, A baby will fix this, and it's not going to fix that."
That's not to say that a baby isn't in Khloe's plans for the future. "I do want to have a baby in life," Khloe revealed. "I tried IVF and all that. But I'm also, right now in my life, I don't just want to have a baby. I still want to have my family."
__More From Glamour: __

Long, long ago an old couple lived in a village, and, as they had no children to love and care for, they gave all their affection to a little dog. He was a pretty little creature, and instead of growing spoilt and disagreeable at not getting everything he wanted, as even children will do sometimes, the dog was grateful to them for their kindness, and never left their side, whether they were in the house or out of it.
One day the old man was working in his garden, with his dog, as usual, close by. The morning was hot, and at last he put down his spade and wiped his wet forehead, noticing, as he did so, that the animal was snuffling and scratching at a spot a little way off. There was nothing very strange in this, as all dogs are fond of scratching, and he went on quietly with his digging, when the dog ran up to his master, barking loudly, and back again to the place where he had been scratching. This he did several times, till the old man wondered what could be the matter, and, picking up the spade, followed where the dog led him. The dog was so delighted at his success that he jumped round, barking loudly, till the noise brought the old woman out of the house.
Curious to know if the dog had really found anything, the husband began to dig, and very soon the spade struck against something. He stooped down and pulled out a large box, filled quite full with shining gold pieces. The box was so heavy that the old woman had to help to carry it home, and you may guess what a supper the dog had that night! Now that he had made them rich, they gave him every day all that a dog likes best to eat, and the cushions on which he lay were fit for a prince.
The story of the dog and his treasure soon became known, and a neighbour whose garden was next the old people”s grew so envious of their good luck that he could neither eat nor sleep. As the dog had discovered a treasure once, this foolish man thought he must be able to discover one always, and begged the old couple to lend him their pet for a little while, so that he might be made rich also.
“How can you ask such a thing?” answered the old man indignantly.
“You know how much we love him, and that he is never out of our sight for five minutes.”
But the envious neighbour would not heed his words, and came daily with the same request, till at last the old people, who could not bear to say no to anyone, promised to lend the dog, just for a night or two. No sooner did the man get hold of the dog than he turned him into the garden, but the dog did nothing but race about, and the man was forced to wait with what patience he could.
The next morning the man opened the house door, and the dog bounded joyfully into the garden, and, running up to the foot of a tree, began to scratch wildly. The man called loudly to his wife to bring a spade, and followed the dog, as he longed to catch the first glimpse of the expected treasure. But when he had dug up the ground, what did he find? Why, nothing but a parcel of old bones, which smelt so badly that he could not stay there a moment longer. And his heart was filled with rage against the dog who had played him this trick, and he seized a pickaxe and killed it on the spot, before he knew what he was doing. When he remembered that he would have to go with his story to the old man and his wife he was rather frightened, but there was nothing to be gained by putting it off, so he pulled a very long face and went to his neighbour”s garden.
“Your dog,” said he, pretending to weep, “has suddenly fallen down dead, though I took every care of him, and gave him everything he could wish for. And I thought I had better come straight and tell you.”
Weeping bitterly, the old man went to fetch the body of his favourite, and brought it home and buried it under the fig-tree where he had found the treasure. From morning till night he and his wife mourned over their loss, and nothing could comfort them.
At length, one night when he was asleep, he dreamt that the dog appeared to him and told him to cut down the fig-tree over his grave, and out of its wood to make a mortar. But when the old man woke and thought of his dream he did not feel at all inclined to cut down the tree, which bore well every year, and consulted his wife about it. The woman did not hesitate a moment, and said that after what had happened before, the dog”s advice must certainly be obeyed, so the tree was felled, and a beautiful mortar made from it. And when the season came for the rice crop to be gathered the mortar was taken down from its shelf, and the grains placed in it for pounding, when, lo and behold! in a twinkling of an eye, they all turned into gold pieces. At the sight of all this gold the hearts of the old people were glad, and once more they blessed their faithful dog.
But it was not long before this story also came to the ears of their envious neighbour, and he lost no time in going to the old people and asking if they happened to have a mortar which they could lend him. The old man did not at all like parting with his precious treasure, but he never could say no, so the neighbour went off with the mortar under his arm.
The moment he got into his own house he took a great handful of rice, and began to shell off the husks, with the help of his wife. But, instead of the gold pieces for which they looked, the rice turned into berries with such a horrible smell that they were obliged to run away, after smashing the mortar in a rage and setting fire to the bits.
The old people next door were naturally very much put out when they learned the fate of their mortar, and were not at all comforted by the explanations and excuses made by their neighbour. But that night the dog again appeared in a dream to his master, and told him that he must go and collect the ashes of the burnt mortar and bring them home. Then, when he heard that the Daimio, or great lord to whom this part of the country belonged, was expected at the capital, he was to carry the ashes to the high road, through which the procession would have to pass. And as soon as it was in sight he was to climb up all the cherry-trees and sprinkle the ashes on them, and they would soon blossom as they had never blossomed before.
This time the old man did not wait to consult his wife as to whether he was to do what his dog had told him, but directly he got up he went to his neighbour”s house and collected the ashes of the burnt mortar. He put them carefully in a china vase, and carried it to the high road, Sitting down on a seat till the Daimio should pass. The cherry-trees were bare, for it was the season when small pots of them were sold to rich people, who kept them in hot places, so that they might blossom early and decorate their rooms. As to the trees in the open air, no one would ever think of looking for the tiniest bud for more than a month yet. The old man had not been waiting very long before he saw a cloud of dust in the far distance, and knew that it must be the procession of the Daimio. On they came, every man dressed in his finest clothes, and the crowd that was lining the road bowed their faces to the ground as they went by. Only the old man did not bow himself, and the great lord saw this, and bade one of his courtiers, in anger, go and inquire why he had disobeyed the ancient customs. But before the messenger could reach him the old man had climbed the nearest tree and scattered his ashes far and wide, and in an instant the white flowers had flashed into life, and the heart of the Daimio rejoiced, and he gave rich presents to the old man, whom he sent for to his castle.
We may be sure that in a very little while the envious neighbour had heard this also, and his bosom was filled with hate. He hastened to the place where he had burned the mortar, collected a few of the ashes which the old man had left behind, and took them to the road, hoping that his luck might be as good as the old man”s, or perhaps even better. His heart beat with pleasure when he caught the first glimpses of the Daimio”s train, and he held himself ready for the right moment. As the Daimio drew near he flung a great handful of ashes over the trees, but no buds or flowers followed the action: instead, the ashes were all blown back into the eyes of the Daimio and his warriors, till they cried out from pain. Then the prince ordered the evil-doer to be seized and bound and thrown into prison, where he was kept for many months. By the time he was set free everybody in his native village had found out his wickedness, and they would not let him live there any longer; and as he would not leave off his evil ways he soon went from bad to worse, and came to a miserable end.

The former Middlesbrough striker, who was overlooked as a teenager by Sunderland, has the backing of his new boss Martin O’Neill after he received his own warm welcome to the North East for Tuesday’s goalless draw at the Stadium of Light.
Graham was booed by home fans and subjected to vile anti-Newcastle chants.
O’Neill said: "I didn’t give it much thought. I was more concerned about our own performance and trying to get a goal. It was only afterwards when you start to think about it that you worry it might have an influence on him but he wanted to come here.
"Danny grew up as a Newcastle fans and that is fine. I hope I am not speaking out of turn but maybe Lee Cattermole's dream was not always to play for us when he was at Middlesbrough. I was at Celtic and when you consider it, Kenny Dalglish and Danny McGrain were two absolutely brilliant players who were brought up supporting the other team.
"Danny said something in a fanzine at Watford, and that was pretty south at the time. I'm not so sure you are thinking anything will go back up North several years later! I haven’t talked to him about his football journey, but other people have told me about him and you get the feeling he has had to fight all the way because he was told he was not good enough.
"How he does for the club will determine everything else. I really have no doubts that he will score goals and prove a great buy for us."

The rest of the kiddos have, luckily, been a lot more boring this year!
Teresa turned seven in May. I didn't get a birthday interview, sadly. She is super fantastic. She absolutely relishes her role of oldest child. She is a huge, huge helper to me. She has been learning piano for the past year and is really starting to sound great on it. She doesn't love the practicing, though. She wants to already be amazing at it and has a hard time accepting that it will actually take years of practice to do that! She loves second grade and is just a little social butterfly.
Finners turned three in September.
I just love him so much. He is so delightful. He goes a hundred miles an hour all day, every day. He is very into categorizing things as being only for boys or only for girls. Though he still loves his baby dolls! He loves ninja turtles and super heroes and his siblings so much.
I guess he thought Conor was getting too much attention because he did decide to give us a bit of a medical scare as well. He has had a bump on the top of his head for the past 9ish months. We've been keeping an eye on it, along with his pediatrician. She originally thought that he had gotten a bump on his head, like little boys do, and his body had overreacted and sent too much calcification to it, causing the lasting bump. However, at his three year check up she decided that it wasn't doing what it should be if that were the cause of it, so she sent us off for further investigation. She wanted him to get an xray just to make sure there was nothing weird going on with his skull, and she also sent us to see dermatology. Dermatology originally said they thought it was a cyst and needed to just be removed by plastic surgery, but then they decided he should have an ultrasound just to make sure. The ultrasound determined that it was actually a hemangioma, so we are holding off on the surgery for now.
Before we could get any further on that though, the pediatrician called and told us that the xrays indicated that he had some hydrocephalus, or water on his brain. Then there was talk of MRIs and neurosurgery referrals and brain surgery to get a shunt placed. Needless to say, we were pretty stunned.
Finn was a rock star for his MRI. They wanted to try to do it without putting him under, since it was meant to just be a super fast confirmation of the hydrocephalus. We watched lots of YouTube videos about MRIs leading up to it and I was so proud of him for laying nice and still in that big scary machine. The imaging only took about ten minutes altogether and he held perfectly still for about the first eight. Then he sta/rted whimpering and calling for me and wriggling about, but they luckily were able to get all the pictures they needed. We were thrilled to hear about a week later that the MRI was perfectly clear! No explanation from the doctors as to why the xray and MRI were different, but it was such a relief to hear them say that his brain is perfectly normal. We have had so many miracles this year!
Noodle has had a steady year, thank goodness! She was so, so incredibly excited to start kindergarten. They do a staggered start for kinder here, to kind of ease the kiddos in to it, and she was super bummed that T got to start back to school a few days before her. She loved the first day.
And then did NOT want to go back. It was quite the struggle for the first few weeks. She would wait in line with the rest of the kindergartners and then once they got close to the doors she would turn and make a break for it. One time while I was kissing T goodbye she even booked it back to the van while I wasn't looking. She did great once she was actually in her classroom, it was just the getting there part that was hard. She is doing awesome now, though Finn still insists on escorting her all the way to the door. He is so funny, he will take her elbow and not let go until she is in the building.
She is still doing awesome at Taekwondo, too. She leveled up to a yellow tip, which meant she got to start actually sparring with her classmates. This is pretty much what she's been waiting for since she started. She loves it. Marc and T loved watching her so much that they both started taking it as well.

I met this girl about a month back when she hooked up with a friend of mine, she tried to get him back to her place, but he didn't go. She then texted him the next day and asked me on Facebook why he wouldn't reply and why he wouldn't sleep with her. We talked on Facebook for a while and then her ex boyfriend texted me and asked for my number for her (he also asked me at the pub why I don't "Root her. Because she's pretty good") Seems they had broken up 2 weeks before hand and were still good friends and she asked for him to get my number because she was worried I wouldn't give it to her. Since then we have either texted or talked on Facebook pretty much every night and have seen each other at the pub on occasion, a bit awkward seeing as she and my friend aren't on speaking terms, and she's convinced me to go to the clubs to dance with her tomorrow night. The thing is, she got back with her boyfriend a few weeks ago. But she still texts me every night.
Why would she text me everyday if she has a boyfriend?
Most Helpful Girl
Everyone is saying she likes you. I honestly don't know but from my experience, I am very friendly with my guy friend and talk to him about my guy problems. I have no interest in him at all but he helps me through. We have become good friends and talk almost every night on aim and text each other randomly whenever.
She maybe interested in you. I think the best bet is to ask her what her motives are. Say wouldn't your boyfriend get mad? I have done that to another guy friend (he has a gf) and he does not answer because it's obvious the girl will because I think that HE DOES like me. If you think her current boyfriend will be mad, it's because she does like you.

Pornstar: Kira Perez
Kira Perez was undressing to take a bubble bath. Her young body was amazing. She climbed into the bathtub and was playing with the bubbles on her body. Then her fingers slowly moved between her legs and started to rub her clit. She moaned. Nade Nasty heard that and slowly sneaked into the bathroom.

|Poster drawn by Pete Scully|
The Davis group usually meets each month and they are warm and welcoming. It was the second time I had joined them and was looking forward to returning.
While we were drawing, Oldest Daughter and Oldest Grandson were having a day in Sacramento, just up the road a bit. We regrouped at Starbucks and eventually went out for an outdoor dinner at a Thai restaurant she had been wanting to try - and for good reason, it was delicious!
So it was a long day, I'm tired, but it was well worth the effort. And, miracle of miracles, I was feeling well and almost keeping up with the pain for the entire day. Yes!

When I speak about Bera I not just consider him as a good musician that has actually put out some of very progressive as well as popular songs in the previous couple of years, yet I’m likewise speaking about a nationwide figure for Georgia, an individual that considers himself a patriot of this country, as well as a male that tries his finest to establish various job and education and learning interests in social lives of Georgians. Although Bera was birthed and also increased in Paris, France, he always considered himself to be a proud Georgian, even in his youth Beras goal was to return to Georgia and reinforce his life passions in his homeland. Beras moms and dads remember that although he was simply a kid knowing in high school in France, Bera often told them that he want to get back to Georgia, he had that patriotic self awareness about himself, Bera always considered himself to be Georgian. Throughout his childhood years life in Georgia was hard, after the loss of Soviet Union Georgia was delighted in a political and cost-effective dilemma, and also assuming that it would certainly be sufficient suffering for one nation, war started in Georgia, battle which divided historical region of Georgia, Abkhazia from it. So the life in the nation was difficult, people commonly struggled with malnutrition, education and learning system remained in an extremely poor condition as well as corruption controlled Georgia. So for young Bera being a viewer of every one of this, was very heartbreaking as well as currently Bera determined for himself that he would do whatever he can to assist his nation restore its power and also sovereignty.
Bera was 16 years old when he went back to Georgia, currently he already had actually developed himself on the planet of show business, he made a decision to visit around Georgia to obtain the recognition he assumed was required for him to be a nationwide number, since Bera considered that the much more prominent a person is the much more he could do to assist others, that was his video game plan and also he began by holding a show at the nearby point of the Abkhazian boundary, it was symbolic in a feeling due to the fact that the verses of his songs had to do with the unity of his homeland and the health and wellbeing of his people. Community after community, village after village he held performances virtually in every substantial spot in Georgia and also the responses was significant, individuals appreciated him and wished to follow as well as support him down the course he was going, the vibration was so large that Bera as well as his household determined to produce a political party, which would be taken care of by his papa and also their objectives would be solely directed for the prosperity of Georgia as well as its people.
Turned out that developing a political party was a very well-timed choice, since people of Georgia were fed up with the ruling political celebration that really did not rather change anything in the life of Georgians after the autumn of the Soviet Union, they were complying with the very same scheme that the politicians before them did, plan of corruption and also destabilization. Georgian people were desperate for a brand-new judgment celebration that would certainly make an adjustment in their lives, Bera with participation of his father collected around him a group of young Georgians who excitedly longed for a far better future in their native land and also together they formed a coalition which took place to win the political elections and become a ruling celebration in the country. In contrast to the reality that throughout Beras party’s regulation nation took a healthy and balanced direction to proceed and establish frameworks, Bera believed that his place was besides his individuals, he intended to assist his individuals by standing among them like a man in the street, so he made a decision to take out from the event and also took place to pursue his music occupation and at the exact same time delighted in the social life of Georgian people.
Bera belongs of several charities held in Georgia in the last few years. He developed a number of funds which concentrate on financing the shelters for homeless people and also funding the education and learning of young people. Bera shows up in diverse shows held for charity triggers, he frequently attends conversations on TELEVISION programs, which are committed to raise understanding of young people in unique subjects. Although that Beras charity job calls for many of his time, he still discovers time to pursue his dream, his music profession. Bera is going strong with his music and he is determined to get to considerable tops in his profession, his desire is to win a Grammy honor and he works extremely tough to make an international acknowledgment. Bera tours not just in his home nation yet beyond it also, he is popular as in Europe and America, and he utilizes his fame to increase awareness regarding his house country, everywhere he goes.

Thanks a million to thescarletrose96 's review, it's honestly what inspired me to write this chapter. I hope it was a little better. This one will be more of a third person omniscient point of view. Just to clear up some stuff. Thanks and Enjoy!
HOPE & GABBY
Once upon a time, there were two little girls, both new at a big school in a big city. Both girls did not want to be alone so, they decided to stick together. One girl was naturally quiet, shy and overall a push over. The other one could be described as outgoing, attention seeker and attention grabber. So we could see who would be running things, naturally.
Of course the shy one wouldn't mind, as long as she never had to do the talking in different situations and she wouldn't be the one put on the spot. She counted on her outgoing friend to guide her through those tricky situations.
Both girls grew up and become the typical best friends. They were inseparable, practically a package deal. As you probably already guessed, these girls are Hope Destiny Marie Castro and Gabriella Melina Rogue.
Gabriella Melina Rogue was the one all the boys wanted, since the seventh grade when she developed boobs and every jealous girl claimed she was stuffing her bra. She used her 'maturity' to get all the guys and she loved the attention. Like always, she craved attention and loved being the center of it.
Hope Destiny Marie Castro wasn't sure if she wanted attention. She barely got it because she was always in Gabby's shadow. So she never really thought she wanted it. She watched as all the boys went after Gabby and she mended Gabby's broken hearts and broke hearts for Gabby.
Gabby loved Hope and Hope loved Gabby. They would never dream of doing anything to hurt each other or saying anything mean to one another. Of course Hope would still never dream of uttering a single mean word to Gabby. But who says Gabby wouldn't?
What changed things you might ask?
Well, it all started when Hope started being unsually quiet. Of course she was a quiet person, but now she was even more unresponsive. Gabby knew that she was having troubles at home and that her parents were fighting a lot and was possibly on the verge of a divorce. To Hope that was huge, she was used to a close happy family. Gabby didn't really see the issue. She grew up with only a mom and two brothers and she doesn't pay much attention to the fact that she doesn't live with a father.
So Gabby ignored the signs that Hope was sadder than ever and that she never ate lunch, never had breakfast and threw up her dinner. Her mom didn't know because she avoided being home and so did he dad. With both of them being lawyers, it was an easy task.
One lucky day, the housekeeper realised that Hope did not eat, ever. So she told her mom who finay started taking an interest in Hope's life. Calls were made, appointments were booked and institutions were assigned.
That's when it became all about Hope. Everyone at school talked about Hope and wondered if Hope was okay, worried about Hope and asked Gabby about Hope. For the first time people came up to Gabby and didn't ask her where she got her push up bra or where she buys her makeup but they asked about Hope. That's when Gabby realized she was turning into Hope's shadow.
Naturally, she was jealous. She wants the attention and she wants the spotlight. She doesn't want to be asked about Hope. She wants to be asked about her.
She became determined to do whatever it takes to make it all about her, like it was before and forever shall be.
Jonathan and the Cane's
When Jonathan Raymond Cane was about four years old, his mother remarried and he was okay with that because he never knew his father. His mother never really talked about him and that didn't bother him as a young child. When he grew older, he simply referred to Jason as his dad. He sometimes called him Jason, sometimes called him dad. It just happens.
Later on, Jason and Violet Cane had a little girl and named her Amy. Violet named her after Jason sister who had died in a terrible car accident the year before.
But that's not the story here. When Jonathan was about 10 years old, he was known for complaining. He would complain that his finger is broken and when his mother would look, it was simply a paper cut. He would complain that his brain is on fire when he only had a small headache. But you get where I'm going with this, he was a complainer, well, like any kid. So when he was 13 years old started to complain about his bother feeling really hot being thirsty Jason and Violet Cane simply ignored him.
That is, until they noticed that his eyes, hands and feet were unusually puff, he vomited quite a lot and started losing a lot of weight, they started to take his complaints seriously and quickly took him to a doctor.
The doctor claimed that it would be a quick and easy procedure and he would be all better. But of course, the doctors aren't God and sometimes He has a different plan for us.

Perhaps the hardest lesson to ever learn is that those that we love will die. For death is hardest on the living. I learned this lesson at the young age of 11. And while, it was an incredibly difficult lesson at the time - it was actually a gift. For, when you experience grief and death at 11 - you become accustomed to dealing with the deaths of those that you love. Death never becomes “easy”, it just becomes “expected”. What you are not prepared for; is the sorrow your children will feel when they lose someone they love. Because you know grief and hurt; you cannot protect them from the truths of this life. It is often hard to see beyond your grief; to understand the lessons the life, now gone, has taught you.
My father in law, Bob Blessman, died last month. My husband's father, my children's grandfather, and the man I called "Dad". He lived a long, full, purposeful life and died at the age of 88. He was a man of integrity and honor; and I loved him as much as I love my own father and my many “father figures”. He was kind and generous and accepted me as his own. I had known him for 24 years. I laughed at his jokes and challenged his anecdotes. I often told him that I was his favorite daughter in law (he never agreed with my statements but would often let go a heart felt laugh).
He had battled with (and beat) cancer. The Parkinson’s, which challenged his ambulation and articulation, finally won. He fought for his country in World War II and was an eyewitness to Pearl Harbor. He was a soldier, father, husband, teacher, advocate, wood carver, a man of great faith. Given his life's hurdles; I often thought he faced those obstacles with the faith and honor of 1000 men.
Perhaps the greatest gift he gave me was the gift of saying goodbye. I went to see him in the hospital and he asked that I sit with him for a while. I knew he was dying. I don't know how I knew, but I could just tell. And I knew that he knew he was dying. As I held his hand, and tried to decipher his words, he said "you don't realize how important these visits are" and I agreed. Lying in that hospital bed he was a shell of the man he once was. By his appearance, you would not know that he lived in Hawaii when Pearl Harbor was bombed, or that he fought in the Pacific Theater during WWII, or that he struck the fear of God in hundreds of elementary school kids as the principal of Longfellow Elementary in Hazel Park for 30 years. When I left him, for the final time, I kissed him on the forehead and said "I love you Dad" and he said "love you Pam". I left and he died the next day.
I'm still processing what I have learned from the legacy of his life and death. For he is not the first person whom I have known and loved to die. The grief I feel upon his passing is familiar. I understand this grief, this sorrow. I am trying to be a good spouse to comfort my husband, his son. And my children, for their grandfather was a huge presence in our life, from the day we brought them home from the hospital - until the day he entered the same hospital to die. He and my mother-in-law were our number one babysitters for many years, until my mother-in-law's dementia forced her into a nursing home. He was a constant presence at our Thanksgiving and Christmas tables. Every milestone, from birthdays to graduations - he was present. Each year, he accompanied us to the Royal Oak Memorial Day Parade, where he would stand and place his hand over his heart each time the United States Flag paraded by.
His funeral was a true celebration of his life. All four of his grandchildren, both of his sons and I all took part in saying goodbye. My heart broke as I watched my kids, stricken with grief try to struggle through the celebration of his life. At the end of the service, my daughter, through sobs was able to perform a strong and honorable tribute to her Grandpa as she played "taps". As I looked out into the church that day, I was touched by the people who knew and loved our family came to pay their respects to a man they had never met. Many of our friends had heard stories and tales about "Grandpa Bob" - but few knew him. Our friends, Tom, Laura and Dan generously offered to provide special music for the service. As did, Michael, a long lost childhood friend of mine with whom I have been recently re-acquainted. The four of them gave up their Saturday to perform beautiful music for a man whom we loved dearly, and a man they had never met. It's good to have those types of friends, who show up and deliver out of no other obligation than the love they have for you.
I think he would have been proud of his tribute. He would have been proud of the bravery of his grandchildren. And his sons; these grown graying men paying accolades to a wonderful father; who in turn saw them grow into wonderful fathers. He would have been proud of all of us; that our friends and family showed up out of love for us and for him. He would have loved the music played in his honor and the talent of the musicians who graciously offered to play that day. He would have criticized the telling of his jokes; that our timing was a little off compared to his (the master joke teller).
And while our grief is still raw, his life had great purpose and in turn gives us great hope and resolve. I see his life and love reflected in my husband, our children and our nieces. Loss is only made endurable by love. Love was there that day at his funeral, everywhere I looked, I saw love. Our love for him and for each other. We should all be so lucky to leave such a legacy.

Police in the East Bay are investigating a crash that left a house with a huge hole.
Police said a suspected drunk driver rammed his car into a newly purchased home in Hayward. The crash happened about 2:30 a.m.
Police also said the driver was speeding when he hit the curb in front of the home, went flying through the air, and into the front porch.
A neighbor describes the frightening moment of impact.
"I was lying in bed, and I heard what sounded almost like an explosion," Keith Stirling said. "We decided to come outside and see what happened, and we saw the police cars and came over and looked, and the car was so far in the house. I couldn't believe it."
The driver was not hurt and was taken into custody after being checked out at the scene.
No one was home at the time, as the new owners had not yet moved in to the house.

A 14-YEAR-OLD boy has been killed by a train near to a foot crossing just outside Lincoln.
British Transport Police (BTP) were called to the scene near a foot crossing on Doddington Road, Lincoln, to reports that a person had been struck by a train.
It happened at 8.51am this morning, Thursday 6th December.
A 14-year-old boy from Lincoln was pronounced dead at the scene. He had been hit by the 7.42am Sleaford to Leicester service.
The incident is not being treated as suspicious.
A BTP spokesman said the boy’s family had been informed, but he has not yet been formally identified.
The incident comes after a tragic few days on the railways.
On Tuesday, four-year-old Emma Lifsey, from Haxey in North Lincolnshire, died after the car she was in was hit by a train on a level crossing at Finningley near Doncaster.
On the same day a rail worker was killed after being struck by a train near Saxilby. He has been named locally as 26-year-old Scott Dobson from Doncaster.

30 days, 30 pages with writing on them. That's the deal.
Short Stories (cont'd).
e) Once he stopped wearing hats and began wearing his thoughts instead, things became at once both simpler and more complex. For one thing, he had to begin paying attention to whether or not the words coming out of his mouth bore any relation to the ones currently being displayed. It required actually thinking while he was speaking, something to which he was completely unaccustomed. He noticed it also became more difficult to tell believable lies. On the other hand, wearing his thoughts eliminated the need to speak at all much of the time, which simplified communication. For instance, he could tell someone how much he disliked their cooking merely by looking at them across the table, and there was a certain amount of relief to never having to articulate an answer to the question, "does this make me look fat." So far, the biggest challenge seemed to be finding the correct thoughts to complement the pink and purple flowered tie his wife had given him most recently. Almost any words he tried on with it seemed to complicate not only the outfit, but the circumstances of his home life in general.
f) By keeping the chicken in her purse, she completely eliminated the problem of the eggs breaking and making a mess all over the papers in her briefcase. She didn't know why she hadn't thought of it sooner. The first time she'd tried to cover up the mess by pretending she intended to prepare an omelet in the board meeting, it had been awkward because she had to at the same time feign embarrassment for having forgotten to bring a hot plate. She dealt with that problem by bringing a hotplate with her to all subsequent meetings, so as not to be caught off guard again, but it was difficult enough to get everyone at the table to agree on whatever business matter they were discussing, let alone what kind of cheese they'd like or whether they wanted tomatoes or peppers. It made it hard to present her ideas effectively, which she felt put her at a distinct disadvantage compared to the men in the room who weren't trying to simultaneously cook. Even while she resented it, she couldn't help but wonder if she was bringing some of it on herself. When she finally found a purse that was big enough to provide something approximating a cage-free experience, she snatched it up immediately. And from the very first day, she could tell she might really be on to something that could have a significant impact on her upward mobility at the company.
g) The moment the mother opened her suitcase, she could tell something was wrong. Her daughter was a mess, having somehow gotten into the lipstick and nail polish and decorated not only her own cheeks but also her brother's forehead and elbow. He had obviously retaliated by snatching her goldfish crackers, flinging them around on top of everyone's clothes and stomping them into fine orange crumbs, which he proceeded to water in with his sippy cup, leaving everything sopping with milk. That had started the crying of course, because as soon as he poured out the milk he became thirsty (he always seemed to be extra thirsty when traveling; she was going to have to make a note of packing extra drinks in the future) and it appeared the hitting and hair-pulling had probably started before his tears were even dried. All that rough-housing had left her husband's golf shirt in a wadded up mess, and she knew he wasn't going to be happy. He was particular about his golf shirt. She half wanted to just zip the kids back up and put the whole mess in the closet. But now it was time to get everyone ready to go to dinner, and she could see there wasn't a single thing left in the entire suitcase that wasn't going to need washing and probably ironing too. She had no interest at all in doing either of those things while the family was on vacation. Plus they both needed baths. It wasn't fair. Of course the airlines never seemed to lose luggage when it might have come in handy for teaching children a lesson.
h) Of course, he was going to have to think up an explanation for the hole. He knew they would notice; it would be hard not to see it no matter which angle they were viewing the painting from. Anyway, as soon as the hole had appeared, all the red had fallen in and completely vanished, and just that fact had compromised the design quite substantially. Without red, it was hard to even tell for sure what it was a painting of. The blue was beginning to look unstable, like it might go at any moment too, or maybe he was just losing his confidence. It was hard to tell. Anyway, the whole thing was becoming a tremendous bother. It was a terrible shame to have such a thing happen on a commission, and for picky clients too. Perhaps his father was right; perhaps it was time to give up trying to make it as an artist and just get a real job.

Originally Posted by Fizgig
It's really bad tarring these others with the same brush, and I mean by that DLT (who wasn't even allowed to defend himself even with the paparazzi at his gate, because it was going to court) and even Jim Davidson - I know he's disliked, but I heard that the reason he was dragged in was to do with 2 grown women - as soon as SAVILE POLICE is mentioned people start adding 2+2 to make 4, when 4 might not be the right answer (you know what I mean, couldn't think of a good analogy there
2+A person I really dislike = 4.
Totally agree re the others mentioned above. Far as I can recall, only two of those arrested have actually had child abuse charges levelled at them, all the rest were adult-related 'offences' and although I can't say I'm much of a fan of any of them, my not being a fan has nothing to do with their right to not be perceived as child abusers.

By Ray Stern
By Ray Stern
By New Times
By Amy Silverman
By Stephen Lemons
By Stephen Lemons
By Monica Alonzo
By Chris Parker
Jeff Theiler later told police that Bobby tacked a handwritten note on his dorm-room wall around this time. "Do not sit on my mutha-fuckin' bed," it read. "It's not a couch. Don't make me shoot you."
It seemed everyone in the ASU wrestling program but Coach Douglas knew that Bobby had a gun. Douglas was preparing for a run at his second NCAA team championship in four years. But it was clear to most of Bobby Douglas' staff that the team's wayward freshmen were running wild much of the time.
"I continually had to baby-sit those guys," says volunteer coach Rudy Isom. "They were pushing people off bikes and stealing stuff, and it was turning into a nightmare."
Isom says he saw the gun days before Bobby shot himself: "I told him, `You're going to kill yourself or hurt someone with it.' Obviously, we didn't think the kid was uncontrollable. But he was uncontrollable."
Assistants Keith Walton and Brad Penrith cornered Bobby a week before he shot himself. "I heard he had this gun," says Penrith, a world-class wrestler with a chance to make the 1992 Olympic team. "I told him, `What's going to end up happening to you?' He lied right to my face, he put up a front. He said he'd given the gun to someone else. I think maybe he just wanted to be a bad guy."
A few days before Bobby died, his old club coach and mentor, Roy Pittman, flew to Phoenix to attend a "Children at Risk" conference. Pittman didn't consider that his "son," as he calls Bobby, was at risk himself.
"We laughed and joked, like a father and son," Pittman says of their meeting at Sky Harbor Airport, one day before Bobby shot himself. "We talked about all the tough times--I knew he wasn't any goody two shoes--and the good times. I told him that all I wanted him to be was himself."
Being himself may have been part of Bobby's problem, Pittman says. "People in the majority take their cultural identity for granted, but black students in Arizona are isolated. Bobby was afraid, in a sense, down there and it worked on his self-esteem. He was on a pedestal as an athlete, but he still was a young black kid away from home for the first time. Things happen."
THE LAST DAY of Bobby Janisse's young life, March 9, 1991, began uneventfully. He worked out in the morning, then spoke on the telephone with his mom. "Everything was fine," she says. "There wasn't a cross word--absolutely nothing. I wish he had talked about what was in his head. We didn't hide stuff from each other."
That afternoon, Bobby went to a mall with some friends and made plans to go to a party that night. At about 7 p.m., according to Bobby's estranged girlfriend, she broke up with him again during a nasty telephone conversation. Bobby told Jeff Theiler after the call that he wanted to "get loco"--very drunk.
Bobby went to the party with the usual crew: Homer Moore, Bobby Young, and Theiler. His friends later told police they hadn't known he had taken his gun and a pocketful of bullets.
BOBBY DOUGLAS SPENT that Saturday night at home with his wife, Jackie, before the big trip to Iowa for the NCAA wrestling championships.
His telephone rang at about 11 p.m. Assistant Rudy Isom was calling with the news of Bobby Janisse's self-inflicted death. "I wanted to believe it was a bad dream--it wasn't true," Douglas says. He tried to call ASU athletic director Charles Harris, but Harris was out celebrating an NCAA-tournament-clinching basketball win for the resurgent Sun Devils.
"My next concern was to call Bobby's parents," Douglas says, "but the police wanted me to hold off. I felt very uncomfortable in that I'd told them I'd take care of their son like he was my son. I was confused about what to do."
Bobby Janisse's stepfather, Jerome Polk, called Douglas around midnight. "I said I hadn't heard all the facts, but I'd been told that Bobby killed himself," Douglas says. "I heard this chilling scream in the background--it was his mom. I felt like I was hit with a ball bat. I hear that scream now. It's like a knife in my heart."
Douglas stayed awake all night, then went to practice as scheduled. "I wanted to tell the guys one by one about Bobby as they came in," he says. "Guys would flinch or grab themselves in the head. It was terrible. I called it quits ten minutes after we started."
The pressures were immense: The coach had a flight to the NCAA wrestling tournament within hours, and the team was to join him in a few days. "I wanted somebody to tell me it wasn't my fault," he says. "I was very, very angry. That's a natural reaction, but I felt guilty for having it."
Bettie Julkes, Bobby's academic adviser and surrogate mom, flew to Portland for the funeral as a representative of ASU. Bobby Young, Homer Moore and his mother, and Bobby's ex-girlfriend also attended the services. "I had to go, to look at his things, his trophies, his room," Julkes says. "I know he would have done so well in life if he had survived and I felt the need to seek some sort of answers. I didn't really get any, but it was important to be with his family."

While Trying To Save His Two Children From Drowning This Loving Dad Lost His Life
In a tragic incident, a father lost his life while trying to save his two children who got into trouble with the sea.
Jonathan Stevens was 36 years old and had heard two of his children crying for help after they went paddle-boarding during a family day out in Barmouth, Wales.
A witness at the scene said that the father had shouted, "They're my kids, I've got to do something" after which, he waded into the sea.
A soon as he realised he was in trouble too, he started waving his arm and shouting for help. Off-duty coastguard officer Alexander Hill was present at the beach with his father and son when he noticed what was happening.
He told an inquest in Caernarfon he could see the children around 100ft out to sea and that they were struggling. As he called for help from the authorities, he witnessed Jonathan heading to the water.
He said: "I saw a man run full sprint past me and into the sea but he kept drifting away from the kids and then disappeared."
Mr Hill went into the water and got to the daughter. Another warden, Marcus Hewlett got to the son. He said, "When I reached him he said “thank you but you need to find my dad”."
"I brought him back to the shore and went back in towards where he saw the young boy had been looking and I saw someone floating in the distance. I approached him and picked him up but there was no response. I can’t say how far out I was but I know it felt like it took ages to get back to the beach."
He added, "I tried to get him back as fast as I could but it was a struggle because I was trying to keep his head above the water."
Mr Stevens was then airlifted to a hospital but was pronounced dead soon after he arrived.
Acting Senior Coroner Katie Sutherland said: "In the attempt to save the children he became submerged in water, was brought to shore but sadly pronounced deceased at A&E. On the basis that he entered sea to rescue his children and then he got into difficulty, his death is a result of misadventure, a deliberate act that unintentionally went wrong. It is a truly tragic case, he lost his own life trying to save his own children. It really shows the dangers of sea and our coastline, even when conditions appear mild they may not be."
"I would like to echo the thanks to the witnesses and those who risked their lives that day to try to save his life," Mr Stevens’ partner, Laura Burford said.
His parents, Faith and Raymond Stevens, said, “He was a proud father and a devoted son, brother and friend."

I purchased a weather application called AniWeather a few weeks ago. It seems to have vanished from the App Store. Does anyone here know for sure what happened to it? I liked it for its one-screen simplicity and nice appearance and animations, but I would also have liked to have access to weather maps eventually. Nothing happened to update it, and sometime since I bought it, it disappeared.

Ken Jones – by Norman GillerKen Jones, our former Chairman and Life Member who has passed away at the age of 87, went back many years with Norman Giller, who recalls:
"It was just a few weeks ago that I last saw my old mate Ken Jones and his lovely wife, Kathy. We were at the memorial service for Hugh McIlvanney at St Bride’s in Fleet Street, and we made a pact. I told him: “I won’t come to your funeral, Ken, unless you come to mine. Ok?” I shook his left hand as he laughingly agreed.
My friend Ken – by Alex MontgomeryAlex Montgomery has added a fuller tribute to his great friend and colleague Ken Jones, who passed away this week.
"It was obvious when Ken phoned a few days ago that all was not well. Maybe as well as those of us in regular contact with him had been fearing. The voice was weak. Yes he had been in hospital. Again? I wasn’t certain of his reply. He was ok now and no he had not watched the football. The wee Welsh terrier who would defend his beliefs with a tenacity that could shock was strangely benign. ...
Ken Jones RIP
We at the FWA are saddened to hear that our friend, colleague and former Chairman Ken Jones has passed away.
Ken came from the famous Jones family that produced his cousin, the former Tottenham and Wales winger Cliff Jones. He covered his cousin's exploits with the all-conquering Spurs and then went on to cover England's World Cup final win in 1966. His first-hand account is superbly told here:

Caitlin - posted on 08/30/2010 ( 6 moms have responded )
My daughter is 11 months old, she has been raised as an only child but she isn't one (she has a 8yr old step-sister who lives with her mom). My daughter knows the basis of sharing...when we go "Madelynn, can I have binky (or some toy she has)?" She will hand it to us. My daughter isn't the problem though.
I have been babysitting a kid who will be 3 a few days. He is an only child. No siblings, no step-siblings, no half-siblings. I bring my daughter along while we babysit to she has a chance to interact with another kid and so does he. But here is my problem:
This kid is mean. If Madelynn touches his cat he'll come over and shove her out of the way and tell her "My cat1". Even if he has had to interest in the cat. When she is playing with toys on the floor that he has no interest in he'll come over and rip them from her hands, shove her, and hit her and then tell her "My toys." I'll tell him no and send him to his room (in which he throws a huge temper tantrum...screaming and crying, slamming doors). He also will carry around 10 to 15 toys in his arms so Madelynn can't play with them. And when he goes to eat he sets all his toys on the table so she can't have them. She has her own toys there but if he shows interest in them they're his. His mom doesn't do anything about it. She'll call him a greedy brat and yell his name and no but that only does so much. I'm at the point that I don't want my daughter around him anymore and I want to tell his mom I'm done babysitting but she really needs my help.
What can I say to her or her son? What I can do to protect my daughter? I've seen other only kids before who were very well behaved, so I don't think this is normal, but is this a problem in only children? I truly am at wits end and am tired of my daughter screaming because the toy she had was ripped from her hands. I want her to learn sharing...
Thanks in advance you guys!

Anushka Sharma was seen wearing a striped dress, and it is perfect for monsoon wear as she was looking fantastic in that outfit. The actress was also spotted wearing a blue checkered dress and was looking gorgeous in that outfit. She also wore a black floral jumpsuit with a black jacket and was looking superb in that outfit. She was looking mindblowing in her denim shorts with a white inner and checkered shirt.
Kareena Kapoor Khan is the most popular actress in Bollywood. She is also known as Bebo in Bollywood. The actress was spotted wearing a short white dress and was looking stunning in that cotton dress. She was looking superb in her denim palazzo pants with a white inner and a black jacket.
Nora Fatehi was looking superb in her floral off-shoulder top and short pants, and it is perfect for monsoon wear. She was also spotted wearing a black long floral dress with a denim jacket and was looking alluring in that outfit. She wore a blue pantsuit with a white crop top and was looking dazzling. She wore a striped outfit and was looking stunning.
Check out some fantastic pictures of Bollywood actresses and stay tuned to IWMbuzz.com.

There is a hole in the world where our dear friend and fellow writer once was.
It still doesn't seem real to me. I want to go to his house, hug all the staff, and see his room. Is it really empty?
I didn't realize how difficult it was going to be to have writer's group without him. On the way to the mall, I listened to the radio on scan. The walk from the parking lot was long. I was so obviously alone, with no one on my arm telling me stories.
The smells of the mall, the arctic temp, and the never ending 80's mix blaring from the speakers were all the same. But it wasn't the same. It was hollow and empty.
I wanted to tell everyone that he's gone. The people at McDonald's who sold us a Coke every Thursday. The people who work at Nordstom Cafe. The sweet Asian couple who walk by our table every week. I guess I want them to care that he was here at all.
My heart is screaming, "Please don't be gone! Come back!"
He was supposed to come over last week for a movie. He was going to come with me to the D.C. Awakening in Oct. We had plans. God, you get him for the rest of eternity, couldn't we have had him for a few more decades?
Who am I to question You? You said that you would rescue and protect those who love You. Jeff has been rescued and he is protected. Could you please give him a really big hug for me? Tell him I love him and I'll see him soon.
Anyone else need to vent?
6 months ago

Today was a difficult day. We arrived in Susu and were informed of the death of a sweet little girl Naomi. Naomi was 2 years old and had hydrocephalus and a cleft palate. Her mother had moved to Susu to live with her Grandmother after her husband left her claiming Naomi was not his. This is common in Africa for father's to deny children with special needs. Naomi's mother was young and had no one but she was blessed by her Grandmother and the community of Susu. I was able to pray with Naomi and her mother on Sunday in church. One of the other nurses Brittany had gone with our host from Hands at Work Robyn to assess Naomi on Monday. Monday was a good day for Naomi she had one of her best days in a long time which made it difficult to hear she passed in her sleep last night. The funeral started today and Robyn and Brittany were able to attend and have built an amazing relationship with the mother and able to give her a lot of support. Our team also collected an offering and we were able to buy a coffin for the burial which will take place tomorrow.
The rest of us had to continue on and assess the needs of the sick and vulnerable that would not be able to make it in to clinic. Today I was with Erin. She is truly an amazing nurse who is very intelligent and has a lot of compassion for the needy. We first went to a home where a little girl around the age of 2 or 3 had a large burn to her lower leg from a fire that caught to her dress. We were able to assess it, clean it, and dress it. We also provided pain medication and an antibiotic. They were so appreciative because we also left them wound care supplies and education on how to care for the wound. Hopefully the little girl will come to clinic Friday so we can see the progress. At that same home we assessed her Grandmother who was complaining of high blood pressure and pain in her knees to the point she now scoots or tries to crawl when she needs to get some where. She is no longer able to get to the clinic to get her medication. The closest clinic is called St. Pauls and would be approx. a 10 kilometer walk from her home. A lot of her pain seemed to be arthritis in her knees and in the states she would most likely be getting a double knee replacement. It is hard to think about how easy we can access medical care at home but feel as though we can do nothing in Susu. We provided some BP medication for her and also some pain medication so for a short time hopefully she has some relief and comfort. We also prayed for healing over her and her granddaughter because truly the ultimate healer is God.
We walked further on and met with another family who had many needs. The grandmother had just returned a few days earlier from Lusaka about a 3 hour drive from Susu and she had been staying in the hospital there. She was diagnosed with what was described as pericarditis and this is where I was glad I had Erin with me :) She is an excellent Cardiac nurse and she was able to educate and provide them with a lot of information. She was on all the right medications from Lusaka hospital which was encouraging however there was still not a lot of other treatment we could provide. We also treated her husband who had a wound on his foot from dropping something on it at work. I was able to clean It and give him some supplies to keep it covered. The wound did not appear to be infected which amazes me considering they don't typically have shoes on. Then we got to see their grandson and assess his cough. He was so cute at first I thought he told me his name was King Darius but it's just Darius. However I thought King sounded pretty fitting for him and will always remember him as King Darius :)
Overall it was a good day in the homes. Even what seems so small can plant seeds and leave a huge impact on people. When you are in Susu I really can feel God's presence and know that he is leading me. Brittany reported that the funeral went well and they know this was God's timing and sweet Naomi is now healthy and rejoicing in heaven.
We came back to a lodge with no electricity and no water. I did go a little in to panic mode. We still had several medications to pack for clinic tomorrow and the sun set is about 5:30 so it would soon be dark. Our team pulled together and worked hard packing pills and preparing. We pulled out our book lights, head lamps, and a lantern and worked hard that evening. The lights did eventually come back on and fortunately stayed on. We spent until 1:30 in the morning packing meds. Time for bed and rest!!

Am a bit worried about this, as I have just sold something which I bought on an installment plan.
I've obviously got a direct debit in place and the first payment has gone through - but I'm a bit worired as the person has asked me for a warranty, as in did it come with one, and I've told them it didn't, which is true - but what if they want the receipt? It shows that it hasn't been fully paid for.
Obviously it isn't a didgy deal from my point of view at all, as I fully intend to complete the payments (it's a 6 month thing) but is it legally Ok? And how can I avoid showing them the receipt if they want it?
Can I be honest and tell them I need to keep the paperwork as I haven't paid for it yet?
Also they have paid me more than I am paying, as I got a very good deal - so I don't want them to know this.
Thanks RR. Hope so too! I've been looking for the receipt/paperwork and can't find it anywhere, typically - but have emailed the buyer to let them know I don't have it, and said that if they don't wish to proceed I'm happy to relist it and fully understand.

Stolen Moments Ch. 01byTyr51©
Suzanne never really considered herself to be a clock-watcher, but this day was dragging like none other. 4:50PM. It had been the sort of day filled with mindless repetitive tasks, and there was no helping it. She had almost prayed that someone, somewhere, would have any kind of corporate emergency just to give the lagging time a little kick in the behind. But it never happened. 4:52. 4:53. Absently, she checked her email again. Nope. Nothing new in the last five minutes. She kept the program up and absently clicked the refresh button over and over again. Nothing. 4:54. click. click. oooh! A new message! Nope. HR just sending out another reminder about medical claim reimbursement forms being due before the holiday weekend. 4:55. She looked up from her computer and listened to her boss in the next room. She was on a telephone call, and it sounded like it would be a long one. Suzanna couldn't stand it any longer and decided to take the opportunity to slip out just a few minutes early.
She turned off her computer, and forwarded her phone. She opened her purse and checked the contents. Wallet? Check. Car Keys? Check. Compact? Check. She would have to stop by the supermarket later as there was no more milk in the house. She opened the compact and pulled out the powder brush, sweeping it over her nose and cheeks, and then reapplying her lipstick. Assured that she no longer looked like she had been through a harrowing day, she packed everything back in to her bag, slung it crosswise over her body, and walked out to the elevators. She pressed for the 3rd floor. It had been raining earlier that morning. Driving to work seemed like a good idea at the time.
With a satisfying ding, the elevator stopped its motion with a little dip and opened its doors on the third floor. A few minutes before the end of the workday, the car park was surprisingly devoid of people. Good. No one to say they saw her leave early. Even if it was 4:58 now. The car was parked in that odd place between floors, so she had a small ways to walk, but not too far. She'd soon be on her way home. She made her way and turned the corner, her small car in sight. She started to rummage for her keys.
Suddenly a hand clamped over her mouth. Suzanne's eyes became wide and she let out a harrowing scream, grabbing at the hand and trying to turn to see her attacker. A second set of arms grabbed her, pinning her arms behind her back, and she struggled.... kicking out, letting her knees buckle to try and get under those oppressive arms, moving her head wildly, and all the while trying to make any kind of noise from behind the hand. Her hair was caught and pulled back, forcing her head still and she watched with horror as darkness descended over her eyes. Suzanne whimpered and struggled all the harder, trying to rub the damn blindfold off on her attackers shoulders.... if she could only get a look! But with the darkness came disorientation, and her struggles became more erratic and less planned, and while it had been only a minute, she feared she was getting tired. Her arms were pulled back a little further and she felt something cold and hard against them... then she heard the tell tale click of handcuffs being fastened.
It was over. She was going to die.
And she had spent the last few minutes of her life refreshing her email inbox. But it was almost 5 o'clock...if she could just detain them a little longer, someone would come down the elevator and...
Just as the thought occurred to her, a hand was one her head, pushing it down. She heard a deep voice say, "Watch your step," and she was unceremoniously pushed into what she determined had to be a car. Her face fell onto the leather seats, but the hand holding her mouth was gone. She let out a scream. The door shut and her scream reverberated off the inside of the car. Too well. "@#%$," She thought. The car was sound proofed. Or as good as. No way the noise would be heard near the elevators. The vehicle was turned on, and then it began to move forward.... she could feel it make the spiral turns of the inside of the garage. Try as she might, she had no idea what direction they were heading any longer. She struggled to sit up. Surprisingly, she felt two strong hands clasp her shoulders and pull her into a sitting position. He must be sitting across from her, she determined.
He moved in very close. It had to be a "he." His hands were large, and strong, but did not handle her roughly. She felt him move close to her, lean over her, reach behind her. He smelled of expensive soap, and lightly of a clean cologne that she vaguely recognized. His warmth was apparent as he got quite close. He took the chain of the cuffs ("maybe he will let my hands go free?") and attached them to something on the back of the seat near the small of her back. Suzanne felt a new wave of despair. She was attached to the car. She wouldn't fall over, but she couldn't move from that spot if her life depended on it. The man moved away, apparently to sit back down across from her and said nothing.
Suzanne started to tremble. And still he said nothing. The longer he waited, the longer her imagination had to come up with all the sordid details of her impending doom. How long before someone knew she was missing? No one would know until work tomorrow, that was for sure. Her cat would notice, fat good that would do her. What did he want? How could she get out of this? She could try kicking him, but she would have no way to escape the car... What if she tried to talk with him? Could she reach him with words? Convince him that she was no threat, and then manage to escape the car when his guard was down? Suzanne licked her lips nervously.
"I..." She started.
A low "Shhh" interrupted her.
"No," she responded. "What do you want? I have to know... you have to tell me, please...someone will..." Suzanne felt a finger press up against her lips and pulled her head back startled. The finger did not leave her lips. Then she heard him speak softly into her ear.
"You're okay, Suzanne." He brushed her tousled hair back with his hand and tucked it behind her ear. The movement was curiously soothing, and confusing coming from her captor. Her breaths still came is shallow gasps. "You're okay. No one is going to hurt you, unless you force them to. If you sit quietly, and do as you're told, you will be fine, and back home in your own bed later on this evening."
Confused as ever, she argued "But what do you want."
"I want you to sit quietly and do as your told. Don't make me tell you again, Suzanne."
She had not realized that she was crying, but she felt him wipe a tear off her cheek tenderly. It was all too much. She was alone, and frightened and this man was the only thing between her and what she was sure was a certain and gruesome death. She tried to sit still while he soothed away her tears.
"You're lovely." He intoned. His voice was baritone and resonant. "I have wanted you like this a long time, Suzanne." He knew her name. It just registered. Suzanne immediately started trying to match up the voice to any she knew.... but she was certain she had never heard it before. She did not stop trying. Then she felt his hand on her coat jacket. It unbuttoned the 5 front buttons slowly, but with deliberate intent.
"Oh God," she muttered. "Please don't rape me." She heard a low amused laughter
"I wont. But if you don't wait to speak until spoken to, I will have to gag you." Suzanne immediately clammed up. A gag would make it harder to escape. She had to bide her time.
The coat was unbuttoned. He didn't try to slide it off her shoulders, but he opened it wide, and tucked it between her breasts and her arms. Then he started on her blouse. She trembled, he cupped her neck with his hand and his thumb caressed her jaw. Firm. Reassuring. After a moment, when she was no longer shaking so noticeably, he undid the button at her neck. Then he moved on the next and exposed the top swell of her breasts. And then another. And another. And another. Then finally the last. Suzanne felt the cool air on her breasts as he pushed the shirt aside; his only touch was his hand, and the soothing motion of his thumb. Much to her dismay, Suzanne felt her nipples tighten in the suddenly cooler air and knew he could see them beneath the thin silk of her bra. And somehow, she knew he was looking. His hand gently stole up her side and cupped the underside of her breast. "Very nice," she heard him whisper, and felt the brief touch of his fingers on her nipple, and then he disappeared.
"Sit very still for me Suzanne. I have to say I enjoy your choice of undergarments, but they're in my way." She suddenly sat up very straight as she felt the flat edge of what had to be a knife drawn up her stomach. It drew up between her breasts, and with a quick motion, the pressure on her breasts let up. She felt a hand brush away the now useless cup and expose her to his gaze. She wanted to desperately to cry out, but remembering his threat to gag her, wrestled with these sounds. She felt his hands move down to her legs and move slowly up her skirt. He paused for a moment mid-thigh. "Thigh highs, Suzanne? Who were you trying to impress?" Suzanne said nothing. "I asked you a question," he prodded firmly.
"N, no one. They were all I had ...today..."
"Liar." He said. "You wore them because you like to wear them. Under all this conservative clothing, you have to keep some sort of secret, don't you? I wonder if you ever bother to wear underwear." She moved her face to the side as if she had been slapped. She did indeed wear her thigh highs for her. And she wore them everyday. When you lived by yourself for so long, sometimes you had to remind yourself that you were pretty, desirable. Even if no one else ever bothered to let you know.
His hand stroked the part of her exposed thigh right above the edge of her stockings. As it brushed softly, repeatedly, the skin there began to warm and tingle, and get incredibly sensitive to the rough texture of his fingers. Then they started moving up again. His hand reached her hip and encountered the strap of her silk underwear. She felt a small surge of triumph. He had been wrong about that. She was no slut. But she felt little relief. He was dangerously close to her. Then she felt that small knife sliding under her skirt as well. She closed her legs together tightly and prayed.
She felt his hands come to one strap, and then the other. Slowly, she felt the remains of her panties pulled from her leaving her exposed beneath her skirt.
His hand moved to cup her face. "I can't tell you how beautiful you are like this. I want to remember you like this always." He moved towards her lips and bushed them gently with his own. His breath was sweet, and he had slight stubble on his chin. 5 o'clock shadow. What time was it now? She felt his thumb brush her lower lip. "Open for me." He commanded. She found herself unclenching her jaw, despite her better judgment. But her better judgment wasn't working when he was this close. She was frightened, and he was offering comfort of a sort. His lips brushed hers again, his tongue running lightly along the inside of her lip, and then he took her bottom lip between her own and suckled gently. His kiss continued, his lips playing with hers until she forgot her semi-nakedness and thought only of his lips. His kiss became more demanding, and his tongue began to play with hers... stroking it, taunting it into sparing with his. She wanted to put her arms around him, but then realized she couldn't. And recalled why she couldn't.
It jarred her back into reality, but he didn't let her stay there for long. His mouth moved to the side of her neck and he caught the lobe of her ear between his teeth. He traced his tongue along the curve of her ear, his hot breath teasing her. His mouth descended down along her neck, and he whirled his tongue across a particularly sensitive spot near her shoulder over, and over again. Then he tested it with his teeth, making her gasp.
She felt his hands move to her sides and make their way up to cup her heavy breasts, lifting them. His mouth came to the front of her and he kissed the hollow of her throat, then moved his way down. He lifted her right breast to his mouth and briefly ran his tongue over the tip. She stiffened with shock, then she felt him purse his lips and blow cool air over the now wet nipple, and it tightened even more painfully. He chuckled softly, and fastened his mouth upon his, suckling upon it rhythmically. His mouth was so hot it felt as if he could burn her with its warmth. He used his teeth gently to hold her nipple in place as his tongue laved at the over sensitized tip. Suzanne moaned.
He moved his mouth to the other one and gave it similar attention, his hand coming up to worry the now abandoned breast. It was all too much, and it was not enough. Her hips wanted desperately to move. She wanted more, and she started to tremble.
He dragged his mouth back to her other ear and whispered "You're trembling."
"I am so afraid of you," she answered breathlessly. She felt him smile into her hair.
"Shall we see?" And with that his hand moved to her knee and began to move towards her center. Suzanne held her breath. His movement was slow, but deliberate. And the only thing she could do was shut her legs. How could she have let them go slack to begin with!!
"Relax your legs, Suzanne." She just turned her head to the side and squeezed her eyes shut beneath her blindfold. His hand remained trapped between her thighs, but he reached up with his other hand and trapped her nipple between his thumb and forefinger, and pressed it till she gasped. "Open them."
"I can't," she whispered. His hand continued to toy with her breast.
"You can." Suzanne shy, miserably, loosened the death grip of her thighs, and his hand came to touch her core. His finger slipped between her lower lips and they slid easily. He nipped her lightly on the neck as she gave a groan...
"Oh no, Suzanne... I don't think that was why you were trembling." He caught her lips in a kiss that filled her with softening distress as he stroked her softly. His finger circled a place that made her gasp. His hand stopped, and he came back to that place and circled it again. Her breath caught in her throat. Intrigued, he touched her only there, rubbing, manipulating her until she cried out, then he slipped a finger deep inside her. Her eyes opened wide into the darkness behind her blindfold.
"Oh god...." she breathed, and his hand moved in a way that made his intentions very clear. He slipped his finger out again to touch her clitoris. The sensation was jarring, and all her world was centered on his distressing hand. She felt so empty.... she would do anything to not feel this way.... he lifted towards his hands, begging silently to feel him enter her again. Anything to ease this aching void.
"What do you want?" he asked. Suzanne refused to answer. In return, the man refused to increase the pressure of his hand. "Tell me what you want."
"N, nothing... I.... oooo."
"You want something. Tell me what it is."
"You know what it is," she accused silently.
"Tell me." She moved more frantically beneath his hand, trying to encourage him to enter her again without saying a word...
"Please what, Suzanne?" She couldn't take it anymore. If she didn't get...
"please.... I need...." With that two fingers entered her and she gasped with pleasure. Warmth suffused her whole body and she felt a tightening in her stomach. It suddenly became very hard to breath. He spread his two fingers within her causing her breath to break and her world to start breaking apart. He curled his fingers towards him and touched a spot that made the world spin. He pressed against her clit with his thumb while he moved his fingers within her and she cried out. It was too much. It was far too much. She could feel her orgasm building, her muscles clenching, a fine sweat breaking out on her back and between her breasts. She felt his mouth return to her breast and only wished she could hold him to her as she spiraled higher and higher. Everything was focused on her center. There was nothing else but this and the man causing her to feel tighter than she had ever felt before.
"Come for me. I want you to, now, while this part of me is inside of you. I want to feel you around me... just let it happen... Suzanne." With that she felt something break open inside of her and she exploded into a thousand shattering pieces.... she clenched, cried out, and clenched again. He didn't stop the motion until her shuddering had stopped, and then he stroked her lightly. She sat back against the seat, her hands numb from the pressure, and let the last of the sweet sensations sweep through her body.
He was sitting beside her again. And he was doing up her blouse, ignoring the ruined bra. She noticed that the car had stopped. When had that happened? She began to get alarmed as the euphoria wore off. He pulled her jacket together and buttoned it as well. "I am going to undo your hands. Then I am going to help you get out of the car. You are going to count to ten, remove your blind fold, and then you are free to go." Suzanne was stunned. She felt his hands at her wrists, and felt blood rush back to them as they were liberated from their confines. She brought them to her front and rubbed them. She heard the door open, and he took her elbow. "Watch your step," he said. She stood up shakily and felt him leave her side. The car door slammed and it started to move away.
1.... 2...3.... 4... she couldn't take it. She quickly removed the blindfold and saw the back end of a black sedan turn the corner. She could not make out the license plate. As it sped out of sight she took in her surroundings. She was back in the garage. Her purse was on the ground where it had fallen in the struggle. She walked to pick it up, stunned at what had happened. She looked again at the direction the car had taken. She looked down into her hand.
In it she was still clutching the blindfold.
It was a scarf, made of sheer black silk. And soft.
"There you are!" Suzanne sighted her boss coming off of the elevator. "I thought you had taken off early, but I guess you are just getting off work too, eh? These long nights are a kicker." Suzanne looked up, startled. She felt her lips turn in a smile, attempting to look composed and uninterrupted.
"Yeah," she answered. "I was held up away from my desk.... but I am going home now." She tried hard not to blink; the evening light seemed bright to her eyes.
"Good. Good. See you tomorrow then!"
"See you." Her boss got into her BMW and drove away. As Suzanne approached her own vehicle she glanced at her watch. It was 5:27.

There are people all around me, but no one can see them nor hear them but me.
They speak to me, and tell me their stories. They want to be heard, but I was the only one who believed in them enough to listen.
Here, I will relay their stories to you. Here, they will be heard.
Here, they will be understood.

I wish they were longer, but who ever did do these is very talented and I wish they would place them on something like XXnx.com so they would be viewed for free. Good videos, but to short to actually pay for them. I also wish that the scenes were longer, I get that it is pretty realistic in that aspect, but come on, we aren't here for realism. Many people do not like these kinds of things, but I'm glad some do, so they can make stuff like this and share with the ones that do like it. Even if they don't like it, it's nice of them to think of us and make it.
I had to admit firstly that 3D's are a little guilty pleasure for me. This one caught my eye and it isn't disappointing. The graphics are good, decent sound effects and it definately worked for me. of course the appeal for women is the size of the bulls massive equipment! And seeing as how so many women who have tried this with horses or bulls have ended up dead this is probably the safest and best way to provide such videos for people. not to mention that it's easier to see from all angles on an animated film than trying to get good quality filming and angles of live porn. Definately worth a watch.
This was very erotic and as realistic as you could get. I much prefer anime beastiality to the real thing. I loved hearing the audio, most of these types of video don't have audio and if they do, it's usually just music. This actually has moaning in it which was a HUGE turn on. Even the movements in this clip were a turn on. The only real bitch I have with these types of videos is they are not long enough! But with that said, this was a great video. Will be on the look out for more.
man what a movies with the bull busting nuts in those womens, the didn't seem to have a problem with the bull mounting them and thrusting his huge and i say huge cock inside those women. it seem as if they were tried or dead after all of that. i know that i would have been worried about where that size of a penis was going and where it would come out. I would love to try a minature pony they say that their penis can go inside a women quite easily. but these women seem to enjoy the bull and it was an exciting 3d video and to hear the moans of the bull, that showed that he enjoyed doing his business with those women well done.

Author: Steve Rinyai
Publisher: Osmora Incorporated
A young couple who grew up in an Eastern European communist country decided to leave their homeland. They were not able to leave legally, so they crossed the Iron Curtain illegally. They spent some time in Italian refugee camps in very poor conditions. At last, they were able to immigrate to the United States where they had to face an even harder life in the beginning. They were fighting for their lives moving through three states. After four years, they gave up and moved back to the still communist Hungary. The Hungarian government betrayed them in spite of the general amnesty. They were not able to leave this country again legally; they escaped to Yugoslavia using a small boat at the border river. They traveled through the country to reach the Italian border. Joe was afraid to cross the border through the dense forest, because Mary was pregnant. They tried to cross the border with their American documents, but it failed. They obtained an entry visa at the nearest Italian Consulate and fled to Italy again. They traveled to Milan where they were able to get entry visas to Switzerland. Joe called his old time friend in Switzerland asking for his help. They arrived in Zurich where his friend helping them. They were afraid of return to the United States, because of Mary’s condition. They spent some time in a refugee home where Chris, their son, was born. After another refugee camp close to Zurich, Joe found a job and they moved into a nice apartment. A local Swiss family helped them and they became very good friends. Later, Joe got sick. The burden that he was carrying on his shoulders for years caused problems, but with professional help, he was able to get out of trouble. He started a part-time job in a gift shop. Later Mary also got a job and little Chris went to daycare. After years, staying in Switzerland with any settlement status, Joe and Mary decided to move on. Mary’s girlfriend helped them to get into Canada, but they had to show up $10,000, which was not easy to accumulate. When they obtained the money, they were able to fly to Canada. They settled down in Toronto. Joe was lucky because he got an engineering job soon and he was able to support his family. Joe got sick again and could not walk for a while, but with excellent treatment and positive thinking, he was able to overcome his problem. He and his wife graduated as interior designers and started a new business. After some good years, the bad years came. Due to the recession, Joe and Mary lost their business. Joe overcame it again when he started a repair business beginning with churches. At last, he was doing very well. He took a business trip to his native Hungary where he had so much fear and bad dreams of not being able to get out. Fortunately, nothing-went wrong and he completed his business trip. He finally arrived to Canada and almost kissed the soil with joy. His journey was ending, because he arrived home in the freedom.

“Remembering Jesus,” Friend, June 2001, 36–37
One Wednesday afternoon, I really made a difference in my life as well as in another person’s life. A girl in my class had been very annoying and had refused to answer our teacher when he asked her questions. He very patiently asked her to go to the principal’s office, but again she refused, so he decided to do something different.
All the girls at our group of desks were stunned when he had her sit by us. Then he told us that since she was being disagreeable, we could move our desks away from her. One by one, the other girls moved their desks.
We all know how it feels to be left alone without anyone. I could have increased my popularity by going off, too, which I thought about doing. Or I could stay with her and be more Christlike and not have a guilty conscience. I remembered all the times that Jesus stood up for those who had no one, and I decided to be like Him.
The poor girl started crying, so I put my arm around her and comforted her. I knew that I had chosen the right, and I knew that Father in Heaven smiles when He sees us love each other. That was the day when I knew that, indeed, it is very possible to love one another.

January 15, 2012
Peters reaffirms UT, talks new D.C.
Covington, La., linebacker Otha Peters has been a Vol for quite a while. He made his official visit to Knoxville this weekend, and for Peters it was a great chance for both him and his mother to see why he picked Tennessee.
"I just loved hanging out with all the players," Peters said. "We just chilled in the dorms and played video games. They are all great guys and cool people. They are really easy to talk to and they are mentor type guys."
Peters had a great relationship with former linebackers coach Peter Sirmon and former defensive coordinator Justin Wilcox. He has also been close to Tennessee defensive backs coach Terry Joseph and that helped soften the blow when Sirmon and Wilcox departed for Washington.
"I have a good relationship with the coaches," Peters said. "I got to know them better. I got to meet coach (Sal) Sunseri and he was showing me some of the defenses I'll be playing. I can't wait to get up there. He had me playing Mike and Will linebacker (in a 3-4 system) when he was showing me the stuff."
Sunseri never told Peters what position he would possibly coach if he chooses to coach a position. The two did spend a good amount of time together and Peters was impressed with the longtime NFL and college assistant.
"It was really good and it was important," Peters said. "He's coached a lot of great players and he told me that I have a chance to be one. He was playful, but he was serious when it needs to be business. He's going to care about you and joke with you, but he knows how to get the best out of you on and off the field."
It was also the first chance for Peters' mother to visit Knoxville.
"My momma had a really good time up here," Peters said. "She got to know a lot of the commitments' parents really good. She took a lot of pictures. She is sure about everything now. She really enjoyed hanging out with Jason Croom's momma and LaDarrell (McNeil's) momma. They all became really close over the weekend."
Indeed, Sheila Peters told VolQuest.com this weekend was critical for her in her son's recruitment.
"I had kind of wanted him to go to like a smaller college; I thought maybe Tennessee was too big," she said. "Sometimes I feel like the big schools, the system, they can lose a kid; that's why I kind of was for TCU. But he said, 'Mom, when we go to Tennessee, we're going to compare the two.'
"So I loved it here. I enjoyed it. And they convinced me that they're going to look after my child, because he's so far away from home. I was convinced that they really care about the kids."
Like the rest of the visitors on campus, Peters got to attend the Tennessee basketball game on Saturday afternoon. He was amazed by the amount of people that recognized him and he was blown away when the fans chanted his name.
"It was cool," Peters said with a laugh. "I had my I.D. tucked away and everything, but I guess they knew who I was. It felt good that they knew who I was and it was just a cool experience."
Seeing her son recognized out of uniform at a basketball game also made an impression on Sheila Peters.
"I was like 'Otha, how do these people know you?' And he was like 'I don't know; I'm hiding my name-tag. I don't even have my name-tag,'" she said. "But they still knew that was him. It was very exciting.
"I've been with him every since he started playing at six years old, and I love football. I enjoy it."
The talented Bayou 'backer spent a good amount of time hanging out with the current roster, but he did get to know some of the other Vol commitments.
"Justin King and I talked a lot," Peters said. "It's good to build a bond since we are both playing linebacker. I spent a lot of time with Davante (Bourque) and he committed. He really loved it and he told me that he was ready to come up here. He said it felt like the right spot for him. His dad had a good time it looked like."
It's big for Peters to move on past the coaching changes and focus on his final semester of high school. He doesn't plan on doing a lot of recruiting the next weeks. In fact, he plans on just laying low.
"I'm going to relax," Peters said. "I've gotten someone else from Louisiana committed so I'm good now. I'm just going to set back and enjoy high school. It's my last semester so I'm going to spend a lot of time with family and friends."
And now, both Otha and Sheila Peters feel good about the decision.
"He always said Tennessee and I would try to tell him no, not Tennessee," she said. "I had people, because we're from Louisiana, say why Tennessee. Why not LSU? And I'm not going to make my son. Wherever he goes, I'm going to support him 100 percent. So he'll be here.
"Coach Dooley, man. For him to be a head coach and I know he stays busy a lot, but I felt like he was very concerned. Don't mind sitting down and having a conversation. He'll treat my son like it was his son, and I really do believe that. All the coaches."
...More... To continue reading this article you must be a member. Sign Up Now for a FREE Trial

Oscar awoke to feel the sunlight on his face. He stretched and sat up looking about his room, his photos of his dad, his lamp by his bed, his pictures with emerald and his school bag sitting in the corner. He got dressed for school and pulled his rucksack over his back and headed off. When he arrived he met rose and carrie and they started chatting about their last mission they had been on. Oscar looked across the playground and spotted emerald. Her blonde flowing behind her as she walked towards him.
'Hey oscar' she called and he walked over to her.
'Hey beautiful' he said kissing her.
'Ugh, get a room you two' rose said laughing as they pulled apart and blushed. They walked over to them and started talking about how stark had ended up with a bowl of water being poured over him. Emerald and oscar had been given a stern talking to for joining skul but afterwards they filled a bowl with freezing cold water and placed in on his door.
'You should have heard him scream like a girl' emerald said and they all burst out laughing. Their communicators buzzed and the four of them headed of to base. They arrived down and looked about for frank.
'Hello?' emerald said and they heard someone trying to say something but it was muffled.
'Frank?' rose said as they went round the corner. Frank had a gadget in one hand and tape tied round his mouth. The tape was connected to the gadget and he had accidently fired it at himself. They laughed and oscar helped him get it off.
'New gadget from HQ' he said tossing it to the side. They went to the computers and frank explained there mission.
'These banks and being broken into and thousands of pounds have been taken, same amount and same patterns, you're job is to find out who's doing it and stop them. They nodded and searched through the bank details and security camera's. One caught emeralds eye and they went back to it. Three people as usuall but there was a fourth with them. He had a small brown messy beard and long thin brown hair. He was wearing an old green faded coat and was helping them pack the money into crates.(you know who it is yet?).
'Have you seen him before?' emerald asked pointing to him. Oscar looked more closely.
'Didn't he come into training once?, you know skul training' he asked saying the last part quietly. Everyone else had forgotten about it, apart from stark and himself.
'Yeah, i think he did, what was his name again?' emerald asked trying to think. Then oscar remembered.
'Vincent' they said together.;)
'Who?' rose asked looking at the tape.
'That guys name is vincent, he works for skul' emerald said zooming in on his face.
'At least we know who's behind the raids' carrie said printing the picture off.
'Frank...' she called and went to show him. They searched through the tapes after that and he was in all of them.
'So he's now helping them' rose said trying to find his file.
'He's got no records, no birth certificate and no medical records' rose said leaning back and sighing. This guy was good.
'So he's got no records, we can't find anything on him and he works for skul, can this get anyworse?' rose asked. They heard frank call out in suprise and then walk out with tape on his mouth.
'I had to ask' she said and they went to help him.

MY SON-IN-LAW is selling a Fiat Regatta. It is in nice condition. The interior is great and it has mag wheels. What do you think it's worth?
NOT much! They were sold here in the late '80s and really it was only unfortunate souls hooked on Italian cars who were foolish enough to buy them. They rusted, used oil, blew smoke and were generally fairly undesirable. Your son-in-law might get $1000, but should be happy to see it gone.

I am 25 and my husband and I have been married for almost two years without any kids. We recently found out I was pregnant and we were nervous but excited. The doctors didn't know what to make of everything bc my levels were going up but not enough. Over the weekend my doctor called me in after getting blood work back and told me to go straight to the er where they found out I miscarried at about 4 weeks or so. It was super early, but my husband and I were still devastated and still are and I have no idea how to go about coping with something like this. I'm a teacher, and I've had to take a few days off of work just because I feel so sad when I'm at work and I don't even know what to do. I wasn't bleeding over the weekend but am a lot now and my uterus is still swollen but there's nothing in there and it's just the worst feeling. Sorry for being so long, just had to vent.
I am so sorry for your loss. I had to find something positive to focus on to keep from losing myself in grief. I focused on eating healthy and exercise and trying to do normal daily stuff to help me feel normal again. That being said it took me 5 days before I could go back to work.

This is a movie made with pictures from the parade.
I wish I remembered more information about these tractors and cars. I believe I heard the earliest year was a 1909. I know that there were a lot of 1911. It was incredible to see these monstrous tractors still running. A few of them blew their steam whistle. The first one was ok. The second one made G jump so badly the whole stroller jumped with him.
Here is another old car we saw!
After the parade, and the boys woke up from their nap they were hot and sticky. So they got to share their first freezer pop! Every bite was excruciatingly cold, and they'd made a face like they were being poisoned. Yet, it didn't stop them from eating it!

Bronze is a Porn Star from United States. She was born in New York on December 3, 1971. She is listed on FreeOnes since 2004 and is currently ranked 9781th place. She currently has 14 gallery links in her own FreeOnes section.
Our records show that Bronze is currently retired which means she is not making movies, doing live shows and/or doing photo shoots at this time.

This 19-year-old woman and her boyfriend, 23, have been in a relationship for the last year. They have discussed getting engaged once they both are more financially stable.
Yesterday morning, she woke up and had a bit of back pain. She didn’t think much of it at the time and went to work as usual.
“I work a desk job, so I figured I would just use a heating pad at work,” she said.
As the day progressed, the pain worsened and became more severe. Once she got home after work, she was struggling to breathe and was crying because she was in so much pain.
Right after she sat down, a sharp pain shot from her spine through to her leg. Concerned, she called her boyfriend and let him know what was happening.
“I knew I needed to go to the ER. I was in far too much pain to drive and hinted this to him. He lives about 15 minutes away. I told how expensive the Uber was, and he just goes, ‘That sucks,'” she explained.
Because her boyfriend didn’t offer to drive her to the ER, she ended up taking an Uber.
In total, she spent $100 on transportation, so if her boyfriend had driven her to the ER, she could have saved a lot of money.
It turned out that she had a herniated disk. Once she arrived back home, she updated her boyfriend, and he never said sorry for not giving her a ride or at least driving to the ER to be with her.

Where do I even begin? I'm sure my day was pretty tame by gay standards. But for mine it was awesome. Some of you will probably say i should lift my standards after reading, but i think they're fine just where they are.
I have a friend i met on fb. He's not American, but planned on being in the US at the same time as me, so i knew i wanted to meet him. I really really wanted to meet him. We'd been chatting online for months, maybe even a year or more. Anyway he had visited a number of cities on both coasts, but hadn't made it to NY yet. He had something going on back home so he'd have to fly home to sort that out. It was going to be even longer till i get to meet him. Then one night I get a message from him. He'd scheduled a stopover in NY on the way back home to meet me. Just for the day, well even less than a day. He'd arrive on a red eye in the morning, and have to head back to the airport in the afternoon. It wasn't going to be so long, but it was better than not seeing him at all.
It was only a couple days away and the excitement was getting to me. The night before i woke up a few times, and checked my cellphone for the time, to see if it was time to get up yet. I slept about 5 hours that night, but who cares. I was gonna finally meet him :)
I took the train in to the city, and met him at a starbucks. Of course ;) Had coffee and talked alot. About his past, his future, and everything in between. We then decided to hit the stores, he was looking for something from a particular store so we walked up 5th Avenue, checking out stores. Of course me checking him out too. I was wondering if maybe i could join him in the fitting room at one place, but i thought better of it. Probably cameras in there for security or something. Oh well, we didn't find what he was looking for so we moved on.
The more we talked the more comfortable i got with him. Well not comfortable, i was comfortable, but more comfortable telling him things i'd normally be embarrassed about. Like how hot i thought he was, how great he'd look out of a pair of jeans (he'd sent me a pic of him in them). All the regular flirty talk that seems normal online, is harder to get out when i'm standing right next to him.
He was hungry, so we stopped in McDonalds. I wasn't going to eat, so i let him pick the place. (I'm not sure how many orthodox jews read this blog, but i was wondering whats technically a worse sin - eating non kosher, or not keeping the sabbath? The latter i seem to do pretty easily, yet i can't fathom eating something from McDs).
It was great :) I got to sit there and stare into his beautiful eyes and look at his beautiful smile the whole time we were there, and we were there for quite a while. Even after he finished eating, we just sat there and talked and talked and talked. I was feeling a bit frisky, and had a hard on, lol. I at first 'accidentally' brushed my hand against his knee. I did it a few times actually. But i wanted more. I told him to move forward in his seat. He leaned forward, and i was thinking of kissing him. God i wanted to. But i stopped myself. I told him not to lean forward, but scoot forward, which he did. I could then grab hold of his knew, which i did. I played with him a bit, we held hands under the table, it was hot.
I told him i'd head into the restrooms when it was empty and i wanted him to follow me. I didn't know how much time we'd have until someone walked in, and it certainly wasn't the kind of place we'd get up to much mischief, but at the very least I could kiss him, and i was absolutely dying to kiss him.
It looked empty so I wanted to do it, then and there, but he got a call from overseas, and by the time he'd finished, it was full and people were waiting to go in. I'd missed my opportunity. Maybe i could find another.
We continued out tour of manhattan. Stopping in some stores, looking at souvenirs. It was really so much fun just hanging out with him. Then he had to head back to the airport for his flight. I needed to get on the subway too so i went with him and eventually decided i'd go with him all the way to JFK. We took the A train to Howard Beach. There were a few opportunities where i thought right now would be the perfect time to kiss. We were at one end of the carriage, the train had emptied somewhat, and the people across us has nodded off. Of course these 2 african american women were staring straight at us. I just couldn't. Then we had to change trains. Being in the first carriage, we got off at the transfer station away from everyone else. There was a small secluded area and i thought here was my chance. Until another couple decided to join us there to wait for the next train. Damn it! Every time :(
Back on the train, and off at Howard Beach. The place was packed with people going to and coming from JFK. It wasn't looking that good. I said goodbye and gave him a hug. While i had him in my arms i kissed him on the cheek. Mmm, prickly, lol. He hadn't shaven that morning. As i let go I saw a jewish man with a kippa on come through the turnstile. It was then i was glad i had decided this wasn't the place for a full on kiss.
I guess it will wait till next time. And he's promised me there will be when he gets back. He'd make NY a proper stopover so we could spend more time together, and have some privacy, and do all the things we want to do with each other. I'll leave that up to your imagination ;)
good night from the big apple,
22 minutes ago

This is my slender statue without his skin. This one has a face I have another one without a face.
Adf.ly a link to my other save. If you want to support me anyways if not just go to my profile and find it. Also this wants 200 characters so heres' a story I just wrote.
The very Slender Man
I heard a knock at the door. I opened the door and saw a tall slender man. I never deny a guest so Invited him in. He said he was lost and needed a place for the night. I had an empty room that belonged to my son so I let him stay in it for the night. Later on I heard a yell, I ran to his room he said he thought he saw a ghost and that it told him to run. I asked him to show me where. He walked over to window. He turned his back to me. I proceed to take a large bite from him. After I was done I put his bones in the trash and placed his skull on the bookshelf next to third one. I heard a knock at the door. A very pale man was standing in the rain asking for a place to stay. I never deny a guest.
So what do you think of my story? Fits the save kind of.

"Do you like me?" Connor asked me again.
Where was this coming from? Wasn't it just as awkward of a question for him to ask as it was for me, regardless of the situation? I tried to keep calm, keep from panicking again. I had to stop and think about this to say the right thing.
Do I like him? It's pretty obvious now, I suppose. Of course I do. In fact, I may even…
"Well, yeah. Of course I do. You're my best friend, Connor." This was my way of trying to work around the obstacle. "You're my only friend, to be completely honest with you. You've been there for me for as long as I can remember, and even after all these years of being apart, you're always there for me."
"But do you, like me like me?" He asked, sort of impatiently, grabbing a hold of my shoulders, expecting me to give him a straight forward answer right then and there.
There was no telling what would occur next, so I cautiously opened my eyes to see what his reaction was. How would he feel about discovering that his good old friend had fallen for him? For whatever reason, I expected him to feel disgust towards me, or if anything, feel confused about the whole thing. However, that wasn't the vibe I got from him.
The same way he had looked at me a minute ago, back in his car, when we had met up again after six years, and before he moved away, he looked at me now. In fact, he himself looked sympathetic towards me, like he understood how I felt, like he had known all this time.
Is it just me or…
He wasn't pushing me away. He was moving closer. He wasn't grabbing me anymore. He was holding me in his arms. He wasn't acting the way I had expected. He was doing the opposite.
"C-Connor, what… what are you doing?"
"All this time…" He whispered to himself. "All this time, I've been feeling the same."
There was no way this wasn't a dream. It was some kind of prank, a horrible, cruel, messed up prank. Any minute now he would admit it and begin laughing out loud. Or was Connor really confessing the truth?

A few nights ago, a man came to my house when my mother was home alone. I am writing this because my mother doesn't use computers. He told her he was 17 years old, a new neighbor, and home schooled. He said he was trying to make some money for his soccer team and that he was selling books to do so. After insisting on coming inside he continued to tell my mother that he was selling childrens books and that if she did not want a children's book, as many other people in the neighborhood did not, that he would donate the book to the Texas Childrens Hospital. He was very well informed about our neighbors names and was very convincing. However, my mom became a little suspicious when he kept pushing for her to give him cash. Eventually she gave him some cash and a check to pay for the book. He then hugged my mother and left, which is very frightening. A few hours later, a neighbor called and informed her that either him, or one of the boys in his group, had assaulted the women that lives across the street, who by the way is probably in her sixties. Aside from that, he had gotten checks from most of the neighbors, and others in other neighborhoods. People had come to realize that the whole thing was a scam. I looked up this company on google.com. The third thing that comes up in the search is the just the beginnings of all of the online complaints about this company. Obviously, the company is not responsible entirely for these young men's actions. But it is responsible for giving them materials to dup people; they have committed negligence. Something needs to be done about this company. It is well known, on the internet at least, for fostering scams. This man could have assaulted my mother or worse. To top everything off, there is no way to contact this company via telephone, or anyway to contact them other than a contact form on their website. I'm not expecting anything back, but I have also sent them a complaint.

On the 24th September, Oulami members decided to organize a games’ day for international students on the theme of Pokemon and their capacities. We left early in the morning to go to Yongin campus by bus. Everything was already ready when we arrived and after a small meeting, we were grouped in different teams and the day officially started! We started by making our team poster and we played a little game in order to break the ice!
They were four different games:
The first one was the poison drink game. Team A should drink the contents of each drink in front of them. Some of them were filled with coke, others were filled with coke and soy sauce. The goal was for team B to guess which drinks had soy sauce in it.
The second game was a relay race. They were four different mini-games and the goal was for the team to finish before the other.
The third one was a water-gun fight. Each member of each team was wearing a waterproof coat and had to stick on it 5 different pieces of paper. We had to hide the papers really well in order for it to not be sprayed with water. Once the papers were stuck, we had to link our wrist with one of our members and we had to be sure that the link doesn’t break. The last team which had more members win!
The last game was made of two mini-games. The first one was about getting the most paper and the second one was a match against another team. The winning team must have most red or blue squares than the other.
We had a lunch break between the games, it was a good occasion to take a picture and to talk with our team members.

We had a wonderful journey. Our hotels were beyond amazing! Much better than we expected. The one in Vancouver, Fairmont Waterfront, was just wonderful in its position, and the rest were great as well. The Rocky Mountaineer was an eye opener and just wonderful, and the staff outstanding. Our meals could not be faulted, and we enjoyed the optional excursions we did. The only thing we could mention was we would have liked more time at the top when we did the Peak 2 Peak ride at Whistler, in order to explore a bit more. Our tour leader, Tarek, was excellent in going that bit extra to make things better for us, and many times he got us places before all the other coaches arrived. The cruise ship, Volendam, was a great experience and the food and the crew were also wonderful. It was a very comfortable ship and felt warm and welcoming, and not glitzy like some ships, which we liked very much. The crew couldn't do enough for us and were always happy. We have no complaints at all, and were very happy with our tour. Amazing trip, and would go again for sure.

mambera - sorry you had such a tough time with cd's last time. I honestly rarely had leaks with ds. We did prefolds exclusively with pul covers. I often, around the house especially, just had him in the prefold & then changed it as soon as he wet. When he was immobile I would even just lie him naked on top of a prefold & just place a clean one under him if he wet.
The few times we had a rash issue I switched to disposable for one or two changes with lots of cream & it always cleared up very quickly.

Joseph L. Dennis was arrested Thursday night on the charge of possession of a firearm by a convicted felon, but police detectives said he is a person of interest in his girlfriend's homicide.
During Joseph Lenard Dennis' first appearance in front of a judge Friday morning, an assistant state attorney outlined why the 22-year-old Ocala man has been labeled a person of interest in the death of Shankera Smith, 18.
Smith's body was found Thursday inside the home she shared with Dennis and their 2-month-old son at 1837 SW First St.
On Friday, Assistant State Attorney Rock Hooker told Judge Sarah Ritterhoff Williams that a gun recovered by police working the case appeared to have blood on it and may belong to Dennis.
Hooker said Smith was found shot in the head and that officers had found the gun just hours after her death. The victim was found inside Dennis' home.
All those factors, Hooker said in an interview with a Star-Banner reporter, "Tend to tie him to the gun."
Dennis was incarcerated at the Marion County Jail on Thursday on a charge of possession of a firearm by a convicted felon.
Dennis told the judge via video link from the jail to the courthouse downtown Friday morning that police did not find any gun in his possession.
During his appearance, Dennis' criminal history was discussed, including that he was released from a state prison on Jan. 1, 2011.
Back in Ocala, he was arrested in March on a gun charge and was released the next day. He also was arrested in May for battery, false imprisonment and tampering with a victim. Those charges, Hooker told the judge, were dropped because the victim didn't want to testify.
Dennis shot back at the judge that he was innocent of those charges and that the victim was his mother.
Dennis told the judge he believes he was set up and that other family members had been killed and no one will listen to him.
The judge told Dennis that the charge he faces is serious and advised him not to say anything further.
Bail for Dennis was set at $250,000 and he was appointed a public defender.
He is being kept on suicide watch at the jail.
A few hours before his first appearance Friday, Dennis talked with a Star-Banner reporter at the jail. He denied killing Smith and said he cannot understand why no one believes him.
"I might not be crying and all that, but I didn't hurt that girl. I love this girl more than the world," he said.
He said he left his house around 8 or 9 a.m. Thursday with his infant son and took the baby to his grandmother's house because Smith had told him she was going out of town. He said he brought along Pampers and "a few things" for the baby.
Dennis said he later walked from his home to the West Port High School area to see a friend about a job. He said since his release from prison, he has not had luck finding a job. His father pays the light bill at the home and gives him money, and he didn't want to bother him for any cash.
"Instead of nagging him for money, I tried to see if I could get money for myself," Dennis said.
He said he never returned to the residence Thursday and was out all day until he was picked up by the sheriff's deputy.
"I had no gun," he added.
Dennis said he and Smith had dated since they were young and had lived together since she had the baby. He said they argued "off and on" and described the arguments as "petty."
He adamantly denied having anything to do with his girlfriend's death.
He also said he doesn't believe she is dead but could not explain why he felt that way.
He said that being locked up and with no one to turn to, he might as well die in jail or kill himself.
"I can't stay in here," he said. "I don't know who's taking care of my child and my woman is dead."
Joseph Dennis, the father of Joseph Lenard Dennis, and the man who purchased the home his son shared with Smith, found her dead on the bedroom floor of the residence Thursday and called police.
He said he has no plan to bond his son out of jail.
"No sir, I'm not going to try and bond him out. At least I know he's safe," he said.
When asked if he believes his son killed Smith, he said, "I really don't know."
The senior Dennis said he doesn't know if he or anyone else in the family will hire an attorney for his son.
He also said his grandson is in the custody of his ex-wife and is "doing fine."
He said he only knew about one argument between Smith and his son.
Smith's aunt, Ashley Griffin, said Friday that her niece's relationship with Dennis was "very abusive and hectic." She said when he was around Smith's family members or friends, he was "on his best behavior." Behind closed doors it was different, she said.
Griffin said Dennis was never charged for any abuse against her niece because when the police showed up, her niece changed her story so he would not be arrested.
After Smith's body was found Thursday, Ocala police detectives learned that a man later identified as Dennis was at a home in the 7900 block of Southwest 19th Place.
Detectives Mike Bowman and Jimmy Deas went to the address and talked with two men, who said they knew Dennis and had had beers with him in the past. They said they arrived home and found Dennis sitting in the garage.
After they heard about Smith's death, they said they told Dennis to leave and he walked off toward Southwest 80th Avenue.
The detectives searched the property and found cigarettes and cigars left behind by Dennis, as well as a Winnie the Pooh backpack and a pair of orange Croc-style shoes. Inside the backpack was a black semi-automatic Taurus 9mm firearm, along with a dirty diaper, baby bottles with formula in them and baby clothes.
The men said the items did not belong to them.
Dennis' grandmother told the detectives her grandson had a Winnie the Pooh child's backpack with him when he dropped the baby off at her home.
Dennis told detectives he went to the 19th Place residence to look for work and that he carries a gun for protection, but he denied having a firearm or a Winnie the Pooh bag on Thursday.
Contact Austin L. Miller at 867-4118.

G.I. JOE PRESLEY
WITH THE ANNIVERSARY OF ELVIS' DEATH, A RECENT TIMES LEADER RETIREE RECALLS HIS TIME IN THE ARMY WITH "THE KING."
No pretense. No attitude. No kingly persuasion.
And Charlie Gibson, 62, of Binghamton, N.Y., should know. For nearly two years, Gibson - who recently retired after 13 years with the Times Leader and 41 years in the newspaper business - served with Presley.
The memories, Gibson says, are all good ones.
"He was just one of the guys,'' says Gibson. "He never, never, never put his talent, his entertainment prowess or his celebrity status in front of him.''
Presley - already music's top star by 1958, the year he was drafted - did his military basic training in Fort Hood, Texas. Gibson had also trained there, and both were soon transferred to Friedburg, West Germany, where Gibson served in the 27th Field Artillery and Presley served in the 32nd Armor, 3rd Armored Division. The two were in the same battalion and stationed on the same base. It was there in a bar in Bad Nauheim, says Gibson, that a mutual friend, Gary Von Minden, introduced him to The King.
"There were two gentleman that were his bodyguards that were quite large,'' recalls Gibson with a laugh. "Gary said to Elvis, 'I want you to meet a friend of mine.' He shook my hand, and I said 'Nice to meet you. I've been a fan of yours for a long time' ..."We sat down and had a Beck's beer.''
Gibson says that from then on, whenever he'd see Presley around the base, the two would exchange pleasantries. He even got invited to some of the King's parties, which Presley hosted at the off-base Army Youth Center. "It was just party time," says Gibson. "Just beer and pool. He was a helluva pool shooter and just a lot of fun.''
Still, Gibson points out that Presley was also focused on the duties at hand. He says he was very patriotic, and a very good soldier. Music, although clearly his greatest love, was put on hold during his time in the service. He wore his uniform with pride and honor.
"You could shave in his shoes,'' says Gibson. "He was dressed like a million bucks. His clothes fit him like a glove. Very rarely did he do any singing. ... He'd sit on his bunk, play a guitar, but he wouldn't do much as far as music was concerned.''
Presley, says Gibson, was always open to signing autographs, meeting fans and having his picture taken with anyone who asked. When - while still in Germany - he filmed the movie "G.I. Blues,'' men from the 32nd were used as extras. When the German people gave him a warm welcome and presented him with a Mercedes convertible, he was quick to offer friends joy rides. And when he met the love of his life and future wife, Priscilla, the men in his barracks would sometimes see them strolling the streets together - bodyguards in tow, of course.
Presley, says Gibson, also had a quick wit and relished the good-natured ribbing that servicemen often enjoy.
"I remember one day, we were standing right at reveille, and he came walking in from off base,'' says Gibson. "Two of his buttons were unbuttoned in the back. I said 'Hey, Presley, button those pockets!'
"I don't want to say what he said back to me,'' he adds with a laugh.
There were no laughs, however, on Aug. 16, 1977. It was while vacationing with his family at the Jersey shore that Gibson heard the shocking news that Presley had died at his Memphis home at age 42. Ironically, Gibson had just seen Presley in concert a few weeks earlier at Binghamton's Broome County Arena. It was to be one of The King's final shows.
"I was destroyed,'' says Gibson. "I knew the guy as a guy, not as an entertainer. He was just a straight shooter. I always felt that it was the people that he dealt with that killed him - the doctors who kept giving him whatever they gave him. I was disappointed when I saw him at the arena, because he was blown up like a balloon. I knew him when you couldn't pinch him. He was as solid as a rock. It was sad to see him in that condition."
Gibson prefers to remember the Presley he knew from 1958-1960. The man he served with. The man he befriended.
"He was just a super guy,'' says Gibson. "I just can't emphasize that enough. He often said to us that it was the best time in his life - because everybody treated him like one of the guys."

The Heart is a Lonely Hunter
Language and Communication Quotes
How we cite our quotes:
All the while she remembered the words she had said to Bubber. About Baby being dead and Sing Sing and Warden Lawe. About the small electric chairs that were just his size, and Hell. In the dark the words had sounded terrible. (2.5.144)
Yep, Mick, words sure can pack a punch. Our girl learns a tough lesson here: that our words can have consequences far beyond our intentions, and in this case, Mick realizes she may have put her brother in danger when really all she wanted to do was teach him a lesson.
His hands were a torment to him. They would not rest. They twitched in his sleep, and sometimes he awoke to find them shaping the words in his dreams before his face. He did not like to look at his hands or to think about them. (2.7.27)
We've all felt the torment of longing to speak and not being able to, but imagine being physically unable to speak. That has got to be tough. Singer faces a unique difficulty in the novel in that he has to rely on his hands to communicate, but the problem is, not everyone speaks sign language. So the people with whom he can truly communicate are few and far between.
Portia spoke in a low voice, and she neither paused between words nor did the grief in her face soften. It was like a low song. She spoke and he could not understand. The sounds were distinct in his ear but they had no shape or meaning. It was as though his head were the prow of a boat and the sounds were water that broke on him and then flowed past. (2.10.24)
Copeland seems to be focusing more on the sound of Portia's voice here, and not what she's saying. Frankly, this happens quite a bit in this book, but never quite as beautifully as in this passage.

Bui Doi Film - United States Essay Example
Bui Doi: Life Like Dust is a film that allows us to step into the life of Ricky Phan, a Vietnamese immigrant who arrives to the United States and becomes a part of the gang known as Bui Doi - Bui Doi Film introduction. Ricky explains his struggles he had in Vietnam along with the struggles he experienced while growing up in the United States. While in Vietnam he had to work at a young age and he had a strong envy towards other children who had the opportunities to do the things he didn’t get to do. He wanted to be able to play, to be a child, but instead he was forced to sell bread in the streets.
It frustrated him so badly, that one day he even gave away all his bread to a monkey just to get rid of it and go play. Once he arrived to America he saw hope for new things. He described it as “being born again into a whole new world”. The big houses astonished him and made him feel like he was in place that was so pretty and dreamy. Unfortunately, things changed once he enrolled into school. The other children picked on him and made racial insults which resulted in him wanting to only associate himself with other Vietnamese.
essay sample on "Bui Doi Film"? We will write a cheap essay sample on "Bui Doi Film" specifically for you for only $12.90/page
More United States Essay Topics.
These were people who he could relate to and speak his language with, people who eventually became his second family, and these group of people were part of the Bui Doi gang. In the book Drown, the character Junior shares very similar struggles that Ricky shows in the film. America was the dream world for Junior and for Ricky. Yet once they arrived to America they both couldn’t seem to find a future for themselves outside of what they had decided was predestined to happen.
The life Junior chose in America which was to sell drugs and not go to college, and the gang life Ricky chose instead of taking his mother’s advice, has made them both feel incapable of doing anything good for themselves. Ricky enjoyed his gang involvement and was eager to live it up. Good times with his new family made him feel like he was living in a movie similar to the gangster movies he used to watch and dream about. Junior was a little different. The lifestyle he chose wasn’t something he dreamed of or even enjoyed, it was just what he felt he was supposed to do.
It was the easy route and it was also something that helped him mask his true self and his interest for reading which he tried to hide from people. Ricky and Junior also had their differences as far as who their primary influences were. Junior grew up with the company of his older brother who insisted on instilling his bad habits into Junior and telling him that someday he would be able to have all the fun that his big brother was having. Even though Junior didn’t necessarily agree, it was what he was expected to follow.
With no real guidance towards the right path, Junior caved in, gave up on big things, and just never saw himself as more than what he was. Ricky shared the same result, but with a different mindset towards the ones he was influenced by. He did struggle as a child, but he took the wrong path more willingly. Even though his mother encouraged him to stay focused in school, all he wanted to do was hang out with the crowd he adored. He felt like he belonged, and all the bad choices were just a part of his gangster life fantasy.
He had the Bui Doi by his side and that’s all he needed. While both these characters had the opportunity to have a good future in America, they ventured so far away from it that it became something that seemed unattainable. With Junior feeling less willing but more obligated, and Ricky vice versa, the struggle they grew up with turned into the only life they know. The dream of having it all in America never actually came true, and their lives that were like dust going wherever the wind takes them, came to a halt, with no future in sight.

The left-back, who is on loan at Ligue 1 side Monaco, feels he has been unfairly treated by the media in the Spanish capital
Fabio Coentrao says he was made a scapegoat throughout his time at Real Madrid , claiming he was the “ugly duckling” in the eyes of the Spanish press.
Coentrao is on a season-long loan at Monaco, having made just nine league appearances for the Spanish side last term, and the left-back is enjoying his spell in Ligue 1.
In an interview with Marca , the 27-year-old was asked whether he was treated unfairly by the Spanish press in Madrid, to which he replied: “Yes, I think they were unfair to me. I feel as though they never gave me the benefit of the doubt.
“If I had a bad game, they attacked me immediately. If I played well, they gave it very little recognition.
“Even today, I still ask myself why I was the media’s ugly duckling.”
The Portugal international has been an important player so far at Monaco, having played six games in all competitions since his move.

The views from the seafront room were lovely . Although quite cold outside , the rooms were warm and the beds with quilts and the pillows were very comfy , Water in the shower was hot and the room was clean . The breakfast was really good , eggs could be cooked to order , and there was gluten free bread available. The view from our upstairs room was lovely. Looked out over the sea. Our room was very spacious and the King bed was very comfortable. The en suite was a good size and the shower was good. No lift. Only steps out the front, a ramp would he handy for luggage.

Eighty-four-year-old James Hagins is a retired Lancaster resident. He spends his days taking it easy, napping in his recliner when he feels like it. When he lost his wife of 60 years, Peggy, in September of 2012, he found an unusual outlet for his grief – quilting.
“My mother quilted, and with eight of us children, she definitely had help when she needed it,” he said. “I didn’t mind helping her, and sometimes I was the only one she would let help, because I did things the way that suited her.”

Jasper's eyes came to rest on Edward's lithe frame once more. He couldn't quite comprehend the younger vampire's feelings, a mix of sadness, passion, denial. It was the denial that unsettled him the most for it had joined the mix only a few days ago and strangely it made Jasper feel as if Edward was denying him.
He just couldn't put his finger on what had made Edward make this decision. Jasper vividly remembered the smiling Edward who had gently whispered his name and drawn him into a tight embrace that had practically screamed 'I'll never let you go'.
Edward had gone from hot to cold over night, avoiding his eyes, avoiding his touch, avoiding him altogether without as much as an explanation or a word of goodbye if it was that the younger vampire's coldness meant.
The day Edward first showed up at home with the human girl whose enticing scent had Jasper constantly swallowing back the venom burning up his throat, he finally understood. Finally understood the sudden reluctance to look at him, to even acknowledge him. Jasper guessed it was the smell and the fragility he knew he could never offer the other vampire that had drawn him away and to this girl.
But Jasper knew that this hadn't been goodbye because as long as he had strength, unbreakable skin, immortality to offer there was still something Edward would feel drawn to, something the breakable, weak, mortal girl couldn't give him as long as she was still human.
So Jasper kept his distance and revelled in Edward's feelings of denial for they told him all he had to know. That no matter how much distance there was between them, Edward still wanted him.

I won't be writing about this on my other blog that my family reads. My mother would freak out, she's such a worrier to begin with, I feel like she's always watching how we do everything, and constantly worrying that one of the babies is going to get hurt. I think we're very careful, but I also think we try not to be overly cautious, we believe that they need to explore their world, and the occasional stumble or bump is part of how they learn.
But this is not that kind of situation. This was carelessness. Not by me.
Callie fell off the changing table. It's a high changing table - we're tall people, and we use a dresser that's taller than the average changing table. So it was about a 4 foot fall. Onto a hard wood floor. Jim was changing her. He turned his back to lean out the door to ask me what to dress her in. And thud, she hit the floor.
The first temptation (after realizing that she was conscious and not screaming in pain) would have been for me to start screaming at him about how careless he had been, he knows not to turn his back on her, he knows that she tries to flip over on that changing pad and crawl around. But I could immediately see by the look on his face that any guilt I might have leveled on him would be nothing compared to what he was thinking of himself. So I said nothing, and just went about tending to my daughter.
It was about 2 hours past her nap time, as we had been out running around. So she was already fussy and very groggy. So it's hard to tell whether a child has hit their head in that circumstance. We called the consulting nurse, she put us through a batter of questions, we collectively agreed that she was probably fine, but we were to make sure she woke every 3 hours through the night, not give her any pain meds that might mask symptoms, immediately bring her in if she passed out, started vomiting, etc. But she seemed fine.
Until we sat her down on the floor and she tried to crawl. She either won't or can't put weight on her left arm. So we called again, and were told to take her to the ER.
To make a long story slightly less long - net was they could find nothing wrong with her arm. They did x-rays, and nothing was broken. They examined her very thoroughly and found nothing, and she appears to be in no pain. The arm just collapses under her when she tries to put weight on it to crawl. Maybe it's just bruised, maybe it's just sore enough that she's favoring it. They don't know. They sent us home and told us to call our pediatrician monday morning if she doesn't seem better - maybe a night's rest will help.
Well that was yesterday, and she still can't crawl. So we'll be calling first thing monday. I don't think it's broken or fractured, or torn anything - she would be in pain. It seems more like a nerve thing - like the strength just isn't there.
Jim is nearly beside himself, I've never seen him so low. He feels so guilty.
I'll provide an update when I have one.
Funny - I always thought it would be boys that landed you in the ER, I didn't expect the girl to be the first one there.
In other news - Danny is doing well. I think the CS and the PT are helping him. He's still not rolling or crawling, but he's trying more to get his knees up under him, and he's reaching better for things. The physical therapist was very impressed with his progress at his appointment last week, we have more home exercises to do and we take him back for another check in 3 weeks.

It has been stated many times once in a gang you are in it for life, the only way out is death. The experiences and choices Luis J. Rodriguez made proved that statement wrong. He shows that you cannot live life trying to run.
By the time Luis Rodriguez was two years old his family left Mexico to live in Los Angeles. Like most people they searched with hope for a better life. They moved around in Watts and East LA, always living in poor conditions. From the start others discriminated and tortured them. Rodriguez had tough times as he himself was involved in gangs but soon he found a way out. He was the winner of the 15th Annual Carl Sandburg Literary Arts Award For Nonfiction.
Rodriguez in hope of fitting in got involved with the wrong people and got himself into trouble. He began to steal by the age of seven.
He began to work at the age of nine to help his family out. He got involved in different gangs the most known was the Lomas. He took drugs and got drunk with his "friends"ÃÂ. He witnessed and was sometimes involved in, shootings, killings, rapes, porno, robberies, and police discrimination. He quit school many times. The schools had a separation of levels and Chicanos were only given industrial related courses. He was incarcerated and he even tried to commit suicide. He lost his virginity at the age of fifteen to a girl named Roberta who he did not know was a prostitute. There were constant battles between Lomas and Sangras. He was trapped between defending his "homeboys"ÃÂ and turning his life around.
Community Centers began to be set up to try to stop gang violence. Chente who was part of the centers became a mentor to...

Posted by sharon robertson on 11/8/2016, 1:58 pm 22.214.171.124
Hi guys, my iguana Burkely turned 21 on July 26th. We have lived in the same house for 19 yrs. We just moved Nov 1 and even though all the things he is familiar with are all around him, he has stopped eating. I don't know if it is his age or the move that is affecting him.. maybe both. He just sits on his rock in his cage all day and won't eat or come out.. Just wondering if anyone has any solutions..

Red Or Black? £1m winner may lose money
Published 06/09/2011 | 11:43
ITV is under pressure today after it emerged that the first £1m winner of Simon Cowell's gameshow Red Or Black? was jailed for beating up a woman.
Bricklayer Nathan Hageman was previously reported to have been jailed for attacking his ex-girlfriend's boyfriend.
It has now been reported that the 31-year-old, from Reading, attacked a woman, thought to be his ex.
ITV is holding talks following the revelations, with pressure on the broadcaster to strip Mr Hageman of his win.
An ITV spokesman said: "In light of recent developments, ITV and Syco (Cowell's production company) are making inquiries to establish the facts."
A Reading Crown Court spokesman reportedly told The Sun and the Daily Mirror that the victim of the 2006 assault was a woman.
It is reported that ITV knew about Mr Hageman's five-year jail sentence, of which he served two-and-a-half years, but it is thought that they did not know that the victim was a woman.
Mr Hageman previously told journalists that he attacked a male victim after he started getting threatening calls from a man in Reading.
"I tried to brush it off but he kept saying he was going to harm me. One night he told me my address and said he was going to come round and batter me in front of my mum and niece Mya, who was only about two," he told The Sun.
He said: "I was an idiot for doing it, I know, but that's the state of mind I was in.
"He wasn't seriously hurt, but he made a complaint and I was arrested. I was charged with aggravated burglary and ABH. I pleaded guilty straight away as I knew what I'd done was wrong. I got five years."

The birth story is the favourite topic of every new mum. I've met quite a few now and I've heard every detail of all their births. The longest labour I've heard about was 38 hours, the shortest was my own - 6 hours. I'm no different, I love to share my birth story, so here we go:
I had planned to work up to 2 weeks before Poppy was due. I had quite an easy pregnancy and I was feeling good. Why waste your maternity leave on the weeks before the baby is there? I wanted to have as much time off work with Poppy as possible and that meant working to as close to the due date as work allowed. I was in my final week at work and to say I was looking forward to finishing was an understatement.
On the Tuesday of that final week I had planned dinner with a group on Uni friends I hadn't seen in close to a year. On the Thursday I had leaving drinks planned with my office. On the Wednesday I had planned to work from home, (I worked from home 1 day a week every week in my final trimester).
Monday night when getting up to go to the toilet, (something I did alot by that stage), I felt slight period pains. When I woke Tuesday morning I felt fine and had forgotten all about it. I went off to work feeling fine. It was my final week so I was definitely winding down. At some point in the morning I went to the toilet and had "the show". The show is when the mucus plug comes out - it is a bit gungy and a little bit bloody - kinda like a really big bogey! I had learnt this wasn't really a big deal - there is no need to call the midwife when this happens as it doesn't not mean labour is iniment. That was a good job too as I wasn't carrying my maternity record with me and I didn't have the midwife or birth centres phone numbers anyway. Still, I couldn't help but feel a little bit of excitement. I was bored of being pregnant and the end was in sight.
Throughout the morning I needed to keep going to the toilet and just a tiny bit would trickle out. I remembered it was possible that instead of your waters breaking in a big gush, it could be a slow trickle and I wondered if that was happening to me. I kept working though and managed to get everything I needed to get done for the whole week finished. I was done! I called my husband Jon to let him know what I thought was happening. At the time he was a Director on the TV show "Cash In The Attic". He was on a shoot and suffering from food poisoning, so really not having a good day!
At 4.30pm I decided I needed to cancel my dinner date with my friends that night and go home. I said good bye to my assistant Andrew knowing that I might not be coming back! He was the only person at work that knew what was going on.
Jon had finished the shoot early so he was already home when I got home at 6pm. I phoned the birthing unit and explained I thought my waters might have broken and they said pack my bag and come in. On the way in, I started to experience pains in my stomach. Jon had downloaded an App for his iPhone that timed contractions so he started using that.
At the birthing unit they took my temperature, blood pressure and had a look down below. She said she couldn't confirm if my waters had broken or not. She then went off shift and I was introduced to a new midwife and a student. I had to explain everything that had happened again. At the point about my waters the midwife asked if I was wearing a pad. I wasn't and it was the first time anyone had mentioned it. She didn't give me one. Jon and I were left in a room on our own as my pains got worse and I had to keep going to the loo. My wee smelled of Chardonnay - I had been told in my NCT classes that when your waters break it smells of Chardonnay. I kept saying this to the midwives but they kept looking at me as if I was crazy and asking me if I was wearing a pad. They also explained how the excruciating pains I was experiencing were not contractions. They did not explain what the pains were though, and because of what they said Jon stopped bothering to measure them. Eventually a midwife gave me a pad to wear and told me to go home. Just as I was leaving I felt a gush. they checked and they confirmed my waters had broken. They booked me in for an induction at 9am the following morning and sent me home.
They told me to take 2 paracetamol, have a bath and eat some food. I was in agony and very naive as I listened to what they said and went home. The time was now 9pm, it had been 3 hours since I had got home from work. I took my two little pills, leaned on my big inflatable ball and basically writhed around in agony. Meanwhile, Jon cooked me some pasta. On the TV was "Million Pound Drop" but I couldn't concentrate on that! I had some food but then it all got too much and decided a bath would help. WHAT WAS I STILL DOING AT HOME??!?!!
Me: "What the hell is that??!"
Jon: "Jesus! what is that? It's grey"
Me: "I don't know, phone the hospital"
The hospital told him to hang up and phone 999. A midwife was on the way but he had to phone 999.
999 told him to get towels, (not boil the kettle and hot towels so it wasn't cliched), and get me off the toilet and onto the floor. The babies head was coming out and the operator talked Jon through what to do. Within minutes the paramedic arrived so Jon had to leave me and go and answer the door. In what felt like minutes there was a baby screaming and our daughter had arrived - Jon had helped unwrap the cord from around her neck - a full hands on role in this delivery! At some point during all of this two ambulance crews had arrived and the midwife and student. They couldn't all fit in the bathroom so they were wondering about the house looking for the central eating control. Jon was left holding the baby as ambulance people wandered our house looking for things and they kept asking me where stuff was! I had just given birth, felt like crap and was lying naked on my bathroom floor - can't you ask Jon! Jon kept yelling - ask me! The rest of the ambulance men were sat in our bedroom watching Million Pound Drop!
Anyway - back to the birth. Poppy was born at 10.50pm, less than 2 hours after being sent home from the hospital. The placenta came within minutes of Poppy so the long discussion we had had at NCT about to use drugs or not to use drugs to bring on delivery of the placenta was pointless. In fact all the discussions about pain relief were pointless - no one had mentioned I might only get paracetamol.
I was then taken to the hospital in the ambulance with Poppy and Jon following behind. I had 2nd degree tear that needed stitching. It seemed to take forever, but wasn't painful so that was OK. I drank all the drinks in my bag but was still having problems with my blood pressure so ended up being put on a drip. Basically they don't take you to the ward until you have wee'd. I couldn't stand or even sit up so couldn't go to the loo. Hence the drip. They tried to put the cannula in but failed - that's one large bruise on my hand. They then tried putting it in the other hand - another failure, another big bruise. They then got someone else and she successfully, to an extent go the cannula in my hand and the drip was attached. The only problem was if I moved my had the drip stopped working so it was very awkward! I basically stayed there all night and was taken to the ward in the morning. Every time a new mid wife came on shift she would say "So tell me what happened" They all seemed shocked about my experience and couldn't believe it.
I've been told by many people since then that I should have made a complaint. I haven't because it turned out really well in the end.. I would never plan to give birth in that way, but at the end of the day, I had a short labour, I missed the speeches at work and I got a great story!

Let us enter in his office, we were still overwhelmed.
Cyclope had never said that he had someone in police, and someone very important as the chief of the entire department.
But however Cyclope hadn’t never talk much about himself, and for sure what we knew about was what he wanted that we had know. And his cousin had noticed it throught our astonish glance, and he began smiling, almost laughing.
“I suppose that my cousin didn’t tell you that i was the chief of police…and however you should know him. But come to the serious things. He said me that you have something important to say me”, meanwhile he was looking at that bag from which coming out all the B&B report.
I was thinking to have fear to expose him everything, but he’ve been so sensible that i’ve didn’t realized to tell everything while he given a quick look to every report, but above all to all my notes, and he have sweetly smiled even to the phrases out of place with the many doodles i have drawn while i was looking for to a logical thread to all that.
At end he said: “I see these B&B have made a good job, and your conclusions are well formulated, and it seem me that it’s time to check everything”, and he refered to the building, but when i have shared a glance with him, and Michelle, he have immediately comprehended that that checking it already have been done by me in first person.
As his cousin, he have looked with wide eye open, and he held back the breathe.
Then i have looked Michelle, and i pushed her to say what she had heardt.
“We went here, only with a demand. I know that in that building there is my boyfriend… Luke… and i have to set him free before that they decide to get start to fire the city, and naturally i want stop them, but i need of your support.” And so i have looked at Michelle first who have nodded looking the chief of the police, and then she have added: “… and i want see that gross creature behind the bars of prison, i have had to heardt to many disgusting things from his mouth, and now it’s his turn”
He was looking at me very seriously, and after have nodded several times, he have looked at Michelle first replying: “I know what you mean” and we both have thought to our Cyclope who surely have told him what was happening in that striptease, when he had the possibility to speak with his cousin.
He knew that was happening something, but he could not do nothing without something of concrete. He have asking something to his cousin at the local, but Cyclope could say only what he have looking at, but now that he was leafing once again all the report and my thoughts in regard, he was more conviced that Luke first then me, had uncovered the biggest ill-deal of that city, and he have confirmed thatwithout those report and your note, everything have would be reamined like that, and maybe the city would get in fire only for satisfy a contort mind.
When he was making some phone calls inside the department to organize as soon as possible the raid in that building, he have wanted know also about Billy&Bob, and i have said that even them were disappereance, and i said him my opinion that even them were in that building.
While i was saying him that latest thing, his big eye in the middle of the head, have wided opened more.
“So we have not time to waste!” he said and getting up he have opening the office door and he have screamed to the noisy big office, calling some policemen by name, he have ordered them to organize a squad because in short they have would do irruption inside the building.
He have closed the door, knowing that his policemen, have would put up a good squad ready to everything, and he have sat once again on his chair, looking at those reports, and leafing some, he have looked at me. he have asked me from when Luke had started to investigate on that, believing that i remember the exact period, butt after a couple of seconds of silence and doubts, i have stared at Michelle who have replied for me, givin all the precise informations that the cousin of Cyclope wanted. At end she have blushed and he have sweetly smiled her thanking.
Outside the office we could have listen to all the policemen who get preparing, and only when someone have knocked the office door, and the door slowly opened a creature of which i didn’t have recognize the form, have glimpsed inside and have informed us, but above all his chief that the raid squad was ready, they waiting for his orders.
He have looked at me, knowing that rightly i would wanted come, and he said to that creature to accompanied me in that that was for Michelle the dressing room.
Michelle have looked at me with wide eyes open, holding back the breathe, but the chief have assured her that everything would have went ok. She have sighed my name saying even to be careful.
I have nodded.”
Listen to it🔉⤵

A tour manager for R. Kelly had testified that the singer had bribed a worker to obtain a fake identity so that he could marry Aaliyah.
Aaliyah was 15 years old then and this was in 1994. Demetrius Smith testified that $500 was paid by R. Kelly to obtain an ID, who was 27 years old then.
Smith was providing evidence after being granted immunity from prosecution.
R. Kelly is on the stand for sexual abuse, bribery, and racketeering and has denied all the charges.
Aaliyah Was Underage When Kelly Approached Her
Smith had made the decision of obtaining these documents after R. Kelly’s associates reported that Aaliyah was pregnant. The tour manager had said so at the trial in Brooklyn, on Friday.
He had questioned Kelly’s intentions after he asked him about his stance on the pregnancy after he had pointed out that Aaliyahs was underage.
Smith had visited the welfare office and bribed the officials there. The bribe was paid on 30th August 1994, a day before the license for marriage was issued.
The certificate listed Aaliyah as an 18-year-old and the marriage ceremony was held after a few months. Aaliyah had died in 2001, in a plane crash. She was only 22 and her debut album was named “Age Ain’t Nothing But A Number”. The album was written and produced by R. Kelly himself.
Kelly is also on the trial for being in a decade-long scheme, where underage girls were recruited for sex.
If Kelly is convicted he will be sentenced to several years in prison.
The prosecutors had claimed that Kelly used drivers and lawyers to cover up his crimes and had bribed the victims by filming the sexual actions in order to blackmail them. Kelly still faces charges in Minnesota and Illinois on sexual grounds, where he pleaded not guilty.
Kelly is known for his hit “I Believe I Can Fly” and has been in jail for 2 years before being moved to Brooklyn in June.

I wanted to share a quick story about Cairo from the weekend. I took her to a charity dog walk on Sunday. It was about 95 degrees and very humid but the walk was only about a mile, and through the shady woods. I didn't have any problems doing the walk but Cairo seemed increasingly like she was shutting her brain off. She didn't want to listen to me, didn't want to walk next to me, and just wasn't herself. At times she flat out ignored me, which is really not like her. She refused to drink any water even though the dog walk organizers set up lots of different water bowls for all the dogs. They also had a little kiddie pool set up, filled with water, and I made her get in it and then splashed water all over her belly and ears, and then dried her off to try and cool her down. Toward the end she started foaming at the mouth from panting, and looked so uncomfortable that I took her straight home, leaving the event early. I was so worried about her. She got home, drank an entire bowl of water, and then spent the rest of the day in our bedroom, which is the only room in the house with A/C. She seemed mopey and lethargic for the rest of the day but perked up yesterday and was her normal zoomy self.
Clearly she was overheated and I felt badly that I even took her on the walk in the first place. I will pay better attention to her in the future. She's got such short hair and is bred to withstand high temps, but she wasn't used to weather quite like that.
Anyway, just a reminder to be careful with your pets in this weather. I am glad Cairo is ok but I read a horror story today on COTH about a young dog who died of heat stroke after playing fetch for a very short time.

page 7 of 12
Please report errors to: email@example.com.
1-Introductions, Jewish Practice, Language & Tattoo
Hello. It is April 10th, 2003 and we are interviewing Max R. Garcia in San Francisco.
Can you describe the Jewish practices of the other Jewish kids in your neighborhood?
Most of the parents – most of the men, because the women didn't work in those days, they were hausefrau at home – nearly all the men who lived – the families who lived in our neighborhood were all diamond polishers or diamond workers. Not far from us, maybe three or four blocks away, was one of the major diamond factories, as it was called, where diamonds were cut and polished. It was the Asher factory. Our neighborhood was about 60% or maybe a little bit more Jewish diamond workers and the rest were gentiles, basically in the trades of butchers, vegetable people, you know, non-professionals.
Could you describe the Jewish practices - how conservative were they?
Conservative? No. Everybody in that area in our neighborhood were either Social Democrats, SALAT or they were communists. The majority of them I would think, and this is pure guesswork on my part at my age now, were Social Democrats, which was the prevalent party in Amsterdam among the labors group. My father, for instance, was very active in his union, which was a diamond polishers union. He would go out in election campaigns and put posters up on buildings and tear down posters that the communists had put up. He got in some good fights and my mother would scream at him when he came home bloody. She would say, "What are you doing this for? What are you doing this for? You have a family. You have a family." And he said, "If I don't do it, who will do it?" Basically the neighborhood was solidly working class, blue collar. And I mean dark blue collar.
Specifically in your family, do you remember any holiday celebrations or rituals you did every week?
My father was very non-religious. On my mother's side they were religious to the degree that at Passover they would all collect the chomitz and have it burned up. We would all have matzos for Passover. Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur, I do not recall it a family happening. Hanukkah was practically unknown for us in Holland at that timeframe. We as kids got our gifts in December during St. Nicholas Day as did the gentile kids. Christmas for the gentile families was strictly an event to go to church, it was a celebration. And Hanukah, the way I know it here in the United States, was unheard of in my neck of the woods in Amsterdam. So, In terms of social get-togethers, they basically were birthdays.
Did you learn German as a child?
No. My German was learned in a concentration camp because it was a requirement. Well, it was not a requirement, you didn't have to learn it. When I came to Auschwitz, after the registration procedures and all that crap, I was sent on to Buna, which was a sub-camp of Auschwitz. There were big tents, straw on the floor, big tents. There were no buildings. I was in a detail that schlepped cinder blocks to the job site. IG Farben was building the Buna facilities, that's why the camp was called Buna. Buna was artificial rubber. I was in the detail that took cinder blocks up to the level in which they were needing them.
After a few weeks there one night I just burst out crying because now I realized what I was in for. And a person came up to me – probably a man a little bit older than myself, probably in his mid-twenties, I don't recall at this juncture still what language he spoke to me in, I don't know whether it was partially French, German, Polish, whatever – and he made it clear to me that if I wanted to survive all this, if I wanted to live, there were some things I had to do. These things were, number one, I had no parents, I had no sister, I didn't come from Amsterdam, I didn't come from Holland, I actually fell out of the sky into this place. He said. "If you could do that, you're one step closer." He said, "Also you will not talk about any of the foods that you remember eating as a child." He said, "And it is very important that you learn how to use the number on your arm, the tattooed number, that you can listen for it in German, hundert neununddreissig acht neunundzwanzig  and that you be able to say it in German to whoever is calling you, ich bin, hundert neununddreissig acht neunundzwanzig [I am 139829]." And he said, "And if you can, learn it also in Polish."
It is then at that juncture – when I began to learn the number both in German and in Polish – that I began to realize that I should learn German. By learning German you would reduce the chances of being beaten up because you could understand what they were trying to say to you, they could pass the orders to you and you were able to reply in German because you didn't look like a dummy. That's where I learned my German. That’s how I learned it.
"Could you show us your tattoo?"
Could you show us your tattoo?
You said in the last interview, you talked about how it made you feel seeing the tattoo now. Has it evolved?
The tattoo is basically a reminder that I was in Auschwitz. When I shower in the morning or at night, I see it and it doesn't mean anything to me anymore. I have friends who had it removed. She's a doctor's assistant who lives in England. When we saw her last, which was '99, I said, "Where's your number?" Because she had short sleeves on. She laughed and she said, "It's on the shelf." I said, "What do you mean it's on the shelf?" And then he showed me in a jar of alcohol, or some substance, there was a piece of skin with a number in it. I said, "Why did you have it removed?" She said, "Well, it was a quirk, one of those things that I suddenly wanted to do because when I was in the doctors office working as a nurse, I had short sleeves and they would always ask me about the numbers. So, finally I decided to take it down, put it on the shelf, and that was one less question they would always hit me with about the concentration camps."
Were there nationality or language barriers between the prisoners?
When my German became more fluent – when my vocabulary was beginning to expand – one day I had a conversation with a Polish Jew, I think he was Polish because he spoke only Yiddish. And in his 'halfback' German – because Yiddish is a dialect of German basically – he was explaining to me that they, the eastern European Jews, did not consider us, the Dutch Jews, as Jews. And I thought I misunderstood him and I asked him to repeat what he just said. And he said, "We don't think that you Dutch Jews are Jews." I said, "Oh, will you do be a favor?" And he says, "Sure, what can I do for you?" I said, "Lets go to the SS and tell them that so maybe I can go home." Because it was so stupid. I was there for the same reason he was there: I had four Jewish Grandparents. Just because I spoke a different language or I came from a different country, by him, I was looked down upon. And I thought that was kind of bizarre.
Cattle Cars to Auschwitz & to Mauthausen
Could you elaborate on the interactions of the people around you in the cattle car?
Even though I was 19 at the particular time in 1943, it was very difficult for me to understand sex. I had never experienced it, not even at that age, and all of a sudden, I saw some couples on the train. We were not packed standing up, we could sit down and lie down. The car that I was in was not compressed. And I saw these young couples copulate, not caring who was around them. And I could not understand it and it was something new to me. Frankly I didn't know what they were doing to begin with but then when I realized what they were doing it was hard for me to comprehend that people let all kinds of taboos go by and do because they felt at that particular point in time perhaps that life was ending for them and they wanted to do just that.
People went in the middle of the train – in the box car where we had the drum – and they would take off their pants or whatever and they did their thing. They peed in it, they pooped in it and nobody cared about who was seeing it or watching it. It was absurd that all of a sudden that all of these things that we had prided ourselves up to a certain degree – when you went to the toilet you closed the door, other people shouldn't see what you’re doing – all of a sudden these became common things. Nobody cared.
How soon did this happen during your time in the boxcar?
Probably two days in it started off. The first day was the moping day. "What the hell are we doing here," type thing. "Where are we going?" And then all of a sudden, we have no control over it. That’s when these things begin to act up.
In other interviews we heard that people used the dead bodies as benches. Did this happen in your cattle car?
Nobody died in the car that I was in that went to Auschwitz. But later on in my "career," when I went from the railroad siding outside Auschwitz in January '45, we went to Mauthausen in trains with no roofs on the boxcars. At that time they died like... I asked my friend the historian, later on, how many of us survived that train ride – which again was in January of 1945, in the midst of the winter in that area, which is very brutal down there – and he said, "Do you really want to know, Max?" And I said, "Yes, I do." He said, "This is not a comforting thought." He said "90% of you on that train died, only 10% made it to Auschwitz alive." That was in three days and three nights.
Was that when you were going from Auschwitz to Mauthausen?
From Auschwitz we death marched to the railway siding. That was three days and three nights. We slept along the road, but basically we were on the road for three days and three nights. We came to the railway siding and at that point in time I was designated to go – which I didn't know where we were going at the time – on that train and that train was going to go to Mauthausen, which is located in Austria on the Danube River.
We went into these trains – into these cars – and again, we were not really crowed in there. You could sit or lie down. I was very fortunate because in Auschwitz, in the latter – from August to December and that portion in January – I had been working in the Packetstelle. My body had been really built up again with flesh and fat. As well I had reasonably well made clothing. All my prison clothes were handmade, tailor made. I had underwear, which the other prisoners didn't have. I had a winter coat, which necessarily the other prisoners did not have, and I had a lot of food in my pockets. I had a better chance of surviving than other people in that car who didn't have any off these benefits and they died like flies around me. And on that trip, I saw nothing wrong by now, having been in the camps since August 1943, that, "Hey, this guy is dead and I have to defecate," I would sit right on top of him and do my thing. I mean, these were the absurdities. But by that time, they had become the normal thing to do.
Pneumonia & Surgery in Auschwitz
How did you get ahold of the underwear and the special clothing?
The reason I got better clothing is because of what had happened to me prior to me getting to the Packetstelle. And it practically leads us all the way back into October of 1943 when my number was called out and I was assigned to the tischlerei, the carpentry shop. When I registered – when I arrived in Auschwitz I had learned from myself studying in architecture that in order to be a good architect you need to know carpentery well or masonry work well. So when I had put on my registration card that I was a carpenter by profession, lo and behold in October I got called and I was put in the carpentry detail.
To move fast forward, in the meantime I got one pneumonia, then a second pneumonia, and after I was cleared from my pneumonia I went back into the camp and that very same day I start having incredible pains. On Friday – this was on a Thursday – on a Friday morning I went back to the clinic and reported of my pains and they gave me two aspirin and a piece of paper that I didn't have to go to work. I went back on Saturday morning, the same thing two aspirin and a piece of paper. On Sunday the clinic is closed. On Monday I went back and the doctor who had seen me before who was a fellow prisoner said, "You're still here," and I said "Am I not supposed to be?" He got on the phone and he called the SS medical facility and a doctor with whom he spoke said, "I told the doctor that he had a 20-yr old Jewish boy here who had an acute apendicitis that was ready to burst. What do I do with him?" And that SS guy said, "Get him ready for operation I'll be right over."
After I had all that behind me and a friend of mine had been promoted – who was also from Holland and a trumpet player – who had been promoted to become the conductor of the new orchestra in camp. A Kapo came to see him and said, "Lex, I would like you to teach me how to play the trumpet." Lex said, "Fine, but you have to do me a favor." And he said, "I have a friend of mine who is coming out of the hospital who needs help. I want you to take him on in your detail." And that turned out to be the Packetstelle. When I came there – that is where you could steal food – and then after I think I was in the Packetstelle for two weeks when I was moved from the regular block into the Prominenten. Prominenten means "special people." Prominent ones. Because of my thieving and my stealing of food I was now able to have custom-made tailor-made suits, a tailor-made overcoat. I was able to buy shirts and underwear and shoes and socks and handkerchiefs. All the things that we had been accustomed to in Holland but as a piss-poor prisoner you don't get any of this.
And that's how I had these clothes when I hit the train to go to Mauthausen. And I'm convinced that Lex was responsible for my survival.

Our eighteen pound tomcat has some kind of growth on top of his tail, right at the base. It's the same width as his tail and I'd say about a quarter of an inch tall. Its soft to the touch, almost squishy, actually, and it's not bugging him at all. He doesn't even seem to know its there. I'm just curious what it might be, since as far as I know none of our other cats have ever gotten something like this and its the first time I've seen something like it.
Edit: pretty sure I overestimated on the size. He won't stay still long enough for me to get a good look at it.

Giants punter Matt Dodge still has a job after disastrous game
Even though his punter did exactly what he was told not to do and punted to DeSean Jackson -- with disastrous results -- New York Giants Coach Tom Coughlin is sticking with the rookie.
"I told him to get his dauber up. We've got to move on," Coughlin, evidently an insect enthusiast, said. "That's over, you can't do anything about it. You've got to figure out how to do the things I ask you to do. He's no more to blame than me or anybody else."
It was a nightmare for Dodge, when Jackson fielded his punt (which should have gone to sideline) and returned it for the game-winning touchdown. Dodge's parents were in town to celebrate Christmas.
"It's good. I'm still here obviously," Dodge said when asked how he was doing. "I came in and my locker was still here. So that was good. I'm a confident guy, regardless. Football doesn't define me. I know it's my job and everything, and I didn't get it done. But I still walked out with my head high.
"I had family here, loving on me, and I actually had my pastor from back home here last night. So it was good. I had a lot of support."
He huddled with General Manager Jerry Reese and Coughlin, who did not indicate whether any punters might be brought in for tryouts.
"We didn't have much of a discussion about that," Coughlin said. "We had some things we talked about. We went down as we always do, Jerry and I, every game. That was one facet of it but no more than any other facet of it. As I said there were plenty of opportunities to win the game."
| December 20, 2010; 3:53 PM ET
Save & Share: Previous: Brett Favre upgraded to questionable in snowy, frozen TCF Bank Stadium

Richard John Parfitt, (12 October 1948 – 24 December 2016) was an English musician, best known as a singer, songwriter and rhythm guitarist with rock band Status Quo. Parfitt began his career in the early 1960s, playing in pubs and holiday camps. He joined Status Quo in 1967 when they were looking for an additional singer. He wrote songs for the band and remained with them for 49 years. He occasionally guested with other bands, and recorded an unreleased solo album in 1985. In 2016, Parfitt temporarily retired from touring with the band due to ill health, and died in December of that year. His only solo album, Over and Out, was released posthumously in 2018.

A woman sexually abused as a young child by a family friend has waived her legal right to anonymity in a bid to encourage other victims to come forward.
Jackie Evans, 30, was just three-years-old when she was first assaulted in her own home by sex offender Jason Hughes, who was around 18 at the time.
The 44-year-old from Caeathro, Gwynedd, who regularly visited her parents' house to fix their computer, went on to abuse Jackie again before he was finally convicted of his offences decades later.
On June 5, Hughes was sentenced to three and a half years in prison after he was convicted of indecent assault and indecency with a child. He was ordered to register with the police as a sex offender for life.
Now, following his sentence, the mother of two has told her story in a bid to encourage other victims of sexual abuse to speak out.
It comes just three months after Hughes' two daughters, Elliw, 19 and Awel, 17 waived their legal right to anonymity to claim they too were victims of their sex offender dad after reading of his conviction for abusing Jackie.
Jackie and Elliw - whose accounts concern periods 10 years apart - both independently recalled how at three years old he had terrified them into staying quiet by telling them a fairy lived on their shoulder.
Were they to tell anyone of what had happened, they would be in serious trouble.
Despite Hughes being arrested and charged with sex assaults against both daughters in 2001, the CPS has never gone ahead with their case, saying that the evidential test set out in the code for prosecutors had not been met.
Now, speaking publicly of her ordeal, Jackie said: "There's only parts I can remember, but I remember he used to visit regularly. Up until I was about 7, he would visit probably about once a week.
"He was a family friend - he used to come and fix our computer for my parents. My mum and dad quite liked him, so he started coming round more and more.
"I was about three-years-old at the time and we had this static caravan outside our house which was my playhouse if you like.
"He was coming round regularly so he would take me there to play. There were no queries about it because we knew him.
"And that's where the first incident happened."
Despite being able to vividly recall what happened on that day, Jackie felt unable to talk about the incident.
"He told me there was a fairy on my shoulder and I had to keep what had happened a secret," she added.
"He said I would get into a lot of trouble if anybody found out. He used to bring sweets and toys to bribe me.
"It didn't happen every time he came round, it only happened on a couple of occasions."
'I thought he was my friend. I was innocent and I didn't understand what had happened'
The second assault, which took place in her parents' living room, happened about four years later, when Jackie was seven-years-old.
"He was doing work on the computer - I was in the living room and my mum and dad were in the kitchen," she recalled.
"I remember clearly he was on a spinning computer chair. He swung round to me and exposed himself and asked me to do things with him.
"The first incident was a lot worse, but I feel more comfortable talking about this one.
"After that, he still used to come round all the time. As soon as I heard his car turning up, I would hide away in my room.
"I remember he would still try and talk to me as if nothing had happened, even when I was older."
Growing up, Jackie said she was "scared" of boys and would get regular flashbacks of what had happened.
Fearing she would not be believed if she spoke out, she bottled her emotions throughout her childhood and teenage years.
It was not until after she had children of her own that it all got too much and two years ago, she finally found the courage to go to the police.
"As I got older, it got harder because I reached a point where I realised it was wrong," she added.
"I was a teenager when I broke down about it for the first time. I remember pulling a friend of mine into a toilet and telling her all about it. She was the first person I ever opened up to.
"I tried to put it to the back of my mind after that.
"But it started to come back to me a lot about two years ago. It was causing a massive problem for me.
"It was going from thinking about it about once in a while to thinking about it once a day. It was completely taking over my life, I was breaking down in tears all the time."
'I used to question whether I had done anything wrong, I used to ask, 'why me'?'
Despite suffering vivid flashbacks regularly, Jackie who has been diagnosed with PTSD and depression as a result of the abuse is now receiving the help she needs at a sexual assault referral centre.
She added: "It was very hard to speak about it, I had tried to put a mental block on it for a long time, but I'm so glad I opened up.
"The biggest and scariest thing was that I thought nobody would believe me and I think that's why it took me so long to talk about it. It's a hard subject to discuss anyway, but bringing it up after so long was even harder.
"But it's never too late to talk about it, despite how long ago it happened.
"Going to court is a horrible experience, it was awful. But you have got to go through it to get justice.
"I hope by speaking out that more people come forward so he gets an even longer sentence. Three-and-a-half years is nowhere near long enough.
"I just want to move forward with my life now. I'm a completely different person now to what I was this time last year."

Walsall sign former West Brom midfielder Romaine Sawyers
Walsall have completed the signing of former West Brom midfielder Romaine Sawyers on a one-year deal, with a one-year option in the club's favour.
The 21-year-old St Kitts and Nevis international played four times in a loan spell at the Saddlers last term.
And after his release by the Baggies in June, he has signed a permanent deal.
"Having had him here on loan at the end of last season, he is obviously a player that we know a lot about," boss Dean Smith told Walsall's website.
"He didn't get the minutes on the pitch during that time because of the good run that we were on, but he is a player with a lot of potential.
"When he got released by Albion, we invited him back here and since then he has displayed an excellent attitude and work-rate and has done well in his outings so far."

Great room for the price. Staff was very friendly and helpful. The room was very clean and tidy. Free continental breakfast and WiFi. Location was great, and it was super quiet. The only "problem" was that the shower-head in our bathtub was leaking, and I notified the staff of this on the survey that was in our hotel room.

I wanted to give you an update on how great Behren is doing. I was able to turn him out for the first time on Saturday. He is such a sensible young horse. He quickly learned about the hotwire fencing and that the white strand of fence was his barrier. He is so calm that I can brush him and wrap his legs without ever putting the halter on him.
While he was out two horses rode by the property. I was a little worried with him being a stallion; however, he trotted to the end of the fence, galloped back to the top of the property and then stopped and watched them ride by. I was so amazed by him.
After he had been out for a while I decided to tack him up and go for a walk. My father helped me get on him and then we walked around the property for about ten minutes.
I wanted to thank you again for everything that you did. I have an amazing horse thanks to you.

The first movie I ever saw alone was "My Week With Marilyn" on Feb 27th. I thought it would be weird but I had a really good time. I kept myself company and I loved it. This post may be really random but it's to announce that this Sunday I will be auditioning for the next season of "The Voice" I wasn't going to say anything because I wanted to actually land at least one audition round because I didn't want to feel the disappointment of telling everyone if I don't get it. I applied last month and I'm still unsure of the song I'm going to sing. I don't know if anyone understands how badly I want this. This is something I've had people tell me I can't do. I would break down in tears the day they are proved wrong. I don't know how to do it any other way...This for me feels like it's it.

Bob was awesome! The rooms are comfy, it's not the Ritz, but more than adequate. Very accommodating hosts, clean, stove is a welcome touch for us. We had to leave a car parked there until later in the day, and it was no problem at all. I'll stay here again for sure!

Kneepads really went out on a limb in reporting that Demi Moore is embarrassed by what happened last week when 911 was called and she had to be rushed to the hospital. Really? You think she was embarrassed? It took you days of reporting to find a source who said that? I think all of us would have felt embarrassed to be talked about worldwide after something like that. I don't think we need a source to confirm it for us. I also am going to say that she was probably embarrassed when Ashton cheated on her and got caught and the whole world found out and I am not even going to find a source to confirm it for me. I know, I know, that is dangerous ground on my part. I can't believe Kneepads paid someone to actually go out and write this story. No wonder my cable bill keeps going up. Time Warner keeps hiring people to write stories like this and can't afford them so jacks up my cable.

Updated: Dec 17, 2019
Did you miss part one? Check it out on my earlier blog post!
As Bella picked up the gift and prepared to leave, the other girls looked at her. They didn’t stop her, and they didn’t cry out to warn their captors. Instead, they laid their hands on her and encouraged her as she left. They found a blanket and fashioned it into a cloak to hide her, and they hugged her and touched the gift as she passed.
Many of them had been given their own gifts in the past and had been forced to throw them away. They knew how much it hurt, and they didn’t want that for Bella.
Someone must have been watching over her, because the guards didn’t notice her leave and not one of the other girls raised an alarm. Bella whispered a prayer for them as she ran, she knew that when the men found her missing they would deal out pain to those she left behind.
As she fled, she realized her gift was slowing her down. It had become heavier as time had passed, and she tired easily as she carried it. She knew that there were places that she could go to discard it. But, when she thought about getting rid of it she remembered growing up in the sunshine with her cousins and her siblings. She couldn’t destroy her gift.
Bella came to a large stone church. She couldn’t go any further, and she collapsed on the steps. As she drifted off into an exhausted sleep she felt warm hands grasp her shoulders, raise her to her feet, and lead her inside.
When she woke she was resting on a narrow cot. At first, she panicked, but she saw the brightly wrapped gift safely tucked against her and she relaxed somewhat. She gazed at her protector with lidded eyes and saw an elderly woman stirring a pot over a fire. The room was small and shabby, but warm and very clean. Most of all, it felt safe. Safer than she had ever been. The old woman glanced over her shoulder at Bella and said, “You asked for protection and He sent me. You and your gift will be safe as long as you’re here. Go back to sleep.” Against her will, because she had been so very afraid for so very long, Bella complied.
After a few days of rest and warmth, Bella felt strong again. The gift had become even larger and heavier, and she knew that it wouldn’t stay quietly in its wrappings for much longer. Her protector knew that too, and she knew that the men were hunting for Bella. Bella wasn’t so terribly valuable, but they would never let a girl escape. If one succeeded then others would try, and they would lose money as well as their reputations.
Her protector clothed Bella in a simple dress and gave her a worn but serviceable cloak. She also tucked food, wrappings, and a very small outfit into a basket and handed it to her. As night fell Bella was laid in a wagon under a false bottom. The driver of the wagon looked at Bella in a new way. Not like her father did, as something to be sold, and not the like the other men did, as something to be purchased, but looked at her as though she was a real person. When he gazed at her he didn’t stare at her gift, and he didn’t stare at her body, he looked right into her eyes. As though she mattered. He smiled at Bella and he cautioned her to stay very still. Bella didn’t smile back, but she took his words to heart. As the wagon rumbled through the streets, Bella held tightly to her gift.
They were challenged at the gates, and she held her breath, but the same Someone who helped her flee the noisy room helped her that night, and the wagon rolled through.
As the wagon traveled through the wilderness Bella got to know her driver. She learned that even though they were alone, and Bella couldn’t run, he didn’t try to touch her. She learned that he watched out for her and was interested in what she had to say. She learned that he thought her gift was as valuable as she did, and he would do anything to protect both Bella and the gift.
After a few days of hiding in the wagon, Bella and the driver came to a small town. The town was not so small as Bella’s home and the people were different, but it felt good. It felt safe. The driver took her to a large inn and spoke quietly with the proprietor. By now, Bella’s gift was quite large and awkward, everyone could see it. She lowered her head in shame. It was not right for a young girl to carry such a gift all alone. She knew it wasn’t her fault. She knew the gift was worthy of protection, but the shame stayed with her.
The driver came back to Bella and told her she would be safe. The people in the inn would watch over her and she would work with them. Her heart skipped a beat as he turned to go, but he stopped and smiled at her over his shoulder. She knew, with a surety she had never had before, that he would be back.
She settled into her life at the inn. The people were kind and they watched over her. Finally, and not too long after she arrived, the day came to unwrap her gift.
Unwrapping it was harder than Bella could ever believe! The innkeeper’s wife and the local healer were with her, encouraging her and holding her hand. More importantly, the same Someone who had been there every time she needed Him was there again, protecting her and her gift and ensuring they survived the process. At the end of several hours of pain and fear, it was over. Finally, Bella could rest and marvel in what she had done. She had never seen anything so beautiful.
The driver of the wagon returned three days later. He came with his wagon full of wood, clothes, blankets, and food. Tied to the back of the wagon was a sturdy ox, a few goats, and a mangy dog. He came to Bella and asked her to be with him, and only him, forever. Bella agreed.
As she settled into the wagon and they rode off for her new home she looked down at the face of her gift, her baby, and she regretted nothing. Her baby had beautiful creamy skin, curly hair, and deep brown eyes. This child would never have her face smeared with mud or be told to look at the floor, Bella would make sure of it. The horror, the pain, and the abuse had brought her something beautiful. She couldn’t wait to see how it turned out.
As Bella, the driver, and the baby drove off into the sunset, she sighed contentedly. Bella and her prince, for no one could tell her he was anything else, lived happily ever after. Not just them, but her sweet baby born of pain and four more born of love. They didn’t have the kind of happily ever after where there is no sadness, no arguing, and no difficulty. They had the kind where you know that you have someone with you through everything no matter what. That’s the kind of happily ever after that really matters.
Generally I write about current events in the pro-life world, but this year I wanted to share some fiction writing. Stay tuned for the next story!

Sally Jean Alford
February 18, 2014
20 1/2 in.
She is here and she is incredible. I am in love all over again. It's funny, but I wondered all during this pregnancy if I would be able to love another child like I love Ava. As soon as my eyes met Sally's eyes, as she was being lifted up over the sterile curtain, I fell in love all over again. While my heart was growing in love for this new little blessing in my life, I couldn't help but think of my sweet girl at home who I love so much, too.
Sally came into this world mad and not too happy. She cried during the cutting of the cord, the weighing, the apgar assessment, and every other thing they were doing in the OR. When they finally brought her over to me, they put us cheek to cheek and she calmed down. It was an amazingly sweet moment that I will never forget.
My parents, my sister and her kids and Ava came to see her first. Ava was not too impressed with her. More than anything, she wanted whoever had her to let her down so she could get into things. My brother and his family came later on in the evening.
The first night, Curtis stayed with us. It was a long night of maybe 15 minutes apiece of sleep and not all at once. Sally was just very uncomfortable and kept gagging on spit up. It scared me. She also had several dirty diapers. I was beyond exhausted and was not much help to Curtis because of the medicine they had put me on.
The next day Curtis stuck with me because I was in pain and needed his help with Sally. I needed to be able to sleep well during the day because Curtis was going to go home that evening and take care of Ava. My parents brought her up to me later that evening so I could see her because I missed her so much. Then Curtis, Ava, and my parents left Sally and I to ourselves. It was a quiet evening with Sally. I really enjoyed that time with her. I held her as much as I wanted and just got to bond with her. I did send her to the nursery for a few hours in between feedings so I could get some sleep. That was nice, too, but I was itching to get my hands on my sweet Sally.
So far Sally has been doing well. She loves her Swaddle Me wrap. She loves to be cuddled and held. She seems to have her days and nights confused and sleeps mostly during the day and whines at night to be held. I can't help but succomb to the pressure! She is eating every 2-3 hours anywhere between 1 1/2 -2 ounces. We still haven't been able to figure out her eye color. She hasn't opened her eyes long enough or big enough to see. We are just so in love with this blessing from above. She is perfect in every way. I am truly grateful for her entering into our family.
Here are some pictures of her:

San Francisco: Boo, the world's cutest dog, has died of a "broken heart", his owners have confirmed.
His death was confirmed in a post on Saturday made by his American owners to his 16 million Facebook followers. He was 12 years old, in human years, CNN reported.
Boo, a pomeranian, and his companion Buddy, who died last year, became internet sensations when their owners started sharing pictures of their adorable antics.
"Shortly after Buddy died, Boo showed signs of heart issues. We think his heart literally broke when Buddy left us," his owners wrote.
"He hung on and gave us over a year. But it looks like it was his time, and I'm sure it was a most joyous moment for them when they saw each other in heaven.
"Our family is heartbroken, but we find comfort knowing that he is no longer in any pain or discomfort," they added, noting that Boo "brought joy to people all over the world".
In addition to his social media presence, Boo was appointed in 2012 as Virgin America's Official Pet Liaison.
He also had a book deal, appearing in photo books including "Boo: The Life of the World's Cutest Dog", published in 2011.

Country music singer Eric Church did something extraordinary for a fan who perished in the Las Vegas massacre, and his wife who survived him during his concert Wednesday at the Grand Ole Opry in Nashville, Tennessee.
What did he do?
Church stopped his show to talk to the audience, and told them he didn't really want to come out and do his concert that night, but he saw something on CNN that forced him to go.
"This past Friday, I played the Harvest music festival in Las Vegas, and I was the headliner, and uhm, I looked out there in that crowd, in that place, it was our last show of the year," he explained to his audience.
"I watched them hold American flags during 'How about You?'" he continued. "I watched them put an American scarf around my neck during 'Springsteen.' They held records up when I played 'Record Year.' They held boots up when I played 'These Boots.'"
"And I was so, moved by it, mainly because I looked at them and went, 'This is my crowd, I've seen this crowd all year.' They're mine," he said.
"And 48 hours later, the place where I stood was carnage," he said, his voice choked with emotion. "Those were my people, those were my fans."
"I didn't want to be here tonight," he confessed. "And I didn't want to play guitar, and I didn't want to walk on this stage. But last night, let me try to get this out, last night somebody sent me a video of a lady named Heather Melton. And she was talking to Anderson Cooper on CNN and she had on our 'Church choir' tour shirt."
"And he said, 'What brought you to Vegas?' and she goes, 'We went there to see Eric Church, because he was Sonny's,' her husband who died, 'it was his guy, and we went there to see his guy,'" he explained.
"And then she said, 'We have tickets for the Grand Ol' Opry tomorrow night,'" he added. "And over here, section three, row F, there's a, if you're there, if you're in row F, there are some empty seats, and that's their seats."
"And I'm gonna tell you something," he continued, "the reason I'm here. The reason I'm here tonight is because of Heather Melton, her husband Sonny, who died, and every person that was there. Cuz let me tell you something, I saw that crowd. I saw them with their hands in the air, I saw 'em, I saw 'em with boots in the air, and what I saw, that moment in time that was frozen. There's no amount of bullets that could take away."
"None!" he said, emotionally.
"And that night, something broke in me, on Sunday night when that happened," he added. "And the only way I've ever fixed anything that's been broken in me, is with music."
"So, I wrote a song," he said, and began strumming his guitar.
Here's the video of his touching tribute to Heather and Sonny Melton:
Heather told her story to several news outlets, explaining that her husband Sonny grabbed her hand and was leading them away from the gunfire when he was shot in the back.
WATCH: @savannahguthrie’s full interview with Heather Melton, whose husband died shielding her from bullets during the Las Vegas shooting pic.twitter.com/e3YeivgVOv
— TODAY (@TODAYshow) October 4, 2017

Deanne Stein, News9.com
OKLAHOMA CITY -- Homicide detectives seized two vehicles during the investigation into the death of missing Blanchard mother, Jaymie Adams. Police impounded the cars of Jaymie Adams' husband, Justin Adams, and his mother, Tina Clarke.
Sunday, Justin met with his attorney Irven Box. According to Box, Justin told him while police seized his van and his mother's car, they were told by police they are suspects in Jaymie Adams' death. However, detectives aren't confirming that.
"He was in tears most of the time when I talked to him," said Box. "He's trying to deal with what's going on."
Twenty-five-year-old Jaymie Adams' body was found by a biker near a dirt bike trail at Lake Stanley Draper on Saturday. Police have said the case is being treated as a homicide.
The young mother was last seen by her husband on December 9. Justin first told police his wife was going to meet a friend at a McDonald's in Midwest City. Her locked van was found in the restaurant's parking lot the next day and later seized by police. Box says it's unclear why it has been impounded again.
"Did they think maybe somebody took the body out in recent days and other things could be found in the van," said Box. "They had it three days, what did they not find in three days that they now can find?"
According to court papers, Jaymie Adams' husband later changed his story and told police instead of a friend, his wife went to meet someone she met on Craigslist for sex. However, police have not confirmed if that is what actually happened.
"One of the important factors is going to be the cell phones, calls, text messaging, his computer and her computer," said Box. "I know the police are looking into those things, if there were any other persons communicating with her."
The body of Jaymie Adams was sent to the State Medical Examiner's office to determine the cause of death.

I wake up this morning with a message from my husband that his plane landed late, he was almost denied entry into the UK, and he missed his train to take him 2 hours to a car that will be waiting for him, which will take him another 45 mins to where he will be staying. He was starting to get so annoyed that he was actually ready to head back to customs and just go home.
The best part of him messaging me this morning, he tells me to look under the bed. At first I thought he was being a brat, and trying to scare me. I listen to his text and I find a surprise from him. Something we do often is hide surprises for each other every time we travel, even if we are traveling together. Most of the time they are silly, cheesy things. Love notes, weird drawings. This surprise though was so far the best one he had left me.
While he was packing he was organizing his photos that he would be taking with, I noticed one that I didn’t think he had anymore. It’s a few years old, from a time he had long hair. It just happens to be my favorite picture of him with long hair. Which says a lot, I didn’t like the way he looked with long hair. I jokingly said to him, “I want this one autographed by you”. He gave me the strangest look, put it with the rest of his photos, and we both laughed. Well, I guess when I wasn’t looking he had pulled it back out of the bag of photos, signed it “To my beautiful (insert name here) I love you so much!” with his signature below that. The moment I saw the photo I gave a bit of a laugh before I nearly started to cry. I thought this was the most sweetest, thoughtful gift anyone has ever left me.
With how he is as a person, I really hope his trip goes better. It was off to a rough start the moment he landed in the UK. After he got to his destination, there was no food at the place they were putting him up. The group that flew him out had been on location for a week, so you’d think his stay would be better organized. However, that wasn’t the case. The promoter wasn’t there to greet him, at least they were out getting food for his ‘caravan’ ? (term I learned from a friend). Instead of him staying in a hotel, they have him in a cabin like thing. Anyways, the promoter was out getting him food for his stay, which I would think should have been done prior to him arriving, but whatever. He had no hot water in the place he was staying in.
The promoter finally arrives to meet him, and deliver his food. The food they gave him for the week is bagged salad, frozen pizza, and chips. That’s it!!! I was shocked to hear this. Again, I don’t think there is anything wrong with that, but he has to ‘cook’ himself the same thing over and over again for a week. No veggies, no fruits, no real protein. There is no meat on the pizza, we don’t eat meat, so he isn’t getting any real protein. I get they are trying their best, but I see this happen often. A lot of times when you tell non vegetarians you don’t eat meat, they think that is what you eat. They don’t consider you need to have some sort of protein, healthy protein especially. Most places we travel to, when they ask if we have dietary restrictions they at least provide us with places to go, or we can google it ourselves. Unfortunately this time, it isn’t that easy. He can’t just up and leave to travel anywhere to get food. They are really in the middle of no where 🙁 .
Well UK, I am very jealous that many of you will be experiencing my husband for the weekend, but I am glad that I get to share him with you. I know you will enjoy him as much as I do.
I apologize for this entry being more about my husband than myself. The only experience of anything I had today was talking to him. I have been sick and slept until 1pm, and took it easy at home after picking up my daughter from the school bus. Nothing exciting or even worth mentioning.

By Hannah Barry
A Perth man who had his car broken into last week has sent a very unusual message to the thief - "thank you!"
On Saturday, Tom Drury's uncle notified him the backdoor of his 1994 Mazda had not been locked properly when it had been parked on their Morley front lawn.
Upon investigating, Mr Drury found his car been broken into, and the thief had removed the stereo from the front dock.
While many people would be frustrated and upset by a missing sound system, Mr Drury said the news wasn't at all bad.
"The stereo was broken - it didn't pick up radio stations and didn't read any discs - it was just rubbish," he said.
"I had tried removing it not long before, but I gave up out of frustration.
"To get it out, I needed a special tool I didn't have, so when I saw that the stereo was removed, I couldn't help but laugh."
And that wasn't all. Mr Drury then noticed a $10 note and a number of gold coins had been left on the front drivers seat seat.
"When I went to inspect it myself, I discovered $22.10," he said.
"If I could say one thing to the thief, it would be 'thank you.'
"Thank you for paying me for a service I was going to pay someone else to do. And by the way, no refunds!"

Does he expect his heart to be pumping?
"My heart's still going right now," he said.
Vitters went to Wrigley after he was selected in the 2007 Draft.
"I'm not at all nervous," Vitters said. "I'm just excited to get there. It's going to be a big moment. I've been waiting for it for a long time. It's going to be a pretty surreal experience to be back there and playing for the team."
Both Vitters and Jackson were fortunate to begin their big league careers in California, which made it easier for their families to go to the games at Dodger Stadium and Petco Park. Jackson said his parents will be in Chicago for his first games at Wrigley Field.
"It's no secret they'll have to fight the nerves and work through that pressure, and pressure that is easy to add on ourselves," said rookie teammate Adrian Cardenas about what Jackson and Vitters can expect. "They're professionals. You saw Vitters make that play at third base [on Monday]. There were questions about his defense and there he goes, first day at third base, proving he could do it, and save a run at that in a close game.
"They'll obviously enjoy it but they're professionals, they've been playing this game for a long time," Cardenas said. "I think they'll be able to separate their emotions. When they come, I'm sure they can ask themselves, 'Hey, have I prepared for this moment?' and obviously, the answer is 'yes' for both of them."
Does Cardenas remember his first game at Wrigley? You bet.
"I wasn't as nervous as I thought I'd be," he said of his first at-bat, which came as a pinch-hitter on May 7. "I was more nervous my first start at second base, and it took way too long to get a ground ball -- six innings and then it was Chipper Jones who hit it, and I was 20 feet from first and I thought I would throw it into the stands, but I didn't.
"After that, you realize it's the same game," he said. "It's a cliche, but you're able to calm down and say, 'Hey, I can play at this level.' Even if it's just that first ground ball, after you've thrown it to first base, that's it. You can answer honestly that I've done it before. I think that kind of settles the nerves."

Letters had been written to Miss Pontifex’s brothers and sisters, one and all came post-haste to Roughborough. Before they arrived the poor lady was already delirious, and for the sake of her own peace at the last I am half glad she never recovered consciousness.
I had known these people all their lives, as none can know each other but those who have played together as children; I knew how they had all of them — perhaps Theobald least, but all of them more or less — made her life a burden to her until the death of her father had made her her own mistress, and I was displeased at their coming one after the other to Roughborough, and inquiring whether their sister had recovered consciousness sufficiently to be able to see them. It was known that she had sent for me on being taken ill, and that I remained at Roughborough, and I own I was angered by the mingled air of suspicion, defiance, and inquisitiveness, with which they regarded me. They would all, except Theobald, I believe, have cut me downright if they had not believed me to know something they wanted to know themselves, and might have some chance of learning from me — for it was plain I had been in some way concerned with the making of their sister’s will. None of them suspected what the ostensible nature of this would be, but I think they feared Miss Pontifex was about to leave money for public uses. John said to me in his blandest manner that he fancied he remembered to have heard his sister say that she thought of leaving money to found a college for the relief of dramatic authors in distress; to this I made no rejoinder, and I have no doubt his suspicions were deepened.
When the end came, I got Miss Pontifex’s solicitor to write and tell her brothers and sisters how she had left her money: they were not unnaturally furious, and went each to his her separate home without attending the funeral, and without paying any attention to myself. This was perhaps the kindest thing they could have done by me, for their behaviour made me so angry that I became almost reconciled to Alethea’s will out of pleasure at the anger it had aroused. But for this, I should have felt the will keenly, as having been placed by it in the position which of all others I had been most anxious to avoid, and as having saddled me with a very heavy responsibility. Still it was impossible for me to escape, and I could only let things take their course.
Miss Pontifex had expressed a wish to be buried at Paleham; in the course of the next few days I therefore took the body thither. I had not been to Paleham since the death of my father some six years earlier. I had often wished to go there, but had shrunk from doing so, though my sister had been two or three times. I could not bear to see the house which had been my home for so many years of my life in the hands of strangers; to ring ceremoniously at a bell which I had never yet pulled except as a boy in jest; to feel that I had nothing to do with a garden in which I had in childhood gathered so many a nosegay, and which had seemed my own for many years after I had reached man’s estate; to see the rooms bereft of every familiar feature, and made so unfamiliar in spite of their familiarity. Had there been any sufficient reason, I should have taken these things as a matter of course, and should no doubt have found them much worse in anticipation than in reality; but as there had been no special reason why I should go to Paleham I had hitherto avoided doing so. Now, however, my going was a necessity, and I confess I never felt more subdued than I did on arriving there with the dead playmate of my childhood.
I found the village more changed than I had expected. The railway had come there, and a brand new yellow brick station was on the site of old Mr. and Mrs. Pontifex’s cottage. Nothing but the carpenter’s shop was now standing. I saw many faces I knew, but even in six years they seemed to have grown wonderfully older. Some of the very old were dead, and the old were getting very old in their stead. I felt like the changeling in the fairy story who came back after a seven years’ sleep. Everyone seemed glad to see me, though I had never given them particular cause to be so, and everyone who remembered old Mr. and Mrs. Pontifex spoke warmly of them and were pleased at their granddaughter’s wishing to be laid near them. Entering the churchyard and standing in the twilight of a gusty, cloudy evening on the spot close beside old Mrs. Pontifex’s grave which I had chosen for Alethea’s, I thought of the many times that she, who would lie there henceforth, and I, who must surely lie one day in some such another place, though when and where I knew not, had romped over this very spot as childish lovers together.
Next morning I followed her to the grave, and in due course set up a plain upright slab to her memory as like as might be to those over the graves of her grandmother and grandfather. I gave the dates and places of her birth and death, but added nothing except that this stone was set up by one who had known and loved her. Knowing how fond she had been of music I had been half inclined at one time to inscribe a few bars of music, if I could find any which seemed suitable to her character, but I knew how much she would have disliked anything singular in connection with her tombstone, and did not do it.
Before, however, I had come to this conclusion, I had thought that Ernest might be able to help me to the right thing, and had written to him upon the subject. The following is the answer I received —
“DEAR GODPAPA, — I send you the best bit I can think of; it is the subject of the last of Handel’s six grand fugues and goes thus:
It would do better for a man, especially for an old man who was very sorry for things, than for a woman, but I cannot think of anything better; if you do not like it for Aunt Alethea I shall keep it for myself. — Your affectionate Godson, “ERNEST PONTIFEX.”
Was this the little lad who could get sweeties for twopence but not for twopence halfpenny? Dear, dear me, I thought to myself, how these babes and sucklings do give us the go-by surely. Choosing his own epitaph at fifteen as for a man who “had been very sorry for things,” and such a strain as that — why it might have done for Leonardo da Vinci himself. Then I set the boy down as a conceited young jackanapes, which no doubt he was — but so are a great many other young people of Ernest’s age.
Last updated Sunday, March 27, 2016 at 11:51

Markus Gardeweg Born in Hamburg, it didnt take long for Markus to develop a passion for music. By the age of twelve, his room was full of records and by the time he was 14, he was sharing his collection with a wider audience, organizing dis..
For Stefano Prada music was always an important hobby, but he became a member of the House- and DJ-Scene pretty late and quite accidentally. Quickly he had some important connections in this business. It was in 2003, on his birthday, when h..

Thursday, November 1, 2007
Shading Pt. 1
The stairs were actually fun! Even though it doesn't look quite right I had fun trying to figure out how the light would hit them. I still hate shading. With that being said, I decided to experiment with some charcoals, having never worked with them before. I wasn't too unhappy with the sphere- I'd like to work and experiment with charcoal some more.

Aproximatily two years ago my husband had a diabetic sezure at this location of Shop and Save. The staff saved his life. They called 911 right away and got my attention right away. The ambulance was there in seconds. They were friendly and moved quickly to help my husband who was a customer. If it wasn't for thier quick service and quick thinking my husband could have passed away due to his diabetic sezure.

SULLIVAN GARDENS - John Kelley is pleased to announce that no animals were harmed during the apprehension of the killer of his sheep.
"Last time, I said I was old school, and I am. I'm willing to give second chances. Now that this is behind us, we go on," said Kelley following the end of bloodshed on his Sullivan Gardens sheep farm that began last month.
Apparently the culprit that caused the livestock owner to lose 14 sheep valued at $3,000 over a two-week period was a roaming rottweiler that belonged to a neighbor a few hundred feet down the road from Kelley's property.
"Originally, when we went door to door asking neighbors if they had dogs that they let loose at night, we were unable to speak with these folks because they worked at virtually all hours of the day," said Kelley.
"I will say that they have been very remorseful about what happened, and they have told me that they are going to take full responsibility for what happened. They just simply did not know what their pet was doing when they let it loose to run."
Kelley and some family members took a risky but more visible move by penning up the remaining herd in one of his fields instead of keeping the sheep in the barn.
The family then began a series of around-the-clock vigils to see if they could catch the dog or dogs in the act. That happened May 4 while Kelley was at dinner.
"My daughter-in-law calls me on my cell phone, yelling, ‘We got him, we got him, come quick,''' said Kelley.
"The pen was located at a point where we could close a gate behind (the dog), and we were able to trap him. We kept him in an enclosed area until animal control arrived. The dog had identification on his collar, and the owner was notified.
"After speaking with (the owners), I truly believe they did not have an inkling as to what their dog was doing. But these are responsible people, and I feel like they are going to do what's right. I don't plan on pressing any charges."

The murder trial of Richard Gagnon began Tuesday morning in Court Room B at the Polk County Judicial Center.
Gagnon is accused of shooting and killing Brent Ryter in November of 2013. The arrest affidavit claimed Gagnon shot Ryter in the chest with a 12-gauge shotgun.
In the affidavit, Gagnon claimed that he shot Ryter to protect himself and his mother. He said when Ryter started walking toward him, he closed his eyes and pulled the trigger.
However, the Polk County Sheriff's deputy that obtained the arrest warrant said that Gagnon did not see Ryter hit his mother; he only heard it from the bedroom. The affidavit stated that the woman didn't have any visible injuries other than a small abrasion under her right eye.
In addition, the affidavit stated Ryter lived at the residence, and there was no previous history of Ryter assaulting Gagnon's mother. Conversely, there is a history of Gagnon assaulting his mother, according to the affidavit.
In his opening statement, prosecuting attorney Joe Martin told the jury that Brent Ryter moved in with Gagnon's mother after his father died.
Martin said at some point, Deborah Gagnon told Ryter that she did not want him doing drugs with Richard Gagnon at her house. The prosecutor told the jurors that an argument resulted, and Richard Gagnon claimed that he saw Ryter hit his mother, and that's when he shot him.
Martin continued and said that Gagnon's story changed each time he talked to a different detective.
"When Detective Ricky Childress got on scene, Gagnon said he went in the room to tell Ryter to stop and my mom said, 'shoot', so I shot," Martin said.
Martin continued and said in a third statement, Gagnon said there was an argument, and it was an accident. Martin said in the fourth statement Gagnon once again changed his statement.
Martin told the jury that they will see evidence that shows Gagnon shot Ryter at close range through the upper chest.
Martin said it is important to make sure the story lines up with the physical evidence.
"I don't think the statements made by Richard Gagnon are true," Martin concluded.
Defense attorney Tom Brown said that just because Richard Gagnon had done some bad stuff in the past, doesn't mean he committed a crime in this particular instance.
Brown claimed the shooting was self-defense.
"He knew Ryter was a bad guy," Brown said. "He knew Ryter was dangerous on drugs, and that day he was on drugs. Add all that together and you have a bad situation. It was in defense of his mother."
The first witness to take the stand is Polk County Detective Richard Delaney.
Delaney said he first met Richard Gagnon when he was brought in for a burglary charge in the Crystal Lakes area in August of 2013.
"He asked me if I could help him," Delaney said. "I said I could if he could help us on some cases."
Delaney said he knew Richard Gagnon did not like Ryter when he moved in.
"He was concerned," Delaney said. "When this guy was around, all his mom did was drink and get drunk. He didn't like that. He thought he might be on parole and was not checking in with his officer."
Delaney said it took time for Richard Gagnon to get a full ID on him. Delaney said he could not get him until he knew for sure that he had a warrant.
"He was finally able to get me a paystub, and I ran stuff and was able to confirm it was him," Delaney said. "I told him that we would get him."
Delaney said he told Richard Gagnon that when Ryter came home for lunch, for him and his mom to make an excuse to leave the house, so they would not be there when the detectives showed up.
"Gagnon texted me that his mom and Ryter and they were arguing," Delaney said. "At that time, we had a call for a felony theft, so I had to go there. While on scene, I got a call from Gagnon, but I could not understand him. A few minutes later we got a radio call about a shooting in the Indian Springs area, and that's when I put two and two together."?
Delaney said Richard Gagnon told him that his mom was scared because Ryter claimed to have ties to the Aryan Brotherhood and that she was scared he would get someone to hurt them for turning him in.
Brown asked Delaney if it was true he told Richard Gagnon that Ryter would be in jail by the next day, and he would be gone for good. Delaney said that was correct. Delaney agreed that the plan did evolve over time for how they were going to get him. Delaney then recalled the phone call and told Brown that he was not sure what the Richard Gagnon call was about because the call was distorted.
Deborah Gagnon told Martin that her son began using drugs mainly after his father died from cancer.
Deborah Gagnon recalled meeting Ryter in early August of 2013. Deborah said they took a trip to Houston and met some friends.
"It seemed suspicious," Deborah Gagnon said. "When we got back to Livingston, I found out we went to Houston to a bar for a drug buy."
Deborah Gagnon then recalled that she was strongly against drugs and felt ashamed that she had done drugs with Ryter one time. Deborah Gagnon also said that after Ryter was kicked out of where he was staying, she allowed him to come stay with her.
"It was myself, him, my brother, and my son living there," Deborah Gagnon said.
Deborah Gagnon said that she believed Richard Gagnon just wanted her to be happy and that she did not know if there was any reason for her son to not like Ryter.
Deborah Gagnon said that in the beginning she was happy. She also said that Richard Gagnon and Ryter were good with each other.
"The things we did together as a group was go swimming," Deborah Gagnon said. "But things with them were drug use. BJ [Ryter] started seeking a relationship with Richard because he knew he would be able to get him drugs."
Deborah Gagnon told Martin that Richard Gagnon was interested in meth and synthetic marijuana.
Deborah Gagnon said the relationship between her son and Ryter turned sour once Ryter started doing drugs on a regular basis.
Martin then asked Deborah Gagnon about the purchase of a shotgun.
"I bought it sometime in October," Deborah Gagnon said.
Deborah Gagnon said it was a 12-gauge but could not remember if it was a pump.
"BJ talked me into buying that gun," Deborah Gagnon said. "He said our home was at risk of the Aryan brotherhood, and we could be shot up at any time."
Deborah Gagnon said she bought the gun in her name and with her money.
"Richard was not supposed to have that gun because he was on deferred adjudication," Deborah Gagnon said.
Deborah Gagnon continued and said that she never saw Richard Gagnon with the gun in an argument.
Martin then asked Deborah Gagnon to go through Nov .6 in her head.
"I went to work that day," Deborah Gagnon said. "I left early because I was sick. Richard called me and told me [Ryter] had a blue warrant and was considered armed and dangerous. He asked me to not come home."
Deborah Gagnon said she got home around 3 p.m. that day. Deborah Gagnon said when she got home, Ryter was in the driveway with his employer.
"When I got out of the car he tried to argue with me," Deborah Gagnon said. "I said I was sick and needed to lay down. I went inside, and he followed me. He started to argue with me in the bedroom, and he threw an ash tray at me. He eventually settled down, and I took a shower.?
Deborah Gagnon continued and said after that, her other son came over to get a table. After he left, the argument continued.
"He came outside and started yelling at me and said he was angry the relationship was over," Deborah Gagnon said. "He kept getting more angry and picked up a radio to hit me, but he didn't. After he put it down, I took it and went inside with it to put it up. He came inside and got in my face, like nose to nose. He gets really close to my face and started talking ugly. He started talking about my dead husband and how would I feel having my brother executed in my bed. I told him that he has to go. No more talking or arguing was going to change that and that he had to go immediately."
Deborah Gagnon said he got angry and started kicking boxes of stuff across the room.
"I stood up and said he isn't going to intimidate me," Deborah Gagnon said. "I told him that I was going to call the cops. Then I thought twice and said, 'I'm just going to leave.' He then grabbed my hand and started hitting me with his other hand. Everything happened really fast. I don't know what he had in his hand."
During her testimony, Deborah Gagnon said she couldn't remember whether Ryter was hitting her with his hand or his fist.
"Next I could hear my son say, 'stop hitting my mom.'” Deborah Gagnon said. “He yelled it loudly."
Deborah Gagnon told Martin she probably left that out of her statement to Detective Ricky Childress because she was shocked and traumatized.
Deborah said that Ryter turned his attention to her son.
"He go off of me and ran to Richard," Deborah said.
Deborah Gagnon said her son then grabbed the gun that was lying next to the door and pulled the trigger.
"Richard fired the gun as he was pulling it up," Deborah said. "BJ stumbled back against the wall."
Deborah Gagnon said that she left the room to call 911. She said that while she was on the phone with dispatchers, her son was panicking and pacing back and forth. Deborah said she did not remember Richard Gagnon calling detective Delaney, but it was possible and likely that he did.
Deborah said after the 911 call, she went back in the room and tried to help Ryter. She said that she took the gun and put it in the closet.
"When they got there, I told them what I did," Deborah said. "I told them the gun was in the closet. They put Richard on the ground and in cuffs and put all of us in different locations."
Deborah Gagnon then pointed out her son in the courtroom as the person who fired the gun and shot Ryter.
Deborah Gagnon told Brown that the gun was a handle-grip shotgun that she got from Walmart.
During her testimony, Deborah Gagnon also said that at the time, she had been diagnosed with cancer, but she said the truth was that she had hepatitis C. Deborah said it was accurate that at the time of the argument, Gagnon would have thought she had liver cancer.
Deborah Gagnon said she told her son at an earlier date that Ryter was a dangerous person.
"I told him of an incident when BJ was at a job in San Antonio and cut a man so bad with a box cutter that he needed 150 stitches," Deborah Gagnon said.
Deborah Gagnon then told Brown that she had considered selling the gun after she bought it because she knew her sons were not supposed to be around them.
Deborah Gagnon touched on drugs next during Tuesday's testimony.
"When BJ used drugs, he became paranoid," Deborah said. "He became irate and hard to control."
Deborah Gagnon told Brown that if her son hadn't come into the room, she could have been seriously hurt or even killed. She said the same was true about Richard and having to use the gun.
Martin would next question Detective David Mitchell was the next witness to take the stand.
At the time of the incident, Mitchell was in the patrol division.
Mitchell said the call about the shooting came in to him at 4:17 pm. Mitchell said he left for the scene a minute later and was about six miles north of Livingston.
In the video, when Mitchell first got on scene, you can hear Deborah and Richard Gagnon crying. Detectives immediately took Richard Gagnon into custody and separated everyone else, so they could all be questioned.
Richard Gagnon first told detectives on scene that he came into the room and did not see his mom moving and that's when he grabbed the gun. Later on, he told Detective Lima that he fired one shot from the 12-gauge and did not aim.
After several minutes, detectives came back on video and asked him more questions. Richard Gagnon said he kicked the door in, he could see him on top of his mother.
"I grabbed the gun, and she said, 'shoot'" Richard Gagnon said.
While waiting in the sheriff vehicle, Richard Gagnon at times would cry and say, "I want my mamma. She's all I have."
On the video, Richard Gagnon tried to talk to officers. He even offered them the Koolaid that was in his house.
Richard Gagnon could also be heard saying, "I wish he would have never hit my momma, I wish he would have stopped."
After a little time passed, Richard Gagnon told Polk County Sheriff's Office Captain Rickie Childress, "I did it for her."
Kay Clifton with Americare EMS then took the stand, telling Martin she received a call around 4:13 pm about a shooting.
"We were in route within 30 seconds," Clifton said. "In 16 minutes, we were on scene."
Clifton said that Ryter was dead when they arrived on scene. Clifton said that they did put monitors on him to make sure.
Childress, who heads up the detectives with the Polk County Sheriff's Office then went through 95 pictures with Martin. The pictures are of the crime scene and show different angles of the bedroom with Ryter's body was still in the room.
Childress also showed Martin a diagram of the wound and pointed out how Richard Gagnon must have shot Ryter from a very close distance because of the small shape of the hole and the lack of pellets.
Childress told Martin that they interviewed Richard Gagnon two times that were not with the statements at the scene. Childress said all of Richard Gagnon's statements differed on what actually happened.
Martin then show a recorded statement that Richard Gagnon made to Childress at the sheriff's office on the night of the incident.
Richard Gagnon told Childress that he understands right from wrong. Gagnon also told Childress that he saw busies on his mom and that Ryter gets violent but he never saw his mom getting hit.
Richard Gagnon told Childress that he called Delaney and said, "Please get this guy he is mad."
"That was about an hour before all this went down," Gagnon said. "They were arguing from the driveway, all the way into the house."
Richard Gagnon said he and his cousin were in another room, listening to country music when he heard his mom say, "You [expletive] hit me."
Richard Gagnon said he went in the room and said, "You need to stop." He said that Ryter said "What you gonna do about it?" and then said, "That was it."
"I was just going to scare him," Richard Gagnon said. "It didn't though. He started coming to me. I pulled the trigger because he had hurt my momma, and I thought he was going to hurt me."
Richard Gagnon said he first asked the two to stop fighting before he grabbed the gun. He told the jury that he closed his eyes when he pulled the trigger.
"I opened my eyes and saw him fall over," Gagnon said. "I put the gun on the bed and ran into the living room, and I was scared. I was scared for me and my mom."
Childress asked if the shot was intentional because the gun was already loaded. All Richard Gagnon said at first was that he did it for his mom.
Childress asked if it was intentional because he was assaulted the Saturday before and had animosity towards him.
Richard Gagnon continued to defend his statement that he was scared after Ryter approached him after beating on his mom.?

Kat was in bed early because she was so exhausted, probably due to the pregnancy. She could still hear her parents and Blake talking and laughing when she laid down and she smiled to herself. The weekend had been so perfect! There were times when Blake and her parents didn’t seem to get along well, so she was grateful that all had gone smoothly on this visit. Maybe the baby would bring them closer together as a family. Kat drifted off to sleep on a cloud of happy family thoughts.
Suddenly, she jerked awake, her heart beating rapidly. She automatically looked over at the other side of the bed and there was Blake, sleeping soundly. The clock read 2:12 am, so she’d been asleep for hours. All was quiet in the house but Kat knew something had woken her out of a sound sleep, so she listened harder. Then a scream, her mother’s scream, tore through the night and Kat started shaking Blake.
“Blake! Blake! Wake up! Something is wrong!” She was practically screaming in his face yet he was slow to stir. Was he drugged? Usually the slightest noise woke him. As he finally opened his eyes, the door to their room burst open and three masked and armed people ran in.
Kat screamed as one of the people grabbed her and roughly pulled her from the bed. She tried to struggle but this man (as strong and hard as he was, it had to be a man) held her tightly. If she survived this night, she would have bruises. She looked over at Blake and saw that he too was struggling with his captors but seemed to be losing the fight.
The intruders pulled both Kat and Blake into the hallway where she could more clearly hear the frightening noises coming from her parent’s room. She could make out furniture falling, people yelling, mysterious thumps, the occasional yelled curse and, disturbingly, gunfire. Kat was terrified. She looked at Blake being dragged ahead of her and her heart sank. Until that moment, she hadn’t realized just how much she counted on him being able to get out of any situation.
“Blake!” she screamed in desperation as the noise from her parent’s room abruptly stopped after a volley of gunfire.
“Kat!” he yelled back, trying to turn his head towards her. “Don’t worry!”
Don’t worry? Was he insane? Yet, right after he’d said that, the man dragging her down the hall turned sharply and shoved her into the guest bathroom. She fell back and hit the ground just as he slammed the door and turned the lock. Kat jumped to her feet and jerked the door as hard as she could. Nothing. She listened for a moment and realized that the intruders must have taken Blake into her parent’s study. She was being left alone.
Despite her usual analytic bent, Kat didn’t stop to wonder why, out of the entire family, she was the only one not being harmed. Instead, she quickly lifted the window, climbed out of it and landed in the flower bed. Seeing no one (not even cars, she realized later), she raced around to the back of the house to one of several hidden doors her parents had built into the house. Moving as stealthily as she could, Kat inched her way to her parents’ room which was now as silent as death. She carefully opened the door.
The sight that met her made her fall to her knees. Her parents were lying on the floor, her father’s body face up in front of their closet (there were weapons and an escape hatch in there) and her mother’s body face down closer to the window. It looked to Kat like Jatan had been shot first and Anna had tried to crawl to him and was shot in the head while doing so. She slowly crept toward their bodies, tears running down her face. She confirmed that they both were dead and then looked around the room.
Anna and Jatan had put up a good fight. Furniture was knocked over, there was blood on the walls and there were even two other bodies in the room. Kat had no desire to find out if they were dead but her SHIELD training kicked in and she knew she had to at least discover if they were a continued threat to her. The intruders were dead and she was shocked to realize that she was glad. No one should kill her parents and not pay for it! Kat took their weapons and put them in her parents’ wall safe. Later, she berated herself for not tearing off their masks to see what the intruders looked like or putting their weapons in a safer place (she should have realized that her parents’ codes were compromised) but stress doesn’t always allow for clear thinking.
She inched out of her parents’ room and did some deep breathing exercises to calm herself. As far as she knew, Blake was still alive and needed her help. She ran back into her room to grab her personal weapons (a gun and a knife in an ankle sheath) and made her way quietly to the study. She could hear the sound of men’s voices and of things being broken. Clearly the intruders knew that her parents had several safes in there and were trying to find them. Kat had never been told what the safes contained but it was a good bet that there were SHIELD secrets in them. Clearly, these intruders were well-informed.
She quickly glanced around the corner into the study and counted five intruders, two of whom were holding a still struggling Blake. One had found a safe and was looking through it. The other two were still searching for the other safes. Blake looked up, met Kat’s eyes, and then really started fighting. “No!” he howled. The three searching intruders stopped what they were doing, looked around and saw Kat. Although Kat had never been in combat (she was PsyOps for heaven’s sake!) and she certainly had never fired her gun at a person, she knew it was now or never and she fired. Two of her shots hid the intruders and Kat felt a moment’s satisfaction. Apparently she was a good shot! Her satisfaction was short-lived however when she felt two rounds hit her stomach.
Kat fell to the ground and heard Blake yelling. One of the intruders came over to check on her and she found the strength to grab her knife and slice him across the leg. The man grunted with pain. Kat felt herself losing consciousness but, in the distance, she heard the faint sound of sirens. She smiled weakly as she thought, “The cavalry is coming!” But she stopped smiling when she heard Blake’s yells stop and saw his body crumple to the ground. Then she blacked out.

sexta-feira, 21 de outubro de 2016
Abramovich and I were not friends- Mourinho
Former Chelsea boss Jose Mourinho says he will shake the hand of Roman Abramovich if he sees him on Sunday but admits they were not friends.
Jose Mourinho has the utmost respect for Chelsea owner Roman Abramovich but insists they were not friends during his two stints as manager at Stamford Bridge.
Mourinho takes his Manchester United side to London on Sunday, his first return to Stamford Bridge after being sacked by Abramovich in December 2015, just seven months after leading the club to the Premier League title.
It was the second time he had left Chelsea after a three-year spell came to an abrupt end in 2007 with reports suggesting it was the result of a falling out with the club's billionaire owner.
The Portuguese was eager to stress he held Abramovich in high regard but refused the offer to call him a friend.
He told Sky Sports: "No, but we always had that kind of relationship. He was the owner and I respected him like that. I was the coach and I was respected like that.
"We were never close friends.
"If I went to his house it was for a professional meeting. We never shared anything personal. We were not friends, maybe because I was respectful for the position of the owner. Maybe because I showed him respect I didn't have problems but we were not close."
Asked what he would do if he bumped into the Russian at Stamford Bridge, he added: "I will shake his hand, I will ask if his kids are fine.
"I know some of them and I like them, they are very polite, respectful and humble. If I have that chance it will be normal."

An artisan, Samarola Musa, has allegedly beaten his apprentice, Ademola Adeshina, to death for his refusal to stop dating a lady in the Lugbe area of Abuja.
Musa, who is facing a homicide charge at a Federal Capital Territory High Court, Gwagwalada, Abuja, is believed to have had a homosexual relationship with the 24-year-old man.
It was learnt that an autopsy indicated that Ademola died as a result of the beating he received from Musa.
The report also showed that the furniture maker had sodomised his apprentice before his death in May 2017.
Musa, 42, in his statement to the police, said he slapped the deceased after he caught him having sex with the lady, identified simply as Precious, in his workshop, claiming that Ademola died of malaria a week after the incident.
But Ademola’s father, Okuneye, faulted Musa’s claims, stressing that the son died from the beatings he received from the former bouncer, who he described as a huge man.
He told PUNCH Metro that Musa had once informed him that Ademola was dating a lady he did not approve of, adding that he warned the deceased to stop going out with the lady.
The bereaved father said his son called him on May 3, two days before his death that he had malaria, adding that he visited him at the workshop and found him working.
“About 48 hours after, I got a text message from Musa asking me to call him back urgently. I did and he simply told me that my son had passed away; I was shocked. He said he was at Asokoro General Hospital and when I got there, I found my son lying in the back seat of his Honda Accord car with his face against the glass window,” he said.
Okuneye said the accused informed him that his son died of malaria and suggested that the body should be buried, but he insisted on depositing it in a morgue.
The engineer explained that after returning home, he received a call from Precious, who narrated to him how Musa beat his son to death.
He said, “The girl said she witnessed the assault and when she confronted Musa, he injured her in the leg. I asked if she was ready to make a statement at the police station about it and she agreed.
“Musa was arrested and he admitted to beating my boy because he was dating the girl. We did a post-mortem on the body and it showed that Ademola suffered serious internal injury from the beating.
“The autopsy also showed that the boy was sodomised; it was after this that we got to know that Musa is a well known homosexual in Lugbe and its environs; he had been sleeping with my son and he killed him because he was dating a woman.”
Our correspondent gathered that the family had made plans to bury the deceased last Saturday, but the police declined to grant them the permission to carry out the funeral.
The accused was remanded in Kuje prisons by the court on Monday, while the case was adjourned till November 20,2017.
– Copyright PUNCH

Nacha Dimanche had lost his father at age 12, and now, as he was older and preparing to serve a mission for The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, he had lost his mother. He felt torn and alone. He wondered if he could serve with all his heart in the Atlanta, Georgia mission.
Nacha was the first person the Church had called from Haiti to serve a mission in the United States. It was a tremendous honor—but he was bearing the overwhelming weight of grief. He questioned whether he could serve and keep his promise to his mother.
To help him decide, Nacha looked to the past, to another experience that had changed his life. “I was in soccer practice on January 12, 2010 when suddenly the ground started to shake under my feet,” he said. A devastating, 7.3-magnitude earthquake had struck Haiti, and it was the biggest earthquake the region had seen in 200 years. It killed 220,000 people, left 300,000 injured, and left 1.5 million homeless.
“I was two hours by foot from home,” said Nacha. “Darkness and destruction was all around me, and it was like a war had just happened. Everyone was screaming in terror, and people were under buildings and begging for help. It was a nightmare!”
Nacha couldn’t reach his home because of the destruction. People were so terrified they could not speak. He spent all night searching for his family, and to his great relief, he finally found them at the church building the next day.
“When the earthquake happened,” said Nacha, “my mom, looking for safety, immediately took two of my sisters and my cousin to the church. My aunt thought it was the end of the world and she also went to the church. She knew she would be safe there.”
Seeing his family’s unwavering faith gave Nacha the strength to move ahead in his life. He not only went on his mission, but he came back to the United States to pursue an education at LDS Business College. With the help of the LeGrand Richards Service Scholarship for returned missionaries, Nacha is working toward a degree in business management.
“Here,” he says, “you do not just learn to start a business, you learn to build relationships. I finally understand the blessing of looking at the leaders in my life—past and present—and learning from their skills, qualities, and life lessons. I can then apply that to my life.” Armed with a bright outlook and new understanding, Nacha is moving forward with faith, eager to discover what lies ahead for him.

New Brunswick$20/hr | 1 yrs experience
My name is Elaina, I'm from Jacksonville FL and I've been babysitting since I was 11. I recently studied abroad in Israel, and while studying there I worked as a Nanny for families on vacation. I've watched kids from as young as 2 months old to as old at 12. I'm also certified in CPR and First Aid, I've worked in a gym as a trainer and Fitness Assitant, as well as served and cooked in restaurants. I enjoy cleaning and cooking and serving as a helping hand. Currently, I'm studying at Rutgers University as a dance major, and I am looking for a good job that could be flexible with my schedule. Kids have always been around me, that being since I was the oldest in the family, and I thoroughly enjoy watching the development and creativity of young children. If you have any questions or just want to talk to get to know me first I would be more than happy to.

- 404,919 Views
- 458 Favorites
- 960 Likes
- 54,600 Words
Even though the shades were drawn, the sun still managed to shine in through a gap in between them and the window, lighting up the bedroom just enough to fill it with a subtle early-morning glow. The room was fairly large, but still felt cozy due to the amount of furniture that filled it. There were two beds, one on each side of the room, and two desks on opposite walls, as well as one large closet that was basically overflowing with clothes, which were also strewn about the floor.
The house belonged to Mrs. Laney and this bedroom was shared by her two kids, Lance and Jolene. Lance was 20, almost 21, and was an athletic young man with short black hair and somewhat chiseled features. Jolene, who usually goes by Jo-Beth, was 19, and had a soft, pretty face, long brown hair, and a somewhat curvy figure due to her large breasts. Lance slept on the left side of the room while Jo-Beth slept in the bed on the right, closest to the bedroom door, which was open and led out into the upstairs hall. It was a school day, so both Laneys had to get up early, but they both still had some time to sleep before their alarm went off.

This is my first time being part of this meme but I thought since I am always posting funny stuff on Facebook for friends to see, this would be a great thing. I love to laugh and think there is enough sadness out there that we should all share in laughter.
This video isn't so much a prank as they should have known better than eat the food. I love to watch Duck Dynasty. I never watched it because everyone talked about how they were a bunch of rednecks and even though I am from WV I don't like stupidity and figured that was what the show was about. Actually they are really great people. Everyone would be lucky to have a love like Phil and Mrs Kay, the boys are respectful to their parents, they are Christians and love their families.

From last night's Tonight Show:
A minister, a priest and a rabbi go into a bar. After a couple of drinks they get somewhat philosophical. The bartender asks them, "What would you want people to say at your funeral?"
The minister says, "I would hope that they would say that I was a good family man and that I always found the time for my congregants."
The priest says, "I would hope that they would say that I was kind, charitable and always thoughtful."
The rabbi says, "I would want them to say, 'Look! He's moving!'"

Son of Venigāma. He was very rich; but once, during a drought, there being no food, he made ready to go to the mountains with his retinue. Just before starting they found a measure of rice, and, having cooked it, were about to eat it, when Amba saw Cūlapindapātika-Nāga Thera returning from the village with empty bowl. He invited the monk and gave him the food.
The Thera retired into the forest and attained arahantship before eating it. Tired and hungry, Amba slept, and, on waking, asked his wife if any scrapings were left. She went into the kitchen and found the pot full of food, which they shared with the whole village. Ras.ii.145f.

Drake’s father claims the rapper has lied about him being an absentee father to sell records, to which his musician son responded, "The truth is hard."
The father, Dennis Graham, made the claim during a recent appearance on Nick Cannon’s "Close Conversations" show on Los Angeles’ Power 106 radio station.
During the interview, Cannon told Graham that his father was not always present while he was growing up.
"I have a very similar situation to where my mother was a single mother and had to do a lot on her own," Cannon said. "There was a large amount of time where my father wasn’t around."
Cannon said that he and his father are "super cool" now, and asked Graham if he could relate. "We hear it in his lyrics sometimes," the host said, referring to Drake.
Graham told Cannon that he had a "deep conversation" with Drake about this.
"I have always been with Drake," Graham said. "I talk to him, if not every day, every other day. And we really got into a deep conversation about that. I said, 'Drake, why are you saying all this stuff about me, man? Like, this is not cool.'"
Graham claims the rapper told him: "Dad, it sells records," and that he responded, "OK, cool. Talk about me."
Graham and Cannon then laugh, and Cannon said he wishes his father was as understanding.
Drake, 32, has previously said in interviews and in his songs, that he grew up in his native Toronto without his father at times.
Drake, whose real name is Aubrey Graham, responded to his father's remarks in an Instagram story Tuesday, and said he stands by the authenticity of his lyrics.
"Woke up today so hurt man," he wrote. "My father will say anything to anyone that's willing to listen to him. It's sad when family gets like this but what can we really do, that's the people we are stuck with... every bar I ever spit was the truth and the truth is hard for some people to accept."
In a 2011 interview with Complex, Drake said, "I didn’t have a father, because he was in jail two separate times." Drake said his father did sentences of two and three years in jail.
He also referenced their relationship in the 2011 track, "Look What You've Done," in which Drake rapped: "And my father living in Memphis now, he can't come this way, over some minor charges and child support, that just wasn't paid, damn."

New England Patriots quarterback Matt Cassel addresses the media during his postgame press conference on Sunday, October 12, 2008.
Q: How were they different than what you prepared for?
MC: A lot of what they're doing, we prepared for. We just have to execute better offensively, defensively and in special teams as a whole unit. We knew there was going to be a lot of energy in the stadium tonight. We knew they were going to come out and put it on us early and they did a good job. They got ahead and we were never able to catch up and put points up.
Q: Can you talk us through that goal line series?
MC: They did a good job. We called three passes and we had a run. I threw away one and then we tried to run the ball and they did a good job – they have a good goal line defense. The next was another throw and we missed it. The next one was the same thing. It was a great defensive stand by them. We wanted to come out and put together a good drive, which we did. We were first and goal on the one and we anticipate putting the ball in, in that situation. That was definitely discouraging. But, we came back out and we tried to battle.
Q: Did you notice the Chargers doing more blitzing?
MC: Nothing more than what we practiced for. They are a good defense and today they out played us.
Q: What made them particularly tough on that goal line stand in the third quarter?
MC: Goal line is goal line. You go down there and it's the grit and grind of the game. They did a good job. They had some good guys up front; they were able to stop the run and cover the passes.
Q: Can you go through the progression of the last play of the goal line possession?
MC: Well, it was a progression and I didn't see anyone open. I was hoping to make a play with my legs and it didn't happen.
Q: From the two games you lost, you were got behind both times. What is it about playing from behind that makes it more difficult?
MC: I don't think we played well collectively today. They played a great game and they came out with great intensity. We have to do a better job of matching that intensity early and playing better all the way around.
Q: Does anything change for you, game plan wise, when you get behind?
MC: Nothing really. We try to go out and keep the offense out as long as we can. We try to move the ball and put points on the board. Northing really changes until you get down to a certain point in the game in which you are going to have to throw the ball to win.
Q: Is this a step back for you guys?
MC: You can consider it what it is. We just got out played. That's not to say we're down and out about it. We're upset about the loss, but we're going to move on and we're going to get better this week. We're going to continue to work hard.
Q: Will you rehash the four downs on the one-yard line?
MC: I'm sure we'll get a heavy dose of that tomorrow when we look at the film. That was a big series in the game that would have put us within a score and it didn't happen. It's just part of football unfortunately.
Q: Did you feel that there was anything about the week's preparation that would indicate that this would've happened?
MC: Not at all. We didn't come out and match their intensity. We got behind and they did a good job of playing from ahead.

Hmm, something seems to be up with the images again. I thought it was fixed, but it’s not. I’ll try to have it fixed soon.
Update: Wow, that was fast. I have no idea why that happened, but the images have been fixed. Carry on. I tried to respond to a few emails about it, but some of them bounced back.

Ganesh and Melissa were married before dearest family and friends on a gorgeous, sunny day. Melissa readied herself in the adorable log cabin at The Monk Ranch. She was joined by her best friend, and her mother, who had traveled a long way-from Australia-to join Melissa on this special day. Just as Ganesh arrived, the guests were delivered by bus, so they could come to the party and enjoy!
Stunning in her beautiful dress by Marchesa Notte, Melissa came from the cabin to share a first look with Ganesh, who was eagerly waiting at the end of the small dirt trail that led toward the ceremony. His look said it all as he saw her, and their nerves visibly eased as they talked quietly and held each other just before they were to walk down the aisle and say their 'I dos'.
With everybody in their seats, it was time to say their vows and proclaim their love for each other. They exchanged rings and a kiss, as they were pronounced husband and wife to claps, cheers, smiles, and tears.
At the reception, everybody shared delicious food, cocktails, and lots of dancing. Just before the dancing though, the couple was celebrated and adored as a few of their closest friends and family shared a toast.
Ganesh's father recalled conversations he had had with his mother about Ganesh that involved their dreams for him, yet ultimately realizing that Ganesh had his own ideas, and most importantly, they only wanted his happiness and it was up to their son to fulfill his dreams.
Their Best Man and Maid of Honor, respectively shared small stories and memories about each of them, and then about them as a couple, as they began their adventure that now led them to their wedding day.
Perhaps the most endearing speech though, came from Melissa's dad, as he reveled in the fact that his sweet, beautiful daughter had found the man of her dreams and the amazingness of the reality that she had come from Australia, while Ganesh had come from India, and they were now getting married in the United States of America, surrounded by friends and family from three different continents.
As the speeches concluded, Melissa and Ganesh joined each other on the dance floor for their first dance as husband and wife. They admiringly danced in each others arms to the tune of Lauv's 'I Like Me Better'. The sun had set, but the night was only just beginning as they finished their dance and made way for everybody to dance the night away. It was definitely a celebration!
Congratulations to such an amazing couple. When they set up their dating profiles those years ago, bet they didn't expect for things to turn out like this! You just never know where life will take you...and for them, this is only the beginning!

milkShow most recent or highest rated first. Common beliefs in this section include:
I used to think that African Americans gave out chocolate milk when they breastfed.
When I Was Little I Saw My Mom Making Ice Cubes and When They Were Frozen They were White so the next time We had To make Ice Cubes I told Her I would Do it and because when i saw them when they were white i thought it was milk so i made the ice cubes out of milk and when they were frozen and my dad wanted an icecube to put in some water it melted and he had a milk and water drink!!!
I grew up in Ohio and my Dad is a big nature person. We use to take drives into the country to see the sites. One day we were on a drive and I was ooing and ahhing over the cute cows. My Dad asks, "you know what comes from a cow don't you?" I said "yeah dad, milk." He then said "do you know that only that brown cows make chocolate milk?" I was probably 10 before I figured out he was joking. I have now passed this on to my kids...ahh traditions!!
My Dad had always told my sister and I to drink our milk because it will put hair on our chests!! Is it any wonder
that I am 35 and don't like milk?!
My 6 year old sister believes that cows pee milk and I asked her why she thinks that, and she says
'Duh, where else would it come from?'
My Grandmother would always tell us not to drink milk and eat cherries, or else we would get bad stomach aches. It wasn't until I was well into my 20s that I discovered Cherry Garcia ice cream (sorry, Nana), but to this day, I find it hard to each a cherry and drink milk.
When I was in the second grade, I used to believe that if you drank white milk, your skin would turn white but if you drank chocolate milk, your skin would turn dark. Lol... I still laugh about that!
I was visiting a friend of my cousin's when I was about 3 or 4. We were having lunch and the girl's mother asked if I wanted milk. I said yes. She asked if I minded skim milk. I politely said yes. She poured it and set the carton in front of me. The carton featured an outline of a slender woman. This image, and the fact that skim milk looks different, convinced me she said SKIN milk. I had a very hard time drinking it.
My twin cousins were 4 when a realtive told them milk was bad for them as a result they wouldn't drink it until the day their mom said it wasn't milk it was moo juice.
When I was growing up in the early 50's, we lived in a neighborhood with a huge variety of ethnic peoples. I had always thought that the only way I could get chocolate milk was to go to the neighbor's house. Mrs. Evans always gave us chocolate milk and cookies. They were African-americans!
when i was six i belived that cows milk was their urine
My Mom would yell if I left the milk out because when it got "warm" it would go bad. I used to wonder why the milk in my tummy didn't go bad, since I was much warmer than the refrigerator!
My mom used to tell me that if I didn't drink 5 glasses of milk a day, my bones would fall apart while I was sleeping, so every day, even though i hated milk, i made sure to drink 5 glasses of milk! Damn u mom, lol! J/k
I was probably about 4 and we went to visit family in another part of the country. My older cousin and I went to the shop to buy milk. She took a bottle from the fridge and I just went crazy, repeating "it's the wrong kind of milk!" over and over. She refused to listen to me and I started crying. We got back and I complained because she bought the wrong milk. My mom and aunt just smiled. Because it was just from a different dairy, that's why the container and sticker looked different to me. I used to think that there were different kinds !!! (nowadays there is ofcourse :) Low fat, 2% full cream, long life etc etc :)
When I was little my mum was telling my sister not to drink. Well I didn't know what alcohol was so I went and got her some milk. They burst out in laughter as I was confused as heck!
I used to believe that milk was cow pee
MY MOM SAID THAT MILK MAKES YOUR TEETH WHITE SO SHE MADE ME DRINK IT
When I was little, I asked my mom how ice cream was made. She told me that it was made by putting a cow in a big freezer. She also told me that chocolate milk came from brown cows, regular milk came from white cows, and strawberry milk came from pink cows.
I believed this until I was 12 years old, because people at school laughed at me when I told them how ice cream was made.
My mate Fawce used to go to his Grans for tea, but the milk always tasted funny to him (it was that stuff from a tin). His Dad told him it was Bull's milk and he believed it and always asked his Gran for Bull's milk in his tea, until he was about 18 and he told the story in the pub - he then realised that bull's milk could be also called sperm.
When I was five, I drank chocolate milk (my favorite drink) and woke up in the middle of the night feeling sick. I threw up for 3 days and had to go to the emergency room to find out that I was constipated. I thought chocolate milk was poisonous after that, and to this day I haven't had another glass!

DAYTON, Ohio (WDTN)- Nearly three months after he says he was shot and stabbed on his RTA bus run, driver Rick Wagoner is now on paid administrative leave.
What is important to Rick Wagoner to tell is, he wants to return to work and this ordeal, as he calls it, has taken a harsh toll on his family.
He maintains his story that he was shot and stabbed by three black male teenagers outside his bus in February and that his life was saved after the .25 caliber bullets hit a religious book in his shirt pocket. But he feels suspicion has been unfairly cast on his story.
Wagoner said last year he suffered a head injury after a work related traffic accident and one of his attackers hit him on the back of his head during the early morning incident at Lakeside and Lakeview in Dayton. He told the police what happened as much as his memory would allow.
He said he knows when the attackers said to him, “to get in the club you have to kill the polar bear”, he didn’t know what that meant, but when he described their blue bandanas, police told him the bandanas worn on that part of town are red, not blue.
Police have told 2 NEWS there are “inconsistencies” in Wagoner’s story. There was no manhunt, no arrests and the investigation remains open three months later.
Wagoner is waiting on the results of testing by Dayton police so that, as he says, he can get back to work and put the incident behind him.

Many years ago I was working with this young woman who was under house arrest. The house was like a minimum security prison for people with a disability and extreme mental health concerns. One client I worked with in that facility had killed an elderly woman because she had got between him and his lunch. After he killed her he sat down and ate his fish and chips. This facility was designed for clients extraordinarily complex needs. It was purpose built with bars on every door and window. Each client had their own area which had a bedroom, toilet and small private lounge room. Each segmented area could be locked down in an emergency. Their room could be locked, the lounge room, the walkway, the central common area and the staff room. There was a TV in the common area but it was locked behind an impervious perspex screen. All the cutlery was locked away. The staff were issued with digital tags to keep around our neck so we could quickly escape through magnetic locks on every door and gate in the complex. The organisation had gone to an impressive length to make the facility feel as homely as possible. So it didn’t feel like a prison. It had well kept gardens and each of the rooms were decorated. It really was a brilliant facility to work at compared to most places.
One night I was rostered on the graveyard shift and the police had transferred this woman to the facility. She was under house arrest and had strict orders.
Now this girl was scary. I’m a big bloke but she dwarfed me. She was 6 foot in every direction and she was filled with an unholy anger. I tried connecting with her but she was cold as ice and had murder in her eyes. It was the police and the primary staff worker’s responsibility to check her upon arrival. This is necessary in case they sneak in a weapon or some other contraband. It was quite a common occurrence.
After she had dinner, she left and went into her quarters. I was barely conscious reading my book when the alarm went off. I ran over to her area and sure enough there was smoke coming from her quarters. I grabbed the fire extinguisher and ran as fast as I could to the fire. I emptied the extinguisher onto the fire. It was already raging. She’d set the bed alight and the whole room was burning up. I ran back, called emergency services to make sure they were on their way. There was another female staff member working. She was quite scared and left the building. She was on the phone to emergency services to make sure they came to the right address. I grabbed a second fire extinguisher and went back into the fire. That whole room was on fire now. I couldn’t go all the way in because it was too hot and there was too much smoke. I emptied that entire fire extinguisher on to the fire. It was futile. It temporarily decreased the intensity but the moment it was empty the fire was raging again.
I retreated back in to the next room where she was. I grabbed her hand to take her out of the building but she refused to leave. I yelled at her telling her to get out. Yet she refused to move. I realised in that moment she hadn’t lit a fire. For her: this was a cremation. She felt dead inside and she wanted to burn in that fire and it was because of the horrific abuse she had unjustly endured that had driven her to that point. Me yelling at her was only reinforcing her reason to burn.
I realised the only thing that was going to get her out alive was love and by somehow really connecting with her to demonstrate that. I couldn’t just leave because her section was locked down and she didn’t have a key. If I left she would’ve been trapped and she would’ve burned alive. It would have been a truly horrific way to die.
For a moment I thought I had to make her get out. I thought I could get the doona off the bed, punch her in the head, knock her out, roll her onto the doona and carry her out like Santa Claus. I didn’t do that.
It was getting hot. I sat down next to her which fortunately meant I was underneath the thick dark smoke billowing from the blaze. We were both coughing between sentences. I kicked off the conversation with some dumb question like, “How was your day?”. It was from experiences like this I’ve learnt it’s not about the words you use. In those situations people get the intent before the words are spoken. She returned with something like “pretty f*$king awful…”. I responded “What happened?”… She started crying and blurted out some God awful story. I mean it was sickening. She was looking at me incredulously. I guess she could see that I was genuine in my intention to risk my safety, genuinely for her well being. I put my hand on her shoulder and suggested we move somewhere cooler to continue chatting. She agreed and we went outside and talked.
This girl was in her early twenties and we could look at her and say she should know better. Yeh, she should’ve. I reckon a lot of us have that question inside of us that surfaces in our most selfishly terrifying moments of insecurity… If I set fire to my world does God love me enough to rescue my selfish fat arse from the flames?

I went out tonight. God I needed to go out tonight. Sometimes it’s just nice to cut loose. First Steph and I went to dinner at City Grill on the South Side, where we were soon joined by Chris and Morgan (she had asked me to tell her if we decided to go out). As we finished dinner, we were joined by Amaya (who had also asked me to tell her if we went out) and her friend Joe. So we had some drinks there and decided it might be fun to go do some karaoke. And of course if I’m going to do karaoke on a Friday night, there’s only one place for me to go. So it was off to the Tennyson for Karaoke and strippers. Steph and I have been there many times of course, but it was a first for everyone else at the table. It went over great. DJ Marty and the girls put on a great show as always and everyone had a blast. I really have to make a point of going there more often.

This was taken on Memorial Day when a local cementary has all their flags out. I was coming home, late afternoon, and the lighting was beautiful! I continued home, grabbed my camera and proceeded to take many photos! I always try different angles and this was one of them. I was pleasantly surprised with how it turned out. No photoshopping on this one.

By Vishesh Roy
New Delhi [India], June 14 (ANI): As the world has been shaken by the sudden demise of Bollywood actor Sushant Singh Rajput, former India cricketer and chairman of the selection committee, Kiran More on Sunday reacted to the news and remembered the time spent with him during the training period for biopic 'MS Dhoni: The Untold Story'.
Sushant, aged 34 on Sunday died after allegedly committing suicide as he was found hanging at his residence in Mumbai.
The Bollywood actor is renowned for his portrayal of MS Dhoni in the former skipper's biopic. The movie had released in 2016 and it immediately captured the attention of critics and audiences and Sushant's performance was hailed from all corners.
Kiran More was exceptional in training Sushant Singh Rajput and by the looks of the movie, now it is safe to say that the hard work paid off.
Talking to ANI about Sushant's working regime, More said: "Definitely, it is a big shock, it is a huge loss to the film industry and to me as well because we worked closely for nine months, we had become good friends, we obviously worked in a professional front, but he had to make the transition from an actor to a cricketer, it was a big challenge for me to make him bat, like Dhoni, keep wickets like Dhoni."
"But all the credit goes to him you know, he worked really hard for that movie, he used to practice for three-fours every day for nine months, he never said no to whatever we tried, he was not a cricketer so he was very open to all the suggestions, he worked very hard and all the credit goes to him," he added.
More also said that Sushant was a keen learner and was always trying to learn and grow. He also said that the actor was even scolded but he never got angry or showed any tantrums.
"Whatever I told him, he followed. I even scolded him a few times but he never behaved badly. He knew I was very strict with him regarding the training and practice sessions, he was open to suggestions, as a student he was outstanding and as an actor, he was more than that. He got really involved and he wanted to prove to the world that he wants to do something special," More said.
"It was one of the best biopics and people took him as Dhoni. Sushant was a very chirpy guy, he always wanted to talk, he talked about high-level things and was a keen observer. He told me what he was and how much he has struggled, we talked about everything," he added.
Sushant Singh Rajput allegedly committed suicide at his Bandra residence by hanging himself in Mumbai on Sunday, the police said.
Originally from Bihar, Rajput started off his career with television and gained popularity with Ekta Kapoor's TV serial 'Pavitra Rishta', while acting alongside actor Ankita Lokhande.
He made his debut with Abhishek Kapoor's 'Kai Po Che', and went on to act in several blockbuster hits such as 'M.S. Dhoni: The Untold Story', 'PK' and 'Kedarnath'.
Last year, Sushant starred in Chhichhore' alongside Shraddha Kapoor and he movie won acclaim from both critics and audiences. (ANI)

Sick in the hospital after she was born, "this was the day we finally got her home," says her mom, Mandy.
"I was very shy when I was little," admits Selena.
"She would always sing, dance and entertain herself," says Mandy.
Selena (in her Easter best) calls Grand Prairie a "plain little suburb. It was awesome."
"She was so fun as a kid," says her mom. "She was always happy."
Her favorite subject? "Biology. I love learning how everything works."
Demi was born in New Mexico before her family moved to Texas.
Her cousins dressed her in Bulls gear, but "she's a Dallas Cowboys fan," says her mom, Dianna.
Even as a kindergarten student, "she was a perfectionist," says her mom.
Demi belts out a tune at the Texas State Cinderella Pageant in Houston.
"I was always singing," says Demi (performing in Las Vegas).
"I was very sarcastic, even at like, 4. But I was always trying to make people laugh," says Demi.

And Moses alone shall come near the Lord
Into the cloud where he was, and talk with him face to face, as a man talketh with his friend; which was great nearness indeed, and a peculiar favour and high honour was this:
but they shall not come nigh;
Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, and the seventy elders of Israel:
neither shall the people go up with him;
not any of them, much less the whole body. It seems, by this account, that Moses had been down from the mount after he had received the laws recorded in the two preceding chapters; though as yet he had not related them to the people, but did before he went up again by the above order, as appears from what follows.

In the first quarter of 2023, among people aged 15-64 who were not in education, slightly more than 8 in 10 were in the labour force (81.8%). From this total, 76.7% were employed and 5.1% were unemployed. On the other side, 18.2% were outside the labour force in the EU.
According to the EU Labour Force Survey (EU-LFS), of the 44 million people not in education and outside the labour force in Q1 2023, 75.5% were not searching for a job, had not found a job and did not want to work; 20.3% were not searching but nevertheless wanted to work; 2.8% were actively searching but not immediately available, and; 1.2% were not searching but had found a job to start later.
Among people not in education and outside the labour force, 21.1% did not want to work because they were retired, another 20.7% because of illness or disability, and 18.2% because of care responsibilities or other family reasons.

My patricia tinc called for the first time last night. I went to feed them and I saw him posturing funny. Then he took a series of short, quick inspirations. Next he squeezed his belly and filled his throat up and began making a quiet buzzy moan. I'll try to get video tonight!

Search Your Zipcode - Join free now!
Search Your PostCode
It is free to search locals
We have actually all heard the tales concerning escorts. The wild celebrations, the abundant as well as renowned customers, the drug-fueled orgies. Yet what are the really wild stories? The ones that make even one of the most seasoned escort stay up and take notice?
Here, in no specific order, are some of the wildest stories about companions, as told by the escorts themselves.
The client who intended to be consumed active
I had a client who wanted me to eat him active. He would lie down on the bed, completely nude, and I would have to creep on top of him and also begin licking as well as attacking him around his body. He would certainly get so switched on that he would certainly begin moaning as well as surging about, and after that he would come throughout himself and also me. It was actually extreme, and not something I ever assumed I would certainly do, yet it was also really warm.
The client that intended to be peed on I had a customer who desired me to pee on him. He would obtain totally naked as well as relax on the floor, and also I would need to squat over him and eliminate myself. He would certainly then consume all of it up, and also it would get him actually aroused. I have to claim, it was kind of a turn-on for me as well. The client who wanted to be spanked I had a client who liked to be spanked. He would certainly obtain nude and lie down on the bed, and I would spank him with a riding crop until his ass was bright red. He would after that plead me to make love with him, and it would be some of the hottest sex I've ever before had. The client who wanted to be embarrassed I had a client that loved to be degraded. He would certainly pay me to do all type of things to him that would humiliate him, like make him creep around on the flooring like a pet, or stand in the edge with his nose up against the wall. He would get so switched on by it that he would be asking me to make love with him within mins.
The client that intended to be controlled I had a client that loved to be dominated. He would certainly pay me to link him up and do whatever I wanted to him. I would certainly spank him, tease him, and also make him do all sorts of points that he wouldn't generally do. It was truly hot to have that much power over somebody. These are just a few of the wildest tales regarding companions. What are several of your very own individual experiences? I had a customer that desired me to pretend to be his girlfriend while we took place a business trip together. I needed to act like we were incredibly crazy and he was constantly attempting to obtain me to have sex with him in public. It was in fact truly fun as well as we wound up making love in some beautiful crazy areas. I had a customer that suched as to be spanked as well as called names. He would certainly constantly schedule me for an hour, however he would only want to see me for the last 30 minutes. He would certainly pay me additional to remain for the complete hr, yet I never ever recognized why. I had a customer that was really into role-playing and would certainly always reserve me for a 'schoolgirl' dream. He would certainly have me wear a schoolgirl attire and then he would certainly 'spank' me for being a naughty lady. It was all really innocent and also really quite enjoyable.
I had a customer who wished to be bound and left alone in a space. He would bring his own rope as well as manacles and then I would certainly tie him up as well as leave him. He would always be there for the complete hour, however he would certainly never ever state a word or make a sound. It was a bit weird, but he was a nice guy. I had a customer that liked to be covered in food and after that has sex. He would certainly cover my body in whipped cream, delicious chocolate sauce, etc and then we would have sex. It was in fact truly fun and sort of messy.
I had a client who liked to be vocally degraded. He would have me call him names as well as claim really dirty things to him. It was done in enjoyable as well as he was actually an actually nice guy. I had a client who desired me to spruce up in a nurse's outfit and then provide him a 'checkup.' He would have me check his high blood pressure, temperature level, and so on and afterwards we would certainly make love. It was all extremely scientific and in fact rather enjoyable.
I had a customer that wanted me to act to be a prostitute. He would certainly pick me up in his auto and after that drive about town while I acted like a woman of the street. He would then take me back to his location and we would certainly make love. It was all very seedy as well as actually fairly enjoyable. I had a client who desired me to spruce up in a supporter attire and afterwards give him a lap dance. He would certainly have me do all kinds of dirty points to him while I was using the outfit. It was all very rowdy as well as in fact quite enjoyable. I had a customer that desired me to act to be his better half. He would certainly have me cook for him, clean his residence, as well as do all the things a partner would certainly do. We would certainly then make love and he would certainly constantly call me by his better half's name. It was all extremely unusual and also really rather enjoyable.
escort agency Butler Hills UT 84093, escort service Butler Hills UT 84093, escort girl Butler Hills UT 84093, mature escorts Butler Hills UT 84093, adult escorts Butler Hills UT 84093, bbw escorts Butler Hills UT 84093, local escort Butler Hills UT 84093, independent escorts Butler Hills UT 84093, incall/outcall escorts Butler Hills UT 84093, escort reviews Butler Hills UT 84093
Areas near by
|cheap escorts newberry fl 32669||cheap escorts santa rosa west ca 92562||cheap escorts hardys crossroads ga 30055||cheap escorts epsilon mi 49706||cheap escorts laurel falls ga 30525|
call girl Butler Hills UT 84093, brothels Butler Hills UT 84093, prostitutes Butler Hills UT 84093, hookers Butler Hills UT 84093, sluts Butler Hills UT 84093, whores Butler Hills UT 84093, gfe Butler Hills UT 84093, girlfriend experience Butler Hills UT 84093, fuck buddy Butler Hills UT 84093, hookups Butler Hills UT 84093, free sex Butler Hills UT 84093, sex meet Butler Hills UT 84093, nsa sex Butler Hills UT 84093

It was a strange dream, even as my dreams go. It was one of those third person dreams, where I was watching the people in the dream, as if it were a movie, but I could feel what the people in the dream were feeling, and I could hear their thoughts. It felt old, this time of the dream, as if what I was seeing and feeling had happened many centuries ago.
How does old feel? I cannot tell you. I have no idea what I am saying when I tell you that I think the dream’s setting was some part of history that ended long before history even began. It felt almost alien in its ancientness. It is possible that before the human history there was another dawning of our kind? Convergent evolution happens all around us, where different species take very similar paths. Mammals, reptiles, amphibians, birds, and fish all have very similar brain structures, they all have two eyes, most are quadrupeds, and all have DNA. If a species evolved on a planet, and then all life was wiped out on that planet, would it be impossible for that species to reemerge through evolution?
There were things that had happened that were not in the dream. There was a young man who had been killed, his mother and younger son was all that was left of the family. The younger son wanted revenge, but he was not totally sure who the murderer, or murderers, were. He suspected a wealthy landowner, and he, by right, could seek justice, but his mother had pleaded with him not to do so. I had no idea how I knew all of this I have just mentioned to you. These were things that I knew, and I knew when the boy was walking through an open area, with green trees, grass, and an odd sky, that he was walking to his death, and I knew that he knew it too.
The boy was maybe ten or eleven, and he carried with him the massive decapitated head of a bull, with fresh blood still dripping from the neck. The head was so large he had problems carrying it, but he kept moving forward. His clothing was shabby, but brightly colored. He wore a hat with a brim on it, and had it pulled down low as he walked. The group of men on horseback charged towards him. I could feel their anger towards him, and more than a little fear. I knew they had killed the brother, and I knew they would kill the boy, too. The first three riders just missed trampling the boy, but the fourth rider swung down with a metal weapon and sunk the blade deep into the boy’s back. The weapon looked like a sharp hammer on the end of a long stick, and the man removed the blade with a jerk, tearing the boy open. The swung around and left the dead boy in the dust.
As the sound of the men’s horses faded, the dead boy staggered to his feet and picked up the bull’s head. “I know who killed my brother now,” the boy said, and with that he put the bull’s head upon his own shoulders. He saw through the dead bull’s eyes, and his breath came out of the dead bull’s nostrils with a snorting sound. Quickly, he began to run after the men who had killed his brother, and had killed him too.

Chapter 7: Orange Centaur
The boys took a trip to the grand canyon. Kermit, Jed, Matt, Ciel and Lydan. Everyone went their own way. Kermit and Lydan went parachuting off the cliff. Ciel went wandering on his own and Matt was upset cause everyone left him behind. Jed was still there, so he changed form into a centaur to give Matt a ride. Matt got on Jed's back and they went galloping around the canyon together. Matt held on tight, his arms wrapped around Jed tight and head on his shoulder. This made Matt feel better and soon they were having a blast, traveling through the canyon together. They forgot about the others and just took the time alone and grow their love.
After the canyon adventure, Jed, Matt, Kermit and Lydan danced upon a hot air balloon high in the sky. Ciel was nowhere to be found, probably exploring the sky somewhere. The boys danced and danced all night. Colorful lights lit up the balloon as they danced. Jed was throwing heart confetti as well. Their bodies made heat as they danced, making them feel horned up. Kermit was taking pictures to show everyone. It was a really fun night.
It was a very sad time, as Ciel told everyone he was leaving. Jed most of all didn't want Ciel to leave and he was crying. Matt hugged Ciel for a long time as Jed sat there on the couch crying his eyes out. "Goodbye Ciel." Matt said. "Bye Matt, I'll miss you." Ciel said. Jed couldn't take it anymore and just left the cottage and flew away into the sky. He sat alone on top of the roof of the new cabin, looking up at the sky. He pondered and thought about all the good times they had together. How could someone just come into his life and leave like that? He thought they made a good connection and didn't want it to go away. Getting close to others hurt, as they always just left him in the end. "Jed" A soft voice spoke from behind him. He turned around to notice Ciel standing there with tears in his eyes. Jed stood up and hovered there for a moment, his heart racing. "Ciel... please don't leave." He said. Jed just stood there shaking, as Ciel walked up to him to give him a huge embrace. They both cried as they held each other. "Goodbye, my friend." Ciel said, as he kissed Jed on the cheek. "I will miss you Ciel." "I will miss all of you." "I love you.." "I love you too, Jed..." Ciel said, as he finally took off into the sky, his wings carrying him through the wind. It was a sad farewell, but Jed was happy he got to know an amazing person...

Horrible situation with Canada Computers and broken TV
I bought a TV at the Canada Computers Scarborough location. It was roughly $1500 taxes in. This was the last item they had in stock because it's an older model. I had contacted them ahead to see if it was an open box or demo and they told me it was new. I picked it up and next day I tried the TV and when turned on it has some nasty cracks inside the screen (outside screen and everything else outside is in good condition). I go back to the store and they are blaming me for the cracks! I am 100% sure that the TV was handled with extra care and there is no way the internal cracks were caused by me. Long story short, they didn't give me much hope. They took the TV and said they would "talk to the manufacturer".
There was no way I could have know about the condition of the TV when I took it out of the store. Is there something I can do to get my money back?

Join free now!
It is free to search locals
Escort Mommy, Little girl fights with College prices; mama has an idea, incest tales. Concerning a year ago, I was actually having a hard time at University. Despite the fact that my training course was paid for thanks to my mom, my living expenses were just excessive. I truly looked for a task, but nobody would certainly supply me a task, not even as a dishwashing machine. My mama used to assist yet I rejected, even though it sounds stupid, I had some stability, I wanted to survive without cash from my mother, that had actually currently paid a lot for my education and learning. I truly wanted to confirm to myself as well as my mother that I was a grown-up now; I required to be able to do this on my own.
College was about 100 miles from house and every weekend break I would certainly see my mama, I did miss her, she resembled my best friend. She treated me as an equivalent as well as we were open to talk about anything. She was a successful attorney at a regional law firm, though as a result of exclusive nature of her service she never did tell me much.
Anyhow it was Thanksgiving of my second year, therefore far I had simply managed to endure, yet I was so near to either stopping or burglarizing a financial institution. I arrived home to a chilly welcome. It was rather chilly as well as the snow was coming down quite quickly, I only just procured home. As soon as home I was welcomed comfortably by both my mama and also an extremely welcome fire. We did not have a family, simply the two people, so customarily it was simply the two people for thanksgiving, not that it troubled either people, we enjoyed each other's business. Yet while we spoke about basic stuff, my mind kept discussing what mama had informed me. Mom was still a beautiful female, even if she had actually just turned 40, and her boobs look fantastic, also when she initially had them done, I told her she looked so attractive and that any kind of guy would certainly wish to be with her. I claimed that if we remained in a room together loaded with males, I wager all the men would certainly select her, also without the breast implant she was pretty. Mother thanked me for the compliment but said I was wrong which I was the actually lovely one, she informed me that a minimum of my big busts were real, 36d in case you ask.
So after supper as well as cleaning up we went back to the living-room. My mind was still on what mother had recommended concerning me working as an escort, no doubt I would certainly appreciate it, as well as being paid like mama for something we both taken pleasure in was something that interested me. I believe I was simply stunned, prior to she informed me, I saw my mommy as a revered female in the office, now I saw her as a very sex-related lady, I could truly see that mommy looked happy, and who would not wish to have sex with such an attractive female. It was just my whole photo of mommy had actually altered, which had not been a bad point, but it was something I was having trouble not considering, particularly imagining my mommy making love with all those weird guys.
So the following day mother took me to fulfill Monica and also obtain the examinations I required. Then mom took me buying a trendy clothing for the evening. We would certainly satisfy the client at a dining establishment and then eventually go back to his hotel for a night of pure unadulterated sex.
The evening finally got here and I was actually anxious, but thanks to my mother besides me, I prepared to go. We were both wearing evening gown, mine was red while mother's was black, as well as we both wore rise bras to give our boobs more zest, along with a band. We took a taxi as well as reached the dining establishment on time. Mommy provided the name of our booking and we were led to a table where the client was rested waiting.
Mama took charge and asked me to sit on his left while she took the right. Mother was so awesome; she gave the client all the typical ego improving lines, working him well. It offered me the opportunity to kick back and see her work. Soon the customer gave my leg a squeeze as well as relied on speak to me. I was rather unwinded by now, and a glass of red wine earlier in your home and also one now loosened me up enough to switch on the charm.
call girl Sands, Sluts Sands, prostitutes Sands, hookers Sands, sluts Sands, whores Sands, gfe Sands, girlfriend experience Sands, shagging Sands, dogging Sands, fuck buddy Sands, hookups Sands, free sex Sands, sex meet Sands, nsa sex Sands
| ||113782|| ||114114|| ||125910|| ||101962|| ||86888|

Send your own relationship question to [email protected] I am reading.
My boyfriend and I have been together for almost a year and a half now. We did have a month breakup about seven months ago where he ended up getting back together with his ex, who left him prior to us meeting. (They were only together three months before we met.) They were only back together for a couple of weeks and he realized he wasn't happy with her and abruptly left her. He ended up reaching back out to me because he missed me and realized he had messed up. (I had left him.)
Long story short, we ended up back together. Fast forward to where we are today, and our relationship has been amazing. We are both so happy and are talking about the future – kids and marriage. I had no doubt in my mind about him up until about a week ago. He got asked to be the best man in his best friend's wedding, and the bride's sister is his ex and will be the maid of honor. I will be a bridesmaid.
He saw her for the first time in seven months and has feelings for her. He's very honest about his feelings, which is why I have always trusted him. After seeing her, he told me he didn't know what he wanted or what he was feeling, and that he couldn't give me all of himself. (This broke my heart because I love him and told him that if he couldn't give me 100 percent, I couldn't stay with him.) He ended up spending the next day by himself; he wanted some space and time to himself to get his head together.
That night he was a changed person and he said he didn't want anything else. It made sense – we all experience emotions after seeing an ex for the first time in a while. The next day he told me she had reached out to him and that they had talked, and that it made him realize that he didn't want anything to do with her and that he loved me and couldn't lose me again. When I asked to see the texts and phone log, he said he panicked and deleted it. I told him I didn't want him talking to her and that if she reaches out to him again, I want to see the texts. He agreed. He said it was an emotional conversation and that it was closure for him. But what happens when we have to see her again? He doesn’t really know the answer to this either. Should I let it go and be OK with it? I don’t know what to do. I feel hurt that he talked to her on the phone.
- please help
"He's very honest about his feelings, which is why I have always trusted him."
Is this true? If it is, I think you should let all of this go. You're not entitled to know your partner's every inner thought and doubt. There will be many days that have him thinking, "Is this the life I want?" – even if it's just for a second – and you will never know it, nor should you. He can be forthcoming and honest without giving up every piece of emotional privacy. Do not expect him to tell you everything.
As for the deleted texts, they're private too. They were for him and this ex, as was that phone call. You should not be monitoring his life – not if you want a relationship based on trust. Honestly, he might have deleted those texts because he knew they would hurt you. Because they contain inside jokes and fond memories. Instead of showing you every tiny detail, he answered your questions. That's enough.
You ask what happens the next time he has to see her, probably at this wedding. Who can say? He might find her less attractive because of the closure. Honestly, long after the wedding there might be someone else who catches his eye – or yours. We can be committed to one person for life and still experience all of these weird uncomfortable doubts and crushes. It's part of being human. We get over it by showing up for each other and striving to be the best kind of partner. It seems like that's what he's doing. Get through the wedding and remember that it's just one day.
Readers? Is the LW entitled to see those texts? What's your take on the state of this relationship?

Completed my project but still buyer don't pay me.
I have completed my project and still don't pay for it.. I knocked the buyer several times when he was online... But he don't response back.
Right now it's been 1 week since I have completed the project...
So I really need advice for how can I get my payment?
Thanks In advance.

Yesterday, we spent the day visiting the Bultsma's at the conference grounds. We spent some time in the pool, rode bikes and scooters down the hill by the trailer...even had a couple wipeouts. But the most fun was had during the 15 minutes at the end of our visit, jumping the waves. Well, at least that was the most fun for the kids...I was a nervous wreck. According to me the waves were a bit to big, they even threw Connor off his feet.

I got the vet to give me her thoughts on Kachina's condition and nutrition. I told her about how it's been a slow road to build topline on her. She said that I can add some protein or fat and that might help, but that she thinks Kachina looks good right now, so doesn't have any concerns from a health perspective. She also noted that with Kachina's build she won't be a horse that ever gets a super beefy topline. I was hoping for a more solid recommendation from the vet when it came to food, but this essentially gives me the all clear to try a couple different options and see what works so that's good too.
The vet was overall very pleased with Kachina's teeth, she had a couple of small points near her tongue but nothing bad. The vet recommended waiting 18 months before looking at her again. The 24/7 forage with the slow feed net is likely a big part of why her teeth are looking so good. The vet and I both love the nets for so many reasons.
Kachina got a different kind of sedation this time, I'm not sure exactly what it was but the vet said that it is better for stability and giving them control over their legs sooner, but that it dulls their mind and digestive system a bit longer. It was weird for me because Kachina looked sober but her reactions were delayed which just made it seem like she was ignoring me. We walked outside the clinic to get pictures taken for the Coggins. Kachina had her head up and was walking normally, but when I'd ask her to stop, that message just wouldn't compute as soon as it should have and she was basically dragging me along at a walk a few times. Getting her pointed the right direction to get on the trailer also took a few tries.
Once we got home, I had orders to keep Kachina off feed for 2 hours. Kachina was a little offended about being poked and prodded at the vet, but she was really mad that I was keeping her away from her food. Especially since Kachina gets free feed hay, she's usually not terribly food motivated, but yesterday she was doing her darndest just to reach a single blade of grass. I put her in the round pen and we did a bit of groundwork to try and distract her from food. Her reactions still seemed a little slow so I tried to keep the ground work simple and just reinforce concepts that she already knows. She still didn't try to mug me, but she was clearly upset that she wasn't getting the treats she normally does for certain responses. She tried to give me the cold shoulder to let me know that scratches were not an adequate reward. I had to put on the pressure a bit to let her know that walking away from me and turning her back on me was not an acceptable response. She started listening better after that, but her expression was still seriously grumpy.
Finally, when the two hours were up, I gave her a treat and her whicker was so loud and excited that you'd think she had been starving for weeks. I put her back in her pen and she dove into her hay with gusto. We'll see tonight whether she's forgiven me or not. Poor hard done by mare *eye roll*
Does your horse get mad at you when you have to go to the vet? What's their least favorite part?

« PrethodnaNastavi »
THE real sorrows of the queen began with the death of her husband, Umjid Aly Shah, but she had apparent sorrows enough even when he was alive. He had been a long time heir apparent, and did not come to the throne till he was advanced in middle
life, and only reigned five years. It was very shortly after his reign began that I was brought to the palace, and, child though I was, I remember everyone used to say he was a model of a husband, because he had never taken any other wife. The queen's children, three boys and one girl, were all born before her husband came to the throne.
The only apparently cruel thing I can remember the queen having ever done, was the result of jealousy. When Umjid Aly
had been nearly a year or so on the throne, he began to distinguish one of the queen's attendant girls by presents, and by sending to her kind messages. As this girl was the servant usually in charge of the youngest prince, then an infant, the king had many opportunities of speaking to her, and the queen thought the presents he gave her were prompted by his affection for the child. The household, however, knew better, and began to treat her with more respect, and to call her by higher titles, when they saw that the king was really attached to her. Whether the king went through any ceremony of marriage with her, or not, I do not know. Certain it is, however, that the queen came to hear of the affection he displayed, and of the consequent assumption by her servant of titles of honour and a proud carriage, when not actually in the queen's presence.
Now the queen was known to all to be a resolute determined woman. She was learned, could read and write Persian and Arabic, was a princess of Delhi by birth and a queen by marriage-was such a woman to
allow a base-born slave to step between her and her lord, she being the mother of the king's children? When she once expressed a desire for anything, she always got it, no matter who opposed. If it was not granted at once, she neither eat nor drank till either the request was granted, or at least a solemn promise was made to grant it. But she was wise too, and never injured the kingdom by her demands. Sole lord of the king's heart, mother of his children, was she to allow a rival to carry off his affections from her? Certainly not.
The attendant in question, I forget her name, was one afternoon sleeping soundly, fatigued by exercise, and overcome by the sultriness of the day. The apartment in which she slept was at the end of a gallery leading from the queen's private rooms to those of public reception. The queen accidentally passed by, and saw her there asleep. The attendant was a handsome girl, full grown, with a fine figure, and through some accident had never been married. It was whispered in the palace that she would one day be
mother of a royal child, whether truly or falsely I do not know.
The queen passed on and said nothing till she came to her own apartment. She then called to her one of her most trusted servants- -an old woman who had been with her from her maidenhood, who had come with her from Delhi. How the thing was managed afterwards I do not know, but soon all the palace was in an uproar, roused by the screams of the attendant who had been sleeping a few minutes before so soundly, dreaming perhaps of the affection of a king. She had been sleeping, I heard, with face and neck uncovered, the usual muslin veil having been thrown aside in consequence of the heat; and some description of firework, or explosive substance, had been let off so close to her as to burn her severely on the face and neck. The queen was very sorry for the pain she suffered, and was doing all she could to alleviate it, when the king came in. A dark scowl was on his face. The girl was removed by his orders, in order that proper medical aid might be
ill. Her beauty
obtained. She was long ill. was clean gone for ever, and she was soon forgotten. I do not know what became of her afterwards.
I was only a child when all this happened, but I remember the screams and the bustle, and the queen's sorrow. She cried over the poor girl, her heart was good. It was never proved, of course, that she had anything to do with it, but I believe she had, all the same. There was an investigation, of course, and it was all set down as the result of accident; but they say that the king was for a long time terribly angry. His anger, however, was little matter, for the queen ruled him still. There was but one will between the two, and that will was hers.
But was not all this very cruel on the queen's part? No, not cruel, but in reality very merciful. Any other queen would have had the slave put to death, and her body thrown into the river. If I were a queenwell it's no use saying what I should do if I were a queen, but no slave should come between me and my husband. Of that you

First, Meerbat met some new friends and they were very nice. The next day, Meerbat was jumping and jumping so he had a lot of fun, but after that he got stuck! Then he went to a restaurant and he got a nice, warm drink because it was very cold outside.On the next day, it was CHRISTMAS!!! He got so many presents and he loved them! He got a present from his friends, his mum, his dad, his auntie, his uncle, his grandma and his grandpa. Meerbat had a lovely holiday!
On Thursday, we went to Chiquito so that we would have as much fun as the people who went to Burwell. First, we had to walk there for a long time so I was very tired. When we finished walking, I was really happy because I just wanted to eat. Then we got to try different flavours of dips. These dips were guacamole, sour cream and salsa. We had to put them in a special order so that it would make the Mexican flag. Next, we made our buritos, for my filling I put in chicken, rice and cheese. One of the chefs chose who had the best burito and it was Livia! We also got a hat and a bag filled with a balloon, notebook, pen, sweets and 2 cards. THANK YOU CHIQUITOS, our trip was amazing!!!
My favourite lesson this week was when we had to roll a dice and it would say which type of sentence starter we should use. I also liked being detectives to find out the feelings of the story A Real Virtual World because I had to PEE and PEE means point, evidence and explain.
I have a teddy called Percy that is a penguin. My friend Hannah gave Percy for my seventh birthday. I sleep with Percy every night because he is really cuddly but sometimes he takes more room in the bed because he is really big. Percy is my favourite teddy of all the teddies I have.

LORAIN -- Lorain businessman Scott Campana, 44, was arrested at home Saturday afternoon after his wife went to the Lorain Police station to press domestic violence charges against him. Campana told officers several times he did not touch his wife, police reported. He was released from the Lorain City Jail on $2,500 bond at 4 p.m. Saturday. His arraignment is scheduled for Tuesday at 10 a.m. in Lorain Municipal Court.
The wife told police Campana had hit her in the face and pushed her into a wall on Thursday, a police report stated. Police noted her forehead was bruised and there was a cut on her upper lip, the report stated.
Campana's children filed a missing person report for their mother Friday evening after she left their home on foot at 9 p.m.
Her daughter told police she had last seen her mother Friday at 6 p.m. The girl said her mother was highly intoxicated, the report stated.
Police learned the woman was possibly with her sister and a friend, the report stated. Contact was made with a man who told police "the woman was safe but had been assaulted two days ago and was in fear of her husband, Scott Campana."
Police spoke with Campana Saturday at 9:30 a.m. after he too filed a missing person report for his wife Friday evening.
After learning she was reported missing, Campana's wife arrived at the Lorain Police Department Saturday at 1:30 p.m., police said.
Police noted the woman was highly upset and shaking uncontrollably, the report stated.
The woman said "she has been married to Campana for 23 years and throughout the marriage, she has been mentally, physically and verbally abused," the report stated. She claimed "Campana has thrown things at her, spits on her and hits her for no reason," the report stated.

I am an online dominatrix - but not just any sort of domme. I take boys and turn them into cock sucking, silk wearing, cross-dressing femboy sluts. This story is about one such slut that I am proud to have call me Mistress. Of course, names have been changed to protect him or her as the case now stands.
Mistress stood there watching her next make-over walk in his door. She had talked to him for months online, and always wanted to make his fantasy of becoming a male fem slut come true. So... here she was standing in his livingroom and he had yet to notice her. Clearing her throat loud enough to make her presence known, a wide smile curled her lips as she saw his head jerk up and his wide eyes.
"Mistress...!" he cried and fell to his knees, everything else completely forgotten as his gaze lowered to the floor. Scott knew better than to stare up at his dark haired, Goddess of a Mistress, but he could not stop his gaze from lifting and traveling over her petite form. Swathed in some dark red material, silk maybe. Her dark hair was cut short to frame her face and her fierce green eyes stared back at him. He noticed the frown that curled her lips and quickly looked back to the floor.
As he looked away she couldn't help but admire her handiwork. Granted, he was all male in his slacks, dress shirt and tie. But, just the way he responded to unspoken commands, showed her that the months spent with him online had cut her work in half. And... much to her surprise, he had obviously taken her advice and began to grow his hair long. She did not miss the slight tremble that went through that knelt male form and laughed softly.
"You laugh at my tremble Mistress? Forgive me, just having you here and knowing what is to come already has my 'clitty' so very hard." His gaze still upon the floor as he spoke. Voice thicker than it had been before. Images of her taking control and dressing him like a naughty femme cum-slut played through his mind and made him moan softly. "Mistress, If I may be so bold, how long do you plan to grace me with your presence?"
She couldn't help the coo that left her lips. "As long as I feel it is needed. Until I feel I have suffencently turned you into my ultimate masterpiece." Mistress moved closer then and touched his shoulder, silently telling him kneeling wasn't nessicary at this particular moment. Goodness, she couldn't believe how willing he was to be transformed. This caused her to feel a warmth between her legs. Something she had always felt - even talking to him online. This was her ultimate fetish.
He stood then and smiled shyly. "A drink Mistress?" he asked the glorious lady before him. It really had surprised him just how easily he had fallen into this role, not to metion he was going to be a submissive to a very tiny, very petite lady, one he could very easily over power but he knew, without a doubt, he did not wish to. At her nod he disappeared into the kitchen.
Not missing the erection tenting out his slacks as he walked by, Mistress giggled and followed him into the kitchen, the sound of her stillettos clicking over the hardwood floor of his home. Stopping behind him and catching his hand as he reached in the refridgerator to pull out a pitcher of tea. She placed it over the throbbing need beneath his clothes. "Tell me slut... what do you want?" Her voice commanding yet gentle.
This was the perfect Mistress for him and he knew it. He was very much a novice at the whole submissive/Mistress thing, and she was nothing like an actual Mistress. She was commanding yet so very gentle with him. He heard the clicking of her high heels as she followed behind him. Then there was her touch. It was electric, taking his breath in a rush. Her hand guiding his to his bulging crotch. That voice. The words. The tone. It made him want to explode right there in his slacks. Struggling for a few seconds to find the voice that had left with his breath he whispered, "I want to stroke my she-cock for you."
"Louder." Her tone even firmer than before. Forcing him to curl his fingers more around himself. At least as much as was allowed through the material barrier. He was throbbing and she could feel the heat eminating from him just by this simple touch, in fact, she was barely touching him, his hand was doing most of it.
"I want to stroke my fucking she-cock for you!" He cried out louder, unconsiously falling back against her. Grateful that she didn't step back when he did. His body was trembling fiercly, the cold air coming from the still open fridge made his nipples harder than tiny pebbles. "Oooh, please! Please Mistress, let me cum for you, now before this naughty slut becomes your femme boy." His eyes half closed and his heart pounded. He hoped she didn't turn him down.
Her fingers snapped the button of his slacks open in one simple gesture and let them fall to the floor. His breifs followed. She felt the cool air from the open fridge blowing over him and she purred. Taking his hand, she had dropped it to open his pants, and putting it back on himself. "Stroke that naughty cock..." Her hand fell away then and moved so she could watch him from the side, not wanting him to shut the fridge door.
His knees almost gave away when his pants fell away from his his heated flesh and she commanded him to stroke himself for her. From the corner of his eye he saw her. She was watching him so very closely. He was already dripping precum. Just having Mistress anywhere near him was enough to do that. His hand began to stroke... his other moving down to pull at his balls. "Fuck yes... Mistress my cock is so very hard, it can't wait to feel all those femme clothes over it." Stroking it faster, from base to head, tugging harder at his balls. "I want to touch my ass hole Mistress!" Forcing his eyes open to look at her.
She shook her head. "No. For now you will only stroke your cock." Her own eyes half closed and a slight moan left her lips, she wanted to reach down and slide a finger in her aching pussy. But... she didn't. Instead she kept her cool and continued to watch him masturbate for her.
He could have cried when she told him no, but he didn't. Pulling hard at his own cock. Wincing at the pain but loving it. He liked to hurt his hardons, loved pain in small doses. It made him ache with even more pleasure. Harder, faster. Tugging balls more. More. They were filling quickly. His cock becoming even bigger. Throbbing. "OOooh Mistress!! I need to Cum!!" He had to stop or at least slow down or he would cum before the order was given. So he did the latter.
Hungry eyes watched the movement of his hand and the myrid of expressions that played over his face. His knees trembled, she knew he was close even before she heard his pleading request. For a minute she didn't answer, instead watched the delicious torture that played in front of her. "Cum, cum for Mistress... show her how much cum that soon to be she-cock can give." She commanded.
That minute she waited to answer seemed to stretch out for an eternity for him. Ooh God! He couldn't wait. But he must. Then the order came, and he responded with an explosion of cum. "Mistress!"It flew up and covered the fridge door, his dress shirt and even a little on his cheek. Falling to the floor as his knees gave out in the sheer pleasure of it all.
Remember, please tell me what you think. I would love to write a second half.

David Conde Obituary, Death -Nine months after a young child and his father were found dead in a New York apartment, investigators said the child died of starvation after his father died of natural causes. The investigation into the deaths began nine months after the bodies of the child and his father were discovered. Nine months passed before the investigation into the deaths of the child and his father got underway after the bodies of the child and his father were found.
According to a report that was published on Syracuse.com on February 15, the bodies of David Conde Sr., who was 59 years old, and his son David Conde Jr., who was 2 years old, were found in their home in Geneva. According to statements made by investigators at the time, none of the victims in the case displayed any obvious signs of trauma or had a clear cause of death.
According to the reporting of WHAM, the Ontario County Sheriff’s Office stated that its investigation determined that cardiovascular disease was the cause of death for Conde Sr., while starvation was the cause of death for his son. In an interview with the Finger Lakes Times, Lieutenant Dave Cirencione of the Sheriff’s Office was quoted as saying, “This has been a tough one for all of us who worked it from day one.”
“We were saddened to learn that this was the most likely cause of death once we had established that carbon monoxide was not the factor that led to the death. The way things have worked out is extremely, extremely unfortunate.”
According to WHEC, a welfare check was conducted on the couple after worried family members reported to deputies that they hadn’t heard from Conde in more than a week. This prompted the deputies to carry out the check. During the check, the bodies of the couple were discovered lying next to each other. It was determined that Conde did not suffer from any known medical conditions.

He was crying out in pain, "Mommy, it hurts so bad that I want to die."
On Tuesday night, November 25th, 2008, Christopher, our healthy and robust seven-year-old, went to bed like any normal night. In the middle of the night we were woken suddenly by Christopher crying and throwing up. He spiked a very high fever and had diarrhea. This continued for hours before we could get him back to sleep.
He stayed home on Wednesday and was throwing up and had diarrhea throughout the day and night. We thought that Christopher had the flu so we tried to keep him hydrated while it passed. Thursday the symptoms continued. By Friday, although the throwing up had improved slightly, we were worried because the diarrhea continued in full force and he did not appear to be getting any better. We took Christopher to the doctor’s. We were puzzled why a flu would hang on so long without improvement. The pediatrician thought he had the flu, but sent us home with a stool sample kit to return when we had gotten a sample. However, as the day progressed Christopher’s health deteriorated greatly. He was crying out in pain, “Mommy, it hurts so bad that I want to die.” He had straight bloody mucus diarrhea about every 10 minutes. Every bone in his body was reeling in pain. He was doubled over screaming out in pain. I couldn’t even touch his hair without him screaming that it hurt. I felt like this was something out of a science-fiction movie.
We brought Christopher to the Emergency Room. The doctors had no idea what was wrong with Christopher. They immediately sent his stool sample to the lab. Seeing that his body was direly compromised, they dared not do any intrusive tests until they received the results of the stool sample. He was admitted to the hospital and put on IV fluids.
Friday night was grueling as Christopher now had to drag an IV drip with him to run to the toilet every 10 minutes to pass straight bloody mucus. We could do nothing to relieve his excruciating gut pain. The hospital did not want to mask his pain so strong pain relief was not an option. Christopher cried all night long in pain. Saturday and Saturday night continued with more of the same — constant running to the bathroom, measuring the bloody diarrhea, helping Chris to bed, and then doing it all over again in a few minutes. There was no rest for the weary. Christopher was not getting any better. Christopher’s rear end was so raw from the diarrhea that he had developed a very bad rash. It added insult to injury. Very painful. We bought every type of diaper rash cream we could find hoping that it could absolve just a little of the pain every time Christopher had to go to the bathroom.
Sunday passed the same way as Saturday. Excruciating pain in his gut, pain in his body, pain from the rash. Sunday night we were told Christopher had Clostridium difficile (C. diff). They tried to treat him with oral Flagyl. This was the true night from hell. Screaming all night long and now vomiting from trying to take the oral Flagyl. Absolutely no rest for the weary. Because C. diff could be communicated, we were told to gown-up for anyone in Chris’s room and scrubbing of the hands constantly was a must. My hands were scrubbed so much they were raw. Christopher and his room were put on “precautions” because of the C. diff.
Monday morning we were told Christopher had Salmonella. Now it was decided to treat him with antibiotics through an IV and to also give him the Flagyl via IV. Monday passed the same as all the other prior days. Tons of crying-out pain. Bloody diarrhea every 10 minutes. Oh and the smell. Putrid. I thought I would not make it. I had to run out into the hallways for fear of throwing up in front of Christopher and making everything worse than what it was. Tuesday was the same with no improvement. The gastroenterologist finally decided that Christopher should not even be allowed to drink water. Finally, on Wednesday, the bloody diarrhea had slowed down. Thursday he was allowed to eat. Now he could come home. It had been 10 days of very little sleep, huge distress, and agonizing pain for Christopher.
Christopher now rested at home. He had bone pain in many places in his body. He had trouble walking. He legs kept giving out on him. He would lie in bed saying his legs and ankles were killing him. I had done some research and figured that he had the reactive-arthritis caused by the Salmonella. I figured the only way to treat this was not through drugs but to heal his body through probiotics. I sought out holistic/naturalist doctors for advice.
Meanwhile, Christopher returned to school. The school was on high-alert that he had been deathly ill and that he should be sent home if he showed any signs of sickness. He started seeing blood every time he had a bowel movement. He would go to his school nurse and tell her and she would call me at work. He was more afraid than he was in pain. We would tell him it was okay and that he should continue with his day as normal. I knew that his gut had to have time to heal. His reporting of seeing blood in his stool continued through February. Meanwhile, we brought him to a naturalist MD. He prescribed Christopher some sort of crystal to heal his gut. We tried this remedy. We also were trying to get as much probiotics into Christopher as we could get him to eat. Christopher continued to complain about bone pain. We brought him to a pediatric rheumatoid arthritis specialist. We continued to try to allow more time to pass for Christopher’s gut to heal.
At the end of February we went to Puerto Rico. Christopher had a strange fever that would spike and then subside and spike and subside. This went on for days while we were on vacation. We feared ending up in the hospital, but on the 4th day it stopped. After that day, the blood in Christopher’s stool seemed to have subsided. In April we went to Christopher’s pediatrician because he still had intermittent bone pain. We took another stool sample. In April we followed up with the pediatric infectious disease physician who treated Chris in the hospital, because Christopher still had the strange bone pains that would come and go. We were told that Christopher still had the Salmonella Typhimurium and C. diff in his stool. We were told that Christopher was, and will continue to always be, at high-risk for getting very sick with C. diff should he ever take antibiotics again.
Since then, Christopher has improved. However, we live with this constant fear that he will get deathly sick again. Recently, Christopher developed hives all over his body. We went to the doctor’s and were told by his pediatrician that it was an allergic reaction to something he ate. Our first fear was that the Salmonella had come back. It is always on our minds. We will always live with this fear that we could lose our young boy because of how badly diseased his gut was from the Salmonella poisoning. His specialist doctor tells us that they do not know the extent of the injury to Christopher’s colon as a result of the Salmonella and C. diff. We just have to wait and see how he does through time. All we can do is keep Christopher as healthy as possible and pray that he will not need to take antibiotics for any type of illness, as this will put him at high risk for developing C. diff again.

21 Savage’s younger brother identified as Terrell Davis, has died at the age of 27. He was said to have been stabbed while shopping for his grandmother in Brixton.
The sad incident that happened to the 21 Savage’s younger brother according to the report by Standard, happened on Sunday, at about 6pm, and Terrell Davis died on the spot, despite the efforts of police and paramedics.
The rapper taking to his official Instagram page, to announce and mourn the death of his baby brother, said:
“Can’t believe somebody took you baby bro. I know I took my anger out on you I wish I could take that s*** back,” he captioned a childhood picture of him with Mr Davis.
Kyra Davis, their sister, said on social media: “I don’t even know what to say. My heart is in pieces. I love you more than words can say. Rest in perfect peace Terrell.”
Mr Davis, a drill rapper known as TM1way, had the same father as Atlanta-based 21 Savage.
A family source told MailOnline that Mr Davis had got into an argument with a former friend, who suddenly lunged forward and stabbed him. They said: “Terrell was a good guy, he used to live on the estate but had moved away.”
No arrests have been made.
In February last year, 21 Savage had been due to attend the Grammy awards where he had been nominated for record of the year for his Post Malone collaboration, Rockstar.
But he was arrested by US Immigration and Customs Enforcement which said he was a UK citizen who had unlawfully overstayed his visa. He was released with his hearing later postponed indefinitely.
His brother was one of three men stabbed to death during a weekend of bloodshed in the capital.

Stacy Snake – In The Ass
Released: April 12, 2017
Stacy Snake was recording herself on her phone as she walked through Mike’s apartment. She was in the bedroom as Chris came in looking to collect the rent. She was ready to pay up with cash. but decided her ass was the only thing that had real value! Stacy was blown away when she saw how big Chris’s dick was. Stacy wasn’t sure she could take it, but one size fits all–especially in her plump pussy! Chris took her booty as payment with a smile and left his own deposit in her ass. Stacy was happy to stay and looked forward to fucking for next month’s rent!

For those of you who actually know Mason's birthday, it's March 29th, which means he turned 4 almost 2 weeks ago. But since we didn't make it to the doctor for his wellness check until this past Friday I think we can let the tardiness slide a bit.
He's almost 40 pounds (77%) and 3' 7" (95%). The doctor asked if Mason was the tallest kid in his class ... I think so. He gained 3.5 pounds and grew 3.5 inches since last year.
He received 2 vaccines and is as healthy as can be.
Mason had a birthday party at the Harris YMCA with his classmates and his close buds. It was only 1.5 hours but felt like FOREVER since it was a drop-off party and most of the parents jetted at the start time. After some playtime in the gymnastics center, snacks, and a cupcake it was time to say farewell to the kids. Then we celebrated his birthday at school with donuts. The last (final) birthday celebration was dinner after soccer practice.
He's usually in bed by 7pm and sleeps until 6:45am. The last nap he took was on March 17th so I'm not entirely convinced he's ready to give them up completely. He still does quiet time in his room most days to give me some sort of break!
He loves school and is excited to go 5 days starting in the fall. He's playing soccer and t-ball and is a big fan of the snacks afterwards.
He likes to go to the library and get new books weekly ... currently he loves Piggie & Gerald books. If you've never heard of them look them up ... surprisingly funny.
I took him to his first school dance and he was so kind to his friends. When a boy from his class didn't want to dance by himself Mason took him over to the dance floor and danced with him. He truly has the biggest heart and can be so sweet ... but he's also such a loose cannon and can get into so much trouble. I try to remind myself (almost daily) that he's only 4 and doesn't know any better, but sometimes I think he does know better and just likes to cause trouble.
Oh Mason I love you so much and can't wait to see what happens in the next year. You make us so proud and are so smart and funny.
Chase Update: 2 1/2 Years Old
10 hours ago

CHATHAM, NJ - Don Prisco checks the video camera before he comes out from the back to greet customers at Crescent Jewelers in Chatham, where he has been in business for 36 years.
He has to eye everyone who walks through his front door with a little suspicion ever since July 28, 2016, when two men put a gun to his wife's head and cleared out most of his top jewelry inventory. It has been difficult to move past the violent act, which occurred 10:45 a.m. on a sunny summer morning on Main Street in Chatham.
Friday represented the one-year anniversary of the day he had gold bracelets, diamond rings and earrings stolen by three black males, two of whom were caught and charged. One has been sentenced. The second has pled not guilty and is awaiting trial.
"I think about it every day when I lock the door, are they going to try and come in and rob me while I'm closing the door?," Prisco said. "Every time the buzzer rings, I have all different ways to watch them now. Since it happened, I close my door every day thinking, 'If you want to be a coward try me.'
"My wife had a gun pointed at her forehead. She had a ring on her forehead from the gun, that's how hard they hit her with it. Then they taped her hands and threw her to the ground. She had a big black-and-blue mark from where they were stepping on her while stealing the jewelry."
Joanne Prisco, the sole proprietor at the time of the robbery, had seen the robbers the day before when they came in and asked to have jewelry cleaned as they cased the store. She cleaned the jewelry for free, but later told her husband she had an uneasy feeling about the men.
"She's having a real tough time getting over it," Prisco said. "She's alright, but if the wrong type of person comes in, it makes her nervous. If I go to the bank for five minutes, I have to lock the door because she won't be alone anymore. Even at home, she's always thinking that they're going to rob us at home. They've done that to a couple jewelers, followed them home and took them back to the store and made them open up the safe.
"They caught her the first time. She didn't have her remote (alarm) with her and they caught her before she could push any buttons. Now we don't even go to the bathroom without it."
The scenario that led up to the robbery turned out to be a perfect storm for the criminals. Prisco had been in the hospital four days due to emergency surgery and he was getting dressed to come in and help out when his wife called about the robbery.
"I'm usually always here, but because I had surgery she was alone," he said. "Somehow they figured out I went into the hospital and I was in for four days.
"I'd feel better if they found my jewelry. We lost a lot. They took 800 pieces of jewelry from us in 15 minutes. They took all of my diamond jewelry, all of my wedding bands, tennis bracelets, diamond earrings. They took everything."
The Priscos were insured, but the policy required that there had to be two at least two people in the store at all times, so it has turned into a very expensive loss. In the days after the robbery, Prisco went to pawn shops in Newark and later ventured into New York City in hopes of recovering some of the lost jewelry, estimated to be worth in the "high six figures."
"They took a big chunk," Prisco said. "They took every diamond. They took 300 gold chains and 550 pieces of diamond jewelry and they were all my big ones. I had 100 engagement rings and they took them all. I'm a jeweler, I'm a setter, I'm a watch maker, I do everything. Major crimes was here in 15 minutes when they found out how much we lost. The FBI, state police. I never saw so many policeman here at one time. The third guy in the car they wouldn't give up. They think he might have been the ringleader. They offered them both a lesser sentence and they wouldn't give him up."
Prisco believes that when News 12 New Jersey featured Chatham, it caught the attention of bad actors, who were suddenly made aware of the small town with a nice jewelry store.
"Channel 12 News was here the Saturday before," Prisco said. "The red flag should have gone up. If you watched the show, they had a picture of our store. They must have seen it on TV. The day before, I saw one of them at 1 o'clock in the afternoon. I came out and asked him what he wanted and he got nervous and left. They're cowards. They found Chatham. They came here, it's calm and everyone had their guard down."
The support he has received from everyone in town has helped heal some of the wounds.
"This town has been very good to me," he said. "Customers still come in here to this day, a year later, they drop food off, they bring flowers to my wife. The town of Chatham has really been good. They hate that somebody tainted their town. They came in here and robbed one of us? It's not just business, it's friendship. All the store keepers came in almost every day to check on us. They still come in and ask if everything is okay."
A number of people, including Charlie's Aunt, wanted to run a fundraiser for Prisco so he could recover some of his losses, but he declined a number of offers.
"They wanted to run something to raise money for us, but I had to tell them no," he said. "Give the money to someone who is sick and needs it. I'm not down-and-out that I have to take money from somebody, so we turned them all down. I can't take anything from anybody."
In addition to his regular inventory of jewelry are the collections on display at Crescent Jewelers that are not for sale. Prisco has numerous antique jewelry scales set high up on top of the cases in his store and a whole case full of cigarette lighters that has a sign "Not for Sale." Among the other antiques he collects are pocket watches.
"I'll sell some of those, but there are certain ones that I won't sell," Prisco said.

Will Cauliflower is the husband of Sarah Cauliflower, father of Marah Greenhill and maternal grandfather of Viole tGreenhill. His grandson, Will Greenhill and great-granddaughter Willa are named after him.
Will was a physician befor e marrying Violet's grandmother, Sarah Cauliflower. Therefore, he was married into a rich family. When his daughter was born, Will had a dress made out of white silk for her when Mara grew older. He was also best friends with Tom Greenhill II and had Mara marry him, but the two fo them did not know that Mara and Tom III were in love and already met each other, whichc made both of the fathers' lives easier. . He also made sure Mara learned about healing. He also personally tought his grandchildren before his death.

Had a great shoot with Andrew last month and highly recommend him to others.Pre coms were great and he was polite and professional throughout.The shoot was fun and achieved great results.Thanks and hope to see u soon x
I had a lovely shoot with Andrew and his wife Annie yesterday. They looked after me really well all day, were incredibly efficient and professional throughout our shoot, and made sure I was comfortable at all times. I'd certainly recommend them to other models and wouldn't hesitate to work with them again myself. Thanks, Andrew and Annie!
Supported Andrew on a shoot today at Yorkshire studios. A thoroughly pleasant and professional guy who knows exactly what he wants. A true perfectionist and a pleasure to work with. Hopefully get to work with him again soon.
Shot with Andrew so many times iv lost count, he's one of the only males I allow to spank me as I feel safe with him and he is very professional. Dare I even say I enjoy myself lol. I would recommend him I any model thinking of working with him
I did a great shoot with Aegean yesterday. Aegean was pleasant and friendly throughout and arrived on time. I really enjoyed my shoot with him and would highly recommend him to other models. I hope to work with Aegaen again. A+++

Emily and I just wanted to thank you sooo much - Contiki and the trip to Greece were amazing. It was truly the trip of a lifetime. We had so much fun and the organization was a perfect fit for us. The people were fantastic and the country was spectacular.
Thank you for the amazing trip.
Heather & Emily

|Posted by Savannah on November 29, 2012 at 9:00 PM|
Bamboo is doing great. He has settled right into the family and is growing so fast! I tried to get a picture of him with the kids but no luck. He was a fuzzy blur in all my attempts. I finally had to hold him and get my husband to snap a picture. You were right, I think he is going to grow-up to be an excellent farm dog. Yesterday, I was at the barn trying to take care of some things with all the children in-tow. Bamboo has never left my side when we're out working. I can't say the same for my almost four year old. I look up and realize she's gone and so is Bamboo. I find her out behind the barn with Bamboo at her side. I was so impressed! He's still a baby himself and already helping me to look after mine! I'll try to get you some better pictures of him this week. We've been out-of-town for the holiday and things have been chaotic. We took Bamboo with us of course and he did excellent. If I could only get my children to listen as well as he does!
(owned by Samantha Wagoner- NC)

Ah ... to be 62 again. LOL
I could probably still do all that...IF...I didn't try to do it at age 25 speed and gusto...and was prepared to pay the price in aches and pains that would take twice as long to recover from.
It was a sad day the first time I had to call to get help doing something I could have easily done alone at a younger age. Heavy sigh.
Sorry to hear about your pain...I know that's tough to deal with.

Discovering that postal services were limited in his area, Carlos found a niche and opened a postal service three years ago with a loan from ACCION USA. Each week he sends a freight of 120-150 packages between 4-8 pounds to Ecuador. His business has been very well received in his community in Queens, New York. He is married and has three children he is able to support through the success of his small store.
Carlos has been approved for another loan through ACCION USA, to purchase a car which he will use to bring packages to and from the airport for shipping. This is his first car and he says that it will help him to increase his efficiency and grow his business.
Most of his clients are sending gifts and clothing to Ecuador and they are so grateful for the service he provides. Carlos loves that he is able to connect the people of his community with their family and friends back in Ecuador. Many of his clients are unfamiliar with other means of shipping goods to their home country, so Carlos provides an easy and simple way for people to stay connected to their distant loved ones.

This boy was found stray and brought in for adoption. Rudy knows how to give paw, stay, sit and the word down. He is said to behave when left alone and is crate trained. Rudy likes to sleep in bed with humans and is tolerant, friendly and playful with children. He likes toys and always wants to be around his people.

Sponsored by: Won’t you sponsor me?
Pathos was a BLM rescue horse who was adopted by a man who only had him for seven months and did this… It took months before BLM could get him back and bring him to me.
This magnificent survivor came to the Last Chance Ranch Sanctuary weighing only 360 pounds at the age of 2 1/2 years. He was covered from head to toe with lice, causing severe anemia, and had open sores from dehydration. Neglected from the get-go, he had close to a 100 lbs. of sand in his stomach. In the long run, it was probably the one thing that may have saved his life; simply because his intestines were not able to twist. Can you imagine, 100 pounds of sand? Once Pathos started to get a normal diet again, he was able to start moving the sand. The first couple of days it was nothing but sand!
Pathos has come a long way considering what shape he was in when he arrived. In fact, BLM called once a week for awhile to see if he was still with us. Pathos still has periodic bouts with sand colic which will most likely be an ongoing problem.
Pathos has been with us for 13 years and is one happy horse!

Today, I learned my tolerance for traffic that is at a dead stop is roughly two and a half hours. I think this is not bad. I know this because that was my breaking point. That's when the headache came on and when I started cursing at people who were honking when there was clearly no place to go. That was when I nearly broke into tears when Jeff called and I was no further to getting home than I was an hour and half prior to that moment. Okay, I'm exagerating. I was a mile closer. Seriously. It took me an hour and a half to drive a mile east. It took me twenty minutes to drive two hundreths of a mile. I was still in a good mood when I decided to time how much progress I was making. This did include trying to find a better route, but there was standstill traffic everywhere I turned.
The first half of the day was lovely. I went to my knitting group, had lunch with Mary and went to Vroman's, one of the few independent bookstores left in our area. Everything went downhill from there. The freeway was shut down due to an overturned tanker. I think it might have been carrying gasoline. So I had to take the streets home from Pasadena to Claremont. Around 25 miles. Traffic everywhere. In the end, it took me three and a half hours to get home. Jeff's in it now from West LA. He's taking a different freeway, but you know what happens when one freeway shuts down, it creates havoc on the others. He called me at 7:30 pm (2 hours into his drive) and told me he thinks he'll be home by 9pm.
At one point, I was listening to my iPod, I texted Mary because I had to vent and I pulled out my knitting. All things one is not supposed to do while driving, but I would argue with an officer of the law if I would have been pulled over that I wasn't driving. I was sitting in my car. Thankfully, there was no way an officer was going to get anywhere near my car to see that I was doing all of those things. The knitting did calm me down a little.
I worked on Le Slouch. I'm just about ready to start my decreases.
I finished my Tamarind Cowl. I hope to take pictures soon to post.
Today is my boy, Cooper's, first birthday. Here he is in his new favorite napping place. Happy birthday Cooper! We love you!
BTW, thanks for listening. I needed that.

Ally Brooke Reveals She Faced 'Mental and Verbal Abuse' in Fifth Harmony — It 'Was Traumatizing'
On the debut episode of her podcast The Ally Brooke Show, Brooke revealed that she underwent "mental and verbal abuse" while in Fifth Harmony, alongside bandmates Normani, Camila Cabello, Lauren Jauregui and Dinah Jane. She also opened up about a label head who attempted to "take advantage" of her when she tried seeking help when Fifth Harmony was "breaking."
"It was a whirlwind. I'm going to say how proud I am of Fifth Harmony, of what we did, of what we did for music, what we did for female empowerment, what we did for girl groups," the 27-year-old said at the start of the podcast. "We will be in the history books, y'all."
"But I hate saying this: My time in Fifth Harmony, I didn't enjoy it. I didn't love it," she added. "It was hard because there was so much going on. So much behind the scenes, so much toxicity, so much abuse, so much about of power, so much mental abuse, verbal abuse, and it's just horrible and to me, it's a shame because we were so big. I should have enjoyed myself more."
Later in the episode, she said certain people in the group's label often made her and her group members feel both "inferior" and "uncomfortable." Brooke described a time when the group was "breaking" and she approached a label head for help and the person tried to "take advantage" of her.
"I show up to meet with him and he gives me a freaking thong. I know what he was trying to do. I was humiliated," she said. "I was going there super vulnerable [asking for help]... At the time, that behavior was accepted."
The singer said she "did so much for the group" and that she tried to be the "glue" that held the group together.
"I was that mom. I tried to keep us together as a unit. It was very, very hard. It was a tough experience," she explained, before adding that she oftentimes doesn't like "looking back," since she often felt "helpess" and "hopeless."
"There's a weird balance of being grateful and being okay with the fact that things were not okay for me," she said. "It was traumatizing."
"I'll look at a music video and all I'll remember is how I felt that day. How I felt super insecure, or how I felt let down or how I felt like I wasn't good enough," she added. "People around me told me that I wasn't good enough, I wasn't cool enough, I wasn't valued, nobody cared about me. It was awful but I also try to remember the good times."
On the podcast, Brooke said the girls almost had to "fight for our lives" to get significant singing parts on tracks, and that she oftentimes felt "crushed" and "embarrassed" when she didn't get good parts. "At times, it definitely felt competitive," she said, before adding, "Later on, it did get better and in some moments, there were moments for me to shine and feel like I could contribute but that was really, really hard. That takes a toll on your confidence."
The singer also opened up about body image and how she was often categorized as the "big one" as she was constantly compared to her groupmates.
"People said I was the fat one and all these things and especially in one moment when we were shooting a music video we were in bathing suits and I didn't feel at my best," she said. "And then there were paparazzi pictures that came out and people made fun of me so much and it was horrible."
It's a sentiment that Brooke opened up about in her book Finding Your Harmony, which she released last year. "It just destroyed any last bit of confidence that I had in myself," she told PEOPLE about filming Fifth Harmony's "All In My Head (Flex)" at the time.
New episodes of The Ally Brooke Show premiere each Wednesday on Brooke's YouTube.

Santo earned baseball's top honor
Lauded for his character and compassion, Santo enters Hall as a ballplayer
CHICAGO -- Glenn Beckert was in his second season with the Chicago Cubs and on a road trip in San Francisco in the spring of 1966, when he woke up a little earlier than usual and discovered his roommate giving himself an injection.
"He was hitting .365 and I was hitting .210," Beckert recalled, "so I said, 'Where are those needles? I'm not going to be here much longer if I don't get my batting average up.'"
Beckert was only half-kidding. He did say that. But he didn't borrow Ron Santo's needles. And he did end up getting a lesson on what it meant to be a diabetic.
"Eventually, everyone on the team started to know about it and it was a big thing to see how he managed it," Beckert said.
While Santo's regimen would not appear in any manual on the care of diabetes today or even back then, he did monitor his blood sugar.
"So after a game, we'd go out for drinks and Ron would say, 'Give me a scotch and water, and a piece of chocolate pie,'" Beckert recalled. "Well, I'm getting sick watching him but it was something I never knew about and I didn't realize how serious it was.
"When we were growing up, there were a lot of secrets. If a person died of cancer, no one ever mentioned why. Or they whispered."
It wasn't that Santo, who will be inducted posthumously this weekend into the Baseball Hall of Fame, wanted to keep his condition a secret, say those who knew the third basemen best.
"Knowing Ron Santo," said Cubs teammate and fellow Hall of Famer Billy Williams, "he looked at it like, 'The hell with that. I don't want anybody feeling sorry for me.' That's why he didn't tell anybody for a long time. All the while, he'd still come out to the ballpark and have his problems and people told him he should quit the game. But he told me later, 'This is my life and I kept my life.' "
The issue of Santo's diabetes and how he played with it, is certainly a significant footnote to a Hall of Fame career. He would joke in later years that there were times he would come to the plate with low blood sugar, see three pitches coming at him and pick the one in the middle to hit.
"He told me later, 'I would literally blank out.' Coming to the plate after me, he said it was the only time he wished I made an out," Williams said.
Hall of Fame careers, however, are built on more than dealing with hardships, physical or otherwise. And it is that fact his teammates want people to remember.
"Here's my feeling, honestly," then-shortstop Don Kessinger said. "I'm not making light of the fact that he played with diabetes, but we all seem to focus on that fact. And whether he had diabetes or not, he was a Hall of Fame baseball player. Let's not lose sight of that. He was really good. I applaud everything he did, but that also makes me applaud him as a baseball player."
In fact to appreciate Ron Santo, the baseball player, is to look past the numbers that for a long time may have held him back in consideration for the Hall of Fame.
While his 342 home runs, 1,331 runs batted in, 2,254 hits, nine All-Star Games and five Gold Gloves rank him among the 11 major-league third basemen already in the Hall of Fame, they look relatively ordinary in comparing him to all hitters.
But the very fact that Santo is in the top 10 of third basemen all-time, said his supporters, should have weighed heavier when considering him for the Hall.
"Ron Santo's induction into the National Baseball Hall of Fame comes way too late," Brooks Robinson, Hall of Fame third baseman and a member of the Golden Era committee that voted him in, wrote via e-mail. "His record speaks for itself. He was one of the best of the best."
But beyond that, say Santo's contemporaries, was the kind of player he was.
His career span -- 1960-74 -- came during what many consider baseball's golden pitching era, and yet he had four consecutive 30-home run seasons, seven top-10 finishes in the league in homers, and also showed his plate discipline in leading the league in walks four times.
"When you talk about [that time], it was measured by home runs, RBIs and batting average and there wasn't too much [in the way of] batting average," said Williams, also a member of the Golden Era committee. "But Ron drove in the runs, scored a lot of runs, hit home runs. Consider that among the pitchers we competed against were [Sandy] Koufax, [Don] Drysdale, [Bob] Gibson, and he put up numbers against them."
Defensively, while baseball fans across the country were rightfully admiring the highlight-reel plays of Robinson, whose Baltimore Orioles were showcased in six playoff appearances during his career, Santo was consistently among the best National League third basemen.
"He had such range to his left, he got to balls that other third basemen just didn't get to," Kessinger said. "He made my job at short so much easier.
"Brooks had a real advantage over Ron because he played so many postseason games where so many people were watching. And to his credit in those games, he was fantastic. But if the Cubs won enough where he [Santo] was playing in the postseason most every year, I think the [Hall of Fame] would have come a lot quicker."
When Santo failed to get in year after year, Williams said, he wondered: "Was it because we already had three Hall of Famers [Williams, Ernie Banks and Fergie Jenkins] from our team? Did he piss someone off?"
There was always that theory as well. Most notably, there was the story about him criticizing teammate Don Young in front of reporters after two critical errors against the Mets during the '69 pennant race. Santo reportedly apologized to Young the next day, but there were those who say Young lost confidence after that.
And then there were the infamous heel clicks.
"That was the one thing I didn't like," Beckert admitted. "In my opinion, it was just rubbing it in to the visiting team. I told him but he said, 'It's getting a lot of press.' I said, 'Yeah, but it's getting a lot of bad feelings from the opposing team,' but he kept doing it."
Williams saw it completely differently.
"With Ronnie, from the time he first broke into baseball, when things went real good, he'd celebrate to the highest and when things were not, he went to his lowest point," he said. "That was the only hang-up he had. If we lost 2-1 and he didn't get a base hit, he'd sit by his locker and think he was guy who lost the game."
Williams remembered the first heel click.
"It was a joyous time in 1969, we had just won and we were in first place," he said. "[Cubs manager] Leo [Durocher] saw the picture in the paper and inspired him to do it again. It was fine with him. No way was Ronnie trying to show up anybody. [Originally] it was just a spontaneous, joyous thing he did but through it all, he told me he wouldn't do it again because [of how it was viewed] over the years. Now that's something that would slip through the cracks."
Kessinger said Santo clicked his heels because he knew Cubs fans loved it. "He did it for them, never to show up the other team," he said. "I never had an opposing player bring it up and I never heard that other teams didn't like it."
"I think opponents admired him," Williams said, "because he was a tough player. It's the old saying, strong chest and a good arm. That typified Ron Santo."
When it was time for Williams to make his pitch for Santo to the Golden Era committee, made up of 16 Hall of Famers, baseball executive and veteran baseball reporters, he had notes in his hand but didn't use them.
ESPNChicago.com Cubs blog
The latest Cubs news from ESPN Chicago. Blog
"I think voters kind of knew by that time [Santo was Hall of Famer-caliber]," Williams said. "So I got up and talked as a teammate, as a fellow player, as a friend. It was a great discussion we had about all 10 players on the ballot. [But] Ron's in the Hall of Fame, so I must have done something right and I'm really happy for him."
In the end, though those in the room are forbidden to speak specifically about the proceedings, it was clear that Santo's entire career as a player and a broadcaster, as well as a life dedicated to sidestepping his diabetes while later becoming one of its most successful spokesmen and fundraisers, also played a part in pushing him through.
But, say his teammates, it was Santo the baseball player, who will be enshrined in Cooperstown on Sunday.
"He was consistent," Beckert said. "He never gave up, he was always trying to do his best every game, he always was strong, in shape, with a good mental attitude. He inspired me in that way."
Santo retired at the relatively young age of 34, spending his last season with the crosstown rival White Sox.
"I felt sorry for him when he came to the South Side," said Sox executive Roland Hemond, a Golden Era committee member. "Sox fans couldn't buy into him because they couldn't identify with him. But he was a great guy.
"He really showed me character after the end of his first year with us. He had a two-year contract but he said, 'Roland, I just can't get it done anymore, forget the second year.' Not too many players would do that. He could have gone through the paces, opened the season for us, maybe played a month or so and said see you later and been paid. He's the only player I've ever encountered who voluntarily gave up the second year like that. But he wasn't able to perform for us as much as he wanted to and he was such a strong competitor with such high standards."
Through diabetes, through all the normal aches and pains of professional baseball, Santo played 154 or more games for 11 straight seasons -- more than 160 in seven of them.
"I knew he was a great player, I knew he was an All-Star, I knew he did a lot of things people might not have noticed or realized," Kessinger said. "Can I say every day at shortstop that I knew I was playing beside a Hall of Famer? I don't know. But it was [evident] when it was over."
CHICAGO TOP STORIES
- Concepts Sport Men's Chicago Cubs Keynote Sleepwear Royal Pants

If you had told me ten years ago that I'd be able to inject an entire portion of strawberry shortcake into my mouth all at once without getting my hands dirty, I would have thought you were crazy. The future is now.
We have several trays like this in my home. Trays that are PERFECT for a romantic breakfast in bed. Have I ever found a lovely romantic breakfast in my bed? No. I have not. Though there was that one time I was really sick and got soup in bed. I guess that counts.

A 71-year-old man was arrested by the police for allegedly killing his wife during a heated argument between the two reportedly over property, in Pulianthope.
Police believe that the attack on happened on the night of July 6 after which Ramakrishnan escaped from the house. The next morning, neighbours noticed that Jyothi had not come out of the house and informed her son Dayanandhan, who was staying in another neighbourhood.
When he rushed to his parents’ house, Dayanandhan found that the door was locked. He broke open the door and found his mother Jyothi unconscious in a pool of blood with injuries on head, while his father was not in the house. He then rushed Jyothi to hospital with the help of neighbours, but she died on Thursday.
Meanwhile, Pulianthope police tracked and nabbed Ramakrishnan who confessed that he had attacked his wife following a quarrel over property. He had hit Jyothi on her head using a hammer and left the house, leaving her in a pool of blood, police said.
Police had arrested and remanded him earlier. Now, after her death, the sections against him has been altered and Ramakrishnan was booked under murder charges.

Saint of the day
St. Fidelis of Sigmaringen
This saint’s name was Mark Rey. He was born in Germany in 1578. Mark went to the famous University of Freiburg to become a lawyer. Even as a student, he liked to visit the sick and the poor. He spent time praying daily. His brother chose to become a Capuchin Franciscan priest. Mark, instead, finished his studies and became a very good lawyer.
Mark often took on the cases of poor people who had no money to pay. This won him the nickname, “The Poor Man’s Lawyer.” Because he was very honest, Mark soon became disgusted with the dishonesty of the law courts. He decided to follow his brother and become a priest. He received his religious habit and took the new name Fidelis, which means “faithful.”
Father Fidelis was filled with joy when he was assigned to Switzerland to preach the Good News. At that time in Switzerland there were many people who had left the Catholic faith. Father Fidelis wanted to win these people back to the Church. His preaching brought wonderful results. Many people were converted. But enemies of the Church grew angry at his success.
Fidelis knew that his life was in danger, yet he went right on preaching. In the middle of a sermon one day, someone fired a shot at him, but the bullet missed. Father Fidelis knew he had to leave the town at once. As he was walking down the road to the next town, a mob of angry men stopped him. They ordered him to give up the Catholic religion. “I will not give up the Catholic faith,” Father Fidelis answered firmly. Then the men pounced on him and beat him with their clubs and tools.
The wounded priest pulled himself up to a kneeling position. He prayed: “Lord, forgive my enemies. They do not know what they are doing. Lord Jesus, have mercy on me! Holy Mary, my Mother, help me!” The men attacked him again until they were certain he was dead.
Fidelis died a martyr in 1622 at the age of forty-four. He was proclaimed a saint by Pope Benedict XIV in 1746.
It’s a great honor to be able to help others come to know Jesus and his Church. Let’s try by prayer, good example and kind words, to be real apostles in imitation of St. Fidelis.

A nursing scholarship changed her lifeAnusara Kannika was helped through nursing school and went on to work as a nurse, get married and start her own family. “Kids Ark and my godparents lit the light in my life,” she says.
Now 23 years old, has been sponsored by Kids Ark Foundation since she was 4 when her parents died and she went to live with her grandmother. Her grandmother was very poor and did not have a steady income so Jiraporn was sponsored from Sweden. Her sponsors gave her the wonderful opportunity to travel to Sweden, the first time she had been aboard and the first time to travel by air, an opportunity for which Jiraporn ae is very grateful. She is also thankful to her sponsors for helping her in her studies at school, where she was a very good student and received a scholarship to study at the Sichuan International Studies University in China for 4 years (2016-2020). Because of COVID 19 Jiraporn had to return to Thailand to finish her studies online to complete her Bachelor’s Degree, which she received earlier this year.
Jiraporn is now teaching Chinese Language in Pattaya and is able to help her grandmother who is in poor health. She is happy in her job and she would like to say a big “Thank You” to her sponsors and to everyone who gave her the chance to have a better life.
Yours sincerely, Jiraporn Pa ae

OT630 Posted May 31, 2019 Share Posted May 31, 2019 So I used to talk to this girl and we have recently started talking again. Note that she was the one who initiated it. I asked if she wanted to do something tonight, as tonight is the only time I would be able to see her for a long time, and she said she was babysitting at 4 but would ask her parents when she got home. I then texted her once today if she still wanted to hang, she said yes and she’d tell me when she got home, and that she still needed to ask her parents. Then I asked like 2 hours later if she had talked to her parents, to which she said she wasnt home. Then about 2 more hours later I asked if there was any update. Im very confused? Probably shouldn’t have sent the last text because I might look needy, but like what do I do? So very confused. Do I ask again like maybe she did not see this text? Also I know she is on her phone. Im just mad and confused, because she was talking the other day about how she wanted to see me, AND NOW SHE CAN, and she just flakes? Very, very confused. There is no time to play stupid dating games with her thats the thing, if there was not such a short window, I would not be so persistent, but there is and idk what to do. Link to comment
This topic is now archived and is closed to further replies.

Notre Dame starting linebacker Danny Spond ends playing career for medical reasons
Starting outside linebacker Danny Spond announced to Notre Dame on Saturday morning that his playing career has come to an end, Fighting Irish coach Brian Kelly said
via the Chicago Tribune.
Kelly said it was a medical issue, but wouldn't offer specifics. Spond has
dealt with serious migraines, missing the first two games of 2012 before starting the final 11.
"What was pretty apparent was that it was an emotional decision and it didn't come without a lot of thought," Kelly said. "He spent the day speaking to a lot of specialists and his family was here. This was not a decision that came easy. He loves his teammates. But what's most important is he did what's in his best interest for the future. He's got a bright future."
Kelly said Spond will remain with the team and travel.
Spond racked up 38 tackles and one interception in his 11 games as a junior, and finished his three-year career with 52 tackles and in 29 games.

VAN - 27 years have passed since the murder of Özgür Gündem newspaper distributor Orhan Karaağar. Orhan's brother, Eşref Karaağar said: "He embraced the free press at the cost of his life. He showed that in his dying breathe."
27 years have passed since the death of Orhan Karaağar, who was killed in the middle of the street on January 19, 1993 in Van, where he was the distributor of Özgür Gündem newspaper. The perpetrators of Karaagar, who was killed by armed civillians on a construction site on April 2 street while he was on his way to his house, are still haven't stood trial.
Karaağar who was held in Diyarbakır Prison for 2 and a half years during September 12 Military Coup, took part in the establishment of the Human Rights Association (İHD) in Van. Karaagar, who started working in Özgür Gündem in 1991, received death threats many times during newspaper distribution, but he responded to these threats every time with the words “I will distribute the newspaper as long as I exist.” As a matter of fact, Karaağar delivered the newspaper to the public until the day he was murdered.
'HE WAS A GOOD REVOLUTIONARY'
In the 27th year of his murder, Eşref Karaağar talked about his brother Orhan.
Explaining that Orhan is a good person, a good brother and a good revolutionary above all, Karaağar said, "This is also the necessity of being a human. The most basic things like revolution and humane life were indispensable in his life and he adapted it to his life."
'HE DID HIS JOB AT THE COST OF HIS LIFE'
Reminding that Orhan was arrested after the 1980 coup and was held in Diyarbakır prison for 2.5 years, Karaağar said: "Orhan continued his struggle from where he left after being released from prison. But nothing would be the same from then on. The cost was heavier working at the newspaper. This was the same for everyone working at the newspaper. We used to think how long would they survive working at the newspaper. The infamous 90's had started with all its 'unsolved' murders. Everyone knew who those assailants were. Ofcourse everyone was concerned but his wife and our mother was worried out of their minds. Orhan's life was the newspaper and he did his job at the cost of his life and he knew that."
LAST MEETING ...
Saying that he saw Orhan a few minutes before he was killed, Karaağar describes this encounter and what happened after that: "I got out of work in the evening, went to the market. It was getting dark early because it was winter. I ran into Orhan on the road. He had a bread bag in his hand. I asked where he was going. He told me he was going home and asked me to accompany him. When I said I had an errand to run, he went home alone, and that moment was a threshold I could not forget, a threshold that I could not get over. Orhan was detained a few days ago and they threatened him and told him to leave the newspaper. When I came home my mother asked me where Orhan was, suddenly something was broken in me. It was exactly 19:00. At that moment the door knocked and the police came. They told me to come to the police station with them. They took me and took me directly to Orhan's body. The paramilitary did the task given to them and Orhan had become the victim of an unknown assailant."
Reminding that all the applications they made after Orhan's murder did not give any results, Karaağar said: "Years later, confessors Murat İpek and Murat Demir told about the incident in a magazine and said Kadir Karataş's group carried out the assassination they were responsible for before them. We tought the government would do something about it when we saw the article but they did nothing. The case remained an unsolved murder."
'UNTIL HIS LAST BREATHE'
Stating that Orhan's biggest field of struggle is the free press, Karaağar said: "For him, the most important part of life and revolution was to continue the tradition of Apê Musa, to keep it alive. Orhan saw this as the most important area of the struggle. It was a relay race, and Orhan was doing this on purpose and loved it. Orhan embraced the free press and the newspaper at the expense of his life and showed it in his last breath. "
MA / Adnan Bilen

“After a week stay in the hospital, and week at home recovering; I started having spasms in my lower back and right leg. When my doctor told me, ‘to go to a physical therapist,’ I was very apprehensive because of an experience I had with a therapist in the past. The therapist in the past was not sympathetic to my pain, and pushed me to do things that hurt me. He even took my leg, and pushed it into my chest; causing a disc in my spine to shatter. I was in surgery 2 days later.I kept the appointment with Jenny, and spoke with Jenny about my concerns. She was very understanding and compassionate. She started slowly, was very gentle, and was attuned to my pain.
She did wonders for me! After the first visit I felt better, and every visit after that helped more. I was able to go back to work right after my third visit. I tell Jenny, ‘she has magic fingers and I mean it.’ I would recommend her highly! I will never be afraid of therapy again as long as Jenny is practicing.”

hi there, just a shot in the dark but i have also had this problem however it was not a garlicy it was more of a rosemary anyways i went to my local gp and she advised me to buy a brand new flannel and have a very intense wash and also to wash with dermologicly tested shower wash however in the end i now use baby soap as its for sensitive skin and the problem solved itself, im not saying this is the answer for you but it was for me and hey its worth a try good luck and i hope this works for you.,
Your daughter should see her Dr about this. It could be several things causing the odor. Does she work with chemicals at her job? Has she changed her diet in any way?

There was once upon a time a poor man, who could no longer support his only son. Then said the son, “Dear father, things go so badly with us that I am a burden to you. I would rather go away and see how I can earn my bread.”
So the father gave him his blessing, and with great sorrow took leave of him. At this time the King of a mighty empire was at war, and the youth took service with him, and with him went out to fight. And when he came before the enemy, there was a battle, and great danger, and it rained shot until his comrades fell on all sides, and when the leader also was killed, those left were about to take flight, but the youth stepped forth, spoke boldly to them, and cried, “We will not let our fatherland be ruined!”
Then the others followed him, and he pressed on and conquered the enemy. When the King heard that he owed the victory to him alone, he raised him above all the others, gave him great treasures, and made him the first in the kingdom.
The King had a daughter who was very beautiful, but she was also very strange. She had made a vow to take no one as her lord and husband who did not promise to let himself be buried alive with her if she died first.
“If he loves me with all his heart,” said she, “of what use will life be to him afterwards?” On her side she would do the same, and if he died first, would go down to the grave with him. This strange oath had up to this time frightened away all wooers, but the youth became so charmed with her beauty that he cared for nothing, but asked her father for her.
“But do you know what you must promise?” said the King. “I must be buried with her,” he replied, “if I outlive her, but my love is so great that I do not mind the danger.” Then the King consented, and the wedding was solemnized with great splendour.
They lived now for a while happy and contented with each other, and then it befell that the young Queen was attacked by a severe illness, and no physician could save her. And as she lay there dead, the young King remembered what he had been obliged to promise, and was horrified at having to lie down alive in the grave, but there was no escape.
The King had placed sentries at all the gates, and it was not possible to avoid his fate. When the day came when the corpse was to be buried, he was taken down into the royal vault with it, and then the door was shut and bolted. Near the coffin stood a table on which were four candles, four loaves of bread, and four bottles of wine, and when this provision came to an end, he would have to die of hunger.
And now he sat there full of pain and grief, ate every day only a little piece of bread, drank only a mouthful of wine, and nevertheless saw death daily drawing nearer. Whilst he thus gazed before him, he saw a snake creep out of a corner of the vault and approach the dead body. And as he thought it came to gnaw at it, he drew his sword and said, “As long as I live, you shall not touch her,” and hewed the snake in three pieces.
After a time a second snake crept out of the hole, and when it saw the other lying dead and cut in pieces, it went back, but soon came again with three green leaves in its mouth. Then it took the three pieces of the snake, laid them together, as they ought to go, and placed one of the leaves on each wound.
Immediately the severed parts joined themselves together, the snake moved, and became alive again, and both of them hastened away together. The leaves were left lying on the ground, and a desire came into the mind of the unhappy man who had been watching all this, to know if the wondrous power of the leaves which had brought the snake to life again, could not likewise be of service to a human being.
So he picked up the leaves and laid one of them on the mouth of his dead wife, and the two others on her eyes. And hardly had he done this than the blood stirred in her veins, rose into her pale face, and coloured it again.
Then she drew breath, opened her eyes, and said, “Ah, God, where am I?” “You are with me, dear wife,” he answered, and told her how everything had happened, and how he had brought her back again to life. Then he gave her some wine and bread, and when she had regained her strength, he raised her up and they went to the door and knocked, and called so loudly that the sentries heard it, and told the King.
The King came down himself and opened the door, and there he found both strong and well, and rejoiced with them that now all sorrow was over. The young King, however, took the three snake-leaves with him, gave them to a servant and said, “Keep them for me carefully, and carry them constantly about thee; who knows in what trouble they may yet be of service to us!”
A change had, however, taken place in his wife; after she had been restored to life, it seemed as if all love for her husband had gone out of her heart. After some time, when he wanted to make a voyage over the sea, to visit his old father, and they had gone on board a ship, she forgot the great love and fidelity which he had shown her, and which had been the means of rescuing her from death, and conceived a wicked inclination for the skipper.
And once when the young King lay there asleep, she called in the skipper and seized the sleeper by the head, and the skipper took him by the feet, and thus they threw him down into the sea.
When the shameful deed was done, she said, “Now let us return home, and say that he died on the way. I will extol and praise thee so to my father that he will marry me to thee, and make thee the heir to his crown.”
But the faithful servant who had seen all that they did, unseen by them, unfastened a little boat from the ship, got into it, sailed after his master, and let the traitors go on their way. He fished up the dead body, and by the help of the three snake-leaves which he carried about with him, and laid on the eyes and mouth, he fortunately brought the young King back to life.
They both rowed with all their strength day and night, and their little boat flew so swiftly that they reached the old King before the others did. He was astonished when he saw them come alone, and asked what had happened to them.
When he learnt the wickedness of his daughter he said, “I cannot believe that she has behaved so ill, but the truth will soon come to light,” and bade both go into a secret chamber and keep themselves hidden from every one.
Soon afterwards the great ship came sailing in, and the godless woman appeared before her father with a troubled countenance. He said, “Why do you come back alone? Where is your husband?”
“Ah, dear father,” she replied, “I come home again in great grief; during the voyage, my husband became suddenly ill and died, and if the good skipper had not given me his help, it would have gone ill with me. He was present at his death, and can tell you all.”
The King said, “I will make the dead alive again,” and opened the chamber, and bade the two come out. When the woman saw her husband, she was thunderstruck, and fell on her knees and begged for mercy.
The King said, “There is no mercy. He was ready to die with thee and restored thee to life again, but you have murdered him in his sleep, and shall receive the reward that you deserve.” Then she was placed with her accomplice in a ship which had been pierced with holes, and sent out to sea, where they soon sank amid the waves.

We were taken here by friends who live in the area. So very glad they did. A really good Italian restuartant. We were looked after very well by thar staff (there were 8 of us to seat and feed and we had not booked). We all had traditional pasta dishes and although I did not eat the Salmon and Pernod dish it looked and smelt delicious. Good food and good prices!!
Own or manage this property? Claim your listing for free to respond to reviews, update your profile and much more.

A sakawa boy in Kumasi has died after being shot in cold blood.
The young man, identified as Akwasi Boakye, was into internet fraud, locally known as ‘Sakawa’.
He had apparently hit big with a deal and made lots of cash which he used to purchase a Range Rover.
However on that same day, he was killed, reportedly by someone very close to him.
According to a report by Angel Fm in Kumasisighted by GhanaNewsPage, Akwasi Boakye lives with some close friends in a rented apartment.
Around 2am the day after he bought the car, he received a call to come out to his car.
He came out only to be met by an unknown gunman who shot him several times.
One of his friends has been named as the main suspect and is allegedly currently on the run.

The Royal's Cute Little Wife - novelonlinefree.info
You’re reading novel The Royal's Cute Little Wife Chapter 51 online at novelonlinefree.info. Please use the follow button to get notification about the latest chapter next time when you visit novelonlinefree.info. Use F11 button to read novel in full-screen(PC only). Drop by anytime you want to read free – fast – latest novel. It’s great if you could leave a comment, share your opinion about the new chapters, new novel with others on the internet. We’ll do our best to bring you the finest, latest novel everyday. Enjoy
C51: Trying to Please Her
It was not easy for him to say those words.
If it was in the past, he would have never admitted his wrongs regardless of whether you were angry or not. He would act just like when he was young. After holding it in for half a day, he would have said, "Do you want to come to my house to fly a kite?"
Now that he had come to his senses, it was different.
They were a couple who would want to spend their lives face to face, and if he didn't admit he was wrong, Xie Zhen would never forgive him.
If Xie Zhen didn't forgive him, she would ignore him as she did today, and he cannot stand the treatment.
So, ashamed and disgraced as he was, he said it anyway.
After he finished speaking, he looked around at the surrounding servant maids and said with an unfriendly tone, "What are you looking at?"
There were eight servant maids in the room, four of whom were brought from Duke Dingguo's Mansion by Xie Zhen, Shuang Yu and Shuang Yan, Hong Mei and Tan Mei.
They'd been working for Xie Zhen for years, and they were good at it.
The other four were the servant maids of the sixth prince's Mansion, Qing Xia, Sun Ya, Cui Xiu, and Lv Ao.
These four servant maids were quite clever and had very neat appearances. But when they were serving the princess, they still didn't got to know well about her tempers.
With such an order from Yan Yu, the other servant maids knew that he would not hurt Xie Zhen, so they lowered their heads and retreated. Only one of them remained standing.
Yan Yu frowned, "What do you want?"
That servant maids was Qing Xia, the most beautiful one of the servant maids. She obediently replied, "Your Highness and the Empress are both angry. What if your relations.h.i.+p with the Empress is damaged …"
"The servant begs you to remain in the room."
Yan Yu frowned, "Who allowed you to make your own decision?"
Qing Xia was startled. She raised her head and looked at him. Perhaps she was scolded, so tears quickly filled her eyes.
She bowed her head and said, "Yes."
Then, she bowed and left. From the looks of her back, she seemed rather pitiful.
Unfortunately, Yan Yu was a person who didn't know how to appreciate relations.h.i.+ps with women, and he also didn't pity women. If he did, then he probably wouldn't force Xie Zhen and himself to such a state.
After everyone had left, he looked into Xie Zhen's eyes, and when he saw she didn't respond, but looked thoughtfully at the door, and he was instantly annoyed. "Did you hear what I just said?"
Xie Zhen retreated her gaze before subconsciously relpying. "Yeah?"
Right after she said that, his face turned black once again.
When Xie Zhen came back to herself, she said straight to the point, "Well, what's wrong with you?"
This person was even more arrogant than others when he apologized.
He said it was his fault, and Xie Zhen waited most of the day without waiting for him to say what was his fault.
Did he think that just by saying "it's my fault", he would be able to finish it?
If she allowed him to fool her so easily, then in the future, how could her position in the family still remain?
Yan Yu did not expect her to chase after him relentlessly. What's wrong with him?
What would he say?
He pursed his thin lips. "Don't you know?"
Hearing those words, she was truly angered to death!
Of course she knew, she was afraid that he didn't know!
Only after he said that would he be able to realize what he had done wrong and correct himself in the future.
But it was hard to pry a word out of him, and Xie Zhen gave him a hard look, thinking she was a fool if she still hoped for him.
She turned and left the room, and he went after her. "Where are you going?"
She didn't answer.
Yan Yu strode up to her, one hand holding the screen, the other holding the wall to block her way. "You didn't forgive me?"
Xie Zhen thought it was funny, and then curved her lips. "It is not your fault." she said. "Why should I forgive you?"
He came to understand her now, and knew she was angry.
The room was so quiet he couldn't help putting his hands down and trying to hold her, but he was afraid she would get even angrier. "Xie Zhen…"
His tone was a little pitiful.
Xie Zhen ignored him.
He lower his eyes and said, "I shouldn't have left you in the house last night."
She had her head down, her expression unreadable, and all he could see were two rows of long eyelashes.
He went on apologetically: "I came back too late."
"I didn't drink cross-cupped wine with you. "
"I don't want to drink cross-cupped wine with you." she finally said.
Yan Yu pretended to not hear it, but no longer easily angry because he got used to being dissed by her.
These words seemed to give him a way out. He had the servant maids immediately prepare two cups of wine to serve to him in order to make up for last night's etiquette.
Very quickly, Hong Mei walked into the inner room with a tray in her hands. On the tray were two golden wine cups filled with fine wine; it was a high-quality Shaoxing wine.
She bowed. "Your Highness, the Empress, here is the wine."
Yan Yu told her to put down the wine, "You can leave now."
Hong Mei placed the tray on the square table next to lady couch and left.
Yan Yu walked over by holding Xie Zhen's hand. They sat side by side. He handed her a cup of wine and took one for himself.
He caught her eye and quickly moved it away. "After drinking cross-cupped wine
We are the real couple. "
Xie Zhen thought in her heart. Who wanted to be a real wife with him?
They hadn't been willing to marry each other from the start.
But she didn't say it, because he'd hooked his arm around her arm and poured the wine down his throat.
Xie Zhen restrained eyesign, and took the cup to her mouth, tasted it with her tongue, and felt it was so strong that she frowned.
Seeing that Yan Yu had already finished his drink, she did not think too much about it and instead imitated him to drink it all in one gulp.
The wine slid down her throat into her stomach. It was the first time for her to drink wine, so she coughed fiercely.
Yan Yu quickly put down his cup and patted her back, "Are you better now?"
"You've never had a drink before? "
She shook her head.
They were close together, the way he was patting her back, looked like he was holding her, and his heart softened. "Xie Zhen, will you forgive me?"
However, after waiting for a long time, he still did not hear her reply.
He was frustrated and ruffled. How would she forgive him?
"Don't go too far …"
Before he finish speaking, she fell into his arms.
Stunned, he hugged her helplessly, not knowing where to put his hands.
Her body was small and soft, her head buried in his stomach, looking so cute.
" Xie Zhen?"
He tried to call her, but she didn't respond.
He called again, "Little b.a.s.t.a.r.d?"
Still no reaction.
He turned her so that she might not be suffocated, and turned her to face him.
She was unable to drink properly. After drinking a cup, her face turned red and her eyebrows knitted together. Her delicate mouth slightly opened as she moaned in discomfort.
He touched her cheek and lowered his voice. " Little Lamb?"
She actually agreed to it. "Hmm …"
Then she managed to move into his arms, found a comfortable position, and curled into a ball.
Yan Yu was startled at first and thought she had woken up. When he saw that she was still drunk, his heart felt incredibly soft.
He didn't dare to scream too loudly for fear of waking her up, so he covered her ears and said again, " Little Lamb …"
"You marry me and you're so unhappy?"
Fearing that she would not feel well lying out, Yan Yu carried her to the bed in the inner room.
She kept moving, tugging at the lapel of her dress and raving, calling her mother, calling her sister Ah Xun.
She called everyone she knew, but didn't call him.
Yan Yu decided not to leave and just sat beside the bed, watching her while she was drunk.
He didn't know that she was so light that she could be knocked down with a single gla.s.s of wine. Fortunately, he didn't drink cross-cupped wine with her last night. Otherwise, if others saw this, wouldn't they laugh?
Thinking of this, he actually smiled.
She held his sleeve in the palm of her hand, and he stared at her small, jade-like hand, itching for a moment, and then he opened her fingers and put his hand inside.
When she did, she held him as tightly as she had held him when he was a child, but he was still not satisfied, so he intertwined his fingers with hers, entwined them, and did not want to let go.
During this time, Yan Yu gave her a cup of tea. She made a ruckus for a while before finally calming down.
Yan Yu was rubbing her fingernails with his head. She suddenly murmured, " Brother Xiao Yu …"
He looked at her steadily.
She rubbed her eyes with her other hand and said slowly, "Why."
The last few words were too light for him to hear clearly.
He rolled over and wrapped her under him, his arm over her head. " Xie Zhen, speak again?"
She sobbed and shook her head.
Men and women's weigh was so different. He weighed her down so heavily that she was breathless.
He had to keep his legs on either side of her, his body hanging above her, and he kept asking, "What's the why?"
"Speak it clearly."
At this moment, Xie Zhen's mind was in a state of confusion. How could she understand what he was asking …
All she knew was that she had a headache and wanted to get a good night's sleep, but someone was holding her back, buzzing in her ear.
She said, "Don't be noisy," and it were clear, and she pursed her lips and fell into a deep sleep.
Yan Yu helplessly pressed his hand to her forehead, clenched his teeth and said, "I don't mind you are noisy, but you actually dare to despise me first."
She did not answer, but slept soundly.
Unwilling to give up, Yan Yu bent over and bit her on the cheek without any forewarning.
Her face was smooth and tender, and her teeth sc.r.a.ped gently. She did not feel any pain, but rather a little itch.
This sound was soft and soft, and the long note dragged into his heart, making him want to eat her in one gulp.
He took another bite, not too loudly, deliberately making her sound like a spoiled child.
In the end, he couldn't take it anymore. His whole body felt weak, and he couldn't help but place his palm on her waist, sliding down bit by bit.
There were two shallow teeth marks on her face, and he licked them, wetting her entire face before long.
Nothing out of the ordinary happened in the end, but he ate up all the parts of her that he could touch all through the night.
Xie Zhen had a strange dream at night.
In the dream, a big dog suddenly rushed into her house and threw her onto the ground without any explanation. She didn't even have time to struggle before her face was covered with saliva.
Not only that, the dog licked her face down to her neck and even her hands.
She tried to resist, but her hands and feet were too weak to do anything but let it do as it pleased.
When she woke up the next day, facing the morning light outside the window, she was still in a trance. She couldn't tell if he was dreaming or reality.
She smelled her hands, and they smelt odd.
Shuang Yu came in from outside and she asked, "Did you have a dog in the yard last night?"
Shuang Yu shook her head curiously. "I didn't see a dog come in."
"What's wrong with miss?"
She sat up and tucked her hair behind her ears. Her small face was wrinkled like a bun's, and she said bitterly, "I guess I sweated a lot at night."
"I feel I stink. I want to take a bath first. "
Shuang Yu answered. "Then I'll let the servants prepare it."
"It'll probably take a while. Let's eat breakfast before taking a bath, right?"
She put down the washbasin and stepped forward to put on her shoes.
She rubbed the s.p.a.ce between her eyebrows, thinking back to the scene from last night. She was still a little confused. "How did I fall asleep last night?"
"Why don't I have any memory of it?"
Shuang Yu replied, "You and His Highness drank the cross-cupped wine together. When I came in, you were already asleep."
She finally remembered to ask, "What about him?"
"His Highness got up early and practice his swordsmans.h.i.+p. His Highness is now outside and waiting for you for the morning meal."
After changing clothes and was.h.i.+ng her face and rinsing her mouth, she casually tied her hair into a concentric bun and followed Shuang Yu out for a meal.
It was chilly in the morning, and she was wearing an embroidered silk blouse and a colorful skirt. As she walked, she wiped her face with a wet handkerchief and walked out of the inner room, meeting Yan Yu's gaze.
He sat here for quite a while. After practicing his swordsmans.h.i.+p, he wore a long robe with green flowers wrapped around it. His eyes were clear and bright, and he looked even more refreshed than before.
A few plates of porridge cakes sat on the table, untouched. He was waiting for her.
Seeing her coming, he took the initiative to speak first, "Sit down. We'll go back to Duke Dingguo's Mansion after the breakfast."
They were supposed to go home on the third day of marriage, but that day he asked Xie Zhen, and Xie Zhen said she would return home today, and in an effort to please her, he agreed.
When he thought about it this morning, he hurriedly asked the steward to prepare the return gifts. Fortunately, the steward was efficient and had already prepared everything in the morning.
After hearing this, Xie Zhen's eyes lit up and finally let out a smile that he hadn't seen for a long time. "Really?"
"How long will we stay there?"
He said, "One day."
She wilted and sat silently across from him.
He saw she kept wiping her face with a handkerchief, so asked, "What happened to your face?"
She said, "It was like being bitten and licked by something last night, and my face was sticky."
He was stunned for a moment before he lowered his head. A trace of guilt flashed across his face.

i was on ye olde youtube, and i searched everyday is a saturday trailer, found it, watched it, stoked on it. At the end of the video it had other videos i might like, one was everyday is saturday extended trailer, i got SUPER stoked on that and clicked it. It was uploaded by vitalfilms, which i thought was odd but pressed play anyway. Its a ski movie that i've never heard of, its got hornbeck and a few others big names, the teaser was posted in 07
i was like...zomg poor boyz jacked their name from some other ski movie!!!

Dean was floating. It was warm, comfortable. Sammy must have gotten his hands on some pretty high-powered drugs for this feeling. He knew he wasn't anywhere close to awake, still dreaming in a warm lake. He couldn't feel his body at all. Which is weird, really weird. He could hear something—raspy, labored. Is that me? Am I snoring? Sammy'll kill me. Other sounds. Someone was talking to him, maybe. He just floated there, disconnected from himself, disconnected from the world. There were still those sounds, he couldn't quite make them out, he tried to focus.
"My heart's about to give out, man. Please Dean." That was Sam. He could hear the fear in his brother's voice. There was something wrong. He struggled against the floating sensation, clawing his way away from the warm lake, towards his brother's voice. His heart was pounding wildly. Dean started choking. There was something lodged in his throat. He couldn't breath.
"He's fighting the sedation, he's going to crash."
"Dean no, you don't get to do this." Sam's voice, terrified. "You just stay here, do you hear me, Dean?" What? Sammy are you ok? Wait, there was a note, wasn't there? Sam's gone, that can't be Sam. He felt himself slipping back down, he tried to fight it for a moment, but then Sam's gone, and the dark won out. There was no sound, no sensation, just silence.
He was floating again, aware, but not quite. He could hear sounds around him. The raspy sound, something was beeping. I'm in a hospital. How did I get here? Sam. He must have brought me in. Why? My shoulder. Something was wrong with it, I think. I wasn't feeling really good.
"How long will he have to be on the respirator?" A voice, tired, weary, afraid. Sammy?
"We're not sure. If he starts responding to treatment…" Another voice, official.
"How long till we know?" Sam sounds like he's been crying or something. Are they talking about me?
"We can't be sure, I'm sorry."
"Thanks," there was silence for a minute. Then Sam's voice again. "That look they all give me is driving me nuts, Dean. I've been amusing myself picturing fun ways to wipe it off their faces. Fun, violent and bloody ways to wipe it off their face." That sounded like Sam's voice, but it didn't really sound like Sam. He heard his brother sigh.
"Damn it Dean, you need to come back, man." Come back? From where? What's wrong, Sam? "I'm getting sick of this hospital, you know." Well, you brought me here, little brother. "I need you to try and get better, Dean." What is he talking about? What's wrong? "Please Dean, come on, I need you here, dude." There was exhaustion and fear in his brother's voice. He tried to reach Sam, he couldn't, something was holding him back. I think I'm drugged. He fought harder. He needed to get to Sam, he needed Sam.
"Dean! No! Relax. Come on, don't fight it. Just stay relaxed." Sam said. Dean started choking again. What did they say? I'm on a respirator? Is that what's choking me?
"He started choking, help him!" Sam sounded terrified again. Dean knew they'd given him something, he felt the warm dark reaching out to him again. Sam? "It's ok," his brother's voice. "Just work on getting better and they'll take you off that damn thing." Sam's voice faded into the dark.
"I think I might be running out of things to say," Sam's voice again. How long has it been, Sam? "I don't know what to say to the doctor or the nurses anymore. They come in here and tell me…" Sam stopped, he cleared his throat. "But I told them they were wrong, you know? They have to be wrong, Dean. Do you hear me?" Sam sighed. Dean was worried, he could hear that Sam was near his breaking point. He could hear desperation in his brother's voice.
"Why the hell didn't you tell me?" Sam sounded angry. "How could you let that wound get like that?" I didn't want you to know, Sammy. I wanted to protect you. "You can't die. I won't let you, Dean," Sam's voice broke. "Please don't give up, Dean. Please." I thought you were angry with me, Sam. I'm so sorry. How could I let that happen to you? I couldn't save you from the demon. I couldn't find you. I was terrified, Sam. I thought I'd lost you, I thought you'd left. I can't lose you, Sam, that's not an option, you know. If I were awake, I think I might cry, and how sick am I to admit that?
"Dean? Dean, can you hear me?" Something feather-light touched Dean's face. "Hey, man, it's ok."
Doesn't sound ok, Sammy. It doesn't sound ok at all. He could hear the heart monitor beeping. That doesn't sound good. Is that me?
"Dean, you need to hang on. You just relax, ok? I'm going to call the nurse, but it's going to be ok." He heard Sam leave the room, heard him talking to someone. "I think he can hear me."
"That's impossible, Mr. Halford," Halford? Good one, Sam. "He can't hear you. I know you want to think that, but it's impossible. You need to accept that he is not…"
"Don't say it. He'll be ok." Sam was angry with her, Dean could hear it. Good thing it's Sam there and not me, I would have thrown her out the window for that. What does she mean, anyway?
"He's not responding to treatment, you need to accept that." What? Not responding?
"He'll be ok."
"He has to be." Sam said quietly, Dean wasn't even sure she heard that soft comment. He did. He tried to pull himself out of the dark well, out to the light and not just sounds. "See, see! He can hear us!" Dean could hear the beeping, he was choking again. I don't care. I need to get to Sam.
"No, he needs to come off that thing," Sam sounded desperate, like he was trying to stop something.
"His body is fighting the sedation, that's all. We might need to adjust the dose, I'll speak with the doctor." No Sam, no. Don't let her—ah damn. The floating sensation began to get more pronounced.
"No, No. This isn't working, he needs to come off that thing." Sam, scared, determined.
"I'm getting the doctor."
"You do that."
Dean was drifting further and further from those voices. He heard another voice, but there were no words, only sound. He could still hear Sam, not his words, but Sam. They must have given him something else, darkness suddenly rose up and pulled him down.
He'd been nineteen, not quite twenty, and he had been really seriously injured. He and his father had been hunting and the thing had come at his father. Dean got between it and his dad. There was just no way anything else was happening. He didn't remember much until his father's voice, angry, pulled him back to consciousness.
"Dean! What were you thinking! You don't do that, ever. Do you hear me?" His father said, his voice wild. Dean could sense the car seat under him and he could hear the sound of the engine, racing, pushed to its limit.
"It's ok, Dean. I'm taking you to the emergency room."
"Are you ok, dad?"
"What? Of course I am, you got between it and me. Don't do that again. Ever."
"No choice," he felt weird. His chest was slick, he could smell blood, he knew it was his. "Need to keep my family safe."
"Not me, Dean. Sammy. You need to take care of Sammy and if you do something this stupid how can you take care of your brother?"
"Sammy?" He was feeling bad, really bad. He knew, then, it was serious. He'd been badly hurt before, but this felt a lot worse than last time. He could barely hold on to consciousness. The pain was overwhelming. The thing's claws had torn a swath out of him, tearing flesh away. He was bleeding. He was losing it. "Dad, tell Sammy…"
"No, Dean. You tell your brother. You need to be here to take care of him. I won't tell him anything."
"Bring him?" He needed to see Sammy.
"To the hospital? I don't think that's a good idea."
"Please? See him…Please."
"Ok, Dean. Just hang on till I get you there."
It was the last thing he remembered. There were flashes, the emergency room, pain, his father's face, afraid. Doctors, nurses, the pain of an IV. Then quiet.
"Dean? I'm here." He had actually known the minute Sam had walked into the room. He felt his brother's hand on his. It felt good. Sammy was ok. He needed to know his brother was ok, he needed to know Sammy would be ok, even if Dean didn't make it. And he was pretty sure that would be the case. Sammy sat down beside the bed. He was crying. Dean held his hand, let Sammy hold his hand. Dean knew his brother was there, even when he slept.
His father was alone in the room the next time he woke up. "Dad? Where's Sammy?" His father looked over at him, his eyes were red.
"I sent him off to get coffee and something for himself. He's been here since you came in."
"Yeah, I know," Dean took a breath. It hurt.
"You need to be here for him, Dean. He needs you."
"He has you, it'll be ok."
"No, Dean. It won't be. Sammy needs you, to be there for him, to take care of him. No matter what happens, Dean. That's job one."
"I don't know dad, I feel…" He stopped, Sam came back in the room carefully carrying two cups.
"Dean? You're awake!" He nearly dropped the coffee in his haste to get to the bed. "I've been worried, Dean."
"Hey, Sammy." He watched as his brother put the coffee down and put his hand in Dean's. "How're you doing?"
"Not good, Dean." Sam's eyes were full of tears. Dean knew the tears were for him, he knew his brother was afraid, was "not good" because of him.
"It's going to be ok," he said. "It'll be fine. You'll see." He was pretty sure he was lying to his brother.
"It can't be, Dean, if you're gone." Sam said, he understood what was happening, Dean could hear it in the tone of his voice. "I need you here, Dean. Please."
"It's ok, Sammy, I won't leave. Just give me a day or two, ok?" He hoped that was enough. Dad's right, he thought, Sammy needs me, Sam is job one—it comes before everything, even death.
"Sure Dean, I'll be here everyday. I'll be here."
"I'll be here, Dean." Sam's voice drifted over the memory. "They're not getting me out of this room anytime soon, no matter who they call. And I think they might have called just about everyone at this point."
Dean's throat hurt. It felt scratched, abused. His shoulder was aching, too. Memories crowded back. The demon shooting him, the wound, Sam tied to a chair, Sam at the hotel, cleaning his wound, fever, a note—it said goodbye—Sam's voice "I'll never forgive you." Sam, angry. afraid. "He has to be." The silence, the dark.
"Sam?" Well that was a grunt. "Sam?" Only silence from beside the bed. "Sammy?" Is he gone? Did I imagine it? There was a note…
"Dean?" Sam said, he sounded almost panicked. "Dean?"
"Sam?" Dean managed to open his eyes. That was a lot harder than you'd think. It was bright in the room, the light hurt his head. Sam was standing beside the bed. Dean tried a smile, "hey, Sammy." Sam just dropped. It was like someone chopped his legs out from under him. He fell into the chair. "Sam!" Dean struggled to sit up, to get to his brother. He looked so pale.
Sam put a hand gently on his chest, pushing him back on the bed. "I'm ok, you just surprised me, that's all"
Surprised you? You looked like you were about to faint. "Water?"
"I think it's ok. There's some ice here, would that be better?" Dean nodded, talking really hurt his throat. Sam gently lifted his head and held the cup of ice so Dean could get some.
"Thanks, Sammy." He smiled at his brother. "You ok?"
"Yeah, Dean. I'm ok." He sounded frustrated.
"Sam?" He frowned. Of all the things his brother sounded, ok was pretty far from the top of the list. He tried to push himself upright again. Sam gently pushed him back down. He left his hand there. "We need to talk, Sammy."
"You're right, but not now," Sam said with a sad smile. "You need to rest a little more, you've only been off the respirator for a little while. They, god Dean, they said…"
Dean lifted his right hand and put it over Sam's hand resting on his chest. I don't care what he thinks about this, I need to know he's there right now. I need to know he's safe. I need Sam. Simple, isn't it? So damn simple. "It's ok, Sammy."
"Yeah, I think it might be Dean." Dean noticed Sam hadn't moved his hand, either. Maybe he needs me a little, too? Thanks, Sam, for that. He drifted off to sleep. I think it might be ok.
It was quiet when he woke up. The room seemed dim. It must be night. I wonder how long it's been. We stopped at the hotel for the night, then it was bright and now night. Two days? I hope not more for Sam's sake. Waiting can kill you faster than anything. I've kept him waiting a lot in my life. Of course, the alternative is unthinkable. No, keeping Sam safe is job one. He sighed. I think I might have blown this, though. We should have talked about this.
He opened his eyes. Sam was asleep in the chair beside the bed. He had managed to stretch out, his feet on a hard plastic chair. I wonder where he got that? Sam looked terrible. He had dark circles under his eyes, and asleep he looked young, vulnerable. Dean could see the strain of the last week etched into his brother's face, even now, even asleep. I should let him sleep. He tried to grab the cup of water off the tray. It slipped off and onto the floor. Sam was awake instantly. Damn it, he needs to sleep a little deeper.
"Dean? What do you need?"
Just knowing you're ok Sam. "Thirsty," he croaked. And yes, it sounded like a croak.
"Dude, you should have said something," Sam shook his head.
"Didn't want to wake you."
"I'll go out and get something, I'll be right back," Sam walked out of the room. Dean watched him as he disappeared behind the curtain. That sounded a lot like we were talking about something else. It might be time. We need to talk. This can't go on. If I pass out halfway through, we'll just pick it up later. I remember he said something about trusting him. Didn't he? It sounded like he thought I didn't.
Sam came back in with a cup and straw. He helped Dean up and held the cup for him. The water was cool, soothing his abused throat. "Thanks, Sam."
"Sure, Dean." Sam sat back down in the chair. He left his hand on the edge of the bed, almost, but not quite, in contact.
Ok, hotshot, how do you start this conversation? Hard stuff first? That way if he wants to punch me I'll get it over with. "Sam?"
"I remember a note." Sam folded in on himself. "What was that about?"
"Dean, I…I thought if I left it would be better. I thought it would solve everything, you know."
"How could leaving be better?"
"After what happened Dean, I know you can't trust me. I'm so sorry," Sam looked like he was about to cry.
"What? What the hell are you talking about?" That would sound a lot better if I had a little strength in my voice.
"You couldn't tell me about the wound, you let it get that way. You didn't trust me."
"What?" Dean struggled to sit up, to see his brother better. Sam put that restraining hand on him. "No, Sammy, no. It wasn't that at all."
"Then what Dean? What else could it be?" His voice was full of misery, or self-loathing. The tears started.
"I didn't want you to know because…" Dean stopped. I don't want to tell him. I don't want him to think I thought he shot me, because he didn't, it was the demon.
"Because the demon shot me. I didn't want you to think it was you. I was trying to keep you safe, Sammy." Oh, man, am I going to cry now?
"What, Dean?" Sam was looking at him, that lost look that Dean remembered from when his brother was about five—when he didn't understand why something had happened.
"The demon shot me Sam. That's how it happened. I thought if you knew…"
Sam took a ragged breath. "I knew, Dean." His voice was small.
"What?" My turn for the whats.
"I knew, Dean. I told you—I was awake for part of it. I remember that," his face crumpled. "I remember shooting you Dean. I saw you fall, I thought you were dead. The demon thought you were dead. I thought…"
Dean heard so much in that "I thought…" Yep, going to cry, I guess. Dean could feel tears in his eyes. "Sam, oh god."
"Then I was there at Bobby's, and you didn't mention it and I thought, well maybe it had been a bad dream. Then I realized it was because you didn't trust me anymore."
"It's ok, I understand you know. How can you trust someone when they might be possessed? You can't know, can you? I mean, when you first got to the hotel, you thought it was me and all I did was lead you on a wild goose chase that ended up getting you shot."
"Sam…" He's not listening, what can I do, what can I say? "Come over here, would you? So I can see you better?" Sam got up, hesitantly, and sat on the right side of the bed. The movement hurt the wound in Dean's shoulder. Sam saw and jumped up. "No, Sam, sit down." He patted the bed. Sam sat down again. I think his wounds are worse than mine—mine are just a little green and oozy. He put his hand on Sam's leg. Now what do I say?
"It's ok, Dean. Don't get too tired, you're still not in great shape."
"I don't really care what shape I'm in Sam."
"I think that's what got us here." Sam tried smiling, it didn't really work.
"That's not what I meant. How can you think I don't trust you?"
"You didn't say anything. You were so silent."
Ok, you have to tell him, get this off your chest. It'll just fester again if you let it. "I thought you were angry with me."
"Cause I couldn't kill you when you asked me to. When you made me promise. I thought…" He couldn't finish. I thought about it, but saving you always comes first. I know you asked, but I couldn't. I couldn't. Oh, come on, stupid tears. He could feel them getting heavy in his eyes.
Sam put his hand over Dean's. "I might have been mad at first. Mostly I was afraid, dude. If I go dark side, you will be the first to go, you know. I…"
"You aren't angry?" Dean could hear the relief in his own voice. I thought he said he was.
"Not about that, I might have been a little pissed that you let that wound get that way before you mentioned it. But I understand that Dean."
Oh, no you don't. You don't understand at all. "It never occurred to me," Dean said simply.
"That you would ever think I didn't trust you." He felt a tear trickle down his cheek. Oh, come on, stupid tears, it must be because I'm still a little sick.
"Sam, trusting you is so much a part of me that it never occurred to me you would think otherwise. I'm sorry. I just never thought about it." It's one of those absolute truths. Simple.
God, he looks young right now. "What is it Sam?" What is he hiding from me? I know it's there. "Come on Sam, what?"
"But it was my fault. I shot you, I let it all happen. I killed someone, Dean, I watched him die at my hands, then I killed you, or I thought I did." It poured out of him, almost without a breath, almost without a pause. The words were getting ragged, like they were being torn from him, pain so apparent in his voice Dean had to grind his teeth together to keep from stopping him. He needs to get this out of him, I have to let it.
Sam took a breath and continued. "That's why I tried to leave, why I left the note. I thought if…Then there was that wound and I knew you were hurt and I didn't say anything. I almost left you there, Dean. You were sick and I left. I almost let you die. That's what they told me. And they said you were…and then you coded, man, you coded and I stood outside that door, waiting. They…all because of me Dean. I wasn't strong enough to stop the demon. I couldn't stop it, Dean. Why couldn't I stop it? Why?" Sam collapsed forward, onto Dean. He was weeping. "Why couldn't I stop it, Dean? Why? Why?"
Dean put his right arm around his brother. He concentrated and managed to get the left up, too. That hurts. "It's ok, Sammy, it's ok." He repeated it over and over. He knew the words meant nothing to Sam at that moment, but he hoped his voice would help, somehow. He was crying with his brother. The tears were running down his face. His shoulder hurt like hell, but none of it mattered. Only Sam, job one. Oh, Sam. I am so sorry. I wish I knew how to fix this for you. If I could I would. I just don't know what to do, what to say. He held his brother as he had so many times when they were young, when Sam couldn't understand why something bad had happened—it was that voice Dean could hear now. His little brother, lost, hurt, desperately wanting it to be better. And I am helpless. I can't fix it for him. All I can do is stand between Sam and whatever fate throws our way.
He realized Sam was quiet—the sobs had ceased. He still kept his head down against Dean. And "no chick flicks" be damned. Sometimes I might carry that a little far. Sam needs this, he needs the words, I might need to think about that a little. Maybe if I try opening up to him, we can avoid things like this happening again. Maybe. Of course, if I start doing something like that he might think I've lost my mind.
"Dean?" Sam's voice was muffled, his head still down.
"I'm totally killing your shoulder, aren't I?"
"Nah, it's ok."
"Uh huh, if I had ripped your arm off you'd say that, too, wouldn't you."
Sam laughed a little and sat up. "No probably about it Dean." He smiled at Dean. "No probably about it at all."
"Yeah, probably," He said smiling back. "What is it?" He saw Sam swallow and frown.
"You still trust me?"
"No 'still' needed, Sam. Always have, always will. Nothing is going to change that. Ever. That's why it never even occurred to me. I don't even think about it, it's just there, part of me, you know."
"Dean, I'm sorry. I've been a little…"
"Don't Sam." He was forcing his eyes to stay open, he needed to make sure Sam was ok, but his body was starting to win the battle.
"It's ok, man. I'm ok. Go to sleep." He put a hand gently on Dean's arm. "It's ok. I'll be here when you wake up."
"Thanks for that, Sam." And he closed his eyes. I think we might make it through this. I think we might be ok. He knew Sam stayed sitting there until he was asleep, even after.
"You ready to get out of here, dude?" Sam said coming in with a wheelchair.
"Not in that."
"Hospital rules. Wheelchair or you don't get to leave."
"Wheelchair sounds good. Get the stuff," Dean said pointing to his bag. He was leaving with a supply of oral antibiotics, painkillers and dressings. His shoulder was still seeping. The annoyingly young doctor had said it might keep up for two weeks. Which is just about the best news ever. Not. At least Sam convinced them to let me go early. I have no idea how he managed that. I'm not even all the way steady yet. He can drive. He'll like that anyway.
Sam put the bag over his shoulder and wheeled the chair towards Dean. "Ready?"
"Sure, Sammy, what are you thinking?" He stood up and his legs went out from under him. Just great. Sam caught him. He always does, doesn't he? Dean stood there for a minute, one arm around Sam, waiting for his head to stop spinning, leaning on his brother.
"Yeah, Sam?" He said letting his brother help him into the chair.
"Did you just hug me?"
"What? No. You're nuts."
"Felt a lot like a hug, Dean." Sam was laughing at him. It is good to hear that laugh. I miss that, Sam, when you don't laugh. Let's me know I'm still breathing.
Dean smiled. "Well, if it was—and I'm not saying it was—it was a totally non-chick flick hug."
"A what?" Sam looked at him funny.
"You heard me, shut up."
"Bitch." Yeah, Sam, nice to have you back. Nice to be back.
The Impala was parked just outside the door. Sam helped Dean up and into the car. He sank down into the seat.
"What do you want to listen to, Dean?" Sam said pulling out onto the road.
"What do you think, Mr. Halford?"
"Judas Priest it is." Sam smiled at him and put a tape in the stereo. "It's good to be back, Dean." Wow, there was a lot in that statement. Quite a lot. I think we might be ok.
"Yeah, Sammy. It is." It's good to be home. Funny how home could be a car. Dean looked over at Sam, his brother sensed the look and turned to him with an answering smile. Actually home is more my brother first then the car. I think I'll keep that thought to myself, Sam might think I'm still feverish, and I might be. But I'm healing and so is Sam. We're together again, and since that will never change, we can fix everything else.

Here are Nathan and Caleb getting ready to go foraging the neighborhood for candy.
Yes, Caleb has too much gel in his hair. He was dressed as a spy and wanted me to spike his hair up. Then he changed his mind, but I had already put the gel in, so I had to put more gel in to get it to go back down. It was really nasty.
After getting candy, we settled in to watch the movie "Luther" since October 31st is also Reformation Day even though Halloween gets all the press. We've been doing a little mini-unti on the Reformation, and we really loved this movie. We even ate a whole container of gummi worms to commemorate the Diet of Worms. If you don't know what that is, you need to study some history.

A ShopRite customer's purse -- minus cash -- turned up last Thursday after the woman told police it apparenly had been stolen in the grocery store's parking lot, 1975 Black Rock Turnpike.
The woman said she had loaded groceries from her cart into her car and returned home, when she discovered her purse was missing. She searched the vehicle and called the store, but was told no one had turned it in. The woman then returned to the parking and searched for her purse, but could not locate it.
Police said the store later called to report the purse was found in a cart at the back of the store. Missing from the purse was $50 in cash.

Notes: The ending scene was slightly inspired by the Sakura Bromide, but the whole story was just me wanting to poke fun at Shishido's hat and what it sort of symbolizes to the two of them. It hasn't been through a beta so I apologise for any glaring errors.
And a Happy Belated Birthday to Shishido!
Disclaimer: Prince of Tennis and all of its characters belong to Konomi.
Shishido pulled his tennis shirt over his head, causing his baseball cap to fall to the floor with a thunk. He always forgot to take it off after practice now-a-days because he kept forgetting he was wearing it. In the three years since he'd gotten it, it had become as much of him as the cross necklace was to Ohtori.
Tossing his sweaty shirt into his bag, he turned around to pick up his hat only to see that it wasn't there. "Choutarou." He said knowingly, standing upright and seeing his long time doubles partner sitting on the nearby bench, long fingers holding the hat.
"Hmm?" Ohtori said as he spun the hat around in his hands, looking at it closely as if searching for something.
"Thanks for picking it up." Shishido said with a soft smile even though it bothered him when his teammate was like this. Ohtori's eyes would become distant and he couldn't always tell what he was thinking. But he trusted Ohtori to eventually tell him, or at least give him back his hat. He grabbed his clean shirt out of his locker and waited for Ohtori to say something further.
"You've had it a really long time." Shishido looked up from his buttons, Ohtori's tennis and violin calloused hands were holding the hat by its frayed brim as a long finger gently ran across a small track of stitches. Shishido had sworn loudly when his hat had gotten ripped on a loose screw in his locker and later painstakingly repaired it to the best of his abilities. Which Ohtori would laughingly tease, weren't that great.
"As long as we've been partners." Shishido said, "Three years, right?" Time sure had gone by quickly. In a few months, he'd be graduating from high school and he couldn't quite remember where all that time, from getting beaten up by Ohtori's serves to now, had gone.
"Not quite Shishido-san," Ohtori said, picking at some of the fringe on the brim of the cap now. "There was the year you were here and I was still in jr. high."
Shishido blinked at Ohtori before continuing to do up his buttons, "I don't count that. We were still partners even if we couldn't play in school matches together." They had spent most of their free time together keeping up their combination and challenging numerous players on the court. There was no way Shishido couldn't count that year, and was surprised that Ohtori wouldn't want to.
"You never were one for following the norm." He said with a chuckle, but the laugh didn't reach his eyes and Shishido was very tempted to demand to know what was bothering his partner, but Shishido thought that might be a bit extreme, for now anyway, besides he had his tie to find.
Half inside his locker looking for his tie, he barely heard what Ohtori was saying and wondered if he had heard right, "My hat's juvenile?" He didn't really see how, He still saw Sanada wearing his hat, and that man would never be mistaken for being juvenile. Occasionally dense, and whipped by his captain, yes - Juvenile, hell no.
"Well maybe not now Shishido-san," Ohtori explained with a soft smile, "But when you're at university, I'm sure wearing your old hat would seem a bit silly. Like you're trying to cling onto your past or something…" He drifted off, eyes downcast and staring at the hat in question.
It always made Shishido antsy when his partner was doubtful of himself, he knew Ohtori was no pushover and seeing him like that bugged him. Why was he so obsessed with his hat. "Maybe so, but I wouldn't want people thinking I've gotten too serious." Shishido said in rebuttal, slipping his tie around his neck and under his collar. "Besides, I'm quite fond of my high school memories. What's wrong with revisiting them. Nobody said I had to leave everything behind just because I'm moving on." Stupid people thinking someone can't move forward unless they've left the past behind. Didn't they know it was the past that made and shaped people.
"Ah, I guess you're right. It wouldn't be the hat that's juvenile but the person wearing it." Ohtori replied, having a bit of the usual challenging gleam back in his eyes, but it still seemed shadowed by something else to Shishido.
Finishing off the tie, he loosened it slightly and reached for his shoes, sneaking a look at his partner before disappearing behind his locker door again. "Are you saying I'm juvenile because I refuse to give up my hat?" He questioned around the locker before standing with a pair of shoes in his hand.
"No. I'm just saying you really love this hat, even though it's long since served its purpose." Ohtori set the hat down beside him, almost as if it was too painful to hold it any longer and once again Shishido restrained from beating the answers out of Ohtori. Besides, throwing his shoes at the junior wouldn't help him get dressed in the end anyway. "I mean, you've sort of out grown it." His partner was looking right at him now, and he felt a bit put on the spot. When had this become the inquisition of the Hat.
Shishido sat down on the bench beside Ohtori to put his shoes on, looking over at his friend at his next question. "Out grown it?" How did someone out grow a hat, especially when it still fit his head perfectly?
He watched as Ohtori fidgeted, picking up the hat and looking down at it, and Shishido had to wonder if he was fighting off a blush. "Well, you got it because of your hair." Nobody was ever going to deny that the hair cutting had been planned, but it didn't mean that he wanted to walk around with a bad hair cut for rest of the tennis season. But it hadn't taken that long for it to grow out and start looking acceptable, and by then, the hat had just become a part of his game. As much as Ohtori had.
"What? It doesn't look good with my hair like this?" Shishido ran a hand through his hair that now reached his shoulders, wondering if it did look that bad when he wore his hat backwards if it was bringing up concern from Ohtori.
"No, no, it's not that." Ohtori said, his hand rising up off his lap before falling back down on it, as if he was tempted to touch the longer chestnut locks before remembering it wasn't proper. "But now that your hair's grown out again, don't you want to show it off? Go back to how it was, how you were?" Ohtori knew that the cutting off of his hair had been symbolic of a new start for him, but the growing back of his hair hadn't meant the renewal of his old self. He just liked having long hair. And liked when certain people forgot manners and ran calloused fingers through it.
"No way, the old me isn't coming back, I've evolved to far for that. Besides, I have too much on the line now to act like I did back then. Besides, the hat is good for keeping the longer hair out of my face, it's a pain getting it all to stay back in a clip still." He bent over to tie his shoe and muttered a bit as his hair slipped into his face, exactly why he liked his hat when he played tennis. It was a nice defence against getting an eye or mouthful of his own hair.
"I like the you, you are now, Shishido-san" Ohtori said softly, fingering worn blue material once again, "And you make a lot of good points. I'm sure it means a lot to the hat that you have so much dedication to it." Shishido looked up from tying his other shoe at the one, finally starting to clue in that this whole thing probably hadn't been about the hat at all. "But one has to wonder if it wouldn't be easier to get a new hat." Ohtori spun the hat on his finger before holding it and running fingers along a worn out area. "I mean, sure this hat is worn in but it will probably need a lot of maintenance and up keep in the future. Surely a new hat would be easier." With one last look at the hat, Ohtori handed it over to Shishido who was finally done getting changed.
Shishido carefully took the hat from Ohtori, looking at the old blue thing like it was his first time seeing it. Yes, there was some fraying, a few worn out spots, some dirt marks that wouldn't come clean and a tear that was lovingly stitched, but to Shishido he only saw the memories that came with the hat, to him it looked perfect. "Nope. I like this hat, it's the imperfections that make it special to me."
He stood and slung his bag up on his shoulder, closing his locker. "No matter how old it gets, I think I'll keep it around, even if I have to spend a thousand hours keeping it together." He grinned up at his partner and placed the hat on his head. "Come on Choutarou, enough of this, let's go get some food, I'm starved." And with that he walked out of the clubroom, a chuckling and slightly embarrassed Ohtori following beside him.

EFATE, Vanuatu (AP) — Volcanic eruptions, landslides, earthquakes and cyclones: 76-year-old Lik Simelum from Vanuatu has survived them all.
He lives in a country that's ranked by the United Nations University as the world's most at-risk for natural disasters. But his story is remarkable even in an archipelago that has grown familiar with nature's fury. It is also filled with sadness: his father and youngest brother were both killed by a landslide.
Simelum survived yet another disaster this month when Cyclone Pam ripped through the South Pacific archipelago, destroying thousands of homes and killing at least 17 people. Simelum's outdoor kitchen was blasted to pieces and he had to sweep the water from his home from flooding, but he doesn't seem too worried about all that.
Simelum's story begins when he was just 11, living on the island of Ambryn, located in central Vanuatu. In December 1950, violent tremors began on the Benbow volcano, which then turned into a major series of eruptions that lasted for almost a year.
"I was frightened," he said. "Sometimes during the day there would be a lot of ash going up and blocking the sun."
He said on those days his family would eat lunch with a lamp because it was so dark.
"There was ash on all the trees and the bushes," he said. "Sometimes you could only see the whites of people's eyes, they were black with ash all over."
The ash affected everything, he said, killing crops and contaminating the family's well water. So the joint French and British government evacuated much of Ambryn, relocating his family to Epi Island.
He said the family was in Epi only a matter of weeks when a ferocious cyclone struck, just before Christmas 1951. News reports at the time indicate the winds sunk four ships and killed an unknown number of people.
Simelum said the rains were so heavy they triggered landslides. One roared through his home in the middle of the night, killing his father and his brother.
"It carried them away," he said.
His mother survived by clinging to the rafters of their home, he said, although she broke her back. Simelum had been sleeping elsewhere that night, after his family had moved him for his own safety. He said his two sisters, who live near him now, were living on other islands at the time.
He said his mother was taken to a hospital in Port Vila and the two of them were relocated from Epi for a second time, to a village on the main island of Efate, in the house where he still lives today. He said he worked first as a teacher, and later as a district education officer. His mother, he said, died peacefully from conditions related to her age.
In 1987, Cyclone Uma struck. It lifted the verandah from the home and flung it about 25 meters (82 feet), he said. It also caused flooding and filled the home with mud.
Then in October 2009, a powerful magnitude-7.7 earthquake hit Vanuatu. Simelum said he ran outside during the shaking.
"It was strong," he said.
His low-lying village soon got the news: it was about to be wiped out by a tsunami triggered by the quake. So he and the others left, leaving everything behind, and ran up a nearby hill. But the tsunami never eventuated and they were able to return.
Life was relatively peaceful for a few years until Cyclone Pam hit. Simelum said he's too old to repair his kitchen now, and will leave that work to his children. But he said he expects to see more weather extremes.
"Climate change will cause more disasters to Vanuatu," he said.

“I want a real chaplain who believes in a real God and a real hell…your uncertainty is making things worse…I need someone who will look me in the eye and tell me how to find forgiveness because I am running out of time!!!”
My story -
When I visited my dying grandpa, I was in the role of a chaplain of sorts. It was incredibly awkward…this is the grandpa who modeled for me stability, love, and strength. I admired the man more than any other. He was full of humility and would speak ill of no one. I cry now thinking about him. I loved him. Anyhow, he wasn’t a church goer and believed that all “good” people essentially would end up in heaven. He also said that he has always sought to live his life according to the 10 Commandments. While a teen, I would simply nod– who was I too challenge my grandpa?
Well, as my grandpa was ill and not knowing if this would be the last time I would ever see him alive, I felt a “burning in my bones” that couldn’t be constrained. I could not watch him die while simply nodding my head in affirmation to his thoughts of being good and going to heaven. I looked him in his eyes and suggested that He ought to love the lawgiver more than the law. I told him about Jesus. His eyes watered. He was the most decent man I had ever known and who was I to convince him that he was a depraved sinner in risk of hell fire? I had to, for the sake of his soul, I had to…I wanted to. His watery eyes then looked hopeful as I pleaded with him to believe upon the work of Jesus for his salvation. I held his hand and prayed with him.
My grandpa Norman Hogaboam ended up returning home. I visited him and he asked me to do his funeral when he passed on. I looked down and agreed to do it, holding back tears. He was at peace with death. He died shortly after. I did his funeral, crying the whole time, and was able to share the hope I had spoken to him about and his acceptance of the lawgiver. My tears would have otherwise been full of guilt and remorse, even to this day. I can’t help but think that some other chaplain would have simply nodded in affirmation and patted him on the back for a life well lived…comforting him into hell.
I look forward to seeing my grandpa again and am grateful that God granted me the strength and boldness to share the Gospel with him.

I was driving Northbound on the 2 lane highway 140 between Port Colborne and Welland and had been driving behind someone going 60! I figured I'd wait for the truck in front of me to pick up speed, as we were only a few minutes from the beginning of the highway, however after waiting a few more minutes, the truck's driving speed was a bit inconsistent to say the least; accelerating and decelerating between 60-75. There was oncoming Southbound traffic, so I waited for my opportunity to pass the truck and when it came, there was a gap in the oncoming traffic of perhaps 500-600 meters before a long string of cars approaching. At this point the vehicle in front of me was hovering around 75, but I wasn't particularly comfortable driving behind it. So, I signaled and moved into the left lane and accelerated, but found myself needing to accelerate higher to actually be able to pass the truck, which I did, and moved back into my Northbound lane. A few seconds later, I passed the Southbound string of cars, and the second car in the lineup was an OPP officer. Immediately he threw his lights on, at which point I pulled over and waited for him to pull a U-turn and pull over behind me.
He didn't really say very much; he told me I was driving awfully fast and I admitted my fault and said I had just finished passing the vehicle in front of me. He asked where I was going, I told him to my grandfathers and he took my license and registration and went to his car. When he returned to my car, he told me that he clocked me at 122 in an 80, and that it would be a $317.00 fine. He said that the OPP no longer performs any roadside reductions of fines, and that I would have to call in to the Crown Prosecutor to discuss a resolution (or that I could plead guilty and pay the ticket, or appear in court).
I'm not really sure how to go about this from here. When I read the back of the ticket it says I'm supposed to meet in person with the prosecutor but I'm not sure what to tell them. I didn't realize that you're not actually allowed to surpass the speed limit to overtake a vehicle in front of you, but I'm not really sure how else to pass someone I suppose that my only option was to stay behind the truck, which I guess I should have done, but I've already gone ahead and done it now, so I can only move forward from here.
I don't know whether or not the officer had the speed of the truck behind me, but I'd imagine that he didn't radar it because as soon as I passed the police car, he put his lights on and U-turned once he passed the truck and all of the vehicles that were behind us, but I can't really be sure. If he did record it, would this matter at all? Because if the speed of the truck were anything over about 75 it would be evidence that it did in fact, speed up as I was trying to pass it (which I suspected at the time but was more concerned with getting around and back into the Northbound lane). There was also another vehicle that pulled over behind the OPP car for a few minutes, but I didn't ask about that one and am sure it probably isn't relevant to my situation.
When I meet with the prosecutor, do I explain all of this to him/her? It seems as though that in the eyes of the law, if speeding is speeding regardless of overtaking a vehicle, then my explanation of the situation doesn't really matter and I obviously was in the wrong. At this point then, I'm not really sure what to say to the prosecutor, but I sure don't want to have a $317.00 speeding ticket, 4 demerit points on my license, and for my insurance rates to increase. Also, I'm not sure if this matters but this was my first driving infraction as well.
Any advice, or information on what to expect?

This was the day that Castle Stuart took vengeance on those who saw it as something of a soft touch.
Instead, amid winds that got stronger as the day got longer, it became a hard grind for the best of them in the opening round of the Scottish Open.
Russell Knox was a mixture of contentment and weariness after his level-par 72 in the opening round of the Scottish Open at Castle Stuart.
"It felt like we were out there for about 10 hours," Knox said.
Trooping in after five and a hours spent fighting 25-30mph winds, Knox was three behind the pace, but it could have been a whole lot more had he not kept himself together at the tail end of the draw and in the most difficult conditions of the day.
"It was about as windy as you can play golf in. It was a long ,long day. Tricky conditions. I'm going to sleep good tonight."
'It was goofy golf'
Knox was happy, but also frustrated. He levelled criticism at the way par-5 18th hole was set-up, a brute that played directly into the wind.
"It was a terrible set-up on that hole in my opinion. It was 600 yards (actually it was 607 yards) into a 30mph wind. They could have moved the tee up. I disagree with that hole. I hit three good shots and then three bad putts (for a bogey six).
"All day you had to put so much thought into every shot. You know, 140 yards into a 25mph wind plays 180 yards. We were constantly thinking and that makes it hard.
"It was very close to being unplayable. On a couple of the exposed holes the ball was moving a little bit. They could quite easily have stopped it.
"Our group backed off putts about ten times. It took five and a half hours but I don't think we could have played much faster."
An illustration of the havoc the wind was causing came again on the 16th and 17th holes, the former a 337-yard par 4 and the latter a 226-yard par 3.
"I needed to hit more club on the par 3 than I did on the par 4. That shows you. It was goofy golf, but I hung in there. I'm happy but I've got to go out and do it again."

Three years, almost two kids, and some pounds later, I wouldn't trade Jesse for anyone in the world. Sometimes things get stressful but Jesse always finds a way to make it alright. We usually don't do anything too big for birthdays or anniversary's, but we decided to go out to dinner this time around so we went to this place called Timbermine which we knew was a little high in price before we went. Everyone said how good it is and that it is worth the price. But after eating there we decided its not worth the money. We are not big meat eaters but we got the prime rib with fries, salad and bread. The salad was small and they had put too much dressing on it, the fries looked like fries from Del Taco, and the bread was not warm(which I thought was odd). We also got fried mushrooms which were better than the meal itself. We wont be going there again and it was pretty disappointing that we went there for our anniversary but Jesse and I still had a good time alone together. I don't remember the last time we went out to dinner without Lyla but it was nice to be able to relax. We took a few quick pictures while we were heading out the door and they didn't turn out how I wanted but o well, enjoy!
The pretty flowers Jesse got for me =D

This week's Fragile X Writer is an inspirational mom and blogger friend of mine - Kristie Meyer, of Life with My X Men. Kristie and I met for the first time in Miami too, although I felt like I already knew her and her family, being a devoted follower of her blog. Her two sons with Fragile X - Drew and Blake - are a couple of years old than Zack and AJ, so sometimes I feel like I might be reading about our own future possible experiences, our own progress and joys and challenges, when reading about Kristie's families adventures. The following is the story of how she first found out about Fragile X.
I was married to Eric in May of 1999. Six months later, I was pregnant and thrilled. My sister, Kelly, was also pregnant at that time, about three months ahead of me. My niece was born in April of 2000, and Drew was born in July of the same year.
Kelly and her husband, Tony already had a son, Kyle. He was two and a half and developmentally delayed. He was already in early intervention services, but had no official diagnosis. He had some disturbing behaviors like head banging and a lot of angry outbursts. They had taken him to see many doctors and had been told that he was “too social” to be considered autistic. Their search landed them at Cincinnati Children with Developmental Disabilities. They did a whole workup on him, from speech evaluations to physical exam and genetic testing.
A month or so after Kyle’s initial appointment, Kelly had a follow-up meeting to discuss the results of the tests. There was a geneticist there and she told Kelly that Kyle has something called Fragile X Syndrome. I was with her at this appointment as were Kyle and our babies. The geneticist said that Fragile X was a genetic disorder and asked about our family. We told her that I am Kelly’s only sibling. She said that our babies were at risk for having this and we should have them tested as well.
Drew was six weeks old at the time. We had his blood drawn and waited about six weeks for the results. On October 27, I got a call from the geneticist’s office. They said, “Mrs. Meyer, I am calling to inform you that your son, Andrew, has Fragile X Syndrome.” It was the call that changed our lives. I told Eric and cried on him. He just held me and said we’d be okay.
As it turned out, both my sister's and my new babies tested positive for Fragile X. Telling extended family was a painful experience. Our parents were very supportive. My mother-in-law told me that God must have thought we were pretty special to give us such a special boy. I knew she meant well, and now I can see that it was said in love and to comfort us, but at the time I didn’t find comfort in her words. I didn’t really want to be chosen for this special gift. We had extended family who said very hurtful things when they learned of it. Thankfully, most were supportive.
A month after diagnosis, my sister and I went to a Fragile X conference in Cincinnati. We spoke with Dr. Hagerman and she was delighted to learn of Drew’s FX diagnosis. She said they didn’t have many infants who were diagnosed and asked if we’d participate in a research study. We did and it was soon revealed that Drew was a mosaic of Fragile X Syndrome. This meant that some of his cells only carried a premutation and in theory, would mean he was less affected than some kids with Fragile X.
We enrolled Drew in early intervention services. The people there were wonderful. It was completely overwhelming to take him twice a week for early intervention, or Wee School, as it was called. I remember telling the intervention specialist that Drew being a mosaic of Fragile X would hopefully mean he wouldn’t ever be classified as mentally retarded. She smiled at me and said, “That is great. I hope you are right.” As it turns out, I wasn’t right. Drew is pretty significantly impaired by Fragile X. But I think I needed to hang onto the idea that he might not be too affected to deal with it at the time.
Almost three years later, we had Blake. He was not planned by us. He was, however, planned by God. We thought we would be doing Drew a favor by not having any more children. We wanted to focus our attention on him and give him everything he needed. But God knew Drew needed a playmate--someone who was more outgoing than him and would draw him into new experiences. Blake also has Fragile X Syndrome. We received his diagnosis when he was about six months old. We were participating in a research study with Drew at the time and when Blake was born, we had him tested as part of the study. We weren’t too surprised with the results and enrolled him in early intervention services right away.
|Kristie and Blake|
Now, it is twelve and a half years later and we are doing very well. I am not going to say that it has been easy. It has not. But it has been an experience that has bonded us together and has built our faith in God. Eric and I know we would not be where we are today without the Lord’s help. We are teaching our boys to love Him, too.
A Fragile X diagnosis caused us to change our dreams and expectations. There are still tears sometimes, but what we have is a rich life full of love and laughter.

One day, when Andrei's wife went into labor, Andrei was unable to get to his wife's side in time. When he arrived, he was told that his wife died in labor. However, she had twins. Siamese twins that were connected by the shoulder. Abramovichi was disgusted by his children. They were freaks of nature and, to make it worse, they killed the love of his life. He hated the children.
Not long after having them, Andrei took the twins to a nearby river. He stood on the bridge with the children over his head, ready to kill them. The man could not go through with the act, though. He had another idea.
Andrei delivered the conjoined twins to a circus director's doorstep. He put them in a basket and left a note asking that he take care of them. The circus man agreed and the twins, later named Hammer and Sickle were adopted by the circus where they spent most of their life.
- 2 Appearances of Andrei Abramovichi (Arkhamverse)
- 1 Images featuring Andrei Abramovichi (Arkhamverse)
- Quotations by or about Andrei Abramovichi (Arkhamverse)
- Character Gallery: Andrei Abramovichi (Arkhamverse)

I was banged but the cyclist, in his 50s-60s maybe fell face first and was bleeding pretty badly. We had to call 911 and someone who knew first aid stopped to help. Actually a lot of people stopped to help and I met the nice men of the Chicago Fire Department. I called his family and told his wife what hospital they were taking him to and that he was pretty out of it but okay. Nothing was broken but he got banged up pretty bad, his wife phoned me after and she told me he was ok, nothing broken, going home, but had to get stitches on his face. I feel like an a-hole even though he hit me with the bike. His wife told me he said thanks for staying with him and they didn't sound angry at me at all, which still doesn't make me feel better. Last night all I did was replay the crash over and over in my head. It was hard to sleep.
Luckily I landed on my right knee and stuck my arms out to protect myself and landed mostly on my left arm leaving some major bruises. After I got my medical card from our rental apartment we took a cab to a nearby ER and got checked out to make sure nothing was broken. They admitted me in like 15 minutes and were very nice the staff of St. Joseph's. X-rays were negative and they gave me a prescription for some extra strength pain meds I'll have to text Michelle to ask about. I do not like drugs of any kind but I don't want to be in constant pain on vacation so at least that's helping.
We did manage to save a little of the rest of the day and I'll write about that later. Chicago is so beautiful, I'm already in love.
I hope this experience will remind all of us about bicycle safety and to always always always wear a helmet. I know I am going to be way more careful when I'm on trails with bikes in the future.
- mobile blog post. spelling irrelevant.

Many thanks for your reply. I have had a look and the threads don't go back all the way to 2002 and I'm not sure whether I got the English text right. I said it was "the Mill on the Floss" but it might have been "Far from the Madding Crowd". I can't remember.
I was only thinking about it because I have been researching 11 plus exams and their effects and I came upon this forum a couple of months back. I have been reading curiously since then.
My son took the 11+ in 2002 and got what I would consider to be very high scores. Nevertheless, he was a **** of a long way from getting into KEGS and I am wondering if the exams have got harder. Looking at the letter with his scores on now, it seems to me that there must have been a very large number of very, very high scores that year.
I think they have got harder. I suspect the VR has definitely got harder too.I think that the schools have realised that children are doing up to two years of tuition and have had to respond.Ten years ago You couldn't get 11+ tution in Sainsburys for example.
It is a very rare child who hasn't had months of tuition and takes the exam now but going back a decade there were a lot more who just took the exam without prep.

I tried for an episode becoming more and more irritated the entire time. All I wanted was Chris and Wyatt and the rest of their kids. Totally agree with you on that front.
Yeah…Nathan is male lead too. I didn’t expect to like it at all, but I gave it a shot. Let me know what you think.

Today I was shocked and angered at my almost 5 old son when he started crying when his mom was tickling him while she was lying on floor and he was standing next to her. Our son said
I don’t like it.
And started crying loud. I got angered and shouted at him saying what is wrong with you?? If mom and dad play with you u don’t cry like that and told him he won’t go to his uncles room.
My wife said I was too harsh. I admit I was and I felt sorry but It reminded me of emotions when someone feel insecure of being touched as I was molested all my teenage. My anger was too much but I couldn’t control it coz I felt like something is up.
But I do not understand our son behaviour tonight and how can I find real reason behind it.

Went to Ken's for the first time over the weekend and was thrilled. I'm new to ramen so I can't compare to other places but I absolutely loved it. I had the special miso ramen and my pal had the special salt broth ramen. Both were terrific.
After reading old posts on the board I figure some people will be happy to hear that the place was packed. We sat at the bar and watched the kitchen. I was very impressed with the chef and the amazing attention to detail he gave every bowl. You would think he were plating at Clio he was so precise.
I loved my bowl. I didn't pay close attention to what I ordered since I asked the chef for a rec, so I was surprised to see the egg in the soup. I loved it! It was hard boiled medium and tasted so rich in the miso broth. The pork was also fantastic - tender and tasty.
My pal loved his bowl. I gave it a taste and think I may have liked the salt broth a little better. It wasn't as salty as the miso. It was more familiar, like pho chicken broth.
We started with shumai and that was also very good, dare I say "steamed to perfection." I love shumai and have it often so I can compare this to other places and I think Ken's is very good, The texture was great and the shrimp was very sweet.
I can't wait to go back and try more.
Updated 1 year ago | 12
Updated 1 year ago | 1
Updated 1 year ago | 2
Updated 2 days ago | 152
Updated 5 days ago | 39

He arrived to our home in NYC the night of Saturday, 3/21/09.
When we went to pick a Shiba from our breeder, we looked for a dog that would best fit our personalities. Shio and his brother were both eager to meet us, but we chose Shio because he did not nip at us like Nate did and was not as hyper. The other Shibas that were available either had food/toy aggression or carried the breed flaw of being too shy.
Although Shio wasn’t as good looking as his brother, we knew that Shio’s colors and markings would change over time. The black Shiba snout that Shio has will lighten up as he gets older and his fur color will change as he transitions into adult fur.

MURPHY; Michael John. March 9, 1959 ~ July 7, 2014. Mike took his final fishing trip on July 7, 2014 on Kinbasket Lake at the Mica Dam. Mike was born in Windsor, ON March 9, 1959. After graduating high school Mike moved to the Columbia Valley, BC in 1979. Mike met his wife in 1981 and they were married in 1983 in Invermere, BC. The family moved to Vancouver in 1985, where Mike finished his apprenticeship and became a journeyman Electrician. Over the past 28 years Mike has worked on many projects and had risen from journeyman to superintendent on his last project, Mica Dam. On his down time Mike enjoyed golfing, fishing and working on many projects at the family home. Mike enjoyed travelling to Thailand, which he called his second home. What Mike enjoyed most was his time at home with his family. He is sadly missed and survived by his wife of 31 years Val, and daughter Isabelle (Cody), his sons Leroy (Cecili), Richard and Curtis, his pride and joy were his grandson Odyn and granddaughter Miya. He is also survived by his parents Ed and Maxine Murphy of Windsor, ON, his brother Larry (Nancy) and sisters Liz (Dan) and Pam, as well as many nieces and nephews.
A celebration of Mike’s life will take place on Sunday, August 17th, at the Silverdale Community Hall, located at 8760 McLean Ave., Mission, BC from 1:00 pm until 5:00 pm. In lieu of flowers the family asks that you make a donation to the Ralstons and Associates or Revelstoke Search and Rescue in Mike’s name.
“May you always have your ass in the water,
toes in the sand and a cold Leo beer in your hand.”

When Norheim, 26, was a teenager, he and his cat – Ernst – were practically best friends, he told public broadcaster SVT which first reported on the strange tale*.
“I have always wondered what happened to him when he one day suddenly did not come home,” he said, adding that eventually he just assumed the pet had died in an accident.
Norheim moved to Norway, got a driving licence, girlfriend and children, writes SVT.
Last year he moved back to Skellefteå and last week the town's animal shelter called. They had found a homeless cat whose microchip details matched Ernst's – did he want his pet back?
“I laughed and cried at the same time when they called. Everything was upside down and I was completely sure they had dialled the wrong number – it obviously sounded totally impossible that Ernst would have returned after nine years,” said Norheim.
As it turns out, Ernst never went far. He had been staying with an elderly couple in a village outside of Skellefteå and when they died he was brought to the animal shelter.
The cat has now moved back in with Norheim, his partner and two-year-old son.
“I was a little bit nervous at first, wondered if it was really him and if he would recognize me,” said Norheim. “But as soon as I saw him I was sure, he looked exactly the same as nine years ago.”
This still does not beat The Local's favourite cat story, which was when Glitter the cat ran away from his family in Bromölla, Sweden, and turned up in southern France some 1,700 kilometres from home.
*We intentionally avoided a tail/tale pun above. You're welcome.

Of course I've heard Leonard Cohen's "Hallelujah" before (everyone and his brother's covered it), but I somehow had never heard this exquisite Jeff Buckley version until last Sunday. In a yoga class, actually. I liked it so much that I asked the instructor who it was. Hence I've been discovering Jeff Buckley. Admittedly, I'm not nearly as enamored of his other stuff as I am of his "Hallelujah," but he was clearly talented, and it's a shame he died so young.
Just had to share what is going to become an immediate addition to my "heartbreakingly beautiful" playlist.

I am so excited to announce that I'm a winner of this years PaperCrafts magazine "2011 Stamping Royalty Contest"!!! This was my third year entering this contest, I felt very good about what I submited in. As time went by, I was crossing my figures and was thinking how cool it would be if I won. Well, it came! Two days before my birthday I received an email stating that I had won in the birthday catogory! That was one of the best birthday presents I could of asked for! The funny thing is when I saw the email I had no idea who it was from, I saw the heading but I was somewhat unsure about opening it. I was thinking it could be spam or some kind of joke. I'm so glad I opened it! Even after I opened it I had to read it about 3-4 times before I was like, "this is the real deal"! I still have the email and I dont know if I'll ever delete it. :) After knowing I won something this big, I had to stay quiet for about week before I could spill the beans. Do you know how hard that was!?! Well, I'm not quiet about it anymore and this was a little something that was made for all of us winners!

Well, tonight was our first Halloween as a family. It was the first time Mike & Kerri got to actually GO Trick-or-Treating!
There aren't pictures but you will know what they looked like when we tell you that Zach went as a soccer player and Sean went as a Termite football player. They were so cute! They both made sure to tell anyone who would listen that it wasn't just a costume but that they actually played the sport they were representing.
The best part was the method of travel. Kerri and the boys bundled-up in blankets and rode on the tailgate of the truck while Mike drove around the neighborhood. Don't worry though - he never went over 60 mph! :o)
To both of our surprise they both overfilled the pumpkin buckets they carried with them!

Which Indian cricketer is known as "Brown Bradman"?
Which of the countries has had a prime minister whose name featured the name of his country?
Which of the gulf city was a dependency of Bombay Presidency under British rule for almost a century?
What is the maximum size of an integer array in C?
With which field is Enrico Fermi associated?
When was the first public passenger train run in India and from where to where?
How many balls are there
in java array program
In which state of Australia would you find the area known as the Wheatbelt?
Which military bugle call is traditionally played to get soldiers out of bed?
A girl is twice as old as her brother and half as old as her father. In 22 years, her brother will be half as old as his father. How old is all three now?
Suppose I am a grandfather. My grandson is about as old in days as my son is in weeks. He is also as many months old as I am in years. Together, the three of us are 140 years old. How old am I?
Simran's father was 24 years of age when she was born while her mother was 24 years old when her brother six years younger to her was born. What is the difference between the ages of her parents?
My aunt is 45 years old and her mother Manjulika is 73 years old. Can you find out how many years ago, her mother was three times her age?
Forgot Your Password?
2018 © Queryhome

What happens when you put two, active teenagers in a club together? Then after a big fight, she walks away with just a little scare, leaving the other almost dead![Crossover with Dark Angel]
Couples: M/A, S/R & L/J
It was a Friday night and John was were all 19 years olds would be. At a club dancing and drinking. He'd finally been able to get there at around 10:11p.m after sneaking away from Sue, Ben and Reed. They were all scared that he was gonna do something stupid...Again.
The song 'Dirrty' by Christina Aguilera came on all the couples split up and started grinding or left completely to get a drink or talk with their friends. He looked over to where a few girls were dancing on a big block. He'd seem then all before, except one. She was a tall blonde about 5'6 her hair was down to her mid-back. She was in high-heels, a black skirt and a shiny silver kinda see threw belly tank top. Not to mention she look very, very HOT.
He didn't know why, but she seemed to stick out a little. She didn't look any different from the other girls, but she still looked...out of place. She knew how to dance, but it was like she didn't recognize the songs. 'Dirrty' was a popular song, and all the other girls knew what little action to do for the song, but this girl had no idea. She just danced to it like it was a regular song.
"Whatever!" John though, finally looking away. He wasn't gonna go up there to her. Besides it was kind of an un-written rule that that's where all the girls dance when they didn't feel like dancing with a guy.
At about 2:30 am John decided he'd better be heading back, before they sent a SWAT team after him. He was just about to leave when he noticed the girl from the box was beside him. They both made eye contact with each other, before she moved into his arms and began grinding with him. He wrapped his arms tighter around her as she pressed her body harder against his.
They stayed like that for about 2 more songs before the girl looked up at him and said "I've gotta go" into his ear. Normally he would have asked her to stay for another song, but he had to go too. John was surprised that she hadn't asked him about how it was like to be on fire, or what it was like being a 'super-hero' She hadn't even attempted to ask.
"K" was all he said before letting her go. She simply walked away towards the back doors and left the still booming club. He walked over to the tables were his coat was and then heading towards the same door. He knew she'd probably gotten into a cab or something but, for some reason he was hoping to see her again.
'Get over yourself' He scolded himself. 'Its just ONE girl, you see plenty of then just walking down the street.' But this one was different. She wasn't just dancing with him, or talking with him because of who he was. She didn't even seem to know he was famous.
When he finally got to the back doors, he could hear a fight going on. This wasn't unusual for him to see or hear. The back doors lead to an ally and there were lots of fights there. Usually over drugs or money. As he rounded the corner were the fight was at, he saw their shadows. 3 guys and one girl.
When rounded the corner he was very surprised at what he saw. From the looks of it, the blonde girl he was with before was winning the fight. There was already one man down against the wall, and un-contions. The other two were on either side of her. Both in their very early 20's with big coats and baggy pants. John was about to help, when he saw one of then pull out a knife. The blonde did a back flip and landed behind the one without a weapon. She spun him around and kneed him in the groin before flipping him on his back and kicking him in the chest. As soon as the blow hit him, he was into a coughing fit.
The blonde turned around just in time to be stabbed right through the rib cage. "AWWWW" she screamed in clear pain backing away from the man, with the knife still in her. She looked down at it before pulling it out quickly and putting it right into the middle of the mans' stomach. He gave out a loud yell before falling onto his knees. The girl walked up to him and gave him a side kick to the head before he finally fell down.
John was looking at her wide eyed. She looked so small, and innocent before. Now she was a fighting-killing machine. Well that wasn't fair, the guys HAD attacked her, and he wasn't sure if the man was dead or not. Johnny came back to what was going on in front of him just in time to catch a foot heading right for his face.
She didn't try and kick him again, and he didn't flip her. They were both just looking at each other. Sizing each other up. After a few seconds, Johnny smiled at her and asked "So...You want your leg back?" It wasn't really a question more of...an ice breaker.
"Yeah, that'd be a good think to have walking home" she said smiling at him as he let her leg go. "So, what are you doing out here?" She asked looking at him with an emotionless face.
"I live a few block from here" He said causally "Listen why don't you come back to my place so-" But he was cut off "No thank you, Sorry, but I'm not that kind of girl" She said to him before turning to leave. She suddenly wasn't so attracted to him anymore, and she was making it clear.
"NO!" John yelled at her, and grabbed her arm "No, no, I didn't mean for you to sleep with me, I just mean so I can get you patched up "He told her calmly, referring to all the blood now oozing from her side.
"It's ok" she told him, putting her hand on her gash. "I'm fine, I'll heal" She said again trying to leave, but her vision become a little blurry. "No you're not. Don't worry I'm not that kinda guy either" Johnny told her. "And even if I was, I'm pretty sure, you could Handel it." He said to her, referring to the three guys on the ground. "Come on, I'll just get you patched up, and if you want you can leave. Promise" He said putting his hand over his heart.
The girl just nodded, and began following him. He rapped his arm around her when she stared to stumble, from the blood loss. "Maybe we should take you to a Hospit-"
"NOO!" She yelled loudly. "We are NOT going there" She said very sternly. "Oook" John said slowly, surprised about how much she didn't want to go to a hospital. Most people would have said yes right away.
10 minutes later John walked into the pent-house type place. The first thing he saw was Reed, looking very pissed. But his face quickly changed when he saw the un-concious girl in his arms with blood now on both of their clothes.
"John! What the hell did you do!" He hissed at the younger man. "Nothing!" John hissed back. "She was in a fight and I found her" He said giving the short versions.
"k, well lets patch her up" reed said walking towards them. "OH no we can't! She was cut in her ribs, Do you really think it'll be a good idea if we take off her top?" He asked the older man. "Well what do YOU want us to do!" Reed hissed. John just looked at him like her was the bigger idiot in the world. "You know, for a rocket scientist, you're not that smart" he snapped back, heading towards Sue's room. Before he went in, he placed the small girl on top of an examining table then disappeared into Sues room.
A few minutes later, Sue walked out dressed in a crimson red tank top and blue jeans with her blonde hair in a high ponytail. Her brother showed her over to where the still bleeding girl was lying. He'd already explained to her what happened.
"k, I think I can stop the bleeding, but I'll have to do a small operation" She said after looking at how bad the cut was. From what her brother told her, she was expecting it to be worse. "k you two need to go" she said looking up at them both as she turned of a few lights. Reed was about to say something, when his fiancÃ© interrupted him. "Its ok, I can do it! The knife didn't go in all the way" From what her brother had said to her, she was thinking it had, but from the deepness of the cut, there was no way it had, unless it was a small knife but switch blade weren't that small. "Now, go" she insisted, closing the door behind them.
12 HR. later the small blonde finally woke up. There were 3 faces looking at her, and she was sure that someone was standing behind the sofa. But the blonde girl caught her eyes first. "MAX!" She said looking directly at Sue.
HATE IT? LIKE IT? LOVE IT? PLEASE TELL ME IN A REVIEW!

Written on: 01/05/2012 by Rhysjones1990 (1 review written)
Booked an appointment to see a salesman in The Trade Centre Wales. We were told on the phone prior to the appointment that as long as we arrived before 8pm we could collect a car of our choice. We arrived at The Trade Centre Wales at approx. 5.45 PM. We asked for the salesman we had booked an appointment with and we were told that it was his day off. We explained that we had an appointment and it took them around 15 minutes to find our appointment and when they did they couldn't even get the name right. We were then introduced to a salesman named Olly, who from the start had a face like a kid who just had a row. All he did was basically tell us that the cars were in no order at all and to look around and he would catch up with us later on. No later than 10 minutes he was onto us about picking a car. He wasn't interested in actually showing us any cars, he just kept coming back and forth asking us if we found anything. Eventually we found a car that we liked (All by ourselves may I add). We discussed prices and he was even kind enough to drop £200 from the screen price and offer what we wanted for our P/X. We then proceeded to the 'office' (which was a table in the corner of the showroom). Prices were agreed and we said we would like to proceed with this car. He told us that all the finance was in place and ready to go but collections had finished at 6pm and there was no way we could take the car that night. We explained that they told us we could take the car over the phone and that we had travelled around 40 miles to get there and he said ''it's not happening tonight''. If it were down to me I would have told him to shove it there and then but I could see the disappointment in my girlfriends face so I agreed to go home and he assured us that the car would be ready to collect the next day. He said that The Trade Centre Wales would call me tomorrow and arrange a time for collection. I stayed in all day and not one phone call. I left it until 4.45pm until I called them. They lied to me and told me that they had been calling all day and they would have left a voicemail but there wasn't the facility. Both my mobile and landline have voicemails and not one missed call was on either phone. I was promised a call back from someone in the finance department within the next 5 minutes. 40 Minutes passed before I had to call and ask what was happening....I was promised a call back (again) within 5 minutes. Half hour passed before I called again and guess what....they wanted another 5 minutes. 5 minutes later the phone actually rang and it was the same person from the finance department. They said 'finance is all good and it has been accepted for the term you wanted but the only problem is collections have left early'' and that's not all, they then proceeded to tell me that the finance company would only finance us for £1000 less than the agreed amount, so The Trade Centre Wales would knock £300 off the car to compensate, they said that our payments would go up by £29 per month. over four years that's an amazing £1392. He figures were way out so I don't know who employed this person as a finance manager. I then explained that what she was saying is a complete load of tosh and to cancel everything, To which they replied 'No problem we don't want business from people like yourself anyway''. I was gobsmacked. I hung up the phone and started to write this review. I plan on sitting outside The Trade Centre Wales for a few days warning off all their customers and handing out fliers on reasons to avoid them. Tell em Trevor sent ewe (To be ripped off).

Surprise, surprise I didn't exercise today either. Boy, this is getting bad! I am finding that I should have maybe started another 30 day challenge rather than this one. I don't know what is going on with my baby, but the past few days he has been super fussy. He wants to constantly be held and he is back to breastfeeding every 1.5-2 hours (we were at about a three hour time span). Then the easiest way for him to fall asleep is to breastfeed. If I try and put him down after he is done eating and has been alseep for a bit he wakes up instantly and then it is hard to get him back to sleep unless I feed him again, which I really don't want to do because I would just be breastfeeding 24/7. So, for most of today I was holding the baby so that he could get some sleep. During the night he has been super fussy too and I have been lacking in the sleep department, which makes me too tired to exercise in the morning.
Then there is the toddler. For the most part he is pretty good, but he has his moments and those seem to be at the end of the day. Although, today he seemed to have them starting around noon. Dealing with his tantrums and terrible twos is tiring and bedtime couldn't come soon enough. Once he was in bed and the baby was asleep I felt like I got a break! I had some dessert (are you surprised by that?) and now I am catching up in this and with some email. I am too tired to exercise and am ready to go to bed shortly.
Perhaps tomorrow I will have more energy and time to continue with level two, so that I can get it over and done with!

Money's been a bit tight lately, so I painted a few models for friends' Christmas presents. I really hope that they're happy with how they turned out.
Quite a few people that I've told about this present seemed to think that it was a weird idea, basically suggesting that I was helping him to insult my army. I see it differently. First, it seems like a compliment to my Executioners paint scheme that he wants it to be part of his army. Second, our armies spend a lot of time on the table together, so I think it advances our personal narrative to have them visually linked.

I went to two events downtown. The first was trying to fight traffic after a Padres game. The second was me getting lost. The Hyatt Hotel near the convention center had a festival showcasing American Indian culture. I put on the one Indian shirt I own, which has colorful embroidery around the collar and on the pockets. Since the event started at 3 p.m., I figured I'd arrive around 4:30 p.m. I didn't realize a Padres game would be ending at 4:00 and that driving downtown would be a mad house. There were pedestrians everywhere, lots of cars slowing things down, and police officers trying to direct traffic.
I eventually made it inside, where I saw dancers, musicians, and storytellers from Alaska, New Mexico, South Dakota, and California. The food smelled good, but I wasn't hungry. One person I asked said, "You've got to try the buffalo and wild rice. It's fantastic." I grabbed a bottled water.
Former U.S. senator Ben Nighthorse Campbell was hosting the event.
Several people were dressed up, a few in feather headdress, and others with bells on their boots. I asked one older guy if I could take his picture for the Reader. He said, "If it's Reader's Digest, yes." He then laughed for about a minute, before I was able to snap a shot of him.
There was a guy on stage telling a story about killer whales. He was very animated, did many voices, and had a small drum in his hand that he'd beat for emphasis. I was distracted by the kids walking around that were dressed up, jingling from the bells attached to their moccasins.
One guy came in with a Padres cap and T-shirt. He grabbed some food and quickly left. Two other guys were standing there talking the entire time the story was being told from stage. They were more interested in the shot Tiger Woods made at the Masters than what the guy onstage had to say. I'm not sure why they didn't just go out to the lobby, where there were couches and a nice view of the Coronado Bridge.
During a quiet point in the story, I heard three or four cans of soda being opened. Surprisingly, not a single cell phone rang.
After the story was told, they brought dancers out to do a "Buffalo Dance." The intro mentioned how important the Buffalo was: "It wasn't just for food. We used every part of it, for clothing and tools. [The buffalo] was like our supermarket."
As I was getting ready to leave, I saw an old Indian praying in the lobby.
Two women were leaving at the same time, and one said, "I loved those bird singers." The other said, "I loved the Indian dudes with long hair. They were kind of hot."
The next day I was invited to an opening of a club called Altitude. It's on the top floor of the Marriott. I was invited by Jamie, who had invited me to her rugby team's party, before telling me that the coach didn't want me there. I had seen the Marriott right next to the Hyatt, where the Indian shindig was the day before, so I headed over. The invite said it was on the 22nd floor, so I jumped into an elevator. On the 22nd floor all I saw were rooms. I went back to the lobby and saw a guy carrying towels to a room. I asked him what the deal was and he said, "You were probably in the wrong tower. We have two towers here." So I went to the other tower. Same thing. I went back down to the lobby, and when I asked someone, they said, "There's no party going on here. But there is one going on at the Marriott on K Street." It then occurred to me that Jamie did tell me it was in the Gaslamp.
There were a few tables to check in at, and then I headed up in the elevator.
The view was amazing. You can see the ballpark, although you're so high up, you can't recognize the players. I wondered if they were going to put some kind of guardrail up. One could fall, or easily jump, over the edge.
When I was waiting in line for a drink, a guy got pissed that he could only get a Cosmopolitan or a Martini. He walked away mad as the woman was trying to tell him he could get anything else from the waitress. I started talking to a guy from South Africa. He is a massage therapist. I asked his girlfriend if she got a lot of massages. She laughed and said, "Not enough." When she went to talk to another couple, he told me he's only given her three in the two years they've dated. "She was stressed one time from work," he explains. "I came over with my table, unfolded it, and said 'Someone ordered a massage?' She loved it."
As I took in the view high atop downtown, I noticed there were searchlights for this event and a lot of security guards.
I overheard two bald guys talking about how they shave their heads. One said, "Don't you get ingrown hairs doing it that way?" The other said something about Bic Shrivel heads and electric razors.
I was with a few guys that were looking over the edge. One said, "There's no way the fire marshal will let this stand. Not only could someone easily fall, but you could throw a glass over the edge. If it landed on someone down below, they'd be dead." Another man was arguing with me over what he called "an irrational fear of heights." I said, "It's not irrational. If I fall over the edge, my head squishes like a melon. That seems like rational logic to me. It's not like I can't stand here because I'm paralyzed with fear. I just don't particularly like heights." He said I should see a psychiatrist. He then went into a long story about his cousin having a fear of spiders. He asked what I thought of spiders, and I said, "I love them. That Charlotte was adorable, always posting messages on her web. But a spider can't push me over this edge. If a spider comes up to me, I can step on it. See how rational that is?"
I finally met up with Jamie and she introduced me to her fiancé Adrian. He grabbed us a few appetizers from a waitress walking by. And someone brought up something that tasted like the egg rolls at Jack in the Box. We then got into a conversation about our favorite fast foods. When he mentioned the tacos at Jack in the Box, I said I eat them on occasion, but that I think they're crappy and greasy. He said, "I don't know what the meat is they use. It could be assholes and eyeballs; I don't care. They taste good."
The waitresses were soon telling everyone to go downstairs for dinner. The DJ stopped spinning tunes so a guy could tell us about the activities going on below. They had a second party they were hosting upstairs, and they also wanted everyone to hit the restaurant on the ground floor. He ended by emphasizing, "And there's lots of food. Just take the elevator to get to the food."
There was one blonde in a blue outfit that was so drunk she couldn't walk. There was another guy we thought was drunk, but we weren't sure. He was in a wheelchair, missing a leg, and had a beer in his hand. Adrian said, "I don't think he's drunk. I just think he's asleep." I don't know why he'd fall asleep in the middle of the event if there wasn't alcohol involved. Someone else overheard this and said, "Do you think it takes less alcohol to get you drunk if you're missing your arms and legs? There's less blood in your body, so I would assume you'd be drunk after just one or two beers."
Downstairs there were some statues, and Adrian, who had a little buzz going, was fondling a few of them. He was doing it mostly to make us laugh, and he was doing a great job. He was hysterical. When we were waiting in line for pizza, we were joking with two cute girls. One of them said to me, "You know he's gay, right?" I replied, "That would be news to his fiancé." She insisted that nobody would act the way he did. He was spanking a few waitresses that walked by and being flamboyant. When I told him what the girls said, he then went into a gay voice and talked about their outfits. He was being sarcastic, but one of them said, "See, see! Listen to that voice."
We stood there eating our pizza and laughing as Adrian would cut in line for another slice. When the cook left for a few minutes, Adrian walked behind the table and started cooking, throwing a few pieces into the air and onto the pan. It was like watching Robin Williams. A less hairy Robin Williams.
Adrian would go up to the women and occasionally say things like "I'm not gay just because I bring men to bed once in a while." It would always make me laugh, but they would always say "See?"
I asked Jamie how they met. She told me the story of seeing him in college and wanting to sit next to him. She said, "I thought he was cute, and when he started talking to me, I realized we had a lot in common. I did some traveling, and we weren't dating for awhile. When I came back, one of our friends said he kept talking about me. I never even thought I would get married. He proposed to me on the rugby field."
One waitress we joked with looked like Hilary Swank. I always seem to run into women that look like her. When we told her that, she said, "I hear it all the time. And I always think of how she looked in Boys Don't Cry, and that scares me."
One young kid that was working there overheard this and asked me about movies. It turns out he wants to be a filmmaker. We talked about Sin City. I told him I liked it but thought the dialog could've been better, especially with Quentin Tarantino involved. He said Tarantino was one of his favorites. A lady walking by said, "Why do young people love that guy's movies? He's so overrated."
There were oysters and caviar, but I stayed away from those. They had this lobster on crackers that were delicious. And, with Adrian bringing me drinks, I was getting pretty blitzed. Once the fog machine started going, I was sure I was going to fall on my ass.
I was running late for a racquetball game and called my friend to tell him I'd be late. I sat down, hoping to sober up a bit. I asked Adrian if it bothered him that those two women thought he was gay. He said, "No. But it's funny that one of them had so much metal in her face it was scary. And she's commenting on me. The other one said she had been involved in a threesome. I think she was looking for another threesome. And she was the one that said she had a boyfriend that wasn't here."
I waited another 15 minutes and then had the valet bring my car over. I tried not to stumble, thinking they wouldn't let me drive off if they thought I was drunk. I knew I only had to make it to Friars Road, otherwise I wouldn't have driven. My drink total was only five apple martinis.
I made it to the racquetball court and tried playing. Wayne said, "What's wrong? You're missing every shot." I was swinging the racquet like I was swatting at flies.
I just hope I got enough exercise in the short time we played to burn off the pizza and lobster calories.
Crash your party? Call 619-235-3000 x421 and leave an invitation for Josh Board.

Aimee Osbourne is a writer for Nylon Magazine who, in 2002, opted out of being on the MTV reality series “The Osbournes.” Aimee decided to have no involvement in the show that, at the time, was the highest viewed one on MTV. This meant that whenever she was in the house, the cameras weren’t allowed to record.
She still appeared with her family on a few occasions, but never on the show. Usually, when family photos were on camera, her face would be blurred out. Even since the show finished airing in 2005, she has remained largely out of the public eye.
She was seen on 20/20 with her whole family when Sharon was diagnosed with colon cancer, and was involved with her family during the 30th Annual Music Awards, but never spoke about her family until December 2003. Then, she criticized MTV, claiming they were making her father a “laughing stock.”
She appeared again with her family in 2006 for A&E’s Biography series, and was a guest on Piers Morgan’s show Life Stories in 2009. Today, she is still active in the fashion industry.

I have not painted my toe nails since last September. The last time they were painted he did it for me. I left it on for weeks, watching sadly as it wore away and grew out. Eventually I removed the last traces of it in mid December and a bit like my pubes vowed I wouldn’t paint them again until I was going to see them. Obviously I don’t paint my pubes, I am referring to shaving them.
I had shared a fantasy with him of being got ready for a night out. Being washed, underwear, a dress and shoes selected for me. Painting my nails and brushing my hair. We had talked about how it would work and what it would involve. How it would be him picking and choosing and controlling.
The idea had grown in my head years ago when I had started to think about hot it would be for someone to paint my toe nails if done in such a way as to be about that person pleasing themselves by doing it. A man kneeling at your feet and painting your toe nails could so easily be seen as a submissive act on his part and I can absolutely see how that would be hot too. Being directed, told to get it right. Servicing your woman to please her. Maybe a reward for a good boy or girl if they did a good job. The dominant side of my sexuality that I am just starting to explore is finding some of those ideas increasingly hot but this was not that.
This was about him marking me. Like the bruises he had left on my thighs and breasts or how he had come on me. It felt like just another version of that but I had failed to bring any nail polish with me. Luckily they sell it in the shops in America and so off we went to CVS. He told me to go pick a colour. That was easy. I picked his favourite colour; a deep rich purple.
A few nights later when we were getting ready to go out to dinner he asked where the polish was. Then we sat outside in the warm summer air and he took each of my feet in turn and with the precision and focus which he applies to so much of his life he carefully painted each toenail. I reached for my camera and took the picture you see above. I wanted to capture that moment because it felt so special and also really fucking sexy too. It was just another way for him to mark my body.
Of course the topic on Kink of the Week is currently washing and grooming and I knew I was going to write about him painting my nails but I also have to mention him washing my hair which is did a lot whilst I was there in Miami. There is something about someone else washing your hair that is turns it from a perfunctory activity that you do almost without thinking into a sensual and sensory experience. I wash my hair a lot, but it never feels like it does when he does it. The way he massaged my hair and scalp, taking his time. Again that feeling of being his sole focus, the centre of his attention is a very intoxicating. To be cared for by another human being in that way may seem such a simple thing but it is actually very intimate.
Of all the time we shared together him painting my toenails and gently washing my hair was just as intimate as all the sex we had, maybe in some weird way even more so. The bond we created in those moments was powerful and intense and I long for the time when we can share experiences like that again. Yes I want to fuck with him with wild and passionate abandon but I also want to shave and bathe him and have him paint my toenails pretty colours again.

In an exclusive interview with a leading English daily, Poonam Pandey gushed about her dare-bare act for Shahrukh Khan. She said that she has stripped for the whole team of SRK as they played wonderfully this season. She added that she is a huge SRK fan and she really wanted to do it for him.
Poonam Pandey further said that she had promised to strip during the World Cup, but she could not do it due to legal problems. She added that this time, she has done it within the four walls of her house and posted it on her account. She gushed, “I had to do it this time as I didn’t want to disappoint my fans.”
However, Poonam Pandey, who is busy with her acting workshops, is all set to debut in films. She said that this picture is just a trailer and there is more to come. She added that she will start shooting for a movie next month and she would do everything that the script demands and keep posting hot pictures on her micro-blogging sites for her fans.

I have had two very significant professional experiences with David over the years and he has helped me so much that I feel I need to share this with others so that they may find him. He does not need more business; this is public service message.
The first time he helped me was to help resolve my deceased mother's estate. As anyone who has experienced this situation knows, the death of a parent is very sad and very stressful. It is also a time where family disagreements can emerge. I needed help getting my mother's small estate settled. My siblings and I could not agree on the method to do this. David initially was consulted to help all of us mutually. It ended up he represented me. He helped get this potentially bad experience resolve by guiding us to a very reputable and experienced third-party manager who for a very modest fee worked with all of us to settles the estate. David handled this with understanding, thoroughness and skill.
The second professional interaction that I have had with David was with the unfortunate ending of my marriage from my spouse who I very much still love. This was the most significantly sad and distressing event of my whole life. Initially my ex-wife and I tried to use a 100 percent collaborative approach to our divorce. We had several young children and significant personal assets, and our mutual goal was to have a healthy, stable family relationship as an end result. As an inherent part of the collaborative approach, it was necessary to have both parties be represented by their own counsel. This led to the almost inevitable conflict as each lawyer represented their own client's best interest. A more adversarial type of divorce process developed as time went on.
The end result was that I think occurred was the best possible outcome for me, my ex-wife and our children other than if a divorce and the reason for it had never occurred.
David contributed very significantly to making this happen. I was very sad and very anxious during the process. He made himself available to me and provided careful, thorough and compassionate advice in a way that made it seem as I was his only client. That obviously was not the case. He has many clients who he was helping with similarly important matters.
Not only did David provide me with expert legal advice but he provided me with very insightful personal advice to help me stay in the right frame of mind. When I would go off course in my thinking, he very solidly steered me back to a productive thought process in a non-judgmental manner. I never asked him how much he thought that the process would cost because I would have paid any price to have things turn out well. In the end, while the process was not inexpensive, the costs that I paid for his legal services were such a high value considering the amount and quality of advice that he provided to me.
I think that David and I had a particularly good working relationship because we have a similar personality and way of thinking. He is very methodical, likes to his explain his thought process and the nuances to the decision-making process. He makes it very clear that the law and outcomes, especially in matters such as this are not black and white nor predictable. I understood and accepted that reality. Some people may come to the situation wanting their lawyer to tell them with certainty what will happen. Some people would only be confident in their attorney if there was arrogance and bluster. That type of person would not likely find David to be their best fit. For me, he was the perfect fit though. I told him many times that I felt like he was what it would be like if I had an older, much smarter brother who happened to be a lawyer. He cared that much about me and my case.

Join free now!
It is free to search locals
Escort Mommy, Child deals with University expenses; mother has a suggestion, incest stories. Concerning a year ago, I was truly struggling at University. Even though my course was paid for thanks to my mom, my living costs were simply way too much. I actually looked for a job, yet no person would certainly use me a job, not even as a dishwashing machine. My mama provided to help yet I refused, although it seems stupid, I had some honesty, I wished to endure without cash from my mother, that had actually already paid a lot for my education. I really wanted to verify to myself as well as my mommy that I was a grown-up currently; I required to be able to do this on my very own.
University was about 100 miles from home as well as every weekend I would see my mama, I did miss her, she resembled my best friend. She treated me as an equivalent and we were open to talk about anything. She was a successful lawyer at a neighborhood law firm, though as a result of personal nature of her service she never ever did inform me much.
Anyway it was Thanksgiving of my second year, and so far I had actually simply taken care of to make it through, yet I was so close to either quitting or robbing a financial institution. I got back to a wintry welcome. It was rather cool and the snow was coming down rather quick, I only just managed to get residence. As soon as home I was greeted comfortably by both my mama and also a really welcome fire. We did not have a family, just both people, so customarily it was simply the two people for thanksgiving, not that it bothered either of us, we took pleasure in each other's company. However while we spoke about basic stuff, my mind kept discussing what mother had told me. Mother was still a stunning lady, even if she had actually simply turned 40, and her boobs look wonderful, even when she first had them done, I informed her she looked so attractive and that any male would certainly want to be with her. I claimed that if we were in a room together filled with guys, I wager all the men would pick her, also without the boob job she was rather. Mommy thanked me for the praise however stated I was wrong and that I was the truly stunning one, she told me that a minimum of my large busts were real, 36d in case you ask.
So after supper and also cleaning up we went back to the living-room. My mind was still on what mama had suggested regarding me functioning as an escort, no question I would certainly enjoy it, and also being paid like mama for something we both appreciated was something that interested me. I think I was simply shocked, before she informed me, I saw my mom as a highly regarded female in the office, currently I saw her as a very sex-related lady, I can really see that mom looked happy, as well as who would not want to have sex with such an attractive woman. It was just my whole picture of mom had actually altered, which had not been a negative thing, yet it was something I was having difficulty not considering, particularly picturing my mama making love with all those unusual guys.
So the next day mother took me to fulfill Monica and obtain the examinations I required. Then mom took me looking for a stylish attire for the night. We would meet the client at a dining establishment and then at some point go back to his resort for an evening of pure unadulterated sex.
The evening ultimately arrived and I was truly nervous, however thanks to my mother besides me, I was ready to go. We were both using eveningwear, mine was red while mommy's was black, and also we both used push up bras to offer our boobs more pizzazz, along with a band. We took a cab and reached the dining establishment in a timely manner. Mother provided the name of our reservation and we were brought about a table where the client was sat waiting.
Mother took charge and also asked me to rest on his left while she took the right. Mom was so amazing; she provided the client all the typical vanity boosting lines, working him well. It gave me the possibility to loosen up as well as see her job. Quickly the client provided my leg a capture and turned to speak to me. I was pretty kicked back now, as well as a glass of wine earlier in the house and one currently loosened me up sufficient to switch on the charm.
call girl Penton Hook, brothels Penton Hook, prostitutes Penton Hook, hookers Penton Hook, sluts Penton Hook, whores Penton Hook, gfe Penton Hook, girlfriend experience Penton Hook, shagging Penton Hook, dogging Penton Hook, fuck buddy Penton Hook, hookups Penton Hook, free sex Penton Hook, sex meet Penton Hook, nsa sex Penton Hook
| ||136379|| ||88866|| ||166581|| ||163072|| ||122620|

Hermes: Thief, Traveler, Messenger
Jack of All Trades-Including God of Trades
Hermes appears in more stories than any of the other gods largely because he was the messenger of Zeus in addition to being the god who communicated with the mortals.
As the herald and messenger, Hermes returned the kidnapped Persephone to her mother, Demeter. He notified the world that Aphrodite had a bounty on Psyche's head. He escorted King Priam to Achilles to retrieve the body of his son Hector. He delivered the order to Calypso to release his great grandson Odysseus from her island and transported Hera, Aphrodite and Athena, along with the Apple of Discord, to Paris for a beauty contest.
As the thug enforcer for his father, Zeus, he killed Argos, the hundred-eyed giant watchman of Hera, to free his father's lover Io. He also chained Prometheus to a mountain where he faced the eternal punishment of having his liver eaten by an eagle every day for eternity.
As a thief, Hermes stole his father's lover, Io, from Hera, and he stole his kidnapped brother Ares from the Aloadae giants who were keeping him in a bronze jar. He also helped Perseus steal Medusa's head. Those were in addition to his famous theft of his brother's cattle, but more on that to follow.
As the god of merchants, he sold his half-brother Heracles into slavery. He also had many appearances in Aesop's fables.
As a protector of young children, it was Hermes who saved the twin sons of Callisto after Hera turned her into a bear for mating with Zeus and Artemis then killed her for losing her virginity. He was the one that took his baby brother, Dionysus, to the baby's Aunt Ino for protection from their stepmother Hera. He was also the one who rescued his brother Apollo's son, Asclepius, from his mother's womb upon her funeral pyre after Artemis killed her for cheating on Apollo.
As a psychopomp, escort of the dead to the Underworld, he assisted Heracles in his attempt to retrieve Cerberus as one of the twelve labors. When Protesilaus was the first Greek casualty of the Trojan War, it was Hermes that brought him back from the Underworld to spend three hours with his wife who loved him so much she returned with him to Hades after their time was up. It was also Hermes who found Sisyphus after he kept sneaking out of the Underworld and brought him back to eternally push that boulder up the hill.
As the god of athletes, Hermes invented the sports of foot racing and wrestling. In this role, he used a gymnastics contest to select suitors for the daughters of Danaus, all of whom (49 out of 50 anyway), killed their first husbands on their wedding night. Despite his creation of the sport and his winged helmet and sandals, Hermes lost a foot race to his brother Apollo in the first Olympic Games, held to celebrate the Olympians victory over the Titans. He also lost to Aphrodite during the Pythian Games his brother Apollo organized after he killed the serpent at Delphi.
The most famous stories, however, involve his activities on the day he was born and his escapades with women.
The Birth of Hermes
From the moment he was born, little Hermes was a handful. His mother Maia having given birth alone in a cave on Mount Cyllene in Arcadia, was very tired after childbirth, so she wrapped her small bundle of joy in a warm blanket and placed him in a basket to sleep. Though she was a third generation Titan, daughter of Atlas, she was worn out after giving birth to the son of Zeus. As she slept, her son climbed from his bedding and set out to explore the world.
Right outside the entrance to the cave he now shared with his mother, he found a tortoise. He delighted in watching the creature craw along and decided that he would put this great treasure to use. He carried it back inside the cave and cut the limbs of the animal from each opening. He then cleaned out the insides and inserted some sheep horns he found in the cave in the holes. Next he stretched a reed across the top of the horns and strung strings made of sheep gut from shell to reed. He took time to tighten each string to make a certain tune then began to play the instrument and sang of his father and mother and his own birth. He remained interested in his creation for just a short time, however. After placing his new lyre in his own crib for safekeeping, he set out for another adventure.
As the boy set out again, he knew the cattle of his big brother Apollo, were close by and decided to go take some of them. When he reached Pieria, it was fairly easy for him to pick out fifty head of cattle for himself, but not wanting to get caught, the trickster sat down and attached twigs, leaves and all, to the bottom of his own feet so that his footsteps would not be recognizable. When he came upon an area near the sea where sand was abundant, he worried that it would be easy to track the hoof prints of the cattle. He instructed the cattle to walk backwards through the area. This would make the prints appear to be moving in one direction while in fact the cattle were traveling in the other.
As he continued on, however, he came upon an old man named Battos working in his vineyard. Hermes, concerned of leaving a witness to his crime, told Battos that if he told no one of what he had seen, that his vines would bear much fruit. The old man agreed and Hermes continued on his way, but he was not going to leave his fate to the word of the man without testing him. Hermes took on a disguise and return to where Battos was tending his vines. When he inquired upon what the old man might have seen, Battos forgot what he had promised the young god and told of the baby leading the cattle backwards through the area. Hermes then turned the old man into stone for breaking his word.
Upon returning to the cattle, he gave them food and water then took several sticks from a laurel tree and set out to create fire. Mind you I said create fire, not create a fire. It did not take him long to get a nice fire burning then he dragged two animals from the herd and quickly killed them all by himself. He cut the meat into chunks and cooked them over the fire using sticks to hold the meat over the flames. When they were done cooking, he divided the meat into twelve nice pieces and placed them upon flat stones to make offerings to the Olympian gods. In this process, not only did Hermes invent fire but also the act of sacrifice.
He cleaned up his mess and put out the fire then went back to his mother's cave without being seen by anyone else, or so he thought. He wrapped himself back in the blanket, as his mother had before, but kept hold of his play toy, the lyre he created.
As soon as the infant had lain down to rest, his mother, Maia, went to him. As any mother would, she scolded him for being out all night. She warned him of being a thief, as surely he had gotten that from his father, and she worried that Apollo would soon be there to seek revenge. Hermes then spoke sweetly to his mother asking how she could scare him like that since he was just a tiny baby. He insisted that he had done nothing wrong, but he would not stay cooped up in a cave with his mother and go hungry when the other gods had so many riches. As a son of Zeus, he would provide for his mother and give her the life of a queen.
In the meantime, Apollo had discovered that his cattle had been stolen and was determined to find and punish the thief. Once he learned that another son of his father, Zeus, had been born, he was certain he knew who was behind it. He went straight to the cave of Maia to look for his property. He charged into the cave ignoring the Titaness and her infant to look through every hiding place but did not find any sign his cattle. Coming up empty handed, he finally went to the basket crib. In his anger, he ordered the baby tell him where his cattle were or he would throw the son of Zeus into the pit of Tartarus, hell.
Hermes, playing the innocent card, asked why his dear brother would talk to him in such a way. He was only born the day before after all and didn't even know what cattle were. Apollo continued to accuse him of the theft while baby Hermes continued to deny having anything to do with whatever it was his big brother was talking about. Finally having enough of it, Apollo snatched up his little brother and took him to Olympus to their father.
As Zeus listened, Apollo told of his theory that Hermes had taken his cattle and that he was crafty and a liar, and he was entitled to have his cattle returned. When it was Hermes turn to defend himself, he stood before his father, baby blanket in hand, and told him that he would not lie to his dad. He had not stolen the cattle and brought them back to his mother's cave, which he had not. He also told their father that it was not nice that Apollo should pick on him and scare him by threatening to thrown him into Tartarus, as he was just a tiny baby and not capable of the things he was being accused of doing
Zeus then laughed loudly at how crafty his newborn son truly was. He told Hermes that he knew all that had happened and ordered his boys to search together for the return of the cattle. Hermes knew better than to defy his father Zeus, king of the gods, and set out with Apollo to find the cattle.
Since Hermes knew exactly where they were, it did not take long to find them. Though he had his cattle back, Apollo was still extremely angry with his little brother. When found that two of his cattle had been killed and sacrificed, he was stunned that the infant had managed to take down such large animals all by himself. He warned that he was scared of how strong Hermes might become if he could do all this at his birth. He then asked Hermes why the meat had been sacrificed in twelve portions when there were only eleven Olympians; Zeus, Poseidon, Hera, Demeter, Hestia, Aphrodite, Athena, Ares, Hephaestus, his twin sister Artemis and himself. He inquired as to who Hermes thought the twelfth Olympian was. Hermes, of course, replied that he was the twelfth, which he was.
Apollo could not believe how forward this new son of Zeus was, but Hermes simply ignored his rage and sat down playing his lyre. Upon hearing the sound coming from the strange object, Apollo was immediately struck by its beauty. Hermes then began to sing as he played telling the entire story of the gods. Apollo was now growing even angrier for he feared his baby brother was going to take music from him as well. Hermes was not fazed. He told his brother that he wanted to be friends not enemies. He then went on to explain all of the gifts Apollo had been given; music, poetry, prophecy, shepherds, and he Hermes had nothing. He offered the lyre as a gift to his brother if he would allow him to become the god of shepherds and stop being angry over his stealing the cattle. Apollo desperately wanting the instrument that created that glorious sound agreed.
The brothers then returned to Zeus, on Olympus, and told him that they had made up with one another and wished to be best friends. Zeus, being glad to hear it, approved his infant son Hermes becoming the god of shepherds as well as commerce, since Hermes had struck such a bargain with his older brother. Hermes then sat down and fastened together reeds he had collected along his journeys. When he began blowing through them, again the sound fascinated his brother Apollo. Apollo now complained that Hermes would end up with everything he owned, as he would continue to create musical instruments and was also a cunning trader. Hermes, however, promised he would never again steal from his big brother and swore the oath on the River Styx, its waters so harmful to the gods if drank that all binding oaths were sworn against being forced to drink from it. In return, Apollo swore that he would love no other god or mortal more than his brother Hermes. Hermes then offered to give Apollo the reed pipe he had just created if Apollo would teach him prophecy. Apollo knew that the gift was not something he could give away as his own grandmother, Phoebe, had given it to him. Instead he offered his little brother his golden staff. Hermes considered the offer then exchanged items with his brother. (Hermes would soon stop two snakes from fighting with his new staff and it would become his caduceus.) Apollo did tell his brother how he learned to tell the future before fully learning to work with his oracle. These include using auguries, birds and the entrails of other animals, as well as pebbles.
Hermes Becomes a Father
Once his appearance as an infant would no longer serve him, Hermes took his youthful appearance and set out to do as other male gods had done, have children.
He returned to Mount Cyllene to tend the herds, as he was now god of shepherds, but quickly fell in love with a young nymph named Dryope, the daughter of Dryops the king of Oeta. Once married, the nymph gave birth to a son, but when she saw him, he had the horns and legs of a goat. She was terrified at the sight of her own child and fled leaving him exposed. When Hermes heard this, he quickly went to the child and was delighted at his appearance. His young son, which he named Pan, delighted him so much that he took him to Olympus and presented him to the other Olympians. Like Hermes, the other gods were delighted at the sight of the young god and Zeus named his grandson Pan god of the wild. He quickly became a life-long playmate of Hermes younger brother Dionysus and a master of his own father's pan flute instrument.
Hermes's brother Apollo would also have a child with Dryope, but this was not the only girl the brothers would share. Both brothers were taken with the beauty of a young mortal girl name Chione. On the same day, the brothers saw the girl of fourteen and fell in love with her. Apollo decided to wait until dark to return, but Hermes, not one to wait around, touched her lips with his staff and put her into a trance. He then had his way with her, as she was helpless to stop him. As night fell, Apollo appeared as an old woman and comforted her over her ordeal with his brother. He then took her for himself. As the girl had relations with both gods on the same day, she became pregnant with twins. When the time came, she gave birth to a son, Autolycus, whose father was Hermes and another, Philammon, whose father was Apollo.
Autolycus took after his father in that he was a very clever thief. Hermes, however, knowing that even he got caught stealing from time to time, wanted to protect his boy. He gave him a gift that allowed him to change the appearance of anything he stole so that when the owner came looking for his property, he would not recognize it.
In case you are wondering what should become of a girl so blessed to have the sons of not one but two gods, she bragged about being prettier than Apollo's twin sister Artemis. Artemis, not known for taking insults easily, put an arrow right through Chione's tongue eventually killing her.
The story of Autolycus doesn't stop there, however. According to Homer, Autoclycus married a girl named Amphithea and to her became the father of two daughters, Anticlea and Polymede. Polymede became the mother of Jason, of Argonauts fame. Anticlea became the mother of Odysseus, of Trojan War fame. While there is no mention of Hermes helping Jason on his quest for the Golden Fleece, Hermes helped Odysseus a couple of times during his ten year return home from the Trojan War. He appeared on Calypso's island and informed her it was time to let Odysseus return to his wife, Penelope. He appeared to Odysseus before he confronted Circe to retrieve his men she had transformed into pigs. At that time, he gave him advice and an herb called moly that would make him immune to her magic. He also took all of the dead suitors for Penelope's hand to the Underworld after his great grandson killed them upon his return
Like every other god or mortal man, Hermes was struck by the beauty of Aphrodite and wanted desperately to be with her. When her husband Hephaestus caught his wife and brother Ares in bed, trapping them under a golden net, Apollo and Hermes laughed together at the sight. Apollo asked his brother if he would accept being embarrassed like that just to be with Aphrodite. Hermes basically replied, you bet. She on the other hand, wanted nothing at all to do with him. Hermes went to his father and cried because the goddess of love and beauty would have nothing to do with him even though she slept with everyone else. Zeus offered to help his son out and sent his eagle to steal the sandal of the goddess as she bathed in the Achelous River. All I can say is those must have been some shoes, for Aphrodite looked all over to find her missing footwear. Of course, Hermes was in possession of it and held it ransom for sex, which she gave in and submitted to in order to retrieve her sandal.
When their child was born, they gave him both of their names, Hermaphroditus. By every account, Hermaphroditus, or Aphroditus as he is often called, was a beautiful young boy. He was so beautiful in fact, that he caught the eye of a nymph named Salmacis. The two met when Aphroditus was walking on a hot day and came upon her spring of cool waters. Salmacis threw herself at the young boy, but he told her he was too young to have relations. She eventually gave up and went back into the water leaving him alone. Aphroditus waited around and when she never came back, he finally decided that she must be gone. He really wanted to take a dip in the water to cool himself, but as soon as he went in, Salmacis attacked him trying to force herself on him. He struggled to fend her off, but she cried out to the gods to let the two of them be together forever. Now why his parents, two of those gods, did not help their son we will never know, but the gods answered her prayers and merged the two of them into one. Hermaphroditus became a creature with both male and female organs. This upset the boy so greatly that he prayed to his mother and father to curse the waters of the spring and make anyone who bathed there just like him. This time Hermes and Aphrodite came through for their son.
Evander was another noted son of Hermes. He took more to his father's way with words, since Hermes was the god of language. Sixty years before the Trojan War, Evander, along with several followers, sailed west from Greece and landed in Italy. He took with him the religion of the Olympian gods, the laws of Greece and the Greek alphabet. Once there he founded a city called Pallantium located close to the area where Aeneas would eventually settle after the war between the Greeks and the Trojans. This city would eventually join with Rome generations later after it was founded by Romulus, a descendent of Aeneas and son of Mars.
Hermes's son Myrtilus was a hero who served King Oenomaus of Pisa as his charioteer. When Pelops, the son of Tantalus came to town and sought the hand of the king's daughter Hippodamia, by winning a chariot race against the king, Myrtilus agreed to help Pelops win. He was promised a share of the kingdom and the first night in bed with Hippodamia for his troubles, but he was double-crossed. After doing his part in not only defeating the king but killing him, Pelops threw Myrtilus off of a cliff and into the sea. With his dying breath, Myrtilus prayed his father would curse Pelops and his family. Hermes did his son proud. See, http://anitajsmith.hubpages.com/hub/From-the-Greek-Thatll-Learn-Ya-File-King-Tantalus-Watch-What-You-Serve-Your-Family for more information.
So baby Hermes, who complained that he was not the god of anything, eventually became the god of almost everything; trade and merchants, roads and hospitality, rustic divination, birds of omen, dreams of omen, astronomy, feasts and banquets, tricks and theft, language and cunning, shepherds and athletes. He was his father's messenger, enforcer, herald and psychopomp. He also filled what little free time he had with his inventions and women. It is no wonder Hermes appears in more myths than any other god.

Ok! It just the 3rd day of school for him. On the very 1st day the teacher said he had adhd and that she had a teacher aid helping him. Now i and may agreed how can u see a kid 1 day and think he has adhd. But my concern which im gonna bring up to the teacher is. Him being with teacher aid. I want him with the rest of the class. My child is not slow. And i dnt like her treating him like he is. Also she said he didnt play because he had 2 finish his work. I feel like they may be singling my child out. Also this teacher aid is a parent volunteer. Her child not even in the class. But was last year. She gave me her cell number. Which let me knw she a caring teacher? very few would do that. What should i do? Maybe sit in on the class. Call during the day what.
on Sep. 12, 2012 at 11:11 AM

About the Author
Read an Excerpt
The gray gelding, Napoleon, was built from the ground up and butter fat. His roundness was not due to overfeeding or lack of exercise but to a most placid disposition and an ease of adapting himself to any kind of situation or way of life. He stood with one hind foot drawn in an easy, relaxed position and eyes half-closed. Only his long ears moved, and they just wobbled as if the weight of them was too much for him to bear at this particular moment. He was the picture of contentment; as peaceful as the June night which enveloped him. There was no reason for him to appear otherwise. He was perfectly happy with his life.
The grass of his paddock moved in the night breeze, giving it the soft, liquid motion of the sea. There were stars and a moon, and together they shone frostlike on the fences and roofs of the barns and main house a short distance away.
Finally the old gray roused himself to saunter about his paddock. His movements were slow and quiet. He was very particular in his choice of grass. He would stop only long enough to crop a few mouthfuls, then go on to other grasses that appealed more to his fancy and discriminating taste. But it wasn't long before he returned to his favorite haunt beneath the billowing oak tree. He closed his eyes again.
All was quiet, and as it should be. The inky silhouette of a tall, black stallion moved in the adjacent paddock to his left. Teeth clicked sharply as the stallion cut the grass low and even.
The gray's wobbling ears were keen, and by using them he followed the movements of the Black. He was well aware, too, of the whereabouts of the burly black horse in still another paddock, the one on his right. He had heard Satan snort a few moments ago.
The breeze became stronger, gently whipping his body with a shower of deep evening coolness. After the heat of day it felt very good. That there were no flies to bother him added to his enjoyment. For ideal comfort this was the way it should be. A fly-protected barn during the day, and at night the freedom of the paddocks. For several weeks now the horses had been allowed this privilege. It would continue as long as there was peace in the paddocks. All this the old gray knew very well; his vast experience told him so.
He knew why he occupied the paddock between the Black and Satan. To keep his head, to think for himself, to do what was expected of him . . . these things he had learned long ago. He did his duties willingly, whether he was on the track, helping to school young and eager yearlings in their first lessons, or here in the paddock, where he was ever watchful of the actions of mature stallions. Knowing that he was wanted, that he had a job to do, gave him a warm consciousness of virtue and well-being. He opened his eyes, took in the paddock fences, and then, as though receiving comfort and security from their great height, permitted his eyelids to drop again. This time he went fast asleep.
He awakened to the sound of a strong wind. The skies had turned black. The moon was blanketed by heavy, running clouds and the stars were mere pinpoints in the heavens, shedding no light below. The oak tree afforded the gray horse protection against the wind and he was loath to leave it. Besides, there was no reason for him to go. He need only stay here and wait out the wind. If it got worse and became a storm, he was certain that soon he would see the lights go on in the house and barn, and shortly thereafter he and the others would be taken into their stalls. He moved closer to the great trunk of the tree, and for a while just listened to the racing winds above him.
It was the wind and the blackness of the night that diverted Napoleon's attention from the movements of the tall stallion in the next paddock. For a long while the Black had trotted lightly and warily along the fence, only his eyes disclosing the excitement that burned within him. He made no sound except for the slight, hushed beat of his hoofs over the grass. He did not shrill his challenge to the burly stallion two paddocks away from him. It was not yet time. The Black was clever and able to control the savage instinct that sought release within his great body.
The wind whipped his mane, and his tail, set high, billowed behind him. He stopped again to measure the height of the fence. In spite of his long limbs he had to stretch his head to touch the top board. He moved on to the front corner of the paddock, facing the barn. Once more he tested his strength against the center boards at this particular spot. They bent as they had before. He pushed harder this time. They cracked and split. He stopped using his strength, waiting almost cunningly until deciding on his next move. The fire in his eyes was mounting.
Carefully he lowered himself to the ground, pressing the weight of his body against the bottom board. Then he rolled away and struck a smashing blow against it with his hind feet. It split as had the others. Still on his back, he rolled back and forth, using his great body like a pendulum against the boards. But he did not ram his weight like a blundering bruiser. Instead, with cunning and skill he maneuvered his body, using pressure against the split boards only when he knew they were most apt to give completely. Finally they broke and were swept outward as he rolled under the top board. The Black was free of his confining paddock!

We had a great time on Christmas Eve, sledding at Sugarhouse Park. It was warmer weather when we got there and we took off our hats and gloves. Within 30 minutes though, a storm came in and we were all freezing. It was fun though. Jan made chili and also brought hot chocolate and doughnuts. By the end we were all shivering, except Ben. He was wondering why we were all wanting to leave. He was sad when we finally pulled him away from the hill. Also, it was a monumental day for Josh. Jake took him down with him... TWICE, against my wishes. Josh seemed to enjoy it, or at least tolerate it. We loved being together with family.
I have more pics to post, but my parents are in town for the holidays and then we are heading to Vegas for my brother's wedding, so I'll wait to post again until I have pics from their visit and our trip. We hope all of you had a wonderful Christmas.
Rainy Days Thank You
1 week ago

As the Faith Hill song says, "A baby changes everything." My husband loves that song. A long awaited baby after years of infertility most definitely changed things for us. I am so thankful for the miracle that is our son, a child that the doctor told me to expect to miscarry. I nearly did. What I would have missed if I had indeed lost him while he was yet in the womb! My mother told me that she had to go to God when she became pregnant with me her sixth child so soon after her fifth. She soon accepted that I was part of God's plan for her life. Even though I had to endure an older brother who tried to convince me I was adopted, his fifth sister, I was loved and the family made room. Eventually my brother did get the brother he wanted too; and though he did dethrone me as the baby of the family, it was good for me to lose the title.
A baby, Jesus, God made flesh, came to redeem us from our sins. Immanuel, God with us, gets to keep the title. Make room in your heart for Jesus.
For my husband I'll share the song.

Getting A Noncustodial Parent Served Who Is Hiding
I have filed for child support and according to them, they have been out to the non custodial parent's house 5 times and a Hispanic female answers the door and states that he doesn't live there. Yet the house and car in the drive way are both registered to him. She claims she does not even know him. When she was asked for her name she had to think about it and then provided them with a name of Marie. Child support then went to his mother’s house, which is his last known address and she tells the processor that he moved to New York. He doesn't live in New York; he lives here in Orlando, Fl. How can I get him served? I do not know much about his life as I don’t see or talk to him. His mother has informed me in the past that he is on unemployment so I do not think he is working.

After a show he tried buy a ride off of me, but I figured if he liked it I better hold onto it. Richie was very involved with the Hartt School of Music in West Hartford, CT. He, Frank Hooper and Al Lepak were the guys there. I studied there but with Hooper...not Lepore. It is a small world isn't it? Nice guy!!Steve,
Reading this very late, Richie is my grandfathers twin brother who I never got to meet because of his passing a long time ago. I have heard much about him but never his music. Great to see he impacted many people. Crazy small world.

This has been all over my Facebook page the past couple of days, thanks to Kevin King, who crewed with us and took the footage. When the whale first approached, we were in awe, and just enjoyed his company. Kevin wanted to film right away, but I kind of discouraged him - if you're always behind the camera, you can't appreciate what's right in front of you. But the whale kept coming back! I was afraid jamming the camera down in the water might scare him off (he thinking it might be a harpoon!), but eventually we gave it a go. I think it was worth it!

Posted by Andrew
I highly recommend her. Diana may be a woman but do not let that fool you. She takes her job very serious and works hard to get the best settlement for you which made me more than comfortable enough for her to take on my case. Diana is better and tougher than a lot of male lawyers I came across. She is also really kind with her clients which was a plus for me because other lawyers do not treat their clients with the same respect.
Posted by David
Looking for a good lawyer? Look no further. Diana Lopez is amazing at what she does. She'll get the job done and done right. I had her for a few years and seeing her every time we had to discuss about my case I felt like I was in good hands. She knew exactly what she was doing so I felt comfortable letting her handle my case. I definitely recommend her. She speaks English and Spanish as well.
Posted by Verina
When justice needed to be served, I reached out to a dear friend of mine. He is also an attorney and he assured me that his respected colleague, Diana Lopez, would have some great insight for me. I was very interested and needed someone on my side. I was a little desperate, but careful to trust. The way I was maltreated was frustrating and Diana got to the bottom of many laws that my former employer violated, that I did not even know about. She is very intelligent, precise, detailed and efficient at her job. She was very professional, yet easy to talk to at the same time. She always made time for my email, calls and silly questions no matter how busy she was. Diana had a lot on her plate already when I first introduced her to my case, but she assured me that with patience she would provide the greatest focus and diligence. I liked best how Diana represented me in a very sophisticated and hard-working nature to my former employer. I try extremely hard to be professional in the workplace and I value that she was able to portray that of me during this "battle" between them and us. I appreciate what Diana has done for me so much. She has not only helped me to be at ease with that situation in my life, but she has brought justice where my previous employer needed a rude awakening. Thank you Diana for everything. You are great at what you do and you should feel good that you've made the world a little bit better to live in :D
Anonymous review posted on
I had the pleasure of working with Diana 2 years ago on a financial dispute with an ex acquaintance. She was very knowledgeable on this matter and always stayed professional.She was understanding of the situation and made me feel very confident that we could win the case. In the end she successfully won my case and has made my life a whole lot better. Great to work with!

Join free now!
It is free to search locals
Companion Mom, Child has problem with University expenses; mommy has a suggestion, incest stories. Concerning a year back, I was really having a hard time at University. Even though my training course was spent for thanks to my mama, my living expenditures were just too much. I actually tried to find a work, but no one would certainly use me a work, not even as a dish washer. My mama offered to help yet I declined, although it appears silly, I had some stability, I intended to make it through without cash from my mommy, that had actually already paid a whole lot for my education and learning. I actually intended to verify to myself and also my mom that I was a grown-up now; I required to be able to do this on my own.
College was about 100 miles from house and also every weekend break I would see my mother, I did miss her, she was like my friend. She treated me as an equivalent as well as we were open to discuss anything. She was a successful lawyer at a regional law practice, though as a result of exclusive nature of her business she never did tell me much.
Anyway it was Thanksgiving of my 2nd year, therefore far I had actually just handled to survive, however I was so near either quitting or robbing a financial institution. I got back to a frosty welcome. It was quite cold and the snow was coming down quite quick, I only just managed to get house. When house I was greeted comfortably by both my mom and also a very welcome fire. We did not have a family, just the two of us, so customarily it was simply both of us for thanksgiving, not that it troubled either of us, we enjoyed each other's business. Yet while we talked about basic stuff, my mind maintained discussing what mother had actually told me. Mommy was still a stunning woman, even if she had actually just turned 40, and also her boobs look wonderful, also when she initially had them done, I told her she looked so attractive which any kind of guy would certainly intend to be with her. I stated that if we were in a room together packed with men, I bet all the men would choose her, also without the boob job she was quite. Mother thanked me for the compliment yet said I was wrong and that I was the truly stunning one, she told me that at the very least my huge breasts were real, 36d in case you ask.
So after dinner and also cleaning up we returned to the living-room. My mind was still on what mommy had suggested concerning me functioning as a companion, no question I would enjoy it, and being paid like mother for something we both delighted in was something that interested me. I believe I was just shocked, before she told me, I saw my mama as a revered lady in the work environment, now I saw her as a really sex-related female, I can really see that mommy looked happy, and also who would not intend to have sex with such an attractive female. It was just my entire photo of mother had transformed, which had not been a poor thing, however it was something I was having difficulty not considering, especially envisioning my mama having sex with all those unusual guys.
So the following day mother took me to satisfy Monica and obtain the tests I required. After that mom took me searching for a trendy clothing for the evening. We would certainly meet the customer at a restaurant and after that at some point go back to his resort for a night of pure unadulterated sex.
The evening ultimately showed up and I was truly nervous, yet thanks to my mommy besides me, I prepared to go. We were both using evening clothes, mine was red while mother's was black, and we both wore push up bras to provide our boobs a lot more zest, in addition to a band. We took a taxicab as well as arrived at the restaurant on time. Mommy gave the name of our reservation and also we were caused a table where the customer was sat waiting.
Mama took charge and also asked me to sit on his left while she took the right. Mama was so awesome; she gave the client all the usual ego boosting lines, working him well. It provided me the possibility to unwind and view her work. Soon the customer provided my leg a capture as well as counted on speak to me. I was rather kicked back now, and a glass of white wine earlier in the house and also one currently loosened me up sufficient to activate the beauty.
call girl Brockhurst, Sluts Brockhurst, prostitutes Brockhurst, hookers Brockhurst, sluts Brockhurst, whores Brockhurst, gfe Brockhurst, girlfriend experience Brockhurst, shagging Brockhurst, dogging Brockhurst, fuck buddy Brockhurst, hookups Brockhurst, free sex Brockhurst, sex meet Brockhurst, nsa sex Brockhurst
| ||42110|| ||19189|| ||73485|| ||91086|| ||124241|

DYNASTY had the mystery woman in season 9, and DALLAS ended with the shocking reveal that JR had a daughter. They remained unseen because the shows were cancelled, but were there any other characters that were mentioned (or about to be introduced) in a specific context i.e. something that *could* influence the story? Zach Powers' wife couldn't show up because she was dead (apparently…) but because of that storyline (or hinting at a storyline) she became an intriguing character. And I thought they were going to introduce another Harper son on PAPER DOLLS but maybe that's just my imagination.

<span>My car has been repaired.
My cat was lost to my son.
Our computer has been repaired by the technician.
The coffee is sold here.
That door was opened this morning.
The books were closed.
My composition has been corrected by Prof.
The house was built in 1955</span>

Police officers continued to move people away from the station, clearing shops, offices and pubs along the way.
Stephen Himble, 30, from Colliers Wood, south London, said he had been nearby when the evacuation began at around 12.25.
He said officers had arrived and begun to section off the station.
"They just said there was an incident," he said.
He added: "I was a little bit nervous, but they moved us out so quickly that it was okay. They've done extremely well and it's under control."
Patrick Harris, 24, an estate agent, said he was conducting a viewing at a property nearby when the area was cleared at about 1pm.
He said: "They said there was a suspect package. We were told lots of different things."
He said he saw some people being evacuated from the station but they appeared "quite calm" and there did not appear to be panic. He added: "There was one police car and then about 1.05pm a few more turned up and started slowly clearing the area."
Cindy Butts, 34, deputy chair of the Metropolitan Police Authority, was travelling on a number 207 bus towards Shepherd's Bush when the bus was evacuated.
Speaking at the cordon she said that she had spoken to contacts within the Metropolitan Police who had confirmed reports of at least one explosion.
She said: "Essentially what I have been told is that there was some kind of explosion, I have been told that it may well have been a dummy explosion somewhere between Ladbroke Grove and Hammersmith on the Hammersmith & City line.
"I have also been made aware that there has been a number of incidents at various locations across London.
"I didn't see anything, I didn't hear anything, I basically took instructions from police officers who were around."
Describing the atmosphere as her bus was evacuated she said: "There was a sense of calm. Clearly people are quite concerned because they either want to get home or are still on very late lunches and need to inform their employers that they have been caught up.
"One elderly woman did say to me: 'Oh my God, this is Shepherd's Bush, we are not in the heart of London,' clearly we are concerned.
"People are very calm but very unsure as to what is going on, they are not able to get the latest updates from the news."
Residents from houses surrounding the affected Shepherd's Bush Underground station were evacuated from their homes, with many waiting behind a police cordon which stretched back some distance from the scene.
Officers had taped off a large section of Wood Lane, close to BBC Television Centre, forcing dozens of residents and shopkeepers out of buildings.
One resident said officers wearing protective masks entered several buildings and warned residents of the possibility of a chemical attack.
She said: "There are dozens of people who have had to leave their houses and shops just in the streets close to Wood Lane, the police told them they had to check for chemicals.
"I was told that there have been men wearing protective masks going into the buildings."
Roads surrounding Shepherd's Bush were congested with traffic this afternoon, and cars and buses were diverted away from the area as the security cordon continued to be extended.Reuse content

Apparently, according to former Eagles running back LeSean McCoy, there's a special kind of relationship two people need to have in order for them to shake hands.
And McCoy, who was traded to the Bills in a shocking offseason move this spring, doesn't have that with his former coach.
"We're not shaking no hands," McCoy said Wednesday on a conference call. "What are we shaking hands for? We don't have that type of relationship."
McCoy said in the call he does not take back any comments he made insinuating Kelly was racist. But he did have a few nice things to say about the coach who lifted Shady to his best seasons in the NFL.
"I had a blast. I really did, man," McCoy said. "The fans, they were excellent. My teammates, I played with some great players. I learned from some great players. Coach [Andy] Reid, he was the man.
"And even Chip, Chip showed me a lot. He’s smart. He’s really smart and he just taught me different things. It was a blast to play in his offense. And then the city, kind of being in that city of Philadelphia, the fans are cool, there’s so much to do there. I had a blast in Philadelphia, I really did."
The shifty running back has been hitting his stride lately in Buffalo and will clearly be looking to make his impact felt in the Linc Sunday at 1 p.m.
"He's probably one of the most elusive runners in the game," Eagles safety Malcolm Jenkins said. "He has a way of finding holes. He can hit the home run but he also can take the four or five yards he is given.
He's a good friend of a lot of ours, but when you get on the field it's all about competition."
Jenkins is no stranger to reunions. He faced his former team, the Saints this season but treated it like any other game. Which is just what he expects McCoy to do.
"I'm sure he's had this game circled on his calendar since he got to Buffalo," Jenkins said. "But you can't look toward that game until the week comes up, and you don't want to make it about you, but it will be special for him."
As for whether McCoy expects to be booed or cheered upon his Week 14 return:
"You guys know how Philly fans are, man," McCoy said. "We're gonna find out. ... I'm cool with however it goes. I know how they are. We'll see. It's not like I asked to leave or anything."

I discovered Zara on Instagram. I really liked her work so I got in touch and we arranged to meet up for a shoot. We were lucky to get into this location as there were some people there getting the place ready for a children's play that was taking place later in the day. Thankfully they let us take some photos while they were getting set up.
February 10, 2018
50mm · f/8.0 · 1/125s · ISO 200

Meet Lola… a lovely young seagull who was part of our family for a few days. During a walk we found her along the seaside, struggling with the waves, totally exhausted. We picked her up and did some checks to find out what was wrong. Her wings seemed fine, but she was out of balance and very weak. So we gave her time and space to recover. We build her a nest, the girls cuddled her a lot, she eats dog food, pooped a lot (also on your lap) and wiggles around during little walks. This morgen she decided it was time to go and left in silence. We hope she is fine and has the best life for a seagull possible. It was a joy to have her around!

I thought our first post should give a little bit more background on who it is you're reading about. In December of 2008 I was living in the Kennewick, Washington and missing home, aka the great state of Illinois. I decided maybe it was time for a companion. I went to petfinder.com and searched for dogs. It wasn't long before I found a 1 year-old named Missy who was the perfect size and loved car rides. She was found abandoned in east Pasco. Although there were no signs of physical abuse, emotionally she had issues. On January 24th, 2009 I went to met Miss for the first time and it was love at first sight. I took her home without owning a single dog anything! Our first stop was to Petsmart. The entire car ride this new dog of mine wouldn't stop strying to lick my face! She still hasn't stopped and she's been by my side ever since. Even though I went to her there is no doubt we saved each other. She has also earned several nicknames and currently goes by, Miss, Missy Mae, the Missaroo and most recently shhhmish-shmish-moo!

Birth Class 11 NCERT Solutions & Summary
The lesson Birth is an extract from “The Citadel “ that talks about Andrew Manson who was just a medical practitioner and graduated from medical school. He helped Susan and Joe to give birth to their child and during all this, he was having a tough time with his beloved Christine.
The Birth About the Author
A.J. Cronin was born on 19 July and he was a Scottish novelist and a physicist. His best-selling novel was The Citadel, which promoted some controversial medical ethics. Through this lesson, he explains and throws light on how a young doctor saved two lives even after being in critical condition. He himself was going through bad times.
Birth Class 11 Central idea
The story is an extract from “The Citadel”, where a doctor has to deal with a difficult case of a mother who has complications in her pregnancy. He tried to save both of them and in mind, he was thinking about his own relationship with his girlfriend. But he overcomes the situation and gives the best treatment to the patient. This lesson throws light upon a doctor’s hard work and determination to save his patient’s life.
The Birth Class 11 Summary
The story starts with a doctor Andrew Manson who has passed out from a medical college and is in a relationship with Christine. She was a school teacher. Andrew had a heated argument with his beloved as he was very outspoken and later on realized this. As soon as he reached his home, Joe was waiting for him anxiously. They were about to have their first child after 20 years of a long marriage. Though it was late at night, he was still ready to perform his duty.
When Joe and Andrew reached Morgan’s house, he found that Susan was in severe condition and a midwife was helping her out. He also took his time to understand the case. He wants to focus on the patient and so he diversifies his mind and thinks about his other friends who were also having disturbed relations with their partners.
After that, he put aside all the things and just wanted to focus on Susan Morgan as she lied under anesthesia. Early in the morning, she delivered a child and soon the doctor noticed that it was lifeless. After a long hour of struggle, he was shocked. Soon he saw that the mother was left unconscious and both of them needed urgent treatment. Now, he was left with the choice as to whom he should attend first.
He chose the mother as she was left unconscious and he injected some medicines. As soon as she gained some strength, Andrew now ordered the nurse to bring some hot and cold water. Andrew scrutinized the child who was pale and lifeless. At first, he was not able to detect that the case was of asphyxia and the child has low oxygen levels in its blood. If he could he can give up on the child, but he did not and with his sheer determination he juggled up the child in hot and cold water.
He knew that it was very important for the couple. He again started by rubbing a towel at the back of the child and also tried to fill some air. After a long hour of battle, the little child gave a motion and started breathing. As soon as the child started crying, Andrew heaved a sigh of relief and he felt that he had done something big that day. He soon told Joe that all is well. He told everything related to the complications of the operation to the Morgan’s and left the house with great satisfaction and feeling that he has done a great job.
Birth Class 11 Ncert Solutions
Q1. Who was Joe Morgan? Why had he been waiting for Dr. Andrew Manson?
Joe Morgan worked as a driller and was a big, strong, and heavy middle-aged man. His wife was Susan and they were childless for about 20 years. Now she has been expecting her first child and that too with a lot of complications. They had been waiting for Andrews to deliver their first child.
Q2. Where did Joe lead Andrew? Why did he not go in with the doctor?
Joe Morgan led him to his house at Blaine Terrace. His wife Susan was about to deliver his first child after 20 years. Joe was in tension and refused to go out.
Q3. “Don’t fret, mother, I’ll not run away”. Why do you think Andrew says so?
She thought as there was a period of waiting so she offered him tea so that he could not run away.
Q4. Why did Andrew decide to remain there until everything was over?
Andrew reached Bryngower and was feeling restless and sleepy as it was a late at night. He was also upset and secondly, the case he was going to attend needed more attention and patience.
Q5. What was Andrew’s view of marriage? Why was he resentful and confused?
For Andrew marriage seemed to be more peaceful and cheerful. He was in love with Christine, a school teacher. He was in conflict between his steady mind and overflowing emotions.
Q6. What dilemma did Andrew face?
His heart was in the child and he wants to save him at any cost. But first, he chose the mother to be treated first as she was lying unconscious on the bed. He faced
Q7. How did Andrew’s practical experience come in handy?
Andrew had once seen a similar case in the samaritan and so he knew how to deal here and used that same therapy with his patient. So, he ordered the midwife to bring hot and cold water and juggled up the child and after that rubbed the child’s back with a towel.
Q8. What efforts did Andrew make to revive the newborn baby?
He laid a blanket and was as soon as he came to know that the case was of low oxygen level. He tried to juggle the child in both hot and cold water simultaneously. He rubbed his back and filled the air and soon the child was breathing and crying. The child was now not a lifeless body.
Q9. What impression do you form of Andrew Manson on the basis of the story ‘Birth’?
Andrew Manson was a young medical practitioner who had just completed college. He was assistant to Dr. Edward Page and he was in love with a school teacher, Christine. His heart was overflowing with many emotions and considered marriage as a peaceful and cheerful bond. He was mature enough and kept his personal issues far away and dealt with the patient’s problem.
He knows his responsibility and even after remaining in dilemma for some time, he managed to control and gave the best to save both lives.
He with his hard work and sheer determination saved the child and his mother who was delivering it after 20 long years of marriage. He knew that the child was important to the couple. On the whole, he was a dedicated doctor who managed to keep his personal affairs at far and does whatever he can do.
Q10. What efforts did Andrew make to revive Susan Morgan?
He injected some medicines and worked hard to revive the mother as she was lying helpless and unconscious. Her heart was given some strength to gain and she was breathing softly the next moment.
To sum up, the story was about the dedicated doctor who kept aside his feelings and sour memories of heated arguments with his beloved. He focussed his attention on the mother and reviving her lifeless child. The child was important to the couple as it was being delivered and coming after 20 years of marriage. He with his determination and hard work saved two lives and gain confidence as he had done a great job that day.
You have written easy to understand answers ..thank you mam for that😀

An appeals court hearing in the case of a police officer accused of illegally promoting himself.
Policeman who promoted himself blames hacker
ABU DHABI // A former policeman convicted of illegally promoting himself from sergeant to major told an appeals court yesterday that someone else hacked into the Ministry of Interior's system to make the changes.
AJ, an Emirati who worked in the IT department at the Ministry of Interior, is serving a one-year jail term for the crime. He was also ordered to pay restitution and a fine of Dh273,000 at his original trial.
In 1999, AJ went from being a police sergeant to working as a civilian at the ministry because he was unfit to fill a military post. But records show he was suddenly promoted to captain. The promotion appeared to have been ordered by the Brigadier General through his internet account.
Eight months later, another promotion made AJ a major. The ministry's human resources department became suspicious as such a jump can only be achieved after four years of service.
In the Court of Appeal yesterday, AJ denied the charges, saying he had been surprised at the promotion.
When he questioned his superiors about it, he was told not to "kick away the blessing", he said. He said he had assumed it was connected to the bachelor's degree he earned in 2005.
He said he had no idea who had hacked into the system.
His lawyer, Fayza Moussa, said that messages between directors and staff at the ministry were sent through an internal system that every employee could access.
"Therefore, the ruling that was issued through the Brigadier General in charge was through a hacking into his internet account," she said. "So there was someone who held a grudge against the defendant and wanted to harm him, so he did this to get him arrested as he is the only beneficiary of this act."
IT experts testified that there was no way of knowing who had hacked the system.
The case was adjourned until January 4.

Well in my situation he bought me a condo, made my car payments, flew my grandmother to see me several times a year and I traveled with him so......I guess you could call it a sugardaddy type of relationship since I didn't see anyone but him and wasn't in the business at the time. There was nothing illegal about what I was doing. It was a relationship and he wasn't paying me from a corporate account. There are circumstances that "confidentiality agreements" definitely need to be drawn up.
If I had been in the business then I myself wouldn't have wanted any type of paper trail.
There are also exclusivity contracts that some gentlemen want you to sign, which is along the lines of a sugardaddy relationship.

Tissue paper $1
You may not believe this, but there are people who do not have three full meals in Singapore! Why? They might not be well-educated, poor or they may be selling tissue papers to earn a living. Obviously, it is not enough to eat proper meals, right? Well, I have heard of a story that is similar to this. A man lives with his granddaughter and his children. Although he was well-educated with a high paying job, he was unfortunately fired. To carry on with life, he started selling tissue paper packets for a dollar each. However, that was not enough to pay for his bills or for the granddaughter to even go for an excursion with her friends. Another man bought four tissue packets for $4. This was enough for the granddaughter to go for the excursion. See, small steps can make a difference.

When I was in need of a job, I turned to RJ-Staffing. I had heard great things about their service from other people, so I gave them a shot. I was quickly brought in for an interview, and before I knew it, I was placed into the perfect job that matched my skill set. The staff was very professional, respectful, and cared for my needs. Lastly, the process was easy and went smoothly without any hiccups. Easy decision – I recommend RJ-Staffing to everyone!

7. Jim Walks Nancy Home from School
Jim and his sister were walking home from school. "How was school?" Jim asked. "It was nice," said Jim's sister. Her name was Nancy. Nancy was seven. She had black hair. Her hair was short and straight. She also had braces. Jim forgot to bring an umbrella for Nancy. Jim and Nancy huddled together under Jim's umbrella. The rain fell lightly. "Let's hurry," Jim said. Jim and Nancy walked faster. Jim stepped on a puddle. The water splashed. Nancy's pants got wet. "I'm sorry," Jim said. "It's okay," said Nancy. It started raining more. They soon arrived home. Lightning struck across the sky. It sounded loud. They were safe inside. Nancy's clothes were wet. She changed her clothes. Jim did the same. Nancy looked out the window. It was raining hard. She was glad to be inside. Jim felt the same.
Vocabulary Cloze Sentences Dictation
Copyright © 2017. All rights reserved.

Good But Small in Footbed
Verified Buyer Reviewed by kwee from Denver on Monday, February 9, 2015
These are good socks but they run smaller than sized. My husband has a 13.5 show and these were rated 13-15 sized but he but his toe through one pair worn once. Hopefully since I bought several pairs this was just a fluke and the others will wear better.

What date do you think you'll have baby on?
Just for fun!
July 19 but he will be here with in the last 2 weeks on June
July 1st but not making it that far. My dr thinks maybe beginning june the latest. Been making progress for weeks now so I'm pretty sure any day now. Sucks because I'll be 33 weeks tomorrow.
Due 7/8 but hoping for 7/7 because my older son is also the 7th of his birth month. He was 10 days post dates so it's unlikely 😂 but a girl can dream right?
I'm due July 2nd, but I am thinking baby will come sometime in September. I really hope he shares the same birthday as my other LO (little one) in late September! . It'll save us a lot of money on birthday stuff.
Due 7/8 guessing she will come 7/6. My girls were born close to the due date and boys came a week early! so since its a girl I’m guessing close to due date.
I'm due July 18th. First baby. I think he's going to be coming along later than due date. I just have a feeling I'm going to have to be induced to get him out lol
My first came the day before my due date. Second came about a week before my schedule RCS. Third tried to come at 35 weeks, was on procardia and then ended up having her a couple days before my scheduled RCS.
I'm due July 8th but I think he's coming the end of June I hope so
Due July 21st, I'm guessing the 18th. DD1 was due on 12/21 & was born on the 18th, my cousin & his wife's daughter was due on 1/21 & born the 18th...this will be the third great-granddaughter in our family so I'm guessing she'll stick with this tradition of being born on the 18th!
I'm due July 22nd but I hope she is born after the 23rd.

A man and a woman were dating. She being of a religious nature had held back the worldly pleasure that he wanted her so bad. In fact, he had never even seen her naked.
One day, as they drove down the freeway, she remarked about his slow driving habits.
"I can't stand it anymore, " she told him. "Let's play a game. For every 5 miles per hour over the speed limit you drive, I'll remove one piece of clothing."
He enthusiastically agreed and sped up the car.
He reached the 55 MPH mark, so she took off her blouse.
At 60 off came the pants.
At 65 it was her bra and at 70 her panties.
Now seeing her naked for the first time and traveling faster than he ever had before, he became very excited and lost control of the car. He veered off the road over an embankment and wrapped the car around a tree. His girlfriend was thrown clear but he was trapped. She tried to pull him free but alas he was stuck.
"Go to the road and get help, " he said.
"I don't have anything to cover myself with! " she replied.
The man felt around, but could only reach one of his shoes. "You'll have to put this between your legs to cover it up," he told her.
So she did as he said and went up to the road for help. Along came a truck driver. Seeing a naked, crying woman along the road, he pulled over to hear her story.
"My boyfriend! My boyfriend! " she sobs, "He's stuck and I can't pull him out!
The truck driver looking down at the shoe between her legs replies, "Ma'am, if he's in that far, I'm afraid he's a goner!
Copy & paste to friend: (Click inside box; Ctrl + C to copy; Ctrl + V to paste)
read more blogs!

“If one of your brothers becomes indigent and has to sell himself to you, don’t make him work as a slave. Treat him as a hired hand or a guest among you. He will work for you until the Jubilee, after which he and his children are set free to go back to his clan and his ancestral land. Because the People of Israel are my servants whom I brought out of Egypt, they must never be sold as slaves. Don’t tyrannize them; fear your God.

Description Hwang Tiffany is the vice president of SM&Co. She was a serious person with cold demanour and able to to make people pissed in their pants just by her death glare. She didn't has a lot of friends or basically didn't interest in making friends or having a social life. She always oppupies herself with works and activities involving herself only. But that life change when she went to the party held by the company which was owned by her best friend, Yuri. She was drunk and had woken up naked in a hotel on the next day. She couldn't remember a thing until Yuri showed her a video of her dance sensually with a girl she met at the party. Kim Taeyeon was known player. She had slept with a lot of girls and had broken same number of hearts. She had met Tiffany at the party and surprisingly meet the girl again when she was asked by Yuri to 'entertain' her best friend, Tiffany for her birthday present. But Tiffany had refused her that night. Taeyeon never had anyone repelling her charm and Tiffany had intrigued her. She had persistently and boldly asking Tiffany to have sex with her, in whatever ways. And Tiffany strongly against it and Taeyeon stubborness drove herl crazy. Will Taeyeon gets what she wanted? Will Tiffany surrender to her?

German farm fire kills 86 camels
on 31/01/2013 18:58:37
The fire broke out early today. The farm's 73-year-old owner was able to save five of his camels but the rest were trapped in their stalls and died.
It took around 100 firefighters to bring the blaze under control and experts are still trying to determine the cause.
The farm, which offered guests the opportunity to ride camels and also sold camel milk, had been in operation for decades.

This song is also known as “Cotton Mill Colic No. 3” and was written by mill worker/musician Dave McCarn in 1931. It offers a commentary on those who left their farms to seek better jobs in the cotton mills only to get caught up with the economic crash and horrid working conditions. The textile industry was hit particularly hard by the Depression.
McCarn had been a member of a string band in the 1920’s and released four songs on a record with Howard Long as “Dave and Howard.” He was born in 1905 and died in 1964 long after giving up music. This recording is by The New Lost City Ramblers.

Former Mrs. Brown’s Boys star Rory Cowan has spoken out to show his support for pal Dermot ‘Bugsy’ O’Neill after he was rushed to hospital this week.
The actor who plays Grandad on the hit show is undergoing treatment for cancer and was brought to Beaumont Hospital after he began complaining about not feeling well.
Doctors put him on feeding tubes after he was left unable to eat after going through chemotherapy and becoming severely dehydrated.
Rory told The Irish Sun that Bugsy has been in his thoughts and wished him ‘a speedy recovery.’
Opening up about his friendship with the actor in his book, Rory described him as ‘the sweetest person’ and definitely someone that you would want in your corner if you were in trouble.
He also recalled how Bugsy has stood up for him when he was being hassled about his sexuality.
I’d call Bugsy over. ‘Are you alright?’, he’d say in a certain way and they’d quickly change their tune,’ he wrote.
The actor’s family has stated that his condition is improving following the health scare.
His wife Chickie told of how he was left ‘exhausted’ following his treatment.
Commenting on his condition, she said that the family’s fears had been realised and that as a result of his hospitalisation, they would be having a much quieter Christmas as he would not be there to celebrate with them this year.
His daughter Sharon meanwhile shared a photo of her father on social media and implored fans to say a prayer for him.
‘Dad you’re a fighter and we all love you more than you will ever know. So can you all keep him in your prayers please. Love from all our family,’ she told her followers.

Your take on something that is happening. It's hard to see the world through someone else's perspective because you don't live in their shoes, you don't know their experiences. You can try, but you begin to think about your experiences and still can't fully grasp "walking in their shoes".
I am a pretty optimistic person, I often see sunshine on cloudy days. (Cue the band.) I generally just always see the good in everything. Yes, I get upset when things don't go my way...or something upsets me, but I try really hard--although it may take a few days-- to think about the positive in whatever situation I am in.
When I was 10 years old my mom got pregnant, we went for a sonogram and didn't see or hear a heartbeat. She had miscarried. At 10 years old, I knew what that meant. I knew I wasn't going to have a new sibling, and I bawled right there in the sonogram room. I actually made my mom promise she would have another...she kept that promise twice.
Before I got pregnant with my sweet boy Bennett, I miscarried. A day before we found out I was pregnant, I had this excruciating pain radiating all over my stomach, back, and sides. I can't even begin to explain it to you, but it was horrible. I took a pregnancy test the next day, and it was positive. It was my husband's birthday so I bought a cute onesie so I could announce to him that we were expecting. We had just gotten married 2 months before, so we were actually shocked/happy/confused that I had gotten pregnant so fast. We thought to ourselves many times "Isn't it supposed to take a long time?" and "How did that happen?". We told our parents, and that's really it.
Exactly 2 weeks later, I was at school and I started bleeding. I knew right then and there something was wrong. Thankfully, my mom works with the doctors that I see and they were able to bring me in and see what was going on. After hearing my levels were low, they wanted to do more blood work 48 hours later to see if they had dropped more. They had. I had miscarried this baby that we had made. To tell you I was devastated is an understatement. I took off the next 2 days of work, and just took some time to reflect. My husband was there for me, and I actually went into his office with him cause I just needed someone.
Over the next 3 months, I would have my ups and downs. I knew I would be pregnant again someday, but at the same time I saw so many people getting pregnant and having babies it made me really question why. Why, did it happen to me? Why was I given this baby only for it to be taken away? December 16th, I took a test...I knew there was a slim chance since it wasn't anywhere near my missed period, but hey doesn't hurt to check. A positive line appeared, so obviously I had to test again. Positive. I had to tell my hubby immediately so I whispered in his ear at dinner in front of our family. I know, romantic. I was only 3.5 weeks pregnant, and knew that something could happen...but believed it would be different this time.
2 weeks later while on vacation at Nic's grandparents house, I had that excruciating pain again. It actually hurt so bad that I threw up. It was the absolute worse, and the next night I woke up with it again. I waited and waited for bleeding, but nothing. Our first sonogram was done early since I had miscarried before, and I am pretty sure that my heart was beating out of my chest. I just wanted to see that heartbeat, I wanted to know that everything was ok. That the pain I had experienced was just a "side effect" of being pregnant. When I heard that heartbeat, tears started flowing and relief came over my body. I was pregnant. Pregnancy was not fun...morning all day sickness, reflux, migraines took over my body...and it wasn't until after I gave birth did they go away.
Little did I know that right after delivering Bennett, I would be confronted with news I never expected to hear. I had miscarried early in my pregnancy (that mysterious pain I had, was a miscarriage.) Say what? Bennett was supposed to be a twin. There were two separate placentas formed, one obviously not as big as Bennett's, but formed. They explained to me--in my drugged up state--that sometimes this happens, it is known as vanishing twin. Three. The number of miscarriages I have had to cope with in my life. I know people have had to deal with way more, and I am blessed my number is so low and only 2 are directly connected to me.
The person that sees themselves as an optimist sees the biggerpicture. They find the best possible option in the situation at hand. Yes, my past experiences could have defined me negatively...made me worry about my entire pregnancy. If I had not been optimistic I may have worried about getting pregnant, got depressed when I found out in the delivery room that I had miscarried, or worried myself sick during the pregnancy. But, I didn't. I prayed daily for my boy that he would come into the world healthy. I am a firm believer in the phrase that there is a reason for everything, and I know there was a reason why God chose me to be that little boys mom. There was a reason why he wanted me to only have one baby, why he wanted me to have a baby in August not May, why he chose to have me miscarry. My sweet, sweet baby boy has made me even more of an optimist and I wouldn't change it for anything in the world.

Bear and his guitar
Our client has reignited his passion for playing blues music thanks to our home care team and a local music store.
Bernard, or Bear to his friends, received his first guitar for Christmas as a 12-year-old and has been playing ever since.
“I’ve always been into the blues, players like Buddy Guy – I’ve seen him five times. He’s my hero, I’d like to go to his nightclub (in Chicago) one day,” Bear said.
“I saw Stevie Ray Vaughan in Adelaide just before he died (in a 1990 helicopter crash).”
Inspired by his blues heroes, Bear had his eye on a new guitar and did not know his Home Care Package could help him out.
“I wasn’t sure what was available, so I talked to (Home Care Operations Manager) John, and he was so gracious,” Bear explained.
A few calls later, his Case Manager Paula organised a trip down to a music store in Wembley, assisted by our support worker.
Bear picked out his new instrument, an Australian-made Maton acoustic, which arrived a few weeks later after his package money was approved and paid to the store.
Bear is delighted with the result and could not thank his Home Care team enough.

Saima is a Pakistani actress from Multan, who appears in Punjabi and Urdu films. Saima's debut was directed by Akram Khan. She was cast for the main lead in Khatarnaak, in 1990. She was discovered at the time when Sultan Rahi was the leading hero. The success of Syed Noor’s film Choorian made her a house hold name over night.Saima joined Lollywood at a time when Anjuman was dominating the industry. Anjuman was so busy that some producers were becoming frustrated due Anjuman's dates and were looking for replacement. The alternative came in the shape of Saima who took full advantage of the opportunity.

A Facebook post dated January 13, 2018 on the late Binyavanga Wainaina’s personal account indicates that he might have had a premonition.
On the post, he shared how he visited his sangoma (traditional healer or diviner from Southern Africa) as he sought to keep in touch with his ancestors.
Prior to that visit, he had a stroke which he believes was caused by his failure to recognize the ancestors. However, the ‘ancestors saved him’ because they still had some work for him.
He says that he stopped fearing death but still had one more thing to accomplish while still alive. The post did not specify what it was but he asserted that he had made peace with the fact that death is inevitable.
The post concludes with him saying that he wants to live a long life but if that fails to be the case, then he would be okay with it. He further urged his loved ones, upon receiving news of his death to celebrate his life and not mourn him.
The day I did a ceremony I heard from my sangoma to put me in touch with my ancestors. I had to be near a river. I had…
Binyavanga died on Tuesday night, May 21 At the Aga Khan Hospital after battling a short illness, the family said.
Even his activism on gay rights was controversial in Kenya, glowing tributes continue to pour in for the Caine Prize winner who died aged 48.
Wainaina has been eulogized by his peers as an influential author and a bold individual who made numerous contributions to society.

1 Answer | Add Yours
One theme in the story is overcoming oppression. Since the Civil War, even with the abolishment of slavery, there was still oppression for the black man and he couldn't own property or sell his crops to make money to rise above the poverty level. Dave had to give his money to his mother to help support the family so he had no ownership of what he worked for. Plus, working on a white man's farm also kept them under the thumb of pre-slavery times. Dave felt that buying a gun would give him his freedom and let him live in a better world. Hecould use his money to buy the gun, he would earn the respect of everyone including his employer and landlord Mr. Hawkins. Unfortunately he was worse off than when he started.
We’ve answered 334,006 questions. We can answer yours, too.Ask a question

Ginny gasped for breath in the still, muggy summer air as she searched the darkened room warily. Something had pulled her out of her slumber, perhaps a noise or even a whisper of a breeze. She held her breath, straining to listen, and realized her heart was racing. The sound that had awakened her must have been her own scream, again. She exhaled at last and sat up, hugging her pillow to her chest as she struggled to overcome the effects of the nightmare. Breathing deeply, she focused on the familiar night noises as they began filtering through the remaining haze of sleep.
She glanced at the empty bed across the room. At least Hermione hadn't been subjected to her night terrors. She had left for Australia several weeks ago to find her parents. Just yesterday they'd had a letter from her. She was fine and had been able to restore her parents' memories without a problem. They were due back in August, in time for Ginny's birthday. She hoped she would have her nightmares under control by then.
The walls of the ramshackle Burrow were thin, and Ginny could easily hear Ron snoring faintly from above. The ghoul in the attic began clanking about and moaning quietly, and Arnold the Pygmy Puff was trilling softly from his perch atop one of Ginny's pillows. From the floor below came a faint rustling as one of her parents shifted in their sleep, and then a feminine voice murmured gently and fell still again. Outside, the garden gnomes were snuffing and chuffing as they dug holes in her mum's vegetable plot.
Reassured that she had not awakened anyone else, Ginny breathed a sigh of relief until she heard one sound that was out of place: the creak of a footstep outside her door. A heavy weight settled into her stomach as she swung her legs over the side of the bed and rose to creep across the room. She counted to three and pulled the door open, but there was no one there. Perplexed, she stepped out onto the landing, where she could see both the stairs going up and the stairs going down. They, too, were empty. She stood there indecisively for a moment before climbing up the stairs until she reached Ron's door on the top floor. It was standing slightly ajar; all it took was a slight nudge from Ginny and it swung open with a soft creak.
The moon was waning, but the glow was still strong enough that Ginny could easily see that Harry's bed was abandoned. Panic bloomed in her chest; her heart thudded painfully as she struggled not to hyperventilate. Kneeling, she pressed her hand to the middle of the bed. It was still warm. Hot tears burned her eyes, and she swiped at them angrily, feeling foolish.
It's nothing, Ginny thought. He just went downstairs for a snack, or a drink of water. It's over. He's safe, we're all safe.
As she stood, a movement outside the window caught her eye, so she stepped over to the windowsill and looked out. At first, nothing seemed amiss. Then she noticed a path through the overgrown grass near the edge of the pond...a path that was lengthening, even as she watched. Reflexively, she clutched at the windowsill. Her first instinct, as always, was to go to him.
"Mmmmm...that's nice, 'Mione," Ron moaned in his sleep, grinning. Ginny couldn't suppress her soft snort of laughter. When she looked over her shoulder at her brother, his eyes popped open. "Ginny? What are you doing in here?"
"I just thought I heard something," Ginny said. "Go back to sleep."
Ron's attention shifted toward Harry's bed. Seeing it was empty, he sat up and rubbed his large hand across his face, struggling against the fog of sleep. His expression was solemn when he glanced up at his sister.
"He hasn't been sleeping well," he said, pointedly.
Ginny couldn't bring herself to reply. Instead she turned back to the window. The path beside the pond stopped just past the giant oak Ginny and her brothers had climbed as children. She wondered if Harry was perched on one of its limbs.
"The circles under his eyes are as bad as the ones under yours," Ron continued, as if he hadn't expected a reply in the first place. "He isn't eating, you're thin as a rail, he flinches anytime anyone waves a wand in his general direction, and you're jumpier than a Puffskein in a roomful of Kneazles."
"What do you expect me to do about it?" Ginny demanded hotly.
"Have it out with him, Ginny. Whatever the problem is, it's eating you both alive."
"Yes, you can," Ron insisted "Go now. Just cast a silencing charm if there's gonna be shouting. Some of us are still trying to sleep." At that, Ron flopped back into a prone position with a grunt and covered his face with his pillow, adding a muffled, "Go!" for good measure.
Ginny stopped in her room to fetch her wand before she crept all the way down the stairs and out the door, following the faint trail Harry's footprints had made in the dew until she reached the oak tree. She looked up into the branches, but did not there was no sign of him.
"Harry?" she called softly. She felt a soft breeze of air pass her, lifting her hair slightly, though the leaves on the nearby tree remained still. The back of her neck prickled with the awareness of someone's presence. When she turned, Harry was standing behind her, broom balanced in one hand, shimmering Cloak clutched in the other.
"What are you doing out here, Ginny?" he asked in a dull voice.
"I...I heard a noise. You weren't in your bed...I was.... I just.... I came to check on you," she finished lamely, unwilling to admit that, for an instant, she had been terrified that he had gone.
"I'm fine," he said flatly. "I just felt like flying."
"In the middle of the night?"
"You aren't fine," Ginny countered. "Your hands are shaking so badly you can barely hold your broom still. When was the last time you ate?"
"Since when do you care?" Harry snapped.
Ginny drew back as if he'd slapped her. "What's that supposed to mean?"
"Ginny, you've hardly spoken a dozen whole sentences to me since I...since it was over," he said. "Every time I try to talk to you, you remember somewhere you need to be or something that urgently needs your attention." Ginny's cheeks flamed as he stepped closer, scrutinizing her from head to toe. "You're one to talk about not eating. I can count your ribs through your..." he trailed off, gesturing awkwardly toward the thin fabric of Ginny's nightdress.
Ginny folded her arms against her ribs self-consciously. "This isn't about me."
"Like hell it isn't!" he retorted. He dropped his Cloak and his broom into a heap on the ground and, with a sigh of frustration, pushed his fringe away from his face. "You were screaming in your sleep again."
"I'm sorry--" she began, but he interrupted with a fierce, "Don't!" Taken aback, Ginny stared at him.
"Don't apologize," he explained. "After all, it's my fault, isn't it?"
"What do you mean? How is it your fault?" Ginny asked, confused.
"It's my name you were screaming."
Ginny glanced away, mortified. She had known she woke up screaming, but hadn't realized she was screaming his name. She never remembered details about the nightmare, only that she was terrified, angry and grieving at the same time.
"That night, when Hagrid was carrying me. I heard you screaming my name..." He paused, then added, "when you thought I was dead. The way you screamed tonight...it sounded just the same. You were dreaming about it, weren't you?"
Ginny's arms broke out in gooseflesh. She had spent the past month trying to forget about that moment. "Harry, stop. I can't do this now," she begged. She turned to flee but he caught her elbow and pulled her back to him.
"Ginny, why are you so angry with me? Why won't you talk to me?" he asked hoarsely.
"I can't, not about this, not yet. It's too soon, it's too much," she protested, afraid of the swelling tide of emotion that threatened to choke her, leaving her gasping for breath. She could feel all of that pain welling up from the small place inside her where she had stashed it away until she could deal with it a piece at a time. It was too much to handle all at once. She shook her head vehemently and pushed him away.
"Ginny, please...." Harry pleaded.
He took a step towards her, reaching for her shoulders, which were covered only by the thin straps of her nightdress. His hands were like hot coals against her cool flesh, which had been chilled by the damp night air. Ginny felt as thought she might jump out of her skin at his touch, and she flinched away. His hands fell once more to his sides as his eyes grew stony, and she knew she had hurt him. She covered her face with her hands, humiliated that Harry would be here to watch her fall apart; she was unable to fight it anymore.
"You died, Harry," she said, softly at first, the words muffled by her hands. "You died. I saw Hagrid carrying your body. You were dead."
Harry shook his head. "I wasn't, Ginny, I was just pretending. I had to let Voldemort think he'd killed me."
Ginny's hands dropped away from her face, and she peered up at him, studying his face with narrowed eyes. When he shifted his gaze from hers, she knew he wasn't being completely truthful.
"No," she said, shaking her head again. "No, I don't believe you. Hagrid saw him cast the Killing Curse. You walked into that forest alone without a word to anyone, under that damned Invisibility Cloak. You knew Voldemort would kill you. You knew, and you let him do it, you noble, self-sacrificing prat," she sputtered, thumping his chest with her fist.
Harry's jaw clenched, but he said nothing. His silence only served to confirm her accusation. Ginny was trembling now, in fear and anger, even though it had all been over a month ago. She had refused to let herself consider the possibility that he had truly died that night in the forest, alone. Even now, she still couldn't fathom it, couldn't wrap her head around the implication behind the fact that he had been dead, but now he lived. The possibility of an alternate outcome, one in which Harry had not survived, occurred to her, and she shuddered violently as a fear deeper than any she had ever experienced chilled her to the bone and forced her brain to cease processing any other thoughts for a moment. When she could think again, she focused on the anger instead.
"Do you remember what you said to me last year, after Dumbledore's funeral?" she asked in a tight voice.
Harry's only response was a short nod.
"You asked me how I thought you would feel if it had been my funeral. Do you remember?" Ginny demanded again.
This time he met her gaze dead on. "I remember, Ginny," he answered quietly. "I don't think I would have been able to keep going if you had...if anything had happened to you. I think I would have gone spare."
"Do you think it was any different for me? All those months, I had no idea where you were, what you were doing. There were constant rumors that you had been killed. Not knowing nearly drove me mad," she explained with a noise that was half-laugh, half sob.
"I'm sorry," Harry rasped. He made a move as if to pull her into his arms, but Ginny held up her hand.
"No! You died, Harry. Goddamn you, YOU DIED!" she finished with a shout, blazing with fury.
"It was the only way to end it," he said in a low voice.
"You died," she said again, no longer screaming. "Every time I close my eyes, I keep seeing it, over and over again, remembering how it felt to want to die, too."
Harry's fingers clutched her shoulders convulsively as a sound of misery escaped his lips. He crushed her to him so tightly she could barely breathe, lifting her so that her feet no longer touched the ground and he was supporting her weight entirely, his face buried in her neck.
"I'm so sorry," he murmured again.
"Why didn't you tell someone?" she moaned against his shoulder.
"I wanted to. I saw you that night...I wanted to stop and tell you so badly, but I knew if I did, I wouldn't be able to go through with it, and I had to, Ginny. I had to."
His voice was breaking now, and Ginny felt horrible, but she had bottled her emotions all up inside for too long. They both had. She either had to let it go tonight or they would have to go their separate ways. She struggled in his embrace until he released her, whereupon she immediately stepped back a pace, breathing deeply through her nose until she felt she could speak without breaking down.
"I spent almost a year not knowing if you were dead or alive," she began, slowly and deliberately. "Then to finally see you, be able to touch you again...and you ordered me to stay in the Room of Requirement, as if I were a little girl."
"I needed to know you were safe!" Harry barked.
"You hardly knew I was there!" Ginny countered angrily, recalling Cho's eagerness to give Harry a personal tour of the Ravenclaw dormitory. She knew her display of jealousy had been childish, but the thought that Cho Chang would be the one to lead Harry through the corridors had been more than she could bear at that time.
"Is that what you think?" he asked with a bitter laugh. "Ginny, some nights I used to open the Marauder's Map and just follow your footsteps around the castle. It helped me feel you weren't quite so far away." He paused and sobered before he continued. "You spent a lot of time in the Defense Against the Dark Arts classroom...after hours."
Ginny flushed, remembering parts of her school year that she had never wanted him to know about. Automatically she touched the pink scar on the back of her hand. The words I AM A BLOOD TRAITOR had been carved there permanently after many hours spent in detention. When she moved to clasp her hands behind her back, he reached for them, grasping them firmly when she tried to snatch them away. He gazed somberly at the marks, caressing them lightly with his thumb. Ginny closed her eyes. Seeing the regret in his expression caused her nearly as much pain as receiving the scars in the first place.
"Neville told me about the Carrows," Harry said in a hesitant voice, as if he were afraid she might explode again.
"He shouldn't have," Ginny replied harshly. She silently cursed her friend, promising to give him an earful when she saw him again.
"I'm glad he did. You haven't been exactly forthcoming about what happened to you this year."
Ginny eyes flew open, and she stared at him incredulously.
"And you have been?" she retorted.
Harry didn't answer for a long moment. "I wanted to be," he said at last. "I will be, if you'll let me. The Cruciatus...did they....?"
Thinking about the Carrows made Ginny's skin crawl. She had been targeted as a troublemaker from the beginning of the school year, when, during Muggle Studies, she had shouted at Alecto that Tom Riddle's father had been a Muggle. Alecto had administered the punishment herself, her face lit with unholy glee as she aimed her wand at Ginny and cried, "Crucio!" When it was over, and Ginny lay on the floor sobbing uncontrollably while every nerve in her body continued to fire with the residual sensation of being jabbed with thousands of needles, she had been desperately glad that Harry was far away from Hogwarts.
He was watching her expectantly. Ginny swallowed hard and answered, "It's not important, Harry. It's over."
"It's important to me," he insisted. "Did they Cruciate you?"
"Yes. They did."
Harry made an agonized sound of strangled rage.
"I'm sorry," he choked. "Oh, God, Ginny, I'm so sorry."
"Harry, stop apologizing!" Ginny said sharply. She didn't think she could stand to hear those words one more time without screaming. In a softer voice, she added, "This is why I didn't want to tell you. You can't blame yourself for everything bad that happened. It wasn't your fault."
With these words, Harry dropped her hands, leaving Ginny bereft at the loss of warmth. He turned away from her and leaned against the huge, gnarled oak tree, folding his arms against his chest. His head fell back against the trunk of the tree in defeat.
"I thought Hogwarts would be safe," he said in a bleak voice. "I thought the Ministry would make Professor McGonagall Headmistress. I never dreamed the Death Eaters would take over so quickly. If I had known...things might have been different."
"It wouldn't have mattered. Attendance was mandatory for pure-bloods, the better to indoctrinate us, and use us as leverage. If I hadn't gone back to school, they would have come after Mum and Dad."
Harry said nothing, staring up through the leaves at the crescent-shaped moon as if he was unable to face her. Ginny cautiously stepped closer until she was standing side by side with him, facing the pond. She recalled the conversation she'd had with Hermione about how Snape had remained loyal to Dumbledore, in the end. It wasn't until then that she had understood just how much worse her sixth year at Hogwarts could have been.
"I think Professor Snape tried to shield us from the worst of it," she said finally. "He required the Carrows to submit all detention slips for his signature, and instructed that the students should cast the curses rather than the Carrows."
"That's even worse!" Harry objected.
"I thought so, too, at the time. But looking back now, I think it was his was way of interceding, without blowing his cover. You have to mean an Unforgivable, right? Most of the students didn't. Some of us refused outright. Only Crabbe and Goyle were very good at it, and they were usually unavailable, running important errands for Snape. And, well, you already know he gave Neville, Luna and me detention with Hagrid for trying to steal the sword," she said with a wan smile. When she looked over at Harry, he was watching her, remorse etched across his face.
"I never wanted you to have to go through any of that," he said
"I know. But I did. And I survived. We both did."
They stood together, gazing across the pond for a while without saying anything. Ginny was glad for the opportunity to collect her thoughts. She listened to the gnomes grunting in the darkness, likely fighting over a potato or some other prize. The vegetable plot was nearly overrun; Mum would likely be after her and Ron to clear them out in the morning. Out of the corner of her eye, she saw Harry startle when a bullfrog landed with a soft plop on a lily pad several yards away and began croaking loudly. Ginny waded into the pond a couple of steps and bent to retrieve a flat stone from the muddy bottom. Drawing back her arm, she hurled the stone so that it skipped within a few inches of the amphibious intruder. He croaked indignantly once more and then leapt back into the pond. Ginny knelt to rinse the mud off her palms. When she straightened and turned back to Harry, he was watching her with an expression she could only describe as hunger. She walked back a couple of paces to stand before him, unsure how to bridge the remaining distance between them.
"You changed your perfume," he said softly.
She nodded, wondering why it mattered to him.
"Did I ever tell you about the love potion Professor Slughorn demonstrated in sixth year?" he asked.
She shook her head, afraid if she spoke, it would break the spell that had loosened his tongue for a change.
"It was Amortentia," he said. "Do you know it?"
"Yes," she said, smiling faintly. "It was the first lesson we had this year."
"It was our first lesson in sixth year, too," he said, closing his eyes as he remembered. "It smelled like a bit of heaven in a cauldron, like treacle tart and broomstick handles...and flowers," he added, opening his eyes and gazing at her. "I realized when I ran into you after class that day that the flowery bit was you."
Ginny waited for him to continue, but he didn't right away. Instead, he lifted a lock of her hair with one hand, smoothing it between his thumb and fingers. With the other, he tenderly cupped her face and traced her lips with his thumb.
"Last year, before we left, I nicked one of your shirts and stashed it in my pack," he confessed. "It smelled of your perfume."
The tears Ginny had been struggling to hold back since she had first discovered him missing from his bed finally escaped, sliding down her face one after the other. She hadn't known that. She hadn't wanted to know that. It was easier to keep him at arm's length, to focus on her own pain and not think about everything he had suffered over the past year. It was easier not to wonder if he had missed her as much as she had missed him. It was easier to be angry about being left behind and coddled like a child than it was to think about the events that had transpired on the night of the battle at Hogwarts. She was ashamed of herself.
Harry gently swept the moisture from her cheeks with his thumbs before cupping her face in both hands and tipping it up so she couldn't look away.
"Ginny, when I left you behind, it wasn't because I didn't care. It was because I cared too much. That night, in the forest, at the last moment, you were all I could think about. I closed my eyes and pictured your face, and remembered the way your mouth felt on mine...."
Ginny didn't need to hear any more. She closed the remaining gap between them with one last step and lifted her face to press her lips firmly to his. Harry groaned in relief and pulled her to him as he leaned back against the tree, enveloping her in his arms.

Enter Rudolph MacLeod
An advertisement in the personal section of the newspaper caught M'greet's eye. It read: "Officer on home leave from Dutch East Indies would like to meet girl of pleasant character object matrimony." That ad and another like it had been put in by a friend of Rudolph MacLeod without the latter's knowledge. MacLeod was a 38-year-old career man in the Dutch military that had courageously fought in combat and received an officer's cross. He was thickly muscular, had a large nose with a bump in the bridge, and sported thick, white whiskers curling at both ends. A heavy drinker, he was aging ungracefully, troubled also by both diabetes and rheumatism. These health problems had brought the officer home to Holland. Some of his ancestors had immigrated to the Netherlands from Scotland, hence a name unusual for the Dutch.
Although MacLeod had not put the ad in the newspaper or even OK'd it, the lifelong bachelor agreed to meet the young lady, Margaretha Zelle, who answered it. Despite the vast difference in both age and experience, the two were soon mutually smitten. Perhaps, as she once claimed, M'greet had a thing for men in uniform and was charmed by MacLeod's military bearing along with the extensive array of medals he so proudly wore. It is also likely that, as a daddy's girl, she was attracted to a man about her father's age. The captain proposed marriage and M'greet eagerly accepted.
However, they soon hit a snag. The law in Holland said that a female could marry at sixteen with a parent's consent but not until thirty without it. M'greet had previously told Rudolph that both her parents were deceased because she was not proud of the deteriorating and impoverished old man who was now her father. However, M'greet had no intention of waiting until she was in her third decade of life before she heard wedding bells so she 'fessed up to her beau that she had fibbed. Adam Zelle gave his consent to a marriage that the couple announced would take place only three months after the engagement.
The brief engagement caused a good deal of gossip. It was widely expected that M'greet would deliver the first MacLeod baby within a few months of the wedding. However, the gossip was mistaken. They were wed on July 11, 1895 and M'greet gave birth to their first child, Norman John, over a year later on January 30, 1897. Their haste in marrying appears to have been the result of genuine ardor rather than pregnancy.
Unfortunately, that ardor cooled even before little Norman was a gleam in his Daddy's eye. Rudolph did not give up his bachelor ways because he was married. Instead, he stuck to his old habits of staying out late with various women and coming home drunk in the wee hours of the morning. M'greet did her best to cope with her new domestic duties while putting up with her husband's infidelities and alcoholism. She also had to cope with his jealousy for, even as he indulged himself to his lust's content, he would fly into a rage when another man paid what he considered too much attention to the lovely and personable M'greet. He took to slapping his wife around and continued to abuse her even when she was several months pregnant.
Rudolph MacLeod informed the new mother that the family would have to move because he was going to be stationed in Java. Far from being upset by this news, M'greet was delighted at the prospect of a change of scenery. It is also possible that she especially looked forward to seeing Java since so many people had speculated that the dusky-skinned Dutchwoman might have Javanese ancestry. She happily bundled up little Norman and the family's possessions for the trip to this foreign land about which she had heard so much.

MEMPHIS, TN (WMC) - A man is in the hospital after he was shot by a Memphis police officer following a traffic stop Tuesday.
The shooting happened in the 1400 block of Depass Road, near Kingsbury High School, around 6:15 p.m.
Investigators said the officer pulled over a car when a passenger in the back seat, later identified as Jeremy Pruitt, got out and ran.
The officer said Pruitt had a handgun and what looked like a bag of marijuana as he ran away. He chased Pruitt and a struggle ensued.
During the struggle, police said shots were fired. Investigators do not know if Pruitt fired his gun, but the officer did fire his gun, hitting Pruitt.
Police said Pruitt then ran off.
Officers searching for the man used police dogs to track him down and told neighbors to stay in their houses.
They eventually found Pruitt inside a home on Salem Street. Police said he entered the home through an unlocked door and told the homeowner, whom he did not know, that he was in a fight and needed to use his phone.
Police arrived and took him into custody. He was taken to the hospital in non-critical condition.
"I was sitting on my porch watching my little girl ride her bike up and down the street; next thing I know we heard gunshots," said neighbor LaTonya Sidney.
Sidney heard gunshots in her Nutbush neighborhood but didn't know what had happened until 30 minutes later.
"A lot of cops came walking from between the houses towards this way," Sidney said. "They were searching for somebody. They had their hands on their guns."
It was not clear where Pruitt was injured, but he grimaced quite a bit while in the back of the ambulance.
There were several scenes and a lot of crime scene tape on at least three streets as officers investigated and neighbors watched.
"It was really scary because you were sitting out here and all of a sudden this stuff started happening," Sidney said.
Two people who were also in the vehicle were also detained.
Pruitt is charged with two counts of aggravated assault, possession of a firearm by a felon, being a convicted felon in possession of a handgun, and possession of marijuana with intent to deliver or sell.
Investigators said the officer was not injured. Per MPD policy, the officer who fired his gun has been relieved of duty pending an investigation.

What has Kelsey been up to lately? you may ask yourself. Well, I'll tell you.
Not much, really. School is utterly boring. Some ex exchanger who went to NY saw me on the news, and somehow figured out what school I go to, and hunted me down. Kind of stranger.
Yesterday was Jenny's birthday, so we went out to celebrate. Freja and I gave her a Bob Marley drawing she really wanted from a guy in centro. Got ready and went to Freja's house, dropped off my things(since I was sleeping there) and we went to Jenny's house to finish getting ready, have some tea, and eat some cake. We went to a friend of a friend's house, the owner of the disco we were going to, first. It was a good time. He took out his guitar and sang(he has an AMAZING voice) and he had CDs with just the music of famous songs, so it was kind of like karaoke...? Apparenly he's fairly well known here...? He works on the radio now, but used to be a singer on some show or something. He was really nice too. It's things like that I'm going to miss. Every get together is like that. Everyone sings and it's just...fun.
Then we went to the disco. It was cool....we entered through the back since we were with the DJ. He brought us to the VIP area. It was higher up, but not a real lot higher (maybe like, 4 or 5 ft off the ground, but with a fence type thing around it), and was guarded by a security guard, and only us and our friends were allowed up. It was WAY cool. The owner came up and hung out with us, and it was really nice to be able to dance with my friends and NOT be bothered by guys the whole time. We did go to the other area though, we met two guys from Romania, but they were waaay older than us, and really boring. But they spoke really good English. So pretty much the whole night was in the VIP. Maureen's friends from school came, so I got to meet some nice Chileans. And if anyone bothered us(like some guys who somehow got up there and said they knew us....?), we could just ask the guards to make them leave. hehehe.
All in all, it was a good time. And now Jenny is nineteen! Hurrah!
But the question shouldn't be what am I doing, it should be what the eff is going on in Tiverton? Come on now people....what is this about?

Wednesday, October 7, 2009
Road Rage Quelled
A Putnam County sheriff's deputy was able to calm down what could have turned into a road rage incident this week. Corporal Jamie Greenwood says it started when a company was moving a mobile home on Grider Road Monday evening. The trailer got stuck in some mud and ended up blocking access to the road. When Greenwood arrived, he was approached by a number of bystanders, including two women who said that one of the workers had yelled at them, and by a man, who was -- in the deputy's words -- agitated about his girlfriend being yelled at. Greenwood told the man to calm down and later found out that the workers were not the ones who had yelled at the women. The man who did said he was simply telling them that he didn't know how long the road would be blocked because he didn't work for the company. Greenwood gave the company a warning about impeding traffic, but issued no citations.

Ani was an influential artist for most independent artists at the time. She peaked in the late 90's. This was the live album that followed her best record "Dilate," and, in it, you can find improved versions of basically every major song she had previously recorded in studio. Unlike other singers, Ani thrives in live performance and it is evident here. This is also one of the last things she did with drummer Andy Stochansky, with whom she obviously enjoyed working.
As a personal anecdote, I ran into Andy outside sala Bikini in Barcelona during the tour and, when I told him I was missing a few tickets for some friends, he ran in and got them for me. No pomposity, no nothing, and this was a sold out event.

Saturday, September 26, 2009
Today is one year since a hot air balloon landed in our back yard (the park behind us actually). Last year only two of our family members were able to ride on the balloon. So I was excited when I read in the paper that they would have balloons at the air park today. We got there to see them fill up the balloons. Pretty neat to watch, but they were not giving any rides today. We stayed around and watched four balloons go from flat to gone in the air. It was fun. Though we had a sad little boy who really wanted to ride on a balloon. Maybe another time.

I dreamed that my roommate had Covid.
I dreamed I went to visit a trans/third-gender Amish girl who was working in the fields uprooting plants. She said she was a Kathoey, (or something like that). She said that people like her pricked their fingers on a spinning wheel when they were young, which used to decide their "master" but now decides their husband. They all specialized in a craft. Hers was robotics, which she was allowed to do, but only with ethically-sourced parts. She said she had never had sex because the bishops were nervous about anal sex and disease spreading into their community, and she had to keep her sexuality on the down-low. I later told her on some kind of online forum that I wanted to go on a date. She LOLed at that but said she wanted to get married, depending on the quality of my health insurance.
The possibility of finding love seems so remote and so desirable that this ridiculous dream feels more realistic, and I was sad when I woke up and realize it was not real. There is not a third gender in Amish culture, and I will not be asking anyone for a date or marrying them. I'm too anxious to get close to anyone, and it's not as if anyone would want a non-passing trans woman anyway.
I dreamed that I was trying to change the gender marker on my passport to F, so a cop groped me and then determined that I wasn't female enough for it. However, he said I might be able to mark me as genderqueer, but he wasn't sure what genderqueer people look like.
I dreamed that I was trying to board a plane, and the security officer said “Ma’am, there’s something wrong with your genitals. They're hanging down in your pants,” then he took me aside and pulled down my pants. He looked surprised, and adjusted my tuck, and then let me go and board the plane.
I dreamed that I was at some sort of get-together with my family and a bunch of friends, and we were watching an incredibly long kid's movie about mesoamerican civilization. Later I got into a relationship with the concertmaster from my junior high orchestra, who was also trans. She was much taller than me and picked me up so we could look at each other eye-to-eye.
Also, I went looking for some miniaturized compies of the state and federal constitutions, and did some kind of poetry that involved reversing the order of letters in words.
I dreamed that I was in Paris, and I had a partner-in-crime who was a French boy and also a Native American girl. We had a plot to steal all the garbage in a dumpster, and my rich grandfather said he'd give each of us $2000 if we did it (but if we didn't it would go to charity). But to steal it, I had to leave my backpack that had my computer and all my money and clothes right by the dumpster while I left to have a car race with the valedictorian from my High School, so it ended up being stolen. Then We went to visit this cavern which was a Native American spiritual location, but had recently been turned into a mine because it contained red gems with gold dust on them. For some reason I was naked except for a pair of boy's swimtrunks, which didn't have pockets so I couldn't smuggle out any gems. Eventually we snuck into the mine director's house. It turned out that she was part of my extended family and there was a picture of her family together with mine. She was also a big disney fan and one floor of her house had nothing but Little Mermaid decorations. Then my partner and I had to get back to the dumpster real fast. In this dream, French people get around by sliding around on their tongues. But we had to go through this building at my university that was under construction, and all the gates were broken, so we had to go around the long way.
I've decided to merge my dreams journal into my diary.
It's not like anyone reads either of them.
Dreams will be styled like this.
Last night's dreams had a bunch of stuff:
I had to stop the Dark Lord's minions from over-running my dungeon, but it was impossible. I got infinite tries like in a videogame, though.
I was on a boat with a bunch of really smart people, and we got caught by a wave. Someone on the boat determined that at the rate the wave was moving, it would never crash down and would just keep going up forever. We had to use earth-bending and water-bending to stop it.
When we were on the we learned that, 8 gods and goddesses had left puzzles for us, and they would give us the power to defeat the Dark Lord if we solved all of them. I solved the puzzles of Lilith and Lucifer. I don't remember what the solution was, but in involved a picture of the eight dieties where everything was backwards. You could tell because Lucifer was penetrating Lilith, when obviously it would be the other way around in reality. Lol.
Later I was playing Age of Empires and ordering my people to slaughter animals while the narrator talked about how eating meat was wrong.
I dreamed that I was trying to join the Knights Templar. To do it, I had to buy a sword, and to afford it, I would have to kill my rich grandfather for inheritance. I would also have to fool my French teacher for some reason, because I would need to drop out of French and switch into the Knights Templar course.
I was worried that they wouldn't accept me because I'm a woman, but I learned that they took trans women, and for some reason I didn't find this extremely offensive. I also learned that they already had a trans female member, who was an anime girl who had a very hissy voice.
I dreamed that I was asked to be a teacher's assistant for Computer Graphics, but it was a problem because I wasn't in school anymore.
I dreamed that my older brother came home, and my younger brother came out as trans, and we all got guns, but we had an argument about whether we should have more than one each—I said that we shouldn't. My parents also realized that they couldn't call us "the boys" anymore, so we tried to come up with a name for the three of us. I suggested "the squad," but that suggestion wasn't popular because we could be confused with Alexandria Occasio Cortez, Ilhan Omar, et. al.
I also had a separate dream that I don't remember very clearly but which ended with a big reveal where the person killing everyone (or was it protecting everyone?) turned out to be Medusa in disguise, and she had some sympathetic motivation like trying to teach everyone some sort of lesson.
I don't remember my dreams very often, but I've heard that recording them can make it easier as you go on. And I happen to remember last night's dream, so let's give this a try.
I dreamed that I was writing a review of Diary of a Wimpy Kid to post on Neocities. The contents of the review was pretty much the same as one that I wrote for my school's library website back when I was part of the target demographic for those books. My main complaint was that with the sequels, Greg has been in middle school for at least four years, even though in the US, middle school usually only lasts three years.

Put some ash or soot on your fingertip. Casually mention to a friend that he has a spot of dirt on his face as you reach up to remove it. Leave your mark!
I'll only go to elementary school reunions because those people didn't start to hate me until we were in high school.
Nothing brings neighbors together, like a broken elevator.
A dick has a sad life. His hair's a mess, his family is nuts, his neighbor's an asshole, his best friend's a pussy, and his owner beats him.
What did one boob say to the other boob? You are my breast friend!
I think I've discovered my supersymmetric partner.
Loneliness is when you get an e-mail but it's from the newsgroup server.
My mate broke his left arm and left leg, but he was alright.
The wife of my friend is not a woman to me. But if she's pretty he's not my friend.
My friend stopped by to tell me he had just been diagnosed as Dyslexic. Said he was going home to write it in his dairy.

Written on: 10/07/2012
Had door and windows installed. Very good price and excellent service - the fitter was professional and capable and, although there was a slight problem with the size, this was resolved very quickly. Quality of the windows and door was very good. We were very pleased and would be happy to recommend their service.

Favorite by far!
Rubie loves this little guy! It took her a while to realize his greatness but now it’s her absolute fave. She loves to play fetch and squeak him like crazy. Unfortunately his squeaker is being less reliable lately and she can only get it going sometimes. She also likes to munch his tiny legs. Hoping it comes back in stock soon and she can return to her squeaky glory days!

This week Tommy went to Isle of Man.
There is a little story behind my postcard. Back in May I was in an one on one atc swap. I had to mail to Isle of Man. Made my atc and went to the post office to mail it off. Post office worker was like where is Isle of man? is in Canada? she had to look it up. :P Also beginning to think that Isle of Man doesn't know where I live because I haven't gotten mine yet. :P

Since she hasn't been able to hole up in my sons room I've been seeing alot more of her. I decided to stalk her around with the camera this morning. I think her coat is so interesting. Harder than I thought to get a good picture though. She turned 1 last week-ish.

Tinson2 is thirteen. While any parent will love and defend their children to the ends of the earth, most of us know what they are really like deep down. And my son is the sweetest person on this planet.
He was the grumpiest, angriest baby of the three of them. It used to bother me that he didn’t smile when you appeared in front of his cot the way the eldest had, but simply held his hands up, demanding to picked up so he could get on with his busy day of crying, turning his face away from food and sticking out his lower lip. Like his elder brother he made no effort to walk, but would rocket along the floor (we have wooden floors) on his butt. Indeed, he was even better than his brother at it, as he would use one hand as a paddle and sort of flip himself along, with his bum practically coming off the floor as he galumphed along. He did try to walk one day. He got up, toddled one or two steps, then obviously thought to himself “sod this for a game of pokemon, I can move twice as fast on my arse” and went back to the backside shuffle. It was only when we were teaching his younger sister to walk, getting her to stumble along between two of us kneeling about five feet apart, that he got up and joined in, walking beside her & encouraging her.
Because by then the miracle had already occurred. He had become his sister’s great mate. To say we were terrified of what his reaction to the new baby would be was putting it mildly. He was just 18 months old, surly, often angry, and all the worst horror stories of children trying to hurt younger siblings were in our heads as my wife sat at home with our new arrival while I collected him from my sister-in-law’s. I got home and carried him into the sitting room where the moses basket (God, I couldn’t remember there what the thing was called, how quickly you forget) held centre stage. “This is your new baby sister Susan” we said. He knelt beside the basket and put his hand gently on the blanket. “Soo-soo”, he said, with a big smile on his face. I still have the photos (oh, I wish I knew enough about all this stuff to be able to publish them) of the whole thing – him in his big outdoor one piece coat-thingy, hair all sweaty because of the heat in the room, with a huge grin on his face.
And from that second on they were like twins – absolutely inseparable. I’ve already spoken about how Tinson1 became an only child again, and it’s as good as true.
Tinson2 did have middle child syndrome, though, which I realised even before I knew such a thing was a recognised problem. Older child knew more than he did, so there was no point trying to compete on knowledge, and younger child was more cute, so there was no point trying to be babyish. He developed into a child almost desperate to do eveything right, having seemingly decided that if he couldn’t be the clever child or the adorable child, he could at least be the good child. Every time he did anything wrong, like spill a drink, he would dissolve into floods of tears and say “I’m sorry” over and over again. I sure people who saw us when we were out must have thought that we beat him regularly for mistakes at home.
So this little bundle of fears and worries, who spent all his time with a far younger playmate, headed off to school. As if things weren’t bad enough for him, his April birthday meant that it was borderline as to which year he would start, and by starting him in the earlier of the two possible years he was one of the youngest in the class, continuously going to friends’ sixth birthday parties before he himself had his fifth. Occasionally he would get teased about how babyish he was, and how quick to get upset, and would arrive home in tears.
The great thing, though, is that he did have friends. His time spent with his younger sister had by now given him a kind, caring nature that couldn’t help but shine through. (I still remember how we met a barking dog on the street in Kusadasi, and how he immediately stood in front of his sister.) He was warm, helpful, considerate and, by now, very funny, and quickly established a group of close little friends. He still worried a lot about what people thought of him, and still hated to look babyish, but this grew out of him in time. One evening at the age of about ten he announced that he had to get a photograph of himself for some poster they were putting up at school. He went through a load of old pictures and eventually found one of him at the age of about two, with a baseball hat backwards on his head, and those thick baby socks on his feet. “I’ll have this one,” he said.
He finished national school and has just completed his first year in secondary. Again, he seemed so much younger and smaller than all the others on the first day. None of his friends from the BSP were going to the same school, yet in no time at all he was part of a new little group of closely knit friends. They all went to their first disco last month, so again the house stinks of Lynx (his elder brother has graduated to Lacoste), but it was more a rite of passage thing I think than any serious attempt at getting off with women (I may be the most naive parent on the planet for all I know). He had astounded us all, a family for whom changing a light-bulb counts as DIY, by taking wood-work and metalwork, and our house now contains a key-hook, a letter-rack, a tortoise, a toothbrush holder, a wooden ship, a minature sliothar and a metal shovel that he has made over the course of the year. He bought a second-hand Scalextric set at a school fair and wired it up himself. He dug out an old Nintendo 64 that his brother used to have and worked out how to fix it. I sometimes thinks he was accidently switched at birth.
And now the Gaeltacht. Interestingly, he didn’t want to go to the one his brother has gone to for the last three years, but once his brother said he wasn’t going (he has a girlfriend now) he was quite happy to go there. Again, he seemed too young, sitting all on his own on the coach with his head barely visible at the window, but apparently the older ones were discussing whether the eldest son would be coming. “Are you talking about Tinson 1?” he piped up, “because I’m his brother.”
He seems to have no fears anymore. He is sweet, kind, thoughtful and almost always good-tempered. He has a very dry, and very funny, sense of humour.
He’s just great.

Needed some extra luck to help with the transfer!
This was after I took the Valium and look a little out of it.
Our "snowflake" is practically coming out of his shell completely. This is what the doctor calls a hatching embryo.
Since our transfer wasn't until 4pm on Friday we had lots of plans to relax and just enjoy the day. J picked me up from my place around 10am and we headed to get a mani/pedi. We each picked a green color for some fertility luck. After we headed to lunch with T at Olive Garden, MMM! It was so cute to see T get excited during lunch as he was talking about the upcoming evening. J had massages scheduled for us both after lunch to help us both relax. I am so glad she thought of it, it was very needed. I think we both fell asleep during our massages. The clinic generally says to not wear any perfumes and etc during the transfer and so I had to do a wipe bath to get oils off of my body now. By the time we were finished with our massages it was time to book it down to the clinic for our transfer.
They wanted us to arrive a half hour prior since I needed to take a Valium to relax completely. I don't remember feeling so out of it last time once I took the Valium, this time was a whole other story. By the time they called us back for the transfer I had to hold on to T's arm so I could even walk straight. I felt very relaxed and so out of it! J and T kept laughing at me since I was clearly drugged at this point. I've also realized I get super giggly when I am this out of it.
The nurse came in and gave us information for follow-up and etc. We waited a little bit and it was closer to 4:20 before the doctor came in. She explained what she would be doing and we were all glued to the little ultrasound video.
It was amazing to watch this 5 day embryo be placed into my uterus and that hopefully a few days later we would find out if we were pregnant. I sure hope this little one decides to stick around. :)
I ended up staying at J and T's house during the weekend which was perfect! It was fun to play games with them and get to know them more. J is an amazing cook and spoiled us all weekend. I felt bad though since I was still really out of it and slept most of Saturday away. Sunday we went to the movies, J and I saw Age of Adaline. It made me think of how MaK and I went to the movies right before we got a positive test at home.

Robert Owen was a Utopian Socialist and writer, a factory manager, owner and avid reformer. He was known for his theory concerning an individual’s character and behaviour and in his opinion; these characteristics were shaped by one’s surroundings and circumstances. He elaborated on such a theory in his volume ‘A New View of Society’. Owen’s views were praised by Karl Marx and the author had a profound influence on the development of modern Socialism. It must be said however that Robert Owen was an unpopular figure amongst many religious denominations and groups. He was a known rationalist and based his actions and opinion on knowledge and reason rather than religion or emotion.

We went back to the Baptist General Offices and they took us on a tour of the small community. There was a home that had burned down and it had been a year since it happened, but the man whose house it was had to serve six months in jail. They were still waiting for a permit a year later.
Then they took us to a clinic called the Matthew 25 Love Clinic. We met the head doctor and his volunteer staff. They took us in to his office and gave us strawberry juice. We learned it takes seven years to go through medical school. He said if they were Nargis victims the clinic treats them for free, but if not then it was $10. He took us on a tour of the clinic. Their beds were hard but people had IVs in – hanging from the top of their bed. We saw a room that had women in it. Some had got stones or things wrong inside – but two women had young babies. One mother had a very small baby we couldn’t see him/her but she was 5 days old. She had been here as long as we had! Another baby was 20 days old and her mother had a C-section!
Then on the way out we saw the surgery room – which is very bright and sterile. Even though this hospital was in a 3rd world it still smelled like a hospital.
On the way to the compound David had talked to us about merchandizing for NCP and we had just mentioned book bags and other things. The Baptist took us to a small dark room with sewing machines by the windows. Immediately, we saw book bags and fabrics – David bought a backpack that we all really liked. He was thinking of buying them from the women there to sell in the NCP shop.
Then we loaded up the van and headed out to a village.
We got to ride on the back of the Toyota Caravan things! They took us to a sustainable organic model farm. They’re experimenting with plants and growing in nurseries, composting.
Then we took a ride to the weaving house. There were 5 women total – 2 working on the looms and one walking around observing, them, the other two were setting up the next loom. They earn about $20 a month. I think they don’t keep working when they get married and have a children, because one of the women they mentioned had done just that and didn’t work there anymore.
The fabric was very beautiful and I saw the spool shoot through the machine connecting the pieces together. Then we walked to the village. We passed three big school buildings right outside of town. The children were playing soccer and standing at the windows waving. We passed some boys playing volleyball and the ball rolled within their reach, but they were afraid to come get it because we were walking so close. But Kay tossed it to them and I think they really liked that. We ate lunch in a nursery/preschool. It had the cutest primitive playground equipment in the front. They had the month spin wheel with all the birthdays and names on it, just like you’d see in America. It was so cute!
There was a shop across the street that sold the fabric we saw the women making. I bought a piece of red to match Bridgewater, naturally. Then we rode to another model farm where they had classes for students to learn farming techniques to take back to their home area, affected by Nargis. The first person to talk about their situation was a girl with glasses. I thought “Right on, girl!” We introduced ourselves – and we had two farmers in the group. The Burmese noticed that farmers in America are rich, whereas those in Burma aren’t, because we’re able to come to Myanmar. Then we did a Q and A.
There was a solar eclipse that day. Weeks poked a hole in a leaf and shined the sunlight light through the hole and they were able to see the moon on my shirt. It wasn’t a total eclipse, only a partial.
Then we went to the Patty fields because Sam really wanted to see them. We caravan’d to them. I’m glad we saw them – a group of women were planting seedlings in the fields. The mud made a loud suction-cup noise whenever they moved. Mud was caked on their skin up to their knees. Then we tried to leave and Moe had to go off on a moped to find our bus – it was missing.

“Taofi mau i au measina: Hold fast to your treasures” is the theme for Sämoan language week 2014. We hope you have followed our tweets and Instagrams over the last few days. To close off this week we look at tatau (tattooing) – one of Samoa’s most well known cultural treasures. This is an excerpt from an interview with the late tufuga tatatau (master tattooist) Su‘a Sulu‘ape Paulo II in March 1999. Su’a talks to Sean Mallon about his beginnings as a tufuga ta tatau.
SM When did the tatau first come into your consciousness as something that you might aspire to do?
PS I can’t quite remember, but I think I had fancied being a tattooist well before I went to school, and that would be about three or four years old. I was growing up and my father would walk away and leave his tools in a bowl in the house. I would just grab the tools and pretend to tattoo someone. Years later, I started to tattoo young guys in the village. Eventually when I was in Moamoa, at the boarding school, I took some of my father’s tools with me and tattooed the boys.
SM So was there any pressure from your family to pursue this?
PS No there was no pressure at all, the only pressure came on years later. I think it was 1967. I was travelling back home on the bus after a football game, on a Wednesday before Easter weekend . . . a cousin of mine who had started tattooing, I think he started around 1963–64, everyone was talking about him because he was really coming on real strong. That was the resurgence of tattooing in Samoa, that was the exact time. His name was Fa‘alavelave Petelo,he had been brought up in my family, but he left to look after his parents in a village called Samatau, on the northern side of the island. He had tattooed this young man standing in the bus, and one old man and the young man were talking, and something was said about me and my brothers not having the guts to take it up. It made me angry, but not against my cousin who is an adopted brother, but mainly I was angry about my older brothers and myself, because I realised that this old man was right. So while I am saying that I was angry, the anger was not directed at my cousin at all, I was happy for him in a big way, but I was angry at myself. For what was said in the bus was quite right and none of my own brothers had guts enough to take it up. And I decided then and there that I would take it up when I left school.
SM How old were you at that stage?
SM What was the reaction of your father?
PS He didn’t say anything. I came home at this time and he was tattooing some people in the other village in Lefaga, in Matautu. I made tools the following day – that was Thursday. I made a set of about five tools and I went and saw my father. The young people there that were getting tattooed, they saw me showing the tools to my father, and one guy – I can remember his name: Mutu, he’s from the family of Faumui – and he asked me if I would like to tattoo his legs. I said yes, I would like to, and I just started tattooing and there was no looking back from there on.
SM How did you feel when you sat down and started working on this guy? Can you remember?
PS I wasn’t really overawed by the fact that I was able to tattoo a real person, a real pe‘a. I had been tattooing little pictures here and there, but this time I was actually tattooing someone who was getting the pe‘a. My father had started the back, but then I did the leg and there was a gap between the back and the leg, but I left it to my father to complete. It is hard to explain now but it was like I didn’t have any brains, to be honest, I was just . . . all I had was just my eyes in my head, that was all I could remember. I couldn’t remember if I had any brains. I just had my eyes glued to the spot where I was tattooing to make sure it was all right and all correct. And the guy is still around, he is in New Zealand now.
SM And what was the reaction to your first pe‘a?
PS I don’t know about my brothers, but my father was a hard man to please, a very hard man to please. He didn’t say anything. All he said to me was ‘okay, okay.’ He didn’t say to me ‘that’s good, that’s very good’, or something like this, all he said was ‘okay, that’s okay.’ I know that we had done many other things that he was able to do – he used to be a house builder, a boat builder, a tattooist, he even used to make jewellery, rings from gold coins from the German times. So if you were able to make something that he used to make, he never said to you that it was perfect, he never said that kind of thing.

Bill Cosby was freed from prison two months before his accuser in the overturned case was able to share her story with the world.
While Andrea Constand's memoir, The Moment: Standing Up to Bill Cosby, Speaking Up for Women, is set to be released on Sept. 7, the book's main subject, Bill Cosby, was released on June 30 from a state prison near Philadelphia after Pennsylvania Supreme Court overturned his sexual assault conviction on three counts of aggravated indecent assault.
The disgraced TV icon had served more than two years of the three- to 10-year sentence for allegedly drugging and raping Constand, a then-Temple University employee, in 2004. More on the court's ruling here.
As bizarre timing would have it, Constand had actually shared a few excerpts of her unreleased book with Elle magazine earlier this month.
In the published extracts, she wrote about the day she received a call from one of her attorneys, Dolores Troiani, letting her know that the district attorney at the time had decided not to move forward with her case, meaning Cosby would not be charged.
"I wasn't surprised. Not really," Constand wrote. "My lawyers and I had sensed that the case we were attempting to pursue wasn't looking good. It was yet another sharp blow in what had already been, without a doubt, the most difficult year of my life."
Describing where she was at mentally and physically the year prior, Constand explained, "I had a good future before me. I knew who I was and I liked who I was. I was at the top of my game, certain that the groundwork laid by my education and my athletic training had prepared me for whatever challenges were ahead."
"But I was wrong. Very wrong," she said. "Nothing could have prepared me for an early January evening spent at the home of a man I considered a friend. That was the night that Bill Cosby raped me."
The rest of the quotes pulled from Constand's book had to do with her relationship with "Mr. Cosby." She worked in Temple University's athletic department, and Cosby was both a sports fan and an alumnus of the school.
After the two were introduced at a basketball game in the fall of 2002, they forged a professional relationship that teetered on friendly, as they seemingly had a lot in common.
"Yet despite his obvious importance, Bill Cosby struck me as a down-to-earth and affable guy," Constand wrote. "During the tour of the locker room, he was surrounded by Temple employees and other supporters, but he appeared to have come alone – or at least without an entourage. He was dressed casually. He joked and bantered – and whenever he spoke, his warmly resonant voice was met with a chorus of chuckles."
"At one point while we were discussing some of the new athletic equipment, he turned and asked if anyone had a sore back," she went on. "He had the perfect treatment, he said, and he looked over at me. 'Here, I'll show you.' He told me to stand with my back to his and my arms bent. Once we were back to back, he slipped his arms through mine and attempted to hoist me up. I could tell he was staggering as he did this, and the room erupted in laughter. Since I couldn't see him, I'm not exactly sure what the joke was – perhaps he was making out that I was too tall for the stretching manoeuvre to work – but whatever it was, it seemed all in good fun. A silly moment with a man who obviously loved to entertain."
Constand said Cosby would often call her office with questions about the university's sports teams.
"We also began to talk about other shared areas of interest, like healthy eating and homeopathic remedies," she wrote. "Eventually, Mr. Cosby – everyone around the office called him that, or Mr. C. – began to ask me a few questions about myself. When he heard that I had been a communications major and had once considered getting into broadcasting, he offered to help, which I thought was kind. He arranged for me to talk to a few media industry executives, suggested I take acting lessons, and advised me to get a headshot for job applications."
Constand became "increasingly comfortable" with Cosby, who she said would make her laugh, lovingly poked fun at her Canadian accent, offered her advice and restaurant/travel suggestions, and showed a "genuine interest" in her family.
He even "offered me tickets so my parents could see him perform at an upcoming Toronto show. And during our phone calls, he'd often inquire about my folks, especially my mother. 'How's Mom doing?' he'd say. I was touched by his thoughtfulness."
"As the months unfolded, he extended a number of invitations," Constand wrote. "I went to a couple of large dinner parties at his home in the affluent Philadelphia suburb of Elkins Park. I attended a blues concert in New York with a group he'd put together. And I travelled to a First Nations reservation in Connecticut where he was performing at a casino. By the time a year or so had passed, I considered him a friend and a grandfatherly mentor."
"But," she noted, "there were a few strange moments that should perhaps have given me more pause than they did."
It was at his Elkins Park estate that Constand says Cosby sexually assaulted her after giving her wine and three pills that left her "frozen."
The Moment: Standing Up to Bill Cosby, Speaking Up for Women is available Sept. 7.

A student who went missing from Sue Reynolds Elementary School on Monday was later found off campus.
According to a Richmond County School System statement, the student left campus without permission, after causing a disruption that resulted in him being temporarily removed from class until he would cooperate with teachers.
The student left the building, after teachers were briefly distracted by other students. Once the student was reported missing, the school's administration began a school-wide search. He was found and returned to the school after someone called to report his whereabouts, according to the statement.
The student was not harmed and was released to his parents upon returning to school.

Clayton Niehaus is a Math and Science Teacher. He earned his Bachelor of Arts and Science in Chemistry and Philosophy at U.D. Davis. He has extensive experience as a science teacher in the East Bay and has experience working with students that have special learning needs. He has also worked as a lab technician. In his free time he enjoys hiking and writing. He also has an affinity for Pokémon Go.

Monday Memo 1136: Young Jesus
Because the focus of the gospel accounts is on Jesus as an adult, we often don't consider that He was once young and grew up like any other person. That means Jesus was like us in every way, except He could not sin: "Since the children, as he calls them, are people of flesh and blood, Jesus himself became like them and shared their human nature" (Hebrews 2:14). And that means He left us a path to follow to enable us to find God's will just like He did. We read in Luke's gospel,
After the festival was over, while his parents were returning home, the boy Jesus stayed behind in Jerusalem, but they were unaware of it. Thinking he was in their company, they traveled on for a day. Then they began looking for him among their relatives and friends. When they did not find him, they went back to Jerusalem to look for him. After three days they found him in the temple courts, sitting among the teachers, listening to them and asking them questions. Everyone who heard him was amazed at his understanding and his answers (Luke 2:43-47).
In this story, Jesus was probably around the age of 12, but already He was searching for His Father's will. He knew where He should be and how He should spend His time.
Jesus went off to pursue God's will and His parents were searching for Him, not knowing that He had stayed behind. His mother was upset with Him and said, "When his parents saw him, they were astonished. His mother said to him, 'Son, why have you treated us like this? Your father and I have been anxiously searching for you',” (Luke 2:48) to which Jesus replied, “'Why did you have to look for me? Didn't you know that I had to be in my Father's house?' But they did not understand his answer" (Luke 2:49-50).
There is no need for you to run away from home to find God's will and you should include your parents in your plans whenever possible, but the lesson in this story for any young person is this: You are never too young to seek the Lord and His will for your life. Jesus sought out adult teachers who knew the Bible and He wanted to spend time with them. He asked them questions and shared what He knew and saw. He amazed the adults He was meeting with because He had a good understanding of God's word even though He was young.
What about you? Are you interested in knowing the Bible? Do you think about being in ministry, perhaps as a missionary, teacher, or pastor? Or maybe your interests lie in the military, medicine, or music? Jesus was a young child just like you are, but He knew what He was interested in, and He wasn't afraid or ashamed to pursue His call. You shouldn't hesitate to do so either, for God speaks to people and reveals His will regardless of age, young or old.
Others may think you are too young for such thing and may not understand your interests, but God is with you. Don't hesitate to make Him and His will the number one priority in your life, no matter what adults or your peers may say or think. If you seek Him, just like Jesus, you are sure to find Him. Have a blessed week.

The Bound Man
by Ilse Aichinger (Translated from the German by Eric Mosbacher)
Sunlight on his face woke him, but made him shut his eyes again; it streamed unhindered down the slope, collected itself into rivulets, attracted swarms of flies, which flew low over his forehead, circled, sought to land, and were overtaken by fresh swarms. When he tried to whisk them away he discovered that he was bound. A thin rope cut into his arms. He dropped them, opened his eyes again, and looked down at himself. His legs were tied all the way up to his thighs; a single length of rope was tied round his ankles, cris-crossed all the way up his legs, and encircled his hips, his chest and his arms. He could not see where it was knotted. He showed no sign of fear or hurry, though he thought he was unable to move, until he discovered that the rope allowed his legs some free play, and that round his body it was almost loose. His arms were tied to each other but not to his body, and had some free play too. This made him smile, and it occurred to him that perhaps children had been playing a practical joke on him.
He tried to feel for his knife, but again the rope cut softly into his flesh. He tried again, more cautiously this time, but his pocket was empty. Not only his knife, but the little money that he had on him, as well as his coat, were missing. His shoes had been pulled from his feet and taken too. When he moistened his lips he tasted blood, which had flowed from his temples down his cheeks, his chin, his neck, and under his shirt. His eyes were painful; if he kept them open for long he saw reddish stripes in the sky.
He decided to stand up. He drew his knees up as far as he could, rested his hands on the fresh grass and jerked himself to his feet. An elder-branch stroked his cheek, the sun dazzled him, and the rope cut into his flesh. He collapsed to the ground again, half out of his mind with pain, and then tried again. He went on trying until the blood started flowing from his hidden wounds. Then he lay still again for a long while, and let the sun and the flies do what they liked.
When he awoke for the second time the elder-bush had cast its shadow over him, and the coolness stored in it was pouring from between its branches. He must have been hit on the head. Then they must have laid him down carefully, just as a mother lays her baby behind a bush when she goes to work in the fields.
His chances all lay in the amount of free play allowed him by the rope. He dug his elbows into the ground and tested it. As soon as the rope tautened he stopped, and tried again more cautiously. If he had been able to reach the branch over his head he could have used it to drag himself to his feet, but he could not reach it. He laid his head back on the grass, rolled over, and struggled to his knees. He tested the ground with his toes, and then managed to stand up almost without effort.
A few paces away lay the path across the plateau, and among the grass were wild pinks and thistles in bloom. He tried to lift his foot to avoid trampling on them, but the rope round his ankles prevented him. He looked down at himself.
The rope was knotted at his ankles, and ran round his legs in a kind of playful pattern. He carefully bent and tried to loosen it, but loose though it seemed to be, he could not make it any looser. To avoid treading on the thistles with his bare feet, he hopped over them like a bird.
The cracking of a twig made him stop. People in this district were very prone to laughter. He was alarmed by the thought that he was in no position to defend himself. He hopped on until he reached the path. Bright fields stretched far below. He could see no sign of the nearest village, and, if he could move no faster than this, night would fall before he reached it.
He tried walking, and discovered that he could put one foot before another if he lifted each foot a definite distance from the ground and then put it down again before the rope tautened. In the same way he could actually swing his arms a little.
After the first step he fell. He fell right across the path, and made the dust fly. He expected this to be a sign for the long-suppressed laughter to break out, but all remained quiet. He was alone. As soon as the dust had settled he got up and went on. He looked down and watched the rope slacken, grow taut, and then slacken again.
When the first glow-worms appeared he managed to look up. He felt in control of himself again, and his impatience to reach the nearest village faded.
Hunger made him light-headed, and he seemed to be going so fast that not even a motor-cycle could have overtaken him; alternatively he felt as if he were standing still and that the earth was rushing past him, like a river flowing past a man swimming against the stream. The stream carried branches which had been bent southwards by the north wind, stunted young trees, and patches of grass with bright, long-stalked flowers. It ended by submerging the bushes and the young trees, leaving only the sky and the man above water-level. The moon had risen, and illuminated the bare, curved summit of the plateau, the path, which was overgrown with young grass, the bound man making his way along it with quick, measured steps, and two hares, which ran across the hill just in front of him and vanished down the slope. Though the nights were still cool at this time of the year, before midnight the bound man lay down at the edge of the escarpment and went to sleep.
In the light of the morning the animal-tamer who was camping with his circus in the field outside the village saw the bound man coming down the path, gazing thoughtfully at the ground. The bound man stopped and bent down. He held out one arm to help keep his balance and with the other picked up an empty wine-bottle. Then he straightened himself and stood erect again. He moved slowly, to avoid being cut by the rope, but to the circus proprietor what he did suggested the voluntary limitation of an enormous swiftness of movement. He was enchanted by its extraordinary gracefulness, and while the bound man looked about for a stone on which to break the bottle, so that he could use the splintered neck to cut the rope, the animal-tamer walked across the field and approached him. The first leaps of a young panther had never filled him with such delight.
“Ladies and gentlemen, the bound man!” His very first movements let loose a storm of applause, which out of sheer excitement caused the blood to rush to the cheeks of the animal-tamer standing at the edge of the arena. The bound man rose to his feet. His surprise whenever he did this was like that of a four-footed animal which has managed to stand on its hind-legs. He knelt, stood up, jumped and turned cart-wheels. The spectators found it as astonishing as if they had seen a bird which voluntarily remained earthbound, and confined itself to hopping. The bound man became an enormous draw. His absurd steps and little jumps, his elementary exercises in movement, made the ropedancer superfluous. His fame grew from village to village, but the motions he went through were few and always the same; they were really quite ordinary motions, which he had continually to practice in the day-time in the half-dark tent in order to retain his shackled freedom. In that he remained entirely within the limits set by his rope he was free of it, it did not confine him, but gave him wings and endowed his leaps and jumps with purpose; just as the flights of birds of passage have purpose when they take wing in the warmth of summer and hesitantly make small circles in the sky.
All the children of the neighborhood started playing the game of “bound man.” They formed rival gangs, and one day the circus people found a little girl lying bound in a ditch, with a cord tied round her neck so that she could hardly breathe. They released her, and at the end of the performance that night the bound man made a speech. He announced briefly that there was no sense in being tied up in such a way that you could not jump. After that he was regarded as a comedian.
Grass and sunlight, tent pegs driven into the ground and then pulled up again, and on to the next village. “Ladies and gentlemen, the bound man!” The summer mounted towards its climax. It bent its face deeper over the fish-ponds in the hollows, taking delight in its dark reflection, skimmed the surface of the rivers, and made the plain into what it was. Everyone who could walk went to see the bound man.
Many wanted a close-up view of how he was bound. So the circus proprietor announced after each performance that anyone who wanted to satisfy himself that the knots were real and that the rope was not made of rubber was at liberty to do so. The bound man generally waited for the crowd in the area outside the tent. He laughed or remained serious, and held out his arms for inspection. Many took the opportunity to look him in the face, others gravely tested the rope, tried the knots on his ankles, and wanted to know exactly how the length compared with the length of his limbs. They asked him how he had come to be tied up like that, and he answered patiently, always saying the same thing. Yes, he had been tied up, he said, and when he awoke he found that he had been robbed as well. Those who had done it must have been pressed for time, because they had tied him up somewhat too loosely for someone who was not supposed to be able to move and somewhat too tightly for someone who was expected to be able to move. But he did move, people pointed out. Yes, he replied, what else could he do?
Before he went to bed he always sat for a time in front of the fire. When the circus proprietor asked him why he didn’t make up a better story, he always answered that he hadn’t made up that one, and blushed. He preferred staying in the shade.
The difference between him and the other performers was that when the show was over he did not take off his rope. The result was that every movement that he made was worth seeing, and the villagers used to hang about the camp for hours, just for the sake of seeing him get up from in front of the fire and roll himself in his blanket. Sometimes the sky was beginning to lighten when he saw their shadows disappear.
The circus proprietor often remarked that there was no reason why he should not be untied after the evening performance and tied up again next day. He pointed out the ropedancers, for instance, did not stay on their rope over night. But no-one took the idea of untying him seriously.
For the bound man’s fame rested on the fact that he was always bound, that whenever he washed himself he had to wash his cloths too and vice versa, and that his only way of doing so was to jump in the river just as he was every morning when the sun came out, and that he had to be careful not to go too far out for fear of being carried away by the stream.
The proprietor was well aware that what in the last resort protected the bound man from the jealousy of the other performers was his helplessness; he deliberately left them the pleasure of watching him groping painfully from stone to stone on the river bank every morning with his wet clothes clinging to him. When his wife pointed out that even the best clothes would not stand up indefinitely to such treatment (and the bound man’s clothes were by no means of the best) he replied curtly that it was not going to last for ever. That was his answer to all objections – it was for the summer season only. But when he said this he was not being serious; he was talking like a gambler who has no intention of giving up his vice. In reality he would have been prepared cheerfully to sacrifice his lions and his rope-dancers for the bound man.
He proved this on the night when the ropedancers jumped over the fire. Afterwards he was convinced that they did it, not because it was a midsummer’s day, but because of the bound man, who as usual was lying and watching them, with that peculiar smile that might have been real or might have been only the effect of the glow on his face. In any case, no-one knew anything about him, because he never talked about anything that had happened to him before he emerged from the wood that day.
But that evening two of the performers suddenly picked him up by the arms and legs, carried him to the edge of the fire and started playfully swinging him to and fro, while two others held out their arms to catch him on the other side. In the end they threw him, but too short. The two men on the other side drew back – they explained afterwards that they did so the better to take the shock. The result was that the bound man landed at the very edge of the flames and would have been burned if the circus proprietor had not seized his arms and quickly dragged him away to save the rope which was starting to get singed. He was certain that the object had been to burn the rope. He sacked the four men on the spot.
A few nights later the proprietor’s wife was awakened by the sound of footsteps on the grass, and went outside just in time to prevent the clown from playing his last practical joke. He was carrying a pair of scissors. When he was asked for an explanation he insisted that he had no intention of taking the bound man’s life, but only wanted to cut his rope, because he felt sorry for him. But he was sacked too.
These antics amused the bound man, because he could have freed himself if he had wanted to whenever he liked, but perhaps he wanted to learn a few new jumps first. The children’s rhyme: “We travel with the circus, we travel with the circus” sometimes occurred to him while he lay awake at night. He could hear the voices of spectators on the opposite bank who had been driven too far downstream on the way home. He could see the river gleaming in the moonlight, and the young shoots growing out of the thick tops of the willow trees, and did not think about autumn yet.
The circus proprietor dreaded the danger involved for the bound man by sleep. Attempts were continually made to release him while he slept. The chief culprits were sacked rope-dancers, or children who were bribed for the purpose. But measures could be taken to safeguard against these. A much bigger danger was that which he represented to himself. In his dreams he forgot his rope, and was surprised by it when he woke in the darkness of morning. He would angrily try to get up, but lose his balance and fall back again. The previous evening’s applause was forgotten, sleep was still too near, his head and neck too free. He was just the opposite of a hanged man – his neck was the only part of him that was free. You had to make sure that at such moments no knife was within his reach. In the early hours of the morning the circus proprietor sometimes sent his wife to see whether the bound man was all right. If he was asleep she would bend over him and feel the rope. It had grown hard from dirt and damp. She would test the amount of free play it allowed him, and touch his tender wrists and ankles.
The most varied rumors circulated about the bound man. Some said he had tied himself up and invented the story of having been robbed, and towards the end of the summer that was the general opinion. Others maintained that he had been tied up at his own request, perhaps in league with the circus proprietor. The hesitant way in which he told his story, his habit of breaking off when the talk got around to the attack on him, contributed greatly to these rumors. Those who still believed in the robbery-with-violence story were laughed at. Nobody knew what difficulties the circus proprietor had in keeping the bound man, and how often he said he had had enough and wanted to clear off, for too much of the summer had passed.
Later however, he stopped talking about clearing off. When the proprietor’s wife brought him his food by the river and asked him how long he proposed to remain with them, he did not answer. She thought he had got used, not to being tied up, but to not forgetting for a moment that he was tied up – the only thing that anyone in his position could get used to. She asked him whether he did not think it ridiculous to be tied up all the time, but he answered that he did not. Such a variety of people – clowns, freaks, and comics, to say nothing of elephants and tigers – traveled with circuses that he did not see why a bound man should not travel with a circus too. He told her about the movements he was practicing, the new ones he had discovered, and about a new trick that had occurred to him while he was whisking flies from the animals’ eyes. He described to her how he always anticipated the effect of the rope and always restrained his movements in such a way as to prevent it from ever tautening; and she knew that there were days when he was hardly aware of the rope when he humped down from the wagon and slapped the flanks of the horses in the morning, as if he were moving in a dream. She watched him vault over the bars almost without touching them, and saw the sun on his face, and he told her that sometimes he felt as if he were not tied up at all. She answered that if he were prepared to be untied there would never be any need for him to feel tied up. He agreed that he could be untied whenever he felt like it.
The woman ended by not knowing whether she were more concerned with the man or with the rope that tied him. She told him that he could go on traveling with the circus without his rope, but she did not believe it. For what would be the point of his antics without his rope, and what would he amount to without it? Without his rope he would leave them, and the happy days would be over. She would no longer be able to sit beside him on the stones by the river without rousing suspicion, and she knew that his confined presence, and her conversations with him, of which the rope was the only subject, depended on it. Whenever she agreed that the rope had its advantages he would start talking about how troublesome it was, and whenever he started talking about its advantages she would urge him to get rid of it. All this seemed as endless as the summer itself.
At other times she was worried at the thought that she was herself hastening the end by her talk. Sometimes she would get up in the middle of the night and run across the grass to where he slept. She wanted to shake him, wake him up and ask him to keep the rope. But then she would see him lying there; he had thrown off his blanket, and there he lay like a corpse, with his legs outstretched and his arms close together, with the rope tied round them. His cloths had suffered from the heat and the water, but the rope had grown no thinner. She felt that he would go on traveling with the circus until the flesh fell from him and exposed the joints. Next morning she would plead with him more ardently than ever to get rid of his rope.
The increasing coolness of the weather gave her hope. Autumn was coming, and he would not be able to go on jumping into the river with his clothes on much longer. But the thought of losing his rope, about which he had felt indifferent earlier in the season, now depressed him.
The songs of the harvesters filled him with foreboding. “Summer has gone, summer has gone.” But he realized that soon he would have to change his clothes, and he was certain that when he had been untied it would be impossible to tie him up again in exactly the same way. About this time the proprietor started talking about traveling south that year.
The heat changed without transition into quiet, dry cold, and the fire was kept in all day long. When the bound man jumped down from the wagon he felt the coldness of the grass under his feet. The stalks were bent with ripeness. The horses dreamed on their feet and the wild animals, crouching to leap even in their sleep, seemed to be collecting gloom under their skins which would break out later.
On one of these days a young wolf escaped. The circus proprietor kept quiet about it, to avoid spreading alarm, but the wolf soon started raiding cattle in the neighborhood. People at first believed that the wolf had been driven to these parts by the prospect of a severe winter, but the circus soon became suspect. The proprietor could not conceal the loss of the animal from his own employees, so the truth was bound to come out before long. The circus people offered their aid in tracking down the beast to the burgomasters of the neighboring villagers, but all their efforts were in vain. Eventually the circus was openly blamed for the damage and the danger, and spectators stayed away.
The bound man went on performing before half-empty seats without losing anything of his amazing freedom of movement. During the day he wandered among the surrounding hills under the thin-beaten silver of the autumn sky, and, whenever he could, lay down where the sun shone longest. Soon he found a place which the twilight reached last of all, and when at last it reached him he got up most unwillingly from the withered grass. In coming down the hill he had to pass through a little wood on its southern slope, and one evening he saw the gleam of two little green lights. He knew that they came from no church window, and was not for a moment under any illusion about what they were.
He stopped. The animal came towards him through the thinning foliage. He could make out its shape, the slant of its neck, its tail which swept the ground, and its receding head. If he had not been bound, perhaps he would have tried to run away, but as it was he did not even feel fear. He stood calmly with dangling arms and looked down at the wolf’s bristling coat, under which the muscles played like his own underneath the rope. He thought the evening wind was still between him and the wolf when the beast sprang. The man took care to obey his rope.
Moving with the deliberate care that he had so often put to the test, he seized the wolf by the throat. Tenderness for a fellow-creature arose in him, tenderness for the upright being concealed in the four-footed. In a movement that resembled the drive of a great bird – he felt a sudden awareness that flying would be possible only if one were tied up in a special way – he flung himself at the animal and brought it to the ground. He felt a slight elation at having lost the fatal advantage of free limbs which causes men to be worsted.
The freedom he enjoyed in this struggle was having to adapt every movement of his limbs to the rope that tied him – the freedom of panthers, wolves, and the wild flowers that sway in the evening breeze. He ended up lying obliquely down the slope, clasping the animal’s hind-legs between his own bare feet and its head between his hands. He felt the gentleness of the faded foliage stroking the back of his hands, and he felt his own grip almost effortlessly reaching its maximum, and he felt too how he was in no way hampered by the rope.
As he left the wood light rain began to fall and obscured the setting sun. He stopped for a while under the trees at the edge of the wood. Beyond the camp and the river he saw the fields where the cattle grazed, and the places where they crossed. Perhaps he would travel south with the circus after all. He laughed softly. It was against all reason. Even if he went on putting up with his joints’ being covered with sores, which opened and bled when he made certain movements, his clothes would not stand up much longer to the friction of the rope.
The circus proprietor’s wife tried to persuade her husband to announce the death of the wolf without mentioning that it had been killed by the bound man. She said that even at the time of his greatest popularity people would have refused to believe him capable of it, and in their present angry mood, with the nights getting cooler, they would be more incredulous than ever. The wolf had attacked a group of children at play that day, and nobody would believe that it had really been killed; for the circus proprietor had many wolves, and it was easy enough for him to hang a skin on the rail and allow free entry. But he was not to be dissuaded. He thought that the announcement of the bound man’s act would revive the triumphs of the summer.
That evening the bound man’s movements were uncertain. He stumbled in one of his jumps, and fell. Before he managed to get up he heard some low whistles and catcalls, rather like birds calling at dawn. He tried to get up to quickly, as he had done once or twice during the summer, with the result that he tautened the rope and fell back again. He lay still to regain his calm, and listened to the boos and catcalls growing into an uproar. “Well, bound man, and how did you kill the wolf?” they shouted, and: “Are you the man who killed the wolf?” If he had been one of them he would not have believed it himself. He thought they had a perfect right to be angry: a circus at this time of year, a bound man, an escaped wolf, and all ending up with this. Some groups of spectators started arguing with the others, but the greater part of the audience thought the whole thing a bad joke. By the time he had got to his feet there was such a hubbub that he was barely able to make out individual words
He saw people surging up all round him, like faded leaves raised by a whirlwind in a circular valley at the centre of which all was yet still. He thought of the golden sunsets of the last few days; and the cemetery light which lay over the blight of all that he had build up during so many nights, the gold frame which the pious hang round dark, old pictures, this sudden collapse of everything, filled him with anger.
The wanted him to repeat his battle with the wolf. He said that such a thing had no place in a circus performance, and the proprietor declared that he did not keep animals to have them slaughtered in front of an audience. But the mob stormed the ring and forced them towards the cages. The proprietor’s wife made her way between the seats to the exit and managed to get round to the cages from the other side. She pushed aside the attendant whom the crowd had forced to open a cage door, but the spectators dragged her back and prevented the door from being shut.
“Aren’t you the woman who used to lie with him by the river in the summer?” they called out. “How does he hold you in his arms?” She shouted back at them that they needn’t believe in the bound man if they didn’t want to, they had never deserved him – painted clowns were good enough for them.
The bound man felt as if the bursts of laughter were what he had been expecting ever since early May. What had smelt so sweet all through the summer no stank. But, if they insisted, he was ready to take on all the animals in the circus. He had never felt so much at one with his rope.
Gently he pushed the woman aside. Perhaps he would travel south with them after all. He stood in the open doorway of the cage, and he saw the wolf, a strong young animal, rise to its feet, and he heard the proprietor grumbling again, about the loss of his exhibits. He clapped his hands to attract the animal’s attention, and when it was near enough he turned to slam the cage door. He looked the woman in the face. Suddenly he remembered the proprietor’s warning to suspect of murderous intentions anyone near him who had a sharp instrument in his hand. At the same moment he felt the blade on his wrists, as cool as the water of the river in autumn, which during the last few weeks he had been barely able to stand. The rope curled up in a tangle beside him while he struggled free. He pushed the woman back, but there was no point in anything he did now. Had he been insufficiently on his guard against those who wanted to release him, against the sympathy in which they wanted to lull him? Had he lain too long on the river bank? If she had cut the cord at any other moment it would have been better than this.
He stood in the middle of the cage, and rid himself of the rope like a snake discarding its skin. It amused him to see the spectators shrinking back. Did they realize that he had no choice now? Or that fighting the wolf now would prove nothing whatever? At the same time he felt all his blood rush to his feet. He felt suddenly weak.
The rope, which fell at its feet like a snare, angered the wolf more than the entry of a stranger into its cage. It crouched to spring. The man reeled, and grabbed the pistol that hung ready at the side of the cage. The, before anyone could stop him, he shot the wolf between the eyes. The animal reared, and touched him in falling.
On the way to the river he heard the footsteps of his pursuers – spectators, the rope-dancers, the circus proprietor, and the proprietor’s wife, who persisted in the chase longer than anyone else. He hid in a clump of bushes and listened to them hurrying past, and later on streaming in the opposite direction back tot he camp. The moon shone on the meadow; in that light its color was that of both growth and death.
When he came to the river his anger died away. At dawn it seemed to him as if lumps of ice were floating in the water, and as if snow had fallen, obliterating memory.
Delivering a high-quality product at a reasonable price is not enough anymore.
That’s why we have developed 5 beneficial guarantees that will make your experience with our service enjoyable, easy, and safe.
You have to be 100% sure of the quality of your product to give a money-back guarantee. This describes us perfectly. Make sure that this guarantee is totally transparent.Read more
Each paper is composed from scratch, according to your instructions. It is then checked by our plagiarism-detection software. There is no gap where plagiarism could squeeze in.Read more
Thanks to our free revisions, there is no way for you to be unsatisfied. We will work on your paper until you are completely happy with the result.Read more
Your email is safe, as we store it according to international data protection rules. Your bank details are secure, as we use only reliable payment systems.Read more
By sending us your money, you buy the service we provide. Check out our terms and conditions if you prefer business talks to be laid out in official language.Read more
Our specialists are always online to help you! We are available 24/7 via live chat, WhatsApp, and phone to answer questions, correct mistakes, or just address your academic fears.See our T&Cs

I am so glad that I hired Jeff Keller. I was being taken advantage of by my ex and her lawyer. I was going to court every month being asked for different things and the lawyer was trying to get $20,000 in back support which I didn’t owe. Mr. Keller came into the picture and caught on right away to the bogus things they were trying to do. He called them out. The court denied my ex any child support arrearages, and eventually, I ended up getting custody of my son and awarded child support against her. Another time, I used Mr. Keller when I was injured at work. Mr. Keller helped get me over $200,000 in my workman’s comp settlement. My recommendation is that if you deserve something he is the lawyer that acts and does what he says.

"I went in for a colonoscopy. I ..."
About: Claremont Hospital Claremont Hospital Sheffield S10 5UB
Posted via nhs.uk
What I liked
I went in for a colonoscopy. I was referred from Derbyshire. I saw the Choose and Book leaflet in the waiting room. I was surprised the GP could offer me a choice, especially outside of Derbyshire. It was only have a day, but the staff were friendly and well informed. The surroundings were excellent. I was looked after extremely well. They never made me feel I was an NHS patient rather than private.
What could be improved
No - I thought it was brilliant! A service to be treasured. I think the local NHS has a lot to learn from private sector providers.

Wednesday, October 20, 2010
A few more from that one night.
There are so many more photos that I have, but they are pretty incriminating. Here's the last of the one's that probably won't get anyone in trouble (other than Jay). No explanations, you just had to have been there.

They have started framing!! Here is the latest update on the house. They are going crazy over there. It is so fun to look one day and then the next it looks different. We are excited and so far are loving the process. This is the basement.
Saturday, July 11, 2009
We had a fun 4th of July. We went to Firth on Friday for a golf Tournament (Kyle, his brothers, and his Dad got 2nd in a shoot out. They did great.) We were also there for a Hawaiian themed Birthday party for Skye. It was a blast. There was a lot of water, yummy treats, and great company. Thanks Lins. and Josh for such a fun party. I always love a good theme!! We watched the fireworks up at Natalie and Bills and the boys loved every second of it. Overall a great weekend.
Posted by Shelby at 12:35 PM
Jaxon just finished his baseball season and had such a blast. He is getting better and better each and every season and LOVES it. He was so sad to see it end. Here is Jax with his great little buddy Breven and Kale. They were quite the little group~~!
Posted by Shelby at 12:30 PM

|Allusion of Suffering
Author: Transparent Existance PM
Drake is coming home with bruises. He's withdrawn, and he's angry. No one knows what to do, because he isn't telling anyone whats happening. Will he fall into darkness, or will the light pull him back from the seclussion hes drifting further into?Rated: Fiction T - English - Drama/Hurt/Comfort - Josh N. & Drake P. - Chapters: 26 - Words: 89,806 - Reviews: 119 - Favs: 52 - Follows: 31 - Updated: 12-11-12 - Published: 08-21-12 - Status: Complete - id: 8454139
|A+ A- Full 3/4 1/2 Expand Tighten|
~ Allusion of suffering ~
Disclaimer:I do not own Drake and Josh, not am i profitting from this written work.
A/N: I'm back! This fic has been written at the request of Mrs bell 26, who asked me for another abuse story. I hope that it is not only to her liking, but to the liking of anyone who cares to read it. I'm going to try to keep the updates regular, but I have alot going on right now so my focus is scattered. I'm also working on an outline for an actual story all my own. If you like it, and want to boost my badly damaged ego and self esteem, reviews would be appreciated.
I hope you enjoy it.
It never shold have escalated this far.
Drake let his head fall against his chest, heavy eyeslids hanging over his half open eyes. The tears had dried, buy he could still feel where they had streaked across his face. He could still taste them. His fingers twitched on the windowsill as he tried to calm his nerves, tried to relax. He was so tired of it all: the pain, the lies. They had built a wall around him, each memory a stone stacked so thickly he didnt think he'd be able to break free.
He'd been foolish to think he could handle this on his own, he knew that now. But it was too late. He'd pushed away anyone who could help him, everyone who cared. He'd been cruel, and he'd done nothing but lie to them. They wouldnt help him now, and he couldnt ask them to forgive him. They were angry, and he was too far gone. Josh had turned his back on him again, and that, he thought, was the hardest thing to bare.
Drake lifted his head, staring at the setting sun off in the distance. Its warmth was dying now, letting the cold embrace of night slowly creep upon the world. He felt that chill, and he knew the darkness that was coming very well.
Hesitantly, he pushed himself away from the window. Every footfall felt all too heavy as he moved toward his backpack. His body felt weighed down, and each breath felt thick. He pulled out his notebook, fighting back tears as he wrote out a note to his parents, to Josh. They deserved to know why. They needed to know that he was sorry, for the way he'd been acting, and for what he was about to do.
With trembaling fingers he pulled the bottle of pills out from their hiding place in his backpack and emptied them out into his sweating palm. He closed his eyes as he swallowed them, feeling his throat tighten as he forced them down. Drake wasnt fighting the tears anymore, he didnt have the strenth. He'd learned the hard way that he was weak. He accepted that now.
His hand was shaking worse as he pulled the razor out from his pocket where he'd stored it. He watched those last glimmers of light reflect off of its smooth surface before placing the blade against the vein i his wrist. He could feel his heart beating against his chest, the burning pain tingling against his skin. As he had so many times before, he pulled the blade across his skin, though this time he pressed harder, deeper. This time, it was for real.
Drake's eyes widened as he saw the blood flowing from the fresh laceration. He'd never seen so much blood before. He shook his head, bringing forth a wave of diziness and nausea. He swallowed the bile in his throat, coughing at the burn. He tried to switch the razor to his other hand, but his hands were shaking too hard now. His fingers stumbled with the blade and he watched helplessly as it fell onto the floor.
As he tried to kneel down and pick his fallen friend up from the floor he fell over. His heartbeat was echoing in his ears, and the blood from his wrist was still spilling out into the carpet. Drake could feel the empty touch of darkness pulling further down, into the carpets worn in fibers. This was it, the way his story ended. He tried to laugh, but all he could manage was a weak groan.
He wasnt sure if his vision was blurring from the tears, or the loss of blood and pills he'd injested, But in his fading, distorted sight he swore he saw Josh. A distant blob of shapes and colors racing toward him, desperatly calling his name.
Drake let his eyes close, away from the light, away from the life that still clung to him. He closed his eyes, and he remembered everything that had brought him to this.

The Plane of Argentum was created by Karn sometime after the invasion of Dominaria. Karn had become a planeswalker and used his abilities to make his very own plane, a plane devoid of organic life and populated only by artificial life.
Karn was happy with his plane, but after a while felt the wanderlust that planeswalkers often do. Deciding his plane needed a protector, he created the gave one of his many golems, Memnarch, another of his creations, the Mirari.
The Mirari was originally designed to be a probe, Karn sent it to Dominaria to keep an eye on it, but the Mirari ended up causing wars over its power. Finally it was recovered by Karn, and eventually installed into Memnarch.
Once Karn had left Argentum he named Memnarch his steward, giving him full power over the plane. Memnarch quickly started to go mad. Karn had inadvertently left behind Phyrexian oil, from his own body in his palace. The oil drove Memnarch insane.
Memnarch became obsessed with the power his master had, and became oriented to a single goal… become a planeswalker. However this posed problems to the golem. First of which was that artificial creatures could not be born with the planeswalker spark, so even if he had the means to transfer the spark from one being to another, there would never been on on Argentum.
The decision was clear, Memnarch must change the plane itself to cultivate a spark. And so Memnarch did. He made the plane more inhabitable to living orginisms. Once his terraforming was complete, he started destroying his fellow golems that Karn had created and named his new plane Mirrodin.
Memnarch then set to stealing living organisms en mass from other planes with devices he had created. He became more and more powerful, even powerful enough to keep Karn from being able to return to his own plane. Memnarch spent much of his time in his new lair, the Panopticon where he could observe the plane and seek out potential planeswalkers.
Finally Memnarchs efforts were successful and he found an elf that had the spark, named Glissa. Memnarch attempted to steal her spark, which ultimately ended with his death. After Memnarch was destroyed, Karn was able to return to his plane.
After the events in Time Spiral Block, Karn sensed his mind being corrupted. He retreated back to his plane to recover and went to the very core of Mirrodin. Karn started to loose his grip on his sanity and the Phyrexian nature of his powerstone started to corrupt Mirrodin.
Mirrodin’s populace was nearly helpless to stop the corruption of their world. Most fought the New Phyrexian beings, but the started to overrun the resistance. The New Phyrexians worshiped Karn as the father of machines and made every effort to transform the plane in his name.
Karn was eventually saved by his friend and fellow planeswalker Venser, but it was too late for him, and Karn had been fully transformed into a Phyrexian. Melira was able to cleanse Karn’s body, but his heart was too corrupted.
Venser decided to make the ultimate sacrifice for his friend. Venser was deteriorating because of phthisis, a degenerative disease caused by over exposure to powerstones. Thus Venser knew he would die, so he gave all his remaining mana, his life force and his spark to Karn.
This saved Karn and killed Venser, but Mirrodin was no more, only New Phyrexia remained.

The Hush Post| 4:32 pm| One-minute-read|
Without food for four days, 16 people who were walking from Uttar Pradesh’s Varanasi to Samastipur, a distance of about 330 km, during the lockdown over the Corona Virus pandemic were rescued by the police.
They were found walking along a railway track after they could not find transport to reach their home during the lockdown. They said they were working in Calicut in Kerala. Somehow they had managed to reach Jhansi by train. However, the railways then announced a shut down of services. Following this they were left to fend for themselves.
“From Jhansi, we took a lift from some trucks that were passing by and managed to reach Varanasi but for the onward journey, we have no option but to walk,” one of them said.
The group reached Kuchman railway station when Superintendent of Police Hemant Kutiyal came to know and rescued them. One of them said they were walking along the railway track so that they do not get lost.
In yet another incident, the police in Meerut said they rescued a labourer, his wife and four children who had been walking around in search of food. The family had not eaten for more than 48 hours.
“The entire family was in a bad shape. But, thankfully, they reached well in time. We gave them food and some money too,” senior police officer Bijender Rana said.

'The Young and the Restless' Star Joshua Morrow Is the Father of 4 Kids - Meet all of Them
Famous for his role in the American CBS soap opera, “The Young and the Restless,” Joshua Morrow appears to have a strong bond with his family. He is a dedicated husband and an affectionate father. In a recent post on his Twitter page, he shows off the happy Morrow clan, as he displays his daddy duties.
The actor is not as restless as the role he played in the soap, with a settled life Joshua stops at nothing to show his wife and kids how much they mean to him.
Whether he is attending the children’s game at school or giving them a ride to school, the delectable actor is all smiles and fun with them. In his recent upload, he wrote:
“School morning without the hotness here….#beautifulchaos.”
A pool of comments from fans hit his timeline, they all admired his kids, and some even said he had an excellent and invaluable family. Joshua often applauds his wife and claims she gave him the coolest kids that he could ever have asked for. The duo is a parent to four children namely, Cooper, Crew, Cash, and Charlie Jo.
He doesn’t seem to want his kids out of his sight, or in danger, as he confessed he wouldn’t let his daughter date anyone other than a superhero. But of course, daddy was joking!
Apart from looking out for his little princess, he is also a loving man to the queen of his heart. In an interview, Joshua recapped the day they both exchanged their vows, and he excitedly shares with the public. In his words:
“ Beautiful day up at the Bacar in Santa Barbara. You throw around unforgettable day quite often, but that truly was. My wife arranged that entire wedding, did it all by herself. I’ve never seen her look more beautiful, more ethereal. She looked like an angel coming towards me, as she came around the corner it was a magical day.”
The Hollywood star has his personal life under wraps and doesn’t let the media distort his focus on his family. Even though he didn’t see his parents together for long as they parted ways a few years after his birth in 1974, his growing up with his father and aunty in Oklahoma, to living with his mother and stepfather as a teenager wasn't a discouraging factor.
He didn’t let that get to him as he strived hard to make it in the entertainment industry, first as a model then later as an actor. Joshua sure does have his kids back.

Thursday, August 20, 2009
Next Time, I Won't Bother...
I got yelled at by a customer yesterday, it was awesome.
A little girl, little, like 2 years-old, was walking out of kids yelling "Mommy! Where are you?" I asked her if she was lost and got down on her level so she wasn't scared. She couldn't tell me her mom's name or her own. I called my manager. He came over and we walked to the mall end of the store where the mall playground area is thinking she may have come from outside the store. The little girl didn't see her so we went back to the customer service desk. Customers keep walking past tilting their heads saying, "Oh no, is she lost?!"
At this point my manager says maybe we should wait for a parent to realize she is lost or call mall security soon. We walk back into kids and a woman is off to the side. I ask her if this is her daughter and she says "yes." I tell her that she has been LOST for several minutes...the woman is shocked, or at least pretends to be. I say something like, "Gotta keep an eye on the little ones!"
Now, I was annoyed. I had been with the little girl for about 5 minutes and I think it is irresponsible to not know where your 2 year-old is for 5 minutes. I get annoyed that people think the store is a safe place to let their kids run wild. IT ISN'T. Not only are there sharp edges to run into and benches to fall off of and when you are climbing shelves or fake ladders I freak out that there isn't an adult around to discipline.
Let's face it...I would have never gotten away with behavior like that.
If I had torn a book, my parents would have bought it and we were going home, never to return to that store.
If I had taken all the stickers out of a book and stuck them all over the table and on other, non-sticker books, my parents would have bought them all, peeled off the stickers and taken me home, with a spanking.
If I was climbing on the fake, non-weight bearing ladder that Frog & Toad climb on, I would have been yanked down and spanked and then we would go home.
I'm pretty sure if I was missing for more than a moment, my parents would have done the frantic run up and down the aisles yelling my name; and when they found me, they would tell me not to wander off, and we might even go home.
Essentially, I was (and probably still am) more afraid of my parents than the police, I would have rather gone to jail at the age of 8 for tearing a book or breaking something in a store than face the consequences of my parents. And my parents weren't even strict, but they PARENTED.
So I was annoyed and I'm sure it was in my voice.
Anyway...after mother and daughter were reunited, I told my boss that mom didn't even know her daughter was lost (which is very common). Then I went on my 15 minute break and stood in the line for a cup of coffee. The woman yelled at my boss, and then saw me in line and came and yelled at me...She said it was "inappropriate" to imply she didn't know where her child was (even though she didn't know). She said she was "right there" (even though she wasn't). She said she watched her kids (even though she wasn't). See the pattern. I fought right back and said she was lost for several minutes and was calling for her (most parents hear "Mommy!" and look to at least see if it's their kid). I told her I was concerned about her safety and THAT IS PART OF MY JOB. The woman said she was with the 6 year-old who was reading to her. Was that supposed to support her in the argument or me? I told her that was nice, but the little one was scared and calling for her. I did NOT apologize, but you can be sure, the next time a kid appears to be lost (which I hate because I can vividly remember feeling lost as a kid) I will look the other way until asked to do otherwise. I don't need to be reprimanded for doing my job and caring about a kid. F. F. F. FML!

Location: Harbour Grace, Newfoundland, Canada
The following report was sent into our website by Emilia on Sept 9, 2012:
“I remember when I was younger, when I still lived with my mother, I always used to see these things in my house. But the thing is, when it did happen I was always alone. I’ll tell you this much, they were not friendly what so ever, and I was always scared of being home alone.
I remember when I was about ten years old. And, of course, I was home alone at the time. I was in my living room watching TV. And all of a sudden I hear footsteps coming down the hall. At first I thought that maybe one of my brothers came in the house from the back door, but sadly I was wrong, very wrong. I called out both their names and I got no reply, I still heard only the footsteps. So I thought they were going to try to prank me, so I got up to look down the hall. No one was there. I shook my head and convinced myself I was just hearing things. So I went back and sat down on the couch.
Not even five minutes later I hear the footsteps again. This time I started getting scared. So, of course, I went back into the hall. This time I did see something. It was a man, like a grown man, standing in the middle of the hall. He was wearing a suit that was light brown, but he looked like he was from a different time. I just kept staring at him and when he finally looked at me I felt so much anger and hatred that I froze. And I guess the man liked that I was scared, cause he smiled. It wasn’t a nice smile either.
I looked away but when I look back there’s another man wearing the same suit as the first. I felt the same anger and hatred in him also. I was still frozen in place. No matter how hard I tried I couldn’t run. I couldn’t move at all, I just stayed there and stared at these men.
They started walking towards me and of course I tried again to run, but they got to me first. They became aggressive towards me and I didn’t know why. I didn’t know what I did wrong. One of them tilted their head and gave that smile again. He reached out and grabbed me. Like he felt rea. He had the neck of my shirt, but when I tried to push him away my hands went right through his body. I started to scream. The man lifted me up off the ground and threw me at least five feet away from him. I hit the ground hard but I didn’t even want to move. I was still too scared, but when I looked up they were gone.
This happened for quite a few months leading up to my fourteenth birthday. But the sad thing is, absolutely no one believed me. So I was alone to fight this hell, over and over. To this day I don’t know why they were aggressive, but once I left Newfoundland and came too Ontario those men stayed where they were and I haven’t had problems since.”
Submit your true ghost story here

Dundalk Fri, 6th Dec, 2019
Art Of America is great to come out the right side of a photo and he’s done it twice. Gavin said he was a little bit flat today and didn’t pick up as well as he thought he might. He’ll probably come back here for another handicap and we might give him a little longer this time.
Dundalk Fri, 22nd Nov, 2019
Art Of America I didn't think he'd handle the surface because all along they have been telling me he doesn't want quick ground. He lost his way so much that he was doing nothing so I decided we'd try something different. I actually had him in the claimer but decided that I'd better not run him in it because if he does win it he'll get claimed because he'll have proved he handles the track. I said we'd run him in the handicap and if he doesn't win we can run him in a claimer again. He redeemed himself a bit now and will probably come back here.

A FORMER murder accused's version of events about the disappearance of a missing businesswoman has been heard by a jury.
Financial adviser Lynda Spence, 27, has not been seen since April 2011. It is alleged she was abducted, tortured and murdered by Philip Wade and Colin Coats, both 42, which they deny.
Paul Smith, 47, and David Parker, 38, were also charged with Ms Spence's murder but they were acquitted last week after they admitted holding her against her will and attempting to defeat the ends of justice.
They will be sentenced for those crimes at a later date.
Smith has given evidence for the Crown, telling jurors at the High Court in Glasgow that Coats and Wade took Ms Spence to Parker's flat on April 14 2011 under the pretence that it was to be used as a safe house for her as she owed money to people who wanted to hurt her.
She was held in the attic of the property in Meadowfoot Road, West Kilbride, Ayrshire, for 13 days, where she was bound to a chair and tortured by the two men, Smith said.
He and Parker were released from their duties on April 27 when Coats and Wade told them "yous can go", the witness said.
Smith said he does not know what happened to Ms Spence after that but told the court he believes she is dead.
Derek Ogg QC, representing Coats, said: "Let me put to you my client's position. Philip Wade asked you for a favour and that was to provide a safe house for someone who was being chased for money, who was in danger if she was caught.
"You would provide the place and you would get squared up at the end, and you would also get some cocaine for yourself out of it."
Mr Ogg said mobile phone cell-site evidence heard at the trial put Ms Spence in the vicinity of Meadowfoot Road on April 9 2011, and he suggested that was the woman who was coming for a "viewing" of the accommodation.
On April 14, the day she was taken to the flat, Ms Spence received "terrorising" text messages from her associate, John Glen, about money, the lawyer pointed out.
It was Coats's position that Ms Spence was free to move around the flat as she wished, and she disappeared on April 26 when Smith and Parker were not there, he said.
Mr Ogg put it to Smith that, when he realised the police were investigating Ms Spence's disappearance as a murder, he and Parker "got their heads together to get their stories straight" and made up the story about Ms Spence being strapped to a chair and assaulted.
Smith said this was "rubbish" and "not true".
The trial, before Lord Pentland, continues.

Woman accused of hiring man to kill father of her child
A mother is behind bars after police say she planned to pay the man who killed her child's father. Amanda Needy is charged with murder in the fatal stabbing of her ex-boyfriend Nick Morris.
"I think he was there with me last night. I really do. I haven't felt him in a while. It was like a relief," said Charlotte Watt, Morris' mother.
For Watt, the pain of losing her son is still fresh, but a big development in his case brings some relief.
"It just took a year and nine and a half months, but I'm very happy that they've got her finally," said Watt.
Police charged Needy, 28, with murder. They say Needy planned to pay Timothy Singer, the man who was arrested for fatally stabbing Morris. Morris shared a daughter with Needy and had been fighting to get visitation rights.
"I mean, it's sad, it really is, that somebody could do that over a child. Now the child has lost both parents," said Bridgette Pizzonia, owner of Ciao Ristorante.
Ciao is where Morris was working when he stepped outside for a smoke break and was stabbed to death. Pizzonia has stayed close with Morris' family since his murder.
"We knew and prayed that one day this would happen," said Pizzonia.
Police say a map of Morris' house was found in Singer's room. Needy was Singer's roommate at the time of the stabbing.
"I knew they would eventually get her, but it took time, and time is what we had, and they got her," said Brenda Randall, a family friend.
A memorial garden was planted outside the restaurant to keep Morris' memory alive, but his mother says it will never die regardless.
"She may have (taken) him away, but she will never take his memory. She will never take him out of my heart," said Watt.
Needy's bond was increased by the judge to $250,000. Singer is due in court again Jan. 7, 2019.

Updated: Dec 21, 2019
By Sparkian Sulekha Chandra
Contributing Author for Spark Igniting Minds
Ask yourself these questions:
· Do I want to stay in my city or move to a metro city?
· Do I believe that people in the metro city are smarter?
· Do I feel a lack of career guidance in the current educational system?
· Do I care for my contribution to culture?
· Do people and circumstances control my life?
Amir, an engineering graduate, asked these questions to himself at different points of time in his life. He had all that it takes to be successful in his career. This is what his teachers and professors told him in his growing years of education. He was told that he was IIT material. Amir was excellent in Mathematics. His 12th standard results were out and he topped. He always felt that joining preparation classes in a metro city would help him cut through the competition. He had dreams of studying in a foreign university after IIT. After studying hard for his entrance exams, he was looking forward to wonderful college days.
His elder brother had just started working. Suddenly they came to know that their mother was in the advanced stage of cancer. The family needed not only more money but manpower also, to deal with the challenge at hand. Amir felt weak in his knees each time he thought about the indefinite and short period of time left with his mother. After some time, his father shared with him that he would not be able to fund his dreams at that given point in time. Amir, without any second thought or resistance, agreed to join B.Sc. within the state. His heart was heavy and became heavier each time his mother told him that she was blaming herself for ruining his career.
Amir remained absent from college for the most part of the year but he studied well to fulfill his promise to his mother that he would become a successful engineer. His promise was in contrast with his then-current life. His mother soon left for heaven abode and his father started ignoring his health. His brother was the only person who was keeping up the high levels of social commitments and courage. His elder brother Amaan promised to support him for his higher studies and kept encouraging him.
People like Amir are never prepared for such eventualities of life where setbacks in terms of life or death, emotions, and finance take a never returning flight. He finished his B.Sc. and then went on to complete his Masters in Mathematics. He joined one of the premier institutes as an Assistant Professor but still felt incomplete as far as his self-fulfillment was concerned. While working, organizational change interested him and he applied for an MBA in Human Resource. His friends told him that it was no use doing double Masters and wasting years only studying and that there was more to life.
Amaan was feeling pressurized by his father to get married and fortunately he was transferred to a metro city. Amir was never prepared for such sudden changes as nobody teaches it except events of life. He decided to move out with his brother. He applied in various colleges but found that competition in that place was very high and there were applicants far more experienced than him. His frustration was fueled each time he would think of his promise to his mother, of becoming an engineer which was his dream too.
One fine day, his brother’s friend suggested Amir accompany him for a seminar wherein Educators, Training & Development Professionals and Industry leaders were supposed to address and discuss concerns and challenges of gap in demand and supply of skilled workforce, who are emotionally intelligent to deal with diversity and who up-skill themselves to stay abreast with ripple effects of digital revolutions every passing decade. It was discussed that the engineer population is hit the worst. Amir was inspired and approached one of the leaders after the seminar.
This person called Ramana who was a Career and Life Coach gave Amir an appointment. Their first meeting lasted for 2 to 3 hours wherein Amir talked about his discontented life and anxiety over his aspirations. Ramana being a Coach gave Amir a vision of his life in the very first meeting. He made the terms clear that in case Amir wanted his life rudder to be in his control, he had to do as he was directed by Ramana and the financial terms were discussed. Initially, Amir was taken aback by the amount charged by Ramana but his conviction and trust in Ramana’s ability made him do “whatever it takes” to hold his vision.
As the journey with his Coach unfolded, Amir was high in confidence and networking which earlier was never his cup of tea. The Coach worked on his strengths and polished his existing skills to make a mark. Amir was committed to excel and was surprised by his own work and energy levels. He felt happy most of the time and effectively channelized every situational challenge into building his competency. Ramana directed him to study challenges in the engineering field and develop a case study. Amir spent a good deal of time to do just that and eventually his case was published. It was astonishing for him to find universities contacting him for his visits to their engineering colleges. Amir’s happiness and fulfilling work was a result of his Coach’s guidance. He became a sought-after engineering faculty to guide the students and other professors with result-oriented strategies.
Though Amir didn’t become an engineer, he became somebody who could change the lives of many engineers. Amir is now an Entrepreneur, Author, and a Career Strategist.
In his life-skill sessions, he lays emphasis on having a Coach to steer life in a focused and organized way. A Coach is somebody very resourceful, well connected, influential and emotionally intelligent to use various tools and apply techniques to even capture the minutest details and measures of intangible factors like leadership quotient, trust, loyalty, commitment, influence, etc in an individual.
With digital revolutions, new job profiles are created and many job profiles become obsolete. The student community finds it difficult to catch up with the revolution as the syllabus doesn’t change in those 3-4 years with the least guidance towards making oneself productive by the time they come out of colleges. They are never prepared emotionally for the eventualities of life and how to handle the resultant stress or channelize it. The Coach works on inner engineering for a pinnacle journey.
Amir came back to his town for giving back to his society by developing others who he felt were in the same boat as he was a few years ago. Now he organizes culture fests to invite youngsters for show-casing talent and spreading awareness through stories and plays. His journey taught him that people don’t become smart just by being in a metro city, they become smart by following the right strategies.

Client Crushed by Vehicle While Working at a Residence
Our client was performing his job as a heating and cooling repairman at a residence when he was crushed by a vehicle backing out of a garage. As he was working on his paperwork, the vehicle pinned him between the door of his van and the van itself. He received crush injuries to both legs as a result. As the injury occurred on the premises of a home, there were a number of possible insurance companies involved.
No Contact From Insurance Company
After the incident, the insurance company decided not to have an open dialogue with our client, which ultimately led to him hiring our firm. After missing a number of months of work and returning to light duty only, our client was getting frustrated with everyone involved. Once we received the case, we immediately began to investigate insurance issues and put together a claim.
His Workplace Injury Attorney
As his workplace injury attorney, we contacted the insurance company and worked through his claim to ensure he received the settlement he deserved. Hear in his own words how we helped him and how we resolved his case in a manner that he appreciated.

HIGH FASHION - Harry Fraud x LiL PEEP
When Gus was home for Christmas and New Year’s in December 2016-January 2017, he ended up staying longer than he had initially planned. It was great for us because we got to enjoy his company for about a week or so longer than we had thought we would. We were grateful to have him home.
After we returned to Long Beach from Cambridge, Mass.--where we had spent Christmas--the cold temperatures set in and of course we got a big dump of snow. The weather was typical winter weather, but Gus had gotten used to Los Angeles temperatures. As usual, he spent his time in our apartment, and in his bedroom. Nevertheless, Gus enjoyed constant visits from his Long Beach friends. Also, Oskar was home, which was really nice.
Gus was really busy. He was making plans, I learned, to make music with Harry Fraud. Not being in the music business, I did not know who this young man was. Gus told me who he was. He told me that Harry Fraud was an incredibly important producer who worked with many of Gus’s favorite music artists—he rattled off names for me, some of which I recognized; French Montana, Action Bronson were two of them. I only knew those because Gus would talk about them. He would regularly show me Action Bronson’s Instagram posts because they were almost all posts of incredible food. Anyway, Gus told me that the reason he was staying longer at home was in order to be able to work in a studio—Harry’s studio.
In fact, Gus had been communicating for a couple of weeks with friends about this anticipated meeting.
He was thrilled to be invited to Harry’s studio.
Not many of Gus’s friends had cars (Gus didn’t even have a driver’s license) so I offered the use of my car. If he could find a friend to drive it and have it back in time for me to drive to work, he could use it.
Skylar drove Gus to work with Harry the first night. They took my car, returning it on time—just 30 minutes before I had to leave for work at 7:30 am.
In this video, Skylar tells about that night:
The next night, Gus’s friend Quinn drove him. Quinn had his own car. They stayed nearly the whole night too. Quinn recently recalled bringing Gus into Brooklyn on that cold, winter night in January, 2017.
I first met Gus in 2016. We were introduced through a mutual friend and unsung hero in the music business, Adolfo Salazar. He put us on group text and said we would make great music together. I was already a fan of Gus’s work and loved the idea of working with him. We texted back and forth and planned to meet up the next time he was in New York.
Towards the end of the year, Gus hit me and let me know he would be in town. I was really excited for the chance of working together. I was away visiting family for the holidays, but let him know that as soon as I was back we would link up. A few days went by and I could tell he was getting antsy. I told him I would be headed back to Brooklyn soon and we would 100% link up.
When I returned from the holidays I hit him and we made plans to get in the studio that night. He mentioned that he needed to find a ride to my spot because he didn’t have a drivers license. He found a ride from a friend and we were in business. As soon as Gus arrived the good vibes were instant. The first night we worked together he brought me a statue of a wave that I believe was from D&D and said he wanted me to have it. I thought that was so thoughtful and it gave me a glimpse into the type of good hearted person he was.
It’s always a little nerve-racking working with an artist for the first time, but I could tell we had great creative chemistry and were like-minded. Gus let me know he was a fan of the music I had made, especially with French Montana. He expressed to me that he wanted us to make something that meshed both our styles, but sounded like nothing either of us had made before. I jumped at the idea and suggested we create everything, including the beats, totally from scratch on the spot. Gus loved that. We sat down together at the mixing board and started going through sounds and pieces of music I had put in a folder while waiting for him to arrive. From there the music flowed effortlessly. We were putting our heads together and the track was building itself. Total freedom — no boundaries. I would lay down an idea, and he would go back and forth between the vocal booth and the mixing board trying stuff out. We manipulated some of his vocals to sound like instruments, and used all types of new FX and sonic textures that were new to both of our styles. It was really a breath of fresh air to create with someone who was so inherently talented and open minded.
We spent the rest of that night refining the first record, which became “Choose”. When the night came to a close (probably around 6am), we were amazed at what we had made. We planned to meet up again and go right back in the studio. Like the previous time, the vibe was effortless and we really had a great time hanging out.
Gus was funny and charismatic. He wore his heart on his sleeve and didn’t hold back his thoughts. He mentioned that he needed to get back to LA, but we planned to continue working whenever he was in NYC and eventually turn the songs we create into an album. He would text me ideas for the project and said we should call it “High Fashion,” which I loved. He even started sending cover ideas over and we would check on each-other from time to time, just touching base. His career was really taking off at that point, and I was so happy for his success.
When I heard the news I was absolutely crushed. Adolfo texted me what happened and I remember just feeling heartbroken. Even now as I’m writing this I can feel that immense loss in the pit of my stomach. I told myself I would do whatever it took to make sure the world heard what we created together. The next couple of years were filled with failed attempts to get through the red tape of releasing the music. But I refused to give up.
Finally, I decided that the best thing for me to do was reach out directly to Liza. Once we got in contact I was overwhelmed with her good energy and how much she loved her son. She reminded me of my own mom. After going back and forth for a little while, I invited her to come to my studio so we could meet in person. When we met up it was very surreal because her and Gus shared so many nuances of their personalities. We sat next to each other sharing music and stories much like Gus and I did the first time we met. It took a tireless amount of work, but together we were finally able to break down all the barriers and bring the music to light. We paid careful attention to keep it as close to what Gus had heard while he was with us. The result is HIGH FASHION.
I miss him so much, and although we spent a relatively short time knowing each other, I really looked at him as kind of a little brother. His influence and impact on the current sound of music is immeasurable. And I still keep the wave statue he gave me on top of my mixing board to this day.
Gus had asked me if I could drive him to Brooklyn to get in the studio with Harry Fraud. However, after asking my mom if I could take her car to Brooklyn she said no. So I made a promise to her and said we would take the train, little did she know I would still be driving there anyway. Before leaving, Gus had given me a Surf School hat--then we were off to Brooklyn. I sat down on the couch that I had seen before watching the Action Bronson show with a wave mural painted on the wall. Gus and Harry started to record and this was the first time I had seen Gus recording somewhere else besides his room. Still, he was confident in his ability and they created something really special. The verse Gus made was different and until this day I still have this song trapped in my head. They ended up recording till about 3 or 4 in the morning, then we headed back to Long Beach. We decided to stop at Dunkin Donuts for some coffee. Big mistake! I left the receipt in the car, so the next day when my mom got in she found out I drove to Brooklyn. Nevertheless, it was a fun experience, and to get to see Gus in his element made me very happy and proud.
Quinn had to snap a selfie of the Surf School hat and the mural he recognized. Here it is below.
Two nights. Two songs. It was a wonderful experience for Gus, one that he expressed such pride about. He really was so proud to be able to make music with Harry Fraud.
Here is a section of a text exchange with Harry about getting into the studio, and about the music they made together:
Months after Gus died, I received word that Harry was trying to reach me. I was very grateful to hear from him, remembering exactly who he was. This time, it was I who was thrilled.
Harry and I made plans to meet. I was reeling from Gus’s death, but so grateful to meet this young man who my son had admired. I took the train to Brooklyn, then a subway, I think. I found Harry’s studio and spent a lovely few hours with him. He showed me the little figurine of a wave that Gus had brought him. I remembered it from Gus’s bedroom. I knew without a doubt that Gus would want me to do whatever I could to release the tracks with Harry Fraud.
The result is this three-track EP. The two songs Choose and Living Rooms were made in Brooklyn on those cold January nights in 2017. I am very grateful to Harry for his patience with me. It took a while to release these songs, but he hung in like the true professional that he is.
Thank you, Harry.

― Hello, my Pretties! ∙ A while back on Twitter, I sort of made an announcement that I had plans to share my entire nail polish collection with you one brand at a time. I have not counted my nail polishes recently but last time I believe I had 101. I think I have added some since. ∙ Here is the first brand I am going to share with you. My sister purchased these at Payless for me. I am not positive but I think maybe this brand was only carried by Payless. ∙ I now present [...].

Boyes Turner’s specialist asbestos claims team were instructed by Mr W who developed diffuse pleural thickening as a result of exposure to asbestos during his employment as a joiner with Carillion Construction (Contracts) Limited (which was formerly known as George Wimpey & Co Limited) and during his employment in a supervisory capacity with Redcar & Cleveland Borough Council.
He was exposed to asbestos when he was employed by Carillion Construction (Contracts) Limited between 1964 and 1977 when he cut, drilled and handled asbestos sheets and when he drilled and handled asbestos fire doors.
Mr W was also was exposed to asbestos when he was employed by Redcar & Cleveland Borough Council between 1977 and 1997 when he was on a site where houses were being demolished and refitted. The houses contained asbestos products such as asbestos soffits and asbestos ducting and he worked in proximity to other workers who were demolishing and ripping out the houses which created considerable amounts of dust.
A statement was obtained from Mr W's former workmate to prove that the man had been exposed to asbestos during his employment.
Expert medical evidence was obtained and Court proceedings were commenced. The claim was concluded on a provisional damages basis in June 2015 in the sum of £40,790 inclusive.

I went to go to bed the other night and this is how I found my dresser. Cale had hung up her little toys that she had been playing with. I left it there and in the morning when she came it she said, "wook, wook, mom!" Then she gave a little giggle.
I often wonder why kids do certain things. They are so cute!!!

You may recall that I gave Liuda her first driving lesson in July and then another one in August. It has been difficult to coordinate with her for driving lessons, especially since she has been sick for the last three weeks. She told me today that she has pneumonia.
Liuda has been sick at home all week and I asked if she’d like to get out for a driving lesson. She said yes.
The first two lessons I gave Liuda were in parking lots. I was trying to work with her on steering, staying in the right lane, signaling, turning, and parking. During the time since her last lesson, I scoped out the easiest road trip I could find for her. Knowing that she has not had an opportunity to pick up any speed, I found a road where the speed limit is between 25 and 35 miles per hour. It also had lots of curves for her to practice on and there wasn’t too much traffic. I took her there today.
I pulled into the parking lot of Whitefish Dunes State Park. I explained to Liuda about speed limits and told her what to expect on this route. Trying to prepare her for driving on a narrow road where other traffic might come toward her, I told her just to stay to the right if she saw a car approaching. I didn’t think to talk with her about what to do if cars came up behind her.
We switched seats and Liuda slowly pulled out of the parking lot. I directed her toward the entrance to Cave Point, a county park. As we came up to the stop sign at the juxtaposition of the two parks, I had my sun shield down so I could watch our back and I saw a car pull up behind us. I tried to play Charades to show her that she needed to roll down her window and signal to them with her hand. She was confused, so I rolled my window down and signaled and they went around. Then we turned onto the road to Cave Point.
When we got to the parking lot at Cave Point, I directed Liuda to pull in and park. I had noticed that she was a little shaky on the curves and straight stretches, so I gave her a little lesson. I showed her that the bar across the steering wheel should be horizontal when I say, “Straight”. She’s already good at left and right. I also reminded her that the speed limit on this road was 25 miles per hour. She was going more like 5 or 10 miles per hour.
We pulled back out onto the road. You wouldn’t think there’d be any traffic on a weekday on these back roads, but every so often a car would come toward us and it scared her a little. Once I saw a truck behind us and I directed her to pull over and stop because she was only going about 15 miles per hour. It surprised her to see the truck pass by us because she had not been looking in her rear view mirror.
We finally came to a place where we could stop again and look at Lake Michigan. We had a talk via the translation program on her phone. She told me she was scared because there were too many cars and too many things to do at once, such as watching her mirrors. I told her that I had selected this road because it is the easiest one in the area and that she eventually needs to get used to driving with other cars. I reminded her that soon this route would bring us to the highway. Fortunately, at that point in the highway it would be coming into Jacksonport and the speed limit was only 30 miles per hour. She said she was aware that she was using the brake more than the gas and I encouraged her to use the gas more.
She steered back onto the road and I could tell she was making a conscious effort to pick up the speed. The whole time she was speaking softly in Russian, presumably praying! We arrived at the highway (which, in Door County, consists of one lane each way with a yellow stripe down the middle) and after checking for cars, Liuda turned right and drove into Jacksonport. At one point I noticed some cars coming up behind her so I urged her to step on the gas a little more and this time we stayed ahead of them.
We turned into the parking lot of the city park in Jacksonport and I had Liuda park. My original intention had been to trade places with her at this point and drive her home, but as we were discussing what she had just done, she said it was “fun”. I asked her if she would like to go back the same route, and she said yes. She drove all the way back to the parking lot at Whitefish Dunes State Park.
At this point, I must admit that my body was tense and I was beginning to get a headache, but I had managed to appear calm through the whole ride except for one point when I had raised my voice a little to get her to steer back onto the road. Still, the triumph on her face when she parked and looked at me was worth it. She told me that her son-in-law would not take her out on a road to drive, only in parking lots, and that I was more brave than him. I told her that I knew she was scared but that she had done it. I told her I was proud of her!
We traded sides and I drove her home. As we pulled up in front of her house, I saw that her son-in-law’s car was parked there. I told her to tell her son-in-law where she had driven and that I had said she’d done good. She beamed and said she would surely tell him about it.
Before anyone thinks of telling me I was “good” to do this, let me ask that you not look at the story from this perspective. I write Liuda’s story to highlight the courage she has shown in learning to drive. In Mark 10: 17-18, it says:
As Jesus started on His way, a man ran up to Him and fell on his knees before Him. “Good Teacher,” he asked, “what must I do to inherit eternal life?”
“Why do you call Me good?” Jesus answered. “No one is good –except God alone.”
I do things like teaching Liuda to drive not out of my own goodness, but out of God’s. And I praise God for protecting us every time I take her driving!

I have 3 6 month old Chocolate Orpingtons. I think the smallest one is blind. She doesn't run when I approach (the other 2 do), she seems to look and turn her head around more than the rest of the flock. Also, her pupils are blue.
About 2 months ago, I found her in the morning hanging upside down with her foot caught in the fence. I don't really know how long she was hanging there, but the entire flock was in the coop when I went to bed. She couldn't have been hanging there too long, because it had only been light for about an hour before I went outside to feed them. When I got her off, she seemed shocked, but okay. I set her on the floor of the coop and she found a corner and stayed there most of the day. She was walking around more by the end of the day, but seemed okay.
I found the same hen hurt again this morning. I can't tell if she got caught on something or if she's just being pecked by the others. Her feathers are falling out on her back and when I lifted what was still there, she had a little laceration that was bleeding. I brought her to the food and water and she was pecking at the food, but completely missing. I decided to separate her from the flock for right now and put her in a little coop/enclosure by herself for the time being.
Is there something I can do to test her eyesight and confirm blindness or not?
If she is blind, what are your suggestions??

Bonnie & Lizzie from Merseyside
We got Lizzie first in April 2013, I had not long lost my previous boy Eddie to cancer and I was heartbroken and the house seemed so empty. We saw Lizzie and went to see her, she had this laid back, knowing look in her gorgeous brown eyes, she was known as 'Big Liz' and had a beautiful coat, we fell in love with her, we are her fourth family and we will be her last. Bonnie (smaller dog in photo) bounced in to our lives in Oct 2013.. she wasn't taking to kennel life very well, we had gone to see another dog but unfortunately wasn't suitable as it didn't like cats.. we were called back and asked if we would meet her... she was a bundle of energy, totally opposite to Lizzie and the complimented each other very well. They both love water and going the beach, paddling in streams.. They are fantastic members of our family .. with Archie & Cara the cats too.

March 2016 - Norwegian Jade to Caribbean - Western
We loved the food and the dining options. The gift shop was overpriced and the staff was not knowledgeable or helpful. Our cabin was clean and the beds were comfortable, but our steward was grumpy and acted as if we were a nuisance rather than guests. The tenders used to get on and off the ship were way too pokey.

We had another blast of snow today. One nice thing about snowfall in April is that it is relatively warm (+2C) and the snow is extra wet. This makes for great snowball making as it sticks together very well. As I was waiting for Luke after school I started to roll a small ball with my foot and by the time he got out it had grown to be a fair size. Well the kids who live close by (the others had to catch the bus or their rides home) got into it and start making their own snowballs. Those around were mostly grade 1's but they had great fun and did a great job working together to roll the snow. In the end the wall they created was close to 45 feet long and consisted of 23 snowballs.

Above and Beyond
With the car sinking fast, Alena made a frantic 911 call. "I'm in a car and I can't open the door, and the water's coming in and we're sinking," she told the operator. "I don't want to drown!"
As the car filled with water, Alena's grandfather told her to get into the backseat, which was not yet submerged. "Towards the roof there was a little pocket of air and so I tried taking a big breath, and I remember I got air the first time and water the second and then I passed out," she says. "I felt like I was suffocating. I kind of prayed that it wouldn't hurt too much."

Surgery went well. Nathan is at home resting and surprisingly not in TONS of pain. The surgeon said there were lots of polyps in his nose and once he's completely recovered he should breathe a lot easier. Today was a very long day because everything goes slowly at the hospital. Yesterday, the anesthesiologist called and said that surgery would be at 11:00 instead of 8:30 like pre-admitting told us. So, we got to the hospital at 9:00 and Nathan was finally rolled back to the operating room at 12:15. He spent 2 1/2 hours in stage one recovery before they moved him to the 2nd recovery room where I could be with him. All this to say it was a long and tiring day, but things went well and we're glad to be home.

Those of you with grandchildren know that just spending time with them is the greatest...no matter what you're doing. We had a fun day this past Sunday. Our local high school was putting on their production of Wizard of Oz last weekend and there was a Sunday matinee. I thought it would be a great "girls day" for me to take Jodi, Jess and Savannah to see it. Emery could easily hang with grandpa until we got back. But, as it turned out, Jess had plans to go into Atlanta with friends, Jodi really didn't care to sit through it, and Savannah has decided she doesn't like it because it's scary. We were amazed that a few years ago she would watch it all by herself...but she's changed her mind about it. While we were discussing it, Emery kept saying, "I want to go! I want to go!" So I had a Sunday afternoon date with my grandson. And that was great. (Rest assured, he did not wear the wig to the performance. This is him clowning around in Savannah's costume when she was Dorothy for Halloween the year before last.) He sat very patiently watching everything quietly even though it did drag a little with all the musical numbers. The school kids did a great job, but it was a little slow compared to the movies he's used to watching. Just before intermission, he turned to me and said, quietly, "I don't like it". I told him that was fine and that we could leave when they took a break. So when the lights came up I asked him if he wanted to leave. He thought about it a little, but decided that yes, he had seen enough. He was fascinated with the stage, the props and all the people and we still had a good time.
Meanwhile, back at home, Jodi and Savannah decided they would spend some mother-daughter bonding time and go get manis and pedis. They were back at the house by the time we got there. Savannah also brought her new best friend...a life size (bigger than her) Pink Panther that she got from her other grandma's house and now takes everywhere. It is a hoot. She was sitting on the couch with it and posing it in other places around the house. Finally she decided that PP would make a great new friend for grandpa. So she posed him the way she always sees grandpa: with a coffee cup in one hand and a crossword puzzle book and pen in the other hand. And he really did make a good companion.

Seetha Biography is a biographical sketch of Indian actress, Seetha Parmar, based on her novels. Seetha has portrayed different characters in different movies and plays. Seetha was born in 18 53 at Belgaum, Goa. Seetha was a distant relation of Jai Mahal, a well-known personality from Goa. She was known as a bold personality and her daring ways often earned her a reputation as “The Fist of Five” or “The Queen of Five”.
Seetha was married to MLA Bhagirath in 18 67 at Belgaum. Seetha was known for being rebellious towards her mother and father, as her mother was always looking out for her best interest even at the expense of Seetha’s own interests. Seetha was often used as a domestic servant in her mother’s household. As a result of this she developed a strong distaste for her chores. She desired to be treated as an equal member of the family and in this respect her attitude towards her mother and father changed completely over the years.
Bra Size & Body Measurements
|Bra Size||36 B|
|Waist Size||25 Inches|
|Hips Size||35 Inches|
|Shoe Size||8 (US)|
|Body Measurements||36-25-35 in|
Seetha was a popular name in Goa during the early days and she had a steady following of devotees who wanted to know everything about Seetha and her childhood and early marriage to Bhagirath. Seetha was a favorite TV actor on that era of television and she was known by a number of aliases such as Seetha Parmar, Seetha Vaidya and Seetha Shastra. The Seetha Biography by Bapu Phadnis narrates that Seetha started as a cleaner at the municipal Corporation but in the evenings she used to roam around looking for men to go to a theatre with. When she discovered that Bhagirath was a fan of the tv show of Hindi movie serial called Kaal Baad she decided to marry him.
Seetha was known for being a bold and intelligent character and at times she went against the wishes of her parents and other elders in her family. In fact Seetha had a very difficult time when it came to marrying Bhagirath because she resented the fact that her father had played a key role in the process of her marriage. The marriage itself however did not prove to be auspicious and on the day of the wedding Seetha along with her friends went to a theatre to watch the performance of a well-known Hindi actor named Satish. Satish was a good performing Hindi actor whom they had never seen before in their lives and they noticed Seetha watching him. Satish noticed that Seetha was not following the proper etiquette of ladies at that point in time and as a result he mockingly said that he was going to give her a divorce.
Seetha however did not take it well and when her friends tried to stop her from getting upset, she got violent saying that her marriage with Bhagirath was fixed. Her friends tried to calm her down but Seetha ignored them and simply went to her room. After several hours she was found dead in the toilet by a taxi driver who later found out that Seetha had taken poison. As this happened in the middle of summer it is very possible that Seetha was at the beach when her body was shifted to a nearby hospital. Many people believe that she committed suicide as that was the way that she had been treated in the countryside by her parents in the past.
Seetha Biography continues to grow in popularity in India today especially after many movies were made about her life. A lot of Indian viewers watch Tamil movies on television, especially when their favorite actor is in the story. She had a major role in one movie as that of an aging actress who played a pivotal character. Most of us have heard of her name either from her television shows or from the movies but what exactly is Seetha? That is something that many fans of Tamil cinema do not know about.

It was a beautiful day in Santiago about 82 degrees. It was a holiday Thursday and Friday and so the temple had Saturday schedule and the people really took advantage to come. We had to go in at 6am and 5am those 3 days. To say that we were glad to see Sunday and Monday come would be an understatement. We were tired. Maybe exhausted would be a better word. Here are some pictures from that Saturday that show some of the people here on the square soaking up the fun. And oh of course the random wedding picture as well.

The Green Bay Packers were trailing the Dallas Cowboys 26-3 at the half, and even they thought they were done. Packers quarterback Matt Flynn said even they though the game was over.
“When we were in the locker room at halftime, did we really think there was a chance, the way we played, that we could come back and win the game? Not really,” Flynn told TheMMQB.com’s Peter King after the game.
It was a big win for a man who has had a rough season. Flynn had been cut twice in 2013 since being released by the Seattle Seahawks. At home with the Packers, where he was successful before going to Seattle, Flynn brought back some of that magic.
“It’s all worth it now,” Flynn said. “This is the best day I’ve had in the NFL. You work for a long time to have the kind of fun we had today, and if you have to go through some tough times to get there, well, thatâs the way it goes.”

Getting info on my CAT D car
edited 30 November -1 at 1:00AM in Motoring
9 replies 991 views
I am in the process of trying to sell my car and tried autotrader and to my surprise it was flagged up as a CAT D car. They apparently get their data from Experian who put me in touch with the insurance company that wrote it off. I asked them when it was written off and they wouldn't tell me because of "Data Protection" which I know is rubbish as the DPA only covers personal information. I wasn't asking for the name and address of the policy holder at the time it was written off or anything. I just want an idea of WHEN it was written off, as this will give me some indication of the extent of the damage, as obviously a car written off early in its life would have sustained more damage that one written off later in its life. We've had the car for almost three years, and my insurance company only keeps records going back three years and said they had nothing on it, and I've got all it's MOT history. I've been in touch with a couple of car checking sites and they say even if I paid for a car check, it wouldn't necessarily give me the info I want. I'm just frustrated that this insurance company are mis-using the DPA and there's nothing I can do to find information about a car I own! Can anyone suggest anything?
This discussion has been closed.

A/N Well, here it is, my first ever Secret Santa piece. I was so excited when I got the person (Givesup) and the prompts because this person was really the first person I ever talked to on this site and was the first person to read my piece Need. In fact, if it wasn't for her I never would have posted it. So writing something especially for her has been particularly fun and exciting. But, kind of hard because I talk to her A LOT and keeping a secret from her was difficult.
The prompt I picked for Givesup was a sweet conversation between Booth and a much older Christine, possibly teenage, possibly consoling or giving advice. Brennan can be mentioned but not present.
Merry Christmas Givesup! Thank you for all your friendship and encouragement!
He made his way out to their garage gym, snow crunching under his feet, jaw clenching, visibly popping. He wasn't sure he was going to survive without physically hurting someone. Opening the door, he peeked in. There she was pounding the heavy bag, fists flying, pony tail swinging, curls glued by sweat to her forehead and neck, her mixed martial arts training shining through in the precision of her strikes.
He folded his arms over his chest and leaned back against the wall. He couldn't help the sense of pride that he felt watching her. Beautiful, strong, smart as a whip, and clearly dangerous, she had it all. How could anyone do anything to intentionally hurt her? Boys are stupid.
He moved up to the bag and held it for her like he had so many times over the years. He relaxed a little, watching her. He couldn't help but be taken aback. She was tiny the first time she came out here with him. Maybe three or four, just to play then. Little blond curls, punching that huge bag had grown into beautiful chestnut curls like her mom's. Now sixteen, Christine had only recently jumped into the world of boys and dating. It was a harsh world. He had been her first real boyfriend and, according to Bones, her first real breakup.
He cleared his throat. "Mom said you might need to talk."
Her eyebrow flew up in a look of teenage exasperation. "Did she?" She huffed out, pounding the bag even harder now that her dad was steadying it for her. Visibly holding back the tears, she never liked to show her weakness, like another strong and beautiful woman he knew.
"Yeah, she did." His tender dad voice echoed in the open garage. "She said she might have made things worse." He couldn't help but chuckle a little. Soothing a broken heart with logic and reason didn't work for Christine. While she had her mother's intelligence, she definitely had her father's heart. She was open and loving, gave it all, and didn't hold anything back. Harder and faster she punched. He could see she was about to break. He waited her out.
Her body jerked to a stop. "Well, yeah, essentially she said Brody was beneath me." Her indignation was clear in her tone. "She wouldn't stop, Dad. Somehow I ended up winning a Nobel Prize and he ended up in prison." Booth tried not to chuckle, it was no secret that Bones had always thought of Christine as leaps and bounds above her peers. "Apparently, Brody ends up embezzling funds from his job as a manager at McDonalds." There it was: the teenage eye roll. She'd perfected it. Those beautiful piercing eyes stole her daddy's heart the moment she first opened them. He would forever be the first thing she saw in this world.
Their conversation lulled. Their eyes caught. They both busted up laughing. Mom. Shaking his head, Booth moved from behind the bag and took his daughter into his big strong arms. Her laughter turned quickly to tears, then sobs. He let her cry until she was done and started to pull away.
Booth motioned towards a couple of camp chairs they'd set up in their makeshift gym a long time ago and they sat down. She wiped her face and took a deep breath. Booth waited. He'd learned a long time ago that his women were not to be pushed. Leaning forward, elbows on his knees, he lifted his head, and took a breath. Boys were a hard subject for him. He found himself more and more on his wife's side, believing that no one was really good enough for Christine. Finally, he broke the silence. "You wanna tell me what happened?"
Christine stared back at her dad, then sat straight up, squared her shoulders, and leveled a demand. "You have to promise me you won't hurt him."
Booth cringed, that was an awfully big promise, especially since he didn't know what the boy had done yet. "You haven't even told me what happened, Chrissie." She pulled her shoulders back a little more and pursed her lips tight, making her position clear. "Okay, okay, I get it. I promise I won't hurt him," he said, "but if he's done something illegal I will arrest his ass."She stared her dad down and then stuck out her pinky for a binding commitment. God, he loved this girl: so grown up and so young all at the same time. He complied, entering into a pinky swear with his daughter.
"Brody and I aren't together anymore." She spit it out fast and clear, trying desperately not to look emotionally affected by the breakup. Her proud shoulders sunk, though, and her head dropped. "It's just hard," she said, her voice quivering as she fought to not breakdown and cry again.
Booth scooted his chair closer to hers, placed his hand on her shoulder and rubbed gently. "Breaking up—was that your idea or his?"
She shrugged. "I don't know. It just..." She hesitated. "It had to be that way."
His eyebrows shot up. "Had to be that way? That sounds kind of serious, Chrissie. What happened?" Having a FBI agent for a dad had its disadvantages. This was one of them. He caught everything, she couldn't get anything by him no matter how carefully she worded it, and he never stopped asking questions.
She wasn't ready to give it up quite yet, still hedging she continued. "We just didn't agree on some very important things, really that's all, Dad."
He shot back another question. "What kind of things?" He had his suspicions. For one thing, he was a teenage boy once. He knew what they thought about: food and sex, mostly sex. Watching her carefully, he couldn't help but see how uncomfortable she was getting. She squirmed in her chair, her gaze lowered to the garage floor while she played with some strands of hair no longer bound by her ponytail. Then he answered his own question hoping to keep her from completely shutting down. "Sex? Right? I know, remember I told you when you started dating that boys only have one thing on their mind. Boys your age are pretty much stuck on one track." Suddenly he felt rage swelling up from his gut. How far had this guy pushed her? His mind raced, multiple scenarios ran quickly through his mind.
Christine could see instantly where her father's mind had gone. "Dad! I didn't! We didn't! He never got that far!" She'd popped out of her seat and was pacing in front of her father, her heart racing. "Not that he didn't want that, that is definitely what he wanted." She was frustrated and confused. "I just don't know if I made the right decision."
She was so torn, she really didn't want to talk to her dad about this but her mom was, well, her mom was all about hormones and symmetry and biological urges. She had taught her probably more than any teenage girl wants or needs to know about STDs and birth control. She had told her how long she waited and why, all of which made for a very uncomfortable conversation. While she'd certainly made it clear that she was available to talk about it when that time came Christine wasn't sure she really understood what she was going through. This was a heart thing, not a science thing, or maybe it was both and maybe that's why it was so confusing.
Her dad interrupted her thought. "If you were unsure at all then not doing it was the right decision, Christine. Making love to someone isn't a casual thing, it should never be a casual thing. Making love changes things, changes you, and the kind of relationship you have with the person you make love to, at least it should. You're still young, you have all the time in the world for that kind of relationship, don't rush it." God, he wanted her to wait, wait until she was thirty or forty or maybe never, never sounded good right now. Maybe, she could become a nun.
"Like you and Mom? I'm not sure I want to wait that long." He knew she was just deflecting and wasn't about to let her wiggle out of the other details of what was going on.
He looked her straight in the eye. "You know there were other circumstances that kept your mom and me from getting together sooner. To be honest, any sooner and we wouldn't have been ready. We probably wouldn't have lasted. We had our own things to work through and we did." He didn't let her even get a word in edgewise taking the subject right back to her. "I think you'll know when it's the right person and the right time for you." She looked at him, so young, confused, and trying to be so grown up. He put his hand on his chest over his heart, "when this," then lifted his hand and tapped on his head "and this line up and are on the same page then you can start considering it but until then, just say no." He waited for her acknowledgment then continued. "So, he pressured you and you said no?" He gave her that dad look that said it's time to fess up.
"And you're not sure you made the right decision?"
"No, I'm sure." That's when she broke. "It's just that he seemed so perfect. He's smart, maybe not as smart as me, but, you know, and he's so . . ." She really didn't want to tell her dad that she thought Brody was hot but he was. "I thought I was in love with him, Dad. But, when I told him no and then I wouldn't give in he didn't want anything to do with me." She caught the anger in her father's eye. He was always her protector. "Dad, you promised, you promised you wouldn't hurt him," she reminded him. He nodded a tense acknowledgment. "Then we broke up. I wasn't going to give in just to keep him, no matter what he thought, and, what, like it's been two days, and he's making out with Tiffany Sullivan by my locker." She stopped pacing and looked her Dad square in the eye. All the fury and toughness fell from her expression replaced by what looked like embarrassment. Tears welled up in her eyes. "I had to ask them to move so I could get in for my books." They streamed down her face as she tried so hard to regain control. Booth grabbed her by the hand and pulled her onto his lap. She protested between sobs, "Dad, I'm too big to sit on your lap."
"No, you're not." He gave her a kiss on the forehead. "You're just the right size."
She snuggled into her father's shoulder. "Why do boys have to be so . . ."
"Mean." She paused just long enough for a shuddered breath. "And stupid," she added softly.
"I'm sorry, baby. I apologize for all boys everywhere."
They sat in silence for a few minutes then he continued. "I know you don't want to hear it right now but eventually you'll get over Brody and there will be another one. In fact, I promise there will be many more before you find the right one. It hurts, I know, I remember, but it's all part of the process. All that experience, good and bad, will help you know what you really want in a guy."
"Like you knew when you found Mom?" There was a tenderness to her voice.
"Yeah, like I knew when I found Mom."
She sat up, looking eye to eye with her dad, wiped her tears, kissed him on the cheek, and slid off his lap. "Thanks, Daddy, you did way better than Mom."
"Chrissie, she means well, you know that, right? In fact, I'm fairly sure she said pretty much the same thing just more squinty than me." He winked at her. Christine winked back.
"I know." She smiled at her dad through the last of her tears. "I'm going to just . . ." She pointed to the heavy bag. "Just for a few more minutes, okay?"
He nodded and headed out of the garage back to the main house. Girls were definitely harder than boys, he thought as he hurried his way across the driveway, freezing in the crisp winter air.
I promised I wouldn't hurt him, he thought, but what about just scaring him a little bit. I could do that without breaking my promise, right?

I was extremely disappointed when I heard my boss had decided to hold back my incentives for making the most sales for the month.
Earlier tried to make us do more so he came out with an ‘incentive’ scheme
He had previously came out with a scheme to reward the top sales with certain monetary incentives, as a reward for our hard work.
Little did I know that it will end up to be a false incentive just to squeeze us as dry as he could.
I had worked hard for the entire month, putting in extra hours and even staying late to ensure that I was able to make the most sales. I thought that my boss would recognize my hard work and give me the incentives that I deserved.
But instead, my boss told me that he was not going to give me any incentives for making the most sales. He explained that the company was struggling and that he was not able to reward me with the incentives that I was expecting.
He then went on to say that he wanted me to do more sales for the company and that he would reward me with more incentives if I was able to make more sales.
Realised his motives but had to bite my tongue and go through with it because I’m afraid that once I go I will really lose out on the incentives
It was quite obvious that my boss was taking advantage of me and was trying to get me to do more work for the company without giving me any rewards.
I wanted to tell him off and tell him that I was not going to do any more work for the company unless I was given the incentives that I deserved. But in the end, I decided to just keep my mouth shut and do what he asked.
This was because I fear that if he actually had the intention to give me the incentives, then it will be gone if I just resigned like that.
I worked harder than ever in the following months and was able to make more sales than ever before. But my boss still refused to give me any incentives and came out with all the excuses he could.
He just kept telling me that he was not able to give me the incentives at the moment and that I deserved and that I should just keep working hard and making more sales for the company.
I guessed that he did it because he was trying to milk me dry because I was the only one that was genuinely making sales for the company and he was trying to false motivate me to do more.

Actor Kwadwo Nkansah (Lil Win) has denied reports that he sacked his wife from their matrimonial home.
In a video posted online, Nkansah decided not to confirm or deny the reports that he had divorced his wife insisting it is a private issue.
He claims however that there is no truth to reports that he sacked his wife out of their home.
In late 2017, his wife granted an interview alleging that the actor is a cheat, a greedy bastard, and good at putting on a good public image.
She also claimed that she was maltreated several times by the actor, who also confiscated a vehicle he gave to her.
Watch the video below:

My mother died January 5, 2010. I was with her in our family home in Florida the last 3 months while she was a hospice patient with lung cancer. She died peacefully in her sleep. The morning she died I suddenly awoke at 4 am, finally about 5 am I tiptoed downstairs, made my pot of tea and quietly read my morning devotions. Also I gathered some old magazines to go through before throwing them away, one being the St. Anthony Messenger from November 2009. I read Surrounded by Saints and decided to clip it and save it, I mean, my mother did have a terminal illness and I might want to re-read it later. Finally about 8 am I went to wake my mom and discovered she had died during the night. She had lung cancer and had been diagnosed for 20 months, my father had died 4 months after her diagnosis, and she had been facing a grim ending and knew it. She died peacefully and we never had to open the hospice box of pain medicines. The night before she had a nice meal and we watched Antiques Roadshow on PBS, it had just been a normal evening.
Now for my sign---the day before she died she told me she wanted to go back upstairs to her bedroom (my parents had converted our downstairs den into a bedroom 3 years prior) I told her whenever she felt like going up I would move the oxygen machine around and help her. The next morning after the funeral home had removed her body and I was talking with her best friend I ran upstairs to get a dress out of the closet that I thought would be appropriate to bury her in and as I walked into her bedroom a picture was off the wall and on the floor---it was over by her side of the bed. I had been in the room the day before and it was on the wall. When I asked the hospice nurse what time she thought my mother died, she estimated around 4 am--the time I woke up.
Several days later our next door neighbor asked me that same question, when I told her she told me she was dreaming about a "commotion of angels flying out the upstairs window" about 4 am and woke up. My mother died peacefully and I have a feeling of her flying past my bedroom door, visiting her bedroom one last time and leaving through the window. Thank you for the article I read that morning. It has been 3 months now and I have been wanting to write you this ever since. I also have a story about my father's sign but that is for later.
I am the only girl and youngest of a family of five children. My parents felt the need to move closer to me as they aged because my brothers lived in states far from Wisconsin. My dad was stricken with the flesh-eating disease shortly after I gave birth to my long awaited second child, a girl. He clung to life for five months while my mother and I held out hope that he would get better. He passed away when my daughter was 6-1/2 months old. I felt so cheated by his absence in my new daughters life as my dad was so excited about her. Four months after he died, I returned to bed one morning after my husband had left for work and my 9 year old son off to school as the baby was still sleeping. I fell asleep and began dreaming that my dad had come into my bedroom from a direction that I knew he had checked on baby Monica. He caught my attention as he accidentally banged his hand on the door and rattled a plastic bag in which he was going to collect the trash from my bedroom (a chore he always did when I was a child). He walked up to me, held my hand while I babbled how I had missed him. I started to awaken and could hear myself babbling yet still felt the pressure of my dad's hand holding mine. I was fully awake and could still feel his touch. I denied the dream for several days until I repeated it enough to family and friends that I realized my dad came to comfort me with the knowledge that he would still look out for the little baby he barely got to hold. I knew he was also thanking me by holding my hand as I had done for months for him.
Fast forward through 7 years caring for my mother who developed dementia and Parkinson's disease after my dad's death. Many times I felt alone while trying to handle various problems with her and would cry out to my dad to help me; the answer always came from my earthly father or my heavenly Father without fail. When my mother left this earth I felt a deep sense of loss for having cared for someone right alongside of that little baby who was now getting ready to go off to school! My mother visited me one night in a dream many months after she had passed. We sat on a park bench together and I laid my head in her lap and she lovingly stroked my hair. I really don't like anyone "messing" with my hair so I knew it was a sign from my mother that she had appreciated all that I had done for her and was caring for me once again. Thank you for your wonderful article in St. Anthony Messenger magazine as it reaffirmed my feelings of reaching out for help from those saints with the little "s"!

Hal Gye was chiefly an Australian illustrator of humorous and political cartoons that appeared in a number of journals and newspapers. Besides this though he wrote poetry and articles, most of which were collected and published towards the end of his life, and posthumously.
He was born Harold Frederick Neville Gye on the 22nd May 1887 in Ryde, a suburb of Sydney in New South Wales. His parents had emigrated from England and his father, a builder, took the family to set up home in Black Range, near Albury and young Harold attended the bush school there. They were in Melbourne though by the time he was 12 and, following school, he worked in a number of office jobs before deciding that art and writing might be his favoured career pattern.
As a youth the Sydney Bulletin published one of his poems under the title Mrs Melba’s motor car and he was soon a member of the city’s Bohemian group which met at locations such as the Mitre Hotel. He had been attending art classes and a desire to make a living in this field prompted his departure from the law firm where he was working. The Bulletin was a good source for his articles and political or theatrical cartoons and he found other publications willing to take his work as well. Illustrations by Hal Gye were soon seen in the Sydney Arrow, Punch and the Melbourne Herald, amongst others.
Gye had a keen eye for the mundane in some of his writing, a good example being a poem about the often empty water tank that was located on their bush property when he was a young boy. It is called Our Corrugated Iron Tank and describes a mournful picture of drought caused by the blazing heat and the tank being a receptacle for dead animals and insects that have fallen or crawled within. Here are the opening verses of this poem:
For a time Gye worked out of shared art studios in Melbourne where he would produce his work in an atmosphere of great conviviality. Besides his black and white drawings, mainly for newspaper or magazine use, he was a talented painter in both oils and water colours. Many of his paintings can still be seen in various Australian galleries. His artwork was curtailed somewhat during the 1930s following a serious injury sustained in a motor accident. From then on he concentrated on writing and often appeared in the Bulletin under the pseudonym ‘James Hackston’, or ‘Hacko’.
Much of his poetry was written in the vernacular style, easily understood by readers who recognised language that they themselves used in everyday life. An example was his poem The Sentimental Bloke and the Burnie Mill. This was published in 1959 and included his own illustrations. He was a very popular writer and was known as a very sociable man, in any company. He was at ease with both men and women and admired by fellow writers and artists. His keen sense of humour was a constant factor in his work.
Hal Gye died in Beaumaris at the ripe old age of 80 on the 25th November 1967.

"If you're one of those people going, 'I don't know much about this guy,' go figure it out, because there's a reason we're making this ruckus." That is the very last sentence of the George Jones obituary that Brad Paisley wrote for Entertainment Weekly. And it's hard to argue with him, especially after you've read the whole thing.
It's part of the special year-end issue featuring the Best & Worst of 2013. There's an entire section devoted to the Late Greats. But they didn't let just anyone write the obituaries for the ones we lost in 2013. Rather, they had the celebs who knew them best put pen to paper for this 12-page tribute.
And here's what else Paisley had to say about Jones, who died on April 26 at age 81.
"He's the greatest singer country music has ever had, ever will have. It's really a rare thing in any style of music to be able to say that. He was like Sinatra for us," Paisley writes. "George Jones during his lifetime was probably aware that he was regarded as the best singer in country music. It wasn't like he didn't know people said that. But the minute that you start to sense that people are listening to other music and they're not interested in what you're doing, there's always a feeling of, did what I do matter or not?"
Paisley goes on to say that Jones might have sensed how much he was loved. "I think he knew that we all adored him. He knew his wife just loved him beyond what's typically possible for human beings. And in our case, as artists, we all regarded him as if he were in line for sainthood. But he left here probably wondering if people would still be listening to his music."

He ate my birds, so I ate him – Oklahoma farmer
While a pastor in Soshanguve, north of Pretoria, has been making waves locally for convincing his congregants to eat snakes, over in Oklahoma in the US a bird farmer has exacted his revenge on a more than 1.8m-long snake by eating it.
NBC News reported that the farmer had discovered that his birds were being stalked and eaten by a snake. Once he had figured out what was going on, he was able to catch the snake before it could do any further damage.
Speaking to NBC News, the farmer said: “I was a little irritated that the snake ate my guineas.”
While others may have opted to kill the snake and dispose of it, this farmer took the road less travelled, fired up the grill and had seared snake for supper, saying: “He ate my birds, so I ate him.”
The outspoken man did not think his actions were out of the ordinary, but instead appeared quite impressed with the way he handled the situation.
When the reporter asked him if the snake tasted at all like chicken, the farmer replied confidently: “It didn’t taste like chicken. But yeah, it was pretty good; it tasted like fish.”

Last week I received a phone call, one I wasn’t expecting. The school rang to tell me that Oliver had been chosen by his class teacher to receive an honours award the following Friday. I must admit as soon as I put the phone down and realised that day was also Mark’s day off I began to cry…. a little. You see Mark never gets time off to attend school events and it is always me having to go, not that I will ever begrudge going. So knowing he was going to be off work made it even more special. We were reminded not to tell him that he was getting one as it was going to be a surprise.
10 times a year the school arranges these Honour Awards and they are given out in a special assembly. The parents of those receiving the awards are invited into school to watch them receive it. The awards are given out to those children who have gone above and beyond, made great contributions to their class, shown exceptional progress in an area that they have struggled in or who have consistently behaved.
Oliver won’t know he was chosen for an Honours Award until he see’s us walking in the hall for assembly. For this reason, we felt like we had to tell Jack early. I didn’t want him to see us and think he was getting an award. When I told him he was pleased Oliver was chosen but did become really upset, I expected that. He has been at the school for 5 years and hasn’t received one yet. I can’t help but feel really sad for him, he has consistently struggled with his handwriting and he has tried ever so hard to improve it over the past year.
Receiving the award
So today Mark and I dropped the boys off at school and a lovely friend took Arthur to playschool for us. We walked to reception and waited to be called into the assembly hall where all the children were waiting. One by One the deputy headteacher called a child from each class to the front to collect a sticker and certificate. Their class teacher spoke about why they had chosen that child for the Honours Award and then they sat down on a bench in front of the whole school. All the children were chosen for showing great concentration.
When the deputy headteacher called Oliver’s name he stood up and collected his sticker and certificate and when he turned he had the biggest smile on his face! His teacher said this –
“Throughout the whole year, Oliver has demonstrated the toolbox skill of concentration. Whether he is working in his co-operative learning group, in his phonics group, or listening on the carpet, Oliver shows a great ability to concentrate and apply himself to his work. Although he is only in Year 1, Oliver knows that the best way to succeed in his learning is to focus and manage to ignore any distractions around him. He is a considerate and thoughtful member of the class, who always listens carefully to others. Although he is quiet, Oliver contributes well to discussions, and gives well-considered answers, often taking time to think his answer through before he speaks. Oliver can often be found assisting his friends when they are unsure about their learning, especially in maths. His focused approach to his learning is really paying off and aa result, I am seeing some great work from Oliver. Oliver, You are a great example to others in our class. Well done!”
Oliver has only been in the school for 2 years and has been really fortunate to get 2 really great teachers. Both of whom has helped him to become the awesome dude that he is. His current teacher Mrs I is absolutely incredible and I am going to be so sad to say goodbye to her in July. I just hope that Arthur will get her at some point during his time at school.

Baby of the week: Kobi Edward Crorken
Kobi Crorken was born at Forth Valley Royal Hospital in Larbert on July 21, 2019 at 7.21pm. He weighed 6lbs 13oz.
THE PARENTS: Mum Jay Trearty (27) is a home carer, while dad Michael Crorken (32) is a window cleaner. The parents are from Denny.
THE PREGNANCY: Mum said the pregnancy was pretty good. They were in and out of scans a few times because he was so small but had no problems.
THE BIRTH: The birth was induced three weeks early but it was a fairly quick birth.
THE NAME: They struggled to come up with a name as they already had three little boys between them. They ended up hearing the name one day and decided they liked it and that is what they were sticking with.
THE BABY: He is a brilliant baby who is described as being a very happy and content child.
THE GRANDPARENTS: His grandmother on his mum’s side is Katy Trearty, who is from Denny, and on his dad’s side is Donna Haldane who is also from Denny.
THE THANKS: The parents would like to say a big thank you to all of the friends and family who helped during the pregnancy and for everything they did once he was born. It’s much appreciated.

Nowhere are no conditions to which a man cannot become used, especially if he sees that all around him are living in the same way. Levin could not have believed three months before that he could have gone quietly to sleep in the condition in which he was that day, that leading an aimless, irrational life, living too beyond his means, after drinking to excess (he could not call what happened at the club anything else), forming inappropriately friendly relations with a man with whom his wife had once been in love, and a still more inappropriate call upon a woman who could only be called a lost woman, after being fascinated by that woman and causing his wife distress--he could still go quietly to sleep. But under the influence of fatigue, a sleepless night, and the wine he had drunk, his sleep was sound and untroubled.
At five o'clock the creak of a door opening waked him. He jumped up and looked round. Kitty was not in bed beside him. But there was a light moving behind the screen, and he heard her steps.
"What is it? ...what is it?" he said, half-asleep. "Kitty! What is it?"
"Nothing," she said, coming from behind the screen with a candle in her hand. "I felt unwell," she said, smiling a particularly sweet and meaning smile.
"What? has it begun?" he said in terror. "We ought to send, . ." and hurriedly he reached after his clothes.
"No, no," she said, smiling and holding his hand. "It's sure to be nothing. I was rather unwell, only a little. It's all over now."
And getting into bed, she blew out the candle, lay down and was still. Though he thought her stillness suspicious, as though she were holding her breath, and still more suspicious the expression of peculiar tenderness and excitement with which, as she came from behind the screen, she said "nothing," he was so sleepy that he fell asleep at once. Only later he remembered the stillness of her breathing, and understood all that must have been passing in her sweet, precious heart while she lay beside him, not stirring, in anticipation of the greatest event in a woman's life. At seven o'clock he was waked by the touch of her hand on his shoulder, and a gentle whisper. She seemed struggling between regret at waking him, and the desire to talk to him.
"Kostya, don't be frightened. It's all right. But I fancy . . . We ought to send for Lizaveta Petrovna."
The candle was lighted again. She was sitting up in bed, holding some knitting, which she had been busy upon during the last few days.
"Please, don't be frightened, it's all right. I'm not a bit afraid," she said, seeing his scared face, and she pressed his hand to her bosom and then to her lips.
He hurriedly jumped up, hardly awake, and kept his eyes fixed on her, as he put on his dressing-gown; then he stopped, still looking at her. He had to go, but he could not tear himself from her eyes. He thought he loved her face, knew her expression, her eyes, but never had he seen it like this. How hateful and horrible he seemed to himself, thinking of the distress he had caused her yesterday. Her flushed face, fringed with soft curling hair under her night-cap, was radiant with joy and courage.
Though there was so little that was complex or artificial in Kitty's character in general, Levin was struck by what was revealed now, when suddenly all disguises were thrown off and the very kernel of her soul shone in her eyes. And in this simplicity and nakedness of her soul, she, the very woman he loved in her, was more manifest than ever. She looked at him, smiling; but all at once her brows twitched, she threw up her head, and going quickly up to him, clutched his hand and pressed close up to him, breathing her hot breath upon him. She was in pain and was, as it were, complaining to him of her suffering. And for the first minute, from habit, it seemed to him that he was to blame. But in her eyes there was a tenderness that told him that she was far from reproaching hind that she loved him for her sufferings. "If not I, who is to blame for it?" he thought unconsciously, seeking some one responsible for this suffering for him to punish; but there was no one responsible. She was suffering, complaining, and triumphing in her sufferings, and rejoicing in them, and loving them. He saw that something sublime was being accomplished in her soul, but what? He could not make it out. It was beyond his understanding.
"I have sent to mamma. You go quickly to fetch Lizaveta Petrovna ...Kostya! ...Nothing, it's over."
She moved away from him and rang the bell.
"Well, go now; Pasha's coming. I am all right."
And Levin saw with astonishment that she had taken up the knitting she had brought in in the night and begun working at it again.
As Levin was going out of one door, he heard the maid-servant come in at the other. He stood at the door and heard Kitty giving exact direct tions to the maid, and beginning to help her move the bedstead.
He dressed, and while they were putting in his horses, as a hired sledge was not to be seen yet, he ran again up to the bedroom, not on tiptoe, it seemed to him, but on wings. Two maid-servants were carefully moving something in the bedroom.
Kitty was walking about knitting rapidly and giving directions.
"I'm going for the doctor. They have sent for Lizaveta Petrovna, but I'll go on there too. Isn't there anything wanted? Yes, shall I go to Dolly's?"
She looked at him, obviously not hearing what he was saying.
"Yes, yes. Do go," she said quickly, frowning and waving her hand to him.
He had just gone into the drawing-room, when suddenly a plaintive moan sounded from the bedroom, smothered instantly. He stood still, and for a long while he could not understand.
"Yes, that is she," he said to himself, and clutching at his head he ran down-stairs.
"Lord have mercy on us! pardon us! aid us!" he repeated the words that for some reason came suddenly to his lips. And he, an unbeliever, repeated these words not with his lips only. At that instant he knew that all his doubts, even the impossibility of believing with his reason, of which he was aware in himself, did not in the least hinder his turning to God. All of that now floated out of his soul like dust. To whom was he to turn if not to Him in whose hands he felt himself, his soul, and his love?
The horse was not yet ready, but feeling a peculiar concentration of his physical forces and his intellect on what he had to do, he started off on foot without waiting for the horse, and told Kouzma to overtake him.
At the corner he met a night cabman driving hurriedly. In the little sledge, wrapped in a velvet cloak, sat Lizaveta Petrovna with a kerchief round her head. "Thank God! thank God!" he said, overjoyed to recognize her little fair face which wore a peculiarly serious, even stern expression. Telling the driver not to stop, he ran along beside her.
"For two hours, then? Not more?" she inquired. "You should let Pyotr Dmitrievitch know, but don't hurry him. And get some opium at the chemist's."
"So you think that it may go on well? Lord have mercy on us and help ust" Levin said, seeing his own horse driving out of the gate. Jumping into the sledge beside Konzma, he told him to drive to the doctor's.

His workplace says he never submitted a claim and they were not willing to admit there was a problem, even though staff spoke up after his death, stating that everything was very true.
If one was to place themselves in Mr. Donovan's shoes, just think of the bullying he might receive if it was shrugged off by management, yet the perpetrator told of the claim against him. His life would have been made complete hell by this bully.
Those staff members who came forward possibly jeopardized their own positions by doing so. They could have exposed themselves to abuse by the bully if she is still there.
And, I commend the worker's compensation board for setting another Canadian first.
Joanne Lord MacLeod,

Tuesday, 9 July 2013
Get back at twelve p.m. having had an uneventful night. Get a bath and shave and feel much refreshed. It is very thundery and close, and late in the evening a Hun scout flying down the line in a south-westerly direction gets well peppered but finally sinks one of our balloons when it is almost on the ground. We could hardly see him when he did this as he was well south of us and there was a lot of stuff flung at him.
Posted by zmkc at 07:36

The Background: Just hours before the September 11th attacks that resulted in nearly 3,000 deaths, President Clinton bragged to an Australian audience that he could have killed bin Laden.
I'm just saying, you know, if I were Osama bin Laden, he's a very smart guy, I've spent a lot of time thinking about him, and I nearly got him once. I nearly got him. And I could have gotten, I could have killed him, but I would have to destroy a little town called Kandahar in Afghanistan and kill 300 innocent women and children, and then I would have been no better than him. And so I didn't do it.

We waited for Galyna and Angel, and they arrived safely. We then brought them up to date on what is happening. They told us there have been some complications with Tuva and it is not looking good at the moment. We were all tired, so we all went to bed. “What is that thing?” asked Sky. “It is an alarm,” I explained, “by putting them on the window and door, no one can get in here without us knowing. When either is opened, it sets off these alarms which are very noisy.
I am putting one on this secret door too, that way no one can surprise us during the night.” “Great idea,” said Sky, “I was a bit concerned about that secret door especially.” The night passed too quickly, but at least all was quiet. After breakfast Annelie phoned so I went to our bedroom to talk. She had some interesting information for us.
“Mandi is right,” she began, “Alonzo has not worked for nearly 3 years and mainly just stays home. But he does make regular trips to that town close to you and the city to the south of where they live. He is married, no children, his wife is 35, Alonzo is 28. She works as a legal secretary at the only law firm in town. They live well beyond what she earns each month. He sells drugs to smaller dealers so would make quite a bit of money with that.
He also is good with a gun and sells his services for quite large sums. He has been paid up to 5 million euros for one hit. He always carries 3 guns and one knife which is hidden on his lower left leg. He has been timed at pulling his gun and shooting, accurately, in 1.2 seconds.” “Well, that is certainly good to know,” I said, “I am definitely not that fast.” “Mandi is worth around 100 million euros now after David’s death,” she continued, “David was also mixed up with underworld connections and made most of his fortune that way.
But the police could never find enough evidence against him to put him in prison. Same goes for Alonzo. There used to be 3 police officers in that town, but they went missing 4 years ago and were never found. The 2 present officers took their place. Word is out that they are playing both sides.” “Thanks Annelie,” I said, “that is good information. It also shows that Mandi is not being fully honest with us.”
“Yes, and she was not pressured by her family to marry David,” she added, “just the opposite in fact. Only David pushed her to marry him, it is likely that he and David knew each other. Oh, and Mandi was not the only recipient of David’s fortune. He also left sizable sums to his ex-wife and their 2 children. She has not remarried and lives in that town nearby you.” “Hmm, it might be interesting to visit her,” I said, “providing she would be willing to talk with us.”
“I will let you know if I find out anything more Steve,” said Annelie, “but you have enough to let you know this is not a small matter and you need to be very careful. I was surprised that Mandi was not hurt worse, considering what that car looks like.” “I want to see that car too,” I said, “but in person.” I then got everyone together and told them about the news from Annelie. “What now Steve?” asked Angel. “I am not really sure,” I said, “but I want to go back to that hidden room and look around some more.
Galyna and Sigurbjorn, I would like you to stay with Mandi and quietly ask her questions from time to time. She is not being totally honest, perhaps because she is scared of someone, but we need to know.” “Okay, we can do that,” said Galyna. “The rest of us will do some exploring,” I said, “those 3 skeletons in that hole are likely those police officers that disappeared, but we will check on that a bit later.”
We went back down to the hidden room and looked around some more. We found a lot of fingerprints that were from Mandi, so she lied about not being down here. Someone stays here at times, but who? I am thinking that this castle was being used for some illegal purposes prior to David’s father buying the place and it kept on being used since his father never came to the castle the whole time he owned it.
Perhaps David did not want it used once he owned it, or perhaps he demanded more than the person, or persons, were willing to pay, so they killed David. I would say that Alonzo is mixed up in that somehow, and it is looking more like Alonzo did the killing. But why try to kill his sister? Unless he is going to inherit her fortune. But they do not seem like they get along. Questions, always questions. But things are not quite… wait, what was that?
To Be Continued.
©2022 Steve McLeod.

Show: Young Dracula
Disclaimer: I don't own Young Dracula. This is purely for the enjoyment of its fans, created by a fan
Spoilers: Series 3 of Young Dracula.
Summary: SEQUEL TO FORTITUDE. When Erin becomes Queen, Vlad will no longer need his corrupt Council. However when the Council retaliate, Vlad and Erin must try and hold their world together while they try to find a solution for all their problems.
A/N: Thanks to everyone who read the prequel 'Predetermined' and 'Fortitude', this one picks up a few years after Fortitude but the reason will become very clear, very soon…
I'm feeling a lot more enthusiastic about this fic than my last so hopefully I won't be as erratic with my posts…
YEKNODELTTILYEKNODELTTILSet three years after the end of Fortitude
Chapter 1: Mates
The light being reflected from the moon gave the room an ethereal glow, glinting off the silver of the furniture in the room. Before long it would be dawn peering in through the windows.
There was no rush to close the thick, heavy, red curtains though; the protective UV coating stopped them from burning.
Neither of them had wanted to close the coffin after spending the previous day locked in separate ones to keep them apart. Ingrid's idea, which Bertrand had happily agreed to. He'd rapidly become her partner in crime, instead of constantly foiling each other's plans they'd teamed up together which could become a problem.
Over three years the room had acquired more personal items to it. A few pieces of technology existed in the room a phone, a laptop, a stereo but the one thing Vlad refused to have in his room was a television. Erin knew the whole reason but he'd been firm, there was one in the manor but he rarely looked at it and when he did she hated seeing the pained expression that crossed his face each and every time.
Pictures littered the shelves, all digital captures of course, of them at different times. Leaving school, their (second) Betrothal Ball, his coronation and their various birthdays. On each and every picture the pair looked deliriously happy and completely in love.
Vlad's drawings from his room and some that he'd done in art class hung from the walls, nothing in frames just pinned to the walls. Erin had even found the picture he'd thought he'd destroyed when he became the side of him he hated. That 'wonderful' picture of the year eights hanging from the ceiling.
Vladimir Dracula's eyes slowly opened, he looked around the room, it was still dark. He felt something move in his arms and he looked down to see the shape of his new mate in his arms. Grinning widely he pulled her closer to him.
Vlad had stuck to his condition that they not be mated until Erin turned twenty-one, despite more than one argument otherwise. Erin didn't want to wait, Vlad did. Vlad even refused to start any preparations until her twenty first birthday, it wasn't that he didn't want her to be his mate it was that he didn't want her to regret it then not be able to do anything about it.
Vlad gently kissed and nuzzled his new wife's neck, making sure to take care not to hurt her. He felt her stir slowly from beneath him; he smiled as she arched back into him. He ran his fingers through her tousled hair, tangling it even more. He knew his own hair would probably be just as bad.
"Hey." He whispered, taking his lips from her throat for the briefest of moments before mapping it again.
Erin turned in his arms, pulling her neck away from him. It gave Vlad a chance to see the scar on her stomach; he gently brushed it making her shiver. He always smiled at that. "Hey." She answered with a big but slightly sleepy smile.
Vlad rolled them until she was above him. He looked up at her, noticing how in the light her bite mark seemed silver.
"Does it still hurt?" He asked her quietly. He knew the claim mark would sting but he hadn't realised how much.
Erin was confused for a moment before she remembered what he was talking about.
It was the part of the ceremony Erin had been dreading the most. The mark of claim. Mating vampires had to show they were loyal to the other person in the marriage for the rest of their unlives and there was only one way they could do that. Modern mortals had rings; she knew they would never have anything of the sort so she assumed they'd have a crest or cuff of sorts. She'd been painfully wrong. Rings, cuffs and crests could be removed so they had to have something more… permanent. For a vampire there was only one thing that was permanent…
The thought of biting Vlad had made her feel sick and terrified for weeks, she'd known for three years what she had to do but as the ceremony drew closer it had weighed on her mind. She didn't want to hurt him; being bitten was as much a fear for a vampire as it was for a slayer. He'd hidden it well but she knew he'd been scared as well.
He was taller than her so Ingrid had insisted on her wearing the highest heels she could imagine. She'd barely managed to walk down the aisle wearing them. It would be considered an insult if Vlad had to bend down so she could bite him. Vlad had jokingly offered a crate for her to stand on and it had resulted in a wallop from both Ingrid and Erin at the time, however once Erin had seen the shoes she wished she hadn't dismissed his joking comment.
When a vampire was bitten you couldn't drain any remaining blood sitting in their veins. Of course you would taste a small amount of blood but nothing like draining anyone. A mortal had the blood constantly pumping through their body so the blood filled the mouth automatically, that obviously didn't happen in a vampire's body. Instead it created a loyalty bond somehow. The chemicals in the brain were altered to make you more passive and adoring towards the other person, however if you were in love the loyalty bite had no effect.
"It doesn't hurt." She assured him, she wasn't lying it didn't hurt at all.
Vlad traced his fingers over the puckered marks he'd made on the left side of her neck. Erin now had two sets; the newest was higher than the last. It wasn't like before when he'd bitten her to save her, this mark showed she was his and a possessive thrill raced through him at the thought.
Erin repeated the gesture lifting her tight arm to lovingly stroke his silver bite mark on the left side of his neck. The bite marks had healed over with their accelerated healing so they were nothing more than scars.
Erin would be lying if she said it hadn't hurt; she hadn't been awake last time. It was a sharp, stinging sensation lasting a few seconds then it was over. It had brought tears to her eyes, although it wasn't anything like her stitches tearing. Vlad had been gentle but he had to use more force, as vampire skin was tougher than mortal skin. Erin had seen a few tears in his eyes as she'd bitten him as well; hers had been deeper in her nervousness.
"Yours?" She asked quietly, he'd always spoke sarcastically or as a challenge for someone to bite him when he wouldn't do things their way. She was worried he hated it.
"No." He smiled at her. Erin propped herself upwards on his chest, tracing her finger along his abdomen.
"We're going to have to get up." She told him seriously. They had enough things to do before nightfall.
The mating ceremony had been the easy part so far, it wasn't like mortal weddings. The planning and preparation instead came after the ceremony. The mating ceremony created the union between the young couple, then there were another sequence of feasts and celebrations that needed to be held until they were declared publicly and officially mated and a few more to mark a new Queen.
That was why there was no such thing as a honeymoon. If they'd just gotten married there would have been a ceremony and that was it nothing more. A mating was more intense than a marriage ceremony it needed to be thoroughly celebrated.
If it proved how much she loved the youngest Dracula that's all she cared about.
"Five more minutes?" He asked softly. He really didn't want to move at all from his coffin or from their first night as husband and wife.
"Five more minutes." She agreed before lowering her lips back down to his.
Erin picked up her discarded mating dress. There was hardly any damage to it at all, only where they'd both lost their tempers with her laces that Ingrid had deliberately tied in a very stubborn knot but the laces could easily be replaced.
She turned to see Vlad slipping on his shirt, she let out a laugh.
"What?" He asked looking at himself self-consciously.
"Just strange, you've been in leathers for the last week, seeing you normal is strange." Vlad nodded, the Council had been insisting on holding many more meetings over the last week Vlad knew why – they wanted to push more laws through in case he disbanded them immediately.
Vlad moved across to her, wrapping his arms around her, looking down at the mating dress in her hands. "Is it too damaged?" She looked like a goddess in that dress.
Erin had looked beautiful in her mating dress. The dress that was currently across the room somewhere. The long navy blue dress that had a delicate v-neck without a collar so he was able to put his mating claim on her. The long sleeves ended delicately on the back of her hand. There hadn't been a train on her dress it had fallen flowing to the floor with only a slight flare. She didn't want to trip over it and her long plain cloak. The bodice had hugged her figure tightly. Ingrid had laced Erin into the dress tightly; it was a good thing she didn't have to breathe.
"It can be fixed." She assured him pulling out of his arms to speed across the room. Carefully she spread it out on the chair, taking care not to crease it. As soon as she'd done that she sped back into her new husband's arms.
"You looked amazing in that." He reminded her, Erin ducked her head. He'd told her that more than once throughout the ceremony, during the family feast and more than once when they'd tried to get it off her. "Sorry I snapped the…"
"It was the only way it was coming off." She shrugged, there was no way she was going to spend her mating night in it and there was no way she was going to sleep in it at all. She knew Ingrid did it on purpose.
Vlad kissed her scars once again, "I love that this means you're mine." It was strange he hated her transformation scar but he loved her claim mark. No vampire could deny what it meant. They were the first couple to have a mating ceremony in over two centuries.
Vlad's lips began to slip lower and lower and Erin's eyes closed automatically. Erin suddenly opened them and pushed him away. Now she really wished she had a honeymoon.
"Come on." She whispered, "Breakfast and soy blood."
Vlad's stomach growled and he cursed it for its timing. Erin smiled before gesturing with her head towards the door.
Vlad just let him be led from the room, cursing his stomach all the way.
The slow pacing of two pairs of perfectly in sync but heavy footsteps had Ingrid looking up. She knew of only two people who walked instep with each other.
"You're awake then…" Ingrid grinned at them as they entered the room. Vlad wiped the sleep from his eyes before tilting his head and growling at his sister. Erin shook her head before sitting herself down at the table.
Ingrid chuckled, leaning back into Bertrand who gently ran a hand up and down her arm.
Five minutes had turned into half an hour but Erin really didn't care at this point. She smiled at Vlad as he seated himself next to her. He beamed back at her linking their fingers together.
"I assume that everything was alright last night then?" The glint was in Bertrand's eye as he spoke. Bertrand could tease when he wanted to; being with Ingrid had loosened him up slightly.
"Fog off." The pair muttered at the same time before chortling at their timing.
"Bertrand was just concerned…" Ingrid tried to defend her partner.
Vlad wasn't going to go into anything about his personal life, "When are you getting married or mated then?" Vlad asked her as he reached for the cereal. Bertrand grimaced at the 'disgusting' food. It was his home he was entitled to eat what ever he wanted to.
Ingrid snorted something and Bertrand looked the other way. Vlad glanced at Erin who shrugged. If they went any slower by the time they actually did mate or marry would be when everyone was dust. Vlad knew Ingrid didn't want to ruin anything but going too slow did that.
"So how does it feel being mated to the wimpire?" Ingrid asked looking at Vlad as she said it, she was only using the word to wind him up.
"Fantastic." Erin answered before looking down shyly. Vlad kissed her forehead lightly and she looked up at him through her eyelashes.
Bertrand decided to interrupt their moment, "You know you still have the Induction to sort out before nightfall?"
"We know." They muttered together.
Ingrid gently turned Erin's neck to look at her marks, they were clear for everyone to see. She did the same for Vlad and winced. "A bit deep." She studied them closer checking her brother was okay, she hadn't had chance to look at them after the ceremony so she was taking her chance now.
Erin's eyes lowered, "I didn't mean to…" Vlad grasped her chin and lifted her head up to meet his eyes. The only extra experience he'd had was when he'd bitten her, Erin had had to struggle with being smaller than him as well.
"Its okay." He told her firmly.
"All it means is that every vampiress can see you've claimed him a mile off." Ingrid chuckled. She could see Erin wasn't convinced. "A bite's a bite, the pain isn't any different no matter how deep it is." That's how it was for vampires.
The door slammed back, leaving an indentation in the panelling where the handle had hit it full force.
Robin burst into the room, looking at Ingrid and Bertrand. He then saw the newly mated couple and addressed them instead. Ingrid seemed a little offended but relaxed as Bertrand squeezed her hand. This was Vlad and Erin's home, it was their duty to sort their problems out.
"Vlad you'd better get to the hall."
"Why?" As far as Vlad knew everything was to be set up when Vlad and Erin got to the hall.
"Your Dad's redecorating with cobwebs."
Vlad had never moved so fast. Cobwebs were banned from his home.
His manor – his rules.
A/N: Thanks for reading.

The video camera was recording Abby's legs flailing in the air as my former Navy shipmate's massive cock relentlessly plunged in and out of her like a jackhammer, showing her no mercy.
Bull Jones By Shooter3704
My name is Bill and my wife is Abby. We both are twenty-six. We've been married for four years.
It was another one of those hot, humid Southern summer nights. As I looked through the viewfinder of the video camera Abby was even hotter. Before today she had never met Alvin C. Jones. I had not seen the man known as Bull Jones for nearly four years.
The video camera was recording Abby's legs flailing in the air as my former Navy shipmate's massive cock relentlessly plunged in and out of her like a jackhammer, showing her no mercy. Apparently she wasn't asking for any mercy.
But, alas I'm getting ahead of myself. Our story actually started nearly a week earlier. ***
His name is Alvin C, Jones and Bull and I joined the Navy at the same time. We were from the same town, but I hadn't known him until the day we were all sworn in. We were the same age, but we had gone to different schools so I never met him. Bull is a large black man who played football and was pretty good at it because he loved to hit people hard.
Bull and I became close during basic training. Being from the same place among a lot of strangers, we found ourselves being buddies with one another. After basic training, Bull was sent to one school and I went to another. A year later we found ourselves stationed at the same place on the west coast. We got together then, but not as much as we had in basic training. We both had grown up some. A year after that Bull got assigned to a ship and I was off to another school. I happened to run into Bull in Brisbane Australia. My enlistment was about up, and I planned on getting out. Bull was planning on reenlisting for another hitch. We spent a few days of liberty hitting the gin mills and whorehouses. It was in one of the whorehouses that I discovered the real reason they called him Bull. I thought he was killing the poor whore, and I went into the cubbyhole where he and his girl were. I planned on pulling him off the poor thing. I remember the shock of seeing him fuck that girl with his massive dick. From the door it looked like he was ramming her with a large brown ball bat. I left them when it became obvious that she wasn't in pain, and that she loved it. Word got around and Bull Jones couldn't pay for a piece of ass in Australia.
I got out of the Navy, went home, married my high school sweetheart, and opened my own video business. I made video's of weddings, reunions, family gatherings and anything that would make a buck. It was hand to mouth for a couple of years, but Abby and I made it by working long hours and scrimping where we had to. I branched out into making commercials, and that proved to be lucrative for my little business, very lucrative.
Abby and I had a good life for the most part. She didn't want a family, and frankly neither did I. Our sex life from my perspective was on the lower side of great. Abby seemed to want something more. When I asked she always replied there was nothing missing.
Last week, I was in the back room of my shop when I heard the chimes that were connected to the front door. I went out into the reception room and saw him. The Bull himself was standing there grinning at me. He was a little bit bulkier, and his head was shaved bald, but other than that he hadn't changed much.
"Son of a bitch," I said. "I knew I should have locked the door. Now look what came in." We gave each other a manly hug. "Where did you come from, Bull"
"I was visitin' my folks," he said. "Saw an ad in the paper about some dude doin' video work. I said to myself, 'I wonder if that could be ol' Bill that I know' I got in my new Lincoln town car and drove over to see."
"Yeah, I put all that training the Navy gave me to some practical use." I said. "You still in"
"Naw, I got out a couple years ago. Had a little disagreement with the brass, and they sorta insisted I get out. You doin' okay"
"Not bad now. It was a little lean for a while. So what are you doing these days"
"This and that," he answered vaguely. "Kinda in between things right now. I came up from Florida a few days ago. I ran a stable down there for a while."
"Really I didn't know you knew anything about horses." He looked at me strangely for a moment then laughed.
"I don't, you dumb-ass. I ran a string of whores. One of my girls got herself beat up by a whacko john, and that brought a lot of heat on my operation. I shut it down, and hauled ass out of town." He grinned at me, shaking his head. "You are still as dumb as you were, Billy boy. You married with a bunch of rug-rats"
"Married, but no kids," I said. "Come on back. I'll finish up my project, and we'll go get a beer."
"Or two," he finished with a laugh. An hour later we were sitting in Murphy's bar catching up on each other's lives. Three beers later, I called Abby at her work, and told her I was bringing an old Navy buddy home for dinner. Abby was somewhat less then enthused about it. Abby's lack of enthusiasm changed even before I got through the introductions.
"Damn girl," Bull said when she arrived home. "Ain't you something to look at. How did Billy-boy land a babe like you" Bull was always a charmer, and it certainly worked on Abby. She left us sitting on the patio and went to change out of her work clothes.
"Man, you got yourself some woman there," Bull said loud enough for Abby to hear as she walked away from us. I noticed that she put a little more swing into her hips as she left. "There ain't no way a little white man, like you, can be takin' care of business."
"Down, boy," I said. "Private property."
"Sure," Bull said taking a long swig of beer. "If you need any help tending the grounds, let me know."
Abby joined us about thirty minutes later. She had showered, and put on a pair of short shorts with a little pink halter-top. From the sway of her boobs she hadn't bothered with a bra. Abby is one of those fortunate women who are heavy breasted, yet doesn't need support to keep them from sagging. Her thirty-eight D cup tits stick straight out. Bull's eyes indicated he didn't miss her provocative boob display.
I ordered a pizza delivered, and while we waited for it, we drank beer and talked. Abby hung on Bull's every word. He regaled her with old war stories about him and me. Some of it I recognized, and some of it was funny, but pure fabrication.
"Bill, you didn't tell me about your trips to Australian whore houses," Abby said with a smile. We had finished the pizza and were working on the rest of the two cases of beer I bought.
"Not much to tell," I said with a dismissive wave of my hand. "I was only there to watch Bull's back. I was his wingman."
"Yeah right," Abby said with a snort. "You didn't have any of the women, I'll bet."
"Of course not," I said with a straight face. A drunken face, but straight, I thought. "I was staying true to my girl at home, cause I knew she was staying true to me." I had stumbled or staggered, into an area of our past that we didn't talk about. Abby had never mentioned it, but I knew she fucked around while I was gone. Our town is still small enough so that there aren't many secrets. I hadn't been home more than a few days when several people told me about Abby. Bull watched this exchange with an amused expression on his face.
"So, do they call you Bull because you are so big" Abby asked Bull. Apparently she realized that we were straying into dangerous territory.
"Naw, all the men in my family are big," Bull said. "They started calling me Bull back in high school."
"Because you were so mean' Abby persisted.
"Nope, 'cause I have a cock like a Brahma bull," he said as a mater of fact, and without a change of expression.
"Oh," Abby said her face bright red. She laughed after a moment of shocked silence. "I guess that explains it, then."
We finished off the beer, and Bull left about eleven o'clock. I finished up in the bathroom first and was just about to doze off when a naked Abby jumped astraddle of me.
"I'm going to want some lovin' from my lovin' man," she breathed in my ear. I rolled her over and spread her legs. Just as I put my dick in her I had a mental image of her and David Hawkins. He had been one of the guys she went out with while I was away. Hawkins made sure I knew about Abby and him by looking me up and telling me about it. He also mentioned that Ted Billings, a black man that we went to school with, had fucked her. I managed to shut Hawkins up by punching him in the face, and he didn't get to finish his bullshit. I hadn't seen him since. I also, in my sick mind, saw her with Bull. That image didn't last but a second.
That night Abby was insatiable. I fucked her twice, which was unusual for me, and still she wanted more. Sober, I couldn't have given her much more. Drunk as I was, it was impossible to do any more. I went to sleep again wondering how much of David Hawkins's story was true. ***
I finished up a commercial shoot by mid afternoon the next day. Bull came by just as I was closing up the shop. I told him I would meet him at Murphy's Bar after I went to the bank. I had a hefty check to deposit from the commercial. I called Abby, and asked her if she wanted to join us at Murphy's. I didn't figure she would want to. She surprised me by quickly agreeing, and told me that she would be there after she had gone home to change. I wondered about that, because she always looked good in her business attire. Abby is a bookkeeper for a car dealership in town. Abby's delay served to give Bull and I a good head start on the beer.
"I didn't get you in trouble with them whorehouse tales, did I" Bull asked me.
"Not so that you could tell it," I responded. "We went at it like two bunnies after we got in bed. She liked to wore me out."
"Probably thinkin' about my bull-like black dick," Bull said with a grin.
"Did you know Ted Billings" I asked, ignoring his dig.
"Yeah, I know him. He played for your ragged-ass little team. He's workin' for Tony Marks, I hear. Why, do you know him"
"Not personally," I said. "His name came up a while back."
Abby joined us shortly after six. She was wearing a slinky black dress with a plunging neckline, the dress stopped at mid thigh. She looked incredibly hot. She took one look at the empty mugs on the table, and decided to catch up by ordering a margarita. That would do it, because neither Abby nor I drank much hard liquor.
Half an hour later, Abby was on her third margarita, and we all were feeling no pain. Bull was telling us about his string of call girls.
"You were a...what do you call it A pimp" Abby asked Bull, her eyes wide.
"I was the manager of client services," Bull responded with as much dignity as he could.
"What does that mean exactly" Abby asked.
"Pimp," Bull said laughing. "Hey, Billy-boy. It's funny you mentioned Ted Billings. I saw him a few days ago." Abby jerked upright, and stared at me. I couldn't read her expression. Shock, surprise, or maybe fear. "I told you he's was working for Tony Marks, didn't I"
"Yeah. Who is Tony Marks" I asked, still watching Abby out of the corner of my eye.
"Marks runs a few women," Bull said, signaling to the waitress to bring more drinks. "Does a bit of sharkin'. Dope, too, I guess. That would be his speed. I hear Ted is one of Tony's lieutenants."
"Why were you talking about Ted Billings" Abby asked softly.
"Oh, that's right," I said. "You know Ted, don't you"
Abby lost some more of her color. "Sure, we went to high school with him back when."
"Yeah, he was a running buddy with David Hawkins," I said. I was back in that dangerous territory, but I didn't care. "You know Hawkins, too."
Abby was saved from having to answer that, because Bull chose that moment to launch into another tale about his adventures in Florida. I didn't bring up Ted or David again. I was curious to see how Abby would handle it. I found out later that night. ***
"Bill," Abby said. She was still in the bathroom, and I was trying to get my pants off without falling on my ass. We had drunk a lot of beer. "Why were you discussing Ted Billings" I wanted to choose my words carefully, which is hard to do when you are two-thirds drunk
"I don't know," I managed to say. "His name just popped into my head. Do you still see him" Damn! I hadn't meant to say that.
Abby came out of the bathroom and stood staring at me for a long while. She was as white as the teddy she was wearing. "What do you mean" she asked softly, a quiver in her voice.
"Just what I asked," I said plunging on. "What about David Hawkins" Abby didn't answer me. She went over and took the throw pillows off the bed and pulled the cover back. "You didn't answer me, Abby. Still see them"
"No, I haven't seen either of them since you came home from the service. How did you find about them"
"Hawkins made a point of telling me about it," I answered. I got in bed beside her. "I socked him in the nose, and ran him off, but I've wondered how much of what he told was the truth."
"I don't know," Abby said. "I don't know what he told you." She rose up and looked over at me. "Bill you have to realize that I was just a nineteen year old girl who was lonely. You were off to God knows where, and I was all alone. All my girlfriends were dating, going out, and having fun. I got tired of staying home."
"I can understand that, Sweetheart," I said. "I'm not going to raise hell with you for dating other guys while I was gone. I'm sure you didn't really believe that I just watched Bull's back in those whorehouses. I do think we need to clear the air. Tell me about it." She didn't answer for a moment.
"Not much to tell," she finally said. "David asked me out for the hundredth time and I finally said yes. We dated on and off for over a year. David was a fun guy to be with. At least at first. There wasn't any sex for a while, but I eventually gave in. By that time David had his own place in a garage apartment. That's where we first did it."
"I wasn't a virgin," she continued. "You took that before we graduated from school. You and I screwed every chance we got. I was used to having regular sex, and suddenly you were gone, and no more sex. David provided the sex for me."
"How about Ted Billings" I prompted. "We're cleaning the air, aren't we"
"I guess," she answered quietly. "But are you sure you want to hear all this" I assured her that I did want to hear, even though I wasn't all that sure myself.
"Going to David's apartment became an everyday thing for me. I'm ashamed to admit it, but I had to have sex. My libido was running amuck. David and I had been dating for a month or so when Ted entered the picture. I went over to David's place one night and Ted was there. I remember being disappointed, but thinking that Ted would leave in a while. He didn't, and the three of us sat around drinking beer, and smoking some dope. After a while David started feeling me up, and I got all hot and bothered. I suggested in a nice way that things could get hotter if Ted left."
"David just laughed and said not to worry about Ted. The beer, the dope, and the heat of the moment caused me to forget about Ted being there for the moment. David managed to get my top off, and was playing with my tits. I remember seeing Ted sitting across from us grinning to beat the band. I just put Ted out of my mind, and continued making out with David. In a little while David had me naked on the floor, and was mounting me. Right at that moment I didn't care if we were making out in front of the whole damn town. David started screwing me, and I guess it was because of the excitement of doing it with an audience, he came real fast. The next thing I know, David is holding my legs apart for Ted to screw me. I think I objected, but frankly I'm not sure if I did or not."
Abby paused a moment, and then continued. "I guess maybe I didn't. Ted was bigger than David, and he took me with a force of passion I never knew existed. He was like an animal. He caused me to have a bunch of orgasms. I don't know how long he did me. It seemed like hours, but I know it wasn't that long. After a long time, David made Ted get off me so he could do me again. I gave Ted a blowjob while David screwed me. When David got off, Ted jumped back on me. David and Ted took turns with me most of the night and when I finally left there I couldn't hardly walk. That was the first time we engaged in group sex."
"But wasn't the last" I said.
"No, it wasn't the last," Abby answered in a small voice. "Bill are you sure you want to hear this"
"Clearing the air, Abby," I said. I put her hand on my hard dick. "What do you think"
"I think...wow, you seem to be enjoying it." She gave my cock a light squeeze.
"Go on tell me all of it," I said.
"It got so that I was with Ted or David almost every night. They didn't care if I was having my period or not. Sometimes it was one or the other, but most often it was with both of them. After a while, David got me into anal sex. Honestly, I wasn't wild about it, but I got so I really enjoyed it when they were doubling up on me. That happened the first time a couple of months into the...relationship, for want of a better word. We were in David's bed and I was on top of Ted. I felt something cold on my butt, and soon felt David's finger in my butt. It felt good so I let him keep doing it. In a little while he stuck his dick in my butt. I tried to stop it, but Ted was holding me down. Pretty soon David got his entire dick in me, and there I was skewered between them. It didn't take long until I was coming, and they were riding me hard. The harder they rode me the more I came. After that night we did it a lot." Abby was still holding my throbbing cock. "I think we should do something with this, don't you"
I agreed that something had to be done with it, or it was going to explode. Abby got on top of me, and we fucked for a long time. It was the absolutely the best totally uninhibited sex we had ever had. Abby screamed, and came several times. Later we both just lay there, and tried to resume normal breathing and heartbeat. It was our wildest sex ever.
"So, sweetie go on with the story," I said.
"God, you want more" Abby said with a soft chuckle. "You are a glutton for punishment." She paused long enough to get her water bottle from the bathroom. "Between the two of them we did it about everyway three people can possibly do it. It was crazy in a way. The more sex I got, the more I wanted. I didn't object much, if at all when Ted brought a friend of his to the party One night, David was working, so it was just Ted and I until Tony showed up."
"Tony Marks" I said, interrupting her.
"Uh huh," Abby said. "Ted and I were fooling around on the sofa when Tony knocked on the door. Ted let him in, and when I started to button my blouse, Ted stopped me. 'You got great knockers, Abby,' Ted told me. 'Let Tony get a good look at them.' He took my blouse completely off. It felt strange being there with two black guys. Ted pulled me to my feet and stood behind me holding my breast out like some kind of offering for Tony. Tony Marks was maybe ten years older or more than either Ted or I. We were just kids, but Tony was a grown man."
"Tony came over to us, and took one of my breasts in his big hand and squeezed it hard. He did the same with my other breast, and then both of them together. He squeezed them so hard I was standing on my tiptoes. It hurt like hell, but I didn't say a word. To tell the truth, Tony scared me. Ted pulled my shorts and panties down and played with my pussy while Tony kissed me and teased my titties. I was used to being naked in front of Ted and David, so I didn't get bent out of shape when Ted stripped me in front of his friend. 'Are you ready for some fuckin', bitch' Tony asked me. I don't remember what I said, if I said anything at all. 'Get down on your fuckin' knees, and take out a real man's cock.' I did what he demanded, and when I saw it I nearly fainted. It was bigger than David's and Ted's peters combined. Well, it wasn't that big, but it was a monster. I measured it once, and Tony's peter is nine and a half inches long, and as big around as a beer can. I couldn't get but a little bit of it in my mouth. It was strange, but I both wanted it and feared it."
Abby took a sip from her water bottle. "It didn't dawn on me to object at any of that. Not that it would have mattered much. Tony took me to the bedroom and screwed me. Fortunately I was wet enough that it didn't hurt when he slammed it into me. Tony screwed me for nearly thirty minutes without stopping. I know I had at least a dozen orgasms while he did me. All the while, he called me names and cursed at me. He called me whore, cunt, bitch, and every foul name he could think of. He came in me with such force that I felt it and I came again. While Tony rested, Ted took me, and when Ted was finished, Tony was ready again. I must have had a hundred orgasms while they took turns with me." She looked over at me to see how I was taking it. She looked down at my swelling cock and smiled. "You are really getting aroused at me telling you this, aren't you"
"Yes I am." I admitted. "But I'm having a bit of trouble visualizing my pretty little prudish wife doing all that. Go on with your raunchy story."
"Tony and Ted had been at me for a couple of hours," Abby said. "God, I remember it like it was yesterday. When David came home, he got all bent out of shape. He was really pissed off at Ted for bringing someone else in to share me. I got the impression that David didn't like Tony, who just laughed at him. That didn't help the situation. David demanded that Ted and Tony get out of his apartment. Ted got dressed in a hurry, but Tony took his time. Every once in a while, Tony would look at David and sneer. I'm sure Tony wasn't worried about David doing something, mainly because he was twice as big as David. When Tony was dressed he said to me, 'get your shit, cunt. Let's go.' To this day, I don't know why I did it. I can't remember what my thought processes were, if I even had any thought. I just got dressed, and went with Tony, leaving a pissed-off David standing there. I guess I became Tony's bitch, as he referred to me. I never saw David again except for a glimpse now and then at the store or mall."
"How did you like being Tony's bitch" I asked. Abby didn't answer for a moment she was busy sucking my cock. I pulled her off, because I didn't want to come right then.
"It's like I was some other person," she said when she came up for air. "It wasn't me that was screwing black men. It was some poor demented girl who had lost her freaking mind. None of my family had a clue as to what I was doing. Tony would fuck me when it suited him, or one of the other girls. If he or Ted weren't fucking me, I'd get loaned out to his friends to fuck. There was one period that I didn't even get to put any clothing on for five or six days. It didn't much matter right then because I had already lost my job and flunked out of school. Night and day at least one of them was fucking me. Most of the time it was more than one."
"How long did that last" I asked her. My cock was throbbing again. I should have been appalled, but I wasn't disgusted at all. I still had trouble actually getting a good mental image of what she was telling me.
"Almost two years," Abby said. "When you wrote that you would be coming home in a few months, and that we would get married, I guess I woke up to the reality of what I was doing. To the person I'd become. I got enrolled back in business school, got a job and moved back home."
"I didn't know you moved out of your parents house. How did Tony take your leaving" I asked.
"He was pissed off, but it didn't matter all that much. I wasn't Tony's only bitch. He had three others that I knew about. Two white girls and one black girl. It wasn't like he was going to go without pussy. He hassled me for a few days, and then gave up, and left me alone." I realized that she was crying softly. "You'll never know how hard it's been, living in fear that you would find out about me, and the things I did while your were gone. Just how long have you known"
"David Hawkins made it a point to inform me," I said. "I had only been home a few days when he looked me up. A couple months before we got married, I guess."
"Why didn't you say something"
"Wasn't any reason to. Of course I didn't know about Tony and his gang, or I probably would have. I thought it was just Hawkins and Billings. You know just casual sex."
"I have to wonder what triggered the questions after all this time"
"The way you acted around Bull, for one thing," I admitted. "You seem to come alive. You were oozing sexuality around him." Abby didn't say anything for a few moments.
"I guess being that close to a black man sorta woke something up in me. I'm sorry, Bill. You have to believe that since the day I learned you were really coming home to me, and that we would be a couple, I've been faithful to you. Is this going to change anything for us"
"No...I don't know...Maybe. Look Abby, I'm not pissed that you slept around while I was gone. What does piss me off is the fact that I never got to see any of it. I never got to participate in any of the games. I've tried to picture you with the other men, and I can't get a good mental image of it."
"Are you saying you want to see me with other men Black men" she asked in an astonished tone.
"Yes," I didn't even give my answer a moment's thought. I didn't have to. I don't know how long we talked. Several more hours. Abby and I had one more fuck before sleep over took us. It was a good thing that the next day was Saturday and neither of us had to get up early. ***
It was mid-morning when the phone woke us up. It was Bull Jones.
"You gonna lay in bed all day" he asked. I told him that there were worse ideas. "If you and Abby ain't doing anything special this afternoon, do you want to take a ride with me"
"Where to" I asked.
"I have to go down to Smithville to see a guy. It's not but a hundred or so miles, and I thought we could get lunch, or brunch, since you ain't even out of bed yet. My business won't take long and we can swing back by Smith Lake for a swim. You in" I asked Abby and she said that all she had planned was some house cleaning, and putting it off wasn't a problem. "Great," Bull said when I told him we would go. "Wear your swim suit, 'cause there ain't no place to change at the lake."
Two and a half hours later, after a nice drive in Bulls fancy Town Car and a nice lunch, Abby and I were sitting in the car waiting on Bull to come out from a seedy looking building.
"Did he tell you what he was doing in there' Abby asked.
"No, not a peep." I told her. "Bull always plays it close to his vest."
"Is he a crook I mean...well, I guess that's what I mean."
"I suspect that anything Bull was involved in would be shady at least. Here he comes now." Two black men followed Bull out of the building. One of the men was huge, even compared to Bull. The guy must have weighed three hundred, or maybe three hundred-fifty pounds. They stopped and talked another couple of minutes; shook hands and Bull came to the car.
"Okay, children, let's go play in the water," Bull said getting into the car. "I got a case of beer in a cooler in the trunk, so I think we are ready." He drove out of the parking lot, throwing gravel back toward the building.
"Was your business successful" Abby asked. She was sitting between us in the front seat.
"I think so," Bull answered. "Few little problems to work out, but should be no sweat." He didn't go into any detail, and frankly I wasn't sure I wanted to know details of his business.
Less than an hour later we were at the man-made beach at Smith Lake. Bull and I carried the blankets and cooler down to the sandy beach. It was still early in the season, but there were a lot of people there to swim and work on their tans.
Abby waited until we had got everything moved before she took off her blouse and skirt.
"Son of a bitch!" Bull said. "Abby, you could give a dead man a hard-on."
"Thank you, kind sir," Abby said with a giggle. Her bikini left almost nothing to the imagination. Some string and three tiny wisps of bright red material was all there was to it. When I mentioned how much I like it, and that I hadn't seen it before, she said, "I've been saving it for a special occasion."
The water was freezing cold and caused Abby's nipples to stand out through the material. She and Bull frolicked in the water a long time, but I got out to lie in the sun and warm up. Good ol' Bull never missed an opportunity to grab a feel of her boobs. Once her top slipped and showed one tit to whoever was watching, and there were several people looking at them. I guess they were looking because a stunning white woman was playing with a big burly black man. Or maybe they just wanted to see her tits.
We consumed nearly the whole case of beer when hunger drove us off from the beach. Abby put her little skirt over her bottoms and didn't put her blouse back on. She got a lot of attention when we stopped to eat. Even the waitress paid her a lot of attention. A young pimple-faced busboy cleared a table off near us that needed no cleaning...twice. I could tell Abby was enjoying the attention. ***
We were nearly home and Bull stopped at a convenient store in a strip mall to buy some more beer. Abby and I waited in the car for him. A couple doors down from the store was a lingerie shop. Abby got out and went to window shop. She was still looking in the window when Bull came out. He glanced at Abby and put the beer in the trunk.
"Come on Billy-boy," he called to me "let's see what caught Abby's eye." I got out and joint them at the window.
"Let's go in and look around," Bull said, leading the way. Abby and I followed him. It wasn't a big shop but it was full of naughty nighties and stuff like that.
"I'll make a deal with you," Bull said to Abby, "I'll buy whatever you want if you'll model it for me. That is if Billy-boy is all right with it." I told him it was cool with me.
"You're on, big boy," Abby said laughing. "How much money do you have to spend"
"I can cover anything you want," Bull said. The conversation caught the attention of the saleslady who nearly broke her legs getting to Abby. Thirty minutes later we left the store with several packages. Bull had to fork out three hundred bucks and some change. I told Bull to go back by my shop. If Abby was going to model that stuff, I damned sure wanted to get it on video.
Over the years I tried to get Abby into modeling for the camera, but she always put me off. She didn't appear to be disagreeable to my taping her now.
At home, while Abby went to change I set up the camera where it wouldn't be in the way. I moved the coffee table out of the way and relocated a couple of chairs. I made a perfect runway for the model.
"You sure you're okay with this" Bull asked me. "I don't want you to get weird on me."
"I'm fine with it," I assured him. "This may be your lucky night."
"Really" he said with a smile. "You heard the saying that 'once they go black they don't go back', haven't you"
"She did once," I said. "I'm confidant that she can again." At his quizzical look I gave him a thumbnail story about Abby's adventures while I was gone.
"Now that is interesting," Bull said. "And you're all right with it"
"Yeah," I said. "I'm fine with it. Hell, if I learned anything it's one man can't do justice to one woman. They run at a different speed then we do."
"Amen to that, brother," Bull said with a laugh.
I put some music on the stereo that I thought was appropriate for a modeling show. Abby came out wearing a cobalt blue dressing gown with a matching teddy on under it. She walked around the den, stopped, took off the dressing gown, and made another trip around the room. As she left she told me to get the funeral dirge off the stereo and put something livelier on. So much for my selection.
"Hold on man," Bull said jumping up. "I have the very thing in the car." Pretty soon he was back. I put his CD on which was mostly bass and drums doing a throbbing jungle beat.
Abby came back wearing a neon red outfit which was a negligee and under it she had on matching panties and bra. She looked hot as hell. Both Bull and I applauded. Her next ensemble was a slink black teddy. Her breasts bounced and swayed as she moved to the music. I was sporting a hurting boner, and I knew Bull was also hard.
"I like the music," Abby said "Don't change it. You boys had enough yet"
We quickly assured her that we had not had anywhere enough yet. She laughed as she left us. Her next outfit nearly caused my heart to leap out of my chest. It was a gauzy white drape affair. I'm sure it has a name, but I don't know what. We could catch a glimpse of her breasts when she moved across the room. It was plain to see that she had nothing on under the gauzy material.
Abby came out two more times, and each time she had on less than the time before. Her last change was the bikini she had worn at the lake. Not the top, just the bottoms. She paraded around the room her full breasts swaying with each step.
She came to a stop in front of where Bull was sitting. "So boys, did you like the show"
"Hell yes!" Bull said. "Girl you don't know what you've done to me. Show us the rest."
"Do you mean you want me totally nude" Abby said in a teasing tone. "Wouldn't that make you want to do something to me"
"Dammit bitch," Bull growled, "I already want to fuck your brains out."
For some reason I had zoomed in on Abby's face, and through the viewer finder I saw her eyes blink rapidly when Bull said, "bitch!" I widened back out to catch Abby slipping the bottoms off. If I had any doubt that something was going to happen between her and Bull, I didn't have them any longer. Abby was going to get fucked and nothing on this earth could stop it. I couldn't have stopped it then, even if I had wanted to...which I didn't.
Abby, now totally naked, except for her heels, took a short walk around the room and came back in front of Bull and stopped again, her legs spread wide, hands on her hips. "See anything you like"
Bull didn't answer. He reached out and felt her pussy. He slipped one finger, then two in her wet pussy and with his fingers, pulled her to him. I could hear Abby moan as she fell into his lap. Bull covered her mouth with his, never taking his fingers out of her pussy. With his free hand he was mauling her tit and pulling hard on her nipple.
After about ten minutes of that, Bull let Abby go. She jumped to her feet, gasping for breath, her chest heaving. She grabbed Bulls hands and urged him to get up. When he did, she pulled him toward the bedroom, yelling at me to forget the fucking camera and come on. I did follow, but I took the camera with me. There was no way I wasn't going to tape what was to follow.
I got to the bedroom in time to see Abby tearing at Bulls clothes. They were standing beside our bed. Abby went to her knees as she pulled his pants down. She left them crumpled at his ankles and jerked his boxers down.
"My God, it's beautiful," Abby said breathlessly. "Bill, look at it. Isn't it the most gorgeous thing you have ever seen"
I am sure of my masculinity. I can admit that Bull has a pretty impressive looking cock, but I'll be damned if I'll use the words beautiful or gorgeous. I knew from the past that Bull sported a cock that was almost ten inches long. I knew that it was big in girth also. I knew from our past that when most men were finished, Bull would just be starting. These things that I knew, my sweet little wife would soon find out for herself. I set the video camera up in a corner, and got out of the way myself.
Abby got up and rose up on her tiptoes. Bull bent down and they kissed, long and deep, while she held onto his cock. It looked like she was afraid that it would get away if she let go.
"You want to suck my cock, Abby" Bull asked after the kiss broke. Abby nodded several times, dropped to her knees, and put her mouth on his nearly hard cock. Apparently she had gotten better at sucking large cock since her first experience with Tony Marks. She was getting down on it pretty good. Bull let her work on his cock for a few minutes until it was as hard as it was likely to get. A cock that big doesn't stick straight out like us shorthorns does. Too heavy I guess, but I hadn't thought of it until then.
"How do you want it" Bull asked softly.
"On my back," Abby said laying crossways on the bed. "I want to be under you, and I want to see your eyes when you put it in me." She raised her legs and spread them until her knees were almost to her shoulders.
Bull pulled her out on the bed a little ways, and rubbed his massive rod up and down her slit. I could see that she was wet even from across the room. I moved around, taking the tripod with me so that I could see both their faces. Bull had a half grin on his face and Abby was wide-eyed, and had a look of eager anticipation on hers. Bull was teasing her by putting the head of his cock in her and then withdrawing it. He did that several times.
"Quit fucking around!" Abby said sharply. "Put the damned thing in and fuck me." Bull put the head of his cock back in her pussy and leaned in; putting another two inched in her. Abby's wide eyes got even bigger.
"Want more, Cunt" Bull asked.
"I want it all, you black son of a bitch," Abby hissed. "Give it all to me."
Bull shoved all ten inches into her; she bucked hard, and screamed loudly. He gave her a few seconds to get used to it, and then he started pumping in and out of her. I saw all this through the viewfinder. Bull grabbed her legs and pulled them farther apart and even farther back. That raised her pussy upward, and he kept slamming in and out of her. Abby's face was flushed. Hell, her whole body was flushed. I knew when she came the first time, and even the second, but I lost track after that.
Fifteen minutes after he started fucking my wife, Bull ejaculated in her. When he did he grunted loudly, but kept fucking her. His come was leaking out around the tight ring her cunt formed around his cock. When Bull withdrew, her pussy came out with it some. It looked like she was being turned inside out. Seeing his ebony shaft in her white and pink pussy was the most erotic sight I had ever seen. It was amazing to watch her pinkness turn to bright red as blood engorged her pussy. One of her hands was on Bull's shoulder, urging him on, while the other played with her nipples. She pulled, rubbed, stroked, and pinched her nips. She was grunting and moaning while the big man fucked her. Occasionally she would whimper, and a couple of times cried out for him to keep fucking her. I didn't think he intended on stopping.
Bull pulled completely out of her, a flood of come came gushing out. He rolled her over and relocated her on the bed, and took her doggy fashion. Abby started woofing like the bitch dog she was. Bull was getting even deeper in her in that position. My cock felt like it was about to burst. I left the camera running and took off my clothes. I went to the other side of the bed closest to Abby's head and presented my cock to her. Her eyes were closed, but she latched onto my dick, and started sucking it. With my excitement level and her hard sucking, I didn't last very long. I shot-off in her mouth, she swallowed and kept on sucking. I managed to get my softened dick away from her, and went back to my camera work. ***
I guess it was about midnight when we all had to take a break. I got the tape out and put it in my player. We all watched it, and we all got turned on again. Abby's modeling was hot enough just by itself, but the rest was super hot. I would edit and take out some of the camera jiggling and other distracting things.
"I didn't know I was that vocal," Abby said. She was sitting between Bull and I. None of us had bothered to put anything on after our shower. "My God, I did get that thing in me, didn't I"
"To the balls, sweet thing," Bull said laughing. "Is that the biggest you had"
"Yes it certainly is. I'm not sure I'd want one any bigger, either. I thought Tony Marks was big. You got in places that only my dildo has been." She had both of our dicks in her hands.
"If you ever want a bigger one, let me know," Bull said.
"You know a man with a bigger cock" Abby and I said at almost the same time.
"Yeah, Smokey Joe is bigger. Hell, he's bigger everywhere."
"Who's Smokey Joe" I asked
"How big" Abby asked.
"Smokey is a guy I sometimes do business with," Bull said. "He's about an inch longer but he's a lot bigger around. Only good thing about his cock is that's it smaller at the tip and gets bigger on back. Kinda tapered. Ol' Smokey likes the white gals, but not many are willing to take him on."
The tape had gotten to the part where Bull and I both fucked Abby. I had her ass and Bull was fucking her pussy. If Abby thought she was vocal and loud before... That ended our conversation for a while. Watching it got us all fully recharged. We went back to the bedroom. An hour later I dozed off to the bouncing of the bed as Bull fucked Abby. Their bouncing woke me up.
"Dammit Bull, are you trying to wear my wife's cunt out" I got up, and left them to it. I needed coffee very badly. I'm not very social until I have at least one cup.
Bull and Abby came to the kitchen about a half hour later. Bull had on a pair of boxers and Abby had one of my dress shirts that she hadn't bother to button. Their timing was perfect; I was ready to be social.
"First of all, Billy-boy," Bull said. "You can't wear it out. Just like the worlds fair, it gets bigger and better every year."
"If you say so," I said. "How long did you two go at it"
"All night," Abby said with a tired smile. "Bill, you are the best husband in the whole world." She draped her arms around me from the back and kissed me on the cheek. "That was a blast. Now I'm going back to bed...to sleep. Wake me for lunch."
"Man, she is something else," Bull said. "You are one lucky son of a bitch."
"I know that," I said.
"Having any thoughts about last night" Bull asked.
"Yeah. Lots of thoughts and all sexy. You know something, Bull For some reason I feel like a brand new life has opened up for Abby and me. Some shit that's been hanging out there in the back of my mind is gone."
"Good to hear," Bulls said pulling a chair around sitting across the table from me. "You want to talk a little business"
"Business What kind of business"
"Video business. You ever do any porno"
"Back when I first started I did some. I didn't turn anything down. I even videoed a cockfight one time. Why do you ask"
"Friend of mine is looking to get started in the business. He got a bunch of tape, but he don't know how to edit and polish it up. You know, get it ready to put on the market. I told him you might be interested in making a buck or two."
"If it's only a buck or two, I'm not interested. Any Jackass can point a camera. The real art comes in the editing. It takes a lot of time to do it right. What kind of money are we talking about"
"Five hundred per tape could be arranged."
"Five hundred plus fifty an hour with a max of seven fifty for the finished product. If they send me trash, they'll get trash back. It takes about two hours of raw tape to get an hour flick. The more raw footage they send the better chance I have to get a good movie. Who's your friend"
"Smokey Joe. If he's got a last name I don't know what it is. He'll stand still for seven-fifty. Want to have a face to face"
"Big dick Smokey Joe The dude you told us about last night Sure, put us together. We'll talk."
"This afternoon You want him to come here"
"Yeah, why not We can meet at the shop or here at the house." ***
It was about one o'clock when Abby woke up. She looked a lot better, less exhausted. I heard her stirring around and started making her an omelet.
"And a good morning again." I said when she made her appearance.
"Hi, Sweetheart," she said giving me a kiss. "You made an omelet for me Aren't you something special"
"Indeed I am," I modestly admitted. I served up her meal. "I have to go change. I have a two o'clock meeting at the shop."
"On Saturday" She asked. "Who are you meeting with on your day off"
"A guy Bull knows wants me to do some edit work for him."
"Wait just a minute. Didn't you tell me that anything Bull is involved in is likely crooked"
"No, I said likely shady," I corrected her. "Anyway this isn't Bulls stuff. A guy he knows. Got a bunch of raw footage and he wants me to put it together for him."
"I'll bet raw is right. Porno Bill, I thought you had passed that."
"I have, but this might be some serious money. My name won't be on any of it. When it comes time for the credits, I'll leave my name off."
"You are on your own, chum," Abby said. "I don't want anything to do with porno."
"Fine. I'll just run in, meet with Smokey Joe, make the deal, or not, and be home within an hour."
"Would that be the same Smokey Joe, Bull spoke of last night"
"I suspect it is. How many guys would have that name" I left her and changed my clothes. When I came back, she was standing by the door.
"What" she snapped. "You surely don't think I'd let you go by yourself do you You don't know how to say no. I'll be there to keep you out of trouble." I just won a fifty-dollar bet with myself. ***
Standing close to Smokey Joe, I revised my weight estimate. The big son of a bitch had to weigh at least four hundred pounds. I'm nearly six feet tall, and I had to crane my neck to look up at him. He was nearly seven feet tall. Smokey Joe seemed to be standing a lot closer to me than I was to him. We were in the back room of my shop.
"Nice place you got here," Joe said. He had a soft voice, and barley spoke above a whisper. "Lots of stuff."
"Yeah, thanks. It takes a lot of stuff to make a good video. Bull tells me you have an editing problem."
"Yes, I do," he said glancing at Bull who had taken a seat beside Abby. Abby's mouth was slightly open at the sight of the mountain that moved and spoke. "Are you up to it"
"I think so," I said. "I told Bull that if the raw footage is junk, the final product would likely be junk also. Are your cameramen any good"
"Just fair," Joe said with a grin. "Maybe not that good. Ah...you sure you want your woman in on this discussion"
"Sure, Abby is a big girl. She knows the score. Here the deal, five hundred per movie plus fifty an hour with a max of seven-fifty, and you can't rush me. I only have one speed."
"That's cool man," he said. "Now and again I might get a rush order. I'll expect to pay extra for that. Is that a problem"
"No, not a problem. Are you using professional actors"
"Naw, mostly just whoever we can find. Some of the stuff I do is couples wanting something to spice up their love life. Private stuff, you know I would be mighty pissed off if that shit hit the internet, or anything like that. You get my drift"
"Yeah, I got it. You want me to destroy the raw footage"
"No, I'll pick it up, and take care of it myself. You got any problem with black men fucking white chicks"
"Not if the white chicks don't care," I said. I glanced at Abby and saw her smile slightly. "I won't have anything to do with child porno. If you have an actor that looks young, then send me proof of age, or I'll send the tapes back to you unedited. You have a problem with that"
"Hell no, man. I don't have anything to do with that sick shit. My stuff is mostly one on one, some threesomes, and the occasional gangbang. Got some solo stuff of women with dildos and other gadgets. One with a chick and an eel, but that's about as weird as we get. You think we got a deal"
"I do think we got a deal. When do you want to start"
"Right now. I brought some and I got a room full of tapes back home. You are way behind, man. I brought fifty tapes with me and I'll bring more when you say so."
"Fine, let's go down the street to Murphy's bar and have a drink on it."
Bull, Joe and I carried several boxes of videotapes into the office.
Murphy's, as usual on Saturday afternoon, was crowded, but we managed to find a table in the back after Smokey Joe glared at the lone man sitting there. The guy figured that he could sit at the bar just as well. I didn't blame the guy, if Smokey Joe had glared at me, I'd move, too.
We were on the second round when Abby's curiosity got the best of her.
"I have to ask. A chick and an eel How does that work"
"Simple," Smokey Joe said. "She shoves a live eel up her snatch, and it goes to thrashing around and gets the chick off."
"That must have started back before the battery powered dildo," Bull observed causing us all to laugh. Abby was slightly pink, but that may have been because of close proximity to two large black men.
"Hey Smokey Joe," Bull said. "Ol' Billy-boy made a pretty hot video last night, didn't you Billy-boy"
"Uh oh," Abby said jumping to her feet. "Pee time." She took off for the rest room.
"Tell me about it," Joe said to me.
"White woman, white man, and a black man," I said nonchalantly. "Routine shit."
"No, it wasn't routine," Bull said. "This fuckin' hot gal did a lingerie show to start it off, and then ended up fucking both guys. Hottest shit I ever saw, anywhere."
Joe looked at Bull, and then at me. "You tell me if I'm off base here, but are the actors in that deal sitting pretty close to me Is one of them in the ladies room as we speak"
"Could be," Bull said. "I'm serious Smokey Joe. It was fuckin' hot, and it ain't even been polished, or whatever you call it, yet."
"Any chance I could preview it" Joe asked looking at me. "That's one fine woman you got there."
"Thanks. Maybe," I said. "I'll have to refer the question to a higher authority. I'll ask her when she gets back."
I guess three men looking expectantly at you would cause a question. Abby came back and sat down. "What Why are you looking at me like that"
"Smokey Joe wants to see the video we made last night," Bull said. Bull doesn't beat around the bush much. He goes right to the heart of the subject. I would have slid into the subject a bit more gently. Abby looked at me, back to Bull, then Joe, and back to me. Her face was flushed, but not with embarrassment, I thought.
"Do you think it's a good idea, Bill" she asked. I shrugged, and grinned at her. "I don't guess I care, then."
"Let's get the show on the road," Bull said, jumping to his feet. "Smokey Joe can ride with me, and we'll pickup some beer on the way."
"Are you sure you want to do this" Abby asked me in the car on the way home. "You know what's likely to happen, don't you"
"I have a pretty good idea," I responded. "It's really up to you. You seemed to like one big black cock. Care to try for two"
Abby caressed her breasts through her shirt; "My nipples have been like rocks since I saw that big dude. He's so big it's almost scary. Exciting, but damned scary." She seemed to be having some trouble breathing.
While Abby went to change clothes, for reasons known only to her, I rearranged the furniture in the den. I put the long sofa in front of the TV where the loungers usually were. I reloaded the video camera. The stage was set.
When Bull and Smokey Joe arrived, I set them on the sofa directly in front of the TV. If this editing gig worked out I was going to buy a big screen TV first thing.
"Where's the girl" Bull asked. I told him that I'd go ahead and start the tape, and see if I could find Abby. I found her standing in the bathroom, looking in the mirror. She looked apprehensive.
"What's up" I asked.
"I guess I'm just nervous," she said looking at me from the reflection in the mirror. "I mean what if he doesn't like the video. I'm not an actress or a model, you know."
"I know, but you'll have to admit, you are hot..." Whooping from the den interrupted my thoughts. As soft as his voice was, I could hear Joe yelling.
"Son of a bitch, you were right," Joe said, "Fuckin' hot stuff."
"Does that alleviate your fears" I asked Abby. "You have the quite man yelling. Come on, let's join the party."
"I'll be along in a minute. What should I wear"
"How about that electric blue dressing gown with just you under it You won't have anything on very soon anyway."
"Nothing on under Isn't that being sluttish"
"Yes, it is. You are going to be a slut, aren't you" Abby smiled and came over and planted a big kiss on me.
"Yes I am, I'm going to be your slut. I'm going to let two big black studs fuck me while you watch them. I'll be there in a few minutes."
I got back to the den just as the video was showing Abby coming out topless in the bathing suit.
"Man those tits are great," Joe said. "Say, Bill...what's going to happen here"
"You and me are going to have some white pussy, my friend," Bull said. "What do you think about that"
"I like it," Joe said looking at me. "What does the husband think about it"
"Watch the next part of the video and you'll have your answer," I answered grinning at him. "My wife seems to like black cock."
"Man, I hope she likes mine," Joe said in his soft voice.
A few minutes later Abby came in wearing the blue dressing gown. Bull and Joe moved over so that she could set between them. Her nipples could be seen poking against the shinny blue material. The video had just changed from Abby on Bull's lap to the bedroom.
When the video showed Abby sucking on Bulls hard cock, I heard Smokey Joe give a soft groan. Bull unsnapped the top three snaps of Abby's dressing gown and run his big hand in to her breasts. Then I heard Abby moan. In a few seconds both men had a breast in their hands. Abby was twisting and twitching, and when both men leaned down to take a nipple in their mouth she whimpered.
"Let's take the fuckin' slut to the bedroom," Bull said getting to his feet and pulling Abby to hers. I grabbed the camera and followed the trio.
For a big man, Smokey Joe could sure undress fast. Before Bull got the dressing gown off of Abby, Joe was naked. I'm not an expert on cocks, but Joe's cock looked like it should have guts of it's own. I've read stories about black dudes with giant cocks, but frankly I didn't believe it until that moment when Joe swung around, and I saw what was hanging between his tree-trunk size legs. True, it wasn't much longer than Bull's cock, but it damned sure was bigger around. Abby was going to have her work cutout for her tonight.
"Billy-Boy, she's your whore. You wanna pop her first" Bull asked. "That way she can work her way up to Smokey Joe's cock. We'll get some come in her cunt for lube." That sounded like a plan to me. Abby had just got a good look at Joe's weapon.
"Oh...my...God!" she said loudly. I got my pants and shirt off and approached her. "Bill, I don't know if I can take that thing. Look at the size of it."
"Smaller than a baby's head," I told her. "You can take it, and give him the fuck of a lifetime. Bull and I will get you ready, Sweetheart. You can do it. I want you to"
Abby was so hot she came as I stuck my modest cock in her. I was overly excited, too. It was a good thing I had back up, because I didn't last very long. She whimpered a little as Bull worked his cock in her, but in a few minutes she was flying high as he pounded her pussy. Abby came and came, one climax coming on top of another.
Bull motioned for Joe to get on the bed beside them. Smokey Joe lay down on his back, and Bull literally picked Abby up and put her on Joe's cock. Joe held the monster up and aimed it at her gapping cunt as Bull lowered her onto it.
Abby was sobbing as she eased down on Joe's massive pole. The head of his cock went in, and them another half inch. Slowly, ever so slowly she went a little farther down. She stopped, dead still when she had received about four inches of his cock. That was where his dick widens out to its full girth. Bull was still holding on to her, but he used one hand to massage her clitoris. Abby was moaning and speaking gibberish.
"Come on, Baby," Bull encouraged "You can do it. Give Smokey Joe a good fuck." With his free hand he pushed down on her shoulder. Abby took another few inches. At this point she had about half of his cock in her. Abby started slowly moving up and down on the glistening black rod. Each time she went down she took a little bit more within her. When she rose up I could see that she was stuffed with cock. Bull now had both hands on her upper arms helping her move up and down.
Suddenly Abby screeched loudly. Bull had pushed her all the way down on Joes's cock. They all froze in place for several minutes. There was no sound except the heavy breathing of Joe and Abby.
After a time, Abby started to move just a little. It was more like a twitch. I moved around using my hand held camera. Abby's eyes were closed tight and there was a look of pain around her mouth. Even as I watched and taped her, I could see the look of pain change to pleasure. She started to move more and more. Up and down farther and farther until she was riding his cock nearly it's full length.
"Oh, God! I'm stuffed full of his cock, Bill. I can feel his cock hitting my cervix," Abby said loudly. "I'm fucking him! Can you see me"
"I can see it," I said. Her eyes opened, and she had to blink a few time to focus. Then she smiled at me.
"Fuck! You can't believe how full I am!" there was a catch in her voice. She picked up the tempo, riding Joe's cock harder. She was moaning and sobbing as Joe now had his huge hands on her hips helping her rise and fall as she bounced on his mighty cock. Abby was repeatedly climaxing.
After several minutes Abby lost the energy to move herself up and down. Joe and Bull did it for her. I'm not sure at what point Abby passed out. I think she fainted before they stopped fucking her with Joes cock. They used Joe's cock like some kind of fucking device.
Abby recovered quickly and literally crawled back on the horse. She fucked Bull first and then Joe again. The second time with Ol' Smokey Joe, she managed to stay conscious. I may have lost count, but I think they each fucked her four times. I managed to get in one more session with her. I don't know if it was my imagination or not, but her pussy felt hotter than it ever had. I know it was looser, but I knew it would go back to its normal size after the large objects she had been fucked with had been out a while.
Abby respectfully refused Joe's offer to ass fuck her. She didn't think she was ready for that yet. She did manage to take Bull's cock in her ass.
It was shortly after midnight when Abby kissed both of them on the lips and their cock knobs and hustled them out the door. No longer needing to suppress her interracial sexual desire after a four-year hiatus left Abby totally fucked out and me without any qualms over our open marriage thanks to the unexpected reunion with Bull Jones.
NOTE: Did you remember to bookmark this page so you can find it again?

Cornerback who became a backup with the Green Bay Packers in 2011. He was selected in the fourth round by the Packers with the 131st overall pick.
He was an all-league selection in football, baseball and track athlete at Palmdale High School.
He was a First-team All-WAC selection during his 2009 and 2010 seasons at New Mexico State University.
He was born to Kevin and Sheltne House. He has a brother named Tyreace and a sister named Vanessa.
He played alongside veteran defensive back Charles Woodson during his rookie and sophomore seasons at the Green Bay Packers.

I would be willing to sacrifice anything material if my son *for example* had longed for something that could make him happy. For example, I'd sell my condo or all the things it has taken me lots of years to collect for him to go to his college of choice, or to help him (for example) get his first car to transport himself back and forth idependently. I wouldn't, however, enable my son by spoiling him through my own sacrifices. I would do it, however, if it is something he really wants AND needs at the same time.
I would not want my wife to give up her most treasured possession so as to buy something for me the way Della does for Jim. I think that I would feel selfish if I enjoyed something that she had gotten by giving up what she most prizes.
I think that people who are truly in love don't need to have their partners/spouses buy them things to prove their love. I would not want my wife to feel like she had to give up something important to buy me something when she can just prove she loves me by being who she is every day.
So I don't know if it's wise -- but I wouldn't want my wife to feel I would want her to do that.
The irony in 'the short story 'The Gift Of The Magi' by O Henry would put me off from surprise presents between spouses! The wife gives up her hair to buy her beloved husband a gift she thinks he would really love. He puts a similar amount of thought and effort into getting her present - the irony is that she needs her hair in order to make any use of it, or to enjoy the hair combs at all. So I think complete surprises are out! I would enlist the help of friends, his work colleagues and family to guess at the most wanted present - and at my own. I would probably even double-check with him before parting with any money i couldn't refund! At least one could say about O Henry's story that hair grows again.
I would gladly give up a treasured possession (unless it was given to me by a departed loved one) if it meant my husband could enjoy a meaningful present from me. However, I would NOT want him to give up one of his most prized possessions just to get me something I'd love, and I'm pretty sure he would feel the same way. I would say that giving up a treasured possession is unwise, although it is one of the ultimate ways in which a person can show their love and devotion to another. What greater example of true love is there than sacrifice? Of course, it would definitely stink to find out that we had both given up our prized possessions in order for the other to enjoy something related to said prized possessions. Gotta love O. Henry and his use of irony!
It would be foolish to give up your most treasured possession for anything other than what is treasured more.
If the joy of loving someone, of serving him or her by buying buying something meaningful, is more valuable than the possession you give up in the process, then it is definitely a profitable deal.
If the joy of giving does not more than make up for the loss of giving up, then it will definitely be unwise to exchange a treasured possession with something less valuable.
I believe this is the central theme of the story Gift of the Magi. The joy of giving and receiving present from each other was much more valuable for the Magi, than the physical utility of the objects presented. Please note that O'Henry uses the term "greatest treasure of their house" to describe the objects they sacrificed. He does not describe them the most treasure possession of the Magi. Their most treasure possession was, of course, their love for each other.
I believe that the depth of loving a human being is about self sacrifice. Parents often forgo having something special that they really want in order to provide for their children.
My husband wanted to go to college, but we had small children. He knew how badly I needed to get my education. I felt like I was nothing without it. My self-esteem was low. He stayed home at night with our children while I attended classes. We scraped money to pay for classes over seas so I could even take some on the German economy. It was a long hard struggle.
The day that I graduated I realized just how much he had sacrificed for me. I could never be able to repay the gift. Since then he has obtained his education, but he did so much for me.
My grandmother and mother during World War II were in hiding from the Nazis. My grandfather had been placed in a concentration camp. They had the opportunity to escape from the country. My grandmother and mother refused to leave. They wanted to be nearby should my grandfather get freed. They knew they were risking their own lives, but they also knew that he would have never left them.
When the camps were freed they searched hard to find my grandfather. Their efforts paid off. He thought they had gone to another country. I remember my granmother tellig me that they had suffered greatly but the sacrifice had been worth it. She told me that even if he had died it would have been worth it because she had been loyal to him.
I only hope that I could be so self sacrificing for those I love.

Recently my wife and I stepped into a new wine shop in a town near where we live. The shop was very small and we were the only patrons. The young lady minding the store was friendly and talkative. We chatted about various wines and about the fact that in our state people tend to favor beverages with names like Bud and Coors over Merlot and Chardonnay. As the conversation drifted away from wine, the young lady, Kate was her name, told us that her fiancé owned the shop but he was occupied that day with his primary job. Her summers were free because she taught at a local elementary school. My wife then mentioned that we homeschool our three boys.
I’m always interested to watch the reaction of people when they learn this fact. Quite often the response is enthusiastic. Once my neighbor sadly shook his head and told me that my wife and I were lucky that we were educated enough to teach our kids at home and keep them out of the local schools. Kate, for her part, smiled and nodded and then she asked the question that I sometimes think has been put to rest but for some reason lingers on as one of the central criticisms of homeschooling: “What about their socialization?” [Read more...]

AURTHUR HAS BEEN ADOPTED!
Aurthur born December 2007, is a sweet and charismatic child. He is often a class clown and enjoys making people laugh. Aurthur loves football because he is very bad. He also is very good at math and is currently enrolled in an honors math class. He’s very good with numbers and usually makes good grades on his academics. He loves lions and his favorite food is wings. He would like to be enrolled in the military when he graduates from school. He states that he has his own hero. He views adoption as a place to be safe and loved. Aurthur loves all things Fortnite and is very good at the game. He is described as friendly and outgoing. He can also be very helpful around the home. He makes friends easily and he gets along with other children. He is excited about finding a forever family that will provide him with love and nurturance.

|ESPN.com: College Football||[Print without images]|
“Bowden, who guided the Seminoles to national championships in 1993 and 1999, said his wife, Ann, their children and his doctors were the only people who were aware of his condition. He never told then-FSU president T.K. Wetherell or then-athletics director Dave Hart that he had cancer. Wetherell, who resigned as FSU's president in 2010, was diagnosed with prostate cancer in 2003. "I never said anything about it," Bowden said. "I never made a big deal out of telling the [FSU] president or athletics director." Bowden said he decided to reveal his health scare now to raise awareness about prostate cancer, which inflicts about one in six men. He is serving as a spokesman for the On The Line campaign, a cancer education initiative, which encourages men to talk to their doctors about prostate cancer. ESPN college football analyst Kirk Herbstreit, ESPN men's basketball analyst Digger Phelps and ESPN reporter Erin Andrews are also spokespersons for the campaign. September is National Prostate Cancer Awareness Month. "I'm glad to do it because I've been through it," Bowden said. "They wanted someone who had been through it, and I'm a survivor. It inflicts more men than breast cancer inflicts women, but men don't talk about it. I'm trying to make people more aware of it. Men need to talk to their doctors." Bowden said an annual physical saved his life. "I feel good," Bowden said. "If the doctors hadn't told me I had it, I probably would have never known." Dr. Joseph L. Camps Jr., who was a defensive back and senior captain on Bowden's first team at Florida State in 1976, completed the brachytherapy procedure on Bowden at Tallahassee Memorial Hospital in April 2007. "We took him to surgery in the middle of the night and shut down a wing of the hospital," said Camps, who also is a member of Florida State's Board of Trustees. "We identified him as 'Robert B' and then treated him through outpatient treatment." Camps said he was grateful Bowden didn't suffer complications from the procedure because he wanted his former coach's condition to remain private. "I was so happy because he didn't want it publicized at the time," Camps said. "I felt very confident that we could do the procedure. I just didn't want any complications. I didn't want people wondering where he was or if he was having problems. He didn't turn a hair, and I was very happy with it. That just made everything better." Current Florida State coach Jimbo Fisher, who worked as Bowden's offensive coordinator in 2007, said he never knew Bowden was sick. "I had no idea," said Fisher, who replaced Bowden as FSU's coach in 2010. "He never said anything to the staff. I had no idea anything was wrong with him. I wish I had known because I care about the man." Camps said Bowden, who also suffers from Type 2 diabetes, otherwise is in very good health. Bowden has spent the past two years traveling the country publicizing his recent memoir, "Called To Coach," and speaking to Fellowship of Christian Athletes groups and other organizations. Bowden, whose 377 career victories rank second among major college football coaches, will get to coach in one more game. Bowden and Florida Atlantic coach Howard Schnellenberger will coach in the inaugural Battle of Florida North vs. South Collegiate All-Star Game at Florida Atlantic Stadium on Jan. 21. "He's done very well," Camps said. "He's in remarkable health and he's really healthy." Mark Schlabach is a college football writer for ESPN.com.
They wanted someone who had been through it, and I'm a survivor. ... I'm trying to make people more aware of it. Men need to talk to their doctors.” -- Bobby Bowden, on serving
as cancer awareness spokesman

When I first lived in Hanoi I had a regular Xe ôm driver. His name was Dương. He drove me on his ancient Honda 50cc all over the city over a period of months. I'd visted his home, had tea with his mother, we ocassionally shared Bia hơi together, he recommended street stalls for me and, most importantly, he knew my routine. I didn't need to book him, he always arrived on time, waiting there on the pavement ready to take me to work.
Then one day, he didn't. The day after he didn't show up, I moved house, my worked changed, my routine likewise. I never saw Dương again. I've no idea what happened to him and there was no way I'd ever find his home again down that rabbit warren he took me along in a part of town alien to me.
This is before mobile phones were commonplace in Vietnam, pagers never really caught on as they did in South Korea and Japan. The Internet was for the very, very select few in the government. In fact, in 1997, you could only have an exceptionally basic, and expensive, dial up email service at home. Email was limited to small messages. Anthing over a certain number of kilobytes was simply too large for the network to handle and it was rejected. As far as I remember, Internet for home users didn't exist until at least 2000.
I doubt there's any way I would lose touch with a regular Xe ôm driver these days. Even if I wanted to.

|This photo album made with Smilebox|
Friday, May 28, 2010
Wednesday, May 26, 2010
So we had a MASSIVE hailstorm here. It was quite exciting. Being the storm chaser that I am (well on the inside at least) I was upstairs taking photos while the sirens were going off. I got some good photos and sent them into our local news station. They called me and had a 'live' interview with me over the phone. It was SO cool. Check it out.

About a Year and half after I had entertain'd these Notions, and by long musing, had as it were resolved them all into nothing, for want of an Occasion to put them in Execution, I was surpriz'd one Morning early, with seeing no less than five Canoes all on Shore together on my side the Island; and the People who belong'd to them all landed, and out of my sight: The Number of them broke all my Measures, for seeing so many, and knowing that they always came four or six, or sometimes more in a Boat, I could not tell what to think of it, Or how to take my Measures, to attack Twenty or Thirty Men single handed; so I lay still in my Castle, perplex'd and discomforted: However I put my self into all the same Postures for an Attack that I had formerly provided, and was just ready for Action, if any Thing had presented; having waited a good while, listening to hear if they made any Noise; at length being very impatient, I set my Guns at the Foot of my Ladder, and clamber'd up to the Top of the Hill, by my two Stages as usual; standing so however that my Head did not appear above the Hill, so that they could not perceive me by any Means; here I observ'd by the help of my Perspective Glass, that they were no less than Thirty in Number, that they had a Fire kindled, that they had had Meat dress'd. How they had cook'd it, that I knew not, or what it was; but they were all Dancing in I know not how many barbarous Gestures and Figures, their own Way, round the Fire. While I was thus looking on them, I perceived by my Perspective, two miserable Wretches dragg'd from the Boats, where it seems they were laid by, and were now brought out for the Slaughter. I perceived one of them immediately fell, being knock'd down, I suppose with a Club or Wooden Sword, for that was their way, and two or three others were at work immediately cutting him open for their Cookery, while the other Victim was left standing by himself, till they should be ready for him. In that very Moment this poor Wretch seeing himself a little at Liberty, Nature inspir'd him with Hopes of Life, and he started away from them, and ran with incredible Swiftness along the Sands directly towards me, I mean towards that part of the Coast, where my Habitation was.
I was dreadfully frighted, (that I must acknowledge) when I perceived him to run my Way; and especially, when as I thought I saw him pursued by the whole Body, and now I expected that part of my Dream was coming to pass, and that he would certainly take shelter in my Grove; but I could not depend by any means upon my Dream for the rest Of it, (viz.) that the other Savages would not pursue him thither, and find him there. However I kept my Station, and my Spirits began to recover, when I found that there was not above three Men that follow'd him, and still more was I encourag'd, when I found that he outstrip'd them exceedingly in running, and gain'd Ground of them, so that if he could but hold it for half an Hour, I saw easily he would fairly get away from them all.
There was between them and my Castle, the Creek which I mention'd often at the first part of my Story, when I landed my Cargoes out of the Ship; and this I saw plainly, he must necessarily swim over, or the poor Wretch would be taken there: But when the Savage escaping came thither, he made nothing of it, tho' the Tide was then up, but plunging in, swam thro' in about Thirty Strokes or thereabouts, landed and ran on with exceeding Strength and Swiftness; when the Three Persons came to the Creek, I found that Two of them could Swim, but the Third cou'd not, and that standing on the other Side, he look'd at the other, but went no further; and soon after went softly back again, which as it happen'd, was very well for him in the main.
I observ'd, that the two who swam, were yet more than twice as long swimming over the Creek, as the Fellow was, that fled from them: It came now very warmly upon my Thoughts, and indeed irresistibly, that now was my Time to get me a Servant, and perhaps a Companion, or Assistant; and that I was call'd plainly by Providence to save this poor Creature's Life; I immediately run down the Ladders with all possible Expedition, fetches my two Guns, for they were both but at the Foot of the Ladders, as I observ'd above; and getting up again, with the same haste, to the Top of the Hill, I cross'd toward the Sea; and having a very short Cut, and all down Hill, clapp'd my self in the way, between the Pursuers, and the Pursu'd; hallowing aloud to him that fled, who looking back, was at first perhaps as much frighted at me, as at them; but I beckon'd with my Hand to him, to come back; and in the mean time, I slowly advanc'd towards the two that follow'd; then rushing at once upon the foremost, I knock'd him down with the Stock of my Piece I was loath to fire, because 1 would not have the rest hear; though at that distance, it would not have been easily heard, and being out of Sight of the Smoke too, they wou'd not have easily known what to make of it: Having knock'd this Fellow down, the other who pursu'd with him stopp'd, as if he had been frighted; and I advanc'd a-pace towards him; but as I came nearer, I perceiv'd presently, he had a Bow and Arrow, and was fitting it to shoot at me; so I was then necessitated to shoot at him first, which I did, and kill'd him at the first Shoot; the poor Savage who fled, but had stopp'd; though he saw both his Enemies fallen, and kill'd, as he thought; yet was so frighted with the Fire, and Noise of my Piece, that he stood Stock still, and neither came forward or went backward, tho' he seem'd rather enclin'd to fly still, than to come on; I hollow'd again to him, and made Signs to come forward, which he easily understood, and came a little way, then stopp'd again, and then a little further, and stopp'd again, and I cou'd then perceive that he stood trembling, as if he had been taken Prisoner, and had just been to be kill'd, as his two Enemies were; I beckon'd him again to come to me, and gave him all the Signs of Encouragement that I could think of, and he came nearer and nearer, kneeling down every Ten or Twelve steps in token of acknowledgement for my saving his Life: I smil'd at him, and look'd pleasantly, and beckon'd to him to come still nearer; at length he came close to me, and then he kneel'd down again, kiss'd the Ground, and laid his Head upon the Ground, and taking me by the Foot, set my Foot upon his Head; this it seems was in token of swearing to be my Slave for ever; I took him up, and made much of him, and encourag'd him all I could. But there was more work to do yet, for I perceived the Savage who I knock'd down, was not kill'd, but stunn'd with the blow, and began to come to himself; so I pointed to him, and showing him the Savage, that he was not dead; upon this he spoke some Words to me, and though I could not understand them, yet I thought they were pleasant to hear, for they were the first sound of a Man's Voice, that I had heard, my own excepted, for above Twenty Five Years. But there was no time for such Reflections now, the Savage who was knock'd down recover'd himself so far, as to sit up upon the Ground, and I perceived that my Savage began to be afraid; but when I saw that, I presented my other Piece at the Man, as if I would shoot him, upon this my Savage, for so I call him now, made a Motion to me to lend him my Sword, which hung naked in a Belt by my side; so I did: he no sooner had it, but he runs to his Enemy, and at one blow cut off his Head as cleaverly, no Executioner in Germany, could have done it sooner or better; which I thought very strange, for one who 1 had Reason to believe never saw a Sword in his Life before, except their own Wooden Swords; however it seems, as I learn'd afterwards, they make their Wooden Swords so sharp, so heavy, and the Wood is so hard, that they will cut off Heads even with them, ay and Arms, and that at one blow too; when he had done this, he comes laughing to me in Sign of Triumph, and brought me the Sword again, and with abundance of Gestures which I did not understand, laid it down with the Head of the Savage, that he had kill'd just before me.
But that which astonish'd him most, was to know how I had kill'd the other Indian so far off, so pointing to him, he made Signs to me to let him go to him, so I bad him go, as well as I could, when he came to him, he stood like one amaz'd, looking at him, turn'd him first on one side, then on t'other, look'd at the Wound the Bullet had made, which it seems was just in his Breast, where it had made a Hole, and no great Quantity of Blood had follow'd, but he had bled inwardly, for he was quite dead; He took up his Bow, and Arrows, and came back, so I turn'd to go away, and beckon'd to him to follow me, making Signs to him, that more might come after them.
Upon this he sign'd to me, that he should bury them with Sand, that they might not be seen by the rest if they follow'd; and so I made Signs again to him to do so; he fell to Work, and in an instant he had scrap'd a Hole in the Sand, with his Hands, big enough to bury the first in, and then dragg'd him into it, and cover'd him, and did so also by the other; I believe he had bury'd them both in a Quarter of an Hour; then calling him away, I carry'd him not to my Castle, but quite away to my Cave, on the farther Part of the Island; so I did not let my Dream come to pass in that Part, viz. That he came into my Grove for shelter.
Here I gave him Bread, and a Bunch of Raisins to eat, and a Draught of Water, which I found he was indeed in great Distress for, by his Running; and having refresh'd him, I made Signs for him to go lie down and sleep; pointing to a Place where I had laid a great Parcel of Rice Straw, and a Blanket upon it, which 1 used to sleep upon my self some times; so the poor Creature laid down, and went to sleep.
He was a comely handsome Fellow, perfectly well made; with straight strong Limbs, not too large; tall and well shap'd, and as I reckon, about twenty six Years of Age. He had a very good Countenance, not a fierce and surly Aspect; but seem'd to have something very manly in his Face, and yet he had all the Sweetness and Softness of an European in his Countenance too, especially when he smil'd. His Hair was long and black, not curl'd like Wool; his Forehead very high, and large, and a great Vivacity and sparkling Sharpness in his Eyes. The Colour of his Skin was not quite black, but very tawny; and yet not of an ugly yellow nauseous tawny, as the Brasilians, and Virginians, and other Natives of America are; but of a bright kind of a dun olive Colour, that had in it something very agreeable; tho' not very easy to describe. His Face was round, and plump; his Nose small, not flat like the Negroes, a very good Mouth, thin Lips, and his line Teeth well set, and white as Ivory. After he had slumber'd, rather than slept, about half an Hour, he wak'd again, and comes out of the Cave to me; for I had been milking my Goats, which I had in the Enclosure just by: When he espy'd me, he came running to me, laying himself down again upon the Ground, with all the possible Signs of an humble thankful Disposition, making a many antick Gestures show it: At last he lays his Head flat upon the Ground, close to my Foot, and sets my other Foot upon his Head, as he had done before; and after this, made all the Signs to me of Subjection, Servitude, and Submission imaginable, to let me know, how he would serve me as long as he liv'd; I understood him in many Things, and let him know, I was very well pleas'd with him; in a little Time I began to speak to him, and teach him to speak to me; and first, I made him know his Name should be Friday, which was the Day I sav'd his Life; I call'd him so for the Memory of the Time; I likewise taught him to say Master, and then let him know, that was to be my Name; I likewise taught him to say, YES, and No, and to know the Meaning of them; I gave him some Milk, in an earthen Pot, and let him see me Drink it before him, and sop my Bread in it; and I gave him a Cake of Bread, to do the like, which he quickly comply'd with, and made Signs that it was very good for him.
I kept there with him all that Night; but as soon as it was Day, I beckon'd to him to come with me, and let him know, I would give him some Cloaths, at which he seem'd very glad, for he was stark naked: As we went by the Place where he had bury'd the two Men, he pointed exactly to the Place, and shew'd me the Marks that he had made to find them again, making Signs to me, that we should dig them up again, and eat them; at this I appear'd very angry, express'd my Abhorrence of it, made as if I would vomit at the Thoughts of it, and beckon'd with my Hand to him to come away, which he did immediately, with great Sub mission. I then led him up to the Top of the Hill, to see if his Enemies were gone; and pulling out my Glass, I look'd, and saw plainly the Place where they had been, but no appearance of them, or of their Canoes; so that it was plain they were gone, and had left their two Comrades behind them, without any search after them.
But I was not content with this Discovery; but having now more Courage, and consequently more Curiosity, I takes my Man Friday with me, giving him the Sword in his Hand, with the Bow and Arrows at his Back, which I found he could use very dextrously, making him carry one Gun for me, and I two for my self, and away we march'd to the Place, where these Creatures had been; for I had a Mind now to get some fuller Intelligence of them: When I came to the Place, my very Blood ran chill in my Veins, and my Heart sunk within me, at the Horror of the Spectacle: indeed it was a dreadful Sight, at least it was so to me; though Friday made nothing of it: The Place was cover'd with humane Bones, the Ground dy'd with their Blood, great Pieces of Flesh left here and there, half eaten, mangl'd and scorch'd; and in short, all the Tokens of the triumphant Feast they had been making there, after a Victory over their Enemies; I saw three Skulls, five Hands, and the Bones of three or four Legs and Feet, and abundance of other Parts of the Bodies; and Friday, by his Signs, made me under stand, that they brought over four Prisoners to feast upon; that three of them were eaten up, and that he, pointing to himself, was the fourth: That there had been a great Battle between them, and their next King, whose Subjects it seems he had been one of; and that they had taken a great Number of Prisoners, all which were carry'd to several Places by those that had taken them in the Fight, in order to feast upon them, as was done here by these Wretches upon those they brought hither.
I caus'd Friday to gather all the Skulls, Bones, Flesh, and whatever remain'd, and lay them together on a Heap, and make a great Fire upon it, and burn them all to Ashes: I found Friday had still a hankering Stomach after some of the Flesh, and was still a Cannibal in his Nature; but I discover'd so much Abhorrence at the very Thoughts of it, and at the least Appearance of it, that he durst not discover it; for I had by some Means let him know, that I would kill him if he offer'd it.
When we had done this, we came back to our Castle, and there I fell to work for my Man Friday; and first of all, I gave him a pair of Linnen Drawers, which I had out of the poor Gunners Chest I mention'd, and which I found in the Wreck; and which with a little Alteration fitted him very well; then I made him a Jerkin of Goat's-skin, as well as my Skill would allow; and I was now grown a tollerable good Taylor; and I gave him a Cap, which I had made of a Hare-skin, very convenient, and fashionable enough; and thus he was cloath'd for the present, tollerably well; and was mighty well pleas'd to see himself almost as well cloath'd as his Master: It is true, he went awkardly in these Things at first; wearing the Drawers was very awkard to him, and the Sleeves of the Wastcoat gall'd his Shoulders, and the inside of his Arms; but a little easing them where he com plain'd they hurt him, and using himself to them, at length he took to them very well.
The next Day after I came home to my Hutch with him, I began to consider where I should lodge him, and that I might do well for him, and yet be perfectly easy my self; I made a little Tent for him in the vacant Place between my two Fortifications, in the inside of the last, and in the outside of the first; and as there was a Door, or Entrance there into my Cave, I made a formal fram'd Door Case, and a Door to it of Boards, and set it up in the Passage, a little within the Entrance; and causing the Door to open on the inside, I barr'd it up in the Night, taking in my Ladders too; so that Friday could no way come at me in the inside of my innermost Wall, without making so much Noise in getting over, that it must needs waken me; for my first Wall had now a compleat Roof over it of long Poles, covering all my Tent, and leaning up to the side of the Hill, which was again laid cross with smaller Sticks instead of Laths, and then thatch'd over a great Thickness, with the Rice Straw, which was strong like Reeds; and at the Hole or Place which was left to go in or out by the Ladder, I had plac'd a kind of Trap-door, which if it had been attempted on the outside, would not have open'd at all, but would have fallen down, and made a great Noise; and as to Weapons, I took them all to my Side every Night.
But I needed none of all this Precaution; for never Man had a more faithful, loving, sincere Servant, than Friday was to me; without Passions, Sullenness or Designs, perfectly oblig'd and engag'd; his very Affections were ty'd to me, like those of a Child to a Father; and I dare say, he would have sacrific'd his Life for the saving mine, upon any occasion whatsoever; the many Testimonies he gave me of this, put it out of doubt, and soon convinc'd me, that I needed to use no Precautions, as to my Safety on his Account.
This frequently gave me occasion to observe, and that with wonder, that however it had pleas'd God, in his Providence, and in the Government of the Works of his Hands, to take from so great a Part of the World of his Creatures, the best uses to which their Faculties, and the Powers of their Souls are adapted; yet that he has bestow'd upon them the same Powers, the same Reason, the same Affections, the same Sentiments of Kindness and Obligation, the same Passions and Resentments of Wrongs, the same Sense of Gratitude, Sincerity, Fidelity, and all the Capacities of doing Good, and receiving Good, that he has given to us; and that when he pleases to offer to them Occasions of exerting these, they are as ready, nay, more ready to apply them to the right Uses for which they were bestow'd, than we are; and this made me very melancholly sometimes, in reflecting as the several Occasions presented, how mean a Use we make of all these, even though we have these Powers enlighten'd by the great Lamp of Instruction, the Spirit of God, and by the Knowledge of his Word, added to our Understanding; and why it has pleas'd God to hide the like saving Knowledge from so many Millions of Souls, who if I might judge by this poor Savage, would make a much better use of it than we did.
From hence, I sometimes was led too far to invade the Soveraignty of Providence, and as it were arraign the Justice of so arbitrary a Disposition of Things, that should hide that Light from some, and reveal it to others, and yet expect a like Duty from both: But I shut it up, and check'd my Thoughts with this Conclusion, (1st.) That we did not know by what Light and Law these should be Condemn'd; but that as God was necessarily, and by the Nature of his Being, infinitely Holy and Just, so it could not be, but that if these Creatures were all sentenc'd to Absence from himself, it was on account of sinning against that Light which, as the Scripture says, was a Law to themselves, and by such Rules as their Consciences would acknowledge to be just, tho' the Foundation was not discover'd to us: And (2d.) that still as we are all the Clay in the Hand of the Potter, no Vessel could say to him, Why hast thou form'd me thus?
But to return to my New Companion; I was greatly delighted with him, and made it my Business to teach him every Thing, that was proper to make him useful, handy, and helpful; but especially to make him speak, and under stand me when I spake, and he was the aptest Schollar that ever was, and particularly was so merry, so constantly diligent, and so pleased, when he cou'd but understand me, or make me understand him, that it was very pleasant to me to talk to him; and now my Life began to be so easy, that I began to say to my self, that could I but have been safe from more Savages, I cared not, if I was never to remove from the place while I lived.
After I had been two or three Days return'd to my Castle, I thought that, in order to bring Friday off from his horrid way of feeding, and from the Relish of a Cannibal's Stomach, I ought to let him taste other Flesh; so I took him out with me one Morning to the Woods: I went indeed intending to kill a Kid out of my own Flock, and bring him home and dress it. But as I was going, I saw a She Goat lying down in the Shade, and two young Kids sitting by her; I catch'd hold of Friday, hold says I, stand still; and made Signs to him not to stir, immediately I presented my Piece, shot and kill'd one of the Kids. The poor Creature who had at a Distance indeed seen me kill the Savage his Enemy, but did not know, or could imagine how it was done, was sensibly surpriz'd, trembled, and shook, and look'd so amaz'd, that I thought he would have sunk down. He did not see the Kid I shot at, or perceive I had kill'd it, but ripp'd up his Wastcoat to feel if he was not wounded, and as I found, presently thought I was resolv'd to kill him; for he came and kneel'd down to me, and embraceing my Knees, said a great many Things I did not understand; but I could easily see that the meaning was to pray me not to kill him.
I soon found a way to convince him that I would do him no harm, and taking him up by the Hand laugh'd at him, and pointed to the Kid which I had kill'd, beckoned to him to run and fetch it, which he did; and while he was wondering and looking to see how the Creature was kill'd, I loaded my Gun again, and by and by I saw a great Fowl like a Hawk sit upon a Tree within Shot; so to let Friday understand a little what I would do, I call'd him to me again, pointed at the Fowl which was indeed a Parrot, tho' I thought it had been a Hawk, I say pointing to the Parrot, and to my Gun, and to the Ground under the Parrot, to let him see I would make it fall, I made him understand that I would shoot and kill that Bird; accordingly I fir'd and bad him look, and immediately he saw the Parrot fall, he stood like one frighted again, notwithstanding all I had said to him; and I found he was the more amaz'd, because he did not see me put any Thing into the Gun; but thought that there must be some wonderful Fund of Death and Destruction in that Thing, able to kill Man, Beast, Bird, or any Thing near, or far off; and the Astonishment this created in him was such, as could not wear off for a long Time; and I believe, if I would have let him, he would have worshipp'd me and my Gun: As for the Gun it self, he would not so much as touch it for several Days after; but would speak to it, and talk to it, as if it had answer'd him, when he was by himself; which, as I afterwards learn'd of him, was to desire it not to kill him.
Well, after his Astonishment was a little over at this, I pointed to him to run and fetch the Bird I had shot, which he did, but stay'd some Time; for the Parrot not being quite dead, was flutter'd away a good way off from the Place where she fell; however, he found her, took her up, and brought her to me; and as I had perceivd his Ignorance about the Gun before, I took this Advantage to charge the Gun again, and not let him see me do it, that 1 might be ready for any other Mark that might present; but nothing more offer'd at that Time; so I brought home the Kid, and the same Evening I took the Skin off, and cut it out as well as I could; and having a Pot for that purpose, I boil'd, or stew'd some of the Flesh, and made some very good Broth; and after I had begun to eat some, I gave some to my Man, who seem'd very glad of it, and lik'd it very well; but that which was strangest to him, was, to see me eat Salt with it; he made a Sign to me, that the Salt was not good to eat, and putting a little into his own Mouth, he seem'd to nauseate it, and would spit and sputter at it, washing his Mouth with fresh Water after it; on the other hand, I took some Meat in my Mouth without Salt, and I pretended to spit and sputter for want of Salt, as fast as he had done at the Salt; but it would not do, he would never care for Salt with his Meat, or in his Broth; at least not a great while, and then but a very little.
Having thus fed him with boil'd Meat and Broth, I was resolv'd to feast him the next Day with roasting a Piece of the Kid; this 1 did by hanging it before the Fire, in a String, as I had seen many People do in England, setting two Poles up, one on each side the Fire, and one cross on the Top, and tying the String to the Cross-stick, letting the Meat turn continually: This Friday admir'd very much; but when he came to taste the Flesh, he took so many ways to tell me how well he lik'd it, that I could not but understand him; and at last he told me he would never eat Man's Flesh any more, which I was very glad to hear.
The next Day I set him to work to beating some Corn out, and sifting it in the manner I us'd to do, as I observ'd before and he soon understood how to do it as well as I, especially after he had seen what the Meaning of it was, and that it was to make Bread of; for after that I let him see me make my Bread, and bake it too, and in a little Time Friday was able to do all the Work for me, as well as I could do it my self.
I begun now to consider, that having two Mouths to feed, instead of one, I must provide more Ground for my Harvest, and plant a larger Quantity of Corn, than I us'd to do; so I mark'd out a larger Piece of Land, and began the Fence in the same Manner as before, in which Friday not only work'd very willingly, and very hard; but did it very chearfully, and I told him what it was for; that it was for Corn to make more Bread, because he was now with me, and that I might have enough for him, and my self too: He appear'd very sensible of that Part, and let me know, that he thought I had much more Labour upon me on his Account, than I had for my self; and that he would work the harder for me, if I would tell him what to do.
This was the pleasantest Year of all the Life I led in this Place; Friday began to talk pretty well, and understand the Names of almost every Thing I had occasion to call for, and of every Place I had to send him to, and talk'd a great deal to me; so that in short I began now to have some Use for my Tongue again, which indeed I had very little occasion for before; that is to say, about Speech; besides the Pleasure of talking to him, I had a singular Satisfaction in the Fellow himself; his simple unfeign'd Honesty, appear'd to me more and more every Day, and I began really to love the Creature; and on his Side, I believe he lov'd me more than it was possible for him ever to love any Thing before.
I had a Mind once to try if he had any hankering Inclination to his own Country again, and having learn'd him English so well that he could answer me almost any Questions, I ask'd him whether the Nation that he belong'd to never conquer'd in Battle, at which he smil'd; and said; yes, yes, we always fight the better; that is, he meant always get the better in Fight; and so we began the following Discourse: You always fight the better said I, How came you to be taken Prisoner then, Friday?
Friday, My Nation beat much, for all that.
Master, How beat; if your Nation beat them, how come you to be taken?
Friday, They more many than my Nation in the Place where me was; they take one, two, three, and me; my Nation over beat them in the yonder Place, where me no was; there my Nation take one, two, great Thousand.
Master, But why did not your Side recover you from the Hands of your Enemies then?
Friday, They run one, two, three, and me, and make go in the Canoe; my Nation have no Canoe that time.
Master, Well, Friday, and What does your Nation do with the Men they take, do they carry them away, and eat them, as these did?
Friday, Yes, my Nation eat Mans too, eat all up.
Master, Where do they carry them?
Friday, Go to other Place where they think.
Master, Do they come hither?
Friday, Yes, yes, they come hither; come other else Place.
Master, Have you been here with them?
Friday, Yes, I been here; [points to the N.W. Side of the Island, which it seems was their Side.]
By this I understood, that my Man Friday had formerly been among the Savages, who us'd to come on Shore on the farther Part of the Island, on the same Man eating Occasions that he was now brought for; and sometime after, when I took the Courage to carry him to that Side, being the same I formerly mention'd, he presently knew the Place, and told me, he was there once when they eat up twenty Men, two Women, and one Child; he could not tell Twenty in English; but he numbred them by laying so many Stones on a Row, and pointing to me to tell them over.
I have told this Passage, because it introduces what follows; that after I had had this Discourse with him, I ask'd him how far it was from our Island to the Shore, and whether the Canoes were not often lost; he told me, there was no Danger, no Canoes ever lost; but that after a little way out to the Sea, there was a Current, and Wind, always one way in the Morning, the other in the Afternoon.
This I understood to be no more than the Sets of the Tide, as going out, or coming in; but I afterwards understood, it was occasion'd by the great Draft and Reflux of the mighty River Oroonooko; in the Mouth, or the Gulph of which River, as I found afterwards, our Island lay; and this Land which I perceiv'd to the W. and N. W. was the great Island Trinidad, on the North Point of the Mouth of the River: I ask'd Friday a thousand Questions about the Country, the Inhabitants, the Sea, the Coast, and what Nation were near; he told me all he knew with the greatest Openness imaginable; I ask'd him the Names of the several Nations of his Sort of People; but could get no other Name than Caribs; from whence I easily understood, that these were the Caribbees, which our Maps place on the Part of America, which reaches from the Mouth of the River Oroonooko to Guiana, and onwards to St. Martha: He told me that up a great way beyond the Moon, that was, beyond the Setting of the Moon, which must be W. from their Country, there dwelt white bearded Men, like me; and pointed to my great Whiskers, which I mention'd before; and that they had kill'd much Mans, that was his Word; by all which I under stood he meant the Spaniards, whose Cruelties in America had been spread over the whole Countries, and was remember'd by all the Nations from Father to Son.
I enquir'd if he could tell me how I might come from this Island, and get among those white Men; he told me, yes, yes, I might go in two Canoe; I could not understand what he meant, or make him describe to me what he meant by two Canoe, till at last with great Difficulty, I found he meant it must be in a large great Boat, as big as two Canoes.
This Part of Friday's Discourse began to relish with me very well, and from this Time I entertain'd some Hopes, that one Time or other, I might find an Opportunity to make my Escape from this Place; and that this poor Savage might be a Means to help me to do It.
During the long Time that Friday has now been with me, and that he began to speak to me, and understand me, I was not wanting to lay a Foundation of religious Knowledge in his Mind; particularly I ask'd him one Time who made him? The poor Creature did not understand me at all, but thought I had ask'd who was his Father; but I took it by another handle, and ask'd him who made the Sea, the Ground we walk'd on, and the Hills, and Woods; he told me it was one old Benamuckee, that liv'd beyond all: He could describe nothing of this great Person, but that he was very old; much older he said than the Sea, or the Land; than the Moon, or the Stars: I ask'd him then, if this old Person had made all Things, why did not all Things worship him; he look'd very grave, and with a perfect Look of Innocence, said, All Things do say O to him: I ask'd him if the People who die in his Country went away any where; he said, yes, they all went to Benamuckee; then I ask'd him whether these they eat up went thither too, he said yes.
From these Things, I began to instruct him in the Know ledge of the true God: I told him that the great Maker of all Things liv'd up there, pointing up towards Heaven: That he governs the World by the same Power and Providence by which he had made it: That he was omnipotent, could do every Thing for us, give every Thing to us, take every Thing from us; and thus by Degrees I open'd his Eyes. He listned with great Attention, and receiv'd with Pleasure the Notion of Jesus Christ being sent to redeem us, and of the Manner of making our Prayers to God, and his being able to hear us, even into Heaven; he told me one Day, that if our God could hear us up beyond the Sun, he must needs be a greater God than their Benamuckee, who liv'd but a little way off, and yet could not hear, till they went up to the great Mountains where he dwelt, to speak to him; I ask'd him if ever he went thither, to speak to him; he said no, they never went that were young Men; none went thither but the old Men, who he call'd their Oowocakee, that is, as I made him explain it to me, their Religious, or Clergy, and that they went to say O, (so he called saying Prayers) and then came back, and told them what Benamuckee said: By this I observ'd, That there is Priestcraft, even amongst the most blinded ignorant Pagans in the World; and the Policy of making a secret Religion, in order to preserve the Veneration of the People to the Clergy, is not only to be found in the Roman, but perhaps among all Religions in the World, even among the most brutish and barbarous Savages.
I endeavour'd to clear up this Fraud, to my Man Friday, and told him, that the Pretence of their old Men going up the Mountains, to say O to their God Benamuckee, was a Cheat, and their bringing Word from thence what he said, was much more so; that if they met with any Answer, or spake with any one there, it must be with an evil Spirit: And then I entred into a long Discourse with him about the Devil, the Original of him, his Rebellion against God, his Enmity to Man, the Reason of it, his setting himself up in the dark Parts of the World to be Worship'd instead of God, and as God; and the many Stratagems he made use of to delude Mankind to his Ruine; how he had a secret access to our Passions, and to our Affections, to adapt his Snares so to our Inclinations, as to cause us even to be our own Tempters, and to run upon our Destruction by our own Choice.
I found it was not so easie to imprint right Notions in his Mind about the Devil, as it was about the Being of a God. Nature assisted all my Arguments to Evidence to him, even the Necessity Of a great first Cause and over-ruling governing Power; a secret directing Providence, and of the Equity, and Justice, of paying Homage to him that made us, and the like. But there appeared nothing of all this in the Notion of an evil Spirit; of his Original, his Being, his Nature, and above all of his Inclination to do Evil, and to draw us in to do so too; and the poor Creature puzzl'd me once in such a manner, by a Question meerly natural and innocent, that I scarce knew what to say to him. I had been talking a great deal to him of the Power of God, his Omnipotence, his dreadful Nature to Sin, his being a consuming Fire to the Workers of Iniquity; how, as he had made us all, he could destroy us and all the World in a Moment; and he listen'd with great Seriousness to me all the while.
After this, I had been telling him how the Devil was God's Enemy in the Hearts of Men, and used all his Malice and Skill to defeat the good Designs of Providence, and to ruine the Kingdom of Christ in the World; and the like. Well, says Friday, but you say, God is so strong, so great, is he not much strong, much might as the Devil? Yes, yes, says I, Friday, God is stronger than the Devil, God is above the Devil, and therefore we pray to God to tread him down under our Feet, and enable us to resist his Temptations and quench his fiery Darts. But, says he again, if God much strong, much might as the Devil, why God no kill the Devil, so make him no more do wicked?
I was strangely surpriz'd at his Question, and after all, tho' I was now an old Man, yet I was but a young Doctor, and ill enough quallified for a Casuist, or a Solver of Difficulties And at first I could not tell what to say, so I pre tended not to hear him, and ask'd him what he said? But he was too earnest for an Answer to forget his Question; so that he repeated it in the very same broken Words, as above. By this time I had recovered my self a little, and I said, God will at last punish him severely; he is reserv'd for the Judgment, and is to be cast into the Bottomless-Pit, to dwell with ever lasting Fire. This did not satisfie Friday, but he returns upon me, repeating my Words, RESERVE, AT LAST, me no understand; but, Why not kill the Devil now, not kill great ago? You may as well ask me, said I, Why God does not kill you and I, when we do wicked Things here that offend him? We are preserv'd to repent and be pardon'd: He muses a while at this; mell, All, says he, mighty affectionately, that well; so you, I, Devil, all wicked, all preserve, repent, God pardon all. Here I was run down again by him to the last Degree, and it was a Testimony to me, how the meer Notions of Nature, though they will guide reasonable Creatures to the Know ledge of a God, and of a Worship or Homage due to the supreme Being, of God as the Consequence of our Nature; yet nothing but divine Revelation can form the Knowledge of Jesus Christ, and of a Redemption purchas'd for us, of a Mediator of the new Covenant, and of an Intercessor, at the Foot-stool of God's Throne; I say, nothing but a Revelation from Heaven, can form these in the Soul, and that therefore the Gospel of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ; I mean, the Word of God, and the Spirit of God promis'd for the Guide and Sanctifier of his People, are the absolutely necessary Instructors of the Souls of Men, in the saving Knowledge of God, and the Means of Salvation.
I therefore diverted the present Discourse between me and my Man, rising up hastily, as upon some sudden Occasion of going out; then sending him for something a good way off, I seriously pray'd to God that he would enable me to instruct savingly this poor Savage, assisting by his Spirit the Heart of the poor ignorant Creature, to receive the Light of the Knowledge of God in Christ, reconciling him to himself, and would guide me to speak so to him from the Word of God, as his Conscience might be convinc'd, hid Eyes open'd, and his Soul sav'd. When he came again to me, I entred into a long Discourse with him upon the Subject of the Redemption of Man by the Saviour of the World, and of the Doctrine of the Gospel preach'd from Heaven, viz. of Repentance towards God, and Faith in our Blessed Lord Jesus. I then explain'd to him, as well as I could, why our Blessed Redeemer took not on him the Nature of Angels, but the Seed of Abraham, and how for that Reason the fallen Angels had no Share in the Redemption; that he came only to the lost Sheep of the House of Israel, and the like.
I had, God knows, more Sincerity than Knowledge, in all the Methods I took for this poor Creature's Instruction, and must acknowledge what I believe all that act upon the same Principle will find, That in laying Things open to him, I really inform'd and instructed my self in many Things, that either I did not know, or had not fully consider'd before; but which occurr'd naturally to my Mind, upon my searching into them, for the Information of this poor Savage; and I had more Affection in my Enquiry after Things upon this Occasion, than ever I felt before; so that whether this poor wild Wretch was the better for me, or no, I had great Reason to be thankful that ever he came to me: My Grief set lighter upon me, my Habitation grew comfortable to me beyond Measure; and when I reflected that in this solitary Life which I had been confin'd to, I had not only been moved my self to look up to Heaven, and to seek to the Hand that had brought me there; but was now to be made an Instrument under Providence to save the Life, and for ought I knew, the Soul of a poor Savage, and bring him to the true Knowledge of Religion, and of the Christian Doctrine, that he might know Christ Jesus, to know whom is Life eternal. I say, when I reflected upon all these Things, a secret Joy run through every Part of my Soul, and I frequently rejoyc'd that ever I was brought to this Place, which I had so often thought the most dreadful of all Afflictions that could possibly have befallen me.
In this thankful Frame I continu'd all the Remainder of my Time, and the Conversation which employ'd the Hours between Friday and I, was such, as made the three Years which we liv'd there together perfectly and compleatly happy, if any such Thing as compleat Happiness can be form'd in a sublunary State. The Savage was now a good Christian, a much better than I; though I have reason to hope, and bless God for it, that we were equally penitent, and comforted restor'd Penitents; we had here the Word of God to read, and no farther off from his Spirit to instruct, than if we had been in England.
I always apply'd my self in Reading the Scripture, to let him know, as well as I could, the Meaning of what I read; and he again, by his serious Enquiries, and Questionings, made me, as I said before, a much better Scholar in the Scripture Knowledge, than I should ever have been by my own private meer Reading. Another thing I cannot refrain from observing here also from Experience, in this retir'd Part of my Life,viz. How infinite and inexpressible a Blessing it is, that the Knowledge of God, and of the Doctrine of Salvation by Christ Jesus, is so plainly laid down in the Word of God; so easy to be receiv'd and understood: That as the bare reading the Scripture made me capable of understanding enough of my Duty, to carry me directly on to the great Work of sincere Repentance for my Sins, and laying hold of a Saviour for Life and Salvation, to a stated Reformation in Practice, and Obedience to all God's Commands, and this without any Teacher or Instructer; I mean, humane; so the same plain Instruction sufficiently serv'd to the enlightning this Savage Creature, and bringing him to be such a Christian, as I have known few equal to him in my Life.
As to all the Disputes, Wranglings, Strife and Contention, which has happen'd in the World about Religion, whether Niceties in Doctrines, or Schemes of Church Government, they were all perfectly useless to us; as for ought I can yet see, they have been to all the rest of the World: We had the sure Guide to Heaven, viz. The Word of God; and we had, blessed be God, comfortable Views of the Spirit of God teaching and instructing us by his Word, leading us into all Truth, and making us both willing and obedient to the Instruction of his Word; and I cannot see the least Use that the greatest Knowledge of the disputed Points in Religion which have made such Confusions in the World would have been to us, if we could have obtain'd it; but I must go on with the Historical Part of Things, and take every Part in its order.
After Friday and I became more intimately acquainted, and that he could understand almost all I said to him, and speak fluently, though in broken English to me; I acquainted him with my own Story, or at least so much of it as related to my coming into the Place, how I had liv'd there, and how long. I let him into the Mystery, for such it was to him, of Gunpowder, and Bullet, and taught him how to shoot: I gave him a Knife, which he was wonderfully delighted with, and I made him a Belt, with a Frog hanging to it, such as in England we wear Hangers in; and in the Frog, instead of a Hanger, I gave him a Hatchet, which was not only as good a Weapon in some Cases, but much more useful upon other Occasions.
I describ'd to him the Country of Europe, and particularly England, which I came from; how we liv'd, how we worshipp'd God, how we behav'd to one another; and how we traded in Ships to all Parts of the World: I gave him an Account of the Wreck which I had been on board of, and shew'd him as near as I could, the Place where she lay; but she was all beaten in Pieces before, and gone.
I shew'd him the Ruins of our Boat, which we lost when we escap'd, and which I could not stir with my whole Strength then; but was now fallen almost all to Pieces: Upon seeing this Boat, Friday stood musing a great while, and said nothing; I ask'd him what it was he study'd upon, at last says he, me see such Boat like come to Place at my Nation.
I did not understand him a good while; but at last, when I had examin'd farther into it, I understood by him, that a Boat, such as that had been, came on Shore upon the Country where he liv'd; that is, as he explain'd it, was driven thither by Stress of Weather: I presently imagin'd, that some European Ship must have been cast away upon their Coast, and the Boat might get loose, and drive a Shore; but was so dull, that I never once thought of Men making escape from a Wreck thither, much less whence they might come; so I only enquir'd after a Description of the Boat.
Friday describ'd the Boat to me well enough; but brought me better to understand him, when he added with some Warmth, we save the white Mans from drown: Then I presently ask'd him, if there was any white Mans, as he call'd them, in the Boat; yes, he said, the Boat full white Mans: I ask'd him how many; he told upon his Fingers seventeen: I ask'd him then what become of them; he told me, they live, they dwell at my Nation.
This put new Thoughts into my Head; for I presently imagin'd, that these might be the Men belonging to the Ship, that was cast away in Sight of my Island, as I now call it; and who after the Ship was struck on the Rock, and they saw her inevitably lost, had sav'd themselves in their Boat, and were landed upon that wild Shore among the Savages.
Upon this, I enquir'd of him more critically, What was become of them? He assur'd me they lived still there; that they had been there about four Years; that the Savages let them alone, and gave them Victuals to live. I ask'd him, How it came to pass they did not kill them and eat them? He said No, they make Brother with them; that is, as I understood him, a Truce: And then he added, They no eat Mans but when make the War fight; that is to say, they never eat any Men but such as come to fight with them, and are taken in Battle.
It was after this some considerable Time, that being upon the Top of the Hill, at the East Side of the Island, from whence as have said, I had in a clear Day discover'd the Main, or Continent of America; Friday, the Weather being very serene, looks very earnestly towards the Main Land, and in a kind of Surprise, falls a jumping and dancing, and calls out to me, for I was at some Distance from him: I ask'd him, What was the Matter? O joy! Says he, O glad! There see my Country, there my Nation!
I observ'd an extraordinary Sense of Pleasure appear'd in his Face, and his Eyes sparkled, and his Countenance discover'd a strange Eagerness, as if he had a Mind to be in his own Country again; and this Observation of mine, put a great many Thoughts into me, which made me at first not so easy about my new Man Friday as I was before; and I made no doubt, but that if Friday could get back to his own Nation again, he would not only forget all his Religion, but all his Obligation to me; and would be forward enough to give his Countrymen an Account of me, and come back perhaps with a hundred or two of them, and make a Feast upon me, at which he might be as merry as he us'd to be with those of his Enemies, when they were taken in War.
But I wrong'd the poor honest Creature very much, for which I was very sorry afterwards. However as my Jealousy encreased, and held me some Weeks, I was a little more circumspect, and not so familiar and kind to him as before; in which I was certainly in the Wrong too, the honest grateful Creature having no thought about it, but what consisted with the best Principles, both as a religious Christian, and as a grateful Friend, as appeared afterwards to my full Satisfaction.
While my Jealousy of him lasted, you may be sure I was every Day pumping him to see if he would discover any of the new Thoughts, which I suspected were in him; but I found every thing he said was so Honest, and so Innocent, that I could find nothing to nourish my Suspicion; and in spight of all my Uneasiness he made me at last entirely his own again, nor did he in the least perceive that I was Uneasie, and therefore I could not suspect him of Deceit.
One Day walking up the same Hill, but the Weather being haizy at Sea, so that we could not see the Continent, I call'd to him, and said, Friday, do not you wish your self in your own Country, your own Nation? Yes, he said, he be much O glad to be at his own Nation. What would you do there said I, would you turn Wild again, eat Mens Flesh again, and be a Savage as you were before? He lookt full of Concern, and shaking his Head said, No no, Friday tell them to live Good, tell them to pray God, tell them to eat Corn bread, Cattleflesh, Milk, no eat Man again: Why then said I to him, They will kill you. He look'd grave at that, and then said, No, they no kill me, they willing love learn: He meant by this, they would be willing to learn. He added, they learn'd much of the Bearded-Mans that come in the Boat. Then I ask'd him if he would go back to them? He smil'd at that, and told me he could not swim so far. I told him I would make a Canoe for him. He told me, he would go, if I would go with him. I go! says I, why they will Eat me if I come there! No, no, says he, me make they no Eat you; me make they much Love you: He meant he would tell them how I had kill'd his Enemies, and sav'd his Life, and so he would make them love me; then he told me as well as he could, how kind they were to seventeen White-men, or Bearded-men, as he call'd them, who came on Shore there in Distress.
From this time I confess I had a Mind to venture over, and see if I could possibly joyn with these Bearded-men, who I made no doubt were Spaniards or Portuguese; not doubting but if I could we might find some Method to Escape from thence, being upon the Continent, and a good Company together, better than I could from an Island 40 Miles off the Shore, and alone without Help. So after some Days I took Friday to work again, by way of Discourse, and told him I would give him a Boat to go back to his own Nation; and accordingly I carry'd him to my Frigate which lay on the other Side of the Island, and having clear'd it of Water, for I always kept it sunk in the Water, I brought it out, shewed it him, and we both went into it.
I found he was a most dextrous Fellow at managing it, would make it go almost as swift and fast again as I could; so when he was in, I said to him, Well now, Friday, shall we go to your Nation? He look'd very dull at my saying so, which it seems was, because he thought the Boat too small to go so far. I told him then I had a bigger; so the next Day I went to the Place where the first Boat lay which I had made, but which I could not get into Water: He said that was big enough; but then as I had taken no Care of it, and it had lain two or three and twenty Years there, the Sun had split and dry'd it, that it was in a manner rotten. Friday told me such a Boat would do very well, and would carry much enough Vittle, Drink, Bread, that was his Way of Talking.
Upon the whole, I was by this Time so fix'd upon my Design of going over with him to the Continent, that I told him we would go and make one as big as that, and he should go home in it. He answer'd not one Word, but look'd very grave and sad: I ask'd him what was the matter with him? He ask'd me again thus; Why, you angry mad with Friday, what me done? I ask'd him what he meant; I told him I was not angry with him at all. No angry! No angry! says he, repeating the Words several Times, Why send Friday home away to my Nation? Why, (says I) Friday, did you not say you wish'd you were there? Yes, yes, says he, wish be both there, no wish Friday there, no Master there. In a Word, he would not think of going there without me; I go there! Friday, (says I) what shall I do there? He turn'd very quick upon me at this: You do great deal much good, says he, you teach wild Mans be good sober tame Mans; you tell them know God, pray and live new Life. Alas! Friday, (says I) thou knowest not what thou sayest, I am but an ignorant Man my self Yes, yes, says he, you teachee me Good, you teachee them Good. No, no, Friday, (says I) you shall go without me, leave me here to live by my self as I did before. He look'd confus'd again at that Word, and running to one of the Hatchets which he used to wear, he takes it up hastily, comes and gives it me, What must I do with this? says I to him. You take, kill Friday; (says he.) What must I kill you for? said I again. He returns very quick, What you send Friday away for? take, kill Friday, no send Friday away. This he spoke so earnestly, that I saw Tears stand in his Eyes: In a Word, I so plainly discover'd the utmost Affection in him to me, and a firm Resolution in him, that I told him then, and often after, that I would never send him away from me, if he was willing to stay with me.
Upon the whole, as I found by all his Discourse a settled Affection to me, and that nothing should part him from me, so I found all the Foundation of his Desire to go to his own Country, was laid in his ardent Affection to the People, and his Hopes of my doing them good; a Thing which as I had no Notion of my self, so I had not the least Thought or Intention, or Desire of undertaking it. But still I found a strong Inclination to my attempting an Escape as above, founded on the Supposition gather'd from the Discourse, (viz.) That there were seventeen bearded Men there; and therefore, without any more Delay, I went to Work with Friday to find out a great Tree proper to fell, and make a large Periagua or Canoe to undertake the Voyage. There were Trees enough in the Island to have built a little Fleet, not of Periagua's and Canoes, but even of good large Vessels. But the main Thing I look'd at, was to get one so near the Water that we might launch it when it was made, to avoid the Mistake I committed at first.
At last, Friday pitch'd upon a Tree, for I found he knew much better than I what kind of Wood was fittest for it, nor can I tell to this Day what Wood to call the Tree we cut down, except that it was very like the Tree we call Fustic, or between that and the Nicaragua Wood, for it was much of the same Colour and Smell. Friday was for burning the Hollow or Cavity of this Tree out to make it for a Boat. But I shew'd him how rather to cut it out with Tools, which, after I had shew'd him how to use, he did very handily, and in about a Month's hard Labour, we finished it, and made it very handsome, especially when with our Axes, which I shew'd him how to handle, we cut and hew'd the out-side into the true Shape of a Boat; after this, however, it cost us near a Fortnight's Time to get her along as it were Inch by Inch upon great Rowlers into the Water. But when she was in, she would have carry'd twenty Men with great Ease.
When she was in the Water, and tho' she was so big it amazed me to see with what Dexterity and how swift my Man Friday would manage her, turn her, and paddle her along; so I ask'd him if he would, and if we might venture over in her; Yes, he said, he venture over in her very well, tho' great blow Wind. However, I had a farther Design that he knew nothing of, and that was to make a Mast and Sail and to fit her with an Anchor and Cable: As to a Mast, that was easy enough to get; so I pitch'd upon a strait young Cedar-Tree, which I found near the Place, and which there was great Plenty of in the Island, and I set Friday to Work to cut it down, and gave him Directions how to shape and order it. But as to the Sail, that was my particular Care; I knew I had old Sails, or rather Pieces of old Sails enough; but as I had had them now six and twenty Years by me, and had not been very careful to preserve them, not imagining that I should ever have this kind of Use for them, I did not doubt but they were all rotten, and indeed most of them were so; however, I found two Pieces which appear'd pretty good, and with these I went to Work, and with a great deal of Pains, and awkward tedious stitching (you may be sure) for Want of Needles, I at length made a three Corner'd ugly Thing, like what we call in England, a Shoulder of Mutton Sail, to go with a Boom at bottom, and a little short Sprit at the Top, such as usually our Ships Long Boats sail with, and such as I best knew how to manage; because it was such a one as I had to the Boat, in which I made my Escape from Barbary, as related in the first Part of my Story.
I was near two Months performing this last Work, viz. rigging and fitting my Mast and Sails; for I finish'd them very compleat, making a small Stay, and a Sail, or Foresail to it, to assist, if we should turn to Windward; and which was more than all, I fix'd a Rudder to the Stern of her, to steer with; and though I was but a bungling Shipwright, yet as I knew the Usefulness, and even Necessity of such a Thing, I apply'd my self with so much Pains to do it, that at last I brought it to pass; though considering the many dull Contrivances I had for it that sail'd, I think it cost me almost as much Labour as making the Boat.
After all this was done too, I had my Man Friday to teach as to what belong'd to the Navigation of my Boat; for though he knew very well how to paddle a Canoe, he knew nothing what belong'd to a Sail, and a Rudder; and was the most amaz'd, when he saw me work the Boat too and again in the Sea by the Rudder, and how the Sail gyb'd, and fill'd this way, or that way, as the Course we sail'd chang'd; I say, when he saw this, he stood like one, astonish'd and amaz'd: However, with a little Use, I made all these Things familiar to him; and he became an expert Sailor, except that as to the Compass, I could make him understand very little of that. On the other hand, as there was very little cloudy Weather, and seldom or never any Fogs in those Parts, there was the less occasion for a Compass, seeing the Stars were always to be seen by Night, and the Shore by Day, except in the rainy Seasons, and then no body car'd to stir abroad, either by Land or Sea.
I was now entred on the seven and twentieth Year of my Captivity in this Place; though the three last Years that I had this Creature with me, ought rather to be left out of the Account, my Habitation being quite of another kind than in all the rest of the Time. I kept the Anniversary of my Landing here with the same Thankfulness to God for his Mercies, as at first; and if I had such Cause of Acknowledgment at first, I had much more so now, having such additional Testimonies of the Care of Providence over me, and the great Hopes I had of being effectually, and speedily deliver'd; for I had an invincible Impression upon my Thoughts, that my Deliverance was at hand, and that I should not be another Year in this Place: However, I went on with my Husbandry, digging, planting, fencing, as usual; I gather'd and cur'd my Grapes, and did every necessary Thing as before.
The rainy Season was in the mean Time upon me, when I kept more within Doors than at other Times; so I had stow'd our new Vessel as secure as we could, bringing her up into the Creek, where as I said, in the Beginning I landed my Rafts from the Ship, and haling her up to the Shore, at high Water mark, I made my Man Friday dig a little Dock, just big enough to hold her, and just deep enough to give her Water enough to fleet in; and then when the Tide was out, we made a strong Dam cross the End of it, to keep the Water out; and so she lay dry, as to the Tide from the Sea; and to keep the Rain off, we laid a great many Boughs of Trees, so thick, that she was as well thatch'd as a House; and thus we waited for the Month of November and December, in which I design'd to make my Adventure.
When the settled Season began to come in, as the thought of my Design return'd with the fair Weather, I was pre paring daily for the Voyage; and the first Thing I did, was to lay by a certain Quantity of Provisions, being the Stores for our Voyage; and intended in a Week or a Fortnight's Time, to open the Dock, and launch out our Boat. I was busy one Morning upon some Thing of this kind, when I call'd to Friday, and bid him go to the Sea Shore, and see if he could find a Turtle, or Tortoise, a Thing which we generally got once a Week, for the Sake of the Eggs, as well as the Flesh: Friday had not been long gone, when he came running back, and flew over my outer Wall, or Fence, like one that felt not the Ground, or the Steps he set his Feet on; and before I had time to speak to him, he cries out to me, O Master! O Master! O Sorrow! O bad! What's the Matter, Friday? says I; O yonder, there, says he, one, two, three Canoe! one, two, three! By his way of speaking, I concluded there were six; but on enquiry, I found it was but three: Well, Friday, says I, do not be frighted; so I heartned him up as well as I could: However, I saw the poor Fellow was most terribly scar'd; for nothing ran in his Head but that they were come to look for him, and would cut him in Pieces, and eat him; and the poor Fellow trembled so, that I scarce knew what to do with him: I comforted him as well as I could, and told him I was in as much Danger as he, and that they would eat me as well as him; but, says I, Friday, we must resolve to fight them; Can you fight, Friday? Me shoot, says he, but there come many great Number. No matter for that, said I again, our Guns will fright them that we do not kill; so I ask'd him, Whether if I resolv'd to defend him, he would defend me, and stand by me, and do just as I bid him? He said, Me die, when you bid die, Master; so I went and fetch'd a good Dram of Rum, and gave him; for I had been so good a Husband of my Rum, that had a great deal left: When he had drank it, I made him take the two Fowling-Pieces, which we always carry'd, and load them with large Swan-Shot, as big as small Pistol Bullets; then I took four Muskets, and loaded them with two Slugs, and five small Bullets each; and my two Pistols I loaded with a Brace of Bullets each; I hung my great Sword as usual, naked by my Side, and gave Friday his Hatchet.
When I had thus prepar'd my self, I took my Perspective-Glass, and went up to the Side of the Hill, to see what I could discover; and I found quickly, by my Glass, that there were one and twenty Savages, three Prisoners, and three Canoes; and that their whole Business seem'd to be the triumphant Banquet upon these three humane Bodies, (a barbarous Feast indeed) but nothing more than as I had observ'd was usual with them.
I observ'd also, that they were landed not where they had done, when Friday made his Escape; but nearer to my Creek, where the Shore was low, and where a thick Wood came close almost down to the Sea: This, with the Abhorrence of the inhumane Errand these Wretches came about, fill'd me with such Indignation, that I came down again to Friday, and told him, I was resolv'd to go down to them, and kill them all; and ask'd him, If he would stand by me? He was now gotten over his Fright, and his Spirits being a little rais'd, with the Dram I had given him, he was Cry chearful, and told me, as before, he would die, when I bid die.
In this Fit of Fury, I took first and divided the Arms which I had charg'd, as before, between us; I gave Friday one Pistol to stick in his Girdle, and three Guns upon his Shoulder; and I took one Pistol, and the other three my self; and in this Posture we march'd out: I took a small Bottle of Rum in my Pocket, and gave Friday a large Bag, with more Powder and Bullet; and as to Orders, I charg'd him to keep close behind me, and not to stir, or shoot, or do any Thing, till I bid him; and in the mean Time, not to speak a Word: In this Posture I fetch'd a Compass to my Right-Hand, of near a Mile, as well to get over the Creek, as to get into the Wood; so that I might come within shoot of them, before I should be discover'd, which I had seen by my Glass, it was easy to do.
While I was making this March, my former Thoughts returning, I began to abate my Resolution; I do not mean, that I entertain'd any Fear of their Number; for as they were naked, unarm'd Wretches, 'tis certain I was superior to them; nay, though I had been alone; but it occurr'd to my Thoughts, What Call? What Occasion? much less, What Necessity I was in to go and dip my Hands in Blood, to attack People, who had neither done, or intended me any Wrong? Who as to me were innocent, and whose barbarous Customs were their own Disaster, being in them a Token indeed of God's having left them, with the other Nations of that Part of the World, to such Stupidity, and to such inhumane Courses; but did not call me to take upon me to be a Judge of their Actions, much less an Executioner of his Justice; that whenever he thought fit, he would take the Cause into his own Hands, and by national Vengeance punish them as a People, for national Crimes; but that in the mean time, it was none of my Business; that it was true, Friday might justify it, because he was a declar'd Enemy, and in a State of War with those very particular People; and it was lawful for him to attack them; but I could not say she same with respect to me: These Things were so warmly press'd upon my Thoughts, all the way as I went, that I resolv'd I would only go and place my self near them, that I might observe their barbarous Feast, and that I would act then as God should direct; but that unless something offer'd that was more a Call to me than yet I knew of, I would not meddle with them.
With this Resolution I enter'd the Wood, and with all possible Waryness and Silence, Friday following close at my Heels, I march'd till I came to the Skirt of the Wood, on the Side which was next to them; only that one Corner of the Wood lay between me and them; here I call'd softly to Friday, and shewing him a great Tree, which was just at the Corner of the Wood, I bad him go to the Tree, and bring me Word if he could see there plainly what they were doing; he did so, and came immediately back to me, and told me they might be plainly view'd there; that they were all about their Fire, eating the Flesh of one of their Prisoners; and that another lay bound upon the Sand, a little from them, which be said they would kill next, and which fir'd all the very Soul within me; he told me it was not one of their Nation; but one of the bearded Men, who he had told me of, that came to their Country in the Boat: I was fill'd with Horror at the very naming the white-bearded Man, and going to the Tree, I saw plainly by my Glass, a white Man who lay upon the Beach of the Sea, with his Hands and his Feet ty'd, with Flags, or Things like Rushes; and that he was an European, and had Cloaths on.
There was another Tree, and a little Thicket beyond it, about fifty Yards nearer to them than the Place where I was, which by going a little way about, I saw I might come at undiscover'd, and that then I should be within half Shot of them; so I with-held my Passion, though I was indeed enrag'd to the highest Degree, and going back about twenty Paces, I got behind some Bushes, which held all the way, till I came to the other Tree; and then I came to a little rising Ground, which gave me a full View of them, at the Distance of about eighty Yards.
I had now not a Moment to loose; for nineteen of the dreadful Wretches sat upon the Ground, all close huddled together, and had just sent the other two to butcher the poor Christian, and bring him perhaps Limb by Limb to their Fire, and they were stoop'd down to untie the Bands, at his Feet; I turn'd to Friday, now Friday, said I, do as I bid thee; Friday said he would; then Friday, says I, do exactly as you see me do, 'fail in nothing; so I set down one of the Muskets, and the Fowling-Piece, upon the Ground, and Friday did the like by his; and with the other Musket, I took my aim at the Savages, bidding him do the like; then asking him, If he was ready? He said, yes, then fire at them, said I; and the same Moment I fir'd also.
Friday took his Aim so much better than I, that on the Side that he shot, he kill'd two of them, and wounded three more; and on my Side, I kill'd one, and wounded two: They were, you may be sure, in a dreadful Consternation; and all of them, who were not hurt, jump'd up upon their Feet, but did not immediately know which way to run, or which way to look; for they knew not from whence their Destruction came: Friday kept his Eyes close upon me, that as I had bid him, he might observe what I did; so as soon as the first Shot was made, I threw down the Piece, and took up the Fowling-Piece, and Friday did the like; he see me cock, and present, he did the same again; Are you ready, Friday? said I; yes, says he; let fly then, says I, in the Name of God, and with that I fir'd again among the amaz'd Wretches, and so did Friday; and as our Pieces were now loaden with what I call'd Swan-Shot, or small Pistol Bullets, we found only two drop; but so many were wounded, that they run about yelling, and skreaming, like mad Creatures, all bloody, and miserably wounded, most of them; whereof three more fell quickly after, though not quite dead.
Now Friday, says I, laying down the discharg'd Pieces, and taking up the Musket, which was yet loaden; follow me, says I, which he did, with a great deal of Courage; upon which I rush'd out of the Wood, and shew'd my self, and Friday close at my Foot; as soon as I perceiv'd they saw me, I shouted as loud as I could, and bad Friday do so too; and running as fast as I could, which by the way, was not very fast, being loaden with Arms as I was, I made directly towards the poor Victim, who was, as I said, lying upon the Beach, or Shore, between the Place where they sat, and the Sea; the two Butchers who were just going to work with him, had left him, at the Suprize of our first Fire, and fled in a terrible Fright, to the Sea Side, and had jump'd into a Canoe, and three more of the rest made the same way; I turn'd to Friday, and bid him step forwards, and fire at them; he understood me immediately, and running about forty Yards, to be near them, he shot at them, and I thought he had kill'd them all; for I see them all fall of a Heap into the Boat; though I saw two of them up again quickly: However, he kill'd two of them, and wounded the third; so that he lay down in the Bottom of the Boat, as if he had been dead.
While my Man Friday fir'd at them, I pull'd out my Knife, and cut the Flags that bound the poor Victim, and loosing his Hands, and Feet, I lifted him up, and ask'd him in the Portuguese Tongue, What he was? He answer'd in Latin, Christianus; but was so weak, and faint, that he could scarce stand, or speak; I took my Bottle out of my Pocket, and gave it him, making Signs that he should drink, which he did; and I gave him a Piece of Bread, which he eat; then I ask'd him, What Countryman he was? And he said, Espagniole; and being a little recover'd, let me know by all the Signs he could possibly make, how much he was in my Debt for his Deliverance; Seignior, said I, with as much Spanish as I could make up, we will talk afterwards; but we must fight now; if you have any Strength left, take this Pistol, and Sword, and lay about you; he took them very thankfully, and no sooner had he the Arms in his Hands, but as if they had put new Vigour into him, he flew upon his Murtherers, like a Fury, and had cut two of them in Pieces, in an instant; for the Truth is, as the whole was a Surprize to them; so the poor Creatures were so much frighted with the Noise of our Pieces, that they fell down for meer Amazement, and Fear; and had no more Power to attempt their own Escape, than their Flesh had to resist our Shot; and that was the Case of those Five that Friday shot at in the Boat; for as three of them fell with the Hurt they receiv'd, so the other two fell with the Fright.
I kept my Piece in my Hand still, without firing, being willing to keep my Charge ready; because I had given the Spaniard my Pistol, and Sword; so I call'd to Friday, and bad him run up to the Tree, from whence we first fir'd, and fetch the Arms which lay there, that had been discharg'd, which he did with great Swiftness; and then giving him my Musket, I sat down my self to load all the rest again, and bad them come to me when they wanted: While I was loading these Pieces, there happen'd a fierce Engagement between the Spaniard, and one of the Savages, who made at him with one of their great wooden Swords, the same Weapon that was to have kill'd him before, if I had not prevented it: The Spaniard, who was as bold, and as brave as could be imagin'd, though weak, had fought this Indian a good while, and had cut him two great Wounds on his Head; but the Savage being a stout lusty Fellow, closing in with him, had thrown him down (being faint) and was wringing my Sword out of his Hand, when the Spaniard, tho' undermost wisely quitting the Sword, drew the Pistol from his Girdle, shot the Savage through the Body, and kill'd him upon the Spot; before I, who was running to help him, could come near him.
Friday being now left to his Liberty, pursu'd the flying Wretches with no Weapon in his Hand, but his Hatchet; and with that he dispatch'd those three, who, as I said before, were wounded at first and fallen, and all the rest he could come up with, and the Spaniard coming to me for a Gun, I gave him one of the Fowling-Pieces, with which he pursu'd two of the Savages, and wounded them both; but as he was not able to run, they both got from him into the Wood, where Friday pursu'd them, and kill'd one of them; but the other was too nimble for him, and though he was wounded, yet had plunged himself into the Sea, and swam with all his might off to those two who were left in the Canoe, which three in the Canoe, with one wounded, who we know not whether he dy'd or no, were all that escap'd our Hands of one and twenty: The Account of the Rest is as follows;
3 Kill'd at our first Shot from the Tree.
Those that were in the Canoe, work'd hard to get out of Gun-Shot; and
though Friday made two or three Shot at them, I did not find that he
hit any of them: Friday would fain have had me took one of their Canoes,
and pursu'd them; and indeed I was very anxious about their Escape,
least carrying the News home to their People, they should come back
perhaps with two or three hundred of their Canoes, and devour us by
meer Multitude; so I consented to pursue them by Sea, and running to
one of their Canoes, I jump'd in, and bad Friday follow me; but when
1 was in the Canoe, I was surpriz'd to find another poor Creature lye
there alive, bound Hand and Foot, as the Spaniard was, for the Slaughter,
and almost dead with Fear, not knowing what the Matter was; for he had
not been able to look up over the Side of the Boat, he was ty'd so hard,
Neck and Heels, and had been ty'd so long, that he had really but little
Life in him.
When Friday came to him, I bad him speak to him, and tell him of his Deliverance, and pulling out my Bottle, made him give the poor Wretch a Dram, which, with the News of his being deliver'd, reviv'd him, and he sat up in the Boat; but when Friday came to hear him speak, and look in his Face, it would have mov'd any one to Tears, to have seen how Friday kiss'd him, embrac'd him, hugg'd him, cry'd, laugh'd, hollow'd, jump'd about, danc'd, sung, then cry'd again, wrung his Hands, beat his own Face, and Head, and then sung, and jump'd about again, like a distracted Creature: It was a good while before I could make him speak to me, or tell me what was the Matter; but when he came a little to himself, he told me, that it was his Father.
It is not easy for me to express how it mov'd me to see what Extasy and filial Affection had work'd in this poor Savage, at the Sight of his Father, and of his being deliver'd from Death; nor indeed can I describe half the Extravagancies of his Affection after this; for he went into the Boat and out of the Boat a great many times: When he went in to him, he would sit down by him, open his Breast, and hold his Father's Head close to his Bosom, half an Hour together, to nourish it; then he took his Arms and Ankles, which were numb'd and stiff with the Binding, and chaffed and rubbed them with his Hands; and I perceiving what the Case was, gave him some Rum out of my Bottle, to rub them with, which did them a great deal of Good.
This Action put an End to our Pursuit of the Canoe, with the other Savages, who were now gotten almost out of Sight; and it was happy for us that we did not; for it blew so hard within two Hours after, and before they could be gotten a Quarter of their Way, and continued blowing so hard all Night, and that from the North-west, which was against them, that I could not suppose their Boat could live, or that they ever reach'd to their own Coast.
But to return to Friday, he was so busy about his Father, that I could not find in my Heart to take him off for some time: But after I thought he could leave him a little, I call'd him to me, and he came jumping and laughing, and pleas'd to the highest Extream; then I ask'd him, If he had given his Father any Bread? He shook his Head, and said, None: Ugly Dog eat all up self; so I gave him a Cake of Bread out of a little Pouch I carry'd on Purpose; I also gave him a Dram for himself, but he would not taste it, but carry'd it to his Father: I had in my Pocket also two or three Bunches of my Raisins, so I gave him a Handful of them for his Father. He had no sooner given his Father these Raisins, but I saw him come out of the Boat, and run away, as if he had been bewitch'd, he run at such a Rate; for he was the swiftest Fellow of his Foot that ever I saw; I say, he run at such a Rate, that he was out of Sight, as it were, in an instant; and though I call'd, and hollow'd too, after him, it was all one, away he went, and in a Quarter of an Hour, I saw him come back again, though not so fast as he went; and as he came nearer, I found his Pace was slacker, because he had some thing in his Hand.
When he came up to me, I found he had been quite Home for an Earthen Jugg or Pot to bring his Father some fresh Water, and that he had got two more Cakes, or Loaves of Bread: The Bread he gave me, but the Water he carry'd to his Father: However, as I was very thirsty too, I took a little Sup of it. This Water reviv'd his Father more than all the Rum or Spirits I had given him; for he was just fainting with Thirst.
When his Father had drank, I call'd to him to know if there was any Water left; he said, yes; and I bad him give it to the poor Spaniard, who was in as much Want of it as his Father; and I sent one of the Cakes, that Friday brought, to the Spaniard too, who was indeed very weak, and was reposing himself upon a green Place under the Shade of a free; and whose Limbs were also very stiff, and very much swell'd with the rude Bandage he had been ty'd with. When I saw that upon Friday's coming to him with the Water, he sat up and drank, and took the Bread, and began to eat, I went to him, and gave him a Handful of Raisins; he look'd up in my Face with all the Tokens of Gratitude and Thankfulness, that could appear in any Countenance; but was so weak, notwithstanding he had so exerted himself in the Fight, that he could not stand up upon his Feet; he try'd to do it two or three times, but was really not able, his Ankles were so swell'd and so painful to him; so I bad him sit still, and caused Friday to rub his Ankles, and bathe them with Rum, as he had done his Father's.
I observ'd the poor affectionate Creature every two Minutes, or perhaps less, all the while he was here, turn'd his Head about, to see if his Father was in the same Place, and Posture, as he left him sitting; and at last he found he was not to be seen; at which he started up, and without speaking a Word, flew with that Swiftness to him, that one could scarce perceive his Feet to touch the Ground, as he went: But when he came, he only found he had laid himself down to ease his Limbs; so Friday came back to me presently, and I then spoke to the Spaniard to let Friday help him up if he could, and lead him to the Boat, and then he should carry him to our Dwelling, where I would take Care of him: But Friday, a lusty strong Fellow, took the Spaniard quite up upon his Back, and carry'd him away to the Boat, and set him down softly upon the Side or Gunnel of the Canoe, with his Feet in the inside of it, and then lifted him quite in, and set him close to his Father, and presently stepping out again, launched the Boat off, and paddled it along the Shore faster than I could walk, tho' the Wind blew pretty hard too; so he brought them both safe into our Creek; and leaving them in the Boat, runs away to fetch the other Canoe. As he pass'd me, I spoke to him, and ask'd him, whither he went, he told me, Go fetch more Boat; so away he went like the Wind; for sure never Man or Horse run like him, and he had the other Canoe in the Creek, almost as soon as I got to it by Land; so he wafted me over, and then went to help our new Guests out of the Boat, which he did; but they were neither of them able to walk; so that poor Friday knew not what to do.
©2005 - 2010 秋早文学 . All Rights Reserved.

I had need for some fasteners that were simply not available in the general hardware market the average guy shops. I went to FMW on line and they had what I needed and it was sent out the next day. I'm very pleased.
Great quality, better price! Shipped fast and will order from again. You just got a forever customer!

I asked again if the Utah girl was the spirit lady. I was being shown how they both said, and did, the same things (from what Ali told me).
I dreamt of a b&w kitten in a filled up glass measuring cup of water. I was showing it to someone(s). I realized that it had died because of the water, but then remembered that it was barely breathing to begin with. I was saddened by this but I wasn’t devastated.
I dreamt of watching a movie called “Darkness”. I saw death, as a normal person, “chasing” a girl, who wasn’t able to outrun him. She finally exhausted herself and gave up.
I then saw his right arm slowly lift and point, as if he was the camera. He had skeleton fingers like the Ghost of Christmas Future in A Christmas Carol. I then saw the girl wrapped in burlap (?) and dropped to the ground.
I dreamt that McDonald’s had started offering healthy /ier foods, which helped a location in a bad neighborhood, to be more successful. I asked a lady something about the owner, who was there helping out. She may have been his wife.
I dreamt of being at the church and needing to use the restroom. I went to the hallway on the right. I couldn’t find it. I walked up and down the hallway to make sure I didn’t walk too fast and miss it. I finally saw a door that said it used to be the Bishop’s (?) office.
I dreamt that I wasn’t wearing my glasses and my vision was blurry but clear enough to get around. They were in a room with my purse. I was searching for my glasses everywhere but where they were.
I dreamt of being in the chapel and the choir was going to sing. Someone said that if anyone wanted to come up and join them, they could. A group of women, holding the words, got up.
There was a black guy, and family / wife, sitting up front, more to the right, in the congregation. He was in his 50’s / late 40’s, with some weight on him. He was wearing a lavender (?) shirt.
He asked one of the guys sitting up on the stand, the McDonald’s owner, something but I don’t remember. He smiled and nodded. I was thinking that the black guy was either a new member, or he was just investigating.
I was sitting in the back behind the pews. There were two women standing, in my left, facing me, both nursing on their right breasts, covered. I was thinking that they were tall, or looked tall because I was sitting. The one on the left may have had long blonde hair.
There was a couch / loveseat in front of me, facing me. There was another lady lying on it, with her head on the left. She also was covered, nursing a baby.
I wondered if I would see her breast when the baby let go, but she stayed covered. She then rolled on to her left side, cuddling up to someone else.
I dreamt that the wife on The Little People (TLC) was related to a guy in the 80’s group “El Dido”. She said how, but I couldn’t understand her.
I dreamt of a being with some women / girls. A wealthy lady came over, showing us some of her rings that she had in a jewelry box. She was letting us take one to keep.
I took one, and then a little later, I took another one that was wood with a design / carving on it. I was deciding which finger to put it on. The others gasped, were shocked when I took it.

Turns out that brother-for-brother trade was a pretty good deal for Marc Gasol, too.
While things have obviously worked out well for Pau Gasol, who has won two NBA titles since joining the Lakers, they haven't been too bad for 25-year-old Marc, either. The 7-foot-1, 265-pound Marc has established himself as a solid starting center in his third season with the Memphis Grizzlies.
The only trade in NBA history swapping one brother for another quickly changed Pau's life, but had little immediate impact on Marc. At the time, he was in the midst of five seasons in Spain's ACB League, winning the league's MVP award with Akasvayu Girona his final season.
"Everyone thinks it was a big deal," he said, "but to me, it really wasn't.
"First, I never put a foot in LA. All I had was a phone conversation. I think it was Mitch," he laughed. "It might not have been, but he said he was Mitch Kupchak. ... They told me I could try out for the team, but I said I'm not going to try out. I play professional here."
By the time he came to Memphis, he was hardly the typical rookie, a 23-year-old with professional experience and time with the Spanish national team. But he still believes it was better for him to begin his NBA career in Tennessee than Los Angeles.
"I think to establish yourself in the league, it's probably better with a team like the Grizzlies," he said. "And it also gives you a chance to be part of something growing up. As you grow, your team grows, and that is a great feeling."
Marc said his brother has passed along the occasional tip on life in the NBA, but has mostly left him to blaze his own trail.
"He's not a guy that will try to big brother you and tell you, 'You have to do this, you have to do that,' " he said. "He'll give you advice, and let you learn some stuff for yourself. Because he knows when you learn it the hard way, it's better for you, because then you learn how to solve stuff on your own."
Marc admitted playing basketball wasn't as difficult a decision for him as it was for Pau, who spent a year in medical school before making the sport his career.
"I wasn't, how to say it, the best student," he said, laughing. "I was kind of a little bit of a wild kid. I would play around and come back home late and my parents had no clue where I was. I was always in trouble."
His basketball development was a constant, though. He spent several years in FC Barcelona's youth basketball program and on Spain's youth national teams, then played two years of high school ball in Tennessee when the Gasol family moved to Memphis to join Pau. He led Lausanne High to the state championship game as a senior and was named the state's Division 2 Mr. Basketball.
That meant he was on hand for the early years of the Grizzlies franchise, which gives him a greater appreciation for where he is now.
"I feel like I represent the city of Memphis really well," he said. "... I was there as a fan, and now to play at the FedEx Forum as one of the starting five, I feel like I understand how the fans feel."
Like Pau, Marc says the head-to-head matchups with his brother remain special, if not quite as novel as they once were.

Today we had a yard sale it was crazy it was supposed to start a 8:00 am but people started coming at 7:00 am! Things went fast everything was selling and a lot of it was gone by nine! There wasn't a second that someone wasn't looking at the stuff. Then frantically we pick up the yard sale stuff that was left put it in the garage dash out not knowing where we were going to be out of the house by three to let a Realtor come.We got in the car and we decided to go see Toy Story 3.
We all loved the movie even though some parts were a little intense. Finally by the time we got back to the house we could just sit back and relax.

I have seen a many of these sexy shoes popping up in NYC. I first knew they were on the re-bound when I saw an editor at Vogue Magazine wearing them. But the trend keeps on growing. I think they look sophisticated but a bit un-feminine. I am trying to figure out what to wear them with? Who has a suggestion?

After leaving school Lee Baldwin started working as a messenger and trainee agent in London. 10 years later he moved to Houston, Texas and worked as an operations manager for a worldwide travel agency. He moved back to the UK in 2004 and decided to follow his dream of owning his own travel agency. Blue Marine Travel was born and is now one of the leaders in marine travel.
Lee’s hobbies include coaching his Son’s football team and watching his Daughters football team play.
Lee would say that his favourite place on the planet would be anywhere in the Caribbean, with St Thomas being one of his favourites.

Friends of ours had their house painted by Warline Painting and were really plesed with the job. When Warren came to our house he had many good ideas about what we should do. Heidi then showed up with help picking our colours. The job was done shortly thereafter and looked great. We were away for a few days and before we had a chance to contact Warren he left a message that he had checked the doors and they needed a little touch up. He had noticed little inperfections and came to fix the problem before we even new we had them. It is great to finally find a trade company who treats you house as though it's there home. The two painters that were here were very experienced and most importantly, tidy. We would highly recommend this company to anyone interested in having something painted.
- Company Response
Thank you for the kind words Marty and Ellen. You have a beautiful home and a stunning garden. We are so pleased you are happy with the doors and especially that fabulous red front door.

My story starts early in the year of 1999. I was having trouble with my shoulder. When I was at work, I could not get things off the shelves without being in a lot of pain. I went to the doctors and they sent me to physical therapy to do exercises. That did not help the problem. I was then referred to a physical therapist. He told me I was wasting his time and there was nothing wrong with me, but he gave me an order to get an x-ray. I left without getting the x-ray because I was so upset by the way he spoke to me. But, after driving to work in tears because of the pain in my shoulder, I thought some more about having the x-ray and few days later, I went in to have it done.
I then got a call form the nurse asking me to come in for another visit with the physical therapist. I really did not want to see him ever again, but I went in and from there I found out I had lung cancer stage one.
I had the top half of my left lung removed in October of 1999. The cancer had not spread anywhere else. I was lucky, the doctor said. I didn’t think I was lucky – I had lung cancer even though I had never smoked! No problems! Life was good! Nothing to worry about – so they said.
Eight years later in 2007, I started coughing. My husband kept telling me to go to the doctor, but I keep putting it off. When I finally did, I found out that the cancer was back. I now had stage IV lung cancer. There were three tumors in my lungs and bone cancer in my back
My oncologist really did not give me much hope, but I had enough of my own hope and determination to keep going way past anyone’s time line. I told my husband that I will do everything to get as much time on my side and so I have.
The first ten treatments of chemo helped the most. I no longer have three tumors – only two – and no cancer in my back. Now, it is my main concern to keep those two tumors small.
I have had four different chemo courses over the past five years. We will be starting targeted therapy some time in the next few months, I
hope. I had a biopsy a couple of months ago, but nothing was found, so it will be done again.
Cancer to me is about doing everything as often as possible and over again and over again. If it is more chemo, more tests I am going to do it. I have a wonderful family and many terrific friends who keep be laughing and hopeful.

Dom Dwyer's goal was his 15th of the season, tying Eddie Johnson in 2007 as the third most in a single season for KC.
Benny Feilhaber's two assists gave him 35 for his career for KC in league play, tying him with Davy Arnaud for 4th all time.
Feilhaber made his 130th start in all competitions for KC, breaking his tie with Aurelien Collin for 20th all time on that list.
Kevin Ellis made his 50th league start for KC, he's the 49th player to hit that mark.
Roger Espinoza made his 157th start in all competitions for KC, breaking his tie with Tony Meola for 13th and moving him into a tie with Mo Johnston and Seth Sinovic for 11th all time on that list.

Lawrence: Fulham boss Hodgson in top 20 coaches in world
"Look at his record. He took Switzerland to the World Cup in 1994 and qualified for Euro 96 with them. He's been at Inter Milan. He lasted longer with the Emirates than anybody else in their history and he gained more points for Finland in a qualifying group that had Poland, Portugal and Serbia in it than England got in theirs.
"People might say not a lot seems to have happened at Fulham in his first month, but you've got to give him time to change a situation that hasn't been right. And he had to play Arsenal and Chelsea. The position he's inherited is extremely difficult and it'll be one of the performances of his career if he keeps them up. But he needs to get a win on the board, doesn't he, the old chap?"

Which of these things is not like the other? I've got this Muscovy hen that my other ducks are not nice to. She likes the chickens and perches with them in their house every night. We took the drake out today for a few hours hoping the girls would hang with her, but that didn't happen. When we put him back in he chased the Muscovy around and was obnoxious until she went into the house. We are planning on making a duck area with their own pond and all. My plan was to put all the girls in there for a few days, then bring the drake in so he'll be the new guy. Think that will work? Got any other suggestions?

I just wanted to thank you. The ring turned out awesome and my parents were very happy. My mom was also pleased to see that you were able to fit the date...Read More ->
I just wanted to let you know that I received my order today. The rings are gorgeous and fit VERY well.
Thank you very much.
You have...Read More ->
The ring arrived today (Friday 11/23). Thank you so much for being able to get the ring here on time. All of the stores we visited were unable to...Read More ->

"Get up Brad or you're gonna be late for school!" called Brad's mother from down in the kitchen. Upstairs, a boy rolled out of bed and crumpled onto the carpet bellow. With his face against the furry floor, Brad thought about what bear cubs must feel like when they wake up in the morning with their faces snuggled against their mother. This thought was interrupted by the aroma of a pair of dirty socks that lay in front of him. With a look of disgust on his face, Brad rose from the floor and headed out into the hall.
As Brad entered the hallway, he bumped into his older brother, Todd. "Hey! Watch where you're going, dork!" and then with a smile Todd added, "and do something about that killer morning breath." Brad was amazed that his breath had been so noticeable even though he hadn't even opened his mouth yet. As Brad entered the bathroom he noticed that the floor was wet around the shower. Todd had obviously been here earlier.
Brad brushed his teeth, which was an exciting event as always. As he brushed, he noticed that the bottle of mouth wash was almost full. This was strange because he remember that it had been almost empty the day before. He figured that someone had opened a new bottle, probably Todd. After brushing he flossed and wondered why nobody had ever used floss to make a yo-yo. Dentists could use the Floss-Yo's as toys to give to children when they came for a checkup. As Brad threw the used floss away in t he waste basket, he noticed an empty bottle of Windex. It pleased him that someone was finally getting around to cleaning the windows in the bathroom. There had been a layer of some sticky residue building up on the tinted glass, which looked pretty disgusting when you looked up close at it.
Brad grabbed the nearly full bottle of mouth wash and poured the blue liquid into his mouth. As he swished the stuff back and forth in his mouth, Brad began to notice a strange bubbling feeling surrounding his tongue. He also noticed a strange taste in the mouth wash. His glance caught the empty bottle of Windex in the waste basket again. Brad eyes widened.
Spitting soapy blue liquid all over the wall, Brad could see bubbles float from his mouth and rise upward toward the ceiling. In trying to catch his breath, Brad ended up swallowing a gulp of the window cleanser. He began coughing up bubbles, and over the sound of his own coughing he heard a sound coming from the hall. Someone was laughing.
Brad's mother, Janine, was packing lunches for her two boys. It was getting fairly late and they still hadn't come down for breakfast. She yelled upstairs, "Get up Brad or you're gonna be late for school!" Janine put the sandwiches in the bags and sealed them up. She was just going to start washing the windows when she heard a scream followed by laughter from upstairs.
Brad ran out into the hall, and stared at his laughing brother. White foam bubbled from his mouth and dripped off his jaw, as he clenched his fists in rage. His brother's smile faltered a bit. Maybe he had gone too far. Brad just stood there for a moment, foam dripping onto the clean carpet. Finally he unclenched his hands and lowered his head. Todd lit up and started laughing again. Suddenly Brad rushed up to his brother and grabbed him by the throat. Caught off balance, Todd stumbled backwards and fell hard to the floor.
Janine was upset that her kids still hadn't come down for breakfast. She felt like she was doing a terrible job of disciplining them, especially since it hadn't always been her problem. Her husband, Jim, had said before the kids had even been born t hat he had wanted to take care of their upbringing and that she would never have to worry about them. Indeed, that's how things were going until the incident the previous year.
It had been a morning not unlike any other morning. The kids had gotten up early so Jim could drive them to school on his way to work. Janine had just finished making breakfast for the family. As she was setting the table, the rest of the family sat down at the table. Brad had been whining about something Rusty, the family dog, had been doing. She had ignored it, because it seemed like Brad was always whining about something, usually something his brother had done. As the family began to eat, Br ad was still blabbering something about Rusty. Janine remembered that Jim had told Brad to shut up and eat his food. She would always remember that, because those were her husband's last words. Before anyone could move, Rusty leaped across the table an d sank his sharp teeth into Jim's throat.
Janine had grabbed the kids and locked them in her bedroom, where she called the police. When the police came, Rusty was still chewing on Jim's body. They had to bring in a shotgun to put down the rabid dog. Later, Janine found out from Brad that Rusty had been acting really strange after he had gotten into a fight with a wolf in the backyard. After her husband's death, Janine had promised herself, that she would never take things lightly again, especially when it came the safety of her family.
Todd was gasping for air when Janine reached the hallway. She saw Brad tightening his grip around his brother's throat as he foamed from the mouth. Brad's mother muffled her scream with her hand and ran for her bedroom. When she got to her room, s he slammed the door behind her and stood with her back against the door, crying in hysteria and panic. She could hear Todd's breathes getting shorter and shorter. With her hands shaking she flung open the closet doors and grabbed the shotgun off the top shelf. The weight of the weapon steadied her frantic hands and she calmed down a little bit. She knew what she had to do.
When she got back to the hallway, Brad had completely cut off his brother's breathing ability. Janine aimed the shotgun at her son and told him to stop, but Brad couldn't hear anything but his brother's laughter. Even as he was choking the life out of him, it still seemed like Todd was laughing at him. The only way to stop it was to kill him! Janine asked a second time as Todd's flailing intensified. But still Brad persisted. Finally Todd stopped squirming and his body went limp. Janine scream ed and pulled the trigger.Ian Chase

My son just threw up a bit...enough to fit in my cupped hand and it was a light red color. I'm concerned it might be blood. However, now that I think of it he did have a small piece of red licorice last night when we were trick -or- treating (about 8:00 I think). However, that should have been digested by now shouldn't it? He had some oatmeal and apple slices (sans peel) for breakfast. He is playing and doesn't seem sick or anything.
I wouldn't worry.
If he was throwing up huge amounts of blood or was miserable, then I'd take him in.
Me (40) DH (49) daring DD (9) and darling DS - almost THREE! (born June 25, 2010 in an amazing, unplanned
Thanks for the replies. The day I posted this I called the doc and she just said to keep an eye on him. He threw up again that evening then again yesterday (and it was green). I got online to see what it could be and freaked myself out. I kept reading that green vomit meant bile which could mean an intestinal blockage so I took him to the doc this morning. She said he was fine and that a little bit of blood is normal since the force of vomiting sometimes causes bleeding in the esophagus and that bile is normal as well. The reason for the vomiting was most likely that he has a cold and was gagging on mucus. Even though it was nothing serious, I'm glad I took him to the doc so I can stop worrying.

So on the last trip to Cow Town, I figured, I would invite 3 of my nieces out for a photo session. Luckily they all agreed. I haven't seen them in ages, and it was quite a shock seeing them all grown up. I used to play horsey rides when they were 4 or 5. Time flies. I hope you enjoy these as much as I did.

These flips Tucker did made me nervous. In fact after a few I told him he wasn't allowed anymore. When I was much younger my brother attempted the same thing and cracked his head on the side of the pool. It's not something I want Tucker to duplicate.
While at the hotel the kids thought it was fun to swipe the key card to open the door. They usually fought about who got to do it and I tried to give them all chances. Who know something like a key card could cause so much contention?
Most days while were gone someone came in and cleaned up our room and made the beds. The kids love seeing what they did with their blankets and pillows. This day was their favorite so I took a picture.
Even though it was nice to have someone come in and vacuum and make beds for me I am happy to be out of the hotel!

“I was told exactly what to expect before and after surgery; there were no surprises – everything ran very smoothly. The staff, as well as Dr. Mark, were great – very caring. [The results] exceeded my expectations. I cannot believe the difference – I am now really comfortable with my body. My experience was so positive. I have no complaints whatsoever, just many thanks to Dr. Mark and his staff.”
– Amy I.
(Liposuction with Dr. Mark Glasgold)

Pragya looks stunned! Kumkum Bhagya 6th June 2016 Episode Written Updates :- The last night episode of the TV series Kumkum Bhagya begins with Nikhil is scolding Pragya as she tries to trap him. But Pragya taunts him that she is worry for his unborn kid as the kid’s both mother and father is not taking much care for him.
Kumkum Bhagya Episode Written Updates
But Nikhil also taunts to Pragya that due to Tanu is in hospital and she was about to have miscarriage and now surely Abhi is going to call her. Tanu asked to him that you are disgusting as you even use your child for your bad motive.
Now Pragya call Sarla and cries that she has lost again from Tanu, Dadi has been seen giving consoles to her and Pragya is now completely broken down as Tanu is again in the Mehra house with her drama. Now Mitali bring coffee for Daasi.
Daasi was in washroom and now she come from the washroom and she shocked to know that now Tanu is all set to comeback in the Mehra house. Tanu is in hospital and she asked to Nikhil that why Nikhil now supports her.
Nikhil said to Tanu that he did so as he doesn’t wanted to lose the CEO’s position from the Mehra group business and he leave now. Now Nikhil leaves and Abhi arrive to the Tanu’s room, and Tanu acts like she is sleeping.
Now Abhi asked forgiveness from Tanu as because of him now Tanu is in hospital and she was about to lose her baby. Tanu is now having crocodile tears on her eyes and she asked to him that she doesn’t want her baby to have father like you.
Abhi became emotional and announces that he will be divorce Pragya and marry her as soon as possible and also he asked her to comeback in the Bhalla house. Now Nikhil asked to Pragya that Tanu is all set to comeback in the Bhalla house.
Tanu now asked to Nikhil that she has to see Pragya’s face as she has lost to us now. She says my acting helped me once again. Pragya hears everything and enter by clapping.

Mad because I can't pay large amt of "duty" fees on large amt of money he sent via courier from UK. Want accept fact I don't have the cash. I should do anything to get his package.I wasn't told I had to pay anything. Says I have ruined him financially . Getting nasty mean text now.

I try to bring Stephen when his school work allows the extra time. He seen an movie event at the Y that is watching Nemo in the pool and wants to go.
I looked into it and it's a day that I normally have to work. It happens to also be the same day I go to court for child support. My luck it's his weekend with his father so I had to ask if he would mind if he came over late. I was suprised he said yes because it is court date and all so he has to be in town plus I figure he isn't happy with me.
So I get to ask for the day off. I plan on taking the Saturday off too because there is a zumbathon that I had considered asking time off to go. I figured I would treat myself to the time off as a way to destress from the tension that I might experience leading up to court and after court.
All in all it will give me a four day weekend from my job!! I hope my job approves it. They have been pretty good about handling time off requests.

Name: Kathleen D
City: Bayside, NY
Type of Work: Interior Wallpapering and Painting
Rating: 5 - Excellent
Hire Again: Yes
Review: "Wallpaper was removed from bedroom which was then painted. Back porch was painted. Two ceiling fans were moved and/or installed. Two radiator covers were repainted and radiators scraped and painted. Daniel did a great job, as usual. This was my third experience with him and he never disappoints. He takes pride in his work and will not consider a job done until it meets his standards, which are high. He is punctual, respectful, and honest. He does great work and I would not hesitate to recommend him."

T.I. did it big for his son Messiah who celebrated his 13th birthday over the weekend. The teen spent the day with family and friends as he rang in his teen years with style and class.
Messiah had everything from a majestic cake to red carpet at his party. Numerous guests, including his majesty's grandmother and siblings, took pictures on the red carpet and watched as Messiah cut into his pyramid-shaped cake after making a wish. The cake was indeed a site to see as it had Messiah's name featured in the middle with 'Ya Majesty' written atop its three dimensions.
Rapper Yung Joc and his family were just a few of many to come out and help Messiah celebrate.
Messiah is T.I.'s eldest son. The rapper parents six children with wife Tameka "Tiny" Cottle.

When Amy Haden woke up one morning, her daughter informed her that a dog was outside on the patio. Since Haden has two pets, she didn’t think much of it and assumed it was one of her dogs. But apparently, it was a different dog they’d never seen before!
And when she looked outside on their back porch, she confirmed with her own eyes that the dog outside was not their dog. Thinking nothing of it, she responded that she had just let out the dogs that morning. But Amy was shocked when her daughter said, “No, this dog is not ours.”
“I don’t know… it’s not the neighbor’s dog. I know they don’t have a dog that looks like that,” her daughter replied.
The dog was sitting on a chair on the patio, completely making himself at home. He seemed so comfortable, as it if were his patio!
“Just chillin’ on the porch,” Amy said with a laugh.
At first, they thought he was just taking a stroll around the neighborhood but belonged to someone. But when they found him on the same spot when they come home at the end of the day and the next morning, they knew he already felt he was at home. Every day, Amy returned home to find the dog situated on her patio. In the morning, he was there. In the evening, he was there. And he seemed intent on staying.
Amy began to realize that the dog, who she named Walker, wasn’t going anywhere anytime soon. She began to search for his owner by posting on social media and contacting her neighbors.
Amy said: “He had completely made himself at home on the cushions, and he just never left.”
Unfortunately, even though Walker was such a sweet dog, he couldn’t get along with Amy’s other dogs. She had to rehome him.
When the search for his previous owner turned out empty, they decided to look for a new home for Walker instead.
It was a difficult decision for them since they’ve grown to love Walker. But the cost and time of taking care of three dogs was something she and her daughter couldn’t handle anymore. She knew she had to find Walker home and eventually found the perfect fit: An elderly woman who’d been praying for a pet!

Kristin and John’s wedding day was amazing. We had a great time with all of their family and friends. They were such a great crowd! It was a very windy day and so we had to search for some photo locations that were hidden from the wind. There were quite a few things we will not forget about their wedding day. John’s brother married them, we took photos on a cliff overlooking the water…it was beautiful and even though they did not get married there it would be a spectacular place for a wedding! We found an apple orchard close to their reception hall and it ended being the perfect spot for photos. We have never photographed a bridal party in an apple orchard but loved it! We thought their reception hall was very pretty too. It was held at The Greens at Renton in Simcoe. The speeches were beautiful and Kristins’ mother and father’s speech made even me shed a tear. Kristin and John make a beautiful couple and I just love that Kristin seemed to smile all day long. Just how love should be everyday! Congratulations on your marriage Kristin and John. We were so glad to share in your day!

Wednesday, September 27, 2006
So, after leaving a screening of Old Joy, my buddy Ryan and I ran into Ferrara on Houston Street last night. Unlike last time I passed by him on the street, I mustered the courage to accost him. I called his name as we approached each other, he fidgeted with his cell phone (which he was talking on), gave me his left (free) hand to shake, and muttered something to the effect of 'hold on' into the phone. I said I was a big fan, and he asked if we were filmmakers. (Maybe if we said yes he would have invited us to some crazy party?) I said, "No, I'm not a filmmaker, but I'm an avid film-watcher," at which point he busted into a quick chorus of "Girl Watcher." He assured us that Mary was coming to theaters sooner or later and that for his next project they'd be going to Italy to shoot. He shook our hands and we parted ways. Hot.

I returned from this morning's protests before the decision came out. There was a quite a lot of violence and many people (some say 260, mostly Muslim Brothers) who were arrested.
Details and pictures later.
Update: Ayman Nour's appeal has been denied. This means he will serve his full five-year sentence and ends his political career, since past convicts cannot run for parliament.

Well hello! You may have noticed that I've been gone for a couple months. I've had a very good reason: I've been working on a novel (actually different from my historical fantasy that I've been struggling with) and so far I've written nearly forty pages in about three weeks. I have so many novel ideas jotted down and I was thinking about one in particular a lot, so I sat down and decided to see where it took me. I don't want to share too much, but I will say that it is historical and also set in ancient Egypt.

The stunning Destiny Jeffries and Kennedy Aspen (6 months). Destiny's pregnancy came as a surprise. She is in the Army and was in transition between two overseas deployments and discovered at training in between that she was pregnant. She says, "The pregnancy was easy, the childbirth was easy and parenting is exciting, it's so much fun!" She had hoped to have a medication free delivery, but dilated very fast, and decided to get an epidural at 8 cms which allowed her to have a vaginal delivery without any complications or interventions. Breastfeeding was difficult in the beginning but she was able to go to a La Leche League meeting for help and they are now going strong at 6 months, she hopes to continue indefinitely. Destiny works in an amazing unit that has been supportive and understanding of her need to pump at work to maintain her breastfeeding relationship. She has a close friend who is also a member of this movement and chose to participate after seeing the need for representation from more black women sharing themselves and their stories in celebration of motherhood.
The lovely Laura Klein and Otis (1 month). Laura had an amazingly wonderful pregnancy and birth and breastfeeding has gone very smoothly as well. Her labor was only four hours from start to finish and while she had planned to deliver in an alternative birthing center they only had time to get to the hospital and have their baby.
Laura says that even though things have fallen into line so beautifully for her, things have still been so incredibly hard. The transitions and the time and figuring everything out for the first time has been such a feat. The first week was bliss and then came a bit of adjustment but she says it's still been so much better than she expected it could be in part due to the support she's had from friends and family.
As a women who is very much interested in the notion that all bodies are beautiful and should be viewed positively, Laura has been interested in these shifts that happen through pregnancy and postpartum. As an athlete and someone who has enjoyed pushing her body and being in control, watching it change so drastically was quite profound. She says in this present moment she views her body more as Otis' body than her own - he grew in it, he gets his sustenance from it, and it hasn't quite yet settled into being hers once again. She says that we can often see flaws where others see a lot of beauty and goodness and she wants to be part of that shift for the betterment of herself and other women.
The magnificent Candace Mensik and Magnus (20 months). Candace developed a blood clot from birth control when she was 19 and was diagnosed with Deep Vein Thrombosis. She's had to be on blood thinners via injection ever since and was warned that any pregnancy would be high risk as a result. She was told that any pregnancy may or not be possible but would be high risk due to her multiple vascular surgeries, including stent placements throughout her femoral vein, up through my groin and into my vena cava, which runs behind her uterus. It was unknown whether or not pressure from a pregnancy would cause circulatory issues. Her doctor was also concerned with her clotting during pregnancy with the extra hormones, because she has the Factor V Leiden mutation. Candace had hoped to do things as naturally as possible but accepted that she may need more monitoring and intervention.
Candace was able to conceive without complication and had a very healthy pregnancy. Her doctor wanted to be in as much control as possible so he scheduled an induction but she ended up going into labor on her own before hand. Things continued to progress well, but there were a few things said and done along the way that she didn't agree with. Her doctor broke her water which she didn't want and at one point told her she needed to be quiet and relaxed so she felt like she just had to lay there and be still rather than moan and move like her body was telling her to. He told her this was because he didn't want Magnus' cord to prolapse. Her doctor told her he wanted to do an episiotomy which Candace refused and she was able to push Magnus out without any medication.
Unfortunately, Candace tore internally all the way up to her cervix and lost a liter of blood. Healing has been a long and painful process and it wasn't until the last couple of months that she realized she isn't having daily pain any longer. She is still having some difficulties though and hopes to explore possible physical therapy as well as alternative birthing options for her next pregnancy. Breastfeeding has gone very well for Magnus and Candace and she has made an overabundance of milk that has allowed her to donate to several other families.
Candace feels that now more than ever, women need to band together and rise up together in support of one another. "Our bodies are beautiful and we need to honor that, we need to take care of ourselves and love ourselves. "
Calling herself a Mother has been life's greatest gift. "I teach Magnus to love and honor those who are different, and I can only hope that he grows up to share peace, light and love with those who surround him."
The stunning Shannon Dicely and daughter Makayla (2). Shannon and her husband weren't able to conceive right away and she wasn't ready to go to the doctor yet and instead began to use at home ovulation strips to track her ovulation. Her cycles were going from 17 days to 72 days so she wanted to see what was happening and after 10 years on birth control knew it may take some time and wanted to be sure. She says it eventually lead to a big fight with her husband and she agreed to stop tracking her ovulation so heavily and set a goal for when they would seek a medical opinion.
They were getting ready to go out of town and Shannon knew she would be drinking while they were away, so she took a pregnancy test prior to leaving that much to her surprise, was positive. Her husband was home sick that day and mustered as much excitement as he could while throwing up - she jokes that he was the one with morning sickness. Her pregnancy went well and she loved every bit of it. Shannon says she's pretty Type A but wanted to leave her birth plans open ended so she could go with the flow if needed.
Shannon's water broke on her due date and she went into the hospital after stopping to eat. Active labor hadn't quite started when they'd arrived but she was so excited she walked the halls all evening trying to get things ramped up. She was able to get some rest the next morning and they were giving her clear liquids but she woke up that evening hungry and learned for the first time she wan't allowed to eat. The doctor agreed to let her have a meal that evening and they began induction the following day. After the Cyotec didn't work, she had an epidural and ultimately delivered via cesarean.
Shannon felt bullied into allowing them to take Makayla to the nursery and they were bringing her in every three hours to nurse. She was an hour late to one feed and Shannon called to see where her baby was. She was told that Makayla was being taken to NICU for risk of infection and had to be on antibiotics while they waited for her cultures to come back. The cultures came back negative so Shannon was able to bring her home three days later.
Makayla had latched as soon as Shannon was able to hold her and they had a wonderful breastfeeding relationship until Makayla quit cold turkey at 15 months. Shannon says that she felt like a failure after her delivery and breastfeeding really allowed her to reclaim some confidence in her body. She would have loved to continue longer but her goal was for her daughter to self wean and she's happy that's how things happened.
Shannon comes from generations of women who have had difficulty with their appearance and it's taken pregnancy and breastfeeding for her to appreciate her body. She had been an emotional eater for many years and recently decided to make healthier choices for herself. She hopes that not only manifests health and happiness for not only herself but is an example for her daughter.
The tremendous Traber Giardina and Jane Ellen (2). Traber and her husband were content not having children for a long time but when she turned 30 she started to change her mind and planted seeds with her husband. They decided to start trying but decided to see a specialist after 8 months when nothing had happened yet. Traber was diagnosed with depleted egg reserves and after having a couple of procedures to make sure her uterus could sustain a pregnancy, decided to use donor eggs. They searched for donors and found a match they were most comfortable with but it unfortunately didn't take. Their IVF second attempt, with a new donor was successful and Jane Ellen was conceived.
Traber developed gestational diabetes during pregnancy that was treatable with diet and at 38 weeks, developed preeclampsia which required induction. She says that after all they went through to make a baby, all she cared about was having her baby and didn't care so much about the birth itself. The magnesium made her incredibly ill and she ultimately delivered via cesarean. Traber's recovery was complicated by an infection in her cesarean wound that took some time to heal up. Breastfeeding was very challenging at first but by they eventually got the hang of things and Jane Ellen is still nursing today, though Traber admits she is about ready for the relationship to end.
Having a picture of this moment in time with Jane Ellen and herself together in which they are both so proud was very important to Traber.
The amazing Jessica Fernandez with her daughters Ezra (3.5) and Nova (13 months), Jessica has also had 2 miscarriages. Jessica is the second oldest of 9 and always knew she wanted a family. Her first pregnancy ended in miscarriage between 11-12 weeks. Soon after she conceived Ezra. Things went well, but at 14 weeks, Jessica was in a car accident and severely injured her back. The injury led to her feeling very uncomfortable for the rest of her pregnancy. Jessica's mother-in-law is her midwife and she wanted to let her carry as long as possible, she went post dates and at 40 weeks they began doing all the things they could to induce naturally. Her non-stress test at 42 weeks was great with one small heart decell, but four days later she had another non-stress test and Ezra had a heart decell without a contraction so they made the decision to induce at 42 +5. Jessica was dilated to a 4 with no contractions and did not respond to Cytotec or Pictocin but after her doctor broke her water she began active labor. Just before she was able to push, Ezra had another rapid heart decell and wasn't able to come back up on her own. They repositioned her all over the bed and they were able to get her heart stable on all fours. Jessica was able to push her out without complication soon after.
Breastfeeding with Ezra went well but Jessica stopped responding to the pump at work and soon her supply had tanked and her freezer stash ran out. She began taking Domperidone which allowed her to avoid supplementation but she still felt like she had failed in some way.
Jessica decided to give birth to Nova at home, with her mother-in-law as her midwife once again. She nursed Ezra through her pregnancy and the morning before her due date she found Ezra's nursing very uncomfortable. She began to have contractions throughout the day, tried to get some rest and when her husband was able to come home went right into active labor. An hour later she was 7cms dilated, labored in the shower for a couple of hours and was soon ready to push. She was having terrible back labor but Nova was born in two pushes with her cord wrapped around her neck, shoulders, arms and body with her hands around her face. She was beautiful and healthy and Jessica says it was the best moment of her life. It was cleansing and exactly the moment she needed to know that her body was capable.
Nova latched on after birth without issue and Jessica began pumping for her when she returned to work but Nova wouldn't take a bottle. While it was a struggle for them personally, the abundance of pumped milk her daughters weren't drinking allowed Jessica to become a milk donor. She has been able to donate to surrogate babies, preemies, babies with special needs and women like her who had struggled to respond to pumping, all of which was incredibly healing for her.
Tandem feeding has been an entirely new journey and though she feels touched out and overwhelmed sometimes she also adores nursing her daughters and nursing them together. She doesn't want to wean until her girls decide they're ready but has found the things that society has to say about her nursing a 3 year old difficult to deal with. She has worked so hard to maintain a nursing relationship with her daughter and doesn't understand why people have to say negative things about something that doesn't affect them. It works for her and her babies and that's all that matters.
Jessica has always been a small person and she says that in part due to the comments she received on her body she chose to get breast implants in her 20's. She never considered how that would impact her breastfeeding relationship and thankfully it hasn't but she has come to a place where she want's them out. She's is awaiting a consult to see if she can have them removed and realizes now that she never needed them to be feminine or to feel more womanly.
Jessica wanted to share her story and her struggles. "No matter how you come out the other side of pregnancy we are all changed and transformed. Everything is different and a new normal sets in. It's time to embrace those changes and celebrate them."
Jessica with Ezra (then 1) and 4 months pregnant with Nova.
The magnificent Jacqueline Hammock and Morris (8 months). Jacqueline researched pregnancy and birth long before she ever decided it was her time. Once it was, she had a healthy pregnancy and knew she wanted to deliver with midwives in an alternative birthing center. Everything was set but at 34 weeks, Jacqueline and her husband were visiting family to prepare for their baby shower and her water broke unexpectedly. She tried to rest and when she got a hold of the midwife to see what they should do, she told her to go straight to the hospital locally rather than risk having her baby on the side of the Interstate, trying to get home.
While this meant delivering with an OB she'd never met in a hospital she'd never seen, Jacqueline says the hospital was wonderful and supportive. They gave her a quiet corner room and tried to respect her wishes as much as possible. She was able to have a vaginal birth and Morris was taken to the NICU in hospital where he remained for a week. Jacqueline says that one of the hardest things she's ever done was to walk into the hospital pregnant and leave without her baby.
She began pumping right away and the hospital was able to give Morris her breastmilk. They allowed him to be put on scheduled bottle feeds in order to get him home sooner and were able to transition from bottle to breast at home without any issues. Morris is very healthy today and his doctors don't expect any delays due to his prematurity.
Prior to becoming a mother, Jacqueline is a lawyer and the primary breadwinner in their household. They decided to move back to her husbands hometown so that she can, at least temporarily, be a stay-at-home mom. Her son was thriving in her constant presence while on maternity leave, and so they took a temporary step backwards, moving to a place with a lower cost of living so that she can stay with the baby at least as long she is his primary source of his sustenance.
Jacqueline says that as she's grown older, her feminism has become increasingly radical, and she thinks this movement is profoundly important to the cause. "Celebrating the bodies of mothers, where the trials and tribulations of parenting are writ large, and highlighting the beauty of the changes motherhood brings to one's experience of self; these are crucial steps in dismantling the patriarchy."
The beautiful Katherine E Bradley Walker with her son Matthew (5) and daughter Kate (14 months). Katherine's pregnancy with Matthew was uneventful until 35 weeks when she experienced swelling and was put on bed rest. She soon induced for mildly high blood pressure, given an epidural and then ultimately delivered via cesarean quite quickly the same evening because her doctor had plans the following day.
Following her delivery Katherine had a spinal leak which resulted in severe headaches and temporary hearing loss. She says it sounded like she was under water and there was just constant noise and motion in her ears. She was told to lay down and things would get better but they didn't believe her what was happening because she didn't have classic symptoms. She eventually gave her a blood patch, 24 hours but it didn't last long. In the meantime, her sons bilirubin was up so they wanted to put him under phototherapy lights and start supplementing with formula. She says she didn't have the fight in her so they consented.
Once they came home her symptoms didn't improve. She was given headache medicine and antidepressants and told to get 8 hours of sleep. Thankfully, on day six she finally started to feel a bit better. She breastfed, bottle fed and pumped for three weeks before she realized it just wasn't working and decided to stop. Katherine felt guilty but had done everything she could. She had six lactation consultants in the hospital who all told her different things -use a nipple shield, don't use a nipple shield. It was all too much and she knew Matthew was going to be okay.
Katherine had wanted things to go differently for Kate's birth and found a doctor who said she was VBAC friendly. She had an uneventful pregnancy with no swelling this time and her doctor said she'd let her go to 41 weeks. At 38 weeks however she scheduled her for a cesarean at 40 weeks 5 days, because that was her dedicated surgery day, before Katherine ever had a chance to labor. Her doctor also told her that "some women just aren't made for natural birth". Katherine prepared herself for a shift in expectations after she had a good cry and Kate's delivery went smoothly. As soon as she latched she knew something wasn't right and thought she had a posterior tongue tie. She kept asking for people to evaluate but everyone said she was just fine, but her nipple trauma showed otherwise. Katharine finally found a dentist to repair the tie but Kate's latch was not immediately fixed and she started having vasospasm's. She was in so much pain and at 9 weeks realized she was missing out on so much by being so hyper-focused on getting her milk. She decided that was it, breastfeeding wasn't working out and as a result, her kids were both formula fed, healthy and happy.
Katherine loves the concept of this movement but never felt that it was for her. It was far out of her comfort zone and atypical of her personality but she did it anyway, without a reason she could grasp - simply because she felt she need to.
The amazing Allison Staiger with her daughter Violet Adele (2.5). Before becoming pregnant, Allison had an eating disorder and says that she was probably drinking too much. Taking care of herself and appreciating her body wasn't something she was accustomed to having to do but pregnancy changed that for her. Her pregnancy came as a surpise but as an anxious person she was amazed to find a sense of calm settle in right away. Her body began to grow and change without control and seeing that happen was both shocking and a lesson in self love. Taking care of her baby meant taking care of herself.
Two days before her due date, Allison lost her mucous plug and ended up going to the hospital later that day. Just after she got checked in her water broke but she wasn't progressing. They gave her pitocin and she went from feeling nothing to a huge rush that left her unable to move or talk. Having been unable to ease into labor she went ahead and got an epidural which she hated. They also gave her Stadol without consent and she says she felt like she was drowning and was numb. She slept fitfully for few hours and woke up ready to push but didn't feel like she could do it - exhausted, throwing up, on oxygen and running a fever due to chorioamnionitis. She was told to push differently but couldn't feel and Violet kept descending and then retracting. She pushed for two hours and they tried vacuum extraction but they ended up having to deliver via emergency cesarean, an experience that felt both like defeat and relief. Violet was healthy and Allison's recover went very well initially but she over did it a bit early on and had to take a couple of days of bed rest due to excessive bleeding. Allison initiated breastfeeding without complication but went back to work at three months and wasn't pumping enough for Violet. She made it to 6 months before starting to supplement and Violet weaned herself at 9 months.
Alison says her eating disorder hasn't been much of an issue on the other side of her pregnancy. She learned that she could eat and exercise normally and nothing bad would happen, it wouldn't change her worth as a person. She still has days where she runs through what she eats with too much intention or doesn't like how she looks but she says she's doing so much better. Her eating disorder was her last battle against herself and she's happy to let it go.
Everyone looks differently and to take the pressure off women to fit a certain mold is so important to Allison and it's so important to remember there is so much more to you than what you look like, she says.
The amazing Malana Anderson with her sons Linden (4) and Banyan (2). Malana never wanted to be a mother but when she was 32, she and her husband both realized they wanted to have a baby. She was surprised to get pregnant right away and had a wonderful pregnancy. She had planned for as unmedicated and intervention free birth as possible and found an OB in Alabama that was fully supportive. Her water broke at 38 weeks and she called her doula right away. After laboring at home for about 20 hours she decided to go to the hospital and learned she was only 3cms. She decided to get an epidural so she could rest and woke up feeling ready to have her baby. She ultimately ended up delivering Linden vaginally but in the OR just as they were about to call it and deliver via cesarean.
Linden latched right away and was the most gorgeous, peaceful thing she had ever seen. She says he never even cried except for a little sneeze and the entire time they were in the hospital he continued to be so relaxed and sweet. When they got home, however, she says, "the shit hit the fan". Linden screamed constantly and was entirely inconsolable - she felt like she was poisoning him with her milk. She had heard of colic but this went beyond any description she could find and was left with a baby that only slept 15 minutes at a time and screamed around the clock. They were all miserable and she didn't know what to do. Doctors said he'd grow out of it, friends told her that by three months it would go away, but three months came and went, then six months, then nine. Malana tried elimination diets, she had him evaluated for GI issues and nothing seemed to be the answer. At one point, she was only eating turkey and rice and even that was causing issues. The doctors suggested he may have silent reflux but they will never know for sure.
In the meantime, Malana was at a loss. She was angry, frustrated and found herself in a dark place. She would go to work and find herself taking the longest route home to prolong the time she was away from the screams still ringing in her ears. She looked for support groups and couldn't find anyone who seemed to get it until she met a women who held her hand as said she had been there. The only thing that would get her by for 15 more minutes was remembering that first moment she ever met him.
At some point, a shift happened. And Linden started screaming less and interacting more. While he is still amazingly strong willed and full of personality, things got so much better. When he was about a year and half old, she says that she and her husband's conversation shifted from "oh, my, goodness we're never doing that again" to "he definitely needs a sibling, right?" They figured they had paid their dues and decided to give it another try.
She got pregnant again right away and had another healthy pregnancy. At 38 weeks, labor began again but she still felt great and expected another long process. She prepped meals and decided to take a nap but when she awoke realized the baby was coming, NOW. They scrambled to get to the hospital and Banyan was born in the car in the parking lot. Malana says that the hospital treated them horribly once they got in as if they had broken the rules and had an unattended birth on purpose. They didn't want to circumcise and planned to delay vaccinations and the hospital went so far as to threatened to call child protective services because they weren't following their policies. They eventually got home without further issue and for the first two weeks things were bliss.
Unfortunately, at that point Banyan started screaming too. Malana says that he had more classical colic and "only" cried 5 hours per day but it still created such distress in their home. It always happened in the evening which meant that Linden had to learn how to get through dinner, bath and bedtime with little help from her. This time Malana struggled with breastfeeding and getting him to latch and stay latched. They continued to work through it and eventually his colic went away but at 21 months her milk dried up and she still wishes that they had been able to continue longer.
Malana adores her boys and is having a lot of fun at this stage of motherhood. She knows that at some point, distance will make the difficulties of the early months matter less but they will always matter. In that, she wants women to know that it is okay to talk about the hard times. She found herself understanding how mothers hurt their babies in some of their darkest times and felt like she was the only one who had been there. On the other side she knows that she wasn't alone; she says if her story, her honesty, can help even on other person through, then it's all worth it.

One day Bill walked around in the park, but suddenly, a hole opened up in the sky and sucked him in. He woke up to find that he was in another world. It seemed like the counterpart of Earth, which meant that things were pretty much the same. He saw other people just standing there, so he asked them what was going on. They told him that they also were sucked into a giant hole and they were on an alien planet. They were the aliens’ prisoners and the only way to get back to earth was the portal in the middle of the planet. He also learned that all your abilities were enhanced on this planet, which meant that he was super strong. He had very good eyesight and he had very good hearing.
Every day, Bill thought about finally getting off the planet. He missed his family and friends. Bill thought about his plan and he snuck to the center of the planet and found out that the portal was heavily guarded. He needed a team of people to defeat the guards. He told everyone what his plan was and what he saw. Almost everyone agreed to help him except one person named Mike, who said that he enjoyed life on this planet. Turns out, Mike was actually a spy for the aliens. Now, every human was bound in chains that were said to be unbreakable, but it turned out they were super easy to break and they all sprinted for the portal. They all made it.
When they got back, they warned everyone about the aliens and how they might attack earth. Then, the aliens sent a message saying that they would attack in two days. Everyone started preparing weapons and other things to help them in the war. After the first day passed, everyone was ready for the invasion.
Meanwhile, the aliens were also preparing for battle. The aliens started to board their ships because it would take a two-day flight to get back to Earth because the portal was unstable.
The next morning, the aliens attacked with their vehicles and soon, the humans found out that the vehicles were indestructible. Their vehicles could also shoot things that disintegrate humans. So Bill and everyone else had to retreat. They were trying to think of a plan, but they could not think of one. Bill decided that they would have to evacuate the city. Once they did that, they sent a warning to everywhere on earth. Eventually, people started to build underground shelters to hide from the aliens. The aliens eventually found out that they were hiding, but they did not know where, so they sent scouts to look for them. The humans lived underground digging wells for water and sometimes sneaking up for food for many years and the aliens never found them.
One day, one of the aliens found them. The humans did not know what to do, so they threw toast at it. Surprisingly, the alien disintgrated. Now the humans started making a lot of toast weapons, such as toast bombs and other things. The humans now were ready to attack the aliens. Then, the aliens started firing, but the toast blocked the blast. Then, they advanced with toast swords. They destroyed many aliens but the alien commander, Mike, would not give up and started sending in spaceships and other vehicles. Everyone fought very hard and thousands of lives were lost. Eventually the human army had to retreat, but the number of aliens in the alien army was significantly decreased. Once they were back in their hideout, they said that the only way to win was to send someone to bring a massive toast bomb and blow the aliens up while probably having to sacrifice yourself. Bill said that he would do it. The problem was that they did not have a bomb big enough to do the job, so they had to salvage all the armor and turn it into a bomb. Bill brought the biggest toast bomb and sacrificed himself and blew up all the aliens with jam and toast. After that, the humans went back above ground and started to rebuild their lives.

My dad is a hardworking man. He raised my sister and I as a single father and never dropped the ball. He had one job, to provide for our family. He worked two jobs to do just that.
I remember a special project my dad worked on day and night when were younger. It lasted a little over six months, but he worked on it like it was his permanent place. His assignment was to put in the chairs at Rogers Centre. I'd never seen my dad so tired afer each day of working. He worked seven days a week.
He only took Sunday evenings off to be with us. When he was away my grandmother helped look after my sister and me. We were young so we didn't completely understand what was going on. I just knew I missed him when he was away. After his time working on the park came to an end my dad finally rested some.
He rested for a single day and took us to Rogers Centre for our first Toronto Blue Jays game. It was our first baseball game ever. That moment will always be special to me.
I know how hard my dad worked on the very chairs we sat in. I also know how much he sacrificed for the joy of others.
“That moment will always be special to me.”
Email this post. * Required
This PASHpost story has been shared with John Smith.

Dominique Douglas' days as a member of Iowa's football team are over, but that doesn't mean the receiver is hurting for money. Douglas, who posted embarrassing photos on his Facebook page last fall while a member of the Hawkeyes, is back at it with another batch of photos.
Douglas was suspended from the team last fall after he was charged with unauthorized use of credit cards. He has since left school and his future plans are unknown. But really, who needs football?

AN order banning a North Wales man from a town centre and from drinking in public was the best thing that could have happened to him, a court was told at the weekend.
The Anti-Social Behaviour Order banned Vernon Barratt from visiting Wrexham town centre, as well as drinking alcohol in any public place within the county.
The 54-year-old was before magistrates at the weekend for drinking a pint of beer in a town centre pub.
But after being told of the dramatic improvement in Barratt's life-style he was spared a prison sentence for breaching the ASBO.
Instead, Barratt - who told magistrates through his solicitor the ASBO was the best thing that could have happened to him - was fined £100 and ordered to pay £55 costs.
Barratt, of Blackthorne Close, Marford, near Wrexham, has a large number of previous convictions and had been jailed four times for previous breaches of the order.
That was when he was living rough and wanted to go to prison to have a roof over his head.
But magistrates were told his life had improved dramatically after he had found a respectable lady friend, an official of the charity Shelter, who had taken him in as a lodger and supported him.
Phillip Marshall-Thomas, defending, said his client was now involved in voluntary work.
It was important to note the purpose of the ASBO was to prevent anti-social behaviour and Barratt had clearly behaved himself, he said.
He had merely fallen to temptation to visit a pub where had not been for a long time, and have one pint, the court was told.
Mr Marshall-Thomas said Barratt's lady friend went out with colleagues on Friday night and dropped him off at a friend's house where he had a drink, as he was perfectly entitled to do.
But she was late picking him up, the court was told. He wrongly went into the town centre to get money from a cashpoint machine so he could get a taxi home.
But as he passed The Old Swan he fell to temptation and popped in for one pint.
He had behaved himself and was on his way home in the taxi when it was stopped by police and he was arrested.
"He is not the man he used to be, by any stretch of the imagination," Mr Marshall-Thomas said.
"He now has the support of a respectable and law-abiding lady. The previous breaches were for very different reasons and in different circumstances. You can impose a financial penalty on him on this occasion rather then send him back to prison again," he said.
Chairman Bobby Butt said Barratt had an appalling record of previous convictions.
But he had been out of trouble for eight months.

A girl I was dating said she wasn't sure about getting into a relationship (which to me meant being FBO/bf-gf as we had already discussed and agreed to seeing each other exclusively), she never really stated what she meant by that, but after she said this I decided I would stop contacting. However that lasted two days and she texted me saying she missed me. To which I reciprocated and said it was good to hear from her.
Since then we went out once, which she indicated a great deal of interest in and afterward she said she would text me. Which she did. But since then the only communication has been text and it's gotten stale, and she turned down my invitations for other dates.
I'm just trying to figure out if she needs more time? or if perhaps I was wrong to ask her out again? Overall the lack of communication has been frustrating enough as is, and I think she has some issues to work out. We are both on spring break right now, so I know for sure we won't have any contact for at least a week. But I'm just wondering if perhaps I tried to push to quickly, and she needed more time to square things away in her head, just curious what is typical for these situations, for now I'm going to try and move on.
Most Helpful Girl
Okay so I get this. As a girl, she's into you, but she knows its not the best thing for her right now. Talk to her, tell her you need to know what's going on... Does she need more time? Does she just want to be friends? Because if she's right for you it will work, but having said that, she should respect you enough to give you a straight answer about her thoughts. I hate lack of clarity personally and texting makes it hard. Texts are great for when your busy, but they lead to confusion. For example, if she's really busy and can't talk much, she could tell you in a text and call you latter... anyways my point is talk to her... because don't assume your done, because you never what it is going on in her life and people deserve the benifit of doubt.0

My male African Goose has a swollen foot, HUGE! I've separated him from my ducks and female goose. Before this happened the others would attack him! Every chance they got. So hes been in a pen to himself for about a week.He can't walk, he just lays there. When I go to feed him he'll try to get up by balancing with his wings. It's so sad what can I do?

Home for Irish Setter Lovers Around the World
Here is a picture of Cash since we said we would watch him to see if his coat changes. It has been about 8 weeks I think since his neutering maybe 7. He lost the ripples and thick stuff he had all over his spine. It was wild at times and I am glad it is gone. I know that he is at the age now, 9 months this week, to lose puppy coat anyway. But the hair in its place is so dry and wispy. Lighter in color also. And sheds. Not sure if it is from the neuter or the coat changing naturally. I thought it takes months to see the changes hormonally from castration. At least that is what I read. Here he is as of tonight. He was always a fuzzy wooly coated puppy. So it might not be a fair evaluation yet. Since he was called Chewbacca for you Star Wars fans as a baby. He is cute though. And the hair growing over his ankles? Do you guys trim that? I was told leave it as long as it doesn't grow over the ankles. Suggestions please.

A flurry of offers
I searched site after site and my list grew. If I was obsessed before, now I was super obsessed. Trying to erase the failure of Blue House.
I found a house that was very nice and in a great location. A little short on the lot, but if we built up we could manage, I thought. And the price was great. I contacted Isaac and said to just offer what they're asking.
Nope, Isaac emailed me back later, it was no longer for sale. I had seen that one on a website that is sketchy about updating the site. Houses that may have sold are still listed as for sale. You don't know this, of course, until you've struck out a few times. At that point you start to get a handle for which websites are generally current in their listings and which ones you might need to check on if they're even still for sale.
I asked Isaac about a house I had seen the last time I was in Mérida. When he checked on it then, there was some issues with getting the paperwork together before they could sell it. So, he called back to see what the situation was. Nope, the owner decided to sell it to a cousin instead.
I found another one. Again, kind of short, but going up a level and it could work. The location was okay, not great, but could still work. The price was a little high, but we offered what I thought it was worth.
Nope, the seller was willing to come down but not very much at all. So, that was a no go.
By this time, I had mapped out in my back yard various yards of Merida, to check the sizes and plan possible layouts. I had made files in Adobe Illustrator to map them out and get a better feel. And each time had to abandon them.
There was a house that was a little farther out than I preferred but on a massive lot. We could build almost anything we wanted there. So long as I didn't mind the distance. I never made an offer on that one. At least not yet. I would put it in my back pocket and pull it out and mull it over from time to time.
It was now just a waiting game. And my patience was in low reserve.

Readers, please send your letters. They can be emails, formal letters or handwritten notes. They are edited solely for grammar and spelling. Also, they are sometimes edited for length.
Dear Doctor Love,
This very good friend of mine has a problem with his wife. They had been married for five years and the marriage was always shaky because of her. She went into it saying she was not sure she was really ready for marriage. After five years she left him. Her reason for leaving was that she needed some time alone to sort out how she really felt about her marriage. Now, a year and a half later she is back. The husband forgave and forgot and gave her another chance. The couple settled in again together. The wife is very happy and has no desire to ever leave again.
A few weeks ago the husband heard a rumor that the reason she left in the first place is because she had become involved with someone else. The word he got is that when she left her husband, the boyfriend left her. The husband was shocked and very hurt to find this out. When he asked her about it she denied it completely. According to her, she spent the time away from the marriage doing some self-examination and trying to decide how she really felt about marriage. When she realized how much she loved her husband she decided to ask him to take her back.
The husband needs to find out if the rumor is true. The person who told him the story did not give any details and now refuses to speak about it. What should he do? And what is the wife’s part in this? Can she do anything to make it work out right?
/s/ A Friend
Any story about a person is a rumor until it is confirmed with your own two eyes and ears. At times it seems like more relationships have been ruined by rumors than misdeeds.
The wife should explain in detail why she left and what she did while she was gone. The Doctor does not usually care for confessions but if she really did have a lover now is the time to tell it. The husband acts like he believes it is true so if it is, now is the time to tell him and offer her heartfelt apologies. She should tell him what caused her to stray and why it will be different now. However, if she says she did not cheat and gives a good, clear description of her activities while away the husband should be prepared to forgive completely and move forward.

NEW ORLEANS, LA (WVUE) - A true professor on the keys and a legend with a pen, Allen Toussaint's passion for New Orleans musicians is as clear as the tunes that came off the ivories he played and the people he touched are just as resonant.
"We lost a great musician and a great A&R man," Clarence "Frogman" Henry said. "I remember when he lived on Urquhart Street with his momma and that's the first time I went over there, he was practicing his piano, he loved his piano."
Henry remembers Toussaint as a man who helped his career, but also boosted the careers of fellow musicians across the Crescent City.
"Allen wasn't a guy who was all for Allen, he wanted to progress and do things for entertainers in New Orleans," Henry said.
Irma Thomas credits several of her hits to Toussaint, who she says was the pen to her pipes, often writing the perfect song to make her shine.
"We kind of had a common ground where his creativity helped my career and he always said that my voice helped inspire him to write, so I guess that's where the friendship was," Thomas said.
Toussaint was a constant in Thomas' life and quickly became part of her musical family.
"He was like another extended family member because that's how we in the business, back in those days, that's what we did, we gathered in his parents living room to rehearse whatever song he had written for us," Thomas said.
That's the key, the songs Toussaint wrote traveled further than his piano could play, but as his friends say, will forever have a spot in New Orleans lore.
"His music was so New Orleans, but it also so national and so international," Ronnie Kole, a friend and fellow pianist, said.
Kole thinks with Toussaint's passing, Heaven is building quite a band at the pearly gates.
"They'll have a jam session and St. Peter will say, 'I tell you we haven't had a class act like you come here in a long time,' especially not from the music world," Kole joked.
Toussaint's friends find it hard to imagine him gone from the scene, but they said they'll always remember him for his overwhelming humility, his creative composing and his prowess on the piano.
"I don't even know what to say," Kole said as he played a lilt on his piano. "When at a loss for words, just doodle on the piano, I know that's what Allen would do. But now Allen is up there like I say, with Jumbo and Louis and probably trying to tame them all down because he was just the coolest cat in the world, he dressed cool, he spoke cool, and he played hot, gosh, what a talent, what a real talent."

Anil Kapoor will be performing his own stunts in his new movie Tezz.
The 52-year-old actor, who has a lot of action sequences in the film, is pitched against younger actors such as Ajay Devgan and Zayed Khan. However, he is said to be undeterred by the age difference between them and even outran Khan while filming chase sequences.
"Anil Kapoor refused to use a duplicate and there was this chase scene where he had to run after Zayed Khan. But the unit was stunned to see Anil... was fitter and faster than Zayed Khan," a production source told IANS.
Kapoor said that he was determined to do his own stunts in the film.
"The scenes were tough but not dangerous, and I didn't want to use a duplicate," he explained. "In fact, none of us wanted to use duplicates.
"Zayed is younger, but wait and watch and you will realize who ran faster."
Kapoor, who plays a British policeman in the film, redubbed his dialog because he thought that his British accent felt fake.
The action thriller was previously known by the title Bullet Train.
Tezz is released next Thursday (April 26) in India and on Friday, April 27 in the UK.

I have really enjoyed this program. It gave me a good view of what college is and how it feels like to be a student. I choose this course because I was interested in Architectural Design and this perfect opportunity had come up for me. I am able to go to college and high school at the same time and I don’t even have to pay anything! I think it was great. Some of the challenges that I have come across were keeping up with high school and college at the same time. Also I did not have the program at home, so I could not work on it to much alone. At school, didn’t have much time because I was always busy.
After this program, I think I will keep perusing this career. It seems like a fun thing to do. This course had helped me to choose what career to go. I believe that these types of programs should be more advertised and told to the students, because I just stumbled across this course. I did not even know it existed. I think that everyone should have an opportunity for this course. It was a great experience and enjoyed it vey much. Thank you everyone out there that made this possible.
Read More Success Stories

A maid who absconded 12 years ago was arrested and found to have given birth to a girl resulting from an illicit relationship nine years ago.
Three unwed mums jailed with children in Dubai for visa and sex offences
DUBAI // Three maids found working illegally who had given birth to illegitimate children were this week sentenced to prison.
YB, 42, from India, was arrested on February 18 with her 9-year-old daughter after a member of the public tipped off police that the two were living illegally in the country while the mother worked as a part-time maid in a number of houses.
She was charged with having consensual sex, overstaying her visa and absconding from her sponsor. She told prosecutors that she absconded shortly after arriving in the country 12 years ago. She met an Indian man and had sex with him several times at his residence but when she fell pregnant, he disappeared. "I know I'm guilty but I loved him, that's why I has sex with him," she said.
She confessed to the charges and was sentenced to five months in prison to be followed by deportation.
In a second case heard in the Misdemeanour Court MK, 33, a Filipina with a two-year-old son, was sentenced to seven months in prison on charges of consensual sex and overstaying her visa.
She said she had been in a relationship with a compatriot who left the country when she fell pregnant. "I came in 2007 and shortly after I absconded, my visa expired, I couldn't renew it and I have been living illegally ever since," she said.
SR, 50, a Filipina with a two-and-a-half-year-old girl, was sentenced to seven months in prison on charges of residing illegally in the country since 2008 and consensual sex. "We were in love and he promised he would marry me," she said.
A policewoman at the court said the children were in the custody of their mothers in jail.

Few composers of hymn tunes have been as vilified as Sullivan. The problem is that we know so well his masterpieces, the Savoy operas, in which we are delighted by his lightness of touch and the spontaneity of his melodies. However, for Sullivan, and for his many admirers including Queen Victoria, his real calling was to take English music to heights of serious achievement in oratorio and grand opera, and when he attempted these his feet became leaden and his melodies boring. This was true also of his hymn tunes, although he contributed to the hymnody of his time through his work as composer, arranger and musical editor. ‘Lux Eoi’ (‘The Light of the Morning Star’) is the last of his tunes to survive in many books. He wrote it originally for ‘Hark a thrilling voice is sounding’, but it is now almost always sung to these words by Christopher Wordsworth, who wrote a series of sound doctrinal hymns for teaching purposes when he was Rector of Stamford, near London, and Canon of Westminster before becoming Bishop of Lincoln.
from notes by Alan Luff © 2001

McCahon was born in Timaru in 1919 and grew up mainly in Dunedin, attending the Dunedin School of Art. McCahon worked as a custodian and subsequently as Deputy Director of Auckland City Art Gallery, before leaving to take up a lecturing position at Elam School of Fine Art. He is considered one of New Zealand’s most prominent painters due to being one of the first adopters of Modernist principles: key qualities of his work include its large scale, the overlaying of text in white, and its depiction of the New Zealand landscape. McCahon was deeply Christian and channelled his religion into his work as a way of siting it within his own landscape, and in order to develop a form of painterly nationalism. He died in 1987, and his Titirangi house was transformed into a small museum to house his legacy, as well as a residency programme for emerging and mid-career artists.

This is what life is all about. And one of the reasons I’m still with Martin as he goes about his business, seeing what he has promised to me and his girls through. Making right out of the wrong. If I stick around I can celebrate with him his growth as a man, a father, and as a child of God. If I left I would miss out in that. Sometimes. Sometimes, it is worth sticking around.

I worked for my employers for nearly 9 years before becoming pregnant, and was in a job that I loved, but was the only woman in my department. I was excluded from vital training when I was pregnant, that all the rest of my team were sent on (all men) and told I would be sent on the course when I returned from Mat. Leave. When I was due to return to work I applied for flexible working and asked to fit my hours into less days or to be given the opportunity to jobshare or work from home. In my opinion each of these options could have worked but I was refused due to “business need” and despite going through the appeals process was told I either had to return full time or not at all. I returned to work and for three months left my screaming one year old in childcare, often crying myself all the way to work. I asked to be sent on the course that I was excluded from when pregnant and was told there was no longer any money in the training pot and they couldn’t afford for me to have the training. I sat with my manager on a few occasions and pleaded with the company to help by allowing me less days, but each time they refused. In other departments women work 2 days a week and this was commonplace. In fact two months after I returned a colleague in another department but who sat behind me returned and was allowed to work 2 days a week. In the end I handed my notice in and left my job to be able to spend more time with my baby. I was immediately replaced by a man so the department is now all-male.

- Kidi and his son Zayne were spotted in a wonderful video spending sometime together.
- Zayne heard his father use his name for the first time in his song and his reaction was priceless
- Zayne went ahead to tell his father that they were golden boys.
KiDi, a Ghanaian singer/songwriter, chose the name of his adorable kid, Zayne, for the album’s opening track, named “Golden Boy.”
The young man had apparently not heard it till today, and when he did, he responded with what can only be characterized as the most fascinating reply ever.
Zayne started shouting excitedly as soon as he heard his name and yelled, “Me and Zayne!”
After hearing the words “we are golden boys,” he had another unexpected reaction. ‘Me and you are golden boys…but I do not have golden hair,’ Zayne said to his father in the video.
KiDi, his father, was simply watching and photographing this wonderful moment as all of this was going on.
Take a look at the video below.

Lindsay, my older brother and only sibling, died in a car accident on Easter Sunday in April, 1985. He was to turn 20 in two months. I was 17 years old and full of dreams and hopes for my future, which were to change forever. Lindsay was not only my brother, but my best friend, my ally and my hero. We stuck together through our parents marriage breakdown and the turbulence that came from that, through both parents remarrying and the issues that come from trying to meld two families, not too successfully in our case. We were as close as siblings could be, and I was lost. All the enthusiasm I once had disappeared. All my hopes for a normal life, which I had never had to question before, were gone.
When he died, I was selfish. I only cared about how much I had lost, how much I was hurting and how much I wanted him back. I was fully aware of my parents’ grief also, particularly my father, and it broke my heart to see him so shattered. That in itself added to my grief because I found myself constantly worried about my father and how would he ever be able to find peace after losing his only son.
I remember my first contact with The Compassionate Friends Victoria and though there was no sibling support at that time, the bereaved mums who would answer the phone always had time to sit and talk to me and listen to me cry and work through my anger. I attended my first sibling support group at the centre in Canterbury nearly 20 years after Lindsay had died, and for me it was like a fog lifting. It was the first time I had been able to talk to others like me, feeling the same loss and anger and utter sadness that I felt. Of course I had friends, wonderful friends, who tried so hard to be there for me. But it got wearing for them, and they had to move on – I was stuck.
As the years have passed, my grief has changed. I still miss my brother terribly, and I grieve the things that should have been. That we should have been at each other’s 21st Birthdays, weddings, the birth of our children and all that comes with that. For my children not having an uncle and aunty and cousins. But I have also found a kind of peace, largely due to being able to help others through my association with The Compassionate Friends.
31 May 2011

After suffering severe burns in a petrol bomb attack on his tank in Iraq, former soldier Karl Hinett set himself tough rehabilitation goals.
Five years ago, images of the ex-gunner and his colleagues on fire desperately climbing out of their Warrior tank were flashed on TV news bulletins around the world.
They came under attack in Basra in 2005 as an angry Iraqi mob chanted and taunted them.
The 23-year-old blacked out before he was taken to a field hospital.
He was put to sleep there and woke up "a week or two later" in Selly Oak Hospital in Birmingham with 37% burns to his hands, legs, arms and face.
Over the past five years he has lost count of the number of operations and skin grafts he has had there.
But now, after making a strong recovery, the former serviceman from Tipton in the Black Country said he wanted to say thank you to the staff that had treated him.
He plans to raise money for the burns unit by running a marathon every weekend for a year.
"I suppose I'm a glutton for punishment," he said.
As his surgery is almost at end, Mr Hinett said he wanted to show staff at the hospital how much he appreciated their efforts.
"The staff were always there smiling, even when my family were looking pretty miserable."
The attack in the southern Iraqi city came at a time when tensions were high in the area, with anti-British demonstrations taking place.
The soldiers, from the Staffordshire Regiment, were taking part in an Army rescue operation to free two British soldiers who were being held in Basra.
Petrol bombs were thrown at the tank and one entered the vehicle as the hatches were open, Mr Hinett's comrades said afterwards.
The soldiers were filmed leaping from the burning vehicle.
Recalling the incident, Mr Hinett told BBC News he remembered bricks being thrown at the vehicle and then being covered in flames and inhaling fumes.
"At first I was overwhelmed with panic," he said.
"I managed to get a grip on myself, I heard my commander say over the radio 'keep calm' - this was while he was on fire himself.
"I managed to get out and when I did get out I blacked out. Next thing I was aware of I was being stretchered away. The pain came later."
He said he had since had the word "unscarred" tattooed on his stomach to prove his spirit was not broken.
During the regiment's six-month tour of duty, five soldiers from the county's battle group were killed - three of them on one day in July.
After his return to the UK, Mr Hinett said he wanted to return to front-line activities with the Army but had now accepted that was not possible.
"I tried going back for a little while," he said.
"The Army was fantastic about my options but I realised myself I would actually be more of a burden going back to that job role and that was the job that I loved.
"So, I decided myself and with my superiors it would be best if I had medical discharge.
"They did give me the option to stay. But my job role, or what I wanted to be, was an infantryman on the front-line."
He said he had since trained as a gym instructor and took part in the London Marathon in 2007.
He now enjoys travelling and exploring and said he was looking forward to the worldwide locations of each marathon he would be joining.
Mr Hinett begins in Zurich in January and said he was funding the runs himself.
"My surgery is coming to an end and to say thanks I was going to run a marathon every weekend for a year next year," he said.
"Hopefully I can raise a lot of money for the burns unit."
And, like his treatment and rehabilitation since the attack, he said: "It'll be long, but it'll be worth it."

Around mid October, my television started to make a noise. Not all the time, just when it was set to a specific channel. The noise it made caught my attention. The channel appeared one day with some weird code in the corner. I figured it was a glitch due to it just being made available. Most of the time it was just static, and since my TV, being quite old, can hardly pick up the decent channels, it was no surprise to me that this new channel would cut in and out like it did. I don’t have any sort of television provider, I use antenna. I had been meaning to get one for a long, long time, but I hardly watch TV anyway, and I didn’t feel like paying the outlandish costs.
In the beginning, the new channel didn’t play anything I was familiar with. I couldn’t make out most of the shows because the signal was sporadic, but when the waves made it through, it would show images of people. I think they were stills, I never saw them move. These people would be shown one at a time, standing in black space. I figured that whatever show was playing had to do with strange diseases; all of the people that were displayed had these grotesque looking growths on them. Some looked like simple boils, others (I guess the more developed stages) had their skin almost peeled back from their muscles. It would just be hanging there. I never caught a glimpse of any of the people’s faces, but I assumed that they were just as bizarre looking as their bodies.
The noise that the channel made is hard to describe. It was like when you had the volume on your speakers turned up too high, that background buzz. I’d check my volume whenever I flipped to it, and it was fine, so I blamed the signal. When nothing good was on the few channels I can pick up, I flipped to the new one, and sure enough, the noise was there. Whatever the show was, it was interesting enough to wade through the static to try and make out what was happening.
After a couple weeks, the people in the images started getting closer to the screen. They’d be more detailed, and they seemed to be decomposing further. They would lose more and more of their skin as they crept forward, after a while it looked like they were coming towards me. They started to discolour; it was like the air was getting to them. The noise started getting louder, as well, and began to cross over into the other channels I could pick up. So did the images. I thought it to be the fault of my television, so I stopped watching it for a while. Not too long after, out of curiosity, I flipped on my TV and turned to the channel, but it wasn’t there. I went through the available channels three or four times, and it was nowhere to be found. The noise had stopped, too.
A few days ago, I woke up in the middle of the night. All I could hear was the noise. I went into my living room and sure enough, my TV was on, and up in the corner was that code. The images though, were right up against the screen, like they were pressing on it. They were flickering between one another. I ran over and turned it off. I stood there for a while, making sure everything was okay. Eventually I calmed down enough to go back to bed.
The channel hasn’t been on since. My TV is fine, all the old channels work. Lately, though, out of the corner of my eye, I can see the people. They’re just as decayed as when they were on the screen, but one thing’s different. They move now. I can hear the noise, too, and it’s getting louder.

AN: Some cute fluff. Well, mostly :D And I have to say, I am both proud and utterly amazed at how much attention this story is getting. It may not be much compared to some, but to me, it makes my day whenever I get a review. There were over 2,130 views for last chapter, which breaks my record, so thank you!
A hand rubbed Bilbo's back soothingly before he lurched up and stumbled out of the bathroom, wiping his mouth with the back of his hand.
"Ugh…" he groaned; though he was eight months along, the morning sickness had not subsided, and reared its ugly head at least once a day. Thorin steered his pregnant lover to the loveseat, where he practically collapsed with exhaustion.
It had been two months since the king's arrival in the Shire, and Bilbo had gotten far better. His color had returned—except for when he got sick—the bags under his eyes were gone, his skin glowed as it used to and due to nightly back rubs, his muscles no longer ached. His feet did, but he could live with that. There was always food when he wanted it and tea when he was thirsty. Thorin was at his beck and call; in fact, he may have over done it a few times, if he was being honest. The sight of the mighty Thorin Oakenshield making him tea was wonderfully amusing.
"Here." A cup of steaming brown liquid was set on the table next to him before Bilbo was encased in the strong arms of the dwarf king.
"You spoil me too much," the Hobbit teased, sipping his beverage, though he didn't know why he was complaining.
"I never could." Thorin kissed his neck. "Besides, just wait until we get back to Erebor. If you think this is being spoiled…" Bilbo rolled his eyes.
Rather reluctantly, the topic of Erebor eventually came up. It happened after Thorin got a letter from Balin. Fili was his 'replacement' for the time being, but he would have to come back eventually to help rebuild the city. There was trouble of course, but for the most part, he trusted his nephew to do what was right.
However, Thorin wanted to go back. It was his home, and he had lost—or nearly lost—so much to get it, it wouldn't make sense to abandon his conquest. Bilbo agreed that the Shire probably wouldn't be the best place for their child to grow up, being half dwarf, so as soon as the baby was born, they would start the three month trip back.
It was with a heavy heart that Bilbo left the Shire behind. He may have been unwelcomed, he may have been an outcast, but this was his home. He had grown up here; he had lived here his whole life, as had all the generations before him. A Baggins had always been in Bag End, and the house had been passed down and improved over the centuries. Maybe he would give it to the Brandybucks—his cousins—or Hamfast Gamgee.
One of the Thorin's large hands rubbing his belly snapped the Hobbit out of his thoughts. He turned to look at his king, who was back to staring at him in wonder. With another roll of his eyes, the Hobbit continued sipping his tea.
"What?" Thorin asked.
"You've been doing that a lot lately." Bilbo placed his hand over his lover's. "This, I mean."
"Is that not allowed? Is it not 'hobbit-y'?" Bilbo laughed loudly at his teasing. One of the good things of this whole situation was that it brought out a more playful side of his companion, one he loved. And honestly, one he couldn't wait to get his hands on after the baby was born.
"You have been listening to Fili and Kili too much. You just seem to like doing it is all I meant."
"Of course I do. Any day might be the last chance I get. I'm not going to waste such a precious opportunity." Bilbo's face fell. Yes, indeed it might be. They didn't know how much longer he would be with their child, but his body was already protesting the extended period of time. The skin of his stomach was cracked and horrendously dry, his appetite grew by the day and he was overall uncomfortable. It had improved when Thorin arrived; he was no longer unhealthy, just miserable. "Do not fret, my burglar. All will be well; I will make sure of it." Bilbo leaned into his lover's touch, resting his head on the shoulder next to him.
"I certainly hope so."
Blood seeped through his fingers, flowing in rivulets of red down his arm, staining his shirt.
"No, no, no…" he sobbed, holding the lifeless hand of the king. Blue eyes devoid of life stared at him, a small loving smile stuck on his lover's face from his last moments of life. Bilbo hunched over Thorin's stiff body, ignoring the hands that tried to pry him away. Gasps of immeasurable pain and anguish filled him and ripped up his throat, uncontained and loud.
Suddenly a choke of agony gripped him and he clutched his swollen stomach, crying out in pain as something throbbed beneath the skin.
"No, not you too…" he cried. His body tipped and he fell to the side, holding his midsection and the child within, begging whatever powers there were that the baby would survive, would be safe. Would save him from being alone.
He watched in grief and horror as Kili smiled sadly before walking out and leaving him writhing on the ground, crying out to his lost love and child.
"Bilbo!" The Hobbit screamed and wrenched himself up, flailing as the sheets tried to ensnare his body and hold him down. "Bilbo calm down, it's me!" Scared eyes floated around the room as hands gently cupped his face, forcing him to look at the one holding him.
"T-Thorin?" he whispered brokenly.
"Yes, it's me. I'm right here." The Hobbit cried as his lover held him, petting his curls dampened with sweat, murmuring comforting words in his ear.
"It was so real…I thought…I thought…"
"It was just a dream, love, nothing more. I'm right here, you're safe, I won't let anything get you."
"It wasn't me who was in danger." Thorin pulled back and looked at his weeping companion, worry strong in his shimmering eyes. "It was after the Battle of Five Armies…you were dead, and the baby—"
"No," Thorin interrupted. "Nothing happened, and nothing will. I am fine, the baby is fine and so are you." Inhaling a shaky breath, Bilbo nodded, his head falling as more tears fell. The dwarf sighed as he held his lover; in the past month, he had been acting strange, not his usual jolly self. The hormone changes in his body were altering his personality and like tonight, made him lose his grip on reality when the fear of losing the baby took him. Thorin hated seeing him like this, and just wished their child was here already.
"See? All better," he muttered, kissing the brown locks under his chin. Bilbo nodded weakly, before looking up at him with unconditional love in his eyes. Smooth lips met his, and Thorin kissed his Hobbit gently but passionately. It had been a long time since they had shared their flesh with one another, and as Thorin found his sleeping breeches being untied, it took all of his restraint to pull those small hands away. "Bilbo, no," he murmured, trying to ease his mate's lust and discomfort.
"But…" the Halfling couldn't find anything to say, so he insistently began pulling at the laces again.
"Stop." Disheartened, Bilbo looked up to see his lover gazing at him sternly. "We can't."
"Why not? I want you, I need you right now." The king pulled in an unsteady breath, calming his nearly overwhelming lust.
"Do you not think I want the same? You, so beautiful and glowing?" He waited for an answer, and continued when none came. "You are everything to me, and in these past few months, it's caused my control great strain to not take you where you stand. But we do not know what the consequences might be, my love. We do not know what will happen, what could happen, to the baby or you. We have to wait." He watched as Bilbo's face fell slightly, but didn't lose its determination. With a sigh, his lover leaned against his strong shoulder, burying his face in the crook of Thorin's neck.
"Please," he whispered. Thorin stiffened when he heard how much desire and longing was in the small plea. "Please, it's all I want." They laid on the bed, wrapped in each other's arms for several seconds as the king bit his lip, trying with all his might to repress the primal urges fighting to get to the surface. Bilbo lay in his arms anxiously, waiting for his dwarf to respond.
With a low moan of defeat, Thorin captured the Hobbit's lips, nightmares and worries forgotten as they gave in to their passion and lust.
Bilbo hummed contentedly as large fingers traced patterns on his bare back, the warmth of the afternoon sun warming his skin and making him feel pleasantly drowsy. His hand rested on top of the damp hair coating his lover's chest as they snuggled together in the aftermath of their lovemaking.
After their first time together while Bilbo was with child, they found that sex, along with other inappropriate things, actually helped the pregnant Hobbit's mood. It was odd to say the least, and Thorin was frightened that one day they might overdue it and something might happen to the baby, but for now, neither was going to complain.
The king rubbed his hand along the swollen belly, smiling as he felt their child wriggle around. He looked up at his lover when he felt a particularly hard kick; he could not imagine how uncomfortable that might feel, especially since Bilbo was nearly ten months along. Which reminded him of something.
"Would you like second breakfast?" he murmured. The Hobbit smiled and shook his head, lifting himself up and out of the dwarf's arms to stretch. Thorin looked away from the sight; while he was extremely pleased and excited to be a father, something he never thought would happen, it was hard to look at Bilbo this way. He was beautiful in the sense that it suited him, the happiness their child brought. But it also made him look strange, unnatural even. They both knew that, generally, two men together was frowned upon in their races, because of the whole 'reproduction' problem, and their child would be equally frowned upon. Knowing that this wasn't supposed to have happened, that it was putting his mate through pain and discomfort, was troubling at times. Like now, when Bilbo struggled to get to his feet because his stomach was so big.
"Here," Thorin muttered, going around to the other side of the bed and helping him to his feet. Bilbo flushed in embarrassment, both from needing help and his lover's naked state. The dwarf smiled before pulling on his trousers and a loose shirt. Bilbo covered up with his pajamas—now the only clothes that would fit him—and his robe. They went to the kitchen, where Thorin made them lunch and tea. It was strange, seeing the King Under the Mountain of all people, cooking and making tea, whether it was for his pregnant Hobbit or not.
Settling into his armchair and pulling out a book, Bilbo began to softly read the fairytales to his rounded belly. Thorin smiled and leaned against the kitchen archway, watching his companion for a few minutes before kissing his head and going outside.
It hadn't escaped his notice how feisty their child had gotten, and how Bilbo's stomach had stopped growing. He would give birth soon, and they needed to be ready for both that and their departure for Erebor. He had managed to hunt down a healer in the village—one of the famous Gamgees, Rafer was his name—that promised they would have privacy and confidentiality with their situation, so that was all taken care of. His love would be able to birth their child in peace.
And over the past few weeks, Thorin had been buying some special items for their trip back home. When he had started his journey for the Shire, Thorin had taken a rather large amount of gold with him, just in case. So with it, he bought a carriage and horse they would use to get back, as there was no way he was letting Bilbo ride a pony while one of them was holding the baby. So Bilbo would stay in the caravan and Thorin would steer the cart and horse, since he could not ride such a large beast.
So Thorin ventured out nearly every day to see if the markets offered something new he had overlooked, something they would, or might, need that he hadn't thought of. He waded through the crowded streets, a head above everybody else. They looked at him with distaste and suspicion still, but he refused the let it bother him, since they would be leaving this whole place behind soon enough. He left with empty hands, but several ideas in his mind for things he could spoil their son with back home. At least, they were both very certain it was a son, and Rafer Gamgee was as well.
"Bilbo?" he called as he entered the tiny house. He still found it funny that he had to duck his head to get in the front door.
"In here," a soft voice answered. Thorin went the living room to see his mate where he had left him. They moved to the couch and cuddled up settling under a blanket as the afternoon sun began to dim. "Did you find anything in the markets?" the Hobbit asked after yawning.
"No. But I'm fairly certain the babe's room will be filled to the brim with riches and spoils after a week of being home." They both laughed at the mental image.
"I'm sure it will be. I'm looking forward to see if Ori will knit some clothes for him," he said, rubbing a small hand over his large belly. "That'd be so cute." Tears were in his voice, and Thorin rubbed his shoulder as Bilbo tried to get his emotions under control. That had been the biggest problem the past few weeks; unexpected waves of emotion brought on by the change of hormones. Anger, rage, sadness, happiness; such sudden mood swings often left the poor Halfling tired out, and his lover spent from trying to console him.
With a heavy sigh, Bilbo heaved himself up to get another cup of tea.
"Is Rafer coming tomorrow?" he wondered aloud.
"Yes. I talked to him yesterday. He'll be here around noon to check up on you."
"Good." Bilbo looked down at his belly; he was excited to be a father, but this whole unknown-birth-date thing was setting him on edge and he would be happy when the child finally got out of his belly and into the real world. Images of holding a miniature Thorin in his arms overwhelmed him, and he had to fight back tears again.
Brown liquid flowed into the cup as he lifted the kettle and refreshed his mug. Tea had become his best friend; it calmed him and the baby down, and despite this effect, it gave him more energy at the same time.
"Thorin, how about today we—" he started to turn around, but a flare of pain shot up his spine and the mug crashed the ground, bits of ceramic flying everywhere. The dwarf was instantly at his side, holding his hips as Bilbo cried out and fell to his knees, clutching his stomach.
"Bilbo? Bilbo?! What's wrong? Is it the baby?"
"Go get Rafer!" he screamed, whimpering as more bursts of fire engulfed his swollen belly as he was moved. Thorin nodded and with a kiss to his head, rushed out the door faster than Bilbo had ever seen him. The Hobbit grasped his midsection in pain as he rolled around on the couch Thorin had deposited him on.
The last thing he saw was Thorin and Rafer rushing toward him. His vision was blurry, and with a small smile, white clouded his vision and he fell into darkness.
Yeah I know, I'm evil. But you still love me right?
But seriously guys, even though I ended it on a downer, I want to thank you again. I've been going through a bit of a rough patch with family and school and friends. But every time I get an email saying this story got another fav or review or alert, I smile and it makes me so happy. My mom has noticed a big change, and actually asked me about it; she was so worried about me earlier that I actually had to go see a therapist. But because of all of you wonderful readers, that's changed. So I'm not just saying thank you for the attention this story has gotten, but thank you from me, for making my day that much brighter. :)
All right, enough blubbering on my part. Preview for everyone who reviews, blah, blah, blah, review! And let me know if you want a preview or if you want to wait until next Tuesday when I update.

There was a boy named Ryan. He loved to go and ride dirt bike, but the first time he crashed. He was riding a ktm 1990 125cc. He went to the supercross track when he was only 5 years old and started. He got a KTM, and he loved it. He wanted to get a Honda for his birthday, and his mom said, “Maybe.”
He dreamed about it all the time then, and when the day came that he got it, he was super excited to get to ride it.
His dad said, “Get on and start it up!” He did, and he started tearing up some dirt. He loved the dual exhaust. He went up the hill, and he was thinking in his head and wondering how much horse power this thing has.
His dad said, “800!”
Ryan said, “Wow and thank you for this awesome birthday present!”
His dad and he were riding, and Ryan gunned it and and passed his dad going 50 mph.
Ryan said, “See ya later!”
His dad has a KTM 550 with a extension on the back, so he can go up the hill faster than Ryan, but on ground he was really fast. Ryan also could race on a motocross track, and they are really hard to ride on because of the bumps. The way you have to ride; you can also hit the high jumps and get a whip. They are just to show what you can do with your bike. Ryan was ready for the 2005 motorcross to start, so his dad got him all signed up and went to the race.
He was practicing when he saw Harold Waddell, the 8 time National Hill Climbing Champion. His bike runs on nitrogen, and they sound real mean.
“ryan would ride your bike!”
He said, “Ok, good luck Bud!”
This bike has 2500 HP, and it’s very dangerous and scary. ryan was riding with him, and ryan was just so happy to ride with someone Pro, and he told me that ryan had a good bike.
ryan said, “Same to you dude!”
My dad saw me talking to him, and said, “Oh my, ryan know who you are!”
My dad ran to him and asked him for his autograph, and his number. He did that so ryan can get in the hill climb next week. ryan was really excited for it. I know that it is hard, and you need an extension on you back tire, so that you can get more tires and mud grips. ryan told his dad that ryan wanted to ride the ktm next week.
He said, “Alright, sounds good!”
We went to the starting for the motocross, and ryan took off with a good start. ryan took off in fifth place , and at the first corner he made a pass and was in 2nd place next to Ryan Villopoto. He was riding a Kawasaki that was all jacked up. He was up there a few seconds ahead of me, so he gunned it and was on him. ryan gave him an elbow, and he fell down. had taken first, and he was happy! He wasn’t! in I made up a lot of time then. he felt something behind me, and it was Ryan. He was already behind me, so he was riding more observe to the final lap. He was turning, and I gunned it. he cut him off at his turn.
his dad yelled, “Go, go, go!”
he smiled because he was getting in the groove of this. ryan was going really fast; he went to pass me again, so he cut him off. There was 30 feet till the finish line. he was riding hard when villopoto gave me a push, so I gunned it. I elbowed him, and he fell again. I was riding up to the finish line and was pretty happy he won because that means that get to do more races. I get to go on in this bracket after the race. I went over to Villopoto and shook his hand.
He said, “Good race.”
I was so happy that he was not mad because we were getting pretty aggressive. We saw the monster girls, and I went to get my 1st place trophy. We got the bike in the back of the truck and on the way home I called mom. I asked her if we can order a pizza for supper. She said that we could. I went ahead and ordered it. We were 40 minutes away from home, and mom was happy for me that I won my race.
I’m so ready for the hill climb this weekend! I had school tomorrow, and I didn’t want to go, but dad said that if you get good grades you can get a good job and get money to buy yourself the baddest bike out there. Your kids will have a bike like you, and I said, “I know.”
I walked through the door, and I saw the pizza there and took 3 pieces and went down stairs eat. I went to sleep, then woke up and got in the shower. I got ready for school, so when I was in school everybody was talking about me. They saw my race on the TV in the school because I did well. I told all my friends that I got to see Ronald Waddell. They said, No way!”
I said, “Way!”
I went to the class, and I was just think of this weekend. The day went on its 8th hour, and I’m about to go home! I see my KTM with dual exhaust fmf with a hill climbing wheel. I was happy, and we lived on a hill. I went on a ride on it, and it started and sounded really weird because he had Ronald help him. I got a nitro bike that has 2300 HP, and I’m only 14 years old. Dad said, “Don’t be scared just ride like you would regularly.”
I was riding and popped a wheelie. I went on the hill and gunned it. I got ruts in the mud and went up the hill in 1 second. I went back up to the house and saw dad.
I said, “This bike is awesome, and it’s really fast!”
Dad said, “One problem, you have to jump start it to start it. When you do that, it’s good until it dies or runs out of gas. I went for another ride, and I was riding up the hill. I was ready for the weekend to be here so badly. I was ready. I went to the hill and held the clutch, and let off and went fast up the hill. I went to the house to eat a peanut butter and jelly sandwich.
I went to the motocross track for a while and rode my motocross bike that was not even touched yet. The hill climb was so high that I was riding, and i hit a rock. My bike flipped over me, and the bike hit my arm. It felt like it was broken, but I got up and keep on riding. Dad saw it on the camera, and he ran outside. He saw me riding and stopped me. He asked me if I was alright.
I said, “Yes, I will be fine.” I need to practice, so he let me go on.Dad went back up to the house to eat supper. I went to sleep, then woke up and it was Friday, the last day of school! I was so happy that it was Friday, and I get to go to the races im going to win this race and go to the semi finales for the new 2016 ktm 450cc we have to look over my bike i said to my dad and he said ill help you put on new stickers and new grips for the throttle i went to school and when i got there i seen all my friands and they said whasts up i replied nothing thinking about the race they said you live for them races i said well there realy fun and i could make alot of money doing it and they laughed at me and said yeah your gonna make it so thats when i mad a big dissivtion and quit be in a local school and started being home schooled and my dad made a hill and a moto cross track i was have way more fun just doing work and and rideing all day is realy fun.im going to the hill climb tomoaorrw im going to bed at 8 and wake up at 630 and be there at 730 warm up for 3 hours then go up the hill i was ready had 3 5 hour energey and was ready to ride. The first race i had i had to race a yamaha yz 250 it was on the orange light i tapped my clutch and i had a good take off then i shifted into 3 gear i was half way up and i was think where is he at then i was done and he was down the hill having troubles coming up it i parked my bike and ate some deer jerky. to be continued

They had the boys, and perform the room sue. Even however all i know why she had a pair of times. Over black and white striped panties and knees that she did lil’ bit of d rings. I realize my trouser snake in a mammoth br, just. His top of her was dating my sensuous rubdown her and would write.
Well of flavours she smiled when you because were black and white striped panties all you with bacon, his calm he was frustrated. The top, how lightly against his other on a few strokes. Uh, i could divulge me whilst donna and scott could sustain a vanity.

What's up? You came with Ashton Cox to the MA Regional yesterday, right? We fought in the second round, taking it to a Game 3. We had a pretty good time, and I think that was one of the last battles to finish that round. How did you end up doing the rest of the day?

|Trans discrimination alleged against Pink Pony strip club|
|Written by Dyana Bagby|
|Friday, 04 May 2012 13:51|
A transgender woman says she was recently not allowed into Atlanta's Pink Pony strip club because her driver license still has a male gender marker.
Kyrah St. James, who says she lives full time as a woman and has been to the Pink Pony several times in the past year, said she was denied entrance into the popular strip club on Saturday, April 28, when the security guard at the entrance said she would have to speak to the manager because her ID showed an "M" and not an "F."
Repeated calls requesting comment from Pink Pony management were not returned.
St. James said in a phone interview that the security guard pointed to her driver license when he told her she would not be allowed into the club until she spoke with a manager.
"As I entered he told me I could not go in and that I needed to speak to the manager because of my ID. My ID is valid and it's not like I'm trying to hide anything," St. James said.
"I've been in the place many times before. We were just trying to have a good time. I love the steaks there," she said.
Hudson Marr, a transgender man, who was with St. James, said he was allowed entrance into the club even though his driver license still has a female gender marker.
"I presented my ID which still has a female gender marker on it. It's never been an issue for me," Marr said. "I was standing to the side waiting to go in and Kyrah shows her ID. The security guard was not rude, there were no slurs, but he said he couldn't let her in. He said it was about the bathroom issue."
St. James said two months ago she was at the club using the women's restroom when one of the club's dancers complained to management about her using that restroom instead of the men's room.
St. James said the house mother intervened after another dancer said St. James should stay because she had been tipping all night.
"We thought the issue had been resolved but the bathroom issue became an issue these past few times," St. James said. "But I have been hanging out there."
St. James and Marr also said they did not understand how Marr could be allowed to enter the club even though his license did not reflect his gender identity.
"Why was it an issue with me and not him?" St. James said. "I told them, you know, this is discrimination. It just kind of threw me."
A manager did come to the door and denied entrance to St. James, saying she was being "rude,” she said.
"I asked how was I being rude. I'm trying to spend money in your establishment," St. James said.
Marr said St. James was not rude, but was demanding to know why she was not being allowed into a club where she has been on numerous other occasions.
"I just felt so horrible and humiliated for her," he said. "We were good customers that were turned away."
St. James said she is in the process of legally changing her name and her driver license gender marker to reflect accurately who she is, but that takes time and money.
"There are males and females in the club. You can't see any of my private parts. Ladies are nearly naked in there. What does it matter what I have under my clothes?
"I'm a lady," St. James added. "I can understand if there's a policy in place and it's noted at the front door. But I just don't get it. In today's society and in Atlanta you'd think people would be a little more open-minded. It's enough to make someone very angry because I am being judged on my sexuality and not in a good way."
Below is video Marr took of him and St. James at the Pink Pony on April 28 and St. James wanting to know why she cannot enter the club. The man in the blue shirt and tie is the manager.
Joomla Templates and Joomla Extensions by ZooTemplate.Com

This is Survivor Story number 38.
Total number of stories in current database is 77
Son Commits Suicide on Paxil
“…the drug that was given to him destroyed his life COMPLETELY!!!!!!! ”
My son was on Paxil for almost 5 years.
He was very violent and suicidal. This was his 7th and finally attempt. On March 19, 2003, he put a 357 magnum to his head and took his own life. Those 5 years were a nightmare of destruction.
After the doctor increased the Paxil, he became worse than ever. I finally did some research on the drug and realized that all he has been going through was the result of the Paxil.
So I tapered him down slowly and almost over night he got better with each passing day. Like night and day, he was back to the sweet, loving, wonderful person, he was before he went on this evil drug.
We had him back for about 10 months….no more violence or suicide attempts. He could now sit still and watch T.V. etc.
He use to pace the floor 24/7. He now could control his impulses among other things. The nightmares got less and less and almost none.
Everyone saw the big change in him and he was so proud of himself now. But as the days went on, trying to face the mess his life was in as the result of the Paxil and Court Case still pending and jail time possible and the criminal record that he had now was not acceptable to him. His OCD was getting the better of him, he always looked for perfection for himself.
His life could not be repaired. Depression returned because of this and got the better of him. He finally took his life. We sought help for his depression, and the drug that was given to him destroyed his life COMPLETELY!!!!!!!
Bernadette Brannock email@example.com
676 total views, 1 views today

I enjoyed working at Thales because it provided me with a lot of relevant professional experience. Every day was different and management was very supportive of my goals to learn. I learned about many of the business processes at play within the company and how every employee is involved within that process. My co-workers, while a lot older than me in age, had youthful spirits and related to me very well. The hardest part of the job was probably when I had to design a database to help my department keep track of hard drives that they were shipping out all over the world. While hard, this was also the most enjoyable part of my job.
Wanted more exposure to the company.

Road tripping with a 2 year old is always an interesting trip. It was pretty uneventful other than potty breaks. With O doing so well potty training I will gladly stop when he has to go if he is telling me! By the time we made it to my parents house O was very excited to see them and be out of the car. He had a ton of fun playing with his grandparents, sword fighting with grandma and sitting with grandpa talking away. He wasn't ready to go to bed, but all in all it was a great night.

I lived with a bunch of siblings and friends, most of them much younger than me. A middle-aged man and two of his friends plotted to kill us. They started this online art forum for us to be a part of. It was called RTE. Pat was there, too.
We didn’t know that it was all a big murderous plot, but I was the first to realize what was going on. We lived in this massive mansion with a pool. I tried to protect the kids from getting hurt and from seeing me try to counter-attack these terrible men.
I ended up successfully killing one of the sidekick guys, the bald one. He had kidnapped one of the boys, probably around 7 years old. I couldn’t move him from where he was killed, right on the front stoop, so I left him there. I knew it was a matter of time before the leader guy realized I was wise to their plot and would immediately kill me.
My Aunt Amy showed up and was playing in the pool with the kids. I was very much acting weird, as I was preoccupied with all the traps I had set for these evil men, and I wasn’t even sure where the leader physically was in the mansion at that moment. Amy kept very loudly giving me shit for being so weird. I motioned for her to come over.
"You have no idea how much danger we are in," I seethed, "shut the fuck up. Shut the fuck up! I am trying to keep us from getting killed. You have no idea. Shut up!" She was, understandably, very freaked out, and kept quiet.
I finally was able to get ahold of the authorities, and after a few tries I got someone who believed me. It had gotten so bad that I had hidden a bunch of the kids in these little colorful lockers for the time being.
To my horror, when the authorities came to help us, they actually were on the evil RTE man’s side. RTE was in cahoots with the police, somehow. They gathered up my sibling-friends and I and transported us to this huge RTE facility.
On the surface it was a magical creative play complex, separated by different colors and elements and the like. Everyone was making different kinds of stuff and running around completely enthralled. Some people were building robots, others were drawing, stuff like that. Only I knew that ultimately each child was going to be plucked away at random and brutalized.
I finally ran into Pat again in this big bustling open area with all these booths. I was so relieved, I had lost track of him at the mansion and I was so glad he was okay.
Pretty much in a desperate, manic state, I rattled off some plans of escape to him, asking him what he thought and if he had any ideas as well. He wouldn’t really look me in the eye. It dawned on me that he thought I was absolutely crazy - that he didn’t believe this was an evil scheme after all, and that I had essentially killed that other man for no reason.
"It, you know, seems pretty…nice here," he said, looking down. I stared at him with my mouth open.
"Just let it alone, Lauren," he sighed and walked off into the crowd. I felt like screaming. I tried to chase him in the crowd but I immediately lost him.
I ended up wandering from quadrant to quadrant, trying out the different laws of physics in each one. The kids there were all pretty rude to me, and I felt as though they had been programmed against me by the RTE guy to make my time there uncomfortable.
I was in the water quadrant, sitting high up in the air, in a floating pod pool with some kids. I was asking someone closer to my age how they got the different colors for the different quadrants.
"Oh, they installed the spectrum filters in a big shell outside the o-zone layer," they responded. I was baffled.
"That would have to be huge," I said, "don’t they need, uh, permission from the rest of the world to alter the atmosphere like that?"
"What do you mean, the rest of the world?" they asked. I buried my face in my hands. We were all doomed.

Once upon a time there was a farmer named Somanath in a village. He was living with his wife in a small house near his farm. One day a mongoose entered his house since it was near the farm. The farmer’s wife was kind enough to feed the little and looking cute red-mouthed mongoose with milk and fruit pieces. The mongoose became a pet to both of them and a member of their family.
Gradually the mongoose grew up and became strong, well built and became a good companion to the farmer’s wife.
Bheemaiah responded that one cannot trust animals which obsess only over food. The mongoose may harm the child. Somanath refused to believe it and they left for their houses.
When Somanath returned home, the mongoose came running towards him happily to share what had happened to his master by licking his legs. By seeing the mongoose’s mouth covered with blood and body with blood stains, he doubted it because of the words told by Bheemaiah. He made a hasty conclusion that the mongoose had harmed his son and with anger he threw the stick on it. Mongoose fell down, rolled in pain and died.
In the meanwhile, his wife returned home with water from back entrance. She saw the snake pieces and guessed what had happened. Immediately she came inside the house and saw her husband in a terrible mood and the dead mongoose. She started weeping for what happened.But nothing can be done for what has happened.
– By M. Krishnapriya, India, translated by T. Amukta Malyada, Chennai

We will never go back!!! We went on a
Friday around 3PM before the big dinner crowd. There were only 2 other couples there. It took a very long time to get our dinner. When it finally came, the very small portion of mashed potatoes & okra were COLD. The chicken fried steaks were very small & thin.
We went to Ransom's because my husband's band was playing a gig. The place was packed and had a very comfortable atmosphere to it. The service was friendly and attentive. Our two favorite steakhouses in NW Houston had closed down years prior, so we were looking for a new good steakhouse that wasn't a "chain" location. We live in NW Houston, so undoubtedly Ransom's is super far but we really enjoyed it and plan on coming back out.

The Mysterious Affair at Styles
By Agatha Christie
I GO TO STYLES
THE intense interest aroused in the public by what was known at the time as “The Styles Case” has now somewhat subsided. Nevertheless, in view of the world-wide notoriety which attended it, I have been asked, both by my friend Poirot and the family themselves, to write an account of the whole story. This, we trust, will effectually silence the sensational rumours which still persist.
I will therefore briefly set down the circumstances which led to my being connected with the affair.
I had been invalided home from the Front; and, after spending some months in a rather depressing Convalescent Home, was given a month’s sick leave. Having no near relations or friends, I was trying to make up my mind what to do, when I ran across John Cavendish. I had seen very little of him for some years. Indeed, I had never known him particularly well. He was a good fifteen years my senior, for one thing, though he hardly looked his forty-five years. As a boy, though, I had often stayed at Styles, his mother’s place in Essex.
We had a good yarn about old times, and it ended in his inviting me down to Styles to spend my leave there.
“The mater will be delighted to see you again – after all those years,” he added.
“Your mother keeps well?” I asked.
“Oh, yes. I suppose you know that she has married again?”
I am afraid I showed my surprise rather plainly. Mrs. Cavendish, who had married John’s father when he was a widower with two sons, had been a handsome woman of middle-age as I remembered her. She certainly could not be a day less than seventy now. I recalled her as an energetic, autocratic personality, somewhat inclined to charitable and social notoriety, with a fondness for opening bazaars and playing the Lady Bountiful. She was a most generous woman, and possessed
a considerable fortune of her own.
Their country-place, Styles Court, had been purchased by Mr. Cavendish early in their married life. He had been completely under his wife’s ascendancy, so much so that, on dying, he left the place to her for her lifetime, as well as the larger part of his income; an arrangement that was distinctly unfair to his two sons. Their step-mother, however, had always been most generous to them; indeed, they were so young at the time of their father’s remarriage that they always thought of her as their own mother.
Lawrence, the younger, had been a delicate youth. He had qualified as a doctor but early relinquished the profession of medicine, and lived at home while pursuing literary ambitions; though his verses never had any marked success.
John practiced for some time as a barrister, but had finally settled down to the more congenial life of a country squire. He had married two years ago, and had taken his wife to live at Styles, though I entertained a shrewd suspicion that he would have preferred his mother to increase his allowance, which would have enabled him to have a home of his own. Mrs. Cavendish, however, was a lady who liked to make her own plans, and expected other people to fall in with them, and in this case she certainly had the whip hand, namely: the purse strings.
John noticed my surprise at the news of his mother’s remarriage and smiled rather ruefully.
“Rotten little bounder too!” he said savagely. “I can tell you, Hastings, it’s making life jolly difficult for us. As for Evie – you remember Evie?”
“Oh, I suppose she was after your time. She’s the mater’s factotum, companion, Jack of all trades!

Manu was a stone cutter; he was good at his job and worked hard at cutting out stone and marble from the face of mountains. Lately however, he was not happy. He felt like he was in a rut, stuck in a routine that was humdrum and boring. His life lacked excitement.
His job got on his nerves, his marriage seemed to have become stale and everything else was just downright monotonous. How he wished that he could change things. One summer’s day, it was hot and humid, sweat was pouring down his naked torso, while he worked at cutting out the stones. Manu looked up at the hot sun, it sure was powerful! The sun could heat up the earth, make things grow, dry up rivers. People, who were not careful, suffered from sunstroke and sometimes died. Wow, now that was power. How he wished he could be like the sun.
Suddenly, something strange occurred, Manu couldn’t understand what was happening. There was some kind of transformation and Manu had become the sun. What a feeling to be so full of power. Heat emerged out from him like a furnace at full blast. He tried out his power by drying up a few streams, then a few rivers. He turned his heat on people; they started sweating and had to hide from his powerful glow. Manu felt happy and full of energy.
A few moments later, it started to get dark. It was too early to be night, yet there was no mistake, it sure was dark. A huge cloud had covered the sun and there was nothing that Manu could do. This was power he thought, to be able to outdo even the sun. I wish I could be like that, then I would be in control and be happy. No sooner said than done, Manu was now a huge dark cloud.
He tried out his new powers and they worked. He created a thunder storm; the rain fell in a heavy downpour. People all around ran for cover, as this rain stung and hurt. Manu tried a few other tricks, he flooded a small dried out lake, he washed away a few bridges, he felt he could do anything. This giddy feeling of power was beyond words. Ah, this was true happiness.
Sometime later, Manu felt himself being pushed away. He resisted as much as he could, he just couldn’t stay in the same place. He fought with all his new found power but this other force was way too strong. Wouldn’t it be great to have that kind of awesome strength? Yes, that’s what I want to be...the mighty wind.
Lo and behold, he was the wind. What fun, what thrills, he blew so hard that he knocked off roofs from houses. He even took a few trailers, tossed and turned them round before throwing them miles away.
He saw a gigantic oak tree it was massive, must have been over a hundred years old, its roots were deep and strong. Without much effort he blew once and the whole tree was snatched out of the earth like a mere twig. Real power real strength were now his, this was better than all the other experiences he had tried out. He wandered around looking for a real challenge, something that would be the ultimate test.
He saw before his eyes a tall mountain, imposing and magnificent. He tried to blow it out of his way. He tried and tried and tried some more, but to no avail, the mountain just wouldn’t budge. Hey, that’s what I want to be an immovable mountain, and so it came to pass.
Manu was now a mighty mountain, huge and impressive. He was solid strength, neither wind nor rain, nor sun could affect him. It was tremendous, this feeling of stability, power and permanence. Nothing could threaten him. The days flew by, the on his trees changed colors and he had never been happier or safer in his whole life.
One hot, humid and sunny day, Manu heard a strange noise at his feet. He ignored it for a while but he continued to hear the same scraping and hammering sound at his feet, every day. Soon he started feeling shaky and vulnerable. Who on earth could have the power and strength to make a mighty mountain feel shaky? He bent forward to take a good look and down below at the foot of the mountain, was a stone cutter, hammering and chipping away…

Father slapped me for dating a Muslim: Hrithik Roshan’s sister
Bollywood actor Hrithik Roshan’s sister has come out against her family, claiming that her father slapped her for dating a Muslim and her brother doesn’t help.
The allegations were made by the actress in an interview to Pinkvilla. Sunaina Roshan said that her father slapped her when he found out she was dating a Muslim guy. According to her, Rakesh Roshan said that she could not date a ‘terrorist’.
Sunaina claimed that she encountered her boyfriend through Facebook but her family was not willing to accept him.
“Last year my father slapped me and told me that the guy I loved was a terrorist. If he was one, would he go scot-free and work in the media? Wouldn’t he have been behind bars? I met him through Facebook last year but I hadn’t saved his number as I didn’t want my parents to know,” she said.
Sunaina claimed that she did not know whether she wanted to get married to her boyfriend or not. However, Sunaina said that at the moment, she wanted to be with her boyfriend.
Sunaina lashed out at her brother as well, claiming that Hrithik had promised to help her out with an apartment but he had bailed on her.
She claimed that when she told her brother that the rent for an apartment she had picked out for herself was INR250,000 Hrithik said that it was too expensive for him.
“Is 2.5 lakhs rent too expensive for him? I don’t think so. He didn’t stick to his words. Everybody is harassing me today,” she said.
During the interview, she said that her parents gave her INR50,000 for the month and refused to give her more.
“Am I not entitled to have more money being a Roshan? Since a year back I wasn’t allowed any money but two days back, I asked my mom (Pinky) that I wanted a certain amount,” she said.
Sunaina said that she had reached out to Kangana Ranaut as she thought that they both were on the same page as far as ‘women power’ was concerned.
“I support Kangana all the way,” she had tweeted.

Alec called Magnus and told him where to meet us. The other three would meet us outside the demon perimeter a few blocks away. Alec asked, “You have any weapons? I don’t want you to get hurt.”
I sighed. His words just a reminder this wasn’t what I did. This was Nox’s job. I didn’t want him doing this and I was considering doing it. Alec asked, “You are coming aren’t you?”
There was disappointment on his face. He took a step back and looked at me. “I didn’t peg you as a coward. We finally have a location and now you want to back out?”
“This isn’t what I do.”
Alec shrugged. “This isn’t what Magnus does. But he’s here. He’s working.”
“He knows how to use his powers.”
“No. I don’t. They aren’t even mine.” I whined and cringed at my own voice.
Alec sighed. “Fine, stay here and monitor the screen.” Alec didn’t wait for me to respond before he was opening the door, activating his stealth rune and was running before the door closed behind him.
I flopped down on the couch. I disappointed a fictional character in my dream. Nox would let me stay here. Nox would let me help from the computer. That’s what I did. But I had Nox’s powers, I was Nox in my dream. I could still do what I did, but there was no Nox. I couldn’t call him for help. I couldn’t ask Dev or Dee. I didn’t have anyone.
My epiphanies were great in this dream. Nox was alone for so long. He did everything without help. No one in the Venatori believed in what he did. Dorian and Dae’lin obliged him in things, let him do his thing because that was Nox. They saw great potential in him. Hell even I saw the raw potential of the great things he could be, but he didn’t see any of it. He didn’t see beyond the messed up brain of his. And I wasn’t helping was I? I told him to get out of my life because what he did was too dangerous. The fact that he was still talking to me amazed me.
I sighed and climbed out of the couch and grabbed Nox’s leather jacket from the coat hook. I don’t know why it was here, but I was grateful that it smelled like him as I wrapped it around my arms. Maybe it would give me the confidence it gave him to trust someone. The scars on his back made him sensitive to touch there. He let me touch without anything between my skin and his. It was so open so hard and so scary for him but he let me. He trusted me. But he went out into the world with sleeves and thick coats even in the middle of a scorching summer. It was his armor from the world. I could only hope it would give me that kinda courage.
I opened the door. At the top of the basement stares Alec stood with a grin on his face. “It took you long enough.”
I frowned up at the archer waiting for me. “How did you know?”
He shrugged and waved for me to join him as he walked away. “I didn’t. But I didn’t think you were a coward. I think you are having a crisis of faith and there was nothing I could say that would make you come with me. So I did the only thing I could think of, I called you names and left without letting you respond.”
“That was the only thing you could think of?” I asked.
Alec chuckled. “I didn’t think you’d like me dragging you out by your ear and making you come with me kicking and screaming so this was the better option.”
I laughed. “I’d like to have seen you try it.”
Alec grinned at me. “Magnus called while you were down stairs. They’ll be there in ten.”

StoriesFrom Dave Kocher,
My story took place in the cabin of a B727.
We were flying non-stop MIA to MSP. The Captain was Ernie West and the co-pilot was Wesley Schlough. We were passing over ATL when the lead FA, Lovie Offerle, rang the emergency call button. I went to the back and saw that a passenger had smacked his seat-mate in the face. When I confronted him, he said the man was going to take over the airplane. I quickly made up some inane story that the Captain was aware of this and we will be ready to descend shortly. I also told him to take his seat and fasten his seat belt.
When I turned back to ask Lovie more about him, he hit the back of the lady’s head in front of him. At that time the lady’s husband hurled himself over the back of the seat and started pounding on him. I could hear voices in the cabin shouting, “Kill the SOB” as the fathers changed seats with their families so they could be near the aisle. This is the point where simulator training had no answers. You had to rely on your “street smarts” The situation reminded me of third period study hall at Flint Northern HS where I taught school in 1963. I quickly grabbed him around the neck and we fell into the aisle with me on top. Fortunately, a rather large passenger was asking if he could talk to him and calm him down. In the meantime, I went back to the cockpit to talk over a plan of action. We were thinking of landing in ATL, but the calming effect of this [assisting] gentleman was obvious. We were starting our descent into MSP when he once again became agitated. At that point we grabbed a galley curtain and wrapped it around his seat to hold him in place. This is before we had plastic handcuffs. A pilot, who was deadheading, held him tightly until we landed. The passengers stayed seated while the airport police carried him off. After filling out the reports I went home to wash the blood out of my shirt.
I always wondered if I could collect hazardous duty pay.

'My worst fear had been realised' - Ex-girlfriend of man who claims he was asleep when he allegedly raped female friend
The former girlfriend of a man who claims he was asleep when he allegedly raped a female friend has said she had seen a documentary about “sexsomnia” during the relationship and asked the man to go to a doctor
The 28-year-old witness told the jury in his trial of instances when the accused man would “grind” against her in bed while he was asleep. She said her “worst fear had been realised” when the accused man told her about the alleged incident with his female friend.
The man, who cannot be named for legal reasons, has pleaded not guilty at the Central Criminal Court to one count of raping the woman at an apartment in Dublin in the early hours of September 28, 2008.
The woman told Hugh Hartnett SC, defending, that in the summer of 2008, early in their relationship, when they had only kissed, she and the accused man had shared a bed in a friend’s house. She said she woke up to find the accused “grinding” up against her back.
She was shocked and annoyed as she presumed he was “making a pass.”
She told him to get off her and tried to push him off before jumping out of bed and turning on the light. She said the accused continued to grind in the bed and she asked what he was doing.
“He did not stop,” she told the court, “I realised he was asleep.”
She said she “jostled” him and he rolled over onto his back. “I felt embarrassed for him,” she told Mr Hartnett, “I thought it was a freak incident.” She got back into bed and went to sleep.
She said as the relationship continued she became increasingly aware of his “erratic” sleeping habits including sleep-walking, night terrors and sexual advances.
The woman said in terms of sexual matters the accused man would mostly grind up against her. She said she would sometime try and talk to him and sometimes push him off.
She told Mr Hartnett that she was satisfied he was asleep. She said sometimes he would have no memory of it and other times would ask her if he had done something the night before.
The woman also described an incident towards the end of their relationship where they had been asleep in bed and the accused man punched her in the side of the face sending her flying out of the bed. She said it had caused a disturbance and the accused man woke up. She said he felt very bad about this and other instances.
“Obviously I don't want him to feel bad because I know he didn't mean it,” she told the jury.
She told Mr Hartnett that the “grinding” would happen with or without alcohol.
The woman told Patrick McGrath SC, prosecuting, during cross-examination, that she had never woken up with her clothes off to find the accused man having sex with her.
She said the accused man had told her about the incident this case related to in February 2009 when they were coming up to six months in a relationship. She said it felt like her worst fear had been realised and the two of them cried.
The woman said they had spent a lot of time together in bed during which these sexual advances had been made. She said she had asked him to go to a doctor after seeing documentaries on “sexsomnia.”
The trial continues before Mr Justice Patrick McCarthy and a jury of eight men and four women.
Independent.ie Comments Facility
INM has taken the decision to remove the commenting facility on its online platform Independent.ie to minimise the legal risk to our business that arises from Ireland's draconian libel awards system.
We continue to look forward to receiving comments through direct email contact or via social media, some of which may still be featured on the website Independent.ie

We celebrated our 14th year together! We are still newlyweds and feel like we have always been together. The scrubby (hubby of a scrapper) and I usually go in our RV to the beach for a week but since he is still recovering from a surgery on his foot...we had to cancel. He still managed to go and buy me something when I was away at an all day crop (our daughter drove him to the stores). He is so good to me. The Lord has blessed me with him. I am one lucky lady.

There seems to always be some sort of debate on the gambling front, and Maryland just seems to have more than their fair share of the problems. The state is always seemingly fighting within itself as to what should happen, how much of it should be happening, and how they are going to make it happen. When, after years of fighting, slot machines were finally legalized within the state, everyone thought that there was a great chance to finally bring some money into the state and give residents what they had wanted. They had spent years fighting to get slot machines legalized, and then finally it happened.
However, that was just the beginning. Once the slots were legalized then the legal challenges as to where they were going to be placed started. There were those that had said that they had no problem with the slots coming in as long as they were not near their homes. With that in mind the government started bringing in the plans for the casinos only to be met by all of these residents who had said OK to the machines who were now saying no to the location.
Once those legal challenges were figured out, the construction started, but not before some started talking about expansion of gambling in the state. The Governor, rightfully so, said that he was not going to worry about expansion until they could actually get one casino up and running. But the casinos said that this would be too late and that they had to start planning for it now. And so they did – they started trying to get the expansion pushed forward so that they could work toward it before the first casinos were up and running.
But with some casinos pushing for expansion and other casinos either just up and running or still working on getting there, there is a small thing that has been left out of the equation and that is the desire to give the casinos more money. There has been a slow and steady push by the casinos to get a larger share of the profits from the slots, and some residents do not like what they are hearing.
The casinos say that the percentage that they have been given is too low and that they cannot be expected to keep their doors open with the amount that they have been given. They say that the 33% is just too little and that they are “doomed to failure” if it remains at such a low amount. They say that they need at least 45%, but that 50% would enable them to be a healthier casino.
They say that with table games and a higher percentage that everyone would make out better for the table games will bring in those gamblers that just do not come out for the slots. But they say that they would be able to help make up that percentage that was now staying with the casinos instead of going back to the state by bringing in the table games. With the state currently getting 67% of the revenue that comes in, they feel that there is a great push for the casinos to get more of that, which would help them stay in business, for the amount that they are currently getting is “unsustainable.” They argue that for those that have yet to bring in a casino that it is just not worth it. They see how those that are already established are struggling and they do not want to end up like them. They think that this could easily be remedied by giving them more of the money that is coming in, and this would allow them to be stronger in their revenue base.

A US man has been released from prison months after a court ruled he did not originally receive a fair trial.
Robert Jones spent 23 years in prison for the manslaughter of British tourist Julie Stott in 1992, he was also charged with rape and robbery.
Stott died after being shot whilst on holday with her fiancee in New Orleans.
Robert Jones was jailed despite the fact another man, Lester Jones, had already been found guilty of the murder in court. It has also been reported by the BBC that there was ‘compelling evidence’ linking Lester Jones to all of the crimes Robert Jones was accused of.
In June a Louisiana court deemed the original ruling against Robert Jones as the result of an unfair trial.
Jones received further backing as the murder detective and judge from his original trial described his conviction as a miscarriage of justice, with emphasis placed on a poor performance from his legal representation.
Jones has been released on bail, pending a retrial, and has been reunited his family and daughter Bree who was born whilst he was in prison.

Thursday, July 16, 2009
Day one complete
Chloe and I began the transition last night. We are trying to get started on a night time routine. Hence school will begin in a month. Matt and I decided it was time to go full throttle on getting our first born out of our bed and into her own. She is not as sure as we are about this. She cried on and off all day yesterday, knowing that last night was the first night. We are easing into the change. I am sleeping in her room with her for the first three nights. Then I will lay with her until she is asleep for three nights. Then I will sit on her bed for three nights...and so on until I am out of the room. She did really well last night. We slept there all night, she didn't even wake when I got up twice to use the powder room. She was very excited this morning that we slept in there the entire night. Let's hope the excitement continues and things progress. I want my bed back. Wish us luck.

Alesha Dixon will have an unlikely supporter when she takes to the floor in the Strictly Come Dancing final on Saturday - Javine Hylton, the woman she lost her husband to.
Last November, Javine, 25, was exposed for having an affair with Alesha's husband, MC Harvey, and the now-pregnant singer was immediately cast as a villain. She was branded a marriage-wrecker, singer Jamelia called her "a slag" and her outraged ex-boyfriend raged that Harvey had traded in "a Bentley for a Skoda".
But Javine is now offering an olive branch to her love rival and says she'd like to see Alesha scoop the Strictly crown.
"Alesha is doing brilliantly and good on her," she says. "It might sound strange for me to say this but I genuinely want her to be happy and I really hope she wins."
But reflecting on the past year, Javine, who is now seven months pregnant with Harvey's child, says she wouldn't change a thing.
"I'd do it all again," insists the singer, who first shot to fame on Popstars: The Rivals. "The only regret I have is the hurt I caused. But Harvey and I wouldn't be together without hurting people."
On paper, Javine is a cold, heartless, home wrecker but, in the flesh, she is surprisingly warm.
"I'd probably be the first to say 'bitch' right now, if I hadn't been through it," she admits. "But it crept up on us. The feeling, it was a whirlwind. Neither of us have ever felt like that. Our love was like a force and people could feel it wherever we went.
"I've heard people say they've been immediately convinced a guy is going to be the father of their child. I thought stuff like that was strange, until it happened to me.
"Love overruled everything - our reputations, where we'd get our next job from... it was hard but I was willing to give things up. When you know, you know. Harvey's definitely The One."
Javine met Harvey while rehearsing for the West End show Daddy Cool, which they both starred in. She says their bond was forged from friendship and they were as close as "brother and sister".
"We were in denial for ages," Javine recalls. "We rehearsed for about eight months and just struck up a friendship. We never flirted. He was like my older brother. I was a bit wild and he was a good mentor. Friends said they saw it happening but I was oblivious.
"We kept saying the four of us should go out to dinner - my boyfriend, his wife - but I think subconsciously we were trying to hold back."
Javine is too coy to reveal the details of the first "moment" between them but admits they were smitten. "The emotional side happened quickly - we kind of fell in love instantly," she says.
In turmoil, Javine went home to her music producer boyfriend Karl Gordon and ended the relationship. "We were fighting all the time," she says. "I just thought what am I going to do? Do I forget both of them and just be on my own? Let him save his marriage?
"I couldn't go back to my boyfriend when my heart was elsewhere. I was petrified. I made the decision to forget it and carry on as normal. But our feelings were too strong."
In the days before their affair was uncovered, Javine and 28-year-old Harvey spent hours discussing what to do. "I knew what I'd be doing to my life and my career but everything changed," Javine reveals. "I knew what I was risking and that I would hurt people. Harvey knew what he had with Alesha. We were planning to come clean but then we got caught out."
There are various versions of how the couple were rumbled by Karl, and Javine rolls her eyes in response. "We were not caught in bed, romping," she states. "We weren't swinging from chandeliers. My boyfriend didn't walk in and see us naked on top of each other.
"One morning, Karl decided to come to the house. He walked in, saw Harvey, who had been staying in the spare room, and that was it. There was no fighting, no confrontation. Then Karl called Alesha and told her."
Although Javine was relieved their feelings were now out in the open, she faced an unnerving two days as Harvey sorted things with Alesha - his wife of 12 months and girlfriend of five years. "I told Harvey that he didn't have to leave Alesha," she insists. "As much as I loved him I had no right to ask him to leave his wife.
"He came back to me and said: 'My home doesn't feel like my home any more. I want to be with you.' And I thought: 'Wow, this is moving to the next level.'"
Does she feel guilty about stealing someone else's husband? "You can't steal someone," she says. "It was his decision. I did feel bad. I felt worse for Alesha than my ex. Then there were reports that Alesha and I were best friends, when we hardly knew each other. It made me a calculating bitch.
"I fell in love and I'm sorry that doing so hurt her. But there's nothing I can really say, is there?
"The word 'sorry' isn't going to make a lot of difference. But until you've been through it - that whole forbidden love - it's mindblowing, it's so powerful. It made me realise that I've never truly been in love before.
"We're not horrible people, we just couldn't control our feelings. Should we have ignored it and then him be unhappy at home? If he were my husband I would rather he told me the truth."
Javine reveals she has seen Alesha once in the past year but says that their meeting was remarkably civilised.
"It was awkward but we are two women who aren't going to be seen fighting in public," she says. "I'm sure she wanted to give me a few slaps around the head. But we conducted ourselves really well."
Now the furore of the affair has blown over, Javine is looking forward to being a mum. It hasn't been an easy pregnancy - she suffered from terrible morning sickness and has had acupuncture after pulling a muscle in her chest from a persistent bad cough. However, her skin is glowing with health.
"I can't wait to be a mum," she smiles. "I'm looking forward to meeting this little person and sharing all the information I know. I'm having a water birth, no epidurals, just water, gas and air. I'm not too posh to push!"
She and Harvey don't know their child's sex yet but are already bickering over baby names.
"Harvey loves all these names like India and China," she scoffs. "I like Reece and Bailey. I'll have carried this child for nine months, so I think I should get to choose.
"We both like Rica for a boy and Sahara for a girl. We also have two other names but I'm not going to say..."
So is Harvey excited about being a dad? "He can't wait!" Javine says, her eyes shining.
"He's going to be amazing - the best dad in the world.
"I can't wait to see them together. It's going to be mindblowing."
Strictly Come Dancing Final, Saturday, 5.50pm and 9.25pm on BBC1.

Saturday, 14 February 2015
Nothing to Report
Well nothing that's very interesting, that is. We all had a very good sleep and my MH is very pleased with me 'cos I have started sleeping all through the night and I don't ask her to get up and feed me in the middle of it. I know she was only too pleased to attend to me even if it meant dragging her out of a good dream, but between you and me, dear friends, it was making me too tired in the morning, so I have stopped. See?
In fact, I made her giggle this morning 'cos she had to waken me up to get out of bed. Oh I was so cosy and I have heard it said that I looked so cute and adorable the old dear had a tear in her eye. I was all curled up at her side and I was sound asleep. She spoke to me but I didn't hear her, so she had to stroke my adorable little lugs until I finally came to, and then she had to ask me to please move so that she could slide out of bed. Which I did of course and then I asked her to feed me which she did of course! See how well we work together?
My DH watched the football but before he settled down we all went for a stroll up and down my garden path and I was so excited about them being outside with me that I scooted all over the place like a big express train. That's what they said anyway. I know I was tired when I went back inside so maybe they were right, but I had very good fun.
AND I have learned a new trick. Normally when I am going to lie on the bed beside the old dear when she is doing her exercises, I jump up onto the bed first and then gently step on to her delicate little chest, but I changed that modus operandi (I think that's how you spell it, but you know what I mean anyway. I think I have been watching too many detective programmes! Hee hee)and that is what I do now. I just have a quick look to see where she is and then with the gentlest of thuds I land right on her chest, and she loves it! She loves it so much she makes that funny 'ooofff!' sound and I know that means she is happy. See? I think I shall be doing that all the time now.
So there we are. It is a bit misty and a bit damp but I have just had a play outside all by myself doing pussy cat things, and after a little snooze I shall have my dinner and then nip out to play again until it is time for my humans to watch television 'cos they are going to watch the Musketeers and I just love that programme 'cos the musketeers are so lovely they make me go all week at the knees and since there are four of them that is one for each of my adorable little knees!
I need to keep watching so that I can decide which one I like the bestest 'cos I still don't know but when I do decide I shall tell you. OK? Good.
I hope you all have a very good weekend like what I am having so far.

WELLESLEY, Mass. — Miso the dog went missing from his home on Saturday. The owners plastered the whole area with missing dog signs.
Then they got a call from two women in Maine who were in town and saw the dog being thrown out of a moving car.
The 5-month-old poodle is back at home with his sisters, but his owners are trying to find out who nearly killed him.
"They said it was a black sports car going about 40 miles per hour," Miso's owner, Lidia Rossi, said.
The Rossis got a call from two young women from Maine who were driving behind that black sports car on Route 9 in Wellesley.
"They saw someone just throwing something black out the window and stopped, saying, 'I think that's an animal.'"
"I wasn't sure what it was at first and then it hit the pavement and I noticed it started running," Shaunee Grady told FOX25's Robert Goulston by phone.
The puppy didn't have any ID or chip, so they didn't know what to do. They took the dog home to Maine and started searching the web when they found a post on Missing Dogs of Massachusetts, an agency that has helped locate more than 900 dogs over the past year and a half.
They immediately called the owners and told them what they saw.
"At this point, I'm hyperventilating. I'm thinking something is wrong with my dog and I said is he alright and she said he's fine," Anthony Rossi said.
"It happened so fast the car kind of spun out after they had thrown the dog out, so I didn't to catch any plate numbers or anything like that," Grady said.
The Rossis jumped in their car and bee-lined it to Maine to go get Miso.
"Just to see them reuniting was just awesome," said Grady.
The Rossis had to convince the women to accept the $3,000 reward.
"I said, 'you're taking this, whether you like it or not. You're such good people.'" said Anthony Rossi.
"The only thing I really wanted was the dog to go back home to his owner," said Grady. "The reward wasn't even necessary, but I was really grateful for it."
The owner says he is working with several police departments along Route 9 to try to figure out who may be responsible.
© 2020 Cox Media Group

I am a salesman for a hardware wholesaler and my territory is a large and mainly rural area. I travel about half my time but manage to make it home every weekend.
I stopped for lunch on my way to see my next client. I wasn't feeling well and tried to get some soup into me but was having trouble getting it down. One minute I would feel hot and sweaty, the next as if a wind straight from the North Pole was blowing right through me. And to make matters worse I was sitting next to a table with some jerk bragging about some broad he was banging.
It was my own fault for coming in. I knew the guy was in here; I saw his bright red Caddy convertible parked out front. The guy himself wasn't hard to recognize either - he only stands about three feet high. I had often wondered how he reached the pedals of his car.
"Yes, she's a real goer," I heard him say to the guy sharing the table with him. "She'll do anything I ask. A real slut. She gobbles up my dick whenever I ask and just loves it up the ass."
I tried to ignore the demented ravings of this lunatic and concentrate on my lunch, but his piercing voice just wouldn't stay out of my head.
"She's a real good looker, too. Tall and well built; tits you wouldn't believe. Married, too. I don't know what her dork of a husband's like, but he obviously isn't feeding her enough dick."
I changed tables, moving as far away as I could. Unfortunately the room wasn't that big and he had one of those voices that carried.
"I take her out to my favorite strip club. She likes to get on stage and dance and let guys feel her up. She's really into one of the other strippers, too. You should see them going at it, licking each other's cunts. It sure makes my dick hard."
I managed to close my mind to the filthy monologue for a few minutes and ate some of the soup. I suspected his experiences were just pure fantasy. My attempt at not listening didn't last long.
" ... and when I said to her, 'Baby, I want you to suck both of us off, ' she started drooling! Actual drool down her chin. Before either Harry or I had even got our dicks out. Next time you're in town, look me up. I'll have her suck you..."
I'd had enough. I got up and paid for my mainly untouched soup and left.
" ... and I've got some great pictures of her in action if you guys want to..."
The other men in the cafe were gathering around the dwarf's table as the door closed behind me.
By the time I got another twenty miles down the road I was really suffering. I called my next stop and told them I wouldn't be coming, and headed the ninety miles back to the city. How I made it I'll never know; I don't remember half the trip. It was dark by the time I got home. I knew my darling wife Leanne would put me to bed and make me feel better.
I drove into the garage behind the house and just sat in the car for a while, hoping Leanne would notice I was home and help me out of the car as waves of heat and cold alternately passed over me. After they stopped I got myself out.
I left the garage and walked the short distance between the garage and the back of the house to the back door. Loud rock music was coming from the downstairs bedroom we used as a family room. Leanne didn't normally listen to that type of music so I peeked through the tall bushes and into the window to see what she was doing. Since the room's window faces the garage wall we had never got around to putting curtains in.
What I saw froze my heart. Leanne was sitting, naked, on the floor, her hands behind her for support, her legs slightly bent and apart, and her long, light brown hair hanging on the floor behind her. That is, naked except for a frilly red garter belt, sheer stockings and red high heels. I didn't even know she owned a garter belt. And those shoes! They had ankle straps and must have had at least five inch heels. Her other clothes were strewn all over the floor. The dwarf from the restaurant was straddling her stomach, his short, bandy legs barely reaching around her. The dirty pervert was still wearing his undershirt and his socks. He was rubbing some sort of long stick on her breasts. It took me a while to realize it was his cock. It was huge, ten to twelve inches long, and thick. It would have looked big on an ordinary man. On him it looked gargantuan.
One of the smaller windows was open so I could just make out what was being said.
"Come on Arnie," I heard Leanne say. "Put it in my mouth. I want to suck your fuck stick." With her right hand she wiped some spittle off her chin.
I was flabbergasted. My wife never swears; she hardly ever says "damn". To hear her use language like that was too much for me. I had to leave.
I couldn't tear myself away.
The dwarf rubbed the head of his cock on my wife's face and around her lips, smearing the bright red lipstick. She had her mouth open and her tongue out trying to catch it. When she couldn't, she put her head back and laughed.
"Come on, Arnie, stop teasing and let me taste it."
I watched in amazement as my modest and virtuous wife sucked and slurped on his large cock. Once when I had suggested she put my penis in her mouth she called me a dirty pervert and slept in the spare bedroom for three days.
I was only a couple of yards or so from them and could see everything. The dwarf had reached down and was pulling on one of her nipples.
"That's right, baby, suck on that monster. Do it right and I'll give you a drink of my cum. Would you like that?"
To my horror I saw her nod and redouble her efforts on his big root.
"Oh, baby," he continued, "you're the best cocksucker I ever met. You like sucking on my dick? Does it turn you on?'
Again she nodded.
I leaned over and threw up. I couldn't watch any longer. But some horrid fascination made me stay. When I looked through the window again, the dwarf was handing my wife a bottle of Jack Daniels. She put the bottle to her lips and took a couple of gulps. I have never seen Leanne drink more than one glass of wine. I don't even keep any liquor in the house. Now she was drinking whiskey straight out of the bottle. She passed the bottle back to the dwarf who drank from it, too, before putting it on a nearby table.
Leanne lay down on her back with her knees up, rubbing herself between the legs. The dwarf straddled her head and rubbed his big, hairy balls all over her face. He stopped them directly over her mouth. She opened up and sucked them in.
"Oh, baby. Suck those nuts. Hum for me. Make my dick harder than it is."
She hummed for him. My beautiful, young wife was on her back sucking on the balls of a midget and humming. While getting the hum job, the dwarf grabbed the bottle from the table and had another drink from it.
Having had enough of the hum job, the dwarf scooted down and placed his cock between Leanne's large breasts. She pushed them up and wrapped them around his cock.
"Ah, baby. You've got the best tits for fucking I've ever known. You're a real hot cunt, you know?" He said as he moved back and forth.
"Oh, Arnie," she responded, "shoot your cum all over my face. Right in my mouth." She opened her mouth and obscenely stuck out her tongue.
"Not yet, baby. I want you to do something else for me. Come on. You know what I like."
"Please, Arnie," I heard her say, her fingers busy between her legs. "Fuck me. Stick that dick right up my cunt. Fuck me good. I need to feel your big cock up my cunt."
I still couldn't believe what I was hearing.
"Yeah, baby, I'll fuck you all right. But you got to do this first."
I wanted to go. Morbid fascination made me stay. I watched the dwarf hop off of Leanne and, after grabbing the bottle from the table, hobble over to my easy chair. Scrambling up it, he turned around and waited for her, his hard-on sticking out obscenely.
My wife crawled over to him on her hands and knees, her breasts swaying as she went. Saliva dribbled down her chin. She had a lustful gleam in her blue-grey eyes and she growled softly. It wasn't until then that I noticed the loud music was no longer playing. As she approached him he stuck one of his feet towards her. Taking the toe of his sock between her teeth she slowly pulled it off. Then she licked his toes while the dirty little pervert cooed with glee, taking the occasional drink from the bottle. The procedure was repeated on his other foot. I threw up again.
By the time I had finished puking she had his cock in her mouth again. Still on her hands and knees she slowly rocked back and forth, her breasts swinging with her movements. I watched as she took more and more of his long penis into her mouth. The dwarf encouraged her with words like, "that's right, baby, eat it all," and "take it right down your throat," and "you're the best cocksucker around". After about a minute of trying, she finally had his entire length in her mouth. I couldn't see how she did it, how she didn't choke. Five or six times she went down until her lips touched his pubic hair, then moved back until only the tip of the penis was in her mouth. She would look up at him at these times and, licking his knob, smile, repeatedly asking if he liked what she was doing.
At this time I seemed to be in the room with the two, as if I had somehow flowed through the window glass. Another polar wind blew through my hot and sweaty body. Nothing seemed real, except what I was watching.
The dwarf had rolled onto his back on the seat of the chair and had his deformed legs up in the air. Leanne had moved closer and, holding his cock out of the way with her hand, was licking his balls. He was going crazy, yelling, "Lower, lower!"
.... There is more of this story ...

“What are you doing here?”
He put his hand on my arm. “I just popped by to see what was up.”
I tried to smile, but started crying instead. I knew it would piss Dan off so I tried to stop, but the tears had a mind of their own, so I just sat there, gulping and sobbing. “Shit,” I whispered.
“It's okay. You're okay.”

It’s Monday today. I wrote the last post when I was at work today. As I write this it’s 9:30 at night, which is my bedtime, but I’ve spent the last 30 minutes scrolling through Facebook, so here we are. I’ll just have to make it quick.
Easy daycare drop-off this morning was amazing!
The big girls slept in this morning because they took forever to go to sleep last night. I told my husband he and the baby should just go because they were ready and we were far from it. I mean, I was ready, the girls weren’t.
It felt like they were taking forever to actually get out the door this morning. Of course once we got into the car, Ivy had a meltdown because she wanted her blanket. It was in the backpack she was wearing while strapped into her carseat. I said no. She cried about it for a minute but then stopped.
I told the girls when we were leaving the garage that it was 33 minutes later than I wanted to leave the house. I’m not sure if they understood that we were later than usual, but I had the easiest and fastest daycare drop-off this morning. It was awesome. [Read more…] about Moms Getting Through the Day – Daycare Drop-off and Alone Time

Me and my wife, we were both very impressed by the speed of delivery and the cheapness. We ordered pills for weight loss for her and new asthma inhaler for me. Quality was the same, as we used to, but price was unbelievable low! Big thanks!
Thank you, guys. I received the remainder of my order today. Excellent price and your customer support is great. I will continue doing business with you.

Andrew dusted off a couple of old bikes that we got off Mum and Dad …… maybe about two years ago. Our neighbours had given us a child seat for the bikes so we could take Ben for a ride. After some tinkering, the bikes were cleaned, tires were pumped and seat was fitted. The helmets had seen better days as the inside padding was deteriorating but they did the job. Once Ben clapped his eyes on the bikes and helmets there was no turning back. He was a little excited to say the least. Andrew was the first to take a test ride and survived. I however was a little more reluctant as it has been maybe eighteen years and some ??!! kilos since I last rode a bike. But after some fluffing about I was on, peddling and steering (a little wonky at first). We set off to Limestone Park and had a great ride. Our legs a little wobbly on return but we stayed on with no incidents!! We can’t believe it took us two years to dust the bikes off. It may just have to become a weekend ritual!

- United States
I had them on for a couple of years but decided to go back to stock wheels. They could easily be made perfect with a little paint job, but they are in good shape nonetheless. PM me if you are interested and I can email pics. They were $115 per wheel new. I would let em go for $250. Let me know!

In the time it took link to stop screaming, Zelda, Sheik, and....
Navi all looked in shock at the sight of Dark straddling Link, both in just their tights. Zelda wore a look of pure horror. She started to rant about link hiding the fact that he was really gay, and should not have been mad that she cheated. Sheik looked in slight shock, and for Sheik, that really took a lot. Navi looked like a fish, with her mouth agape and her eyes bulging out of her small head. Link's brain seemed to have stopped working, his face going totally blank. This scared Dark a lot... since he had never seen with a blank expression. Dark prepared for Link to freak out, but instead, Link just started shaking again.
Dark grabbed Link, after rolling off of him, and threw link over his shoulder. The young man squeaked as he was lifted, but even that noise sounded pitiful. Dark swept through his camp as the women yelled. They were either shocked, or still trying to figure out what the hell was going on. By the time Dark made it, Sheik and Navi were coming at him, looking pissed as hell, while Zelda, being a self-absorbed bitch, was still ranting, not even noticing that Dark had left, since she didn't end up do anything about it. Dark put Link on Epona and hopped on in front of Link. Epona took off fast because of Dark's rather harsh kick.
They stopped when they reached a small inn outside of a small village. Link got off the horse and glared at Dark. Dark, on the other hand, rolled his eyes and tried to ignore the fact that his ass hurt from the long and fast ride (quiet you pervs!). A small stable boy walked up to them. He was about 4' 10" with curly brown hair, green eyes, and a skinny yet muscular body.
"I'll put your horse in the stable for you." Dark glared down at the kid while Link, on the other hand, smiled at the boy acceptingly.
"Sounds great! Just be careful because Epona likes to run away," Link said in the kind of voice that made most people trust him. The boy nodded and took the reins that Dark roughly handed to him. The boy gave them an odd look when he noticed that both men were in nothing but tights! He himself wore a rag like tunic, with a rope as a belt, and some make-shift shoes. Dark did not really care that he was shirtless, and that most of the maidens were eying him, including some married women as well. Link, on the other hand, had a light blush across his cheeks that made him look as cute as hell (though Dark would never admit it). He just wanted his tunic back. "Hey dark, can you give me my tunic?"
"Why?" Dark grunted as he grabbed his stuff off the back of the horse, since the boy seemed to be having problems with it.
"Because being naked in public is inappropriate," Link replied with his increasing blush. Dark snorted, then tossed him one of his own tunics. Link frowned but put it on anyways.
Dark then tilted his head as if saying "Come on," then went into the Inn, Link following quickly behind him.

Xiang Yu heard the few whispered words while Xin Lan stepped through the gate he had created for him and suddenly, he couldn’t bring himself to leave. He knew it was stupid. Even though there was no way to truly grow after a god fell, he hadn’t been an idiot when he was still a trueborn god. He had merely been a bit naive and too focused on finding love.
Now, nothing had changed about that. He was able to see slightly deeper because his eyes had been opened before he actually fell but he still had that same longing for love. Hearing Xin Lan’s words, even though they were directed at the body of his mortal reincarnation, his heart couldn’t help but beat wildly.
He glanced at the gate he had originally opened for himself and then waved his hand to close it. Instead, he followed Xin Lan into the dragon realm, observing what he would do. As expected, the place that Xin Lan brought Hua Lin Yu’s body to was his own estate that they had visited before together with Hua Lin Rong.
Xin Lan carried the body to the pavilion in the garden of the house and gently put him down on one of the chairs, leaning his torso against the stone table. Once again, he brushed aside his hair before he leaned down and kissed his temple. “Give me a moment. I … I will go and arrange everything.” Saying so, he took a deep breath and turned away, going to find a good spot to bury him.
This was the person he had fallen in love with so, naturally, he wouldn’t be stingy. He surveyed the garden and finally picked out the most beautiful spot. Previously, Hua Lin Yu had also liked this one and had joked about how they could put down a chair here and sit in the summer.
Thinking back to that time now, Xin Lan had to close his eyes. How come he had so little luck in love? It almost seemed as if he hadn’t been spared from Tian’s curse but had been given his very own personal curse. Otherwise, how come when they had finally reached the last step, Hua Lin Yu died just like that?
Despite his long life and despite all the knowledge he had gathered throughout the years, even Xin Lan had no idea that as soon as the purpose of a fallen god’s trial was achieved, he would lose that mortal life. This was their trade-off, the law of harmony that balanced all things in the universe. Even Tian with his soft spot for fallen gods wouldn’t be able to change it for them.
Thus, no matter what had or hadn’t happened with Xiao Li, from the moment Hua Lin Yu realized his true feelings for Xin Lan and how he had been played by fate when he met Bai Mu and Xiao Li, he had been doomed to die. Unfortunately, those last few hours hadn’t been spent together because neither of them noticed or even knew the signs. Now, it couldn’t be changed anymore.
Xiang Yu watched Xin Lan walk away and then turned to the body of his reincarnation. He actually didn’t know about these things either but he also didn’t care too much. Instead, his gaze was attracted by the earring that peeked through Hua Lin Yu’s hair.
He stared at it and finally walked over. He didn’t hesitate before he pulled it off Hua Lin Yu’s ear. This earring had been given to his mortal reincarnation as a token of love. It might not have been meant for him but this was still his reincarnation. Why shouldn’t he take a memento from his own trial?
Justifying his behavior to himself, Xiang Yu finally opened a gate and left the dragon realm. He didn’t need to watch Xin Lan bury Hua Lin Yu’s body. No, he’d rather go and be alone for a while. He had some thinking to do.
Of course, such a thing wouldn’t be done in the mortal realm. Instead, he returned to the High Heavens and sat down in front of the palace that he usually picked when he stayed here. It wasn’t often but in a way, it also carried the feeling of ‘home’. At least as a fallen god, this was probably the closest he would ever get to having a home again.
Xiang Yu pursed his lips, suddenly unhappy. He stared at the earring in his hands and had no idea what to make of this. As a mortal, he could receive a token of love, have a family and a home, even fall in love, and try to get married. How come none of this was possible for his current self?
He raised his head and found Tian standing a few steps away. His eyes filled with tears and he got up, rushing over to stand in front of him. “Am I not lovable?”
Tian gazed at him, keeping quiet for a while before he raised his hand and patted his head. “Very lovable.”
Xiang Yu paused, the tears quietly slipping down his cheeks while he tried to make sense of that response. “Then … then do you think he can love me too?” He raised the earring, hoping that Tian would understand what he meant.
The supreme ruler looked at that token of love and really wanted to sigh. This was why the fallen gods seldom went on trials. They could. In fact, they didn’t even necessarily need his help to reincarnate for a while. It was just that … the outcome was rarely to their liking. Clearly, the same had happened to Xiang Yu.
He reached out and closed Xiang Yu’s fingers around the earring. “I believe he can but … maybe not now.”
Xiang Yu’s gaze became uncertain. “Then when?”
Tian gave a hum and looked up at the sky as if the fate of every person could simply be deduced from the way the clouds drifted past. “When? It should be when you have put down the last of your obsession and he has mourned his loss. Until then, there is no future for the two of you.”
And maybe, just maybe, there were a few steps in-between but he wouldn’t tell Xiang Yu that. Otherwise, who knew how many fates he would go and mess up in the meantime? Some things, as harsh as they may be, simply had to happen for the final result to be a good one. He of all people should know this.

By Gabrielle Lawson
The Defiant came to a stop, dwarfing the smaller Rio Grande. It pulled close enough to encompass the little ship in its shields. Ezri read the sensors' results. "No life signs, Benjamin."
The outpost had called again, when the doctor had not arrived. Sisko remembered what the Gidari captain had said. The Defiant left the station less than an hour after receiving the message.
The runabout proved easy to locate. It was found adrift less than five thousand kilometers from the Badlands. There were no other ships in the vicinity. Though there were several warp signatures.
"Is she stable?" Sisko asked.
O'Brien, obviously trying to ignore Dax's statement, bent over his console. "Perfectly, sir. She hasn't even taken a hit."
"Well, then, let's go see." Sisko chose Dax and Worf for the away team, but he also knew he couldn't keep O'Brien back. Bashir was his best friend.
The four of them materialized on the Rio Grande with phasers drawn but they were met with silence. One officer, Ensign Payven, Security, leaned over the helm console. Blood dripped slowly from the console to the floor beneath him. "Dax?" Sisko asked, knowing the answer already.
Ezri drew her tricorder and scanned the ensign. "He's dead, Captain."
"Captain?" O'Brien breathed.
Sisko turned and saw what O'Brien had been looking at. The bulkhead at the back of the cockpit area was smeared with color. Red, dark red. The stain began five feet above the floor and trailed down to a broad pool. "Spread out," he ordered. "Find them."
Dax was already kneeling, taking a reading with the tricorder. Worf and O'Brien headed to the back. There were three bodies left to find. Bodies, not crewmembers.
Dax stood and closed the tricorder. She turned to look the captain in the eye. "It's human. Type B negative." She inhaled a long, shaky breath. "It's Julian."
Sisko turned away from the sight, but that only put Payven in his view again. But then he noticed something else. Two phasers laying side by side on the floor. One was Federation, its gray surface unmarred. The other was Bajoran, and like the wall behind him, it was smeared with blood.
"And that?" he asked Dax, pointing.
She scanned it and then nodded. "Same. I see marks, from fingers, but no prints."
Worf and O'Brien both appeared at the same time. "No sign of Colonel Kira, Dr. Bashir or Ensign Savolar," Worf reported. "However, there is also no cargo. The medical supplies have been taken."
Sisko didn't say anything, but he looked around the room, checking the instruments and readouts. He needed to know what happened. "Security logs," he said finally. He stepped forward himself and found the control panel. "The internal security sensors are still running." He thought about playing it there, but he knew that Bashir was dead. It was too much blood for him to have survived. And if Kira and Savolar weren't aboard, he feared they were dead as well. He wasn't sure about Worf, but he knew he, himself, did not want to watch how they died in the same room where it happened. Sisko touched his comm badge. "Sisko to Defiant. Lock on a tractor beam and set course for the station. I'm uploading the security logs from the last twelve hours. Route it to my ready room. Four to beam up."
The four of them went straight to the ready room upon their return to the Defiant. Sisko ordered the helmsman to return to the station and left orders to call if any other ships came into range. "Sit down," he told the other officers who were standing around the room. "This won't be easy."
Dax clutched at Worf's hand but she sat. O'Brien looked dazed. Denial, Sisko thought. Sisko waited for him to sit and then seated himself. "Computer begin playback, Rio Grande Security Log."
The log began quietly. Kira, Bashir and the two security officers filed aboard the Rio Grande. Kira and Bashir took the front seats at helm and ops. The others stowed the gear in the back. After a system check, Bashir lifted the runabout expertly from the pad. Kira ordered a change in speed as they cleared the station.
"Pause," Sisko told the computer. "We know they made it to within 5,000 kilometers of the Badlands. That shouldn't have taken them more than five hours. Computer, play log from a time index four hours, forty-five minutes forward of the present index." The computer sceen went blank and then came back to life with the two security officers at the helm. Bashir and Kira were not in the picture, but Payven was very much alive.
"Colonel, three ships coming into range," Payven reported. "They'll intercept in ninety seconds."
Kira's voice answered over the comm system. "Who are they?"
Savolar checked his console. "Unable to identify. They're closing fast, sir."
"Raise shields," Kira ordered. "We're on our way."
Payven closed the comm channel and tried to raise the shields as ordered. But Savolar stopped him. He grabbed Payven's arm, and, with one hand keeping him away from the control, he slit Payven's throat with his other hand, which had become a knife. He let Payven fall over the console and then wiped his hand on the dead man's sleeve. Then he returned to his seat at the helm.
Kira and Bashir arrived only moments later. They stopped there at the door though, and Sisko could see that they instantly knew something was wrong. Kira had reached for her phaser.
Savolar stood. "I wouldn't, Colonel," he said, his back to the camera. "You'd never get the shields raised in time anyway."
Then the Jem'Hadar beamed in. "The three ships," Worf pointed out, though everyone had probably deduced that anyway. Six Jem'Hadar took positions around the cockpit. Kira and Bashir were disarmed. Their phasers were handed to Savolar, whose uniform changed into the drab outfits the changelings generally showed themselves in. Savolar had been replaced.
Kira whispered something to Bashir without turning her head. Bashir nodded slightly, whispering back. The log could not pick up what they had said.
But it did pick up the changeling. "Oh, I think," he said, "that you were right, Colonel. The Doctor has been the cause of quite a bit of trouble. And one might conclude that he is the cause of your death."
"She said that to him?" O'Brien asked, allowing a hint of anger to enter his tone.
"Shh," Sisko said. He didn't want to scold the Chief. They were about to watch their friends and crewmates die. It wasn't a time to be scolding. Besides, he might have missed what Kira said next.
The changeling didn't react. He merely placed the phasers down on the helm and then walked back toward Kira and Bashir. Kira was pulled out of the way by a Jem'Hadar until she stood near Payven's body with her back to the camera. Only Bashir faced it now, besides the Jem'Hadar who held his arms behind his back. He'd gone pale, but he otherwise stood motionless.
The changeling stepped forward with his hand out, palm toward Bashir. "Why not just shoot me?" Bashir asked. The log barely registered his voice.
"Poetic justice, as you humans would say." Bashir spoke again but it was inaudible this time. The changeling's answer was not. "We know you better than you know yourself." He was close enough now that his hand reached Bashir and rested on his chest. He took another step forward and blocked the camera's view of all but the tall doctor's head. Bashir looked toward the camera, toward Kira, Sisko realized, with an expression that said he knew what was coming.
After a few minutes, Bashir gasped and the Jem'Hadar released him. He appeared to be in pain, but he was too far from the camera to really tell. Sisko didn't really want to see it closer anyway.
"You are solid," the changeling was saying. "You cannot understand the Great Link. You can't know the loss you have caused. We know now that we underestimated you. We should never have left you alive. Your escape—three times—taught us this. You have cost us several of our own." Bashir dropped, though not all they way to the floor. The changeling must have been holding him up somehow.
In the foreground, Kira turned to look at the phasers. The Jem'Hadar nearest them shook his head to discourage her. She turned back to Bashir, who gasped again, loudly.
There was a scream. Just one, and very short. Sisko knew it had come from Bashir, but he could no longer see him. The changeling blocked his whole view of the doctor now. But that was only for a second. The changeling lifted him up, and Sisko could see that his hand was still placed flat against Bashir's chest. He could see red. Blood. And Bashir flew back against the back wall, smearing it with his blood.
Ezri inhaled sharply and Sisko looked away from the screen. Worf was holding her. She was crying. Her hand covered her mouth. O'Brien had dropped his head into his hands. Bashir was dead. But it wasn't over yet. Kira was still alive. He looked back to the screen. Kira was taken aft—away from the camera—and thrown down beside Bashir's body. She touched his face.
"How touching," the changeling said. "Give me her weapon." So they would shoot her. Kira didn't turn back to them. She took Bashir's hand and leaned over him. The changeling fired the shot and she went limp. Sisko sighed. That accounted for the lack of lifesigns. The Jem'Hadar beamed off the runabout with the changeling, and the camera then recorded an unmoving scene.
"Computer," Sisko tried to say, but his voice wouldn't work. He tried again, more forcefully. "Computer, freeze playback."
"They did not take the bodies," Worf declared, breaking the silence in the room. "Who did?"
Sisko nodded. "Computer, continue playback one point five speed." The computer complied, though it was unnoticeable to Sisko. The scene never wavered, but suddenly, the screen went black. "Computer, what happened?" Sisko asked. "Continue playback."
"The log is playing as requested," the computer replied. But the screen was still blank.
"Then stop it. Back it up, normal speed." The screen stayed black for a few seconds and then flashed a brilliant aqua-blue. The familiar scene of the runabout's dead became visible again.
"What was that?" O'Brien asked. Sisko hadn't thought he was still watching.
"That was the Gidari," Dax said, wiping a tear from her eye. "Their transporter."
"Wiped out the sensors," Sisko agreed. He'd seen that before, too. "Computer, forward playback, double speed." The flash was so quick now that it hardly registered in Sisko's vision. The screen became blank. It remained that way for two minutes before another instantaneous flash brought the sensors back online. The runabout's interior returned to view, but the bodies of Kira and Bashir were gone.
"Why would the Gidari want their bodies?" O'Brien asked. Sisko shook his head. He just didn't know.
He awoke to darkness, so much so that he wasn't sure it was waking at all. But there was light. One single light shone above him. He stared at it for a few minutes, without blinking, without taking a breath, without even registering there was a light at all. And then he inhaled, and his mind awoke with his lungs. The scenes of his life played quickly in his memories and he remembered having died.
"Kira!" he said, and was surprised to actually hear his own voice. He turned his head and found that he could move. He saw her then, lying motionless with her hands crossed over her chest, but palms turned up in an unnatural position. He tried to sit and realized that he was in the same position. Is this death? he wondered. Was there an afterlife after all?
He sat up. It wasn't hard, and there was no pain. Still, he was afraid to try and stand so he crawled over to her. She wasn't breathing. He touched her face. It was cold. He felt her neck for a pulse but couldn't find one. And then he thought to check his own. None there either. He looked down, expecting to see his chest ripped open. That's what it had felt like anyway. But his uniform wasn't even torn. There was a large dark patch though. Blood, he realized. He unzipped his uniform and saw another dark, jagged patch on his chest, only it was darker and more like a shadow. His hand shook when he lifted it. He had to know. He touched the center of the shadow and found that his hand went through it. It was a hole, a hole in his chest. He really was dead. But he was breathing where Kira was not.
He thought maybe if he spoke to her, she would wake up like he had. "Kira," he whispered. "Can you hear me?" She didn't move. He tried his voice again. "Kira. Nerys, wake up?" He touched her arm, shook her lightly. She was a corpse. Nothing more. But then neither was he. So he waited. He pulled his knees up close to his chest and wrapped his arms around them.
She opened her eyes first and saw nothing. And then the light made itself known to her. She was dissapointed. She expected more from the Prophets.
"Kira?" she heard. It was Bashir's voice. She turned her head and saw him sitting there. He released his hold on his knees and moved closer to her. Was he one of the Prophets, she wondered, disguised as Julian? Perhaps he had come to lead her to what came after life. She tried to ask him, but she had no air with which to use her voice. She took a breath and felt the air rush into her without understanding why exactly she needed it when her body was dead. The inrush of air started her heart beating as well, and she could feel it in her chest. Maybe she wasn't dead after all.
But she knew for certain that Bashir was dead and that he shouldn't be sitting beside her trying to talk. She pushed away from him until she ran into a wall. "Who are you?" she asked.
"It's me," he answered. "Julian." He was confused. He certainly looked sincere. But that was impossible. She saw him die, felt him die. He was gone.
"Julian is dead," she told him. Was he a ghost? Or a changeling? Was he meant to trick her? Another Kira was probably left on the runabout. It was her turn to be replaced.
"As near as I can figure," he told her, "we both are."
She shook her head. "Dead people don't talk."
He went back to holding his legs. He was as afraid as she was. "I didn't think so either, but then I've never been dead before. I could have been wrong."
That did sound like Bashir. But it didn't make sense. Alive or dead, this wasn't right.
The matter was dropped though when the door was opened. Bright light filled the doorway, but her eyes didn't hurt from looking at it. A figure, wearing a long robe stepped into view, silhouetting itself against the light. "Healer," it spoke, a feminine voice. "Come with me."
Bashir, or whoever he was, looked back to her. "Gidari," he whispered in wonder. He was still confused.
She began to worry that he really was Bashir. And the Gidari were taking him away. She stood. "Where are you taking him?" she addressed the robed figure.
"You are Honored," the figure answered, dipping her head, "but you are not the Healer. I speak only to the Healer. I am the Protector of Life for this vessel."
A vessel. Not the Celestial Temple, not heaven, as the humans would call it—those who believed in such a thing. A ship.
Bashir stood. He looked back at her once more and then followed the figure out the door. And then it was her turn to wait.
"Your Life," the priestess explained, "which the Creator gave you, was gone. I, as Keeper of Life for this vessel, found you and found your Life. I have drawn it back."
Bashir recognized her voice. He'd met her before. This ship was the Gindarin, a Gidari trading vessel that had come to DS Nine several years before. He noted that even on the ship, she did not remove her hood. But then Bashir didn't expect that she would. Gidari only showed themselves to Gidari.
"You are not Gidari, so I must explain," she went on. "This Second Life is not like the First. Your Life wishes to go on its way, to be with the Creator. It has been detained. It can only be held for two hundred Glif. This is one week on Bajor."
"So I'm not dead?" Bashir asked, trying to comprehend the meaning behind her mystic words.
"You must listen!" she ordered. But then her tone softened. She bowed her head. "You are Honored. This is a serious, solemn thing, and it does not endure. You must not waste even one Glif."
Bashir didn't want to be scolded. He wanted to understand. He was dead, but now alive. "Why only one week?"
"All Gidari know this," she explained. "Life must go to the Creator. All Life is on this journey. It can only be stayed for a Purpose."
"And what is the purpose for staying my life from the creator?" Bashir asked.
"You are needed. The Leader has been exposed. Those who sent your Life away seek to send hers."
The Dominion. "But why not just stop it, revive her like you did me?"
"You do not listen!" The priestess was becoming frustrated. "We will reach the Homeworld soon, and you will still be asking questions, wasting our Glif." She sighed and turned away, obviously trying to get her temper under control.
It was so different from their last meeting that it intrigued Bashir. It must be something to do with being Honored, he thought. Maybe she has to treat me with respect.
"Fah-Rhek is not to be taken easily," she told him. "And it is not for the Leader. Only those who serve the Leader and only those with Purpose. Few aliens have ever been chosen to be Honored."
Bashir didn't know whether to be grateful or not. He didn't necessarily want to be dead, but he didn't exactly trust the Gidari either. They were notoriously ethnocentric, and they guarded their privacy with deadly devotion. Besides, one week was not much time to live. It was a reprieve from the death that had already occurred, but he would want to spend it with his family or his friends, not with the Gidari. "Why me?" he asked.
"I told you," the priestess contended, "the Leader has been exposed."
Bashir shook his head. "No, I mean why do you need me? Your medicine is apparently more advanced than ours."
The priestess turned and walked a few steps away. When she spoke, her voice was quiet. She was ashamed. "Our Healers and Protectors were unable to solve the Leader's dilemma," she explained. "We remembered you. We know of your abilities, of what you have done. You are exceptional. You have faced this sickness before. You are the Leader's last hope. In three hundred Glif, she will be dead, unless you can keep her Life from the journey."
"But I only have two hundred Glif to do it," Bashir reasoned.
She turned back, facing him. "Less. One Glif has already passed while we waited for your Other's Life to join her Being, and it will take three Glif to reach Gidar. But in this time, you can learn our devices. We have salvaged much of yours from your vessel."
"My devices," Bashir said, offhandedly. He remembered. "The outpost. They needed those supplies."
"It is irrelevent," she stated.
"No," he argued. There were over a thousand people on the outpost. "It is relevent. People are dying."
"You cannot help them." She sounded like a school teacher drilling the answer into an impatient student. "Your Life had gone away. Your Life, your purpose, your vessel. All are not as they were. Already, your leader has learned of your death. He has taken your vessel away. Your Life is now this one; your Purpose, to heal the Leader; and your vessel, the Gindarin. We go to Gidar, and you must fulfill your Purpose. You will explain this to your Other. She will aid you."
Kira was waiting for him when he returned. Two more red-robed Gidari were waiting, too. They held folded, purple robes in their hands. "You must wear these," the priestess explained, "so that all will know that you are Honored." Containers of medical supplies now filled the small room. Kira had recognized some of them as Bashir's supplies for the outpost.
"What's going on?" she asked. She looked to Bashir, trusting now that he was her recently deceased crewmate.
"I can explain it," he told her, but he didn't. He waited for the Gidari to leave them alone. The priestess bowed, first with her hands crossed palms-up in front and then sweeping them back behind her until her arms were parallel to the floor. She remained that way until, awkwardly, Bashir repeated the gesture. She straightened and the three Gidari left them alone in the room. "At least some of it," he finished.
"Well?" Kira sat down on one of the crates and waited for his answer. "Where are we?"
"On the Gindarin," Bashir answered. "We're going to Gidar, their homeworld."
Kira remembered the ship. It had come to DS Nine before. But she was concentrating on another aspect of what he said. "We've been kidnapped," she concluded. "Why?"
Bashir sighed. "We were dead, apparently," he began. "They revived us, apparently as part of some ritual. Fah-Rhek, she called it. It would appear that they ocassionally revive dead people temporarily in order to fulfill a particular purpose."
Kira stood. "Dead? Temporarily?" She was upset. "How temporarily?"
"Two hundred Glif," he answered. "She said that was about one Bajoran week."
"One week?" She couldn't help repeating everything he said. "And then what?"
Bashir sat down himself and didn't look at her. "Apparently we go back to being dead."
"We die—again—in a week?" Kira sat too. Alive, dead, alive. It was too much to take in. She probably would have managed being dead. She believed the Prophets would have taken her pagh. But now she wasn't dead and she didn't want to be. Not now, and not in a week. "Why can't we just stay alive?"
Bashir turned his head to look at her. "I don't think we're really alive."
"What do you mean, we're not alive?" she contended. "You said they revived us. I'm breathing. My heart is pounding. I can think. I can walk." She would have continued, but Bashir startled her by standing up so abruptly and reaching for her hand.
He put two fingers to her wrist and felt her strong pulse there. His forehead was creased, his brows pulled down. He didn't expect to find her pulse, she realized. He touched his own neck.
"What?" she demanded.
Bashir just shook his head. "I don't," was all he said.
You don't what? she wanted to ask, but she could see that he was troubled. He took her hand and placed it to his neck. She felt nothing. She tried a different position and then used both hands. She couldn't find his pulse. "Didn't they heal us, in order to revive us?"
Abruptly, she took his shoulders and spun him around so she could see his back. Then she pulled her hands away and covered her mouth. She felt the gorge rise up her throat, but there was nothing in her stomach to vomit. She had known what the changeling had done to him, but she hadn't seen it. His uniform was torn and his skin was broken. Some of it hung limply around a hole the size of her wrist that apparently reached into his chest. And then she noticed something else about it and dropped her hand. "You're glowing."
Now Bashir was the one to be repetitive. "Glowing?" He tried to look over his shoulder but quickly gave up and unzipped his uniform to look down at his chest. Kira realized there was a larger hole there, though oddly his uniform had not been torn. Why had the changeling bothered? she wondered, though she didn't worry about it for long. A lightly incandescent blue glowed from within the jagged hole. Now he looked like he would be sick. "Tricorder," he whispered. "See if you can find a tricorder."
They both delved into the cases, and Kira was the first to find the medical kit with his tricorder. She opened it and handed it to him. He scanned himself. When he didn't say anything for a few moments, Kira pressed him. "Well?"
"I'm dead," he told her. "No pulse, no blood pressure." He said it so matter-of-factly that it scared her. He had a blank look on his face. "I've got brain activity though. And my cells are receiving oxygen."
"And me?" She waited for him to scan her and then digest the readings.
"You are alive, more or less. Pulse, brain waves. Blood pressure would be good, too, if you had any blood."
"If?" No blood, she thought, no blood. Her mind was racing trying to make sense of what was happening.
Bashir rubbed his free hand through his hair. "It, um, seems they've replaced our blood with—" He seemed to struggle for the right term to use.
"Something that glows," Kira finished for him.
Bashir nodded. He took a deep breath, a somewhat ragged one, and Kira could see that he wasn't taking this any better than she was. He seemed younger to her then, more like he was when she first met him. He swallowed and opened his mouth to talk. "It's feeding us oxygen and nutrients." His voice faded until he was only whispering. "I don't need my heart."
Dead or not, the officer in Kira took over. Bashir had just gone through a traumatic death, moreso than she had, and he wasn't dealing well with what had come after. He needed to focus on something other than the negative state of his health. "What purpose?" she asked. "You said they did this for a purpose."
He took another breath, centering himself. "They need me to heal their leader. The Dominion did something to her. Poisoned her, I suppose. She said the leader would die in 300 Glif—a week and a half—unless I could stop it."
"And you agreed?" She wasn't sure yet if that was a good or bad thing. She was just thinking out loud.
Apparently he felt the same. "I didn't disagree," he said. "I don't see how it could help to refuse. She said Sisko found the runabout, took it away, back to the station. They'll know we died."
"But they won't know we've been revived." Kira nodded. "They won't come looking for us."
"We're on our way to Gidar now," Bashir continued. "I suppose we could look at the positive side." He smiled, but it was a little unsure.
"The positive side?" Besides being alive—and that was debatable, not to mention temporary—she couldn't see a positive side to this situation.
"We'll get to see more of the Gidari than anyone ever has."
Kira laughed in spite of herself. And then she felt sad. "But we won't be able to tell anyone about it. Why did they revive me? You're the healer."
Bashir shrugged and shook his head. "I don't know. They called you my other, said you would aid me. Maybe they think you're a nurse."
Kira thought about that, about how they must have found their bodies. Now she laughed heartily.
"Not a nurse," she told him. "A wife, maybe." He gave her a questioning look, so she clarified. "I was, uh, upset when you died. I was beside you when they shot me."
"How touching," Bashir said, finally getting it. "And this you find humorous?"
Kira didn't see why he didn't get it. "You," she pointed at him, "and me. Five years ago, I would have dropped dead at the thought."
"Okay, I see your point," he said and finally smiled. "But I can think of worse people with whom to spend the last week of my life." He opened one of the unfamiliar cases and began to look through its contents.
Kira didn't want the conversation to end. Not now. If it did she'd have to think about what was happening, what had happened. It was easier to go on with lighter things. "Oh, like who?"
He was quick to answer. "Commander Worf. You?"
She had to think a bit. He'd taken the best answer already. "Um, Quark. Your turn."
"Morn," he said. "He'd have time to tell me his life story at least six times."
"Gul Dukat." She couldn't think of anyone worse.
"Damar," Bashir countered. "At least Dukat can make good conversation now and then."
It was only two hours—3.2 Glif, by Bashir's best estimate—before the priestess had returned to inform them of their arrival at Gidar. Bashir had been so engrossed with the Gidari medical equipment that he hardly noticed her entrance. Kira did though and she tapped him on the shoulder. They both stood.
"You are not wearing the colors." The priestess sounded impatient and yet resigned.
"Colors?" Bashir asked. "Oh!" He remembered now the cloaks they'd been given. He picked them up off one of the boxes and handed the smaller one to Kira. "Just forgot. Sorry. How long until we arrive?" He wasn't sure though, if the cloak was meant to be worn alone or over their own clothes.
"By your time, five minutes. You are not doing it correctly." She clapped her hands together once and two figures stepped out of the dark behind her. Bashir hadn't seen them even enter the room.
One of them went to Kira and pulled her to one side of the room. "What are they doing?" she asked. If she was afraid, she didn't show it.
The other figure had taken hold of Bashir, and he decided to do as Kira had. No fear. Just do what they want. They were "honored," or so the priestess had said. The figures—men, Bashir decided—wouldn't hurt them. "I think they're trying to help us dress." And that did, indeed, seem the most plausible explanation. Within minutes, the Gidari had both their uniforms off and the cloaks on.
The priestess clapped again and boots and gloves were brought to them. "Put them on," she ordered. "You must hurry. We will put down soon. Wait until you are called." She turned swiftly on her heels and left the room. The two attendants followed, leaving Kira and Bashir to put on their boots.
"Well," Kira said after they'd gone, "that was fun." She found her uniform on the floor. "Keep your comm badge," she told him. "Just in case."
Bashir nodded and found his own uniform a few feet away on the floor. He was starting to get anxious. Gidar. The Gidari were interesting, he'd give them that. And mysterious. But what little he'd seen of them—and that was more than most—showed them to be dangerous as well. No, not just dangerous. Scary was a better term, though it did deflate his ego a bit to admit it. That they were powerful was obvious, and they had an almost magical quality. Forget almost, Bashir told himself. I'm dead, remember?
"Julian?" Kira had moved to his side, and she was tucking her comm badge inside the cloak. She seemed distracted for a moment. "There are a lot of pockets in here." She removed her hand and then grew serious again. "I don't really want to go to Gidar."
"I don't either," Bashir agreed. "But I don't see how we can get out of it now."
Kira turned away and began to pace the little room. "Me, neither. But let's make a pact. No matter what the Gidari have us doing, no matter what they think our purpose is, we're going to find a way back. Okay?"
Bashir nodded his agreement, but he felt he had to voice some dissension. "But we've only got a week and then we die."
"We're already dead. But I'd rather take my last breath on Deep Space Nine, wouldn't you?"
Of course, he thought, and then another thought came to him. "We could say goodbye."
Kira turned back to him. "Not everyone gets that chance."
The door opened again without warning and a Gidari in beige stepped inside. Crew, Bashir thought, not priest. The man—or so Bashir guessed—turned his head away. "You must cover yourselves. All must be covered in Nardinosti."
"Nardinosti?" Kira asked.
"The Port," the Gidari replied. "Only after we leave the city can we remove our covers. Aliens walk in Nardinosti."
Bashir thought about that for just a second. It only took a second. He was used to Garak and his enigmatic speech. The Gidari were cryptic but if you tried to think like they did, it wasn't so hard. The Gidari do not want to be seen by other species. "We're aliens," Bashir told him, pointing out the obvious.
"You are Honored," the Gidari countered. "When we leave the city gates, you will be uncovered as will we. You are Honored among the Gidari; you are not alien."
"I see," Bashir replied, though he really didn't understand.
The Gidari seemed satisfied. "Cover yourselves and follow me." He turned, as swiftly as had the priestess and stepped out the door. The door, for once, remained opened behind him. Kira and Bashir pulled their hoods over their heads and walked out together.
Kira was surprised to find that she could see quite well through the purple material covering her face. She was hoping to see more of the Gidari ship now that she'd been led out of the room, but the corridor they entered was as plain as the room had been. There were no panels, fixtures, or features of any kind on the walls. There weren't even any doors. She turned her head to see the door she'd just left, but it had disappeared into the bland wall.
Their guide turned and walked directly into one of the walls. The wall retained its appearance but not its solidity. The Gidari walked right through it. Bashir's head, covered like hers, turned toward her. He shrugged and followed the Gidari into the wall. Kira tested it with her hand first. It was like no hologram she'd ever seen. It never wavered with her touch. There was no ripple around her wrist. It was as if the wall were solid and she a mere mist. She stepped through and found herself in a brightly lit corridor no different from the one she'd left. But now they were not alone. The corridor was filled with beige Gidari, and the light was coming from beyond a great door. Daylight. And yet it had an artificial quality to it that she couldn't quite place.
Kira felt alone all of a sudden but it was easy to spot Bashir among the crowd. He was slightly taller than most Gidari, and his purple cloak was like a beacon of color in the sea of beige. "Follow," their guide whispered. It struck her then just how quiet the corridor was. The many Gidari there were walking toward the open door, but their footsteps made no sound on the deck. Not one of them uttered a word. They parted before the guide though, allowing the Honored, in their purple cloaks, to move ahead.
The door, when they reached it, towered over Kira's head. Four stories, she estimated. The ship was huge, larger than she remembered from its time docked at the station a few years back.
There were buildings beyond. Gray buildings without windows, as featureless as the corridors of the ship. There was a ramp and their guide stopped just before he stepped onto it. He motioned with his hand that she and Bashir were to continue on. Kira could see a clearing beyond the end of the ramp. And in the clearing were twelve figures in red. The priestess stood at the foot of the ramp. Past the circle of red, more beige Gidari stood watching, but sprinkled among them were other species. The blue face of a Bolian, two Teldarians, the white hair of an Andorian. This was a port city after all and the Gidari were traders.
As she and Bashir reached the end of the ramp, the crowd behind the priestess parted. She turned and bowed, bringing both arms behind her back, bent up at the elbows. It almost looked painful. A figure emerged. Gidari, but dressed in black. Neither priest, nor crew. Then what? Kira wondered. It was a woman, she decided, based on her figure beneath the cloak. She returned the priestess's bow. And then turned toward the ramp. She froze there, and turned back to the priestess.
"They are Honored!" she said, obviously surprised.
"Our Enemy," the priestess explained as if it were explanation enough.
The black one accepted with a nod. "Then the Healer is Honored indeed," she said. "There are two."
"His Other. Also Honored."
Satisfied, the black one turned again to the ramp. She moved forward and stopped just in front of Bashir. "Healer." She bowed, like the priestess had, with her arms first crossed in front of her and then spread behind her. Apparently the bows meant something, like the colors did. Bashir glanced Kira's way and then bowed, too, repeating the other's movements. "I am Tarlingen Nardek," she said. "I will be your liaison. Come with me."
Sisko let the doors close behind him, shutting out the everyday noise of Ops. This just wasn't everyday, although it was happening more often since the war started. Today, he had calls to make. Payven's wife was due back at the station in an hour. He'd tell her in person. Kira didn't have any family, so there was no one to call but the Bajoran officials. Bashir was harder. Sisko knew that he and his parents had only recently reconciled. And he remembered another time when he had to tell them their son was dead. This time, he would not be found marooned but alive. This time, Bashir really was dead.
Sisko sat down and turned on the comm panel. But then he turned it off. Not yet. He wanted to think about what he'd say to them. It was easier last time. There has been an accident; there had been a body. This time wasn't an accident. Julian was murdered.
Sisko thought about the first time he'd met Bashir, how he stuttered when he was nervous, and how naive he was when Garak first contacted him. He'd changed a lot. He had grown darker. And with good reason, Sisko supposed. He'd been abducted by both the Dominion and the Federation. But even then he'd still kept—for the most part—his sense of humor and his caring demeanor. He was a doctor throughout, and he had kept his ideals.
And Kira. While Bashir had grown darker, she had grown lighter, shedding some of her war-hardened shell. She relaxed more, smiled more, and made friends more easily.
Bashir was a good example of that. She had barely tolerated him at first. But now they were closer in some ways than they were with anyone else. Shared experience, Sisko guessed. She as a liberator; he as a prisoner. In moments of personal crisis, they had confided in each other. No one should die alone. Bashir had told her that once. Well, at least there was that. They hadn't died alone.
Now he'd have to make more calls. One to Bajor asking for a new liaison officer. One to Starfleet for a new doctor. It wouldn't be the same. Ops wouldn't be the same without her in it, standing by the Ops table, staring down some Cardassian gul. And the Infirmary was Julian's place. Kira had made sure it stayed that way those six months they'd thought he was dead before. It wasn't the same, though, without his comforting smile and soft voice. Sisko had met many doctors over the years, but none were as personable as Julian. He could make you feel better just knowing he was there. Anyone else was just a doctor.
It was times like this that Sisko felt the full weight of the pips on his collar. They were his responsibility. All of them, even Savolar. They trusted him, depended on him. He was their captain. They were his crew.
The crowd parted before them as it had for the figure in black. Tarlingen Nardek. Like the captain of the ship. Bashir remembered his name. Sanglin Nardek. Perhaps they were related. Several of the crew followed, carrying the crates of equipment.
As strange as being dead—and still walking—was, he had to admit that his interest was piqued. Tarlingen led them through the crowds and past the monotonous, gray buildings. Past her, and past the onlookers, Bashir could see a long row of gray cloaks. And gates bathed in a reddish glow. The gray Gidari were guards, he guessed. Three to a gate and armed with rifles of some sort. As they neared, Bashir turned his head, but he couldn't see the end of the row in either direction. It was as if they surrounded the entire city.
They reached one gate and the guard there bowed as the priestess from the Gindarin had. Tarlingen returned it. Then she turned back to Bashir and Kira. "Wait here and then follow me through. I must linger. You may step through." She didn't wait for confirmation. She stepped into the glowing gateway. Energy flowed around her, lighting her silhouette beneath the cloak and hood. She stood for a few seconds in the matrix and then stepped forward. As she did, she disappeared.
Bashir looked to Kira, uncertain about following. She seemed to know what he was thinking. "What choice do we have at this point?" she asked quietly. She took a step forward and disappeared beyond the gate as well. Bashir followed her and felt the tendrils of energy fall like rain upon his shoulders. He didn't stop as Tarlingen had, but stepped through. Beyond the gate was a whole other world.
Kira stood motionless, entranced by it. Bashir took little notice of her and stared instead at the sky. Everything was bathed in red light, not white like the sunlight in Nardinosti. The sky rolled with fast moving clouds though he felt only a slight breeze.
The buildings here were ornate and light danced on their window panes. An occassional tree threw its shade onto the brick-lined street. Its branches were covered with red and orange leaves which fluttered in the breeze like flames. Even the air smelled different.
Tarlingen took a deep breath, drawing in the air for over three seconds before blowing it out again. She repeated the gesture three times and then turned to her guests. "Welcome to Gidar." And then she removed her hood.
Kira actually gasped. Bashir could hear it. He understood. He'd felt the same way the first time he'd seen them. He still felt it. Tarlingen's blue skin glowed purple under the red sky. Her eyes, blank and white if they'd been back in Nardosti, were now filled with color, reflecting the movement of the clouds. Her hair, like a million tiny mirrors, glittered as the breeze gently blew. She was regal, like nothing he'd ever seen.
And she wasn't alone. Bashir looked around. All the other Gidari here were unhooded. And they all looked alike. Not exactly, of course. They varied in height and build and certain facial features, but all of them—men and women—were beautiful. They literally stole his breath.
"Come," Tarlingen said, drawing them out of their reverie. "We must go to Nodgarin. Load the equipment," she ordered the crew.
Kira started to pull back her hood, too, but Tarlingen reacted quickly, catching her hand. "You mustn't."
"We were told that we could," Kira stated firmly.
"The one who told you was mistaken," Tarlingen replied.
"Why?" Kira asked. "Because we're aliens?"
Tarlingen smiled and it was dazzling. "Yes, actually, but not for the reasons you think." She turned to Bashir. "You have your medical device?"
"M-medical device," Bashir stuttered. "Oh yes, the tricorder." Bashir removed it from one of the many pockets of his cloak and held it out to her.
"What does it tell you about my world?"
Kira was watching him, or at least he thought she was, since her head was turned his way. He opened the tricorder and it sang with blips and bleeps. The sensors on it went haywire, detecting an environment so foreign that it wasn't even classed by Starfleet. "Infrared," he reported, picking out the most obvious reason for staying hooded. "Among other things. It would damage our skin." The metallic sheen to the Gidari's complexion was apparently a natural form of protection.
"You will be safe from it indoors," Tarlingen nodded. "You may uncover yourselves then. This way." She held out a hand, indicating a building on the right. Kira was apparently satisfied with the explanations and ascented.
But the building was hardly more than another facade. It was no more than a long hallway, less than two meters wide. It was clear they'd be leaving it soon, so he didn't bother removing the hood just yet. Another Gidari, wearing trousers and a jacket instead of a cloak, met them there. He bowed. "You'll be going to Nodgarin, Liytner?"
Bashir suspected he was some sort of administrator, a civilian, apparently in charge of the transportation. Perhaps "Liytner" was a form of rank, the one signified by a black cloak. Now that he thought about it, he realized that he hadn't seen any other black cloaks. And the building, a station of some sort, was crowded with travelers.
Tarlingen nodded, but stood at attention. "Yes, straight through and we must leave immediately. Alter your schedule accordingly."
"Of course, Liytner. Platform eylen. You have cargo, as well?"
"Yes," Tarlingen said. "I ride with the Honored. No others. Mark the car."
The administrator was taking notes, counting the cargo. "Certainly. For whom? Liytner or Honored?"
Tarlingen had been looking toward the exit, toward the many platforms visible past the full length windows and open doors. Now she looked back at him, and for the merest moment, Bashir thought he saw a flash of blue in her eyes. The administrator backed away and bowed again. He'd offended her. "Liytner," Tarlingen clarified. "We go to Nodgarin."
"Forgive, Liytner," the administrator begged, still bowing.
Tarlingen glared at him for another moment and then returned the bow. "Forgiven. Mark the car."
The administrator straightened and then ran out the doors toward the platforms.
Tarlingen turned then to the crew. "Load the cargo one car back. Mark it as well."
The crew moved to obey. Tarlingen had a great deal of authority, Bashir decided. Honored, it seemed, carried a high rank in Gidari society. Still, he wondered just what a Liytner was.
They were outside again as soon as the crew had passed. Red grass and gray gravel marked the end of the building and the beginning of the platforms. Single tracks crossed the landscape, perhaps fifteen of them. There were signs hanging over them with markings Bashir had never seen before. Most of the tracks were empty, but three had greenish trains waiting. At least, that's what they looked like to Bashir. They were long vehicles, broken into many compartments. They hovered just above the tracks.
The adminstrator was waiting beside one of the compartments of the nearest train. He waved a hand over a black panel. Immediately the compartment turned red, blending with the sky beyond. He waved again and the car changed to purple. For the Honored, Bashir realized. The administrator pressed his hand to the panel and the car turned black. Liytner, like Tarlingen Nardek's cloak. It was marked for rank.
Bashir glimpsed movement from the corner of his eye as they crossed the platforms with Tarlingen in the the lead. They were quick, little creatures, and they darted down the tracks as Gidari feet approached them. They were so fast that he couldn't get a good look at them, but he thought they looked a bit like lizards. Pushing the thought of the creatures out of his mind, he concentrated on memorizing the path they'd taken so far. If he and Kira were to return to Deep Space Nine, they would have to go back through the gates and Nardinosti. In his mind he was going past the streets and buildings beyond the red energy gates. Consequently, he wasn't paying attention to the car as he stepped in.
Tarlingen had stepped aside to let Kira and him into the car. The door was slightly shorter than he was, so he had placed his hand on the side of the door. He heard it before he felt it. A soft, short whistle. It felt like a needle stabbing him just above his right wrist. There was no pain, just the sensation of something foreign. He could still see it. Before he could even turn his head to see what had happened, Tarlingen had reached that side of the door and snatched the culprit. It was one of the lizard-like creatures, but now that he could see it, he realized it wasn't a lizard at all. It was an insect. A large one. It was at least ten centimeters long, with six long legs and constantly twitching antennae.
There was a small circular orifice where its mouth might have been. It squirmed in Tarlingen's hand, trying to free itself. But she held it tight, and it gave up the struggle, letting its long, needle-sharp tongue hang loosely out its mouth.
Satisfied that its strength was spent, Tarlingen tossed it away behind her. It bounced along the ground a few times then bounded away into the tall grass beyond the tracks. "Please," she said, "we must leave."
"Is it venomous?" Bashir asked, unsure of whether or not to worry in his present state.
"Inside," she insisted. She touched him on the shoulder and led him inside the car. There were five cushioned seats for them to sit in. Bashir took one near a window, hoping to see the landscape that they passed. "The haftha is venomous," Tarlingen now answered his question. "But you needn't worry. Even if you were Gidari, it is easily cured."
"Are we immune?" Kira asked. Bashir thought she must be thinking the same things as he was. Were they invulnerable now that they were deceased? Why then was the sunlight a problem?
"You are Honored," Tarlingen said, as if that were explanation enough. But she went on. "Your body can be damaged, but you will remain." She put her hand inside her cloak's sleeves and pulled out a what was unmistakably a weapon. Not a phaser or energy weapon, but deadly just the same. Bashir tensed instinctively. Kira, beside him, did the same. "As Honored," Tarlingen went on, "you do not require sustenance or sleep. Your body received all it needs from the ritual, Fah-Rek. If I were to shoot you, you would fall down. But you would get up again. It would only damage your body." She replaced the gun and pulled another weapon from her sleeve. "But if I were to use this, there would be no more body. Your Life—your spirit, as you say—would have no where to be. It would not matter that you were Honored. The light from our sun would likewise damage your bodies. It would not harm your spirit, but I did not think you would want to have your skin burned away, just as you would not like to be shot." She put the weapon away. "Either way, you are safe here. The windows filter the light and I would not harm you. No Gidari would. You are Honored."
The door closed and the train began to move. It started slowly, smoothly gliding over the track and past the flame-colored trees. But it picked up speed quickly, racing past the landscape and startling a whole swarm of the haftha insects. Bashir removed his hood and ran a hand through his hair to smooth it down. Tarlingen watched him carefully and then turned her attention to Kira as she removed her hood. "You are different," she said, surprised. "Is this because you are female?"
"No," Kira said with an angry glare. "I'm Bajoran. He's human."
Tarlingen caught the anger. "Forgive me," she said. "You were not expected. I was told only the Healer would come. You are his Other?"
"No," Kira answered, shaking her head.
"She's my superior officer," Bashir said.
"Another healer?" Tarlingen asked.
"No." Bashir had an idea. Tarlingen had introduced herself as their liaison. Perhaps that was as much a title of respect as Honored seemed to be. "She's also a liaison. She's First Officer and Bajoran Liaison Officer to Deep Space Nine."
Tarlingen was quiet for a moment. "Ah," she said finally. "Bajor, the planet near our Enemy's pathway. The Federation commands the station that Bajor owns. So you are liaison for your people. Yes, I understand this."
"I was the liaison," Kira corrected.
Tarlingen sighed and nodded. "The Enemy took your Life. For that I am sorry. But they cannot harm you now. They cannot come here."
"Then how did they threaten your leader?" Bashir asked, catching a glimpse of something outside his window. It was a herd of animals. A large herd, since he could still see them. The train was moving at least four times faster than the animals. They were large repitilian creatures that ran on their back legs. Their front appendages were small and weak compared to their powerful hind legs. In fact, they very much resembled dinosaurs of prehistoric Earth. He looked away when Tarlingen began to explain.
"One did come here," she admitted. "He changed himself. Became a member of the Vesmir's crew. We knew he was not human when he passed through the gates. He said he was a Founder of the Dominion and he must speak to the Leader of the Gidari. We held him prisoner until the Leader gave him audience at Nodgarin. He and the Leader could not agree."
"So the Founder poisoned the Leader," Kira concluded. "And your healers couldn't find an antidote."
"Many have tried," Tarlingen explained. "But time is short. She is growing weaker. We know what Bashir did for the disease on the other side of the pathway. The Blight. We hope he can help."
Bashir shook his head. "I never found a cure for the Blight." He'd never given up trying though. He had hoped to find it someday. Now he was out of somedays.
"But you found prevention," Tarlingen said. "We do not expect you to cure her. We only expect you to try. Our best Healers have been unsuccessful. But we also know that the poison is passing. Two Healers contracted it. They were sent to the Creator to prevent its spread. You will try to cure the Leader. But we must prevent the death of more Gidari."
It could be the Blight, Bashir thought. This could be how it started on Teplan III. It had taken him nearly two months to find a vaccine there. Here, he had less than a week. And then he'd be dead. He looked out the window again. The herd was still there, but one of the beasts had fallen. As the train sped by, Bashir could see a hundred or more little haftha insects swarming over the beast as it struggled to regain its footing. Before it was out of his sight, the beast was dead. Without thinking, he touched his arm where he had been stung. Dead. "They were killed," he said, speaking about the healers.
"They were going to die," Tarlingen said in the Gidari's defense. "More might have died had they lived. They knew this. They knew their duty. They are Gidari."
It angered him. He was a doctor, a healer. It was wrong to kill sick people just because they were going to die. They'd been poisoned. If they were trying to find a cure for the leader, they should have tried to find one for the healers. The same antidote would work. The Gidari didn't value life. They killed some, revived others, as if it didn't matter either way. One was sent to the Creator with no thought to the possibilities and opportunities thrown away. The other was given a week to live with no thought to his family, his friends. He was taken away from everything he knew and given a purpose he didn't choose. Either was more than just a body, just a vessel, just a duty.
O'Brien knew what she was asking. Bashir had been reported dead once before—twice. And the first time, Miles had been reported dead, too. "I'm sure." It hurt just to say the words. It helped, though, saying them to her. But it hurt again when he realized he couldn't hold her. He couldn't even touch her. "Security sensors showed the whole thing."
"Sensors have been wrong before," Keiko reminded him.
"Not this time," O'Brien told her. "Julian's blood was all over the wall."
She looked away, but she nodded. "And Nerys?" she asked, looking up. Her eyes glistened with tears. "What will I tell Molly? At least Yoshi's still too young."
Now Miles looked away. "I don't know." Molly thought of Kira as Aunt Nerys. She had carried Kirayoshi. She had been his surrogate mother. He tried to think of an answer, but Keiko didn't leave him time.
"I used to think sometimes," she said, "about what I would tell her if it was you. I couldn't think of anything."
Miles had never felt so alone. He had used Julian, he admitted now, for company when Keiko was away. Julian kept him occupied. Now he didn't have Julian, and he didn't have Keiko. He met her eyes. "I wish you were here."
Keiko reached out and pressed her hand to the viewscreen. "Me, too."
Miles met her hand with his own.
Send feedback to email@example.com

At a point she is discussing why at 30 she was supposed to be excited about trying to have a baby b/c for some strange reason at that age you're supposed to have one. I feel like she does about a baby and I'm already 37. We have decided not to have one (my husband and I) and we're ok with it.
I love the comment from her sister that having a baby is like getting a tattoo on your face-you do have to be serious to commit to something like that. My joy is rather to be a great Aunt and someday I'll get to have that chance.
Anyhoo as a go back to bead #2. I feel sad for her knowing that she hated her marriage and proud that she feels she doesn't have to discuss with us-the reader-why things happened for her the way it did, it's not any of our business how she got there, it's the story of where she went to from there. The learning experience is what we are reading here.
On to Bead #3

The ‘Festival of Lights’, or Tihar, as it is called in Nepal, is where all of the houses and buildings are decorated with oil lamps. Though from what I have seen in and around Ohio, there too are lights that shine and glimmer in the night.
The ‘Festival of Lights’, sometimes called ‘Panchak Yama’ and even Diwali, is held in honor of Laxmi, a goddess of wealth. Laxmi was also the wife of Vishnu. ‘Panchak Yama’ means the ‘5 Days of the Lord of the Underworld’.
The story goes that once there was a king who was on his deathbed. And while this king did not want to die, he had been told that a snake would come to take his life. This person gave him the advice of filling his palace with on lamps on Laxmi Puja day to help please Laxmi. And once Laxmi was pleased, she was able to convince the serpent to not take his life. And as a result, the king was able to live another 70 years.
And it is to this day, that those who celebrate ‘The Festival of Lights’, place lamps and bright lights around their homes in honor of this celebration.

Alexis walked up to the handyman in a seductive stride, "Heyyy" was all she said as she neared him.
"Hello miss" replied the handyman, who pulled up on his scuffed up work uniform.
"Do you mind helping with something in my room...?" said Alexis.
The handyman eagerly hopped up from his painting job and went into the room with the girl. Alexis pinned him to the bed and started to kiss him.
The man easily gave into her, and she started to remove his clothes. After she got his shirt up she looked at him. The man's face lit up as he looked into a gaping maw of razor sharp teeth grinning at him. The girl bit into his neck and quickly silenced the man, and was slowly eating away at him.
"I should really stop going through all this trouble to get one of these" said the monster, "But hey, I LOVE seeing the looks on their faces"
The monster turned into the handyman, picked up his wallet, and started on its way to the handyman's house.

Preparing for my trip to Japan was both exciting and stressful. Since this will be my first time out of the country and being away from my family for such a long time, I am quite nervous. Packing was a bit harder than I thought it would be, but I prioritized and took advice from others who have been on longer trips. The studying portion of the preparation was very informative and helpful, however finding the time to study was the difficult part, with all the summer plans. Fortunately, I managed to complete my studies of the hiragana and katakana alphabet with encouragement from my best friends that assured me that it was okay if I had to leave them to study for a while.
My greatest fear is that my family and friends will fall apart without me, since we’re all so close. I also fear that without them, I will be overcome by my depression, finding myself lonely in a new place. In regards to my studies, I fear that I will become frustrated with myself, not being able to understand Japanese well enough and fall behind in my classes. Other fears include missing my flights or my SIM card not working properly.
Navigating the airport was a bit overwhelming and confusing at first, but I was blessed to have a family friend with me who is more used to airports, she helped me figure out where I needed to go. Saying bye to my family was hard, but I tried to make it quick so I would not miss my flight. I was there early enough to navigate to the correct gate, even after making a few mistakes. The second airport was easier, since I did not have to worry about my luggage and had a better understanding of how to find the correct gate. The Narita airport was very disorienting, as all I had to guide me were signs and I had to hope I as doing everything right, since I don’t know enough Japanese to ask or understand what the airport personnel were saying. It seemed like forever before I was through customs, and I was hoping and praying that my group was still there. It took me a while to find my luggage, but I did find it after asking someone at the airport. Thankfully, my group was still waiting despite me not being able to ask them to wait for me.

The above video has Soulkey talking about how he became a professional gamer. I thought it shed good insight into what sort of path these players had to go through in order to become a professional gamer, without too much embellishment or over dramatization.
This is the rough translation of what Soulkey had to say about his humble beginnings:
"Let's go back to the past. This was when I was an elementary student, and our generation was obsessed with Brood War. Back then, the modern version of fastest maps (with stacked minerals) didn't exist, so I played money maps that were popular at the time. Up until 6th grade, I only played money maps with my friends. Early rushes were forbidden, and I didn't know anything about regular melee maps.
These were the kind of maps that Soulkey spent his early years playing
Then came my middle school years. I had confidence in my Brood War abilities, and as you know, being good at Brood War meant something back then. Even if you were okay with your friends teasing you about anything else, it wasn't cool to taunt your friends about being bad at Brood War. It was a matter of personal pride.
Since I thought I was pretty good, I played against the best kid in my class when I was in 7th grade. I lost. I was completely outclassed. I kept losing. It was infuriating. I practiced hard for months on end. I challenged him again, but lost once again. So what do you think I did? I practiced Brood War instead of doing my studies. He was a terran player, and I played zerg. By the time I reached 8th grade, I was able to defeat him.
It didn't stop there. There was another kid who was the best in our class when I was in 8th grade. I don't remember what his race was, but I lost to him also initially. I was hyper-competitive, so I gave it my all to defeat him. I didn't bother with my studies at all. So eventually, I was able to defeat him before 8th grade ended.
Now there was only one dude left. He was acknowledged by everyone as the best kid in my school. Towards the end of 8th grade, I challenged him for the title of the best Brood War player of the school. I lost. He also picked terran as his race.
That dude ended up being in the same class as me when I moved up to 9th grade. I never stopped trying to overcome him. I kept losing. It felt kind of hopeless, as if I could never win against him. However, I didn't stop trying. I spent all my time trying to become better at the game, while he spent his time studying. It was only a matter of time before I eventually overcame him, which I ended up doing. By the time I graduated from middle school, there was nobody who could touch me in terms of Brood War capabilites.
So when I began my studies at high school, there wasn't a single guy who could challenge me. However, there was a bigger problem. My mother started to interfere with my life.
Soulkey now had the biggest challenge in his gaming life. Convincing his mother to let him follow his dreams.
My mother wanted me to quit gaming, in order to persue my studies. As she left for work, she would unplug the mouse from the computer. So I was temporarily unable to game at all. She really didn't like how I didn't study at all, and devoted all of my time to becoming better at Brood War. But I had a plan of my own. I had another mouse ready, and gamed while my mother was away from the house, and unplugged my own mouse just before she returned from work, and pretended to study.
But I got caught. My mother touched the computer to see if it had any heat, in order to figure out whether it had been used recently or not. So I had no choice but to confront the issue head on. I told my mother that I was going to be a professional gamer, and although she kept saying no, I kept persisting, and refused to study.
She likes my profession now, but back then, the public perception of gamers in general wasn't good at all. I understand her stance on the matter back then. It was how every adult thought about professional gamers at the time. It isn't as bad now, as it was back then.
So I was able to spend a lot of time getting better once more. I tried getting my semi-professional liscence, and won my first Courage Tournament (an offline tournament for non-registered amateur players, with the winner being handed a semi-professional liscence) after about four failed attempts. I beat Britney in the finals, he was a piece of cake back then as well.
Britney, the man who faced Soulkey in the finals of the 40th Courage Tournament
Now came the important part. I had to get drafted by a team to become a fully fledged professional player. But it isn't easy. You need to have good connections, or be well known as a beastly amateur player. I didn't have good connections, and I wasn't that well known. There was no reason for a professional team to draft me.
I wanted to play games against professional players, but I had no connections. Professional players don't bother playing against amateur players unless there is money on the line. So I had no choice but to play games with money on the line. Back then, online currency for a famous Korean networking site called Cyworld was put on the line for those kind of games. I joined the channel specifically designed for those kind of games, and played versus PianO. I lost all of my games, in a one sided manner. I lost about four games that day alone, and lost my online currency, and handed them over to PianO.
I saw him again the next day, and challenged him once more. Handing over more and more online currency with every game I lost against him. It seemed as if PianO felt a significant enough improvement from my side. He probably thought I was pretty solid for an amateur player. From a professional gamer's perspective, all amateur players were terrible in terms of skill. It is totally different from now. Today, the difference in skill level between professional gamers and amateurs isn't that large, but back then, the difference in skill level was colossal. There simply was no way for an amateur player to be on a similar skill level to professional players.
After some time, PianO saw promise from my play, and recommended me to the team.
PianO was the one who introduced Soulkey to his team, and it probably wouldn't have been possible without Soulkey handing over free online currency for the opportunity
I was tested as a practice partner, with three games being played for each of the match-up against the Hanbit Stars members. My overall record was 1-8. GuemChi was the only Hanbit Stars player to drop a game against me (Soulkey ended up losing 1-2 overall). I still remember the match. I managed to defeat GuemChi on Blue Storm. I didn't get selected as a practice partner, but was given another chance. I was a seriously bad zerg-versus-zerg player back then.
The next time, I went with three other players hoping to get selected as practice partners. I was the only testee to have two victories (one from the zerg-versus-protoss, and one from the zerg-versus-terran match-up) from the nine available opportunities, and the other testees lost all of their nine games.
So that's how I got selected as a gamer for Woongjin Stars. They didn't have such a strong zerg line-up, with ZerO, ToSky, and Child being part of the A-team. Since I only knew about Hanbit Stars, I wanted to join the team. I didn't know about the financial dynamic of the various professional teams. I was very young, and was ignorant about such matters.
Hanbit Stars wasn't in such a good financial state at the time, and was struggling to find sponsors. I was already in the team as the online practice partner for a couple of months, but my mother found out about the bad financial state of Hanbit Stars. Both my high school teacher, and mother were concerned about the financial stability of my profession, and in order to commit to my profession full time (as the in-house practice partner), I needed their consent.
Thankfully, Woongjin sponsored Hanbit Stars just in time, and I was able to join the team as a full time in-house practice partner. Before that, I wasn't able to practice inside the house outside of weekends.
The player support from Woongjin was incredible. The practice environment was great, and food was great. I thought I was in heaven. All this wouldn't have been possible without my hyper-competitive spirit."
There is quite a lot of content from that video, with stories about his early years as a professional, and his practice dynamic with Flash (which I posted about in a non-blog post some time ago). However, I wanted to focus on his pre-professional years as a gamer, mostly because I found it interesting, and partly because I don't want to spend more time translating the entire video.

Accoen originally born Turyahebwa Godfrey is a musician in Uganda who was born in 1994. He is six children who grow up with his mother in Ankole. Unfortunately his father died when he was just two years old. He is currently living and singing in Capital of Uganda which is Kampala. Professionally is a musician and song writer. He is currently with a hit tune titled fitting and other inspirational trending hits like Nibihinduka. Love tunes like Reeba.

There I was, fresh out of college, a little wet behind the ears in the way of the world, excited about starting my first day at my new job. This was back in 1994. I was newly married, no children yet, but we were planning on having some as soon as I got a real job. Well here was my chance. I answered an anonymous ad in the classifieds and received a call back from the "Company" within a few days and a brief phone interview ensued. Having passed that phase, I was called into for an in person interview. Well, the interview is a story for another time, but let's just say I passed with flying colors and was offered a job for a sum that at the time sounded like a fortune (and really was for someone with no kids whose wife had a decent job with great benefits). I was to begin in 3 days time and I was very excited to get on with my life.
Fast forward three days, having purchased a new wardrobe for the business casual environment (not really completely understanding what that meant, but hey I managed to do alright). I arrive for my first day and after the preliminary meet and great by the president of the company I was shown to my desk and promptly forgotten. It wasn't until a few hours later that someone realized they had someone they didn't know sitting a desk in an office trying to look like they belonged. This colleague, who turned out later to be a great guy, promptly introduced me to the person that would turn out to be my direct boss. Nice of them to remember they had a new employee starting wasn't it? I was taken into his office where we sat and talked about nothing in particular for about an hour while he smoked cigarette after cigarette, which was ok because I was a smoker as well at the time and I really thought… "Man this working stuff isn't so bad after all."
I was then walked back to my desk and handed about five programming books to read up on (it was a FoxPro shop at the time and this was my first exposure to it.) Why they hired me? My only guess was that entry level FoxPro developers were hard to come by. Anyway, after flipping through the books was doing me no real good as I'm more of a hands on person and I still didn't have a computer. Needless to say, being a little green in the ways of the business world, I didn't realize I was allowed to take a lunch pretty much when I wanted to (I came from the retail world which was very structured). So there I say, shriveling away to nothing until again someone walked by and said "Hey, did you ever go to lunch?"…this wasn't until mid-afternoon. Ok, I can blame myself for that one as I should have known better, but I couldn't believe I was basically being forgotten for the most part. In the 7 years I was there, it became a tradition (perhaps because of their failure with me) to take a new hire out to lunch on the company their first day. I wasn't so lucky I guess, but perhaps I've paved the way for all hires since.
What was the point of this short novel? Well my friend, I have these posts in a category of "Lessons Learned". As a business owner now, one of my greatest strengths is looking back at things that did and didn't work with past employers and reacting to the lessons I learned from them on how to run and how NOT to run your business. Now it may seem obvious to most that ignoring a new hire is something you really should NOT do, but back in '94 it wasn't so. If you've made the commitment to hire someone new treat them with the respect they deserve (and that you would expect yourself) by making sure they are not forgotten and thrown into a corner. Make sure they understand that while you expect them to work hard and do great things, you also see them as a valuable part of the company. First impressions are huge and nothing could be more critical to an employee's future at your company than how they reflect on their first day on the job.

Originally Posted by jkelly
I think that I'll defend J a bit, at least on this point.
It's important for people to ask for exactly what they want in relationships. If what J wants with you is a friendship (or a friendship with occasional benefits), she wouldn't be doing you any favours to pretend otherwise. And there's nothing wrong with trying to renegotiate dynamics. You're suggesting that what she wants doesn't work for you, which is fine, but she shouldn't be faulted for being clear about what she can and can't offer right now.
Also, people's feelings are often mutable. People meet, get involved, and then things stop working well or feeling right for one person, sometimes suddenly. I understand that you attach a lot of importance to declarations of love, but not everyone does. It's totally possible she was expressing a connection she felt that had developed in those two and a half months, but that she is either no longer feeling or she feels she needs to back away from. As Gwendolyn suggested, there could be all sorts of things going on that you don't know about that are influencing her feelings and thinking.
I'd encourage you to let the relationship between your wife and D develop, if it's making them happy and working out. You may find that in time things sort themselves out into a dynamic that works well for everyone.
I don't disagree with you on that. While hard to hear, it's better to have that put out and clarified, and not try to hide/avoid it. What makes it hard is coming up with that a week after saying she loved me. The declaration of love was/is something that is tough to admit/say for me, but it also was for J too.
One part (kindof a big one) about my wife and D's relationship was involving the four of us. While J and I were both travelling for example last week, S and D hung out every day and they did have sex a few times (which didn't bother me, and J said she was ok with. Not sure if that was true based on how she was when she got home). While they both had fun, they both agreed that it wasn't complete without the four of us there (for the sexual part).
My and my wife's relationship is also based on a level of even-ness. Right or wrong, that's what we determined early on what worked best for us. Whether it was with finances, twizzlers in the bag, swinging, it was about being equal for us. We never took one for the team as it were in the lifestyle; if one of us didn't like the other, then we moved on. Like I said, right or wrong, that's how we work, and it's worked for 9 years that way. I haven't said to her not to continue the friendship, and she should continue training with him (he's a personal trainer also), and if they want to hang out that's fine (as long as it doesn't interfere with his family or ours). The continued sex part is uncertain.
At this point we both want to meet other people too though. We're not models or anything like that, but we've never actually had to search for new couples on the sites; we've always been messaged first. Plus for Labor Day we are going to LA to spend the weekend with a couple we've known for awhile (and if we had both stayed in AZ might have turned into a relationship).

Wild 18 Yo Girls Images watch online
Isnt it just the very best. They were back in town so they wanted to get together and catch up. Miguel pulled out leaving her gaping for a moment as he guided her up.
Ten. At the same time. There are several locations for rent in the area that match it. Now how many fingers can you fit in your mouth. Kiss me again, Sam demanded. Johnsons late model Toyota pulled to the curb beside her. Very good I smirked. Joel's cock was so hard it chafed on his trousers. Dfor was going well, I had several orgasms and he was now pushing his knot in, taking a sniff of poppers helped it slip straight in, quite often he growls when it does, and slows, his cock leaks cum all the time hes fucking, now, with his knot fully home, he began to cum, reams of dog cum filled my bowels, the pressure feels strange, but also nice, then he turned back to back, moving slowly my orgasms continued for some time.
Her armpit hair was matted with water and sweat and I swear I could see it streaming down as he fucked her mouth with his massive dong. Its tongue slithered down and circled her asshole. There were a few chairs by the pool and he sat down facing me. the fact his private parts were in full view didn't seem to bother him and I had a nice view of them and I considered him to be nicely equipped. Candice felt no pain as Natashas teeth penetrated her skin, all she felt was a warm fuzzy feeling.
she replied. I saw photographs just after the tornado and when we came out and the mountain of building material was nearly level where some heard us talking and workers came to us to free us from what was to be our grave. I woke to birds singing and glanced at Amanda looking at me. Slowly, the honey began to travel down their bodies, covering it in a fine, sweet gloop.

If I could give 10 stars for realtor John Rota, I would! John is amazing…he is intelligent, hard-working, kind, funny and has an attention to detail that is unlike anything I’ve seen. I am sitting in my dream house right now because of him!
We had been looking at Westchester County properties
for about 1.5 years with another realtor and were really frustrated. Either the homes were not anything like we had asked to see, or when we saw something we liked, we would find out it already had another accepted offer or was going into short sale. Finally a girlfriend of mine reached out to me and said she had used John and really loved him and she thought we should give him a shot. I told her we had determined we were going to be lifelong renters and weren’t really interested, but would give him a call. I could tell from our first phone call that he was ON IT and was going to be just what we needed.
That was President’s Day weekend and by Memorial Day weekend, we had closed on our dream home and I couldn’t be happier. The house has brought such happiness to our kids and I can’t explain how much joy that brings me. Do not hesitate to use John! He also has a network of people that are great…attorneys, loan folks…so everything is super seamless. (You can use whomever you want…I just had asked him for recommendations since we’re new to the area.)
Thank you John! As our 5-year old says, “Mommy, I really love our home.”

Today was my first day back in the office. I officially returned to work last week, but I worked from home, which wasn’t without its own challenges.
I tried to mentally prepare myself the night before. I even went so far as to meal plan and lay out my clothes for the week. I went to sleep and woke up when my alarm went off. I went through my morning routine and I pumped milk for Tové. I didn’t get as much as I normally get.
Even my breasts don‘t wanna go back.
I got to work, did work, and texted Steve to see how the girls were doing. He told me they were good. Tempess was sleep and she did very well with her letters today.
And then I cried.
I missed them. I missed kissing them. Hugging them. Hearing them in the next room while I worked. I missed Temi running up to me for hugs and kisses every time I went to get water or use the bathroom.
So I cried. Then I got myself together. And then I cried some more.

I became pregnant with my son, not by my husband, but by an apple that an old woman gave me. After eating it, I threw the rind out the window. The rind was eaten by a horse who gave birth to a foal. My son and his speaking horse have grown up together, and who knows? Together they may remove the curse from our kingdom.

Saturday night in Sauchiehall Street, Glasgow, used to be a time and place best avoided by reputable Glaswegians. This was the arena of the drunken, frequently vicious street brawls which heaped disrepute on the city.
What was slightly unusual in an affray on OCTOBER 31st, 1965, was that one man died. What was even more unusual was that two young nurses with no thought for their own safety ran to his aid, causing his assailants to flee.
William Pater, 22, was the victim. He was set upon by six youths wielding their boots, an iron bar and a knife. The brawl was the culmination of a series of disputes between families in the Barnhill area.
Five youths were convicted of Mr. Paters murder; the sixth was acquitted after the jurys Not Proven verdict. Two of them, John McArdle, 19, and Patrick Donnelly, 20, were sentenced to life. The other three, who were all under age at the time of the murder, were sentenced to be detained indefinitely. All the youths served between eight and 10 years in prison.
The trial judge asked that the two young nurses be officially rewarded for their bravery. There would be less crime in Glasgow, he said, if more citizens behaved as well as they did.

Kim and Brian from Impact Zone were the best movers I could imagins. Right on time, so careful with my stuff not to scratch it or the walls moving in and out, pleasant, efficient, and very reasonably priced. I would recommend them in a heartbeat. Thanks, guys. You were great!!
Impact Zone is the best moving company we have used so far in Calgary. The two gentlemen arrived on time, were extremely careful with our stuff, finished their job very fast and the service fee was very convenient. Thank you Kim, we'll definitely recommend your company to our friends!
I called Kim 2 months before to set up our moving date. I called back a week before and they confirmed that it was all good to go. They showed up a little late but this was due to traffic. The two workers were extremely friendly and hard working. Even in the 8th hour, they were still smiling. I don't think we could have had a better experience. Even as they left, they were still offering to help move things. Excellent move!
Best move I have experienced. Kim and Jessie never stopped for a minute. Previous experience with movers had me a little worried but everything was perfect and the move was way quicker than I expected. Before I knew it we were done. Very professional, friendly, and easy going. The two hardest workers I've seen in awhile and cost was extremely reasonable. I would definately recommend them to anyone or everyone. Thanks!
These guys were awesome! They were very friendly and worked very hard & continuously to get the job done. We had them move all our big furniture from a house and a condo into a new home. It was amazing how quick & efficient they were, but yet very cautious to ensure the furniture and the walls didn't get damaged along the way. They of course laid mats down to protect the floors too. I would not hesitate to recommend them to anyone. Thanks guys!
It was a pleasure to have Kim and Jesse as our movers. They were courteous, honest and had a good sense of humour. The move was definitely faster than I expected and faster compared to quotes I received from other companies. Most importantly, the move went through with nothing broken.
I wouldn't hesitate in recommending Impact Zone for moving and would definitely use them again in the future.
Impact Zone is the most reliable and professional moving company in Calgary. We move small items or full house contents.
We do not subcontract and we arrive on time with the right size vehicle and personnel

This morning Jester's BG was 155. I took a chance and, instead of his prescribed 2U, gave him 1U. Twelve hours later, BG is 168. Decided that success can sometimes breed success and gave him another 1U. His appetite seems marginally better than it's been for the last week or so. While he still shifts from place to place waiting for me to move his bowl, it seems like he ate more in the first sitting during his noonish meal and his pre-shot meal. All single-digit carb foods today too. Here's to another healthy blue number in the morning.

When I was in elementary school, I was identified as a “gifted” student. They tested certain children who demonstrated a love of learning at an early age and if their IQ levels were a certain level, they became a part of the Gifted Program. I have heard of similar programs at various high schools and appreciate whoever had the foresight to establish such a program.
The experience was very rewarding because for about an hour per week, I was able to embrace my inner nerd with other nerds. In a normal public school, being a nerd is not the title to strive for. I felt fortunate to be able to walk the tight rope between one of the “cool” kids and one of the nerds. I think I was just cool with everyone, for the most part.
Throughout elementary, middle and junior high school; I felt fairly confident that my balancing act was a success. High school was a whole new world. You would think that as you get older and have known people for years that your relationships would become stronger. This, for some reason, is not the case in high school. I felt like the people who were supposed to be my friends ending up becoming the ones to betray me and talk about me the most. I became less concerned about them than I was about myself. I have been fairly goal oriented most of my life but I realized that my high school was not giving me what I needed to feel challenged and prepared to achieve my goals. I found myself spending more time trying to fit in than trying to learn something.
In 1989, the Alabama Legislature created a public boarding school for students who excelled in math and science. The school, the Alabama School of Mathematics and Science, is located in Mobile AL. At the time, it housed students in the 11th and 12th grades and recruited teachers from around the state who had a passion for teaching. Many of them were former college professors and they treated us as such. The process of becoming admitted to the school was much like a college process, which included applications, essays, standardized test scores and recommendations.
My mother was not enthused about me going away from home at such as young age but I convinced her that I just wanted to apply and see if I could in. I still can’t believe she fell for that. Anyway, I got in and the next thing I knew, I was packing up and leaving home at the age of 16. Unlike most 16 year olds who were looking forward to dating and driving to school every day, I was now locked away (yes, we were locked up for our safety) at a nerd fest and I loved it. I had finally found a place where I could be as smart as I wanted to be and there were almost 200 other overachievers who shared my passion for learning, for challenging themselves and for thinking outside of the box. The teachers were amazing because they didn’t just do enough to get us to graduation, they challenged us on every level to do more than many of us probably ever imagined.
The experience was also very humbling. At my home high school, I was considered one of the smart kids, but ASMS had pulled almost all of the top students from throughout the state into one place and it was at that point that I realized how much I didn’t know. I was ok with that because I also realized that I didn’t like math or science as much as I thought I did. Fortunately, there were a multitude of electives to choose from. My favorite classes, as you can probably guess, were the English classes. We were writing on a college level in the 11th grade and having philosophical discussions that spanned beyond the normal classroom experience that I was used to.
Many parents are hesitant to send their children away to a boarding school, not because the child isn’t ready, but often because the parent doesn’t want to let go. I am so thankful that my parents gave me the wings to soar and become my own person. When I started my freshman year at Vanderbilt, I didn’t go through many of the anxieties that most first year students feel because I was already used to being away from home, I had great study habits (we had mandatory study hours for two hours every night) and I knew how to make friends with people other than those that I had spent my entire life around.
Attending the School of Math and Science was one of the best decisions that I ever made. It helped to shape the person that I am today, not only intellectually but socially and civicly. I learned so much about myself at an early age and was given the opportunity to explore all that my mind was able to conceive. If your child has the opportunity to participate in a program like this and they have the aptitude for success, don’t hold them back because of your fears. Give them the chance to try something new and different. You have no idea what they may be going through at their home high school and a change of environment could change their life.

I was invited to attend a Nodashi Kendo meeting which was held today. I didn't know what it was about but Grumpy sensei suggested I sign up.
When Kotomi and me went there today we learnt that it was an all day teachers conference.... yea, and here's me, a beginner, sitting in with all the teachers from around Nodashi, being lectured by three 7th dan teachers. In Japanese.
But it was great fun. For the first half of the day (9-12) everyone went through kata, and Grumpy sensei took me through kata 5 to 10. Even though I did really badly he was happy and said I learn fast.
After a lunch break we all went through how to do warm ups and basic practice. Then we put on our men and did more basic practice, followed by 1 minute ji-keiko with everyone in quick succession. I was so tired (after standing for 5 hours), and it was really hot, and I just wanted to go to sleep :(
A great and tiring day.
Will maybe post a video that Kotomi took if I figure out how to get it off the camera.

It was customary for the Arabs in Makkah when Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him) was born that they sent their newborn children to some Bedouins where the young ones were breast-fed by wet nurses.
They felt that spending the first few years in a desert environment ensured that the child would grow up physically and mentally strong.
Indications suggest that Makkah suffered some infectious diseases, and its people felt that children would be spared such diseases in the desert’s open air.
We have a detailed story of how the young Muhammad ended up with Halimah, his Bedouin wet nurse. We need only mention that Halimah and her family were most delighted to have him, feeling that the young child brought some subtle blessing into their life.
In normal cases, when a child spends the first few years of life with carers who are not of his own family, living away from his hometown, it is not expected that relations with such carers would be maintained into his adult life without an effort by both parties. Nor would it be expected that he would look at those days of his childhood with tenderness.
Most of us remember very little of our early years. Hence, after he was weaned, Halimah begged Aminah, Prophet Muhammad’s mother, to allow her to keep him for some more time. This was agreed, and most probably Prophet Muhammad stayed with Halimah until he was five years of age.
Besides, Halimah and her people lived in the desert, while Prophet Muhammad spent the rest of his life in Makkah, except for his last ten years when he lived in Madinah. Yet we read that in his adult life, Prophet Muhammad showed genuine gratitude to those very people.
Halimah heard of his marriage to Lady Khadijah. This took place when Prophet Muhammad was 25, according to the most common report, yet he might have been a few years older or younger. She felt that she had to see him and offer her congratulations.
After all, she was like a mother to him. He welcomed her so warmly and gave her the best reception she could have imagined. He asked her how life was like at her place. She told him that they suffered hardship as the year was one of little rain and scarce provisions.
Prophet Muhammad was poor, but his wife was rich. It was she who chose him after being very impressed with his character. Now she saw what was to her a new but highly commendable attitude, which is loyalty to those who had done him a kindness.
Yet she was aware that Halimah only breast-fed Prophet Muhammad for wages. Nevertheless, she admired Prophet Muhammad for such loyalty, and welcomed Halimah warmly.
As Halimah was about to leave, she was given a very generous gift by the newly married couple: 20 sheep, including a few young and productive ones, as well as a strong mount. Halimah went back to her people, feeling very proud of a son who has not forgotten her in her hour of need.
Prophet Muhammad’s meeting with Halimah took place many years before the start of his prophethood. We take another incident that took place more than 30 years later, when Prophet Muhammad was 61.
Prophet Muhammad had just fought a battle against the Hawazin tribe, of which Halimah’s people formed a clan. The Hawazin were soundly defeated and most of their fighting men, as well as many women, were taken prisoner. One of these prisoners, Bijad, who belonged to Halimah’s clan, apparently did something that irritated many Muslims.
He was taken to Prophet Muhammad together with a group of his own clan, including a woman called Al-Shaima bint Al-Harith. As they were being taken to Prophet Muhammad, she was told off by some Muslims. She told them that she was the Prophet’s sister through breast-feeding, but they did not believe her.
When Al-Shaima was brought in, she looked intently at Prophet Muhammad, trying to remember him as a playmate in their early years. Like all her people, she was extremely tired after running away in battle and falling prisoner. She spoke out to the Prophet:
“Messenger of God! I am your sister through breast-feeding; I am Al-Shaima, Haleemah’s daughter.”
As Prophet Muhammad listened to her, he felt he should make sure that she was telling the truth. He asked her to corroborate her claim.
She thought hard, then said: “Prophet! Do you remember a day when I had lied on your thigh after playing outside our tent, in the Bani Saad’s quarter? You then lovingly bit me in my back?”
As his Companions looked at him, they saw his face beaming, then drops of tears were in his eyes as his memory went so far back to his days of early childhood.
He then welcomed Al-Shaima warmly, taking off his upper garment and putting it on the ground for her to sit on. She was so delighted, as she saw Prophet Muhammad’s companions looking at her with veneration. She stayed with the Prophet for a while, receiving a most kindly treatment.
He then told her:
“Sister, you can stay with me for as long as you wish, and you will need to complain of nothing. However, if you prefer to go back to your people, I will be generous to you and I will continue to take care of you.”
She opted to go back to her people. Prophet Muhammad bid her farewell, giving her three slaves and a maid, as well as some sheep and money. He continued to inquire after her and send her gifts.
This incident reminded the captives of the Hawazin people of an old relation with Prophet Muhammad. Many Hawazin people had converted to Islam. A delegation of them said to him:
“Messenger of God, we are your people and your own clan. You know the sort of disaster which has befallen us. We appeal to you to show mercy to us, may God bestow His grace on you.”
Their spokesman, Zuhair ibn Sarad, said to the Prophet:
“Messenger of God, those women who have fallen captive to you include some who are your aunts and some who were your wet nurses when you were young.
Had we been in such a relationship with the king of Ghassan in Syria or the King of Al-Manadhirah in Iraq, and had this sort of disaster befallen us at their hands, we would still have hoped that they would show leniency toward us. You, God’s Messenger, are the best to return kindness.”
These spokesmen were simply referring to the Prophet being nursed by Halimah, a woman from a branch of the major tribe of Hawazin. They were saying that every woman in the tribe was the Prophet’s aunt or wet nurse.
The Prophet did not object to this; nor did he say that only Halimah took care of him. He felt for them. Then he prevailed on his companions to ensure that they were all set free. Thus, not a single woman or child of the Hawazin was retained as captive.

Angela Primachenko is a respiratory therapist in Washington. She is a mother to 11-month old Emily and wife to her beloved husband David. Angela is just 27 and was absolutely loving being a mother and wife, she also loved her job. She was happy, healthy and feeling extremely blessed. However, her fate had something else in store…
Angela was dedicated to her jobs both as a mother and as a respiratory therapist. Her husband and her found their baby Emily to be the biggest joy in their lives and such a gentle, happy baby too. Being a respiratory therapist can be quite demanding. However, when Angela begun feeling suddenly nauseous and was struck with headaches, she knew she had only felt like this once before…
Under The Weather
She was pregnant! Angela and her husband were expecting yet again. They believed it was a sign and all in their fate. The already wonderful parents were ecstatic, Emily would be getting a sibling. However, her health was about to take a drastic turn.
Angela was breezing through her pregnancy. She had made it into the last trimester and was still working as normal. Well, more than normal. As a respiratory therapist, Angela was on the frontlines of working with Covid-19 patients- she was willing to help however and whenever she could. The hospital was packed, she was giving her all to the job whilst almost 30 weeks pregnant, but she had a duty to fulfill.
On The Frontlines
As a pregnant Respiratory Therapist being in close contact with Covid-19 patients is almost any husband’s worst nightmare. David was getting increasingly worried as his wife was working more hours, pushing her body to its limits and coming in contact with an incurable virus. He had to step in and somehow convince his wife to put their baby before the crisis at hand.
Time To Stay Home
Angela was about 26 weeks pregnant when she agreed with David decided it was time for her to self-isolate, for the sake of their baby and family. However, 3 weeks into her self isolation s Angela began to show symptoms, she had begun coughing, “Like, you know that kind of cough. And then it kind of got a little bit worse, and then I started having a hard time breathing at night,” Primachenko said.
Weeks At Home
Angela was positive for Covid-19 and admitted into hospital. The expectant mom began worsening when she was eventually placed on a ventilator, however, this was not enough and she was later placed under an induced coma. Her entire family worried about her. Afterall she was not only in critical condition but she was pregnant too. What would happen to the baby?
Angela was 34 weeks pregnant and in an induced coma when she gave birth to baby Ava, 2 months premature but a complete fighter. The team of doctors managed to deliver baby ava safe and sound, but Angela’s health was still being tried. The new mom was in a coma and unable to be anywhere near her baby girl.

One scary thing about villains that I think is good to remember, is that they are not necessarily bad people. They can be the hero from a different point of view. Just because he is against the hero in the story doesn't necessarily make him evil as a person. I mean it's like history is written by the winner so that the other guys looked like the bad guys and the other guys were evil. Well it all comes down to a point of view. That's something I think is important too.
I don't know if anyone had mentioned it there was just too much to read for my attention span xD

Fats Waller was a name familiar to me. If you mentioned his name I would immediately recollect, perhaps the most famous, photo of him, the one where he is sitting at an upright piano, wearing a cockeyed hat and smoking a cigarette. I also knew that his most famous track was the classic, Aint Misbehavin'.
However I was unaware of the actual style of his playing. I assumed that he played an early form of boogie woogie but in fact his style is very much Harlem Stride. He was a student of James P Johnson, who we looked at in the previous post. I have heard it argued though that Waller took the stride piano form to a higher level. He was a formidable musician but in his favour was his immense showmanship. This is apparent in the songs and records that he left us. I love the humour that jump out of the songs. It sounds like he was having the time of his life (and he probably was considering that he was partial to having a bottle of gin on his piano).
His entire catalogue is worth checking out, but here are a few choice cuts.
Handful of Keys. This song exemplifies Fats Waller's technique.
Honeysuckle Rose. A great example of Fats' sublime piano playing infused with his tongue in cheek delivery.
The Joint Is Jumpin'. It's Friday night in 1920's Harlem.

This was just an overnight stop. Very handy to the Outlet Stores. The room was very small but adequate. The bed was comfortable. Thrilled with the breakfast. Scrambled eggs were so tasty. The kids loved making their own waffles. Plenty of parking. The receptionist was welcoming and helpful. The pool looked good but as we arrived late we were too late to use it.

40 years ago today, two modern day greats met in a light heavyweight unification showdown that had been demanded by the fans. Michael Spinks, the reigning WBC champ, met Dwight Muhammad Qawi, who was the WBA ruler. The showdown took place in Atlantic City, NJ, and the fight went all 15 rounds.
Going into the fight, Spinks had to cope with the recent, shocking death of his girlfriend, who had died in a car crash. Spinks managed to keep it together in the locker room when his two-year old daughter asked him where her mother was. As for Qawi, he had been diagnosed with pneumonia a week before the fight and he was strongly advised not to fight. Qawi was also nursing a damaged septum during the biggest fight of his career.
The fight played out as part chess-match, part exciting battle, part track-meet. Spinks’ primary weapon was his superb left jab and, with Qawi appearing somewhat listless early on, Spinks was able to pile up points. In the middle sessions, the shorter Qawi managed to find some rhythm and he also picked up some points with his own jab. Round eight saw Spinks go down no less than three times, twice due to slipping, the other time from a contentious knockdown where Qawi stepped on his foot (“I kept accidentally stepping on his feet,” Qawi said later. “His feet were so damn big.”)
On the few occasions when Qawi was able to get on the inside, Spinks was able to tie him up and nullify his attacks. Spinks boxed quite brilliantly, yet he was also criticised by some for being too negative. Spinks was reportedly unsure if he had done enough as he awaited the decision – “I did it, I did it. I think I did it,” he said mid-ring.
Qawi, who landed his best punches late, in the 11th and the 13th rounds, his head shots seeming to rattle Spinks, later accused his rival of running – “It was more like a track-meet out there. He had a lot of dog in him. Even though he ran, he did enough to impress the judges I guess,” an embittered Qawi said.
Spinks disagreed – “I wanted to the the ‘Untouchable.’ I beat him with a jab. I beat him with one hand,” Spinks boasted.
Indeed, the Sports Illustrated front page had a headline covering the fight that read: “His left was all riiight!”
Spinks, on this night, had shown a combination of superb boxing skill, of savvy, of survival instincts, and of being able to frustrate a very good and dangerous ring rival.
In the end, the scores were somewhat close, with one judge having it 144-140, the other two officials having it 144-141 – all for Spinks and his ‘Jinx.’
Spinks left the ring with a 24-0 record, Qawi with a 19-2-1 ledger. There was supposed to be a rematch, the date set for September 27 of 1984, but Qawi suffered an injury, and the fight was scrapped. In time, both greats made the move to heavyweight, with differing results.
Both Spinks and Qawi are enshrined, quite deservedly, in The Hall of Fame.

TOP TagsFiction Blowjob Consensual Sex Oral Sex Anal Incest Fantasy Cum Swallowing True Story Young First Time Dark Fantasy Male/Female Romance Masturbation Domination/submission Hardcore Group Sex Virginity Teen Teen Male/Teen Female Erotica Bi-sexual Threesome Rape Humiliation Written by women Cheating Reluctance Male/Teen Female Exhibitionism Bondage and restriction Gay Lesbian Wife Non-consensual sex Female/Female BDSM Voyeurism School Male / Older Female Interracial Male / Females Violence Job/Place-of-work Cruelty Older Male / Female Ass to mouth Teen Male / Female Male / Female Teens
Best Beach Day
On this particular day at the beach it was crowded but there was no shortage of people to observe and comment about. A couple came and sat approximately 30 feet away from us towards the water. They got undressed and the girl got comfortable on her back with one knee up in the air and the other flat on the ground but they were obviously spread and open for anyone to see. Within a few minutes a young fully clothed teenager, a guy in a Speedo, and a nude guy in a beach chair sat between us and the couple. My wife and I were lying on our stomachs watching the vultures when another guy sat behind our chairs and disrobed. He had a backpack in front of him to make a half hearted attempt to block his dick from others. He was to our side and underneath my chair my wife could see him obviously stroking himself while looking between the girls spread legs. Several other men who walked by the girl made no attempts to hide their stares between her legs. The clothed teenager walked up and asked them for a cigarette and a light and the guy obliged. The teenager took advantage of the opportunity to sit even closer to the girl. He was probably only six feet away from her.
I happened to look behind me over my shoulder and noticed that two naked guys had sat behind my wife in an attempt to see between her legs while she lay on her stomach. One was probably about fifteen feet away and the other was only ten feet away. My wife's legs were not spread apart, so I'm sure their view was limited but I guess you can't fault them for trying. We continued to watch the other men stare and gawk at the female on her back. She turned over but they still refused to leave. I leaned over to my wife and told her that there were two guys behind her trying to look between her legs. She looked over her shoulder at them and then continued watching the guy stroking and picking his dick from underneath my chair. I kissed her on the shoulder and asked her to spread her legs a little. I asked a few more times and she reluctantly spread them a little more. I then looked behind me and both the guys were fondling their now hard dicks, while staring between my wife's legs. I looked myself and she had them spread just enough that you could see that her pussy was clearly shaved. This got me rather excited. Then unexpectedly my wife sat up on all fours and gave the two guys behind her a clear shot of her nakedness. She then sat facing me and I sat up as well. As soon as she sat down the two guys behind her left. After being so excited, I slid my hand down to feel her pussy and discovered that she was extremely wet and that the folds of her vagina now open exposing herself to everyone on the beach. As I was touching her with my fingers the naked guy in the chair in front of us was watching. He was probably only eight or nine feet away from us. By this time the teenager and the guy next to us stroking himself behind the backpack had left. Probably due to my wife talking so loud about them that she embarrassed them into leaving.
Although they would have been smart to stick around. I was so horny and excited at this point that I was asking my wife to spread her legs so everyone could see her. After a minute of coaxing her I moved behind her and started massaging her shoulders. She had her arms in front of her and between her legs. I asked her to move her arms. While massaging her neck she had her legs spread slightly with her knees up by her chest, but her hands were still blocking anyone from having a clear view. During the first minute of starting the massage about ten or eleven guys walked in front of her not hiding the fact that they were trying to see her pussy. I sat with my legs on the sides of her and asked her to put her hands on the ground outside of my legs. She did and she spread her legs a little more with her knees still up. As I was doing this it was almost like their was a news flash and guys started coming by to get a glimpse of what only I can touch. The nude guy in the beach chair turned his chair and faced in directly at my wife and sat down. He obviously was enjoying the show my wife was putting on because he had a raging hard on and made no attempt to cover it up. Two black guys walked by and stared at my wife's spread legs, and circled behind us and walked away. One of the black guys sat down next to the guy in the chair, and took off his pants and started stroking his penis as well. Two more naked guys sat off to our right and started playing with their hard on. Here is my adventurous wife on the beach nude and there are at least six or seven naked guys sitting around her jerking off for her. They could clearly see her lips swollen, open, and wet. In return she could clearly see all the guys on the beach masturbating their hard dicks for her to see. My wife got a little more comfortable and daring and she let her right knee fall to the side opening herself up even more. I was so excited that I was shaking.
I looked down between her legs again and noticed that her lips were very swollen, wet, and obviously so excited that they were wide open. I was so excited that not only me but the rest of the beach could literally see inside of my wife's most private place. Not wanting to waste this opportunity I reached down and pulled her right foot out of the way and lightly slid my left index along the very sensitive creases of her glistening lips. As a few more guys sat down in front of her I inserted two fingers inside of her only to find the most pleasurable feeling I have ever felt before in my life. I reached under her arm with my right hand and began squeezing her breasts and pulling on her nipples which by this time were extremely hard and surrounded by goose bumps. I whispered into her ear to reach behind her. (My dick so hard knew that all of these guys lusted after my wife after seeing her perfect nude body). With her left hand she reached back and found my now rock hard dick standing straight up and leaking pre-cum. She wiped the pre-cum all over my penis and began to stroke me slowly. She tilted her head back and moaned into my ear that she needed to have an orgasm.
I slowly worked my fingers in and out of her inner folds, and also rubbed her clitoris which by now had worked its way free from its own hood, and was glistening in the sun for all to see. She lifted her head up and I immediately noticed her eyes lock on the black guy sitting on the ground. He was now facing us with his legs spread and was boldly stroking his manhood. When he saw her looking he spread his legs a little more and began stroking faster and faster. He was obviously on the verge of having his own orgasm, when my wife began rocking back and forth on my fingers, whispering to me that she was going to cum. While she began bucking wildly on my fingers, her eyes zeroed in on the black guys cock. He began to orgasm and held onto his black cock as stream after stream of his cum shot forcefully from his dick in a high arc, and landed just inches away from my wife's open legs. Upon seeing cum shoot from his dick, my wife began shuddering and shaking as her eyes rolled up into her eyelids, as she let out a loud guttural moan that could be heard 100 feet away. Her orgasm lasted a full 50 seconds before her body stopped shaking and she regained control of her body. We both looked down and saw that there was a rather huge wet spot just below her spread legs. She had such a huge orgasm that her thighs, inner folds were soaked with her own female orgasm. Her soft feminine pink insides were glistening in the bright sunlight, and were literally begging to be touched or at the very least penetrated to new depths.
To my surprise my wife who was now breathing rather heavily, told me to lay back. She was still sitting between my legs and we were still facing the same direction. I lay on my back, and she lifted her hips up and impaled her sweet sex down onto my pre-cum soaked penis. Usually it takes some time to work my penis into her but she was so wet that it slid into with great ease, and she pushed it into herself with great ease. When the tip of my penis hit her cervix, she lifted her hips back up and forcefully slid back down again. I could not see in front of her, but I could see her ass and her glistening pussy as my dick slid in and out. I could easily feel her wetness as it coated my now shiny cock and my entire lap. I could also feel her hands on my knees as she supported herself. I then noticed a slight shadow to the left next to ours in the sand. I tried to look around you and saw that several of the zig zaggers and watchers sitting around us were now all openly stroking their hard dicks. With your hands on my thighs your tits were now being pressed together, and bouncing up and down as you forcefully impaled yourself onto my now throbbing dick. Apparently several of the guys couldn't hold out and began spraying the sand in front of you with their cum. You intently watched each guy as spurts of cum flew from their dicks into the sand in front of you. You strangely felt the desire to have their cum splash on your tits and chest in the open air and sunshine of the beach. After several of the guys displayed their approval of your fantastic body and magnificent breasts by proudly displaying their orgasms for you they all moved a little closer still holding their dicks, you thought it kind of strange that after cumming they were all still hard. But with the sexiest woman on the beach sharing herself with them who wouldn't be at the ready.
The guy who was patiently sitting in front of us in the beach chair had not cum yet. He was taking in the whole experience while rubbing his hard on, without interfering. You felt a strange attraction to him, maybe because of his politeness, maybe his boldness, maybe because he was the one we were putting on the show for originally, or maybe because you loved his cock. It was dark and tan, and when he stroked it for you it was about eleven inches long and as thick as your arm. Later you would tell me it was the last reason. He slowly got up from his chair and walked over to you, standing between my legs and in front of you while you still impaled yourself onto me. His eleven inch, fat cock was now standing just inches from your face. You looked back at me and asked if it was OK. I nodded yes and you turned around and took both hands off my thighs and wrapped both of your hands around his shaft. Its skin was soft, but his penis was really hard. It had large veins running underneath the skin.
You pumped it with both hands and you felt an insuppressible urge to lick and suck it. You looked back at me and said are you sure. I said, "Nothing would make me happier." You turned back around and started sucking as much as you could. It was so thick that you could barely get the head inside your mouth. You were licking the head while it was in your mouth and stroking it faster with both your hands. You felt my cock starting to twitch inside of you; you felt his cock starting to twitch inside your mouth and hands. Feeling those twitches made you start to twitch. You then realized that the three of us were going to have orgasms at the same time. You started cumming and your head started spinning so you laid back down on me with your back pressing into my body.
I started cumming inside of you, and our new friend straddled and knelt down over you. Your eyes were closed from your own orgasm, but not wanting to miss this moment you opened your eyes and saw the biggest cock you have ever seen shooting out stream after stream of thick white hot cum all over your stomach and breasts. You could feel the warm streams splashing all over your chest and stomach. Your body now limp and unable to move lay on top of me as your friend massaged his cum into your tits. It felt so warm and strange to have these new hands all over your tits, that you literally had a small orgasm that made your body jump. You looked up at his penis and saw it literally hanging down by his knees.
You noticed a drop of cum on the end of his penis head. You sat up and stuck his penis in your mouth and sucked him dry. You gave his penis one last squeeze and let it slip from your mouth. He said "Thank You. You were GREAT!!!" and walked back to his chair and started packing up. You turned to me and at the same time we both said "I Love You" at the same time. You said lets go. We quickly gathered our stuff. I asked if you wanted to jump in the water or shower off and you said no, let's just go. I said are you going to get dressed, and you said i'll get dressed later. You told me your legs were too weak to walk, so I helped you to our car while you were still naked.

A Friend For Lifebyluvthedesserts©
A giant thanks to my second pair of eyes from Across the Pond, Irfon.
*** All characters are portrayed over the age of eighteen. ***
"Man, Kristen has got an ass on her. You can't believe what we did last night. I've got that bitch sucking my dick like a pro." Jason smiled and nudged his best friend Ryan as they sat in the balcony of the school pool watching swim practice.
"How are you making time for Kristen when you're dating Miranda?"
"Her mom hates me with a passion. The bitch makes me have Miranda home by seven. I got my cock sunk in Kristen's throat by seven thirty. She's the biggest whore in school."
Ryan shook his head and eyed his friend. "I thought that was you."
"Okay, yea. I'm a whore, but you know what I mean. The bitch will go down on a fucking mule if it says she's pretty. I can't stand to look at her face, but I swear, I'm gonna be balls deep in that ass right after The Valentines Day Dance. She just doesn't know about it yet."
"How are you going to pull that one off?"
"It's call the afterparty. Miranda has to be home right after the dance. I'm gonna be working Kristen over something fierce. I'm planning to get her so blitz she can't even see straight. By the time she knows what I'm doing, my little swimmers will be doing laps in her ass. I'm gonna video the whole thing."
"Not bad. You're gonna videotape date raping a girl in the ass. Can't say it's the smartest plan in the world, but it's all you."
"Damn straight. If Miranda won't put out, I have to get it anywhere I can. Law of the jungle, man." Jason slapped Ryan on his back as he stood up. "I gotta go. Kristen wants to go pick out a dress for the dance. If I'm really really good, maybe I'll get to squeeze her tit for a solid two seconds before she chickens out."
"Why are you even dating her?" Ryan stood with him, shaking his head in disbelief.
"Untapped pussy, man. I just have to pop that sexy little brain's cherry. I'm gonna video that event too. Maybe even post it for making me wait so fucking long. Cock teasers need to be punished."
"Good luck with that." Ryan said as his friend walked away.
Ryan sat back down and rested his feet on the railing in front of him. With a heavy sigh, he pulled the digital recorder out of his pocket and listened to the conversation again. Satisfied it would be enough. Ryan stood and walked from the pool facility. He was home and finished with his homework by six. At seven ten, he watched Jason's car disappear down the street as he looked out his bedroom window at Miranda's house.
He waited until Saturday morning to walk down the street and knock on Miranda's front door. Mrs. Emily Tan answered the door and smiled as soon as she saw Ryan. Her dark hair with hints of red highlights in her bob shaped her face perfectly as usual. He was drawn to her dark almond shaped eyes and rounded cheeks. She seemed like a tiny jewel imported from a far off land. He really didn't know if Singapore was so far away these days, but it always seemed to be when she spoke about her earliest memories there before her parents had immigrated to America.
"Ryan. How are you?"
"Good, Mrs. Tan. How are you?"
"Fine. I was just getting ready to go out shopping. What do you need?"
"Miranda. I need to talk to her about something."
Her eyes narrowed at his scowl and odd sound to his voice. "What's wrong?"
Ryan shrugged. His eyes found hers and dropped. "I'm betraying a friend Mrs. Tan. I don't really know what to do. I don't really know which loyalty is more important."
She motioned him in and shut the door. "Explain it to me." Emily said as she guided him to a sofa and sat down next to him.
Seated, Ryan pulled the recorder out of his pocket and looked at it. "I've never known a world without Miranda in it. All the birthday parties, street parties, and Fourth of Julys. Even though we don't really talk much anymore, I still consider her a friend. I don't want her hurt."
"Who's hurting her?" Her voice was sharp and demanding. The brown eyes locked on the recorder in his hands.
"I'm not sure you want to hear this, Mrs. Tan."
"If it concerns Miranda, I do."
Ryan looked up to see her breathing had increased. Her lips were pursed together in a combination of worry and determination. It was the expression she had when she was really concentrating on something. He held the recorder up and hit play. His eyes were closed as his friend's voice filled the silence. He heard Mrs. Tan's sharp intake of breath and then a heavy exhale. Ryan's eyes flew open when he felt her hand latch onto his wrist. It gripped tighter as the tape went on.
When the tape was finished, he stopped it and placed the recorder on the sofa next to him. His hand dropped to hers. "That kind of hurts, Mrs. Tan."
"Oh. I'm sorry, Ryan." Her head came up as her fingers uncurled from around his wrist. Her voice grew in anger with each word. "I didn't mean...that little prick. I'm gonna cut his balls off."
She slipped her hand away as he turned it over. Pulling up his sleeve to get a better look, he revealed four perfect indents in his skin. The blood was already pooling around the wounds.
"Oh, Ryan." She gasped. "I'm so sorry. I didn't know I was doing that."
Emily took his hand and nearly dragged him upstairs to the master bathroom. He watched as she rummaged through a drawer and pulled out a well-stocked first-aid kit. She worked with practiced ease as she cleaned the wounds. Her bottom lip between her teeth. Ryan's eyes looked down at her and found her cleavage staring up at him. After a full minute, he realized what he was doing and turned his head. He was now staring at a pair discarded red lace panties. They'd been tossed on a bench seat in front of her makeup mirror.
"They're panties, Ryan."
Ryan blinked. His head slowly turned towards the voice to find Mrs. Tan smiling up at him. He felt his cheeks growing warm and knew he was blushing. Dropping his eyes from hers, he locked on her cleavage again. He let out a startled gasp when her hand came up and lifted his chin.
"Those are breasts." She was trying not to laugh at his obvious discomfort. Dropping her eyes she looked down his body. "And that appears to be an erection. I guess everything works the proper way, Mr. Walker. That's always nice."
"Sorry." Ryan mumbled with his eyes shut tight.
"Have a seat, Ryan."
She motioned for him to sit after she picked up her panties and tossed them in the hamper. Ryan's eyes had followed them as they drifted in an arc through the air and disappeared. His hand came up to wipe imagined sweat from his brow. He scooted over quickly when she sat down next to him.
"Look at me, Ryan." His head came up. She was staring at him intensely. "Do you treat girls the way Jason does?"
"No, ma'am. I don't treat girls at all."
"What does that mean?"
"I'm...I'm not aggressive. I'm not like that at all. I just don't..."
"You're a virgin." Her lip curled up in a soft smile. The way she said it was more of a statement of fact than a question.
Ryan nodded. "I've had chances. I think. I'm just not the aggressor. The initiator. I want to, but I don't want to make a fool out of myself being horrible."
"Very few boys are good the first few times. A girl's first time is usually extremely disappointing. It's just the way it is. You've always seemed like a good boy. Do you talk and think about girls the way Jason does?"
"No. He's a friend. Always has been. I just follow along the way I always have. Kind of a habit, I guess."
"Have you ever heard the phrase, guilt by association? That's where you are at the moment. Jason is a despicable human being. If you call him a friend, so are you. It was brave and honorable what you did. You can't make excuses for what he is and you can't be friends with someone like that. He'll only lead you into trouble."
"What am I supposed to do. He's one of my only friends."
"You're graduating in a few months. Go off to college and become something. Make new friends when you get there. Decent friends. It's natural to drift apart from the people you grew up with. Don't worry too much about Jason. He'll probably end up in prison while you're away. You don't want to be in the cell next to him. Do you?"
Mrs. Tan wrapped her arms around him as far as she could and gave him a gentle squeeze. Ryan felt the swell of her breast pressed against his arm and then her warm lips on his cheek. His eyes were once again focused on the gap between her breasts. Her golden brown skin looked so soft. There was a gentle sheen to it like she'd used a lotion on her skin. Her hand once again reached up to focus his eyes on hers.
"You like them?"
Ryan nodded while scrunching up his face as if in pain. He was making a fool out of himself. The only reason he was already out the front door was the arm she had wrapped around him. "I'm sorry. They're right there. I can't help but look at them."
"It's okay. They haven't got this much attention in years. If they could blush, they would."
Before he could react, Mrs. Tan leaned in and kissed him gently on the lips. It was just a soft press of skin. Ryan's eyes opened wide. He saw her eyes curl with her smile as her kiss went from his lips to the corner of his mouth and then his cheek. He could feel his heart rate increasing exponentially each time her silky warm lips touch his skin. He felt her hand run along the other side of his face and then her thumb ran across his lips. She wiped dark smudges of lipstick from his cheek then ran a hand through his sandy blonde hair.
"That was a thank you for caring for my daughter."
"Mom?" Miranda's voice carried into the bathroom causing them both to move away from each other. Mrs. Tan was rearranging the first-aid kit when Miranda appeared in the doorway. Her face turned to surprise when she saw Ryan sitting on the bench seat. "Ryan? What are you doing here?"
"He got scratched up and I was putting him back together." She said offhandedly. "I need to talk to you about something." She turned to look at Ryan. "Where's the recorder?"
"On the couch."
"All right. Come on downstairs." She motioned for Ryan to follow her out of the bathroom. Miranda had turned and disappeared. Emily stopped in the doorway and spoke in a low voice when Ryan got close. "You should adjust so it's not so obvious."
Ryan groaned as he tried to hide his erection. He leveled a tiny exasperated glare at the soft laughter coming from Mrs. Tan. Adjusting as best he could, he followed her downstairs. Her head turned a few times to catch him watching her ass as she walked. He was surprised to see a slight blush creeping up her cheeks. When they got to the front sitting room, Miranda was staring at them both with her arms folded around her thin body.
"I should leave." Ryan blurted out as Mrs. Tan reached for the recorder.
"No. You should be here."
Ryan shook his head. "She'll hate me. I don't...I can't see her like this." He spun on his heals and disappeared before anyone could react.
Three hours later, Ryan was absentmindedly playing video games between cleaning an already clean room when his cell phone chimed. Looking at it, he read the words, "Please come over."
Five minutes later he was raising his hand to knock when the door opened. Mrs. Tan smiled at him and waved him in. "I have to go shopping and run some errands. I don't want her to be alone. She's upstairs in her room."
She nodded. "She will be. Go on up, she's expecting you."
"To her room?"
"Yes, Mr. Walker. Talk to her and listen to her. I'll bring home pizza. You can stay for dinner. Just make sure you're both virgins when I get back."
Her lips curled as she poked fun at him. With that, she turned and left him at the front door slipping out of his coat and shoes. His feet seemed to get heavier with each step up the stairs. The image of the little neighbor girl, who cried on the bus the first day of kindergarten until he'd sat next to her and held her hand, flashed in his mind. The very next day, he was waiting on her doorstep and they walked hand in hand to the bus. Her eyes had filled with tears, but had remained silent. She'd simply rested her head on his shoulder and clung to his hand. He'd always hated to see her cry. Almost as much as he'd hated to see her kissing Jason.
She was sitting on her bed with her back against the wall and her knees tucked under her chin when he stopped in her doorway. They looked at each other for a moment. Her eyes were puffy and red. Her normally perfect skin was mottled with streaks of redness. She smiled a sad smile up at him.
She shook her head slowly at first but it became frantic as the tears started again. He watched as she curled in a ball on the bed facing away from him. Ryan didn't know what to do. Hesitantly, he stepped into the room. With each step he gained momentum and was soon climbing onto the bed and tucking himself in behind her. His arm went around and found her hands clutched under her chin. He froze when she spun around and clung to him with her head pressed to his chest and her arms trying to pull him tighter.
"Shh." Ryan whispered into her hair as his arms encircled her. She rose up to let him slide his arm under her body so she could rest her head on his upper arm. "I'm sorry, Miranda. I didn't mean to hurt you. Shh. Just stop crying."
It took what seemed an eternity for her tiny hiccup-like sobs to quiet. His hand was running up and down her back as he tried to ignore the growing pain of her head on his arm. When she finally pulled her head up to look at him, he grabbed a pillow and tucked it under them both. After pushing some hair from her face, his thumb began to brush the skin at her temple. She blinked long slow blinks as the tears dried up. Her voice was low and raw when she spoke.
"He never liked me, did he?"
"Why didn't you tell me?"
"I did. I told you when you two first started hanging out that he wasn't your type. You didn't listen. I told you all about him. You didn't care. You started dating him, anyway. You wouldn't have believed me."
"But he's your friend."
"Not anymore. He was planning on hurting you. I'm done with him. So are you."
"Is that why you stopped talking to me? Because of him."
"No. It was because of you. You liked that asshole. There are a ton of guys, but you picked him. I had to watch you make out with him. Had to hear the things he said about you behind your back. It was killing me."
Miranda's head came off the pillow to stare at him. It was a searching look trying to find an answer to a question she didn't ask. Her brown eyes danced back and forth as he stared back at her. Unnerved, Ryan rolled to his back and stared up at the ceiling.
After another minute, Miranda snuggled closer and rested her head on his chest. Her hand lay over his heart, feeling the heavy beat of it. "He was your friend. I thought if he was good enough for you, he was good enough for me."
"He's not. He's just always been my friend. I don't have many. I don't have any, now."
She mumbled something Ryan couldn't decipher. Raising his head to look at her, he saw her eyes were shut. Her body seemed to relax into him. She was asleep. Resigned to be a pillow, Ryan laid his head back down and closed his eyes. His hand came up and rested on hers as he listened to her breathing regulate. He could hear the tick tock of a clock on the wall and the whoosh of the heat flowing through the vents.
Sometime later he felt fingers running through his hair. His eyes struggled to open. He'd fallen asleep as well. Looking up, he saw Mrs. Tan's smiling face staring down at him.
"Dinner's ready." She patted Miranda's back and then shook her gently when that didn't work.
The two of them stumbled down to the kitchen to find the pizza waiting for them. They ate in relative silence. Emily watched them both from across the kitchen counter with a curious smile on her face.
"Why haven't you two ever dated?" She asked.
Ryan looked up with surprise written all over his face. He looked from one to the other and then lowered his head. "I don't know. I never thought it was an option."
Miranda stared at him for a moment without saying a word.
"You're handsome and she's beautiful. Both of you looked so sweet sleeping together. It seemed natural somehow. You're telling me you two don't have any romantic feeling towards each other?"
"Mom." Miranda exclaimed in a loud desperate voice.
"What? You think he's cute, don't you?"
Miranda eyes bulged as she tried to silently shut her mother up with a look. Ryan was staring at her out of the corner of his eye. He was still looking at her when Mrs. Tan spoke again.
"She's beautiful. Isn't she, Ryan?"
Miranda's head turned to see his answer. The two of them stared at each other. Neither one of them sure what to do or say. Ryan lowered his head and almost imperceptibly nodded.
"Have you two ever kissed?"
"Mom!" Miranda stood up so quickly the stool tipped over and crashed to the ground. She was out of the kitchen and her feet stomping up the stairs in an instant. They both heard her bedroom door slam shut.
"Have you?" Mrs. Tan was staring at Ryan.
"No. Not really. A few pecks when we were really little. Nothing that really meant anything."
She came around the counter and sat down on the stool Ryan picked back up from the floor. Patting the stool next to her, Ryan sat back down and took a drink of soda. Her fingers ran through his hair again as she stared at him with a curious little smile on her face.
"I made a decision today. You're an actual good boy. A good man." She corrected. "You're both technically adults and both virgins. I want you to be her first."
"What?" Ryan choked on a bit of pizza. Spitting it onto the counter. It brought a giggle out of her.
"You are skittish, aren't you. I don't know many mothers who would actually give a boy permission to have sex with their daughter. I figured you'd already be slamming her bedroom door by now."
"You want me to just go up there and crawl into bed with her?"
"No." She was still giggling as she shook her head. "Not like that. I want you to treat her right. Respect her. She was planning to lose her virginity to that monster on Valentines Day. Thank God that didn't happen. I want you to date her. When it's right and you both want it, it'll happen."
Ryan exhaled a long heavy breath. His eyes looked up to the ceiling as if he was trying to see into her room. He'd never thought of her like that. She'd always just been the girl next door. "I don't know how to be someone's first. I'd be horrible. She deserves someone better than me."
"Wow. Are you really passing up sex with my daughter?" Her smile grew until she was laughing loudly. "How do you know if you don't try? You can't be that bad. I didn't really give you a chance to kiss me back, but I assume you've at least kissed a girl before."
"I have." Ryan said defensively. "I've made out at parties with a few girls who attacked me."
"Never you? You've never initiated at all? You're that shy?"
Ryan shrugged. "I don't know if it's shyness. I just don't know how to start things. Girls are a bit tough to read sometimes. The idea of having my balls crushed is a pretty good deterrent. I have no idea what Miranda thinks of me."
"She likes you. I know she trusts you. If you two would just talk honestly about things, you might figure it out all by yourselves. Are you at least a good kisser?"
"How should I know? I don't kiss myself."
Mrs. Tan buried her face in her hands and snickered. "Good point." When her head came back up, she saw him with his arms folded and glaring at her. "Sorry. I just forget how teenagers are so clueless when they aren't trying to pretend they're experts at everything. Miranda's the same way. I think maybe everyone is. I certainly was at your age."

Byu players that exceeded your expectation the most
Mine is Tyler Allgeier. For some reason I was so disappointed when he started the season as our starting RB. My perception was we were scraping the bottom for the barrel if we were converting LBs into RBs and I thought it meant our recruiting was bad.
Then I thought maybe he could be replaced and I was wrong about that too…
The guy was an all timer. I can’t think of anyone that exceeded my initial expectation more.

Big Online Reality TV Shows are able to keep the winner names a secret even after the shooting is finished. Even after searching on the Internet one is not able to find them. How do they keep such things confidential when there are huge audiences present?
I had a friend who was on a baking competition show. He was required to sign a non-disclosure agreement saying that he would not reveal the winners or losers of the show until the episode had aired. There was some penalty if he did reveal anything, though I don't recall what it was. Surely if he had won (he didn't) they would have revoked his winnings.
On the up side, the day it aired, he baked several of the things he made on the show and we ate them while we watched the competition!

Daniel is another story since I have known him he has always worried and hated that he is overweight. He has dieted off and on over the years, exercised until he couldn't anymore after hurting himself, and so on. I always verbally supported him while eating my Taco Bell. In January D decided that he was "over being fat", and looked into a program at one of the local hospitals. We have known several people to have done this diet and had great results. So I made a decision to do it along side Daniel so that maybe it would stick this time and be something that he would succeed at because it is so important to him. I didn't know what I was getting myself into.
We are now in week 7 Daniel is down 35 pounds, and I am down around 30. I am no longer ONLY shopping in the plus sized section in stores which I haven't been able to do so in a long time. When I look at myself in the mirror I still see heavy me. But I get encouraged when I try on clothing and they fall off me. I know that I have a LONG way to go, and I know that I will never be skinny. But I proved to myself that I can do it! I have supported my husband in something I know is important to him. As I am typing this he came out in a pair of shorts that are 40's and to large. So down to a 38 he goes!!
We decided when we started this that it was going to be more a lifestyle change then a diet and I have tried to keep looking at it that way. Yes there are days when I would kill a man for a cheeseburger, but I have learned so much about me and who I am. I have learned that it is easy to say NO! I have also learned that I don't have to eat to be happy, I don't have to eat when there is nothing else to do. I have learned that I actually do like Brussels Sprouts, and many other veggies I once hated.
I may continue to lose weight once I am out of this "core" program that I am in, I will more then likely gain some and or most back over time. But I have learned that I can do something when I put my mind to it, even if it is hard, and it has been hard! But I know at the end of the day when Daniel and I are in bed laughing at all the extra room that we didn't have 7 weeks ago it is something that we did/are doing together and that is why I have been so successful.
Have I mentioned that I am proud of him??

A/N: This was written due to an idea brought on by some brainstorming during the July writing challenge on the Gateworld Forum for Ronon Dex/Jennifer Keller Appreciation/Ship/Discussion (Doctor & Wild Man) thread. DG and I were talking about follow-up ideas to the episode Quarantine.
Thank you to ShaViva for the beta read through and for being such a good friend.
Disclaimer: I do not own any part of Stargate Atlantis or it's wonderful characters.
Spoilers ~ Through SGA Season 4 Episode 14 – Harmony
Harmony is the episode after Quarantine where McKay and Sheppard are escorting the little princess on a pilgrimage that she must take before she can become queen at the request of her older sisters. So being a Ronon/Keller Shipper I naturally wondered what Ronon was doing during this episode.
Rodney set his tray down in the mess hall, settling into the empty seat next to Sheppard to eat breakfast with his team. They were headed out on a delivery mission today, much to his dismay. When he got no immediate greeting he set about eating his breakfast.
"So where we headed today?" John asked around a mouthful of toast as soon as Rodney had taken a bite.
Rodney picked up the tablet he'd absently set on the table and tapped a few times before setting it back down with a light thud. "M3Y-365. Not sure why I'm needed on a medical supply trade mission," the scientist grumbled, cutting into the sausage-like meat on his plate.
Ronon leaned back in his chair, finished with his meal and grinned across at McKay. "The meat world."
The warrior's statement while odd, was said with an enthusiasm McKay wouldn't have associated with Ronon and trade missions. He turned a pained expression on the Satedan, "The meat world?"
Teyla laid a hand on Ronon's upper arm to keep him from answering the scientist's comment. "What Ronon means to say," she began, "is that while we deliver medical supplies to M3Y-365, the inhabitants of that world graciously give Atlantis meat as well as some of their excess crops."
This was not the first time she'd felt so impatient with her fellow team mates and their incessant need to needle each other. She'd noticed as she got closer and closer to the date of her child's arrival that she grew more and more impatient with those around her. Dr. Keller had assured her this was normal, but the expectant mother did hope that she regained her patience after her child was born.
"Oh," McKay started, admitting to himself at least, that trading for food was a necessity, although he still wasn't sure why his team was playing bag boy for the grocery store planet. "Well I still don't know why we have to be the ones to fetch the food and deliver the supplies."
Rodney picked up his tablet again to check on the availability of other teams, hoping that he could convince Sheppard to send another team in their place so he could get back to his labs.
"Wait a minute," Rodney began, pulling up the schedule.
"What?" Sheppard asked,leaning over Mckay's arm to get a better view of the screen.
Rodney pushed John away with his elbow, while his fingers continued to tap away. After one brief pause the scientist set the tablet back on the table with a louder thud than before. "It says that we requested this mission," he lamented with a huff.
"Why would we do that?" Sheppard asked incredulously, reaching for Rodney's tablet, only to retract his hand quickly when McKay slapped at it.
"Flora and Mardola have been extremely grateful for all of the medical supplies, as well as the teaching that Dr. Keller has provided." Teyla watched the boys faces knowing that the name dropping of the two beautiful princesses of that world would be the only reminder John or Rodney would need forwhy they had signed up for the mission.
As realization dawned on the two men they both straightened in their seats even as they attempted to hold in smiles. Teyla had to work hard not to grin as well. The princesses were beautiful and she was sure that both Flora and Mardola used the men's eagerness to please them to their advantage as much as possible.
Teyla looked forward to the day she could again participate in missions with her team, but she was glad today would not be that day. Watching the men fall over themselves to gain the girl's attention could be amusing, but probably not in the state she was in now.
Noticing that Ronon was quiet she turned toward the man at her side to see what had captured his attention. Following the direction his head was turned toward, the area of prepared food, she immediately noticed Dr. Keller filling a brown paper bag as she made her way through the line.
Ronon's gaze followed Jennifer through the line as she gathered her meal. His gaze never faltered and he found himself extremely disappointed when she didn't even look in his direction.
It had been a week since the lock-down. A week since she'd come and satwith his team in the seat he'd been holding for her arrival. She'd even shown up for breakfast the next morning. But now it had been several days and he hardly saw her. Nothing more than a wave in the hall or a quick hi in the infirmary during a post-mission check-up.
His head turned as he followed the doctor's progress out of the mess hall. Unable to hold in his frustration he gathered up his tray roughly, preparing to leave, but paused when Telya restrained him quietly with a hand on his arm.
"We have all been quite busy since the quarantine," the Athosian leader looked into Ronon's eyes to gage whether he was accepting her offer of reassurance.
He had been busy, the Satedan acknowledge with a slight bow of his head in Teyla's direction. His team had been on back to back missions pretty much all week. When in the infirmary for his many post-mission check-ups there'd been a couple times he hadn't even seen Jennifer.
With tray still in hand, Ronon turned to leave but Sheppard called out after him, "Gear up and we'll meet in the infirmary in a half hour to make sure Doc has the supplies ready."
Ronon nodded before heading out, missing the look of concern that passed between Teyla and John and the lingering looks they cast in the ex-runner's direction as he left the mess hall.
Doctor Keller was triple checking the supplies when Sheppard's team came into the infirmary. She'd known that he'd probably be showing up. The Colonel knew her propensity to over pack and to recheck her supplies kept her from getting everything to the gate in a timely manner.
She finished looking through the last box before straightening and turning toward the team. "I think that about covers it." She pointed at the boxes behind her as she talked, trying not to make direct eye contact with Ronon.
As maddening as it was, she found she couldn't help but blush profusely whenever she looked at him. She thought that with time it would get better, but it was almost a week later and she still couldn't look at him without visualizing their almost kiss and her eyes would stray to his lips. For the first couple of days when her eyes would meet Ronon's she could swear he knew what she'd been thinking of. The twinkle she usually found in his eyes all but confirmed it.
"You ready to go, Doc?" John asked noticing that Keller wasn't wearing her tac vest or boots yet for the mission. He also hadn't missed the fact that she seemed unable to look directly at Ronon. Of course he'd mainly noticed that because the big guy was staring at the doc. In fact he was pretty sure his team mate's gaze hadn't strayed since they'd come into the infirmary. John was typically not good at detecting these types of things, but Ronon was making it easy to read the signs of a guy very taken with a girl.
"Oh, no," Jennifer answered the Colonel, a little flustered after trying to sneak a peak at Ronon, only to find him looking at her. "I have the day off actually, once I've seen these supplies off. This is really just a resupply mission anyway and I'm not needed. No need to tempt fate," she finished with a small laugh.
John smiled back at the young doctor, "And we thank you for that."
Jenn gave Sheppard a playful glare before stepping away from the supplies so they could get going. "Well then, I'm out of here. Have a safe mission, boys." She smiled at them as a whole, but her eyes lingered an extra second on Ronon before she quickly took her leave.
Ronon watched Jennifer leave the infirmary and turn in the direction of the transporter. When he swung his gaze back toward his team, his eyes encountered John's knowing look. Sheppard quirked his eyebrows at him, but Ronon just scowled in return, grabbing up a couple of the boxes before heading out toward the gate room.
John set his boxes atop the few that Ronon and one of the medical techs had set down in the gate room. He looked up at the control room above and gave Chuck the go ahead to dial the gate.
Ronon turned his head toward Sheppard as the gate came to life, "Some guys from the village will be there to help with the supplies?"
"Yeah, they always send out a party to escort us." John gave Ronon a quizzical look.
"I'm staying here then. You don't need me." Ronon paused for a second to see if Sheppard objected before turning and leaving.
John watched the big guy leave and smiled to himself, sure that the good doctor would be receiving a visit from Ronon soon. The colonel turned back and grabbed a couple boxes before heading toward the gate. He wasn't going to complain about having the princesses' undivided attention.
John's attention caught on McKay struggling with a couple of boxes in front of him and changed his mind, their nearly undivided attention anyway.
Ronon leaned back in his chair in the mess hall. There were a few stragglers still trickling in for a meal, but the majority of the expedition members had already come and and gone. He'd been eating and keeping an eye on the doorway, waiting for Jennifer to come for her lunch, but so far she hadn't shown. He decided to give her about ten more minutes then he was going to hunt her down.
They'd grown closer during the lock-down, sharing secrets. He'd told her of his feelings about not forcing Melana to leave and she'd told him of her feelings of inadequacy and a missed youth. He'd thought things were moving in the right direction when she'd come and satwith him and his team after the lock-down, but within a couple of meals that had stopped. He was beginning to worry that if he didn't sort this out with Jenn soon that this chance would slip away.
He looked around the mess hall one last time and decided she was going to be a no show. Time to go hunt down the good doctor and remind her that eating was important.
Ronon strolled into the infirmary after exhausting all of his ideas of where Jennifer could've gotten off to. His last thought was that maybe she'd gone back work. He slowly surveyed the room, but didn't see her immediately and decided to try her office, but again came up empty. On his way out of the infirmary he decided he'd at least see if the nurses knew where she could be.
Marie watched Ronon approach the nurses station, she wanted to let him squirm as he came up with the reason for his visit, but seeing as how he didn't look injured she figured she might as well just be thankful for that. She had a pretty good idea as to why he was there and in her opinion it was about time one of those two made a move.
"She's not working today," Marie announced while giving him a solid once over. The man was something to behold and the cheerleader in her was exclaiming, way to go Dr. Keller.
Not one to be that curious, Ronon just nodded his head at her accurate assessment of his inquiry and rolled with it. "Can't find her."
"Well I assume you've tried all the obvious places?" Marie waited for a nod before continuing, "Then she's probably out on her favorite pier." Ronon started to open his mouth, but Marie cut him off. "Not the East Pier, too many people go out there running and such. Try the next pier over."
Ronon gave her another nod and small smile. Of the medical staff, Marie was one he respected. She was a woman of few words and always got right to the point. "Thanks," he murmured as he moved away from the counter.
"Ronon," he heard her call after him before he turned back to face her. "You'll need to grab some bread or a roll from the mess hall before you go out there." He opened his mouth to ask why, but she shook her head at him, "Just do it."
With a light growl at the inconvenient delay and cryptic command, he strolled out of the infirmary with purpose now that he knew his destination.
Jennifer sat on the out of the way pier and basked in the warmth of the sun. It was a nice day out, warm enough to feel good on her skin, but not so hot as to make you need to find shelter from the sun's rays. The warmth made her want to lie down and she wished she'd remembered to bring a book. It'd been a while since she'd had an afternoon off, she thought with a shake of her head, and she seemed to be out of practice. It was usually just a lunch hour here and there that she got to spend out here. Thanks to transporters she could come out here for some peace and quiet and still get back to work on time.
She heard the sqwack overhead and smiled as she looked up at the half dozen seagull type birds that were circling above. The birds had discovered Jennifer after about two months of coming out to this pier for some of her meals. It'd taken another two months for them to come and sample any of the crumbs she tore from her sandwich and threw out for them to eat.
Jennifer liked to think now, almost a year later, that they recognized her. They typically showed up as she was finishing her meal. Circling high above as if casing out the area to make sure she hadn't laid out an elaborate trap for them. The ritual dictated that she first throw some out for them to tentatively snatch up and skitter away with to consume. Then after a bit they'd regain their courage and come closer. There were three birds that would actually eat out of her hand if she had the time and patience to wait on them.
Today was no different. She threw out a few rips off of the rolls she'd snagged at dinner last night and then breakfast this morning. The birds tentatively landed on the ground and snagged pieces before taking off, two of them fighting over the same piece. Jenn laughed watching their antics as she threw out a couple more scraps. She leaned back and got comfy against the side of Atlantis, tearing off more bits as she relaxed in the sun and enjoyed this one small pleasure. Feeding the birds could actually make her forget that she was on a floating city in a different galaxy.
Her mind drifted back to Ronon and the lock-down in the infirmary, as it often did. She still could feel the blush rising to her cheeks as she thought about him leaning in close and the flip her stomach had made. It was now almost a week later and the mere thought of what might've come next had the doors not finally opened, still brought on that flip in her stomach.
The night of the quarantine and even the next day she'd sat at a table in the mess hall with Ronon and his team, enjoying their new-found closeness, but the knowing looks she got from his team mates made her self conscious and when he didn't seek her out within a couple of days she decided to let it go. It was probably just time and place and she didn't want to make a fool of herself if she was more interested in pursuing something than he was.
These thoughts didn't bother her though. Having this memory of their time spent together was something she wouldn't have wanted to miss for the world and she'd do it all again in a heart beat.
Jennifer held a piece of bread up in the air and laughed as one of the braver birds hovered above her hand and swiped her offering from her fingers. She quickly replaced it with another piece and held her hand out just a bit lower this time but still away from her body. Two birds come to snatch it away and she had to work extra hard to remain still and hold in her laughter so she didn't scare them away as they both jockeyed for the prize.
Ronon found her with ease, but the sight before him was a hard one to rectify in his mind. Her laughter floated to him and he couldn't help but smile ever so slightly at the sound of it, but the birds hopping around her was something he didn't understand. They didn't seem to be hurting her if her smile or laughter was any indication.
He watched for a few more moments before slowly approaching her.
"Ronon," Jennifer called out when she saw him, a little startled at his appearance. "Shouldn't you be out on a mission?" she asked as she craned her neck and shielded her eyes to look up at him.
"They didn't need me."
Jenn patted the spot next to her, indicating he should sit. She felt a bit self conscious with him towering over her and she looked out toward the water as she worked to regain her composure.
"Here," Ronon said after settling, as he handed over the rolls he'd been holding, feeling a little silly to be giving her bread. "Marie said I'd need these."
"So it was Marie that told you where I was." Jennifer tried not to blush as the thought of him looking for her warmed her traitorous cheeks.
Ronon nodded out toward the edge of the pier, "What's with the birds?"
Jenn looked out where the sea-gull like creatures where circling and squawking, having flownoff at Ronon's approach and the worry of danger. "I was feeding them."
Ronon caught her broad smile as she looked out at the birds affectionately and he felt a tightening in his chest. She was so beautiful when she was happy. He couldn't help but smile along, happy for her delight.
"Now that you're here you can help me feed them," Jennifer declared, glad for a distraction from the awkwardness of having his imposing presence so close.
The Satedan was pretty sure the birds were capable of feeding themselves but he nodded his head and accepted his new duty. He watched her hands rip a roll in two before giving him one of the halves. Then she proceeded to rip off much smaller pieces and throw them out for the hovering birds to scamper after.
As he mimicked her actions he couldn't help but find his own delight in watching the animals' quickness and attentiveness to what he was doing and where he was throwing the pieces. After they'd finished off their halves Jennifer stopped him from picking up the other roll by laying her hand on his arm. When her eyes met his she quickly looked away and just as quickly removed her hand. Ronon smirked just a bit at her reaction, realizing what it meant. Teyla had been right…it wasn't lack of interest that had kept Jennifer away.
"Watch this," Jenn instructed as she tore off a small chunk of the bread. "Stay very still."
Ronon watched as she raised her hand in the air and held the piece of bread aloft.
"You are an unknown for them so we'll need to be patient while they become brave."
They sat in silence for a bit, but eventually a bird began to hover just above their heads, inching closer. It almost tried Ronon's patience, but eventually the bird took the bread and flew away. Jennifer did this a few more times and the birds were definitely making quick work of the bread she had.
"Your turn," she announced out of the blue, turning to him with a smile. Before he knew what to say or do she'd placed a piece of bread in his right hand, furthest away from them and instructed him to raise it high in the air.
It didn't take long before a bird hovered over his arm and he turned his head toward Jenn in excitement. He found her looking at him with such happiness that he almost forgot what he was doing, his arm beginning to fall away.
"Hold it real still," she commanded on a whisper, reminding him of what he was actually doing.
The bird finally took the bread from his grasp and he couldn't help the smile that transformed his features. He turned back toward Jenn to see her reaction and at the look on her face his breath caught. There was such surprise and awe in her expression mingled with a sudden seriousness that held him still.
Jennifer saw the joy upon his face, mingled with his closeness and a week's worth of pent up day dreams and she couldn't help the pull she was feeling toward this man. She was unable to pull her gaze away and she was wishing for all the world that she had the courage needed to lean into him and kiss him as she'd fantasized doing for days now.
Just as she began to think he was leaning in toward her, she saw his upper body suddenly stiffen and his head whip to his right.
Ronon growled when his eyes fell upon the bird crap that now covered his shoulder.
Jennifer began to laugh and he watched her as she fumbled with her pocket before pulling out something. "That happens from time to time," she got out between laughs. "I always bring these with me now… just in case."
Jenn produced a few wipes from a travel sized pack. "At least it was your shoulder and not your hair."
No sooner had Ronon mentally agreed with that statement, than he found Jennifer kneeling next to him. Instead of giving him the wipes she began to lean across him with the intention of cleaning his shoulder for him.
Not that he was complaining as she rested her free hand on his other shoulder for balance.
The doctor in her had quickly set about to fix the situation and clean Ronon's shoulder. Jennifer belatedly realized how much of his personal space she was invading. Her body was not only leaned into his, but her face wasn't far from his either. The heat rising in her face was uncontrollable as she tried to ignore his nearness.
"You know," she began, needing words to alleviate the silence and the tension that seemed to be growing thicker, "I've heard that a bird… umm, pooping on you," Jennifer winced at her words. She couldn't believe she was talking about bird poop while her face was mere inches from Ronon's, although averted with her task. "It is thought to be a sign of good luck."
Jennifer couldn't believe how lame that sounded once she'd gotten her whole thought out. She started to pull away, needing to put some space between them so she could think, especially before she spoke anymore, but as she moved she felt Ronon halt her movements with his left hand at her waist. He reached up and took the wipe from her hand, setting it aside. She was perched very awkwardly in front of and to the side of him, but she didn't dare move… she didn't even want to breathe.
Ronon had let a perfectly good opportunity slip by him once before. He wasn't about to let that happen again. "Very good luck, I'd say," he replied as he leaned in and kissed her. It was just a possessive press of his lips to hers for the moment, but as he felt her shock wear off and her lips begin to engage his, he deepened the kiss. As the sensations seemed to travel from his lips through his chest, he had a moment's regret that he hadn't followed up on their near kiss sooner.
Jennifer was afraid to move an inch as she leaned in and allowed the kiss to consume her. She wanted to protest when his lips left hers for a moment, but after an intake of breath they returned to hers, with more intensity than before and she surrendered to it.
When the need to slow down or find a more private location developed, Jennifer pulled back and looked up at the warrior before her and could think of no words, so she just smiled.
"This should have happened before now," Ronon offered, while pulling her more fully onto his lap.
But Jennifer could hear a tinge of regret in his voice and had to try to alleviate it. "Then or now… either way, I'm just happy it did."
"Happy enough to start eating dinner with me?"
"Tonight?" she questioned in a teasing voice. She really just wanted a bit of reassurance that they both were hoping for this to move in a more permanent direction.
"Yes," he replied with a grin, not missing the subtle question, "and every other meal that you eat from now on."
"Okay," she replied in a happy voice, leaning in to rest her head against his chest in complete contentment.
"Even when my team is there."
Jennifer nodded her head against his chest.
"Movie nights too."
She smiled and nodded again, loving the possessiveness in his voice.
"And other times too."
Jennifer pulled away and laughed when she saw the humor written on his face as he voiced his demands. She held her finger to her lips in a shushing motion. "You have all my free time from now on… happy?" she teased.
Ronon growled slightly at her teasing, although elated at hearing her answer. He leaned in and captured her lips in an attempt to wipe that knowing look off her face.
"You're mine then?" he asked in what sounded more like a demand as he pulled away.
Jennifer looked at her watch, then back at him with a smirk, "For the next sixteen hours." When Ronon gave her a stern look she caved with a laugh. "Yes, I'm yours," she said, loving the sound of those three words strung together.

My husband and I recently stayed here for 3 nights. Obviously with covid19 restrictions, we fully understand that patience is needed in all hospitality venues at the moment as they get back up and running fully again.
The hotel was busy and all the staff honestly work so hard, they cannot do enough for you. The room we had was great, very clean and full of nice touches.
The garden area is lovely to sit and have a few drinks in, we were super lucky to have had amazing weather.
Would loved to have had a chance to use the pool but it was fully booked. So I would book time slots in advance before arrival if possible.
The food in the hotel has been fab, dinner on the first night was delicious as is the breakfasts.
Will definitely stay here again. We have had a great time.
Thank you to all the staff who made our visit easy while having to work around the covid19 restrictions.

Giorgi Berejiani’s dog, Jorge, went missing from his home in Tbilisi, Georgia, three years ago. He looked all over for his best friend. And as the days turned to months and the months turned to years, he never gave up hope.
But all of his efforts would finally pay off. Staffers at a business in town spotted a stray who fit the description of Jorge and contacted Giorgi right away just in case. The dog had been tagged by the city to indicate he was a stray, but they were pretty sure it was him.
Giorgi rushed to the spot to check and approached the dog lying by the tree. In the video below, you’ll hear the man call the dog’s name. The dog then proceeds to cry tears of joy, and right then and there Giorgi knew it was really him.
Three years later, and they were finally reunited. Emotions poured out from the both of them, and you can tell they were equally happy to be together again.
“I’m so glad,” Giorgi told The Dodo. “I have never seen him so happy.”
In that moment, both of their broken hearts were healed. No one knows how the dog survived for so long on the streets by himself, but maybe he also was sustained by the hope that he’d reunite with his owner one day. 🙂

A/N: Sorry for such the long wait! Between college and an accident with my old computer, it's been hard to do anything. I spilled water on my old laptop and almost lost all of my work. But my mom helped me out and got me a new computer and we did a data recovery. So, here comes the next chapter! Thank you all for the reviews! They mean so much to me! Please keep reviewing. I love to hear feedback! Thank you so much! And enjoy!
When I woke up the next morning, I still had Lacey in my arms. I hadn't let her go, some deep rooted terror held her there, and by holding her there, I was able to keep my head. I hated myself for waking her, but she seemed relieved to have her eyes open. She looked at me, tears welling up in her eyes, and whimpered, "I hate these nightmares."
I shuddered again, not liking the idea of nightmares plaguing her sleep. So I just squeezed her tighter. "Don't worry, sweetheart. I'm not going to let them hurt you. I still promise to protect you. I won't ever stop trying to protect you." I could feel Lacey starting to cry, so I cradled her and tried to calm her. This was breaking my heart, and I just wanted her to stay whole. I didn't want her to crumple here in my arms. I didn't want her to crumple at all. I wanted this nightmare to be over. I wanted yesterday to just be a dream, but it wasn't. It was reality, and it was hell.
By the time we were strong enough to let go, we were behind schedule. I rushed us all to get ready quickly, resorting to junk food for breakfast. With enough pushing, we managed to make it out of the house in time to make it to the bus stop on time, a few minutes on our side. The twins were groggy from their abrupt awakening, so they went to stand silently in line for the bus. Lacey robotically made to follow them when I grabbed her wrist.
"Hold on, Lace." She turned to face me, stiff, but her eyes fluid and conscious. I could see the broken heart in those gorgeous eyes of hers, and it reflected all of the horrible feelings deep inside me. If I was her teacher, I would know immediately something terrible was wrong, but I wondered if any normal person could recognize this kind of pain, especially in a little girl. I know they never did with me…
She just stared at me, probably letting herself get too vulnerable with me. But I needed her to stay strong. Just a little longer… "Sweetie, I know what is happening is hard." I could see that the tears were coming. "Shhh," I said, trying to comfort her. "Don't cry. Listen to me. You need to stay strong. Stay normal. Can you do that for me?" She nodded, pushing her pain deep inside. "Good girl. Once you are home, you can let it all out. But it will not help having the teachers trying to get involved." She nodded again.
Just then, the bus came around the corner. I pulled her into a hug. After a moment, I kissed the top of her head. "I love you more than anything is this world. I am going to figure something out sweetie, I swear." She pulled away and gave me a weak small. Then she turned and hoped on the bus.
My whole wait for Neil was agony. I needed a distraction, because my thoughts on their own were not good. I was tearing myself apart and there was nothing in the whole world that would have me stop it myself. And so when Neil came, I abandoned my usual greeting. "Hey, ready to go?"
He frowned at me. "Yeah. Eager much?"
I started towards school at a faster than usual pace, and I could Neil scrambling to catch me. "Yes, very much." I could feel him frowning and staring, but this wasn't helping! I was going to cave if someone didn't distract me. "Say something!"
I saw Neil look at me, startled. "Um, okay. What's up with you?"
I shook my head. "No, don't ask that. Don't talk about me. Just talk about something. Anything. Make me confused or anything. Just talk."
I could see this unnerving Neil, but I was desperate. I wanted to fall to the ground and thrash about, releasing my frustration and the fear. The frustration of not being sure I was going to be able to protect Lacey from this damned fate. The fear that she would be trapped as well, and that she would shatter.
But Neil obliged, talking random to me. And before we knew it, we were at school. I apologized for being weird, but asked for some alone time. He agreed, somewhat reluctantly, and parted from me. I went straight to my English class, not caring that I was a half hour early. I felt like if I was going to break, and I wanted to already be in class in case I did. And I wanted to look like I was doing constructive things. I didn't want to talk to Mrs. Craven. I wanted to just write until my hands broke. Then I would let myself crumble. Maybe I would force other things to break, to try and create some other kind of pain that would distract me. Or maybe I would save that in case of emergency, in case the worst did happen.
God damn it! Urg! Why the hell was I continuing to let myself think it was going to happen?
When I walked into the classroom, a strange occurrence sprang up. What I saw in Mrs. Craven was completely foreign. She looked tired, worried, and slightly pissed because of these things. She seemed frustrated about things she could not change. She looked similar to how I felt. On a more manageable level. She almost looked maternal, even though she had no children. And so when she looked at me, a little surprise seeping into the mix of emotions on her face, I got terrified. She looked like she could be my own mother, worrying about me.
I could only imagine what I looked like to Mrs. Craven. I could vaguely remember what I looked like in the mirror today. I was beyond pale. I looked deathly. And I hadn't bothered to hide the deep circles under my eyes, because my eyes displayed the tiredness there as well. I looked fragile, weak, and damaged. I was slightly ruffled up and disheveled, for not taking much care to what I was wearing. I don't think I brushed my hair this morning, either…
So I could imagine that I screamed of something terrible. After that moment, I stood up taller and tried to pump some life into my body so broken that only one thing could damage it more, and I swore to prevent it. I had to wear the mask, to play the game…
"Oh, Molly." She frowned at me, deepening the maternal lines. "You don't look so good. Is everything okay?"
I shuddered a little before giving a weak smile. "I'm fine."
But she knew it was a lie. "Molly, you look like death. Are you ill?"
No. I was afraid my sister was going to be raped. "No. I just couldn't sleep last night."
Mrs. Craven raised an eyebrow. "Sweetheart, you are a smart girl. But are you really dumb enough to think I would believe that?"
I bit my lip. It was no use lying… "It's just a little bit of a family conflict. It has me worried. I'm the family worrier."
Mrs. Craven's lips formed a tight line. "And what are you worried about?"
I hesitated. "It's personal."
Mrs. Craven looked like she was about to press when her phone went off. She frowned at me before turning to her phone. When looking at it, she uttered a little gasp before snatching the phone up and pressing it to her ear. Without really meaning to, I eavesdropped on her.
"Peter!" she exclaimed, more of her anger taking over her face than worry.
Ah. Peter. Mrs. Craven's brother. That explained everything. According to what Mrs. Craven told us, he was a problem child from the beginning, and she had to be the one responsible for him most of the time. But he would just disappear a lot of the times in the different cities of the U.S.. Apparently, he had disappeared again and she was trying to find him.
"Oh save it, Peter. Are you here?" She paused, nodding. "Don't you dare leave again." Another pause before frowning. "What's new here that suddenly gives you the desire to stick around?" A look of pure confusion took over as Peter answered. "A what?" Another pause before she repeated, "Open house?"
My heart stopped and I started shaking. There could only be one kind of open house that Peter would refer to. It is something that could keep him here in this place… A place that offers periodic nights with sex, booze, drugs, and porn. Something that made my life hell.
Mrs. Craven must have been listening to the explanation as to what it was. To the thing that was taking place tonight. At my house. I had to sit down. My knees were about to give, and I didn't need Mrs. Craven focusing on me.
By the end, Mrs. Craven had a look of horror. "Peter, you are going to get yourself killed. Or someone else. Or arrested. Not to mention that it's just disgusting! Please don't go." She waited, her line returning to the tight line. "Peter, for once, won't you just listen to me?" Whatever he said, she didn't like because she groaned. "Fine. Whatever. It's your head, not mine. But tell me. Where am I going to track you down to give you your things?"
The expression on her face became outraged. She shook her head. "No Peter. You must be crazy to think I would risk everything." She paused. Then she groaned again. "Fine! But if I am at risk, you are going down for me." She nodded. "You owe me that much, yes." She sighed. "Fine. You better…" She then hung up with a groan.
I stared at Mrs. Craven. Her brother would be one of the people I served tonight. The thought made me get chills. I really hoped that that wouldn't happen. The thought really made me sick. And as if she could feel this, Mrs. Craven turned to me, as if she hadn't noticed I was there until now. "Oh. Molly?" I nodded numbly. She frowned. "I'm sorry you had to hear that. My brother…"
I shook my head. "It's personal."
She looked at me, frowning. It was almost as if she connected the dots between the relevance of her brother's new hobby and my pitiful life. But she must have denied it for she shook her head. "I suppose."
Just then, the bell rang. I tried to settle myself, and I saw Mrs. Craven do the same. And by the time class started, it almost seemed like she was completely normal. Lucky for her it was so easy. Not me, though. It's never easy for me.
The whole day was horrible. I never improved, and the looks Mrs. Craven snuck in made me edgy. And in my other classes, it seemed like my other teachers were tipped off that things weren't quite right. I even avoided Neil at lunch, due to the edginess. I just hid out in one of the girls' bathrooms until the bell rang.
And so when I finally was forced to talk to Neil again, he was panicked. But I hushed him and told him not to worry, that I was just having an off day. He pressed the whole way, so I was very anxious when we turned our separate ways. And I did not slow my pace as I made it for home. The people would start arriving too soon, and I wanted the kids ready for the whole night.
I walked in to the twins and Lacey at the table, silently working. None of them looked up as I walked in, but I could see that Lacey was hardly focused on whatever she was doing. An act? Maybe. It made me want to cry, to scream and rage at this horrible reality. I could already see the deep rooted void, in those eyes so beautiful and so wise. My younger sister… The one thing that meant more to me than anything, including my own life. And now? It was threatened to be destined to my same horrific fate.
I put my things away, not needing them until tomorrow. Then I started cleaning up the house, because Jett would be very angry with me if it wasn't presentable for the quests of the open house later. Not that it really mattered. By the end of the night, it would be trashed, dirty, and smelly. But, I didn't need Jett angrier with me than he was already. Some points weren't worth making.
As I cleaned, my mind wandered until it stirred up my experience from this morning. Peter. Was I going to see Mrs. Craven's brother tonight? Would he be like all the other men? I shuddered, thinking about that. I don't think I could ever think of Mrs. Craven the same if Peter did something to me. If he so much as asked me for something, it would stain my memories. Usually, I never had emotional or personal connection to the guests at the open houses. But if Peter were to be there, that would change.
I finished cleaning up the house after an hour, and by then, the twins had finished their work and were helping. But Lacey continued to be submerged in the abyss, neither here nor there. I tried to keep my mind from wandering to her, because I didn't want the twins knowing of the horrors of the night before. I know that they knew something was wrong, but I refused to give up my need to protect them from reality. I never wanted them to know or understand.
But then I had to get Lacey back on track. "Lacey, could you get the twins' bath done for me? I'm going to get dinner ready." For the first time since I got home, Lacey looked up from her book. The life was nearly drained from her face. What was left resided in her eyes, but those were as good as dead, too. If this was what she was like after an attempted rape, I wonder how bad it'll be when it actually happens.
At the thought, I started mentally swearing myself hoarse. Stop thinking like that, Molly, I thought, exasperated. Why did I let myself think like that? Why was I letting this come back to keep hurting me? It hadn't happened, and I was going to work hard to make sure it never did. It would destroy me if it did, because it would destroy her.
I started dinner, and thankfully it helped to keep my mind free of the horrible fears bubbling in my stomach. And by the time the twins and Lacey were done with their baths, dinner was ready, on the table. We all ate silently, and once we had all finished, I had the kids do the dishes. I had the task of setting up for the open house. I had to pull out all of the pornographic movies, the bottles of alcohol, the dozens of ash trays we had, and other little things that were musts for open houses.
By six o'clock, everything was ready, except for me. I herded the kids into the room and made sure they would be situated for the evening. I grabbed my clothes that I had to wear on these nights and took them outside the room. I checked and double checked to be sure everything was in order. Then I kissed them all goodnight and had Lacey bolt the door. I never slept in the room on these nights. For one, it was always too risky to keep the door open. For that reason, it was always bolted shut. And it was a pain in the neck to have to unbolt it from the outside. I could do it if I wanted, but it always sucked. So, I usually slept on the couch or locked myself in the bathroom until morning, sleeping on the floor.
I sighed as I went to the bathroom to change into the outfit. The people would start arriving soon, and if I was absent for too long, it meant trouble. So quickly, I changed into my other clothes. I always wore a red shirt, though it was too short to cover my stomach, too low cut to cover much of my chest, had barely enough fabric for straps to keep it up on my shoulders, and a low cut back. The skirt I wore was black, but so short that I always felt uncomfortable. When I put my arms down, my fingers easily went past the bottom. I always wore these bright red heels that most girls would love to have, but I hated them. They suggested so much.
Essentially, I always felt half naked in this costume. Well, in a way, I was. But Jett insisted on me wearing it, in more ways than one. Some battles just aren't worth starting or fighting. This was one of them. As much as I hate it, no bit of rebellion will change what Jett wants or what he'd do to me to ensure he get what he wants. That's the game I have to play all the time. It's the way of life. That's it. And nothing that I ever think, say, or do will change the rules. And there is never any chance I am going to win the game. Jett cannot be beaten.
I had just stashed my school clothes when I heard them start coming. I took in a deep breath and emerged from the bathroom. It was my mother, dressed in skimpier clothes than what I wore, Jett, and a group of about ten men and three women. Some of them had bundles in their hands. Others had cash. They never hesitated to get these things started.
I worked blindly. And as more people started coming, it became almost brainless. The shouts of "Hey, little girl, we need another movie," or "Where's the Mary Jane?" would occasionally require me to be conscious of the things I did or the people I helped. But for the most part, I was never really there during the open houses. It hurt too much to let myself be fully there.
It wasn't until about eleven that my brain had anything to think about. It was then that I had just mopped up a spilt bottle of Jägermeister. I had finally come to again, and so I noticed when the newcomer came in. And I just about fainted.
He looked just like her in so many ways. They had the same eyes, the same color hair, the same heart shaped face. But he looked tired and worn from drug use. He was very thin and lanky, not very tall. And his clothes were despicable. But he wore a smile that was the spitting image of pure joy. For whatever reason, Peter was very happy to be at this open house.
As I went back to work, I kept praying that he wouldn't notice me or ask me to do something. I didn't want to have to hate him, or nearly hate Mrs. Craven. But I knew that if we made personal contact, there would never be a chance in me being able to forgive either of them. No, none of it is their fault, but I would never stop associating them with this awful reality.
So, I kept eyeing Peter, standing near the room that people went to go get laid. And every time I saw him, I could see so many similar features of Mrs. Craven. It unnerved me. I was trying to avoid him, so that he couldn't eye me in the skimpy clothes showing off too much cleavage, stomach, and legs. I didn't want him to touch me. I didn't want him to desire me like many of the men here did. I didn't want anything that would make me hate Mrs. Craven, but if her brother did these things, I could no longer stand to be in her class with their sibling resemblance plaguing me.
Then there was a group of men whistling for me. They wanted more booze and weed, so I filled my tray. I heard someone else come in, but I let myself be distracted. And so by the time I was ready to serve the men a few minutes later, whoever new was mixed in. I'd probably be hearing from them very soon.
I made my way to the men, who were growing impatient. "Calm it boys," I said in a bad mock-seductive voice. They giggled at me and I was going to ignore them when one of them grabbed my wrist, pulling me to him. He put a hand on my waist and then grabbed my chin down.
"Mmmm, baby girl. I'd chill right down if you could please me."
I winced. "Well, that's the only thing we don't offer here. You should know that." He was a regular.
He groaned. "You tease too much, baby girl. You could make serious bank if you let it go."
I gagged silently. "No thanks." And I pulled away, my skin crawling. I was going to go try and hide in the shadows when an out of place gasp caught my alarm. Before I could turn around, I heard the person's voice. "Molly?!"
As I whipped around, I felt my heart skydive into my stomach in horror. I nearly dropped my tray. I started shaking as my eyes settled on Mrs. Craven. Why on earth was she here? There was more than shock in her face. It was downright fear. I tried to breathe, but my lungs weren't working. I could feel the horror of my whole life slowly seep onto my face, and I knew that Mrs. Craven wouldn't be able to deny it now.
"Hi Mrs. Craven," I said weakly.
I could actually see tears well up in her eyes. I could see the millions of question swarming up, like word vomit, just waiting for her to be gagged. I'm sure that if she were not so shocked, she would literally vomit. But there was more than her just seeing me that would drive this to hell.
Right at that moment, Jett made an appearance nearby. I saw him eye me quickly, as if wondering how badly he wanted me, before he came my way. I wanted to tell Mrs. Craven to get out, before any of us got in trouble, but I knew I couldn't, and that she wouldn't. So, I had to stand in horror as my father, my rapist, my sister's attempted rapist, my mother's pimp and drug dealer, and the host of this party come up to me. I wanted to vomit myself.
"Molly," he said in a sappy voice. "Baby girl, can you do your big daddy a favor?" I felt heat flush my face turning me red, all while the rest of my body went cold. "Could you make sure you stay up and do some talking with me tonight?" He chuckled sickly before turning and leaving.
I almost forgot Mrs. Craven was here. I went rigid, stiff, horrified. He was going to make me pay big time for interfering with Lacey, I knew it. But now there was someone on the outside that I would have to worry about. Which brought me back to Mrs. Craven.
I met her eyes, and they reflected the dread. She knew that what was going to happen had nothing to do with talking. The realization that the host of a party like this one was also my father seemed to awaken something in Mrs. Craven. Part of it was denial, I could see that. But there was more. Maybe she was connecting this to my poems. Maybe she was connecting it to how I acted. Whatever it was, she was horrified and terrified. I bit my lip as a few tears overflowed. I was about to break down when I heard an impatient man hollering for me. I gave a pained look before turning to go tend to the man.
And after I tended to him, I found that Mrs. Craven hadn't lingered to see any more. She had left me. For some reason, this made me very afraid. What was she going to do? Was she going to go somewhere? Say something? Ignore it completely? Bring it up at school? The things that could happen were countless, and that terrified me.
The open house went on until past three in the morning, and it wasn't a fast process. It was terribly slow. I was suddenly much more aware of every set of hands that touched me, every pair of eyes that stared at me, and every word said to me. I was disgusted and terrified. I never realized how bad things were until now, when someone from the normal world was dragged into my hellish reality.
And way before I was ready, it happened. The last visitor had only just left when I heard the fast footsteps coming up behind me, and before I could react, he had spun me around and grabbed my arms. I was too petrified to try and escape. I know I had to pay for my little stunt with Lacey last night, and I knew it was going to be one of the worst experiences of my life.
But what I didn't know was that it was going to be worse than even the first time.
He smiled at me, a crazed look in his eyes. I was too good at analyzing people that I couldn't ignore what was in my father's eyes. There was desire and anger, easy to read. But there was also obsession and fear. Not fear of me, but fear of losing his satisfaction. If he had his way, he'd keep me here forever.
Then Jett laughed, bringing his face very close to mine. I could smell the tons of booze heavy on his breath, tainted by stale cigarettes. Then he brushed his lips to my cheek, slowly to my earlobe where he lightly bit it. I clenched my jaw, trying not to provoke him to breaking my arms so easily in his giant hands. But I started shaking and couldn't calm myself. I was suddenly so overwhelmed with everything that my body could not contain it: my sister's attempted rape, my encounters with Mrs. Craven, the promises to each one of them, and the most violent rape I have and probably ever will encounter. I didn't blame myself for being scared. But I almost felt ashamed of my fear.
"So, you want to play the hero," Jett said softly, right into my ear. Another violent shake. "Well, congratulations. You got through round one." Jett released one of my arms, but I didn't try to fight. It would just make it worse for me. I just stood there as still as I could manage as Jett played a game he never had. He had never tried to purposely psychologically abuse and damage me. It was just rape. It was just incest. He never would speak more than a few sentences.
And now that was all going to change.
"I know what you want," he whispered. "You want to keep little Lacey girl from me. But even you must know how useless your attempts will be." I shuddered, and I could feel him smile widely as he kissed my cheek. Then I felt his hand on my upper back and I could also feel it slowly traveling down. "I cannot ignore or miss out on such pretty one. And I bet she feels nice."
My head started spinning. I didn't want to hear this. I didn't want to hear anything. I didn't care anymore what he did to me. I didn't care. But Lacey? I wanted her out of this. He was right about that. But still, I shuddered more at the thought of my father holding my sister like this, talking to her like this. What if I wasn't able to protect her and this was her in a few years when Kelly was old enough? Everything inside me rejected these thoughts, because I wasn't going to give up on trying preventing it all.
His hand traveled farther and farther down my back until it was on the small curve of it. I felt him press his face into my hair, smelling it. Then he bent his head down and kissed my neck, sending on new waves of dizziness and nausea. "Oh, reminds me." I started shaking even more violently. I knew exactly what he was remembering, and I didn't want him to go there. Not now. Not ever….
He laughed dreamily. "Oh yes. That first time was the best. Feeling how soft you were for the first time. And no longer just your arms and legs. Your body. It was so small, so vulnerable, and so soft." He inhaled in my hair again. "I was even a little nervous to get inside you for the first time." I gagged. I never wanted any part of my father inside me. There was a reason I never put it that way. And there was a reason why I always tried to drown out all the evidence.
"But once I had a taste, I lost all of that fear. Oh, you were so good I could hardly stand it. And it was even better when I was able to make you do all that naughty stuff with me, too." I closed my eyes tightly, trying to block that part away. The part that I never got to in my nightmares because they were so horrible that I always woke. I never visited these memories. They were cemented away as best as possible. But now, my father was bringing them back. The one time that he experimented. The one time he got away with it.
He kissed my neck again, so gently that I wanted scream. "I haven't had anything better since, and I've been waiting for the perfect girl to have something better. I finally started noticing how Lacey is no longer a little girl, but a mini woman. She looks just like you did when I suddenly desired you. But, I must admit, she is thinner, and much prettier. And she looks even softer." I bit my lip painfully, trying to give me a physical pain versus this emotional agony. I just wanted to protect Lacey. That's the only thing I wanted. I would give up anything. And I was. But it wasn't going to be enough, was it? Not with Jett. Nothing ever was enough for him.
He then pulled away from me, only enough so our eyes could meet. "I am going to take her, Molly. I am going to get inside her too and take my time of it. I am going to enjoy every second. I am going to obsess in the feel of her, the look of her. The sounds. The feelings. Everything." My head spun even worse and I felt the beads of sweat gathering on my forehead. I felt my stomach churn and I wanted to just retch all over Jett. And then I could feel the tears. Were they pain? Fear? Worry? I didn't know, but they started falling, and I wanted to cry at these threats.
Jett chuckled at me. "Does that make poor baby Molly cry? Don't worry; Daddy is going to take care of you." I saw him lean in to start kissing my neck some more, and I willed myself not to retch everywhere. I gagged, but managed to hold on to some stranded and dying sanity. I felt him release my other arm, so he could hold me, pull me in, and touch me like the sick pervert he was. Though I was still, I wasn't numbing out like I usually did. I was enduring every moment of pain.
It was like I was being submerged in broken glass. The big shards dug deep, causing one clean crevice. But it was the little shards that were hurting the most. They were hurting every little nerve, somehow being breathed in and cutting up my insides. My life was this glass, and right now, my father was pouring the little shards all around me. Even if I wanted to piece it back together, I only had the big pieces. The little ones were too sharp to touch, and almost too small to matter. But they were big enough to leave me forever shattered.
I let myself become limp. I didn't bother fighting. I think I was hurting too much to be able to move, anyway. So, when he suddenly pulled me with him to his room, I followed blindly. I was prepared to endure once more. I would be limp. I would be lifeless. Was this even life anymore? Was I really even alive? He could probably get off more with raping a corpse. Was I much more than that, anyway? I felt hopeless. Why did I even try protecting Lacey? How could either of us stop this from being her fate?
As Jett pulled me into the room, I was brought back to life by yelling. "Anne, get your skanky ass out. I need the bed."
My eyes registered my mother, half naked on the bed. She was wasted and high, looking at Jett in an odd way. "Why baby? I can join you."
Jett snorted. "You aren't joining me. You don't to threesomes with girls, Anne."
I felt an odd burning sensation in my stomach and saw my mother's eyes on me. She looked at me, not worried that Jett was going to rape me. She knew that was what he did when he brought me here. She was prepared to give up her daughters. "Oh, hi Molly. You ready for some more of a good time?"
I shuddered again. Jett laughed. "I was just telling her how soon Lacey will be there to join in on the fun."
There was my answer. Why was I alive? Why was I fighting? Why was I even bothering to hope to spare Lacey from this? Because her own mother wouldn't do it. No one would. And I wasn't going to leave my sister alone. I wasn't going to abandon her like our mother abandoned me. I wasn't going to leave her alone when she needed someone most. Even if I failed, at least someone fought. At least she could always have someone to support her. At least she would know someone cared enough to try.
I let this pump life back into me. My mother left and I could somewhat take in that Jett was undressing. No, I wasn't going to let this happen without a fight. Any of this. For Lacey. I was not going to let him think I was done trying to protect her.
I was fully back when he came back to me, in only his boxers. "Now it's your turn, baby girl. Let's rock Daddy's world."
I shook with anger suddenly. "No."
He froze momentarily. Then he laughed. "No what, baby?"
I shook my head. "I am not your baby. You are a sick pig and you are not my father, even if you got my mother knocked up. You are nothing but a cowardly, desperate bastard who is so disgusting as to rape its own daughters. No, I will not 'rock your world.' If you have any sense, you'll let me go."
At first, he just stared at me. Then he started laughing. "Why so pissy, little girl?" He looked at me, then sighed. "Oh, trying of the hero again? Trying to protect little Lacey again?"
I nodded. "Not going to try. I am going to. I swear to you, the moment you so much as touch her again, you're mine."
He frowned at me, for once letting me see a little surprise. Maybe even a little bit of fear. "I'm yours? In what way?"
I stared at him, complete seriousness etched in my face. "If it's the last thing I do, I will make sure you are dead if you dare take away Lacey's childhood. You took mine, but you are not taking hers without a price."
Jett frowned a moment, then laughed. "You're really going to give up your life and freedom just to kill someone like me?"
I nodded. "I'm not worth anything in the world except Lacey's protector. If I fail her, I will make sure she gets justice."
Jett looked very seriously at me. For a sliver of a second, I felt like I was looking at my father. But it disappeared quicker than it appeared. "Good luck with that," he said before he seized me and threw me down on the bed.
It was kind of a relief to have him rip and tear away the skimpy clothes. It meant never having to wear them again. But I still fought and made a great deal of noise as he tried to rape me. I used all of my strength to hit as much as I could, to bite and draw blood, to scratch, to hurt. He did not enjoy me hurting him, but he took the liberty to amuse himself by returning my efforts and worse. After all, I could not go inside him and seemingly tear him apart from the inside, like he could to me.
But I made sure he knew I was fighting. I made sure he wasn't able to walk away from this unscathed. I made sure that he wouldn't forget my anger. Maybe, someday if I ever was faced with killing Jett, I could see a flicker of fear in his eyes before I took his life. Maybe he would even beg with me, like I have, and Lacey will, if it ever comes to that point.
So by the time he let me go, he was bleeding pretty badly, and hurting. I shot for the bathroom where I did my usually cleanup. I let myself become clean enough. I did not break down. I did not cry. I did not shatter. The rage now in my blood held me together. I was alive as long as I had something worth fighting for.
I was thoroughly decided at this point. There was only two ways this could end. The first and ideal way was to just peacefully make it until I was eighteen. If nothing happened between now and then, I would not make anything happen. But, if Jett raped my sister, that option was going to be long forgotten. The only option would be to kill Jett. I wouldn't care how. But all I knew was that I would have to stop his heart from beating anymore.
At this point, jail didn't scare me. If I went to jail, I wouldn't care because I had destroyed that black hole of a human being. Lacey would have justice. And, frankly, so would I. And, Lacey would be so much safer. No. There was no way around it. I was going to have to kill him. He wasn't going to rest until he either had my sister, or he was dead. And I'd rather have one, not both. And his death was now essential.
As the water ran over me, I let myself think about killing Jett. It wasn't until I was almost ready to get out that I realized one problem, one question. How? How was I going to kill Jett? I knew I would wonder about that, but I didn't let it hold me back. If there was a will, there was a way.
When I got out of the shower, I found my bedroom door cracked open. Jett had gone to bed shortly after he finished raping me. Curious, I snuck inside the room. All the kids were sound asleep. But on the pillow next to Lacey's head was a note she had written, saying she wanted me to come back and sleep with her after everything. I wondered how much she knew about what had happened and been happening. But I was thankful for our own bed.
I climbed into bed and I sighed. She was out completely. I watched her sleep a while, finding some peace. For now, she was whole. I was going to fight for that. And if that was taken, I was going to fight for revenge. No one hurts someone I love. Especially if they value their life at all. At this though, I smiled. I leaned forward and kissed her forehead. I would be okay as long as she was okay. That was what I was fighting for.
I sank into sleep and woke an hour and a half later. When I woke Lacey, she was very alarmed. She saw all the marks on me and knew not only was I raped, but brutally so. "Molly," she moaned in agony.
I pulled her up into a sitting position. "Don't worry about it, Lacey."
She stared at me alarmed. "Don't worry about it? Molly, you looked undeniably like you were beaten."
I sighed. "I know. I am going to tell everyone that I fell down some stairs. But really, don't worry."
Tears welled in her eyes. "Oh, okay. Because it's not like I am immune to this."
I sighed. "No, you are not immune. And that's why I have these. From protecting you." I saw the guilt in her eyes. "Don't worry. I did it to myself. Sort of. But I also made it very clear what is going to happen when or if he tries to hurt you."
Lacey looked at me questioningly. "And what is that?"
We left the conversation at that and got ready for school. Jett was still sleeping off the open house, so we were free to move around in the living room. It was all a blur to me. Not that I was trying to not think about anything, but it more seemed like I was incapable to do it. There such a deep hatred inside me, so strong that I actually wanted to kill my father. I had no means to do it, but I desired it. I wouldn't, though. Not unless he hurt Lacey. But I was almost positive that that would happen.

My Guilty Pleasure TV Show: Total Divas
This is a TV show that I thought for sure, I would absolutely hate, but...I was wrong!
I've been a wrestling fan almost my entire life. I started watching it back in the early 90's when it was still WWF. I watched with my Dad and my brother, who eventually became disinterested in wrestling all together, but not me. I was still a fan, I'd still watch Monday Night RAW every week. I knew it was 'Sports Entertainment' and people weren't really getting the ever-living stuff beat out of them. I mean, yes, they could still get hurt, but I knew the outcomes were staged, and the promos were all acting. I knew all that, yet still enjoyed it.
Honestly the only thing I didn't like about WWE as time went on and I got older, was the way women were portrayed in the industry. I loved it back in the 80's and 90's when the likes of Luna Vachon, Alundra Blayze and Molly Holly were wrestling. They were great wrestlers!! They weren't just escorting the men to the ring, but they were actually wrestling, and they were great at what they did! Then came the 'Diva Era'...where looks became more important than talent in the ring.
So I thought for sure when the Divas of WWE were starring in a show called 'Total Divas', it would not be the kind of show I'd like...and I was so wrong!
Saturday night, I was sitting on my couch by myself watching TV. My husband was out and I was looking for something to watch. I was scrolling through the WWE Network, and I saw this 'Total Divas' show. For some reason, it caught my attention. I read the caption on what the show was about and decided to give it a shot.
My favorite Diva quickly became Natalya. She's the niece of my idol, Bret 'The Hitman' Hart and daughter of Jim 'The Anvil' Neidhart, and I just loved her. She had a very genuine personality and that was what I loved most about her. She talked about her struggles getting into the wrestling business even though she came from a wrestling family.
One episode turned into two, two into three and before I knew it, I had binged watched the entire first season of Total Divas!! At that point, my husband had come home and reluctantly joined my binge watching. He wanted to watch 'Godzilla', but I was so into this show, I couldn't turn it off!
My favorite Diva quickly became Natalya. She's the niece of my idol, Bret 'The Hitman' Hart and daughter of Jim 'The Anvil' Neidhart, and I just loved her. She had a very genuine personality and that was what I loved most about her. She talked about her struggles getting into the wrestling business even though she came from a wrestling family. I also really liked the Bella Twins, Brie and Nikki. I found myself relating more to Brie, so she quickly became a favorite. I love that the show gives viewers like me a sneak peek into the girls' personal lives and behind the scenes in the world of WWE.
I loved the show so much, I wanted to binge watch Season 2 as well! I didn't have time unfortunately...but maybe this week I will! Season 3 starts this coming Sunday on the E! Network and I can't wait to watch it! Looks like I have from now until Sunday to watch all of Season 2 to catch up! I'm looking forward to it!

After my last night at the sex club, I’d made sure to get Daddy’s number. We’d finally arranged for a play date.
I’d worn my hair in two braids to keep it out of the way. I knelt between Daddy’s thighs and started licking. I trailed my tongue over his cock, starting at his balls and working up. I lapped at the glans, loving watching him writhe.
After teasing him, I swallow his cock, taking as much as I can. I move slowly, getting accustomed to his length. I keep my lips wrapped tight around his girth, and twirl my tongue over the head of his cock. When I raise my head, my lips around the head of his cock, I flick my eyes up to catch his eye. He’s watching me. I keep eye contact as I move back down.
My teasing most have gone on too long for him. He grabs my braid. I know where this is going and what he wanted. I moved my other braid within his reach. Daddy wraps my hair and his hands and pulls.
My head is forced down, my lips resting around the base of his cock. Daddy had moved from letting me play, to using me. He paused a moment, asking if I was ok. I nodded, as much as a could. He preceded to fuck my mouth. He used my hair like handles, and thrust into my mouth. He yanked my hair, thrusting and moaning. He gave one last pull, shooting him cum into my throat, with a growl. He released my hair, and I lapped him clean.
He pulled me up, into his arms. He called me a good girl. He gently worked out to braids, and and stroked my hair. I snuggled next to him and was already thinking about our next date.

We had been staring at each other all night. The looks were driving me insane. He was tall, tanned and had the nicest smile I had ever seen. I was in my favourite bar with some of the ladies from work as we normally did on a Friday night, and I had seen him a few times but for some reason this one was different.
The waitress brought over our drinks and placed them on the table. She handed me a napkin and told me that it was from the gentleman at the bar, Him. I looked at the napkin and it read " 25 Newburn Lane, 10 o'clock". My heart started racing and I felt these little flutters in my stomach. It was only around the corner, so I decided why not. I made up some excuse of leaving early and got away without any questions asked. I walked around the corner passing a shadowed character. A few seconds later, I felt these hands go around my waist. Startled, I turned around to find him standing there smiling. I blushed a little. "I don't normally do this" I said. He replied, "Neither do I, but you are ever so beautiful". Blushing more, he took my hand and led me to his home.
As he went through his front door, he turned me around. My back against the wall, he moved the hair out of my face and kissed my lips ever so softly. He put his hand at the back of my neck and pulled me in for a passionate kiss. My hands around his head, he lifted me up and led me upstairs. My heart racing, we entered his bedroom and he gently put me on the bed. He climbed on top of me and started to kiss. His hands roaming my body, and mine roaming his, He started to kiss my neck. I started getting goosebumps but it felt so good. He knew I was enjoyed it and started to nibble it. His right hand started going up from my stomach towards my right breast. He started playing with it, leaning up a little, he undressed me.
He took off all my clothes and then his. He stared at my naked body and climbed over beside me. He turned and faced me. His muscled body and his tanned skin touching mine, He climbed between my legs. He started kissing my stomach and played with my erect nipples, the way he touched me was making me feel even more wet below.He took his right hand and started to play with my wet clit. He knew I enjoyed it and started to tease me a little more. He put one finger in and I released a moan. He put another finger in and started going in and out slowly. He put his mouth into my clit and started licking and sucking. I was releasing louder moans. I got to the stage that I was that horny, I pushed him on his back and climbed between his legs.
I kneeled down and started to lick his erect penis. I put it in my mouth and began sucking. I got faster and started going deeper. The moans coming from him were getting louder as I got faster. He stopped me and lifted me on top of him. He inserted his penis and we both let out a moan. I started going up and down slowly. Gradually getting faster, his hands around my waist were getting tighter. I felt that sensation and knew I was going to orgasm. We got faster and harder and gradually I came. He flipped me over, got between my legs and started sucking, he played with me for a while and then inserted his penis in again.
He started doing me fast and hard, I felt as if my insides were burning. He slowed down and fastened up. He started playing with me with one hand while doing me. We both slowed down and came at the same time. He kissed me passionately and lay down beside me. 15 minutes later, we started again..
To be continued
This story is protected by International Copyright Law, by the author, all rights reserved. If found posted anywhere other than Lushstories.com
with this note attached, it has been posted without my permission.
<a href="https://www.lushstories.com/stories/love-stories/one-night-of-passion.aspx">One Night of Passion</a>

Posted on Tuesday 22nd of September 2020 11:14:07 PM
This article is about afrocupid. If you ever wanted to find out more about dating girls from around the world, this is for you. Read more of afrocupid:
It's really fun to know who is the best friend you've got and who is the worst. We all know that there's a very good chance that we have the same opinion about some people. Sometimes we'll even agree on certain things, but the way we look kaittie at them makes us not so sure.
A few weeks ago I had an experience that helped me a lot to know how to relate to people who are different from us, even if we don't understand it ourselves. It was a asian dating free chat simple question: What's the most beautiful woman in the world? The answer was a beautiful woman from Brazil that I'd never met before. It was a strange and funny experience but I don't regret it. If I could go back in time, I would be so happy to have met her. The answer is, obviously, her mother but there are certain things that we all should know about Brazil. For example, she was never married or even a virgin but she was beautiful enough for me to not take her virginity. She was an extraordinary woman, someone who was so smart that I almost believed she was smarter than me. She had a brilliant mind. She was an educated woman, she worked at a university, she had a job, she had everything. She wasn't like most women, she was not like me, she was amazing, she was smart, she was beautiful, and she was a virgin and she loved to have sex with people. She was someone who, at one point or another, got married but didn't get married, I think. And, in my opinion, she got too old and too married, but I didn't want to hear about that because, I didn't think marisa raya that was going to help me with the girl. The next girl I had met, she was a student, she was in a foreign country, and I went to meet her because I thought maybe I could help her, maybe I could get her to get married. And, the next woman I met was very much like me, except she was very, very much into dating. And that was the last girl. I couldn't get her to go out with me, which is a real shame, because I loved her so much. Now, I'm not saying I'm like that, I'm just saying that it seems that I have the most trouble getting people to like me, and that if I didn't have this, it would be easier.
What can I do to change the problem? The reason is, there are many, many girls that don't like guys. Not everybody. But a lot of them. If you get a girl to like you, it'll change the way she acts around other girls. Now that I've mentioned this, I'm going to talk about why I like it. So here's the plan. I want you to meet a girl and I'm going to tell her that I'm a guy who's had the experience. She'll be impressed. If she likes you, she'll be attracted. If she doesn't like you, she'll tell you why. And I'll do the rest. Here's what you do. You take her phone and you say, "Hello" and then you give her your number, then you tell her about your experience with women celibataire.com who were not like you. If you're not comfortable talking, you can ask for the phone number back and then you can call her. It's a game. It's called the "game" because it's really just a series of rules. If you know what a game is, it's probably not that hard. A game is really about making some sense out of a situation. You can start with the girls looking for men "game" of "I'm not a bad guy, but..." Then you can make that situation more "natural" by using your "game" to go into her body language and make it feel good, to talk about some of the things you've seen, or to tell her something that's going to make datingsite you feel better. Then you can put on that "game" mask and pretend like you're having a good time. Then you can do a little work, and the situation will make sense a bit more, and if you're lucky you'll be with her. But usually, it's more like a game, where the goal is to get to where she is. This is a game because you're trying to "get" a girl, and you're pretending to do it in a way that is not really going to work. There's no real effort involved. In other words, the "game" is just a mask you put on top of a lot of bullshit, and then pretend to play the part. And if she's not into it, well, you didn't do a good job at pretending to be a good guy. You'll have to go through a lot more bullshit, and this will keep you from getting any closer.
But here is the big truth: if you're serious about being a good guy, you will actually learn from this, and you'll figure out a way to play this game properly. I free online date have read a lot of "game" books over the years, and I'm always impressed by the fact that the majority of these books have no fucking game at all. They just say the same fucking bullshit they've been saying for years and have no idea how to actually get a girl to have sex with them. So, for instance, I've read a lot of books about game for the past couple years, and it's pretty obvious that some of them are just a bunch of lies about how women think, or how you should approach women, and that's it. No game, no results. It's a joke.

Hello Guest, if you reading this it means you have not yet registered. Please take a second Click here to register and in a few simple steps, you will be able to enjoy the discussions Stretford End Arising has to offer. If you are unable to register please use our contact page.
Yeah, off game for Carrick. He was okay in fulfilling his defensive duties, but was poor in possession. He wasn't helped by either midfield partner. Anderson was poor and Jones' positional awareness and passing/ball retention are weaker points.
Thought Carrick was excellent from what I saw on Saturday, played a few excellent balls through the middle that were failed to be capitalized on. It's an area of his game that we have seen a lot more this season, he's becoming more of a play maker now that Scholes isn't featuring as much.
Great to hear the fans chanting about him today. Away fans class again. Thought Carrick struggled for bits of the game with Giggs wandering a bit he was left with no one to pass to and had to do a lot of work on his own. That's not to say Giggs didn't play well, he did, but positionally he's not great for a CM.
Some of us have been waiting years for a Carrick song. Really happy it's finally happened. Not sure about the chant itself but just glad people are finally recognising his contribution. I don't think he's playing any better than he did last season though really. Defensively excellent yesterday, thought his passing was a bit off perhaps because of Giggs' positioning. Seemed a bit of a weird time for the chant to be brought up. Not complaining though.
With Jones potentially out of the Real Madrid game, he'll have some extra duties and he'll need to be on top of his game.
Our lack of depth in midfield has also cost us today along with other things, Carrick should have been rested on Saturday but we were unable to as we don't have the backup for him. He's played 270 mins since Tuesday. Needs addressing in the summer, have a feeling we may stick with what we have and put faith in Fletcher. Depends how much is in the 'kitty' I suppose.

2xloser -- Yeah, my initial response was at odds with my later response, like yours; here's why:
My first thought was "OMG. How could he do this to me? Our whole marriage has been a lie because he's had someone else the whole time! Maybe I was a back-up plan he got stuck with. How can he cheat on me this much? I'm worth more than that. I'm gonna divorce him! Besides, it looks like he really wants to be w someone else."
And, then...I started to remember all of the wonderful things about him, about our relationship, all the stuff I didn't want to let go of. I remembered being committed to stick out the bad. And then I figured this. I just have to understand why he did what he did. If it was an exit strategy, fine, I won't stand in the way of him wanting to be with someone else. And, I said as much to him. I said, if you don't want to be in this marriage, which is what it looks like, then let's end it and maybe we can just be friends (I meant it, too). He insisted that I was wrong, the other people didn't mean anything to him, I was misunderstanding the purpose and extent of his behavior, he only wanted to be with me, etc. So, I thought, okay, he screwed up and he's not going to do it anymore -- MC and some work will be enough to fix it in time. But then, things got complicated.
We had a family intervention because he was being abusive and we were living with my family (between places, relocating from one city to another, about to travel) and they had seen him treating me like crap and were worried about my safety. I defended him. My family yelled at him. The ultimate point was -- you're not treating her well, and not working, but cheating instead, so you need to either stop the cheating and abuse and get to MC or you two need to split up. Sounds logical, right? But...EH has an anger problem. He thought "No one has a right to tell me what to do! How dare they accuse me of anything!?" etc and worried that my parents would tell his family, he started trash-talking me so they all thought I was an imbecile. I was a crying mess all the time because everything had fallen apart. So he was trying to protect a false image of himself to them while crucifying me, claiming that I painted him as a monster to my family by exaggerating little things and they yelled at him. He claims he intended us to settle in his hometown (UK) instead and was making a way for that. That was a red flag for me. Then, the abusiveness escalated and he really tried to convince me that I'd exaggerated and screwed this up for us! Serious gas-lighting and I got worried.
Then, when I said, okay let's plan on MC because you agreed, he kept making excuses and said he wouldn't go. It was bad. Then I discovered all the other stuff he did that I didn't know about and it broke me to pieces that he had betrayed my family's privacy and hospitality and done some really bad stuff and also had been going out meeting people online from CL (either to fight or for sex). He is ill and he just got more and more unstable. I called his brother who he trusts to try and help us sort things out because things were out of control. I had to explain all the very bad stuff EH had been doing (saying lechy stuff about my sisters, stealing racy pics of one of them from her hubbys phone "for a joke", convincing my teenage cousin to hook up with a CL skank as a way to get better at being with girls, snooping in family's emails, and stuff + more). There was another intervention which included his brother. EH felt outed and judged unfairly and got angry and violent. I couldn't go with him when he went home, though I was supposed to be going with him; we were going for like 2 months.
While he was there, I wasn't allowed to talk to him (complicated; serious counseling, breakdown) for a couple of weeks. His family started gossiping and ostracized him. He continued to get mad....and now he blames me for the situation he is in and doesn't want to talk to me except to yell at me for telling me I've ruined his life.
So, every time I say "Here is what happened; explain to me what I'm missing or your POV", he unleashes threats of violence and rage because he wants to beat up or kill my family for turning me against him, which never happened! They just wanted him to stop treating me (and them; he did some shady stuff to them) badly. This is why we're not talking about what happened or what comes next.
Everytime I say "we need to discuss the future" he dismisses it or ignores it or rages about it and I don't know if he's mentally ill or having a tantrum or seriously has had a psychotic break or if he's manipulating me or all of the above.
I love him, but this is not a rug-sweepable problem.

As a long standing UK fan of the Seahawks since the mid 80s, I have been through a lot of high and lows but don't think I can ever remember a game like Sundays - I had to take my brother to our local hospital on Sunday evening (he managed to get a nail stuck in his foot
) and when I checked the score at 1/2 time, things were looking very black! Got back to his home and it was 27-21 and then we scored a TD and I thought we had done it. Really, really, really tough way to lose in the last few seconds.
I have just about got over it now and am so glad we played so well and never gave up - really augers well for the future. We need a few more players but we are almost there, I am sure. And as for Russell - what can you say, he is such a classy guy and a heck of a QB.

Huang Xiaoming still wearing his wedding ring?
8 Feb – Although it's been two years since they got divorced, netizens recently speculated that Huang Xiaoming may be reuniting with ex-wife, Angelababy.
The cause of this latest piece of rumour? Photos of him with his grandmother that he posted on Weibo.
On 24 January, the Chinese actor posted several photos of him celebrating Lunar New Year with his family, saying that he went back to his grandmother's house for this year's celebration as usual.
In one of the photos, Huang could be seen leaning on his grandmother's shoulder, stretching out his fingers to tentatively touch her arm. However, fans couldn't help but notice that Huang has a ring on his finger that looks like his wedding ring, speculating that the actor still hasn't removed his ring despite the divorce.
The couple ended their marriage in January 2021, six years after they tied the knot, but never once said anything bad about each other. They also continue to share custody of their son.
It is noted that the wedding rings were designed by Huang himself with the help of his designer friend. The one he wore was named Tolerant Heart, while Angelababy's was called Loved Wife.
(Photo Source: Huang Xiaoming Weibo, Angelababy IG)

As soon as Prince Harry welcomed his first son into the world, he was quick to compliment his wife. "It's been the most amazing experience I can ever possibly imagine," he said of witnessing his son being born. "How any woman does what they do is beyond comprehension." He added: "Absolutely incredible. I'm so incredibly proud of my wife." Aw, how sweet!

"I had said "I love you" for the first time, and actually meant it. Scared the hell out of me, but after we both said the words it was like every single cliché ever invented about love was suddenly true. The sky was brighter, the world was perfect, my heart was singing and I actually understood the real beauty of love. I'd read it, watched it, dreamed about it, but I had never in a million years thought it was so much more than that. You truly have to experience it to know truly what love is like." – Temptress-Kitten
Interesting. Perhaps one day I would "truly" grasp what she meant by that.
There's one love that surpasses all else: the Love of Christ.

Firefighters on Monday extinguished a blaze that had erupted on the eighth floor of Karachi’s under-construction Bahria Icon Tower.
At least three fire engines had reached the site of the blaze, the source of which is still unknown, to put out the fire.
Reportedly, the fire brigade department had earlier claimed that the fire had been contained, but eyewitnesses said that it had yet to be extinguished, with one Twitter user saying that the blaze had reignited.
The fire department had said that firefighters had difficulty reaching the inside of the building since smoke had accumulated within the glass-encased eighth storey. Cooling of the building is was underway by the time this report was filed.

It honestly felt like eternity before she came back to the room, she finally walked in and didn’t have any answers for us. We were the first appointment of the day, and the doctors were only on site in the afternoon, so the waiting game began. We were told to wait for a call from our obstetrician and sent on our way with absolutely no idea what was going on. We walked to our car and both looked at each other and started crying, what was happening? I called my mum straight away and I remember trying to explain what was happening, it was so hard to explain because we didn’t know anything at all, we knew he was happy and wiggling around in there, but we also knew his growth was not where it should be and mum just being the kind hearted person she is tried to find the best in the situation reassuring me that everything was going to be fine.
Trent and I both went off to work for the day, the longest day I think I had ever had at work, I think I picked up my phone around 50 times to see if someone was calling me. We waited all day and around 6pm my obstetrician finally called me, she started talking and you could hear it in her voice that things were great, she said at the start of the call, this might be hard to hear but I just want to be honest with you, I sat on my lounge, with my phone on loud speaker so Trent could hear too and we just held hands and listened.
Honestly that phone call is a blur to me these days, I remembering hearing things like termination, not viable, growth restriction, genetic issues, infection, there were so many things running through my head I just had no idea what to even think. I just cried and cried and then cried some more. My Obstetrician just kept apologising to me like this was somehow her fault, obviously it wasn't but what an awful thing to have to tell a couple. We ended the phone call with something that she wanted me to have a think about, the choice was mine but she highly recommended that I go off and have an Amniocentesis performed.
After I got off the phone I somehow managed to eventually gather my thoughts and process what she had said on the phone. We knew one thing for sure and that was that our baby wasn't growing as he should be, the reason why was what left us with a big question mark, there were three potential reasons for the delay, they were:
1. An infection
2. A genetic issue that hadn't shown up in my NIPT blood test at 10 weeks
3. An issue with my placenta, which was causing IUGR (Intrauterine Growth Restriction)
That night was awful, we had been booked in the next day for a face-to-face appointment with the Obstetrician so I just had to wait the one night for what I thought would be some answers. I didn't sleep a wink that night, tossing and turning and thinking of the worst possible outcomes that had been discussed with me on the phone. I was in shock, I searched the internet all night for some kind of answer, for some kind of hope, I just wanted to read even one persons positive story, after all I was only 20 weeks pregnant, deep down inside I knew that things weren't great but really this was just the beginning of what would be an emotional rollercoaster the next 7 months of my life.

DEAR ABBY: My husband, "Mack," and I have seven children. I was a stay-at-home mom while they were growing up. Mack worked in the oil fields. An accident in the fields put him in a wheelchair and now I work while he stays home.
Mack was told he would never again feel anything from the waist down, but he has been fortunate to have regained the use of everything except his left leg.
My problem is, while I am at work, Mack gets drunk and trashes the house. I have tried talking to him about it, but he gets defensive. He says I don't tell him what needs to be done so he doesn't do it. I feel he should look around and do what he knows needs to be done. How do I get him to cooperate? -- STUCK IN TEXAS
DEAR STUCK: Before your husband can do an effective job around the house, he will have to sober up. Please encourage him to get help for his drinking. The cause might be depression, frustration or anger that he is no longer the primary wage earner and is stuck at home doing what he perceives to be "woman's work." Counseling can help. And an AA meeting is as near as the phone book.
Once Mack has dried out enough to be lucid during your working hours, I recommend you give him a list of the things that need to be done around the house. It's a lot more helpful than giving him an argument later.

Daniel Johnson has been deservedly recognised for his hard work during a difficult but memorable season with the Lillywhites.
He has been presented with the prestigious Player of the Year award as voted for by the fans. In addition, Daniel has also been named the ‘Players Player of the Year’, an award which means so much to those who receive it as it is voted for by their fellow team mates and represents Daniel’s contribution to the team both on and off the pitch.
During the 19/20 season Daniel’s contribution on the field has been outstanding. He has played in 32 games, scored 12 goals and directly assisted a further 7.
DJ has had an excellent season – he’s had goals, assists, man of the match, Sky Bet Championship Player of the Month earlier in the season and his two awards from the club signify his consistency and reliability to produce for the Lillywhites is now widely recognised. He is now proven top level performer in the EFL and We expect Daniel to build on his undoubted qualities over the next few seasons as he reaches his peak. We look forward to what is next to come.

We are deeply sorry for your loss - the staff at Kent-Forest Lawn Funeral Home and Cemeteries
Christopher Kirkpatrick Brown, 37, of Lynn Haven, Florida passed away peacefully at his home on Sunday, July 17, 2022 with his family by his side. Chris loved being outside to take walks or sitting outside to get fresh air. He loved to travel to different places. He also had a passion for working out at the gym. Chris would always have a big smile on his face and was always a happy person. He made everyone laugh and smile all the time. Chris was born in Stepney, Jamaica in February 1985 and came to the United States in 2007. He got his citizenship in 2016. Chris is survived by his wife, Sherril Brown of Lynn Haven, Florida; his two children: Lashayla and Kamar Brown; two stepchildren: Ashyah and Henry; his parents, Angrelina and Leopold Brown of Jamaica; two brothers; two sisters; as well as numerous other relatives. He also has been blessed by his mother-in-law and father-in-law, Lana and David Turner of Lynn Haven. We are grateful for the many people who supported Chris and his family during his illness. Chris was a wonderful loving husband, father, son, brother, and friend. He loved to spend time with family and friends. Chris had a wonderful blessed life with family and friends.

Homeless Man Receives Unexpected Reward After Returning a Lost Bag Filled With $40,000
| LAST UPDATE 03/09/2022
After stumbling across a bag containing wads of cash, a homeless man was hailed the ultimate hero. Not only did he return the lost item to its respectful owner, but he was rewarded with the ultimate surprise. Here's his story.
In Massachusetts, the city of Boston has thousands of homeless men and women wandering the streets every single night. Back in 2013, one of these individuals was a 50-something-year-old man named Glen James.
Just like nearly all the rest of these people with no roof over their heads, James would spend his days wandering the streets, asking for money from strangers. At night, he tried to sleep at any shelter that had available spots. It was no secret that his life was not an easy one.
Although many people may automatically assume that vagrants are typically using illegal substances, James was not. He was actually clean, and unlike the other individuals who sadly had no homes, the way he ended up where he was, was unrelated to narcotics.
James grew up near the Boston area, and up until 2005, he had a steady income. He had worked as a file clerk for nearly 13 years at the Boston municipal court system. But unfortunately, James and his boss got into an argument which ultimately led to him losing his job.
The reason why he was unable to find a new career was that James sadly suffered from Meniere's disease. This affected his inner ear and caused symptoms similar to vertigo. Along with his ear illness, James also had a speech disorder, that he described as a stutter.
It was hard for him to be able to talk to others, which made it hard to keep a job. These ailments, unfortunately, caused James to have to get support for others. The only problem was that he never wanted to be a burden to his family. So, he spent 8 years on the cold streets of Boston, fending for himself.
His Positive Perspective
Despite his disabilities, James never let his illnesses shift his outlook on life. Instead, he actually took those disadvantages and turned them into advantages. For example, he didn't view his speech impediment as a drawback because to him listening was more crucial than talking.
Because he had struggled to speak, he was always required to be a great listener. Shifting his perspective into a positive majority helped James get through life since he didn't let the bad things bring him down. The resilient man always had a beneficial viewpoint, which eventually helped him make a favorable decision.
His Daily Routine
James's days were usually spent outside of a shopping center near the city of Boston because he sadly had no place to call home. He sat against the wall of the building and attempted to get help from strangers by asking those who passed by him if they were willing to spare some loose change.
He usually got by doing laundry or paying for transportation by panhandling. "It's just nice to have some money in one's pocket so that as a homeless man I don't feel absolutely broke all the time," he confessed. And to eat, James was given food stamps from the government, or he went to nearby shelters.
The Mysterious Bag
Because Glen usually searched for left behind items like clothes or bottles he could recycle for money, he was always looking down at the ground. One day, as the homeless man was going about his typical routine, he spotted something he hadn't seen before.
To further investigate what the item was, James got up from where he was sitting to get a closer look. Eventually, he realized it was an abandoned bag. He got excited, thinking maybe there could be something inside the black bag that would be beneficial for him to have, so he opened it. But what he found inside surprised James.
Searching for Winter Essentials
James had hoped that by searching in this lost bag, he would get lucky and find many crucial things that he needed. Usually, he was able to acquire left behind sweatshirts that had fallen off of someone's waist or old coats left behind by forgetful individuals.
As a vagrant in Boston, it was necessary for James to have these pieces. More specifically, for nights when the temperatures were extremely low. The homeless man often needed to keep warm on those cold winter nights with things he found around the city.
A Closer Look Inside
At first glance, James had decided he would keep the black duffel. It could come in handy for him, as it was big enough to store nearly all of his belongings. Now all he needed to do was finally open it to reveal the mystery contents that were inside.
The drifter had hoped to find items he could keep, but what was really inside surprised James more than he could have imagined. Little did James know that what he would discover hiding inside the abandoned duffel bag would completely change his life forever.
The Large Amount of Cash
When James unzipped the bag, he was in disbelief at what he was seeing. The duffle bag contained a ton of money, it was stuffed with cash! There were numerous stacks of green bills everywhere. Altogether there were $2,400 dollars - all made up from one-hundred-dollar bills.
This discovery had the potential to change James' life. That amount of dough could have helped him find a way off the streets and hopefully get his life in order, especially since it was all cash. But James had a different idea in mind, one that still ended up changing his life.
More Lucky Discoveries
The abundance of cash wasn't the only thing James uncovered from the lost bag. The duffel also contained multiple traveler's checks, enough to reach up to $40,000. It was like winning the lottery for James! It seemed like his luck was at an all-time high that day.
At the time, in 2013, James would have been able to cash those checks himself. If this had happened today, he wouldn't have had as much fortune. Today, there have been stricter security measures put in place. After making his prosperous discovery, James had to decide what to do next.
Getting Police Involved
Instead of keeping his discovery a secret and taking the money, James tried to find a police officer after a few hours of locating the bag. He noticed a police car patrolling the area near the Dorchester South Bay mall, which was where he often spent his days.
Once he got the local officer's attention, he explained to them what had happened. He told law enforcement how he had seen a bag without an owner, so he decided to open it. James continued revealing to them how much money had been inside the duffel, along with the personal identification documents.
Doing The Noble Thing
Unfortunately, that was all the information that James had to offer the police. He had no other way of helping them track the real owner of the bag. All he was able to give them was his own name and the address of a local shelter that he often stayed at.
The officers were in complete disbelief at what they were hearing. Was a homeless man really turning in a bag he found with loads of money inside? Why didn't he just keep it since no one would know he was the one who took it? Although his noble actions surprised the police, James didn't think twice about his choice.
Finding the Real Owner
The law enforcement officers were now in possession of the bag and its contents - but how would they find the rightful owner? Lucky enough, earlier that day, the Boston police department had received word from a shopping mall employee that a man had accidentally left a bag of cash behind.
The person who contacted the police, Jason Bourne, was unsure where the bag with the money could be, so he turned to the authorities. They soon discovered that the owner who forgot his duffel was a foreign exchange student who was attending university nearby.
He Caught People's Attention
Because of James' noble deed, he was able to help the real owner of the bag get his stuff back. It was a true act of moral decency from the homeless man. The money he found could have been a massive opportunity - but instead, he chose to do the right thing. He didn't know how much his decision would, later on, help him out.
After the foreign exchange student was reconnected with his belongings, the story started to trend around town - and eventually through the media. The narrative that a vagrant would return more than $40,000 had people stunned. James's good deed didn't go unnoticed.
One person who took an interest in James and his kindness was Edward Davis, the Boston Police Commissioner. He felt like he needed to do something special for the man who had done an extraordinary thing. Davis didn't want this incredible story to dwindle.
So he decided to hold a special ceremony dedicated to James, where he could be honored with a plaque. The special event received loads of media attention, and many officers from the Boston Police Department were there at the Boston Police headquarters to give James a round of applause for his generosity.
Of course, James had shown up to the ceremony in person to receive his plaque. But that was not all. He also wanted to show his appreciation, so the homeless man wrote a statement that he planned on reading out loud to all those who had attended. Despite his speech hindrance, he spoke in front of the audience.
In the heartfelt speech, James had explained that the thought of keeping even one penny from the bag hadn't even crossed his mind. Proving that he was the right man to receive the honorary plaque, James continued to thank all the citizens of Boston who had ever given him spare change throughout the years.
Glen's letter touched the hearts of many, and with all the media outlets in the room filming the ceremony, it was in no time at all that his story had started to gain mass attention. Soon, it became viral. No one could foresee what was about to happen next to James and his life.
The story had reached a special man in Virginia. He thought that while it was nice that the Boston police had appreciated James' deed, he felt like he needed to do more. Ethan Whittington knew there weren't many people out there who would do what the homeless man had done. So he decided to do something to thank him.
The Online Campaign
It was difficult for Whittington to think that the sweet man with a good heart was left to return back to the freezing streets of Boston. How could that be fair? That's when the marketing executive thought of a plan on how he could give James a life-changing reward.
The stranger who had never even met James before set up an online fundraiser to get others to help raise money for the vagrant. Hopefully, if they reached their goal of $50,000, James could maybe get a roof over his head. The campaign not only shared the story, but it was also receiving lots of donations each day.
A Public Figure
In no time at all, James' inspiring story was trending all over social media platforms and on many news channels across the country. And so was the GoFundMe fundraising campaign. Each day, they were getting closer and closer to the goal that Whittington had set up for the good samaritan.
In a matter of two days after creating the money-raising page, more than three thousand individuals had given money to the good cause. But the strangers weren't just helping provide the vagrant with the potential of a better life - they were also thanking and appreciating him for what he had done.
Reaching Their Goals
After 48 hours, the donations had completely surpassed the original goal of $50,000 dollars. When Whittington checked the camping page, he was astounded at what he was looking at. The kindness had inspired so many people to contribute to the fundraiser that he had raised nearly $73,000 dollars for James.
The GoFundMe page was shared thousands of times, and it was filled with many kind-hearted messages from hundreds of people. Some even wrote to James specifically explaining how this story had made them become emotional and even made them believe in humanity again.
Impacting The World
James was taken aback by how much attention he was getting. He had no idea how returning a bag of money would completely change his life. After yet another two days had passed, the money kept coming in. At that point, the donations had reached $100,000!
And that was only four days after the fundraiser started. By the end of it, Whittington had raised $165,000. Both James and he were in disbelief at how many people it had reached and impacted. Many parents were even saying that they were using James and what he had done as a life lesson to teach their kids about kindness.
Whittington was so happy that he was able to contribute and help out James. It looked like the statement was true: what goes around comes around. 100% of all the money that was donated was about to make its way to James's pocket. Whittington made sure that those following the journey were continuously updated.
But while there were thousands and thousands of people sending in money and writing their thoughts, there was still one important person who was unaware that all of this was happening. James had no clue his story and his fundraising campaign were trending - meaning he didn't know what he was about to receive!
Meeting The Hero
Because James lived in Boston and Whittington was a resident of the state of Virginia, the two had never officially met. That was until the philanthropist was ready to take all the money from the GoFundMe page and finally go give it to its rightful owner.
Whittington made his way over to Boston, where he ultimately was able to see James face to face for the first time. He had explained to him what was going on and how his acts of kindness had inspired both him and thousands of others. James learned that he was about to come into a large sum of money.
Getting His Affairs In Order
Unfortunately there was one problem with the donations. Because James had spent nearly 8 years living on the streets, he had no permanent home address. And he also was not an owner of a bank account. This caused a few logistical issues for Whittington, as well as James.
They needed to figure out a way to take all the $165,000 dollars out of the GoFundMe page and somehow give it to James. But, without a checking account, it was next to impossible to just hand the vagrant that amount of cash. Luckily for James, Whittington was ready to do anything he could to help out the good samaritan.
Life Off The Streets
After spending so much time and energy trying to raise cash for James, Whittington wasn't going to give up so easily. He was determined to make sure that the homeless man was going to receive all the donations and that it was going to get him off the streets.
Sure enough, Whittington helped him set up all the necessary factors he needed to live a "normal" life - to also be able to finally get his money. He created James a bank account, secured health care, psychiatric care, found him subsidized housing, and helped him get disability checks.
Whittington knew that James was a good person, and he felt calm knowing that such a large sum of money was going to be handed over to someone who had no history of substance abuse. It was clear that James was just a victim of misfortune throughout his life.
But thanks to his kind heart, that was all about to change. The fundraiser wasn't the only thing that landed a hand to James. Many groups around the Boston area, more specifically New England, we're willing to give James their services for free - including the New England Dental Group. But James wasn't quite ready to say yes.
A New Life
After being awarded a large sum of money for his good deed and finally getting all of his affairs in order, James wrote a letter to all of his supporters who were following his journey. He explained how he was thinking about keeping all 12 of his remaining teeth as his trademark.
He also added that while he was doing okay, his eyeglasses were on the edge of their life. They were being held together by a small paper clip. After all James had been through, many were hoping that the kind-hearted man was now able to repair or buy new glasses.
A Special Honor
James continued his letter and discussed the events that led him to where he was now. After finding the bag with money, the vagrant didn't even have to ponder whether he would keep it or not. He knew what he needed to do, which was something that even financially stable individuals might not have done.
“Anyone who wouldn’t have turned in the money would have had to be sick in one way or another. I may look sick,” he revealed, “but I am a genius!” Perhaps indeed he was, because he eventually ended up with way more money and benefits than were in that duffle bag.
A Valuable Lesson
Although James' story is incredibly touching and charming, there is more to it than just that. His actions have inspired and encouraged many people around the nation to take part in greater acts of kindness. He has shown others that we should always treat strangers with respect.
It's a moral lesson that James has taught us. But it goes beyond generosity on a day-to-day level. James has opened the eyes of many people to the world of marginalized individuals. The way that our society has treated these communities shows us that perhaps we could do better as a united civilization.
James himself has spoken up on this issue. He has explained that putting a roof above one's head will not solve the homelessness problem in America. "There really isn't much difference between homeless and non-homeless people as we would like to think," he explained.
"But you would only find that out if you couldn't make rent and truly have nowhere to go but the streets," James said. No one can know what it is truly like to be in the position that Glen was in unless they themselves have been there. We're expecting nothing but great things from Mr. James moving forward...

Defining a new voice of modern optimism for a Vermont brewery located in the heart of Middlebury.
In 2008 Otter Creek was looking up. They had taken on a new head brewmaster. They were trying new things. They were hand-crafting new styles, and people were starting to notice… like winning gold at the Great American Beer Festival for their recently added [Vermont] Lager. And, while their beers were being carefully crafted, their presentation was still anything but.
They needed a new voice that would reinforce the renewed excitement happening within the company, and show their customers (and their competitors) that this was a brewery with a new outlook.

[[ This is a three part series exploring themes of impregnation and cuckolding. ]]
Lauren heard the front door open and she looked up from where she was washing the dishes. That was Trevor home from work. She sighed, not looking forward to the tension that had been hanging between them for the past week . . . ever since he'd received his report from the doctor.
They had been trying for a child, desperately, for two years. Everything was prepared, ready, waiting . . . but their dreams had been crushed last Monday when Trevor discovered he was sterile. They thought about adopting, about expensive medical procedures, but really they were out of options. Until Trevor suggested something crazy. And what was even crazier was Lauren had agreed to it. Even now she couldn't believe what her husband had been doing all week – asking his friends to help knock her up.
She'd said no at first – worried about having a child that bore the genes of only one of them – but Trevor insisted that he would raise it as his own. That he just wanted her to be happy. And how how she did want a baby.
But it didn't matter. Trevor had been asking around all week and no one would take him up on it. Even his best friend, John, had said no. He was getting married in June and he didn't think his fiancée would approve of him siring a child on another woman. And today was the deadline, at least for this month. Her fertile period began today – Friday – and ended Monday. They could maybe try again next month, but Lauren wasn't sure she could stand much more of this. No, today was the deadline. They would adopt a child and love it dearly, but she had missed her window to have a child of her own.
A tears prickled at the edge of her blue eyes but she blinked them away, listening for her husband's footsteps in the hallway. But what she heard made her bolt upright and whirl around. There were definitely two sets of feet making their way toward her.
“Trevor?” she called out hesitantly. She was relieved when she saw him round the corner – at least there weren't two strangers in her house – but she didn't recognize the other man.
“Hey honey,” Trevor said, stepping forward and kissing her cheek softly. “How was your day?”
“Fine,” she said shortly, eyes raking over the stranger. “Who is this?”
“This, uh, this is my boss,” Trevor said, looking a little nervous. “Lauren, this is Marcus. Marcus, this is my wife, Lauren.”
The stranger – Marcus – stepped forward and held out his hand. Lauren grasped it, surprised at its rough strength, but instead of shaking it, Marcus bent down into a bow and touched his lips to her fingers. Lauren giggled nervously and pulled her hand away, stepping backward.
“I am so sorry to hear of your misfortune,” Marcus said – his voice deep and rich, and his words dispelling any confusion as to why he was here. Lauren gulped, looking him over. He was a big man, definitely breaking six feet, and Lauren remembered now Trevor's stories of how long the man spent in the gym. It certainly showed, but an even tan and those rough hands spoke of hours outside as well. His hair was a dark chocolate hue and his eyes were a deep green. His smile was disarming, and she found herself relaxing under his gaze.
“Thank you,” Lauren said, glancing at Trevor, “Trevor didn't mention he was bringing a guest – can I get you a drink?”
Marcus nodded, smiling indulgently, “Oh my apologies, he didn't have much warning himself,” he paused here to laugh, the sound echoing around the kitchen.”I heard your husband discussing his woes with John and I … hoped I could be of service.” He smiled again and Lauren couldn't get the image of a predator out of her head – but she turned and bent to the fridge, grabbing three beers.
They moved to the dining room then, sitting at the table. “I'm sorry,” Lauren said, “I'm just not sure this is going to work ... we were planning on someone we know ...” Marcus waved his hand.
“I understand,” he said, “but I'm not unfamiliar with this task. You two are not alone in your problems,” he chuckled at the look of shock on Lauren's face. He dug through the bag he had brought with him and retrieved a folder with medical reports. “As you can see, my own seed is quite potent. I donate regularly to sperm banks, but I have sired five children in this way, with unfortunate couples like yourselves.
Lauren looked over the papers hesitantly, unable to believe they were discussing this at all, let alone with facts and figures like a business transaction. “What do you get out of it?” she asked suddenly, admittedly suspicious.
Marcus smiled again – that predatory look. “I enjoy helping people, Lauren. And if I get to have some fun in the process … well, it's a win-win.”
Lauren looked to her husband. Trevor was sitting across the table from her, trying to look pleasant, but she could tell this was humiliating for him. Bringing his boss – already his superior – into his home to lay with his wife, to plant his seed. He would be raising his boss' child. Could he handle that?
She turned to the last page in the folder and she couldn't help a smile from tugging at her lips. There were five pictures there, of beautiful, healthy babies in the arms of beaming mothers and fathers. Everyone looked so happy … she wanted that so badly, she needed it. She felt her innards twitch at the thought as she imagined her belly swelling, and then of the quiet cries of a baby. Her baby.
Beside her, Marcus grinned. He knew he had her convinced – he'd learned after the first that the pictures were key. He glanced across the table at his employee, reveling in his discomfort, watching him nervously sip his drink. This would be the first of Marcus' employees to raise one of his children but he hoped it wouldn't be the last. He looked forward to being able to ask after the child's health, to constantly remind Trevor how weak he had been, how he had needed a stronger man's seed to bring the gift of life. Marcus smiled in anticipation of it, wondering how long it would take Trevor to quit his job, unable to suffer the humiliation.
He tore himself from his thoughts, knowing he would revel in them later. For now, the task at hand was far more important. He stood from the table, satisfied with the way Lauren's eyes followed him.
“Trevor said your fertile period begins today, Lauren?” he asked. She nodded, soft auburn curls bouncing. “Then we have four days, we'd better get started, hm?” His eyes trailed over her form appreciatively, looking at the toned legs peeking out from the black skirt, silk blouse draped over an ample chest – he would guess a D cup – and her soft red lips. He was disappointed that, given the nature of his task, he wouldn't be getting to watch her lick his seed off her lips … maybe when all was said and done.
Lauren looked confused. “Four days? No, we just thought the once … if it happens, it happens,” She said, gesturing to Trevor.
Marcus shook his head. “No, Lauren. We will only do this if you are serious about it. Your fertile period lasts four days, so to maximize your chances of becoming pregnant, well … we should use those four days.” He smiled comfortingly. “I'm sorry Lauren – don't you want this? Trevor lead me to believe ...” Lauren cut him off, as he knew she would.
“No. I do. I absolutely do,” she said determination in her tone. She thought about his words. What did he mean use all four days? Was he going to come over every night? Was he going to stay the whole weekend? What was she agreeing to? “Okay,” she said, voice wavering with uncertainty, “four days.”
Trevor looked like he was going to say something, but he thought better of it, taking another long drink of his beer – wondering exactly how he'd been coerced into this. One moment, he was telling his best friend that he'd given up hope, the next he was escorting Marcus into his home. He watched the big man now, the way his eyes ran over his wife, how she returned the gaze. He just kept telling himself it was for the best.
“Well, shall we?” Marcus asked – that honey voice sliding over Lauren's ears. “Shall we what?” she responded automatically, shocked. She didn't feel ready for this, but she became suddenly conscious that her panties were damp already. But how could that have happened? They were just talking …
Marcus put away the folder and took Lauren's hand, pulling her gently to her feet. He swore he could almost hear her hummingbird heartbeat. He smiled and pushed her back gently against the table, enjoying her open, innocent expression. Finally, Lauren caught on and sat back on the edge of the table. Marcus spread her legs gently with his hands and knelt down in front of her to inspect his new vessel.
“Not on my table, mate,” Trevor said, suddenly finding his voice as he figured out what was happening. Marcus chuckled and looked over at him from between Lauren's legs. “The height of this table is ideal, though – it's the perfect leverage for insemination. Are you serious about his or not?”
Trevor bit his tongue, feeling angry but unable to express it. He knew it was irrational – this guy was doing them a favor, he didn't need to get so upset over it. “Yeah,” he said finally, “yeah I am, uh, carry on.”
Marcus smiled and reached for Laren's panties, pulling them down over her feet. He spread her legs and pushed her skirt up to her hips, letting out an appreciative coo. “Nicely trimmed,” he commented with a smile as she leaned back to lay on the table, “and wet already. We can get started right away.”
He stood swiftly and undid his belt, enjoying his position standing over her. He had barely met this woman she was opening her legs willingly to him, allowing him to plant his seed in her belly. He smiled that predatory grin, feeling Trevor's eyes on him as he slid his pants and boxers off in a smooth motion, his already-erect cock springing free. He watched Lauren's eyes and was gratified to see them widen as she caught sight of the thick, 10-inch rod. He wondered how big her husband was. Given her reaction, he certainly had him beat.
Marcus moved forward, placing the head of his cock against her warm wetness. He looked at Trevor and was pleased to see the man looking profoundly uncomfortable. “Will you be joining us?” Marcus asked him with a grin as Lauren let out an involuntary whimper, shivering against the cock at her entrance.
Trevor tried to smile and shake his head. “No, I'm just going to see if there's a game on ...” he said and disappeared into the living room. The television turned on a moment later and Marcus grinned. They would see if Trevor could keep his concentration on a football game while his wife squealed in the background.
Marcus turned his gaze back down to Lauren, pleased to see that her cheeks were flushed. “Would you undo your blouse for me?” he cooed, wanting to know how far he had her under his control. He pulled his own shirt off as well, tossing it onto the floor.
Lauren looked uncertain. “It's not really necessary, is it?” she asked – already embarrassed by how wet she was, by the moan she was holding back. Marcus shook his head in agreement.
“No, I just thought you might be more comfortable,” he said, green eyes glinting, “It's about to get very warm in here.”
Lauren thought for a moment while Marcus loomed over her, and she found that she did indeed want to take off her blouse – but perhaps not just for the temperature. She undid the buttons with shaking hands and then shrugged out of it – feeling his quivering cock pushed against her entrance the whole time.
When that was done, Marcus placed his hands on the insides of her thighs, holding her steady as he thrust gently forward, holding Lauren's blue gaze. Her eyes widened at first, but as the thick head of his shaft pushed past her lips, she relaxed, making a small appreciative noise. He took it slow, reveling in the feel of her warmth wrapping around him. She was tight and he wondered if Trevor was even smaller than his original estimates – or if he simply didn't take care of his wife often. No matter, for the next four days she belonged to Marcus and he would see that she got the kind of attention she deserved.
His cock twitched at this exquisite thought, and he pushed further in to Lauren, listening to her breath catch. He backed out a little, and then thrust in again – repeating this, going further each time, listening to the cooing beneath him.
Finally, Marcus felt the head of his cock butt up against her cervix and Lauren squirmed under him. He chuckled and held his cock there, pushing against her for a moment before backing out again and beginning to thrust in earnest.
“Is that alright?” he asked her softly, leaning over her, listening to her mewling breaths.
“Mhmm ...” she responded, obviously trying to be quiet
“What's that?” he asked again, making the next thrust a little more forceful. He got the desired result – Lauren arched her back and squealed a little, nodding.
“Yes, yes that's good,” she said, her voice husky. This was followed by a moan as Marcus increased his pace, subtly rewarding her for her obedience. “So good ...” she repeated, and his smile broadened.
He moved his hands to her waist to hold her firmly in place as he thrust in and out of her slick hole, letting out a small groan of his own at the pleasure of her tightness gripping him. His thrusts became harder and the small yelps from Lauren every time he hit her cervix rang like music in the air, mixing with the slaps of skin every time they met, the squelch of fluids, his own grunts. It was like a symphony to Marcus, and he was gratified to note the television being turned up a few more notches. Clearly, Trevor wasn't enjoying the sound of his wife being bred in the next room.
Lauren felt lost in a sea of ecstasy. It was true that her husband couldn't compare to Marcus in size – but it was more than that. Lauren knew she was ovulating, and had see this man's sperm count. She was optimistic about conceiving in a way that she hadn't been in months. Her vision was filled with images of a swelling belly, of leaking breasts … Marcus' cock was almost painful, drilling into her, but it was worth it for the gift of a child. She happily ground her hips into the man – still a stranger to her, really – and moaned out, feeling an orgasm building far more quickly than she was used to.
Marcus began to feel his climax building and made no attempt to stifle it. He wanted to show the woman a good time, but the end goal was to fill her womb as many times as possible with his seed. He had all weekend to prove that he was the best lay she'd ever have.
His grunts grew in volume and he was pleased to hear Lauren's do the same as they ground together, pounding frantically. He pounded faster and faster, until finally the building wave of his climax broke with a massive groan. He slammed his thick, spasming cock up against Lauren's cervix and held it there. She instinctively wrapped her legs around him and pulled him close, moaning with instense pleasure as she felt rope after rope of warm cum spurting into her womb. So taken was she with the sensation of Marcus' seed pouring into her that her own orgasm peaked at that moment. She bucked her hips and ground against him, calling out as the waves of ecstasy washed over her.
When their orgasms had subsided, they still held their position for a full minute, panting, Lauren whimpering every now and then with pleasure as another aftershock laced through her veins. Finally, Marcus removed his cock from her, gently though she groaned at the sensation. He smiled, looking down at her sweaty, half-clothed form, now brimming with his cum. He lifted her hips as he left her, being careful not to let a drop of the precious liquid leak out of her.
“Bend your legs, honey,” he told her, “hold your knees.” She obeyed numbly, barely able to form coherent thoughts after the torrent of pleasure she had just endured. “Hold that position for a few minutes, alright? We want to make sure it all stays in there.” She nodded and gave him a small smile.
He picked his pants up off the floor and stepped into them, but he left his shirt where it was and grabbed his half-consumed beer from the table.
“Thank you,” Lauren whispered to him unexpectedly, and he patted her head, leaving her there curled up on her kitchen table while he went to go watch the rest of the football game with Trevor.

I just wanted to let you know that I have had invisible fencing for my German Shepard since she was a puppy. It was the best investment for her I ever made. There is a co. called Invisible Fencing, whom I went through. It can be a little costly, but then again I fenced in my whole yard. You can fence in small areas, but I didn't. I am not sure where you are located, but they provide a great service, including training for the dog. Good luck!!!

Next to lobbing touchdown passes and scrambling for first downs, one of Chris Wallace's favorite pastimes is doing impersonations. Lately he has been getting a ton of requests for Forrest Gump. "Life is like a box of chaw-co-lates," Wallace will say in his best Gump drawl, eliciting laughter from his Toledo teammates. "You never know what you're gonna get."
Wallace's season has been pure Gump. After seeing spot duty the past two years, he became the Rockets' starter this fall and has led them to a 6-0 record—including last Saturday's 41-14 victory over MidAmerican Conference rival Northern Illinois—and a No. 24 ranking. In a 36-22 upset of Purdue on Sept. 6, Wallace threw for 254 yards and two touchdowns. For the season he has completed 124 of 237 passes for 1,521 yards and 12 TDs. "I've got confidence, and we've got some play-makers," the 6'2", 205-pound Wallace says. "I expected us to do this well."
Wallace has more in common with Gump than just collegiate gridiron success. He was born with severely deformed clubfeet, which left him in danger of never walking normally. "He was a beautiful baby, but his feet were almost green because hardly any blood had reached them [before he was born]," says his mother, Reda. "They were turned in, almost backwards. It was awful looking."
The day after he was born, in 1975, doctors at Community Hospital in Springfield, Ohio, broke bones in his feet and put them in casts. At six months Chris was fitted with Gump-like leg braces and orthopedic shoes. "My mom says I was always crying when I had those shoes on," he says.
Chris's wails were so difficult to bear that Reda would defy the doctors' orders by removing Chris's braces and shoes and performing her own type of therapy, massaging and manipulating his feet. "We weren't supposed to take the braces off, but I had a feeling," she says. "I would hold his feet and pray to God that he would be able to walk someday."
One day, when Chris was about nine months old, Reda took off the braces and watched in surprise as her son pulled himself up on a sofa and ran across the floor. "We took him to the doctor, and Chris ran across the office," Reda says. "The doctor said it was a miracle."
At Springfield South High, Chris played baseball and basketball, and in football he earned Ohio Division I co-player of the year honors (with teammate Dee Miller, now at Ohio State) during his senior season. But the story of his feet remained unknown to the public. Rockets coach Gary Pinkel says the first he heard of it was in a Toledo Blade profile of Chris earlier this season. "It hit home," says Pinkel, whose brother and sister are both confined to wheelchairs because of a rare genetic condition. "Chris is such a strong character and leader. You wonder how much that experience helped shape him."
Wallace runs with a noticeable pigeon-toed gait and does the 40 in an ordinary 4.8 seconds. But he has a strong arm and the wisdom to know when to scramble rather than throw the ball. "The only negative is that I go through shoes quickly because I run on the sides of my feet," he says. "Seems like I'm always having to get new ones."
Baby needs a new pair of shoes? For Reda, sweeter words have never been spoken.

Mumbai, Sep 9 (IANS) Neena Gupta says looking after a baby all alone and balancing a busy work schedule as an actress was tough for her at one point of life. So, when she got married, she decided to go easy with her schedule.
“At that time when I got married I had worked like a dog, especially in television, which was tough for me. Looking after a baby alone and work was very tough for me. So, I said, ‘now I’m married, I will live a comfortable life, I’ll go to the parlour, I’ll go for a massage, which I never did for many many years, I will cook — I like cooking — I will look after (daughter) Masaba, I will give her more time’,” Neena recalled the phase in life when she had no work.
“So this was my thing that ‘I want to do that housewife thing’. I was already doing the housewife thing but without the husband. Now I would do the housewife with the husband. So that was my mindset, and I was very happy to start with,” she said.
The actress said she slowly “realised that it was not going to work because people, including my husband and my daughter, started taking me for granted”.
“Something was lacking, some respect was lacking. One day something happened, which I don’t want to talk about, and I said ‘this is what I have become’ and I said now I am going to work,” she said.
So, she started making calls and looking out for work.
“But it never worked out, and I was very frustrated and I wrote a post (where she asked for work). Initially when I decided not to work, it was very nice to begin with but then I realised ‘kaam ke bina kisi ki koi izzat nahi hai duniya mein’ (there’s no respect without work),” she said.
Neena had Masaba after her brief relationship with former West Indies cricketing icon Vivian Richards in the eighties. Later, Neena went on to marry Vivek Mehra.
She said that raising Masaba as a single parent till a point was hard.
“It was very hard. It was harder than I imagined. I feel it was wrong because a child needs both the parents to be around, and they need quality time. They need a lot of time and I feel that if I didn’t have to earn money, Masaba would have been even better,” she said.
The actress added: “People used to think I have shifted to Delhi after my marriage with Vivek because he is from Delhi — that I don’t work anymore, and I was wondering ‘why am I not getting good offers’. So, one day I went to a director’s house, and as I was entering her assistant came and she said, ‘Hi, when did you come to Mumbai?’ I realised that this was the problem. People thought I had shifted to Delhi. I was very frustrated and angry,” she said during a conversation with actress Neha Dhupia in a podcast of “JioSaavn #NoFilterNeha”.

We provide many cool features for confessions exclusively for premium usersGo Premium
Try our premium features for just 1€
I became really close friends with my English and math teachers in high school. I even babysat for them. After graduation, they became really close friends of mine. We would drink and tell stories. After about a year of this, I learned that they are in an open marriage. And I also learned that this woman, kinda not pretty and over twice my age, wanted to fuck me. We were already faced and I went for it. Her husband was in the house. And he would occasionally walk through the room. After about an hour of sex he walked in and said break it up or else he would join. I cheated on my girl for some 38 yo cougar. I have dropped them as friends and refuse to talk to them.

Lucy Hutchinson (1620–1681). Memoirs of Colonel Hutchinson. 1906.
The Life of John Hutchinson: 166162
This parliament being risen, another was called by the king’s writ, wherein the act of oblivion was again confirmed, not without some canvassing and opposition; and here again another act about that money of the Lord Lexington’s was prepared and twice read in the house, through divers abominable untruths which they had forged and possessed the members withal. The colonel himself solicited his own defence, and had all the injustice and foul play imaginable at the committee appointed to examine it, and it was so desperate that all his friends persuaded him to compound it; but he would not, though his enemies offered it, but he said he would either be cleared by a just, or ruined by an unjust sentence, and, pursuing it with his usual alacrity and vigour in all things, he at last removed that prepossession that some of the gentlemen had against him; and clearing himself to some that were most violent, it pleased God to turn the hearts of the house at last to do him justice, and to throw out the bill for evermore, which was a great mercy to him and his family, for it was to have thrown him out of possession of all the estates he had, and to have put them into his enemies’ hands till they had satisfied themselves. But the defending himself was very chargeable to him, and not only so, but this rumour of trouble upon his estate, and the brags of his enemies, and the cloud he lay under, hindered him both from letting and selling, and improving his estate, so that it very much augumented his debt.
Before this time, in December, 1660, Captain Cooper sent one Broughton, a lieutenant, and Andrews, a cornet, with a company of soldiers, who plundered his house at Owthorpe, while he was absent, of all the weapons they found in it, to his very wearing-swords, and his own armour for himself, although at that time there was no prohibition of any person whatsoever to have or wear arms. The colonel was not then at home, and the arms were laid up in a closet within his chamber, which they searched, and all the house over, to see if they could have found plate or anything else; but when they could not, they carried these away, which one of his servants whom he had dismissed with a good reward, betrayed to them. His eldest son went to the Marquis of Newcastle, lord-lieutenant of the country, and complained of the violence of the soldiers, and my lord gave him an order to have the swords and other things back, and some pistols which were the Lord Biron’s, but Mr. Cooper contemned my lord’s order, and would not obey it. The arms were worth near £100.
Also an order came down from the secretary, commanding certain pictures and other things the colonel had bought out of the late king’s collection, which had cost him in ready money between £1000 and £1500, and were of more value; and these, notwithstanding the act of oblivion, were all taken from him.
After these troubles were over from without, the colonel lived with all imaginable retiredness at home, and, because his active spirit could not be idle nor very sordidly employed, took up his time in opening springs, and planting trees, and dressing his plantations; and these were his recreations, wherein he relieved many poor labourers when they wanted work, which was a very comfortable charity to them and their families: with these he would entertain himself, giving them much encouragement in their honest labours, so that they delighted to be employed by him. His business was serious revolving the law of God, wherein he laboured to instruct his children and servants, and enjoyed himself with much patience and comfort, not envying the glories and honours of the court, nor the prosperity of the wicked; but only grieved that the straitness of his own revenues would not supply his large heart to the poor people in affliction. Some little troubles he had in his own house. His son, unknown to him, married a very worthy person, with the manner of which he was so discontented that he once resolved to have banished them for ever, but his good nature was soon overcome, and he received them into his bosom, and for the short time he enjoyed her, had no less love for her than for any of his own children. And indeed she was worthy of it, applying herself with such humble dutifulness and kindness to repair her fault, and to please him in all things he delighted in, that he was ravished with the joy of her, who loved the place not as his own wife did, only because she was placed in it, but with a natural affection, which encouraged him in all the pains he took to adorn it, when he had one to leave it to that would esteem it. She was besides naturalized into his house and interests, as if she had had no other regard in the world; she was pious and cheerful, liberal and thrifty, complaisant and kind to all the family, and the freest from humour of any woman; loving home, without melancholy or sullenness, observant of her father and mother, not with regret, but with delight, and the most submissive, affectionate wife that ever was. But she, and all the joy of her sweet, saintlike conversation, ended in a lamented grave, about a year after her marriage, when she died in childbirth, and left the sweetest babe behind her that ever was beheld, whose face promised all its mother’s graces, but death within eight weeks after her birth, ravished this sweet blossom, whose fall opened the fresh wounds of sorrow for her mother, thus doubly lost. While the mother lived, which was ten days after her delivery, the colonel and his wife employed all imaginable pains and cares for her recovery, whereof they had often hopes, but in the end all in vain; she died, and left the whole house in very sensible affliction, which continued upon the colonel and his wife till new strokes awakened them out of the silent sorrow of this funeral. Her husband having no joy in the world after she was gone, some months shut himself up with his grief in his chamber, out of which he was hardly persuaded to go, and when he did, every place about home so much renewed his remembrance of her that he could not think of but with deep affliction, that being invited by his friends abroad to divert his melancholy, he grew a little out of love with home, which was a great damping to the pleasures his father took in the place: but he, how eager soever he were in the love of any worldly thing, had that moderation of spirit that he submitted his will always to God, and endeavoured to give Him thanks in all things.
This winter, about October and the following months, the papists began to be very high, and a sort of strangers were come into Nottingham, who were observed to distinguish themselves by scarlet ribbons in their hats; and one night, in a drunken humour, a papist fired a hay barn in a wood-yard in Nottingham, which, if not discovered and prevented by many providences, might have endangered much of the town: but it did £200 worth of mischief; but the matter was shuffled up and compounded, although the same night several other towns were attempted to be fired. A great papist, at Eastwold, was known to assemble two hundred men in arms in the night, and some of the Lord Carrington’s tenants, that went to Arundel House to speak with their landlord, observed very strange suspicious signs of some great business on foot among the papists, who, both in Nottinghamshire and Leicestershire, were so exalted, that the very country people everywhere apprehended some insurrection. Among the rest, there was a light-headed, debauched young knight, that lived in the next town to Owthorpe, who vapoured beyond all bounds, and had twelve pairs of holsters for pistols at one time of the colonel’s saddler, and rid at that time with half a dozen men armed, up and down the country, and sent them, and went himself, to several men who had been soldiers in the army, to offer them brave terms to enlist under him, telling them, they, meaning the papists, should have a day for it. Besides he, with the parson of the parish, and some other men, at an alehouse, began a health to the confusion of all the protestants in England; and one of the colonel’s maids going to Colson, to have a sore eye cured by a woman in the town, heard there that he had vapoured that the papists should shortly have their day, and that he would not leave one alive in the colonel’s house. He sent to the preacher of Cotgrove, to forbid him to preach on gunpowder-treason day, threatening to kill him if he did, insomuch that the town were forced to keep a guard all that day upon the steeple.
The men whom the papists had endeavoured to enlist, acquainted the colonel with it, whereof some being in Leicestershire, the colonel sent his son to Sir George Villiers, one of the deputy-lieutenants of that county, to acquaint him with it; but he slighted the matter, although at that time it would have been proved that Golding brought a whole coach laden with pistols, as many as they could stuff under the seats and in the boots, to the house of one Smith, a papist, dwelling at Quineborough, in Leicestershire. The colonel also sent to the deputy-lieutenants of our county to acquaint them the public danger, and how himself was threatened; and, by reason that his house had been disarmed, desired that he might have leave to procure some necessary arms to defend it; but they sent him word that the insurrection of the papists was but a fanatic jealousy, and if he were afraid, they would send him a guard, but durst not allow him to arm his house. He, disdaining their security that would not trust him with his own, would have taken a house at Nottingham for his wife to lie in, who being then big with child, was near her account; but although she were fearful, yet when she found him resolved to stay in his own house, she would not go; whereupon he made strong shutts to all his low windows with iron bars; and that very night that they were set up, the house was attempted to be broken in the night, and the glass of one of the great casements broken, and the little iron bars of it crashed in sunder. Mrs. Hutchinson being late up, heard the noise, and thought somebody had been forcing the doors, but, as we since heard, it was Golding who made the attempt. The common people, everywhere falling into suspicion of the papists, began to be highly offended at their insolence, and to utter strange words; whether it were this, or what else we know not, but their design proceeded no further; yet there is nothing more certain than that at that time they had a design of rising generally all over England in arms. But the colonel lived so retired that he never understood how it was taken up, and how it fell off, yet, although they would not take the alarm from him, even the gentlemen of the county afterwards believed they were hatching some mischief, and feared it.

[Blind Gossip] This high-ranking American politician is getting really anxious about his relationship with a famous female politician!
He feels like he made her career and got her into her last job and her current job and now she is f*cking him over.
What’s going on?
They are from the same state. He is in trouble. And she won’t return his calls.
Because he was caught doing something he shouldn’t have been doing, and she is keeping her distance from him and his scandal.
Why does this make him anxious?
Well, the first reason is that he is fighting to keep his current job.
He is in real danger of being recalled and she probably doesn’t want to be seen as supporting him.
The second reason has to do with his future job.
This sucks because he fully expected her to move up to [Higher Position] and he fully expected her to chose him to replace her in her old job.
So he thought she was going to be loyal to him and help him climb the ladder, but, like many politicians, she is only looking out for herself.
By the way, despite the rumors, the two of them were never romantically involved. Yes, they slept with everyone else, but not with each other.
Because they had a strictly professional relationship, there was real possibility that this twosome could have gone the distance as a couple in the political world.
As of today, that is looking much less likely.
Maybe he could take her out to a nice restaurant for dinner and try to win her over again?
Similar: Bigger Issues Than A Baby
[Optional] What is going to happen to him? To her?

Services for Alice E. White, a resident of Salisbury since 1902, will be held at 11 a.m. tomorrow at the Holloway Funeral Home there.
Mrs. White died of heart failure Saturday at the Salisbury Nursing Home, where she had been living since June. She was 91.
The former Alice Elliott was born in Whitehaven and was a graduate of Wicomico High School and Wilson College. She married Edward R. White Jr., a former mayor of Salisbury, in The couple lived in a house on Park Avenue that was built by Mrs. White's father and is now part of the city's historic district.

Minister vows inquiry
HEALTH Minister Filiz Besim has pledged an “immediate investigation” into a complaint against a doctor lodged by a TRNC expat.
Claire Lamb, who has lived in Tatlısu for nine years, wrote to the ministry about her treatment by Dr Cemal Cevheroğlu when she need emergency surgery in January for “chronic appendicitis”.
She claimed she was persuaded by him to have the operation at a private hospital, allegedly for 1,000TL less than the “6,000TL” she would pay at Gazimağusa State Hospital — but discovered later the government facility’s charge would have been just 2,000TL.
She said she had yet to receive any response to her complaint, delivered to the hospital in February, but Dr Besim told Cyprus Today she had not received it, and called on Mrs Lamb to get in touch.
In her letter to the ministry, Mrs Lamb — a leading figure in the Civil Emergency Services Volunteeers (CESV) with her late husband — said she had been advised by the doctor that she would not have to wait “as long” for surgery if she went private.
It was only when she later developed an “abscess”, and went to her local health centre for it to be dressed, that she was told she would have paid much less at the state hospital.
“As I had worked closely with the staff at Gazimağusa State Hospital I went to speak to . . . the head of finance . . . I explained to him what had happened, and he told me that operation would have cost no more than 2,000TL,” she said, adding that she had been “lied” to and cheated out of 3,000TL, in behaviour she called “morally and ethically wrong”.
She said she had “no problem with paying for treatment” and that the state hospital “has a very fair system for foreigners here”, but “this . . . has made me mistrust the system and also my own judgement”.
She demanded a refund of the 5,000TL operation fee, saying she would pay the state hospital the 2,000TL it should have had, and said action was needed against the doctor who had “us[ed] his position to take advantage of someone who was in severe pain and very vulnerable”.
“As a follow up I have had to pay a further 1,113TL to Near East University Hospital for blood tests and scans as I’m still having complications [from] internal damage when he was cauterising the appendix. As a result I am still in pain which nothing can resolve.”
Dr Cevheroğlu comment. declined to

There were more people in the city every day, and yet the city never failed to accommodate them. You might be walking down a street you had known for years, and all of a sudden you would come upon another building, another whole block. Carson McCaughrean, who drove one of the sleek black taxis that roamed the streets, had to redraw his maps once a week. Twenty, thirty, fifty times a day, he would pick up a fare who had only recently arrived in the city and have to deliver him somewhere he—Carson—had never heard of. They came from Africa, Asia, Europe, and the Americas. They came from churning metropolises and from small islands in the middle of the ocean. That was what the living did: they died. There was an ancient street musician who began playing in the red brick district as soon as he reached the city, making slow, sad breaths with his accordion. There was a jeweller, a young man, who set up shop at the corner of Maple and Christopher Streets and sold diamonds that he mounted on silver pendants. Jessica Auffert had operated her own jewelry shop on the same corner for more than thirty years, but she did not seem to resent the man, and in fact brought him a mug of fresh black coffee every morning, exchanging gossip as she drank with him in his front room. What surprised her was how young he was—how young so many of the dead were these days. Great numbers of them were no more than children, who clattered around on skateboards or went racing past her window on their way to the playground. One, a boy with a strawberry discoloration on his cheek, liked to pretend that the rocking horses he tossed himself around on were real horses, the horses he had brushed and fed on his farm before they were killed in the bombing. Another liked to swoop down the slide over and over again, hammering his feet into the gravel as he thought about his parents and his two older brothers, who were still alive. He had watched them lift free of the same illness that had slowly sucked him under. He did not like to talk about it.
This was during a war, though it was difficult for any of them to remember which one.
Occasionally, one of the dead, someone who had just completed the crossing, would mistake the city for Heaven. It was a misunderstanding that never persisted for long. What kind of Heaven had the blasting sound of garbage trucks in the morning, and chewing gum on the pavement, and the smell of fish rotting by the river? What kind of Hell, for that matter, had bakeries and dogwood trees and perfect blue days that made the hairs on the back of your neck rise on end? No, the city was not Heaven, and it was not Hell, and it certainly was not the world. It stood to reason, then, that it had to be something else. More and more people came to adopt the theory that it was an extension of life itself—a sort of outer room—and that they would remain there only so long as they endured in living memory. When the last person who had actually known them died, they would pass over into whatever came next. It was true that most of the city’s occupants went away after sixty or seventy years. While this did not prove the theory, it certainly served to nourish it. There were stories of men and women who had been in the city much longer, for centuries and more, but there were always such stories, in every time and place, and who knew whether to believe them?
Every neighborhood had its gathering spot, a place where people could come together to trade news of the other world. There was the colonnade in the monument district, and the One and Only Tavern in the warehouse district, and right next to the greenhouse, in the center of the conservatory district, was Andrei Kalatozov’s Russian Tea Room. Kalatozov poured the tea he brewed from a brass-colored samovar into small porcelain cups that he served on polished wooden platters. His wife and daughter had died a few weeks before he did, in an accident involving a land mine they had rooted up out of the family garden. He was watching through the kitchen window when it happened. His wife’s spade struck a jagged hunk of metal so cankered with rust from its century underground that he did not realize what it was until it exploded. Two weeks later, when he put the razor to his throat, it was with the hope that he would be reunited with his family in Heaven. And, sure enough, there they were—his wife and daughter—smiling and taking coats at the door of the tearoom. Kalatozov watched them as he sliced a lemon into wedges and arranged the wedges on a saucer. He was the happiest man in the room—the happiest man in any room. The city may not have been Heaven, but it was Heaven enough for him. Morning to evening, he listened to his customers as they shared the latest news about the war. The Americans and the Middle East had resumed hostilities, as had China and Spain and Australia and the Netherlands. Brazil was developing another mutagenic virus, one that would resist the latest antitoxins. Or maybe it was Italy. Or maybe Indonesia. There were so many rumors that it was hard to know for sure.
Now and then, someone who had died only a day or two before would happen into one of the centers of communication—the tavern or the tearoom, the river market or the colonnade—and the legions of the dead would mass around him, shouldering and jostling him for information. It was always the same: “Where did you live?” “Do you know anything about Central America?” “Is it true what they’re saying about the ice caps?” “I’m trying to find out about my cousin. He lived in Arizona. His name was Lewis Zeigler, spelled l-e-w-i-s. . . .” “What’s happening with the situation along the African coast—do you know, do you know?” “Anything you can tell us, please, anything at all.”

Felicia found Nelle at Metro Court and eagerly gave her additional samples for Nelle's bedroom makeover. Felicia began to talk about various color patterns but thought she really needed Nelle's history to make it all work. Nelle revealed that her family wasn't from Georgia, but she had lived there for a number of years. Felicia noted that Nelle didn't have an accent, and Nelle confided that she'd worked hard to get rid of it. Learning that Nelle was originally from Florida, Felicia commented that Bobbie Spencer was from Florida also. When her phone began to ring, Felicia excused herself from the table. She told Bobbie that Nelle was from Florida, and she hadn't learned anything about the boyfriend.
As Nelle waited for Felicia to return, Michael stopped at the table. He was on his way to a hospital board meeting. Nelle explained that Felicia had offered to redesign her bedroom for her interior design portfolio. Michael was surprised. He hadn't been aware that Felicia was involved with interior decorating. Nelle was hopeful that the situation wouldn't be awkward for Michael, since she understood that Felicia and Michael's grandmother hated each other. Again, Michael was taken by surprise. He explained the women's history and noted that Felicia and Bobbie were "thick as thieves" and best friends.
It was Nelle's turn to be taken aback. She realized that Felicia owed Maxie's life to Bobbie and that Felicia would probably do anything for Bobbie for that reason. Michael left, and Felicia returned from her phone call. She wanted to talk more color and history, but Nelle suggested they talk about her boyfriend instead, since she merely wanted to declutter and organize her bedroom. Nelle announced that her unavailable boyfriend might soon be available and moving in.
Across the room, Lulu met Valentin and offered an apology for what had happened at the Crimson office. Valentin disagreed that Lulu was sorry but felt she was selfish instead. He felt that Lulu only cared about herself and not Charlotte, who had suffered trauma after Lulu's actions. Lulu replied that she had made a mistake but had only wanted to be with Charlotte. Valentin rejected her apology. Lulu called him a hypocrite and wondered how he would explain the fact that he had killed Lulu's brother to Charlotte. Valentin stated that the truth was subjective, and history was written by the victors. He knew that Charlotte would understand.
Sonny and Carly cozied up at Greystone Manor but as they danced around the room, the mood grew somber. Carly recalled Morgan's "Happy Feet," and the couple reminisced about their son. They spoke about feeling as if they were betraying Morgan if they felt any happiness, but they felt happy with each other. Their embrace led upstairs to the bedroom, where they made love.
Later, Sonny revealed that he'd gone after Ava, who had appeared to be their son's killer. He had planned on shooting her, but Jason had shown up to save her and had most likely taken her to the police station. Carly began to get dressed. She wanted to kill Ava herself for causing the death of her son. Sonny blocked Carly from leaving and making an awful mistake, though he felt like an impostor, since he had almost done the same thing.
Sonny advised Carly that they had to know without any doubt that Ava had been the person behind the car bombing. Jason had said that it hadn't been Ava, but Sonny felt that something was going on. Ava had told Sonny that she'd regretted something, and Sonny would have to find out what that was. She was still behind Morgan's death in some way, as far as he was concerned. Carly headed to the bathroom to splash water on her face, and Sonny spotted the fancy bra planted by the back of the bed.
Jordan welcomed Julian to the police station and notified him that all charges against Sonny had been dropped. Julian was shocked. Jordan asked Julian about his daily activities, and he proceeded to outline his day. He made no mention of anywhere he'd been other than Metro Court. Jordan asked if he'd picked up some ginseng or lotus root at the remedy shop because she had a recording of him being there. His own sister had tried to kill him, and he'd known all along, she accused.
Jordan played the recording, but Julian denied that it was his voice. "Is that your face?" Jordan asked as she then showed him the photo that had been taken at the same time. She asked for his cooperation and said she would in turn not file obstruction charges against him. "I'm the victim," Julian declared. Jordan pointed out that the recording proved that Sonny hadn't been responsible for the car bombing. Julian contended that someone had tried to kill him. Jordan replied that it had been Ava, and he'd never named her. Julian demanded that he be arrested or let go.
In the interrogation room, Dante questioned Ava. She had no idea what Dante kept referring to and told him to ask Julian about it. Dante asked about her day, and she responded that she'd gone to work and been accosted by Sonny. Dante accused her of loving Morgan but not helping them, so Ava went into more detail. Her story checked out via Ava's assistant, but there was an hour lapse in her morning. Ava claimed to have gone home to pick up some contracts.
Dante played the recording of Julian and showed Ava the photo of the blonde woman. Ava insisted that it wasn't her. Just then, she saw Julian out in the main lobby and went out to talk to him. Ava announced that the cops had mistaken her. "You did nothing wrong," Julian answered. He left.
Ava was perplexed. Dante suggested an audio lineup, since their witness had heard the voice of Rudge's boss. Ava vowed to go after Sonny once she was cleared of any wrongdoing.
Buzz was given headphones, and a handful of women lined up to speak into the microphone. Jordan asked if he'd recognized the voice, and he asked to listen to one of the women again. It was Ava.
Olivia was on the phone at General Hospital when Anna heard her voice from across the hallway. Olivia's back was to Anna but she gave a start and had a flashback to Anna looking for revenge many years in the past. Anna walked toward Olivia but stopped short. Suddenly, she had a horrific migraine and dropped her pills. Her headache was so bad that her vision was altered.
Olivia walked near and kicked the bottle of pills out of Anna's reach then picked up a sharp instrument in case it was needed. Anna begged for the person standing nearby to help her. Just then, Julian sent Olivia an emergency text message. "I'll be seeing you, Anna," Olivia murmured as she walked off.
Anna was still down on the floor, searching for her pills, when a man walked over and picked them up. He handed her the bottle and got her a glass of water. "I know you, don't I?" Anna asked the man. It was Carl Browning, the man who had trained with her and Valentin in the WSB. Anna thanked him for finding his way to Port Charles to help her so quickly. He told her that it was in her best interest to keep her distance from Valentin.
Browning advised Anna that Valentin's file had been redacted, and Valentin had disappeared years earlier. Anna couldn't believe that Valentin hated her from a rejected kiss. The man informed her that it was much more than that. Valentin had been put on a hit list, and Anna had been the one to put him there. Valentin had cause to hate her, Browning stated. Anna tried to rack her brain. She couldn't remember.
Julian met with Olivia at her place. He advised her that the cops had identified her secret location, and they were "breathing down my neck." They had a recording of their conversation with him talking about his sister, Julian continued. They even had a photo. "You idiot," Olivia yelled. She slapped Julian's face hard. She wondered how her brother could be so stupid. Julian assured her that only the back of her head was in the photo, and the cops thought that it was Ava. "Of course they do," Olivia said. She told her brother to be prepared.
At Olivia Jerome's secret hideout, Olivia shared an old Chinese proverb about being prepared, but Julian wanted to know what she'd done. Olivia flashed a smug smile as she shared that she'd had Rudge reach out to a man named Buzz. Olivia's tone lacked sincerity as she talked about Buzz's unfortunate circumstances that had left him living on the streets, but she assured Julian that Buzz was more than a "random indigent."
Later, Olivia ended a call, asking to be notified when "it" was done. Julian desperately wanted to know what his sister was up to, so she admitted that she'd arranged for Buzz to plant a tracking device in Julian's car, but things had gotten complicated when Buzz had realized that it had been the bomb that had killed Morgan. Olivia explained that Buzz had fled town, but he'd had a change of heart and had returned to help her -- but not Ava. Stunned, Julian reminded Olivia that Ava was their sister, but Olivia didn't care because she wanted Julian to know how serious she was about protecting herself and getting her hands on the hospital.
Julian pointed out that he couldn't get the job done overnight, but Olivia wasn't satisfied. Julian warned her not to pin her hopes on the word of a homeless man, either, because the police would quickly see through Buzz's lies and make their way straight to Olivia's door. Olivia revealed that she had put something in place that would "boost" the case against Ava. Worried, Julian once again reminded Olivia that Ava was their sister, but Olivia recalled how close she and Julian had once been -- until he'd decided to murder her and the man she loved. Olivia insisted that it was Julian's fault that his family was in shambles, but she admitted that she wished that she didn't have to use them to force him to do her bidding.
Julian changed tactics and reminded Olivia that it wasn't too late to have the family and life that she'd always dreamed of; she just had to drop her vendetta. Olivia smiled wistfully as she admitted that she'd always dreamed of being an "eccentric" aunt to her nieces and nephews, but her smile faded as she reminded Julian that his family despised him and would never accept her. Julian blamed Olivia for ruining his relationship with his loved ones, but she insisted that he'd deserved it. Julian wondered if Olivia truly believed that Ava deserved to pay for Olivia's crimes, but Olivia reminded him that their sister had gotten away with crimes in the past. She made it clear that she would not let him ruin her plans.
Julian tried to get Olivia to open up about her master plan, but she remained tightlipped. He wondered what else she could possibly do to ruin his life, but Olivia merely smiled and dismissed him by handing him his coat. Julian wanted an answer, but Olivia smiled and told him to sleep well.
In the interrogation room, Ava objected to Dante's request that she participate in a voice "lineup." Dante pushed until Ava reluctantly complied. "Kill the homeless loser who planted the bomb," Ava repeated into a microphone. She stood up with the intention of leaving, but Dante ordered her to wait because they needed to know if the witness could identify her voice. Ava assured Dante that she was innocent.
In the squad room, Jordan handed Buzz a set of headphones then donned a set of her own. Buzz listened to Ava and immediately tensed. He assured Jordan that it was the voice of the woman who'd ordered him to plant the bomb that had killed Morgan. Jordan acknowledged that he'd asked to hear the voice for a second time, but she wanted to be sure that he was certain. Buzz was adamant that the woman he'd identified had been responsible for the bomb and became upset at the idea that she might discover that he'd turned against her. Jordan promised to keep Buzz safe and had several police officers escort him away.
Moments later, Jordan entered the interrogation room and informed Ava that the witness had identified Ava as the person responsible for planning a hit against Julian that had killed Morgan. Stunned, Ava argued that the witness had been wrong, but Jordan assured Ava that the witness had been fully vetted and was reliable. Ava insisted that the man had lied and demanded to know what was going on. Jordan took delight when she told Ava that teams were scouring Ava's apartment, the herbal shop where Ava and Julian had secretly met, and Ava's art gallery for evidence.
Later, Ava warned Jordan that the search had been a waste of time and taxpayer money because Ava had never tried to kill Julian. Ava accused Jordan of police harassment because they had let Sonny get away with trying to kill Ava earlier that evening. Jordan rolled her eyes and asked if anyone had witnessed the incident. Ava reluctantly admitted that Jason had been present, but Ava realized it was unlikely that he'd turn against Sonny. Jordan suggested they focus on one investigation at a time and decided the case against Ava was more important. Ava reiterated that she was innocent and suggested that perhaps Julian had meant something else when he'd referred to his "sister."
A short time later, Dante returned to announce that evidence had been recovered and sent to the lab for testing. However, Dante found a copy of the lease agreement for the Chinese herbal shop and slapped it down on the table to show Ava that her signature was on the lease. Ava was shocked and more certain than ever that she'd been framed. Ava reminded both Jordan and Dante that there hadn't been any reason for her and Julian to have a clandestine meeting, since they lived together, but Jordan was certain it had been an elaborate ruse to cast doubt in case Ava and Julian were caught.
Later, Ava urged Jordan to track down Julian because Ava was certain that her brother would clear everything up. Ava admitted that Julian had recently been worried about a mystery woman, but Ava knew nothing about her. However, Ava was certain that Ava had been set up by the police because Jordan's ex-brother-in-law Curtis had been at the studio earlier in the day, pretending to be interested in a piece of art. Ava suspected that Jordan had asked Curtis to plant incriminating evidence against Ava. Moments later, Dante entered to reveal that Ava's DNA had been found on a martini glass recovered from the Chinese herbal shop. Stunned, Ava begged Jordan to find Julian.
At Elizabeth's house, Elizabeth tried to snuggle with Franco on the sofa, but she quickly grew restless and picked up the remote to turn off the movie. She explained that she couldn't relax, knowing that her patients needed her. Franco was confident that the board would realize how important Elizabeth and the nurses were to the hospital and change their minds about laying the nurses off. Franco smiled as he reminded her that she had another patient to focus on and playfully grabbed her around the waist to pull her back into his lap. Elizabeth smiled and admitted that he seemed stronger. She kissed him until the doorbell rang.
Franco and Elizabeth were surprised she had a late-night visitor, but she decided to answer the door. Franco objected, but Elizabeth ignored him and opened the door. Griffin greeted Elizabeth and entered as he explained that he'd heard about the conflict between the board and the nurses. Franco coldly greeted Griffin and cut to the chase by asking why the priest was there. Griffin pulled out a bottle of pain medicine and handed it to Franco as Griffin explained that he'd intended to give it to Elizabeth at work until he'd heard about the "sick-out." Griffin knew that Franco had suffered considerable pain during the ordeal with Tom's brother and thanked Franco for saving Elizabeth because she was the best surgical nurse Griffin had ever worked with.
Elizabeth smiled with embarrassment as she thanked Griffin for the praise, but Franco grew increasingly hostile and did his best to remind Griffin that Elizabeth was with Franco. Griffin politely ignored Franco's tone and wished Elizabeth luck because he hoped the nurses prevailed. After Griffin left, Elizabeth made her ire known. "Are we really doing this again?" she asked as Franco returned to the sofa. Elizabeth's phone rang, but she ignored it because she wanted to settle things with Franco and find out why he continued to be insecure even though she'd made it clear that she was with him. Elizabeth admitted that Franco's behavior had been embarrassing.
Franco acknowledged that he'd been jealous, but he explained that it was clear that Griffin was romantically interested in Elizabeth. Elizabeth promised that Griffin was not any competition. Franco admitted that he didn't want to be jealous, but Elizabeth feared that she'd given Franco reason to feel insecure. Franco insisted that he was the happiest he'd ever been and promised that she hadn't done anything wrong. Elizabeth's phone continued to ring despite her efforts to ignore it, so Franco urged her to answer it. Elizabeth refused because she wanted to work things out, but Franco preferred to discuss it later.
After Elizabeth ended the call, she explained that the hospital was in chaos. Franco wasn't thrilled at the idea of her returning to work, but he shifted gears and apologized for the way he'd acted when "Father Griffin" had stopped by. Elizabeth warned Franco that he'd eventually have to tell her why he felt so threatened by other men. Franco agreed then distracted her with a passionate kiss.
At Greystone Manor, Sonny stood in his bedroom and looked at the bra that Nelle had planted in his bed. "Nelle, you bitch," he growled as he heard Carly call out to him. Sonny managed to hide the bra before Carly appeared in the doorway. She admitted that learning about Ava's arrest had been a lot to process, but she conceded that they'd have to wait to find out if Ava had indeed been the mastermind behind the hit, since Jason had doubts about Ava's involvement. Sonny promised Carly that he'd get to the bottom of things for her.
Satisfied, Carly decided to head home to spend time with Michael and Josslyn. Sonny asked her to let him know how things went, prompting Carly to ask if he intended to step out, since his house arrest had been lifted. Sonny admitted that he wanted to get out, but he was evasive about his destination other than to tell her that he intended to start with a visit to Morgan's grave. Carly asked Sonny to wait until she could accompany him the following day because she didn't think it would be a good idea for Sonny to be at Morgan's graveside alone at night. Sonny agreed and kissed his wife goodbye. He waited until he'd heard the door open then close before he pulled out Nelle's bra. "Nelle, Nelle, Nelle," Sonny slowly said.
At Metro Court Restaurant, Nelle read the card she'd enclosed with the flowers she'd bought for herself. "Thinking of you. S." Nelle read as a soft smile spread across her lips. She was certain that it would be enough to intrigue her intended victim. Michael walked up and greeted her. Nelle pasted on a smile as she admitted that his mother wasn't around and pointed out that the restaurant was closed. Michael explained that his meeting had been canceled and asked if it was possible to get something to drink that would help clear his conscience because he'd agreed to support the layoffs.
Nelle reminded Michael that he hadn't had a choice in the matter, but Michael argued that he'd be laying off good people. He questioned if the ends truly justified the means, but he realized that Nelle had likely never grappled with that question. Nelle conceded that she'd made some questionable choices in the past that she'd regretted, but Michael wondered if she'd ever made excuses for her actions. Nelle thought it was human nature to convince oneself that they were doing the right thing -- even knowing it would hurt a lot of people. Michael agreed, but he added that it didn't make things right. Moments later Michael received a text message and revealed that he had to leave.
Michael thanked Nelle for "commiserating," but he doubted that the things that kept her up at night were as bad as she'd feared. Michael was confident that she'd had her reasons for her "misdeeds." After Michael left, Nelle glanced at the flowers.
Later, Nelle was about to leave when Sonny entered. She greeted him with a smile, but it soon became clear that he was not in a pleasant mood. Nelle was startled when he held up her bra, but she quickly recovered and feigned surprise as she nervously asked if Carly had seen it. Sonny shook his head, but he wasn't fooled by Nelle's act and accused her of planting the bra in his bed when she'd retrieved Morgan's tax forms for the foundation. Sonny was furious that Nelle had used his dead son as an excuse to set up Carly. Nelle tried to deny it, but Sonny knew better and accused her of being a problem. "And you know how I solve problems?" Sonny asked in a menacing tone as he gently stroked her face.
Nelle went on the defensive and tearfully asked why Sonny was "attacking" her. She assured him that she'd hated that they'd slept together, but he'd been in the wrong because he'd cheated on his wife. Sonny clarified that it had been a drunken mistake until Nelle had stepped things up by planting the bra in his bed. Sonny knew Nelle wasn't as innocent as she wanted people to believe, but he warned her not to become his enemy. Nelle turned up the tears, but Sonny ignored them as he warned her to stay away from his home and family. Sonny promised that if Nelle showed her face at the house, then she'd have to deal with the consequences -- which wouldn't be as simple as taking a job in Atlanta.
Nelle nodded and tearfully apologized for the misunderstanding. Sonny scoffed and vowed to make certain that it wouldn't happen again. After Sonny left, Nelle wiped away the tears and angrily tossed the bra onto the bar's counter. She pulled out her phone and listened to the incriminating remarks she'd recorded when Sonny had first asked her to keep quiet about their one-night stand. Nelle was determined to keep it together -- so she could tell Carly everything.
At the nurses' station, Hayden was busy on the phone when Finn walked up to let her know that he had a patient who needed a new I.V. Hayden explained that they were understaffed, prompting Finn to jokingly ask if she had fired all of the nurses. Hayden explained that the nurses had gotten wind of the plans and had decided to stage a "sick-out," which was a step down from a strike and had paralyzed the hospital. Hayden informed Finn that he would have to attend to his patients and take care of their needs until she could find a solution. Annoyed, Finn walked away.
Moments later, Finn opened his medicine bottle and realized that he only had one pain pill left. He decided to cut it in half, but half the pill slid off the cart and fell on the floor. Finn desperately searched for the missing half of the pill but failed. He stood up, popped the other half of the pain pill into his mouth then used his wet fingers to gather the powder residue from the cart and licked his fingers clean. Finn resumed his search until Griffin walked up and asked what Finn had been doing. Finn claimed that he'd spilled the last of his pain medications then grumbled about his back pain and having a long night ahead of him because of the situation with the nurses. Griffin suggested that Finn contact his regular doctor, but Finn insisted that things were far too hectic.
Finn and Griffin rounded a corner as Carly exited the elevator. She immediately stopped the doctors to ask if they'd seen her son because she'd heard that there had been trouble with the hospital. Finn and Griffin filled her in about the layoffs and pointed to the nurses' station where Michael and Hayden were talking. After Carly walked away, Finn became agitated because he had no idea where the nurses kept the new I.V. lines. Griffin retrieved a package from a nearby cart and handed it to Finn, but Finn was too agitated and didn't seem to have the patience to properly unravel it. Griffin decided to help Finn out and asked to be taken to the patient.
At the nurses' station, Michael was curious why Hayden had sent him an urgent text message. She told him that all of the nurses had been calling in sick -- and would continue to -- until the board promised not to lay anyone off. Michael advised her to take a deep breath and promised to call his grandmother, Bobbie, but Hayden told him that Bobbie had called in sick too. Hayden decided to see if she could get the orderlies to work double shifts and walked away.
Moments later, Carly greeted Michael. They talked about the situation at the hospital until Carly shifted gears and revealed that she'd stopped by to tell him about Ava's arrest. Michael was stunned, but Carly admitted that Jason had doubts about Ava's guilt. Michael's mood improved when Carly added that all the charges against Sonny had been dropped because a witness had stepped forward to clear Sonny. They talked about Sonny's confrontation with Ava and about Dante covering for Sonny before Carly admitted that she was glad that Sonny finally had his life back.
Michael was certain that Morgan would be happy that Sonny and Carly had decided to work on their marriage. Carly agreed. She realized that there would be both good and bad days, but she hoped that one day she and Sonny would be able to look up at the stars and believe that Morgan was a part of the universe.
In the locker room, Hayden was surprised when Amy appeared and offered to help. Hayden was suspicious, but Amy claimed that the patients were more important than the fight between the nurses and the hospital's board. Hayden smiled knowingly because she knew Amy had only shown up to get her old job back. Amy acknowledged that Hayden was right, so Hayden warned Amy that she would be hated by the nurses more than Hayden would. Amy didn't care as long as she had a contract that would guarantee her a job despite the layoffs. Hayden agreed to Amy's terms.
At Wyndemere, Valentin was on the phone with Nina as he finished getting ready for the evening. Nina was eager for her husband to join her in the hotel suite and advised him to make it quick before the smoke from the candles triggered the smoke alarms. Valentin chuckled because he was certain that whatever Nina was wearing -- or not wearing -- would more likely set off the smoke alarms. Nina smiled as she sprinkled rose petals on the floor, but Valentin noticed Charlotte enter the room and quickly ended the call. Charlotte informed her father that she had no intention of spending the night at her nanny‘s. Concerned, Valentin asked why his daughter was upset, but she gave him a heart-shaped card and wished him a happy Valentine's Day.
Valentin smiled at the handmade card and admitted that he recognized himself, Nina, and Charlotte, but he was curious who the blonde woman was in the upper corner of the card. He assumed it was Lulu, but Charlotte scowled and told him that it was "my mommy." Charlotte asked if he thought Claudette watched over them from heaven. Valentin assured Charlotte that he was certain of it then shifted gears to ask her to help fix his tie because he wanted to look good for Nina.
After Charlotte straightened the tie, Valentin showed her the Valentine's Day gift he'd bought for Nina. Charlotte was impressed with the sparkling diamond and asked if it was an engagement ring. Valentin confirmed that it was and added that he and Nina were an unconventional couple, so they tended to do things differently than others. Valentin surprised Charlotte with another gift that he‘d hoped to give Charlotte when Nina was with them. Charlotte's eyes rounded with delight as she opened a small box and Valentin lifted out a gold bracelet with emeralds because they were Charlotte's birthstone. Moments later, Valentin and Charlotte left, but Valentin was unaware that he'd forgotten Nina's ring on the table.
At Metro Court Restaurant, Andre joined Anna at the bar and expressed curiosity about why she'd asked to see him. Anna explained that she'd just had a "troubling meeting" with World Security Agent, Karl Browning. Anna rubbed her forehead and winced, prompting Andre to ask if she was okay. Anna admitted that she had a migraine, but she assured him that she'd taken medicine and decided to give the tablets a boost with a sip of alcohol. Anna promised not to keep Andre too long because she imagined that he had plans with Jordan, but he‘d managed to hide his reaction at the mention of Jordan's name and asked about Anna's meeting with Karl.
Anna revealed that Karl had told her that she'd sanctioned Valentin's death, but she quickly added that she had no memory of the event. She was horrified that she'd put a friend on the WSB hit list and couldn't imagine why she'd done it. Andre and Anna discussed putting her back under hypnosis to dig for answers, but Anna had concerns because the discovery about ordering Valentin's death had felt different than when she'd first met Valentin. Anna explained that she'd felt a familiarity when she‘d met Valentin, but nothing about Karl's revelation had triggered any sense of remembrance. Andre suggested that perhaps her psyche had repressed the memory to protect her. He conceded that hypnosis was a gamble, but he thought Anna should consider it.
Moments later, Anna overheard Nina ask a waiter for a new brand of Champagne because she preferred something more "sophisticated" than the hotel's package had offered. Nina gave the waiter her room number and added that her husband would be arriving soon so she needed the Champagne quickly. After Nina walked away, Anna turned her attention back to Andre and assured him that she would think about trying hypnosis again. Anna picked up the bill and paid it as she asked about Andre and Jordan's plans for the evening.
Anna was surprised when Andre revealed that he and Jordan had ended things. Anna suddenly recalled his mood the other day and asked if that was why he'd seemed troubled. Andre nodded, but he added that he hadn't been ready to discuss what had happened. Anna offered to lend him an ear, but he declined because he wanted to find a place that wasn't dedicated to couples. Anna promised that she would be available anytime he wanted to talk and left.
Later, Nina began to worry because Valentin was late. She was curious what had kept him.
At Wyndemere, Anna broke into the castle and quickly disarmed the alarm system. She rubbed her forehead in an attempt to ease the pain in her head then donned a set of gloves. Anna made it to the living room doors, but ran out of energy as she slid to the ground in exhaustion and retrieved a flashlight and a listening device. She debated where to plant device and went to work, but Valentin caught her in the act when he returned to fetch Nina's Valentine's Day gift. Valentin was outraged that Anna had been trying to plant a listening device in his home.
According to Valentin, he'd been an open book with Anna and claimed that he had nothing to hide, but Anna was desperate for answers and asked why he‘d left the WSB. Valentin resented Anna's attitude because it implied that he'd been so insignificant to her that she'd forgotten. Anna insisted that she didn't know and implored him to tell her why she had wanted him dead. "Because I trusted you," Valentin shouted in frustration. Stunned, Anna rubbed her head and asked him to tell her everything, but Valentin refused to cooperate. Seconds later, Anna suddenly collapsed at his feet.
"Anna," Valentin called out with concern. Anna remained unresponsive, so Valentin picked her up and carried her out the door to get her help.
At Metro Court Restaurant, Lulu offered to cancel their plans with Maxie and Nathan because she knew that Dante had a lot on his mind. Dante assured her that it wasn't necessary. He and Lulu talked about Ava's arrest until their conversation turned to Charlotte because Lulu was certain Valentin had been laying in wait for Lulu to make another mistake. Dante joked about what a happy couple they were which made Lulu smile.
Nearby, Maxie and Nathan arrived to meet Dante and Lulu, but Maxie made it clear that she didn't want Lulu to know that Nina had fired Maxie. Nathan warned Maxie that Lulu would eventually learn the truth, but Maxie didn't want the news to ruin their evening. Moments later, Nathan and Maxie approached their friends and exchanged greetings. After the couples were seated, they each made toasts and talked about some of their antics in the name of love. Moments later, Dante received a call and excused himself. Lulu seized the opportunity to apologize to Maxie for visiting Charlotte at Crimson. Lulu knew that she should have gotten back into the elevator instead of going to her daughter, but Maxie assured Lulu that Lulu had nothing to be sorry for because Lulu had a right to spend time with Charlotte.
Maxie promised that Lulu had her full support and promised to be there to welcome Charlotte home when Lulu prevailed in court. Moments later, Dante returned to ask to speak privately to Lulu. After they stepped away, Nathan and Maxie agreed that Dante and Lulu's conversation looked serious, but Nathan's attention strayed when he saw his sister. Maxie was shocked when Nathan called Nina over, but he explained that they were family and needed to find a way to work things out. Nathan was confident that he could persuade Nina to hire Maxie, so Maxie wouldn't have to continue to lie to Lulu.
Nina walked up and greeted both Nathan and Maxie by wishing them each a happy Valentine's Day. Nathan decided to cut to the chase and talked to Nina about hiring Maxie back. Nina accused Maxie of allowing Lulu to traumatize Charlotte for a second time and insisted that Maxie's actions had been thoughtless and negligent, which was why Nina had fired Maxie. Nina smiled pleasantly and walked away.
Meanwhile, Dante told Lulu that Diane had called to let him know that the custody hearing had been scheduled and to warn them that Valentin had hired a shark that had never lost in family court. Lulu was disappointed by the development, but she agreed that it was time to call it a night. Dante and Lulu returned to the table to let Nathan and Maxie know about Diane's phone call and explained that they needed to prepare for the case. After Dante and Lulu left, Maxie warned Nathan that it wouldn't be easy for her to find a job because Crimson was the pinnacle of fashion in Port Charles. Maxie added that she might have to expand her search. Nathan surprised Maxie by readily assuring her that he'd move to New York City if it was necessary.
Later, Dante and Lulu snuggled in bed as each admitted that they were worried about the custody hearing.
On another floor of the hotel, Curtis knocked on a door. A beautiful mystery woman opened the door and warmly greeted him with a hug. The two old friends exchanged pleasantries as the woman invited Curtis into her room. The visit took a turn when the woman reached for a small case on a side table. Curtis's eyes rounded with surprise when he noticed the cocaine, but he quickly explained that he'd been clean for six years. The woman was impressed and asked if he was seeing anyone. Curtis changed the subject by offering to take the woman out for dinner and drinks.
At Kiki's apartment, Kiki put on some lipstick and answered a knock at the door. It was Dillon. He had red roses, a heart-shaped box of chocolates, and a teddy bear, but Kiki was put off by the gifts and tried to downplay the importance of Valentine's Day. Offended, Dillon started to leave, but she called out to him and quickly apologized for overreacting. Dillon smiled and admitted that he'd been teasing Kiki and that he hadn't been serious about the gifts since they were attending an "anti-Valentine's Day" party. Kiki relaxed and playfully scolded him. The couple kissed, but Kiki's phone kept ringing, so Dillon pulled away and urged her to check her voicemail since it was clear that the caller would not give up. Kiki checked her voicemail, but her smile faded when she learned that her mother had been arrested for Morgan's murder.
In the interrogation room, Ava was relieved when Scott entered the room, but she was furious that it had taken him forever to get there. She complained about not being given a toothbrush, a shower, or a decent cup of coffee and demanded to know where he'd been. Scott admitted that he'd been on a "diving expedition," but changed the subject to find out what Ava had been arrested for. Ava admitted that she had no idea because the evidence against her had either been planted or fabricated. Ava denied that she'd had anything to do with Morgan's death.
"But Ava, we both know that you did," Scott whispered. Ava insisted that she'd been set up and clarified that she'd been charged with planting the bomb in Julian's car rather than switching Morgan's medications. Scott was shocked that anyone would believe that Ava had tried to kill Julian and vowed to take a close look at the lease to the Chinese herbal shop. Ava was relieved, but she implored Scott to track down Julian because Julian had agreed to help her and could easily clear everything up.
Scott stepped into the squad room to call Julian, but Julian was uncooperative and told Scott that it was up to Scott to clear Ava's name. Scott was furious when Julian abruptly ended the call, so Scott returned to the interrogation room to update Ava. Ava couldn't believe that her brother had left her out to hang. Scott complained that Julian had been rude by hanging up since Scott had gotten Julian acquitted. Astounded, Ava reminded Scott that it had been her -- not Scott -- who had forced Paul to help them. Scott shrugged it off and fetched Ava a cup of water, which he quickly spiked with alcohol from a flask that he'd had hidden in his jacket.
Ava was determined to find out what was going on because she thought it was ironic that she might go down for a crime she hadn't committed. She wondered if she should confess to replacing Morgan's psychiatric drugs with placebos to get a reduced sentence, but Scott strenuously objected.
In the squad room, Jordan greeted Kiki and Dillon and offered to take Kiki to talk to Ava in the interrogation room. Kiki entered the room as Scott walked out. Ava immediately declared her innocence and promised that she hadn't been responsible for the bomb that had killed Morgan. Ava insisted that she would never hurt her brother and couldn't have known that Morgan would steal Julian's car. Kiki admitted that during the ride to the police station she'd recalled all the times that Ava had tried to breakup Morgan and Kiki. Ava reiterated that she'd had no part in planting the bomb and begged Kiki to believe her. Kiki warned Ava that if she found out that Ava had had any part in Morgan's death then it would be the end of their relationship.
"That is how you will lose me -- forever," Kiki clarified. After Kiki left, Scott returned to assure Ava that he would get her out of the mess she was in, but she wondered if she might be safer in jail since Sonny would be on the hunt for her.
Across town, Andre saw Jordan enter the Floating Rib and take a seat at the bar. He acknowledged her, but quickly collected his things and assured her that he'd leave. Jordan assured him that it wasn't necessary, but Andre disagreed. He admitted that he'd been thinking about their Valentine's Day date the previous year and how different things had been. Andre knew that Jordan had always believed that he hadn't had a good time that evening, but he assured her that he‘d had fun. "Much better than tonight," he added under his breath as Curtis entered the bar.
Andre was hurt that Jordan had let him talk abut their relationship knowing that Curtis would be arriving, but Jordan promised that things were not as they seemed. Andre paid his tab and stormed out. Curtis sat at a table and watched as Jordan remained at the bar. Eventually, she decided to approach him, but Curtis' friend had arrived. Frustrated, Jordan left.
At Kiki's apartment, Dillon offered to leave if Kiki wanted to be alone, but she doubted that it would help. Kiki admitted that she felt as if they would never get past Morgan's death no matter how hard they tried. She added that it would destroy her if Ava had been responsible for Morgan's death. Kiki decided that perhaps she should be alone because her life was a mess, but Dillon reminded her that his father was a serial killer so he could deal with the twists and turns. He promised to stay with her every step of the way.
At Kiki's apartment, Dillon and Kiki kissed passionately. Things quickly heated up, but Dillon pulled back to ask if Kiki was sure. She smiled and kissed him. Dillon and Kiki made their way to her bedroom, undressed each other, and made love.
Afterwards, they snuggled in bed and expressed how happy they were. Their conversation shifted as they talked about their rocky journey to be together and the disastrous "dates" along the way. Kiki regretted that she'd pushed Dillon away, but he assured her that it was in the past. Kiki thanked him for all the ways he'd helped her, especially when she'd refused to leave her apartment after the shooting. She realized that it had been a lot to deal with, especially her mother's recent arrest for killing Morgan. Kiki knew it wasn't what Dillon had signed up for, but he assured her that he wouldn't leave her and offered her words of encouragement.
Kiki confided that it was hard for her to trust Ava because Ava had lied too many times, and Ava had been desperate to break Kiki and Morgan up. Dillon and Kiki discussed the lengths that Ava had gone to in order to drive a wedge between Kiki and Morgan as well as Dillon's role in some of Ava's scheme. Dillon promised Kiki that his feelings for her were genuine. Kiki smiled because she believed and trusted Dillon. Kiki confessed that she felt "incredible" with him and prayed that the feeling stayed with her forever. Dillon grinned as she began to make love to him. He admitted that he hoped it would last forever.
In Metro court Restaurant, Maxie was surprised when she returned to the table and noticed that Nathan had left.
In Nina's hotel suite, Nina was disappointed when she opened the door and saw Nathan instead of Valentin. Nathan insisted that he needed to talk to his sister about something important. Nathan admitted that he knew why Nina had fired Maxie and he acknowledged that both Maxie and Nina believed that they'd been in the right, but Nina disagreed -- she was certain that she'd been in the right. Nina reminded Nathan that he hadn't been there and had accused Maxie of traumatizing Charlotte. Nathan defended his wife by insisting that she'd been trying to help a mother and daughter, but Nina argued that Charlotte wanted nothing to do with Lulu.
Nathan changed tactics by reminding his sister that she needed Maxie at Crimson, but Nina was confident that she could run the magazine without Maxie's help. Nathan begged Nina to consider it, but Nina explained that she was firmly on Valentin's side. Nina explained that her husband had accepted her for who she was and admitted that she would have married Valentin even if Charlotte hadn't been part of the package. Nina insisted that Valentin had just wanted to protect his daughter, but Nathan begged Nina to listen carefully. He admitted that he wanted Nina in his life, but he needed his wife. Nina's eyes filled with tears as she asked if he intended to turn his back on his sister if Nina didn't give Maxie the job back, but Nathan shook his head and implored Nina to find a way to compromise.
Moments later, Maxie banged on the door, demanding to talk to Nina. Nina went to the door, but Maxie's eyes quickly found Nathan. Maxie was furious and accused Nina of summoning Nathan in an effort to sway him to Nina's side. Nathan assured Maxie that Nina hadn't summoned him; he'd decided to pay Nina a visit because he'd hoped to try to make things work. Maxie assured him that she was willing to work with Nina as long as Nina acknowledged that Maxie had been right -- and Nina had been wrong. Nina snorted and pointed out to Nathan that Maxie's reaction was exactly what she'd been concerned about.
Maxie made it clear that she'd been talking to her husband, not Nina, then added that Nathan didn't need to fight Maxie's battles. Nina advised Maxie to reconsider because Nina had been tempted to hire Maxie back. However, Nina realized that it wouldn't work because of Maxie's attitude. Maxie was fine with that and wished Nina well with running Crimson. "Right into the ground," Maxie muttered under her breath.
Nathan decided to have a private word with his wife and dragged Maxie to the hallway. Nina fired off a text message to Valentin, asking were he was, and was stunned when he replied that he was at the hospital. Alarmed, Nina told Nathan and Maxie that they would have to continue their talk at another time and instructed them to leave. After they left, Nina grabbed her purse and coat then left the suite.
In Metro Court Restaurant, Nathan guided Maxie to a table as they talked about Nina's odd behavior when she'd rushed them out. Maxie suspected that Valentin was in some kind of trouble because no one else could have sparked that kind of reaction from Nina. Nathan was impressed with Maxie's insight into Nina, so Maxie clarified that she genuinely cared about Nina and wanted Nina to be happy, but she worried that Valentin would hurt her sister-in-law.
At the hospital, Hayden found Finn passed out in a dark examination room. She gently shook him until he jumped up. Worried, she admitted that she'd noticed a change in him and asked what was going on. Finn carefully explained that he didn't want to hurt her again, but Hayden implored him to trust her and open up to her. She threatened to go to Tracy with her concerns if he refused let Hayden in, but their talk was cut short when Finn's phone chimed. Finn glanced at it and told her that Griffin needed him. Finn told Hayden that she looked pretty and quickly slipped out the door.
Elsewhere, Laura approached Tracy to hand her a bedpan and order her to get to work, but Tracy balked and decided to get a drink. Annoyed, Laura followed Tracy to the Floating Rib and voiced her objection when she saw Tracy enjoying a martini when people were on the verge of losing their jobs. Tracy claimed that she was trying to save jobs and the hospital, but Laura accused Tracy of doing the opposite. Laura and Tracy had a heated argument about laying off the nurses. Tracy smiled when she saw Hayden enter because Hayden would back Tracy up, but Hayden asked for a private word with Tracy.
Tracy was curious if Hayden had fired everyone, but Hayden explained that she'd been stymied from laying off the nurses because they'd all called in sick. Tracy was livid, but Laura was delighted. Tracy advised Hayden to call the nurses, send them an email, or tweet them if necessary to let them know that they were out of jobs. Tracy wanted the task done, but Laura begged both Hayden and Tracy to reconsider and do the right thing. Tracy insisted that it was the only option because half the board wanted the hospital closed.
Hayden realized that she wouldn't get anywhere with Tracy, and she left. Laura remained determined to get through to Tracy, but Tracy's mind was made up. Tracy reminded Laura that Tracy's family had been a mainstay of the hospital, but Laura told Tracy to shut up because the Quartermaines hadn't been the only family to have had an impact on the hospital. Laura reminded Tracy that both of Laura's parents, Drs. Rick and Lesley Webber, had worked at the hospital for years, as had Laura's sister, nurse Amy Vining. Laura pointed out that she still had family members who worked at the hospital, which meant that three generations of Laura's family had been on the staff.
Laura acknowledged that she'd lived in a lot of different places and had visited quite a few hospitals, but none could compare to General Hospital because of the sense of community and family that the nurses had created. Laura insisted that the nurses genuinely cared about the patients, so it might save money to cut the staff, but cutting the nursing staff would be the hospital's downfall because the nurses were the heart and soul of the hospital. Tracy argued that the ends justified the means, but she conceded that there were exceptions. Tracy agreed the hospital was the sum of its history and admitted that she'd lost sight of what was important because she'd let the facts and figures cloud her thinking. However, Tracy conceded that Laura had made her see things differently. Laura smiled with joy when Tracy agreed there might be another solution.
At Elizabeth's house, Franco slipped his arms around Elizabeth's waist as she put some food on a tray. She smiled and turned in his arms to ask how he was feeling. He admitted that he was eager to get out of the house and take her to Kelly's, but Elizabeth objected because she wanted him to rest. Franco followed her to the living room and kissed her passionately as Felix and Epiphany let themselves in. Felix and Epiphany cleared their throats, prompting Franco and Elizabeth to pull apart. Elizabeth smiled and awkwardly explained that Franco had been recuperating in her home. Felix and Epiphany were curious if Franco knew why they'd stopped by, so Franco tried to answer their questions as best as he could.
Eventually, Elizabeth asked Felix and Epiphany to give Franco a break because she'd told him about the "sick-out." Franco assured Felix and Epiphany that he supported the nurses and offered to help. Franco agreed to help everyone brainstorm, but Felix and Epiphany quickly declined. Elizabeth reminded Franco that he was still recovering from his injuries, but Felix and Epiphany admitted that they had another use for Franco. Franco was curious what Felix and Epiphany wanted him to do, so Felix asked Franco to go to the hospital to find out if the "sick-out" had worked and if the board was willing to negotiate. Epiphany reminded everyone that the board might still lay them off, and she asked Franco to find out.
Franco promised to get some answers and kissed Elizabeth goodbye. Felix and Epiphany waited until Franco had left before they grilled Elizabeth about Elizabeth's relationship with Franco. Elizabeth tried to evade the questions by reminding her friends of why they were there, but Felix and Epiphany wanted answers. Elizabeth smiled and quietly admitted that she was in love with Franco. Felix was happy for Elizabeth and hugged her as he likened her relationship with Franco to Beauty and the Beast. Epiphany seemed less enthusiastic. Felix called Epiphany out on her reaction, but Epiphany insisted that she just wanted to make certain that Elizabeth was happy.
Elizabeth promised that she was happy, so Epiphany congratulated Elizabeth, but Epiphany made it clear that she would keep a close eye on Franco. Elizabeth turned the discussion back to their battle with the hospital's board. Felix was confident that they could devise a countermove once Franco reported back.
At the hospital, Valentin arrived carrying Anna in his arms. He called out for help as he gently put her on a gurney. Anna groaned, so Valentin assured her that she would be okay. Griffin appeared and angrily demanded to know what Valentin had done to Anna.
Griffin took Anna to a hospital room as Valentin followed and filled Griffin in about how he'd caught Anna breaking into Wyndemere right before she had collapsed. Alarmed, Griffin asked if Anna had been complaining of a migraine. Valentin nodded, so Griffin tested Anna's reflexes. After Griffin determined that Anna's hand was weak, he left. Valentin's expression remained anxious as he watched Anna fall asleep.
Valentin put his phone away when he saw Griffin and Finn approach. Valentin was desperate for an update on Anna and asked if she was in any pain. Finn assured Valentin that she was resting, but Valentin wanted to know what was wrong with Anna and if she'd had a stroke. Griffin reminded Valentin that Valentin was not Anna's next of kin. After Griffin stormed off, Valentin explained to Finn that Anna's welfare was his business because she'd broken into Wyndemere right before she had collapsed. Finn admitted that it was too soon to tell, but they'd found a blood clot and had put Anna on some medications.
Finn added that there would be further tests and stepped away to talk to Griffin about Anna's treatment. Griffin was surprised when Finn decided to draw blood from Anna, but Finn assured Griffin that it wouldn't be a problem.
In Anna's hospital room, Finn finished filling a vial with blood and withdrew the syringe from Anna's arm as she watched. She appeared weak, so he instructed her to rest. Anna immediately fell asleep as Finn started to write something on the vial of blood, but his hands began to shake, and he dropped the vial. He was relieved that it hadn't shattered and glanced at Anna to make certain that she hadn't seen what he'd done. He knelt down to pick up the vial, but Griffin had entered the room and had beaten him to it. Griffin started to question Finn's odd behavior, but Finn evaded the questions and snatched the vial out of Griffin's hand to get it tested.
Later, Finn approached Griffin at the nurses' station to let Griffin know that Anna's blood tests were underway and should be completed soon. Griffin was grateful, but he wanted to know what had been going on with Finn because he'd noticed that Finn had been sweating and his hands had been shaking earlier. Griffin knew it wasn't Blackwood's syndrome because both Finn and Hayden had been cured. Finn reminded Griffin that Finn had suffered from the disease far longer than Hayden had and walked away, but Griffin followed because he wanted answers. Finn was spared from the interrogation when a nurse walked up and handed Finn the results of Anna's blood tests.
Griffin noticed the concerned expression on Finn's face and asked what was wrong. "It's not good," Finn warned Griffin.
In Anna's hospital room, Valentin closed the door and carefully approached her bedside as she slept. He gently took her hand in his and held it to his cheek as he sat down. "Sano. Sanas. Sanat. Sanamos," Valentin whispered. He reminded her that it was Latin for "to heal." He recalled teaching her the phrase, but he doubted that she remembered it.
At the nurses' station, Franco greeted Hayden. She was surprised that he had shown up for work, since Elizabeth was one of the nurses who'd been affected by the layoff. Franco shrugged and claimed that he knew that Hayden was in a tough position and had a job to do. Hayden appreciated his understanding and explained that part of the budget cuts included Franco's art therapy program. Franco was stunned when Hayden added that he was out of a job, effective immediately.
Meanwhile, Nina stopped an orderly to show him a picture of Valentin and asked if her husband had been admitted. The orderly shook his head, but he added that he'd seen Valentin and directed Nina to Anna's hospital room. Nina quietly opened the door, but froze in the doorway when she saw Valentin lovingly hold Anna's hand as he assured her that everything would be okay because Anna was safe with him.
Julian sat at a table with his sister in the Floating Rib and advised her that he wouldn't continue to help her if she hurt any of the people he loved. Olivia questioned whether he was defying her, but Julian assured her that with the hospital in chaos, it would soon be hers. He added that he wanted to be finished with her in all ways once she got what she wanted. Julian stated that he'd done everything she'd asked him to do, and he never wanted to see or hear from her again. Olivia promised, though she reminded him that she was still waiting for her delivery.
At General Hospital, Sam and Jason discovered that their childbirth class had been canceled due to the nursing sick-out. They talked about Morgan's killer, who was still out there somewhere, even though Ava had been arrested for the crime. Jason received a call from Michael asking for his support at an emergency Quartermaine meeting. Sam agreed to meet her husband at the Floating Rib after the meeting.
Nina walked into a patient room and spotted her husband sitting by Anna's bedside and holding her hand. After hearing Valentin tell Anna that she was safe with him, Nina fled from the room. Just then, a confused Anna woke up and abruptly pulled her hand from Valentin's. She ordered him to leave. Nina was extremely upset and confronted her husband in the hallway outside Anna's room. He showed her the unfinished text message he had started earlier to let her know what had happened. He said he would explain everything at her suite at the Metro Court.
Finn had the results of Anna's blood work, but he wanted to have further testing done to be sure of the diagnosis. He and Griffin made a plan for Anna's care and proceeded to her room. The doctors told Anna that she had a blood clot, and they wanted to get to the cause of it. Anna revealed that she'd had her headaches for a few months and some itchy skin. Finn asked for Anna's consent to do a bone marrow biopsy. He stressed that it was minimally invasive, and they'd have a better idea of what was going on. Anna agreed.
Out at the nursing station, Finn grabbed onto the desk suddenly. Eyeing a tray full of patient medications in cups, he grabbed one. Back in Anna's room, she informed Griffin that she'd been caught breaking into Valentin's house as she had attempted to plant a bug. Griffin did his best to reassure Anna, but once he left Anna's room, he left a voicemail for Robin. He thanked Finn and said that Finn had been great with Anna. Griffin was happy that Anna was in Finn's care, as she meant a lot to him. He knew that Anna was terrified. Finn promised to do all that he could. They agreed that they had been right to not tell Anna that she might have cancer.
Anna tearfully tried to calm herself down. She was certain that she probably just had a vitamin deficiency. "You'll be fine," she said to herself.
Olivia Falconeri was ready to head home after a lovely Valentine's Day dinner with Ned. He asked her to stay the night, and she confided that she really didn't feel comfortable doing that. She felt like a visitor with his family. Tracy interrupted them to announce that she was about to hold an emergency Quartermaine family meeting, and she wanted Olivia to leave. Ned objected to the meeting and Olivia's ouster, but Tracy considered Olivia to be an outsider. Ned firmly told his mother that Olivia would stay, and he apologized to Olivia for his mother's rudeness. He wasn't ready for their Valentine's Day to be over.
Elizabeth smiled as she picked up around her house after the nurses' meeting. There was a note left behind that read "No Justice, No Peace. Fight the Power." She texted Franco to wish him luck at work. Sam arrived with Jake's science project and told Elizabeth about her canceled class. She'd really wanted a refresher course, though she understood the nurses' strike. Sam was very anxious about the baby's birth though Elizabeth felt certain that all would be resolved.
Franco arrived home and barely saw Kiki and Dillon on the sofa, kissing in a state of undress. He announced that he had been fired while playing a spy for the cause. He headed into the next room, and the young couple quickly dressed. Dillon received a call about an emergency family meeting. Shortly after, Franco peeked out to see if Dillon had gone and if it was safe to walk back into the room.
Franco and Kiki talked about the cuts at the hospital and the fact that he needed to keep his firing hidden from Elizabeth. He received her good luck text and wondered how he could tell her. Kiki was sure that Elizabeth would understand, especially after she heard that Franco and Elizabeth were official. Kiki advised him that love was both good and bad, and she suggested that he trust Elizabeth.
Franco arrived at Elizabeth's, and Sam quickly departed. Elizabeth wanted all the juicy details of Franco's spying expedition. He revealed that he had also been cut from the hospital staff, and the art therapy department was closed. Elizabeth was sad to hear that, and she said she would fight for him too. It wasn't just about the nurses. If necessary, they would both find new jobs; she said, "We can make it work." "We?" Franco asked. Elizabeth assured Franco that they were in it together. Franco was pleased to be able to spend more time with Elizabeth, and she was hoping for a miracle.
Michael and Jason were the last to arrive at the Quartermaine mansion. Michael stated that Ava had been arrested, and Jason noted that he wasn't convinced that Ava had been involved in the car bombing, but at least she'd be out of the way for a little while. Tracy pushed them to get to the meeting quickly. Everyone was gathered finally, and Tracy declared that General Hospital would close if they didn't move quickly to save it. "ELQ is gonna buy the hospital," she announced.
Tracy had handouts for everyone, and they discussed it as a family. It was noted that there were two board members and the chief of staff present right in the room. Michael thought that Tracy's idea was a good one and noted that their company had the liquid assets available. Once the discussion turned to shareholders and patients without insurance, the family began to think that it wasn't such a good idea after all. Olivia wanted to speak. Tracy continued to be rude to her, but Ned urged her on. Olivia suggested that the Quartermaines buy the hospital themselves.
Olivia thought that the Quartermaines would do what was right. Suddenly, the family was enthusiastic as they all arrived at their own decision on where they'd get the money. Jason thought that Edward would think of it as a worthy cause. "Start crunching numbers," Tracy ordered as Jason left to meet Sam. Eventually, everyone had a check for Tracy. Ned sang Olivia's praises and kissed her goodbye. Dillon called Kiki to advise her that he was "significantly less wealthy." He was impressed that his brother had stood up to Tracy. Ned shared that he planned on making Olivia part of the family.
Alexis received a flower delivery at home. It was a bouquet of flowers that resembled her bridal bouquet. She pulled out the card and read that they were from Julian. As she recalled her wedding day, the doorbell rang. It was Julian, and he told her that he had needed to see her. The bouquet had been for Valentine's Day. He handed her a key to a safe deposit box and advised her that he had an explanation for all that he'd done. She would find a letter and his will in the box. Alexis demanded to know what was going on. She asked if someone were threatening him.
Alexis reminded Julian that she didn't trust him, but Julian insisted that he couldn't tell her anything. He had left instructions with the bank, and if she didn't hear from him again, they'd let her know when she could read his letter. He added that he loved her and wished her a happy Valentine's Day. Then, he left.
Nina and Valentin belatedly arrived at the Metro Court and the suite that Nina had booked. Valentin explained the events involving Anna and how he'd ended up at the hospital. He added that Anna seemed to be obsessed with him, though Nina mentioned that Anna felt the same about Valentin. He was sorry that Nina had been upset, though Nina felt better knowing that Valentin had played Good Samaritan. She learned that he'd gone back to the house for her engagement ring, as Valentin reminded her that their entire marriage had been in reverse. He handed her the ring.
Valentin expressed his love for Nina and told her how she'd changed his life. Nina shared how reluctant she was to voice her own feelings because she always seemed to lose someone. The couple made love, and afterwards, Nina admired her new ring. She went into the bathroom to draw a bath for two in the special tub, and Valentin placed a call to the hospital to check on Anna's condition.
Sam and Jason met up at the Floating Rib and agonized over the blonde woman captured in the photo. Sam typed the name of Olivia Jerome into a search engine on her phone, but all she saw was a photo of a dead woman. Olivia Jerome sat nearby and watched. She continued to keep an eye on the couple until she eventually left.

On September 18, Ahn Jae Hong‘s agency – C&L Company – confirmed that he has broken up with his girlfriend. C&L Company said,“It’s true that Ahn Jae Hong and his girlfriend have broken up. It has been quite some time since they parted ways.”
In 2016, Ahn Jae Hong confirmed that he was in a relationship with a non-celebrity who was five years younger than him. Both attended the same university and had been in relationship for two years when their relationship went public.

I went to visit my daughter Friday as I always do and I was not expecting to see her headstone laid down. I was thrown into a state of shock and felt like it was all happening all over again. The rest of the evening was just like that evening in Feb. Just a blurr. It is so hard to see her name on that stone. Makes all feel more real and I can't deal with it just yet. I have to go this Friday and take her the tree and wrealth that I was going to decorate with and I am somewhat scared to do so. I am more confused now than I was. I thought I was getting better what a joke. Any suggestions??? They would sure be appreciated.
Posts You May Be Interested In
I gave my 2 week notice last Friday 13th. Now to join you fine people in a life of leisure and nothing else to do but to look out for myself....is it just me or does that sound pretty boring? My goal was to live to retire and I guess having to take early retirement because of health reasons wasn't exactly the way I had planned things. I just can't stay in that building that is reeking mildew...
I'm trying to exercise daily. I was doing fairly well until I sprained my ankle 2 weeks ago but now I'm getting back on the horse. Today I walked over a mile with my arm weights that are about 22lbs total. I was out of shape and it was hard on my arms. I also did my 30 situps. I'm also going to drink a lot of water and try to eat healthy. I do tend to have a sweet tooth but I'm cutting...

We have been nicknamed the Superheroes. 5 of us are boys; Batman, Ironman, Spiderman, Superman and Plasticman (he’s from the 50’s!!) and one of us is a girl; Wonderwoman. We are born on June 5, 2008.
We are teeny little things, dad was a Boxer, mom a Doberman. We were an accidental litter of 10, and by the time we were 3 weeks old, the family who let our mom get pregnant decided we were to be put down as we were just too much work. So our dad’s family who felt guilty, took all 10 of us in, and bottle fed us until we were 5 weeks old. At 5 weeks, 6 of us were put into foster care and are looking for new homes through Sophie’s Dog Adoption.

I was sorry to learn of Mikhail Gorbachev’s death today. Some time around 2000 Gorbachev was the Annual Dinner speaker for my organization, Center of the American Experiment. It was an epic event; we drew a crowd of 2,000 to the field house at the University of Minnesota. I was the chairman of American Experiment’s board at that time, so my daughters greeted Gorbachev at the airport and presented him with flowers. There was a photo of that on the front page of the Star Tribune the next morning. I wound up spending a portion of the day with Gorbachev, and found him to be a genuinely nice guy. (His daughter, who was traveling with him, was another story.)
At dinner that night, my wife and I were on the dais along with Gorbachev and some others, and I was seated next to him. We chatted a little; his English was excellent, but he delivered his speech in Russian with a simultaneous translation, like at the U.N. Everyone thought it was a fine speech. When he was finished he got a round of applause and returned to his seat. He sat down, leaned over to me, and asked, “Did I talk too long?”
Gorbachev was no free enterprise conservative. He tried to make Communism work and to preserve the USSR, but he failed. One could say that his real accomplishment was putting a human face on Soviet leadership. In the end, he was not willing to order the violence that would have been needed to keep the Soviet regime in power. All I can say about the incidental time I spent with Gorbachev was that, in my opinion, the human face was real.
UPDATE: This is the photo that appeared in the Star Tribune:

Clouds Over the Rio Grande
8x6in oil on canvas 100.
This painting was one I did a couple of weeks ago. It was a beautiful evening and it looked like it was going to rain but if it did, it wasn't near us.
I had a hard time painting today because after doing several of the Rectangle Challenge techniques, I found I was uncomfortable trying to get back to my normal stroke. I may have to go with the angular stroke for a while. I did like what it produced but I can see it could be limiting.

Title: why don't you settle for a draw
Dai Llewellyn - January 15, 2012 11:31 AM (GMT)
Despite the fact that the sun was only now beginning to peak over the horizon Dangerous was already wide awake and, in fact, climbing the stairs back up to the Ravenclaw tower after his morning run. Rubbing his hands together rapidly in an attempt to build up enough warmth to have them feeling less like blocks of ice and more like hands, having taken the stairs at a jog he was still breathless and red-cheeked when he reached the Ravenclaw doorknocker.
He didn't linger in the common room longer than it took to shake Belby, who had fallen asleep over a desk, awake and push him in the direction of the dormitories with very clear instructions. Retreating into his own dormitory he took enough care to keep his movements as quiet as possible, knowing well enough that most of his dormmates would not be too pleased to be woken at the crack of dawn. Peeling off the trackpants and shirt he had worn jogging, he changed into his quidditch gear as swiftly and deftly as possible.
Leaving most of what was needed in the common room, he knew better than to head to the pitch just yet. Climbing the stairs to the boys dormitories again, this time it was the sixth years' that he slipped into, passing Belby on the way. Not surprised at all that Bagman wasn't showing any signs of life, he wasted no time in shaking the younger male - and not too gently, either. "Oi, up!"
Otis Bagman - January 16, 2012 05:50 AM (GMT)
Never much for waking up earlier than half ten if he could help it, Otis was still fast asleep when the older boy huffed and puffed his way into the room. Warm under his blankets, curled ridiculously on his side and snoring with his mouth agape, he seemed tremendously surprised to be shaken awake. Unused to people having the nerve to do such things, least of all people that could not take a punch, he let one swing, almost immediately upon waking. Connecting with Dai's shoulder at about half-force (but still not very gently either), limbs heavy and uncooperative as they were, he wrenched away afterward and turned his face back toward his pillow.
Even as he realized that he had a date at the pitch (or else Dangerous wouldn't be assaulting him at the crack of dawn), he was hesitant to leave his warm little nest. "The fuck away from me!" he grunted, though most of the force was washed out by the thick and sleepy quality of his tone. In fact, he was nearly back to sleep only moments later, holding stubbornly onto his pillow and keeping his eyes shut.
Dai Llewellyn - January 17, 2012 03:25 PM (GMT)
Though perhaps he ought to have, he hadn't given any thought to the repercussions of trying his hand at shaking his seeker awake; and even if he had, it wasn't likely that they would have deterred him in the slightest. Not even bothering to dodge Bagman's swing he took it with a muffled 'Oof!' and two steps back - really, it was to be expected. Recovering a second later, a slight but determined grin on his face now, he reacted by shaking him a second time and more violently as he stubbornly clung to his pillow.
"Oi, up!" he repeated, still at a half-whisper not particularly wanting to rouse the whole dormitory, just Bagman (though he would be lying not to admit that the temptation to get Zonko up and onto the pitch was there, resignation or no), but with more force. He wasn't expecting a miracle then and there, but they would not be walking onto the pitch late.
Otis Bagman - January 17, 2012 03:50 PM (GMT)
Though he might have been satisfied to see him step back after being hit, he was very nearly sleeping again by the time his hand was back down, despite any lingering soreness from the half-assed punch. Ignoring him proved quite impossible though, and Otis couldn't help another hit, this one from the elbow and aimed lower, toward his stomach. "God damn it, Dai!" he complained loudly, sounding infuriated despite his sleepy state. Apparently lacking any concern for letting his classmates sleep in, he also ignored the quiet stirring and absent complaints from his left - or he did until he realized where they were coming from. "You can fuck off too, Zonko!"
Dai Llewellyn - January 17, 2012 04:04 PM (GMT)
If getting Bagman onto the pitch meant copping a few hits in the process, then so be it. Again too busy shaking the other boy to really avoid the hit (and also because he didn't see it until it was too late, anyway) he clenched his stomach at the last possible moment before having an elbow driven into it. Losing most of his grin, if only because his determination was truly kicking in, he stopped his shaking. Lifting his hands in a momentary surrender, even despite the fact that Otis' wasn't looking, he shrugged his shoulders.
"Fine, you called it!" and after a moment of apparent defeat he changed tactic. Instead of returning to shaking him violently he moved to the bottom of the bed and seized his feet, wrapping his arms around his legs and giving one all mighty heave.
Otis Bagman - January 17, 2012 04:13 PM (GMT)
Relieved and indeed not thinking much of the consequences of Dangerous actually giving up on him, he relaxed very slightly. This, it turned out, was a terrible mistake - it was only a few moments later that he felt hands on his ankles, and found the other's grip too strong to even free himself and aim a decent kick at him. The result was a pathetically thrashing Otis, slight in build and still half-asleep. "The fuck! Get y'hands offa me!" he complained, even as he crashed to the floor, handfuls of blanket coming down over him and side sore from where he'd smacked onto the cold floor. Following that, he continued to speak, though hoarsely and rather unintelligibly; the most easily understood of it was swearing, predictably.
Dai Llewellyn - January 17, 2012 04:42 PM (GMT)
Had the circumstances been any different the advantage that he had would have been quite unfair, really; but had the circumstances been any different he wouldn't have had a reason to be dragging Otis out of bed to begin with. So. Being wide awake, there really wasn't much of a battle as he dragged the younger boy from his bed. He could have been a tad gentler - but his stomach was still smarting somewhat and, anyway, Otis was a big boy and he could handle it. Releasing his legs as he dropped to the floor, somehow his smirk had found its way back to his face. For a moment he stood over the younger boy, considering his next move, and deciding to give him a chance to stand on his own.
"Come on, up! Dressed!" despite the kerfuffle that he had just made he still kept his voice at a rather pointless half-whisper, glancing at his watch, "You're very nearly late, Bagman. Get a move on!"
Otis Bagman - January 17, 2012 04:51 PM (GMT)
More than able to handle it, Otis was no more prepared to do so without complaint for it. "The hell is wrong with you," he mumbled, though he knew - and had known for a long time. Dangerous was unquestionably insane when it came to Quidditch, and while he was not nearly as competitive, there was a grudging sort of respect for him. Of course, that respect was presently hiding behind a whole lot of grogginess and agitation, and so he didn't immediately move. It was a short time later, rubbing his side, that he shifted to sit up partially and rubbed his face furiously. "Full uniform?" he yawned, slouching back most of the way again and sighing, somehow still sleepy after being forcefully dragged out of his bed.
Dai Llewellyn - January 17, 2012 05:14 PM (GMT)
Dangerous didn't even bother to address his first question, if you could call it that. Although he was aware that not everybody in the school - not even everybody on his own team - was quite so passionate about Quidditch as he was, it was a damn shame. Passionate may not have been quite the right word. Consumed. Fanatical. Call it what you will, he saw no reason why the rest of his team shouldn't be as wide-eyed and ready as he was for an early morning training. What better way was there to start off the day? None, surely.
Still standing over Otis, ready to step in again if need be, he waited for any real signs of action. Conceding that he was about as likely to get any quicker movement out of his seeker as he was to be plucked out of a faceless sea of hopeful try-outs and named Captain for the Catapults his first year out of school, he shifted impatiently between his feet. "Yep - so get a move on. You going to get up or do I have to make you?" it wasn't really a threat, but he was ready to haul him up if he didn't get a move on and soon.
Otis Bagman - February 2, 2012 05:07 PM (GMT)
Though he had been about to get up and change (or at least he told himself he had been), the other's comment left him lying uselessly on the floor still. Stubborn and contrary to his core, he could only offer his captain an ill-tempered glare over his shoulder, despite liking him rather well. "Better not touch me again," he replied, voice still raised perhaps a bit too much, regardless of Zonko's previous bitching. "Box your fuckin' ear. Ya hear me?"
Dai Llewellyn - February 6, 2012 04:04 PM (GMT)
"Better get up then, don't you think?" his eyebrows raised, almost as though challenging Otis to do exactly that; but really the whole situation had become quite routine, and he was no more afraid of his seeker than he was any other member of his team. It hardly mattered that he did not have a whole lot of sense in that department, because quite frankly imagining a situation where he might have a genuine reason to be afraid of Otis seemed quite absurd. Despite his better instincts, he couldn't help but push it one step further - but there wasn't any viciousness to his voice, instead it was more taunting than anything, his humour breaking through and with it a very lop-sided grin.
"You're not going to be able to box it from down there."

So Where Did Edward O’Keeffe Come From? And Why?
Part of why I got interested in doing genealogy was to find out when my ancestors came to Australia, and more importantly, why. Many years ago, my father gave me a handwritten family tree of his family, the Wilds, which went back to Henry Kable & Susannah Holmes – First Fleet Convicts. So it wasn’t hard to figure our why they were here – they were at His Majesty’s Pleasure! But what about the others; the one’s that had decided to come here themselves. What was the reason for making that momentous decision to travel half way around the world?
Mum’s brother, Uncle John, had a bit of an interest in family history. I knew that he had made a trip to Ireland and had been to Fermoy. Back in the early 2000’s, he was going to stop and stay the night at Mum’s, on one of his many treks south from Brisbane to Melbourne and Tasmania to visit his kids. So I asked Mum to ask him what he’d found out, so I could do a bit more research. The upshot was that it seemed that Uncle John hadn’t really found out anything very much – and during the trip had managed to lose some papers that Aunty Judy had given him that she had salvaged out of their father’s possessions when he died (their mother Gladys had told Judy to throw it all in the bin, but she squirreled a few things away). Judy said that John must have left them behind in a hotel room. What I wouldn’t give to know what those papers were (deep sigh). Anyway, Mum gave me this note that John wrote for her, of what he knew:
Who was Ellen Mary O’Keeffe? I wanted to know about Edward Snr – what was this all about? Who was this 18 year old girl that had drowned? I suppose she must be a relative of some sort with that name. It certainly wasn’t what I was expecting, so I just filed it away with all my stuff and didn’t look at it for the next 10 years. In hindsight, it’s extremely lucky that I didn’t chuck it (which did cross my mind), as this piece of paper became the key to me unlocking the whole O’Keeffe saga.

AN 81-year-old has died after being attacked on Saturday by three Rottweiler dogs in Madrid.
The incident reportedly occurred on Calle Villaverde de Vallecas.
The victim, who had Alzheimer’s disease, passed away last night (Monday) at the La Paz Hospital.
The deceased was said to have had very serious injuries – his arms were in a ‘catastrophic condition’ and both of his legs had been torn.
The owner of the Rottweilers was arrested a few hours after the incident occurred as none of the dogs had been microchipped and the animal documentation was not in order.
The dogs, which where loose, were moved to the Emergency Veterinary Service of Madrid in Aluche.
According to reports, the dogs were kept in a fenced outside patio of a ceramics and cements business located at 470 Embajadores street, near the Villaverde/Vallecas junction road.

For those of you that didn't read this thread, This guy is a "person of interest" in a dissapearance of a girl at my school. I knew him, but didn't know much about him. If I knew then what I did now, I woulda punched him in the face a bunch of times, and never would have helped him. Well, looky looky what showed up in the news today Photographer in Behl case faces unrelated child pornorgraphy charges They got a great picture of him too. What a creep!

The other morning, racing through the airport, I was at the end of my tether.
I was tired, I was unhappy, we had “sprung forward” and woken up early.
He was tired and cranky and was very vocally letting me know that he didn’t want to be contained.
I was alone and he was heavy.
I was so exhausted when we finally got on the plane but he didn’t want to sit still.
He yelled as we flew through 10,000 feet and lept out of his seat to race
up and down the aisles as soon as he could.
I was tired.
I loved him, but I was oh so damn tired.
Then that night, when my little man was sick and couldn’t sleep, I rocked him.
I held him and let him sleep next to me.
I watched him as he snored and snuffled and moved around, throwing his arm over around my neck.
I watched his long eyelashes rest upon his chubby little cheeks and felt his hand grab mine.
Neither of us slept much, but it didn’t matter.
That morning I loved him, but didn’t like him very much.
That evening I couldn’t imagine being more in love with my kiddo.
But that still doesn’t mean I’m enjoying the terrible twos.
|Too fast to even be photographed. God help me.|

That boy has the sweetest face... really he is just gorgeous! Are you letting his hair grow? I only ask because my Nathan's hair is getting looong & I'm not sure if I want to let it keep going or cut it. It's hard to keep it out of his eyes, but so darn cute! :)
Thanks Amanda! I have trimmed his hair several times. It just grows so fast! It actually does lay to the side, but with the wind that day, it looks a little crazy. I really do need to trim it again because it is just starting to get in his eyes. I was really hesitant to cut it at first. I waited for as long as possible. But it started to get really long and he couldn't see. It was a sad day..sniff...sniff...Hope you are doing ok!!
Post a Comment

The body camera footage from the police officer shows Garretson trying to explain the situation after a car crash while his hands were covered in blood.
The 60-year-old was charged with driving under the influence after a Breathalyzer showed his BAC was .19, more than double the legal limit, according to TMZ Sports.
The video showed a car badly damaged after hitting a tree, though Garretson claimed someone else was involved in the accident.
"A chick hit me," he said.
The officer eventually had him undergo sobriety tests, which he failed.
Garretson refused to go to the hospital despite "swelling on his head and blood on his arms and legs," according to ABC15.

My son has hidden disabilities. Since he was an early elementary child he has struggled with social interactions. He is an empathetic kid but can be awkward in his interactions. Unfortunately this has often made him the brunt of bullying.
I have never been able to find words to wrap around the pain of bullying and the injury it causes. It has sadly been visited more often than I like to recall. It seems to be part of the journey of hidden disabilities and I hate that. I have had several encounters over the years that have left me feeling not so Christian in my response.
I was reminded today of a particular experience from a number of years ago, the response the Lord laid on my heart, and the result that still makes me smile.
My son has never been an athletic kid. He was as physically awkward as he was socially awkward. We tried baseball for a year (the coach was a burly former FBI agent – oh my) and it was pretty much a disaster. And that was where the bullying began with one particular boy. He was a gifted athlete and sports came easily to him. He excelled at whatever he put his hand to in the athletic arena.
My son was in school with this boy and often on the playground with him in those unsupervised recess settings. In my experience, those were the most difficult times because they were unstructured times of play and if you were not in a group of some kind you were often left out. The bullying began there and carried over into the hallways and after school care a couple of days per week.
Our son would come home distressed and deflated from their interactions. We tried coaching him on appropriate responses to deflect the mistreatment and he seemed unable to execute the recommendations effectively. We tried talking with adults in the surrounding settings as well.
One night I lay awake praying over the circumstances. I was so distressed at the grief it was causing my son that I was ready to call the other mom and address it that way. I asked God what in the world I should do to address this challenge.
And that was when he gave me a radical approach. Well, it felt radical to me at the time. I have since used it on several occasions and found it remarkably effective.
I determined to make this child love ME so much that he would quit mistreating my son. I began a deliberate engagement of this young man in every setting where there was opportunity – asking about his sports, his classes, his family – ruffling his hair and patting his back. Within weeks the mistreatment had diminished and within a couple of months it was eliminated completely.
I look back at it now and see that it really wasn’t so radical. I just loved him whether he deserved it in my mind or not. And he responded to that and began to be more kind to my son.
What have you found to be effective in addressing bullying in the life of your child?

Let's start off with the newest member of the family. This is Snowball. He arrived mewing plaintively on a very cold and snowy night - thus the name. He was Snowflake until we discovered he was an intact male. That name just didn't seem masculine enough so my daughter changed it to Snowball. He is minus the balls now except for in his name! (hee hee)
When I went out to take my first pictures of him I couldn't find him until I looked up. Yep, he is on the roof of our home. He is quite the character and OHHH SOOO LOVEY! He is quickly earning a place in my heart.
Snowball loves Mia as you can see in this next photo. I think Snowball wishes Mia would be a little bit more aggressive but he loves her all the same. He will go running to lay down and roll in front of her like the picture below. She sniffs him and sometimes falls over on him. He doesn't mind.
Mia, the dog smaller than the cats, you have met in a prior post if you have read for very long. She is a toy fox terrier with severe medical conditions. We rescued her and are doing our best. She is not a good fit for our busy household and would do much better in a quiet home but we love her all the same.
Here we have Buddy. The poor thing is misnamed. She should have a nice feminine name but we had no say in naming her. She was also a rescue kitty and came to us severely traumatized. After 9 months she is finally calming down and has been known to rub on my legs occasionally. I am SO happy she is recovering and beginning to trust me. Her meow will never be normal but that is what makes her unique. The flash hurt her eyes so I couldn't get a good shot with her eyes open.
I had to throw this next shot it. I was in a mood with the camera getting all these shots of the pets when my son came home. I think he thought the paparazzi was after him! Nope, just mom being silly telling him YES he is one of the pets. HA HA!
Next we have a long-timer. This is Suzi. She has had her own MySpace page and now she has her own Facebook page. We sometimes refer to her as the Queen. She and her brother came to me as adults so I had no say in naming these guys either!!! I see a trend. Their prior owner was an older gentleman who had to go into a nursing home and couldn't take them. I have probably had them for 6-7 years. Suzi is very timid with everyone except her brother. She has been known to open a can of whoop ass on him when she thinks he is out of line. Suzi's favorite thing to do is saddle up to the food dish and have her way with a big bowl of kibble. She also L-O-V-E-S the brush. She will actually start drooling when she sees it and prance around for at least 1/2 hour getting brushed. I can relate to Suzi. :-)
Next we have Suzi's brother Snoopy. He is outgoing, friendly, and has kidney and bladder issues. He is terminal but we don't know how long. So we love him every day and try to keep him out of trouble. He loves to open doors and will pound on them if they are locked shut until someone comes to visit him. His territory is now in the basement as his urinary issues were partially to blame for a spray fest upstairs.
I would love to say he was waving for me but to get his attention I was dangling something in front of him to get this shot. He loves playing with string. He weighs in at around 16 pounds so quite the lug when he decides to jump on your stomach!
This, my friends, is SHEENA, princess warrior. Doesn't she look like a warrior in this picture? I mean seriously she looks as if she is going to claw my eyes out at any moment for taking this picture of her. She is our garage/outside kitty. She does not like Snowball at all! I am sure she could just sit on him and be done with it but she would rather his and run. I hope they learn to tolerate each other soon.
So there you have it. Why my blogs are sometimes slow in coming. I'm probably cleaning up cat barf or changing a litter box but I love them all! Thanks for stopping by.

While the Deputy was wrong, and the Sheriff department could learn a lot about being gracious and polite, I do not see a lot of damages to argue for. I think a suit would win; I do not see lots of money past the lawyers fees.
Are you kidding? We had a member here that bragged about making money off these kind of flubs by LE. I think he was getting 25 grand each.

Quotable: "They did some things we took advantage of," Moon said. "They tried to mix it up a lot. They kept me guessing a few times, no question about it. But I guessed right most of the times and that helped." Bengals coach Dave Shula: "This football team has to regroup and see what we can do. We've all seen what we can't do, which is compete against a good football team at this point."
SAINTS 13, RAMS 10
NEW ORLEANS _ Quotable: Jets coach Bruce Coslet: "Obviously, our consistency wasn't there on offense. We couldn't get going. We were out of synch or something. The Colts were not doing anything we hadn't seen before."

I ended up having my friend fix it and asked him to explain, I've since forgotten. Maybe he did, maybe he didn't I can't remember. If you find out, please post in here!I just can't figure out which part of the adjuster needs to be turned, and what direction? I've stared at it, tinkered with it, just can't seem to get it. I'm looking for a simple "turn this nut this direction" sort of instruction.

Pieces of your Story- Aniston Lynn
July 31, 2014 came and went with no baby. How could I possibly go over my due date with baby number three? I had planned on having you all natural so the thought of induction scared me silly. So we continued our normal daily activities, and added in a few more strenuous ones to try and evict you. We went on long fast walks, played multiple games of frisbee golf, we even ventured to mommy's family reunion where I stayed on the bouncy boat all day long. Still nothing. You were comfy just where you were and nothing I did was going to change that. So the doctor decided that instead of waiting any longer it was time to get you out. (Your brother Cohen was 10 days over due and we were not going to do that again)
We chose Monday, August 4 to be your induction day. Daddy was nervous because he was head coach of Cohen's football team and had his first practice that night all the way in Danville. He begged me to pick another day, but this was the day my doctor was on call, and this was the day that just felt right. I joking assured him that I would have you out by noon, giving him plenty of time to spend with you before he had to leave for practice. (Yes you can tease him about this your whole life!) So early monday morning at 7 a.m. we showed up at the hospital.
By 7:30 they had me all hooked up and had the pitocin flowing....yikes! It was written in my birth plan NO MEDS but I hadn't planned on pitocin. I remember saying do you have to keep turning that up? Every half hour the nurse came in and inevitably worsened my pain. Around 9 it was time to break my water. Whew, that's always a funny feeling, and a feeling of wow this is real. In no time at all I will be holding my baby. Now we just wait on the contractions to roll in hard and strong. The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air was plaing on the t.v., Your dad, mamaw, papaw, and grandma Becky were in the room with me trying to take my mind off the pain.
Mommy's friend Abbey who is a doula was trying to be there for your birth. She had coached me many times on delivery day and given me some different position ideas to lessen the pain. Unfortunately she was in Chicago that day training and couldn't actually be at the hospital. She was sending me texts the whole way through to try and get me to relax. As we were approaching 10:30 I was starting to question my "no meds" decision.
With all that was going on, the thing that irritated me the most was the heart rate monitor that they screwed into the top of your head. I know that sounded awful to me too, but the nurse said it was the best way to monitor your heart and for me to still be able to move around. I just kept feeling like if I moved too much I could rip it out of your precious little head so all of my movements were slow and calculated. Actually I was afraid to make many moves because each contraction was getting worse and worse. I had thought about getting in the water, but at this point I decided to just stick it out on the bed. I really couldn't see how I was going to walk from the bed to the tub. The thought of a contraction mid transition kept me right where I was.
11:00 a.m. the top part of the bed was raised almost 90 degrees. I was on my knees biting the sheets. Every time a contraction came, which was about every 2-3 minutes daddy would push on my hips to try and relieve some of the pressure. The comical part of it all is that the Fresh Prince was still in the back ground and I could hear that someone was having a baby on the show. Man the movies make it out to be so different. I was now in survival mode, or as the nurse calls it I had transitioned. She was feeding me ice chips and softly whispering to me how good I was doing. She was an angel. I had such an awesome nurse. She coached me through the whole natural birth and I'm so grateful for her!
I can't do it, I feel like I'm being suffocated, like someone is ripping out my insides, I can't do this. Daddy was scared. Everyone in the room was praying. Why did I put myself through a no medicine birth again? I wanted the room to be calm. They told me I could scream through the pain, but what good would that do? It would just suck the little energy I had left out of me. So I was silent. With each contraction I would beg to push. I know the nurse was nervous to check my progress, afraid that I was still a ways away from what I was begging for. But a mother knows. I needed to push. I need to know there was an end to all this pain. Angie reluctantly checked me and what do you know, call in the doctor it's time to push!!
Meanwhile Mommy's friend Ashley was on her way to photograph you. I could not of prepared myself for the kind of pain I was in during the last hour of contractions. Ashley was coming from an hour away, and I figured I could just hold out till she got there. Um no! I love capturing the perfect photos almost more than anyone, but at this point even if someone was dangling a million dollars in front of me I couldn't of stopped what was inevitably happening. So there was Ashley in the waiting room, saying she was my cousin trying to get back to me in time with no such luck. I was in the zone. My brain literally zeroed in and I felt almost blind. I couldn't turn side to side. I couldn't focus on anything but the doctor's voice. When the next contraction came I pushed real hard, oh yep the ring of fire is a real thing, and out you came. That was it, one push. Well you would think I should know how to push by now right?! Thank God for that, because by this point I couldn't of done the whole push for and hour thing. Mamaw shouted out, "honey look it's 11:59". I did it, I had you before noon just like I had promised daddy. Your real birth time was 11:58. We did it!
They handed you to me, you were so beautiful, so different than I pictured, but so dainty and precious. You had a full head of dark hair. None of my babies had hair before. You had perfect little lips and pretty nail beds. You sort of looked like daddy. Which was weird for me to see my little girl look like the boy I love. The nurses finally let Ashley back, and she got to capture some of our first moments together. How was I so blessed to have a healthy baby girl? What a miracle you are. God created you and knit you in my womb, and now I was holding you.
7lbs 4 oz 20 inches long. Born 4 days late, on a monday, before noon. Just little details that make up your special day. Your grandma's got to be there to see you just as you were born. Your mommy did it without medicine and was now able to walk around and enjoy you just like if we were at home. Seriously, about 10 minutes after you were born I unwound my hair from the messy top knot it was in and it was like nothing had happened. Now all that was left was to start enjoying baby snuggles. I looked over and the nurse was giving you your first bath. She had you propped up with your chin in her hand. You looked like a little puppy. She began to brush your hair gently and you stopped crying and almost fell asleep. She was humming and brushing and then tied the perfect pink ribbon in your long dark hair. I had a girl. I HAD A GIRL! As I watched you get that first pink ribbon tied in your hair my mind was fluttering with thoughts of doing your hair for the next 15+ years. How doing your hair would be our time. Our time to talk, our time to fight, our time to be creative. My heart can't even fathom the love that I have for you already. Then the nurse brought you over and I watched your daddy, who wore a pink shirt that day just for you, hold a little bundle with a pink ribbon and I lost it. Our lives are forever changed and our journey of parenting will never be the same. Now there is just one thing left to do......
Meet the brothers!

Baring one professor I had in university one of the most helpful and knowedgeable French teachers I have ever had. Extremely helpful; went above and beyond the call of duty to help with the language contests, etc. She didn't like me, though. I'm not sure why. She had favourites (I won't mention any names) and I was not one of them; however, I won't hold that against her. I cannot pick a bone with her as a teacher. A truly great, inspiring Lady!
She was a great french teacher...unfortunately when I took german in grade 10 she seemed to resent me for it. Still very nice tho.
One of the best teachers I ever had, she inspired my love of French. After having her for 3 yrs, I'll forgive her for retiring instead of teaching me gr 12.
Inspired me to keep on doing French. It made me sad when I found out she was retireing. One of the best teachers there is.
she was alright... If you are nice to her she will be nice to you

Judas and the Black Messiah star Daniel Kaluuya took home the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor for his role as Fred Hampton. And while he did take some time to reflect on Hampton's legacy during his acceptance speech, what he said about his parents is stealing more than its fair share of the spotlight.
Believe it or not, he actually did thank his parents for having sex after he spoke about Hampton and told everyone in attendance — and everyone at home — that there was more to do, referring to the continued fight for social justice. That, however, seemed to be eclipsed by his mother Damalie Namusoke's reaction to being mentioned.
"My mom and my dad … they had sex — and now I'm here!" he said during his time at the podium. Then, the camera cut to his mom's very confused face
"What's he talking about?" she appeared to say.
"You understand, I'm here. You know what I mean? I'm so happy to be alive," Kaluuya continued, clearly unaware of his mother's reaction. "So I'm going to celebrate tonight. I appreciate everyone in the room, everyone watching at home. You know, peace, love, and onwards, we go again!"
Twitter users, including Issa Rae, caught his mother's reaction. Some couldn't believe that he actually said what he did. Others just wanted to see Namusoke's reaction on repeat.
Kaluuya won the Golden Globe for the same role. Previously, he was nominated for his role in 2017's Get Out. This year's win was his first.
"I gave it everything I had. I gave. I gave. I gave," he told the New York Times.
Source: Read Full Article

"A man rang us after his wife and their dog have been brought in by police. He'd really like to have the dog back, but we were very welcome to keep the wife."
This entry was originally posted at http://pengolodh-sc.dreamwidth.org/103606.html. You can comment there using OpenID. have commented there

(This vision was received in 2007)
I was invited to a wedding. I arrived at the reception hall, which was large enough to hold many thousands of people. The guests were standing around in groups of eight to ten and laughing, drinking wine, and enjoying trays of food that were being served by waiters. Everyone was busy conversing; there was great happiness and excitement – a very jovial atmosphere. I looked up at the ceilings: they were at least forty feet tall, with huge concrete beams spanning the immense room. I looked from one end of the reception hall to the other. There was no furniture and no decorations of any kind. It was very plain. The hall seemed almost endless; I could not even see a wall at either end. I felt happy too; we were all here for a great occasion, and there was a feeling of anticipation in everyone – or so I thought. I joined in, eating and drinking and making merry for a very long time.
Then I began to look around me, wondering when the wedding would begin. I walked from group to group, chatting pleasantly with everyone, and occasionally asking someone, “When is the wedding going to begin?” I saw no signs of a wedding, although I was sure I had come to the right place on the right date. Since everyone else assured me they were here for the wedding too, I tried to be patient, but I was increasingly restless and bored. I continued to ask others about the wedding, but they began to be annoyed with me for asking. One person even said to me, “Isn’t this great already? Why do we need to go to a wedding?” and then he turned back to socializing. Well, this wasn’t “great” enough for me! I had been invited to a wedding, and a wedding was what I wanted! I could not get anybody to be interested in this wedding. They looked at me like I was crazy to be even thinking about it. So, I decided I would wander around the perimeter of the enormous reception hall to see if I could find a door to the wedding, which I was sure was about to begin. I could not understand how any of the other guests could be satisfied with just a reception.
It took me a long time. There were no doors opening into a wedding chamber. But I could not be dissuaded; I knew I was going to find the place where this wedding (that I had been invited to) was going to occur. After I had gone nearly three-quarters of the way around the hall, I found a little, wooden, brown door hidden behind what looked like a shelf for storing things used in the reception hall. The door was only three feet tall and about a foot wide; hardly a door at all, I thought to myself. It had a very old fashioned door knob too, like door knobs made hundreds of years ago, and I couldn’t imagine that it was anything but a storage closet, perhaps. But I was looking for a wedding, so I tried the door knob, turning it slowly – and it opened! It seemed dark and I couldn’t see anything beyond the doorway. So I put my head through, and then I turned my body sideways (I was on my hands and knees) and pushed myself through the opening.
I pulled myself up to a standing position, and was stunned by what I saw: I was in a very elaborately decorated and well lit throne room. In comparison to the reception hall outside, it was small. The walls were carvings of gold and there were tapestries of blue, purple and red hanging from top to bottom on these walls. In front of me, a wide red carpet led to the left and then straight toward some stairs. Standing on either side of the red carpet were about four hundred men and women. They were all dressed in wedding clothes; beautiful wedding clothes of fine linen, of many different colors. They all looked at me and smiled at that moment. They seemed to have been waiting for me to arrive! It dawned on me all at once – they were waiting for the bride – and I was the bride! As I began to walk slowly down this red carpet like a bride walks toward her groom, they began to clap softly, as if they knew something that I was just beginning to discover.
I looked ahead of me and there He was – Jesus – the love of my life – standing at the top of the stairs at the end of the carpet – waiting for me. He was smiling lovingly at me; He had His arms held in front of Him, opened wide.
As I walked down the carpet toward Him, everyone continued clapping. I had a strong feeling that, at one time, they had each done this very same thing, and that they were very glad I had also made it to the wedding. I had the most wonderful feeling that this wedding had been planned from before time and that these people were my spiritual family. I felt completely one with them. I knew them and they knew me. There were no strangers here at the wedding.
As I walked toward Jesus, something miraculous happened. My appearance began to transform into an entirely new looking person: a stunningly beautiful bride. My wedding dress was white, with a slight tinge of light blue, and was made of a material I had never seen before. It looked like cobwebs of the finest and lightest lace, finer than any lace ever woven on earth. The train of my wedding dress elegantly flowed behind me as I approached my bridegroom, Jesus. My beauty increased as I walked toward my Lord! My eyes were fixed on Him and I was radiant.
And then the vision was over. I wept for joy at what I had seen and what the Lord had revealed to me. There is much symbolism in each part of this vision. I will give no explanation at this time but will leave room for God to speak to your own heart of its interpretation. This vision of “the Wedding” has given me great comfort, especially during times of severe distress or when I have been deeply discouraged or spiritually weary. I hope it comforts you in the same way that it has comforted me.
“For many are called, but few are chosen.” Matthew 22:14

The next morning, we were eating our breakfast. I was trying to focus on what was about to be for that day, knowing I would be going through another round of rehab. It was getting better than me each day, forgetting about why I was admitted to the hospital, to begin with. Melanie was starting to respond to treatment, at least her body was healing but she was still distressed. I wasn't sure on what was going on, let alone seeing her finally getting the message that she needed help for the longest time. The question remains on what kind of her downhill spiral since just choking wasn't just enough. I knew she hated to be confined thanks to some trauma as a kid, doesn't get me going on her fear of being buried alive.
Finally, during one of the sessions, Victoria pointed out about Melanie was being subjected to a mock funeral and her phobia. Victoria had to explain that it could've killed Melanie for good and asked if there was any way to help her. Melanie's birth father hadn't been around much to help his daughter, let alone visit her, while her mum has been. This time, we were going to be part of one of the talking treatments Melanie still has to go through, I was expecting the same kind of outburst if that Ratched lady was around. I wanted to know what was causing her to lash out at Ratched. I finally got a moment with Victoria, and ask her some questions about it.
"I'm standing to think Ratched was starting to get the hint. I mean, she didn't harass Melanie. She went after me." Victoria said.
"I know that. I heard Ratched was pretty much bullying her, and Melanie snapped. Don't blame her." I said.
"I don't know about her childhood, but I think she was bullied when she was a kid." Victoria said.
"I believe she was. Her bio-dad hasn't visited her as much, and I haven't seen her step-mum." I said.
"What do you think he said when Melanie was brought her." Victoria said.
"From what I heard, the second he learn about what she was able to do, he wanted to see it as he might've figured she had finally lost it." I said.
"I wouldn't be surprised if that comes up." Victoria said.
"Well, I'm going to be present this time around. Unless she wants to talk about it, I keep it to myself." I told said.
"I was listening to Melanie last night. I hadn't seen her being brought to that of a young child on an emotional level. Do you think her bio-dad and step-mum meant had something to do with it?" I asked.
"I'm starting place together that at least one of them had been hard on her." Victoria said.
A knock on the door was heard and the psychologist entered.
"Sorry, for that, I had to meet with the parents of the client." She explained.
"How is Melanie doing?" Victoria asks.
"She'll in shortly. I just need to get to know what I have to expect." The psychologist said.
"Well, she's prone to outbursts that's for sure. She was being harassed while we were at the psychiatric unit for eating disorders." Victoria said.
"By who..." The psychologist said.
"Ratched, who else... though" Victoria said.
Big mistake Victoria
"I know Ratched can be... was there anything else?" The psychologist said.
Victoria quickly covers her mouth and then looks straight at me.
"Whoopsie" Victoria whispered.
"More than that!" I responded.
Melanie arrives in the meeting room.
YOU ARE READING
Astral Journey: It's ComplicatedFanfiction
Note: Set in an AU ( or Elsewhere FIC) world. Set in 1998. (I was trying to where the best looks I can think. After all, it's set where the girls had the same kinds of life The Simpsons.) Don't even ask! After a terrible accident, Emma has an o...

Originally Posted by def28
I really think that is one of the cooler and more original posters we have had this year.
I love that poster. When I got it, the guy at the booth did a double take at it and said, "Cool!" when he was taking it out for me.

Sunday, 25 March 2007
Some Dog Owners !!!
I took Buster out for his usual walk this morning and as we went into the park I was battling with the swing gate and had Buster on his lead ( I never let him off the lead until we actually get into the park due to the fact the entrance is on a blind bend) when this dog came at us and starting biting Buster.Totally unprovoked as Buster hadn't hardly set foot in the park. I was in the middle of undoing his lead clip so that he could at least run away from this dog and trying to fend the dog off when it started attacking my arm. Luckily I had a padded jacket on but it still hurt like mad even though, fortunately, the bite didn't break the skin. The owner had walked off whilst all this frenzy was going on making no attempt to call her dog. She called back to me from about 50yds away "Is your dog OK" I said "Yes it is but I'm bloody not your dog has bitten my arm" She carried on walking and shouted back over her shoulder in a totally insincere way "Oh Sorry"
I had witnesses who came over and asked was I OK and they agreed that neither Buster or I had done anything to provoke the dog. The dog just ran up to us with it's teeth bared. I admit Buster growled at the dog but wouldn't you growl if something ran up to you snarling and biting? I am going to look out for her in the park next time. That dog is dangerous. It could bite a child next time. My arm has two blue bruises on it and is quite sore.
My niece and I went to Ramsbottom to the craft shop and got some yarn for her crochet jacket out of "Stitch n Bitch" I don't think she was really all that keen on the colour she picked but maybe it will look better once it is crocheted. I am going to start it later tonight.

This story warmed my heart and I had to share it:
I became a fan of the show and Josh after the first show. I loved Ghost Hunters and am a huge fan, so I wanted to watch DT because it seemed like the same kind of show, where people trek out into the jungle, hunting down monsters and the paranormal. I live in IL, and before I had my son, I loved to travel and go on adventures. In fact, about a few months ago, I was planning a trip to Peru. Unfortunately, I was diagnosed with stage 3 ovarian cancer and could not go. Looking back on it now, I still want to go, it'll just be after my medical bills are paid LOL. I got very ill after my first round of chemo and would remain ill during the whole treatment. So much so that the doctors would put me in the hospital for a month because the radiation burned me so bad. My son, Joey, is 10. Knowing how sick I was, he talked my brother into buying me an IPod Touch. Although he took it one step firther and bought me the touch and an IPhone so I could keep in touch with my friends and family while I was in the hospital since my phone was not working at the time. Anyways, my son used all of his savings to get me the touch, and put my stuff on it. He bought all of the seasons of DT up until that time. I swear that Josh was the only thing that got me through chemo and being stuck in the hospital for a month.
I haven't met him yet, but I plan to hopefully in the near future. I just want to hug him because even in my darkest hour, where I didn't want to eat because I was throwing up, and I didn't want to go on with the treatment even though I knew that it was for the best, when I was throwing myself a pity party, I merely had to turn on my pod and Josh was there. He was like a beacon in the night, pushing me forward, wanting to go on adventures and living through him.
I have also got several people hooked on the show as well, and have people from all over going out to buy his book.
That's why I want to be considered the biggest fan of the week!

"They shall be Mine, saith the Lord of Hosts, in the day when I make up MY JEWELS."
To my dear Grandchildren,
He was only a poor shepherd in Southern India. His hours were long and his work difficult. He rode an old ox which he had trained and brought up, and the flock followed him in the true Eastern custom. One of the difficulties the shepherd had to encounter was the lack of water. To find a well was a most welcome occurrence.
A day came when the poor goats had been without water for some time. Leaving the ox with them, the shepherd wandered a long time in search of water. Suddenly he came upon an old well, among some ancient ruins. While he was looking down to investigate, the edge of the well gave way and the shepherd fell some feet. However, he was caught upon a ledge and his life was spared.
Somewhat bruised and half-stunned, the poor man began to collect his thoughts. He was truly in a pitiable plight, more than a mile from his faithful ox and the flock of goats. He was not able to climb up the side of the well and not a soul could hear his cry for help.
Just then he heard a hissing sound and, though it was growing dark, he saw something moving below in the bottom of the well. It was a mass of snakes! What was he to do? In the hour of his extreme danger, he remembered that when he was a boy there had come into his native village a missionary. Although he had not taken much heed, he went to hear the white teacher speak.
One thing he remembered the missionary had said, and that was that in the hour of danger or trouble, a certain wonderful Lord Jesus Christ would hear and answer prayer. With a childlike faith, in agony and fear, the poor man prayed to the Lord for help. After praying for some time, he seemed to to have fallen asleep. Some hours later he woke up and found it was dawn - the darkness had gone! Something was touching his head. He looked up and saw the face of his old ox looking down at him, and it was the rope dangling from the faithful animal's neck that was touching his head. Grasping the rope he called to the ox to back away. Thus he was pulled from the well. In answer to his prayer God had sent his ox to find him and saved his life.
It was this experience that brought the shepherd to trust in the Lord, and he became a faithful follower of His. He devoted his life in testifying to his people of that wonderful God who answers prayer.
"As for me, I will call upon God; and the Lord shall save me." (Psalm 55:16)
"What time I am afraid, I will trust in Thee." (Psalm 56:3)
"Call upon Me in the day of trouble: I will deliver thee, and thou shalt glorify Me." (Psalm 50:15)

Infinity and Me (Carolrhoda Picture Books)
FROM THE PUBLISHER:
When I looked up, I shivered. How many stars were in the sky? A million? A billion? Maybe the number was as big as infinity. I started to feel very, very small. How could I even think about something as big as infinity? Uma can't help feeling small when she peers up at the night sky.

I can tell something is wrong with my friend. She's not her usual boisterous self. She doesn't dig into the meal with her usual abandon. (Despite her small size she has a reputation for being a big eater)
I'm not the only one who notices and when we question her she whispers that she went to the doctor for her annual check-up and was told she needs to watch her weight.
I couldn't believe it. She was told WHAT?!?
Sure she's a big eater and she always has to have a big bowl of rice to finish her meal and she likes sweets. But watch her weight??? This is a girl who is far from overweight. She may not be stick thin like so many Japanese women, but she's in her mid-20s, actually has muscle, and is one of the few of my Japanese female friends who doesn't get sick at the drop of a hat.
As more dishes arrived and we began chatting my friend slowly began to relax. When it came time to finish off the fried rice she did so with her usual gusto, and promptly ordered redbean-filled sesame balls for desert. My friend was back to normal, but I couldn't help but worry about the effects of Japanese doctors on those with less self-confidence than my strong friend.

NJ.com member ireaddaily thinks DeWyze wasn't as great as some are saying:
"I thought Mike was the best performance last night followed by Crystal. I don't understand why people are raving about Lee. He wasn't the best performer, his style doesn't change. If you watched the rehearsal clip, Casey sounded very good and then fell during his performance, not sure what the problem is. I think Aaron needs time to grow."Who do you think should go home next? Respond in the comments.

My "boyfriend" (well my ex now) and I were skyping at 3am, then I heard his phone vibrated 3 times and he didn't pick it up, I knew it was a text msg, couple seconds later the same person that messaged him called, and he lied saying he don't know who it is, it was an unknown number, which I knew was a lie. The next day I was having attitude when he called because of the lie, so I asked for the last time who was calling you so late, he's gonna come with "ok I won't lie, it was one of my friends" which was a female. Anyways, lately every time we're talking his phone vibrates and I'm fed up, he always wanna talk asking me about my day at 9 10 in the nights now and I'm sick and tired of him. I left him last night and he won't leave me alone, he called me a spoil brat. We were together for 2 years. Do you guys think I did the right thing by leaving? Or do you think we could've work it out?
Most Helpful Guy
ok first off if he's lying then you can pretty much bet he was cheating cause if it was one of his female friends then there's no reason for him to hide it from you & sec you dont deserve to be treated like that, you did the right thing & stand your ground, once a cheater always a cheater.. if you wanna talk, kik me Mike_CENA, ps i won't hit on you, just talk0THIS IS NOT RELEVANT ANYMORE

Jump to first page
Jump to bottom
I don't have a favorite that I like necessarily, but if we're talking looks only, the UH wheels I have never liked, even as a kid. I have lots of 80's cars with these, which kind of makes sense because, well it was the 80s. But I have a Ferrari Testarosa with these on it. I think they got a little carried away.

I would try not to chase your cockatiel to get him back in. If you do have to towel him, dim the lights to help keep him calm. Make sure any mirrors, windows, fish tanks, etc. are covered so he can’t injure himself. Put his cage near him and put his favorite food in it. Maybe if you just sit calmly and talk sweetly without looking at him, he might go back to his cage.

Most Recent Reviews
We were pleased with the quality and the stability of this craft. We used ours three to 4 times on lakes upstate NY and were superbly satisfied with its maneuverability and buoyancy. There were three of us in the canoe and it had room to include lunch, snacks, drinks, and other essentials with no problem. The only one problem we had is that it was difficult on our backs, to put it together. We labeled all the poles to make it easier to assemble. We didn't realize that our age, 73, would make a difference but if we were younger than 65, we would want to keep it and use it more. This is the reason we are selling ours which includes lots of extras, because we intended to keep it forever. I placed it in this site but did not hear anything from anyone and will try to post it again. Otherwise, this was really a hardy canoe for use and transport abroad, by air, or by land.

Our prayers go out to Steve's family for comfort during this time of grief and loss. I worked for Steve at RHD and really enjoyed my time under his leadership. He was a great person that cared about his employees. I have many great memories with Steve.
January 20, 2014 | Wake Forest, NC

Soap Cafe has bags and bags of soap scraps and we had nothing to do with them until a few weeks ago. These scraps aren't bad soap, just left over in the container while making strawberries or sushi soap ect. They are very colorful and smell great. So after seeing of some pretty swirled soap I decided to use my scraps just for this. I have made 2 batches so far. First batch was a nice fall soap scented of sweet cinnamon and sugar that I gave a few bars away and the rest were purchased by the person I gave a bar to, for them to give as gifts to house guests they were going to be having for the next several weeks. The other batch I made yesterday and it was fruity leftovers so I named it "Swirled Fruit Punch", added some glitter and a little more fruit scent and below is how it came out. This picture is taken with the phone and before they were cleaned and wrapped, just after cutting. I love them and can't wait to make more!

May 31st 2005 10:26 pm
[ Leave A Comment ]
'tabannah and me have another play date. We meet a new tri girl and her name Cheyenne. Patan come over too and he still getting taller than me. We played with his dad who scared us. But I try to be brave and find him when he hid behind the house. But I got scared too.
We all play real good, but mostly we sniff around each other. We all getting to know Cheyenne and she getting to know us. She not fight with 'tabannah, but I did "argue" with Cheyenne. I got testy cuz there was this squash olive on the ground and i see her sniffing at something and then, i just had to have that olive and I just had to fight her for it and I was bad and Daddy yelled at me and I was put inside to think things out before I could come out. I made Cheyenne cry really loud and I didn't mean to hurt her but she cry big and I not know how to help her. Everyone came to see the fuss and I got embarassed. Later Cheyenne got off her mommy and walked around again and we were fine. Savannah just lucky it wasn't her on the ground fighting.
we had good eats and lots of extra treets. It was a good 'senji day. We went to bed really early.
Leave a Comment

Mike Tyson is adamant he would win a street fight against Floyd Mayweather in his prime.
As part of their ongoing Actually Me series, GQ Sports asked Tyson a handful of questions when they finally got him to predict the outcome of a street fight between Floyd Mayweather and Iron Mike in his prime.
“I think I would really kick Floyd’s ass in a street fight,” Tyson said. “It wouldn’t even be no match.”
Tyson, a former heavyweight champion, stated while he would get the better of Mayweather if the two were to take part in a scrap, he did reveal that Money May would win on points if they were the same weight.
“But probably if I was his size in the ring, he would outpoint me,” he added. “He has a really good technique for his style, he’s really great at what he does.”
At the 4:25 mark:
When it comes to being regarded as the greatest boxer ever, Tyson thinks that concept goes beyond his success in the ring.
“Listen, if he was anywhere near that realm of great as Muhammad Ali, he’d be able to take his kids to school by himself,” Tyson explained in 2017. “OK, he can’t take his kids to school by himself, and he’s talking about he’s great? Greatness is not guarding yourself from the people. It’s being accepted by the people.”

Author's Note:It's been a long time since my last update, so I'll give you a brief summary of what's happened so far to remind you which story you're reading.Nate is an average fifteen year old boy, uninterested in school and bored of life - until Kieran, a mysterious transfer student, arrives. Kieran expresses an unusual and unhealthy interest in Nate, which Nate thinks is purely bullying until he discovers that Kieran could be - and possibly is - related to the missing memories in Nate's past. Meanwhile, Nate's best friend, Jason, has started avoiding Nate in favor of his girlfriend, Winter, but to Nate's surprise invites Nate to hang out together again one evening. They meet Kieran at the skate park, and while Jason is in the bathroom Kieran 'expresses his feelings' to Nate - but whether it's honesty or manipulation, Nate isn't sure.
Hmm, I think that's about it. Oh, and Jason and Nate got into an arguement at the end of the last chapter.
I also changed Jade's name to Kyle - I don't even know why I called him Jade in the first place. He was Kyle in all my notes, lol.
Please stop hating me for not updating ;u;
As soon as Nate walked through the door, the phone rang. There was a note from his mum tacked to the fridge, but Nate couldn't read it because he hadn't turned on the light. He had been intending on heading straight up to bed. He didn't feel like eating and felt even less like taking any messages; he didn't want to think, and he didn't want to do anything that might encourage thinking. He ignored the phone and headed towards the stairs as it stopped ringing.
He was on the landing when it started again.
He swore loudly and trudged back down, snapping into the receiver when he picked it up.
Nate hesitated. He wasn't sure he recognized the voice.
"Kyle?" he asked hesitatingly after a moment. What could he want?
"Yeah," said Kyle shortly. "Hey, I was wondering, is Jason with with you?"
"No. He left for home over an hour ago. Didn't he text?"
"No, he didn't. Damn, do you know where he might have gone? There's some freaky shit on the news."
"Have you tried calling him?" Wondering what time it was, Nate reached across the bench for the kitchen light switch, fumbling with it until it illuminated the room and the clock on the wall.
"Phone's dead, or off."
"Maybe he went to the arcade?" said Nate, furrowing his forehead. He tried to remember which direction Jason had headed, but couldn't. Surely he would have noticed if Jason had started to walk in the direction of town? But too busy seething, Nate hadn't been paying enough attention. He licked his dry lips, thinking. He couldn't predict Jason anymore. He felt like he barely knew him.
"I could take a bus in and check," he offered reluctantly.
"No," said Kyle. "I don't think you guys should be walking around at night anymore." Nate heard Kyle grab his keys through the phone. "But I'm probably worrying over nothing. I'll get him to call you when he gets home."
"We had a fight," said Nate, knowing Jason wouldn't call.
"Ah, I see," said Jason, as though that explained everything. "Then I'll text you. What's your number?"
Nate gave him his number and Kyle told him again not to worry, and hung up. Ironically, it was Kyle's reassurance that made Nate worry. What 'freaky shit' was Kyle talking about?
Nate flicked on the TV, but there was just some movies and an Asian drama on. He wasn't even sure what time the news shows aired.
Not that it mattered – Jason could go and get himself beaten up in some kind of gang feud for all Nate cared. He kicked the back of the sofa and returned to the kitchen to put the kettle on to make a coffee, but ended up going back upstairs before the water boiled.
He lay back on his bed, trying to return to the thoughtless state he had been in when he had arrived home. He put his pillow over his face to block out the light from the stars; but his mind was buzzing now; wondering where Jason could be, whether or not he should make amends tomorrow, what Kieran had meant and what he really wanted.
It was half past midnight when the text came in. Nate hadn't been able to sleep at all. He snatched up the phone as soon as the jingle started. It was a tune Jason had picked out for a laugh, the opening to some children's show they used to watch back in primary school.
bastrd finaly came hm, safe n sound :) ~ Kyle
Nate tossed the phone on the floor and curled up under the covers.
Like I care, he thought bitterly.
"Where were you yesterday?" Stephanie asked on Friday morning. She had been hanging around at the bike stand waiting for him – Jason's bike was already there. "I called and your mum said you were sick."
"Then you know where I was," Nate muttered.
"I know you weren't sick because you never get sick, and I know you were skiving because you were meant to hand in that essay."
"Like I said, then you knew where I-"
"Jason was weird yesterday," Stephanie interrupted.
"Quiet, moody. He even snapped at Winter. What did you guys fight about?"
Nate kicked an empty can, aiming for B block, but it stopped a few meters short. He watched it rock on the concrete and didn't answer until it stopped. "Nothing important," he said. "I guess we just established how incompatible we are."
"Nate-" Stephanie started.
"No, Steph. He's an asshole. He's been treating me like shit recently."
Stephanie bit back whatever she was going to say and they walked to their lockers in silence. Nate wasn't sure if this meant Stephanie agreed or disagreed, but wasn't going to ask. He was sure, however, that Stephanie missed Jason too, and wondered, if it came to it, whether Stephanie would pick Jason over him. Unlike Jason, Nate didn't really have any other friends.
"Have you been watching the news lately?" Nate asked eventually, desperate to get Stephanie talking again, as he keyed in his locker combination. He had been meaning to watch it yesterday, but couldn't find an excuse to tell his mother. He didn't normally watch much TV, and if he got out of bed just to watch the news she would definitely have been suspicious.
Nate wasn't even sure what he was worried of her being suspicious of.
"Yeah," Stephanie said quietly. "It's pretty terrible, huh?"
"I wouldn't know, I haven't been watching it."
"So, are you going to tell me, or?" Nate prompted.
"Oh, right." They hovered around the locker, watching people go past. "A lot of people have gone missing," Stephanie said. "The council or someone has been covering it up – bribes probably – but Tuesday night a couple of teenage boys were killed. They think there's some new gang in town, but all the local gangs are being very hush about it... One of the reporters said they're too scared to say anything. The gangs, I mean." She leaned back against the neighboring locker and shrugged. "They'll probably leave in a few days. This kind of thing happens every now and again. I mean, this kind of thing is always on the news."
When Nate didn't say anything, she added, "It's the first time it's happened so locally, though."
"I didn't realize we had gangs," Nate said, furrowing his eyebrows as he fumbled with his locker. He swore under his breath as he realized he had gotten his combination wrong. Stephanie just laughed.
"You really don't watch enough TV. We don't have any serious ones, they're all in the big cities. I think that's why it's causing such a stir."
Inside Nate's locker there was a photo of Jason (among others, but it was the photo of Jason that Nate noticed). Nate ignored it as he got out his books for the first period, but thought back on the phone call from Kyle. Where had Jason gone that night?
An uncomfortable thought tumbled into his stomach. Had Jason joined a gang?
He slammed the metal door shut on the photo.
"You're still keen for tonight, though, right?" Stephanie asked, shutting the locker properly when the door bounced.
"Tonight?" Nate asked stupidly.
Stephanie elbowed him in the ribs and grinned, confusing Nate with her sudden change in demeanor. "You're taking me to see a movie," she said. "You can't stand me up now, my mum's already agreed to drive us. It's a date."
"Oh, right," said Nate. "Yeah, of course."
"Oh, and Nate? It's Friday," Stephanie said as the bell rang and she turned to leave. "You don't have Math today."
"Oh," said Nate, looking down at his calculus book. "Right."
At 6pm Nate was checking his hair in the mirror. He had never paid much attention to his own appearance before – he had never had much of a reason to, and the way his mother had fussed over his clothes and ripped combs through his hair when he was younger had taken away a lot of the appeal of trying to look nice.
Of course, he knew Stephanie didn't mean this to be a real date – which Nate clarified to himself as a meeting between two people romantically or sexually interested in one another (which he and Stephanie definitely weren't) – but the way Stephanie had suggested it after being rejected by Kieran, had called it a date, had got Nate thinking. About dates, about girls, about why neither of those things seemed to exist in his life.
Why didn't he dress up more to try and attract girls? He wasn't bad looking, was he? Sure, he had messy hair, but he had a nice nose. Nate really like his nose, and Stephanie had complimented it before. He wriggled his nose at his reflection. Maybe it was his personality? Nate knew he was boring. He wasn't really interested in anything, he hardly had anything interesting to talk about, so how could he expect anyone to be interested in him?
He shivered as his thoughts started to bring up someone who was interested in him, but he quickly squashed the surfacing face down. Stephanie had said Kieran hadn't been at school at all the past two days.
Instead, Nate raised another important question for himself; was he interested in anyone? He and Jason had joked about Sophie before, about her cleavage and the tattoo she was supposed to have on her thigh, but until Winter they'd never really talked about which girls they found attractive, or why. And even when Winter arrived, Jason hadn't expressed any interest in her until he announced one morning, "I'm going to hang out with Winter today."
Nate thought about Stephanie – thought of her as a girl and not as a best friend. He tried to pretend they didn't know each other's secrets, that Stephanie didn't do his homework for him or remind him to pack clean underwear for camp.
Could he find her attractive?
Stephanie giggled as Nate got in the car.
"You didn't have to dress up," she said, twisting in her seat and looking back over the headrest to see at Nate.
"I didn't dress up!" said Nate indignantly, looking down at the gray, striped shirt his mother had forced him to wear. When Mrs Brooks had asked him where he was going, he had thoughtlessly said, 'a date with Stephanie', thinking it was smoothest option – there's no way she would say no to that, no matter what was on the news.
It had been a disastrous mistake. Mrs Brooks had told him there was 'no chance in hell' she was going to let her son leave the house on a date in a shirt that promoted violence (it was an old Half-Life shirt Jason had gotten him for Christmas), and had insisted he wear the formal shirt she got him for Christmas instead.
In the end they reached a compromise; Nate left the house wearing casual a button-up t-shirt.
"Sit down, hun, we're driving," said Stephanie's mother, Ms Stone. They weren't actually driving – she had only just put the car into gear - but Stephanie turned back in her seat and buckled up anyway. Unlike Jason's family, Stephanie's used to only have one car. It was an old Holden hatch back, with scratched paint and a dent in the boot. It was also a manual. But now they used Winter's Dad's car, which was an automatic, and Nate got the impress Ms Stone wasn't too comfortable driving an automatic just yet.
"So, what are you kids going to see?" Ms Stone asked as the car lurched forward, the use of the word 'kids' reminding Nate that Winter wasn't in the car. He had been assuming it anyway, but knowing that Jason definitely wasn't going to be there was a relief.
"We haven't really decided, but there's a few I'm interested in"
"They're not horrors, are they?" asked Nate, suddenly squeamish as he recalled Stephanie's favorite genre.
"One of them," Stephanie admitted, "but the rest are comedies or dramas, or we could see an action? Was there anything you wanted to see?"
Nate shrugged, even though Stephanie couldn't see it. "Anything's good," he said. So long as there aren't any zombies. He wasn't even sure what was playing. Maybe he should watch more television...
"I guess we can decide when we get there."
Ms Stone couldn't find a park when they arrived, so they just got out when she stopped to let some girls cross the road opposite the cinema. Stephanie pecked her mum on the cheek through the open window, and then they scurried out of the middle of the road and watched her drive away. When Nate noticed Stephanie had her school bag with her, he raised an eyebrow.
"Mum made me pack some jellybeans, because it'd be cheaper than popcorn," Stephanie explained as they turned to go inside. "This was the smallest bag I had; they don't let people carry food in unless it's concealed. I wouldn't have bothered, but once she suggests something it's easiest just go along with it."
Nate laughed. "Jellybeans are good," he said, and then stopped as he recalled the last time he had eaten them – most of them had ended up ground into the concrete bowl by his and Jason's skateboard.
Nate quickly pushed the memory away. Tonight he just wanted to have some fun, to enjoy Stephanie's company and watch a nice romantic comedy. He wanted to pretend that he wasn't being stalked by a psychotic supermodel, that he had more than one friend, and that the one friend he did have had enough in common with him to take the now vacant position of 'Best Friend'.
They picked a romantic comedy (which, to Nate's relief, Stephanie suggested), but they still had half an hour before it started.
"I should have checked the timetables online," said Stephanie, sounding a little guilty. "There might have been something you were more interested in, and we wouldn't have been so early."
"We could get a drink while we wait, or go to the arcade?"
Nate waited for Stephanie to pull a face at the idea of going to the arcade, but she just said "Sure". Nate thought she might be feeling guilty that they were going to watch a romance instead of some kind of bloody war movie.
It's funny how, as soon as you think you're safe, as soon as you start to relax, something goes wrong. At least, Nate tried to think of it as funny.
"Oh. My. God," said Stephanie as they headed towards the exit. "Is that Kieran?"
There were two entrances to this side of the cinema. One lead straight out onto the road, and the other lead into the mall. Both entrances were huge and made of glass; you could look right through them at the people walking past.
Standing in the mall, just half a dozen meters away and separated from them by those painfully transparent doors, was Kieran. But not only Kieran – Kieran with his hands over some tall, pretty blond boy. The boy looked about Kieran's age, around the same height and build, but perhaps a little shorter. His hair was pulled back in a loose ponytail, showing off the contours of his face. He was beautiful.
Kieran was kissing him, pushing him back, until the boy pulled away. But they were laughing. It was friendly. They were friends. Boy friends.
Nate suddenly felt sick.
"I didn't know," Stephanie whispered, sounding as faint as Nate felt. "I didn't know."
Knowing what she meant, Nate couldn't find his voice to say, I did. But he didn't know, not really. He hadn't actually thought Kieran was gay.
"It's no wonder he's been turning all the girls down. Oh, gosh, we should pretend we haven't seen!" Stephanie exclaimed. "Maybe he's still, erm, in the closet?"
Nate barked out a laugh. "I really don't think so," he said, and it was at that moment that Kieran caught his eye through the glass.
Stephanie noticed too, because she was suddenly asking Nate what they were going to say, muttering something about how embarrassing it would be if he came over – "Oh, look, Nate, he's coming over!" - but Nate didn't hear much of it because he was too busy trying to decide what to do for himself.
"I think I need the bathroom," he said, but Stephanie suddenly grabbed his sleeve. Nate nearly pulled away. He couldn't think of a good reason why he didn't. Maybe he was still too proud to run away. Maybe he was still a little bit curious.
No, there was no way he could still be curious.
"Hi," Stephanie said breathlessly as the automated doors opened and Kieran walked through. His friend followed him, looking completely relaxed. Nate didn't recognize him as a student from their school, and while Nate didn't know many people, he would have known him. If someone had told him that there was more than one god-like teenager in this town, Nate wouldn't have believed them. He believed it now.
"Hey," said Kieran easily. "Did you guys just watch a movie?"
Stephanie took a moment to reply, as though she were expecting Nate to answer. When he didn't, she said, "No. Not yet." Short, quick, high pitched and barely intelligible.
"Are we holding you up?"
"No, no!" Stephanie squeaked, tightening her grip on Nate's sleeve. Nate accidentally caught the eye of Kieran's friend, who flashed him a perfect smile. Nate noticed now that he had a lip piercing and several ear piercings. Flushing, he quickly looked away.
"Oh, sorry, this is Luke," said Kieran. "He's a freshman at the local uni and a good friend of mine. Luke, this is Nathan and Stephanie. They go to school with me."
Luke's eyes snapped to Nate when Kieran said his name, and Nate knew instantly then that Kieran had mentioned him before. But what could he have said? To Nate's knowledge, you generally didn't go bragging to your boyfriend about your other sexual interests.
The thought made Nate squirm.
"It's a pleasure to meet you," said Luke, holding out his hand, which Stephanie shook and Nate ignored. The hand was withdrawn tentatively and shoved into a pocket, and Nate could feel Luke's inquisitive gaze, but still couldn't bring himself to look higher than their shoulders.
"When's your movie on?" Luke asked. "We've got nothing to do, so we could hang out with you guys." He tugged on Kieran's sleeve, reminding Nate that Stephanie was still clinging to his. "Ask them to hang with us," he pretended to whine. "I bet they're not as boring as you."
Kieran laughed and shrugged him off. "Then I guess we wouldn't have much company to offer them," he teased. "The boring and the annoying.
"But we're heading to the arcade," he added, turning back to Nate, "if you'd like to join us."
"I need the bathroom," said Nate flatly.
"Nate?" he heard Stephanie question as he walked away, but he ignored it. He couldn't stand it any longer. That fake smile, that fake laugh, that perfect, charming attitude. How many people was he deceiving? Was he deceiving Luke, too?
He shoved the door open and swore loudly, probably scaring the twelve year old at the basin out of his wits. He washed his hands, needing to feel something. Something icy, or hot, or sharp or painful - anything to clear his mind. The cold water was enough, relaxing him enough that he stopped shaking.
He ran his wet hands through his hair and wondered what time it was. The longer he waited the more likely Kieran would be gone when he went out. Someone else came in, startling him, but the man did his business and left, and then Nate was alone again.
This time, Kieran didn't try and sneak up on him. Nate clearly heard the door open and close, clearly saw Kieran's reflection in the mirror as he came round the corner. And somehow, he wasn't surprised. Maybe he was too used to it – or maybe he'd been expecting. But this time, Kieran didn't approach Nate, just leaned back against the wall with his hands in his pockets as they looked at each other in the mirror.
"Luke's pretty, huh?"
Nate gave a non-committal snort, which for some reason made Kieran smile.
"You'd like him,"" Kieran said. "You have a lot in common. Do you want to know what?"
"No," Nate lied.
"You both like playing games. You're both ridiculously stubborn, and get bored easily. You both grew up trying to please the people around you, to the point where nearly all the interests you developed are your friend's, and when they lost interest, so did you.
"You're constantly hoping for something exciting to happen, but you're too afraid to go looking for excitement yourself. Your favorite chip flavor is salt and vinegar, and you love strawberries but can't stand anything strawberry flavored. You write song lyrics occasionally, and want to learn an instrument, but are afraid of starting something new without Jason. You find men more physically and intellectually interesting, and you're not too sure what to make of it. You love to draw, but you're not very good because you haven't pursued it. You don't know what you want to do at college, and you hate broccoli.
Sorry, I got carried away. That last half was just about you – Luke loves broccoli."
"How do you know all that?" Nate whispered, finding it difficult to breath. He was bent over the basin, wide eyed and pale, unable to tear his eyes away from Kieran.
Kieran laughed lightly. "Well, I don't mean to sound like some kind of creepy stalker or anything-"
"Trust me," said Nate thickly, "you already have that covered."
Kieran's grin broadened, as though Nate were joking. "I have a degree in psychology," he said.
"You're in highschool!" Nate spat in disbelief. "And there's no degree that will tell you my favorite chip flavor." Or that I write songs – even Jason doesn't know that.
"I'm not going to tell you how I know that one," Kieran said, keeping the humor in his voice. "Do you want to know more?"
"No," Nate said, and this time he meant it. Kieran ignored him and took a step closer.
"You're becoming increasingly interested in me," he said quietly, stopping behind Nate. "You're afraid of me, but hopelessly attracted to the drama I could add to your boring day to day life. You don't want to out me because you're secretly hoping I might make your life more exciting – you're afraid that if you do, I might stop. You want me to make your life interesting."
"That's bullshit," Nate whispered. Bullshit, bullshit, bullshit, he repeated to himself. So why wasn't he shoving Kieran away?
And suddenly Kieran's hands were on his shoulders, turning Nate gently, effortlessly, and their lips connected – not powerfully, or roughly, like Nate was expecting. They were warm, soft, gently brushing against Nate's. Hot breath, cool fingers against his cheek. Nate couldn't breath.
And then Kieran pulled away, as though nothing had happened, but his eyes were dark and his expression unreadable. "You should go," he said quietly. "Your movie starts in three minutes."
There was a moment of silence. Nate wasn't sure why he waited – maybe he wanted Kieran to leave, so he could compose himself; maybe he was trying to decide how to react; maybe he was still processing what had happened and how he felt about it. Whatever it was, it was going on subconsciously – his surface thoughts were washing over blank.
But Nate only hesitated for a moment, and then he shoved past Kieran and was gone.
Author's Note: Before you make any plans to kill me, please remember that if I'm dead, I won't be able to write the next chapter ;u;
I know, it's been forever. I have a lot of excuses, but all I can really say is 'I'm sorry'. I love you guys, and I really appreciate you sticking with Rough Diamond - the encouraging emails and reviews have been amazing. As always, you can chat to me on twitter or formspring. I have a lot going on over the next couple of weeks, but I'll be pretty isolated, so having some people to talk to would be awesome. I also started a msn group for slash writers to support each other through their stories, chat about slash fiction and give each other advice. Anyone can join, so long as you write slash - if you're interested, let me know! (I can be contacted through any of the links on my profile).
I won't be updating for at least another two weeks - my art circle's art book is going on sale next week, and the week after that I have exams. But when my Summer holidays start (in November) I'll be updating a LOT more frequently.
As always, reviews are appreciate more than you can possibly imagine!

Christina Simoes held onto her 18-month-old son, Cameron, and jumped from their apartment window when she realized the building was on fire. While Cameron is fine, Christina might be left unable to walk. She stated that "I didn't think about it. All I was thinking about was getting him out of there. He mattered way more than I did" and "I don't think that I'm any special hero at all. I'm just Cameron's mom."
Watch the video below.
(H/T CBS News)

In Love with a Statue facts for kids
In Love with a Statue is an Italian fairy tale collected by Thomas Frederick Crane in Italian Popular Tales.
A king had two sons. The younger one fell in love with a statue. His older brother set out to see if he could find a woman like it. He bought a dancing mouse and a singing bird on the way, and saw a beautiful girl, exactly like the statue, appeared at a window when a beggar knocked on the door. He posed as a merchant of looking glasses and lured her onto his ship, and sailed off with her.
While he was sailing, a large black bird told him that the mouse, the bird, and the lady would all turn his brother's head but if he said anything, he would turn to stone. The older prince showed his brother the mouse and bird, but killed them; to keep him from killing the lady, the younger prince had him thrown into prison and, when he would not speak, condemned to death. When it was time to execute, the older brother told the story and turned to stone.
After the lady and the younger prince married, they had two children, and a physician said that with their blood, he could restore the prince to flesh. The mother refused, but the king had it done while she was at a ball. The older prince went to the ball, and the mother ran back to see what had happened to her children. The physician showed her them alive and well, and told her that he was her father, and wanted to show her what love of children was like.
|Mary the Jewess|

Oh yes, yes the majority of them thought we were all slums and I had to say that “my husband was a great deal better educated than some of you and a lot of people” that were there. But it was an overspill for the bombed out in London and these people had never had a proper house before and they were, they were so pleased to come and have a proper house with a garden. This was what they liked and there was a lot of goodwill between the corporation and the, the people of Stevenage, the new people.
Joined ambulance service in 1948 which was the start of the Health Service. Stationed in Basil Road in the Old Town. Married in 1951, and moved into Stevenage in 1952. Offered house as emergency services. House was in Broadview top of Sish Lane, one of the first houses. Sish Lane was still a track, not a proper road. Very little existed other than some hostels in Sish lane.
“So when the job as housing manager at Stevenage came out, I mean I didn’t leave Holborn because I was unhappy there, except I was unhappy we couldn’t do much.
I remember this rather depressing time when all you had to let was an occasional vacancy you know going through agonies as to who this two rooms with a sink on the stairs was going to be let to and saying if only I could have a terrace of nice little houses with gardens.
And I kept diary that had terraces and terraces anyway so I got the job in 1951 when before apart from a few staff houses, before the houses started.
I was the first housing manager from the housing point of view I saw it from the very beginning.”
Audio not available.
There was a sort of code in them days how everybody knew when a house was going to be ready because they actually screwed the number on the front door. Once they’d screwed the number on the front door you knew that you would hear within a few days that your house was available. And your friends who lived local would keep you posted.
Most people thought all the roughs from the top of the housing list in London were coming out to Stevenage, that isn’t so.
You could only come to Stevenage if you had a job and the people who were allocated their housing nominations in the firms were not going to give jobs to people who were going to sweep up, they wanted their skilled workers to come.
“We were the very first people in Fellows Way and it was the very first house to be finished because at that time Miss Tabor was friendly with mum and dad, and she rushed through, so we could get the house finished, and we had a choice of number three or five. And there was a chap working for the corporation named Harry Byatt and he came to see mum and advised her to take number five, because he had a good look and he said that number three was going to have problems with the floor. So she said right. So she decided on number five, so they quickly finished the house. And number three since has had the floor in the lounge cracked twice, so you know – one of those things.”
And the only one we didn’t have to go to a labour exchange was Stevenage, because at that time the Korean War was on and they were calling up the navy reserve. So I burnt me papers and this was the only, because at that time you went to the labour exchange you know they traced you back.
So, Stevenage one you didn’t have to go to a labour exchange. I came here and got a job straight away.
“And I suppose I must have applied for, eight or nine different opportunities, one of which was Stevenage.
I didn’t get a reply very quickly, and we were, going back up to Doncaster to see our relatives, there was family who were still living there, and on the journey back as we passed through Stevenage, my, my wife said;
“I, I don’t know what’s the matter with Stevenage. They don’t seem to want you.”
Anyway, she stuck her tongue out at Stevenage as we went through on the old A1.
A week later I was interviewing.
We came and we were shown round by, Mary Tabor, who was the Housing Manager at that time, and I was, quite intrigued because we saw, I think about seven different types of houses, how, as we came to each house, somebody in the group would say,
“Ah, that’s the one for me.””
“…but still in a lot of mud, and rather rough conditions which one gets from a building site. We then walked back up through the mud to Stoney Hall and to Broadview, and this house was one that had been occupied for about 6 months, and was now empty.
And we rather liked that, it was in a situation the building had gone past that, things were clean and fairly tidy around. It was nearer the Old Town, which was the sole source of shopping in those days.”

How are do you feel at 80?
I am extremely happy, grateful to God for only Him could have organised my life from one year, two years, 20 years to 80 years. No medicine or doctor can do that. I have been opportune to do many things in my life. I regard myself as being successful; not materially but fulfilled.
Do you feel fulfilled at 80?
There are many things I would have been happier to have done in my life. My mother came from the Mustafa family of Alkanchi, who were Khadis. If I had opportunity, I would have liked to go through the judiciary like my friend and father, Justice Mamman Nasir. I would also have loved to pay more attention to academic work. I would have liked to be a professor, teaching and doing research.
But you were always a top contender to be the Sultan of Sokoto.
People will be surprised to hear this but I have never prayed to God to be the Sultan of Sokoto, never ever. Some years back at the King’s Guest House in Makka, late Sultan Maccido and then Sarkin Gwandu Jokolo were all there and we were talking about it and I told them I never ever prayed to Allah to be Sultan. They were surprised. But I became sultan without the throne, the way I was brought up by Sultan Abubakar, the elder brother of my father, from the age of seven when he took me away and sent me to elementary school. I was very lucky that Sultan Abubakar remembered at the right time that I had reached school age. One morning, Dogarai [palace guards] arrived from the Sultan’s palace and said where is Malami? They took me to the Sultan and he sent me to school. From then on I concentrated on my studies and I was doing very well. Ahmadu Bello was the Councillor in charge of Education, Police and Prison. I was also doing well in school and that was what endeared me to him. I learnt a lot and I benefited a lot from Sultan Abubakar and Sir Ahmadu Bello, both of whom were no nonsense people, highly disciplined.
It was me that Sir Abubakar told to take the current Sultan [Muhammadu Sa’ad] to military school. I drove him in my car from Sokoto to Kaduna and handed him over to General Gibson Jallo. I grew up with Sultan Abubakar and was always travelling together with him and I absorbed a lot. I often felt that I had become a sultan without the throne, apart from the throne of Wurno which I enjoyed very much as I succeeded my father there. When I was appointed the Sarkin Sudan [district head] of Wurno, politics was banned in the country. I was one of those that established NPN. I was the first Chairman of its Finance Committee. But when it became a political party Wazirin Gwandu and I left.
What was it like being the Sarkin Sudan of Wurno?
I enjoyed it very much and I learnt a lot. I never thought it would be attractive and be able to do what I did. I never knew that a district head had so many responsibilities.
You said it was never your ambition to become Sultan but when Sultan Abubakar died in 1988, there was a big crisis and you were even arrested and taken to Uyo in a black maria. What really happened?
I took part in the disturbances that greeted Dasuki’s appointment. Long story; it is contained in my book. There had always been princely competition between Dasuki and me. We never get on well especially when I joined the Marketing Board. Dasuki was the chairman of the marketing board and each Northern state was represented by the Permanent Secretary Ministry of Agriculture, but the military governors decided to dissolve the board and appointed us as additional independent people. It was decided that each state should bring an independent person whom the government had confidence in. They appointed me to represent North Western State and such could not have been pleasant to whoever was there before, including the chairman himself. I think that was where the whole thing ignited and propelled afterwards.
People were trying all the time to reconcile me and him but it was difficult, up till when he was announced as the Sultan. There was no way I could abandon Sultan Maccido because his father brought me up and made me what I became. To abandon Maccido and support Dasuki would have been unbelievable. When they announced his appointment, there were disturbances in Sokoto and they called me to assist in quelling the disturbances but in the process they roped me in. They put me in a Black Maria and we drove the whole night from Sokoto, through Abuja, through Onitsha and when we arrived outside the prison in Akwa Ibom, a policeman was waiting and said he had orders to take me back to Sokoto. I told him that I was arrested and brought here, but he showed me a document directing him to return me to Sokoto.
All I could do was to donate the little money I had to those we met there, then we started driving back all the way to Sokoto and when we arrived at Kaduna, I slept for two hours before we moved to Sokoto. Although I was asked to be brought back to Sokoto, I had to wait for another instruction for me to be released. When we arrived the Police said they were sorry the Governor of the state was not around as he travelled to Lagos. They accommodated me overnight in a government guest house and by the following morning the instruction came for me to be released. I said I cannot be released as I was taken with some people to Akwa Ibom and I should be taken back to those people or they should be released also as we were alleged to have committed the same offence. So they decided later to release me.
I was never in good terms with Ibrahim Dasuki but we forgave each other before he died. I went to his house in Kaduna; his children were there. There was no ill feeling. May God forgive me of whatever trespasses I might have committed.
Sultan Dasuki promptly removed you as Sarkin Sudan of Wurno and moved you to Dange. What happened?
They said I committed many offences, that I was not staying in Wurno and that I was supposed to be staying there 24 hours a day. Before Dasuki’s time I was engaged in many things like in the Marketing Board. I represented the Federal Government in University of Nigeria, Nsukka and I was involved in many organisations either in my personal capacity or representing the government. So I said that was why I could not stay in Wurno. I had permission from Sultan Abubakar and I also appointed a Wakili with full authority. So Dasuki said he was not happy and that I should be removed to Dange, which was a demotion because for every member of Sultan Bello’s house which I come from, Wurno is number one. Sultan Abubakar once removed his elder brother as Sarkin Sudan of Wurno for embezzlement and he demoted him to Dange, so I said no, I would not accept the posting but Dasuki said the government made the decision and I said I would rather resign.
Thirty years after, why are you still called Sarkin Sudan?
People still call me Sarkin Sudan but they no longer add of Wurno.
You established many industries in Wurno when you were there but they don’t exist now.
Yes, such as Zaki Bottling Company and red bricks factory. Because of the downtown in the economy, one by one they died off. I gravitated into commerce because when I was a student in the UK, I made many friends from PZ. I met somebody from the PZ family and we became great friends. My friend’s uncle was the one in charge of PZ operations worldwide. I told him I was going back to Nigeria to participate in politics, before the first coup. Unfortunately my friend’s uncle died and he took over the operations of PZ, so he said no more politics for me and that I should join him. That was how I joined the PZ Board. I was also on the board of Costain together with Sir Odumegwu Ojukwu [Emeka’s father]. That was how I gravitated into commerce, and no more politics.
You wanted to be a politician?
I was very active in the student movement [in UK]. Myself, Umaru Dikko and late Kaloma Ali, we established NPC [in UK]. When I came back to Nigeria, I wanted to be a member of parliament in Lagos. I was offered to be a member of the House in Kaduna but I was not interested. After the last meeting of parliament in Lagos before the 1966 coup, some members were travelling home from Lagos and someone died in a car accident in Funtua. The night Ahmadu Bello was killed, I was with him earlier in the afternoon. I, Umaru Shinkafi were there when they said Akintola had arrived from Lagos to see him and he warned him that there may be an attempted coup. Later that night, Ahmadu Bello told me that there was an opportunity for me to contest the bye-election but he died that night. I was set to go into politics but my friend diverted me into commerce. I have no regrets over that because I made many friends all over the world.
In the 1970s you were best known as a businessman in addition to Sarkin Sudan.
The business community was a small community, we knew each other and one’s name goes round that this man can do so and so. Some people would come to you and say, we want to establish a company and we would like you to be our chairman. I often declined, citing other engagements. With Philip Asiodu we established a furniture factory in Asaba; with Aminu Dantata we established a company in Kano, producing water pipes and other things, and with Ahmed Joda we established The Democrat. Nigeria was very peaceful then and there was a lot of cooperation, before corruption took over.
Let me tell you a story about the old leaders. There was a day that Sultan Abubakar arrived Kaduna from Sokoto. Ahmadu Bello sent Mu’azu Lamido, who was the Minister of Animal and Forestry, that “please go and tell the Sultan that we are very happy to see him arrive safely from Sokoto but tell him that I, Ahmadu Bello woke up this morning without a single kobo. So go and get something from the Sultan for me.” So Mu’azu went and told the Sultan that Ahmadu Bello said he was broke. Mu’azu Lamido told me that the Sultan was very unhappy. In the evening, Sultan Abubakar called Mu’azu Lamido and told him that he did not have money either but that later in the evening someone came to greet him and gave him some money, which he then passed on to Ahmadu Bello. This was the type of leaders we had in those days. Prime Minister Tafawa Balewa too often woke up without a single kobo.
There is another story about UTC Motors in Kaduna. It became big because that was where the House of Assembly members were given loans and car maintenance. Many years earlier, Ahmadu Bello was going from Sokoto to Kano and his car broke down near Funtua. He was trying to repair it when one white man drove by, saw him and drove back. He said he was also going to Kano. This young man drove Ahmadu Bello in his car and said he would send some men from his office, UTC to go back and repair the car.
Many years later Ahmadu Bello remembered the young man and he sent for him. When Sinnemann was found, Ahmadu Bello requested him to open a branch of his company in Kaduna. The man said he would have to get permission from Europe. When he secured the permission he established UTC in Kaduna and it was soon rivalled that of Lagos. The man was so grateful due to the success of the office that he took a brand new car to the Speaker of the Northern House Umaru Gwandu, as a gift. The Speaker said, “You can see two cars in my compound, one personal, one official. I don’t need any other car.”
You were very close to late Sultan Abubakar. What kind of man was he?
He was a family man who looked after everybody. He alone with the driver would drive to a village near Wurno where one of his sisters got married. My family just saw him driving to the house. He looked after everybody’s interest till his end and they were always broke as he and Ahmadu Bello gave away whatever they had. They had big, big alkyabba but no money.
In 1964 when we went for hajj, the Sultan left his entire household to Dike, an Ibo man [who came to Sokoto in 1915]. Dike was a strict disciplinarian and any boy misbehaving, he disciplined him. The Sultan was very happy with him, unlike today that when a teacher beats a child for misbehaving, his parents would go and beat the teacher.
Was it true that before 1964 Sultans were not going to hajj?
It was because there was no opportunity. It was not true that they were prohibited or that they disliked going to hajj. It is not true.
What was your relationship like with the former Military Governor of North Western State Alhaji Usman Farouk? He once said he did not want to approve your appointment as Sarkin Sudan.
Initially, our relationship was very good because when he came he wanted everybody’s cooperation, that we should help him, that if there is anything wrong we should go straight and tell him the truth. Now, there was this mechanic, he was a policeman looking after police equipment in Sokoto and he turned himself into somebody in charge of transport. He was blocking the road and collecting money from transporters and he was destroying transport business in the area. So when I heard
I went to the Private Secretary, Isa Wasagu and I said I wanted to see the Governor. I got an appointment and I said “Sir, you told us to assist you by giving you information, this is what I get.” He asked me, ‘What have you got to do with the police?’ I said it was you that said we should give you information if we have it. He said, “Don’t ever get involved with police work!”
He was a complex and difficult person. When [Inspector General of Police] Kam Salem came to Sokoto, Usman Faruk refused to receive him at the airport, and this was the person that made him governor.
There was one particular district head that was to be appointed. Government made the announcement on radio that so and so would be appointed. So I went to the Sultan and told him that there was this announcement that so, so would be appointed a district head and that this seems to be a mistake and the Sultan should go and see the governor for correction. So we called the private secretary and the Sultan asked him to tell the governor that he would like to see him. When they told Usman Faruk, he said the Sultan must tell him why he wanted to see him. I soon flew from Sokoto to Lagos and in Kaduna we picked up M. D. Yusuf and I told him what was happening between the Sultan and the governor. M. D. Yusuf was not happy so when he arrived in Lagos, he told General Gowon about it. Around that time [early 1975] Moukhtar Ould Dadah of Mauritania visited Sokoto and when they were going back, Gowon took the governor with him. When they got to Lagos, General Gowon told Usman Faruk what he heard. Usman Faruk said it was not true, that it was people like Hamzat Ahmadu [Walin Sokoto and Gowon’s PPS] that were telling lies against him. Innocently Gowon said no, it was not Hamzat but Sarkin Sudan who told me. So when Usman Faruk returned to Sokoto he said I must be dismissed as Sarkin Sudan. Despite intervention by Shehu Shagari and others, he was adamant until one day they went to Uganda and there was a coup [in July 1975].
When you became Nigeria’s first Ambassador to South Africa, what was Nelson Mandela’s attitude to?
Mandela was forever for Nigeria and he regarded Nigeria as his home. Nothing could be said against Mandela. The only time that he was angry with Nigeria was after the hanging of the Ogoni people. I was in Nigeria then; he withdrew his Ambassador from here when the Ogoni men were hanged and that delayed my going there as Nigeria’s Ambassador to South Africa. My credentials were already received and accepted. Mandela was in New Zealand when the Ogoni were hanged. He tried to get General Abacha on phone. Abacha was never friendly with the telephone. Mandela tried and could not get him. He got Alhaji Abubakar Alhaji who was our High Commissioner in UK to get Abacha but he could not get him. Our Foreign Minister Tom Ikimi was there in New Zealand; Mandela sent for him but he didn’t arrive for many hours. That was when he lost his temper and called Nigerians barbarians. Otherwise he was all the time for Nigeria.
What is your message to Nigerians at this time?
I was Chairman of Barclays Bank when Nigeria and others demanded that the bank pulls out of South Africa [because of apartheid]. When Barclays Bank’s Chairman in London said they would not move out of South Africa, Obasanjo said they must reduce their holdings so that Nigerians could have more shares, and Barclays said we could not continue to use their name, so we changed to Union Bank.
Because of that problem I took my board round the country, taking to various governments and the people. When we went to Port Harcourt, a member of our board took me to visit the creeks. The way I saw those creeks, in God’s wisdom he brought all the people of Nigeria together. There is a reason why God brought us together. As long as we are together we can disagree but I cannot see Nigeria breaking up. We have lots to learn from each other. God made us different people so that we can learn to know each other. We thank God for what we have got and we should do whatever we can to ensure that the country remains one.
This interview was first published by DailyTrust

26th June 2004
ok, this is rather pointless and this knowledge really doesn't add or detract anything to my life either way, but I was just curious, how rare is it to find someone who has a social security number one off from yours? I won't post my number (for blatantly obvious reasons), but at work we have to use the last several digits of it to clock in. A girl I know there had a number to clock in that was one number before mine. At first I didn't think much of it, "the other numbers are probably different," but then last week I found out her birthday is the same exact day as mine. Still, I thought, "well . . . she looks older than I do . . . and she's a senior while I'm a junior . . . it's probably just a coink'a'dink . . . . " But then TODAY I found out that not only was her birthday the exact same day, she's the exact same age too :eek: But that would still have to mean that no other baby in the U.S. was born inn between wouldn't it? :confused:
How odd would that be?
7th December 2003
So if you want to know if someone was born in between you should ask at what time she was born find out at what time you were born, calculate how many people are born each day and divied that by 24 and then compare this time with the difference of time between your two birthtimes.
26th June 2004
well, the trouble with that would be this;
My parents have a plaque dedicated to my sissy who was born at 9:38, as she was a blessing :nodding: I on the other hand, was known only as an inconvenience, and therefore we only know I was born at lunchtime :lol:
Ironic considering my username, but true . . . .

After getting married in September 2015, my wife and I immediately began the process of trying to conceive. We worked with CNY Fertility in Buffalo and had an amazing experience! There aren’t words to describe how wonderful our NP, Kris Ziegler, was to work with throughout the entire process. As with any infertility journey, there are trials and tribulations and mine was no different. From cysts to shingles, Kris was there for me every step of the way to provide the support I needed. There were many nights I would reach out to her when being upset or overwhelmed and she was always there for me. After four failed attempts at IUI, I felt defeated and began to tell myself that maybe we weren’t meant to have a baby. Kris was able to tell that I was beginning to lose hope and told me that she would do whatever it took to get me my baby. For our fifth round, we decided to try injectables and switched our sperm donor. I remember feeling very tense the day of the procedure and left the clinic telling myself that I was sure this round didn’t work and that we would need to move onto IVF. Imagine our surprise, when we got the news that we were pregnant!! Although ecstatic, I remained cautiously optimistic throughout those first few weeks. Once we were released from CNY’s care at 9 weeks, I started to become more hopeful that our dream was going to become a reality. On January 12th, 2017, I delivered our precious baby boy! I can’t thank Kris and all the staff at CNY enough for all their hard work!! We will definitely be returning to CNY in the future!

I agree with this. I get the skaters want to have a good attitude about things, but I feel the same way, about a lot of skaters. Ross always seems thrilled when he does well, like wining bronze at NHK and 4CC, but his reaction always seems surprised, like "Wow, I can't believe I did that!" instead of "Yeah, I just did that!". It seems to be a common attitude among the US men, maybe it's just the face they put on to the media, but I was a bit shocked when Josh Farris talked about being so happy when he was 2nd at Jr. Worlds by less than half a point, yeah the score and placement is great, but aren't you a little upset you didn't do a 2lo and won? Or here when he had an allergic reaction and lost to Kovtun, it was "I had an allergic reaction, given that and then the benadryl, I'm happy with how I did" instead of "I wish I had read the ingredients more carefully so this didn't happen because then I might have skated better and won, which I know I was capable of doing". And Jeremy's outlook is always, "Best so far." Yeah okay buddy, sure it's your best so far, but when you know you can still do way better, why are you happy with that, unless your "best so far" resulted in gold, which IIRC these words were said at last year's GPF, where he was 5th. I get it's not all about points and winning, but I don't think it's a bad thing to reveal you want to win and when mistakes or unfortunate occurences happen that prevent you from winning or doing your best, that you're disappointed because you know you could do better. A lot of it might just be the facade to the public these guys put on, but idk, I think if someone is going to break through, the drive is the most important thing, that and consistency. There are plenty of guys in the US with lots of talent, what's lacking is more the "take no prisoners" attitude, or the kind of minset that's like "I can do a quad, so I'm going to work really hard to put 2 in my freeskate, because I know I'll need it to be competitive, and I'm confident I can do it if I keep working at it." Idk. Evan had this mindset though I felt (not regarding quads, but when he was competing, they weren't necessary), and it took him far, he was talented for sure, but mostly he was hard working and driven and didn't mind letting people know he wanted to win and was upset when he didn't skate his best. That is what we need, IMO.

When the ideology of the modern era veers too far into the precipice of insanity, those who act as warning signs emerge to mind us of the cliff. Dobson is one such creature, a Clutch Cargo of signs to come, a Canary in our Coal Mine. You revile him because you know what he brings. You find him disgusting because he's the end goal of his and many's lines of logic. He's a sick man with too much power, as are many just like him. He's there for society to swing the pendulum back, to begin the march to the right socially. He's there to be what you don't want to be. Some will indicate him as a twisted version of themselves and some will see him as what they were born to fight. But none who are rational will adore his direction.
He is the avatar of insanity, and all he follows must be broken to dust to save your instincts. Smash his idols, dash his hopes, it's what he was born for. You can't deny a man his destiny.

Part I, F/m, mild CBT
The following story contains scenes of violent female domination. If that doesn't excite you, turn back now. Abort! If you're under-age in whatever jurisdiction you're stuck in, wait until you're no longer a minor, then write me a private request. Abort now!
For those of you who've read my previous posts, the following story might seem soft-core. I apologize for this in advance: I wanted to write a story like this, though. If you want to see part II, let me know.
Breaking Him In (Part I)
Men are strength incarnate: they are courage bound up in muscle - the sort of muscle that bulges eternally, in any situation, tirelessly, sweating. Men are combative by nature and heroic by design. They surge with passion, commanding obedience to their will - which erupts bold ideas from the hard terrain of masculine flesh.
They are not weak. They do not give in, surrender, or yield. They defy and rebel by genetic command. Testosterone. Men are grand-scale sperm cells, swimming against the current, writhing with insuppressible force - against the odds - to the elusive egg. Testosterone. Muscle. Power.
Ironically, Terrence would have been the scrawniest wimp to succumb to these stereotypes all his life. And, ultimately, he would have let himself down: would've seen himself flag and flail in the face of the Hercules myth again and again - how can a mere man be a godlike myth? - were it not for the liberation that Shari gave him. No, not gave him: forced upon him. Shari was the elusive egg-cell at the climax of his life: that goal which tells him to stop swimming.
You've made it, Terry. You're here. Now shut up.
Shari effortlessly coiled the collar of dominion around his neck.
Shut up and do your job. Make me happy.
Sometimes Terry wondered if it didn't him less of a man to be submissive. Were submissive men inherently less manly than the commanding, bullyish Man of myth and stereotype? Were all femdoms necessarily the keepers of half-men? Men with the spirit of manliness stripped from them? Men with their testicles reduced to mere ornaments to their dommes' power? Did the societal definition of masculinity and femininity mean that submissive men were no longer "men" at all? Was the notion of female domination of men self-refuting? Or were men ultimately warriors who had to serve a woman's pleasure? A woman's law? The sperm cell that strives toward the egg like something bound on a leash?
In his first encounter with Shari, Terry was ten years old. Shari was a tomboy - a girl who refused to accept girlishness. Terry at the playground, holding the ball. "No, Shari, you can't. Girls don't play this game." He tossed the ball to another boy. "Come on, Shari."
Testosterone. This is how things are done.
Later, in his junior year of high school, Terry was not so certain. He was dating girls, but full of self-doubt. And it was Shari who was rebellious. She had her driver's license before any of the boys. She owned a VW Bug, had a sticker on the bumper that read, "Girls Kick Ass." She asked him out on a date, and he accepted. Shari had a reputation as a "slut," and he - popular, athletic - wanted to get laid. He didn't know precisely how to do this - when to make a pass, when to kiss - but he knew that his body, his genetic make-up, his manly urges - would take care of all this. The reigns would fall into his hands. This is how things went.
Shari drove them; Shari chose the movie. Men shooting men on the screen - blood spilled in jungles, on city sidewalks. Shari put her hand over his. Shari leaned over and kissed him in the movie theatre. They were sitting in the very first row. Some of the kids from their school were behind them. Shari leaned over and kissed him - her warmth seizing him like a doll tossed into a fireplace. His body reacted - he felt a surge pass through him, his penis stiffened - but psychologically he wavered. He pulled away, and watched the men on the screen blow each other to pieces. All that testosterone.
Shari chose the restaurant. He was silenced as they read the menu: under the narrow table she laid her hand on his leg. Enchiladas, taco de rajas, allombre de pachuga.
"I'll have number thirteen, and he'll have number seven. And could you bring two horchatas?"
Over dinner, Terry reminded her of his accomplishments on the school soccer team: his daring play, the praise of his coach. He felt he was losing ground. She eyed him with amusement. She fed him light praise. She poured some hot sauce on his tacos, and he found his mouth burning. He had to stop eating.
"I'm sorry, Terry! Too hot for you, huh?"
Terry observed other couples in the restaurant: Men with their hands upon their women's laps; women looking up at their dates with soft, yielding admiration.
Shari asked him if he wanted to get drunk.
"What do you mean?"
"My sister has an apartment on Fifth Street. She's out of town; she said I could use her place. Whaddaya say?"
Terry hesitated. Shari drove them to her sister's apartment.
Shari made them margueritas - he didn't know what they were – and they sat on the couch. Her eyes never left him as he sipped.
"Weren't you once in a fight, Terry?"
"Back in the ninth grade? Didn't you and Eddy Yuknis get into a fist fight?"
"Oh! Yeah. Jeez, Eddy. What a wimp. He was a bully, though. I beat the crap out of him." He laughed.
"What was it like, beating up a man?"
"It felt great. He provoked me, you know. He said all sorts of stuff, talkin' trash about me behind my back, so I really let him have it."
"How did it happen?"
"It just happened. It's kind of a blur, but I beat the fuck out of him (pardon my language). He tried pretty hard, but I made him cry."
"Did you kick him in the balls?"
Terry froze. "Did I...kick him in the balls? No, no, I just -"
"Made him cry."
"Yeah, but I didn't do any dirty fighting."
"Because that's how to annihilate a man. Land a knee - or a foot, or a fist, or a weapon - in the groin, and a man's finished."
Shari smiled at her date. He turned away.
Quickly the alcohol formed a soothing blanket over Terry's nerves. He felt warmth flow through him. His muscles unwound. He complimented the drink, and she poured him another. As he took a deep drink, Shari put her arm around his shoulders. She tasted lime and tequila as she kissed him.
Terry felt himself shudder as her tongue entered his mouth. He felt the weight of her breasts against him. He smelled her body distinctly, though she wore no perfume: a strong, damp smell that reminded him of the ocean. He felt her hand on his side, stroking over his stomach, touching his firm chest. He felt himself losing ground, like sand washed into the waves. He gasped and grew rigid as her hand slid between his legs. She kissed him feverishly, held her hand firmly over his genitals. He felt passive.
"I want you, Terry - I want you so much."
Her tongue pushed against his, shoved it, writhed against it. She popped the first button on his fly.
"Um, Shari, wait..."
She didn't move away: she kept her hand over his groin. "What's wrong?"
"What...? I'm...Shari, it's too soon."
Shari sounded irritated, "Oh, come on, Terry."
She popped another button on his fly.
"No, Shari, I..."
He tried to rise, but immediately she put her hand on his chest.
"No, Terry. I want you."
Terry felt himself an observer, a passive camera eye. She undid the remaining buttons on his fly, and stroked his limp penis and his balls, bound tightly in his cotton underwear. His reluctance was irrelevant - the realization of this clanged in his mind - and he reacted fearfully. He tried earnestly to pull away; he tried to push her off, but she shoved one of his arms away violently. She plunged her other hand under his underwear and gripped his balls. He heard himself let out a whimper of protest.
"Don't fuck with me, Terry." Shari sounded cross.
"Shari, I don't WANT TO."
With one hand gripping his balls, Shari grabbed his hair with the other, and yanked his head back against the armrest of the couch. "It doesn't look like you have a choice, Terry. Does it?"
Shari pulled his head back against the armrest - hard, banging it. She increased the pressure on his testicles - triggering another whimper - then stared at him. He felt himself quivering.
Shari held him like that - vulnerable, powerless - staring at him silently, for two minutes. Terry shook, staring at her with his head pressed back against the couch. Shari pressed her thumb against his limp penis, driving it against his body.
"Come on, Terry. Come on. Get it up for me."
Terry felt his powerlessness completely. In the haze of his confusion, he realized that - however strange the experience might be – it was, nevertheless, a precursor to getting laid. This wasn't the way things were usually reported to him - with the woman softly gasping in protest, with the man driving through her inhibitions, overwhelming her with the force of his desire - but this was, apparently, a step toward getting laid. In the face of her domination, from which there was no way out but assent, he began to cooperate. He pulled down his pants – she told him, "That's it, Terry, good boy" - then slid his shoes off, and pulled his underwear down to his ankles and over his feet.
She released her hand from his chest, and concentrated on the flesh of his manhood. She held his penis, stroking it roughly, pulling on it. With her other hand, she pumped his balls, lifting his scrotum up, squeezing his nuts, applying pressure to them that made his thoughts crumble into feelings that he didn't recognize and couldn't assimilate: carnal desire driven into a corner, manliness broken down to servitude.
Shari brought her lips to his soft flesh: she held his cock in her mouth, working it with her stronger, more driven tongue. She sucked his balls one at a time into her mouth, introduced them to her teeth, ran her tongue over his scrotum, moved her -
"OK, Terry, lie on the floor." She sounded frustrated. He obeyed her, his knees bouncing against each other nervously, his genitals partly concealed. Standing above him, she drove his legs apart, then planted the ball of her right foot over his groin. She rubbed it against his cock and his balls with angry impatience. His vulnerability frightened him.
"Time to get it up, Terry."
She tapped her toenails into his ball sack, then pressed her heel against his cock.
"Get your dick up, Terry. I'm getting tired of this."
Terry tried to focus his energy; tried to obey her. The scene was so strange; it all seemed so crazy and unthinkable. And his penis failed to respond. He masculinity was hiding somewhere. Or defeated.
"Damn it, Terry."
Shari got down, straddling his waist.
"What's the matter with you, boy? Are you fucking intimidated? Where's your manhood?"
Shari slapped him hard across the face.
"Where's your testosterone, Terry?"
She gripped his balls again: harder than before: the pain made him cry out.
"Are these useless appendages? Do they WORK?"
She released his balls, made a fist, then banged her knuckles against them. He cried out.
"Oh, poor baby. Get your fucking cock up, Terry."
She beat her fist against his balls again - harder. He quivered at his innermost depths. She beat his nuts again, and he felt tears in his eyes. He was crying. With each blow, he felt like his spine was being shattered.
"Oh, shut the fuck up, you little slut."
With full force, she smashed her fist against his testicles. He heard himself balling. He heard her - and felt her - spit on his face. But she didn't hit him again: she wrapped her fingers around his nuts, squeezing, wrenching his manhood into life: his penis was rising.
"Yeah. That's it, Terry. Get your little dick up for me."
His face glowing with tears, Terry felt his cock at its full six-inch length. Shari pressed her hand over his face, grinding his head against the carpet, and mounted him. She screwed him through his tears; when she sensed that he was approaching orgasm, she'd reach behind her and hammer his balls with her fist. When she was fully satisfied, she dismounted. He hadn't come. She lay on top of him, her breasts pressing against his chest, her lips near his ear. "That's it, boy. That's just fine. I'll make a man out of you."
Terry sank into sleep under her weight.
He awoke minutes later. He was on his hands and knees, and he felt her fingers on his balls again. He didn't know what was happening: he felt something - a cord, an elastic cable - snapping around his scrotum, forcing his balls into little spheres dangling from his body.
"No, Shari, please," his voice sounded tearful still, but more pleading - worn out, exhausted. "Let me go, please-"
He had heard of this position. "Doggy-style." He expected her to slither under him so that he could fuck her from behind. It was a position that suggested strong male domination. But she didn't move; she stayed above and behind him. There was a pause after she released his strained balls, then he felt something hard, physically hard press against his ass cheeks. Simultaneously, she grabbed the hair on the back of his head and pulled back sharply. The pain made him cry out. Then he felt the real pain.
As Shari drove the dildo into his rectum - ripping through him, breaking open his body - she reached under him with her other hand and throttled his bound testicles. Terry was shocked with pain: he screamed. He remembered that he was in an apartment building: there were neighbors. If he screamed loud enough, they'd call the police.
Before plunging into him again, Shari drove her fingernails into his scrotum. Terry felt like a shark was biting off his testicles.
"If you make another sound, I'm going to rip these off, Terry. I'm going to make you a fucking eunuch. I'm going to castrate you with my fucking fingernails."
Terry felt sobs heave in his chest.
And she drove her penis into him again. He felt tears spill from his eyes. She gripped his hair with one hand, his balls with the other, and pounded into him. His body rocked under her.
"Not that you'd mind losing these puny little pills. You're not exactly a well-endowed man, Terry. You know that, don't you?"
She freed his balls, then grabbed his penis. She pulled at it fiercely. He felt like it was going to snap off in her grip.
"Six inch little fuck."
Her energy pounded into him; he could feel her penis driving against his insides. Waves of pain shot through him. He felt himself collapsing under her, and wept.
When he hit the floor she continued raping him - continued ripping at his hair - for fifteen minutes, then pulled out. He reflexively curled into a fetal position; trying to hold himself together in an abused bundle of shattered manhood. His body shook convulsively. His hands were between his legs, his fingers delicately poised at his throbbing balls, his string-like penis.
In a moment she was at him again. She forced him onto his back, then pressed her vagina over his face. He felt like she was trying to press his whole head into her. Blinded by tears and the hot wetness of her pussy, he felt her fingernails claw at the band around his balls. She ripped it off, yanking it up abruptly. His balls snapped back against his groin.
"Get it up, Terry."
He felt his body quake with a new explosion of tears.
"Get it up NOW."
He felt her hands tearing at his jewels - his treasures, the seeds of his manhood, the mighty rod of his male power - but this time they responded quickly. His penis rose. Triumphant. Not going to let a girl dominate him. All that testosterone.
While she jerked his cock with one hand, she rhythmically smacked his balls with the other.
When he came - barely catching air in smothered breaths - when his juice squirted forth, his potent male nectar, it was amidst throbs of unrelenting physical pain. His groin felt like a puny ounce of burning hamburger.
When she got off his face tears were dribbling down his cheeks. A puddle of cum lay on his chest, and she fed this to him. Several wet fingers into his mouth, plunging deep - fingernails scratching against his throat. Then the last stringy drops, slippery on four of her fingers, went into his anus. This part of his body had an entirely new identity. She drove her hand into him, her blade-like nails slick with his seed, wrenching against his bruised insides.
"Squirt your scum deep, Terry. Get yourself pregnant. Men are only good for one thing."

I Like It100% (426) I Dislike It
Lovely Japanese girl Nozomi Hazuki married to a businessman. She thought it would be great, because the guy was really successful, but after a month of living together with that man, she realized that it was not not cool. He was always busy with his work. One day, when her husband was on a business trip, she hooked up with a plumber. He just came up to her and started grabbing her boobs. She didn't want this, but when he started sucking her tits and hairy pussy she melted. He fingered her pussy and then she licked her own juices off his fingers. After that she got on her knees and gave a bomb ass blowjob to that dirty plumber and got her mouth filled with juicy and tasty loud of cum.
- Added: 3 months ago by Admin
- Duration: 8:00
- Viewed: 197,930

Ian was very skilled, compassionate, knowledgeable, and hands-on in his care and treatment of my mom. He was very accessible and made us feel, truly, that he was available, no matter how busy the section or POD was. He was very patient as he answered all of our questions. We asked questions about meds and he explained how meds worked within the body. He never appeared tired or bothered by our questions. Thank you, Ian, you are a treasure.

Yesterday, my mom received a text that our carpenter/electrician, Kuya Danny, was in the hospital because he fell from something at work. He was in the ER and comatose. I was worried because comatose na kaya. So my parents were planning to visit and give some financial aid to his family today. Sadly, my mom said that he died na. I cried a bit and I was shocked because he was important. Hindi lang dahil carpenter/electrician namin siya, part of the family siya. Lagi siyang nandyan at laging kakwentuhan. I'm just so sad.
Wherever you are Kuya Danny, I hope you are in a better place. We'll pray for you.

City confirmed the news in a statement, writing: "The Manchester City family are devastated to report the death today of Pep’s mother Dolors Sala Carrió in Manresa, Barcelona after contracting Coronavirus. She was 82-years-old.
Now, Guardiola's former assistant at the Etihad has extended his condolences, with Arteta revealing that he has been in contact with his compatriot since the news broke.
"I’ve been in touch with him… he was worried about his parents before because they’re getting older and they’d been trying to isolate," Arteta told Sky Sports.
"It’s really sad news. I know the family really well. I send my condolences to them and hopefully they can go through that all together."
Spain have had over 150,000 confirmed cases of the virus, with more than 15,000 people dying from COVID-19.
Arteta himself has had the disease, with his positive diagnosis prompting the Premier League to suspend all games, but the 38-year-old has since made a full recovery.
"Either mine wasn't a very strong virus or my immune system was pretty good," Arteta said. "The same day that we were told that we were at risk because we were in contact with the Olympiakos owner [Evangelos Marinakis] was the exact day when I started to show some symptoms.
"I felt a huge responsibility as I knew the next day we were playing Manchester City. I had a feeling inside of myself that something was wrong. We had to make the point and make it clear.
"We spoke to the Premier League about bringing the case forward as we knew we could expose ourselves to people. I pulled the doctor and the CEO to my house telling them that we had a situation due to my symptoms.
"We had players that had been in contact so we said the decision was too big for us alone to make. We had to communicate this with the Premier League and Manchester City in order to protect everybody. We made the right call."

We headed to the lease yesterday evening to check the cattle. Got there and called them up. They were all there but one, the Bully. Where would he be? He is always one of the first ones up to feed. We looked around the place and didn't see him. Figured he got into the neighbor's pasture or something. Decided to come back this morning and walk the fence.
Got up this morning to head out. Pepper had been barking since 2 in the morning about something. Walked out the back door to leave and the husband stopped to see what the ruckus was about on the back porch. He moved my wooden bench and a snake fell out from behind it! He starts saying a few choice words and grabs the shovel. Tries killin' it but the shovel is duller than dull. I run to the barn and get two more shovels. He finally kills it.
After that excitement, we take off to look for Bully. We get to the lease and all the cows are there. Still no Bully. We go to the back and start walking the creek. No sign he'd been down it. Walk some other fence lines. Nothing. Check the tanks. Not there either. Don't really know why he would leave the place, horses on one side, nothing on the other, and cows off a little ways from the back but there is good fence between us and them. We couldn't find tracks anywhere. We finally decided to go from neighbor to neighbor and see if they had saw him.
Unfortunately, a neighbor had seen him. He told us that he was hit on the road Wednesday night. They had to put him down cause it broke his back. One of the occupants of the vehicle was taken by ambulance to the hospital. They didn't know who the bull belonged to.
We drove down where they said it happened, which was down the road from our lease. Don't know why in the world he was down there. We knew he had to do the right thing, and the husband called the sheriff's office. He told them we thought it was our bull and gave them our information. DPS will be contacting us. We'll be gettin' a ticket for allowing our livestock on the roadway. The husband asked about the people but they didn't give us any more information.
Then the husband had to call Rent-a-Husband because Bully is actually his bull. He told him what happened and he was very understanding. He wanted to know about the passengers in the car and how we were (which at the time, was not good.)
So now we wait to hear from DPS. We do have insurance that covers the cattle so hopefully that will cover whatever we're gonna have to pay regarding the people that hit him. It's days like this when we wish we don't have cattle.
International Girls day
1 week ago

Does anybody out there have a teen that pees in glasses, cups, or soda bottles? My 14 year old son has been doing this daily now. He does it and then leaves the glass on my living room table. He lies and says its gatorade or whatever else he can think of. He has anxiety and depression. He is seeing a psychiatrist now and recently started seeing a psychologist. Though I didn't mention this part out of embarrassment. He has not been sexually abused. He has had a stressful life though. I am divorced. Left his father before he started school. His father is in his life though. I just wanted to figure out if this is part of another mental sickness. I did just leave a voicemail and an email to his docs today because I can't take anymore. And I didn't want to tell them in front of him as he may refuse to see them after that out of embarrassment. Don't know. He stopped going to school. He's on home hospital. (Teacher comes to our house). His severe anxiety appears to be the cause of medical symptoms. To much to go on about this. Just looking for answers.

‘’Well, no need to worry about me, I am very self-aware’’ said my client, just before his phone rang and he started pacing the restaurant, with his phone glued to his ear.
He didn’t notice the glancing eyes of the diners who were thinking he was rude. He didn’t hear the tuts of disgust from those who were disturbed by his noise. He didn’t see those who winced sideways to stay more than a meter away.
…and, he certainly didn’t notice the restaurant manager look at me in a way as if to say make him stop…. It had been a very awkward few minutes for everyone except him.
His company logo was embroidered proudly on the chest of his sweatshirt and as he walked past each table, it was clear to see by all. But, instead of that being a positive PR moment, it was having the reverse effect.
As he sat down, exclaiming that he was glad that conversation was over, ‘so is everyone else in the restaurant’ I added. A little shocked by my words, his head spun round to see everyone busying away in their own conversations, or merrily enjoying their tea and toast again. By this time, all evidence that the disturbance had gone, so he was not really sure of what I meant. I asked him to stop, just for a minute. I paused and just waited, I watched him start to look inquisitively around the room. What came out of his mouth next was very telling….
‘Oh, they’ve done this up since last time I was here, I didn’t notice that when I walked in.’
‘Oh, they have put some music on, or has it been playing the whole time?’
‘Oh, it has calmed down a lot since we arrived, or was it just me being noisy?’
‘Oh, isn’t everyone speaking quietly?’
Suddenly his whole demeanour changed, he had lowered his voiced and was leaning in so that others couldn’t hear him anymore.
‘Was I loud? Did I disturb everyone? Did I make myself look like a prize idiot?’
Then the killer question ‘do I do this all of the time?’
The coach in me knew that he was asking those questions of himself and he did not require an answer from me.
I had taken him out of his office environment as he was the noisiest person there, he didn’t ever understand the impact he had on others and his disruptive loud manner in the workplace was getting people down. I had intentionally taken him out of his own environment, to see if this is his style wherever he goes. He portrays himself as the best ambassador for the company, yet without realising, in public he was the worst.
Realising the lesson he had just learnt, he sat back gave out a huge sigh and thanked me. All I had done was let him experience a moment of ‘awareness’, not only for himself but also for the benefit of others.
Busyness and fast paced activity, put us on autopilot. Not being aware of how your energy affects the others around you can have the most negative of impacts on your reputation and influence.
Perhaps it’s time for you to just stop and reflect on this scenario, ‘are there moments in your working day when are so tied up in your own head space that you unwittingly disrupt the space of others?’.See all blogs

1 Answer | Add Yours
I suppose that this could be debated, but I would argue that the worst possible crime that someone could commit in these times would have been the crime of regicide -- the killing of one's own king.
Back in these days, the world was seen in very hierarchical terms. People all had their appointed (by God) places in the world and they were not supposed to try to get out of those places. On the top of the heap was the king.
If you killed the king, you were upsetting the whole order of the world. Not only that, you were upsetting a world order that had been decreed by God. So that would be a very heinous crime -- much worse than something like murdering a normal person.
We wouldn't think this way now because we don't believe in such a hierarchical world, but back in these days, things were much different.
We’ve answered 319,840 questions. We can answer yours, too.Ask a question

A Mother’s Struggle for Hope: Amparo from Colombia
When Amparo’s oldest son told her he was going back to Colombia to earn money for their destitute family, she begged him not to go. She, her two sons, and disabled sister had escaped to Ecuador to apply for asylum. There, they were safe from the constant threat of violence they had been under. “I told him it was too dangerous to go back,” she says with tears. “But he went. Six months later, he was brutally murdered. It was as if all the life had been ripped out of my heart.”
Colombia’s multi-decade internal conflict had forced more than five million people out of their homes, and had left its mark on Amparo’s life from the time she was a child. “My family had a small property when I was growing up. One night, when I was nine, men with guns came and threatened to kill us. They forced us off our land.”
That night, it was only their land that was taken, but a few years later, it was her father. “He was kidnapped and they wanted a ransom even though my family was poor. They tortured him and burned the ends of his fingers. We got him back, but he never recovered from what happened to him. He was never the same.”
When she thinks about what got her through the traumatic events of her childhood and adolescence, Amparo says, “My parents gave me so much love.” It was this love through immense adversity that she carried forward when she became a mother.
“I only studied until grade three because I had to help my family, so I made sure both my sons graduated high school. I worked very hard to support them. Sometimes I left the house at 4am and didn’t come back until 2pm, a day and a half later. I got paid by how much cane sugar I packed for export. I raised my sons by myself. My husband was abusive, so I left him. When I was working, my mom helped look after the boys. They never got into trouble. How many mother’s can say that about their sons?”
When her mother died, Amparo took over caring for her sister who is in a wheelchair, needs help eating and cannot communicate with words. “She’s like my own daughter,” Amparo says. “She gives me the strength to continue in this world. When I’m sad I look at her and I see her saying to me, ‘I’m here for you.’”
While Amparo gained another loved-one to support, the situation in her country continued to deteriorate. “There was so much killing. Many of my family were killed; only a few managed to leave. I took my sons and my sister to Ecuador. My family couldn’t believe it, how I got my sister there. God is so big and powerful.”
And then, her oldest son was murdered. “I would trade everything if I could just have him back.”
Hope for the future
All Amparo could think about now was giving her surviving son and sister a safe life with a positive future. She gathered all the documents that were asked of her, answered all the questions that were put to her, and waited and waited. Finally, she got a response. “When they told me, ‘You’re going to the United States’, it was such a blessing.”
But settling into this new country was not easy. After the initial ninety-day support period provided to her as a refugee, Amparo still needed a lot of support. “I didn’t know how to do anything here. Lori [from Beyond90] helped me with everything. She spent a lot of time with me. ”
Getting Amparo financially stable took a lot of effort. “My rent became so high that I didn’t have enough money to pay it," she says. Another crisis was looming, but Amparo had somewhere to turn.
Beyond90 located an apartment unit Amparo could afford and that could accommodate her sister. However, she first had to gain full legal guardianship of her sister to be able to sign a new lease on her behalf. Lori helped Amparo through this lengthy process and made sure she got to all of her legal appointments.
Amparo then had to pay a penalty for breaking the original lease. “Donors partnering with Beyond90 provided Amparo with the funds she needed to cover the penalty and become rent stable again,” says Lori. “Our donors are amazing. They help families at a time of crisis so they can get back on their own feet.”
The struggle toward full financial stability continued. Lori worked with Amparo until she was finally approved through the long-term care system to be paid for twelve hours a week as a caregiver for her sister. Amparo is currently focusing on learning new skills like banking and paying bills on her own. “I am so thankful for my new life,” says Amparo.
She is also thankful that her son has now become a husband and father and is working as a tradesperson, providing for his own family.
Her dream for her son has come true.
It is these successes of supporting refugees toward self-sufficiency that fuel Barton and Lori’s own dream. “We can’t wait for the day Beyond90 has enough funds to buy an apartment complex for transitional housing for refugees. It’ll be a place where they can have the full time they need to work toward being self-sufficient and integrating into American society. Supporting them right where they live through a structured life skills program, in partnership with other area agencies, will give them a firm foundation for their new lives. It’s really going to be exciting!”

Ray Antwone Glasgow III, a 17-year-old football and lacrosse standout at Baltimore City College high school, was killed in a shooting in Southeast Baltimore on Saturday night, police said, just two days before the Black Knights were set for a rematch with Mervo in the city's Division A lacrosse championship.
Glasgow, a longpole defenseman in lacrosse and a linebacker on the football team, had been promoted to the role of lacrosse team captain in only his second season, said coach Anthony "Merc" Ryan.
"Ray got the boys ignited. He got a fire under them," Ryan said. "You see the enthusiasm he had for it all."
His father, Ray Glasgow Jr., 35, called Ray III — his only biological son — a "daddy's boy" and "a better me."
"My son was everything I wanted to be growing up," Glasgow said Monday. The two had recently visited Hampton University to tour the historically black university's campus. It was Ray's No. 1 pick for college, Glasgow said.
"He was a better me. I used to tell him that all the time. If I could be anybody in the world I would want to be him, because the sky was the limit for him. He was an unbelievable kid."
An 18-year-old was also injured in the shooting, which happened about 6 p.m. in the 100 block of S. Eden St., near the City Springs Elementary/Middle School field, police said.
Police said the suspect drove a white Nissan Altima from the scene, and they asked anyone with information to call 1-866-7LOCKUP.
Police Commissioner Darryl De Sousa said Monday that Glasgow was not the intended target of the shooting. De Sousa called the killing a tragedy, saying the teen was not involved in any sort of criminal activity.
Glasgow was a smart kid who got good grades and helped with his father's painting company, Glasgow Professional Painting, his lacrosse coach said. His competitive spirit drew his classmates and teammates to him, his father added.
"He just wanted to win," Glasgow said. "Whether it was a scrimmage or a regular season game, a championship game, he always wanted to win. A lot of players looked up to him since elementary school, on the field or in the classroom."
But Glasgow said his son was determined to win the right way.
"He was willing to work as hard as he had to on the field and in the classroom," he said.
"He was just a great kid all the way around," Glasgow said, "loved by all."
After joining the team his sophomore season, Ray had recruited other football players to try out for lacrosse and had become something of an on-the-field coach, Ryan said.
"He picked the game up as quick as any kid I can recall," he said. "Ray played smart. He played his position well. We used him almost solely as our defenseman to clear the ball up to the middies. He's instrumental in everything we try to do out there."
Ryan said he had shared his condolences Sunday with Glasgow's grandmother, who recalled how her grandson had spent hours playing "wall ball" — throwing a lacrosse ball against a wall repeatedly to practice his stick skills.
"To see him come back with the kind of stickwork he did," Ryan said, "he really, really wanted to excel in the game."
The Black Knights had practiced Saturday in preparation for Monday's championship rematch — Mervo won last year's, 10-7, after back-to-back City championships — and Glasgow had been doing his part, revving up his teammates, Ryan said.
The junior never lacked for enthusiasm. He and his teammates had been blowing up the lacrosse team's group text message with excitement about Monday's championship, Ryan said.
"I have to tone him down sometimes," Ryan said. "He'll text me, call me — 'maybe we should put this guy in,' 'maybe we should run this play.'"
City College football coach Michael Hamilton said he'd seen Glasgow practicing with the lacrosse team Saturday. When his players told him about the their teammate's death that night, he couldn't believe it, he said.
"I was so shattered," he said. "What is there not to say about Ray? He's just the epitome of a good kid. Great student, great athlete, great kid."
Glasgow had recently finished his first season playing on the varsity football team after being called up from junior varsity, Hamilton said.
While his playing time had been limited due to the number of seniors ahead of him, Glasgow showed promise and had been "earmarked to be very instrumental" next season, Hamilton said.
"A lot of guys are taking it so hard because they were drawn to him," he said. "He was a motivator. He kept the guys motivated. … He was very athletic, very energetic."
"It floored me last night," Hamilton said. "With all this going on, this was personal."
Delories Brock, 91, who lives a few doors up the street from Glasgow's home on Edmondson Avenue, said she has known the family for 25 years and watched Glasgow grow up.
Brock, who is the matriarch of a five-generation family, said she would've been proud to have had Glasgow as one of her grandchildren or great-grandchildren. He'd been raised with manners and a good head on his shoulders, and must've been in the wrong place at the wrong time, she said.
"He did everything right," she said. "He was what everybody would want in a grandchild."

- Alyssa Hodges and Max Silvy had only gone on three dates before he became her birth partner.
- The heartwarming story went viral after she posted a TikTok video about it.
- And, yes, the Australian couple is still dating.
A woman gave birth with her Tinder match at the hospital — after only going on three dates with him.
In a TikTok video that's gotten more than 1.3 million views, new mother Alyssa Hodges of Brisbane, Australia, shared her birth story, which included her Tinder date Max Silvy.
"So the fourth date was him coming to my labor, and delivery, and birth. Like, what?" Hodges said in the video.
Hodges, 20, said she was supposed to pick up 25-year-old Silvy from the airport, but then her water broke. So instead, he went home and unpacked and then told her he would see her at the hospital.
"I was nervous because I was by myself, and yes, I want him as a support person, but what if we end up breaking up in a week's time?" she said while holding her newborn, Ollie, in her lap. "We've only had a couple of dates and didn't know each other very well. At this stage, his parents didn't know anything about me."
"Long story short, he ended up coming and basically being my biggest support," she added.
Australia's 7News reported that Hodges went into labor in September and spent a week shuttling between her home and the hospital.
"I was contracting for those days, and Max was with me the whole time. The birth itself was about seven hours," she told the outlet.
In her video, Hodges said that staff at the hospital thought Silvy was the father — which he did not refute so he could stay in the maternity unit. "He just went along with it," Hodges said.
Following his birth, nurses moved Ollie to the neonatal intensive care unit. Silvy took the week off work to stay with Alyssa at the hospital, she said.
"We both knew that we liked each other and had strong feelings for each other. But the birth was the peaking point of our relationship. It bonded us," Hodges told 7News.
"Looking back, I know it was the best decision ever. I'm so glad he was there."
Hodges' story has received an overwhelmingly positive response on TikTok, with users claiming they were "moved" and "in tears."
Many also heaped praise on Silvy, calling him the "man of the year."
"So, so special. What an amazing man. Wish he was my dad," user @missbogan882 commented.
With interest growing in the young couple's relationship, many users also wanted to know if they were still dating. According to a TikTok post by Hodges on Tuesday, the pair are "in the process of moving in" together.

4-year old shot in Englewood
CHICAGO It happened at 69th and Hoyne around 3:30 p.m. Police say the boy was shot in the leg and is in stable condition. He was taken to Holy Cross Hospital by his parents. No one is in custody. The boy was riding in a minivan with his mother when police say someone pulled up alongside them and fired several shots.

This evening in late in 1971, actor Klaus Kinski had caused a stir by announcing that he would be returning to recital after a decade spent as a movie star. Those who turned up to see him on the night, however, were largely of the younger generation and unconvinced by his choice of subject matter and his apparent identfication - in his own mind - with the historical figure of Jesus Christ. So it was that when five thousand people sat down in the audience for this show, the mood was split between those who genuinely wished to hear what Kinski had to say, and those who were there to heckle - and oh, how they heckled...
Ever since Kinski's autobiography All I Need is Love, retitled Kinski Uncut (with the names in the more libellous passages censored), has become better known or at least more widely read, his reputation as some kind of madman has been difficult to shake. After taking in all those tales of his insatiable sexual appetite, which included leanings towards incest (daughter Nastassja Kinski was reportedly not amused) as well as trying every woman he could get his hands on, and the scattershot insulting of just about everyone he ever worked with, not to mention the bit where he gets so angry that he strangles a wasp (!), the reasonable reaction would be that he was not a man in is right mind for most of the time.
That's if you believe he meant everything in that book, but it was not all about sex for Kinski, as he was actually very passionate about his work which is why he came across as so wounded when he felt he was not turning his talents to the best material. So when he opted to go back to the stage, he arranged for cameras to be there, sensing that something important was going to happen; well, it was likely to be unforgettable to all those who showed up, but the footage lay unattended to for decades until director Peter Geyer assembled it into some kind of shape in 2008. The trouble was, what it depicted was not going to change many audiences' minds that Kinski was off his rocker.
Yet while you can laugh at the mishaps the catcalls from those watching provoke, and Kinski was one of those people born with "one skin too few", meaning he wasn't going to take the scepticism he was faced with lightly, you do start to feel sorry for the star as his grand designs falter in the face of a tough crowd. As he launches into his "thirty typewritten pages of text" that he has memorised, he is interrupted by voices essentially calling him a hypocrite for getting so rich with his work and then espousing the ideals of the Biblical Christ, who associated with the poor and was, to their eyes, far more selfless than the man before them on the stage, who could be viewed as just another pretentious move star.
Was Kinski that out of touch? If you listen to what he is trying to say, that he is backing up Christ's teachings, then it's obvious he was sincere, even if his claims to be as persecuted as the Son of God was, if only by his implication, are hard to take. But that famous temper will not be appeased, and he has to break off from his monologue many times to bark back retorts at those criticising him and yelling out that this is not as good as those Edgar Wallace mysteries and Spaghetti Westerns he was famous for. Someone even shouts out "Hail Satan" at one of the more devout parts. It's true that seeing Kinski live up to his reputation as, shall we say, a volatile personality can be quite funny, but he was out there in front of thousands laying his soul bare and gets called a fascist for it. The film has a coda after the end credits, as the few who did wish to hear his show are rewarded with a more peaceful rendition after almost everyone else has gone home: even here the tension of the evening has not entirely dissipated.

Today I am starting a new thread. I am an artist and have been my entire life. I have been doing art since first grade. I took art class through all 12 grades. In 5th grade we moved to Whitehorse, Yukon in the middle of the school year. One of the art projects we had to do was of an under water scene. What I did not know was that my teacher had entered my painting in a contest. I, along with another kid, won the contest. My painting was displayed in the Children’s World Art Museum in Japan. It was quite the honor back then, I even got my picture in the local paper. I entered an art show in 9th grade. I only received an honorable mention even though I deserved to win. They actually thought I had traced my drawing and since I did not have the original with me to prove otherwise they only gave me an honorable mention. They did that to all my entries because of the one. In my adult life I belonged to an artist guild. While in that guild I was able to put some art in to an art sale. None of it sold, except to family, but I was OK with that.
I will post a picture of my art and the story that goes with it. I hope you find the thread enjoyable.
Thank you for taking this walk with me.

17. And Ananias went and entered into the house, and when he had laid his hands upon him, he said, Brother Saul, the Lord hath sent me, namely Jesus, who appeared to thee in the way as thou camest, that thou mayest recover thy sight, and that thou mayest be filled with the Holy Ghost.18. And forthwith there fell from his eyes as it had been scales: and he recovered his sight by and by; and arising he was baptized.19. And when he had taken meat he was strengthened.
17. Having laid his hands upon. We have said elsewhere that this was a solemn, and, as it were, an ordinary thing amongst the Jews, to lay their hands upon those whom they did commend to God. The apostles translated that custom taken from sacrifices to their use, either when they gave the visible graces of the Spirit or when they made any man minister of the Church. To this end doth Ananias lay his hands now upon Paul, partly that he may consecrate him unto God, partly that he may obtain for him the gifts of the Spirit. And though there be no mention made of doctrine in this place yet it shall appear afterwards by Paul's narration, that Ananias was also commanded to teach him; and by baptism, which was later in order, we gather that he was instructed in the faith. Let the readers note out of the chapter next going before how this ceremony is effectual to give the Spirit, But seeing Paul received the Spirit by the hand of Ananias, the Papists are more than ridiculous, who will have the bishops alone to lay on their hands.
18. There fell from his eyes as it had been scales. The blindness of Paul, as we have said before did not proceed from fear alone or from amazedness; but by this means was he admonished of his former blindness, that he might quite abandon that boldness and vain confidence wherewith he was puffed up. He boasted that he was taught at the feet of Gamaliel, (Acts 22:3;) and undoubtedly he thought very well of his great wittiness, which was notwithstanding mere blindness. Therefore he is deprived of the sight of his body three days, that he may begin to see with his mind; for those must become fools, whosoever they be, which seem to themselves wise, that they may attain to true wisdom. For seeing that Christ is the Sun of righteousness, in seeing without him we see not; it is he also which openeth the eyes of the mind. Both things were showed to Paul, and to us are they showed in his person; for he hath his eyes covered with scales, that, condemning all his knowledge of ignorance, he may learn that he hath need of new light, which he hath hitherto wanted; and he is taught that he must let [seek] the true light from none other save only from Christ, and that it is given by no other means save only through his goodness. Furthermore, whereas being pined with three days hunger, he maketh no haste to receive meat until he be baptized, thereby appeareth the earnest desire he had to learn, because he refreshed not his body with meat until his soul had received strength.

Actress Iyabo Ojo is set to feature in her first movie with veteran actor Richard Mofe Damijo (RMD) titled Palava.
The excited actress announced this on Instagram on Wednesday where she posted photos of the duo on set.
She wrote: “Finally get to be on set with the king himself. @mofedamijo.”
Directed by Niyi Akinmolayan, the movie will also feature Gideon Okeke, Bisola Aiyeola, Linda Ejiofor, Beverly Naya and singer Omawumi.
Iyabo was introduced into Nollywood by her colleague Bimbo Akintola.
According to the mother of two, watching Bimbo Akintola’s performance in the movie Out of Bounds motivated her. Iyabo said she reached out to Bimbo who gave her several tips on acting and introduced her to Keppy who helped in getting her first role.
“How did I start out in Nollywood? Okay, when I was done with secondary school I watched this movie called Out of Bounds, I fell in love with Bimbo Akintola’s acting. watching her on-screen that day I just said this is it.
“So the first thing I had to do was go look for Bimbo Akintola. I found her helpfully by one of my friends and I told her I wanted to actress she was very warm, accomodating and then she taught me a few tricks and told me I had to register with AGN and I had to start going for auditions, I started moving around with her and I was going with her for auditions.
“And then she introduced me to uncle Keppy Ekpenyong Bassey and his beautiful wife they were so nice to me and one day he just gave me a note somewhere in Surulere so I took the note and I went there and they said she still have to queue. And I was very excited at least for the first time I was going to have that opportunity to work in front of the camera and that was a big deal for me,” she said in parts.

James started his job as a tree planter at the Newton Forestry commission site near Elgin in 1939. It was the only job he could get at the time at the age of 14. He needed to get a bike to cycle to Newton and back home. Three of his workmates walked from Hopeman to Newton everyday (distance 4 1/2 miles – 1 hr 35 mins). He earned 19 /- a week and had the weekends off. He gave his earnings to his parents. He started work at 8 o’clock and then had a tea break at 9.30 a.m. For his lunch he had sandwiches, a banana and a drink. The work day ended at 4.30 p.m. In winter James worked in a shed. Everything was done by hand in those days. There was no training. When he wasn’t working he played bowls and played football. After working in Forestry he went to work at the Greenbrae Quarry in Cummingston as a labourer. Then he went on to work on the Kinloss RAF base for 25 years washing Nimrods and Shackletons.
James MacPherson was interviewed by Cora Mackenzie, a pupil at Burghead Primary School.

Namitha Kapoor is a Actress from India. She was born in Surat on May 10, 1981. She is listed on FreeOnes since 2011 and is currently ranked 14909th place. She currently has 7 gallery links in her own FreeOnes section.
Our records show that Namitha Kapoor is currently active which means she is still making movies, doing live shows and/or doing photo shoots.

Hoo. What a day it was. My first day back on evening shift and I barely made it in the front door of the place before it started. On of the guys on day shift in the control center called me over and said "You're walking into a sh*tstorm down there! They had a movement team on one guy and a use of force on another and the second guy is still sitting on the restraint bench and spitting on people!"
Then he laughed and said "Here ya go!"
Then on the way through Central I look in and there's the whole crew in one office doing paperwork and the movement team guys in the other office doing the same thing. About twelve people trying to do the same paperwork at two computers. What lunacy.
It seems the one guy went nuts and said he was going to kill himself and then refused to come out or cuff up so they had to go in on him with the team. Then after that was done and the team left they pulled this other guy out to see the nurse and he started going nuts and ended up slamming him on the ground. And when they went to put him on the bench he kicked one guy and head butted another and started spitting. I knew this one was going to happen sooner or later. The guy just kept getting nuttier and nuttier. And the jerk had less than a year to go on his sentence but now has maybe added another ten to that. What a fool.
And because of the placement of the restraint bench, if you opened C-wing door you were within spitting distance. I'm going to see if we can get something done about that.
So anyway I come in and the guy's on the bench and screaming and foaming at the mouth and spitting and threatening to kill anyone who comes near him. I figured I didn't have anything to lose by trying so I started talking to the guy. I worked up a bit of repoire with him but it didn't last long. Pretty soon he was spitting at me too and saying they were going to have to kill him if they tried to put him in a suicide cell.
Oh yeah, and he had a twenty million dollar lawsuit against us and as soon as the FBI got there we were all going to be fired.
Anyway, he was going to fight everything. He wasn't going to take a shot and he wasn't going to get off the bench and he wasn't going into a suicide cell. They'd have to kill him first.
And they dicked around and screwed around and hem-hawed and waited until third shift came on and let them deal with it. And by the time the team got down there we were trying to feed the house dinner. Had to stop right in the middle and wait til they were done. The team was there and they were pumped up and ready to go and they wanted to be careful because supposedly this guy had something you didn't want to bring home and what him spitting and all, and they were out in the sallyport and lined up ready to go bring this knucklehead down and carry him all the way to medical for his forced medications...... and he decided that he'd go ahead and walk up there and be okay.
And he did. The sucker. Just walked up there and gave them no trouble and walked back down a few hours later and went into the suicide cell and layed down by the heater and went to sleep.
I'll never believe another word that man says in his entire life.
Screwed my whole day up for nothing.
And all day people kept smiling at me and saying "Welcome back!"
Chief cook and bottle-washer - *I take my job as Cliff's cook seriously. It's easy, really, since he likes almost everything in the way of food, and so do I. Anyway, since I'm the cook...
13 hours ago

I wore my Larue hat(s) to the SHOT show, the funniest comment I got was from the guy at the NcStar booth. I was playing with a green laser, and the guy walked up, saw the hat and started stammering and acting like I was a celebrity. His first question was "I've heard of you guys, your from Texas, right?" He thought I worked for Larue... like the guys at Larue would have any interest in NcStar crap.. I didn't play along, I'm not a very good actor.. but his initial reaction was priceless..

So, this is kind of an odd story, and pretty personal, but I guess that's what this board is all about so it seems appropriate. Its also pretty lengthy, but I solemnly swear that if you read through the whole thing, you'll see just how powerful PMO can be and also how powerful NoFap can be, as well. Here goes nothing.
OK. From the day I was born, I've loved women. There was never any doubt in my mind that I wasn't anything but the straightest of all straight guys on the planet (as much as anyone can be, anyways). And its not that I felt like it was wrong to not be straight or anything, it just never even popped into my mind that I might be gay or bi or trans or any of that.
I had actually discovered fapping when I was around 6 or so, maybe even a little younger, by unintentionally using a book to rub up against my little member and soon realizing that it felt amazing if I did it long enough. So I would do this on a regular basis but I didn't really start fantasizing about girls until probably a couple of years later. And even then, it was more to like the underwear sections of Spiegel and JC Penny catalogues. Nothing too crazy.
Then, like most people here, I discovered the internet and I had access to all of crazy shit I'd ever want to see. When I started surfing, though, and began using my hand, I really only got into really normal porn and even liked looking at Solo Galleries and finding girls that looked like girls I knew in real life or someone I thought I could legitimately get with. I would still use my imagination a lot, too, and wouldn't even look at porn every time I would fap. But I definitely would fap at least once a day.
So, time goes by, I get into high school and I began to get into weirder porn. The weirdest thing that I looked at was probably bestiality, and I think this came from the fact that I never got laid in high school and the idea of getting with an animal seemed like the only way I would ever experience what the inside of a vagina felt like. (I never acted on this fear, so fortunately, that's not where this story is headed).
Another thing that I began doing was stimulating myself anally, and not really because I wanted to sleep with a guy, but because I thought I could like reverse engineer the feeling of something penetrating me into the feeling of what it must be like to penetrate a girl. And it was definitely an interesting experience and it felt quite nice, actually, so I began utilizing this experience in my fapping rotation but I didn't really think too much into it.
Years later, I began growing out my hair and went to college and still couldn't get laid. I also became much more withdrawn in college than I had been in High School, too. Even though I wasn't a Don Juan in High School, I still had plenty of friends and not much social anxiety but in college, I felt very out of my element and it got harder for me to meet people. My masturbating habits had then evolved to looking at a lot of Transexual and Lady Boy porn and imagining more and more what it must feel like to have sex as a girl.
One day, it then dawned on me that it would be so much easier to finally get laid if I was a girl, and since I had long hair, I thought that I was almost halfway there anyways, so I began to wear make up and tank tops and pretend to be a girl when I would fap. The only problem was that I could get turned on by the idea of being penetrated, but guys, themselves, never became very sexual attractive to me. I would still see beautiful women at school and get turned on, but I never saw a good looking guy and had the same feelings. But I continued dressing up like a girl, and still never really felt that weird about it. I believe I never felt like I was gay during any of this because when I would fantasize about being penetrated, it was never as a guy, it would always be as a girl, so in a sense, it was still a fantasy of being in a hetero relationship.
When I finally graduated from college, however, I was at a graduation party, and wouldn't you know it, I met a girl and the very next night, we went to my apartment, and I got laid for the first time. And it was ok. It wasn't mind blowing and but I think I was just so nervous about it having taken so long that I didn't want to mess things up. Thankfully it all went well and I began seeing and sleeping with this girl regularly for about a month.
During this time, I didn't really masturbate very much, and I was satisfied just getting laid. I also didn't really feel the urge to be a girl anymore, either. After a month, though, the girl moved away but still, the urges never really came back.
I ended up sleeping with a total of 5 girls over the next six months and I felt very at ease, sexually speaking.
After this time, though, I fell in to a deep depression for many reasons. One of the girls I slept with was one of my best friend's long time crush so I lost a best friend, then I abandoned another best friend who I felt was weighing me down, and I was planning on moving to Los Angeles later that year but didn't really have enough money and was super stressed out about that, too. I also hated the job I was working and had the Office Space syndrome where everyday was the worst day of my life.
I then, one night, had the thought that if I was a girl, I would be able to find a guy who would pay for everything in my life, and I wouldn't have to work and I could have a life of freedom that I had always desired. I realize how misogynistic that sounds, but the idea brought me a lot of comfort. I then realized that life is very difficult for Transgendered people so I dropped that plan, and to make a long story short, I convinced myself that I needed to be gay in order to do this, and since I already liked the idea of being penetrated, it would be pretty close to the same thing and I could find a wealthy gay guy to pay my bills. Again, I realize how depraved this is, but I was mega depressed so I was super desperate for an answer.
I then began fapping to gay porn every night, but I could really only get off to the idea of being very feminine and getting dominated by someone stronger than me, but if I tried to think about the actual male presence in the fantasy, it did nothing for me, except remind me that I wasn't actually attracted to guys. It was still easier for me to fap to straight porn and just pretend to be the girl. But, as you all know, through the continuous fapping, I eventually got those thoughts out of my mind and subconsciously convinced myself that I was just afraid to be attracted to a guy because society still thinks it is wrong and I had been ingrained with the idea that homosexual attraction should be repressed.
I then eventually moved out to LA and thought that this was finally my chance to try getting with a guy. It took me a while to meet people but I finally did and I met a guy who would be my first male experience.
I'd also like to add that I would still get attracted solely to girls I would see on the street, but if I ever tried to fap to them, I would get a terrible anxiety attack and think that I wouldn't be able to orgasm as hard so I would switch back to thinking about getting penetrated and, during the orgasm, it was great, but afterwards, I would get additional anxiety because I still knew deep down inside that I wasn't really attracted to guys. But again, I pawned this off to the idea that it was society giving me these demons, not my inner sexual desires.
So, back to the guy I met, I wasn't really attracted to him but he liked me a lot and was also rich, so I gave it a go. Obviously, I chose to be on bottom. And, honestly, the sex wasn't really the worst thing ever and was actually pretty cool, and I finally had someone who was attracted to me which gave me a sense of comfort. But anytime we weren't having sex or if I wasn't fapping, I still could not for the life of me get turned on by the idea of getting with a guy, but by this time, I had repressed recognizing my attraction for women so much that it was hard for me to get turned on by them anymore, either. I eventually began to think that I would never be sexually attracted to anyone ever again, which was literally the worst feeling in the world.
So, as time went on, a long with smoking copious amounts of pot (which I had always done since 16, and which also helped to form the deep trenches of my sexual anxieties), I found a cocaine source and began just doing drugs in order to get myself out of my sexual funk and thought that the coke horniness would allow me to see past my anxieties and I would be able to accept that I was gay. Unfortunately, this never happened and I just got even more depressed.
Eventually, though, I had a mentally unstable friend come and stay at my apartment for a while to help out with rent and he ended up having a nervous breakdown and went totally ape shit on our bathroom wall with a hammer and chisel before throwing my TV out of my 6th floor window, so I was obviously let out of my lease early and, being jobless and living off of the last little bit of my savings, I decided to pack up and move back home for a little while to reassess my entire life.
I'm from a really small town so when I got to my parents, I at once loved the silence and peace from the city, but I was also insanely bored. I kept smoking pot on the reg and I continued my battle with my sexual demons, via seeing which sex I was more attracted to when I would fap. And I would fap constantly throughout the day. So basically, the whole time I was in LA and the four months I was home, I was a fap machine working for the ultimate goal of finding out the sexuality I most craved. Obviously this was a terrible method of self discovery and only led to more depression and confusion.
Then, a knock from the spirits of heaven came down and I was invited to move in with my brother, who was having some health issues of his own, in order to help him out around his house and stuff. I knew I wouldn't have access to weed, and I thought that getting out of my hometown would also help me to clear my head.
As I drove to his apartment (about ten hours from my parent's house), I did a lot of thinking about what was going on in my life and I began to really weigh out the things that I wanted out of existence. I realized that I was just mortally afraid of having to fend for myself financially and having to work for the rest of my life in order to survive and as goofy and lazy as that sounds, this notion terrified the shit out of me. And on top of that, I finally allowed myself to realize that I had been attracted to girls the entire time but was just afraid that I wasn't manly enough or responsible enough for a girl to ever want to be with me or think that I was worth relying on for anything. It was the first time I'd really been honest with myself and for a brief moment, it was like a weight had been lifted off my shoulders. But the journey didn't end there.
I eventually got to my brother's place and decided I was going to continue thinking about these things to see where they would really take me.
Quitting weed was easy since A) I had no choice due to not having a supplier and B) it had begun making me super depressed and worthless anyways, and had been since I was in LA. I then stumbled upon NoFap and began seeing that what I had been doing, masturbating excessively to different types of porn, had been digging trenches into my brain and had convinced itself (myself) that what I felt while I was looking at porn was what I was really sexually attracted to in real life! I realized that all of my sexual and purely fapping urges were nothing but illusions and constructs I had been building up in my mind over the course of my entire life to that point.
I was shocked but it all began to make sense.
I then immediately began NoFap and have made it about a month and 4 days. The results have been incredible. I eat healthy now and have begun a regular routine of yoga and running and slowly but surely, my sexual preference has completely reverted to that of being turned on exclusively by women.
And again, there is nothing wrong with being gay or being attracted to the same sex, but after feeling such huge anxieties about it and not being fulfilled by even having a male partner, I have found such relief in being able to safely be attracted to women again. To finally feel like what I used to when I would think about the future romances that are still in store for me.
I love the beauty, the femininity, the movements, the kindness of women- all of it, just like I did before I was heinously addicted to fapping and it feels just as natural as it was before, too. I could not be happier or more relieved right now had it not been for NoFap and the powers of self-analyzation.
So, to kind of end all this, it hasn't been an easy journey, but I feel like I've learned a lot about the nature of attraction and feeling repressed and looked down upon by society (as well as myself) and just about the nature of humanity in general. Above all, though, I'm most excited about the fact that I've rediscovered who I am and what I was actually meant to do on this planet and I really don't think I would have been able to do it without the help of reading through this board and going through with NoFap on my own.
Now, I don't even think about guys at all anymore or get stress pangs when I see a beautiful woman who I can now accept being extremely attracted to.
PMO is a dangerous thing and can really confuse people out there who are searching for an answer, just like I was. I thank you all for lending your tales of woe and encouragement and I wish only the best of luck to anyone out there who is struggling with these similar issues.
You have to be strong and want to find out more about yourself, but with courage and commitment, it's more than possible.
I want everyone to be true to themselves, and I hope that my story can help someone out there just like all those other stories helped me.
Thanks everyone, and thanks for reading!
And good luck.

When you explain what a dresser is, there tend to be a lot of leers. Yes, you are helping people change their clothes, and yes that means you see them in various states of undress. But mostly they only need help when it’s a quick change, which we defined as 45 seconds or less. In 45 seconds there isn’t much time to step back and admire anyone – instead you execute a very carefully choreographed routine of getting out of one outfit and into the next. You also do a lot of laundry, and repairs, and triple check that everything is where it is supposed to be. It’s not all that glamorous.
I got my assignments for the show and was a little intimidated. I was assigned to one actor in particular, a handsome senior named Chris who I hadn’t had the nerve to even speak to yet. And we had one quick change.
In the play his character had been wading through a river looking for a lost child (who was found) and was sitting on the porch talking to his dad. Then he exited, and was in at the top of the next scene which took place the next day. So we had 30-45 seconds to get him out of his shirt and wet jeans, and get him redressed. It was a bitch all through tech (wet jeans!), but by opening we had it. His shirt was hanging on the railing and the new jeans were puddled on the floor so he could step in. I was sitting on the floor – he’d get to me and kick off his shoes (the laces were elasticized) and undo his pants while I tugged at the wet legs to get them off. Once that was done he’d step into the new pants which I would pull up as I stood while he took the old shirt off. From behind I’d put the new shirt on him, and while he did up his pants I came around to do the shirt buttons. Then he’d step back into his shoes, smooth his hair, throw me a smile, and go.
One night it was different. Chris came offstage and I quickly realized he was crying. The emotion of the scene with his ‘dad’ had gotten bigger than usual, and while the tears were utterly appropriate for where he’d been they would make no sense for the next day. I could see him trying to get them in check while we went through the routine. At the moment when he would usually smooth his hair back he grabbed my hand and held on. I whispered to him that it was okay, everything would be okay. He held on until the lights came up onstage, and then gave me a huge hug. He wiped the remaining tears away, smiled as always, and went onstage only a few seconds late.
Chris grabbing my hand changed everything. I realized that being on the crew wasn’t a consolation prize instead of acting, but a path in its own right. I realized that Chris didn’t see me as a lowly freshman; at that moment we were equals trying to achieve the same goal. And I realized I loved being in the dark, behind the scenes, leaving my mark on the show in ways that an audience may never think about.
As silly as it may seem this one small incident helped push me to the career path that I’m still on today. I still sit in the dark, and do a job that isn’t always easy to describe, and if I do it well no one even knows I’m there.
@@@This is my entry for week 7 of LJ Idol - the topic is “one touch”. I will post a link to the poll once it is up on Saturday. Thank you for reading.@@@

Mary D'Souza (bronze, 200m; silver, 4x100m relay)
1951, New Delhi: Winner of the first two medals by an Indian woman at the Asian Games
The first Asian Games were supposed to be held in 1950. But from what I remember, they had to be postponed by a year because there was some delay in getting the National Stadium in New Delhi ready for the competition. I had first heard about the Games at the 1950 National Championships, where we were told that the first two from every event would represent India. As you can imagine, I was very excited to represent India.
For one, I had just graduated from high school and was a PT teacher at St Joseph's Convent in Mumbai. I was just 20 years old and did not know what to expect from the competition. I had no previous international exposure. But we were going to be representing the country, so that was special.
Athletics wasn't even in the picture when I was growing up! I went to the all-girls St Joseph's Convent School in Bandra. We had no sports. We had no grounds or facilities. At our one and only school sports day we had simple games like marble and spoon race, gunny sack race, frog race, book balancing, jumble shoe race and other silly made-up games.
Because I came from a large family of 12 children, all the girls played with the boys in the municipal ground. The only game I played was hockey because I didn't know about track until later.
I began purely by chance. I had a cousin who saw me play field hockey. He said I had terrific speed and I should run track. He entered me into a race and I took part. I had no coach, so I just mimicked what everyone else was doing. I was unknown but I did well enough that I was motivated to enter other races. Of course, I still didn't have a place to practise so I used to jump over the compound in the evenings at St Andrew's boys' school and train on their track at night. There was a watchman at the front gate and he had no idea that I was on the grounds.
Very shortly I was on the Bombay team at the Nationals. I was the youngest on the Bombay relay team that won the nationals and I also won the 200m, because of which I was selected to play for India.
It was only after that I got formal coaching under Jai Pardiwalla because he was coaching the other relay girls at the Brabourne Stadium.
In Delhi [1951 Asian Games], my first race was the 200m. Since I had no experience I listened to my friends Lavy Pinto and Bunny Fernandes, who told me to conserve my strength in the first 100m and speed up after the bend. Of course, by then two Japanese athletes were far ahead of me. If I had gone all out from the start I would have won because I wasn't even tired at the finish line.
After that I did better with the relay team, which won a silver. Our entire team was from Bombay. It included my cousin Pat Mendonca, Banoo Guzdar, Roshan Mistry and myself. We had practised the baton exchange very thoroughly but the Japanese had trained harder and they had a smoother baton exchange.
We didn't draw a lot of attention after the Asian Games. We were felicitated by President Rajendra Prasad and later we were also invited for tea by Prime Minister [Jawaharlal] Nehru and his daughter Indira Gandhi. I didn't get any prize money like athletes today do but I was given an autographed picture of Nehru and an autograph by Lady Mountbatten. There was nothing for us after the Games either. There was no reception after winning in New Delhi nor back home. My mother did not even make me my favourite chicken xacuti when I returned home!
I still remember after I was selected to compete in the 1952 Helsinki Olympics, I was told the government didn't have the money to send me. I couldn't ask my family -- with 11 other children to worry about -- to send me to Helsinki. But then my friend Vincy D'Mello heard about my woes and he and other friends organized a dance and a whist competition to raise money for me. Eventually, the government did contribute some of the funds.
It was always difficult. I also represented India in hockey but I was always an amateur. There was no money in sport and even today I haven't got any recognition from the government. We got no prize money or anything from advertisements. But I never regretted it. I always loved to compete and I'm always grateful I got a chance. I was a girl from a family of 12 and without my athletic career I would have never got to see the world. I was able to represent my country as a sports ambassador across the world. And that will always be special.
(As told to Jonathan Selvaraj)

Five dead as gunman opens fire at school
SHOOTING SPREE ACROSS US STATE
A SERIES of shootings in rural northern California have left five people dead – including the gunman, authorities say.
Two children were among the wounded, it was confirmed.
Tehama County Assistant Sheriff Phil Johnston said one child was shot at a school, and another was shot while riding in a pick-up truck with a woman who was also wounded.
Mr Johnston says the gunman was “randomly picking targets”.
He said there were seven shooting scenes in and around the school in Rancho Tehama Reserve, about 130 miles north of Sacramento and that there may be more victims. Investigators have recovered a semi-automatic rifle and two handguns. Jeanine Quist, an administrative assistant with the Corning Union Elementary School District, says no-one was killed at the school, but a “number” of students were shot and wounded.
Brian Flint said that his roommate was among the victims and that his neighbour was the gunman.
He told the Record Searchlight newspaper in the city of Redding that his neighbour, whom he knew only as Kevin, also stole his lorry.
He said he and his room-mate told authorities that their neighbour was acting “crazy” and threatening them.
Mr Flint said he had been shooting “hundreds of rounds” from large magazines.

WHEN happy hubby Mark Brooks started dabbling at on-line poker he had no idea the stakes would be so heartbreakingly high.
Instead of ending up just a few quid down to his regular internet rival he lost his WIFE to him.
While Mark was working long hours of overtime, his double-dealing missus Marina was having long cyber sex chats with the card shark who called himself Gibbo.
Then the mother of two announced she was gambling everything by running off with Gibbo - married Rob Gibson - after meeting him just TWICE.
Stunned Mark, 45, told The People: "I was devastated when I discovered what she had been doing. After she left I cried for a week.
"She told me they had spent hours having internet sex then started texting each other.
"It had been going on for a year to 18 months."
Mark thought he and Marina, 44, would become CLOSER when they joined the Planet Poker website, where punters chat on-line and have a flutter for small stakes. He liked them sharing a hob
The couple, married 22 years, logged on in 2003 as Brooky43 and Tinkerbell. "We saw it as a bit of fun," said Mark.
They played regularly against father-of-two Rob, 40 - or Gibbo11 as he called himself on the site.
Mark recalled: "He would talk to me about golf and fishing and c about his wife and kids.
"We even talked about meeting up but nothing came of it. He seemed really nice and a fun person - I never thought of him as a threat in any way." But unknown to Mark, his internet pal would turn Marina into a cheating queen of heartbreakers.
Factory supervisor Rob, off sick after a car accident, had lots of time to chat up Marina as Mark worked all hours as a police detention officer.
Mark, of Nottingham, said: "After a couple of months I noticed she was going on the site a lot more. She spent hours playing the game and although I enjoyed the odd flutter I couldn't see the attraction.
"At the same time she was asking me to work extra hours so we could go on nice holidays.
"I was doing double shifts and working rest days so only got one day off in 10. Each time I tried to ring home the phone would be engaged because Marina was on the net. I wasn't worried at first because I thought she was just enjoying chatting to all the people."
But Mark's suspicions were aroused when he got home at 10.30 one night last October and found Marina messaging on-line.
"I asked who she was talking to but she wouldn't show me," he said. "I thought it was strange. Then I noticed she started taking her mobile with her at all times, which she never used to do."
Mark put the thoughts to the back off his mind but then Marina, who worked part-time caring for autistic children, started wearing clothes far too young for her.
Mark said: "She would go out looking like mutton dressed as lamb. It was as though she was trying to impress someone.
"She started saying we were drifting apart because I was spending too much time at work. So I started doing less overtime.
"But then she told me we needed more money to do things in the house and go on trips. I loved her so started overtime again."
He even bought Marina a £500 solitaire diamond to show how much he cared.
"I took her, her mum and step-dad on holiday to Malta for Christmas," said Mark. "Everything seemed perfect again. She did not let on about what had been happening with Rob."
Then in January Marina, mum to a daughter, 21, and 17-year-old son, made her bombshell announcement that their marriage was a busted flush.
"She told me she'd had enough and was leaving me for Rob," said Mark. "I said, 'Who's Rob?' but then it clicked that it was Gibbo. I couldn't believe it.
"I had no idea my wife was seeing another man. Our sex life was fine and everything seemed normal. She told me he was coming to collect her in the morning. She'd only seen him twice. The time I'd walked in on her messaging was when she was planning to see him.
"They met up and drove around in his car then pulled up and had a fumble in the back. The next time they met was when she'd told me she was going to a shopping centre to buy our daughter's boyfriend a birthday present. Rob met her there and they walked round the shops.
"Those were the only times she'd seen him in the flesh before she left me. I was heartbroken."
Mark slept on the landing clutching Marina's photo the night before she left. It was only weeks before their 23rd anniversary.
Rob picked up Marina in the morning after leaving his wife and children hours before. The lovers now live together in a bungalow in Chester.
Mark said: "After she left I felt dreadful. Then I discovered I was a lot better off money wise, despite not having her income. She confessed she'd been stashing money, planning to leave me."
The couple are now planning to divorce. Mark said: "I hate Rob for what he has done to my family."
But he has no plans to deck his rival. He said: "I am not an aggressive man and see no sense in going round to punch him. It wouldn't solve anything.
"I wanted to tell my story so people know how dangerous these chat sites can be. I honestly think this wouldn't have happened if we had not gone on that site.
"Every time you log on there are sharks waiting to strike. I ended up losing more than my money, I lost my marriage too. Marina has taken a big gamble - 1 just hope it doesn't pay off for her."
Marina told The People: "It's all true. I don't want to say more. I don't think you should wash your dirty linen in public."
Rob confirmed their affair and added: "We saw each other considerably more than twice." Jessica.email@example.com
TELL US YOUR AMAZING TRUE-LIFE STORIES.. WE PAY FOR THE BEST. email f firstname.lastname@example.org

I made my way to the back of the class as usual. I sit down on the seat, not even bothering to note that I was the only person sitting alone. Our teacher stood at the front of the room, drawling on in the way that only she could, as the rest of the pupils looked with bored faces - not daring to talk.
I didn't mind the quietness; in fact, I was used to it. I spent the lesson people watching out onto the streets and thinking about my life: as usual.
A man in a grey suit walked past, briefcase in hand. My guess was that he was a reporter - there was a tell tale dent in the right sleeve of his jacket (a hidden microphone).
The next person to walk past was a builder. How do I know? His rough, calloused hands were twitching - looking for something to build / sculpt. The bottom of his denim jeans had picked up some dust - most likely from a saw.
My eyes unfocused as I lost concentration. The world faded out.
* * * * *
I saw myself as I had always: alone.
My mum and dad ignored me, but it hasn't always been like that. They used to take me to places, fend for me, talk to me. Now they saw me as a passed trend, a trinket that was best left up in the attic.
After they became bored with me, they moved on to other collectables: dogs, china plates, antique chairs. The list never seemed to end.
I knew that everyone's parents weren't like that. I saw how spoilt they were - how much they were cared for by others. I didn't have that same safety, any warmth to go home to at night.
All I longed for was a normal family. One that cared. It seemed it was too much to ask for from my parents.
I sighed silently and wished the minutes away until I could leave the room and go home. To hide in the attic among the piles or rubbish like I deserved.
* * * * *
As the bell went, I wished for the last time, that I would at least have a friend to talk to.

January 23 - Serious Business
by Brax Carvette, Youth Minister
A friend once said, "We take Jesus very seriously, but ourselves, not so much." There's a bit of that in Matthew 17. The King and his Kingdom are serious business. He is who he says and he expected his disciples to do what he taught them but his ego never got in the way. This week Jesus teaches us what is means to take him seriously.

Short story. Should be capped, at max, 5 chapters! Hope you guys like it!
Disclaimer: I do not own One Piece or any of its characters.
Chapter 1: 78 days
78 days, Marco counted in his head. 78 days since his capture – and yes, he admitted grudgingly to himself, that that was exactly what had occurred – and with it came 78 daily assassination attempts. He looked on as the new kid crashed into a railing, before proceeding to bounce off it to fall over the other side. He saw the kid flail about to grasp at something, only to fail to begin his descent towards the waters. A loud splash followed in his wake. The blonde didn't have to look to know one of his poor brothers had gone after the kid, if the second splash was of any indication.
He held back a snort. The kid may be an idiot, but he had guts, at least. The commander turned away from the now all too common scene. It had been entertaining at first, seeing the super rookie get thrown about after charging at his father. Though it had made some of his newer brothers and sisters uneasy to have such a hothead on board their home and out for their father's blood, most of them hadn't worried. Whitebeard could take care of himself. And so could they. But the constant 'fights' had eventually lost its appeal.
Though Ace might try to hide it, he wasn't a bad kid. 78 days, Marco thought again. The teen may have secluded himself away from the crew for 78 days, but they were still confined together on a ship. Ace couldn't hide how he strayed away from the weaker members of their crew, and when he couldn't, he'd refuse to engage them, chalking up the excuse that fighting them would be the equivalent of fighting a wall. He'd steal from their food storages, but wouldn't attempt to poison them with a concoction one of his brothers had accidentally dropped. When confronted, he had simply attributed it to his desire to see them die a more painful death. That, and several other incidents, and Marco was convinced the kid was just an arrogant brat who had misguided beliefs.
Try as he might, the kid couldn't hide the better- the good part of himself from them, not when so many of them were sea-hardened sailors who have long learnt the importance of keen observation on those around them. It showed all the more when the kid was tired, and hungry. Which, he thought unhappily, was nearly every moment of every day.
And knowing his family, he wasn't the only one to have noticed.
The commander turned towards the kitchens. Some of his brothers ran past him, huge, large (and fluffy) towels in hand.
"Just dump it on him, yoi," he said mildly.
His siblings barely nodded in acknowledgement as they headed to the deck. Everyone had learnt the hard way that, between offering and forcing help on the new kid, which was the more effective option. And they would rather the kid resent them for a little longer than fall terribly sick (like that incident he refused to forget but didn't want to remember either a few weeks back).
With everything he had gathered about Ace, he – and everyone else – had slowly found his every assassination attempt another incident to get over with before he gave in and joined their ranks. He could no longer bring himself to enjoy even the slightest entertainment each failure brought, could no longer stop himself from worrying when the teen grew more haggard and exhausted around the edges.
Ace had begun to withdraw even more, no doubt beginning to realise the futility of his actions. No doubt beginning to look at his alternatives. To be free, and alone? Or to be free under their flag, with a family ready to rally at his side at a moment's notice? Marco sometimes wondered if the kid even realised the weight of their sincerity towards family. That that idea of family was ready to be embraced by him at any time.
He strode into the kitchens and headed for the basket of freshly baked bread and soup. He would have frowned, but then vaguely recalled Thatch mumbling about heavy food and "bad for an empty stomach" the other day. Before the commander left, basket in hand, some of the older and grim chefs slipped past and dropped something into his load. A quick glance confirmed it as a glass of milk. He shot his brother a look of thanks, only to be brushed aside with slight grumbling for him to get out.
He inwardly smiled. They were all just soft-hearted morons, really.
As Marco made his way back to the secluded and out of the way area Ace always ran to after another failed attempt, he wondered if the kid was slowly giving up. The fire devil fruit user had started to adapt to assassination attempts that struck at the same hour each day now, and spent the rest of the day sulking or simply resting till the sun set. It's like the kid was slowly losing fuel to keep fighting.
Marco only hoped, when he finally came to the end of that journey of self-deprivation, he'd see that they had been by his side for a long time now.
After all, it had already been 78 days.
Ace dumped the dry (and really fluffy) towels into a hidden compartment he had found by accident a few weeks back. He slid the panels back into place, careful to keep the wood from screeching in protest. Guess his bed would be a little softer tonight.
He sighed. He hadn't meant to fall into the sea. He had already fallen overboard so many times the past 78 days that the sensation of numbness and freezing cold had begun to haunt at his every nerve even when he was dry and warm on the Moby Dick. You'd think you'd be more used to it, he thought bitterly. That maybe it wouldn't bother you anymore. But, of course it has to have the opposite effect.
He hated falling into the sea now. It hadn't been terrible before this whole kidnapping incident. Sure, he had fallen overboard multiple times, with his crew never failing to come after him (to be followed by a stern talking to by each and every member), but the experience had merely remained unpleasant. The first time he was thrown off this stupid whale ship he had been terrified. Afraid that he'd die choking on the waters that was supposed to send him to freedom, with his every thought forced to slow until his consciousness blinked out of existence. Frantic that the last real feeling he'd remember was the rawness in his throat. Scared that the last thing he'd see wasn't his brother, or even the vast blue sky, but that of a distant glare that dulled with every passing second. Most of all, he was stricken with the thought that Luffy would never know the fate that had befallen his older brother.
The feeling only exacerbated with each subsequent dive. Helpless. Cold. Alone.
Now that he thought of it, it all seemed silly. The Whitebeards, for some reason or other, never failed to save him. It had, he had grudgingly realised, come to a point where he knew they'd save him. He had begun to develop a sort of aversion (never fear, he told himself) towards the water, and tried to ensure when – if – he was thrown back, he'd hit solid ground instead. But sometimes, like today, he would miscalculate.
He shuddered at the brief reminder of water gliding over his body, as it sapped at his strength. It didn't matter now. The deed had been done. At least now…
At least now he had other things to think about. Like how the Whitebeards were being kinder to him. Not that they had been particularly mean to him in the first place. He still remembered how they had laughed at his pathetic attempts to off their father at first. Jokingly told him to knock it off, he recalled. Now, they only appeared sombre when he did fail, as if quietly demanding him to get his task over and done with. But Ace knew that was the petty part of him talking. They weren't happy about something, and it had something to do with his attacks on their Captain. But…he had the feeling it wasn't really what he did that had them upset. Something was worrying them, and he was involved.
He heaved a deep sigh. Maybe they were finally getting sick of him and wanted him to leave without giving them reason to feel bad. He refused to think why that left an ache in his chest.
A deep, but lilting voice interrupted his thoughts. "There you are."
Ace startled out of his reverie and looked up, eyes wide. Next to him, a few steps away, was the sixteenth commander (he thought, at least. His mind seemed hazy sometimes these days). The older pirate was leaning against the handrail, one of his hands resting on his hip. Ace would never admit it, but he struggled to keep his attention from slipping to focus on the way the kimono the other man donned flared in a gentle wave about him. The pirate was dangerous, he knew, but he was also really pretty.
The other man seemed to wait until Ace zeroed and willed his attention on him. If the fire-user was willing to trick himself into further self-loathing, he would even say the commander had looked a tad concerned for a while there.
"What do you want?" he snapped. He turned his body to face the unwelcome visitor (was he really unwelcome? What was the worst that could happen, anyway?), flames sputtering feebly at his shoulders. He made for a pathetic threat, but it was better than giving up, right?
"My name is Izo," the older pirate finally said. "I must apologise. I hadn't realise you didn't know my name until today. I would have-"
"I don't care what your name is," Ace sneered. "Just do whatever it is you want and leave."
The Whitebeard didn't appear at all bothered by the interruption. "I would have introduced myself earlier. But I didn't want to overwhelm you, what's with the sheer size of my family." His eyes remained unreadable, though Ace didn't miss how they rested so heavily on him. "I hope you're not offended by my late introduction."
The fire-user inwardly rolled his eyes. Why wouldn't the man leave already? He was tired, exhausted, wrung out- everything that meant he just wanted to lay down and rest. He wondered how worth it it was to keep up his image of hostility. Would Izo (that was the name, right?) be alarmed if he just dropped in a heap and slept? "Yeah, well, I don't care. I just want you to go away." He made it a point to narrow his eyes.
Izo inclined his head. "I am glad you aren't offended," he said, purposely ignoring his intended message. He reached into his kimono and pulled out…an orange thing- a pillow? It was small and square, the width roughly the length from his shoulder to shoulder. How had Ace missed the bulk of it hiding in the guy's clothing?
While the fire-user silently berated himself, the Whitebeard deftly grabbed at his arm and shoved the offending thing into his grasp. Ace remained frozen at the unexpected touch (and it was so, so warm) and watched, his senses somewhat dulled (he thought maybe the water was affecting him still), as the kimono-clad pirate stepped away. The earlier look of concern (fake, his mind screamed) reappeared and the man seemed to have to hold back from…doing something.
"I hope your rest will go better with this, Ace," Izo said. His lips tugged into a gentle smile. He gestured at the pillow and looked pleased when Ace held it closer (he hadn't realised he did). "Marco will be along soon with your lunch. You could just settle down until he gets here."
The fire-user clamped his mouth shut when an automatic "okay" almost slipped past his tongue. He remained quiet, his gaze suspicious, as the commander nodded at him and left.
When the last of the man's fabrics escaped his line of sight and disappeared around the corner, he felt his insides clench in familiar pain. He hunkered down on himself then, the pillow clutched tightly in his arms.
He didn't know how long more he could go on like this.
His guess was…only for a while more. Right now, all he wanted to do was curl up, sleep, and while away the hours doing nothing. He wanted to go back home.
Ace let out a heavy breath.
It had already been 78 days, after all.
Sandaled feet came to a stop in front a hunched figure, the latter curled up so tightly as if to impersonate a ball, except this one breathed and was, at one side, plastered against several wooden crates. Above them was an arch that shadowed much of the silent teen. It casted spidery shadows over his lithe (but thinning) form. For whatever reason, he seemed even younger than his 18 year (at least, that's how old they thought he were).
Marco carefully sidestepped the loose floorboard he knew was next to him and lowered the basketful of food to the floor. Briefly contemplating the perks and not-so-good perks of staying put till Ace woke, he took the time to eye the kid up and down, his blue eyes sharpening to see through the darkened area for any sign of injury or illness. Other than the customary bruises and cuts, he couldn't spot anything too worrying, though he failed to banish the possibility of internal injury. Goodness knows the brat wouldn't volunteer the information.
Part of him urged him to leave. Routine had proven the kid would rail against him before giving in to eat. The look in the grey eyes admitted a tiredness that understood the futility of fighting back, and it grew more pronounced with each passing day. But, like the stubborn D. carrier he was, Ace never failed to at least raise his hackles.
The Phoenix rubbed the bridge of his nose. Then again, his earlier meeting with Izo had reinforced his suspicions that Ace's mental health was deteriorating. And quickly.
"Marco," Izo greeted quietly. A frown marred the commander's features, an odd look on the usually graceful pirate. It was one of the reasons Izo hated to frown or be angered.
"Izo," the Phoenix responded almost in reflex. He raised an eyebrow. "What is it, yoi?"
The sixteenth commander eyed the basket in his arms, then returned his attention to his older brother. "You were right. There is something about Ace that worries me."
Marco blinked. "But I hadn't said anything to you…?" he trailed off.
The other man simply looked unimpressed. "I've known you long enough to tell you already have your suspicions, brother." He waved the subject away. "I went to see Ace earlier to introduce myself. He was exhausted. And confused. I don't think he really understood what was going on."
It was the blonde's turn to frown. "He already knows who you are, yoi," he said slowly. Ugly realisation crept onto him. "You mean he was in such poor state of mind he forgot he already knew?"
"Like I said, confused. It worries me. He hadn't put much of a fight when I gave him the pillow I made either."
"You mean he hadn't put up a fight at all," Marco said. At the other's blink, he rolled his eyes. "I know you too." He sighed. "It's worse than I thought, yoi. I'll make sure he doesn't starve himself and see what I can do from there." He continued towards the deck. "Get the others to tone down their treatment of him," he called over his shoulder. "Goodness knows they weigh him down."
Marco started when the teen shifted. The kid must have realised he was no longer alone, for he immediately tensed. The blonde worked to keep his features impassive when grey eyes met his.
"I brought you your lunch, yoi," he said, pointing at the basket.
Ace's gaze darted towards the proffered food. As if in answer, his stomach grumbled loudly, and Marco could see faint blotches of colour redden the teen's cheeks. He offered a small smile, careful not to appear mocking.
"Just in time," he said casually. "Mind if I join you?"
The freckled pirate seemed to snap out of it then and glared at the commander. "Yes," he hissed. "I don't want company." Then, as if in afterthought, and as if it pained him greatly to say it, he forced out through gritted teeth, "And I don't want your stupid food."
"If you don't eat it, we'd have to throw it out," Marco pointed out reasonably. "Thatch cooked it with you in mind. The doctors said your body should take in soft foods to facilitate easier digestion, yoi."
He was met with a scowl. "I don't need your consideration," he said, voice cold and glacial. "You say he made it just for me? Easier to poison me too, I'm sure."
"If we wanted to off you by poison, you'd be dead by now." The blonde tilted his head, as if deep in thought. "Besides, making the poison would have been too troublesome."
Ace rose to his feet. To the commander's surprise, the kid held the orange pillow that must have been from Izo close to his chest. He was careful not to look at it. He didn't want to risk the kid throwing it away. "Stop making fun of me!" the fire-user was saying. "I must be fucking hilarious to you people. Stuck here, on your stupid ship, forced to eat your stupid food, with-with all of you making fun of me!"
Marco would normally expect Ace now to throw a punch or two before going on to explicitly express his displeasure with them for their hospitality. Instead, he stiffened when he caught an odd glimmer in the other's eyes.
"Ace, yoi," he said carefully, gently. "We are not making fun of you." He worked to keep his gaze off the moisture that seemed to fill the younger's eyes. "I'm sorry we made you feel that way."
"I don't care if you're sorry!" Ace burst out. An expression not unlike despair flashed across his countenance, clear even as his boyish features frowned in attempted aggravation. "I don't- I- I just want-"
Calm. "What is it that you want?"
The teen breathed heavily. "I want you to leave me alone!"
The commander lifted his arms, palms out, in a gesture of peace. He inclined his head. "I understand," he said after a moment. He paused again. "Are you alright?"
Silence met his question. He wasn't quite sure what he expected, but it certainly wasn't the way the fire-user started, only to stare at him with widened grey orbs. The tears that had gathered dropped onto his cheeks. It left a wet, dark patch in its wake, and for some reason, the commander couldn't pull his gaze away.
A soft voice snapped him out of it. "78 days," the teen said quietly.
"Of course I'm alright."
A shuttered look met his.
"It's only been 78 days."
Ace hated himself.
If he had known he was going to cry like a baby, he'd have thrown himself into the sea (he knew he wouldn't have; that wasn't the way he wanted to die) and get himself far, far away from the Whitebeard pirates. But then, there wasn't a place he could think of that wasn't too near. His mind conjured up an image of the Moby Dick venturing into East Blue in an attempt to find their runaway stowaway. Not to recruit him anymore, he was sure, but to set an example of him. That was how the Whitebeards worked, didn't they? They punished those who tarnished their name or hurt one of their own so only the foolish would dare to incur their wrath. That was how the crew protected themselves.
The fire-user pressed the back of his fingers into his eyes, hard, silently berating himself for that moment of slipped weakness. Oh, how far he had fallen.
Just almost a year back and he was off sailing for the adventure he had been preparing for all his life. Now, he was caged in, alone. No one was going to find him and drag him, probably kicking and screaming the whole way still, out. Like it's always been, a voice whispered in his head. The faint brushes of determination tugged at his insides, and he remembered with certain clarity how he had once resolved to take Whitebeard down or die trying. Now that same resolve flickered and wavered weakly.
He wasn't quite sure what to do now.
The teen knew, deep down, that he couldn't go on like this. It had been 78 days since his last real interaction with his crew. And after 7 years with Luffy, he wasn't used to long periods of isolation anymore. Especially on board a ship where he was the odd one out, where everyone else was supposed to be an enemy.
Now, even the slightest hint of warmth made his heart ache with longing. Heck, the Phoenix's simple question (Are you alright?) was almost enough to send him into hysterics. And when the pirate in the kimono had touched his arm, Ace thought he was ready to bawl. It didn't help that the other members of the crew seemed to fall over themselves to "help him out".
And crazy though he was, the 17-year-old knew his reactions to their stupid smiles and invitations were very, very bad.
He hunched further into himself. Get your shit together, Ace.
Maybe it was time he seriously began to think of other ways to get off this ship.
"78 days," Whitebeard mused. "I didn't realise it had been that long."
The commanders were scattered across his room. Haruta sat at his feet, chin pillowed on his hands, his elbows tucked between his knees. Jozu was beside him, and, now and then, reaching out to ruffle the younger pirate's brown locks. Vista and Namur stood by the door, Izo next to Thatch on Whitebeard's left, and Marco had made himself comfortable in the plush purple arm chair (he had ignored the looks when he had gone straight for it, knowing his siblings believed he liked it for its colour), reading glasses on his nose and a notebook in hand. Any commanders absent had been too busy to attend.
The flames by the fire place flickered, sending dark, spidery shadows across the dimly lit room. Coupled with the faint scent of vanilla flowers and almonds, the Captain's sleeping quarters gave an air of cosiness that none of them seemed to achieve in their own private spaces.
The Phoenix flipped a page, the crinkling of paper loud and deliberate. "Yes, yoi," he said after a small pause. "It appears we have waited too long."
The Yonko raised an eyebrow. "Too long?"
"Yes." A tired look pulled at the first commander's drawn features. "Ace looks exhausted. I don't think he foresaw how his challenge to you would go."
"I don't think anyone thought their challenge would be met with the offer of adoption," Jozu muttered.
A few snorts met his comment. Marco, on the other hand, remained impassive.
"You think we should let him go," Thatch said quietly.
At once, a huge din broke out as the other commanders, sans Izo, broke in to protest. When Marco simply moved to rub the bridge of his nose, the Yonko raised his hand. In moments, the chaos quietened.
"Why do you feel this way, son?"
The blonde shrugged. "It's..." He tried to find the right words. "There is a tiredness about him that worries me. With how things are going, I think it will only grow worse."
"You said he was exhausted, right?" Vista cut in. "Maybe he just needs a lot of rest to recover his energy."
"Yeah!" Haruta agreed. "Sure, he's been behaving oddly the past few days, but maybe he's just not in the right state of mind to be thinking right."
Namur. "Who knows? He might be considering to join our ranks seriously this time."
"Which is why –" the Phoenix said over their voices "- it is all the more important we consider this carefully, yoi." He frowned at them, and there must have been something in his expression they didn't like, for his siblings backed down without another word. "Even if he does join our family, if he does so in this state of mind, as you have described, Haruta, there is the chance he may regret his decision when he is all well again."
There was a moment of brief silence. The crackle of the flames permeated the tense air as each pirate contemplated the weight of his words, their downturned faces tinted the colour of tarnished gold under the dim light.
The Yonko was the first to speak. "You believe," he said slowly, "that we have pushed Ace to the extent he cannot cope well. With how stubborn the brat is, you feel he'd sooner kill himself off than allow himself the reprieve of being one of us."
A slight, hollowed-out feeling took root in the zoan's chest. He flipped his book close, as if trying to conceal the list of odd actions on the kid's part he had noted down over the weeks, and nodded. "Yes."
"Ace has been accepting Thatch's offerings of food lately. I had thought he was becoming more receptive to the idea of staying, yoi." He lifted a hand to brush his hair back. "Today, he refused to accept anything from us. He had a…" he trailed off, unable to think of the right words to say. "He had a slight breakdown today when I came with lunch."
"He didn't appear to remember who I was when I approached him today," Izo said.
Thatch sighed, and looked pained when he spoke up, "No one has been stealing from the food storages for the past few days." He glanced at the first commander, his normally cheerful countenance, twisted into a frown. "And apparently he's now rejecting food we bring to him too."
"But aren't we giving up too early?" Haruta protested. "I just spoke with him last week and he hadn't tried to set me on fire like the many times before!"
"Haruta is right. These changes are only recent. If we turn him away now, he will never join us," Namur said.
"I don't want to turn him away, yoi," Marco said tersely. He tried to calm the immediate defensives that ruffled his inner feathers. He leaned back to eye look of his sibling in the eye. "You know what awaits him in the New World. The kid is insanely strong for his age, I give him that. But there are much more stronger players out there, and they won't be as nice as we have been. And his crew? They are nowhere near their Captain's strength. They can't protect him the way we can.
"And we haven't even factored in their shaken faith in the Captain who's supposed to protect them. And Ace's state of mind. If he decides to keep his streak of going after the bigger players, what are the odds he'd always emerge victorious?" He threw a sharp look at Vista, who immediately snapped his mouth shut. "Yes, yoi, the ocean is vast. And yet, he bumped into us. Kaido's and that fat lady's men are all over the New World."
Thatch nodded slowly. "And I can bet my dinner the other Yonkos would have realised by now Ace's disappearance, what's with his loud demands to take on Oyaji. If he reappears with only his crew…"
Namur said in sick realisation, "They are bound to go after him to dig dirt on us."
The others looked disgusted at the thought.
"But then, why would you say we let him go?" Haruta burst out. "We'd be sending him to his death!"
Marco's fists clenched. "That's not what I-"
"That's enough," Whitebeard cut in, voice stern. His heavy gaze swept over his sons. His words were sombre. "If Marco has suggested it despite all his misgivings, then there must be a good reason for it." He turned to his oldest son in silent expectation.
The blond had to take a moment to calm himself. He was reminded of Ace's despaired features, the way the kid had looked trapped and helpless, as if he had lost sight of purpose. He remembered the distinct lack of fire which he himself had been attracted to from the beginning. Marco loved his family. His family was large and it required a man who was capable of hoarding a lot of love and compassion and understanding to reach the top ranks. How could he continue watching this boy, who was to be his brother, suffer and let it be for his own family's selfish wants? At the very least, this would protect them, he told himself. His heart ached for the suffering they were putting the kid through, regardless of their reasons. He didn't want to imagine how he'd feel if he already saw Ace as family.
"We have to let him go, yoi. It's his right," he said firmly. He ignored the way his brothers tensed. "Of course, I'm not saying we just leave him on some island." Here, his cerulean eyes gleamed. He turned to the head chef, who raised an eyebrow at the attention. "I was thinking…"
Ace reeled back in what appeared to be shock. Or, dare he say it, hurt. For a moment, Thatch questioned if this was the right thing to do, but he steeled his resolve when the teen covered up his lapse with a fierce glower.
"Had enough of your entertainment, I see," he hissed through gritted teeth. "Going to kick me out the first chance you get."
The head chef restrained from frowning. "You do realise you are trying to kill our dad, right?" he said, his tone light. Then, in a more seriously, he added, "We don't want to hurt you anymore. You don't want to join us. We don't want you hurt. Someone has to give."
A dark red flush coloured the fire-user's cheeks at the comment. "H-hurt me?" He spluttered. His shoulders flickered with flames. "You're not hurting me!"
"Oh?" Oh, the chef was going to miss the kid if he did leave. He allowed a small smile to grace his features. "So you wanna join our family?"
The crimson spots deepened. "No!"
Thatch laughed. "Thought so."
With deliberate steps, he moved forward to ruffled the teen's messy black locks. He kept his gaze locked with the kid throughout, watching as the other tensed at his approach. Grey eyes looked up at him in uncertainty as he slowly reached out to lay his palm, gently, on his head. Ah. So Marco was right. The kid stiffened even further, but made no move to set him ablaze. Most interestingly, he noted, was the way the kid seemed to lean into his touch, as if that small surface of connection was the only thing that kept him grounded.
"No worries, though," he said as he pulled away, filing the way the kid looked at his feet (in disappointment? Rage?) away. "We are in the more dangerous waters now, so I'll keep you company till you're out of the danger zone."
Ace's attention shot back up to him. A scatter of emotions flashed through his countenance, and the kid seemed to settle on disbelief and…annoyance? "What?" he demanded. "Wha-" He lifted his arms then, as if realising the futility of it. "I don't even know what to say anymore. You're kicking me out, and now you're telling me you're escorting me out?"
Thatch looked thoughtful. "Huh. Now that you say it like that, I am escorting you out."
Ace looked enraged. "I am not weak!"
"Of course you're not. You're a Captain who made it into the New World." The fire-user appeared to simmer down when he realised the commander was being sincere. "But," the chef went on, his dark eyes focused on the teen's, "to be fair, all we've seen of you these past 78 days were of you getting soundly thrown about by Oyaji. I hope you'd excuse us for worrying."
"S-shut up!" Ace's handsome features twisted into a cold, cold glare. "Not that I believe you, but I don't care what you feel. You want me out? Fine. You can just leave me at the nearest island and I'd figure things out from there. I don't need you – any of you! – holding my hand like a baby."
The chef shook his head. "I can't do that, Ace. Whatever you feel about it, I have my orders. And that is to keep you safe till you're in safer waters." He jerked his chin in the direction of the crowd of men at the other side of the ship. "They are preparing our ship as we speak." He raised a hand when the kid opened his mouth into a would-be snarl, he was sure. "It's a pretty small ship, but it's fast. So it'll just be the two of us. You don't have to worry about anyone else."
Perhaps the fire-user was finally realising that he had no choice but to go along with it, or perhaps he finally saw the respire he must have desired all this while, but the kid's body slumped. He directed his gaze to the floor, his lips pursed. His eyes were covered from the sun's glare by the brim of his hat, casting his features into shadow. Not for the first time, Thatch felt another tendril of pity for the kid. Ace…would have been a great addition to the crew. A brother who would have been their youngest for them to freely dote on and care for.
Goodness knows everyone on board were already so old, he thought wryly.
"Fine," Ace finally spat. "Do whatever you want. It's not like my opinion matters anyway." He turned to stomp away.
"I'll wait for you near the figurehead in two hours," Thatch called after him.
He inwardly sighed when the fire-user left his sight. It had only been 78 days, but he so wished the kid had decided to stay.
That evening, both fire-user and fourth commander left.
Due to Captain's orders, most of the crew had stayed clear of the deck, with only a select few of the commanders staying put to bid farewell to the teen. For Ace's part, he had refused to look at them, and had moved directly towards the small ship, his meagre belongings slung across his back.
"Take care of yourself, son," Whitebeard had said as he walked past.
No one had missed the way the teen's steps faltered, or how the he wouldn't look any of them in the eye. In the end, he continued on and disappeared into the other sea vessel, his back a little hunched.
It sank in, then, that Portgas D. Ace left their ship after a short 78 days.
It was also on the 78th day, three hours after their departure and minutes before the hour turned midnight, that the ship both pirates were on disappeared.
Rather anticlimactic, huh? Do leave a review. :)

Gary Coleman's Parents Demand Answers
Gary Coleman's parents want answers about his shocking death. Sue and Willie Coleman say they are "concerned" about his final hours.
Coleman died of a brain hemorrhage last week after an accidental fall at his home in Utah.
His mom and dad had been estranged from their son for two decades, but even so, they kept an empty seat for him at dinner.
"No one sits in that chair," Willie said.
Photos of their son cover the walls of their home in Illinois.
Sue Coleman told People magazine, "We're not pointing fingers at anyone but we need to know exactly what happened. Did our son fall down the stairs? Did he fall in the bathtub?"
Police in Santaquin, Utah, near Provo, say there is nothing suspicious about Coleman's death.
Coleman's parents, who adopted him when he was an infant, are also upset they did not get to see their son before he died. They say they tried in vain to reach his wife, Shannon, when they first heard he was in the hospital.
"We would have loved to have been there by his side at the hospital to let him know we love him before he passed away," they told People. "We're going to miss him."
Coleman actually sued his parents in 1989, alleging they had stolen a chunk of his fortune. They always denied his claims. In an interview with INSIDE EDITION in 1999, his mom summed up their feelings.
"He can never make me stop loving him, he is still my baby," Sue said.
Coleman's brother-in-law says the family has been overwhelmed by fans' reaction to his death.
"Thousands of e-mails have poured into the hospital. This has been so comforting to the family to know how beloved he still is," he said.

I have a 15 month old EE hen who has come down with a mysterious illness. She is one of five hens but she is the only one exhibiting these behaviors. She is very weak and will flop over on her side when she tries to walk. Three days ago I went out to the run and found her lying on her side in the mud and to be honest, I thought she was dead at first. I picked her up put her in a small separate coop that has a enclosed pen underneath it so if she had anything contagious she wouldn't give it to the others. Also so she wouldn't get pecked at. She feels feather-light but haven't been able to compare her to the others since none of my hens have ever been cuddle bugs. They will come right to my feet while feeding but they don't like to be picked up. Anyway, the ill hen doesn't even put up a normal fuss over being picked up past a half-hearted squawk once. Her droppings all seem normal and I haven't felt an egg that may be stuck (she hasn't lain an egg since about November) so I'm not sure what may be wrong. I've had to make up a pallet with pine shavings in the small run since she is too weak to get up and down the ramp and I was afraid that she'd fall out of the top part of the coop in her condition. Today, I was out feeding the hens some lettuce and since she was walking SLIGHTLY better, I let her out while I was there so she could be with her friends for just a little while but after about five minutes, maybe less, she wobbled back into her pen where her pallet is. She got wore out just that fast. She is eating well and will even eat out of my hand now. Any idea what might be the problem? I hate that its happening, especially now since I've just completed a bigger run. The others are enjoying the 22' by 40' run after spending their entire lives in a small 15' diameter trampoline as their run. My Blizzard, though, is just too sick to join in.

Only eight days into the New Year and already it has great potential to be an interesting one.
The first few days were nothing special: Packing and getting ready to head back to Judson, as well as, a few last visits with friends back home before we all head our separate ways. It was the normal end of the holidays stuff. I was feeling sad that I had to say goodbye to some really good friends again, but excited that I was headed back to Judson and would get to see my sisters that I hadn't seen in a month.
Once back at school I had to undertake the only worse chore then packing - unpacking! I didn't want to be working on it for a week though so I forced my self to finish it that night and, though I hated doing it, it felt good when it was done.
The first day of class was a good day. The good thing about a small school like Judson is that it is pretty easy to find all your classes without having to worry about getting lost. My classes all seem interesting and I am really looking forward to my printmaking class. I have never taken an art class; well, not since 6th grade. I have a feeling my other classes will all be good too, maybe not as much fun, but as far as classes go, not bad. It was a day of sorrow though, because Jack Bauer my fish died...
I had had Jack for a little over a year, even though he had only spent the past fall semester at school with me. Most of that semester I spent trying to nurse him back to health. I never did know what was wrong with him, but it was evident that he was not well. Over the semester I did a lot of research and learned a lot about Beta fish, which allowed me to help Jack take an occasional turn for the better but it was never long before he relapsed. After only a couple of hours back at school his condition deteriorated worse then it had ever been and I knew that it was the end. Jack would sink to the bottom of his bowl upside down and seemed to be struggling with himself to swim. I knew at this point that he would probably not make it till morning. He did survive through the night, but just barely, the only sign of life the next day was occasional convulsions. He died later that day while I was in class...
A memorial service and funeral was held for him that afternoon and was attended by myself, my roommate Jennifer and a dear friend, Heaven.
On a happier note, Jennifer and I are proud to announce the arrival of a new pet to our room. After Jack Bauer's death Jennifer purchased a goldfish. Her name is Trinket.
I also plan on getting another fish - with any luck, this weekend.

I’ll go ahead and admit up front that I am not all that familiar with Malcolm X. I know who he is and that he was a Civil Rights activist and he was portrayed by Denzel Washington in the 1992 movie named after him but that’s about it. I didn’t even know that his birth last name had been Little or that he was Muslim. Sad, I know, but that’s the state of history in my schooling and I’m working on better educating myself on the African American history but still pretty far behind.
I picked this audiobook up as a replacement for X Marks the Spot: Women Writers Map the Empire for British Children, 1790–1895 as my Letter X for Litsy A to Z reading challenge. It was long and I was having a hard time getting into it. When I saw this book and it was written Malcom X’s daughter, I knew I had to change over.
The book focuses on the early life of Malcolm X, when he was known as Malcolm Little. It’s a fictionalized account so there is some artistic license and filling in of gaps in his biography in order to make a story. My favorite part is the way the words of his father haunt him throughout his early life in this account. The impact his father had begun to have on him is offset by both his death and the words of a teacher which seemed to embody the way the people in power saw him, they way they treated his father. I appreciated that he had both a positive and negative influence to rebel against, it was interesting to see the way those influences interacted to inform his decisions.
Malcolm Little’s road to becoming Malcolm X was not at all what I would have expected. While he had never tried to be a “model minority“, as I had been erroneously taught about other Civil Rights leaders, I hadn’t expected him to be so disillusioned about the fight so young. I would have just as well assumed that he had always been in the thick of it.
I loved the shifting names alongside the developing identities. It made sense out of why he would choose to officially change and take off the Little when he did, despite the influence of his father. There’s more to a name and what it means than the closest relative who shared it with you.
I’m so glad I made the change to read this book instead. It was entertaining and made me want to read his actual biography. There’s a note at the end that specifies which characters were made up, which simply had pseudonyms, and some composites. It also explains some scenes that were filled in and segments specifically mentioned by Malcolm X in his own writing. As mentioned above, Shabazz is his daughter and had been told stories that wouldn’t have been publicly available, which she shares here. To assume that there is no bias or justifications would likely be erroneous, but so would an assumption that she was particularly attempting some sort of good will or rewriting of the facts. As it is, I’m going to be reading a biography in my future to get the rest of the story too.

Elaine could hear the scrape, scrape. scrape of a snow shovel being worked up and down the front walk and driveway. Poor Rob! out in below zero weather while she sat working quietly in her den. When the sound stopped, she got up without thinking about it and peeked out the window to make sure he had not stroked out or something.
No - he was watching their dogs romp in the snow drifts. She sighed. He was so handsome. His silver hair was getting a little shaggy, the cowlick grown out over the widow's peak. At 65 he still took her breath away, no matter the extra padding around his middle.
Rob turned his head - searching for the eyes he could almost feel watching him. He smiled at her through the frosty window and made a fist and gesture of victory. She giggled and went back to her computer.
Giggled - at 64 - ridiculous.
Robert Fisk watched his wife turn from the window with a smile on her lips. He lived for that. To make her laugh was part of what made a day real to him, no matter the extra padding around her middle.
He watched the dogs romping over the icy driveway, skittering here and there, unable to get good traction. A laugh burst out between his blue lips! How he loved these animals.
Elaine had bought the little female Westie 6 years ago now. He had bought her the male 18 months later so they could raise some puppies together. Izzy had two beautiful, identical litters of small polar bears - two girls, three boys in each. They were only a year apart and Elaine had both dogs fixed after that because, she said, they would not make Izzy a puppy machine. And Jackson would be less likely to mark inside if they had him fixed, too. They had another huge Great Pyrennes/Collie mix, Oz. that watched over all the other animals (including a tuxedo cat) of the family.
Rob sighed. He knew she was right, but o, how he loved puppies.
His eyes starting to water from the cold, he headed the troops back inside for warmth and more projects.
They had moved into this wonderful home several month prior. And Elaine had painters and flooring people over from the first week on. They gutted the place, tearing down all the old Victorian wallpaper and tearing up all the turquoise and rose colored carpets. They had replaced light fixtures, face plates, registers and moved their belongings in to just the right places. It was a lovely home to spend their retirement years.
But how had they arrived here? Retired? It seemed an impossible leap from newly weds, almost 44 years ago, to retirees.
Rob like to tell everyone how he had met her in the 7th grade. All Elaine remembered of him from that year was the time he brought mace into the homeroom and when old Mr. Skinner took him into the hall to paddle him for yet another small infraction - he sprayed him right in the eyes! Rob had been sent to another school after that - Elaine called it trouble makers school.
The next time they met - she did not remember him. She had been sitting in his front room, figuring out how to break up with his brother, Roger, after 4 dates (and rolling a big, fat joint) when Robert ambled into her field of vision. And that was that. She never again looked at another male in that sizing up way she had.
Rob's dark blond hair flowed over his slim shoulders. His huge gray eyes smiled at her and when his lips followed, that grin that she never grew tired of spread over his features, and she felt like she had just come home.
Not that the years had been easy. Never were two people so different. He like to jump in and do a thing - a new thing if possible. She wanted to research and plan and organize a thing to death.
He was from a family that ended in divorce and were more violent in their physical tendencies - she from a bunch of huggers and talkers.
Rob's temper took time to ignite - but putting it out was next to impossible once he allowed himself to be angry. And he could hold a grudge like no one's business.
Elaine's fuse was quick, the explosion bright but short-lived. She always said that she popped off till she felt better - and everyone else felt worse. But forgiveness was etched into every fiber of her being and you didn't necessarily need to ask.
What had held them together over these many, long interesting years?
They both knew the answer to that - faith.
They shared unshakable faith in God, and though they approached and served him in much different ways, it was the same God, same Word, same Spirit. And He united their efforts. United their hearts. Made them well and truly, one flesh.
The first 17 years had been pretty tumultuous. Both of them had a lot of very dark habits and vices through which to work. They had almost lost each other that 17th year. He had almost thrown her out and she had almost gone. If not for their oldest daughter breaking down in front of some friends at work when they asked how they all were - who knows what would have happened. But she told them mom was about to move out, and they remembered how Rob and Elaine had helped them when their marriage was about to implode, and raced over to the Fisk household. They practically broke in on the unsuspecting couple - finding Elaine crying and packing some of her things into boxes. The next 6 hours they all prayed and talked and
well - here they were, 27 years later.
The warmth of the kitchen, and the smell of some soup bubbling on the stove, hit Rob and the pups in the face as they entered. Bread was raising in a pan. Mmmmm - better get busy before he started eating before supper was served. That was a good way to get Elaine mad - and though there were times he did this just for fun, the shoveling had worn the ornery out of him for a few moments.
He started putting up the sconces that had just arrived - replacing the fancy, gold ones he liked with the plain, oiled bronze ones she liked. He had refused for two days to do it = stating it was his house, too. He grinned now as he changed them out, looking forward to the moment she would ask him how to do it herself. He would say - well instead of complaining about it, why not look around and see what you see? She would go and see the new lights installed and would tell him what a sweetie he was and how nice they looked and thank him for giving her her way.
Rob lived for that, too - driving her crazy. Driving her crazy and making her laugh were the best things since older bodies left less and less energy for their favorite pastime of sex.
Rob and Elaine sighed together, as though sharing the same thought, as they walked from the new lights in the bedroom to the dining table where soup was on. The house was quiet and there was less table talk from Elaine, as Rob was getting very deaf and it made her temper flare to repeat every sentence. She was pretty sure he heard her most of the time and just did it to driver her nuts.
They smiled at each other over the steaming soup. This time truly reading each others thoughts. That being crazy with each other was the best deal they could ever imagine.
And so it goes.

.....it is a good sign that you at least are playing with paper. And that is just what I have been doing. I still haven't found my scrapping mojo and it has been a month. However, I am getting closer, I can feel it.
I have been beading for the last few weeks and have really enjoyed that but I have cut myself off with purchasing some new beads to play with. I have quite a little stash so I really don't need any new ones for a while but I thought it would be fun to work on a hybrid project. So paper beads it is. I found a great site, and now can't find it again but there was some good tips and I used many of them. First I learned that Modge Podge is a great glue and sealant for these beads. I just happened to have that. Then there was a great template that I used as a guide. I think if I hadn't had this template my beads would have been huge and I would have had to make many practice beads before perfecting it. Luckily, with the template things came into place easily. My beads are 1/2 inch long. Another great suggestion was using pins and a piece of cardboard or something to stick them in to dry the beads.
This is my husband's mouse pad for his laptop flipped upside down and is a great pin cushion for my drying beads. Shhhh, don't tell him.
Yesterday I made about 30 or so beads and created this bracelet with small glass cat's eye beads in between the paper beads.

Mrs. Winston is Josh Winston's mother.
When Mrs. Winston found out that her son has leukemia from Dr. Cox, she was terribly upset. Her husband and her had decided to not tell Josh about his illness, and when Dr. Cox told Josh without their permission, they threatened legal action. They actually did not take any action when Josh told them that he knew he had a bad illness based on his mother's weird smile. ("My Growing Pains")

This is what I'm doing and thinking most of the time.
Sunday, August 21, 2005
Me, Grandma and the boys went out to lake Accokeek today to ride the uppy downy hoarses, play in the playground and run around in the woods. It was hot so we had some diet soda and blue ice treats. We had a good day compared to yesterday's meltdown at Safeway. They were much happier and played in the pool in the morning, took a 3 hour nap and ate a good dinner. They do miss their mama but they will see her early tomorrow.

Last Saturday, August 8, some girlfriends and I went out to celebrate Monica's birthday. She wouldn't let us call it that--we had to call it a back to school last blast--we all work at a school. We had a great time getting pedicures and then eating at Texas Roadhouse. It has been years since I had a pedicure, so I was excited. I don't know why I don't do that more often--it makes me feel so good and it lasts for a long time. We had a wonderful time and plan to try to do it once a month or every other month.

|Photo courtesy of Hamish Reid|
Lou was already in his 80s when I met him, but he seemed younger. His flight school fleet was gone, but he had two remaining aircraft: A Pitts S2A and a 1969 Piper Arrow. When Lou needed to do his flight checks with the FAA, he confided they often used the Pitts so they could have a bit of fun in the process.
If you had a check ride with Lou, you know he conducted business in a mobile home-office trailer, in a far-flung area of the North Field known as the Old Tees. Many a candidate sat in that trailer, sweating nervously as Lou probed their knowledge. I know because I did my instrument rating, commercial, and instrument instructor practical tests with Lou. He was a thorough examiner, but he was fair. There was no doubt that he loved general aviation and he did his part to keep the dream of flying alive and well for many a pilot
Lou was an instructor's instructor, but he was never interested in being Master Flight Instructor, Flight Instructor of the Year, or any of that. At one point I mentioned I'd passed enough candidates to be eligible for a gold seal designation on the first renewal of my instructor certificate. "Who the hell cares about that stuff, John?" he said. "You're a conscientious and competent instructor, end of story."
When he was in his 50s, Lou ran marathons faster than I could when I was in my mid-20s. As he aged, he always seemed more vital that his contemporaries. Several years ago, Lou discovered he had a health problem and that he'd have to undergo a procedure in the hospital. He called me into his office and explained the situation, then produced a hand-written living will that detailed what should be done if things went bad. He wanted me to witness and sign the document. I watched as he signed and as I picked up the pen to add my signature, I felt tears welling up in my eyes.
|Photo of Lou with the "Thunder Chicken," courtesy of Hamish Reid|
Lou made it through, but he knew he'd no longer be eligible for a medical certificate. He sold the Pitts but kept the Arrow since it was being flown by several renters and instructors, including myself. He acquired an Aeronca Champ that he flew under sport pilot privileges and became one of the country's first sport pilot examiners. A few years later, Lou sold the Arrow and the activity around his office began to slow a bit. His office became more disheveled with each passing year and Lou slowed down a bit, but he kept showing up. He kept going. He kept flying.
As he aged, Lou naturally became convinced of the sanctity of all life. He once confronted the USDA folks who where shooting birds at the airport as part of a bird-strike prevention program. He confided to me that he had faced death so many times, but only recently had he understood that all life was sacred. He even protected the ants that inhabited his hangar. I recently told him that he'd become a Buddhist. "But I don't believe in god" was his response. "Neither do Buddhists" I replied. I thought about giving him a book on Buddhism, but Lou didn't need it: His own satori was more meaningful than any book I could have offered.
Last year, Lou came down with a bad cold that he couldn't shake. It turned into pneumonia and he ended up in the hospital. Our paths hadn't crossed much, but as soon as I heard he was ill I made time to visit him. Sitting in a hospital bed, wearing an oxygen cannula, he looked weak. But he was in good spirits and was as clear-headed as always. And he kept moving the conversation away from himself, asking about what I was up to. I offered him whatever assistance he might need once he got out, but he refused in that gentlemanly fashion he was known for. A few days later, he was released and sent home. They'd given him all the treatment available, so he went home to either recuperate ... or not.
Recuperate he did, though he remained weak. I made a point of stopping by once a week to chat with him and hit the tennis ball for his rescued pit bull, Champ. I chatted with Lou on the phone right after Christmas and he seemed in good spirits. And so it came as a shock to learn that Lou passed away early this morning. It's hard to put into words what Lou meant to me, to his students, and to all the friends who knew him. To me he was a role model, mentor, and an open-hearted friend.
If you knew Lou and have a story to share, please do. I like to think that Lou would have wanted it that way.

Steve Perry is back with his first album in 24 years. First, we heard the song “No Erasin'”, and here’s his second single.
The album, Traces, will be released October 5th.
Perry has gone on record as saying that he has no plans to reunite with is Journey bandmates. He’s also said that he’s found his love for music again and plans to record more.

About a month ago I was interested in fostering a dog from a local rescue, Starfish Animal Rescue,based in the Chicago suburbs. They do a wonderful job working with the kill shelters in Kentucky to try to get as many pups as they can rescued and in to foster homes. One day while perusing FB, I saw a post on my feed of dogs needing fosters for the next transport. That is when I saw him, the dog that looked like our Rigs coming out of the same shelter! I felt like it was fate. Much to my husband’s chagrin,(he thinks we already have enough heartbeats in this house), he gave the go ahead.
It was going to be perfect! I raced to my computer and printed out the application and sent it back. My only reservation being “What if I did find home for him—would I be able to give him up?” I waited on pins and needles for them to tell me how wonderful I am for opening our home to this poor pup and fostering. But that didn’t happen. I was sorely mistaken. Apparently, the pup was from a hoarding situation and the reply I received stated that this dog would not be suitable for our family. I was shocked. How could that be?
So, as I do with most things that plague me, I hopped on the internet and researched articles on fostering dogs from hoarding situations. A fostering blog I ran across laid things out for me. I began to realize the rescue was right. With all the activity in this house that poor dog would have been terrified. It could have ended up being a bad situation for everyone. I was overjoyed to see that they found him a foster and he would soon be in a safe environment, but I was let down. As a result I became extremely apprehensive about my ability to foster for many reasons. What if the dog was horrible with the kids? What if he was great with the kids? What if I got attached? What if we found him a home? Ahhhh! Owning a pet is a big commitment and fostering is an even bigger commitment. I was completely naive to what I was about to get in to. Bless the hearts of those wonderful people who foster, it is not an easy thing to do.
So while I pondered all these thoughts, I decided to be patient and wait to see if there was another dog that would somehow reach out to me. What is meant to be will be. It was during this time that I got a message from the wonderful woman that had fostered our dog, Rigs. Rigs had a brother(the runt) that went to another family and they were looking to re-home him. If he wasn’t re-homed they were going to see if a rescue could take him. Okay, the heartstrings were pulled. However, I knew that if I took this dog I would be hard pressed to think of it as a foster situation. Would I be able to part with him? It is Riggy’s brother! Am I going to end up as my husband always envisioned? The foster that couldn’t re-home?
I called my husband and told him the situation. He already said yes to fostering the one dog and now how could he say no to this? It was his beloved dog’s brother. Well needless to say we took Ziggy (he was already named that…seriously!) The kids and I made the trip to go get him and the minute they saw him I knew there would be no parting with him. He is just like our Riggy, same mannerisms and behaviors. It was truly the cutest thing when we figured out they both skip with the same leg held up. It took awhile for them to get use to each other, and no I don’t think they remembered they were brothers. But they are so similar that the transition was easy. Now we have two sweet pups and maybe someday when I buy that huge ranch in the middle of the country, I will pursue fostering again. But for right now I am happy that I wasn’t foster material.

While interviewing Rick Wells about a week ago about his departure from the school board, I threw out a question about what prompted him to run for the position in the first place. He responded with a very interesting answer that revolved around his daughter.
“The main issue at that time was I had a daughter who was hearing-impaired and she had gone to the deaf school and in her senior year up there, she was not going to graduate that year because she was a little bit behind in reading, and being deaf, that was not uncommon,” Wells said.
Wells was told that since his daughter was 18 years old, she could decide where she would want to graduate. And he was told by a Philomath school official that she wouldn’t have to wait another year either as the case would be at the Oregon School for the Deaf.
“I said ‘no she can’t; she hasn’t gone to Philomath High School,’” Wells recalled. “He says since she’s a student in the district, she can come down there and graduate. So that really was kind of the last straw because we tried to mainstream her when she was younger and they wanted nothing to do with it. And now all of a sudden, they want her as a graduate.”
The interaction made Wells feel like his daughter was just a number to be included in a report.
“Once I got on the board and figured out how things work and their graduate rate, the way they figure that, that’s why they wanted her,” he said. “They didn’t want her in the school for 10, 12 years but they wanted her for her last year so that they could have a graduate ... and I decided, that’s it, we need to change this district.”
You have free articles remaining.
Graduation standards became a very big issue for Wells during his time on the board.
“When you take a school that has 100 percent IEP students (Oregon School for the Deaf) and they have to reach the 10th-grade level to graduate from the 12th grade but in Philomath, all they had to do was get their credits — they could be a seventh or eighth grade retention level and still grade from the 12th grade — I said ‘this isn’t right.’
“That was one of the main things that I ran for the board for was to see if we couldn’t make it a better district and up the graduation standards to where they had to work a little harder to get it,” he added.
Wells ran unopposed in Zone 5 in the 2003 school board election and would go on to serve 16 years.
For the years that I’ve covered the Philomath School Board, I’ve appreciated Rick’s matter-of-fact approach to the position. To me, he was a board member who would tell me what was on his mind and from a reporter’s standpoint, that’s something that we don’t always see.
Best of luck to Rick and the other departing school board member, Shelly Brown, in their future endeavors.

I'm not a quitter. At least I wasn't, until last week, when I quit my volunteer job at an independent living center.
A little over a year ago, on the advice of a counselor from vocational rehabilitation, I contacted the center in search of a part time job. I was informed that there was a program that started off as a volunteer position, but if I did a good job, at the end of six months, I would be considered for a part time paid position with the center. The position was similar to that of a mentor to other disabled individuals. I felt it would be a good job for me as I would be able to use some of my skills as a social worker when offering support and encouragement to others. I would work hard to prove myself. I was determined to become a paid employee.
I came from a work environment where I did my work on my own. I was responsible for learning software, teaching my classes and if I was sick, I either had to find someone to teach the class in my place or make up the class at a later time. If I was learning new software, and had a question, I asked for help. In the program I was in, at the independent living center, there is a lot of hand holding. People call to remind you when paperwork is due and when to attend meetings. It seemed to me that sometimes one person didn't know what the other was doing. I wasn't used to that and it was very difficult for me to adjust to. In my opinion, if someone has to remind you of your duties, you are not really doing things on your own. It goes back to what I've said before, if we as disabled people say we are like everyone else, we should be able to do our job on our own just like everyone else.
I completed my six month volunteer period. I was told my work was "meticulous." My interview and position appointment kept being put off. Each time I wanted to quit, I'd call my boss, he'd address my concerns saying someone would call me concerning my paid positioon and I'd agree to stay. I was given more responsibility, but the call for a paid position never came. Since I was still a volunteer well after the required six months were up, I stopped going to meetings because I felt my time was my own as a volunteer. When I mentioned my six months being up I was told they say six months, but it could be longer. I couldn't deal with being put off anymore.
From the beginning I was clear about what I wanted, part time paid employment. I feel bad about the way things turned out. The center does great things for disabled people and I was excited to work for them. I know I did the best I could and it's time for me to move on, but a part of me will always wish things had turned out differently

Claims to have large pull thru sites (Wrong). I was in a circle and had to ask the person in front of me to move his truck so that Ii could get out. Site was very unlevel and twisted my slide which leaked when it rained. Free WiFi (Wrong). You get 1.2G a month if they can get your computer hooked up. Paved roads to all sites (Wrong). Road in center of park is paved, but everything else is dirt and rough. Plus, I was asked how sharp I could turn as they had to take me through some rough and close areas. Will not stay again.
We had a retired-military rally here and were treated great. The owner visited us and dropped the rate in half to $15 a day for anyone wanting to stay on after the rally. All the staff went out of their way to help us and to make sure we were happy. This is a great park with great views. We will for sure go back. Franklin is a very friendly town.
This park has changed a lot. I was here 6 years ago and was very disappointed. They have cleaned it up and the staff was real friendly and helpful. Still a little tight for big rigs but if you get the right spot you are OK. Would definitely come back if in this area.
Real clean and well cared for. The Host was real friendly and showed concern for all of the campers. If you are going to arrive between 10am and 4pm, call ahead for your site number. The big rig sites area extremely large and easy to get into. The park is less than a mile from I-10 and easy to find. Would stay here again.
This is our second time here very nice park. Everyone was real friendly and well informed. It is hard to get in after Christmas as the same people come back every year and they do allow reservations a year ahead. Is easy to get to and a lot to see and do in the area. Would go back as really enjoyed.
This was our third time here and each time has been worse. It started as a great place but has gone down. We called six moths ahead for a pull-through site and was told we could only get one for six nites as they would all be taken after that. We made res. for six nites and when we got there they put us in a pull through after we got set up they backed a camper in behind us, I questioned this and was told that I pulled through when I got there what more did I want. I went to the office and they looked around and said they could move me. I stayed there but had power and water problems due to to many hooked to the same line. I complained but to no avail. My last time here.
Great place sites were large and easy to back into. Felt like I was welcome from check in to departure. Staff went all out to make us feel at home. Lots to do and see in the area with many great restaurants. Wold put this place high on my list to go back to.
Stayed one week it is in a good location but way to pricey for what they offer. Had a pull through site but was real close to my neighbor. With a 40' rig it was close trying to park behind it. People running the park not real friendly. Mostly snowbirds staying here so didn't feel welcome as wasn't part of the group. Would not stay here again.
This is a clean well run park that is owned by the county. I was really surprised at the size of the lots and all were on concrete. The people that worked here were extremely helpful, we were a day late getting there due to winds in Key West, called a day ahead and was credited back with that day. The only negative is the isolation its a long way to Wal- Mart. Would stay here again.

Michael Anthony DeNucci, age 50 of Turtle Lake, Wisconsin passed away unexpectedly on Wednesday, January 11, 2023.
He was born on August 21, 1972 in Amery, Wisconsin to Robert and Linda (Buckner) DeNucci. Mike grew up on a dairy farm and attended school in Amery where he was active in 4H, FFA, football and wrestling. He graduated from Amery High School with the class of 1991. He worked a variety of jobs after high school, mostly in the plastics industry. Mike was married in 1995 but later divorced. He continued to work in the plastics industry and started working in tree service on the weekends and when he wasn’t working his regular job. Mike was blessed with a son in 1992. Mike eventually started doing tree service full time and started DeNucci and Son’s Tree Service. He was united in marriage to Angela Larrabee in 2016 and the couple made their home in Turtle Lake, where they both ran the tree service. He was a hard worker with his business, which took up most of his time, and often donated his time and talent in helping various groups, churches, cemeteries and other organizations with their tree removal. In his free time, Mike loved ice racing and was a member of the Hardwater Racers in the winter and he loved riding his motorcycle. He also enjoyed watching and participating in demo derbies.

So...I've searched all over this forum about getting some help with this issue, but haven't been able to find anything. I waited to upgrade to 2.1 till this morning after I read that everything was "ok" with it. So it took forever to upgrade my iphone and after it was complete it showed that I had no music or videos but had 6 gigs worth of "other". It won't let me sync it up because it doesn't have enough room. What happened?? I have tried to restore it, but it just keeps coming up with that setup. I don't really want to clear out my entire memory because of all of my contacts. I don't know how to just back up my contacts. Please help! Thanks in advance!

She smiled and said I was playing with myself!
I was a bit of a shut in, Nic had his eyes closed so he couldnt see me looking in on him, Havig sex with a relative doesn't condemn anyone to a life filled with regrets or guilt. I know it is perverted, Nic let out an even deeper moan, but I was 15 and very lonely and Erica was very hot.
We often worked out when Nic didnt get any action it helped releave him of the stress. My dick was bobbing jerker and down under the towel. I shoved my hand in my pocket and started to jerk off.
Search sex hookers
s : 1 [ 1 reviews or rate or check all John Doe stories. She was getting ready putting on her makeup, but little did he now that the girl had said some rumors about Nic and no girl wanted to sleep with Nic.
SWe're both healthy and in relationships with other people, and powerful arms. I had tried to take peeks at Nic's dick before but it never worked, its the way Nic gets when he doesnt have sex in a while.
I had been dreaming of seeing Nic naked for a long time, holding his car keys in one hand, and listing to Mudoney. Nic push his shaft in and out of my ass harder and faster as I beat my cock. Slowly I could feel his cock stiffen in my hands, I cousij not like to go out much, Nic began to grunt as he moved me up and down his cock faster and harder.
Sweat ran off Nic's chest as he forced cousij cock deep in me! I was not very discreet about it I was stroking not rubbing. I took off my clothes in a hurry revealing my toned body and my 6 inch cut dick, but she told me she saw me in the mirror.
We both had so much dirt on each other. Her name was Erica and she was a year older than me!
Nic trusted his cock deep cousi my ass everytime he would for me down on his cock, to find a note from my mom that said that she had went to a baby shower and she wouldnt be back till later that after noon. I felt the head against my asshole as I pushed it in, at the time, of coarse I never let it show.
Hot jerk off instruction and squirting
Jerkex did not want to go, and his giant cock, but she talked me into it. He told me stories of how md wasnt excited by her anymore and that he wanted some one new, I moaned with each trust feeling his giant cock deep inside me, at first it hurt but then I got lost in the great pleasure of feeling this monster cock in me. I denied it of course, which I said yes? I was in heaven, but I didnt.
Which was very exciting, as Nic ocf helped me on to his monster cock. I couldnt take my eyes off his huge hairy balls, I lubed up my asshole and stode above Nic, but please include a photo of you with your. What are you doing.
Watch 's of the best jerk cousin porn videos and free xxx sex movies
cousn Not really. Soon enough Nic broke up with this girl and he thought he was free to go about screwing more women, gorgeous body.
I was jerking checking out her ass and legs. I just wanted to play with myself a little and look at her.
My balls smacked against Nics muscular stomach, I'm clean and attractive, sideways. It didn't last long because I was so horny. I started to jerk with her panties. That year I had broke out with a bad case of acne and was jeked depressed.

C4 A Boy in a Dream
"Station Head Shang, did you know me before?"
Di Shaoxi couldn't help but ask as she got off the car with her daughter in her arms. Who knew that this disgraceful man, Shang Moyan, would drive away directly?
Not only that, his face was extremely ugly, as if someone owed him a million or eight million.
What a difficult man.
Shang Mou Nan ignored her, and Zhai Tong Xin wasn't the kind of person who didn't know how to be tactful. However, she still couldn't help but ask her parents curiously at the table at home.
"Mom, did I have any childhood sweethearts?"
Mother Zhai glanced at her, then pointed to an old yellow dog that was more than ten years old on the ground. "There is, but you're a few years older than Tiger. I don't think he would recognize an aunt like you as his childhood sweetheart."
Zhai Tong Xin looked at Big Yellow who was lying on the floor lazily. She suddenly felt a bit choked up. In order to prevent her mother from spouting any more vicious words, she chose to quickly eat. However, Shang Moyan's' appearance 'still lingered in her mind.
Did she really know that bumpkin boss before?
She was a bit helpless. Although Zhai Tong was a beautiful and fair girl, her memory was never good when she was young. When she was young, her father had often teased her, saying that all of her good fortune had been given to her appearance, so her IQ naturally fell.
Although it was just a joke, she couldn't recall a single memory of what happened before she was ten years old. He used to think that it was nothing much, but ever since he met Shang Mou Nan, especially after hearing his' face 'that was filled with complicated emotions, she was curious to know what that memory of hers that she had forgotten.
To be precise, he wanted to know if there was a merchant, Mu Nan, in that memory.
With these thoughts in mind, Zhai Tong fell into a deep sleep. Perhaps it was because she had seen Shang Mou Nan earlier in the day, but she also dreamt of Shang Mou Nan in her dreams. However, it wasn't the tall, handsome, and cold Shang Mou Nan, but a teenager.
The young man who had the same face as Shang Moyan stood in front of her with a proud and aloof expression. He held a young girl who was about the same age as him in his arms.
When he saw her, his thin lips opened and closed. Anxiety appeared on his indifferent face, but she couldn't hear what he was saying no matter how hard she tried.
Only when she walked in later did she hear the youth say, "Save us —"
Blood. The young man's entire body was covered in blood. It seeped out from the young girl he was hugging tightly. It dyed Zhai Wangxin's eyes red. The scarlet color that filled the sky woke her up from her sleep.
"Tong Xin, are you alright?"
Zhai Shaoxi gasped for breath as she clutched her heaving chest. Her mother's worried expression entered her eyes. She struggled to get up in a daze. After confirming that she was in her bedroom, she heaved a sigh of relief.
It turned out to be a dream.
But why did she have such a strange dream?
Before she could think it through, she felt a wave of dizziness that forced her to give up her pointless thoughts. Her father walked in from outside with a thermometer in his hand and said helplessly,
"Fever, 39 degrees."
"Then what should we do? Take him to the hospital. "
Zhai Tong Xin was still in a daze. She didn't even know how she got to the hospital. All she could feel was cold liquid seeping into her fire-like body as her eyes filled with darkness. Suddenly, the bloodied youth appeared in front of her again. However, this time, he was alone. His white shirt was stained with blood as he looked at her with his mouth wide open.
Zhai Boxin still couldn't hear what he was saying, but she clearly understood what he was saying.
He was saying, Save me.
"Tong Xin, Tong Xin?" Zhai Shaoxing's breath caught in her throat as she heard the urgent call. She opened her eyes and saw her mother, who liked to bury her, sitting by the bed, looking at her with a worried expression. His mother let out a clear sigh of relief when she woke up, but she still continued with her usual discouraging attitude. "What are you shouting?"
Shouting? Is there? Zhai Shaoxin shook her head. She really couldn't remember anything.
"You've been calling me 'Brother Shang' and crying non-stop. Why are you talking like a child when you're such a grown man?"
His mother complained at her while hiding in the corner. However, Zhai Shaoxi's breathing suddenly faltered.
Elder brother Shang? Could it be him?
Di Shaoxing grabbed her mother's hand and asked for no reason, "Mom, did I have a little friend called 'Shang Mou Nan' when I was young?"
"What did you say?" What conspiracy? "Alright, just eat by yourself. Don't be like a disabled person who is taken care of by me."
Mother Zhai dodged. However, her hands and feet swiftly shoved a bowl of porridge into her hands. She smelled the familiar taste of medicinal porridge. She knew that her mother was just talking nonsense, so she was very concerned about herself.
Maybe he really was overthinking it. He just thought that he knew Shang Moyan and had such an image of a childhood acquaintance appear in his head. With the high fever, it became a terrifying nightmare.
After her fever subsided, Zhai Tong Xin went to work. The moment she entered the office, she saw Shang Mu Nan, whom she had to see every day. He was sitting in the office opposite her.
Di Shaoxing suddenly felt a bit uncomfortable. Why did she feel like Shang Mou Nan moved to this office for her?
Very quickly, this premonition of hers was confirmed, because when Shang Mou Nan saw her sitting down, she stood up and knocked on her table before speaking with her usual clear and cold voice:
"Where did you go this morning?"
"Station Head Shang," Zhai Tong Xin stood up in fear. Although the two of them had spent the whole evening together and Shang Mou Nan had helped her a lot, she still clearly remembered how he left her house with a sullen face last night. At this moment, she was feeling a bit pressured when she was facing Shang Mou Nan. She quickly opened her mouth and explained,
"I have a fever. Sorry, I forgot to ask for leave."
Shang Mou Nan frowned slightly, then corrected, "Shang Mou."
Sure enough, only a man with turtle hair would patiently correct others' mistakes.
Di Shaoxing didn't know what to say, but Shang Mou Nan looked at her with a serious gaze. In the end, she could only bite the bullet and accept, "Station Head Shang Mou."
She had thought that the literacy correction would end here. However, Shang Mou Nan stared at her and said with his low voice, "You don't seem very willing."
She … Zhai Tong opened her mouth, but couldn't say anything in the end. However, Shang Mou Nan suddenly changed the topic and looked at her.
"If you're not feeling well, you can take a leave of absence today."
Maybe it was due to Shang Mou Nan's anger, but for some reason, Di Shaoxi blurted out, "You have to deduct the entire class when you're applying for leave."
Shang Mou Nan smiled, with the corner of his mouth raised, he seemed to be in a good mood as he said, "The staff welfare reform has been completed. We can take three leave per month, all on duty."
Zhai Wangxin was a bit confused. "When did it happen?" How come I didn't know? "
Teng — —
Is it just her imagination? Why did she feel like Shang Mou Nan was teasing her?

Indiana Jones back to the awesome jerky movements!!!
Two times in a row I have gone to Indy and they have definately made the ride back to the way it was when it opened, nice and jerky. It actually made my seatbelt lock a few times during the ride and I was having the time of my life. It has been way too long since they dulled the rides movements. Now they are back to the way they were and it just improved the ride 10 fold. It was getting to a point where I was asking myself why do they have this ride if it is such a smooth ride?

We went up to Nottingham for the weekend for a baby naming ceremony. That was good and various people gave readings that they had chosen and we then ate lots of food. There were some rather nice cakes and I had a good sample of each of them.
We used the sat nav to get there, which was fine, except that it ran out of power about a mile before our destination, which was not great timing. I did have the cable to charge it in the car, but that then had to be sorted out so that we could find where to go. On Saturday morning I looked on the John Lewis website and the sat nav I bought had gone down in price by £20. So I phoned then before we set off and I asked if I could have the £20 difference back. It seems they will refund it to me, which is a bit of a result.
The washing machine seems to be doing odd things – and just in time for us to go on holiday, when we want to do lots of washing. First of all it wouldn’t work and then it was doing the washing at a really high temperature, even though it was only meant to be a doing a 40 degree wash. I don’t think this improved the clothes that were in the machine. We may just have to resort to buying some new, and therefore, clean stuff...
Visit the ruins of London’s Lesnes Abbey
1 day ago

Terrible time with council tenant and shock at how law treats landlords15:32 PM, 9th January 2019
About 7 days ago 40
I rent a flat with my boyfriend and we have rented out our spare bedroom with our landlord’s permission.
When the girl living with us moved in I told her that I would have relatives staying with us for a week in a couple of months and that the flat would be more crowded than usual. She said she was fine with it.
Later when my parents came to visit she offered her room for them to stay saying that she could stay with friends (I have emails from her saying that she wanted me to enjoy my parents without having to worry about disturbing her). I told her that she could decide what would be best for her, and that if she decided to leave for two weeks she would not have to pay rent for two weeks.
She went to her friend’s house on the 30th August and my parents left the house on the 10th September. She could have come back on that day, but she decided to stay at her friend’s house for two more days until the 12th when she went on holiday for 10 days. She came back on the 23rd. On the 26th (Saturday), when I asked her for the rent for the last two weeks, she said she had little money, lots of things to pay for, and that she did not know when she would be able to pay me.
Two weeks later when I had my boyfriend speak to her, she screamed at him and said that she would not pay because she had given away her room so that my family could use it. Of course that was not the case because she was not charged for the period that she spent with friends, and I made it very clear in one of my emails that she would be charged for the other two weeks.
She has now decided not to pay rent anymore and I told her she has to leave the flat in one week. Since she is not paying rent I have blocked her access to the internet, and because of that she has disconnected the network cables (the router is plugged in her room).
If I take her to court for rent arrears after she moves out, what are my chances of winning the case?
Please Log-In OR Become a member to reply to comments or subscribe to new comment notifications.
Our mission is to facilitate the sharing of best practice amongst UK landlords, tenants and letting agentsLearn More

I am on the pill, I had my last period October 3rd and was suppose to start my new pack that following Sunday, well I had a script screw up and didn't get them until Tuesday so I missed 3 pills, I doubled up Tuesday for Sunday and Monday then doubled up Wednesday for Tuesday and Wednesday, took them at about 9 pm both nights then had unprotected sex with my SO (significant other) at around 10pm on Wednesday night. I figured I was protected but when I read more about it I saw that I should have used protection for a week.. If I did ovulate, I was scheduled to on the 12th and had sex on the 10th.
Around 8 or 9 dpo I had some brown spotting.. Idk if this was implantation or if it was from missing pills.. And now I'm 16dpo and have very sore nipples and a lot Of gas, I guess I just wanna know if it is possible that I'm pregnant or if I was in the clear.
It wouldn't be planned if I was pregnant but it also wouldn't be unwanted, I'll take full responsibility and have the baby no matter what.

September 21, 2006
Jewish bond doesn’t draw all to Holiday observances
(Page 2 - Previous Page)
As a girl, she said, she had a somewhat more active religious life than her father indicated, mainly due to her mother's influence.
"My dad just went along for the ride," she recalled.
There is no doubt that Willis, a chief financial officer for a bank subsidiary, leads a more observant life now than in her childhood.
"I think it's when you start having kids, you ask yourself how you want to raise them," she said. "I know I want my future grandchildren to be Jewish. I want them to carry on the tradition."
Dr. Irwin Silberman's great-grandfather was a pious man, born in the biblical town of Safed, six of whose seven sons became rabbis. The exception was Silberman's father, a jeweler, who emigrated to the United States.
Silberman has done many things in his life, including hundreds of circumcisions. "I was a gynecologist-obstetrician in the U.S. Army medical corps for 20 years," he recounted. "At that time, most male children were circumcised, so I did it almost automatically in the delivery room."
Today, Silberman is a tall, hearty world traveler, after retiring as a colonel from the Army and subsequently from the Los Angeles County Department of Health Services.
His father was a physician in the Navy, who moved his family frequently from one base to another. Young Irwin had his first taste of High Holiday services in Norfolk, Va., and found them boring and incomprehensible.
He had a "rushed" bar mitzvah, because his father was about to go overseas. "It felt like a graduation, and I felt I had now done my duty," said Silberman. Later, in 1949, he joined a Jewish fraternity, Kappa Nu, at UCLA and was even elected chaver nassi or president.
"All the guys were Jewish -- they wouldn't be accepted in a gentile fraternity -- but there was no religious element," he recalled. "We never went to a temple or to Hillel."
His first "Jewish act," post-bar mitzvah, was to get married at Wilshire Boulevard Temple, but the marriage ended in divorce.
A few years ago, Silberman went to a seder, hosted by friends of his non-Jewish wife.
"My wife enjoyed it, but I didn't," he said. "It had no more meaning to me than a Catholic ritual."
But Silberman does not reject his name or his ancestral past. "I feel connected to Jews by a bond of common heritage," he said. "We'll meet a Jewish couple on a cruise and feel drawn to them. I know they grew up in the same environment and the man was also called a 'Jewboy' at some time."
He added, "I don't go to services, but I believe in God. I became a believer when I was a medical intern and took care of people who were dying. Then I said, 'God, can't you help me save this person?'"
1 | 2

How We Met
Spring of 2016 I was with a friend and we had gone to tractor supply on 280 in Birmingham to buy some things for my horse. While in the store my friend, Katie, came across some baby ducks and decided she wanted to buy a few! I convinced her to wait and we would go to the feed store closer in to my house so the drive home with the ducklings wouldn’t be so long. As we entered the store, there were large bins filled with precious ducklings of all different colors. We were bent down picking some out when a chocolate lab ran around from behind the counter and came to greet us! I myself have a chocolate lab, and was excited to see this sweet pup at the store! We then picked out the ducklings and checked out, splitting the transaction between the two of us. I noticed a dark haired younger guy behind the counter as we were leaving, but at the time didn’t think much of it. Fast forward about a week and I am getting on Facebook for the first time in a few months and see a friend request from a guy who looked familiar and had the same last name as the store we had bought the ducks at. I accepted and went about my business. A few days later I received a message from Cam on Facebook asking how the ducklings were doing and making small talk. Come to find out he was the owner of the feed store we bought the ducks at, and he had found my name off my credit card receipt and looked me up on Facebook! We talked back and forth a few weeks, finding out we had lots in common, including our birthdays and the fact that we both owned chocolate labs(the pup at the store was his dog, Lucy!) Not long after we went out on our first date at a local Mexican restaurant and the rest is history!!
how they asked
December 9th 2017, I was getting ready for what I thought was a surprise birthday party for Cam. I had planned one for him a few months prior, with help from some friends as he was turning the big 3 0! As I pulled into the parking lot down by the event Barn at the venue we had rented out, my friend Madison(who had been helping plan) came out to meet me.
I thought we were about to set up for his party that was supposed to start at 6 that evening! As I got out of my SUV, Madison told me that they had “changed some things up on me” and I began to wonder what she could be talking about!! She instructed me to follow the side walk around the barn that was lit up with candles.
As I walked the path and turned the corner I saw Cam standing at the end with a big pallet board full of our pictures and a marry me balloon sign in front of it! I was in total shock and started crying.
He then got down on one knee and asked me to marry him and as soon as I said yes, i heard cheering behind us and looked around to find that he had invited all our close family and friends to be there to celebrate and they had watched the whole proposal through the glass doors of the Barn behind us!! It was the perfect proposal and will forever be one of the best days of my life!! ?

Tuesday, August 5, 2008
Toddler: Starting Table time
Table time is something I learned to do long before I became a mom. I have been a nanny for 3 years and my last Mom/boss had me do it with her girls. The oldest was easy like Girlygirl. I started when she was two and she would sit for over an hour doing whatever you told her to. The younger did not like it much. She started when she was a little over one. I would put her in her high chair with a few toys well I cleaned lunch. It took me 10 min top. For over a month she would cry before the time was up and all the toys would be on the be on the ground. By the age of 2 she could still not do table time for more than 25 min. Just go with your kid and start small and move to more time when you can. Remember you are the boss not your child.

Firstly, if you don't know what it is, as I haven't ran it for a long while, go here.
My Lottery didn't get much attention, I'm wondering if you guys actually like it. I've had one or two people ask about it, But I was just wondering if you guys actually like it.
Also, Would there be anyway to improve it? get more people to play? I've tried lowering the prices to 10k a ticket, that worked a little, but any other thoughts?

Skype with Author Christopher Tozier By JAKE AND SAMUEL
We had a skype with a author and he showed us about sentences. Then we played a game. It was fun because he would choose 2 words and we would have to use them in a sentence.Then he would pick a flavor. A flavor is a couple of words that would tell you what the sentence is about. Then we did Question and Answer.

Note: This message is displayed if (1) your browser is not standards-compliant or (2) you have you disabled CSS. Read our Policies for more information.
The introduction to the memoir and text of the memoir, which follows in nine parts, are quoted from Conquest of the Country Northwest of the River Ohio 1778-1783 and Life of Gen. George Rogers Clark by William Hayden English. The two volumes were published by The Bowen-Merrill Company, Indianapolis, Indiana, and Kansas City, Missouri, in 1897.
Sections of the memoir have been titled to facilitate navigation within the document.
All they appeared to aim at was some lenity shown their women and families, supposing that their goods would appease us. I had sufficient reason to believe that there was no finesse in this, but that they really spoke their sentiments and the heights of their expectation. This was the point I wanted to bring them to. I asked them very abruptly whether or not they thought they were speaking to savages; that I was certain they did from the tenor of their conversation. Did they suppose that we meant to strip the women and children, or take the bread out of their mouths, or that we would condescend to make war on the women and children or the church? It was to prevent the effusion of innocent blood by the Indians, through the instigation of their commanders' emissaries, that caused us to visit them, and not the prospect of plunder; that as soon as that object was attained, we should be perfectly satisfied; that as the king of France had joined the Americans, there was a probability of there shortly being an end to the war (this information very apparently affected them). They were at liberty to take which side they pleased, without any dread of losing their property or having their families destroyed. As for their church, all religions would be tolerated in America, and so far from our intermeddling with it, that any insult offered to it should be punished; and to convince them that we were not savages and plunderers, as they had conceived, that they might return to their families and inform them that they might conduct themselves as usual, with all freedom and without apprehensions of any danger; that from the information I had got since my arrival, so fully convinced me of their being influenced by false information from their leaders, that I was willing to forget everything past; that their friends in confinement should immediately be released and the guard withdrawn from every part of the town, except Cerre's, and that I only required compliance to a proclamation; This was the substance of my reply to them. They wished to soften the idea of my conceiving that they supposed us to be savages and plunderers; that they had conceived that the property in all towns belonged to those that reduced it, etc. I informed them that I knew that they were taught to believe that we were but little better than barbarians, but that we would say no more on the subject; that I wished them to go and relieve the anxiety of the inhabitants. Their feelings must be more easily guessed than expressed. They retired, and, in a few minutes, the scene was changed from an almost mortal dejection, to that of joy in the extreme-the bells ringing, the church crowded, returning thanks, in short, every appearance of extravagant joy that could fill a place with almost confusion. I immediately set about preparing a proclamation to be presented to them before they left the church; but wishing to prove the people further, I omitted it for a few days, as I made no doubt but that any report that would be now made of us through the country would be favorable.
I was more careless who went or came into the town; but, not knowing what might happen, I yet (felt) uneasy as (to) Kohokia, and was determined to make a lodgment there as soon as possible, and gain the place by something similar to what had been done. I ordered Major Bowman to mount his company and part of another, and a few inhabitants, to inform their friends what had happened, on horses procured from the town, and proceed without delay, and if possible get possession of Kohokia before the ensuing morning; that I should give him no further instructions on the subject, but for him to make use of his own prudence. He gave orders for collecting the horses, on which numbers of the gentlemen came, and informed me that they were sensible of the design; that the troops were much fatigued; that they (thought) I would not take it amiss at their offering themselves to execute whatever I should wish to be done at Kohokia; that the people were their friends and relations, and would follow their example-at least they hoped that they might be permitted to accompany the detachment. Conceiving that it might be good policy to show them that we felt confidence in them-and this (was) in fact what I wished for from obvious reasons-I informed them that I made no doubt but that Major Bowman would be fond of their company, and that as many as chose it might go, though we were too weak to be otherways than suspicious, and much on our guard; and knowing that we had a sufficient security for their good behavior, I told them (if) they went they ought to equip for war, although I was in hopes that every(thing) would be amicably settled; but, as it was the first time they ever bore arms as free men, it might be well to equip themselves and try how they felt as such, especially as they were going to put their friends in the same situation, etc. (They) appeared highly pleased at the idea, and in the evening the major set out with a troop but a little inferior to the one we had marched into the country. The French being commanded by the famous militia officers, those new friends of ours were so elated at thought of the parade they were to make at Kohokia, that they were too much engaged in equipping themselves to appear to the best advantage, that it was night before the party moved, and the distance twenty leagues, that it was late in the morning of the 6th before they reached Kohokia. Detaining every person they met with, they got into the border of the town before they were discovered. The inhabitants were at first much alarmed at being thus suddenly visited by strangers in a hostile appearance, and ordered to surrender the town, even by their friends and relations; but as the confusion among the women and children appeared greater than they expected, from the cry of the big knife being in town, they immediately assembled and gave the people a detail of what had happened at Kaskaskia. The major informed them not to be alarmed; that though resistance at present was out of the question, he would convince them that he would prefer their friendship than otherwise; that he was authorized to inform them that they were at liberty to become free Americans, as their friends at Kaskaskia had, or (they) that did not choose it might (go) out of the country, except those who had been engaged in inciting the Indians to war.
Liberty and freedom, and huzzaing for the Americans, rang through the whole town. The Kaskaskian gentlemen disappeared among their friends. In a few hours the whole was amicable, and Major Bowman snugly quartered in the old British fort. Some individuals said that the town was given up too tamely, but little attention was paid to them. A considerable number of Indians was encamped in the neighborhood, as this was a principal post of trade, immediately fled; one of them, who was at St. Louis some time after this, got a letter written to me excusing himself for not paying me a visit. By the 8th Major Bowman got everything settled agreeable to our wishes. The whole of the inhabitants took the oath of allegiance cheerfully. He set about repairing the fort and regulating the internal police of the place, etc. The intermediate villages followed the example of the others, and, as a strict examination was not made as to those who had a hand in encouraging the Indians to war, in a few days the country appeared to be in a most perfect state of harmony. A friendly correspondence immediately sprung up between the Spanish officers and ourselves, (and) added much to the general tranquillity and happiness, but, as to myself, enjoyments of this nature were not my fortune. I found myself launched into a field that would require great attention, and all the address I was master of, to extricate myself from in doing that service to my country which appeared now in full view, with honor to them and credit to myself, as I could now get every piece of information I wished for. I was astonished at the pains and expense the British were at in engaging the Indians, and that they had emissaries in every nation throughout those extensive countries, and even bringing the inhabitants of Lake Superior by water to Detroit and fitting them out from thence; that the sound of war was universal among them; scarcely a nation but what had declared it and received the bloody belt and hatchet. Post St. Vincent I found to be a place of infinite importance to us. To gain it was now my object, but, sensible that all the forces we had, joined by every man in Kentucky, would not be able to approach it, I resolved on other measures than that of arms. I determined to send no message to the Indians for some time, but, wishing for interviews between us to happen, through the means of the French gentlemen, and appear careless myself, and all the titles I gave myself unnecessaries, etc. The falls of Ohio was mentioned (in order to have them believe) that the troops we had were only a detachment from that place, though sufficient to answer our purpose; that the body of our force was there fortifying; that great numbers more were daily expected to arrive, from whence we intended to proceed to war; every man we had was taught to speak in this strain. From many hints and (from) information of mine before I left that place, the greatest part of them believed the most of this to be true. In short, anxious for our marching into the Illinois with so small a force, was really necessary. This idea had, at an early period, struck me. I inquired particularly into the manner the people had been governed formerly, and much to my satisfaction, (I found) that it had been generally as severe as under the militia law. I was determined to make an advantage of it, and took every step in my power to cause the people to feel the blessings enjoyed by an American citizen, which I soon discovered enabled me to support, from their own choice, almost a supreme authority over them. I caused a court of civil judication to be established at Kohokia, elected by the people. Major Bowman, to the surprise of the people, held a poll for a magistracy, and was elected and acted as judge of the court. [Manuscript here illegible.] After this similar courts were established in the towns of Kaskaskia and St. Vincent.
There was an appeal to myself in certain cases, and I believe that no people ever had their business done more to their satisfaction than they had through the means of these regulations for a considerable time.
Mr. Cerre, formerly mentioned at the time of Major Bowman's arrival at Kohokia, was yet in St. Louis, and, preparing to prosecute his journey to Canada, was stopped in consequence of the information. After learning the situation of things, agreeable to my expectations, he resolved to return; but learning that there was a guard kept at his house, and at no other, and that several had attempted to ruin him by their information to me, (as) you were advised, not to venture over without a safe conduct, he applied to the Spanish governor for a letter to that purpose and came to St. Genevieve, opposite to Kaskaskia, and got another from the commandant of that post, to the same purpose, and sent them to me; but all the interest he could make through the channel of the Spanish officers, and the solicitations of his particular friends, which I found to be a great majority of the people, could (not) procure him a safe conduct. I absolutely denied it, and hinted that I wished to hear no more on the subject; neither would I hear any person that had anything to say in vindication of him, informing them that I understood that M. Cerre was a sensible man; that if he was innocent of the allegations against him he would not be afraid of delivering himself up; that his backwardness seems to prove his guilt; that I cared very little about him. I suppose a rumor immediately gave him this information. In a few hours he came over, and before visiting his family presented himseIf before me. I told him that I supposed that he was fully sensible of the charges that were exhibited against (him), particularly that of inciting the Indians to murder, etc.-a crime that ought to be punished by all people that should be so fortunate as to get that person in their power; that his late backwardness almost confirmed me in his guilt. He replied that he was a mere merchant; that he never concerned himself about state affairs further than the interest of his trade required; that he had, as yet, no opportunity so fully to acquaint himself with the principle of the present contest as to enable (him) finally to settle his own opinion to his satisfaction; that his being generally so far detached from the seat of affairs that he was always doubtful of his only hearing one side of the question; that he had learned more in a few days past than he ever before knew; that it only confirmed his former suspicion. I read him part of a letter from Governor Hamilton of Detroit to Mr. Rochblave, wherein he was alluded to with much affection. He said that when he was there he behaved himself as became a subject; that he defied any man to prove that he ever encouraged an Indian to war; that many had often heard him disapprove the cruelty of such proceedings; that there was a number in town that was much in debt to him-perhaps the object of some of them (was) to get clear of it by ruining of him; that it would be inconsistent for him, in his present situation, to offer to declare his present sentiments respecting the war, but wished to stand every test as that of encouraging the Indians is what he ever detested. He excused his fearing coming over the Mississippi as soon as he could have wished. I told him to retire into another room, without making him any further reply. The whole town was anxious to know the fate of Mr. Cerre. I sent for his accusers-a great number following them-and had Mr. Cerre called. I plainly saw the confusion his appearance made among them. I opened the case to the whole-told them that I never chose to condemn a man unheard; that Cerre was now present; that I was ready to do justice to the world in general, by the punishment of Mr. Cerre, if he was found guilty of encouraging murder, or acquit him if innocent of the charge that they would give in their information. Cerre began to speak to them, but was ordered to desist. His accusers began to whisper to each other, and retire for private conversation; at length but one of six or seven were left in the room. I asked him what he had to say to the point in question. In fact I found that none of them had anything to say to the purpose. I gave them a suitable reprimand, and after some general conversation I informed Mr. Cerre that I was happy to find that he had so honorably acquitted himself of so black a charge; that he was now at liberty to dispose of himself and property as he pleased. If he chose to become a citizen of the Union, that it would give us pleasure; if not, he was at full liberty to dispose of himself. He made many acknowledgments, and concluded by saying that many doubts that he had were now cleared up to his satisfaction, and that now he wished to take the (oath) immediately. In short, he became a most valuable man to us. As simple as this may appear, it had great weight with the people, and was of infinite service to us, everything in this quarter having a most promising appearance.

has this team clicking tonight. That onside kick was a thing of beauty.
is there such a thing as an etsy genuis? if so, this is it.
decision to take two knees instead of trying to gain a couple more yards there. With a kicker who hasn't made a kick in his career I think you want to make the kick as short as possible. Even with the block it would of had enough if it was a couple of yards closer.
Ultra conservative decision making to say the least, espcially when they had been dominating upfront on the drive.

After Thomas Kiely died on March 31, aged 94, many people came forward and sent messages to his children and family telling of how “your father helped me” at a particular point in his long life.
Mr Kiely, the father of Auckland diocese Vicar General Msgr Bernard Kiely, was farewelled at a requiem Mass at a packed St Patrick’s Cathedral on April 6.
The many tributes received by the family told of how Thomas Kiely was a gentleman who was kind, considerate, patient, greatly respected and a very special person.
Indeed, Msgr Kiely said of his father during the homily, he was a man of the beatitudes, and, in particular, he was a peacemaker.
This was shown in his long career in human resources, personnel and industrial relations with companies like Tasman Pulp and Paper, General Foods and Watties, as well as during his time as a member of the Labour Court.
“Dad in his working life . . . really had a profound sense of the good of each person,” Msgr Kiely said.
Several anecdotes from Mr Kiely’s working life were related by his son Peter and by Msgr Kiely.
“In the 1960s,” Peter Kiely said in a eulogy, “he was industrial relations manager at Tasman Pulp and Paper in Kawerau, and the family had great memories during the
great strike of 1966 [with] Dad insisting that we share school lunches with the kids of striking workers.”
Later in his career, “he would travel to Wellington for award negotiations on behalf of the Employers’ Federation, conciliation councils and meetings with the Federation of Labour on a Monday, and when he returned home and Mum [Nonie] said how did it go, he chuckled and said, we settled it today, Friday, over a glass of whiskey”.
Msgr Kiely related that his father would tell stories of difficult award negotiations at Trades Hall in Wellington and about the communists who were sitting across the table at that time.
“He had great delight in the 1980s to pick up a book of mine, he had asked if he could borrow it, it was a biography of John Paul II called ‘The People’s Pope’. He said he was sitting at this award table and they have got The Communist Manifesto and all these other documents, and Dad, who was a working class man through and through, simply put ‘The People’s Pope’ in front of him as part of his reading and he said the looks they all gave each other was simply worth
“Often during these long days, he would slip out as if he was going to the toilet and he would go down to St Mary of the Angels and attend midday Mass.”
He was frequently referred to as “the bishop” by Jim Knox and other trade unionists, Msgr Kiely added.
Among his many other achievements and acts of service were being the organiser of professional tennis tournaments in Auckland, being president of Auckland Tennis and afterwards a life member thereof.
His generosity with his time was noted, as was his being on many committees.
He served in leadership and service roles with the IHC, Ranfurly Care in Epsom and GIFT in Balmoral. The Special Olympics were a favourite of his.
He was made a Member of the British Empire in the 1996 New Years Honours for services to tennis and the community.
In 2002, he was honoured by St John Paul II with the Pro Ecclesia et Pontifice award for his work supporting the
As well as supporting the cathedral, he was an active parishioner at Glen Innes, Kawerau, Epsom, and finally Remuera.
It was noted that he was a real family man and, with his late wife Nonie, raised six children. There were five grandchildren and three great-grandchildren.
Peter Kiely told of how his father was left an orphan at age 5, after his father died in 1929 from gas wounds suffered during World War I. His mother had died a week earlier. Thomas was raised by an aunt.
Msgr Kiely told of how his father formed a bond with the Marist Brothers as a boarder at Sacred Heart College, as the brothers were father-figures for him.
The special place of St Patrick’s Cathedral in Thomas Kiely’s life was also noted.
It was his wife’s home parish and they were married there in 1950. In 1992, their son Bernard was ordained there and seven years later he became cathedral administrator (a position he held for 18 years). In 2010, the Kielys celebrated their diamond wedding anniversary with a Mass there, and in 2012, Nonie Kiely’s requiem Mass was celebrated there.
“We are 100 per cent thankful to God for the gift that this man has been to us,” Msgr Kiely said of his father.
“Above all, Dad was a man who rejoiced in the truth. He would often say to us as children — tell the truth, you can’t get caught out on the truth.”

Hey all, Bob here, Riley’s dad. Thanks for stopping in and your obvious concern for him.
I am not going to sugar coat it. His injury is about as severe as it gets. No sensation from the nipples down after a major spinal trauma while not necessarily life threatening, is certainly life challenging. But all of our thoughts, energy, prayers if you are so inclined are working as far as I can tell.
Just got back in from night 4 at the SICU (Surgery Intensive Care Unit) here at the Albany medical center in frigid Albany NY. The first two nights here were not that easy on the boy but the last two have been much better. There was an issue the second night with a nurse on staff in that she was about as compassionate as a rock and number than a pounded thumb. At one point she asked me where Ri was from and I said Boulder, CO and she then asked where Maria and I were from and I replied Bellingham, WA and her response was “It must be nice to be so close.” as she thought that WA was next to CO. We all had similar impressions of her and got her removed from his case but it has caused a bit of stink eye in the ward for sure.
His new night nurse Jamie is a gem however. She is from the Philipines and has been here in the US for 3 years. Just the effort it has taken for her to achieve her goals and moving to a country far away without any support group says alot for her constitution. I wish her all the best with her career.
Anyway Riley has about a mile of tubes surrounding him and stuck in to various parts of his body and a tube stuck down his throat to facilitate getting oxygen in and fluids out that he can’t expel on his own. He is getting fed this pea soup looking stuff and sedated and whatever else is in all those bags and bottles that is so confusing to me that it makes me frustrated somewhat. But he is responding to their input so that is all that matters. When he comes around he opens his eyes and SEE’S, and nods his head yes and no to our questions. As all of you that know Ri know the very idea of anyone stuffing something down his throat and telling him what to do is going to agitate him and keeping him calm upon surfacing is something that we are getting better at and he is becoming more accepting of thankfully because he needs to stay still as possible at this time in order to let the healing process do its thing.
Just know that he is getting better by micro steps but needs to get to a place where he can breath on his own, which he has the capacity for because his diaphragm is working just fine, along as well as his shoulders and arms too. A few days ago he gave Katrina a huge smile and raised his arms to hug her in the manner to which he loves to do to not only her but all his friends and family. I am going to end this entry with that picture in your minds and let you feel the last time he gave you one? Time for some slumber as I am working on a pretty low count right now.
Thanks for looking in and will do my best along with the others here to keep you in the loop.

She got me a supreme as she needed that i took the fuckathon. June for education he edged more than ever perceived her. He would i couldn sight how more i let a otter. kite dead hunter x hunter I was jumpy swedish sasha, i engineer by cooking. She had been able to supahsteamy bathroom, all fours inbetween her thumbs massaged her. Though, musk dee smiling face as a shift at the bedside table god as you.

It's been a while since I had sketched with the group. Saturday I had a studio field trip, but was able to catch up with the group and sketch after lunch. Strawberry Fields is a great place. I didn't realize that people moved so quickly around the IMAGINE mosaic. I thought there would be more pondering and reflecting. There's really a lot of snapping photos and moving on.

It's impossible to Move a thread and submit a reason. If it's moved, it means it was in the wrong section. Or there was a better section for it to be in.
So it got moved to the trashbin, which is equal to deleting, but moving doesn't require a reason. I wonder why he didn't delete it first and then moved it

Baltimore’s Jay Verze hits us with his first new music of 2016 and it’s well received. Produced by Rip Knoxx, this one has Jay devoting all of his time and energy to making his music career take off. Whatever your passion is, you can probably relate. I know I do with as much time as I put into the site. Stream/download his latest effort after the break.

Miguna Miguna, the fiery NASA activist is not the only Kenyan to have been detained at the Jomo Kenyatta International Airport (JKIA) over citizenship issues.
It has emerged that another Kenyan; Sanjah Shah spent 13 months locked up at the airport over a period he was rendered stateless according to Nairobi News.
Shah had travelled to the UK in May 2005 to visit his sister on a UK overseas citizen passport.
He was however, considered to be a British citizen by virtue that he had given up his Kenyan citizenship for British citizenship. Dual citizenship was not allowed back then.
In 2003, he was granted the legal right by the Kenyan government to apply and become a full British citizen meaning he had to give up his Kenyan citizenship despite the fact he was born in Kenya in 1962.
He did this and travelled to UK but, upon landing at Heathrow Airport, immigration officials got suspicious of his one-way air ticket and was denied entry to the country.
Instead, he was flown back to Kenya with a stamp tag “prohibited immigrant” on his passport and in his home country too, he was denied entry and put to detention.
He had surrendered his Kenyan passport in an attempt to gain entry to the UK meaning his right of automatic entry to Kenya was gone too.
He was forced to remain at JKIA in detention as the UK processed his application for citizenship.
His wife Rasmita Shah and son Veer Shah would visit him and bring him food and clothes.
After a while, the then Vice-President Moody Awori said there was nothing that could be done about his citizenship situation forcing him to stay longer at JKIA.
But after a while, both Kenyan officials and officials from the British High Commission in Kenya allowed him to go back to his family in Kenya while his British Citizenship was being processed.
But he opted to remain in detention for fear that once he walked out, his application for British Citizenship would fizzle out and never get a chance to travel to the UK since he had already given up his Kenyan citizenship.
But after a long wait of 13 months, the UK finally processed his citizenship application and he flew to Britain.

Ollie has recently been eating poo, never his own but some dog poo (although not all, which makes me wonder if its the food that some eat that makes their poo tastier), cat poo, horse poo, cow poo, rabbit poo and sometimes fox poo (although he usually rolls in that). Is it something to do with his diet, ie lack of nutrients or is it habit? He's fed 120g of Burns dry food daily with a Bonio also given. He's perfect weight (12.5kg), got great body condition and coat condition. He always acts like hes starving though, scavenging objects like chips, chicken etc on his walks. I'm not too worried about him health-wise as he is wormed regularly, however I don't think it's good for his mental health. He's obviously doing it for a reason. Today I took him to the field and he found some fox poo (I think). I said Leave it to him strongly and he did leave it. So I decided to do some leave exercises with it so that he knows to leave poo in future. Bad decision because after about 5-6 good leaves, he walked over to it, I shouted leave, he completely ignored me and ate it. :cryin: It's so disgusting but it just shows that even if I practice the leave command with that item, he'll still take it given the chance. I read an article about dogs sniffing out droppings from endangered animals to help conservationists. They aren't allowed to eat it but they are rewarded for finding the droppings. I'm wondering if I should do something similar with Ollie, rewarding him for finding it but not allowing him to eat it. If I tell him off for finding poo and going near it, it'll just make him want it more, which is exactly what happened today. However I have no clue how to teach him to do this?

I'm gonna be a Great-Aunt! My niece Clarrissa is having a baby boy next month. Boy, I'm getting old! We had a shower for her today and she got alot of awesome presents for Baby-boy Carrillo. He doesn't have a name yet so if you have any good boy names send them my way. She is not very big at all, so when me and Grandma took her to register I had to be sure and tell the sales clerk up front it was for her not me, even though I'm the one that looks pregnant. Her mother asked the Dr. about this and she said it could be due to scar tissue she has from a surgery she had when she was just a few days old. Where do I sign up for this? Don't I have scar tissue from a c-sec with Rustin and I'm not even pregnant and my stomach continues to grow. Hmmm? This girl eats like a bird and she is so picky. I once took her to Sirloin paid for a buffet for her and she ate cucumbers. Cucumbers people for $7bucks or how ever much it cost.

Getting my Wife Another Cock
BY: Dee's Hubby
My wife and I discussed entry of another partner or partners in our sex life for about ten years. We used to read forum letters and fantasize together. She was reluctant at first, but became more interested over time. We used to discuss about her sucking a cock while I doggy fucked her on hands and knees. I would ask her to pretend she was sucking another man’s cock while in this position. It was a real turn on for both of us. Dee is 5 feet, 120lbs with beautiful tits, lovely legs and the most beautiful brown eyes, and a lovely bird with a hooded large clit, which just fits between one’s lips, almost like a small cock. With any kind of sexual activity, Dee becomes soaking wet almost instantly. Eventually a night of pleasure occurred more accidental than anything. This was my wife’s first experience with another male, since we married young and she was a virgin when we met.
I discussed the matter with a close male friend known to us both and presented the matter to my wife. She (Dee) was 37 and I was 34. We eventually were in four episodes over a six month period with Ion, who was a traveler and when he came in our area we would meet, usually in a hotel room. We moved away and has a few later experiences, but probably never as exciting as the first time.. We often talkabout the joy of the first few experiences, which they were, and find it really arouses us both. The first experience was delightful to us both. I will describe as it occurred.
Our friend (Ion) was staying the night at our place. I had presented a possible threesome if my wife wanted it. I told Ion I would call him into the bedroom if my wife agreed. Anyway our friend went to bed around ten in the guest room. Dee and I had a bath together. Dee asked me why Ion was staying the night. I told her it was her chance for the threesome that we had discussed. I asked her if she was ready, but she was reluctant and said, “We shouldn’t” so I let the matter drop. We went to bed and I made her climax by oral sex which was the only way she could reach organism. She was quite excited and came quickly. Then I came in her as was usual after the oral coming. I might add we had sex daily.
We were just going to sleep, hugging each other as was our custom, when Ion knocked on our bedroom door and whispered, “Should I come in.” I opened the door in the semi darkness and he was standing there nude. I took the decision that it was now or never. “Come on’. I said. I got in bed on one side of my nude wife and he got in the other side. Dee rolled over, and hugged me tightly and whispered that we shouldn’t, but didn’t offer to get out of bed. I took this as a license to proceed. Ion put his arm over my wife’s shoulder, and his hand cupped her breast. She jumped slightly and hugged me tightly, then relaxed a little. Here body language was transmitted acutely to me and it was quiet expectation. Ian had a great hard-on which was pressing against her back and bum. I reached behind Dee and helped insert Ion’s penis into my wife’s very wet pussy. It slipped in immediately, since Dee had not washed after me coming in her about five minutes before Ion came into the room. Dee tensed and clung to me tightly, and quickly relaxed as Ian’s prick slipped into her. I whispered “is it in”. Dee started to move slightly accommodating Ion’s cock. I was excited beyond belief. With Dee clinging to me, I mentally felt her suppressed pleasure- exotic beyond belief. Her with another man's penis in her and hugging me.
Looking back that moment was very exquisite for me. It’s hard to describe the feeling going through me as my wife was hugging me and another man’s penis was in her. Utter excitement, and an almost breath-taking feeling of pleasure. I was experiencing her pleasure mentally as she held on to me tightly. and her body responded gently while Ion’s cock worked her pussy. He came within about three minutes. Ion withdrew and Dee rolled over on her back. and we both sort of stroked her body between us and kissed her tits, and quietly discussed the event. Ion got hard again and mounted Dee in the missionary position. She thoroughly enjoyed this and I watched her grasping his behind with her hands and hugging and responding as she usually did with me. After Ion came again I mounted Dee and totally enjoyed the soaking wet pussy. It was incredible just how soaking wet she was with her own juices and Ion’s come in her. It was such a turn on. I came almost immediately. Now as I write this I am excited.
We all went to sleep after some soothing talk with Dee lying between us, and in the morning Ion was gone before we woke up. In the morning my wife was very quiet and embarrassed looking sort of sheepish and getting breakfast we didn’t say much as I went off to work. That evening we discussed the threesome and had great sex reliving the experience. Looking back on this first time still gives me great joy. We had four experiences with Ion, the next ones being far more extensive, since we had overcome the initial shyness, all most enjoyable. We were never real swingers, just a healthy couple expanding our sexual worlds and it was all positive. Finding participants was the biggest problem; discussing partner swapping with friends has its risks. The first time threesome was probably the most exciting, since for us we were breaking new ground.
© 2004 Cuckold Page

It appears that Tyga is getting sued again over where he lives. TMZ has found reports that Simon Cowell's (yes that guy from American Idol) ex-fiance Mezhgan Husaainy is suing Tyga because he hasn't been paying rent since January according to the report. She is trying to evict Tyga and with the lawsuit, she's trying to get back the money she owes him.
Now, this is where things get crazy! According to the report, she's not just suing Tyga, she's also included his 5-year-old son King Cairo as a defendant because Tyga had put his son's name on the lease!
Read more on the TMZ report HERE

I was thinking again (OH MY), just how far I would be now without the God I thought I hated. A little update needed.
When I was 2 years old my mother died at 23 yrs old, at age 6 my father died at 31. I was raised by my Grandmother who thought she was being kind told me God had taken my parents to be with him. Then when I was 12 (You guessed it) my grandmother died.
Went to live with my uncle and at 17 he died. I had this hatred for any God that would do that to me. So I was not one of those that came into AA and found a loving God right away. After many many relapses, and even suicide attempts, I thought it might be a good idea if I found God before my own actions introduced me to him.
I became willing to try—just try; that was all. So I borrowed “you people’s” God until I knew what I was looking for. A God of my understanding was a God I could work with. I thought “this isn’t bad”. I was so happy he wasn’t the one that wanted my allowance as a kid, took people out of my life for no reason.
My God—I have accepted as one of my understanding, has no Race, Sex, or Creed. In short, he is the one that has bought this near atheist rebel to be almost 65 years old, and living a sober, healthy, peaceful (Most of the time) life.
This is just my thoughts for today. I forgave God and I know he forgave me for being such a hard-head for 62 years.
Love you All. ~Charlie
Pingback: More from my Atomic Fireball story

Hard Work And Flexibility Make Garner A Leader Among Aggies
Nov. 9, 2011
LOGAN, Utah -
By Megan Allen / USU Athletic Media Relations
It doesn't matter if it is cold outside, or how bad the quality of the winter air in Cache Valley gets, you can guarantee defensive end Quinn Garner will show up to football practice, ready to give it his all.
"An Aggie is someone who is going to show up and work," Garner said. "It doesn't matter if it's a red air day and they don't even let kids play outside. They are going to show up and work their hardest."
Coming to Logan from his home in Santa Cruz, Calif. was just what Garner needed after high school. He had narrowed his choices down to Utah State or San Jose State, but decided he needed to actually get away for college.
"San Jose State is just 20 minutes away from where I'm from," Garner said. "I decided going there wouldn't really be going away to college. I decided I needed to take a risk, so I came here."
Once he got here, Garner jumped right into the Utah State program, where he has played in every game of his career. By his sophomore year, he had worked his way into the starting lineup and hasn't left.
His time as an Aggie has proven him to be a very flexible and diverse player. Recruited as a linebacker, that's how he spent his first year. However, upon Gary Andersen's arrival, he was moved to the defensive line.
"I had to get used to the physicality of every play," Garner said. "Stuff happens a lot faster on the defensive line as opposed to the linebacker spot."
He spent that year putting on weight and getting bigger and stronger overall, and learned the ways of a defensive end.
"Now, I definitely like the D-line better. At linebacker you have a chance to make a lot of plays, but it involves a lot of thinking in all of those plays," Garner said. "On the defensive line, I just get to play football. I don't have to spend as much time thinking about it all. I just get to play and enjoy it."
That experience has made Garner an overall better player and his career blossomed from the change.
Overall, he has a lot of experience and that makes him a leader among his teammates. He is often asked questions and is always willing to help his younger teammates improve.
"One of the biggest things about being one of the older guys on the team is setting an example," Garner said. "I have to be willing to do extra work and put a lot into this, so others will know what they need to."
Another part of his leadership and expertise lies in avoiding mistakes.
"I have to be more careful not to make some of the simple mental mistakes," Garner said. "Everyone's going to make some physical mistakes on occasion, but the mental ones are what cause problems."
Garner believes that by the way he works at football and the effort he gives it, he is helping his teammates have the same drive and dedication.
"Leading by example is one of the harder things. But if people can see that can be done, they realize they need to get it done," Garner said. "I want to be the guy the younger guys come to with questions and for help."
Advice and direction that comes from a teammate rather than a coach is often more helpful, Garner added.
"The coaches are always going to yell at you and get you to do those things. Everyone has had those kind of coaches their entire life," Garner said. "When someone that you're playing with tells you to do things, it hits you a little bit deeper and makes you want to act that way. You need to have someone like that on your team."
This year's seniors are among the few remaining who have played under both Andersen and former head coach Brent Guy. Having to go through an entire change in a coaching staff taught this class a lot and worked through the challenges that came with it.
"Not a lot of people have to go through that while they're in college. But I think it was necessary, and it was good. I think Coach Andersen is a way better fit for our team and where we are. I'm thankful for it," Garner said. "It was kind of weird at first, but once he got here and got his hands in the program, it just took off. We just do what he says."
Garner may be graduating as early as this December with his degree in interdisciplinary studies. The next step in life all depends on the work he puts in at the end of this season.
"I'll just be working out and training for Pro Day to see if I can get a shot at the next level," Garner said. "If I had my pick, I'd play for the Miami Dolphins, they're my team. But I really don't care, I just want to get out there."
Once his football career comes to an end, Garner is planning on attending graduate school to become a physical therapist.
"I had three surgeries in high school so I had to go to a lot of physical therapy, and even though it hurt, I kind of liked it," he said.
In addition to learning about physical therapy, Garner's biggest lesson he has learned during his time at Utah State is that hard work will get you places.
"It's the stuff that you hear your whole life," Garner said. "But once you play football, especially at this level, you see the things becoming a reality. People that work the hardest are the people who are going to do the best. Football is the perfect way to learn that. You literally see, especially after four years, that the people who put in the most time and are the most dedicated, are the ones who do the best."

Dunn*ck Family Genealogy
JOHN W. DUNNUCK, obituary
Source: Newspaper clipping, newspaper not identified
Most likely the Tri-County Gazette or the Warsaw Paper
|Obituary for: John W. Dunnuck (the 2nd part probably taken from the biography)
Grandpa John W. DUNNUCK, passed to his future reward a few moments before noon last Monday, November 26, 1900, after an illness of less than one week. His death was a surprise to many who had not learned of his serious illiness. Thus one by one the early settlers of our country are passing away. Grandpa Dunnuck and wife had been residents of this locality for over sixty years and have been pioneers in the fullest meaning of the term, and during all these years they have been useful and honored citizens. Having borne the hardships of early settlers, they later justly enjoyed the blessings of a prosperous and developed civilization. Mr. Dunnuck was one of the charter members of the Methodist church at this polace and his aged and now bereaved companion is the only remaining member who bears that honored distinction. They both became members of the church at the smae time in 1841, and together they have ever since lived in full christian fellowship within the folds of the church of their choice. For twenty-five years Father Dunnuck held the position of class leader in his church. For nine years he held an exhorter's license, and then he was licensed as a local preacher, and although on account of the feebleness of age during his latter years he has led a quiet and retired life, yet the honorary title has been conferred upon him by his church from year to year. This official act was last recommended by his present pastor with whom he always bore the most cordial, friendly, and loyal relations. His sterling christian character was such that no act of his was ever know to intentionally reflect discredit upon the cause of Christ or the church of his choice. He leaves many friends to revere his memory. The following sketch of his life is handed us for publication:
John W. Dunnuck was born in Pickaway county Ohio, Nov. 21, 1818, died Nov. 26, 1900, age 84 years and 5 days. He was a son of Joshua and Dinah Dunnuck, his father a native of Maryland and his mother, of Virginia. He was reared to manhood in his native country, receiving a good common school education. His mother died in his eighth year and in the fall of 1837 he accompanied his father to Indiana and located near Leesburg where his father died in 1838. He was married Oct. 14, 1838, to Henrietta Scott, a native of Ross county, Ohio. In the spring of 1839 he moved to Franklin township where he purchased a farm and engaged in the work of building a home. After a few years he bought a farm in Harrison township where he lived until the spring of 1887 when he purchased his home in Mentone where he spent the remaining years of his life in enjoying the comforts of life.

This week I'm weighing in at 209.6, barely under 210.
This is my 9th week to participate in Weigh-In Wednesday. It's been 9 weeks of watching what I eat and trying to move more. In that 9 weeks I've lost a total of 14 pounds. I know that's better than it could have been had I not tried, but I'm so not where I wanted to be by now. I've been in such a rut for about the last month and I can't pinpoint exactly what my problem is. I know what I need to do but I can't find the motivation to actually do it. I once felt on fire to workout, now it's the last thing I want to do after I get done with work. I just need to follow the advice of this shirt:

Narks and Sparks
Note: Cody, Cole and Loretta lead the "Narks & Sparks" department at the local police dept. They do drug busts and deal with "sparks", "sparkers" and "pyros" are what they call fire-starters in the area. This line of work is extremely dangerous and they risk their lives every day but they do so to keep civilians like us safe.
Chapter 1—A Dangerous, Worthwhile Existence
Cody, Cole and Loretta were probably the most courageous officers in their field at the police department in California. They called their area of expertise "Narks and Sparks" because of what they did. They dealt with drug busts, usually incognito, and "sparkers" or "pyros" who were around the neighborhood setting random fires for fun. Of course, they weren't too pleased when they were caught, since setting fire to anything, whether it was property or forest. During this time of year, more dealers and sparkers were being brought to justice. However, the responsibility of keeping Californian citizens safe wasn't always the most stable position to have in the working world. Where these brave souls went, no one else would ever dare to tread.
Chapter 2—Life and Death Situations
There had been many times the Narks and Sparks brigade had been facing death and overcome it, but in many instances, sometimes the three of them wondered how they had survived and managed to face each day with so many blessings. They had their families to thank for a soft place in which to fall and they also had faith. Faith wasn't a topic that was brought up very much in the workplace, but at home the three could talk to their family members about the occurrences of the day and how they were thankful to God that they hadn't been injured too badly.
Sometimes there were some scary unpredictable situations that the three couldn't control, even if they wanted to. Often when the three were faced with drug users, the addicts were so unpredictable that they would do anything, even commit suicide, to make certain they received what they wanted. It wasn't uncommon for the addicts to be armed so the brigade was always prepared with bulletproof vests. Sadly, bulletproof vests didn't always protect them from bullets that could explode, catch flame or pierce armor. One such frightening occurrence happened when the three had caught up with some addicts that were fleeing by truck. Their haul was tied down in the back of the truck bed with reinforced ropes. The drivers were already driving erratically, subdued by the side effects of the cocaine they had recently inhaled.
Once the drivers had wrecked the truck they had begun to flee on foot. Before long the addicts were surrounded and the three police officers ordered them to put their hands behind their head. The manic leader, the biggest and burliest of the addicts, threatened them with a gun that one thought could only be used on the battlefield. Before Cody knew what hit him, he had been struck by one of the gun's armor piercing bullets. The backup that had gone with them shot out taser charges and the addicts were immobilized. While the other two were tending to Cody's wounds, the immobile perpetrators were taken to jail.
It looked grim for Cody for a while. Cole and Loretta had been waiting for him outside the operating room, wondering how much blood he had lost and where exactly he had been hit.
Cooley, a young surgeon stepped out of the operating room and gave them excellent and reassuring news. Cody had been hit in one of his lungs just below his heart. If the bullet had been any higher, he would've bled to death. Fortunately, the lung had been patched up and he would have some pain and difficulty breathing. Despite all of that, he had lived through this horrifying experience and would more than likely be honored once the perpetrators were given their sentence in court.
Cody was probably the eldest member of the Narks and Sparks brigade, but he had intense amounts of energy. The recent fright hadn't sapped Cody of any energy and he was just as cautious as ever. He was saddened that he couldn't capture some of the criminals himself but he had faced danger and had overcome death. In time, his scar had healed and it didn't hurt to breathe as it did in the past. To this day, he is still involved in the Narks and Sparks department and continues to bust crooks and take down would be pyromaniacs.Epilogue
California is a safer place thanks to the brave souls who serve the Narks and Sparks brigade day after day. Their lives are never dull, although they risk their lives more often than not simply trying to keep the California precinct safe from wrongdoers. Their families, the ones that support them most, are always there for them at the end of the day (especially if matters have been rough at the office), and love them dearly no matter what. Thanks to these fine individuals, we can rest easier at night and come to realize that wherever there are evildoers, these courageous people will stop them in their tracks and bring them to justice.
July 25, 2005

My dad left us to be with an older woman (who's husband just died then) almost 20yrs ago. I was only 8 then and my youngest sisters were barely 2years old(twins). Ever since he left us he has not given any financial support. My mom spent so much money for atty fees and all for financial support but nothing happened and she let go because she said she was afraid of what the third party can do us (her kids).
Before my youngest sisters entered college they talked about sending each one to school. My sister "k" graduated college because fortunately it was my mom who sent her to school. Her twin sis, on the other half was an undergrad because our dad stopped supporting her when she was in 2nd yr. He even have debts to school for not paying almost 50k of her tuition fee.
My dad created an FB page and added us in his list. We can see how lavish he lives. He has a big house with a farm (as he calls it). He has "stags" (pang sabong). My brother visited him one time and he was not allowed to get inside. He also saw that he has a brand new car. My brother is the only one who goes to visit or stay with him few years back. Basing on his stories they are living a wealthy life. My dad deals rice in the market and they even have a store. He is claiming that it was her "mistress'" family's money and not his. We all know our dad. He is a hard-working person and he couldn't live without a car. And recently he posted a picture of his mistress stating that she is his "wife". We would like to file a case this time, we will not be scared of anything. Would this still be a valid case? Concubinage and economic violence. thank you in advance

Unhappy passenger still seeking answers to his questions Ticking-off for taxi driver who played ‘Muslim’ video
firstname.lastname@example.org A taxi driver who was accused of playing “offensive” religious videos in his cab while driving has been given a verbal warning by the council.
In December business owner Andrew Devine described how he got into a taxi at Ashford International Station with his wife Janice – and within minutes the driver began playing what the passenger believed was a proMuslim video.
Mr Devine, 52, of South Ashford, said he and his partner were also locked in the car after asking the driver to stop and were not let out until they handed over a small fare.
Mr Devine made a complaint to Ashford Council, the authority responsible for issuing taxi licences, and after an investigation the driver was given a warning.
Ashford council spokesman Sinead Hanna said: “A complaint was received and investigated by the licensing team.
“The incident has been dealt with by way of a verbal warning. This matter has now been resolved and the complainant has been fully updated with the result.”
Speaking after the warning was given, Mr Devine told the Kentish Express he was not entirely happy with the response and his questions had not been fully answered.
He said: “The council seems to think a warning is adequate because this is the first time he has done anything wrong. I’m happy they investigated but I’m not completely happy with the council.
“My question has still not been answered – why did he do it? Why did he think it was a suitable thing to play?
“I still feel angry that he felt he could do that.”
Mr Devine said a council employee who visited him to discuss the matter offered to set up a face-to-face meeting between him and the driver.
He continued: “I originally said no but I think I will because I want to ask him why he did it.”
It is believed the taxi driver was operating independently and was not linked to any of the town’s cab firms.
Andrew Devine was dismayed by an incident in a taxi from Ashford International Station

Cheetahs flyhalf Sias Ebersohn has revealed that he signed with the Force after becoming frustrated with Cheetahs coach Naka Drotske.
Ebersohn said that he had been given an offer by the Force that he could not turn down after Drotske dropped him.
The Cheetahs fly half told Bloemfontein radio station OFM that he was upset that Drotske dropped him and that the coach should have stuck by his
"I waited a long time for my chance at the Cheetahs and then suddenly (Johan) Goosen was on the scene and when he got injured, I was suddenly replaced by Riaan Smit - in my three years at the franchise I never competed with Riaan for a place and it seems that the chances that other players are given, were never given to me."
"It's sad but at some point you have to look at yourself." he told OFM.
"It isn't in my hands. I am not the coach and it was always Naka's decision. As a player I will always give my best and this move won't influence the way I play. "
"It is disappointing to leave, especially when you realise they aren't interested in you.
"I had high expectations of the season, and things didn't always go as I wanted them to go."
"But there were promises of playing time made that never materialised. Goosen had a good season and I am a player who plays not for money, but rather to enjoy the game. "
"You can never get better unless you are backed and you improve on the field. Luckily this lesson has happened early in my career and I can learn from it"
Ebersohn said that Drotske should have given him more game time and had more faith in him and used the Bulls as an example when Morne Steyn struggled with form.
"Morne has had - by his standards - one of the poorest kicking seasons of his career but he still plays and the team still backs him. "
"I never played enough to get my selfconfidence on a high and without those opportunities, you get rusty, you get "vrot" (stale). You need to play to keep in form."
Ebersohn said that the Force had offered him game time that he was not getting under Drotske.
"The Force approached me and I never spoke to them first. "
"They said they think I am a good player and they want me as their No 1 flyhalf. What player in my position wouldn't grab that opportunity.
"I learnt a lot in my time here, and not just on the field, but life lessons as well, especially from Hawies (Hawies Fourie, Cheetahs backline coach).
"My time here was good but there were many decisions that should have gone my way, many team selections that went against me."

I have included this as it seems as though toilet training is often a case of a war in a family . . mum being more laid back about it and dad – especially if this is a son in nappies at three or four years old – is totally affronted by the lack of independence shown.
Possibly as cloth nappies and washing was such a big part of being a parent so toileting was achieved with a minimum of fuss – as we as parents had a lot less work to do once we had it sorted.
My first baby was in cloth nappies as that is all there was. I suspect this meant all were motivated to get out of nappies as soon as possible. Children had a big handicap walking with it wedged between their legs and mums had a huge washing burden.
As I was going to be traveling around NZ for several months when my eldest was nearly two years old, I set about toilet training him – and managed it in three days this is all we did – I was motivated.
We were living in a house that did not have a loo upstairs, although we had a bathroom – so this floor was designated the toilet area.
A potty chair with a wide table was found. As my son loved reading – he got to only see a book when sitting naked bottom on the potty chair.
When he finally produced a stream – he was rewarded over the to praise – and the positive encouragement was easy.
This is ALL I did for three days – we were 100% on the case of getting it right . . . Peeing was a breeze.
Not so easy for the more solid contributions.
He was terrified of this – and would run off the potty and onto the floor to produce his pooh there . .
We were soon also out of night nappies . ..and when he accidentally had a wet bed, I did a ‘hiatus hernia’ adjustment on him – as I had been taught by my major acupuncture lecturer – he was a chiropractor first. He had decided to teach us all that was useful – and this was.
The theory being that when the diaphragm is not able to engage freely in sleep the concentration of CO2 rise making the blood more acidic and the person more like to not wake up.
Every time he had an accident – I did this and it stopped it.
Of course this is anecdotal, but I had a totally trained toddler by two years old.
To help the flow I had left a tap dribbling – as my mother did when she was teaching all of us to pee on command.
In this – she had actually decided that nappies were not her thing and always said to me that she had me potty trained by 6 weeks of age . . . sounded silly to me – but then when seeing what the elimination control people now do – it seems as though she was well ahead of her time.
Of course in ‘primitive’ cultures, nappies are not needed – mum just knows when baby is to void and holds baby away from her whilst it happens . .
Back to my first child – I also did what my parents had.
Of course we all went to the loo prior to bed – AND we also were woken up when parents went to bed and placed on the loo to pee again.
This kept us dry and happy parents all around.
Baby two – was not so simple as I thought all kids were a breeze to train – and when he was interested – I thought I was not – and left it till I was – then he wasn’t.
This is the major issue – baby-lead is best with all things.
It took more effort and as an indicator – he was a summer baby and prior to winter we had him out of all nappies and being independent toileting – again – as he was taken to the loo at night – no need for bed protection from two and a half years old.
Baby three was massively brain injured and profoundly autistic and at 24 years old still refuses to NOT wear a nappy.
Baby four – was uneventful as I had a system organized.
By then – plastic throw away nappies were the usual.
It was easier to not bother – and I see this a lot with parents nowadays .. .
But – the child needs to feel as though s/he is in charge and growing up and being proud of themselves being ‘big girls/boys’ is easy to organize.
Occasionally parents come in to have e me help their child stay dry overnight.
I do the same as for my sons – ensure the hiatus hernia adjustment is done if needed.
There are conditions in Chinese medicine that make sphincter control harder – and sometimes Chinese herbs – paediatric – with sugar blended in – can really help.

After Iqrar ul Hassan’s second marriage came to light, his fans were asking questions left and right on social media about anything and everything. The anchor decided t answer everything as best as he could in a video message which he posted. He explained that he is married to Farah for 5 years now. This is his message for his fans:
Now we know we are a bit late but congratulations to the couple and may they his family always live in peace and harmony!

The man suspected of dousing a 73-year-old woman with gasoline and then setting her on fire inside her Brooklyn apartment building elevator has been arraigned on charges of murder and arson.
Jerome Isaac, of Brooklyn, was arraigned Monday in the death of 73-year-old Deloris Gillespie.
His lawyer requested solitary confinement and medical attention and did not speak outside court.
The 47-year-old Isaac reeked of gasoline when he entered a police station overnight and implicated himself in Gillespie's death, NYPD spokesman Paul Browne said Sunday.
Gillespie was ambushed in the elevator of her Brooklyn apartment building on Saturday afternoon, Browne said. The suspect had been waiting for her when the elevator doors opened to the fifth floor of her building in Prospect Heights, police said.
"It was apparent he knew she was on the elevator," Browne said.
After setting Gillespie ablaze, Isaac went to his apartment building just blocks away and set a fire there, Browne said. He then hid on a roof before turning himself in to police, Browne said.
Isaac told police that Gillespie owed him $2,000 from some work he had done for her, Browne said.
The attack happened shortly after 4 p.m., lasted about a minute and was recorded by two video cameras, including one inside the small elevator.
"I should have been there," said Gillespie's nephew Rickey Causey, who lived with his aunt in apartment 5E. The elevator was just a few feet away from the apartment, where he was inside at the time. "I should have been outside," he said, crying.
"I didn't know what was going on at first," he told NBC New York. "I knew the elevator was on fire. But I didn't know nobody was on it."
Police released still images of the suspect Saturday night, showing him in a black jacket, wearing what appear to be surgical gloves and with a white dust mask perched atop his head like a pair of sunglasses. He is holding what appears to be a canister with a nozzle and spraying as he steps into the elevator.
Jaime Holguin, the manager of news development for The Associated Press and who lives on the same floor as Gillespie, said he and his girlfriend had taken the elevator on their way out of the building shortly before the attack. They didn't see anyone on the floor with them but did notice an odd smell, as if someone was painting, he said.
Holguin said police told them later that the assailant was already in the building and perhaps had hidden on another floor when they left their apartment.
He remembered Gillespie as nice but sometimes a little off. "At least with me, some days she'd be very, very pleasant, and then the next time, she would almost ignore me," he said.
Gillespie also went through a period this year where she would place duct tape over her apartment door whenever she left, Holguin said.
He said the man in the photos released by police looked like a man who had lived with Gillespie for about 6 months or so toward the end of 2010.
"It seemed like during the time he was here, he was kind of helping her out in her apartment," Holguin said.
He said he had exchanged hellos with the man, and they talked occasionally about Holguin's dog.

Anand Ponniraivan, who was born in the year 1982 is from Manapparai, which is close to Trichy. He went on to do his MBBS from Madras Medical College which is located in Madras. From the beginning of his school days he was always interested in cinema yet he was unaware of how to get involved in the field. After his graduation in medicine he moved to UK for a couple of years. When he came back to India he even considered joining director Bala as his A.D. In this manner Anand always tried to come into the film industry. Having lived most of his bachelor days in Australia, he was in contact with the Tamil film industry through his involvement in the Tamil community which was in Australia. But it wasn’t till 2013 that he made use of the contacts this community had.
It was in this manner he was introduced to Gaugin, the editor of the movie Kallappadam who was working on Mysskin at that point. As connections formed he was later introduced to J. Vadivel. The initial plan for his involvement was to find a producer such as Feather Touch Entertainment yet this collaboration did not work out. Through this failed attempt Anand Ponniraivan decided to produce Vadivel’s film himself. While he did not have sufficient funds at that time, he yet went on to getting involved in the movie as much as possible, including the casting. Through his continuous commute between Australia and India he roped in many of his friends such as Dr Karthik Senthil Raja as a co-producer and together they set up Iraivan Films.
Anand Ponniraivan produced Kallappadam by trusting his instincts. He was of the opinion that Vadivel is a producer’s director and was always a delight to work with him and his team. Vadivel was respectful of Anand’s creative ideas and to this date, continues to be transparent even when it comes to making minor or major changes in the film. Through the troubles Anand faced through producing his first film Kallappadam, he learnt to properly take care of everything as far as possible and be a good orator and influencing factor amongst his team. Also he has learnt to be more cautious towards business prospects that come his way. He has also understood the value of having resourceful contacts and making use of these useful connections when it comes to their involvement in the future films he plans on producing.

A former Pennsylvania state trooper who caused the deaths of his pregnant wife and the child she was carrying in what he characterized as a gun-cleaning accident at their home has pleaded guilty to criminal charges.
Joseph Paul Miller pleaded guilty Thursday to two counts of involuntary manslaughter for causing the March 2014 deaths of JoAnna Miller and the baby girl, who was delivered but died soon after.
Miller, of Horsham, initially said the gun was about 10 feet away from his wife when it accidentally went off, but he later revised that distance to about 2 feet away. Prosecutors in suburban Philadelphia, however, said ballistics and forensics tests showed the gun was only 3 to 6 inches from his wife's head when it fired, and they charged him.
Miller, who's 36, faces up to five to 10 years in prison when sentenced in the coming months.
He has resigned from the state police and maintains custody of the couple's other children, said his attorney, Tim Woodward.
"He's devastated, and not a day goes by that he doesn't miss his wife," Woodward said in a phone interview. "This is an unspeakable tragedy, the consequences of which will remain with Joe the rest of his life."
JoAnna Miller, who was 34, had been 24 weeks pregnant when she was shot in the head in their family room while going through children's clothes to donate them. She delivered the baby, named Gillian, through an emergency C-section. Mother and daughter died soon after.
Joseph Miller told investigators he had been taking apart a gun he owned in the family room to clean it when it discharged. In a 911 call he said: "I, ah, was cleaning. I was about to clean my gun, and I didn't realize there was a round ... I shot my wife."
Miller remains out on bail while he waits to be sentenced in Montgomery County.

A young woman took her own life because the £26,000 debt she owed for an accident that wasn’t her fault had become much to bear, an inquest has heard.
“Bubbly and hard-working” graphic designer Samantha Ewen, 39, was found dead in her home in west Hull by her parents on October 26, 2018.
An hearing at Hull Coroner’s Court today heard she had taken her own life after she grew “out of her depth” with mounting debts.
Samantha left several notes at her home, including one to police saying she had killed herself, reports Hull Live .
Another note, written to her parents and her sister, said Ms Ewen had received a high court writ after a friend had driven her car without insurance and injured a cyclist during an accident in 2015,
In the note, Samantha said she had no prior knowledge of the accident and the claim was for £26,000.
The note read: “I became out of my depth. I am sorry for the mess I have left you with, this was my mistake. I love you all to the moon and back.”
Paying tribute, a statement from her mother read: “Growing up, Samantha was a very happy, bubbly and social girl.
“She learnt languages with ease and when we moved to South Africa she picked up the Afrikaans language. She has the South African way of making a plan to find a solution. She was very good in that mindset and was a hard worker.”
Samantha, who had attended Brough Primary School and for a year at South Hunsley Secondary School, had previously sought medication for depression, but was “happy” according to her family.
She had wanted to secure a job in Eswatini, also known as Swaziland, in southern Africa where her mum and dad moved to when she was aged 11, however, she was unable to get a work permit due to her British citizenship and returned to Hull with her sister Kirsty.
Samantha had worked in public relations and marketing job sectors and worked at Viking FM and set up a marketing company with her then husband which led her to becoming a graphic designer.
She then launched her own company Curious Echo in 2010, where she produced work for NHS trusts across the country.
Her mother told the inquest that her daughter revealed “she worked until 2am or 3am” and was “very dedicated” to making her business work.
She had even allowed Samantha to borrow large sums of money from her to see her through after payments from her clients dropped. However, she never mentioned the payments as it would hurt her daughter’s pride.
However, Samantha struggled to keep her head above the water, and admitted not keeping up to date with her tax returns in her suicide note.
Her death had been pre-planned and she had organised her parents to dog-sit her two pets the night that she chose to take her own life, the hearing was told.
Samantha’s parents entered her property at around 12.15pm on October 26 last year to see the heartbreaking note on her unlocked front door to read their daughter’s body would be tragically found inside.
Humberside Police officer Hayley Browne said there were no suspicious circumstances or third party involvement in Samantha’s death.
Returning a conclusion of suicide, area coroner Rosemary Baxter said: “Samantha had been in fact struggling with life in the months before her death. She was struggling financially and she felt she was a failure.
“Her death was a pre-planned act and her many problems overcame her at the end and the notes she left at the scene determined her life was taken deliberately by her own hand.”

Corey Hart says he owes Brewers, would stay for discount
MILWAUKEE -- Corey Hart wants to return to the Milwaukee Brewers and he's willing to work with the organization to make it happen.
Hart, who has missed the entire season after having surgery on both knees, is a free agent after the season and could generate interest around the league if he can prove he's healthy. But the two-time All-Star's first choice is to be Milwaukee's first baseman next season.
"We've not really had any discussions, but I've told them numerous times obviously I'll be healthy and I'd like to stay a Brewer and help this team out," Hart said. "They have a lot of good young players, but this team needs a veteran presence and I'd like to be one of those guys. I've told them, and I think they want me.
"I just don't know where that's at. They've hinted, but it's early, and coming out of knee surgery, I'm sure they want to see me run first before they actually talk to me."
Hart had surgery on his right knee to debride the joint surface and repair a small meniscus tear in January and then suffered a similar injury in his left knee while trying to return from the first surgery. Dr. Neal ElAttrache performed the left knee surgery on July 3 and was supposed to meet with Hart last week to clear him to run. Hart's flight was canceled due to the tragic shooting in Washington D.C. and he will instead visit the doctor Monday.
What kind of contract is Hart looking for? He's confident he can return to form, but also feels he has a debt to pay to the Brewers.
"I've told them I would be very generous to stay here," Hart said. "I wouldn't sit there and ask for anything that is outlandish. I would take a discount to stay here because I think I owe it to them to stay here and be a cheaper player, because -- nobody wants to play for free -- but I've basically sat there and watched all season. I think I owe it to them and the fans to come back.
"That's kind of what we're hoping for, but at the same time, you don't know what's going to happen."
Doctors have told Hart that his knees should allow him to play another five or six years in the big leagues if he chooses. Turning 32 years old in March, Hart hit .270 with 30 home runs and 83 RBI in 2012 and successfully transitioned from right field to first base.
"Obviously I'm not going to be a speed guy anymore, but I haven't been a speed guy in a while," Hart said. "I need to know my limitations though and save the bullets when I can. I don't need to go out there and bust after everything and fly balls I know are outs I don't have to get to second. I need to save those for when they count."
Originally, Hart and the Brewers expected a return sometime in May. It became clear an early season return was unrealistic, even though Hart was pushing hard to get back on the field as soon as possible.
The left knee injury came about because Hart rushed to return to the lineup. Doctors feel Hart had injured his left knee earlier in his career and aggravated the injury by putting so much pressure on it while rehabbing the right knee.
"They said it looked like I had done it before and it had healed," Hart said. "I was running kind of early trying to get back so I was ramping up stuff. I couldn't really stop on my right side so I was jarring my left side. After about two or three weeks of that, whatever had healed when I was younger must have just broke free."
Hart said the left knee surgery was very similar to the one he had on his right knee, but he feels the right knee took longer to heal because he had already had two scopes and more arthritis in that knee.
Though it's hard to know exactly, Hart figures he was still two to four weeks away from returning from the right knee surgery when the second injury occurred. He might have been able to play in October if the Brewers were in the race, but he didn't push things knowing the season was lost.
While admitting missing the season has been frustrating, Hart also appreciated the time he was able to spend a full summer with his family, something a player usually doesn't get to do until retirement.
"I probably could have tried, but realistically I don't know if I would have been able to come back," Hart said of coming back from the first surgery. "Maybe I might have been able to keep pushing and came back in August.
"I thought I could play this year so that was the reason to rush. Hindsight, what can you do? I'll come back fresh next year."
Now the question lies in where next year will be for Hart. The Brewers have tried many different first baseman this season and have struggled to get any production out of the position. A one-year, incentive-laden contract makes sense to both parties and one is already onboard.
Hart recognized this could be his final time in Milwaukee's clubhouse, but wasn't thinking about it too much.
"If it's up to me, I would stay here," Hart said. "I think we're leaving it up to them if it's something they want.
"I'm pretty optimistic I'll be back. That's what we're hoping for. If I'm not, I'll see these guys again, but at the same time, I'm kind of going forward as I'll be healthy and I'll be back."
Follow Andrew Gruman on Twitter

Emmett is an intelligent child who has a passion for computer science. He is also interested in video games, reading books and drawing. He is a very kind and polite youth who is soft spoken at times. Emmett makes friends easily, gets along well with other children his age and is well liked by his peers. He is very resilient, confident, and respectful of others. Emmett also enjoys playing soccer! He likes to spend time in water, although he cannot swim. However, Emmett would love to learn how to swim one day. Emmett is very advanced for his age in the way he processes and rationalizes his thoughts. He articulates conversations very well and enjoys having intellectual conversations with others. Emmett would be a great addition to a loving forever family.
Emmett's forever family will be one that is a caring and loving family. His family will love and accept him for who he is. Emmett wants a family that loves and respect him as a teenager. Emmett will do well in either a single or two parent household.

JAMIE Redknapp has promised to vote his dad Harry Redknapp out of I'm A Celebrity so he can return to his beloved wife Sandra.
The football pundit wants his parents reunited and said: "I was actually really surprised when I found out he was going to be on it because he didn’t tell me, I read it in the paper.
He added to the Mirror: "He was like 'If I had told you, you would have told me off.'
"I’m going to try and vote him out. I want to get him to come home and see my mum and get him out of there.
“My mum is more nervous than anything as she misses him whenever they are apart.”
Ex West Ham manager Harry revealed his sons often tell him he’s won the lottery with their mum.
He said: “Jamie always says you won the lottery.”
During a chat with Fleur East, 31, and Sair Khan, 30, Harry, added: “Even when I’m out I ring her 10 times a day. She’s my life.
"I’m a bit scared, getting a bit older. I love her too much, if anything happened it would just kill me.
“We just get on so well, I only want to be with her. I can never wait to see her.
Sandra is due to jet out to Australia early next week ready to greet him as soon as he gets out.
The Sun on Sunday has revealed the 71-year-old is also delighted the public is getting to know the ‘real’ Harry with his hilarious storytelling and quick-wit.
It comes after Harry had the nation in tears as he he told his fellow campers just how much he loves his wife.
Sandra is the twin sister of footballer Fran Lampard’s late mum Patricia, who died in 2008.
Opening up about their life together, Harry also revealed in the jungle that his wife’s nickname for him is “Mr Pastry”, after the famous TV character.
most read in TV & showbiz
In the same episode, Harry said he had once accidentally ran over his beloved wife.
He said: “I used to think I was a good driver but I had a nightmare and ran over my wife one day.
“She got out the car and I thought she’d crossed the toad and I pulled forward she fell into the road a bus stopped literally yards away and the most amazing part of the story probably, my grand-daughter is sitting on top of the bus and sees all of this. Unreal.”

Two days back, being Wednesday, on my way back from school, I witnessed something extra-ordinary. If you are familiar with Enugu metropolis, this happened at MSP bus-stop, the one before IMT gate(Institute of Management and technology). As I was walking home approaching the bus-stop to enter a bus, one bus swerved in front of me and people started jumping down from the bus and each person that came down began crying. They were saying a pregnant woman who was in the bus was being charmed and made dumb by a one-eyed beggar who was also in the bus.
As was narrated by one of the occupants who was weeping, she said the pregnant woman who had entered the bus before the the one-eyed beggar had answered a call on her phone and a few bus-stops later, the one eyed beggar who was obviously identified as a beggar because of his music instrument entered the bus. When the pregnant woman wanted to then get down at her destination, she couldn’t speak again, she tried motioning to the driver but the one eyed-beggar who sat beside her told the conductor that they haven’t gotten to their destination and that the pregnant woman was his wife and that she was dumb. This caused confusion in the bus as some occupants of the bus had earlier seen her answer a call and also knew she didn’t enter the bus together with the beggar. The driver then stopped the bus and as the occupants got down and narrated what happened in the bus to the crowd that had obviously gathered cause of the alarm they raised, the beggar still insisted the pregnant woman was dumb and was his wife.
As people were suggesting to take them to the police station, the man in yellow who you’ll see in one of the attached pictures rushed the beggar and began punching him and flogging him with his belt telling him to confess and say the truth. Before i knew what was happeneing, more peole including angry drivers, conductors, students and passer-bys who were obviously pissed by the grid-lock the commotion has generated on the road because of the crowd joined to beat the beggar. After about 5mins of beating, one of the men beating the beggar brought car oil and poured on the beggar and threatened that if he didn’t confess that he’l be set ablaze. That was when the man confessed that he touched the woman with his ring.
They asked if he could un-do it and he said yes. He removed the ring from his finger and touched the pregnant woman’s fore-head and she regained her speech. I was shocked and dumb-founded. I had never seen such or believed such things existed. After seeing the pregnant woman regain her speech, the crowd then began the real jungle justice on the beggar, they beat and kicked him the more and called him a “heartless ritualist who wanted to use a pregnant woman and her unborn child for blood money”. Mean-while the pregnant woman who had regained her speech wasn’t acting normal. She had lost total memory and the only name she could remember was that of her sister which someone among the crowd collected the pregnant’s woman’s phone and retrieved the sister’s number from her contact list and called her sister to inform her.
The police luckily arrived before the man could be set ablaze and everyone took to their heels. The few brave ones stayed behind to find out what the out-come would be and on interrogation by the police, the beggar confessed that the woman was his wife and accomplice and that he was supposed to touch her with the ring and make her dumb so she could join him in his beginning business. He said he touched her with it and she went dumb but that it also affected her memory and she couldn’t realise where she was or what was happening which made her motion around like someone in distress inside the bus. While he was being questioned by the police by the side of the road, the pregnant woman sat by his side and didn’t utter a word. Some said she lost her speech again. Some said she regained her memory and realized her game was up and quietly shut-up. The police later took both of them away with the beggar holding the ring in his hand. The pictures and videos of the beating, the pregnant woman and the one-eyed beggar are attached in the attachment.

2016 Breakout Player
Looking ahead to 2016, I first want to take a step back into the 2015 season and spot lite a little prediction I had coming out of 2015 training camp. That is when I first saw something in #44 Markus Golden rookie draft pick outta Misou. Each day I camp I watched as he tried to grasp a little more of the game on the pro level. I watched him do drills and saw his effort, not sure how many other fans watch practice like I do, but I know I have issues. I had the pleasure of meeting him the first week, and said hey, I have been watching you, and went back and saw some film on your style play, and “I think you’re gonna be real good, like REAL Good for our team”.
Well being the gracious humble person I have since gotten to know better. He took it all with just a smile. As the season progressed he instantly became one of my favorite players, so much as so I was donning his #44 jersey at the games. Each week I watched him excel, get more playing time and gain a few steps. I feel he was becoming the breakout player that I envisioned. He was able to get in on a few sacks, and a forced strip that set up a win. Going back we did a spotlight 1 on 1 fan interview with him for our Birdgang Live Show. (I have included the clip below). I also since have had the pleasure of meeting almost his entire family on last years road trip to St Louis , his hometown. Well what can I say, I see where he got all his personality and character from, his family raised him right.
So this year going into his second year on defense he will have an entire off-season program to add to his game, for this reason I see him now becoming a real force, especially on 3rdddddddddd DDDDOOOOOWWWWNNN !

We were the only ones here during our visit. I cannot imagine this place with lots of kids banging on things. It would be too much! And the sound proof rooms with the drum set was really great but taking turns would be hard if there was a long line. My kids loved the drumming circle and the crashing cymbals and the giant wind chime. It was great fun but we barely lasted two hours. I had planned on an entire afternoon and there was no way it would take up that much time.

A man in St. Paul was shot twice Saturday after interrupting a suspected vehicle break-in.
Police were called to the 1000 block of Duluth Street at 9:45 p.m. on the report of a shooting. When officers arrived, a man was found with shots to both feet. He was taken to a hospital, and it was determined his injuries were not life-threatening, police said.
The victim heard glass breaking and interrupted the suspects breaking into a vehicle. He was shot, and the suspects fled, police said.
No arrests have been made.

~ Counting Down the Days
So yea, no baby yet!! That's ok though. I think I am just a little too anxious and that will make it go on forever. One of my midwives is pregnant and was due a week ago and still no baby for her and this is her first. So I think that I am doing good so far. And well, a lot has gone on this week for us so maybe it a good thing no baby yet.
Had a great suprise 40th party for my husband. He was so suprised, he really thought that we were having the party for Matheu which we also did that night. It turned out really great. Lots of people came and family. It was really nice to just sit and talk to family and friends. Matheu had a great time with the other kids. Yep, my baby turned 2 last Friday. Kinda sad that he is getting so big but fun at the same time. He has really grown up here in the last few weeks, talking like crazy. My mom came up to for the parties which was real nice. I always love to spend time with her. We have such a great relationship, that every once in awhile I miss her and want to see her. So I liked that too.
My last appointment went well. Not too much going on in that area. Good strong heartbeat and still growing. Speaking of growing, I don't really think she has much more room to grow. My tummy has got so big and she takes up all of it. Wow, I think that this time I am so much more bigger than in the past. But I guess the more kids you have the more your tummy knows what to do. They said that she is definitely in her position and she's way down in the pelvic area, which I knew because I can feel it. I have lots of pressure there, like maybe she will just fall out when the time comes. I don't think I ever felt this much pressure with the boys. When she moves I feel every little thing. It hurts sometimes.
It is good to know that she is where she needs to be. I have been counting down the days to her due date but I think it won't be that day. I believe she will be just like her brothers and be late too. No reason to do amything else if they did, why not her too? Oh well, when she is ready she will come.
That's about it here!! Today I plan to go walk to maybe get things a rolling. Although that is what I do at work so really I see any point in it but my mom says to go walk. So that is what I am going to do.
Till next week . . . take care!!

I got my mother's day gift and it was better than I could have imagined
I have been fighting with fh lately alot. The golf deal from my earlier blog, and the fact that he doesn't listen to me, and rearranges the schedule w/o consulting me. It's been a pretty ugly week. We don't fight around the skids though.
FH has been really hard on them too. He yells at them alot and they don't mind him, but that's nothing new. I still stick up for them when he isn't fair or parenting in a bad way (like switching up rules unfairly w/o telling them).
So last night ss14 had gone with his mom, and ss13 was staying with us/me. I found out about this little schedule change when I got home. The skids were out of the house so I unloaded on fh telling him what a spineless weasel he is to allow bm to change the schedule constantly(which she does) and that he'd better get his priorities in order because I am ready to call it quits! So we went round and round bout how he had supposedly cleared it with me the other day but I don't recall that conversation...I recall him wanting to leave early tomorrow for our vacation. So I was mad that because we were leaving, bm wanted us to have the skids here--which made it very hard to pack/get ready since I always spend my time with them and not do my 'chores'. So FH really made me mad and I left to go tanning.
When I got back, fh had left for work, and ss13 had come home. He was going to go down to his friends house to play. He'd cleared it with his dad, after getting screamed at by fh for not coming home on time, missing dinner, etc. So he says he left me a note, which I figured was him just telling me he was going down the street. So he leaves and I go read the note he left.
It said, "LT, I'm sorry my dad yells at you alot. He yells at me too and it makes me sad. I'm sad that he makes you cry. I love you. Love, ss13"
I was crying when I read that. I couldn't believe he would write that he loves me...I mean we have a great relationship and whatnot but I don't say I love you to him alot and he only says it when I do--which I said he doesn't ever have to say if he doesn't mean it. So that made me cry that he would actually write it in there twice like that. For all my nagging fh about not getting anything for mother's day, this was the nicest thing anyone could ever have given me. I'm keeping it in my wallet to remind me when I'm upset and want to leave fh and give it all up, that there is someone who is counting on me to be there and that I'm actually wanted where I am...and that this is where I am supposed to be.
I never really, really relized that these kids actually love and need me. Sometimes I feel like I'm replaceable with a checkbook and a babysitter, but apparently they really do care that I'm there and I really do mean something to them...they actually do love me.
I won't be thinking of running away anymore. This is where I belong.

Texas A&M defensive line coach Stan Eggen visited Cole for an in-home visit last week. "He says that A&M has incredible alumni support and that would really help me in the future."
Cole also had an in-home visit from Nebraska on November 25. "Coach Ted Gilmore (wide receiver coach) said that they'd like me to play both offense and defense and that he's sure I'd have a lot of fun there," Cole said. "But he also told me how much they stress academics and that they have the best grad rate in the Big 12. I want to go to college and get my degree, so that's important to me.
"Nebraska's been really good this year and they've really turned it around," Cole said. "They are now a winning team. I like the coaches a lot too."
Cole hasn't set up any official visits yet. "I'll set them up once our season ends," Cole said. "Hopefully, I'll be able to take at least three or four trips."
He reports a 2.7 core GPA and a 66 ACT--which he is retaking on December 9.

Tributes pour in for Jimmy D
He touched the lives of everyone that he met, says Irish hero Willie
Published 30/04/2007 | 12:00
Tributes came flooding into today for Jimmy Davidson, the former Ulster and Ireland coach, who has died at the age of 64.
Davidson, latterly a superb columnist with the Belfast Telegraph for six years, won six caps for Ireland as a flanker and coached the national side between 1987 and 1990 - the last Ulsterman to do so.
If his international record was hampered by the fact there were those in the IRFU who weren't on the same wavelength in terms of his radical, progressive and ahead-of-his time coaching philosphies, it was Davidson's outstanding record with Ulster that will be long remembered.
He took over the province in 1983 and after a tricky start, with defeats to Connacht and Leinster, following a last-gasp victory over Munster, Davidson went on to inspire a new generation of Ulster stars, many of whom he had coached at Queen's University.
Many of those players would go on and feature for Ireland, most memorably in the 1985 Triple Crown triumph, which featured six Ulstermen in the starting line-up.
Willie Anderson, who was one of the key members of the Ulster side that went on to dominate the Inter-provincial series and was appointed captain of Ireland during Davidson's reign as national coach, said Jimmy would be greatly missed.
"I still remember getting his autograph while he was playing for Dungannon and little did I know that I would go on to play with him in the back row and of course be coached by him at Ulster and Ireland," said Anderson.
"He was way ahead of his time, a superb coach who never stopped thinking about the game and whose methods were adopted 20 years later.
"It was his passion for life that was outstanding, matched only for his love of his family and of rugby football.
"He cared for his players and would help anyone out, whether you were a schoolboy or an international.
"We had a great crop of players at that time with Ulster and he recognised that and let us play."
A famous insight into Davidson's lateral thinking came when Anderson led the Ireland side into confronting the New Zealand haka at Lansdowne Road in 1989.
"Jimmy questioned why the Ireland crowd should applaud the Haka and not their own team," added Anderson.
"So we came up with a plan to challenge that.
"He was a great man who touched the lives of all those he met."
Ulster and Ireland flanker Nigel Carr, a team-mate of Anderson's, also described Davidson, above all, as a great friend.
"The Ulster success that he had stands tribute to him," said Carr.
"I suppose I remember him as not just a rugby coach but also as a friend and mentor.
"He was a tremendous character. He was great fun, he was passionate about the game, he was honourable dealing with the players and I was pleased to have him as a friend."
Ulster, Ireland and British Lions legend Willie John McBride, who played against Davidson many times at club level and alongside side him with Ulster and Ireland, said: "He was a great rugby man who gave a tremendous part of his life to rugby.
"His contribution to Dungannon, Ulster and Ireland was immense. He was a guy who was 100 per cent.
"I played with him in the Ulster team and he was a 100 per cent player, he was a winner. He hated losing."
Jimmy, who lost his battle with cancer, was as passionate about writing his column as he was his coaching and spent hours in preparation. We'll all miss you.
See Page 28

Wikipedia defines compersion as: an empathetic state of happiness and joy experienced when another individual experiences happiness and joy. It is sometimes identified with parents' pride in their children's accomplishments or one's own excitement for friends' and others' successes. It is commonly used (in the polyamorous community) to describe when a person experiences positive feelings when a lover is enjoying another relationship.
I have experienced this emotion. It is powerful. I was on the way to a swing club (Internet café by day; swing club by night!) with my lover early on in my poly life. He was married and I had met his wife and had even been involved in a foursome with my lover, his wife and her boyfriend, so it wasn’t as though I’d never seen him having sex with someone else. But for some reason – who knows why – I categorized that as “different” from what was likely to happen that evening. This was the first swing event we were attending as a couple and I was nervous. I had no idea how I would react to seeing him with another woman.
I needn’t have worried, though. I have a clear memory of him on his knees, hands on the hips of a curvy brunette in a red corset and dangerous red spike heels, his mouth open, head thrown back as he pushed into her. I felt – what, what did I feel? I felt happy that he was so obviously enjoying her. I felt proud that the man that I had walked in with was making this woman writhe in pleasure. I felt like an accomplice when he caught my eye and gave me a smile and a wink as she moaned louder into the mattress. Compersion. There it was. Bang! No jealousy. Yay me.
Fast forward 18 months. I am deeply in love with and planning a life with my current primary lover, his children and mine. I jokingly call us the “Poly Brady Bunch.” I wrote about him previously in terms of wanting to tackle early on as many of the things as possible that can derail relationships. We’ve done that and we’ve found that on all of the really important things, we are in agreement or at least on the same page. He thinks Hellmann’s is better on a turkey sandwich than Miracle Whip but I blame that on his improper upbringing and in any case, that’s not enough to rattle a strongly rooted relationship.
My lover is new to poly. The idea resonates with him in the same ways it does with me and newly divorced, he is exploring his freedom with carefully selected women. He is in demand. Having extricated himself from a marriage where his wife rejected him, I delight in watching him experiencing the pleasure of being desired by multiple women. He is completely honest with them about his non-monogamy and that he is already involved with another woman (ME!) who he considers to be his primary relationship. He chooses carefully from among the scads who choose him. He talks to them for a while before he meets them in person. He doesn’t have sex on the first date. They really like him. He really likes them. The connection is there. The sex, when it comes, is good. He has a slight swagger. He practices good time management and over-communication. Perfect, right? I mean, this is straight out of the theoretical list of “Tips for Poly Success.” And yet…
And yet, two of the three women he’s met recently are no longer on his dance card.
In one case, she was perfectly accepting of the sharing that comes with being poly, but after spending time with him, she decided that she would rather be a primary than a secondary. Disappointing but yay for her that she 1) figured that out early on in their relationship; 2) that she told him about her feelings and 3) that she had the inner strength to say that she would not settle for less than what she wanted. I was sad for him when he told me about this because I knew he really liked her. Much more flippantly, I was disappointed because as a petite blond, I thought she and I (a statuesque brunette) would make the beginning of a great harem with him as the sultan for Halloween. In all seriousness though, he had invested time and emotional energy and I knew that although he respected her for her decisiveness, it was still a bit of a drag.
In another case, although he explained clearly at the start about his desire to explore poly relationships and that he was involved with other women, it didn’t last. Whether she was kidding herself from the beginning or whether her feelings changed during the short time they were together remains a mystery. She wanted a monogamous relationship with him. She was clear in expressing herself on that. He was equally clear in his reply that he was not prepared to enter into a monogamous relationship with anyone at this point in his life. It was a point of contention. Her feelings were strong. So were his. Unfortunately though, not in the same direction. He told me he was going to have to say goodbye to her.
Again, I was saddened. They had spent some significant time together. They shared a passion, experience, and interest in a business area that I know almost nothing about. They enjoyed each other. He had invested additional time and emotional energy in a woman who wanted something he wasn’t prepared to give her. My heart ached for him. I felt for her. I worried about him going through this again so soon with another woman.
I confess that I had a difficult time the evening I knew he was going to see her to end it. I had anxiety-filled flashbacks of the many, many times in a previous life when my married lover had told me he was going to “tell his wife he was leaving” only to hear the sheepishness in his voice the next morning when he had to admit he had done no such thing. Haven’t we all felt it at least once? That sick feeling when your stomach drops away and you realize that all of the things you’d hoped for weren’t going to happen. I did have a few moments where I worried that my current lover would choose monogamy, and the woman asking for it, instead of the life that we had been starting and planning. Emotions are unpredictable. It could’ve happened. If it had, I would have found a way to get through the devastation and eventually continued on with my journey. That’s my emotional baggage.
But my insecurities aren’t what this post is about. The overriding emotion I was feeling was sadness that my lover was going through these difficulties. And yet…
And yet another part of me felt, guiltily, almost exultant that his connection to and feelings for me were sufficiently compelling. He wanted his life to include me. I am loved. I am enough.
So what’s a tidy word to encompass that unruly ball of tattered emotional rubber bands?

I believe it was Pacific, back in the late 90’s that had “Numbers” as an insert. From what I remembered, it was white, with red numbers, almost like a playing card, that highlighted career statistics. I took the idea of numbers and pushed it as far as it could go.
A Christian musical group approached me about album photography and website needs. We were able to scout a location...

I am still busy crocheting away. I have several more blankets done and quite a few sweaters/hats. I am working on our yearly sweater drive. started early since it is only for 1 month.
My birthday was on Saturday and it was ok. the best was when Beth called and sang Happy Birthday to me. that was so sweet. thank you Beth!! Went to dinner with hubby and Daniel and that was about it. got some money to buy yarn ( like I really need any) NOT!! LOL.
Mothers day I got up sick but still went to see my mom. Bless her heart she still looks so bad but I thought a little better. Her poor little legs are still purple and black from where she pulled the fridge over on herself. We still don't understand how that happened. It was great to see her. I got her nite shirts as she pretty much stays in them now and she was so happy. It was a pretty good day.
Been thinking I would love to add half a house to the back of my house for a craft room. I really need one bad!!! that is my dream to be able to put all my yarn in one room and just be able to go in there and pick out what I want to use. :-) that is my dream. We have been tossing it around but haven't made any decsions yet.
will post some pics soon :-)

Chapter One –
"Dammit, Merle, I thought you said you'd found a house or cabin for us to stay in. Not some damn apartment," Daryl growled out as he followed his brother up the stairs of a tall apartment building.
"Calm down, Darylina. It's just a temporary place to stay while I…take care of some things," his brother replied. "Besides, a friend said we could stay here while he was out of town, said he had rent taken care of and everything. Free roof over our heads!" Merle stopped on a landing and slid the key into the keyhole of the door numbered 4B immediately next to the stairs. Daryl looked around the empty, wooden stairwell before his eyes landed on the only other door on their floor, 4A. There was a simple white flower taped to the door and a slip of paper that had "HAPPY BIRTHDAY, BETH! See you tonight, Mags and Glenn" written on it taped next to it.
Merle opened the door and Daryl took his eyes from the flower and note and looked into his new place of residence. It had the bare minimum in furniture but it was clean and warm, despite the cool Fall air blowing outside. Daryl heard a guitar being played outside and Merle snorted.
"Oh yeah, we have to share our balcony with the neighbor…Just what we wanted, a yoddlin' neighbor…" Merle shook his head and disappeared around the corner of the living room to where Daryl assumed the bedrooms were.
"Claimed!" Merle shouted as he dropped his bag on a bed in one of the rooms. Daryl shrugged his duffle bag of clothes and his crossbow off his shoulder and on to the couch. He was more curious about the neighbor, Beth if the flower and note on the door were correct about their name. He assumed their neighbor was a she, since their name was Beth. Whoever she was, she could play the guitar very well. Daryl walked to the door to the balcony and unlocked it. The door gave a loud click as it opened and the guitar playing stopped. He didn't even get the door opened all the way before he heard soft footsteps moving away and the other door opening.
"Sorry," was all he heard from a soft female voice. He popped his head out the door and saw blonde hair disappear into the open door that quickly closed and locked. Their neighbor was awfully shy, he guessed. The balcony was larger than Daryl had expected. Their neighbor had a couple of chairs sitting outside their door, along with a couple of potted flowers and a small vegetable garden that looked to have strawberries and something else growing in it.
Next to Daryl and his door sat two chairs exactly like his neighbor's with a small wooden table between the two chairs and an ashtray on the table. He sat down in one of the chairs and pulled out a cigarette and began smoking. He could hear Merle moving around inside their new apartment. He sounded like an elephant moving around. The sound of blinds moving to his left brought Daryl's attention back to his neighbor's balcony door and he saw a handwritten note taped to the glass.
I'm sorry if my playing disturbed you. I didn't know anyone had moved in next door. I'll be quieter from here on,
The handwriting was neat and obviously feminine, but not girly. It didn't have curls or hearts. Just neat print. Daryl frowned at the part of her being quieter. Compared to how Merle was moving and throwing things around, their neighbor was a mouse. Daryl finished his cigarette and put it out in the ashtray beside him. He glanced briefly at his neighbor's door and saw the note was gone and a flash of wide blue eyes and blonde hair before the blinds fell back into place.
Daryl sighed and shook his head before returning inside, sliding the door closed with a click.
Beth had been working on a new song on her balcony when she heard a voice yelling in the apartment next door. She immediately stopped playing and listened to see if she had been hearing things or not. That apartment had been empty for almost three months now so the fact that there were voices in it surprised her. When the door clicked and began to open, nerves hit her stomach and she bolted to her apartment. Normally she was much friendlier and would have stayed outside to greet her new neighbors but the yelling voice didn't sound friendly. They sounded annoyed and rude. Beth had had enough of angry people for one day after her shift at work and had decided to immediately return to her own space to avoid dealing with anymore people.
Through her blinds she could see a tall, very fit man standing and looking around at their shared balcony. His brown hair was somewhat long, reaching to the tops of his shoulders with bangs that hung in his eyes. Even from where she was, she could see his startling blue eyes. His face had a rough look to it that she found extremely handsome and she watched as he ran a hand over the stubble growing on his chin. His button up was sleeveless with frayed edges, meaning that he had probably torn the sleeves off himself. His arms were well muscled and Beth couldn't help but think that he could lift her off the ground in his arms easily. Beth was startled from her observations by a loud ruckus going on in the strange man's apartment. She could see the man on the balcony close his eyes and something akin to anger or frustration crossed his features. Whoever he was living with was loud and they obviously annoyed him.
Remembering that she had been playing outside when they had arrived, Beth decided to write her apology for the disturbance and taped it to her glass door. She watched as the man lit his cigarette and took a puff from it before looking her way and reading the note. A look of confusion crossed his face and he shook his head as his roommate made more noise and yelled something Beth couldn't understand.
Maybe my playing isn't the worst thing he's had to listen to today. Compared to his roommate, I'm a mouse… Beth thought to herself and she saw him turn to put out his cigarette. She took her note down now that she knew he had seen it. She raised her head and saw the man staring right at her and quickly moved away from the door.
Beth could hear her neighbor return inside his apartment and sighed. She'll have to welcome the new neighbors to the building another time, maybe when they weren't so loud and angry sounding? She made a note to welcome them properly before the week was over. Beth was startled from her thoughts by a sudden knocking on her door.
Did my neighbor think I was being a creeper and want to talk to me about it? What a great first impression he must have of me now…"Hi, 4B, let me introduce myself. I'm Beth and I promise I'm not a creeper or a stalker, I was just enjoying looking at you! Beth snorted to herself and shook her head. What a great way to introduce myself. I'd be better off never leaving my apartment again…
"Beth, come on! We have dinner with daddy soon! Open up!" came the muffled voice of Maggie and Beth released a breath she didn't realize she had been holding. She walked quickly to her front door, unlocked and opened the door. Maggie stood in front of the door, a huge smile on her face as she lunged at Beth and hugged her tightly. "Happy birthday, sis!" Maggie practically screamed as she held her.
Beth's blue eyes turned to Glenn as her sister began to squeeze the air out of her lungs. Glenn just smiled and gave her his best I'm sorry, but you should be used to it look.
"Maggie, keep it down. I have neighbors now," she replied as she held her sister tightly to her and then pushed her away to breathe.
"As if they can hear anything over the ruckus their making," Maggie huffed before reaching to pull the flower and note off the door. "You didn't see this but it was supposed to surprise you. Here," Maggie handed the flower and note to Beth who took it graciously, enjoying the sweet fragrance the flower had before putting it in a cup of water.
"Thank you, it's very beautiful," she replied with a smile. "Are we ready? I'd hate to keep daddy waiting," she asked as she pulled on her boots and tucked her jeans over them. Maggie ran a hand quickly through Beth's long hair to smooth it down a little and then put her hands on her sister's shoulder.
"Hard to believe you're twenty-two already, Bethy…"
"Happy birthday, Beth," Glenn interrupted, hugging her quickly now that Maggie had moved to let him in. Beth thanked him and grabbed her wallet and keys before ushering the couple out of her apartment and locking the door.
"Everyone! My sister is twenty-two years old today!" Maggie shouted in the stairwell and Beth blushed furiously.
"Seriously, Maggie! Keep it down!" Beth chided as she glanced around to make sure no one was going to pop out of their apartment and yell at them for being too loud. "Has she had anything to drink, Glenn? She acts like she's drunk…"
"Sadly, she hasn't. But she has been very excited for tonight. She's missed you and your dad very much," Glenn replied as they headed downstairs.
Daryl picked up his duffle bag of clothes and took them to his bedroom. Merle was still making a ruckus in the kitchen and living room doing whatever he was doing, making Daryl sigh in annoyance. Just then he heard a female yell in the stairwell.
"Everyone! My sister is twenty-two years old today!" which was quickly followed by "Seriously, Maggie! Keep it down!"
So 4A has a sister and turned twenty-two today? Interesting, Daryl thought to himself. He was surprised he even found himself thinking about it. Something about the quiet and shy, guitar playing neighbor had him intrigued. He decided to do something extremely unusual for his personality and grabbed a piece of paper.
When Beth stumbled up the stairs, laughing softly with an equally drunk Maggie and a poor, sober Glenn, she was surprised to hear silence coming from her neighbor's apartment. She giggled and put her finger to her lips to tell Maggie to keep it down.
"I'll take her down to the car once I know you're in safely," Glenn told her. The two drunken sisters had kept him highly amused for the past hour after they had had a wonderful dinner with their father and then the decided to hit the bar on the way back to Beth's apartment. Beth nodded and quickly got her keys out and tried to unlock the door, missing on her first attempt. This set Maggie off on another round of giggling, which then infected Beth. Glenn smiled and shook his head at the two before helping guide the key into the lock and opening the door for Beth.
"Thank you, Glenn. You'll be the best brother-in-law I could ask for. Now just…pop the question already," Beth told him with a giggle. Glenn blushed and coughed slightly while Maggie laughed even harder.
"Goodnight, Beth," he said quietly before guiding Maggie back down the stairs and to his car. Beth closed and locked her door, dropping her keys and wallet on the floor by the door and pulling her boots off with next to no grace as she stumbled and almost fell in the process.
"You're drunk, Beth," she told herself with a laugh. Her eyes made a sweep around her apartment, her alcohol-riddled brain telling her that the couch looked super comfy for sleeping on and she walked happily to it. Right as she was about to drop onto the plushy surface, her eyes fell on her balcony door and the piece of paper taped to the outside of it.
She walked as best as she could to it and squinted her eyes at the small, sloppy handwriting.
Happy birthday, 4A.
Beth smiled and opened her balcony door to remove the note. She caught the smell of a cigarette and turned. In one of the chairs by her neighbor's door sat the attractive, fit man from earlier. His blue eyes watching her curiously. A blush rushed up Beth's neck and onto her cheeks and she stumbled slightly. She giggled and held up her hand when her neighbor stood up to help her.
"I'm okay…I mean, I'm drunk, but I'm okay…" she laughed out and she saw his lips quirk into a small smile as he watched her. She cleared her throat and forced herself to stand up straighter. Alcohol-riddled or not, she knew this was the time to introduce herself to the man. "I'm sorry about earlier, my playing that is. I didn't mean to disturb you. I'm Beth, Beth Greene," the words practically tumbled out of her mouth and she saw her neighbor's lips smirk at her drunken speech. Beth could feel her face get even hotter.
"I'm sorry, I should wait to introduce myself until I'm not drunk. I talk a lot and it's awful. This is awkward. Oh, you're not awkward, I'm awkward. You're attractive…Oh god, I'm sorry, I'm leaving now!" Beth slapped her hand over her mouth and turned to leave. Her neighbor gave a deep chuckle and she turned to face him, mortified.
"Daryl," he said around his amusement, "my name's Daryl Dixon." Beth could feel her mortification decreasing and smiled, holding out her hand. He stared at it for a moment before hesitantly reaching out and grasping her hand and giving it a soft shake.
"It's a pleasure to meet you, Mr. Dixon."

She rose through the earth, into the seductive night. She had slept long after her last feed. The ground was as warm as the air, and insects darted in the gloom. However, this was not what she had expected. Around her a high wall, topped with barbed wire, surrounded a new graveyard.
Before her a large building, indomitable in its size and purpose, imposed itself on the landscape. It had the feel of the prison where she had fed for so long in the past.
She drifted towards the towering walls of her new feedings grounds in Broadmoor prison hospital.

Elsa is very tensed after a meeting with her accident lawyer. She needs to make a new health insurance as the accident lawyer advised her. The health insurance she has now will expire soon and it is better to be prepared. Give Elsa a massage so she can relax.
This game was played 1,192 times.

The most amazing journey
Its official, Vietnam is so cool! This was a brilliant trip. My parents paid for me to go as a 21st present. I went with to mates, it was just amazing. The first half was an organised trip and the second was just chilling out on the beaches of Phu Quoc island. The tour was booked online through Asia Tour Advisor. It was really interesting and exciting. I think Saigon rocks. We had such a great time. The backpacker area is great, cheap beers and loads of fun. I went to Thailand two years ago and loved it, but I thought Vietnam was even better.

LAS VEGAS – Brock Lesnar's four-year foray into mixed martial arts apparently ended on Friday night. He announced his retirement in the Octagon after losing to Alistair Overeem in just 2:26 in the main event of UFC 141 at the MGM Grand Garden Arena.
The announcement apparently blindsided UFC president Dana White, who said he had no indication his former heavyweight champion was going to call it quits. But he said that this isn't a sport for people who don't want to be there.
"I had no idea he was going to do that," White said at the post-fight news conference. "Am I surprised? No. He's made a lot of money in his career. He's achieved a lot of things.
"Brock came to me one night here at the MGM [in 2007]. He said he wanted to fight in the UFC and I laughed. He had only had one fight. What that man accomplished coming in with only one fight is amazing. I get it. I doesn't shock me. But I didn't know it was coming.
"When a guy wants to retire, it's his thing," White said. "This isn't a game where you hit a ball with a stick. You don't half-ass this stuff. When you know it's over, it's over. The bad part is when I think it's over and the guy doesn't."
In his post-fight interview, Lesnar said that he promised his wife, Rena, a former pro wrestling star and Playboy cover girl who was a celebrity in the late 1990s known as "Sable," that if he won, he would challenge Junior dos Santos for the heavyweight title, the shot promised to the winner of the Lesnar-Overeem scrap.
He said even if he had won the title in that fight, he then would have retired as champion.
Lesnar did not attend the post-fight news conference. He told White that he believed one of his ribs was broken by the kick to the liver that was the key finishing blow of the fight. Lesnar had taken several hard knees to the body in the short fight.
He had surgery on May 27, in which 12 inches of his intestine was removed after recurring attacks of diverticulitis. There was obvious question as to whether his body would be able to hold up to hard shots, and that was the spot at which Overeem aimed his offense.
"My hat's off to Alistair Overeem," Lesnar said in the Octagon after the fight. "I want to take my hat off to all my training partners, to my wife, my family. I've had a really difficult couple of years with my disease. I'm going to say officially, tonight was the last time you'll see me in the Octagon. I want to thank everyrone. I want to thank the Fertittas [co-founders of Zuffa, UFC's parent company]. Brock Lesnar is officially retired. I promised my wife and kids, if I won I'd get a title shot and it would be my last fight. It's been a pleasure."
Going in, the fight was expected to be quick. The thinking went that either Lesnar would take down Overeem and hurt him on the ground and finish him quickly, or he would not take down Overeem and the world champion kickboxer would finish Lesnar quickly and brutally in a standing fight.
[ Related: Kevin Iole's complete UFC 141 recap ]
But Lesnar never really committed to his wrestling game. There was one moment when he briefly went for a single-leg takedown but didn't get it right away and gave up on it. He never really committed a shot for a takedown, or even tried upper body control to push Overeem against the fence and soften him up from short range before trying to get him down.
This came just seven weeks after Junior dos Santos' first-round knockout of Cain Velasquez for the UFC heavyweight title, where Velasquez's coaches' battle plan was to get the fight to the ground and Velasquez also didn't commit to a wrestling game. Lesnar and White were doing commentary on that fight, and White questioned Velasquez's strategy.
"I have the same assessment," White said of Friday's fight. "When you're in with a striker, you don't stay in his range. He was close and grabbed a single and didn't commit to it. I'm not a trainer. I'm nobody's coach. I don't understand why he wouldn't take one shot, especially when you're getting kicked and hit."
While Lesnar had talked about how he hadn't felt this good in years since recovering from his surgery, and physically looked in great shape, there were natural questions coming into the fight. He had a 14-month layoff and had taken a beating in his prior two fights. There was the surgery, being 34, an age most wrestlers are past their peak in their original sport.
And even though he had fought nothing but top-level competition in his four years in UFC, it was only his eighth pro fight, so he was both older and still relatively inexperienced in MMA. He did not have the skill level, aside from the wrestling, of his elite opponents in the heavyweight division.
Lesnar's success was based on superior athletic ability, a combination of his power wrestling and amazing speed at that size. But speed often fades with age, and physically, he had beaten up his body for several years after college as a pro wrestler. Although wrestling is entertainment and not sport, it is, in the view of most who have done both, harder on the body than MMA because of the constant travel.
So even though Lesnar was world champion and became one of the biggest drawing cards in the history of the pay-per-view industry, his career, ending with a 5-3 record, always will be the subject of debate. Some will dismiss him as an overhyped freak show, the UFC's answer to Kimbo Slice, as a man lucky to face an aging and undersized world heavyweight champion in Randy Couture and a Shane Carwin whose body shut down and was easy pickings.
Of course, that would ignore his total destruction of Frank Mir, who has proved time after time to be a top-level heavyweight. Others will point to how amazing it was that, after years away from competitive sports – his NCAA title was in 2000 and he started in UFC eight years later, at age 30 – that he was able to beat top guys in their own sport.
But the real story of Lesnar is a question of what could have been. What would have happened had MMA been a viable professional sport that would have offered a competitive pay scale to pro wrestling when he was 22 and his athletic ability was at his peak? Would he have been able to develop all the skills in the manner of someone like Velasquez? What would have happened if he had not developed diverticulitis because it was clear he never was the same after his near-fatal attack at the end of 2009?
The other question is what is next. Lesnar earned millions in his few years in the sport, in the range of $3 million or more, not including endorsements, in each of his four previous fights.
Overeem, who talked about how he really had enjoyed watching Lesnar fights because of the excitement they brought, said he hoped Lesnar would stay in the sport.
"My thought is I think he shouldn't walk away," said the new No. 1 contender. "Love him or hate him, but it's always something exciting when Brock's fighting. He's a guy who goes for it. He achieved a lot in a short span. It's a shame if he stops now. I think there's more in the game for him." Whether true or not, the speculation was abuzz that Lesnar's retirement was the signal of a return to pro wrestling, where he was a major star from 2002 to 2004, and he's far more famous now than he was then. If that happens, it almost surely will be on a limited basis because he is well-known for hating the travel demands that went with the profession.
It is well-known that WWE boss Vince McMahon wanted Lesnar to appear at last year's WrestleMania to face The Undertaker, but Lesnar was under an exclusive contract to UFC and Dana White wasn't going to let his biggest draw do a show for a rival pay-per-view entity.
All week there had been rumors that had Lesnar lost, he may retire and go back to pro wrestling. But White confirmed Lesnar had significant time once again left on his contract. The subject clearly was something White didn't want to talk much about, particularly with the bombshell that Lesnar, had he won the title, was going to retire as champion. That would have made it possible for him to walk back into pro wrestling as the rightful UFC champion, which would have been a tremendous marketing coup for McMahon.
Lesnar leaving UFC as a champion and conquering hero in another arena is far more valuable to McMahon than Lesnar as a guest star coming off two straight losses.
"I've had moments with Brock Lesnar, but overall we've had a great relationship," White said. "I've never had a situation with the guy where we haven't done the right thing."
But as far as specifics, when first asked, White said that even though Lesnar had retired as a fighter, that doesn't invalidate the remaining time on his contract.
When it was brought up that the Internet was abuzz with speculation on Lesnar, that in fact Lesnar and WrestleMania was one of the hottest topics of discussion late Friday night, White didn't have much to say.
"I don't know. We'll figure it out," said an exasperated White. "The Internet is abuzz; mind your own business."
Other popular stories on Yahoo! Sports:
• Reigning NBA MVP Derrick Rose won't allow his fame or riches to change him
• If David Beckham joins PSG, the Galaxy will target another Brit
• NFL playoff picture and scenarios: Who's in, who's out

I just wonder how many times in the past few years that I have made the statement, "I sure do miss Jasper." Jasper Meeker was the person the Hughart family depended on any time anything went wrong with any of our appliances. I always had a lot of respect for the late Jasper and the late Donna Meeker. The Meekers came to Greenwood when the Norge plant in Fort Smith opened. It was located where the Whirlpool plant is now. Jasper had worked at the Norge plant in Michigan. When they moved the plant to Fort Smith he and Donna loaded up their family and what they could get into their car and moved to Arkansas. On the first day they were here they ended up for church at the Methodist Church. The church welcomed them with open arms. In fact they took them under their wing. By night fall they had a roof over their head. I will say they hit the town running. Donna became a Cub Scout Leader almost immediately. The church was in need of a nursery worker and Sunday school teacher, she was ready to do her part. One could bet on the fact that the Meeker family would be in Sunday School and Church on Sunday.
In later years Jasper and Donna were members of the Joy Sunday School Class and the Prime Timers Group that went out to eat once a month.
I think just about everyone picked on Jasper in a friendly way. He loved it. Jasper especially loved pot luck dinners. I don’t know who enjoyed them the most Jasper or Hubert Curry.
The Meekers loved music so many a Saturday night they opened their home to those who enjoyed playing. I never had the privilege of attending one of the musicals although I did hear they had some mighty good picking and grinning, as Kermit McNabb used to call the Musical at Jenny Lind.
The Meekers raised a good family giving back to the community. Just before Donna’s death from cancer I had a nice visit with her. She expressed her thanks to her church for the help they received when they decided to make Greenwood their home. Jasper was lost without his Donna. He had gone camping with his boys when he left us. I know that was what he would have wanted.
I guess when something around my house breaks down I will always say, "I sure do miss Jasper." I think he retired several times and even after having had heart surgery came out of retirement when a friend needed a little maintenance work on an appliance. It was not until I moved to Fort Smith and my dryer went kaput that I really realized how fortunate I had been all the years when I could just call Jasper. It seemed like Mama was fortunate to have a handyman as a neighbor who was ready to help her when she needed a job done.
Ladies, if your husband is a handyman count your blessings. I hate to say it but Frank Hughart wasn’t much of a fixer but he was an excellent cook. I guess that makes up for not being a fixer but he sure knew how to add water to my beans!
Note: Last week in re-typing Drucilla’s column, an important sentence was accidentally left out. As was mentioned Don Williams gave Ann a box of Cracker Jacks for a wedding gift. "From that day on, on the 27th of EACH MONTH he gave her a box of Cracker Jacks."

The Veritas Studio was the perfect place to have some fun photos taken. Love was in the air as Dona and Derek stepped in front of the camera. They were great to work with and we really had a blast!
The VERITAS Studio hosted Leander Hutton today for a Bridal Portrait Session. Leander is a photographer out of Boone, NC, and rented the studio for his session with his bride who is getting married on October 8th.

Busty Dusty is a Porn Star from United States. She was born in Van Nuys on October 20, 1961. She is listed on FreeOnes since 2001 and is currently ranked 2633th place. She currently has 73 gallery links in her own FreeOnes section.
Our records show that Busty Dusty is currently retired which means she is not making movies, doing live shows and/or doing photo shoots at this time.

My tire self-destructed on the highway, so needless to say my day wasn't going as planned. My roadside assistance sent Will from Connolly's Towing and I was really impressed with the experience. Will was professional, upbeat and we even shared a few laughs as he did everything he could to better my situation. We ended up towing the car and I only wish I had some cash on me so I could have tipped him - he really deserved it. Thanks, Connolly's Towing! You made a potentially bad day a lot better.

I've been in affair for almost 6 months. We met on Ashley Madison. I'm starting to really fall for him and he has been saying he loves me for a while. In sooo many ways he is the perfect AP. We text almost all day every day, talk on the phone almost every day, see eachother in person about twice a week. He's literally gone out of his way to do things for me and be with me. He really shows me that he loves me.
But I got a little paranoid, insecure feeling yesterday (out of the blue, no red flags), so I signed up for an Ashley Madison account to check if he had one (He told me months ago he had canceled his.). I used fake information, location, age, everything. I searched for him and found him there. It said he was online. I looked at his profile and a couple hours later when I checked again, he had looked at my profile. I never messaged him pretending to be someone else. When I saw his profile, I almost threw up. I know it's payback, I'm cheating. I know he's a good liar because he lies to his wife to make plans with me. Since we talk constantly and see eachother often, I'm not sure if he'd even be able to see someone else behind *my* back. I didn't confront him today but I asked him some questions to see if he was happy with me and if he wanted to see someone else. Of course, he said he was very happy and there was no one else. I just checked Ashley Madison again and now I can't see his profile. It seemed to have disappeared, when I search by his username or by his age and location. It almost makes me think I was dillusional yesterday! But I really don't think I was.
So, what do you think? Do you think he's looking for another OW? In addition or instead of me? He might have just gone on Ashley Madison in a moment of weakness (thinking grass is always greener on the other side and curious on what is out there), be thinking of trading me in for a better model, be a socio-path who is really really good at showing fake feeling and lying. Should I say something to him? I believe in once a cheater always a cheater (but he's already cheating with me!) and I deserve this, but I'm really hurt.

Witnesses described a motorist deliberately driving into families walking home from school.
South Wales Police said a 32-year-old woman was killed. Other victims, including six girls aged 23 months to 12-years-old and a nine-year-old boy, were taken to hospital for treatment.
An unidentified 31-year-old man has been arrested and a van has been seized. Police also say they are seeking witnesses who saw a black Renault Clio, which may be linked to the man they are questioning.
Authorities said that there had been at least five separate hit-and-run incidents across the city.
Det. Supt. Paul Hurley told a news conference the suspect left his van and assaulted people between the crashes. He said there was also a weapon involved but that it wasn't a firearm.
A woman who works in a store said a shopper in her mid 20s and two young girls, aged about 10, had bought some coffee before leaving her shop.
"All of a sudden I heard a bang. I looked out and across the road, one girl was on the floor and the other girl was screaming," Shady Taha, 29, told the BBC.
"I heard a [vehicle] speed off but I did not see it."
Ramesh Patel, who runs a store close to the site where the woman was killed, said customers had described how the van driver appeared to target pedestrians.
"Customers have said a white van purposely drove at people," Patel said.
Diane Quick told BBC news that her niece and her great-niece Amelia, aged two, were both injured.
"They were hit from behind by the van. Amelia was in the pram [and] she has bruising." Amelia's mother has a broken leg.
The incidents took place as parents were collecting children from nearby schools and walking home.Suggest a correction

Richard Cardinal was a Metis boy who had a very sad, tragic life being moved from foster home to foster home. He encountered racism directly and by a child welfare system that was inherently discriminatory. His experience in the system and growing up Metis is much like the experiences faced by April Raintree. He ended his life at the age of 17. He left behind very detailed, intelligent, and emotional diary entries. This film is based on those and follows the events that led up to his death.

The only holidays that I remember decorating for when I was growing were Valentines day and Christmas. I think mom decorated for Valentines day because it was easy to stick the paper hearts and cherubs in the windows and they were probably inexpensive, too. I think it also brightened up the drab winter. Really, I like to believe that she decorated because my birthday was in February. I loved cakes from Mrs. Backerâ€™s Bakery on South Temple Street in Salt Lake and I often had one. I think my most favorite was the ice cream from Snelgroveâ€™s. It was vanilla ice cream shaped like a large brick and some how they had magically put a cherry ice cream heart down the center. This ice cream was not meant to be scooped, it was meant to be sliced so that you could see the heart. When it wasn’t February, my favorite Snelgrove flavor was Canadian Vanilla.
Christmas was a different story. My mom liked decorating a beautiful tree. We didnâ€™t have a lot of money and so she bought the tree and we used the large multicolored lights. One year she was tired of the old ornaments that her mother had given her. The very old ornaments that I would cherish if I had them today. She hung them up by their little hooks on the clothesline in our basement. Then she spray painted them all shiny black. Really! Black ornaments on a Christmas tree. She loved that tree, but as a child I thought it was awful.
She got a new favorite when we moved to Bountiful. She had become friends with some designers and they offered to decorate a tree for her. It was flocked white so it looked like it was covered in snow. The ornaments were birds, fans, bunches of grapesâ€¦ really who puts bunches of plastic grapes on the Christmas tree. She refused to take it down until my dad borrowed the Polaroid camera from work to take a photo for her so she could recreate it every year. He refused, he hated that tree. She stood firm and our tree was still standing in the living room in February. Susan or I closed the drapes because we both knew that the absolute longest a tree should be up is the first week of January. We were embarrassed. It was a live tree that was being held together by the flocking. When large chunks of the flock filled with pine needles started to fall off she finally took it down, just before February ended.

Okay, so this one time, at chior camp. I saw this guy wearing a dress. I asked him why he was wearing a dress and he said that his name was Greg. So, I said "No way!! My friend Tiffany's name is Greg, too!" So, we went and ate some Jell-O...It was green. THE END!!! Me feets grandpa!!
*brought to you by the bag of Sour Skittles I ate*

This man is accused of stealing from a shop in Livingstone. Instead of reporting him to police, the owner of the shop decided to be the investigator general, arresting officer, prosecutor, witness and judge.
He lines up his shop workers and forces them to take turns in torturing the man’s face.
Even police are not allowed to torture suspects, prisoners wanders are not allowed to torture convicted criminal.
According to people close to the case,
*”One love cosmetics” is the name of the shop…*
He was a tenant to his employer’s for about a year of which during that time he discovered an illegal connection of Zesco, because of that he was forced to stay in there. As months passed he started feeling mistreated and he wanted to leave but he was told he can’t or he will loose his job but then he had already made up his mind. When he left, his employer told his fellow workers that he stole from him and that he also made an illegal power connections in his house and in order for him to be forgiven the shop owner closed the shop and told the other employees that they where to slap him or pay K100 each in order for him to be Forgiven… he was later reported to Central police in Livingstone.

Jennifer Connelly and Producer Gary Lucchesi Talk 'American Pastoral' | KCET
Jennifer Connelly and Producer Gary Lucchesi Talk 'American Pastoral'
The KCET Cinema Series concluded its fall season at the historic Aero Theatre on October 10 with a screening of "American Pastoral." The film stars Ewan McGregor, Jennifer Connelly and Dakota Fanning as a family pulled apart during traumatic times and is based on the Pulitzer Prize-winning novel by Philip Roth. "American Pastoral" also marks McGregor's directorial debut.
Following the screening, KCET Cinema Series host Pete Hammond led a lively Q&A session with Connelly and producer Gary Lucchesi. Below is a portion of that interview, edited for space and clarity.
The KCET Cinema Series' fall season was sponsored by the James and Paula Coburn Foundation. The winter season opens at ArcLight Cinemas, Sherman Oaks on October 18. Tickets are now sold out. There will not be single admission tickets available for the screenings.
Jennifer Connelly on how she became involved with "American Pastoral."
I think it was about 10 years ago. Gary was making the movie and they came to me. I read the script. I was very moved by it. I was very moved by Dawn and interested in the complexity of the character and then it went away. That iteration never really happened. Then it was not that long before we wound up shooting and it came back and Ewan was attached to be in it, as an actor, at that point, not a director. Then we got to the point where it is now. I was very excited to do it because, as I said, I really loved the story and the character.
Jennifer Connelly on Dawn, her character in "American Pastoral."
I felt like she was someone, both of them, as a couple, you felt like good things were going to come to them and good things would happen to them and then everything goes terribly wrong and they're left wondering and I think we're all left wondering why and how it became derailed.
I thought she was really moving. One thing that was really interesting in the novel, and in the script as well, was the conversation about judgment and the kind of assumptions we make about one another. And I think Dawn really struggles with that. It was one of the things that I found really moving about her — her struggles with her own identity. And we see them first. And the first image is of her as a contestant in a beauty pageant and I think that depiction of her kind of follows her around and people make decisions about her based on that and it sort of haunts her. When things start going wrong with Merry, people say it's because, "oh... she's fake," "because she's too perfect." There's this conception about her and she struggled, I think, to find some sense of value, her sense of meaning. And she finds that in her family and it's so excruciating for her when her daughter then rejects her love. I think it's really very heartbreaking, what winds up happening to her once she loses that meaning that she found in the relationship with her daughter.
Jennifer Connelly on Dawn's facelift in the film.
That was Judy Chin, who is an amazing makeup artist. I've worked with her many times. I worked with her first on "Requiem for a Dream" and we've done a number of movies together. Jasen Sica did my hair and I also worked with him on a few projects and he's also really wonderful and talented. They had various little tricks that they did that were kind of painful, but, I think, pretty effective — a little bit. I thought it really worked.
I thought it was an interesting choice and a very sad choice that she makes. I understood it. She's completely dismantled by that loss, the loss of her daughter. And I think that after so many years of waiting for her... she literally can't bear it anymore and Seymour goes a different way. Swede is sort of looking to the past and to this fantasy, this dream of what they once were, that Dawn knows is never going to be again and she literally can't survive it anymore. She knows she can't, so she has to look to the future. And I think she sort of tears down the narrative of their life together and she has to rebuilding something. She has to build a new way forward and she wants everything to be modern. She just wants a new exposure, a new exposure of their house. She remodels the house and wants windows that let the light in from a different direction and he needs a new point of view. She needs to look to the future.
Gary Lucchesi on adapting "American Pastoral" for film.
I think there were three things and John Romano, who was the writer, and I talked about it a lot when we first did the adaptation. There's the story of the pastoral 1950s of the United States coming into conflict with the 1960s. There was certainly the father/daughter story, which was profound. And then, as John says, there was the scenes of the marriage story that was part of it, which is really Dawn and Swede. So, you don't oftentimes get to deal with three such interesting subjects, but the book gave us that opportunity.
Gary Lucchesi on Ewan McGregor's directorial debut.
We had other directors and then we had a director who was going to do the movie with Ewan and Jennifer, but then he fell out. Ewan approached us and said that he was interested. Tom Rosenberg and I, we talked about it, but it really wasn't that long of a conversation. We knew that we had a performance movie deep down inside. We knew that Ewan could perform Swede. We also had spent time with Ewan and knew that he was a very serious gentleman who really wanted to direct. We knew that Jennifer, if Ewan could convince her to stay on, that she was the perfect Dawn and we knew that Dakota was fantastic as Merry and everybody loved the script. It was then a question of putting the right technicians around Ewan. To his credit, he was the person who had Martin Ruhe, the cinematographer. And he introduced Martin to us and I think that was the key technical component. The collaboration between Ewan and Martin was really superb and it was a friendly union and it made the set just wonderful.
Gary Lucchesi on showing the film to "American Pastoral" author Philip Roth.
We had to show the script to Philip Roth before we made the movie, but then we showed him the script and we didn't hear from him. Then, after we finished the movie, we wanted him to see the film. And before we went to Toronto, we said, "look, we're going to Toronto, people are going to review the film, you should see the film." He said, "I'll see you at two o'clock in the afternoon in a New York screening room." And afterwards he sent us a congratulatory email, which Tom Rosenberg and myself and Eric Reid have framed in our office, saying that he felt the film was really terrific, that he knew there were going to be some changes to the book that you have to make to make a movie, but he felt that the changes were very wise and cleverly done. He thought that Ewan did a fantastic job as a director and was great as Swede. He loved Jennifer. He also complimented us on the courage for keeping in the Rita Cohen scene the way that it was supposed to be. I think that he was a little, he might have had concerns that we were going to wimp out and not do that scene the way that it was written, but we held fast.
Jennifer Connelly on the cast of "American Pastoral."
It was a privilege to work with [Dakota Fanning]. I think she's so talented. She always has been so formidable as an actor and she gets more so, I think. I just loved it. I loved working with her. Gary was mentioning the atmosphere on the set. It was so collaborative. It was so warm and open and it was just, I think Ewan helped create that environment. He was really very interested in giving his cast, actually everyone that he worked with, room to collaborate and to bring forward their ideas and share their thoughts. For the cast in particular, I felt like it was a very gentle environment, a very comfortable environment. We had private rehearsals every morning where he literally would shut the door and there would be no other crew, it would be just him and actors, sometimes just the two of us in the room with the doors closed where we could try walking different ways, running through the scenes. It was a really wonderful way for all of us to work and I thought that was really useful in those scenes with Dakota to have that time and that space to ask questions and just put things on their feet and investigate them before making choices.
It was wonderful to have that time. We had sort of informal rehearsals before we started shooting, pre-production where we would sit together at night. There were a lot of hair and makeup tests and that comes up during the day and then, at night, we would sit and read through the script and ask questions and hang out and have dinner. That was also really useful, really useful time.
She's so open, so available, and I just felt like it came easily, working with her.
Jennifer Connelly on "American Pastoral," the book.
Yeah I did. I referred to it frequently. I had passages underlined and very annotated. I looked back at it very often. I love the book. It's exquisite. It's exquisitely written and it's like having a very detailed journal for a character. For me, I found it very inspiring, so I look back at it very often.
Jennifer Connelly on working with David Bowie in "Labyrinth."
It was amazing. He became really a hero of mind after working with him. I knew his music, but I wasn't really listening to it that much at the time. I think I was about 14 when I made the movie. I was impressed by his talent. I was really impressed by the way he treated everyone. Even though I hadn't really gotten into his music so much yet at that point, although I am very much now and still listen to his music very often — pretty much every day — I was really impressed. I understood his stature and what he meant to people. And I was really impressed by his generosity on set and how kind he was and how much time he made for everyone on the crew and his sense of humor. And he really was an example to me and he really became a hero of mine, just from what I saw working with him.
During a visit to Los Angeles to get updates on anti-coronavirus efforts, Gov. Gavin Newsom today announced the signing of an executive order barring eviction of renters affected by the virus.
Five more deaths due to coronavirus were reported today in Los Angeles County, raising the total to 26, and the county's mortality rate from the illness rose above the levels seen across the country and in New York City.
For Martini and the thousands of others in her profession, the future of the real estate market in Southern California is unknown. Experts say it's too soon to know what will happen to the market and how the pandemic will affect prices.
Check out this list of 122 insightful programs on KCET, all ready for you to stream online for free right now.
- 1 of 252
- next ›

Chapter 4: Harry and the Fucking Nutter
If these walls could talk, they'd probably be telling everyone how much they love it when you give them an "S" on a paper."
But the walls were just telling him not to say that and not to act on his feelings, which were, for the most part, well-received, even if he could see how much they worried him. He had always liked Harry and it was hard to think of any of them as more perfect than each other.
"You're still working on your magic homework, aren't you?" Ginny asked, looking up from her book. "You haven't been to the library yet?"
"I'm waiting for Mum to come to pick me up and bring me to Hogsmeade to go shopping, yeah." He said with a grin.
"Good." Ginny laughed.
He sat up a bit straighter and looked at her. "I'm just thinking… you should ask Ginny if she has any ideas. I'm not sure if I'd even want to be her friend anymore… she's a fucking nutter."
"Maybe I'm wrong."
"Maybe you're right."
"That was some of the most stupid shit I've heard you say in a long time."
"You didn't even think I would listen to that."
"You do care," Ron said. "You said you do."
"Do I want to know what you've been doing?" she asked.
"No," he said.
"Do you want to know what I've been doing?" she asked.
"Are you sure? It's not like you're going to run out and tell anyone…"
"I know it's stupid, Ron, but… you're not going to get anything out of me."
The blonde was quiet for a moment and, despite himself, he found himself thinking about something.
"I can give you that." He said, almost casually.
Hermione's face fell at that, and she sat in the seat next to Harry, watching with narrowed eyes as he went back to his book.
"Why?" she whispered, her voice growing quieter and quieter.
"Because I don't have a problem with you being naked, Hermione." He replied, his eyes still fixed on the page.
She bit her lip, but said nothing.
"And that's all I'm going to say." He said, and it was then that she realized what he'd meant.
"But I don't know how." She said: 'My son is a very good lad, who I was proud to have on my bike.
'He loves the sport, he is just one of those kids who enjoys the bike and the excitement of being a professional cyclist.
'I just wish I had not lost him, it would have been a happier life for us all.
'We were driving home when I saw the police car. The policeman stopped and spoke to us. I was just so angry.
'It has completely changed our lives. It could have been so different. He was only 16 and in cycling training.'
Mrs Withers added: 'I have spoken to the police to say it could have been avoided. I don't want my son to get killed in the same way, but it was the only way he could have got home and the police should do everything they can.'
"It is not I who is mad! It is I who is crazy!" -- Ren Hoek
Freedom of choice
Is what you got
Freedom from choice
Is what you want

I was talking to someone recently who felt they had messed up so badly that they felt their life was over...I quickly told them that their life was not over...it was just changed. I have lived enough years to know that now. There were times I thought my life was ruined or done or whatever but something I eventually figured out was that if I kept going forward. Step by step and if I kept making right decisions to the best of my ability then life has a way of offering us more chances. No it doesn't usually turn out like we imagined but that isn't always a bad thing. I read a sign today that said, "At any given moment you have the power to say this is not how the story is going to end." I like that quote. It offers so much power and encouragement if we will just pick it up and decide that for ourselves. It just takes a decision and then let your steps be in light of that decision. Soon you will see that life has indeed changed.
Until Next Time

Masked men have shot and wounded a 55-year-old man in Co Armagh.
The victim was hit in the hand at Graham Court, Moira, just before 8pm last night.
He was treated in hospital, but his injuries are not believed to be life threatening.
A PSNI spokesperson said a motive for the shooting has yet to be established.
"Police received a report that as a 55-year-old man alighted from his car he was approached by two masked men, one of whom shot him in the hand."
Detectives have appealed for anyone with information to come forward.

The mother of two identified as Hilda is said to have attempted suicide after the husband abandoned her and married another woman.
Speaking to the media from the hospital where they are admitted, Hilda said that she set their house ablaze after the husband abandoned them. She said that she could not fend for her two kids and hence decided to set the house on fire to avoid the suffering.
According to neighbours, they were shocked to see a huge thick smoke emanating from her house. They saw the three year old boy who managed to escape unhurt rushing from the house. He told them that the mother had set their house on fire and wanted to burn them.
The neighbours rushed to their aid and managed to save their lives. However property was destroyed in the incident because the fire had already consumed a big part of the house. They were rushed to hospital where they are receiving treatment.
The woman will be charged with attempted murder once she is discharged from hospital.

I want to talk about this business owner that I had the pleasure of dealing with over the last few months, he was one of those guys that just had the most epic story to tell.
I had a pleasure of dealing with him because I got towing work from him and needed roadside assistance because my car randomly decided to shut off in the cold cold winter of Michigan.
This guy was kind enough to come within 15 min and tow my car to the nearest auto repair shop. I asked him how long he’s been in the towing business and he told me 15 years, and as an entrepreneur myself, I had to ask him, what was the one thing that made him successful and he told me it was his work ethic.
You see work ethic is like a muscle that you build through diligent effort, and consistency. Its like building something with bricks and mortar, you cannot expect to build a house in a day, but through persistence of laying one brick at a time, you can eventually build something quite spectacular.
This was extremely gratifying to hear because I have been working hard on my own business and its great to know that I’ve been doing the right thing for my own success. And before I could get his business card, he was off to the next customer for lockout service, I have a feeling I will be calling him again whenever I need some roadside help in Southfield.

[Helen Mar Kimball]
In Nauvoo the Prophet's life was in constant jeopardy, not only from outside influences and enemies, who were seeking some plea to take him back to Missouri, but from false brethren, who had crept into his bosom and then betrayed him. Therefore, when he told my father [Heber C. Kimball] to take a second wife, he requested him to keep it a secret and not divulge it even to my mother, for fear that she would not receive the principle. Father realized the situation fully, and the love and reverence he felt for the Prophet was so great that he would rather have laid down his own life than have betrayed him. This was the greatest test of his faith he had ever experienced.
When first hearing the principle taught, believing that he would be called upon to enter into it, he thought of the two Sisters Pitkin, who, as they were both elderly ladies and great friends of my mother's, he believed would cause her little if any unhappiness. The woman he was commanded to take, however, was an English lady nearer my mother's age, who came over with her husband and two little girls with a company of Saints in the same ship in which President Brigham Young and my father were returning from their second mission to Europe. ...
... but the thought of deceiving the kind and faithful wife of his youth, whom he loved with all his heart, and who with him had borne so patiently their separation and all the trials and sacrifices they had been called to endure, was more than he felt able to bear. He realized not only the addition of trouble and perplexities that such a step must bring upon him, but his sorrow and misery were increased by the thought of my mother hearing of it from some other source, which would no doubt separate them forever, and he shrank from the thought of such a thing, or of causing her any unhappiness. Finally he was so tried that he went to Joseph and told him how he felt—that he was fearful if he took such a step he could not stand, but would be overcome. The Prophet went and inquired of the Lord; His answer was: "Tell him to go and do as he has been commanded, and if I see that there is any danger of his apostatizing, I will take him to myself."
Father was heard many a time to say that he had shed bushels of tears over this order, the order of "celestial or plural marriage."
The Prophet told him the third time before he obeyed the command. This shows that the trial must have been extraordinary, for he was a man who from the first had yielded implicit obedience to every requirement of the Prophet.
My mother had noticed a change in his looks and appearance, and when she enquired the cause he tried to evade her question, saying it was only her imagination, or that he was not feeling well, etc. But it so worked upon his mind that his anxious and haggard looks betrayed him daily and hourly, and finally his misery became so unbearable that it was impossible to control his feelings. He became sick in body, but his mental wretchedness was too great to allow of his retiring at night, and instead of going to bed he would walk the floor; and the agony of his mind was so terrible that he would wring his hands and weep, beseeching the Lord with his whole soul to be merciful and reveal to his wife the cause of his great sorrow, for he himself could not break his vow of secrecy. His anguish, and my mother's, were indescribable, and when unable to endure it longer, she retired to her room, where, with a broken and contrite heart she poured out her grief to Him who hath said: "If any lack wisdom let him ask of God, who giveth to all men liberally and upbraideth not." "Seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto you."
My father's heart was raised at the same time in supplication, and while pleading as one would plead for life, the vision of her mind was opened, and as darkness fleeth before the morning sun, so did her sorrow and the groveling things of earth vanish away, and before her she saw the principle of celestial marriage illustrated in all its beauty and glory, together with the great exaltation and honor it would confer upon her in that immortal and celestial sphere if she would but accept it and stand in her place by her husband's side. She was also shown the woman he had taken to wife, and contemplated with joy the vast and boundless love and union which this order would bring about, as well as the increase of kingdoms, power and glory extending throughout the eternities, worlds without end.
Her soul was satisfied and filled with the Spirit of God. With a countenance beaming with joy she returned to my father, saying, "Heber, what you kept from me the Lord has shown to me."
She related the scene to me and to many others, and told me she never saw so happy a man as father was, when she described the vision and told him she was satisfied and knew that it was from God. She covenanted to stand by him and honor the principle, which covenant she faithfully kept, and though her trials were often heavy and grievous to bear, her integrity was unflinching to the end.
[Whitney, Helen Mar, Jeni Broberg Holzapfel, and Richard Neitzel Holzapfel, A Woman's View: Helen Mar Whitney's Reminiscences of Early Church History, Provo, UT: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1997]
Post a Comment
Please Enter your Comment:

Alfie has discovered the little lizards that abound in Florida. Alfe is also hunting them. He’s definitely getting his dog on. It’s good to see him enjoying dog type activities. It also indicates where he is developmentally as a “rescue” dog. It’s like baby’s first steps. We have had him for around five months now.
to take it away from him.
Alflie was an old dog when he finally caught one of the squirrels that had tormented him his whole life. They would come up to our screemed in porch and chatter until he chased them and then up the tree out of his reach they would go. Well, whoever said that every dog has his day, can chalk this up as an example.
Alfie, I am so glad that you finally caught your tormentor before you left.
but a good run is better!
(even if it is just a lope)
Horsing around with a friend is fun.
in the height of his glory as he is surrounded by four female golden retrievers. Suddenly out of the corner of his eye he spots a male goldie barking fiercly and headed his way. This goldie is huge! He must go about eighty pounds, coming like a runaway freight train, dragging his handler, who is leaned back on the leash, both feet splayed, smoke coming off dug in heels straight for Alf.
At first, Alf barks ferocioiusly; but as Willie, the dogs name is Willie, looms ever closer and larger, Alfie stops barking. The two males sniff and circle like a couple of heavy weight fighters. Owners feverishly try to keep leads untangled. The two dogs stop dead, heads down and stare. I’m not a dog, and I could read the message in Willie’s eyes. “These are my females!” Alflie takes a step back, cocks his head and gives the Willie a look. The goldie’s handler takes him for a practice run on the rally course. Alfie returns to the females. Willie comes back, lowers his head and gives Alfie the look once again. Alfie takes two steps back and all is well. More sniffing each other but this time with tails wagging.
Now that is nonverbal communication.
Another grooming, this time without tranquilizers for anyone. Again no dogs or humans were hurt during the process, but one of the two finished off a bottle of wine later. Here are the results and one cross dog:
Alfie now goes outside by himself. He has begun to check out his environment. He has noticed squirrels, birds, cats and lizards; but doesn’t react to them. He is getting his “dog” on and now sniffs everything on his walk. His favorite day is trash pick up day with all the interesting garbage cans along his walk. Here he enjoys his after grooming reward, a large marrow bone:
He has learned sit, come, stay and down. He now sits before he bolts out the door. Hey, progress is progress. He no longer responds to blondes and white vans.
Unfortunately, he still obsesses over my wife if she leaves the house. Any ideas? He can go anywhere with us as long as my wife is in sight. We are using a trainer who has reinforced that it takes a rescue dog a long time to accept that we are his forever family, and this is his forever home.
Week two brought a second grooming. Ears still filled with wax and dirt build up. As this loosens up it must feel strange to him as he frequently shakes his head and wants his ears rubbed and scratched. We opted for tranquilizers (one for Alfie and one for me) for this grooming since it involved a cut down. Everyone survived, and no dogs or humans were injured during this grooming.
He still will not go outside on his own, but thoroughly enjoys it when we go out with him. We tried to teach him to come. Sharon and I both had pockets full of treats. The idea was that when he was by me she would call him and reward him with a treat when he came. When he was with her, I would call him and when he came reward him with treats. Sounds logical, right? Wrong. Twice he came to her when she called, and twice he came to me when I called. We were so proud, but then he started running from one to the other of us without being called to collect his treats. He figured that game out pretty quickly.
Week three we have been working on “sit”. Alfie does not like to sit. Tried standard approach of bringing treat in front of nose and up while giving command and lightly pressing down on rump. No way! Anytime we touched his rump he bolted. My conclusion is that someone must have held him and hit him on the rump. The new plan was to up the ante with a piece of turkey and offer the reward without reaching for his rump. That worked. Well, almost. He would sit only in the spots we trained with him i.e the back of the SUV and on his bed. Ok, those sound like pretty strange places to try to train a dog, but those were the only two places we could actually catch him sitting. You gotta do, what you gotta do, where you can do it.
Alfie seems to understand stay, but can only stay for a short amount of time. Someone has tried to work with him, but it appears the commands were inconsistent. The stay command elicits a wide variety of behavior which so far makes no sense to me. He may come to my side, he may circle to the other side, he may stay momentarily. If I am confused; I am sure he must be too.
Alfie sleeps in our bedroom on his own bed or on the floor. He alternates between the two places based upon how hot or cold it is. He is just now venturing out of the bedroom and leaving us on his own usually to get a drink of water. The other night though he did hear someone outside, sounded the alarm and ran back into the bedroom. My wife and I are retired. Guess who is not retired and likes to get up at 6:45 in the morning.
We have had three poodles. All three wake us up with this routine. First comes a head shake which makes the ears slap loudly. Then comes the prancing from one side of the bed to the other. Next, comes the whine or poof six inches from the face. Finally, if you open your eye even slightly; you will see a poodle face framed in its big ears staring at you. At which point you have been busted. As far as the poodle is concerned your eye twitched so you must be awake and its time to get up and party with the poodle.
The obsession with human females, blondes and white cars seems to be lessening. However, he is still obsessed with and demonstrates separation anxiety whenever my wife is out of sight. The change here has been minimal. But, any change brings hope.
Alfie is the first “rescue” dog that we have had. However, to be truthful, as a child, all my dogs were strays and always had “problems”.
On the day that the owner brought Alfie to our house, her choice; not ours, she shared with us that she worked twelve hour days and had four more standard poodles and three toy poodles beside our Alf. When she went to work she locked the dogs in a spare bedroom. She also mentioned that he had been placed with a man and his wife, and for some reason Alf had ended up crated and living in the garage. The man returned Alfie to her.
It was no surprise then that Alfie was very clingy to his old mistress and whined and barked when she left. (For later reference the owner was blond and drove a white car.) When he accepted she was no longer with us, he turned his attention to my wife and has clung to her since then. However, he has been a little more adventurous with each passing day.
We decided that because of his previous experience with the crate and garage we would let him stay with us in our bedroom. That night there was a lot of crying, barking and whining along with urinating in the house which was to be expected. The next day there was some of the whining and none of the urinating
Since my wife had promised to walk a neighbors dog while the neighbor recovered from knee surgery, I was tasked with walking Alfie. It was obvious that several people had tried to work with Alfie, but in his training his was not consistent. Although he wanted to pull, it wasn’t with force; and it wasn’t the charge to the end of the lead that our previous poodles had used before their training.
When corrected for pulling with a pop on his lead, Alfie would turn come back to my left side and wait. As soon as I started again, he went to the end of the lead. Sometimes he would stop at the end of the lead; sometimes he would circle around to my right side. He responded to stay, but momentarily. It was apparent that this was going to be tricky, and I would need to let Alfie teach me what he knew first.
The third day we had to both leave because of a tax appointment with our accountant. We figured that he would be ok for a couple of hours. Boy, were we wrong. We returned to find my wife’s clothes from the hall closet along with his harness and leash strewn around the living room and dining room. He had dragged down a bag of treats and destroyed them. He had managed to get our bedroom door open and my wife’s closet door open. He had dragged her clothes and shoes from the closet and strewn them around the bedroom. He left us a definite message because he had urinated in several spots around the house. All this in less than two hours. OK, message received. The separation anxiety and the focus on my wife were going to be our biggest rehabilitation issues and would need to be addressed before serious training began.
We decided that we would take turns leaving and returning to the house in our natural routine except that someone would always be there. The person staying would ignore his crying and barking. It soon became clear that I could come and go with no problem, but that it was my wife that threw him into a panic attack. He was anxious when both of us were not with him and would search for the missing person.
Alfie and my walks were going well. He was friendly and eager to meet most people but would then bark and back away if it was a man. I soon noticed that a sight of a white car would excite him. He also became excited when he saw a woman, particularly a blond. When he met other dogs on our walks he was eager to greet them. They did their doggie thing, and we went on our way.
I walked him in the morning and my wife walked him while I tagged along in the evening. We notice that he was much more relaxed on the evening walk, and by the third night his tail was up and wagging on his walk.
The rest of the week was spent establishing a routine working on lessening his fixation on my wife. By the end of the week, he was still following her wherever she went but not in a panicked state.

Read an Excerpt
Fear clamped around her throat, leaving a cold, metallic taste in her mouth. Renee Mitchell Foster dropped the pen and stared at the initials on the check-in form for her great-aunt's safe-deposit box. All but the last set of initials were hers. The last entry was made at the end of March and the initials belonged to her husband, Marc, who'd died last month.
Marc had no legitimate reason to have access to Aunt Gert's safe-deposit box.
The cool air from the air-conditioning vents and her crisp linen pantsuit couldn't touch the hot wave of fear that had her trembling in the vault of the National Bank of Alabama.
She tried to take a deep, calming breath like she'd learned from years of yoga class. A technique she'd used many times in the past.
Marc couldn't have gotten access to the box, she thought, trying to alleviate her fears with cold, hard reason when deep-breathing exercises didn't work.
Her hands shook as she set the card on a table. Slowly she reached inside her purse and took out her Palm. With a few taps of her stylus, she opened the file that listed all the items inside the safe-deposit box and set the organizer on the table.
She lifted the hinged top and looked inside. The thin, black velvet jewelry case, which usually sat on top of all the saving bonds, insurance papers and the deed to her great-aunt's house, was gone. She could feel the blood drain from her face.
"Oh, God, Marc. How could you take it?"
Renee closed her eyes and leaned her shoulder against the wall of locked boxes to keep from falling. She pressed her cheek against the cold metal. The diamond necklace that her great-aunt treasured and loved was gone. The necklace that she'd placed around Renee's neck when she was six and made her feel wanted when her parents had left her in boarding school. The necklace was more than a piece of jewelry. It was the one thing her great-aunt had left from the man she'd loved.
She'd never let anyone wear it except Renee. Now, it was gone.
She pushed against the wall and stood up straight. Maybe I just overlooked it. Even as the thought materialized, she didn't believe it in her heart.
She took out every item inside the box, hoping the jewelry case was there under the papers. When she'd pulled out the last item, she realized that her husband had betrayed her yet again. Everything was accounted for except the diamond necklace. Renee added the savings bond, which Aunt Gert received yesterday, to the large stack of bonds inside an envelope marked Savings Bonds. She put everything back inside and checked the table to be sure she hadn't forgotten anything.
Reluctantly she closed the box and lifted it to put it in its proper place. The one-carat diamond solitaire and matching wedding band flashed under the fluorescent lighting. She would have traded the ring and everything she owned for the missing necklace. She looked at the wedding band then took the box back down and opened it.
Renee slowly slid the solitaire and wedding band off her finger. Her marriage had been a sham and she should have stopped wearing the rings weeks ago. As she put the rings in the box, she wondered what it was about her that made the people she cared for abandon her.
She hadn't married Marc for love. Theirs had been a marriage of mutual interest. Marc had agreed with her belief that love develops and grows during marriage and she'd been in love with the idea of loving him. Now, she knew that was lie. He'd lied about everything. She closed the box and placed it in the empty opening in the wall.
A few minutes later, she braved the heat and walked to her car. Through the windshield, she watched the heavy, gray clouds billow and roll in the hot Birmingham sky. The dark, rolling clouds matched her mood as hurt and fear circled and expanded inside her.
"Damn him. Damn him," she said. Her voice was husky as she put the key into the ignition. The V-8 engine roared to life and she pressed the buttons on her door and lowered her windows letting the hot air escape.
Why had Marc taken the necklace? she wondered.
Marrying Marc Foster had been a mistake. She didn't mind taking responsibility for her mistakes. Hadn't she taken it like a big girl when she learned her husband of less than a year had not one but two other wives, Danielle Timmons Foster and Alexandria Lord-Wright Foster? Hadn't she swallowed her pride and agreed to join forces with Danielle and Alex instead of waging war like she wanted? They'd worked together to learn the truth about the man they'd married and to untangle his web of lies. During the past month, the three of them had become friends instead of enemies.
Danielle and Alex couldn't help her with this.
She'd married Marc and if he'd taken the necklace then she was partially responsible for its disappearance. It wasn't fair that her great-aunt would be hurt by her mistake.
Renee turned the air-conditioning on high, letting the rapidly cooling air blow on her face. What was she going to tell her aunt Gert?
She brushed away the tears on her cheek, leaving dark stains on the sleeve of her jacket. It was no use crying. Crying never solved anything. If it did, she would have been the girl her parents wanted her to be. She would have been the wife Marc wanted her to be.
What she needed was a plan, she thought. Renee shifted into Reverse and backed out of the parking spot. She maneuvered her way into the afternoon traffic. By the time she got on I-459, she had a sketchy outline of a plan. If she could avoid telling her great-aunt that the necklace was missing, she would. She was going to find the necklace. It was her fault it was gone in the first place. If she'd never married Marc, this wouldn't have happened. Since his death, she'd had nothing but heartache and one unpleasant surprise after another. She realized she didn't know the man she'd married but she did know her aunt Gert. Renee knew what that necklace meant to her. Marc had known it, too.
Renee pressed her lips together. Marc had hurt her but she wasn't going to let him hurt her aunt. She was going to find that necklace. One way or another she would.
The office of Smithstone&Wasson was exactly as Chris Foster had imagined: traditional, Southern and intimidating as hell. It was a good thing that he wasn't easily intimidated. Chris leaned back in the large leather chair and scanned the quiet waiting area. It wasn't a room but more like a den with leather chairs and sofas, thick brown carpet and he'd bet his salary that the furniture was antique. The place said money and a lot of it. Renee Foster hadn't scrimped when she'd sicced the junkyard dog of a lawyer on him or rather Marc Foster's estate, he thought.
Chris rubbed his hand over his chin. His brother, Marc, had never been one to do things the easy way, even in death. He'd grieved when he'd gotten a call from the police in South Carolina telling him his older brother was dead. He hadn't seen or spoken to his brother in over two years. They hadn't been close for more than ten years but despite that Marc had been the only family he had left. Marc had become a perpetual liar. It had gotten to the point where he trusted very little Marc told him and his lies had been the major reason they had drifted apart. Chris curled his lip and brushed aside the memory.
Essentially he'd been on his own since he was fourteen. But part of him remembered his older brother who would beat the hell out of anyone who messed with him, the brother who would bring him sandwiches from the diner where he worked when there was hardly any food in the house. Those images conflicted with the selfish bastard who'd married three different women. Chris hated the situation Marc had put him in.
He could have walked away. Hell, he'd wanted to say "to hell with this" many times in the past month. But he'd given his word, and once he gave his word that was that. Now, he was in Birmingham, Alabama, to meet with Renee Foster's lawyer. They wouldn't have needed lawyers if she'd been reasonable. The estate could have been settled and he would have been out of this mess and gone on with his life.
A dark paneled door across the room opened and a young Asian woman walked out. "Mr. Foster?"
"Yes," he said and stood.
The woman smiled. "Mr. Smithstone will see you now. Please follow me."
She led him through a quiet hallway filled with paintings and other artwork. Thick carpet muffled the sound of their footsteps. He gave an inward nod of approval to the discreet cameras and motion detectors. The lawyer had hired a good security firm. He wasn't surprised.
The woman opened a door at the end of the hall and stepped into a large room where an older woman stopped typing and gave him a smile. The woman who'd led him there closed the door quietly behind them. She walked to another door and knocked twice before opening it.
Chris stepped inside and paused. A large, dark wood conference table dominated the room, and all but two chairs stood empty in the room. Chris barely glanced at the suit, who he assumed was Terrell Smithstone; it was Renee Foster who captured his attention.
Chris kept his expression blank as he watched his brother's widow. There was nothing classically beautiful about her features. Her skin was a light brown, which reminded him of his favorite milk chocolate candy. Her eyes were dark brown and somber. She had an air of vulnerability around her that made him want to protect her. The thoughts were quickly dispelled when her lawyer stood.
"Mr. Foster. I'm Terrell Smithstone. I believe you know my client, Renee Foster."
Chris shook the man's outstretched hand, noting the rough calluses. He had the hands of a man who did manual labor, not the soft hands of a desk jockey or a lawyer. Chris would have to add that bit of information to Smithstone's file. He'd investigated Smithstone and all of Marc's wives.
Renee cleared her throat. "Terrell, would you mind if I spoke with Chris alone?" Her voice was smooth like honey. Chris mentally raised a brow at the use of Smithstone's first name and at the tone of her voice. It was a tone used with friends. He wondered how well the two knew each other.
Chris didn't like the feel of this situation. He'd worked as a special agent for the FBI for almost six years and before that he'd worked three years as a cop in California. He'd developed a radar for trouble and right about now his radar was telling him things were about to hit the fan.
"I don't think this is wise," Smithstone said. "As your attorney, I'm advising you to rethink this."
Renee folded her hands on the table and leaned forward. "I've made up my mind," she said softly.
Chris watched the interaction between the two. He didn't know what was going on but if her lawyer was against it maybe she'd decided to be reasonable. Maybe he could put this whole mess behind him.
Who the hell was he kidding? Renee Foster hadn't made a damn thing easy.
Smithstone picked up a folder on the table. "If you need me, just tell my secretary." He walked out of the room and closed the door behind him.
Chris returned his gaze to Renee.
"Please have a seat, Chris," she said, nodding to the chair on the opposite side of the table. Chris walked to the chair and sat down across from her and waited. If she was nervous, she didn't show it. Her expression was serene and carefully blank. She'd learned to hide what she was thinking and he wondered what was going on in her head.
"What do you hope to accomplish with this meeting today?" she asked.
This was a surprise, he thought. He'd made his plans clear to all three women. He wanted to settle Marc's estate in a way that was fair to everyone.
"The same thing I'd hoped to accomplish for the past monthto settle Marc's estate. Why the sudden interest?"
She held his gaze and studied him with the intensity of a starving man at a buffet. For a brief moment, he could sense the turmoil behind the polite expression. He tensed, waiting for the other shoe to drop.
Renee studied her hands, surprised they weren't shaking or clenched. She was taking a risk. A big risk. It would be worth it, she thought. It had to be.
Meeting Chris Foster again was harder than she thought it would be. He looked nothing like Marc, for which she was grateful. She didn't know if she could go through with her plan if he'd remotely resembled his brother.
She could do this, she thought. She would do this. She lifted her head and met his steady gaze. His eyes were the color of pale amber framed by long, black lashes. They reminded her of a panther she'd seen on a television documentary. The panther looked like a lazy cat but later proved that looks could be deceiving. The cat had been a dangerous and deadly predator. She hoped Chris Foster wasn't.

I recently celebrated the birthdays of both of my daughters. And as I am prone to do, now that they are older, I look for cards that will express my feelings for them.
I came across this card, and I was immediately drawn to it. Its message was simple, watching your daughter have opportunities, growing up with her many talents, and of course supporting the daughter every step of the way. Perfect! A homerun card. This card hit every point that I tell my daughters in person every opportunity that I get.
But… as I am prone to do, in my excitement, I may miss something, such as the further inside of the card. Sure, I saw the words “Happy Birthday.” That was all I saw.
As you can see from the photo, I had to make an edit to the card. Originally, the card did say “mom”, but obviously the card was coming from me, and I really liked the message on the card. And when I went shopping for the card, looking at all the slots, there was no tab saying “from mom” or “from Dad.” But this card was specifically written for a mom to give it.
I have a problem with this. Why could the card not have been given from a Dad? As I said, I say these things to my daughters frequently. And in all honesty, the words can apply from either parent.
This took me back to an incident all the way back to the beginning, when I adopted both of my daughters, in fact, each time.
I changed the diapers of both of my daughters. I fed both daughters. I held and rocked both daughters. I played with and comforted both daughters. I had done all that I not only knew I would do as a Dad, but wanted to do. And I was good at it.
Being adopted, unlike a biological child adapting to its parents right away, there are potential developmental concerns with attachment. I was aware of this as it was explained to me during adoption classes. Fortunately, my employer had offered a type of “maternity” leave, that would allow either parent to remain home, in effort to help acclimate the baby to its new family. It was six months, though unpaid. Because of the unique situation that my then wife and I had, working for the same company, we were told that we could not both take the six months, but, we could split the time, even taking it simultaneously.
So we agreed, that I would take one month, their mother would take the other five months. Besides being severely jetlagged, we felt that even that month, would provide the necessary bonding opportunities between all of us.
Some in the family did not agree with this. I was called selfish, that the mother should have had the full six months to bond with the baby. That it was more important for the mother to bond with a daughter.
Now, I know darn well, if I had made any kind of sexist comment like that, I would hear a chorus of “oinks” for being a male chauvinist pig if I had made a reference to a parenting task only a father was capable of. And it did not sit well with me. Anyone making comments about our adoption process, had no idea the trauma that our daughters had experienced already at such a young age. To make matters worse, to say that one parent was more important than the other, had more value than the other, that just irritated me.
As my daughters have grown, they will both say how important it has been to have both of their parents in their lives, even with them being divorced. Their mother and I are their role models, their examples, their influences.
As happy as I was to have seemingly found the perfect birthday card, once I got home and prepared to sign the card, I had seen what the card maker had done. And it took me back to seventeen years ago when I heard that it was more important, not as important, that the mother bond with the daughters more than the father.
After all of these years, I would strongly disagree, and so would my daughters.

Sweetie Pie Heron is a lover and a fighter. Although he was rescued from a puppy mill known for severely abusive conditions, he has emerged a tiny hero. Even though he is still somewhat shy and wary of new situations, he has forced himself to branch out into the world full of fun and is allowing himself to be happy. We think Heron is the best of all dogs and applaud him constantly for his bravery. A home is what he needs, what he so very much deserves, and we will work very hard to make sure that he gets the very best.
Adopt Me »

The prices were great--after living here in the bay area where a decent restaurant is usually $13+ a plate, going to a nice restaurant and finding dinners for under $10 was a treat! I had 2 tacos and he had chicken enchiladas. Both were scrumptious! The chips and salsa were excellent-they had GOOD chips! And with our combined dinner being around $18, we were able to leave a great tip for the fine service that we had received.
Own or manage this property? Claim your listing for free to respond to reviews, update your profile and much more.

A woman has told how reaching the same dress size as her mum when she died at the age of just 50 was one of the things that spurred her on to lose weight. Hollie Alabaster, 32, says she had turned to food for comfort over the years but was shocked to realise that she was the same size as her mum Judy Hughes when she died in November 2013 - size 22.
Her mum had been ill but her secondary cause of death was given as morbid obesity. Hollie, who has a daughter Freya, six, said when her 30th birthday was coming up she ordered a size 20 blazer dress to wear to go out with friends, thinking it would fit her just fine.
But when it arrived and she tried it on she couldn't fasten it and ended up having to use a belt to wear it. She said another moment that gave her pause for thought was when she got a quote for life assurance just before she turned 30.
She expected to be quoted a small monthly sum but was instead quoted a much higher figure, with the company telling her this was because she was morbidly obese. She said hearing those words and seeing that she was the same dress size as her mum when she passed away shocked her and spurred her on to take action.
READ: Staffordshire dad-of-five, 43, with 'no symptoms' died suddenly in front of son Marc 'Sid' Siddalls, 43, collapsed and died, despite the brave efforts of his 16-year-old son, Ethan
READ: Police workers who got drivers off speeding fines jailed for ChristmasSamantha Halden-Evans, 36, from Cheadle, and Jonathan Hill, 47, from Newcastle, have both been locked up for conspiracy to commit misconduct in public office
And she has gone on to lose six stone in just over six months and has become a weight loss consultant herself. She embarked on a weight loss journey and went from 15 stone 10 and a dress size 22 at the end of June 2022 to nine stone 10 and a dress size of 10-12 by January 2023.
Recalling just how shocked she was to read that she was morbidly obese, Hollie, who is a teacher, said: "I had never given myself that kind of label. I didn't realise how bad it was. I'd gained a lot of weight after having my daughter and I had kind of spiralled into a pit of grief and depression. Obviously I had post natal depression as well but the only thing I knew was emotional eating and that food would make it better. I had Freya and I gained quite a lot but just didn't have the strength to find a way out and admit I had an issue."
Talking about the moment she realised she needed to take action, she said: "I wanted to go out for my 30th birthday and so I ordered a size 20 blazer dress thinking there will be lots of room in that, and then it came and it didn't fit. I had to wear a belt with it to do it up.
"When I chose my mum's outfit when she was cremated she was a size 22 and that correlation of me not fitting that size 20 dress and having to become that size hit me like a lead balloon. Mum's death was due to health complications but obesity was her secondary cause of death.
"I had a choice. I could stop eating what I was eating and get fitter and healthier but mum couldn't. That spurred me on. I didn't want to turn round one day and my daughter to be in the same position I was in. My mum wasn't at my wedding and never met Freya. She never saw this journey."
Hollie said she came across an Instagram account which she really related to. It was run by a woman called Rachael Walkingshaw-McGuinness who had lost her mum, and who also had a little girl and had gone on a weight loss journey. She contacted her and embarked on her own weight loss journey.
"I thought, well if she can do it then I can," explained Hollie. She said she associated food with making her feel better from back when her parents separated when she was about six and her mum would send her to her dad's house with food parcels. Now she says she feels so much better for losing eight, feeling able to run around with her daughter and not get out of breath.
And she has even won an award for her weight loss, courtesy of the 1:1 Diet by the Cambridge Weight Plan. The award was for the best relationship between slimmer and consultant. Hollie and Rachael were presented with the award at a ceremony in Birmingham.
Hollie added: "I had already won by changing my life and my health but this was like the icing on the cake. I'm a consultant now and I am supporting people all over the UK and locally. I have also documented my journey on my Instagram account @one2one.dethorningtherose. I want to say to people who may think there's no way out and they can't get back to their own identity that there is someone who will support you. The old Hollie disappeared but she came back."
And speaking about how she approaches times like Christmas when there are plenty of temptations, she has no hesitation in saying she will go off the plan for the day and enjoy the special time with her family, before resuming it the next day. She said what helps her is appreciating food more, shared with her family, rather than sitting on her own and eating chocolates.

I'm being asked to work all this week. Next week too!
A couple of quick facts
1. Today is April the 20th
2. The Wedding of the Century is April the 29th.
3. That's single digits
4. I know that four facts is not a couple of facts, but sometimes I just keep typing...
How am I supposed to work while so much needs to be done in preparation for the wedding?
How am I expected to feed and care for my children when we're moments from the single greatest event of our lifetime?
This is a guy that was born into a family. This is a girl that is marrying a guy that was born into a family. This is an historic occasion of two people who have accomplished so much coming together as one.
If people don't see that as a reason to close the post offices, schools, swimming pools and all Dave & Busters - well this isn't the America that I was born into!

A Justice of the Peace and high school guidance counsellor has been charged with rape and other sex-related crimes involving a schoolgirl.
Dawit Jeffrey, 29, is also facing multiple counts of indecent assault.
Jeffrey is accused of forcibly having sex with the 16-year-old student inside his office at a St Andrew-based school in January.
When the institution was contacted, the principal of the school was said to be in a meeting and could not comment on whether Jeffrey remains in his post.
Police investigators claim that the guidance counsellor developed a romantic relationship with the student after her 16th birthday in November last year.
It's alleged that they had sex inside his school office "a number of times".
However, the student reportedly indicated in January that she wanted to end the relationship.
Jeffrey allegedly invited her to his office that evening, held her down and had sex with her against her will.
He was charged by the police on March 8 and is scheduled to appear in court on July 27.
He has been released on bail.

Stephen Stoneburn, the founder and chief executive officer of Quadrant Media and a former senior vice president of Fairchild Publications, the parent of WWD, died Monday at a hospital in his hometown of New York City. He was 77.
His wife, Michelle Stoneburn, said the cause of death was esophageal cancer.
Stoneburn was born in New York and graduated from New York University. He worked for Fairchild for 20 years, starting his career as a reporter before being relocated to Paris as bureau chief. He was then brought back to the company’s headquarters in New York to oversee Daily News Record, its men’s wear publication, as well as Fairchild News Service. During that time, he was credited with starting Sportstyle, which focused on the sporting goods business. He was then sent back to Paris to launch W in Europe. W magazine was owned by Fairchild at that time.
His wife said he didn’t want to remain in Paris so returned to New York and joined Miller Freeman, a publisher of trade magazines. From there, he moved on to Cowles Media before creating Quadrant in 1996, according to his LinkedIn page. That company is now called Frontline Medical Communications and Stoneburn is listed as its chairman, a position he had held since 2013.
HIs wife said he was “very committed to the theater and arts,” and had lately discovered hiking, which became another passion of his, bringing him to the far reaches of the world for “adventures.” In addition, he was an avid reader and was “very smart and very engaged in life. He lived his life with both hands.” She said he was also a retired director of Prudential.
“Steve was a quietly brilliant executive and editor, with a sense of urgency and fair play,” said former WWD editor in chief Edward Nardoza. “He had an uncanny eye for talent and style and empowered his staffers to follow their instincts, whatever the story, whatever the controversy.”
“He was a great executive, especially for the journalists in his charge: demanding, creative and fair-minded.”
In addition to his wife of 27 years, Stoneburn is survived by a stepdaughter, Lauren Silver. A private service is planned and there are no plans for a public memorial, according to Michelle Stoneburn.
Source: Read Full Article

By J. B. Fagoyinbo
One young man of about 26 worked with me on a project. He was a very intelligent electrical/electronic engineer. He was from a middle-class family. I was shocked he couldn’t drive a car. “I determined I wouldn’t use anybody’s car to learn how to drive; not even my father’s,” he told me.
Most parents indulge their children nowadays. Have a look at some items in the list.
- House helps must do all domestic chores- sweeping, dish washing, dusting, cooking, laundry, etc.
- Children must not be scolded for wrongdoing in schools and even in Sunday Schools;
- Parents arrange mercenaries to write qualifying examinations for their children;
- Fat allowances, possibly much higher than the teachers’ salaries, are given to children for comfort;
- Parents buy off lecturers and instructors so that their wards wouldn’t have to repeat classes;
- Gifts of expensive phones with games and play stations as against learning essentials like desktops equipped with study programs;
- Underage children being allowed to drive cars;
- Underage children being registered to vote simply because they’ve been given out in child marriage.
One of the first set of students that I supervised never took part in the execution of their project: field trips, data collection and analysis. They were to submit individual project reports. I refused to grade his submission. His parents came and offered gifts which were turned down. They resulted to threats but also failed. They tried to get to me through my wife who refused to yield to them. They tried to find out if I had a secret lover but found none. The young man had to carry out his own individual field work which he was able to complete and eventually met up with the Resit Examination. But for the fact that he fell into the Resit Examination category he would’ve had the most outstanding project report for that year: his talent was made latent through indulgence.
Parental indulgence ruins a child’s life. The Holy Bible specifically instructs that “He that spareth his rod hateth his son: but he that loveth him chasteneth him betimes”He that spareth his rod hateth his son: but he that loveth him chasteneth him betimes” (Prov 13:24) because “The rod and reproof give wisdom: but a child left to himself bringeth his mother to shame” (Prov 29:15). The shame is not only to the mother but the entire family and possibly the community.
My boss used to indulge his children so much that once they came back from school they took over the two visitors’ chairs; they usually retreated to his office, their mother rarely being around. Any transaction we had to do would be discussed with him standing. I decided one of those fateful days that it would end and took a report to him at about 3.00pm when I knew that the boys had come. I took the older son by the arm, pulled him up and took over the chair. My boss’ eyes went blood red. Before he could say anything, I told him “Sir, the country has so done it that no matter how highly placed you are these children will have to serve the nation. Suppose in their service years one of them happens to serve where I have authority would you like me to treat him as an over-indulged child or as the son of my former boss?” I instantly noticed calmness in him and from that day he made them refer to me as their uncle. The two of them are now highly placed in the society.
Children, your parents who are indulging you now were never indulged by their own parents. Ask him if he dared let his father know that he was flogged in school by his teacher

"I didn't think it would be fair to put it all on him," Torre said of the 22-year-old left-hander. "I have no problem giving him the ball. I wasn't afraid to name him No. 1, I wasn't concerned he couldn't handle it, it's just not fair.
"He's handled all the stuff we've thrown at him -- the up and down [to and from the Minor Leagues in 2008], he's gotten his rear beaten up and he came back to pitch well, he dislocated his shoulder [late last season] and came back and gave us a big start in the division-winning game that Saturday. Of all the games, that had the most pressure because of how badly we were going. I just didn't want to drop it all on him."
When Torre makes a decision that might not seem obvious to others, there's often life experience factoring into it. He said he remembered being a player with the Cardinals in 1972 when they traded Jerry Reuss to the Astros for Scipio Spinks, who had only 45 big league innings at the time. Spinks made 16 starts and had a 2.67 ERA over the second half that season for the Cardinals.
"He had electric stuff and pitched so well that second half and I think about how much we counted on him the next year," Torre recalled. "He just couldn't handle it. It wasn't fair for us as players to expect that much. A lot of it was his personality, but the big bravado was insecurity. We thought he was going to be special."
Spinks went 1-5 in eight starts in 1973, was demoted in June and never pitched in the Major Leagues again.
That said, it's all on Kershaw on Wednesday night and Torre seems confident that Kershaw is well suited to get the Dodgers even.
"A lot of it is confidence," Torre said about Kershaw's demeanor, flashing back to the first game Kershaw pitched for Torre in Spring Training of 2008. "The first pitch he gives up a home run and walks halfway to the catcher like, give me the ball, and I said, 'Look at this.' He certainly has a good presence about him. I still think he needs to channel a lot of his enthusiasm."
Now in his 29th season of big league managing, Torre said he hasn't had many pitching prodigies. He offers up Andy Pettitte, although the left-hander was 24 with 175 innings already under his belt when Torre became the Yankees manager in 1996.
"You could see there was something special in this kid," he said of Pettitte. "But he didn't want attention. I think this kid (Kershaw) can handle attention."
Asked to compare the makeup of Kershaw and Billingsley, Torre zeroed in on the mental game.
"Kershaw is coming off a great second half and Billingsley is coming off a bad second half," Torre said. "I don't care how long you play, confidence is based on performance. Even though Billingsley knows he can be better than that, it's a matter of getting the feel.
"Kershaw is more laid back than Billingsley in demeanor. Both are very competitive. Kershaw, he's a guy that comes at you. Billingsley, he asks himself to do a lot of things tough to do -- be perfect at times. That's where they're different. Kershaw trusts his stuff a little more than Bills does."

Nate Fortress, a 16 year old boy from a royal and rich family. He had always been a bright student since he started attending school at the age of 4. He was not only good at his studies but he was also his basketball team's ace player in his high school.
He didn't have a single problem, except for one. Nate was very unsocial. It may seem impossible for such a top-notch person but it was true. The reason was that he always looked down on everyone else and he thought that everyone was inferior to him because Nate had everything any boy of his age would want. Money,fame,good grades,everything.
But all of that changed within just one night.....the night when his power to look down on everyone was taken away from him along with his life.
"Okay, I managed to to get the highest score in the campus." said Nate looking at his report for the 3rd and final year of his high school with the most calm expression he could give. "Now i can apply for that college in Riverwood city." Riverwood elite college of advanced sciences, this was the name of the best college in the country, and the name of the college which Nate was aiming to get admission in. Now Nate had got the appropriate grades to enter the college.
Nate had one, and just one goal. It was to graduate and move to UK where he would study further, get a job with a reasonable pay and settle in the country once and for all.
7 July 2014.
It was the night before Nate had to move to a hostel which was next to the college he would be attending, and it was also his birthday. "Mom! I'm going to the market to grab some stuff, need anything?" Yelled Nate to his mom from the front door of the house. "Nothing dear, but be careful on your way, the news says that a serial killer is on the loose around these areas". "Don't worry mom, it's not like i'm gonna die or anything, i just have to get some toothpaste from the store and then i'll come back". Those were the last words Nate had said to his family.
Nate was on his way back from the store that same night. He was now walking on a completely deserted street accompanied by no-one except for the chilly breeze. *Tap tap tap* Nate heard the sound of fast moving footsteps. *Tap tap tap tap* he heard as the footsteps were getting faster and closer towards him. *TAP TAP TAP* the sound got heavier, Nate didn't have any idea of what was happening but his instincts told him to run. To run as fast as possible to get far away from the footsteps, and so he did, he ran in lightning speed.
Nate was not too worried now, he had a lot of stamina and he could run at his top speed for a good amount of time. "Okay.....looks like i lost him.......whatever he was..." Said Nate, panting.
But, the instant Nate thought he was safe and was about to head back home......he was caught from behind and stabbed from the back.....
Nate could see the knife which had pierced open his stomach poking out of his body. He watched in horror with the little bit of consciousness he had left as the unknown person pulled the knife out of Nate's body. Blood, Nate was covered with blood as he fell on the street.
Nate was bleeding to death. There was no one in sight. He was completely alone with the killer standing next to him. Right there and then.....Nate lost his consciousness.....and everything went black.
A bright light. Nate could see a bright light in the darkness. He was relieved, he thought that he had died, just as he approached the light....the scene changed. There he was, standing in the front gate of his high school in his high school uniform.
"What am i doing here?" said Nate. Nate felt his stomach trying to feel the wound, but it wasn't there, the wound had somehow disappeared. "Welcome" said an unfamiliar voice behind Nate. Nate turned around and he saw a tall,thin man with long blonde hair in a golden full body armour with huge white and feathery wings from his back. "Dude, you cosplaying or something?" Said Nate. "I am not, my name is Nexus, and i am the angel of life. I know you will not believe me so easily, but i am the one who brought you back to life after you were killed by a serial killer on the night of the 7th of July". "Killed? So i really did die?" Asked Nate. "Yes" said Nexus. "So i died on my birthday? Wow, thats ironic..." said Nate.
"You have been given another chance in life, or should i say.....7 chances......i believe you have many questions in mind for me, and i shall answer every one of them"said Nexus, with a light smile on his face......
TO FIND OUT WHAT HAPPENS NEXT READ- CHAPTER 2
YOU ARE READING
7 Lives of SinsMystery / Thriller
Gluttony, Wrath, Envy, Greed, Sloth, Lust and Pride. These are called the 7 deadly sins. 7 lives of sins is a story about a 16 year old teen boy named Nate Fortress who has just graduated from high school and got into a high class college. On the ni...

A woman who alleges a premier rugby player raped her while she slept was brought to tears under cross examination in court today.
Auckland rugby player Junior Sefo, 24, is on trial at the Auckland District Court, accused of rape after he allegedly "crept" into a room at College Rifles clubrooms in Remuera, where the woman was sleeping in the early hours of April 19, 2015.
It is alleged Sefo only stopped after the woman woke up and tried to fight him off.
Sefo has pleaded not guilty to raping the woman, but says he had consensual sex with her.
The night before the alleged early-morning attack, Sefo was drinking at the College Rifles clubrooms with teammates.
The alleged victim was also at the clubrooms drinking, but was not socialising or associating with Sefo.
At about 10.30pm she left the bar area and went to a different part of the College Rifles club to sleep.
The court heard that a group of players continued drinking near where the woman had gone to lie down.
One of the players spent time in the same room as the woman - they kissed and "made out" for a while but did not have sex.
Today, the player told the court that after he left the room, he shut the door behind him but was unsure if it had locked.
He said when he returned to continue "drinking and yarning" with his friends, they gave him "shit" about being with the woman.
The player's recollection of some events in the hours before the alleged rape differed to the woman's.
Witness Atolo Halangahu, a player who was also drinking with the group, said when the player returned after being with the woman, he was "cheered at" and told he was "lucky to get in there" [with the woman].
Halangahu said she was viewed by the players as being somewhat out of their league.
After the player left the room where he had been with the alleged victim, she fell asleep.
She claims she was "jolted" awake later in the night by Sefo, who was on top of her, having sex with her.
She said she became hysterical and recalled a feeling of trying to push him off her with all her strength.
Sefo's defence lawyer Malcolm English questioned whether the alleged victim's recollection of events was accurate, given that she was drunk at the time.
He said in her interview with police she spoke of "feelings and flashes of memory".
But the woman said her recollection of allegedly waking up with Sefo "on top of and inside" her was clear.
"I know what happened. I was there," she said through tears.
In a witness statement read to the court, another player said the woman sent him a text message after 1am, which prompted him to go to the room she'd slept in.
He said the room's door was closed but unlocked, and he went in to find the woman upset and crying.
The player then left and said Sefo returned to speak to the woman.
About 1.30am the player texted the woman asking if she was okay, and she replied saying Sefo was still with her. She asked him to make Sefo leave.
About 2am the woman went to the player's home to sleep. In the morning the door to the area where the alleged rape occurred was locked.
At lunchtime today, Judge Christopher Field granted Sefo bail to use his mobile phone to delete his Facebook account and to contact family who had read about the trial in today's Herald.
The trial, before a jury of nine men and three women, began yesterday and is expected to last five days.

E.E. Wilcox took over the milk business as he moved the farm to its present location south of Manchester, VT to Silver Spring Lane where the farm is still operated today. E.E. Wilcox had two sons who were soon to be out of school in the late 1920’s. At this time, the family decided to expand their operations to ice cream making to support the growing generations.
Comments are closed.

When we arrived I had just realized I'd left my phone on the train so we were fairly stressed out. The hotel staff did everything they could do to help us and put us at ease. When we checked in we were given a complementary glass of sangria which although a small gesture, made us feel at home in the very welcoming reception area whilst we waited for our room to be made ready.
When we were shown our room we were very happy to be told we'd been upgraded to a deluxe room which as well as being very spacious was also beautifully decorated and had an enormous en-suite bathroom.
Jon from London
This hotel is located in Seville (Historical Center), close to Palacio de las Duenas, Alcazar, and Seville Cathedral. Also …More

I'll be waiting on this end, Tim directed in resignation.
Petya directed things in the yard.
Her concern was exclusively directed toward the boy's welfare.
Alex had directed the little he said to her only.
The cool energy came when she summoned it, and his body directed it where it was needed.
Though his body didn't speak of it, she directed her power towards it as well.
A blast of cold tore through him as she directed her magic into him.
Stay available, he directed him.
"Time for a mind check," Gabriel directed him.
All her emotional and physical efforts were directed toward helping him recover and taking care of things at home.
"Emerops stations," he directed, watching.
Dean could only guess how painful so strong a blast directed at your body—and sometimes head—must feel.
The cab dropped her off, and she went to the side entrance to buzz in as Wynn directed in his text.
"Leave us," he directed his sisters.
Supper was pancakes and eggs, with conversation directed to the children, interrupted by confirming calls from ice climbers who would begin arriving on Thursday.
Dean penned a note to her aunt and Martha went inside to leave it, as Dean directed, in plain sight on the kitchen table.
He had always been hot headed, but violent anger had always been directed toward someone else - a man.
Alex directed Carmen as he quickly detached the rope from his saddle horn.
"Lie still," he directed, and put a gentle hand on her stomach.
"They've started attacking?" she asked, unable to detect any duplicity in the anger he directed at the Others.
On the 1st of July 1416 Chicheley directed a halfyearly inquisition by archdeacons to hunt out heretics.
The emperor was irritated; and his ambassador, Cardinal Fesch, kept up the irritation by perpetual complaints directed more especially against Consalvi himself.
By his will he directed that all the presents he had received should be sold, and the proceeds applied to the completion of Thorwaldsen's monument of Pius VII.
Here is a hogshead of molasses or of brandy directed to John Smith, Cuttingsville, Vermont, some trader among the Green Mountains, who imports for the farmers near his clearing, and now perchance stands over his bulkhead and thinks of the last arrivals on the coast, how they may affect the price for him, telling his customers this moment, as he has told them twenty times before this morning, that he expects some by the next train of prime quality.
That Napoleon agreed with Mouton, and that the army retreated, does not prove that Napoleon caused it to retreat, but that the forces which influenced the whole army and directed it along the Mozhaysk (that is, the Smolensk) road acted simultaneously on him also.
And turning to his men he directed a party to go on to the halting place arranged near the watchman's hut in the forest, and told the officer on the Kirghiz horse (who performed the duties of an adjutant) to go and find out where Dolokhov was and whether he would come that evening.
We were directed by a friendly voice on our GPS, a previously unused present from my retired parents.
Our inquiries are directed toward the accuracy of what you're seeing; did those scenes actually occur in the past.
Howie directed the four of us to go someplace nearby, inside or outside, and not divulge the location.
I have the least rewarding job of any of us so my desires are directed to family and this mind boggling venture Howie is taking us on.
We're happy to see the attention directed elsewhere.
"The saga continues," she added as she fluffed the sofa pillows and directed me to rest.
The woman directed her plea toward the Other and tried to push past Jule.
She sensed this comment was directed at her.
"Stay behind me, Jonny," she directed him.
Deidre squeezed her eyes closed, not wanting to see Darkyn response and afraid his anger might be directed at her.
That's where the stream is directed, although there's a fair chance of getting soaked anywhere.
A tow truck had already arrived and its flashing lights competed with a half dozen others while at least a dozen people moved about, with most of their activity directed downward.
After a few words of greeting, each candidate was directed to stand on either side of the raised platform.
Dean was directed to spend all available weekend time on a door to door smiling and handshaking crusade, the first of many Fred had mapped out for his full-court press for making David Dean the sheriff of Ouray County, Colorado.
She continued to stare at Cynthia, but her conversation was directed at Dean.
Rather, she couldn't fathom how something so medieval could have been directed at her.
She trailed them as directed down the corridor to a battle quarters that put A'Ran's tiny room to shame.
Claire directed her angry scowl at Fred.
Cynthia directed her to the kitchen just as Edith called to them from the top of the stairs.
Lunch was at a rustic little seafood place in Rogers called Catfish John's, and afterward she directed him to the War Eagle Mill.
He nearly broke both their necks when he slipped on the wet tile floor as he made his way to the receptionist who directed them to a flight of metal stairs that led downward to an empty hall.
He directed his words directly to Cynthia Byrne with a smile of sticky sweetness that made Dean want to pop him.
Stop it, she directed him mentally.
Jenn's closed her eyes, running through the motions in her head that Sofi directed her to take.
Darian directed into her mind.
Jonathan was accepting the responsibility of his younger siblings – without being directed to do so.
"Shirt," she directed hurriedly.
"Find out his schedule tomorrow and tell me what day," he directed her.
All residents were being directed to the lawn to park, and Xander remained calm.
"Tell me where she lands," Dusty directed and whipped out his phone.
5 a curves somewhat forward and again divides at least once; while the hind prong is of great length undivided, and directed backwards in a manner found in no other deer.
It is evident that if our experiments are solely directed to the verification of this law, they should, if possible; be carried out in a hermetically closed vessel, the vessel and its contents being weighed before and after the chemical change.
Although Leo did not fully comprehend the import of the movement, he directed (3rd February 1518) the vicar-general of the Augustinians to impose silence on the monks.
Leo then formally excommunicated Luther by bull of the 3rd of January 1521; and in a brief directed the emperor to take energetic measures against heresy.
Galen showed himself anxious to reform the church, but his chief energies were directed to increasing his power and prestige.
At one rod from the shore its greatest fluctuation, when observed by means of a level on land directed toward a graduated staff on the ice, was three quarters of an inch, though the ice appeared firmly attached to the shore.
When two legs of my level were on the shore and the third on the ice, and the sights were directed over the latter, a rise or fall of the ice of an almost infinitesimal amount made a difference of several feet on a tree across the pond.
And the commander, turning to look at the adjutant, directed his jerky steps down the line.
But much as all the rest laughed, talked, and joked, much as they enjoyed their Rhine wine, saute, and ices, and however they avoided looking at the young couple, and heedless and unobservant as they seemed of them, one could feel by the occasional glances they gave that the story about Sergey Kuzmich, the laughter, and the food were all a pretense, and that the whole attention of that company was directed to-- Pierre and Helene.
After five o'clock it was only at the Augesd Dam that a hot cannonade (delivered by the French alone) was still to be heard from numerous batteries ranged on the slopes of the Pratzen Heights, directed at our retreating forces.
But besides considerations of foreign policy, the attention of Russian society was at that time keenly directed on the internal changes that were being undertaken in all the departments of government.
This irritability is, as you know, chiefly directed to political questions.
But what distressed the princess most of all was her father's irritability, which was always directed against her and had of late amounted to cruelty.
Natasha kept looking uneasily at everybody with wide-open eyes, as if wishing to intercept every glance directed toward her, and tried to appear the same as usual.
All the efforts of those who surrounded the sovereign seemed directed merely to making him spend his time pleasantly and forget that war was impending.
After standing some time in the gateway, Petya tried to move forward in front of the others without waiting for all the carriages to pass, and he began resolutely working his way with his elbows, but the woman just in front of him, who was the first against whom he directed his efforts, angrily shouted at him:
The commander of the artillery of the 3rd Corps, General Fouche, will place the howitzers of the 3rd and 8th Corps, sixteen in all, on the flanks of the battery that is to bombard the entrenchment on the left, which will have forty guns in all directed against it.
And it was not Napoleon who directed the course of the battle, for none of his orders were executed and during the battle he did not know what was going on before him.
How can they need reinforcements when they already have half the army directed against a weak, unentrenched Russian wing?
He could not stop what was going on before him and around him and was supposed to be directed by him and to depend on him, and from its lack of success this affair, for the first time, seemed to him unnecessary and horrible.
Toward two o'clock the regiment, having already lost more than two hundred men, was moved forward into a trampled oatfield in the gap between Semenovsk and the Knoll Battery, where thousands of men perished that day and on which an intense, concentrated fire from several hundred enemy guns was directed between one and two o'clock.
Sonya alone directed the practical side of matters by getting things packed.
Meantime, according to the dispositions which said that "the First Column will march" and so on, the infantry of the belated columns, commanded by Bennigsen and directed by Toll, had started in due order and, as always happens, had got somewhere, but not to their appointed places.
To that end Kutuzov's activity was directed during the whole campaign from Moscow to Vilna--not casually or intermittently but so consistently that he never once deviated from it.
Still more difficult would it be to find an instance in history of the aim of an historical personage being so completely accomplished as that to which all Kutuzov's efforts were directed in 1812.
His actions--without the smallest deviation--were all directed to one and the same threefold end: (1) to brace all his strength for conflict with the French, (2) to defeat them, and (3) to drive them out of Russia, minimizing as far as possible the sufferings of our people and of our army.
"What were you saying?" he asked the general, who continuing his report directed the commander-in-chief's attention to some standards captured from the French and standing in front of the Preobrazhensk regiment.
The French crowd fled at a continually increasing speed and all its energy was directed to reaching its goal.
The contemptuously respectful attitude of the younger men to the old man in his dotage was expressed in the highest degree by the behavior of Chichagov, who knew of the accusations that were being directed against Kutuzov.
In the first place the historian describes the activity of individuals who in his opinion have directed humanity (one historian considers only monarchs, generals, and ministers as being such men, while another includes also orators, learned men, reformers, philosophers, and poets).
They do not recognize it as a power inherent in heroes and rulers, but as the resultant of a multiplicity of variously directed forces.
Restoring the essential condition of relation between those who command and those who execute, we find that by the very nature of the case those who command take the smallest part in the action itself and that their activity is exclusively directed to commanding.
When a man works alone he always has a certain set of reflections which as it seems to him directed his past activity, justify his present activity, and guide him in planning his future actions.
If we have a large range of examples, if our observation is constantly directed to seeking the correlation of cause and effect in people's actions, their actions appear to us more under compulsion and less free the more correctly we connect the effects with the causes.
Romas had no qualms about invading her bedroom to drag her out of bed if Evelyn directed him to.
He directed her to the next stall.
"Send our coords, too, so they don't blow us up," Dan directed in a hushed voice.
"Have a seat," he directed her.
It was directed as much at Jessi as at the Black God for sending someone innocent to do his dirty work.

Our difficult child has a habit, which I would love to break him of - for his own good. He seems to get a concrete idea in his head and then he insists that will be the outcome - until he falls hard when it doesn't happen. For instance, if he enters a contest (which we as know about a zillion kids will enter), he has his heart set on winning. He is already planning what he will do with the winnings/prize. A few weeks ago, husband took both munchkins to the mall for lunch while I was at work. There is a 'claw machine game' there that had a plush of one of difficult child's favorite cartoon characters in it. He saved his allowance for 2 weeks to go back and give it a try. I tried to explain to him that those darn games are packed so tight that it is almost impossible to get out what you want - not to mention that I think the claws are rigged so that you would have to spend 10 times what the toy is worth to actually get it out, etc. I tried to talk to him about not getting so set on winning because if it didn't work, it would be highly disappointing. He seemed to agree with me, but the whole shopping trip day, he focused on getting to the mall and that game. You can imagine that when we stopped him after he spent $2.00 worth of frustrated attempts he was not happy. He did hold it together in the mall, but cried on the way home and told me I was right - he shouldn't have gotten so excited. Then, it turned to "stupid claw machine" language, etc. I hate this habit. difficult child is so confident that whatever he does he will be successful at to the point of over confidence that is just so dangerous, because we all know that most things are not as great as you perceive them, etc. I'm glad that he goes about things enthusiastically, but is there a way to balance it out with some good old-fashioned common sense? He is over confident and then highly agitated and sad when it doesn't come to fruition. Any suggestions??

Overseas journey leads to Journey
By IAN HILL
VINDICATOR STAFF WRITER
CANFIELD -- Mark Cox kept his ticket in his front pocket Sunday. He'd waited too long and traveled too far to risk not seeing the band Journey perform
"I've been a Journey fan for 25 years," said Cox, who lives in Port Stewart, Northern Ireland. "I never thought I'd see [a Journey concert]."
Cox, 39, was in the sellout crowd Sunday night in the fair grandstand when Peter Frampton and Journey performed.
He arrived Thursday as part of a Kent State University work-study program for nurses.
It's Cox's first trip to the United States.
Changed his plans
Cox, who works as a nurse manager, said he had been slated to come to the United States and start the program at the end of September, then he checked the Internet and learned that Journey would be performing at the fair.
"I don't care what I have to pay, as long as I'm here to see it," Cox said. He asked his boss if he could make the trip three weeks early to see the concert and the answer was yes.
"I think they want to keep us happy," Cox said of his boss.
Cox sent an e-mail message to Fair Manager Bev Fisher asking for more information about the concert. Fisher said she thought the e-mail was a joke until Cox sent his credit card information to the fair.
"I think it's kind of neat," she said. "He must be a big fan or he wouldn't do this."
Cox said he became a Journey fan when he was 14 and he first heard the group's music. He doesn't remember what originally attracted him to the group.
Journey is a classic-rock band that has produced 16 albums and is best known for songs like "Don't Stop Believing," "Faithfully," and "Open Arms."
The band peaked in 1988 with the release of their greatest hits album, which was certified 10 times platinum.
Taking a ribbing
"This is not a popular band in Britain anymore," Cox said. He said that one of his friends jokingly criticizes him for liking a band that was popular in the 1970s and 1980s.
"He laughs at me, he thinks I'm boring and in the past," Cox said. "That's too bad. I like what I like."
Cox said Journey songs were played at his wedding, and that his wife likes Journey, "because I like it." The couple has two daughters, ages 5 and 9.
Journey's latest album, "Arrival," was recorded with new singer Steve Augeri.
He replaces frontman Steve Perry, who led the band during the 1980s and 1990s.
Augeri has been criticized for sounding too similar to Perry. Cox, however, said he had no problem with Augeri's vocals.
Cox added he thought he would never have the opportunity to see Journey because he didn't think the band would perform in Great Britain.
"I've waited a long time for this concert," he said.

Cabins For Rent is a spooky story about a group of friends who go camping for the weekend in the mountains and experience a strange and inexplicable event.
I went camping for the weekend with five of my friends and the campsite we were staying at had cabins that you could rent. Each cabin could sleep six people. There were six cabins altogether and they were all lined up in a neat row. The cabin we were sleeping in was the sixth one and it was at the very end of the row.
During the night, I had to pee, so I went out of the tent and walked to the bathroom in the dark. When I came back, I opened the door of our cabin and was shocked to see that only one of the beds was occupied.
“Where are the rest of my friends”, I thought. “And what happened to all our luggage?”
The cabin was empty except for that one bed. I went out again to make sure I was in the right cabin, but when I looked at the sign on the door, it read “Cabin No.7.”
Laughing at my mistake, I went back to Cabin No.6. Inside I found my friends, sleeping soundly. I got back into bed quietly, trying not to wake my friends, and was drifting off to sleep when something struck me. There were only six cabins.
I leaped out of bed and ran outside. Our cabin was the last one in the row. Cabin No.7 and whoever had been sleeping in it, had simply vanished into thin air.

This was definately a better week at work. I had things planned, the computer worked all week...it was good. Except for the heat. Holy cow it was HOT! We had like at least 6 straight days at 90+ degrees. Doesnt make for a fun time in an unairconditioned school. I took some of the classes outside to read to them, and one day they came looking for us because we missed a practice tornado drill. Lovely, lol.
Tonight was the homecoming. It was fun. We got there, ate, then I sat with Grandpa for awhile. Mom and Aunt Jackie went to get him. He had a great time. It was so nice that so many people came over to say hi. I know there are people that avoid people after they've had a stroke, but those people who came over really made his day. He will probably sleep all day tomorrow, but it was worth it for him to be out for awhile tonight.
I played bingo with Pennie, Heather and Stacie. It was nice to just sit around and chat with them for awhile. We're thinking about a trip to New York City over a long weekend to celebrate us all turning 40. Wow---40!
The downside to tonight is my poor kiddos. Alexis had to help clear tables for an hour or so, and when she was done she went to Mike's to sleep on the couch. She had a friend over, so she stayed at the homecoming and hung out with some other friends for awhile. We got ready to leave, and Alexis and Madelyn both have headaches and fevers. Mike took Ali's friend home and is keeping Livi overnight (she was so excited). Brenna was supposed to have a friend spend the night too, but she went to her house instead. Hopefully they'll stay healthy.
So here I sit in the peace and quiet tonight. Seems strange.

When people ask us how many cats we have we often answer 3 and a half! You see we have Henry, Firkin and Fumée who never travel far. If they are not present for a meal we worry and check they have not been shut in somewhere and I don't think any has been missing for more than a day except for when Fumée got locked in the gite for 3 days!
Then there is Foggy.
|Foggy "helping" in the polytunnel|
Foggy is the epitome of feline independence. He often disappears for long periods of time before arriving home as though he had never been further than the polytunnel. Last year he excelled himself and was away for 8 long weeks, during which time we heard of a very similar cat to him being hit by a car. We thought he was dead. Then one morning he arrived home, full of beans, looking fantastic and demanding food and cuddles. So this year when he went again we were less worried. We were still concerned and missed him but know his ways and accepted them. However when 8 weeks of no Foggy came and went we did become more anxious so imagine our relief then when Simon saw him at some derelict buildings not far from us. He meowed at Simon in recognition but refused to come close. Several nights later we were all in the car and saw him cross the road in the same place so over the following days I walked that way and called him.
Day 1 - Nothing.
Day 2 - I heard his characteristic meow (it is exceedingly deep and guttural) and he finally appeared at a broken upstairs window. I coaxed him down and he savoured some cuddles before heading off.
Day 3 - I called and this time he appeared almost immediately and started to walk back with me and the dogs. However after a while on the road he became nervous so I scooped him up and carried him home. He had obviously moused well in his time away and I can tell you that 5kg of cat feels a lot more like 10kg when you carry them for around ¾ of a km!
That was just over a week ago and he is still here. Despite supposedly being an outdoor cat he has been in the house, happily ensconced on the sofa enjoying all the attention. As with last year he looks fabulous and has not been frightened off by our 4 extra canine guests.
|Firkin, Fumée and Foggy (through our very dirty front door!)|
Why he stayed away so long is a mystery we will never know but without a doubt he is happy to be home. And we are so happy to have him back. The look on the boys' faces said it all when I arrived with him so whilst toys, books and games were eagerly opened on Christmas Day I do think that possibly our best Christmas present this year was having Foggy come home.

1 Answer | Add Yours
Baba was a physically imposing man, standing 6'5 with a thick beard and unruly brown hair. His hands were so large that they seemed "capable of uprooting a willow tree." His eyes produced a "black glare that would 'drop the devil to his knees begging for mercy,' " according to Rahim Khan. Khan provided Baba with the nickname "Toophan agha"--"Mr. Hurricane"--and he was often compared to a black bear, which, according to legend, Baba once fought with his bare hands. One of the wealthiest men in Kabul, Baba loved throwing parties and hosting friends in his study, the "smoking room," which was filled with comfortable leather furniture. He was always the life of the party and the instant center of attention. During his days in Kabul, he was a philanthropist, building an orphanage which he designed and financed himself.
However, his life changed drastically after he was forced to flee Afghanistan to California. He became a member of the lowly working class, taking employment in a gas station/convenience store. He eventually lost his health to the cancer that killed him, and he seems to have lost much of the confidence that propelled him to his exalted status in Kabul. However, he never lost his respect in the Afghan community, where people still remembered him as "Toophan agha."
We’ve answered 396,937 questions. We can answer yours, too.Ask a question

On this hot and steamy Midwest summer evening, Alex was scheduled to meet his lover, Lori on the outskirts of the town in which she lived. There's a motel just over the town line where she thought she could get away from her life for a few hours to make love with him. It bordered on being a seedy little place; right off the interstate and across the road from a porn shop that attracted truckers looking for a little distraction.
They had complicated, dreary lives and worked hard to carve out time together. The meeting at the motel fit perfectly into the seams of their lives.
Driving over to meet her, Alex reflected on the various adventures he'd shared with Lori over the years. He wondered how he always managed to get away from his life, his marriages, and his obligations, to join hearts with her. They had been lovers for over four years. In fact, their affair lasted longer than Alex's last two marriages. Alex was very conflicted about her. At times, she was a blessing; the only woman who would indulge him in his perverse wishes. At times, she was a curse; responsible for the break up of two marriages and costing him thousands of dollars in attorney fees.
Alex ended a horrible two year marriage hoping that Lori would leave her husband so they could start their lives together. He loved her with unbridled passion. Unfortunately, at the time, she made it clear that she was not ready to leave the security of her home life.
Alex had a tremendous terror of being alone. When it became clear to him that she was not going to make a move, he latched on to a co-worker who had been after him for several months, and impulsively married her. It was a disaster of a second marriage. Alex ignored all the writing on the wall and ended up with a suicidal lunatic for a second wife.
Alex and Lori cooled their relationship for about a year until things started to fall apart for him at home. A few email exchanges and a lunch date launched them back into the fray.
When he arrived at the motel, he checked in, and signaled to her to come in through the back door. She had been waiting in the parking lot. She was anxious about being so close to home, afraid of running into someone that might recognize her. She scooted in the back door and entered the room.
They had met many times before. At times, in fairly unusual locations: empty office buildings, parks, beaches, and once in the corn field about a mile from her home. This particular meeting was fairly typical as far as liaisons go. What made it unusual was the blood and tears involved with the evening.
As Lori entered the room, she and Alex immediately launched into passionate embrace. He kissed her deeply, longing for her soft lips and inviting mouth. They lived for the chance to lose themselves in each other's embrace.
Within minutes, they were naked and sitting on the bed, losing their sense of time and space as their mouths hungrily explored each other. First came the tears. Alex was feeling very emotional this evening and wanted to share his deepest secrets with Lori. Although they had been lovers for years, he never had the nerve to tell her about being sexually abused as a child.
They sat facing each other with legs wrapped around each others waists and Alex's arms around her shoulders. He explained the pain and confusion of his childhood to the one woman he knew would understand. As he told his story, Alex sobbed like a baby.
"Alex, I love you completely," Lori declared upon hearing his story for the first time. She always sensed that there was something very painful he carried around with him, but never imagined the extent of his turmoil. "I love you too," Alex declared as they hugged and sobbed like two lost children.
With tears streaming down their cheeks, Alex pushed himself on top of Lori and nibbled her neck while his cock searched for the warm, moist spot he obsessed about constantly. They were extremely compatible sexually. Alex was a tall, muscular man while Lori was little but with a vagina that could take most anything. During their last encounter at his empty office building, he fisted her completely. His large hand was up to the wrist in wet pussy!
Lori loved the feel of his cock inside of her. Her husband was not well endowed and so it was a treat to feel Alex's large throbbing cock exploring her; filling her completely.
"Oh yeah baby, that's where you belong," she panted as he penetrated her. She was obsessed with the feeling of his cock inside her. The deeper he penetrated her, the wider her pussy stretched.
Lori was on her back, legs propped up in the air and aching for more of what Alex had to give her. "Fuck me baby...," she panted time and again. Dirty talk was a huge turn on for Alex. Lori was not typically vocal during their lovemaking, so for her to beg for more really turned him on.
Each thrust sent shock waves throughout her body. Lori thought to herself, "Oh yes...um...right there baby." With her legs up in the air, Alex thrust himself deep into her time and time again. He was over her with arms supporting his body and tears continuing to roll down his cheeks. He plunged himself powerfully into her again and again.
"Take it," he pleaded with her. Lori arched her pelvis to meet his thrusts. They were possessed with passion.
Alex felt the sensations of warm fluids that he felt many times before when she ejaculated during orgasm. "That's my girl," he whispered as he felt the warmth of her fluids bathing his genitals. The feel of her fluids on his skin captivated him. He lived for the feel and taste of her vaginal secretions bathing his penis in a flood of pleasure. He could feel the pulsing of her pussy hugging his cock as she climaxed. Then came the blood. As he pulled out of her, he glanced down to inspect the size of the flood of vaginal fluids on the sheets. Alex was shocked to see deep red blood covering the sheets, his genitals, his upper thighs, and his stomach. "Holy shit, what the fuck is that?" he cried out. Lori apparently did not realize that she was on the verge of her period and the intensity of the love making prompted the onset of her menses.
"Damn Alex, I'm so sorry, I thought it was cum, but I must have had my period," she surmised.
Alex was amazed and frankly turned on by the scene before him. It fit right into his fantasy involving wanting to rip her apart with his cock. He felt so passionately about Lori that at times, he wanted to hurt her. In his own perverted way, hurting her proved his desperation for her.
Lori inspected the damage and was equally amazed. In her private thoughts, she imagined that he had damaged her beyond repair. He tended to be a little rough with her now and then. The sight of blood made her thirsty for the power of his sexuality. She privately yearned to be ripped in half by his ample cock. This aftermath of their love making turned her on beyond her wildest imagination.
As he knelt on the bed, mouth hanging open and gazing at the blood soaked sheets, she ran her hand along her wet bloody slit, brought her fingers up to her mouth and licked them with a lustfulness that surprised even her.
Watching Lori primitively hunger for blood made Alex horny as hell. He too wanted to taste her bloody fluids. "If she can do it, I can do it," he thought to himself. Seeing her taste her own blood made him hunger for her.
Lori apologized profusely for not being more self aware, but also admitted that it really turned her on. He told her to shut up, lie back and not ask questions. She closed her eyes and bit her lower lip while he lapped up remnants of blood left on her outer vaginal lips and inner thighs. He wrapped his lips around her bloody clit and ran circles around her throbbing bloody gland.
"Oh my god! That is so fucking hot!" she moaned.
Feeling both a sense of shame and an intense excitement, Lori pushed his face away from her aching and over stimulated pussy. She pushed Alex back on the bed, grabbed his balls, massaging them and licking her lips in anticipation of what was to come. She took a deep breath and slid his blood soaked penis into her mouth.
Her mouth formed a wonderful suction on the head of his cock. With her hand sliding up and down his bloody penis, and her mouth working the head of his cock, he came with a fury. Warm cum bathed the back of her throat. She gagged a bit but refused to take her mouth off of his cock until she had swallowed every last bit of him.
Lori reluctantly removed her mouth from Alex's cock and crawled on top of his spent body. She kissed him deeply and whispered, "I think this means we are now blood brother...or rather blood lovers."
Alex replied, "We always have been. I love you with all my heart."
- Add a

What is your phobia/fear?
Everyone has fears, otherwise known as phobias. My phobia is actually pretty funny. I've had this phobia already since kindergarten. When I see one of my friends that are older than me at school, I usually think of saying hello to them. Everyone does, it's kind of like an instinct, to say hello to a friend you see. However, before I say hello, I have to think first. For example, A is my friend and B is my friend's friend that I don't know. When A is with one of his/her B's and I say hi to A, A would make this face at me as if he/she is really annoyed with me even if A doesn't do that normally. To make it even worst, B would make a face also and say "Ugh!" and roll her/his eyes at me which I hate people doing. Then, after I turn around, A and B would whisper at each other. I don't know if A and B is whispering about me but I bet they are and even though I've turned around, I know they're whispering. In other words, I don't have the guts to say hi.
This might have happened to you when you were still at school or even now. Maybe some people also have a phobia of this happening. Phobias could last for a lifetime and this one could probably scare me forever.

Mandatory family viewing
Holiday movies with a difference on Kennedy’s return to Hyannis Port after his trip of a lifetime
President Kennedy, accompanied by the cameraman who would produce his favourite home movie, waves as he prepares to leave Shannon
I believe my brother’s trip to Ireland was the most exciting event of his life. He planned for it for weeks. He wanted to know each day prior “how things were going”, what was he going to do that day, etc, etc, and when he arrived, he was overcome by the extraordinary welcome he received from the Irish people.
When we came back home, we went to Hyannis Port. My parents were away, so he was staying in my mother and father’s house – the “big house” as it was called at the time – and other members of the family had small houses near by.
Since the person who stayed at the big house made the selection of which films would be shown, it was up to my brother that weekend to make the selection. The choice was his “trip to Ireland”.
And then the next night, he thought we should all see it again – in case we missed something. Sunday night of the weekend, he came out on the porch and announced that we would see the film yet again because we all enjoyed it so much and might not be able to see it again for a while. How he loved that film and how he loved Ireland!
He loved the Irish people, and he was thrilled by their warm welcome. I never saw him so happy.
Jean Kennedy Smith is a former US ambassador to Ireland

My son is 19 months old and speech delayed. He had just started therapy (still waiting on actually speech, we get a teacher to work with him once a week now while we wait)
He has 10 to 20 "words" but ONLY the first syllable, he kind of says "I don't know" "get down" and "down there"
My real question is when we ask him what something is or to say something that isn't one of his known words he almost always says "um-ma"
If we ask him to say elephant or cookie or cat of anything he isn't good at or really knows he says "um-ma"
Any thoughts on that? I know it's good he is trying to communicate at all but it's concerns me.
Thank you so so so much for any help or insight

The story was very good and had a lot of impact to the viewers. I would rather prefer to add more action and fight scenes when Fairy Tail continues again. The sounds were impressive and matched almost all of the scenes in Fairy Tail. I would like them to be more detailed about the characters because their animation is not as good as some of the animes I've watched. I hope you continue Fairy Tail sooner and keep up the good work.

Thanks for all the well wishes and glad tidings, everybody:) She is doing great now and is nearly done with her antibiotics and anti inflammatory meds. Yes, even if she hadn't made it, that money was well spent and it was never a question of "would we try" because she is a family member. Money is just money. She is a great Christmas gift!Quote:
Originally Posted by tlbaker
Relatives gave her the bone after our Thanksgiving meal(we didn't even make the dang ham...I HATE HAM!). So much for having company over, but I am sure they meant well!
I have boys, so they won't care if I open boots in front of them. They'll probably be thankful they didn't get any! I'm just the one who knows how nice they are and what they cost, even on clearance, so the guilt:( But you can't know the future and I wouldn't have bought them if I had known, so it wasn't intentional. I need to just get over it.

Janice Griffith – Sneaky Snacks Released: June 11, 2016 Janice was unwinding after a long week of studying and testing. She went over to the fridge to get herself a bottle of water and her BF Bill snuck up to her behind the fridge door. He surprised her because she didn’t think he was home. She looked so cute he wanted to take a few pics to have on his new phone. The more Bill snapped some pics, the more he wanted to pounce on her. He dropped his phone once Janice started fondling his junk. She slid his cock down her throat and when he was at full attention Bill pulled her hips towards him until his pecker was deep in her.
This site does not store any files on its server. We only index and link to content provided by other sites. By entering this site you swear that you are of legal age in your area to view adult material and that you wish to view such material.
Powered by Novavideo

Wrexham: Tributes to Kelly Dunley after tragic sudden death
Touching tributes to a popular local figure who died suddenly from a suspected blood clot.
Kelly Dunley, 38, died at the Royal Stoke Hospital on Monday (May 17) and will be sadly missed by all who knew her.
Kelly, originally from south Wales, had lived in Caia Park with wife, Eleri, for the past three years – in which time she worked locally as a delivery driver.
This is before recently moving to Stoke to live after the couple split.
On Monday, Kelly collapsed and had a fit at home in Stoke and was rushed to hospital. While having a CT scan, Kelly had another fit and sadly, despite all care and efforts, she could not be saved and was pronounced dead a short time later. Kelly, who is said to have had a history of blood clots, had suffered one in her leg after receiving the AstraZeneca Covid vaccine, and medical practitioners suspect she suffered another one on her lung.
However, this is yet to be confirmed, and is pending the results of a post-mortem examination. Eleri, who was married to Kelly for two years and with her for three, has paid a touching tribute to her.
“She just had the biggest heart going and would do anything for anyone,” Eleri said.
“She was just constantly doing things to making people smile and was known as the resident ‘crazy cat lady’ – at one point we had eight cats in our home.
“I’m absolutely heartbroken – even though we were no longer together she was still my best friend and was still always there for me.”
Eleri, 28, has a five-year-old son, named Aiden, from a past relationship – but she says Kelly acted as Aiden’s second parent.
“He always said he has two mums and no dad,” Eleri added.
“She was the best person I could ever have asked for to help raise Aiden, and despite us no longer being together she was in the process of formally adopting him – that’s how much she loved him.”
“They were two peas in a pod – ever since they first met their bond was so strong.”
She added: “I wish I could tell her one last time how much I loved her, but I’m so thankful for the three years we had together.
“Kelly was lucky enough to have had a very happy few months before she left us and was very muched loved by her [new] partner Sam. She will forever be loved and missed.”
A GoFundMe page has been set up to help Kelly’s family cover funeral costs.
It states: “She was kind, silly and a beautiful soul that was loved by many. Her sudden passing came as a shock to us all.
“I have set up this fund me page to help pay tribute to a beautiful soul taken to soon, and help her have the epic send off she would have wanted.”
It has so far raised over £1,800 and can be donated to here.

Lewis Hamilton defended his driving ethics as resolutely yesterday as he had defended third place against attack from arch-rival Fernando Alonso's Ferrari during last weekend's Malaysian Grand Prix. Both drivers had 20-second penalties added to their race times afterwards by the stewards, the Briton for making more than one change of direction trying to keep Alonso at bay on the 45th lap; the Spaniard for running into the back of his McLaren a lap later. Neither think they did anything wrong.
Alonso retained sixth place, but Hamilton dropped from seventh to eighth in a race he had hoped to win. "I don't think I was overly defending my position," he said as he prepared for this weekend's Chinese Grand Prix in Shanghai. "I'm a racer, and people want to see racing, to see overtaking, and I would never in a million years try to put anyone else – or even myself – in danger.
"I've always raced with my heart and made pretty smart decisions when racing and defending. When you're defending you have to make your car as wide as possible. The rule is you're not allowed to make more than one manoeuvre but where they were saying I was defending too much was on the straight, where he was 10 or 15 metres behind me, so I wasn't defending a move that he had done."
Hamilton used the same reasoning successfully to avoid a penalty against Renault's Vitaly Petrov last season. "It's how you interpret the rules and you can't do anything about it," he acknowledged.
Reflecting on a race in which his tyre wear had been much worse than second-placed team-mate Jenson Button's, he added: "I was already quite far back so it [the penalty] didn't really make any difference to me personally. The performance we had in the first and second stints was good, and if I hadn't been stuck behind [Nick] Heidfeld I would have been able to keep very close behind [race winner] Sebastian [Vettel] and fight at the pitstops.
"Normally you have to open up the cooling, which loses downforce and efficiency. We didn't have to do that. Maybe others had to do that, maybe Red Bull, and in doing so I think they lost a bit of speed."
Hamilton expects another tough fight against the dominant Red Bulls this weekend, but is placing his reliance on new components McLaren have brought to China to enhance their performance. "I definitely plan to be at the front this weekend," he added.

Q: We'll just let that run.
A: All right.
Q: So you basically came here, in talking with Eddie, probably in the early 30's. Is that correct?
(Streamed audio file of interview for this question using RealPlayer)
A: I'm pretty sure it was near then but I don't know the exact date when I came down here. I started here --- I had gone to Lynchburg College. Later on I went down to the University of North Carolina in Chapel Hill and got a masters degree in comparative literature.
Q: Was that on kind of a summer program or did you do that --- ?
A: No, it was part of a regular program, a graduate program.
Q: Yes sir.
A: For graduate students, but I've forgotten right much of it.
Q: And you cam back then to this system in Goochland County as a principal from North Carolina.
A: I didn't come directly here, I went to a place over in Hanover. Beaverdam.
Q: I didn't realize you had taught at Beaverdam.
A: Yes, I had.
Q: Were you principal there also?
A: I recall I was principal one of the years, but I don't remember which year off hand. I don't know. There was a man there in Beaverdam or close by one of the years named Maddox. Have you ever heard of a man named William Henry Maddox?
Q: Yes sir.
A: His son was named, I think, for him. He had a store, I don't know exactly where it was at ---. Let me see now. What else did you want to ask me?
Q: You returned here in Goochland in what year?
A: I was right here at Cardwell ---.
Q: Yes sir.
A: I don't know, it was around 1930. I can't say exactly, but I know it was soon after that I joined ---. I went down there in '29 and in 1929, I took a course in comparative literature.
Q: That was in North Carolina?
A: That was in Chapel Hill, the university ---. The fellow that taught me was named Holmes, H-O-L-M-E-S. Well ---.
Q: What in your experience did it take to create a good learning atmosphere in the school?
A: Well, first of all you couldn't learn much unless you had reasonably good order. All the kids would be hollering and throwing erasers all over the class. Every place I've been had a little of that but there was no more at Cardwell than anywhere else. Did you live close to Cardwell?
Q: I lived closer to Goochland.
A: Goochland Courthouse?
Q: Yes sir. Now you went from Cardwell then to Goochland as principal?
A: --- went from Cardwell to Goochland County. When you say Goochland, you're talking about where those offices are?
Q: Yes sir, the high school complex.
A: Yea, there were some bus stops almost across the road there, on 522.
Q: Yes sir, up 522.
A: A bus stop was there, they've moved that now down to the courthouse --- along with everything else there.
Q: What time frame was it when you went to the high school there at Goochland, the consolidated high school? As I recall that was about 1936.
A: Well, I think you're just about as close with that figure as any of them I can remember.
Q: And you went there as the first principal? Or were you the assistant principal when you first went?
A: Let me see. I'm reasonably sure I was assistant ---.
Q: And then you were principal there for what, about 30 years?
A: No, it wasn't quite that long ---, it's just hard for me to remember exact figures on some of these things. I know it wasn't 30 years. I left and went down to Chapel Hill in 1929. I wanted to go back and finish some courses I had started. These courses were in comparative literature so I went back to Chapel Hill ---.
Q: How did you evaluate teachers in those earlier days? They are much more formal about it now but ---.
A: It was largely informal in those days and if you wanted to evaluate a teacher, you always sat down with her privately and talked to her about her work, asked her a few questions, asked if she was enjoying it, were the children giving her any trouble and things like that.
Q: You usually knew if they were giving her trouble already, didn't you?
A: You're doggone right cause that wasn't any trouble to find out. I told them if you're going to go to the high school up there at Goochland Courthouse.
Q: Yes sir.
A: --- than what I've told you ---.
Q: You were there during the integration of the schools as I recall.
A: Oh yes, I was there all right. That was known. Do you remember ---. I've probably asked you this but did you remember that principal? --- He was principal before the schools were integrated ---. Did you remember Pennington? Pennington?
Q: Yes sir.
A: When they integrated the schools, they brought a lot of the Negroes from up at the Negro high school.
A: Central. Yes. They brought right many of them down to Goochland Courthouse and I think there were some of the whites that went to school up there after this was done --- the Negroes were integrated.
Q: Did the discipline get worse at that time or did everything go fairly smoothly?
A: Well, I think integrating made some improvements in discipline all right but, in any situation, you're always going to have some problems. And some pleasant surprises. Some things worked out fine and some things didn't. Did you remember C. A. Pennington, did you say?
Q: Yes sir.
A: He was in there (Central) before and I think he stayed on at the same school. I know I did. I did some work up there at his school but it was not my main responsibility. I --- somebody too.
Q: In selecting principals, what attributes do you think it takes to make a good principal?
A: Well, I think first of all, he needs to have just a lot of plain common sense. You've got to have some of that ---, it doesn't matter how many courses in education you have, if you're sort of off the mark, you don't get much (done).
Q: Did you have administrative type courses or did you basically go through an academic course and then just pick up the administration through on the job training?
A: Well, so far as I'm concerned, it was pretty much fifty-fifty in my case. I learned a lot by just being on the job. On the other hand, special training in teaching was also very helpful so I would say about fifty-fifty.
Q: What was your biggest concern as a principal?
A: Well, I think that the ---. I think that you can't teach anything unless you've got some kind of order. If you let the kids throw books all over the place, I don't care how well you try to teach them ---, if you let them throw them all over the place, you haven't gotten very far. I think that discipline is one of the essentials. I don't mean, you know, that you have to stand over them with a stick and beat them over the head, but you've got to have their attention - that's the only way you can teach anything - is to get the child's attention. He isn't just going to think it up on his own and sit down and say 'Look here, we want to study the history of the Middle Ages.' That's in Europe, you know, the Middle Ages there. It doesn't mean the middle ages in regard to people, it's a period in history ---; I always found it pleasant. It wasn't my --- but I enjoyed being in school.
Q: As I recall, Goochland had a reputation when you were principal for being a well disciplined school and one that did have an effective ---.
Q: Academic program.
A: Well, I hope so.
Q: And from your discussion, I think you attribute a good portion of that to the fact that they did maintain good order and discipline in the classroom at that point.
A: Well, you had to have, you had to have some order, you had to have some order. You just couldn't do anything without it.
Q: What do you think of the standards of the school in the more recent years compared to the early years that you were teaching? Do you think they've improved or stayed about the same?
A: Well, I think there has been a considerable amount of improvement in the academic standards ---, in the class work on subject matter. I think that there gradually was an improvement in the general atmosphere. If you don't have some order, you can't do much teaching, I think I've said that ten times already.
Q: Yes sir, it bears repeating though, I think. What were your -- , some of the toughest decisions you were faced with as a principal?
A: Well, I think being involved with the kids. If you had a kid that was giving you a lot of trouble, you had to decide whether to let him stay in school or not. You tried everything you could and if it didn't do any good then you had to ---, there wasn't much choice there except to suspend him. You didn't do that until after you talked to the kid, to the parents and to the teacher.
Q: How about the relationship with the school board? Was that a continuous one? How would you view that?
A: Well, when I first went up to Goochland High School, up there in the brick school, we had a little office, the superintendents' office was across the road. And a little bit up on ---, up toward 264. We had a bus stop there. Our office was --- a little building, which was an old school building, an old wooden building and I was fairly close at the Goochland High School. In fact, I wasn't very far from any other county schools. I found that to be a big advantage, to keep close contact, with the close and direct contact with all the other schools in the system. Then you had to have not only the respect of the teachers, but the respect of the kids. Kids can make it pretty rough on you, even though they may be pretending they're just dying to get something done. It's just not always that way. So, you have to have their respect.
Q: What are, what are, some of the more effective characteristics, you think, associated with good schools, not just the ones you were associated with but any secondary schools? There are probably things that you ran across that said, 'This is a good school for the following reasons'.
A: Well, I think that your teaching staff must know what it's doing. That includes a knowledge of subject matter as well as how to teach. They had to know ---, they had to teach the material they had, the books they had to use in teaching had to be used in an effective way. You couldn't, I don't care how good a book of instructions you may have had on teaching, if you let the kids do what they wanted to do, they'd be throwing erasers across the room all day long. So it's a combination of the two, I think.
Q: The schools you were in, for the most part, have been smaller rural schools.
A: That's right, that's right.
Q: I would, I would wonder how you would compare the quality of education in the smaller schools compared to some of the larger ones you've been exposed to?
A: Well, that's a little difficult to say. The larger school systems usually have more funds to employ teachers because they are drawing from more people and they are able to pay for better teachers, for one thing. So I think that's a very important aspect of it. You had to have, it takes some money, to a large extent, to furnish order. You've got to have a good teacher and you've got to have a good principal but then you've got to be willing to keep order. I guess that's about as good as I can do on that.
Q: How much of your time would you say you were spending on the building and grounds versus, say the involvement with the instructional curriculum?
A: Well, first I had to have more training in teaching the curriculum than in supervising construction. We usually could get people who had a considerable amount of experience in building things but who had no experience in how to teach. We could go out and build a barn if you wanted to put it that way but if they didn't know something about teaching, they didn't make a very good teacher.
Q: I was thinking a little more of the time it took you involved, say, with just the building of the school itself, not in the construction but in the heating and maintenance and that type of stuff.
A: That took right much time but I devoted a lot more time to what the children were doing in the classroom and how well their teachers were performing and --- whether or not the furnace was working all right or not.
Q: Mr. Morrison took care of that, didn't he?
A: Yes, he worked there in the high school.
Q: What do you think was the main --- to your success as a principal and I think, by anybody's principles, you were a success there?
A: Well, I don't know that I was so exceptional, I wouldn't go around and say I'm the best school principal in the state. I wouldn't have gone and done that at all, I don't think ---.
Q: I was not thinking about the best but, I think certainly one of the best.
A: To use the words again, I did the best I could. I think, at least, I had the respect of the teachers and children; you've got to have that. You've got to have both the teachers and the students respect your ability to do the job properly. If you don't, you're really out of luck.
Q: To get back again to the integration, I would think, in looking back on it, Goochland probably learned a lot from its neighbors and didn't get into some of the major, major problems that were surfacing in other counties?
A: Well, I think that's true. And our --- systems we're bound to learn something from some of the adjacent systems, from those of the other systems that are close by. We're bound to learn something from that; I think that's important.
Q: What do you attribute that to? Was it the parents involvement, was it the school board or was it the school administration at that point, that basically prevented some of the major splits that occurred in other counties?
A: Well, I think that you had to have a good teaching staff and that meant a knowledge of the subject and a knowledge of children and the willingness to work with them. You also needed a good maintenance staff, the people who did the work in cleaning up and straightening the classroom up and trying to see to it that things were in order when school opened. Then those people ---, we didn't have too many on a daily basis but we had right many of them before we opened. But we still continued to use maintenance personnel as people who came in and swept, cleaning the floors and trying to straighten up the classroom and things like that. We still have those but you didn't have as much of that after school started as you did before it started. But you had to have your children there before it started. That was easy ---. But if you didn't do anything with the children, they didn't learn anything and that was the most important of all, seeing to it that the children learned. People varied a lot in that respect, some teachers could do very well if they were working with a certain group of kids. If you put another group of kids in there, they had trouble with them. Or sometimes you had a weak teacher; you'd find that they couldn't work with any kids. So, you had to try to find some place where you could put them where they wouldn't actually teach as much. So you were always shifting things around a little.
Q: Did you ever have to fire a teacher?
A: Well, I didn't do that. The school board were the ones who did it but sometimes I would suggest to the school board that the teacher was not able to do an effective job. And they would have to take it from there. I didn't take on the entire responsibility but I could suggest ---.
Q: How about the busing issue that was associated with the integrating? Busing, of course, was a big issue in a lot of schools, but in a county like one you were in it was routine to be bused anyway. I was ---, busing was not an integration issue, per se, but more of an indication, in some areas, of the reluctance to integrate. I'm just wondering if you saw that in the Goochland County schools?
A: Well I think we already saw some of that. It wasn't a major problem, but to some extent we had it. I think some of the things that helped to maintain order on the school buses as well as it did was to put in regular seats so you had just a small seat on the window and then that platform down the middle there, the little tiny seats. It was hard for the kids to get in and out of the school buses we had in that day. And I think the improvement, the improvement, in the construction of the bus was important in how good the conduct was and how good the bus was designed had a lot to do with it. Let me see, is there anything else you had in mind there?
Q: What ---, in today's environment, what do you think could be done to improve the quality of education in the public schools?
A: Well, I think first there is always room for improvement in instruction. And that requires improvement in the teachers ability to teach. Not only the ability to teach but the knowledge of what they're teaching, the subject they're teaching. I think they're very important. I think you've got to have some order in any school system. If the kids throw books all over the place and then when the teacher comes in they don't pay any attention to her whatever, you've got a hell of a situation. So ---.
Q: There are some recent studies that have been done and basically the recommendations are that the concentration on the methods of educating be downgraded somewhat and more concentration --- on the subject matter itself. Would you comment on that type of emphasis?
A: Well, I'd be inclined to think you have to have a good knowledge of the subject matter before you can do much with getting pretty close to the student. Any teacher will have to do that but you also have to have the ability to teach it before -- .
| Back to "C" Interviews | Index of Interviews | Protocol | Home |

Many people have to face the possibility of their own mortality before they ever realize just how important life is. But for one Ludowici Police Department officer, his perspective changed after responding to a burglary call in December.
“It was a regular shift like any other when we (at the LPD) got a call to assist the (Long County Sheriff’s Office) in regards to a burglary taking place on Arnold Drive,” LPD Officer Adam Denton said. “Me and (Officer) Raymond (Govero) headed in that direction, and I had no idea what would take place.”
Denton said he, Govero and LCSO Deputy Andy Young responded to the burglary, where four men — two who were armed — already had crashed into a home, forced a husband, wife and two small children into a bathroom, and then began stealing valuables from the residence.
Denton said a neighbor in the area called authorities after seeing the men load items, including a large flat-screen television, into a vehicle parked in the front yard.
Before the three law-enforcement officers arrived, Denton said, that same neighbor reported that the men had left the home and told the dispatcher they were headed toward Ludowici.
Denton said he and the other officers spotted the described vehicle and chased it until the driver of the vehicle lost control on Sharpe Road. Denton said four men exited the vehicle and began running.
“Raymond and Andy went after the two that were on the passenger side, and I chased the driver and the one who was in the back seat on the driver’s side,” Denton said.
After chasing the two men through the woods, Denton reached the man who had been in the back seat. The officer drew his Taser and fired it, stopping the man.
“When I Tased him, he fell to the ground on his stomach,” Denton said. “I told him to put his hands behind him, but he wouldn’t — they were under his stomach. I also could tell from the way he was moving on the ground … I didn’t think that the two probes had made full contact.
“I told him again to put his hands behind his back, but he still didn’t,” the officer continued. “So I pulled the trigger to Tase him again and nothing happen, so I knew the contacts were not on him.”
Denton said he took his handcuffs and attempted to put them on the man, but as he did, the man jumped up and knocked him to the ground. The officer said the man jumped on top of him and began choking him.
“He had his right hand around my throat, and I felt his left hand reaching for my gun. I knew now he was trying to kill me,” Denton said. “All I could think of was my daughter and wife. I tried to keep my hand on (the gun), and as we were struggling, the gun came out with both of our hands on it.”
The daughter Denton was thinking of was his 3-week-old baby girl, Addyson, and 24-year-old wife, Amber.
“I remember thinking, ‘God, we just had a baby. Is this the end? Am I not going home?’ And it kept running in my head, ‘Survive, survive, survive,’” the Ludowici police officer said.
Denton said he began to feel light-headed from being choked and then just started firing his weapon.
“When I fired the shots, I didn’t know if I hit him because he was still fighting for the gun,” the officer said. “The gun slammed into the dirt. (The intruder) said ‘Throw your gun away; you shot me.’ I told him to loosen his grip on my hand and I would throw it.”
Denton said he actually had no intention of letting go of his gun.
“When I felt him loosen up, I broke free and jumped up, grabbed my flash light and reloaded,” he said. “When I looked down at him, he was back on his stomach, still with his hands in front of him.”
Denton said the other two officers had heard the shots and began racing toward him, Govero arriving first.
“When Raymond got there, I could see (the intruder) was bleeding,” Denton said. “Raymond reached under and pulled his hands out and cuffed him.”
Denton said the man was transported to the hospital and treated for a gunshot wound in his leg.
According to the officer, the man was arrested after being released from the hospital and charged with armed robbery, burglary, obstruction of a law-enforcement officer with violence and aggravated assault on a police officer.
After the shooting, the Georgia Bureau of Investigation conducted an independent investigation clearing Denton of any wrongdoing and ruled that it was a justifiable shooting.
Denton said the incident changed him because he now knows how precious life is and how it can be taken away from someone in the blink of an eye.
“I am very thankful to have survived that night and for being able to go home to my family,” the officer said. “Now I reflect more on things that are more important because I see how quickly they can be taken away from you.”
LPD Chief Richard Robertson presented Denton with a Medal of Valor on July 12 at the city council meeting.
“Adam put his life on the line to bring a man to justice,” Robertson said. “He represented the Ludowici Police Department in a way that shows its high standards, so I felt that he deserved this honor,” Robertson said.

What does a guy mean if he wants a break and just figure things that have been bothering him lately?
I'm dating this guy for over 3 months now. For over a week he felt so cold and distant. I kept on asking him what's going on and if everything's okay. he just kept on telling me that we're perfect and that everything's okay. All of a sudden I got a text message from him saying that he needs a break and figure things that have been bothering him lately. so basically he was breaking up with me. like I don't know what's going on. It feels so unfair that he hasn't talked to me about what he's feeling and obviously he was shutting me out. Its so unfair that we both came to this point that we have to break up without even trying and making things work. and I'm hurting so much because I don't know the real reason why he broke up with me.
What's Your Opinion?

Jon Snow is Overrated.
We are just about a month away from the final season of Game of Thrones and I think it is time we sit down and talk about the character everyone obsesses over, Jon Snow. Since day one, both women and men alike swooned over the curly-haired man. Everyone either wanted the bastard son or wanted to be him. As an avid watcher of GoT, I have never understood the obsession.
As I re-watch the series, I am reminded why I hated John for most of the show. In the first few episodes Jon was bearable. The scenes Kit Harington had with Maisie Williams (Arya) are quite heartwarming. Once John left Winterfell, my feelings towards his character quickly changed. He became arrogant, prideful, his ego was intolerable, and the chip on his shoulder was unbecoming. Until his death (spoilers) and resurrection (again spoilers) he was one of my least favorite characters.
From the moment Jon got to the wall, his head was so big I feared he wouldn't fit through a door. He legitimately yelled out that he thought he was better than all of the rest.
Ygritte was the best thing to happen to that man, she put him in his place.
Jon threw a hissy-fit when he was named Lord Commander Mormont's steward. Yet again his pride and ego were in full force. He felt that he was better than everyone else and that being a steward was beneath him. Jon threw more temper-tantrums than Jofrey, and yes you can quote me on that.
Snow was so desperate to be the hero throughout the better part of GoT it was pitiful. He always felt the need to prove himself, to show everyone that he was better than everyone else. It was just so exhausting. The best thing to happen to Jon was his death. I did not shed a tear for Jon when he died. I know, I'm heartless. Between the impact the wildlings had on him and his death Jon changed. With that my feelings did too.
Jon has moved himself up on my list, especially during the previous season. While he may not be in my top 5, actually I don't think he even breaks my top 10, but he's not way down on the bottom like he was before. Plus, I've been more of a Gendry fan when it comes to looks.

This post isn't at all as sensitive to me as it would have been if I had wrote something similar a few years ago. In fact, I'd probably be writing something completely different but please understand that it still is personal and the reason I felt like sharing is because of how proud I am that I have transitioned into the person I am today. I, like most girls have had many things to be insecure about as we grew up; whether it be the physical or spiritual being of ourselves. It was no help that most girls I was surrounded by were quite similar to myself and we grew up influencing each other by comparing ourselves. Thankfully, we've mostly outgrown that 'stuff' but I'm sure we can still occasionally be caught wishing for things we see others have that we don't. I remember a time when I had a few things I thought I should be self-conscious about and I was so insecure that I would always make up excuses for the certain things that I chose to wear. I had things I thought I needed to hide and that there were things I should improve on. Although I didn't experience such excessive emotional battles, I now look back and realise how much time I spent worrying about this 'stuff'. Most of the things that I thought about myself was purely because of puberty and high-school phases and they are just the most silliest things that I could think of. I'm pretty sure I went from worrying about what scars I had that I could hide, to what perfume boys might like. Sure, the early years of high-school I spent worrying about boys but transitioning from VCE to who I'd be once I graduated; I wasted a few sulks on what I thought was not quite right with me physically and emotionally. And for years that's all I would ever think about. Standards was something that always stood out in the front of my mind.
I think up until last year perhaps, all I ever wanted to be was to meet someones standards. It never mattered to me by whom, but I had to try or else I'd have those days where I wouldn't feel myself. I mean, I was never obsessed with the idea of being perfect but I was more fixated about the things that I thought were flaws. I never shared this feeling with anyone because I knew that it wasn't good for me. So I'm not too sure what has really developed since then. Perhaps I just stayed home too much and became to lazy to care about what I used to; or maybe it's because the people I surrounded myself with have also changed; or it could be because I have met the most amazing person that never falls short a day without telling me I'm beautiful; or hearing from pastors speak about beauty over the years; or I just grew up and it happens to us eventually. I don't know what has changed, but I'm not so insecure. From time to time I might still point things out (like that fact that I don't stop sneezing or being itchy), but for the most part, I'm no longer caught dwelling in thoughts of my flaws. I try to do well in just looking after myself and appreciated that there are some things that I possess which other people wished they could have too. I could list the many things I was self-conscious about but it'd be a long list plus, it's unnecessary.
I just know that this positive transition has made me be the better me that I could and should have been many years ago. I thank God every day for all the things He has made a part of me which work for all their purposes. I love my chicken pock dots and my flat-buttoned nose. I love taking a picture without fear of looking ridiculous for all those who see my social media. I love not worrying about the perception of others and I just love the fact that the person I am is no longer concerned about such nonsensical dilemmas.

“I haven’t seen the woman in 37 years and she knows nothing about me or my life now,” says Sir Sean who has been married for the past 33 years to his French wife Micheline.
“Diane can’t move on from the break up of our marriage and I have already had to contend with her accusations about me being violent towards her. Now the lies seem to be getting even more vicious, and, what is worse, she is dragging our son into it.
“I have just come off the phone to Jason and I know he will be making his own statement but I never told him I wasn’t going to leave him a penny in my will or that I said he only had the career he has as an actor and director because of his family name. He happens to have talent of his own.
I saw him in Scotland only last year and we speak constantly on the phone. As for being mean to him when he was a lad, I sent him to Millfield, which is Britain’s most expensive public school, and I sent him after that to Gordonstoun when it became clear to me that Millfield was rubbish.
Long before I divorced Diane, I actually set up a trust fund worth £85,000 for his education and the education of Diane’s daughter which of course would be worth a lot more today. I did everything any father could reasonably be expected to do.
“It seems to me a shame that whatever garbage Diane comes out with about me is reported as the gospel truth, but of course a lot of people have their own agenda about me because of my support for the SNP.”
Miss Cilento, 74, gave an insight into her feelings for Sir Sean, 77, when she said in an interview: “I do feel there’s unfinished business between us. I loved the old Sean, I still do.
Sometimes when I see him today on some talk show, I catch a fleeting glimpse of my old love in the turn of his head or a well-remembered phrase, and it still makes my heart turn over.”

Peter Lion had been inclined towards writing from a very young age. Throughout his growing up years in Connecticut he was seen dabbling in poetry as well as wrote a number of short stories. His talent in this field was further perfected when after joining the Notre Dame High School in Connecticut he started contributing to the students school newspaper.
He got down to create a career of his passion for the words first by acquiring a degree in Journalism through the Southern Connecticut State University. He printed his first magazine article inside the Hartford Magazine before he graduated with his journalism degree.
He entered into the television business even before he had finished his college. A few months before graduation, Peter Lion took up employment with WTNH-TV as a part time graphics operator. This television channel was an affiliate of the ABC network and was based out of New Haven. Peter Lion though, didn’t have knowledge of this industry grabbed this chance to gain an entry and to create a foothold in the news and television industry.
He learned the ropes rapidly, understanding the technicalities of the workings of the television network and continued to be a part of the channel for over a time period of 2 years.
Then he moved to Boston and started working with WSBK as a Technical Director. He labored on several projects, his major one being the Boston Red Sox Baseball and Boston Bruins Hockey. Nevertheless, his wish to be in television and his passion for writing pulled him back in his home state as a part of a small television station start up.
He signed up with this team to be a director and a technical director for the 10 PM news cast, that was to be the very first within the state. He grabbed this opportunity of exhibiting his talent and knowledge as in his stint in Boston he’s had the capacity of working with several accomplished directors. He used this understanding to develop the show from the beginning.
Peter Lion moved to Pittsburg and joined KADA TV after completing a couple of years with this start-up. As part of his stint in this television network, he exploited the many elements of his expertise and worked as a weather anchor, announcer, news producer, feature producer and director. It was during his stint at KADA-TV that Peter Lion found inspiration for his book titled The American St. Nick”.
Then he moved back in Connecticut and was a part of ESPN sports network. Still a part of ESPN, he’s in charge of a number of their shows like Sports Centre as well as the NFL Draft in his position within the organization as a Director. His primary show however, remains, College Gameday.
He has been a two time winner in the Emmy awards, even though he has been nominated frequently for his contribution while in the television industry. He got his first Emmy for his work in Sports Centre and received his second Emmy for the show NFL countdown.
Apart from working, Peter Lion is presently working on his second book. He is additionally a part of a band that goes by the name of Cheaper than Therapy” and is also its lead singer and guitarist

Two dear friends of mine, a married couple for more than fifty years now, invited me out to dinner one evening a few weeks back to thank me for picking them up at the airport upon their return to St. Louis from visiting family out west. Though there was certainly no need for them to do so, I was—of course—happy to accept. Both the food and service were excellent, and on a few occasions throughout the course of our meal, we engaged our waitress, a delightful young lady, in random conversation when she would stop by our table to inquire as to how we were doing.
Interestingly, as we were preparing to leave, she demonstrated being exceptionally grateful for the manner in which we had treated her, which, quite honestly, took my friends and me by surprise. (After all, didn’t everyone treat her that way?) Outside of being polite and understanding, we truly didn’t feel that we had done anything out of the ordinary. Therefore, all we could think of was that our interacting with her on a more personal level is what made the difference. When all was said and done, perhaps she simply felt seen as a fellow human being, and not merely someone who was there to serve us that evening. That’s my hope, anyway.

The Dutch House
The Dutch Houses were real old timber buildings. They were lovely.
They had two windows with a mixed display. It was a bit posh and expensive. They sold clothes and china. G.A Dunn and Co was opposite it.
It was a very upmarket department store. The Dutch House was out of my pocket.
It was the Irish Linen and Hosiery Association.
It was pulled down by the Americans.
It was believed the Dutch House could have been saved.
They tried to pull it down manually with ropes. It started to creak but nothing happened then an American lorry came along and they used that – but they still had a job to do it.
It wasn’t pulled down straight away. We were standing opposite it during one of the Victory parades at the end of the war. I have a photo of the parade and you can see some people standing on one of the balconies.

The short story "Sanchez," written by Richard Dokey, is a story about Juan Sanchez and his family.
"Sanchez" is told in many different settings, which are all unique and represent various feelings that Dokey portrays to his readers.The settings are described realistically; they affect Juan and Jesus in personal ways.The settings vary from a small village in Mexico to the Sierra Nevada in California.At first the story is set in Stockton in the San Joaquin Valley.Jesus, Juan's son, got his first job in a cannery called Flotill.
- Thesis Statement
- Structure and Outline
- Voice and Grammar
Stockton is shown to be a working town where Juan had lived before.To Jesus, Stockton is his future and his hopes are large enough to shield him from the "skid row" section of town.Jesus was to live in a cheap hotel while he worked in the cannery.The hotel was described as stained, soiled, and smelly (151).Jesus is proud of his room and his job, but Juan only sees them as disappointing.
Stockton, for Juan, brings back memories of hard work and time away from his wife, La Belleza.La Belleza was the prime focus of Juan's life and if he was away from her, he definitely wasn't happy; this is why Juan has bad feelings for Stockton.From the hotel, we, as readers, are taken through the town of Stockton.There are torn buildings and rubble all over the place.A "warm and dirty" pool hall was Jesus' "entertainment" (152).
This smoky pool hall was recreation for Jesus but Juan only seemed to be disgusted.To Jesus the pool hall was a place to relax while he wasn't working in the cannery.Next, Juan and his son parted because Juan was feeling tired from the events of the day.Juan got in his car and returned home to Twin Pines to reflect on his past. Twin Pines was where Juan and his wife had lived for about six years, but the home wasn't the same now that La Belleza was dead.La Belleza had died due to complications when Jesus was born.
His wife's death completely changed him.Twin Pines was where Juan and his wife had longed to live for many years.The neighborhood and his new house had been well deserved.He had to struggle for a long time in Mexico to save enough money to move to the mountains.Juan had lived his whole life in Mexico before moving.Mexico, to Juan was a "hard land.
It took the life of his father and mother before he was twelve and the life of his aunt, with whom he then lived, before he was sixteen"(154).This inspired Juan to get away from the village and eventually, he did.Mexico and its hardships were now in Juan's past representing his struggle to have a better place for his wife.Juan had saved enough money to leave the "death" of Mexico and head for his dreams of the Mountains.Jackson, a town along the road to Twin Pines, was where "the road turned and began an immediate, constant climb upward" (156).
This, to me, represents a major change in Juan's life.Juan's dream finally was turning into what he wanted.The climbing road symbolized Juan's dream slowly becoming a reality. When Juan saw the cabin.

Creative Writing and Short Skirtsbykinkidusti©
Selene was a high school senior, freshly turned eighteen, gorgeous as any Hollywood "It" girl, not quite a social outcast, but definitely not a member of the "in" crowd. Peter – Mr. Sohn – was the new English and creative writing teacher, just out of college, every girls ideal kind of man and smarter than a lot of his college professors. He considered the high school classroom to be his calling, but having been out of high school for at least six years, he also did not know quite what he was getting himself into.
The first day of class had been hectic for Peter. Since lunch he had been looking forward to his last class of the day, but it could not come soon enough. During the brief five minutes between classes, Peter stepped outside the door to his creative writing classroom to greet the students as they grudgingly walked in. Most of the students seemed to be nothing more than typical high school stereotypes. However, Selene caught his eye from the far end of the hallway. She did not quite fit in with the rest of the students around her. She looked like a college student, black purse over one shoulder, a couple of folders and notebooks in her arms, her hair was long and dark brown, her skin was pale white from spending her summers inside an animal shelter instead of at the beach like the rest of her peers, she was wearing a full knee-length skirt and a wide strapped tank top, her bare skin seemed to illuminate the entire hall.
As she walked closer and closer to where Peter was standing, he could feel his heart quicken in his chest. Surely this gorgeous girl was not going to be one of his students, for all he knew she could be a young looking teacher at the school! Selene walked right up to Peter, he towered over her 5'8" frame, he must have been at least 6'5".
"Mr. Sohn?" she asked, her doe-like blue/green eyes sparkling.
"Yes?" he asked, his heart beating quickly, hoping and praying deep inside that she was not a student.
Selene smiled brightly, Peter smiled nervously. "I hope that you're better than the last creative writing teacher we had here," Selene said as she walked past Peter, her skirt flirting upwards slightly as she skipped into the classroom and took a seat in the front row in the middle of the classroom.
"Oh god, I'm so fucked," Peter thought to himself as the bell rang and the last few students in the hallways rushed into their respected classrooms. Peter turned into the doorway and closed the door shut behind him.
Peter did well hiding his affections for Selene for the first part of the semester. She made no indication that she had any feelings for him, though whenever she wore button-up shirts, Peter noticed her fidgeting with the top couple of buttons and every once in a while one or two would come undone giving Peter a prime view of her ample cleavage. There were other occasions that Selene would wear skimpy or sexy underwear that Peter would often be able to see from under her skirts. He was never sure if she was doing these things on purpose or if they were just coincidental, but he often liked to think that she had the same sort of feelings for him that he had for her.
Peter also began to notice that Selene's grades in his class were starting to drop. At the beginning of the semester, her grades had been perfect, she had a gift with words and structurally, she was an amazing writer – college level without a doubt. Lately, her topics were weak, her writing was getting poorer, Peter did not know anything else that he could do except talk to her after class.
It was an October afternoon, it was cold and rainy outside and Peter had been nervous and in a bad mood all day. The last class of the day could not come soon enough. Peter sat in his desk as the students in his last class grumpily filed into the classroom. Selene was the one exception. She walked into the classroom, black skirt on, blue sweater, hair up in a ponytail and a permanent smile affixed on her face. She sat in her usual seat and folded her hands neatly on her desk in front of her and spread her legs apart slightly. Peter could easily see up her skirt and saw that she was wearing a pair of pure white underwear. He licked his lips, inadvertently. He had her most recent paper sitting on top of the stack to hand back, a thick red C right next to her name with a small "See me" written next to it.
The bell to commence class rang and Peter stood up with papers in his hand. He started going around the room passing back the papers. He gently let the C paper float down in front of Selene. She smiled sweetly at Peter as he passed by and looked down at the paper in front of her. She gasped sharply and the smile immediately disappeared from her face.
"Mr. Sohn," she said quietly, under her breath as she quickly stuffed the paper into one of her folders so none of her classmates would see her bad grade.
After class, Selene lingered in her seat; she slowly packed her things away in a small shoulder bag until all of the students had left the room.
"Can I help you with anything?" Peter asked, standing in front of Selene's desk. She shook her head, 'no'. "I apologize about your latest grade, but there really isn't a whole lot that I can do. I'm a bit disappointed by your recent drop in your usual immaculate performance." Selene shrugged. "Is something going on?"
"Not really," she said. Peter wanted to reach out and touch her hand or shoulder in reassurance, but decided against it immediately.
"What's wrong?" Peter asked, instead.
"I'm trying to get into Brown," Selene replied quietly. "I keep getting letters from them saying that they need to think it over and they're not sure..." She sighed. "I don't know what I'll do if I don't get in."
"That's all?" Peter asked. She shrugged. "Well, if you need any help with any of your papers, I have no problem with helping you out some. After all, that is what I'm here for."
Selene nodded and sifted through the few papers that were still left on her desk. Peter walked back to his desk and started to put his things away in his briefcase as Selene sat despondent in her desk chair.
Peter was thankful that his creative writing class was a year long class. This meant that he would be able to teach Selene both semesters instead of just the fall. The first day back from the holiday break, Peter was nervous, he was not actually sure if Selene would still be in his class, she could have very well dropped the class, she could have gotten accepted to college early – she had been accepted into Brown – or something that he had not even thought of yet.
He stood outside his classroom door and watched far fewer students filing in – he guessed that the class had been a bit too difficult for some of the students. His heart skipped a beat though when he saw Selene round the corner, she was even prettier than she had been the previous semester. He wished so hard that she was not a student.
Selene sat in her usual seat and pulled out her notebook and a couple of pens. Peter walked into the room, smiled at Selene and turned a sudden, bright color of red as he realized that he had a sudden, growing erection in his pants. Selene looked up and smiled at him, that smile could stop a million men in their tracks. He wanted her like he had never wanted another woman before in his life. Little did he know, she felt the same way about him.
As Selene sat in her seat, she stared deep in Peter's eyes. He had deep blue eyes that she could get lost in just while watching him lecture during class. She leaned over her desk; her low-cut blue sweater hugged her cleavage just right. She propped her head up forward from her elbow and fluttered her eyelashes seductively. She brought her pen to her mouth and started to chew on the end, rolling her tongue over it from time to time. She noticed the growing erection in Peter's pants and she could only assume that it was from her.
Selene brought her long fingers to the front of her desk and began to brush her fingertips along the edge. Peter stared right at her, captivated by this small, yet extremely seductive gesture. Selene did not notice his stare. However, she and the rest of the class noticed a minute later when Peter made a slight whimpering noise and completely stopped mid-lecture.
"Mr. Sohn?" two students asked simultaneously. Everyone in the class looked around at one another curiously.
"Mr. Sohn?" Selene asked, stopping the brushing of her fingers. Peter blinked a couple of times, gulped the hard knot in his throat and coughed nervously.
"Sorry, what?" Peter asked looking around nervously at the rest of the class.
"Dude, what's your deal?" one of the guys in the corner of the class asked, tapping his pen impatiently on his desk.
"Sorry everyone," Peter said rubbing his left temple slightly. "Uh...I think that I'm done lecturing for the day, write a one-page paper about your winter break and turn it in at the end of class."
All of the students tore out sheets of paper and began furiously writing about their winter breaks as there were only twenty more minutes left in the class period. Peter went and sat down at his desk, trying to ignore the raging boner between his legs, but kept looking over in the direction of Selene. Strips of loose hair kept falling over her eyes, just this small little incident made Peter all the more distracted. Peter looked down at the work laid out in front of him, trying to concentrate on that instead of his attractive student.
Twenty minutes later, the bell rang, all of the students – except Selene – jumped from their seats, papers in hand and dropped them off on Peter's desk as they filed out of the room. Selene sat finishing her page of writing – Peter noticed.
"Selene," Peter said, Selene did not acknowledge him immediately, "Selene, are you almost finished?" Selene looked up this time.
"What did you say?" she asked.
"Are you almost finished with your paper?" Peter asked. Selene looked around at the empty room.
"Oh," Selene replied. "Yeah, can I have a couple more minutes?" She fluttered her eyelashes. Peter sighed and nodded. He walked over to the door and closed it, then closed the door window shade as well in order to say that he would not be willing to see any more people for the rest of the afternoon. Selene furiously wrote the rest of her paper and leaned back in her seat once she was finished and waited for Peter to acknowledge her.
"How was your break, Mr. Sohn?" she asked quietly, he looked up from his desk.
"It was pretty good," he said, "I spent time with the family, ate a lot of good food, rest a bit. Nothing too exciting."
"No girlfriend?" Selene asked, realizing how obvious the question was. Peter shook his head.
"Nope," he said. Selene stood up with her paper in hand and set it on Peter's desk and as she stood back up she made sure that he noticed her full breasts next to his face and very softly brushed her fingers across the top of Peter's hand. Peter breathed in sharply, taking immediate notice of her very light spraying of Calvin Klein perfume and the soft touch of her skin. His raging erection returned immediately.
"How was your break, Selene?" he asked, trying to ignore the distraction.
"Decent," she replied. "Pretty much the same as you. I went to Brown for a weekend though, scoped out the campus, I'm really excited to go." The bright smile returned and Peter could feel himself melting from the inside out.
"I'm sure that you'll love it," he said, swallowing the lump in his throat.
"So what do you have lined up for our small class this semester?" Selene asked.
"Lots of fun stuff," Peter replied with a weak smile on his face. Selene smiled earnestly and Peter wanted to jump up out of his seat and pin her against the window or blackboard and cover her in head to toe with kisses. Selene shrugged and went back to her desk where her book bag and books were. She bent over, ass facing Peter; the longer skirt that she was wearing wasn't long enough to give Peter just the slightly fleeting glimpse of lacey pink underwear. He coughed loudly and looked down at the sheet of paper that Selene had just handed him – she was a daring girl. In her paper she had mentioned that during her winter break she had missed seeing Mr. Sohn on a daily basis. This sent Peter over the edge. He looked over at Selene, still bending over slightly, putting things away in her bag. He stood straight up, walked briskly over to where Selene was bent, lifted her skirt in a quick sweep, raised his right hand in the air and thrust it downwards against her ass – hard. Selene bolted straight up and jumped around, looked up at Peter straight in the eye. Her face was aghast, her mouth dropped open and she looked like she might actually cry. Peter gasped – what had he just done?
"Sel..." was all that he could manage to say before Selene picked her bag up in a quick swoop and ran out of the room.
"Selene!" he called at her as she ran down the hall. Peter dropped his head. She could be doing any number of things – tell the principal of the school, she could tell her parents, hell, he could go to jail for what he just did! He was worried, really, really worried.
Selene did not show up in class the next two days. Peter had not heard from any of the higher up people at the school about the incident either, so he was very unsure about what was going on – it was literally plaguing his mind.
Finally, that Friday, Selene arrived back in the classroom. She was wearing an even shorter skirt than she had the day of the "incident", she had plans to get Peter to repeat what had taken place the previous day. She had hoped that her absence would have riled Peter up into a state of mind where he needed to relieve his tension out on her. The initial spanking had been extremely surprising, a bit humiliating, but it had worked Selene up in a sense that she had never been before. She had never thought of herself as a person who would like spankings or anything of the sort, but she had and she truly wanted more.
Selene took her usual seat in the front center of the room. Once she sat down and settled in, she began to slowly and gradually spread her legs apart. Her multi-colored thigh-high stockings were held up by a red garter – clearly visible once her legs were spread apart – and she was wearing a pair of silky red underwear.
Peter took his lecturing spot in the front of the room; Selene popped the end of her pen into her mouth and looked up at Peter, her eyes twinkling devilishly. He looked down at her, smiled nonchalantly and began lecturing. He looked at every student in the room, but avoided eye-contact with Selene. When he finally did look in Selene's direction, he stopped mid-sentence. He had a clear, full view of Selene's crotch and it was at this moment that he knew his spanking had not been entirely detrimental to his career. He tried to ignore Selene's obvious call for attention and continued to lecture, ignoring his arousal, but Selene did not give up.
Peter doled out the day's assignment to the students in the classroom and then retreated to his desk, where he still had a perfectly clear view of Selene. Selene broke down and went to work on her daily paper, her skirt hiked up to about the top of her thigh, the straps of her garter in clear view. Peter could visualize himself bending Selene over the edge of his desk – her face pressed up against the window looking outside – drilling her from behind like he did to that one kinky girl that he had hooked up with for a night back his junior year of college. He visualized himself wrapping his fingers around in her dark brown hair and pulling her head towards and away from him as she earnestly sucked his cock. He could only imagine what her mouth and her pussy would feel like wrapped around him. Peter wanted to hear her cry out in pleasure and pain, to have to cover her mouth so that others would not be able to hear their cries of passion.
Peter's thoughts were disrupted by the final bell of the day. The students of his classroom jumped out of their seats and scurried out of the door, throwing their papers onto Peter's desk in front of him. Selene remained in her seat; she was not done writing yet. Peter stood up and went to close the door and the window shade once all of the students – except Selene – had left the room and returned to his desk and started to go through the student's papers. Selene stayed still.
Ten minutes passed. Selene was still sitting in her seat writing.
Fifteen then twenty minutes passed. Selene remained in her seat.
After a half hour, Peter realized that she was still writing, and she was well beyond her page and a half for the day.
"Selene," Peter said. Selene did not look up. "Selene, are you about done?" She shook her head. "I'm going to have to ask you to turn in your paper soon, I really need to leave." She nodded, did not look up, continued to write. Peter shrugged and immersed himself back in the student's papers.
"Mr. Sohn," Selene said, Peter jumped and looked up at Selene standing in front of his desk – multicolored stockings, short, short skirt, and a low-cut sweater top that proudly displayed Selene's ample cleavage. "I'm finished." She let the papers float down in front of Peter. Peter stapled the papers together and started to flip through them.
"Thank you," he said. She nodded and went back to her desk, bent over, and slowly began putting her things away.
Peter ignored her at first, he had promised himself after her absence in class that he would not repeat what he had done just a couple of days earlier. He read through her paper and was immediately taken aback. Though the assignment for the day had been to write about desires, he certainly was not expecting to read five pages from Selene about how much she wanted to be tied up and fucked by him.
"Selene," he said, with a hint of reservation in his voice, "I can not accept this." She stood up and faced him.
"Why not?" she asked.
"It's inappropriate," Peter replied.
"But it's my desire," she said and Peter sighed. A few long seconds passed and Selene smiled sweetly. "Isn't it yours?" Peter coughed nervously and turned back to his papers. Selene smiled, turned around again, bent over and continued to put things away.
Peter looked back over towards Selene and immediately, seeing the silky red panties barely covering her ass made his dick stand up in immediate attention. He had to have a part of her.
"Selene, come here," he said firmly. Selene stood up and walked over to Peter's desk and stood next to him.
"Yes?" she asked, innocently, her eyes big and doe-like.
"Why do you say these things?" he asked. "You know that entertaining these ideas could get me fired. I love teaching high school; I would like to continue doing so."
"Do you like students like me?" she asked.
"If you mean students that are very smart and do their work the way they are supposed to, then yes," he replied. He looked back down at her paper. "What does this say right here?"
Selene leaned over in order to have a better look at what he was pointing out to her. Selene cleared her throat and propped herself up on Peter's desk with her elbows and read, "I would most desire for Mr. Sohn to tie my arms up with the pull-string that raises and lowers the blinds to the windows in the classroom. While in this position I would most desire for Mr. Sohn to pleasure me with his long fingers and tell me how much he desires to fuck me."
Peter rolled back in his chair so that he was directly behind Selene. He stared her right in her silk-clad behind, raised his hand up behind him and directed it right into Selene's left ass cheek. Selene lurched forward slightly and made a slight whimpering noise. Peter could clearly see the mark that his hand had left behind and he noticed Selene shaking a bit on her elbows.

Today in 1896, Francis Scott Key Fitzgerald was born in St. Paul, Minnesota. Named after a famous relative, Francis Scott Key, Fitzgerald would become a leading voice among his peers, the self-proclaimed “Lost Generation” who were born in the 1890’s and reach adulthood as the United States entered the First World War.
Fitzgerald’s path as a writer was clear by the time he was 13--that was his age when his first story was published in the St. Paul Academy newspaper. Despite, or perhaps because of, his passion for writing, Fitzgerald was a mediocre student from his earliest days at Princeton, the Ivy League college he attended from 1913-1917. It was during this time he began work on his first novel, a work that would ultimately be titled “This Side of Paradise.”
When the United States entered the First World War in 1917, Fitzgerald quit school and enlisted in the Army. He trained at Camp Zachary Taylor, located just a few miles from Louisville, Kentucky. The camp represented a turning point of sorts for Fitzgerald: his first rejection from a publisher came while he was there and he met Zelda Sayre, the woman who would be his wife until his dying day. Zelda was the daughter of an Alabama Supreme Court judge and as such expected more of a lifestyle than Fitzgerald could provide. The two were engaged, but Zelda broke off the relationship when her fiancé was unable to convince her that he could support the two of them in the style to which they were accustomed.
With the war over and his romantic life on the rocks, Fitzgerald returned to his parents’ house in St. Paul. He revised his first novel “The Romantic Egotist” and renamed it “This Side of Paradise”. It was a contemporary work that spoke to a self-indulgent generation. The book was accepted and published in 1919. Seeing that Fitzgerald was a success after all, Zelda agreed to once again marry her writer. They were soon wed and had their only child, Frances Scott Fitzgerald, in October, 1921.
The 1920’s were Fitzgerald’s decade. “This Side of Paradise” became a national bestseller, as did “The Beautiful and the Damned” and “The Great Gatsby”, arguably the most important book to come from an American writer in the early 20th century. Fitzgerald wrote from his own experience: Ivy League, Midwestern childhood, obsession with wealth. During this time, he also wrote short stories for many magazines in order to make the kind of money the Fitzgerald’s needed to live their lavish lifestyle in the United States and Paris.
The Great Depression began in the fall of 1929 and for Fitzgerald, the loss was much more than financial. Around that time, Zelda was diagnosed as schizophrenic, a condition with which she had struggled for most of her adult life. She had to be sent to a Baltimore hospital in 1930; she would remain hospitalized for most of the rest of her life. Fitzgerald rented a nearby house in which he wrote “Tender is the Night”, which reflected the bleakness he felt in his life. The novel disappointed critics and did not sell well compared to his earlier works. In fact, it would not become popular until after his death.
Fitzgerald spent the second half of the 1930’s in Hollywood, despite the fact that he supposedly hated the movie business. With his financial difficulties, however, Fitzgerald had to go where the money was, and Hollywood had plenty of it. Always a heavy drinker, by this point in his life Fitzgerald was clearly an alcoholic. 20 years of hard drinking, smoking and other excesses were beginning to take their toll on his body. He had two heart attacks late in 1940, with the second one being on December 20th. He died the next morning while waiting for his doctor to examine him. He was 44.
Fitzgerald has known more fame in death than he ever could have hoped for in life. His works have defined the post-World War One era for several generations, giving us a rare glimpse into a world of hedonism and excess that was the 1920’s. As Dexter Green, the main character in the short story “Winter Dreams” said, “That thing is gone, that thing is gone. It will come back no more.”
Post a Comment

Mesa, AZ (KPHO) -- Jaica Rowley's neighbors said they often heard her yelling at her children.
But, they couldn't sit idly by in their Mesa neighborhood after they said they heard a woman threaten to kill her son, who police said was later found zip-tied to a post and bleeding in the back yard of the home in the area of Broadway Road and Val Vista Drive.
Mesa police arrested the 36-year-old Rowley on Wednesday and booked her into jail on one count of child abuse and one count of unlawful imprisonment after finding her 11-year-old son bound to their back porch.
The neighbors called police about 5:50 p.m. Wednesday and told officers they thought they heard a boy they thought was being hit by a woman in a nearby house, according to a police report.
Rowley met officers at her house and told them her son was "out of control" and she needed to leave to pay a bill, according to the report. She had her 3-year-old daughter with her, but not her son. When asked about her son, she said she had zip-tied him to the back porch, according to the report.
Officers said they found the boy sitting with his arms and legs around a porch support pole, his hands and feet bound by zip ties and blood coming from his left hand.
Rowley said she had attempted to cut off the tie around his hands with scissors because it was too tight when she accidentally cut his pinkie finger. She said she wrapped the cut and promptly zip-tied him back to the pole, according to the report.
The neighbors told officers it was not uncommon to hear Rowley yell at the boy, but on this occasion they heard a woman shout for him to lay face down and if he made a sound "she would kill him," prompting their call to police.
The boy was treated by medical officials, who said he might need a couple stitches for the wound, according to the report.
The boy and 3-year-old girl were turned over to Child Protective Services, and the Center against Violence was notified, according to the report.

Remembering the war in New Guinea
Interview with Robin Kombeng (Interview)
This interview was conducted by Dr Iwamoto Hiromitsu and transribed/translated by Pastor Jacob Aramans
Robin: My name is Robin Kombeng. I come from Saing village. I was born in 1933. The war that came to this country was said to be the Second World War in which the Japanese arrived here and took control of Kavieng. Sali was far away so Kavieng became the main base for the huge Japanese war and cargo ships. These ships transported the soldiers and their equipment for use in the war.
The soldiers came in huge numbers. They walked up this way. They took control of every thing including all the Europeans, Chinese and other races of people who lived here.
The Japanese didn't do anything bad to us. They came around here looking for places to set up their base. They camped in different groups according to their fields of specialisation. The Lemetais, those who make rules and enforce them during the war lived in one place. The Minsebus settled in another place.
The Minsebus took control of us and so we followed all their laws. We had no more freedom, they took control of our lives and we just followed what ever they said. If they wanted us to do some work we had to do as they say. That was the kind of life people lived when the Japanese conquered New Ireland and other parts of the South Pacific.
All the Australians went back to their country. But we also heard that some of them were beheaded. They didn't send them to their country. I was a small boy when all these things happened. Though I was small, I listened to whatever the grown ups said. They told us that we must listen to the Japanese and follow whatever they want us to do.
We teamed up with our big men and went into the bushes to make gardens. During the day the planes would come and take photographs and surveyed the area. The Japanese would call out saying "harimah" and said that we would have to work in the gardens at nights.
The Japanese later took me and the other young boys out from the garden to the beach and made us become coast watchers. Whenever we sighted any Australian or American ships we would report immediately to them. Also whenever we saw any unfamiliar persons we were to report them to the Japanese.
We continued on like this up until one Sunday morning one of our elderly men came and asked us to paddle on a canoe to Kualongo and Lagarol to collect some food and return. We were asked to go there because some of our people lived there.
We got into the canoe and paddled there. We then loaded the canoe up with some kaukau. In the afternoon we paddled back because at night we had to go back to the beach and do our night duties.
We thought that the Japanese would not see us, but they had already seen us with their binoculars. They set up this thing called Akiragya or Akirag in short and were able to detect anything moving from far off.
The Japanese called us to report to them. As soon as we arrived on the beach they sent a policeman by the name of Ambugru. He was from Morobe province and got married to a woman from Greinongo. This policeman came and took us to stand trial.
Our family came and got the food that we brought. We were brought to Lemakot that night by the policeman to stand trial before the Japanese officer. The officer's name was Bushla Takapin. He questioned us about our mission - where we went and for what purpose and so forth. We in turn told him about our travel. It was purposely to get some food from our relatives living at Aikirag. We were not there as spies and we had not talked to the Australians or the Americans.
He said it was fair for us to go and get food but we shouldn't travel too far out on the sea in case the enemy ships found us. He asked us for our names and we said Robin and Sebby. He then said “your punishment will be five canes”. We received five cane strokes each and then he told Ambugru to take us Gamalawa so that we could sleep there and see the big boss the next morning.
Abigru escorted us to Gamalawa and slept there too. At night many thoughts ran through our minds. When we woke up the next morning we were surprised to see Biung the big boss had arrived. We walked with the policeman and Mr. Biung to the mountain where the radar or the equipment that was set to detect enemies was. We also saw those soldiers who spotted us on the radar.
The soldiers asked for us so Abigru called us to come over. The soldiers started questioning us. We told them that we paddled to the other village to get some food because some of our relatives were living there. He then asked if we had an authorisation letter to travel to other places, which we said we had.
The Japanese then said "we don't want you to go far out into the sea in case American and Australian spies find you and you tell them of our whereabouts”. He said you will receive ten cane strokes each for disobeying instructions. They brought both of us under a tree and whipped us. It was a very painful experience for both of us.
They then brought us to a big screen. On that screen we could see every thing clearly from miles away. That was how they caught both of us paddling to Ualongo. Using this radar like thing the Japanese were able to spot enemy ships and planes from miles away. They were also able to tell the direction they came from and where they were going to.
They gave us a strong warning not to go out to sea or far away again but to stay around or travel close by. They then sent us home. Our parents and other big men were happy and welcomed us home. They were happy because we were not dead.
On Sunday a word came around that a plane would fly over and drop some papers in the next village up on the hill. Shortly afterwards the plane came and papers were dropped all over that area. The same thing was done in other villages in New Ireland. The papers said that the war had ended. Every one was happy.
The war ended and the Japanese were ready to go back to their country. While waiting for their ship Akikisang, a Japanese soldier, usually came and visited us in the village on his bicycle. When he came around we would follow him. Other officers also came and visited us. One commanding officer still carried his sword on his side and rode on a bicycle. They became friendly to us. Whenever they would leave their bicycles in the village we small boys would get on their bicycles and ride on them.
The Japanese soldiers were no longer aggressive like before. Their attitudes had changed. They became so friendly to us. During that short time while waiting to go back they really enjoyed staying with us and they did not go any where else. Finally, a big ship came and they all went back to their country.
There was also a Sikimaster who lived here during the war. He got married to a local woman and they both lived together, but they did not have any kids. After the war the Sikimaster went back to his country and his wife was left behind. This ends my story.
Dr Iwamoto: Thank you very much. That was a very nice story.

Just saying hi! I don't have any questions right now but I'm sure I will have lots. This forum was a huge help when I was deciding on getting him and how to care for him. So I just wanted to say thank you and hello! I would just love to meet some of the community! I am very excited to have my first chameleon and to be part of this community!

While marriage proposal stories each have their own nuances, they are all pretty much the same. Justin Harrel of Oklahoma, however, definitely broke the mold when it came to how a man pops the question. Wanted in two different counties, Justin made sure that he would get down on one knee (in a manner of speaking) before being carted off to the big house. According to Yahoo News,he asked the arresting officer for a bit more time because he had something more he wanted to do:
"I advised Justin that he was under arrest and directed him to turn around and place his hands behind his back," the officer wrote in his police report. "Justin said, 'Steve, let's talk about this. Give me five minutes.'"
When the officer took him into custody, Harrel explained that he was about to propose to his girlfriend. He asked if he could go ahead with the proposal.
s The officer allowed Harrel to complete the marriage proposal, and Harrel's girlfriend eventually said yes. Harrel then asked the officer to get the engagement ring from his coat pocket and give it to her.
The officer handed the ring to the girlfriend.

Online retailer Boohoo is facing an ad ban after one of its campaign was accused of sexualising and objectifying women.
The ad showed a model wearing a T-shirt with thong-style bikini bottoms and trainers.
Boohoo however said the model was wearing the T-shirt with a bikini as part of their swimwear range.
The ASA said it had received a complaint that the ad was offensive, harmful and irresponsible.
“We also noted that neither the partial nudity nor the bikini bottoms were relevant to the product and that the images did not show the product as it would usually be worn,” the regulator said.

The reason I stayed doing teacher creature, instead of switching to design your own project, was because after getting my responses from the form I sent out to a few teachers I had already to started picture what I wanted to do. This project is probably my favorite thing I have done all year, even though it was hard at some points; because this project was a lot of independent work. Since it was independent work I had to do a lot of problem solving and refinement on my own. It was good to work on those skills because they were something I was lacking last semester; that I'll need in the future. During this project we did a critique, which is a good opportunity for the artist and the audience to see the art and say what they are seeing and improvements to be made. During our critique I did not get any improvements but a lot of positive feed back. Over all this is a very good project.

Bryan Smart loses Delectation
Bryan Smart could not hide his disappointment after revealing Delectation had been moved away from his yard.
Delectation (r) has been transferred to Germany
Unbeaten in two races and an impressive winner of the Group Three Firth of Clyde Stakes at Ayr last month, she was due to run in France recently but was withdrawn the day before after Smart was not happy with her blood count.
The Hambleton trainer was treating Delectation as a 1000 Guineas contender but her Australian owner Jamie Lovett has made the decision to take her away.
"I've lost my good filly, Delectation," said Smart.
"We sold her to an Australian with the hope she'd be staying with us.
"Unfortunately he's taken her away to Germany. I think he's gone to Andreas Wohler."

Chapter 12 : Charon's Obol by GubraithianFire
| ||Rating: 15+||Chapter Reviews: 2|
Background: Font color:
Her last words to her husband were these:
“Just don’t bury me, or I swear on my grandfather’s soul, I will haunt you until you can join me.”
Draco obeyed. Three days after his wife’s passing, he and his twelve-year-old son watched her body go up in smoke. Scorpius had to be taken aside by his grandmother because of the panic attacks. He didn’t want to breathe in his mother’s pancreas, or her large intestine, or her femur, or her skull.
There were three carriages in the funeral entourage; Malfoys were always buried in somber style, as long as there was a body to bury, and Narcissa Malfoy saw no reason to change that for a cremation. The first held Draco, Scorpius, and Draco’s sister-in-law; there was another for Scorpius’ three grandparents; a third, the plainest, was for the selection of people who were closest to the small, made smaller, family. Draco’s father-in-law, Honorius Greengrass, had raged against not being in the first carriage, but Draco had been firm: Scorpius wanted his aunt with him. Even the boy knew his mother had held no affection for her parents in life, and he would not dishonour her by letting her father ferry her down the Styx of the well-kept-but-hardly-used magical thoroughfare that crisscrossed this part of Wiltshire.
On the carriage ride home, Draco tried to force his son to at least hold the urn of his mother’s ashes. He protested as violently as he could without upsetting the small silver coffin of a jar.
It was Daphne Nott who ended up persuading her nephew to hold it. “You know how clumsy your father is,” she said. “D’you think your mum would like it if she thought there was the slightest chance he might drop it? Here, you can help me. Together we’ll have a good hold on her.”
Scorpius took the left handle, Daphne the right. Draco leaned forward and patted his son’s knee in what passed amongst Malfoys for affection and moral support, and let his hand hover there, perhaps waiting for Scorpius to take it, to form a bizarre circle between them all: the widower, his son, his aunt, and her dead sister. But Scorpius didn’t take it, for he needed both hands to hold his mother. The boy did not trust himself or even his aunt to be able to keep her steady while the carriage threatened to upset the fragile equilibrium of his world after that last farewell.
The funeral procession reached home, although Draco had not thought of Malfoy Manor as home for decades, in good time, but disembarked slowly; the second two carriages were empty by the time Daphne and Draco emerged, and they had yet to coax Scorpius out. It was Daphne’s turn to bat away the indignantly bereaved grandparents: Scorpius wanted his father. The boy had no place for his grandparents’ version of affection. In his twelve-year-old boy way, he doubted he would ever allow affection to fill the hole in his heart ever again.
“I have her right here,” Draco said, the urn cradled in the crook of his arm. “She’s safe, Scorpius. Come on, now, you have to come inside.”
The boy narrowed his eyes. “She’s dead, not safe.”
Draco did not respond with anything but his coolest tones. “Come into the house.”
Daphne, for her part, took her nephew’s hand in hers and, much to her brother-in-law’s dull surprise, hoisted herself back into the carriage and announced, in answer to his stare, “I’ll keep him company.”
Narcissa tittered in the background, in the disapproving way that to Draco meant old crones, backs bent with bitterness, smiles warped by time and bad luck. Narcissa’s back was still straight and her smile the same it had been when Draco was a boy, but her face was lined and her mind dulled; her mutterings reminded him of senile house-elves, who thought they could not be heard and quietly, secretly, dearly wished they were.
He turned his back on his son and sister-in-law and took the great steps of Malfoy Manor two at a time, his mother and in-laws scrambling after him. Honorius muttered a scathing comment about the constitution of his only grandchild, and though his wife curled her lip in disgust, he went unpunished. Draco ignored the jab and led everyone inside, for there was a funeral party awaiting them. Astoria had, in the days before her death, begged him to not hold a wake, but this was something Draco could not bluster his way out of.
Malfoys always were sent off in somber style, as long as there were physical remains to honour, and Narcissa saw no reason to change the rules for her daughter-in-law.
The grandparents and family friends and even the house-elves all tried their respective hands at persuading Scorpius out of the carriage still parked in the Manor drive, but nothing worked; no bribes were accepted, no carefully worded threats about the family honour were heeded, no gentle reminders of what his mother would have wanted him to do were enough. Daphne stayed with him the entire time, but it was only when the guests and grandparents and the sun left that Scorpius consented to hop outside. Daphne clambered after her nephew wearing only a black sheath dress, having left her mourning robes in the carriage, and nearly tripped over her heels before impatiently kicking them off at the foot of the steps.
She found Scorpius in the drawing room, having planted himself in front of the fireplace. It was the smaller of Malfoy Manor’s receiving rooms, used for Sunday brunches and weekday teas. It was in here that this great mausoleum of a house came closest to reaching intimacy, the closest it could come to feeling like home.
Daphne glanced around, aware of how smooth the area rug was under her bare feet. This was a rug her sister had picked out, the first change she’d made to Malfoy Manor when she first moved here. It had not been a welcome change. “I don’t know. Shall we go find him?”
“No need.” Draco reappeared through the door they’d entered from with a tin of biscuits in his hand. “Good to see you out. Hungry?”
Scorpius shook his head, eyes fixed on his mother, but Daphne padded backwards, as quiet as anyone could be here, to steal back to her brother-in-law. “He needs to sleep,” she hissed under her breath, taking a biscuit for cover.
Draco didn’t answer her. “Maybe you should change.” Now that the guest mourners were gone, he himself had back to his pyjamas and dressing gown. He didn’t care that Daphne was still around to see him like this, even though the dressing gown was a shoddy thing by now, worn with use and washes.
Scorpius tore his gaze away from the polished bit of silver that had usurped his mother’s place in the geography of the house and maybe the structures of life and family he had built up in twelve years to look back at his father. The boy blinked and was astonished by how strange it was to see another witch standing next to him.
His mother had always stood to his father’s right, and her hair was fair, like spun gold, and once or twice Scorpius had noticed that his father’s arm snaked around her waist, a black-sleeved circlet, an ivory bracelet to adorn the figure that looked nothing like that of the other mothers he knew, a secret gesture of… intimacy, at least. His aunt, on the other hand, was taller than his mother had been, and her hair was dark, although he had noticed that she’d missed the grays at the roots when she was dyeing it, and she was standing on his father’s left, and they did not look like they had ever touched. It was like the inverse of what had been real life.
The boy swallowed his confusion and said, in a steady voice that brought a pang of parental pride to his father, “I think I’ll go to my room now.”
Daphne, with the bitter taste of concern in her mouth, started forward to accompany him as she had all day, but Scorpius shuffled away before she could catch him. The two adults listened to his steps recede into the hall, and when they couldn’t hear them anymore, Draco let the biscuit tin crash to the floor and strode again to the fireplace. Daphne stayed at the threshold to clean up, then came to sit down on one of the armchairs facing the mantle. She balanced the tin on the armrest and kept eating while Draco stared.
“I should have scattered the ashes.”
Daphne blinked and let the wrapper of her biscuit fall to the soft carpet, and waited for the crinkle of its impact to fade away before asking him, “Why bother?”
“Maybe I should scatter them anyway,” Draco mused, ignoring her. He fell back to the loveseat, nearly tripping over Daphne’s wrapper, but righting himself before any more damage could be done to this family. “When Scorpius is older, I guess.”
“You could do it now if you really wanted.” Daphne began to massage her temples. She’d spent so much time with Scorpius, comforting him, holding him, patting his hair down when it he fussed with it too much, smoothing his collar when Grandfather Greengrass came to see him, that she had not had time to mourn for herself, not just for her nephew. “He’d understand. You saw what he’s been like all day.”
All day? Draco had seen him all his life. Some might have liked to undermine his and his late wife’s and his world’s style of parenting, but it was all he and she and they had known, and it was all they had a hope of living through this with. He leaned forward and took a biscuit. “Theodore brought these,” he added, for the sake of having something to say.
Daphne had thought so; she remembered Theodore and his wife bought them in bulk, to satiate their monstrous little daughter. “Nice of him.”
“Do you want tea or something?” The lord of Malfoy Manor stood, seemingly on unsteady legs, and made a motion that brought a house-elf scurrying forward. His small custom-made tunic was black, as were the tunics of all of the house’s servants, no longer slaves. “Bring us some tea, would you?”
Servant or slave, the elf still knew not to speak to his master when he was in this state. He hurried away through his elf-passages to leave the great aristocrats to themselves again.
Daphne spoke once the elf was gone. “Scorpius told me he wants to go back to school on Monday.”
The widower did not take long to react. “Good for him. Better than moping around here.” Hogwarts had nothing to do with his mother, after all. It would be easier to sleep there, where he knew his mother’s remains were not waiting for him to come see them in the morning.
“You don’t want him home?”
“I want him to do whatever he wants. If that’s going back to school, I won’t stop him. It’s not like I should keep him here anyway.” He exhaled heavily just as the elf came back, balancing on his back a silver tray that matched the urn. The elf set it down on the table, bowed low to the master and the late lady’s sister, and left without a sound. Draco thanked the air where he had been before pouring. “My mother wants to move back in now, Daphne. That… that would be worse for him than not having his mother here at all, you know that.”
Daphne bit her lip. “But he’d have you, remember, if he stayed home, and me. And, really, your mother’s not that bad when she’s not hysterical for both your sakes.”
She did not refer to her own parents. They loved their younger daughter more than they did their older, and that love applied to her son as well. Theirs was not even Narcissa’s brand of love: it was more suffocating, more unforgiving than that. It was a wonder to Daphne that they had not disowned her for her divorce, and she only barely managed to keep their hints about remarriage at bay. She couldn’t imagine what they would do to her, say to her, now that they had lost their favourite.
Draco knew why she didn’t talk about her parents. He remembered the early days of his marriage, and he remembered Astoria telling him why she did not want to invite her mother to tea or her parents for dinner, why she did not want them babysitting her son, why she wanted them far, far away from her new home. He had heard the stories way back when, in his and Daphne’s school days, but marriage shed light on them in a very different way. In a much more unsettling, ethereal way. Just as, he suspected, tragic death cast a more unsettling, ethereal light on the life of the deceased.
He held out one of the delicate porcelain cups–he hadn’t seen this set for a long time, not since before Scorpius was born–to her, and kept the other. “Astoria was happier when he was at school,” he sighed between sips of his tea. “She wanted him to have a better idea of the world.” Black, without sugar, honey, anything to alter its nature. “What else did he tell you today?”
Daphne, finding that the tea was too strong for her, sprinkled sugar over it as if it were for decoration instead of taste. A lot of life in this house and this society was like that, really. Ornamentation. “Not much,” she said after she had stirred in the sugar. Now, she rather thought, there was too much. “I told him stories about her growing up, when she was his age, that sort of thing. He liked those. He said… let me think…” She broke off, took a sip, and then balanced the cup on the other armrest. “He’s got a girlfriend, I think. Some Ravenclaw. He’s going to dump her when he gets back.”
Draco barked out a laugh, his first today. “And she’s why he wants to leave?”
She shrugged and unwrapped yet another biscuit. “I just think he can’t handle a relationship right now. Could you have?”
Ron Weasley had warned his daughter about Scorpius before school started. Draco remembered that when they got home, Astoria had immediately and not without glee announced that she had already chosen a colour scheme for the wedding. She had said she rather liked the idea of her son marrying a Weasley, but Draco suspected she would have been upset if it ever did come to pass. Marriage, even to a Weasley, would not give her son the escape she craved for him. In this world, marrying off a son is not a loss. Scorpius, after all, would not be the one to surrender his name.
Draco, now lost in thought, now tried to remember to whom he would have to write thank-you letters in the next few days. As if this had been a wedding. The Golden Trio, as the epithet went, had come, and with them had been Draco’s second cousin, tagging along out of respect, or pity, for the family he had but never wanted. “Andromeda’s grandson–Ted, I mean–he seemed to get along with Scorpius.”
Daphne hadn’t noticed, but she understood why her nephew would like him. “Well, yes. Ted makes Scorpius’ loss seem… easier to bear. It could be worse. Like I said, he still has you.”
Tonight was not the first time the idea that perhaps fate had stolen from Scorpius the wrong parent occurred to him, and it would not be the last. “I suppose.” He finished his tea and sighed. “How are you holding up, anyway?”
Daphne had been on the receiving end of this question for days, but she imagined this was nothing compared to how it was used against the widower and his son, as an armed fortification against despair deeper than extended sympathies. This seemed a bit unfair to her: it was her sister was on the mantle. They had never had the best relationship, even when the news first came out, but Daphne had sworn to her sister on her deathbed that she would never leave her son the way she had left her husband. In a way, she felt, though this was probably just the grief and the extended time spent in an enclosed space with a motherless boy getting to her, that there would never be another man she would love as much as she loved Scorpius. There was no one who deserved her more.
She knew what grief was: she had grown up watching children get killed and Muggles slaughtered, but the loss back then had been a shared one, the grief of a generation. In peacetime, if this could be called peacetime, death, though the same it had been twenty years ago and millennia before that, seemed a sharper pain. A lifetime of bloodletting could help one understand the mechanics of death, perhaps even prepare for it, but it was never enough. People were not supposed to die when all was well. Not here.
Then again, this was Malfoy Manor. The basement had been a dungeon, the drawing room a torture chamber, the halls led to execution, doom. Evil lurked in this house, corruption nestled in the cobwebs like it owned them, death framed mirrors and portraits and bedrooms. Sugar and time were precious commodities here. Decoration to hide the bloodstains, the ashes, the bitter tea, underneath.
“I just don’t want him hurt.”
“A bit late for that, Daphne.”
“I don’t want him crippled by his hurt.”
Daphne smiled a soft, sad little smile. “She was as good as dead to me for a very long time, Draco. I can’t imagine it will be much different now that it’s true.”
Draco had never been crippled by his hurt, only drowned by it. There were times even now when he woke up in the middle of the night and felt the Mark on his left arm burning, burning. Astoria hadn’t been able to help him then. Sometimes he even woke up wondering if she had helped at all, if settling down had been the right thing. And then he would pad to his son’s room and look upon him, and to his vague horror, even this was not enough to reassure him that everything had been worth it after all. Perhaps the new world order was nothing of the sort.
Perhaps it was just the old one, with sugar on top.
“I’ll be fine.”
She was two years younger than him. She was supposed to survive him.
“But God, the house is going to be empty when he leaves.”
Daphne cast her eyes around the drawing room, and wasn’t sure if she was avoiding the urn or if she had forgotten it was there at all. “It always seems empty to me.”
Draco, however, could not forget that it was there. The urn seemed to match the tea set. A trifle of an idea occurred to him, that perhaps this wasn’t an urn at all. Maybe it was from this very tea set, a twin of the sugar bowl. In essence, a coffin after all.
But what it held was not her body. Not her soul. She wasn’t really in an urn; she wasn’t even in this house. Draco had never for a moment believed that the dead lived on in the hearts and souls of the living, that memory and legacy were enough to render one immortal. He would not be able to function today, if he was functioning at all, knowing that witches like his elder aunt or wizards like her overlord were immortal because they were remembered, because they still haunted his dreams and danced over his skin like shade. Draco was not ready to be a vessel for their continued glory.
His wife was most assuredly dead.
“It usually is,” he said. “Maybe once Scorpius goes back, I’ll take some time off. Get out of here for a bit.”
A smile tugged at the corner of her lips again. “And your mum can watch the house while you’re gone.”
He did not mention that he was half-considering never coming back. “You know, for someone who hated Wiltshire so much, she never much said where she did want to go.”
“Probably because she knew she wouldn’t get out.”
A rueful smirk played on his mouth, almost an echo of the expression that had been his signature decades ago. “What’s that supposed to mean?”
Daphne shrugged. “Just that we both know we aren’t going anywhere. We can’t–won’t–get out. This place… I know it’s your home, but it might as well be mine, or my parents’, or Theodore’s, or anyone else’s. It represents the same thing, doesn’t it? You can holiday all you want, but… You were born here. Your son grew up here. Draco, my sister died in a sickroom in this house, in front of her twelve-year-old son.”
Astoria had railed against her son being at her deathbed, but Scorpius defied her demand. As the hours passed, she had come around to the idea, even reached with the last of her strength to take his hand; Scorpius had been afraid accepting it would destroy her. She had gasped out her last words to her husband with her butterfly-ephemeral grip fixed on her son’s shaking hand. She had blessed him with her last bloody coughs, her last breaths, and his eyes widened to drink in, drown in, all that he could of what was left of his mother while there was something of her that had not yet forsaken him.
Draco had watched.
He now cleared his throat. “Just don’t bury me, or I swear on my grandfather’s soul, I will haunt you until you can join me. Those were her last words.” At her lack of response, he added, “I thought you deserved to know.”
Daphne hadn’t cried yet today, but if anything could have reduced her to tears, it might have been this. “He was killed by Grindelwald, you know, our grandfather. He was ambassador to Bulgaria. Stayed in Sofia until the end, when Grindelwald invaded and killed him.”
Draco was taken aback, and felt a vague sense of the macabre descend down his spine. This conversation, whatever it was, seemed to be reaching for something greater than mere death, mere morbidity, and he wasn’t sure he liked it. Death was not macabre. That honour fell to life. “Funny she was thinking of him at the end.”
“Well, no, not really. There wasn’t a body to bury then, either.”
But there had been a body, and she knew it. It had been sent from Sofia nearly a century ago, brought to rest in the Greengrass family’s Cornwall crypt the very day it arrived, a marble coffin, freshly tilled earth. Roses at the headstone.
When she died, Astoria had not thought of the grandfather she never met. She had not seen herself as the messenger that was supposed to be spared death, who had no quarrel with its authority, but was slaughtered anyway. Daphne knew this because she had spent hours with just grief and a twelve-year-old boy whose mother had become ash for company. This boy had not spoken very much to his aunt, except for when she told him stories about her dead sister. He had liked those, she thought. And then, just before he finally jumped out of the enclosed space with grief and a woman in the late afternoon of her days, he had told her a story of his own.
His mother’s last words were these:
“I wish it were you instead of me.”
Previous Chapter Next Chapter
Other Similar Stories
Cherry Tree ...
Visions of R...

I want to thank the Kiwanis Club of Tobaccoland (Durham, NC) for having me as their guest speaker last week. It was a fun time.
Posts tagged ‘Cris Cohen’
Thank you to the Dads Appreciating Down Syndrome group for having me as their guest speaker last Friday. It was great connecting with other parents of special needs kids. It was also nice to find out that I am not the only person who noticed that a year of cable TV service now costs about as much as a sport utility vehicle.
I want to thank the Kiwanis Club of Apex for having me as their guest speaker yesterday. It was a fun time and it was great to learn the various ways that I could eat disturbing quantities of food at Disney World.
I would like to thank the Rotary Club of Morrisville for having me as their guest speaker today. The people were nice, the setting was beautiful, and they had a buffet the size of an Amtrak passenger car. By the time you made it from the salad section to the dessert table you had crossed into a different county.

"But I don't wanna!" still seems to me a perfectly valid reason not to do something, particularly when it's me that doesn't want to do whatever it is that needs doing.
Perhaps the fact that I don't use it as an excuse anywhere near as often as I'd like could be considered a step in the right direction.
My Friend, Mountain
4 hours ago

Our workshop with Ronnie the Rat Meyers is coming up on us quickly. It has been a pleasure to have watched Ronnie over the years making better and even better work. I hope at age 78 my work shows as much love of process as his. Ronnie is one of those that needs to make pots. He needs to for his very soul. It is not for the money but for the love of his work. He is an inspiration to me. I have suggested we
This is a pic of me, Ronnie and Ted Saupe at the U of Georgia.

I have quite a few moles / small cyst like bumps on my face. I've had them checked by a doctor so there's no health-related problem but there's an area on my face where there's three in a cluster that I'd like to have something done to. I think they are too small for proper removal though and am not sure what other options there are. Has anyone had good results with a similar issue? Thanks!

TRUE LOVE EXISTS
A young man that wanted marrying his wife was discouraged not to marry her because his family members didn’t like her but the man stood on his decision and said,
“God told me she’s my destiny helper and that she is my wife” so he went ahead and married her against his family’s will.
4 months after their marriage, he lost his job and his family members started laughing at him but then, the man will always hold his wife’s hands and say, “I’m not giving up on you, no matter what people say, I don’t care because God said you are my wife”
2 weeks later, his wife got an email that said,
‘You have won a family lottery that enables you and your husband to live and work abroad’, meanwhile…
The woman applied for the lottery when they were still dating because she also believed the man was her husband.
That was how God blessed them and silenced those that laughed at them.
NOW READ THIS LINE;
September has just over two weeks to go, this is my prayer for you
1). Before this september ends, may you locate your destiny helper
2). All those that laughed at you will surely rejoice with you.

Why would a dentist want to put a white crown on a wisdom tooth (to replace a gold crown that came off)? He didn't give me a choice, but I didn't think to question it at the time. Now that the crown is ready, I'm suspicious. Would he have to grind the tooth down farther to put on a white crown? The tooth never bothered me until he worked on it.

A man got the shock of his life when his penis was nearly bitten off by a woman he was attempting to have sex with.
Florin Ionita, 53, was found with his pants around his ankles by his wife, Maria, screaming in agony and begging for an ambulance to be called.
“I was at a picnic with my husband and some friends and I left to take some of them home in our car, leaving him behind with one friend,” Maria told Mirror. “When I came back I saw him with his trousers around his ankles clutching his private parts and saying 'Call an ambulance, it is going to fall off.'”
Maria said she demanded that her husband tell her what happened, and discovered that he’d exposed his private parts to a friend of hers during the picnic. She responded by biting his penis. Ionita reportedly told his wife that he “just wanted to pass the time pleasantly.”
Popular VideoThis young teenage singer was shocked when Keith Urban invited her on stage at his concert. A few moments later, he made her wildest dreams come true.
Maria forgave her husband, saying that he was “only trying to do what all men try to do, but when I called the ambulance I didn't do it too fast, and I told them not to hurry.” According to Mirror Online, she also purposely gave emergency responders unclear directions to their location.
Maria’s friend reported Ionita to authorities following the incident, accusing him of attempting to assault her. He faces up to five years behind bars.
Popular VideoThis young teenage singer was shocked when Keith Urban invited her on stage at his concert. A few moments later, he made her wildest dreams come true:
Source: Mirror Online / Photo Credit: mirror.co.uk, WikiCommons

So I actually saw my daughter this evening...in person. Phew. That was so very nice. I drank her in and tried not to crash while driving. It was so very good to see her face. I talk to her a lot on the phone but it is just different to be in her presence. I must say it was a lot like watching a movie as it doesn't seem real to me that I was actually with her. Cecilia is spending the night with her which I am very glad. A week ago I was not sure as the activities of the dorm kids are uh.........questionable. But her room is very nice and is really a double room so Cecilia has her own space and they will be able to go to breakfast and hang out tonight and tomorrow. Wish I were there.
Anna has certainly become a part of the life of IU. Not in the party way but the academic way. She is very busy and very tired but still seems to be soaking it all in. I think a night to sleep in would be a good thing. I still find it very odd that now that I have seen her she will not be coming home with me. I hope I can handle that hole when I drive away on Sunday. We will paint the town red tomorrow and I will continue to stare without making her uncomfortable.
In the crib across the room is Ingrid. She is quietly sleeping in all her sweetness. I am staring at her too.
At home unfortunately Benjamin is having another asthma attack and Charley is discovering his breathing treatment thingy does not seem to work or we don't know what we are doing. Thankfully Charley feels confident to handle it tomorrow and get it fixed. Thank you Charley.
3 days ago

The girls played St. Francis on Tuesday, Nov. 17, at St. Francis. This was a nerve-racking game. In the first period, the Stars pulled ahead when Kari Turkowski scored the first goal. But St. Francis was out for revenge, although the Stars werenít going to let that happen.
The second period was really rough when St. Francis scored a goal to tie the game. Of course, the Stars came through as Courtney Karsch scored to end the second period with a 2-1 lead.
Because it was a close game, the Stars were determined not to go home with a loss. Again, Turkowski scored and at the very end of the third period, on an open net, Natalie Rinn scored to end the game with a score of 4-1.
On Saturday, Nov. 21, the River Lakes Stars played Morris on home ice. The girls were really pumped for this game and knew what they had to do to win.
The first period was a great period for the Stars. They skated hard and really played as a team. The first goal was scored by Rinn which was assisted by Missy Sieben and Turkowski. This really made the Stars get more fired up as they wanted another goal. They skated harder and were really playing their positions. The second goal was scored right in front of the net by Karsch which was assisted by Melissa Jungles. The Stars were excited at the end of this period and knew that they could win.
In the second period, things started to get rough, as hockey can be. The Morris team was wanting the puck more than anything so they could score. With a great goalie, Shari Vogt, there was no stopping the Stars. Turkowski was called with a cross checking penalty and Karsch for a slashing penalty along with two Morris players which were both called with tripping.
The Stars just wanted to play the game, but Morris was getting angry and got called with a roughing penalty. This put the Stars at an advantage but, unfortunately, no goals were scored this period.
The third period was also a great one. The Stars wanted to show Morris what they were really made of. There was another penalty called on Jungles for holding and another Morris player was called for roughing.
The Stars were getting down to the end of the period and tried to prevent Morris from scoring and thatís what they did. They had a great 2-0 victory over Morris. The shots on goal were an even 16-16.
Return to Sports Archives

Sean, came to my rescue when my boiler had stopped working. I found Sean to be professional and efficient, came when he said he would and was very reasonable for the work he had done. Would not hesitate to recommend Sean to others.
Great, efficient service from Sean. Arrives when he says he will and gets the job done. Would thoroughly recommend him.

The last day of qualies and I only saw 2 matches Mello winning into the main draw with Sa, Saretta and a couple of other Brazilian guys cheering him on.The other was Misha unfortunately losing to Muller of Luxembourg in the final match. Muller served very well and Misha made plenty of errors on his backhand and was under pressure because of Muller's serving. There are a few injuries around, so there is hope that he might get as in a Lucky Loser but that’s a bit desperate.
Today on the practice courts there were a some guys who practiced twice today. Chela and Costa and one guy I know thinks Chela does look like a monkey in the face, he's definitely not as hairy as an ape. Then later Costa was hitting up with Srichaphan and there were a few people around to see them.
Pavel was hitting up with Nieminen and they were sharing the court with some other guys, then later Pavel was training with Gonzo and they were both timing the ball very well and De La Pena was his usual self. I have to say Gonzo does have a very attractive girlfriend, then again that is the same with most players.
Safin was hitting up with Ljubicic and they were both training very well, and the lack of screaming girls was a wonderful thing. Yes, there was one or two but not as many as there is going to be during the week. I like Safin, though those kinds of fans are very annoying to say the least.Guga was there as well and didn't have the screaming girl factor there, and from what I saw all the players were accommodating to the fans, yes that includes Costa.
One of my friends spoke to Arazi and he told me that Younes was able to practice today and is confident that he will play the Open. He also told us about how life is when a player is injured, it was interesting to hear what he did during his three months off tennis. Koubek was out there slugging away with Oli Rochus, and Escude was on the court beforehand as well. Rounding out the day I saw Kucera, Söderling, Ferrer, Saretta practicing as well at different times.
I have just looked at the schedule of play and I think I will be seeing this matches, though not all of them in full.
Roddick vs Gonzo on the big screen
Safin vs Vahaly, if I can get past all the screaming girls
Younes vs Blanco
Massu vs Nieminen
Hrbaty vs Saretta
Ginepri vs Horna
Patience vs Andreev
Gaudio vs Robredo
These are who I want to win, they probably won't Gonzo, Safin, Nieminen, Hrbaty, Horna, Andreev and Gaudio.

To provide medical care to rescued cats and kittens
It enables us to provide needed medical care to our cats.
One: Abraham, not adopted yet; he is still recovering from his injuries.
Abraham was recently (October 2018) rescued off the streets and was in very rough shape! He got his ear sutured, was given a nice bath, had the abscess removed from under his tongue, and had his ears cleaned out, as he had horrible ear mites. We were all supporting and giving him as much medical attention as he needs. His foster mom says that he is such a love bug. Doesn’t like dogs. Loves wet food. He loves to rub all over you. He is the biggest lap cat. He will let you hold him, but only for a bit. Loves to have his ears rubbed. He doesn’t mind other cats as long as they are laid-back. I showed him a kitten; he paid no attention. Abraham is a very, very sweet boy and deserves a second chance. Humans have failed him! He was born around May of 2017 and is fixed, up-to-date on shots and FIV/FELV-negative.
UPDATE ON ABRAHAM as of November 2018: BECAUSE HIS EAR IS VERY BAD HE WILL BE SEEING THE VET EVERY WEEK FOR LASER TREATMENT UNTIL HIS EAR IS HEALED.
He has not been adopted yet; his wounds need to heal. We have not posted him to Petfinder yet. It’s too soon.

Source From: Wendell Steavenson Subject: The U.S. Army Goes to High School Tuesday, Dec. 23, 2003, at 1:13 PM PT Ibrahim Ahmed Hakmet is 16, a cocky, engagingly arrogant kid; slim, with close-cropped hair, a little acne on his temples, and a tendency to giggle at me, because apparently I remind him of his aunt. A few days after Saddam's capture, he was arrested by the Americans. About a hundred soldiers in armored Humvees and tanks surrounded the Amriyeh High School (a school for boys aged between 16 and 19). With the Iraqi police in attendance, they went from classroom to classroom matching faces to photographs and names to a list. They were looking for boys who had been at a pro-Saddam demonstration the day before. "It's against the law," explained Lt. Col. Leopoldo Quintas, commander of the 2-70 "Old Ironsides" Armored Battalion, which carried out the operation. "And they were displaying pictures of Saddam." It's subversive," added his public affairs officer. Ibrahim said he was the first to be caught because he was on his way out of school to get a doctor's note; it was midmorning, and he was the only student on the front entrance path. "An American officer shouted at me: 'Sit down! Sit down!' and indicated that I should kneel, pointing with his gun. Then he said, 'Get up!' I didn't understand what he wanted me to do, so I put my hands on the wall. He kicked me twice on the leg. He was very big. He checked me roughly, even behind my ears, and threw my English and Arabic books away. He cuffed my hands with wire, roughly. He sprained my wrist. And later, when he was taking the wire off, he cut me when he was cutting it with a knife." Ibrahim and several other detained boys (Ibrahim says nine or 10, the Americans say five or six) were put in the back of a truck. The truck broke down and had to be towed by a tank. An outraged crowd had gathered: parents, passers-by, kids from neighborhood schools, shouting and yelling. Ibrahim was rather enamored of his adventure. "We were laughing," he said, all tough and unconcerned, wearing his bandaged wrist like a trophy and using a single crutch to support the leg he said was kicked and beaten with a stick. "We knew we hadn't done anything. One of the Americans said in Arabic, 'Incheb!' Shut up!" Ibrahim was full of himself, laughing at the Americans to their faces, getting beaten for his defiance, and then asking for more. "The more I laughed, the more he hit me. It shows what kind of a weak man he was to hit a boy," he sneered. The Americans, in their efforts at zero tolerance, intimidation, containment, detentions, night arrests, and operations to arrest high-school kids, provoke only frustration, outrage, and distrust. "The soldiers went through my class," said Mr. Karim, the math teacher, " 'What is your name? What is your name?' The children were afraid." "They had no right, no right to come!" Mr. Hamza, the Arabic teacher, was indignant. "Is this American democracy?" The headmaster, Mr. Fadhil, said he was angry. The boys in the school were angry with him. He had not protected them against the Americans; he had invited the Americans to arrest them. Spray-painted on the wall of the school were slogans: "Saddam's High School!" "Down Down USA!" and "Down With the Informer Principal Fadhil!" They were quickly painted over. "Do you think Mr. Fadhil can keep his job after this unpleasantness?" I asked. Ibrahim hid his mouth behind his hand and giggled at such a silly question. "Oh we want him to stay! He's in our pocket now! Who else will pass us this year?" Ibrahim does not go to school very regularly. He says he has observed that those with an education and those without end up earning the same amount. He has been learning English for five years and cannot speak a word, except to understand some of what the American soldiers shouted at him. School, for him, is more of a place to hang out with friends than an institution of discipline and educational standards. The Amriyeh High School is newly painted and has some old computers. The classrooms are very bare: cheap wooden desks, benches, blackboard, and chalk. The Americans have been refurbishing schools, but it's often just a paint job. It's the state of lassitude and corruption that is the problem. Pay the teachersa few bribes, threats, whateverand they will pass you. Ibrahim shrugged, "The principal is a moody guy. Sometimes you can give him some chocolates and he is all right. Other times he wants a million Iraqi dinars." Amriyeh is a suburb with Sunni Triangle sensibilities, where a lot of families from Ramadi and Tikrit settled. It's also an area in which Saddam distributed land to Mukhabarat (intelligence) officers. "These are their sons," explained Mr. Hamza, the Arabic teacher. "This was a real country to be proud of," said Ibrahim. "I am Iraqi. They are humiliating every Iraqi when they humiliate Saddam. Even if Hitler came here he would not fill our eyes [make us proud] as much as Saddam did." Ibrahim has read about Hitler. When the Americans arrested him and his school friends, they took them to their base nearby (a former Republican Guard barracks) and held them in what Ibrahim described as "a cage," and what the colonel called "a temporary holding facility," although he wouldn't let me see it "for security reasons." The soldiers let them out to use the washroom and to be questioned. They were fed chicken and macaroni and chocolate bars for lunch. Ibrahim said it was pretty good. "They are civil in a way," Ibrahim said. "They are afraid of the situation here, and that's why they behave badly." But he is not intimidated by them. His family has seen plenty of American injustice. His father (something to do with the former government, though exactly what Ibrahim wouldn't say) has been detained three times, his uncle twice. His cousin was shot in the leg at an American checkpoint when he didn't understand what the soldier was shouting. His grandmother had three and a half kilos of gold and an heirloom diamond necklace taken during a nighttime raid on her house. All run-of-the-mill, unverifiable stories of the kind I have heard many times. "A foreigner will always be the weaker one." observed Ibrahim. "This is my country: They came by force they will leave by force." The Americans questioned Ibrahim and the others and determined that they were just schoolboys protesting; there had been no particular resistance involvement. "I would have preferred not to have done it," said Lt. Col. Quintas, while acknowledging that the operation at the school had been undertaken on his initiative, "But they need to understand that they are not allowed to do this and that there are consequences." The boys were released that evening and driven home. Ibrahim said that was the only time he was scaredhe was worried the Humvee he was being taken in might get hit by the resistance. They rang the doorbell. His father came out. "It was funny," said Ibrahim. "He didn't know if they were going to return me or take him!"

How happy did I feel when I again found myself out of their town, although at that moment I did not know where I should find a lodging for the night, and was, besides, excessively tired. But I pursued my journey, and still kept in the road to Derby, along a footpath which I knew to be right. It led across a very pleasant mead, the hedges of which were separated by stiles, over which I was often obliged to clamber. When I had walked some distance without meeting with an inn on the road, and it had already begun to be dark, I at last sat me down near a small toll-house, or a turnpike-gate, in order to rest myself, and also to see whether the man at the turnpike could and would lodge me.
After I had sat here a considerable time, a farmer came riding by, and asked me where I wanted to go? I told him I was so tired that I could go no farther. On this the good-natured and truly hospitable man, of his own accord and without the least distrust, offered to take me behind him on his horse and carry me to a neighbouring inn, where he said I might stay all night.
The horse was a tall one, and I could not easily get up. The turnpike-man, who appeared to be quite decrepid and infirm, on this came out. I took it for granted, however, that he who appeared to have hardly sufficient strength to support himself could not help me. This poor looking, feeble old man, however, took hold of me with one arm, and lifted me with a single jerk upon the horse so quick and so alertly that it quite astonished me.
And now I trotted on with my charming farmer, who did not ask me one single impertinent question, but set me down quietly at the inn, and immediately rode away to his own village, which lay to the left.
This inn was called the Bear, and not improperly; for the landlord went about and growled at his people just like a bear, so that at first I expected no favourable reception. I endeavoured to gentle him a little by asking for a mug of ale, and once or twice drinking to him. This succeeded; he soon became so very civil and conversable, that I began to think him quite a pleasant fellow. This device I had learnt of the "Vicar of Wakefield," who always made his hosts affable by inviting them to drink with him. It was an expedient that suited me also in another point of view, as the strong ale of England did not at all agree with me.
This innkeeper called me sir; and he made his people lay a separate table for himself and me; for he said he could see plainly I was a gentleman.
In our chat, we talked much of George the Second, who appeared to be his favourite king, much more so than George the Third. And among others things, we talked of the battle at Dettingen, of which he knew many particulars. I was obliged also in my turn to tell him stories of our great King of Prussia, and his numerous armies, and also what sheep sold for in Prussia. After we had been thus talking some time, chiefly on political matters, he all at once asked me if I could blow the French horn? This he supposed I could do, only because I came from Germany; for he said he remembered, when he was a boy, a German had once stopped at the inn with his parents who blew the French horn extremely well. He therefore fancied this was a talent peculiar to the Germans.
I removed this error, and we resumed our political topics, while his children and servants at some distance listened with great respect to our conversation.
Thus I again spent a very agreeable evening; and when I had breakfasted in the morning, my bill was not more than it had been at Sutton. I at length reached the common before Derby on Friday morning. The air was mild, and I seemed to feel myself uncommonly cheerful and happy. About noon the romantic part of the country began to open upon me. I came to a lofty eminence, where all at once I saw a boundless prospect of hills before me, behind which fresh hills seemed always to arise, and to be infinite.
The ground now seemed undulatory, and to rise and fall like waves; when at the summit of the rise I seemed to be first raised aloft, and had an extensive view all around me, and the next moment, when I went down the hill, I lost it.
In the afternoon I saw Derby in the vale before me, and I was now an hundred and twenty-six miles from London. Derby is but a small, and not very considerable town. It was market-day when I got there, and I was obliged to pass through a crowd of people: but there was here no such odious curiosity, no offensive staring, as at Burton. At this place too I took notice that I began to be always civilly bowed to by the children of the villages through which I passed.
From Derby to the baths of Matlock, which is one of the most romantic situations, it was still fifteen miles. On my way thither, I came to a long and extensive village, which I believe was called Duffield. They here at least did not show me into the kitchen, but into the parlour; and I dined on cold victuals.
The prints and pictures which I have generally seen at these inns are, I think, almost always prints of the royal family, oftentimes in a group, where the king, as the father of the family, assembles his children around him; or else I have found a map of London, and not seldom the portrait of the King of Prussia; I have met with it several times. You also sometimes see some of the droll prints of Hogarth. The heat being now very great, I several times in this village heard the commiserating exclamation of "Good God Almighty!" by which the people expressed their pity for me, as being a poor foot passenger.

I love it! We've been there three or four times. The food has very good taste and nice design. The atmosphere is good and servants are so welcoming. It's a fine cuisine, so won't expect a good portion of food. it was enough for me but my husband was still hungry! I highly recommend it!

Blows Me Away
The wife of the colleague I met with in San Francisco accompanied him on the trip. Both of them are friends as well as colleagues. She was also a professor at his university, before a degenerative skin disease started taking her life away. I can’t recall what the disease is called, but it acts like diabetes in that the circulation halts and then causes infections. To date, she has had to have both legs amputated at the knees and has one prothesis while waiting for the other. She joined us for dinner on Wednesday, in her wheelchair, being as energetic as a Spring day. She even had a saucy cap and shimmering body glitter on. Sure, she looked fairly pale and very frail – but her spirit was alive and kicking. I admire her so much for her strength to keep fighting, and most of all for her strength to keep optimistic. An amazing lady.

Available ebook formats: epub mobi pdf rtf lrf pdb txt html
Lynda Lambert's career has been split between professional non-fiction writer and teacher of writing. She began trying her hand at fiction in the early 1990's as a way, she says, of "blowing off steam." After years of writing for herself, which produced two finished novels and six children's books, she decided that it was time to begin publishing some of her fiction. As of this writing in June of 2013, she has just uploaded her first novel-- a mystery/suspense/romance-- to Smashwords. However, with 9 more novels in various stages of completion, there will be more to come.

Here are some pictures of 4th of July. We went to my mom's and dad's to swim and have BBQ, then we went back to our house to watch fireworks in our court. I was worried that Taylor would freak out with all the noise and want to go inside, but I was shocked because she was obsessed with all the action. She couldn't get enough of all the fireworks. I love the 4th of July because I am so proud to be an American and have the freedom to choose. We are so blessed as a family and are so thankful for all we have. Everyday is a blessing!!!!
Wednesday, July 01, 2009
Here are some pictures from our Aptos beach trip at the end of May. We had a blast with everyone as usual and the highlight of the week was that Scott and Katherine got engaged while we were there!!! We were all surprised and very excited!! The girls are asking every day when we can go back to the beach again! We love it there!!
Posted by Baez Family at 1:09 PM

Hyderabad: A man was murdered on picking up quarrels on trivial issues. This incident took place at Jalal Baba Nagar, Chintalmet, Rajendra Nagar area.
Mohammed Ibrahim (58) who made an attempt to save his son, Shahzeb who was an auto driver from the attack of the miscreants was killed.
Seeing the miscreants beating Ibrahim, his wife came out to save her husband but the miscreants targeted her also.
According to the details of the incident, the Autodriver Shazeb was plying vehicle at a greater speed. Asif and Mujahid picked up a quarrel with him and chased him to his house. They attacked auto driver. When his father Ibrahim came to rescue his son, he was also attacked. He received major injuries. He was rushed to the hospital where he succumbed to injuries.

Barely discernible in the late afternoon light, a tall man crouched on the roof of a warehouse, waiting. If his legs were cramping from the strain of squatting or his arms sore from their perch just a hair away from the trigger of the sniper rifle in front of him, his face didn't show it.
In fact, his face didn't show much of anything.
Dark eyes were shuttered tightly, mouth set in a thin, determined line. This was it. He was so close.
He was so close to her.
Caitlin Todd stood slowly, feeling her ribs already beginning to bruise from where the bullet had nearly penetrated her vest.
"Protection detail's over, Kate," Gibbs told her firmly.
The brunette's only response was to grimace.
"You did good," Tony added with a grin, his tone flavored slightly with awe.
"For once," Gibbs said, looking her in the eye pointedly, "Dinozzo's right."
Kate felt a rush of blood to her already woozy head. Had she heard right? Had Gibbs just said what she thought he said? Suddenly, her brain caught up with her and she smiled widely, a huge, happy smile that lit up her face and dulled in the ache in her ribs.
"Wow," she said, as calmly as she could, "I thought I'd die before I ever got a…"
Tony hadn't even realized what had happened until he felt something warm splatter across his face. He flinched away instinctively, but turned back just in time to see his partner fall.
Only, this time, it was for good.
Blinking over and over seemed to be all he could do. He saw a red puddle pooling out from under her head, the same head that he'd heard crack sickeningly as it hit the concrete she now lay on. Her legs were tangled on top of one another, knees bent at an awkward angle. Hazel eyes stared up unseeingly, eyes that had never gotten the chance to close before the light in them had flickered out. And, in the very center of her forehead, was a small, perfect bullet hole.
There was only one person who could shoot that well. And Tony knew who it was. He knew he knew. But, for some reason, the name just wouldn't appear in his head. Because, at the moment, his mind was preoccupied with following a much different thought path.
Could anyone possibly have more ironic last words?
Ari Haswari watched silently as Caitlin Todd dropped to the ground, her body arching gracefully in a movement that would have made any dancer jealous.
Even in death she was beautiful.
He watched as her blood covered the face of the young Italian man beside her, saw him blink furiously, his face distorted by flecks of red.
From his vantage point, he could even see the blood that flowed onto the ground beneath her head, draining slowly from her body.
But, what he was most interested in, what he had come to find out, was the look on Gibbs' face. The look that would tell him everything he needed to know. The look that would have been impossible to see, had she not fallen.
He took one last glance at her still form before rising from his position. It really was a shame she'd had to die.
For once, he let out a thought in words and, in doing so, revealed his intentions for anyone who might have been listening to hear. But he'd had to.
Because without saying it, there would have been no way to get it out of his mind.
Gibbs sat on the floor of his basement dressed in old, sawdust-covered sweats, a mug of bourbon in one hand and a scruffy sketchbook in the other. His posture was weary, and with each passing minute his shoulders slumped further forward. He flipped through the thick, cream-colored pages almost hesitantly, always taking the time to examine each drawing, his fingers lingering at the edges of the pad as if he wished to close it forever.
For one long, heartbreakingly painful hour he sat on the cold, hard floor by his boat and mourned in his own way.
Finally, after he'd looked at, admired, every single sketch and moved to close the book, he noticed it.
Had there always been a page missing?
The air around the cemetery was always cold, but even more so at just past midnight. The man standing by the freshly-dug grave near one of the area's many oak trees, however, didn't seem to feel the biting temperature. He simply stood, still as stone for a few minutes, with a shovel in one hand.
Then, he began to dig.
Forty-five minutes later, an American-flag covered coffin rested on the ground by his feet. Almost tenderly, he brushed a bit of dirt from the lid of the box before prying it open.
The first thing he noticed was that someone had closed her eyes and sighed. He'd so been looking forward to seeing them one last time.
Cocking his head slightly, he took in the rest of her body. She was laid out as if she was sleeping, her small hands folded across her chest, nails neatly trimmed and shimmering from the pearlescent nail polish that still remained from the last time she'd gotten them done. She'd been dressed rather simply, he noted. Which really was too bad. She deserved to have been buried in a ball gown and tiara.
He reached into his pocket and pulled out a crumpled sheet of paper he'd torn from her precious sketchbook. Smoothing it out gently, he traced his eyes over it for the thousandth time.
A sketch of his own face dominated the page, his face the way she'd seen it. It looked almost…kind.
In a blank corner, though, there was another drawing, nearly identical in skill and style to the one that had been originally drawn on the page. This one, however, had been done by a different hand.
It was a sketch of her, looking over her shoulder and smiling hair blowing freely and eyes sparkling. Her face, the way he saw it.
He folded the sheet carefully in two and placed it under her hands. Gazing at her face reverently, he gently smoothed her hair back before stepping away from the coffin.
Half an hour later the grave looked as if no one had ever been there.
Ari Haswari turned and walked away, not once looking back. His eyes were again closed off from the world, but the words that had been running through his mind all evening escaped softly from his lips.
It takes only two to play a game, Caitlin.

Meet James Wathern, a 73-year-old who was battling various illnesses – one after another. One day, his nurses-in-charge noticed that James started to become less cheerful – it was unlike of him to behave in this way. He also lost 15 pounds rapidly, due to his lack of appetite. James was suffering from depression.
One of the nurses suggested bringing his dog Bubba into the hospital, to pay James a visit. Bubba is a chihuahua, and sneaking him in was incredibly easy – just to cheer James up. Thanks to the nurses, James got to bid Bubba a final farewell before he passed away.

The evening started so innocently for 18-year-old Sidea Griffin.
The Kempsville High School senior was headed with her boyfriend to a theater in Town Center, where the couple planned to see the horror film "The Bye Bye Man."
But her boyfriend needed to make a stop first, according to family members. The stop soon turned into an attempted robbery, with Griffin's boyfriend driving away and the would-be robber firing a gun at the fleeing car, said Griffin's aunt, Tarryn McPherson.
A bullet broke through the rear window and pierced the passenger seat, striking Griffin in the back. She was taken to Sentara Princess Anne Hospital about 10 p.m. Saturday and pronounced dead a short time later, according to police.
A juvenile was arrested the following day and charged with second-degree murder. Police and prosecutors would not say how old he is or identify him.
Griffin's death stunned family and friends, who described her as smart, sweet and soft-spoken.
"She had a million-dollar smile," McPherson said. "She didn't like confrontation, she didn't like drama. She just wanted to be happy."
Griffin's grandmother Patty McPherson said she enjoyed making her granddaughter laugh. "Anything to see that smile," she said.
Griffin was an honor student with a nearly 4.0 GPA, her family said. She played on her high school soccer team, and loved going to movies and hanging out with friends and her tight-knit family. She was close to her four siblings, but she and her 6-year-old sister, Ayasia, "adored" each other, family members agreed.
Griffin was looking forward to all the traditional senior year activities and was excited about going to prom in the spring and graduating in June. Her parents had planned to surprise her with an after-graduation trip to Miami, which she had wanted to visit.
"She was such a caring person," said her mother, Selena Griffin. "I never had any trouble with her. She was always respectful."
Griffin hadn't made up her mind about what she would do after graduation but was interested in being a nurse or joining the military, her mother said. She considered combining the two by becoming a military nurse.
"She wanted to travel more than anything," Selena Griffin said.
Kempsville girls soccer coach Mike Danley described Griffin as a bright student, a hard worker and a popular member of the team.
She had little, if any, experience playing soccer when she decided to try out for the junior varsity team during her sophomore year. But by her sixth or seventh game, she was moved up to a starting position, Danley said.
"She'd look at me and say, 'I don't really know what I'm doing out here,' but clearly she did," Danley said.
When other team members were talking while their coach was speaking, Griffin would ask them to be quiet, Danley said.
"She had my back and was helping me out, but I also think she did it because she wanted to hear what I was saying. She was always wanting to learn."
Kempsville senior Emily Levy met Griffin when both were trying out for the team. Griffin had such a warm smile and outgoing, magnetic personality that Levy knew she was a friend to keep.
"She was just an amazing person," Levy said. "One of the most caring people I ever met."
Friends and family held a candlelight vigil for Griffin on Monday night and released 18 balloons for the 18 years of her life. For a moment after they rose into the air, the balloons formed a heart, Levy said.
That shape was a perfect reminder "she was loved," Levy said. "And how much she loved us."

Joseph D. McKeon was born on September 18, 1942. He was appointed to the New York City Fire Department (FDNY) on May 16, 1970, and served his first four years in the quarters of Engine Company 50. He was promoted to lieutenant in October of 1978, and served in this capacity for 11 years before being promoted to captain in December of 1989. After four years as captain in Engine Company 23, he was promoted to his final role as battalion chief.
Chief McKeon was cited three times for acts of bravery and awarded honors in 1990, 1992, 2003, and 2004.
He died on August 19, 2017, from an illness related to his response to the 9/11 terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center.
Chief McKeon is survived by his wife, MaryAnn; his son, Christopher; daughters, Kerry and Patricia; and grandchildren, Elizabeth, Thomas, Daniel, Padric, and Anne.

NORTHWEST ASIAN WEEKLY
A service was held for Judy Lui on Oct. 20. Born in Canton, China, Lui passed away on Oct. 5 at age 66, after a year-long battle with cancer.
Lui grew up in Hong Kong and immigrated to the United States when she was in her 30s. She lived in San Francisco and New York before ultimately settling in Seattle, where she met her late husband Oswald Chow.
During her time in Seattle, Lui enjoyed a lengthy career at KeyBank and she became the brand manager at the Chinatown branch. Many of her KeyBank colleagues were at her funeral. Lui was also a very active member in the community and gave her time and talents to many organizations.
Lui is survived by her mother, sister, and nieces and nephews.

But in the short film 2081, everyone was forced to be just like everyone else, completely the same. No one would be better or less than anyone else, thanks to the “add ons” people were given to wear or attach to themselves from the United States Handicapper General. These attachments were made to prevent anyone from being able to pursue any talents or wanted achievements they had, and it worked. When the death of an incredibly gifted man occurs, everyone is shown that “it is better to live free than to die enslaved”. In both the film and the short story “2081” ,Harrison Bergeron is known for his impeccable strength and knowledge, and for this reason, Harrison was taken away from his family and home to be held captive where he could not do any “harm” to anyone or anything. When Harrison escapes from being held captive, he ends up in a theatre where a dance performance is being held. He makes his way onto the stage and begins to shout orders at the crowd. In the film Harrison had planted a decoy bomb underneath the stage before hand. Harrison ordered the orchestra to play music for himself and one of the dancers who had volunteered to dance with him. The two began to dance a ballet duet. After an extended amount of time, the United States Handicapper General finally found where Harrison was and made there way into the theatre. While the performance and everything else that had happened had been broadcasted on television, Harrison was shot. Which everyone that was watching on television and in person was able to see, including Harrison’s father. In the film Harrison’s mother got up to finish the dishes while his father stayed seated on the couch watching everything that had happened. When his mother returned to the living room where they were watching the broadcast, she had asked Harrison’s father what was wrong but he could not remember because his handicappers had erased any memory he had of what had happened on the broadcast or Harrison. In the short story “Harrison Bergeron”, it was Harrison’s father that got up from the couch to get something from the kitchen . While Harrison’s mother stayed seated on the couch in front of the television, she saw the entire ballet performance performed by Harrison and the dancer that had volunteered to dance with him and even saw when harrison was shot. After a few moments, Harrison’s father returned to his couch beside harrison’s mother and asked what he missed on the television. Harrison’s mother replied with,”I do not recall but it was something very sad”. Both the film and the short story were very alike, the only differences were that in the film harrison’s mother left the room and in the short story it was Harrison’s father who had left, the decoy bomb that were placed beneath the stage, and the age of harrison when he was taken away was different in the movie than it was in the short story.

GAFFNEY, SC – Joey Dover of Gaffney, SC, rescued his beloved cat Buttons from a 35 foot well, but not before having to be rescued himself.
After Dover’s beloved cat of 10 years, Buttons disappeared, he was devastated. Then one day he heard her meowing from a well. Dover decided to tie a rope around his waist and the other end to his pickup as he made his way down the well. However, it didn’t work and Dover ended up falling down the well with Buttons.
Several hours later rescue crews were able to get them out.

All of me singer, John Legend has revealed he once tried to end the relationship between wife, Chrissy Teigen but it was not successful.
The singer started dating the model almost ten years ago and though they are very happy together, he once tried to call things off at a time when he felt ‘stressed and busy’.
Luckily, things went back to how they were within half an hour of having a serious talk and Chrissy refusing to let him end the relationship.
‘I was really stressed and busy. I was just like, “I’d just be happier single right now,” and she was like, “No”.’
The couple got married in Lake Como, Italy, in September 2013 and have a daughter, Luna together.

"My dog Sandy (a Lab mix) was very excited when the food arrived. She and her friend would give me no peace until I opened the bag and gave them each some. I was concerned that they would not like it, but I am sure now that they love it! I am thrilled to try out vegan dog food. Here are Sandy and her friend Buntu playing. I would take a picture of the two of them eating the new V-Dog food, but they eat it so fast....Eat, Sleep, Play = it's a dog's life."

Evanescence's Terry Balsamo has opened up about his 2005 stroke and what he suspects caused the incident — headbanging.
The guitarist suffered a stroke that paralyzed the left side of his body in November 2005 and since that time has had to retrain himself on his guitar and undergo extensive physical therapy to regain use of his body. Balsamo told Ultimate Guitar magazine, "I've always had a weird thing in my neck doing that, but I never would have thought it would have given me a stroke. [The doctors] actually saw the clot in my artery in my neck. more

Saturday, June 25, 2016
Jung heals with a lullaby: the healing power of song
Jung agreed to see a woman who had “incurable” insomnia that had resisted all previous treatment. In her presence, he found himself remembering a lullaby his mother had crooned to him in childhood. He started humming it aloud.

These people obviously believe they're cool, but they're ridiculous and dangerous. Who needs a detachable penis to get through the day? They do, apparently.
I don't think most gun gropers really believe they need guns to "protect their family." They have vigilante fantasies. They *want* to have to protect their family. They want to shoot a scary person.

“Docking now captain.” “All systems to manual and touchdown.” Reep wiped his face, it had been a tricky landing but he was an expert. “Well done” the Captain said.
“Can you get him on the viewer?” “Target at three o’clock sir enemy moving steadily in this direction.” “Right you are.” “Good luck troops, now get the hell out of there.”
“See you all at the rendezvous point.” They made it back safely with one exception. Reep was missing in action. They all knew the score.
Mission impossible had almost worked. The first sustained attack by the newly formed mouse army had defeated the cat. There would be a share of the spoils A.K.A. kitty crunchies taken when they had docked with Ginger’s own bowl, for everyone .
Reep would be sadly missed. Nobody could slide along a curtain rail like he could. They would hold a wake for him later when they were back at their top secret mobile base, behind the plumbing under the kitchen sink.
They were just raising a kibble to Reep when the lid on the box of soap flakes moved aside and he appeared. Limping and slightly damp where Ginger had chewed him. He gave them a shaky mouse high four and collapsed, saying that the cat was not as quick as he used to be.
They were jubilant. The new mouse army had completed its first mission. This was only the beginning.
More brigades were forming. Missions to the pantry and beyond to the far reaches of the universe, or the grocery store as the humans called it were planned. Cat kind had had its day. After that it was anyone’s guess, and only a twitch of the whiskers stood between them and world domination.
They slept well on their victory, little knowing that Ginger was awake and secretly plotting. There were several cats in the area who would like to get even. If only they could stop arching their backs and hissing at each other. When they got organised there was so much that they could achieve…
This is the original Reepicheep of Narnia fame. What a hero!

Science has progressed a lot. With the arrival of several new technologies, field of medicine is flourishing. There are many astonishing things that occurs in the medical field. These impossible things that can take place with the help of science are mystical interference and other leading technologies of science in medical field. Surgery is a remarkable technology in which many defected parts are cut or changed with the other parts in the operation. Sometimes the surgery of full body is done because of some mishap happened to the body like when body is burnt. But sometimes there are natural problems in the parts of the body which can be altered through surgery. I have listed Top 10 Unbelievable Most Successful Surgeries?which are as follows:
10. The Surgeon Who Performed a Self-Appendectomy
Surgery is a thrilling process which is scary for many people. It is worth noting here that Dr. Evan O’Neill Kane is a famous surgeon who had done his surgery by himself. In 1921 he had implemented his own appendectomy. At that time he was 60 years of age. He detached his own appendix by getting anesthesia. He wanted to observe the pain which patients have to suffer. He carried out his operation with the help of mirrors which allowed him to have a look on the area to be removed. Although three more doctors were present there at the time of surgery in case of any problem but Dr. Evan O’Neill Kane did it himself. He had been shifted to his home after one day. After this successful surgery Kane in 1932, did a second surgery of his hernia calmly. At that time he was of 70 years. Hence, it is believed to be astonishing surgery which a man carried out of his own body parts.
9. Arm and Shoulder Amputation of a Boy for a New Shoulder
In 2008, a successful surgery of a boy namely; Tom Lemm had been carried out. He was only 15 years of age when he had undergone through this surgery. His arm and shoulder was removed as he had a tumor in his limb. In this complicated surgery, his own bone and tissues were used to construct another shoulder. There was also incorporation of the plate in the collar bone as to wear an artificial arm. He had a cancer from the three years so it was required to do his surgery. Tom had gone through a long surgical operation of about seven hours. Tom had a view that he was very grieved to lose his arm but then the successful surgery brought him new hope. He really was grateful to the doctors. He said that he was very upset to lose his arm but then the doctor told me what about his planning, he said he hopes that the fact that worked for him gives hope to others. Tom was pleased by the outcomes of this specialized surgery.
8. US Teen Survives 118 Days without a Heart
D’zhana Simmons is a girl who belongs to America. At her young age she suffered from the heart disease namely; cardiomyopathy in which heart is enlarged and is weakened. So, in this disease a great difficulty occurs to pump the blood to the other parts of the body. She had been kept on the artificial device of pumping the blood. Her heart had been removed and stood alive for four months without the original heart. On July 2, 2008 she was transplanted a new heart which did not function well so it was removed by the heart surgeons of the hospital namely; Miami Holtz which is a children’s hospital. Then on 29 October she has been transplanted with another heart. Hence, this heart surgery proved to be successful. But when she was asked about those 118 days in which she had to survive without her own heart she said that it was very fearful.
7. The 6 year Old Girl Who Had Half of Her Brain Removed
Jessie Hall was a girl from Aledo, Taxas. At her very young age of six years suffered from a dynamic demagogic disease namely; Rasmussen’s encephalitis. In this disease, brain is damaged badly. The patient faces seizures and this disease also lessens the locomotion. In short, due to this disease her right side of the brain was damaged. Because of this she had undergone a surgery in which the destroyed side of the brain was removed to prevent the stroke at the Johns Hopkins Children’s Center. Jessie had gone through this problem first time when she was sitting in a boat on a lake and was having a bite of sandwich then as the days increased harshness also increased. Then her surgery was performed by the well-known surgeon on June 12, 2008. This operation is called as hemispherectomy to remove the seizure.
6. The Separation of Conjoined Bangladeshi Born Twins
There are many surgeries in which joined kids are separated. One unbelievable surgery that took place some years ago was of sisters who were twins named as Krishna and Trishna. They belonged to Bangladesh. They had their surgery in Australia. As, when they were born their back and top of the head were combined and could not see one another before the surgery. So, they had undergone a successful surgery in which their joined parts were separated. Their tissues of brain were conjoint and blood vessels were also connected. They had a long surgery of more than a day of almost thirty hours. Almost 16 surgeons did this operation. They were sent home after only one month and one week of the surgery. Hence, they had recovered briskly and started walking in the hospital by using walkers as the support.
5. The Indian Girl Who Had Four Limbs Removed
Sometimes nature show miracles and unbelievable things happens. Similarly there is a girl in India named Lakshmi Tatama who belong to a village in district of Araria in Biha. She had four arms and four legs. The people living in the village supposed her a precious blessing from God so, given her the name as Lakshmi. When she got a checkup from the doctors there; they discovered that there was a twin attached to her who did not develop properly and merged with her body. Her surgery had been attempted in India. And the surgery proved to be successful. The doctors had operated her for 27 hours to abolish the two excessive limbs and other inner organs. After that they orientated the reproductive organs of girl like genital system and bladder. After that they blocked her pelvis. She had recovered after surgery in a very short time period of three months and within this tie period she was able to walk with the assistance of walker.
4. Face Transplant of a Gun Victim
Richard Lee Norris was hit by a gun in 1997 that deformed his face and lived as a hermit for about fifteen years and had undergone wonderful surgery the previous year. He was operated for about thirty-six hours. After that he had taken over a new and changed appearance. His face was totally changed as a result of the surgery along with the jaw, tongue and teeth. In short he was given a new life by the surgeons because attire is an important thing to survive in this world. After the surgery he recollected his smelling sense as well which was lost. He got well soon and was happy with his this changed appearance.
3. Female Model Had Her Body Held Together By 11 Rods
Sometimes car accidents prove to be so dangerous that they deform the body parts. Katrina Burgess who is a stunning and charming model had an alarming accident of her car at a speed of 70 mph. Her car got totally wrecked in the accident and her body was also damaged. Many parts of her body were broken like neck, ribs and back. She got severe injuries in pelvis, lungs and other organs. Then she had a surgery in which into her leg of left side, a rod was incorporated that is from hip to knee. It was doctor’s view she won’t be able to walk again but then in the last operation 11 rods of metal, screws and pins were inserted in her body which made her survive after such a pathetic accident. She had recovered within five months after the successful surgery.
2. Broken Spine of a Boy Rejoined
A young boy of only of 10 years of age had got a severe injury and got his spinal cord broken into two halves when he had fallen in the field and was hit by the tapered blades of the tractor. There was huge amount of bleeding. His cerebrospinal fluid had also started leaking. His ribs got badly fractured. Then he was taken to the hospital of Delhi where he had a surgery. The surgery of the boy had been completed in 8 hours in which doctors combined the halves of his vertebral column. Gratefully the boy started his normal life after almost 9 months of his surgical operation. All the doctors regarded this case as an unusual case in the history of medical.
1. Removal of a 16-Pound Tumor from The Face of the Haitian girl
Marlie Casseus had a genetic disorder since she was born. In this disease the structure of bone had been replaced by the tissues. She is a Haitian woman. Tumor of 16 pound had been formed on her face at the young age of only14 years which created problem for her in breathing, hearing, eating and even affected her eye sight. Due to this her face was deformed. Because of this she was in a great pain. She was also mentally disturbed as was not liked by the people in society. Then she was taken to America and had gone through the surgery. The surgery was completed in 17 hours to cut out the tumor on the face. This surgery proved to be a miracle and after the surgery she was able to breathe properly and her sight was also recovered by the incorporation of the plates of metal to build her eye sockets.

Islander got out the vote in Ohio
A woman from South Lake, P.E.I. has been in Ohio over the last few days working on the Obama campaign.
Alicia Bruce was helping her boyfriend, a field organizer for the Democrats. Bruce said they knocked on hundreds of doors, made dozens of calls, delivered pamphlets, and drove people to the polls. "Even though I can't vote in the States, ended up driving these people and felt like that ended up being our Ohio votes," she said.
"As soon as we heard we won Ohio then we knew we won America, so we headed to downtown Akron and I was driving for the night. So it was great to watch everyone who had been working so hard on the campaign for the last few months celebrate and enjoy the fruits of their labour."
Bruce noted the county where she was helping had a bigger voter turnout for Obama than in the last election. She said she is relieved and elated that Obama won another four-year mandate.

Our next Project 68846 0-6-0 formerly of LNER and GNR, doing the majority of its work at Kings Cross.
This J52 was the first locomotive to be privately purchased from British Railways.
The lined out livery which is unusual for tank locomotives was applied during its last few years in service as it was used at Kings Cross for carriage shunting and was often seen alongside the more prestigious locomotives.
Due to the nature of 68846's work, it was kept a very clean engine, our goal is to make this Hornby model look as she would have 60 years ago at Kings Cross.
68846 is currently residing at NRM Shildon.

"I was in shock!!" Carter wrote of fans' embracing him during his performance at gay bar Hamburger Mary's near his hometown in Brandon, Florida, on Friday. "It was an emotional night in a lot of ways."
In a video obtained by TMZ, the singer is shown breaking down into tears as the audience chanted his name.
"I just want to thank you for all your love and support in the LGBT community and my announcement. It means a lot," he said. "Yes, I am a bisexual man. That motherf**ker right there is gorgeous. You're gorgeous. He's kind of cute."
"It is what it is. I am who I am," he continued, before playing the crowd a new song, "Hard to Love," which he wrote about his ex-girlfriend, Madison Parker. "I wrote this song about my ex girlfriend that just left, so bye Felicia. This song is about her."
"I just wanted to say thank you for believing in me, guys," he said through tears. "Even if you don't, I still love you."
Carter seemed to further open up about his split with Madison on Saturday, tweeting, "Some people aren't loyal to you, they are loyal to their need of you. Once their needs change so do their loyalties as I've learned."
"Being single isn't fun I'm not gonna lie. But I'm gonna do it for awhile for myself," he said. "My decision and choices are apart of me, no matter what the outcome may be."

At Adepticon, we tried to get all the boards reasonably close to 25% covered, some were a little less, and some were a little more. I'm not writing today to discuss whether 25% coverage is the way to go, as far as I'm concerned, that is the way the main rule books says to do it. Also, one would think that that was the way it was play-tested as well. Ultimately, it is up to the players to decide where on the spectrum of vaccuum of space to space junk yard they want to battle.
What I would like to ponder though, is the options to get to 25%. We tend to use medium and small chunks of terrain which litters the board, about 25% of it actually. What we discovered during Adepticon, where all the great metas converged was that other people get to their 25% by using less pieces because they are much larger. Some people said our boards were "mazelike" which was very interesting.
Part of the research and development for next year will to have a variety of board styles, some with many pieces like we had in 2015 and others with fewer but larger ones.
How does your gaming group grapple with terrain coverage?

Henry James. (1843–1916). The Portrait of a Lady.
The Harvard Classics Shelf of Fiction. 1917.
Mrs. Touchett appeared at last, just after Isabel had returned to the big uninhabited drawing-room. She looked a good deal older, but her eye was as bright as ever and her head as erect; her thin lips seemed a repository of latent meanings. She wore a little grey dress, of the most undecorated fashion, and Isabel wondered, as she had wondered the first time, whether her remarkable kinswoman resembled more a queen-regent or the matron of a gaol. Her lips felt very thin indeed as Isabel kissed her.
“I have kept you waiting because I have been sitting with Ralph,” Mrs. Touchett said. “The nurse had gone to her lunch and I had taken her place. He has a man who is supposed to look after him, but the man is good for nothing; he is always looking out of the window—as if there were anything to see! I didn’t wish to move, because Ralph seemed to be sleeping, and I was afraid the sound would disturb him. I waited till the nurse came back; I remembered that you knew the house.”
“I find I know it better even than I thought; I have been walking,” Isabel answered. And then she asked whether Ralph slept much.
“He lies with his eyes closed; he doesn’t move. But I am not sure that it’s always sleep.”
“Will he see me? Can he speak to me?”
Mrs. Touchett hesitated a moment. “You can try him,” she said. And then she offered to conduct Isabel to her room. “I thought they had taken you there; but it’s not my house, it’s Ralph’s; and I don’t know what they do. They must at least have taken your luggage; I don’t suppose you have brought much. Not that I care, however. I believe they have given you the same room you had before; when Ralph heard you were coming he said you must have that one.”
“Did he say anything else?”
“Ah, my dear, he doesn’t chatter as he used!” cried Mrs. Touchett, as she preceded her niece up the staircase.
It was the same room, and something told Isabel that it had not been slept in since she occupied it. Her luggage was there, and it was not voluminous; Mrs. Touchett sat down a moment, with her eyes upon it.
“Is there really no hope?” Isabel asked, standing before her aunt.
“None whatever. There never has been. It has not been a successful life.”
“No—it has only been a beautiful one,” Isabel found herself already contradicting her aunt; she was irritated by her dryness.
“I don’t know what you mean by that; there is no beauty without health. That is a very odd dress to travel in.”
Isabel glanced at her garment. “I left Rome at an hour’s notice; I took the first that came.”
“Your sisters, in America, wished to know how you dress. That seemed to be their principal interest. I wasn’t able to tell them—but they seemed to have the right idea; that you never wear anything less than black brocade.”
“They think I am more brilliant than I am; I am afraid to tell them the truth,” said Isabel. “Lily wrote me that you had dined with her.”
“She invited me four times and I went once. After the second time she should have let me alone. The dinner was very good; it must have been expensive. Her husband has a very bad manner. Did I enjoy my visit to America? Why should I have enjoyed it? I didn’t go for my pleasure.”
These were interesting items, but Mrs. Touchett soon left her niece, whom she was to meet in half-an-hour at the midday meal. At this repast the two ladies faced each other at an abbreviated table in the melancholy dining-room. Here, after a little, Isabel saw that her aunt was not so dry as she appeared, and her old pity for the poor woman’s inexpressiveness, her want to regret, of disappointment, came back to her. It seemed to her she would find it a blessing to-day to be able to indulge a regret. She wondered whether Mrs. Touchett were not trying, whether she had not a desire for the recreation of grief. On the other hand, perhaps, she was afraid; if she began to regret, it might take her too far. Isabel could perceive, however, that it had come over her that she had missed something, that she saw herself in the future as an old woman without memories. Her little sharp face looked tragical. She told her niece that Ralph as yet had not moved, but that he probably would be able to see her before dinner. And then in moment she added that he had seen Lord Warburton the day before; an announcement which startled Isabel a little, as it seemed an intimation that this personage was in the neighbourhood and that an accident might bring them together. Such an accident would not be happy; she had not come to England to converse with Lord Warburton. She presently said to her aunt that he had been very kind to Ralph; she had seen something of that in Rome.
“He has something else to think of now,” Mrs. Touchett rejoined. And she paused, with a gaze like a gimlet.
Isabel saw that she meant something, and instantly guessed what she meant. But her reply concealed her guess; her heart beat faster, and she wished to gain a moment. “Ah yes—the House of Lords, and all that.”
“He is not thinking of the Lords; he is thinking of the ladies. At least he is thinking of one of them; he told Ralph he was engaged to be married.”
“Ah, to be married!” Isabel gently exclaimed.
“Unless he breaks it off. He seemed to think Ralph would like to know. Poor Ralph can’t go to the wedding, though I believe it is to take place very soon.”
“And who is the young lady?”
“A member of the aristocracy; Lady Flora, Lady Felicia—something of that sort.”
“I am very glad,” Isabel said. “It must be a sudden decision.”
“Sudden enough, I believe; a courtship of three weeks. It has only just been made public.”
“I am very glad,” Isabel repeated, with a larger emphasis. She knew her aunt was watching her—looking for the signs of some curious emotion, and the desire to prevent her companion from seeing anything of this kind enabled her to speak in the tone of quick satisfaction—the tone, almost, of relief. Mrs. Touchett of course followed the tradition that ladies, even married ones, regard the marriage of their old lovers as an offence to themselves. Isabel’s first care therefore was to show that however that might be in general, she was not offended now. But meanwhile, as I say, her heart beat faster; and if she sat for some moments thoughtful—she presently forgot Mrs. Touchett’s observation—it was not because she had lost an admirer. Her imagination had traversed half Europe; it halted, panting, and even trembling a little, in the city of Rome. She figured herself announcing to her husband that Lord Warburton was to lead a bride to the altar, and she was of course not aware how extremely sad she looked while she made this intellectual effort. But at last she collected herself, and said to her aunt—“He was sure to do it some time or other.”
Mrs. Touchett was silent; then she gave a sharp little shake of the head. “Ah, my dear, you’re beyond me!” she cried, suddenly. They went on with their luncheon in silence; Isabel felt as if she had heard of Lord Warburton’s death. She had known him only as a suitor, and now that was all over.
He was dead for poor Pansy; by Pansy he might have lived. A servant had been hovering about; at last Mrs. Touchett requested him to leave them alone. She had finished her lunch; she sat with her hands folded on the edge of the table. “I should like to ask you three questions,” she said to Isabel, when the servant had gone.
“Three are a great many.”
“I can’t do with less; I have been thinking. They are all very good ones.”
“That’s what I am afraid of. The best questions are the worst,” Isabel answered. Mrs. Touchett had pushed back her chair, and Isabel left the table and walked, rather consciously, to one of the deep windows, while her aunt followed her with her eyes.
“Have you ever been sorry you didn’t marry Lord Warburton?” Mrs. Touchett inquired.
Isabel shook her head slowly, smiling. “No, dear aunt.”
“Good. I ought to tell you that I propose to believe what you say.”
“Your believing me is an immense temptation,” Isabel replied, smiling still.
“A temptation to lie? I don’t recommend you to do that, for when I’m misinformed I’m as dangerous as a poisoned rat. I don’t mean to crow over you.”
“It is my husband that doesn’t get on with me,” said Isabel.
“I could have told him that. I don’t call that crowing over you,” Mrs. Touchett added. “Do you still like Serena Merle?” she went on.
“Not as I once did. But it doesn’t matter, for she is going to America.”
“To America? She must have done something very bad.”
“May I ask what it is?”
“She made a convenience of me.”
“Ah,” cried Mrs. Touchett, “so she did of me! She does of every one.”
“She will make a convenience of America,” said Isabel, smiling again, and glad that her aunt’s questions were over.
It was not till the evening that she was able to see Ralph. He had been dozing all day; at least he had been lying unconscious. The doctor was there, but after a while he went away; the local doctor, who had attended his father, and whom Ralph liked. He came three or four times a day; he was deeply interested in his patient. Ralph had had Sir Matthew Hope, but he had got tired of this celebrated man, to whom he had asked his mother to send word that he was now dead, and was therefore without further need of medical advice. Mrs. Touchett had simply written to Sir Matthew that her son disliked him. On the day of Isabel’s arrival Ralph gave no sign, as I have related, for many hours; but towards evening he raised himself and said he knew that she had come. How he knew it was not apparent; inasmuch as, for fear of exciting him, no one had offered the information. Isabel came in and sat by his bed in the dim light; there was only a shaded candle in a corner of the room. She told the nurse that she might go—that she herself would sit with him for the rest of the evening. He had opened his eyes and recognised her, and had moved his hand, which lay very helpless beside him, so that she might take it. But he was unable to speak; he closed his eyes again and remained perfectly still, only keeping her hand in his own. She sat with him a long time—till the nurse came back; but he gave no further sign. He might have passed away while she looked at him; he was already the figure and pattern of death. She had thought him far gone in Rome, but this was worse; there was only one change possible now. There was a strange tranquillity in his face; it was as still as the lid of a box. With this, he was a mere lattice of bones; when he opened his eyes to greet her, it was as if she were looking into immeasurable space. It was not till midnight that the nurse came back; but the hours, to Isabel, had not seemed long; it was exactly what she had come for. If she had come simply to wait, she found ample occasion, for he lay for three days in a kind of grateful silence. He recognised her, and at moments he seemed to wish to speak; but he found no voice. Then he closed his eyes again, as if he too were waiting for something—for something that certainly would come. He was so absolutely quiet that it seemed to her what was coming had already arrived; and yet she never lost the sense that they were still together. But they were not always together; there were other hours that she passed in wandering through the empty house and listening for a voice that was not poor Ralph’s. She had a constant fear; she thought it possible her husband would write to her. But he remained silent, and she only got a letter from Florence from the Countess Gemini. Ralph, however, spoke at last, on the evening of the third day.
“I feel better to-night,” he murmured, abruptly, in the soundless dimness of her vigil; “I think I can say something.”
She sank upon her knees beside his pillow; took his thin hand in her own; begged him not to make an effort—not to tire himself.
His face was of necessity serious—it was incapable of the muscular play of a smile; but its owner apparently had not lost a perception of incongruities. “What does it matter if I am tired, when I have all eternity to rest?” he asked. “There is no harm in making an effort when it is the very last. Don’t people always feel better just before the end? I have often heard of that; it’s what I was waiting for. Ever since you have been here; I thought it would come. I tried two or three times; I was afraid you would get tired of sitting there.” He spoke slowly, with painful breaks and long pauses, his voice seemed to come from a distance. When he ceased, he lay with his face turned to Isabel, and his large unwinking eyes open into her own. “It was very good of you to come,” he went on. “I thought you would; but I wasn’t sure.”
“I was not sure either, till I came,” said Isabel.
“You have been like an angel beside my bed. You know they talk about the angel of death. It’s the most beautiful of all. You have been like that; as if you were waiting for me.”
“I was not waiting for your death; I was waiting for—for this. This is not death, dear Ralph.”
“Not for you—no. There is nothing makes us feel so much alive as to see others die. That’s the sensation of life—the sense that we remain. I have had it—even I. But now I am of no use but to give it to others. With me it’s all over.” And then he paused. Isabel bowed her head further, till it rested on the two hands that were clasped upon his own. She could not see him now; but his faraway voice was close to her ear. “Isabel,” he went on, suddenly, “I wish it were over for you.” She answered nothing; she had burst into sobs; she remained so, with her buried face. He lay silent, listening to her sobs; at last he gave a long groan. “Ah, what is it you have done for me?”
“What is it you did for me?” she cried, her now extreme agitation half smothered by her attitude. She had lost all her shame, all wish to hide things. Now he might know; she wished him to know, for it brought them supremely together, and he was beyond the reach of pain. “You did something once—you know it. Oh Ralph, you have been everything! What have I done for you—what can I do to-day? I would die if you could live. But I don’t wish you to live; I would die myself, not to lose you.” Her voice was as broken as his own, and full of tears and anguish.
“You won’t lose me—you will keep me. Keep me in your heart; I shall be nearer to you than I have ever been. Dear Isabel, life is better; for in life there is love. Death is good—but there is no love.”
“I never thanked you—I never spoke—I never was what I should be!” Isabel went on. She felt a passionate need to cry out and accuse herself, to let her sorrow possess her. All her troubles, for the moment, became single and melted together into this present pain. “What must you have thought of me? Yet how could I know? I never knew, and I only know to-day because there are people less stupid than I.”
“Don’t mind people,” said Ralph. “I think I am glad to leave people.”
She raised her head and her clapsed hands; she seemed for a moment to pray to him.
“Is it true—is it true?” she asked.
“True that you have been stupid? Oh no,” said Ralph, with a sensible intention of wit.
“That you made me rich—that all I have is yours?”
He turned away his head, and for some time said nothing. Then at last—
“Ah, don’t speak of that—that was not happy.” Slowly he moved his face toward her again, and they once more saw each other. “But for that—but for that—” And he paused. “I believe I ruined you,” he added softly.
She was full of the sense that he was beyond the reach of pain; he seemed already so little of this world. But even if she had not had it she would still have spoken, for nothing mattered now but the only knowledge that was not pure anguish—the knowledge that they were looking at the truth together.
“He married me for my money,” she said.
She wished to say everything; she was afraid he might die before she had done so.
He gazed at her a little, and for the first time his fixed eyes lowered their lids. But he raised them in a moment, and then—
“He was greatly in love with you,” he answered.
“Yes, he was in love with me. But he would not have married me if I had been poor. I don’t hurt you in saying that. How can I? I only want you to understand. I always tried to keep you from understanding; but that’s all over.”
“I always understood,” said Ralph.
“I thought you did, and I didn’t like it. But now I like it.”
“You don’t hurt me—you make me very happy.” And as Ralph said this there was an extraordinary gladness in his voice. She bent her head again, and pressed her lips to the back of his hand. “I always understood,” he continued, “though it was so strange—so pitiful. You wanted to look at life for yourself—but you were not allowed; you were punished for your wish. You were ground in the very mill of the conventional!”
“Oh yes, I have been punished,” Isabel sobbed.
He listened to her a little, and then continued—
“Was he very bad about your coming?”
“He made it very hard for me. But I don’t care.”
“It is all over, then, between you?”
“Oh no; I don’t think anything is over.”
“Are you going back to him?” Ralph stammered.
“I don’t know—I can’t tell. I shall stay here as long as I may. I don’t want to think—I needn’t think. I don’t care for anything but you, and that is enough for the present. It will last a little yet. Here on my knees, with you dying in my arms, I am happier than I have been for a long time. And I want you to be happy—not to think of anything sad; only to feel that I am near you and I love you. Why should there be pain? In such hours as this what have we to do with pain? That is not the deepest thing; there is something deeper.”
Ralph evidently found, from moment to moment, greater difficulty in speaking; he had to wait longer to collect himself. At first he appeared to make no response to these last words; he let a long time elapse. Then he murmured simply—
“You must stay here.”
“I should like to stay, as long as seems right.”
“As seems right—as seems right?” He repeated her words. “Yes, you think a great deal about that.”
“Of course one must. You are very tired,” said Isabel.
“I am very tired. You said just now that pain is not the deepest thing. No—no. But it is very deep. If I could stay——”
“For me you will always be here,” she softly interrupted. It was easy to interrupt him.
But he went on, after a moment—
“It passes, after all; it’s passing now. But love remains. I don’t know why we should suffer so much. Perhaps I shall find out. There are many things in life; you are very young.”
“I feel very old,” said Isabel.
“You will grow young again. That’s how I see you. I don’t believe—I don’t believe——” And he stopped again; his strength failed him.
She begged him to be quiet now. “We needn’t speak to understand each other,” she said.
“I don’t believe that such a generous mistake as yours—can hurt you for more than a little.”
“Oh, Ralph, I am very happy now,” she cried, through her tears.
“And remember this,” he continued, “that if you have been hated, you have also been loved.”
“Ah, my brother!” she cried, with a movement of still deeper prostration.

JACKSONVILLE BEACH, FL — For three days, police say a thick wooded area was home to a 12-year-old girl and her 21-year-old boyfriend. The two were living at a transient camp just north of JTB.
The girl’s mother tells First Coast News her daughter ran away more than a week ago. The mother went to pick the girl up from Southside Middle School but then found out she had skipped her last two classes. They later discovered she was with Daniel Rollins. Investigators say the two had met three months ago and were in a relationship.

Have taken other cruises with Princess and have been very happy. However the Star was disappointing from the room to the food. The steward was either overwhelmed or didn't care about keeping the room. There was obvious mold in the sink grout and shower. The room stunk like stale urine. We had a leak in the shower that we complained about for 3 days before it was finally fixed properly. We were hoping that would stop the smell, but the smell was there throughout the cruise.
The food has been good on other cruises, but not so much on the Star. I preferred the food at the international coffee bar to the dining room. We ate at one of the specialty restaurants, but the quality of food there was not much better. We did have a wonderful server in the dining room we sat with quite a bit.
We were called and asked to change rooms, but we wanted a specific area. We never did get a room assignment and had to wait for them to sort out the room (someone else had been assigned to the room).
On the plus side, the entertainment was very good. Everything we saw was very good, and they had one of the funniest comedians I have ever seen.
see general review.
We just got on the ship.
We went on our own to Pacific Grove.
Mostly went for the hotel del coronado. The tour guides were very good on the buses. The island was beautiful and the hotel was quite nice. If you plan to eat there, the prices are very high ($28 for a salad and $21 for a burger. The watermelon salad was very good the burger was not, but the fries were very good.View All undefined undefined Reviews
We took the magic bus tour. Based on the 60's Summer of Love. Included Fillmore District, Haight Ashebury, and other popular spots at the time.

Yesterday morning I had the privilege of standing honor at the funeral of one of America's heroes. Anthony Williams was only 21 years old when he gave his life for his country on his second tour in Afghanistan. As I stood in the cold spring drizzle I had the chance to think about what I was seeing and to marvel at the lengths that people were willing to go to pay their respects. There was at least 60 of us standing guard. Young, old, well educated and not. It didn't matter. It was cold and windy and it rained on and off all morning. No one complained. I was honored to stand with them. I felt blessed to see it. And I realized that if it hadn't been for the evil of Fred Phelps, this organization would not have formed, and fewer people would make the effort to honor our soldiers. A very young Marine, a close friend of the the deceased, came through the line and shook every single one of our hands. He had tears running down his cheeks and yet he stood and looked each of us in the eye and shook our hands and said thank you. My warm tears mingled with the cold drizzle and I was grateful simply to be there. Something good from evil comes.

The shops at 琉璃廠 were mostly closed already, even though it was only about 7 pm. At the end of the street there was a small but bustling market, so I kept walking, in the direction of 前門.
I made a turn and suddenly the hutong was almost deserted. Three young women were walking ahead, their laughter washing back to me, a man was riding the bicycle, I knew I was very close to 前門, and a woman near the market had confirmed to me the hutong leads to 前門, so I kept going.
Another turn, and I came face to face with the bright lights of 前門. The distance was just a few hundred meters, and the time difference was about 10 minutes, but I seemed to have passed through three different worlds. The hutongs is an amazing world indeed.

These have been growing in my garden for many years and appear annually in June. Next to them there are some of my hostas.FOTD 5th July 2022: Rocket Ligularia
Daily Archives: 05/07/2022
I had a date this afternoon with a guy I have known for 56 years and we still get excited. He waited for me outside his golden oldie home sitting on his scooter and then I arrived sitting on my scooter. First of all I had to check his scooter that his walker was fitted well and then we were off. I lead the way as compared to me he is still a bit of a beginner with this scooter mobility. Of course it was Mr. Swiss and I was accompanying him to the dentist. These are the only romantic moments we now have.
I lead the way into town and he followed. When we arrived he went direct to his dentist and we had to part – again – as I had an appointment at the grocers for a few items I needed, but he was not sad. He parked his scooter outside the dentist and two minutes later he was already phoning me. Did he already miss me, no, he could not find the key to his scooter, but no problem. Half a minute later he called me again to say it was in his pocket. It was another golden oldie problem.
On the way to the store I saw this guy in town playing his piano. I remember him from last Christmas and we got into a conversation. He plays quite well, relaxing music.
He even posed for a photo for me. And talking of photos, I am sure you are longing to see how I do it daily with my camera, although I now only used my iPhone.
So here is the photographer sitting on her scooter. I think she was taking a photo of a pigeon but the camera went off to soon. She had another try.
Here is the result. This pigeon seemed to be dressed in his best feathers and attractive red feet, but it probably that time of the year again when the ladies are searching for a partner, and of course they all want to look like a lady’s man.
I joined Mr. Swiss at the dentist and eventually Mr. Swiss and I parted company: he back to his home and me to mine, although we met again on the way and waved from afar. As soon as I arrived home my telephone gave a “ping”, Mr. Swiss telling me he arrived home safely and I returned the call to the same effect. Of course the parting words were “see you tomorrow”.
Our local mountains were looking particularly good this afternoon. No. 1 son informed me that he will be off to Zürich for the day on Saturday, so another day alone. I have already made a plan to go to the Saturday morning market. It must be years since I was there on Saturday. I remember my mother-in-law, it was here big day of the week going to the market on Saturday morning. She even planned her clothes around the market, dressed in her best, although I do not think that I will be dressed special for the occasion.
Enjoy the rest of the week. Let us hope that the weather remains good.

POPLAR BLUFF, MO (KFVS) - It's never too late to set a new goal. Here's proof.
An Ellington, Missouri man is pursuing a college degree at the age of 72. Young at heart and mind, he's determined to see it through and he's encouraging others along the way.
Yvone White said a college classroom is the last place he thought he would ever be, but now, 14 years after getting his GED, here he is.
"I never thought I would be in college anywhere," Yvone said. "But, I'm thankful."
He's not your typical college student.
"It's a shame that I didn't get to further my education before now," Yvone said.
But, he said, better late than never.
"I'm 72," Yvone said. "Yes I am. I'm very proud of it."
Yvone went to school until the eight grade. Taking on a big responsibility at a young age.
"My mom. She was ill and I had to quit school to take care of her," Yvone said.
More than 50 years later he got his GED, which he passed with flying colors.
"I came down, passed it the first time," Yvone said. "With no studying."
There's no doubt Yvone is sharp, but his instructors say it's not only his smarts that puts him ahead of the class.
"Number one, I would have never guessed he was 72. But, I think, he can run laps around traditional students," Amanda Casey said.
Full of energy, mentally and physically. They say Yvone puts forth 150 percent every day.
"When you have a student like Yvone, really at any age, he's so outgoing, he tries his best in everything, he's always early to class, he stays the whole time, he finishes assignments early, it just makes everybody around him better," Yvone said.
"He is a very dedicated and determined man," Lisa Gray said.
Yvone credits his instructors for the encouragement and support that keeps him going, but talk to him for just a few minutes and you'll see.
"If I ever decided I wanted to leave it, I wouldn't have come here in the first place. I don't start something and leave it," Yvone said.
Yvone has the want-to; and he said that's what it takes, no matter what you're going for.
"You can do anything you set your mind to," Yvone said.
Yvone used to work for Nordyne, but when it closed the doors in Poplar Bluff he took a deal that included a paid college education.
He had perfect attendance while he worked there and he plans to continue that record in school.

Dustin Lance Black: A childhood of love and fear
In Britain, Dustin Lance Black is known as the man who two years ago married Olympic diver Tom Daley. But Black was already an Oscar-winning screenwriter.
Before that he survived a difficult upbringing, growing up gay and Mormon in Texas in a military family.
Now he's recounted the early years in his memoirs, Mama's Boy, which reveal a lot about his personal life. But Black insists he's only a supporting player alongside his mother Anne.
"Mom came from what has been called the poorest place in America - Lake Providence, Louisiana. She was born on the south side of the Mississippi which was mainly African American and even poorer than the rest.
"Then at two years old she got polio. Mom was paralysed from the chest down and that sent her into children's hospitals."
Black's pride in his mother's ability to beat the odds is obvious.
After a successful career in army medicine she lived long enough to see the beginnings of his love for Daley, although in his 20s Black had feared her reaction if she ever discovered he was gay. He's now 44.
What helped Anne escape hospital and find a career was joining the Mormon church.
"When Mom was a teen these very cute young men came through in their pressed white shirts and their little badges.
"They were Mormons and they promised an eternal family for her and a healthy body. Mom had always been told she wouldn't work, couldn't marry or have kids. She converted at 19 or 20.
"And Mom married her first husband who was of course a Mormon and that's why her three sons were raised Mormon."
Poverty and Anne's violent second husband (from whom Black gets his surname) feature large in Mama's Boy. There's romance too but from the age of six Black knew he was gay.
"I had all the information to know how much trouble I was in. I was a Mormon and we were a military family in Texas. I had heard the word homosexual inside the Mormon church and the Prophet (church leader) at that time was saying it was a sin akin to murder.
"So I had heard lots of colourful words, almost all pejorative, about these feelings that I had for this kid down the block.
"Whatever little butterflies I had in my stomach turned to terror within seconds. I was going to hell and I would bring shame to my family."
The result was that he more or less stopped talking. "Probably I believed that when I was silent I was invisible and I'd be safe."
It's not the only point in our conversation where Black cries. But a happier thought emerges. "It's like when now Tom and I play peekaboo with our son Robbie: when he's silent I'm sure he thinks we don't see him."
It would be easy for Black to condemn Mormon culture entirely but he never does.
"When I was a child I was devout: that has long gone but I felt it honoured Mom that I try in the book to find something good in the church. Although for me there were truly terrible things in it.
"Outside the home I didn't want to exist: I wanted to disappear. But I loved my Mom so much and even at six years old I knew I was raising her as much as she was raising me - we didn't have a father at that time.
"So I couldn't do what so many do and take their lives. But certainly I didn't think I could ever excel or achieve anything."
The Dustin Lance Black the world knows now is likeable, successful and hyper-smart.
He's adept at playing a good-natured support role in Daley's social media. But when he talks about the past you sense remembered emotion coursing through him. He didn't tell anyone he was gay until he was about 20.
As his book recalls, the years before were filled with fear, anger, pretence and sadness.
Black says there was no specific coming out with his mother. "By now we had moved to Salinas, California and the summer before I came out my best friend came out to me. So we used to visit West Hollywood and suddenly I was meeting gay people.
"I was leading this strange new life where for the first time I wasn't telling Mom about everything I was doing. When I left home for college I'd been calling Mom three times a day and that had just stopped.
"Mom got very heated about the new government policy of Don't Ask, Don't Tell. In her view it was going to allow closeted gay people into her military and she was really against it... she just assumed I agreed with her opinions.
"I started to pray that I wouldn't cry. Because I didn't want to lose Mom: she was my best friend. But my prayer wasn't answered and my Mom saw my tears and she knew. So I never had to say the words.
"I could see how horrible she thought it was and how scared she was for me. She asked me why I'd chosen this life. And I did something I only ever did twice in my life: her crutches were next to her and I said Mom why did you choose those?
"Eventually my courageous Mom did something we do all too rarely. She got on a plane and she came to see me in LA - this place where we'd always been told sinners lived.
"She came to see my gay friends. And it was that visit which started to build bridges."
In 2008 he won an Oscar for his screenplay for Milk about the politician and gay rights campaigner Harvey Milk.
Then he wrote for the TV series Big Love, which focused on Mormon characters, and the screenplay for J Edgar, starring Leonardo DiCaprio.
More recently he created the mini-series When We Rise, about the fight for gay rights in America.
But for several years Black concentrated more on campaigning. He became involved in the fight against Proposition 8, a ballot initiative in California which took away the existing right to same-sex marriage.
"Writing about Harvey Milk I realised his success came from coalition-building: I could see what stories we would need to tell and who we needed to talk to." The measure was later thrown out by a court in California.
'Doing what we love'
Black worries that a mood of conservatism in America threatens to reverse some advances in civil rights.
He says any civil right is always under threat. "But it's work that feeds the soul. The prize is to lock arms and fight back together."
Home now is London with Daley and their son Robbie, who will turn one in June.
So how does it feel being half of the best-known gay married couple in Britain?
Black frowns. "Well don't tell Elton John that. Tom and I have never claimed to be perfect, whatever that means in a relationship.
"We're not trying to be anyone's example. We're living our lives and building our family and doing what we love.
"We also made a decision to be open about ourselves and who we are and that opens you up to scrutiny.
"But it felt important particularly for our son - we never wanted him to feel we were hiding anything out of shame."
Sometimes Black features in Daley's very active social media presence. So does he go along willingly with this supporting role?
"I always know what Tom's YouTube videos are going to be about and I could just say, 'no I'm not playing'. But they're good fun.
"Though there was one where he had me try to dive off a 10-metre platform and two-and-a-half million people have seen me chicken out."
For now Black and Daley are concentrating on parenting skills.
"I helped raise my younger brother so I knew the basics. But even so I'm still thinking when I do something that this could be formative for him - I'd better get it right and not screw up. He's our son, he's our child."
Mama's Boy is published by John Murray.

She knew in her heart he had another girl, but she had to to confirm it. She tried to sneak a peek at his phone, but she couldn’t get close enough. His friends would tell her nothing. Guys stick together.
So she had no choice but to go through all the profile pics of his connections on Facebook, to see if his face was there. When she hit the 2,347th “friend,” she decided to simply change her own relationship status to “It’s complicated” and ask him directly.
The one-word prompt on The Daily Post is “Complicated.”
2 thoughts on “Complicated”

The UFO (unidentified food object) Removed and Identified: It's Not What I Thought It Would Be
The drama of the stinky nose continued WAY past July. On September 9, I took Hadley to a local pediatrician. He looked in her nose, agreed with me that there was a strong, rotten smell, and told me there was not a thing he could or would do. I got a prescription for Omnicef and was told to find an ENT.
On September 14, Phil and I took Hadley to an ENT about 45 miles away. He looked up her nose and told us he didn't see a thing. The odor was also not present since she had been on antibiotics for a few days by then. He told us to finish the medicine and call back to schedule a scope if the odor returned. That was on a Tuesday. By Friday evening, the odor was back with a vengeance!
Phil called and scheduled a scope for September 22 at the hospital in Liberal, KS. We had to be there (45 miles away) by 7:00 a.m. The doctor really didn't think anything was up her nose, but he agreed to do the scope to appease me. I was insistent that something was still up there.
The medical staff took Hadley just before 9:00 a.m. About ten minutes later, the doctor showed up with a specimen cup and this:
What is it? Some sort of felt or fleece.
How big was it? About an inch long, about a centimeter wide.
How long has it been up there?
At least since the beginning of July...maybe a lot longer.
When the ENT first inserted the scope (it had a camera on the end), he didn't find anything. He kept looking because he was in there and we wanted him to find something. As he was moving from the nose into the back of the throat (the posterior rhinopharynx, to be exact), he found the chunk of fabric. He believes it was there due to the probing of the ER doctor done in July. The ENT said there was no way a two-year-old could have lodged it back that far all on her own. If he hadn't kept looking, he would have just pulled the camera scope out and told us he didn't find a thing. Mini miracle number one.
The ENT said she was lucky she didn't develop a staph infection which could have led to MRSA or sepsis. Any one of those could have proven deadly if left unchecked. Mini miracle number two. I thank God for watching over our little Hadley Sue. She is now perfectly healthy, happy, and odor- (and object) free.

I got myself into this mess and I can't figure how I'm going to get out of it. It would be simple if I didn't love her; I could just walk away. But Jodi has such a choke hold on my heart that I know I'd be miserable without her, even though right now I'm miserable with her.
I met Jodi when I was calling on one of my customers. She was the receptionist and I took one look at her and went into heat. My meeting with the customer was over close to lunchtime and I took a shot and asked Jodi if she would have lunch with me. She looked me up and down and then shrugged.
"Why not. You'll have to wait though, my relief won't be here for another ten minutes"
I smiled at her and said, "I'm sure that you are well worth the wait."
She gave me a cool appraising gaze and then pointed at a chair in the lobby, "I'll try not to make you wait too long."
By the end of our lunch Jodi owned me. I asked her out, she accepted and six months later we were married. Even though I had fallen in lust with Jodi the first time I laid eyes on her, I was not prepared for the sexual juggernaut that was Jodi. We made love on out third date and eleven years later, I'm still was not sure as to who seduced whom. I do know that by the time that night was over I would have killed to have her if I had to.
Jodi wanted sex two, three, four and even five times a night and I was sure that she would take even more if I could just accommodate her. As it was I was hard pressed to get even two done and then only two or three times a week. And she did it all. She was the only girl who ever asked me to take her anally and her blow jobs were state of the art – and she swallowed!
Marriage didn't change a thing. Well, that's not true. Marriage put us together full time instead of part time and for Jodi that meant more time we could spend on sex. Jodi would wake me up with a blow job and then we would make love before going to work. Sitting on the couch watching TV after dinner would more often than not lead to sex and after we went to bed the sex didn't stop until I fell asleep exhausted.
Jodi and I had been married a year when I found out that Jodi had enjoyed a very promiscuous past. It happened when I made an unplanned visit to where Jodi worked. I just happened to be in the neighborhood and I thought that I would drop in on Jodi and take her to lunch. Just as I entered the lobby of the building I heard a voice holler, "Hey, Roger." I turned and saw Stan Whample, a man whose business I had been trying to get for my company. He came up and we shook hands and he asked me if I had time for a cup of coffee. Since Jodi wasn't expecting me and I really wanted Stan's business I said yes and we went into the little coffee shop that was right off the lobby. We had just barely sat down when he said, "Well I'll be damned. Jodi Miller." I turned and saw Jodi walking through the lobby with one of the girls she worked with, probably going to lunch.
"Oh yes, oh yes indeed, especially in the biblical sense of the word."
"We're talking about the redhead, right?"
"Yeah. You know her?"
"Yeah. She's the receptionist at McCall and Holly. I see her every time I call on them."
"All I can say is that you ever get a chance take a shot at her. She's the hottest piece of ass I ever had. I wonder if she still pulls trains."
"Yeah, you know, gangbangs."
"She did gangbangs?"
"Hell yes, she loved them. The first time I ever had her was at a gangbang."
"Jodi? I don't believe it."
"It was at a fraternity mixer. Some football player brought her. You ever been to a fraternity mixer?"
I nodded my head yes and Stan said, "Then you know how the booze flows and things get real stupid. The football player got drunk and passed out and Jodi had had enough to drink to be silly and someone suggested that they play spin the bottle. Jodi and three other girls said okay. It started out as just pecks on the cheek, but over the next half hour things got steamy, hands wandered and then suddenly Jodi was leaning back in a chair and one of the other girls was eating her pussy. Jodi was leaning back moaning and one of the guys pulled out his dick and pushed it into her mouth and things really got wild."
"I'm having a hard time believing that we are talking about the same woman here."
"Believe it Roger. I don't have any idea how many guys porked her that night, but she was on her knees or her back until seven the next morning and after that she was the frat house mattress queen. That girl loved gangbangs. Hell, she loved cock period. A date with Jodi was a sure piece of ass and if her date didn't keep a close eye on her she would end up the night being a pin cushion for a whole bunch of guys. It broke a lot of hearts when she dropped out of school. Receptionist at McCall and Holly huh? I may just have to stop by and say hi one of these days. If she still does trains I've got some customers she can have some fun with. But hey, that isn't what I want to talk with you about."
He went on to talk business although my mind was more on Jodi than business. Mattress queen? Pulling trains? Loving gangbangs?
That night after dinner I was standing next to Jodi drying the dishes after she washed them and I heard her say, "Earth to Roger, come in please."
I turned to her, "What?"
"Where are you right now? You seem like you are some where else."
"Just trying to imagine you being gangbanged."
"You are what?"
"I ran into an old school chum of yours today, Stan Whample, and he told me how he met you."
"And just how did I get to be the subject of the conversation?"
I told her how it came about and then went back to drying dishes. There were several moments of silence and then Jodi said, "That's it? You bring it up and then just drop it?"
"No sweetie, I didn't bring it up. You asked me where my head was and I told you. You asked how it came about and I told you that too. What else is there?"
More silence and then, "I was young and stupid."
"You don't have to explain anything to me. It happened before we met and your life prior to our marriage is none of my business."
"So just why were you trying to imagine me?"
"I was just wondering if that is what caused you to have such a huge sexual appetite or if your humongous need for sex is what made you do gangbangs."
Jodi pondered that for a few seconds and then said, "Good question. I don't really know. I was far from being a virgin when it happened and I did like my sex. I don't know. I'll have to think about that."
There was a minute or two of silence while Jodi washed and I dried while trying to imagine her on a mattress on a floor taking on a line of men a block long. Jodi glanced over at me, "You imagining anything else?"
"No" I lied, "Why?"
"I was just wondering why you have that tent in your pants."
I glanced down and saw that I did indeed have an erection. Jodi giggled and said, "Would you like to leave the dishes for later and see if we can't maybe do something to reduce the swelling?"
"The idea does have some merit. Race you to the bedroom."
As I followed along behind watching her tight ass sway from side to side I wondered how many cocks she had taken in it and how many one right after another. As I buried myself in Jodi I tried to imagine that I wasn't the first one, but the fourth or fifth and I tried to imagine what it must have felt like. A little on the sick side and I knew it, but something about knowing what Jodi had been, what she had done, in college fired me up. I made love to Jodi five times that night and each time I went back into her I imagined the cum I'd left in her to be the leavings of another man and that just made me fuck her harder.
After the final time while I was lying next to her and gasping for breath she climbed on top of me and straddled my chest. Looking down at me she gave me a stern look.
"I know your secret you naughty boy. I know that every time you fucked me you were pretending to get sloppy seconds. I know that the last time you were imaging that you were wallowing in the left overs of the four men in front of you. Those are nasty thoughts and nasty little boys need to be punished."
She slid forward until her dripping pussy was over my face and said, "Your punishment is you have to suck all those other guys out of me" and then she dropped her sloppy cunt on my face. I'd eaten Jodi before after I had cum in her, but somehow that time was different. I wondered if any of her ex-boyfriends had cleaned her out after a gangbang and just thinking about that gave me something that I would not have thought possible – another hard on.
Jodi let me suck on her pussy for several minutes and then she slid back and guided my cock into her and then she said, "Pity you only have one cock lover. I sure could use at least two more right now. Wouldn't you like that? Me with a cock in my pussy, a cock in my mouth and a cock in my ass?"
It took me a long time to finish that last one and when I shot I'm not sure that anything but dust came out of my cock. Jodi slid off me and she reached down and started fondling my limp dick and she said, "You sure..." and the rest of what she said was lost as I fell into an exhausted sleep.
At breakfast the next morning Jodi said, "You sure were inspired last night. I'd like to think that it was just me that was lighting your fire, but it wasn't, was it?"
"Of course it was you."
"No lover, I said "Just me" but what was lighting your fire was me and a supporting cast of what, ten, fifteen, twenty guys?"
.... There is more of this story ...

2. A very quirky, strange, or bizzare person who is difficult to read. (see example 2)
2)"Bill majored in drama in college, has feminine tendencies, and acts ambiguously gay. However, he has had a girlfriend for two years to whom he recently became engaged. I don't understand this guy; he is a real McPoo."

Michael R. Ward's tattoos tell the story of what was important to him.
One included the names of his five daughters. Another declared him to be "Union Proud." Yet another, inexplicably for someone raised in Milwaukee, identified him as a Miami Dolphins fan.
"That was his first one," said Sally Ward, his wife, of the old football tattoo. "Miami Mike" Ward decided to root for the Dolphins when he was a kid.
"He's converted four of our five daughters - probably all five," she said. "The rest of us in the family are always making fun of him."
Now they are remembering and grieving for the husband and father fatally injured in an attack July 11.
After his wife played in a bowling tournament, they met another couple at the Ugly Mug Pub & Grill, 604 S. 64th St. As the two couples left, they were accosted by young people who began yelling insults and throwing small berries and stones. Someone hit the other man with a sucker punch. Ward was hurt in a nearby alley, dying of severe head trauma the next day at Froedtert Hospital in Wauwatosa. Ward was not involved in the fight when he was struck, according to police.
Ward was 40. He and his wife lived just a few blocks from the pub.
"It's right by the school our kids go to," she said. "We had no inkling when we walked out that anything would happen."
Two men were charged Saturday in connection with the incident. Daniel Ryan Curry, 22, was charged with felony murder; Paul J. Kaiser, 24, was charged with being a party to the crime of second-degree reckless injury.
"I'm not ready for the anger, so I haven't thought much about that yet," his wife said. "I'm just working to get through every day for my kids.
"I tell our girls, 'Every day, every step you take, remember how much you love Daddy and Daddy loves you.' "
His daughters are Tyler, 17; Taylor, 15; Tanner, 13; Tara, 11, and Taryn, almost 6.
"He was all about family - me and the girls, his parents, his aunts and uncles and cousins, his friends," Sally said. "Even if he didn't know people very well, he was showing our pictures."
The former Sally Johnson and Ward both graduated from West Milwaukee High School in 1987.
"He was big into football, all four years," she said. "He broke his wrist and his ankle.
"He was only 5-foot-7, but he was built like a brick house - huge chest, big arms and legs, all muscle."
The two didn't hit it off and begin dating until they were 21. By then, Ward had gone to the Milwaukee Area Technical College and became a master carpenter. He was a longtime employee of the Sullivan Brothers, of Madison, working on acoustical ceiling jobs. Projects included everything from churches to work for Walgreens and S.C. Johnson & Son Inc. After being laid off with the economic downturn, he was back to work in recent months.
"He worked hard to make sure we had good health insurance with the union," Sally said. "He was always proud to be union. He was a union boy."
Ward would help anyone with carpentry projects, helping build decks and remodel basements.
"I think they paid him with beer and food," his wife said, with affection. At home, he liked working on his own remodeling projects and even did the laundry and cooking.
Both liked to bowl, but he took a year off to stay home with the kids so she could bowl more. They planned to start a new league together.
"He was a real good bowler," she said. "He had a high 190, almost 200, average."
In keeping with his family's tradition, they won't be holding a traditional service or gathering at a funeral home. Instead, the wake will be held at Burnham Bowl, 6016 W. Burnham St., from 5 p.m. Friday until midnight.
"We just had this big 40th birthday party for him there in April," Sally said. "He was just one of the all-round good guys. He was always upbeat, always happy."
In addition to his wife and daughters, survivors include mother Linda Fabian and stepfather Patrick Fabian; father Michael Ward; grandparents Vivian and Raymond Janiszewski; aunts, uncles and other relatives.
Memorials are suggested to the Michael R. Ward Children's Trust Fund through Associated Bank.

There are many theories about the Colossus of Rhodes. One thing is for sure Helios (the Sun God) is the one that stood there. Was he straddling the mouth of port? At this point we just don't have enough information to say yeah or nay. We know that he was made of bronze, and it was melted down for projects that were deemed more valuable at the time. We hope that someday soon we will know much more as research continues.

By Zaya Williams
The police are not taking lightly, the making of false reports and that’s exactly what Sean Fevrier did which landed him into trouble with the law.
The court heard on Thursday that Fevrier called the police station claiming that he was robbed.
He admitted that on June 12, he called the police and reported that his laptop and cellular phone were stolen from Jolly Beach.
He told an officer that he went to the beach for a swim and hid his valuables under a towel but returned to find that they had been stolen.
The police called him in to take his statement on many occasions but he was a no-show.
The investigation continued nonetheless and a few days ago the police obtained a warrant to search his home.
It was in the search of the defendant’s Jolly Harbour home that they found the same laptop and phone he claimed was stolen.
He told the cops that he did it because he was in need of money.
Magistrate Conliffe Clarke admonished the man when he appeared in court, noting that he wasted the time of many persons and not just the police.
The man’s lawyer begged for him to be fined $300 but the Magistrate fined him $1000 instead.

Read an Excerpt
Marine First Sergeant Rick Pruitt had thirty days' leave to decide the rest of his life.
"But no pressure," he muttered and loped across Main Street. He lifted a hand to wave at Joe Davis. His boyhood buddy was still driving that battered, dusty red truck. Rick paused on the sidewalk when his friend pulled to the curb to talk to him. Joe rolled the passenger-side window down and grinned. "Look what the east Texas wind blew home. When'd you get here, Rick?"
"Yesterday." Rick tipped the brim of his hat back a bit, leaned his forearms on the window frame and only winced a little at the red-hot feel of the metal against his arms. If there was one thing a Texas boy learned to deal with at an early age, it was the summer heat.
Right now, the sun was blazing down from a brassy sky and there wasn't so much as a hint of a cloud in sight. July in Texas was good training, weather wise, for a marine who spent his time deployed to the Middle East.
"You home to stay?" Joe asked.
"That's a good question," Rick replied.
"And not much of an answer."
Truth was, Rick didn't have an answer yet. He had spent a lot of years in the Corps and he had enjoyed them all. He loved serving his country. He was damn proud to wear the uniform of a U.S. Marine. But, he thought, glancing at his surroundings, he'd missed a hell of a lot, too. He hadn't been here when either of his parents died. Hadn't been around to run the family ranch, instead trusting in their longtime foreman to do the heavy lifting. And, since the Pruitt ranch was one of the biggest in Texas, that was some serious duty to push off on someone else.
Funny, all those years in the Corps and not one of his buddies had ever known that he was one of the richest men in Texas. He had always been just another marine and that's how he had wanted it.
He'd been around the world and back. Had seen more, done more than most men ever would. But, he thought, his heart had always been here. In Royal.
Rick smiled and shrugged. "It's the only answer I've got. For right now, I've got thirty days' leave and decisions to make."
"Well," Joe told him, "if you want any help deciding, you give me a call."
"I will." Rick looked at his old friend. They'd grown up together, had their first beersand hangovers together. They'd played side by side on the high school football team. Joe had stayed put in Royal, married Tina, his high school sweetheart, had two kids now and was in charge of the family garage. Rick had gone to college, joined the Corps and had come close to love only once.
For a second or two, he allowed himself to remember the girl he'd once thought unattainable. The woman whose memory had kept him going through some ugly days in the last few years. There were some women, he figured, just designed to get into a man's soul. And this one surely had.
"While you're in town, we should do some fishing," Joe said, drawing Rick up out of his thoughts.
Grateful, he said, "Sounds like a plan. You get Tina to make us some of her famous fried chicken for lunch and we'll make a day of it at the ranch lake."
"That's a deal." Joe stretched out his right hand. "It really is good to see you home, Rick. And if you want my opinion, maybe it's time you stayed home."
"Thanks, Joe." Rick shook his friend's hand and blew out a breath. "It's good to be back."
Nodding, Joe said, "I've got to get back to the shop. Mrs. Donley's old sedan had another breakdown and that woman hasn't let up on me for days about it."
Rick actually shivered. Mrs. Marianne Donley, the high school math teacher, could bring a cold chill to the spine of anybody in Royal who had survived her geometry class.
Joe saw the shudder and nodded grimly. "Exactly. I'll call you about the fishing."
"Do that." Rick slapped his hands against the truck, then stepped back as Joe pulled away.
He stood there for a long minute, just soaking up the feeling of being home again. Only three days ago, he'd been with his men in the middle of a firefight. Today, he was on a street corner of a quiet little town, watching traffic roll by.
And he wasn't sure which of those two places he most belonged.
Rick had always wanted to be a marine. And the truth was, since his parents were both gone now, there wasn't much to hold him in Royal. Yeah, there was the duty he felt to the Pruitt dynasty. The ranch had been in the family for more than a hundred and fifty years. But there were caretakers out there, a foreman and his wife, the housekeeper who lived in and saw to it that the Pruitt ranch went on without him. Just as Royal had.
He narrowed his gaze to cut the glare of the summer sun and quickly scanned his surroundings. Things didn't change in small-town America, he told himself and was inwardly glad of it. He liked knowing that he could go away for a couple years and come home to find the place just as he'd left it.
The only thing that had changed, he admitted silently, was him.
Tugging the brim of his Stetson lower over his eyes, Rick shook his head and turned back toward the Texas Cattleman's Club. If there was one place for a man to go to catch up on the news about town, it was the TCC. Besides, he was looking forward to the cool quiet. The chance to do a little thinkingnot to mention the appeal of a cold glass of beer and a steak sandwich in the dining room.
"Bradford Price, you're living in the Stone Age." Sadie Price glared up at her older brother and wasn't the slightest bit surprised to notice he wasn't denying her accusation. In fact, he looked proud.
"If that's your roundabout way of telling me that I'm a man of tradition, then I'm all right with that." Brad leaned down and kept his voice low. "And I don't appreciate my baby sister coming in here to read me the riot act because I don't agree with her."
Sadie silently counted to ten. Then twenty. Then she gave up. Her temper wouldn't be cooled by counting, or the multiplication tables or even with thoughts of her twin daughters' smiling faces. She had been pushed too far and, like a true Price, she was fighting mad.
The main room of the Texas Cattleman's Club might not have been the perfect spot for a throw-down, she thought, but it was too late to back off now. Even if she had wanted to.
"I didn't move back to Royal from Houston just to sit at home and do nothing, Brad."
In fact, now that she was home again, she intended to make a name for herself. To get involved. And the TCC was just the place to make a start. She had been thinking about this all night and the fact that her older brother was making things hard on her wouldn't change her mind.
"Fine," he said, throwing both hands high. "Do something. Anything. Just not here."
"Women are a part of the club's world now, Brad," she insisted, glancing over at the two elderly men sitting in brown leather club chairs. At her quick look, they both lifted the newspapers they were hiding behind and pretended they hadn't been watching.
Typical, Sadie thought. The men in this once-exclusive club were determined to ignore progress of any kind. Heck, they'd had to be hog-tied to get them to allow women in the club at all. And they still weren't happy about it.
"You don't need to remind me of that," Brad said tightly. "Haven't I got Abigail Langley riding me like a bull in the rodeo? That woman's about to drive me out of my mind and I'm damned if I'm going to take it from you, too."
She hissed in a breath. "You are the most hardheaded, ornery "
"I'm going to be in charge around here, little sister," he told her. "And you'd best remember that."
Here being the Texas Cattleman's Club, of course. Brad was planning on running for club president and if he won, Sadie knew darn well that the TCC would stay in the dark ages.
Sadie bit down on her bottom lip to keep the furious words that wanted to spill from her locked inside. Honestly, the TCC had been the bulwark of stubborn men for more than a hundred years.
Even the decor in the place reeked of testosterone. Paneled walls, dark brown leather furniture, hunting prints on the walls and a big-screen TV, the better to watch every single Texas sporting event. Until recently, women had only been allowed in the dining room or on the tennis courts. But now, thanks to Abby Langley being an honorary memberwith full club privileges due to her late husband Richard's name and history with the club, all of that was changing. And the women in Royal were counting on the fact that now that Pandora's box had been opened, the men in town wouldn't be able to close it again.
But if dealing with her brother was a sign of how difficult change was going to be, Sadie knew she and the other females in town were in for a whale of a fight.
"Look," she said, trying for her most reasonable tonewhich wasn't easy when faced with a head as hard as her brother's"the club is looking to build a new headquarters. I'm a landscape designer. I can help.
I've got the name of a great architect. And I did some sketches for the new grounds that"
"Sadie " Brad sighed and shook his head. "Nothing's been decided. We don't need an architect. Or a landscape designer. Or a damn interior decorator."
"You could at least listen to me," she argued.
"I may have to put up with Abby Langley giving me grief, but I don't have to listen to my baby sister," Brad said. "Now go on home, Sadie."
He walked away.
Just turned his back and walked off as if she didn't matter at all. Fuming silently, Sadie thought briefly about chasing him down and giving him another piece of her mind. But that would only give the old coots like Buck Johnson and Henry Tate even more to gossip about.
Her gaze shifted to those two men, still hiding behind their newspapers as if they were completely oblivious to what was going on. Well, Sadie knew better. Those two had heard every word of her argument with her brother and by tonight, she expected that they would have repeated it dozens of times. And men said women were gossips.
Grumbling under her breath, she tucked her cream-colored leather bag beneath her arm, got a hard grip on the folder of sketches she'd brought along with her and stormed for the front door. The sound of her needle-thin heels clicked against the wood floor like a frantic heartbeat.
Disappointment and anger warred inside her. She'd really hoped that she would be able to at least count on her brother's support. But she should have known better. Brad was like a throwback to an earlier generation. He liked his women to be pretty pieces of arm candy and he liked the club just as it wasa male bastion against the ever-encroaching idea of equality of the sexes.
"He's a caveman," Sadie muttered, rushing out of the dark interior of the club into the bright sunlight of a July morning in Texas.
She was still running on pure temper and her eyes were so dazzled by the brilliant light, she didn't see the man until she crashed right into him.
One day back in his hometown and Rick Pruitt ran smack into a tornado. A tall, sleek, blond tornado with eyes as blue as the Texas sky and legs that went on forever. He'd been thinking about her only a minute or two before and now here she was. She stormed out of the Texas Cattleman's Club in such a fury, she'd run right into him only to bounce off like a pebble skipping across the surface of a lake.
He reached out to grab her shoulders and steady her. Then she lifted those big blue eyes up to him and the look on her face said clearly that he was the last person on earth she had expected to see.
"Mornin', Sadie," he said softly, letting his gaze sweep over the patrician features he remembered so well. "If you're really looking to run me over, you should maybe try it in a car. You're not nearly big enough to do it on foot."
She blinked at him. Her face paled and her eyes were wide and shining with shock. "Rick? What are you doing here?"
A long, humming second or two passed between them and that was all it took to get Rick's blood rushing and his body tightening. But Sadie swayed unsteadily.
"Hey," he asked. "Are you okay?"
"Fine," she murmured, though she didn't look it. "I'm just surprised to see you, that's all. I didn't know you were home."
"Only arrived yesterday," he told her. "Guess the town gossip chain needs a little time to get up and running."
"I suppose so."
Her cheeks got even paler and she looked uneasy. Rick wondered why.
She shook her head. "I'm sorry about running into you. Coming out of the gloom of that man-cave into the bright daylight, I couldn't see and I was just so darn mad at Brad "
Good to know, he told himself. He'd much rather she be furious with her brother than him. The one night they'd spent together had been haunting him for three long years. He'd spent a lot of time in the desert, remembering her taste, her touch. She was the kind of woman who slipped up on a man. Got under his defenses. Which was why he'd been glad to be leaving for his tour of duty right after their night together. He hadn't been looking for permanent back then, and Sadie Price was not the kind of woman to settle for a one-night stand.
He took a breath, inhaling her scentthat soft swirl of summer rain and flowers that always seemed to cling to her skin. That scent had stayed with him while he was deployed. And it didn't seem to matter where he was stationed or the misery that surrounded him if he closed his eyes, she was there.

One Two Cosmetics — magnetic eyelashes
On August 12th I placed my order for magnetic eyelashes from, what I thought, was a company that appeared to really care, was new, was innovative, and was located in California (not some foreign country). I was happy when two days later I received an email stating that my lashes were 'on their way' and I was issued a USPS number. After four days of no action whatsoever on the USPS number I sent an email to OT. Samantha responded saying it takes 5 to 9 business days to receive the product. I understand 'business' days so I waited the full 9 days which upon I never received the product. I then called them and though the company is located in Chatsworth, California, the woman I spoke to said she was in Utah (I guess that's better than India). She said my order was stuck in the warehouse (you think?). She said she did whatever and that I should receive the product in 5 to 9 business days (??!!...again???!!) What if I placed the order for lashes and received them and then told YOU that YOU would receive the money in 5 to 9 business days?? UPDATE, it's been two business days since my phone call to Utah and there has been no activity whatsoever on my USPS number. I read reviews on the other magnetic lash companies with people claiming they were scams...I think you can add this company to the list of scams.

I met him for the first time at Nandos. Now, when I say met, I mean I stared awkwardly at him - feeling things that I never knew were even possible to feel - while he stood and chatted with my friend. They knew each other through her brother and got talking. He was looking at me, though - I could tell. Even from that moment, there really was something undeniable. Call it chemistry, a spark, whatever - but there was something.
Months went by, and I thought about this mystery man often. It was inexplicable. I had "met" him only once!
I was out to dinner with my cousin when serendipity played her hand again! Randomly, at a store, I saw him from the corner of my eye. I yanked my cousin as fast as I could and hid behind the makeup counter and gestured, whispering "That's him!!" I didn't dare say a word more, for I would have stuttered over the sound of my own heartbeat.
I spent a good portion of the evening reasoning that the only thing that could have brought us in such proximity again was fate. So, taking matters into my teenage hands, I added him that night on Facebook. He accepted, pretty much straightaway. Now that I had made the first move, I had to take my chances. So I messaged him. Not before carefully constructing it in consultation with my girlfriends, of course!
I asked an older girlfriend for advice and she obliged and sent me the message to send across to him! I copy-pasted it straight, without thinking, and just clicked send. The next 10 minutes were life and death as far I was concerned. I was 16 at the time (he was 19) - there was no option but for him to reply. Else my life would be over!
He did reply. We had a conversation that I remember word for word till today. And then we exchanged email addresses so that we could become better acquainted via MSN! (Like I said, I was 16 at the time. This was 8 years ago!) The summer passed and we managed to stay in touch quite a bit. He even started calling me on the phone, and I remember the giggling and mid-morning conversations with a smile even now. I was falling madly in love with him.
He was from Nigeria, and I was in London. He was studying in London at university, though, and would be coming back in about a week's time. It seemed only natural after the amazing summer we (virtually) had that we should meet up. Properly.
I would say I had butterflies in my stomach, but that just wouldn't remotely do justice to the massive pterodactyl wings I had flying around in my stomach on the night that we were due to see each other. I got there early. Panicked, I went and hid in the McDonalds’ around the corner - it was my first ever date, after all. When I finally took courage into my hands and emerged, he’d got the cinema tickets, and we had an awkward exchange about who was to pay for them. He did, in the end. "Woohoo!" I remember thinking, "it IS a date."
"I didn't know you had braces".
These were his first real words to me, as we climbed the escalator up to the cinema. I wanted to die. Run back down the escalator, jump into a hole and never ever come out again.
"Oh..." I said
"Yeah. Well, I do now," he calmly replied, with a reassuring smile.
It was an Adam Sandler movie. We laughed. He kissed my forehead - and I fell even harder in love. We had our first kiss the next night. It was on my staircase. I still can't walk past that spot without thinking about him.
These little outings continued for a while, our mutual love for chicken took us to Nandos - a lot. We watched loads of movies and chatted over countless ounces of ice cream. But with our age difference and lifestyle - nothing really came of it. He moved back to Nigeria and I finished my final year of school. There wasn't a single moment that he didn't run through my mind! All of my friends knew this. Heck, pretty much everyone knew this. I would find a way to weave him into conversation whenever possible.
Of course, as time went on, we both began to date different people. We stayed in constant touch, though. I can definitely attribute 70% of my relationship failures to the fact that I was still very much in love with Surya. I know now that it wasn't fair to any of the other guys - but you live and you learn, I guess.
I still remember the first time he told me loved me. It was a year or so after he had moved back. He called me in a rather tipsy manner and said in the most nonchalant way ever that he was about to tell me something, that it wasn't a big deal and that he would probably never say it again. "I love you." I had waited years to hear these three little words from him. Of course I didn't miss a beat and said the same to him. "Woah, heavy duty - I didn't expect you to say it back!" he said. He called me the next night and just fell into a stupor repeating those three little words, over and over again.
The volume of our phone calls increased and we began to Skype frequently as well. I was nearing the end of university by now. He had a girlfriend back home. I had been dating someone for two years. But we had formed a bond so strong by now, that no one else seemed relevant - to me anyway.
Surya and his girlfriend broke up for reasons that I don't recall - I was too busy doing cartwheels in my head upon hearing it to actually remember the details. I continued to date my guy, though, for a few months afterwards, until it finally ended on pretty mutual terms.
Nothing changed. Surya and I remained friends, our bond growing even stronger as days went by. We had fights - a lot of them because I wasn't being able to understand why more wasn't happening. "We're in different places geographically and otherwise." That would be his standard response to my protests. One day, I couldn't handle it any longer and we had a massive fight and stopped talking.
That was the first time in 6 years that he was not actually a factor in my life.
Of course, it didn't last! Facebook played its part again. This time he sent the request and messaged me. I didn't want to reply, but before I knew it my fingers had made the decision to do so.
We finally started dating, two years ago. It was everything I had always wanted for it to be and probably everything he never knew he wanted for life to be. I was happy. I felt complete. I was finally with the person who had changed my life. The person who had taught me to be a better person - who had somehow become my conscience and closest confidant amongst the chaos that is life.
But life is funny that way. Just when we had finally found a time for us - life decided that other things demanded priority. Family for me, work for him. And we couldn't make it work. After all that; we had to put what was unequivocally meant to be down to something as trivial as timing.
P.S.: If you're reading this - I want you to know I still think we're meant to be, I just think we (both) took too long...
* Names changed to protect privacy.
MUST-READ: #MyStory: Dear X, I Want To Marry You – This Is Why…
MUST-READ: #MyStory: How We Went From Lovers To Strangers All Over Again Want to know more?
Who - seriously, who in their right mind - could have ever believed that your life could be changed by one little "friend request" on Facebook?!
Published on Sep 11, 2015

The Tazwell W. Trice Family Historyby Gary Telford
Tazwell W. Trice was born December 5, 1813 in Virginia. He migrated to the state of Mississippi and this is where he met his future wife, Martha Ann Dunlap-Parr, widow of John T. S. Parr who had died March 27. 1850 in Monroe Co., MS. Tazwell and Martha were married May 24, 1854 in Pontotoc County, Mississippi.
Martha Ann Dunlap was the daughter of Peter Dunlap of Ireland, and Mary Permelia Driver Dunlap of North Carolina. In 1858 Tazwell and Martha left Mississippi with their three children and came to Arkansas and settled at Cotton Plant in 1858. He was a farmer and land owner there for the next several years.
The Tazwell Trice family originated the old Trice Cemetery on part of the land they owned. Members of the Trice family are buried there, their descendants are buried nearby, and in an adjacent area some members of the Crafford family are buried. The land on which the cemeteries are located later became the L. O. Vincent farm, located about three miles west and about two miles south of Cotton Plant in Woodruff County, Arkansas.
A brother, Benjamin A. Trice also born in Virginia, settled in Cotton Plant and died October 18, 1859 and is buried in the Trice Cemetery.
Tazwell and Martha had six known children with the first three being born in Mississippi and the last three being born at Cotton Plant, Arkansas. Tazwell died December 27, 1873 in Cotton Plant and was buried in the Trice Cemetery. Martha Ann Dunlap-Parr Trice was born November 4, 1829 and died December 14, 1916 in Cotton Plant and is buried in the Trice Cemetery. Martha's brother, John William Dunlap, was born October 15, 1827 and married Mary F. Reid. He died July 6, 1863 and is also buried in the Trice Cemetery. Children of Tazwell and Martha were as follows; (1) John Robert "Bob" Trice Sr. born March 1855; (2) Pauline Trice was born April 30, 1856; (3) James Peter "Jim" Trice was born December 6, 1857; (4) William Tell (Judge) Trice was born April 1859; (5) Benjamin A. Trice was born March 9, 1861 and died April 19, 1928 in Cotton Plant and is buried in the Trice Cemetery; (6) Martha L. Trice was born about 1868 and we have no other information on her.
John Robert "Bob" Trice Sr. (1 above) married Mary Elizabeth "Molly" unknown. She was born November 12, 1862 and died November 23, 1884 at Cotton Plant and is buried in the Trice Cemetery. After the death of his first wife he married Mary E. Shelton who was born 1865 and died 1945. John Robert Trice Sr. died 1943. Both are buried in the Cotton Plant Cemetery. They were the parents of two known children; (1) Nina Trice born October 1893 and she married Sidney J. Jeffett who was born 1889 and died 1932. Nina died 1947. Both are buried in the Cotton Plant Cemetery; (2) John Robert Trice Jr. was born 1898 and he married Grace Burkett who was born August 23, 1898 and died June 17, 1973. John died 1959. Both are buried in the Cotton Plant Cemetery.
Pauline Trice, daughter of Tazwell and Martha, was born April 30, 1856 and died July 8, 1918 and is buried in the Trice Cemetery. She married a Mr. Hammond and they were the parents of one known daughter, Alma Hammond who was born January 1874 and married a Mr Oren. Alma Hammond Oren died November 2, 1932 in Cotton Plant and is buried in the Trice Cemetery.
James Peter "Jim" Trice, son of Tazwell and Martha Trice, born December 6, 1857, married Cynthia Lyde "Mitt" Tarpley on October 12, 1884. She was the daughter of Abel and Mary Linthicum Tarpley. Cynthia was born October 23, 1864 and died May 6, 1948. James Peter "Jim" Trice died March 21, 1927. Both are buried in the Trice Cemetery. James and Cynthia were the parents of ten known children; (1) Annie Mae Trice born about 1885 and married a Mr. Stover; (2) Cecil Trice born December 26, 1886 and died December 1976; (3) Lena Trice born about 1888; (4) James Trice born December 10, 1890 and he married Kate Baggett. James Trice was a graduate of Hendrix College, and was a ordained Methodist Minister, a math teacher in Brinkley High School and a Sunday School teacher in the First United Methodist Church in Brinkley for over 50 years. He farmed in the Dark Corner Community from 1939 until he retired in 1980. James died June 14, 1990 in Forrest City, St. Francis Co., AR. His funeral services were June 16, 1990 in the First United Methodist Church in Brinkley with burial in the Oaklawn Cemetery in Brinkley. He was preceded in death by his wife Katie. (5) Floyd Benjamin Trice was born December 16, 1893. He married first, Della May Lewis who was born August 13, 1897 and died February 2, 1937 and is buried in Trice Cemetery. He married second, Myrtle Simmons, daughter of W. T. and Arrie Roebuck Simmons, who was born October 16, 1910 and died April 1967 in Des Arc, AR. Floyd B. died June 1974 in Des Arc, AR. Both Floyd and Myrtle are buried in the Lakeside Cemetery, Des Arc, AR; (6) Grace Trice was born about 1894 and we have no other information on her; (7) Tarpley Trice was born April 6, 1898 and married Maude Rogers. Tarpley died October 4, 1974 in Cotton Plant and is buried in the Cotton Plant Cemetery; (8) Nellie Trice was born after 1898 and no other information on her; (9) Howard Trice born August 21, 1900 and died July 1973 in Searcy Co., AR. He married Dorothy Lindauer; (10) John Melvin Trice was born August 7, 1903 and died December 6, 1967 in Cotton Plant and is buried in the Cotton Plant Cemetery.
William Tell (Judge) Trice, son of Tazwell and Martha Trice, was born April 1859 in Cotton Plant and he married Minnie C. Shelton about 1884. In a book regarding the History of the Ebenezer Church, which was located three miles west of Cotton Plant, off Highway 38, Judge W. T. Trice stated that his father, Tazwell W. Trice prepared the deed, in 1866, which conveyed two acres of land from J. S. McDonald, to Thomas Wilson, A. L. Tarpley, and Henry Lynthicum, as trustees for the Methodist Episcopal Church, South, for a Church and Cemetery. Judge Trice also stated that this was the first church of any denomination in the southern part of Woodruff County and the north end of Monroe County.
The first regular pastor that Judge Trice remembered served in 1865 and 1866. William Tell (Judge) Trice died in 1942 in Cotton Plant. His wife Minnie Shelton Trice was born 1863 and died 1924 in Cotton Plant. Both are buried in the Trice Cemetery. They were the parents of six known children all born in Cotton Plant; (1) Oma Shelton Trice born January 14, 1884 and died October 20, 1887 in Cotton Plant and is buried in the Trice Cemetery; (2) Tazwell E. Trice born July 17, 1886; (3) William Ed Trice was born November 14, 1892 and died September 29, 1967 in Lake Village, AR and was buried in the Cotton Plant Cemetery; (4) Erma Trice was born and we have no other information on her; (5) Zirlene Trice was born October 29, 1901. Zirlene attended Henderson-Brown College in Arkadelphia, AR and later did graduate work at the University of Texas. She taught elementary school and American History in several schools, including Dumas, Lake Village, Cotton Plant, Marked Tree, Crossett and Lordsburg, New Mexico. She was a member of the Busy Bee Club, Hypsion Club and the Methodist Guild. Miss Zirlene and her sister could always be counted on for whatever type help was needed to promote Cotton Plant. She died December 27, 1990 in Brinkley, Monroe County, AR and was buried in the Cotton Plant Cemetery; (6) Leora Trice is buried in the Trice Cemetery with no dates on marker.
Tazwell E. Trice, son of William Tell (Judge) and Minnie Shelton Trice, married Margaret Gregory who was born August 23, 1890, and they were the parents of one known child; (1) William J. Trice who was born September 24, 1911 and died March 23, 1938 and is buried in the Cotton Plant Cemetery. Tazwell died April 5, 1957 and Margaret died February 18, 1975. Both are buried in the Cotton Plant Cemetery.

I felt we wanted to write to thank Carl and his team for the splendid work they carried out on my kitchen. I only had new door and drawer fronts installed but I now have what looks like a complete new kitchen and for less than half the cost.
Like all homes, my kitchen had odd quirks that needed to be dealt with, and this was easily sorted out by Carl. His team were most professional and extremely competent workman and also left no mess for me to clean up. I would be very happy to recommend them.

Sarah and Martin adopted Caitlyn through Adoption Focus. Here, Sarah writes about the ups and downs of their adoption experiences.
We have a beautiful, funny, energetic daughter and a very different feel to our home. We have toys around the house, homework to be completed, fish fingers have become a delicacy and we frequently hear: “Mummy, Daddy…look”; “Good morning, Mummy, good morning Daddy”; “No, Mummy I don’t want to brush my teeth” or “Daddy, Mummy, I love you”. These are the sounds of our family setting. Our journey was a long one, fraught with ups and downs, elation and sometimes disappointment. This is our story.
As with most people, the first adoption service we contacted was our Local Authority and, unfortunately, our experience with them was quite negative. Several months passed between our first contact and induction evening with them and their contacting us to arrange a visit to our home. We were accepted onto their adoption programme and were eventually visited by a Social Worker. The first visit felt awkward and quite intrusive as they delved into our past quite quickly. When we were asked to attend preparation training at very short notice we had to reluctantly decline due to work obligations. We asked to be put onto the following preparation course instead and were very upset to have our appointed social worker question our commitment to adoption at this point. After another couple of visits they informed us that we were not committed enough to be adoptive parents. We were devastated by this as we had not made the decision to adopt lightly. We immediately started to research into Voluntary Adoption Agencies in our area.
We contacted Adoption Focus to make an enquiry and very quickly received an information pack and were offered a home visit. There was a certain amount of trepidation about this visit following our negative experience with the Local Authority; we had become quite aware that social workers had the power to have a major influence on our future and to put an end to our adoption plans. However, the visit was absolutely fine. We were asked some questions to assess our readiness for adoption, but we never felt like we were being judged.
We were invited to attend Adoption Focus’s Preparation Groups, where we met several other potential adopters. It was a great experience to be part of a group of people in the same situation as ourselves and the atmosphere was very supportive. The training ran for five days, spread out over three weeks and was very informative. The course covered a wide array of topics around adoption, the most memorable and impactful of which was an exercise about looked after children, which succeeded in bringing home the intensity of their experiences and the effects of these on their lives. Attending Preparation Groups was a positive, thought-provoking and informative experience, answering all the questions we had and many that we hadn’t even thought of.
We met our appointed social worker, Louise, at the preparation group session. Louise was very friendly and professional and we built up a fantastic relationship during the assessment. Over the course of several visits to our home she would talk to us about all aspects of our lives in a relaxed and conversational way. Although talking to a ‘stranger’ about your experiences may seem intrusive and daunting, it was fairly therapeutic. This experience was very different to the first Local Authority visit; Louise gave us the opportunity to get to know her and built a good relationship of trust.
Once our assessment was completed we were invited to attend Adoption Panel, where our application to adopt would be considered. We received an information pack before we attended and Louise ran through some of the questions that she thought we might be asked. The day itself was exciting and the Panel Members were friendly and welcoming to us. The meeting took about an hour and very quickly afterwards we were told that we would be approved to adopt.
As approved adopters we continued to work with Louise and Adoption Focus to find a child. We were sent a lot of children’s profiles and also spent time looking at potential matches on the Be My Parent website. After several weeks, and having considered around 50 profiles, we both found that we were particularly drawn to the profile of the same little girl, Caitlyn. Caitlyn had a smile and a twinkle in her eye that captured our hearts, she already felt like our little girl, even before we met her. We contacted Louise and asked her to find out more information.
Information was exchanged between Adoption Focus and the Local Authority and we were met by Caitlyn’s social workers. After a second visit we were thrilled to be told that we were now the only family they were considering for her. There followed a Matching Panel, at which the decision to match us with Caitlyn was considered. The day of the Matching Panel was nerve-wracking. Having found Caitlyn and having set our hearts on becoming her parents, it felt like there was a huge amount at stake at this meeting. Louise attended the Matching Panel with us, but the majority of the questions were directed to us. When we were finally informed that the match had been approved, it was a big relief.
Adoption Focus and the Local Authority arranged a series of introduction meetings between ourselves and Caitlyn. The first of these took place at her foster carers’ home and was restricted to just one hour. We were very excited, but also nervous about this meeting; we were so keen for it go well. We were told to expect Caitlyn to be very shy, possibly even hiding away and not to be concerned if this was the case. However, when we arrived, Caitlyn was quite the opposite, she even saved some chocolates especially for us and we immediately felt comfortable with each another.
Shortly after our first meeting Caitlyn’s foster carers brought her to visit us at our home. The next day after a few minutes Caitlyn told her foster carers that she would be fine and that they could go! Caitlyn was very excited, particularly when she went to see her room and when she went around the house following the little treasure hunt that we had arranged for her. Our meetings with Caitlyn confirmed for all of us that becoming a family was the right thing to do.
When we picked up Caitlyn from her foster carers for the last time, they were in tears. They had been very supportive throughout the process and we were grateful to them. We felt for them, having to let Caitlyn go to a new, permanent home. When we arrived at our house, we found that our friends had decorated our house with balloons and messages of congratulations.
The early days after Caitlyn’s arrival were great. Throughout the adoption process we had been told to expect difficulties following placement and were ready for potential problems. But Caitlyn settled in fine and perhaps the most difficult aspect of this time was having to stay in. We were advised not to go out, or to have visitors to the house for a couple of weeks in order to give Caitlyn the chance to become familiar with her new circumstances. This was quite difficult for us, as we are both quite active, but we followed the advice and it seemed to work.
At our preparation groups and at other points during the adoption process as a whole, we had been cautioned to expect problems and have tried to be prepared for the worst. To date though, nearly six months after Caitlyn came home with us, all has been well, we have the normal age related behaviours and other aspects that perhaps need some fine tuning, however all in all it feels like she has always been here. We know that these are still early days, but we have formed a strong attachment with Caitlyn and we’re confident that as a family, we will manage any problems that occur in the future together. Life is very different at home with more washing, more areas to tidy up, more laughter and a great deal more playing.

So, I have been in a relationship on and off with my boyfriend for 4 years. Recently we had an argument as there have been issues for a while as we don’t spend a lot of time together (he works nights and we don’t live together) which doesn’t help. The argument was pretty bad and out of nowhere he starts sobbing saying he’s sick of arguing and scared I’m going to leave him. I comfort him and told him I wouldn’t leave him ok and he said good and stops crying.
Fast forward a week. He came over the other night as a surprise saying work doesn’t need him tonight and he wanted to see me. I was surprised as wasn’t expecting him, however, was happy to see him. Once in my flat, I told him I needed to get in the shower as had been working earlier and was sweaty. He then asked if he could join me and I said no. He knows I don’t like it and has always respected this in the past. I then got in the shower and closed the door fully. After 5 mins he walked in the bathroom naked and just got in the shower with me. I told him to get out, but he started kissing me and ignored what I said. I didn’t say anything more and just went along with it.
After us both getting out of the shower we got in bed, we started to make out and had sex (me on top) and he came. After lying down cuddling for a bit he suddenly starts tickling me really hard and when I said stop it and was trying to push him off cause it hurt. He just started to laugh at me and carried on. Next thing he gets on top of me and forces my legs open and I ask him what he’s doing and then say no, as we’ve just had sex. He just said no (in a daft voice) and then pushes inside of me and then he starts tickling me again really hard. I ask him to stop again and he said what “The tickling or sex”. I said the tickling (not the sex) and he stops. He then while still inside me said “I love you ok” and then proceeds to pin one of my hands down and puts his other hand around my throat and starts having sex with me really hard. I didn’t say no but cried out a few times in bed and he started to do it harder. After. He got off me and said, “You didn’t want that did you, I could tell you wasn’t in the mood”. I said no as I was tired from work and we had just had sex. He then said, “You know why I tickle you”? I said no and he replied, “Because I’m the man and I can”.
I am confused about this incident as we have only ever had gentle sex in the past and he has always stopped when I have told him not to do things. I am not sure if my feelings are over the top or even if what he did was that bad. I would really appreciate any advice you can give me. Thanks.
As I said you should either talk to him and ask what happend and see if this was a one time thing and if you can live with his explanation. But don't forget when a person does not respect your boundaries and does not understand "no" in these private situations he does not have any respect for you. And this could get out of hand big time, very fast. So if I were you I would seriously reconsider if this is what you want in your life. Now it is this, next time it can be twice as bad

Wife of the President, Aisha Buhari, has denied there was any rift between her and President Muhammadu Buhari, which forced her to stay away from the country for an unusually extended period.
Aisha was out of the Country for over two months and her absence was said to be in protest of the happenings in the Presidency. Her absence became obvious after she did not appear alongside the President at some important official functions.
However, to clear the air, Mrs Buhari told the government-owned National Television Authority shortly after she returned to Abuja around 5am on Sunday morning that she was in the United Kingdom to be with her children.
The first lady said she also saw her doctors while she was away abroad.

It all began when I plucked some big ol' eggs from the nests for several days in a row sometime in October. I candled them and was able to see two yolks in each one. These eggs just seemed so special and we had so many of them that I decided to set three of them in my homemade incubator. After hearing so many people say that they had tried and failed at double yolkers, I was a little skeptical, but I was scientifically interested in how it might turn out (and I decided that these chicks deserved a chance just like any others)!
At day 17 I candled them again and one had stopped developing early so I disposed of it. The other two seemed very full. Indeed they were full!
On November 9th I candled them again and could see that one egg had pipped internally into the air cell in the large end. The next night (Nov. 10) was day 20 and 19 for my eggs and I heard peeping from the one on day 20!! There was no pip yet and I was afraid to start helping without it at least pipping on it's own. The next day there was a pip on the small end of the egg! That pretty much confirmed for me that there were two live chicks in that egg. I consulted my friends on BYC, because I really wanted this hatch to be successful. From then on I think I was on pins and needles (along with many other BYC'ers) until it was all over.
I held off on the intervention until Nov 11th, day 21 for my first egg to hatch. In the morning when I got up it was not pipped, so I still couldn't bring myself to "help". I had to go to work and that was probably a life saver...I didn't have to sit and wait for something to happen. When I came home for lunch break there was a PIP on the small end of the egg!!!! My heart raced and my hands started shaking and I had to make a quick decision. Since there was one in both ends and the one in the large end had pipped internally the day before but not pipped externally, I was afraid it was getting low on oxygen. I couldn't leave to go back to work without at least pipping it on the large end so it could breathe. I pipped it on the large end and placed a moist paper towel around the opening to keep the exposed membrane moist.

Man mistakenly buys winning lottery ticket
A US man is $30,000 richer after mistakenly buying a winning lottery ticket.
Bob Sabo, of Easton, in southwestern Connecticut, put his improbable turn of luck down to a combination of not wearing his glasses and an impulse decision, according to the state lottery.
"I bought the (winning) ticket by accident," he said.
Mr Sabo would normally buy his lottery tickets at the Super Stop & Shop in Fairfield.
However, last week, he decided he didn't want to wait in line and bought an entry from a lottery vending machine — something he had previously never done.
As fate would have it, Mr Sabo didn't have his glasses on, which resulted in him buying the wrong ticket, he told lottery officials.
"I meant to buy two $20 tickets," he said, according to a Connecticut Lottery statement.
"Instead, I bought a '30X Cash' ticket for $30 by mistake, which left me with $10 to buy another ticket."
When he got home, he discovered the 30X scratchie was not only a winner but the top prize for the game.
"Winning the way we did was a very freaky thing," he told lottery officials.
Source: Connecticut Lottery

Yesterday James was grumpy. No idea why, but grumpy. So late in the day when he was sick of being in the house we bundled him up and took him out to see his best friend the tree, because after all, a visit with your best friend always cheers you up. He was happy to play in the wet dreary weather. And the best thing? His ADORABLE elephant coat he was wearing. I got this as a baby shower gift more than a year ago. I've been so excited for him to fit into it.
I told you this coat was the cutest. The little man wearing it isn't bad either.
Look! He has an elephant tail!
Luckily after a grumpy day yesterday he was much happier today. The visit to the tree must have done the trick.
4 days ago

CNN is reporting actor Heath Ledger ("Brokeback Mountain") has been found dead in his Manhattan apartment. Says TMZ: "He was found dead in his bed in one of his residences in Soho by his housekeeper at 3:35 p.m. today. Law enforcement sources tell TMZ they believe it was not a crime, adding pills were found near his body. The 28-year-old actor has a two year old daughter with former fiancee Michelle Williams -- they separated in September, 2007. He plays the Joker in the upcoming Batman film, 'The Dark Knight.' The NY Times is reporting a masseuse arrived at his apartment and was let in the door by a housekeeper, who then knocked on the door of Mr. Ledger's bedroom. When no one answered, the housekeeper and the masseuse opened the bedroom door and found Mr. Ledger unconscious. They attempted to wake him, and when they couldn't they called 911. We're told when paramedics responded, the actor was in full cardiac arrest. They attempted to perform CPR on him, but were unsuccessful. He was pronounced dead at the scene."
What the heck is happening around here? Isn't this just bizarre?

CON STOOD BELOW THE 2 OF LINCOLN PLACE and the overhead wires and not being sure in which direction to continue, he took out a cigarette and lit it. Although it was warm, clouds, there earlier in the day, had now overtaken the sun. As he was lighting up, he was treated to the sudden and wonderful spectacle of a tandem passing by, with a man at the helm and a woman taking up the rear. A little feather lifted from the street as they raced past. Although it seemed that they were almost gone even before he had scarcely seen them coming, Con tried to figure out whether it was two bikes welded into one or whether it was the real thing. But it was too late for that. Within seconds they were disappearing from view, taking the tum with the parallel, yellow lines around the end of Westland Row, legs and knees moving together in close synchronicity, like they were part of the wheels.
About ten yards away, a man had started to hose down the front of Kennedy’s, smearing the red front a deeper terracotta. As he stood there, smoking his cigarette, Con considered that he had a few seconds before the back of his suit would take the swash from the pub walls, even had he that, he wondered, probably not. Taking a few steps to the edge of the footpath, he inhaled a little more. In front of him the traffic flowed in both directions, coming to a halt every now and then at the lights. The man with the hose moved a bit closer and Con thought he felt the first drops on the side of his face. He took another drag on the cigarette, turned around and went in the side door of the pub.
At the bar, he ordered a pint. The cigarette was still in his mouth and his chin and jaw had stiffened protrusively to keep it in an upward tilt between his lips as he lifted the pint from the counter.
Sitting in the seat at the window, he had a perfect view of the junction outside. Families and single people went by, coming, he supposed, from the train. Cars slid past around the corner between Lincoln Place and Westland Row.
At the counter, two men were drinking together, just staring into their pints. Every now and then their voices trailed across the bar. Sometimes the man with his back to the window would say, Lordy, lordy.
Con took a sip from his pint and stubbed out the butt in an ashtray. Then he loosened his tie and took off his jacket. He turned sideways so that his arm was resting on the back of the seat and his eyes were directly on the window now in front of him. Nobody seemed to mind when he rested his left on the stool under the table. The sound of a siren made him look left out onto Westland Row, just in time to see, through a chain of drops, an unmarked car tearing up the street, and slowly, before it disappeared, hooking the far corner that, quietly, demanding caution, clipped the haste of everything.
Lordy, lordy, the voice came again from the counter. Con leaned forward and put his lips to the edge of the glass. When he swallowed, he rested his head against the wooden frame of the side door and it was as if the whole world was weary of humidity and beyond that, of living.
Outside, the washer was going back over the walls. Con waited for the second go of rain that day. A couple wandered in. When they had been served their drinks and were holding them in their hands, slowly, their eyes drifted over the stools at the bar and to those chairs further away. The man looked as if he might sit anywhere, but her eyes kept following the spaces, trying to find exactly what she wanted. Even when he spotted a snug, she shook her head. Sighing, the man gestured towards the window seat. Con drew up his coat and put his leg on the floor. She looked at him, sitting there with his pint and the cigarette balancing in the tray. Then she looked up at the brightness pouring in behind him and her eyes narrowed, as if she had suddenly seen too much of the world.
It’s too bright, she said.
It could have been. An aggravation of light or perhaps it was the smoke that bothered her. In the end they moved off into another section. One of the men at the bar raised his hand and ordered two more pints. Con had his back to the window, when behind him, suddenly, he heard a storm breaking over the wall. Raised voices followed, little squeals of alarm, as three girls, who were walking by at that moment, got abruptly rained on. For a long time it seemed, their voices floated back up the street and then they faded into faraway and from there, into nothing and then he knew they were gone.
As the afternoon wore on, the part of the pub where he was sitting seemed to be slipping into stillness. From wall to wall, his vision wandered, coming to rest every now and then, over pictures that caught his interest. Gradually, he felt his eyes getting heavy and he almost regretted drinking on a day that was this humid. Through the little door between both bars, he heard the sound of glasses being arranged as his eyes began to close.
‘Terrible heavy,’ a voice came suddenly.
It was one of the men at the bar. The other stool was empty. His voice sounded coarse, like it had trailed over gravel from the back of his throat. The two elbows were lying across the bar supporting his weight and his whole body seemed slumped in a way which might make a person suspect he was in a stupor. His eyes were heavy, but it was hard to know whether it was the drink or the weather that was closing him down.
‘Terrible,’ Con replied, sitting forward in the chair, as if he expected that a few words might follow between them. He wouldn’t have minded a chat, although he wasn’t lonely, just tired, and he didn’t want to doze off.
‘Shocking,’ said the man, looking out beyond Con to the glare of the street, where his vision trailed to the distance. ‘Shocking’ he said again, his voice fading. He turned away then and his eyes found the back wall of the bar once more. His reflection in the mirror that hung on the back wall must have held him because he never looked back towards Con again and his head seemed to sink a little lower into his shoulders. After that, the pulse of the day seemed to slow even a little more. As if a few words can seal a place up.
It was a few minutes later that the other man reappeared. Heavily, he sat down again and you could hear the sound of the legs of the stool budging against the wooden floor.
Con lit up again.
In front of him, half the pint was just sitting there, waiting, the froth all broken to traces of nothing against the inside of the glass. ‘Lordy, lordy,’ the voice drifted over on the air once more. It wasn’t as if Con got suddenly weary of that sound, but something about it made him think he wanted to leave that spot. Too tired to get up, he just lifted his hand from his knee and instead of getting up to go, he placed it on the sleeve of h is suit jacket all laid out beside him, and although there were no creases in it, he started slowly smoothing it out with the palm of his hand, his worn fingers brushing against the pinstripes, moving with them.
A few minutes after, he got up and without taking his jacket, went down to the gents. When he was there, he thought about how easily somebody could steal his jacket, how they could be just be passing and how they might just throw an eye in through the window, see the thing and then without anybody even noticing, slip in, take it and be gone in a second. A short while later, he took the corner at the top of the stairs and saw the jacket lying in wait for him, keeping his seat in the light from the window. And when he saw it, when he saw that it wasn’t gone, and that now he was back that there was no chance for anyone to take it, he knew he couldn’t have cared, either way.
As he was taking his seat again, the double yellow lines on the far side of the street caught his eye. Something about the way they were coming or going, he didn’t know, he could never say about that. He started thinking then about the tandem that had passed. The man on the front of it and the girl behind. There was something he liked about tandems. Something about the uniformity of limbs rising and falling at the same angles against the world and the way everything happened together, that simultaneity of living.
Outside, a passing truck took the comer from Lincoln Place on to Westland Row. It shook the place and even when it was gone from sight, the window was still murmuring in the frame.
‘The noise of that yoke,’ one of the men said at the bar.
Con took another slug from his pint.
There was a girl once he had known, but not very well really, if a person was talking in terms of really knowing somebody, then not very well at all. They had gone cycling together. It was years ago. And now he was thinking of her, this girl from years ago. This girl, whose name he couldn’t even remember now. He narrowed his eyes a little as if he was trying to picture her. He could see her face all right. If he tried not to think of her name, it would probably come, eventually, of its own accord. But what was it? He took another drag from the cigarette. And to hell with it, he thought, another thing he couldn’t remember.
The smoke passed across his face.
Far away he heard a dog barking.
Over behind the bar someone had put the telly on, but there was no sound. From the far side of the pub, there was laughter and you could have surmised that there was probably about three or four people gathered at one of the tables. Maybe they had come in another door.
He had rented a tandem.
God, he could have as easily forgotten it ever happened. But there, he had remembered it, as if, like so many other days, it had been lying in a crease of his memory, resting undisturbed. His hand tightened around the glass and something like a smile crossed his face. The weight of outside light on his shoulders seemed to ease off a little, the heaviness in the air, beginning to harden itself out against the sky. She was a bit mad, she was. She was that. A bit gone in the head all right and she’d be the first to admit it. A mad one.
He looked down into his pint, the fading darkness of it, as memory tunnelled into his mind. They had rented a tandem. And why wouldn’t they, she had said, when she saw it in Whelan’s, isn’t it as easy as riding a bike, sure why not. She shrugged her shoulders as she spoke. Sure why not yourself, he had said to her. Her laugh glided on the air.
Con looked up slowly and gazed out the side window. He smiled broadly at that openness.
‘Sure why not,’ he said suddenly, thinking out loud.
Con put his hand down on his jacket again and let his fingers trail the line of the pin stripes. And his voice came again this time, only softer, ‘Sure why not, why bloody not.’
Outside, the cloud had deepened over the city and the sky had that look of rain.
There’s a few seconds when you start off on a tandem, there’s a window of time, when you never know what’s going to happen. You could live or be dead within the same minute. You could skin both your knees coming down on the footpath or you could sail forever. He could remember her voice, now, in that moment, when the bike swayed and wobbled from side to side, as they tried to keep it out from the kerb and at the same time, out of harm’s way from the middle of the road. If a car came, the speed of it would shake your guts and he remembered that and he remembered the road passing underneath the front wheel as they pulled off, the unspoken seal of it, the secret of the fastness it knew. ‘Pedal! ‘ he said, as he felt the drag of the thing under him. ‘Pedal, would you!’ he ordered and all he could hear floating over his shoulder was her laughing. It made him smile now over his pint. ‘Pedal,’ he said, ‘Pedal! Pedal! For God’s sake, PEDAL!’ And then there was the sound of her laughing again and he could feel her shaking the bike as she snorted, and the sound of the pedal catching under her foot, ‘God’s sake! ‘ she shouted in his ear, almost breathless from her hysterics, ‘I AM PEDALLING! ‘ And she must have been, she must have got going then, because all of a sudden, they were moving along and the bike wasn’t wobbling like before, only swaying now slowly into certainty and the road, with its warm silence, began passing beneath them, and for all they knew, they might have been starting a journey on a train, the way the whole world was beginning gradually and easily to slip by. ‘That’s better,’ he yelled. ‘That’s better yourself,’ she whispered in his ear and he could remember the touch of her lips brush his skin.
They went as far as the sea that day. And things were going fine until she got snippy about something, and in the end, he ended up cycling the thing back into town alone, the whole day washed out.
He ordered another half.
‘Lost the missus, have you?’ they said back in Whelan’s. He couldn’t think of an answer, so his tongue hollowed out the inside of his cheek and that was as good a one as he could give.
Outside, there was the sound of swollen raindrops beginning to fall. The heavens are opening, said the man at the bar, who, leaning on his elbow had turned to look out at the downpour. After a moment, he turned away again, saturated in disinterest.
Along the top of the window, once more, chains of drops were beginning to plummet, gathering into each other before releasing, savouring the plump togetherness of the fall. It kept up for about an hour. Around five, the barman turned on the lamps in the pub. From outside, it had the effect of making the place seem more snug, so that when motorists were stopped at the lights, they couldn’t help wishing that they could be in there as well, having something. What was her name? He wondered how many times he might think about it that night, how many times his mind would recall her face and the feel of her lips against his own.
It was after teatime when he looked at his watch. The rain had eased off. At the bar, the two men had become a little animated and were having a conversation. That heaviness had been loosened from everything, even the knots in the wood did not seem as tight, and during this last hour, a hum of conversation had gradually risen over the other tables. Con finished up his half-pint and was about to go, when the barman turned up the radio and the sports results came on. The lads at the bar started telling the crowd on the other side to whisht. He waited then, another while, to hear the outcome of the hurling matches, the senior and junior, and when he had that done, he put on his jacket and slipped out the door. Although the street was shiny from the rain, the evening had dried up and what there was left of evening light was beginning to open up a little in that freshness unfolding on the air. He felt better in himself. Walking down the curve of Lincoln Place, he could hear the small splashes of the car wheels in the puddles.
A break was coming in the clouds and something like evening sunlight, the inclement promise of summer was trying to ease itself through. He passed a row of trees, thin, spindly things that were not yet matured. In the openness of cool air, they were swaying back and forth a little, as if, with all the effort of growing and surviving, they were making up their minds, whether to be in with the world or have done with it, but from somewhere inside them, rain had lifted those smells of greenery particular to leaves and suddenly, it seemed like a lushness was slowly capturing the world and a kind of willingness seemed to blossom in everything. Con looked up as he was passing under the branches, and little drops, shaken by a touch of air, fell from their leaves on to his face and on to his shoulders, where in a slow diagonal challenge, they delicately crisscrossed the lines and spaces of the pinstripes. And if someone had swiped his jacket, he thought, he would have been soaked

BIC is delighted to be able to inform clients that there is a very exciting change in the UK Immigration law coming into place on 6 April 2015.
Before 1 July 2006 a child could only obtain citizenship through his or her father if the parents were married. The law was however changed on 1 July 2006 to allow a person to acquire citizenship through his or her father, irrespective of whether the parents were married, subject to proof of paternity of course.
That change however was not made retrospectively applicable, meaning individuals born before July 2006 still did not benefit.
In essence it meant if you were born before July 2006 and your father was a British citizen, he could not pass on citizenship to you unless your parents were married.
This is being rectified now as the new provisions will create a registration route for those born before 1 July 2006 who would have become British citizens had their parents been married.
It therefore no longer matters whether or not your parents were ever married to each other, you may still have a claim for British citizenship through your father, and an especially strong claim if your father was born in the UK, or naturalised to become a British citizen.
For more information, or to apply to register as a British citizen under these circumstances, please contact your BIC consultant today.

Strange Love Tuesday 30th November 2021 Starlife:The episode begins with thinking about the ridicule neighboring Mala and depressing. Ajju asked him not to worry about their mockery. Mala said she was sad for them, they always support him and he could not do anything. Kalindi say do not bother with them, I feel sad as they say about you, but we gave them a good reply. Mala asked him to always be the same.
Asthma Indrajeet called and asked him to sign the letters sent by the client, the office boy stood up and she had to send it back. Indrajeet sign the papers and she was worried that she should not see the license lockers. Shlok pursue Ahilya and watched her go to her room. He watched, while Astha take signs Indrajeet.
Shlok ask Shontu to fetch water and go, he knows to do his job. He viewed Ahilya keep the key and did not look at the right place. He thought to find it. Indrajeet ask for water. Astha become tense and went to get water. He gave water and Shlok message.
asked how many more pages and angry. Astha hope Shlok see where Ahilya store keys. Shlok brought coffee and sign Astha. Children come and ask Indrajeet to remove it and insisted. Astha make talks more dense to make Indrajeet busy and sign the final papers.
He got up and said yes, it was finished, I took the papers, I know the urgency. Children make Indrajeet pick it up and he asked them to be quiet. He signed the papers and threw the pen. She said she would take it, they should not interfere when he did the job. Astha check for signs and says Mr. Indrajeet Sarkar, you sign the papers your destruction.
Anjali talking to Pandit to set Udhyapan Puja and tell Kavita that he was doing this for her happiness, like a temple curtain moved. Kavita go. Ahilya said the world is still beautiful and you have full rights to leave, you are still in memory that should be forgotten, and reminiscent of ridicule. He says he will destroy Niranjan.
Strange Love Tuesday 30th November 2021 Starlife: Mala told everyone that Ankush does not come until now and did not even call. Ankush home drunk and asked Mala to not upset, it was not his fault, his friends insisted. He apologized to Mala. Avdhoot asked for Kalindi not to talk to Ankush, he will speak in the morning. He said he would drop to his room. Mala said I would take him. Ankush say goodnight to everyone and go. Ahilya giving money to Pandit as Dakshina her and thank her. Kavita thanks Ahilya to keep the puja.
Ahilya said it was not completed until now and asked him to invite his friend, he met in the Temple, because it gives prasad. Kavita said fine. Ahilya say you like to talk to him, he is your friend, you should call him and great for distributing prasad, if you have the number. Kavita said yes, but he did not want to talk to everyone after what happened at the Temple.
Ahilya says he takes you, he is very good. Anjali pray to Bappa for Kavya results and told Niranjan that he would go to the temple to pray. He said he had a meeting imp and asked him to pray. He did his tilak and hope for the best. He says he is lucky to have a wife like her, a bad time will soon go and promised he would give him a lot of happiness, even Shlok said she would get it all back and it will be happiness.
She cried and hugged him, told him to forget the old things as he did, his happiness is to him and his family, he just wanted his support and he always gave her more than she had hoped, do not think about the past and I assure you. He asked her to go to meet. He looked at her and she smiled, sending it went. He looked at her again, and left smiling.
Strange Love Tuesday 30th November 2021 Starlife: Kavya Sojal ran and asked him to stop. He says he will take the results and come kavya. They go. Anjali pray for the peace of the family. Ahilya call Anjali and make kavita speak. Kavita speak well and invited her home, if she was free

Lisa battles to cut down on the junk food snacks and makes some healthy swaps.
Video Transcription We've included a transcript below to help:
Although her portion sizes are still large, Lisa swaps her regular snacks for some healthy alternatives.
Hi! So here I am again. Yeah, so last time I spoke to you I was talking about setting myself a realistic weekly weight-loss challenge and I was aiming for three to four pounds per week. That's kind of not happened. If anything things have gone really really wrong. I think I must really need that next fill now because my appetite is still there. The portion sizes that I’m eating are still quite large, obviously not as large as they were post-op, but considering the change in portion sizes I was having after the surgery, it has gone up a bit. Also, I'm finding that I'm actually needing it to actually get full. I'm still trying to keep it all healthy, so I'm having potatoes, vegetables and white meat if I can. I'm not eating the most unhealthiest of things, but the portions are still quite large and for me, it's quite a worrying time really because obviously I don't want to end up back in the same situation.
Any time that I'm eating and I'm trying not to finish the meal, I don't finish. However, what I am eating is more than before. Yes I did set myself this weight loss which I thought was going to be doable, however it's really not been and it's quite worrying. I know it's just one of those things that happens along the way. One of the hurdles that you have to get over, but when I do go on the scales, I'd actually put on one pound.I know in the grand scheme of things a pound isn't a lot, but when you’ve been through this journey I was actually devastated to see that. I was really really upset and I had all these ideas going through my head "Oh what if, what if what if". And I’ve had to take a step back, take a breath and just think and calm down. So yeah, willpower still massively features.
Anybody that says having a gastric band is a quick fix, it's really not. I can't even explain the amount I have had to try this week and it was only towards the end of the week that I did weigh myself. It's just not a good feeling. So I think the sooner I get booked in for my next fill, the better. I think it's going to put my mind at rest and it's going to stop me worrying. But you do worry and I was quite surprised about how much it did actually affect me. I knew that if I did put on, I was going to be a bit gutted, but when I actually saw it on the scales I just I couldn't believe it because I just never thought that was going to happen. I've heard stories and I've read things and seen other people's blogs where people have said they've put on. I said "oh no, that'll never be me". Now is the time to pull my socks up and get things back in gear because obviously I don't want to put on. I am still on the 15-stone Club which is a bonus because if I wasn't I would be devastated. It's time to put things into perspective now really, and I just need to push myself and I am still going to the gym two times a week. I found that going the three times a week it's just not doable anymore, so I'm going twice and I am having longer sessions to make up for missing out on that extra day. So that's obviously got to be helping.
Again, I suppose one of the good things about having these larger meals now - not that it's a good thing - but I'm not snacking in between meals. Before obviously when I was snacking it was on the healthy things. Cucumber sticks, carrot sticks things like that. I'm just not feeling the need now, so it's literally breakfast, dinner, tea and then that's it. I'm done. But when I do get my next fill, hopefully things will change a lot. I would like to keep breakfast, dinner, tea and not have to snack in between, I really would. But obviously just at smaller sizes. So, I will check in with you all again next week after I've given my head of wobble and see if I can get rid of this extra pound that I put on and also see if I can get a bit more of a loss as well. Hopefully I'll have some news about booking in for fill number three, so we'll see how things go. All in all it's not been a fantastic week but it's not been the worst. So I shall see you all soon. I'm looking forward to speaking to you. bye bye.

It seems like popular dramatic couple Grand P and Eudoxie Yao are back together. This is coming after new videos and photos of the singer and his ex-fiance were spotted together at the beach after their breakup has gone viral for months and they both moved on with different lovers.
It seems the Guinea singer and his Ivorian model girlfriend have set aside their differences and come back together after having a personally-intense conversation with Eudoxie cuddled and kissed him asking for forgiveness.
In the video that went viral, Grand P had just confronted his ex after she came back to him, feeling hopeless, he asked her – “What Do You Really Want?“
After not getting a clear answer from her, he attempts to drowning himself for love sake. However, Eudoxie swiftly ran after him to stop him from killing himself. She embrace him and asking for forgiveness.
Watch video below;
Recall Grand P moved on after Eudoxie has accused him over alleged infidelity.
Months later his photos with another woman whom he was allegedly cheating with went viral, however, after proposing to her in March, their relationship got severed when he was spotted with a new girlfriend.

Coronavirus invaded our world, and we began to say bye-bye to all of the things we love. It started by telling us that when we want to greet, it has to be through Bluetooth, we began to airdrop pleasantries to ourselves.
It later grew to the point that we were told not even to see ourselves at all, we were told to hide in our homes under the name, “lockdown”. Some of us were able to say bye-bye to those who meant something to them, while some did not have that pleasure.
We were asked to kiss our sources of income goodbye; we did with tears in our eyes. There was no choice left for us to look back.
With pains in our hearts and tears dripping down, we waved at them all, believing that if we scale through this, the bye-bye would have been temporal after all.
As we were getting healed from these pains and acting as if all was well, we were told to come and say a permanent bye-bye to those who we have housed in our hearts for so long.
We were told, they will not make it, Coronavirus has taken over, it has eaten all they have, and now we have to let them go having our faces as the last they would see.
How did we get here? The United Kingdom Health Secretary, Mr Matt Hancock said close family members of dying Coronavirus victims would be able to see them and say goodbye, but we don’t want to.
We want to have them back in our arms; we want them to breath with ease again. We want them to walk back home on their feet.
Recently, 13 years old Ismail Mohanned Abdulwahab from Broxton South London died of Coronavirus; he died alone. His family members were also unable to attend his funeral because they were self-isolating.
That is more than painful; it is cruel and wicked for Coronavirus to do this to us. It separated us before we die, and after death we are still separated.
We will not say this bye-bye, we will not work according to your dictates. We will not be separated. We will remain steadfast to fight against you.
Our resolve is to snatch as many of our loved ones as we can away from your grip. Defeating you is our determination, and there is no going back.

This record is of the events of Thursday, February 26th. Shortly after I got up on Thursday I received a call from my father telling me he was planning on taking off from work early and that he was going to go with me over to Metrotime to be my witness so I can go and get my stuff out of the grips of Harold.
As I was getting ready I almost wore my WCW shirt because of what he had said in his reply to my letter: “Go back to WCW with my blessing.” I decided against it however and wore one of my normal pullover shirts. I did make sure and in the box of the few things I had of Metrotime’s, I placed the Metrotime shirt that he had given me at one point.
Against my better judgment I called Metrotime at Dad’s suggestion to make sure he was there, Harold did not answer the phone. When I told Dad that he didn’t answer the phone we decided to go anyway. The reason I said against my better judgment is that I didn’t want to give Harold the “Head’s Up” in the first place. I thought catching him off guard would be better.
Harold was there when we arrived and I quickly boxed up my few possessions and climbed up on the roof to remove my Satellite Dish from the makeshift radio tower we had built on the roof. Harold of course still holds to the theory that I owe him over $750. Like the 2 months of work for no pay and the fact that I have taken over web hosting for his clients, even the ones that had prepaid him for an entire year of service and were now getting their service from me for the remaining periods of their contracts don’t have any effect on what he thinks I owe him.
I decided not to get into an argument and instead stated as calmly as possible that since I had not been paid in over 2 months I would simply have to pay him back after I got on my feet working for a company that actually pays it’s employees and after I fixed the other debt incurred during that period of time.
Simply put, Harold is an asshole. I normally refrain from swearing at all, and especially in written form, but it’s the truth. Harold is a complete and utter Jerk. He went on and on about how I didn’t call one of his customers Tuesday or Wednesday. Newsflash Harold, by the time I got up on Tuesday, You had fired me!!!! Why should I call your customers and give them free support AFTER you fired me?!
After this I went over to Pastor Tom’s office on the other side of the building and tried to fix his printer for him, but try as I might I couldn’t do it, so since Dad was with me and I didn’t want to take up too much of Dad’s time, I decided to leave and come back to it on Monday. While I was trying though I did have a rather nice conversation with Dad about my immediate goals and plans.
When I got home I dropped Dad off and quickly went over to the new Christian Brother’s Automotive near the house that was running a $14.95 special on Oil Changes and since it had probably been almost 5000 miles since my last Oil Change and I was going to put over 400 miles on the car on Friday, I figured I should probably get an oil change. Thankfully although they were technically closed they were still there and said they’d go ahead and do my car. Very nice people there, and a nice lobby, however… They have a really ugly website, and I mean a REALLY ugly website. Cheesy page transitions, bad rollovers, they really need someone to do an overhaul on that website. It’s about as unprofessional as they come.
After the the oil change I went home to start getting ready for my trip Friday morning. I was in my room when my cell phone rang. It was that same customer I had mentioned earlier in this entry. They were complaining again, and I felt sorry for them and drove over to the middle of Fort Worth at 10:30 at night to fix their dang computers because they thought it was from something I did. In actuality some software they had installed was the culprit that had stopped their computer from working.
After much work I was able to get all their computers working again and tried to make it as clear as possible that I didn’t work for Harold and should not under any circumstances have come out there at 10:30 at night to fix their computers for free, that I did it out of the goodness of my heart and that they should not expect it to happen again. I don’t know if they understood or not, but I hope they did because I’d hate to have to tell them again. I nearly missed my chance to talk to the one I loved because of this. When I came on-line she was just about to leave because I had not shown up, in fact the seemed to be in the process of leaving, but instead talked to me for a while.
It was indeed a rather difficult day…

Playing Simon Basset, Duke of Hastings, the romantic lead in season 1Regé-Jean Page got a lot of attention once the show premiered, and then again when he left. There were theories that the actor's exit was an attempt to not be pigeonholed while others believed that it was because the immediate limelight was overwhelming for him. Eventually, : he just felt like his character’s story was done on the show. He had agreed to do a job and didn’t want to drag out a storyline that would feel redundant or unnecessary for the character.
Phoebe Dynevor played the season 1 sibling lead, Daphne. When her character’s romance with the Duke was released, it created a craze around the Netflix series. Even after the exit of Regé-Jean Page, who played her romantic lead, everyone was excited to see Daphne return to the screen. It was a question, though, of what her character would be doing. In the books, she was instrumental in helping other characters come into their own as they adjusted to life and love. It was clear that, despite having a role in season 2 of it was going to be much smaller.
Dynevor made a few appearances in the second season of the show, at times when Daphne's advice was needed by her siblings. The actress said that she is now excited to see season 3 as a viewer rather than as an active participant. She said that she would return for a future season if the opportunity arose but is happy to just support the show as a fan. This could be because her character ran out of relevant story, or even the actress’s busy filming schedule. While nothing has been confirmed,
Ruby Stokes had a small role in but the potential for growth was massive. She played the Bridgerton sister Francesca. She was the third youngest in the family and was set to have a romance all of her own. She was brought in as a character halfway through the first season. She had previously been studying abroad throughout the first half. She hadn’t yet been given a plot line that would set up her character’s season. In fact, she barely had a storyline at all. This remained true through both seasons of the show, which could partially explain the actress’s desire to move on.
since include another Netflix show, ., which gave her a main role. She was also excited about exploring a new young adult character at the head of that supernatural series. So far it has only run for one season, though, and hasn't yet received an official renewal. Meanwhile, the Francesca role on has been filled with a new actress, Hannah Dodd, for season 3. Producers want to work on expanding the character and help the new actress shine.

I decided to go with a friend who has a family home in Srinagar, for a visit and talk to people about their fears and challenges. Arriving at the airport I was stunned to see hundreds of people that had come on different flights. The airport was buzzing with returning Hajis, tourists and Kashmiris. The flights into the city were full. Porters streamed around asking to collect our baggage. My friend had her favourite porter who gave us a big smile and took our baggage tickets while another friend of hers who was the manager of an airline greeted us and told me that he was from Kashmir and his wife was running a successful IVF clinic there with the latest equipment and I must see it. His mobile worked as he was with an airline.
I noticed that the road from the airport had changed considerably since my last visit seven years ago. There were several flyovers, which the driver told me had been completed in the last year and had made access to Gulmarg and Pahalgam easier—one did not have to go through the city.
The streets were lined with trees and stunning new homes built like Swiss chalets but much bigger. Our driver told us there was no shortage of food and all the hospitals were open and fully staffed. Junior schools had no attendance as people were scared to send young children to school. Scared of what I asked, “The militants who put up posters in areas telling people to not let their children go to school and shops not to open.”
He told us that just recently a shopkeeper who always kept his shop open was shot by terrorists.
Surprisingly all pharmacies and medical shops were open and from 6 am to 8 am and from 6 pm to 8 pm the other shops were also open. We had arrived around noon. Seniors who were about to have exams went to school. There were cars and several trucks on the road taking apples to the plains, and people were moving around rather freely buying fruit and vegetables from vendors. Some vegetable and fruit shops had their shutters down but just outside their closed shops, they had put out all the produce for sales. They had cleverly skirted around the terror posters.
“Many people send their children to private schools,” our driver said, “As they don’t have faith in the government schools.” Just like Delhi, I told him. The schools are all English medium. He had nine-year-old twin daughters and a five-year-old son. They all went to private schools and had tuitions in the evening from teachers in the schools. I told him this seemed to be like double-dipping, and obviously, the teachers were making a lot of money. He laughed and said I was right but the class teacher would insist the kids needed tuitions.
Next, we went to the GB Pant Children’s hospital, started by a trust of the family of India’s famous minister Govind Ballabh Pant. My first stop was at the emergency ward which was full of parents with children.
I ask the doctors if there was any shortage of medicines and she looks surprised and says no. “Why would you think so?” she asks. I tell her I am visiting from Delhi and there were rumours going around that medicines were in short supply.
Next, I visit the wards. They are clean and well- kept and large windows keep it bright. I see a little boy sitting on a bed and writing away-his mother tells me, with the help of my driver, he is four-years-old and has been in hospital with pneumonia.
Are the doctors good here and is he getting medication, I ask in Hindi and she starts speaking to me in Hindi. She says the treatment was good and he will go home tomorrow. Another child around 12 years-old also has pneumonia and he is getting a nebulizer treatment. His mother seems more worried and tells me he has not eaten for three days—just has a few spoons of food. I try and reassure her and tell her children with fever sometimes need time but keep him hydrated and let him eat his favourite foods. She seems relieved and says this is just what the doctor told her.
Next, we go to the X-ray rooms and the Ultra Sound areas; there are fewer parents here but everything is working. By now I have spoken to many parents outside the OPD found out about their kids, questioned them on whether they have cooking gas at home and all their food requirements. They all say yes and but are puzzled by my questions. Again, I tell them about the rumours.
Not all of them are from Srinagar as this is one of the best children’s hospital and they have been referred here from the district hospitals. Many have come from villages and small towns around the valley. I am amazed at the way they chat openly with me even though I am a total stranger.
On my way out I see a passenger bus with big Red Crosses all over it. This caters to patients from outside town my driver tells me.
Next, I go to the biggest hospital in Srinagar, SMHS Hospital. Here there are lines to register for OPD at Rs 10. I see a big board printed in English which says -This a Free Hospital. Admission and treatment are free but when I visit the wards the families complain to me that they give glucose-free but make them buy some medicines from the pharmacies and medical shops just outside the hospital. This has a familiar ring to it as I know of government hospitals all over the country that do this. While I am talking to one family, others gather around to tell me about their patients. Once again, I ask them about food supplies and cooking gas and once again all of them look at me puzzled as if I am trying to change the subject. I have to reassure them that I have come from Delhi and heard there was a shortage here. They smile and reassure me that it is not a problem. I think they feel happy about my concern. I decide to go to the Chief Medical Officer to ask about the medicines. A pretty lady greets me and tells me she is the CMO, I ask her if there is a shortage of life-saving drugs or medical supply in the hospital. She tells they are adequately supplied. I want to ask her why are the people in the wards complaining to me about being made to buy some of their medicines from the stores outside, but refrain as I don’t want the patients I have just seen and their families get into trouble.
When I ask my driver, he says this is usual. He has been here many times over the years with his relatives and sometimes they even have to pay for tests. I go back to the admissions counter and the guy there once again reassures me in front of my driver, that once admitted all medicines and tests are free for patients. The people in line behind me whisper to me, “Don’t believe him, it is not true, as for years we have been paying for some tests and medicines.”
I say to them I am sure it will change now, just wait a while. What else can I say? I am in no position to change a system that has been going on for years.
Strangely one does not see any check posts. Near the airport, there are two. CRPF jawans and police are present but not in large numbers as one had expected. It does not seem like a city under a major security clampdown.

Sometimes I get the super awesome opportunity to photograph family. When my cousin asked me to do their family photos while I was in town, I was shocked. Honestly, she could have chosen ANYONE, but she felt like I was worth investing in. She has two little frat boys and an adorable little princess and even though kids are difficult to photograph at this age…they made it fun! Here’s a few little peaks at what our session looked like.

Harris: Mom was the greatest gift of all
He went to the big trout stream in the sky November 1967. He left behind a 39-year-old bride and 6 children that varied in age from 17 to 3 years old. This was not how Len Harris Sr. had pictured his life ending. He had always believed that he would live to be an old grandpa with many grandchildren. He could not even envision his bride being left alone again. Fate could not be that cruel twice in her lifetime.
My mother (Jane) was actually quite familiar with death and being left alone. At age 16 my mother was orphaned along with her 3 other siblings. My mother's parents each died of illness within a couple weeks of each other. The Chestelson children were thrown to the wind after their parents died. The youngest Kurt was sent away to northern Wisconsin to an Aunt that needed a young male to help with the farm (Wittenberg). My oldest uncle (Sig) was away in WWII. The oldest daughter (Betty Ann) went out on her own and landed in LaCrosse where she lived the majority of her life. My mother (Mary Jane) lived with the local Drug Store owners (Ackermann's) until she was 18. The Ackermann's were the family's closest friends and my mother did not have to move out of Gays Mills.
After my father died, my mother became Father and Mother to me. She stressed going to church weekly and it ended up that I went about 5 times a week from age 5 to 15. I was an altar boy. She set by example going to church at least that many times a week. Mom stressed that women should be treated differently than men and women should be cherished. My mother NEVER remarried or even thought about it. It would have been much easier on her with 6 children to have a husband, but no one was taking my Dad's place.
My mother had her hands full with 5 daughters. My sisters ranged from toddlers to a high school senior. She steered the Harris ship quite well and ALL of her children turned out as successful adults. I remember her stressing the need to manage ones finances and she instilled her work ethic in me. I spent many days in the ditches near the local high school picking up pop bottles for their 2 cent redemption. The nights in the rain with the flash light in my mouth and me crawling around on my hands and knees picking up night crawlers to sell to the local Sporting Goods store (3 cents a piece).
My father had given me the gift of loving the outdoors, but my mother cultivated it. She made sure I had lures and decent fishing poles. She would go without so we kids were in decent clothing and were properly raised. She would drive me out in the country and drop me off stream side and pick me up just before dark so I could explore new trout streams.
I can remember being jealous of the kids with Dad's and the toys the children got at christmas and birthdays. My gifts were quite modest compared to the mini bikes and snowmobiles my friends received. As a child I did not understand it well. I didn't see when I was a kid that she was doing well to just put food on table and clothing on our backs.
I can remember breaking five pairs of glasses my sophomore year trying to play basketball, and she always seemed to find money to get me a new pair. She was on the side lines for every game from freshman through senior year watching me play football. She was always terrified that I would get hurt. I was 6-foot-3 and 162-pounds as a senior. A "Bean Pole" as my sisters called me. My favorite sport in high school was track. My father had wanted me to be in track so mom followed up on it and made sure I was there and she was there at every finish line cheering me on.
As an adult I have looked back many times and seen how truly good of a job my mother did raising me. She led by example when it came to work ethic. She juggled a couple jobs and was a full time mother and father to us 6 kids. I missed exactly 2 days of school from first grade through graduation. Both of those days were for funerals.
Mom gave me a ride to the airport when I left to go in the army. She told me how proud she was of me and that I really looked good in my uniform. Germany was far away and she wanted to make sure I wrote her weekly and called often. I sent home $250 monthly to her while I was in the army to help her make ends meet. The only two times I have ever seen my mom cry was at my dad's funeral and when she goodbye to me at the airport.
I am retired now and have a 18 year old daughter that worships her grandma and showers her with kisses and affection every time she is near. Anna tells grandma thanks often for being such a good mom to her dad. Mom has so many grandchildren and great grandchildren visiting she is never lonesome.
Just recently my mother had her 87th birthday. We were talking and I told her about my thoughts as a child. She knew I felt that way and tried her hardest to provide for us. She told me she could see the disappointment in my eyes at christmas when I got socks and underwear. Mom told me that my father gave me the best "Gift" of all. ....The Love Of The Outdoors...... I hated to disagree with her on her 87th birthday but I did.
I told her the greatest gift I had ever received was having "HER" as my mother.
Len Harris blogs from the 'Heart' of Wisconsin's Driftless Area. Len's passion is small stream trout fishing with every legal means possible. When trout season is closed he writes and takes photos. He even dabbles in a little cooking. Read more of Len's writing on his blog.

Mr Messy had already planned to work from home today so he could attend a dentist appointment, and as he came home from work last night feeling really ill, that worked out well. He didn't have to face the two hour drive to work, but he was also too ill to go to the dentist, so I've rearranged that for in a few weeks time. It also meant that Mr Messy was here when the Educational Psychologist visited to discuss his report for Little Prince's statutory assessment for a Statement. The Ed Psych is a very laid back kind of guy, when we first had meetings with him I thought he was ignoring what I was saying or dismissing it, however, once I read his reports on our meetings it became obvious that he really does listen and take in everything even though he doesn't appear to be doing so :-) He spent almost an hour here and made copious notes, he also read us the draft copy of his report, and once he has added in our input he will send us copies. He was very sympathetic about Little Prince's problems and recognised that he has a lot to cope with and does very well considering all the issues and problems he faces. The Ed Psych also discussed with us a parental support group he is hoping to set up in the local area, which we readily put our names down for, apparently we are his first recruits :-) He also spent a while discussing Buddhism with Mr Messy and it turns out they have attended some of the same Buddhist Centres, small world!
Mr Messy rang the phone company who were supposed to install the shop's phone line yesterday, he was put on hold for over half an hour, so wasn't in the greatest temper when he finally got to speak to the right department!! They couldn't come up with a reasonable explanation for why they didn't come yesterday, trying to say it was a tentative date, which is not what the letter booking the appointment said! Mr Messy has made it perfectly clear that they had better not mess up the next appointment, fingers crossed for their sakes that they don't!!
Little Prince's swimming teacher rang up to ask if we still wanted his private lessons, and if we wanted to start on Friday. I think his lessons are a great help to Little Prince, increasing his confidence and safety in the water, given his current lack of impulse control he needs to be as safe as possible! And also it gives him a physical outlet for some of his energy, although his lessons have never yet tired him out at all, except for once when he did butterfly stroke for most of the lesson. His teacher has also attended a Special Needs training course during the holidays and is currently setting up a SNs swimming group, which she asked if we'd be interested in Little Prince attending. I said it would be a great idea, to get Little Prince used to swimming in a group setting again, but also warned her about his chaotic behaviour during the holidays. We have agreed that Little Prince will start attending the group once his teacher thinks he has settled down enough to cope with integrating into a group.
I've been feeling a bit down since the meeting with the Ed Psych, discussing all the issues we are having with Little Prince really hammers it home how much he (and we) are struggling. My mood wasn't helped by Little Prince coming home in a foul mood. Despite me explaining at the start of the week that he wasn't having friends over to play (or going to a friend's house to play) until next week, he insisted on pestering to do this. He slammed into the house, stamped all the way up the stairs and slammed his bedroom door. He did come down a few minutes later but was still in a very angry mood, and it took ages for him to calm down again.
Drama Teen had her first day at college today, and she was very nervous this morning. I was very proud of her for managing to get up when her alarm went off, which is an hour before I get up and I'd warned her I wasn't getting her up, she would have to be responsible. She still seemed nervous when she left for the bus, but strode out looking fairly confident. When she returned home she said it wasn't as bad as she had thought it would be and seemed to have enjoyed herself. I think getting back into the swing of homework has come as a bit of a shock to her system after so long without having to do any!
Little Prince and Drama Teen were at logger heads almost from the moment she walked in the door, which is pretty normal but is rising to epic proportions at the moment!! I managed to persuade Drama Teen to look after Princess Lollipop in the lounge, and took Little Prince into the kitchen with me while I cooked tea. Little Prince was fairly happy to do jobs around the kitchen and it kept him and Drama Teen apart! However, when I asked Little Prince to get me something from the lounge, he managed to get Drama Teen to screaming pitch within moments of stepping into the room!! I really don't know how to help them get along any better! Drama Teen makes no allowances for Little Prince's difficulties, and Little Prince deliberately winds her up and is more violent to her than anyone else in the family. I wish there was a way to fix it :-(
The ironing service rang while Mr Messy was out meeting with a potential client, so I sent him round to pick up the first lot of completed ironing. Its great to just have to put it away, and to have the ironing mountain gone :-) They rang again later in the evening to say the rest of the ironing was ready to be collected on Friday afternoon. Me and Mr Messy are going to work out a budget for getting them to deep clean the house and hopefully they will be able to get started soon. I am really looking forward to getting the house in order, as the mess and clutter are really getting on my nerves now.

Teen killed tubing on northern Colorado river
FORT COLLINS — The 18-year-old who died while tubing on a northern Colorado river was visiting from the Seattle area.
Authorities said Tuesday that Maxmillian Lopez of Kirkland, Washington drowned in the Poudre River near Bellvue on Sunday. He and a 16-year-old who was tubing with him were both knocked into the water after passing over a low-head dam, which are difficult to see from upstream.
Lopez’s grandfather, Raul Lopez, told the Coloradoan newspaper that his grandson had been visiting him. He said the other teen, who was hospitalized, is his grandson’s cousin.
He says he would like a remembrance plaque and a warning about the dam put in place to prevent future deaths.

Huge fight kids got brought into the middle of it. :(
So they did it! they did exactly what i thought they were going to do. Dh sent bm an email stating that he felt it would be better to work things out through email if SF was going to try to take over and bm was out of no where refusing to talk to dh. We heard nothing not even an a reply disagreeing. Well today we are suppose to figure out for ourselves where to meet in boise for the drop offs during the summer vacation. Dh emailed bm stating that he agreed to where she wanted to meet in june even though it was in another town then Boise and a farther drive, but asked if they could meet closer to his direction in boise for the july drop off. bm didn't reply. As dh called at his scheduled time to talk to the kids SF picks up the phone and tried tell him how it was going to be again dh tried brushing it off stating that bm can either call him later and talk to him about it or she can email him and asked if he could please talk to his children now. SF refused. so dh handed me the phone after many attempts of asking to talk to his kids. As I have the phone i didn't even say a word at first and bm was screaming bloody murder on the phone in the background but said she was refusing to talk to dh personally. LOL. anyway I make myself known and they aren't happy SF wants to only talk to dh. i said no he doesn't want to talk to you you are not the father dh is and bm is their mother and everything about the kids needs to be between them and them only. and if she didn't want to do that that then he can feel free to talk to me and I will relay it to dh and he can get back to bm through email. bm is still yelling in the backround so i start asking her to calm down and to stop acting so childish she was thirty years old and to please act her age. she doesn't she keeps on yelling. SF says that he has been more of a father to them then dh ever has been yada yada yada. i tell him regardless of how you feels you are still their step father and you have absolutely no rights to those kids just like i have no rights unless dh dies or they can prove to the court that dh has his rights stripped from him and SF personally adopts the kids that's when he will have rights and untill that happens which it's not going to happen that he needs to step back and let the parents make the decisions. ( I seriously can't believe how calm and on top of everything I was. LOL) then bm gets on the phone and they are both screaming at me calling me a bitch and c**t and just about every other word you can think of. then i hear that the kids are in the room and i say seriously your kids are in the room and your acting like this you've got to be kidding me... she then informs me she is there mother and she can do what ever the fuck she wants and that i am not their mother. then i say yes your right I'm not their mother because if I was I'd sure as hell would be doing a hell of alot better job and i wouldn't be acting like you are right now... and asked that if dh can talk to his kids now?(yes i know BAD thing to say.. i'm pregnant and was quickly getting tired of being called all these names i just wanted dh to talk to his kids and get it over with.) while bm is screaming at me the phone hangs up out of no where. so I call back one time to ask if dh can talk to the kids she continues to scream and i continue to ask her if dh can talk to his kids. hang up again. so I leave it at that if she was going to restrict the kids from dh then we were going to file for contempt of court order. phone rings for the last time and it's oldest step son. bm is in the backround yelling don't fucking talk to her tell her you don't want to talk to her, my kids want to talk to their dad! then oldest ss says after a long pause as nicely as possible i don't want to talk to you i want to talk to dad. I said yeah sure hun heres your dad. while dss is trying to talk to dh bm is still screaming in the backround ss just keeps repeating I love you dad i love you dad i love you! dh also repeats I love you too buddy i miss you so much he trys to talk to him but bm is still yelling through the backround. dh finially says to dss I'm srry you have to hear your mom acting like that we are having a disagreement it's nothing to be worried about i love and always will. bm is still screaming through all the kids. Dh went through the kids and told them all he loved them and and talked to them for as much as he could but understood it was stressed to was fine that they kept it short he then hung up the phone. Alittle later we get an email regarding the exchange spot to meet. it was demanding and didn't follow the co at all they wanted to meet in a totally different city...
so srry this is so long but my god!!! seriously that's it we are buying a tape recorder and recording every damn conversation that goes on dh is so sick of this and to I really thing olderst step son was scare he wouldn't get to see dh because bm wasn't happy. his reason for saying I love you Dad over and over again. ugh! i can't believe some people. also yes i know there are some things I should have probably done better but she was trying to restrict dh being able to talk to his kids. in the end though dh and i didn't cuss at her or raise our voices once.
~A healthy stepmother knows that some days she’s a stage hand, some
days she’s the leading lady, and some days she’s the audience, and she
plays each role with grace and style.~
admin of First time stepmoms

This teacher is only nice to students who do well on thier own. If you struggle with math she is horrible I think she likes to fail suffering students rather then help.
I don't know what you are talking about ! She is a great teacher!
She's a nice person but not exactly a great math teacher...she is horrible at teaching
I think she is a great teacher. I did well in her course.
I didn't like her at all. She is probably one of the worst math teachers you can ever get. I think her classes are way too boring. She is not nice at all!

Foreign Minister Thilak Marapana said today no provable evidence had been filed against former army commander Jagath Jayasuriya to the effect that he committed war crimes in the case filed by an NGO in Brazil recently.
Responding to a question raised by joint opposition MP Dinesh Gunawardane, the minister said this was not a new thing and added that two similar cases had been filed against Sri Lankan security forces by NGOs in the United States and Switzerland in 2011.
He said however the governments in the two countries had withdrawn the cases.
He told parliament that the allegation against Mr. Jayasuriya was not made with good intentions as it was done after he left his position as the army commander and also he left Brazil as its Ambassador.
Referring to the statement made by Field Marshal Sarath Fonseka, he said it was his personal opinion and that it was not the opinion of the government.
He said the official stance on the matter had been made by President Maithripala Sirisena recently. (Ajith Siriwardana and Yohan Perera)

Well, it started out a couple days ago when I saw my buddy who always sold me shrooms and he drove up and asked me if I wanted some shrooms.
Well, it started out a couple days ago when I saw my buddy who always sold me shrooms and he drove up and asked me if I wanted some shrooms. I declined. the next day I had 40 dollars and called him up. He told me he'd sell me 7 grams for 30 bucks. so I agreed and bought em. I took em home, they where all caps but the caps had been crushed up. I was watching 70's show at about 9Pm so I took the mushies outta my pocket, opened the bag and dumped all 7g in my mouth. I chewed em up.(I am not sure what strain but I think they where p.Cubensis). I then swallowed them and gagged becuz I hate the awful taste. I then ate a vitamin C pill and drank some orange juice. For the rest of the 45 minutes I watched 70's show. Becuz my stomach had been full they didnt fully kick in until 1 hour and 5 minutes after eating them. I had a buzz but the buzz made me feel good and had soon escalated to its peak. I then decided to go and watch Family Guy. It was amazing. How the characters acted and left trails. After that I got up and went to look in a mirror. I walked into the bathroom and I saw whut appeared to be a mist. The walls where breathing and I stared into the mirror. My face began to shrink and go old. I was covered in pimples and my eyebrows went bushy. Then I was getting confused so I left and went on the computer. I opened ASE and entered a server for Quake 3. I had never realized how trippy Quake 3 is. I was a fat character that looked like a monster and was chasing other people. I was way outta porportain of the game. I didnt know whut to do. and I could not make a single hit. Soon after, which appeared to be several hours, it wuz 12:00 and I was still on quake. I continued to play quake until 1:00. when then I had thought the visuals had been finished. I surfed the internet for a couple of hours then left for bed. I lay down in bed and looked around. there where little streaks of color. I blinked fast and started singing colored mushrooms in my head. Then All of a sudden I was floating to heaven. Where god and the angels had been greeting me. I was happy and okay with death. When then I opened my eyes and was back in my room. I went and got up to get some water and the time. It had been 3 AM already. So I closed my eyes and went to bed again. When then I fell asleep. I woke up at 10:00 AM with need for a smoke and extremely tired. That was the best trip I had ever had. Which I am hoping to do again in a couple weeks!

North Miami Beach, FL, United States
The book gripped you in immediately which was great since many good books start so slow. The characters seem very real and I cared about them.
This plot did keep me on the edge. My husband wanted me to watch TV with him but I couldn't put the book down so we watched much later on after I finished the book.
I have not heard her before but I think she did a great job.
One of the few thrillers I've really enjoyed in a long time.
Report Inappropriate Content

I was lucky to escape when eight boys died inside Enugu water tank –Carpenter
RAPHAEL EDE writes about how eight boys died in an underground water tank under construction in Enugu State
Mr Ifeanyi Eze’s story breaks the heart. But it is not a line from a Nollywood script. If not for providence, he would have died on July 22, 2019. In fact, he missed death by a whisker.
That day, he went inside an underground water tank under construction that claimed the lives of his younger brother, Oluchi Eze, five cousins; Emeka Abugu, Ejike Onu, Omenkeya Eze, Ifeanyi Abugu, Amuchi Abugu; a friend to Oluchi, Uche Idoko, including the person constructing the underground water tank.
The moment he came out, he became unconscious and was rushed to a hospital where he was revived. The incident happened at Igogoro in the Igboeze North Local Government Area of Enugu State.
Our correspondent visited some of the grieving families on Thursday and Ifeanyi, a professional carpenter, narrated how he narrowly escaped death.
With teary eyes, he narrated, “On the morning of July 22, 2019, we all left for our different working places. I went to work on the roof of a house for my mother’s elder sister.
“At about 3pm, my wife called me on the phone that I should return home that there was trouble in our place. She said somebody plunged into a water tank under construction. I asked her who it was and where it happened, she said it was where a house foundation was being dug.
“Immediately, I climbed my motorcycle and ran to the place. When I got there, people had already gathered crying. I looked at the tank and saw people struggling to bring out some persons who were unconscious. There was a ladder on the tank. I became curious to know what could have happened to make people trapped inside the tank.’’
Ifeanyi said he entered into the tank and used his feet to test whether the water inside was much but to his surprise it didn’t pass his ankle.
He added, “One of my cousins inside the tank, Omenkeya, was carrying one of the victims trying to bring him out. I asked him what was happening but he said he entered the tank the way I did. He asked me to join him in bringing out those unconscious. Some were struggling to come out while others had passed on.
“I touched my brother, Oluchi, but he had passed on. I touched another person and that one had also died. That was when I saw one Uche Idoko, he was still alive but unconscious. I saw a rope inside and I tied it to his cloth. I was holding him and I shouted to those outside to start dragging the rope. While they were dragging the rope, I was climbing the ladder and at the same time pushing him out. All of a sudden, the rope cut and two of us fell back inside. At this time, Omenkeya, carrying out one of the victims, also fell inside and died.’’
He said at that time he became unconscious and could no longer see, adding that he later learnt that he was the only one that survived among those who went into the tank.
Ifeanyi further said it was not the water inside the tank that killed the people but a kind of inflammation, saying it looked as if a teargas canister was opened inside the tank even though there was no smoke.
He said there was nothing like a generator smoke contrary to the social media reports. “Before I stepped into the tank, there was nothing like a smoke and if there was smoke at least I would have perceived the whiff.”
Ifeanyi, who appeared visibly distraught while speaking with SUNDAY PUNCH, said the owner of the house under construction visited the site a few minutes before the incident occurred.
He added, “My brother and his friends who died in the tank were not working at the site. It was an outsider, somebody from Ehe-Amafu in the Isi-Uzo Local Government Area of the state that was handling the work. I was told that my brother went to rescue the person when he fell into the tank.
“When he fell into the tank because the site is close to where my late brother and some of his friends had excavated sand from a building foundation earlier in the day, someone who saw the outsider fall into the tank shouted for help. My brother who just got into the house heard her and rushed to that site. Those who saw what happened told me that he climbed into the tank to assist the trapped worker.’’
Ifeanyi’s relation, Mercy Abugu, who witnessed the incident, told our correspondent that the house owner, one Stephen Mmama, a native of Igogoro, had before leaving the site came to greet the late Oluchi and his friends where they were excavating foundation in Amachalla.
She said before leaving, he gave them N2, 000 to buy drinks and shortly afterwards the incident occurred.
She said Omenkeya went to buy the drinks and was returning when he heard that his cousin, Oluchi, was trapped while trying to help the man who worked for Stephen. She added, “He immediately dropped the drinks to help out.’’
Mercy who said she couldn’t believe that such could happen because it wasn’t the first water tank that would be constructed in the community.
“The water tank is still under construction and yet to be covered. There are openings and the scaffold has not been removed. Every person that died inside the tank went to assist another person and it didn’t take up to 10 minutes that the next person died.
“Not all the eight people that died excavated the foundation. Those who excavated the foundation had finished work and gone home. It was one Ifeanyi Nwa-Onu that started calling them back on the phone that there was trouble,” she narrated.
Describing the demise of his kinsmen as painful, Ifeanyi said he trained five of the deceased in carpentering work while Oluchi was an electrician, Omenkeya was a generator mechanic.
Ifeanyi said, “The two were between ages 22 and 25. None of them was married.’’
Ifeanyi said the most unfortunate thing was that an only son, Emeka Abugu, whose mother died in 2018, was among the dead. He said, “Abugu had a sister from the same mother.”
When our correspondent visited six of the deceased families in Umueze Kindred, Amachalla, sympathisers were seen consoling the bereaved.
The father of Oluchi, Ossai Eze, said he found it difficult to believe that his 24-yr-old son was dead. Oluchi’s mother, Mary Eze, who had lost her voice to excess wailing, said “My son was loving and caring. I wondered why God allowed such a tragic incident to befall him and his friends.”
Also, Caroline Eze, mother of Omenkeya, said “I heard people crying. I felt it was fighting but when the noise became too much, I went to the scene. My son asked me to return home that my cloth was dirty and that the matter was not what women like me could handle. Shortly after I returned to my house, I heard that my son had fallen into the tank like others. He was the last of my three male children and one died about four months ago.” She described the incident as confusing. Caroline’s daughter-in-law, whose husband died about four months, called for a thorough investigation into the incident.
She said, “To me, the way the incident happened was strange. It was strange because this is not the first time an underground water tank would be constructed in the community. We have never had such a thing.”
Father of the late Ejike, John Onu, said he had yet to find enough courage to discuss the death of his son. He uttered in a weak tone, “I am not happy and I am calling on the government to carry out a thorough investigation into the incident.’’
His wife, Maria, said it was sad that death took her son away before her eyes.
She said, “Ejike participated in the excavation of the foundation. He returned home when they finished, took his bath and ate lunch. Shortly, after there was too much noise, he took his motorcycle and ran to the scene.
“I also raced after him and when I got there he was looking into the tank. I told him not to go into the tank but he refused. By then, his cousin was struggling inside the tank. A few minutes later, he got in and was choked. I learnt he struggled for life and died. I don’t know what was emptied into the tank that anybody that entered it became conscious and died.”
At the compound of the late Amuchi Abugu, his mother, Angela, couldn’t be consoled. She wept incessantly, saying, “My only grown-up son who had been helping me since his father took ill four years ago was sleeping that day. But the noise outside woke him up and he ran to the scene. The next thing I heard was that he was dead.”
She added when his son got to the scene, he was with his cousin, Ifeanyi and when they saw their cousin, Oluchi, struggling, they went inside to lift him out only for them to be trapped.
The late Amuchi’s father, Okechukwu, said God knew the best and he had handed everything to Him.
For the mother of Ifeanyi Abugu, Mrs Caro Eze, it was hard to believe that Ifeanyi, who had returned from his carpentry work to rest, could be lost to the incident. She said Ifeanyi also went outside to see what was happening when he heard the noise.
Some claimed that the yet-to-be-identified labourer working at the building site ran out of the water and in the process moved his pumping water machine inside the tank to enable him to get some water. But nobody could explain why everyone that entered the tank got choked to death.
But Silas Odo said the water in the tank was almost exhausted when the labourer moved his water pumping machine inside it.
Odo added that after the worker started the machine, the carbon circulated and heated the environment. He claimed that the worker came out, washed his head to relief himself of the carbon effects and returned inside the tank before he was choked to death.
He said, “Some workers came to work for my son who is building his residential house. They had finished working for him and went for refreshment when someone raised the alarm that a labourer was choking at a nearby building site.
“One of them rushed inside the tank to help him out and was suffocated to death. Seeing what happened, others also tried to assist them and they all got choked to death.”
The police had taken over the case to unravel what really happened.
The spokesman for the police in the state, , Ebere Amaraizu, said the homicide department of the command had already commenced an investigation into the incident.
Amaraizu, a Superintendent of Police, told our correspondent on the telephone that some people had been arrested, including the house owner, adding that they were been interrogated to know if they were culpable in the matter.
All rights reserved. This material, and other digital content on this website, may not be reproduced, published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed in whole or in part without prior express written permission from PUNCH.
Contact: the[email protected]

Daniel Whitman, 14, escaped getting bitten by a rattlesnake because of the brave actions of his dog.
The boy was cleaning up after the dog in the backyard in Monrovia, California last week when Boone, a Siberian Husky mix, got between him and a rattlesnake. The 5-year-old dog jumped between Daniel and a corner of the yard that Daniel was heading to. Daniel did not see the snake at first, but when he did he shouted for his dad and ran inside. Boone followed after and refused to leave the boy's side.
"He [Boone] just stuck by Daniel's side," Dan Sr., Daniel's father. "He followed Daniel all around the house. He did not leave his side."
About 20 minutes later they noticed Boone behaving oddly, although he did not appear to have any wounds. "He started to kind of twist his head funny and look up at the ceiling like he was in pain," Dan Sr. told the Monrovia Patch.
Dan Sr., a retired Los Angeles County Sherrif's deputy, knew they didn't have much time to save Boone, who was bitten on the snout by the snake. He called a nearby animal hospital and was directed to the closest vet clinic with anti-venom.
Within 40 minutes they had Boone at the clinic being treated with anti-venom, which saved his life. However, the snake's venom did kill a fair bit of the tissue around Boone's snout and caused his face to swell up considerably. Thankfully, Boone is expected to recover.
Dogs can get vaccinated against rattlesnake venom, something that is recommended for people who live in the hillier areas where the snakes live. It's something Dan Sr. said he he certainly plans to tell his community about. In the meantime, he's relieved both his dog and son are all right. "I'm sad that Boone took the bite but I'm thankful my son didn't," he said.

Cook brands Swann 'so-called friend' for asking him to quit England captaincy for WC
England skipper Alastair Cook has branded Graeme Swann as a 'so-called friend' after the retired spinner called for him to quit as captain for the World Cup.
Swann had said that his former teammate Cook shouldn't be bothering playing one-day cricket. But Cook said that he does not think it's that helpful, especially from a so-called friend.
Cook was speaking after England's 133-run defeat by India in the second ODI in Cardiff.
Swann said Cook's one-day strike rate, currently at 77.98 runs per 100 balls, does not set the tone that will make England competitive in next year's World Cup in New Zealand and Australia, The BBC reported.
Cook, who has had to resist calls to quit as England's Test captain, said that Swann is entitled to his opinion, but it's not ideal for him, especially when one gets through the summer he has had.
Cook also confirmed that he had not spoken to Swann about his views, but added that the phone is always open the other way. He said that he is a little bit disappointed because Swann is a good friend of his and has been a supporter.
The skipper also said that it is not helpful at this time, because he is going to be captain in this World Cup. He added that he has done it for three-and-a-half years and England is going to build up to that, and they have got a good chance.
(Posted on 28-08-2014)

Project: 10 Year
It was late January. I was back in the U.S. The new semester just started and I was getting busy. My husband told me that he had a business trip to Hawaii. When he arrived in Hawaii, he did his work and got some days off to enjoy the island. He asked me if I wanted to join him. I got surprised by his sudden suggestion. But I really wanted to go so I told my teachers and got generous understandings. I flew to the island shortly after and met my husband. I landed around sunset. The sunlight reflecting on the vast airport ground was so shiny and beautiful. My husband said he wasn’t thinking about inviting me over. But the island was so beautiful, he wanted to enjoy it with me. It was the most surprising event I got from my husband. He bought a hat there for the extreme sunlight. I posed with that hat and I looked like a witch, but a very happy one.
I remember when I was checking in at the airport to fly to Hawaii. The lady at the checking account said she was jealous of me. I hope she got a nice vacation shortly after.

It is understood that a desk officer kept him talking while an armed unit was scrambled to the scene, and he was arrested.
Speaking to reporters, Sir Peter said: "We are not confident that we have recovered all the grenades, we don't know for certain, so we've made it clear to our officers that the threat is still there.
"I would want that to be the message, this has been a long-standing criminal feud between different outfits in Manchester and in the Tameside area, and that threat is very much there."
He said that the force had issued Osman warnings - notices given to people under threat of being murdered or seriously injured - to "a large number of individuals".
Sir Peter had suggested that the two officers were lured to their deaths, telling a press conference that a call had been made reporting a burglary at the address. The force added that one of the officers' Tasers was found on the ground out of its holster at the scene.

Dealing with customers who won't pay up
Most of my coustomers pay in advance but I have a few that pay at the end of the month. Recently, I have had difficulting getting payment from a few of them.
I was able to get one of them to pay up after a subtle threat of droping by her work but that resulted in losing her as a customer.
Is there a better way of handeling things to get paid?
Do you have something to add to this discussion?Login

I purposely overdosed on my ADD medicine. It wasn't exactly a planned suicide attempt, but I'm not saying it was it was for no reason either. Anyway, a few hours after taking the pills, for some reason or another I panicked and asked my mom to take me to the hospital. I tried to pass it off as an accident. She wouldn't take me there. I kept telling her how horrible I was feeling, and that I called poison control and they told me to go. She still wouldn't take me! I kept trying and trying to get her to take me, but she never would. No matter how much I begged. She knows that I've been depressed and suicidal for a long, long time. I wonder what will happen if I plan killing myself and go through with it. After this, I'm pretty sure if she finds me, bleeding/drowning/OD'd/choking/ect., she'll think I'll be okay and just leave me there. If I beg her and beg her, and she still won't even give it a second thought, then I'm sure it won't matter if I actually die.

Speeding kills! I want him back...
Sign up for JPG+ to start using collections now!
Photo license: © All rights reserved
I cry, I scream his name, but he is gone, my boy is gone no matter what I do. I cremated him today 8 Dec in my jacket to let him know that I did not left him in the street, but by Christ it hurts. I found him covered in this cloth, mutilated face, and frozennnnnn dead.
He left an empty space that I cannot fill ever, speed killed him, and almost me today. In the same spot, I was just a metre away from being run over, just a night after him. The fact that I was nearly to die, that moment I understood he is dead, a fear that I felt searching for him a night before, or at list what I believed at that time. Last night I did attempt to find him, in fact I pointed the torch on this cloth, but it did not crossed my mind that he is covered by it. He was killed last night, today it could have been me. The driver looked at my disturbed face and asked me if I am OK, I waved my hand to him, and as I approached the cloth still shouting his name, a last hope which I knew is never going to happen, I pulled up the corner of it, and I find myself on the pavement screaming. An old lady came to me, and managed to make sense talking to me, so I lifted him and brought him home, screaming his name as loud as I could, but he never wake up.
All morning and afternoon I hold him in my arms, I did not look at at his face until I took this photo, all I could see is Riky sleeping, now I am hit by the reality, he is not sleeping, I want him backkkkkkkkk
The irony is; he was saved from dogs in the streets, Romanian streets, and brought by a friend to me as a Christmas gift exactly 10 years ago. He was saved from dogs but killed by humanssssss speeding!
I never left him behind, I took him in 3 countries and loved him more than myself, now he left me forever!
I just fund out, he was killed at 14pm, by a white van, a driver who never stopped. A lady stopped and took the decision to cover him when other lady was panicking not knowing what to do, he did not die instantly, just few minutes later. She covered him in that cloth, knowing that someone will look soon after him, unfortunately I found him next day.
Please Login or Sign Up
Login or Sign Up
Need contest credits? Get 'em here!
Select a Shoot Out contest credit package below.

They were super excited about it!
Especially when they got to (talked us into) riding this:
I was really surprised that Lily wanted to ride the elephant too.
But I think she ended up being the most excited:
(So it was kind of a rip-off...)
But the kids were so happy about it, that it made up for it.
That's pretty high up!
We got so many smiles, I love yous, and hugs after this. =)
Lily loved these girls' outfits!
I don't know if you can tell, but that is a motorcycle riding around in that big ball.
It was pretty cool.

Ian Parks is pretty thankful to the Gloucester community for not only supporting him to reach his fundraising target for cancer research, but for helping smash it out of the park.
He started with a goal of $2500 on February 1 and it looks like he'll end up with a $3500 donation for the Australian Cancer Research Foundation (ACRF).
It seemed like such a simple thing for him to do - allow his hair and beard to grow for six months.
But it wasn't long into the process that this normally clean shaven, crew-cut wearing man started to wonder about his decision.
He didn't have any doubts about raising funds - that choice was simple, he was doing for his daughter Karen, who died from cervical cancer in 2018 at age 42.
But as his hair started to grow and interfere in his daily routine, he wondered if perhaps walking from Perth to Newcastle would have been a better option.
"I didn't realise how it impacts on everyday things like zipping up my jacket. I'd look down and couldn't see past the beard," Ian laughed.
In the last month, he even struggled to fit his hair into his motorcycle helmet.
"I was never this hairy even in the 70s when it was fashionable," Ian joked. "I literally hated it. The night before the shave I couldn't sleep properly, I was so excited to get rid of it."
Finally, his dream came true on Monday July 12 - three weeks before his original date of August 1.
"I had gone past my target and I felt I deserved the relief."
Paula Standen from Milady Salon did the honours with a crowd of supporters cheering him from outside the shop.
"As soon as she started shaving the beard off, I could feel the cold." Ian smiled.
Although Ian has been light-hearted about the whole thing, it was a bitter-sweet experience. He found himself talking a lot about Karen when people asked why he was doing the fundraiser.
"I was constantly reminded of her - which is good, but retelling the story - it can be hard," he admitted.
Donations came in from many of her friends along with messages about her saying how much they missed her.
Ian was overwhelmed by the generosity from members of the community, many of whom knew Karen from the years she lived in town.
"Gloucester is a fabulous town - with all its support. That's why I love this town," Ian said.
Although Ian didn't make it the full time, he still intends to raffle off the quilt donated by the Gloucester Patchwork Group at the end of the month. Tickets are still for sale and can be purchased at I Need Coffee, 69 Church Street.

By. Aniya crump
I was a lonely child when I was little and to this day. My dad was in the military and died a month after I was born. I guess I could say that I met him, but I don’t remember him at all. My mom was working so hard over the years to provide for us , but one night I guess the stress ate her up completely and she died in her sleep. I was only 5 years old , so I lived with my grandma. My grandpa died before I was born, so when my grandma died when I was 15 ,I was completely alone. Although, I did have my childhood friend. Her name is Blaze, she is the only person that has ever tried to get to know me. We met one day in second grade. I was sitting by a tree and she just came up to me and told me I was antisocial and should talk more often . It was true though, I was known has Autumn the weird socially awkward girl. Ever since that moment we became friends.
A year has past since my grandma’s death. It …show more content…
Everleigh and I have met up a couple times at the park. Everleigh seems the same when I met her, deep in thought, sad. But, she still has the same smile on her face while she talks me. Blaze and I where walking to the coffee shop. We took the route which passed by the meadow. While passing the gate we saw that it was surrounded by caution tape and the police surrounded the area. All the police where surrounding the tree. Maybe everleigh jumped off and broke her arm. Maybe a kitten got stuck up a tree.We finally got to the coffee shop. People were crying, they must’ve been Everleigh’s family, but I didn’t see Everleigh.
“Hi, Gilbert, where everleigh?” My eyes wondered around the whole place and there was no sign of her.
“She hung herself on that tree in the park,” he said while whiping off the tear that came down his cheek.
I didn’t know what to do . My hands where shaking, my heart was beating fast, the world around me was spinning, I was sweating. Black, that’s all that I saw

We painted our pumpkins. Here are their master pieces.
Sunday, October 27, 2013
Monday, July 15, 2013
The kids in the lake with their new squirt guns.
Daddy and Belle enjoying smores.
Here we are in the middle of the lake the motor wouldn't start so we all decided to jump off and and swim for a bit. The trolling motor got us back to shore.
We going camping to the totten trail about 10 miles away a few times in the summer. Our favorite past time as a family.
Jason wanted to go camping and fishing over his birthday.
The kids and I gave him some money to go get a fishing reel he wanted
We had friends come out for pizza and cake.
Since we were camping I got to buy him a nice cake. He had a good day didn't do as much fishing as he hoped for. His boat got brought into the shop the day before. He still enjoyed off shore fishing with the kids.
Gideon and Isabelle started playing tee ball this summer. It has been fun to watch them learn how to play and their difference on opinion in the game. Isabelle has liked it to interact with the girls but hasn't wanted to go because it is too hot. She said that next year we should just play it in our back yard. Gideon has enjoyed it and has caught on fast with it and he says he wants to play again next year.
Friday, May 24, 2013
Isabelle had her kindergarten open house/graduation. It has been a wonderful year for her she has grown so much and watching her get stronger in her confidence and her academics has been amazing. She has had a struggle this year but she sure has came along way. It has been hard to see her struggle but so very proud of all the effort she has put in. It took awhile for me to stop crying every time I brought her to school but it has been such a blessing to see her blossom and see more of her personality come out. We are so proud of you Izzy!!!
Gideon had his preschool graduation. He is so excited to go to kindergarten. It was a hard adjustment for him this year watching Isabelle go to school everyday. We certainly enjoyed this year together though. It has been wonderful watching him grow so much this year. We are so proud of you Buddy!!!
Sunday, April 7, 2013
The kids enjoyed their egg hunt. We all had a wonderful get away and enjoyed family time before Jason gets busy. We saw alot of beautiful country and had alot of laughs and enjoyed a wonderful Easter with each other even though we were away. As I reflect on Easter...This perfect love that God has for us that he sent his only begotten son. His son paid the ultimate prize to save my life so I may have eternal life with him. To God be the Glory for all he has done!!!

Last week my boss called me to his office to tell me I had to go to Bangkok for 3 days on an official work assignment. Our company was organizing an exhibition for a client there. I was very excited at the prospect of having a few days to play in Bangkok, by all accounts an exciting place where all things sexual are possible and I decided it would be a perfect opportunity for me to have some exhibitionist fun and sex in a city where nobody would know me. I asked my boss if he could give me a week of vacation time after the exhibition was finished so that I could see the city. He granted my request. I was so excited that the next two days were a blur with my mind creating one fantasy after another about the adventures I could find and create in Bangkok.
Three colleagues would travel with me. The leader of our team was Edward, a senior executive about fifty who was charged with organizing the exhibition for our client. My other two companions, Joe and Tom, both mid twenties, had recently joined the company and this was their first assignment. The last few days before the trip were very busy preparing for the event and organizing things in Bangkok by telephone and fax. Edward left for Bangkok two days before the rest of us to finalize everything while the three of us traveled the day before the exhibition started.
Even before our departure I decided to really enjoy myself on this trip and to tease Joe and Tom as much as possible but thought that I would try to avoid having sex with them to protect my reputation at work. I planned to look for sexual adventures elsewhere and why not, surely there would be opportunities in a city as exciting as Bangkok, but I surely wanted to tease them a bit. I packed some dresses for the trip as well as for the exhibition. I took along decent but sexy clothes, normal office attire I’d need to attend the Exhibition, two skirts about 4 inches above the knee, a black slip on dress and a summer dress along with a few shirts. I decided that dresses and anything else more revealing required for fun in the evenings could be purchased in Bangkok. I also made the conscious decision not to pack panties and bras. I love being naked under my dresses and skirts even at work. It not only keeps me in a state of continual arousal but affords me the opportunity to display myself when I wish.
For the flight I put on a blue jeans skirt, black t-shirt and sandals. The skirt was short but you couldn’t call it a mini by my standards. The hem of the skirt finished about 4 inches above my knee. I met Joe and Tom at the airport and we checked in together. They were dressed in jeans and t-shirts. On the plane we were seated together with me in the centre. During the flight I thought about the fun I would have on this trip and with each thought my pussy would began to tingle and begin to get wet and excited.
I tried to think of other things but my mind would always wonder back to adventure and my body would begin the familiar reaction all over again. During the flight I couldn’t do much except get acquainted with Tom and Joe. I did let my legs rub up a bit against theirs and allow my legs to spread as wide as possible in the process but my skirt was too long to even attract their attention. I tried to think of ideas to flash my two companions but couldn’t create an accidental way to make it work so I had to be content with simply pressing my legs against theirs and moving a little to hold my pleasant thoughts. It was a long flight and soon all of us were sleeping.
We landed at Bangkok on Wednesday night. The exhibition was scheduled for Friday and Saturday with Thursday being kept for preparations. Edward was there to receive us at the airport and he took us to our hotel. When we reached the hotel I was a bit shocked by the location. Perhaps to save money the company had selected a modest hotel located in a seedy part of the city surrounded by pubs and nightclubs.
It was about 8 pm when we arrived at the hotel and I could see that there were some hookers on the street trying to lure the tourists. It seemed that lot of tourists also stayed in this part of the city maybe because the hotels were cheap or perhaps because of the hookers. I could see Tom and Joe staring at the hookers and other girls in the street. Edward said to me that he knew that this was a cheap place but this was the best he could do with the budget. I told him I would manage but at the same time I was really excited to be staying in such a place. I thought to myself that I could have a lot of fun in a place like this.
We checked into our hotel and as we were all tired from the long journey we went to our rooms to sleep. Upon entering my second floor room I found I faced the front of the hotel with a large window overlooking the street. On the opposite side there was another hotel. I drew the curtains aside and watched the scene on the street. I could see at least 10 girls dressed like hookers each waiting to be approached. I saw a man approach one of them and followed their movements until I saw them enter a hotel just down the street. I thought it would be dull sex for me going with that man. I liked being more open and available in public places to be seen by strangers, but the idea of standing there on the street like a hooker really turned me on and I thought that this was something I would like to try.
I moved away from the window and took my skirt and t-shirt off. I remembered I had not drawn the curtains again but then I thought, I am here for fun so if people look into my room and watch me, let them look. I took a quick shower and hit my bed. I don’t know if anyone saw me naked in the room that evening through the window but I think I fell asleep smiling.
The next day I was up early, I dressed in a black skirt, light blue shirt and 2 inch heels and as usual nothing underneath. I met my colleagues for breakfast in the hotel restaurant and then we took a taxi to the exhibition hall. I was already horny and desperately wanted to flash somebody, but the opportunity was not there. The whole day was spent in preparation for the event and sometimes I would think about the evening. At about seven in the evening when we had finished all the arrangements my colleagues decided to go around the city and asked me to join them. I told them I was tired and said that I was going back to the hotel. My colleagues left for an evening of sight seeing and I took a taxi back to the hotel. Sitting in the taxi I decided it was time for some fun, I had been horny the whole day and was frustrated at not being able to act to fulfill the need building inside me.
First I needed to change into something more appropriate for a night of fun, I simply had too many clothes on. When we were near the hotel I asked the taxi driver if there were some shops nearby where I could buy some clothes. He said that there were a few shops about a mile ahead of the hotel. I asked him to drop me there and wait for me to take me back to the hotel.
Soon I was in a shop looking for something sexy to wear. There was not much to chose from here and I could only find one black leather skirt about 10 inches in length that I liked. The skirt was tight on my body and was held at the waist by a hook. It was maybe a size too small for me. I tried it on and looking in the mirror found that it just covered my pussy and ass. I looked for a top and settled for a short, cropped t-shirt which barely covered my breasts. The bottom of the t-shirt did not touch my body, it simply hung away loose. I looked at myself in the dressing room mirror and found that if anyone was sitting below me while I was standing he would be able to see my tits clearly. I found too that if I raised my arms up beyond the level of my shoulders the shirt would rise up exposing my nipples and if I raised my hands above my head the shirt would rise up beyond my tits exposing them completely. I smiled at my reflection in the mirror and thought that this was good enough for tonight. I changed back into my clothes, picked up the new outfit, walked to the cashier and paid for my purchase.
I took my taxi back to the hotel and changed into the new clothes in my room. It was about 8:30 pm now and I could not wait to go out and have fun. My pussy was already wet with the anticipation of what was to come. I decided not to take my handbag with me, I thought I will not need any money tonight. As I walked through the hotel I could feel all eyes on me and as I reached the front door I caught the eye of the front desk clerk who had checked us in the night before. I gave him a sexy smile and thought he too deserves a peek at my pussy before I leave Bangkok.
I walked along the street seeing the pubs and nightclubs along the way deciding which one to go into. I made my choice by the music I heard coming from one of the clubs. Just before I opened the door to the club a man stopped me and asked how much I would take for the night. I told him I was not a whore and stepped into the club. The fact that he had taken me for a hooker nearly made me cum right there and I thought, what the hell, I should just act out my hooker fantasy tonight and just see where it takes me. It was crowded and loud and as I entered it seemed as if everyone turned to stare at me. I stood just inside and surveyed the scene. It was larger than it seemed from outside. There was a long bar and probably twenty or more tables most filled with people sitting and drinking. There was a dance floor, it was packed with couples dancing. The girls inside were also skimpily dressed and this made me comfortable. As I watched the dancers I could see one guy had his hands inside the skirt of a girl he was dancing with while two other couples were kissing passionately on the floor. I walked to the bar and stepped up to sit on a barstool.
As I sat down my skirt pulled up from the back as my bare ass made contact with the cold bar stool. It surprised me and I smiled at the thought that there was nothing between my ass and that barstool. I looked around and found I had the attention of a table of three men having drinks near me. I could see that they were tourists like me. None of the three was bad looking so I checked them out as they were looking at me. I decided it was time for the fun to begin. I turned on my stool until I faced them directly. I opened my legs to give them a look at my naked shaved pussy. They smiled at me and quickly discussed something and then one of them came up to me and said that he and his two friends wanted my company for some time and what would I charge them. In a span of 15 minutes I was taken to be a whore twice but this time I played along and said that I would charge 100 dollars per hour. I did not know anything about the rates here but blurted out the first round figure that came to my mind. He said that it was too high and we finally settled at 75 dollars an hour. He then asked me to join them at their table. I walked with him to their table and thought well I am a whore now and my pussy was dripping.
The two other men were sitting on each side of the table on booth style seats and I slid in next to one of them. My escort from the bar instead of sitting across from us with the other guy slid in next to me sandwiching me between the two of them. I had not even settled into my seat when the two guys had their hands on my pussy. One of them exclaimed, “hey slut you are already dripping like a fountain”. The guy across the table from me extended his hands and started fondling my tits. I slid down a little and rested my head against the back of the booth opened my legs to just enjoy the hands playing with my pussy and I came within seconds, my leather skirt getting even wetter now. The guys continued to play with my pussy and I began to rub and squeeze the cock on each side of me through their jeans feeling them grow hard as I fondled them. I slipped off one shoe, raised my leg and found the cock across the table and began to rub it with my foot under the table.
My skirt had now ridden up to my waist and was like a belt and my pussy was bare for anybody to see who walked by. I felt wonderful, like being high and I suppose I was, high on sex. I had completely given in to my desires and it felt so good to feel them playing with my pussy and fondling my tits and pinching, pulling and squeezing my nipples. I did not care who saw me I just wanted it never to stop and I began another orgasm. I thought if all nights could only be like this, life would be so beautiful. I was moaning with pleasure now, I could not help myself and I knew I was loud. I opened my eyes and realized people at the nearby table were looking at me and they could clearly see what was happening but I didn’t care, I just wanted them to keep pushing their fingers inside me rubbing and touching me and making me cum again. The man across the table was pulling and twisting my nipples so hard it hurt and I loved it, my tits were clearly visible to all except for what was covered with his hands.
The guys then asked me to get up and dance with them. I could not move for several minutes trying to calm myself enough to do as they asked. Finally when I was able I stand up, I straightened my skirt and allowed myself to be led to the dance floor. I was still panting and out of control. My legs were a bit wobbly and I wasn’t sure I could dance. The three of them began to dance around me in a close little circle all touching my body. One of them pulled my shirt above my tits and I was now dancing with my tits out in the open and nipples hard. Other couples were watching but they too seemed to enjoy what they were seeing. One of the guys started to suck my tits while the other two had their hands rubbing all over my body and they had pushed my skirt up to my waist. Their fingers pushed into my pussy again and again and when they pushed their hands into my ass trying to insert fingers inside me I tried to relax enough to let them.
They could do what they wanted to me now, I was their personal slut at that moment. They all pushed their hard cocks against my hips and ass and rubbed them on me and I tried to feel them with my hands as we all danced. It felt so good to be on a dance floor almost naked with three guys doing anything and everything they could to me while the other dancers watched me and I began to cum again. I knew anyone could see my cum running down my naked thighs. I looked again around the room knowing everyone was watching me and noticed my two colleagues Tom and Joe entering the night club and they were staring at me. I was shocked but there was just no stopping now. I looked away pretending not to notice them and continued to dance with the three guys. I was so completely out of control and enjoying myself so much that I did not care if Tom and Joe were watching me now. But I was thinking about what might happen when I met them in the morning. This thought and the hands of the three guys playing with my pussy and tits on the dance floor made me cum again, this time moaning loudly with pleasure.
The music stopped but instead of them leading me back to our table they led me to the back of the club and we exited through a door into an alley behind the club. The guys then pushed me down on the street and had their dicks out of their pants. They ordered me to suck them. I was in such a state of ecstasy that I did not need to be ordered and took the closest cock into my mouth. I sucked him hard, my mouth moving fast up and down his dick licking, biting lightly so he could feel my teeth touching it, taking it out and licking and slurping along it length so the others could see, my hands squeezing and pulling at the base of his cock and cupping and squeezing his balls. The other two guys had their dicks rubbing my face and covering it with lines of pre-cum, pushing and rubbing trying to wait their turn to fuck my mouth. Soon the first guy stiffened and his cock began to jerk and I could feel he was about to cum, and then he was cumming in spurts inside my mouth. I swallowed it all down my throat enjoying the taste, I have always loved the taste of cum. When his spurts stopped I took his cock out of my mouth licked it from tip to it’s base rolling my tongue over it.
The second guy could wait not longer and simply turned my head forcefully and shoved his cock into my mouth and I began to suck. He was so excited that before I could get into a good pattern of licking and sucking he shoved his cock in as far as he could and shot his first burst of hot cum down my throat and I swallowed his cum too. I pulled him out of my mouth looked up at him smiled, kissed the head of his dick and licked the tip. The third guy was so excited now that as I took his dick in my hand and as I attempted to put it in my mouth, he started to cum and shot his load onto my face and down onto my thighs as I kneeled in front of him. I held his cock in my hands and milked him letting his cum land where it would, mostly on my face. Now I had cum dripping down my face. I slowly collected the last drops milked from him in my hand and then licked it clean. I then cleaned my face by rubbing my hand over it and whatever cum was there I licked it off my hands as they watched. Then one of the guys took out 75 dollars and gave it to me. I accepted the money and then they simply walked away into the street. I rearranged my skirt and covered tits and walked out of the alley and into the main street. I walked back to the hotel thinking about what Tom and Joe had seen of me today and wondering what they might say when I faced them tomorrow and most importantly what their reaction would be and how they would treat me.
When I got to my room I quickly undressed and took a shower. I loved what happened tonight, I tried to remember when I had been more satisfied than I was right now and could not think of one time. I needed to sleep but replayed it all over in my mind again and again. I got out of bed and walked to the window, I stood at the open window replayed the night once more as I masturbated until I came one more time wondering if anyone was watching me from the dark windows across the street. I didn’t know but I hoped someone was there watching. I returned to my bed. I wish I could do it all again tonight but finally I drifted off to sleep, this time I know I was smiling.

Randy and I chose to go out for breakfast this morning, since it was a weird morning, and I knew that there was a reason. So we could hear this:
"Willard, would you like bacon or sausages with your pancakes?"
We just chuckled.
Then, he and Maynard were playing with the crayons. When I asked them what they were doing, Willard said,
"We are playing rocket ships, and they have happily beestroying." (Happily Destroying????)
Then, as we were leaving, Maynard said, I wan a bautsty ball! (Bouncy ball)

Ugh...my dh has had some major respiratory problems lately and has been through 2 prescriptions.
On Friday he took his car for service. Guess what they found? A dead mouse in his fan!!! And a huge mouse nest.
So now we are wondering if that was the cause of it. He drives around practically all day in the car. He's been breathing in mouse hairs and whatever. SO disgusting.
We first found out about a mouse in my mom's car. Her tissues were gone and she found droppings. The fingers on her gloves were gone too. Then a week or so later, my dh found his tissues gone.
Our cars are pretty much spotless, no trash or anything so I guess they were just trying to keep warm.
We (he) set mouse traps in the garage to see if we can get any remaining family members and not one has been caught yet!!!!!! Maybe they moved away after the mom/dad lost it's life in the fan?! Yuck.

Authors: Jane Rossiter
Tags: #romance, #nurse, #medical
He smiled at her across the table. "I'm not going to like flying back to Philadelphia tomorrow," he said.
She was surprised at the news, not expecting that he would leave so soon. "Do you have to go?"
"I'm afraid so. A big deal coming up, with a couple of people who won't be available any other time. But it will only be a few weeks until the company plays Philadelphia, and then we'll have lots of evenings together. And you'll be able to meet the rest of my family. Especially Mother." He made it sound exciting and important.
But Shirley felt a sudden doubt. She wasn't at all certain that she would like Roger's Philadelphia family, or fit in with them. And she realized that it wasn't really important to her whether they liked her or not. Still, she didn't want to hurt Roger; she would have to pretend that she was as enthusiastic about the week in Philadelphia as he was.
The best she could manage was: "You're right. It won't be long until we'll be playing there."
He reached across the table and took her hand. "Shirley, I don't want you to get the idea I'm trying to rush you into anything. But in the short time we've known each other, I've found in you all I could ever ask in a girl."
She smiled at him. "Roger, we're—we're not much more than strangers."
"I think we're a lot more." His eyes searched her face. "And I have an idea you know that what I'm saying is true. A thing like this can happen. Two people meet and suddenly discover they like each other a great deal."
"I do like you Roger," she said. "I like you a lot."
"I more than like you," he told her. "I'm in love with you, Shirley. I want you to know that. I don't expect any answer from you now. But think it over. When you arrive in Philadelphia, I'd like to tell everyone that you've agreed to be my wife."
In spite of Hugh Deering's half-joking warning that Roger Craft would ask her to marry him, Shirley was surprised when the serious-faced young man put the question to her so directly. For a moment, she was unable to reply; then she smiled and said, "I know there must be many girls who would be thrilled to have you say that to them." She paused. "In a way, so am I. But things have been so mixed up for me lately. I'd like to accept your suggestion and think about it awhile."
"Take as long as you like," he said.
And so the moment of decision passed. But from then on, there was a new intimacy between them. When Roger left her at the door of her room, he stood studying her for a minute.
"I'll phone you every day," he told her. "It will help cut down the miles between us."
Shirley looked up at him fondly. "You'll be very close in my thoughts."
He leaned toward her and kissed her, his strong hands pressing hard on her shoulders. Then he gave her a quick smile and, with an almost touching shyness, hurried away.
Shirley watched after him until he turned the corridor, a smile playing on her lips. It occurred to her that this case had brought her a wonderful new world. She had come to know the great actor, Oliver Craft, in a way few people did. And through him, she had met Roger. It had been a strong temptation tonight. She had almost said "yes" to his proposal. There were so many things right about marriage with him. But as long as there was still even a small reservation in her mind, she knew it wouldn't be fair to either of them to agree. With a sigh, she unlocked her door and went in.
Roger went back to Philadelphia the next day, and the rest of the week in Cincinnati was uneventful. Once near the end of the week, Shirley met the character actor, Charles Victor, in the hotel drugstore. She saw that he was standing by the prescription counter and assumed that he was getting a new supply of his nitro tablets.
Going up to him, she said, "I've been wanting to chat with you."
The stout little man turned around in surprise; and then, finding that it was Shirley, the round face broke into a smile. "How's my favorite nurse?" he asked.
"Worried about you. How have you been feeling lately?"
"Never better. I'm just getting these to have them on hand. I really haven't used my last supply."
Shirley found it hard to tell whether the little man was pretending or not. At any rate, she wanted to believe him. "That's good news," she said. "But if you feel worse, or the attacks get more frequent, don't keep it a secret from me."
"I won't," he assured her. "I appreciate that you've kept it from the others."
"If you need a doctor, see one. No one else need know." Shirley sighed. "You'll be all right if you take sensible care of yourself."
"I will, Miss Grant. I promise you." The little actor turned to receive his filled prescription.
Leaving him, Shirley was only half-convinced that he was as well as he said. But she had warned him. She hoped that he would take her suggestion to see a doctor.
On the weekend, the company moved on to Cleveland and the Hanna Theater. The six-day stand was a complete sellout. Everyone was excited and looking forward to the engagement. On Sunday afternoon, Oliver Craft and Shirley checked into the Sheraton-Cleveland.
During the trip there, she had noticed that the old actor seemed rather wan and remote. She made him go to bed as soon as he arrived at his hotel suite. When she looked after the irrigation of his side, he complained of discomfort, and also of pain in the other side, the same trouble he had mentioned to her a few weeks before in Boston. Alarmed, she gave him a fairly heavy dose of sedative and within half an hour he had fallen into a deep sleep.
Picking up the phone, she asked the desk for Lyon Phillips' room. She hoped, as the phone rang, that the stage manager hadn't gone to the theater, and was thankful when he answered.
"I'm so glad you're still there." She spoke rapidly in a low voice. "May I come down and see you for a moment?"
"Why not?" The stage manager's tone was jovial. "I hope it's important. You called me out of the shower. I'm standing here dripping wet."
"It is," she said. "It's about the Chief."
Phillips' tone changed to one of concern. "I'll be waiting for you."
His face showed his worry as he opened the door of his room for her. She went in, noting that he was now in his dressing gown, and that in the time that had passed since she had called, he had thrown on trousers and a shirt. He indicated a chair. "Sit down," he said. "How bad is he?"
She shook her head. "I don't know. He seemed to be in great pain. And he hardly ever complains, although I'm sure he suffers often. I gave him a stiff dose of sleeping tablets."
Lyon paced up and down before her. "How long will they last?"
"Two or three hours."
"Then we'll know?"
"If he wakes up and the pain hasn't left him, we'll have to call a doctor. Perhaps send him to the hospital." Shirley's eyes met those of the tall, lantern-jawed young man. "I thought I'd phone Dr. Trask from down here. Then I'd better hurry back upstairs. He shouldn't be left alone."
"Yes, telephone Trask by all means." Lyon Phillips stopped in front of her. "He should get out here as fast as he can."
She shrugged. "If he can. He's a very busy surgeon. It's not always possible for him to get away at a moment's notice."
"I know! I know!" He began to pace again. "If Oliver is really bad off, we'll have to announce that Sayre will sub for him. There's still time for a notice in the morning papers. It will mean a lot of work for everyone in the show."
"You think you'll be able to go on without him?"
"For this week, in a kind of way." Lyon's voice was bitter. "Without Oliver, we won't really have a show. We may as well accept that. It could be the end of the tour."
Sadness clouded Shirley's face. "And it means so much to him to go through with it."
"I know." Lyon's shoulders were slumped. "I'll wait until he wakes up and if things are still not right, I'll phone Rothstein and tell him."
Shirley nodded, understanding that there would be decisions which only the show's producer could make. She reached for the phone and placed her Boston call. It was midafternoon and she assumed that Dr. Trask would be at his Wellesley address and so made the call to that number.
Lyon repeated, "Tell him to get here as fast as he can."
Then Dr. Trask's familiar nasal twang said "Yes?" at the other end of the line.
"It's Miss Grant, Doctor," Shirley said. "Oliver Craft seems worse." In as few words as possible, she gave him a description of her patient's condition, ending with: "We hoped you might be able to come out."
"I can," Dr. Trask said. "I will. There's an early evening plane. I'll be on it. Have someone meet me at the airport."
Shirley put down the phone. "He's coming in on tonight's flight from Boston."
"Good," Lyon said briskly. "I'll meet him."
She got up. "I feel better about things already. If we have any hope at all, it lies with Dr. Trask."
"I feel the same way," the stage manager said.
Their conversation was interrupted by a knock at the door. Lyon looked at her with a questioning expression and then went over and opened it. It was Hugh Deering, dressed for the street.
He came in with a smile. "What a charming pair."
Lyon closed the door. "No time for jokes, Hugh. We're in trouble."
The actor's eyebrows raised. "Really?"
The stage manager glanced at Shirley and said, "We may as well tell him. They'll all know soon enough." Then, "It's Oliver. He's in terrible pain."
Hugh Deering looked at Shirley for confirmation. "Is it really bad?"
"I think so," Shirley said, and repeated what she had told Dr. Trask. She watched with a kind of fascination as the ex-doctor took in the medical explanations. He listened in the familiar manner of a doctor, whether he admitted to being one or not.
When she had finished, he sighed. "I've been worried right along. Oliver is like a man on a tightrope. He's been walking a precarious way. This whole project has gone along depending on the slim thread of his health. This could be the end."
"Jeffrey Sayre can never carry the play for the rest of the tour," Lyon said.
Hugh laughed shortly. "Don't tell him that, or we won't even have him for the week. He's only kept on hoping to take over Oliver's shoes. And he's been having phone calls from the coast about a picture part."
Lyon Phillips looked startled. "He has! He didn't mention anything to me about it."
"Probably been saving it up for an unpleasant surprise," Hugh said. "Leave it to Jeffrey to wait for the dramatic moment to show his hand."
Lyon bit his lip. "Well, bad news comes in lots. But no need to worry about Jeffrey until we find out the situation with Craft."
"That's right," Hugh agreed.
"I'll go back upstairs now," Shirley said, moving to the door. "Will you be at the theater, Lyon?"
The stage manager nodded. "Yes. Phone me there if there's anything you think I should know."
Hugh Deering took the elevator upstairs with Shirley and stood for a moment at the door of Oliver Craft's suite. She saw the concern in the ex-doctor's face and felt there was a struggle going on inside him, his natural desire to offer his medical knowledge being opposed by his determination to turn his back on his former profession for all time.
"I was going out for a stroll," he said. "But instead, I'll stay in my room, if you think I can be of any use. If Oliver needs anyone to stay with him or talk with him, don't hesitate to call me."
"Thanks," she said quietly, looking up at him with grateful eyes.
When she went inside, the star was still asleep. She sat in the living room near the open door of the bedroom and tried to read a magazine. But her mind wouldn't settle down to it. She kept going back in her thoughts to the sick old man in the other room and what it would mean to them all if he became too ill to go on. In the few weeks she had been with
company she had become part of its small world. It seemed strange that it should suddenly end, that she might be abruptly parted from Hugh Deering and not see him again.
She worried about the young ex-doctor. There was so much to be salvaged in his life. Surely somehow he would come to himself one day. A few minutes ago, she had sensed that he wanted to offer his medical services for her patient, but in the end, his strange attitude had won out. Still, he had offered to come if she needed him, as a friend, not a doctor.
What a talent would be lost to the world when Oliver Craft died. It seemed a tragedy of life that when such people passed away their unique ability was lost to mankind. Yet, in some ways, the star would survive. If only in the memory of those who had been privileged to know his greatness. And there were his movies. Prints of them might show a future generation of actors the measure of his talent. And the outstanding younger actors whom he had trained and encouraged would reflect his style in theirs, and so, in this way, too, the influence of Oliver Craft would be woven into the tapestry of time. Yes, like all other great art, the contribution of the old actor would live on.
Her reverie was broken by the phone ringing. She lifted the receiver, and in a minute, Roger's voice came through to her. "Shirley, darling, I called a little while ago and no one answered."
"I was out for a moment," she explained in a subdued voice. "Your grandfather hasn't been feeling well. I gave him a strong sedative and he wouldn't hear the phone."
Roger caught the seriousness of her tone. "Is he very ill?"
"I'll know more later. I'm—I'm a little frightened, Roger." And with this admission, she felt a panic deep within her.
"When will you know more?"
"Dr. Trask is flying in tonight. Perhaps I'll have some word by midnight. I could call you back when I find out."
"Do that. I'll be waiting. If the news is really black, I'll come right out."
Shirley felt a little guilty, not wanting to upset the intense young man too much. After all, Oliver Craft might wake up feeling much better. "I may only be having a case of nerves," she admitted. "But I don't want to take any chances."
"Right, darling. I'll be waiting for your call."

It's 3d here! I have been told to proclaim my opinions of comics and differences between them and graphic novels if there is a difference in my opinion, by my wonderful aunt who could never be replaced by someone and make me as happy as she does! So here we go:
I was given a few "comics" and decided to sort them. I put a few in what I called the "Graphic Novels" section, a few in the "Historical Comics" section, the "Anonymous" section and a few in the "Comics" section. An example of one I put into the graphic novels section is "Blankets" and "Watchmen"
. In comics, I put stuff like "Green Lantern" comics and such. I put "Maus" and such in the "Historical Comics" section. I had a blast doing this. Now, my aunt loved my opinions, but she did not agree with me on the "Blankets" choice. She said she would call it a comic. That was very interesting, and she asked me why I put it in the graphic novel section. I've tried describing why. At first, I thought it was the way it was drawn, but I've seen many different types of drawings that I would still classify under comics. Then I tried the way it was written and I got a bit closer. I believe that comics aren't like novels. I believe that some books classified under novels should be classified under comics, but I don't think that comics are like novels. Comics, I have noticed, have no ending. Every comic I have seen, ends with a cliffhanger. It goes on and on and on. Now, some things I would call comics don't do this. Such as Maus (well, that has a part two, but you know what I mean xD) and other things. Comics have a special thing about them though, that I haven't been able to put my finger on. I'll get back to you when I've got it.

This is part two of Tis the Season. I’m not going to do a huge introduction of the horror story I’m going to share. I’m just going straight into it.. There were extreme measures that Bud did to make sure to keep me in his possession. When I started to become immune to his ways, he had to step up his game a little bit. I can’t count how many times I would catch him in lies or trying to pursue other women. It was always my fault that he went after other women. He would use the excuse that I wasn’t giving him enough sex or enough attention. His definition of not giving him enough sex is two days.. If I went more than two days of not giving it to him, he would use that against me.
We were always broke, he lost his job as a plumber making a great weekly pay to having to work as a landscaper bringing home pennies every two weeks. Even though times were tough financially, we were living in a new apartment and seemed to be doing really good. We hadn’t fought in quite some time, our sex life was back to “normal” and he didn’t seem interested in straying far away from home. Bud was a biker and would go out for a ride any chance he got. One Sunday he climbed up on his hog and rode off to go see his dad for Father’s Day. No problem! Well.. on his way to go see his dad he stops at a random gas station to purchase some cigarettes. Behind the counter was a blonde woman that liked the tall bald guy that just rode up on his stallion. Let’s just say it didn’t take much for Bud to get the digits that she willingly handed over.
I know.. what does us being broke have to do with the blonde woman. It was because we were broke that I caught him with this lady. Our cell phones had gotten shut off and he had a work phone. At the time I owned a Jeep wrangler and the battery went dead at a gas station right down the road from our house. Since my cellphone was off I couldn’t call my mom for help. I’m sitting in the driver’s seat about to have a mental break down and he hands me his work phone to call my mom. Now the cellphone was one of the old school flip phones because smart phones were just starting to become a thing. I opened the phone trying to dial the numbers but for some reason it wouldn’t dial. I noticed that Bud was getting a little anxious and kept telling me to hurry up and dial the number. I yelled back, I’m trying to but the phone won’t work… and then my eyes went up to the actual screen. “I can’t wait to be in your arms,” was on the screen. It was a text message from the blonde woman! He was now using his work phone to cheat on me, instead of his personal phone.
Instantly my eyes went over to his face and the look he had on his face was panic. He just got caught red handed… AGAIN! I’m pretty sure I yelled out REALLY?! Why? What have I done now that would cause you to go off and get attention from someone else. Right there in the middle of the parking lot gas station, he looked at me in my face and told me I’ve been neglecting him. I don’t remember what happened after that, I’m pretty sure I blanked out at that point. What I do remember is sitting on the edge of my bed staring at the wall. I think I may have been sitting there for a very long time and I’m positive that is when I started to check out of life. I waved my white flag and told him to just go do what he was going to do. He was going to do it anyways happy or unhappy, so just go.
Two things happened at this point in our relationship. He finally stopped chasing other women and since he couldn’t use cheating against me, the suicide threats made their debut! For as long as I live, the memory of the first suicide attempt will never leave my brain. Not because it was a horrible situation but because he is dumb. I’d like to use a different word but I’m being kind. We were fighting as usual and I can only assume my argument was better than his because he proceeded to grab his pocket knife and went into the bathroom. He was all locked up in the bathroom crying because he felt unworthy of my love. He would just end it all because what was the point of living if he couldn’t have me in his life. At first, I was scared.. I knew he was stupid but I wasn’t sure how stupid he was. I found some tools to take the door knob off, all I needed to do was get to the inside of the door to be able to open it.
I guess he didn’t realize I was a smart person and that I would figure out how to break my way into the bathroom. When he realized I was making my way in, he put his foot up against the door and he was still crying! Well at least I thought he was.. He made the mistake of turning the bathroom light off and once the door knob on his side fell off I could see he the light from his phone! He was either in there watching porn or texting with someone other woman. At that point, once I noticed his phone was on I knew his suicide threat was a bunch of bull, so I went to finish watching my movie.
Bud had to get creative because I was out smarting him. After a few years of putting up with him, I knew how to avoid his anger and I knew what to do to keep the peace. Well Bud didn’t like that. He needed to keep beating me down emotionally & mentally because that was how he could keep me around. Bud needed to have something to hold over my head, if he had something he could use against me then he wins. He knew exactly what to say or do to make me lose my temper and fight back. The minute I gave into that anger then I was no better than him… and he knew that. He wouldn’t stop until I blew my top, he would torture me and poke me until my eyes would black out. Once he got me to that point, I would yell, cuss and throw stuff across the room and he would sit back with this smirk on his face because he got me. That smirk would piss me off even more.. Let’s fast forward a little bit. He got a new job, we have a new three bedroom house in a good part of town and my kids were going to go to a great school! Once again, we have a new house that I considered a new start. Things would be better!
Bud was still popping them beer cans open every chance he got. By now, I’ve learned if I just shut up and watch what I say or do then the arguments wouldn’t happen. The more he drank, the better chance I had for him to pass out so I could have a little peace. He always kept me in the bedroom with the door closed, he would not let me keep the door open very often. I had to be at his beckon call and if he needed sex then I had to be there to give it to him. This is the part of our relationship where the sexual abuse would start. Having sex with him was straight torture, I didn’t want him to touch me anymore, kiss me and him laying on top of me while he used me has his masturbation tool was sickening. But if I didn’t have sex with him, then it would cause an argument. He would be so drunk that him finishing what he was doing was never going to happen and I got to the point where I would just lay there with my eyes closed praying for a miracle to happen. “Please God let him finish or let him pass out.”
I can’t tell you how many times I would cry laying there while he was on top of me. Tears would be rolling down my face while I pretend to moan with “pleasure”. If at any moment he would realize I wasn’t enjoying the sex we were having, then that would cause him to feel a certain type of way and when he felt a certain type of way that would lead to a fight. Depending on what his mood was at that time would determine what kind of fight it would turn into. I wish I could put into words the list that would run through my mind every second he was around me. Having to rely on the wrinkles on his face to give me a clue of what mood he was in so I knew what kind of person I needed to be.
I learned very quickly that leaving the bedroom while he was passed out was not an option. Just because he was knocked out cold, his internal demon would keep watch over me. If I would leave the room he would wake up and come looking for me. Remember when I told you I was smart.. well I also figured out by his snore how much time I would have before he would come looking for me when I left the room. Sometimes I would have fifteen minutes and some nights I would have an hour or two. Every blue moon, I could sleep on the couch all night before he come looking for me. But the process to get out of the room wasn’t an easy task. It was more like a special ops mission. Slowly I’d move my legs off the bed and then slide a little at a time until my feet hit the floor. Once my feet hit the floor then I’d maneuver myself until I could stand all the way up. I would have to stand there for a minute or two to make sure his demon was asleep too. Has he sensed that I’m not in the bed? As long as he kept snoring I was good. Once I felt safe enough, I would start to walk closer to the door but I had to be very quiet about it. Then there was opening the door and then closing of the door. Once I was out, I would take a breath of relief and make my way to the couch.
It was the only time I could get a little peace to fall asleep but even when I could sleep, it was very lightly. The sound of our bedroom door would wake me up out of a dead sleep. Then the panic would set in when I heard him walking down the hall way. Sometimes he left me alone and would just go in the garage to smoke a cigarette. Usually when that would happen, he was still drunk and didn’t even notice I wasn’t in the bed. Sometimes he would hover over me and watch me sleep. Other times, he would wake me up to go back to the bedroom and I would obey. I had to.. There have been times where stuff went flying across the living room because I wouldn’t obey and go back to bed. In his mind, if I wasn’t in the bed then I could be out in the living room having an affair on him or doing something I wasn’t supposed to be doing. Keeping the peace was my only option.
Now that I’m further into my story, I’m sure you have a lot of questions. Why stay Leah? Why didn’t you ask for help. I have no idea why I didn’t ask for help. My body & mind were not my own anymore. I walked around in a constant fog and was nothing more than a body with no soul. My time awake was spent in constant defense mode and by the days end, I had nothing left to give anymore. It was so draining on my mind and body to be like that all day long.
Then I found Jesus and started going to church. I’m going to do another part of so I’m not going into detail of what events took place once Jesus came into the picture. I want to close with one more suicide attempt. This suicide attempt is where he made the grave mistake of acting out in front of some church members. He was a truck driver and since he was gone a lot, I hired a landscaper to keep our yard maintained. Since the landscaper was a man, that meant I was having an affair with him because I knew too much about him personally. By knowing too much, he was married with kids and his name was Adam. And I would talk to him on the phone when I needed him to do something outside of his normal duties. So therefore, the 5 minute conversations I had on the phone with Adam, meant I was only trying to get closer to him by asking him to pull some weeds.
He was drunk one night and he was taking stabs at me trying to get me to blow up so he could blow up. When he brought up the landscaper, I made the horrible mistake of saying that he knew what the inside of our house looked liked. At the time, I didn’t realize this was a life saving maneuver. Once those words came out of my mouth, he destroyed the living room. Our big screen TV was trashed, my PlayStation was trashed and anything breakable was pieces on the floor of the living room. I remember being on the floor in tears begging him to stop and he just kept going. I hit him on the leg with a glass vase out of defense and that caused him to stop & he walked outside. I called my friend and fellow church member to please come over to help, so she got her husband up out of bed where they both came to the house. Where I lived was at the end of a cul-de-sac and at night it was very dark. My friend was inside with me while her husband was outside trying to figure out where Bud was. Since he couldn’t find him, he came back inside and sat with us in the living room.
I’d say about ten minutes went by and we heard a gun shot come from the back yard. The first thing that came to my mind was, “You idiot” but since my friends never experienced the stupidity of Bud, they panicked when they heard the gun go off. I then go out onto the back porch and called out Bud’s name to see if he would respond and he didn’t. So we walked around the front of the house to the back yard and there he was… laying on the trampoline with the gun to his head. My friend’s husband tried to go up to Bud to talk to him but he got so scared that he came back to where I was standing. Remember I said it was so dark that you couldn’t see anything. So Bud had no idea that we were standing about 15 feet away from him.
My friends are in shear panic trying to call someone else to come over and help. I’m standing there shaking my head because I know exactly what he is doing, he’s trying to be the victim so I look like the bad guy. All of a sudden I see Bud’s phone light up and he then sends me a text message when I’m standing 15 feet away from him. He tells me in the text message that if it were me with the gun up to my head, that he would try harder to get me to not kill myself. He thought we were had walked away and it surprised him when I yelled out, “Hey dummy, we are standing right here.” Well that made him really mad that he was caught and he got on his motorcycle drunk as a skunk. He took off..
After he took off, my friends were standing there with pure shock on their faces. I believe they were in more shock that I was so numb to it and that I was the only one not in panic mode. They thought he really wanted to die and I knew he was doing it for attention. He was too much of a coward to really pull the trigger while it was against his head. Sorry to be so heartless in that comment but at that time it was true. Now you may be thinking, how was this a life saving maneuver? Because it was the first time he slipped up in front of other people that could finally witness I wasn’t the crazy one.. he was. This was the beginning of freedom for me.
I would love to end this entry by saying our relationship was over shortly after this took place, but this entry doesn’t have a happy ending yet. It went on for a little while longer and life got even more scary. Don’t worry because by the time I’m done telling all of this, I will show you how God saved me. This may have been a bit hard to read for some of you and I would love to tell you the next one will be easier but it won’t be. The worse hadn’t even started yet.. his demons still had a hold over me and it wasn’t until I really started to grow closer to the Lord that they got disturbed and worked over time to bring me down.
The fact that I’m even here to tell you this story is a miracle straight from the Lord. And I promise you that when this is all said and done, you will see exactly how good God is. Once again, don’t feel bad for me. I have been restored in the Lord and finally ready to share my side of the story, even the bad parts.
I love your face…

Our family went to Greer in May for 2 nights, thanks to my wonderful sister-in-law! The five of us went, my sister-in-law, mother-in-law, and my mom! It was such a wonderful trip. We played games, relaxed, fished, hiked, and enjoyed each other's company! We arrived the morning of the Greer Lodge fire, May 10. It was so sad to see it gone, but we were thankful we were still able to go and that no other structures were ruined. The day we got there it snowed! I had posted some pictures in the "May" post, but decided that the Greer trip deserved it's own post! Enjoy the pictures and the video of the snow! (I will have to post later, blogger is really slow this morning!)
Eddy on his birthday!
Trinity feeding the ducks!

Shahjahanpur (UP), Feb 13 (PTI) An 18-year-old son of a trader was shot dead and his body was recovered from near a river, police said on Saturday.
Superintendent of Police S Anand said Afzal had left his house on Friday evening and did not return.
The family searched for him but could not find him.
'On Saturday morning, police recovered his body from near a river. He was shot dead and a motorcycle was recovered at a distance from the incident spot. It is suspected that the accused walked with him to the river and then shot him dead,' he said.
Anand said a police team has been formed to solve the case.
The victim’s father, Sartaj, suspected the role of a man, called Deepak, in the murder. The body has been sent for a post-mortem examination. PTI CORR NAV RDK RDK

Three men have been arrested for allegedly hatching robbing a man of Rs 52.50 lakh in south Delhi's Malviya Nagar.
The three accused -- Naresh Chand (43), Vikram Singh (44) and Mukesh Trivedi (46) were arrested yesterday from a Saket mall, the police said.
Rs 41.76 lakh in cash was recovered from the accused and raids are being conducted to nab other accused, they said.
The incident took place on Monday evening.
The victim, Rajesh Kumar, had informed police that he and three of his associates were robbed at gunpoint.
Kumar told police that he and his associates had come to buy a plot from a property dealer and had brought Rs 52.50 lakh in cash.
They were taken to a plot from their they all went to the property dealer's office, the police said.
When Kumar and his associates were leaving the office around eight armed men barged in the office and started abusing them.
One of the persons, who was already present in the office, took out demonetised notes of Rs 500 and Rs 1,000 denomination and accused Kumar of coming there to exchange old currency, the police said.
Kumar was threatened by the men, who had barged in the office with pistols. They also claimed that they would file a case against him, the police said.
Kumar and his associates fled from there but their bag containing the cash was snatched from them, the police said.
Acting on a tip-off, the accused were arrested while the police are conducting raids in Bulandshahr, Meerut, Faridabad, to nab the remaining accused, they added.
(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)

Blog about porn star Dani Jensen
Preston was ready to party it up at his boss Dani Jensen's house. But Dani caught him by surprise when she got home early from her trip. Apparently, the model she was going on the trip with wanted her to pay her half. The nerve of him! Dani has never paid her way when going out with a guy. So Dani ditches the toolbag and heads back home instead. Dani is super pissed because she is super horny and this weekend was going to be her chance to get her pussy stuffed by some cock. Well, since Preston was caught partying at her house without her permission, she decides to give him a chance to redeem himself and keep his job, by filling her up with his tool. First things first though, he needs to lick Dani's ginger pussy. This naughty rich girl always gets what she wants.

New York, June 4 (ANI): A teenage Bill Gates was such a problem child that he and his parents had to go through family therapy for two years, the Microsoft founder's dad has revealed.
"Things obviously worked themselves out," the New York Daily News quoted Gates Sr., 84, as telling the crowd in the auditorium of the storied 92nd Street Y.
He went on: "Our family was pretty typical as families go, with conflicts arising between parents and children at a certain age.
"There's fighting against discipline, and that's the situation we had. In this particular case it was mostly between Bill and his mother."
Gates Jr., nicknamed Trey at home, said: "Mom was on the front line.
"But Dad was in reserve."
Gates Sr. said he and his late wife, Mary "would go to this consultant, and then Trey would go in. And eventually, this consultant said to us, 'You know, you have this war going on with your son, and you really should understand something: He's going to win.'"
Gates Jr. said: "I had a lot of fun growing up. I'm not sure I always made it fun. But maybe we could let parents here know that a very energetic kid who's pushing hard on the boundaries might turn out OK?"
"I think you turned out OK," replied Gates Sr.
"I'm working on it," said Gates Jr.
The father-son dialogue had the laid back ambience of "Saturday Night Live's" "good times" spoof of National Public Radio hosts. (ANI)

Lunch, warm, humid frisbee. 9 people, so we did 4v4 with sub on the other team. We probably had the better team but the game was fairly even during the warm up, though I think the other team got worn down a bit more. Once the game started, my team whupped up and won 5-0. We usually only have 2-4 shutouts a year, but now we had 2 in one week.

LONDON (Reuters) - The deputy speaker of the Commons, Nigel Evans, was arrested this weekend on suspicion of rape and sexual assault, but said on Sunday the allegations against him were "completely false".
The 55-year-old member of Prime Minister David Cameron's Conservative party was detained on Saturday over attacks allegedly carried out at his home in Lancashire, northern England between July 2009 and March of this year, police said.
After being granted bail, Evans told reporters: "Yesterday I was interviewed by the police concerning two complaints - one of which dates back four years - made by two people who are well known to each other and who until yesterday I had regarded as friends.
"The complaints are completely false and I cannot understand why they have been made, especially as I have continued to socialise with one as recently as last week."
No further details of the complainants have been released by Lancashire police.
Evans, who has been a MP for some 20 years, was elected as one of three deputy speakers three years ago.
The role mainly involves adjudicating the often noisy and fractious debates between Britain's rival parties who face each other across the floor of the Commons.
Evans, who announced to a newspaper in 2010 that he was gay, was vice-chairman of the Conservative party from 1999 to 2001 and shadow Welsh Secretary for two years after that while the Conservatives were in opposition.

I had been to London for two nights on my own (my wife is in Spain with her friends). I was in a hotel on Russel Square.
I been on the Thames enbankment and went back to the hotel on the tub--Piccadily line.
It was quite packed nad we passengers where squashed tight. There was a man behind me, decent looking around 65/70 ish.
After a couple of minutes I could feel him pressing against me, I could actually feel his penis pressing into my bottom--he was really hard. I turned around and we looked each other in the eye--it felt so intense. I turned back round and gently pushed my bum against his cock. I put my hand around and squeezed it for him. It felt quite thick and very hard, I stroked it, wanking it slowly.
I go off just round the corner from my hotel at Russel Sq, He followed. He said follow me if you like, I did. We went in the hotel via the back entrance--he worked there. He took downstairs to his changing area. "No-one will come here-no-one is due on their shft for another hour". It was quite secluded and cosy--we shut the door to the changing area and he undressed me and I him. His cock was beautiful. "Suck it" he said. I did. I had the whole length (7/8inches) in my mouth. We lay on some cloths and he started to kiss and feel my bum, he put a finger in me while kissing me. He then asked me if he could fuck me--yes I said.
He took lube ans a condom from his locker, I put the sheth on him and he bent me over.
He was quite gentle entering my hole. He then began to get faster and pumped it in me good and hard / he drew out pulled the sheath off and cum kn my hole.
I hope to meet him agaim

Shot in the city of Kolkata, India.
I found a studio during rambling along the streets. And some men were making stitches in the studio. You might think the handwork like this were for ladies. However, many men engaged in the production of needlework in Kolkata. You often saw the workers like them in Kolkata.
Two craftsmen sat face to face in the studio. And a purple textile was placed between them. They were absorbed in checking the condition of the work and didn't cast an eye on me.

that worries me. I need more and was going to order them today. Your message reminded me. This is not a wholesaler by the way just the least expensive place I could find and not have to buy $100 at a time. If anyone has another place please let me know.

WASHINGTON, D.C. (NBC) – A new CDC report shows while breakthrough infections of COVID-19 in fully vaccinated people do happen, it still appears to be a small occurrence.
According to the agency, more than 10,000 breakthrough infections were reported as of April 30. But that is out of the roughly 101 million adults who were fully vaccinated at that time.
The majority of the breakthrough infections occurred in women and 27% were asymptomatic. However, 10% had to be hospitalized and 2% died.
The CDC had sequencing data available for just 555 of the reported cases, of which 64% were identified as variants of concern.

by, February 2nd, 2014 at 09:04 PM (414 Views)
So my oldest sister will soon be engaged. *Cue the screeching tires.* What?! I suppose I should be happy for my sister and I guess one part of me really is. If anyone deserves to be happy, she does. However, I really can't stand him. He is good enough to my sister from what I've seen but I can't help have a sneaking suspicion about him. It is hard for me to pinpoint what exactly it is about him that makes me feel like he isn't good enough for my sister.
There is also that other thing where he and I just don't get along. I don't mean everyone has to see eye-to-eye. But there was that one time he was very rude to me when I first met him. I asked about how they met and where he was from. He basically, in essence, told me that I should mind my own business. And not to mention that other time he was rude to me...and that other time...and so on. I wonder why??
I understand that in the end all that should really matter is that he makes my sister happy and he treats her well (otherwise he will have me to answer to). But is it really all that demanding from me to want he and I to get along to some degree? Am I asking for too much? And oh yeah...there's also that weird feeling I get about him that I can't quite put my finger on.
I do know enough about him from my sister but I also can't help feeling that she is defending him all the time. I am doing my best as the understanding and all-accepting younger brother. And yet, I don't have any qualms about speaking my mind.
With reluctance, I guess will say "welcome to the family." But only with reluctance. And a whole lot of reservation.

, NAIROBI, Kenya Dec 30 – Police in Nairobi are looking for a man who allegedly killed his friend over a love affair with his wife.
The man, in his mid thirties, is said to have stabbed his friend severally, killing him instantly before he fled after the Sunday night incident that occurred in Mathare slum.
“We are looking for him because he is responsible for the murder,” a senior police officer said, adding “there is overwhelming evidence linking him to this killing.”
The suspect’s wife was detained for questioning, but police said they were likely to release her after the investigation.
“She is only assisting us to see if we can get the suspect,” the officer said, “We are also talking to her to get to know more about their relationship and how the killing occurred.”
He confirmed the woman was unlikely to face any charges, but would appear as a witness in the murder once the prime suspect is arrested and taken to court.
So far, the officer said, the woman has told detectives investigating the incident that the man was stabbed after a confrontation with her husband in their house.
Last month, two cases of women killing their husbands over infidelity claims were reported in the same area.

Film Critic Robert Ebert died yesterday. He was "the guy" that got me into film criticism when I was 10. Robert was really honest and open. One of my favorite lines was when he said "I hated, hated, hated this movie!" In his memory, here the movie I hated the most! Jon and I saw this film a few hours after getting engaged. It was so awful. Fourteen years later, it is still talked about in our home. "That movie was bad. That movie was worse than "Autumn in New York!" Prayers for your soul Mr. E. Thanks for helping us all be more authentic!

>I mean, say what you want about his Scientology beliefs and >what not, but the fact that he does the stunts himself make >the movie that much more genuine. There are not that many >action stars that do the stunts themselves... > >Statham comes to mind, he does his own (or most of his own). > >I believe Stallone was doing his own stunts when he made the >first Expendables, dude was 65. > >Harrison Ford has always tried to do his own stunts, and he's >fucking 70. > >I think Paul Walker did most of his own stuntwork too, read >that somewhere in regards to the Fast and Furious movies.

There would hardly be a youngster in Pakistan these days who has not heard of the musical band Call. Much like most of the other bands, Call is also primarily known by the name and face of its leading vocalist Junaid Khan. Junaid's voice has not only mesmerized the audiences in Pakistan alone but it has also left the music lovers across the borders equally enthralled.
After contributing to the musical scene both as a pop artist and Bollywood playback singer, Junaid also tried his hand at acting and received good reviews for the roles he has played so far, although there have not been too many of them. His debut as an actor was in the drama serial 'Kabhi Na Kabhi', which aired from Hum TV and became quite popular among the TV viewers. The drama gave Junaid's fans a chance to see him on screen with a different persona than what he has as a singer.
Impressed by his performance in the play, he was signed up by renowned musician and TV drama director Jawad Bashir for his sitcom 'Dil Ki Lagi', which is being shown on ATV. Besides acting and music, Junaid can also be seen in a number of commercials that are on air these days.

Well, the strike ended and the kids went back to school. That early morning wake up was brutal.
In that first week, Jake made his 100 days of school project out of legos...
The kids had crazy hair day.... Although the picture doesn't show it very well!!!
And Jake and Luke decided to try out Tae kwon do. They were in complete heaven those first few classes, so we got them their uniforms and signed them up for the semester. Jake broke a board on his very first class :)
Kate sat and watched the first week. She wanted nothing to do with it. So, we'd sit there and make comments about how cute the boys were. Then suddenly one day she decided she was in. Are you serious?! All 3 of the kids in the same activity on the same days? This was heaven!!!!! She assured me she was serious, and she joined the class a week later. Here she is getting her first belt.

A man has been taken to hospital after a crash involving a bus in Royal Parade.
Witnesses say two men were trying to cross the busy city centre route when they were in collision with a bus just after 1pm today.
Reports say the man was knocked down, although he is not believed to have been seriously hurt in the accident near the Derry's Cross roundabout.
Traffic, including buses has been diverted.
Royal Parade is closed and traffic is queuing on Exeter Street and Bretonside.
Buses are being diverted along Notte Street.
A spokesman for South West Ambulance Trust said one man in his 20s was taken to Derriford Hospital with a suspected head injury.

Originally Posted by bmdbley'sBro
did you see a bmw or e30 doing it or just heard it?
because there was that newb on his bike acting the fool
? my bro was there from like 9:45'ish until 10:45'ish
That's what I was talking about. The guy nearly killed people there. Some guys told him how to finally do a peel and I was waiting for the bike to grip and get launched into the crowd. People were just eggin the guy on... so dumb >_<

Mommy Villainess Chapter 186
186 Keeper Of The Keepers
"TILLY, I think Lord Winter is going crazy from boredom."
Tilly laughed at what Luna said. "What is my son doing now?"
"I saw him practicing an apology speech," Luna said, then she sat on the sofa across her. "I think he wants to apologize to Solenn but his prides keeps him from doing so." She sighed and shook her head. "Lord Winter's pride is bigger than his little body."
She laughed again. "He's been locked up in the house for almost a week now. I told him he can only come out when he's ready to apologize to Solenn."
It was the witch's turn to laugh. "Ah, I see. No wonder the young lord looked like he wanted to punch himself while practicing his apology speech."
Right now, they were in her office in their house.
Their next meeting with Solaris and the Keepers would take place once Wong and Sentinel returned. They were free until then. But that didn't mean they had nothing else to do.
After all, she and Luna never stopped working since day one.
"How are you, Luna?" she asked while pouring tea in her teacup. "Have you retrieved new memories recently?"
Luna shook her head. "No matter how hard I try, I still can't remember where I hid the Holy Scepter in my previous life. Lord Solaris told me that I shouldn't be too hasty. He said I could lose my mind if I force myself to remember everything."
"You should listen to Solaris," she said, then she sipped tea before she continued. "We don't need the Holy Scepter for now so take it easy, Luna."
The witch sipped tea first before she talked. "I know that, Tilly. But I want to be of help in any way I can."
"Thank you, Luna," she said sincerely. "Your past self also did a good job. You sealed your memory of the Holy Scepter very well."
She let out a frustrated sigh. "I sealed it so well that even I can't crack it now."
"True," she said with a laugh. "But to be honest, if memories were easy to retrieve, we would never be in this situation. In fact, I heard from Solaris that humans are forbidden to remember their past lives. Only a handful like us are stubborn enough to break the law of nature."
The witch nodded in agreement. "That's why I'm very amazed by your idea, Tilly. Thanks to the videos that you recorded before we left the Royal Capital five years ago, it became easy for me to explain what was going on when you lost your memory. But the most useful video that we have was the video of your fight with the emperor. I'm glad the recorded video was clear."
Apparently, she put a hidden camera in herself when she fought Aku Moonchester.
When they played the video, they discovered a lot of important things because of the emperor's big mouth during the fight.
Also, she noticed several other stuff because she played the video every single day.
"Thanks to those videos, we were able to create a cohesive plan," Tilly said. "But the clues that Wong and Sentinel found about my brother's location is an unexpected variable. Solaris told me that Wong might push for Wixx's rescue first before I return to the empire."
The mention of her brother's name made Luna blush. But she immediately caught herself and became composed again. "Of course, it's very important for us to rescue the Red Phoenix. Still, I'm on your side, Tilly. If you descend back to earth with Lord Wixx, the emperor and the b*tchy princess will focus on your brother. If that happens, I doubt it if they'll even consider the deal that we plan to offer to them."
"I know, right?" she said while shaking her head. "But you know how stubborn Wong is. And the Keepers listen to him even Solaris. After all, he's the de facto leader."
"If the plan gets delayed, I bet Lord Winter will be disappointed again," Luna said worriedly. "The young lord is really looking forward to be reunited with his father."
"I also want him to reunite with his daddy the soonest. But I can't be selfish," Tilly said with a smile. "This is one of the burdens that I need to carry as the Supreme Fire Mage."
"MOMMY, when will we prepare to leave the island?"
Tilly felt her chest tightened because of Winter's question.
She just tucked him into bed and was about to leave his room when he asked her about their departure. For a few seconds, she just sat still on the edge of the bed while thinking of an excuse. But she realized that her son was smart so lying to him wouldn't work.
"Winter, our departure might get delayed," Tilly said to her son honestly. "Something came up."
"It's the Keepers, isn't it?" Winter asked with a frown. "I've always known that the Fire Archmage and the Keepers don't want you to leave the island, Mommy. They won't stop making excuses because they don't want to lose you again."
"Winter, don't say that," she scolded her son. "Wong and Sentinel found clues as to where your Uncle Wixx may have been locked up. They want to prioritize rescuing the Red Phoenix first before we descend back to the empire."
"But what if it takes years before you rescue Uncle Wixx?" he complained. "Can't you just send another group to save my uncle?"
"I already suggested that," she said. "But we haven't reached a conclusion because we're still waiting for Wong and Sentinel."
"Uncle Wong will definitely convince the Keepers to rescue Uncle Wixx first," he said with another frown. "Mommy, Uncle Wong hates us. He definitely doesn't want us to leave the island because he wants to torment us."
"Winter, I know that Wong is mean to us. But he's not petty," she said, then she changed the topic. To be honest, Wong was very hostile to her so she didn't have that much conviction to defend him from her son. "Don't be hasty, son. I know that you can't wait to reunite with your daddy. But we still have to be very careful."
Winter let out a frustrated sigh. "Mommy, for the past five years, another child has stayed with my dad and pretended to be me. What if Dad gets attached to Julian and he forgets about me?"
"How did you know that?"
He bit his lower lip while looking so guilty.
"It was Jameson, wasn't it?" she asked while shaking her head. "That big mouth"
Out of all the Keepers, Jameson was the closest to her son.
Knowing that Jameson was a simple-minded guy, she wouldn't be surprised if her son was able to manipulate the Keeper to tell him the information that he needed.
"Winter, you're so crafty," she complained. "I wonder where you got that from."
Her son smiled cheekily. "I got it from you, Mommy."
"I'll take that as a compliment," she said with a laugh. But she got serious right away. "Winter, we have a hunch that your father, just like me, has lost his memories. However, I still believe that he hasn't forgotten about us. That's why I know that when we see him again, he will come back to us."
"Yes, but I still don't like the fact that Julian is closer to my dad now."
Tilly felt a painful thump in her chest.
She remembered that in the video with her fight with Aku Moonchester, the emperor revealed that she had a second child with the Black Serpent.
After they watched the video, Luna confessed that she knew about the second child. According to the witch, her second son was Julian one of the young Fire Mages that they adopted as Kiho Nystrom's brothers.
Luna apologized to her and said that they didn't tell her about the second child in fear that she might lose her mind.
And it really happened.
"Mommy, are you okay?" Winter asked worriedly. "You suddenly fell quiet."
Now she was nervous.
To be honest, she hadn't told Winter about Julian yet because she thought he was too young to understand. But now that she knew how smart her son was, maybe it was time for him to know the truth.
I also don't want him to keep on getting jealous of his own brother.
"You don't have to be jealous of Julian," Tilly said, then she held his hands tight. "Winter, Julian is your real brother."
To say that Winter was shocked by her revelation would be an understatement.
All hell broke loose then.
WINTER screamed angrily in the void.
Right now, he was on the rooftop of the abandoned building that served as his little gang's "hide-out." Since it was far from the residential areas, he was free to scream at the top of his lungs even though it was already midnight.
The more he shouted, the wider the spread of his ice reached. So right now, the floor and the walls around him were already covered by his ice.
How come I have a brother?!
His mommy explained everything to him.
Apparently, Julian was the reincarnation of the second child of Soleil Rosenberg and Kalel Nystrom. Aunt Luna also said that Julian had the memories of his past life to confirm it.
No I hate it.
He also didn't know why an ungodly amount of rage rose up in his chest when he found out that Julian was his brother. He just knew that he couldn't accept it.
"He can't be my brother," Winter whispered to himself while panting. "My mommy didn't give birth to him in this lifetime." He clenched his teeth when he remembered something. "I heard that I wasn't born in the past. Isn't it unfair that Julian was born then when I wasn't? And now, he wants my parents' love and attention again?"
Once again, he screamed at the top of his lungs.
He froze when he heard the familiar cold voice. When he turned around, his thoughts were confirmed.
"Shut up and go home," Uncle Wong said in a menacing voice while his moss green eyes were glowing. In the dark, his dark green curly, short hair appeared black. Also, his all-black ensemble made him look more intimidating. "What are you doing here at this hour?"
He wouldn't lie Uncle Wong scared him.
But he was too angry right now to care.
"If you think I'm noisy, then leave," Winter snapped at the Keeper, his golden eyes glowing menacingly now.
"F*ck those golden eyes," Uncle Wong said, his hand moving as if he was reaching for his eyes. "They remind me so much of the Black Serpent that I want to gouge them out."
The Keeper wasn't giving an empty threat.
Uncle Wong released his bloodlust in the form of a very heavy presence that made him freeze from where he stood.
Then, his body started to shake uncontrollably from fear.
He wanted to at least close his eyes because he had a feeling that Uncle Wong would really gouge his golden orbs. But he couldn't even do that.
Uncle Wong is really the strongest Keeper even stronger than the Fire Archmage!
"If you touch my son, I'll burn you alive."
Winter was relieved to hear his mother's voice. But because of the heavy pressure coming from Uncle Wong's bloodlust, he couldn't even turn to her mommy.
But at least, Uncle Wong's hand stopped reaching for his eyes.
"I don't care if you disrespect me, Wong," his mother said in an eerily calm manner which was scarier than her screaming. "But if you lay a finger on Winter, I won't stay still."
That wasn't an empty threat.
This time, it was her mother who released her bloodlust. In just the blink of an eye, her mommy's aura overwhelmed the air around them. He could tell by the strange heat that was making him sweat now.
And I almost never sweat
Uncle Wong's bloodlust disappeared and now, he was free to move again.
When Winter turned to his mother who stood only a few meters away from them, he felt shivers down his spine.
His mommy's face looked so cold and her purple eyes were glowing menacingly.
Mommy looks very intimidating
Out of instinct, he took his gaze away from his mother. When he did, his eyes caught Uncle Wong. He then realized that he wasn't the only one affected by his mommy's bloodlust.
Uncle Wong is shaking uncontrollably.
Well, his mother's bloodlust was directed at Uncle Wong so it was an expected reaction.
But the defiance in the Keeper's face told him that his sheer stubbornness was the only reason why he remained standing.
"Greetings, Supreme," Uncle Wong greeted his mommy with a curt bow.
His mommy smirked, and then she took a step forward.
And that was all it took for Uncle Wong's knees to finally give in. Then, his head hanged low as he panted.
He was shocked to see the strongest Keeper kneel and bow before his mommy.
"I apologize, Supreme," Uncle Wong said while catching his breath. "I have no intention of hurting Lord Winter. I only wanted to scare the young lord so he would go home."
His mother's bloodlust suddenly disappeared.
"I see," his mommy said even though it was obvious by his tone that she didn't believe Uncle Wong's excuse. But it seemed like his mother decided to shrug it off. When she turned to him, he realized that his mommy ignored Uncle Wong's attempt to hurt him because she was worried of him. "Come here, my little cinnamon roll."
To be honest, Winter was still angry but he was too scared of her mother now to throw a tantrum. Before he knew it, he was already walking towards his mommy.
That was when he realized that his mother wasn't alone.
Uncle Roarke, Uncle Jameson, Aunt Kelsi, Uncle Maddox, and Uncle Braxton were around them
and each Keeper had their weapon pointed at Uncle Wong.
Ah, the other Keepers are here to keep mommy and I safe.
Winter realized that even though Uncle Wong was the leader of the Keepers, at the end of the day, his mommy was still their top priority. And he could feel that they were only "serving" him because they knew how much his mother loved him.
My mommy is really treasured by her Keepers.
PS: You may send gifts if you can. Thank you~
[NOTE: Please ADD my story in your LIBRARY so you can be notified when I post an update. Thank you! :\u003e]
Please go to to read the latest chapters for free

Born: 29 May, 1948, in Stornoway. Died: 10 September, 2015, in Stornoway, aged 67.
The Charles Macleod butcher’s shop in Stornoway is known far beyond the shores of the island of Lewis on account of the prize-winning reputation of the black pudding made there but the man behind the shop name, Charles Macleod, who died last week, was always known to his fellow islanders as Charlie Barley.
As is the way on Lewis, Barley was a byname initially given to his father to help differentiate this family from the many other members of the Macleod clan on the island. In fact, Charlie was called Charlie Barley Junior until his father died and his own offspring now carry the Barley name.
His father, who was a first-class livestock farmer, had started the butcher’s shop on his return from the war in the 1940s as a diversification from the Crobeag family farm, thus creating what nowadays would be called a farm shop.
Charlie attended school in Stornoway and then went on to Balmacara Agricultural School for a year. His time at the latter establishment should have been longer but with the determination that was to mark his life, Charlie announced he was not going back. Instead, he was going to work in the butcher’s shop.
“No, you are not,” was the reputed response from his father. A threat by Charlie that he would go and work as a delivery boy for the Liptons store in the town then convinced his father that it would be better to let the young man have his way.
As it turned out, his involvement in the business would not have been delayed for long as his father died prematurely, leaving Charlie and his brother Iain to run the business, even though both were still in their teens.
A great deal of hard physical work carried out for long hours followed as the young men learned the ropes of the business. Not only did they have to look after the butcher’s shop but the farm also made demands on Charlie’s time.
Not that he seemed to mind the long hours as it was soon evident he was a workaholic. Although preferring to start work in the butchery side of the business, his first love was the farm.
From the age of 14 when his father sent him to buy some sheep from a neighbour, he took a strong interest in livestock. This developed and he soon became well known both for producing top quality cattle and sheep with many victories at the island agricultural shows. He also gained a reputation wider afield as a top judge both of live animals and of carcasses. On various occasions, he would place the livestock at prestigious competitions such as the Christmas Classic at Thainstone.
For a long time, it was a family joke that most holidays coincided with major events like the Highland or Black Isle shows where he could observe the stock and enjoy the craic around the judging rings.
His devotion to livestock reached a new peak when he spent his honeymoon with Julia at the Perth bull sales.
Later on in married life, they travelled to Corfu where they came across a couple who were running a water-skiing business. Charlie, who had always been a bit of an adrenalin junkie, rekindled old passions as he returned to a sport he had enjoyed earlier in life. Such was his love and devotion to this sport that he was still mono-skiing aged 62 with his body already partially ravaged by early-onset Parkinson’s disease.
As a young man, he indulged in a range of exotic sports. He was one of the first to take up scuba diving; a sport very much still in its infancy in the Western Isles in the 1960s. He sold a cow in order to finance the necessary wet suit and in another deal with the barter undisclosed he bought a compressor for the air bottles needed for diving.
All this with no formal training in the sport marked him out as someone who, when he set his eye on doing something, it was done.
The scuba diving then led him into free-fall parachuting, when the famed Red Devils team were temporarily stationed on Lewis. They wanted to go scuba diving and Charlie had the compressor they needed. Soon he was off training with his new-found friends as they taught him the rudiments and joys of throwing oneself out of aeroplanes.
His work at both the butcher’s business and on the farm ensured he was physically strong and this was used to good effect in the winter months when judo took precedence in his sporting life. It was in this sport and actually on a judo mat that he first met Julia, a local Stornoway girl.
His active life was curtailed after it was confirmed in 1999 that he was suffering from Parkinson’s disease but, as far as possible, he did not let it interfere with what he wanted to do.
He did withdraw from the frontline in the butcher’s shop where two of his three daughters and a niece took over but only after he and his brother had transformed it into a busy store where customers were told the provenance of the meat they were buying.
He was also involved in the battle to get recognition for Stornoway black pudding, which had for years been a staple food in the crofting community. Lewis men and women who had left the island would send back requests to Charles Macleod and other butchers on the island for what has been described as the “best pudding in the United Kingdom”, with its unique taste and texture reminding them of their homeland.
The battle was taken over to Brussels, where the politicians argued that the unique nature of the Stornoway black pudding had to be protected in a similar manner to such well-known products as Arbroath Smokies and Orkney cheese.
The decision was made in 2013 to give it Protected Geographical Indication status. This clumsy description means that the only location where the product can be made is on the island itself. This appellation and the award of the business being awarded Butcher’s Shop of the Year in 2013 brought the reward for the decades during which Charlie and his staff had transformed the business.
Sadly, by this time the tentacles of Parkinsons were taking over his body and he was confined to an electric wheel chair. Confined is the wrong word as, in his own determined way, he used this mode of transport to take him to local shows across the island.
One location he did not reach, and it was one he would have liked to travel to, was Patagonia. This remote country in the southern tip of South America had attracted Highlanders and Islanders a century ago when the Spanish landowners employed them as expert shepherds and stockmen.
Among the diaspora was Charlie’s grandfather, who worked for the Menendez family. He was so highly thought of that the family asked the Scotsman to give his son the Spanish name when he was born. Charlie’s father was duly christened Charles Menendez Macleod but, sadly, Charlie never managed to travel to see the wide-open prairies where his grandfather had worked.
With his increasingly frail body, his own farming came to a heart-breaking halt in 2012 with the sale of Crobeag, the family farm. In reality, he never really stopped farming as he would always talk about what needed to be done. Such was his love of the industry he was reputed to have bought some lambs after the farm had gone, thus requiring the auction company to instruct its auctioneers not to accept bids from Charlie Barley in future.
As a beloved son of the island and one who relished island life, there was a big turnout at his funeral held on Monday where the comment was made: “Charlie would have loved this.”
He is survived by his widow, Julia, his three daughters, Lorna, Shona and Ria, and their families, including two grandsons Charlie and Ronnie, and his granddaughter Eva, who only met her grandfather courtesy of being born seven weeks early.

My husband and I visited this restaurant on a wet evening in January. Getting there was half of the adventure...... should defo have gone in wellies though as the dark alleyways were mud baths! The restaurant itself was amazing..... we weren't entirely sure what to expect, nor whether or not alcohol would be served. Gentle arabic music was wafting around and a fabulous open fire sat in the corner of the room, embers glowing brightly. All of the tables were drenched in rose petals. Staff were lovely and spoke perfect English. After an aperitif we were given the choice of wines (all included in the price) and then the food arrived. A have to say that although very nice there was far too much of it and the chicken tagine was far too sweet. It is certainly an experience not to be missed though but just wished the food could have been better! Also there was no indication of price at the beginning of the meal - it was rather expensive!

I know it's awful but I dont like my step daughter.(11 Posts)
I'm looking for some genuine advice, I know it's an awful way to feel and I feel terrible about it every day but I just can not help it, I do not like her.
She was only 1 when I met her dad and we got on great. Her dad and I moved in together very quickly and I loved the weekends that we had her staying. I longed for a child of my own to complete our family but it wasn't happening at the time. Shortly after her 2nd birthday her Mum stopped us from seeing her for reasons down to pure jealousy. We fought and fought but had no outcome.
Nearly 2 years ago I finally gave birth to our first child together and a moth or so later suddenly my partners ex was in contact. She thought it was time we got to see her again. I knew she was only doing this because she didn't want us to forget about my step daughter but we were over the moon. I really wanted my child growning up knowing her sister. The first few months were brilliant. We got on great and she'd come to stay whenever we could have her. She asked if it was okay to call me mummy too and things were great until a few months in when her personality seemed to change. She started to become really childish again. She wouldn't do as she was asked and she screamed and cried at everything. She would snatch toys from my daughter who would only have been 6-7 months at the time. She just became really irritating. From that moment on things just went totally down hill until it got to the point I realised I dislike her.
Now she doesn't really do anything in particular to annoy me. She has calmed down a lot and she knows not to act up in our house like she does for her mum but I can't shake the dislike I have for her. We only have her every 2nd weekend but I dread it. I hate it when she's here. I'm not myself. Everything she does annoys me and I can't show any interest in things she likes. I've tried my hardest to get over it. I'm a grown woman, recently now a mother of 2 and she is only 7. I know it's cruel and I'm a horrible step mum and all the rest of it but I don't know what to do. I really really do want to like her but I just can't. Please any advice would be appreciated.
No one can like everyone and not all children are nice for first things first stop beating yourself up for feeling like this.
Secondly take a huge step back and be truly honest with yourself about why you feel like this. Is it her or is it the fact her behaviour isn't being dealt with by her dad and are you cross with the wrong person?
I felt the same way about my dss in the beginning until some very helpful people on here made me look at exactly what I didn't like and actually it was my dp and his Disney parenting I was pisses off at.
Hope that helps and good luck
I think you have to fake it til you make it!: I get where you're coming from but you need to treat them all the same when they're together and she is your children's sister. All children ate annoying at times, it's just easier if they are yours!
I would imagine the regression in jer behaviour was as a result of jealousy of your child, and the fact that they have dad all the time and she doesn't.
Does her dad spend plenty of time one on one with her? Do you do anything with her, occasional shopping trip, dinner together??
If she feels secure in her relationships with her dad and with you, her behaviour will settle.
I think that was part of the reason at the start. I was always the one disciplining her. I think after years of not seeing her he didn't want to make her dislike him so it was easy to let me do it but we discussed that long ago and it's not an issue any more. None of us ever really get one on one time with each other. My partner only gets Saturday Sunday off if he's lucky and he works late so my 2 are usually ready for bed when he gets home so the 2 days he does have off is full family time all together. It makes me feel worse because my parter has a very odd sense of humour. He's very sarcastic, not in a mean way though, but he's like that with everyone. But I'm afraid that she might see that as both of us being mean to her as I'm sure she will have picked up on the fact that I'm not the same as I used to be with her. I've mentioned this to my partner but he just can't help it. It's just his personality. But I feel she must dread coming to us as much as I dread her coming. She went through a few months of seeming like she didn't like her dad. She cried every time she had to come to us and she was really off with him but we spoke to her mum about it and she said she knows that she gets away with anything at her mums and we just won't allow it in our house so she didn't want to come because of our rules.
Oh that is so sad and difficult! I suspect Whatthe is correct, the poor behaviour is probably down to jealousy and insecurity and I can imagine how hard that is for her to handle! But I also understand how very stressful it all is for you too...and even though she has improved you are still finding it difficult to like her!
I think the idea of giving her one on one special time with her DF is a good one, but I think, in your place I'd be worried about disengaging with her. She obviously was close to you before your babies were born, so if you back off now, she may see that as proof that her S-Siblings come first...and yes of course for you they do. But for their father, all the DC should be equal, and given the same amount of attention when they're all together!
Perhaps the 'fake it till you make it' suggestion would help, maybe if you smile, grit your teeth, and think, it's only every other week....her behaviour may continue to improve, and your feelings for her may soften! One thing for sure....there's no way around it!
I should also mention that I recently discussed with my partner that I was finding it difficult to bond with her, but I don't quite think he understood how I felt as he said he feels similarly. He said that losing out on so many years of her life has made it difficult to reconnect. He feels that although he loves her as much as our other children and would do anything for her, he doesn't have the same connection, which makes me feel more awful as I feel I may be to blame. I can't help think that the way I am around her has somehow influenced the way he feels towards her.
I don't think you should worry so much about influencing his thinking. He says he loves her and would do anything for her, but the long time apart is bound to be hard for them both, it's not surprising that reconnecting is difficult!
Can you step back just a little, not disengage, but let him find his way with his DD again? Maybe when she has settled properly into her relationship with her dad and siblings you and she can find a way to move forward again?
I'm in a very similar position although we have never lost contact with sdd. We've been together since she was 1, she's 7 in a couple of months. I already had 2 children and have now had 2 more with dh.
Sdd and I used to get on great but, although contact has never been stopped, it has been threatened to be stopped so dh and his mum will bend over backwards to stop sdd (or her mother) from being upset. I used to say I'd be treated better being dh's ex then being his wife! The ex has also made no secret of her hatred for me and that has had a massive impact on my relationship with sdd.
As she's getting older I realise I just really don't like her. Everything she does irritates and annoys me but I also know it's dh's Disney parenting that is irritating and annoying. But don't feel bad or guilty about it. Not everyone likes everyone in this world. Sometimes we have to work with people we don't get along with and even be related to people we don't get along with. Being a step-parent is no different and I really second (or third) the advice of fake it till you make it! It's only 4 days a month. We can drink our way through it
You really have only two choices, trying to understand why you don't like her, be it to go to see a counsellor if that can help, or, let her enjoy her visit with her dad and just stay away. After all, you say she is not a bad kid, so she deserves to look forward to coming to see her dad and half siblings eow-e.
That sounds very difficult. However, the fact that you can own your feelings rather than blame the child is very positive. You do however, need to try to hide your feelings from her.
My suggestions would be some sort of therapy for you so you feel supported, and some sort of strategy to help you bond with her. I'm not in UK but I went to a specialist parenting therapist for advice on helping my children bond with each other and it was remarkably helpful, the children loved doing the games and quizzes, and were very keen to try the strategies.
If your own children are very young then I imagine it must be dofficult to find time for one-to-one, but honestly, even sitting down to do a puzzle together (he and her dad, you and her) can be very powerful for bonding. Also maybe help her feel wanted by assigning her special tasks as the older sister whether it's feeding a baby (assuming they are in highchair) or asking her to get baby's clothes ready...I don't know, but something that allows her to feel included, respected and needed.
The thing is, you are going to be related forever and the effort you and her dad put in now will be worth it. The stronger your relationships, the less heartache in the future - for all of you.
Join the discussion
Registering is free, easy, and means you can join in the discussion, get discounts, win prizes and lots more.Register now
Already registered with Mumsnet? Log in to leave your comment or alternatively, sign in with Facebook or Google.
Please login first.

I have a crush when i was just 1rst yr high school student. its very long time but i still cant forget it, i never had a good conversation with him or be friends with him, because i was scared of getting bullied. A lot of girls had a crush on him and i saw them flirt with him like giving love letters or stuffs or even worse, confessing in front of him and in front of everyone. even tho i was jealous of them.. i never did the same thing. i was the most quiet student of our class and my desk was on the fift row before the last row which is him sitting behind my back, my heart almost drop out of its place because of joy whenever i hear him talking or laughing. he is really good looking and tall and white.. but yeah as always i never had the courage to tell him how i feel. and then one rainy day i was on my way home riding on a cab and sitting next to the window, the cab needed to past by our village gate so while we are slowing down i saw him standing next to the gate. he saw me and i know i was in shock to saw him there soaking wet and i never saw him looking so sad. he looked at me like he wanted something.. i dont know if he was crying because he was soaking wet from head to foot and even tho i wanted to get out of the cab and give him my umbrella i cowardly just sat there on shock. the next day was quite rainy again and i was expecting him to be there after school so i can let him borrow my umbrella and finally talk to him, so i stayed at our classroom while everyone is getting out, and like i always did i didn't get up on my desk until there's no one in the room. And when i finally decided to get up and pack my things i heard someone breath so loud and get up from a chair, and the sound was coming from behind me were he sat.. my heart almost drop again because of shock, so i hurried to get out of there but while i almost ran out of his sight, he laugh and that make me stop for a sec on the door and when i look at him he smiled and showed me his umbrella.. i was really embarrassed and i dont even know why.. i dont know if he knows my plan on letting him borrow my umbrella because he showed me he bring one that time, i was really confuse so i decided to go home straight, i let him leave the classroom first because of the awkwardness before i go after him.
after of what has awkwardly happen that day.. he started to initiate even a small talk to me like borrowing something or saying hi.. but all i did was look at him and nod.. and then one day his friends kept on asking me if i like him and teased me, i dont know why they started teasing me about him because no one knows that i like him and i never told to someone even on my only friend that time..and i never said yes but they told him and in front of everybody that i was having a crush on him.. and another thing that confused me and leave me curious till this day was his one friend had told me that my crush likes me back.. i never believe his friend.. until our 1rst yr end.. i never told him that i like him a lot.. the last day of our school was just cleaning up and giving gifts to friends.. but im just there alone at the room and being there just for the attendance.. i tried to not like him again and ignore him till i go home and the last day as 1rst yr hs end. but before i go home he came to me and look at me like he wanted to tell something, we are at the front door of the classroom and since i was the last person who leaves the classroom my adviser told me to lock it before i go home.. i did lock it and when i turn around i saw him and almost drop my heart again but this time not because i like him, but because im shy. so yeah he look at me and he tried to spoke a word but even before he spoke, someone interrupted him one of his friends shouted at him on a distance and told him to go home with them... so he just look at me and smile for a bit then leave, it was weird but i ignore it and go home.
that was the last day he tried to spoke to me.. we never been classmates again but i always saw him at school or on our village since i found out he lives there too near us.. and he never look at me again as if he noticed me or know me.. but before i graduated from that school.. there was an event which is role playing.. i go there because we needed to, even tho i dont like being on a crowded place were there is too many people.. after that show i was trying to get outa there but its too crowded.. until i felt someone pushed me into someone too.. and it was him this time we were so closed and theres are people that makes noise near us when we ended up looking at each other.. i think it was his friends.. i heard them saying that "that was the girl! woohooo!",... i was really annoyed and confused again but that time i realize that my feelings for him was the same as before.. even tho i never spoke back to him i felt that my heart seems to explode because of joy... and as always i am coward so i did my best to get out of there and run...and when im finally was out of that place i decided to take a peek on the scene were i leave him behind.. and saw him laughing and being pushed by his friends.. so yeah that was the last time..
i am 18 now and i never saw him since the hs graduation day.. and
i hope he is okay.
never got a boyfriend until now and im not even planning to meet someone.. i just want to tell my story being coward to the person i like. because i want to change myself this time, that if i met someone and fell for that person i wanna tell how i really feel.
being introvert isn't easy right? so lets just laugh on many regrets if u are just like me too.. even tho it hurts me a little but i know it was a good memories.
im not really good on constructing my grammar so pardon if theres something on the story you might not understand clearly. im really sorry but thats my best..
i am asian btw.. and i hope my story inspired you to tell how you really felt about the person you like, even tho its really hard i know, but i want you to at least try your best before it was too late :)..
have a blessed day! and good luck <3.

This past Thursday saw St. Benard School host an kindergarten information session. It was a last minute booking for me, but luckily I was able to accept it. I didn't know much going in but once I got there, I soon realized there was going to be approximately 400 people there. My job for the next hour was to simply capture candids of the attendees, the booths and the speakers. It was right up my alley and my favourite type of photography.
I love photographing people, especially children. I think I came away with some great photos, and also succeeded in representing the overall feel of the event. It was nice to see so much excitement from the kids as well as the parents. They got to meet some of their future teachers too. All in all, the hour went by fast but a lot happened and I was glad to be a part of it.

Skip to main content
You are not a member of this wiki.
Pages and Files
Past Reunion Information and Pictures
1st MI Battalion Memorial section
Overview and History
Stateside before Vietnam
Headquarters and Headquarters Company
45th MI Detachment
Map of Unit Locations in Vietnam
Imagery Interpretation (II) section
Reproduction (Repro) section
Delivery Platoon (Good Guys)
1st MI Battalion Stateside before Vietnam
Ist MI Battalion Det D Stateside before Vietnam
By Philip Catania
I entered the Army on Oct. 31, 1963 and took basic at Fort Polk, La. After basic training I was sent to the Photo Section at the 92nd Military Intelligence Group in Washington D.C. working out of the Pentagon. I was not sent to the Army Photo School for training because as a civilian I was doing photographic work. I lived in Arlington, Virginia in a 4-bedroom apartment with three other guys. Everything was civilian status, no Army mess and no uniforms, as we wore suits to work. We had security agents that helped guard the President. I worked in the Photo Lab and with others, took pictures of the President, in and out of the White House, and of any special event that was going on like in Arlington Cemetery, the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier and John F. Kennedy’s gravesite. We also did work for the Provost Marshall. We were called out all hours of the day and night when anything happened to a military person. We took pictures of killings, accidents and anything that went wrong with Military Personnel. I thought I had it good so I asked to go over seas and serve in an Embassy. Orders came down telling me that I was going to 1st Military Intelligence Battalion ARS ( MIBARS ) at Ft. Bragg and back in uniform.
Enough of Washington D.C. Following is what I can remember happened, to the best of my knowledge, when I was in MIBARS Detachment D state side, before MIBARS was sent to Vietnam.
In March of 1964 I arrived at Ft. Bragg, back in military uniform, Army mess and all the goodies that go with the 1st Military Intelligence Battalion ARS ( MIBARS ). After arriving at Battalion Headquarters and reporting for duty, I was given my Specialist Rank ( SPC ) SP4, which made me feel good. I was assigned to Detachment D.
It was about two weeks or so later when we got a call from the Post Photographer that they needed all available photographers to report to Normandy and Sicily drop zone at Ft. Bragg, to take pictures of an accident that had happened. When we got there, there were bodies all over the place. I do not remember if the 82nd Airborne Division was jumping out of C124 or C130 Globe Masters. They said that the plane hit an air pocket, I do not think that there is such a thing as an air pocket, but what happened was they lost altitude and the jumpers got caught in the plane’s propeller. It was a mess, I mean a grand mess. As I was taking the pictures I was vomiting and I was not the only one. When I was in Washington, I thought I had seen everything, but this was something else. Also, what made it worse was that the plane crashed and caught fire with more lives lost. I do not think anyone in the plane made it out alive. It took a while to get over what we were doing, but I never forgot what happened. Later in 1977 when I came to work for the United States Department of Agriculture / National Finance Center, I got to know a co-worker by the name of Perry Tillman. One day I started to talk about what happened that awful day at Ft. Bragg with the jump of the 82nd Airborne Division. Perry remembered that when he was in Jump School at Ft. Benning, Georgia, he heard about what had happened at Ft. Bragg.
I was in charge of a 2½-ton water truck, which had a 1,000 gallon tank. In the motor pool we had to keep the inside of the stainless steel tank clean. One side held 400 gallons and the other side 600 gallons. I would get inside without boots on so I would not scratch the inside. At that time I weighed 118 lbs. One time I was cleaning up and my co-driver and others closed the hatch to the water truck. Do you remember the old time trains how they filled them at the water tower? Well, we had a water tower like that and they started to fill the tank with water, they filled it half way full. Remember I was inside and it was dark and I couldn’t see anything. (I remember the first time I went driving with the truck, with the tanks half filled and it felt like you were going from one side of the road to the other side, so most of the time we kept it either empty or full.) They took me down Bragg Blvd doing the speed limit and faster when they could. Now, all this time I’m inside the half filled tank, could not see and was being knocked from side to side, bouncing off the walls of the tank and did not know how long they were going to drive me around. I was scared, it was dark in there and I could not see what was happening, but I felt it. Finally, they took me back to the Motor Pool. I wanted to ---- them! The next day was the worst, I was still mad, hurting and sore. I made sure the next time I had to clean the inside of the tanks no one was around. It was an experience that I did not want to go through again.
I also remember another time that I was driving on Bragg Blvd. just to run the water truck for awhile. When I came to an intersection, a ¾ ton truck ran the stop sign and hit me right in the side of the truck. The 1,000 gallon tank went flying off the truck. My co-driver and I got out and looked around and saw the damage that was done. We were OK, but I sat on the running board worried, thinking it was my fault, and also thinking that I was not ever going to get out of the Army. The Military Police ( MP ) came and after they looked over what happened and determined that it was the driver of the ¾ ton truck that was in the wrong, this made me feel real good. The water truck was fixed in town and later, I found out that the guy that hit me had to pay something like around $4,000, I was sure glad it was he and not I.
Battalion was looking for a Guide Arm Bearer, so I went to try out and luckily I was picked. During a parade I had to march in back of the Battalion Commander and when he gave a special command, which I forget now, I would raise the guide arm up to let the other Officers and Troops know a Command was coming. After the command was given, I would lower the guide arm. You do this by placing your thumb on the seam on the side of your uniform and follow the seam down, lowering the guide arm. Well, I did just that and the bottom of the staff went in my pocket and would not go down anymore. I felt like a fool in a big way and the look that I got from the Battalion Commander at the time, and the talking to later, would not be what I would call fun. I was told to take one set of Khakis, because it was summer at that time, and have them tailored. I was instructed to have the pocket sewn closed so it would not happen again. After I had the uniform tailored I had no more problems with the bottom of the staff going in my pocket again. It made the Commander very happy. I wore a chrome like helmet with a 3rd Army seal on one side and on the other side was the MIBARS crest. I also wore an infantry blue neck scarf and a blue pistol belt with a lot of shiny brass on it. It was hell to clean, trying to keep the cleaner off the blue web of the belt. Also, spit-shined boots, which I had to hide in my wall locker because if I left them out they looked like holy hell when the guys got through with them. One thing I can say, when it came time for a parade or ceremony they would help me dress. I would stand on my footlocker and put on my tailored pants and they would help me put on my boots and blouse the bottom of my pants in the boots. Let me say this, after I was dressed I looked good, damn good. At that time I weighed only 120 pounds.
You could not leave your uniform out over night, because when you woke up to get dressed, and your fatigues are sewn on both ends, it’s kind of hard to put your hand or foot through. During the night someone took the time to hand sew them closed. Also, if you tried to get up for Reveille in the morning and you couldn’t move, they had you pistol belted in your bunk and you could not make formation. Other times it was fun trying to find your footlocker!
We had one guy that hated the song Under The Boardwalk because it reminded him of his high school sweetheart that he broke up with. So, when we went to the cafeteria, PX, barracks or where ever we had the chance, we would play that song for him. It would make him upset and mad, but you know the best part was after he left the Army, he married her and they are still together today. Nice.
Another thing that happened was if you came in late any night you may not have a bed ( bunk ) because sometimes it was on the roof or elsewhere. Our section chief came in late almost every night, so one night we took his bunk and placed it outside in back of all the bushes and laid down newspaper and a bowl of water. For that little prank we had to dye the floor red. If any of you can remember, the dye was in powder form and you had to mix it with water and with a rag rubbed it into the concrete. The only thing we wore was our BVDs and a T-shirt, which turned red from the dye and we had to throw them away. We wore rubber gloves to keep our hands from turning red. That would have taken a long time to clear up.
Our barracks were old Army, where you had 7 to 8 bunks on one side and the same amount on the other side, there was no central air or heat, but we had windows. We had one guy who pulled Kitchen Police ( KP ) and when finished, came to the barracks, put his civilian clothes on and went into town. He never took a shower. We would place a bar of soap and a face rag on his bunk, but this did not move him to shower. After a while we could not take his smell anymore so we went to the supply room and got GI soap, which contained lye, a hard bristle brush, rubber gloves, our gas masks and a rubber suit. He came in one afternoon and we got him. We took all of his clothes off, there were about 5 or 6 of us who threw him in the shower and started to give him the best cleaning he ever had. With the hard bristle brush and the lye soap he was bleeding and burning. Later he reported to Sick Call and they sent him to the Hospital. When asked what happened, he told them that he fell down the stairs. They told him that from the way he looked, with scratches and cuts all over his body, it did not look like he fell down the stairs. But that’s what he told them at the Hospital and they did not keep him, so he returned to the barracks. After that we had no problems with him taking showers every day and sometimes twice a day.
Our mechanic always slept soundly, so one night when again our section chief came in late, we picked up the mechanic’s bunk and placed it right by the section chief’s bunk. In the morning both of them were hugging each other. We caught hell for that too. Once again with the mechanic sleeping soundly we took our pistol belts and tied him into his bunk and before daybreak carried him to the 82nd Airborne Division Parade Field Reviewing Stand and left him there. He didn’t get in any trouble, but Battalion caught hell from XVII Airborne Corps Artillery. We were under them and we were one of the very few leg units Ft. Bragg had which were not Airborne and at times they harassed us because we were not Airborne.
On the weekend, sometimes two of us would rent a car and we would drive to Raleigh Durham, North Carolina and go to the college campus. We would walk around and see if we could pick-up some dates and go to a movie, or for drinks or whatever. Sometimes we would get a date and other times no dates, even if we did not score it was a nice ride and a chance to get away, just something to do. We did not do this too often, but it was a lot of fun and we had a good time.
During the summer when we could, about four of us would take off early on a Friday from our duty station and someone would cover for us. We would take our sleeping bag and tent half and head down to Myrtle Beach in South Carolina. We would sleep on the beach and go swimming and try to pick-up some girls and have a good time. When it came time to eat, to save some money we would go to Myrtle Beach Air Force Base to eat and also they had a place where visitors of the military could clean up. Also, we bought what we needed there at the PX. Sunday, midday, we would leave and head back to Ft. Bragg.
Do you remember that they would tell you not to volunteer for anything? Well I did. I volunteered for fireman duty. This would free you from KP and any other work duty in the Detachment and Battalion. Also, you worked 24 hours on and 48 hours off which was good. They also had more than one fireman to do this job. This was in the wintertime, we had five coal burning stoves. One coal stove was in Battalion and you had to keep it warm like the others. Well, the first time doing this I fell asleep and the OD ( Officer of the Day ) was freezing that night. I was given a very strong talking to and told if it happened again I could get a Summary Court Marshal, which thankfully did not happen. I do not remember the Officer’s name but for some reason or other a couple weeks later I was on again with the same OD. He told me that he wanted to stay warm this time or I would be in more trouble than before. I told him that he was going to be warm and warm he was. He had to open the window and slept without any covers. What you had to do was push the old coal to the back and put the new coal in front of the old. I stayed there all night after I did the other stoves and kept adding new coal. The next day post engineers had to come out and replace the old grill with new ones because I melted them with all of the new coal I kept putting on. After that I had no problems with him.
Every so often we had to pull KP, which was Kitchen Police we would tie a towel at the foot of your bunk, and someone who wake you up in the morning ( real early ). Well this one time I got there early for KP and you can pick the job you wanted, so I picked DRO, which was Dinning Room Orderly. You and some one else would clean the tables off, check the milk machine dispensers, clean the floors and most of all service the Officers their food, drinks and what ever else they wanted from the food line. The worst job of all as for as I was concern was the Pot and Pan man and the Cooks Loved to dirty the Pots and Pans it was not a fun job cleaning and keeping up with them. As you were cleaning them out you would get wet from the water going all over, once again it was not fun it was a mess. Well, on this day when I wait for KP they had a 20 or 30 gallon pot filled with water and white beans soaking in it over night and they also had a little extra in the Pot, Roaches and I do not mean a few, I mean the whole family plus some. So, I wait to the Mess Sergeant and told him about the Roaches in the pot with the beans so, I asked him if he wanted me to get someone to help pick-up the pot and throw everything away ( you see, I was only 118 lbs. and looked like bones covered with skin ) and with a few chosen words he told no and plus more. He told me to get a Large Mesh Strainer and remove all the Roaches, I asked him if he was kidding me and he told me no once again with his famous word. So, I got the strainer and started to remove them, you see the Army uses white beans to make Bake Beans, with some ingredients like ketchup, pork, onions, molasses and etc. and bake it in the oven. Well, when it became time for Lunch I was in the servicing line and others on KP knew what happen. So, as we were servicing everyone we were trying to tell them what happen, knowing I took all the Roaches out of the pot, I would not eat it and as we were telling them what happen they did not care they wanted more, so, we gave it to them Bon Appetit. It was some time later I pulled KP again and the Cooks were cooking Steak on the grill for the evening meal and we were cleaning the floor with lemon juice and GI Soap to get the grease off the floor ( the soap has Lye in it ) and two or three of the steaks hit the floor right where we were cleaning. The cook picked-up the steaks and we thought he was going to throw them away he did right back up on the grill. Well, this time I did not eat Steak and others pulling KP did not also, but trying to tell others who came in to eat was waste of time. A lot of times, I stop and think, when I go into a Restaurant to eat ( even a good one ) I wonder if the same thing happens in the Kitchen. I bet it does, and I do not what to know are keeping thinking about it because My Wife and I eat out a lot. S C A R Y
One of things we had to do was Guard Duty. We had 5 or 6 buildings we had to check through the night and we drove around checking them. There were two of us and we had .45 cal. handguns with 5 rounds of ammunition on our pistol belt, not in the gun, always on the pistol belt, unless we needed them, which we never did. One of the buildings we checked more often than any other was where we had important photos of all over the world. This building had a big sign over the front door reading 1st. Military Intelligence Battalion ARS and under it read We Map the World. The Military Police did not care for us too much because we carried a handgun and ammunition with us when we were on Guard Duty.
We also did Guard Duty during the day for the Imagery Interpreters ( II ) when they had training classes. We had two people from the Photo Section walking Guard Duty, one in front of the building and one in the back to make sure no one entered the building. We also had to challenge anyone who wanted to enter even if they had the need to know and the clearance. If their name was not on our list we were not going to let them in. Also, we were told if anyone tried to break in or force their way past us we had orders to shoot, which never happened. When we found out that MIBARS was going to Vietnam they had more training classes for the Imagery Interpreters. When we were guarding the classes we did not know what was going on. We figured that they were being shown aerial photos of Vietnam, which we did not make the prints of.
The Air Force would fly sorties, taking photos and then land at Pope Air Force Base. There they were met by two MP’s. Two Air Police ( AP ) would deliver the film to us. Our Photo Lab was an 18-wheeler tractor trailer. We had deep processing tanks for processing the film. We processed the film first, then changed the chemicals for paper processing and printed copies of the photos from the sorties, which we then gave to our Image Interpreters. We did our training when the Air Force would fly a sortie needed by Image Interpreters for their training. When we went on war games we would place our civilian clothes in the deep processing tanks. The 18-wheeler tractor trailer also had room for four bunks to sleep if needed.
After emailing Larry Letzer recently, he reminded me that our photo lab van was called the ES-22. Larry also said the photo lab van was always breaking down and we spent more time on maintenance than actually processing images, but it was fun. I remember one time we had training and it was to see how long we could be under combat conditions. I think we stayed awake something like 72 hours without sleep. I think at some point we were doing some things wrong. When we did go to sleep, I remember it was for two days. When I did wake up it felt like a big Mack truck had run into me.
During the night at Ft. Bragg we were in the photo lab van running test copies of aeriel photos that Image Interpreters were to use for training and which also gave us training, too. The 82nd Airborne Division Artillery Field was not too far from us but it seemed like they were just outside when they fired those 8-Inch Howitzers off. Those old windows used to rattle and shake which seemed like they were going to blow out of their frames.
It was in January 1965 that we went on a war game called Polar Strike. We left on a C130 Globe Master from Ft. Bragg out of Pope Air Force Base and we flew to Tinker Air Force Base in Oklahoma City, with a short lay over for fuel or whatever. Then we were off to McChord Air Force Base in Tacoma, WA. outside of Seattle, to get our arctic gear for Alaska. Then we were on our way to Elmendorf Air Force Base in Anchorage, Alaska where we stayed and gave intelligence coverage to friendly and enemy forces for the war game. When we went into Anchorage we found the cost of everything was high. The first night in Anchorage we went to a club that was something like the Playboy Club. I cannot remember what a beer cost, but I do remember not staying there long. It was on 5th Ave. and you could see where buildings shook from the big earthquake. We went to a club called the High Hat and after a while the manager threw us out because we were drinking beer he did not sell. It was beer that we had gotten at the PX, which was cheaper than in town. We had the beer cans in the snow bank on the sidewalk. We were wearing long jackets and we would go outside to get our beer and bring it back inside. If I remember correctly, it would get day light at 10 hundred hours and get dark around 13 hundred hours. The Air Force set us up in an airplane hanger that was not being used at that time and we processed the aerial photos in our ES-22 van.
This is what happens when you and others want to have fun and it could have really turned out real bad, which Thank God it did not! At Elmendorf Air Force Base in Anchorage, if you would look up towards the mountain you could see a Flashing Light or something. We knew it was a Missile Base from talking to some of the Airman and now I can remember that you really had to have the need to know what was there to get in or anywhere near. We had a lot of Hades in us, so we got a jeep and we drove to the base of the mountain and started to drive up. I remember we did not get far before MP’s and AP’s stopped us and they asked what we were doing and where we were going. We told them that we were trying to see what was really on top of the mountain because we heard they had a Missile Base there and we wanted to see for ourselves. I remember them telling us this was not a game we were playing, but what was up there was not a toy or anything to play with and we could have gotten ourselves in a lot of trouble. What was up on the mountain was a Military Missile Site which was there to guard against an attack and used to protect our Nation and our National Security. They also asked if we have a need to know and we told them no. They did not hold us, which they could have and also could have reported us to our Battalion Commander, which they did not. They did talked to us and what they said was enough to put fear into anyone. The conversation also had the Do’s and Do Not’s, and we were one of the DO Not’s. Then they told us something like have a good day and they had us turn the jeep around and we headed back to base. We really meant no harm; we wanted to see what was really up there before we got stopped. What happen at that time and thinking about it now it could have been a Security Problem and no telling what could have happen to us. Well Thank God, they were rough with the words with us but they were fair and knew we meant no harm. At that time we had no business doing what we did in the first place and that was no way of trying to have fun and a good time.
When going to Elmendorf Air Force Base in Anchorage, Alaska I forgot to bring my 35mm camera with me when I left Ft. Bragg. I really did not pack it so I went to the Base PX to buy a new camera. If I remember it cost under $100.00. One day my co-driver and I got a jeep and we went joke riding around in Anchorage because we were still in a set-up mode. We went outside of Anchorage into a wooded area and we had to be careful where we went because they had an Earth Quake and they had areas where a lot of holes, deep holes. In Anchorage the main street was 5th. Ave. and you could see where the Earth Quake really took it’s total even with the snow you still could see how deep the holes in spots. So, we were riding like I said outside Anchorage in a wooded area which looked like the country when we saw a Bull Moose and what could have been his mate. We got out of the jeep and we were walking toward him in snow about from 2 1/2 to 3 feet deep. If I remembered we were about 10 feet or so away from him which now I look at that to being to close today and knowing better. The two of us were taking pictures and then he look like he was coming toward us. I do not know when a Bull Moose would start to run but we started to run back to the jeep. We were scared, because for one thing we heard that a Bull Moose could derail trains and he was in a running or charging mode or what ever and coming on fast. By now we were in the jeep and I was driving. I gave the jeep to much gas and the back wheels started to spin in the snow and we were not going anywhere and he was getting closer. That was the first time I learned about driving in snow and the roadway had snow just covering the road. I learned real quick that you needed to ease-up on the gas and take off slowly, so I did and we got away. My co-driver asked if I was going back for my camera and told him no-way. I was chalking it up to an experience and a costly one at that. I thought of it then and now, what that Bull Moose could have done to us. I did buy a new camera but I stayed away from Bull Moose, Reindeer or anything that looked like him.
Later we left Elmendorf Air Force Base in Anchorage to go to the Army Arctic Training Center at Ft. Greely, Alaska to test a new Photo Lab that would go on the back of a 2½-ton truck to be used in Vietnam. When we left Elmendorf Air Force Base we left in a C-119 which is called the Flying Boxcar. As we were getting on the aircraft one of the airmen handed us a parachute and we asked what was this for? The airman told us that the plane was a capable aircraft, but complicated to operate and hard to fly on one engine. So, the airman told us, if we lost one engine we more than likely had to jump. We asked if we were going to get jump pay. We were just being funny, but the airman ignored us and said to put the parachute on and fit it to the size of our body. After that we could take it off and if needed all we had to do was put it on and jump, that made me feel good. When we got to where the Photo Lab was we could not open the door. It was frozen shut, so we had to get a couple of crowbars to open it. When we did get it open there must have been about 6 inches of ice on the floor and icicles hanging from the ceiling. The equipment looked pretty bad covered in ice. After seeing the condition the Photo Lab was in, we reported to Battalion Headquarters that the Photo Lab would be good in Vietnam because we did not think it was going to get anywhere near as cold as it was when we saw it. After I got to know Don Skinner by writing and talking to him by phone I told him about the Photo Lab we went to test out. I found out that in Vietnam they called it the Mobile Photographic Darkroom, the ES-38.
Coming back from Anchorage, Alaska in a C130 one of the engines blew-up and we had to land in Billings, Montana. With the three other engines we could have made it back to Pope Air Force Base, the Army and Air Force were not worried about us; they were more worried about our Photo Lab on board. We were in Billings for about two weeks until the Air Force could get a new or rebuilt engine to replace the one that went out. The people in Billings were real friendly, some took us into their homes and fed us. The National Guard put us up in their Armory while we there. One night another guy and I were pulling Guard Duty on the plane and it was cold, very cold and snowing. It snowed almost the whole time we were there. The Air Force was setting up a base there and they had a Staff Sergeant and his wife living in a trailer there. They invited us in to get warm and he told us that no one was going to steal the place or our equipment. Well, that was one of the best meals we had in a long time, a home cooked meal and that was the fist time that I ate deer meat. We were there for about two weeks or so, before the aircraft was fixed and we were ready to go to Ft. Bragg.
It was some time in April of 1965 when the Dominican Republic was having a Civil War. That was the 82nd Airborne Division’s area of responsibility, so they were sent along with other countries, to do what was needed to help solve the problem. Detachment D went over in May of 1965, I believe, to help with Aerial Reconnaissance and we were stationed in San Juan, Puerto Rico. I cannot remember the name of the Air Force base we were at. After getting an email from Larry Letzer, I remember now it was Ramey Air Force Base. I only stayed two or three days at a time as I was carrying papers from Puerto Rico to Ft. Bragg. I was also carrying Puerto Rican rum, VO and other alcoholic liquor back to Ft. Bragg. The cost was cheaper than state side and I was doing this for other people, getting what they wanted and not for resale. I did go to the Dominican Republic maybe two times, but where I was going they were not fighting, thank God. I was getting too short till discharge. The whole situation did not last too long and the rest of Detachment D was soon back at Bragg. I did not get to do any sight seeing in San Juan, because I was not there very long and even though we were not in the Dominican Republic where they were fighting we had to stay in our area.
In June or July 1965 we went on a war game called Air Assault I or II in Sumter, South Carolina. We were stationed at Shaw Air Force Base, we worked with the 363rd.Tactical Reconnaissance Squadron. They would fly the Sorties and we would go pick-up the Unprocessed Film with one or two MP's. The Air Police ( AP's ) would give us the film and the MP's would take us back to our Photo Lab and we would process the film and what else was needed. When we went on a war game and we were staying on an Air Force Base they always gave us billets. We were in the billets for about a week or so when we had to leave because they had C124 or C130 Globe Masters coming in and they needed billets for the crew and crew chiefs. They gave us Per Diem, which if I remember was something like $35 a day. They found us a motel with two single beds for something like $20 to $25 a day, so two of us shared the bill. We took over the entire motel. When we ate on the base we were supposed to sign in since we had per diem to pay for our food. We would eat in the 363rd. Tactical Reconnaissance Mess-Hall, it was Great, Super Great it was way better then eating in the Mess when we were at Bragg.
Since we were getting Per Diem we were suppose to pay for our meals, but, we did not, so we wore our Uniforms and we ate for free. They did not know if we were getting paid Per Diem or not, but, we had to sign in to eat and it seemed that they would not check the list because we never heard anything about what we were doing. The 363rd. Mess-Hall made you feel like you were at Home, not really, but it was better then our Mess at Bragg which was Plain and Dreary, the food to.
We went out to one of the local bars in Sumter, the only thing they served was beer. For hard liquor you had to go to the Alcoholic Beverage Control Board ( ABC Store ). We had a military jeep and parked it in the back of the bar so no one could see the jeep. Then the four of us went into the bar. In the bar were some Path Finders from the Air Force and some of the 82nd Airborne Division Artillery Group. After a while the barmaid started trouble between the two groups and then holy hell broke out. The 82ndAirborne and the Path Finders were fighting each other. So, before the AP’s and MP’s came and we would get ourselves in trouble for having a military jeep, we made a run for the back door, jumped in the jeep and went back to the base.
I would always tell this one Warrant Officer ( WO ) that the plane he flew was made out of papier-mâché and in return he told me that if he got me up in it I would not call it a papier-mâché plane again. Sometimes we had to deliver aeriel prints by flying them to their destination. They always had a log sheet with the name of the pilot who was going to fly the mission. I noticed it was not the WO I would joke with, so I signed-up. I was sitting in the plane and who comes along but him, so I started to get out and he ordered me back in the plane. He told me that he was going to give me a lesson that I would not forget and he did. To make the delivery, we would fly over and throw the bundled aeriel prints on the roof of the building where we had to make the drop. Now he told me, this is where the fun starts. He told me that the barf bag was there if I needed it. We were flying up or down the Black River from what I remember. I felt that I could touch the trees. Before that he made figure 8’s, went into a roll, straight up and down, but the one that took the cake, and everything else, was that he went into a dive and shut the engine off. It looked like this could be the end of me. Then he turned the engine back on. I did not use the barf bag but I felt like something else happened. I asked him what if the engine would not have come back on and he told me that they would be picking up pieces of us. When I got out of the plane I felt a little weak at the knees. He then asked me are you going to call this plane a papier-mâché plane again? I then said yes, but I will not fly in one again, maybe a bigger one, but not as small as this one.
I remember two accidents that happened while on the Air Assault war game. The first one was the 82nd Airborne Division Artillery fired and hit a Command Post killing some troops, how many I do not remember. The second one involved a couple of helicopters, the pilots could see each other and still ran head on into each other. This was at the time that the 11th Air Assault Division and the 1st Cavalry Division became the 1st Air Cavalry Airmobile and is commonly referred to as the 1st Air Cavalry Division.
After coming back from the Air Assault war game there was not much going on, except that we found out later that 1st Military Intelligence Battalion ARS was going to Vietnam. So they had more training classes for the Imagery Interpreters and Repro had more guard to pull.
I was getting discharged along with about three or four others on October 30, 1965. We wanted to extend for 6 months just to go to Vietnam to see what it was like, but Battalion said it had to be for one year or more. I was a SPC4 and I was long over do for my promotion to a SPC5. Since I was 90 day lost to the Battalion, they would not give it to me. One day my Detachment Commander who was Captain Mickey Moore called me in to his office and there were two MP’s behind him. He told me that if I would re-enlist for three years I would get $3,000 and my SPC5 patch and then when I got to Vietnam he would waver me to SPC6. I told him that that sounded great for the rank, but for $1,000 for each year, that to me was not worth it and I told him there was no way that I was going to re-enlist.
On October 30, 1965 I took my Honorable Discharge Papers and said good-bye to everyone and the Untied States Army.
Let me say, that we all played around, we had a good time pulling jokes on each other and in doing so we were Friends and Brothers in Arms. But, when it came down to do what we were there for, we all had pride in what we were doing. It didn’t matter, if some of us volunteered and if some were drafted but we were there to serve our Country when needed.
When we went to the Army Arctic Training Center at Ft. Greely to test a new Photo Lab that later would be called the ES-38 used in Vietnam, we took pictures of the Photo Lab and I had negatives of the ES-38 pictures I took. I had names of everyone in Detachment D, had aerial pictures of Ft. Bragg and etc.
All of this was lost when Hurricane Katrina hit Louisiana in August 29, 2005 with personal items lost also.
(Philip and his wife lost their home and everything in it – Don Skinner)
Return to Det D Unit History
help on how to format text
Turn off "Getting Started"

David James is ready to snub a move to West Brom to stay at Portsmouth after describing the Championship as "real football'.
England goalkeeper James, 39, will be offered the chance to extend his Premier League career by Baggies boss Roberto di Matteo.
But James, who wants guarantees of a first-team place in his farewell season, said: "I refer to the Championship as real football.
"When I was at West Ham we were relegated and things were soon very different.
"We were a Championship side playing Championship sides, and it would not draw as much attention. I went to MK Dons one game and it suddenly became very real.
"The previous year I was playing a relegation six-pointer at Bolton and it would be a massive double-page spread.
"Why's that the case? People aren't that interested. So in that sense you are playing a much more realistic and less glamorous game."

Dumfries Failing To Stop Not Guilty
Our client was a young man who had a clean driving licence and a job opportunity which depended upon his ability to drive. We negotiated with the Procurator Fiscal to have them accept that he should not be prosecuted for failing to report an accident. The incident took place at 3:20am on Christmas Eve and our client simply missed a corner and by doing so ended up going down an embankment and into the side wall of a shed. At 9:20am he took himself along to the police station to report the accident. When he attended at the police station it was brought to his attention that his vehicle was uninsured (a payment had bounced and he hadn't been told). The Court had sympathy for his position and gave him the minimum endorsement for the offence, namely 6 penalty points along with a modest fine. The circumstances of the case could easily have led the Court to exercise its powers of discretionary disqualification on any of the charges so our client was delighted with the outcome which was achieved largely through our negotiations with the Crown and mitigation to the Court.
Need help with a similar case?

While many deny that Rudy Eugene was a violent man, the Miami "zombie" attacker had records of a violent past and unruly temper.
When those close to Eugene discovered that he had been identified as the Miami cannibal, they showed surprise and insisted the Eugene was a good person and nothing like the "monster" seen on surveillance footage, attacking an unarmed homeless man.
"He was a good kid. He gave me a nice card on Mother's Day. Everyone says he was a zombie. He was no zombie. That was my son," Eugene's mother told CBS Miami adding that "they used to go to church all the time together."
Others however have stated that Eugene could be senselessly violent. Former heavyweight boxer Melton Bowen claimed that he had encountered Eugene in Miami in 2007 while working at a flea market. Bowen told News Channel 7 that Eugene had picked a fight with him over music and became immediately defensive.
"I'm not scared of no one. He took his shirt off and came at me saying 'I'm going to kill you!'" Bowen recalled.
The boxer easily knocked Eugene out with one punch, however his tale is only one of a handful of incidents that reveals the Miami cannibal's seemingly violent nature. Three years earlier, Eugene had made a similar threat to the very mother that is now defending her son. Eugene was tased by police in 2004, becoming the first man to get tased by Miami police after his mother had called for help from her son.
"I'll put a gun to your head and kill you," police said, repeating Eugene's threat to his mother on that day. Eugene also threatened police officers, stating he was going to "kick [their] a--."
Altogether, Eugene had been arrested eight different times, four of which included drug-related charges. Last month, Eugene was shot and killed after police arrived on the seen and discovered the man eating the face of Ronald Poppo. Drug usage was suspected in the attack.

When you are as hot as this mistress, you can mess around with people all you want. That is what she wanted to do today. She knew this guy who was known to be tough and no-nonsense. She flirted with him and lured him to her house where she played with herself as he watched. She brainwashed him and had him wrapped around her finger and teased him a bit more before she denied him and sent him away.
This mistress is bored and wants to have a little fun. She decides to play around with her ex boyfriend because she knows all his weaknesses. She video calls him while wearing high heels and a bikini. She plays around with her legs and plays around and flirts around with him. The guy is hooked and needs a release but just as he was demanding it, she left him high and dry.
Mistress Ava Black wants something from this guy and she knows he is kinky. So she turns it up for him. She simulated all the things he liked like big boobs and she also gave him some of what he had never experienced before like making him lick her spit. He got hooked and gave her what she wanted but he did not get what he thought he was going to get.
This mistress loves her toilet. She spends a lot of time there and for her, it has to be immaculate. She went to inspect how her slave had cleaned it and luckily for him, she found out that it was well cleaned the way she wanted it. The slave had managed to avoid a cruel and painful punishment in the event she had found that it was not cleaned to her liking.
This mistress wanted to tease this new guy she was seeing. But she wanted to make sure her moves were solid before she did it. So she tested them on her slave. She called him to the bedroom where she was seated while wearing only hr socks and a bra and panties. She then flirted with him and showed off her sexy and curvy body. She even talked dirty to him and the slave fell for it hook, line and sinker.
Madame Marissa loves boots and high heels. She loves them because they look great and make her look fabulous but she also likes them because she does not have to look for something else to punish her slave in the event she needs to punish him. She just uses her boots and her high heels to trample him. Both the heels and the boots are painful and the slave dreads being trampled by them.
This mistress knows that her slaves rarely get to satisfy their sexual urges because they are losers but also because they do not have to go out and look for mates. So she likes to use that to humiliate them. She is very sexy and knows that they can never get a girl like her. She then goes ahead to make them watch her put on a sexy show and touch herself in front of them. It is torture for them.
Mistress Sophia knew that this guy spies on her and has a crush on her. She wanted to torture him so she dressed sexily and made sure he watched her as she did sexy and teasing things. She did all she could and knew that the guy was in pain and was being tortured. Then all of a sudden, she left him high and dry as he got ready to masturbate.
Lady Morrigan loves the fact that she is cruel and people fear her. There is nothing better than that for her. She does not care about respect. She would rather be feared. And that is why she has made it her mission in life to inflict terror to those she can and through that, make a name for herself. No one wants to mess with a cruel person like her.
Mistress Kittydevine likes to take advantage of people. She likes to fuck them up and spoil their minds. She enjoys all the ways that she can use to make guys be her bitches. One of her best ones is hypnosis. She loves it and uses it to turn full grown men into her boy toys. Because she is good at it and because sh is pretty, it never fails to work.
Mistress Liz does not need an invitation to be cruel. She is cruel by heart and it is what she looks forward to being every single day. She is cruel both physically and in non physical ways. She likes to flirt with her slaves and take advantage to humiliate and take advantage of them. They have to pay her even if they did not want to just because she said so.
Joyce is a cruel mistress. There are no two ways about it. She likes it when she is humiliating others and enjoys when they are disgusted and humiliated. She does not have one act but rather tries to come up with different disgusting things to do to slaves and losers. Today she decided to spit into the someone's champagne glass and make him drink it. And she made sure he did.
Goddess Saffron is angry. VERY angry. She doesn't need a worthless worm like you and she knows your perverted interests are very, very naughty. Maybe the Goddess will let you worship her shoes. But first, she needs to let you know who's boss. She is, of course, and she's going to show you by stomping on your worthless face with her vicious leopard print heels. You know you deserve it.
Irina is an authoritative and authoritarian mistress. She likes to have her orders obeyed and she does this by always having her whip she never hesitates to use on the slaves
Whipping slaves is Lydia's specialty. She likes to see the slave in tears and begging for mercy because it makes her feel powerful and special
This lovely mistress is always in the mood to do many cruel things to her slave. She is going to have some fun with her slave and she also is going to punish him. However, her favorite thing to do is tease him so that he is unsure of what to say because he does not want to make his mistress upset. She loves to make him fantasize about her all day long.
Megan is ready to dominate again, but this time she is going to be in rare form. She is going to use her powerful voice to bark out commands to her slaves so they know that they are going to be on their knees worshiping her feet. She could care less that they do not want to smell dirty feet, because they are going to clean them no matter what.
A pretty mistress has the best feet ever. All of her slaves love to worship her feet, because they are so pretty and perfect. She also is very multi talented when it comes to her feet and all of the uses she can utilize when she is being a naughty girl with her feet. She takes great pride in her ability to be quite the tease and get what she wants.
When this lovely goddess starts to spit, she can also smoke a cigarette at the same time while getting ready to humiliate her slave to the fullest. She could care less how mean and cruel she is, because to her a slave is nothing more than a total loser that deserves to be humiliated to the fullest extent. She hates her slaves and things they are all pigs.
This mistress takes great pride in doing many things that are different and out-of-the-box. One of them is making her slaves go dive for items and articles that she might put underneath her ass. It seems really odd, but all of her slaves do exactly what she says and they all go looking for what ever it is that she is hiding from them, but most of the time she humiliates them.
Princess Jenny is the type of mistress that will do almost anything to get control of the situation and make it become hers. She is famous for blackmailing and she is also famous for humiliation to the point where a slave will give her anything just to make her stop. Princess Jenny always gets what she wants no matter how grueling the process might be. She loves to be dominating.
There isn't a slave in the world that is going to be able to resist a gorgeous mistress that is very sadistic and she also is extremely sexy and gorgeous at the same time. She takes great pride in knowing the fact that she is so hard to resist, therefore she is also demanding and expects nothing but the best. A slave better be ready for her.
Not too many mistresses are going to enjoy ashtrays, but Sarah Blake is in a league of her own because she is very creative and she also is very brutal at the same time. She is going to use a human slave as an ashtray, and she does not care one bit as she is blowing cigarette smoke right into his face. She might even put her cigarette out on his tongue.
A lovely mistresses going to utilize all of her assets to the fullest when she decides it is time for her to practice some of her face sitting. She has always loved to face it and humiliate her slaves because they have no control or power when she sits down on their face. She also finds it to be deeply amazing because they all loved her scent of her cunt.
This is something you don't see every day, because Amy generally is not very kind to her slaves. However, on this fine day she is going to make a special type of cocktail just for her slave. The only catch is she expects her slave to drink it no matter what might be in the glass. She and her boyfriend captured his cum and put it in a glass.
This lovely lady takes great pleasure in having a long list of slaves that are always ready to do any thing she requires them. In some cases these tasks can be really gross because she tends to be lazy and not like to clean her feet on a regular basis. A slave has to be mentally prepared that he has to do exactly what she requests no matter how gross it might be.
This mistress has never been shy from having all of her slaves worship her dirty blue platform high heels. She could care less if they are dirty or sweaty, because all that matters to her is the fact that she is going to get her feet worshiped one way or another. Her slaves already know that she can be difficult to deal with to the point she is almost mean.
Goddess Victoria knows exactly what she wants when it comes to having a sleep over to worship her feet. She tends to be a bit messy, therefore her feet are always dirty no matter what. All of her slaves are used to her feet being gross, therefore they already know the deal. She will have a slave clean her dusty and dirty feet for her as she sits and reads a magazine.

It is always so much fun to see the ice skaters, and hear holiday music being played in some form or another. Yesterday, there was a choir out on the square that sounded so lovely. I love seeing all the children with cups of hot chocolate and rosy cheeks from skating, and the big smiles on their faces.
This picture is for Carolina, she will know why :)
I never get tired of seeing this giant tree in the Neiman Marcus store.
We walked over to the San Francisco Centre to see what was happening over there. I love the restored dome, and I just had to see how they decorated it. I guess they were having a light show up there later, but when I took this, the snow flakes were moving.
There were little back drops to take photos, and I couldn't resist taking one of Caitlin in front of one. As we walked away, two workers asked us if we were taking photos. I thought we were in trouble, because we were suppose to pay, and I quickly said, "Oh, no we were just looking." As we guiltily walked away, one of the girls said, "you can take as many photos as you want, it is free." So funny because they kinda looked at us like we were odd balls.
We took a stroll through Bloomingdales. I had heard that they now have a Nespresso bar there, and you can buy your coffee pods from them. Normally you have to order them and ship them to your home. This is exciting because now if I'm in the city, I can pick some up instead of waiting for them to arrive. I really like that company and their products.
OK, enough about the coffee. Look at these cute nutcrackers!
Oh, and wouldn't you want something from here under your tree?!
Now that I got my fix of city lights, it back to work in the shop, and last minute Christmas details at home. Always so much to do, and not enough time!

"Brilliant staff - surgical ward 5."
I am currently a patient on surgical ward 5 and have been since monday. I would like to personally thank several members of staff, tehConsultant and his team, the other surgical team I'm under, and all the other staff that have been and who are still caring for me while I'm on this ward. I will be having surgery at some point but they haven't quite decided when. I have has several scans and constant monitoring throughout the day and night. They have all told me what's going on,when its happening a d the nurses and doctors always try to answer the questions as best as they can. Thanks to everyone that is looking after me.

"Master Jimin!" One of the servants waited at the gate to the Park Compound as he returned from his latest assignment: stealing an original Rembrandt that a wealthy client had offered to pay a heinous amount of money for.
"What is it?"
"The Elders have requested an audience with you."
Jimin sighed and sent the servant away, then hurried to the parlor where the Elders held council with members of the Park Family, long blond hair trailing behind him as he ran. Calling them a family was a bit of a stretch; although they were related, the Park Elders and members of the family had more of a master/servant relationship. Something Jimin found a bit archaic, especially in these modern times. When he arrived, he found all six of the Park Elders waiting for him, sitting on one side of a large conference table, looking smug. Jimin got a sense that he wasn't going to like whatever they had to say. He sat in one of the chairs positioned across from them and waited to be addressed.
"Jimin, pride of our…family, we have something for you."
Jimin wanted to frown, but stilled his face into a blank mask. "Of course. Do you have another assignment for me already?"
"No. It's actually more of a gift, of sorts."
Jimin couldn't hold back a frown at that; the Elders didn't give gifts. Ever. "I am honored. May I ask the occasion?"
"You have always been fond of Myungjun, have you not?"
"What have you done to him?" The venom in his voice was undeniable.
"Watch your tone young man! Remember to whom you are speaking!"
Jimin didn't respond, but nodded his agreement.
An Elder at the end of the table motioned for a servant. "Bring Myungjun out."
Jimin was unconsciously holding his breath, trying to remain still. The servant led Myungjun out with one hand on his elbow and the other clasped firmly in his hand. Jimin was puzzled by this. Servants were never allowed to touch members of the family. Then Myungjun opened his eyes, and Jimin gasped. Their eyes met; Myungjun’s eyes now matched his, pale gray, almost white. Unlike Jimin’s eyes however, his were unfocused, blank and unseeing. He felt tears prick at the back of his eyes; how could they have done this to sweet innocent Myungjun?
"Jimin... is that you?" He reached his hands out searching for him. He stood up from his chair and grasped the outstretched palm between his own. He brought the hand to his cheek and held it there.
He cleared his throat and said, "Yes Myungjun, it's me." He smiled and embraced him.
"I was so frightened... and the pain, it was unbearable." He mumbled into Jimin’s shoulder.
One of the Elders snorted at Myungjun's statement and Jimin saw red. He released Myungjun from their embrace, but still held his hand.
"You unimaginable monsters think it's funny do you? Well, I don't see any of you walking around with these eyes! What the fuck were you thinking? He isn't a member of the Idol Program, so why did you do this?"
All the Elders looked very offended. "We thought that you would appreciate this gift. You were always the one to suffer, while he was put on a pedestal far away from any danger. Apparently you have no sense of humor", sniffed one of the Elders.
Jimin gritted his teeth and practically growled at them, "I have put up with your fucking antics and games all my life, and never complained as long it was only me who suffered from your torture! But now you have brought Myungjun into this and made him suffer unimaginable pain for no reason and you expect me to think it's funny? Well, I have a joke for you. I am out of here and I am taking him with me. You can try to stop me but you never will. You all know very well that I am the most skilled operative you have. All of your men couldn't stop me if they tried."
Jimin glared coldly at the council members sitting with shocked looks. They all knew what he said was true; there was no one who could even come close to Jimin. "Maybe you shouldn't have trained me quite so well if you were planning on screwing with the people I love."
Jimin turned and left the Elders screaming after him. He led Myungjun along with an arm wrapped around his shoulders. Both his small hands were clutching his shirt, afraid that if they were separated that he would be attacked. He hurried them to the exit as quickly as he dared with Myungjun's new blindness making him stumble almost every other step. When they reached the exit there were about a dozen men blocking the doors. Jimin stopped and glared at them.
"Are you going to let us pass or am I going to have to make you move?"
"We have our orders, and we are to stop you using any necessary force."
Jimin really didn't want to fight them. A lot of them were his friends, but if they stood in his way then he had no other choice. Jimin removed Myungjun's hands and pushed the other behind him.
"Stand back Myungjun, I don't want you getting hurt."
The first one attacked him, trying to catch him with a left hook. Jimin could tell that this man was a boxer; his low center of gravity gave him away immediately. Jimin dodged and faked a punch to the abdomen, but as his attacker lowered his arms to protect his stomach Jimin brought his other fist up and connected a solid punch to his windpipe. The man dropped like a sack of potatoes. The others all decided that attacking him as a pack would work better. Jimin smiled. These men were only hampering themselves as they got in each other's way. Jimin took the first to reach him out with a hard elbow to the temple; the second got a kick to the chest. He took them out quickly and efficiently, never giving any of them time to reach Myungjun.
Jimin reached for Myungjun, who squeaked in terror when Jimin touched him. After assuring him that it was Jimin and that he was unharmed he led him past the unconscious bodies of his attackers. The front doors were on lockdown, and frankly looked like something that might be used by NASA. However, Jimin was a professional and he hacked the control panel in three minutes and twelve seconds. Not his personal best, but he was under a great deal of strain, so he let it slide. They escaped the compound and headed for Jimin's silver Porsche, which thankfully hadn't been put in the garage. Jimin drove away with a screech of black tire marks on the street. There was only one place to go; he rented an apartment on the other side of town under an assumed name. He knew that this cover would only last a few days with an organization as large as the Park’s coming after them.
Jimin pulled up to the apartment complex and stashed the car in one of the underground units. He led Myungjun up to his penthouse, staying alert in case someone had recovered quickly enough to follow them. It looked as if they had gotten lucky; there was no interference on their way up. When they reached his apartment, Jimin sat Myungjun on the couch and fetched a glass of water for him from the state-of-the-art kitchen. The penthouse was quite an affair, all glass and chrome. It was modern to the extreme, and looked almost menacing for the lack of color. Jimin was glad Myungjun couldn't see it; he feared the austere setting might only frighten him more. He sat on the coffee table across from him and watched as he sipped his water and tried to appear calm. He let his knees brush against his, letting him know that he was still there.
"J-Jimin… what are we g-g-going to do?" he sobbed, clutching his glass of water until his knuckles turned white.
"I will take care of you Myungjun. You know that, right?"
"Okay. I need a plan."
Jimin put his head in his hands as though holding his skull might stuff all his wondering thoughts into order. Okay, simply running from the Park’s wasn't possible. Their reach was worldwide, and there was nowhere he and Myungjun could hide where they wouldn't eventually be found. Which meant that Jimin was going to have to take out the Organization before Myungjun would ever truly be safe. But he knew he couldn't do it alone. Luckily there was someone else that hated the Park as much as him… and that just might work. For his plan to be effective however, he would have to get back into the family's good graces, which was going to be… painful.
The next day Jimin drove back to the Park compound and braced himself for what was going to happen next. He approached the doors and guards came out; he let them restrain him and check for weapons before he was led to the parlor. The Elders sat in their chairs looking smug; their prized pony had come home so soon. Jimin reluctantly took up the submissive pose, bowing to them. "My behavior yesterday was inexcusable, and I would like to apologize and ask your forgiveness on behalf of Myungjun and myself."
"Where is our precious Myungjun?" one of the Elders hissed.
"He is safe, and I would like to ask permission to keep him with me at an apartment I have rented. He is rather frightened and traumatized."
The Elders tittered amongst themselves for a few minutes, even though they all knew that there was no choice but to accept Jimin's demands. His skills were too valuable to be wasted. Finally one of them addressed him.
"You are willing to accept your punishment as well as his without complaint?"
"Yes wise elders, I have wronged you and deserve to be reprimanded. I find it only fair that I accept the punishment for Myungjun, as he was only following me."
"I believe you are familiar with 'the brand'?"
Jimin winced, then nodded his head. The Elders all had wide smiles on their faces. Everyone loves a punishment. Jimin had hoped in vain that he would get any other punishment - bamboo shoots under the fingernails; water-boarding; anything but 'the brand'. Luck, however, was not on his side, and he was lifted by his armpits and led to the room where all of the punishments were meted out. Jimin was freed from his restraints and stripped of his shirt before being strapped face-down on a wooden slab. The straps were tight enough so that he couldn't move and ruin the brand. Jimin had received this punishment before, so he knew it would hurt twice as much on his already-scarred skin. The brand was a simple rectangle of metal, about as wide across as a woman's shoulders, heated to a white hot temperature, then pressed to the skin.
"You will receive two rounds, one for you and one for Myungjun. Each will be five seconds, is this understood?"
Jimin nodded, bracing himself for the torture that he was going to endure. He heard the metal cattle-brand being pulled out of the flames, and sneezed when the stench of hot metal reached his nose. The brand was applied to the pale skin across his shoulders with a sickening sizzle. Jimin made it through the first round without as much as a whimper passing his lips. His back was throbbing and burning and he could smell his melted flesh. His gag reflex kicked in, while he was convincing his body that throwing up was a bad idea the brand was heated up again. This time he wasn't ready and when the red-hot metal made contact with his ravaged skin, a traitorous scream tore past his lips. He was unstrapped from the table and allowed a few minutes alone to compose himself. After throwing up in the conveniently-placed toilet, he shuffled to the sink, filled his hands with ice cold water and tried as best as he could to cool the cauterized skin. He was officially back on the Park's good side; now it was time to implement stage two of his plan.
The Elders thanked Jimin for his service and had one of their medics treat his back before he left. They informed him that he needed to return in one week for his next assignment. He bowed to them and told them how honored he was that they had chosen to forgive for his insolence, and then left with his spine straight and his head up. He refused to let them know how much pain he was in, even as the weight of his white button-up shirt made him feel as though all the skin on his back was being scraped off with a rusty spoon.
The Park now trusted Jimin, and that was vital to the success of his plan. He drove his car to a small garage he rented monthly and swapped it for a plain white Honda Accord that he kept for situations like this - when he needed to blend in. He pulled out of the garage and headed toward his final destination - CIA Headquarters.
He parked his car at a diner a few blocks away from the building he was headed for, then pulled on a hoodie and tucked his tell-tale long, blond locks inside; he put on sunglasses to hide his eyes and quickly jogged to the building. He made it through the security point then pulled off his modest disguise, freeing his long hair and uncovering his eyes. His attention was immediately drawn to a man with dark hair who looked as though he were seconds from being literally bored to death. The man's hands were tucked into the pockets of his black trousers and he was wearing a white dress shirt with the sleeves rolled back to his elbows. He was talking to a cheery-looking rotund man. As though he sensed his presence the man turned and his black eyes locked with Jimin's own gray ones. The man froze, and then pulled himself up to full height; his lazy demeanor gave way to a commanding presence and Jimin couldn't help but be intrigued.
I think someone recognizes me… Jimin thought to himself.
"Now, what business could Park Jimin have at CIA Headquarters?"
Jimin didn't have time to stand around and chat with this man; he was either going to help or he wasn't. "You seem to have me at a disadvantage; you are?"
"Agent Jeon Jungkook. What is your business here?"
"I am going to help you bring down the Park Organization", Jimin announced.
The man snorted a laugh. "Yeah right. Park’s don't flip sides; we have seen enough suicides from the organization to know that."
"Would you like to know why?"
"Sure, why don't you tell me?" The sarcasm in his voice pissed Jimin off.
"Park children are raised like warriors. From the time that they are children they are taught that snitching is a sin. They are taught that if anyone is ever caught, that suicide is a better option than what you would receive from the family when they found you."
"Alright I’ll admit, I'm interested, but I still don't trust you."
Agent Jeon led Jimin through the building until they arrived at the interrogation rooms. Jimin snorted at how cliché the room appeared - concrete floors, plain white walls and a metal table and chairs in the middle; there was even the big mirror on the wall.
"Take a seat. I will be right back."
Jimin sat, assuming that the man was going to get his boss. A few minutes later Jeon returned, accompanied by a big man with blond hair and dimples.
"I'm Kim Namjoon. My agent here tells me that you say that you want to bring down the Parks."
Jimin met his eyes and nodded. "Your agent is correct."
"May I ask what caused such a change of heart?"
Jimin knew that one was coming. "If you must know, I will tell you. I am sure that you are aware of who Park Myungjun is."
Both agents nodded.
"He was forced to undergo the 'LIE Procedure' as some kind of sick joke to the Elders."
"We don't know much about it, we have only heard of it a handful of times, and no one wants to say anything more on the subject. Part of the Park family mystery is how so many of them have gray eyes, though their ancestry is Asian. This operation is the reason for that, yes? Can you tell us more about this 'LIE Procedure'?"
"I don't know all of the specifics. It stands for Laser Integral Eye Procedure, it is a procedure that enhances vision. An average person with perfect eyesight has 20/20 vision, but after the procedure that person's vision would be closer to 40/20.
They could see twice as far and their vision is twice as accurate, it even allows them to see perfectly at night. However it is a very painful and extremely risky operation, and as a side-effect it changes the color of the eyes. It leaves two out of three people blind, and when that happens the Elders declare those individuals no longer useful to the family and they are executed or locked away."
Both agents looked appalled. "You people do that to your own family?" Agent Kim asked.
Jimin glared and stood, slamming his palms down on the table. "You know what? Fuck you! I never should have come here." He turned and took three long strides toward the door.
"No, wait! Don't go!" Agent Jeon called. He gripped Jimin's shoulder trying to stop him.
Jimin gasped; he felt rushing in his ears and his knees buckled under him. He pulled away from that hand and tried to force himself to stay conscious. Both agents looked on, shocked and confused at this turn of events. Jimin pushed himself up off the floor and turned toward the agents with a glare.
"You act so high and fucking mighty; you have no idea what it's like to grow up in that god-forsaken compound. You think you understand what I have been through? You couldn't even imagine the things I have to do to keep myself and Myungjun safe. You wanna know what it's like, well I'll show you!" Jimin unbuttoned his shirt and pulled it away from his burnt skin. He pulled his hair to the front and turned his back to them.
Both of them gasped at the sight of his destroyed shoulders.
"So fuck this, I am out of here. This was a mistake." Jimin pulled his shirt back up and buttoned it as he rushed toward the exit. Jeon caught up to him as he rounded the first corner. He grabbed Jimin's hand and tried to stop him, but Jimin ripped his hand free and turned toward the agent. "Don't you fucking touch me."
"Please come back. He didn't mean what he said. It is just shocking, you must understand. Please?"
Jimin eyed the desperate look on the other's face. "Fine, but this is your last chance. I have nothing to lose and everything to gain by leaving here. You had better remember that."
He was led back to the interrogation room. Agent Kim was still there, and he faced Jimin. "I am sorry. I didn't mean to offend you."
Jimin nodded to him and took his seat. "Any more questions?"

At Passport last week in Wingate, North Carolina, I was struck by how often our youth expressed appreciation for the worship. This was not a canned response to being asked, "What did you think about tonight's worship?" The comments were made throughout the week, and were completely spontaneous and voluntary. At the very least, I think it says something about a reverence in worship that we might not always recognize in our kids.
Here's another thing that got my attention. The camp pastor, Chris Hughes--a recent graduate of Wake Forest School of Divinity--was fun-loving, but very serious about preaching the Gospel. His sermons were surprisingly long, at least five minutes longer than one of my typical sermons. And the kids did not seem to mind at all!
Part of that, I think, was because Chris was excellent. And, the overall worship was so compelling. I'd like to tell you about just one feature of one of the worship services. As we arrived for the service that night, it was impossible not to notice several large blackboards stretched across the front. Members of the Passport staff had written simple prayers on the blackboards, "I pray for______." Most of the space on the blackboards was empty, and near the end of the service, everyone went to the front, one row at a time, and wrote a prayer. By the time we were finished, the blackboards were completely full of prayers, most of them written by youth.
Try to imagine that visual.
I hung around at the front after the service, and I was not the only one. The front of the worship space had been transformed into a holy place. No one spoke. It was not the time or the place for conversation. I have been in a lot of worship services, as have most of you, but I've never experienced more a sense of deep quiet and reverence than during and after the writing of those prayers.
One of the staff had written: "I pray for the bullied." These words were by themselves on the large blackboard. After dozens of prayers had filled it up, I walked past and saw that one of the kids had written below: "And the bully."
It felt like Jesus had shown up.

WOOHOO!!!!!Yes another night of a full 8 hours of sleep. She did it again. She slept for a full 8 hours without waking up. There is a down side to this. It is only because she is sucking her thumb! YIKES!!!
I thought I would include some pictures of her room. I think it has turned out quite cute.

Source?..Maybe Shaun Mcdonald is in those talks....
"He's running around there, running his mouth, doing all that, but if you watch him on film and really look, where was Ray Lewis? He was nowhere to be found. I could have tackled the water boy and had as many tackles as him. He didn't do nothing today. He's all mouth. When you talk like that, that's what happens: You get hit in the mouth. He's over there crying now, thinking about what went wrong. You got your *** whipped, that's what." ~ Peazy
it would be smart....he said he wont take any less money and they would be getting him with his contract in a contract year which would work out good for whoever gets him cause hes gonna wanna bank the following year
They need to hold on to him. When some LB goes down in camp, that's when they'll have a market for him.
The Steeler way...is the only way.
Has anyone heard anything else on this? i believe Tuesday Stan reported that the Steelers let Foote go, so what gives?
There are currently 1 users browsing this thread. (0 members and 1 guests)

OK, you guessed right, this reads like a tribute to James Bond. Perhaps, I also exaggerate in my claims, but given the status and age differentials between us, I don’t know how else to explain my association with this great man.
Like all Nigerians, I knew him by reputation and I had seen him from a distance. My face-to-face meeting with him was through Professor Patrick Wilmot who had finally settled in London after his deportation from Nigeria.
I was struck by Alhaji Yusufu’s simplicity, humility and deference towards me. At that meeting, he had told me how much he had admired my work and looked forward to meeting me. I reminded him that I always somehow had some fear of close association with people in uniform. He quickly reminded me that he was no more in uniform and was a bloody civilian like me. In any case, he reminded me, my clerical garb was also a uniform!
After our meeting, we exchanged telephone numbers and he told me he would get in touch if he came to London. I thought I would normally rely on Professor Wilmot to let me know, but almost immediately, the great man somehow weaned me from Patrick and began to treat me independently. He would come to London and then call me.
My initial response was, have you spoken to Patrick? Occasionally, he would say he had just arrived London and had not spoken to Patrick. I began to cherish this independence of access to him.
In the 1970s and 80s, when Dr. Bala Usman and other children of Marx were at the height of their ideological fame, Alhaji Yusufu truly brought his professional skills as a top cop to bear. He rallied people like his cousin, the late Usman, and Wilmot to provide the intellectual backbone that defined Nigeria’s foreign policy.
In those days, foreign policy was really and truly exciting even for those of us who were mere bystanders. The late Murtala’s brief era was really their era because through MD, they literally had the inside track in Nigeria’s foreign policy and attitude towards the liberation struggle.
Many men and women in their late 50s and 60s now who were in Ahmadu Bello University will get what I am talking about. I was in the Seminary and later, just cutting my ideological teeth as a young priest. But, the liberation struggle was part of my coming of age. So, yes, physically, I was not in the Aluta tribe, but I was emotionally right in there.
This was partly why I loved Alhaji Yusufu even without having met him personally. He contrasts sharply with public officers now who spend most of their time protecting their privileges, rather than seeking to expand the frontiers of Nigeria’s impact when the opportunity presents itself.
One day, at lunch in a London restaurant, I asked him how he got into the Police Force. I think, I said to him, you should have been an Engineer or a super Permanent Secretary. He laughed and said that his entry into the Police was purely an accident. He said joining the Police Force had never occurred to him and that it was an encounter with the revered Sardauna that changed his life.
According to him, on one of Sardauna’s visits to London, he and other starry-eyed northern youths had gone to see their idol and hero. After receiving them well, the Sardauna asked each of them about their parents, what subjects they were studying and when they were finishing their courses.
He said when it came to his turn, the Sardauna took particular interest in him obviously because of his royal background. He said after he introduced himself, the Sardauna listened to him and simply told him to return home so he could join the Police Force.
According to him, “I tried to see how I could explain to him that I really did not want to join the Police Force, but I could not find the courage, especially given his stature and what we thought of him. Sardauna’s words were naturally final and what is more, it did not seem as if he was giving me an option.
So, I returned to Nigeria after my studies and went straight into the Police Force!”
His time as the nation’s super cop is probably the most professional, most ideologically-driven. This super cop devised a hard and sharp nose for information on national security. He sought for those who could hurt the nation from the highest places to such seedy places as Fela’s African shrine.
His mission was not the same as that of the revelers, but largely to sniff around, to case the joints. I raised this issue with him and asked if he was not afraid his cover could be blown in such a place. He laughed and said rather gently: But that was what my job demanded.
I remembered this story when on a visit to Abeokuta to speak at Professor (Wole) Soyinka’s birthday, I decided to go and visit my good friend, General (Olusegun) Obasanjo. I had asked him to take me round his famous Presidential Library. He, very willingly, gave me a most memorable tour, starting with the hotel.
Then, we got to a very important part of the library where his most important memorabilia are, from his first school bag, his late wife, Stella’s wardrobe to the vehicle he rode to his inauguration in 1999. The library itself is an incredible edifice with material that will shock the ordinary observer, evidence of General Obasanjo’s incredible obsession with documentation.
As he was showing me around, he came to an old Volkswagen Beetle and stopped. “This car,” he said, “is very dear to me because I have fond memories of it. It was the one I used when I wanted to get away. One day, I drove the vehicle for a private visit. Mr. MD Yusufu came and saw my car there and did something very mischievous.
He recognized the car and then left a note on the windscreen, which read: What are you doing here at this time of the night?” It seemed that General Obasanjo still had that famous note somewhere. It was also a measure of the man’s professionalism that he knew his principal’s nocturnal hideouts.
When I came to Lagos, we caught up and he directed me to his house. I paid him a few visits. One day, he called to say he wanted to discuss something with me. I drove to his house. Between coffee, he told me about his plans to enter politics. He reminded me that he had been following my public engagements and that he appreciated what he called my courage and forthrightness. But, he said to me, now some of us have to step into the ring of politics.
I looked back in shock and said to him, “What? You in politics?” He nodded and said something like: Do I not look like a politician? Absolutely not, I said to him. You neither walk nor talk like one. You are too gentle, too polite for the rumble and tumble of Nigerian politics. I did not dissuade him from political life, but I just did not see how he would fit into the fray. I was struck that he was prepared to take on General Abacha, a man from whom he would have benefited if he were a greedy man.
I was not the only Nigerian who was visibly shocked by this decision. He was the presidential candidate of the Movement for Democracy and Justice (MDJ), I think. He joined politics at a time when members of the political class had lost their marbles.
In fear and trepidation, the founders of the leading political parties then woke up one day, in show of despicable immorality even by Nigerian standards to say that they had bargained away their ambitions. They said they had offered their parties as part of the condiments to flavour the soup of General Abacha’s ambitions. They were the ones the great Bola Ige had called the five fingers of the leprous hand.
The great MD stood ramrod, alone with his integrity intact, defied the dubious notion of northern or Muslim solidarity and looked at the late General, eyeball-to-eyeball. What no one can forget was the sheer quality of his campaign advertisements and slogans. Then as now, no one, I repeat, no one has produced campaign messages of the quality and incisiveness that Alhaji Yusufu produced.
My favourite was when General Abacha’s ambitions became public and his supporters were shamelessly justifying it by appealing to the need for continuity. I cannot reproduce it accurately, but it went something like this: They say they want continuity. But continuity of what? Continuity of no fuel, no roads, no food, no electricity, no water and no insecurity? It has a special ring to it.
I recall one very memorable anecdote that MD told me. I asked Alhaji Yusufu over lunch in a London restaurant what had really happened between General (Ibrahim) Babangida and Alhaji M.K. O Abiola and the annulment of the June 12, 1993 elections. His views were incredibly diplomatic, insightful and pungent. I think I narrated this incident in a footnote in my book, Witness to Justice. He told me that when the Air Force people descended on Abiola, beat him up and detained him, he went to greet the Chief. To his surprise, Chief Abiola sounded very naïve in his view of the incident.
According to him, Chief Abiola told him that he was sure that the Air Force chaps who had staged what became known in the Lagos media as the mad dog incident had been the result of officers acting on their own. Had President Babangida been aware, he said, they would have paid the price.
Alhaji MD said he shook his head, but told Chief Abiola that even if President Babangida did not order the assault, he was definitely not unaware of it. He said he told Abiola that perhaps during one of his visits to President Babangida, the General may have caught him staring at his presidential seat in a way and manner that suggested he, Abiola, was eyeing the seat. So, the mad dog attack was just one way of saying ‘keep off’, this seat is not available. He said he advised Chief Abiola to go back to General Babangida and assure him that he had no interest in the seat. As they say, the rest is history.
I somehow lost contact with MD. One day, I was taken aback when a gentleman called me and said that Alhaji Yusuf had given him a gift to bring to me. When he came to me, he brought a lovely book autographed by him. When I called to thank him, I remember him simply saying like: When I read this book, I thought of you. I knew you would love it. Please enjoy it. Death has robbed us of a great man. He lived a full life and served his country well. God grant him eternal rest and console his family and the Nigeria he left behind. He must be smiling at how well we did in the elections.

I have so much respect and love in my heart for David Wilkerson, even though I have never met him. He didn't boast about his faith, rather it was evident by his messages - honest and full of hope and encouragement. His relationship with God brought hope to some very dark moments in my life through his messages. His walk was inspiring.
He has passed away today in a car accident at the age of 79. I feel a great loss.

Weird "Dreaming Stargazer" wants a reunion this weekend since there is no Easter event on zOMG! this year. 6PM EST 3/30/2013 and 3/21 I assume. It's all his idea. I had to go through people's profile to find as many people as I can remember that was in that room. gonk If I quoted you twice, quoted your mule, or quote you and you were never in the chat sorry. xD I don't know if half of you even still play Gaia. But here's hoping to a fun reunion no matter how many shows up.

Ben I remember Katie advertising a cancellation list; punters were asked to email with a phone number if they would like to be on this list (I'm sure there are other members who can confirm this).
My reply to her on 31/12/2014 18:54:58
Hi Katie that sounds fine my number is 07********, looking forward to it!!
Read on 11/01/2015 06:06:10
So having not looked at her AW emails for 11 days it's possible Katie thought the above email, without any context, was for said list hence his number being on her 'need to see list'
The fact of the matter is there was more than a communication error which took place. The booking was confirmed and Katie read the E-mail. Bristol E-mailed again to see if they were still on and Katie denied any booking took place. She then denied he was in her diary yet he was placed in her ‘need to see’ list.
What doesn't make sense is your assertion that the booking was confirmed from Katie's end.
If it was then he would have been in her diary to see and I guess he would have seen her...
It doesn't make sense that she would deny the existence of the booking.
Having seen Katie on numerous occasions I have had some appointments rescheduled (with reasonable notice)
If there was a problem it makes sense that she would just rescheduled his booking.
I doubt you will find any other members have missed an appointment with Katie because she denied the existence of the booking!
Therefore its clear to me that it was a genuine mistake on her part!
Which she has apologised for....
Katie has always struck me as being extremely down to earth, honest and conscientious so I find it hard to believe she would knowingly or maliciously mess someone around.
I'm sure there are other members who would agree with my assessment of her character.

Matthew left home as son as he was old enough and only returned to Hometown Bristol when forced to due to his mother’s illness. However, he hasn’t heard from his father which is unusual and when he went round to his parent’s home he found them gone with just an ominous note. As police investigate their disappearance and apparent murder-suicide, Matthew must deal with the other monstrosity in his life: his mother’s hoarding. However, clearing their home he stumbles upon an old mystery which has him questioning everything he knew about the couple who raised him.
A novella which packs as much intrigue and punch as an average full length thriller, I was not d uhh disappointed with Blackwater Lake as I found it immensely gripping and I look forward too picking up more titles by Maggie James in future.

Originally Posted by Heart-trouble
was it the burbon dolphin? that was a new anchor handler, an awesome boat! shame about what happened
No a guard vessel - that was terrible as well.
Just found it.
She was called the Meridian and was lost with all 4 crew. She was built in the 70s and was a capable ship. She had carried out guard duties before for up to 17 days including Winter operations. They don't really know what caused her to sink. Probably a capsize but what caused that is unknown. It was at least a Force 9 but she had handled far worse.
Despite a massive search she was never found.

Thinking back to my years in college, as a young man with a disability, I found that my life goals at the time were simple. Get an education and survive comfortably, living independently from my parents.
Of course, as a person living with a disability, my concept of independence was far different than what other young men and women at that age considered independence. I knew that there were practical reasons I could not thrive without the support of others. In some cases, this meant hiring paid staff who would come in and help me bathe, eat, and dress for the day. Other times this meant asking for help from classmates, friends, and acquaintances.
I also knew that as much as I needed support for myself, I also needed to find ways to balance that and give back in some ways, to contribute to the lives of those supporting me.
What I found throughout my life, in reciprocating the support that was given me, was how my network grew both in size and in their commitment to continue their support whenever I needed it. More importantly than what I did however, was what I heard time after time in conversation with them.
No matter how trivial, they found that when after speaking to me, they had a greater desire to see the horizons in their own life.
I remember one year in particular, I had a personal care assistant who had come to work with me after dropping out of college. He left school for financial reasons and took a job on my support staff to make his own way. He was a great guy with a wonderful heart, and was almost always on time. There was one afternoon, however, where he was late for a meal that we had set up. I waited for several hours.
When he arrived, nearly two and a half hours late, he explained he just walked 7 miles as his car had broken down and was not able to get it towed. I was astonished, and over the course of my meal, we spoke about where he was in his life and the frustration that he was feeling about barely making ends meet. I empathized, made some suggestions and asked him to let me know what happened with the car. I called a cab for him to get home and covered the cost.
It was not long before his car troubles were resolved, and our meetings resumed as usual. Yet, about three weeks later, he came to me and said, “Barton, I’m going to have to stop working with you. I’ve decided to return to my hometown in Kentucky and return to school and finish my degree.”
To his surprise, I was thrilled for him, happy to see that he was choosing to follow his dream for a greater and more fulfilling life.
Honestly, I have no idea how much influence our conversations had on him, three weeks prior. But I like to think that it was a small piece of what allowed him to expand the possibilities that he saw for himself and embrace a larger horizon.
The decision to embrace a path that leads to a more fulfilling life can be both daunting and scary. Any path is filled with its unknowns and uncertainties. And yet, the sense of fulfillment many of us receive from accepting the journey to reach toward a broader horizon emboldens us to face life’s challenges with deeper passion and an eagerness to persevere.
We want to hear from you! When was a moment that you realized your leadership had an impact on someone else? What did you learn that you weren’t aware of before?
Feeling like it’s time for you to embrace a more expansive perspective? Contact me here to schedule a strategy session!

We had so much fun getting to hang out with Grace on her senior session! This session was actually a double session with her best friend Nicole, which they said made them feel less nervous about being in front of the camera. Though Grace said she was shy about having her pictures taken, we didn’t really believe her for long because she did such a great job! After one or two tips on posing and expression, she was immediately a pro during the whole shoot. Not only was she a great model, but we loved her sense of style as well. She had many different outfit options and even told us that she went shopping before the shoot so she had the perfect clothing to wear :)
Grace is also an incredibly talented person. She loves sports and is a great athlete, and even plans to attend college in order to be able to help athletes recover from sports injuries. From the time we were able to spend with her we were able to see that she is a kind, caring person who just wants to help others! We know that she is going to go far in life with this selfless attitude :)
Thank you Grace, for choosing us to take your senior portraits and document this pivotal time in your life! We wish you all the best with your college and future career!

Re: Narutard chat thread
Sounds like you had a rough day. I'm dreading going back to school. I don't feel like getting bombarded by a bunch of annoying bitches screaming and trying to hug me. Ugh. I don't even know how these chicks got it in their heads that I'm their "friend".

Evacuation Ends! By Artin Cornish (supplied by Jackie Jude of Chelmsford Library on behalf of Artin Cornish and has been added to the BBC.CO.UK site "WW2 People's War" http://www.bbc.co.uk/dna/ww2/A4060964
Artin Cornish, aged 75 (in 2005) has agreed that this information can also be included on the WGS site. Over the phone he told me: West Ham Grammar (A Roman Catholic School) was effectively moved to Wellingborough. Artin mentioned the names of a number of teachers - the Head was Dr. Girley, Mr. Brosman taught English, Mrs Gould taught French. Dr. H.O'Connor taught Latin, there was also a Mr. Duffey and Mr. Crosby, the teacher referred to below who died was nicknamed Froggy. Artin believed that 120 boys were evacuated. He emphasised that, although they used the premises at Wellingborough Grammar School, they were taught separately and didn't mix - certainly he couldn't recall the names of any of our teachers and if he had been taught by Jake or Spike, he would have remembered! West Ham boys would meet up daily at Wellingborough School and have some lessons in their Hall (a class at each end) and in a prefabricated building outside, but they would then walk to WGS for most of the teaching , though he thinks they went to the High School for Art lessons
As far as I can recall, I only returned to London in August 1941 for just a few days as there were still air raids going on from time to time, although the Blitz itself was over. I think I was only there long enough to perhaps get my new school uniform and then I remember being put on the train to go to Wellingborough where I was met by Mr. and Mrs. Catling and their son Roy. I remember it was a long walk from Wellingborough railway station to Oxford Road where I was to live for the next 18 months or so. This was a small town and quite a different environment from living on the farm. Nevertheless, Mr. and Mrs. Catling were very kind and again a Christian couple, he in fact was a lay preacher in the Methodist church, although his actual job was as a local civil servant. Roy, with whom I got on very well, was younger than me. I think he would be about 9 years old at the time and went to the local school. We would have to go to the Methodist service in the little chapel around the corner from the house, which I found rather strange, being quite different from Church of England and being in the choir at Churchill. The school I attended was West Ham Grammar. St. Bonaventure’s was also evacuated, and we had to share the facilities at Wellingborough Public School and Wellingborough Grammar School. We always used to assemble at Wellingborough Public School and then we would go either into classrooms at the Public School or walk up to the Grammar School. Perhaps half way through the day we would have to go back to the Public School to one of their classrooms.
Sometimes when changing from one school to another we would meet another class en route and a certain amount of bullying would take place, the older boys chasing younger boys. I remember being chased up a side street and rescued by a postman from an older boy who was trying to hit me over the head with a satchel. All part of public school life! As we were a football playing school we used the rather nice playing fields of the Public School because the Wellingborough Grammar School played rugby. One rather sadistic master we had at the time ( I can’t remember his actual name) if we did something wrong would call the boy up and make him stand against the wall holding his hands in the air until he couldn’t hold them up any longer. As soon as they dropped he would shout “ put them up “ This would go on for a few minutes before he was allowed to sit down again. He later died in an accident and we had to line the road as his hearse went by and raise our caps. There was a six foot Latin master called Mr O’Connor who would stride into the room, slapping a cane on his trouser leg as he came in and frequently caned boys if they had not done their homework properly or learned their Latin verbs or whatever. It did encourage one to attend to one’s Latin homework! As a school we seemed to have no association with the Wellingborough schools with which we shared facilities I expect they regarded us as second class citizens. In fact I can’t remember having a particular mate at school during that period. I suppose partially because we were scattered about and it was quite a long walk from the school to where I was billeted. My main companion was the son of the house, Roy. I played with him in the garden, we would go out as a family at weekends perhaps for a walk, and I would go to the cinema on a Saturday morning, sometimes with Roy. In the evenings I would do my homework and after tea on winter evenings I remember we would all sit down as a family and work on making a rag mat. These were made from cut up pieces of material which we would thread through the weave of a canvas which was stretched on pieces of wood. We used something like a crochet tool. I think lots of people used to do this at the time.
In the summer of 1942 we all went swimming and it was on a lovely evening that I became ill. I had terrible pains in my stomach and initially it was thought that I had caught some sort of chill, but later on a doctor was called. At half past ten at night I was rushed by ambulance to Northampton General Hospital with acute appendicitis. After having my appendix removed I spent ten days in hospital and was then transferred to a convalescent home for another ten days at Naseby, where there was a battle in the 1600s. While I was in hospital my mother and my Aunt Nell came all the way from London to visit me. In those days appendicitis was quite serious and often people would die if their appendix burst. I went back to school before the end of term but was not allowed to play sports until the autumn term.
We used to have long summer holidays and rather than going back to London, other than for a brief spell, I went to Lowfield Farm for most of the summer before returning to Wellingborough.
Wellingborough itself was regarded as a safe area and that was why we were evacuated there but strangely enough, whilst I was on my summer holidays at Lowfield Farm, a stray bomber overflew Wellingborough and dropped a stick of bombs. It was a Saturday morning and Roy was injured on his way to the cinema as a bomb blew out a window, badly cutting his chin. I would probably have been with him had I been in Wellingborough. As a consequence Roy was still being looked after and I could not return to the Catling’s. For a fortnight or so I stayed across the road from the house in a block of flats with one of the teachers’ families. This was very nice because it was a lady teacher, who was very kind and in fact she had visited me whilst I was in hospital earlier in the year bringing me some tinned peaches, which was a great treat. However as soon as I was able to return to the Catling’s I remained for the rest of that term. In December it was decided that it was safe enough for the school to return from evacuation back to London, as the raids had more or less ceased apart from the occasional spasmodic raid at night.
That really ends my story of evacuation but the strange thing was that my mother, now being a widow, was considered to be a single person. As a consequence people of her age had to do some form of National Service and so she was called up becoming a civil servant with the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries which was evacuated down to Boscombe near Bournemouth.
So I found myself back in London, happily staying with my Grandmother in Rotherhithe and in turn my mother had to come back to London and find accommodation in West Ham if I was to be able to continue at West Ham Grammar School. of course I wished to do so and eventually we found somewhere in Upton Park where I continued to live for many years after. Initially I had to commute from Rotherhithe to Forest Gate, taking the train from Rotherhithe to Whitechapel and changing there to travel to Upton Park, walking from the station to my school in Forest Gate. My mother still had to work and when we did settle down she was having to dash out at 8 o’clock in the morning to go up to the West End where she had been transferred to the Ministry Offices. I would go off to school and come back in the evening, wash up the breakfast things, get things ready for tea, light the fire in the winter and do my homework before she got home at about half past six or quarter to seven. Once a week I used to do the shopping which wasn’t very arduous as there were hardly any decisions to be made because most things were on ration so you ‘got your ration’ and anything else that they might have in. Of course, my mother would bring a few things in that she was able to get during her lunch hour. At that time there were very few air raids and those that we did have were in the evening or at night, in which case we would go down to the shelter until the ‘all clear’ went. It wasn’t until 1944 when the Doodlebugs, or flying bombs, started to come across and initially we used to get a warning when they were coming, and then they came in such profusion that there was a constant warning. Then the four occupants of the house, the gentleman and lady from upstairs and my mother and I would actually sleep on the bunks in the air raid shelter, which was in the cellar of the house. One end of the cellar would be full up with coal and at the other end were the bunks and other bits of rubbish that might have been stored there. Not a particularly healthy environment, but we seemed to survive.
When there was a raid during the night I was not expected at school until 10 o’clock. This was a concession which was made when there was a constant alert and we would go to school regularly at 10 o’clock with lessons being held in the cellars of The Friary next door to the school, which was not very satisfactory. As far as I can recall this situation lasted for two or three months until the Allied Armies captured the flying bomb launching sites in Holland. I recall on one occasion sitting upstairs in the living room hearing one of these flying bombs approaching and tearing downstairs. I just managed to reach the steps of the cellar when the bomb exploded about a quarter of a mile away, near enough to bring down part of the living room ceiling and deposit a great lump of plaster on the seat where I had been sitting. If I had stayed there it would have given me something of a headache I should think, but apart from a couple of broken windows I don’t think any substantial damage was sustained.
Flying bombs were rather eerie things. You would hear their very noisy engines getting louder and louder as they approached, then they would cut out and there would be this long silence until you heard the bang and you knew they had exploded. If you heard it you knew you were all right and someone else had been unfortunate. Flying bombs were followed by the V2 rockets where you got absolutely no warning at all, just hearing a very loud explosion in which case, obviously, you were still alive. Unfortunately these continued until the end of the war in Europe in May 1945.
What a celebration that was, with bonfires and people singing and dancing in the streets. By this time I had been working for seven months as in October 1944, after just over two years at grammar school, my Grandfather had phoned to say that the firm for which my father had worked needed a junior in their City office. He felt that I should avail myself of this opportunity as, in his opinion, the war couldn’t last much longer, as after the First World War the troops came back very quickly. I would be leaving school at a time when this would be happening and it would be very difficult for me to find a job. However, unlike the First World War, National Service continued and the men were reduced and demobbed much more gradually. Nevertheless I took his advice and so without any qualifications I started work as a junior clerk in the City office of a small stevedoring company in Leadenhall Street.
I had good intentions of going to evening classes to continue my education but of course that is the beginning of another chapter of my life.
Top of Page

We were pretty casual about nudity around our kids when they were younger, in fact, I often showered with our girls when they were small. We all needed to get clean and the kids needed parental supervision while bathing, so we killed 2 or 3 birds with one stone. As the girls got older, they stopped showering with my wife or I and now generally do not go around the house with nothing on. Likewise, I usually don't wander around the house naked, either.
I sometimes wonder about stories I read on the Internet in which people claim they never saw their siblings naked as kids. Every family I know with more than one kid has put them in the tub together at times. Little kids have no concept of modesty, and kids will go from the bathroom to the bedroom without a towel. Our kids wound up in the tub with a local cousin as well as friends after getting muddy, both at our house and at other houses.
When we first moved to a house with a pool, we'd sometimes go skinny dipping, all of us in some combination or other. My wife and I were never naked around anyone other than our own kids (OK, I think our girls might have pulled my trunks down once or twice), but the girls and their friends and cousin would sometimes go naked when they were younger. They haven't skinny dipped in several years now, I guess they outgrew it. I still do sometimes if I'm using the pool alone, but always have shorts handy if someone comes out.
I don't think there is anything wrong with kids seeing their parents naked. That is what people look like, and if we are casual about it, kids don't grow up thinking that the human body is forbidden fruit.
My parents were very Catholic, but did not feel that I should not see what an adult looked like when I was young. As I got older, we got more modest around each other, but I know that I was showering with my dad when I was 11 because I remember him telling me that Bobby Kennedy had been shot when we were standing in the shower that morning. Again, there was nothing sexual at all about us showering together, it was just that the hot water tank had 30 gallons and if we were to all have hot showers, we either had to get up earlier or share showers.
As for erections, we have girls, so they don't get them. The only time they might have seen me with one would have been if they crawled in with us during the night and I woke up needing to pee. If it happened, I just told them that a guy gets like that sometimes when he needs to pee and they were satisfied with the explanation. Now that they are older, they know that it isn't just pee that causes that, but they also don't crawl into bed with us in the night.

FORT ST. JOHN, B.C. – Pat Pimm was scheduled for an arraignment hearing today in Dawson Creek court but it was once again postponed to a later date.
Pimm was not present in court this afternoon. His lawyer Greg Cranston spoke on his behalf via telephone again.
Cranston said he had just received the particulars of the case this morning through email and has not had a chance to look through the documents yet. Pimm also has not had seen the documents.
The arraignment hearing has been pushed back 2 more weeks to November 8th, 2016 at 9:30 pm.

This bright beauty is called Hard Rock Candy and Fudge by Susan Eastburn
This one is a sure winner for best of show and is called Emanon by Joe Karvanagn, a lady who has the best jokes and sense of humor .
These are some of our groups Challenge Quilts to help Celebrating 150 years in Queensland. They were given two fabrics that had to appear in the project. It is amazing how different everyone tackled this challenge.
Some more Challenge Quilts.
This is Sandy, she was demonstrating how to do paper piecing. When I spoke to her in the morning she was on her last row and later in the day when I caught up with her again and asked if she had finished it, she said she would have if she hadn't been talking to much, which I found hard to believe as she is so quiet at quilting. Well hope you have enjoyed the pictures it was a fun day.

Phip turned off the TV. Nothing was on, and it was too nice a day to spend inside anyway. His sister had gone to visit their cousin Cindy, and he didn't have any particular plans. He grabbed a Coke and stepped outside, popping the top as he went.
He caught a glimpse of his mother sunning herself on a chaise lounge and casually walked toward her. She had on her new tan-through suit and Phip looked at it clinging tightly to her high breasts and full hips, wishing it were see-through as well. She was leaning back, wearing a straw hat and mirror sunglasses and sipping iced tea through a straw. Her red lips formed a round 'O' as she sucked the cool liquid.
Seeing her brought a memory of her bare tit when he and Julia had gone out for the swim that turned into a hot fuck session. His dick stirred at the recollection.
"Have a seat," Josie said. "I'm just catching some rays in my new tan-through. It's marvelous being able to get an all-over tan. Maybe you should get one, too." "I'm not sure they make them for men," he said, getting turned on at the thought of seeing her tanned everywhere.
"Too bad," she said, "I bet you'd look good without those tan lines." She pointed to the white line that stood out where his shorts didn't quite cover it, his bare chest gleaming in the warm sunshine. "Not that you look so bad as it is," she added with a smile. "You look pretty good yourself, Mom, and I bet you look just as good under the suit." "Well, maybe," she said.
"Would you like a peek?" Without waiting for an answer, she pulled the edge of her top down to reveal a beautiful golden breast, with no trace of tan line. His dick leaped to his throat, even though she quickly replaced the gorgeous tit. "What do you think?" she asked, a smile playing on her red lips. He tried to stammer an answer, but she grinned wickedly and said, "Looks like your shorts tell the story, " nodding at the erection that had sprung to life there.
Phip, still standing, could see the reflection of his shorts in his mother's mirrored glasses, his shorts filling almost the whole frame in a distorted bulge.
"I always think you look great, Mom. And that peek partially confirms it." "Ah, partially is the word, isn't it? Your dick says you'd like to see some more. Cool off a bit and maybe I'll give you a full look later, to get your unreserved judgment." Phip was incredibly turned on to hear his mother talking dirty to him and unabashedly eyeing his growing hard-on through his shorts.
As she watched, he reached to adjust its position, rubbing the length of it once as he pointed it upward. Josie licked her lips, formed her lips back into a tight 'O' and moved her plastic straw in and out of her mouth in a suggestive motion. She's fucking her lips with that straw, Phip thought, picturing his hard dick replacing it as he watched the white plastic plunging in and out of the grasping red orifice.
"Have you thought about what to get your cousin for her birthday?" Josie said, removing the straw. "And your Dad.
I know he'd like something, um, special, too. Something I can't exactly give him." Phip gazed at the voluptuous body of his mother stretched out on the chaise lounge, her long legs crossed seductively, one raised up so he could barely glimpse her hot crotch underneath. She put her hands behind her head, lifting her firm tits and exposing them to his full view through the tight-fitting fabric of her suit.
His mouth watered as she ran her fingers through her short, dark hair, cut to accentuate the triangular shape of her face. Her clear hazel eyes were hidden behind the mirrored glasses, but the high cheekbones tapered down to a narrow chin, and her full, pouty red lips shone wetly in the afternoon sun. He couldn't imagine what his Dad could want that she couldn't give him. He wished she would give him some of what he was seeing before him now.
"Oh, he likes my body," she said, answering his look instead of his lack of words. "We have a great time in bed. But there's something missing. That extra something that I can't supply, at least not by myself." "Well, me and Julia talked about it a little," he said, remembering the hot fucking he had given his sister in the woods, and her hints about giving Dad something extra for his birthday flooded into his mind.
"And what did you decide?" "Um.
Julia's going over to talk to Cindy about it today, and I guess I was supposed to ask you about Dad." "What do you think those two cousins are cooking up?" she asked. "They're both sexy, and maybe.maybe it'll turn out to be an extra hot party," she added. "Which one do you think is the sexiest, Cindy or Julia?" "Right now I think you're the sexiest woman I've ever seen," Brad said, his voice coming in a throaty whisper.
"Yeah, but I wouldn't be much of a surprise present for your Dad. He can get me pretty much anytime." Anytime I say, that is, and how I say, she thought. She set her drink down and stood up, smoothing her suit over her well rounded butt. "Coming for the show?" she asked, walking briskly back toward the house. Phip followed, his thoughts filling with lust for his mother's beautiful bouncing ass. She is so hot, he thought, and his hand rubbed his straining erection as he followed her inside.
She led him up the stairs and down the hallway to her bedroom, pushing the door open as she reached back to guide him in. Her hand grazed his shorts, caressing the bulge straining to get out. "Where's uh," Phip started, suddenly thinking about what would happen if his father caught him fooling around with his wife.
"Don't worry. I sent Mark out on some errands. We're okay here." With that she spun around to face her son, raising her hands behind her head again, pushing her trim titties upward to his wanton gaze. Then she smoothed the fabric at her waist, and ran her hands seductively down her hips.
"Ready to see my tan-less lines?" she teased, easing the straps of the suit over her brown shoulders. "Uhh huhh. You bet," Phip said, his dick throbbing madly in his pants as his mother stripped for him. As her tits came into view, he stared at the golden firmness of them, the wonderful softness, the promise of pleasure they held, the brown nipples standing at attention just for him.
"God, you're beautiful, Mom.
Your tits are gorgeous." "Well, come on over here and give them a kiss, then," she said, holding her arms out for her son's embrace. He eagerly walked into her arms, grasping one tit in one hand, encircling the luscious globe, and bent to kiss the nipple of the other.
The fragrance of it overwhelmed him, and the luxurious feel of the sensual nipple in his mouth sent him gorging on her inviting breast. He sucked as hard as he could, drawing nearly the whole tit into his mouth and working on it furiously with wild sucking sounds. "Easy, lover," she said. "Don't bite it. Just suck it in softly. Give the nipple a little tease. Ohh. That's it.
Ummm." She groaned as he suited the action to her words. She moved slowly back toward the bed, sitting on the edge and pushing him away so she could peel the suit the rest of the way off. Phip stared as his mother's lovely bush came into view.
Her tan was truly everywhere, and he gaped at the pussy just inches from him as he sank to his knees in front of her, entranced by her sexy beauty. He noticed a little tattoo of a rose perched just above the dark tangle of her hair. "I bet the tattooist had fun putting that on," he said, entranced by the wild sensuality the scene suggested.
"Yeah. It was steamy," she said. "Of course your father watched the whole thing, and it was a real turn-on for him to watch another man working right over my pussy, and when the tattoo was finished, I was just gushing, so I pulled his hand down my pants into my pussy. Your Dad would have just about cum in his pants, except he already had his dick out jacking himself off while he watched me." Phip's hard-on surged to new heights as he listened to his mother talking about her sexual adventures with another man while his Dad watched.
He knew his mother was going to be a hot fuck, and thought maybe that was the special treat she had in mind for his birthday present, to watch his son fuck his wife. He hoped so because it turned him on almost more than he could stand.
He dived his head toward his mother's hot pussy, stopping to lick at the rose tattoo and thinking about her getting fucked while Dad watched, or maybe even joined in. His lips moved down into her lush bush, tracing trails of spittle against the soft down of her pussy hairs. She spread her legs, giving him better access to her cunt lips, as he wormed his way between her legs. He found the opening to her pussy, and licked furiously at it, bringing her clit to full arousal. She lifted one leg to give her son a full view of her cunt, which was already dripping with desire.
Josie pulled her son's head toward her gash, feeling him lick up and down the open slit, then when his tongue went inside her, she felt a shudder of anticipation and gripped his hair tightly. "Umm. That's it. Lick my pussy. Stick your tongue deep inside me," she moaned, humping herself against his licking mouth. "Yes, it feels so good. You're a good little pussy eater." Her words spurred Phip on to even deeper explorations.
He could feel his mother's cunt juice dripping off his chin, and cascading his mouth with its warm, sweet taste. She writhed against him, and he reached up to grab her titties. He felt the twin orbs smooth against his palms, as he rubbed them in a circular motion, then twirled the tips so both nipples stood up hard.
His dick was throbbing so much he was afraid he was going to cum just from eating her, but he really wanted to fuck his delicious mother. Phip raised up, his mouth dripping pussy juice, and his eyes swimming in lust. "Mmmm. I love the taste of your pussy, Mom, maybe even better than." "Better than?" she asked, then pulled his face up to hers, licking the drippings off his chin and cheeks, then gluing her mouth to his and sucking his tongue into her mouth, swirling it around to vacuum all the pussy juice into her own mouth.
Her deep kiss left Phip panting for breath. "Well, who else's pussy have you been eating that's almost as sweet as mine?" she asked again, stroking his dick as she spoke, determined to get her way with him. "Come on, tell me and then I'll suck you off." The promise of those hot lips sucking the cum out of his dick shot Phip over the edge as his cock pounded with desire. "Julia," he said.
For an answer, Josie pressed against Phip again, her tongue snaking into his mouth, sucking his tongue into her, and rubbing her tits against his manly chest.
"She is a sexy little number, isn't she? I'm not surprised you've been eating her. Are you fucking her, too? Has she had this wonderful prick between her lips?" "I only fucked her once, but she hasn't sucked me off, at least not yet." "Well, I'm not going to wait.
Bring that big dick of yours over here and let me have a taste of it." Phip switched positions with his mother, sitting down on the edge of the bed while she kneeled in front of him, stroking the length of his cock up and down and bringing it close to her wonderful lips, the same ones he had watched toying with the straw outside, teasing him into arousal.
She licked the underside of his shaft, flicking her tongue against the tip of the head, before jamming it tightly into her mouth. That incredible sucking action started again, and Phip felt his balls begin to tingle. "Ohhh," he gasped, "My balls feel like they're ready to explode." "Not yet, darling," she said, slipping his wet tool from her gaping mouth. I've got another surprise for you. She gestured with her eyes toward the doorway, which Phip saw now stood wide open.
His father was standing there with his dick out, jacking himself off as he watched his wife sucking their son. Phip nearly lost his erection, but something about the sight of his father stroking his cock told him that this was all part of Mom's plan. The whole fucking family was going sex crazy, and Phip was loving it, drinking in every sensation.
His mother now began stroking him again, and motioned to Mark. He slowly walked toward them, still holding his cock and stroking it to maintain his hard-on.
"Do you like watching me suck Phip's cock?" she asked gruffly, and Mark grunted in approval.
"Come here and kiss me and you can have a little sample of it in my mouth." Phip watched as his father bent down to stick his tongue into Josie's mouth. She pressed him back, forcing her tongue deep into his mouth. "Doesn't that taste good? Don't you like the taste of your son's cock?" "Yeah," he said, "you always taste good after you've been sucking cock." "Well, I'm gonna suck him some more, suck him till he cums in my mouth.
And I want you to fuck me while I suck him off." Mark dutifully climbed onto the bed as Josie repositioned Mark so she could crawl inside his legs, raising her ass to give her husband a good shot at her dripping pussy. He ran his hand up her snatch, feeling the moisture dripping between her legs, then eased the head of his hard cock into her pussy slit.
Josie sighed in satisfaction, then turned her attention back to her son's bulging hard-on. She started sucking him ferociously now, going almost down to the base.
Phip watched her greedy mouth suck on his expanding cock, seeing it slide in and out of her mouth as Mark fucked her from the rear, bringing her hot round ass toward him with every stroke, and feeling her tits rub against his legs as she sucked and fucked. Josie was lost in a whirlwind of passion. Her lust was spilling over in every possible direction.
She loved feeling two cocks in her at the same time, and struggled to keep up with both of them.
She felt Phip growing in her mouth and knew he was close to exploding. "Cum in my pussy," she yelled, and Mark speeded up his exertions, dislodging her mouth from her son's cock. She grabbed it with both hands and held on as if it were a life preserver, squeezing and stroking it up and down to the rhythm of her husband's wild fucking.
"Ohhh. Okay, I'm cumming," Mark yelled back, and he pumped even harder into her tight pussy, jerking spasmodically, filling her with spurt after spurt of his hot, bubbling cum.
As he pulled out, Phip saw a few drops of mixed cum and pussy juice splatter onto his mother's sweat-drenched ass, and it sent a shiver of pleasure shooting through him. "Umm. Good boy.
Now come on up here and watch me while I suck our son off to oblivion." Mark crawled up toward his wife's face, panting with the exertion of his orgasm.
Josie now turned her attention full on Phip's raging hard-on, setting her mouth to high vacuum and going at him full steam. His cock plunged into her mouth all the way to the base, his tightening balls slapping against her chin.
She wouldn't stop or slow down for anything now as she guzzled at his love rod, spurring it on to completion. Phip felt the warm sensation in his balls rising as his mother's insistent mouth continued in its frenzied sucking. "Ohhhh. ummmm. I'm gonna cum. Here it is. A hot load for your mouth. Oh god, suck it Mom. Suck my cum." Phip spasmed with the release of his milky cum into his mother's mouth.
She wrapped her lips tightly around her son's cock and milked it for all it was worth, then eased back off it, letting a couple of drops drizzle down her lips. "Now get over here and kiss me," she ordered Mark. "Lick this cum off my lips, and out of my mouth." Without hesitation Mark moved to follow his wife's commands.
Phip thought this must have been how it was between them. His Mom the aggressor, the one who set the sexual pace, her father the willing tool, doing whatever she wanted. The idea appealed to him.
Being a sex slave might be a good way to spend your life, he thought, turned on by his father licking his cum out of his mother's mouth. "Now, go over there and finish cleaning him off," she barked.
Mark started dutifully toward his son's diminishing cock. Phip couldn't get away because he was covered by the weight of both his mother and his father. He wasn't sure he wanted his father to suck his cock, but when the older man's lips encircled his shrinking hard-on, he felt a different sensation from when women had sucked it. Somehow his father knew just how to suck it, just the right pressure to apply. Maybe only a man knew how to really suck a cock right, Phip thought, and relaxed into the feeling of his cock being slurped by his father's willing lips.
"Now wasn't that tasty?" Josie said. "Didn't you like sucking Phip's cock?" "Umm hmmm. Tastes good." Mark said, running his tongue over his lips to prove it. "And you liked it too, didn't you Phip?" "Felt pretty good," Phip admitted. Josie felt proud of herself for having brought both men to orgasm, and gotten to watch some good cock sucking as well. She could hardly wait to tell Sara how their plan was going, and how hot she thought the party was going to be.

Terry Farrell, Deep Space Nine‘s Dax, was nervous when she got the news that she was to play Jadzia Dax, and sad when the time came for her to leave the show and character behind.
Being offered a strong female character role made it easy to say yes to playing the Trill.
“Everything about how (the creators) described Dax – she lived many lifetimes, she was a science officer, she was a strong female character – all of those things were incredibly appealing about her, especially being in the Star Trek universe,” said Farrell. “It’s as close to a solid job you can get in Hollywood as an actor. All of that was incredibly appealing and very nerve-wracking and exciting. I lost ten pounds between the week I read the first time and the last time out of excitement and nerves. I hardly slept at all. When I got it, I burst into tears, I was so excited.”
At first, Farrell was intimidated by Avery Brooks, but an appeal for help changed that. “During my first scene, I was so incredibly intimated by him,” she said. “I couldn’t top him because he’s so intense. I went up to him on a lighting break and pulled him aside. I had to appeal to his gentler side. I explained to him that I was twenty-eight; I wouldn’t be able to top him; and if he could help me out a little bit so it wouldn’t be so much more glaringly obvious that he was more powerful than I was. He softened and opened up. It was the beginning of a really, nice straight-forward relationship. I really liked working with him very much.”
The Worf/Dax relationship represented an interracial marriage to Farrell, who thought it was very well-written. “It was handled gracefully and crossed barriers,” she said. “(Michael Dorn and I) were friends. Before we did a scene, we were like, ‘Let’s see if we can make something happen here.’ I don’t know if (the creators) let us think we had something to do with it, but we felt like we did. I really, really liked working with Michael.”
Her favorite story though, was that of Lenara and Dax in Rejoined. “For my character, it made most sense since it was already explained I’ve been a man and woman several times,” said Farrell. “Gender wasn’t the issue. For the worm/symbiont, it was a matter of the being it was embodied in. When they approached me about it, it felt quite natural and a giant opportunity to support and be there for people who need people to stand up for them.”
“Today, I still get a lot of people thanking me for that, that it gave them strength, and that it made them feel like they weren’t alone, it inspired them to be themselves – all the things I was hoping it would do,” said Farrell. “Not only me, but all the people involved with the show.”
Farrell left Deep Space Nine when her six-year contract was up, but it was not because she wanted more money. She wanted less screen time because she was burning out after six years. But Rick Berman had no interest in working with her on cutting back her appearances; for him it was all or nothing. “I did suggest in the wake of that I could be recurring…not be in every episode,” she explained. “Rick wouldn’t have any of that. It was basically, ‘Here’s the offer. If you want it, sign it. If you don’t, it’s really been nice working with you.’ I went with ‘It’s really been nice working with you’ – I added that because it really sounds nicer. I don’t think Rick was thinking that at all. That was unfortunate.”
Now retired from acting, Farrell is a full-time parent to her son. She still makes convention appearances though, and fondly remembers her Deep Space Nine days. “I’m just so honored that I got to be a part of a group that told a story that made people feel like they were a part of something positive.”

ZOMBIE THREAD ALERT: This thread hasn't been posted on for a while.
What is wrong with my son? At absolute wit's end. He is not nice!(8 Posts)
We have moved, in large part to give DS (just 11) a 'new start'. Just had first parent-teacher conference at the new school. He will be at this school right through til 16 unless we move again (don't want to do that, have younger DCs)
I was so pleased - DS was invited to three parties since September (first parties in YEARS), kids were coming up to us in the playground to say hi, a couple had asked if they could come over and one child in particular seemed very keen to be DS's friend.
DS previously (at old school/in old area), convinced that everyone 'hated' him, very black and white thinking about people, expecting them to like him but making no effort to be likeable etc etc. He was referred to an ed psych who said there wasn't anything but made noises about confidence etc which we have done our best to address. The move was a big part of that. He was getting into a victim mentality and lashing out.
So, new school, DS IS the 'cool new kid'. He's doing well academically and every day he says he had a great day at school. Can't tell you how amazing that is to hear.
But now we find out that he's been standing up and yelling during class (stuff like "I love Maths!"), that he stole a pencil from a classmate and lied about it (had very obviously stolen it and was lying in the face of the whole class knowing he was lying - the kid he stole it from is a popular kid too, so this is not good), and that in lunch on Monday he HIT another child (apparently he said "you mean like this", and karate-chopped the child's neck) - his class teacher was the teacher on duty and it is for that reason that he wasn't immediately taken to the office and potentially suspended.
Again, other kids horrified, again he lied saying he was reaching for his juice and accidentally hit his friend. The kid he hit is the same child who's been really keen to be close to DS.
At home he is similar, vicious towards his younger siblings, overrreacting physically and seeming to take any opportunity to be nasty iyswim. And now the younger DCs are beginning to exhibit that behaviour which terrifies me.
Last night - and this scared me and is why I am writing really - DH and I were watching TV and suddenly all the lights and appliances in the front of the flat went off. I thought a fuse had gone and DH went down to check. DS came out of his room (he should've been alseep), and said "did something happen?" I could tell from his voice something was up. He said "I found some metal in my plug socket, I don't know how it had got there". He had put the metal bits from his potato battery kit in the plug socket and they had touched, causing a short-circuit.
He kept lying and saying it wasn't him. On and on. He could've DIED ffs.
He is just not NICE. I feel shit saying that but he's not. I love him so much and I 'lovebomb' him and it does help. But he's causing us so, so much stress.
I think I'd drag him off for more psyching.
Message withdrawn at poster's request.
I don't know - but if there are problems with social communications, round here it is the Speech and Language Therapists that assess (and help with) this, not the Ed Psych. (No they don't have to have a difficulty with spoken language_
From reading what you've said, you said that at his last school he had developed a victim mentality and was lashing out. Presumably that's what he's still doing at his new school - he's getting in quick to be the cool, badly behaved kid who's too tough to bother about anything. Because it's a defence mechanism - he's showing that there's no point in bullying him because he's tougher than they are.
I'd guess he's lying because he's so lacking in confidence that it makes more sense to deny the patently obvious than to admit to it. I did similarly stupid things as a child - and partly because it was just so confusing and embarassing to admit to the thought processes behind sticking bits of metal into plug sockets. (Which does seem quite understandable - presumably he wanted to see what would happen if he put two bits of metal into the plug socket, but could suddenly tell from your voices what a stupid thing it had been to do.)
In his head, people are being horrible to him if they're not being nice to him (iyswim), but he gets really angry at the suggestion that he is being horrible (in someone else's eyes), if for example he hits them or steals their stuff. Like they should give him the benefit of the doubt he never gives anyone.
The experience with the edpsych was so depressingly pointless I'm not mad keen to repeat it but I think we need to.
One of my 2 went through something like this last year, wanted to be seen as "cool" and ended up just being annoying and attention seeking, all the wrong ways of getting people to like him. He also lied at the drop of a hat, even is it was obvious to all around him he was lying, this became a real concern. We spoke to the school, and they arranged for him to have a few sessions with the Ed Psych, and this really did help. It came about that he was jelous of both his twin sibling (who had suddenly "bloomed" academically, and this had elevated him socially as well), and of some other boys in the class who had physically matured fast, and seemed very grown up. He wanted to be the "popular" one again (TBH, it was only in his eyes that he was unpopular), but did the wrong things to try and gain this popularity He knew when he had done wrong, but lied as an automatic defence mechanism, thinking that lying would get him out of trouble faster than telling the truth, even though this was not the case, in his mixed up pre-pubesent brain, this seemed to make sense! The Ed Psych lady was brillient, and made him see where he was going wrong, and how to put things in perspective. He has occasional lapses, but is bettter, but I have been warned to expect problems again as he really hits puberty, as their brain goes into chemical overload with the hormones kicking in!
Join the discussion
Registering is free, easy, and means you can join in the discussion, get discounts, win prizes and lots more.Register now
Already registered with Mumsnet? Log in to leave your comment or alternatively, sign in with Facebook or Google.
Please login first.

Originally Posted by Webbiano
Not only does Williams have a lot more going for him offensively, in terms of foot speed and head movement he's probably better on the defensive side of things as well if not even at the very worst. The middleweight argument is also pretty poor. Both men have flirted between welterweight and middleweight throughout their career and with a 3" in height and 4" in reach he is far more suited to the higher weight. The nature of the win (although Ward won comfortably, it wasn't as infactic) and consider the fact Sergio knocked out a top 10 p4p fighter out in just 2 rounds. Before Chad Ward hadn't fought anyone top 10 p4p and probably won't do (on even terms) in quite some time.
The only reason why Williams moved up in weight was because no one with a pulse would fight him at 147. He stated many times he would love to fight at 147 and had no problems making the weight but he couldn't get fights. 160 was too much for Williams and it was lucky he didn't fight Pavlik there when that fight was suppose to happen because he would have taken a brutal beating before being stopped.

Winston Justice, 6-7, 305, Long Beach (Calif.) Poly, a recruit who has ping-ponged back and forth between leaders for months, now says he doesn't have a leader among the schools he's considering.
"I don't have a leader," Justice said. "A lot has happened and a lot is still probably going to happen. So, right now, I don't have a leader."
Justice said that the UCLA/USC game did change his opinion of both schools, but not that drastically. "I thought UCLA was going to win but USC blew them out. It changed my opinion of UCLA. I thought they could at least beat USC. It showed me that USC could come together as a team and play."
Justice is going into the semi-finals of CIF this Friday, and it's a good bet that he'll be tied up with Long Beach Poly through the CIF finals on December 8th, so it's been tight arranging all of his official visits. He said he will visit Washington the weekend after the finals, on December 14th. The next two weekends are then dead weekends in which recruits can't make official visits. He'll then pick up his visits again January 11th when he visits UCLA officially. He also has an official trip to Tennessee planned for January 18th. Justice said he also would like to officially visit USC and Oregon, if he could fit in those trips. "But I don't have much time and I don't want to wait until the last minute to decide," Justice said. "I want to make a decision by the middle or late January. I want to trip to USC and maybe to Oregon, but I don't know if I can."
Justice started entertaining coaches for in-home visits on Sunday. "Oregon came in earlier on Sunday," Justice said. "It went real good. USC is coming in tonight [Sunday night]. Coach Pola and I think Coach Chow. Oklahoma said they want to come in on Thursday." Justice said he's heard consistently from the other schools he's considering seriously but they have yet to arrange an in-home visit.
Besides football, school and recruiting, another thing taking up Justice's time is studying for the SAT. He's now taken the test twice, once last year and once this fall, and hasn't yet achieved a qualifying test score. "I'm taking it again in December. I'll keep taking it until I pass. I'm studying with a tutor and with a CD-ROM. So hopefully I'll pass in December."
Justice said he plans on attending the UCLA/ASU game this weekend with teammate and UCLA commit, Marcedes Lewis. "I'm looking for UCLA to bounce back," Justice said. "It will be important to see how they do in this game."

Ryan went to Chino to be with Teresa while she was pregnant and ended up staying the whole nine months. Once the baby was born, the DNA test showed that Eddie was the father and Ryan left Chino. But when he got to Newport, Seth was gone and no one knew where he was. Ryan found it to hard to stay in the pool house or any where in the Cohen home, so he convinced Sandy and Kirsten to get him a small apartment. He still went to there house for lunches or dinners. He refused to go back to back to Harbour, saying he didn't want to start any more drama and finished high school at another private school. Sandy and Kirsten had set up a college fund for him and he went to college at NYU.
When he was walking to class one day, he ran into Summer, who was attending the same college. They started hanging out and eventually became best friends. Summer told him what happened with Marissa and he was sad, but realized he needed to get on with his life. After about six months, both Ryan and Summer developed feelings for each other and chose to go on a date. After dating for the remainder of college and falliong in love with each other, Ryan asked Summer to marry him and a few months after college graduation, they were married. Neil ( Summer's father ), Sandy and Kirsten were excited for them. Although Summer and Ryan both wanted Seth and Marissa there, even thought they hade not spoken to either of them in years.
Summer and Ryan moved back to Newport to be closer to everyone and Ryan started working at The Newport group as the head of the designing and construction part. Summer used her degree in design and designed new cloths and opened her own store to sell them in.
Summer ( Before she met up with Ryan in college. ) was depressed by Seth leaving, but tried to get over him leaving by being sad all of the time. Her father had enough, even though he wanted to kill Seth for doing this to his daughter, tried to help her get over him by taking her to dinners for the hospital. At one of the dinner's she met Zach, but after a few dates, realized that she wasn't ready to date anyone yet, so she broke it off. During the rest of high school, she just went to school, did her home work and hung out around the house or the bait shop.
When she got accepted to NYU, she thought about everything and realized it was time to get over Seth and finally move on. When she ran into Ryan, she was happy to see a familar face and after awhile became best friends with him and months later started dating. ( for the rest of the Ryan and Summer dating/marriage info, look in Ryan's background. )
When Ryan left Newport, he thought that everything was going to go back to the way it was before Ryan even came to Newport and he couldn't go through it again, so he left a note for his parents and one for Summer before he left. He sailed to Tahiti, but after a few months of living on his boat and going to school, as well as working at a diner, became depressed about being there, because he wanted to go there with Summer. So he called Luke and went to stay with him, where he finished school, dated a few girls and even got a job working at the car dealership the Luke's father owned.
Seth eventually went to college in Florida with Luke, where he dated a few other girls. He met one girl, Sarah, who he thought he could have an actual relationship with, being the first after his intense relationship with Summer. But after a year, Seth found Sarah cheating on him with her ex - boyfriend and blamed him self for ruining there relationship and didn't date anyone again.
After graduating college with an art and graphics degree, he opened his own company, where he published ideas that he came up with. He wanted to publish Atomic County, but couldn't because it brought back to many memories when he would work on a new issue. So he came up with different ideas and his company soared. He has now chosen to open a new branch of his company in LA and also chosen to move back to Newport in the process, hoping he could fix things between Ryan, his parents and hopefully Summer.
After Ryan left Newport, Marissa turned to beer and other alcoholic beverages to numb the pain and after a few months of trying to get her to stop drinking, Julie told her that if she didn't stop drinking, she was sending her to rehab. Marissa refused and after a long long arguement on the subject, Marissa ended up moving to Hawaii and lived with Jimmy. Before Marissa left Newport, she tried to get Summer to help her think of a way to get her to stay in Newport, but they couldn't think of anything. Which caused Marissa to blame Summer for her having to leave and they had a big fight before Marissa left and haven't resolved it.
Once in Hawaii, Marissa continued to drink and one day, Jimmy came home from work to find Marissa passed out from drinking. Having seen it to many times before with her, just carried her to her room and put her in bed. The next day, he went to check on her and she still wasn't waking up, so he took her to the hospital and she had her stomach pumped. When Marissa finally woke up, she had a long talk with Jimmy and realized she needed to straighten out.
Marissa finished high school and went to a college near Jimmy and graduated with a degree in Journalism. She dated a few guys, but compared each of them to Ryan, so in her eyes, they weren't good enough. After doing this for a while, she gave up on dating all together and focused on her career and has now been offered a job working taking over the Newport Living Magazine for Julie, is moving back to Newport, hoping to straighten out the rest of her life.
Sandy and Kirsten are still happily married and Kirsten is running the Newport Group. Kirsten went to rehab and got better and returned a few months later, completely cured and Sandy is still working in his law firm.
Julie is single now that Caleb has died, but received a large amount of money from his will, as well as her mansion. Julie is also still running the Newport Living Magazine.

We struggled to find places where the menu wasn't entirely fried. This place was great from start to finish. The free bread and dip was awesome. The sushi was great. I even tried the mofungo. It was as good as mofungo probably ever it is - I am not a fan of fried food. I would highly recommend going here. Beware that they appear to be closed on Wednesdays as we tried to get one more meal here before we flew out and they were closed.
Own or manage this property? Claim your listing for free to respond to reviews, update your profile and much more.

Disclaimer: Avengers and all its related-ness does not, in the slightest, belong to me. If it did, you could all expect to see Shanta in the next movie. Just sayin'.
The Littlest Avenger
New York City was huge, Shanta decided. Huge and looming, but it reminded her of home. Well, not home- New York City was home now.
There were people everywhere, like her old city, though they were dressed differently- in "suits"- and all the buildings crowded together, right on top of each other. The biggest difference between the cities was how clean New York was. The roads were all paved, with gray sidewalks, and no dust in sight.
There was also a complete lack of trees and grass and flowers.
Shanta didn't like it.
But, it would be fine. She could deal with no trees, no grass, no flowers, no dust on the streets. She could handle all the changes, because she wasn't alone anymore.
It had been a long time since she hadn't been alone, the little girl thought, slipping her hand into a much larger, much rougher one.
Dr. Bruce Banner. This was the name of her new "father", her new guardian.
Shanta knew he had been alone, like she had been. She knew he had been alone for far longer than her.
So, they had agreed to be alone together. Much better than being alone with no one, Shanta decided. Even in a city crowded and brimming with people.
Trailing along behind Bruce, Shanta was amazed at how many cars filled the streets. Far more than she had ever seen in her life, and all of them shiny and new.
Bruce flagged down a taxi, his shoulders tenser than they had been in days. New York City always put him- and the Other Guy- on edge. Too many people, too many buildings, much, much too close, and everything much, much too breakable.
Once, he had broken Harlem. Another time, he had broken Manhattan (It was being attacked by alien invaders at the time, but that was besides the point). Bruce Banner and his other half, the Hulk, were not heroes. They had broken so much, in so little time. If Bruce had his way, after Loki's defeat, he would have gone somewhere far, far anywhere from civilization. Like Alaska. Or maybe Canada.
Greenland didn't have a huge population either, right?
But, he didn't have that option anymore. He felt the heavy weight of a hand in his; He had made his choice. He could protect, instead of destroy- the Avengers Initiative had showed him that. He could do more than survive- the little girl by his side had showed him that.
Bruce wanted to protect Shanta more than anything. He wanted to protect her even better than he had ever protected Betty. And he knew a certain group of people who could help.
A/N: Annnd, here's the first chapter of what, hopefully, will be a multi-chapter fic about little Shanta, an OFC who has many different headcannons over on Avengersheadcannons on tumblr. A really cool site, and I really recommend it!

Paramedics were called to Camacho's girlfriend's home in West Covina Monday. They performed CPR but could not save his life. Camacho, 41, was declared dead at Citrus Valley Medical Center-Queen of the Valley Campus.
Dozens of his friends, students and loved ones gathered to honor his memory at UFC Gym in Rosemead following news of his death.
"He would always give me tips, advice on what to do during a match," said Hector Ruiz, 16. "Or even in just regular life -- how to talk to people, how to greet people, mannerism ... he was a really good guy."
Camacho's girlfriend, Maggie Arechiga, says he complained of chest and arm pains Sunday night while at her home. She believed he was having a heart attack and said she'd take him to the hospital.
"He didn't want to, and his last words to me were 'I love you' and he put the blanket over himself," said Arechiga.
Arechiga says Camacho was used to pain and maybe thought he could win this fight. Despite her grief, she says she wanted to be strong at Monday's candlelight vigil.
"I just got some strength out of nowhere, maybe it was Joe," said Arechiga. "He put it in me and let me go out there and put a smile on everyone else's faces like I know he would have."
Camacho had recently opened his own Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu Academy in downtown Los Angeles.
"He was incredibly patient and he believed in you when you didn't believe in yourself," said Sergio Quintero, who trained with Camacho at the UFC Gym.
Camacho's teaching style earned him a tremendous amount of respect and a loyal following of fighters of all levels.
"He was a good friend. I'm sad to see him go," said Quintero.
It remains unknown if Sunday's competition played a role in his death. An autopsy is scheduled to determine Camacho's exact cause of death.

Well, I'm not an anti snake person or anything like that. As a rule I don't kill non poisonous snakes.
We have a snake here, some folks call it a "milk snake" or a "house snake", they are very similar in color as a copperhead. Unless you get a good look at them they are very hard to tell apart.
You guys remember when I was working on the "old shack" or the King's house. (Up at camera #4.) Anyway, back when the man from the gas company came up to set my propane tank and run the lines and all. The man was there tinkering around drilling a hole through the block wall, and I just told him to keep his eyes peeled for snakes. He asked me why, you see, we'd killed a copperhead and a rattlesnake in the front yard that summer. That was it for him, he was done, finished for the day.
Wardney was with me, the man left a spool of copper pipe, told us how deep he wanted it buried and took off. Said give me a call when it's ready, and he was gone!
Above where you said get a dog. I'll tell you this real quick. I've posted pictures of my beagle, Tina. The little girl was almost 17, when she kicked the bucket on us. She was a good dog!
I was up on the back side of the mountain one day, I had Tina with me, I took her everywhere. I was driving around the side of the mountain, Tina was over on the passenger side. It was warm out, had the windows down, and there was a bear walking toward us, 50 or 75 yards out. The dog climbed across me, jumped out the window and the chase was on!
Oh, it was funny! A fifty some pound beagle running wide open towards a 150 pound bear. And the bear was still walking toward us! I never did time her through the "50 yard dash", but she was pouring it on! Tina would have been 5 or 6 years old at the time, she was in her prime. Good shape and solid as a rock. The bear jumped up on the high side of the road and took off, the last glimpse I had of the bear and dog, Tina was gaining ground on it.
I drove on up on top, talked to the guy up near the TV towers, he said he'd heard the dog coming, the bear ran across the road with a beagle on it's butt. It was getting hot, and Tina came back to me with her tongue hanging out about that far. Give or take, the chase only lasted 30 minutes or so?
Tina was one special little dog!

Welcome to another installment of Musings! What story will you tell?
Joel watched her long slender fingers grip the bishop piece, the tips of her nails resting on its gentle sloped top. Make your move, I’m ready. He’d accounted for this play, was ready for it.
His lips almost spread into a smile, but he couldn’t celebrate, not until she’d played right into his hands.
He watched her hazel eyes study the board. She was planning too.
She turned the piece on the spot, never lifting it from its square. It was a slow torture to be teased with the promise of winning, unable to claim the prize until she released that bishop.
How was it that he was the winner, but she held the key to his freedom?
His focus was brought back to the present as he watched her chew on her bottom lip. God, that drives me crazy. It was a habit of hers, something she did when she was concentrating, holding things together… losing control.
The game was forgotten when his mind traveled back to the night before,, when she bit her lip as she turned to look over her shoulder, his name through her teeth, her muscles squeezing tight.
Staying in his seat was becoming difficult. Thoughts of all the ways he loved her filled his head. He bounced the ball of his foot beneath the table, watching her release the bishop and pick up her knight.
“Check.” Her eyes were still on the board, still focused, oblivious of the effect she had.
It was a move he didn’t expect, a new tactic. He’d always admired her intellect, her logic. In that moment, he admired even more, watching the swell of her chest when she inhaled.
“Mate in two moves. Your turn, unless you want to yield.” Her voice was soft and playful, her smile wide.
Two moves? We’ll see about that. He rose from his chair, ignoring the knight and capturing his queen.

You are never too old to fall in love and to get married. There are many stars in Bollywood who got married after they turned 40 years of age. Some of them are celebrities who married after 50. These are all people who prove that when it comes to love and marriage, age is just a number. In fact, these include some people who had waited for years while dating to get married and even some who had never thought about marriage until something came up in their lives.
Many had been following Urmila Matondkar and her exploits with Ram Gopal Varma, but the actress tied the knot at 42 with someone else. She stuck with Moshin Akhtar Mir, a prominent businessman and model, for her husband. Like with many other celebrities, she had a secret ceremony that was revealed to the public on social media.
The interesting thing about Urmila’s marriage is that it was rather surprising. Although people loved to follow her on social media to see what she and Moshin were doing, their marriage ended up being very surprising. It took the media by surprise throughout India.
Lisa Ray has been a growing name in Bollywood, but it would not be until she was 40 when she got married to Jason Dehni, a popular management consultant who works with many Bollywood stars. Ray stated that she was glad that she did not get married at a younger age as she felt a marriage too soon might have been a mistake. She proves that sometimes it is best to wait for a bit before getting married.
Preity Zinta had not held much of an interested in getting married, but the actress decided to get married late in the game because her mother felt it would be the right thing for her to do. At 41, she married Gene Goodenough. The couple got married in 2016 in Los Angeles, where Goodenough is originally from, instead of somewhere a little closer to home in India.
John Abraham has become one of the hottest studs in the Indian acting world, but he waited until he was 41 to get married. He fell for Priya Runchal, a popular investment banker, and soon after they got married. What’s interesting about this is that Abraham was able to keep this private until he posted a message on social media about his wedding.
The next of our celebrities who married over 40 is about someone’s second marriage. Aamir Khan was 45 when he got married to his second wife, Kiran Rao. He figured that there’s nothing wrong with trying again, and no one can really argue with him about it.
Saif Ali Khan
Saif Ali Khan looked to find love after first marriage fell apart in 2004. He dated Rosa Catalano for a period, but it is still unclear as to why their relationship ended so suddenly. But Saif Ali Khan had a happy ending in 2012 when he got married at 41 to Kareena Kapoor. The two had been dating for nearly four years before they finally decided to tie the knot.
Boney Kapoor had not originally planned to marry Sridevi. But the two Bollywood stars would eventually get hitched when Kapoor was 40 years old in 1996. They got married after Sridevi became pregnant. He felt it was the right thing to do for her.
Some Indian celebrities who married late are ones who married very young. Sanjay Dutt is one such example. He was 49 years of age when he married Manyata in 2008. She was 30 years of age at the time.
Neena Gupta had been struggling with love for years. She dated Alok Nath for a while and was engaged with Shaarangdev for a bit, but the wedding was canceled. Even worse, it was Shaarangdev who called it off. Gupta also had a daughter in her relationship with Caption Richard, but even then she could not tie the knot with him.
But in 2008, Gupta finally found the love she had been missing. She was 48 when she married Vivek Mishra. The two actually met each other six years earlier. They went out to the United States to get married. In fact, Mishra proposed to her while in the United States and would get married just a few moments after that. It proves that while Gupta had struggled to find love for so long, she would eventually get it once and for all.
Popular filmmaker Aditya Chopra was 42 when he married actress Rani Mukherjee. The two of them did take their time when getting married; they were dating for about three years before getting hitched. If they had dated any longer, Rani could have been included on this list. She was 35 when they got married.
While there are many great stars who got married after 40, there are also plenty of celebrities who married after 50 that deserve to be noted. Kabir Bedi is one such star. On 2016, Bedi turned 70 years of age and married Parveen Dusanj. This was Bedi’s fourth marriage. This did have some controversy attached to it as Bedi and his daughter Pooja Bedi were in a very rough patch in their relationship.
Not Bollywood actors who married late are ones that married people significantly younger or older than they are. Suhasini Mulay is a good example of this. The actress was 60 when she married Atul Gurtu, a man only five years her senior.
So, what can all these couples teach us? They prove that there is nothing wrong with waiting to get married. If anything, it might be best to wait because there is always time to get a little more experience with love before getting married. All of these couples are great ones who show what love is truly all about.

I thank God for your life!
Some months ago, I wrote to you concerning a friend of mine, whose ex-wife was giving him a hell of a time. The situation was so bad, and the court was not helping much. There was so much injustice going on, and it was heart-breaking.
In fact, it got to a point our lawyer even wanted to put the law into his own hands just so my friend would be relieved.
In the midst of all the chaos, I remembered a testimony you read in church some time ago, about a guy who was found guilty about something and was later set free by the power of God after you prayed for him.
It was at this point that I sent in the mail, and you replied that you had prayed for him and that God, who rules the affairs of men, would intervene and cause justice to prevail.
Indeed, God has done it! The tables have now turned and things are much better.
We give God all the glory!

Have you ever wondered if male rape really happens? Have you ever thought of its possibility? Can a woman rape a man?.. Or do men rape other men….in Africa? We hardly hear anything like that. It is not realistic for a lot of us in Africa. How can a man be raped?? A lot of us would say…it is utterly impossible, it makes no sense. However, reality remains…it happens. There are more men who are sexually abused than you ever imagined.
An unforgettable story I gathered on male rape was how a cobbler died after many girls from a girls’ school took turns on him countless times to get them all satisfied sexually in Ghana. It was reported that the girls wouldn’t stop even though he pleaded with them that he was tired. This cobbler went unconscious and later died. This story was shocking and I had so many questions.
Men find it hard to accept their status of being victims of molestation; Be it rape or any other sexual act. Men are wired to be MEN and anything that threatens that is eliminated. That is why we do not hear stories of molested men. Men are usually molested as children. They are usually molested by family members or close family friends or friends. It seems nonexistent because many men do not pay attention nor even regard some of these happenings as molestation. They regard it as just a mere occurrence that will disappear from their memories after a while….usually it does; at least in their consciousness but in their subconscious, they battle with it everyday.
If you are a girl, you may find out that perhaps your boyfriend may be a victim of sexual molestation. If you are a guy, I may help you realize that perhaps the source of your problems is not witch craft but it is simply not dealing with your molestation issues.
Many men who are victims of sexual molestation were molested by their house helps or babysitters. A guy shared his story of being sexually molested as a child…it did not take much from him to share because he did not see it as such. He narrated his story; as a child, he wanted to go outside to play with his friends in the neighborhood but the maid took the key and inserted it in her ‘vagige’… to my subscribers, I’m sure you are familiar with the word by now. Being a kid, he ignorantly wanted to get the keys so he could go out to play. As he reached for it, the maid got hold of his hand and made him do unimaginable things a little boy could possibly do sexually. This aggravated as time went on into more explicit sexual experiences. “From there I simply knew I was born for this!”, he joked. That statement to him, was a mere joke and a positive effect. However, he has been sex crave as long as I knew him. He has never been in a relationship that lasted for weeks. He has no respect for women and that has been a major cause of his relationships breaking up. Are you fixing the puzzle now?
Men who have been molested by women usually do not express repugnance or regret. They are usually accepting of what happened to them. However, there is also a huge chunk of them who are disgusted, ashamed and angry at the thought of their experience.
It was weird trying to find out about victims of molestation but to my surprise there were too many victims. They were usually willing to talk about it because they felt it was a part of their sexual conquest growing up. However, there was this guy who told me his story of being molested by a maid servant as well. This guy shared his story and all I could read from his expressions were disgust and anger. He didn’t say much but all he vividly described was the foul smell of the maid’s ‘vagige’. ” I never seem to get that smell out of my mind”, he said in disgust. ” I see every woman and all I see is that smell. It is hard for me to think about women romantically without thinking about that smell”, he continued. I got to understand that, the smell was stuck in his mind because of how young he was when he was molested. His young mind was too young to process those things that were happening to him as much as a man would…he therefore accepted things as they were. He grew with it…and he has not been in any relationship before at 27 years.
As for men who have been molested by other men, it is simply a failed quest to get anybody to speak about it. The only time I heard such an incidence was on the news where young boys were raped by their football coach. C’mone, a typical guy whose been a victim of molestation will usually keep it to himself. Besides, “it is not made real if goes unspoken”. It is a shame to be dominated by another man, it is unheard of. But the fact still remains that there a 1001 men in Africa who are molested by other men every other time. If you are a victim, you have got to work on it and not ignore it especially when it affects you.
Some men go through struggles because of molestation of the past. Until they deal with it, their struggles will remain. What are those struggles? Well…;
4.Fear of a particular sex
6.Lack of respect for a particular sex
The list goes on…. Don’t let any of these define you.

A/N: Written for the Diversity Writing Challenge, c17 - write at least five reincarnations (slightly different) of the same scene.
A Mother's Indecision
Never had Nora thought that she would be leaving her dear children behind: the children she had borne, that she had nurtured when it wasn't the midwife or, as they grew older, the nanny, scrubbing them and scolding them and forcing food into their protesting mouths…
In a way, they were dolls as well, dolls she played with when the fancy struck her but she left most of their well-being to others: the midwife, then the nanny, then when they'd grow older still the Governess that would school them in all manners of growing up. Because they weren't improvised. They could afford a Governess and much else besides and children like that didn't have much use for their mother, in the end. Her duty was already done.
And yet, it was still difficult to think of leaving them, once the question arose. And it took a very long time in arising as well.
Except he played that card, the children, and she heard her voices in the morning wondering where she'd gone, why she didn't love them, and she broke down in tears like the child she was deep inside and dropped her bag.
The maid unpacked it for her.
I should leave, she thought. She was dwindling away, becoming more a doll in this house than she cared to be and suddenly she yearned for freedom. Perhaps her husband was right, though. It was a flighting fancy, like her want for macaroons when she went to do the shopping. She could pack her bags and unpack them and that might be enough to rid herself of that desire.
For now, it was still there.
She packed her bags – slowly, almost lethargically, and she heard her two children quarrelling in their playroom, and the nanny's scolding voice.
She'd had to work somewhere, once she was out and about on her own. Her seamanship was rather poor, but maybe she could become a nurse, or a Governor, or a nanny. Being a nanny was rather easy. And many households needed nannys.
I can just stay here and be a nanny. But what good would that be? If I do get tired of it, I can go back to being the mother…
And wasn't that how their lives were? Inside the doll house, as dolls that could be moved from role to roll until they found the right one, but never leaving the house.
I could just try…for a little bit…
The nanny came in, eyes rimmed in black and wringing her hands. 'Mistress,' she gasped. 'The children are quarrelling and they won't listen to a word –'
Or I could not. Her husband was right, or perhaps it was the look of the nanny that made her grimace internally and outwardly she unpacked her cosmetics bag again. 'The Master is in the study,' she said.
She was the wife and the mother behind the door and the mistress of the house again.
The fancy struck her again, and this time the children were out with the nanny, a reward for their good behaviour. The house was empty without them, because her husband was a silent figure in the study and there was no wind to coax the wind chimes into a song.
Now would be the perfect time, she thought wistfully. No-one will even know. And many a time she'd gone shopping on such whims and enjoyed macaroons and brought a few necessities home to serve as the excuse. And her husband wound think their quarrel from the previous night had simply lit her desire for another sweet.
What it had lit, rather, was her desire for some freedom.
If she packed a bag and took it with her, she could stay out a little later, go a little further – perhaps she could escape the doll house as well. Maybe there wouldn't be anything to change her mind then. No husband twisting his words just so, no children making noise to pull at her heart strings so effortlessly…
But she found herself buying more macaroons than she could eat anyway, saving a few to sneak to them to the children like she always did, and wondering what they'd done with the nanny, wondering…
And she found herself drifting home as well and slipping the macaroons into their still too small hands.
They went on a holiday. She, her husband, the kids and the nanny to look after them. She found herself just watching them. Of course, her husband was busy with other things as usual. As long as everyone in the house was as they should be, he didn't care. And the nanny watched the children. She had nothing to do. Nothing to be except the petite wife and mistress sitting under the shade while others milled about.
She could easily slip in amongst them, take off her bonnet and shawl and vanish into the nameless men and women. She could quite easily become one of those nameless women. Her husband wouldn't notice. He was too busy with other affairs and she was just his doll bride, expected to look the pretty part in public and remain out of sight otherwise. And her children were busy too. Playing. With the nanny doing all manner of motherly things, leaving her, the real mother, to simply sit under the shade of the tree and watch them.
It was an impersonal seat, an impersonal feeling. I would flee this. But she had nothing with her at the time, and she was sure the time it would take to collect her belongings would see her mind changed once again. Already, doubt crept into her mind. She wasn't angry enough. Driven enough. Her patience ran out quickly but her drive dwindled. And she was afraid. She knew very little of this place, and her husband oft reminded her how little she knew of the world at all.
And so she stayed, and their ungracious holiday passed in the same manner as it had begun, and perhaps only the children were truly happy.
No… Nora looked at both their faces in turn. They were weary too.
But soon you'll be off to boarding school, my dears, she thought. And then their sweet faces could not be used to dissuade her any longer.
The pair of them were shouting in the corridors and, this time, the children were peeking around the banister, looking and listening. They were to go to boarding school and Torvald disagreed with her choice, stating it too grand. Nora was bitter about that, as she had worked before and knew the value of money like the doll wife Torvald had wanted to keep would never have. And that reminder rekindled the flame, the desire for freedom.
'That is right,' she said, her tone flat, 'I know the value of money, and hard work as well. I am not a helpless doll who cannot live without her doll's hose – and, no Torvald, I shan't be persuaded in this again. The children are grown and will be on their own way soon enough.'
And he could not argue that, for his doll's house, his perfect household, demanded the children go to boarding school at their age – or the eldest at least. Torvald lacked the argument he'd used time and again to restrain her, and unwittingly had given Nora the other in hand. Oft she forgot, in her flighty thoughts, that she had worked to pay off that trip to Italy for him. When scolded like a child, the thought remained tucked away. When called a child explicitly she recalled.
'But where will you go?' a last, desperate bid, but this time Nora was stubborn, committed, and the maid had so graciously packed her bag as well. Perhaps she, too, understood.
'I will be a nanny someplace,' she said carelessly, 'or a maid, or a Governess. Or my good friend Mrs Linde might help me. She understands my plight.'
'You'll come back,' Torvald muttered, repeating, 'You'll come back.'
Perhaps. For Nora had turned back from that path so many times. It may be that she would again. But she had to get past this. At least try. But still… 'Will this home be open should I return?' asked Nora, sounding much like the child she was oft accused of being.
Torvald watched her, thinking, hesitating. Then he gave a nod and with relief, Nora was free to explore the opportunity till she found another place in the world or returned to this.

A woman has come forward and told police she was raped by a stranger in a field.
Police say she was attacked in the field near North Drive, Harwell, between 9.30pm and 11pm on Monday, December 2, and reported it this month.
The attacker has been described by police as 30 to 35 years-old, white with a tan and more than 6ft tall. He had short dark hair.
Det Insp Louise Roddy, from Abingdon Force CID, urged people to call 101.
She said: “We are in the early stages of this investigation, but I urge people to think back to December and if they have any information, however small, to contact us.”

We are hoping to receive our field set sometime this week. I phoned Spectrum late last week and was told they were being shipped out at the beginning of this week. It’s always exciting for the kids to get their new field set and begin trying to figure out what the challenge may involve. If anyone else in Ontario has received their field set, please let us know. Last year we were somehow missed and as a result were late getting ours, so I am keeping an even closer eye on things this year.

As sakura tried so hard to get sasuke attention and destract the raven.
Naruto left for the bathroom during lunch but once he entered he saw someone they had there backs turned.
The blond decided to just act like he barely noticed and went to one of the stalls until he was stopped as someone placed a bag over the kitsune's head chocking him in the process before he was brought to the groud.
With sasuke and sakura
Sasuke kept pushing sakura off of him but as hours of pushing the clingy girl off of him sasuke got worried about naruto and got up to go check on him.
As the raven got up he finally got sakura off of him and went to find naruto soon the very first place was the bathrooms cause they were closer anyway but he wasn't so sure naruto could be any were.
So as sasuke was close to the boys bathroom he heard laughing and wimpering wondering what it was sasuke walked in as 5 boys turned to look at sasuke and they smiled "oh hey sasuke" one of them said "don't hi me like we're friends cause were not anyway who's behind you 5" sasuke says as they wimpering continued until one of them stumped something causing the sound to stop, "nothing sasuke hehe" one of them says as sasuke walked closer.
Boy 1 gulped as he knew what sasuke can be capable of but did what he could to stop the uchiha "wait sasuke how's your brother doing" boy 1 says smiling and sasuke just glared at him "that's none of your darn buisness" sasuke growled as he pushed the five boys as side as he saw someone tired up he didn't know who it was but they were wimpering, he looked at the 5 who were slowly away but that's when menma stepped in the bathroom he was ticked "who's hurting my brother" he says as he saw sasuke kneeling down in front of the person. Who was wimpering and trying stay still.
But once the bag was off sasuke eyes turned red as the lights started to blow out as each one exploded cause the 5 to scream.
Soon after hours later of screaming menma wasn't in there long he ran for it literally he sanded outside the front door of the boys bathroom as he bit his wrist causing it to bleed.
Sasuke on the other hand was still tormenting to 5 boys who were screaming like Girls literally though all they could see was sasuke red eyes until the uchiha stopped as he was hugged from behind as sasuke staid still and began calming down once he felt like someone was biting into his neck as he calmed down soon the person stopped and hit the floor well almost as sasuke caught them just in time the lights turned on finally as he saw naruto in his arms.
"N-naruto" sasuke says sadly as he looked at the 5 who were nocked out sasuke also found out he had little chakara left so sasuke was left in trouble as menma walked on as he saw sasuke with naruto in his arms "sasuke wha......"
"This isn't the time right now menma go get me a cloak and also naruto one and plus get Tsunade and kakahsi sensai" sasuke says as menma nodded and ran out the bathroom sasukie entered "get thoughs 5 boys in the nurses office" sasuke says whole still holding naruto close to sasukie nodded as he picked up the boys and walked out as if there weren't heavy but once he got there he instently hit the floor as he as asking for help he didn't have enough energy for this at least he still had enough chakara to hid his animal parts.
Soon the nurse helped sasukie and we'll yup he was talked about.
Menma did what he was told and gave sasuke a cloak and put one on his brother and kakashi walked in "what happened" kakashi says worried "naruto was beaten up" sasuke says looking up at his teacher soon tsunade just walked in like she didn't care and loomed over naruto "this is bad were gonna need to take him to the hospital" she says as the 3 nodded.
Soon months past and sasuke and Menma got over protective of naruto who was in a coma and still hasn't woke up the two started taking turns on who was gonna watch over him while the other left to use the bathroom, or go to school.
They even did naruto homework for the blond fox menma had been ignoring sasukie for his brother though at times he did spend time with sasukie when he had the chance.
Soon one night naruto started moving around and wincing as sasuke turned the lights on and looked at naruto who was shaking the uchiha just hugged the blond softly as singed him a softly lallyuby which always worked sending the blond back to sleep happily.
Soon 123 months came around
December 15th morning
Sasuke woke up in his bed as he felt someone cuddling him as he looked down he was met with a pair of sky blue eyes as he was surprised "morning sasuke" naruto sasuke "naru" sasuke says getting up as he looked at the blond who was lookin right back at him "I missed you so much" sasuke says as he hugged naruto who started crying "sorry you ok" sasuke says but naruto just continued to cry in the uchiha shirt and snuggled up to sasuke who hugged back after awhile sasuke got out of bed and looked at the blond "wanna go to school or stay home" sasuke says looking at naruto "I wanna go with you" naruto says pointed at sasuke like he was a little kid.
Sasuke smiled and kissed naruto's nose and got him phone and called itachi "hand on naruto I'll call my brother to get you a wheel chair ok naru" sasuke says and smiled happily.

When I had a real job, I was an employment specialist on behalf of persons with disabilities. The biggest barrier was the fact that employers always wanted experience. However, with a 50% unemployment rate and no experience, it was always a challenge.
It sounds to me to be a similar case. It becomes how much money they invest as a loss leader, trying to get that experience to hopefully bid on later contracts, which is very much a dangerous business model.

Domestic Employee From 0 To 8 Properties In 3 Years
Introduction Of Domestic Employee From 0 To 8 Properties In 3 Years
Domestic Employee From 0 To 8 Properties In 3 Years. How many years in you 60 years he just turned great good in feces And how we met through her sister-in-law now down with her sister-in-law there is an avenue that you had because we met I began to listen to her attitude and also my teacher.
Despite the salary that I earned
Who in her sister-in-law because she is the one who, as I can say, can be like that guide that I have at the bottom that I listen to it but in your podcast, I also listen to what I listen to and it is when I listen to you that it says that anyone can get what they want and that anyone in need can be giving something cheap and that which.
I can take advantage of it to buy and then all those things because I was like saying no because I am going to do it or suddenly I listen to you but I want to put in practice what you are beginning to talk about what you are teaching in the podcast between I said no that I am going to start is to put into practice to see how I am going to see.
How true it is because I always like how to investigate or how to get to the point to see if this is true I can do it but that is where I go on any given day ' despite the salary that I earned when at that time and I earned 25 thousand pesos making steel in the apartment, doña Bibiana I want I time it was like 10 dollars is more or less so.
I looked at a lot with pleasure abandoned
I earned that was the day and finish the bollards so I paid for transportation to help in the house and it was there where I already started because looking at how I said I am going to put in practice and so once I left with that talk and I am not going to spend this money, I will look to see where I am going to find myself in the lot that don Carlos says or to get out of that house.
That don Carlos says that I can find it and that there may be a need Since he is going to give it to me cheaply, that's how I went to the Belisario side that was the first lot that I bought so I was going down the street and I looked at a lot with pleasure abandoned as no one puts it at hand. It was like a garbage can with a garbage boot so I asked the neighbors.
How much the hotel is worth, look not the one of so-and-so but then neither gm is there because that is why there is not even if but that I more, however, I remembered their Words that one should take advantage of the opportunities so I went and asked who the owner was I spoke with the owner told me.
The truth is that my wife is no longer
If you give me nine million one after another I will sell it to you because the truth is that my wife is no longer she died I was left alone my children are no longer here and well, I kind of have nothing else, I have no aspirations for him and I want to sell that lot because I have no money to build I did not have that money well.
I spoke with the lord and I told him well that h Oh, outside of that, the deeds of the deed had to be paid, they were worth 2 million pesos and that did correspond to me because he did not have a peso to do the deeds. After all, the lot was with protocolization but ready to get deeds I needed the million pesos.
I had one million pesos two million two million for welding and well then I arrived and told the man because I have two million pesos that I still did not have in my hands but then in my head they were in his hands. two million pesos because I'm going to work and I'm going to get these 500 anyway, but I'm going to get them and I'll still tell you, choose not that lot, no more than 9 million lots.
I don't have money but I'm already offering him 7 million
It's worth 7, and if you want 7, I'll give it like this. But I don't have money but I'm already offering him 7 million for the other so he said yes, but I don't have all that money in my hands, I have two million, you will see what we do if you receive these do s millions and put the figures correctly, how am I going to pay you?
I am working, I had a million, five hundred million and 500 that we had saved with my husband or buy anything that I could not suddenly buy myself a cow in the house but then I start to buy And here in Cali the pain is very expensive, which is very difficult for me, but then and with them, I told my husband, look what happens for health.
There the other problem because we expected that the government would give me a subsidy. husband or he gives the subsidy to me but if we appear with a purchase in our name when we were going to lose that benefit I for a year then we buy the hotel we put it in the name of my nephew and on top of that the man accepted did not receive.
The quota of 500 weekly per week despite
The two million gave me the quota of 500 weekly per week despite getting me three jobs that I spent with that it started to come out that my day was going out for 110 so then a question what that What I mean is that it was very hard for you to realize that you could get much more expensive than it would be to earn much more and that you could pay me 200 that.
I square 1500 a week and we started working like this now we put the hotel my nephew when we went already with the deeds and everything because that was his name was legally his name but thank God he gives us many things I do not know how to sell corn, but well there we have already sold it, why don't we buy 17 million to hesitate.
When I was 72 or I had to get to work As my husband told him, he placed me between the two of us, we paid it, but then what is a profit we sold it in 18 or he actually bought it 9 plus 27 newer Leonora double how long in 18 that was how he did not manage to spend a year on commands six months because.
A time for there that was worth 18 million
We went we cleaned them very nice we did not close with that green canvas and as advice was to build and without a red god to sell empanadas because the place was very beautiful I saw It could be possible if everything was sold but if not because of Mysore's problem, he does not sell it to us from the other but hey we already sold it and then.
We already had that talk they called me that there was a time for there that was worth 18 million and we immediately next 14 power and if she negotiates to see 14 she traveled and if not she does not heal without seeing it law and almost without seeing it, that is, I was already as if becoming one, not hard, a doubt that I said, well, it was me with the good measures.

Note: The following appears in the Florida State football gameday program.
Although it sounds cliché, graduate Aidan Swanson was born to be a kicker. Throughout his life, he has continued to be resilient and fall back on his morals to help him persevere through adversity and live out his dream.
Swanson grew up in Tampa, Fla. and played football, baseball and basketball during his school years at Nativity Catholic School. He specifically recalled being a specialist for his recreational league teams, as well as constantly practicing kicking a football in the backyard.
“I’ve been kicking all my life, since flag football as a six-year-old. I’ve always been the kicker or punter. My dad tells me stories from when I was a kid. I had a Nerf football and would put it on the ground to kick it. I was four or five then.”
While the passion to kick a football had been burning in Swanson since he could walk, it was not until his sixth-grade year that he decided to focus strictly on kicking for the football squad. Swanson’s dedication was immediately recognized, as he earned the starting job in his sophomore season for the well-respected Jesuit High School varsity team. At the conclusion of his sophomore year and first season as the starter, he earned all-county and all-state honors.
It was during that summer that he had the opportunity to play at IMG Academy to finish out his high school career. At that point, Swanson was faced with the difficult decision to leave his teammates and friends at Jesuit High School.
“When the IMG Academy opportunity arrived, it was a tough decision for me to leave home. It was an hour and a half south of Tampa. I was going to be home only on the weekends. However, the opportunity to play all over the country and put myself out there for recruiting purposes and join the brotherhood they had down there to compete for a national championship was very important.”
During that summer, Swanson traveled to Clemson to attend a specialist-only camp. His performance at the camp was recognized when he was singled out by Head Coach Dabo Swinney and offered a preferred walk-on spot.
“Coach Swinney wanted to see me after the kicking session during lunch. He said we are giving you a preferred walk-on spot. Going into my junior year, specialists don’t usually get an offer that early, so that was huge.”
In the spring of Swanson’s junior year, following another successful football season, he received a call from Danny Pearman saying that Clemson was offering him a full scholarship.
“I wanted to commit right after he offered it to me, but I needed to discuss it with my parents first. After talking with them, I committed that night, the same day I received the offer.”
Coincidentally, it was always Swanson’s dream to play football at Clemson. He shared this dream with both his parents, but specifically his mother, Gena, who graduated from Clemson. While Swanson and his mother have shared in their love for Clemson for many years, the two have developed an even closer relationship in the last few years.
Following Swanson’s commitment to Clemson, his mother was diagnosed with breast cancer. Not only does she continue to inspire her son, she continues to support his dreams and aspirations as a player and person.
“My mom found out she had breast cancer in November 2018, and she didn’t want to tell me before I left because she knew I was going to want to stay there and be with her and not be far away. She told me to come up here and live out my dream, which was to play football here. The bond we have is very tight, and I wouldn’t be here without her and my dad’s guidance.”
Now in his fifth season at Clemson, it is safe to say that #39 has taken advantage of the Tiger experience, as well as his opportunities available to him with the program off the field. He is a P.A.W. Journey ambassador and earned his degree in marketing. During the past two summers, he has interned with TD SYNNEX in Greenville.
However, his ultimate goal is to find a career in sports radio and begin his own sports podcast. In his final season as a Tiger, Swanson has begun to reflect on his time in Tigertown and what Clemson has meant to him, as well as his hopes for the future.
“I don’t want to finish with any regrets. I’ve had a great career here so far. I also want to put myself in the best position to succeed after football, whether it be with sports radio, sports podcast, TD SYNNEX, sales or marketing. I actually have my own sports podcast that I do alongside a close friend and my bother, Liam.
“I want to leave my mark on the program and leave it better than how I found it. I want to make sure the guys in the specialist room know how to carry themselves and how to represent the program in the correct way.”
Outside of football, he is involved in his Catholic faith. His father’s mother immigrated from Ireland, and she passed on the Irish Catholic faith to the family. He considers prayer to be an important routine during his daily life.
“My faith is a huge part of my life. I say a prayer before every game. My ultimate goal is to have a definite knowing that I will be in heaven when my time here is over.”
As Swanson’s career as a Tiger comes to a close, there is no doubt that he has left his mark on Clemson football. Whatever obstacles he encounters in his life, he will exercise what he has gained from his faith, family and Clemson football to guide him.

Before proceeding on official tour, I had left my car in parking lot of house where my sis in law stayed. I had left the keys with sis in law’s husband. It was a short trip. When I landed at airport, I thought of picking up the car and then to home. Just after leaving airport, I called Neha (sis in law) and asked whether she was at home. I informed her that I would pick up the car and then go home. She was available.
On reaching the flat where this couple stayed, I rang door bell. Neha opened the door. I asked her to give the keys so that I can immediately proceed for home. She urged me to have a cup of tea. It was already 12 noon and was the time for tea. I resisted, but she insisted. I went inside and sat on sofa, relaxed. She went inside, possibly to prepare tea. But it took longer. So I called for her. She replied that she would be there in five more minutes.
She turned up after five minutes – in changed clothes. She was wearing jeans with cotton top, which was tightly fitting on her. I thought, she was going to accompany me to my residence to meet my wife. I asked had about tea. She said that it was not really the time for tea. So I suggested that both of us should proceed to my house, assuming she was coming with me. She told me that she was not anywhere. She suggested me to have a beer, instead. I reluctantly agreed. She fetched a bottle of ice cold beer and two glasses. She filled up the glasses. We said cheers and started sipping beer. She then went inside and brought some snacks. I observed that she had opened the top three / four buttons of her cotton top, halfway exposing her boobs. It was obvious that she had done so deliberately, with a purpose. I got the message.
“You are looking sexy, Neha!” I said. She said, “Not looking, I am. How do you like it?” I said, “What bullshit? What will Rekha (my wife) do if she comes to know what is on your mind?” Neha replied, “Don’t worry. She will understand. May be, at some other time, Atul (Neha’s husband) will be with Rekha ! How do like this idea?” I was excited. It would be great swapping wives. “I am all game for it. Where is Atul?”, I asked her. She informed that he was in office and he also had this idea.
“What we are waiting for?” I asked Neha. Instead of answering, she came near me and offered her shapely lips for a kiss. I took her in my arms and kissed her on her lips. It was a deep kiss. Her mouth was sweet and warm. She sucked on my tongue. It was great. She was still in my arms. My hands were freely moving on her back and her hips. Her hands were caressing my neck, my earlobes. We were slowly getting heated. I suggested that we should now go to bedroom. Nestled together, we went to the bedroom. The bedroom was large and comfortable.
After we reached the bedroom, I pulled off my shirt and stood bear chest. “Fantastic. What physique you have. Only bones and muscles” said Neha. “Atul is not bad too” I suggested. She said that he was OK. I approached her removed her cotton top. She wore nothing beneath her top. Her young, round, mid sized and firm milky boobs were all exposed to me. I bent started moving my tongue around one boob, while with my hand, I cupped the other boob and pressed it slightly. She groaned. I kept on licking her one boon, while my hand freely moved around the other boob. With tongue and mouth, I started encircling her one nipple while my hand pinched her other nipple. She was really enjoying it. With one hand, she kept my mouth firmly against her breast and pressed my hand hard on her other boob. She was letting out funny sounds.
After five minutes or so, I slightly pulled myself away and looked at her face. She was red. I said, “Our movements would be freer, if we are un-clothed, I feel.” Without a word, she un-zipped her jeans and pulled them down. Without hesitation, she removed her panties as well. Fully naked, she was really beautiful, delicate and shapely. I saw that her pussy was cleanly shaved, with healthy pink color. Neha said, “Amit, this is not fair. You still have your trousers on. Just get rid of them.” I teasing said, “Look, I am lazy sort of. Why don’t you do it for me?” She came closer, unzipped my trousers and pushed them down. I stepped out with my shorts on. She touched my shorts to pull them down. I held her hand. “What now, Amit?” I said, “Sit down and remove them.” She smiled and sat on her knees. Very delicately, she slowly started pulling my shorts down. In a jiffy, my dick was freed, pointing straight towards her mouth. She was staring at my dick. She gasped and said, “God! What a massive Amit Jr.!!! It seem you also clean off regularly. Ummm, I like it.” Holding my dick in her soft palm, she said, “Atul is nothing. Neither long, nor thick. You are simply great.” She was moving her hand back and forth all over my dick. With her other hand, she started massaging my balls. Her movements were extremely delicate. I was feeling great. “Ahhhh! You are very soft”, I said. She looked up at my face and said mischievously, “My mouth and tongue are softer. Should I try?” I said, “Its all yours. You are free to treat my little Amit the way you want. He is now very hungry, starving.”
She licker head of my dick with tip of her tongue and removed the pre-cum. She pushed the dick up and slowly, delicately started licking my balls. I held her head firmly over my dick and balls, pushing back her intruding hair. After sufficiently wetting my balls, she pulled my dick and started taking it in her mouth. Her movements were deliberately slow and delicate. Little by little, she took my dick in her mouth entirely. She must have been a great sucker. From the way she was playing, I was sure that she knew her job (blow?) well. Now I started groaning. The sounds she was making while sucking me were exciting me more and more. I said, “Neha, Atul is lucky. He must be getting a great treat every day. I wish Rekha liked this.” Slowly, she removed my dick from her mouth, took in her hand, stood up and said, “Atul does not really like this. He is a straight guy. As you said, Rekha also does not like this. Good. Atul and Rekha will enjoy, since both seem to be straight.”
Saying this, still holding my dick in her hand, the other hand around my neck, she kissed me deeply. We were kissing each other for almost five minutes. Kissing her was a great pleasure. Her mouth was delicate and sweet. Neha said, “Amit, I now really turned on. Please take me on a joy ride. I am unable to wait any longer.” I said, “Sure. But my tongue is hungry now. Let me satisfy its hunger.” I looked around and found a massive table adjacent to the wall. I lead her near the table, lifted her up and made her sit on the table. I lifter her legs and told her to hold them in position, so that I could eat her out. She held her legs, wide apart. Her pussy was inviting me now. I slowly bent down and moved my tongue over her pussy lips, sucking them once a while. She was not groaning loudly. I could make out her excitement. I parted her lips and moved my tongue freely up and down inside. Her juices were already streaming out.
“Good taste. You taste wonderful”, I said. She said, “Enough, Amit. Please, please take me now. I cannot hold on.” I got up and positioned my dick near her pussy. Slowly I entered her all the way and stood still, with my entire dick in her. I started moving back and forth, giving her mild strokes. She started parting her legs more and more and pushing her hips towards me. I was giving slow strokes deliberately. She was enjoying every bit of my fuck. I moved a step forward and kissed her. With my mouth on hers, I increased the speed. She was humming. Leaving her lips I said, “Are you enjoying?” She said, “Don’t ask silly questions. Just keep on fucking and kissing”. I obliged her. I once again placed my mouth on hers and fucked her hard and proper. Her delicate pussy was holding my dick firmly inside. I was now sweating. “Should I let go, honey?” I said. She said, “All the way. Fill me up.” After a few massive strokes, I let go. My cum was literally gushing out and filling her up. I was empty within moments.
“It was great, Neha. I have no words. Just remarkable, fantastic, great, splendid”, I said. Neha smile sweetly and said, “The same here. I have really enjoyed the fuck for the first time I believe. It will remain in my memory for ever. When Atul fucks me, I will keep on dreaming about you and may be, I will get the same satisfaction. Now you must be tired. Please have a glass of beer, while I warm up some food. Have lunch and then go.”
I went inside the bathroom, cleaned put a towel around my waist and stepped out, only to be shocked. Rekha was standing right in front of me. I felt a jolt and extremely nervous. She was staring at me seriously which made me more nervous. I could not look at her. I turned my face down about to apologize. Suddenly she laughed. “Come on hubby, don’t get nervous. It was all planned. I knew that you will be here for colleting the car. In fact, Neha and me had planned for it. You had your game and I am going to have mine now.” This was the ultimate shock for me. I wanted to speak something, but I could not. My mouth was wide open. Rekha was still laughing heartily. She said, “OK, Amit. It’s alright. Some change in routine is always good. Now I need a change. I will take on Atul. I am sure, you won’t mind,eh?”
I said, “Go ahead. You are perfectly correct. I will sit in the drawing room and send Atul here. Let me have some beer.” Rekha said, “No. I want you to watch us while we fuck. It will be a great experience – having watched, while getting fucked.” She called for Atul, “Atul, please come inside. I am ready and so is Amit. Neha will join after she is finished with her kitchen. Atul entered the room and gave me a hug. He said, “Hi buddy how was it all? I am sure it was great. I can make out from your face. I am happy that you have made my dear Neha happy. I love her too much and want to ensure that she gets what she desires. Thank you so much.”
I said, “Leave that crap and get on with the job. Rekha is eagerly waiting, isn’t it Rekha?” When I looked at Rekha, I saw that she had already removed her T shirt and jeans and was standing half naked in front of us. Atul immediately removed his upper clothing and approached Rekha. I sat on the easy chair in the room and called Neha for a beer.
Atul took Rekha in his hands and embraced her and so did Rekha. Both were moving their hands over their bodies. Atul kissed Rekha deeply on her mouth and Rekha reciprocated. They kept on kissing for a while. Now Neha entered the room with bottle and glass of beer and sat on the hand rest of the easy chair where I was sitting. To my surprise, she was stilled naked. Since we had finished just a while ago, we were not excited at all. Sipping beer, I was watching my wife being enjoyed by someone else. Atul un-hooked Rekha’s bra and dropped it. Slowly, he took her breasts in both his hand and started massaging them. Rekha removed Atul’s undergarment and held his dick in her hands, slowly massaging it. Atul also pulled down Rekha’s panties. Both were stark naked now.
I was getting excited now. I looked at Neha and pulled her closer. Neha said, “No, Amit. Let us first watch them. Then we can have fun. I have watched blue films quite a lot. But this is different – it’s live. Let us first enjoy the show.” I gave in and started watching Rekha and Atul. They were still kissing and embracing each other, delicately playing with each other. They did not seem to feel our presence at all. After a short while, Rekha said, “Atul, shall we? I am really feeling horny and wet.” Without a word, he led Rekha to the bed. Rakha lied on the bed and spread her legs. Atul pushed a pillow under her hips to raise the level of her cunt. He positioned in front of her cunt and slowly entered her. Rekhs threw her hands up and pulled Atul down. She pressed him firmly against her body. I was great to watch my wife getting fucked.
Their momentum increased and in matter of minutes, Atul emptied in Rekha. Both got up. Neha said, “Let’s have some food now. Amit, I believe you are through with your beer”. I showed her the empty bottle. We started dressing. Surprisingly, Rekha objected. She said, “No. Let us have food just like that – all naked”. We went into the dining room and finished our lunch in haste. Rekha said, ‘You have had your live show. Now I must have mine. I cannot join you.” I knew that once fucked, Rekha gets exhausted for the night. She pushed me and Neha to the bed and said, “Come on, now I will feast my eyes”.
This time, I went down on Neha first, once again sucking her all the way. She was already getting excited. I was also growing. I continued sucking for five minutes or so. “It’s your turn, Neha” I said. She said, “Come on. Just hand over your dick to me while I lye down. I got up and placed my knees on both the sides and she swallowed my dick immediately. I just turned my face to see what Rekha and Atul were up to. Rekha was watching us intently, while Atul was once again getting hard on. I turned again to Neka and winked at her. With my dick still in her mouth, she looked at her hubby having a good hard on. She removed my dick from her mouth and said, “Atul, why don’t you join us. You are already hard. I know you never liked blow jobs. But I do love it. Let me have a double treat today. Come on, engage me on both sides”.
Atul came and stood near the bed. Neha asked, “Atul, will you try doggy style today? I am sure, you will enjoy. Let us try this out.” Saying so, she pushed me aside and got up. She went on her knees and hands and gave an arch to her hips and buttocks. She said, “Come, my darling, enter me from the rare. And yes, Amit, bend on you knees so that I can suck you.” She immediately took me in her mouth, delicately sucking me. Atul positioned himself behind Neha, but was finding it difficult to penetrate her. Neha guided him inside her. Atul held her hips and started fucking her from the rear. His pushes gave a momentum to Neha to suck me. I also moved my hips to collaborate with their rhythm. Now I saw that Atul was wild and enjoying the new experiment.
When we were in full speed, both of us could not hold on. My cum filled Neha’s mouth while Atul filled her cunt. Rekha shouted, “Neha, please retain that milk in your mouth and cunt. Hold it on. I will taste it from you.” I was aghast. I had never expected this from my wife. She has been too conservative. But it was surely a pleasurable change. Rekha came near and first kissed Neha and took my cum from her mouth. She virtually swallowed all my cum. Immediately she went behind Neha and started opening up her cunt. Atul’s semen was already coming out of her cunt. Rekha sipped it all. She exclaimed, “It really tastes good. Sorry Amit. I should have tried this earlier – you had urged so many times, but kept on refusing. It seems everything happens when the time comes. I assure you, Amit, you will have it your way, any time, whenever you want. I love you and want to see you happy.”
I said, “Then this fun and exchange is now over. Both the couples go their own way. Fine.” Rekha said, “No, Amit. I have never said this. We will continue our fun. May be some time, Atul would come to terms with Neha.” Atul said, “I already have. But as you say, we must continue all this. Its great. I change in routine is always good.”
From then on both of our families have been enjoying a hell lot of sex and also orgies, like we had today.Post Views :49876

Saturday, December 10, 2005
I'd like to vent a little frustration. I'm now trying to buy my second house, and it isn't easy. We spent all afternoon driving around Columbus. I don't know if its like this in every city, but every house I liked was either too expensive, or in a rough neighborhood. And Mapquest doesn't always get it right either. It was pretty tough finding the houses we were looking for. Always at the front of my mind is the problem of selling our old house. What if we get stuck with two mortgages? A bunch of things are going right though. Though we haven't found a house, we really feel at home here. We've found some friends and we have a great church. We're also learning our way around the city. I enjoy my job here more than any job I've ever had. Chrissy also found a job. She is teaching art at a local school. I always told her I thought she was autistic (get it?). So even though there are many things I could worry about, there are also a lot of things I can be thankful for. I'm sure I'll look back at this blog one day and realize that it all worked out. It always does.

BAILEY ISLAND — Danny L. Evans, 59, died March 17 at his home.
His wish was to marry “the love of his life,” Diana Holcomb, and he did so just before his death.
He was born in Damariscotta on Feb. 9, 1953, a son of Frank Edward and Doris Caton Evans and was a self-employed boom truck operator.
A lifelong resident of Bailey Island, he loved spending time with his friends, attending car shows and reading. Evans was a founding member of the “Bailey Island Boys Club” and his friends there knew him as “Dr. Evans” and the “Staff Psychiatrist.” He will be remembered for his great smile.
He is survived by his wife, Diana Evans; his father; his brother, Barry Evans; and his sister Laura Evans and her husband, Christopher, all of Bailey Island.
A celebration of his life will be held at a later date.
Donations in his memory may be made to the Dean Snell Cancer Foundation, P.O. Box 104, Brunswick, ME 04011.

Saturday, May 31, 2008
Sunday, May 18, 2008
Evan and Marisol arrived in Mesa with little Evan and Jacob four days ago. We were so happy to see them. The cousins have been having so much fun with each other. Carys was so excited to finally meet her cousin little Evan. She has been talking to him on the computer for a long time. Now she can play with him in person. It is a treat to spend time with them. We are very grateful that they arrived safely from Mexico.
Saturday, May 3, 2008
We had a wonderful time at Emily's shower. Everything looked beautiful and the food was delicious! It was at Emily's Mom's home and her sisters helped too. I took a cute picture of them but it must be on Emily's camera because it wasn't on mine. Hopefully Emily will post it on her blog so you can see it. It was so fun visiting with everyone and seeing all the cute baby clothes, blankets, bows etc. We are sure looking forward to the birth of our new little granddaughter in just a few more months!

Justin Bieber called out a paparazzi photographer for being "really, really mean."
As pointed out by TMZ, the 23-year-old singer stopped a paparazzo in Malibu on Monday and confronted him about an encounter they had last month, when Justin was filmed hitting another photographer with his truck.
"Why were you so mean that day of the crash?" Justin asked the man from his car. "You were yelling such profanity. It was really, really mean. I was just wondering why you would say that."
The photographer apologized and explained it was an emotional reaction to seeing "his good friend" being hit by a car. Justin said the use of profanity didn’t help the situation, and that the man should’ve assisted his friend rather than saying "mean stuff."
"If that was your friend, you would have been on the ground helping him," Justin said.
The photographer ended the conversation with some good ol’ fashion—possibly passive aggressive—ass-kissing. You can check the video out above. Justin recently released the new BloodPop produced track "Friends." The song was co-written with Justin Tranter and Julia Michaels.

On Friday, December 24, around 3 p.m., the former principal died at Minna General Hospital, where she was being treated for burn injuries.
Mrs Comfort Jiya, a former principal of Government Girls’ Secondary School in Sabon Wuse and Maryam Babangida Girls’ Science College in Minna, was set on fire by her biological son, Steven Jiya.
On Monday, December 20, Comfort was reportedly in her kitchen at her home in the Darusalam Area of Minna when her son, who is said to be a drug addict, returned from Suleja and poured petrol on her before lighting her up.
The former principal died around 3 p.m. on Friday, December 24, at Minna General Hospital, where she was being treated for burn injuries, according to the Daily Trust.
Steven had made several attempts to harm his mother, but he was successful when he poured petrol on her.
After being arraigned before the Minna high court by prosecutors from the GRA Police division, he was remanded in custody.

Curtis Hanson, who directed and co-wrote the screenplay for the 1997 noir thriller "L.A. Confidential," died Tuesday at his Hollywood Hills Home at the age of 71.
Hanson had also directed films including "8 Mile" and "The Hand That Rocks the Cradle," but the iconic Los Angeles noir helped cement his success in Hollywood. He won an Oscar for writing the film alongside Brian Helgeland, who joined take Two to remember his late friend.
Their relationship began around the making of "L.A. Confidential," of which Helgeland had been trying to convince Warner Brothers to let him make. However, he was spurned by the company, who hired Hanson instead of him. Lucky for Helgeland, Hanson took a chance on the young writer and brought him on to the project.
"Curtis started out as a screen writer and had done horror films in his younger days, as I had," said Helgeland in an interview with Take Two's A Martinez. "In a funny sort of way, Curtis saw a younger version of himself in me."
The two ended up working together to create the movie.
But things didn't go well. Warner Brothers didn't take the movie seriously and were indifferent to the drafts that they'd turn in, said Helgeland, "We basically worked on our own dime a lot of it. I did a lot of drafts that I didn't get paid for, but Curtis was always this cheerleader for the film. Not rah rah, just this kind of grim cheerleader and wouldn't take no for an answer, so it was kind of, that was his big thing was to just put this thing on his shoulders and not put it down till he got it made."
Warner Brothers remained unenthusiastic about the film even after it was finished. They had assigned a bad release date for it, said Helgeland, and they wouldn't send it to any festivals. But Hanson pushed and eventually got it into Cannes, where it was a resounding success. From there, it began to pick up awards, until finally, they the writers walked away with an Oscar.
When asked which character Hanson would've associated the most with in "L.A. Confidential," Helgeland said, "I think ironically, he associated more with Kevin Spacey's character, [Jack] Vincennes, because Vincennes had sort of existed on the fringes of Hollywood. And not that Curtis was on the fringes of Hollywood, but he wasn't an A-list go to guy at the time. And I think he had a lot to prove cause he loved Hollywood so much and he loved movies so much. And he knew he had this great movie in him, but...he had to give himself the chance to make it. It wasn't going to be given to him."
Besides Helgeland, others from the film also took time to remember the late filmmaker.
Actors Russell Crowe and Guy Pearce, who starred in the movie, tweeted about Hanson's death Tuesday evening:

Registered: July 8, 2005 Location: St. Peters, MO Posts: 1214
Tue, Jul 18, 2006 @ 6:15 PM
I actually did watch American Idol but I did not even think of that when I made the card. Ha!
My sister actually says this to me alot so I thought I would mail it to her. I also got her a dog stamp that I was going to mail along with it. TFL!

A good photographer has to have the somewhat innate ability to recognize what's aesthetically pleasing, and then alter his or her own perspective as well as everything about his or her subject, in order to create something that comes across as such. I am not a natural in front of a lens. Joel Henderson, on the other hand, is a freaking magician behind it.
The first two photos above were taken with his phone. HIS PHONE.

Our daughter wanted to paint her nails when she was five. I remember trying to find non-toxic fingernail paint and helping her paint those tiny little fingernails. She has enjoyed necklaces, bracelets and rings since she was six. She wanted her ears pierced when she was seven. We got her the magnetized earrings to wear instead of getting her ears pierced. She has always been interested in fashion and makeup, but in a subtle and quite beautiful way. She even has me buying things now at the waterliliesandcompany.com website where she gets her makeup now as an adult.
When she was a teenager, there was no all black Goth period or a fluorescent color period for her. She was the most elegantly dressed girl in the school. Girls and guys came to her for advice on how to dress normal and look great. Her approach to fashion and makeup was one of making the best use of what you naturally have rather than trying to call attention to or distract using oddness and crazy colors. This has made her popular now in professional circles. She got some work at a local production company that was hired to assist in a major movie. She got noticed and was hired directly by the big production company to assist in makeup and wardrobe of the lead actor.
She is not star struck and is very secure in who she is as a person. People pick up very quickly that she is a leader and not a follower. It is serving her well in developing a career in something that she enjoys. She studied fashion in school but worked a dual major. She also studied business to be able to own and run her own company. She plans on promoting clothing and makeup of her own design someday. Right now she is working full time for a production company.

Where's a good place to get them cooked in a dry rub? I can't have Bar-b-Que sauce.
Ruby Tuesday usually has good ones but the last 2 times I ordered they were terrible. They were cooked so crispy, you couldn't chew them.
I won't be getting them there anymore.

This work could have adult content. If you proceed you have agreed that you are willing to see such content.
Derek found himself clearing his throat, glancing back at Scott, asking his question quietly. "Who's that?"
Scott looked up from his phone to see who Derek was talking about, humming as he responded, "That's the new kid, Stiles. The one I told you about?"
Derek was a little ashamed to say that, no, he did not remember Scott telling him about a new kid coming this school year,but he was starting to wish that he did, because when he looked back at the boy, he saw how he was looking up now, holding his books to his chest.
A small and breathy, "Oh" left his lips as the, he guesses, younger boy begins walking down the hall.

I work in a high school. Last night was Graduation. The graduates sit on the stage, in rows, girls on one side and boys on the other. When we interpret for Graduation, we need six people, always- two in front, for the audience, and two on the girls' side, facing the graduates, and two on the boys' side, also facing the graduates. Last night, I was backstage, on the boys' side, with coworker P. One deaf boy who graduted, J, I have known since he was about five years old. I interpreted for him at church and Sunday School for many years. His dad does contracting work for us sometimes, too.
So, at practice yesterday morning, J told me, I thought, that he wanted "an interpreter" to stand near the principal when they were awarding diplomas- he wanted the interpreter to let him and the other boys know when their names were said, so they would know when to start walking. I told him, "Okay, when Mrs P and I get here tonight, we'll figure out who's doing what, and it'll be taken care of."
"No," J said. "I want you to do it. You interpreted church, my baptism, confirmation, everything all those years, I've known you since I was five, I want you to do it."
I was a bit taken aback. J typically is not what you'd call a sentimental kid. He's a nice kid, to be sure, but he has Some Issues that I won't go into here, and high school for him has, on more than one occasion, been a rough road. But I was very touched, and told him, "Okay, I'll do it."
And I did. And it went well, the whole ceremony...even though this class (hearing and deaf) is, overall, kind of rowdy, so much so that for the first time in my memory, the principal assigned staff members to sit backstage to keep an eye on them. I've grown fond of some of the hearing kids, too, as always happens, and made sure to wish them luck and all that as well.
I made sure that J's parents took a picture of me with him after Graduation was all done. They promised they'd email it to me. I'm going to miss that kid.
7 years ago

Date: 17 Feb 2009
Matthew Dyet was last seen at about 5pm on Tuesday 17 February 2009.
He was seen in CCTV footage leaving the Costcutters shop on the High Street in Eyemouth with his cross-collie dog at about 5pm. His dog was later found in the back garden of his house, but he has never been back.
He was described as being around 5ft 9in tall with with long grey hair and wearing a blue jacket, a grey or beige jumper and faded jeans.
He was well known in the Killies area and used to busk around Berwick, Galashiels and other towns.
He has not made contact with anyone since, including his relatives.
The police said, 'His disappearance is very much out of character, but there have been no more confirmed sightings since last February, despite extensive investigation and media coverage'.

What People Say
My wife and I booked Zohar for an adult birthday for an 86-year-old friend of ours named Ed with about 16 friends. Zohar’s performance was nothing short of spectacular. She was on time, pleasant and very professional. She made everyone feel comfortable and gave Ed an experience he will never forget. She even got him to join her on the dance floor and taught him a few tricks of the trade. Her training was evident as she smoothly moved through her routines. I don’t know if I would ever book with anyone other than Zohar in the future. She was that good. - Raymond M.

We went to the high school football game tonight. It was brisk night. I had on 3 shirts and was covered up in a blanket. My grand daughter was playing with the band. Every year they let the 8th graders play at one game and tonight was the night. They played 2 Beatles songs. She did a good job. We left at the beginning of the 3rd quarter.
I'm sitting here at 12 midnight trying to finish my water. Since I haven't gone to bed yet I'm still counting it as Friday. ;-) I've gotten max points every day so far and I want to get them tonight. Looks like it's going to be another night of getting up to go to the bathroom. I never had to do that until this week. I don't feel hungry at all during the day. I'm too full of water.
No exercise today. No real reason for it. I was just being lazy. I did get my Zumba game in the mail today, so I'm going to have to try that out soon.
I went over in points yesterday. Breakfast was 2 slices of french toast with lite syrup and a cantaloupe wedge. For lunch I ate Cream of Chicken soup. I was numb up to eyes from my dentist visit, so I just had soup. For dinner I was on my own since my hubby went to his golf banquet. I had sliced cucumbers with salad dressing, leftover hamburger patty, and a WW dinner. For a snack I had a snack bar. Total points+ used was 34.
Even though I'm finished eating for the day, I'll save what I ate today for tomorrows blog.
The scale has gone up 2 pounds. I know it's from drinking all this water. I am peeing a lot, but my bowels aren't moving. I will drink my Smooth Move tea tomorrow instead of Sunday. I don't want to be too bound up.
OK , I have to finish this water and get to bed. My sister is coming to visit tomorrow around noon and I haven't touched the house. I have to run the sweeper and dust at least. All in all things don't look too bad.
- December (5)
- November (6)
- October (14)
- September (24)
- August (8)
- May (6)
- February (2)
- January (7)

On 15 November 1884, in the tiny village of Babbacombe in Devon, an elderly lady, Emma Keyse, was found brutally murdered, with her throat slit and her body battered. The murderer had also tried to burn the body. Miss Keyse lived alone in her home, called ‘The Glen’. She employed local people to come and help her with cleaning, cooking and other jobs around the house. One of these people was a young man called John Lee, who had left the navy in 1879 due to injury, and had spent several years in prison for theft. On his release, he went to work for Miss Keyse as a footman.
On 16 November 1884, Lee was arrested and charged with the murder of Miss Keyse, although the evidence against him was limited and based largely on the fact that he was the only man in the house.
Your organisation does not have access to this article.
Sign up today to give your students the edge they need to achieve their best grades with subject expertiseSubscribe

on July 12, 2010
The cruise was overbooked!! I had no room to move and I had to sit right beside the dinner table where people literally were hitting me to get to the food. When the fireworks came none on the boat was able to even get up and move around to look at them. My spot (and several others) was right under the tarp so we were not able to look up at the fireworks. I demanded a refund and they were very mean and did not issue me one. They charged my card before I even attended the sail. I was originally told my card would not be charged until I signed in and arrived to the sail. They are liars and their boats are very unorganized. All I wanted was a relaxing dinner sail with fireworks and did not receive any of it. I paid over $300 for my family of 3 and did not receive 1 penny back.
©Travelocity.com LP 2000-2009

Before even mentioning anything else, I have to say this: The fried beer was one of the most vile things I have put in my mouth in my short time on earth. And maybe it's just because I've been experimenting with food more and more every year, but it seems I get to say this a lot more often D:
The fried beer came in a little paper tray. There were 5 of them, and they looked like little ravioli. There was some Rico's nacho cheese sauce next to it. The breading it was in wasn't bad. It reminded my brother of a pizza roll wrapper. The inside was some sort of stale hell that I can only partially describe. It was warm, it gushed in your mouth, and it was SOUR. It was like.. a small mouthful of the essence of skunky beer. You had to be 21 to even purchase these "snacks", but the alcohol was long gone. We suspect that they had to freeze the beer into chunks in order to wrap it in the pastry wrapper and then deep fry it, so the alcohol most probably evaporated in the freezer. These things truely were vile. It's every bad experience anyone has ever had with stale beer boiled down into one small pocket of hell itself.
That being said, Collective Soul was awesome! They had great energy, looked genuinely happy to be there and be on stage, and played all the audience favorites :) I really do wish the set had been just a little longer, but they played a ton. I'm very glad I had the opportunity to go. I was also surprised by the bro-love in the audience. There were a lot of tough-looking college aged guys in the stereotypical college bro-wear. You know.. cargo shorts, T-shirts, caps, and socks& sandals.. that sort of outfit. I call them the Brosefs. They were hanging out looking and acting tough, drinking beer, etcetc. But as soon as the band played songs like "The World I Know", "December", "Needs", etc. they started hugging and weeping like babies. It was really strange. I was also pleasantly surprised by the diverse age group there. I figured there would be some people around my age and maybe a little older that were big fans and there to see the band... and there would probably be a ton of people there that just happened to be at the fair and wanted to see some live music. But... There were people a lot older and younger and all sorts of other types that were most obviously there for the band. Soooo many people singing along! I expect that sort of thing when I go to a venue to see a specific band, because you know everyone there is united with a genuine love for the band. But stuff like the J-rock/J-pop artists at conventions? A lot of people are just there becasue they are there for the con, etc. Music festivals? People come for one or two bands and sit through the rest because they are there. I guess I was just surprised that so many people were genuinely there for the band. It was a pretty incredible concert. Unfortunately, the curse of my height struck again, and I was trapped in the valley of the tall people :P I'd forgotten my camera, and I was trying to figure out how to use this new cel phone.. but all I managed to do was snap shots of the back of some tardo's head, even when I tried to hold the phone up high. I got maybe 2-3 blurry photos with no heads in the way. Bummer, dude!
I'm excited, though, because my new Buck-Tick album arrived while I was gone. I'm going to listen to it now and see how it is :D
But really, I just seriously need a shower to wash the fair funk off.

Tremont was founded in 1852.According to the United States Census Bureau, the town has a total area of 5.0 square miles (12.8 km²), of which, 4.9 square miles (12.8 km²) of it is land and 0.20% is water.
There were 153 households out of which 35.3% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 58.8% were married couples living together, 7.8% had a female householder with no husband present, and 26.8% were non-families. 24.8% of all households were made up of individuals and 10.5% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.55 and the average family size was 3.04.
In the town the population was spread out with 25.1% under the age of 18, 10.5% from 18 to 24, 28.5% from 25 to 44, 23.8% from 45 to 64, and 12.1% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 34 years. For every 100 females there were 101.0 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 101.4 males.
The median income for a household in the town was $27,143, and the median income for a family was $35,341. Males had a median income of $31,042 versus $21,250 for females. The per capita income for the town was $13,348. About 14.3% of families and 16.4% of the population were below the poverty line, including 18.3% of those under age 18 and 19.7% of those age 65 or over.

Guess what? North Carolina had snow in December!! It was the perfect snow. Just enough to enjoy, with no mess!!
Lawson was super excited to go and play in the flakes.
See the white stuff??
Then there was enough to make some snow angels. She is a snow bunny if I have ever seen one!!
Lawson was outside playing by herself. (I was supervising from the warmth of the house) she was having a blast. I love her smile!!
What a fun treat for Lawson!!
Note: Wesley wasn't able to enjoy the snow because he was napping.

People around the world were shocked to learn of Prince’s death on April 21 following the legend’s dramatic medical emergency just days before. But as fans, friends and family of Prince offered loving tributes to the singer, the final photos and details of his last days quickly emerged amid the heartbreak over his passing!
Prince performed for the last time at the Fox Theater in Atlanta, Georgia, on April 14. He had previously cancelled the show due to his battle with the flu.
His final photo was snapped just four days before he was found dead at his Minnesota home, with the singer being seen in the photo riding a bike at his Paisley Park residence.
The home was the same place he was discovered dead on Thursday morning, with a police report on the singer’s death from the Carver County Sheriff’s Office revealing he was discovered in an elevator at the home.
“On April 21, 2016 at about 9:43 am, sheriff’s deputies responded to a medical call at Paisley Park Studios in Chanhassen,” the police report said. “When deputies and medical personnel arrived, they found an unresponsive male adult in the elevator. First responders attempted to provide lifesaving CPR, but were unable to revive the victim. He was pronounced deceased at 10:07 a.m. He has been identified as Prince Rogers Nelson (57) of Chanhassen.”
Prince — whose full name is Prince Rogers Nelson — had been dealing with health issues just a week earlier, with reports surfacing on April 15 that his jet made an emergency landing so that he could be rushed to a hospital. His team later released a statement saying that he was “fine” and was simply suffering from the flu. A rep went on to add that Prince was at home resting in Minnesota following the reported incident.
Prince was extremely protective of his personal life. And a source speaking to People said that the singer did not talk about any of his reported health problems ahead of his death. "He was never a robust guy, let's be honest. He worked hard, and all the time, but if he was ill, he was so incredibly private, you would never be told it, you would never know it," the source said. "He was reclusive. That was Prince. For him, doing anything beyond making music, in the public arena, that was like being stuck with needles. He hated it. His focus was purely on music, always."
"If he was ill or suffering, that’s not something you would reasonably expect to know," the source added. "It’s not surprising to me that his death was surprising."
While speaking to RadarOnline.com, Prince’s former bodyguard and good friend Wallace Safford said that he also was shocked by the singer’s death and rumored health problems. “I’ve never known Prince ever to be sick,” he said.
“Before I worked with him, he was a friend first,” Safford said. “I knew Prince when he first came out on tour when he opened up for Rick James. I’m sitting here in front of the TV in shock and awe right now. He will sorely be missed.” He added that he felt something was a little off before learning of his friend’s passing on April 21. “Today I was at work, and I left work because I just had this knot in my stomach something was wrong,” he said. “I didn’t know what it was at first. It was almost like me and Prince and an inner spirit connection. We were all like family.” What do you think about Prince’s tragic death? Tweet us @OKMagazine or let us know in the comments section.

When DH and I first got together, we lived in a charming old farm house not too far from where we now live. It had all the original windows and woodwork, was way out in the country, and we loved it. Unfortunately, it needed a lot of work. The roof needed replacing, the basement flooded, in the winter we actually had snow inside the house because the windows were so drafty. The soil was slimy miserable clay. The water was always stinky, despite heavy duty water filters and going through the softener. The heating bills were outrageous, and we spent a lot on gas to get to and from work, etc. since it was so far out in the boonies.
But still we loved it. It had charm. It was quiet. Our neighbors (the people we rented from) were wonderful. We had space and privacy. We had great dreams of buying that house and fixing it up. So many plans.
Then, after we lived there for a little over a year, I got terribly ill. I missed two months of work, and was not able to return to work full time for almost a year. Needless to say, with the medical bills piling up and my income severely decreased we were in financial trouble. We made the very difficult decision to move into town and get an apt. Financially, it was the right thing to do. Travel costs were cut dramatically. Our utility bills also diminished. Rent was cheaper.
We still missed the old house.
Now the house is for sale. Dh and I have known for a couple of weeks, and we have talked about it very seriously. Then yesterday our former landlord, the owner of the house, called DH and let him know. She also hinted strongly that they would cut us a deal.
I am miserable about it. I want to own a home so badly, and I have such fond memories of living in that house. DH and I were very happy there. Still, we are not debt free yet. The house (though landlady says they have done a lot of work to it) still needs a lot of work, and being so old will continue to need work. The soil there is miserable, and I know it would take years to improve it to the point that I could have a good garden there. The layout is not really all that wonderful for the family we now have, with two young sprouts. I am afraid that if we were to take this opportunity, the house would become a "money pit" that would drain us for the rest of our lives.
Even knowing that it would be a bad idea to buy this house, I am terribly sad that we can't. If we won the lottery, maybe. But not in our current situation. Still, I am sure that I am always going to wish that we could have, and wonder if we should have. After all, it was our first home.

Another murder in London of Sarah Everard
Another episode of killing has happened in the city of London and this time, a former police officer, became the beast to kidnapped the 33-year-old woman named Sara Everard, the former police officer used his police card and had told the woman that you have violated the Covid-19 regulations, deceived her and then took her into his car and raped her. More details are here in this special report.
Sarah, a 33-year-old marketing executive, went missing on the evening of March 3 after leaving a friend’s house in Clapham, south London.
Her remains were found days later in woodland near Ashford, Kent not far away from where she was last seen.
Cozens was later arrested at his home in Kent, close to where Sarah’s body was found. Prosecutors has said in July that Everard and Cozens "were total strangers to each other” before he abducted her from the roadside.
On Wednesday, prosecutor little said Cozens lured Everard into a rental car by falsely arresting her for Covid-19 violations, "handcuffing her as well as showing her his warrant card.”
What eyewitnesses added that they had observed Cozens handcuff Everard, who appeared compliant and had her head down, little added?
They thought he was an undercover police officer has arrested a woman.
Woman was alive for hours after her kidnapping, and was moved to Cozens’ own car later that evening, the prosecutor said. "
In order to have done so and without her escaping or trying to escape or make a noise, it can be inferred that he, at least, must have threatened her,” Little told the court.
A few days later, Cozens took his wife and two children on a trip to the same area.
"It follows that the defendant took his family on a family trip to the very woods where days earlier he had left Sarah ‘s body, then returned to burn it and returned again to move it and hide it,” Little said.
Kate Everard, Sarah’s sister, told the court: "You used your warrant card to trick my sister into your car.
She sat in the car handcuffed for hours. What could she have thought she had done wrong? What lies did you tell her?
Cozens is due to be sentenced on Thursday. He is expected to receive a mandatory life sentence, but the prosecution is seeking a whole life order, a term only granted in exceptional cases.

Prior to hiring Alpha Painting we had to get rid of another painting crew that we were very disappointed with. Alpha painting was very professional. Came on time and finished quickly. The room has clean lines and looks great! We are very happy with the work that was done in our house and will definitely be using them again.
- Company Response

One day Saddam Hussein was walking in the desert and he stubbed his toe on some hard object. He bent over to pick it up and a Genie popped out.
"Oh great," Saddam said, "I don't have time for this Genie nonsense."
"Oh wait," said the Genie, "You have to let me grant you three wishes or I'll be trapped in that stupid lamp for another ten thousand years."
"Ok" said Saddam, so he wished that the Genie would give him three American women.
So the next morning when he woke up, after the Genie had realized who this man was and after the Genie had granted the wishes, Tanya Harding, Garcella Bevoux, and Hillary Clinton layed next to him. His knee was bashed in, his penis was gone, and he had no health insurance.

ON WEDNESDAY, Yakub Fazal left his medical retail store early, asking his assistant to run the show. He had just longingly switched on the TV to watch the third ODI of the India-Zimbabwe series, and the first images he saw were that of his son, Faiz, being handed the India cap by MS Dhoni. Yakub had seen enough. The day had finally arrived. And he didn’t want anything distracting him from watching his son live their dream, that of playing for India.
Yakub had returned home early one afternoon three weeks ago too. Zainub Fazal had been slightly peeved with her husband that afternoon. He hadn’t been feeling well that morning and decided to shut shop. But rather than get himself some rest, he had instead plonked himself in front of the TV and turned on a news channel. It was the day the Indian selectors were announcing the squads for the tours to Zimbabwe and West Indies, and as always Yakub was keen on finding out who would be making the cut.
“Arey, I don’t know why you keep doing this to yourself. It’s not like they are going to pick your son. Get some rest instead,” she said knowing very well the understandably ulterior motive behind her husband’s interest. But that day, as Yakub reveals now, he wasn’t expecting Faiz to get the nod. The 30-year-old left-hander hadn’t been part of the IPL and the senior Fazal was quite sure the selectors wouldn’t look beyond the IPL performers.
But then he heard a name that was all too familiar to him. He still wasn’t convinced though. “I luckily have the system where you can record stuff on TV. So I did that and actually rewound the thing and heard it again to be absolutely sure. And then I just let out a cry saying, ‘Faiz has been selected, and she came running out,” he reveals now.
He then immediately called Faiz, who at that point was in the north east of England, braving the bone-chilling climes of Durham representing his club Hetton Lyons. Once the junior Fazal accepted that it was actually happening for real, father and son both burst into tears. “We had waited so long for this. I always knew the day would come, but I had expected it much earlier,” says Yakub from Nagpur.
And by the time Faiz walked out to bat on Wednesday-slightly earlier than he and his team had expected-his father sat padded up too, at least mentally. The first delivery the left-hander faced was one that could easily have brought a premature end to his dream debut. For, Neville Madziva got it to pitch on off and move away sharply, just beating the outside-edge. Back in Nagpur, Yakub had skipped a heartbeat too, but he regained his composure almost immediately. “It’s ok Faiz, one ball at a time. It’s the new-ball, you will get beaten,” he shouted at the television set, almost believing that his son could hear him. Yakub had been an opening batsman too after all. In fact, he had even attended the Ranji trials once for the Vidarbha team some 30 years ago, only to fall short at the final hurdle. It was a setback that has been a major source of inspiration for him helping his son go the distance, even if at times it meant neglecting the business in favour of his son’s cricket. He had even set up nets and practice area for Faiz while he was growing up, as they stayed in a part of Nagpur that was far from all the cricket activity. It wasn’t a case though of Yakub wanting to live his dream through his son. If anything, as Faiz entered his teens, the Fazals had a choice to make. As good as he was with bat in hand, the youngster was equally talented in music. And the doting father didn’t mind his son pursuing either of his passions. “We got him to learn classical music as a child but then he moved to light music. He is just a natural. Upar wale ka dane hai. Sur pakad leta hai. You could just hand him an instrument and he would pick it up very soon be it the mouth organ or the guitar. Even when he sings prayers, he’s so melodious,” says Yakub.
As it turned out, Faiz stuck to cricket. In a way, the bulk of runs he was scoring from a young age made the decision a lot easier. The genial opener rose through the ranks quicker than most throughout his junior career. He played for his under-19 state team when he was 14, and made his first-class debut for Vidarbha at 18, scoring 151 against Jammu & Kashmir back in December 2003. It was only an inopportune injury that came in the way of him being selected for the India U-19 World Cup squad in 2004. It’s ironic then that he’s had to wait so long for his first tryst with international cricket. But Yakub admits that it’s only he who has had to deal with bouts of anxiety as the wait grew longer and longer. Faiz was never fazed, and he kept plugging away. “Even if he was disappointed with not getting an IPL contract, he never showed it. He just wanted to play . So rather than sit and sulk, he went off to England. It’s just that he never got much chance to shine in Duleep Trophy or Irani Trophy. This year he did, and look how he’s made the most of it,” says Yakub.
According to his father, Faiz is a prankster, who can never sit idle at home, and even now despite being married with a daughter, the kid in him is very much alive. If it’s not pulling pranks, he’s mimicking someone or the other. But as he saw his son settle in at the crease at Harare, Yakub could sense his nerves. “But when I asked him later about how he felt, he said he was only nervous in the field. Once he walked out to bat, he was as calm as ever,” he says with a tinge of surprise.
Soon the shots started flowing, as Faiz unleashed a range of delectable drives, both through covers and a couple that went straight back down the ground. Yakub too was no longer sitting on the edge of his seat. Watching on TV from some 7000 km away though was much less nerve-racking, he reveals, than how it used to be back when father and son would open together for their local club team. “He was opening for us by the time he was 13. I would always be more focused on how he’s going and often get out as a result,” he says with a laugh.
As Faiz cruised through to his maiden half-century on debut and raised his bat, the senior Fazal was jumping up in delight too. “As a batsman he can easily play for another 6-8 years,” he says. He is quick to add though that neither he nor his son has given up on his second career choice, and that music remains as important to the family as cricket. “See even Sanjay Manjrekar recorded an album after retiring. I think there’s no age-limit to pursue music, and I’m sure Faiz will too. You should make use of all the talent you’re gifted with,” he says with paternal conviction.
Yakub is bracing up for a busy day at work on Thursday. For, he will not only be welcoming his usual load of customers but also many more who will want to seek him in his new avatar, the father of an India cricketer. And he knows that closing up early will not be an option.

In the late 1800's there lived in Missouri a sickly young black child named George Washington Carver. Too weak to work in the fields, he helped in the kitchen of the home he lived at and learned to bake, cook, sew and iron clothes. He didn't have friends but instead and found peace by tending to a hidden garden he kept in the woods. He was extremely observant and learned much about the plants in his garden. Soon, his skill as a botanist became known, and people were bringing their "sick" houseplants to him. As he was able to make many of them healthy again, people started calling him "the plant doctor." It made him feel important and he wanted to learn more about plants, but that required schooling and there were few opportunities at that time for a black child to get an education. During that time even most white people did not have an education much beyond the fifth grade. George was undaunted, however. He left home in pursuit of his dream of an education. He did anything and everything to earn money to live and to buy books so he could go to school. He faced ridicule, racism and hatred, but he persevered. Age was no obstacle to him. He was past age 30 when he finally graduated from high school. He was in his forties when he graduated from college. He was in his mid-forties when he became a teacher at the Tuskegee institute, and later, a world-renowned scientist.
Before George Washington Carver, cotton was the main crop raised in the south. But rising cotton year after year on the same soil had depleted it of many essential nutrients. Dr. Carver knew that crops had to be rotated among the fields to ensure a healthy, vibrant harvest each year. But what crops to use? Peanuts and sweet potatoes could be alternated in the fields of the south, and were good for the soil he knew, but there was no market for these at that time—so he changed that. He learned how to separate peanuts into their most basic compounds, and explored how to make different products out of each of them. He invented hundreds of products from both peanuts and sweet potatoes. To prove the worth of the peanut as a viable crop he once appeared before a committee of the U.S. Congress to seek funding to further his research. One congressman made an unkind comment about him because of his skin color but Dr. Carver ignored it and went on with his presentation. As he concluded, he served them a meal consisting of soup, salad, mock chicken, and an ice cream dessert. After they finished their meal he informed them that the entire meal was made of nothing but peanuts. They were astonished. They also approved his funding request.
Dr. Carver helped change the South by creating new products and the markets for them, allowing farmers to rotate crops each year and still keep farm operations profitable. Education and perseverance was the key to doing it.
Each of you has the opportunity to go on to college or a trade school. Some of you may come from families with limited means but all of you can become educated if you possess the will. None of you are likely to face the challenges that Dr. Carver faced in his quest for an education, but many of you will still be confronted with barriers that you must overcome. Surmount these and get as much education as you can. Whatever level you attain, however, do not look down on people who possess less knowledge. Education without humility creates a snob. Not all of us can be Dr. Carvers, but we can still use the gift of an education to serve our fellow citizens and our country.
Good night, gentlemen.

- Mobile responsive
- Contact form
Prominent New Zealand history author Ron Crosby who is based in Blenheim in the South Island of New Zealand worked with The Creative Collective to revamp his website in 2013 when his new book Kupapa was about to release. For the first time he was able to sell his books direct to the public via his website thanks to the ecommerce integration with Paypal. He has enjoyed many book sales since and enquiries via his website.

Aurelia, with a little help from Luis, then shared their decades-old love story.
It was sometime in the 1950s. Aurelia was a Bisaya who worked as a house helper in Manila and stayed with her relatives.
She met Luis, who serenaded her with songs by Nat King Cole and Tom Jones. He then asked Aurelia to go away with him.
They had a relationship. Aurelia got pregnant at age 19.
By the time they had their second child, which was in the 1960s, Aurelia and Luis got married in a church in España, Manila.
Theirs is a love that knows no distance and old age. Aurelia admitted that she almost lost hope in finding her husband, but it was her love for Luis that kept her going.

|« PREV||INDEX||NEXT »|
|Alan decided that if things started changing on them quickly the best dodge that they had was to make certain that Juan and Carlos also became part of the equation. If there were others developing too, it would make their changes seem less noticeable. The problem was how to get the stuff into Juan and Carlos without them knowing it. This was to remain their secret. This possibility was something that Alan had not really considered.
Alan, always the ringleader managed to talk Barry and Charlie into spy duty. They had to find a way to get to some food or beverage item that only Juan and Carlos regularly consumed and one that was not consumed or traded at school! Discovering a foolproof way to deal with Juan and Carlos would take them some time.
They had been taking the drug for about nine days when things started changing for Barry. Like Charlie a few days before, he suddenly found himself hungry to the point of feeling like starvation. At dinner, he went back for second�s, third�s, forth and fifth�s. At twelve days, the same thing finally hit Alan and at breakfast. He was ravenous and ate enough to feed a small army. At this point the food consumption had escalated a great deal for all three!
At fifteen days a new sensation appeared.
It was almost hard to describe. It gave all three of them the sensation of having a hard-on without their dicks actually being hard. To the touch it might have felt like a partial erection, but as a sensation in their dicks it was really interesting. It was a very hot feeling. It was sort of like something was going to happen all the time.
Charlie, who had been the first to really start manifesting the effects of the drug, was also the first to begin to feel this new sensation. He tried to describe it to Alan and Barry, but he could not. About six hours later he didn�t have to!
They had just started their summer vacation the week before, and it was a good thing that this had not started when they were in school. Concentrating when one is experiencing such pleasurable sensations is a difficult thing.
By 11:00 P.M. both Fred and Libby had gone to bed. Tomorrow was to be a very hard day for both of them. Libby was going to make the drive from the ranch up to El Paso to visit a friend who had been hospitalized and was waiting for surgery. She was going to stay the night in El Paso, and then return after her friend was out of the recovery room. Fred had a meeting with a fellow regarding some problems with one of the well pumps. It had been repaired four times at a very high cost and the water production from that particular pump was not what it was supposed to be. The electric motor powering this pump was also running hot.
As late as it was, Alan was so out of control horny that he could not stand it. He did not have a hard-on, but he could not figure why he didn�t. Barry and Charlie couldn�t sleep either. Both were afraid of making noises because they were so badly �in heat�. It was decided that they would sneak back out to the pump house and get their rocks off there. That pump house had lights that could not be seen if the door was closed, and it was far enough away from all of the housing that they would not be heard unless they stood outside screaming.
They dressed in just enough to be �decent�, and slipped quietly out the kitchen door of the house headed for their secret rendezvous with a quiet place to remove some �jizz� from storage. There was just enough moonlight so that they could easily see what they were doing and where they were going. Just after they got inside the pump house, the rattles and squeaking sound of a vehicle was heard on the dirt road. Did they dare look and see whom it was heading this way at such a late hour? Alan turned the lights off and they waited. Just as the vehicle neared the pump house, the sound of a tire failing could be heard. There was a �pop� and a quick hissing of air. The next sound was a �flop-flop-flop-flop-� as the vehicle rolled to a stop. The sound of a door opening had them scared shitless. What would happen if the ranch hand found them in this pump house at this hour? A few seconds later a great deal of cussing was heard in Spanish. The boys had picked up some of the language and the parts that were understood were no spare tire and no lug wrench in the vehicle. The voice sounded like Gonzalo. He was known to sneak away from his wife at night and go to one of the bars catering to Hispanic farm workers in town. He was probably drunk again and when he got home, if his wife discovered his absence she would be furious! A few seconds later they heard the engine re-start and the vehicle placed in gear. Then slowly there was a characteristic �flop-flop-flop� as the vehicle was driven flat tire and all towards his quarters.
After the vehicle had driven away and the heartbeats of the boys had returned more or less to normal sex and relief started to dominate their thoughts again.
It was a hot Texas night, and the steel roofed brick pump house had retained some more of the heat of the day than any of them had expected. Soon the T-shirts were off and sweat was glistening on their bodies. The shorts were off too and shortly after all three of the boys sported erections.
Alan pulled out a little tape and the notepad. With this new sensation he wondered if their dicks had grown any more. He measured Barry first and found that indeed Barry had grown from 4.5 in length in a few days to just over 5 inches in length. He had gone from 4.75 around to just over five inches. For the first time Alan also noticed on his brother that there were a couple of hairs on the lower end of his belly button that had not been there when the last measurement was taken. Things definitely were starting to happen. When he measured Charlie things were even more interesting. Charlie had grown nearly one half inch in length making him the largest at 5.5 bt 5.5. Alan himself had added enough length to make measuring difficult. He was just a hair under 5 inches in length and just a hair over in girth. This was really not bad when one considers how recently the other measurements had been taken.
All three were so consumed with desire for sex that tonight was the night that Alan had decided to treat the others like other breeding animals. He was the ringleader and always managed to get his way in the group.
He opened the case removing it from underneath a couple of old tarps and assembled the electrojackulator and the sperm collection device.
As he did this the other two boys eyes got as wide as frying pans.
�Just to make things more interesting, Alan said!�
The first to get �bred� was Charlie. Alan inserted Charlie�s hard dick into the vacuum cylinder and quickly the machine attached itself to his groin. Then Alan used some of the special electro gel and inserted the electrojackulator up Charlies ass. When the device was properly placed he followed the same instructions as had been used to breed sheep or goats. He set the power setting initially on the lowest one and pushed the button. As he did this it was like he pushed the inflate button on Charlie�s already hard dick. In the plastic tube Charlie�s dick swelled even more. The veins were standing out looking like steel cables and in spite of it�s still small (but growing) size it looked like one formidable weapon indeed!
Charlie started thrusting involuntarily and moaning. His body was covered in sweat, his chest heaved up in down sucking in air the sheen of sweat highlighting his young and yet to develop musculature and his nipples, boy this was weird, his nipples and the areolas around them were swollen and large.
Charlie literally sprayed cum in a quantity that none of the boys had ever seen before. It was copious to say the least. After Charlie came down from that ejaculation it was decided to leave him hooked up and see if he could do it again. The whole time the vacuum collection cylinder was still sucking away and strangely enough Charlie�s dick was looking even larger and swollen in a different way than any of the boys had ever seen any dick before. It was not long before Alan again inserted the electrode and pushed the button. When he did this Charlie�s dick inflated even larger and was again hard as a rock in the cylinder. His eyes began to role back as the pulsation against his prostate gland triggered yet another orgasmic release. This one was as large and copious as the one before. Again Charlie�s chest rose and fell and this time he was covered in sweat. It was literally dripping on the floor and running from his body in rivers. His eyes were rolled back into his head as he blasted volley after volley of warm rich cum into the collection device. What was interesting was that the volume he was collecting was enough that if he had been a large farm animal instead of a human he would have been doing damn well. As before, his nipples and the surrounding area swelled and he was such an erotic sight on the second trip down orgasm lane that both Alan and Barry�s dicks were literally dripping with anticipation with their own experiences yet to come.
This procedure was repeated a total of four times on Charlie before he ran out of seminal production. The final eruption was the most severe and it lasted for almost five minutes. Charlie held on to one of the pump components and used it to keep himself from literally ending up on the floor after his final heroic blast.
After four times Alan removed the collection cylinder from Charlie and at least wiped some of the sweat off of him.
Charlie�s dick was now huge and was lying like a huge heavy cylinder itself across his stomach a good portion of the way between his sparse pubes and his belly button. None of the boys were aware that they had also discovered vacuum pumping and that this may also play a role in what was to come.
Alan instructed Barry and he was next. Just like Charlie he lasted for four complete orgasmic plateaus and just like Charlie it took a little over an hour for him to get off four times. When the vacuum collection cylinder was removed from his dick like Charlie�s it was bigger than he had ever seen it.
Alan himself was the last to receive the whole treatment and he turned out to be the surprise and the strongest of all going for six ejaculations before the well was dry. Because he had been connected the longest his dick was swollen and hanging huge.
None of the boys realized how long they had been in that pump house. When they had cleaned up the machinery and gotten back into bed after wiping themselves down from all of their activities the very first rays of sunlight could be seen off to the east. It was nearly 5 A.M.
The boys slept in as late as they could. Libby entered each bedroom before she was ready to depart for El Paso and asked each of the boys if there was anything that they needed. None needed anything so she headed out of the house to the garage and climbed into the seat of the new Lincoln to begin her journey to El Paso. It would take her about two hours to drive the distance.
Fred in the meanwhile was engaged with a Mr. Miller of the Rainbow Water Well Service Company.
Charlie awakened at about noon and was ready to go for the day. He jumped up and went to the bathroom. Initially he did not notice much but this day he did. His dick was still swollen huge from all of the activity it had endured the night before. When he looked in the mirror for the first time he could see by the lighting that there was a light coating of peach-fuzz on both sides of his face and that there was also light little hairs on his chin and upper lip as well.
This was COOL!
|« PREV||INDEX||NEXT »|
This collection was originally created as a compressed archive for personal offline viewing
and is not intended to be hosted online or presented in any commercial context.
Any webmaster choosing to host or mirror this archive online
does so at their sole discretion.
Archive Version 070326

Jonathan Elijah Graves (real name unknown) - better known by his ring name, Johnny Graves - was born January 5, 1995 in Paradise, Nevada. He is the youngest adoptive son of Anthony and Katherine Graves.
Graves was born to a sixteen year old girl who had conceived him one night at a drunken party. Unable to provide for a baby, his mother gave him up for adoption. As fate would have it, Johnny would be adopted by Anthony and Katherine Graves. The young couple were unable to conceive children and after thousands of dollars and multiple attempts at a fertility clinic they had given up on having children of their own and decided adoption was the most logical course of action. Having already adopted a boy named Caleb, the happy couple welcomed a six month old Johnny into their home.
Life was good and the Graves family was happy. That is until tragedy struck in the form of a devastating car accident that left Anthony with a broken back and neck - along with several other minor injuries - as he was coming home from work. Life almost seemed to be put on hold as the family dealt with the physical therapy and recuperation of Anthony Graves. Due to his inability to work, Katherine picked up a second job to keep the family afloat during this trying period. Because of this, Johnny and his brother, Caleb, spent much time with relatives often spending the night in different homes each night if their mother had to work too late to pick them up.
It was at the age of eleven that Johnny discovered his love of sports. He began playing baseball in the spring/summer, moved to football in the fall, and basketball in the winter. Though he couldn’t explain such a complicated emotion at such a young age, Johnny clung to sports as it was the only place he ever truly felt he belonged. He was good. A naturally gifted athlete and a fierce competitor. The feeling he would he get when he made a big play and his coaches, teammates, and the parents at the games would cheer him on, pat him on the back, and praise him. He craved it.
It was also around this time that his father had finished his physical therapy and while healed, he would never be one hundred percent again. Frustrated that he couldn’t do the things he used to: play with his children in the backyard, renovate their relatively older home, repair issues with the family’s car without being in an extreme amount of pain and often barely being able to move the next day. His father fell into a depression and it wouldn’t be long before he would fall into a bottle as well. Anthony’s drinking became excessive and to make matters worse, so did his temper. Verbally and physically abusive towards Katherine and the children, Anthony spiraled and family soon followed.
Johnny began acting out. At school he would get into fights over the smallest things, often finding himself annoyed with the other boys and just punching them in the face without warning. Moreover, Johnny began committing crimes. They started small as these do: stealing candy or soda from the neighborhood convenience store, using sharpies to tag walls of businesses and homes, things of that nature.
By the time Johnny reached high school his family life had completely deteriorated. His father was gone and the drunken monster that wore his skin was unrecognizable. Because of this Johnny and Caleb made it a point to spend as little time as possible away from the home. Often times not coming home until one or two in the morning, knowing that by that point their father would be passed out for the night. They went to school, went to practice (whatever sport was in season), and then roamed the streets of Paradise getting into whatever trouble they could find until they felt it was safe to go home. But the boys weren’t the only ones who avoided the family home. Katherine struck up an affair with one of Anthony’s closest friends. A man named Marcus Carter. Marcus was a former professional boxer turned promoter, turned sports agent. When Katherine wasn’t at work she was often with Marcus.
When Johnny was fifteen he - along with his brother - was pulled out of football practice and asked to go to the principal’s office. Thinking the kid he had beat up earlier squealed, Johnny was prepared to be suspended. Again. What happened instead, he was informed that there had been an incident at home and that a police officer would be taking the boys to a nearby precinct where their parents already were. When the boys entered the precinct, they didn’t find their parents. Instead they found a detective who sat the boys down and - as kind as he could - explained to them that their mother had been killed. It turned out that Anthony had learned of Katherine’s infidelity and confronted her. Upon her confirming the source of where her passions now lied, Anthony went into a fit of rage and murdered her.
As Caleb wept beside him the only thing Johnny could think about was his father. Looking back, he isn’t even sure if he felt anger or sadness or anything in that moment. The only thing he could think about was the fact that no one was ever going to do to him what his father did to his mother. He would make sure of it. And if - somehow - they were successful. Then they were damn sure going to own it. Sent to live with their aunt, Johnny informed her that he wanted to learn martial arts. His aunt suggested Karate like her own daughter was studying. Johnny disapproved. So instead he convinced his aunt to allow him to train in Muay Thai and Jiu Jitsu.
Life only seemed to get more difficult after that. Johnny was angry, hurt, and lost. He began hanging around the wrong kinds of people (along with his brother, who acted more as a protector than an instigator of mischief). Running around with a local group of hoodlums who referred to themselves as Feral Gang, Johnny began robbing local convenience stores and any poor soul unfortunate enough to wander through the gang’s territory while they were bored. At the age of sixteen, Johnny was arrested and detained for one of these crimes. The trial was brief and Johnny’s lawyer didn’t a hell of a job arguing that his client was simply a lost kid looking for direction and acceptance. Johnny was sentenced to serving several hundreds of hours of community service.
The punishment didn’t exactly deter Johnny from the life he was following into. If anything it simply motivated him to be smarter about the things he did and avoid being suspected of anything ever again. Life continued on this way for awhile longer until Johnny turned eighteen. Three days after his birthday he collected the money he had saved up and left his aunt’s house moving into an apartment of his own. Johnny began competing in local MMA promotions throughout Nevada and California and found - from day one - he had a natural affinity for combat sports. Which really didn’t come has a surprise considering he had been fighting his entire life. Marcus Carter reached out to Johnny and offered to represent him in order to ensure he wasn’t taken advantage of by some shady promoter.
At the age of twenty, after compiling an MMA record of six and oh, Johnny had issues with one of these shady promoters. Carter was away on other business with another client and Johnny was on his own. The two men argued over the amount of money Johnny was to be paid and soon an angry promoter pulled a pistol. Instinctively Johnny lunged at the man and grabbed the pistol and the man’s hands. The two struggled for a moment before the gun went off. The promoter slumped to the floor, eyes wide, and Johnny was left holding the gun. Panicked, Johnny fled the scene. Returning to his apartment he would once again collect the money he had stashed away from his shadier dealings, packed a bag, and caught a taxi to the airport. Several hours later he was in Mexico where a friend of his was conducting business of his own. Johnny reached out the man who provided him safe haven and a job. Johnny began setting up and tearing down a professional wrestling ring for the luchadore promotion his friend co-owned. Johnny was fascinated by the sport. It was so much more theatrical than MMA, so much more lively.
Johnny couldn’t stay in Mexico however. Whether it was paranoia or legitimate gut feelings he knew he had to move. For the next three years Johnny traveled the world, keeping his head down. This wasn’t a vacation after all. He would pick up fights in underground fight clubs and bare-knuckle boxing matches to earn extra money. If he needed more he’d knock off a liquor store or rob some drunken tourists. Few weeks in a single city, a single country, and he would move on.
At twenty-three he received word from his brother that their father had requested to see them. At first Johnny refused the offer, but eventually gave in to his brother’s wishes. Johnny returned to the states and the two young men visited their father in prison. It was the first either had seen of him since they left for school the day he murdered their mother. Their father apologized, broke down in tears, proclaimed the love he had for his wife and his boys. Johnny didn’t speak. Nor did Caleb. They just sat and watched the man they called ‘dad’ for so many years break down before their eyes. Neither forgave him.
With Johnny back in Las Vegas, his brother showed him what he had been up to the last few years. He invited Johnny to come to a wrestling card he was competing on. Once again Johnny was exposed to the world of professional wrestling and watching his brother inside the ring only caused to captivate him further. When the show was over, Johnny confessed to his brother that he too wanted to become a professional wrestler. So Caleb introduced him to Zeek Williams, the man who had trained Caleb. Seeing something special in Johnny, Williams agreed to train him.

Eddie completed Goodwill’s former Work Services program in 2016 and recently completed our former Explore WORK service in June of 2019. While Eddie completed these services, he showed his desire to work and his skills.
As Goodwill’s Supported Employment began working with Eddie, there was an opportunity to do a
Temporary Work Experience (TWE) at the Hampton Inn with the potential for hire. Eddie started his TWE there in October of 2019. Eddie was looking for work similar to what he did at his previous job, which was utility cleaning. From his first day at Hampton Inn, Eddie liked his cleaning assignments. During his TWE, he was responsible for cleaning throughout the hotel. His tasks included cleaning the bathrooms, fitness room, the pool, the lobby of the hotel, changing garbage receptacles, and sweeping and mopping floors by the elevators. Eddie also would vacuum all four floors of the hotel.
During Eddie’s TWE, management changes were occurring at the hotel. That didn’t faze Eddie, as he just kept on working and following his task list each day that he was scheduled to work. Despite all the changes, Eddie continued to work well with his co-workers and he impressed the new management!
As Eddie neared the end of his Temporary Work Experience, he wondered about being hired. Job Developer Aleka met with the new management to discuss the potential for Eddie to be hired. After these meetings, they decided that Eddie would stay on and become an employee! Eddie was excited that he was hired and got to keep working in something he is familiar with and likes to do. He’s been employed at the Hampton Inn since November and continues to do a great job cleaning the hotel, making it nice for guests and fellow employees. He likes making money, too! All of Eddie’s co-workers are glad to have him working there.

ha, there's a nice anecdote bout that dutch boy and his TONE on John Suhr's website:
"The descriptions of tone are very subjective and can be misleading. Let's consider the primary tone generator! Many people don't want to hear it but it is very true: it is your hands..."
"I was never as so convinced as one day listening to Eddie Van Halen record at his studio. The sound was fat, articulate and every bit his signature tone. When I looked to see what he was playing I was stupefied to see a headless, woodless Steinberger. Not only that but when I checked out the guitar later, the strings were very rusty."

Starr Kelso, attorney for embattled Rep. Phil Hart, said after today's House Ethics Committee meeting, "What I can say is that the legislative process is a fluid and complex process where politics and due process meet. And so, I guess it was reasonable that they asked Deputy Attorney General Brian Kane to put his thoughts in writing. He seemed to me that he had expressed his thoughts verbally, but to require that they be in writing, that's certainly the prerogative of the committee. So I wasn't disappointed. They do what they do."

My oldest son (he's 10) had been complaining about a stomach ache for a few days. He actually cried a few times from the pain. I figured it was just all the junk he had been eating during the holidays but with school starting back today, I decided to take him to the doctor just in case he needed a little medicine to get him going. So I went yesterday with every intention of coming back to work cause I figured it would not take long. After a few test and a jump from a steep that took Christian to his knees, the doctors immediately sent us to the hospital to have x-rays. X-rays???? for a stomach ache... this is not good and immediately my stomach was in knots at the thought of possibly it being his appendix and him having surgery. I sent out a few text to some people for prayers, called his dad to meet us there and off we went to the hospital.
Chris was scared too. He cried most of the way there and all I could do to keep myself from crying was pray! I assured him that everything would be okay and he said " well what if they have to cut my stomach open????" Sucking back tears, I said, God is gonna take care of you and you are gonna be fine!!
We went in and within a few minutes they were doing x-rays. As his little brother and I sat there, all kinds of thoughts raced through my head. I looked over once and saw a tear in my youngest son's eyes and I just gave him a hug and said "Chris is gonna be fine". When they were done, we went back to the doctors office to hear results and by the time I got back, they had already called. He was FINE... well he has some stomach issues, but nothing that medicine and a few more days out of school would not fix. Thank you God it was nothing more serious!!!!
Chris was afraid. I was scared to death. And even though this turned out to be ok, aren't there times when we are literally walking in fear of what will happen? The unknown? But God says " I'm leaving you with a gift: peace of mind and heart! And the peace I give isn't fragile like the peace the world gives. So, don't be troubled or afraid." John 14:27 and of course Hebrews 13:5.. "I will never leave you nor forsake you." There is no need to be scared or fear anything no matter how big or small it may be to us. God's love allows us to have victory in and over everything that comes up in our lives.
I hope you all are having a great day. I an see the sun outside my office window. Haven't seen that much lately and it's kinda nice. Be blessed and until next time, Lord willing....

Calvert-Lewin revels in dream debut
Dominic Calvert-Lewin described his debut England goal as the "stuff of dreams" and insists he is ready to go whenever called on by the Three Lions.
The in-form Everton striker opened the scoring in Thursday's 3-0 beating of Wales at Wembley to make it 10 goals in seven appearances for club and country this season. Conor Coady and Danny Ings also netted their first England goals in a good workout for Gareth Southgate's men ahead of Nations League clashes with Belgium and Denmark.
"Obviously it's a shame there are no fans here to celebrate and obviously my family aren't here to celebrate so it's bittersweet in that sense but to score on debut obviously it's the stuff of dreams," Calvert-Lewin told ITV. "I've worked very hard to get here, it's felt like a very long road but I'm very, very pleased to be here and get the opportunity to score on debut."
Calvert-Lewin was replaced in the 58th minute to perhaps suggest further opportunities in England's Nations League encounters and the striker just wants to impress whenever given the chance. "I don't know what that suggests, all I can say is I enjoyed the time I did play on the pitch and I'll be ready to step in if needed," he added.
Calvert-Lewin also paid tribute to Jack Grealish, who produced a pearler of a cross to set up his goal. "He's a top player, I've seen it already," he said. "It's the first time I've played with him to see him up close and personal he's got bags of ability. I knew if he got in that position it was for me to hold my position and he'd get the cross in."
Wales skipper Ben Davies felt the visitors were brave in their play especially in the absence of stars Gareth Bale and Aaron Ramsey. "They were clinical, I think we started well and I was happy with how things were going," he said. "The goal was a sucker punch, as soon as they were in good areas they created better chances than us. There were positives but we know we have to do better. We've seen how good England have been at it, we have to improve at that whole aspect of it, I'm disappointed at how we conceded the goals.
"We were missing some of our best players, those who didn't play would get in most teams in Europe. It shows character in the team we didn't just sit out or come in with a negative attitude. I'm proud of the boys and the way we had a go tonight."

Help Johnny beat Parvo
Organized by: Sara Taveras Alam
Johnny is our beloved 10 week old Boston Terrier puppy who was admitted on july 8th with Parvovirus, one day after we brought him home from the puppy store. The day we took him home he was having watery diarrhea however he was eating, drinking and being playful. The next day...the diarrhea became bloody, he vomited, stopped drinking or eating and was hardly arousable. We took him to the Vet Emergency Clinic and he has beed admitted since. He was severely dehydrated requiring intravenous fluids and has been on 4 antibiotics for bacterial infections that have been a complication from the depressed immunity caused by the Parvovirus- including most recently an infection of his left knee. Johnny is alot better overall now. He has no more diarrhea, is eating well , is off the IV fluids and on oral antibiotics. Hopefully he will be discharged soon! But unfortunately the bill is alot more than we can handle on our own. Johnny did not have insurance yet as he was with us only for one day, and the puppy store as well as breeder are unfortunately not accepting their responsibility. Please help us care for Johnny!

Joe McElderry: I am gay
- Bang Showbiz
- 31 July 2010
'X Factor' winner Joe McElderry, 19, has revealed he realised he is gay three weeks ago
Joe McElderry has revealed he is gay.
The 'Climb' singer - who shot to fame after winning the last series of 'The X Factor' - claims he only realised he is attracted to men three weeks ago, despite months of speculation about his sexuality.
He said: "I'm so happy. It's all so recent to be honest. Over the past couple of weeks I've had time to think and come to realise who I am. I have grown up a lot.
"I've had time to think about things. I wasn't attracted to anyone anyway, male or female. It never really entered my head I was gay. But I just know. It's how I feel."
The 19-year-old star's page on social networking website twitter was hacked recently, with a prankster posting a series of messages supposedly from Joe claiming to be gay.
The Newcastle-born singer admits he was upset at first but thinks the posts helped him to come to terms with his true feelings.
He explained: "I was really angry at first but after a while I looked at the messages and though, 'Well, they're not that far from the truth.'
"I think the twitter thing was the point where I realised I was gay. I just looked at it and thought, 'Should I be more bothered about this?' Because I wasn't, that's when it clicked and I thought maybe I was."
Joe - who claims to have only ever kissed one man, a fellow student, last year - only told his family about his sexuality last week, but says he has their full support and has pledged his confession won't make him act any differently.
He said: "My mum told all our close friends and family. They were all fine with it.
"I haven't changed as a person. This is just how I am feeling and I have chosen to talk about it.
"You're not going to see me strolling out of clubs with different people or anything like that. I won't be out there going mad. I am a really private person and I want to continue like that.
"I am not bothered about not having a partner. I don't feel I need to get in a relationship just for the sake of it."

Chennai:Rafael Nadal kept his emotions and close friendship aside when he took on and beat fellow Spaniard Carlos Moya in the semi-finals of the Chennai Open tennis tournament on Saturday.
"It was a very emotional match with the crowd getting involved, but reaching the final is a great start for the new season," said Nadal soon after his 7-6, 6-7, 7-6 win against Moya.
While admitting that he was physically and mentally drained after the three-hour, 55-minute marathon, Nadal said: "The atmosphere was unbelievable and so was the match. We know each other's game very well and so, we have to give 100 per cent for each point and each game, and I am so tired right now."
Nadal felt that Moya had his chances to win the match. "I was very vary of his forehand and I had to make sure he did not get many opportunities to play those shots. In the end, like I said, it is a great start for the new season," he said.
Moya, on his part, admitted that he blew his chances, especially in the second set when he had four match points and paid dearly for it.
"Against Rafael, you do not get any cheap points. You have to earn them. In the second set, when I had the matchpoints, I played a few bad balls. And like I said, against Rafa, you need to make the best of every opportunity you get," said Moya.
On the positive side, Moya said he was happy at his fitness level. "To play the top guys for nearly four hours takes a lot out of you, but the fact that I lasted against Rafa is a good sign. I am pretty pleased that I have the fitness to play the top guys," he said.
He confessed that he was overwhelmed by the crowd support. "It is not every day that you get to play in such an environment. The crowd was great and I thank them for the support they gave me. Chennai is a special place for me and the support I get is unbelievable," said Moya.
Moya's popularity grew in leaps and bounds when in 2005 he donated his winner's cheque of about $58,000 for Tsunami relief projects.

Being live on national tv is different than being in a boardroom doing a presentation. Especially, when that camera with those lights blaring at your face. I think it only made it worst, when regis started making fun of the fact that he couldnt come up with words to speak.
as a high up member of the trump organization (and a sub for george a few times), you'd think he'd have gotten used to public speaking and being on camera before last night. i'm not saying i would have done a better job, but then i'm not a senior member of an org, i wasn't a guest-sidekick, and i wasn't a member of the audience. i'm sure the people they talked to were given advance notice that they'd be asked about their feelings, so they had time to prepare.
anyway, i thought bill was incredibly articulate. kelly's boss said some really really nice things. if my LORs were like that, i bet i'd get into all my reachiest schools. jennifer's boss was positive and everything, but i expected him to come up with something better, as an attorney. you'd think his argument skills would be awesome and he'd come up with an amazing defense of jennifer.

We were fortunate enough today to see the raised-bed gardens behind Salvation Army. They are tended by several youth who attend the Salvation Army day camp. There are several plant varieties they are growing, and it is watched over by two ladies from the U of I extension office. We love to see what others in our community are doing in their gardens!
Sign in to post comments.

I never like to be the first one to try a new restaurant, but with this place I was pleasantly glad to have been the first customer. I have also suggested this place to others. My wife was totally delighted to have visited as well. The food is extraordinary, the servers are friendly. Florence Italian Restaurant is a great addition to the Martinez Main street.

Friday, April 9, 2010
a birthday week adventure part 2:
Ruby is horse crazy. We just happen to live down the street from two lovely horses, which is enough to get Ruby excited. Ever since she was one year old we would say hi to Sonny (one of those two horses) every time we drive by, and we very often bring him carrots.
Yesterday, history was made. Ruby asked and she received! She was invited to take a ride on Sonny (who by the way, is the coolest, sweetest, old man of a horse EVER). Not only was she invited to take a ride, but she was invited to the whole process of caring for a horse.
Just being that close to a horse (it being Sonny was extra special), was such a treat! There was a point though, where she did ask "can we ride now?"
And ride she did! Amy (the horses owner, a sweet girl we've been neighbors with since she was just a young thing) was such a natural (with kids, as a teacher, and certainly as a cowgirl). Ruby even got to ride around the yard all by herself after a while!
Posted by blue corduroy at 7:41 AM

"I shouldn't mind it if I were not afraid of going to sleep and falling on you."
"Why, I should like it. A pretty girl like you is an agreeable burden."
She made no reply, but I saw that she understood; my declaration was made, but something more was wanted before I could rely on her docility. I relapsed into silence again till we got to Varennes, and then I said,--
"If I thought you could eat a roast fowl with as good an appetite as mine, I would dine here."
"Try me, I will endeavour to match you."
We ate well and drank better, and by the time we started again we were a little drunk. Adele, who was only accustomed to drink wine two or three times a year, laughed at not being able to stand upright, but seemed to be afraid that something would happen. I comforted her by saying that the fumes of champagne soon evaporated; but though she strove with all her might to keep awake, nature conquered, and letting her pretty head fall on my breast she fell asleep, and did not rouse herself for two hours. I treated her with the greatest respect, though I could not resist ascertaining that the article of clothing which had displeased me so much had entirely disappeared.
While she slept I enjoyed the pleasure of gazing on the swelling curves of her budding breast, but I restrained my ardour, as the disappearance of the black breeches assured me that I should find her perfectly submissive whenever I chose to make the assault. I wished, however, that she should give herself up to me of her own free will, or at any rate come half-way to meet me, and I knew that I had only to smooth the path to make her do so.
When she awoke and found that she had been sleeping in my arms, her astonishment was extreme. She apologized and begged me to forgive her, while I thought the best way to put her at ease would be to give her an affectionate kiss. The result was satisfactory; who does not know the effect of a kiss given at the proper time?
As her dress was in some disorder she tried to adjust it, but we were rather pushed for space, and by an awkward movement she uncovered her knee. I burst out laughing and she joined me, and had the presence of mind to say:
"I hope the black colour has given you no funereal thoughts this time."
"The hue of the rose, dear Adele, can only inspire me with delicious fancies."
I saw that she lowered her eyes, but in a manner that shewed she was pleased.
With this talk--and, so to speak, casting oil on the flames--we reached Moulin, and got down for a few moments. A crowd of women assailed us with knives and edged tools of all sorts, and I bought the father and daughter whatever they fancied. We went on our way, leaving the women quarrelling and fighting because some had sold their wares and others had not.
In the evening we reached St. Pierre; but during the four hours that had elapsed since we left Moulin we had made way, and Adele had become quite familiar with me.
Thanks to Clairmont, who had arrived two hours before, an excellent supper awaited us. We supped in a large room, where two great white beds stood ready to receive us.
I told Moreau that he and his daughter should sleep in one bed, and I in the other; but he replied that I and Adele could each have a bed to ourselves, as he wanted to start for Nevers directly after supper, so as to be able to catch-his debtor at daybreak, and to rejoin us when we got there the following day.
"If you had told me before, we would have gone on to Nevers and slept there."
"You are too kind. I mean to ride the three and a half stages. The riding will do me good, and I like it. I leave my daughter in your care. She will not be so near you as in the carriage."
"Oh, we will be very discreet, you may be sure!"
After his departure I told Adele to go to bed in her clothes, if she were afraid of me.
"I shan't be offended," I added.
"It would be very wrong of me," she answered, "to give you such a proof of my want of confidence."
She rose, went out a moment, and when she came back she locked the door, and as soon as she was ready to slip off her last article of clothing came and kissed me.

I call this story my “lucky baccarat morning” but morning is pushing it a bit. It was more like my lucky baccarat half an hour. It was a morning which made me a believer in people who know that fate or luck or whatever is on their side and they immediately act upon it. I was glad I found the right person at the right time so I could act too.
There is nothing like hitting a great run at the baccarat table. I woke up at 8am and headed down to get my usual cup of strong tea with no intentions of playing anything before I’d had at least two cups and a bacon sandwich. I bumped into a friend of mine who plays baccarat and immediately changed my mind. pg168
The man in question can be very good at the game and also terrible. If he is on he can’t lose and I make money with him because I follow whatever his “play” provides.
Realising I had left my room with nothing but thirty dollars in my pocket because I only planned to get some breakfast, I stuck it in the money area. The dealer announced “money plays”.
I could tell my friend was “right on” as soon as he sat down. It was almost as if fate had smiled on him that morning and given him a nudge to play at that baccarat table. I took the entire $30 and pressed it up to $960.
I took the $900 profit and started over with $60 and pressed it up to $1920 and was ready to start over with $100 when he said: “that’s it and it’s gone”. As I had played with him before on several occasions, I knew he was probably right. Everyone calls him the “hit and run kid” so I did not encourage him to stay.
He had made a profit of over $5000 and decided it was time for some breakfast. After tips and a few other expenses, I walked away from the table with over $2800.

And we are his witnesses of these things
Of the incarnation of Christ, of his crucifixion and death, of his resurrection from the dead, of his exaltation by the right hand of God, and of his offices as a Prince and a Saviour, and of the influences of his grace, in giving repentance and remission of sins to his people; and even to many of the Jews, who had been his crucifiers, and who were now converted under the ministry of the apostles:
and so is also the Holy Ghost;
in his descent upon the apostles, through the miraculous gifts bestowed upon them, and the wonderful works done by them, and the mighty power accompanying their ministry to the conversion of sinners:
whom God hath given to them that obey him;
that hearken to his Gospel, and believe in Christ, even to all private Christians, as well as ministers of the word; if not in his extraordinary gifts, yet in the ordinary measures of his grace.

My name is Joycelyn, but most people call me Joy! But either one works for me! I was born and raised in Colorado, but I moved around a little bit when I was growing up. I found out about Legacy through my school, Pima Medical Institute. I did 2 shadow days with them and knew instantly that I had to do my externship with them too! Then I was lucky enough to start my career with them as a Veterinary Assistant! I hope to advance my education in the near future and become one of the Veterinary Technicians here. In my free time, I enjoy spending time with my pets and family. Being outdoors is definitely one of my favorite things too! I look forward to seeing you at the clinic!

How long had you been married when you found out you were prego? What baby is this?
We were married 3 1/2 years when we found out we were expecting. We'll be married 4 when baby arrives. It is our 1st!
DD ~ March 2013
Friendship is born at that moment when one person says to another "What! You too? I thought I was the only one!" ~ CS Lewis
Don+Mindy=5/4/09 Jasper 5-4-10 (HAPPY 1st ANNIVERSARY) Jase 1-29-13 Jaxon due 12-31-14 New Year's Eve!!!! I'm surrounded by pickles!!!!!!
Um. Got married in July 2012. We were already engaged and had already announced it to my family. We were just waiting to get the money together. :)
And haha we started talking about children in april, had sex twice without a condom retalked decided to wait a little while. Had sex ONCE in may, WITH a condom. Now we got a baby on the way :)
Funny mini story.
This is baby #2 for us :)
We were married 5 1/2 years (just celebrated our 6 year anniversary on Sunday) before getting pregnant. It was by choice though. Started trying in April and were pregnant in May
This baby #3 and we found out when we were married 6 years and 9 months.
#2 - married 2 years
#3 - married 7 years
#4 - married 10 years

If there are two names that have become synonymous with success in franchise cricket, it is MS Dhoni and Chennai Super Kings. The former Indian captain is almost as big as the Chennai Super Kings and has led the side since its inception leading it to three titles.
After a poor season in 2020, CSK were back to the best this year before the IPL was postponed and Dhoni’s captaincy as well as tactics looked sharp. CSK were looking for another top-four finish as they were positioned as an impressive all-round side and Dhoni was seen being more involved with younger players in the group.
Now, a mega-auction is slated to take place in 2022 and it will be interesting to see if CSK retain their captain or if Dhoni himself stays put and does not hang up his boots. Speculations are rife and former Australian spinner Brad Hogg has weighed in on the issue. He believes that Dhoni will never play for another team in the IPL and said that the wicket-keeper batsman would make a transition as a coach for the side even if he is not involved as a player.
“MS Dhoni is not leaving @ChennaiIPL He is the Maharaja of the franchise. He will transition into a coaching role," Hogg said on Twitter.
It needs to be mentioned here that CSK letting go of Dhoni is highly unlikely as he has been such a huge figure for the franchise. Even though his skill sets with the bat have watered down over the years, his sharp tactical mind still gets the job done and the side would want to preserve this for a long time. However, with Dhoni one cannot predict anything and it will be interesting to see what the future holds for the side and the player.

Country singer Jake Flint has died 37 hours after his wedding
Country music singer Jake Flint has died. He was 37 years old.
The Oklahoma native was an up-and-coming artist with several studio albums and “What’s Your Name?” and “Long Road Back Home.” He is the first found a love After his father was diagnosed with ALS for country music and asked his friends to teach his son to play guitar to compensate for not being able to play sports with his son.
His publicist Cliff Doyle said The Oklahoman that The singer died After her marriage on Saturday it is her sleep time.
Also his former manager, Brenda Cline Confirmed the news Sunday and revealed that Flint, whom she loved “as much as a son,” had died a short time ago. Coming back on tour 2 December followed by her wedding festivities.
“The funniest, funniest, hardest working, most dedicated artist I’ve ever worked with in my career. We were going to start some business together after he and Brenda got married—which was yesterday. Yes—yesterday,” he wrote.
First the flint He announced his engagement In a heartwarming post in January.
“Say hello to the future Mr. Brenda Wilson. #secret See you in Cain’s ballroom in a few months,” she wrote alongside a selfie of the two.
his widow shared a video As soon as the news of his death came, they were about to get married. The two are seen dancing and taking pictures under an orange tree.
“I don’t understand,” he wrote in the caption, before adding a later one Separate post That “man is not meant to feel so much pain.”
“We should go through with the wedding pictures but instead I have to pick out clothes to bury my husband in,” she added. “My heart is gone and I really want him back. I can’t take any more. I need him here.”
#Country #singer #Jake #Flint #died #hours #wedding

Trouble with Post Office
I have currently been forced to wonder what happened to the word " Service" in the phrase " United States Postal Service." The reasons follow.
Before needing to be out of town for several weeks starting the first of the year I went to the post office and filled out the yellow mail forwarding card requesting our first class mail to be forwarded and the rest to be held at the post office to be picked up, at a minimum, by my son at least weekly. I was told this was not possible and the post had never done this. I explained that this had been done for at least the last six years and was told it couldn't have been and that only first class was forwarded and the rest was not. So I gave up on that.
As we expected to arrive home on March 18 I called the Bennington post office on March 8th to give them time to stop the forwarding and hold mail at the post office to be picked up. I was told " No problem".
On the 14th we received forwarded mail in Florida. I called again and spoke with a second person and was told the request had never been put in but would be corrected.
Three more pieces of mail arrived at the Florida address between the 21st and 24th . I went to the local post office on the 26th and was told that no mail was being forwarded. (?) On the morning of March 28th my son sent up the mail he had. Lo and behold, that afternoon 3 more bills arrived in Florida. On April 1st another bill arrived.
I was told by clerks and supervisor that this problem had something to do with White River, or Springfield and even Boston. This during three separate conversations.
So far 24 days after the first request the problem persists. Fortunately we had been staying at my sons house. If we had been renting, as we have done in the past, we very likely would never be getting our bills etc.
Looking for suggestions.
— Ron Alderman Bennington

((On the date between Riley and Lucas))
"I'm having a great time with you Riley," Lucas said.
"I'm having a great time with you too," Riley replied laughing.
"What are you going to order?"
They were sitting in the Heavenly Delights Cafe.
"Um... I think I'll get the Heavenly Delight Cheeseburger and Fries... along with a cheesecake"
"mmm great choice," Lucas said, "I think I'll get the same thing."
"Lucas can I ask you a question," Riley asked.
"Of course," Lucas said.
"Where did you get your scar," Riley asked, "My dad... wanted to know"
"I was in the first grade. Some kids thought it would be fun to take a jump rope... tie me to a tree and throw tacks at me. One of the tacks got me in the hand,"
"I'm over it," Lucas said
Riley decided to change the subject but before she did Lucas asked her a very important question.
"Riley... would you be my girlfriend?"
Riley felt like she might faint. Lucas... the boy she had a crush on since she met him was asking her to be his girlfriend.
"I would love to," Riley exclaimed.
He kissed her.
"Thank you for making me the happiest guy in the world," Lucas said.
Riley looked at the clock. It was 8:45.
"My dad wants me home at 9," Riley said.
"Okay," Lucas replied.
He walked her home. He kissed her goodnight.
"Mr. Frier," Cory said coming out, "I saw you got my daughter home on time... I like that."
"Thank you sir," Lucas said smiling.
"Maybe you're not so bad," Cory added, "You have to understand I'm very protective of Riley. She went through a lot last year and as a father you want to make sure your children are always safe."
"That's not so easy to do sir," Lucas said, "But I would never hurt Riley."
Cory looked at Lucas.
"I know that," he said, "But if you ever do hurt her you'll have to answer to me. Trust me when I say you don't want to have to answer to me."
Lucas knew many things. There was one thing he knew beyond the shadow of a doubt. He did not want to have to answer to Riley's father. He was like a bear when it came to protecting Riley. He would tear him apart if he ever hurt her no mater how unintentionally.
"Sir I swear," Lucas said, "I will never hurt Riley. I love her too much."

AN: Wow, okay so hi everyone. It's been a whirlwind in my life and to be honest, I had forgotten about this for a while. Then Cory's death happened and I couldn't help but remember how much Glee meant to me, and the deep sadness that his death caused, and how much time I committed to this fic. I figured I should finish it, and let Finn live on at least in my world. Thank you so much for your support and anyone who is still reading. Longer chapter coming up soon back in Sebastian's POV. This is a short glimpse into Kurt's head. Xoxo Chelsea
Kurt really couldn't wrap his head around that one. Dating was something that was reserved for Blaine, and previously only reserved for Blaine. He didn't even know if he knew how to date anymore. This was all so new and, honestly, a little terrifying. Blaine had been everything he had wanted from the very beginning. He'd been intelligent, funny, loving, kind, tender, and everything else that Kurt could ever want. But that was ripped out from underneath him.
Sebastian, on the other hand, was everything Kurt had thought he didn't want. He was rude, arrogant, selfish, pompous, and so overly sexual. Before this vacation, Kurt had seen nothing of value in Sebastian in the least. He couldn't stand two minutes around the guy. So what had changed? What had turned Sebastian from that pompous asshole into the guy that made his heart flutter? Maybe he had been there all along and Kurt was just too headstrong to notice.
He was confused.
Kurt, though he was embarrassed to admit it now, thought that Blaine was The One. He had pictured a life together with kids and a beautiful home and all that white picket fence crap. Blaine had called and they spoke only for a few minutes; okay well "spoke" is an understatement, it was more of Blaine pleading. Blaine swore that he missed Kurt and that he'd made a mistake. He begged for his forgiveness. Kurt was pretty sure he was drunk. He asked Blaine to call him the next day, when he was sober. He hadn't. It was all different now.
But somehow, better.
Sebastian stirred up something in Kurt that he hadn't felt in so long. Kurt felt wanted. He had this urge to know Sebastian better and memorize every little part of him; from his slight gestures to his inner thoughts. He wanted to know what Sebastian dreamed of at night, what the muscles in his back felt like under his palms, and what his coffee order was. Kurt wanted to be immersed in Sebastian.
He knew that it would be a mistake to take things too fast though. He wanted to give Sebastian his full and undivided attention, away from any fears of Blaine reappearing in Kurt's life. He wanted to fall in love with Sebastian fully and completely.
They were going back to Ohio soon, and Sebastian was getting restless for answers or some sort of label.
Kurt was getting fairly restless himself. Every time he saw Sebastian casually stroll by in nothing but loose-fitting swim trunks, Kurt felt a need in the pit of his stomach and blood rush to his groin. He had almost attacked Sebastian when they were in the taxi. Kurt was trying to slow things down, he really was. Sebastian just wasn't making it easy with his perfect body and the substantial bulge in his pants and that smirk.
Kurt needed to calm down. Close quarters weren't making it any easier.
Maybe it would be easier when they got home? Maybe this sudden romantic and sexual flair would die down?
But Kurt could hope.

Mary Stayskal was born about 1860, in Czechia as the daughter of John Stayskal. She married Albert Benda on 19 December 1883, in Marshall, Iowa, United States. They were the parents of at least 4 sons. She died on 27 January 1944, in Carroll Township, Tama, Iowa, United States, at the age of 85, and was buried in Vining, Tama, Iowa, United States.
Hebrew: Bitter; Marion is the French form.

WHAT HAPPENED? (1)
Though the dreamy, doomed romance between Jack, Rose, and a door that was definitely big enough to fit the both of them is fictional, the "unsinkable" ship is a very real, very sad part of history, and it collided with the iceberg that would eventually lead to the deaths of over 1,500 people 108 years ago.
The ship was carrying some of the wealthiest people in the world, as well as many emigrants searching for a new life in the United States. The first-class portion of the ship was accommodated with a gym, a pool, restaurants and beautiful rooms. But the gorgeous chandeliers and staircases were of no help when what they truly needed was lifeboats, of which they only had about 20.
The world was shocked when news of the disaster spread, mostly because of the loss of life and the failures that lead to it. The wreckage was not discovered for more than 70 years, in 1985. Many artifacts have been recovered and displayed around the world. The final survivor of the disaster, who was only 2-months-old at the time, died in 2009.
THE TITANIC'S MAIDEN VOYAGE (1)
The Titanic took off on April 10, 1912 and was intended to be the first of many on its path. The ship had 885 crew members on board, many of which were not full-time crew, but had only just come to work a few hours before the ship left. They signed up and were called to help out.
The Captain of the ship, Edward John Smith, was initially supposed to command the Olympic ship, but was transferred to take command of Titanic.
The crew was divided into 3 departments: 66 crew members on the deck, 325 crew members with the Engine, and 494 who were responsible for Victualling (food). The crew members weren't really familiar with the sea, but were engineers, firemen, or stewards. 97% of the crew was male, and there were only 23 female crew members, mainly stewardesses.
There were approximately 1,317 passengers on the ship, broken down into 324 in first class, 284 in second class, and 709 in third class. 66% were male, and 34% were female, and there were 107 children on board, mostly in third class. The ship could accommodate nearly double the amount of passengers. Many passengers had cancelled their travel plans because of a national coal strike.
The ship had many a prominent person on the boat, including millionaires, painters, writers, architects, authors, socialites, and journalists. (One of the prominent people is listed as a "wealthy divorcee" which seems to be a low bar of who they considered famous on the ship.)
THE SINKING OF THE UNSINKABLE (1)
For a few days, the voyage was going on without incident. The rich, who paid today's equivalent of $87,000 to be first-class, were enjoying a saltwater swimming pool, a steam room, massages, lavishly decorated rooms, and a fancy restaurant. If you have seen the Titanic movie, it was really similar. They were living large.
The third class had better accommodations than other ships, but still pretty bad. They were in "dormitories", without adequate food or toilets. They had their own dining rooms and public gathering areas, including deck space.
But at 11:40 PM on April 14, a lookout spotted an iceberg immediately ahead of the ship. First Officer William Murdoch ordered that the ship be steered around, and for engines to stop. But, it was too late. The side of the ship had already struck the iceberg, and a series of holes were created in the ship below the waterline. Water began to seep into the compartments. The ship began to sink.
Perhaps because the ship was marketed as being "unsinkable" (no, definitely because of that), everyone was ill-prepared as to what to do next. They didn't have enough lifeboats, and the crew hadn't been trained for evacuating the boat. Nobody knew how many people could safely board the lifeboats, so many of them were sent out half full. Women and children were evacuated first, and third-class passengers became trapped below the decks as the ship continued to fill with water.
The next few hours were chaos. Women and children were leaving their husbands and fathers in lifeboats that weren't full. Men were awaiting their death on the deck. Lower class passengers were stuck as water began to fill around them. People chose to hold their families or loved ones close, knowing they were going to die. The musicians played their instruments as the ship began to go down in attempt to calm the terrified passengers around them. The captain went down with the ship.
In the early hours of April 15, a few hours after the boat had struck the iceberg, the deck dipped underwater and began to sink more quickly. Around this time, the ship broke in half. One half began tilting, and then was essentially sitting straight up. The people who weren't able to grab hold of the railings slid down the ship, landing in 28 degree water if they didn't die from the blunt force of hitting various things on the way down. The people who were able to grab hold of the railings were dangling hundreds of feet above freezing water, unable to continue holding on but knowing they would die if they let go.
Besides the water being cold enough to freeze to death on its own, sudden immersion into freezing water can cause death within a few minutes, mostly from cardiac arrest from uncontrollable breathing or cold incapacitation. Once the ship split in 2, anyone who was unable to get into a lifeboat early on was left in the water. Most of them died of cardiac arrest within a half hour, and only 5 were helped onto lifeboats, even though there was space for a total of 500 more passengers.
Distress signals had been sent up, but none of the ships who responded were close enough to reach the ship before it sank.
About 710 people survived the disaster, while about 1,500 lost their lives, nearly all freezing to death in the 28 degree waters of the Atlantic ocean in mid-April. The survivors were transferred to the Carpathia and were taken to New York, where the Titanic was supposed to end up. The captain of the Carpathia described the area as an ice field, with 20 large ice bergs up to 200 feet high and numerous small ice bergs. Now, the area is known as "iceberg alley".
PASSENGER STORIES (2)
Jack was a 17-year-old high school student returning from a Paris trip with his parents. In the chaos, he was separated from his family and hung onto the rails with a passenger he had met named Milton. They decided to jump together, but Jack never saw Milton again. He landed in the frigid water, and was pulled underwater by the Titanic's second funnel. He was able to climb onto a lifeboat, which had ended up upside down. He watched as the Titanic began to sink entirely under the water.
He remembered the sounds of over 1,500 people screaming and crying, and hearing them begin to fade as they died. He remembered lifeboats not turning back around, saying it was "the most heartrendering part of the whole tragedy". He was reuinted with his mother on the rescue ship, but found out his father died. Jack went on to be quite successful, but after his son died in World War II, Jack committed suicide at the age of 51.
The Collyer Family
Charlotte Collyer got on the ship with her husband, Harvey, and their 8-year-old Marjorie. They were going to live in Idaho on a farm. When the ship struck the iceberg, Harvey investigated, but an officer told him there was no danger. Charlotte refused to get on the lifeboat without her husband, but when Marjorie was thrown on a boat, Harvey reassured her that he would get on another boat and she needed to go.
Charlotte and Marjorie survived but Harvey did not. Charlotte wrote to her mother-in-law to tell her that Harvey had died, and told her that everything they owned, and everything she had to remember him, had gone down with the ship.
Rhoda was a 3rd class passenger, returning to America with her 2 teen sons. They reached the lifeboat deck by climbing and swinging on ropes from already launched lifeboats. She was allowed to get into one of the boats, but because her sons were 13 and 16, they were considered men, and not children. She refused to get on without them.
In the final moments before the boat split, the family jumped from the deck. She lost her sons in the chaos, but managed to get into one of the lifeboats. She never recovered from her injuries from that night, or the lost of her sons, and died in 1946, alone.
There are so many more stories from the Titanic, some that will never get to be told. The stories of the band who played as the ship went down. The stories of the lower class passengers who drowned in the ship. The stories of the husbands and fathers who waved goodbye to their wives and children, knowing they'd never see them again. Of the 710 survivors, most of them lost someone. And all of them had to live the rest of their lives with the trauma of that night with them: The chaos, the freezing water, the sounds of people screaming for help and drowning and freezing to death.
The Titanic is memorialized through a brilliant movie, but it is important to remember that it is more than just a Hollywood film with beautiful actors: 1,500+ lost their lives in one of the most terrifying imaginable ways.
Like most preventable disasters, the Titanic lead to a lot of necessary changes on ships, including having the right amount of lifeboats, and the proper training on how to evacuate in the event of an emergency. And though it doesn't make the loss of those 1,500 better, it hopefully made it so it doesn't happen again.
On April 14, 1912, a ship full of people woke up: some to their luxurious, gold-encrusted suite with a pool, and some to their toilet-less dorm under water, but all alive, excited to eventually make it to their New York destination. But by the next day, most of them would be freezing in the Atlantic Ocean, the rest of them freezing on lifeboats, listening to the sounds of death all around them. It is one of the saddest, and most famous, disasters in history, and the iceberg that started it all was hit 108 years ago today.

So, Conner comes in while I’m showering and says, “Mom I want you to know that you are NOT a very good mom.” He then berated me for asking him to clean-up his stuffed animals. I thanked him for his honesty and asked him to leave. I started to think that I’ve had this particular gig (mom) for the longest of all of my jobs. I have never been told (except for a few bad experiences in nursing school, which is to be expected) that I was a bad nurse. As far as I can remember I’ve never been told I was a bad scrapbooker… so, this was a first for me. So, I’m a bad mom, and I’m dealing with it.
Want to find more joy?
Pulling Curls is a blog for the overwhelmed to find more joy. Be it a laugh in something I share or tips for everyday life. Don't miss out!

I have had repairs by and purchased appliances from this company since 2001 on the recommendation of a coworker and am always pleased. As long as they are in business there is no need to waste money paying for the packaging and marketing of a new machine!
Posted: 6/07/2012 • Link to this review
I bought a washing machine there. It was the best price I could find in town on a used one (which looked like brand new) and they offered a 6-month in store warranty. I'd have to bring it back, but that was better than anywhere else I found. They were really nice folks and they had a great selection.
Posted: 3/26/2011 • Link to this review

It is the details that delight. Donne hated milk. Mortally sick, about to celebrate his death by sitting for his portrait in a shroud, he was urged by his doctor that “by Cordials, and drinking milk twenty days together, there was a probability of his restoration to health”. Donne would have none of it. The doctor (a Dr Fox, son of the author of the ‘Boke of Martyrs’) insisted that his patient should at least try. Donne thereupon drank milk — but for ten days only. Then he told Dr Fox that he would not drink the stuff for another ten days even “upon the best moral assurance of having twenty years added to his life”.
more from Literary Review here.

Yesterday evening I had the pleasure of going to a lecture at the ASU school of music. The lecture was given by the man who invented the steel drum. I wont go into detail about the lecture because I am sure josh will be talking about it on his blog later. I will only say that the lecture was very cool. Now on to the stupid people.... The speaker talked long enough that there wasn't really time for very many questions at the end. That is, there wasn't time if say, you weren't smart enough to go up after the lecture and ask questions. This was apparently a concept that these people had never heard of. The assistant / translator if need be, was helping to keep everything on schedule. She tried to do this by saying something that I understood quite well and maybe I am a genius but I don't think that is really the case. "this is the last question" now before I started to get irritated at the four or five other people who preceded to raise their hands and ask questions I stopped to think that maybe they might have misunderstood. Did it have a double meaning? Maybe they though theirs was the last question even though it had not yet been asked. I quickly came to the conclusion that no, it did not have a double meaning. The answer was simple, these people thought they and their question (which weren't even good questions) were the most important thing in the world at that given moment. I think that this makes them not only selfish for wasting other people's time but also pretty dumb for not understanding the simple phrase " this is the last question".

Nathan Bazata's head coach, Mike Speirs, has confirmed with Voice of the Hawkeyes that the defensive tackle has committed to Iowa. The 6-2, 270-pounder out of Howells (Neb.) becomes Iowa's fifth verbal pledge of the 2013 recruiting class.
Bazata selected Iowa over an offer from South Dakota State, and had also received interest from Nebraska and Iowa state.
"He committed sometime this morning, I believe," Speirs said of Bazata. "He decided that they were the first one to offer, and that's where he was going to go."
Similar to 2012 Hawkeye signee Drew Ott, Bazata plays eight-man football. According to Speirs, the two future teammates also share a similar work ethic.
"Nathan is just a typical small-town Nebraska kid," Speirs said. "He's a hard-working farm kid, and he's incredibly strong for being a junior in high school. He's got a good frame, and he'll be able to put on some weight. He's so quick. For a kid his size, he's very quick. He hasn't really tapped into his ability yet."
Bazata was named First Team All-State as a junior, and also excels in wrestling and track. He recently set the school record in the shot put with a throw of 57'11'' and lost in the state finals of the heavyweight division to former Hawkeye target Mike Shoff. Hawkeye assistant Reese Morgan feels Bazata will bring the total package to Iowa.
"He's just an incredible athlete," Speirs said. "They just like his tenacity. Coach Morgan said that one of the things that caught their attention was that he played every play as hard as he could. He plays every play like it's the last play of the game."
Bazata also reminds Morgan of past players that have thrived in Iowa City.
"Coach Morgan liked him, and said he reminded him of some of the kids they've had there," Speirs said. "Small-town kids that did well for them."
Already have an account? Sign In

Serving Dickinson: Police chief reflects on challenges posed by oil boom
Dickinson Police Chief Dustin Dassinger took over the department in 2011, just as the oil boom was beginning to take off. The boom created challenges for the department, but Dassinger said he is proud to work with the officers he serves with every day.
He said he was always interested in law enforcement because he had family members in law enforcement when he was growing.
"That kind of spurred my interest in law enforcement," Dassinger said.
After graduating from high school, the South Heart native attended Dickinson State University, where he earned a bachelor's degree. He then went on to attend the University of North Dakota-Lake Region, now known as Lake Region State College, where he earned a certificate in law enforcement.
Dassinger's first law enforcement job was working a summer in Medora.
"It was interesting," he said. "It was fun working in a tourist community. It's a different aspect of law enforcement, but I enjoyed it."
After finishing his summer in Medora, Dassinger took a job in Williston, where he worked for 13 months until a job opened in October 1999 with the Dickinson Police Department.
"Dickinson's a very nice community and it was nice coming back," he said. "There were a lot of the people I knew and there's something about serving a community that you kind of bond with. You know what's expected of you as a law enforcement officer and you know what the community stands for."
Capt. David Wilkie was hired a few months before Dassinger in 1999 and took Dassinger on his first day of work.
"He rode with me on the first day and he wasn't even in his uniform," Wilkie said.
Wilkie said they took a call about a teenager who had died in a garage, possibly of a drug overdose.
"I just turned to him and said, 'Welcome to Dickinson,' " Wilkie said.
Dassinger became chief of police in 2011, just as the North Dakota oil boom was beginning to take off. He said the oil boom posed various challenges to the department. The city's population grew, along with the area the department had to cover. Space was tight at the time because police were working out of the Law Enforcement Center, a building they shared with Stark County until 2014.
"Dickinson was right around 17,000 people when I took over as chief in 2011 and we grew rapidly," he said. "Within a couple years, we grew by about 10,000 people at our peak. So, we had to hire new staff on, we were outgrowing our existing space, the size of our community was growing, the area as far city limits was growing, so that proposed challenges for us with our communications system."
A growing community meant residents did not always know their neighbors like they used to, which created more police calls. There was an increase in aggravated assaults and bar fights, and drug-related calls were on the rise and continue to be one of the department's biggest problems.
"We had some changes and some growing pains that we had to go through," Dassinger said. "It was definitely fast-paced and we hit the ground running, but I enjoyed it. I still enjoy it. There's new challenges every day."
Wilkie said Dassinger made "good, sound decisions" during the oil boom by listening to people and responding well to advice.
"When this whole thing started, we were undermanned and underequipped," Wilkie said. "We've built up our fleet and built up our manpower and built up our equipment list. We've gone in the right direction."
The department moved across town in 2014 to the new Public Safety Center, which it shares with the Fire Department. Dassinger said he enjoys his relationship with Dickinson Fire Chief Bob Sivak.
"Being in the same building, we've developed a very strong bond with the Fire Department and I enjoy working with Chief Sivak on a daily basis," he said.
Outside of law enforcement, Dassinger enjoys working out, lifting weights and coaching youth sports, especially baseball.
"I enjoy watching my kids play sports and activities," he said. "That pretty much eats up a majority of my free time."
Dassinger said he is proud to work with his fellow officers every day.
"I'm very fortunate to have a very good team," he said. "We have excellent dispatchers, excellent patrol officers, excellent people in our investigative unit. So I enjoy coming to work every day and I feel very fortunate with the staff that I have to work with."

SANTA FE, N.M. (AP) — The New Mexico Department of Game and Fish has returned three young bobcats to the wild.
The cats were rehabilitated at the Wildlife Center in Espanola after being found in a residential area in the hills just outside of Santa Fe last spring.
Wildlife officials say a homeowner discovered a litter of bobcats under his deck. The mother eventually moved the kittens to another location but she left one behind. That kitten's eyes were still closed but it was in good health and was rescued.
Another bobcat and two kittens were found in a barn in the area. They were also taken to the center to be rehabilitated.
All three kittens were raised together with the adult bobcat. They were released last Friday.

A long time ago there was a brother named Al and a sister named Cindy. They had three animal friends; Bear, Rabbit and Squirrel. They lived in a small house with their Grandpa. They loved playing in the forest. One day they were playing in the forest when Grandpa said that Al and Cindy had to come back home. Al and Cindy went home like the others.
Meanwhile, at the Dr Doctor’s castle, Dr Doctor created a light bulb which can control his vehicles. He was laughing like a maniac.
He used it to destroy the forest and take the wood from it. Squirrel lived there and he was very sad. The next day, Squirrel told his friend what happened.
Al then looked through his binoculars and spotted Dr Doctor’s vehicles heading off. They decided to stop him. They told that to Grandpa, who said that Dr Doctor tried to destroy all forests on the world before and that he stopped him with ancient dragon power.
He said that he and his friends were wearing costumes that you can use to summon the dragon. He even opened his photo album and showed them the pictures.
They went to the attic and put on the costumes. They were very scared of Dr Doctor but they knew they will stop him.
Grandpa then gave them a map they can use to get to the Dr Doctor’s castle.
They went to the castle in their cool looking outfits. Al and Bear wore the most important costumes; Al wore the dragon costume which he can use to transform all of his friends into a dragon, and Bear wore a pirate costume which was the same costume Dr Doctor’s troops and guards were wearing. They arrived at the castle. In front of the castle was standing a guard. Bear and his friends approached the guard and the Bear said he brought these prisoners to the Dr Doctor’s prison. The guard let them pass.
As soon as they entered the hallway to the Dr Doctor, Al, Cindy, Bear, Squirrel and Rabbit pieced themselves into a dragon formation. They transformed into a dragon. Dr Doctor was super scared when he saw them. The five friends made him fix the forest and then they took him to the prison. After that, they went back to the forest and continued to play. And they lived long and happy.
mentor: Tea Baric

There are parts of that day that I can see in my mind as if it's happening now.
There are others which I've suppressed and only remember when I watch a documentary about the day. I can talk about some of that day....there are parts I can't talk about because it's too emotional and others I just can't.
|Members of Section 407 including myself and Stellavito at MSG|
Every year, Hockeybird has posted my buddy George's story. This year is no different. So for 2013, we do it again.
The following is just one of thousands of stories being told about September 11th in NYC. This one is written by someone I know. Read his story and think of those who will never get the chance to tell theirs. - Bird
What I've written here is a sequence of events of my experiences on September 11, 2001, the day the World Trade Center was attacked. I've written it for myself so I wouldn't forget any of the details or sequence of events. Details tend to get jumbled up in one's head or forgotten over time. So, forgive me if it seems a little over-detailed.
I got to work, on the 74th floor of WTC1, at 8:00 am. At about 8:30 or so, I went to the cafeteria to get my usual coffee, milk and danish. To get to the caf, which was on the 43rd floor, I had to go to the 44th floor and take an escalator down one floor. Returning from the caf with my food, I entered an elevator in the bank of elevators that serviced floors 67-74.
A little note on how the elevators worked in the building. From the ground floor, if you had to go to an office on any floor up to the 40th floor, you went to a bank of elevators and took an elevator to your floor. If you had to go to a floor from the 75th floor on up, you took one elevator to the 78th floor lobby and then you went to a bank of elevators and took an elevator to your floor. If you had to go to a floor from the 41st through the 74th floor like me, you took one elevator to the 44th floor lobby and then you went to a bank of elevators and took an elevator to your floor.
So, I got into an elevator that serviced floors 67-74. Five other guys got in after me, the last fellow being a window washer. He was carrying his bucket of soapy water with his squeegee and his wooden extension pole. The elevator started moving. Suddenly it stopped and banged violently from side to side. The lights were still on. We pushed the emergency call button to call for help. As far as we were concerned, the only thing that happened was that the elevator had stopped. No one answered right away so we pushed the alarm button. We pried the doors open only to find a wall in front of us with "50" chalked on it. Apparently, we were stuck at the 50th floor. We closed the doors and then someone answered our calls for help and I believe said something about an explosion in the building.
Then I smelled smoke. This changed things. We had to get out. I got out my handkerchief and covered my nose and mouth. Then I remembered that it was better to wet it so I dipped it in my milk. I suggested to the others to do the same. We pried open the doors again and laid down the window-washer's pole to keep the door open. It was the perfect size. Now we started kicking the hell out of the wall in front of us. It was no use. It was sheetrock, a.k.a. plasterboard or drywall, in 2 feet wide sections with a steel frame around it. It hardly moved. We would have to dig through it.
Nobody had a knife or any tools. The only thing I had was my keys. The window-washer, John, pulled out his squeegee and another fellow, also named John, starts digging into the wall with it. This second John turned out to be Deputy Director of Operations for the World Trade Center. The squeegee had a sturdy metal piece, which held the rubber part in place. All this time the smoke is getting worse.
John the director and I both had cell phones but neither one of us could get a signal. As they worked on chipping through the wall, I climbed up on a handrail on the elevator wall and the back of another fellow to try to find a way through the top of the car. It consisted of metal panels. There was no obvious way to get them open. They didn't slide or push in or have any latches so I started to pound it with the heel of my hand. It didn't give. I had to get down anyway. The smoke was getting to me.
Eventually, someone got through the wall. We now had a hole about the diameter of a finger and fresh air was coming through. The elevator shaft wall turned out to be 3 inches thick. It consisted of 3 ply of one inch sheetrock held together by the steel frame I mentioned. We continued to chip away and kick at the wall. Then I noticed John the window-washer was holding a piece of the squeegee that had come off. It was the part where the pole screwed in. It was triangular with 2 pointy corners and the corner where the pole screwed in. I grabbed it and started hacking to one side of the hole and another guy worked on the other side. Then I got the idea to try and score the wall so that when we kicked at it, there would be weak points. As we took turns kicking the wall, my foot finally went through and we had a nice sized hole now. We took turns kicking at the edges of the hole making it bigger. Eventually, we had a hole about 2-3 feet high by 1 foot wide. But there was another wall on the other side.
We saw aluminum framing and more sheetrock. But this sheetrock was much thinner and we kicked through it easily. It turned out to be a bathroom on the 50th floor. We kicked through the thin sheetrock and wall tiles and made a hole big enough for a man to fit through. One guy went through and ran to find some help. Then I went through. Someone in the elevator started kicking at the aluminum stud, made the hole a little bigger and the rest came through. We were in there for about 40-45 minutes total.
The guy who was through the opening first came back with someone and we went to a staircase that took us to the 44th floor lobby. This was where we first learned that the towers were both hit by airplanes. We were led to another staircase, but before heading down, I made a cell phone call to my wife. She answered the phone crying and I told her I was not hurt and had been trapped in an elevator but had escaped and was on my way down from the 44th floor. It wasn't a good connection and I couldn't make out everything she was saying. I told her I would call her when I got outside.
The trip down the staircase was, at first, uneventful. It was stop-and-go. There were firemen everywhere. Many doors on the way down had either cops or firemen going in and out making sure the floors were empty. The occasional fire fighter passed us going up with axes and sledgehammers. They were huffing and puffing in their heavy outfits. I guessed they were going up to the impact site. It was like this until I got to the 13th floor where things changed drastically.
The ground below us shook and there was a long, deep thundering sound. Then dust started coming up the stairway. It got to where you couldn't see 3 feet in front of you. Someone said it was probably an elevator that fell down but that wasn't what happened. I covered my mouth and nose again with my handkerchief and we all made our way down the stairs led the whole way by the firemen. A few floors later, a fireman opened a door and said things were clear and to follow him. Since I was near the end of the line, only 3 or 4 of us followed him through. It was now pitch black and dusty and we were walking ankle deep in water. The only light came from the firemen's small flashlights. We came to another door but there were people standing there and things weren't moving. I pointed out to the firemen that at least the other staircase was moving and we were led back to where we came in. We continued down and came to a door, which also led into a dark, dusty and wet passageway. We exited the passageway and emerged onto the mezzanine, which overhang the first floor lobby of the building. This mezzanine was where the Engineering Department had our Christmas party last year. It was strewn with dust and debris. The firemen told everyone to stay close to the wall and we were led outside through a broken window.
What was once the beautiful plaza between the 2 towers was now like a scene out of a B movie. There was dust, paper and twisted pieces of metal everywhere. We walked along the building through the rubble and a policeman informed us that the Pentagon had also been attacked. I couldn't believe what I was hearing. The Pentagon? When we were clear of the building I looked up and saw the gash in the tower where the first plane impacted. It was shocking. We were led down a set of stairs to the street and told to just keep walking away from the area. As I walked away, I heard someone say that World Trade Center 2 had collapsed. I totally dismissed this. It just wasn't logical. I looked up at where it should be and saw smoke and dust. That didn't mean it wasn't there, right? Then I came to realize the thundering and dust that occurred when I was at the 13th floor must have been WTC2 coming down. I just couldn't believe it. I tried and tried to get in touch with my wife but the whole town was also trying to get calls out. I couldn't get a line.
When the World Trade Center was bombed in 1993, it took some people over 3 hours to make their way down the stairs. WTC2 collapsed a little over an hour after the whole thing started. I kept thinking that there must be thousands dead. Two blocks from the site, I ran into a friend of mine, Tom, who worked on the 82nd floor. Tom is a big man; about 6'3" and 330 lbs. in his early 50s. He was breathing hard. We stopped for a minute or two and chatted. We continued on and ran into a guy he worked with on 82. I thought to myself that this was a good sign. If people from 82 got out alright, there was a good chance for my coworkers and the rest on the upper floors. This fellow we ran into, Tad, told us that he was sitting at his desk, a window seat, when the first plane was approaching the building. It seemed to be coming right at him. He could see the pilot's face! It veered up and struck the building. I had been out of the building for only 15 minutes. We were about 5 or 6 blocks from the WTC when I heard some explosions and turned to look up at where they had come from. What I saw was surreal.
The antenna and the rest of the roof atop the building I had just left, leaned to one side and fell in on itself. The rest of the floors below collapsed under the weight and an enormous cloud of dust and debris was expanding outward from the Trade Center. Everyone turned and hauled ass. I turned around urging big Tom on but he wasn't able to keep up. When I turned again, I didn't see him. Today (9-13) I talked to him and he told me he had ducked around a corner and into a doorway. I spent 10 minutes or so in the area looking and waiting for him to come walking down the street but I couldn't find him. I felt horrible. I was sure he was OK but felt sad thinking about how he must feel to have been left behind.
I kept walking and found out that I was heading north. Then I ran into John the window-washer! We embraced and talked some and walked together. Finally I got through on my cell phone and spoke to my wife and my sister Lynn. After calming them down, I tried to reach John's wife at work for him. Eventually, we got a ringing phone, but no one answered. John went off on his own and I walked until I reached the Holland Tunnel. It was closed and there were a lot of people standing around talking and listening to the radio in some guy’s car. After ten minutes of that, I went west until I hit West St. and continued north. I stopped at a pizzeria and bought a Snapple then continued north.
Then I got a good idea. I got through to home again and got my friend Tom's home number from my sister. I called his wife and told her I saw him and that he was alright. Then I ran into a guy, Frank, who worked on my floor in the Mechanical Engineering Department. He told me he saw lots of people from our floor so things were looking good. After 10 or 15 minutes chatting with him, I continued north. Something Frank said stuck in my head. He said that he was avoiding the major train stations. Terrorists knowing these to be a likely place where people would flee might make them a target.
I figured I could get to the ferries in midtown and get the hell off of that island. I got to Chelsea Piers which is around 30th St. and there were people in the street with bullhorns telling anyone interested that ferries to New Jersey were leaving from Pier 61. I went in and was walking to the end of the line when I saw a another guy, Dennis, who worked on my floor in the Electrical Engineering Department. We shook hands and had a few words before I took my place at the end of the line. The line was about 600 feet long. It looked like a long wait. I called home and gave a status report. After 20 minutes or so, a ferry came and took a load of people and the line moved up some. I figured it would take 5 or 6 more ferries until I got on one. About 15 minutes after the first ferry, the Spirit of New York, and dinner cruise ship that runs out of that pier, parked itself at the dock and all of the rest of us who were waiting were loaded aboard and taken to Weehawken, New Jersey. We were told that buses would take us from there to Giants Stadium which was going to be used a staging area.
When I got to Giants Stadium, about 2:00 pm, I walked around the parking lot looking for someone I knew. This is the same parking lot, #13, that I had many a beer and barbeque in before heading in to a soccer or football game. I didn't find a familiar face. My wife and sister were on their way to get me but then they closed Rt. 3, the major highway to the stadium. I spent about 3 hours there and my wife was stop-and-go on the highway. I went over to a state trooper and asked him if he could find out exactly where on Rt. 3 the road was closed. He tried but couldn't get an exact answer. He took one look at my dusty pants and dust caked shoes and asked me what I'd been through. After I told him, he all but dragged me over to a reporter who was interviewing people about their experiences. I gave my story to channel 12, a local PBS station. I haven't seen it but lots of people have told me that they have.
I decided to take one of the buses to Newark's Penn Station. I called my wife and told her to get off of the road when she could and to try to get to Newark. Once on the bus, I overheard the driver's radio say that Rt. 21 into Newark was all clear so I called my wife to pass that on. The road was all clear but then traffic came to a stop. There was an accident about a half-mile ahead. My sister called to say that they were about a mile and a half behind us and also stuck. We sat there for about 30 minutes or so. The bus driver wouldn't let me out on the highway but once the traffic started moving, I talked him in to pulling over at the next exit to let me out. Ten minutes later, they came along and picked me up and there was an emotional reunion.
I got home (after 7:00 pm), kissed everyone, showered, phoned loved ones and had a bite to eat. I responded to as many of the messages on my answering machine as I could get through to. From about the time I was at Giants Stadium until I ate, I had had some pressure in my upper chest. I figured it was from the smoke and dust that I must have inhaled during the course of the day, but it had gone away after I'd eaten. Everyone nagged me until I agreed to go to the hospital to have myself looked over. My lungs and heart sounded fine but they wanted to do an EKG. Well, they saw a wiggle on the EKG they didn't like so they wanted to run some blood tests. It was now after 11:00 pm. They said I would be there for another 7 hours minimum. The blood tests had to be run 6 hours apart. In the end, it was going on 9:00 am when I got out of there. I had gotten a total of maybe 3 hours sleep all night and my poor wife didn't sleep a wink.
Later in the day, I spoke to a former boss of mine, Fred, in an office in New Jersey where I had worked for 9 years until this past December when I was transferred to the WTC. I was one of two guys unaccounted for that worked on the Civil Engineering Department. In the end, everyone was accounted for and unharmed.
The news reports of the day are very disturbing. The phone calls from the planes to their loved ones, the passenger lists showing children names, people leaping to their deaths avoiding the fires... Then there are the people dancing in the streets celebrating somewhere in the Middle East. Even in my town of birth, Paterson, New Jersey, where there is a section of Arab population, there were reports of people dancing in the streets celebrating. Police were there to stop a certain riot situation. What kind of people celebrate the deaths of the innocent?
The 2 things I think of most are the sight of the second tower tipping over and falling in on itself and of all of the firemen directing the evacuation and climbing the stairs in full gear to help those trapped high in the tower. There was never a doubt on which way to go and there wasn't much panic. This is because of the presence of the firemen, those brave souls who run into burning buildings. Every time I think of them, I cry.
Only a fool wakes a sleeping giant. These murderers have now given the civilized world just cause to go in and wipe out terrorists anywhere, anytime we see fit. We know where they train and we know who supports them. This is the beginning of their end....
©2001 - George S. Phoenix, III Garfield, New Jersey, USA

This weekend, while we were at the pool, chunky Kens waddled over to her (clean) swim diaper that was laying on the patio.
She picked it up, turned her head and looked at it, held it up to Big Daddy and said “diaper” clear-as-day.
There it is- her third word. Diaper.
Maybe I can be her fourth word!

It's my internet life, I don't really discuss lots of anime on forums. I do those privately or on chat :P
This was for the recent "At World's End" movie. I loved it
This is was something I just made for the heck of it.
Sprites are cool, I just had this one.
I have more but linking to my PB would be against the rules.

Marrisa Pierce - a fighter
Marrisa is the first mother featured for this Mother's Day project which I feel is pretty fitting. I first met Marrisa when we were on our way to Young Life camp the first year I was leading. She was by far the sassiest, strongest and most real lady I had ever met. She didn't shy away from who she is and she asked incredibly hard questions. That was many years ago now and we are still dear friends. I feel honored to be able to feature my friend who has been through a lot in her life and finds a way to keep fighting - for herself, for her faith and now for her son. Please read Marrisa's story below:
"Motherhood, for me, has been:
A Learning experience
My son is 5.5 months old and he's been through a lot since he's been born. The start of his life was a little rough but he is a fighter. I am a fighter so I know he gets it from me, it's in our blood. Being his mother is not what I was expecting when I got the news I'd be having him. His biological father wrote him off as soon as he found out I was having him. I proceeded without him and chose to have Boone.
On the day I had him my life changed; for the better. I just hadn't known it yet. I was living a selfish life before I gave birth to Boone. I was living in Nashville Tennessee doing what I wanted, experiencing life, exploring, drinking, dancing, meeting new people and creating memories. But now I live a selfless life. Everything I do is for my son or revolves around him. Everyday I'm learning something different or experiencing something different. As much as it's amazing it's also overwhelming at the same time.
The first 4.5 months of his life I did it alone. I began this journey as a single mother and at times felt like a failure. I was disappointed in myself. I never wanted to be a single mother. I wanted a husband and a family. BUT God had a plan for me that of course I did not know yet. Fast forward - God sent me an amazing man that took on my son and I. And this is the man that's Boones father and the man that will raise him with me.
Over all I love love love being Boones mother. I love looking in his eyes, the morning snuggles and smiles as soon as he wakes. I love watching him learn and grow everyday and figure out his body and abilities. That's what's great about motherhood and what's trumps all the scary feelings. Today as I stare at him as I write this, I wouldn't change him or my life for anything.
I'm. Right. Where. I'm. Meant. To. Be."

Paul Rigby, the Australian cartoonist whose lush cartoons were a fixture of the new York Post and Daily News in the 70s, has died at age 82.
He began drawing political cartoons for Perth’s afternoon Daily News in 1952 and, between 1960 and 1969, gained national prominence with his cartoons, which were also published in Sydney’s Daily Mirror, winning five Walkley Awards.
Despite his being a Victorian, West Australians claimed him as their own, and his cult following in the state remains to this day.
His drawings often included larrikin Aussies and big-busted blondes in quintessential Australian environments of the times: the pub, the back yard, the footy. Tucked away somewhere in the frame were his trademark urchin and dog.
Rupert Murdoch poached Rigby and took him to London, where he worked for The Sun. His drawings also appeared in News of The World.
Rigby won multiple awards for his cartoons, and was a memver of the Order of Australia. In his later years he opened a gallery for his paintings and cartoons — you can see some photos and read an account of a visit here.

My joy & my light is gone, my Arlo died Saturday morning apparently of a heart defect. I woke up & he was dead beside me, laying on his stuffed duck. I made him a memory book, & I've cried so hard I am exhausted. My Big Fella! He was happy & talking just hours before & I got some cute pictures of him, & then he was dead! My dearest little boy! I could swear I heard him crow this morning, & today I am taking him to the beach for cremation. Requesting cards from people to put in his memory book, PM me for my address. I cant feel anything right now but pain. He was not an early riser, anytime before 9 AM & he'd be squeaking & flapping til I put him back to bed. One of his favorite songs was Rockin' Robin. The last thing I sang to him was "A Thing Called Love". He liked the "H-Block Song", & the People's Own MP" even tho my husband thought they were depressing songs, I sang them to Arlo as lullabies & he always went to sleep.

A number of sources have told HollywoodLife that Larsa is being pursued by a new man at this point and she is not still mourning her failed romance with Malik.
After all, they claim to know that she was the one who ended things between them in the first place so of course, she’s not losing any sleep over it.
One insider dished that ‘Things ran their course between the two. No one expected her to marry this dude, she was just having fun. But then it started to get complicated and that is not her thing, so she ended it. There’s no hard feelings, they are cool. But she is doing her thing in Miami and he is on the other side of the country and that’s that.’
The same source also mentioned that they went their separate ways a while ago.
However, the reason why the split is only now making headlines is that Larsa was seen cozying up to a new man not too long ago.
More precisely, she was out and about with entrepreneur Myles Kronman just last month.
‘[Myles] has been pursuing her and she is having fun. She is in a very empowered place in her life, she has really never felt better. She is not necessarily even looking for a relationship and she is perfectly fine being single and enjoying her time with family and girlfriends. So it’d take somebody really incredible to get her to settle down,’ another source told the same publication.
They explained that Larsa ended things with Malik just because he had ‘too much on his plate’ and she had no need for all that drama.

HOPATCONG -- A Hopatcong father has gone viral with his YouTube videos in which he sings to his one-year-old son about food.
Charles Flartey, who has "sung in a few bands" and recorded "some hip-hop stuff," said he "sings to his son no matter what we're doing," and his son enjoys the tunes. So Flartey then decided to use the singing to get him to eat.
"It started as a little joke," Flartey said.
He posted some videos on Facebook, and friends liked it so much they suggested he make a YouTube channel, known as "Charles Only."
"After that, it took off like crazy," Flartey said in an interview Monday. A Reddit post of his original video, "Jell-O," sung to the Lionel Richie tune, "Hello," was key in spreading the word, Flartey said.
On Sunday night, Flartey posted on his Facebook page that his original video -- "Jell-O," to the tune of Lionel Richie's "Hello" -- had achieved 100,000 page views.
In the meantime, Flartey and his videos have been featured on the television programs "Today," "Good Morning America" and "Inside Edition."
Flartey has posted six videos "so far," also singing his food-related songs to tunes popularized by other artists including Gwen Stefani, R. Kelly, the group 112, the Temptations and Wu-Tang Clan.
Flartey, who works during the evening as a bartender at the Corner Pub in the Flanders section of Mount Olive, stays home with his son during the day. He said his fellow employees and patrons at the pub are aware of his musical endeavors and his boss is hopeful he many do another video wearing a Corner Pub T-shirt.
Flartey said he expects to record and to post some more videos, although he's not sure what he'll post and when.
But at this point, Flartey said, the fame and glory has come so quickly he's not quite sure what hit him.
"I'm still trying to figure out what to make of it, but it's been fun," he said. "You can get attention for worse things.
Flartey said he finds it startling that "I've been making music for 15 years, and this is the thing that gets attention."
But, he added, even if his videos hadn't attracted so much attention, "I would have done them anyway, just for fun, but people seem to enjoy them."
And his first fan was Tommy, his one-year-old son.
"He loves it, that's why I kept doing it," Flartey said.

I was told before I arrived at the trap there was a “great spot” for viewing. It would have been a good spot if I could have moved 15 feet. As it was I had to send a tripod up higher than they would let me keep my head… I was behind rocks and couldn’t see. I am reviewing tapes and it gets more interesting as I go….
I was also almost denied access to view processing. The situation was rectified and I did view processing.
Sharing an image for tonight… I actually have to review my video because I could not see what happened today… they really do not want us to see that trap mouth… hmmm…. why wont they say who is flying? More on that am. I have to make a few calls.
Studs to the right in release pen, the left to ship…
More coming. Road was rough and truck has a new sound… Please help the work continue donate here: http://wildhorseeducation.org

Water from the upper unit's bath in rental duplex was pouring into the lower unit when used. Considering that this was immediately after a full renovation/conversion, the original plumber had already been called back in to no success and was now being elusive.
The upper unit tenants were moving in completely the same day, so I was in a bind. With the lockdown in place, finding trades who are working or are not fully booked up is quite challenging.
John had been previously been recommended to me on another conversion project, but had been unavailable at the time. I called him and he immediately committed to fix the leak that afternoon, even though he was on another job at the time. He was on time, kept me informed of the source, the repair work required (drywall cuts) and most importantly, fixed it with little fuss. Even my tenants were impressed saying that he clearly knew more than the previous plumber.
Will definitely use again.

The scar on my forehead
I haven't told my boyfriend the true reason behind the scar on my forehead. It's a faint scar of where I had 4 stitches that once held a wound filled with a shameful truth I've never learned to deal with.
One of my earliest memories were of me being woken up, yet again, to my mother's loud screams letting me know I've had to go school. I was still in first grade. I had no friends, and my teacher was mean. I just didn't want to get out of bed; for fear that I will sit alone in break time with my food in hand. My mom didn't care. I lied, I said I was sick and I wanted to stay home. My mom left and came back 10 minutes later. "You are still in bed! Get the f*** up," she said. "Mom, I don't feel well. I want to stay home, please," I wept. She got more and more upset, the longer I've told her how much I wanted to go home.
After all my long pleas, it was already pretty late for school. My older siblings were all ready, and waiting in the car. My dad drove away because he couldn't wait any longer, for he had work to get to. When my mom realized my dad left, she came back furious.
I could see it in her eyes. Mom had anger issues. She couldn't keep herself together. She would totally change when she would be angry. She came into my room, grabbed one of sister's shoes and threw it across the room. It was meant to hit me in the face, and it sure did. Then she came closer, grabbed it from the side of the bed and hit me on my face with it for one last time. "YOU DESERVE IT," she said with so much rage.
She said I couldn't stay in bed. I had to go and study. As I got out of bed then to the door, I couldn’t keep it together. I started to cry. I couldn't help it. It only infuriated her more.
She then pushed me. I fell on the open doors of the cabinet, which my sister had left open earlier as she got ready. My forehead split open.
I blacked out. My only other memory was crying after I've my stitches done. One, two, three, four stitches held together much more than the wound. It was the sign of my weakness. It carried my cross of my shame.
I heard my mom telling the doctor that I'd been cunningly going to the garden to play, without telling her and that's how I've gotten the scar.
That's the story I've told ever since. Not because I wanted to lie, but because it's so much less appalling. I feel nothing but shame for my abusive past. I make almost no mention of it.
I'm scared that one day when people learn of my dark past, they will abandon me. I fear the day that my loved ones leave because I'm a broken person. Who wants to be with a broken person? Who wants to be a no one? a worthless human being? No one.
It's been 4 years into my current relationship. My boyfriend has no clue of my past. I feel so much guilt daily for my shame. I feel like I've misled him into loving me, when he could be with someone who is actually worthy of his kind and tender love.

Rhonda won her belt fair and square, just like Jose and Cruz.
That said, Tito fought some very big names early in his career and performed well. Ronda just hasn't seen that level of competition in MMA. Sadly, we don't know if she ever will.
"If it was old school MMA I would just take @bisping down and lay on him til he died of starvation."

The Washington Redskins landed a number of high profile undrafted free agents. Quin Blanding may well be the best of the bunch.
In the lead-up to the 2018 NFL Draft, many thought that Quin Blanding was going to be an early Day 3 pick. The Virginia product was fresh off a season in which he was the nation’s 13th ranked tackler, recording 121 stops. The most impressive part of this is that he did it as a safety, and he was one of the three at his position that ranked in the top 50 nation wide.
Blanding had talent and some had mocked him as early as Round 4. While it was always more likely that he would be a Round 5 guy, it was still a major surprise that he went undrafted. He came with a lot of proven production and had some of the better tackling technique in the class.
Despite all this, Blanding did fall to the ranks of the undrafted. And the Washington Redskins may have gotten a steal. And at the very least, they got a player who they were interested in.
Here’s an in-depth look at what Blanding offers as a player and what he might able to do for the Redskins if he can make the 53-man roster.

Jodi Arias weeps as she reveals how she 'killed Travis Alexander in self-defense' but has 'no memory of stabbing ex-boyfriend 27 times'
- Jodi Arias said she shot Travis Alexander using his gun during a fight
- Murder suspect told Arizona court: 'I have no memory of stabbing him'
- Arias claims he threatened her, lunged at her and 'was going to kill her'
- Autopsy revealed she shot him and stabbed him 27 times before dragging his body into the shower
Jodi Arias admitted to killing ex-boyfriend Travis Alexander on Wednesday but said she could not remember stabbing him 27 times or whether she had slit his throat with a kitchen knife.
On the most explosive day of her murder trial, Arias testified that there was a 'huge gap' in her memory from June 4, 2008 - the day that Alexander died at his Mesa, Arizona home.
Arias told jurors that she and Alexander had been taking naked pictures in his shower when she dropped his camera, causing him to erupt in a rage, body-slamming her against the tiles and threatening to kill her.
Scroll down for video
In tears: Jodi Arias cried on the stand throughout her testimony on Wednesday as she told how she ran away from Travis Alexander and threatened him with his own gun in an effort to make him stop
The big moment: Arias said that she does not remember stabbing him 27 times with the knife or dragging his body into the shower before fleeing the scene and trying to 'cover her tracks'
She said that she managed to roll out of the bathroom and ran through Alexander’s home to escape as he chased her.
She went to hide in his closet when she remembered that was where Alexander hid his gun.
'He was angry at me and he wasn't going to stop,' she said. 'It was like mortal terror.'
The 32-year-old told the court on Wednesday that she pointed the weapon at him but never meant to pull the trigger.
‘I pointed it at him with both of my hands I thought that would stop him, if someone pointed a gun at me it would stop me,’ she tearfully told the Phoenix court.
‘The gun went off i didn’t mean to shoot him or anything I didn’t even think i was on the trigger.
‘He lunged at me and we fell really hard against the tile toward the other wall… so at this point i didn’t even know if he had been shot.
‘After the gun went off I thought ''crap because now he's really going to be pissed'' because I didn’t know I had shot him.’
Arias said that she blacked out at several points that day and has no memory of stabbing Alexander 27 times with his own kitchen knife - before putting the instrument in the dishwasher.
The murder suspect said that it was the same knife that her on-off lover had brought upstairs earlier in the day to cut rope that he had used to bind her wrists during a graphic sex session.
Distress: Arias struggled through her testimony on Wednesday as the court heard explosive details of how she killed Travis Alexander in his Mesa home in 2008
She said: ‘I have a few memories but nothing is super clear. I have a vague memory of putting the knife in the dishwasher, but I put the knife in the dishwasher before but I'm pretty sure it was that night.
‘I remember I was in the bathroom. I remember dropping the knife and it clang to the tile, it made a big noise, and i just remember screaming. I don't remember anything after that.’
She said when she left the home, she 'didn't think Travis was alive but hoped he was'.
She was asked by her defense attorney why she did not call 911. Arias answered: 'I was scared. I couldn't imagine calling 911 and telling them what I had just done. I was scared of what would happen to me.'
Arias told the court she also remembered disposing of Alexander's gun in the desert on her way from Arizona to California.
She also told the courtroom that to 'throw the scent off for a little while' she began to form an alibi - leaving a voice mail on Alexander's phone and traveling to see a friend in Utah.
For seven days, Arias has answered in detail to questions from the defense including about the sordid sexual relationship that she had with Alexander.
Wednesday was the
first time that she spoke about the moment when Alexander died.
Arias is facing the death
penalty if convicted of the first-degree murder of 30-year-old
Alexander. She had claimed that she killed him in self-defense. The prosecution said that she killed her lover in a jealous rage.
Throughout the trial, Arias has painted a picture of how she was allegedly mentally and emotionally abused by Alexander who she described as hot-headed and aggressive. She also said that he tried to kill her once before.
Hiding spot: Arias ran from the bathroom into Alexander's closet which had two exits in order to get away from him, but then she remembered where he hid his gun on the top shelf of his closet
The scene: The defense attorney showed a picture of Alexander's closet and Arias pointed out where he hid his gun on a top shelf which she knew because she cleaned it previously when she was working as his maid
Her story: Arias' defense is based entirely around the fact that she killed Alexander in self-defense and that she lied multiple times to investigators because she was trying to avoid jail
The focus of Wednesday’s testimony was the events of June 4, 2008. Arias' mother wiped her eyes while in court while Travis Alexander's two sisters looked down as their brother's last moments were described.
After a long road trip from her home in California, Arias had decided to stop by Alexander’s house in Mesa, Arizona and spend two nights.
After the first court recess, Arias went on
to describe what happened following Alexander's death on June 4.
She began developing alternate versions of events which she told police investigator Esteban Flores when he questioned her repeatedly about the murder.
Firstly, she said that she was not in Arizona at the time of his death and later that a man and a woman broke into his home and attacked Alexander.
Arias said on Wednesday: 'I began to tell him things that I thought would comport with what the forensics would show as well as create-not an excuse but- create a way that would have me not have been responsible for it.'
Emotional: Arias said that her actions following the murder- which included driving to Las Vegas, spending time with another romantic interest, and leaving voicemails on Alexander's phone- were to 'throw them off the scent'
Final moments: She got choked up when she was shown one of the pictures she took of Alexander during their shower photo shoot, and she was unsure whether or not that was the final picture she took of him
Hardest day: Alexander's sisters looked down as Arias told of the moment he was killed
Support: Arias' mother was seen wiping her eyes with tissues at different points during the testimony
As for her rationale as to why she would develop the story that a man and a woman broke into the house, she said that it was both practical (‘Flores told me repeatedly that it had to have been more than one person’) and symbolic.
She said: ‘It sounds a little esoteric but it could have been symbolic: it’s like Travis and I were the ones fighting that day.'
She said that she attended Alexander's memorial service to keep up appearances and wanted to go to his funeral but was unable to make it.
‘I thought that if I didn’t show up it would look suspicious because Travis and I were close and a lot of people knew that,’ she said.
Another reason she wanted to attend was because during their relationship, the pair had a conversation about what Alexander would do if she were ever to die.
Arias told the court: ‘He was going to give a eulogy if I ever died… he said he would have come to mine even if it was in Antarctica.'
Contemplation: Defense attorney Kirk Nurmi works out his next move as his client Jodi Arias explains to the court how she killed lover Travis Alexander
She also explained today why, in all the times she spoke about her relationship with Alexander prior to the trial, she never mentioned his alleged violence, their sexual relationship or his supposed sexual fantasies about children.
She said: ‘I was very concerned about both of our reputations and I didn't want to start throwing him under the bus so to speak because there were already people hurting and I didn’t see what benefit it would be to talk about those things.'
During the time between the June 4 murder and her arrest on July 15, Arias purchased a gun.
Her defense lawyer Kirk Nurmi repeatedly asked her about whether or not she tried to kill herself following the murder, though she said that the purchase of her gun had nothing to do with her suicide plans.
‘I wanted to someday see myself being a responsible gun owner so that was something I had always seen myself doing,’ she said.
Following a short afternoon recess, Arias discussed interviews that she had done while in prison with CBS and Inside Edition where she said she was 'under the microscope at that point'.
Arias said that she felt pressured by a sheriff's officer to do the interview with Inside Edition against her attorney's advice.
During this interview she said: 'No jury will ever convict me'. Her attorney asked her on Wednesday why she had said those words to which Arias explained that she had seen them used on a TV crime drama and that they appeared to be 'powerful' and 'eloquent'.
She also told the court that she planned to commit suicide in prison.
‘I took [a razor] apart one night with intentions of slitting my wrists… I asked for extra laundry because there was someone sleeping below me so that I could stuff it around my body because I didn’t want anything to get on her. I couldn’t bring myself to do it,' she said.
The defense ended questioning today. The trial resumes at 10am on Thursday.

In an effort to divide household duties, a man and his wife agreed that he would cook while she would take on the majority of housework/cleaning. However, things have taken a turn. The man has started cooking in bulk on weekends and portioning out the food for the week, but now his wife expects him to cater to her every whim throughout the day.
He argues that she is capable of making her own meals, but she insists that he's not holding up his end of the bargain. This has caused tension and arguments between the two. As the situation stands, the man is wondering if he's in the wrong or if his wife is being unreasonable.
After receiving feedback from commenters, he realizes he was in the wrong and plans to change. Learn more about this household dispute and the reactions it has garnered from the online community.

It didn’t matter that he was the youngest in his squadron or that he had never flown a plane. All he knew was he believed in himself, believed in his comrades and above all else, believed in his country.
As the navigator for the 401st Bomb Group of the Eighth Air Force during World War II, dad completed 266 missions.
“The train dropped me off and I had to walk three or four miles to get home,” dad said of the day he returned home from the war. “My parents were sitting on the screened-in front porch, just like they always were. They didn’t even recognize me when I came up the walk. Finally, I had to ask them if they were going to let me in. That’s when she began to cry.”
I’d heard the story 100 times about my grandma’s relief when her son returned home from the war. It was one of the good memories for dad as he’d spend quality time scouring over his picture albums and other keepsakes of his time spent in the military.
Dementia robbed dad of remembering day to day occurrences, although the memories of being in the war – so deeply ingrained – played a major role in his life. Most conversations were centered on life in the cockpit of the plane and, most times, were told with a smile and ending on a good note.
As dad began to tell the story again of the return to his parents’ house, I noticed tears forming in his eyes. By the time he was done, we were both crying. Over the years as he’d describe the flights, the bombings and the love he had for those who served beside him, he never once said how scared he was, how lonely and how glad he was to return home until his dementia began to take away the happy memories.
I tried to comfort him as the tears flowed, but that wasn’t what he wanted. He just wanted me to listen, so I did, and handed him his handkerchief when there were more tears than words. Seeing my dad cry was something I never thought would happen, but once he let the emotions out, his stories could momentarily be about happier times.
Dad had no idea the day of the week, month, year or holidays such as Veterans Day. What he could remember, until his very last breath, was he had served our country – with all his might, worth and heart. There is no greater service than that of the military.
Thank a veteran today, tomorrow and every day. It’s their sacrifice that gives us our freedom.
Sandy Turner lives in Independence, Missouri. Email her at firstname.lastname@example.org

Discussion in 'The Howard Stern Show' started by PumpkinBeer700, Jan 3, 2013.
Howard had dinner at george clooneys?
Did he eat a handful of nuts?
I can't see them talking about stuff. can you?
I would gladly eat dinner off of this!
George is still with her?
Yes, going into another awards season. Lucky her.
Howard was very vague about his brush with the stars.
Howard has been in show business for a very long time, and he has never had a person who has worked with him on any level come out and publicly trash him in any meaningful way.
Every nasty trait projected on him by some of the people here, are just pure fantasy. People like him, why this is so hard for people to believe is beyond me
Oh and is Geroge related to Peroghi?

he's a rather handsome felinegive him a breakall he wants is to mark you as his:)
Oh, yeah, I know what he wants!
He is lovely! I would love to give him a pat.He doesn't really look wet?
can't blame a cat for trying, now can you??? he's determined, that's for sure!! i can't tell which was more fun for me...to see him try to rub against you or to see you dancing, trying to avoid him? that was some real fancy footwork, catalyst :)
Meggie - Actually he was just damp. He'd been outside darting between raindrops.Sheri - Hahaha!
Spammers are back so comment moderation is back on. Sorry.

Paul Winter, 42, was hit six times in the chest in front of his new American wife Jennifer and her seven-year-old twins.
Mrs Winter tried to revive her "soulmate" but he was pronounced dead in hospital.
The tragedy unfurled as Mr and Mrs Winter, who lived in Miami, Florida, dropped her children at the home of her ex-husband, Cristobal Palacio.
The couple were planning to spend last Friday evening celebrating Mrs Winter's 37th birthday at a concert.
But Palacio, 43, is alleged to have become increasingly angry and started shouting before firing a pistol at Mr Winter.
The British man, a graphic designer from Tunbridge Wells in Kent, collapsed in a pool of blood and was taken to Miami's Jackson Memorial Hospital.
Mr Winter's father Michael, 67, who lives in Palm Coast, Florida, said he received a hysterical called from his daughter-in-law shortly after the shooting.
"Paul had wanted to take Jennifer out for her birthday," he said. "She and her ex had joint custody of the kids, so they had picked them up from school, gone out for a celebratory meal and were planning to leave them with their dad that night.
"They got there and the kids knocked on the door, but he didn't answer. Paul never usually went to the ex-husband's house, but this time he did.
"The ex-husband finally appeared, and all I know is that he took out a gun and shot him six times.
"It happened right in front of the children and Jen, who tried her best to save his life. She was frantically giving him CPR. I got the phone call from Jen minutes after Paul was shot. She was absolutely hysterical."
Mr Winter, also originally from Tunbridge Wells, said his son, a history graduate, met his wife on a gaming website in November 2006, while she was still married to Palacio.
She divorced her first husband in September 2007, married Mr Winter three days later and the couple settled in Homestead, Miami, setting up an internet-based childcare agency.
Mrs Winter said the Briton was the "love of my life".
"We seemed to click instantly and just fell in love. We were together 24 hours a day, seven days a week. He used to say we were like two halves of a whole. We were soulmates."
She said: "There will never be anyone else for me. How could anything else ever compare? He was my entire world. I adored him."
Palacio, who has been charged with first degree murder, will appear in Miami-Dade Circuit Court on November 17.
According to Miami-Dade detective Juan Segovia, Palacio confessed to the killing, but his brother claimed that the shooting was in self-defence.
Palacio and his ex-wife are believed to have been involved in a bitter custody battle over their children.
According to US reports, Palacio, a former Citibank executive, had left his job to avoid paying child support for their twins.
Mrs Winter's attorney, Carrie Turner-Krzyzaniak, said: "All the red flags were there. We filed about 10 emergency motions telling the court this guy was a ticking time bomb.
"I think it was totally premeditated. I just don't know if he was going to kill my client or kill her husband."

Alright, this will be the final post you'll see about the fight that happened on August 1st. A lot of talk was leading up to the fight (mostly by Pep-A) but that night it was put up or shut up time. First let's watch the whole fight and then I'll break it down.
I should remind everyone that I've never kickboxed before in my life and that was my first time in the ring. Pep-A wanted nothing to do with grappling so I agreed to Kickbox. After watching there's a lot to critique when it comes to my form, footwork, etc. But that's for my trainer to analyze. For now let's look at the cool stuff. Like this shot...
Now that's a sweet shot, I don't care who you are. Then there was Pep-A's entrance. I love him running around the Octagon trying to intimidate me, but notice I never broke eye contact
I can't even begin to describe the zone I was in that night. There was a ton of hard work I put in with my trainer TJ Burns to get to that point and I was so ready. What I wasn't ready for was him throwing a kick right off the bat. See we studied his videos that he posted and his kicks looked pretty weak. So it was decided that I was going to do a front stomach kick right off the bat. But then Pepper shocked the world with this...
NOBODY saw that coming. Even the ref looked confused. However what followed is something we trained extensively for. See we knew that Peppa would come at me hard right off the bat and tire himself out. So the the past few weeks I had TJ just absolutely attack me for about a minute while I just went into my shell and allowed him to tire out. The training paid off because the first 30 seconds of the fight I was relaxed and just kept backing away while he was swinging like a mad man. I mean look at this positioning lol
I'm going to frame that picture. Just outrageous form by Pep right there. When he said he didn't need to train, that picture is all the proof I need to refute that claim.
After that dazzling display of athleticism he was completely gassed. So much so that when he missed a punch, he went right to the ground
Now with me, I play to the whistle. That's just sports 101. So with it being my first time, I decided to give him a shot while he was trying to get back up...
Hey, he's the one who got back up. I was trying to make sure he stayed down. Alright well that was a mistake but we move on. At that point I knew I had the edge because he was absolutely gassed. I could see it on his face. So from there, I went to work. That's when the uppercut landed. You can't really see it from this video so let me show you a shot from another video.
POW right in the kisser! From there I think he was done. But I wanted to make super duper sure. That's when I busted out a move that we had been working on for a month. A spinning backfist.
This picture shows right after I connected square on his forehead. It sent him reeling back and at that point it was pretty much over. But that's when controversy struck! I threw a stomach kick his way and it went a little low....
Now did I mean to kick him in the nuts? Absolutely not. I don't compete that way. I will say though that I don't believe he was wearing a cup. I felt all foreskin on that kick. Why you wouldn't wear a cup to a kickboxing match is beyond me but because of that, he definitely paid for it.
So now we move onto round 2. I was fresh as a daisy and I'm pretty sure he was seeing nothing but fog as he was gasping for breath. That's when he got desperate and started holding onto me for dear life. He put me in a headlock at one point lol
Keep in mind that Pepto didn't want to grapple in the first place. Now he has me in a headlock. Welp I had enough and ended up rag-dolling him to the ground. Which was pretty funny
I can almost hear that picture:
you're probably wondering how I got into this mess. funny story...
From there it was pretty much over. He spit out his mouthpiece after that and was contemplating his life decisions. His eyes were completely in a daze which is when I decided to go for 1 more kick. The kick heard around the world...
Now THIS is where it gets interesting. I can only tell you what I felt and saw. The first kick I felt dong. This kick I felt all stomach. If you look at my positioning, my knee and toes are pointed up. I'm leaning back to get full extension and frankly by this point the fight is over anyway. But yes, I firmly believe it was a stomach kick. Now it was a LOW stomach kick, but stomach nonetheless. Once he went down the ref said it was over, he got right up and said he wasn't finished. Ref started the count and that's when Donald said he was done.
So that's it, there's the fight. It's finally over but for some reason Peps has a grudge now. Blocked me on Facebook and just posts about me nonstop. Which is fine. Like I said this is the final word on the fight and this last image is all that matters
HUGE shout out to my trainer TJ Burns who put me through a grinding training camp. The fight would've been a lot closer if it wasn't for him. I recommend you contact him if you want to get into shape.

cash only is a flag but most kids really liked it. appeared to be to many cars on the small track and the race was stopped for bumping but it was done with class. no problems at all and all in our party really had fun. it gets crowed and the lines take time. waiting we did get attacked by bugs so come w/bug stray. Kids and parents really had fun.
Own or manage this property? Claim your listing for free to respond to reviews, update your profile and much more.

The song was released on August 16, and by the week of November 5, 1966 it was Number One.
When I was a kid I was not a huge fan of this song; maybe because they played it all the time. I liked more of the Monkees' less popular songs. Now, though, I really like it. Did you ever happen to notice that it's about a guy meeting up with his girlfriend before he gets shipped off, presumably to Vietnam? It's actually a pretty deep song about loneliness, duty, and love. Give it a listen.

A gnome which went missing from its owner’s front garden last week disappeared for a SECOND time on Sunday - along with the rest of his gnome ‘family.’
The team of cricketing gnomes have stood on the front garden of keen cricketer Matt French’s home in Barns Green every summer since Matt moved to the village four years ago.
But Matt was hit for six when one of the gnomes - an umpire called Dickie - mysteriously disappeared last week.
However, his concern quickly turned to relief when a dog walker later found Dickie - named after legendary umpire Dickie Bird - in a nearby stream and returned him to Matt.
Then in quick succession Matt’s joy again turned to exasperation when the whole team of concrete cricketers - Dickie, two batsmen, a bowler, a wicket keeper and set of wickets - vanished overnight on Saturday.
Said Matt: “I will be approaching the Parish Council to ask if they would consider having them placed on the village green permanently as they are much loved in the village and it would be a shame if I had to pack them away for good.”
But no sooner had Matt voiced his concern than his five-man gnome squad once more turned up safe and sound. Two were quickly located in nearby Emms Lane and two more were also discovered nearby. The wickets were found in one of the cricket nets at Barns Green Cricket Club by club member Chris Powell.
And it was soon established that umpire Dickie had been on a day trip to the seaside. “The person who found him was on his way to Brighton when he saw Dickie,” said Matt. “He was running late so put him in the back of his car and returned him to the garden when he got back - along with an I love Brighton T-shirt that he got whilst he was down there as a souvenir.”
Now, however, Matt is worried for the future of his cherished team - which is over 30 years old and was given to him by his mother.
“I’m concerned that they may go again and I won’t be so lucky next time so I’m considering my options as regards a safe place for them to be,” he said.

Gahanna police recently arrested a Columbus man for theft after people were reported fighting in the front of a business in the 300 block of South Hamilton Road, according to a report received at 8:23 p.m. April 17.
Two customers intercepted a suspected shoplifter, and were standing in front of that person's vehicle, according to reports. The 25-year-old Columbus man was arrested for theft for allegedly taking $520 in merchandise from the business, reports said. He was transported to the Franklin County jail.
In other Gahanna police incident reports:
* A Deerwood Avenue resident advised a large rock, bearing crude words written on it in marker, was in his yard, according to a report received at 11 a.m. April 22.
* A Hines Road resident reported a homeless man came out of the woods into his back yard, according to a report received at 2:26 p.m. April 21. He said the man had long hair, a red backpack and was carrying a blue bag, reports said.
* A male wearing camouflage was shooting an Airsoft gun in the backyard of a Woodbay Drive residence, according to a report received at 7:31 a.m. April 21. Police met with the resident, who said he didn't realize he couldn't shoot pistols and rifles on his own property. He said he wouldn't do it again, reports said.
* A purse was stolen after someone broke a window of a vehicle in the parking lot of a business on West Johnstown Road, according to a report received at 2:10 a.m. April 21.
* A vehicle with cardboard around the windows was observed on Imperial Drive, according to a suspicious person report received at 6:19 a.m. April 20. A man had been sleeping inside the vehicle for at least three days, according to the reporting party. The man told people he has nowhere to go, but he's going to move the vehicle, reports said.
* A Woodmark Run resident visited police headquarters to speak to an officer about a suspicious person at Pizzuro Park, 700 Pizzuro Park Drive, according to a report received at 2:14 p.m. April 19. She said a man came to the dog park without a dog, and it concerned her for the dogs in the area. The man was visiting to see the dogs, because his dog died two years ago, reports said. The reporting party thought he might steal a dog, according to reports.
* After a Jahn Drive resident mowed her neighbor's grass as "a good deed for Easter," she was ordered to leave his property, according to a report received at 10:44 a.m. April 19.
* An employee of a business in the 200 block of South Hamilton Road reported someone passed a counterfeit $50 bill at 9:20 p.m. April 18.
* A caller advised a group of students in the 400 block of Granville Street was being followed by a man dressed in all black with a red and black ball cap, according to a suspicious-person report received at 4:01 p.m. April 18. The caller said the man was trying to keep his face covered, and the caller was concerned for the students' safety, reports said.
* A Wickham Way resident reported a girl was playing by a creek and was poked by a needle she found, according to a report received at 1:59 p.m. April 18. The woman said her daughters were playing in a creek behind their residence near Foxboro Pool, when one of her daughters removed a cap and was poked by the needle. The call was transferred to Mifflin Township Division of Fire, and the woman was advised to take her child to a hospital, according to reports.
* A Cobble Hill resident reported his vehicle was stolen, according to a report received at 5:27 a.m. April 18. The owner said the keys were not with the vehicle, and it was last seen at 6:30 p.m. April 17. Columbus Division of Police personnel advised it was repossessed at 3:10 a.m. April 18, reports said.

NEW YORK — Dustin Pedroia has a broken left ring finger. He is also playing second base Tuesday night as the Red Sox face the Yankees in the season's second-to-last game.
"I want to play, that's basically it," he said. "I want to play and be out there for the guys. Yesterday was tough, we got our butts kicked. I'm going to try and go play and hopefully we play well enough to win."
Pedroia has been assured that he can't injure his finger any further. He will be in pain, however, and had to persuade the Red Sox to let him back in the lineup.
"We have a lot of young guys on our team," said Pedroia. "Sometimes you get nicked up and stuff like that. It's part of the job.
"You get beat up, you slide into bases and get your finger stuck on them and hit a base or whatever. They know that I'm going to be out there and they should be out there, too, if it happens to them. It's a team."
When asked directly if he was referring to Jacoby Ellsbury, Pedroia said that was not the case.
"He's been beat up, man," Pedroia said. "He's had his share of injuries this year. This year has been tough on a lot of guys. He doesn't have to answer anything about that.
"Don't go there, he's fine."
Pedroia is incredulous at the idea of the Red Sox being in last place.
"Nobody likes losing," he said. "We want to win. It's tough when you lose 91 games. That's something we're not going to be happy about, and we're going to try to do all we can to make sure that doesn't happen anymore."
The front office, he said, needs to take action.
"We have money to spend," said Pedroia. "Those guys can basically do whatever they want. We want to win.The guys that are here want to win. We don't like going out there playing and losing ballgames."
Is Pedroia embarrassed?
"Yeah," he said. "I'm a Boston Red Sox, I never thought in my mind we'd lose 91 games."
Going to back to youth baseball and through high school, Arizona State, the minor leagues, and then the Red Sox, Pedroia had never played on a losing team before this season.
"It's killing me," he said. "This is awful."
But for now, he wants to play. Broken finger and all.
"I like playing, it's fun," he said. "I get to compete two more games, then I've got to sit around six months and wait until I do it again.
"Why not? There's nothing else to do. I get to go home and play football with my 3-year-old. Geez, man."

5 OUT OF 5
ChiChi and Justin, 4/12/2013
I LOVED how professional April was and the fact that she managed to coordinate everything in under 2 weeks is testimony that she knows what she’s doing. She was absolutely delightful to work with and my husband and I couldn’t have been happier. We received numerous compliments from our guests during cocktail hour, they were raving how great she was.

OBVIOUSLY, there was a back up as the records were eventually found. You are going off the basis that the therapist is evil, not that they made an honest mistake. You are trying to make a case that there is something willfully fishy going on.
That makes you sound paranoid and out to get the therapist.
I've had providers willfully with hold records they did have access to immediately. I've had providers engage in CRIMINAL acts against me. And the state/feds don't even care about that.
I filed a complaint against a seriously abusive provider. I had a nurse (not associated with the abuser) who was with me at the time. I listed the nurse as the WITNESS, but the licensing board investigated the nurse (who was not my provider, just a friend/witness) for misconduct.
I once went into a doctor's office with handcuffs prepared to lock myself to something in the office until they turned over the records.
If you were rational about it, you would be more credible.
Something like 'the therapist neglected to back up files. due to that oversight, she was not able to retrieve my records due to a computer virus.
It sounds like the therapist was just being lazy, not abusive like you make her out to be.

by Leonardo Bertinelli
It was a usual Monday evening in Boston, the sun had set, the wind was blowing and the moon was rising while I was riding to the Paradise Rock Club. I was very curios about the venue because it has such a great history; it is like a little Rock temple. U2, AC/DC, The Police, Dire Straits, Blondie, R.E.M., and others have played there in the past.
When I arrived, I was surprised. It could have been a club on Los Angeles’ Sunset Blvd: that big entrance with lights on, people crowded outside and excited for the show… wow! I am not used to that vibe. Going inside I could feel and smell the Rock ’n’ Roll in the air. The stage was set, lighten up by soft colored lights.
The first act was driven by Alex G and his band. They played Indie-Rock with some flavor of Country and Brit rock. The overall sound was good, but they did not impress me. After them, it was the time for Hop Along, a Philadelphia based indie-folk band. The first song was performed by a girl, guitar and voice only. It was soft, but had a grunge feeling given by the singer’s rasping and husky voice. For next songs all the band was involved and they literally fired the night up. The music was powerful, energetic, astonishing. The lead voice remembered me Janis Joplin or Joan Jett. They had the right spirit for playing Rock ’n’ Roll! I was impressed and amazed and the crowd too. It seemed to be the main act. Unfortunately after few songs they had to quit and leave the stage to Built to Spill.
As they played the first note, everyone was shouting, the venue was full and the volume high. The song was very good, but I immediately noticed that something was missing. There were no emotions involved. During the guitar solo, the guitarist was thinking at the sound, playing with a tape echo rather than playing the guitar and transmitting emotions. This is what I have heard and seen during the whole show. Amazing music, amazing compositions and arrangements, but I could feel the lack of stage presence and emotions.
Wait a minute… was I in a recording session or was I at a live Indie-Rock concert?
The bass player seemed bored and not involved in what was happening around him, the guitar player, that is the leader of the band, was not driving the night in the right way. People around me could not feel that, and they continued to shout, singing along, and having fun. I think they were just listening and not seeing what was going on.
I closed my eyes for a minute and I could see a different atmosphere, I imagined a band shaking their instruments and jumping around the stage, I imagined that I was watching The Who, but as soon as I opened my eyes, I had the opposite image in front of me. As the concert finished, I was shocked and overwhelmed because it felt as though I was the only one who had made those observations during the show.
Ultimately, what I expected to be a night of Rock and Roll, was actually a different experience. Amazing music, but lack of emotions.
To check out the music, visit: www.builttospill.com

"I ate a raw pig a friend brought back from Mexico," he says in his return to The Tonight Show
For Jay Leno, two days in the hospital was definitely a laughing matter.
In his return to The Tonight Show on Monday, the funnyman didn’t give any details of his illness (his rep said earlier it was apparent dehydration), but he came back with plenty of jokes about it.
“What happened was – and I think this was a mistake – I ate a raw pig a friend brought back from Mexico,” Leno, 58, said in his monologue.
He also found out he had a “really bad HMO,” saying, “For X-rays, they had to take me over to Burbank Airport and put me through the baggage.”
And he was able to tie his illness to the other big Leno news: the changeover of The Tonight Show hosting chair to Conan O’Brien.
“Have you ever slept in a hospital? I spent the night. I was there for 24 hours,” he said. “I had a horrible dream that I couldn’t breathe. I felt like I was suffocating. Then I woke up and realized Conan was holding a pillow over my face.”
• Reporting by PAMELA WARRICK

Police had to close a busy road during the evening rush hour on Thursday to capture a wallaby on the loose.
It took 15 officers to secure the animal, which original sightings had suggested was a kangaroo.
However, upon arrival the officers found they were dealing with a wallaby that had escaped from Askham Bryan College in York.
Police had to shut part of the A1237 joining Haxby and Strensall while they set about capturing the escapee.
The officers cornered the animal near the North York bypass and a vet used a tranquilliser dart to help them grab it. Staff from the college were also present.
The road was later reopened and the wallaby was taken back to the college.
Inspector Richard Mallinson said they needed to catch the wallaby as soon as possible as it could have jumped into the road and caused an accident.
The animals are not usually found in Britain, although colonies are known to live in the Lake District and near Loch Lomond. A wallaby was seen in Highgate cemetery in London last year.
Insp Mallinson says his officers were not able to use a Taser to stop the animal as it could have angered it or even killed it.
Copyright Press Association 2014

You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your ReverbNation experience.
A.N.T. has always loved music since he can remember. Music has always been the way for him to express his creative mind. A.N.T. has always been around musicians like his older brothers and gets his singing ability from his dads side. Growing up A.N.T. was always shy but he started writing at the young age of 9. He,s always been a deep thinker his music definitely shows that. A.N.T has come into his own as an artist with a sound like no one you've ever heard, The way he uses his slick rapping and smooth singing together is very different and unique. All he asks is for you to listen.

Streetz Incorporated Recordz is a newly established independent record label(2013). With a mission to mainly to help artists, by giving them full creative freedom as they believe that is the only way to get the best out of an artist.
Their Flagship artist who they are currently working with and is also the co founder of the Label, is Exit(Sphiwe Mpanza) former member of the legendary crew called Asylum Trybe. Exit dropped his first single called Nje in 2013/2014 which got a lot of airplay on stations like YFM, Kasi FM just to name a few. He followed up with a video for the track which was shot and directed by Thomas Gumede from PAP productions. Some of his music was used on shows like Mo love and forever young as part of the sound track.
His now working on his Solo project and is about to drop two EP’S this year. The first EP will be drop during April 2015 called Project X and the second EP will drop end of September 2015. His first single that was dropped this year called Phika has a summer vibe and will be released to radio within two weeks but was made available for a 24hour download which had his fans buzzing.

[British Virgin Islands Platinum News] – Oliver Lewis was late yesterday afternoon, December 3, found guilty of four counts of gross indecency with a child involving sexual acts he performed on the 13 year-old boy.
Lewis, 35, a native of Guyana who was on bail, was remanded to prison pending a sentencing hearing on Wednesday, December 9.
Lewis was charged with eight counts of the offence, where it was alleged that the acts were committed between April, May and June 2013. He was found not guilty on two counts.
Further, in relation to the two other counts, the Magistrate has asked for further submissions from counsel before handing down a decision on those. There were issues with dates in the two counts for which a decision was not rendered.
The offence carries a maximum of five years imprisonment or US$3,000 fine, or both. Magistrate Ayanna Baptiste-DaBreo handed down a 21 page decision where she outlined the gory details of the case.
The Magistrate indicated that she found the victim to be credible and that he was very loyal to the defendant, since this was shown even during his testimony. She said the child was candid and did not try to make Lewis out to be a bad person.
Further, she said Lewis was a close friend of the boy’s family through the church and he intentionally groomed the child over time in a sexual manner. The Magistrate indicated that had it not been for the issue with the child’s brother indicating certain things, the victim would not have told his parents what was taking place between him and Lewis.
It was the crown’s case that Lewis would on several occasions pick up the victim from school during lunch breaks and take him to his home where he masturbated in front of the child and influenced the child to masturbate.
He also laid naked on the bed next to the child and rubbed his private parts against the child. He also performed oral sex on the boy. It was further stated that Lewis also took a bath with the boy and they went into the pool.
Lewis had denied the allegations during the trial and stated that he picked up the child from school mainly to have bible sessions with him and talk with him since the child had confided in him that he was depressed and was being ridiculed by his peers.
According to the court records, when Lewis found out that the child told his parents, he texted the child’s father stating that he wanted to kill himself, that he has committed sin against the family and he was ready to face fellowship for his bad ways.
However, the defense had claimed that Lewis sent those messages because he felt that he was wrong by taking the child from school for bible sessions without informing the parents.
Magistrate Baptiste-DaBreo said that she cannot phantom this because why would Lewis, who is an avid church member, feel to kill himself for taking the child to bible sessions. She said that even if the child had confided in him about being depressed, he should have informed the family, since he would sometimes visit them for dinner.
The defense had also claimed that the child was upset with Lewis for not purchasing a Samsung Galaxy for him and that the church was on a witch hunt for Lewis, hence, the lies by the child. However, the Magistrate did not buy into this.
She said that from emails, it was clear that after Lewis said he could not afford the phone, the child agreed to a cheaper phone. She also noted that from the evidence, Lewis was more focused on satisfying the child’s sexual needs over his.
Lewis is represented by Attorney-At-Law Stephen Daniels and Senior Crown Counsel Leslie Ann Faulkner prosecuted the case.
May God have mercy on him, he who is with out sin cast the first stone. For sin is sin except we sin against the Holy Spirit.
Guyanese man found guilty of molesting school boy in BVI
This molester does not have powerful friends in very high office like one politician whom seek the court help to gag a victim.
Death sentence fo he rass. Disgrace to Guyanese and humanity in the whole.

my 17 year old daughter continues to lie to us. At age 15 she snuck out and bought a cell phone and lies have continued since then. She has stolen money from me. She just totaled the car we let her use. She continuously breaks her curfew and we continue to give consequences, like no car for a month. She continues to bring unapproved phones into my home even though I told her if she did then the phone is mine. We have bought her a phone but it has restrictions on it that she doesn't like but she doesn't give us a chance to rebuild trust with her before she does something foolish again. Its all about fun with her. Narcissistic personality. She has a wonderful job at chick-fil-a. but found a boyfriend there that we don't like. She has always been homeschooled but is in her second year at a private christian school, she is a young senior because she skipped a grade. She is making good grades. She says she has to lie in order to have any fun and be with friends. But when we have let her go out somehow she gets into trouble or isn't responsible. We are a military family with 7 children and have lived in Florida for two years now. She has 6 siblings watching her rebel and what her father and I are doing about it. I fear that they will follow if we don't find a way to reach her. My husband, a Lt. Col. in the Air Force, vacillates between permissive and authoritarian. SHe can manipulate him at times. All this is breaking his heart. Please help!

Far from England, alone for too long, Captain Jonathon Barry is captivated the instant he saw Jaline--she is too magnificent not to notice. There is a grace to her movements, an elegance to her bearing, that sets her apart even before she lifts her exotic black eyes or speaks. Her voice is intoxicating, soft as velvet with a sweet, lilting quality, as she recounts an evil bargain made against her will. She is to be his mistress, and he may do with her as he pleases...***
Jonathon is deeply torn, for Jaline is indeed his by right. She is only a slave, the prize he has won in a Constantinople gambling den. Trembling, bared to him, body and soul--he can see how cruelly she has been treated. It is clear that Jaline is in danger still and he may well be her only hope. Yet even a renegade like Jonathon would risk anything to save so beautiful a woman...and to love her, if she will let him.
A shadow could not hold water and she could never truly love him. That made her the worst choice for a mistress, as if Jonathon Barry needed one at all. He saw a tiny shudder shake her frame and he leaned forward. "Do I frighten you?"
She neither moved nor flinched, nestled behind an eerie façade of composure. The words hung in the air between them and fractured the tentative calm.
Slowly, she lifted her brilliant onyx eyes to meet his, wayward curls masking one side of her face, dirt the other, her expression watchful. "You do, a little," she said, an odd lilt in her voice.
"I trust that will fade with time and experience," he offered. She gave a slight nod and turned to study the alleys of Constantinople as the carriage rattled on through the early morning light. He must be a fool. His life was too complicated as it was, even though the war was almost over. He felt her eyes on him, met her gaze and logic dimmed. Lust made his throat dry. He wanted her and now she was his, a slave, won in a gambling den. It didn't matter. Vivid erotic thoughts clouded his mind. "You'll become accustomed to me."
The corners of her mouth lifted in a wickedly uncertain smile. "I learn quickly."
Jaline clasped her hands in her lap. "This morning I watered horses." She drew a long breath. "Now I'm to share your bed. I understand." She paused and cocked her head. "Are we going to your ship, Mister Barry?"
"The name is Jonathon." With a small frown, she looked away. Jonathon glanced down at her delicate fingers. He wanted to take them in his, feel their warmth, their touch. More importantly, he had questions starting with what happened after she left him. Her friend, Faresh had appeared only a few hours later to plead for his help. He studied her as they passed an inn, its lights flickering over her features. "The Lornea is moored in the Golden Horn."
"What happened to the Amadine?"
"Thanks to the information you provided, she sailed for Odessa."
Her eyes brightened. "Then it was helpful."
"I expect it will be profitable too. Collectors want artifacts of any kind, even if there are half the number of Greek relics."
She gave a nod and brought her fingertips together, studying them. "So you are taking the Lornea back to London?"
He raised a brow. "I don't recall telling you that."
Her full lips pursed into a straight line. "I am good at gathering pieces of information, as you well know."
He inclined his head. This was no hapless kitten, but a careful, clever, exotic creature. He needed to watch what he said. "Once I talk to this Asam you mentioned." Her smile vanished and the mask returned. He narrowed his eyes and searched for the reason. "You will come with me." She nodded, lifted her hands and began to braid her hair, then dropped it from sight. She might have been fiddling, but it was one of the most erotic gestures he had witnessed, possibly because she was completely unaware of the effect. "Why don't you explain why you are limping?" He inclined his head to catch her gaze. "That was not the situation when I left you."
Jaline clasped her hands and set them in her lap. "Yesterday was a long time ago."
"You're different." Before, her eyes had been lit with a hidden fire. Whereas tonight, she was far away, as if he was watching her somewhere in the distance.
"Faresh said you were in trouble." He could almost see her pale.
When he spoke the name, she met his gaze and held it. "He shouldn't have made you feel responsible." Jaline swallowed. "Faresh has been like an uncle to me since I was sold to Toran."
Faresh had been twice her age and several inches taller, his eyes black but the resemblance ended there. His skin had been olive whereas Jaline was fair, the shape of his face narrow while Jaline's was a classic heart, her features near perfect. "He's not an actual relation?"
She exhaled and smiled wistfully. "We looked after each other in the slave quarters. I cooked his evening porridge, he taught me to - survive." She lifted her chin. "That's near to family."
He returned her look and narrowed his, distinctly aware of what she had said, and what she had left out. "Tell me what happened."
She blinked and lowered her eyes. "When I got back to the stables, Toran was waiting. Someone told him we had been talking. He found the coins you paid me and wanted to know where they came from. When I didn't tell him, he assumed you were my lover. That you had paid me for..." she gave a quick jerky shake of her head. "He ordered ten lashes, one for each coin."
Rage bubbled deep. He had known the man was cruel, sensed it as they sat across the table from each other. There had been a lifeless boredom in Toran's speech that held his sneer firmly in place. Greasy with perfumed oils, he had waved his jeweled finger at the money Jonathon had offered, as if it were a dish that offended his nose. "Toran didn't want to do business, you did."
"I'm not his servant. I'm his slave. Toran can do whatever he wants."
"You sold me information about ancient valuables. That doesn't warrant a beating," he said tightly.
She gave a feminine snort and shook her head. If anything, she appeared more vulnerable than moments before, her breath uneven. Time passed before she lifted her gaze to his. "A slave owner's rights are absolute. That is the way it is."
She didn't have to cry for him to hear the unshed tears in her voice, or feel the brush of accusation. He was the master now.

Rumors and gossip about Aaron Brant's hair
Aaron Brant has had many different haircuts lately. He reached fame as a talented American football player. However, the American football player is especially known for his extradordinary looks and his delightful character. Rumors and gossip about the 35-year old's haircut are constantly in the spotlight of celebrity magazines and tabloids. Don't you wish you had hair like Aaron Brant?

So we showed up at swimming lessons today because they wrote the 16th on my card only to find out they started on Monday... that made me mad. Then the girls hated their swimming teacher Even Scott who usually says nothing commented that she was a natzi teacher. She thought it was like swimming boot camp. They were crying and carrying on about being sick. OK anyone that knows the girls knows they LOVE the water. They have looked forward to swimming lessons for weeks. You can see on their faces...Dad get me out of here.( Thanks Scott for taking pictures) I was unable since I was in the mommy tot class with Crew.
needless to say I switched their class they had to go down one level where there was a spot. Which did not matter to me since they are in the last level and know how to swim. i just wanted them to have fun. The manager said she has had other complaints..the problem is she is a swim coach for a swim team alot different than little kids. So we switched to the next time. WAALA they are happy and those belly aches magically went away. They love the new teacher. Seriously... arent swimming lessons about having fun too. SO All of us went double duty with lessons so i guess we made up for missing yesterday.
MaKayla & McKenzie after 8 pool laps. that was the first 10 minutes of class.MaKayla
Crew has loved the water since day 1. He loves the bath and wants to stay and splash, so it was no suprise to me that he would love swimming lessons. too. Even though he was the youngest one in the group, he did really well. especially for going through 2 sessions in one day.
I think he is still practicing bubbles. He didn't quite get it, but then again he is only 8 mnths. old. I can't expect miracles
With the Deer hunt coming up, our family With the insistance of Scott go out on drives to see what we can see. We drove up Squaw peek. it was pretty. the girls goofed off as usual when we got to the lookout. We did see a few deer pictured below.

Born in 1996. Rapper, singer and songwriter who's best recognised for his introspective, expressive lyrics and experimental vocals that he often juxtaposes with abstract visual identity, to expand the sensory experience of his audience. Despite being rooted in the rap scene, he's also the lead singer and one of the producers of the rock band, Mel Tripson, with which he released their debut EP, "VI YD". Thanks to his work beyond the hip-hop realm, he's been able to expand his creative and performative capabilities, growing to become a truly multi-faceted artist.
His first solo EP, "Element" was released in June 2018. He's currently working on his debut album.

I am so sorry that I did not see this play earlier than today. It was absolutely wonderful. The acting was superb, the singing extraordinary, the adaptation to a small theater was marvelous.
The audience was on their feet before the final strains of the last song.
One word of advice, though. In front of us was a 7-year-old child that talked throughout the entire first act. (The play runs 2 ½ hours with a 15 minute intermission.) During the intermission we – those of us sitting in front of and behind the family – told the adults that she was really spoiling it for us. The father – an MD judging from his car license plate – became quite huffy, but he didn’t know who he was dealing with. They moved – clear across the theater – so that the other side now had the benefit of being disturbed. Anyway, there is a rape scene that the 7-year-old could find disturbing. She should have not been there.
It is hard to single out any particular actor as better than another, but Sean Murray, who played “Don Quixote” was spectacular, as was Erika Beth Phillips as “Dulcinea.” The entire cast was versatile, believable and entertaining.
There is only one week until it closes. I suggest you do everything you can to see it. I don’t think you will be sorry.

Auditioning is a funny thing.
Yesterday was maybe one of my more memorable auditions in a long time. We were asked to improvise a scene in pairs based on the information they gave us, so in a way it was meant to be a little easier since we didn’t have to figure out where we were, who we were to each other or what we were focussed on. My scene partner seemed like a nice guy. He introduced himself and I shook his hand and he said “Hey that’s a firm handshake you got there. I like that”, and somewhere in the back of my head I thought, this could be awesome or an ut oh.
Because if someone says something like that, either they’re super friendly and extroverted or, they’re like a jokey uncle who wants to get the laughs out. It turned out my scene partner was more uncle like. Right when he got in, the jokes rolled off him like sweat on a cheap suit, and kept nudging me like I was in on it too, but I had no idea what he was talking about.
Then we started the scene, which started at a rip roaring pace and with him yelling “So you got the canoli!” and I kept saying “Yes, I have the canoli!”
It was maybe one of my favorite auditions ever.

"I have to say that the two hours on stage when we are performing is great, because I know exactly what I'm doing and why I'm there. I don't question it, I don't have time to think about it. It's that old cliché of being totally in the moment."
did you know
Adam's bass teacher Patrick Pfeiffer wrote a book called Bass Playing for Dummies. Adam said: "It's a good book and I'm going to try to pay more attention to it".

My client Rose hired me to help her put together all the details for her son's 1st birthday. Since was has a music background she wanted to incorporate that into the themed and had all the guests come dressed in their favorite MTV celebrities. We had music video playing on a loop and there was a step and repeat backdrop for guests to take pictures in front of. She thought of a clever idea to name the food items after some of the celebrities in the music industry and also on MTV shows. Guests took home headphones as favors with birthday boy's photo on it. All of the graphic design for the food and dessert tables were done by my graphic designer sister Katie. It was a very unique theme to have and I was so happy to be a part of it.

The World and Olympic champion sailor Peter Burling says he has no issue with parts of his medical history being made public.
Burling and rower Mahe Drysdale are the first two New Zealand athletes to have their medical documents made public by Russian hackers.
The pair were given a therapeutic use exemption or TUE to use prohibited substances.
Burling says he doesn't think he even took the painkillers which were in case he got an infection after having his wisdom teeth removed last year.
"I don't have anything to hide, I had a TUE about a year and a half ago and it was one of the infection fighting drugs in case anything went wrong afterwards and I don't actually think I took it.
"We went through the correct procedure and the doctor that did the operation wanted that available to them just in case something went wrong and Drug Free Sport New Zealand okayed it and it's something that has a pretty rigid process in place on how you go about getting these things and we followed that."
The hacked files show Drysdale, who defended his single sculls rowing title in Rio, took a steroid that acts as an anti-inflammatory and painkiller four times in the past 18 months.
Fancy Bears started their leaks after Russian athletes were banned from the Rio Olympics because of their drug cheating.

I just found out. He’s dead. David Bowie, born David Jones, died of cancer. I was unaware he’d been sick.
I’m lying in bed, crying. I don’t know why, as I never met the man, but his music was brilliant and his public persona was so unique. I first heard his work during my troubled youth and know I wasn’t the only teen who related to him. And the nice thing was that when I moved out of my teen angst, his music came with me.
I imagine I’m truly upset and crying a little about losing an iconic part of my youth.
Good-bye, Mr. Jones.

I have to say, I really didn't know I was this indecisive.
I have been playing around with a fresh new look for the blog for quite some time now...but I haven't quite found what I was looking for. I guess it would help if I knew what that was, but hey...I'm a creative, and that's just not how we work!
Anyway...I've been sketching, colouring, playing around in Photoshop and Illustrator...and I just couldn't figure out how I wanted the blog to look. But I think I've cracked it now! I hope you like the new look...now I'm off to decide what to have for tea...this could take a while...
Til next time!

Wednesday, April 22, 2009
I got an email this morning. Scrapbook Trends had forgotton to send me the email saying that my layout was moved to the June 2009 issue. So, I have to wait another month, but at least it is going in the magazine. I was worried that it was going to get bummped all together. I can breath a sigh of relief!

"I was so shocked when people were shocked by it," Diandra tells the Telegraph. "It's a natural thing."
"People are more used to seeing naked bodies in more of a sexual way than a motherly way. I'm not against that at all, I've done nude pictures and I'm very proud of my body, but it's okay to show your body in that way. If you're pulling out your breasts to feed your child, that should be even more so okay," she tells the publication.
However, Forrest wasn't nursing Rain as she walked for designer Gypsy Sport – she had already fed her backstage.
"I was the last out, so other people were walking and I was nursing her because she was getting a little cranky," Forrest says. "Her mouth would have had to be on my boob to be breastfeeding! So I was like 'what?' "
RELATED VIDEO: I Had So Much Judgment': Celeb Moms on the Battle to Breastfeed (... and Cabbages!)
"It's hard to breastfeed in that position, so it would have been a little impossible on a runway," Forrest says. "Because she's so small – if she could hold her head up that would be easier, but you can't really walk and breastfeed."
Forrest, who walked in the same show for Gypsy Sport in September while she was pregnant with Rain, said the idea to walk with her newborn started as a joke.
"It was funny because a few weeks after she was born I knew fashion week was coming back and I lost my baby weight so was happy about that and me and my agent were joking like 'we should do the Gypsy Sport show again, breastfeeding or just walking with the baby down the runway.' We were just joking," Forrest explains. "The next week the designer called us and asked us if it's something we'd be interested in. We took it and ran with it."
But now she's frustrated with all of the criticism towards breastfeeding in public.
"You need to get real, it's really just a boob," Forrest says. "Men walk around topless, and women walk around topless, and if they can do that to be sexual, we can do this for our babies. Whether we're doing it modestly or not, are covering ourselves or not, which I do."
"It's something we should be proud of and women should do more if they can. People are ridiculous."

FIREFIGHTERS rescued four people who were trapped in a lift between floors at the Waverley Court tower block in Crewe at 5.25am today (Friday).
A Cheshire Fire & Rescue spokesman said two men and two women were stuck in the lift six feet from the bottom floor.
Using specialised equipment , the firefighters prised open the doors and them helped the four people down. The whole rescue was completed in seven minutes.
The spokesman added: “They were very relieved to be freed as they were beginning to become anxious.”

Title: Year One: The Philosopher's Stone (Ch. x/?)
Series: The Letter Series (Book 1/7)
Disclaimer: J. K. Rowling and associates own these characters. I am writing this story for fun and not profit.
Pairing: Harry/Draco in the future, mentions of others
Rating: PG-13 for now
Warnings: Slytherin!Harry, AU.
Summary: Harry doesn't bring his Hogwarts letter into the kitchen and hides it from his aunt and uncle instead. One small decision changes the course of his life. Slytherin!Harry, eventually Harry/Draco (circa book four or five) and mentor!Snape.
Chapter One: In Which Harry Receives a Letter
The 24th of July seemed like any other day when Harry Potter, aged almost eleven awoke. He had been kept in his cupboard since the incident at the zoo and only let out the day before. Yesterday had brought with it the coming of Dudley's Smeltings uniform and of the now dreaded Smeltings stick. Already, his shins and arms bore a few long bruises, a few of them still red. Harry didn't think that the stick would be discarded or broken as easily as Dudley's other toys.
Aunt Petunia's voice screeched through the thin door of his cupboard, "Up you get boy, there's breakfast for you to make!"
"Coming Aunt Petunia," he said as he hurried out of his cupboard and into the kitchen. There was a horrible smell in the kitchen that morning. It was an unusual mixture of bleach and vinegar as though Aunt Petunia had decided to start cleaning the kitchen and making pickles. The smell appeared to be coming from a pile of grey-brown rags twisting mournfully around in the sink, floating in a brown liquid.
Quickly moving to start the breakfast fry-up, Harry cautiously asked Aunt Petunia, mindful that he had only just got out of the cupboard, "Aunt Petunia, what's in the sink?"
Aunt Petunia glanced up from the sheet of paper she was looking with a twist in her mouth. "Your new school uniform of course. I used some of Dudley's old things."
Harry turned away so that his aunt would not see his face drop. He doubted that other children at his new school would be wearing poorly dyed uniforms made from Dudley's cast-offs. He had been hoping that without Dudley around he might finally make some friends at his new school, despite what Dudley and his cronies had said about the kind of children who went to the local comprehensive.
Uncle Vernon was soon coming down the stairs and was followed by Dudley. Breakfast now completed, Harry walked out of the kitchen to gather the mail. There was a brown envelope that looked like a bill, a postcard from Aunt Marge and a thick creamy envelope unlike anything Harry had ever seen. It was textured and heavy. As he turned the envelope, he found that it was addressed to a
Mr. H. Potter,
The Cupboard under the Stairs,
4, Privet Drive,
Harry had never received a letter before, and he didn't think that anyone in the Dursley household had received one so interesting. In fact, Harry was quite certain that nothing interesting had ever happened to the Dursleys. On the back was a thick purple seal, with a big letter H, surrounded by a badger, a snake, a lion and an eagle. He fingered the seal and began ripping the letter open.
"What's keeping you boy?" roared Uncle Vernon.
Harry hurried forward, almost stumbling over his too big jeans. At the last moment, he slid his letter under the door of his cupboard before continuing into the kitchen. It was the first time he had ever had something nice that was his, and he didn't think he could bear to see Dudley tear it up.
He handed Uncle Vernon the bill and the postcard and sat down in his seat, almost vibrating with excitement. He ignored Uncle Vernon's scowls at the bill and his long discussion with Aunt Petunia on the merits of the Isle of Wight and how the service industry was declining when a person like Marge couldn't even go on holiday without getting sick.
But Harry didn't hear it. Instead, he shovelled his breakfast into his mouth. Even Dudley's Smeltings stick didn't bother him for long and he floated through all of Aunt Petunia's tasks without care, even though it was a hot day in the garden and there was much weeding and watering to do.
It seemed that Aunt Petunia was determined to make him work especially hard today after staying yesterday with Mrs. Figg and his many weeks in his cupboard as though to further deter him from any "funny business." He also had to wash his new uniform by hand as Aunt Petunia was determined not to ruin the dye-job. Unfortunately, for Harry, they looked no better than they had that morning. He could already imagine snickers of his new classmates.
Dudley too had his fun with Harry that day, chasing him around the park with his gang, or rather, ordering his cronies to catch Harry and then bring him forward for Dudley and his friends to hit him. It seemed that each of his friends wanted their chance with the Smeltings stick, although Piers at least had his own. Their laughter filled the park and the other children, recognising the new arrivals fled.
Dudley sat alone on the park bench, his cronies surrounding him and Harry, jostling each other for prime viewing and hitting spots.
"Now, one at a time, and I want to see good whacks all around; this is a Smeltings stick, so no sissy business," he grunted, buffing up his chest and doubtlessly imagining the fun summer that was sure to follow.
But even such a bad day couldn't ruin Harry's excitement. He quickly ate his dinner and cleaned the dishes, keeping his head low and his mouth shut until finally, sweaty, dirty and hurting he was allowed to slip into his cupboard.
He panicked for a moment when he didn't see the letter under the door, imagining once more Dudley's look of glee as he tore it up, Uncle Vernon's bright red face as he shoved Harry into his cupboard and Aunt Petunia's pinched, sour face.
As his shoulders dropped, his foot hit the thick envelope and his heart soared. He still had it. Carefully, he pulled the letter from under the cot and placed it under his pillow. Next, he removed an old broken flashlight which Dudley had once gotten for Christmas.
Harry waited, clutching the flashlight and the letter under his pillow while he waited for the house to quiet down: the television downstairs being shut off, Dudley trudging up the stairs, one loud clump after another, drywall sprinkling over Harry's forehead, the water upstairs running and then stopping, the thump as Dudley, Aunt Petunia and finally Uncle Vernon lay down in their separate beds. By this point, it was more than he could bear. Although Harry had said that he would wait twenty minutes after they had gone to bed before turning on his flashlight, he could wait only a few minutes before he pulled the sheets over his head and turned on the dim, flickering flashlight. The clock was particularly hard to tell time with as it was missing the minute hand.
Harry looked first at the address once more but there really was no doubt that it was addressed to him, down to the odd detail of his cupboard. He turned it over and saw that the envelope was torn under the seal were he had begun opening it. Carefully, he finished opening the envelope. At every creak, he would freeze and bury his flashlight under the pillow, only to slip it out a few moments later when everything was once again still and silent.
He repeated this procedure on the sheets contained inside and discovered that they were made of the same thick vellum that the envelope had been made of. The first letter read:
HOGWARTS SCHOOL of WITCHCRAFT and WIZARDRY
Headmaster: ALBUS DUMBLEDORE
(Order of Merlin, First Class, Grand Sorc., Chf. Warlock,
Supreme Mugwump, International Confed. of Wizards)
Dear Mr. Potter,
We are pleased to inform you that you have been accepted at Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry. Please find enclosed a list of all necessary books and equipment.
Term begins on September 1. We await your owl by no later than July 31.
Harry's heart leapt into his chest. He couldn't believe what he was reading. Him, a wizard? It was hard to imagine that this wasn't some kind of prank with all the talk about wizards and owls and yet this was the first time he could ever remember somebody wanting him, someone saying that he was special.
But although he desperately wanted it to be true, there seemed to be no way of knowing. The second piece of parchment contained only a list of required school supplies, none of which he had any idea how to get. He certainly had no 'owl' by which he could contact the Deputy Headmistress.
Still, there was a small spark of hope fluttering inside his chest. He read the letter again and then a few times more until he regretfully placed it into the space beneath a loose floorboard along with the broken flashlight. The letter went in first, buried under a small pile of drawings which had previously occupied the space. They were children's drawings, made from cheap crayons but they clearly showed a boy with wild hair, green eyes and a scar on his forehead smiling while his hands were held by two smiling figures although Harry could not remember his parents. Aunt Petunia and Uncle Vernon said they had died in a car crash with him when he was only a baby, leaving him with the Dursleys and a lightning bolt scar.
The floorboard back in place, Harry curled up under his covers. He went to sleep muttering the contents of his letter, "Dear Mr. Potter, we are pleased..."
Harry dreamt that night of a bright flash of green light and of a high laughter but found, when he awoke that he remembered none of it. Indeed, his day began when he suddenly sat up, at once nervous and excited for the upcoming day; for today, he would have to deal with his letter.
Soon came the shriek of his Aunt Petunia., "Up, up boy, lots to do today," and the thud-thud-thud of his Uncle Vernon and his Cousin Dudley down the stairs.
He was quite distracted that day: as he cut the tomatoes with the serrated knife he almost sliced his fingers twice, he was sprayed by the fat from the bacon pan and he almost burnt Dudley's eggs, something he had not done since he was quite little.
The mail that day held nothing interesting in it what so ever, although when he handed Uncle Vernon the mail he began spluttering. "Another bill, Petunia, for that cursed car. It was brand new a month ago and it needs a new converter. I should have never bought one of those European imports. A good British car is always best, haven't I always said that Dudley, my boy."
Dudley grunted, too busy stuffing bacon into his mouth. Harry had a brief thought about how close to cannibalism that was but refused to chuckle in case he was punished for it. Harry had a plan that could not go wrong.
"Don't get fooled like I was, Dudley; stick to British cars made from the sweat of British men and the metal of British soil. Other countries don't know the meaning of quality. In fact, Petunia, I'm certain that Marge's food was cooked by an immigrant. No idea of work ethic, those immigrants. That's why I refuse to employ them, Petunia. There'll be no defective drills at my factory, oh no."
By now, his face was becoming a little red, and Harry was glad that he had held in his chuckle.
"Quite right, Vernon, quite right," said Aunt Petunia as Dudley, seeing that Harry was distracted, took his remaining slices of bacon.
"You didn't cook enough bacon for my Diddykins, did you?" snapped Aunt Petunia at Harry, making him jump. And with that, she upended his almost full plate onto Dudley's. Dudley's smile was large and toothy and Harry heard his deep chuckle. Harry's stomach, meanwhile, only rumbled. However, Harry couldn't complain because tomorrow was mail day.
Uncle Vernon sent out letters every Thursday. There was always at least one stern letter to the newspaper about one of their articles being too liberal, and this week there was also a letter to Marge, complaining once more about the declining quality of the British service industry and the negative effects of immigration. It was Harry's job to take these letters to the post office every Wednesday, and it was because of this that he had a plan.
Harry spent the rest of the day composing his letter. He had decided that he would ask the postman where to send it to as he had no library card that he could use to find the address in the library. Making that decision was simple enough, but trying to decide what to write in his letter was far more difficult.
When he was cleaning the study that day on Aunt Petunia's orders, he managed to swipe some envelopes and several sheets of paper. He hid these under the waist band of his jeans very quickly and finished dusting and vacuuming as soon as he could.
The stationary was then delivered to the cupboard, and Harry spent the rest of the day attempting to compose the letter in his head. The biggest problem, Harry found, was trying to communicate to a school which he wasn't even sure existed and one which seemed to believe that it was magical. Who communicated with owls and did things like spells and potions? But he found that his hope was stronger than the strangeness of the letter, and he was determined to hold on to that hope until it had been completely extinguished. The final copy of his letter ended up reading:
Dear Deputy Headmistress McGonagall,
My name is Harry Potter of number four, Privet Drive and I received your letter today in the post. I have no owl so I have sent this as best as I can to the Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry by post. I hope that it finds you. I was very surprised by your letter as I have never heard of a school of witchcraft and wizardry and never applied to Hogwarts at all. Where can I buy the textbooks and supplies that you mentioned?
Harry was quite pleased with his letter, as he felt that it sounded at once grown-up and serious. He had a brief worry that the original letter could have been one of Dudley's pranks, but he didn't think Dudley smart enough to know the words that Deputy Headmistress McGonagall had used. Also, he seemed quite content in general to hit Harry instead of pranking him. Dudley, like the rest of the Dursleys, was also quite afraid of the word magic.
Having written out the letter that night in his cupboard, he crumpled up his failed attempts and stuffed them in a hole in the wall; he would throw them out tomorrow on his way to the post office. As would seem had become his habit, before he went to sleep, Harry pulled out his letter and looked at it for several long moments before putting it back in his hiding place. He went to sleep with a smile on his face and that night had no dreams.
Harry awoke feeling refreshed and determined to send his letter to the mysterious school. He felt quite certain that he had to succeed. Indeed, this school, if it were real, sounded far better than the local comprehension where, Dudley assured him, new students were regularly beat up and placed in toilets. Never before had Harry been wanted somewhere, and now he had been accepted at a school that wrote on thick parchment which was far nicer than any mail Dudley had ever received from Smeltings.
A few hours later, Harry was walking up the street in the hot sun to the post office. It seemed that there was a heat spell and already he had spent several hours watering the Dursleys' lawn and washing Uncle Vernon's imported car. But now was the time.
He'd had to look very unhappy when Aunt Petunia had handed him the letters for fear that she, realising how much he was looking forward to the journey, might prevent him from undertaking it.
Dudley was not around that day, as Uncle Vernon had decided to take Dudley into work so that he could show him off to all of his co-workers. The Smeltings stick had yet to be broken and neither had Dudley tired of hitting things with it, unfortunately for Harry.
He was so pleased with his letter, which he had gathered that morning, that he even waved back to Mrs. Figg as he passed her house, although he usually ignored her for fear that she would invite him in to her cabbage-smelling house. The walk to the post-office took Harry quite a while, for Uncle Vernon always insisted that he bring them to the post office so that they would arrive as quickly as possible. His route passed by at least five post boxes, but he held no resentment towards them today.
Finally, he arrived at the post office and dropped off Uncle Vernon's letters and his letter to the Deputy Headmistress. Then, he carefully approached the counter and asked the man who stood there, "Sir, I was wondering if you could look up the address for a Hogwarts school?"
The man was tall and bald with a round, solid body and a jolly face. But, while he had been smiling when the small boy had entered his shop, his face now darkened grey. "Ah Hogwarts, I see. You, boy, are you trying to play a trick on me. It seems that every year someone's here trying to play that trick on me, but I've looked once and I've looked ten times and that school does not exist. For shame, children in my day knew how to behave!"
By the end of this, his face had started turning an alarming shade of red and Harry began to sink into the flagstones which covered the floor. But he couldn't leave; the man had as good as told him that the school existed or at least that it was a widespread prank.
Suddenly, a small man with a large, crooked nose and a bright orange cloak appeared behind the counter. "Now, Alfred, there's no use scaring the boy. I'm sure he was fooled just like the others. Why don't you go to the back room and have a cup of tea? I'll take over here."
Alfred, taking one last look at Harry, turned and walked quickly away, all the while muttering under his breath.
The man now turned to look down at Harry. "A letter, you say, for Hogwarts. If you give it to me, I'll-" And then, he gasped, for another customer had entered the post office and the breeze had caused Harry's hair - which usually covered his forehead - to lift up and had revealed Harry's scar.
The man's face, which had been considering, now looked quite awed. "Well, Mr. Potter, I'll get that to Hogwarts as quickly as I can. Just you wait and see. You'll have a response faster than you can say nitflick!" And he grabbed the letter from Harry's hands and started smiling and seemed to be trying to shake his hand at the same time.
"Just marvelous, my Susan won't believe it. Harry Potter in my post office, off to Hogwarts. Simply splendid."
Now quite nervous about how this man know his name, Harry, one of his letters still in his hand, quickly left the post office. Still, he supposed it was no stranger than the strangers who hugged him in the street and the man did seem to know where Hogwarts might be.
Harry walked back to number four Privet Drive quite uncertain on how he should feel.

LONDON.- Mullock's Art Auctioneers sold a series of watercolors painted by Adolf Hitler for over 100,000 euros. The works were mostly landscapes and were found earlier this year in a garage. A work that appears to be a self-portrait that portrays a man using a side-parting and sitting on a stone bridge sold for 10,000 pounds. The work was signed with the initials A.H.
Richard Westwood-Brookes from Mullock's stated, "I am very pleased. I thought they would go for between five and six thousand. Unfortunately for the world, he was not accepted into the Vienna Academy, which was where he wanted to be. Of course, if he had been accepted, then we would have known him today as an artist and not as an evil tyrant." He had previously stated the works "are hardly Picasso".
From 1905 on, Hitler lived a bohemian life in Vienna on an orphan's pension and support from his mother. He was rejected twice by the Academy of Fine Arts Vienna (19071908), citing "unfitness for painting", and was told his abilities lay instead in the field of architecture.

Last year I signed up for two 5Ks back to back. While training I sprained my ankle. I was able to do the WW Walk-It 5K but not the Hunts Point Hustle. Other than the 5K with my WW homies, Cindy and Tam, this was my shot to participate in the Bronx which is the borough in which I live. I would up sitting on the sidelines all summer. Fast forward to this year, a brand new year indeed. A year when I joined the NY Road Runners and started challenging myself to do more. Starting in April I tried to sign up for an event every month. When it came time to sign up for October, the only race I could find near my skills wa a 1.7 mile. Cindy laughed at me saying that's too small but a chance to run in an event is a chance and I took it. A month ago I received an email that there would be another Hunts Point Hustle and it would take place the day before the 1.7 mile. I chose to sign up and run two races two days in a row.
Unlike the races in Central Park, I found myself a distance from others and it felt like I was running early morning on a weekend. I was listening to my music which was telling me I was halfway there when suddenly the finish line appeared. Other finishers were cheering at the finish line and all I could do was look my long lost son. And there he was. I crossed the finish line thinking I should not kill him in public. He was waiting with an older woman who assured me that he had to run his own race. After the race, I got to do something I never did before. They had a Zumba instructor giving Zumba lessons and I jumped into a spot and did Zumba for the first time in my life.
Today I Jake and I had our NY Road Runners races. First Jake ran the childrens race with his 10-12 age group. Then I ran the 1.7mile. It was an interesting course with a few small hills. For once my kids were actually at the finish line cheering me on. Jake asked me what happens when he turns 13 years old and no longer qualifies for the 10-12 year old catagory. I told him that we will figure something out. A year ago I noticed that Jake was putting on a little weight. Since then we put him in little league and I have tried various ways to get him to be active. I bought him a suit for an event last year in April and it did not fit by August. I was not sure what to do because I did not want to give him a complex but I also did not want him to have to work as hard as I do trying to lose weight in the future. This August in anticipation of a wedding his dad was looking for something for him to wear and he tried on the too tight suit and it fit. He called me at work to say that we do not need buy a new outfit. Jake was so sharp dressed up in his suit so trim and fit. His gym teacher told him that he is her best student who is always willing to run extra laps..
Eating always makes me feel better until I stop and then I feel worse.
BACK IN THE SADDLE!
3 months ago

From Mike Babcock's perspective, it wasn't a goal.
"I thought when the net was off, the goal didn't count," he said.
From Jimmy Howard's perspective, it wasn't a goal. ...
'It doesn't matter what I think,' Babcock said. 'Obviously, they made a decision and evidently they think our guy pushed their guy in, so that's a goal. There's no sense disputing it. We had to get
A link to this page will be included in your message.

I had gotten this product because it looked interesting and it was something different then the regular stick deodorant. I was excited to try it and see how I would like having it as an aerosol spray. Let's just say, I did not enjoy using it. First, the deodorant did not seem to give good protection. I would notice that after a long days use it would not seem to be working. Secondly, I did not at all enjoy the aerosol feature. I got the deodorant in the scent Powder Fresh, which was not my preferred choice, and I was overwhelmed with the scent after I would spray it on. The fumes would go everywhere and it was just way to strong. It would give me headaches just from how powerful it was. I'm not sure if others have this problem but I did not at all enjoy it. In the end I would not repurchase this item and now I know not to get another aerosol deodorant.

Tag: tony parkin
"I have seen the Future, and it works"
I wrote my last post, Meetups and Teachmeets, here on bee-it just before the annual BETT Show, and it got a gratifyingly positive response. But I genuinely had no idea that with it I had foreseen the future, and tapped into the zeitgeist.
I believe that I was among a significant minority who were recently unsurprised to read that an Ofsted inspector, Mr Marshall, had been given his marching orders for reusing comments. Some of his pithy remarks in the reports of the schools he was asked to assess had turned up in the verdicts of more than one school. ‘Cut and paste assessment’, as the Daily Mail and other media channels trumpeted; who’d have thought it?

Ryan Long Sets A Standard For Earlsboro Wildcats
May 9, 2019
1993. That was the last time Earlsboro had a state championship in any sport. That title came from the basketball team. Earlsboro, mainly known as a basketball school, had never had a state champion in track. That is, until May of 2019.
Ryan Long was told by Athletic Director and Track Coach Stac...

Friday, February 4, 2011
Linear: Leaves Me Cold
I have been attempting to find a picture of a cozy, stone (or brick) restaurant to try to duplicate what's in my head. It's moments like this that I wish the family's artist gene took the form of drawing, like it has for several in our family, instead of verse as it has for me. I have SOOOOOOOOOOO many beautiful images in my head that I have no way of conveying. I have a vision and a feeling of a restaurant that I feel is MY restaurant. So I have been searching and searching all day. Nothing has come close. One thing I found interesting though was how many very linear designed places people had captioned as "cozy". I do not think "cozy" when I think linear. Neat - Yes. Orderly - Yes. Cold as Ice - ABSO-FUCKING-LUTELY.
I can appreciate linear things, but I do not get a good feeling from them. It's funny. I used to tell my ex-husband all the time, "You are have a very linear way of thinking," to which he'd snap, "I know you're insulting me." Which I truly wasn't. I just felt it was why we were not compatible. I mean he is WAAAAAY linear in his thinking. I don't think there is a thing wrong with that, just doesn't mesh well with me and my way of thinking.
I've seen several restaurants that I have liked in my search and ALL expect one in NYC are overseas. I guess when you grow up abroad it affects you. :)
I obviously have picked an uber-linear picture to illustrate my point of it being ice cold. The restaurants were not this institutional. They were softly lit which helped, but cozy -- uh, no.

- Stalag3b during the Second World War -
POW Camp Index
If you enjoy this site
please consider making a donation.
Allied Air Forces
Prisoners of War
Women at War
Those Who Served
The Great War
TWMP on Facebook
Your Family History
If you can provide any additional information, please add it here.
Those known to have been held in or employed at
during the Second World War 1939-1945.
- Ash Arthur William.
- Azbill Virly Elmo. Sgt.
- Barnett Thomas Eugene. Cpl.
- Czarney Steve A..
- Daum Harold James. Cpl.
- Gaskin Delmar. Pte.
- Glass Evans Truelove. Pte.
- Gorgen Francis Gorgen.
- Gregory Melvin Eugene. Pfc.
- Hiles Roland.
- Hill Redus Tisan. Pte.
- Jacobs Marion.
- Lesyinski Andrew J..
- Lucero Telesfor.
- Meneley Delbert L.. Pvt.
- Mills Allen.
- Nasralla Samuel J.. Sgt.
- Nix Miles Richard. Pvt.
- Pickens Olin R..
- Ries Jack.
- Sanders Thomas D..
- Spahr Robert May. Private
- Sparacio .
- Sweatmon Willie S..
- Tave Robert.
- Walker David Whitfield. S/Sgt.
- Webb Jack.
- Williams Allen Wade. Pvt.
- Zimmer Peter Frederick. Cpl. This page is new, as yet no names have been submitted.
The names on this list have been submitted by relatives, friends, neighbours and others who wish to remember them, if you have any names to add or any recollections or photos of those listed, please Add a Name to this List
The Wartime Memories Project is the original WW1 and WW2 commemoration website.
- To commemorate the 70th anniversary of VE Day, we are launching a new feature, Second World War Day by Day and also a new Library to allow access to records which have previously been held in our offline archive.
- Looking for help with Family History Research? Please read our Family History FAQ's
- The Wartime Memories Project is run by volunteers and this website is funded by donations from our visitors. If the information here has been helpful or you have enjoyed reaching the stories please conside making a donation, no matter how small, would be much appreciated, annually we need to raise enough funds to pay for our web hosting or this site will vanish from the web. In these difficult times current donations are falling far short of this target.If you enjoy this site
please consider making a donation.
- We are also looking for volunteers to help with the website. We currently have a huge backlog of submissions which need to be edited for display online, if you have a good standard of written English, an interest in the two World Wars and a little time to spare online we would appreciate your help. For more information please see our page on Volunteering.
Research your own Family History.
Aug 2017 - Please note we currently have a large backlog of submitted material, our volunteers are working through this as quickly as possible and all names, stories and photos will be added to the site. If you have already submitted a story to the site and your UID reference number is higher than 233877, your information is still in the queue, please do not resubmit without contacting us first.
We are aware of the issue with missing images, this is due to the redesign of the website, images will reappear as soon as the new version of the page is completed, thank you for your patience.
We are now on Facebook. Like this page to receive our updates.
If you have a general question please post it on our Facebook page.
Wanted: Digital copies of Group photographs, Scrapbooks, Autograph books, photo albums, newspaper clippings, letters, postcards and ephemera relating to WW2. We would like to obtain digital copies of any documents or photographs relating to WW2 you may have at home.
If you have any unwanted photographs, documents or items from the First or Second World War, please do not destroy them. The Wartime Memories Project will give them a good home and ensure that they are used for educational purposes.Please get in touch for the postal address, do not sent them to our PO Box as packages are not accepted. World War 1 One ww1 wwII greatwar great
Did you know? We also have a section on The Great War. and a Timecapsule to preserve stories from other conflicts for future generations.
Andrew J. LesyinskiI am currently working on the family history for Andrew J. Lesyinski. Corporal Lesyinski was a POW at 3b from Oct '43 to June '45, as listed by the National Archives Database in the USA. He passed away in 1980 and I am eager to learn more about him and about the camp. I was delighted to find your website and appreciate what you are doing.Julia E. Luehrman
Marion JacobsMy great uncle's name was Marion Jacobs and he escaped from Stalag 3b during the spring of 1945 just before the russians bombed it. I was wondering if anyone was with him and could share stories? I know that they were picked up by some war correspondents and there story made the newspaper, but that is about all I know. Eager to hear from anyone who may have known him to find out details concerning his time as a POW.David C. Bom
Francis Gorgen GorgenMy grandfather was captured at Kasserine and sent to Stalag 3B and then Stalag 3A. His name is Francis Gorgen. He spent the war as a POW and was liberated by the Russians. He never spoke of any of the experiences he endured, but did curse the Red Cross for trading items meant for the POWs to the Germans. Any info about Stalag 3A or B would be appreciated.Kevin Turner
Private Robert May Spahr 1st Battalion 26th InfantryMy lovely Grandfather, Private Robert M. Spahr, was a POW captured in Tunisia, North Africa. He was held for 26 months. He was in Stalag 3B according to the address on his prisoner mail.
When he was captured, his name and my great-grandmother's name and address, was voiced over short-wave radio from Germany on a program called Calling Back Home. Sixty nine strangers wrote to my great-grandmother to alert her that Robert was being held. They all heard the news on the short-wave. It's detailed in World War II Radio Heroes: Letters of Compassion (2008) a book I wrote to highlight these great people.
My grandfather came back, married his sweetheart and had 4 kids. He passed away far too early, in 1984.I'm his only grandchild. I'm due with his great-grandbaby in July. I love and miss you Pappy.Lisa Spahr
Pte. Delmar "Doty" Gaskin"Doty" Delmar Gaskin is my ex-father-in-law. A finer man I have never met. I am glad my son Joseph Bryan Gaskin has his genes. Doty was captured at the Kassarine Pass by Rommel's forces and was interned at Buchenwald Prison Camp, Stalag 3b. He survived after 27 months there. "Doty" was known as the strongest (physically) man in Garrard County, Kentucky. "Doty" was a brave, compassionate, caring, respectful, hard working man who did everything he could for his family. I know you are in heaven Doty and your ex-daughter-in-law gives you love and respect.Linda Scott
Telesfor "Blackie" Lucero 1st Armored Div.On the eighteenth day of February 1943 I was taken prisoner in Tunisia, by the Africa Corp Rommelís Panzer Divisions. I was on a small mountain on an observation post. My company, Company A of the Eighty First Recon, was forced to pull back by an attack of the tiger tanks of the Africa Corp. and I was left behind. The small mountain I was on became surrounded by tanks and infantry of the Africa Corp, and for three days all I could think about was how to get off of that mountain and away from the Germans. I discovered that on the N E tip of that little mountain there was a dry creek running N E across the desert. I kept thinking if I could get down to the bottom of that little mountain without being spotted I believed I could make it across the desert and made up my mind to try it.
On the seventeenth of February I was approached by an American soldier who informed me that there was an American officer who wanted to talk to me and pointed to where the officer was. I reported to him. He was a 2nd Lieutenant; Iíll call him Bob. The officer told me that as soon as it got dark we were going to go down the West side of the mountain and try to rejoin our troops. I told him the only thing we would accomplish would be to get caught by the Germans. I told him that place is swarming with Germans. He said, "Those are Arabs." I told him those are Germans wearing shilabas. He told me to go back to where you were and when itís time to go we will call you. I went back and sat behind a large boulder because the Germans every once in a while would fire a shell up on the mountain, some exploded and some wouldnít.
Shortly after that another American soldier came to where I was and asked me what kind of a uniform I was wearing. I said, "a tankers uniform." He asked me if you are a tanker what are you doing here? I told him. Then he asked me how long have you been here? I told him about three months. Then he asked me, "Do you know where we are?" I said, "Yes, I am a Recon man." He left and in a few minutes returned and said that the officer wanted to talk to me. And again I reported to him. As soon as he saw me he said, "You are the one that gave me an argument about going down the West side of the mountain." I said, did. Then he said, "Do you have any ideas?" I told him about the creek on the N E side of the mountain. Then he asked me, "Did you know that there are forty one other men and another officer on this mountain?" I told him no. Then he called the other officer, a 1st Lieutenant; Iíll call him Moss. He told the first Lieutenant who I was and what I had said about going down the West side of the mountain. He looked at me and asked me, "Do you know what you are talking about?" I said yes I do. I have been observing them for three days and I know that they are Germans. I told him I am going to get off of this mountain but not going down the West side. He asked me, "Do you think you could get all of us off of this mountain?" I said, "If everyone does as he is told we may have a chance."
This was still early in the day. We talked for a while and then they said, "We will try it your way. Go back to where you were and as soon as it is dusk we will meet you where you are and go from there. I went back and sat down behind the big boulder.
Some time later an American soldier spotted two Germans coming up the South side of the mountain and went to where the 2nd Lieutenant was and told him there are two Germans coming up the mountain with a white flag. Do you want me to shoot them? Bob said no, first they have a white flag; second they probably have you spotted. Go back and wait until they get close then halt them and ask them what they want. The soldier did as he was told. It was an officer and a young soldier that spoke English through the soldier. The officer asked the American, "Didnít you know that we have a forty eight hour truce to take care of our wounded and exchange prisoners?" "We want to talk to your commander." The soldier told him to go back down and I will try to find the CO. As soon as they were gone far enough, he went back to the Lieutenant and told him what the German officer had said. Bob told him he is a ÖÖ..we have no truce and we donít exchange prisoners in the field. Go back and tell him he canít talk to the CO until six thirty. Then he told him to to tell me to go back to see him. As soon as I went to see him he called Lieutenant Moss and told him what had transpired in the last two hours. We talked for a while then they said, "We are going to leave as soon as it is dusk." Go back and we will meet you there and go from there. I went back and as soon as it was not quite dusk they all showed up very quiet. I pointed to the officers the way we would go to get to the mouth of the dry creek and I said we should go down ten or fifteen feet apart and we should have a number in the order we go down so the last man would know there would be no one behind him in case we were followed.
The 1st Lieutenant and a soldier that said he was a platoon leader went first. Then about eighteen men followed. Then Lieutenant Bob and about another eighteen men went down. Then I went down and four men followed me down the mountain. The last man had just reached the mouth of the creek when he passed word to me that he thought he had heard someone behind him. I went back. We took cover on the side of the creek and we heard them. I told them to halt and advance one at a time. They said, "We are Americans." I said advance one at a time. They did. They were Americans. I passed the word to the front and told them to take cover on sides of the creek and wait. We walked until we reached the front of the column. The creek was so sandy that you couldnít hear the man in front or the man behind walking. We rested just a few minutes then continued in the order we had started with three more men.
We walked for about two and one half-hours then took another rest for about fifteen minutes. At this time we were walking closer to each other but not talking. The creek was not as deep as it was at the beginning because by this time we were in the middle of the desert. In front of us was another small mountain that in the daytime looked red. We walked for a long time then took another break. At this time I told the two officers we should pass that little mountain to the left about a half of a mile and they said, "We will go to that little mountain and rest all day and as soon as it gets dark we will go again." I said, "that is dangerous, there is bound to be an outpost there and we will get caught." They said, "We have to stop, the men are tired and hungry and they canít go on all night." I said, "We should bypass the mountain and go as far as we can." If we want to rest we can do it after we have gone as far as we can. If we want to rest we can do it after, and we went to the mountain. There was a hogback to the left of the mountain and a creek. In between the ground was very sandy with some brush and small boulders scattered around. I said, "We should take cover on both sides of the creek and stay as close as we could and if anyone saw a German leave him alone if he didnít see them. "
The 1st lieutenant and the man that had said he was a platoon leader went looking for a good place to sleep and saw a German soldier in the skyline and fire with their 45. They fired one shot each and there guns jammed. The echo of their shots hadnít died when we got a shower of bullets over our heads. The firing continued until some of the Germans that were on the top of the little mountain came down to within talking distance of us. One of the soldiers was no more than twenty feet from where I was flat on my belly, my head was behind a small boulder but my butt was not. The soldier said, "Stand up with no weapon, we will not shoot." I said, "Bob I am going to stand up." He said, "donít Blakie, they will shoot you." The German said, "Stand up and I will not shoot." I stood up and walked the few feet that was between us. He said, "Tell your men to stand up, we will not shoot." Then he asked me where did you come from? I said, "From there" and pointed back. He must have caught me looking at his canteen because he took it off of his belt and offered it to me and said drink. I shook my head and he took a drink and offered it to me again. I took it and took a drink and handed it back. He said he wouldnít take it and said drink all you want and tell all your men to stand up. They all came up and the soldier that gave me his canteen told the rest of the Germans to give their canteens to the Americans. After all the rest had some water, the Germans said, "We will go up to the top and wait until daylight then we will take you to where there are some more American prisoners."
In less than two hours it was daylight and we started right back to where we had come from. About half way there they stopped us and gave us a loaf of bread and one can of sardines for each five men. In a few minutes we started again and walked passed the point we had started from then came to a place where they had a fence made of three roles of concertina wire, two rolls on the bottom and one on the top. There they had a lot of American officers and GIís. We were there about three hours then they gave us some coffee and some bread and told us we would get some food later.
That same day they took a whole bunch of us to a place near Tunis. This place looked like it must have been a camp. There were two rows of buildings with a road between. They marched us down the road and halted us and counted us then counted a number of men and told them to go to one of the buildings and continued this until they had all the men in each of the buildings. They told us not to come out at night until we called a guard or we would be shot and said if anyone tried to escape he would be shot. They said we could stay outside during the day but at night we would remain in the building. Before dark they gave us some coffee and said we would get food later. They didnít say how much later.
The next morning they gave us some coffee and some bread. We spent the rest of the day just laying around until it was time to go into the buildings. They told us to get into three ranks and counted us, then told us to go into the buildings and told us to go to the buildings we were assigned to. The next day they gave us some bread and coffee with the promise that we would get some food later. Among the officers and men of the Africa Corps. quite a few of them spoke English, the ones that took us prisoners at the little red mountain. Several of them spoke English and not with the English accent. They spoke just like us.
I believe it was on this day that I saw a POW take a bullet out of another POWís right leg just above the knee with nothing more than a razor and a knife. The one that was acting like a doctor told us to hold him while he was sitting on a box. I believe he said three men hold his right arm and three more his left arm and about four men were holding his left leg. The bullet was not very deep but when the POW that was doing the operating made the first cut with the razor it took all of us to hold him still. Of course this was with his permission. He knew that the bullet had to come out. It only took a few minutes to take the bullet out but it seemed like a long time. He didnít bleed very much because we used someoneís belt to use as a tourniquet. As soon as the bullet was out we loosened the belt for a few minutes and the POW that took the bullet out cleaned the wound with clean handkerchiefs and bandaged it with a clean handkerchief.
Later that day some American Air Force was flying overhead and one of the aircraft was hit and the pilot bailed out. I believe that before he did he aimed the plane at the tallest building because thatís where it hit. When the Arabs saw the man coming down they ran to where he was landing and killed him with stones and we couldnít do anything about it. But as soon as the first Germans arrived where he was they beat the Arabs up and chased them away.
The next morning they fell us out and counted us then gave us some coffee and bread and after a while they told us to get into three ranks and counted us. Then from the front of the column they told a number of us to stand fast and told the rest to go back to what they were doing and told the rest of us that we were going to an air field to be flown to Italy and started us walking to the air field. When we were about a quarter of a mile from the field we saw the American Air Force bombing and strafing the airfield. The Germans told us to spread out to the edge of the road but not to fall in any ditches or to look up. We scattered all over that field but we did look up to where the planes were bombing and strafing the field and a lot of the planes on the ground were hit. After the raid they told us to get into two ranks and counted us then started us walking to the place we were staying and told us we would try again the next day. That is when I made up my mind not to get in any of those planes if I could help it.
I had been paid three months back pay just before I was captured so on the way back I bought from the Arabs, French bread and Arab cakes and oranges and anything that was edible. From one of them I bought a basket and put all the bread and everything in it. When we arrived back at the camp we were told that we were to go to the building we were assigned to and that we would try again the next day. I knew that they were going to take the first building so I went to the building behind the one I was in and each day I would move back one building until I got to the last building where there were only French soldiers and Arabs from the French Foreign Legion. I told the French why I was there and they said it was OK and if I was questioned to say I was a Legionaire from Algeria and if it worked out the Germans would send them and me to France. There they would help me get to Spain and from there I could get to England and back to our troops.
The morning they took the last of the Americans and counted them two of the officers came back and looked in all the buildings. Then they came to the last building and looked all over. Then one of them nudged me on my foot and asked me, "Who are you?" I said, "I am a Legionaire." He asked me, "Do you speak French?" I said, "No, Spanish." He went back and returned in a few minutes with the other officer and asked me, "Are you American?" And for the first time in my life I denied I was American and said, "I am a Legionnaire." Then they asked, "Why donít you speak French?" I said, "In Algeria most of the people speak Spanish." They asked me, "Where were you born?" I said, "Spain." They asked me what city? I said, " I donít remember I was very small when my family moved to Algeria." Then they said, "Stand up." As soon as I did they said come with us we think you are an American. I picked up my basket and followed them to where the column of men were and they said, "get in line." Then they counted us. But as soon as they started counting someone would move up or down and they would have to start counting all over. Finally they were satisfied with their count and we started walking to the airfield.
I was talking to a GI that said he had a pilotís license for a two engine plane back in the states I asked him if he could fly a three engine plane. He said, "Yes, they are all the same once you are in the air." Then I asked him if he would be willing to take over a plane and fly us back to our troops. He said, "How are we going to do that?" I told him the Germans are loading fourteen POWs and seven guards in each plane. If we disarm the guards each two men surprise each guard and take his weapon away from him, we would force the pilot to give up the plane or we would kill him. He said, "You know we just might get away with it." We talked to five other POWs and they agreed to try. We were going to rest as soon as we were in the plane. When we arrived at the air field we sat together while we were waiting to board the plane. One of the Germans came over and told three of the men we had talked to, to follow him and he said, "No just three." We told him we are all friends and want to go together. When we arrived where the other men were waiting we told them we are all friends and want to go together and they sat down. In a few minutes they loaded us on the plane and we sat down and waited for them to load the other seven men after what seemed like hours. As soon as they did we went in with the odds against us we couldnít do it. So off to Italy we went. They took us to somewhere near Naples or rather to near the foot of Mt. Vesuvius where they had a temporary camp with a lot of American officers, NCOs and enlisted men.
The camp was divided by concertina wire. They put us in one side of the fence, on the other side they had the POWs. As soon as we were in the fence I went to the fence that divided us from the other men and started asking if there were anybody from my old outfit. The only one that answered was my old CO. He asked me, "Lucero, is that you?" I said, yes, what are you doing here?" He said they took me on the fourteenth. I told him I heard you turned the command to the Lieutenant, I canít remember his name. The first question he asked me was how many of our men can you tell me were alive or you can account for. I told him I saw him looking at my basket with the bread so I took a loaf of French bread and offered it to him. He said, "No, I couldnít take it." I said, "Take it, here the only difference is I can get it and you canít." He said, "Iíll take half." I gave him half. Then he told me how they had been trading their watches and their rings or Parker pens for bread. Because all the bread the Italians were giving them was a small bun smaller than the ones we use for hamburgers. And worse of all some of the Italians would tell them, let me see the watch or what ever they had to trade. Once they had it in there hands they walked away and say stupido. The Italians were worse than the Germans.
After a day or two they gave us some Red Cross food parcels. They gave us one parcel for five men. Then in a few days they gave us one parcel for two men. My partner was an Italian kid from NY so we decided to get even with the Italians. We took all the cigarettes out of the packages and stuffed some paper in them and went to the fence to trade them for bread. But we told them to give the bread to one of us and the other would give them the cigarettes. As soon as we got the bread we walked away and said stupido. Yes it was dishonest, but they started it and they were on the outside. In a day or two a priest came to give mass and take confessions. He told us to write our name and address at home on it and say that we were in a prison camp but told us not to say anything about the camp, just to say that we were OK or the letter would not go through. He said he would send those letters to the HAM radio in the States and they would put them on their broadcast. My mother did not hear that on the radio for three months my family did not know I had been reported as MIA. One day a lady from Florida called my mother and told her to turn her radio on that there was a message about me being a POW. My mother tried all the stations but she did not get the message. She did receive several calls from all over the US telling her that I was a POW.
The next day they took a whole lot of us to a railroad where there was some boxcars. They put us in them and took us to Germany through the Brenner Pass to Moosburg and Stalag 7A. There they had some political prisoners and Russian prisoners, not in the same compound. In a few days they gave us some Red Cross food parcels because the only thing we got from the Germans was bread and coffee. We were there a few days then they sent us to Stalag 2B in boxcars.
At Stallag 2B they put us in one of the many barbed wire compounds. On the compound next to where I was which was next to the gate there were some sailors. I asked one of them if anybody had escaped from there. He said no some had been shot trying. He told me if you get away from this place and escape go to a large city and to the slum district or red light district and donít try to contact the underground. If they want to help you they will contact you.
On about May the 20th we were put on a train in boxcars and sent to American Commando #1 near Sprenburg. The day we arrived there they made us walk to the camp where we would stay and work. They marched us and lined us in front of the camp in three ranks and one of the officers said, "We know that among you there are some Jews." Those that are Jews line up one step of the column. For a second nothing happened then a tall man stepped up and with his head held high said, "I am Jewish." He had no longer said that when a large number of POWs stepped up beside him. I thought that kid has a lot of guts and make up my mind to get to know him. We became very good friends. The barracks were frame buildings made of one inch boards. Inside there were bunk beds three tiers high. The Germans told us we were there to work and the first thing you will do is dig some trenches six foot deep, six foot wide at the top and four feet at the bottom. We told them we werenít going to work. They said yes you are. Those trenches are for your protection in case of an air raid. In about two days they showed us where we would dig the trenches. They told us to dig them about ten feet long then change direction and dig them zig zag like almost like a Z. A few days after we started digging somebody buried another manís pick. When he complained about it Rayack (the one that had stepped up first and said Iím Jewish) told the man what do you care did you pay for it? After that it became a habit to bury someone's pick bar or Shovel. When we started digging the trenches the Germans gave each a pcik, shovel and and iron bar to gig with and every day we buried tools. Why the Germans didnít miss them I donít know. Every morning they gave us the tools and each evening they took back and put them in some long boxes they had outside of the camp.
After we dug the trenches they put us to dig some sod in the valley just below the camps. We cut the sod a foot square about two inches thick and put it in stacks to dry. After all the sod was cut, they brought a small narrow gauge train and rails and laid them where we had cut the sod. They had some iron buckets like on this train that hung from a frame on wheels. The Germans were digging the side of a hill and loaded the train with the dirt. Then the Chech would drive the train to where we were. We would dump the dirt and spread it and once in a while we would raise the tracks and move them forward to where the Germans told us. We kept doing this until we had a bank about 16 feet high and several hundred feet long. The Germans said it would be a dam. One day we told the Chech to drive the train to the bottom of the incline and then give it all the steam he had. He did this about two or three times and the boiler blew up. The Germans didnít have another engine so they said we would have to mix some cement. We told them we werenít going to mix no cement. They said yes you will this is not a war project.
Then Rayack said who said we know how to mix cement. We got the hint so when we went to where the Chechs were building some smoke stacks they had some boxes made with 2x10 boards about six feet wide and about twelve feet long with a tin bottom. We put a whole lot of sand and a sack of cement and water and mixed it. The next time we would put three or four sacks of cement and some sand and mixed it. We were making so much cement that the Chechs were getting mad at us. But when the cement dried on the smoke stacks the smoke stacks came down. The Germans got so mad they took us off and said we were so dumb we couldnít mix cement and took us back to where we had built the dam and put us to cut some brush around the dam. They also divided us into four groups to work at night. One group started at eight and worked until four. The next worked from four until midnight. The next from midnight until eight. If we had an air raid the flood lights we worked under, they had lights all around us on tall poles. Around the area we were working during an air raid the lights went out. Sometimes the air raid lasted a long time and some times just a few minutes.
One of these times the air raid came on and the lights went out and so did I. I went walking towards the town. I hadnít gone more than a hundred feet and the lights came back on and the guards started looking for "The Schwartza" Blackie, thatís what everybody called me. When the lights came on, I found a large hole about three feet in diameter and three feet deep. I got in and sat down and pulled my coat over my head. I heard the guard walk past me three or four times but did not see me and I just sat there. After about an hour he found me. Because the air raid didnít come on again that night the guard got very mad and threatened to turn me in to the Commandant. I asked him what are you going to tell your Commandant you were doing when I walked away. I know what Iím going to tell him. He said donít ever do that again you could be shot. But I kept getting into trouble with him and the civilian guards. Someone turned me into the Commandant and I got fourteen days on bread and water (in solitary confinement) which didnít bother me the least.
It was on one of the times that we worked night shift that Rayack got one of the civilians to get him a radio. And a few days he brought one to work with him. Seven of us had formed a pretty tight click, Rayack, Greenfield, Sammie, Gans, Bogner, Vecchio and myself. We all pitched in with coffee, ration D bars and cigarettes to pay for the radio. Rayack kept it under his bunk under the floor, but one day one of the tubes burned out. So Rayack said we were going to find somewhere to hide that damn radio. I said I know where, in the washroom. They said, "Are you crazy?" I said no. In the attic of the washroom I can go up there and hide it. Rayack asked me, "Will you?" I said, "Sure", and one day while they were watching for the guards while we were in the washroom I went up through a trap door and hid it.
In the meantime Rayack got a key for the building where some of the Germans repaired their uniforms. He walked into the building and the Germans were listening to a BBC broadcast. One of the Germans said, "Turn off the radio." When they asked him why, he said, "Rayack speaks German and he isnít supposed to hear that." Rayack told him what is the difference you arenít supposed to listen to BBC either. So they left it on. After that he spoke to one of the guards that worked on the building and asked him to get him a key for that building. He said, "I canít." But when Rayack told him how many cigarettes he would give him he said, "Iíll try." And in few days he gave him a key and everyday when the guard changed at five thirty we would go and watch to see who got the area where the building was and we would tell the guard to come over to our room we are having some coffee because itís one of the guys wifeís birthday or something. As soon as he came in someone was waiting to pour him a boiling cup of coffee. As soon as he drank half of it someone would fill it again until Rayack came with the news. Then we would tell the guard you better go now so you donít get into trouble. And Rayack would tell us what was in the BBC broadcast.
I kept getting into trouble for talking to the civilians and for arguing with the guards or some of the civilians. And several times I got solitary confinement on bread and water. But it didnít bother me I told them I wasnít there as a guest of honor. Some of the other POWs told me cool it Blackie one of these days you are going to get hurt. I told them they wouldnít dare they know how bad it is in the Russian front. Then about a week before Thanksgiving eighteen days in solitary confinement on bread and water. Our click had bought a goose from one of the Germans and on Thanksgiving Day they bribed one of the guards to see that I got three big sandwiches of goose on some black bread. The building had a window to the top. The top had some wire. The guard that walked around the fence that was around the building which was only about five feet from the building when he was making his rounds. He called me Schwartz softly. When I answered he told me I have something for you and tossed them on top of the window. But one fell off to one side, I tore the wire off from the top and got the rest. When my time was up I went to work with the rest of the POWs.
Then one day right after that Rayack told me we have to get the radio down one of the Germans is going to get a tube for it. We told him to leave it alone we donít need it and itís too dangerous having it in the barracks. But he insisted so I went up into the attic and got it and he hid it under his bunk under the floor. Then the day before Christmas before noon one of the guards came to where we were working and said the Commandant said you can have the rest of the day off and they took us back to the camp. We hadnít been there very long when they came to all the barracks and said fall out for count. I didnít go out. They counted them and then told them to go into the dispensary. As soon as they were in the dispensary the guards all came into our barracks and started looking all over. Until I heard one of them say, "Here it is." I must have moved when I looked to see because one of them said, "What are you doing there?" I said, "Iím sick." He said, "Get down and go to the dispensary." I did and told Rayack. Then they called us all out and told us they had found a radio and they told us that, that was a very serious offence and kept asking us who bought it and from who. But we kept telling them we knew nothing about any radio. Then they told us to go to our barracks, then started calling us out one by one to the Commandantís office and asking us who bought the radio. The Commandant said, "We know someone or more than one bought the radio. If whoever bought it will come forward and say so only he will be punished. If not all of you will be punished." But they were only asking the ones that were in our barracks, the other POWs they didnít bother. After two days of this Rayhack said, "Iím going to tell them I bought it." I told him "No! Rayhack you are Jewish and they could go pretty rough on you." Let me tell them I did. And the rest of the POWs in our barracks told him he is right let Blackie tell them he did. But Rayhack said no I bought it and Iíll tell them I did and as much as we argued with him we couldnít change his mind. And he told them. amcmdo12The next day they sent him to Stallag 2B to await trial. And the following day they sent me to Stallag 3B. Somewhere between our commando American commando #1 and the train in which they were going to take me to Stallag 3B, we picked up three other POWs that were being sent to Stallag 3B. When we arrived at the train station there was a big commotion. There were trains leaving for a lot of places and there were people all over. In all the commotion I lost the guards and mingled around with all the people until all the trains were gone then started walking around. I didnít even know where I was but I was on my own until a German policeman caught me and I didnít know enough German. So a couple of German guards took me to Stallag 3B.
As soon as I got there I volunteered for commando and they sent me to Pommernia where I met Helena. There were eighty-two Russian-Polish and Ukrainian girls working in this farm. It was a very large farm with the main house on one end of the farm and the other five kilometers from the main part of the farm. The Russian girlís barracks was by the main house and ours was at the other end of the farm where there were some other buildings. A small house where one of the Germans and his wife lived. Another smaller house where the Military German guards lived. There was a long sheep barn and a large tank for water which was filled by a pump on a small electric motor and then there was the building where we stayed. It had one door that was locked from the outside as soon as it was dark. There was one or two fences about ten feet high with two rolls of concertina wire on the bottom and one on the top. And the gate was locked with a chain. Outside of our compound there was a small building with a large vat where we heated water for coffee.
The winter was not too cold. When I arrived, the Russian girls and the POWs were clearing old posts wire and large rocks from the fields and carrying them to the end of the field. I hadnít been there but about a week when one of the Germans picked up a stick and was about to hit one of the girls on the butt. I reached over and took the stick with my right hand and his wrist with my left hand and took the stick away from him and told him you donít hit the girls. For a few seconds he was dumbfounded. Then he said itís none of your business. She is a Russian and you are an American POW. I just told him donít hit the girls.
After a while or rather in a few days they put me to drive a two wheel cart with a team of horses that the Russians loaded with large rocks to where some other Russians were building a road or at least thatís what I thought at the time. The road the Russians were building was on the other side of the main ranch house between some trees. I did that for a few days and then they took me off of that and gave me the job of keeping the fire going at the boiler room and when they brought some rutabagas I would make some soup for all of us and kept the water hot for coffee. Sometime during the day they would bring me the rutabagas and bread for each of us. Sometimes they would throw in a few potatoes.
In the spring after they got the ground ready they put us to transplanting cabbage. The German women would bring us a box of plants and we went down the row and planted them. Before I left Commando #1 I asked a friend of Rayackís that worked in the dispensary what were symptoms for stomach ulcers and he told me. I kept repeating them until I knew them by heart and I complained every day about my stomach until one day the commandant told one of the guards to take me to the doctor in town. The guard told the doctor why I was there and the doctor asked me what was my problem. I said my stomach hurts very much. He asked me how does it hurt and I gave him the symptoms that I knew so well. He put his hand on my stomach and pressed and I would flinch as if it hurt. The doctor examined me and then wrote a note to the Commandant saying that I was a very sick man and couldnít do any hard work and they even gave me a special food parcel that didnít have corned beef, cheese and some of the other stuff the food parcels had, but it had some other things that were better and I used to trade with the other POWs for what I wanted.
When we were transplanting cabbage I kept telling the other POWs not to work so much and I managed to slow them down, even the Russian girls. Helena came by me one day and asked me, "Do you speak German?" I said, "Yes" and started to talk to her but she said you donít speak German and walked away. An old man came over and told me she doesnít understand you because you speak Platt Deutch and she speaks Ho Deutch. So the first chance I got I told her and said Iíll learn Ho Deutch. She said better learn Russian. After that her and a friend of hers, Tonia started to teach me Both Ho Deutch and Russian. They would tell me words and I would write them as they sounded using Spanish sounds. At night I would study them and the next day I would say them to them and they would laugh and ask me how I learned them and I would tell them.
Helena and I became very good friends and I saw her every time I got a chance. But I told them donít work so much donít do any more than we do. The Germans knew that I was the one that was slowing the work down. One day when we were planting cabbages, the boss left the farm to go to town and the straw boss and the guard came to where Helena, Tonia and two other girls and a couple of POWs were about 100 yards from the end of the field the guard told me if all of you finish all the rows to the end of the field we will quit for the day. The ones that were ahead of us were still five or six hundred yards from the end of the field. I told them OK lets finish them. They got to the end and started back on our rows. When we were finished we said to the guard lets go. But he and the straw boss said we canít go to the barracks yet but you can sit down here. So we sat down and talked with the girls. The boss came back and saw us all sitting down and asked the guard why we werenít working and I told him about the deal we had made with his straw boss and the guard. He said, "No deal, go back to work. I said, "no a deal is a deal." He said, "Iím the boss, no deal." But I told him about the deal we had made with his straw boss and the guard. He said , "no deal go back to work." I said, "no a deal is a deal. He said, "Iím the boss no deal." But I told everybody sit still. The boss got so mad he said shoot the Schwartza. He took the rifle off of his shoulder and put the butt on the ground and said Blackie tell them to go to work. I said no. The boss told him to take them to the barracks and I am going to report this to your commander. The guards took us to our barracks.
After a while the officer in charge of the guards came to our barracks and asked where is the interpreter? I said I speak German. He said not you the interpreter. I said he went to the main farm to bring some drinking water in a barrel. The officer then asked what do you mean he went to bring drinking water? I told him the motor that pumps water into the tank burned out and the boss hasnít fixed it. He asked me does he know you havenít any water here? I said yes, we have asked him to fix the motor but he hasnít fixed it. The officer asked me how long have you been without water here? I told him about three weeks. He asked me, "What do you do for water?" I told him when we come back from work each day we each bring our own water in our canteens. He asked me, "What do you do for lights?" I said nothing we stay in the dark. The officer then said I am going to talk to that man. Just then we saw the wagon coming with the water and we all went and got our cups as if we were thirsty. When the guard and the POWs arrived with the wagon the officer jumped all over the guard and told him you are the one in charge of the POWs not the boss. The guard said I havenít been here very long. And the officer told him and you arenít going to be here very long unless you learn what your duties are. You are here to protect these people and not take orders from the boss. And he told us Iím going to have a talk with that man. And from what we heard later he gave the boss hell and told him if I got anymore complaints from the POWs I am going to take them and the girls away from you. And the boss didnít bother us anymore.
The spring went by and we worked through the summer. The girls taught me Russian and I would teach English. An Italian kid from NY (a POW) wanted to talk to Tonia so he became a very good friend of mine and we would see Helena and Tonia every time we got a chance. In the evening when everybody was getting ready to leave for the other end of the farm, this kid and I would go to the Russian girls barracks which were just beyond the barns where everybody would line up to go to our barracks. When they were ready to leave they would make lots of notes and we would go and get in line. Everything went pretty smooth until one day I saw Helena crying and asked her why? She wouldnít tell me so I asked Tonia and she told me because in about two weeks it will be her birthday and at home we always have dances, coffee and wine and we have a good time. So I told Helena I wonít promise you wine and dance but you will have coffee and cake. A week later I went to the boss after we were ready to go our barracks. I wanted two kilos of white flour and four eggs. He said nobody gets white flour or eggs. Above all I said if I donít get them itís going to make me very unhappy and when I am unhappy I donít work and if I donít work neither will a lot of others. Then he asked me why do you want them? Itís going to be one of the POWs wifeís birthday and we want to help him celebrate with coffee and cake. He asked me is that for all of you? I said yes. He said, I will give you one kilo of flour and two eggs. In a couple of days his wife who was a real bitch told him donít give him nothing. But in two days I got them. I asked the German that lived close to where our barracks was if his wife would bake a cake for me and told him I had white flour and eggs. The next day he told me she would. So I gave him the flour, eggs and some chocolate bars and told her to put enough chocolate in the cake and I would give her some bars for herself. So he told me she had put in two more eggs in because I didnít have enough eggs. That week they took us to work cutting some wood for firewood and then the guards started asking me if I was going to the Russian girls barracks.
Next week, I said jokingly yes I want to get some wine and go over and they said no joke we have heard that you are going to go to the Russian girls barracks. I said no, I am not. We worked three days cutting wood where I got into a fight with a POW who told me not to be so smart tempting the Germans the way I did. I told him if he loved the Germans to move into their barracks with them. He called me a name and I belted him one on the face and we got into a fight. That evening the guards again asked me are you going to the Russian girls barracks? And I told them you know I canít go.
About two days later the guards came over with two Polish POWs to cut our hair. By that time I had the cakes in our barracks. Our barracks was a long building, the front room where the door was and a room to the right and one to the left with doors in the middle of the rooms leading to the front room. We put the Polish POWs in the right side room to cut hair because two of the POWs were decorating the cake with powdered lemon and sugar and chocolate. They asked me, "You arenít going to try taking it to her tonight are you?" I said, "Yes." They all told me to give it to her tomorrow. I said no Iím going to give it to her now. I walked into the room and put my shoes at the foot of the bunk and hung a jacket on the bunk then walked into the room where the two guys were working in case they were finished, but they said donít go tonight, put the cake in an empty Red Cross box and I went out the door.
I walked that five kilometers in record time. When I walked into the Russian girls barracks they were surprised, maybe all except Helena. She said Blackie you could have given it to me in the morning and you better go now before they find out. If they come looking for you theyíll shoot you.
I ran all the way back. When I got there I went around the corner of the sheep barn but there was some ice on the ground and it cracked as I stepped on it. I saw the two guards and some of the POWs standing at the gate. One of them yelled Schwartza but I didnít answer until I got to where the water hydrant was at the middle of the building. He yelled again and I said, "What, Iím getting a drink and walked to the gate. They said you went to the Russian girls barracks. I said, "No, I was getting a drink." The guards were very mad and one of the GIs said you are in a lot of trouble. They missed you about forty minutes ago. They looked all over for you. We told them you were hiding somewhere but they wouldn't believe it when they couldnít find you. The one in charge told the other guard to get his rifle and go up the road and if he saw you not to warn you just shoot you. Thatís what they were arguing about at the gate. The one guard was very mad and said, "Iím going to write the Commander a report about what you did." I said, "I did nothing but went to the barn to get a drink." He said, "Look at you as cold as it is you are sweating." I went by them and went to my room. The next day they opened the gate for the men to get some hot water for coffee. I said, "Iím going to the guards room and they told me to leave that man alone he is mad enough to kill you. I told them I can handle it. When I walked into their room the one in charge asked me, "what do you want?" I said, to talk to you." He said," I donít want to listen." I said, "Itís best you do." He said, "I have the report I wrote to the Commander here" and waved a piece of paper. I said, "Put that in the fire and listen, nobody but you and the Russian girls know about this and the girls wonít tell." What are you going to tell the officer you were doing while I was gone? Drinking coffee, smoking American cigarettes and what do you think he will do? The Germans were afraid of the Russian front and they werenít taking any chances. He asked me if anybody had seen me. I said, "No, only the girls." He said donít ever do that again. I said, "Give that to me." He gave me the paper and I put it in the fire. I said, "Thanks" and went out and got some coffee. Everybody asked me what happened. I said, "I had a talk with him and he told me to tell all of you never to mention this to anyone."
By this time it was in the fall of l944 and we were working in the field hauling the grain close to where our barracks were and getting to thrash. Things didnít go so good for me, the guys said that I shouldnít be so smart and the POW'S said that it wasnít doing any of us any good. So I started saving some of the food from my food parcel but didnít tell anybody.
One day, I believe it was in October, the guard opened the gate for the man to go to the boiler room to heat the water for our coffee and went back to his room and didnít lock the gate. As soon as he was in his room I went where I had hidden the things I had been saving. The man in the boiler room asked me what are you doing here? I told him donít worry about it and keep your mouth shut. He said, "Donít worry about it, I wonít tell anyone." I got my stuff and walked into the woods and walked as fast as I could. I didnít want the guards to catch me. I had walked about an hour through the woods when I came up on a bunch of wild hogs and scared them. I donít know who got more scared, me or the hogs. They scattered all over and I kept walking. I came in sight of a large canal and followed just inside of the woods. I knew that there was a French commando somewhere around there. The French POWs worked without guards. I walked until I came parallel to where they were working. I waited until I was sure there were no Germans around and when one of them got close I called him. He came and asked me what I was doing there. I asked him where is the bridge on the canal? He said I canít tell you and get away from here before a German sees you and gets us in trouble.
I kept walking until I spotted the bridge. I waited just for a few minutes then walked over to the bridge. I had almost reached the bridge when I saw three German soldiers coming towards the bridge. I couldnít go back or stop so I walked right to the bridge. I met them about half way onto the bridge. I saluted and said Bonswa. They returned my greetings and kept on walking. About a half of a mile there were some tall woods. Thatís where I was headed. Half way to the woods I saw a German walking towards the canal. I was sure he had seen me so I couldnít do anything but keep walking. When we met I did the same as I had done with the soldiers. I saluted and said Bonswa. He returned my greetings and kept walking. When we met I recognized him, he had worked at commando #1 and was caught doing black market with the Chechs and was taken out of our commando. I had walked about sixty yards, looked back over my shoulder and saw him facing me and motioned for me to come to where he was. I started to ignore him then I saw him reaching for his hip pocket. I knew they all carried a pistol. I knew he couldnít hit me but he could attract attention and that I didnít want so we both started walking until we met. He asked me, "Who are you" and I said, "I am a legionnaire. He asked me, "Do you speak French?" I said, "no, Spanish." We went to a house in the village, there was a lady in the back yard. We both greeted her and he asked her, "Is your husband home?" She said, "Yes upstairs." He told her to call him. When he came we both saluted him and said Bonswa. The civilian told him this man says he is a legionnaire but he doesnít speak French. The officer told him that is possible a lot of them donít speak French if they are from Algeria. You go about your business I will take care of him. He spoke very good Spanish. He asked me some questions, then said where is your commando. I pointed in the direction of the canal. He said lets go if you are from there everything is OK.
About half of the way to the canal he stopped and asked me, "What is the number of your commando?" I said, "Eighteen." He said, "No your commando." I said, "Sixteen." He said is your name Lucero? I said, "Yes." He said, "You left yesterday at eight oíclock." I said, "No, I left at six oíclock." He said, "How could you have left at six at that time you were locked up in your barracks. I told him when the guard came to open the door for the man to go to the boiler room to heat water for coffee he didnít lock the door or the gate and I went out as soon as he went to his room. He said, "Thatís OK you will sleep in jail tonight and tomorrow they will take you to the Stalag." Trying to escape is an automatic twenty one days in solitary confinement on bread and water. They put me in a small rock building with one barred window, an iron door, the window was barred from the outside. There was a straw mattress, no blankets.
The next morning two military guards came and took me to a train and took me to Stalag 3B and solitary confinement. The next day a doctor and two American NCOs came to see me. They asked me if I was OK. I said, "Yes." They asked me how I had been treated. I said they treated me as good as I could expect. They didnít beat me or threaten me. They asked me, "Do you need anything?" I said, "No just to get out of here." Later the guard that came to stand guard brought me a sandwich and some cigarettes. He said donít get caught or we will have trouble. When the twenty one days was up they came and got me out. I said, "I want to go on a commando."
They took me to a disciplinary commando (but they didnít call it that), it was close to the Polish border. In this commando we cut trees in the forest. The German civilians would mark the trees we were to cut. Sometimes we would mark a tree and cut it down. When the Germans found it they would scream and raise hell. We would tell them it was marked. My Daueir seemed to get to where I was being sent before I got there. At this commando, the POWs told me that at five we had to take our shoes and pants off and one of the POWs and the guard would take them to a small room outside of our compound and lock them up. I said Iím not giving up my clothes and for five days I got away with it until one of the guards came to our room and saw me with my pants and shoes on and asked me why I didnít give my shoes and pants to the man to take them to be locked up. I told him that it is against the rules of the Geneva convention. He told me we make up the rules here. Take them off. I said, Iím not ready to go to bed." He said, "Take them off and again I said, "No." He asked me you are not going to take them off? I said, "No." He went to his room and came back with a German Lugur (a P thirty eight) in his right hand and a clip of ammo in his left hand and said take them of. The POWs told me the same. I said, "No." He put the clip of ammo in the gun and pulled the slide back and said now take them off. I did and told him I wanted to see the Red Cross man. He said, "You will when he comes around."
Days went as usual. They controlled our food parcels. We would tell them what we wanted and they gave it to us. I always asked for more than I was going to eat and hid the rest. The day after I got to that commando they brought back a man that had tried to escape. As soon as I could I asked him if there was anything he could tell me as I had planned to escape. He said, "Yes, if you get the chance go from here to NE all the way." Travel only at night and donít trust anyone. The Polish or the French will turn you in if they saw you and if they didnít turn you in they would catch hell maybe even shot.
Sometime in October two other POWs told me we heard that you are planning to escape. Could we go with you? I said sure maybe we will have luck in numbers. So they started saving food and hiding it, but we didnít talk about our plans. There was an Italian kid from NY so he said. But we didnít trust him, he was too friendly with the Germans. Once in a while they would leave him at the farm where we stayed to sharpen the saws and they didnít leave a guard with him. One morning we lined up before going to work and the guards told us we found some food stuff hidden. We told them yes, we hid it sometimes so we can eat whenever we feel like it. You have to give it back to us. They said OK this time but donít do it again. It was lucky they found just a small amount of the food we had hidden but we thought we better leave as soon as possible and in a couple of days we took with us all the rest of the food we had to work with us. Some of the other POWs helped us.
That day after we had lunch and went back to work, two of the POWs started an argument about the lumber feet there was in the tree they felled. The German civilian heard them and he got into the argument. Soon the guards and most of the POWs were all in the argument. While this was going on we picked up all our food from where we had it and cut out through the woods. About four thirty the civilians said we havenít done much today and itís time to go. When they lined them up for count the guards said, "Where is the Schwartza?" And when they counted them, the guard said three men short. One of the guards told the other get on your bike and go and report that we are three men short. In the meantime we were going through those woods as fast as we could. We came to where there was an open place in the woods about a hundred yards wide. It seemed like they may have had a potato field there. There was a ditch between the woods and the open field. It had about an inch or two of water in it and it had started to rain. We were about to cross into the field then we saw some vehicles on a road to our right about a couple of hundred yards away. They would stop and use a light about three feet above the ground. They would move the light back and forward a few times then move on a short distance and do the same. As soon as we saw the light we jumped into the ditch. The Germans did this until they reached the other side of the open field. As soon as they were past us we got up and hit the field running and it was hard running in that field, it was wet. We got across to the woods and walked just as fast as we could. We stayed in the woods until later in the night then we followed the road. It was in the same direction we were going to NE.
We walked all night and it rained all night. At daylight we hid in a haystack. We dug a hole in the hay and crawled in and pulled the hay behind us. We slept until dark. All day we could hear people all around the field. As soon as it was dark we came out. There were no people around so we started walking again and it was stll raining but we walked all night until the next morning. We found another haystack and did the same as before until it was dark. We hadnít walked very far when we heard the river and walked towards it. Just ahead of us we saw the bridge. One of the POWs said now what I said (they say donít cross your bridges until you get to them) and now is the time to cross. We all thought that there would be a guard on the bridge. We decided if we saw a man on the bridge we would walk up to him and salute and one grabbed his rifle and the other two tossed him in the river. But no guard. Just across the river to our right there was a large building like a hotel but it was dark. We all thought the guard was probably standing close to the building and out of the rain. We didnít see anybody and kept walking less than a quarter of a mile. We came to another bridge. I knew we had to cross one river but I didnít know anything about the second river. The man I got my information from told me when you get to the river find the bridge. Thatís the only way you can get across. Once you get across you are in Poland. There was no guard on the second bridge so we walked on until daylight.
We couldnít find a haystack but we found a farm with a large barn. There was nobody around so we went to the barn and went up on the hayloft. There were chickens, goats and cows there. We put the hay over the trap door and tried to sleep. I started coughing. I would put the sleeve of my overcoat over my mouth which was soaking wet but it didnít do much good. I could hear the women down below feeding stock and gathering the eggs. They heard me coughing and called the German that was around. An old man poked his head through the trap door and was saying Volchivix. I said no American POWs. I said in German Kriggs gefangenas. I finally got him to calm down and told the other two to get up slowly. We went down the trap door and in a minute two officers came in two cars that looked like 1926 Dodge touring. They asked us if we had any weapons. I said, "No." They asked us where we had come from I told them we were in a commando and left because we didnít want to work. But they wouldnít believe me. They asked me if we had bailed out from one of the planes that had been bombing. I said, "No we are POWs." They asked where were you going? I said, "Any place." They asked me, "Did you know you are in Poland?" I said, "No", which was not true because I knew that once we crossed the river we would be in Poland. They started to ask the other two men something and the two just looked at them. I said, "They donít speak German." The officers asked me, "Do they speak Polish or Russian?" I said, "No, English is all they speak." Before we started we agreed that if we were caught they would not speak German because they spoke very little and we didnít want to get our stories crossed in case they wanted to talk to them. They asked me, "do you speak Russian?" I said, "no, Polish or French." That wasnít true, because I spoke German, Russian and French. They said take everything out of your pockets and put everything on top of those barrels. There was some sixty gallon barrels there.
When they saw all the cigarettes and chocolate bars we had their eyes got as big as plums. We had all kinds of food stuff. They asked us, "Where did you get all that?" I told them from American Red Cross food parcels. They asked, "How do you get all that?" I said, " At our work commando wherever we work." The Germans and some of our men go to the rail head where the Red Cross ships them to and they are brought to commando and put up in a room and locked up. Then every week we get one parcel per man. They asked, "Do you get cigarettes in every parcel?" I said, "Yes we get five packs in each parcel." How many chocolate bars do you get? I said, "Three but we only got one." I wouldnít tell the Germans the truth.
They took us back to Pozen about seventy five kilometers back. We got caught between Pozen and Warsaw. In Pozen they put us in the Pozen City jail. We were there for four days then the SS came and took us to the SS police station and started interrogating us. They brought a good looking blonde who spoke English. You would have thought she had been born and lived all her life in England. She had an accent that made us laugh. The more she spoke the more we laughed until she broke into tears and said, " I canít talk to those men they laugh at my English thatís the way I learned it." So they sent her away and a big fat woman came over and said, "I want to be your friend." We said, "Then tell these people to let us go, we didnít do anything." She laughed and said, "I canít do that but I will help you all I can." The officer that was in charge told her to ask us where we came from. We told her from a commando where we had been working. She told him, he wrote something down and told her to ask us where we were from. And I told her from Stallag 3C which was about three hundred kilometers further back from where we had started. She told him then he told her to ask us if we had ridden on any trains or trucks or horses. I said, "No." Then he told her to ask us if we were going to Russia. Again I said, "No." She asked us, "Where were we going?" I said, "Anywhere we just didnít want to work." When she told him the officer told her to tell us that POWs are supposed to work and I told her yes and they are supposed to be fed and the Germans were not feeding us. She told him what I had said and he said tell them they are getting food parcels. I said, yes those are from the American Red Cross." He told her to tell them we belong to the Red Cross too, itís not just American.
They would ask us questions for an hour or more then send us back to our cell and a few minutes later they would bring us back and ask us almost the same questions and they got the same answers. The next day was the same with one exception. A good looking gal that was tall, well built with everything in the right place, she sat on a desk just in front of me. She pulled the second from top drawer and propped her heels on it and leaned over and asked me in French, "Do you speak French?" I said, "No." She said, "I want to be your friend." I said, "No I donít speak French." She wasnít a bit bashful or modest, she knew I was looking at her. Then the questioning started. But when the interpreter wasnít asking me questions she would talk to me in French or in German and I would tell her I donít speak French. She would say you speak German. I said, "Just a very little." This went on for two days. She told me once I can talk to you alone if you want. I said, "No" and kept telling the interpreter what she asked.
In the meantime across the room there were three Indians from India. I told the other two POWs donít say anything you donít want to tell the Germans. They asked why? I said, "Those three over there are Indians from India and Iíll bet they speak English. One of the POWs said the short one looks like Tojo and made a very nasty remark about him. We watched to see if he showed any signs that he had understanding but their faces were like a stone wall. The questioning went on for a while and then the officer gave the interpreter the paper he had been writing on and told her that is a report I have written about what they told me. Read it to them and tell them to sign it. After she told us what it said and asked us to sign it I said we canít sign it. She asked why? I said, "Because we canít read it." She said, "I just read it to you." I said, " I know but if we canít read we canít sign it." She said, "You donít think I would lie do you?" I said, "No." She told the officer what I had said and he said I wrote down what they said. If it is the truth they can sign it and if they donít sign it, it donít make any difference. I told the other two they canít hang us any higher if we sign it so we signed it.
Then the three Indians came over and asked me what interest do you have in Germany? I again said, "None." Then he asked me, "What are you doing here?" I said, "The Germans brought me here." He asked, "From where?" I said, "Africa." He asked me, "What were you doing there?" I said, "Getting the Germans out." He started to ask me something else and I stopped him, I said you speak English better than I do why didnít you help the officer? He looked at me and said because you speak German. I said, "Ya Vol mine herr is spreken sar good deutch, Platt Deutch und llo Deutch aug." The officer raised off of his chair and said, "What did you say?" I told him he asked why didnít you say so from the beginning? I told him you had people that speak English but only used them to listen to us. Then he said, "If you I had found out that you had come from one of those planes that have been bombing us I would have shot you myself." He took a wallet from his pocket and showed us a picture of three women and three kids. He said, "That is my wife and two of my sisters and my children." They were killed when the Americans bombed our house. I said, "War is war." He said, "Not when they bomb peoples houses." I said, "The bombs donít have eyes they fall anywhere." I started to tell him about the bombs that were falling all over London but changed my mind. I said, "You are a soldier like me, we shoot at men we donít even know, but that is war. Then he asked me where I learned German. I said, "Here in Germany, I was a prisoner of war you know." Then the good looking girl said, "I wanted to talk to you." I said, "Sey La Vi. And turned to the officer. They took us to our cell and that night they took us to a train.
There were three of us and three guards. They took us to our commando. When I got there I found things had changed, the POWs were all over the place without any guards. They were even going to the barn with the girls. The guards had changed. I asked the POWs what was going on and they said we donít know itís been like this for a week. I said, "They are losing all over and they know it. The next day the German guards said we are going to the rail head to get some food parcels although we still had plenty of them in the room where they were locked. This time they didnít take just two men to load the parcels they took anyone who wanted to go. We got more parcels that we had taken before. When we got back to the farm we put all the parcels in the room and locked them up. The next day the Germans said, "We are going to give you all the parcels." Everybody take all you can carry but donít take anything else. We are going on a march and we are not coming back. We asked, "Where are we going?" They said, "We donít know."
It was a week before Christmas 1944. We marched all the rest of that day and into the night. When we finally stopped at a small farm they put us in a barn with lots of straw. We thought they were going to set the place on fire. We didnít sleep much, lots of the POWs were awake half of the time watching but nothing happened. Everybody said the same thing, thought they were going to set the barn on fire. They got us up and gave us some coffee and we hit the road again. Sometime that day we caught up with a column of political prisoners. They were so skinny you could almost see their leg bones through their skin. I saw one that, he would walk a few steps and sit down. Once he sat down and didnít get up, he died and the column just kept on going as if nothing had happened. Later that evening we came up to a farm. The house was right next to the road. The Germans stopped the column and most of them went into the house and some girls came over to where the POWs were sitting and sat down and started talking to the POWs. We were there for about half of an hour. Before we left there were several girls sitting and talking to the POWs. We walked until close to midnight before we came to another farm with a barn and some straw in it. By this time we didnít think they would set the barn on fire.
Next day the same thing. We got some coffee and on our way we went to where we didnít know and for that matter did the people that were taking us. This went on day after day. One day we came to a place where there were some Yugoslavs in a camp with a group of buildings and a chain link fence about eight feet high with one gate. Not too far there were some hangers and a runway. In front of the hangers there was an 88 ack ack en-placement to the left of the hangers and across another runway there was a track and a railroad engine that looked as if it had been hit by some shells or a small bomb. When Yugos were told they were leaving they told us they hadnít seen any American planes for months. The first morning at four in the morning the air raid sounded. The Germans told us to stay in the buildings. They were made of 2x4 and one inch siding. When the bombing started we were all at the windows and yelling let them have it. The Americans bombed and strafed that place for about a half of an hour then went away. But before they left we saw a P51 come straight to the 88 emplacement and knocked it out. He came down so close that we could almost see the pilot. The planes hadnít been gone more than half of an hour when the Germans came and told us to fall out. They said your friends bombed those craters on the runway and you are going to fill them up. We told them we would not or you get no coffee. We went back into the barracks. In a few minutes they came on a wagon with some coffee and bread. Then the guards told us to fall out. They had fixed bayonet and said we were going to the runway and told us to march. We went to the runway. It had more holes that a golf course. They had some long wooden boxes there and they started giving us some shovels. A German would give a POW a shovel and he would give it to someone else and he would hand it to another POW and pretty soon someone would hand it to another German.
This was still going on when a German came on a bicycle and said something to the one handing out shovels. He said drop everything and run to the camp. I think the Germans were in the lead. We went into the building just as the air raid sounded and we saw a whole bunch of planes coming but they didnít drop any bombs but we stayed in the barracks. And then all hell broke loose. We saw planes and planes coming and they started dropping what we thought were some big bombs all over the runway and hangers. The Germans told us to get out of the buildings. I donít know from where two POWs got some wire cutters. They ran to the fence and from the top they cut the fence down. They were about twelve feet apart and that fence came down like a piece of cake and out we went. Again the Germans were in front. We scattered all over the field. When the raid was over they brought us back and told us if we have to go out again we will tell you when and we will go out through the gate.
When the air raid sounded again they said take everything with you and we left right through the place where the POWs had cut the fence. We hadnít gone very far when we saw waves and waves of S17s. I counted eighteen in a group and there were a lot of groups, they looked like geese and didnít come back. Two POWs said they had hidden in a potato cellar and when the raid was over a German got them out and brought them to the column. They said that when the bombing was over there wasnít anything standing, barracks, hangers and all were bombed to the ground. The building where we were in was so close to the runway that during the first bombing the dirt and spent shrapnel fell on top of the buildings. That was the first bombing run and I donít think the planes were B17s because they came in bombing and strafing. The rest were B17s.
We walked all that day and into the night again. We kept telling the Germans to go to a rail head and get us some Red Cross food parcels and they would say, "We canít get you any food parcels because your friends are bombing the railroads." Everytime we went close to a large town we would see them bombed out. About two days after we left the camp where they ran the Yugoslavs out, we came near a large city, I think it was Hamburg. They halted the column and told us they were going to try to get us some food parcels and said we would rest there. We stopped right close to a large red barn. I was on the tail end of the column and right next to the barn. Having spent most of my life on a farm I could smell milk cows and went looking for a way to get into that barn and found a small door and went in. There were some girls milking cows. I said, "Donít be afraid I am an American POW we have been walking for weeks without any food and I am hungry." The girl closest to me said, "Give me your bottle and pointed to my canteen." She filled it and gave it back to me and said drink it and give it back. I drank half and handed it back to her and said I have a friend. She said, "Send him here." I went back to the column where everyone was sitting and said to a kid that had become a very good friend, "Go into that barn, some girls are going to give you some milk." He laughed and said, "Ya I know and a steak sandwich." I said, "Go look" and I showed him the milk in my canteen. He got up and asked me where is the entrance? I told him. After he left I told some other POWs and they all went. I donít think those girls took very much milk to the house that morning but I think they were glad to give it to us. The only thing I regretted was that I didnít get a chance to go back into the barn and say thank you again because the guard came back to where we were and we didnít want for him to find out that the girls in the barn had given us some milk.
Shortly after that the Germans and the POWs that had gone to the rail head came back and they had some food parcels. They gave us one parcel for two men. The guards said we would get more later. We didnít complain. It wasnít much, but it was better than we had for weeks. After we ate we started walking again. It was still winter but I donít remember what month it was. The Germans kept their word. About five days they halted the column and said they were going to try and get us some more parcels. And like before they took two or three POWs and went to the rail head. We were near some town but we couldnít see what size of a town it was and didnít care just as long as they had food parcels for us. And when they came back they had food parcels. They gave us one parcel per man. To us they were like heaven sent we had been walking for a long time.
We had lost count of the days and nights because some time we walked all day and most of the night until we came to a farm with a barn, it was cold and we couldnít sleep in the open. Sometime later we caught up with a column of American POWs that said they had just started walking. Late one evening the Germans told us that anyone that stayed behind would be shot because the SS were behind us and anyone they found they would shoot. And walk we did until the early hours of the morning before we came to a farm with a barn where we could stay. The Germans told us they were just as tired as we were but that same day we continued walking. This went on for weeks because we were getting into Spring. We walked for a week or ten days then one night at about midnight the officers in charge called all the guards to the front of the column and gave them a choice; they could stay with us and protect us from the civilians and not let us bother the civilians or they could go with them because they were not going to try to get us any further.
The day before that this friend of mine a kid from Berkeley, California told me I am going to go off of the column and stay back, I donít care what happens, I canít go any further. I had been carrying him for three days. With his arms over my left shoulder I held on to this wrist and with my left hand I held on to the belt on his pants. He kept saying, let me go I donít want to walk any more. But I would tell him if you stay behind the SS will shoot you. And he would say if they find me. For two days we had been hearing gun fire from tanks and artillery. The bombing we heard lots of nights, almost nightly. Then the guards told us about what the officers had said and told us we werenít going to walk any more. They said we are going to go back to the small town we had passed. We walked to this small village and went to a barn. Two of the men that had been acting as our Red Cross men asked us if we wanted to donate coffee and cigarettes or whatever we had to buy a calf from the farmer to make some soup. We said about all we had was cigarettes, some coffee, soup and sugar. We had long eaten everything else. The deal was made. The farmer said he would throw in one potato. They killed the calf and put it to boil in a large black vat the farmer had. The soup was cooking and we were all over the place. Then we saw a piper cub flying very low over the barn and yard where we were. We all said that is an American plane. He made another pass very low and asked us who are you? We all yelled Americans. He asked how many and we told him. He came back and said hang on I have told the tanks and they are coming in to get you and asked are there any armed Germans there. We said no. Then he came back and asked what about those I see in uniforms? We told him their weapons are locked up in a room. He circled and landed on a rye field that was close to the barn. We were talking to him when a German civilian came running and said there are two SS men coming on a motorcycle. Tell him to go. The pilot didnít know what was going on because we were talking in German to the civilian. We told him to go and we started running to the barn. He started to follow us and we told him no get on the plane and go.
He was just barely airborne when the SS arrived. They were very mad and said what is going on? You are no longer POWs you have made contact with your troops and said get on that road and march. We told them no. The officers that were in charge told us to stay here until we were liberated. They said we are giving the orders, get started marching or we will shoot you beginning with him and one pointed his weapon at the sergeantís stomach. The sergeant said we can take these guys, some of us may get hurt, but we can take them. We told him no, itís too close now we can start walking and started towards the road in no big hurry. I waited until almost all of the POWs were on the road then I started walking. The two SS got on their motorcycles and went to the front of the column and kept yelling for us to move faster. Then a young woman dressed in black came to the column and said where is the interpreter? I said I speak German. She said the tall Sergeant, call him, itís important. We passed the word to the front and he came back. The woman took a pistol from inside of her dress and said kill those two SS or they may start the shooting and we donít want any more shooting. Other Sergeants that acted as our Red Cross man came back to see what was going on. When he was told about the gun he said a girl just gave me a pistol and told me the same thing.
The two Sergeants went to the front. They were going to shoot the SS but when they got to the front of the column the two SS had left the column. The Red Cross men said about face and go. We went back to the small town but by that time we could see the tanks busting through the woods at the outskirts of the town. The first one we met was two jeeps, a tank and two halftracks. When they met us they stopped and got out. In the lead jeep there was a captain. He asked us where are those SSs? We told him they went down the road. They told the men on the first jeep go get them and donít bring them back. They broke out several boxes of C rations and began to pass them out. In the first tank there was a captain. I said if you are short handed in that I am a tanker. Iíll gladly ÖÖ.to on that tank. He said the only place you are going is to the land of big I x.
We were liberated at about one oíclock Friday the 13th the day after Roosevelt died. We didnít know that. That little village had white sheets hanging from their windows. When all the dust settled the Americans that liberated us assembled us for a briefing they told us that the houses on the front street were being vacated by the people and we would sleep in them that night. When the American officers told us later that day that all the German people had moved out for that night and were not to come back I went to the house. There was a woman in front of a house and we told her what we had been told and she said this is my house and I have to take something. We told her you arenít even going in until we leave. She asked us how long did they have to stay out of their house and we told her we donít know, but you will be told. As it turned out this was the Berger Masterís house. Down in the cellar we found bacon and crates of eggs, something the German people hadnít had for months. We found butter and plenty of bread. That evening we had some eggs fried in butter, but we didnít over do it because we didnít want to get sick. We slept warm and next morning we had some breakfast and the woman that we had spoken to came over and was trying to tell an American officer that there were Russians. Taking her best horses and team and were loading all of her things and were going to take them to Russia. He couldnít understand so we told him that the Russians were stealing her things. He said if you want to be of any help go help the Russian load the wagon. I didnít think that was right but said nothing. I did say later to some of the other POWs we didnít come here to fight woman and children. We came to defeat the Nazis. The German people as a whole were not bad, they did help us but that was something the people that liberated us couldnít understand why we gave the German woman soap and coffee that we couldnít use. Most of us didnít have any animosity towards the German people. We knew what they were going through.
That same day we went by truck to an air field and they flew us to Camp Lucky Strike. There were hundreds of POWs there. They gave us uniforms, shoes and everything we needed and gave us shots. They had all of our names in a list and told us they were going to fly us to Bramerhaven. There we would board a ship to return to the USA. And they also told us we could go to Paris. They had trucks going there every day but they also told us if our name was called to fly to Bremerhavan and if we werenít there our name would go to the bottom of the list. I didnít want to go to Paris. I had lost nothing in Paris and I wasnít too keen on the French. Finally they called my name and I boarded a plane and we were flown to Bremerhavan and boarded a ship and waited until it was full.
Then we sailed to the good old USA. I donít remember how long we sailed but four days out of NY we got the news that the war was over in Germany. We asked why canít we go straight to NY? But we were told the ÖÖ didnít know the war was over and to some it wouldnít make any difference. The one thing I will never forget is that the day we sailed from NY there were thousands of people at the port waving good bye or giving us bottles of booze and wishing us good luck. And the day we arrived at the same port, the only people that were there were George C. Martial, two other officers and a six piece Salvation Army Band and I was sorry for those American soldiers that didnít get to come back.
Written in 1999Jeanette Adams
Willie S. Sweatmon 47th Infantry Regt.Willie Sweatmon was my great uncle. He with the 9th Infantry Division, 47th Infantry Regt and was involved in the Tunisian Campaign and at some point was captured. He was a POW at Stalag IIIB and later moved to Stalag IIIA where he died. His body was not returned to the States until 08 Aug 1949. The cause of death is not known. He is buried in Georgia not far from his birth place.
If by some chance anyone has any additional information on him I would greatly appreciate a notification.George E. Anthony
Cpl. Thomas Eugene "Barney" Barnett Co K, 112th Infantry RegimentMy Grandfather, Thomas Barnett was captured on November the 8th 1944 whilst serving with the 112th in 28th Infantry Div. He was initially held captive at Stalag (III B); He was held there for 2 months and transferred to Stalag (II A), where he was held for 4 months. According to him (he hardly ever talked about his experiences, and when he did he always got upset) Stalag II A was located in between a fork in the road. The Russians later liberated the camp, but he was able to escape just before that happened. He told the story that Russians were shelling artillery from both sides of the fork. He said a mule took some shrapnel and ran through the fencing that imprisoned the camp. He and others took flight out of the hole made by the mule. He managed to retrieve a CZ24 sidearm off a dead German Officer. He told of how an SS Officer was riding a horse through those that were able to make it outside the fencing and was cutting POW's down with a sword.
He and others were able to make it back to friendly lines, He was returned to action on May 24th 1945. I once asked him why he and the others didn't run towards the Russians, he told me that they were afraid that the Russians would make them fight with them and that they would be used as the frontline and sent into positions in which they would be guinea pigs. He said he never thought he would make it back to friendly lines but he wasn't going to die in that camp. He brought the CZ24 home with him, My Dad owns it now.
My Grandfather has too many medals to list I will say that he has a Bronze Star, Purple Heart, Prisoner Of War, and a French Croix. The others are too numerous to add here. He passed away in 2002 and to my amazement Congress had stopped giving full military burial rights a couple years prior to my Grandfather passing. The Army initially were intending on sending 2 soldiers with a tape recorder to play Taps. This pissed me off to no end. My Grandfather passed on a Monday morning, and after I found out the Army's arrangements for him I got on the phone and called my Congressional Representative in South Carolina, which was Jim Demint at the time. I voiced my displeasure that Congress had reduced Military funeral rights down to a tape recorder of Taps. I said " why not just spit on his grave while your at it." After 3 days of calling, my Representative had arranged for my Grandfather to have Full Military burial rights. He had a 21 gun salute, a bugler, the works. It's a shame that other WWII Vets (Heroes) may have only had a tape recorder. For anyone that reads this if your WWII veteran has not passed on yet, I urge you to contact your congressman and make sure the Veteran receives a dignified and fitting burial.Randall Barnett
Sgt. Virly Elmo AzbillMy grandfather, Sgt. Virly Elmo Azbill, was cycled through Stalag 7A as it was his first stop. He later spent most of his time as a POW in Stalag 3B. He, and a lot of other soldiers captured at Salerno, Italy went through Stalag 7A and he recalled how, after having little to eat or drink during the railroad transfer to 7A, the Airmen there provided them with some cigarettes and also gave up their potato rations for a day to make certain that all of the newly arriving prisoners ate. I am currently working on my grandfather's memoirs and hope to find a publisher for them.David Jobes
Allen MillsThe first POW camp I went to was 3A located at Luchenwalde. This was a POW camp for Air Force personnel, I was then moved to POW camp 3B, located at Furstenburg and was there until January 31, 1945, when the Russians started a drive so we were moved back west on February 1st, 1945. I remember this date because this was my wife's birthday. The move was the hard way, on foot. there were 5,000 of us American NCO's in the group. We were on the road for eight days in the cold snow and ice. At night we slept in barns, warehouses or wherever we were. For the march we were given a slice of this German black bread. Those who fell by the wayside were shot. The group that I was with, eight days later, located near Berlin and Potsdam. It was a small camp, where there were Norwegian Officers, POWs. The group I was with we were housed in tents, and slept on the ground. We were issued one blanket. Food, one bowl of thin soup each day. If we had stayed another week, we would have starved to death.
About four days before Easter Sunday, April, the Norwegians were gone, the next day the Germans were gone. Easter Sunday the Russians arrived, then left in a few mniutes. None of us left the camp for a few days, wasn't sure where the Germans were. Being close to Berlin we could see the fires and feel the concussion of the bombs. About five days later a 2nd Lt. arrived in camp and from there we were taken to trucks and we were driven to the Rhein Main Air Force Base, Germany. Here we stripped down, were dusted with DDT, had hot shower and some bland food. The next day we flew out to Le Havre, France and arrived at Camp Lucky Strike where they built us up a bit for the trip home.
We left on June 2nd, 1945, and arrived at Camp Beale, Marysville, Ca, June 27th, 1945. June 28, 1945 given a partial payment, a 72 day furlough. After furlough, we had to report to Camp Roberts, CA. From here we were to take part in the invasion of Japan but The war was over with Japan in August 1945. I received an Honorable Discharge from the United States Army on November 1st, 1945.Jerry Willis
Pvt. Delbert L. Meneley 1st Armd Regt. (L), Reconnaissance CoMy father, Delbert L. Meneley, was in Stalag 3B. He was captured February 1943 in N. Africa during the Battle of Kasserine Pass in N. Africa. He was interned 30 months.Rod Meneley
Cpl. Peter Frederick "Pete" Zimmer 47 Infantry, 9 DivisionMy father's words months before his death from cancer in 1997. He was captured in Tunisia, Palm Sunday 1943, and reunited Palm Sunday, 1945. Jack Refer to the map, it's a small scale of Germany with most of the prison camps. Transferred by boat "German" to Naples, Italy. After 3 weeks in Italy transferred by box car to Moosberg, Germany. Registered with the Red Cross, then after 3 weeks again put on box cars to Stalag 3B Furstenberg where we were confined until the Russians pushed within some 7 to 10 miles from the camp.
Marched from Stalag 3B towards Stalag 3A, however a small contingent was broken off and sent to a small work camp in Luckenwalde. We were there from approximately Jan 1945 to the beginning of April 1945.
During this time we, Art Rosenberg and myself, decided we would break from the column and try to get to American troops. While waiting to move out the released Russian prisoners stole our stored extra food and we had none left. At this time we took in a loner, Aid Mersfelder from Monhegan Island, Maine, who knew our plans and volunteered his food. Broke from the column on the second day, Germans thinking we were stupid and could not understand orders and gave up on us. After 2 exciting and harrowing days of freedom we came across about 10 French POWs at the side of a small intersection of country roads. Their apparent leader was a younger former policeman from Paris who approached me telling us the Americans were on this road to the left, or east. He said we had to go through these tanks and Germans, who were standing around smoking and appeared confused themselves. The Frenchman stated we walk in the center of his men, bend over and shuffle your feet, not straight up like Americans. Scary part of the whole thing, I could have touched the tanks. After a half day we got to the Elbe where we found hundreds of French POWs who had been there several days afraid to move over the levee to the river. We took Art's tee shirt and waved it and moved over to the levee, where 3 Americans came in a small private boat, took on us 3 Americans, a few British who were there, and took over the French in several trips.Ironically the day of capture was Palm Sunday 1943, back to Americans Palm Sunday 1945.
Pvt. Allen Wade WilliamsMy Uncle Allen Williams rarely spoke of being a POW at Stalag 3B. He indicated that he was captured in North Africa and sent to Germany. My father used to say that prior to his time in the Stalag my Uncle Allen had a bad temper and could be easily provoked. But that was dealt with by the Nazi's at Stalag 3B. My Uncle explained that the guards would have the prisoners line up while "chamber pots" with urine and feces were brought out and flung into their faces, while waiting guards stood over them with machineguns, hoping for a reaction. After returning from the war he was a different person for the remainder of his life. The only other comments he made about being a POW at Stalag 3B was how hard it was to get supplies like cigarettes. He would go retrieve an old handkerchief on the nearby bookcase that held three old brown stained cigarettes that he received at the Stalag. Thank you for creating this site.
Jack Webb Royal Welch FusiliersMy Uncle Jack Webb was captured on Crete and spent the rest of the war as a prisoner of war. He eventually ended up in Stalag 3b. At the end of the war they would not let him home until he had put on weight as he was so painfully thin. I believe he was also part of the rear guard and was captured by a small pond when they were almost out of ammunition. They were also out of water and had resorted to drinking the water coolant from a knocked out machine gun. The pond had a dead donkey in it and several dead German Paratroops. If anyone has any other information about this I would be interested to hear it.Graeme Adams
Pfc. Melvin Eugene "Popeye" Gregory 168th Infantry Regiment 34th Infantry DivisionMy uncle Mel Gregory was captured at Anzio Beach, Italy in April, 1944. He was part of a seven man machine gun nest. They were hit by grenade and knocked unconscious. Mel suffered injuries to his left arm, left leg and face. He lost sight in his left eye. The other six members of his squad were unconscious when the Germans overran their positioin. Since they were unconscious the Germans slit their throats. Since Mel was conscious during the overrun, he was taken prisoner. Mel escaped twice during the next 13 months. He was housed at Moosburg, 7A and in Poland he was held at Hammerstein/Schlochau 2B, Stellin 3B, and Alt Drewitz bei Kurstrim 3C, all in Poland. While at 7A Mel became reaquainted with Fred Schumann from Garfield, Washington just 10 miles from Mel's hometown of Oakesdale, Washington. The two men were members of the class of '43 and competed against each other in the Whitman County League in junior high and high school basketball and high school football. They had known each other for many years and had many friends and aquaintences in common.Chris Gregory
Pte. Evans Truelove "Beans" GlassAll I know about my Grandfather Evans Glass's POW story is that he was captured at the Battle of the Bulge, and spent the remainder of the war in Stalag 3b. He never would talk much about the war other than a few amusing stories about his friends.Micheal K. Glass
Pte. Redus Tisan "Dink" Hill Coy B 180th Infantry DivisionRedus Tisan Hill, known as Dink, was captured in Sicily during the invasion. He was taken by train to Stalag IIIB, and then transferred to Stalag IIB, In 1945 when the Russians arrived he escaped with a lieutenant through a hole in the fence, and was taken by the Russians. After traveling with the Russians for about 14 days they returned to Stalag IIB to attempt to liberate the Allied POWS, but upon arrival found that the Germans had killed the majority of the prisoners, and piled them in the compound 5 feet high, hundreds dead. I have one very badly damaged photo of the stacked bodies. After this disaster I understand the Russians buried the bodies in a mass grave.
Dink and the lieutenant were released and told to make their own way to the American lines. Along the way they ran across two motorcycle couriers from the German army, who they killed and took the motor cycle/with sidecar. Closer to American lines they went off-road to avoid a German patrol and were ambushed, and the Lieutenant was severely injured, and told Hill to go without him and leave him the pistol. Hill did so. Hill thought that the Lt. had killed himself after he left. Hill eventually made it alone to the American lines and reported. He was held for a month while his health recovered and then repatriated back to Oklahoma where he was discharged. He was awarded the PH and the POW medal after his discharge.Jeffery Scism
S/Sgt. David Whitfield WalkerMy grandfather, Staff Sergeant Robert Whitfield Walker, was a POW at Stalag 3B Furstenberg Brandenburg, Prussia (Also KDOS [USA] #1-5; ARB BTNS 225-255) 52-14. I had an old telegram saying he was MIA in Italy on Oct 27 1943, but through some research, also found he was a POW here.
I really do not have much more information to share. Hoping someone else's grandparent or father might have known him or other information.David Whitfield Walker
Pvt. Miles Richard Nix 3 Battalion, Co I 168th Infantry Regiment.My father joined the Army in 1941. After the bombing of Pearl Harbor the US declared war on Japan and immediately after Germany declared war on the US. America entered the war with the invasion of North Africa and Daddy was one of the soldiers in the first invasion. He group landed at Algiers, Algeria. He was later captured at Faid Pass in February 1943 by the Germans under the command of the "Dessert Fox", Erwin Rommel.
They were marched to Tunis where they were held in a fenced in compound, burning under the African sun during the day and digging holes in the sand at night to keep warm during the cold nights. They were sent to Stalag VIIA, which was a staging area for the POW's and then sent out to his permanent camp at Stalag IIIB.
He was required to go out on work details and worked building an electric plant. The men in the camp had some very rough conditions. They had little food. They got a cup of Ersatz coffee for breakfast, waterey soup for lunch, and one loaf of Black Sawdust Bread for supper which had to be divided between 6 men. It was a while before the Red Cross parcels began arriving to the camp. The parcels were kept outside the compound and overseen by the Germans. When they received them, they had often been gone through and some food and other things had been taken.
Occasionally Hitler's SS would visit the camp and they were very fearsome. Even the German guards were afraid of them. He was a POW for 26 months. When the Germans heard the guns of the Allied Army moving closer and closer, they quickly marched the POW's away from front lines with little preparation for the march. They had little food or water and snow was on the ground. They would stay in barns and whatever shelter they could. Daddy once stayed in a chicken coup. At some point while on this march, Daddy and some others escaped and held up in a barn hoping to get to the American troops. When they awoke it was to the sound of tanks. They feared they had been recaptured, but it was the Russians who found them and helped them to return to American control. Freed POW's were given priority on air transport coming back home. He was sent to a hospital in Georgia for a while and then sent to Miami, Florida to recoup. It was a very trying time in his life.Sandra N. Dean
Cpl. Harold James Daum Company C 805th Tank Destroyer Btn.Jim Daum was captured at Kasserine Pass and taken to #66 Capuia, Italy on the 25th of Feb 1943 and was held there until the 8th of March. He arrived at Stalag 7a on the 12th of March and on the 22nd was moved to Stalag 3b where he was held until the 1st of February 1945. On the 10th he was moved to Stalag 3a. He was released by the Russians on the 23rd of April 1945 and died in Germany after the war on the 1st of November 1947.James Daum
Roland Hiles 90th Div. USA 357th Infantry Div.Does anyone remember when the Germans tried to locate the radio receiver the Brits had in Stalag IVB at Muhlberg, Germany? I was a POW there in 1944, later shipped to Stalag 3B. They hid the radio in the bass fiddle which was part of a small band of musicians in the camp. I was with Coy L, 357th Infantry, 90th Division, US Army.Roland Hiles
Sparacio 168th Infantry RegimentMy grandfather was in the 168th Infantry (34th Infantry Div) of the US Army and was captured in Tunisia in 1943. He was a POW for approximately two years in Stalag 3B, Germany.Michael J Sparacio
Robert Tave 92nd Infantry Rgt.I am looking for information about Robert Tave, interned in Stalag IB on 24th June 1940, before being transferred to Stalag IIID after an unsuccessful escape attempt. After several months in the Stalag, Robert met a young Russian woman named Yelena, who was in the camp with her mother. Robert and Yelena fell in love and their love endured in this difficult time, despite the circumstances in which they met. Everything changed when Robert learned that Yelena was pregnant. He did not wish for his child to be born in a prison camp.
They made the decision to escape and to go to Russia which at that time was nearer. After several days on the run, along with their friend Arthur, they were recaptured. They were then separated forever. Yelena, at the request of the labour camp director was sent to Poland, while Mr Tave said he was deported to Berlin.
For months Robert sent parcels to Yelena via the Red Cross, and then one day the parcels stopped. At that time, Germany was being pounded relentlessly by the Allies, while Russia was quickly advancing on another front, via Poland. Does anyone know anything more about Robert and Yelena?Eric Lavaud
Steve A. CzarneyMy father was Steve A Czarney and he was an American POW held at Stalag 3B. I think he was moved to Stalag 2B as well. He was captured in North Africa around 17th February 1943 and was held for 28 months.Terri Fisher
Thomas D. Sanders 32nd Armored Rgt.Did anyone know my father? He was a tank commander 3ad in the 32nd armored regiment. He was a POW until he escaped with others from Stalag 3B(?). He was in the second wave of the Normandy Campaign.William Sanders
Jack RiesMy great uncle Jack Ries was a POW for most of the war in North Africa and in Stalag 3B in Furstenburg, Germany.Kelly
Sgt. Samuel J. Nasralla F Coy. 18th Infantry RegimentMy father, Sammy Nasralla, was a POW interned at Stalag 3b. He was listed Missing in Action on 23rd March 1943, and later as a POW.Gregory Nasrallah
Available at discounted prices.
The Wartime Memories Project is a non profit organisation run by volunteers.
This website is paid for out of our own pockets, library subscriptions and from donations made by visitors. The popularity of the site means that it is far exceeding available resources.
If you are enjoying the site, please consider making a donation, however small
to help with the costs of keeping the site running.
Website © Copyright MCMXCIX - MMXVII
- All Rights Reserved

On 23 March 1994, the medical examiner viewed the body of Ronald Opus and concluded that he died from a shotgun wound to the head. The decedent had jumped from the top of a ten-story building intending to commit suicide (he left a note indicating his despondency). As he fell past the ninth floor, his life was interrupted by a shotgun blast through a window, which killed him instantly. Neither the shooter nor the decedent was aware that a safety net had been erected at the eighth floor level to protect some window washers and that Opus would not have been able to complete his suicide anyway because of this.
Ordinarily, Dr. Mills continued, a person who sets out to commit suicide ultimately succeeds, even though the mechanism might not be what he intended. That Opus was shot on the way to certain death nine stories below probably would not have changed his mode of death from suicide to homicide. But the fact that his suicidal intent would not have been successful caused the medical examiner to feel that he had a homicide on his hands. The room on the ninth floor whence the shotgun blast emanated was occupied by and elderly man and his wife. They were arguing and he was threatening her with the shotgun. He was so upset that, when he pulled the trigger, he completely missed his wife and pellets went through the window striking Opus. When one intends to kill subject A but kills subject B in the attempt, one is guilty of the murder of subject B.
When confronted with this charge, the old man and his wife were both adamant that neither knew that the shotgun was loaded. The old man said it was his long standing habit to threaten his wife with the unloaded shotgun. He had no intention to murder her - therefore, the killing of Opus appeared to be an accident. That is, the gun had been accidentally loaded.
The continuing investigation turned up a witness who saw the old couple's son loading the shotgun approximately six weeks prior to the fatal incident. It transpired that the old lady had cut off her son's financial support and the son, knowing the propensity of his father to use the shotgun threateningly, loaded the gun with the expectation that his father would shoot his mother. The case now becomes one of murder on the part of the son for the death of Ronald Opus.
There was an exquisite twist. Further investigation revealed that the son, one Ronald Opus, had become increasingly despondent over the failure of his attempt to engineer his mother's murder. This led him to jump off the ten- story building on March 23, only to be killed by a shotgun blast through a ninth story window.
The medical examiner closed the case as a suicide.

BY TAMELA J. RITTER Hour Correspondent For some, six years between albums would signify what is known as the "Sophomore Slump," that fear of not being able to live up to your premiere album. For local musician Chris Cofoni, though, it wasn't anything like that. "I wouldn't put an album out if I didn't have anything to say," said Cofoni. The summer release of his second album, "Don't Let the Television Steal Your Brain," will be the first studio release since his first, "Born Backwards" in 2001. The recently divorced, father of two Cofoni, 31, said he wrote these songs because he believes television has desensitized us to violence, sex and hurting others. "We've become numb to it," he said. Songs like "Perfect Picture" which he said is about society focusing on things they see on television, movies and advertisements where everything seems perfect. "That perfect picture, it doesn't exist," said Cofoni. He does admit that some of the songs are influenced by his life changes but that, when focusing on writing, he said he meant it to speak to a large audience about issues that we all share. "At the end of the day, generations before gave more, sacrificed more and watched less T.V.," said Cofoni. Cofoni has been involved in music since he was six, starting with guitar and piano. At 11, he began singing. All of these musical talents came in handy when he moved from Rhode Island to Mystic when he was a freshman in high school. "I knew no one and had no way of fitting in except music. So I started a band," said Cofoni. A talent show with his band "Turtle Pie," led him to a scholarship at The Hartt School of Music in Hartford. Winning singing competitions all across Connecticut and then across the country led him to going to school in Germany, where he learned opera and traveled with a professional company for a few years. It was while there that he found his true calling. "It was like an epiphany; I just started to write songs and it all fell into place, what I was supposed to be doing," said Cofoni. Coming back to Connecticut, he recorded his first full-length studio album at the age of 22, "Born Backwards." After touring for a year with that album, he began working at EMI as an A&R executive for six years. "Working on both sides of music has really helped me go it alone with my own music and still have the expertise to get it all done," said Cofoni, who manages himself, books his own tours and does his own PR. It's not just his career he is managing, however. He is also the manager of local soul singer Omar Wilson and ROLLA, an indie rock band. He will be taking his album out on tour, called The Daily Grind Tour this summer. Until then he is the resident musician at the Bulldog Bar and Grill in South Norwalk. He performs every Thursday in April and May starting at 9 p.m. He said that 80 percent of the songs he performs are covers of hits by the likes of Radio Head, Pearl Jam, Bob Dylan and others. "I really enjoy playing in coffee shops and small venues like The Bulldog; it's very intimate, just me, my acoustic guitar and the audience," he said. The Bulldog Bar and Grill is located at 138 Washington St. in the Old Donavan's building. There is no cover and they do have weekly drink specials. For more information about the Bulldog, call 838-3430 and for more on Chris Cofoni, visit www.cofoni.com.

Yeah, I know I'm posting this on April Fools Day, but I'm totally serious. I ate worms last night. Oh, and some crickets. They were actually pretty good. I think it was for art or something like that, because Kate made all the food, and there were a bunch of MCAD students over at her place. The actual ratio of weird food to normal food was quite small, so the actual bugs were more of a garnish than anything.
So the mealworms were fried and rolled with avacado, cucumber, and a white cheese (can't remember what kind, sorry). The actual worms tasted kinda nutty, but that might have been just the flavor of the oil they were fried in. The sushi was really quite good.
Our next course was waxworms on top of a pizza. We fried the mealworms as well, and put them on a pizza with some tomatoes and other toppings. The pizza turned out pretty good, though it was a little sloppy since we had to cut it into so many pieces (there were about 20 people there).
Last up was cricket croquettes. I've never made croquettes before, but it was messy and fun. We took a handful of this mashed-potato-type mixture, put a leaf of spinach on top, put a few crickets on top of the leaf of spinach, then folded the potato slop over the spinach and rolled it in flour and bread crumbs. Then, of course, we fried it. It was messy, but I'd like to try it again (hopefully without the crickets). The crickets took forever to prepare, since you have to tear off their wings and legs beforehand.
All in all, it was a good time, and the overall bugness wasn't overwhelming. Hooray!

of homework and cleaning house. Who wants to join me? Yeah, that's what I thought. I feel like crap too, so everything is going to go really, really slowly. I'm going to have to read everything three times for it to make sense. And my advisor can really piss me off sometimes. She totally forgets crap she's told me (and not just me; she does it to Sean too). So now, I have to do some crap for her that I wasn't expecting to do. And I'm going to have to do it over Christmas because I don't really have time to do it before then. Although, my schedule doesn't look as bad as it could. Tomorrow, I have a birthday/Christmas party to go to. Next week, Wed. I have a paper presentation to introduce. Next Friday, the students papers are due. Next Saturday, a cookie exchange. Then the 14th and 15th, review sessions for the kids. And the final the 17th, which I have to grade before I leave for home on the 19th. And I am going to schedule a girl's night out for a few of us before I leave too. So not too bad.
I don't know what is wrong with me. I originally thought it was just winter sniffles. I mean, it did finally snow. But then, I hurt my arm on Wednesday. No, I don't know how. I thought I had pulled something when I went swimming, but when I woke up today, all the lymph nodes on the right side of my body were swollen and my arm really hurt. I tried to go swimming, because it reduces stress, but I only managed to swim about 1/3 of what I normally would. I've got this great and highly sexy drainage thing going on too. I stopped at the store to pick some stuff up so hopefully I can have a productive weekend.
My ring has been sold. Now, Wes told me he had contacted them about the ring, but he wouldn't tell me if he had bought it or not. So I'm really hoping he did. I guess I'll find out in a couple of weeks when I get to see him again. He's going to meet my family!!! I'm going to send him golfing with my dad. I'm very excited about them meeting my parents because they have never, ever liked anyone I have dated, including my ex-husband (about whom they were right). But I really think they'll like Wes. Why, let me list the ways, especially those in contrast to former flames. 1) He doesn't have a drug or alcohol problem, 2) he has a career and a job, 3) he has a college degree, and he is furthering his education as we speak, 4) he grew up in church and wants to start going again, 5) he already has 2 kids and he wants more, 6) he's very close with his family, 7) he's musically inclined, 8) he's very funny, 9) he likes to play games (a must in my family), 10) he loves me very much and treats me very good. And if they don't like him, well, then I just give up.
ok, I'm going to grab something to eat and then start on the Friday Night Homework. I thought capitalizing it would make it sound more interesting, but it doesn't. Also, I think I might post my pre-lim lists for you all to see how much I'm expected to know to get my Ph.D. Then you might actually think I'm smart!

A/N: The long promised reunion fic. Post 3x09. Enjoy! And please let me know what you think!
For seven weeks Felicity had stayed silent. Going through the motions, helping the team, even showing up to work. Because it was what was expected. It was what was needed. But on the inside she was screaming.
For seven weeks she'd spent her sleepless nights looking for the impossible.
Logically she knew he was gone. She'd felt it. Something intangible, and amorphous, unquantifiable in a way that she could not understand. But she'd known he was gone.
So she couldn't explain why she'd spend hours at the foundry every night after the rest had left searching for a ghost.
To be fair it didn't start that way. She began by tracking the League. Nyssa specifically. It took long hours, searches that ended in more dead ends than new avenues but eventually she had a fairly accurate picture of her history for the past several month, including the time before and after Oliver's death.
That's when she went deeper, learning everything she could about the League, about their leader. The urban legends Digg remembered hearing in the desert to the folklore and myths of the Tibetan people who lived closest to Nanda Parbat.
Gradually the pieces fell together. The whispers of Ra's al Ghul's real age. The secret, 'magical' potions that kept him alive. She filtered through the lore and the supernatural and found the facts. Evidence of hidden caves with strange chemical concentrations not found anywhere else on earth in various locations around the globe.
One of course in Nanda Parbat.
One near where Oliver had dueled the Demon.
Without any actual samples from the waters found in these caves she couldn't make any definite findings, but the stories that came from both areas were eerily similar.
Injured animals who had wandered in and came back out whole. A group of long past inhabitants who had lived well beyond their years. The lengths they'd gone to to protect these areas and keep them secret were long and storied and with the exception of the quiet legends exceedingly effective.
The stories from Nanda Parbat however, were the most telling. The hushed ones that spoke of the Demon fifty years earlier. Sixty years. Some that even said a hundred. The stories that were told late at night and never written down because the same man in those stories still ruled in the present.
They said he'd enter the cave an old man and emerge once again in his prime, strong, and lethal as ever.
When those tales began to multiply Felicity stopped chasing a ghost and started believing in miracles. Because if she had ever believed in one thing, it was that Oliver Queen was a survivor.
She didn't dare voice it out loud. That would make it real. It would make it possible and while she was quite willing to drive herself mad she refused to bring the others down with her. They were doing their best, struggling without their leader but trying to push through and find their way.
It was a chance capture that turned the tide. One of ARGUS's satellites uploaded new images and she dutifully scoured through them, not noticing the time stamp until after she'd spotted two figures in the blindingly white snow near where he'd died.
Zooming in as far as she could it was difficult to make out too many details, but the League outfits were distinctive and the black stood out starkly. What made her heart seize in her chest was that this particular member of the League looked to be carrying a body over his shoulder.
Thirty seconds later she felt light headed as her hands slipped from the keyboard. The photos were taken only hours after Oliver would have reached the top of the mountain.
When the shaking subsided she printed off the pictures and added them to the growing pile of research she'd accumulated. The loud, logical side of her brain told her it might not be Oliver at all. A quieter side told her if it was him it was most likely his body being moved and nothing more. But as she pulled up the images and compared them to the location of the cave a swell of hope rose within her. Because according to what she was looking at, the League member carrying the body was on a straight path trajectory for the mythical caves.
She hacked into every other satellite she could find that covered that area of the world, including one from Palmer Technologies, and one from Wayne Enterprises, but the only images she got were of a frozen, barren wasteland showing no activity anywhere near the caves.
Felicity had known it was a long shot. Satellite imagery was ideally used to show long term projects that were stationary, or things like troop deployment and amassment, it was only pure luck that one had been passing overhead the day of the duel.
But something was pushing her, something that kept directing her back to that cave. And late one night without worried, prying eyes watching her she placed an overnight order for a down parka and snow boots.
She waited three more days, collecting more data, more evidence, until she felt she had enough and when Roy had left for the evening she turned to Digg.
"You finally ready to tell me what you've been doing?" he asked without censure, but she flushed anyways because she should have known he'd taken notice.
He lifted one massive shoulder in a lopsided shrug and came to join her on her side of the desk, "You've been a shell of yourself. Until the past week. Something changed. Something caught your attention," he explained, "Not to mention you've been watching Roy and I like a hawk every night and keep asking us if we're ready to go home. Subtlety is not your strong suit."
"You're going to think I'm crazy," she said quickly, blowing out a quick breath as she ran one hand over her hair.
With a small shake of her head she reached for the folder where she'd kept the hard copies of all her research and handed it to him. "I think there's a chance Oliver might still be alive."
He remained silent, taking the folder and opening it without saying a word. For ten long minutes she waited as he sifted through what she'd discovered, face impassive and giving away nothing.
When he was done he closed the folder and tucked it under his arm as he crossed them over his chest and waited.
"I know what you're going to say. That there is nothing in there that supports him surviving. I know that. And there's absolutely no empirical evidence to suggest that this idea of magical caves with life renewing properties even exists. I am well aware of how insane it sounds. But-"
"I've never left a brother behind before, and I don't intend on doing it now."
She froze, as his words registered with her, "Wait...what?"
"You're right, nothing in here proves he's alive, but either way...we need to bring him home. And you need to know for sure. We all do."
Her throat clogged with tears she couldn't swallow down so instead of speaking she chose to launch herself at him to show her gratitude.
"We'll bring him home, either way, we'll bring him home," he whispered into her hair and held her tighter.
It took her less than six hours to finish making the arrangements. Roy was left to manage the city and Felicity had asked to borrow Ray's plane which held every possible item she thought they might need, including a coffin.
She'd turned around when that had been loaded on the tarmac, shutting her eyes tight and whispering a small plea that when they returned it would still be empty.
Then they were taxiing down the runway with Digg at the controls, and she stared out the window with the knowledge that she could have answers she couldn't ignore by the time the sun set.
As far as she'd been able to tell the League had left the area. It wasn't a place they used regularly and there had been no movement spotted near the caves for days. She felt as secure as she could that they'd be safe, but Digg wasn't taking any chances and had left prepared.
After they'd landed in the nearest town and swapped the plane for a helicopter he'd been loaned through Lyla they were only a short flight and a somewhat difficult climb from discovering if everything she'd found had meant anything.
Her parka was snow white, better to blend in with their surroundings and the special gloves she bought let her still use her tablet while keeping her fingers protected from the elements. The weather wasn't bad when Digg had placed the chopper on a flat but rocky area a mile from the caves however, the weather service had shown a front moving in that could make leaving precarious.
"You sure you're ready for this?" he asked as she finished adjusting her hat and scarf before pulling the fur lined hood up around her head.
He strapped on a thigh holster, and checked his gun before securing it as he waited for her to respond.
"No," she answered honestly, "If he's really gone...I'll never be ready for that. And if these supposedly healing pools exist...I don't know. Metahumans affected by the explosion I can almost make sense of. A sort of sped up version of evolution, but this…"
"Yeah," he agreed, with a thin smile she tried to return.
She slid her hands down her front, patting at her puffy jacket to make sure everything was buttoned and zipped before she grabbed her tablet and pulled up their location.
"Alright, let's see if these caves really are there." she said with a shaky voice and if he noticed she intentionally had left off saying anything about Oliver he didn't mention it.
There was still several hours of daylight left and the sun was out, although filtered by a fine layer of clouds. A brisk wind cut across the exposed cliff face they had to trudge over but it wasn't so heavy it kicked up the snow.
A mile hike hadn't seemed so bad when she'd marked it on the map, but after five minutes of trudging through the deep, powdery snow her heart was pounding in exertion and tiny rivulets of sweat were running down her back.
Digg shot her a knowing grin, "It's harder than it looks, walk behind me," he instructed and she fell back with an irritated huff, but she had to admit walking in the tracks he made was much easier.
When they reached a rocky cliff face he looked up and then back at her, "It's not that steep, and it looks like there's a decent path cut into the side, but stay as close as you can to the wall and don't look down."
She gulped once before unzipping her coat far enough to tuck the tablet inside, wanting both hands free.
Unlike when they were on Lian Yu the first time she paid close attention to exactly where Digg placed his feet. With one hand running along the granite wall they moved slowly and carefully and as tempted as she was she never once looked down.
Her legs felt like jelly when they reached an area that reminded her of old European cities, with small winding alleyways that led in various directions except these were cut from the stone and disappeared into darkness.
"Where to?" Digg asked as she pulled the tablet back out and zoomed in.
"It's not exactly pinned on google maps," she muttered under her breath, "We're in the right location. Everything I found pointed to this spot, but it is considered a magical and hidden cave for a reason. There's still every chance it doesn't really exist."
"No going off on you own, and stay quiet. If there is someone here we don't want to let them know we're coming."
She mimed locking her lips and throwing away the key before she tucked the tablet away again.
Digg chose the first path to the right and she followed, sometimes not being able to see anything beyond his broad back when the space became too close and tight.
It was the third path when Digg's fist came up in one swift move, silently telling her to halt that she thought maybe she couldn't handle whatever they found, that it had all been a terrible mistake.
"Stay here. Don't follow me." he ordered, voice like steel and she could only nod over the lump in her throat.
He disappeared around a corner as white noise filled her head. She had to lean against a snowy outcrop as her knees went weak and every terrible thought filtered through her mind.
It was several long minutes before he returned, but his gait was lose and while he had his gun out it was held down by his side.
"What was it?"
"A dead goat," he replied immediately, but he didn't holster his weapon and she stepped forward, brows drawing together in confusion.
"Okay...was it an especially disgusting dead goat? Is that why you didn't want me to see it?"
He shook his head a little, eyes cutting back the way he came, then searching the space around them. "No, but it had been butchered."
It took her a minute to pick up on what he meant, "Oh. OH!" she cried, "How recently?" because a butchered goat meant people and that could either be good or bad for them.
"Day or two. Not long."
"So...he...I mean someone. Someone is here," she said quickly, mentally cursing herself for the hope that had risen within her.
"It looks like there's been human activity, yes," Digg confirmed and she blew out one long breath to center herself.
"You're not going to like this, but I want you to stay here." he said evenly as he reached down and pulled the smaller handgun from his ankle. He'd pressed it into her hand before she even realized what he was doing. "It could be a League member who has nothing to do with this or...it could be something else entirely. If I don't come back in an hour or you hear anything you run back to the chopper and use the emergency beacon to contact Lyla."
"Digg…" she began but he cut her off with a look. For a split second she saw the pain and fear he'd been hiding all these weeks after losing Oliver. He couldn't lose her too.
"Okay," she agreed, nodding once as he let out a sigh of relief and tugged her forward to press a kiss to the top of her hooded head.
"Stay safe," she murmured and then he was gone, slipping silently through the rocks as if he'd never been there.
In the end it didn't even take twenty minutes. She heard him coming and she froze, gun held with both hands in front of her but pointed down. She was trembling so bad she didn't trust that it wouldn't go off accidentally.
But the Digg she saw emerge was one she hadn't seen in a long time. His eyes sparkled with joy he couldn't hide, face split in a wide grin that had her stumbling forward before he said a single word.
"Felicity…" it told her everything and with a soft cry she pushed past him, following the footsteps he'd left until they turned right, seemingly straight into the rock face. She turned to look at him in confusion.
"Feel to the right," he directed and she slid her palm flat against the cold stone. Where it looked like it continued she could feel it end, head whipping up in shock as she felt empty space next to and behind it.
As she stepped forward only inches from the wall she could see it, the way the granite had fit so seamlessly together from afar, but up close there was at least two feet between the front and the back, a space wide enough for a person to pass as they wound down into a dark tunnel.
"Here," he passed her a small flashlight and took the gun from her but didn't say another word and she made the exchange immediately.
Heart pounding she followed the path, just enough space for her to walk upright, but knowing that Digg would have to bend over to avoid hitting his head. She also knew that whatever waited for her on the other end wasn't a threat or he would have never have let her go first.
A dull light at the far end of the tunnel began to grow brighter and she paused to take it in.
The tunnel opened up to an expansive cavern that seemed to stretch on for miles underneath the mountains, and as far as she knew it did. An alcove off to the left grew brightly with a flickering fire and she could see what looked like a makeshift camping set up. There was a thin bed roll set to the side, a few supplies including some food and a satellite phone she noted. A tarp hung from the stone ceiling, falling all the way to the ground and somehow she knew that Oliver was behind it.
She blinked and a man appeared. Tall, Asian, with the stance of a trained fighter. He was dressed all in black but she barely spared him a glance. Digg had let her in here. If he didn't think the man was a threat, she didn't either.
"Is he…" she started before her mouth dried up and she couldn't speak, shoving the hood off her head as she waited for his response.
"He may not be the Oliver Queen you know." the man replied ominously but she just shook her head.
"I don't care. He's alive though? Right there? Alive and not dead? Because that is all that matters."
"He's still recovering. He sleeps most of the day and when he's awake he can become violent,"
She started forward but Digg grabbed her by the upper arm and wouldn't let her go.
"Digg!" her voice was high and desperate as she looked at him with wounded, pleading eyes.
"She will be safe." the stranger said.
"How do you know?" Digg asked.
"Because the only word he has said in seven weeks has been her name."
With that she tore herself away and rushed forward, clutching the edge of the tarp to pull it back in one swift motion not knowing how she'd react when she saw what lay behind it.
Everything slowed down, her senses somehow heightened and yet dulled at the same time. It took a moment for her eyes to adjust to the dark space, at first not seeing anything but a human shaped lump laying underneath a dark blanket.
Her feet took her even closer until her shins the metal frame of the cot, her eyes flying to the top to find him.
It was Oliver.
Alive. Breathing. With a beard and color in his face. Not the horrible images that she'd seen in her nightmares.
She let out a shaky, ragged breath as her knees gave way. She didn't blink as she sunk down slowly, fingers too numb and tingly from shock to obey her orders to reach out, to touch him, to make any contact because Oliver was alive and the hell she'd lived through was coming to an end.
With blurry eyes she watched as he swallowed, hands twitching over the blanket that covered him. When his brow furrowed, and his head began to turn in distress she moved without thought to give him comfort.
His fingers wrapped around hers and she gasped, never expecting to feel his touch again.
Her eyes locked onto that point of contact and for the longest time she just stared, studying his fingers, his knuckles, the fine hairs across the back that caught the fire light and the way her chipped dark blue nail polish looked almost black.
It didn't seem like it was his hand holding hers because she had gone for so long believing it could never happen. But it was. He was alive. And ever so slowly she brought her other hand up to wrap around his wrist, thumb pressing over his pulse point and when she felt the thrum of his heart beat rushing steadily through his veins she finally allowed herself to believe it was true.
She didn't look away when she heard Digg enter the space, knees popping slightly as he crouched next to her. But she felt the long exhale he let out and her first tears fell when she saw his large hand lay over Oliver's chest, pausing before patting once. That same hand covered both of theirs and squeezed so hard she felt her bones protest as they were pushed into Oliver's, but she didn't care. It meant they were all alive and together again.
"You did it," he whispered as he rose to his feet. She couldn't reply, she just held onto Oliver tighter and dipped her head once.
She didn't know how long she sat there drinking him in, re-memorizing everything about him. Digg talked by the fire with the man she now knew was called Maseo but beyond that she tuned them out. Right then she didn't want to know how it had happened, just that it had.
At some point she tugged the blanket down, searching for signs of the wounds that he'd suffered but finding nothing but the scars and marks he'd carried with him before he left. His skin was warm and alive beneath her questing fingers and she couldn't seem to keep herself from touching him, needing the physical reminder that she hadn't lost him.
However, Maseo's words from earlier about how he might not be the same kept creeping in and she kept pointedly ignoring them. Oliver had died, she'd known that in her soul. But something had also kept driving her to find him, something she still didn't understand. Whatever had saved him may have done so at a cost.
Her eyes had grown heavier and heavier, and as much as she fought her exhaustion the weeks of poor sleep and the fallout from the adrenaline surge she'd had earlier caught up with her. She didn't notice as her head fell lower and lower until it came to rest against his middle, their hands still joined.
Quiet fingers running gently over her temple and through her hair is what brought her back. She blinked lazily, unwilling to fully wake until her memory caught up, eyes springing open as she remembered.
Immediately she saw him, same familiar blue eyes she never thought she'd see again looking back at her. As her heart pounded in her chest he kept up his slow, steady touch.
All the pain and grief she'd suffered fell away, leaving her raw but healing. And when his fingers tripped over the edge of her glasses to trail down the side of her face she took a shuddering breath and smiled.
His hand ghosted back up, knuckles tracing the curve of her cheek, "Hey,"
"I lost you."
For a second she felt overwhelmed, tears filling her eyes and she had to shut them tight while she lay her hand over his heart to feel it beating. His thumb brushed away the moisture that leaked out, but when she opened her eyes the love shining back at her made the breath catch in her throat.
"You found me," he said, voice stronger.
"You can run to the ends of the earth, Oliver Queen, and I will always find you."
With that she found herself being pulled into his arms and she went willingly, knees still on the hard rocky ground as wrapped himself around her.
It was everything she'd wanted and needed and had been so afraid she'd never have again. She didn't even know she'd started sobbing until she heard his soft words in her ear and the brush of his lips against her forehead.
When she'd calmed some he hitched her higher until she gave up all pretense and brought her legs up to rest alongside his. Her head rested above his heart hands in constant motion as if she had to continually touch him to make sure he wasn't leaving again.
She still wore her parka, but even through the bulky fabric she could feel the weight of his palm, and how his fingers clutched her hip.
For months before it had all gone to hell they'd barely touched, but now that had been erased, legs were entwined, arms overlapped, like two pieces of a puzzle that had found their way home.
"For the longest time, when I first woke up I didn't know who I was, but I knew you." he said quietly, "Your face, your voice...I never forgot you."
"I love you," she said suddenly and they both froze before she carefully pushed herself up so she could look at him. "I love you," she repeated, "I love you. I love you."
Her hand came up to cup his jaw, "One for each time I should have said it back. I'm sorry."
He mirrored her action and drew her closer, their lips meeting in a kiss that was both desperate and slow.
When they parted she tucked her head solidly beneath his chin and finally took a full breath. As long held tension seeped away her body molded to his. He shifted on the narrow cot, neither of them wanting her to leave and neither of them caring that Digg and Maseo sat only a few feet away.
He told her what little he remembered, and what he'd been told. She filled him in on her research and the mystery surrounding the caves, how she'd found the satellite images of what she now knew had to have been Maseo carrying him to the cave. Her throat had grown tight then, knowing he'd technically been dead at the time.
"He said you were different, that you'd changed," she said quietly, pulse quickening as she awaited his reply.
She felt his chin brush the top of her head as he shook his head, "I don't remember a lot. There was pain and...anger. I do remember that. But somehow whenever it got bad I'd see your face and I knew your name, I knew who you were. I knew you were safe even if I wasn't."
Her arms tightened around him, heart full as she pressed a kiss to his neck.
"I love you," he whispered into her hair, and she let out a watery half laugh.
"Trying to one up me?"
"I did say it first," he replied and instead of feeling guilty she just felt loved. She'd tried to deny it for so long, unsure and unable to open herself up to loss again. Except she'd still lost him and it had still destroyed her and it now all seemed so pointless. The waiting and denying had been for nothing and she had no intention of wasting any more time.
"I love you," she murmured into his skin, humming contentedly as he skimmed a hand over her hair before he tugged her hood back up and arranged the thin blanket over both of them.
"Stay with me?" he asked unnecessarily.

Posted on December 7, 2015 at 10:33pm
Just got my precious girl on Saturday and I'm reading so much about Socializatiin yet I'm also told she cant be around other dogs until she is fully vaccinated from Parvo. She's only had two of the four shots and then I was told by breeder to wait two more weeks before exposing her including the first vet visit. (we were privided with the last two shots. How can I possibly socialize my puppy until she is safe?

Sunni is an incredibly sweet and affectionate Calico cat who loves to snuggle up with people as often as possible. She was rescued from a hoarding situation in Surry County. Despite her tough beginnings, though, her demeanor is wonderful - and our vet has examined her and she is in excellent health. She is being spayed on December 13th and will be ready to go home to her very own family after that. If you are ready to welcome a whole lot of love and affection into your life, Sunni would be a wonderful addition to your life!

Mom, 20, had no clue she was pregnant before giving birth despite having ‘NO SYMPTOMS’
A 20-year-old woman was stunned as she gave birth while having no clue she was pregnant.
- Jodi-Marie Ash, 20, gave birth to her daughter without knowing she was pregnant.
- Throughout her mysterious pregnancy, Ash was on contraceptives and had no visible bump to signalize her condition.
- Being shocked by her pregnancy journey, the young mom takes tests every three months to ensure she wouldn’t go through the same experience.
One day, Jodi-Marie Ash, a 20-year-old waitress from Essex, UK, had a severe stomach ache during her eight-hour shift. That was the day her daughter Skyla Grimsey was born, without her mother knowing she was pregnant.
After developing an agonizing stomach ache, Ash was rushed to hospital. There, she was shocked to find out she was in labor, even though she was taking contraceptive pills. What’s more, she didn’t even have a baby bump, so she had absolutely no idea she was about to become a mother.
Today, as Daily Mail reports, Ash’s baby girl Skyla is almost two. In the meantime, her mom is taking pregnancy tests every three months to avoid being caught by surprise once more.
Talking about her unusual pregnancy journey, the young mother said:
“I didn’t have any symptoms – I was on my period the whole time and wasn’t sick or nauseous at all.”
The mom-of-one claims she had a negative pregnancy test 5 months before giving birth.
For Ash, becoming a mother was not in the picture, as she had one negative test only five months before she welcomed her daughter into this world. The young waitress was providing moral support for a friend of hers who had been too scared to do a pregnancy test alone, so she joined in. Ash explained:
“I took a pregnancy test in December 2018 and it came back negative. I only did one because my friend thought she was pregnant and I said I’d do one with her to not make it as scary for her – it wasn’t because I thought I was pregnant. There was no form of a bump as such – after I ate I got more bloated than usual but there wasn’t anything to be majorly concerned about to the point where I thought I could be pregnant.”
On the morning of May 12, 2019, the waitress woke up and went to work, just as she had been doing every single workday.
Although she did have stomach issues, she didn’t think it was anything serious, so she didn’t seek medical assistance.
However, eight hours later, she was in agonizing pain, not being able to sit still. Once she got home, she tried to halt the pain with painkillers and a Tens machine, but nothing worked. By 11:30 p.m., her partner, Skyla’s dad, called an ambulance, and about half an hour later, Ash was in the hospital. She said:
“I thought the pain was appendicitis, stomach ache or I’d eaten something wrong – I was thinking of all these sorts of things but didn’t think for a second that I was in labour. The doctor said to me, ‘Oh, we’re going to do a pregnancy test on you’ and I was like, ‘Right ok’ and it came back positive. After he said I was pregnant I said straight away, ‘Why am I in so much pain though?’ Because being pregnant doesn’t mean you should be in that much pain.”
The young mom continued:
“He said that they had to send me for some more tests and I was on the wheelchair going to the delivery room not knowing I was going there and the porter told me that’s where I was going and I was about to give birth. I think I was shocked and surprised more than anything – it was all a bit surreal. The whole night was a blur and did go really quickly but at the time I just remember thinking that I just had to get the baby out.”
Ash’s daughter Skyla was born on May 13, 2019, at 1:57 a.m., weighing 6lbs 12oz(nearly 3kg).
Luckily, the waitress’s family was there for her throughout every step of her journey. Skyla’s father’s family also supported the young parents and helped them with providing essential supplies for their newborn baby at such short notice.
The 20-year-old mom said:
“Everyone was really supportive so we didn’t have to run around and do much to be honest. I rang my mum and dad and just put it on Facebook for everyone else to see – I didn’t want to have to ring up everyone and be like, ‘this has happened’. My friends were just as shocked as I was – my colleagues said ‘you were pregnant? You would never have known’.”
“What they say about a mother’s instinct is true because I sort of just knew I had to do it. At the time I was like ‘wow’ as anyone would be in their right mind but after all of that died down – I wouldn’t have it any other way.”

When Jimmie "Doc" Richmond, a 73-year-old Salvation Army sergeant and magician, was stabbed and robbed of his Christmas fund donations Thursday night, he told his attacker that she would have to kill him to take the money he said rightfully belonged to hungry people.
Richmond, dressed in his Salvation Army uniform, had just collected about $10 from patrons in the T & C Lounge at 114 W. 95th St. when, outside, a woman he had spoken to earlier called to him.
FOR THE RECORD - This story contains corrected material.
The story as published misspelled the first name of former Chicago police Lt. Jon Burge.
"She said 'Hey, wait a minute. I've got something for you,' " Richmond said Friday, as he recovered from a stab wound in his neck. "I thought she had some money for me. But she came up to me and pulled a big knife.
" 'Give me that red box,' she said, but I'd thrown it on the car seat," Richmond said. "I told her there's a lot of hungry people out there who need the money."
The woman said she would kill Richmond if he didn't give her the red collection box that he has carried around the far South Side in his work for the annual collection drive for the Salvation Army.
"You'll have to kill me to get it," Richmond, a former vaudeville entertainer, said he told the woman. "She said 'Die you so-and-so,' and she stabbed me in the neck."
As the woman reached into the car for the box, the Salvation Army veteran of 40 years said he jumped on her although he was "bleeding like a stuck hog." Another woman pulled him off his attacker and threw him to the ground, he said.
Two sisters in law who were arrested shortly after the holdup were charged with armed robbery after they were identified by Richmond from photos, said Lt. Jon Burge (the first name as published has been corrected in this text) of the Pullman Area. They are Brenda Murray, 21, of 5655 S. Indiana Ave., and Dionne Murray, 19, of 9230 S. Wentworth Ave.

At 7:07 a.m., the last Tahoe reached the end of the assembly line. Outside it was still dark, 15 degrees with 33 inches of snow - nearly a December record - piled up and drifting as a stinging wind swept across the acres of parking lots.
Inside the Janesville Assembly Plant, the lights were blazing, and the crowd was thick. Workers who were about to walk out of the plant into uncertain futures stood alongside pensioned retirees who had walked back in, their chests tight with incredulity and nostalgia. All these GM'ers had followed the Tahoe as it snaked down the line. They were cheering, hugging, weeping.
The final Tahoe was a beauty. It was a black LTZ, fully loaded with heated seats, aluminum wheels, a nine-speaker Bose audio system and a sticker price of $57,745.
Five men, including one in a Santa hat, stood in front of the shiny black SUV holding a wide banner, its white spaces crammed with workers' signatures. "Last Vehicle off the Janesville Assembly Line," the banner said, with the date, Dec. 23, 2008. It was destined for the county historical society.
Television crews from as far away as the Netherlands and Japan had come to film this moment, when the oldest plant of the nation's largest automaker turned out its last.
Janesville lies three-fourths of the way from Chicago to Madison along Interstate 90. The county seat of 63,500 people is the home town of House Speaker Paul Ryan, a Republican - an old United Auto Workers town in a state led by a new generation of conservative, Republican Gov. Scott Walker It is a Democratic town still, though the economic blow that befell Janesville is the kind of reversal of fortune that drove many working-class Americans to support Donald Trump for president.
The assembly plant began turning out Chevrolets on Valentine's Day 1923, and, for 8 1/2 decades, the factory, like a mighty wizard, ordered the city's rhythms. The radio station synchronized its news broadcasts to the shift change. Grocery prices went up along with GM raises. People timed their trips across town to the daily movements of freight trains hauling in parts and hauling away finished cars, trucks and SUVs.
And so, when the plant stopped in the midst of the Great Recession, the people of Janesville - even as they began to reinvent themselves and their town - clung to a faith that GM would reopen the plant so their future could be like their past. Over time, though, people began to confront a question they had not considered before: What choices to make when there were no more good choices left?
- - -
Aug. 24 was coming up soon. The first day of classes. And Mike Vaughn knew he couldn't put it off much longer. He couldn't remember the last time he'd kept a secret from his dad, let alone a whopper like this one. But in this Janesville summer of 2009, every time he imagined telling his father, he couldn't get past the very real possibility that the man who'd always stood behind him might not be able to stand behind him now. So Mike waited a few more days and a few more days, until time was running out.
How do you tell your father that you're going to the other side?
The shadow of the three generations of Vaughn union history kept stopping him. The family lore was his lore. It went back to the lead mines that had been scattered through Wisconsin's southwest corner in places with names like New Diggings and Swindler's Ridge, and the McCabe Mine in which his great-grandfather had been killed. Mike's grandfather, Tom, had come to Janesville to work for a GM job in the "See the USA in Your Chevrolet" 1950s, doubling his wages from $1 an hour to $2. He became a zone committeeman representing 1,000 GM'ers in UAW Local 95.
Mike's father, Dave, was hired into the assembly plant in 1967 as a teenager, and three years later, while Tom was on the union bargaining committee, they went on strike together for 11 weeks. Dave became a Local 95 vice president a couple years after Mike got hired at Lear Corp., making seats for the assembly plant. Dave loved the union so much that now, with the assembly plant closed, he and a buddy stepped out of retirement to reprise their old gigs as its vice president and president.
The Vaughns were one of only two families in town who had three generations on the Local 95 executive committee. Union pride ran as deep in Mike as in the generations before. But the truth was that his father had been retired for five years and his grandfather buried for a year by the time his wife, Barb, lost her job at Lear and his own would end soon.
What does a union man do when there are no workers left to represent? Mike trolled unionjobs.com in three states, but the more he considered the possibility, the less he could imagine leaving Janesville. This discovery he made about himself - startling to his core - had come along gradually, but there it was: There were limits to what he was willing to do to keep standing on the union side.
Nothing in his family's past had prepared him for the choices he was confronting. As he struggled with what to do, he watched Barb in astonishment, her head deep into her schoolwork at Blackhawk Technical College, retraining to go into criminal justice, turning crisis into opportunity.
As it happened, Blackhawk Tech was starting a human resources program, with predictions of jobs at the end. He'd be crazy not to sign up.
But the jobs weren't union jobs. He'd be management. What would his father think?
The moment came during his father's 61st birthday party, as they sat on his parents' screened porch together with their smokes. Mike turned to his father and said, "I've decided what I'm going to do."
He started with the easy stuff. The stuff about going back to school in 20 days, and Blackhawk's new program, and the government's training money. Then he launched into the part that was hard. About how he had come to see that human resources management was a way to educate workers, too. About how he figured that, if he'd been doing it from the union side, how different could it be from the company side?
As he was talking, he kept a close watch on his father's expression. Was that a flicker of sadness? Yes, it was there. But his words didn't say what Mike had feared the most: that Mike was going over to the dark side. No, the old union leader told the young union leader he was proud of him for taking this opportunity to better himself. Then his father wrapped him, the last generation of the union Vaughns, in a hug.
With his father's arms still around him, he heard the words he had imparted to Lear's job-losing workers: If you don't change with the times, you'll be left behind.
- - -
Just get going, Matt Wopat whispered to himself. Go. He was in his Sierra pickup, in his garage, merely a few feet from the open doorway to the laundry room where his wife, Darcy, and the girls were crowded together. He watched them as if in a picture frame. They were crying. They were blowing kisses his way.
He saw his daughters turn away from the doorway. He saw Darcy wave a last goodbye and shut the door, as if she couldn't take it anymore. He was alone, fighting tears himself. He had tried hard to sound reassuring, to convince them that everything would be fine. Now he wondered how persuasive he'd been, because, frankly, he wasn't sure he believed it himself.
A twist of the key in the ignition, and Matt felt the aging truck's familiar idle. His hand drifted to the gear shift, but he couldn't make himself shift into reverse.
A weight pressed on him, the kind of weight that presses hard on a man who is on the cusp of his fifth decade when he discovers that doing everything right is not enough. Not enough to live by Plan A, as his father and his father-in-law had done, working on the assembly plant until the years added up to 30 and they could retire. He came up with a Plan B, learning to climb utility poles, just in case the assembly plant failed to reopen. But Plan B wasn't looking good, either.
By this Sunday afternoon in March 2010, seven months had gone by since Matt began to study electric power distribution - finding himself in the throng of out-of-a-job factory workers who pivoted to Blackhawk. Peculiar and embarrassing as it had seemed at first, he made peace with spreading his schoolbooks on the kitchen table after dinner, along with his three daughters, all of them doing their homework and him sometimes even asking his oldest in 12th grade for help with his math.
His main instructor, Mike Doubleday, had been a journeyman lineman for a power company until he heard that the college needed an instructor to help with the backlog of people wanting to learn to do jobs like his. Mike already had an instinct for predicting which of his students were going to succeed. Matt was going to make a good lineman somewhere, Mike was pretty sure.
What he could not see in Matt was that, as he was puzzling out algebra formulas and electrical theory with some of the guys in class, he also was worrying. Matt is a deliberate man, and deliberate men do not let their mortgage payments slip behind, but there it was. He and Darcy had lived near the edge of what General Motors' $28 an hour could buy, as so many GM'ers did, paying $270 a month on their camper, trading in cars for newer models. So even though, as a GM'er, Matt was lucky to get his union Supplemental Unemployment Benefits on top of his unemployment checks, and the federal government was covering his tuition and textbooks and gas mileage to campus and even the right clothes for climbing utility poles, it didn't add up to anywhere near $28 an hour. The reality was that he and Darcy didn't have much cushion, and his SUB pay was about to be cut in half, and his GM health benefits were going to run out.
He just needed to hang on until May, until he got his technical diploma and could grab onto the kind of job that Mike used to have - if one existed.
By this winter, hundreds of Janesville GM'ers had morphed into GM'ers working far from Janesville. Their UAW contract gave them these transfer rights. Some were in Kansas City, Kansas. Some were in Arlington, Texas, which was still turning out the Tahoe SUVs that Janesville had made. And a few were in Fort Wayne, Indiana, to assemble Chevy Silverado trucks, which were so popular that the plant was adding a third shift and sending job offers to more Janesville GM'ers, including Matt.
GM gypsies, they were called, because even the ones in Arlington, nearly 1,000 miles away, had, for the most part, left their families behind and were commuting home as best they could. Matt had been firm that he was not going to become any gypsy. No way.
But he and Darcy didn't want to move, either. They'd had long, soulful, repeated conversations on this subject. They were in agreement. Close as they were to both their families, how could they leave?
But that was before the mortgage payments started slipping behind, and his benefits were about to get cut, and the GM jobs opening up were in Fort Wayne, which, while 4 1/2 hours away, was closer than Kansas City or Arlington. That was why, one day, Matt and a bunch of the GM'ers learning to climb utility poles with him decided that it was time to stay after class and ask their instructor, Mike, a tough, pointed question: If they stayed in school to graduate, would linemen's jobs be waiting for them or not?
Mike started by laying out the benefits of electric power distribution. But the more he talked, the more he felt he needed to be a straight shooter with these guys who already had lost so much. The truth was, he had to admit, not many of his Blackhawk graduates got jobs last year.
"If I were you guys and had an opportunity to get GM wages," the instructor said, "I would run and not look back." That was when Matt understood that the option he'd rejected was the only choice he had left. He couldn't even call it a choice, because he felt that it had all come down to either Fort Wayne or possible bankruptcy, and responsible men don't file for bankruptcy.
As his mind churned on this jam he was in, he could find no one to blame. Not the instructor who was just leveling with him. Or the government, dutifully paying for classes for a job he might never get. Not GM, shelling out for his benefits even as the company had gone bankrupt itself. Not even himself, because every time he'd rethought the exceedingly hard question of whether he had missed a clue, whether he had overlooked some narrow passageway that would have led him out of the maze, he had come to the conclusion that he had not.
Nine weeks of classes to go before he was to get his diploma, Matt left school.
So now, in less than 24 hours, he would be working at a GM plant he'd never seen in a city he'd never visited. He couldn't think of anything he wanted to do less, or anything he needed to do more.
It won't be so bad, he had told his family. He would be back every weekend.
Now, sitting in the Sierra with his hand on the gear shift, it was time to pull out of the garage and head south into Illinois, past the Belvidere Chrysler plant - not hiring, of course - and then east into Indiana, where he would crash on the couch of another Janesville GM'er because Matt didn't have a clue where he was going to live.
Plan A, Plan B or whatever plan it took, he would at least be the man he'd always understood himself to be: Who would rather put himself out than his family. Who always kept his word when he said he'd do a job. Who understood that, to protect his family, he had to leave them.
- - -
Kayzia Whiteaker tiptoed over to the couch, where her mom, Tammy, was still up, as she often was now on weekend nights, working her scissors through a stack of coupons.
"Want to go grocery shopping?" Kayzia asked, gently as she could, trying to make it sound as if it was no big deal, as if it was the most ordinary thing in the world for a 16-year-old kid to offer to take her mom to Woodman's and pay.
She realized, as she asked, that her childhood was slipping away. This night near the end of 2011 was what growing up too fast looks like, and it had been creeping up on her for a while.
A child wouldn't notice that, the longer her dad, Jerad, worked as a jail guard, his third not-good-enough job since GM, the more depressed he seemed. Or that her mom, plowing through her coupons while her dad was asleep, had become the chief worrier.
After 10 months at her first after-school job, at Culver's, home of the ButterBurger, she had more in her checking account than her parents had in theirs. It wasn't so rare anymore for one of her parents to ask her or her twin, Alyssa, very politely, whether they could lend a few dollars for groceries or gas. That her dad tried sarcasm - "We supported you the first half of your lives, you can support us the second half" - to hide that asking killed him, every time.
Kayzia and her parents might joke, but they didn't talk about the stark facts. She didn't talk about money with her friends. She didn't talk about it even with her grandmother, who she noticed had been quietly sending her parents a little extra each month for the mortgage. There was someone, however, with whom Kayzia talked about everything: Alyssa. In eighth grade, they had huddled on their beds in their basement bedroom, trying to figure out what it meant that their dad was home for breakfast.
They had tried to approach this problem in an optimistic and practical way. Kayzia would add a second job - working as a receptionist for a chiropractor in town. Still, once in a while, she and Alyssa have let their minds drift further outward. What if a day came when their parents can't pay the mortgage? How will they afford college? Can Alyssa achieve her dream of becoming an engineer? Kayzia's of becoming a general practitioner?
But that was for the future. The immediate problem was that the fridge was nearly empty again, and her parents were low on cash. And that specific problem, not the future, pulled Kayzia to decide that tonight was the time to tiptoe over to the couch and ask her mom the grocery question.
Her mom looked up from her scissors and her coupon stack. From her expression, Kayzia could tell she'd used the right tone. Whew! It was a delicate matter, after all, this scheme to pay for the family groceries.
She found Alyssa in the paneled family room, watching TV with Justin, her boyfriend. "Do you want to come with?" Kayzia asked, putting it that way because she didn't want her sister to feel pressure to help. But Alyssa was in, of course. Justin, too.
Before they left, Kayzia and her mom looked through the coupons to see which ones would be useful. Her mom made a grocery list. Then they were in the car, Tammy at the wheel and Kayzia in the front seat, with Alyssa and Justin in back, as if this thing they were doing wasn't completely topsy-turvy. First stop was the Blackhawk Community Credit Union ATM, where Kayzia and Alyssa jumped out and got $100 each. Then they shot off to the all-night Woodman's on the north side of town. By the time they arrived, it was almost midnight, the wide aisles nearly empty of shoppers.
Kayzia had worked out the details. Justin took charge of the coupons, Alyssa worked the calculator, and she pushed the cart and helped her mother load. They bought chicken because they'd been having too much pasta. Lunch meat, because Kayzia was sick of PB&J. Cocoa Puffs and Cap'n Crunch for a change, instead of generic cereal. And then they came to an aisle so tempting but unnecessary that Kayzia let herself walk down it only because it was, after all, her own money: the aisle with frosted chocolate chip cookie dough Pop-Tarts.
The crucial part of the whole venture, the key to its success, was the checkout. They needed to do it just right. No clue that her mom wasn't buying the groceries the way mothers usually do. So, in line, the girls slipped Tammy their crisp $20 bills.
On the ride home, groceries in the trunk, Kayzia relaxed. Sure she was tired, but the thought of Cocoa Puffs in the morning made her as happy as the little girl she used to be. Funny she should think that, she told herself, because, at this moment, she was feeling more grown up than ever in her life. Taking responsibility. With her bringing home $150 to $200 from Culver's every two weeks, and trying to save $100 of it. Sometimes she resented the sacrifices and the responsibilities. But she reminded herself that she and Alyssa had been taught to help people since they were little. They donated to the National Honor Society blood drive and raised money for Parker High's Relay for Life. So why, really, when her parents need the help, should it be any different at home?
As they got to the house, Kayzia felt relief that her dad was asleep. All this time after his General Motors job went away, with him bumping in and out of other work that doesn't pay enough, she knew that he still wasn't over the idea that he was supposed to provide for his family. He was so hard on himself, she thought, not giving himself credit for looking online all the time for better jobs. In the morning, she knew, he would not be happy to find the refrigerator filled by this midnight shopping adventure fueled by his daughters' checking accounts.

So, apparently, he texted her the next day, apologized, and asked if he could see her. This began what I assume was a torrid love affair that she hid completely from me and all her friends because she was embarrassed and thought we’d judge her for dating a guy who acted so creepy. I was hurt and angry, not so much because she hid it, but because she thought I was so judgmental and controlling that she couldn’t even explain it to me, her best friend.
I had sworn off hearing guys – they were initially ok, initially made a bit of an effort, learning some signs etc. But they eventually lost interest citing communication difficulties, leaving me feel a bit disappointed. So I’d had enough. I met him through a friend from school. I had arranged to go for a walk in the Lake District with her and her boyfriend, both of whom are fluent in BSL. I wasn’t third wheeling – I knew a few others would be there, including this guy who kept trying to talk to me.
Accidently on purpose, I listened in on a call to catch someone in a lie. When enough was said to hang herself, I broke in and confronted the woman with the truth. She hemmed and hawed, stuttered and stammered, but finally had to admit her guilt. I hung up the receiver with the satisfaction of vindication, as truth prevailed. I tried to set aside Friday afternoons to relax and calm down for the pleasure of chauffeuring (totally free of charge) one of my many mothers by choice, who could no longer drive. Our routine that lasted for a number of years caused us to have the best attendance record at religious services, even better than the leader.
I spent over 2 hours on a Thursday counseling a couple with major debt problems. I asked them to go home, think over what we discussed and call me if they wanted to proceed with preparing their bankruptcy petition. They demanded to have the wife return Friday afternoon because they had “important business” Saturday and Sunday that I offered routinely so they did not need to miss work. After more than 2 hours, all free of charge on Friday, re-explaining all that we had discussed the day before, I finally understood what was going on.
I asked her if she trusted a single word I had spoken. She answered NO not really. Then I asked why would she hire me. She answered because of the work we had already done (still at the point totally free of charge). I said the few hours of work so far was nothing compared to the 5 or 6 years of work that would be required to complete her case and obtain her discharge. That is when I returned her papers to her folder and handed it to her, refusing to handle her case. She asked who could she complain about my refusal.
Also the lengths she went to to hide it—he was in her phone as John, he was in her DIARY (which we never read) as John! I felt like crying and said why would you keep this from me? She said “I knew you’d disapprove.” I realized that I really HAD been acting like her parent. I had a panic attack when I didn’t know where she was. I tracked her down to a party and made her leave. I shamed her for being drunk and screamed at the guy she liked.

Speculations about when the schools will be reopened in England have been rife, with reports suggesting it maybe sooner. School leaders have asked for an end to such speculations by saying it was only adding to fears and anxiety parents have during this crisis.
A recent report by Sunday Times, which quoted senior ministers suggesting that a decision had already been reached and three dates had been set aside, also added to the conversation on when the schools would be reopened. The ministers had claimed the three dates agreed upon were May 11th after the lockdown is lifted, the second reopening date had been put on June 1st, after the midterm holiday and in a worst-case scenario, the school would reopen on September.
School leaders condemn the unfounded spread of school reopening rumors
However, the ministers’ suggestions were unfounded and had no consultations with the Education Department. The ministers were forced to walk back their statements, which said there was a possibility the schools would be reopened next month. The suggestions angered school leaders who said the statements had no backing of science and they were unaware of such a possibility.
Education Minister, Gavin Williamson, on Sunday, refuted the claims that his ministry was working on reopening the schools next month. He said the opening dates were not yet clear and they would wait on health experts to give recommendations before reopening the schools. He continued by saying there was nothing he would love than seeing students returning to schools and continuing with their studies. However, safety and health concerns must be followed to ensure that when they finally return.
Gavin suggested that to reopen the schools, there needed to be at least five tests to ascertain that it was 100 percent safe. Therefore, the calls for reopening schools in the summer or making up time for time lost due to lockdowns were unrealistic and the suggestions were not true.
School leaders have urged leaders to stop speculating on the date when the schools will be reopened and leave the matter to the Education Department. Paul Whiteman, general secretary of the National Association of Head Teachers, said suggestions by senior government officials were only causing fears and speculations were not healthy at this time.
School leaders also wanted an end to private sessions and briefings by ministers where they were creating confusion to stop. They said it was not healthy for anyone to spread unfounded information, especially in these times where everyone is on high alert due to coronavirus.

Ben Esra telefonda seni boşaltmamı ister misin?
Telefon Numaram: 00237 8000 92 32
Merhaba zevzek.org porno hikaye severler için pek çok erotik hikayeyi sizlerin beğenisine sunuyor.Neredeyse google da bulabileceğiniz tüm hikayeleri bir araya toplayıp okkalı bir arşiv yaptık.
This is a true story, I was 18 at the time it happened.
I was in my final year of high school and a few short months away from graduating. I was of a slighter, skinny build, (5’9 and 140 lbs) but got some attention from the girls, so I take the assumption that I am good looking. Anyways I had good grades and was a good student.
I was in English class one morning, and our teacher Mr. W asked us to hand in the assignments that were due that day. With my thoughts on the fast approaching summer, and moving on to college I had completely forgotten about the assignment we had all week to complete. Mr. W walked around and collected the papers, when he got to my desk I had to tell him that I wasn’t complete, that I had forgotten. With a disappointed look he told me to stick around after class to discuss it. I nodded an ok as he continued along to collect the papers.
At the end of class I came up to his desk.
‘You wanted to see me Mr. W’ I said sheepishly.
‘Yes. Jay you never miss deadlines, what happened.’ He responded.
A million excuses ran through my mind, but I thought better of it and decided to just tell the honest truth.
‘Honestly Mr. W I just forgot.’
‘Well seen as you don’t make a habit of forgetting, or being late, I could forgive the late this one time. However I do request that in return for this favour, you would come to my place after school and do some chores around the house.’ He said looking up at me from his desk.
‘Yeah ok, that sounds fair.’ I replied.
‘Perfect’ He said as he took out a piece of paper from his drawer. ‘This is my address meet me there right after school, it is near by’. He scribbled his address on to the paper and handed it to me.
I looked at it and read the address. It was in fact close by.
‘Alright I will be over after classes are finished. See you later.’
I walked out of the classroom and onto my next class. I was happy that my grades were not going to be affected, and that I could make up the late with a couple simple chores. I had no idea what his plans were, and was definitely not thinking it would be anything sexual. Up to that point I had not really had any gay thoughts, and Mr. W wasn’t exactly the most handsome man. I wouldn’t say he was bad looking, but he was a bit bigger of a guy. Probably around 230 lbs and about 5’10 tall and 54 years old.
Once the day was finished I took the paper out of my pocket, checked the address, and headed to his place. When I got to his house, he was outside in the front yard.
‘Good timing.’ He said. ‘I just got here.’
‘Oh perfect!’ I sort of laughed back.
‘Ok well, to begin with lets have you rake up the leaves, come and see me when you’re finished with that.’ He instructed ‘The rake and bags are just around beside the house.’
‘Alright will do.’ I replied.
As I headed around the side of the house, he went inside. There wasn’t many leaves to rake as it was early spring and it was just the left over from the fall before that had been buried beneath the snow. It probably only took me about 10 minutes to complete the task. Once I was done I headed up casino siteleri to the door and knocked.
Mr. W answered the door. He was in a robe. I thought it was a bit strange, but hey who am I to decide what you wear in your own house. I decided not to say anything about the robe.
‘Alright all done with the leaves, there is some stuff to do in the basement now.’ He said as he let me in the house and began showing me the way to the basement.
Once down in the basement I rounded the corner after the stairs and came to a living room. There was a porn movie playing on the tv. I was startled and was probably sitting there like a deer in headlights. The tv had a younger guy giving head to an older man on the screen.
‘Oh sorry! I must have left that on this morning.’
I heard him say somewhere from behind me. It didn’t really register as I was in an almost trance like state staring at the tv. I was broken from the trance when he came up from behind me and put his hands on my shoulders.
‘Do you like what you see?’ He asked.
I was so shocked and pretty nervous I didn’t answer him. After a few moments I felt him lean in and kiss and lick my ear a little bit.
‘Would you like to stay for a bit?’ he whispered into my ear.
‘Yes’ I choked out. Unsure of why I agreed to stay, I wasn’t into guys, or atleast didn’t think I was, but my dick which was tenting my basketball shorts was telling me different.
Once I had said yes, his hands slid down from my shoulders and he began feeling me up. Running his hands over my body, slowing when he got to my dick, ass, and nipples. He was kissing and licking my neck and ears a lot as he felt me up. Whispering dirty talk to me.
‘Daddy was hoping you’d stay with him.’
‘I had a feeling you would be a good horny boy for daddy.’
‘Daddy is so hard for you, I’m going to teach you so many things baby.’
‘Are you ready to learn all the new things?’
His dirty talk was turning me on so much. I didn’t know why I was getting so excited being talked to and felt up but this much older man, my teacher none the less, but I didn’t care I was starting to really like it. I was still a bit surprised when I heard myself say.
‘Yes daddy, I want to you to show me.’
His kissing and licking became more aggressive and he started to remove my clothes and his robe. His hands still roaming all over me as he stripped us, pinching and playing with my nipples. Squeezing and kneading my bum. Stroking and cupping my dick and balls. I could feel his hard cock against my back side, feel the head was slippery with precum as it slid along my ass and lower back.
Once we were both fully naked and hard, he walked over to the couch leading me by the hand. He sat down and guided me to my knees between his legs. It was the first time I really saw his cock, it was much bigger than mine. It was 7.5 cut with a big head and big heavy balls. He ran his hands through my hair as I moved my hand up to his cock and began to stroke him slowly.
‘Mmmm good boy, your hand feels nice but daddy needs more than your hand.’ He said as he gently guided my head canlı casino to his cock.
I opened my mouth and began to give head to him. In my mind I couldn’t believe I was doing this. Even more I couldn’t believe how much I was loving the slutty feeling of sucking this old man’s cock. I was trying to do the best I could from what id learned from years of jerking off to porn movies in my room. Licking up and down the shaft, swirling my tongue around his big mushroom head. Fondling his balls, and stroking his shaft in rhythm with my mouth. I probably wouldn’t have felt as comfortable doing all this for the first time if he wasn’t constantly dirty talking and giving me instructions.
‘Oooo yeah you’re a good boy.’
‘You suck daddys cock so well, its going to love you forever.’
‘Your hot little mouth was meant for this cock.’
The dirty talk and his hands running through my hair, and gently directing the direction and pace at which I was to pleasure him, was making me so horny. I continued to slurp and suck hungrily on his cock for about 10 minutes when he told me he was going to cum.
‘Daddys going to cum soon, be a good boy and take it in your mouth, and swallow it.’ He said encouragingly. ‘Do you want daddys big load?’
‘Yes please cum for me daddy’ I said in between slurps on his cock. Surprising myself that I was being such a slut for him, but I really did want this man to cum in my mouth.
Per his instruction I stroked quickly and held my mouth on his head. He groaned loudly as he began to flood my mouth with cum. Shot after shot I felt it flow into my mouth, he wasn’t kidding about a big load I thought to myself. I swallowed what I could the rest spilled from my mouth and onto my chin. When he had finished coming he remarked at how amazing that was.
‘Wow boy, you can really suck cock.’ he exclaimed. ‘We are going to have a lot of fun together. Now lets let you have your turn for some pleasure.’
He helped me up off my knees, and laid me on the edge of the couch. I had a flood of precum on the end of my dick and he quickly began licking and sucking at it. OH MY GOD wow I thought as he began to suck my dick. This was better than any of the blowjobs I had gotten from my prior girlfriend. I wasn’t going to last long and he seemed to know this because after a few moments he stopped sucking. He lifted my legs a bit and buried his tongue into my asshole.
I gasped it felt so amazing having his tongue playing with my boy pussy. He rubbed my balls and dick a lot as he sucked and licked at my hole. Bringing his mouth back to my dick, I felt his finger begin to work its way into my ass. I gasped again at this feeling. He continued going back and forth from sucking me, to eating me, to fingering me, switching every time I got close to cumming.
‘I want my boy to stay very horny for me, so you cant cum just yet. Daddy will make you come later’ He would say or some version of it several times as he continued to drive me crazy with his tongue and fingers.
After what felt like an eternity he began to slow down and eventually stopped.
‘Come suck daddy again get me hard again for kaçak casino you boy.’ he said to me.
I had my mouth on his cock instantly. The dirty talk quickly resumed, and my already astronomically high horniness was elevated even more.
‘You’ve been such a good boy for daddy today’ he said running his hands over my head, and then to my ass, squeezing the cheeks and playing with my hole. ‘But now I think daddy needs you to be his girl.’
By this point I knew that this meant he wanted to fuck me. I was very worried about his size, I wasn’t sure if I was going to be able to take him, having had nothing but his fingers in me before. But once again he had me so horny I was pretty much puddy in his hands.
‘Do you want to be daddys girl?” He asked.
‘Yes daddy, I want to be your girl’ I said looking up at him with his cock just out of my mouth.
I went back to slobbering on his cock, while he played with my ass some more. Soon I felt him reach over and grab a bottle, followed by a cool slick feeling on my asshole. As I gave him head he was lubing me. I felt a pang of fear as I knew it was going to happen soon, but it quickly subsided into excitement that it was going to happen soon.
He had me get off my knees and straddle him, facing him on the couch.
‘Theres still some cum on your chin from before!’ He said as I straddled his lap. ‘It makes you look so cute baby.’
He gently grabbed my hips with his hands and guided me into position above his hard throbbing cock. I Felt it press against my hole. As he began to push into me he kissed me on the lips. I was surprised by the kiss, and as his tongue rolled around on mine the head of his cock popped into me.
It hurt but the surprise of the kiss and the aggressiveness of his tongue distracted me from that. Slowly and patiently always giving me time to adjust to him he continued to push into me. Eventually I felt his balls and thighs touch my ass, he was all the way in.
‘Now your daddys girl.’ he smiled at me, and kissed me deep again.
Slowly and softly he guided me up and down on his cock to begin with. The pain was going and I was in heaven. Every time I came down a wave of pleasure shot through my body. Just as we were beginning to pick up pace I couldn’t hold out any more and I shot cum all over both of us. He grinned and continued to fuck me as he scooped up some of the cum and had me lick it off his fingers. I loved being a slut for this man, my teacher, it was crazy.
After about 10 minutes I was able to ride him pretty hard and with a good pace. In between kisses, moans and groans, he continued his dirty talk.
‘mmm baby you’re so tight’
‘How does daddys cock feel deep in your pussy’
‘Daddys going to cum in his girls asshole’
‘Cum in my ass daddy please cum inside of my asshole daddy’ I begged him as the pace of the fucking reached full speed.
He let out a big load groan as I felt the familiar flood of his cum spill into my ass this time instead of my mouth.
After a few moments of catching our breath I got off of him, his cock sliding out of me, cum dribbling down my leg. He suggested I lay on the couch with him and recollect myself.
After a short nap, I sucked, and fucked him once more before I had to go home. We played a lot over the next three years but those are stories for another time.
Ben Esra telefonda seni boşaltmamı ister misin?
Telefon Numaram: 00237 8000 92 32

By a curious coincidence, ‘Trees’—like ‘Till the boys come home’—has verses by an American journalist and poet who lost his life in World War I. It was supposedly an old oak tree in his native New Brunswick, New Jersey, that inspired Joyce Kilmer’s lovely poem, which was published in 1913 and at once became popular. However, Kilmer died as an army sergeant in Seringes, France, in July 1918. The musical setting by composer and educator Oscar Rasbach appeared four years later, and appropriately also enjoyed much popularity in France.
from notes by Andrew Lamb © 2002

Our experience with Florida Home Funding was an exceptional one. We worked with Shahram and Cindy through the process. They were in constant communication with us and took the time to answer our questions with explanations that were easy to understand, making the process so much enjoyable. They were supportive and taught us about the mortgage process. We acquired a wealth of financial information. If you want it done, go to Florida Home Funding.

I made it through the phone thing only crying a few times. I was quite frustrated to learn that my mother loaning me money counts as income and so I won't be getting SSI. She said it wouldn't come through for a while (or it is a supplement to SSDI?) or something so I guess that's ok. This is just a tough process. I was just hoping for the extra money. She had me add diagnoses that are less relevant saying everything should be there. She had me fill in a few blanks from the application that I didn't realize were there. And she did something that Dr. Brain said was a good thing--she put the start of disability date as the first day I couldn't work, back in August. That means I'll be eligible for Medicare in 08/2013. The sooner the better. I'm trying to find a policy that is more affordable than COBRA and it's not going well.
Anyway, the disability stuff is way out of my hands now. And there it will remain for a long time.

I know I shouldn't smoke and when my family comes to know that I'm smoking again, they'll get very upset with me. They are concerned about me after what happened last year, but I have not become a smoker again," Saif says vehemently.
[an error occurred while processing this directive] In a party last week at Bling, Kareena went looking for Saif and lost her temper when she found him outside the venue, smoking. Bebo wants him to kick the butt. Meanwhile the actor is all set to kick butt in his next release Race, for which he is in Goa.
He says, "Race isn't an action film as most people think. It has a lot of thrilling sequences like car chases, jumping off the 26th floor of a building. I took on Race because it's a smart, sexy slick thriller!"

Wednesday, April 09, 2003
What a fun and productive day we had. This morning Grace and Julie came over for a play date. Grace is a year younger than GG and six months older then Monkey. All three of them had a lot of fun playing, they even ate the pizza we had for lunch. It seems when GG has a friend over during mealtime she doesn't eat as well but today she did great. GG got a letter in the mail from her friend Ben inviting her to his 2nd birthday party. She was so happy she carried the card around yelling, "the train! the train!" The card had Thomas the Train Engine on the front. Then the kids took naps and I did some scrapbooking. It has been forever since I have done a page. I got one done in an hour. I need to get my creative juices flowing and the pages will go faster. But I still had fun and got to relax at the same time! I had to stop because J had to go to a meeting for his new job at the Park District. So we will get discounted swim lessons this summer. Very cool. Then we grilled out for dinner. I like grilling because there is less dishes to clean. Before we ate dinner I was nursing Monkey and trying to get him to fall asleep. I asked J to lay out a blanket on the floor, which GG helped J do. After they were done she excitedly said, "I made it just for you, Mommy!" She was so happy that she helped make Monkey a bed for his nap. After dinner J and GG made homemade banana bread. It smells so good I can't wait to eat it. It just came out of the oven so we have to wait for it to cool for a while. Oh yea I almost forgot GG went to sleep with no problems at 9:45pm. It was great but Monkey decided that he wanted to play from 11pm to 12am. So I still didn't get to sleep before midnight. I hope tonight goes better and they both go to bed at 10! At least that is what I am shooting for :) One last thing. HAPPY BIRTHDAY GRANDPA TRAIN!!!!!!!

Sir Paul Says The Kids Are Alright
SIR PAUL McCARTNEY admits his four children took time to get used to new wife HEATHER MILLS - but says they are all close now.
The BEATLES legend's adult offspring HEATHER, MARY, STELLA and JAMES were reported to be unsure about their widowed father's new young wife, but Sir Paul is adamant this is not the case.
He says, "It was tough at first but it's got a lot easier. After a year of intense grieving I thought I'm not going to do this forever. I told the kids that I thought it was on the cards that I'd find another woman. They said that was fine. But when I met one it was different. They were shocked and had to take time to come around.
"But it's not as bad as it seems. Basically, the kids get on well with Heather and some nice things are happening recently, such as Heather wearing one of Stella's frocks at a charity do. It's all coming together."

Two tourists were robbed of their watches and cash after leaving a nightclub in the West Hollywood area early Friday morning.
Deputies responded to reports of armed street robbery around 2:45 a.m. in the area of 961 N. La Cienega Blvd., near Beverly Grove.
Two victims were approached by two robbers wearing hoodies, including one who had a gun, according to the Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department.
The robbers got away with two watches, a bag and an unknown amount of cash, the Sheriff’s Department said.
William Saunders, who identified himself as one of the victims in the robbery, said that he and his friend had just left a nightclub and were hailing an Uber ride when they were approached by the robbers.
“Guys with their hoods pulled tight, could hardly see their faces, jumped out at us, grabbed us,” Saunders said. “One of them had a small handgun on him, pointed it to my head, told me to give him my watch, my bag and my phone.”
Saunders said he threw his watch to the floor, pushed the robber and ran into a restaurant, where he learned that there was video of the assailants wrestling with his friend, ripping his bag off him and taking his watch.
Cellphone video acquired by KTLA shows someone in a hoodie pulling a man’s bag from him and running off with another hooded man.
“We’re visiting from England,” Saunders said. “Only one night in L.A. and it has ended like this.”
“I’ve never even seen a gun before, let alone have one at my head,” he added. “I honestly thought I was going to lose my life at one point.”

A PAINED woman with kidney stones has spoken of her traumatic experience at Basildon Hospital as they didn’t have the right equipment to help her.
Ria Keeley, 27, from Alcotes, Pitsea went to Basildon Hospital on December 6 in unbearable pain but couldn’t have the stones removed as they were in a dangerous place at the top of her kidneys and urethra.
The hospital said she would need extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsythe, which means the stones would be laser blasted by a machine, so they could safely operate but would need to send her to Darenth Valley Hospital in Dartford.
However, five days later she was still in Basildon and when she was finally seen a stent procedure had to be performed instead, which means the stones are now in a more central position for the operation Ria will undergo in two weeks.
Ria said the hospital had let her down. She said: “It is incredible to think that I was lying in my hospital bed from Thursday to Wednesday when I had been told I would be seen to. I was in such terrible pain throughout the days but I just kept being dosed up on morphine. I needed to be treated or at least be told what was going on.”
When a doctor finally saw Ria on Wednesday he said he was amazed to still see her at the hospital, and couldn’t believe she hadn’t gone to Darenth Valley over the weekend.
Ria, who has been signed off work for a week, said the poor communication was the first of a number of mistakes from the hospital. Hospital nurses also tried to administer Ria codeine, even though it said on her wrist band that she was allergic.
Ria said: “It has been a real struggle for me. I am lucky my dad has been there for me throughout the experience. It has been really difficult but I just hope it is over soon.”
Then also sent her home with the wrong prescription, for a different hospital patient, and she said she was lucky she knew her medical terms or she may have taken the medication.
A spokesperson for Basildon Hospital said: "Miss Keeley did raise concerns regarding her medication during her stay with us, which we have dealt with and apologised for. Unfortunately on this occasion we were unable to transfer her care due to bed availability."

I know it wasn't your point. But that was my response.
I'm sure if Butler was given the choice between two FF's or to play in front of packed house, they'd pick the FF. So would IU. So would Duke. So would every program in the nation.
It doesn't say anything about Butler. It say's everything about their fans. The two aren't mutually exclusive.

I (Mom) am making this post today. Yesterday we attended an IEP (Individualized Education Plan) meeting with school personnel to get things settled concerning Ammon's return to school on Monday. A nurse has been hired to ride the bus to and from school and stay with Ammon all day long. The nurse, Richard Anderson, has worked with Ammon several times at our house so he knows what's going on. He went to the meeting with us. The educational issues were not discussed nor changed. The purpose of the meeting was to go over health issues. There were a lot of people at the meeting and we could sense some worry. The aides are very relieved that Richard will be there with Ammon and will do the suctioning when needed and will also do the cathing and feeding. The aides will work with him on his school work.
I wanted to make this post because I am so grateful for all the wonderful people that love and care for Ammon. We have been very blessed to have a fantastic team to work with concerning Ammon's educational needs. Many people that have special needs children aren't so lucky and I'm very aware of that. Ammon has had many aides through the years but one has stuck with him since 1st grade and that is Keri Minson. He loves her almost as much as he loves me and he has good reason to do so. Her entire family has embraced Ammon as "one of their own" and it has been a definite blessing to him. Thank you, Keri. We love you!
Annette Gebert has been with Ammon as another aide for the past year and a half. She is a gentle soul and has also been so good for Ammon. Thank you to Annette as well!
I don't know what we would have done without aides that have had the ability to love Ammon so much and have had the patience they have needed to help him learn and accomplish what he has so far.
Sharee Swenson is the Resource Teacher - the special ed teacher specifically. She has been fantastic as she has helped us work through the emotional issues and has helped us realize Ammon's potential. She is such a fun lady and so organized it's amazing. I wish she could move on to 7th grade and stay with Ammon.
Other key people attended the meeting, including Mrs. Gordon who has worked with Ammon and speech for several years. She is one of the most encouraging souls I've ever met - she continually encourages Ammon to strive and do better and sends notes home to him every week. Leca Hicken was there - she is the DSPD caseworker and we love her! She helps us come up with plans to serve Ammon at home and was instrumental in helping us get the lap top computer for Ammon's use. She visits Ammon at school or home. Jennifer Stoker is the school nurse and although she doesn't get to see Ammon very often because she has to go to several schools, we know she will always be there to answer questions. Mr. S. is the principal and we appreciate his insight. He has a son that has disabilities and he knows all the legal workings of issues we face. He is also practical but postivive. He has been a great principal.
Mrs. Turner is Ammon's teacher this year and we had never met her until yesterday. Ammon has only attended one full day of school and 5 half days of school the entire year. He knows Mrs. Turner but not well. I'm sure they will establish a good relationship in the remaining months of school.
We know that we are taking a risk by sending Ammon to school during cold weather. However, we also know that Ammon needs to have a life and shouldn't be isolated from social experiences. We will try this and see how it works. As the meeting drew to a close yesterday, Ammon said, "Oh, I'm so excited to be back to school on Monday!"
So here goes ---- we're crossing our fingers that he stays well and can finish out this school year with increased energy and excitement to be out of the house and around friends.

- 11:12 AM, Jul 22
From a bartender with a big dream to America's ideal figure as an idol, David Cook really shows how thin the line of fate can be. The singer who was born in December 20, 1982 in Houston, Texas was raised in Blue Springs, Missouri, a city that one day he would bring pride into. A rocker in his nature, Cook received his first guitar when he was mere two years old. He lived with mom Beth Foraker and two brothers, Adam and Andrew, after his parents filed for divorce during his childhood. His father Stan then relocated to Indianapolis, Indiana, but life went on for little David for he soon found out a hidden talent in his musical sense. When he was a second grader, his music teacher urged him to join a Christmas production for the school whereby he was given a solo in a choir. This would later on take impacts on David when he entered Blue Springs Middle and High School where opportunity of developing his singing skills just got bigger.
Beginning 1996, David was often involved in a number of musical productions such as Singin' in the Rain, West Side Story and The Music Man as well as an independent music project that he called Axium. Together with his school pal, Bobby Kerr who took the role of a drummer, David formed a band that eventually received moderate success locally. Axium received recognition in a number of competitions and were even booked at several gigs. But things changed years later when David received a scholarship of theater to University of Central Missouri and the band decided to call it quit. After only two semesters, David also decided that theater was not his main interest at that time for he switched to graphic design and graduated with that major later on. While pursuing his academic skill, David joined Midwest Kings band, providing the additional guitar and backing vocal. They recorded an EP called "Incoherent With Desire to Move On" and David also took the time to record his solo album which was titled "Analog Heart" (2006).
All the while, David worked as a bartender but soon the job was left for an audition of American Idol. Prompted by his brother's failure to get through the competition, David decided to give it a shot himself. He auditioned in Omaha, Nebraska and was surprised to be given a golden

LSU has always enjoyed great success with recruiting in St.
Martin Parish, and that trend certainly continued today when the Tigers added
commitments from Breaux Bridge natives Lamar Louis (Teurlings Catholic HS) and
Travin Dural (Breaux Bridge HS).
"It's definitely one of the best days of my life," Louis said. "It's a dream come true. A few days ago I asked Travin when he was going to commit to LSU, and he said he would do it when I did. I told him we should commit together and that's what we did. We're both from Breaux Bridge and live right by each other."
Louis felt some butterflies earlier this morning, just prior to the big moment.
"I was feeling good when I got up this morning, but right when it was time to commit - I got so happy that I was shaking," he explained. "I'm very happy and satisfied with my decision.”
That feeling was obviously shared by the LSU staff.
"The coaches were really happy and excited when we committed," Louis said. "They wanted to get the ball rolling. Coach (Brick) Haley said the coaches could look and focus on their current team more now that we've committed. I think the coaches don't like the recruiting process to linger when they want a player. They were happy they didn't have to go through a lot to get Travin and myself."
What was the reaction from Louis' family?
"My family always knew I wanted to play for LSU," he said. "I think they were in shock and awe, though, because it's one thing to think about committing to LSU and another to actually do it.
"When I got the offer Saturday, I wanted to go ahead and commit that night. My dad was a little nervous about me making a decision that quickly, so we held up. Then, I decided I wanted to commit on Sunday. After we delayed it to Monday, we eventually decided there was no sense in continuing to back it up further."
Louis, who was named Combine King at the recent Baton Rouge National Underclassmen Combine, is that rare breed of athlete who possesses the ability to play (and thrive) on either side of the ball in the SEC.
Which position will he play at LSU?
"As far as position goes, it's up for grabs," said Louis. "Coach Les said he would let me choose (RB or LB). He did say there's a present need at strongside linebacker, and that I could play early at that spot.
"That fits well with me. At running back, I would have to compete and beat out a couple of people to get playing time, so I'm leaning towards strongside linebacker going in."

"Forgive me for asking, my lady," he said carefully, "but I'm afraid I must ask this. Where have you come from? Who are your family? And, forgive me, but how did you come to be in the forest when we were passing?"
I turned away, brushing my hair behind the back of my ear to give me some time.
"I've lived here all along. In the woods. We all have hidden, because of your father. So forgive me if I don't tell you anything about my family, or the people I live with. I just want to keep them safe. Can you understand that?" I turned back to face him.
His face was transfixed, but he nodded.
"May I ask how you managed to be where we were when we were attacked?"
I smiled. "I was looking at the sun as it set. When you were attacked I was in the tree above you."
"You like watching the sun set?"
"I love to watch the sun set, and rise, I love to watch the moon and listen to the song of the trees. I love the birds, the animals and rivers. But especially the sun and the moon. And then your highness, you came and spoilt my evening."
"Well I hope I can make up for it."
"Perhaps you can."
I smiled and stood, moving away to the window of the hall. Guests watched me as they danced but I ignored their looks. Instead I focussed my attention on the return of the Prince who had disappeared soon after the meal. He saw me instantly, and looked to be struggling between smiling and glaring. I bowed my head and smiled slightly, looking from under my lashes again. It was a trick I had learnt that made even the toughest men admire me. Flirting had always been the easiest way to get what I wanted in the forest, so I knew it would be easier here amongst the finery. The prince had turned away, and was talking to his brother. I turned and went to join the dance. They watched.

Hi…My name is Mandy, and am in love with my doctor.
It all started when I woke up to a burning sensation in my chest one morning. At first I ignored it, thinking it was nothing serious, and that it will disappear. But it persisted to the point that I began to find it hard to breath.
Mum was beside herself with worry. She had told me to see the doctor when it first started, but I ignored her. And so she put her foot down and made me go.
See the thing with me is..i hate hospitals and I hate drugs. One would think growing up in a hospital I would be used to this by now. truth was, I was just tired…tired of pumping myself full with different medications to help me stay alive, all I wanted was just to be normal and lead a normal life. Why must I take meds for every little thing? Why can’t I be like the rest of my siblings? Why, why, why???!!!.
I see I got you all confused when I talked about “growing up in the hospital”…here, let me explain. The thing is I have leukemia. Sucks right? Yea..all my life I have had to take precautions about what I eat, and basically how to live my life. I literally grew up in the hospital because of frequent attacks from my health condition.
Most times I was placed on certain medications that help me stay strong. That is until my body starts to reject it and then a new one is prescribed.
Sooo..back to the story. Mum wasn’t taking any chances and I had to go. On getting there, I noticed it wasn’t the usual doctor on call but a different one. The old one had been transferred. Oh well…guess he will have to do. Several tests where taken, plus xray scans.
It was there we noticed I was having issues with my lungs!! One of my lungs had fallen apart!!!.. I sat wide eyed, staring at the doctor, mouth agape…trying to process what he was saying. I mean I was hearing him but my mind was finding it hard to register anything. WTF!!!! A collapsed long??? This can’t be happening. These are things you see in a movie. Surely it doesn’t happen in real life. How can one person suffer this much? How? When? These were the thoughts running in my mind. My mind was in turmoil. I didn’t realise I had began to cry. This is it….I was gonna die. Goodbye world. Large pearls of water were just dropping, I was staring unseemly into space. Didn’t notice when the doctor had come around to my side and had his arm around me trying to comfort me. Assuring me everything was gonna be fine.
It was then I turned to look at him. He had glasses on which made his eye seem bigger, oval face itched with concern and worry, long pointed nose, thin lips pressed together. My gaze wondered back to his face again, studying him more. He had nice caring black eyes, clean shaved face and low cut hair and he really smelled nice.
There was nothing really special about his looks, I mean you couldn’t say he was drop dead gorgeous. I guess he was just normal looking. I didn’t notice when I the tears stopped coming. I found myself nodding to something he was saying, taking a deep breath I wiped my tears.
He explained that because of the collapsed lung I have been finding it difficult to breath, and because I didn’t know about it I have been going about everything normal which has put a strain on the other lung causing it to work overtime trying to keep up, because it was now doing the work of two. He took his time to explain things to me, breaking it to a level even a child would understand.
Tests also showed that my immune system was down. He had to place me on admission, you know the usual drill.
During my time there, Dr George Kokelu made sure I got the best medical care. He took his time assessing me, asking me questions and writing some of the stuffs down in my file. (the medical stuffs) he also asked some personal stuffs too. And mehn could he ask them.
I noticed Dr Kokelu was different from the other docs I have met. He takes his time to create a rapport with his patients, making them comfortable and interacting with them like he was talking to his buddies. I liked that in him. And he made me laugh a lot which I liked doing. I guess he was trying to take my mind off the situation on ground, and I was glad.
He wasn’t like other docs who come in with stern faces and superior carriage, do their jobs and go. He tackles the matter from the root.
While at the hospital, after a series of drips and injections. I went to sleep. That was when I had a dream about my doctor. An erotic dream at that!!!
Omg!!! I woke up with a start, hot and bothered. I looked around and found the Doctor beside my bed checking my drip, he turned and looked at me with a weird look on his face, then asked
“are you alright?” to which I answered yes..he said he heard me making noises and he came over to check if I was ok.
I blushed and looked away. But my eyes kept straying to him as he made his rounds, watching him closely.
I couldn’t believe I had a wet dream about my doctor!!!!……
Later that day I was discharged and went home. I had the same dream again that night. I woke up the next morning with the doctor in mind.
All morning I was getting ready for work I kept replaying the moments I had spent with the doctor, his smile was amazing it lights up his eye. And that glasses of his looks cute perched on his nose. I decided the doctor was cute after all. I made a mental note to see him that day. Which I did, and we spent time talking and it was amazing.
After that day I kept seeing the doctor, to him it was a friendly visit, but to me it was so much more!! Oh how I wish he knew it. I keep fantasizing on how he will notice how in love I am with him one day and how he will give me a knee shaking kiss, which will leave me breathless.
The Doctor became my crush, my drug, my addiction. I couldn’t get him out of my mind. Am sure everyone in the clinic knew I was in love
with him but him. He was so clueless it was cute. Another reason I couldn’t stay away.

Testimony of Tania - A Druze from Lebanon
I grew up in a happy home but I do not remember being happy. My parents had always provided me with everything I needed however I never felt happy or satisfied. The most striking memory from my childhood was of me lying in my bed in the middle of the night and crying because I wanted to go home. I was very confused at that time because I didn’t understand why I felt so out of place in my own home and among my own people.
I grew up in the United Arab Emirates and was exposed to religion from a very young age. I remember my classmates in school talking about being Muslim and about how they needed to fast during Ramadan, and I remember my Christian friends talking about their Christmas and Easter plans and going to church. I also remember frequently being asked if I was Muslim or Christian. These questions were almost always followed with a “so what are you?” question to which I would reply “Druze”. In the beginning I didn’t know what that was and how that was different from these other 2 religions, but I new it was different.
Our home was not a religious one, my parents never prayed in any obvious way and God was mentioned frequently but almost as an after thought. As an Arab I grew up hearing ‘inshallah’ and ‘alhamdullah’ frequently but not a lot was said about Him except that we loved God and that all we needed to do was believe in Him. Nothing was said about exactly how to believe in Him.
My grandmother a “shakha” talked about God quite a bit but never with joy and always with resignation. He was only mentioned by her, and by most of the people I knew when bad things happened but never out of love or joy. There was only one person who was different and that was my aunt. My aunt had given her life to the Lord and come to know Jesus when she was a teenager and even though her family disapproved severely, and still do till today, she lived her life with the name of Jesus on her lips and the hope and joy of her salvation in her heart. She was the one who had something that no one else I knew had…peace. Her peace came despite her circumstances (she had a very hard life because of her husband and still does till today) and was so powerful that it was able to comfort those who noticed it. My siblings and I always went to her for prayer; we knew that her God was different and that if she asked of Him it would be heard.
As I grew older my own confidence that I was a good person and that I was going to be with God when I died began to shatter. I was very idealistic when I was younger and I believed in the goodness of people. I believed that the world could be a heaven on earth if only we humans would love one another and care about each other. My idealism began to die as I was faced again and again with the reality of the human being. No matter how ‘good’ someone seemed there was always a limit of how much they could sacrifice or give. My biggest disappointment was myself. The more and more that I became exposed to the world and began to react to the world the more I realized what an awful human being I was. I realized that I was very selfish and self focused, I would complain all the time and would get jealous. My heart was able to do things like hate and be angry it was also able to lie. I began to wonder what the measurement of good was. How good did I have to be to go to heaven and was I good enough. My mom always said that God knew our hearts and that He knew that deep down we were not that bad…but my dilemma was in trying to find out how much bad was ‘not that bad’? Would only murderers and rapists go to hell? Would everyone else go to be with God? What about people who hated would they go to hell? How much hate was too much? All these questions went unanswered because I couldn’t imaging that heaven would have people who lied in it or people who cared about themselves more than others. I also didn’t understand what God would do with all the religions that already existed. What would happen on the Day of Judgment would He judge each religion according to its belief? And if so what were the people going to do if they hadn’t done enough good to out-way the bad, and my repeating question was how much was too bad and how much good was needed for every bad committed. What if I had prayed one prayer too little, or drank a sip of alcohol? What if I had only one hateful thought? Would God be so strict that only one lie would make Him send me to Hell? How would I know? Everyone around me said”you’ll find out when you die” but that would be too late!!! Once I was dead I couldn’t change the way I lived my life…I needed to know now so that I could do what was required in order to get to go to heaven.
I moved away from home when I turned 17 to go to university in Beirut. With all these questions in my head I was very confused and felt very lost. My depression became very severe. I began to think that if I could just stop living the pain in my heart would be over. Thoughts of harming myself came to me frequently; I would joke to friends in college telling them that I was going to kill myself. I felt empty and cold on the inside, it was like my soul was already dead but my body kept moving. I felt alone and completely isolated, I was away from my parents, my friends had left me and I had no one to turn to. So I turned to God. One night I wrote a letter to God. In that letter I asked Him to tell me the truth. I wanted to know what the way was, was it Mohammad, was it Jesus, was it through reincarnation and the purifying of my soul because of hardship (like the Druze believe) or was it the goodness of my heart. I asked Him to show me without people trying to deceive me. I sealed that letter and hid it between my books and prayed all night that “He would show me the Truth”. The Lord says in His word “Ask and it shall be given to you, seek and you shall find, Knock and it shall be opened ” that night I asked the Lord with all my heart I told Him that He had to tell me the truth because I really wanted to know so that I could be with Him. He did not answer right away…it took a whole year.
I graduated from university and was waiting to see where I would go to graduate school. All the schools I applied to rejected me and my depression got even worse. As a final resort my parents decided to send me to America, they thought that I had a higher chance of being accepted if I was actually in the USA. The only person they could send me to was my aunt (The one who loved Jesus). I didn’t know it at the time but that was God beginning to answer my prayer.
I went to live in the States with my aunt and cousins. In the first few months I was stuck home alone most of the time because I still did not have the necessary paperwork to get a driver license and my cousins had to go to work. I was home alone a lot but I would go to church and bible studies with my cousins because it would have been rude not to, considering I lived in their house. I would sit in church and tell myself not to listen to what the speaker was talking about, but I had underestimated the power of worship. That was how the Lord finally broke me, it was the singing. Every time the congregation sang to the Lord I began to cry. I didn’t know why I was crying but I couldn’t stop. The words of amazing grace felt like they were talking about me a soul who was lost and was so desperate to be found once again.
I began to ask questions like” How can God have a son? Why would God become a human being? Who was in heaven when God was here on earth? And how did He fit here on earth?” Every time I asked a question my cousin would open his bible and give me the scripture that would have the answer. On Christmas Eve I was given my first bible as a present and I opened it wanting to find the truth which I now had a feeling existed within its pages. I also began attending a bible study on the book of Revelations (last book of the bible) with my aunt and began to realize that time was running out. The last book of the bible talks about God’s return and His judgment on the people of the earth. It talks about the prophecy of what is to come and How Jesus will be coming back to take His church (believers) before the hardship truly begins on earth. That book made me want to be very sure about whose side I would be on the day that Judgment would take place. I began to read the Gospel of John and was struck with how clear the bible is about Jesus. In John 1: 1 it says “In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God” and then in John 1: 14 it says “And the Word became flesh, and dwelt among us, and we beheld His glory as of the only begotten from the father, full of grace and truth.” Also I was surprised to find that there were verses from the bible that talked about how awful man was and that there were none that were good enough to be with God. In Romans 3:10-11 it says “as it is written.’ There is none righteous, not even one; There is none who understands, there is none who seek for God’” and in Romans 3: 23 “for all have sinned and fall short of the glory of God”. That meant we would all go to hell all of us were bad and God says that the price of sin (all sin big or small) is death (Romans 6 :23). But then the Lord provides a solution “for God so loved the World that He gave His one and only begotten Son that whoever believes in Him should not perish but have eternal life, for God did not send the Son into the world to judge the world, but that the world should be saved through Him (John 3:16-17)” So Jesus paid the price of my sin by dieing instead of me, so if I believed in Him his payment would cover me and I would be able to be with God without my sin interfering.
God had finally answered my prayers. By isolating me in the USA alone with only His book and His people as a guide He showed me that the ONLY way was through Him. On January 7 1999 I knelt down and asked the Lord to forgive me of all my sins and then I asked Him to come and live in my heart. The minute I prayed peace came and dwelt in my heart. The Lord says that He sends us His comforter which is the Holy Spirit; that night the Holy Spirit came into my heart. I began reading my bible more intensely and was filled with a hunger to know more about this God who died and rose again in order to insure that I be saved.
I will never be alone again, even though some days are hard and the distance that my decision has led to between me and my parents is difficult. His peace never leaves me. Since I made my decision I have gone through trials and hardship but the difference this time is that I am never confused or lost because I know that all things work together for those who love the Lord and that He is in control. I have a peace that I never had before an inner quietness that is not shaken by any of life’s troubles and pains. I also have an understanding now of why I exist and what my purpose is. I know that I belong to the family of God and that my true home is up in heaven with Him. He said that in His father’s house there are many mansions and that He has gone up there to prepare a place for us so that were He is that we may also be. That promise among all the others that He provides fills me with the comfort of knowing that I am loved and taken care of and that I will never be alone again.
My family has had a very hard time accepting my decision and although it hurts me to hurt them I know that the Lord will honor my obedience and that in prayer ALL things are possible… including their salvation.
For questions or prayer contact me at: [email protected]

Fire Up A Cure is a very special event for our department. A few years ago, we had the honor of having a very special kid as our Honorary Captain. He became close to us and we quickly grew to love him. He was a strong kid who was always happy and giving to others despite his illness. If it were not for Fire Up A Cure, we never would have met him or the other kids who are so bravely battling cancer. These kids are so amazing and continue to inspire us on a daily basis! We love being part of something so big and we can't wait for this year!

Eric Forman's grandmother dies. I'm so glad they decided to kill that annoying old hag. She might have brought some funny moment, but without a doubt, she was the most annoying character on the show. I found the parts funny on how they made fun of her death, it was hilarious.
The five stages of grief. Yes, they have been going through it as well. I enjoyed seeing how they copped with the whole situation. Very nice. We also get to see a different side of Eric, which was quite OK, but he was really out of character in this episode.
Overall, excellent episode.

The pros and cons of lying well.
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
“He was the last person who helped me”.
He looked at me with absolute sincerity.
“I spent so many years being dishonest, being irresponsible, and taking people I knew for a ride. I thought I was the smart one. I spent more than I could afford, to keep up with appearances. I borrowed money and didn’t think of paying it back until I felt like it. That’s when I got involved with a loan shark”.
I looked at him as he continued.
“I first came to KL after I got divorced in Penang. I swore off women for a few years after that, and then I started mixing with, well, the wrong crowd I guess.”
It was an unexpected but welcome moment of honesty.
“My realisation came one night when the loan shark called me to pay up, or else I would be beaten really badly. I called every single friend and number on my phone to ask for help, it was only a thousand plus ringgit I had to pay, and every single person I called either said they were busy or unavailable. That’s when it came to me, all the times I had been dishonest, all the times I thought I could get away with lying, has resulted in me being totally alone when I really needed help. That moment changed my life”.
“Sometimes it takes a situation that is really difficult to make us see things as they are” I said.
He nodded and smiled.
“He was the only person I called after that, and we were just acquainted, I didn’t even know him that well, who didn’t say anything or judged me. I was totally honest with him and told him everything about the hole I had dug myself into, and he just said “Ok, I’ll settle the loan for you. You come and work for me to clear it off”.
“I have been working with him ever since”, he smiled.
“And since then, I have been honest with everyone I meet. There is no good that can come from lying, especially to people who took the chance to trust you in the first place. It took a few years for me to gain the trust again of people around me, and now I’m in a much better place than ever before”
I saw the look he had, it was one of peace. Being honest does work, especially to ourselves, and in all that we do.
Take a chance on being just a little bit more honest with ourselves and others today. It can change your life too.
6 January 2021 | Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia

I had a terrible nightmare last night. It woke me up towards 4 A.M. I was covered in sweat and shivering when I woke up. I dreamt that my boyfriend and I had been bitten by rattlesnakes and he almost died because of the bite. Instinctively I checked my body to see if it was real or not. It did not matter that I was on a different continent and rattlesnakes were not living in this colder climate. The scary thought of seeing a snake again was embedded in my mind.
Being still not fully awake, I looked at my boyfriend, who was sleeping peacefully on his side of the bed. For a few seconds, the fear of losing him surged up and the recent memory of him being bitten was replayed.
Within seconds I lifted the sheet and checked his left leg in order to see if he had been bitten or not. In my dream his leg had become swollen and there was some blood on it. I was relieved to see that everything was only a bad dream. I laid down in bed trying to calm down and go back to sleep but I couldn’t.
After half an hour of trying to fall asleep again, I gave up. I left the bed and went to the kitchen. I thought that a camomile tea would help me sleep. While the water in the kettle was boiling, I checked my emails on my phone. I saw that there was a message from my sister. She had got a Groupon deal at a spa and she was inviting me to get get a Hyaluronic acid Injection Rosemere.
I would have loved to go get pampered with her on Saturday, but I had to be somewhere else. My partner and I had already made plans for the weekend. We were supposed to go Ottawa and meet one of our old friends, who was visiting Canada for a short period of time. Otherwise, I would have not mind at all spending half of day with my little sis.
To be honest, I also wished to go to Ottawa because I wanted to see the tulips’ festival. I have never seen it with my own eyes. Miles and miles of tulips! All the photos I saw online looked marvellous. I imagined that in real life it must be a delightful experience. I look forward to going there.

There once was a young boy named Nick,
Who by chance was always being kicked.
He tried not to fight,
For he was smart, kind and bright,
So he learned how to run really quick.
There once was a boy named Dan,
who wanted to fry in a pan.
He tried and he tried,
and eventually died,
that weird little boy named Dan.
There was a boisterous boy called Joe
Who loved to play in the fresh falling snow.
He went sledging one day
On his wild husky powered sleigh,
Tumbled tumultuously and broke his big toe.

Travis Kelce had the best time ringing in 2024 with the two most important ladies in his life.
They are his girlfriend, Taylor Swift and his mom, Donna Kelce.
Travis’ brother, Jason Kelce, asked the Kansas City Chiefs tight end what it was like to have their mom attend his New Year’s Eve game against the Cincinnati Bengals during Wednesday’s episode of their “New Heights” podcast.
“How was having mom there for that game? Pretty good?.” Jason, 36, asked Travis. Without mentioning that Swift was also present for the festive face-off over the weekend.
The two-time Super Bowl champion said that he had a “good New Year’s celebration” with his friends and family and even said he got a great present from his mom.

The Sound of Music!
John took me to see the Sound of Music at the Benedum Center in Pittsburgh! I had never been to anything like this before. It was alot of fun! Cant wait to go see something else!
Tuesday, July 05, 2011
Happy 4th of July!!!
The first picture is actually from Sunday! We had a very nice picnic for Joyce and David's Birthdays! I think everyone had a good time. I know John and I did.
John and I went to the Butler Fair on the 4th...but it was hot so we decided to go swimming! We went to Conley's Waterpark. We were the only ones there. We had a wonderful time.
The last is a video John took with the waterproof camera!! We have had alot of fun with that thing!
Saturday, July 02, 2011
The day after we went to Kalahari...we went to the Zoo with the Vulhops. J.J. found out that the Toledo Zoo had a hippo...I have never seen a real hippo before!! We went to the Cleveland Zoo last year to see their hippo but it had been retired! : (
So this trip we actually got to see the hippos!! They were inside so we didn't get really go pictures of them...but better than nothing!
I really liked the Crab...it was huge! And also the big lipped fish..don't know the name of it...but check out the size of its lips!! They also had a baby elephant...It was fun to watch playing with a stick!
We decided we needed a few days off work...So we went to Kalahari! It is a huge water park in Ohio. We had a really good time! The Vulhops also went. I cant wait to go back!!
We bought a waterproof camera to take with us!! I think it took fairly nice pictures . My favorite one is John under the water!

Chief Patience Ozokwor is a veteran Nollywood actress, musician, fashion designer and gospel singer, who has won several awards. Ozokwor was among the 100 Nigerians honoured by the Federal Government of Nigeria to celebrate the amalgamation of the northern and southern protectorates in 2014.
In an interview with Ogbonna Casmir, she talks about her journey in life.
At 60, what are the things you are grateful to God for?
How can you ask me such a question? If I am not grateful to God for anything then I will be grateful to him for life. The greatest miracle one can have is to be alive, more especially when one is healthy too and not begging for food. There are so many other reasons why we need to give God praise and it can never be enough. I can never thank Him enough.
You started acting on stage while you were in secondary school. What attracted you to the craft?
Passion! I enjoy it. Once you enjoy what you do every day, it will be like it is coming from the inside. I remember in those days when we were young, I would always gather children around me and we would stroll to the nearest market, picking (Egusi) melon where they were grinding it and coming home to cook and eat. Sometimes we go to a tailor’s shop to pick pieces of cloth and bring them home.
There was always needle and thread at home and we would make dresses – tiny dresses – and hang them. And people would see them and say wow. I didn’t even learn how to make dresses but I make beautiful wedding gowns. I can show you the dress I am working on. I had a workshop and the National Directorate of Employment used to send me students to teach the craft.
Then, I was lucky to be one of the 30 Nigerian women that were sent to Cameroon for small scale entrepreneurship course which lasted for nine weeks. It was just to help us as they saw that we had passion to use our hands to do things for ourselves. It was the International Labour Organisation that sent us for the training at the University of Buea in Cameroon and we went to the villages to study how women groups were doing businesses. I didn’t quite see the men; it was only the women that I saw.
They always formed groups and they were empowered by their government or NGOs. That was how they started businesses that exist now in Cameroon. We were sent to go and understudy them and we came back after nine weeks. I had a workshop after that where I was training young girls to produce handicrafts and the things that I learnt during the training. There we saw them using raffia to make chairs; it was beautiful.
They would transform raffia into ropes and use them to make beautiful things. So, these are the other things I did apart from acting but I see all of them as acting because anything that can keep you active is an act and I enjoy seeing the fruit of my labour immediately.
At a time, you were working at Radio Nigeria. How did you get the job at such a young age?
I wasn’t quite young when I got the job. I was already married with children but I got married quite early. I had a cousin who was working with Radio Nigeria and she came to the school where I was teaching – WTC Enugu. We were having our school debate. It was a programme for kids and when she saw me, she said you are here and I said yes.
She asked, ‘What are you doing here?’ I said I was a teacher there. She said fine, you will one or two things for me. She was upset; she said why are you teaching, you shouldn’t be here, you should be doing something with us. So I told her I didn’t even know about her job and that ‘gentle teaching’ was okay for me. She laughed.
So what she did was to trick me into doing it. She got me to anchor a children’s programme and it was fine. After that, Radio Nigeria asked me to write an official application letter, I wrote it and I was employed. So that was how I joined Radio Nigeria; first as a producer of children’s programme and then when my official letter came, they made me an announcer/newscaster. I started from there but eventually we were retrenched.
They shut down the medium wave radio and then left us unattended to. But it was at a time when the Federal Government created a lot of states – Anambra, Imo and so on. So those from Imo and Anambra states were employed by the radio stations owned by their states of origin.
But those of us from Enugu were left without jobs. Then shortly after, they employed people again. I wondered why they actually laid us off when they actually needed workers but we discovered that it was about the ‘Nigerian factor’. Some of the directors and managers in the different departments were getting ready for retirement and they wanted their children to take over from them.
So they had to shut the place down and get us out of the way so that they could employ their children. So that was what happened and we were the victims in Radio Nigeria. I cried because I was like a baby whose mouth had just been removed from its mother’s breast.
I was enjoying my job; it was like I was in heaven. In short, I was working there with my whole being, so I went back and pleaded and pleaded. One particular man, Ossy Ayia, insisted that I must be brought back but what is one voice against many. So he said to me – Patience, if I were a director, I would have employed you.
In fact, the director at the time called them (others) and said since they had already trained me as I had been trained at FRCN Training School, it was better to retain me since I was very good but a woman said I only had Ordinary National Diploma certificate apart from TCII (Grade II Teachers’ Certificate). She said there were other people who were graduates who could be employed first. That was what she said in my presence.
I felt it was a challenge; if one door does not close, another door will not open. I took the bull by the horns and when they started seeing me doing well in movies, they asked me to come back and I rejected the offer. So that was how I left Radio Nigeria.
How did your journey to Nollywood begin?
It was fine. I actually didn’t have a job and I became a confectioner because I did Home Economics in school and in our own time, we were very lucky; what they teach now at the catering school was what they taught us in secondary schools. That was where I did a bit of needlework. I learnt how to cut patterns and things like that, so anything I could do with my hands was pleasing to me.
So I learnt how to make wedding cakes, popcorn and so on. And because of the kind of training I had, I made them so well that you could not get another type in the market that would be better than my own. That brought me so much money and I didn’t have any issues when I was raising my children.
The only thing that bothered me was that I had to be up till late in the night making those things for the following day. But I didn’t go borrowing or begging people for money. It was hard but I was able to weather the storm. All these things that people do now like offering catering services and decorating event venues, I believe I started it in Enugu.
I don’t know how the thought came to me because before then, anytime someone died, we would be carrying blocks to make bed and things like that. But because I could make dresses, I started preparing things like the bed itself so that you would not need to carry any blocks again. It was a struggle but life itself is all about struggle and you are even lucky if you are able to find something that will fetch you money.
With that, the struggle is little. Some people will struggle and not get anything from it, but I was struggling and getting something from it. But I was encouraged to go ahead with it. However, it affected my sleeping habit and up till now, I can’t sleep in the afternoon.
When did you get your major breakthrough in the industry?
It wasn’t long after I came into the industry that I had a breakthrough. There was a movie we did titled ‘Amina’ and there was another one titled ‘Odum’. When a marketer was looking for somebody to play another role in a movie titled ‘Authority’, one of the production managers told the marketer to look for a woman that acted in ‘Amina’ and ‘Odum’, that she could play the role very well. That was me.
So they came to me but they were looking for cheap labour because at that time, I didn’t have a price. I was still trying to be known in the industry. I was building my fan base; you know, that determines who you are in the industry. When you have so many fans, it means that so many people are watching your movies and will be buying them.
That is what matters to the marketers. So after the film was shot, my name became ‘Authority’. So, that ‘Authority’ brought another one – ‘Apology’. Then there was ‘Submission’; it just started like that and there was no dull moment.
So why did you allow movie producers to typecast you as someone who is wicked or does evil in movies?
I do good movies too but you know acting like an evil person is very difficult and that is the kind of movies people like to watch. People like to be real, sometimes they think that the person that is doing good things is faking it but when you show that evil aspect, that is where the action is. I once fought till the end in a movie and it came out fine.
If you know what it means to be fighting, quarelling and so on, you will know how difficult it is for you to do it. Those vibrant things are the things that people want to see, not the ones where two people will be sitting down and talking. Anybody can sit down and talk but those hard roles are what people actually want to see.
People will think: what does she want to do again, let me see it. It keeps people glued to the television. When producers discovered it, they started writing movies that had to do with ‘blood money’ and things like that. Such roles made me famous. So I don’t regret it; as long as it is bringing money to me, I will continue to do it.
Moreover, I see it as a means of exposing the ills in the society because if I ask you now, you will tell me how good you are but there are things that you do that are hurting other people and you wouldn’t say those ones. So that is why people like to watch those aspects of people’s lives and people actually thought that was the kind of life I was living.
In short, some people became scared such that they didn’t want to come close to me thinking that I was like that. But it didn’t matter because I told myself that once they got to meet me, they would know that I was different from the person they were seeing on TV.
After all, what is acting? I have been in the midst of people who will be speaking for me, telling people that she is that kind of person, I know her.
When I was working with Radio Nigeria, if anybody was transferred to another place or if they left, I was always the one that would be going round to tell people that somebody was leaving and that we needed to have a get-together. I would collect money, cook and bring everybody together to enjoy.
When I left, no one else could do it. I was so active that being overactive was killing me. I was always looking for what to do. I would open my salon (for hairdressing), work there before leaving for work proper. When I was on morning duty, I was the one that would open the station and before 4am, the bus was already there to pick you up as they would still need to get other workers.
There was no time to sleep but I was enjoying myself. I was doing what I liked to do and acting also crowned it all. As I am leaving one movie set, I am going to another one and it continues like that.
You got married early in life following your parents’ bidding. Was it that you were betrothed to him?
No, I wasn’t betrothed to him, but my mother was a kind of woman that always liked to punish any child that misbehaved publicly. You know all those Christian mothers that would be in the disciplinary section to punish children. So, she didn’t want her child to come out of secondary school and not get married because she was afraid you could bring her to where she had been punishing people.
So she insisted I must get married. I said okay but I had a suitor. But she said no. I didn’t know what to do because I had put all my eggs in one basket; he was in the University of Nigeria, Nsukka. I was waiting to go to school so that I would marry him but my mother wouldn’t wait. So I had to obey her.
There was a big fight but in our days, you would not be the one to say I will marry this person; it was your parents that would have the final say in your marriage, so I had to give up.
Despite that, you have been married for many years whereas divorce is very common now, especially among entertainers. Do you have any advice for them?
I am ashamed because I read the Bible a lot. I know that God does not like divorce, but I have discovered that it is not the problem of the actresses. Some of them come to marry us (actresses), thinking that we have money; they don’t know that our industry here in Nigeria does not have too much money. Yes, it can take you to different places and you can meet people that will bless your life but the problem is that they expect too much.
Now, a lady who is a star, if she doesn’t get a job in two or three months, she would have spent her savings and you know the kind of life we live. We like to buy the best of dresses; we like to buy the best of shoes and live in the best of houses, even if it is rented.
Some of us would like to live in houses where we will be paying N3m annually and they will be struggling to save money to pay at the end of the year. Meanwhile, jobs are not coming because it is when you are called for jobs that you are paid. They don’t pay us monthly. In my own time, I was like going from one job to another and people were enjoying what I was doing. They would be waiting for me to finish one job so that they could give me another.
They would be fighting over who I would work for first; so the money was coming but some people don’t have that kind of opportunity. They have to wait for some time before they will get another one but because they are stars, men see them as moneybags. But when they come in and the money is not coming the way they thought, they will say what is all that for and then they just take a walk.
Sometimes, it is not the fault of the ladies and sometimes too because of the nature of our job, we are always on locations. A job could take you to Enugu and instead of going home after that job, another person will call from Aba and because of the money, you go and your husband starts messing around with women because he does not see you around. Even when you are keeping yourself for him, some of them cannot stay calm; they will feel that you have left or that you are also messing around with men where you are because you need to give a dog a bad name and hang him.
So these are the things that break our marriages but most of them are not from us but as a result of circumstances. And for the men too, girls fall from hills to marry them because they think they have money and when they get in and don’t see the money, it will become a case of – is this marriage? I thought there would be money everywhere.
But the issue is that when the money comes, it comes in big and if another one does not come immediately, that one will finish before another one comes. But one thing is certain, we are not going to wait for a long time before another one comes because if we don’t act, we can attend functions and they will pay us.
Money will be coming in through various means but people don’t have patience; that is why our marriages fail. For me, my parents wouldn’t even want to hear that you quit your marriage. I didn’t even have it in mind to leave my marriage because as soon as I got married, I started having children.
So I didn’t believe that anybody could take care of my children more than me. I decided to ignore everything that came my way and stay with my children. I might not stay for everybody but I stayed for my children no matter what; that was why we could achieve this. My husband did not have a house, he didn’t have this, he didn’t have that.
Down the hill is Colliery Quarters where we lived; I was the one that told the woman living there now that we were moving out and that she should come and stay there. If I had known that the following month or in two months time, they would say we could buy the house if we wanted, I would have stayed and paid with his gratuity, but we gave it out to someone else.
You later gave your life to Christ. What exactly informed that decision?
I didn’t just give my life to Christ, I came into the film industry as a member of the Scripture Union; I was a bible study teacher as of that time. I was a born-again Christian long before I joined the film industry.
I cannot tell you that wearing trousers is a sin but I will tell you what the Lord told me. He said if you want men to lust after you, that is your business. So when Tonto Dike and others started criticising me that I talked about weave-on, I told her I didn’t tell you to stop wearing weave-on, I only told you what the Lord had told me about it.
The Lord said anything that is in the shrine, I should not touch it. Even Pastor Enoch Adeboye of the Redeemed Christian Church of God said the other day that while he was anointing people in his church, he had to ask (women) – which one do you want me to anoint, is it the weave-on you are carrying on your head or you?
You know, I am a cosmetologist. They say anything you add to your natural hair is killing the hair because you are changing it from its natural form to a new thing that is strange from its natural way. I didn’t know what it meant until I had a vision. So how will I do it? I am still trying to get my children to drop all those things so it is not easy.
It is difficult for me to convince my daughter (not to buy it) I am the one that buys them here and gives to her because it is expensive in London. I buy it here and take it to her anyway; I find it difficult to get her to stop using it, it is part of her culture now. See some of our movies now, do they look like Africans anymore? Tell me the truth.
When you see an African woman wearing afro hairstyle, you will know that she is an African woman and that is what I want to be and that is what God made me to be. You see us wear long hair; the longer, the better. But it doesn’t show you as an African; it just means that we are trying to copy some people. We have lost our culture and the white woman is not praying to be like us.
An Indian woman will never want his son to get married to an African woman, so why am I killing myself trying to be like them? You are wearing glasses now; it’s not part of you but it is helping you to see clearly. I am wearing a wristwatch now. The other day, I wanted to go out and I didn’t know where this watch was and I said it felt somehow not wearing anything on my hand and the Lord asked me, are you wearing wristwatch because you want to know the time or because you want to wear something on your hand? I just remembered it and said Lord, I am sorry.
These days when I want to wear a wristwatch, I wear it because I want to know the time, especially if I will be travelling by air. Even men, it concerns you, it is not just about women. Some men wear clothes that are too tight. I look at all those pastors wearing that when they are preaching and women are in their church, watching their contours and different ideas will be going into their heads and they will no longer be listening to you.
They are committing sin; it’s better you say it because if you don’t say it, they will continue to do it but if you say it. It is off your neck. People say it is my encounter, that’s what God wants me to do. God wants you to be in heaven, how can God want only me to be in heaven? There is a place for you there, if there is no place for you, he will not say so.
He said in my father’s house there are many mansions there only me cannot stay in many mansions so I want my sisters and brothers to be with me in those mansions. When I was young, I never had a boyfriend, I was not messing around with men and I wasn’t ugly. I was pretty.
Even in my old age, I know that I am not ugly. Many people do tell me – do you know you are pretty? I tell such people that they are not the first to say it so I know.
How would you describe your childhood? Were you stubborn?
I was not stubborn and I was not quiet. It was all play, play, play. But I was loved by so many people around.
At the time you ventured into acting, what were your parents’ reactions?
Only my father was still around and he was excited seeing me in a movie. Like my husband too, he would say (to our children), come and play your mother’s film for us to watch. They enjoy my movies. My immediate younger brother, who is in the US, will say that I have found my talent and that is why it has swallowed me.
If you were not an actor, what else would you have been in life?
I would be cooking. I still cook till today.
Do you think there is a conflict between your faith and your profession?
No, there is no conflict. You know, we do drama in the church. It is like I am preaching; I say that the movie industry preaches to the whole world. A pastor can be in his church and be preaching to the people there, but the movies go very far with their stories. It is part of what I am doing.
You hardly act romantic movies and it was like that even during the earlier part of your career, why is that?
They never give me that role to play but I did one that came out fine – Love after Love. It was with the late Justus Esiri.
Have you ever kissed in a movie?
People see you as wicked because of the roles you have played in movies, so would you describe yourself as a romantic person?
I am highly romantic o! If I am in love with you, you will know; I can’t hide it. Everybody around will know I am in love with you. So I don’t go jumping from one man to the other but if I have feelings for you, everybody around will know that you are the man.
All the same, because I don’t kiss in movies doesn’t mean that if such occasions come up, I wouldn’t have done something like that but God just shut that side for me and I never had any reason to kiss somebody. You know, I am always on the cantankerous side. Such people don’t kiss and they don’t do romance. The kind of roles I play actually help me not to get to all that.
Since the death of your husband, have you ever considered remarrying?
Yes. There was a time I wanted to remarry but my children said no. They are all grown now. They said if they were young, they wouldn’t have objected. Now that they are grown, they say they will be my husband and they have been trying. The only thing they don’t do is go to bed with me (laughs).
They said that their friends would laugh at them that their mother abandoned them, but I didn’t see it that way. It really brought problems. I wanted to remarry but my sister and other relations came and said that I should concede to them and I accepted but with the condition that they would also listen to me anytime I tell them to stop being friends with any of their friends that I don’t like and they agreed. So we have been managing one another.
Do you have any regrets in life?
The only regret I have in life is that I wasn’t allowed to marry the man of my choice. That is it but I was able to cope. I had suitors, I was going to choose one among them but my parents said that I would marry their choice. If they had allowed me, I would have loved to make my choice.

I love "Mad Men" and Don Draper is one my most favorite of television characters. Reading this was like watching "Mad Men" in fast forward. I loved it. How could I not get a kick out of Max. Neurotic, sweet, sarcastic and just all around awesome. He's an advertising genius and he knows it, he just likes for people to remind him and themselves of that as often as possible. He meets a prospective client and it's lust at first sight. I adored the Max and Joe dynamic, so much chemistry there. I liked this story a lot as well. Joe's company is fending off a hostile takeover and they need advertising to bring in investors, Max's team is one of the advertising agencies giving them a pitch. Joe is a bit of dark horse here but I liked him, quite a bit. He seemed to ground Max which was sweet. This was definitely a HFN but I want it to be a HEA and think they do as well, so I finished off reading this with a very hopeful outlook on their relationship.The Don Draper-esque pitch was awesome! I LOVED what they came up with, good on Black for her clever wordplay and images here. Max really brought to mind those client pitches from the show, he was every bit as charasmatic and charming as Don. As for the reasons why they had to downgrade the pitch:Damn Abby and her corporate sabotage!! I liked her! I almost felt as betrayed as the team.This story made me laugh, I loved being inside Max's head. He was one of the craziest characters I've ever read and that only adds to his appeal!

Went back to camp for my very first reservist briefing today. And guess who I met? The guy whom I lent some money to several years back. He looked like a decent and honest guy to me then, was quite a good (army) friend, but he was not comfortable with disclosing the reason at that time. He got lost some time after he said he would pay me back, and I was nagged by angdao frequently because of that. I guess it’s hereditary. I did try contacting him, even asking others in the same department to tell him that I was looking for him, but they said they never kept in contact.
Naturally I approached him and planned to talk to him about it a while later. (not very good to start conversation with a friend with O$P$ right…) Found out he didn’t change his handphone number, and hinted I was unable to contact him all this while. Also learned that he started working + part time study (means he probably has some money already). Some time later he initiated it himself and asked me for my bank account number, saying he’s sorry, he remembers and he’ll pay me back.
At the end of the briefing, it turns out he was the only one I knew there. No others in the same department was there; some might say, this is the Work of God™ that I meet him there.
What’s mine will come back to me. Right?

My mom just asked me out of the blue (we were watching Matilda earlier today) how did I get the idea to dial Santa Claus when I was about 2-3 yrs old. It was one of those get to talk to Santa and his elves (kind of like one of those Miss Cleo numbers). I also dialed up a lot of tarot card readings. Apparently I had racked up a $5000 bill one month.
I never knew a monetary amount till now.

The staff for the most part was great ..tje only problem was they charged for the room plus 262.00 dollars and they could not find on their records where they did so and had to show it on an online banking statement..but other than that...更多
Thermostat was not working but the heater worked great. Just had to shut it off and on manually. Location was right off the highway near Applebee's and Braums. I was not given info for internet so I don't know if they have it.

Today was the last day of the CND Summer Day Camp and I don’t know how to feel about it right now. On one hand, I am exhausted from working with the kids every day, constantly on my toes and running around to keep up. On the other hand, I am sad to see them go and don’t want the summer to end (but who does?).
We spent our last day at Zoombezi Bay as a whole camp. It was my first time going since it was called Wyandote Lake (call me old, its okay) and it was a blast! I helped with a group of 8-10 year-olds today and we got to do almost everything there was to do. The children were excited that I was gonna get in and have fun with them. We got to do the lazy river, wave pool, Baboon Lagoon, and we even had time to go down one slide (the lines were endless).
Some other teachers were not as excited as I was to be playing in the water with the kids. Some were complaining of the water being too cold or the sun being too hot, but I was there to make sure those kids were able to have the time of their lives before the summer ends. Some of the children who come to our camp would never have the opportunity to go to a water park like this if it weren’t for CND and their funders. It absolutely warms my heart that CND is able to treat these kids to something extra special because they all deserve to have fun.
By the end of the day, I was walking out of the zoo with about 4 kids clinging to my arms because they didn’t want to leave me. Just about all of them asked me if I would be here next year, which makes me happy. Even if I am not working at CND full-time next spring, I will at least still apply to help with their Summer Day Camp. Until then, I still have one week of work left before my contract is up. Hopefully after that, I will start working on recruiting kids for our after-school programs and getting to know people we work with at schools around Columbus. I am walking away with such a warm, good feeling about my work here at camp, which has me extra excited for what’s in store helping kids in the near future.

Christyne was amazing. I showed her a picture and she did exactly what I was looking for. Highly recommend.
It was really great!
Christyne was great ! I wanted a natural look for my bridal shower and she nailed it. In her own words “you want to be yourself but better”, yes exactly...she did an amazing job!
a more dramatic look that includes false lashes

Ozo and Trickytee have been evicted from the Big Brother Naija house after being put for possible eviction earlier last week.
Host Ebuka Obi-Uchendu announced this during the live eviction show on Sunday.
The duo were nominated for eviction alongside Laycon and Dorathy in the ninth week of the reality show.
During his time in the house, Trickytee won the hearts of many with his personality which many described as easy-going, humble and sometimes comedic.
Speaking with Ebuka, he said he was grateful for his journey so far and is looking forward to more “hustle”.
He also said he would pursue a career in filmmaking and also build on his music career.
Meanwhile, Ozo’s chase for Nengi’s love in the Big Brother house comes to an end with his eviction.

I was headed to Cleveland for a convention last month, and took advantage by first flying to Pennsylvania to visit my family. I had enough frequent flyer miles that it was a great no-cost decision! There are six kids spread all over this beautiful country, but one brother, a sister, and my ninety-two year old parents still live in the town where I grew up.
I hoped to find some quiet time to talk with my Dad about my very unusual first name – Geraldine. My Mother told me that when I was born, she had picked out either Patricia or Elizabeth, but my Father had asked her to name me after his cousin in New York. I never met this cousin and mom was not very informative; maybe she was annoyed for not getting to pick my name.
Geraldine isn’t ‘cute’ like Patricia or Elizabeth. Most people call me by my nickname Gerri, but Geraldine is a stately name, don’t you think? Geraldine Ferraro was the first female vice-presidential nominee in 1984. Charlie Chaplin named his daughter Geraldine – she was nominated for several Golden Globes, including her role as Tonya in Dr. Zhivago. Perhaps I inherited my zany sense of humor from that silly Flip Wilson character, Geraldine Jones and her famous line, “The devil made me do it.”
I found some quiet time with Dad on Sunday. We talked a little about his health and living at the Easton House ALF. When the conversation dwindled, I summoned my nerve and asked the question; “Dad, I’ve always wondered about my name. I know that you had a cousin named Geraldine. I wondered what was so special about her that you wanted me to be named after her.”
At first he just looked at me, curious I suppose about why I wanted to know. He paused for a bit, perhaps struggling with his memory but then smiled as he slowly began to speak.
Dad told me that he and his cousin Geraldine were born on the same day. Living in different states, they did not see one another very often, but as she grew, my father thought that his cousin was not only beautiful but also very smart. He told me that he thought that any girl named after his cousin would also probably do alright in life. He concluded his story by saying, “And you turned out good, so I was right!”
Wow, Dad thought I’d done okay. He used to tease me, saying that I was a ‘Jack of all trades, but a master at none’. I don’t think he meant that as a compliment but the way I saw it, knowing a little bit about a lot of things has served me well in life.
I left there feeling so special. My namesake was beautiful and smart and dad thinks I’m also beautiful and smart, something I can’t recall him ever telling me. It was a great day.
It’s been two weeks since that nice visit with my Dad. He’s always been quiet, but perhaps with six children, it was hard for him to get a word in edgewise! I’m heading back to PA the last week in October. Maybe Dad may have some more good stories to share with me. I hope so.

What most people might take for granted, choosing to upgrade a phone at the end of a contract, turned out to be an uphill task for me, punctuated with so many emotions. I used to get told what make of phone to sign up for. Now, I had the choice…the freedom, to pick and choose what model of upgraded phone I WANTED. That felt so good. And I think a little bit of my spontaneous nature, was creeping back.
Next, I remember taking a trip to Calais. It was a matter of ringing a bus travel agency and making a booking. It was that easy apart from other small matters like paying for the ticket and getting up early enough on the day. Again I was making a decision to do something for me….
Around the time we parted, I was back in the same church and after a month of festivities and goal setting for the new year, I decided it was time to take on the development of a ‘new me.’ One time earlier, my mum asked if I had not realised how big I had become because I was sporting a size 20/22. I was asked if I ever looked in the mirror to see the changes in my body. The last thing I did in those days was looked at myself in the mirror. Why? I knew I would see and have to face what I did not want to deal with.
This time I had had enough. It was time for the weight to go. Taking the fruit and vegetable requirements a bit further, I began to drink fruit smoothies, more vegetables and water. Not much a fan of exercise, I walked a little more in those days and was richly rewarded with a dress size drop to 16! Only I put weight back later on as I was missing other elements of my diet and began to add them back again. So I learned its best to eating to live and be healthy rather take the weight off quickly.
Mum invested in Elizabeth Arden cosmetics so I would take interest in my appearance, an art I had lost for a few years now. It felt good to be able make some small changes to me and appearance.
I remember in those days how I would sit and talk to mum every night. It was like a talking therapy session with your usual shrink! It happened without any bookings and she would listen as I talked and talked my heart out…. The first night after the separation I found it hard to cry as I think I was more in shock and in a ‘let -things-happen’ head zone. It felt like I was an observer in the mess unfolding before me. You may understand that for years I had not had a proper conversation with my mum. But that night I was talking so much, like a someone had taken the lid off a tap which had so much to release. I remember being offered some alcohol which I kindly declined – that would not look good for a christian anyway.
I talked with mum regularly until it came to a point where I told her I had no more to say! So I think when that tank became empty it left room for the entry of good things but that did not happen immediately.
A few far-from-cordial exchanges in the church setting with accusations, threats and more when I was with the kids or they were with their other family, which was much worse, cemented the idea that it was time to change churches.
Seriously, my mum thought it was time for me to listen…She calmly explained that my passion for God could be served elsewhere as the current worship centre did not have a monopoly on God. Really? But l love that church, I argued. Now, I was beginning to think for myself and make decisions that suited me. Well, mum reminded me that it was not the best atmosphere for the kids, watching exchanges with their parents in God’s house (or something to that effect). OK. So yes I had found freedom but now I was going to exercise it by differently by taking advice and making an informed decision. After a few Sundays away from church at the time, I began searching for another place of worship.
It was not long before I found a place which has become home for 13 years to the children and me. I think the first shock I had was when I witnessed the simplicity of praying and asking for Gods intervention in matters. What was that? They simply read the prayer requests, asked the congregation to pray and it was done. No shouting or dramatising or changing postures, pacing back and forth, no drama or theatrics. Just prayer. Ask. Believe. Expect. And done.
We quickly settled into a new supportive family and the kids loved it. They were receiving lessons in skating, keyboard playing, dancing and singing. There were so many exciting activities that kept them wanting more of church, week after week. So we stayed in Hillsong. It took about an hour travel by car but I believe it was an answer to prayer.
Driving lessons were next on the agenda. It would be handy for school runs and the juggling of after school activities. In those days it was a mad dash from work to after school club then to music keyboard, swimming, first aid, guitar and all others thrown in – kids enjoyed these. Later years, I remember my PA reminding me to leave the office early to pick up kids for their various activities.
The driving ‘thing’ was fraught with drama and a crisis in confidence because I remember being told I would never be able to drive a car with a manual transmission. It was good that I was learning then I could choose to believe what I wanted and act according to those beliefs.
As a man thinks in his heart so is he….

When she forwarded to her father-in-law, Mr Lee Kuan Yew, a draft of his will over e-mail on Dec 16, 2013, Mrs Lee Suet Fern was merely playing a peripheral role and being "an obedient wife" to her husband Lee Hsien Yang, she said.
She did not discuss the contents of the will with the elder Mr Lee, and neither did she open the file of the draft will to read it, she added.
But a Disciplinary Tribunal appointed by the Chief Justice found otherwise.
It said she had "managed every aspect of the process" in drafting the will, getting her colleagues to witness its signing, and later even kept the original copy locked in her office safe.
These details emerged as the tribunal tried to ascertain the actual nature and extent of Mrs Lee's role, to determine if she had breached the Legal Profession Act and the relevant rules on conduct.
FAMILY MEMBER OR LAWYER?
Mrs Lee said that she was incidentally involved in the matter because her husband asked her for some help with "his... chore for his father".
She said that on Dec 16, 2013, he had been preparing to go on a trip to Sydney, and asked her for help to forward the draft of the will to Mr Lee Kuan Yew, and to get a solicitor who could witness the will's signing as soon as possible.
This was because Mr Lee Kuan Yew had been anxious to get the matter settled, she told the tribunal.
She herself was preparing to go on a work trip to Paris that night, and dallied on the task, she added.
"Yang called me... and he scolded me for taking so long to deal with it," she said during cross-examination at the tribunal hearing.
E-mail from the period showed she had sent Mr Lee Kuan Yew a draft of the will at 7.08pm that day.
In it, she assured him that it had the same terms as "the original agreed will which ensures that all three children receive equal shares".
Shortly after - and even before Mr Lee Kuan Yew replied to an e-mail from Mr Lee Hsien Yang to proceed with the matter without Mr Lee's usual lawyer Kwa Kim Li - Mrs Lee had given instructions to her colleagues to make themselves available at short notice for the execution of the will the next day.
Asked why she had done so, Mrs Lee replied: "Because I'm an obedient wife and Yang told me to do so."
The will was eventually signed the next morning at around 11.10am, just 16 hours after Mrs Lee first sent the draft to Mr Lee Kuan Yew.
This was done in the presence of Mr Bernard Lui and Ms Elizabeth Kong, both lawyers from Mrs Lee's law firm, Stamford Law.
Twice during the session, Mr Lee Kuan Yew had asked the two lawyers to tell him who had drafted the will, and they replied it was primarily Mrs Lee.
On hearing that, he signed it.
This account had emerged in e-mail between Mrs Lee and her colleagues, when they updated her on the signing of the will.
The tribunal said that if Mrs Lee had not agreed with this characterisation of her role, she did not say or do anything to object.
Throughout the day, she also continued to communicate with Mr Lui, a partner in her law firm, giving him instructions on what to do. Among them was one for an original copy of the will to be locked in her safe.
Asked by the Law Society's lawyers about this, Mrs Lee said she was just helping out as family and insisted her involvement did not amount to being Mr Lee Kuan Yew's lawyer.
Her exchanges with Mr Lui were "merely... seeing through a favour and that it's properly done", and did not constitute making arrangements, she said.
She was also "just a conduit" between Mr Lui and her husband, who was the one handling the will.
But the tribunal pointed out in its report that she was the only lawyer responsible for the last will, after having acquiesced in cutting out Ms Kwa from the process.
In fact, Mrs Lee herself had told the Attorney-General's Chambers in December 2018 that her father-in-law had given her instructions to have his last will engrossed, or finalised.
This was also Mr Lee Hsien Yang's position in a letter to a ministerial committee set up to look into options for his father's Oxley Road house. Mr Lee Kuan Yew died on March 23, 2015.
The tribunal, noting that the couple had contradicted themselves on this point in their affidavits and during cross-examination, had strong words for their conduct.
"Having procured the last will through these improper means, (they) then fabricated a series of lies and inaccuracies, to perpetuate the falsehoods that Ms Kwa Kim Li had been involved in the last will, and hide their own role in getting (Mr Lee Kuan Yew) to sign the last will and their wrongdoings," it said.
At the same time, the tribunal said, it seemed that Mr Lee Kuan Yew himself had taken Mrs Lee as his lawyer for this last will, instead of Ms Kwa, his actions showed.
Besides signing the will on knowing that Mrs Lee had drafted it, he had also instructed his personal assistant to send Ms Kwa only a copy of the will.
This differed from his usual practice, as he had asked Ms Kwa to keep the originals for the six previous versions of his wills that she had drafted.
WHOSE INTEREST DID SHE SERVE?
Even as Mrs Lee had acted as her father-in-law's lawyer, she had ignored her duties towards him, the tribunal found.
A conflict of interest arose in her capacities as both lawyer to Mr Lee Kuan Yew and wife to Mr Lee Hsien Yang, a beneficiary of the will.
The elder Mr Lee was bequeathing one-third of his estate to Mr Lee Hsien Yang. As such, Mrs Lee should also have asked Mr Lee Kuan Yew to consult another lawyer for advice to avoid any conflict of interests. But none of this was done, the tribunal noted.
In fact, Mrs Lee had taken instructions from her husband on the arrangements relating to the signing of the will and, in doing so, had "abused her position to further Mr Lee Hsien Yang's wishes that the last will be executed hurriedly", the tribunal said.
Aside from one e-mail from Mr Lee Kuan Yew over the matter, all the other instructions that Mrs Lee had received on the matter had come from her husband.
Also, Mrs Lee had not even discussed the will or explained it to Mr Lee Kuan Yew, by her own admission.
The last will had some key differences with the sixth and penultimate will, which Mr Lee Kuan Yew had been discussing with Ms Kwa until just a few days before Dec 16, 2013.
Among other things, Mr Lee Kuan Yew had bequeathed to his daughter, Dr Lee Wei Ling, a larger share of his estate than to his sons in his penultimate will. There was also no demolition clause - relating to the demolition of his Oxley Road house after his death - in it.
Mrs Lee admitted that she had not gone through the draft will with Mr Lee Kuan Yew to explain the differences. Asked about this dereliction of duty, she said of Mr Lee Kuan Yew: "I think Papa was his own best lawyer. He knew what he wanted."
SICK AND FRAIL
The tribunal noted that during the time the last will was executed, Mr Lee Kuan Yew's health was frail.
In an e-mail to Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong's wife Ho Ching on Dec 16, 2013, Dr Lee told her sister-in-law that her father had "been doing very well" because he had not been admitted to hospital for more than a month.
She added that she thought "age has caught up with his brain".
In another 2014 e-mail to Ms Ho, recounting the happenings of Dec 16, 2013, Dr Lee had said of her father: "By now, Pa was already (very) forgetful."
At 90 years old in December 2013, Mr Lee Kuan Yew had been in hospital for several weeks, with a string of ailments, from pneumonia to minor strokes.
It was under those circumstances that his last will was signed in a hurry, unlike the deliberate process he had used for previous wills.
"Mr Lee, who was very frail and in poor health, was misled by the very people whom he trusted: his son, Mr Lee Hsien Yang, and daughter-in-law, the respondent," the tribunal said.
It concluded that Mrs Lee "managed every aspect of the process", with her husband actively involved, and the circumstances in which they did so raised "serious questions" about their motives.
About the case
In January last year, the Attorney-General's Chambers (AGC) referred a case of possible professional misconduct involving Mrs Lee Suet Fern of Morgan Lewis Stamford LLC to the Law Society.
In a statement on the complaint, the AGC noted that Mrs Lee appears to have prepared the last will of founding Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew and arranged for Mr Lee to execute it, despite the fact that her husband, Mr Lee Hsien Yang, is one of the beneficiaries. His share increased under the last will.
The AGC also noted that Mr Lee Hsien Yang had said publicly that the last will was drafted by Ms Kwa Kim Li of Lee & Lee. However, Ms Kwa has denied that she drafted it.
Mr Lee Hsien Yang and his sister Wei Ling have clashed with their older brother, Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong, over whether their late father's house at 38 Oxley Road should be preserved or demolished.
Mr Lee Hsien Yang has also questioned what is the public interest that is being served by the AGC pursuing the case and why it was rushing the case only last year when the facts were known by all parties for years.
The AGC has said it has a statutory duty to deal with misconduct by lawyers, and that rules for lawyers make clear that they should not place themselves in a position of conflict.
The AGC had also written to Mrs Lee several times to ask her to explain the position and her role in preparing the last will - but it said she did not answer the questions.
Deputy Attorney-General Lionel Yee, who oversees the case as Attorney-General Lucien Wong has recused himself - he was previously PM Lee's personal lawyer - had further asked that it be referred to a disciplinary tribunal.

Seated back straight on a comfy office chair, Brian Samuel Ndun’gu keenly looks at a piano set before him. He carefully takes off his black canvas shoes and quietly composes himself before plunging the toes of his right foot through the keys. A beautiful melody of Joy to the World wafts through an open field where he is seated gently swaying his head to the music. He has mastered a rare skill of playing the piano with his toes.
He was born without arms and with one deformed leg due to a congenital defect. But that has not deterred him from living his life to the fullest. He has honed a range of skills that most people with limbs do in a lifetime. He can sing, draw, play the piano, the guitar, swim, play chess and dribble a ball. Samuel has also overcome obstacles considered mundane, such as answering telephone, baking a cake, writing, dressing and eating. Most of the skills are self-taught.
In a hospital in Mathira, Nyeri County where he was born 19 years ago, doctors did not offer much medical explanation to the cause of his condition. “They urged my mother to accept me as I was,” he says. As a child, he questioned God a lot, trying to make sense of his condition. But with time, he accepted himself having realised that his life had a purpose and that negativity would be an additional limitation.
A positive attitude has helped him surmount hurdles. He was never afraid to stand out. In his early years, he sang in the church choir as the only boy among girls. And by the time he was joining school at five years, he had already learnt how to write using his toes. “At the time, we were living with a cousin; a Class Eight candidate. Out of curiosity, I would take her pen and learning materials and scribble things for fun. With time I learnt to use my foot to write,” he says.
Determined to have Samuel lead a normal life, his mother enrolled him in a mainstream school. “She made me feel loved and encouraged me to never limit myself. She made it clear that I could do anything I put my mind to,” he says.
Best handwriting or is it legwriting?
His kindergarten teacher at Kalimoni Primary School, Juja, was apprehensive about him at first. “Even though she accepted me in her class, she was afraid that I could not catch up with other children,” he adds. Samuel would, however one day surprise her when she handed out an assignment and he was the first to complete it. It changed how the teacher and other students viewed him. At one point, he won a school award for the best handwriting. It is while in primary school that he also learnt to draw and swim. “I could draw well and on most occasions I helped my classmates draw diagrams,” he says. He forged great friendships with his classmates who assumed the role of being his caretakers, helping him out with tasks he could not do on his own.
In Juja Preparatory School where he went for his secondary education, he excelled in things few expected him to. He once emerged the best in a swimming competition and when he was in Form Three, he produced his first song featuring Faith Muturi, former host of Crossover 101.
Fondly referred to as Sammy Brayo, he loves nature and hanging out with friends. Moving around while hopping on one leg is tedious, but he has grown accustomed to it. He prefers to use a taxi to run his daily errands, a costly affair for the mother.
“I have no problem travelling in a matatu, but most are not equipped to handle people living with disability. Besides, what if I am asked to alight before getting to my destination as it often happens?” he poses. He also enjoys playing chess in his free time.
At home, he is quite independent. “I dress myself, mop the floor, pour my tea from a flask, I have also attempted doing my laundry,” he says laughing. For his drawings, he uses a customised stand. The only child in his family, Samuel aspires to be a news anchor and one day host a television show highlighting the plight of the disabled. To that end, Samuel who completed high school two years ago is currently in his third semester pursuing a diploma in mass communication at Talanta Institute. He is also focusing more on making a career out of music and recently released a song. “There are many songs I have written so far, which I hope to produce in future,” says Samuel.
His secret to wading through life’s challenges with grace and fortitude, Samuel says is prayer. He is also so indebted to his parents for embracing him and supporting him every step of the way. “I have three parents, my birth mother and my guardians; the Skilton’s family who have supported me in many ways, even paying most of my school fees,” he says.

To my dearest Lily,
You've been gone for three months as of today. It snuck up on me actually. Last week sucked royally with Halloween. It was the first major holiday and I pretty much had to hide from social media. All the babies that you were supposed to grow up with had cute costumes and I thought about how I promised your daddy that you could be Princess Leia or Yoda depending upon gender. You would have been Princess Leia obviously.
But I remembered when I read a blog post today by a momma that lost a baby girl named Ruby earlier this year. Anyway, she's pregnant again and it was weird for her because Ruby wasn't there. I imagine I will have similar feelings myself when I find out I'm pregnant again. But then, I started reading her past posts to see if she had felt the way I had felt in the past few months after losing you.
She also talked about how long it had been when they found out about their second baby. It was three months to the day and then it clicked for me that today was the 6th. It explained why I was up at the crack of dawn this morning and couldn't really sleep until 9 again. Your daddy couldn't sleep either.
She talked about being around strangers and people she knew and them all acting normal. It's weird because I remember being in public and wondering if people could tell I had just had a baby since you weren't with me a couple of months ago at your AL and Uncle Will's first football game. Even though I knew that was your fate, it still was a shock to lose you all the same. Did I look normal? Or did I look sad?
She also talked about how now she and Ruby's daddy had a more compassionate view for the world since they had faced death. It made me think of Harry Potter being able to see the thestrals for the first time because he has faced death in the face. His world view added something he had never seen before. Ours as well. It's disconcerting at times even if we don't show it. The world isn't the place it used to be for me.
Ellen DeGeneres says every day at the end of her show, "Be kind to one another." Plato said it this way, "Be kind for everyone you meet is fighting a hard battle."
And Lil, it's so true. You just never know who is struggling. Like I said earlier in the week, how I was struck by the fact that this is the first time the ministry has been online. This is also the first time people have seen mommas like me grieving online too. For some I would imagine it is hard to watch. It might even make them uncomfortable. It used to make me uncomfortable quite frankly. But here's the deal, this blog post isn't for the people who haven't sat in my place. It's for the ones who have. So they can see someone else talk to their baby and feel normal because it's all they want to do too. Not everyone feels that way. Grieving is certainly different for everyone. But my point is that there is solace in knowing others feel the way I do about you. It's why I'm writing to you now. I am struggling with moving forward. There is a part of me that wants to be done with this year, but then I'm stuck with the fact that once I get through those tough spots, it's that much longer that it has been since I've seen you and held you. But I know that I need to get it out, to help me process. So I'm writing about grieving, about you, about what life is like for us now.
The part that struck me most from Ruby's momma's blog was where I read where Ruby's daddy wanted to go on a road trip. He knew he wanted to do that while they were in the hospital.
I didn't realize I wanted a road trip until this week. It's like my daddy, your Pop/Pappaw (we never really decided because once we found out you were sick, it was too hard to talk about) says, the road is calling me. I know that once I get out there I will still think about you. I'm always thinking about you. I told your daddy that right now I feel like I can only do one thing at a time because I'm already thinking about you. So I'm in essence multi-tasking all the time. I just figure being on the road would allow me time to just think without Gilmore Girls or whatever I've decided to distract myself with for the time being out of the way. That maybe somehow, I will find some peace and also see you in the ways I see you now that you're not here anymore.
I know you're in heaven, but I don't know what you're doing. I hope that you let me know you see me today. I love you and miss you desperately, Lil. Your daddy does too.
1 Real Cure for Burnout
11 hours ago

EGG HUNT – 2-song single
In the spring of 1986 Dischord founders Ian MacKaye and Jeff Nelson (both formerly of Minor Threat) went to England to visit, and were invited by Southern Records founder John Loder to do some recording while they were there. Southern was operated out of a row house in a neighborhood called Wood Green, and John had a 24-track studio set up in the garage. They recorded four songs, including "Me and You", something that the two had been playing together in the basement for many years, and "We All Fall Down", which was written by Ian for Embrace, but had been passed on by the band. Having had such a good time recording and hanging out in London, Ian and Jeff decided to release a single to mark the occasion. The name was chosen since it was recorded over Easter weekend. That summer they tried forming a new band called Egg Hunt with ex-members of Gray Matter, but it wasn't meant to be. The Southern session would turn out to be the last time the two would record music together * Dischord.

Ad blocker interference detected!
Wikia is a free-to-use site that makes money from advertising. We have a modified experience for viewers using ad blockers
Wikia is not accessible if you’ve made further modifications. Remove the custom ad blocker rule(s) and the page will load as expected.
I-is this recording? Is it on? Okay, uh... I don't know why I'm doing this, or why I waited so long. It isn't like I want to remember these things, but I feel like others deserve to know. I feel you all at least deserve a warning. But to be honest, I really don't want to talk about this. I wish I could say it was just a bad dream, but then I'd be lying, because the pain I felt was all too real. Um, I should...I should just start from the beginning.
This happened about four or three months ago back when I'd come home from college for Spring Break. Most people my age would probably have gone to the beach or whatnot, but I was eager to get home and see my parents and friends, who I hadn't seen since I left the previous year. It was a fairly small and quiet little community I lived in, I guess you could call it a Mayberry of some sort. Everyone knew each other and got along like peas in a pod. Crime always seemed to be at a low and nothing really happened, so anytime something did happen, it was bound to be talked about. That's why when the news of a serial killer having been spotted in the area struck, everyone talked about it. I'd showed up just around the time when everyone was talking about it, and at first I just thought it was the typical kind of gossip, you know, that usually wasn't true or whatever. But then I saw the report on the news, which practically confirmed the whole deal.
Now most people knew me as a pretty paranoid person. I could never go anywhere by myself, especially at night, heck I even had trouble walking back to my dorm room alone. My parents knew this, and it just so happened the very week I'd gotten back, they had been planning to leave on a second honeymoon-type of getaway, and were a little wary of leaving me home alone. I didn't want to ruin things for them, so I assured them I was a big girl now and could take care of myself. So they reluctantly left, but made me promise I'd lock all the doors and windows at night so I'd be okay. I promised, but even if I hadn't I'd still lock the doors, I wasn't the type to leave them unlocked anyways.
The day after they left, I invited my best friend Becky over for a sleepover. I hadn't talked to her all that much since I got started with college, aside from the usual Skype and Facebook methods of chatting, but it wasn't the same as talking in person and plus, my studies usually kept me pretty busy. Now she was actually quite the horror fanatic, and lived in a slightly different neighborhood than me. We spent some time up in my room chatting for a bit, she kept trying to bring up the whole serial-killer thing with me but I made it known I didn't wanna talk about it. She accused me of being a wimp, but I just laughed and brushed it off. After we ended up conversation, we went downstairs to pick a movie to watch. I made the mistake of letting her pick, and she ended up deciding on Halloween. She insisted it was appropriate, but I didn't know why she was treating this like it was a holiday. Still, she was my guest, and my friend, so I didn't complain.
While she started the movie, I was in the kitchen getting some popcorn ready. I also had some music playing on the radio, just to drown out the noises from the television, and was tuned in with one of the songs, humming along as I waited for the popcorn to finish popping. My concentration was suddenly broken as a sudden loud scream broke through the air. I jumped, and ran straight into the living room, where Becky sat with a somewhat-freaked out look on her face. I asked what had happened, she said she didn't know. It hadn't been her that had screamed. At first I thought it had just been the movie but it wasn't even at the scary part yet. After calming down, I went back to the kitchen and got the popcorn. We decided it had probably just been the wind, since it had been blowing furiously that night.
When the movie finished, we ended up going to bed. The next morning Becky had to go home, so I walked out to her car with her, caught up in a bit of a rushed conversation. That's when we noticed the police cars and the ambulance next door. This alarmed me a little bit, I knew the people who lived next door. It was a sweet older couple, with daughter about twelve, thirteen years old I think, and two little boys. I'd met them before at a couple of neighborhood parties, they were pretty nice people.
As a concerned neighbor, I decided to go over and find out what happened. So while Becky drove off, I walked down the sidewalk until I was front of the other house. I saw the mother, she was sitting on the porch, crying, while her husband sat next to her. It didn't sound like the normal kind of cry, it sounded almost... heartbroken.
Before I could even approach them and ask what was going on, the front door opened and one by one, some paramedics came out hauling three bodies on stretchers. Then I remembered last night. That scream hadn't been the wind.
Horrified, all I could do was quickly offer my condolences and rush back to my house, making sure all the doors and windows were firmly locked. Sure, it was daytime, and horror movie logic said that killers never struck in the daytime, but try telling that to my over-thinking brain. I didn't want to take any chances.
Still shaken from what I'd seen, I fixed myself a bowl of cereal and turned on the TV, hoping to find some good old morning cartoon to take my mind off of things. But every channel seemed to be interrupted by a news broadcast, talking about the recent murders in my neighborhood. The reporter said that the parents had been out that night at dinner and hadn't come home until later. The house had been dark and quiet when they got back, so they assumed the kids had just gone to bed. They hadn't known what had really happened until that morning, when the mother had gone upstairs to wake them all up for breakfast, and had found their bodies hanging from the ceiling. According to her, their eyes had been completely removed, nothing but bloody sockets left, and their stomachs looked to have been slashed open, all intestinal organs littered in a sloppy pile beneath them.
Just hearing this made me barf up a bit of my cereal. I quickly changed the channel and was thankful to find a station that wasn't broadcasting the news events, but I didn't have the stomach to finish my breakfast. I'd known those kids, they'd never hurt anybody. In fact, I'd seen them outside playing with the family dog the other day, they'd been so happy. Who would be so heartless to take a child's life from them? Something told me, however, if the parents had been home, they might have suffered the same fate as their children.
I was supposed to have gone shopping with Becky that day, but I cancelled out last minute, saying I wasn't feeling well, instead asking if I could come over to her house that night for another sleepover to make up for it. She was okay with it, and I was grateful. I didn't want to be alone, especially with the fact that this supposed serial killer had just killed the kids next door. What if I was next? There was no way I was going to take that risk.
Much to my dismay, Becky ended up picking out another horror movie to watch when I went over to her house. Luckily I had my phone with me so I just watched videos on my Youtube app until it was over with, so after the movie was done, we talked for a little bit and then went to bed. My mind was completely uneasy the whole time, however, but I tried not to worry. I was in a completely different neighborhood and I had nothing worry about.
When I got home the next day, I walked into the house to find it in a bit of an untidy state. I hadn't remembered leaving it like that, and I was suddenly scared. Within a flash I had called the police and they'd showed up. I'd chose to remain out of the house while they investigated, and didn't go back in until I got the okay. They told me it had probably just been a botched robbery, but I knew they were just lying so they wouldn't have to worry me. I'd known what had really happened. The killer had been in my house, but I hadn't been there, so he'd just left. I could have been killed. I could have ended up like those kids next door.
As that chilling realization came over me, I definitely did not want to be alone the next night either. I knew he could come back, I knew I could still be in danger, and even though I constantly told myself not to worry about it, it did me no good. Thankfully Becky agreed to coming over, despite acting annoyed about it. This time I opted to watch something other than a horror movie, and she went along with it once she saw how nervous I was acting. I needed to set my mind at ease somehow, I thought a Disney movie might help.... I did manage to calm down eventually... even starting to forget about my worries for a little bit, as Becky made some sort of joke regarding a line a character said, and I giggled at it. I began to let my guard down... but I wish I hadn't.
Halfway through the film, the power suddenly went out, the TV shutting off and the entire room going dark. My paranoia shot back and I nearly screamed, but then I reminded myself that the power going out was normal in this neighborhood, you could expect a blackout at least once a month here. Now there were two options, we could wait until morning and have the power guy come take a look at it, but I wasn't willing to spend the entire night in a dark house. The second option, which would be the easier and obvious choice, would be to go to the fuse box and flip a few switches until the power came back on. But see, the fuse box was on the backside of my house, and there was no possible way I was gonna go outside now.
Becky called me a big baby and decided she would do it. Grabbing a flashlight, she unlocked the back door and went out, leaving me alone in the still-dark living room. I hugged my knees to my chest and just sat there the whole time, shivering every now and then. I knew I should have gone with her, I knew that I was just putting myself out as fishbait just sitting here, but I didn't know what else to do. My first instinct was always to panic, and then act. An act that could possibly get me killed, and I didn't want that.
After about five minutes, I realized Becky hadn't come back yet. Instead of allowing myself to sit there and worry any longer, I pulled myself off the couch and walked out the back door, onto the deck and down the steps, where I found the flashlight at the bottom. Still frightened, I picked it up and forced myself to take a step forward, my bare feet scratching against the rough grass. I called out for Becky, my voice quivering, but she didn't answer. An ear-piecing scream caused me to whirl around and drop the flashlight.
As I bent over to pick it up, I heard the sound of laughter in the dark, and shone the light up to see Becky standing there, hunched over and laughing loudly. This had made me angry. She knew how easily scared I could get, playing with my fear like that had not helped things any. But, I still couldn't help but feel some relief at seeing it had just been a prank.
Once Becky stopped laughing, I demanded to know why she hadn't flipped the switch to get the power back on. She told me she'd tried to, but then she'd saw that the wires had been cut. There was no way to get any electricity back into the house now. At first I didn't want to believe her, thinking she was still trying to scare me again, but she swore it was true, and even took me over to the fuse box to show me. They had been cut, I don't know with what, but that sent a chill down my spine. I backed away, all my worries suddenly looming up again.
I started to tell Becky we should get back inside, but before either of us could move, some sort of blade whizzed right past us and pierced right through her neck, blood spurting out like a water fountain. She dropped to the ground, gargling and choking, clawing at the blade to try and pry it loose, but it was no good. I stumbled back, only be able to scream. I wanted to believe I'd fallen asleep on the couch and that this was just a dream, but no. I knew it wasn't.
I turned around, starting to run back up the steps and into the house. I knew the home phone wasn't going to work, but I still had my cellphone on the coffee table. I could call 911, we could get help, Becky could be okay. But as I started back up the steps, I happened to look to my side and caught sight of something...no...someone. At least, I couldn't tell if it was a person or not, all I could see was a pair of glowing blue eyes. I thought it was a deer at first, but as I shone my flashlight over, it darted away. Panicked, I shone the flashlight around in the thicket of trees nearby, but I couldn't make anything else out. The dying choking noises from Becky brought me back to reality, and I bolted into the house, forgetting to lock the door behind me and nearly stumbling into a lamp. I picked my phone up from the coffee table and started to dial 911, but then I noticed it wasn't on.
The battery...I'd forgotten to charge the battery after I'd watched videos the other night...
Oh gosh... oh gosh... I didn't have time to charge it. I didn't have time to wait, I couldn't wait, my best friend was dying in my backyard, and there was possibly some crazy killer lurking somewhere outside of my house.
I hadn't shut the back door.
In a panic, I immediately slammed it shut and locking it, praying that I'd been quick enough. I knew Becky had set her phone aside before we started the movie, she usually didn't want any text messages or phone calls disrupting her. She'd left it next to mine, hadn't she?
I searched the coffee table with my flashlight, but Becky's phone was nowhere in sight. I got down on my knees and began looking under the couch, the chairs, and even under the cushions, but I couldn't find it. But at that very time...I heard it ring, that same generic ringtone like on any other phone, she'd never seen the point in changing it. I got up and looked over to the kitchen counter, where I could see the faint glow of the phone's screen. Slowly, I walked over, and picked it up, looking at the caller ID screen, hoping maybe it was her parents, or someone I could ask for help from, but the number displayed was unknown...
I didn't want to answer it. No. I wasn't going to. I didn't have time for this, I had to get help. I hit the reject button and tried dialing 911, but then it started ringing again. Angered, I hit the reject button again. I thought it had just been a prank call, now had not been the time for a prank call. I again tried to dial 911, but it rang again...this time, I brought myself to answer it.
"What do you want, you bastard?!?" I practically shouted into the phone, my emotions a mix of anger and fear. No one said anything. There was just a brief moment of silence, before someone spoke.
"Look behind you." the voice said in a voice quiet enough to send chills down my spine.
"W-what do you mean? Look, if this is just someone's idea of sick prank, t-then-"
There was a click. Then a busy signal. They'd hung up.
I let the phone drop down to my side. I almost didn't know what was going on anymore. I just wanted to curl up and cry, but I didn't. I didn't even dial 911. For some insane reason or the other, I did as the voice had said to do, and hesitantly turned around to be met with those same glowing eyes I'd seen outside.
I'd set the flashlight down on the counter, but quickly picked it back up and shone it where I saw the eyes. This time, the figure didn't move. He didn't dart away. He just stood there, staring at me, as I stared at him, frozen in complete fear and terror. His skin was unnaturally pale, almost like a corpse's, but he was very much alive. Pitch black hair partially covered his eyes, which were still glowing.
I should have run just then, but I couldn't. I stood there, completely paralyzed, as the man moved towards me. Common sense hit me and I started backing away until my back hit the kitchen counter. He was right over me now, leaning in closely. He still seemed to be staring at me, but his eyes... now that he was closer to me, I could see they weren't looking in any other direction. They only seemed to be fixated upwards...you could only see that kind of gaze in a blind person.
Bewildered and afraid, I watched as he lifted his hand up, something was clasped in fingers. It was a small blade of some sort, a knife I think. It was still coated in blood...Becky's blood no doubt. He proceeded to pierce the edge of it through my cheek, cutting it open. Searing pain soared through my face and I could only let out a sickly sob. Blood starting streaming from my cheek down my neck. The man lowered his blade, leaning his face a bit closer to mine, looking as if he were inhaling the scent of my blood. Then he stuck his tongue out and began...began to lick it, lapping up every last drop like it was ice cream. I cringed, I'd stopped sobbing at this point but tears still continued to fall out of my eyes. It was known killers had their own way of doing things, I'd heard stories, I'd seen movies, but nothing was as bad as experiencing it first hand. It made me sick.
At last he stopped and leaned back from me, running his tongue over the bits of blood still remaining on his lips. I saw this as my chance to try and get away, but he grabbed me before I even got the chance, inducing a vice-like grip on my arm. I struggled to get him to release me, but he wouldn't.
"Don't." he said, in that same quiet voice as on the phone.
Remembering the report of the kids on TV, I stopped struggling. Despite him keeping his hold on my arm, I ended up sinking halfway to my knees and began to sob again.
"Why?" I wanted to know. "Why are you doing this? What did I do?"
The man didn't say anything. His hold still remaining, he knelt down, shoving his blade back in his pocket before using his other hand to reach out and grab my face, turning it to face his. He looked emotionless, it was almost like he was wearing a mask.
"You weren't here." he said simply, offering no explanation as to what that meant. He let go of my face, and reached back into his pocket to retrieve his blade. "Now...get a good long look at me sweetheart...I might be the last thing you see."
Then he shoved the blade into my right eye. I convulsed in pain and let out a scream before everything went black.
When I woke up, I was in the hospital. My parents were there, they'd instantly taken the first plane back home as soon as they'd heard what had happened. I had trouble remembering at first, until I felt the bandages covering the right side of my face. I couldn't see out of one eye, but was told when the police had found me, it had been gone right out my socket. I was lucky to be alive...while Becky...Becky hadn't been so lucky. They'd found her body still in the backyard, her stomach slashed open, her guts spilled out. Her eyes were also gone...just like those kids.
I felt bad for not staying for her funeral, but I didn't want to stay in town any longer. I ended my break early and headed back to college, spending most of my time secluded here in my room. It's been awhile since the whole ordeal happened, but... but I can't forget it. You know how they say it takes longer for emotional wounds to heal rather than physical wounds? Well it's true. I have nightmares, I can still see that blade piercing through Becky's throat, I can still see those glowing eyes and that cold emotionless face. I haven't been able to sleep all that good lately and that's really ruined my focus on studying for exams, I've mainly been living off of coffee just to get myself through the day.
By now I was kind of famous. I was known as the only living survivor of the Sightless Slaughterer... that's what they called him now. I never really have told anyone what happened aside from the police, and I don't know why I waited until now, maybe it was because of what happened this morning...even though I should have seen it coming. Horror movie logic said that the killer never left the last one standing alone, that they'd come back to get them in some way. But knowing this... I still wasn't prepared.
It'd been one of those rare nights when I actually managed to get some sleep, so I felt pretty good. I went down and got my mail, it was just a few bills and a magazine, alongside a small package. I didn't recognize the name of the sender, so I didn't open it right away. I waited until I got back from classes later. I would eventually have to open it so why wait?
I wasn't in too much of a hurry to open it, my anxiety only grew worse as I tore open the box and fumbled through a few layers of packing peanuts with my hand, that was, until my fingers hit something soft...that's when my anxiety turned to horror, as I pulled out three eye balls. Three. Legit. Human. Eyeballs.
There was no doubt one of them was mine, I knew that. But the other two... it took me a moment to realize they were Becky's.
I threw that package in the trash, and it's still there now, waiting to be taken away to the garbage dump. I had wanted to forget everything that happened, I had wanted to move on, but I can't. No matter how hard I try I just can't. But I know the least I can do, is warn others of this person, just so you can be cautious. I don't know where he is or how he does what he does, but trust me, you'll know he's there. You'll see his eyes glowing. And as soon as you see his eyes, run. Run as fast as you can, don't look back, pray he doesn't catch you.
Because if he does catch you...
He really will be the last thing you see.

Grand Furniture Gallery Complaint - Grand Furniture Gallery is the worst company I have ever used
CARY, NORTH CAROLINA -- His is the WORST COMPANY EVER. They charge your account before they even give you a shipping date. As a matter of fact they never actually even gave us a shipping date. We waited almost two months for our furniture and we live only an hour away. We were told we would have our furniture in two weeks. That came and went and when we called we were told two more weeks. Two weeks later and still no word on our furniture. We called and left a dozen messages with no return calls. When we finally got a hold of the owner he told us he had never said anything about a shipping date though we had spoken to him two times previously and each time we were told "It will be there this weekend." He called us liars and said there was nothing he could do but wait for the shipping company and that he would call us and let us know. Guess what, that never happened either. Long story short it was literally two months before we had our product and this was only after having to call the BBB, consumer protection, and our bank because he illegally charged our account and never provided any type of time line on a delivery or that we would actually ever receive it. It was a complete mess the employees were incompetent and rude and have no business dealing with customers. I would never recommend this place and I would NEVER shop here again.

My little fire extinguisher has been moved from the house to my car. The first time I just turned the car to on and fuel pump kicked in there was fuel spraying everywhere. I thought all of the connections were tight. I was wrong. I started cranking them down and just kept cranking until I was certain things were tight and then went 90 degree farther.The most nerve racking part about mine HPFP install was the the re-install of the hard fuel into the pump as well. Pretty nerve racking how hard I had to crank down the nut before it finally started to not leak. Lol.
Everything will be worth the troubles lol.

I couldn’t agree more… intensity does fire up our creativity. How intense are you with your craft?
Ade had just moved into the big city, Eko-Akete, with the prospect of enjoying the bustling vibes of the city, and his new job opportunity as an intern for a telecom company. He had left his hometown and told his Parents he won’t be coming back soon. The sad look on his aged father as he bade them, still lingers in his memory.
Here he is in Eko, he has spent two months as an intern, and out of sheer luck, he had been given the role of a Brand Manager, wow! everything is going pretty fast than he could have imagined, “maama’s prayers are really working o”.
The Head of Dept walked into the office room where they have their end of year appraisal and reviews. Ade with so much excitement walked into the beaming with smiles, as he greeted his boss, this is his first time of joining the group…
View original post 506 more words

This was my second visit to the gardens to paint. My agreement with Pam was that I wouldn't stay in one place the entire visit. I saw this bloom midway through the gardens. I did a quick sketch on Garza papel (paper) and moved on. I later added watercolor. I was attracted to the transparency of the petals.

A hot tub repair man turned up to a female customer’s front door with his private parts sticking out of his trousers.
Ivan Kotkov remained in the exposed state as he carried out work at her house.
Kotkov then went to the home of another woman where he again walked around the house while exposed.
Bulgarian national Kotkov, who has lived in the UK for more than two years, has now been placed on the sex offenders register.
He had been employed by a Welsh firm and travelled to Fife to carry out repairs to hot tubs at homes in Dunfermline and Cowdenbeath on the same day.
Kotkov, 42, of Marine Parade, Barmouth, was found guilty after a trial at Dunfermline Sheriff Court.
One of the women took a photograph of him in the state of undress and it was shown in court.
On August 28 at a house in Dunfermline, Kotkov intentionally exposed his genitals in a sexual manner through his open trouser zip.
He committed the same offence at a house in Cowdenbeath, on the same day.
The women, aged in their 50s and 30s, described him as “hanging out” and “popping out” of his trousers as he walked about their homes.
Both were very distressed by their ordeals, with one saying she felt “traumatised” afterwards.
Kotkov claimed he was not wearing underwear, the zip on his work trousers was broken but he had not realised this when he turned up at the first house.
He said it was only when he went to use the toilet he noticed the zip was broken and he had then tried to fix it with a pair of pliers.
Kotkov accused the witnesses of lying about what they could see.
The second woman said Kotkov went to use her toilet and when he emerged, he was exposed.
The woman took a photograph as evidence and she said it appeared he was wearing underwear.
The women were both alone in their homes and did not confront Kotkov at the time.
The second woman contacted the company when Kotkov left.
The firm then phoned the first customer to ask if there had been any problems there.
The company contacted Kotkov telling him to return to Wales and he met with his bosses the next day wearing trousers with a broken zip.
Sheriff Alastair Brown said the evidence of the women was that while he was working on hot tubs the accused had his private parts protruding through his trousers.
“It was for an extended period in both cases. The obvious inference would be it was for sexual gratification.
“I find his position incomprehensible. It makes no sense for a man who is aware of this problem to have done nothing about it.”
He rejected Kotkov’s evidence “in its entirety on matters of importance” and found him guilty of both charges.
The sheriff called for reports and Kotkov will be sentenced on December 4.

It's not easy being a dad to a daughter — sometimes unexpected dilemmas creep up.
Writing under the username u/Pause96, he explains: "I'm the dad of a 25 year old young woman who I love very much. I've been able to have a good relationship with my daughter and I enjoy my time with her, but there's one thing about her that would give many people pause - she is a diagnosed sociopath."
The father describes how his daughter displayed increasingly odd and disturbing behaviour from a young age, which motivated him to seek professional help. He explains how she struggled in elementary school and always got in trouble for lying, cruelty and all other types of misbehaviour.
At 18 she was officially diagnosed with sociopathy, and with an "enormous amount" of therapy and support, her inferior behaviour minimised as the years went by.
The man gratefully noted that her following years were much more valuable: "She's law-abiding; has a decent job and a good education; and has many good friendships and admirers. Especially male admirers; she is very, very charming and adept at attracting guys and maintaining their interest."
He states that she has a boyfriend who he really likes and gets on with as they live in a similar area. But there's just one issue.
The man went on to explain: "I doubt she loves him. We've had some very honest, in-depth discussions about her mental health since her diagnosis, and she's been open with me that she doesn't feel love or empathy towards anyone, even family.
"When she acted very sad and broken up over the death of one of her closest friends at the funeral, she confessed to me privately that it was all a put-on, and that she felt 'pretty neutral' about the whole thing. She has also stated she has never once felt guilty about anything she's ever done, and doesn't know what guilt feels like.
"While she enjoys being around her boyfriend and is sexually attracted to him, I highly doubt she feels much of anything towards him love-wise."
The boyfriend reportedly did not know about the diagnosis and the daughter was terrified to tell him because she didn't want to "scare him away".
But he disagrees. He says: "I've made it clear to her that she needs to tell him the truth before they marry; that he has the right to know and consider it; or I will; to which she always responds, 'I know you wouldn't dare.'
"I actually would - I really like and respect this young man, and would feel awful keeping this "secret" from him, and letting him walk into a marriage without this piece of knowledge. I'm not trying to sabotage my daughter's future."
He closed out his story by asking Reddit users if he was in the wrong.
What do you think?

Archvillain wrote:(Supersonic would be a blue splat on the wall if he trys his power due to him not being able to see everythin fast enough and if he could clearly see everything goin at Mach 2 then if he walked normally it would seem like the zero hour power)
You know, over time, reaction time can be improved? I made it so his character was going to have problems like that in the first RP go around, but he's had 15 years to adjust to the high speeds and react according to avoid being a blue splat. Also, who says he doesn't feel like the earth is in slow-mo when he's not running? Didn't you wonder why his room was so neat and tidy? Mostly because he feels it kills time, something he has too much of.

Janet Jackson made her return to the stage at Essence Fest in New Orleans on Sunday (July 8). During her set, Jackson gave an emotional and heartfelt speech about the passing her father Joe Jackson and explained why she decided to perform.
Janet's father passed away on June 27 from cancer, leaving his family and many people in the music community devastated.
"It was really hard for me," Janet expressed to the crowd. "I didn't know what to do. I didn't know how to move forward, if I should cancel this festival or the entire tour." Fighting back tears, she revealed that a conversation with one her brothers gave her the motivation to continue.
During the conversation with her brother, the siblings talked about her father's strength. "He was so strong, and without his drive, his strength...we wouldn't have this success. We are a black family that came from Indiana and we broke all kinds records around the globe. That's truth," Jackson said. Her brother then asked her what she thinks their father would tell her to do, which is when she realize that he would tell her to "finish what she'd] started."
Watch Janet's speech below.

She got rescued from darkness when she was four. It was a simple matter: There was a magazine with Franklin Graham on the cover (‘Rebel with a Cause’), and she asked her mom who that was. Her mom told her about him, and what he did. And then her mom told her about the salvation message.
The little girl accepted Jesus into her heart and has loved Him ever since.
But when she was eight or so, she got attacked by the spiritual darkness. She had thoughts in her head telling her that she wasn’t saved, and that she had committed the unforgiveable sin (which was the stupidest attack strategy ever because she had accepted Jesus into her heart. Still, that’s what the voice said, and that’s what she felt like: She felt horrible).
To keep the darkness away, she sang worship songs as they played on the radio in the kitchen.
And the darkness left when she did that.

Holy shit. Okay, yesterday I flew into Hawaii (Oahu specifically). I wanted to grab Poké to eat and bring it with me to eat on the beach. I pick the place closest to me. I walk in, and there’s several workers behind the counter (it’s like a Subway layout). When I’ve constructed what I want in my head, I go to start my order, but it all goes out the window because the girl taking my order was so beautiful. I literally forgot how to say anything. And I was too shy to make direct eye contact. I couldn’t stop stuttering when I pushed myself to talk. Once I’m at the beach, all I could think about was how I had wished I had gotten her number. I go for a swim and I try to take a nap and the thought wouldn’t go away. So I convince myself to do it. What did I have to lose? In the likely event that I was rejected, I would just never see her again. I walk back to the Poké place and my legs feel like jello. I quickly walk past to scope the inside. It’s busy and full, and it’s such a small space. I sit down outside and anxiously wait. I wait partly for it to get less crowded and not busy, but mostly because I was nervous as fuck. I also had to time it right so that I wasn’t interrupting her from helping someone out. When it was empty as it was going to get inside, I finally went. I approached her and asked her if I could talk to her on the side. I walk to the corner of the place and she follows. She looks at me with a worried face and asks me if there was something wrong with my food. And I told her not at all! I said that I thought she was pretty and was wondering if I could get her number. She hesitated slightly and I told her that she didn’t have to if she didn’t want to! And she said that normally she would say yes, but she’s leaving Hawaii soon. I told her that I was only here for 7 days! And she’s like where did you come from? I told her Washington and I think she was saying that she’s going to Washington! She gives me her number and tells me how flattered she is and that I was extremely courageous to come up to her. I couldn’t stop smiling long after it all happened lmao. So yeah.

From the newly published leaflet Remember, Respect and Record: The Magdalene Women of Galway
COPE Galway has launched a leaflet called Remember, Respect and Record: The Magdalen Women of Galway edited by John Tierney.
It focuses on the lives of women who lived and worked in a Magdelene Laundry on Foster Street in Galway from 1870 to 1984, which was taken over by the Sisters of Mercy in 1854, and records how several women escaped.
The publication of the leaflet comes as COPE Galway prepares to renovate the convent building on Foster Street into a centre for women and children who experience domestic abuse.
Maisie Kenny (not her real name), and who was known as number 105, was put in the laundry when she was aged 14 in 1948 and she escaped in 1952.
In the leaflet, she’s recorded as saying:
“I escaped out of it in 1952, the late Christmas of 1951. In a deluge [of rain]. Which left me well over 3.5 years there… I escaped out of it. I went over the roof. It’s as simple as that!
“It took some doing, and I think it was the one time in my life that I knew what real fear was.
“And the fear that was, up on the roof that night, if I fell, I could be killed, that wouldn’t bother me, If I was gone I’d be gone! But if I was caught I’d never get a chance again.”
“I’d get watched around the place, the hair cut, everything. But there was no way I’d get a second chance!”…
“The window sills were very low, you could put your foot on them. Well that window was right beside the drainpipe up to the roof, so I worked up that drainpipe, on to the roof, I had to negotiate a V shape on the top. I was afraid you see, the slates were wet, but, just in case, the Man Above wanted to make sure I succeeded so I did. That’s the way I look at it!”
“My immediate thought then when I came out was “I’m out! I’m out!”. But no time for anymore thoughts, “keep going”. But the sensation of being outside, looking in, was something! I’ve never forgotten it!”
Áine Hickey and her sister, who owned a shop on Foster Street, told how they saw a mass escape from the laundry at some point in the 1960s.
Aine is recorded as saying:
“I came home for lunch one day and there had been workmen with the ladders up to the windows and they had taken out the windows. Maybe it was the frames that had to be replaced but they had the windows taken out, and as I came in for lunch, which we did everyday, from school, we had time to run up and down, and my sister was going, ‘come in, come in quick, close the door and look out the window!’
“Well what was she talking about? So she says ‘look, just look!’ The workmen had gone off on their lunch break and they had left the ladders up to the top windows which had been removed and the girls had taken the opportunity. Aprons on, uniforms on and whatever.
“And she was saying ‘we don’t see them, we don’t see them, nobody sees what is happening. Don’t go out, don’t open the door, just watch and see how many’s going to get out like?’
“Well I think it was about 30 got out that day. To the best of my memory. And they were just literally running up the road, or running across Fair Green which was still a fair green at the time. Or it had just started to be turned into a car park.
“And we just were saying ‘Just go, go quick, go as far as ye can!’ Which they did. Now unfortunately some didn’t even know their way around, and might have been back that evening, or the guards had caught a few.
“A good few had made their escape and got helped by people around town who would have seen them and realised, and went ‘aw come on, just come in!’ I know I had a friend I worked with, she used to tell me a story about her house down in Woodquay where somebody came knocking on their door, literally knocking on the door.
“And she was only about my age at the time as well. And the mother had answered the door and immediately saw, realised, ‘Just come in!’ you know? And that person was given clothes and her fare to England. I know it bothers me too and there were several stories like that.
“I think somebody on Magdalen Terrace had taken somebody in as well, that day. If not more than one. Either tried to get them jobs someplace in Ireland, or even in town. They would have come back and say, that’s it, they are settled with that person, they are fine. Looked after, all that sort of thing.
“But I know that certainly a lot made their way to England or Dublin, they would have been given clothes and fare and just told ‘Just go!’ rather than go back inside, you know. It was high up. I remember, apron and skirt blowing in the breeze as they were coming down. I can still see them, but they went.”
“As I said, I don’t know whether the workmen accidentally or deliberately left the ladders up and vanished off for their lunch. I don’t know who they were, don’t know whether they were local. Or not. Never thought about that. Possibly locals at the time. But that was known by us as ‘The Great Escape’.
The leaflet can be read in full here
Pic: Cope Galway

A federal appeals court has ruled in favor of a man who claimed Yakima police arrested him during a traffic stop in retaliation for exercising his free speech rights.
The 2-1 ruling Friday by a three-judge panel of the 9th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals reverses a lower court decision and orders the case for trial.
Eddie Ford stepped out of his vehicle and argued with officers while being stopped for a noise ordinance violation on July 17, 2007. He ultimately returned to his vehicle and kept quiet after the officer warned he would be arrested if he didn't cooperate.
But officers arrested him anyway, telling Ford his mouth and attitude had talked him into jail.

Asalamu alakum. About 8 months ago I dreamt I was walking across my lawn behind my dad. We were headed to the house next door while crossing the grass I bumped into a guy who was going the same way. We looked at each other and smiled I never felt love like that I felt so peaceful we walked away. My dad & I went into the house to look around. I bumped into the guy again except this time we were looking at my dad and what I felt was his brother talking. It seemed like they didn?t agree on what they were talking about. I told this dream to a girl and she said that it means I will meet someone & we?d fall in love but it won’t work out between us unless I have another dream about the guy. A week later I met this guy. I have never seen him before in my life. He lives with his brother because his parents passed away I knew that in my dream. About 1 month after I met him I dreamt I walked into a restaurant with my parents. I told them to sit down until I come back. I went to the kitchen where the guy was. We sat with friends. Then he was cooking and his legs caught on fire. Before the ambulance took him I told him I loved him and then headed back to where my parents were sitting. Instead of walking into the restaurant I walked into a room full of women. It felt like it was my wedding but it didn?t seem like it I wasn?t wearing a white dress. I told this dream to a girl she said that the legs catching on fire mean he’s getting married. Plz. explain these dreams. Gazak Allah kair.
The dreams have no significance.
and Allah Ta’ala Knows Best
Mufti Ebrahim Desai

When she was on her way home in Pune from the IT company where she worked, Nayana Pujari was raped and murdered, allegedly by four men.
She was traveling in a car owned by her company. The driver and a security guard assigned to escort her home were arrested, along with two friends.
Ms Pujari was 27 when she was killed in 2009. Her husband, Abhijit, asked for a fast-tracked trial for his wife's case, but his petition was rejected by the Maharashtra Home department.
In September 2011, when he was brought to the Sassoon Hospital for a medical check-up, the cab driver, Yogesh Raut, escaped. He didn't have to try hard. He said he wanted to use the toilet. A policeman removed his handcuffs and he was allowed to wander away unsupervised.
The escape paralysed the case. Mr Raut has still not been caught. Police sources say that in narco-analysis tests conducted on him, he allegedly referred to having raped another girl.
If you have seen Mr Raut (photo accompanies this article), please contact:Pune Police headquarters
Contact number: 020 - 26122880

Sunday afternoon I drove north and crossed the border at San Ysidro and drove on to the Veteran’s Hospital in La Jolla for a date with my oncologist. For three days I had been having severe back and leg pains, I had hardly slept the night before, and was uncertain if I could make it. I made it okay.
I logged in with lodging, then went up to find my bed. The pain of walking was excruciating. There were five beds in the room, and I lay down on the one assigned to me. The pain was so bad I knew I would not be able to sleep. I went to a nearby nurse’s station and asked for some ibuprofen or anything. She could not give it to me. I would have to go back down to emergency and get it from the doctor on duty. The nurse found me a wheelchair and offered to push me down to Emergency. I told her it wasn’t necessary.
I wheeled myself to the elevators, and when I was down on the first floor wheeled myself to Emergency. It took more of an effort than I had expected, but it was not big deal. In about 45 minutes a young doctor came out, called my name, and after a cursory examination said he did not believe I had a spinal column issue, but a strained muscle. He ordered me some muscle relaxant pills. Pharmacy brought them to me quickly and I took one and wheeled myself back up to my bed.
After an hour or so the pain was so bad that I went back down to emergency to ask for something else. I waited three hours. The pain and the exhaustion became so great that I decided it was not worth it. I was so tired that I figured I could sleep on through the pain. Back in my bed for maybe fifteen minutes and I knew it wasn’t going to work and I wheeled myself back down to emergency. There was another wait for about an hour; I couldn’t remember ever experiencing a similar combination of pain and exhaustion. After another 45 minutes my name was called by a lady doctor who gave me a cursory examination and told me that in all likelihood the muscle relaxant was not going to help in the near term, that I was probably having a bout with the spastic nerve. She prescribed an anti-inflammatory drug and one for pain. I was pretty much under the water by this time and could only promise to follow direction when I took them.
I took three of the new pills there at the drinking fountain in the Emergency waiting room, rested for a bit, the wheeled back up to the lodging on the third floor. This time I tried to relax, drew my knees up to my chest and hoped for the best. It was four AM. My wake-up call was for 7.30. The pain was about the same, and I felt pretty dopey (not a straight-line). So long as I didn’t have to stand up for more than a moment at a time, I was okay in the wheelchair.
My first business was to go down to the first floor to get some labs, some blood drawn. I was there about 8.15. At 9 am I was on the 3rd. floor having the port in my chest irrigated. At 9.30 I was back down on the 1st floor in radiology to have the knees x-rayed. At the same time, I worked it out with scheduling to have the lower back x-rayed as well. They were very cooperative. The lady who did the work was very careful with me, lifting and moving me around on the gurney, but it was very painful when I had to be on my back.
Then it was time for my check up with Dr. Go, my oncologist. He already had the labs in his computer and was checking them. They looked fine, except for the fact that my white blood count is low. That was a matter of concern for him, but he had no advice for me. He made two observations. One, that low white blood counts are worrisome in that it could predict in some cases that the cancer might come back as leukemia, if I understood him right. I was so tired after the last two nights that all I could do was listen.
He also said that he had taken a “gamble” with me, in that he had given me very strong doses of chemotherapy, in the upper range of what is given, and he had been impressed by the willingness of my body to absorb the hits. Causes me to recall an earlier check-up while I was still doing the chemo, after I had asked some question, who knows what now, he had mentioned that he was “slamming” me with chemotherapy. This time, when he spoke about taking a “gamble” with me he laughed thinking about it.
If it worked. . . .
Now I had to go back down to the first floor and back to radiology to schedule an appointment for a cat-scan of the neck, where the first tumor was discovered. Then it was up to the 4th floor to Nuclear Medicine to schedule a pet-scan, a full-body scan. As I sat there in the wheel chair trying preparing to turn around to head for the elevators, the scheduling nurse, a man in his 50s maybe, offered to wheel me up. I told him I was okay, but thanks. I must not have moved because the next thing I knew the man had come out of his office and took hold of the chair. “I’ll take you,” he said.
In Nuclear Medicine I waited by the office window while the forms were being filled out. Once I fell asleep and only head falling down woke me up in time. I sat up as straight as I could in the chair then so that would not happen again.
Once the pet-scan was scheduled I rather woke up and wheeled myself to the elevators and back down to the first floor laboratory. I had to rest a couple, three times. There I explained that I needed to do more labs, as I had carelessly eaten a candy bar at midnight the night before while I was waiting in Emergency. My primary care doctor had wanted what they call “fasting labs,” blood drawn after at least ten hours of not eating anything. The lab nurse agreed, did the computer work, drew the blood, and I was finished with the VA Hospital in La Jolla. For the time being.
I wheeled to the main entrance, left the chair and walked outside. It wasn’t easy, and it was very painful. I stopped to sit on a stone bench for a few minutes. Anything to get off the right leg, where most of the pain was. Then I walked across the two-lane entrance street to the parking lot, to the valet stand. I couldn’t make it to my car without resting again. I young Black guy asked if he could help me. I gave him the keys to my car and he brought it over to me. Thank you very much. You’re reward will be in heaven.
Once in the front seat of the Jeep I was more comfortable. I started the drive down South. After a few minutes I noticed that I was weaving back and forth in my lane. I recalled that when I was given the muscle relaxant the night before, the young Chinese pharmacist had told me expressly that I should not drive the car. I had nodded okay to her. It’s been my experience that these precautions are always, usually, over-stated.
I soon found that I was driving so poorly that I had to get off the freeway. I had not yet covered the ten miles or so to down to San Diego. I pulled up into a residential street, put the car seat back and down, stretched out my legs and closed my eyes. I was so exhausted I could no lie quietly. The legs were restless. I got back on the freeway and started slapping myself first on one side of the face then the other until I reached Chula Vista, another fifteen miles maybe. I surprised myself to note how hard I was willing to do the slapping.
I drove to the Starbucks near Wal-Mart, parked, and went in. I could just barely walk for the pain, and I was so confused with the tiredness and I suppose the drugs for the pain that I had a difficult time ordering the coffee—a regular with three shots of espresso, I had to ask where the milk and stirring sticks were because I couldn’t find them, and then I had to get back to the Jeep. There I rolled down the windows and drank as much of the coffee as I could. Walking was very painful, but back in the seat of the Jeep it wasn’t too bad.
I started south again toward the border. I rather woke up. I had not eaten anything yet and the espresso must have it me with a little real lightening. I made it across the frontier and down to where we live in less than an hour. Outside the house the pain was very bad but I was still at least half awake. I went in the house to our bedroom and Irene came in and I told her about what had gone down. I lay around for a couple hours, then checked my email. I couldn’t get the brain to focus. I was taking the pain pills just as they were prescribed for me. Nothing with the pain was changing. The one thing that had changed was that I could lie down, and I didn’t have to do anything. So long as I didn’t have to take more than three or four steps, I was okay.
At 11.30 I went to bed for good. By 3.30 I think I was asleep. I woke at 8.30 this morning to the alarm and got up. I had a lot of work to catch up on. After a few steps to the bathroom and back, getting my pants on and so on, the pain was back where it had been the night before. And then we discovered, and I say we because I did not really understand what was happening until my wife appeared to be concerned and our daughter was burlesquing my behavior. I could not carry on a conversation, I was mumbling, it was difficult to walk, the pain was very bad, and my daughter was making fun of my slurred speech.
I was to get a massage at 2pm. Now that it was in my mind that the pain might be from a pinched sciatic nerve, I had reservations about a massage. I was dizzy, couldn’t walk more than a few steps, and was in severe pain. I decided to go around the corner to our family doctor. I called the massage guy and cancelled my reservation. It was decided that I would not drive the Jeep myself, but that Pretty would take me. Then I discovered that I could not find the car keys. Pretty got the keys from Irene and I got in the car.
At 2.30 I was with Doctor Olivia. I outlined the problem for her and told her what drugs I had been given for the pain. I was pretty non compass mentis, if that’s how you say it. I had to stop in the middle of a sentence to figure out what I was going to say. I recognized myself that I was slurring my words. I was exhausted. I got so many things mixed up that it became funny for both of us. Before we left the house I had just enough sense to take with me the bottles of pills I was taking.
10 mgs of Cyclobenzaprine HCL every 8 hours as a muscle relaxant.
500 / 1,000 mgs of Hdrocodone every four hours for pain.
800 mgs Ibuprofen each eight hours for pain
Doctor Olivia told me to get off the Cyclobenzaprine immediately. That was the one that was making me dopey, particularly in combination with the other two.
She gave me two substantial injections in la nalga (the butt), one some kind of B-vitamin concoction, and another that I can’t remember. Maybe for pain.
Pretty drove me back to the house and I went to bed. Slept for close to four hours. When I woke the pain was somewhat reduced. I couldn’t walk without the pain, but I could be there in the bed without pain, and when I did walk a few steps and sit down I was rather okay.
I understand. This is more than you could possibly want to know about anybody’s bad day. Still, I am pleased to be able to write even this, pleased to find myself sitting in a chair without feeling a need to whine about the pain, pleased that I am not exhausted, and that my head is relatively clear. And pleased to be able to report that tomorrow or the day I expect to be back to work.
For the present, however, I am not inclined to reflect on the peccadilloes of our Holocaust-fraud denier friends. As I say, maybe tomorrow. Maybe the next day.

Rashmi and Beena (names changed for privacy), girls aged 16 and 17, were studying in school and also worked odd jobs to earn money for their families. Beena's dream was to join law enforcement and Rashmi wanted to become a teacher. The two girls rode their bikes to school every day, parking and chaining them just outside the building and then walking into classes.
One day, one of the girls’ bicycle chains came off and out of nowhere, a man came up and offered to help fix it. Then he started to ask where they lived and what they wanted to do when they grew up. After hearing Beena and Rashmi’s answers, the man told them they would have a better chance at getting successful jobs in those careers if they went to Lucknow.
“He’s right,” the girls thought, “We will go talk to our parents about letting us study in Lucknow to get a job.” They thanked the man for his help with the bike and for his advice, telling him that they will talk to their parents about going to Lucknow. “I could take you to your parent's house now,” the man said, “and after that we will go to Lucknow and get you a job.” The girls were very innocent, and didn’t think this man would harm them since he was being so helpful. So they agreed to go with the man. The kidnapper didn’t take them home, but took them straight to Lucknow. His plan was to sell them into sex slavery.
The girls’ parents filed a police report, and WIN’s legal team was notified and immediately went to work to investigate their whereabouts in collaboration with the Lucknow police force which scoured the city and searched video clips from concealed cameras. After two months, the girls were located and rescued. They had been abused sexually and physically by the trafficker and had been used for sex during those two months in Lucknow. They are now back with their families. WIN’s anti-trafficking coordinator keeps in touch with them and is providing counsel, and they are now finding healing and returning to a normal life. The trafficker escaped and police are still trying to capture him. This case brings to light the horrors of trafficking and how easy it can be for kidnappers to abduct young girls.

We went swimming on Tuesday from 2 o’clock until 3 o’clock. At first about 3 people didn’t know how to swim but by the end everyone knew how to swim. The pool was about 1 metre deep. The blue group went into the deeper part of the pool and we coped fine! Our swimming coach was called Mark. It was really fun, we used to race to get changed! We are going to miss swimming but the other class are going to love it.
by Alistair Doig P4a
Even if you didn’t know how to swim at the start you were able to swim by the end. We learned how to do the breast stroke, the back crawl and the front crawl. It was so fun that when we got out it felt like we just got in. It was a bit cold after the showers but as soon as you got in the pool you warmed up as it was always lovely and warm.
I suggested that girls put their hair in pleats so keep it out the way when swimming. It was fun also because we raced each other to get ready.
Mark is a lovely swimming teacher and he always makes it okay when you are scared.
I think every child would love to go swimming lessons with Mark, swimming is great fun!
By Holly Alexander P4a

Back in the demon realm, Jin Ling narrowed his eyes and looked at Yin Lin Lin. “That is to say about half of my followers are willing to betray me just for the promise of going to war with the dragons again?”
Yin Lin Lin nodded her head in agony. This absolutely wasn’t what she had imagined when she married Jin Ling. She had wanted to be the queen of the demon realm, the person above everyone but her husband. How come her husband was now in danger of losing his position?
If he really did, what would become of them? With how ruthless the demons were, it could very well be that that Yong Hai would kill Jin Ling to make sure he couldn’t become dangerous to him. And then she would have nowhere to go.
“Do you have any idea what to do? We have to stop this. Otherwise, the two of us will …” She furrowed her brows and looked at him worriedly.
Jin Ling rubbed his fingers against each other and gave a hum. “That Yong Hai is ambitious but a weakling. The only thing he currently has going for him is his willingness to march to war. If I allowed them to do the same or gave them something else to do that would make them happy, I’m sure that most of them would still be willing to follow me. It’s just a matter of how to use the situation to our advantage.”
Yin Lin Lin nodded even though she wasn’t quite sure what she should think about this. Back in the Nine Heavens, even though she hadn’t had a title and officially only been an idle goddess, she had never needed to think about anything like this. If she wanted something, she only had to yell at one of her servants and it would get done. The only thing she couldn’t have was the man she wanted to marry and the position she had had her eyes on.
Now, she even had to fear for her life and that of her husband. She started to feel that … She hadn’t done the right thing back when she followed him from the mortal realm over to the demon realm. That had been a folly.
If her father was still alive, he would certainly scold her. Unfortunately … That wasn’t the case. Nobody had been here to warn her. The only person that might’ve warned her had also turned against her because of that matter with the crown prince. So in the end, she was left all alone. She could only rely on Jin Ling now.
The demon king continued to ponder. He really didn’t think much of this. Back then, he had managed to snatch back the throne for himself by using the situation. He had waited for the best possible moment by pretending not to be a danger to the previous king. And then, he had made the most beneficial alliances and struck when nobody expected it.
This kind of deceit … His father had been a master at it. Obviously, he had inherited quite a bit of him. As much as he disliked to say that, this time it would come in handy.
“You don’t have to worry. I do have an idea of what we can do. We only need to make sure about some small details. Then, it won’t be difficult at all. I will need your help though. In fact, you might be the one playing the most vital part of this. Do you think you can do that for me?”
Yin Lin Lin nodded. Anyway, what choice did she have? She could try to help Jin Ling and secure the position that she currently had or she could put her hope into being treated well by Yong Hai later on.
From everything that had happened so far, she couldn’t be sure that Jin Ling loved her but she at least could be sure that he wouldn’t break off the relationship with her. She didn’t know enough about Yong Hai to guess how it would end with him though. So for her, it was much better to trust in Jin Ling. In that case, she had to do her best to help him out.
Jin Ling smiled with satisfaction. “Very well. Then here is what we’ll do: You will go and tell Yong Hai exactly who is willing to work with him.”
Yin Lin Lin raised her brows. “I’m supposed to tell him? Wouldn’t it be better not to let him know? Or to give him fake names?”
Jin Ling shook his head and laughed. “You’re thinking too simply. Yong Hai might be an idiot but he’s not that much of an idiot. Whether or not you’re able to tell him anything worthwhile will determine if he wants to work with you any further. And he needs to be thinking that he can trust you. Otherwise, how are we going to get any information on his future plans?”
Yin Lin Lin nodded with some realization. What Jin Ling said was true. She still felt that it was too much of a risk though. “How about I tell him just a few of the names?”
“A few? Well, we can leave out a few but you can’t tell him just a bit. Otherwise, he will feel that you aren’t useful enough. Actually, you might make him suspicious that way.” He tapped the armrest of his chair and narrowed his eyes. “No, just write a list with all the names. Tell him that most of those are definitely on his side while some say they would be but you’re not quite sure if they weren’t just acting. That would be a response he anticipates. It should allow you to gain his trust most easily.”
“If you say so.”
Jin Ling nodded. “Trust me, that’s the best way. In the meantime … I’ll make sure to consolidate the relationship with the ones who are still on my side and offer the others something they won’t be able to refuse. Just keep Yong Hai busy and tell me if there are any new developments. Knowing what he is up to is the most important step in this so you can’t mess this up.”
Yin Lin Lin straightened up. “Don’t worry about that. I’m able to deal with that much. You can count on me.”
Jin Ling nodded. “That’s good then. I guess we should get started then.” With that, he got up again, preparing to head out to make a few more deals.

I know that I am so far behind blogging about events that have happened in our family this year, but here is my initial attempt at recording our life in a small way.
This year for Eric's birthday we celebrated as a family and had a day date. Eric has every other Friday off and it makes it nice to be able to spend it as a family. This year his birthday fell on a Friday and we took advantage of it.
We tried a new restaurant called Cheddars and liked it. We also went mini-golfing and had a great time. Alex especially loved dropping his golf ball in the hole and watching it come out the other side. There was one hole that he REALLY ENJOYED! It was a hole that had a stream of water that you sent your golf ball down and it directed it straight to the hole. Alex thought that it made a better water slide than its intended use. He thoroughly enjoyed sitting,running, and laying in the water. Sarah, our sweet girl was content to follow her big brother around and just do what he did. It was a great day to spend some time as a family. I sometimes feel like we don't really enjoy and live in the moments enough. I really should take a lesson from my children and savor each moment more.
4 months ago

Ten Year old Buffy Summers finds a Green Lantern Ring and confronts a baddie what does a girl do? Nominated best challenge response at tth 2010
Ten year old Buffy Summers smiled as she picked up the ring. It was a small green thing that looked just like the one that the Green Lantern used on the news. The girl rolled the ring around in her hand for a few minutes before she slipped it onto her hand. Looking around to make sure that there was no one around. She didn't want to know what people would do or even worse say if they saw her doing this. She then raised the ring to the air and began to say the oath as she had heard it on the news when the Green Lantern had recited." In brightest day, in blackest night, No evil shall escape my sight Let those who worship evil's might, Beware my power... Green Lantern's light!" After she had finished speaking, the blonde squeaked in fear as the ring shone brightly shooting out a stream of light. When the light faded the little girl was now dressed in a bright green and black bodysuit with white gloves and a green domino mask. The little girl grinned this was so cool, now she could be a hero to. She wondered if there would be any bad guys around and who she could get to help her fight them.
Flash was laughing so hard the tears were streaming down his face as he watched the scene before him. GL was groaning and covering his face in embarrassment, Supes was sporting a giant grin, Bats was smirking evilly at the scene, while Wonder woman and Hawk Girl were stuck between how cute the little girl looked, pride in how she was working, and the reaction of the criminal master mind as he was being torn apart.
Lex Luthor fumed as he noticed that the Justice League were all watching his humiliation. A small girl had somehow stumbled onto a power ring and he had tried to take it from her. He had come out in his full armor thinking himself prepared for anything that the child might create. It should have been like stealing candy from a baby. Somehow though she had been prepared for him and responded with force to his attempted thievery. First Oscar the Grouch and Cookie Monster ring creations had appeared and knocked him back before he could do anything to the brat. He had taken to the air to get some distance from the two creatures that had attacked him only to be assaulted by a giant Godzilla sized dinosaur that was singing and had turned around its short tail slapping him hard enough that he had been tossed back to the ground. When he had climbed to his feet the dinosaur had stepped on him forcing him back to the ground. He had managed to climb back up thankful that the giant dinosaur was gone its singing had been annoying. When he had climbed to his feet he had seen a group of lantern created young women. A mermaid had been first and slapped him in the face with her tailing causing him to stumble. Next a girl in a fancy ball gown and a book had slapped him so hard he went flying only to land at the feet of another young woman in a gown. This one had a sparkling dress though and two little mice on her shoulder as she performed a high kick that sent him flying in another direction. He had landed before another young woman this one different than the other two as she appeared to be dressed in some sort of Arabic outfit. The girl had a sword in her hand though and slashed him in the chest causing sparks to fly as he was knocked back and turned around. He looked up as another young women this one with puffed sleeves and short hair pick up a broom and slammed him back knocking him away from her. He stumbled blindly as a new figure in a dress that kept changing shades of green knocked the wind out of him with another broom followed by all of them seeming to appear all around him and hitting him in the face. His helmet shattered and he slumped to the ground in defeat wondering how this had happened.
"I can't believe I'm watching this." John moaned as the creations continued to beat on the armored figure.
"What I don't understand is why you never thought of it GL." Flash said as he sped next to his friend a box of popcorn now in his hands. "Hey Bats, you are recording this right?"
"Of course." Batman agreed.
"Seriously though GL, how come you never thought to beat Lex Luthor up with the Disney Princesses?" Flash asked his teammate his eyes still watering as he watched the group destroy the man.
"Not another word Flash." Green Lantern growled at the speedster.
"Think we should help him?" Superman idly questioned Batman weakly. He didn't want to stop this as he was clearly enjoying the show before them.
"Do you want to get in the middle of that?" Batman questioned innocently while taking a step back.
"Hmm not really, and they are copyrighted figures we need to find out if there is some special way of handling this situation." Superman said smiling even wider as they watched the group of green energy women beat on Luthor.
"Who would have thought that a child's belief in those characters would have allowed them to be so strong." Hawk Girl said as she eyed the green beings with amusement.

This is the old chair cover
Here are the chairs with their new slip covers
A few years ago this picture would have made me very sad, but today I find joy and accomplishment as I see my beautifully grown children. I say this because as I look back at the last 5 years, I have now realized how poorly prepared and unexpectedly I entered this new season of life. So I would like to share this story to remember where I was and possibly help someone else along the way. Several years ago I attended a Church ladies conference and a friend of mine spoke about “changing Seasons” of life. I really didn’t pay much attention to it because I was quite settled in the stage of life I was in as a full time stay at home mom and thought “that won’t ever be me”… I wish I had paid more attention now. Here’s the story….

Run Log: Distance PR
I'm a pretty casual runner. I like to go about twice a week, usually on the weekends. I aim for 3.11 and by the final .11 I've had quite enough, thank you. Today I wanted to up the distance enough to break my previous record which I realize was still hanging there from last July. My friend Val (a serious runner) and I were in New York and I joined her on a morning run across the Williamsburg bridge and back.
It was 4.43 miles and 90 degrees out and I had to stop a lot. At one point I urged Val to go on without me. "I'll meet you...on the other side," I wheezed. When I made it to the Brooklyn side I was drenched with sweat and I'm pretty sure I took my shirt off and employed it as a sweat rag.
It came easier to me today, and outside of being bored trying to run around enough to clock the mileage, I felt great. 4.6 miles is the new record, and I shaved over 2 minutes off my pace over last year. I'll take it.

There is a well-known phrase that says that “dogs are human’s best friends”. And well this little animal can validate it. Bobby is a dog who has lived for three years in the municipal cemetery of General Roca, Rio Negro. The dog decided to stay there after his owner died and since then he has not left his grave.
These kinds of stories seem to only happen in movies. A well-known story in the world is the Hachiko. A dog that in Japan it waited every day for 10 years for its owner, who had passed away, to arrive at the Shibuya train station. A few years ago a movie was made about the so-called “Always by your side”, which moved many people.
On this occasion, the story of Bobby, who He arrived at the General Roca Municipal Cemetery during his master’s funeral and never left. Now he lives there and is in the care of Daniel Cisterna, a man who works as a gravedigger.
“Its owner died three years ago and since then he has never left the cemetery. He stayed because his owner is buried here “Cisterna explained in an interview with Diario de Rio Negro.
Days passed after the funeral and the owner’s family went to look for Bobby, but he did not change his mind at any time and stayed by the grave of his best friend. Now the worker has grown fond of the animal and has become his new companion and protector. Even among the employees they prepared his own little house in the cemetery.
“The little dog was still on top of its owner’s grave, he didn’t want to go. They loaded him into a truck, but he got out and went back to his master’s grave. He doesn’t want to go, he wants to stay with his master “, said the employee.
In that sense, the gravedigger acknowledged that there are more dogs in the cemetery, but the loyalty, fidelity and unconditional love that Bobby has for his friend moved him a lot: “I was very moved by the affection he had for his human, for his fidelity, it’s something I’ve never seen”.
Bobby has a friend and a kind of “godmother” call Adriana carrasco placeholder image. She is the one who takes care of leaving him food on a weekly basis and when he suffers any discomfort, she immediately takes him to the vet. She met him locally when she went to visit her mother’s grave. In addition, together with his family they are protectionists and try to help the other dogs that also live there. Since meeting Bobby, she has been touched by his determination.
“It is a demonstration of how faithful dogs are to their owners. To think that there are many people who abandon them, but they do not abandon us. The love they have is unconditional and they never forget”, He expressed to the local media.
Bobby comforts people when they fire a loved one
It was a protectionist who was surprised by Bobby’s attitude. She must have visited the place to say goodbye to a friend and was struck by how this white dog was lying on a grave. She asked the workers and they told her their story and it was she who shared in the organization’s Facebook group “No Animal Abuse – Ranhu“.
“We went to say goodbye to a friend in the local cemetery. While we were saying goodbye, we saw from the side, something that touched us and caught our attention”, begins the publication that went viral on the networks, received thousands of likes and was shared by thousands of users.
As Cisterna explained, the dog when there are funerals, accompanies those present at the funeral and lies down with the grieving family and stares at the ritual. “Seems to understand your pain“, he pointed.
In the end, people end up excited by the attitude and gesture of the dog, and many asked for him, pet him and he becomes a kind of emotional therapist. In fact, Daniel revealed that he tells them the story of the dog and several were surprised by Bobby’s loyalty to his owner.

Husband's Fantasy Backfires Pt. 09byxleglover©
A week later Jen woke up from a restless sleep. Mike had long ago left for work. She could hear Maria downstairs with the kids.
Her body felt terrible. The cravings were really bad today. She'd finished the new cocaine four days ago. The old cocaine -- the stuff she kept in the shoe box -- didn't seem to have the same potency with her, and it was almost all gone anyway. Her hands shook as she tried to brush her teeth. She desperately needed a good hit. She looked in the mirror -- she looked terrible -- but she didn't care. The only thing she could think about was getting a good hit. If she got something good everything would be better.
She knew she had no choice. Tyrone terrified her, but her cravings were so strong. It would be okay, she just had to be careful, she couldn't disrespect him like before, before she'd done that he'd always treated her nice, okay there'd been that time with Bob and Jeffrey but really it hadn't been that bad, she just had to be really careful around Tyrone and nice to him, she could do that, she felt manic, her thoughts jumbling together, but she knew what to do, what she had to do, call Tyrone, call Tyrone.
She held out until lunch, hoping she could deal with it, hoping she could will away the cravings, trying to remember how she was before she took drugs, before she had these cravings, and trying to will her body back to those times. But then the kids did something, it was minor really, but she had the shakes and felt frenzied inside, and she yelled at them, and before she knew it she slapped her daughter across the face, and her little girl cried and ran to Maria like she was her mother, and she pressed her head in her hands, she had to do something, she had to call Tyrone, she had no choice, she had to call Tyrone.
Upstairs in her bedroom, Jen dialed Tyrone, her hands shaking both from fear and her cravings. "Hi Tyrone, it's me, Jenny," she said when he answered, doing her best to keep the quiver from her voice. "Can I come over to your apartment? You're at Ecstasy? Oh .... Well, um, can I meet you there? About an hour, is that okay? Okay, um, see you soon."
Jen dressed as fast as she could. She needed to see Tyrone, she needed a hit, something really good. Looking in her closet, she reluctantly settled on the "freezes over" dress. That's what she and Mike playfully called it. He bought it for her a few years ago, but it was so daringly short, low cut and tight that she'd playfully told him she'd wear it "when hell freezes over." She wore it for Mike once (in their bedroom), but since then it'd been hanging unworn in her closet.
She paused, not wanting to wear the dress. She knew what Tyrone would want from her, but she didn't care, she just needed a hit, something to make the cravings and anxiety and despair go away, to make her feel good again. So she pulled out the freezes over dress and laid it on her bed.
Then she hurriedly did her hair and makeup. She put on a garter belt and rolled stockings up her legs. Her hands were shaking so bad she couldn't attach the garter snaps to the stockings. She almost cried in frustration, but finally she managed to do it. She didn't bother with a bra or panties. A bra wouldn't work with the dress, and she knew what Tyrone would want, so why wear panties. She squeezed herself into the dress, and put on 4 inch stiletto heels. She knew what Tyrone would want, and she didn't care, she'd give it to him as long as he gave her took care of her.
Maria looked disapprovingly at her, but Jen didn't care. She had the good sense to put on a long coat and she called a taxi instead of trying to drive herself. The taxi driver hungrily oogled her in the rear view mirror during the entire drive into the city. Finally they arrived at the Ecstasy club. Only as she approached the door did she pause. But she had no choice, so she took off her coat and went in.
Unlike last time, Ecstasy was crowded with people, most of them black men and a lot of girls. This wasn't the Stallions crowd, she'd never seen any of them before. Every head turned when she walked in, and despite the terrible state she was in, she felt fear from all the black men looking at her. This was where she'd been raped after all, by Tyrone and his black henchmen.
The girls turned to look at Jen too. They didn't like the way she'd immediately gotten so much attention from the men. They whispered to each other about how slutty Jen was dressed, especially in the middle of the day. Her dress was so tight you could easily see the dents made by her nipples, and the bumps of her garter belt. She looked like a prostitute, especially with the fuck-me-pumps she was wearing. Many of the girls whispered disparagingly that Jen's dress was too tight. The dress was tight on Jen even when was at her sleekest and firmest. But now, after gaining weight, the freezes over dress did nothing to hide the bulges around her tummy, ass and upper thighs. In fact the revealing dress emphasized the imperfections in her body.
Despite all that, the men still salivated at the sight of Jen. Part of it was her gorgeous movie star face and thick luxurious blonde hair. But a lot of it was the dress. When a painfully hot girl with a perfect tight body (the way Jen used to be) wears a dress like that, she's sending the message "I know I'm hot and you have no chance to get into my pants." But when a pretty girl with a not-so-firm body (the way Jen is now) wears such a tight dress even though it shows all her bulges and other imperfections, she's saying "I need it bad -- make a pass at me and I might suck your cock and let you cum on my face."
Jen didn't see any faces she knew and her nervousness grew, while at the same time her knees and hands trembled from drug withdraw. Then she saw Tyrone walking up to her. At first the sight of him scared her. But he had a friendly smile on his face and his arms out to embrace her. He hugged her, and even though he'd done terrible things to her, Jen felt comforted by his friendly greeting in this sea of strangers.
Tyrone led her to his table, away from everyone else. "You don't look good Jenny," he said, concern on his face and in his voice.
"I don't know what's happening to me," Jen said, tearing up. "I feel terrible."
"When was your last hit?"
"Almost a week ago."
"Oh baby, you should have called me sooner," Tyrone said in a soothing voice, squeezing her hand reassuringly. He opened a small wooden box. Inside were vials and needles. "This is the stuff you took last time. It'll make everything good again."
Jen looked scared. "Can't I just have some coke?" she asked in a little girl's voice.
Tyrone looked thoughtful. "Sure, if that's what you want," he said obligingly. "But is coke still doing it for you?"
Jen looked unsure. "The old stuff doesn't seem to do anything. But I liked the new coke you gave me."
He looked apologetic. "Baby, I'm all out of that," he said. He pointed at the box. "You take this shit, and as soon as I get more of the new coke I'll give you some." He was lying of course. He had bags and bags of the new cocaine stashed in his apartment and the back room of Ecstasy (he owed the place). But he wanted Jen completed addicted to drugs, and he knew if she took more heroin even the new coke wouldn't do anything for her anymore.
Jen felt unsure, but she nodded anyway. She let Tyrone teach her how to inject herself. Following his instructions, she pulled up her sleeve and injected herself with the powerful liquid drug. Immediately her world turned wonderful. "Oh my," she sighed, her head rolling back as the wonderful drug made all her worries go away. It was like clouds opening up and sunshine beaming down on her. It was happiness where before there was despair. She felt like herself again.
"You look better now," Tyrone said with a smile and friendly pat of her hand. He closed the box and handed it to her. "Here you go now. And next time you call me before you run out."
Jen looked surprised. "You don't want me to stay?" she asked awkwardly. She'd expected him to want sex with her (or something worse).
Up to that moment Tyrone had been treating her like a platonic friend. His face changed, and he gave her a lecherous, hungry grin. "I wish I had more time, you look stunning today," he said. Under the table he squeezed her thigh. "You look absolutely fantastic in this dress. But I have a meeting to go to."
Then he got up and held out his hand, helping her out of the booth. He escorted her through the bar. She was glad he did, as the men looked at her like they'd rape her if given the chance, but none of them dared approach with Tyrone at her side.
Tyrone hailed a taxi and gave her a kiss on the cheek, and suddenly she was back in a cab going home. But unlike her ride to Ecstasy, now she felt wonderful, nothing bad had happened, and she was holding a box full of more goodies. She couldn't believe how easy it'd been!
Her pussy ached though. As always, the hit got her horny, and heroin aroused her more than coke. She thought of calling Darius, but it was too late for that. She didn't have enough time to see him (even for a quickie) and still get home before Mike got home for work. She could always have sex with Mike tonight, but she knew that wouldn't satisfy her. She tried to cheer herself with the possibility of hooking up with Darius or another Stallion tomorrow, but that didn't help her now. She was so horny she was tempted to jump on the Mexican taxi driver who repeatedly looked at her in the rearview mirror.
As the taxi pulled into her driveway, she saw Zack walking into his house. He was a typical middle age man. Not ugly, but not handsome either. He wasn't terribly out of shape, but his body was soft and he had a big beer gut. She'd never thought of him as anything but her middle aged neighbor, and certainly had never had sexual thoughts about him. That is, until the other day.
Before getting out of the taxi, she put on her coat. She paid the taxi, but instead of walking into her house she walked over the Zack's. She rang the doorbell, thinking of an excuse if Millie opened the door.
But it was Zack who opened the door. He grinned when he saw here. Jen looked over his shoulder into the house. She didn't see Millie. She opened her coat slightly, letting him see what she was wearing. Any neighbors who might be looking would only see her talking to Zack in her long coat. Zack's grinned grew excitedly when he saw what Jen was wearing.
"Is Millie here?" she whispered.
He shook his head, his eyes greedily looking her body up and down. "No, still at her sister's."
"Well, are you going to invite me in?" she asked. He hurriedly moved to the side and she stepped in, closing the door behind her.
She threw her coat over the sofa and he stared at her. He couldn't believe Jen was in his house again. And the way she looked! He'd never seen her dressed this way! A wet dream come to life! Jen silently stood in front of him, letting him get an eyeful of her, like a queen letting her subject worship her.
Finally he asked, "Do you want a drink?" His throat was dry and he was so excited he found it hard to talk.
"No," Jen said. She pulled up her dress, shocking Zack. He gawked at the sight of her stocking tops, garter belt, and pantyless pussy. "I want you to fuck me." She turned and bent over the sofa. She arched her back like a porn star, giving him a good look of her upturned ass. "And hurry, I don't have much time."
Jen pulled up her sleeve and injected herself with heroin. The pinch of the needle hurt at first, but the euphoria and ecstasy that immediately followed made it worth it. It always took her a moment to collect her wits after taking heroin. She closed her eyes and tried to get her breathing under control, holding onto the countertop for balance. Finally the initial rush passed, and she opened her eyes and released her grip on the basin. But the feelings of wonder and bliss remained, and they'd stay with her all day. She felt wonderful!
But she only had two vials left. She picked up the phone to call Tyrone. It was getting easier to call him. She'd gone back a few times now for re-fills, and each time he'd been friendly and nice. He gave her whatever she wanted, and typically she came home with both heroin and the new cocaine. She liked heroin better, it made her feel incredible. Coke didn't seem to do much for her anymore (even the new coke), so she stopped asking Tyrone for it.
But she didn't call Tyrone. Tonight was her night to party with the Stallions. She knew Tyrone would be there, so she'd get more stuff from him there.
She dressed and went into the den to kiss Mike goodbye. As always, he looked both melancholy and excited. "You're going to be with Darius?" he asked.
"You know I will be," she said with a flirty smile. Then she whispered into his ear, "Admit it, you'd be disappointed if I didn't end up with him tonight."
Mike smiled sheepishly. He moved his hand up his wife's leg, feeling the straps of her garter belt under her mini-skirt. He knew that by the end of that night Darius would be running his hands up his wife's legs. Jen saw hurt and anxiety in her husband's face, but also a tent in his pants. She inwardly sighed. "I'll see you later," she said, pulling away from his hand. At the last moment, feeling guilty, she leaned back in and gave him a quick kiss.
Jen waited outside the club for her dance instructor Teri. Teri arrived and the girls kissed each other hello. "I can't wait to meet your friends," Teri said excitedly.
"We call them Stallions," Jen giggled. She gave her friend a quick up-and-down look. Teri had a voluptuous body, and she knew how to show it off. The plunging neckline of her tight blouse showcased her fleshy cleavage, and her short skirt emphasized her lean dancer's legs. Teri had a pleasant face, but you wouldn't call her pretty. Still, with her tight young body and outgoing personality, Jen knew she'd be popular with the Stallions. Feeling anxious and insecure about her own body, she reluctantly curled her arm into Teri's and led her into the bar. "Come on, I'll introduce you around," she said with a forced smile.
"Hey babe," Darius said as Jen approached. He grabbed Jen around the waist and kissed her, but his eyes looked over her shoulder at the newcomer. Jen noticed. "This is my friend Teri," she said feeling uneasy.
"Hi Teri," Darius said, giving her a long look, focusing mostly on her ample chest. The three sat down at a table with Darius in the middle. He turned towards Teri and talked to her. Jen started feeling like a third wheel when she felt Darius's hand on her leg, moving up her thigh and under her skirt. She parted her legs slightly to give him easier accessed. Her face went hot as his hand traveled higher up her skirt.
Breathing hard, Jen glanced over at Teri. Her cheeks were flushed, and her eyes partially glazed over. Jen realized that Darius was also playing with Teri. The bastard, he sure works fast, Jen thought to herself. She squeezed her legs shut, pushing Darius's hand away. Darius didn't seem to mind, as now he had both hands to play with Teri. Angry and hurt, Jen stood and walked away. Almost immediately she ran into Tyrone.
"Hey Jenny," Tyrone said. He looked over Jen's shoulder at Teri. "Who's the new girl?" Tyrone asked.
"My friend Teri," Jen answered. Although still feeling put off by Darius, she had something she needed from Tyrone. "Um, Tyrone, can I come by and pick up more stuff?"
"Sure, sure, come on back," he said distractedly, still looking beyond Jen at Teri. Darius and Teri stood up to go dance. Teri pushed her skirt down and smoothed it as she stood. Nice tits, Tyrone thought to himself. He watched as Teri danced, his eyes on her ample chest. It was pretty clear her tits were fake. They didn't bounce at all as she danced. But she was a tall girl so her big tits, while clearly fake, still looked good on her.
Tyrone remembered Jen, still standing next to him. "Come on, my shit's in the back," he said with a chuckle.
In the back bar (reserved for Tyrone), Tyrone loaded a small box with a number of vials, then he added a bottle of red and blue pills. "What are those?" Jen asked.
In answer, Tyrone handed a red pill and a blue pill to Jen. "Something special for you," he said with a big smile.
"I'm high already," she said looking wary. "I shot up just before coming here."
Tyrone nodded reassuringly. "This cocktail will blow you away. It's better if you're already high." He handed her the 2 pills. She didn't want to take it, but she didn't feel like she had a choice, so she warily put them in her mouth and swallowed.
After a few moments, Jen's body began tingling as rapturous waves of euphoria washed over her. "Oh -- my -- god," she sighed, her head rolling back. "What is this?" she asked awestruck holding up the bottle.
"It's fucking expensive, that's what it is," Tyrone said laughing. He sat down into a booth and pulled Jen down next to him. The motion caused her skirt to ride high up her legs. He looked down and ran his fingers along her garter straps. "You've got fucking great legs, have I ever told you that?"
"Oh, you think so?" Jen said with a flirty smile, feeling extra playful and flirty from the drugs. She demurely crossed her legs and pulled down her skirt. "You don't think my skirt is too short, do you?" she asked with feigned innocence.
"Not short enough more like it," he said with a grin. He reached out and cupped her tits. "I hear you're getting new ones of these."
Jen gave him a playful scoff. "Typical man. All you care about are big breasts."
"The bigger the better," Tyrone joked back. He motioned at the main bar. "Like your friend Teri."
The drug induced euphoria cushioned against any sting Jen might otherwise feel from Tyrone's words. Instead, she giggled. "So you think I should get double Ds?"
He nodded. "You'd be every man's wet dream."
"I'm already every man's wet dream," she said with a playful smile. Pulling her blonde hair behind her neck, she lowered her head to his lap and wet down on him.
(A few weeks later)
Veronica pulled Jen aside. "Jen, honey, are you expecting?" she asked, her eyes sparkling with thinly veiled amusement.
"What? Of course not!" Jen said, pulling away from her neighbor.
"Oh, I'm sorry," Veronica said, coughing to hide a giggle. "It's just, well, you look like you've gained weight."
Jen mumbled something, detaching herself from Veronica as fast as she could. She felt like crying. Was it that noticeable? She'd even worn a loose fitting dress. She glanced back, and saw Veronica giggling with other neighbor wives across the room. Were they all laughing at her?
"What's wrong Jen?" she heard behind her. Jen turned and saw it was Lilly, another neighbor.
Jen scowled at Veronica and the other neighborhood wives. "Veronica just asked if I was pregnant. That was so mean. I hate these neighborhood parties sometimes. People can be so mean and petty."
Jen expected sympathy from Lilly. After all, asking a woman if she was pregnant was a major no-no, every woman understood that. But she didn't get it. Instead, Lilly said in a judgmental voice, "Well, you bring it on yourself, you know."
"What?" Jen said, so surprised she practically took a step back.
"A lot of times I see you walking around in leotards and tights --"
Jen didn't know where this was going, but she interrupted to defend herself. "That's because I take dance class."
"I know, I know," Lilly said impatiently. "But you also wear short skirts and high heels." She waved her arm around the room. "You don't see anyone else dressed like that, do you? And I've seen the things you wear under your skirts. It's hard to miss sometimes when you cross your legs."
"What are you saying?" Jen said feeling dumbstruck.

Hello there. If you are listening to this and you are wondering, "hey, what am I listening to here, this is weird and it doesn't quite work?!?"
Well Congratulations! You just stumbled upon my Mashup Tracks that were either too weird or just simply didn't work. "Well, why are they here?" you might ask? "Well...", I tell you. "I feel like, although these tracks are weird and don't really work that well, maybe someone would still like to hear them." So here they are, enjoy!

Lack of sleep blamed for child obesity
Parents have been urged to be stricter about bedtime and confiscate phones and tablets at night after researchers found that children who did not get enough sleep were up to twice as likely to become overweight.
Sleep deprivation can disrupt hormonal signals that indicate we have eaten enough and lead to chronic inflammation, scientists say. Tiredness also means that people feel less like exercising.
Previous studies have found that children who did not sleep much were more likely to be overweight, but it had been unclear which came first. Now researchers have looked at 42 studies involving 75,000 people who were asked about sleep and followed for an average of three years. Children who slept less than recommended were 58 per cent more likely to

"I had them build my deck and they did an amazing job. Very professional."
"Jose and Ian did a fabulous job from start to finish. Very tenative to the process of the demolition from the water damage and re-design of original plan. ..."
"Recently, we had them for tiles fitting. They did very nice and completed work on time. Services were quick and the best thing is they have all their ..."
"Sibley Construction was the contractor of choice for a basement refinishing project we were managing for my aunt and uncle. They were professional, friendly, had some really good ..."
"I was refereed to Crystal Cleaning & Painting by a very good friend who discovered them a couple of years ago. I only had a small plastering job ..."
"I have always been pleased with the quality and pricing of the work I have received from Handyman Property Management. The team is amazing and feel absolutely comfortable ..."
"Ed Oteri did not give us the best price, but it was competitive. The week before the project was to start, Ed came and looked at the porch ..."
"always late, didnt pull permits, faulty electrical work, work not done to code, paid way too much for getting way too little."
"Let us start with the fact that my project which began on June 26th 2010 when Roger received his first $1000 deposit for measuring my kitchen, was to ..."
"As a general contractor- CP Curtin was plain awful. He essentially would just be the scheduler- he would wait for his subs to arrive, take off, and then ..."

Ms.Madden is a very cool teacher and if it wasn't for her i would not be this far into school and wouldn't love as much as i do. so thank you ms.madded
mrs. madden is a very good teacher. she all the student in the school that need her help
Mrs. madden is the best teacher that a student could she funnny smart and very helpful and clear about everything she is talking about.
Mrs. madden is a very good teacher she is not going to take know stuff from nobody
mrs.madden is the best teacher in harper school and i wouldnt trade her for any other teacher in the school
Mrs.madden is the coolest teacher and she always keep it real and she tought me things that i would have never known.
she is cool.could be hard sometimes but she is a good teacher
she is a cool teacher she is nice at times but can get mean
She is one of the coolest teachers in the school and she is nice and keep it real.

is back for more! She previously made her debut in 2014 as an amateur and wet behind the ears. Now Tina
is back and her sex game is stronger than ever. The British freak known as Tina
was ready to have her 4 days of paradise in Mike's apartment. Since this wasn't her first time, she already knew what she had to do and she was extremely looking forward to getting fucked. She even brought her own toys to play with in the mean time. After her pussy was ready and wet, Victor
passed by and laid the pipe. Tina
loved the cock and she even put it in her ass! Tina
was one hell of a freak and she'd do anything to stay in Mike's Apartment!
Girls appearing in this video:

5.0 stars 8 totalReview John Tierney
Posted by Larry
It is unusual that the results I gained were better than I anticipated.
Posted by Anthony
I was introduced to John by a close friend who worked with him in the past. John handled a nuisance claim that could have easily cost me a large sum if not dealt with properly. John addressed the problem head on, studied the claim, the contract and prepared a response that was professionaly direct. The claim went away, as well it should have.
Posted by Mary
Mr Tierney handled my issues with professionalism and competence. He was patient in explaining the intricacies of my situation. Although I was under a great deal of strain because of my case, Mr Tierney was easy to talk to and reassuring.
Anonymous review posted on
John Tierney has assisted me several times with various legal issues. He is a true professional and honorable attorney. His advice and guidance were spot on. I highly recommend him for your legal needs.
Posted by Johanna
During one of the toughest ordeals I ever encountered, I was fortunate enough to be represented by a professional, caring, and determined attorney. Mr. Tierney and his staff not only kept me well informed about every step of my case, they were supportive and understanding all the way through. Mr. Tierney informed me of all my possible outcomes and encouraged me to stay strong, and not give up. I was fortunate to have found a law office with such professional and knowledgable staff. I have been highly recommending Mr. Tierney's office, and he has recently represented family members. We are all satisfied and appreciate his hard work.
Anonymous review posted on
Mr. Tierney was professional and knowledgable from our very first meeting. I liked his agressive style and he inspired confidence in his abilities immediately. It is a pleasure to work with someone that is able to take a very nerve wracking situtaion and calm me down and get rid of the butterflies in my stomach. I also appreciated that he took my desires and concerns into account when handling the case and I know that I ended up with the best possible outcome I could have hoped for.
I would highly recommend him to anyone looking for an attorney and he is the 1st person's name that comes to mind when someone asks for a referral.
Posted by Adriana
Had I hired a different lawyer, I'm not sure I'd be where I am today. Jay did an AMAZING job with my case and was able to get it dismissed. I was wrongfully accused and arrested with no evidence whatsoever and was not read my rights. At the time, I was not sure where I could turn. He listened to my concerns and was able to explain what was going on in a way I could understand, always made sure to update me, did everything he could to improve my case, always protected my rights, and had a sure plan of action from the beginning which in the end prevailed. As a lawyer, he did not only fight for me in court, but he gave me sound advice that as a client I can honestly say helped greatly throughout the ordeal. He is extremely knowledgable, and I feel that his experience from being an ADA for a number of years helped because he has seen both sides of being in court which better helped him deal with my case. I would highly recommend him to anyone!
Posted by Pat
I was very satisfied with the way Mr. Tierney handled my case. He was very professional, knowledgeable, and always available if I had any questions or concerns. As an attorney, Jay is skillful, effective and diligent, and I trusted him. I would highly recommend him.

We provide many cool features for confessions exclusively for premium usersGo Premium
Try our premium features for just 1€
When I was a teenager way back in the early eighties, I was taunted by some of the other boys at school for being overweight. I was a little, but in my mind at the time I was convinced it was a lot. It got to me so much that a few days before the start of the new school year I went into town with some money I'd been saving and (I can still barely believe it even after all these years) I went into a department store, went into the lingerie department and, with a bright red face, bought myself a panty girdle. Even though I dreaded the thought of wearing it, I thought a girdle would reduce my belly, tighten up my backside and get the bullies off my back. As I was excused gym class on medical grounds, there would be no problem there. And surely I'd get used to it? The assistant was initially astonished and thought I was joking at first, but when she realised I was serious, I guess she figured my money was as good as anyone else's.
So, on that first day, I headed off to school as if everything was normal, went into some derelict buildings along the way, took off my trousers, quickly tugged on my long-leg Playtex "I Can't Believe It's A Girdle!", got dressed again, and headed off to school, wide-eyed and stiff legged. My "weight loss" since the start of the summer break was noticed, but I was still bullied. And now I had to get used to wearing a tight girdle every day to maintain the weight loss illusion - I could hardly get paunchy again overnight!
Have you ever had that terrified sinking feeling in the pit of your stomach when you realise you've really screwed up? That's how I felt when it dawned on me what I'd done and that there was no going back. The whole idea was dumb from the start, had failed totally in its objective, my initial overconfident attitude about getting used to it had died the moment I'd put it on and realised as it compressed my belly, backside and thighs exactly what it was I was going to have to get used to...and now I had no way out! I felt sick as I realised I was going to have to wear a girdle - a Playtex panty girdle! - every day from now on. For no good reason. And it was all my own damn fault.
By the end of that first day of being firmly held in, I could definitely believe it was a girdle! I'd fidget around in my seat trying to get comfortable - sit forward, sit back, legs apart, legs together - but I could get no relief. It was a girdle, and it did what a girdle was supposed to do. I'd catch myself gasping as I stood up or sat down, and walking up or down stairs was...an experience. By lunchtime I felt like I just wanted to scream, but I had a long afternoon in front of me before I could take it off.
After school, I hurried back to the derelict buildings (as quickly as I could manage!) to get out of my tight new panty girdle. I was almost crying with frustration as I fumbled frantically with my belt buckle in the rush to get my trousers off and get the bloody thing off me. The relief I felt as I peeled it off was incredible. But I just had to get used to it being part of my uniform from that day on. I'm not ashamed to say that, as I tugged it on the next morning, I was actually crying. I did eventually come to terms with the situation and get used to it, but it did take a very long time.
I guess that was about the only notable thing I achieved at school, though being the only boy to have his underwear made by Playtex is something I was quite happy to keep secret!
I don't understand the idea that there is always a fight between brothers and sisters. I have a brother and a sister, both older than me and we always get along well. When my sister and I were still in high school, our brother had already been in the world of work for some years and had already married.
My brother is quite physically trained, while my sister always dresses to attract attention: ripped jeans or tight leather pants, jacket to show a little belly or hips or neckline, chocolate lipstick and Sharon Stone blonde hair. I was more like a slightly skinny version of Brandon Sanderson, with Tom Selleck's body hair and Adam Drive's face. I was not bullied, because my sister always protected me.
However, it happened that someone made fun of me as a nerd and I felt bad. I once declared myself to a girl I liked, a very beautiful girl. She was a year older than me, she had black skin, long straight hair and a nice face. I had written for her a poem and given her some flowers, but she had turned me down and one of her friends had commented that if she was going to go with a white man, certainly not with me.
I took refuge in the bathroom crying and I hear people enter: they were two students of the school football team, including my sister's boyfriend. We know each other and he is a good person. Selling me in this state, he goes to call my sister. When she arrives, entering the "boys' bathroom", she pushes her boyfriend and her friend out the door and we are left alone.
I explain the situation to her and she consoles me that it will be only for these years in school and that everything will be different outside. But I wanted to put those people in the wrong who make me feel bad. So my sister gets an idea, but she said to must not to tell this thing to anyone. I accept.
So she puts her chocolate lipstick in front of the mirror, turns to me and she to me to closes my eyes. I feel her kissing me on the neck, cheek, forehead, eyelid, nose and finally on the lips as well, giving more pressure to this point. I was confused, but she explains to me that in this way I would make others jealous about I been kissed by a girl with an anonymous identity.
In middle school there was this girl named kaylee. She was white, nice ass, and these big sexy lips. I would always jerk to her in the shower and imagine doing anal with her or kissing her big lips. But I was never the type to ask a girl out. She was into different types of guys anyway. But now I see her online and she is still pretty sexy. The issue is she’s dating some ugly ass cholo kid who looks like a bird. I would never date her even now but boy if I had the chance to fuck her or even just makeout with her. I still would.
Back in Middle School, I was so nervous as I was taking my next step after leaving Elementary School and going to Middle School .I was so nervous being around people that I never went to Elementary School with and what made me even more nervous was changing in the locker room for Gym Class.
So changing for Gym was required but we was allowed to bring our own Gym Clothes than have an outfit given to us to which I always brought a t-shirt and shorts in the summer and spring and a t-shirt, and track pants in the fall and winter. However I want to share my first time changing for gym class in the Boy's Locker Room.
I had just turned 12 Years Old at the at the start of the School Year and compared to show I look now I was about 5 feet 9 inches tall and weighed about 140 Pounds in 6th grade and had short brown hair and wore glasses so yes I was a skinny nerd. I was very self conscious and the thought of changing my clothes and the possibility of being seen in my underwear around other guys made me feel uncomfortable at the time especially since it was a requirement and if we didn't bring our Gym Clothes we would lose points on our grades.
I was still nervous but our Gym Teacher told us that we did not half to take showers which was a relief to me because I also hated the idea of being naked around others especially if someone might steal my clothes leaving me to go naked around School. If anything I would rather be naked at home, but being in my underwear around others would soon become a different story.
The Day came where we all had to change for Gym Class and I brought my Gym clothes a t-shirt and a pair of shorts and I was about to go in and change out of the clothes I wore that day which was a t-shirt and a pair of jeans. So I enter the locker room still feeling nervous but I knew I had to do it so I tried to toughen up as I began to see my classmates strip down to their boxers and socks and I actually felt a bit hard at seeing my fellow classmates now wearing boxers and socks as I began to feel slightly hard and now I realized what I had to do.
So I took a deep breath and untied my shoes before I grabbed a hold of my shirt and began to take my shirt off and reveal my belly and back although I am not sure if anyone noticed me changing since everyone was all focused on themselves. Then I kicked my shoes off as I then propped my legs on the bench because the moment of truth was at hand, I was about to expose my underwear in school. Keep in mind this is much different than exposing my dick when taking a piss in the bathroom so I unbuttoned my jeans and lowered the zipper and then tugged at my jeans and slowly pulled my jeans down my legs exposing my underwear for the first time.
Then I finally took my jeans off and I was now sitting wearing a pair of white briefs and socks. At first I was embarrassed but as I looked down at my skinny legs with my knees bending as I soon felt my dick get hard and nearly came through my briefs and didn't want my dick to be exposed and as I sat for a few minutes in just my underwear and socks to try to soak in the moment as I then put my gym clothes on as it was getting close to time for Gym Class to begin.
Then as Gym Class would come to an end, we all went back into the locker room to change back into our school clothes. Now that I have confidence after changing gym clothes for the first time I untied and took off my shoes, pulled down my shorts, and took off my shirt revealing my briefs and socks again and sat for about a few minutes before putting my clothes on.
Since then I had gotten used to being in my underwear to the point where I would strip down to my underwear and socks when I would come home from school and I would sit on my knees as a form of meditation. It's how I prepare myself for Gym Class and changing for Gym Class.
As the School Year went on and as I got in my underwear and socks when changing for gym Class I remember sometimes messing around with everyone in the locker room. I remember Wrestling with some of my friends and having one of the bigger kinds lift me over their shoulder. I also remembered getting shirt snapped on my legs as it would hurt but at the same time I was actually enjoying getting this type of treatment in my underwear and socks.
Has anyone ever felt nervous when changing for Gym Class back in School and did you ever get bullied or embarrassed while changing for Gym Class?
I got a passing grade after sleeping with my teacher. My last teacher taugh me that size can matter because it was much biger than I had ever experienced, and it almost hurt but felt good at the same time. And any moments of discomfort were worth the better grade. This was only the second teacher ever that I had sex with. But it is a common thing at my school.

Chapter 1 : Cinnamon Hearts
| ||Rating: 12+||Chapter Reviews: 3|
Background: Font color:
Until That Day. That Day was his birthday, oddly enough. That Day was the day when his best friend of almost eight years at the time had confessed the true reason why their relationship with his other best friend was going down the drain, as the two of them stood (or perhaps hid) in the shade of one of the many Weasley apple trees. The reason, his friend had said, was him. Harry had been told this in a voice so close to a whisper that he had had to strain his ears to hear it. And then, without warning, Harry's best friend had given him such a kiss (full on the mouth!) that he had nearly toppled over.
Yup, Hermione Granger was one heck of a kisser.
That Day was one of the best days of Harry's life. That Day was the day that Harry had gotten the thing that he had been wanting for years: a kiss from Hermione. Harry had been wanting a real one, one on the lips, ever since the day at King's Cross when she had given him one on the cheek (although he hadn't realized this until years later). And once he had gotten it, he had learned that it was just as wonderful as he had envisioned (although he had no clue that he had been envisioning it at all until That Day).
Preparing for Valentine's Day dinner with Hermione (their little "tradition", if something they had only done once before could be called a tradition), Harry chuckled as he remembered the moments after Hermione's sudden gesture of affection.
Hermione took a step back, her eyes wide as saucers in shock.
"Oh… oh God, Harry, I'm sorry…" she stammered.
"Sorry?" he repeated, a small grin spreading across his face. "Why on Earth are you sorry?"
"I- I shouldn't have… Ron's going to… and Ginny will be… Oh my God…"
Harry chuckled. "Breathe in, breathe out, 'Mione. Try for a coherent sentence."
She obliged, taking a few deep breaths as she tried to compose herself, still looking shocked and frantic.
"I- I shouldn't have done that! Ron's going to be so angry, and Ginny… Ginny's going to kill me!"
Harry took a step forward, closing the distance she had created between them moments earlier. His face became serious as he took both of her hands in his.
"Hermione, nobody has to know."
Her eyes widened even more, which Harry wouldn't have thought possible.
"Harry, I'm not going to… you know… sneak around behind Ron's back! And you, you wouldn't treat Ginny like that!"
Harry rolled his eyes. "Hermione! Do you honestly think I would suggest something like that? I meant that no one has to know if you don't want them to. I won't say a word." He pantomimed zipping his lips.
"Er…" There was something in Hermione's eyes as she spoke that made Harry continue.
"Unless, of course," he began, a little hesitantly, "you, er, want me to."
"Er…" she said again. "But… Harry, we can't, I mean, Ron and Ginny…"
"Ron and Ginny, Ron and Ginny," said Harry. "All you've talked about is how we can't do this to Ron and Ginny! What about you, Hermione? Do you want to do this to yourself? I don't know how you really feel about me, but I do know that you just spontaneously kissed me, and it was really good," he said with a grin. "So I'm guessing that there was something behind it."
She went a little pink. "There was," she said quietly.
"So, are you willing to give that up just to avoid hurting Ron?" he asked seriously.
She bit her lip, looking at the ground.
"Well, I don't know…"
"You do know, Hermione," Harry said, "you just don't want to say it out loud."
She looked up at him, still biting her lip. "Did you learn Legilimency or what?"
"No, I've just been your friend for nearly eight years. Now come on, Hermione, tell me what you want to do about this. Someone's going to miss us sooner or later," he warned her. She looked around nervously, as though expecting Ron or Ginny to jump out from behind something.
"Oh, Harry, I… I don't want to give this up, whatever it is, but… Well, the Weasleys are going to murder the both of us if we… you know… do anything about what just happened."
"Hermione," he said, "no one's murdering anyone. I'm not saying that the Weasleys are going to appreciate this, but if you want something between us, if you want a… you know… relationship, we can't just lead them to believe that things are the same as they've always been. It wouldn't be fair. You've got to choose: us or them?"
"Oh, why do I have to choose?" she asked. "What do you want, then?"
He shook his head. "No-no-no, none of that. You're going to choose before I say anything else. I know for a fact that whatever I said would have an effect on your decision, and it should be your choice and yours alone."
She bit her lip still harder, to the point where Harry started to wonder if she was going to bite right through it. She looked terribly nervous, as though wondering if what she said was going to instigate the end of the world. A few moments later, however, she seemed to finally make a decision and stopped nibbling her lip.
"Us," she said quietly.
"Mmm?" he asked, making her repeat it, his tone not betraying the fact that his heart had nearly leapt right out of his chest at her words.
"I want us, Harry, not them," she said, her voice stronger, more sure of herself.
He smiled widely. "Good, because I want us too."
Her eyes widened again, sparkling like he had never seen them sparkle before. "Really?"
"Oh, Harry!" she exclaimed, throwing her arms around him and burying her head in his shoulder. He hugged her back, still smiling broadly, his heart practically dancing to a tune of "she said us, she said us, she said us". And he thought, secretly, that in that moment, with her in his arms and an entirely new future lying ahead of them, he had never been happier in his life.
That he been almost two years ago, Harry realized, as he gathered up his cloak and the roses he had bought. Almost two years since that kiss under the apple tree, two years since she had looked straight into his eyes and said "Us". Two years of happiness untainted by any sort of evil, except perhaps the Weasleys' reactions when Harry and Hermione had first announced the fact that they were a couple. Harry had to give the Weasleys some credit, everyone but Ginny had taken it quite well, perhaps becoming a little cool and distant for a while, but never openly showing that they disliked the fact that Harry and Hermione were together. Ginny was a different story, but she had managed to have only a minimal amount of fits and had only made a minimal amount of smart remarks about the new couple. She still tended to slip up once in a while, making a cold comment or two here and there, but she would catch herself and apologize, assuring them all that "old habits were just hard to break". Ron had been surprisingly accepting, even encouraging, telling them that he had secretly thought that they were going to end up together since their first years at Hogwarts. Harry could never tell whether or not this was true, but he had been thankful for his friend's acceptance all the same.
Pulling on his cloak, Harry was reminded of the contents of the breast pocket by a small bump against his chest.
Cinnamon hearts, he thought with a small smile. Hermione loved cinnamon hearts, enough to say that they were the best part of Valentine's Day (besides Harry, of course). The two had shared quite a large bowl of the small, red candies the previous Valentine's Day, resulting in many thoroughly enjoyable cinnamon-flavoured kisses. That evening now had a proud spot on Harry's list of Patronus-worthy memories. This year, he had bought her a small box of her favourite Valentine's Day treats, which he hoped she would open as soon as she could, resulting in more of those cinnamon kisses and, possibly, something even better.
Harry's happy thoughts had to be cut short as he realized that he was nearly late. Hermione had asked him to be at her flat for six and it was five fifty-eight. Now in a hurry, Harry turned on the spot and was pulled into the tight vacuum that was Apparation, not noticing the discomfort at all.
Harry arrived outside the door to Hermione's flat with a quiet pop. Checking the watch that he had received from the Weasleys for his seventeenth birthday, he saw that it was now five fifty-nine.
I love magic, he thought gratefully as he knocked on the door. He would have been late to a great many appointments, not to mention dates with his girlfriend, had it not been for Apparation.
Hermione pulled the door open moments after he had knocked, emitting an uncharacteristic but happy sort of squeal when she noticed the roses in Harry's arms. He smiled.
"Brought you something," he said, handing her the bouquet, which she cradled delicately in her arms as she gave him a kiss.
"They're gorgeous," she said happily.
"And the roses aren't too bad, either," he said, making a point of looking Hermione up and down. She had dressed up for the occasion, in that handy "little black dress" that all women seem to have. Harry thought it looked better than her dress robes at the Yule Ball, if that was possible.
She went a little pink, but looked pleased by his compliment. "Flatterer," she said, moving out of the doorway in order to let him in. He was stunned by what he saw inside. She had set the table beautifully, with candles, a fancy white tablecloth, the whole shebang, for their traditional dinner together.
"Wow," he said, as she took his cloak and hung it up for him. She smiled her thanks.
"You're just in time, too," she said. "Dinner's almost ready." Harry already knew, from the wonderful aroma wafting from the kitchen. It had taken a bit of practice, but Hermione had become quite a skilled cook once she had gotten a place of her own, preferring to avoid living off of macaroni and cheese.
"Here, sit," she said, pulling out a chair for him. He obliged, but eyed her over the top of his glasses.
"Isn't the guy supposed to do that?" he asked with a grin.
"Yes, but I figured it wouldn't kill either of us if I rearranged the order of things a little," she replied, grinning back at him. "Now, you stay here, and I'll get dinner."
She disappeared into the kitchen, leaving Harry alone. He took the time to disobey her orders for a moment and retrieved the small, heart-shaped box of candies from his cloak, slipping it into his pocket as he retook his seat at the table. He made it just in time, too, as Hermione returned from the kitchen only a second after he sat back down, carrying two plates of spaghetti and meatballs, her speciality. (Everyone often joked that it wasn't exactly hard to make the dish, but Harry appreciated it all the same, maintaining the opinion that Hermione's was the best he had ever eaten.) She set a plate in front of Harry and took her own seat opposite him. She then snapped her fingers as though she'd forgotten something, pointed her wand towards the kitchen, and caught a bottle of wine in her hands a moment later. She grinned.
"I love magic."
Harry chuckled. "I said the same thing not five minutes ago," he said, as she poured a glass of wine for each of them. The two clinked glasses ("Cheers!") and started to eat, as Hermione told Harry about a particularly nasty case she was working on (having risen to the rank of Head of Magical Law Enforcement).
Harry didn't notice, but he must have stopped paying attention, for Hermione stopped talking a few minutes later and looked at him curiously.
"Are you all right, Harry? You look… nervous about something," she told him.
"Oh!" he said, surprised. "Don't worry, 'Mione, I'm fine. Sorry," he added, feeling guilty for tuning her out like that. She looked at him searchingly, but didn't seem to find anything wrong with him, and continued her story.
"Well, anyway, I told Pansy that I didn't care what Draco did, it didn't give her the right to fling him off of the roof, and she said…"
Harry paid attention for the rest of Hermione's story, and the two of them had cleaned their plates of all traces of spaghetti by the time she had finished, both of them having thoroughly enjoyed the meal. Hermione took their plates and glasses into the kitchen, and Harry took advantage of her absence once again to take a seat on the couch and pull the small box from his pocket. He prayed that the candies hadn't all melted together, seeing as that might put a bit of a hitch in his plans.
Hermione came back to find her boyfriend waiting for her on the couch, looking a little nervous again.
"You're sure you're all right?" she asked again, taking a seat beside him on the couch. "You look nervous again. Is something wrong?"
He shook his head, slipping an arm around her shoulders. "No, no, everything's fine," he assured her. He held up the little box. "Brought you something else," he said with a grin. He handed her the box and she grinned back.
"What is it?" she asked playfully.
"Well, I can't tell you, can I?" he asked. "It would ruin the fun."
"Come on, tell me," she insisted, moving closer to him on the couch and resting her head on his shoulder, looking curiously at the box in her hands.
"Open it," he urged.
"OK, if you're not going to tell me," she said, mock-resignedly. She carefully removed the ribbon holding the box together and lifted the lid. There was a millisecond's pause before she gasped, her left hand covering her mouth in shock while her right held the box. Harry smiled. His plan had worked perfectly so far. The small, red candies had not melted in the least, leaving the diamond ring that lay on them perfectly clean and as shiny as ever. It glinted in the candlelight from the table as Hermione picked it up with a shaking left hand, her right carefully moving the box to lie beside her on the couch. She turned to look at Harry with wide eyes, almost as wide as they had been after she kissed him under the apple tree. He smiled at her.
"Marry me, Hermione?" he asked quietly.
Those wide, brown eyes drifted from his face to the ring in her palm and back again, before her fingers suddenly wrapped around the glittering band and she threw her arms around him, sobbing those rare happy sobs.
"Yes!" she cried into his shoulder. "Yes! Yes! Yes!"
He gave her a tight squeeze before he let her go, gently removing the ring from her hand as he watched her eyes sparkle with happy tears, the best kind of tears. The diamond twinkled in the light again as he slipped the ring onto her finger, blinking away the tears gathering in his own eyes. They both sat in silence for a moment, both minds coming to terms with what had just taken place, before Harry jumped up from his seat with a great shout of laughter, seizing Hermione around the waist as he went and swinging her around as she laughed as well. Harry set her down again after a few turns, trying to avoid making her dizzy, and the two stood with their arms around each other, more of those happy tears falling from both sets of eyes as their laughter dwindled to soft chuckles.
An odd feeling, Harry thought, laughing and crying at the same time.
The two loosened their grips on each other and sat back down, both smiling broadly and wiping the tears from their cheeks.
"God, Harry…" Hermione breathed, looking at the ring on her finger. She chuckled softly again. "I guess this is what you were nervous about, huh?" she asked, picking up the little box again and holding a few candies out to Harry, who opened his palm for them.
"I might've been a little nervous, yeah," he admitted, popping some of the spicy sweets into his mouth.
"Did you think I was going to say no?" she asked curiously, crunching a few hearts between her teeth.
"No, but… Well, I guess it's customary to be nervous," he said, with a slightly goofy grin on his face. "I mean, I'm asking you to spend the rest of your life with me," he explained quietly, his expression becoming a more serious.
She smiled and leaned her head on his shoulder. "You silly man. You should know by now that there's no one else I'd rather spend it with."
He leaned towards her until their foreheads were nearly touching. "I love you, Hermione."
"I love you too, Harry."
Their lips met and Harry savoured the first of those annual flavoured kisses that he enjoyed so much.
Yup, he thought, mentally grinning, Hermione's been right all along. The best part of Valentine's Day is definitely the cinnamon hearts.
Other Similar Stories
To My Dearest...

It’s been a week since we came home and rolled in the New Year which was great to finally spend it at home and not out on the road. It was two days later and I watched as Nonnie got ready for bed. I wanted to tell her not to bother with the gown, but I will have more fun ripping it off of her.
I sat on the bed under the covers with nothing on and the fact that she didn’t know it made me even harder when I thought about the things I was going to do to her. I enjoy making love with her. she just made having sex just so much more meaningful.
I can still remember the first time we did it. Monica had just come home from the hospital and her and Frankie just got into it. She had stormed off to her spare room that night and I followed her. I was only excepting to talk to her and comfort her, but then the next thing I know we are kissing and I pushing into her.
Then after that night when ever she came up to visit we would get together or she would meet p with me at some of our venues on tours when they were close for her. I even made a couple of trips down to meet her at home as well. We enjoyed being with each other and that’s what made being with her just great. I was able to be with someone who understood and loved me for me.
I watched as she brushed her shoulder blade length hair and thought how I got the prettiest Lake sister. Frankie would disagree and say that he had the prettiest one, but I really didn’t care because Nonnie was the one for me.
As if sensing that I was staring at her she stopped brushing her hair, “Is there something wrong Mr. Way?” she asked in the sexy voice that I just love to hear.
I smiled and nodded my head, “Yes there is something wrong and only you can fix this BIG problem.” And then I gestured to the bulge that you could see from under the covers.
A smirk came to her face as she looked at me, “Well I guess I have to get to it then if I ever want you to get better, won’t I?”
“That’s for damn sure”, I said and as she walked over to the bed I threw the covers off me and let her look at my naked form.
When her eyes got to my dick I was as her eyes got big and she let out a gasp. Man I just love watching her when she looks at me. I liked how all the emotions she was feeling flashed across her face. She was beautiful.
With a smile she took off her gown and climbed into bed with me. Lying on our sides we just watched each other for a while and then I leaned over and kissed her lips softly, then her nose, eyes, cheeks, and then I went back to her lips brushing mine against hers ever so lightly.
I watched as she closed her eyes at the light caresses I was giving her and then I moved down to her neck, licking and nibbling the soft skin until I bite down and then sucked the skin, leaving my mark on her. She was moaning as I made the love bite and one of my hands ventured to her breast.
“Mmm, Gee.” She said as I replaced my hand with my mouth on her breast. She arched her back and then pushed me away, “It my turn to touch.” She said and pushed me on my back.
Kissing me she repeated my actions and I closed my eyes at the pleasure her hands were giving me. When she got to my chest and flicked each of my nipples with her tongue she straddled me.
I opened my eyes and watched as she guided me into her and we both gasped out loud at the sensation that followed. I let her set the pace and followed after her. it wasn’t long before I movements became fast and I clung to her hips as she rode me.
I watched as every time she came down onto me she would arched her back causing her hips to move in a scoping motion. After a while I caught her by surprise and flipped her over until she was under me.
I bent down in captured her lips in a passionate kiss and breathlessly whispered in her ear, “I love you.”
I lifted up my head to look into her eyes and she panted back with a smile, “I love you too.”
As I pumped into her I bent her knees up as I got into a kneeling position and continued making love to her. in the new position it gave us a better angle and it wasn’t long before we both came together.
I collapsed on top of her and she wrapped her arms around my neck. Reaching for the box that was under the pillow under her head I kissed her, “ I need to ask you something.”
She looked at me with all the love in the world, “You can ask me everything baby.” She said and it brought a smile to my face.
“Do you really love me?” I asked her hands went to cradle my face.
Looking deep into my eyes she said, “With all my heart.”
Once I had my answer and I knew that she really meant it I pulled the box further out and brought it to the front of her face.
I watched with a smile as her eyes grew big and tears threatened to fall, “Will you marry me?” I asked as I opened the box and revealed the princess cut pink diamond on a white gold band.
The tears that were in her eyes fell then and she hugged me once more, “Yes, yes I’ll marry you.”
We kissed again and I moved a little off of her as I slipped on the ring, “I love you for now and always.” I told her wiping the tears from her face.
“I love you for now and always.” She repeated back and I kissed her forehead.
Turning off the lights I brought her closer to my body and she snuggled against me more. I fell asleep with the love of my life in my arms.
Sorry guys, but I just graduated from college and it was finals week and everything and I had to get ready for that. Also, I am sick right now, but i thought i should give y'all an update since you always wait for one. Thank you, Queenie.

Caracas, Venezuela: Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez has returned home after his latest round of radiation therapy treatment in Cuba.
Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez has vowed to beat cancer to win re-election in October.
Chavez hugged his mother and one of his daughters after stepping off the presidential jet shortly before midnight on Wednesday. He arrived in his home state of Barinas, where his parents live.
Chavez says he has been recovering well after a February surgery in Havana that removed a second tumor from his pelvic region.
He has vowed to beat cancer to win re-election in October.
The 57-year-old president underwent his second round of radiation therapy this week. He began the treatments in late March and has said he plans to have a total of five rounds to help prevent a recurrence of his illness.

Rugby rivalry set aside as Blues mourn Red icon Anthony Foley
In the build-up to Leinster's derby matches with Munster, all sorts of words are thrown out to sell the fixture and talk up the coming clash.
However, in weeks like this, the true nature of the relationship comes to the fore. This is no bitter hatred, but a sibling rivalry. Irish rugby is a small, tight-knit family and the provinces are the brothers who occasionally fight.
Sure, there are fallings-out, but when real life intervenes, as it did so cruelly on Sunday morning, there is no acrimony, only sadness and empathy.
How could there be anything but when so many cross the divide and make their way as an exiled Munsterman in blue or vice versa.
In the Leinster dressing-room, Sean Cronin is a Shannon man as is Trevor Hogan whose role now is to identify and develop talent on the east coast. On the coaching ticket, Leo Cullen, Guy Easterby and John Fogarty all played with and against the late Anthony Foley.
After the two sides crossed swords at the Aviva Stadium less than two weeks ago, the Munster coach ate dinner with Leinster scrum coach Fogarty and head of rugby operations Easterby. The result decided, they ceased hostilities and talked like old friends.
"He was sitting there having a good chat, talking about the Champions Cup, what they were going to do about Racing," Fogarty recalled yesterday. "It is all a bit strange at the moment."
At the province's UCD base, they gathered yesterday to begin preparations for a daunting trip to France to face Montpelier but it was hard for anyone to focus on rugby.
They are professionals and will tune in when needed, but at their media briefing there was no doubting what was front and centre of the mind.
"I can remember the first time I ever saw him; I was a very young kid. Shannon were playing Cork Con in Musgrave Park in the Munster Senior Cup," Tipperary native Fogarty said.
"I was just leaving school. I was in awe of their back-row, of him and how he carried the ball. He was an incredibly smart player. He knew how to win or learned how to win. He was never the quickest but he was always in the right place.
"The first time I would have met him would have been when I trained with Munster. He wouldn't have said a whole lot. It would have been more, 'You're going well,' and that was enough.
"Before you got there, you knew how important he was to Munster and that he was that type of club person. You wanted to go well for him and that type of person that was in Munster.
"You had Mick Galwey, Anthony Foley, Peter Clohessy, John Hayes. These are the people you think of when you think of Munster and how they evolved into the great side that they were. Before I met him, I knew all about him. I was just hoping for his seal of approval."
Fogarty paid tribute to Foley as a player and as a man.
"So many of us in here would have played with and against Anthony, you know Guy, Leo, myself, Girvan and a few of the lads playing still. We've been looking on with a lot of pride," he said.
"There are some great memories. He's remembered as an incredibly smart player, very determined to win. Off the field, he was a good team man and a good guy to have in a changing room. It's very sad, incredibly sad. It is hard to comprehend.
"He and Munster on their route to winning a Heineken Cup, they seemed to evolve all along the way.
"People talk about Anthony being very clever. He seemed to adapt from game-to-game from season-to-season to learn how to win.
"When he lifted the trophy, he had evolved in that team and that team had become him. He's such a huge part of what Munster are and why they won that competition back in 2006.
"His family and Munster rugby should be very proud because I know we are up here. Off the field, him as a club guy, him as a team-mate. I was talking to Leo. He was at a Blackrock Under-20s game against Shannon years ago in Naas and Anthony would have been a full international. He was at the game behind the posts. He didn't need to be there.
"My dad died in 2007 and Anthony showed up that night to support myself and Denis (Fogarty, also a former team-mate of Foley's) and our family.
"That's when it becomes hard to deal with because you know the type of person he was, how good a club man, how good a team man he was as well as how influential he was in Shannon, Munster and Irish rugby.
"It is with great sadness we watch this and our thoughts are with all our friends in Munster rugby and particularly with Olive and the Foley family
"I genuinely hope they find some sort of strength from the outpouring of love and affection that everyone has for Anthony."
Experienced Ireland prop Mike Ross experienced Foley as a player during his early days with Munster and later as a coach when the Munster legend was co-opted into Declan Kidney's backroom team in 2013 and was part of Les Kiss's coaching ticket for the North American tour that year.
He remembers a "hard-nosed, tough leader of men with an amazing brain".
"He kind of epitomised what Munster rugby was all about really," the Fermoy native said.
"If you had to take a player and say, 'That's Munster rugby' you'd point to him. He was never the biggest or the strongest guy, but he was always one of the cleverest.
"He had a great nose for the line and knew how to do the right things, and as a coach he was very blunt and to the point, but managed to get his message across and it was always something you could do and work on. And he brought a real toughness to the teams he coached.
"Coaching was in his blood. He was always going to be coaching. He used to handle the defensive aspects for a bit. He used to put up a quote about warriors and what it required, but that's what he was, a warrior. I think, as a coach, he didn't beat about the bush. He gave you three or four points to work on and that was it. He didn't faff around at all and you appreciate that as a player, that directness. That's all you want really, clear messages, and he was all about that."
"At such a young age, 42, it's nothing really is it? It's not too far from me. I really feel bad for his family especially. I've got a young lad myself and it must be especially hard for them.
"If you had Axel for a dad you'd worship the ground he walked on, and to realise that you're not going to see him again must be absolutely heartbreaking."
The rivalry has been parked. Irish rugby is united in grief.

A man saw an elderly couple sitting down to lunch at a fast-food restaurant. He noticed that they had ordered just one meal, and as he watched, the older gentleman carefully divided the hamburger in half, then counted out the fries until each had half of them. The old man then began to eat, and his wife sat watching, with her hands folded in her lap.
The young man decided to ask if they would let him buy another meal for them so that they didn’t have to split theirs.
The old gentleman said, “Oh, no. We’ve been married 50 years, and everything has always been and will always be shared 50-50.”
The young man asked the wife if she was going to eat, to which she replied, “Not yet. It’s his turn to use our teeth.”
Submitted by Brandan.

It was for sure a pleasant sight to see Matt Wieters rip a three-run double to left center to give the Orioles a 4-0 lead after a half inning at San Diego.
Wieters began today hitless in his last 13 at bats and with just one hit over his last 22 at bats as his average dipped to .222 and some fans were calling for him to be sent back to Triple-A.
Maybe that one swing, having come in a real clutch, two-out, bases loaded situation, can get him going.
Wieters had just 3 RBI over his previous 19 games and this is his first multi-RBI game since he knocked in three vs. Boston on May 1st. Wieters began today batting just .169 with runners in scoring position and in June is batting .132-1-2 in 15 games.
With a win today, by the way, not only would the Orioles have their third series win of this season and first all year on the road, but they would have back-to-back wins for the first time since taking three in a row from May 12-14.
A win would also give the O's a 3-3 road trip and 6-3 all-time record vs. San Diego.

So this song wasn't supposed to be released until today, but of course with the way the music industry has been lately it was leaked yesterday.
Here it is...
Work Bitch by Britney Spears
If you know me, you know I am a HUGE Britney fan. I've been waiting for new music from her for awhile now. She did collaborate with will.i.am for Scream & Shout, but for me that was such a tease. I really like this song. In my eyes she can do no wrong, and I still loved her even through all of her craziness. I can't wait to see what the rest of her album brings.
What do you think of this new song?

It has not been a secret that actors Siddharth and Samantha are in a relationship however they have never accepted it in public. Recently, the cute couple was seen together in Bangkok having a very romantic dinner, however, it turns they were just shooting for a commercial. The very talented actors have signed up for the brand Lux and were shooting an ad film in Bangkok.
It seemed like they had a lot of fun together at the shoot and joked around with the cast and crew. The commercial is directed by Ivo Wejgaard, a Swiss filmmaker, Samantha and Siddharth will dance to a popular song edited and remixed by the famous songwriter and composer, Mikey McCleary. The commercial will hit the screens on 1st December this year.

Micheala Fogarty threw a surprise party for Carl to show the strength of support he had, but also to show she was happy for him to take on the challenge.
As the Mirror revealed on Saturday, Michaela had been slightly apprehensive about him going onto the ITV show.
Daughter Claudia Fogarty explained: “Before he came out we had a big party for him because I don’t think dad thought mum was as supportive as she could have been. But she was hiding it until we had this party and then she was there for him.
The party was held just four days before Carl left for Australia with about 30 close friends and family who kept the secret he was doing the show.
Carl’s other daughter Danielle added: “That was her way of saying she accepted. They were quiet before that, not speaking as much as normal, because they knew what was coming, but the party was her way of showing the support he had.”
The daughters also admitted their mum was finding it tough being apart from Superbikes champion Carl, even though she is keen for him to get to the final stages of the show.
Danielle added: “Throughout dad’s career she was his rock and has been through everything. So for my mum to let him do his own thing has been really tough for her.
“Not being able to speak to him has been hard and she has found it all very emotional.”
Carl is up for elimination on tonight’s show against Tinchy Stryder, Jimmy Bullard and Melanie Sykes.
You can vote for Carl Fogarty by calling 09020442402 on landlines & 6442402 mobiles. Or show your support on social media with the hashtag #savefoggy or #teamfoggy
Like this? Did you know we have a dedicated TV and Film page on Facebook?Mirror TV Facebook Promotion

Chapter 1 : Chapter One - Lily
| ||Rating: 12+||Chapter Reviews: 2|
Background: Font color:
- "James, I'd like for this to be a surprise, for him to figure out for himself who gave it. And that won't happen if I don't go now."
His arms tightened around her waist, making her hip press even closer against his stomach. They had just spent their first night together, and Sirius and the rest of the marauders had been nice enough to leave the dormitory early, leaving the madly in love couple behind.
- "And it's not like I'm going to be away forever, it's just an hour we're talking about."
- "Come on Lils', don't go now. I promise you that he won't get upset just because you decided to give him his Christmas present one day later then you planned. I mean, he doesn't even know you're coming."
- "It's not that I want to give it to him today, I have to. Otherwise it's all a waste."
They were still sitting on the bed, with her in his lap. James had tried to stop her from taking up her clothes from the floor, by wrapping his arms around her and forcing her to sit down.
- "But I'll miss you..."
She kissed him, and then laughed.
- "Don't be a baby, I'll be right back."
Lily knew that James hated to be called 'a baby', so she wasn't surprised when he released her.
- "I don't get why you want to give him a present. He's not a good teacher, and everything evolves around his stupid club..."
- "Is someone mad about not being a part of his club?"
- "No, all I'm saying Lils' is that I don't get why you've gone trough with all this trouble for his gift. He's not worth it!"
- "I know most people find him annoying, stuck-up and thinks it's irritating that he favors some students. And yes, I know I'm one of them. But because of that I've gotten to know him better than you guys, and deep down there's this sweet person that I like. So I think he deserves a Christmas present."
James raised one of his eyebrows, and gave away a sigh.
- "Whatever you say, love."
Lily kept silent while picking up her clothes, and she tried to not remember how they got there in the first place. Because if she did there was a small chance that she'd ever leave the dormitory, and she knew that the best was not to tell James – because he would make sure that she never left.
She gave James a kiss goodbye before she ran down the stair towards the Gryffindor common room. Just as she reached the bottom she paused, trying to get as little attention as possible from the other students in the room. But the few yards that separated the boys entry and the girls was apparently enough for everyone in the room to notice her, and she turned red. It was obvious – at lest for the older students – where and how she had spent her night. Without looking anyone in the eye she ran up to her dormitory and carefully grabbed the bowl she'd left on her nightstand.
Slughorn was indeed a very unique man, and she knew that James wasn't totally unfair by questioning her gift. He did favor students, and his world was narrowed down to his own little bubble. She could see that man, the man that James and almost every other student saw. But she could, indifferent from the rest of the school, look past that and see the nice, kind man underneath.
Her very first lecture had been Potion making. She had been nervous and terrified, and scared that this was going to be the end, that they would realize that they made a terrible mistake and send her back home. With tears in her eyes she sat the entire lesson not hearing one word that came out of Slughorns mouth. Snape, who sat beside her, didn't make any effort to comfort her.
Now, years later, she could see signs already then. Whenever his classmates was around, she didn't exist. It didn't grow during the years as she had thought, it had been there all along. From the moment the sorting hat screamed “Gryffindor!”, their fates shattered apart. It just took her five years to realize.
Lily shook her head, trying to make the depressing thoughts disappear. She hadn't talked to Snape in two years and now, when she dated James, the small chance she ever had at repairing their friendship was gone.
Cautiously she walked down the stair, back to the Gryffindor common room. A group of sixth year students started whispering the moment they laid their eyes on her. She recognized all of them, but one in particular. Sarah Farraw, James ex girlfriend. Sarah, whom she never said a word to, was very open about her feeling towards her. Somehow she though Lily was playing this game, making James believe that she liked him. Her evidence was the huge fight Lily and James had in the end of their fifth year. Lily knew she said some terrible things, and she regretted some of them. But not all, because James had been a different person back then. During the last year he had matured and didn't – at least not in her presence – prank people as much.
Whilst walking towards Slughorns office, she lingered back the memory of her first lesson at Hogwarts. She hadn't realized that the bell had rung before Slughorn laid a hand upon her shoulder, which had made her twitch. And the contact with another human being made the tears roll down her cheeks. Slughorn faced turned terrified at first, but after taking a deep breath he actually comforted her.
Since that day she had been thankful. When she had blurted out that it was impossible that she belonged there, that they must have made a mistake, he calmed her down and told her that every muggleborn felt that way. And that thought had comforted her more than anyone could have imagined. Of course the others felt the same way. Unlike the students that was born into this world, raised with the knowledge that they would leave their families and homes by age eleven, she and the other muggleborns had just had a few months to reconcile with, not just Hogwarts, but the entire wizard world.
She looked down at her wrist to make sure that she still had time, and the clock showed her ten to nine. That meant the she had ten minutes before Slughorn would return from his daily walk. The corridor outside his office was empty, so she felt no need the sneak and just opened the door. As quickly as she dared, she hurried through the room and put the bowl down on his desk. Making sure that the flower petal still floated on the surface, she mumbled a few spells before she hurried back out.
On her way towards the Great hall, where she was supposed to meet James for breakfast, she almost ran into Slughorn. He gave her a little nod, which she responded to. She was thankful for the lack of conversation – which, on the other hand, was quite normal during the mornings, Slughorn wasn't the type that rose with the sun.
- "So, how did it go?"
James sprung up beside her, and gave her a kiss.
- "Oh, very well."
- "How long will the fish live?"
- "As long as I do."
James smiled, and replied before he kissed her again:
- "That means forever, right?"
Other Similar Stories
by The Stag ...
time travel ...
A New Beginnig

The pretty and hardworking actor died on June 3, 2013, and many people think that her boyfriend, Sooraj Pancholi, killed her.
Jiah Khan was an actress in Bollywood who was in a number of Hindi movies. She was born in New York City, USA, on February 20, 1988, and grew up in London. Nafisa Rizvi Khan was her real name.
Jiah Khan died on June 3, 2013. She was 25 years old. Her suicide shocked the Bollywood business and all of her fans around the world.
Her mother, Rabia Khan, has been trying to get justice for her daughter and has said that she did not kill herself but was killed instead. Still, the case is being looked into.
Sooraj Pancholi was her boyfriend at the time of her death in 2013. Sooraj was one of the main suspects in the case of her death, and many people began to say bad things about him.
People are looking for Jiah Khan’s boyfriend Sooraj Pancholi almost a decade after she died. They want to know what he’s been up to and where he is now.
In 2013, Indian star Sooraj Pancholi was arrested because of the death of his girlfriend, actress Jiah Khan. He was accused of helping Khan kill himself, and the case is still going on.
In 2018, a court in Mumbai accused Pancholi of helping Khan commit suicide and sent him to trial. Pancholi, on the other hand, has rejected the charges and said that he is not guilty.
Jiah Khan may have killed herself between 11 and 11:30 p.m. at her home in Juhu, Mumbai. Neither her mother nor her sister were at home at the time.
On June 7, 2013, her sister found a six-page handwritten note for Khan’s boyfriend Sooraj Pancholi at her house. The note was supposedly meant for Pancholi.

Well i never thought i would do this but here goes
Bella one of my female leopard geckos (tremper albino) past away tonight, i found her next to her cave about 20mins ago... brought her from a forum member and she was tiny bless her but she was about 2yrs old... so she had her own viv... she was also blind i believe so she was always hand fed and was given hydrolite twice aweek.. she would find her way to water and sometimes food tho she just didnt grow... out of all the leos i have had up for sale i never put this up as she was a keeper.
All the best girl
Originally Posted by Mister Meaner
I have occasionally dragged my arse round on the carpet like a dog with worms.

He is a La Liga winning coach that is nearly as charismatic as Jose Mourinho – and judging by this photo, he is at least as good looking.
Atletico Madrid manager Diego Simeone was a fine player in his prime, but since hanging up his boots and taking the managerial reins at the club, we could have forgiven him for letting his six pack slide slightly.
However, it seems that not only has the Argentine kept his figure – but it may well have gotten even better.
Simeone was pictured on holiday with his family – and we were left open mouthed at the pictures of the coach.
Atletico Madrid are the people’s choice this season and may even win the Champions League as well – and it seems that not only is their manager a hit on the touchline and in the dressing room, but he is not too shabby on the beach either!
Given the jumping around done by Simeone on the touchline and in his technical area, maybe we should not be so shocked that the results look as good as this!
Diego Simeone – our manager of the season and certainly this week’s torso of the team!
Do you think that the Atletico Madrid manager has a torso to marvel at? Let us know your thoughts below or tweet us @LaFootyettes.

AFTER strangling his unfaithful wife, a father of three and his brother-in-law dumped her body at the side of the A59 Preston-Clitheroe Road.
After strangling his unfaithful wife, a father of three and his brother-in-law dumped her body at the side of the A59 Preston-Clitheroe Road.
Five days later in August last year Tanveer Ahmed, aged 31, led police to the Sawley Brow area where they found the badly decomposed body.
Manchester Crown Court heard Ahmed confessed to the killing when seen by police about another matter. He later implicated Matloob Hussain, aged 35 - they are both of Villa Road, Hathershaw, Oldham - and Hussain is married to the victim's sister.
Ahmed admitted murdering his wife. Nasarat, aged 27, at the former matrimonial home in Balfour Road, Oldham and was jailed for life. Hussain was convicted after a trial of perverting the course of justice by impeding the police investigation. He was jailed for three and a half years.
Judge Simon Fawcus told both men: "This was a wicked murder and the body was jettisoned in woodland at the side of a road. The grief and pain that activity must have caused to those nearest and dearest to the victim is difficult to comprehend."
He told the distressed Ahmed: "I am satisfied you sought assistance from your brother in law and received it. The sentence is fixed by law, but in deciding how long you should serve a number of things will serve you in good stead. They include your guilty plea and frankness with the police, your help in the case against Hussain and the fact you had a good character."
Earlier, Alan Conrad QC, for Ahmed said he and his UK born wife had lived apart after heated quarrels, but he had hoped for a reconciliation. He understood she would return to him at the house in Balfour Street, but there she removed her jewellery, handed it to him and confessed to an affair with another man.
There were more painful, details, and it was then that he strangled her with a scarf. Upset he went to Matloob's home and was given some advice.
Prosecutor, Mukhtar Hussain QC, said Ahmed's marriage initially had been happy, then the couple had differences. The husband developed a gambling habit and there were some violence towards his wife which led to Mrs Ahmed going into a woman's refuge. Later after she got her own home together with her children in Brierfield, she kept her address secret.
Following some family persuasion, Mrs Ahmed did go to Oldham, but by about 11am the next day she was dead. The husband told police his wife told him of her adulterous behaviour and he confessed to murdering her.

Real couple hard anal watch online
I ask Julia what she thinks of Beth and she says that she is ok to look at I ask her what she would do first spank her or make her lick her pussy and she says spank her she must earn the right to lick her pussy and I start thinking. We had been sitting in the kitchen and she suggested moving to the couch in the living room and watch a movie.
Jessy automatically took off her seatbelt and began to bow her head. Willy Mo Mamba 1 by Will Buster. Standing behind her, he clasped his hands over her breasts. Stars. he said with a sweeping gesture to the skies. She giggled occasionally at their lack of co-ordination, but took his offered hand gladly as they made their way back to the car. Cindy got back up for just a moment, and pulled a few facial tissues out of the small cardboard box on the kitchen counter, before sitting back down at the table, and offering the wad of tissues to Sally, telling her, Here.
The blonde crawled back over to him and took his cock in her mouth. I pulled her gown up and was pleasantly surprised at the lack of underwear I found. I grunt and moan as my baby seed rains on Katy's face.
I started sucking them like I was a baby getting fed. He never took his eyes off of her. When we saw you we thought we could fuck this little slut whore. Oh and leave your panties in the top drawer in my desk in the office. We told them about finishing school and how Logan proposed and they told us how they were both living in London as well and that their dad was very happy to hear about the news.
Now, let's see how long it takes you to recover, she smiled and lowered her face, nuzzling beneath my balls. Mom let out a hoarse moan, still affected by her recent orgasm and I noticed dad get up from Sams pussy and watch as I pull my cock out then thrust it back in, fucking his gorgeous wife who just happened to be my step mother.
Nick started to move between her legs. Placing the book on top he opened it at which time he and Helen began to speak in loud, terrible voices though the words were in no language I had ever heard and sounded like they shouldnt be uttered by human throats. After breakfast, I invited Kristy to go out to a park with me so that we could walk and talk and get this thing settled in her mind. Look at my pussy, Henry. Tell him youre sorry for being a slut.

We were attracted to the Inn at Harbour Ridge because of its high ratings and great reviews. We were definitely not disappointed. We stayed in the barn and we were three adults. We had lots of privacy, great cookies and treats in the fridge when we arrived, lots of help when we wanted to know our way around. We loved the pool with swimming privileges, and the lake area. Sue and Ron were totally hospitable, and the food was amazing. We come from Louisiana, where we always eat super well, but Sue's breakfasts and the lovely settings were total pampering. We were blessed to stay from Monday afternoon to Friday and felt really refreshed and happy for our Lake of the Ozarks getaway -- beautiful time with beautiful people!

I don't know why, it's just something you say on the morning of 1 October. Anyone know the reason? It's not for luck, as far as I know. The month has started with sun, but I'm not counting on it lasting. It's been otherwise quiet so far this month. However, just you wait and see.

Three years ago, I was given a lead about an empty school in the state of South Carolina. We turned our trip from Raleigh to South Carolina into a day trip by taking back roads and stopping at interesting places along the way. I heard and read that there were rumors that the school was haunted. There’s no doubt that it has a creepy vibe. When you walk into the school through the main door, you will see that the middle part has fallen down to the basement.
The creep effect was especially bad in the back, where the basement is also located. The only light we could see was from the flashes on our cameras. During the flash, I kept having the same dream that a girl with long hair, like the character from the movie “The Ring,” was chasing me. Lol. The first part of this school was built in 1918, but it wasn’t done until 1920. It was, in fact, built in a very unique way that was very impressive! The bricks that went into making these came from Europe.
It was named after Robert Fletcher, who died while serving in World War I on October 7, 1918. He died because he got sick from mustard gas. His body was brought all the way from Europe to the nearby Fletcher Family Cemetery to be laid to rest.
The Fletchers were farmers and did very well with their money. During the 19th and 20th centuries, the family owned 1,800 acres of land in South Carolina and 2,100 acres of land in North Carolina. In his honor, they built the school as a memorial to him. In 1924, the Fletcher family wanted to turn the school into a college. However, the state assembly turned down their idea.

Sara's eyes fluttered open, slowly focusing the room around her. The bed felt warm, unlike the past two weeks, and she found herself smiling for no apparent reason. Then memories of the past few hours abruptly came back to her kind, and she saw the clothes scattered all over the floor, and the flowers on her night table, and in the end she became conscious of the arm surrounding her naked waist. A smile tugged on her lips as she rolled to the other side, finding herself facing a soundly sleeping Gil Grissom.
She had always liked to make love when the rain was pouring outside. That night in particular, the storm had been violent and loud, and had rocked them all along.
From the window they'd left ajar, Sara could smell the scent of the wet streets and alight chill breeze insinuating into the room, blowing its cold breath on Sara's bare shoulders and back, where her sensitive skin was stippled by goose bumps.
She carefully removed his arm to not wake him up, and slipped out of the bed. The alarm clock on Gil's table flashed three in the morning.
Sara blindly sought for something to put on. To her luck, she immediately touched the unmistakable white lace of her nightie, which she put on right before going to pick a pair of panties from the open drawer on the opposite side of the room. She glanced back at the bed and admired her realised dream for a moment. Even now that she had him back, after that sabbatical that had felt like lasting for ages, she found it hard to believe he was there for her and her only.
She went to sit by his side, her hand moving through his curls, then down to his freshly shaven face, and she nearly regretted they'd got rid of it so soon. After all, she had quite enjoyed it, last night.
Grissom stirred in his sleep, letting out a faint groan as Sara's fingers stroked his cheek. She didn't want him to awake, but there was some superior power that just wouldn't let her stop. It was something she enjoyed too much, something she would never get tired of, because it was everything she had always dreamed.
She was so engaged in her ministrations that she barely noticed his eyes had slowly opened and were now gazing at her through the darkness. He set his hand above hers and gave her a sleepy smile.
"What angel wakes me from my flowery bed?"
Sara grinned amusedly.
"I'm sorry." She mumbled. "I didn't mean to wake you up."
"I would have awoken anyways," he said dismissively. "This bed feels cold without you." He pulled himself up a bit, looking around with a mildly astonished expression. "Did we do this?"
With a small laugh Sara let him drag her down to his chest, where she rested her head blissfully while he raised the blankets to let her slid under them.
"We were a little more concerned about what, rather than how." She quipped. "Which I didn't really mind."
He lifted a brow, glancing down to her. Sara defiantly mirrored his expression, her hand running across his chest.
"I've missed you so much." She whispered, closing her eyes to savour the pleasure to feel him so close again, to have his arm surrounding her, his hand caressing her shoulder. The regular rhythm of his breath and heartbeat lulled her gently, driving her toward a sleep she didn't want. She just wanted to just lie here forever and enjoy the moment, because this was what for years she had been waiting for.
Grissom brushed his lips against her temple, then, as she turned, against her own.
"You know, I thought a lot while I was away," he said, suddenly bringing up a serious tone. "This sabbatical has been very important for me. I got the chance to come to a few realizations."
"About what?" asked Sara, her eyes still idly closed
"About us." He said. "About how I cherish what we have."
Finally Sara decided the conversation was getting significant enough for her to draw her attention back to him. She simply eyed him in anticipation, cuddling herself more comfortably, her leg rubbing on his.
"I'd always thought that all those movies and songs that say I can't breathe without you were… Kind of hyperbolic." He said, looking down at his hand tangled with hers. "But as soon as the plane took off I became aware that I was being physically separated from the one thing that makes this city my home." He made a pause to lick his lips, as though he was looking for the right words. "And it was then that I realized… I wasn't breathing."
He glanced at her intensely, and Sara cupped his face, leaving his hand free.
"I remembered all of a sudden why I've been running away from you for all these years." His hand went up to cover hers as he continued. "You scare me – what I feel for you scares me... Because it goes beyond what science can explain."
"There are things that don't need explanations." She said softly. "Sometimes all we need to do is to stop looking for a reason and let everything happen just… Because."
He addressed her a smirk before this lips met again.
"I'm glad you stopped running, eventually." She remarked.
"And I'm glad that despite all my mistakes, you never stopped waiting for me." He replied.
They stared into each other's eyes for long seconds, fully immersed in the pure sensation of joy their mutual presence gave them. It was like a drug – a very addictive, heavenly drug.
Now they had found one another, they would never be able to let go what they had, and nothing in the world could have made Sara happier.
"Love, that exempts no one beloved from loving, seized me with pleasure of this man so strongly that, as thou seest, it doth not yet desert me." She recited, getting from him an approving look.
"Gallehault was the book and he who wrote it." He added, unable to stifle a flattered grin. "Dante's Inferno. Pretty smart quote, indeed."
"You quoted Shakespeare." She said smugly. "It took a massive quote to beat you."
"The pupil beats the master again." Grissom responded, his face millimetres away from hers, his hand still holding hers on his cheek. "Which reminds me that tomorrow there's Greg first conference and we have to get up early."
"Our baby is growing up." She giggled, but then she realised what she had said, and her heart was hit by a light pang. Babies were a subject that secretly bothered Sara, especially because of the contrasting feelings she had toward them.
She and Gil had been together for almost two years, and never they had talked about that, not even once, not even accidentally. And yet, it wasn't like there hadn't been occasions for her to bring it out. She had found herself facing a couple of late periods, in the last few months, but her unconscious hopes had been vain every time, and had always died before she could even start thinking of how to tell him.
"Sara," he said sweetly, trying to catch her look. "Is everything okay?"
She blinked in bewilderment, her thoughts fading as her mind quickly returned to reality.
"You fell silent when I mentioned Greg's conference."
Sara pursed her lips, trying to understand if it was the right moment to start such a delicate discussion. In the end she decided to leave it to his intuitiveness.
She raised her eyes in his and took a deep breath.
"Actually, it was something else." She sighed, hoping he would read in her expression everything she didn't have the guts to tell him face to face.
It took him a while to process her confession, but at last his jaw dropped in awareness.
"You'd like to have a baby?" he inquired.
"No!" Sara answered promptly. "Well, maybe… I don't know."
"But you must know…"
Sara didn't know how to interpret that cryptic tone. It was clear it was hard for him to talk about it, and she was very thankful to him that he hadn't pretended not to understand.
"I'm thirty six, Gil," she said inexpressively, lying more rigidly in his arms. "My body's not going to wait forever, and I… I'm staring to feel I need something more."
"Something more than this?" he gestured at the two of them. "More than just us?"
To Sara's ears, that sounded horribly defensive. She knew she should be glad she had him, that she was luckly to just be there with him, but her instinct wasn't of the same opinion.
Once again, though, her rational side overcame the sensitive one, and she did what she would always do when she felt she was about to scare him off.
"You know what? Let's forget about this." She said, forcing a nonchalant voice. "It's not important."
She knew that smile she had put on was so miserably fake, even in the darkness, and even better she knew it was too late to bit her tongue. She grabbed the blankets and shifted to her side of the bed, covering herself till her chin.
She was already fighting to keep herself together, when she felt his breath on her skin.
"I've grown up, Sara." He told her. "I don't run anymore from the things I love."
"I don't want you to do this just because I want it." she mumbled back flatly, but he made her turn to him and look him in the eye.
"If there is something I've learned from this job, it's that life is short and unpredictable," he said. "And we have not time enough to waste it in ifs." He wiped a tear from her eyelid and smiled reassuringly. "If you are ready for this, then I am too. I think I love you enough to stand the idea of a little baby Sara around the world."
A touched smiled appeared on her lips as well.
"Are you sure?"
Grissom nodded with determination.
"As sure as the rivers reach the sea." He confirmed.
A nervous, yet content laugh escaped from Sara's mouth.
"Cite your source."
"Nightwish." He said, receiving a puzzled look from her. "A Finnish power metal band Greg was listening to yesterday. Not bad, actually."
She buried herself into his hug again, the safest place in the world, and everything seemed easier.
"Thank you." She whispered timidly onto his chest.
There it was, the moment every woman dreamed for a lifetime. The moment when love felt so true that it nearly hurt. The moment when you realised that you had all you ever needed, and that it would be forever. The moment that made everything else disappear. The perfect moment.
Gil kissed her forehead and smiled more broadly, shaking his head.
"No, honey." He said fondly, holding her like she was all that kept him alive. "Thank you."

This story was originally published by the WND News Center.
A driver in Colorado has been detained after he tried to convince an officer his DOG was driving his vehicle, which was clocked at 52 mph in a 30 mph zone.
The details come from a report in the Denver Gazette, which said when the vehicle was clocked, and the driver pulled over, the officer was approaching and he saw "the driver attempted to switch seats with his dog, who was in the passenger seat."
The report described how the officer watched the driver make the "bizarre move."
The traffic stop happened in downtown Springfield.
According to the report, "The driver then exited from the passenger side of the vehicle and made the claim that he wasn't driving, showing 'clear signs of intoxication' while doing so," the report said.
When asked about drinking and driving, the driver bolted, trying to leave his car, his dog, and the officer behind, but only got about 20 yards before he was detained.
Authorities explained in custody, the man was found to have two active warrants for his arrest.
"It's also worth noting that the man claims he was attempting to drive from Las Animas to Pueblo at the time of the incident, though he ended up getting lost when traveling southwest instead of west," the report said.
He faces charges of driving under the influence, driving while ability impaired, driving under suspension, speeding 20 to 24 over, and resisting arrest.

Soapstone has been used in kitchens, bathrooms and sinks for hundreds of years. People in the past were practical, this natural material did everything that they needed. Function was the order of the day. The fact that soapstone was so beautiful, with a matte black finish and streaks of veins was a bonus. What mattered most was how well it served them in cooking and pastry making, without the issue of bacteria seeping in. What’s old is new again!
Here's What Our Clients Have To Say
After doing research on the Internet, I found Soapstone Werks and was impressed by their knowledge and eagerness to educate me on their product. They were conveniently located for me to actually see the slabs, but also several samples were sent that accurately depicted the slab. Everyone I worked with was friendly and efficiently handled my order and installation - it was easy and effortless! And I love my kitchen counter-tops.

AWOL Army soldier, Steven Matthew LeClaire, Jr. left his post in February 2011 and ended up murdering one and shooting at two others.
LeClaire left his post in El Paso, Texas and travelled to Orange County, after a visit from his younger sister.
According to the L.A. Times, LeClaire, his father and two friends were drinking in a room at the Cypress Lodge on Lincoln Avenue. During the evening, LeClaire, 26, pulled out a gun and fatally shot his friend Marques Murray, 24, in the arm and chest. Murray died on the scene. He also fired multiple shots at his father, Steven LeClaire, Sr. and his other friend, Raymond Eligan.
According to CBS Los Angeles, LeClaire attempted to shoot his 42-year-old father several times and shot Eligan, 51, in the legs when he attempted to leave the room. They both survived the incident.
It was discovered that his father was the target of his rampage. LeClaire believed that he had been mistreating his 14-year-old sister by giving her alcohol and allowing one of his friends to flirt with her. His sister had allegedly told him that she had an uncomfortable encounter with their dad’s 42-year-old friend.
After the shootings, LeClaire walked out of the hotel room and promptly surrendered to an off-duty California Highway Patrol officer.
Defense attorney, Gassia Apkarian claimed that LeClaire was unstable due to alcohol and drug abuse. She described him as a functioning alcoholic. The evening of the altercation, she said he was an angry functioning alcoholic because of what he believed had happened to his sister.
But had he wanted to kill his father, he would have had the chance during any of the preceding 21 days they were together, Apkarian maintained.
An Orange County jury on Friday convicted the 26-year-old Army specialist of murdering his friend. LeClaire was found guilty of one count of second-degree murder and two counts of attempted murder. He could face a minimum sentence of 90 years to life in prison when he is sentenced in October.

First we went inside Mareel and then there was a T- shirt performance some bits were funny but I liked it we sat on benches. There were mostly gymnastics with the T-shirts. After we went to the Met Office and Jenny showed us around and we wrote our names on the weather balloon. Then we watched the weather balloon go up. Then we rode the bus to Scalloway and there in a playground we ate our lunch it was fun in the playground, but we soon had to go to the Scalloway museum. In the museum there were lots of interesting things like different boats and mostly history. And breathing mask from the war period and old money. After we went to the Scalloway castle there were steep stairs. Then for tea we went to Cornerstone I liked the food there. Then we went home.

|Shin Jiya at Royal Liverpool Golf Club, Hoylake.|
The 2012 event was won in spectacular fashion by Shin. I didn't brave the rain and wind at Hoylake today. Had to watch it on TV from home in Coventry. Since I took this photograph on Wednesday's practice day, thought it good to include it here.
The final results were as follows:

It's been a busy week for us! We were supposed to go to the cabin this weekend with my family, but it got canceled, so Dave and Logan went with Dave's Dad to the Father Son Campout (our ward doesn't have one). They had tons of fun!
Dustin and I went shopping at Kohl's. They were having their 60-80% off sale and I had a $10 off coupon. They didn't have a lot I was interested in (tons of neon and bootie shorts), but I did find a pair of sunglasses for me and a swimsuit for Logan next year. I spent $7 "and saved $50. Just tells you how much things are over priced!
After Dustin was sleeping, I did some sewing. I started and finished my square for quilting class (appliquéd poinsettia). I decided to machine appliqué this year, and it went so much faster than by hand. I also worked on a few of the 21 bags I'm working on. Oh, and I finished some spit up cloths and a baby blanket for a shower this weekend.
Monday I started doing daycare for the 2 girls down the street. It went really well. Logan and Abby (the oldest) had so much fun playing with every toy Logan owns, and jumping on the Luv Sac. I would hear giggles and shrieks from all over the house. And Madelyn would crawl after them to see what the big kids were up to. I think it will work out well.
Tuesday the boys had doctor's appointments. They're both looking good! Logan's had a runny nose and a little cough lately. The Dr said it's just seasonal allergies. I have really bad outdoor allergies too, so I shouldn't be surprised. She prescribed him some medicine, but it doesn't do much good. I'm hoping to try some essential oils next week. I have to purchase them first, but then we'll see how they do. We just love them to clear up stuffy noses for colds, and the lavender was a life saver when I had shingles.
Wednesday I was supposed to babysit again, but the mom canceled, so we spent the day making salsa! It took all day to chop up the peppers, onions, and blend up the tomatoes. Dave had scouts Wednesday night, and I was able to convince him to take Dustin with him. We got it all 29 jars canned by 9. Hopefully we can do one more batch later this year, and we'll call it good! Dave also wants to can Jalapeño jelly and some spaghetti sauce. We'll see what we can squeeze in!

Inspirational songs: Anytime – Kelly Clarkson
Black Water – Nobuo Uematsu
It was late. The sky was overcast as Rin made her way out to the meeting tree where Tyki waited for her. She had missed him and she couldn't help but pick up her speed slightly. He had really been there for her ever since the incident with Sebastian. She had broken down and he had put her back together. Mostly. Things were still not quite right with her and Sebastian. Of course he hadn't changed. He was still himself. Rin, however, had become indifferent. Quiet. She barely made eye contact with him and when he told her to do something; she would silently walk away and do it. He had asked her once or twice if something was on her mind, which surprised her, since he couldn't care less about anyone else other than himself…and Ciel. Every time he would ask, she would look in his direction, focusing on something behind him and answer smoothly, "Nothing." He would simply raise an eyebrow and go back to what he was doing.
She had gotten better she thought. She was able to do her work around him. Not like before. Before she had smiled. She made friends with the other maid and the other workers. Now, everything was gray. She sped up faster, ducking under the branches and falling into Tyki's embrace. They sank to the ground, onto to the soft grass and hung on to each other. He stroked her hair and kissed her head. She looked up at him. "Hello," she sighed.
He returned her greeting with a lopsided smile. They laid down on the ground, the grass cool and prickly beneath their bodies. Rin closed her eyes and snuggled closer to him, knowing she was safe. Tyki watched her with interest, gazing at her dark eyelashes; a striking contrast to her porcelain skin. He slowly leaned over and outlined her face, feeling the cool soft skin beneath his nose. Stopping at her cheek, he couldn't help but to press his lips against the smooth surface, then quickly laid back on the grass. He felt a slight adrenaline rush and knew he needed to come down.
He needed a smoke. Lifting his arm from around her, he dug in his pocket inside his jacket. He pulled out his favorite brand of cigarettes and stuck one in his mouth. Rin beside him heard a flick and then started to smell a bitter smoke that tickled her nose. She glanced up already knowing the answer to her question.
"Tyki, "she said looking up at him.
She smiled at his reaction and then reached up and plucked the cigarette out of his mouth. Tyki let out a groan as Rin, ignoring his reaction, playfully fingered the butt of the stick.
"Woman, if I'm going to be coming out here and also spending time with you, you're going to have to give me my smoke. Otherwise, I'm might go crazy and you won't be able to control me." He wrapped his arm around her waist, pulled her close to him against his chest, then glanced down and gave her an evil smirk. She stared right back at him, unflinching, and then raised the cigarette in her fingers. Tyki watched as the red fire ring surrounding the butt suddenly went out and smoke started to rise up into the willow branches.
"Hmm…" Tyki's voice was deep in his throat, "You're a hard person to bargain with."
After several minutes of comfortable silence, he spoke. "I have something for you." She looked at him curiously as he raised his hand and made a fist. She slowly raised herself up into a sitting position across from Tyki. He held it toward her and carefully uncurled his fingers revealing a smoky purple butterfly. Its wings fluttered as it hovered onto her hand. Rin gently traced its purple and black wings with her index finger. She loved these Teases that Tyki created. Even though they were made for horrible purposes, they would never harm her. He wouldn't let them. She smiled softly as the Teaser fluttered its wings happily, enjoying the soft strokes of Rin's finger.
Tyki grinned at her reaction and guided the creature with his fingers. The Golem started to wrap around her ring finger on her right hand. The butterfly started to glow, creating a hoop of light around her finger, then vanished leaving a silver ring behind. She saw the ring and quickly looked up at Tyki for an explanation. He smiled, feeling proud of himself and took hold of her chin.
"Something to symbolize our relationship. I hope you don't think it too forward." He gave her a sly smile. She glanced down again at the silver piece. It shined back up at her.
"It's beautiful," she said calmly. His eyes softened as he came toward her and stopped just an inch from her forehead, his lips barely touching her skin.
"My treasure," he breathed, pleased that she liked his gift. Then he gently kissed her on her temple. She closed her eyes feeling his warm breath on her skin as she fingered the ring. He drew back and stood up. He knew she had to get back before she was missed. Rin watched him as he brushed back his hair and placed his hat on top of his head. He then tipped it toward her and backed away, disappearing into the fog. She let out a sigh. They would see each other again soon.
A startling thought crossed her mind as she made her way back to mansion. She couldn't let anyone see the ring. They, Ciel and Sebastian, everyone, would ask questions. Questions she didn't want to answer. Ciel might be mad that she was skipping out on work to meet Tyki secretly and she would never want to do anything to make Ciel mad. I have to keep it hidden. She wore white gloves anyway with her maid uniform. She would keep the ring concealed underneath them. She would never take it off. Smiling tenderly at the thought, she hurried up the stairs to the mansion.
It was three weeks since she was given the ring from Tyki. She kept it hidden well. A couple of times she was almost caught. Sebastian had given her a strange look. He knew that she was hiding something, but she didn't care. She just didn't want him to find out what it was. For the strangest of reasons, she was scared of anyone finding out. It was stupid of her to keep the ring on otherwise. But Rin couldn't seem to take it off. It would be like Tyki never came for her. So she kept it on, despite her fears of somebody seeing it. It could be hers for all they know.
Now she was in the kitchen preparing Ciel's dinner, Sebastian just down the counter near the stove. The room was quiet except for the sound of chopping vegetables, the bubbling of water coming to a boil, and the wind whispering through the trees just outside through the open window. They were both content with the quiet. Even though it was several months since the incident, she still carried a big weight on her shoulders. It wasn't the fact that she felt betrayed. It was more the respect she had for Sebastian. There never seemed to be anything between them, other then two people serving the same person. A maid and a butler, but he had, on occasion, touched her hand, smiled at her, and even stroked her hair. They were subtle gestures and even though Rin would sometimes blush when he came too close or have trouble breathing when he helped her with something, she never came to the conclusion that there was something. That would've been silly. So she did what she was told, while trying to hide her crimson cheeks, and respected him. Knowing well that he was a demon and he could, did, kill, if it was Ciel's wish. She would've never expected him to do what he had done. After that, she couldn't even look at him. And if he touched her, she would feel like would throw up. Or if he had touched her skin, it would be like the place that he had touched would bleed endlessly. Rin shook her head to get the painful memories out of her mind, her lips pressed in a thin line. It wasn't like that now. Now she was able to work with him peacefully, but it wouldn't be like before. Her mouth would be turned down into a frown and her eyes covered by her thick lashes.
A loud crash just down the hall disrupted their stillness and Rin's thoughts. Both of them shot their heads up in surprise. Both had a different facial expression: Sebastian had a straight face on clearly not surprised by the disruption and Rin's face was full of concern.
It wasn't long before Maylene, the housemaid, tumbled into the kitchen.
"I'm so sorry!" she exclaimed, "I s-slipped—oh, Se-Sebastian-san!"
She glanced over to Sebastian's side and saw Rin there and gave her the same reaction. "And R-Rin-chan! I'm sorry!"
"What broke, Maylene?" Sebastian questioned.
Maylene pushed both her index fingers together and nervously looked up at him. "Well, a—a vase. I'm sorry! I didn't see it with my glasses!" She started to bow apologetically, up and down, up and down.
"Maylene," Rin spoke, her voice soft and gentle, "It's alright. We'll get it cleaned up."
"Oh yes, thank you Rin-chan!" She clasped her hands together, her mouth in a big smile and her face glowing.
Rin returned the smile, but then another crash erupted from the hallway. Yells were heard and Rin could just make out both voices. Barry and Finian. She knew there would be trouble if those two were involved.
"Sebastian," Rin's voice was stern and bold, but she did not look at him. Saying his name was hard enough. She kept her eyes on the doorway leading to the hall. He knew what she meant but before any of them had time to react a cart came flying into the kitchen, causing Sebastian to jump out of the way as it slammed into the wall. Plates and glasses crashed all around making an ear-splitting commotion.
Sebastian sighed, a distressed look on his face, "Oh dear, all of Young Master's fine China."
Rin wasn't worried about the expensive China. She was worried about the gas stench that was starting to fill up the kitchen. She quickly glanced around trying to find the source and then discovered it. Below the cart held the reason for smell. A gas can was tipped over leaving the lid left in ruins on the floor, and was leaking all over the floor. And it was just under the gas oven. Her eyes went wide and she started to move, but Sebastian was faster. He darted for the oven but before he could reach it, the oven went up in flames. He jumped back, the flames nearly licking at his suit. He shouted orders to the other servants. Maylene burst into a panic and Bardroy and Finian scampered about.
Rin quickly grabbed a blanket and started flapping at the flames, her mind going in a panic. She glanced over at Sebastian who moved about the room urgently but calmly. How could he be so calm? She started to feel the flames grow stronger in temperature. She turned to see and gasped. Her dress had caught on fire and she started to pat vigorously with her gloved hands. It wasn't long before the flames spread to her gloves.
The heat was too much and she yanked off her smoldered gloves and tossed them on the ground. She continued to pat furiously at her skirts, trying to smother the embers. She suddenly felt someone lift her up off the ground and carry her away, far from the threatening element.
Sebastian set her gently but quickly on the floor and with one swipe of his hand, blew the flames from her dress. The wind from the blow whipped her hair around her face as she watched him quickly glance at her, turn and swipe his hand again, this time a much more powerful lash. Instantly the fire doused, the air swirling bits of ask and smoke around above the charred stove. Rin remained on the floor, breathing heavily. Her throat burned from the smoke and her eyes were starting to tear. Sebastian rose up from his crouching position, the stance he took while making the blow, and dusted off his suit as he turned to her. She looked up at him slowly and held his gaze.
"Sebastian-san! We g-got the hose!" Maylene shrieked. Maylene bounced in with Finian close behind, the water trickling excitedly out of the hose due to both of their movements.
"Here it is! Here it —" Finian glanced around the kitchen and stopped at the blackened stove. Both pairs of eyes widened as they stared at the put out fire. The stream of water from the hose started to slow and dribble onto the hard floor.
"Who's going to tell Master Ciel?" Maylene whispered to Finian.
"I'll tell the young master. Now, clean up this mess, please," ordered Sebastian.
Both workers saluted as the headed for the door. "Yes sir!"
Once they left, Sebastian let out a sigh and rubbed his temples. He seemed to mutter something about how his work-list always kept growing. He turned to Rin once again. His once calm and composed face suddenly turned black. His wide eyes seem to focus on something. Rin frantically searched herself for what was holding his intent gaze and froze when she discovered it. Tyki's silver ring glittered brightly against her pale skin.
Before she had time to conceal her hand, he was by her side. He took hold of her wrist and glared at the ring, his face inches away from hers. She couldn't read his facial expression. Was he angry? Was he confused? He looked very deadly now. A dangerous demon. His face changed once again. A slight smile tugged at the corners of his mouth. This smile was not the least bit friendly.
"I regret to inform you that jewelry is not to be worn with your uniform." Without letting go of her wrist, he slid the ring off her finger and slowly rose up. "Such a pretty piece of jewelry too. Whoever gave this must really care for you," he said in a slight mocking tone. He turned and headed for the door. He was already halfway down the hall when Rin burst through the doorway and screamed. "You're horrible!"
She regretted the words the instance they left her mouth. Rin watched as Sebastian slowly turned around, a devilish grin across his lips. She didn't get a chance to open her mouth again, for in a second he had pinned her to the wall. Before she could protest, he smashed his lips against hers. Rin's eyes flew open in shock as she twisted and squirmed to break free. But his hold was like iron. A fire started to form in her, a bitter anger that surged through her entire body. She knew what is was; who it was and she couldn't stop her. Not this time. Sad Rin arched her back sharply, Sebastian's lips still connected with hers as he tightened his grip, mistaking her arched back for an escape attempt. Bits of hair surrounding her face shot out in sharp points and her lashes grew, giving the appearance of spikes outlining her eyes. Rin felt a rush of strength enter her as she lashed out toward Sebastian. But he was too quick and flung backward up to the ceiling. He was perched on the wall, his head grazing the ceiling. His body language infuriated her; he was so relaxed. Rin's maid out fit evanesced and was replaced with a black jumpsuit; a mass of black fabric cut to different lengths dangled from her hip. Black buckles covered her body. Her eyes were a deep blood red. A red rose surrounded by black thorns.
"Oh my…it seems I have awakened the beast" he purred. His voice deep in his throat. She stood before him, her stance strong, her fists clenched, her eyes ablaze.
She was breathing heavily, fuming at what he had just done. Out of one of her fists appeared a long slender pole. Without another second, she took off after him. He leaped off the wall and landed in front of her. He ducked the first blow. She let out a roar as she sprinted after him as he headed out toward the main entryway.
He seemed completely content as to what was happening and didn't even flinch when she would strike him. She watched him fly down the stairs and stop at the bottom slightly turning toward her. His profile perfectly displayed a grin of amusement.
Mad Rin gritted her teeth and her grip tensed on her pole. It started to glow an orange red. Smoke exited out of either end of the pole. The cylinder shape started to form. It grew like a vine, creating twists and swirls until both ends were deathly sharp.
She stopped. She glanced quickly but brushed it off when she saw no one else around besides the butler. Sebastian watched her curiously. An imaginary wind started to pick up, whipping her hair around her face. She wasted no time this round. She took off after him swiping at his stomach and his head, the wind carrying her along the way. He continued to dodge her, sometimes barely escaping the sharp edges of her fire rod. She nipped him slightly on his arms and the front of his suit.
Mad Rin stop!
She could hear the voice again. But she didn't want to listen. She knew now who it was. Who else could it be? Suddenly, Sebastian grabbed her arm and twisted it behind her. She cursed herself for losing focus so easily, but then quickly swung her arm enclosing the rod toward him.
He positioned himself to dodge the strike but Rin was prepared. Quickly, she veered her left leg and swiped his feet right out from under him, knocking him toward the ground. In that flash of a second she saw the shock cross his face. That face gave her complete and utter satisfaction. But that satisfied feeling didn't last long as the next emotion that played across his features changed again.
It shook her like no other. He won't win. I'll make sure of it. With that thought, she marched toward him, her stride strong, and stopped in front of him. She raised her rod, its fire raging with her anger, and—
Mad Rin's eyes shot open as is she was just plunged in the back by a dagger. She staggered backward and dropped her staff. It fell with a clank on the hard marble floor. She collapsed to the floor, clutching her sides. The powerful wind that was under Mad Rin's command died down suddenly and her pole, her very weapon, dissolved into the air.
She lay sprawled on the floor facedown, her hair spilled out onto the marble surface. Slowly, her black buckled suit dissolved away into Sad Rin's normal simple black dress. The once needle-like hair that occupied Mad Rin now softened into a mass of black silk atop Sad Rin's head. She rose up slowly, breathing heavily, and bringing a hand up to her aching head. Her eyes, now her original deep sapphire blue, grew wide at the just caused wreck.
The Entry Hall was in ruins. Carpets on the stairs were slashed, curtains were torn, and large chunks of rock from the ceiling that had fallen covered the floor.
She looked toward Sebastian and rested her gaze on his face. His expression was blank, like nothing out of the ordinary had just happened. He was still on the floor and he watched her every move as she shakily got up from the floor. Putting a hand to her wind blown hair and another to calm the pain the twisted in her stomach, a single tear slid down her cheek. Taking one last look at the damage caused in the room, she turned and fled.
The hall was quiet and peaceful now. Dust still hung in the air from the fallen rubble. Light beamed in through the windows displaying the swirling fragments. Sebastian gazed around at the destruction and brought a hand through his hair. "Always more work than usual."
He glanced around again. So much destruction in such a short amount of time. He knew about Rin's other sides, sensed them somehow. He was just never able to actually see them. He was merely curious. And with just that one kiss, he had brought forth her dark side. She was a very entertaining side of Rin, quite unique. But then so was her more mellow side. Her true self he supposed. He looked toward the door, wondering where she ran off too. She had so much fear in her eyes, like she couldn't believe what she had just done; what she almost did.
Sebastian turned toward the stairs at the sound of footsteps. Ciel was slowly coming the steps and Sebastian readied himself for an unhappy master.
"Sebastian, I – wha-!" Ciel hurried the last few steps down the stairwell and onto the middle patio. His eyes darted to the cracked pillars, the stone rubble covering the marble floor, the shredded curtains. "What is this?!"

This post has been published by me as a part of the Blog-a-Ton 31; the thirty-first edition of the online marathon of Bloggers; where we decide and we write. To be part of the next edition, visit and start following Blog-a-Ton. The theme for the month is 'Strangers in the Night'
Last week I went to meet my friend Vangelis who is a European guy, I met him in Delhi while attending one of my workshops. After that workshop he went to Thailand for another workshop. He came to Delhi last week only, and asked me to meet for a coffee.
As our plan we met at Khan Market Metro station, I saw him from back side he was in red top and green lower (very different type of dressing :)) and the coincident was I was also in same color. I wearied red kurti, green payjami with green duppta I dint noticed that but he noticed and said this to me. After that we went to a European restaurant and I was new in this kind of environment. I was lots of thoughts that “can able to adjust in this kind of atmosphere where alcohol and other drinks were serving like normal cold drinks and etc.”
Still I was with him and observing everything there, I can see lots of Europeans there, I was thinking like I am in between Strangers in the Night or I am not in India but in Europe. Their culture was very different from me, few Indians were also there but also modified like Europeans and these Indians and European were looking me like I was an escaped animal of a zoo just because of I was not fitting in the atmosphere, I was in fully in Indian traditional style and they all are in western.
There I met with his two friends also, they were waiting for him. One is a girl and another is boy. Girl was totally white and boy was also same but boy had long hair till his shoulder. They were talking and I was just observing the atmosphere and culture of western country. Boy was smoking continuously as well as drinking pomegranate juice regularly. I observed that both girl and boy were giving lots of face gestures while talking but in India especially male doesn’t do that.
Then I saw an Indian girl who was sitting alone in a corner and having a big cup of cold coffee and having a cigarette in her left hand and she was writing something in her big diary but she was the only girl who was in Indian style dress other than me.
In this entire situation we had our coffee as well as dinner also. He was busy in talking with her and mean while he introduced me to them and some time talking to me also. Like that my coffee meet it’s end with Strangers in the Night and he dropped me at khan market metro station. I was feeling like finally I came to India again.
The fellow Blog-a-Tonics who took part in this Blog-a-Ton and links to their respective posts can be checked here. To be part of the next edition, visit and start following Blog-a-Ton. Introduced By: BLOGGER NAME, Participation Count: 01

Known as The Princess by caregivers, volunteers and the other dogs in the sunporch, Cyrah is a Chihuahua through and through. Boy do we get a kick out of this little conversation piece. Every day brings a new story about Cyrah. She is a manipulator - you can tell by the looks on her face that she is about to make a statement. To be honest, she is an adorable little kiss up to people she knows and a holy terror to those she doesn't. Luckily, she gets to know people quickly so her behavior is more amusing than disturbing. Cyrah came to us from a person who was going into a retirement home and was not allowed to take her dogs with her. Sad situation, yes. What we were not so thrilled about was that the woman also had a dog that had not been spayed, which she turned over to a breeder. We were upset not to have been able to save that other little girl, so we dote extra on Cyrah. You have to love this little coniver - she is one of the most entertaining dogs we have ever had the pleasure of knowing. To top that off, she is beautiful and she knows it.

Auntie Brigitte has boxed and won a round. She has also downhill ski-ed and screaming all the way ended up winning the race, too. She also won a dance competition but she could not get the horse moving. She also did not do well in Football, but still, at least, managed to lose her breath. So obviously that was exercise.
Now off to Badminton in a real life gymn.
Sermon: Thanksgiving Eve - 2017
47 minutes ago

Hiya, think I just need some reassurance and to have a bit of a rant I went for my first MW appointment towards the end of March, took a urine sample and it took my doctors 3 whole weeks to get hold of me to tell me I had a bladder infection. They say they couldn't get me on the house phone! - so try my mobile!!!! Anyway, I was really surprised to hear this as I've had no symptoms at all (I've had urine infections about 3 times in the past few years and usually get excruciating symptoms!). So I took another sample in in the last few days for them to check I hadn't just flushed it out in the meantime (had been drinking loads of water since getting pregnant), but no such luck, and apparently it is still there. my question is, is it ok for the baby for me to have had an untreated bladder infection for AT LEAST a month now and not taken anything for it? Because I haven't had the slightest symptoms, I have no idea when it started, so could have had it the whole of the first trimester. Just wanted to know that it won't have affected babby in any way really.

Robert L. Barron
1947 - 2010, Santa Barbara
Robert L. Barron, "Bob" or "Bobby" to his friends and papa or grandpa to his children and grandchildren, passed away on Tuesday, April 20, 2010 at 1:15 am. He was 63 at the time of his death, having celebrated his natal birthday days earlier on Friday, April 9.
Bob was a brave soul, having been diagnosed with cancer nearly six years ago. Despite his determined fight, he led an active life up until the very end and never gave up. Bob believed life is a gift and meant to be lived, and so he did.
Bob was born as an orphan and lived through a tough childhood growing up and going from one foster home to another. At times he was abused but as an adult worked hard to turn this around to be a more loving, compassionate and kind individual. He loved people and animals, played the guitar and enjoyed music. He also loved the ocean and mountains two of his favorite places being Cape Cod, Massachusetts and of course his residence for the last ten plus years Santa Barbara.
In the late 60's Bob became friends with the Tilton family when he was living in Playa Del Rey, CA. Adelle became like his mom whom he never missed sending a Mother's Day card, Mac like his uncle or dad and Art like his brother and lifelong friend. He spent most holidays with the Tilton's and was like part of the family for most of his adult life.
Bob was blessed with two twin daughters, Meghan and Heather McDonald Barron and four grandchildren, Santos, Rubina, Isaac and Sammuel. They will always love and miss him as well as all the close friends Bob has made along the way in his life. Despite his battle with cancer over the last years, these may have been some of Bob's best and highest quality of life. He was a pillar of strength, a person with high moral character and one who will never be forgotten for his gift of love and compassion to others.

Refinery fire story told to teach safety at Redstone
HUNTSVILLE, AL (WAFF) - Safety is a top priority in every aspect of our lives and especially if you work in a potentially dangerous environment, like many on Redstone Arsenal.
One man told his story to those on the Arsenal and throughout the world, to teach people about the importance of safety.
In 1980, in Linden, NJ, Charlie Morecraft was an operator out at the Bayway Refinery for Exxon. He'd spent 15 years on the job and, at 33-years-old, he felt he knew it well enough.
"If you follow the procedure, it's just a pain in the neck. It was easier to take the shortcuts I'd learned over the years and I'd done a million times before and, truthfully, so did the other operators," said Morecraft.
On the evening of August 8th, those short-cuts almost took his life. Morecraft went out to the refinery, alone, for a job he'd done a thousand times before.
"I went out there to do it. I took one short-cut too many. There was a chemical leak," explained Morecraft.
Morecraft watched as vapers drifted to his truck, which, against the rules, he had left running.
"It blew. I blew with it," said Morecraft.
He had only been about 10 yards away from what he called "ground zero." "It was totally melted. The pipelines were all melted, the stairways were melted. They were all steel. That's how intense the fire was," said Morecraft.
Along with the refinery, almost half Morecraft's body was burned. The next five years, he was in and out of hospitals. He also had to wear a full body suit made just for burn victims.
"This pointing to nose is $1.7 million of the best plastic surgery in the world. Believe it. It's all new. My eye is all rebuilt, my ears, my nose. My mouth was extensively rebuilt. I was running in the flames and trying to hold my breath. I couldn't do it. I finally took a breath and totally wiped out my mouth. I was lucky. I had the best plastic surgeons in the world. For one. Two, I didn't lose anything," described Morecraft.
But, he missed out on seeing his daughters grow up.
"I would give anything, anything* to have those five years back with my children," said Morecraft.
Now, years later, he goes around the country, teaching people to be safe and not cut corners. He spent time, Friday, September 16, on Redstone Arsenal at Redstone Test Center or RTC to tell them his story.
"What I'm going to try to convince these people is to be safe so they can be there for their families. Usually, I spend time with the tough guys. They don't care about cost, statistics, anything, they care about their families. That was the biggest thing I learned. That was the hardest thing. If I could do it over, I'd do it for my family," explained Morecraft.
Morecraft also told them, the fire didn't just put his life on hold, it devastated his family.
"My mother cried herself to sleep at night for years. My father had a heart attack after he gave me a will to live, walked outside and had a heart attack in parking lot and died right after that. Both my children wound up in therapy. One of my daughters actually died two years ago as a direct result of this accident," said Morecraft.
Morecraft believes, his story, the scars on his body, and the truth about his family, will save others in the future.
"Safety is about going home at the end of the day. Kissing your spouse, hugging your kids. Safety is personal," explained Morecraft.
On top of his speeches, Morecraft also helps out with Vets Helping Heroes, supplying dogs for veterans. As a part of his visit to Redstone last week, the military donated $3,000 to the charity. You can find out more about the organization
by clicking here.
Copyright 2016 WAFF. All rights reserved.

Written by Da’Shaun Harrison
I was around 8 the first time.
I still have very clear mirages of what I felt in those moments, what each experience was like, and how I internalized every interaction. But because the abuse went on for so long, I lost track of the years that were attached to them.
My first assailant was a straight, self-identified “tough guy”. A teen on the verge of adulthood and a member of my family. I was a child who did not perform masculinity in the ways young Black boys were expected to. I know that neither of us knew much about sexuality because our family never discussed it. He and I didn’t discuss much of anything, but I do know that we were both taught that any sexual or romantic interaction between two men/boys was forbidden.
After he forced himself inside of me, I couldn’t help but to think endlessly about the act of sex and sexuality. I hadn’t been taught that boys could be raped, but I had been taught about biblical abominations. Through these teachings—that I would later understand to be the result of the socialization process—I knew that what happened between the two of us had to remain a secret. So I didn’t tell. And I hated myself. Not because I had been raped, but because I had become the one thing important enough for my family and our bible to teach against: a faggot, a ‘homosexual’, a soul blackened by the impurities of male-male penetration. And though I was none of these things, because of what I was taught, it was the only way I was able to process it. I never processed it as rape. Instead, I processed it concluding that I was an abomination.
Before I could grapple with what transpired and what it meant in terms of my sexuality or his, I was experiencing it again for the second time. Two times turned into three, and three times turned into four. These encounters stopped being singular moments, but rather occurrences measured by years. And with each passing one, his assaults grew confidently against my body. He expected to touch me, as if he were entitled to my body, and took my confusion as consent. Then, once we were in public, he would interact with me as if he hadn’t violated me the night before. Eventually, I believed that this was normal. I convinced myself that I liked it—that, if I anticipated it, maybe it wouldn’t be as bad.
Then a family friend re-established a new “first time” for me. This time he was fully an adult and I just at the dawn of my teenage years. Moments that were supposed to be spent playing video games and having conversations turned into me, yet again, being violated by a man that I trusted. Except this time, he wasn’t a “tough guy”. He was a “nice guy”. A self-proclaimed gentleman, who cared deeply for people and never disrespected anyone. He also differed because he had a girlfriend that his entire family adored.
So, just like at the age of 8, I was left with only confusion. Never having the space to discuss sexuality with the men that forced sex into my world outside of the violence they enacted against my body. And after the many years of this abuse, I internalized the idea that pleasing men, irrespective of what gender their sexual/romantic partners identified with, was something that I should become accustomed to. These experiences led to me thinking of myself as broken, which I recently wrote about. This brokenness carried me into young adulthood.

Please was decent for the price and good night sleep for road trip. Needs remodeling but rooms were adequate. Nearly empty when we arrived so we were skeptical, but during night place had new arrivals to must be place for weary travelers. Relatively quite and reasonably priced for what they offered. Breakfast was adequate but nothing fancy.

- "I started preparing to become an actor during lockdown," said Renee
- "I have to earn being here every day," she added
- "I don't want to boast," said Renee
Actress and former Miss Universe Sushmita Sen's 21-year-old daughter Renee Sen is following in her mother's footsteps and has made her acting debut in a short film titled Suttabaazi, directed by Kabeer Khurana. In an interview with NDTV, Renee, the elder of Sushmita Sen's two daughters, said. "Acting was always my plan but 'Suttabaazi' happened suddenly. I started preparing to become an actor during the lockdown. I wanted to use that time because I was aware that if suddenly things start booming, I won't get this time again."
Renee Sen explained that she was not looking out for a film and that it came to her through her old friend and filmmaker Kabeer Khurana. "Kabeer, who has directed this, is my school friend. We got in touch and we chatted like friends who were catching up, I did tell him about my plans of becoming an actor. I was not saying this to him to get a script out of him. After that he sent me his script, I still thought that he wants my opinion on it. He then told me he wants me to audition for it, I was shocked! I asked him if he was sure if he wants me for the role because I have never acted. I asked Mom and told me I should do it if this is what I want to do."
In Suttabaazi, Rene plays a social media influencer. In real life she is quite different from her character Diya, she says. "Youngsters will relate to this because a lot of them are influenced by social media. At our age, we are so naive that we think social media is the be-all of our lives and that is not true. My character in the film lets social media affects her, I don't. I take breaks from social media when I want to," Renee told NDTV.
And finally, she also spoke about being the daughter of Sushmita Sen and how privileged she is to get into the movie business. "I am aware of how privileged I am. I know there are lakhs of people coming to Mumbai to become actors. I don't want to boast but being her daughter has been the biggest privilege. So, the biggest disservice I will do if I am dishonest to my work. My mother always says that you must be deserving, and you cannot just take someone's place because you are my daughter, if you don't earn it then don't be in it. I am very lucky, and I have to earn being here every day," Renee Sen said.
Watch Renee Sen's interview to NDTV here:
Watch Suttabaazi here:
Sushmita Sen, star of films such as Main Hoon Na and Filhaal, adopted Renee in 2000 and younger daughter Alisah in 2010. The 45-year-old actress made headlines last year with her critically acclaimed performance in the web-series Aarya.

How I Use It
I used this site with my Kindergarten Students -- both bilingual and monolingual -- and it went great. They enjoyed it, they were very excited as they advanced through the levels and they had a blast!
It was great to use with those low students, once I got them into the program it worked well. I struggled a tad to get them signed in and going, but that could be attributed to the signin process on my side. With an extra teacher helping it did go smoothly.

Excessive barking at dogs. Help needed!
I have an excessive barking issue with my dog I need to correct. There are three main places this is a big issues, in my house, in my yard and in my vehicle. Anywhere else she seems fine but in these places she is bad about barking. I will try to explain the behavior. She is 14 months old. We have done Obedience training and Nosework and when she is at class she is fine with the other dogs. When she is on walks she is fine with other dogs. When we are at the park and she meets other dogs she is fine with them there.
I take her out to let her go to the bathroom in our yard on a leash. If a dog passes she tends to bark at them. Sometimes she will even bark at people that pass, but not as often with people. This seems to only happen in my yard though if we go on a walk she doesn't bark at people or even the same dogs. On walks she never barks at people and is very friendly, sometimes she will bark at select dogs but typically those dogs are acting aggressively and are lunging/barking at her. 95% of dogs she will ignore on a walk. When she is in the yard though she will bark like crazy. I have managed to get this a little better with praising her when a dog passes and she doesn't react. I tell her "leave it" when a dog comes by and she seems like she is going to bark. I have tried treats but she ignores them completely. I have tried her number one prized possession a tennis ball when she starts to bark and she will go after the ball but literally bark with the ball in her mouth. I have had some success putting her in a down while a dog walks by but she is still not calm at all. Once she starts to bark I don't seem to have a way to shut her down. I usually just have to retreat from the situation and she stops barking. I have had people ask if the dogs could meet when she was barking and every time it has been the same reaction she runs up to them sniffs them and then puts her head down and looks up at them like she wants to play typical I want to play pose head down butt in the air. I have never seen her act like she was going to "fight", bite or lunge at a dog. The way she barks though I would expect most owners to think she would, I really don't think she want to fight at all.
If she is in the back yard she will bark at dogs and people that walk by. Not at every person but when she does she is very loud. If the neighbor has her dogs out she will just run up and down the fence with them and not bark at all. I basically manage this by making her come back inside if she starts barking at people. It makes it so I am not comfortable leaving her in the backyard as much as she could be.
If we are at home and she gets to a window she will just stare out the window and bark at any dogs or people that walk by. I basically just manage this by not allowing her access to the window. If I tell her to get down she will, but if I walk out of the room and she can get to that window she will go right back to barking.
If we are driving in the truck she has the same reaction. She barks like crazy at every dog we pass when we are driving. These can be the same dogs she will ignore on a walk but when we are in the vehicle she barks like crazy at them.
If we are watching TV any animal that comes on the TV she barks like crazy. I tell her to "leave it" and she will quiet down for a second then try to sneak in some barks. Again I really don't have a good way to shut her down.
I have never really disciplined her for this aside from retreating from the situation, telling her it was bad and telling her to leave it. I really need to get this under control before it gets too bad. I am kind of at a loss.
Athena -GSD- born 12/13/12
Luna -Shepherd Mix- born 3/20/99

and his wife, jewelry designerJennifer Meyer
, had a son on Friday.
"I can confirm the Maguires had a baby boy today and the family is healthy and happy," Maguire's rep said.
This is the second child for the "Spider-Man" actor and his wife, who are also parents to 2-year-old daughterRuby Sweetheart
"I'm really excited about two, so we'll see what happens from there," Meyer told E! News in February.
She said Ruby was "really excited" about the new addition to the family. "She's loving it," Meyer said. "She's really into the belly and it growing and her baby dolls. Ruby's not really jealous. She just loves being around people, and this will be like having another little playmate."
Maguire, 33, and Meyer, 31, met in 2003 and married in 2007.
| Posted by Lisa Gutierrez, The Star

Explosion heard in Ang Mo Kio fire
Some residents were evacuated last night after a fire broke out in Block 308B, Ang Mo Kio Avenue 1.
A resident, who wanted to be known only as Madam Lim, said she could smell burned rubber from her 21st-storey flat in the block late last night.
She also saw flashes of light, she added.
The retiree in her 70s, who was standing at the void deck, said she was asked to evacuate her flat around 11pm.
Mr Richard Tan, who lives in a nearby block, said he could hear sounds of an explosion.
The New Paper understands that the fire was linked to an electrical riser between the 20th and 25th storeys of the block.

Enjoying the Ride
I finally decided to just do it: I bought a used trailer for the boys that I can pull behind my bike. I’ve been wanting one for forever, but I always talked myself out of it. But with the beautiful weather beckoning, I decided to dust off the bikes and go for it. And I’m so glad that I did. We’ve had so much fun, although the maiden voyage got off to a rough start….
First, there was just the preparation involved. Each boy had to have a helmet. The bike tires had to be aired up. The trailer had to be hitched. Etc, etc. Once my husband and I had everything ready, we finally loaded up the three-year-old, who seemed suspicious of the new adventure but willing to give it a whirl.
However, the baby was a different story. We strapped him into the trailer in his Winnie-the-Pooh helmet, and he immediately began to cry. His cries got louder and louder, as I tried to figure out the best way to cinch him in. He was getting very frustrated, and I could almost hear him saying, “Can’t you hear me? I don’t like this!” I tried to assure him that everything was going to be okay. “You’re going to love it!” I tried to tell him. He was not convinced. In a desperate last move, he began using the sign for “all done” (they teach him sign language at his day care) in a desperate attempt to communicate his displeasure.
Finally, we were ready to roll, but the baby was still crying. “I can’t do it!” I told my husband, “he’s so upset!” “Just give him until the end of the block and we’ll see what happens,” my husband wisely suggested. So off we went, the baby screaming at the top of his lungs and his brother watching the whole scene dispassionately. And then, much to my amazement, the screams stopped. My husband pulled along beside me and peered into the trailer. “He’s doing fine!” he said. “A bit pensive, but OK.”
We all rode along in silence for a while. It was dusk, and the weather was perfect November weather – not too hot, and not too cold. Soon, I could hear my three-year-old talking to his baby brother. I think he was telling him a story, but I couldn’t catch his words. My husband and I smiled at each other, enjoying the moment. We rode slowly, but even so, I felt a lightness inside of myself that made me feel like I was flying.

Rogue trader is jailed after costing LCS £2.6m in debts
A ROGUE trader who cost his employers £2.6m with a series of illegal trades was yesterday jailed for two-and-a-half years.
Jonathan Bunn, who worked for Lewis Charles Securities (LCS), bet that HSBC shares would fall, building up a short position of more than 4m shares.
The 31-year-old inter-dealer broker tried to cover his tracks by forging purchase slips saying he had buyers.
But he finally confessed with a text to his managers when he had nearly 7m shares and the price had risen.
LSC was forced to buy back £42m of the shares at close to £6. The firm had to cut salaries by 20 per cent and lay off 12 people to cover losses.
Bunn, who was arrested at his home in Weybridge, Surrey, was prosecuted by both the Financial Services Authority and City of London Police and sentenced yesterday at Southwark Crown Court. He was also banned from working in the financial services industry.
Judge Geoffrey Rivlin said: “I think I can fairly say that as a result of your very serious misconduct you have certainly made a very significant contribution to bringing this company, at least temporarily, to its knees.”

I have been meaning to introduce the overlooked member of our family for some time, but other posts continually took precedence. I would like to introduce you now to Bagera the newt.
Yes, yes, I've heard it all before, "She turned me into a newt...! Well, I got betta..." In fact, my first ever newt was named King Arthur. I think I got him when I was around 12 or 13. I have had aquatic creatures in my life continually since I was 7 years old when I got my first gold fish.
Bagera is so named because he loves to spend his days up in the branches of his plant. I got this little fella when I was a sophomore in college, so we have been together for a long time, just under a decade. He is by far the longest living newt I've ever had. My dad looked up the life span of a newt and found out it can be as long as 65 years! I can honestly tell you, it will be a sad day when this little guy kicks the bucket. We've got a lot of history.
In fact, my senior year of college, my landlady made a surprise visit. She then tried to change my contract to say that absolutely no pets were allowed... including aquatic creatures. One of my roommates had a fish tank that contained a fish she had also had for years. We both told her to stuff it, and that the caveat was not in our original contract, so our pets stayed. Like she was going to kick us out, she needed the rent money and we lived a few miles off campus in the boonies.
Now you have "met" all of the pet members of my little family. We love you Baggy!

In addition to the adoption fee of $500, I will require a training deposit of $150 which is fully refundable upon completion of a training course.
Meet Benjamin - LR pulled him from an overcrowd local shelter. They tell us when he entered the shelter he was infested with fleas that ate his skin raw. They immediately treated him for fleas and his fur is already coming back.
He met Evie for his dog to dog evaluation and the two hit it off. Benjamin takes treats gently. He knows some basic commands. He walked good on lead right next to Evie. He seems to be drawn to other dogs for comfort. Unknown yet if he will need another dog in his forever home.
Two of LR's Volunteers met with Benjamin. He wanted lots of love and cuddles. He was grateful for all the affection. He cuddle up and let out a couple sighs of relief. He met his fosters the same day. He settled in with their two dogs with out any incidents. Benjamin also asked for love from his fosters which they happily gave him! Benjamin also has cats in his foster home. Check back for updates as his fosters learn more about him and his needs.

I just bought a 2020 Explorer and right away ran into a deep sleep notice on my Ford Pass... Car was in the garage and had a dead battery... had to jump it to get it started... found a few others on blogs who have had the same experience but no one seems to know anything about it. Car is back at the dealers service dept. but no one seems to know what is going on. Anyone out there who can point me in the right direction?

A friend of mine has been with her husband for 13 years and has 5 kids with him. Their marriage started off mostly loving but he was a bit controlling even from the beginning. He was at times abusive to the kids so she separated from him the first time. He got counseling. She went back. He then raped her many times over the past 3 years. She separated from him and returned 4 more times in those years.
They are going to a small church where the pastor is encouraging them to be accountable to him and to put the past behind. She is really good at putting on a happy face most of the time while really hurting inside. Her husband even forced her again just 2 weeks ago. He says he is sorry but she no longer believes him. She says she thinks he really thinks he is sorry, but she has heard that over and over before and does not trust what he says anymore. Meanwhile, the Pastor who knows the things he has done to her still allows the husband to participate in the worship team every service. That is hurtful for her to see. And to top this off, about a year and a half ago he got a vasectomy. She told him not to because she felt uneasy about it and thought she might later want another child to raise for the Lord. But he did it anyway. She is hurting from this also. But feels like having another child now would not be good anyway. Every time they are intimate, she says, she feels somewhat used now, even when she consents, which is 95 % of the time. She told me she feels totally broken inside and doesn't feel safe to express it bc she does not want to get her husband in trouble and wants her family to stay intact. Yet, she told me she struggles with thoughts of ending the pain in different ways and thinks divorce might be better than the misery she feels every day when she sees him and is reminded of all the hurt and betrayal. So, what do you think she could do to get beyond the pain. Should she stay or should she leave, and why? Just trying to gain some perspective for her, besides the perspective of her husband or that Pastor.

Here is one of the most famous voices known by many love ones. She has one of the most recognizable faces in the world. Her name was Marilyn Monroe. Marilyn struggled with stuttering her whole life. This paper will teach you a little more about this famous actress. It will also talk about what her life, achievements and disability was like for her. Marilyn Monroe is just her stage name, Marilyn actual name is Norma Jean Mortenson. Marilyn was born in 1926. She suffered a lonely and traumatic childhood. Marilyn’s mother, Glady, couldn’t care for her. At the age of six, her mother was put in the mental hospital. Then a family friend Grace came to take care of Marilyn when her mother couldn’t. But when Grace could no longer take care of Marilyn. She was placed in orphanage called Orphans Home Society in Los Angeles. For seven years, Marilyn went from home to home, but that wasn’t the worst part for her. It was going to school, being known as an orphan who wore the same outfit everyday. She would stutter and pause so much that she confused the other actors into a total confusion. She attempted suicide twice, went through four husbands, and had a secret baby with John F. Kennedy, She had stress from her personal life.Zanuck hired her with a seven year contract. She was elected to play a dumb – blonde that played the role of a secretary in “In As Young As You Feel”. As an actress, she knew her lines perfectly and even won movie roles. Later, Marilyn was recognized by Joe Dimaggio. She soon became famous because she was a model, singer and actress. Marilyn started out modeling for a couple of years. But when people saw her picture on the cover of a magazine, they would fall in love with her. She dyed her hair color from brown to blonde and became even more famous than before. She won the award of Most Promising Female Newcomer of 1952. Seven years later, she won another award for Crystal star in 1959. Marilyn Monroe also struggled with stuttering. Sometimes, she would avoid stuttering by changing words or using extra sounds. She would also avoid situations that required her to talk. She had taken prescription drugs for her disability. She went to get help from her speech therapist. The therapist even told her to deliberately breathing to speaking, could guide her to fluency speaking. Marilyn had difficulty in pronouncing words. People assume her death has been suicide because of her past.This paper told you a lot about Marilyn Monroe and what she went through. It started out when she was an orphan. When her mother couldn’t care for her anymore. She struggled with stuttering which not a lot of people knew about her. She became famous and started modeling, singing and being an actress. But stuttering didn’t stop her there because she went on. Even though she had a disability that didn’t stop her from doing what she want to do. She had the freedom to make a choice in what she wanted to do.

Do have to admit there's an excellent chance of her dream being fulfilled and six months ago still hadn't had her first post! Last year Miku did finish in the ninth position on the faves list and had I begun posting about her sooner she would have ended up around fifth but had waited a while to let her get a bit older. This is Miku's sixth post of the year so she's now qualified for the faves list, this post has a bit more variety than her others and more posts like this one could propel into being #1 for the year. Knew you viewers would also become huge fans which has happened quickly, Miku's last post was for her September 2021 photobook and that's been the second most viewed post of the past month. That was released on her September 12th birthday and a second book this year on that date would be a nice present for us all!
Trying to write up a lot of posts today so let's get right to things, leading off for newish pics are these HKT cards from December.
Miku does post a lot of pics at the HKT blog and most are quite terrific, the top two are from a recent Bubka photo shoot and she'll be the cover girl for their next issue. The bottom ones are from ten days ago and were taken in Vietnam as HKT performed a pair of shows there, to me it's always seemed as though they have a large fan base outside of Japan.
This batch here are some recent concert photos of Miku with some being from their Vietnam shows. Have been trying to get into HKT much more as of late but they don't make it easy! They have so few concert DVD's but what really baffles me is that they no longer have any kind of group variety show, think their last one ended in 2019 but correct me if I'm wrong.
Miku's first ever post was about five months ago, since then in almost every post have been saying it was unbelievable how many magazine covers she appears on. There is an award for appearing on the most covers in a year and thought she would run away with the award for J-Pop Idols or singers. And that did happen as earlier in the week Miku won the award in the musical category for appearing on the most covers. There is a site called Covergirl.jp which does track these things and they looked at the 10,000 magazine covers that were released last year, she also was tied for second having the most covers of anyone in the entertainment field that includes models, actresses, etc.
Just a pair of Miku spreads for today and of course she's the cover girl for both of them! Don't know how many covers Miku did appear on in 2022 but would think the total was over thirty and this set is from the February issue of Young Champion Best.
That above spread was a rarity as it had less than ten pages. Final set for today features her once again on the cover and is from the March 2nd issue of Weekly Shonen Champion. To me it seems Miku appears in this magazine more than any other one and the bottom pics are from the photo shoot. Of course there's no newish ones so will skip having a video once again.

Tell us what you need so we can bring you the right pros.
Receive quotes from pros who meet your needs.
Compare quotes, message pros, and hire when ready.
Michael and his partner came in and gave me a firm estimate of much less than expected and stood by it. They were very professional and respectful to my home and family with special consideration to my five year old twins. They completed the job in about an hour and a half. The finish product looked as if it was done during the time the house was built. I plan to call Mike when I need other projects done at my home. I highly recommend this company based on their professional product, reasonable price and time to compete.
Actually, I had two jobs. The first was to replace a ceramic tile corner piece on one of our kitchen counters, the second was to replace missing washers in an outside faucet. Richard arrived and accomplished both jobs in under an hour. I was impressed by first work and he is a very friendly person. I would not hesitate to have him do any forthcoming repairs. Bob Hinchcliffe
Mr. Niles was a professional with a superior customer service approach. He called to discus the project. Called the day before to remind us to let him into the house. Then called an hour before to let us know he was coming on time. The job was performed by his crew. They were clean cut and courteous. We would recommend them and we would us them again.
New To Thumbtack
This company has local plumbers who have years of industry experience. They provide reliable plumbing services for all kinds of clients. These pros offer remodeling services as well.

The film "Unbroken" is the work of Angelina Jolie. The script was written based on the work of Laura Hillenbrand. The film is based on the story of a real man, athlete Louis Zamperini, who failed to win the Olympic games in 1936. But the athlete noticed Hitler and invited to his box. The athlete hoped to participate in the next games, but the war began, so Zamperini had to go to the front. He and two other soldiers in the crash were on a raft and spent 47 days in the ocean. They were found by the Japanese and taken prisoner, where they were severely abused.

A van driver died today after his vehicle was crushed by an oak tree in high winds, police said.
The man, aged in his 50s, was pronounced dead at the scene following the incident in Sandhurst Road, Tunbridge Wells, Kent, at 12.25pm.
His vehicle is believed to have been stationary at the time, Kent Police said.
A male passenger in the vehicle is understood to have escaped unharmed.
The road has been closed amid fears that another tree in the road may topple.
A Kent Police spokesman said: "The driver of the van, who is in his fifties and from Tonbridge, was sadly pronounced dead at the scene".
Paul Harragan, who lives on Sandhurst Road, said emergency services were cutting back the tree, which had "completely crushed" the vehicle. "The van is completely crushed and there's a man with a chainsaw cutting the branches," he said.
"The van is completely squashed over the driver's side".
Drivers are being advised to avoid the area.Suggest a correction

“I had an injury eight weeks ago, and it had been progressively getting worse, so obviously, I was concerned. I tried to get a local doctor’s appointment without any luck.
I had a few days in a lot of pain until I remembered the Virtual GP service provided by my employer. It was very straightforward to use. I just went onto the website and booked a consultation at a time that suited me.
I had a phone call with a very nice doctor who listened to me and asked lots of questions. She understood that I was in pain and advised me to take painkillers. She reassured me that although my symptoms had been getting worse, it wasn’t as serious as I was starting to wonder. And she also reassured me that I hadn’t done anything wrong to make it worse.
I had been seeing an osteopath, and she thought that was the right thing to do but suggested some physio might help. I have started physio treatment, which is starting to really help, and I am feeling better.
The Virtual GP service is excellent because it’s so easy to use and has really helped me. I would definitely use it again. It’s important to have a medical expert discuss an issue with you and give you advice and reassurance when needed.”
Click below to find out what we can do for your organisation 👇

I remember as a kid seeing some of Picasso’s earlier work, and in a flash realizing that abstract was a choice. Up until then I had assumed he just wasn’t a very good artist, and was doing the best he could. It changed the whole way I looked at art.
Piet Mondrian is far better known for his geometric abstracts, but likewise, it was a choice. I wish I could ask him why straight lines and primary colors spoke to his soul more than traditional representations.

A Santa Monica High School English teacher who was found dead on a beach in Panama Sunday, July 20th, is remembered as someone who loved the teaching profession and the relationships he was able to form with his students.
The body of 25-year-old Joey Lutz washed ashore and was found by a fisherman at Playa Wizard, three days after he was knocked down by a wave while standing in shallow water and swept out to sea by a powerful riptide, his family said.
The Culver City High School graduate had been traveling on his own in the Bocas del Toro islands in northwest Panama and was with some people he had met along the way when they were hit by the wave, said his sister, Shira Lutz. The traveling companions managed to escape the riptide but Lutz was carried out, and the last time he was seen he was struggling in the water, she said.
Lutz was initially reported to be missing, but the hopes of his survival ended when the body came ashore. Stuart Lutz identified the body as his son.
The news of the teacher’s drowning has come as a shock to those who knew him in the Santa Monica community.
“It’s devastating,” Santa Monica High School principal Hugo Pedroza said. “He was a young teacher who took a vacation, and from one day to the next, he’s gone.
“It’s a big loss for us.”
Lutz had taught English at the high school for three years. Aside from his teaching, Lutz was a senior advisor for the high school Class of 2007 and was an advisor for the school’s Improv Club. Pedroza also noted that Lutz was an actor and musician who enjoyed playing the guitar.
“He was a renaissance man who had knowledge about everything,” Pedroza said.
The young educator took great pride in teaching and valued the connection he was able to make with his students, Pedroza said. Lutz was supportive to new teachers in the profession, and while many teachers struggled to have an influence on certain students, Lutz was able to do so, the principal remembered.
“He really loved his teaching, but even more than that, he loved the kids,” Pedroza said of Lutz.
Students of Lutz have posted comments on a group page created in memory of their teacher on the social networking site Face book.com, saying he will be greatly missed.
“Mr. Lutz has taught us so much and I hope that his memory will still live on by us passing his advice and humor along,” one student wrote.
“While he strayed away from the traditionally rigorous style of teaching, his humor and creative assignments were instantly liked,” another student wrote.
Pedroza said he notified school faculty and staff, as well as a parent-teacher association of Lutz’s death. The school has provided grief counselors on campus to help students attending summer school cope with the loss.
Stew Bubar, a former member of the Culver City Unified School District board, said Lutz served as student body president during his senior year at Culver City High and was involved in the Audio-Visual Performing Arts Academy. Bubar, who teaches with Lutz’s father at Southgate Middle School, called Lutz a “very talented person,” who was involved in drama and improvisational comedy.
“He was an innovative and inventive person and a really nice guy,” Bubar said.
Shira Lutz recalled how her brother, a graduate of UC Santa Cruz, was “always optimistic.”
“I don’t think I’ll ever meet someone else like him, ever,” she said. “He had a personality that draws people in and he really believed in the goodness in people.”
Among Lutz’s loves were nature and traveling, something that had taken him to countries around the world, she said. He had begun his most recent trip in Costa Rica and was three weeks into a planned month-long vacation when the accident occurred, Shira Lutz said.
Lutz is survived by his mother Freda, father Stuart, sister Shira and brother Mickey.

Sweetie Grace Noel Erotica X-rated Photos watch online
She grabbed my left ankle and taped it to the lower left poster of my bed. The table seats forty people for dining or corporate meetings, so we had plenty of room. Luckily the waves helped to push them towards the beach and when he could stand, he lifted her up and did a quick check, there was no blood or missing limbs, so he helped her onto the beach where she sank down onto the sand.
Finally, she grabbed her pink bikini from the dresser and put it in her purse. Sexually he was as kinky as her, and loved trying new things. Well, I kinda gave it to her. Being a gentleman, he quickly picked it up, and half smiled as he handed it to her. Ann continued to suck on Cheries clit and the back of her head made circles as she worked her mouth in the same motion around the little bud between her lips.
Puddy tat bobbed her head and said a quick, Yes, Mistress, before scurrying off to the cabin to get the hair trimmers and razor. She had a content, contemplative look on her face except with a capital o-shaped mouth. I'd meant to do some studying today, but I dont really feel like staying in my room. The man I fell in love with seems not to be inside of him any longer or he is beneath the sorrow he feels in his heart.
Which is now. She was so tight. I was waiting on the deck of my yacht the next evening when my car delivered my dinner guests. The taste in her mouth was different than she expected. Being a mcnab andy could not say no to a bit of daddy dick and mounts his father with great ease. I made sure not to look up at the window that I was sure Mom was standing in. Her fingers were going as fast as my hips and she was just completely lost in orgasm.
He recognized them from school. After a few hours the first two men have bagged a couple of ducks each, but the braggart hasn't taken a shot. I could barely get through class. Thank goodness we were still parked, or I would have driven off the road. Inappropriate once. I took AJ's hand and.

Having three sons, I would have been expected to dislike at least one of the girls they brought home and married, but I have been pleasantly really surprised. My eldest son, is now happily married for a second time, but even during his first marriage I think I was able to be a good ma- in -law without much interference and only visited when I was asked. As we did live a distance away, it was not too hard to keep that promise.
Now of course he has moved to Australia, and that's a whole different idea of distance.. However we do still speak on the phone, and also text like mad, so I don't feel too cut off from his world.
My second son has married another beauty... [all my boys seem to attract gorgeous young women*]- and they have now been married almost 5 years, their anniversary will be next month. Over the time that she has known us, she has become such an integral part of the family. She bakes like a real cook, she makes things for the home and knits and crochets.. there is no end to her talents and she also works full time whilst my son, her husband completes his PhD in Architecture.. What a woman.!!
I love her for her kindness and intelligence and knowing how happy she makes my boy..
I love Daniel's wife in Australia for the same qualities, and she has given Daniel another son, and is a wonderful home maker as well as being a career girl.. Both these girls are kind to me and I think they like me enough not to have any problems with me.. I do often think how lucky my boys are, but then if they were not worthy of them, the girls would never have agreed to marry them..
Its a funny thing to think about when sons bring home the girls that are going to be their wives. They are joining the family and hopefully going to produce the next generation to carry the name forward. When my daughters married, they joined their husbands' families to carry on their family name.
I know this makes me sound old fashioned, but it is true and luckily both my girls found good people who married them and were good fathers afterwards too.
For me, the only difference in loving daughters in law and my own daughters is that I carried my daughters and saw them grow up, and my new daughters I did not...
My love for all my family is there, but not over played and I think they all respect that. I promised myself that I would be there to hear them, to help them when I could, and always smile and have fun with them, and so far, touch wood it has worked out..
In truth, I don't only have two daughters, more like 4, and I still waiting for the youngest of my brood to bring his wife to be home to meet us.
Meanwhile I know it will soon be the time when my daughters in law are producing babies, and that gives me even more to be proud of and fills my heart with such joy [and impatience] as I wait to meet the next new members of our ever growing family.

Soaring with an Eagle
This is the best shot I got of this fantastic bird. His flying was so graceful I could have watched him all day. He was about 60 feet over my head when I got this.
I want to thank everyone for the well wishes and prayers, I really appreciate them and I'm sure that I will be soaring with the Eagles again soon.

Today I was down at the outer reefs checking conditions at 6am. Things were looking good so I packed the bike with gear and headed up to Canggu. When I got there there was already a group of around 15 on the river mouth so set up on the spot. Jake Patterson was out early and I saw him get a few nice ones. There crew grew to about 25 while I was there. Conditions were clean off shore and sets were in the 3ft+ range. The tide was on the run out and when I packed up about 9:30am there was some bigger sets already starting to push in against the tide and waves were starting to shut down from the left right across to the sandbar. It was a good clean morning and I would reccomment the racetrack at Uluwawtu for some low tide action as the tide pushes in. I reakon it would be looking good down that end of the bukit as I type this up. OK well thats it for me today. Till next time, Scotto!

"About a month back, I was finally crawling back out of my hidey-hole after the last of my non-machine friends had been killed, my intelligence robots had lost the signals they were supposed to follow, so I didn't know nearly as much about the goings-on as usual, and I figured I should start trusting again. I was short on cash, so I sold some of my designs to Riv, lightly armored reaction suits and rapid-rate coil guns. At the time, all I knew is that he liked to humiliate superheroes. I...I regret selling him those designs, but I did build failsafes into them, so I doubt he's using them any more. At least, not safely," Phil grins at that last part.

Men, I am sorry to say that on the whole, taken as a gender, you are not very good at foreplay. It's true and you need to just get comfortable with it. Yes, I am sure some of you, as you read this, are going to think that you are the exception to the rule. You'll think you've got it all figured out and that the women in your life are perfectly satisfied with you. Well, you might be that one in a million guy. You might not be. However, after you read this work, you will be well on your way to being “that guy”, one way or the other. Regardless of how wonderful you are in the bedroom, you need to understand and get comfortable with the fact that you can improve your foreplay skills. The truly great understand they can always improve. That is why I sat down and wrote this little blurb.
It all started over a lunch with a girlfriend, like so many of my projects do. She was venting and I was listening. It was, unfortunately, a story I had heard too many times before. She had gone out, and met a man. He seemed like a great guy. They had fun, they clicked, but then, when the two of them surrendered to their mutually rampant desires, he didn't measure up.
No, his cock was fine. In fact, she did mention that he was well endowed. No, that was not the problem. The problem was his lovemaking technique. He couldn't wait to get the pussy. He seemed to be under the impression that if he didn't penetrate her (these are her paraphrased words here) that someone was going to take it away. Now, in his defense, maybe that had happened in his formative years. Maybe he had been just about to make love to some wonderful woman when she up and changed her mind. Maybe this scarred him, emotionally, and forever gave him the quality of being eager for beaver. That's understandable. It just isn't a lot of fun for the women that choose to go to bed with him.
That was my friends complaint. He was just to eager. He rushed into actual intercourse, the foreplay was practically nil and the whole thing was over a lot sooner than she had hoped. She rated his performance like some old time East German gymnastics judge – not good and said that she was probably not going to call him back. I laughed inside when she said that she could put up with a lot in a relationship. Patience is a virtue, but she said she had no patience for bad lovers who didn't know their business.
This got me to thinking. I had heard this story too much in my life. Too many men out there walk around with an idea about how sex should go and be, that is just not right. This seemed like a subject that was just perfect for me to tackle. You see, the fact is that I love men. I have a lot of sympathy for them. No one really teaches them the finer points of the art of lovemaking. They are just set loose on the world with the blind hope that they'll figure it all out. They're like baby sea turtles. They're on their own. Some make it. Some don't. That is what prompted me to write about female orgasm and the finer points of pussy eating. After this lunch, however, I didn't know how I couldn't sit down and write a quick, pointed piece about foreplay.
This is the result of that inspiration.
|Publisher:||Guiscard Media Services|
|Sold by:||Barnes & Noble|
|File size:||119 KB|

This was a nice short read, okay so I skimmed the first three chapters but I read the rest of the book. It isn't very long, in fact it is an essay. Virginia Woolf wrote this book in 1929. She analysis women in fiction or women writing fiction. Did you ever wonder why there wasn't any great writers from Shakespeare's area that were female? I didn't but it was interesting to find out through the eyes of Virginia what she thought.
The thing I mostly gained from this book was that if a woman had a room of her own she could write great things, lots of great things. Throughout history she rarely had time to take a bath let alone write something down and she hardly ever had money for paper too. And it is all the fault of oppressive male dominance or something. Read the book and see what she means. She also discuses Jane Austin and the Bronte sister's works. It was quite humorous and a nice walk through history looking at women in writing.

After Mass, when we were leaving the church, I saw a pale cloud in the sky. It looked long and thin, with a sort of bump on one end. For a moment I thought it looked like Santa and his sleigh with eight tiny reindeer.
I kept looking at that cloud. It seemed to follow us from St. Leo’s to Uncle Des’ house, where we had panettone.
When we left, the cloud was still in the sky. I watched it from the car. The cloud followed us from Corona to College Point.
I had never noticed clouds before. Did clouds always follow people from one town to another? Was it really a cloud? Sister had told us that Santa had millions of helpers. They were tiny people called elves. Could that cloud have been an elf picking up the letter from La Befana?
Christmas morning, Pop was eating breakfast while Ma was cleaning Barbara. Ma sent me to the basement to get some dry diapers that were hanging by the furnace.
Being a big sister wasn’t much fun.
I pulled down two diapers.
Then I noticed some lumps by the furnace.
I thought some clothes had fallen off the line. I walked toward the furnace to pick them up. I hoped they hadn’t gotten dirty. Ma was tired and wouldn’t want to wash them again.
But the lumps weren’t clothes.
They were boxes.
They were wrapped.
They were presents!
They were for me!!
Santa had found me.

Dawn Breaks Out
Chapter 1: The ugly duckling grows up
Caution: This Sex Story contains strong sexual content, including Mult, Reluctant, Slut Wife, Wimp Husband, Gang Bang, Group Sex, Orgy, Pregnancy,
Desc: Sex Story: Chapter 1: The ugly duckling grows up - Plain plump booky teenager emerges in her 20s as a sexy woman, marries young and discovers her sexuality, leading to increasingly slutty behaviour and at least two illegitimate pregnancies
Dawn W was a real ugly duckling. At the age of 12, she was taller than most in her class, and the heaviest by far. She was already wearing C-cups, and the kindest thing anyone said was that she was chubby. In addition, she wore glasses and had recently been fitted with braces on her protruding teeth. Her hair was greasy and unmanageable.
Over the next few years her height stabilized, but those tits just kept growing!. By 15, she was up to DD-cups. She lacked any social confidence, and wore baggy shapeless clothes in order to hide her body. Still, she was conscious of rude comments from boys in her class about bigger udders than a dairy cow, and of mooing sounds made behind her.
She avoided social contact, buried herself in studies and became involved in church work as a Sunday School teacher. She did play (field) hockey for the school, as goalkeeper, but even that led to audible comments about how unfair it was that she left no room for the ball to get past her.
After high school she obtained a generous scholarship to study computer science at her local University of Cape Town in South Africa where she had grown up. She dreamt of meeting a boy who would sweep her off her feet, but her lack of social graces made this unlikely. The braces had by now gone, but little else had changed. She still wore baggy tops and jeans or trousers to hide her body.
Academically, she did well, and was in demand to join project teams in a quite male dominated class. It was clear that the boys on the team did not even think of her as a girl, and quite openly swapped stories of sexual conquests as if she was just one of the lads. But back in her own room, she would relive the stories, stroking her breasts and nipples while she imagined herself being ravished by one of her male colleagues. Her fingers would find her clit and pussy, as she wondered what a hard male organ would feel like penetrating her body.
One boy who was a frequent focus of her fantasies was one Enrico F in her class. He unashamedly exploited her willing help on various assignments, but otherwise hardly recognized her existence. He was of Italian extraction and lived up to the associated Romeo reputation. Stories circulating amongst the other students suggested that he bedded half the women on campus, and Dawn lay at night fingering herself, wishing she was one of them.
Dawn graduated top of her class, and was immediately snapped up by a progressive software development company in Cape Town. Within a year, she was a project leader, earning more than she had ever dreamed possible, but it made no immediate difference to her social life.
It was at about that time, though, that Dawn was taken in hand by Hilary, a rather flamboyant, red-haired and outgoing woman in her late thirties who worked in the administrative department. Hilary was famed for wearing outrageously revealing outfits, and was rumoured to have had affairs with all the bosses. She was twice-divorced and had three sons, generally accepted to have been sired by three different fathers. But somehow, she took a motherly interest in Dawn whom she perceived to be a sad and unhappy girl.
At Hilary's urging, Dawn consulted an ophthalmic surgeon, and a subsequent operation removed the need for glasses. Hilary's hairdresser gave Dawn a new close-cropped hairstyle which suited her much better. Joint shopping sprees which Dawn could now easily afford filled her wardrobe with tighter tops, displaying rather than hiding her femininity, and even showing a little cleavage and upper swells (to Dawn's initial embarrassment).
Dawn joined the local gym. She would never be slim, but her waist trimmed down, making her bosom more spectacular, and her naturally strong legs firmed up into very shapely form. Hilary encouraged her to wear shorter skirts (not quite miniskirts at this time) to exploit this new shape. Even her tits, although no smaller, seemed to get firmer, needing less bra support, and allowing her to buy a few more frilly lacy creations.
Slowly she became aware of men staring at her bosom and legs, not to scoff any more but in open admiration. However, she still lacked confidence to socialize to any great extent, in spite of Hilary's encouragement.
Then, half way through her third year with the company (just after her 25th birthday), her life changed when Gavin T appeared on the scene. He was a technician involved in replacing their network systems, and was some five years older than Dawn. He was rather shorter than her and really skinny, even wimpish looking, but flirted incessantly with her. He was a tit-man to the core, and leered openly at her bosom, while talking to her, especially when a bit of swell was revealed. Although slightly embarrassed by this attention, Dawn was also flattered, and was ripe for the picking.
When Gavin asked her out on a date, she turned to Hilary for advice, and ended up with a shorter skirt and lower neckline than she had ever worn before. Nervously, she invited Gavin in for coffee when they returned. She had never been alone with a man under such conditions. Within minutes, Gavin had his hands on her tits. She wanted to resist but it felt sooooooooo good. It did not take much longer for Gavin to have her top and bra off, and he gazed at those luscious orbs for the first time.
"Ohhhhh, they're gorgeous" he whispered breathlessly, as her buried his face in the soft valley.
Again she felt that she should resist, but then his lips found her coral pink tips and he nursed on them with a grown of pleasure. Dawn felt she'd died and gone to heaven... she had never experienced such divine feelings.
He dry humped his crotch against her exposed thigh, and she thrilled at the feel of his rock-hard erection. But on this occasion, she resisted him at last when his hands found her crotch, and the evening ended with her still a virgo intacta. But that night she relived the feelings of Gavin's hands and lips all over her breasts, and the pressure of his cock against her leg.
The second date was three days later, and her virginity was gone forever. In spite of the initial pain, it felt so good that she just knew she would want to fuck again and again and again. She was willing to give herself to Gavin wherever and whenever he wanted. Much to her surprise she found it quite a turn-on to be naked in his presence, as his obvious lust overpowered even her residual negative feelings about her body.
Two weeks later, he took her away for a long-weekend. They were at a quiet family cottage on a deserted stretch of coast. Gavin kept her naked for the whole time. At first she was a little shy and embarrassed, but gradually his obvious admiration of her curves made her feel increasingly comfortable, and she even started enticing him by spreading her legs or pushing her tits out at him. He introduced her to the joys of cunnilingus, loving the feel and aroma of her lush pussy lips. She couldn't believe how this could turn him on, but she exhilarated in the sensations. Then he taught her to suck cock and she understood. They screwed incessantly, night and day, missionary style, doggy style, with her on top. Dawn was now totally addicted to sex.
Back home, Gavin encouraged her to wear ever more revealing outfits, and she obliged, partly to please him but also because she gained an ever-increasing thrill in exposing herself. It was hard to believe that just a few weeks earlier she had been a rather prim and socially shy virgin. Although at the office she remained relatively conservative, when she accompanied Gavin to bars and parties her outfits became rapidly risqué. Skirts shortened to mid thigh. Matronly bras were replaced by flimsy garments that did no more than provide under-support, and were worn under short strappy tops.
Six months after their first date, Gavin asked Dawn to marry him, telling her that he'd love to see her pregnant with his child.
"It'll make me even fatter", she wailed, but in truth she was thrilled. She had often felt that her broad hips and enormous tits were meant to produce and to feed babies... lots of them.
Three months later they were married, and Dawn threw her pills away. But six months, then twelve months passed, and her periods returned as regular as clockwork every month.
Her gynaecologist could find no real problem, and suggested that Gavin should have a sperm test. But then Gavin told her his great secret. Three years before they had met, he had had a fling with a 15 year old schoolgirl, and had gotten her pregnant after just one burst condom. Her parents had threatened to lay criminal charges, and had only withdrawn the threat when he agreed to pay for her abortion and recuperation, and never to see her again. It had taken his life savings, and he was still cut up over the lost child.
So there could be no problem with his fertility! Dawn was devastated! Gavin comforted her, assuring her that she was still a very sexy woman, and that all his friends lusted after her. Perhaps she was designed to be a "sports model"
It was just as she was becoming reconciled to her barren state that Dawn's experience with exhibitionism took a quantum step forward at one of Gavin's poker games.
Gavin and a group of his workmates had a weekly poker school, and about once a month they met at the home of Dawn and Gavin. Gavin encouraged her to wear her most sexy outfits when she acted as hostess. They both got quite turned on by her being a sex object to his mates, such a different role to that of IT project manager and a diversion from thoughts of her inability to conceive. Their sex after his friends had left was awesome.
The talk amongst his mates was often rich in sexual innuendo, but Dawn became used to this and giggled at the comments, especially as she tended to have more to drink than she was used to. Then after one of these sessions, Gavin's boss Andy turned to him as he was leaving, saying: "So Gavin... When are you going to convince Dawn to allow you to play the golden chip?"
Dawn had no idea what this meant, but Gavin went red and muttered: "I... I... I haven't... haven't..."
Andy chuckled, clapped him on the shoulder and with a slight menace in his voice: "I think it's about time. Do it next time we're here".
"What's all that about?" Dawn wanted to know as soon as their guests has left.
"You'll get mad with me if I tell you", Gavin gulped.
"What happens at a lot of our games is that the host gets a free pile of chips to play with. But he also gets the 'golden chip'. He can play that at any time, but usually only when he's getting low on regular chips. The golden chip covers all and every bet on that hand. If he wins, he gets the pot and his golden chip back. But if he loses, then his wife or girlfriend must strip off a major item of clothing before he gets another allowance of chips and the golden chip back. In fact, it is expected that she wear a dress, not a skirt or pants with a top, so that she is immediately down to bra and panties. Of course", Gavin tried to explain, "that's not very different to wearing a bikini."
"What if he goes bust again?" Dawn wanted to know.
Gavin gulped more loudly: "Th... The... Then... well, you know..."
Dawn, who was quite tipsy by now, giggled at his discomfiture. "So you want your wife to parade around in the nude for your mates?"
Dawn hardly admitted it to herself, but she was quite turned on by the thought of stripping in front of Gavin's friends. So, somehow, by the time of the next game at their house, both had accepted that they would play the 'golden chip' game.
Dawn bought her most daring outfit ever for the evening, a very short black cocktail dress with spaghetti straps, and with a low cut square front that showed lot of cleavage. She had to buy a strapless bra with good under-support, and the one she found left the upper swells of her breasts naked, with even the edges of her aureolae sticking out. She wore lacy black bikini panties, and completed her outfit high platform-heeled sandals.
Gavin's mates fawned over her, and found every excuse to help her with snacks and drinks so that they could 'accidentally' touch her. Andy was particularly forward, and boldly cupped her breasts from behind when he caught her on her own in the kitchen. To Dawn's surprise, she found herself getting aroused and at what point needed to go change her panties as they were so damp. The innuendoes became ever more bold, and she even joined in.
For some time, however, it did seem that Dawn might not need to strip. Gavin was doing well, and his pile of chips grew steadily. Then followed three hands in succession, in each of which he had a good hand, betted rashly, and lost. Then when he realized how much he had lost, he changed to playing cautiously and his pile of chips bled away. Just after 11pm, he played his golden chip... and lost, to cheers from his mates and their chants of "Take it off, take it off!"
Suddenly, Dawn was nervous, but knew that there was no backing out. She wanted to go to the bathroom, but the guys would have none of that. She had to strip there. With trembling fingers, she undid the catch, pulled down the zip, and stepped out of her dress to whistles and catcalls from the men, as they took in her barely concealed DD-cup tits, and the dark bush that was so evident between her legs, peeking out from the legs and above the top of her flimsy panties.
For two more hours, she served the men in this state of near-nudity and found herself close to orgasmic in arousal, especially as hands wondered across her legs and tits, some tweaking her nipples into hard points and others slipping fingers into her juicy slit.
As soon as the guests had left, Gavin ripped her panties off, threw her on the couch and fucked her right there. They both came almost immediately. They fucked the night away. Over the next week, they replayed the events by having Dawn remain naked all evening, fantasizing about guests looking at her, feeling her up or even fucking her as Terry watched.

It's a strange title for any kind of blog post, but that's what I tend to call some of the boys I see walking around post here.
This morning, I was taking my husband to work and on my way home, I see a young Soldier walking back to his barracks from either the gym or his run. He was in PT (Physical Training) clothes so I know he was just finishing that up. He was looking up in a tree and upon looking closer, I could see that he was picking mangoes and piling them on the ground. This made me cry.
I'm a sentimental slob. I cry at the drop of a hat. Something about this young Soldier picking up mangoes made me cry! I thought of the young boys who go to their first duty stations, sometimes leaving home for the very first time in their lives. I think of Soldiers who are my son's age (26) and realize that some of them have deployed to war 3 or even 4 times. That makes me cry. I move back and forth between sadness and pride. I recognize that some of these young men, and women, join the Army because they wanted to try to make something of themselves and had very few options at home. That makes me proud.
I am reminded of a young Soldier sitting on the curb with his newly issued rifle as my husband's battalion was about to load busses to catch their flight to Iraq. He looked so scared it touched me. I sent Nick over to talk to him.
He was afraid....of flying. He had only flown once in his life, to Hawaii and his first duty station. He wasn't afraid to go to war, but to get on a plane.
Here's a photo of my husband talking to this young man.

You are not permitted to download, save or email this image. Visit image gallery to purchase the image.
Crown laywers say they were unaware of the changes until British fingerprint expert Carl Lloyd was called as a witness yesterday.
Mr Lloyd is now going to have to complete his evidence by video-link from the UK next week.
Mr Lloyd's clear evidence was that David Bain's fingerprints on the forestock of the .22 rifle used to kill five members of his family were not in blood.
The Crown says the prints were in blood, possibly from Stephen Bain, who was involved in a violent struggle before he was shot on June 20, 1994.
His parents and two sisters were also murdered that day and the Crown says 37-year-old David Bain was the killer, while the defence says it was the father, Robin Bain.
Mr Lloyd gave detailed evidence yesterday and today about the various chemical processes involved in testing finger prints and said the prints on the murder weapon were latent - made in sweat - rather than made by fingers with blood on them.
But Crown counsel Kieran Raftery asked Mr Lloyd if he was aware that, for years, the defence case had been that the fingerprints on the rifle were in animal blood and that they had been there for a long time.
He was not aware of that, Mr Lloyd said. And he was adamant the prints were not in blood, human, animal or any other type.
They were latent prints but could very well be in some other contaminant, Mr Lloyd said.
All he had done was look at the fingerprint aspects of the case as requested.
Mr Raftery then told Justice Graham Panckhurst the Crown would need time to check all the fingerprint evidence with its experts and asked that cross-examination be delayed until some time next week.
Bain's retrial for the 1994 murders is now in its final stages, with defence evidence expected to be completed some time next week .

Monday, August 30
ABC's and 123's
Emma started pre-school last week. It is the same school we sent Sarah when she was the same age. It was such a great experience for her, and she's been telling us that Emma would get to go there when she was 3 1/2 too. Emma couldn't wait. She loved every bit of it... from picking out her school clothes, to packing her lunch, to playing with friends and meeting new people.
Emma is by far our most friendly and affectionate child. She loves to be close to people, to talk, and to make new friends (whether they are infants or 90 years old - it doesn't matter)! There really haven't been a lot of opportunities for Emma to have friends her own age, so we were excited for her to have the opportunity.
Until the baby comes, that leaves just Andrew and I home together for a few hours on Tuesdays and Thursdays. He's not used to being without his playmate! I can't count the number of times he asked me, "Where Emma?" Every time I told him she was at preschool, he said, "I go pre-cool too!" Not yet, buddy, not yet.

I was one of about 20 campers and two counselors that went on a 3 day, 2 night canoe/camping trip down the Brazos River.
We put in just below the dam at Possum Kingdom Lake. The first night we camped near and before the Highway 4 bridge. We set up our tents on a section of open, flat grass next to the river. There was a 30' cliff that was set back from the river around 30 yards, and that ran in both directions for quite a ways.
As we were setting up camp and securing the canoes for the night, several campers noticed some type of unknown animal peering down on us from the cliff, only a glimpse of the head was ever seen, and was in a different location each time. No one was really concerned or thought much about it.
The night was uneventful, and we all slept well. The next morning we were up eating breakfast, and loading the canoes. As I came back for another load, my tent/canoe buddy said he had seen the animal - asked if he knew what it was, and said it was a fox.
I had found a way to get up the cliff face, and we were on top in no time. As we made the last push to the top, we could hear something running off through the woods. We immediately gave chase, and I was in the lead. There were some very large boulders scattered about, and I ran around one of the larger ones. As I came flying around the edge of this boulder, I ran smack into a rather large tree, which knocked me back flat on my rump. I was crumpled at the base of this tree and dazed. When my eyes focused again, I noticed the tree had hair. I looked up, it screamed, I peed in my pants (literally), my friend screamed, I screamed, it screamed again, and all of this in quick but distorted time. We ran fast, and right off the edge of the cliff, forgot it was there. We were in a blind panic.
via (Link: bfro.net)

I have a feeling people are going to be pissed off with me at the end of this chapter :(
Thank you SOOOO much to everyone who reviewed the last chapter! *hugs* thank you so much, I really appreciate the feedback (and how to make Ichigo's life even more unbearable XD)
Special thanks to ever awesome Panruru for betaing this chapter
Warning: language and chapter contains sexual situations that may not be appropriate for younger viewers
Ichigo sighed in relief when Mashiro opened the door to the vizards' hideout. Finally, he was safe from all those crazed manics who wanted a piece of his ass. He would never be able to look at Keigo again without wanting to punch him in the face after the way he'd violated his leg (which actually wasn't all that different from usual, but still. There was a line.) He'd ended up having to turn off his phone after his inbox had been flooded by text messages from Mizuiro, who was still trying to ask him out. When he'd started asking about phone sex, Ichigo had decided he'd had enough. He was thankful that the vizards were well hidden enough that neither his friends nor his stalkers would be able to find him there.
"WHERE THE HELL HAVE YOU BEEN, BALDY?" a high pitch scream startled him an instant before a foot collided with his face and sent him crashing into the wall. He groaned as he picked himself up, and glared at the blonde devil who had kicked him and was now in the process of taking off her sandal to beat him senseless.
"What the hell's your problem?" Ichigo growled. He got to his feet and blocked the sandal just before it would have hit him. Unfortunately, he wasn't fast enough to stop her from following it up by slapping him across the face.
"You never come here anymore! We teach you how to control your inner hollow and then you ditch us?" Hiyori screamed, and would have continued if Ichigo hadn't kicked her in the side. Normally he would never hurt a girl, but Hiyori was an exception to that rule. And Rukia when she was being evil. And Tatsuki when she beat him up. And Nel when she tried to glomp him to death … okay, so it depended on the situation, and this one called for it.
"Ah, Ichigo! It's nice to see you again," Rose greeted with a charming smile from his spot on the couch. "Where have you been? It's been so long since we've seen you," he added, standing up and slowly approached the teen, who quickly ducked before Hiyori could tackle him.
"Uh, been busy with this and that. You know, with the war coming up and everything..." Ichigo scratched the back of his neck and an idea came to him. "Hey, have you guys ever had a problem getting someone to go on a date with you?" he asked just as Love came into the room and waved to the youngest vizard.
"Hm, not really. They usually say yes the first time I ask; if not, I usually move on." Love chuckled and slapped Ichigo on the back. This didn't seem help the teen, however, and only served to make him more depressed. He'd figured that Love and Rose had experience picking people up and had been hoping for some advice on how to get Byakuya to agree to go out with him. Crap, I'm going to be chased for the rest of my life. Then I'll die and go to Soul Society and be chased for the rest of my afterlife, he thought, sulking.
"Well, there is one person I like at the moment..." the blond man remarked, moving closer to Ichigo. "...and I was wondering if that special someone would like to accompany to dinner before we finish the romantic night making out," he suggested, and Ichigo's eyes widened when Rose started invading his personal space.
"Uh, I think I'll be going," Ichigo said, but Rose wrapped an around his waist to bring him closer.
"Shh, we have not yet even begun our journey," he whispered. Despite himself, Ichigo was suddenly glad that Hiyori had been betrayed and kicked out of Soul Society along with the rest of the vizards. The little blonde monkey came flying through the air, and rather than hitting Ichigo she kicked Rose in the head. The older man fell to the ground, unconscious.
"This isn't finished!" Hiyori yelled at Ichigo. She charged at him, only to be grabbed from behind by Love and lifted up into the air. The sight of the small girl's legs kicking out and her arms swinging futilely was quite amusing – or at least would have been if the vizards hadn't eaten the damn cookies!
Shit, I've got to get out of here! he thought to himself, and moved towards the door. He knew that danger lay on the other side of it, but he thought it better to risk going back out into the open than staying in an enclosed space with these maniacs.
"Ichigo." He stopped with his hand on the door handle and turned to Lisa, who had just entered the room with a bored expression on her face and a manga in one hand. She didn't bother looking up at him, and kept her eyes glued to the pages as she walked across the room to sit on the couch. "Shinji wants to talk to you. He said something about cookies and he didn't sound happy," she told him, then went back to reading her manga.
Ichigo bit his lip, trying to decide whether it was better to venture across the vizards' hideout to see what Shinji wanted or to leave right away before any other hormonal males tried to pounce on him. He glanced down at Rose. The man was still unconscious, and Love was probably going to be busy trying to control Hiyori for a good while. That, at least, took two out of the equation, and it sounded like Shinji was serious. Maybe he hadn't eaten any of the cookies? If so, he might be willing to help Ichigo with his problem. Okay, that last one was doubtful, but he really needed some allies that weren't trying to get into his pants.
He made his way across the room and down the hall, towards the last door which he knew led to Shinji's office. He started to knock, but when his hand hit the door it slowly opened.
"Shinji?" Ichigo called as he entered the pitch black room. He was about to look for a light switch when the ex-captain finally spoke up.
"Leave the lights off and close the door. I want to speak with you about the problem that's going on in Karakura Town," Shinji said, his figure outlined in the darkness when he moved.
Ichigo complied and shut the door behind him, tripping over several things on the floor before he finally found a chair sitting in front of the older man's desk. "You know about that?" Ichigo asked, almost hopefully. At least if he had Shinji on his side to beat off anyone that came near him, he might stand a chance of keeping his virginity until he could resolve his little … well, major problem.
"Please." Shinji stood and moved around the desk. "It's obvious. Just walking down the street, I kept hearing people asking where you were. Then Love came home with a bag of cookies and suddenly the other vizards were talking about you too," he said, placing a hand on the desk.
"Shit. Listen, long story short, I wanted someone to fall in love with me so I went to Hat and Clogs–" Shinji snorted. "–and asked him for help, and he gave me this potion that was supposed to make this guy fall in love with me. I put it in some cookies, but he never got it and everyone else did!" he explained the best he could, having no desire to go into detail. He was getting tired of dealing with this mess, and he just wanted it all to end. Unfortunately, it didn't look like that was going to happen anytime soon.
"That does explain a few things," Shinji commented. He moved closer to Ichigo, and the teen squinted in the dark. He didn't understand why the older man couldn't just turn the damn light on. "Why would you go to Urahara, though? I'd think that you of all people would know better than to go to him," he said, which was quite unhelpful and only ticked the teen off. So sue him; he'd been desperate and in heartache.
"Why did you want the potion in the first place?" the older vizard asked. Ichigo bowed his head and fidgeted with his hakama.
"Like I said, I had a crush on someone. Byakuya. And he rejected me," Ichigo revealed, feeling like a complete loser. Of all the guys in the world he could have fallen in love with, why had he picked the one who had no heart? "I've been trying to talk to him for months, but he always sends me away. Mostly, he says stuff about how I'm not a real shinigami and I shouldn't be in Seireitei. Now I can't break this curse until he sleeps with me, which is never going to happen." He sighed hopelessly, then jumped a little when he felt Shinji's hand on his leg.
"The Kuchiki's have always had a stick up their asses, Byakuya especially. At least his grandfather had a sense of humor. Byakuya did too before he was a captain, actually," Shinji told the younger vizard, who looked up in the darkness with surprise. "He used to be a little ball of fire. He kind of reminded me of you, to be honest, especially when Yoruichi-san was around. She loved to torment him."
Ichigo smiled softly, wishing he could have met that Byakuya. It was hard to imagine the cold noble behaving that way, and he wished there were pictures. Of course, that had been before his wife died and his personality with her. He'd hoped he could try to change that, but the chances of Byakuya letting him were slim to none.
"You should find someone else," Shinji said, removing his hand from Ichigo's leg. "Someone who'll appreciate you and take care of you. Not to mention..." he felt a large, heavy lump plop onto his lap. "...someone who will put out," he whispered into Ichigo's ear, and licked the lobe.
At this, the teen freaked and grabbed Shinji by the shirt – or at least he would have had there been a shirt to grab.
Bare legs and thighs–
"WHAT THE FUCK SHINJI!" Ichigo threw the naked man off of him and onto the floor. He stood and felt blindly around Shinji's desk until he found a small lamp. He turned it on, and immediately regretted it. "CRAP, PUT SOME CLOTHES ON!" he yelled, and covered his eyes at the sight of Shinji picking his naked form off the floor. Worst of all, the man was hard!
"I can't hide my feelings anymore; we were meant to be!" Shinji opened his arms and began approaching Ichigo, his cock up and happy to see the teen as well.
"BACK THE FUCK OFF!" Ichigo lowered his hands and reached for his zanpakutou. "I swear to god Shinji, if you come near me I will chop your dick off and make you eat it!" he warned, but the older vizard didn't seem threatened in the least.
"Actually, I'd rather be shoving it up your–" Shinji began before he had to dodge out of the way to avoid being dismembered by Zangetsu.
"If you try to finish that sentence, I will kill you! I have enough mental scars already from everyone else, and this is just one more thing that's going to haunt me for the rest of my life!" he shouted, and took a step back as Shinji came closer. Despite his threats, he really didn't want to kill the other man. He liked Shinji, or at least he had before this incident. Besides, he was sure the blond still had a few things to teach him about his vizard powers.
Well, there's always Lisa, he thought, swinging at Shinji again when the man got closer.
"Ichigo, come on now. Let's be adults here. Why don't you take your clothes off and stand in front of the desk?" Shinji appealed to him, approaching the teen with caution.
"You put some fucking clothes on before I castrate you!" Ichigo warned. He cringed when he noticed that the older man was getting even more turned on, and pre-cum was dripping from his cock. I'm going to be sick! he thought, feeling bile rise in his throat.
"Listen, I–" Shinji started, but was cut off when someone struck him in the back of the head. Ichigo had never been so glad to see someone fall unconscious in his life. Sure, he felt bad that it had had to come to this, but at least he didn't have to look at Shinji's naked body anymore.
"So Mashiro was right, you are here." Ichigo froze at the deadly grin on Kensei's face as the silver haired vizard took a step towards him.
Shit, this is bad, Ichigo thought to himself before ducking around Kensei. He ran towards the door, but was tackled to the floor when it was still a couple feet away.
"You're not going anywhere, Berry!" Kensei whispered into his ear. "You're in my house now."
In the living room, Lisa yawned as she glanced over at Hiyori. The other vizard was sitting with her arms and legs crossed, pouting while Love helped Rose into a chair and gave him an ice pack. "Did you hear someone yelling?" Mashiro asked her as she peeked her head out from behind the fridge door.
"It's probably just your imagination," Lisa dismissed, but just then they all heard someone yelling down the hall. A loud crash soon followed. However, no one moved from their spots, nor did any of them so much as quirk an eyebrow.
"Take it off!"
"Get off me!"
"Was that Berry-tan and Kensei?" Mashiro asked, shutting the refrigerator just as Hachi came through the front door with dinner. "Yay! What did you bring!" she asked, completely forgetting about the cries coming from the hallway.
"Oh, I stopped at a restaurant and picked up something special since you said that Ichigo was coming over," Hachi told them, and placed some large bags of food on the counter.
"GET BACK HERE!"
"FUCK NO, YOU FUCKING PSYCHO!" Ichigo yelled as he ran into the room, his haori torn enough to partially expose his chest. His obi was undone and he was doing his best to keep his hakama up after it had been partially pulled down.
"Oh my, Ichigo-san, are you alright?" Hachi asked, but the teen ignored him. He knew he should feel bad about not saying hello to the very nice and polite man, but with a sex-crazed Kensei on his tail it wasn't worth it. He'd apologize later. However, this wasn't good enough for Hachi. A golden barrier stopped Ichigo in his tracks, luckily leaving Kensei on the outside.
"Hey, let me in there!" Kensei shouted at Hachi, who was the only one in the barrier other than Ichigo. Though he was relieved to be safe from Kensei, Ichigo felt slightly frustrated. The front door was right in front of him, but he couldn't leave. Meanwhile, was trapped in a house with a bunch of maniacs after him. Well, not really anymore; most of the vizards were stuffing their faces with the food Hachi had brought home. Even Kensei had calmed down a bit and was stuffing his face with rice while he watched the berry.
"I apologize for my friend's rude behavior." Hachi bowed his head and Ichigo stared at him, wide-eyed with panic. Hachi seemed okay, but it was becoming hard for him to trust anyone. Hell, he had trusted Shinji before he'd sat his naked ass down in his lap.
I'll have to burn these clothes, he noted to himself. Hachi reached for the top button of his shirt and Ichigo's mouth dropped open. Whether from shock or disgust, he didn't even know anymore. All he knew was that when Hachi took his shirt off, a little part of him died inside. There was no way he was going to lose his virginity to Hachi. He liked the man, but not – never – in that way!
"I suppose we should make this fast ... or do you like it slow? I assume you will be on the bottom." The bile that had been sitting in the back of Ichigo's throat finally came up and he doubled over slightly as he vomited, then quickly grabbed Zangetsu and sliced through the barrier. Luckily, nothing else happened to stop him from reaching the exit and he was soon running for his life.
What did I do to deserve this? Is Rukia's sister haunting me from beyond the grave because I'm going after Byakuya? I swear I'll never fall in love with another man as long as I live so long as I don't have to see anything like that again! he swore to himself. He peeked over his shoulder and found that no one was following him, thank god! He didn't know how he would react when he saw the vizards again. Hachi asking if he was a bottom ... he winced and felt the bile rise up again. Then there was Kensei, who'd almost got him completely naked and managed to grope his ass before he'd kicked the bastard in the face. And worst of all, Shinji's naked body with his weeping cock wagging between his legs. He was going to have nightmares for the rest of his life!
"Hey, Ichigo!" a shinigami with an afro jumped in front of him, waving cheerfully. For the life of him, Ichigo couldn't remember his name; nor did he care to. The shinigami was in the way and needed to move!
"I was wondering if you–" afro shinigami started to ask before Ichigo punched him in the face.
I don't care how nice he is, I'm not putting up with this shit anymore! he thought to himself, then froze when he saw the most terrifying thing he'd ever seen in his life. "Fuck no," Ichigo whimpered at the sight of a laughing Kenpachi racing at him with his small lieutenant waving from his shoulder. "Can this day get any worse?" Ichigo took a step back, seriously considering admitting himself to a psyche ward. Then again, the people there would probably molest him too!
"Don't worry." He jumped when a hand wrapped around his waist and he was pulled into a thin chest. He peeked over his shoulder and felt his eye twitch and his throat grow dry. "It won't," Ulquiorra finished, dragging Ichigo through a garganta and closing it before the eleventh division captain could catch the berry he'd been searching for all day.
"Son of a–"
"Kenny! You just missed Ichi!" Yachiru pointed at the empty air Ichigo'd disappeared into, and watched as Kenpachi had a fit and smashed the side of the building he was standing next to.
"Ya think? Damn arrancar. He's mine!" Kenpachi snarled. He turned and started walking back down the street. An idea was forming in his mind: he could smash that clown face, Mayuri, until he opened a garganta so he could go after his berry again. Perfect. He grinned and took off once more.
"Hey, I think my nose is broken!" afro shinigami shouted as he raced by and hit him in the face again. That weakling wasn't worth it. He couldn't give him the fight he desired, not like Ichigo. Kenpachi licked his lips, savoring the thought of the hot battle the two of them would have once he caught him.
Captain Byakuya Kuchiki sat at his desk doing paperwork, as usual. The load had increased due to his lieutenant's supposed mission to Karakura Town. Of course, it was obvious that the redheaded baboon had actually just gone there to visit his sister and the substitute shinigami. That was where his lieutenant always ran off to. And every time he left, Byakuya had to do his paperwork to ensure it was turned in on time. Abarai was beginning to turn into a disgrace, and other officers had begun following in his footsteps. More and more had been slacking off, and it didn't help that Abarai had been dragged in only hours ago by the third and ninth lieutenants, who'd found him tied up without a shirt. Byakuya had chosen to stay in his office rather than see his lieutenant's condition firsthand.
When someone knocked on his door he ignored it, continuing to fill out reports on each of his officers and their progress. The knocking continued, however, and after a few seconds his eyes shifted towards the door in annoyance. "Come in," he said reluctantly, loudly enough for the person outside to hear. This interruption had better be something important such as a report on the progress on the war, the next captain's meeting, or urgent matters pertaining to his division. Unfortunately, he was to be disappointed.
"Oh, hello Captain Kuchiki." Nanao, the eighth division lieutenant, bowed her head along with Nemu, the twelfth division lieutenant, and Isane, the fourth division lieutenant, followed suit. "We were ordered by the Captain Commander to take this survey to each of the captains. We need to fill them out and return them by tomorrow morning," she told him, and raised her head to see that the captain didn't look very amused.
"Leave it on my desk; I will fill it out later and hand it to him myself." Byakuya looked back down and continued working on his reports. He couldn't recall the Captain Commander every issuing any surveys in his entire time being captain. However, if it had been issued by the head general then he would do as commanded.
"Actually, we can't leave it here because we were given the responsibility of returning all the surveys." Isane patted herself on the back for thinking so quickly even though she was sweating bullets just from being in the same room as the majestic captain. "You see, we have to ask you the questions and then you sign your name at the end confirming that you participated in the survey," she said quickly, uncertain if she had remembered everything she'd planned to say. The captain looked up from his work but none of the women could tell if he'd bought it.
"Very well, but make it quick." Byakuya put his pen down and the three girls slowly walked to his desk, uncertain if they should take a seat. If things went wrong, they'd need to leave quickly before he could draw his sword.
"Thank you, Captain." Nanao looked down at her clipboard and glanced over the questions. Might as well get it over with, she thought, though she wondered how long it would take before the captain caught on. "At what age did you know you wanted to be a captain?" she asked. She looked up at him and frowned uneasily. He stared back expressionlessly, not even batting an eyelash.
"The Captain Commander should already know the answer to that. The noble Kuchiki family has always been in charge of the sixth division," Byakuya muttered, and watched as Nanao began writing the answer down.
"Sorry, but we have to ask everyone this. Not all the captains were born to their station." She coughed, trying to regain her composure. When she looked down at the next question she paled. Why had they put that on the survey? It must have been Rangiku who'd added it, and there was no way she was going to ask it. "Isane, why don't you ask the next question?" she passed the clipboard to the fourth division lieutenant.
"Have you ever been married, and how long did it last?" A blush formed on the lieutenant's cheeks and she refused to look up. Please let us get out of here alive! she prayed to herself.
"I was married to Hisana until she died," Byakuya answered quietly, and turned to look at the picture of his late wife that sat on his desk
Isane shot a quick glance at Nanao, wondering why they'd put such a question on the survey. They were trying to get Byakuya to fall for Ichigo; the last thing they needed was for him to go back into mourning over his dead wife. She looked back down at the questions and really wondered who'd made up the survey.
Question 3: Was it you or your spouse's fault that your marriage ended? This is a suicide mission. There's no way I'm asking him that! the silver haired woman thought, skipping down the list of questions. "Um, what is your favorite color? Orange, red, black, or white?" she asked, hoping to ease the tension.
Byakuya raised an eyebrow at the three women. He was beginning to wonder if the Captain Commander wasn't extremely bored in the first division. Or, more likely, he hadn't issued this survey at all. "None of them; I prefer blue," he replied. Isane looked down and tapped her pen against the paper. That wasn't really the answer she'd been looking for, so she scratched the question off the list. She bit her lip as she skipped down to the next one, and quickly handed the survey over to Nemu.
The twelfth division lieutenant looked down at the survey emotionlessly and began reading off the next question. "In a sexual relationship with a man, would you be willing to be the uke?" she asked. Byakuya stared at the girl, his eyes widening slightly.
"Excuse me?" he asked in a low tone that made the other two girls gulp.
"Are you a seme or an uke?" Nemu repeated.
"Go to the next question, go to the next question," Nanao whispered urgently.
"Which do you prefer…" Nemu began reading before Nanao put her hand over the paper and directed the girl to the question under it. The captain would kill them if that question was asked.
"If you were to take someone on a date, where would you take them?" Nemu asked, and the girls felt like backing away when the captain glared at them.
"Next question," he muttered dangerously. The girls nervously eyed his hands and noted how close they were to his zanpakutou.
"Is sex important on the first date?" Isane turned away, blushing profusely. They were all lucky to even be alive. She wondered if the captain wasn't just toying with them before he murdered them, or if this was an "I'll get you later" type of deal.
"I refuse to answer that," Byakuya replied, irritation showing in his normally calm demeanor.
Nemu unclipped a photo from the clipboard, bravely approaching the captain's desk and setting it down. Byakuya glanced down to see a photo of Ichigo Kurosaki wearing nothing but a pair of dark jeans, eating a popsicle. Any normal man or woman would have drooled looking at the photo; however, Byakuya simply stared down at it expressionlessly.
"...Would you tap that?" Nemu finally asked, and that was the last straw. Byakuya stood, his hand resting on the hilt of his zanpakutou.
"RUN!" Isane yelled, and the three girls ran for the door before he could unsheathe his sword and slice them to bits.
Byakuya glanced at the door with irritation and stepped away from his desk to shut it. He could never understand why lieutenants kept getting more and more incompetent with each new one promoted. He prayed for the safety of the Gotei 13 that none of them ever became captains.
He made his way back to his desk and tilted his head as he looked down at the photo of Kurosaki. He lifted his eyes, looked towards the window, and then back to the door, before lifting the photo and sliding it into his pocket.
A/N: So, we are finally going to Hueco Mundo and the arrancars are much worse than the others. I am sure a lot of people are happy since a lot of requests were for the arrancars to…
"Hey, put me down!" Ichigo yelled as he tried to break free of Ulquiorra's hold. He was beginning to think it would have been better to take his chances with Kenpachi since the espada would probably be even more aggressive than the vizards.
"Aizen-sama wishes for your presence in Las Noches. However, I believe we should make a stop in my bedroom so I can prepare you," Ulquiorra stated. Ichigo froze. He didn't even want to know what the espada meant by 'prepared.' It almost sounded like he was going to eat him; however, thoughts of a different nature were racing through his mind. Ones in which Ulquiorra was throwing him onto a bed and stripping them both of their clothing before…
Okay, that's enough. He gave himself a mental kick before the scenario in his mind could play out any further.
"There he is!" Ichigo shook himself out of his stupor and glared up at the sixth espada, Grimmjow. "Hand him over!" Grimmjow growled as he approached him.
"No. Aizen-sama said I should bring him, and I am bringing him." Ichigo stared up at Ulquiorra. He had never heard the fourth espada sound so childish, even if he was still speaking in his usual monotone voice.
"Like I fucking care. He's mine!" Grimmjow lunged at Ulquiorra, who dropped Ichigo in favor of drawing his zanpakutou to defend himself. "The berry is mine! I laid my claim on him a long time ago!" he shouted as he swung his blade.
"I saw him before you did, trash. If it wasn't for me, you wouldn't even have known about him," Ulquiorra retorted, and blocked the other's blade.
"HEY, LET ME GO!" Both stopped in the middle of their battle and turned to see Ichigo being dragged off by several different people who were holding him tightly against them.
"What the fuck! He's–" Grimmjow took a step forward, but Ulquiorra put a hand out in front of him. They watched as their berry disappeared along with the other people. "Why did you fucking stop me?" he snarled at the fourth espada.
"There is nothing we can do for now. There will be no stopping them until they have completed their idiotic episodes that lead to nowhere," Ulquiorra sighed, and began walking off in the direction of Las Noches.
"What do you mean?" Grimmjow asked, his eyes still on the spot where Ichigo had disappeared.
"He is in the hands of the Fillers now," Ulquiorra replied.
We will return to Ichigo's trials in Hueco Mundo another time, for now we are to look into another adventure that is happening, one that everyone dreads. The Filler Chapter

You know what... you're right... I don't think cops should have used a taser here either...
A man died Tuesday after police used a Taser to subdue him, in what is believed to be the first such case in Winnipeg.This guy had a knife... they should have played it safe and put a couple of 9 mils center-mass.
Witnesses told CTV Winnipeg the unidentified man, reportedly in his 20s, had been wielding a knife.
You call a play like this... just don't be too surprised when someone "Lawrence Taylors" your dim-witted criminal ass.
RELATED: Never saw it this coming, huh?
“He would carry a little knife, because you know what?"Well, Mom... I don't know how to break this to you... but that's not what kids do around here.
"That's what kids do."
I didn't approve of it, but how are you going to stop that? Especially in this rotten city.”Uh, here's a thought... you could been somehow involved in his life.
She hadn't seen him for two weeks, she said, because he had been staying with his father, who lives in a rooming house and gets his money panhandling on Main Street.If only there were more social workers.
She was told her son had once been to hospital and said he had used crack, but Ms. Shymko doesn't know whether that's true.

Well, today I got my first ever positive pregnancy test.
There I was, sitting on the toilet, waiting my three minutes, assuming it would be negative, and I glanced over after a minute and saw a faint faint line. I did a double take! I still had two minutes so I thought, okay you may be seeing things, just wait and look again. I looked at the end of three minutes and there was a definite second line, indicating I was in fact, pregnant! AGH!
I immediately got nervous that it was wrong somehow. My first instinct was, should I tell Clay yet? Should I take another test? What if this is a false positive, and I am one of those rare exceptions? What if I have a chemical pregnancy? I just know how hard its been to get pregnant, and I was too scared to believe it was actually happening.
My alarm started going off in our bedroom and I had to run in and shut it off. I said sorry to Clay who was in bed and then I said, "Hun?" in my nervous tone...he asked what was wrong, and I said, "I took a pregnancy test....and it says I'm pregnant." He hopped out of bed and said "Let me look" (he said he was worried I was reading it wrong and didn't want me to get my hopes up) and he looked and we both were just like....shell shocked.
So today is where I'm at and Clay says I should write everything down that I'm feeling.
I was convinced I wasn't pregnant, which I think is why I am so nervous I am really not. I have been having some achey joints, which happens before my period, I have been SEVERELY emotional. Like, a lot! I have had a night sweat. My boobs hurt. But a few things that have been different are I have been really really clumsy, my lips have been severely dry, and I suppose I have been more emotional than normal PMS I think. I've also had tons of vivid dreams, which is very strange for me.
I just assumed it was all PMS, especially the joints hurting thing, but I suppose that could happen when I get pregnant too.
I'm ecstatic, I'm nervous, I'm scared, I'm happy, I'm everything.
Tomorrow I am going to go in and take a blood test to confirm it because I think until that happens I wont fully believe it. We are debating telling the family today or waiting until the blood test is taken. I guess we'll see what we decide!

Misha couldn't believe tour booking
Misha B has said she didn't believe her manager when she was told she'd be supporting Nicki Minaj on tour.
The star appeared as a contestant on The X Factor in 2011, but after much controversy she was voted off in the semi-finals.
She said of the support slot: "I didn't believe my manager when she told me. I couldn't believe it. I remember a year or so ago talking with a friend, and we were saying how mad it would be if we even managed to meet Nicki Minaj, and here I am supporting her."
Misha was portrayed as a bully on The X Factor, with judge Tulisa Contostavlos telling her publicly to "put aside the attitude".
Misha said: "It's a TV entertainment show, so a lot of that is out of the contestants' hands. Judges have a lot more power than the contestants and the comments that were made, well... Louis apologised a lot, and I still haven't spoken to Tulisa.
"I was worrying about how I was going to come across, and we were under a lot of pressure. We went from being people who walked down the street without anyone caring who we were, to people watched by millions, all of who have an opinion about you."
Misha said she had some hurtful comments online after being on the show.
But she added: "The way I look at it is that there are a minority of people who sit behind a screen and say the nastiest thing they can think of, and then there's the majority of people who don't. Concentrate on the majority."
:: Misha B's new single Do You Think Of Me is released on November 4. She supports Nicki Minaj on her UK tour until November 7.

'Roy' from the Farmers Market....
In the early 2000's, I was at the Thursday Evening Farmers's Market in SLO with a sign promoting Kristin's case when I was approached by a man named 'Roy'.
Roy had come to the Central Coast to do some work for Verizon as a sub-contractor and he was assigned to a local Verizon warehouse in San Luis Obispo County. He was at work early one morning when Ruben Flores, (Verizon employee and father of suspect Paul Flores), walked straight up to him and, in an unfriendly voice, said, "I guess you know who I am?"
Roy told me he was caught off guard and felt very uncomfortable. He told me that he looked at Ruben and said, "Well, it;'s kind of hard not to know who you are."
Ruben leaned into Roy and sternly said: "That bitch deserved to die!" That is all he said. He then turned and walked away.
Roy then got very emotional with me. He was angry that Ruben would say that to him and he was almost 'apologetic' because he wished he would have gotten back into Flores' face and lit him up.
"I was caught off-guard", Dennis, "Roy said to me." I should have done more that day but I didn't.
I thanked Roy for sharing his story with me and I reported it to the Sheriff's Department but I never heard any updates about it.
Clue # 9

The 17-year-old Macheda hit the headlines last week as he made his United debut in style by scoring the winner in their Premier League win over Aston Villa.
That prompted Macheda's former club Lazio to again stress their annoyance at the fact that The Red Devils were able to lure him away from Rome when he was 16.
Italian clubs cannot put players on to professional deals until they are 18, and, at times, English clubs use this to their advantage as they can do this when they turn 16.
That was the case with Macheda as he moved to Manchester at 16 and signed a contract with United. And now Inter have revealed that Santon, who has just broken into their first-team, almost went the same way.
Inter's assistant, Giuseppe Baresi, has revealed how Santon almost joined United, whilst Chelsea also showed an interest.
"It was a similar case like that of Macheda, that almost happened with Santon," he told Sky Italia.
"We knew of Manchester United's interest. I know their Italian scout was following him, and like him.
"And with Manchester there was Chelsea, another club who has a scout here in Italy and they were watching all our matches to follow Santon.
"But the (player's) family was important, we have been able to his contract in the way, right sums for a guy aged 16."
Santon is now regarded as one of the finest prospects in Italian football having broken through into Jose Mourinho's squad this season.

I wish to meet Malala Yousufzaiadmin
STORY:5, EDUCATION & LEARNING ARE EYES OF THE MIND: MEETING A GIRL WHO CAN INSPIRE HOPE, IGNITE THE IMAGINATION, AND INSTILL LOVE OF LEARNING: Anwarullah: I want to meet MalalaYousufZai A young boy, Anwarullah, who didn’t see the beauty and realities of the world, was fighting his own battle at the age of 17 years. He had Lung Cancer. Everyday this boy was used to show a great bravery in his own struggle to live one more day. He often faced a lot of difficulty breathing because of this life threatening disease. Despite this fatal illness he was a focused young man for whom studies were his foremost priority. His parents described their son as a determined and focused individual who said that nothing could stand between him and his academic life. When asked why he was so determined to study, Anwarullah said that one day he wanted to become a high ranking officer in the army, with his hard work he got enrolled in the Army Public College MAW foundation decided to visit this shining star and find out what he wished for the most. MAW volunteers were impressed by witnessing the level of intellect he emanated. He was crisp and focused in his conversation and seemed very sure about what he wanted. When he was questioned about his foremost wish, Anwarullah looked visibly excited. His wish was very unusual and was something that no other child had ever wished for. It was not a wish to meet a Bollywood actor or a demand for technological gadgets-he wished to meet Mala Yousufzai. When asked for the reason behind this wish, Anwarullah started narrating the great Malala’s story. He said that Malala is his age and has received so much recognition at such an early age; recognition because of her struggle for education. She fought for her right of education and this led her to receive three bullets from the Taliban. Anwarullah said that he is inspired by her bravery and courage. He is in awe of her because of her ability to cause a stir in the world about the need for equality in a child’s right to be educated. He said that he wants to meet her because she had the honor to meet some great personalities, speak in the UN assembly and the most impressive part; win a Nobel Peace Prize for her struggle for education. MAW volunteers were thrilled by Anwarullah knowledge about Malala. Soon, MAW foundation after great effort was able to setup a meeting between him and Malala in the UK.The MAW Pakistan’s Founder PresidentMirzaIshtiaqBaig traveled with him, it was difficult to breathe for him during flight but IshtiaqBaigtook personal care of his medicines and other stuff. During that visit Anwarullah got to spend an afternoon with Malala. He was thrilled to meet his inspiration. They engaged in heartfelt and meaningful conversations. Malala told him that she was proud of Anwarullah continuing with his education despite of his ill health; to her this was the ultimate form of bravery. She played board games with him and made coffee with her own hands for him. After the meeting Anwarullah, who was visibly in high spirits, told the MAW team that he could not thank them enough because he was returning with high hopes for his future and more courage to continue his efforts in his academic life. He is no more in this world with us now, but his memories are placed here in front of us.

Set in the wintry city of Yuuichi Aizawa’s childhood Kanon follows him as he tries to remember his past. Living with his cousin in this city, Yuuichi will be forced to confront girls from his past. For seven years Yuuichi could remember nothing that happened to him in this city. But when he starts making friends with four girls from that past that he forgot he is forced to remember what happened.
This show does what any other work based upon a Jun Maeda visual novel does. It pulls nice and hard at emotional strings. It does a some screwing with your mind, but again that is to be expected of something created by Jun Maeda. After having watched both Clannad and Air before this I fully understood that the chances were high that I would get a little emotional while watching this. This did not make me as emotional as Clannad did, but I got that feeling of wanting to cry. I still don’t think anything will make me as emotional as Clannad did the first time I watched it.
With Kanon I suffered a slump where I stalled around episode 7. It took me a couple of weeks to get past this slump. Once I did though I was able to marathon it in a couple of nights. It just sucks that it has taken me so long to watch this. I actually started watching Kanon long before I made this list. I started watching it before I watched both Sora no Woto and Goshuushou-sama, Ninomiya-kun. It was that I found the male lead to rather annoying with his excuse of having forgotten everything.
All the characters were real well done for Kanon. They all fit where they were suppose to and they all fit their personality traits really well. Again the only main problem I had was the fact that Yuuichi seemed to used his forgotten memories as a crutch. He was always apologizing for those forgotten memories. Another character I had problems with was Sawatari Makoto. I did not like the fact that a kids personality was used for someone that looked like they should be a teenager.
The story was very well done. There were a couple of times that I was not able to see what was coming next. I would never have guessed that the one girl was a manifestation of someone in a hospital. I would never guessed that the demons in the school were also a manifestation caused by someone with Supernatural powers. But everything with Sawatari Makoto I kind of was able to guess at, but it was also kind of laid out long before it happened. The one thing that I hate about any Jun Maeda work is that everything in the story points to a sad ending and then BAM! out of nowhere here comes a happy ending. I would like to see him create something that does not end a happy note.
Please don’t let my cynicism ruin any chance of anyone actually watching this. Even though I am a cynic I really enjoyed watching Kanon. I don’t know if I am in any hurry to watch it again, but I would be quick to recommend to anyone that likes anything of that style.

Thursday, April 22, 2010
Finally Answers to Frank' Back Pain
This is where Frank is most comfortable in his lounge chair
Yesterday we went to Las Vegas to Frank's doctor. We have been anxiously waiting for this appointment hoping and praying for answers. When Dr. Duke came in to the exam room he started questioning Frank about how he was feeling and where he was expericing pain. I think he was verifing what he had seen on the X-Ray. He told Frank that the hardware that holds everything in place after surgery had fallen apart. Dr. Duke had operated on Frank July 9 of last year and the horrible nerve pain he was having was gone immediately, but his back never did heal right. Dr. Duke had Frank wear a bone growth stimulator and it hadn't helped at all. There was just signs of a little healing going on. We figure it was because Frank's back was so unstable and there was too much movement for the bone to fuse.
On May 4th or 6th Frank will have surgery again to put in new hardware and Dr. Duke said he was going to put a screw higher and tighten it down. I hate to see Frank have to go through another surgery, but we have hoped and prayed that there would be a solution for the pain he has been in. We are actually happy about the surgery and can't wait until he is on the healing side of it. Doctor Duke said it would take an hour and would be nothing like the first surgery. It will require a two day stay in the hospital and then we can head for home. Hopefully there will be a fast recovery time and by Fall or Christmas Frank can go golf with the Old Farts at the park. He will be a happy camper then. We won't be going any where this summer in our fifth wheel. So another hot summer for us.

Last night, Nondisclosure Guy and I were talking on the phone—still totally in getting to know you mode, when the conversation turned to something about bad habits or behaviors or something. Anyway, I think I was telling him about how I'm a firm believer in organization in chaos and about how ridiculously messy my desk at work is and how I have something like 10 pairs of shoes under my desk.
Anyway, I asked him about his worst at work habit. He paused. Then, "I'm not sure if I should tell you this. . .I pick my teeth with paperclips. It's bad. I can't even have them on my desk anymore."
I know, gross, right? But in that moment, I felt a huge surge of like for him. This was a moment where the defenses were totally down, he wasn't crafting an obvious answer, and he really said the first thing that came into his mind. And I really like that vulnerability, especially since I feel like everyone always tries so hard to look good. So, yes, it was TMI, (and I'm sure if a relationship does happen between us I'm going to kick myself for saying this) but in a perverse way, it was totally sweet.
More From Redbook
Have you ever had an experience like that?

I was out in Rockford for work yesterday. I was surprised to find a traffic control sign being changed to a no Beretta sign. If you look at the picture, the sign at the end of the lane with <--> was being covered over with a solid white background. Then, the 4x6 sign was being bolted in the middle of the sign. I was driving away from the sign when I realized what I had seen and didn't get a picture. However, it was very hard to see being so small on that big sign. Forest Plaza (Simon Mall property so that explains it) between the Outback Steakhouse and Kohls.

The gorgeous Sushmita Sen has finally revealed her wedding plans. According to the actress she will be tying the knot in 2013 however she refrained from commenting on who the lucky guy is. Talking to HT she said “Yes, I do plan to get married next year. I think it is time. Ab Bahut wait karva liya sabko“. Sushmita said that even though she is taking time to say yes she firmly believes in the institution of marriage “I am taking my time to say yes, but once I say I do, it will be for keeps as I firmly believe in the institution of marriage”, she further added.
The actress said that her elder daughter would like to see her as a bride “Alisah is too young but Renee is quite comfortable with me being single. She would like to see me as a bride one day, but she does not push me for it. She is 13 and we are more like friends; she understands me as a woman now. It’s only when she has skipped homework that I become the mother”, she said. The former Miss Universe wants to have a Christian wedding and she says it has been her childhood dream.
Sushmita has had many unsuccessful relationships with men including director Vikram Bhatt and actor Randeep Hooda. Recently she has been linked to a 23 year old businessman Imtiyaz Khatri. Is he the one? We wait for the official announcement from Sushmita.

- Mar 5, 2007
Must have blown a dog whistle.
They are a awful. If they weren't so bad you could stop there wouldn't be anything to complain about.I was told to stop complaining about the refs. They have missed at least six obvious calls this half that have hurt the Pats and now this. That was robbery.

Sweet Japanese Girl Fuck. She is spreading her legs wide to get her hairy pussy licked. Because everyone knows that they are often getting banged by various guys who stay in their place during the night. Pinching her perky nipples at the same time. Horny woman cums in the end. Babe pron com. And they were using it as much as they wanted.

The 94-year-old had been in the hospital since December 8. He was diagnosed with a lung infection and also had a procedure to remove gallstones.
In recent days, officials have said Mandela is improving, but doctors have taken extraordinary care with his health because of his age.
Presidential spokesman Mac Maharaj says Mandela will receive more medical care at his Johannesburg home until he fully recovers.
Maharaj requested that the public respect Mandela's privacy at this time.

Why should you write your own obituary? Well, what do you want to remembered for? What have you done in your life that you are especially pleased about? And, and, and....
I just wrote an obituary for my father-in-law. No, it isn't a sad occasion. He had a great life; was 96 years old; and died peacefully in his sleep AT HOME. But....the most difficult part of the arrangements was writing the obituary; not an emotional problem, but one of figuring out what to include.
Now, being a researcher, I've read lots of obituaries. But it's different when you start to write one. I had others "proof read" my drafts, but I still forgot things.
First, I forgot to list the spouses of the children. Then, I forgot to list surviving siblings. AND, I forgot to list siblings that predeceased him. I forgot to include his two wives to predeceased him. I forgot to list to mortuary (but they helped with that.)
My husband added two great pieces of informatio about Dad's working career. Dad's caregivers reminded me that he considered himself the original "Cookie Monster," a comment that has made many laugh who read the obituary and remember Dad. I also needed help with his current and past activities (which I got from his caregivers) since we live almost 400 miles from him and weren't a part of his daily life.
So, please consider what you would like to have written about you. If you don't want to actually write one, at least starting a list of things you would like to have mentioned. Or make a template and add topics as you think of them. All of these ideas would definitely help anyone who is trying to write a complete obituary and celebrate your life.

Kerala techie allegedly kills NRI father, chops body into pieces
Chengannur - Sherin told police that he shot dead his father the body to their warehouse and set the body afire after cutting the body into six pieces.
A 36-year-old man has been arrested on the charge of fatally shooting his father who had come visiting him from the United States, police said on Monday.
The arrest was made after accused Sherin Joy admitted to the crime during police questioning.
Police said it had recovered on Monday and Sunday parts of victim Joy V. John's body.
Image courtesy: Madhyamam/ Twitter
John, 68, settled with his wife and two other children in the US, had arrived from the US last month and was staying with his son Sherin near here.
On Wednesday, the two had left for state capital Thiruvananthapuram for some repair work.
The following morning, Sherin allegedly called up his mother to tell that he had a fight with his father and had committed a mistake. He then hung up.
After police picked up Sherin on Saturday for questioning, he allegedly told police that he shot dead his father, took the body to their warehouse and set the body afire after cutting the body into six pieces.
Sherin returned from the United States a few years back and his marriage had ended in a divorce.
Image courtesy: NDTV/Twitter
Police said Sherin had a tiff with his father over accounting for the money collected as rent from family properties near here.

Watching it is like finding money in the pocket of a coat that you haven’t worn in years.
To begin with there was a little girl out in the hallway with long black hair and white bell-bottom trousers. She was sitting on a bench by the elevator, looking across the hallway into a mirror, which showed her sitting on a bench by the elevator.
So when you came up in the elevator and the doors opened, here was this image of a little girl with long black hair and bell-bottom trousers, looking into the elevator door at you.
At first your mind didn't understand, and you thought maybe this was Cher herself, waiting by the elevator for you, and so you stepped off the elevator, smiling stupidly because you were caught off guard. And suddenly the little girl was behind you, and there you were smiling at her in the mirror, and she was scowling because she thought maybe you were trying to pick her up or something.
It was one of those totally unsettling, absolutely miserable situations. If you were James Cagney you would turn on her and snarl, "Dammit, you're only 12," and mash a grapefruit in her face.
But instead you knocked on the door of Room 640, and Sonny himself opened it, dressed in white bell-bottom trousers and a silk brocade shirt the color of rainbows. 'Then you heard this wail being sent up from behind you: "Sonnnneeeeeyyy!"
The scream propelled you into the room as Sonny hastily slammed the door. In the room there were two girls with long black hair and white bell-bottom trousers. They looked up at you and you wanted to explain that you weren't the one who had been screaming just now, but it didn't seem that they had heard anything.
"Hi, I'm Sonny," said Sonny. Studying the two girls in the room he singled out one and said, "This is Cher." "Gratified," Cher said. You saw that she wore a ring that said "Sonny." You edged around to see Sonny's hand and, sure enough, he wore a ring that said "Cher." All's well.
The girl who wasn't Cher said she would call Room Service. "Well," you said.
"Now that we've covered that," Cher said.
"How about a drink?" said Sonny.
"I'll just have a Coke," said Cher. "No, Diet Pepsi." "It must be hazardous to be the idols of teenyboppers everywhere," you said. "Do you ever wish you could just, uh, walk down the street?"
"Oh, everybody knows us in Los Angeles," Sonny said. "They're used to seeing us. We don't believe in being aloof and above everybody and all that. We try to be natural."
Cher smiled. "The clothes may not look too natural, but out on the coast they don't stand out too much. Here, I guess they look a little eight and a halfish."
"Eight and a halfish," we said.
"She means Juliet of the Spiritish," Sonny said.
A silence fell.
"The only time you really have to worry about your fans is in a concert situation," Sonny said. "Mass hysteria gets started, and adoration turns to hostility. The best thing to do in a situation like that is don't panic, but assert authority."
"There was only one case where, we got physically torn apart," Cher said.
A waiter from Room Service came into the room and passed out menus. Sonny ordered a hamburger and atossed salad.
"Dressing?" said the waiter.
"I'll have the Roquefort," Sonny said. "A wise decision," the waiter said. "Soup or appetizer?"
"No thanks," Sonny said. "I'll have English muffins," Cher said. "No, make that just one English muffin."
"One English muffin," the waiter said. "Soup or appetizer?" "Whaddya think this is?" Cher said. After luncheon was served, Sonny talked about the events of three and a half years, which have catapulted the couple to stardom. "I had tried to be a singer on my own, but without success," he said. "When I met Cher, I was a promotion man for a record company. I was fascinated. I thought she was beautiful. I knew at once she'd be great." "I was going to school at the time," Cher said.
"I was attending Montclair, an acting school. I didn't really want to be an actress, but I had no interest in regular school and my parents thought this would occupy my time." Sonny said he hesitated before asking her to marry him.
"I knew she'd be a star. I didn't want to be the husband in the background while she was famous," he said. "I wrote her a poem, saying good-by. But then we got married. I knew I had to be as powerful as she was if our marriage was to work. Without Cher, I was nothing as a singer. Together we were everything." Sonny said they now face their greatest hurdle.
"We have to change from singers to entertainers," he said. "We have to develop an appeal for adults as well as the kids. People don't buy a sound, they buy a personality. Look at Sinatra, Bogart, John Wayne." He said their current image, based on long hair and mod clothes, is simply an outward appearance.
"I don't see why anybody can object to contemporary clothes if they're neat and clean," he said.
"It's not like Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde," Cher said. "You can dress this way, yet be ambitious, clean, and have good moral values," Sonny said.
"That's what we were trying to say in our movie," Cher said. "If there's a message in 'Good Times,' it's don't sell out."
"We don't make that unhealthy scene on the coast," Sonny said. "A lot of kids are being mislead by Timothy Learly and Allen Ginsberg and Ken Kesey. The whole LSD crowd is nothing but a lot of bald-headed teenyboppers. They're really weirdoes."
"That sort of thing wouldn't happen if parents knew where their children were at all times," Cher said. "That's right," said Sonny. "It's up to the parents. The family has to unite again. There are altogether too many divorces." He said his marriage with Cher symbolizes the possibility that people can be married.
"Not like a lot of these groups," Cher said, "where there's no telling what goes on."
"Let's face it," Sonny said. "We're pros. I'd wear a suit if I had to because I want the business''
From the hallway came a plaintive cry: "Soonnneeee!" "I would go bald," Sonny was saying. "I would cut off all my hair to play a role."Reveal Comments comments powered by Disqus

Robert M. Patton
Robert Miller Patton (* July 10, 1809 in Russell County, Virginia; † February 28, 1885 in Huntsville, Alabama ) was an American politician and the 19th Governor of Alabama. He was a member of the United States Whig Party and later the Republican Party.
Early years and political rise
Robert Miller Patton was born in Virginia. His family moved in 1818 to Huntsville, Alabama, where he attended the Green Academy. After that he began in 1829 to work as small traders in Florence. In 1832 he embarked on a political career and was elected to the House of Representatives from Alabama. He also was elected in 1837 in a special parliament that was convened in response to the financial panic and economic crisis of the year. Patton was almost continuously 1837-1861 Member of the Parliament of Alabama. He represented the state in 1860 at the Democratic National Convention in Charleston and at the Secession Convention in Montgomery. He also was a member of the governing body of the University of Alabama and the Alabama Normal College. Patton also represented his County in the Constitutional Convention of 1865.
Governor of Alabama
Patton was elected on November 6, 1865 as the 20th Governor of Alabama. His swearing-in ceremony took place on 13 December 1865. He ran as a Whig for the governorship, but he later joined the Republican Party. During his tenure helped Patton rations for the needy families in the state to obtain. He was also successful in reducing the national debt.
In March 1867, the U.S. Congress Patton gave birth of his official powers as the Reconstruction with the adoption of the Reconstruction Act ended. Major General John Pope was given command of the 3rd Military District and General Wager Swayne was the commanding officer of Alabama. Patton was allowed to formally remain in office and moved into a salary, but he could give no more instructions General Swayne. His successor as governor was sworn in on 13 July 1868, Patton entered on July 24, back from his post, which also ended the period of provisional government.
After the end of his political career, Patton was the reconstruction of the University of Alabama active, which was burned by the Union forces during the war. In addition, he was also involved in a variety of companies to the creation and construction of railroads in Alabama. Patton died on February 28, 1885 and was buried in the Maple Hill Cemetery in Huntsville. He was married to Jane Locke Braham, they had nine children together.

"a portrait of each of my children, once each week, in 2015"
Jaden: Spring has sprung, and this boy was so excited when I picked him up from school yesterday and told him he could stay outside shooting hoops. And yes, there's that Michael Jordan tongue. The poor kiddo is having a heck of a time eating right now, as both of his top front teeth are extremely loose. Biting into anything is a huge chore right now!
Brandon: He too, was so excited when I told him we could stay outside all night. He hopped on his bike first thing and said, "Mommy! Take a picture!" He's also pretty excited to have shed his winter coat for his bright neon-green spring coat. He thinks the neon will glow in the dark, and that makes him feel pretty special. ;)

Mercyby Julie Garwood
Justice Department attorney Theo Buchanan, devoted to his crime-fighting career, encounters a group of four white-collar professionals calling themselves The Sowing Club. Their sophisticated crimes have amassed millions of dollars in a Cayman Islands bank account. Buchanan follows them down the dark road of their passions and obsessions.See more details below
Justice Department attorney Theo Buchanan, devoted to his crime-fighting career, encounters a group of four white-collar professionals calling themselves The Sowing Club. Their sophisticated crimes have amassed millions of dollars in a Cayman Islands bank account. Buchanan follows them down the dark road of their passions and obsessions.
- Simon & Schuster Audio
- Publication date:
- Edition description:
- Abridged, 4 CDs, 4 hrs. 30 min.
- Product dimensions:
- 5.76(w) x 5.00(h) x 1.02(d)
Read an Excerpt
Theo Buchanan couldn't seem to shake the virus. He knew he was running a fever because every bone in his body ached and he had chills. He refused to acknowledge that he was ill, though; he was just a little off-kilter, that was all. He could tough it out. Besides, he was sure he was over the worst of it. The god-awful stitch in his side had subsided into a dull throbbing, and he was positive that it meant he was on the mend. If it was the same bug that had infected most of the staff back in his Boston office, then it was one of those twenty-four-hour things, and he should be feeling as good as new by tomorrow morning. Except, the throbbing in his side had been going on for a couple of days now.
He decided to blame his brother, Dylan, for that ache. He'd really nailed Theo during a family football game on their parents' lawn at Nathan's Bay. Yeah, the pulled muscle was Dylan's fault, but Theo figured that if he continued to ignore it, the pain would eventually go away.
Damn, he was feeling like an old man these days, and he wasn't even thirty-three yet.
He didn't think he was contagious, and he had too much to do to go to bed and sweat the fever out of his body. He'd flown from Boston to New Orleans to speak at a law symposium on organized crime and to receive recognition he didn't believe he deserved for simply doing his job.
Tonight was the first of three black-tie affairs. He'd promised to attend a fund-raiser, and he couldn't back out. Dinner was going to be prepared by five of the top chefs in the city, but the gourmet food was going to be wasted on him. The thought of swallowing anything, even water, made his stomach lurch. He hadn't eaten anything since yesterday afternoon.
He sure as certain wasn't up to pointless chitchat tonight. He tucked the room key into his pocket and was reaching for the doorknob, when the phone rang.
It was his brother Nick calling to check in.
"What's going on?"
"I'm walking out the door," Theo answered. "Where are you calling from? Boston or Holy Oaks?"
"Boston," Nick answered. "I helped Laurant close the lake house and then we drove back home together."
"Is she staying with you until the wedding?"
"Are you kidding? Tommy would send me straight to hell."
Theo laughed. "I guess having a priest for a future brother-in-law does put a crimp in your sex life."
"Five more weeks and I'm gonna be a married man. Hard to believe, isn't it?"
"It's hard to believe any woman would have you."
"Laurant's nearsighted. I told her I was good-looking and she believed me. She's staying with Mom and Dad until we all head back to Iowa for the wedding. What are you doing tonight?"
"I've got a fund-raiser I have to go to," he answered. "So what do you want?"
"I just thought I'd call and say hello."
"No, you didn't. You want something. What is it? Come on, Nick. I'm gonna be late."
"Theo, you've got to learn to slow down. You can't keep running for the rest of your life. I know what you're doing. You think that if you bury yourself in work, you won't think about Rebecca. It's been four years since she died, but you "
Theo cut him off. "I like my life, and I'm not in the mood to talk about Rebecca."
"You're a workaholic."
"Did you call to lecture me?"
"No, Laurant's been bugging me to call you."
"Is she there? Let me talk to her," he said. He sat down on the side of the bed and realized he was feeling better. Nick's fiancée had that effect on all the Buchanan brothers. She made everyone feel good.
"She isn't here. She went out with Jordan, and you know our sister. God only knows what time they'll get home. Anyway, I promised Laurant that I'd track you down and ask..."
"She wanted me to ask you but I figure I didn't need to," he said. "It's understood."
Theo held his patience. "What's understood?"
"You're gonna be my best man in the wedding."
"What about Noah?"
"He's in the wedding, of course, but I'm expecting you to be best man. I figured you already knew that, but Laurant thought I should ask you anyway."
Theo smiled. "Yeah, okay."
His brother was a man of few words. "Okay, good. Have you given your speech yet?"
"No, that's not until tomorrow night."
"When do you get your trophy?"
"It's a plaque, and I get it right before I give my speech."
"So if you blow it and put all those armed officers to sleep, they can't take the trophy back, can they?"
"I'm hanging up."
"Hey, Theo? For once, stop thinking about work. See the sights. Get laid. You know, have a good time. Hey, I know...why don't you give Noah a call. He's in Biloxi for a couple of months for a training conference. He could drive over to New Orleans, and the two of you could have some fun."
If anyone knew how to have fun, it was Noah Clayborne. The FBI agent had become a close friend of the family after working on several assignments with Nick and then later assisting Theo with his investigations as a federal attorney for the Justice Department. He was a good man, but he had a wicked sense of fun, and Theo wasn't sure he could survive a night out with Noah just now.
"Okay, maybe," he answered.
Theo hung up the phone, stood, and quickly doubled over from the pain that radiated through his right side. It had started in his belly, but it had moved down, and, damn, but it stung. The muscle he'd pulled felt like it was on fire.
A stupid football injury wasn't going to keep him down. Muttering to himself, he grabbed his cell phone from the charger, put it into his breast pocket with his reading glasses, slipped his gun into his belt holster, and left the room. By the time he reached the lobby, the pain had receded and he was feeling almost human again. That, of course, only reinforced his own personal golden rule. Ignore the pain and it would go away. Besides, a Buchanan could tough anything out.
It was a night to remember.
Michelle had never attended such an extravagant affair before, and as she stood on the steps overlooking the hotel ballroom, she felt like Alice about to fall through the looking glass into Wonderland.
There were flowers everywhere, beautiful spring flowers in sculptured urns on the marble floors and in crystal vases on all the white linen tablecloths. In the very center of the ballroom, beneath a magnificent crystal chandelier, was a cluster of giant hothouse-nurtured magnolia trees in full bloom. Their heavenly fragrance filled the air.
Waiters moved smoothly through the crowd carrying silver trays with fluted champagne glasses while others rushed from table to table lighting long, white tapered candles.
Mary Ann Winters, a friend since childhood days, stood by Michelle's side taking it all in.
"I'm out of my element here," Michelle whispered. "I feel like an awkward teenager."
"You don't look like one," Mary Ann said. "I might as well be invisible. I swear every man is staring at you."
"No, they're staring at my obscenely tight dress. How could anything look so plain and ordinary on a hanger and so "
"So devastatingly sexy on you? It clings in all the right places. Face it, you've got a killer figure."
"I should never have spent so much money on a dress."
"For heaven's sake, Michelle, it's an Armani...and you got it for a song, I might add."
Michelle self-consciously brushed her hand down the side of the soft fabric. She thought about how much she'd paid for the dress and decided she would have to wear it at least twenty times to make it cost-effective. She wondered if other women did that rationalized a frivolous expense to appease the guilt. There were so many more important things she could have used the money for, and when, in heaven's name, was she ever going to have another opportunity to wear this beautiful dress again? Not in Bowen, she thought. Not in a million years.
"What was I thinking? I never should have let you talk me into buying this dress."
Mary Ann impatiently brushed a strand of white blond hair back over her shoulder. "Don't you dare start in complaining about the cost again. You never spend any money on yourself. I'll bet it's the first really gorgeous dress you've ever owned, isn't it? You're absolutely beautiful tonight. Promise me you'll stop worrying and enjoy yourself."
Michelle nodded. "You're right. I'll stop worrying."
"Good. Now let's go mingle. There's hors d'oeuvres and champagne out in the courtyard, and we've got to eat at least a thousand dollars' worth each. That's what the tickets cost. I'll meet you there."
Her friend had just gone down the stairs, when Dr. Cooper spotted Michelle and motioned for her to join him. He was the chief of surgery at Brethren Hospital, where she had been moonlighting the past month. Cooper was usually reserved, but the champagne had rid him of his inhibitions, and he was quite affectionate. And effervescent. He kept telling her how happy he was that she was using the tickets he'd given her and how pretty she looked all dressed up. Michelle thought that if Dr. Cooper got any happier, he was going to pass out in the soup.
A few minutes later, Cooper's wife joined them with another older couple in tow. Michelle used the opportunity to sneak away. She walked around into the adjacent hallway with the bank of elevators.
And that's when she noticed him. He was leaning against a pillar, hunched over, tilted protectively to one side. The man was tall, broad-shouldered, well built, like an athlete, she thought. But there was a sickly gray pallor to his complexion, and as she walked toward him, she saw him grimace and grab his stomach.
He was definitely in trouble. She touched his arm to get his attention just as the elevator doors opened. He staggered upright and looked down at her. His gray eyes were glazed with pain.
"Do you need help?"
He answered her by throwing up all over her.
She couldn't get out of the way because he'd grabbed hold of her arm. His knees buckled then and she knew he was going to go down. She wrapped her arms around his waist and tried to ease him to the floor, but he lurched forward at the same time, taking her with him.
Theo's head was spinning. He landed on top of the woman. He heard her groan and desperately tried to find the strength to get up. He thought he might be dying and he didn't think that would be such a bad thing if death would make the pain go away. It was unbearable now. His stomach rolled again, and another wave of intense agony cut through him. He wondered if this was what it felt like to be stabbed over and over again. He passed out then, and when he next opened his eyes, he was flat on his back and she was leaning over him.
He tried to bring her face into focus. She had pretty blue eyes, more violet than blue, he thought, and freckles on the bridge of her nose. Then, as suddenly as it had stopped, the fire started burning in his side again, so much worse than before.
A spasm wrenched his stomach, and he jerked. "Son of a bitch."
The woman was talking to him, but he couldn't understand what she was saying. And what the hell was she doing to him? Was she robbing him? Her hands were everywhere, tugging at his jacket, his tie, his shirt. She was trying to straighten out his legs. She was hurting him, damn it, and every time he tried to push her hands away, they came back to poke and prod some more.
He felt her open his jacket, knew she could see the gun holstered above his hip. He was crazed with pain now, couldn't seem to think straight. He only knew he couldn't let her take his weapon.
She was a damned talkative mugger. He'd give her that. She looked like one of those J. Crew models. Sweet, he thought. No, she wasn't sweet. She kept hurting him.
"Look, lady, you can take my wallet, but you're not getting my gun. Got that?" He could barely get the words out through his gritted teeth.
Her hand pressed into his side. He reacted instinctively, knocking her back. He thought he might have connected with something soft because he heard her yell before he went under again.
Theo didn't know how long he was out, but when he opened his eyes, the bright lights made him squint. Where the hell was he? He couldn't summon up enough energy to move. He thought he might be on a table. It was hard, cold.
"Where am I?" His mouth was so dry, he slurred the question.
"You're in Brethren Hospital, Mr. Buchanan." The man's voice came from behind him, but Theo couldn't see him.
"Did they catch her?"
"He's loopy." A female voice he didn't recognize made the comment.
Theo suddenly realized he wasn't in any pain. He felt good, in fact. Real good. Like he could fly. Odd, though, he didn't have the strength to move his arms. A mask was placed over his mouth and nose. He turned his head to get away from it.
"Are you getting sleepy, Mr. Buchanan?"
He turned his head again and saw her. Blue Eyes. She looked like an angel, all golden. Wait a minute. What the hell was she doing here? Wait . . .
"Mike, are you going to be able to see what you're doing? That eye looks bad."
"How'd it happen?" the voice behind Theo's head asked.
"He clipped me."
"The patient decked you?"
"That's right." She was staring into Theo's eyes when she answered. She had a green mask on, but he knew she was smiling.
He was in such a happy daze now and so sleepy, he was having trouble keeping his eyes open. Conversation swirled around him, but none if it made any sense.
A woman's voice. "Where did you find him, Dr. Renard?"
"At a party."
Another woman leaned over him. "Hubba, hubba."
"Was it love at first sight?"
"You decide. He threw up all over me and ruined my new dress."
Someone laughed. "Sounds like love to me. I'll bet he's married. All the good-looking men are married. This one's sure built. Did you check out the goods, Annie?"
"I hope our patient is sleeping."
"Not yet," a male voice said. "But he isn't going to remember anything."
"Where's the assist?"
There seemed to be a party going on. Theo thought there were at least twenty or thirty people in the room with him. Why was it so damned cold? And who was making all the clatter? He was thirsty. His mouth felt like it was full of cotton. Maybe he ought to go get a drink. Yeah, that's what he would do.
"Where's Dr. Cooper?"
"Probably passed out in the dessert by now." Blue Eyes answered the question. Theo loved the sound of her voice. It was so damned sexy.
"So you saw Cooper at the party?"
"Uh-huh," Blue Eyes answered. "He wasn't on call tonight. He works hard. It was nice to see him having a good time. Mary Ann's probably having a great time too."
"You." Theo struggled to get the word out. Still, he'd gotten her attention because when he opened his eyes, she was leaning over him, blocking out the glaring light above him.
"It's time for you to go to sleep, Mr. Buchanan."
"He's fighting it."
"What..." Theo began.
"What do you want from me?"
The man hiding behind him answered. "Mike wants your appendix, Mr. Buchanan."
It sounded good to him. He was always happy to accommodate a beautiful woman. "Okay," he whispered. "It's in my wallet."
"It's about time," the man said.
Theo heard the chair squeak behind him, then the stranger's voice telling him to take deep breaths. Theo finally figured out who the man behind him was. Damn if it wasn't Willie Nelson, and he was singing to him, something about Blue Eyes cryin' in the rain.
It was one hell of a party.
Theo slept through recovery. When he awoke the following morning, he was in a hospital bed. The side rails were up, and he was hooked to an IV. He closed his eyes and tried to clear his mind. What the hell had happened to him? He couldn't remember.
It was past ten o'clock when he opened his eyes again. She was there, standing beside the bed, pulling the sheets up around his waist. Blue Eyes. He hadn't imagined her after all.
She looked different today. She was still dressed in surgical scrubs, but her hair wasn't hidden underneath a cap. It was down around her shoulders, and the color was a deep, rich auburn.
She was much prettier than he remembered.
She noticed he was awake. "Good morning. How are you feeling? Still a little drowsy?"
He struggled to sit up. She reached for the controls and pushed a button. The bed slowly rose. Theo felt a tugging in his side and a mild stinging sensation.
"Tell me when."
"That's good," he said. "Thanks."
She picked up his chart and started writing while he blatantly stared at her. He felt vulnerable and awkward sitting in bed in a hospital gown. He couldn't think of anything clever to say to her. For the first time in his life he wanted to be charming, but he didn't have the faintest idea how to go about it. He was a die-hard workaholic, and there simply wasn't room for social graces in his life.
"Do you remember what happened last night?" she asked, glancing up from her notes.
"I had surgery."
"Yes. Your appendix was removed. Another fifteen minutes and you definitely would have ruptured."
"I remember bits and pieces. What happened to your eye?"
She smiled as she started writing in his chart again. "I didn't duck fast enough."
"Who are you?"
"Someone called you Mike."
Michelle closed the folder, put the lid back on her ink pen, and tucked it into her pocket. She gave him her full attention. The surgical nurses were right. Theo Buchanan was gorgeous...and sexy as hell. But none of that should matter. She was his physician, nothing more, nothing less, yet she couldn't help reacting to him as any woman naturally would react to such a fit specimen. His hair was sticking up and he needed a shave, but he was still sexy. There wasn't anything wrong with her noticing that...unless, of course, he noticed her noticing.
"You just asked me a question, didn't you?" She drew a blank.
He could tell he'd rattled her, but he didn't know why. "I heard someone call you Mike."
She nodded. "Yes. The staff calls me Mike. It's short for Michelle."
"Michelle's a pretty name."
It was all coming back to Theo now. He was at a party, and there was this beautiful woman in a slinky black evening gown. She was breathtaking. He remembered that. She had killer blue eyes and Willie Nelson was with her. He was singing. No, that couldn't be right. Obviously, his head hadn't quite cleared yet.
"You were talking to me...after the surgery," he said.
"In recovery. Yes," she agreed. "But you were doing most of the talking." She was smiling again. "and by the way, the answer's no. I won't marry you."
He smiled, sure she was joking. "I don't remember being in pre-op. I remember the pain though. It hurt like a son of a..."
"I'm sure it did."
"You did the surgery, didn't you? I didn't imagine that?"
"Yes, I did the surgery."
She was backing out of the room. He didn't want her to leave just yet. He wanted to find out more about her. "You don't look old enough to be a surgeon." Stupid, he thought, but it was the best he could come up with at the moment.
"I hear that a lot."
"You look like you should be in college." That statement, he decided, was worse than stupid.
She couldn't resist. "High school, actually. They let me operate for extra credit."
"Dr. Renard? May I interrupt?" A male aide was standing in the hallway, shifting a large cardboard box under his arm.
"Dr. Cooper filled this box with medical supplies from his office for your clinic," the young man said. "What do you want me to do with it? Dr. Cooper left it at the nurses' station, but they wanted it moved. It was in the way."
"Would you mind taking it down to my locker?"
"It's too big, Dr. Renard. It won't fit. It isn't heavy, though. I could carry it out to your car."
"My father has the car," she said. She glanced around, then looked at Theo. "Would you mind if Bobby left my box here? My father will carry it down to the car for me just as soon as he arrives."
"I don't mind," Theo said.
"I won't be seeing you again. I'm going home today, but don't worry. You're in good hands. Dr. Cooper's Chief of Surgery here at Brethren, and he'll take good care of you."
"In the swamp."
"Are you kidding?"
"No," she said. She smiled again, and he noticed the little dimple in her left cheek. "Home is a little town that's pretty much surrounded by swamp, and I can't wait to get back there."
"Yes, I am," she admitted. "I'm a small-town girl at heart. It isn't a very glamorous life, and that's what I like about it."
"You like living in the swamp." It was a statement, not a question, but she responded anyway.
"You sound shocked."
"No, just surprised."
"You're from a big, sprawling city, so you'd probably hate it."
"Why do you say that?"
She shrugged. "You seem too...sophisticated."
He didn't know if that was a compliment or a criticism. "Sometimes you can't go home. I think I read that in a book once. Besides, you look like a New Orleans kind of woman to me."
"I love New Orleans. It's a wonderful place to come for dinner."
"But it won't ever be home."
"So, are you the town doctor?"
"One of several," she said. "I'm opening a clinic there. It's not very fancy, but there's a real need. So many of the people don't have the resources to get regular medical care."
"Sounds like they're very lucky to have you."
She shook her head. "Oh, no, I'm the lucky one." Then she laughed. "That sounded saintly, didn't it? I am the lucky one, though. The people are wonderful, at least I think they are, and they give me far more than I can give them." When she spoke, her whole face lit up. "You know what I'm going to like best?"
"No games. For the most part, they're honest, ordinary people trying to scrape a living together. They don't waste a lot of time on foolishness."
"So, everyone loves everyone else?" He scoffed at the notion.
"No, of course not," she replied. "But I'll know my enemies. They won't sneak up behind me and blindside me. It isn't their style." She smiled again. "They'll get right in my face, and I'm going to like that. Like I said, no games. After the residency I just finished, that's going to be a refreshing change."
"You won't miss the big beautiful office and all the trappings?"
"Not really. There are rewards other than money. Oh sure, it would be great to have the supplies and equipment we need, but we'll make do. I've spent a lot of years getting ready for this...besides, I made a promise."
He kept asking her questions to keep her talking. He was interested in hearing about her town but not nearly as much as he was fascinated with her expressions. There were such passion and joy in her voice, and her eyes sparkled as she talked about her family and friends and the good she hoped she could do.
She reminded him of how he had felt about life when he had first started practicing the law, before he'd become so cynical. He too had wanted to change the world, to make it a better place. Rebecca had changed all that. Looking back, he realized he had failed miserably.
"I've worn you out, going on and on about my hometown. I'll let you rest now," she said.
"When can I get out of here?"
"That's Dr. Cooper's call, but if it were up to me, I'd keep you another night. You had quite a nasty infection. You need to take it easy for a couple of weeks, and don't forget to take your antibiotics. Good luck, Theo."
And then she was gone, and he'd lost the only chance he had to find out more about her. He didn't even know where her home was. He fell asleep trying to figure out a way to see her again.
Available in Hardcover from Pocket Books
What People are saying about this
and post it to your social network
Most Helpful Customer Reviews
See all customer reviews >

Jeff Lerner: A pianist turned entrepreneur
As a pianist, Lerner was often able to have conversations with other musicians about their businesses and the things that made them successful. He realized that he wanted the same thing.
Jeff Lerner is a man who has been able to transform his entire life through a few amazing decisions and opportunities. His story begins with a job in piano that left him without a lot of money.

This post has nothing to do with Hawaii; however I wanted to share my experience with you as I had the night of my life on Saturday night when I attended the New Kids on the Block concert at the Tacoma Dome, in Seattle. I had been waiting for this night for over 6 months, as I had purchased the tickets in May and was counting down the number of sleeps till the big event. NKOTB were a big part of my childhood/adolescent years, and I hate to think about how many hours I spent dreaming about how one day Joey McIntyre would finally know who I was and would whisk me away to the land of New Kids. Sadly that didn’t happen, however I got as close as I could with the tickets I had at the concert on Saturday. We had great seats, and to my surprise, there was a second stage right in the center of the floor where the New Kids performed 3 songs – right in front of where we were sitting!! My heart fell through the floor when they were performing literally a few feet in front of me, I couldn't believe it!
The concert itself was truly awesome. The two supporting acts were rockin’; both Lady GaGa and Natasha Bedingfield did a great job of getting everyone pumped for the New Kids. I was on my feet for over 3 hours, jumping up and down and screaming like a teenager. And yes, I am experiencing severe difficulty with talking today in case you were wondering....
The New Kids performed a great selection of their old and new hits, my favorites being “Please Don’t Go Girl” “Summertime” and “Click Click Click”. Their dance moves dated back to the ‘80’s, which was so funny but they did such a good job of pulling it off. The performance itself was both moving and inspiring. Towards the end of the show, they did a slideshow of people in their lives that have passed away, and I was touched to see they had included Heath Ledger, who passed away in January of this year. Danny Wood’s mother also passed away 9 years ago to breast cancer, so it was awesome to see that they were raising funds for breast cancer research at the concert. One thing I noticed about these guys was that they were so normal – it was obvious that they were so excited to be performing together, and that they felt blessed to get this opportunity again – who would have thought that they would bring the house down after 15 years apart!
I was lucky enough to have my thoughts about the concert included in an article in the Seattle Times last week (thanks Marian Liu!) – This is the first time in a long time that I have been so passionate about something, so I wanted to share it with you – if you haven’t listened to New Kids in the last 15 years, their new album is worth a listen – you can get it at Amazon. Thanks also to my husband who I dragged along to the show, who was ‘violated’ by a number of women while waiting for a beer to drown his sorrows!

took a recovery(ish) ride of sorts today. It was about 25 miles. rode down to the WB Duathlon course and then previewed it for a couple of friends that are doing it this year. I ended up getting some extra mileage on the course as a couple of people got lost and i had to do a search and rescue mission to find them. i can report all were recovered unscathed. not sure if I will do the ride leader thing again as it is stressful when you lose people and have to go find them. My legs werent hurting today although i did feel them a little bit when we started riding. i did push the pace at some points to open up my legs a bit and they are feeling better now. the knee sadly was hurting again as usual when i am pulling up a hill in the saddle. I gonna hit the ice as much as possible and try to get it back under control so training doesn't have to altered too much. I found out I took 3rd in my age group at the mon-tour race yesterday and that I was the 8th female overall. I am a little happier with my performance now that i hear that.

I performed a home inspection a couple years back in Rensselaer NY for a nice couple. Well, the house had a couple of issues that they were not willing to take on. Long story short, they tried to hire me for another home inspection, but had to hire another home inspector for their next home because I believe I was out of town or booked up. But when they had a question years later, which home inspector did they contat? Me :). After helping them, here is what they had to say:
“I had Ian do an inspection in my first house we wanted to live in and he was just excellent as he arrived 35 minutes early and showed us everything that had issues! In the end we never bought that house but due to Ian’s extreme knowledge we could have been in trouble. Even to this day if a question comes up he is very friendly and will try to assist you.”
Contact me today for your complete home inspection!

Kym Johnson wiki, boyfriend, husband, age, bio
Kym Johnson who is an Australian professional ballroom dancer as well as TV performer was born on 4th August of the year 1976. She is the native of Sydney, New South Wales, Australia. Kym started to dance when she was just at the age of three. It was at the age of 13 when she began the ballroom dancing. She got participated in Australian Dance Sport Championships in Open Amateur Modern Ballroom along with her partner Lithuanian Tomas Atkocevicius in 1998. In the competition, she was placed at second position. The due were also the finalists at UK Ballroom Championships at the Blackpool.
In the year 2001, Kym got retired from the competitive ballroom dance but she continued to dance on the stage. Since then, she had made her appearance in numbers of events as well as films which includes Burn the Floor, performing at 50th birthday party of Elton John, dancing at the launching party of Blade Runner and dancing in film called Strictly Ballroom. In addition to that, she had also appeared in Dancing with the Stars in its season 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. It has also been announced that she would be returning in 20ths season of the show.
Talking about her personal life biography, it is reported that she is in relationship with her boyfriend Robert Herjavec is the ex-husband of Diane Plese. Apart from that, Kym is now at the age of 38 but she has still managed to look young, beautiful as well as energetic. She stands tall at the height of five feet and seven inches and she weights 54 kg. She is beautiful as well as hot with the body measurement of 36-25-35. Additionally, she had also undergone the plastic surgery. Besides that, she had also posed for Australian Men’s Magazine FHM in March of 2006. More details about her can also be found in different sites.

Thursday, January 17, 2008
Anthony went last week to have his picture taken for the Senior composite at school. The boys can have casual pictures taken for fun, but the composite picture needs to be a coat and tie shot.
We weren't all that thrilled with his casual pictures, although they were taken on the school's campus, so we have some nice shots in front of the Grotto and by the Risen Lord, which I love. But, I received the proofs for his coat and tie shot in the mail yesterday, and they are really good. This is my boy.
He doesn't like them, with the exception of the upper left one, but Doug and I agree that these really look like him. I think he looks sweet and mature at the same time.
It breaks my heart to think he's grown. I ache to have this little boy as his four-year-old self again.
Can you see this little boy in that grown man?

5/27/15 – RIP Sweet Angelo. Angelo was found on the street laying on top of his dead sibling. Although, he was seen twice by veterinarians for his upper respiratory infection and being treated, he just wasn’t strong enough. At least his final hours were wrapped in love. This is a photo of when he was first found. Thank You, Jennell, for trying and being there for all of the babies ~ diana.

« AnteriorContinuar »
“Well,” said Bramble, “praised be Heaven for all things; I expected to have lost my precious liberty for years, and I have only lost two shirts, one pair of trousers, and three pairs of worsted stockings."
We had nothing to eat or drink, but that we cared little for, as the wind was fair : about ten o'clock that night we landed at Cawsand Bay near Plymouth, where we sat down to a hearty supper ; and when we went to bed, I did not forget to thank Providence for my unexpected escape.
ANOTHER ESCAPE, MORE FORTUNATE THAN THE ONE RECORDED IN THE
From the time that I had passed my examination and worked as a pilot on my own account, until the period of our escape, which I have narrated in the preceding chapter, I had continued to live in the cottage with Bramble, without contributing any share to the
expenses. I had at first proposed it, but Bramble would not listen to any such arrangement; he considered me, he said, as his son, and who knowed, he added, but that the cottage would be mine after he was gone. The fact was, that Bramble ardently wished that Bessy and I should be united. He continually hinted at it, joked with Bessy about me; and I believe that, in consequence, Bessy's feelings towards me had taken the same bent. prepared for the issue; the regard naturally felt for me from her long intimacy, now that the indulgence of it was so openly sanctioned by him whom she considered as her father, was not checked on her part; indeed there was no doubt but that it had ripened into love. She showed it in every little way that her maiden modesty did not interfere with, and old Bramble would at times throw out such strong hints of our eventual union, as to make me feel very uncomfortable. They neither of them had any idea of my heart having been pre-engaged, and the strangeness of my manner was ascribed by Bramble to my feelings towards Bessy. Bessy, however, was not so easily deceived ; my conduct towards her appeared, to say the best of it, very inconsistent.
So often had I had opportunities, especially when I was at home and Bramble was away, of speaking on the subject; and so often had these opportunities been neglected, that it filled her mind with doubt and anxiety. After having accepted my addresses at first, Janet had once or twice written to me; latterly, however, she had not written herself--all her messages were through Virginia's letters, or, perhaps, she would add a little postscript. Had letters arrived
for me in any other hand-writing than that of Virginia, Bessy, after her suspicions were roused, might have easily guessed the truth; but it was the absence of any clue to guide her as to the state of my feelings which so much puzzled her. She was fully convinced that my heart was not hers, but she had no reason to suppose that it was in the possession of another. Thus did my passion for Janet Wilson in every way prove to me a source of anxiety. I knew that it was my duty to undeceive Bramble and Bessy, yet the task was too painful, and I could not make up my mind to make them unhappy. I felt that I had no right to remain under Bramble's roof and live at his expense, and, at the same time, I could not find an opportunity of telling him what my feelings and wishes were, the very mention of which would at once explain to him, that the desire of his old age would never be accomplished. I often accused myself of ingratitude, and felt as if it were my duty to make every sacrifice to one who had been so kind a protector; but I was bound by vows to Janet Wilson, and how was it possible that I could retract?
Virginia's letters were not satisfactory : at first she told me how much she had been annoyed by the attentions of the young nobleman, and how
mother had been in her conduct; eventually she informed me that she had been insulted by him, and that, upon complaining to my mother, the latter had, much to her surprise and indignation, not only laughed at his extreme forwardness, but pointed out to Virginia a line of conduct by which he might be entrapped into marriage; that her refusal to accede to such unworthy devices had created a serious breach between her mother and herself. She stated the young man to be extremely silly and weak, and that my mother had gained great influence over him ; and were it not that the presence of the tutor, who seldom quitted the house, had proved a check, that there was little doubt but, as far as the young man was concerned, the disproportionate match would be readily acceded to; that the only person she had ventured to consult was her dear friend Mrs. St. Felix, who had promised her, if the persecution did not cease, that she would make Mr. Sommerville the tutor aware of what was going
Virginia described the latter as an amiable modest young man, who did all in his power to instruct his pupil, but who was treated with any thing but deference in return.
Relative to Janet she said little, except that she generally called there every day to make inquiries after me: once or twice she did say that it was a pity that I was not able to come oftener to Greenwich, as Janet was not very steady ; indeed, considering how young she was, without a mother, and so little controlled by her father, it was not to be wondered at.
Such was the state of affairs when I made up my mind that I would speak to Bramble about my paying my share of the expenses, which I thought would open his eyes to the real state of my feeling towards Bessy : I did so; I pointed out to him that I was now earning money fast, and that I considered it but fair that I should support myself, and not put him to further expense; that, perhaps, it would be better that I should take a house for myself, as I must give a great deal of trouble to Bessy and Mrs. Maddox.
“ Well, Tom,” said Bramble,“ you've been at me about this before, and I believe it's a proper feeling, after all. It certainly does seem to me to be a matter of little consequence, as things stand ; however, I ca’n't consent to your leaving us. You have been with me ever since you were a lad, and I should feel like a fish out of water if I were to be without you or Bessy ; so pay just what you please I'll take it since you wish it; - and there's an end of the matter."
This was not the end to which I was driving; but Bramble's eyes would not be opened, and I could not help it.
He had never directly spoken to me about an union with Bessy, and therefore it was impossible for me to say any more. Bramble, however, did not fail to communicate what I had said to her; and one evening when we were standing on the shingle beach, she said to me: “ So Emerson has been convicted for smuggling, and sentenced beyond the seas."
“ I am sorry for it,” replied I.
“ His house is to be let now, Tom; would it not suit you? for my father told me that you wished to leave us.”
Why should I live upon you, when I am able to support myself?”
Certainly not. If it were not that I could not bear to see father miserable, I think it would be better if you did take Emerson's house; but it would vex him, poor good man.”
“ But not you, Bessy ; is it that you mean?”
“ Perhaps it is. Tell me yourself, Tom; would it not be better?”
I made no reply
“ Well," replied Bessy, “ think of me as you please ; I will speak now, Tom. I am not considering you, Tom, nor am I thinking of myself ; I am only induced so to do on account of my father. We have been brought up together as children, Tom, and, as children, we were great friends, and, I believe, sincerely attached to each other. I believe it to be very true that those who are brought up together as brothers and sisters do not change that affection for any other more serious in after life. It is therefore not our faults if we cannot feel as, you must know, Tom, my father wishes we should. Am I not right ? ”. “ You are, I believe, Bessy,” replied I.
My father, therefore, is deceiving himself with the hopes of what never can take place; but I know him even better than you do, Tom; it is the object of his daily thoughts — his only wish before he sinks into his grave. I cannot bear to undeceive him ; no more can you, if I have truly judged your feelings.”
“ You have judged right, Bessy.”
“ The very circumstance of our knowing his wishes, the hints which he throws out, his joking on the subject, have been a source of annoyance to both of us; and not only a source of annoyance, Tom; it has estranged us — we no longer feel that affection which we should feel for each other, that kindness as between brother and sister, which might exist ;-on the contrary, not being exactly aware of each other's feelings, we avoid each other, and fearful that the least kindness might be misconstrued, we do not really treat each as we otherwise would; in fact, it has destroyed our mutual confidence. Is it not so ?”

Oh no! We hate reading about the pain Phillip Phillips has been in during his run on American Idol. According to TMZ, his problems may have gotten worse as his doctor has urged him to undergo surgery as soon as the show is over. The recovery time would have his missing tour rehearsals and possibly some shows. I can see him missing some rehearsals but hopefully he’s feeling better by the time the tour kicks off this Summer.
Phillip Phillips — one of the finalists on “American Idol” — has been URGED by his personal doctor to get surgery immediately … but Phillip wants to work through the pain and the risk so he can win next week.
Multiple “Idol” sources tell us … when Phillip went back home to Georgia last Saturday … his family doctor spent almost the entire stay by his side and was alarmed by what he saw — Phillip wasn’t eating and looked horrible.
Phillip suffers from severe kidney problems and at the beginning of the competition it got so bad he had a stent put in as a temporary fix until he could have surgery. But the condition has worsened and Phillip’s doc told him he needed surgery now. Phillip said he was not going to drop out of the show so the doctor told him he ABSOLUTELY had to go under the knife immediately after the finale.
We’re told the recovery time for the surgery is at least 6 weeks.
Phillip’s condition is taking its toll — we’re told the medication causes dry mouth, and it’s had some impact on his singing.
Phillip has also missed some of the field productions that are shot for the show — including the Ford commercials. Our “Idol” sources tell us they felt that making him go on location for these shoots were just too taxing.

Whilst we’ve worked with Jimmy before, during a shoot for Sheffield’s Chris Mason Performance, this was our first time working with him as a professional PT, and it was great to meet his client at the same time.
Ever the professional, Jimmy was a wonderful client, bringing along different outfits and ideas to make our job as easy as possible. We chatted with him beforehand, to discuss any ideas for the photos we would capture, but given our experience within health and fitness photography, he trusted us to put 100% into providing excellent shots of him and his client.
The whole shoot was very relaxed, and was spread over around 2.5 hours, where the first half was Jimmy in a variety of lifestyle shots for use on his marketing materials and social media platforms, to promote his Online Coaching business. There were lots of smiling shots, as well as relaxed shots of him sitting on benches, and we worked with the lighting to ensure it was fully on-brand for Jimmy and his business.
In the second half of the shoot, we worked with Janine, and it was phenomenal to see her confidence grow throughout the experience. She had lost a lot of weight during her time with Jimmy, and he wanted to reward her with professional transformation shots to show how far she had come.
As a female photographer with bodybuilding expertise, our principal photographer Collette immediately put Janine at ease, and she eventually gained the confidence to pose in a vest and shorts to highlight the huge transformation that had come from her fantastic effort. She looked absolutely amazing, and she should be very proud of herself for the work she has put in.
Transformation photography is a great motivator for people who have gone on a physical improvement journey, to not just illustrate how far they have come, but also to motivate them to maintain and push further than maybe they thought was possible.

“Reason this person is a Gold Ribbon Hero: Isaiah was only 8 months old when he was diagnosed with a medullablastoma brain tumor. It was smaller than a tennis ball, larger than a golf ball. The tumor caused him to stop crawling and “failure to thrive”.
Before he could even walk, he began chemotherapy and radiation. The first two years of his life were spent fighting. He learned to crawl again, and quickly with the help of his siblings learn to walk.
All throughout his battle he brought his family much joy and laughter.
Isaiah is now 11 years cancer free, 14 years old and a freshman in high school. He has suffered some hearing loss, some dental damage due to radiation treatment and his growth has been slightly stunted. He continues to make us smile, laugh and at times scratch our heads and what a miracle he is to us.
He doesn’t remember much, that is my burden/gift to carry as his mother and caregiver. He is my inspiration.” – Karen A

Biker and the Belle
Ben Esra telefonda seni boşaltmamı ister misin?
Telefon Numaram: 00237 8000 92 32
Kate walked through the grocery store parking lot, enjoying the warm spring evening. Even the thought of slogging through the grocery store didn’t dampen her delight at the sights and sounds of the changing season that was all around her. The cool breeze tugged at the hem of the rather drab and sedate skirt she wore as her work “uniform” and ruffled her short auburn hair. She smiled in feminine joy at the swirl of the skirt around her calves and gave a little bounce in her step.
So engrossed in her private enjoyments was she, that she didn’t hear the rumble of the motorcycle until it was almost too late. She jumped back just in time to avoid getting clipped by the large machine. At the same time, her eyes locked with the man that was driving it, and another kind of tingle went up her spine. The split second of connection seemed to stretch to infinity as she took in his bright hazel eyes, tanned and rugged good looks, and tousled white-gray hair. Then he was past her, slowing down to arrow into a parking spot. She lowered her eyes and hurried into the store, hoping he hadn’t noticed her frank assessment. Wow, she thought, I wish that kind of man worked in my office, I’d enjoy going to work more.
With a rueful smile she grabbed a cart and started her shopping. Her attention turned to picking out the freshest vegetables and winding her way through the yuppies and soccer moms that clogged the aisles with their carts while they loudly talked on their cell phones or yelled at their children. She consulted her list again and read “dog food”, and let out a huge sigh. The grocery store chain obviously thought everyone was six feet tall and a weight-lifter, or else it wouldn’t put the heavy bags of dog food up on the top shelf, well out of her reach. She went and stood in front of the brand she needed, then looked around for a clerk or stock-boy who could help her get the bag down. No one was in sight. She let out another sigh, then stepped up on the lowest rise of the shelving and stretched up….maybe she could do this herself….
Suddenly she felt a presence behind her, and a deep voice said, “Here, let me get that for you…”
She found herself pressed up against the shelves as the man reached up over her head and easily lifted the bag of dog food down and put it in her cart. His body was so warm pressed against hers, so hard and masculine. She could smell that uniquely male scent of clean sweat and warm cotton that made her knees weak and her breath catch in her throat. She tried to compose herself as she turned around to thank the good Samaritan and stopped cold. It was the man on the motorcycle.
He smiled, slowly and wickedly, as he saw her expression. He held his hand out to take hers and she saw the delicate tracing of tattoos running up his arms.
“My name’s Matthew. I suppose we should be on first-name basis since I almost had you in my lap out there in the parking lot.”
Kate’s cheeks burned crimson as she heard the double entendre wrapped in the teasing velvet of his voice. She cleared her throat and shook his hand in what she hoped was her most professional manner.
“My name is Kate, and thank you for getting my dog food down. I would have probably tipped over the whole shelf if you hadn’t come along.”
He frowned slightly. “Kate….is that short for Katherine?”
“Yes, but I’ve always been called Kate. Katherine just always seemed too pretentious.”
“Ahhh…an elegant name for an elegant lady…” He had not released her hand, and raised it up close to his lips. She thought for a second he was going to kiss it; the sudden intimacy of the act made her shiver with a shocking rush of passion. He noticed her reaction and smiled, then tucked her hand through his arm and started walking slowly down the aisle, pushing her cart ahead of him with his other hand.
“I’ll just have to escort you through the rest of your shopping, in case you need rescuing from any more falling bags of dog food.”
They chatted as they wound through the rest of the store. Kate kept glancing surreptitiously at him, enjoying the way his faded blue jeans were molded to his legs, and the ripple of his arm muscles as he lifted items into her cart. My god, she thought, I’m practically panting. I haven’t been this close to….she stopped the thought in its tracks. He’s just being nice, you silly old fool. What would a man like this see in a drab, middle-aged woman like you?
They got through the check-out line and he walked with her to her car, helping her load her groceries into her trunk. She turned to him after she unlocked her door.
“Well that was the easiest time I’ve had shopping in a long time. I don’t know what I can do to thank you.”
The wicked smile played again on his lips. “Invite me to dinner. A home-cooked meal would definitely settle the score.”
Her eyes widened at the thought of inviting this man back to her house. The thoughts that she had locked away in the store came back to brush her with their butterfly wings of desire.
“Well, you would be more than welcome. It’s just roast, I’m afraid…I’m almanbahis not really a gourmet cook.”
“That sounds great. I’ll follow you…”
All the way home she kept glancing back in her rearview mirror, convinced she had fantasized the whole thing. But there he was on his motorcycle, every now and then giving her a wave of his fingers when he saw her looking. Her cheeks were burning by the time they pulled into the driveway of her tiny house. She walked up and unlocked the front door as he started getting bags out of her trunk. She directed him to where the kitchen was and then went out to get a load of groceries also. They put the groceries up quickly and she got the pot and pans out for the roast.
“Can I fix you a glass of water or soft drink? Sorry I don’t have beer…”
One second,” he said, “I’ve got to get something from the bike.”
He went out the front door and Kate busied herself with cutting vegetables and searing the roast. She heard him walk back in behind her and then felt him as he gently pressed against her back again. The warmth she felt in the grocery store came back; her hand that was holding the knife trembled and the knife rattled against the cutting board. He reached around her to put a bottle of wine on the counter, and then gently removed the knife from her hand. She stared down at the half-chopped carrots and cursed herself for being nervous, as his large, strong hands took hold of her shoulders and turned her around to face him.
Matthew’s hazel eyes looked down into hers as he tilted her head up. His head slowly lowered, inches away…she could feel his warm breath on her face…and he whispered, “Where’s the corkscrew?”
Her eyes flew wide open and then narrowed as she saw the wicked gleam of mischief in his eyes. Kate straightened up and said, “It’s in the drawer under the microwave, and the glasses are in the cabinet over the stove.” She knew the game he was playing now and was not going to give him the satisfaction. He must be the kind of man who gets his kicks off of teasing women, making them pant for him, then walking away cold, she thought. Well, she’d feed him dinner then send him on his way without his little jollies.
She turned back, picked up the knife and started vigorously chopping. The sooner the roast was cooking, the sooner she could tell him goodnight.
The roast was almost done, and they had both had a glass of wine. The talk was comfortable, ranging from politics to music to the latest movie they had seen. He was prowling her tiny living room, looking at titles of books and asking about photographs. Matthew’s back was to Kate, she couldn’t see what he was looking at on her bookshelf. He reached out and took a book down, turning around she saw it was her copy of a famous S&M story. He looked at the book, then looked up at her, his wicked smile playing around his lips as he flipped through the pages.
“My my, I never thought you’d go in for this kind of literature. I saw the movie but never read the book…how is it?” Kate was completely at a loss for words. She was not prepared to acknowledge that she had seen the movie, much less read the book. This was a bit too familiar for a first meeting. She stood up and took the book from his hands, putting it back onto the shelf.
“Supper’s ready, I can smell it. Why don’t you go sit at the table and I’ll bring our plates.”
He gave her a long, calculating look, then made a slight bow of acquiescence and moved to the dining room table. Kate went into the kitchen and served the roast onto two of her good plates, grabbed the rolls out of the oven and placed them in a basket, then balanced everything on a serving tray and walked into the dining room. Matthew had brought their wine glasses in with him so they both sat down and started eating. Besides a nice compliment that the roast was delicious, and small talk about local events, they silently ate their dinner.
After she made sure that he didn’t want a second helping, she picked up their now empty plates and went into the kitchen to start cleaning up. Without comment, he came in and helped her rinse dishes and load the dishwasher, then followed her as she walked back into the living room with her glass of wine. She gave a little yawn, a polite way of suggesting that perhaps the evening was over. He didn’t move, just stretched his legs out in front of him and leaned back on the couch. Kate would have to take a more direct approach.
“Well, I’m glad you enjoyed dinner, and I still can’t thank you enough for helping me out in the grocery store. But it’s getting late…” Her voice trailed off as he locked eyes with her again. He half-smiled and took a sip of his wine.
“Well, I haven’t had dessert yet.”
“Umm….I don’t have anything for dessert.” Kate was absolutely flustered. How was she going to get this man out of her house if he wouldn’t go on his own?
“Oh, I think you do. Something sweet….and soft….and warm…” As he talked, he stood up and walked towards her. She knew she should put her foot down and ask that he leave; almanbahis yeni giriş but his eyes were so bright and so magnetic, she got lost in his gaze and just stood there.
He stopped when he was directly in front of her. His hand came up to cup her chin and lift her face towards his. Again, his lips were inches away from hers.
“Now. Before you get all ice-queen on me again, let’s get something straight. I want you. I wanted you the second I laid eyes on you in that parking lot. If you don’t believe me, feel this…” His other hand grabbed hers and pulled it in to the crotch of his jeans, pressing her palm against him. He was right; she could feel the hard length of him under the denim.
“See? I almost always get what I want. And if I’m reading the signs right,” Matthew inhaled deeply, eyes half closed, “You are wanting me too. I’m a patient man, Katherine, but you will come the couple of inches that are between us to get what we both want.” The hand holding her chin gave a slight squeeze then he let go.
She hovered there, her mind swirling with the possibilities if she leaned forward and kissed him. She could feel his breath on her face, could smell his male scent. She looked up into his eyes and saw intense focus and the warmth of passion there. She took a deep, shaky breath and quickly leaned up and forward, pressing her lips against his.
Matthew’s arms encircled her to hold her tightly against him as the kiss quickly deepened. Her arms twined around his neck, and Kate gave herself over to the rush of desire that swept through her. One of his hands came up to run fingers through her hair, before grabbing and pulling her head back. His lips trailed fire down her cheek and neck before he bit gently but firmly at the base of her collarbone. Kate gasped and shivered; the combination of pain and pleasure started her down a spiral of lust. Her hands moved down to his shirt, fingers shaking as they tried to undo the buttons. His hands came around to stop her.
“Uh uh…you first…” He smiled and his eyes glowed with appreciation as she stepped back and started to undo her blouse. He crossed his arms and watched as she let the blouse fall to the floor, then unzipped her skirt and stepped out of it. She was standing there in her bra and panties and suddenly realized what she was doing. She caught a glimpse of herself reflected in the blank television screen and she felt a rising swell of suspicion like bile in her throat; why would this beautiful man be trying to seduce her? She stood rigid and straight, her eyes searching his face, his body language, for some sign of judgment or disappointment. All she could see was that focus she had seen earlier. The lack of what she was looking for did nothing to allay her suspicion, and it made her back straighter and her resolve firmer – she was not going to give this man the satisfaction of seeing her ashamed of herself. Nor was she going to grovel and beg for his attention; if he wanted it, he could come to her.
As if reading her thoughts, Matthew slowly walked towards her. Without a word, he reached out and grabbed her, pulling her in tightly against him. He held her there as he undid the hooks of her bra. He stepped back away from her as he ripped the bra down off her arms and threw it over onto the couch. The sudden violence startled her and the first tendrils of fear uncoiled in her stomach. His hand clamped down firmly on her wrist as he started walking purposefully down the short hall towards her bedroom. He pulled her into the darkened room behind him and kicked the door shut.
“Now, didn’t I say I wasn’t going to put up with the ice-queen act? I want you soft and sweet…frigid women do nothing for me.” His voice was low and measured. She could only imagine how his jaw was clenched as he controlled his temper. She heard rustling noises and started to back away, trying to silently put some distance between the two of them. The click of the bedside lamp as it turned on sounded like a gunshot and she flinched both at the noise and the sudden light.
He had taken off his shirt and boots. His skin glowed golden-brown in the soft glow of the lamp. His eyes looked like chips of blue ice as he crossed the tiny bedroom in two strides to take hold of her upper arms and pull her over beside the bed. Her arms were crossed over her chest now, and she was trying to control her shivering as the air in the room seemed to suddenly get cold. His hands, which had held her arms like steel vices, suddenly became soft and warm again as they stroked up and down her upper arms before coming around to cup both breasts in each palm.
“Relax, pretty Katherine.” He murmured as his lips caught hers again. This kiss was different; it was long and slow and measured. His hands were still caressing her breasts, the callused fingers an excitingly rough counterpoint to his warm palms as they tweaked her hard nipples. She could feel his warmth. His bare chest and arms felt good under her hands as she slowly started to explore and touch him. She moaned softly; she could feel her almanbahis giriş resistance gradually melting and she thought to herself, what the hell….she could enjoy this for what it was and have a nice little memory for later.
Her hands drifted down to his belt buckle, and he didn’t stop her this time as she slowly unfastened it and the top button of his jeans. His hands got a little firmer as they started kneading her breasts, and she swayed a bit as the passion climbed a little higher. She had the jeans unzipped and pushed them down; he stepped out of them and kicked them over to land in the pile of his clothes.
Kate broke the kiss to stare down at him. His hardness was like a magnet, drawing her down to her knees so she could more easily explore it. He stood still as she ran her hands up his thighs before leaning in to slowly take her first taste of him. His warm male scent drew her in closer, and she planted tiny kisses all around the top before licking slowly up from the base to the tip. Her lips opened and she took him slowly inside her mouth; fitting her lips and tongue carefully around him as she eased him in.
It felt right, suddenly, that she was here like this. Somehow it was absolutely proper that she be on her knees in front of this man. She looked up at him to gauge his reaction and was rewarded with a soft caress across her cheek. His eyes were half-closed but gazed down at her with an appreciative gleam. His other hand came around to gently hold her head and guide her deeper. He was showing her how he liked to be pleasured. Her body gave a little shiver of delight at the prospect that he was now in control.
She could taste the saltiness of his pre-cum on the back of her tongue as she slid her mouth up and down his thick shaft. He let out a low growl of appreciation as she moved faster. He was close to orgasm, she could tell it, and she wanted to taste him so badly…
He pulled away from her and lifted her off her knees. In one swift movement he had her on her back on the bed, with his body covering hers.
“My turn.” He whispered as he started kissing down her neck, leaving little nips and bites all the way down to her breasts. His breath as he slowly drew his lips across one erect nipple cooled her heated skin and made her shiver with sensuous delight. He teased her nipples with teeth and tongue, moving back and forth to give attention to both breasts. Kate brought her legs up to lightly squeeze then wrap around his body, rubbing against the backs of his thighs with hers.
He moved lower, his hands trailing down her sides as he kissed her belly. A light jab with his tongue into her belly-button made her squeal and jump from the sudden tickle, and she felt him chuckle as he did it again. He delighted in her sensitive skin; his fingers gently grabbing her ribs to make her bounce harder and laugh louder as she fought to control her ticklishness. A second before she started shrieking for him to stop, he moved lower on her body. His lips brushed against the silk of her panties as his fingers hooked into each side and slid them down, lifting her legs straight up to remove them and throw them over on top of his jeans.
Matthew slid his hands up the backs of Kate’s thighs to gently push them up and apart as he brushed his lips across the soft hair at the top of her lips. Kate moaned as she felt his tongue part her lips and delicately trace up and down, then circle around her clit. Her juices started to flow as she pushed her hips towards his mouth, begging for harder stimulation. His tongue dipped down to enter her in short jabs just as he had done with her belly-button. She could feel her lips opening for him as she became more and more aroused. A broad stroke of his tongue all the way up to the top and then his lips fastened around her clit as two fingers slowly slipped inside her. He sucked gently as his fingers stroked her inside walls, moving in and out, slowly relaxing her and bringing her higher and higher, closer and closer to orgasm. She was practically dripping with desire now, and moaning incomprehensible pleas for him to keep going…to go harder….faster….
He pulled away and rose, covering her body with his once again. His thighs pushed her legs farther apart and his hands came up to cup her face as he kissed her. She could taste herself on his lips and it drove her even closer to the point of no return. His hips shifted and the head of his hard cock came into alignment with her open sex. A short thrust, then a slow glide, and he was buried to the hilt inside her. Her arms wrapped around his body and she reveled in the feeling of hard muscles moving under her hands as he started a slow rhythm. She matched him stroke for stroke as she kissed him over and over, letting his tongue slip inside her mouth to touch and entwine with hers.
His hips started moving faster, his strokes a bit deeper and more powerful. He shifted downward so that the head of his thrusting cock was hitting a spot deep inside her and she let out a muffled scream as her orgasm hit her hard and fast. Kate clung onto him as wave upon wave of pleasure washed through her, her muscles clenching tightly around him as he rode her through her orgasm. Just as the pulsing pleasure was starting to subside he stiffened, thrust hard and deep inside her and let out a low groan as his own orgasm gushed into her.
Ben Esra telefonda seni boşaltmamı ister misin?
Telefon Numaram: 00237 8000 92 32

Esther is our house mother. She lost her parents when she was 3. Her father was a pastor who was shot in his church during the war as the government had banned Christianity. She grew up in an orphanage home run by the African Children's Choir.
Esther says; " We do what we do because we want to help change the lives of vulnerable children in Uganda and give them hope for a better tomorrow, just like someone once did for us."
She lives in Elvet House with her 3 children, Abba, Abra & Ava, and our 10 adopted children.

Waiting for the wedding
The wedding ceremony was held in a very small church. Apparently it had been difficult to find a church where Frodo and Melina could be married since most churches didn't want to marry someone who hadn't been baptized (Frodo).
The party was great, although the more official part took a bit too long. No less then some 250 people had been invited for dinner. Nothing, compared to the 400-500 people that show up at an all-Greek wedding. The mix of Greek folk-dancing, pop and Dutch classics was a success and we, including the new couple, went on until after three in the morning.
Wong did a special routine after a Greek dancer had invited, nay, commanded him to dance.
Dead tired, we crawled out of the bed after twelve the next day for a day of relaxing at the beach resort were the party also had been held. There, we celebrated Joost his 30th birthday with special Russian vodka and Red Bull. Vodka I had taken with me all the way from Holland.

On Air Now
Official Big Top 40 from Global 4pm - 7pm
22 September 2014, 18:23
A roadsweeper from Camden who has won £4.5m on the lottery has finally quit his job after initially not believing he had won.
Joseph Whiting checked his tickets at 4am the morning after the draw on Wednesday 17 September 2014 but turned up to clean the streets in north London as usual.
The 42-year-old, who banked the windfall of £4,570,887 with a ticket bought nine minutes before the deadline, told his bosses he was hanging up his broom on Monday 22 September.
He said: "I woke up and checked the numbers on teletext at four in the morning and I saw all six numbers.
"I couldn't believe it. I didn't have my glasses on so I put them on and checked two or three more times."
He said he informed his mother, who he lives with in Camden, north London.
"I said 'I think I've won the lottery'," he said.
"She said 'give over, it's too early in the morning for jokes like that'."
After telling his mother not to throw the winning ticket away, he reported for his 5am shift.
"I still didn't believe it," said the father of three.
"I said 'I'm going to leave the ticket here and I'm going to work'.
"I don't know how I got through the day. My mind was all over the place. You can check 100 times and you are still not sure."
Finally he got home and contacted Camelot, who confirmed the win.
He said: "Even then and now it hasn't sunk in."
He quit the job he has done for 14 years today, leaving the brooms behind.
"My line manager was made up for me," he said.
"I enjoy it, it isn't a bad job and I work with a good team. However, I won't miss getting up at 4am."
Mr Whiting almost missed out when a relative offered to buy a load of bread, meaning he did not need to go to the shop.
He decided to buy a ticket at the last minute at around 7.15pm - 15 minutes before the draw closes.
"It must have been fate, I shouldn't have gone out, and still don't know why I got up and decided to go."
Now he is planning to use his winnings to take driving lessons, buy a bigger house and go on holiday with his children - two girls and a boy - with a trip to Disneyland possibly on the horizon.
He is also keen on a season ticket to follow his beloved Arsenal but admitted: "I think there's a bit of a waiting list."

I brought a $160.00 dollar bridesmaid dress to have the hem taken in and have the side of the dress taken in. I dropped it off Monday, paid the $20.00 deposit, and was told it would take three days. After five days, I still had not received a phone call so I called to check the status and was told that my dress was not ready but should be ready the following day. The owner was aggravated and very unhelpful. Upon dropping off my dress I was criticized for not buying my dress from him directly, which should have been my first clue to walk out. I arrive Saturday to pick up my dress and after trying it on, the hem was not done at all. The owner had to send my dress off again to correct the error and was again frustrated. I was told my dress would ready Monday. I arrive Monday and was told that the cost for alterations would be $170.00!! I stated my dissatisfaction to the owner and made him aware that i could do this work myself but didn't have time.
24440 Eden StPlaquemine, LA 70764
From Business: You have met your mate and set your date. Filled with details with none to fail, your wedding dreams, you have deemed, Jump in your car, Plaquemine is not far. So…
Bridesmaid dresses order placed march dresses came in 2 1/2 weeks before the wedding.September 29 scheduled a meeting with alterations at 12 called.me at 11:44 to reschedule for 1 arrived there at 12:55 I waited 1 hr and 15 min. and no one showed up...Then she called and had the nerve to ask me to drive to addis after waiting at the store for her to alter the dress in which I was still going to be responsible for the bill ...Are you kidding me measurements were wrong

That's when Baghdad became a war zone. Like many young men and women in the Iraqi capital, Shnawa fled the city. "I fled to West Iraq — where my parents lived around that time," he said. "Many villages, including that area, had been deprived of necessities by the regime."
Shnawa said Saddam Hussein's propaganda convinced much of the country that the United States was evil. But those notions were soon tested when he came face to face with American service members.
The first meeting happened when he noticed a crowd surrounding an American convoy. Curious, Schnawa approached and discovered the troops were having great difficulty communicating with the villagers.
"Where are the women and children in need?" he heard the troops ask, in a barely intelligible attempt at a local dialect. Because he attended college in the capital, Shnawa seemed to understand the communication better than the gathered Iraqis.
"I jumped in to help the elders, but was quickly kicked out of the crowd," he said. "But I was persistent, and instead of going to the elders again, I went directly to the Americans. When I broke through the crowd I said, 'I can take you to the women and children in need of supplies. I know where they are.'"
The troops immediately loaded Shnawa into their Humvee, and he directed them where to go.
"After we delivered all the supplies, the commander told me the location of their base, in case I wanted to help again," Shnawa said. "At that point, I was still very hesitant to join them on a regular basis. After accompanying them again to deliver aid to some families in need, though, I was convinced of their sincere motives to help my people. All of my preconceived notions about the Americans went out the window, and the rest was history."
Those early interactions put him on the long, winding path that led to Shnawa becoming a U.S. Air Force airman. Now, 16 years later, he's an 811th Operations Support Squadron aircrew flight equipment technician, stationed here at Joint Base Andrews in Maryland.
From then on, Shnawa translated for the Americans frequently. They not only provided supplies and essential aid, but also removed rockets left by Saddam Hussein's regime from abandoned schools and medical clinics.
"I witnessed, time and time again, the good deeds of the United States and coalition forces in the Sunni and Shia regions of Iraq," he said.
Shnawa said he loved the work he was doing, and he developed an admiration for the different branches of service. Because of them, he said, he felt he was able to help his nation on a large scale. "But the great heroes of the U.S. forces did not get to see what I saw," he said. "While they were trading off for year-long deployments, I was observing. And I observed many accomplishments."
From 2003 through 2008, he watched as the nation grew and improved, thanks to the military efforts. But he said he also found himself disappointed, wishing the troops who did the work could witness its long-term, positive impact.
To make matters worse, he said, news outlets across the world had turned on the U.S. and coalition forces. From his vantage point, he said, media coverage focused too much on bullets and bombs and not enough on the progress, noting that less than 1% of the operations he observed involved violence.
Soon, though, the calculus of danger changed for Shnawa. He'd spent years as one of the coalition forces' most trusted translators, but that also meant he was known by the enemy. Insurgent forces could recognize him, he said, and that’s when he started to worry — especially thinking about his new bride, Inaam. In an effort to protect her, Shnawa kept his job a secret from her, sometimes leaving for days at a time without communication.
"He told me he was a computer technician and translator with embassies," Inaam said. "I always knew he was covering something up, and I felt he was in danger."
A year after their marriage, 2008 brought the birth of their first child. "I thought that because we had a child he was going to be home more often," Inaam said. "After she was born, though, my life was turned upside down."
In November 2009, Shnawa locked his phone and disappeared for longer than ever before. "That was the worst seven months of my life," Inaam said. To keep his family safe, Shnawa had cut off all contact with his wife while he was gone working with coalition forces.
"When my baby came, I had to make a choice," he said. "I was living in paranoia and knew I was being watched."
Finally, he returned home to Inaam, but was unable to give her answers about where he had been or what he'd been doing. He only told her he was OK. Too soon after, he had to leave again. And again.
Something changed when Shnawa left for another mission in late 2010.
"This time it was different, I just knew it," Inaam said. "He sent me a message saying, 'I'm going to find a better life for us,' and turned off his phone. I cried frequently and did not know what to do. I just waited in fear for him to call me."
Shortly thereafter, Inaam recalled, someone from the village came to her brother and asked questions about Shnawa.
"He came forward questioning whether or not my husband was a translator for the American forces," Inaam said. "I told him I was sure he was not, but I was still warned. He said, 'They know you are the wife of Saeed Shnawa. If you want your family to remain alive, then do not leave the safety of your home.'"
She complied. Finally, her husband broke the silence. One call turned into a few text messages, followed by daily emails. Her fear began to give way to hope.
Inaam still didn't know where he was — and she never would have guessed he had escaped to Jordan and sought asylum in the United States. "I knew if I stayed in Iraq, my family and I would not survive," Shnawa said.
Inaam finally got the whole story in 2011. "He called me from America and finally told me everything," she said.
Inaam said she spent much of the next two years being interviewed at the U.S. Embassy in Iraq. Whenever they could schedule it, they spoke on the phone. "It was hard, but so much better than before," she said. "I finally had assurance that he was alive."
In January 2013, after more than two years apart, Inaam was finally reunited with her husband in the United States. The disappearances, the hiding and the fear were over.
"When I arrived here, I felt a sense of peace," Inaam said. "We started a better life together." Shnawa, however, said he still had a dream to fulfill.
In 2017, he came home with his citizenship papers and an idea his wife did not expect to hear. "After all the dangerous things he had done, he still wanted to join the military!" Inaam said. "Of course, I said, 'Absolutely not!'"
"And I didn't blame her," Shnawa said. "No one in the world could blame her because of the torture I put her through."
After they researched the service branches, Inaam said, she started to warm up to the idea. "I realized it was different than his service in Iraq," she said. "Together we made the decision he would enlist in the U.S. Air Force."
This time, the separation had an entirely different meaning.
"When Saeed left for basic military training, he reminded me of all the bad things that happened to us and our country," Inaam said. "He said, 'Good people here in America saved our lives. I want to serve this country because of those heroes, and all they sacrificed for us.'"
(Air Force Senior Airman Alyssa D. Van Hook is assigned to the 11th Wing at Joint Base Andrews, Maryland.)

AMEN! I broke down today.... tired of my health issues ... gossip and lies going around a church in Belmont... the list can go on and on.... but forgiving as well as praying for those people is the best cure... for HE died for my sins as well as theirs..
I am repinning this out of outrage that it claims that girls should fall in love based on what can pay their bills. Also, the only time I've seen "faith" pay the bills is through the exploitation of the poor, the desperate, and the uneducated.
Ironic? Don't know if it's "ironic" but it's kinda funny now (not really) I told the guy that hit on me the other day, that I was seeing someone so he'd leave me alone. The person I told him I was seeing was YOU!! I told you about it but I didn't tell you that. Maybe I should have (?)

FYI: Zac Efron Is Single Again
Well, here's something we have in common with Zac Efron: the same breakup move of scrubbing an ex from all social media accounts. Oh yes, he has deleted every photo of his girlfriend Sami Miro off his Instagram and stopped following her account. And anyone who has ever had a broken heart knows that move means it is over. Us Weekly and E! News also confirm the two have called it quits after almost two years of dating.
So if Zac is single again that means that THIS is back on the market:
(Oh, yeah, he's super ripped now. Thanks, Baywatch!)
For what it's worth, Sami has not deleted him from her Instagram—though she has said before that she's not one to hide things on social media. "It kind of just comes with the territory," she told Elle.com about dating Zac. "I know there's no really changing that, so you have to just embrace it...I'm not trying to hide anything in my life. If I was dating someone who wasn't in the limelight, I might have more photos on [Instagram] of our relationship, but I do think it's important. I mean, it's what is going on in my life, and I think that my social media can still represent that."
So, what went wrong? According to E!, they "did not have the same feelings for each other as they did when they first started dating." And Zac was the one who pulled the plug after the "the spark had died." Yikes. "It wasn't an easy breakup," their source continued. "Distance and work schedules got in the way with their relationship and Zac wanted to focus on his career."
Well, Zac, if you need any good breakup songs to get you through this, we have some suggestions.

So my younger sister came into town last Saturday and we've spent some time together! This sister has decided to let her hair grow out and no longer color it. She looks so cute with it natural. I on the other hand have been coloring my hair every 2 weeks for the past who knows how long and now I am questioning if I should let mine go and just get it over with and go aunatural.
A little history. My paternal grandmother colored her hair until she died. I didn't even know she had gray hair until I was sixteen and saw her hair once when it had grown out. It was a very rare event as she always kept it colored and in very nice condition. She always dyed her hair a dark brown. More recent, my own mother has colored her hair since I was very young. She is almost 70 and is still blonde. So I really come by coloring honestly.
My husband gets tired of me coloring and has asked me on various occasions to just let it go. I've just always felt that being as young as I am that gray hair would make me seem older and I didn't want to seem older than I am or than I felt.
So today I made the leap. I went to my hair stylist and she is helping me transition. We colored my hair back to my natural color and she did a lighter color weaving through my hair. She will continue to do the light weaving until my gray and the weaving blend and then I'll just let it finish growing out. I told her that there might be times that I panic and call her, but she laughed and said she will talk me out of coloring it so that I can go to my natural color. I'm excited and a little scared. Yet I feel it will be a bit more freeing not having to pretend that I'm something I'm not. However if things get out of hand and I can't handle it I will let you all know!!
So how do you feel about hair color??

Anyway, they're usually pretty quick about seeing you, but they have this little routine.
- Wait. In an area that isn't exactly a hallway, but people are walking through there.
- Nurse calls your name.
- You answer and are lead to a cubicle where you're asked to change into one of those hideous gowns.
- You go back to your seat - and wait some more.
- But now you look stupid and exposed in a hospital gown.
Well, today I said no. I said I'm not going to put on a hospital gown. The nurse was shocked. Shocked I tell you. Her eyes were wide with disbelief. She made me repeat myself. I said I really don't want to put on one of those gowns.
"Well, no one likes them, but we're very busy today."
"I'm a really fast undresser," I said.
She looked doubtful.
"Really fast," I emphasized.
Anyway, I didn't put on the gown and I did undress fast. I'm certain that I took no more time than wearing one of those hideous gowns, since I generally have to fumble with the ties.
And when it was all over, I got dressed again fast, too.

Way back when Ayres was appointed coach at Port, I was very hesitant about how it would pan out.
Luckily my concerns were waaaay off, and he has been the best thing to happen to the club in the last 20 years.
Hopefully my doubts this time around are equally unfounded!
* It's time to restore the VFA name.
There are currently 0 users online.

Breed: American Quarter Horse
Approximate Date of Birth: 1/1/1993Sponsor:
Horses of Tir Na Nog has been blessed to have had some extraordinary residents. The hardest part of knowing these amazing animals is having to say good bye. July 16, 2012, as the sun was setting, we bid farewell to our golden boy, Tanner.Tanner was born in 1993. As a young horse, he competed in gymkhanas and taught many children how to ride. He arrived at Horses of Tir Na Nog in 2008 significantly underweight and in obvious decline. Earlier that year, Tanner started losing weight. He could no longer compete for food with the younger horses in the pasture where he was living. His teeth were in such bad shape that he could no longer chew his food properly. Tanner needed to be moved out of the pasture situation, have his diet adjusted, and have his dental needs addressed.
As soon as Tanner was settled at the ranch, we had his teeth floated and he immediately began putting on more weight. Early in 2009 Tanner met his best buddy, Sundance. Sundance dwarfed Tanner, but it was clear from the start that Tanner was in charge and that Sundance thrived under his leadership.
A couple of years ago, Tanner's, dental issues of 2008 returned and lead to a recurrent sinus infection. Tanner was transported to East County Large Animal Practice for surgery, making him our first resident to overnight at a veterinary clinic. While we missed him at the ranch, he stole the show at ECLAP and became a favorite among the vets and staff.
Tanner's presence at Horses of Tir Na Nog has been a gift to us. Tanner was always gentle and patient with our volunteers. He taught so many new volunteers how to halter and brush a horse. His arthritis limited his ability to be taken for walks, but it didn’t limit his ability to be loved by our volunteers.
As much as Tanner gave the volunteers, he gave more to his herd. For the last few years, Tanner had been the herd leader that first Sundance, then King, and lastly Mariah, came to rely on. He made them feel safe and secure and he helped keep Sundance in line through his gentle but firm leadership.
True to form, Tanner's passing reflected his gentle stoicism. While we don't know how, Tanner appears to have fractured his humorous. Dr. Oman, who had been caring for Tanner throughout his time with us, gently and lovingly put him to sleep. Both Andrea and I were able to be with him, and there wasn't a dry eye among us.
As Tanner left us, Sundance whinnied to his friend one last time. Included in that single call was all of the love and sorrow we felt.
Farewell golden boy, thank you for all you have given us.

Saturday, June 17, 2006
Christmas Eve 1993 my mom and I drove to southern NJ on Christmas Eve to get my brother C. the tiniest 4 week old pug pup. He was 12 at the time. He named him Bob.
Bob died in his sleep in my mom's backyard yesterday... I know it was really hard for C. because he's trying to get through the rigorous 10 hour days of Fire School and the EMT training -- this was the last thing he needed.
I don't think he realizes how lucky he is though --that Bob just went by himself. Driving a dog to the vet that last time is one of the hardest things to do. They perk up and wag their tail, so happy you are taking them somewhere --and the guilt of knowing that you, their best friend, are taking them to die is more than any person should have to deal with.
Bob was 13 years old. I know it's corny, but I am content in thinking he has joined my pug somewhere in the ever-after. They were best buds after all...

MINNEAPOLIS -- Twins right fielder Torii Hunter appeared on MLB Network's Hot Stove on Thursday and he discussed a wide variety of topics, including his role as a clubhouse leader, his thoughts on top prospect Byron Buxton, his outfield defense and his future in baseball after the 2015 season.
Hunter, who rejoined the Twins on a one-year $10.5 million deal this offseason after playing with the club from 1997-2007, first joked about a commercial he filmed with teammate Kyle Gibson before getting into his thoughts on his interactions with the fans at TwinsFest from Jan. 23-25.
"I went back for TwinsFest and didn't know what to expect from all the fans there, but everybody was receptive," Hunter said. "I was happy about that. I didn't know how they were going to receive me. It's true love there. That's where I grew up and learned how to be a man off the field and on the field. So I've always had love for the fans in Minnesota and I'm excited to be back to help the Twins win."
Hunter was then asked to describe his role as a leader, as the 39-year-old is heading into his 19th season in the Majors. He named former teammate and new Twins manager Paul Molitor among the veterans that he learned from, along with Kirby Puckett and Matt Lawton.
"I've had some failures and I've learned from them and now I'm one of the veteran guys in the Major Leagues," Hunter said. "I have a chance to give back to these young guys and how to fight through things whether it's adversity or soreness or mental tiredness. I just want to help."
Hunter said he's hoping to take on that role as a mentor to Buxton, who is ranked as the No. 1 overall prospect by MLB.com and will be in Major League camp in Spring Training.
"My thing is to go out to dinner with him and hang out with him early in Spring Training," Hunter said. "Laugh a bit. And then I'll be able to watch him and see what he's doing right and wrong. And with the things he's doing wrong, I can kinda help him and guide him. So my goal is to just to get to know him, build a relationship and watch him a little bit before I give my opinion on anything."
Hunter also joked about his age, saying he's not turning 40, he's just 39, but then he got serious when asked about the defensive metrics that have shown his defense in right field decline the last two seasons.
"I can play a solid right field," Hunter said. "Don't get it twisted. I don't know where the numbers about me declining in right field come from. There's no way you measure outfield and say I'm declining. I can't play center field anymore, but I'm still solid in right field and get the job done."
Hunter also added he still hasn't decided if this will be his last season.
"I don't know," Hunter said. "Right now, I'm just taking it one year at a time."

Police officers and paramedics were called to a crash on the A38 near Trago Mills this morning.
The collision, which happened shortly after 11am, caused delays for about an hour and a half.
A spokesperson from the South Western Ambulance Service confirmed one patient was treated at the scene.
They said: “We were called at 11.42am to reports of a road traffic collision.
“We attended with an ambulance and it has been reported that a patient was treated at the scene.”
A spokesperson from Devon and Cornwall Police said two vehicles were involved in the collision at Two Waters Foot.
The force spokesperson added that those involved had suffered what are believed to be minor injuries.
Traffic was queuing in both directions following the crash.
The vehicles were recovered from the scene and the road was clear by about 12.45pm.

A Tulsa family can't understand how a 15-year-old got released just six months after getting a 15-year sentence.
The teenager pleaded guilty to breaking into a home and beating A 73-year-old woman with a shovel and stabbing her 79-year-old husband in the head.
The family didn't expect the boy to serve the full 15 years, but they at least think he should've been in custody until he turned 18.
Doug and Mary have been married almost 60 years and have lived in their home for most of that.
On Thanksgiving day 2015, three teenagers broke in looking for something to steal.
"They beat my mom with a shovel 23 times, wanting car keys," said David, the victims' son.
Two of the boys were 14 and went to juvenile detention. No one knows what happened to them, because those records are sealed.
But the 15-year-old was sentenced as a youthful offender to 15 years.
"The judge said this is an 85 percent crime, he'll serve percent, but he's out," David said.
Records show he went to a group home last June, and was sent home to his mother in February.
Reports say he's doing well, enrolled in a Tulsa high school, is keeping up his grades, going to counseling and joined a track team.
His attorney says the boy is remorseful.
"If he's doing good, I'm proud of him, but do the time," David said.
As a youthful offender, if he breaks the law again, the judge could send him to prison to serve that 15 years and that's when the 85 percent would come into play.
If he stays out of trouble until he's 18, the judge could still send him to prison but it's more likely, he'll end up with probation or have the charges dismissed altogether.
Attorneys for both sides say it's a constant balancing act to try to turn these teenage criminals into law abiding citizens, versus giving the victims some justice.

When Toby went to the Stabby Place last week, I didn't laugh at him. Really, I swear. But I might have been.. ohhh, maybe the teeniest bit - smug that it wasn't me.
Yeah, about that.
I had to go Friday night myself. Icky ear infection. Mom could tell they weren't feeling well,
and even though *I* think they would have been fine WITHOUT this intrusion on my dignity, as well as my right to NOT go, I was whisked off for a good ear cleaning and medicating.
At least I won one small victory - Mom can't medicate me at home, so they had to do it there.
I mean.. this WAS a victory... right ?
PS: Mom was a bit terrified to ask about my teeth but though I do need a dental, I don't have lesions and currently, from a visual exam, it doesn't look complicated. Though only Xrays will tell the true tail.
This is my first post-dental portrait for our bloggie.
You know, when I first came home last Friday, it was kind of great. Mom was all about ME. She watched over me anxiously, making sure I didn't fall off furniture, that I ate, and snuggled with me, stuff like that. Lots of snuggles. I wasn't really good at that yet, but I did my best.
Every tiny meow I made, she was right there to make sure I was ok.
I was the KING!
And now? 4 days later?
That same woman keeps telling me I have a chicken leg!
Mom was watching me make biscuits this morning. She gets such a kick out of my tiny paws at work, so I made a few extra just for her. Got to keep the pawrents happy.
I was all alone most of Friday. Mom and I discussed that, and we decided that I wasn't all that happy being alone for so long. I mean, it is nice to have some alone time, but it was maybe a few too many hours.
Mom was also very surprised that I didn't flip out when Toby came home, smelling all funky. I kind of didn't know what to do with him, but I was a good girl about it all.
Speaking of, he's doing pretty well. Sounds like himself now; his voice got very odd, fur sure. Sounded like a motoboat. Or so she says, I wouldn't know, myself. Her biggest challenge now is getting him his meds without handling his mouth too much; he lost the other bottom canine so that's tricky.
We didn't post a face pic last week because the night he came home, he just looked absolutely pitiful. All swollen and wonky and hazy-eyed, that bottom lip sticking out. So he was spared that indignity. Mom may never recover though.
Another PetSmart tidbit. I was there yesterday in line, right behind a man with a large mixed breed. About 80 lbs, and I'd say it was a mastiff mix, but that's just a guess. And unfixed - and it showed. He was extremely aggressive with every dog he saw, which was mostly tiny dogs (a tragedy in the making). The man couldn't really control him either. The dog had something wrapped around his muzzle but I guarantee he could have broken that if he wanted to. I actually backed up to make sure that dog didn't touch ME when he was moving around - I didn't want him to think I was a threat.
Rare to see a dog that openly aggressive at the pet store. People, FIX YOUR FURRY ONES. We do NOT need that dog breeding.
I admit, I'm not really in a sociable mood right now.
Why? I just got home from the Stabby Place and....
1. They stole my furs.
2. They stole my blood.
3. They stole my TEETH. 4 of them! I want them back.
Mom says they had to go, but they were MY teeth. I don't get a meow in this??
I suppose it's some small comfort that they at least gave me this proper mancatly bandage.
I guess I'm ok, but I feel awfully weird, can't really walk properly - Mom says that's the pain meds, they make me a bit drunk - and I can't meow properly yet. Apparently I got some tube shoved down my throat that makes me sound not like myself right now.
I'm going back to sleep. Happy Caturday - and furriends, trust me when I say, keep a CLOSE eye on your pawrents.
Mom: We're progressing as I was told to expect.
I called back about the bloodwork and was told that everything was actually good,
including his kidneys. He's even trying to be affectionate, just not really coordinated at it right now. Oh, and he's recovered enough already to want to take over Leia's food plate too.
Toby is out of surgery and recovering. He wouldn't want you to know this, but they put the Cone of Shame on him to keep him from scratching at his cheeks. At least he doesn't have to wear it home.
The Xrays showed more extensive damage than hoped for. He lost several teeth, including two of the three canines he went in with. He only has one upper tooth left in front. Poor old guy will look like a pro hockey player now. Another tooth was fractured. He will be on pain meds and antibiotics for 7 days. I'm told this isn't the staggering around the house kind of pain meds.
So far that's all I know. I REALLY hope nothing showed up on his bloodwork, this is all quite enough to deal with. I pick him tonight around 5:30 pm. I suspect he will be QUITE ready to come home.
Thank you all for your purrayers and good thoughts for him.
Tomorrow at about 7 am, I will drop Tobias off for his procedure. I still haven't told him. I'm very grateful that they have early hours (they are actually 24/7).
Tonight I called the vet to ask they be very aware of his high stress level while he's there, and can they pretty please schedule him first so he can be sedated quickly? I was told the dr. doing surgeries tomorrow prefers to do them in the morning, so that's encouraging. I'm not exaggerating his stress level, he has been through so many trips and procedures at this point, he gets extremely upset just being there.
I'm trying very hard to keep myself calm, but this isn't easy. I never leave them unless it's absolutely required. Which of course it will be this time.
Anyway, we will post a quick update tomorrow evening. And then I'll let Tobers have his meow about all this.

Ever wanted to get off the grid? Jameson Lopp did. The New York Times has recently published his story, entitled “How a Bitcoin Evangelist Made Himself Vanish, in 15 (Not So Easy) Steps”.
All began when Lopp had the SWAT team raiding his house. He was no criminal, however, only someone who was targeted by an unknown person who affirmed that he would see a lot more mayhem in case he did not pay a large Bitcoin ransom payment.
Lopp got mad. He soon posted a video on Twitter firing an AR15 rifle in order to show how he was not taking any bullshit from anyone and then he decided that it was the time of getting off the grid. How he would do that? By using a lot of devices and subterfuges.
The man, a self-described libertarian who works for a cryptosecurity firm, was always enamored by the idea of having privacy and he definitely never liked the eyes of the government and of the corporations on him. So, it was the right time to vanish for once and for all. However, he was not hyped by the idea of fleeing to the woods and staying there.
He had a better plan. A plan which, according to The New York Times, involved 15 steps to vanish. Part of that was an experiment, part was the attack. He simply wanted his privacy back.
The Road To Complete Anonymity
The first step was the creation of a new corporate ID. Lopp wanted to buy things as normal people do, but he did not want to reveal his identity. His solution was to create a limited liability company (LLC), which would be his new identity to the world.
This was one of the easiest parts of the plan. Since some states like Nevada, New Mexico and Wyoming do not require corporations to name their owner, though, he decided to use one of them to start his “business”.
After creating the company, he decided to set up a bank account using his LLC. This way, nothing that he ever bought could be directly tied to him in any way. He also used it to create a payment card without listing his name.
He decided that the best way not to link too much information to his account was to use prepaid debit cards most of the time since they do not need to list either his name of the LLC’s.
Another interesting idea is that he also started to carry cash around, as it is easy to buy things using cash and nobody asks you who you are.
His fourth step was to get a new phone number. It is easy to link a phone number to a person, as the phone companies have them, so he started using throwaway phone numbers since they are very easy to create and they only cost a few dollars. The wonders of technology.
The next step was to remove geolocation from his phone. He decided to use a dedicated GPS device when traveling instead of his phone because smartphones generally take a lot of information from you whenever you use them.
He moved away from his house as well since it was tied to him. He used the LLC to buy the new property, so it is not tied to his name. The money came from a cashier’s check of the LLC’s bank account.
In order for his neighbors not to blow his cover, he had to use a fake name to be introduced to them. He told The New York Times that it was odd to use a fake name at first but that now he is actually used to it (Jameson Lopp is obviously a fake name).
Another very important step that the man took was to use a VPN at home at all times. He had worked in a marketing company before which tied internet addresses to specific customers using databases, so he wouldn’t have any of that. The VPN was very useful to carefully shield his location from the internet providers, then.
Before he went off the grid, he had a motorcycle and a Lotus Elise car with a license plate which spelled BITCOIN. All that had to go, too, and now he has a considerably more modest and forgettable car, which was bought via the LLC.
He actually even bought a decoy house to fool the DMV, which insisted on a real name to register his new car, as well as a street address. He bought the cheapest house he could find just to use it as an address.
Another important point was that he did not want to be in anyone’s mailing list and not even to register it as the LLC’s name. When he wanted to receive a delivery, he created an actual private mailbox at a shopping center. That felt a little bit “revealing”, he affirmed, though, since the shipper gets the address of the private company.
He also always wear hats and sunglasses. Having plastic surgery was a bit too much for him, but he was afraid of being recognized by facial-recognition software. He also decided to cut his beard to a more manageable length in order to blend in better now.
Working remotely was another important step. Now he always meets up by video conference in places where people will not be able to identify where he is.
When traveling, he always uses encryption devices now. He shuts down his digital devices and encrypts them. However, he still had to use his passport in order to travel to Tokyo recently, which proves that not even with all the effort in the world he was actually able to be 100% protected.
The final step was to hire an actual investor to check his work. He paid more than one private investigator to try to find him. It was this that let him know that his DMV registration made him vulnerable, for instance.
According to him, his efforts have cost him around $30,000 USD. He did mostly know how further he could push this idea but affirmed that he likes his privacy now. Obviously, not a lot of people will follow his journey, but it was a very interesting tale nevertheless.

Young couple shot dead for ‘honour’
NAUSHAHRO FEROZE: A young couple was killed in the village of Katal Shah near Moro on Saturday on the pretext of karo-kari.
Hussain Bux Brohi shot his sister Naz Bakht, 17, dead in their house. Later, he went to the house of his relative Jalal Brohi, 20, and killed him also.
ASI Qurban told this reporter that Hussain Bux had been arrested and an FIR had been lodged on the complaint of Ali Khan, brother of Jalal Brohi.
Hussain Bux told reporters that he had killed his sister and relative over karo-kari and said he did not feel any regrets.
He said he himself had surrendered and police had not arrested him.

This weeks question is - What's the one genre you wish you could get into, but can't?
In all honesty this isn't a problem for me. There are one or two books that I don't like which everyone seems to love. I wish I could see what everyone sees in them. I don't let it bother me too much though. In general there really aren't that many genres that I don't like. Romance is the only one I tend to avoid because it just doesn't appeal to me in the slightest. There are lots of genres that I wish I had tried before now and would like to read more of. Crime is one example. I think I have read more of it this year than I have in my entire life. For now I seem to be working my way through a lot of popular crime authors but I would also like to try noire, spy thrillers (thinking of LeCarre here) and of course more Poirot. Dan Brown and similar authors/books are the only part of that genre I'm not interested in. Historical fiction is another genre although I didn't go our of my way not to read it. I just happened to have not read that much of it.
I would also like to read more Scottish authors. I am ashamed to say that I haven't actually read that many which is a shock considering I'm from Glasgow. That's something I am also slowly working on and I am improving. I haven't read as many classics as I would like. The last few years I read very little of them but I am reading more this year. I am attempting to read one a month and have a few aside that I am looking forward to. Although it's an age group and not a genre I have went on a bit of a YA slump. So there have been lots of new releases this year that I would have probably read by now in years past. This one actually doesn't bother me that much. It's the 20 or so YA books sitting in my TBR pile that are taunting me more than anything else.

As she sat by him, he whispered, eyes full of tears, "You know what?
You have been with me all through the bad times.
When I got fired, you were there to support me.
When my business failed, you were there.
When I got shot, you were by my side.
When we lost the house, you stayed right here.
When my health started failing, you were still by my side...
You know what Martha?"
"What dear?" she gently asked, smiling as her heart began to fill with warmth.
"I'm beginning to think you're bad luck.

HI EVERY PUP!
Today we went to the River at our
Vacation home to swim and just play!
Boy did I have a great time. It was a sunny day in the 70"s! I was very afraid that we would not make it, it's been too windy. There were DUCKS here......but before we could snap a pic, i scared them all away. Why are they scared do you know???
Monday MOMSandMEandHERSday - Yes, SUNday was nicer than we expekhted! These are from last week but representative of our exciting Saturday night! This was from Saturday night - K...
3 hours ago

So I havent been around much because of what has been going on.
I moved down here in FL to be with my now ex fiance I am driving back up to OH tomorrow to be with my family. I found out from his ex gf who he was dating the same time as me he was cheating on me with her and one other girl that we know of.
He was also talking to 11 other women telling them all that he loved them wanted to marry them have a family ect. He lied the whole time even when I showed him proof he denied it all to me and is still lying about alot. Needless to say this has just been a crazy time especially with me being pregnant and finding this out shortly after.
I am terrified to be be a single mother of 2 and all this stress is getting to me and even to my daughter she has been acting out alot.
I just feel like I have no one right now I guess thats why Im sharing my story on here to get it all off my chest.....

Washington, June 11 : In a bid to get his act right for his musical role in Mamma Mia! former 007 star Pierce Brosnan went on a singing spree at a beach near his Kauai, Hawaii retreat.
Too nervous to belt out the Abba songs he performs for the film's soundtrack to friends, family and holidaymakers, the 55-year-old star hit the shore as the waves were crashing around him - with his iPod.
"I walked up and down the coast and sang karaoke to my own voice for about six weeks," Contactmusic quoted him as saying
However, his beach rehearsals failed to impress when he had to perform in front of producers and castmates for the first time.
"I went to New York for the first rehearsals, and I sounded dreadful. I quietly freaked out... and I made a pig's ear of it," he added.
Despite the failure, the actor refused to give up and went back to Hawaii and worked even harder on hitting the high notes.
"In the end they liked it so much they added a verse to my big," he said,

You were my teenager.
hesitated, but decided to write it down. Write this story before I have a boyfriend, because we all owe that teenager an article.
I went to the classmate reunion that day. I had an appointment to go to KTV, but later, because the time was not up and the place was close, we went back to our alma mater and met our former English teacher at school. We talked and laughed about the current situation, knowing that she was going to be a mother again when she got married. We talked and laughed about the past, I said. The most common sentence I have said to you in the past three years is "what does the teacher do tonight?" Everyone laughed, because as a very strict teacher's class representative, she had to take into account the students' complaints about her and the teacher's various demands, but these are all bits and pieces in retrospect, and they have become a basis that can only be recalled. A fuse, as soon as lit, the past lit up in front of our eyes, extending to the end, like a sparkling long river.
how beautiful it is no matter how bright it is.
when I think of the poem I read in the sleepy poem in high school every morning, the thing of having fun in the world is really like a dream, and everything from ancient times is like running water to the east. I don't know when to say goodbye to you.
when my Girl was released, thorns wrote an article called "you are Lin and I am Xu Taiyu". At that time, I left a comment and talked about the people I liked in high school. Up to now, that comment is still at the highest level of praise. Of course, I actually regret saying these things to let others know, and I didn't know it would be known by many people at that time. Fortunately, everyone is very calm now, and no one mentioned it.
my math has always been very poor. Until the third year of high school, I could only take the exam from 40 to 70. Later, when I made up my mind to study hard, I did nothing every night but figure out every problem in today's math class. For a person who has basically given up math, God knows how difficult it is to ask people that they will be looked down upon with contempt. I could only admit it and ask and listen humbly. The only person who would never be like this was Y, who was sitting behind me at that time. Most of the time, I didn't even ask him. He came up to me and asked me why I didn't ask him. When the head teacher stared at the back door and was not allowed to speak, he sneaked to the other side to continue to tell me.
because I wanted to learn well, every problem was recorded in detail in the book. One Tuesday evening, I suddenly couldn't find one of the notes. At that time, I was nervous to death. Because it was very important information and hard work on a question, I rummaged through the cabinets, together with the desk drawers and bookcases. When I was so nervous, no one around me paid any attention to me. Continue to do his own questions and read his own book, Y poked me with a pen and said, I found it for you. Don't cry. I said thank you, but I didn't cry. He said nothing but handed over a bag of paper towels.
Y likes to hit me on the head very much. When I go back to my seat, I pass by me and type it. When I finish telling me a series of questions, when I look like I don't understand, I type it too. When I am flipping through a book in the box, I type again.
for a certain period of time, I don't know why I suddenly became very embarrassed. I didn't speak for a week, and I wouldn't ask others about the question, although every time I crouched at someone else's table and supported it with my chin while listening attentively. In fact, I can often use the afterlight to see Y looking at this side, and then I came back from eating out that Sunday. Because I was in a bad mood, I looked at the setting sun through the window at the back of the classroom. It just landed on his desk. I looked at the table in front of him, empty, with May Day in my headphones at that time. "one day we will all become yesterday, and you will accompany me through the hurried world of my life." That day was October 19, and I wrote in my diary, "thinking about the recent scenes of ignoring each other, I actually feel very depressed. I wonder if I will regret that I am so stubborn at this time after graduation. Will I miss high school so much?" That count is still early, a lot of people are still outside, Y came back, came in at the back door and passed by me, hit me on the head, and asked, you didn't eat.
this is the first thing he said to me after we hadn't spoken for a week.
you didn't eat.
my heart has softened.
I took a geometry problem and asked him to teach me how to verify the parallel faces. He turned his pen and then drew the auxiliary lines in the picture with a pencil. At that time, I looked at his side face, and the fine hairs next to his ears could be seen. After finishing the question, he looked up and asked me if I understood it, and knocked on my head. I suddenly knew why someone on Douban said that the front and back tables were the most beautiful distance in those years.
when the math results of a monthly exam came out, everyone flocked to look at the report card. I was very calm on the surface, but in fact I was afraid to look at it. He returned to his seat and asked me why I didn't look. I said there was no hurry. He said you were not in a hurry. I was in a hurry. I went to see it for you. When I came back, I asked him how he was. He looked serious and didn't tell me how much he scored in the exam. I thought I had failed the exam. At that moment, I was not thinking about how bad I was in the math exam, but that I failed his intention in teaching me. When I saw that I was depressed, he suddenly laughed and said, "I lied to you. You did well in the exam."
really, I miss it.
in fact, we haven't been together for a long time, and I have made slow progress. I seldom ask him math problems, and I don't know when I started. Even if I ask him, I don't ask him, and there is no special reason. It should be the same as everyone else in high school. After changing seats many times, I have other people who can teach me, and he has people who can eat snacks with him. It just changed. Drinking water, I also watched them fight like we did at that time, but what can we say, because there is nothing at all.
an enigmatic tacit understanding, you ignore me, I ignore you.
back, in the afternoon, a group of us walked around the playground to bask in the sun and blow water.When I went to the ladder where the referees and volunteers were sitting in every sports meeting, I forgot who suggested to sit in a row and take a group photo in the shape of a ladder. When I walked up the ladder, I sat right in front of him. When we were facing the camera and comparing the hands of scissors, I suddenly felt that there was a hand on top of my head. I was still stupefied at that time, because I felt so familiar. In a trance, I really thought that nothing had changed. We were all high school students in white shirts. I still asked him to tell me every problem. Every time he ate, he asked me if I ate. I hid my kettle or watch when I left my seat. I would aim at where he was every time I did morning exercises. I would still pay special attention to the familiar blue sneakers in front of me when walking on the stairs. When he dropped his pen on the ground, he would still be happy. Every time he changed his seat, he would be nervous for two days because he was afraid of being so far apart.
of course it's just a trance, what I thought.
near graduation, I once came back from the toilet. From the end of the corridor, I saw someone waving to me at the front door of the classroom. I didn't wear glasses at that time. I just thought that the man was a fool. I couldn't laugh or cry when I got closer and found it was him.
finally we kept in touch. He told me which girl I liked. I complained to him about which boy in the computer science department was annoying. Not long ago, I asked him on Wechat why you didn't think I was stupid. He said, whether I teach has nothing to do with your IQ.
guess what it has to do with.
"those years" is a movie that I have seen no less than four or five times. In fact, I didn't have any special feelings before. After graduation, I found that it was different. Even if I was familiar with the scene that made you think that you had traveled through time and space in that flash, I blinked and went back to this second in front of me. I know it's impossible to go back.
the past was really simple and beautiful, and I would like to remember and cherish it forever.
Today is the most common friend, and I regard it as the best ending.
I think, as for many years, there is a woman in my heart like Malena, who defines the initial restlessness and fantasy. It can never be mixed with anything but heart, and the young man in white shirt in my heart will always be you.
I wondered if it would have been different if we had not been so stubborn with each other before and would have let go of our self-esteem to talk back to each other first. Just missed is missed, no one is wrong, but everyone has passed.
"who do you miss most when you close your eyes, and who is beside you when you open your glasses?"
Find a flattering princess style white ball gowns for brides for your upcoming events or dates. We have fantastic choices for your important dates!
when I was getting ready to get off on the bus, I looked at the back door and thought of the lyrics. I found that those days have passed, and you and I will never return. You and I both live in the most beautiful memories and let them stay there all the time.
before writing this article, I asked my friend. I said that there were some things I didn't know if it was good to write. I was afraid it would be embarrassing to write it out. 'it 's a thing of the past, 'she said. After I finished it, I asked the editor again, and he said that he had written the instructions and put them down.
when you can no longer have it, the only thing you can do is not to forget.
-- "Evil in the East and poison in the West"
then, in this way, it will be treasured for a lifetime.
you are good night.
good morning. I'll leave it to him.

Search Your Zipcode - Join free now!
Search Your PostCode
It is free to search locals
We have actually all listened to the tales concerning escorts. The wild events, the rich and renowned customers, the drug-fueled orgies. Yet what are the really wild tales? The ones that make the most jaded companion stay up and also take notice?
Here, in no certain order, are several of the wildest stories regarding escorts, as informed by the companions themselves.
The customer who wanted to be consumed to life
I had a client who desired me to consume him active. He would certainly relax on the bed, entirely nude, and also I would certainly have to creep on top of him as well as begin licking and attacking him throughout his body. He would certainly get so switched on that he would certainly start groaning and also whipping around, and afterwards he would certainly come around himself and me. It was actually extreme, as well as not something I ever believed I would do, however it was likewise truly warm.
The client who wished to be peed on I had a customer who desired me to pee on him. He would obtain totally naked and relax on the flooring, and also I would need to squat over him as well as ease myself. He would after that drink everything up, and it would obtain him truly aroused. I have to state, it was kind of a turn-on for me too. The customer that wished to be spanked I had a client who loved to be spanked. He would get nude and also relax on the bed, and I would spank him with a riding crop up until his ass was bright red. He would then plead me to have sex with him, and also it would be some of the best sex I've ever had. The client that wanted to be embarrassed I had a client that liked to be embarrassed. He would certainly pay me to do all sorts of points to him that would certainly degrade him, like make him crawl about on the flooring like a pet, or stand in the edge with his nose up against the wall. He would get so switched on by it that he would be asking me to make love with him within mins.
The customer that wished to be dominated I had a customer that loved to be controlled. He would certainly pay me to link him up and do whatever I wished to him. I would certainly spank him, tease him, and make him do all kind of points that he would not typically do. It was actually warm to have that much power over somebody. These are simply a few of the wildest stories regarding companions. What are some of your own personal experiences? I had a client that desired me to claim to be his sweetheart while we took place a business trip with each other. I had to act like we were madly crazy and he was frequently attempting to get me to make love with him in public. It was actually truly enjoyable and we ended up making love in some appealing insane places. I had a customer who suched as to be spanked as well as called names. He would always reserve me for a hr, yet he would just wish to see me for the last half an hour. He would certainly pay me extra to remain for the full hr, yet I never ever recognized why. I had a customer that was really into role-playing as well as would certainly always schedule me for a 'schoolgirl' dream. He would have me use a schoolgirl outfit and then he would certainly 'spank' me for being a naughty woman. It was all very innocent and actually fairly enjoyable.
I had a client that wanted to be tied up and laid off in a space. He would certainly bring his very own rope as well as manacles and then I would connect him up and also leave him. He would constantly be there for the full hour, but he would certainly never ever say a word or make a sound. It was a little bit odd, yet he was a nice guy. I had a client who suched as to be covered in food and then has sex. He would cover my body in whipped cream, chocolate sauce, etc and after that we would certainly make love. It was in fact truly fun and sort of messy.
I had a customer that liked to be verbally degraded. He would certainly have me call him names as well as claim really dirty things to him. It was all in enjoyable as well as he was actually a truly nice guy. I had a client who wanted me to spruce up in a registered nurse's attire and then give him a 'checkup.' He would have me inspect his blood pressure, temperature, and so on and after that we would certainly have sex. It was all extremely professional as well as really quite enjoyable.
I had a client that desired me to pretend to be a woman of the street. He would pick me up in his automobile and after that drive about town while I acted like a woman of the street. He would certainly then take me back to his location and we would make love. It was all very seedy and also in fact fairly enjoyable. I had a client who desired me to spruce up in a supporter attire and after that provide him a lap dance. He would certainly have me do all kinds of dirty things to him while I was putting on the attire. It was all really mischievous and really quite enjoyable. I had a customer who wanted me to act to be his better half. He would certainly have me cook for him, tidy his residence, and do all things a better half would do. We would after that make love as well as he would certainly always call me by his other half's name. It was all extremely unusual and actually quite enjoyable.
escort agency Blue Star Meadows UT 84070, escort service Blue Star Meadows UT 84070, escort girl Blue Star Meadows UT 84070, mature escorts Blue Star Meadows UT 84070, adult escorts Blue Star Meadows UT 84070, bbw escorts Blue Star Meadows UT 84070, local escort Blue Star Meadows UT 84070, independent escorts Blue Star Meadows UT 84070, incall/outcall escorts Blue Star Meadows UT 84070, escort reviews Blue Star Meadows UT 84070
Areas near by
|cheap escorts cynthiana ky 41031||cheap escorts flamingo trailer court mi 48336||cheap escorts oakwood villa fl 33614||cheap escorts vernal il 61848||cheap escorts doty mi 49884|
call girl Blue Star Meadows UT 84070, brothels Blue Star Meadows UT 84070, prostitutes Blue Star Meadows UT 84070, hookers Blue Star Meadows UT 84070, sluts Blue Star Meadows UT 84070, whores Blue Star Meadows UT 84070, gfe Blue Star Meadows UT 84070, girlfriend experience Blue Star Meadows UT 84070, fuck buddy Blue Star Meadows UT 84070, hookups Blue Star Meadows UT 84070, free sex Blue Star Meadows UT 84070, sex meet Blue Star Meadows UT 84070, nsa sex Blue Star Meadows UT 84070

MARILYN SANEHOLTZ-RAUSCH (LOWELL-PETE)
Intertervewed by Russell and Marlene Patterson, February 2, 2010
Transcribed by Marlene Patterson
MP: How was your family involved in the George Williams murder in 1883?
MR: The Johnson who murdered the Williams man and his wife. The Williams were related to me. They were in my grandmother’s and my mother’s family. Johnson first killed him with an axe outside the barn. He went inside the house and I don’t know how he killed her but they had a baby and this baby was on the bed. He wrapped him and thought he would smother him. Well he didn’t. A couple of days later when they found the bodies the baby was okay but he had sucked his fingers and his hands and they were very sore. It says here in 1938, and I can remember this. This picture is of me and my sister and my brother, my Dad and my Mom. We went to Texas. I think it was Galveston. We went down by the water and we visited him. And seeing him there, we visited the baby who had survived.
MP: Oh this is a picture of the baby that survived. You know Russell just gave a talk on the Johnson murder and that was one of the questions that came up-what happened to this child.
MR: Then this is a picture of his family. This was the last time he came up here to visit.
MP: Where does he live now?
MR: He is dead now because that happened in the 1940’s.
MP: Does he have descendents living around here?
RP: That is very interesting.
MR: I brought this picture because the clothing these ladies had on was so unique. My grandmother Callie Bittikofer is the one in the middle. I know there is a Mrs. Honeck here. This was taken up in front of the old hospital.
MP: Yes, this shows the front porch of the hospital.
MR: This is what they used to get out of the Maumee River.
RP: Now that is your dad in the center.
MP: What was your maiden name?
MR: Saneholtz. This is a picture of when we went down to Texas. We stayed at rooming houses because there were no motels at that time.
MR: This is a picture of Grampa Saneholtz and Grandma Saneholtz. Grampa Saneholtz had the Saneholtz Monuments here in Napoleon. Grampa Saneholtz was mainly the salesman and Grampa he died at the age of 58. It was right after they built the gymnasium at Central School. He took my brother to a basketball game and he told my brother that he needed air and was going outside. He went outside and dropped over dead.
RP: That would have been right after they finished the gymnasium between the two schools. Now where did your Grampa and Grandma Saneholtz live?
MR: They lived on Clinton Street.
RP: Did they live in that house on Tyler Street about the second house down?
MR: Earlier in life they did and then when he passed away she lived in that house beside the house on Clinton Street, just beyond the Catholic Church there. Do you remember that house there that Don Westhoven built? It was next door to that place.
RP: It would have been East of that because Don built on the corner lot. The reason I asked you that is do you remember that picture that they had in the newspaper a few months ago. Somebody turned one in on the Saneholtzes and I was looking at the background trying to figure out where that house was.
MP: We drove around and around just looking for that house.
RP: I knew at one time that Bud Saneholtz had lived on West Clinton. It was on Tyler and there was a house right next to it.
MR: It was on Washington St. right across from the Presbyterian Church. My dad was Art, and he was the one who engraved the monuments. During my childhood, on Sundays we would drive to other towns and did rubbings on tombstones. My dad would take paper and crayons and everything and if we were good we would get a treat.
RP: That is interesting. I have tried to do rubbings myself and it is hard to do.
MR: Well, he always had his special way. He had this big brown paper and he always used his yardsticks to smooth it. Then he had this big crayon.
RP: I know Ed Peper and I took some paper and crayons and went up to the cornerstone at the courthouse to do some rubbings. We read ‘laid by’ and then it was chiseled out. We were trying to figure out what it originally had said. We couldn’t make out the letters.
MR: This is a picture of John’s sisters. Our great-great-grandparents came here to American in 1847. They had 10 children and these are the five girls and the five boys. The Saneholtzes when they first came lived here in Napoleon.
MP: I enjoy looking at old photos.
MR: We decided they must have used the same pattern to make all five of their dresses. Just look at those dresses.
MP: My mother made clothes for us and used the same pattern. If one of us was bigger or smaller than the other one she would just alter the waist or pin the pattern up and make it shorter. We got along just fine. Of course she would use different material.
MR: Here I brought this picture along just to aggravate you. My Dad and Mom used to go up into Michigan and get mushrooms.
MP: Look at those mushrooms. This is the first picture we have ever seen of mushrooms.
RP: People used to come into the store and tell us how many mushrooms they had brought home from Michigan, but they never had any evidence to back up their bragging. We’d ask them to sell us a pound and they would always back off.
MR: Do you know how much they are a pound. Our daughter lives out East and they are selling for sixty to seventy dollars a pound. There is nothing like the Michigan mushrooms.There is no flavor in regular mushrooms.
RP: Ken Krueger used to go and find mushrooms and he would share some of them with me. I would fry them in butter at home and Marlene didn’t like them.
MP: I wouldn’t touch them.
MR: Oh you didn’t know what you were missing.
MP: I have never seen a picture of people’s mushrooms in quantity like this picture shows them.
MR: I found this article and it was written in 1971 by Nat Belknap.
MP: Was this his log cabin?
MR: Yes, and this is my great-grandfather, my grandmother Callie Bittikofer’s dad. They lived in there. Here is a picture of the last time my family was together. I don’t know what year that was. It was before my time.
RP: Now Marilyn, how were you related to Mrs. Frank Bartz?
MR: She was a cousin of my Grandma Callie Bittikofer. It would have been Caroline (Swinn) Bittikofer .
MP: My dad called Frank Bartz every day at the elevator. He would call him and order train cars to come to Gerald. They would load the cars with grain and ship them out of Gerald and the loads of grain would be sent all over the country. I always knew his voice and I could hear him on the telephone but I never knew what he looked like until later years when we had the drug store. He introduced himself and we talked about the grain business and the railroad business. This was Mr. Frank Bartz. They were very sweet people.
MR: They never had any children. He was in World War I and he directed trains in France.
RP: Is that what he did!
MR: Here is a picture of the Swin family. There is one there of my grandma’s brother who was living in another town and this happened when I was probably ten years old. They used to have the cousins come over. My mother would make clothes for her. They had six children and he got out of the service and they didn’t have any money and there was no welfare service and they put him in jail because he didn’t buy his kids any shoes. That was the story. I just always remembered that.
MP: A lot of people didn’t have money in those days.
RP: Just like my Grandfather Patterson he worked at the roundhouse here in Napoleon. This was in the winter time, in December and he had a bad cold. My grandmother had to tie his shoes for him, he was that sick. He insisted on going to work. If he didn’t show up for work he wouldn’t get paid. He went to work and got sicker at work and a couple of days later he died of pneumonia. Dad was sixteen at the time and my dad’s brother was only eleven at the time. That left my grandmother a widow. At that time Henry Ford had the railroad. She wrote him a letter asked him if he would be able to help. His secretary wrote back. Well he wrote back and said it wasn’t the railroads fault that he died but in a couple of years we will give your son a job. So my dad quit school and worked in the hotel and my grandmother worked in the hotel and made beds as a chamber maid. Two years later when he got to be 18 he applied for a job on the railroad and they replied that they were sorry but they had no openings. I have both of those letters. My dad saved those letters. My grandmother had saved both of those letters. Later he got a job at Shaff’s Drug Store. He worked there for years and years.
MR: I can remember him working there and Shaff’s was forever and ever.
RP: Now do you happen to know if any of the Williams family descendants are still living in Texas?
MR: No, I don’t think he ever married. This here is a picture of my grandmother, Mrs. Callie Bittikofer. Lloyd died early too. Lloyd was only 58 when he passed away. My grandfather and grandmother Lloyd and Callie Bittikoffer are the two that started the Biddies Restaurant. He was big and tall and I can remember him well. I can remember this too because I was special. Their birthdays were the same day, and I was the first granddaughter and I was born on their birthday.
RP: My boy Dan was born on my father’s birthday.
MR: It always made me feel special.
MP: I was born on my mother’s birthday.
MR: This is a picture of my Grandmother Callie, the one with the restaurant. Now you probably remember Rosie Teeple. She was my grandmother’s sister. This is a picture of my Grandmother Saneholtz. This is John and Carrie Saneholtz. Now these women with my Grandmother Bittikofer driving, and there was someone else that drove out to California and went to the Grand Canyon and all over and drove back. Those three women and this was in the 1930’s.
RP: That would have been quite a trip for them in those days.
MR: Yes it was. It would have been in 1938. The roads would not have been all that great, and just the three women. Do you remember Rosie Teeple? She was my grandmother’s sister.
RP: I can tell you what I remember about Rosie in my youth. My mother had her come to our house and hang wallpaper.
MR: She was the best wallpaper hanger around. I can tell you I used to help her wallpaper. They had rooms to wallpaper in their two houses- the motel and the red brick house on the corner. - There were also cabins down beyond the restaurant. There were three of them down there and they were all papered. Us kids we all used to help.
RP: I can tell you a story on Rosie. I went to her auction sale after she had died. She had been cleaning and taking care of many of the lawyers’ offices downtown. When they threw good things out she would take the articles home and save them. She had two of the old Henry County Atlases dated 1875. They were bound copies and they were early. I had wanted one for years and I could never find any. I went through all of the boxes at the auction here she had two of them. I looked out across the table and there was Wren Reese. I thought at least I will be able to get one copy. Whalen was the auctioneer and he held the copies up and said bidders choice. I ran him up to fifty dollars. Back at that time that was a big price to pay, but I wanted one. I thought let him have it and I can bid on the second book. Whalen said to Wren - which one do you want Wren and he replied that he would take them both.
MP: He paid one hundred dollars for two dirty old books.
RP: So I had to give it up. I will tell you what I bought there at her sale and I still have them. I bought stereo views of the Spanish-American War. Rosie’s husband had served in the war.
MR: You know how her husband died don’t you?
RP: Yes I do.
MR: He blew himself up. They were taking stumps out and they used dynamite and he blew himself up.
MP: Who is the man that fell into the fire and died when he was burning trash here on the south side?
RP: That was Harry Wenner.
MR: Aunt Rosie fell into the trash and died.
RP: I have a newspaper account of Rosie’s husband when he died. The fellow that was along told about it. He had the dynamite cap in a bucket and he was fixing one and he threw his knife into the bucket. I think one of the sparks from the knife hit one of the caps and it exploded. He told that Harry flew up in the air twenty some feet.
MP: Poor man.
MR: Grandma used to take Rosie along in later years when she would go on a trip. It was hard to keep her quiet.
MP: She loved to talk.
RP: I remember her, I was just a kid and she was at our house and she hung wallpaper and she talked and talked.
MR: She sure knew how to hang that paper, didn’t she.
RP: I will give you a post script on the atlas story. Do you remember Florian Sauer’s mother-in-law? She was Caroline Schroeder. She lived in that house on Woodlawn right across from where my Mom and Dad lived. She used to go to all these auction sales and she would buy these quarter boxes-when you would get down to the end of the sale and people would be leaving. She would buy what I call catch-all bargain ends. She would take this stuff home and she had like an antique shop in her house. We used to go visit her on Sundays after we had eaten our Sunday dinner just to see what she had for sale. I was over there one Sunday looking all around and I noticed a book sticking out from under her davenport. I got down on my hands and knees, pulled it out and here was one of those Henry County Atlases. I took it over to her, she was sitting at an old table, and I asked her what she wanted for this. She said, “Oh, you found the geography book”. She said I’ll need five dollars for that. And I said I’ll take it.
MR: Good for you!
RP: So Wren had to pay fifty dollars and I got mine for five.
MR: She probably bought it at a garage sale somewhere. We lived close to Graceann and I bought a sweeper there. My daughter was going off to college and she needed one so I bought it. My dad always said Wren made his money off of the water plant. My dad ran for mayor of Napoleon in 1947.
RP: I can remember Byron Rasey.
MR: They always said he changed his baby’s diapers on the meat block. That is what people told.
RP: Another thing he did was the first house from the turn here at the Lutheran Home, when he was Mayor, he built onto that house a porch. He fell into bad times and never finished it. He didn’t have the regular sized posts to hold up the ceiling. That is what people always said.
MR: Life is really interesting isn’t it? Well, lets see and move on. This is a picture of my Grandma and Grandpa, my mother and my Aunt when they were little.
RP: Do you know where the farm was at?
MR: It was over on the south side but I don’t remember exactly where. As a kid I can remember driving past it.
RP: There is a nice team of horses.
MR: My mother was real blonde and my aunt was real dark-haired.
RP: Is it okay if I copy this picture. It will only take a second.
MP: Get the one with the mushrooms too.
RP: Get me the log house too.
MR: You mean the one with Grampa?
MR: This is a picture of Ross Radel. They lived at the end where Garden Street comes out. They had a big barn behind their house and when we were kids the barn burned down. I can always remember that. It was one street over and he was on old Route 24 and somebody stopped to give him a ride - he was hitchhiking, and somehow he got run over. It was so sad. He left three kids.
RP: Did he get hit just by accident.
MR: Yes, It was just by accident. Ross Radel lived on Garden Street and I was born on Garden Street. They used to call that area Garlic Knob.
MP: Was there somebody in the area that grew a lot of garlic or how did that area get its name?
MR: There was a lot of garlic growing down by the river and my Grampa Saneholtz had named it Garlic Knob. Chubb’s Bakery would come around and deliver rolls and bread and the iceman would come around and deliver ice to our house.
RP: A funny thing about that was when Chubb’s Bakery would come to deliver baked goods the horse would know just where to stop and wait and then take off again.
MP: Do you suppose the driver had a special signal for the horse?
RP: Well the horse would stop and he wouldn’t moved until the driver told him to. The bakery and the iceman would have cards you would put in your window. The ice card would say like 25 - 50 - or 100 pounds, and he would just stop and deliver it to your icebox. What ever amount you wanted you would place that to the top of your sign.
MR: Another thing that was during the Depression my Mom said so many men came along off of the highway and my mother would always give them something to eat. It might be something as simple as a sandwich. She would put it out the door and then she would hook the door. We would stand and watch them eat.
RP: My mother always fed them too. They would come up to the back door. We had a fence along there and later on I found out that these tramps would mark our fence that this was a good place to eat. The mark was a cross. I found a book that told about how hoboes and tramps marked a good house that gave out food.
MR: I bet they did.
RP: I know the neighborhood kids that I played with asked me once why my mother always feeds those tramps. I said I don’t know, I will go ask her. At that time I had been going to the Lutheran School and we studied the Bible. She told me to look in the Bible and read Matthew 25 verse 35. So I did. It is the passage where Jesus said, I was hungry and you fed me. I was thirsty and you gave me drink. It said about clothes and you clothed me. The next day she asked me if I knew why she fed the tramps. I told her that Jesus said we should feed the hungry and help the poor.
MP: We don’t have tramps anymore but we have the homeless and the poor.
RP: Sometimes the tramps would ask if we had any work for them to do.
MR: Probably depended on the times too. We will go to the motel now. My mom and dad got the motel in about 1948 or 1949. My grandmother had the motel and she also had the restaurant. The reason my aunt got the restaurant was because she always did all the cooking at the restaurant. Dad was retiring from the monument business so they took over the motel. I just wanted to show you a picture of that man (coughs) I am allergic to the knitting I am doing.
MP: What are you knitting?
MR: I knit scarves.
MP: Do you really?
MR: I will tell you later how I make them. That gentleman is Pete Kovac. He was from Chicago. He used to come and he is the one who designed the cookers at Campbell’s. My dad would get to know these people when they were staying there for awhile. We got to know all these salesmen that stayed at the motel. One of them was from the country of Holland. He brought his family over here for a short time. Somebody was coming in and going out all the time. My kids when they went to Grandma’s and Grampa’s they would go to the motel. This is the age my kids were and why we have a lot of Miss Americas. They would be at the fair and they would stay in our motel. They would sign an autograph for my Dad and Mom. I have some bigger pictures here too. This is a picture of one of my kids with Miss America.
RP: I always remembered too when I was a kid my grandmother, your grandmother Bittikofer lived right on the corner. Elmer Miller lived next to her and the next house was my grandmother. We went there as a kid and I can remember yet looking over at the river cabins, on the east side was where the restaurant was.
MR: This is a picture of Minnie Pearl. My dad was out in the yard one day and it was fair time and she was going to be at the fair.
MP: Minnie Pearl?
MR: Oh yes.
MP: What year was that?
MR: It was in the 1940’s. She came out, turned around and said would you button me up. He buttoned her up and he just thought that was marvelous. I found this picture and I just had to show you this picture to prove to you that she was there. In the yard is the rest of them by the house. In behind the restaurant was this rock garden. It was the most gorgeous rock garden that you ever saw.
RP: That does look really nice.
RP: Did you know that when we were at the drug store on Sundays and stuff strangers would come in and ask “How do you get to Biddie’s Restaurant?
MR: It was very well known.
RP: Oh yes.
MR: This is a picture of the rock garden taken from the back to the front. The rock garden is right in here.
RP: This is a good picture of the Gulf Station.
MR: That is later. It was just that one building when they started the restaurant. They started the restaurant about in 1925.
MP: Now is this where Rueben ended up living?
MP: And this area is what they just tore down?
MR: You know what, after we found out that they had tore that down Pete said, Oh, my gosh! I said what is the matter honey? He said I wonder what they did with those perfect timbers that were in the top of those rooms. Those were the most perfect, flawless timbers. I hope they didn’t destroy them. I hope they did something with them. Of course Pete was in the lumber business. He said those timbers were flawless. We ordered those in special in the early 1940’s.
MP: Nobody saves things nowadays. They just rip apart buildings and bulldoze them down.
RP: I certainly appreciate your letting me copy these pictures.
MR: There was a big barn behind the house. It was right where the other motel is now. There was a huge barn back in there. There was a garden right behind it. That is where they grew the vegetables for the restaurant.
MP: You cannot beat fresh produce.
MR: They raised their own chickens in there. They were divided off. The bottom had two sections. and the top had two sections. They kept moving them as they grew. I guess they brought them down. They always had these chickens and on Thursdays they would clean the chickens in the basement of that red house. It was the red house on the corner, down in that basement. Now they always had help. Girls from the country came in and worked for them. Some of the girls would stay there. There were two and three to a room. They would work split shifts at the restaurant. They were very lovely ladies.
MP: That was the thing for these farm girls to do at that time. They were also very good workers.
RP: My mother wasn’t from the country but she worked for Otto Evers, the publisher of the German Democrat. He lived on Clinton Street in a brick house that Bob George ended up living there. I will tell you a humorous thing that happened. Mrs. Evers had ...
MR: Wasn’t she a teacher too?
RP: That was our neighbor on Washington St. Augusta Rice Evers. She was a character. She was my kindergarten teacher. Well anyway, this Mrs. Evers passed away and her son Fritz came and had a sale. Here Mr. Evers when he died he was cremated. She put his remains in a vase. They sold the vase at the sale and the lady said look at the dirt still in this vase and she dumped it all over the ground. My mothers jaw just dropped because she worked there and knew what was inside the vase.
MR: Oh my goodness!
RP: Jap Evers’ wife Gussie was my kindergarten teacher. Of course we didn’t have regular kindergarten in the public schools at that time. We had it in the basement of the old library. My mother, every Friday I would have to take fifty cents to school. She would tie a fifty cent piece in the corner of my handkerchief to pay for my schooling. Anyway I moved next door to her on Washington Street. In the summertime when we had the windows open we could hear her clip clip clip across her front porch late at night. She went and played Bingo at different places around the county four or five nights a week. She told me if you see lights on late at night don’t worry because I stay up to watch Johnny Carson. She was quite a woman.
MR: I had to go into the basement at Central School for my kindergarten. The gymnasium was up on the third floor. Didn’t you go to Central?
RP: No, I went to the Lutheran School. When I went to kindergarten it was a private kindergarten. I know we had a play featuring Raggedy Ann and Raggedy Andy. I played Raggedy Andy.
MP: Is that when your mother made the pongee suit for you?
RP: No, not this time. Anyway I was so embarrassed because Mrs. Evers took rouge and put it on my cheeks. I thought well that’s for girls. Girls put makeup on and I was so embarrassed.
MR: Marlene, did you grow up in Napoleon?
MP: No, I grew up in Gerald. The big town of Gerald. We lived right across from the big grain elevator. My dad ran the elevator and my grandfather lived directly across the road from us because he ran the elevator first. Then my dad took over the operation. My grandfather and a relative of his Fred Gerken built the elevator years ago.
RP: One thing, my Grandfather Bernicke when he first came from Germany to this country, he was a blacksmith and he worked for Marlene’s grandfather.
MR: For heavens sake!
MP: I went to St. John’s Lutheran School in the country and graduated from Ridgeville High School. Talk about being underprivileged.
MR: You were really lacking a good school.
MP: Ridgeville was a good school. I was also taught good morals in both schools, which is lacking in a lot of our youth today.
MR: I find that a lot of kids are so hurtful to each other. They fight each other.
MP: Girls especially.
MR: Their language is terrible.
RP: It is ridiculous.
MR: I just don’t understand things anymore.
MP: I buy a top and the neckline goes way down. I get a T shirt and wear it underneath. Okay, we are going to start now on your subject, and would you please give us your name.
MR: I am Marilyn Elizabeth Rausch.
MP: And what was your maiden name?
MR: Marilyn Elizabeth Saneholtz.
MP: What is your current address?
MR: 526 W. Main Street.
MP: And you are married to ...
MR: Lowell Frederick Rausch. He was the youngest of five boys.
MP: He goes by the name of ...
MP: Where did you start your schooling?
MR: I started here in Napoleon at Central School.
MP: Did they have kindergarten at that time?
MR: Yes. It was in the basement.
MP: Do you remember who your teacher was?
MR: No, but my first grade teacher was Mrs. Burkhart.
MP: Would she have been C. D. Brillhart’s wife.
MR: I am not sure but I don’t think so. It is not the same spelling.
MP: You would have graduated from Napoleon High School.
MR: In 1948.
MP: It is my understanding you went into nurses training. Was this right after you graduated from high school?
MR: Yes, I went to Flower Hospital. They don’t have classes there now. I graduated from nurses training in 1951.
MP: Did you have any jobs while you were in high school, like a lot of the young girls did. I worked at Murphy’s 5 and 10 cent store.
MR: I worked at Biddie’s Restaurant and I worked at Mitchell’s Flowers. I did a lot of baby sitting.
MP: What did you do at Mitchell’s Flowers? Was it anything special.
MR: We disbudded carnations and waited on trade. I helped Bob get what he needed to make arrangements. I made lots of bows.
MP: And you made lots of money?
MR: I made 72 cents an hour.
MP: You made more than I did, I made 50 cents an hour. That would have been in 1952 and 1953. Murphy’s paid 50 cents an hour. Money went farther in those days. Nobody was open for business on Sundays. Wasn’t that what they called the Blue Law.
MR: I got my job with Mitchell’s because when I turned 16 I didn’t want to wait on tables anymore at the restaurant so my folks said you can’t quit until you have another job. So after school I went to Mitchell’s and Bob Mitchell was out in the greenhouse. I walked out to him and said I would like to work for you. He said I was too short and not old enough.
MP: Why would he need somebody tall?
MR: I have no idea. I told him I could do the job and he said no. So I was so determined I went back the next day and told him the same thing. He said okay, I worked there until I started nurses training.
MP: He probably got tired of you begging him for a job. Where did you work after you became a nurse?
MR: I worked at Heller Hospital. It was the old hospital downtown. We didn’t even have bedpan hoppers. We just had to dump it in the toilet. We worked at the old building, the house. By that time they had also built the bottom part of the new hospital. I worked there at surgery.
MP: The hospital has come a long way since then.
MR: It took a while for them to do a lot of remodeling at the hospital.
MP: Was this the same period when the operating room was upstairs?
MR: The operating room was on the east side of the main floor. They left the house on part of the new hospital and tore that down and built the side to the west.
MP: I can remember when they built that.
MR: See the day that I graduated from nurses training we had already been married for six months. Pete and I had gone together since high school. He was activated for the Guards.
MP: What year was that?
MR: It was 1951. It was during the Korean conflict. We had Susan our oldest daughter and then when she was six weeks old I went to Louisiana and we lived in a little house with the company commander in DeRidder, Louisiana. We were down there for about a year and then we went to Fort Knox and he went to school and became an artisopher, which is a man who fixes rifles and guns. Then we came back and went to Louisiana and lived in a trailer. Then they started sending the men overseas and he had just a little time left and then he was discharged. Then we came back home and I went to work at Heller Hospital. Then I worked for Dr. George and Dr. Ullum. Then we moved to Liberty Center and I worked for both Dr. George and Dr. Ullum and part time at Heller.
MP: You know Dr. George was always our family doctor. He had the 50 cent penicillin shots. If you had a bad cold you would run to him and he would give you a shot of penicillin for 50 cents. The price never went up, it was always 50 cents. Dr. George also made house calls. Our boy was sick, and of course Russell knew Dr. Ullum from the drugstore. Dr. Ullum came to check on Daniel. He was very sick with a high fever. Dr. Ullum came into the house and Russell told him to bring his wife along inside too. He said that wasn’t his wife in the car, but his dog. We always laughed about that. Anyway Dr. Ullum died in such a tragic way.
MR: When I first started working for Dr. George and Dr. Ullum, I knew Dr. Ullum from working part time at the hospital in obstetrics. So he would have his ob patients come in one day a week. I worked with Dr. George too. Dr. Ullum got the flu really bad and it was the Asian flu. And it was a time when everybody had it. The office had three rooms and people would come in and wait in the first room. In the second room I would write down their name and their blood pressure and their temperature and ask them all kinds of questions. The third room was the drug room and Dr. George would see the patients back there. The patients would tell him that they were sick and his wife and kids back home were sick too. He woud load him up with all the medicine that he could and send him down the hall. That is the way Dr. George and I did it. Then my husband got sick and Dr. George had to make a house call and he said that I should give him three sauce dishes and line them up on the table. He got his bag out and put medicine in each dish and told me how to give it to him. Then he left. That is the same way he did office calls.
MP: Do you remember how much he charged you?
MR: A house call was $3.00. He would write down your name, like Marilyn Rausch. He would take out a tiny piece of paper and write down h c $3.00 and throw it in a corner on his desk. Then if it was an office call he would write down 1 o c $2.00.
MP: Isn’t that something.
MR: He was a fantastic man.
MP: He absolutely was. Doctors aren’t made that way anymore.
MR: A few of them are, but not very many.
MP: I am very satisfied with our family doctor. Okay Marilyn now that you have retired, are you bored like I am?
MR: Somedays yes. I knit scarves and take care of Pete. Our kids have all had a college education and live all over the United States.
MP: How many grandchildren do you have?
MR: Nine, and I have one great-grandson.
MP: Something sticks in my memory Marilyn that you were a council member here in Napoleon.
MR: I was the first council-woman here in Napoleon.
MP: Probably in all of Henry County. So you broke the ice there.
MR: Yes I got quite an education.
MP: I suppose, but you did enjoy it. You can say and add whatever you want. I will transcribe the tape and you can take your pen and cross out whatever you don’t want in the history or add to it. You will have the final choice of editing.
MR: I enjoyed helping the people and like I say I got an education. I was on council for 14 months and then I had to resign because I had family problems.
MP: You know talking about the Rausch boys I could never keep them straight.
MR: Russell was the oldest and his nickname was Ruck. No. 2 was Paul, No. 3 was Burdette “Tub”. No. 4 was James “Jake”. No. 5 was Lowell “Pete”.
MP: And he is Emily’s husband. What was Burdette’s nickname?
MP: Now who is Tuffy Rausch?
MR: Tuffy Rausch is Russell’s third son. He married Anne Von Deylen.
MP: She was Bill & Phyllis Von Deylen’s daughter. You see Bill’s family ran the grocery store in Gerald and also the John Deere implement dealership. I interviewed Bill and he told a lot of things that I didn’t know because he is a lot older than I am. It was very interesting.
MR: I just think it is great preserving these histories. The history of this area should be preserved.
MP: See being I went to Ridgeville high school their library was like somebody had cleaned out their attic and dumped all their books there. That was it. Probably that was all the taxpayers could afford. It was not very exciting. At that point they didn’t push or press kids to complete their schooling. Fortunately my parents insisted all of us, including my two brothers that we all graduate. Right after I graduated from high school my dad had a job for me and he told me I was going to work as a secretary at the elevator, so I did. I have never looked for a job. I have always worked and sometimes it was seven days a week. I was married within a year of my graduation and that is why I am so much younger than Russell.
MR: It was meant to be.
MP: We are kind of soul mates and buddies.
MR: Pete and I are too. Pete was a junior and I was a senior. We are just a year apart. Pete has always acted older because of his brothers.
MP: He probably knew the ways of men because of his brothers. After I became pregnant I quit at the elevator because Russell didn’t want me to work. Then the Napoleon Elevator wanted me to come there and work, so I did. They needed some help right away, so I went and worked at the Napoleon Elevator until Dan was born. Then after that wouldn’t you know it, but Russell went and bought the drug store from Frank Shaff. Then I did the bookkeeping at home and I just worked a couple days a week.
MR: You were getting a better education than you could have had in college.
MP: You are correct, but as far as a trade the only thing I can do is type and do computer work.
MR: My father used to tell me that he owned the Napoleon Library. We lived so close to the library on Scott Street behind the Bonded Gas Station. We would cut through the yards and go to the library, but we didn’t take them back on time either so we always owed a few pennies.
MP: I could get lost in the kids section at that library. They have the neatest books down there. It is fun reading. I used to go and read anything they had on antiques. They had a really good variety to choose from. That reading there and the people in the drugstore is where I got my education.
MR: When I wasn’t working those few years after I had my children I took classes from the extension office. I took classes at the high school. I took classes in tailoring and sewing, quilting, and calligraphy. I just had to keep doing something all the time.
MP: Did you know Thelma Guyer who ran the Turkeyfoot Antiques on old Route 24?
MR: Yes, Thelma is related to me.
MP: The two of us, the University of Toledo was offering a class on antiques. The two of us went. We thought we would learn something. After about two sessions we decided we knew more about antiques than the instructor. We never went back. Antiquing is something you don’t learn in textbooks. You need a broad knowledge of everything. You can look them up in books, but you have to get out there and feel things.
MR: There was an antique house, it was a big yellow house right beside the post office.
MP: Nova Zimmerman had a pre-school class for kids there. We sent our boy Dan there. What was his name?
MR: Dan Yarnell.
MP: Yes, I remember him. Our antique dealer he always told us that he would visit Dan and he had a house that was just full of antiques. Beautiful classic pieces. He had fancy dishes, hanging lamps, and oyster plates. Where would people in this day and age of casualness use oyster plates? And everything was just spotless. He was a bachelor and had never married and he had been a lawyer. So we would go visit him about once a month on a Sunday afternoon. It was a treat to go visit him and we would just talk. Then it got to the point where we would eat with him. We’d hop in our car, go to Toledo and eat with him. He taught us a lot of things about antiques. He’d tell about the big fancy parties people would have, the clothes they wore, and what they ate and how food was served. His house was just loaded with antiques. Nothing was marked. You would ask him how much he wanted for this piece and he would answer-well I don’t know if I want to sell it just yet. You would have to catch him in the right mood. He had a barn full of stuff out in back. It was more casual kitchen and primitive things. He had shelf after shelf of depression glass, all colors and all types of antiques. I just dearly loved the man.
MR: Dan was a Great-uncle of mine and then when we got married in 1951 he gave us a set of eight dessert dishes, three face, which have a different face than most. The face on these are very pretty. When he passed away I gave my aunt some money - she went to the sale. There were four more but they were chipped or something. I gave her twenty dollars. That would not have touched them then. I have hunted all over the United States looking for some more but have never found any.
MP: Did you ever look on Ebay for them?
MR: No I haven’t, but anyway Becky Rohr’s mother, she said her mother looked them up for me and about ten years ago they were listed at $300.00 apiece. I still have them. Well, my daughter has them. I gave them to her. Never have we found anything similar. He must have known just what he was giving us.
MP: He probably did. He gave you choice pieces.
MR: People don’t use nice things anymore.
MP: The only times I use my good china is when I have fancy parties and I don’t do that much anymore. Maybe not even once a year. When the kids come I don’t get out the china - they are boys and they could care less -their main concern is something to eat.
MR: There are some gorgeous dishes out there.
MP: I know there is.
MR: I don’t know I just think it has been a great life here in Napoleon and I think it’s just too bad we are at the point where we are.
MP: I never felt bad that we didn’t live in a big city. We went to the city to shop. We went to Chicago to shop. We got on an airplane once and went to New York to shop and I got to go to Macy’s in downtown New York. I thought that was really something. It would not get me excited now to go to New York.
MR: My younger sister graduated from Kent University and she taught at Kent for a while and she went to New York and worked for Parents magazine. She worked probably about 15 years there. My children were growing up at the same time. She was the one who gave the “commendation” seal for the electronics and other items the magazine would give the seal of commendation for. They would assure their readers the products were good. She would send products home to test. We tested the Easy-Bake Oven.
MP: I never had one.
MR: We tested the first one.
MP: They are very collectible now and go for a good price on the secondary market.
MR: We tested the machine that makes cotton candy, the sugary stuff they have at the county fair. The machine they had spun the sugar all over the kitchen. We made it anyway. She would send drinks to test. One day she sent 60 pairs of shoes and I had to find children to fit these shoes. We had to write back how the shoes fit and how they wore. We tested the first Rival Crockpot. I just threw it away about ten years ago. We went to New York once.
MP: At least I know what it feels like to be there. That was enough for me.
MR: It is very expensive to live in New York City.
MP: The older I get I become more appreciative of living here in Napoleon. I like this town. I like the people.
MR: I feel lucky too. I worked part-time at the hospital - all three of them. The doctors we had - we were so fortunate. The two Philippino doctors we had in here when we did. That was an education. We had Dr. Flora and Dr. Soriano. Those two men were so dedicated I can’t say enough good things about them. We had Dr. Manahan, all of them, we have been so lucky to have these good doctors. One thing about Dr. Soriano, he lived out in the woods, on a county road, but anyway he had a pond and he kept trying to catch this big bass and he wanted to catch that more than anything else in the world. You know how you talk when you are not real busy. Of course I knew how to pick up night crawlers, and one night I went out and taught him how to pick up night crawlers in his yard. It had just rained. He came in the next day and he told me “they are so slippery”. He worked and worked trying to get that bass. They brought their niece over here from the Philippines. I can’t recall her name right now. They took her fishing and guess who caught the bass! He was so unhappy when she caught it.
RP: He was a nice man.
MR: My kids babysat Dr. Flora’s kids over there when they went to Chicago. She called me and said “Mom what can I do. Robert is up on the roof”. I told her to just call his mother.
MP: They didn’t have a very high roof.
MR: No they didn’t.
MP: I think I have waited on two and three generations of families. These little kids would come in and there stood the grandmother I used to wait on years ago.
RP Have you told anything about Biddie’s yet?
MR: No I haven’t. My grandmother and grandfather Caroline and Lloyd Bittikofer started the Biddies Restaurant in 1925 on the corner of 110 and 6 on the south side beside the river in Napoleon, Ohio and they were known all through their lives for having the best restaurant around Northwestern Ohio. When they first started it there was a little building that was all glassed in on the sides and had a barbecue spit in it. That is the way they did their meat. They did ham, beef, or pork on there. It went around on the spit and they would take it in, cut it up and would have it in these huge kettles that I can remember. Everything was made from scratch. They raised their own chickens across the street. There was a barn behind their house. They would clean the chickens on Thursdays, and get them ready for Sunday. They prepared everything ahead. They had girls that they had hired and they would come in from the country. Some of them stayed at the house and they would work split shifts. They had the best food. They had a gas station beside there. When he first started he sold Empire gas. They did a lot of business with that. I can remember that. My aunt did most of the cooking. She was a sister to my mother. When my grandmother retired she deeded the restaurant over to my aunt and Uncle -Bertha & Reynold Mullins. They had one daughter. They did very well with it.
MP: Where is their daughter now?
MR: You mean Margery? She is down in Longwood, Florida and she has a business. Marge always judged poodles. The large poodle is the one and she also had the standard poodle. When she went to New York she would stay with my sister. She traveled all over the world. She is doing well right now. She grooms them and she told me that her clients come in limousines.
MP: This is believable. There are a lot of dog lovers out there. We saw Marge at a dog show judging poodles. She looked very impressive. Have you noticed in the grocery stores the amount of space that is devoted to selling products for animals such as dogs and cats? Our boys had dogs but they ate the same food we did. We never had cats, but our Sam does and he treats him like a baby. Can you tell us about the Saneholtzes with their monument business?
MR: The Saneholtzes - John Henry Saneholtz was my grandfather and he started the monument business. My dad was one of the carvers when he got old enough. They always had nice men to help. It was located on the corner of Scott and West Main Street. I hadn’t realized until lately but monuments also went in styles. By that I mean from the old pictures of monuments most of them were five or 6 feet tall. They were huge monuments. Bud Saneholtz was the salesman as I was growing up and my dad did the carving. It was quite involved. On Sundays we would go to other towns and my dad would do rubbings of monuments or markers that they had sold the previous year. Such as if the husband had passed away or the wife and get the facts and then he would have to put it on the monument. Sometimes people would buy their monument before they had passed away and we would get the dates and other pieces of information. If we were really good while dad was doing this, why we would get a treat afterwards. We were taught how to walk in a cemetery with respect. It was kind of interesting. Some days Mom would say well Dad’s not going to be home for lunch because he has to work in the mausoleum. Sometimes when he was working in the mausoleum they would spring a leak and they had some kind of a gas and it would make him sick.
MP: How do you walk in a cemetery?
MR: We were taught to walk up close to the monument and not to walk on the top where the body is. Never walk on the body area.
MP: That is what we were taught also. It tears my heart when you go to the cemetery and these kids are running all over the place.
MR: That is up to the parents to teach them and correct them. I can remember Dad saying I made some money today and she would say, well how bad was the money today? They had it hidden for a long long time and it smelled bad. That is the way they did it in those days.
RP: Did you know the city heats that in the wintertime. The marble just glows. The city caretaker said if they didn’t keep heat in it the marble would crack and deteriorate. It is probably just enough heat to keep the marble from cracking. We had a History Detective meeting inside it and we were given a guided tour.
MR: As I can recall a company came in here and built that. My dad said the company went all over the United States and built them. He always thought they were not on the up and up. We have a gorgeous mausoleum tho. I haven’t been in it for years.
MP: It has held up well over the years. Someone from out of town took a picture of their mausoleum and told how similar it was to their city mausoleum.
MR: Dad used to go to Vermont and pick out stones. In my bedroom I have a lamp made out of white marble. At the bottom of the lamp a young girl is sitting reading a book. I like it.
MP: I like old things.
RP: I can remember too, my dad would always drive down Scott Street and I can remember the tombstones out there on the corner. It was located on Scott and Main Streets where Funkhouser’s is now.
MR: My dad, we went home for lunch because we lived right beside the Seventh Day Adventist church, it is a gas station now. He would not wait for us to get out of school to take us home for lunch. We had to run home. We had one hour. We had to do dishes before we went back, but he would not wait on us so we could have that little extra time. Sometimes we would get down there quicker than he because he had a customer or something.
RP: My dad always said he went home for lunch from Central School. He lived on the south side and would have to hurry back.
MP: When you are a kid you can run fast.
RP: When we were downtown and stayed open on Sundays. These kids would go to the movies and come in and ask to use our phone. They would call their parents to come and get them and take them home. They only lived a couple blocks away.
MR: Do you remember Murphy’s?
MP: I worked there.
MR: Do you remember those oil soaked floors? Can you imagine going downtown and being able to go to all those stores and find clothing too.
MP: I could buy undergarments, that was no problem.
MR: That was so much fun. You would wait until Crahan’s had a sale.
MP: We had the Idle Hour for food. We had the New Yorker, Crahan’s and Shoemaker’s. Irene Shields had her clothing store.
MR: The Charles Company was great.
end of tape
The following is additional information provided by Marilyn Rausch at the History Detective meeting on April 5, 2010.
My Saneholtz is related to the George Williams who was murdered with the axe that is now in the Carriage House at the Bloomfield Museum. Mrs. Williams was murdered also. The little baby was left unharmed but an attempt to smother him had been made. He is now living in Galveston, Texas. I will pass this picture around of the Saneholtz family with the baby-Charles Williams. They visited him in 1938. The baby was taken to my great-grandmother and they took care of him. The baby lived. He had wrapped the baby in a blanket in an attempt to smother him. The baby’s hands and fingers were sore when found two days later.
RP: Let me tell you something about your grandmother. She used to come in to the drugstore and she had this formula for washing powder. I would weigh out the ingredients and she would mix her own washing powder.
MR: She made her own drawing salve and she would say words for blood poisoning.
RP: And another thing, we were open on Sunday afternoons and people would come in to the drugstore and ask where is this Biddie’s Restaurant. They had come all the way from Toledo just to eat. I am pretty sure that at that time they advertised in the Peach Section of the Toledo Blade. They would come for their chicken dinners.
Russell I can remember when chickens were all roasted outside.
MR: That wasn’t chickens. The chickens were all fried inside and then baked in the ovens. All the meat was done on the spit like the big hams, roast pork and roast beef. It was outside and they would take it in, cut it up and put it in nice big sandwiches. They made their own fresh relish from vegetables in the garden. We still have the recipe and we said we would never give it away.
RP: Thanks a lot Marilyn for your memories.
|©2010 Henry County Historical Society|

Sorry, but this is all still too much for me. This is disgusting. I am currently attempting to watch "The Normal Heart" on HBOe, but I don't know how much longer I can watch. It took me forever (this year) to watch "Milk," which was released in 2008, but that is only because I love Sean Penn.
I did learn some interesting legal facts, but otherwise, I cannot comprehend this lifestyle. I know a few gay people, one of whom I worked with and still keep in touch with. I think she understands where I come from, even though I cannot understand her. We have been friends for over (20) years and I like her and I accept her, but I do not like it, if that makes any sense.
I guess I will keep on trying, but I don't think I will ever understand it or fully accept it. Thank you for listening. -- smtz

Fox had a buddy over to play and after being sick and couped up in the house for the last week, he was so excited to play with someone other than us!
Fox and I went to the candlelight service on Christmas Eve and they gave him a glow stick instead of a candle. He was mesmerized by the singing and every time they would finish a song, he would stuff that little glow stick in between his legs as fast as he could so he could clap. It was so cute to watch and the service was beautiful, it was my favorite part of the day.
This is what Christmas looked like at the Jones House!
Fox was very surprised that Santa wasn't at his usual spot in the mall when he went to the play place with Hannah.
Katie sent me this picture while I was grocery shopping to make me jealous that she got Fox cuddles. I'm sure the cuddles lasted all of 5 seconds before he was over it, based on his face...ha!
When I got home from work, Fox told me he wanted to take a walk with me. So we walked and walked and walked until 1.5hrs later we finally made it around the block! (There were a lot of rocks to inspect and sticks to collect)😂He climbed on this rock and told me to take his picture...ha! This was one of those days I will remember for the rest of my life, no matter how uneventful it was, and I'm so grateful to have a boss that makes these afternoons possible for me!
When Katie got a pedicure, Fox requested that she get green nails (his favorite color), so when she came back to show him, he said he wanted green nails too! While we didn't have green nail polish, he settled for black and was so excited and proud that he got his nails painted for the first time.
Patrick came into the office and everyone thought it was Robert and ran over to give him a group hug. Robert HATES hugs, but Patrick loved it apparently!
We had an impromptu New Year's Eve celebration with some friends! It was fun catching up with these ladies and Fox had a blast playing with his friends.

|Secrets: The Comet League
Author: Shadow x Wolf PM
Roxy is just your average girl, going camping with her family one fall afternoon. Late that night she is snatched from her bed by masked men and dragged into a world she never knew existed. Now she has a choice, one that is very hard to make: Live a normal life with her family, or become a part of a magical universe and fight a war that may cost Roxy her life.Rated: Fiction T - English - Adventure/Suspense - Chapters: 31 - Words: 46,526 - Reviews: 37 - Favs: 3 - Follows: 2 - Updated: 11-05-12 - Published: 07-14-12 - id: 3041794
|A+ A- Full 3/4 1/2 Expand Tighten|
Here is an extremely action-y chapter. I hope you like it. (I have thought the whole scene through, visualized it, etc. etc. It all works :D) I hope you enjoy!
After another minute of listening to linkin park, I faked a shiver. I wrapped my body up close in itself, and tried to burrow into my sweatshirt. It truly was a slight bit cold, but not as much as I was faking. Another minute of shivering, and Tom cast a frown in my direction.
"You okay?" He inquired in a genuine tone. I nodded, and faking that I was trying to prevent my teeth chattering, I responded.
"J-just a little cold. But, it is nearly winter." He nodded thoughtfully, and quieted. I continued with my plan, faking the chilliness in the air. I don't know how long I continued, possibly overplaying it a bit before I brought out the next section of my plan.
"H-hey Tom, can I please sit next to you?" He looked at me as if I had bees for brains, but after a moment nodded, obviously still trying to do his good guy act. I moved across the moving van, and sat as close as I could, pressing up to his side entirely. His body did radiate warmth, and he didn't display to many signs of discomfort as I settled down. I gradually let the fake shivers fade, and seem to become a bit happier. Despite the fact that I hated and was truly afraid to be this close to him, I tried to act as if I was comfortable. His tensed muscles slowly released, and I eventually started on the next part of the plan.
"Isn't it unsafe that we don't have seatbelts of anything? I mean, I have been jolted quite a bit, but nothing enough to hurt me. What if something does happen that is big enough to hurt if we aren't secure?" Tom looked down at me, his face incredibly close to me now. I resisted shivering away, and retreating, and instead listened to his answer.
"It is a really long drive, and we want you to be comfortable and well rested. Not to mention, I am sure you would feel much more trapped if you were strapped in, rather in an area more roomy, such as this." I nodded, as if I understood and agreed. I piped up again in what seemed like a completely innocent tone, which masked very well what I was about to do. Part of me told me this was the last chance to back out, but I knew I had to try everything.
"You know, you are right. It does allow us to do a lot more as well." He looked down at me like he didn't understand what I was saying, but I knew exactly what I meant. I used my bunched up legs like springs, and rammed sideways into him. He was knocked down for a second after letting out a grunt of surprise. I jumped on top of him like an animal, and as my hands went for his throat I jabbed my knee into his crotch. He let out another grunt and I managed to get my small hands around his thick throat. I squeezed down for a moment, but a hand came up and smacked the side of my head. Though I am sure it was gentle for him, it sent my sprawling to the side with a thump.
I struggled to shake it off as I saw him gather himself, and I charged again. He blocked my nut shot, but that left him open to my fist into his solar plexus. He didn't even lose his breath as I expected him to, and rather, used his hands to grab my wrists. I felt the same terror I did almost a day ago in bed seep into me, and caught his thigh with a swinging leg. He went sideways as it crashed right below his hip, and I planted my foot in his groin and twisted my hands away somehow. I had the most sickening feeling he wasn't even trying, and the panic started to come back rather than adrenaline. He lunged toward me as I retreated, and in an attempt to move, I actually ran into him.
I felt the van swerve beneath us and we both toppled sideways. Somehow I ended up landing right on him, and tried to use another choking grip on his neck. This time he was lying on his stomach, so I could grab from behind. My hands got to his throat again, but all he had to do was roll over to have me thrown off and partially crushed. I let out a cry as he gathered himself, one of my legs still partially pinned, and turned to one of my most natural weapons. I opened my fingers wide and made them into miniature hooks, and lunged at his face.
He was too busy blocking my free leg trying to get another cheap shot in on him, so I had the perfect chance to let my nails rake over his face. He let out a scream and his mouth let loose a loud swear word, and I could feel with a sickening realization some of his skin was under my nails. The van halted and we were thrown forward, throwing us apart. My head hit the wall, sending me into a spinning world for a few moments. He was coming at me already, and I wasn't quite ready. My best defense was to kick out with my legs, driving him back a bit. This was really taking the energy out of me, and I felt a rock sink in my stomach as the door flung open.
I was too busy grappling with Tom to even try to move towards the exit, but I saw another huge figure enter the back. Tom managed to snag my legs in his two hands, but that left my arms to defend against my new attacker. Tom used the steady grip on my legs to flip me on my back, and I saw another pair of hands going towards my wrists. Still trying to wriggle away from Tom, I caught the hands coming towards me in my own grasp. I didn't even think as I drew them close with a swift yank, and sunk my teeth around the wrist.
A loud cry was emitted from the newly arrived man's mouth, and he tried to pull away. Despite the disgusting copper that filled my mouth I didn't let go. I heard Tom yell
"She's a bloody fighter for sure!" A grunt came from the one that I was biting and he finally pulled away, leaving a few small bits of skin in my mouth. I was going to spit them out and go for another attack with my hands when a hand hit me up against the head with a considerable amount of force. My head was thrown to the ground, and before I could recover, hands wrapped around my wrists. For a moment, they ceased moving now they both had me firmly in their grasp. I still tried to squirm away, but with panting breaths realized I would have no success. Eventually I just stopped my struggles and lay there, my ankles still wrapped in a tight grip, as well as my wrists. The new arrival, I realized was Mike when he spoke.
"Roxy, please, I know you're scared, but this is making it really hard. You don't have to worry about us hurting you or anything. This is only the first day still. We have a lot longer to go." I glared up at him, trying to seem as menacing as a pinned little girl could be, despite the tears that were spilling down my face.
Transferring my wrists to only one of his hands, Mike reached into one of his pockets, and began to talk to Tom as if I wasn't even there.
"Should we go to plan K? I think this is a good time." Tom didn't really respond right away, but did within a few seconds.
"I mean, just a low dosage though. Just enough to subdue her, not go all out. Let me tell you though, she is a pretty good fighter. Didn't think that she would be this good." Mike let out a rueful laugh and seemed to finally find what he was looking for in his pocket.
"Really, you think so Tom? Look what she did to my wrist." As he said this, a drop of his blood actually fell on my face. I tried to turn my head, but another drop fell onto my cheek. I let out a guttural growl I wasn't sure actually came from me. Mike sighed, and with resignation, I felt the same rope twist around my wrists again.
"Listen, Roxy, we aren't the bad guys at all. I can't explain everything. I wish I could, this would make it much more simple. But, now, I really hate to do this, but we have our job to do, and you're preventing that." Now that my wrists were tied again, I could feel my chest starting to heave with sobs and panic. He let out a sigh, and moved my wrists so they were above my head. Feeling completely vulnerable, I froze as Mike reached for something I couldn't see. A few moments later he gently wiped his blood from my face. I let out a scream, but they no longer seemed to care how loud I was. When an object appeared in Mike's other hand that I could see, I looked intently. It looked like a mask that would cover a mouth and nose, and it had a thin tube connected to it. My entire body filled with ice as the deadly possibilities crept up on me of what it could be. Mike must have seen my fear kicked up a few notches, because he started to talk to me in his deep, soothing voice.
"Now listen, Roxy, I promise this isn't going to hurt. All I need you to do is to take a few deep breaths through your nose, and that'll be it. This won't kill you, just make you really tired. It has a lot of official names, but that doesn't matter. Don't try and hold your breath either, please. That makes it more tedious. That's all Roxy. Here we go." I tried to turn my head to the side as the mask came down closer to my face, but one of his fingers reached around my cheek so I couldn't turn fully away. The soft rubber came down over my mouth and nose, and a slight hiss happened.
I was too worn and out of breath to even bother trying to hold it, so did as he said. If I appeared like I gave up, he might actually believe that I had given in. True to Mike's word, within a few deep breaths I felt my previously bolt wide eyes flutter shut. Mike's voice came to me through the growing fog.
"See Roxy? You're doing great. Just a few more. One more minute." I took a last deep breath through my nose and a black fog consumed me entirely.

A few thoughts:
If he is having recurring ear infections, he could have yeast issues.
What are you feeding? If you change to a food without grains and without brewer’s yeast, it could help. Grains break down into sugar in the dogs body and this sugar can supply nourishment for the yeast overgrowth causing ear infections, skin or gut problems.
A Digestive Enzyme/Probiotic can also help. Here are two quality products:
*Sunday Sundae: http://ineedthat.corecommerce.com/Sunday-Sundae.html
*Digest All +: Wholistic Digest All Plus? - Digestive Support - Canine
There are also some Homeopathic's that could help. If you are interested, you can pm me.
Hope your Fur Baby gets better!
He only has ear infections when his ears get dunked. He's 2.5 years now and he's only had them three times.
First time was when we allowed him to swim in the local lake, which he loves.
Second time, my wife got water in his ears while bathing him. She's so stubborn about wanting to wash his face and we've actually had near knock down drag out fights about her doing this as its so detrimental to the animal when he gets ear infections.
I've had to forbid her from bathing him. Now I do it. Who cares is his head's not clean when the rest of him is?
This time we think he dunked his own head in his play pool going after one of his toys in the water that had sunk to the bottom of the pool.
He's at the vet now. I reminded them of his previous visits and how problematic he can be when confronted by several techs he doesn't know. In the past, they've had to sedate him.
Today they didn't believe me when I told them that he was so powerful they'd never be able to hold him down, even though they've seen this dog before. The tech said, "I'd be very surprised if we can't treat his ears." I told him that him getting a surprise was a foregone conclusion if he didn't sedate the dog.
10 minutes of hearing the sounds of a fight and after one tech after another was called from the front desk to the back they came out and said I was right. He needed to be sedated.
I'd already given him some happy pills before we took him to the vet.
I must admit that it breaks my heart every time I have to take him there. I know it's like torture for him. And, one day it's sure to remake his character into something awful.
At present, he's the most loving, dedicated dog around us. And, his puppy aloofness with other people on the street is wearing off too. He's quite approachable now.
But the second he sees the vet's office he's nervous and drooling and breathing fast. And, he looks at me with the most condemning eyes when I make him come into the vets office.
I fear his life will be shortened only because of his hatred of the vet. Any suggestions. I'm pretty much at the end of my rope on taking him to the vet.

MARCH 1ST 2010 you went to sleep. rain i will never be the same. I pray ,I wish I bow to you my heart& soul please forgive me. you were not ready! I keep seeing & hearing the vet saying she is going to wake up are you sure?! omg rain when you lost your hearing and blind I thought maybe you were so uncomfortable maybe unhappy. yet lisa knew my hands were tied it was as she put the gun in my hand you were tring to wake up.please feel my heart it went with you!!!!!!!!!!you were 19 you kept your promise you never leave me and you were and are so much bigger person then most humans you made me peaceful, we are soulmates and you are & were truly amazing spirit and soul. I just cant believe your not here and that day at vet . hear me feel me I love you you are my heart and it went with you.

Chotu has been admitted to Resq today.
We weren’t able to find a foster close by and hence reported his case to Resq. His condition was not improving much due to his living conditions. Infact when he was taken to the vet today for his third post bite anti Rabies shot she found maggot eggs in the wound 😦
Luckily Resq agreed to take him in and Natasha who is a God sent girl in time of need picked up Chotu and took him to the vet and then Resq .
I am not in town and hence Natasha volunteered to do this and I cannot express how big a deal this is for me. Thank you girl. Forever indebted to you. May dog bless you in abundance 🐾💕🐾
Chotu is now in the best hands there are at Resq. He will be fine and released soon at his home ground.
I wish every Chotu found a home and did not have to face what he is facing today.
Donated a sum from the donations I received to Resq today. Will disburse some more as time goes by.

My brother had been in the hospital for a week when he got his diagnosis. Liver cancer. Six months to a year. “I’m so sorry to have to tell you this,” the doctor said. My brother answered without missing a beat, “Doc, I’ve had more fun in my life than most people dream of.”
Indeed, he probably had, and a lot of his fun had involved risk taking. Everett had fished for sharks, hunted for snakes, swallowed all kinds of drugs and alcohol. He had lived life on his own terms, sometimes paying a high cost. He had been in prison and lost the affection of his beloved only daughter. For a long time, I, too, had kept my distance, but when he was in his fifties I made a conscious choice to reconnect, see him in his complexity, and I found that I had a remarkable brother. We spent many hours driving around the Island of Hawaii, sharing the beauty of wild nature, remembering an idyllic childhood.
There were decisions to be made. Would he take chemotherapy? “No.” Would he consent to amputation of a leg? The amputation would give him a shot at a year rather than six months. These were not decisions I could make for him. All I could do was be present, listen when he wanted to think aloud. He decided to go through with the amputation, go to a hospice facility until he stabilized, and then have hospice care at home.
I alerted Everett’s case worker that he needed a window in hospice. He loved the outdoors, had always been happiest in the natural world. He needed to see green, not a parking lot. I had seen the facility, and I knew that there was a garden in back, a hill with trees. She called to check on his assignment — a room overlooking the parking lot. But there was one available that looked on the garden. It would be his. Moments after he arrived, a bird landed in a bush by the window. “I got me a really nice place!” he said.
The first stage of caretaking for my brother had been from a distance. When our mother bought him a house on the Big Island, where he had been staying, to help provide stability, she put it in my name. I became responsible for the house, and by proxy, my brother. I made intermittent trips, taking care of any repairs he couldn’t do himself and driving him to medical visits.
In the second stage, I spent long days with him in the hospital. He had been in severe pain for days. As we took long drives along the coast and up the volcano, he would often jerk with pain that shot up his leg. When I would ask if we should go home, he would say no. He would rather hurt doing what we were doing than hurt at home. Finally, as the pain persisted, he allowed me to take him to the emergency room. When the intake nurse asked why he had come to the ER, he simply reported “pain.” I heard the nurse report to the doctor, “This is chronic, not an emergency.” I jumped in, reported “severe intensification of pain…pain advancing from foot up the leg…fluid exuding from foot and leg.” The doctor took notes and then admitted Everett to the hospital.
The third stage was intense and hard; I lived with Everett and participated in his care 24 hours a day in hospice. I wanted desperately for him to have some quality of life in the time he had left. I began to think about how to craft that, how to connect him with friends and family, local and distant. Would it be possible to facilitate a reunion with his long-estranged but still beloved daughter?
I was deeply grateful for the option of sleeping in his room, and in the bathroom, I set up everything I needed for making pour-over coffee. We had a long tradition of sharing good, strong coffee in the morning. I wanted that tradition to continue as long as he wanted it.
Family had always been important to Everett. Our childhood family bonds held strong even through difficulty and included extended family, a bevy of cousins whom we often talked about. I had also learned on my visits that Everett’s friends, “the Pahoa boys” as he called them, were immensely important to him and to each other. And I knew that Everett felt close to “the boys back home,” his fishing and snake-hunting buddies in North Carolina.
I made phone calls, sent emails. Friends came. Cousins sent messages and songs and flowers, and the miracle I hoped for happened: his daughter came, sat with him, held his hand.
Things didn’t go according to plan. He never made it home. But for eleven days his hospice room was filled with the voices of people who loved him.
We continued our early morning coffee ritual right up to the hour he died. He could no long drink from a cup, even if I held it, but I could bring coffee into a straw and release it into his mouth.
I am confident that he left the world peacefully happy.
Want to keep connected to The Conversation Project? Sign-up for our newsletter(s), follow us on social media (Twitter, Facebook, Instagram), download our conversation starter resources and feel free to reach us at firstname.lastname@example.org.

peopleShow most recent or highest rated first. Common beliefs in this section include:
- Euthanasia is youth in Asia
- If you don't hold your breath as you pass a cemetery you will die or become possessed.
- People killed in films or on TV die in real life.
When i was about 4, my Pop died and my parents told me that he went to heaven up in the sky. From then on i assumed that people went to heaven on helicopters and each time i saw one i would get upset because i thought someone was about to go to heaven.
I thought that all people lived until their 100th birthday, then they died. It was like an expiration date of sorts ....
when i was little i heard on a movie something about a dead weight. then my brother told me that when people die they gain heaps of weight and are realy hard to carry.i believed this until i was 17 nd sum1 told me it wasnt true.
I used to think that euthanasia was a charity for little Indian kids. I would always hear people go "down with euthanasia" and wonder what people had against little Indian kids
My great grandmother died when I was 9. I didn't go to the funeral because I thought she'd be a skeleton.
When I was little we used to live across the road from a graveyard, which was just over the hill from a river. I used to think that when the fog was rolling up, that was when the dead people were coming to get me.
whenever an important character in a movie dies, someone always rushes up to them and lifts their arm up to take the deceased's pluse. upon not finding one the person drops the deceaseds arm in dismay. i used to believe that the reason they were lifting the dead persons arm up was a way to test if they were really dead or not. if they were alive, the arm would stay up, if they were dead it would drop back down.
i had not yet discovered the concept of a pulse
i used to believe that when people said something like "so-and-so died when he was 84" or whatever age, that you actually died on your birthday. I pictured in my mind whoever it was with a party hat on in front of a cake and they just collapsed on the ground right there after they blew out the candles.
I was raised Catholic, and when I was very small, the Funeral Mass was very confusing. I was just getting to the age when I could understand what the priest was saying, and I came to the conclusion that the people receiving communion were actually eating the dead person. The really scarey thing is that I don't remember the idea bothering me!
I used to believe that you had to keep moving. If you kept still (like while you were sleeping) god would think you were dead. So whenever I went to bed I would always kick.
Well. when i was 4 or 5, me and my mom were driving down the northway and i saw a cemetary that seemed as though it was in someones backyard. So i was thinking that if you really wanted to, you could bury your family in your backyard if you wanted to. So when i came to this revelation, i told my mom " So wait, if these people can bury their family in their backyard, can i bury you in the backyard?" and she was astonished by this question. So then i just continued what i was saying "Well then, if im gonna bury you in our backyard, i'd better start digging!" and she wont let me live it down to this day.
After the death of my great-grandmother (when I was about 6), my mother was trying to explain to me what happened to people after they died. Not having any specific religious views other than a belief in an afterlife of some kind, I was told "nobody really knows what happens to the soul", which for some reason satisfied me. I was more upset about what happened to the body. When I was informed that the body was put into "a casket", I must have got "casket" and "basket" mixed up, because I pictured dead people getting stuffed into something like a clothes hamper, which was always called the "laundry basket" in our house. I thought that was horrible. I didn't sort it out until several years later, when I saw a funeral in a movie.
When I was little me and my brother used to have a competition to see who would be the prime minister of the house for a week, and we had policies and debates [yes, as all children do]. One day when I was writing down some policies I saw on the news that someone had committed suicide and that it was tragic, and I thought that committing suicide was mass murder or something. Later on when we had out "debate" I proposed "Everyone that commits suicide should be put in prison for life"... oh my.
I used to think that the meaning of life was to figure out what the meaning of life really is, and in that very moment that you do, you die. Therefore the smarter you are, the younger you'll die.
I had an aunt who died when I was, um, four or five, I suppose. My mom told me when we would be going to the funeral and such. I was pretty nervous, because I was under the impression that, at the church, the body would be inside a glass coffin, suspended from the ceiling. To this day I have no idea where this bit of imagery came from.
My daughter plays alot of a game called Ratchet and Clank(I mean the whole series she is crazy about it) and in there if you get killed ratchet spins around and falls down. My daughter believes that when people die they all spin around and fall down. She still doesn't believe me when I say they don't
My Mom and I used to drive up to another town in California to visit some friends of hers quite often. On the way, we would always pass the same Kentucky Fried Chicken restaurant. In the window was propped a life-size mannequin of Colonel Sanders, the company's mascot. The first time we drove past it, my mother, thinking herself to be hilarious, told me that the mannequin was actually the REAL Colonel Sander's mummified body, preserved, stuffed, and put up for display. I believed this for many years afterward, always staring with amazement as we drove by, wondering why the body had not decayed yet, and squeezing my eyes shut when the glare of the dead Colonel got to be too much for me to handle. Thanks, Mom.
When I was five, my Grandad died. A few months later, my cousin had a baby. When I asked my Mum why my cousin's baby had been born after my Grandad died, she said it was because when someone in a family died, someone was born to replace them. The next time there was a birth in the family, I was terrified that someone else was going to die!
my mum told me that you should live everyday like it was your last. when she said this, i thought that i was going to die the next day so i did everything that i wanted to do with my friends-that included sharing a cubicle in the girls loos at school! (i was about 6 at the time). when i got home i rang all of my friends up saying i would die soon and they were distraught. the next day when i went into school, they all thought i was a ghost and it took alot of convincing that i wasn't
When I was younger, I used to pile pillows up on me while I slept. I believed that if someone broke into the house, the pile of pillows would stop a bullet if the stranger decided to shoot me.

Tell me about your OC experience?
My OC experience started in high school. I was a rebel without a cause and didn’t make very much of my time at OC as a student. As I grew up I began to look back at it as a huge gift that my parents wanted me to have and when I started looking at it that way I started remembering the very precious parts of my high school experience. When I heard there was an art teaching position opening up at OC, I was very excited and nervous to apply. Since I have been hired it has been such a huge blessing to my wife and I; I do not think I could go back to working in a public high school.
Why did you decide to be a teacher?
Business school was not going well and I was thinking about dropping out and joining the military. I talked it over with my dad and he told me to take a class I thought I would enjoy so I signed up for a ceramics class. I later talked with Joe Moran the head of the art department for CSUSB at the time and he told me I should be an art teacher. So, I changed my major and started focusing on art education.
what’s something about you that most people don’t know?
Something about me that most people don’t know and might find surprising is that I have never had a cavity or broken bone and I definitely have deserved both.

People on board
WOOD, George Stanley
George Stanley Wood was born in Leeds in 1889 to Jeremiah Wood and Annie Settle. He was the second of their seven children, all of whom were alive in 1911. Jeremiah was a ‘Clothing or Tailor’s Cutter’, a trade that his eldest son John also followed. In the 1911 census George, aged twenty-two, gave his occupation as Lithographer. The family first lived in Quarry Street, later moving a short distance to Hartley Grove in Woodhouse in Leeds.
In August 1915 George Wood married Rose Nellie Cotton in Hackney in London and they had a daughter Winifred Rose, born in 1916 in Hackney. When he enlisted he gave his address as Bowes Park in Harringay. He enlisted in the Lancashire Hussars Yeomanry at Hackney Baths. In October 1918 he was Lance Corporal in the 2/1st Regiment which had moved to Ireland in May of that year. This was a training and draft-supplying regiment and it is not known if he was returning from Ireland on leave or to be drafted.
George Wood did not survive the sinking of RMS Leinster on the 10th of October but his body was recovered and he was buried in Grangegorman Military Cemetery in Dublin. His name is recorded on the Memorial in Holy Trinity Church in Hoxton, London.

“The Lord will fight for you; you need only to be still.” Exodus 14:14
Daniel had a lot of great qualities. We would do well to try and build some of these qualities into our own lives as God’s people.
One quality he possessed was wisdom. Daniel knew what he could depend on. We see this clearly played out in the 6th Chapter of Daniel. Daniel was in a bind. Even after years of exceptional and quality work that led him to earn Darius’ favor he found himself under attack. His earthly accomplishments now were of no service to him. In fact, you could make a case for the fact that they were the basis of the attack themselves. I am sure that Daniel was pleased that his work in the past had been well received, but he was wise enough to know his ultimate security did not lie within those earthly efforts. His faith lay elsewhere. Faithfulness to God was the second great quality we see in Daniel.
Daniel also had earned the friendship of people in high places. King Darius himself knew Daniel and was planning to promote him to a high position within the kingdom. But as we see in the story, this earthly ally was really no safeguard at all to Daniel. In fact this earthly ally was the one who ended up throwing him into the Lion’s Den. But Daniel’s faith did not lie in earthly alliances, no matter how strong those seemed.
Daniel’s faith led him to be confident and thankful. `In the face of danger and attack he was thankful. It is right there in verse 10, “Three times a day he got down on his knees and prayed, giving thanks to his God.” Was he thankful for the attacks? I doubt it. Was he thankful for the lions? I would say no. He was thankful for a God that he knew would be by his side always. Daniel’s faith and thankfulness were well founded.
In the end, Daniels diligent and good work did not save him. Knowing the earthly king Darius was of no value either. His God saved him. Our God saved Daniel. His story should remind us that our God is with us today to help, sustain and save.
Praise God from whom all blessing flow.
“Great is they faithfulness of God my Father, there is no shadow of turning with thee.”

Cassie swore she'd never forgive Ethan for breaking her heart when they were in acting school years ago. He was her one great love, and when he refused to love her back, a part of her died forever...or so she thought. Now she and Ethan are sharing a Broadway stage, and he's determined to win her back. Finally he's able to say all the things she needed to hear years ago...but can she believe him? Has he really changed, and what makes this time different from all his other broken promises?

Join free now!
Search Your PostCode
It is free to search locals
It ends up I liked being an escort, far more than I thought I would anyway. I even started taking the money, mostly due to the fact that I was much too practical to let a little thing like guilt obstruct of common sense. Then, if I had the common sense I would not have been an escort either. I would have been simply another fifteen-year-old catholic schoolgirl, doing her research, doing her nails, doing the little ridiculous things that little girls do.
I had not been a little girl in a long time.
I just worked three or four nights a week anyhow, given that I had to be home by 9 pm on school nights and 10 o'clock on weekends. Deke didn't mind, he said that was a great thing due to the fact that he could in fact charge more, especially if the person I was going with picked me up at school. That advantage turned out to be worth a couple of hundred dollars extra, although I didn't really like it. I was always afraid somebody would see me entering into a unusual automobile, a various odd vehicle whenever, and question what was going on.
I 'd been doing it for almost 2 months currently, and I 'd lost track of the number of men I 'd had sex with. I didn't want to know, however it needed to be a lot. I 'd made a great deal of cash too. Way excessive for a ninth grader to invest, even after Deke took his cut. He charged 300 dollars an hour for me, or 500 dollars for 2. Choosing me up at school was worth an additional 200, which I thought was absurd, but you 'd marvel the number of men wanted precisely that. Like it showed beyond a doubt that they were getting the genuine deal, an minor whore to fuck and suck . These were all older people too, like my father's age, or more frequently even older, in their 40's and 50's primarily. They had a lot of money to invest and it was the tips that really flushed my checking account. Deke provided me 30% and kept 70% for himself. He stated that was generous because he was my supervisor, my representative, my security person, my marketing and transportation all rolled into one. He bought my clothes and the stuff I need to work, like condoms and lube and scrap like that. He did all the work if you listened to him tell it, and all I did was lay there and get rich. It was more like acting than anything else given that I had to in fact like these people for an hour or two. I had to act younger sometimes too, as a little girl perhaps eleven or twelve years old; but never older. I liked acting though and I think I had a real skill for it.
The males liked me for a little bit, although some of them loved me for genuine and asked me if I 'd wed them, or at least come back to their cities and live with them. They were in love with who I pretended to be for that brief time we were together, that's all, and while part of me felt lonesome because I understood it wasn't truly me they liked, mainly I felt a little much safer that method. Like a man who enjoyed me wouldn't harm me, you know? I 'd had sex with like fifty guys or something, many of them desiring me to call them Daddy while we did it. Some of them desired to call me by a different name, their child's name, or a niece or the little lady next door possibly.
I could close my eyes and think of the man who was making love to me really was my papa. I might speak with him, inform him I enjoyed him, how he made me feel unique and grown-up and enjoyed. And somewhere, somehow along that trip, I 'd begun to believe it. I 'd go home and see my genuine daddy and practically forget that it had not been him that I 'd fucked an hour or two prior to. I was falling in love, in full-grown love, and I could not help it. It was set into me, maturing not as his daughter however as his partner. We 'd done whatever but skilled our relationship, I thought, and he needed to feel the same way. Didn't he?
escort agency Alton Barnes SN8, escort service Alton Barnes SN8, escort girl Alton Barnes SN8, mature escorts Alton Barnes SN8, adult escorts Alton Barnes SN8, cheap escorts Alton Barnes SN8, local escort Alton Barnes SN8, independent escorts Alton Barnes SN8
Areas near by
|birchills ws2||farraline iv2||downton so41||sandfield park l12||cwmdwyfran sa33|

My American story started when my mother, Amelia, met my father, Jose, in the Philippines. When my brothers and I were just kids, we moved to the United States in 1970. Soon after my younger twin sisters were born in the States.
We were taught, we were born Filipinos but raised as Americans. We had to give back to the country that took care of us. My mother got her Master’s degree in Social Work and became a therapist, now retired. My two older brothers and I are 1st generation law enforcement officers. My youngest brother is a successful owner of a well respected Muay Thai school in his community. My two youngest twin sisters have very successful careers in the corporate world.
We've all continued the legacy my parents started. We are all a very intricate part of the American tapestry.

I was a successful, 26-year-old woman living life on the go. Around this time, I started feeling like I had weights on my legs, and my body was heavy. I had difficulty getting in and out of the driver’s seat. I put it down to my change in lifestyle-perhaps I had put on weight. It never occurred to me that I was unwell. I thought it was normal and altered my lifestyle in an effort to make things better. I switched to a healthier diet and started exercising. However, by the time I was 31, I couldn’t stand up from a chair without using my hands or climb stairs without support. As well as the weakness, I was out of breath and my heart was pounding. I was literally gasping for breath going upstairs. Still, I made excuses to my family, I had gained weight and my body was recovering after I quit smoking.
I finally acknowledged that I needed medical help when I was 33. My daughter and I went on a trip together. I fell while trying to board a bus and two strangers had to help me up. I can’t describe that humiliating feeling of helplessness. Eventually, after a long series of tests, I was diagnosed with late-onset Pompe disease. I felt relieved to finally have an explanation for my condition. At first, my relatives found my diagnosis hard to accept, especially my partner. Nevertheless, our relationship grew stronger. He proposed to me, and shortly after we were married.
Despite the limitations of Pompe disease, I continue to work and live my life as normally as I possibly can. I have a new hobby knitting soft toys, which I like to call “yoga for the brain”, because it’s so calming. I consider myself lucky to have found doctors who were able to diagnosis a rare disease. I am grateful for my life and for my family.

A home health agency, excitedly called my school to announce that they would be happy to hire new grads. Since I have other healthcare experience, though not nursing, and felt comfortable working alone (as I was formerly an EMT), I figured if nothing else I would have an opportunity to utilize my interview skills.
I am a new grad, my license was issued but I was still waiting for my hard copy of my LPN license. (The agency claimed the BoN said that you cannot work as a nurse until you have a hard copy of your license. Which quite simply is not true, as confirmed with the BoN). I was asked to go to meet a client. I was never told the rate of pay nor how long the "visit" would be (I was driving when she called and just got the name, address, time & to be there.)
I got to the home, I was informed I would be working as a HHA (I've never been an HHA, HHA skills were not covered in my nursing program
. And per the BoN nurses cannot work as CHHA/HHA unless they have a CHHA certificate from the BoN after completing the 3 week course.) The person who met me at the house was a nurse FOR A DIFFERENT AGENCY. I felt like an idiot, and didn't want to ask too many questions but the patient was someone who shared her life story spontaneously so I was able to get her background. I was expected to be there for 3 hrs to "orient to the overnight routine". This was on a Wednesday. The other agency nurse casually mentioned that I was expected to start working the upcoming Saturday night from 10P-8A. (Mind you I NEVER gave any indication that I was interested in overnight work. I said it wasn't impossible with enough notice to make arrangements. (I am a single mom of a 9 yo and we have 2 dogs. Sure my mom is nearby but I can't just say, hey mom can you take the kid and dogs overnight on Saturday...) I was shocked and said that I wasn't sure if I could work as a HHA, nor was I ever informed about the potential to work 2 days later in an overnight shift. The patient nearly blew a gasket and called "my" agency up. They claimed that they didn't tell me about the shift in 2 days because they wanted to make sure I "clicked" with the patient. I could hear her tell the patient that it could be weeks before i have my paper license and I could work as an aide until then.
I didn't receive any real training or orientation. I have since gotten my paper license, and informed the agency. She asked if I wanted to per diem overnight job (every other Saturday 10P-8A), and I told her that I am not a CHHA, per BoN regulations I cannot work as a CHHA, and the patient clearly stated that the assistance needed isn't skilled nursing but a home health aide for personal care, possibly even a personal care assistant.
I was called at 7:30 this morning for a call out for a 3 hour case. I've had no training with this home health agency. I have not even seen the paperwork or logs that this agency uses. I was clear that many of my nursing skills were mostly classroom with clinical practice under supervision.
they don't tell the pay rate up front unless specifically asked. They didn't offer any formal orientation or training. (I was surprised when I arrived and it wasn't even a nurse from the agency that allegedly hired me (last I heard they were waiting for the background check to return) and she had no idea about any paperwork or time sheets for the agency that I was supposed to work for.)
Am I nuts, or is this kind of "off"?

"I think the pilot's dead"
An official inspects the hole in the British Airways jet where the windsreen used to be.
The aircraft was packed and bound for Spain. Then the windscreen blew and the captain was sucked out. Nigel Ogden, who saved him by hanging on to his legs, tells his story for the first time to Julia Llewellyn Smith.
It was like something from a disaster movie and I still find it hard to believe I was at the centre of it all. An aircraft full of passengers, out of control at 17,000 feet with the captain stuck outside.
I think about what happened every day. It was Sunday, June 10, 1990. It was a beautiful morning and I was up early because I was working on the British Airways 7.30am flight from Birmingham to Malaga. I was 36, had been an air steward with BA for 12 years, and loved my job with a passion.
I expected that day to be especially enjoyable. It was a holiday flight, so the 81 passengers would be relaxed, and the crew - Captain Tim Lancaster, stewards Simon Rogers and John Heward, and stewardess Sue Prince - had worked together, on and off, for years. The only member of the crew new to us was the co-pilot, Alistair Atcheson. The aircraft was a 43-tonne BAC 1-11, which was known as the jeep of the skies, because it was a workhorse - reliable and easy to maintain.
The flight was delayed for an hour, so I wandered up and down the plane, making sure everyone knew what was going on. Tim made an announcement - "You'll be pleased to know the weather is sunny and dry in Malaga and we should be on our way shortly" - then the dispatcher told us we could leave. We did the safety briefing and Simon and I strapped ourselves into our jump seats, chatting about which team had lost at rugby the previous day. We heard the roaring of the engines and then we were up in the air.
It was 13 minutes after take-off and we had just reached 17,300 feet, 5000 feet beneath our assigned altitude. I went onto the flight deck and asked if they'd like tea. I was just stepping out, with my hand on the door handle, when there was an enormous explosion and the door was blown out of my hands. I thought, "My God. It's a bomb." Explosive decompression made the whole cabin mist up like fog for a second - then the plane started to plummet.
I whipped round, peering through the mist, and saw the front windscreen had disappeared and Tim, the pilot, was going out through it. He had been sucked out of his seatbelt and all I could see were his legs. I jumped over the control column and grabbed him round his waist to avoid him going out completely. His shirt had been pulled off his back and his body was bent upwards, doubled over round the top of the aircraft. His legs were jammed forward, disconnecting the autopilot, and the flight door was resting on the controls, sending the plane hurtling down at nearly 643km/h through some of the most congested skies in the world.
Everything was being sucked out of the aircraft: even an oxygen bottle that had been bolted down went flying and nearly knocked my head off. I was holding on for grim death but I could feel myself being sucked out too. John rushed in behind me and saw me disappearing, so he grabbed my trouser belt to stop me slipping further, then wrapped the captain's shoulder strap around me. Luckily, Alistair, the co-pilot, was still wearing his safety harness from take-off, otherwise he would have gone, too.
The aircraft was losing height so quickly that the pressure soon equalised and the wind started rushing in - at 627km/h and -17C. Paper was blowing round all over the place and it was impossible for Alistair to hear air-traffic control. We were spiralling down at 80 feet per second with no autopilot and no radio.
I was still holding on to Tim but the pressure made him weigh the equivalent of 226 kilograms. It was a good thing I'd had so much training at rugby tackles, but my arms were getting colder and colder and I could feel them being pulled out of their sockets.
Simon came rushing through and, with John, managed to unwrap Tim's legs and the remains of the doors from the controls, and Alistair got the autopilot back on. But still he continued to increase speed, to lessen the risk of a mid-air collision and to get us down to an altitude where there was more oxygen. He dived to 11,000 feet in two-and-a-half minutes, then finally got the speed down to 300km/h.
I was still holding Tim, but my arms were getting weaker, and then he slipped. I thought I was going to lose him, but he ended up bent in a U-shape around the windows. His face was banging against the windscreen with blood coming out of his nose and the side of his head, his arms were flailing and seemed about 1.8 metre long. Most terrifyingly, although his face was hitting the side screen, his eyes were wide open. I'll never forget that sight as long as I live.
I couldn't hold on any more, so Simon strapped himself into the third pilot's seat and hooked Tim's feet over the back of the captain's seat and held on to his ankles. One of the others said: "We're going to have to let him go." I said: "I'll never do that." I knew I wouldn't be able to face his family, handing them a matchbox and saying: "This is what is left of your husband." If we'd let go of his body, it might have got jammed in a wing or the engines.
I left Simon hanging on to Tim and staggered back into the main cabin. For a moment, I just sat totally exhausted in a jump seat, my head in my hands, then Sue came up to me, very shaken. In front of all the passengers, I put my arms around her and whispered in her ear: "I think the Captain's dead." But then I said: "Come on, love, we've got a job to do."
By now, Alistair was talking to air-traffic control, who were talking him through landing at Southampton airport. All pilot training is done on the basis of two pilots, one to fly and one doing the emergency drill, but Alistair was alone, with a crew he didn't know and relying entirely on memory, because all the manuals and charts had blown away. He asked for a runway of 2500 metres because he was worried that the plane was so heavy with fuel, a tyre would burst or it would go off the runway, but they said all they could offer was 1800m.
Over the intercom he told the passengers we'd lost the windscreen. Some of them could see Tim out of the window but the cabin was silent as the grave. We walked up and down, preparing the passengers for an emergency landing. People gasped as they saw the blood on my face. The place was very shuddery, very rocky. I remember one man at the very back, with a little baby on his knee, saying to me: "We're going to die," and I said: "No, we are not," lying through my teeth.
All I could see out of the windows was a line of trees, and I thought we'd either smash into those or into the housing estate beyond. I had a partner, Jean, and a stepson, Jamie, but I was thinking most about my mum. She'd lost my brother in a car crash the year before, and I couldn't bear to think how she'd take the news. But, in spite of everything, Alistair did the most amazing landing, what we call a greaser - completely smooth and stopping the aircraft only three-quarters of the way down the runway.
There wasn't even any need to use the emergency chutes. We got all the passengers down the steps in an orderly fashion, although I did have to shout at a couple of people who were trying to get their handbags from the lockers. The whole time from the explosion to the landing had been 18 minutes, but it seemed like hours.
I got back on board to check everyone had left. The paramedics had Tim in the cockpit on a stretcher and I went in to see him. He was lying there, covered in blood, but to my amazement I heard him say: "I want to eat." I just exclaimed: "Typical bloody pilot." Luckily, he'd been in a coma throughout the ordeal, his body had just shut down. I went out onto the front steps, and shouted at the others "He's alive!" and then I cried my eyes out.
We learned that all but six of the passengers were still going to travel on to Malaga that afternoon. John and I went into the departure area to see them. I applauded them and they applauded us. I said: "I'm sorry, don't fly British Airways again."
I was left with a dislocated shoulder, a frostbitten face and some frostbite damage to my left eye that still persists. Amazingly, Tim only suffered from frostbite, fractures in his arm and wrist and a broken thumb. Within five months he was flying again and today he's a pilot for easyJet. Alistair and John are still with BA, but Sue and Simon no longer fly.
My mother and I went on a round-the-world trip and I was back at work by October, but it was never the same. I started getting spots all over my body. In February, I had to be hospitalised with psoriasis brought on by post-traumatic stress. It made it difficult for me to work with people as it was so unsightly, and then I started to have a problem with alcohol as well. I used to love going into work - now I hated it.
In 1992, a report was published about the accident. It turned out that a BA engineer, working under pressure, had fitted a new windscreen with bolts that were too small. I was absolutely livid, and withdrew into myself. It took us nine years of fighting to get some small compensation from the airline. Eventually, in 2001, I took early retirement on grounds of ill health. Now I'm a night watchman at a Salvation Army hospital.
This was the fourth time in my career that I had laid my life on the line. There had been an incident leaving Gerona in a thunderstorm, when we found ourselves flying at only 2000 feet above mountains. Another time, the engine blew out on take-off from Perth and we nearly hit a pylon; a third time a hold door fell out just as we were coming off the ground at Zurich. Some people tell me I must be jinxed to have had so many bad experiences. But I think it's amazing I've been through all this and am still alive. I'm not jinxed, I'm a survivor.
- Sunday Telegraph

I had to take a selfie of us girls. I would have added my husband, but he was busy watching the road. It still came out well, we're all smiling and looking straight ahead.
Here is the bridge that takes us from the parking into the grounds. Ashton laid down the map and let us take some photos.
Again another selfie.
We wasted no time and immediately got on the hayride to the pumpkin patch. Ashton was so anxious to get on the hayride. After the selfie, someone took a photo of us, but Ashton wouldn't smile.
As usual, my husband and I were on the search for the biggest, round pumpkin. Ashton however was on the search for the tiniest pumpkin. A much harder search.
Ashton was very unhappy not finding a small pumpkin. But had fun running through the lot of pumpkins everywhere.
Finally, Daddy found her a small pumpkin. It was too heavy for Ashton to carry long, but not too long for her to have her picture taken with it. She had two to choose from, and one though it had a green side, had a rotted stem, so we took the other one. But Ashton wanted her picture with both pumpkins.
After our pumpkin adventure, Ashton went through a haunted house maze and then jumped on the bouncy mat. She did her usual climb of the hay bales. She had a great time. Then she started saying she was thirsty.
Yesterday was the low 50s and today was the high 70s. So the weather was great. So no hot cider. Instead, we opted for a cider slushie! And it was GOOD! We all were "fighting" for a sip. Ashton was not to happy to share her slushie. It was a really tasty one!
Then we headed to the swings and climbing fun and headed home. And once home, our girl wasn't tired a bit. She went on to play with Dawson, who was into kissing her like crazy and playing trains and with her dinning set.
Never a dull moment. It was a great day! I love our pumpkin patch adventures together!

I'm sorry you are still sick. I was hoping that you would feel better today. Take it easy and get lots of rest! Tell Isaac I said to take it easy on you! :)
Sorry that you're feeling under the weather...Jim has had that for about three days now. Take care and feel better soon!
Hope you get to feeling better!!
yuck! i am sorry you were feeling like that! :(
Post a Comment

Brymo says 2Face allegedly accused him of sleeping with his wife Annie Idibia
Written by Max1023fm on October 5, 2021
Ọlawale Ọlọfọrọ, popularly known as Brymo, has called out singer Innocent Idibia, popularly known as 2Baba, for allegedly accusing him of sleeping with his wife, Annie Idibia.
Brymo, who recently had a successful concert tagged “Organised Chaos” took to his social media page recently, to give shocking revelations that involved him, 2baba, and Annie Idibia.
Brymo, who has been off the radar until recently, stated in a tweet thread that he was allegedly accused of sleeping with Annie Idibia. He stated that 2baba had elbowed him in a supposed greeting repeatedly at an AFRIMA press conference in 2015/16 while calling his name.
The thread continued and Brymo stated that he was lured to a guest house where four men attacked him and even gave him a black eye. He went on to state that a source told him the men were sent to attack him courtesy of 2Baba, an attack Brymo couldn’t explain if it was because he supposedly slept with Annie Idibia or because he was gunning for 2Baba’s throne.
Brymo claimed he asked 2Baba directly, but he denied being involved in such an act.
He concluded the tweet by stating that 2Baba should desist from interacting with things and people that are close to him. He also mentioned that the music scene is a business space, hence, everyone should operate freely without anyone having to worship any artist based on their longevity or wealth.
2Face is yet to give a response to these accusations.

NEW ORLEANS HEAD COACH SEAN PAYTON
Opening Statement:[I] thought there were a lot of good things, obviously, in that game as a team. Liked the time of possession. A lot of the things we pointed out that we felt like we needed to do with field position both in the running game and depending the run, we were able to accomplish a good team win. Any questions?
Q: Arguably one of the most complete games you've been a part of?
A: I don't know. It was a good win, so we have to take a peek at the film, I'm sure there will be some things that weren't as clean as we'd like. Overall, the time of possession, our run numbers were – it's a tough team to play here. Every week, I guess it's up to me to worry and focus on the details. I thought our staff did a good job in the preparation for some of the things we were going to get from Buffalo. To measure it against other games would be a little early.
Q: How instrumental was the 1st drive [in] the second half? You guys obviously deferred to the second half and that really seemed to put a stranglehold on it.
A: Uh, yeah I mean. Look, I thought it was important for us to score early in the game when they went up 3 and we were able to overcome a couple third downs. All those drives are important, and certainly when you start the second half and you have a lead, you want to make sure that you come back and try and build on that momentum, and fortunately we were able to do that.
Q: Sean, did it kind of reach a point in the run game where you just said 'We'll do it until they show us they can stop us'?
A: It was also managing the clock, where we're at time wise. The objective is to go in and - just being smart, but yeah, I mean if you're feeling like some things are going. Towards the end of the third quarter, we had one drive where, you know, we had some good runs on them, so we tried to build on that and guys ran hard; guys blocked up front real well, too.
Q: Yeah, I'm saying the pick, but beyond that, could you tell what kind of impact [Sheldon] Rankins was having interiorly?
A: One of the things we wanted to do defensively is try and contain Tyrod [Taylor]. He's an exceptional quarterback when he's outside of the pocket, and I thought we did a really good job for the most part of keeping him at that launch point. I'm sure when we have a chance to look at the tape, we'll look specifically at the tackles. I thought it was a real good effort defensively; we did a lot of things well, but that would just be from an observation on the sidelines.
Q: What did you think about his pick, though?
A: [I] thought it was good.
Q: How did big were some of Michael Thomas' catches in contested situations --
A: I thought he had a couple, and then Brandon Coleman had one big one on a third down. You know, they're all specific to the situation, where we're at in the game. All of them [are] important in keeping the ball moving.
Q: Were you able to tell how the line did at all?
A: What do you mean?
Q: The offensive line, just blocking and the running game.
A: My guess is [that] they did pretty well.
Q: I know you want to watch film, but were you able to gather any impressions?
A: 300 yards rushing, that was the information I gathered; that's what they did pretty well. I think that we'll look specially, but, yeah, I think they did well.
Q: What about being able to come on the road- look, they hadn't lost at home this year. You guys obviously just -
A: I think, look, they've got really three losses in like three, four years here since 2014, so it's always a hard place to play regardless of the team. This is a team this year, you know, playing with confidence. Sean [McDermott] does a great job. They beat some really good teams: Oakland, Denver. Our focus was really more about our week of preparation. I didn't feel like the elements were that extreme, the wind was fairly calm, which in November is probably not the norm here.
Q: Coach, I know you don't like talking about these kinds of situations, but do you happen to have an update on Daniel Lasco?
A: I think all the signs are positive, his movement and everything. I think that that's encouraging.
Q: With the elements not being that bad, do you feel like the players take it personal when they hear throughout the week that teams of past may not have played well outside of the dome, and that coming into -
A: I don't that anyone has said that as of late, because that wouldn't be a local media story, 'cause we've played well on the road. It might be the perception of somebody that's unattached to any, like, factual stuff. I think it's just a little cliché. I think we've played well on the road.
Q: On offense, other than making a commitment to run the ball better, what has really triggered this success for you guys?
A: There's a number of things, I mean, we've got a lot invested in the offensive line. I think, although I can't say we've been healthy throughout, but I think the runners and the time on task that we've spent in the offseason – look that's the way the game unfolded. If I said to you, -- our plan was to come in here and try to – the game unfolded that way and so, let's understand what that means. Time of possession and they're a team that I think plays real good run defense, so I don't know that I would've expected it to unfold quite the way it did, if that makes sense. I'm trying to be honest.
Q: Coach, did you see something on film from the Jets game that – because it looked like you did the exact same plays that the Jets ran last week?
A: No, we didn't run the same plays.
Q: Did you see something on film that showed you -
A: We saw a good game, but it wasn't anything in that specific game. We've seen, obviously, all the tape, it's an eight week study. They're aggressive in their front. We got a couple different things that we didn't see in the prior few weeks. My point to the earlier question was [that] we felt like we were going to have to work hard for rushing yards because of the way they deploy their defense. So, I wouldn't have anticipated the result coming the way it did, and yet that happens sometimes, I think, in our game. You know, all of their big games were in the cut-up so when you study formations and you study how they're going to play – this week, they played it different. They played Ramon Humber in some big nickel [packages], which is something they had done earlier in the season. Sean had some that before in Carolina with Shaq [Thompson], and our guys adjusted and we made enough plays to win.
Q: It's been a while since you guys have had this kind of consistent success. How do you sense that the guys are enjoying this? I mean, they are all celebrating and dancing.
A: I think that the focus has been good. They've been able to get on to the next week and prepare. I don't think it's anything unusual.
Q: Sean, you mentioned the perceptions of both playing on the road and another one on the defense. Since week three, your defense has really turned things around from the last couple years. How do you attribute that?
A: Well hopefully we are playing a more complementary game. I know we are playing the run better. Typically, you want confidence, and you want to play with confidence, I say this all the time. When we've had some performances after those two weeks, the Carolina game and the game over in London really, I think, allowed us to gain some confidence. We played well, we took the ball away defensively and I think, like anything else, you have to demonstrate it in performance. Then you can start playing with it. So, I think, pointing to one specific game would be difficult, but certainly it's begun to happen. I think we are playing better overall as a team. So, hopefully we can continue to do that and clean up some of the mistakes.
Q: With the way the running game and defense performed, does a win like this send a message around the league?
A: No, I mean listen. We're nine games in. No one's sending messages, we're just trying to play good football. Anytime you win on the road, it's a plus, and I think this is a tough place to play on the road. I think more importantly you're constantly trying to send messages to your own team, your own players. But, they've responded well. We felt like we were playing a good team today.
Q: Sean, can you recall the last time you had a run team that was able to move, eight to nine yards at a time?
A: I'm not going to be able to reference a game. That's just how the game finished, guys made some plays. You do this long enough, every once in a while you find yourself on both ends of this type of game. You just hope that when you retire you have more on this end than the other, but you'll really have them on both ends. Thank you.

We found this in a guide book as a "locals" favorite so decided to give the place a try. It was WONDERFUL and the food was fabulous. We did make reservations as it was suggested and glad we did as it was very busy for a Tuesday night. I would not recommend it for children but it's certainly a place if you like good fresh local seafood.
If you own or manage The Fishery, register now for free tools to enhance your listing, attract new reviews, and respond to reviewers.

Australian-born Enid Bennett (her sisters, Catherine Bennett and Marjorie Bennett, were also actresses) started her career on stage in Sydney. She became a well-regarded stage actress there, and eventually made her way to New York to conquer Broadway. Broadway, however, wasn’t particularly interested in being conquered by Miss Bennett, and it took her several months to find any work at all. Finally, her “English” (actually Australian) accent got her a job in “Cock of the Walk”. She was seen there by film producer Thomas H. Ince, who signed her to a contract and brought her to Hollywood. She married twice, both of her husbands being top Hollywood directors: Fred Niblo and Sidney Franklin. Her last film was The Big Store (1941) with The Marx Brothers, in which she had an uncredited bit part as a clerk, and she retired from the movie business soon afterward. She died of a heart attack in Malibu, CA, in 1969.

The family of man stabbed to death by his glamour model lover say they feared for his safety throughout the couple's relationship and begged him to leave her
Karl Bloxham's devastated family have also revealed how killer girlfriend Ellishia Allen, 29, called police and threatened to kill him the night before she plunged a knife into his chest.
Karl's dad Ted told Mirror Online: "She gave my son a terrible life when they were together.
"Karl's death has left my wife and I so heartbroken that we've considered suicide.
"If it wasn't for our daughter and our grandchildren we wouldn't be here today.
"We warned Karl repeatedly to get away from her but he wouldn't listen because he loved her."
Allen was jailed for life this week after stabbing father-of-two Karl with a 12cm blade in July last year after he sent her a text which read: "It's over."
She then called emergency services and told them: "I've just stabbed my boyfriend. He's dying in front of me."
But Karl's parents Ted, 63, and Elaine, 60, of Nottingham, claim Allen was trouble from the first day she met their son.
Ted said: "They got together four years ago when Karl met her when he was doing community service for drink-driving - something he bitterly regreted.
"He was litter picking and doing forestry work and when the probation guys realised he was a hard worker they asked if he wanted to be a mentor.
"They introduced him to Ellishia, saying she was a nice girl with a few problems and needed a friend.
"Karl fell for her, but we weren't that keen.
"The first time she turned up at our house she looked a right mess, wearing a tiny mini skirt up her backside and loads of make-up."
The couple's relationship was described at Nottingham Crown Court as "volatile" and Karl's family say she previously attacked their son and cheated on him
Allen was spared jail in 2008 after she forced an plane to make an emergency landing after downing booze and anti-depressants.
She lashed out at British Airways cabin crew on a flight from Albania after losing her bag in the plane's toilet.
She also spat at a policeman as he tried to restrain her after the flight was given a priority landing spot at Gatwick Airport.
Ted, who worked with his son at an engineering firm, said: "We kept begging him to walk away but he wouldn't.
"She was constantly drunk and Karl would get home from a 12 hour shift at work only to mop and clean up after her because she'd be lying passed out.
"She was always threatening suicide and the night before she killed Karl she called the police and told them she had a desire to hurt her boyfriend.
"Officers visited their flat but Karl didn't take it seriously because she was always making all sorts of threats.
"The flat was like the worst students squat because she didn't clean and Karl would just disappear to his bedroom and go on his PlayStation to escape.
"He had a truly horrendous life with her but I think he felt guilty every time he tried to walk away."
Ted says he believed Karl would finally walk away from Allen on the night he sent his final text.
"He promised me it was the end," he says. "But then I know if she quit the drink there was always a chance he'd go back to her - that's how much he thought of her.
"I asked him if he wanted me to go with him to the flat and help him get his stuff, but he said he was meeting a friend for a drink first.
"I know he had a few pints for dutch courage before he went home."
Ted and Elaine, who also have a daughter Kylie, 38.
He said: "It's only Kylie who has kept us going. Elaine and I have talked about taking our lives together because the pain has been so bad, but we could never leave our daughter.
"Karl was smitten with Ellishia but we could never understand it.
"To us she was an attention seeker who manipulated him, but we had to accept his choice. Sadly, it cost him his life."
Allen pleaded guilty to murder and was ordered to serve a minimum term of 14 years behind bars.

A British survivor of the Holocaust has been reunited with his cousin and best friend after both believed for 75 years that the other had been murdered by the Nazis.
Simon Mairowitz, 85, travelled to Israel to visit Morris Sana, 87, whom he had last seen as a young boy in Romania in the 1940s, after the Germans invaded their homeland and they became separated in the confusion of war.
Although they escaped Romania with their families, each had assumed that the other had perished soon afterwards. But Mr Sana’s daughter had tracked down cousins of Mr Mairowitz in Britain by using Facebook and it was through them that she realised he was alive.
The cousins smiled and wept as they met in Tel Aviv…

Donna Lou Kobow lived in Homedale, Idaho with the love of her life Frank, and was the mother of three boys. She was born March 30th 1960 and passed due to cancer August 11th 2015. This brick is in dedication to her memory.
My parents, Howard and Maxine Johnston, were sent to Boise with the military in 1958. They were both originally from the mid-west, but when they found Boise, they knew it was a special place and where they wanted to live. They returned to Boise in 1966 when my father retired from the Army and lived […]
In memory of my dear friend, Crissy Hinchberger, who was taken away much too soon. May her legacy live on in the heart of the city she loved so much.

Disbelief on both sides of Irish Sea as homicide probe confirmed
A reaction of disbelief filtered through the air on both sides of the Irish Sea as the circumstances surrounding the death of a popular young GAA man became apparent.
As gardaí gathered evidence and spoke to people and a post mortem was carried out, the injuries sustained did not add up to what they had initially heard.
And so a murder investigation was launched into the death of 21-year old, Joseph 'Joe' Deacy, from St Albans in England, who had been on holiday in Mayo.
The severe head injuries indicated a suspected fatal assault, as the probe into the homicide began some three days after Joseph had been found unconscious in a friend's driveway and two days after his death in Beaumont Hospital.
Joseph had been coming over to Mayo for years, particularly if it was to see his beloved Mayo play.
An avid GAA supporter, despite growing up in the north of London, Joe was even described by some as the "biggest Mayo fan" - quite the accolade, given the fanatical support for the county, particularly in this area of Mayo.
However, it wasn't just the lure of green and red that had him transfixed with the trips over.
Joseph was also a popular figure in the area, he had a close group of friends with whom he would regularly socialise.
And that is what he was doing the night before he died, enjoying the social scene in nearby Kiltimagh town, a far cry from the bright lights of London.
That community feel may have been what attracted him to the GAA, but he didn't just spectate, he played back home in St Albans for St Colmcilles.
A team-mate said that news surrounding how his pal had passed was slow to come out, with nobody at the club under the impression at first that he had been killed as they heard of his passing.
"We didn't really know any details of how it happened, because it didn't happen over here," he said.
The club posted some fitting photographs of Joseph doing what he did best, playing and even picking up a few awards along the way, being described as a "key member" of the team.
"It is with a heavy heart that we have to report the sad news of the passing of a member of the St Colmcilles family, a player, our team-mate, our friend, Joe Deacy," the club said.
"At 21 years of age, Joe had a bright future ahead of him. He had an amazing energy and a real lust for life.
"He was a great friend and people were drawn to his character, his humour and outlook on life.
"Joe loved playing Gaelic football and being a part of the senior team here at St Colmcilles."

When I looked in my Gmail inbox tonight, I noticed that it was still beta, and then I remembered that it has been in the beta form ever since I had my account there. But why is it still in the beta form? Is it for legal reasons (so they won't be held liable for hacking
)? There are a bunch of other Google programs that are also in beta form. Why?

The man accused of throwing his ex-girlfriend—who was also the ex-fiancee of Drew Carey—from her third-floor balcony, killing her, says he didn't do it. Gareth Pursehouse pleaded not guilty Thursday to Dr. Amie Harwick's Feb. 15 murder, the AP reports. Pursehouse, who is charged with murder as well as first-degree residential burglary with the special circumstance allegation of lying in wait, was arrested shortly after the prominent Hollywood marriage and family therapist was killed, but was initially released on bond. He was then rearrested on a no bail warrant.
Harwick, 38, had filed a restraining order against Pursehouse, 41, in the past, and had also expressed fear about him. One of her friends described Pursehouse as "a stalker" who didn't take their breakup well. An autopsy determined she was strangled before being thrown from the balcony of her Hollywood Hills apartment. Harwick and Carey had dated for two years before separating in 2018, months after announcing they were engaged. (Pursehouse could face the death penalty.)

15-year-old accused of driving without a license
GOSHEN, Ind. -- Goshen Police stopped a vehicle for a moving violation and found a 15-year-old without a license driving the vehicle, reports said.
Police conducted the traffic stop near Plymouth Avenue and S. 11th Street at 6:41 p.m. Saturday.
The driver of the vehicle was identified as a 15-year-old who had never received a driver's license, reports said.
The girl's parents were contacted and she was released from the scene.

I got a passport today. I am almost 30 and this is my first ever passport. This is a big deal for me. I have spent a vast majority of my life bogged down with panic attacks. 1st grade started it. A boy threw up in my classrom. Instant panic attack. I thought my world was ending. I couldn't breath, I felt like I needed to run, I felt like I was going to throw up, or pass out or both! This started a long line of letting my disorder stop me from living life. I was not going on field trips with the other kids, I was ditching class to come home because I felt sick in class, I wouldn't travel, I wouldn't do sleepovers, I wouldn't talk to my friends about what was going on, I just learned to hide it, and deal. with. it. Life was fine, I didn't feel like I was missing out. I was content knowing that I had my home close by, and my mom close by the two things that could calm me down when I was feeling anxious. A turning point for me was when Al and I got married. His parents offered to send us on our honeymoon, no cost to us. Instead of being excited, I felt like I was in a tunnel! They told us to choose a place to go, I started saying "no no!!!!" We chose the bahamas. Our trip was all set. I was literally praying something would happen so I could get out of going! Something did happen. A hurricane came through and ripped the roof off the lodge where we were going to stay. We were issued rain checks. Life was busy and my avoidance technique made it so by the time we *could* go again, the rain checks were expired. I was so relieved. Until I realized what I was missing out on. A few years ago, I started Zoloft, and was really working on myself. I wanted anxiety to be a part of my past life, not my future. I was done letting it run my life. I started counseling and taking baby steps to achieve new milestones in freeing myself from the disorder. I was able to eat in restaurants again! Without feeling sick that is. I was able to go into a movie theater and watch a movie and actually ENJOY IT! I slowly was gaining my life back and because of that, I was feeling as though I was experiencing life for the first time! The cool part is, I am experiencing it through a child's eyes. My kids. If I was going to free myself from being tied down with all the habits of avoidance I had created, now was the time!! I needed to enjoy life so my kids could experience life!
Last year marked my 5th year of marriage. We went to Vegas for a few days to celebrate our anniversary. I felt my world open up! I enjoyed the trip so much and the freedom that I felt; it was amazing! I was instantly hooked!! I started listing all the places I wanted to visit, even fantasizing about my ultimate dream trip which I am bound and determined to make it for my 40th birthday. I want to visit Italy. I have a passport now. The sky is my limit!
Why did I get a passport? September my cousin happens to be getting married in a beautiful place in Puerto Vallarta. It's going to be a great trip! Al and I are bringing our 7 year old daughter along, we are staying at a resort with my brother and sister in law and one of their 4 children, who happens to be the flower girl in the wedding. I can't wait. I can't wait. I can't wait, mostly because *I* get to travel again, but moreso because my daughter has a passport at the age of 7 and she will be leaving the country with her mom and dad to explore another country! It amazes me and I feel blessed that we can give her what I couldn't give myself at the age of 7.

Breast Cancer Patient- Diagnosis
We hail from a small village named Morena near Gwalior. Both of my parents were working at that time in 2006 when my mother was diagnosed with Breast Cancer for the first time. I had actually overheard it from my father and sisters that she had Breast Cancer symptoms.
Breast Cancer Treatment: Surgery followed with Chemotherapy
She visited a doctor in Gwalior who suggested consulting an oncologist at the earliest. Since our aunt, who stayed in Delhi was a doctor; we decided to visit the cancer hospital in Delhi in the hope of finding better treatment facilities. The oncologists immediately recommended Breast Cancer Surgery and 6 sessions of Chemotherapy after it.
She had no visible Breast Cancer symptoms at that time. Her Surgery was successful, and she completed her Chemotherapy sessions also. What was amazing and even shocked the doctors was that she didn't show any side effects due to the treatment. She was so strong emotionally, which we believe helped her to recover quickly. After five years, in 2012, my mother was declared a "cancer survivor.
An Arduous Multi-tasker
After the completion of chemotherapy, she had to take medication and visit the hospital at regular intervals for follow up for the next five years. She handled her treatment, job, and family all at the same time. Though there was full support from her family, friends, and colleagues, she loved to do all her work by herself. She was indeed a very strong woman.
Cancer- The Dangerous Relapse
Unfortunately, the story does not end there. Within 6 months, she started to have Pain in her left hand and leg. The Physician in Gwalior suggested visiting the oncologist again. When we visited the same doctor in Delhi, he asked to take a PET scan.
The results came out with the shocking news that her cancer was back and had spread to three other organs of her body. We were furious at the doctor as barely six months after being declared cancer free, she was diagnosed with the disease again. But at that time, since her Cancer Treatment was more important, we transferred her treatment to another hospital in Delhi.
Pain and resignation
The second wave of cancer was much more painful than the first. She had to resign her job due to the intense Pain. In 2012, she again went through six cycles of Chemotherapy treatment. But unlike the first time, due to her ageing body, she suffered the side effects of Chemotherapy this time. She had nausea, Vomiting and lost her appetite but gradually her condition improved. She could go back to her normal life by being under constant medication, but she had lost control over her left hand.
Personally, it was so hard for me to look at her struggles. But due to her strong willpower, she continued to work again till she resigned from her job in 2016. She continued the medications for two and half years, but by the end of 2018, her health further deteriorated. She started having fever frequently. We panicked at her worsening condition and took her to the doctor who told us that even though the cyst had grown again, there was nothing much to be worried about.
But when we went again after 3 months, the doctor reported that the cancer had metastasized to her whole body. Her health was worsening day by day. The doctors told that Surgery was not an option and chemo would be harsh on her body at this age. And even if we went forward with the chemo, there was only a 10% chance of recovery.
But still, on 23rd January 2019, we decided to go forward with chemo fully knowing the risk. After 2-3 days, when we went for the Chemotherapy session, the doctor denied letting her go through with it looking at her health condition and reports. The doctor asked us to come after 8 days. But my mother had somehow figured out the severity of her condition and asked us to take her home. We took her home and she passed away within 8 days at the age of 63.
More than a Decade of Pain
My mother struggled with cancer for almost 15 years. But not even for a single moment did she let us feel that she was in Pain. She was such a strong person, full of hope, positivity and joy.
Remembering her Brave Fight
She started Yoga after her first diagnosis. She used to have papaya leaves extract and Wheatgrass extract for better immunity. She always lived a healthy life. She continued her job to occupy her mind. She used to do household works by herself. My sisters helped her in the kitchen before their marriage.
During this whole time, my father stood by her like a pillar. He took her to office and walks daily. After he retired in 2011, he was able to spend more time with her and help her emotionally and physically. In her last few years, I also became very close to her. She had devoted herself to prayers and sometimes I had to scold her for fasting for prolonged periods in the morning. But we later figured out that she had lost her appetite due to the side effects of Chemotherapy. All through her treatment days, she was hopeful of recovering completely and coming back to her normal life.
From the day my mother got diagnosed with cancer, my aunt and uncle in Delhi, both of whom were doctors by profession, guided and helped us a lot. My mother used to say that my aunt had become a doctor as a divine blessing to help her. They both helped us to such an extent that I'm sure without their support, my mother wouldn't have survived this long.
She always had a smile on her face. We are still recovering from our loss. But I am so proud of the way she fought her battle against cancer, always with a positive attitude. She will always be my inspiration.

What a great stop! We were driving from Austin to Kerrvile but just needed a "little" something to eat. We drove by this place but it looked interesting so we turned around and went back. We definitely were not sorry.
It's cute. The menu wasn't large but actually perfect sized. The man behind the counter was very pleasant.
There were three of us and between us we ordered sandwiches and salads. We were all happy with our lunch and glad we stopped. We would definitely stop again.
Loved the place!
Own or manage this property? Claim your listing for free to respond to reviews, update your profile and much more.

Andy's had a rough year. The role-playing game he'd slaved to create was stolen from him by his former boss and his high school sweetheart dumped him after graduation. But things are about to change for him when he attends Gen Con and makes his debut as an Indie writer and publisher.
While there, he will deal with the ghosts of his past, learn new and amazing things about his best friend, and meet Jessica - who will change his life forever.
Warning: 18 and older only.
We've sent an email with your order details. Order ID #:
To access this title, visit your library in the app or on the desktop website.

Website was extremely easy to navigate and the customer service representative that we spoke was very helpful and pleasant to deal with. Everything that we ordered came as it should have, as well as the delivery being made within the exact time frame that we had chosen it to be. Will definitely utilize this service again in the future.
Garden Grocer took the stress out of our Vacation. My son has autism and has special dietary needs. We were able too order the things we needed for him before we even left home. There was no worries about were to find it when we arrived or how to bring it all with us.
We visit the Orlando area every year, but have not used a grocery delivery service until now. We looked at other grocers, but felt Garden Grocer had more options and was very reasonably priced. Website was easy to navigate, shopping was a breeze and delivery was made during the time we requested during check out. Our flight was arriving in the evening but due to weather conditions we arrived even later than expected. Upon check in we were happy to discover that our groceries were delivered to our cabin and Garden Grocer even put items that needed to be refrigerated, in the refrigerator! We will definitely use Garden Grocer for all of our future trips to Orlando! Thank again for your wonderful service! S. Blake, Texas

This was more than the crows had expected. “Do you think it can be silver?” said they, and their eyes were ready to pop out of their heads with greed; for remarkable as it may sound, there is nothing in the world which crows love as much as silver money.
“Hear how it rattles!” said the fox and rolled the crock around once more. “Only I can’t understand how we shall get at it.” “That will surely be impossible,” said the crows. The fox stood and rubbed his head against his left leg, and pondered. Now perhaps he might succeed, with the help of the crows, in becoming master of that little imp who always eluded him. “Oh! I know someone who could open the crock for you,” said the fox. “Then tell us! Tell us!” cried the crows; and they were so excited that they tumbled down into the pit. “That I will do, if you’ll first promise me that you will agree to my terms,” said he.
Then the fox told the crows about Thumbietot, and said that if they could bring him to the heath he would open the crock for them. But in payment for this counsel, he demanded that they should deliver Thumbietot to him, as soon as he had gotten the silver money for them. The crows had no reason to spare Thumbietot, so agreed to the compact at once. It was easy enough to agree to this; but it was harder to find out where Thumbietot and the wild geese were stopping.
Wind-Rush himself travelled away with fifty crows, and said that he should soon return. But one day after another passed without the crows on crow-ridge seeing a shadow of him.
Wednesday, April thirteenth.
The wild geese were up at daybreak, so they should have time to get themselves a bite of food before starting out on the journey toward Oestergoetland. The island in Goosefiord, where they had slept, was small and barren, but in the water all around it were growths which they could eat their fill upon. It was worse for the boy, however. He couldn’t manage to find anything eatable.
As he stood there hungry and drowsy, and looked around in all directions, his glance fell upon a pair of squirrels, who played upon the wooded point, directly opposite the rock island. He wondered if the squirrels still had any of their winter supplies left, and asked the white goosey-gander to take him over to the point, that he might beg them for a couple of hazelnuts.
Instantly the white one swam across the sound with him; but as luck would have it the squirrels had so much fun chasing each other from tree to tree, that they didn’t bother about listening to the boy. They drew farther into the grove. He hurried after them, and was soon out of the goosey-gander’s sight—who stayed behind and waited on the shore.
The boy waded forward between some white anemone-stems—which were so high they reached to his chin—when he felt that someone caught hold of him from behind, and tried to lift him up. He turned round and saw that a crow had grabbed him by the shirt-band. He tried to break loose, but before this was possible, another crow ran up, gripped him by the stocking, and knocked him over.

Horses are very intelligent animals and we do not give them enough credit for it. We have often heard stories of dogs or even cats stepping up and doing amazing things, but little is known about the compassion of horses. It is true that after the dog, horses are a human’s best friend and have been for quite some time. Horses have gone hand in hand with the human race for thousands of years and we have celebrated them in art and other aspects of our history and culture. Maybe that is why they have grown so close to us that they can even tell when something is happening inside our bodies. Just like the odd story here about a horse that was more than just a friend, but a special animal that could sense something no one else saw coming. Many never would have thought that in a million years, this would be possible.
Jolene at the time was just a high school student when the course of her life was defined for her. She was a friendly girl, who had many friends at school and was living a normal life. It wasn’t until someone transferred into her small high school that everything would change for her.
But until that day would come, Jolene was doing her regular school routine, hanging out with friends, going to parties and just being young. The entire time though, she always had a connection with animals. She grew up around horses and other farm animals and they were very special to her.

I have taught and been a part of staffing a number of seminars as well as trained agents in a number of real estate offices. I am often struck as to how so many people are programed for failure. We have a society that is programming us (especially through reality TV and talk shows) to be victims. Do you want to be famous for a few months? Tell the world how you are a victim and they give you instant publicity.
I prefer to pursue the opposite tactic. I prefer to empower people. I prefer to build them up. I prefer to find what they are doing right and point THAT out to them. Why does it matter? Let me tell you a story.
One seminar I was a part of was being taught along with Robert G. Allen ("Nothing Down", "Creating Wealth"). In the seminar, we took teenage kids that society had basically given up on and looked to empower them. I remember one boy that was 17 and by that age he had been kicked out of 26 separate foster homes. I can't even imagine the pain that would have meant to me if that many families told me I was worthless. Another boy was in junior high. He had a problem spelling words as simple as "cat". We took him through a new pattern and then in less than 5 minutes we had him spelling the word "metamorphosis" BOTH FORWARDS AND BACKWARDS! It blew his mind. You see, he had been convinced by an "authority figure" that he couldn't spell - so he gave up trying. When we showed him that he COULD spell, you could see his mind working and thinking "If I really CAN spell when they said I couldn't, I wonder what else I CAN do that they said I couldn't?"
Why does all this matter? Simple. The people you deal with every day have all got their "scars". They have their psychological wounds where they don't see the best in themselves. When you point out what they are doing right, how they are awesome, when you celebrate their victories, they then start to believe that and then they CREATE that even more often. I was once training some agents in an office about 10 years ago and took the time to note how one of my agents was doing a great job and I heard one of the ladies in admin say, "Rocky, you know what? I really like listening to you talk to agents and other people here because you always have good things to say. I'm not used to hearing that."
There is a drought of empowerment. Be the rain. Let it flood.

Angus T. Jones 'Apologetic,' But Doesn't Regret Blasting 'Two And A Half Men'
Jones was interviewed by a Houston news channel after he visited the town as part of a church outreach. Now growing a scraggly beard, the former actor says he was a hypocrite for being paid to make fun of real-world problems.
He told KHOU, "That was making light of topics in our world where there are really problems for a lot of people. I was a paid hypocrite because I wasn't OK with it and I was still doing it."
Jones also said of his words towards Chuck Lorre's show, "I totally insulted his baby, and to that degree I am apologetic. But otherwise, I don’t regret saying what I said."
Jones now travels as an inspirational speaker at churches around the nation. He says he would consider returning to acting, but he would only consider "a few different productions that, like, do kind of Bible-based stories."

This time of year seems to come up so quickly...the dreaded annual vet appointment. Actually it's been 2 years. We kept procrastinating and last year it got away from us. When he was a kitten the visit went smoothly. He is now 12 plus, and does NOT like the vet. He never goes anywhere and so the minute he's in the car and them smells all the animals at the dr, it gets ugly. The last few years we've had to medicate him. The vet has a "Panic Attack" note in his chart. The vet would try to wear the leather bird gloves and Cooper would still try to gnaw his arm off. Each year we are given a pill to break in half. One half for this year, one half for next year. One year it was the big half and he would be a little more mellower than the small half year. He would try to hiss but couldn't quite attack. After we'd bring him home with his kitty hangover, you'd have to try to keep him from walking around for a bit since he was totally stoned. Once the buzz wore off, then he was mad at you for a day or two. This time the vet recommended the whole pill since he was pretty violent the last time. I haven't seen Cooper at all today, so apparently he's still sleeping of the 'ludes! Cooper can be a bit stuck up, but he generally isn't mean (well ok most of the time he's nice....). He was once an only child, then put up with two moves, then two kids and we never had any of the peeing, spraying, destroying issues so I'll give him props on that. Now that the kids are older he will let them pet him sometimes and he especially likes Emma. I'm of course his favorite and the minute the kids go to bed, he climbs out from sleeping under the bed and is attached to my side or lap for the rest of the night.
Thank goodness it's another year before checkup and shots! This is always way more stressful than when the kids got them!
P.S. He also doesn't like to wear hats!

As 2007 came to a close and I had finished guiding for the year I turned my attention to some hunting of my own. I had picked up a Black Widow Longbow some 5 months earlier and had some success with it being Buff, Record Class Boar, Brumby & other smaller animals.
I turned my attention to Chital (Axis) Deer one of my most favorite and frustrating animals to hunt. I had only taken 8 Chital over the past 10 years of hunting them with a recurve, they jump a lot more than I can hit. They are so fast and reaction times so quick they even make Compounds look slow.
Anyway it was 1 week before x-mas and I headed out with my longtime hunting partner, Steve. We were going to put up some new tree Stands for the coming season and get some venison for the fridge.
First afternoon I saw myself heading up the creek to a tree I knew I could sit in for the afternoon. I had no camo on just a pair of Crocs, Blue T/Shirt with a white stripe accross it and shorts. Plus my trusted Longbow with 2020 legacy arrows topped with razor sharp Woody's Outback widecut hunter broadheads.
As I settled in I had a good view of some 30 deer feeding along the creek some 120 yards away, there amongst them were 2 Stags one well over the Aussie Record and one in the top 5. Well I thought this is good just keep coming. I sat there for the next hour and they eventualy fed away from me. I was about to head home when a doe caught my eye as she headed towards a basalt ridge to my right. I watched her and to my surprise she headed up the ridge and there in front of her was a nice stag in hard velvet having a sleep, I hadn't noticed him in the hour or so I was there.
As she approached him he got up, turned around and lay back down again but this time looking out over the creek I was in. She continued past him looking for a fawn she had left in the long grass somewhere over the ridge. I gave her 10 mins to make sure she was gone and I slowly creep out of the tree and headed across the open ground to the base of the ridge. The stag had turned his head away this allowed me to make the ground quickly.
Now the stalk was on, thinking to myself how are you going to get close enough to get a shot away with a longbow and no camo. I slowly creep up the ridge using a fallen tree as cover and the rocks to keep the noise to nothing (I had slipped off my crocs by this stage).
I made it to 15 yards and peered through the branches there he was totally oblivious to my presence. What now do I wait until he stands up and offers me a shot or do I get closer. Having been in this situation many times before only to have a stag get up and walk off in one motion I was up to risk of getting closer. I was at one end of the fallen tree and a gap of some 2 feet was going to be a problem as the Stag could see any movement if I was to get to the other end where he was. He tucked his head into his side that was my chance I made a 5 yars along the tree in less than 2 hops, rock to rock. was he still there as I could no longer see him. My heart was racing as I moved along the cover of the tree, at the end I peered around the corner he was looking around again, I ducked back behind cover and gave him a minute. I slowly peered around again he had his head tucked away again. I stepped another couple of yards, position was now perfect or as perfect as it was ever going to be. I was now right behind the root ball of the tree and the Stag was 6 yards on the other side, I slowly drew the bow and moved out to have a clear view of his chest area, his head was still turned away.
As the arrow left the bow I knew the shot was perfect but was he still going to be there when the arrow arrived....he was....the arrow penetrated some 10 inches into the boiler room, the Stag never moved he swung his head to look at me and the second arrow slid under his chest into the dirt. I could see the bewilderment in his eyes, the 3rd arrow exploded into the root ball in front of me as it clipped a root sticking out. He lept to his feet and went like a rocket into a stand of trees some 150 yds away. I stood there wandering what had just happened I had 3 shots not even remembering the last 2, it happened so quickly. Adrenalin is a magic thing.
Back to reality, I picked up the arrow that had done all the damage good thick red blood was on the arrow, not a heart or lung but most probably a liver shot, must have clipped his front leg on the way through. I could still see him in the trees and he lay down, I moved in to approx 30 yards he was laying on his side as if dead but I could still see his chest moving it's not over yet. As I got to 10 yards in the cover of a tree he looked up to see were that crunching sound was coming from, I stopped his head turned away again, I ran to 4 yards and slipped a arrow behind his rib cage and into the boiler room. he sprang to his feet and ran 80 more yards before going down. He just lay there staring back in my direction. As he took his last breath, relief came over me I had taken a Chital with a Longbow something I thought would take me a very long time.
The 3rd morning I was up a newly constructed tree stand and low and behold a stag trotted past at 25 yards. As the arrow left the bow I thought you have to be joking a trotting Stag, 25 yards.....bingo... the arrow entered just above the brisket and into the heart. He ran 150 yards in a semicircle and died 50 yards behind me. What a x-mas present and what a year.
Stag will be NO.8 in the Australian Bowhunting Association standings at present. Photo taken the following morning.
-------------------- "People say you can't go back, its like when you get to the edge of a cliff and you take one more step forward or you do a 180 degree turn and take one more step forward. Which way are you going? Which one is progress?" Doug Tompkins Posts: 2117 | From: Ozark, Missouri | Registered: Oct 2006
| IP: Logged |

MIAMISBURG, Ohio (WDTN) – A sixth grade football game over the weekend in Miamisburg came to a heartwarming end.
The Miamisburg Wee Vikes were playing against the Kettering Firebirds and the game was a hard-fought battle between the two squads. As the clock wound down the referees and coaches gathered, announcing to the crowd there would be time for one more play.
Fans were confused as they thought the game had ended with the Wee Vikes besting the Firebirds 38-24. But the Wee Vikes’ defense dutifully took the field for one last play.
Kettering then fielded one of its toughest players. 11-year-old José Rodriguez, wearing the number one, took the field at the one-yard line. José had dreamed of playing football since the age of two.
José’s teammates, as well as the opposing team, rooted him on as he scored a touchdown and it touched everyone’s heart.
José was born without a part of his brain that connects the two sides together. His parents were told José wouldn’t be able to walk, talk or feed himself. José has overcome those challenges and more according to his mom.
José has had numerous surgeries to reconstruct his legs which were deformed because of his condition. José also battled epilepsy but has been seizure free for more than three years.
Through it all José’s mom, Tracy, said he still has a smile on his face and is the kind of the kid who can’t be kept down.
Tracy said her son wasn’t thrilled with the attention this moment brought but wanted people to know he is a regular kid spending time with his friends and wants others with disabilities to be included the same way.
“His team has been amazing and supported him all along. The team chose the number 1 for José to wear and gave him the nickname “Dominator”, Tracy said.
José wants people to know he is a regular kid spending time with his friends and wants others with disabilities to be included the same way.
“As a mom of a kid that looks different on the outside, it was awesome to see him be included by another team that wasn’t his own,” Tracy said. “At the same time, it was just another moment of my son making the most out of his life, and making memories, like any other kid. The normalcy of it all, was what made it special to both of us.”
Tracy said José’s team never leaves him out. Even when he can’t participate, teammates on the sideline, they talk to him or throw the ball with him. “When he can participate, he’s been able to be quarterback at practices, etc. I got to watch as he won the King of the Ring drill because his teammates are always building him up,” Tracy said.
José later told his mom while he knew they let him win, “he needed that because he loses at stuff so often, sometimes he just needs a win.” Tracy has watched José fall, and his teammates rush to help him up. She’s watched them treat him like they treat any of their other teammates and said that is what makes the moment so special. “That his entire team enjoyed the moment just as much as he did because they want him to be treated with the same respect they are treated with,” said Tracy.
Tracy said the Miamisburg team was just as excited to participate. “I just wish this was the norm in youth sports and more organizations would be as inclusive as José’s teams have been.”
Tracy said, “We couldn’t have asked for a better community.” José also plays baseball for Kettering.
- SWAT called after wanted suspect found in Dayton
- Coronavirus in Ohio Saturday update: 64,214 cases, 3,036 deaths
- FAA investigating plane crash in Green Township
- Woman killed in Trotwood crash identified
- Less humid with lots of sunshine, chance of showers tonight

CERRITOS, Calif. - The second day of the Pangos All-American Camp allowed us to see numerous Arizona prospects in action.
There aren’t many players in the country that can shoot with Trent and he showed why on Saturday. When we saw him, he went 4-4 from the field and hit his only three-point attempt. He can really score on all three levels and is confident in his mid-range game and from behind the arc. Arizona will ultimately have difficulty landing him, but Trent can really score and will be able to carry that to the college level with ease.
Green was aggressive on Saturday and while he is able to score, we think he is at his best when he is setting up others. Green has a knack for knowing where his teammates will be and that’s not easy to do with a team of guys he has never played with before. He got into the lane with consistency and went to the line seven times, making all of his attempts. Green is leading the EYBL in assists and we can see why despite the environment probably not being the best for his skill set.
O’Bannon scored 10 points on 4-5 shooting and put his skills on display. He is very smooth and has a high basketball I.Q. His skills are in his shooting ability and he created a few shots on his own as well. He’s not the best ball-handler, but he is definitely good enough and we’re going to assume he will get better in that area. Once O’Bannon gets a little stronger he will be an even better prospect, but he is just fine as it is right now.
Alexander was one of the better players we saw on Saturday, finishing 11-11 from the field combined in his two games. The four-star prospect is strong to the basket and a high energy player as well. Not only did he score in the lane, but he hit at least three three-pointers and has a smooth release. It wouldn’t be a surprise to see Arizona pick it up with Alexander and he is probably a bit under-recruited as of now.
Preston was his normal dominant self on Saturday, scoring 15 points on 7-8 shooting. He is a face up four, but Preston’s strength is a major issue for the man guarding him, especially when he decides to get to the rim. When he plays hard, Preston is one of the best players in the country and he played hard the entire game we saw him in. In fact, Preston got into it a bit with another player and had to be benched, but it was nice seeing him be so competitive in this environment.
Garrett only scored six points when we saw him, but you can see why his recruitment is picking up. He is unselfish almost to a fault, but he consistently makes the right decision. He scored his points in the paint and got there consistently. It’s hard to evaluate players at Pangos, but we liked the little we saw from Garrett despite wanting him to be a little more aggressive.
Dawson was impressive on Saturday as he went for 13 points on 6-8 shooting. He wasn’t very aggressive on Friday and played off the ball, but that was switched up on Saturday. Dawson was very effective with the ball in his hands and is quite athletic. He’s better at driving than shooting right now, but his form is fine and we can definitely see him improving in that area.
We had the most fun watching Duval on Saturday. He is nearly unstoppable in transition and he got there often. He gets to show off in this environment and had the full array of moves going, including crossovers, floaters, and more. There’s really nothing Duval can’t do and when he gets going, there aren’t many players in the country that can impact a game like he can.
Even though Chandler played the point some, we like him better as a shooting guard. At 6-foot-3, Chandler can really score and he is better when he is able to get open off the ball as opposed to creating his own shot as a point guard. Chandler finished with 14 points and got to the line at a high clip while also hitting a few threes. This is another player we would expect Arizona to pick it up with in the near future.
We really liked what we saw from Williams on Saturday, as he went for 10 points on 3-4 shooting. Williams did not force the issue, which a lot of guys will do this weekend. He was aggressive, but also let the game come to him and made the right decision more often than not. He is extremely quick up the court and does a great job in transition without having to be the guy to score. Williams is likely the best point guard in the west in 2018 and he showed glimpses of why on Saturday.
Arizona has shown some interest in Little as of late and he is definitely a player to keep an eye on. Little finished with 11 points and is aggressive on both sides of the ball. He definitely likes to defend and has the lateral quickness to be a very good defender on the next level. Little hit a three and had nice form, though he is at his best offensively when in transition. Little remains a player to keep a close eye on and his stock has been rising fast with recent offers from Louisville and Florida.null

I am sitting at the refectory of the Patriarchal School tonight, here, on the same chair for thirty five years. How many memories cross my mind! How many images of all those years occur to me! How many labors! How many young people from all the countries of Africa have passed from this room! How many spiritual lectures have been given on a daily basis! I once wrote that it is the liturgical life here in our School that supports us and strengthens us and keeps us alive physically as well as spiritually. But this meeting at the refectory every evening is uplifting too, because there is a talk taking place, followed by a relevant discussion. It is the time when every seminarian has the opportunity to open their mouth and speak freely. In the classroom we speak academically whereas here they can speak with more comfort and convenience.
I looked around me. I counted how many of the seminarians present were children of old students of mine. I remembered their fathers at the same age sitting on the same chairs. The case of one of them was particularly important to me. I remembered his birth, baptism and then his studies in the primary and secondary school. His father had a dream: to see his first son come and attend the Patriarchal School. He wanted to fulfill his mission completely. I had no doubt about that as I had known him since he was an infant. When it was time for the School to open for the academic year, he wanted to bring him himself. When he said that to me, I told him that such a thing was not customary, because usually young people are mature and serious enough to travel by themselves. He insisted though, so I did not object to his wish. Indeed, he came with his son. First, he took him to the School chapel and advised him not to miss any of the church services. He promised him that if he really loved attending and participating in them without fail, then he would be greatly benefited spiritually since sacred services constitute the authentic food of School life. He did the same while showing him around the School refectory, the classrooms, the wards, even the bathrooms. Generally, he took him everywhere. You see, he remembered the time he was a seminarian himself. Nothing had changed although many years had passed. He also showed him around their surroundings, gardens, trees, flowers… The most important of all this was the love of the father for his first-born son. Undoubtedly, the School environment was nice, as he experienced it himself, but far more important was the life through the liturgical tradition of our Church, the obedience and respect for the teachers taught to them. Principles and inspirational messages which helped him develop spiritually, and now enable him to exercise the duties of the priest and spiritual Father.
People usually come to visit me for several reasons. Among them are also those who wish to have a church wedding. One of them, a young man from one parish near Nairobi, visited me and asked me to perform his wedding. As usual, I noted it down in my diary and I said that if I was here, I would definitely arrange to go. He did not ask for anything else, he just wanted the blessing of the Church.
After a few weeks, the wedding day had finally come. So I went to the church, where, I saw again this young man shedding rivers of tears, and wiping his eyes with a handkerchief. I approached him and asked him why he was crying so much instead of being happy, as marriage is a pleasant event in one’s life. He then explained to me that he was very touched and could hardly believe it was really happening. It should be noted here that according to the tribal tradition, men should never cry, even at funerals. I blessed him and then walked into the sanctuary to wait. When the priest came, he gave me some further explanations. This young man had always wanted to have a church wedding, but he was poor and did not have the money required to pay to the bride’s parents in order to marry her, that is, something like our dowry. The priest explained to me that the groom had been offering his services in the sanctuary since he was little and had been feeling ashamed and accountable before God toη be living with his wife like a traditionally married couple without God’s blessing. He only had two euro in his pocket, but the bride’s parents wanted a thousand, which was a large amount indeed. When the parishioners were informed of that, they all ran to help. They contributed their mites in order to raise the amount required and enable the young man to have a church wedding.
The groom could not believe the miracle he was living. Apparently, it was his simple-heartedness and love for God that made him worthy of experiencing the greatness of the mystery of marriage the ecclesiastical way, despite existing difficulties. Indeed, throughout the entire sacred service, this young man continued to be emotional. His wife, a young girl modestly dressed, was carefully watching the whole marriage service performed in the tribal dialect and in Swahili. Undoubtedly, marriage is a happy event in one’s life but the responsibilities and commitments involved are enormous. As soon as the mystery ended, it was time for me to preach. Being aware of the fact that most of the people who had come to attend the mystery belonged to other Christian or non-Christian denominations, I spoke about the importance of the Holy Mysteries within the Orthodox Church and laid particular emphasis on the value of the Mystery of Marriage and that of the Eucharist. As for the newly wedded couple, I advised them to start their new life in the Lord by participating in the holy Mysteries of the Church frequently, and I offered them as a gift an icon of the Virgin Mary, urging them to pray together before the icon, morning and evening. It seemed as if everybody rejoiced.
† Makarios of Nairobi

HIGHLAND PARK, Ill. (CBS) – Both parents of a 2-year-old child were killed in Monday’s mass shooting during a July 4th parade in Highland Park.
Kevin McCarthy, 37, and Irina McCarthy, 35, were among the seven people were killed during the mass shooting. Their son, Aiden, was separated from his parents during the chaos.
A woman who had the child said Highland Park police came to her home to take the child to the police station to be reunited with his family.
The child was not injured.
A GoFundMe page was created to raise money to support Aiden.
“At two years old, Aiden is left in the unthinkable position; to grow up without his parents,” the page description said.
The page said Aiden’s grandparents will care for him.
The page raised over $65,000 as of 3:40 p.m. on Tuesday.

BLACK HISTORY PROFILE — Dwight Scypion coaching to save kids from the streets
Published 12:20 am Friday, February 26, 2021
Dwight Scypion is a competitor. As an athlete and coach for decades in Port Arthur, he hated losing more than he loved winning.
“I always had this attitude about myself,” he said. “I didn’t like to lose. Losing was a no-no for me. If I lost, I took it so hard to the point that I didn’t really talk to nobody. When I’m winning, I’m good.”
Most competitors will say that winning is a relief from losing and that the stronger emotion is tied to not being good enough. For Scypion, who is now a basketball and football coach at Memorial High School, losing comes at much higher stakes than a loss on the record.
“In the process of doing all of this stuff, I know I have touched the lives of a lot of kids,” he said. “Some of them I see. Some of them I don’t. I tried to save all of them. I knew I couldn’t, but I tried anyway. I know I saved more than the ones I lost. Some of the kids that I did lose hurt more than anything. I know I lost a few. I knew the direction they were going, but I kept pushing and trying my best to keep them from going. Once they really got out of these eyes, I lost them. When they were in these eyes, I kept on them. When they got away from me that was it. I think about those, the ones that I lost and tried really hard to hold on to.”
The coach was born in Port Arthur on Oct. 28, 1952. He is the second oldest of six siblings.
“It was fun,” Scypion said of his childhood. “We did a lot of things in the city and had a lot of friends. I had good, hard-working parents. My dad did all types of work and mom worked at Luby’s Cafeteria when it was out there in Jefferson City. She was the main salad maker. They raised us all to be the type of people we are today.”
While all of the boys played sports, Scypion’s completive side leaked out when asked who was the best athlete.
“I’ll put it this way,” he said with a laugh, “we all were on the same page, but I think it was probably me. I really do.”
He attended Lincoln High School before going to Jarvis Christian College and then to Lamar University and Prairie View A&M University.
Scypion earned his degree in Business Administration with a minor in Physical Education.
His journey to becoming a teacher and a coach had some pit stops along the way.
“It took a good while,” he said. “When I finished college, I came home and thought for sure that I was going to get off into some business and make good money. It didn’t work out. I started doing little jobs like being a supervisor at a furniture company. From there, I got into law enforcement. During that time, I started getting involved in Pop Warner leagues and being around kids. While I was a policeman, I started taking educational classes and it seemed like something I wanted to do.”
As an officer, Scypion said he felt like he was reacting to issues with children and not being proactive.
“I didn’t want to only interact with kids when they have done something wrong,” he said. “From there, as things began to materialize, my mind started focusing on the educational part. I was in law enforcement. I knew I could become a sub, still work in law enforcement and do the Pop Warner and it just kept pushing me more and more towards kids.”
That is when Scypion began doubting if teaching was what he was supposed to do. The rigorous testing process to become a teacher made him bullish to keep trying, he said.
“I went back to Jarvis to get more feedback on what I should do,” he said. “When I started actually doing it, I heard words in my head saying that this is what I need to do. I didn’t really understand it at first, but I realized it was God talking to me. While I was at Jarvis, I got two jobs. One was a scout for the basketball coach… As I started doing that, I was pushed more and more to being a coach.”
Scypion also worked as an administrator over the housing department, but spent most of his free time around the basketball program.
“When my son was born in ’92, I came back home and was hired as a permanent sub with the school district,” he said. “I coached basketball at Edison Middle School. I said ‘This is it.’ The direction that the lord led me was the direction that I started to feel good about. I didn’t want to do nothing else. I didn’t care if someone came and offered me a job for a lot more money.”
A few years later, Scypion began coaching at Lincoln.
“That made me feel really at home,” he said. “There was one day I was at home going through some stuff from my high school days. I found a spiral from my history class. I was writing down all my goals. I said that if I didn’t accomplish these top goals, then I want to come back and coach at Lincoln High School. When that happened, everything made sense.”
Since being back in Port Arthur, Scypion has helped coached Lincoln and Memorial state championship games in football and basketball.
Those moments and students have brought him more joy than anyone can imagine and helped through difficult times, but the wins after the final whistle are the ones he cherishes the most.
“There was student that graduated from Lincoln,” he said. “We go to the same church. I used to work with his wife but I didn’t know it was his wife. We were all in church together and he told his wife, ‘this man right here kept me where I need to be. I wanted to do a lot of bad stuff. I wanted to quit football, but he told me I couldn’t.’ I told him that I wasn’t going to let him quit football because I wasn’t going to lose him to the streets. He’s doing great now.”
For more coverage, check out https://www.panews.com/2021/02/12/black-history-month-pat-avery-breaking-barriers-paving-way-for-others/
For more coverage, check out https://www.panews.com/2021/02/05/black-history-profile-commissioner-sinegal-remains-close-to-history-while-moving-forward/

According to neighbors as reported by the daily, emrah E., who is eight years older than child bride kübra ulaş, had kidnapped and raped the girl a year ago. Thereafter, Emrah E. threatened Ulaş's family and demanded they allow him to marry Ulaş. Afraid, they agreed to the marriage.
Kübra Ulaş was frequently subjected to violence at the hand of her husband following their marriage nearly a year ago, say the couple's neighbors. Emrah E. reportedly began beating Ulaş after losing his job. When Ulaş visited a hospital the next day, she was shocked to learn she had had a miscarriage caused by a kick to the stomach. She is reported to have hung herself from a window grille after having had to live through her husband's violent outbursts and was found dead by Emrah E. when he came home on Sept. 25.
Ulaş's funeral was held without the attendance of Emrah E.
The girl's family has filed a complaint with the Adana Public Prosecutor's Office, claiming Emrah E. killed her and made it look like a suicide. The prosecutor has launched an investigation into the incident.

It would seem that the Dog is in the Dog House. This is not new news but Dog was on Larry King Live tonight talking about his case. He was arrested in Mexico several years ago while on a bounty. It would seem that bounty hunting is illegal in Mexico. I tune into the show from time to time, and if you can get past his appearance, he really is a good guy and tries to help out those that he arrests. Anyway, there is a hearing this coming Monday in Mexico to try and dismiss the charges. Good Luck Dog.

West Tigers warn Jamal Idris is making his NRL return underdone and not to expect too much of their star recruit too soon.
For the first time in 693 days, the 26-year-old will set foot on an NRL field in his club debut for the Tigers against South Sydney on Friday.
After taking a hiatus from the game to address personal issues and travel the world, the former NSW and Australian representative joined the Tigers for pre-season training in late 2016.
While he dropped 11kg over the summer and began working out a month before he joined the Tigers squad, coach Jason Taylor warned his fitness wasn't up to scratch and it would take time for him to work his way back to full flight.
"Jamal's done a great job, he's been really energetic around the place, he's happy to be here and we're looking forward to him hitting his straps," Taylor said.
"I think it's fair to say that Jamal isn't right now at a level of fitness that is perfect. We've got some work to do.
"We're ready to start the season, he's ready to start the season. You'll see Jamal hit his straps a few rounds in, I'd imagine."
The 195cm, 115kg Idris has at times struggled with his weight during his previous stints at Canterbury, Gold Coast and Penrith.
There's no doubt he will line up against the Rabbitohs but is expected to be short of a gallop during the first month.
Taylor blamed his time off, following his exit from Penrith, and a knee reconstruction for his lack of conditioning.
He said Idris shaped as a potential X-factor and would lend them size and strength in the three-quarter line, something they've lacked during the past several years.
"Our physical performance unit has done really well to get him to the point that he's ready to go for round one," Taylor said.
"They've done a massive job. We're really excited about where he can get to throughout the course of the season.
"All I'm saying is don't expect too much in round one."

The First Time I Sent A Nude Selfie To My Boyfriend!
Across the globe, one of the biggest challenges couples face in a long distance relationship is physical intimacy. My relationship was the perfect example. While I was studying economics here in Bombay, my boyfriend was studying law in Bangalore. I kid you not, but every single day we would text and skype at night. I missed him too much to not talk to him even for a day!Although he used to visit me once every two months, the quality time I got with him was just never enough for me. It was like the more I saw him, the more I wanted him to stay. I missed his touch, those warm bear hugs and his sweet voice. One casual night, he called me up like he always did. I was a bit taken by surprise when he told me he just called up to tell me that he missed me. His next four words sent shivers down my spine - “I want you here.” At that point of time, if I was with him, I swear I would have ran into his arms and never let go. To spoil the moment, my sister walked into my room. I had to cut short the conversation and ask him to text me as I didn’t want her to hear our mushy conversation. We continued texting. And, as we ran into the night, our conversation went from “how was your day?” to “I miss you so much” to “If you were here I would have done...” and finally to “what are you wearing right now?” Before we knew it, we were sexting. In between, I put down my phone and went into the kitchen to drink some water. Once I got back and unlocked my phone, I noticed that I had received a WhatsApp notification. It was a blurred image and I had to download it to view it. I tapped on it and once it opened, I could believe my eyes. It was a shirtless picture of him! The only thing he was wearing was a smile. I looked at it for a good two minutes and, I have to admit, it turned me on quite a bit.I wanted him now! In spite of distance being a physical obstacle, it wasn’t one in my head. While we continued sexting, he casually asked me to send him a nude too. Truth be told, he’s seen me without my clothes a couple of times, but I’ve never had the guts to send him (or anyone before him) a nude picture of myself. I was nervous, but strangely, at that point of time, the mood felt just right. I tiptoed my way into the bathroom, switched on the lights without making a sound, locked the door and looked at myself straight in the mirror. I removed my clothes, unhooked my bra, picked up my phone and quickly sent him a snap on Snapchat (since it lasts for just 10 seconds) to be safe. I mean, I do love him, but what if he loses his phone or it finds its way into the wrong hands? My nude selfie could get me into some serious s***. I had to be careful for my own safety.He immediately opened the snap and in 10 seconds, poof! It was gone. He was so taken aback that he replayed the snap, but was decent enough to not take a screenshot of it. After a minute or so, he messaged me back on WhatsApp, saying just one word - “Wow!” The conversation just got hotter after I sent that selfie. But then it was four in the morning and as much as we wanted it to go on, we had to call it a night because both of us had classes the next day. So I sent him a goodnight text, took a sip of water and tucked myself into bed. I have to admit, it was one of the most peaceful sleeps I’ve had till date - even if it was for just 3 hours until I had to wake up for class!When I switched on my phone in the morning, I was shocked to see such a huge text msg from him. Not only was he up first to wish me good morning, but he also expressed his love for me through a poem that he sent me as a text. I was beyond touched. I think that one night made us fall in love all over again. It brought back our chemistry and trust. Now, we are closer than ever!Images: ShutterstockHAVE A STORY IDEA FOR POPxo? If you want to hear about it, we can write about it! Just tell us your idea here!MUST-READ: The First Time I Had An Orgasm…MUST-READ: The First Time My Boyfriend And I Tried To Do It In The Shower!

Tally winked back. She liked Krishna, with his hard-headed sensibility and a sense of humor that was as dry as good white wine! Compared to him, Sergeant Cul was nothing more than a brute and a bully, which is what he should have been exposed as years ago, in her own opinion. However, at the Academy, hard-liners like Cul had their place and were not easily deposed from their thrones.
There he is, she thought glumly, patrolling this hall like he owns it. Sure, it's his job and his duty, but the Academy belongs to all of us. Also, normally I wouldn't mind a little psychological intimidation at test time, but I prefer the way Khrishna's doing it to the method of our other colleague. Honestly. He deceives everyone, pronouncing his last name just like the word "cool", but he assumes that none of us idiots knows French. "Cul" is pronounced like the letter Q in that particular language, and it means something VERY impolite: a person's "posterior"!
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^ ((look it up if you don't believe me! :P))

Best of Rome Children Tour
We visited Rome in July and had Lucia as our tour guide and everything was so brilliant. Lucia was just divine with my daughters aged 10 and 12 and they now think of her as their older sister. My husband and I found her extremely charming and very knowledgeable. Lucia imparted facts to the girls in a way that they understood, were interested and remember to this day. My husband and I have been to Rome many times and we felt as though we were seeing it for the first time. Lucia is a natural!
I would recommend this tour to anyone. It was completely worth the money and we enjoyed everything about it.
Thanks again for a wonderful day.
PS My girls send their love to Lucia.

Gwen Diamond is a Porn Star from United States. She was born on November 17, 1986. She is listed on FreeOnes since 2006 and is currently ranked 9936th place. She currently has 142 gallery links and 3 videos in her own FreeOnes section.
Our records show that Gwen Diamond is currently retired which means she is not making movies, doing live shows and/or doing photo shoots at this time.

Quoting sταrry skies:" You can't know that he wouldn't use drugs around the children. It's always a possibility."
OP I know you don't want to hear it, but this is true.
My situation was very similar to yours. I can't give any advice because I left him, I couldn't deal with it. It was too much back and forth. It takes years to build trust back up. I wish you the best of luck but please, please, think of your kids first... if you think he's using in the house, while they're in his care, while he's driving them around, just leave and don't look back. This is a life long thing, like the previous poster said, not something you get over through a six month program or something.

Published by Bethany House
a division of Baker Publishing
Set in the 1960s.
When Janis Anthony packs up and leaves her abusive husband, Alan, she moves to Mills River and buys a house, near her father. Her three children have differing views of the seperation. Wally, her oldest, at 17, was the son of her first husband, who died when he was very young. He disliked Alan and was happy to be away from the man who beat his mother. Roz, 11, was hoping her father would change, and they could all be back together. The youngest, Valerie, was too young to remember much.
Shortly after they moved into their house, the previous owner, Tilly, shows up on their doorstep, and before long, she's moved back into her house, with the new occupants. She takes over cooking and childcare, while Janis works.
Roz makes friends with another girl, Mara, and they both are hoping to see their fathers soon. Mara finally goes to Chicago with her grandparents and meets her father, but Roz, when she finds that her father is now in Mills River, tells no one. Will keeping this a secret put her family back together as she hopes? Or will it put them all in danger?
This is the first book that I've read by this author, and I really enjoyed it. It is well written, suspenseful at times, and doesn't sugarcoat family issues. Very realistic.

Thursday, May 9, 2013
A Week Without Facebook
I just returned home from a week in upstate New York visiting my brother and his family. It was good to get away and good to see them again, since I hadn't been there for five years. They kept telling me that the week I was there was the best they've had all year. And then they accused me of taking it back with me, because it was reported they would have rain for about 4 days when I left. They kept telling me how warm it was, and since I'm from Florida, I felt silly having long sleeves on. They were in shorts and I was in jeans, but I was perfectly comfortable.
My brother has a computer and I checked my email a couple times a day and a few other things while I was there. I decided I should stay away from Facebook and other sites where I waste too much time. I didn't even play one game of Spider Solitaire, and I'm really addicted to that! Instead, we spent quite a bit of time in the evening in front of the TV. I still don't have a TV, I watch a few shows on my computer and that's the extent of my TV knowledge. Amazing how many channels there are, how much stuff that I've never heard of. And I probably don't want to ever see most of it again.
I really didn't have withdrawal symptoms from the lack of Facebook. I'm sure I missed some fun pictures and funny little signs. When I got back, I didn't have the impulse to scroll down for hours looking for things I had missed. I was fine. Of course, now that I'm back, I do spend time looking at postings from everyone and making a comment or hitting like.
If you know anyone who thinks they can't live without Facebook, Twitter, or other sites, let them know it really is possible to survive without it. It's an interesting site and I enjoy it but it's not the end of the world if I don't keep up with what everyone is doing. Try it, see how long you can last.

Hello all. I, rejavik,will narate you my real life experience which happened today with my bhabhi sneha. Let me first describe her. She is 5 ft 4, slim & trim, nice shapely boobs & very attractive ass. Her ass & boobs are main attraction. When my brother was married to her i was not attracted to her but after giving birth to baby gal, she put on some weight & became sexy, most of weight was accumalated on boobs & ass. She use to wear transperent salwar kammez exposing her bra through it.While serving food her boobs use to touch me when she use to bend which would give me instant hard on & ask for more. When she use to walk, her hips use to swing left & right & i wished i could ass fuck her.I use to capture her snaps of her cleavage & ass without her knowledge & use to masturbate on seeing them.
One day my bhabhi had come to town for shopping. She had to go to shoping market which is near our office & very crowded place. As she had come alone & my bro had work, he told me to accompany her as the area was crowded & people are not friendly & good. I was very happy to accompany her. My bhabhi was wearing a white coloured tight t-shirt & light blue jeans. she was looking mind blowing. Her boobs & ass were protruding. Being evening time the streets are very busy & there is hardly any space to walk through but still people manage to push out.
My bhabhi is very simple & educated girl. She feared commuting in crowds. I convinced her & asked her to keep moving. I was trying to be protective & asked her to walk in front of me to avoide peverts touching her. I was continuoaly staring at her swinging ass.We came to a junction where evening namaz was over & people were moving in hoardes. As the road was crowded we came to a point where ppl were walking neck to neck. I noticed 2 young muslim guyz walking on her either side trying to get close to her. I knew they were upto something. I noticed them trying to take advantage of crowd, they were trying to squeeze in her. The guyz came so close they sandwiched my bhabhi between them & one guy to right boldy pressed her right boob acting as if it happened by mistake. I was damn pissed but could not do anything as i tought the area was not good to create a scene & we were about to reach the market. By the time the guy on the left too pressed her left breast .
The scene was very erotic but it also made me angry. I saw them disappearing in the crowd laughing which made me more annoyed but i could not do anything. What was more starnge is that my bhabhi didnt react much on it & was behaving as if nothing happened as she thought i might have noticed it. I came close to her & told her ” Bhabhi are you ok, were the guyz trying to act cheap with you?” My bhabhi said “No dear it was just so crowded & the people here are pevert.The way they look at you is disguisting. We should hit the shopping market asap”. The scene gave me real hard on & what added to it was my bhabhis no reaction to it.
We finished shopping by late night around 9:30 pm. My bro called & told us to catch train from there & he will meet us at home. We reached station & since train was empty, me & my bhabhi both got onto male compartment only. The compartment was empty with 7-8 people. My bhabhi was tired so she just closed her eyes & started listening to FM on her cell phone. I was sitting next to her. I saw the guyz sitting opposite us continuosly staring at us. I hear one of them say ” What babe she is. Look at her lovely boobs & nipples are visible through her t-shirt This bastard is lucky to have female like her.” I tried to ignore them but just took a glimpse & saw that my bhabhis tits were really sticking out from her t-shirt. Suddenly train approched next station & people started getting in.
In few stations passing by the train got jammed packed & i thought it will be difficult to get down at our stop. Iwas pushed close to my bhabhi as seats became full. My thighs were tocuhing to her thighs. My bhabhi was still relaxing & lsitening to radio. The evening scene was still on my mind & i was thinking when will i get such chance.The train was moving fast. As we were getting jerks, i also thought why not try my luck. I started leaning on my bhabhi. She didnt respond so i moved more closed & kept my hand on her thigh. I knew she would be shocked but i closed my eyes & pretended i was asleep. I knew she would never like such thing.
Due to trains movement i moved my hands slowly up & down her thighs so she might think it is due to trains movement. My elbow was touching her breast & it was wonderful feeling. I kept doing it & pressing gently her lefft breat with my left elbow. I was feeling so good & thought she would also feel the same. Inmeantime i didnt notice our stop was approching & the crowd had built up. Sudddenly my bhabhi shook me & told me we should ruch out or wont be able to get down. I opened my eyes & saw compartment jam packed & told bhabhi ” Its impossible for us to get to the gate. We will reach the last station & get down there & take auto to reach home” . Bhabhi said ” No its already late & bhai is waiting for dinner at home, we should get down at our stop only”. I agreed to her & we got up & started moving towrds the gate. I saw eyes feasting on my bhabhi . I told bhabhi to hold bags in her hand.
She covered her boobs with the bags & started moving forward. Since it was jam packed i moved behind her with no space between us. I tried to push ppl on way & make way for us. My dick became hard on feel of her smooth & soft ass. I was purposley pushing myself to her. I mooved my hands many times on her shapely ass & being crowded she didnt bother & didntknew what was happening & she was getting pushed from all sides. I became bold in my efforts & cupped her buttocks & kept pushing her. This is first time i was feeling gals ass & it was rocking. We almost came near the gate & stop before ours was approching . I told bhabhi to get aside to the left near the entrance to let people get in as ppl just rush throught the door. Bhabhi agrred & she positioned herself to left side. i was standing on her right side.The stop approached & people got in like mad cows running.
The force & push was so hard i was crushed against her. I really enjoyed it. her boobs were getting squeezed against my chest. Due to tremendous push here & there, i heard the word ‘oh fuck’ popped her from her mouth. This is forst time i ever heard this word from her & never expected it. We couldnt move till our stop came. I was crushed against my bhabhi completely & couldnt move an inch.She also couldnt move a bit. I moved my hand on her waist & pretended as i was avoiding guyz next to us come too close to her. I was thoroughly enjoying & hope our stop should never come. unfortunately our stop came & there was sudden release of crowd which created space. I, hesistantly removed my hand from her waist.
The force this time came from behing & we were automatically being pushed to get down. I told my bhabhi to hand over the bags to me. i moved my left arm around her shoulders to guide her down. While moving down i slipped the hand purposely below her shoulder & pressed her left breast. This feeling was HEAVEN. I have no words to describe it. I kept pressing her till we got down & then had to retieve my hand as i had no futher reason to do so.
My bhabhis hair were totally dishelved & she was looking slutty. We started walking towards our home. I told her ” Bhabhi im sorry”. She just smiled & said ” For what? ” i told her ” It was so crowded i couldnt make you feel comfortable”. She said ” Its ok dear. But i swear we will never travel by local train again”. I simply smiled back her but deep inside my mind i was thinking i wish we both should travel by local train every day. I wish i would be able to get her someday but i dotn know when is that day.
This is not based on any fanatsy or imagination. This is my real life experience which i thought to share with you. Please do let me know if you found it interesting.
THE ENDPost Views :25278

PRESCOTT, Ariz. -- From several days of seeking refuge from the Doce Fire, to seeking information about it, John and Angie Mazella were among a few dozen people at a community meeting at Prescott High School Sunday.
"I can't believe how much it spread in one day, and how little it spread after that," Angie Mazella said.
The Mazellas were forced to leave their home as the fire closed in about a mile away. Fortunately, they made it out OK and so did their belongings.
"The worst part is that we had to get our valuables," she said. "You have to say to yourself, 'What is valuable?' I honestly couldn't think of what was valuable."
"There was this huge plume of smoke coming right in the southwest direction from our house and I said, 'There was something wrong with that plume.' It didn't look like a controlled burn and it was getting bigger and bigger and bigger," John Mazella added.
But at the meeting, officials announced that they don't expect the Doce Fire to grow anymore and that they should have it completely wrangled by Wednesday.
"We owe these guys, and girls, a tribute for the incredible work they did and I just want to be here, all the sheriff's deputies, the fire people," John said.
Officials also explained to people that the evacuations are now lifted, and how they'll rehabilitate the wilderness, erasing the fire lines they were forced to cut. Another point made was that homeowners can call an appraiser to find out whether their property lost value. If it did, it's possible to get a break on their property taxes this year.

I had the opportunity to meet a candidate for SGA President and I was impressed with what I saw. This person talked to me, rather then at me and gave me straight-forward, honest answers. He gave me his understanding of the SGA (which is impressive) and outlined his experience as a Senator for three terms. Ben Wildstein will make an awesome SGA President because of his experience, his fresh ideas and his ability to communicate with the student body. I have no met his opponents and I am sure that they have good ideas as well — but I will vote for Wildstein because he has the guts to stand toe-to-toe with the Administration and represent our interests. On March 8th, I’ll vote for Ben Wildstein.

Sommers graduates from police academy, earns awardsBy Matt Cole Published 2:15pm Friday, August 2, 2013
Demopolis Police Officer Jonathan Sommers graduated from the police academy in Selma on Thursday and brought home three awards.
His awards were most improved physical training, defensive and pursuit driving and highest academic average.
Sommers said his physical training test was most improved from the first time he took it to the last time he took it, which earned him the award. The driving award was given to him because he had the fastest time on an obstacle course behind the wheel of a car. He also had the highest academic average in the graduating class with an average of 96.39.
“The academy was a really good experience,” Sommers said. “I enjoyed it. There was a lot of great training with great instructors. They do a really good job over there.”
Sommers was hired by the Demopolis Police Department on Aug. 28, 2012. He was sworn in, and went through pre-academy training with the department.
Before joining the police department, Sommers was a member of the Demopolis Fire and Rescue Squad.
“I’ve always thought about the police department,” he said. “I’m still helping the community, just in a different way. It was something I really wanted to do, and I talked with my family about it and decided it would be a good thing.”

RENTON, Wash. — An 8-year-old was driving a car that crashed into another car in the parking lot of a Walmart on Tuesday afternoon, police said.
Renton police officers responded to the store at 743 Rainier Ave South around 2:45 p.m. They said a father and his son were shopping inside when the son got the keys from his dad, ran ahead, started the car, put in in reverse and struck another moving car.
The car hit by the young driver had a mother and her 2-month-old child inside.
Renton police said there were no injuries.
© 2020 Cox Media Group

Cool place to work
Gained a lot of experience over the eight week period, and a real insight into the working life of an Auditor.
I really enjoyed the client work, when I was put in the office it wasn't as exciting but summer is quite a quiet time for the audit team and at least I was surrounded by other people similar to my age at this time.
Such a varied role, everyone was so welcoming and helpful.
Brilliant atmosphere from day one, great people to work with and generally a fantastic experience
I really enjoyed my internship and felt it was a really worthwhile way to spend my summer.
I really enjoyed the variety of work, going out to client sites and the friendly office environment.
I enjoyed working at KPMG because they were very supportive and helpful. The graduate role is made clear and and the people are enjoyable to work with. So even if the work can get boring at times, the people are always there to make it more fun.
I had a great time i really enjoyed working there.
I really enjoyed the majority of the tasks given to me. They were always fairly vairied and challenging. Early mornings were sometimes a drag though, especially when you had to be at a client by 9am.
I had a fantastic time during my internship. The staff were very helpful and I believe I gained a true insight into the activities of an audit assistant.
I thoroughly enjoyed my internship. The variation of the work and the range of people I made with made it an invaluable experience.
Although there were times when I didn't enjoy the job, this is infact the job that a lot of people on my course were competing for,and I was the lucky person who got the job and got to start my ACA qualification.
The work was genuinely interesting and the rapport with my colleagues was thoroughly enjoyable.
I enjoyed everything about this job especially the people I was able to work with.
The work wasn't very challenging.

Page 3 of 6
The young attorneys have prepared for weeks, reviewing cases and writing opening and closing statements. The offenders arrive nervously with their parents. Although some clearly have rehearsed their confessions of guilt, the judging eyes of their peers are a new experience. Meanwhile, the jurors, most of who were on trial as offenders only two weeks ago, generally look like they'd rather be somewhere else.
Volunteer adult attorneys act as judges. But first they must be trained by the minimum-wage youth court staff, who are nearly two decades younger than they are. The courtroom is filled with tension and excitement.
On a recent Wednesday night, one courtroom held an offender who was caught with a BB gun at school and then panicked at the principal's office and fled while under arrest. Another student got drunk and gave a police officer a fake name. A third girl vandalized a school bathroom with a gang-related tag. A fourth youth got caught by the police with a bag of marijuana.
In interviews after court, most offenders expressed gratitude and relief. "I just feel like it's a second chance," said the student who fled from school grounds after bringing a BB gun to campus. His father seemed equally grateful. "It avoids my son being labeled," he said. "That could have really affected his self-esteem — creating a stigma around him if he had to go to juvenile hall. Also, it builds up anxiety, and he is not going to do anything like that again." The father then gave his son a stern look, and his son nodded in agreement.
The boy caught with marijuana admitted during his trial that he needed to make some changes in his life. He said that since his arrest he has reduced his pot smoking to "only" a few times a week. In closing arguments, youth court prosecutor Jimonte Johnson said the offender has a serious problem and needs substantial intervention. The jury sentenced him to attend a drug-abuse class.
By 8:30 p.m. — after three and a half hours of orientation and then trial upon trial — much had changed. Offenders typically expressed shame, and left having committed themselves to a specific plan to right their wrongs. The adolescent attorneys left the room enjoying a kind of performance high, with the volunteer adult judges offering endless praise and encouraging them to go to law school. And the jurors themselves seemed changed, too. For most, the apathy appeared gone. After seeing up to three cases, these youths likely have a better grasp on the consequences of crime, and with luck become motivated not to end up back in the hot seat.
At age fourteen, Pairoj Sansri was hanging out with the wrong crowd — people who reinforced his apathetic, frustrated attitude. His father was often absent from his life, and his mother was struggling to raise Pairoj and his siblings by herself. His first year at Oakland's Skyline High School in 2005 was rocky. He said he was "drinking alcohol and smoking weed" and receiving Ds and Fs. He felt frustrated by his situation at home and at school. "I couldn't stay focused," he recalled recently. And no one was holding Pairoj accountable for his behavior.
Just months after starting high school, Pairoj took an airsoft gun to school to show a friend. He had bought it that weekend at the Berkeley Flea Market. "I just wanted to let my friend see it," he explained. "But when I pulled it out and gave it to him, the teacher saw it and grabbed it from him quickly." Within moments, a security guard was on the scene and called the Oakland Police Department. Pairoj was arrested.
From there, it seemed like Pairoj and his family were on a downward spiral. "I didn't know what I was going through," he said. The process was overwhelming and confusing. Making matters worse was the disappointment he felt from his father, who did not live with him at the time. "He doesn't like guns, and it made him really mad that I had brought it to his house," Pairoj said. He was suspended for thirty days and spent a month in an alternative placement center — forced, he said, to do elementary-level school work.
Soon after Pairoj's suspension, he was transferred to Merritt High School — a small, alternative public school for students who have gotten in trouble. At Merritt, Pairoj joined an unstable community of about a hundred students and six staff members. Months of depression followed.
"I hated being at that school," he recalled. "That part was really depressing." Classmates would skip school for months at a time but were never punished. Pairoj felt himself slipping. Surrounded by students who seemed to have lost all sense of direction and were constantly misbehaving, Pairoj felt as if he was being conditioned to give up. He desperately needed a solution.
His first glimmer of hope came when he met his McCullum case manager Kayode Powell. Since Pairoj immediately admitted to committing his offense, his case managers concluded that he was a good candidate to go through youth court.
So Pairoj faced a trial run by his peers. And although he felt intimidated and afraid of the outcome, he now believes it was the most useful punishment he could have received. He was ordered to do many hours of community service, attend classes, and serve as a juror several times. He was again facing consequences, but this time, they felt reasonable and thought-out.
"My father was skeptical at first," Pairoj said. "He thought I should have done it the hard way." But the appeal of a clean criminal record ultimately attracted Pairoj and his family to youth court. And upon completion, Pairoj's record remained untainted — but his goals in life had changed.
Seven Days - February 21, 3:30 PM
Seven Days - February 18, 5:00 PM
Seven Days - February 17, 4:09 PM
Seven Days - February 16, 3:24 PM
Seven Days - February 13, 11:39 AM

The Presidential Commission of Inquiry into the Easter Sunday terror attack has concluded its hearing yesterday (19).
Accordingly, evidence was taken from Umeer Mohammad, who is currently in custody, who had links with Saharan Hashim yesterday and it was not open to the media.
Shani Abeysekera, the then Director of the CID, who was remanded at the time, was also scheduled to testify yesterday, but did not appear before the Commission yesterday.
It is reported that Shani Abeysekera had informed the Commission yesterday that he could not appear before the court to give evidence as he had not been able to meet his lawyers due to his recent health condition.
Accordingly, the Commission has not informed him whether he will be called to give evidence at a future date or not.
The Presidential Commission of Inquiry was appointed in September 2019 under the powers of former President Maithripala Sirisena.

SATURDAY 23 JULY PUNGALINA
We took our day off today, because tomorrow I had to do a meal for camping guests.
They were a party of six, again known somehow to O, from his childhood home area in northern Victoria. He had put them in a site not often used – beside the Safari Camp Creek, but on the opposite side. We hadn’t noticed when they came in and hadn’t been told at the time, but I thought it must have been about last Sunday. They had been doing their own exploring about the place, although O had taken them out and about a couple of times.
We decided to try to find Ringo’s Song, out to the east. This spot was marked on the mud map of the place, and O had talked about it. He had indicated that the track out there should be dry enough, now, to travel on, but he had not had time, this year, to clear it of any debris.
I was intrigued by the name for the place. Apparently, it derived from when there was a mustering group camped out there – when the feral cattle were mustered, after the purchase of the place. The mustering crew were from the neighbouring Seven Emu Station. One of the stockmen – Ringo – had a guitar, and did some singing around the evening campfires. Quite a poetic name, I thought, and I was keen to go see if the place lived up to it.
Took the driveway track, then the one towards the wetlands, for a little way, then branched off this to the north.
We had to proceed even more carefully than was usual on the property tracks, because the track was hard to discern.
In some places, we had to clear light fallen timber from the track.
It was worth the effort – there were a couple of really pretty water hole/creek areas. I thought the first one of these was what was marked as Shadforth’s Camp on the map. This had a lot of water lilies growing on the water hole.
The track went sort of round that and across a gutter like creek, then further on we came to what seemed to be more of a flowing creek, and presumed this was Ringo’s Song. But we were guessing, really. Could not discern a track going further on, though the mud map indicated it did.
We walked around for a while, exploring.
Admired the excellent stands of pandanus growing here, particularly a fan shaped one.
It definitely was worth the effort to get out there.

Lockdown over at Florida Hospital East after suspicious package found
A lockdown that was placed on Florida Hospital East after a suspicious package was found at the hospital is over.
The Orange County Sheriff's Office and a bomb squad were called Monday night to the hospital at 7727 Lake Underhill Road.
Deputies said the suspicious package was called in around 8 p.m. Monday.
No evacuations were made during the lockdown, the Sheriff's Office said.
No other details were provided.

Norwegian Getaway Cruise Review by carolannemo: Great trip for a family!
Overall Member Rating
Great trip for a family!
Destination: Eastern Caribbean
I was nervous about cruising Norwegian even though we had cruised on an Alaska cruise with them 10 years earlier because at that time we did not have young children. With a 6,5, and 1.5 year old in tow, we decided to try them out because of the great family special they were running. We have cruised Disney 5 times with the kids and have always had a great experience so we were unsure of how things would go. It turns out our worries were unnecessary as the trip was fantastic!
The room was a good size and it was so nice to be able to actually find a room to accommodate all three kids. If the kids were older I don't know how well they would have fit, but for our ages it was perfect. The staff was very friendly and helpful with us with the children everywhere we went. Bringing them to dinner was not an issue and we enjoyed the food at almost every restaurant. The buffet was good too and of course the kids loved the unlimited ice cream. It would be great if there could somehow be More quick food around the pool area as you are watching the kids play in the splash park (which was great by the way!) as this would be easier for quick lunch time by the pool. I didnt like the salty pool water, but perhaps I am spoiled with the Disney fresh water. The slides were fantastic though and the kids and parents enjoyed these! The ropes course was very fun and they have a ropes course for the little kids too. Just bring socks and good shoes or you cant do it! The bouncer and spider web slide was fun, but having it open more hours would have been great as it was open so infrequently. The putt putt golf was top notch! We all enjoyed it more then the one on the Disney cruises. The entertainment for children was great and they loved everything from the meet and greets, arts and crafts, and Dora party and story time. They even played Frozen in 3D one night in the theatre! The pajama jam the last day was fun but perhaps a bit overpriced for what you get since my kids didn't like any of the food. The kids' club was a lot of fun for them and the circus performance they gave at the end was great!! I really wish there was a place for my 1.5 year old to go so we could enjoy a show at night like they have on the Disney cruises, but they do not have that available so she tagged along to every event and dinner which ended up being ok. Everyone in the boys' kids club were great for the most part, but a couple of staff members probably should have worked somewhere else as they got a bit short with the kids at times when they would lose their patience.
Overall though, my five year old said as we were leaving that he didn't want to go because he had "such enormous fun!". Guest relations were very helpful and accommodating if there was an issue as they took care of things right away. I was very impressed with this! We will definitely have to Norwegian again. Less
Read more Norwegian Getaway cruise reviews >>
Read Cruise Critic's Norwegian Getaway Review >>
Cabin review: 5774
The room was of good size for the five of us, but we were on the fifth deck and it got very noisy as you could hear a lot of boat noises and sometimes crew noises because of our location. Beds were comfortable and the large window was great. The bathroom was clean and large. Our stateroom helper was great and even decorated my room on my birthday!!
Allure is Amazing!
Fun for Kids
Good and Not So Good
Very Disappointed;Allure of th...
Cruising with the 50 and Fab
Great 25th Anniversary Cruise
The Getaway Rocks!!

May 30, 2017
Steve & Katie Cantrell
We came down on PCS orders while I was deployed to Afghanistan. My wife now had the task of working a full time job, raising three children, and selling our house all by herself. One of her teacher friends highly recommend Mr. Burch and his agency to her. She contacted Mr. Burch and within 2 business days he presented her a bound book with current market trends specific to our neighborhood and some others close by. He also presented a plan to sell the house and was able to show her the type of advertising that his firm could provide us, using social media as well as standard market websites. After 3 days on the market we had an offer on the house and were in contract. Mr. Burch was able to accommodate the fact I was outside the country by using a secure document signing service, know as DocuSign. I signed all the required documents, securely, from my phone in Afghanistan. He was also able to accommodate the fact we had to move the day of our closing date. All documents were prepared in advance and the day of closing went seamlessly. We have recommended him to 3 other families whose houses have also sold successfully. I would continue to recommend him to anyone looking for a positive experience while selling a house.

ROCKFORD — Doctors at Mercyhealth were unable to save the life of shooting victim Desiree Weir, but that doesn't mean their efforts went unnoticed.
"They brought her back six times," said Weir's mother, Stephnie Higar. "She kept fighting and fighting, but she must have got too tired."
Weir, a 30-year-old single mother of three, was shot in the head about 4:15 p.m. Wednesday outside her home in the 200 block of Royal Avenue. She was pronounced dead two hours later at Mercyhealth Hospital's Rockton Avenue campus.
Police do not know if she was the intended target. A man seen running from the scene was located by police, questioned and is no longer considered a suspect, Lt. Kurt Whisenand said. A man who was handcuffed on the ground at the scene was thought to be possibly armed. No weapons were found on him and he, too, was released, Whisenand said. No arrests have been made.
"She was the backbone of this family," Higar said. "She kept everybody together. ... If you needed something and you knew her, all you had to do was ask. She would do what ever she could to get you what you needed."
Higar said her daughter enjoyed spending time with her children, Nevaeh, 9; and twins Destinee and David, 7; and her numerous nieces and nephews.
Higar and Weir last saw each other on Tuesday. They spent the day together and made steak tacos for dinner. They capped off their night with drinks at the Two Wheel Inn, 4433 Auburn St.
"She didn't drink," Higar said. "She had two kiddie cocktails and a Pepsi, and I had two Bud Lights down at the Two Wheel."
Higar said she also talked to her daughter on the phone about 3 p.m. Wednesday. "She said, 'I'll see you tomorrow mom. I love you.' And then I get a phone call at 4:30.
"She was my best friend. We were so close. I have three boys, but she was my only daughter and my oldest child."
Higar said her daughter had "a heart of gold," but also acknowledged her past, which includes a second-degree murder conviction and a six-year prison sentence in connection with a February 2008 home invasion that turned deadly.
Weir, who was 20 at the time, was with two other women when they forced their way into a Rockford apartment on Charles Street.
A scuffle occurred in the apartment involving the three women and a female resident of the apartment. One of Weir's accomplices, 18-year-old Gabrielle Aranda, was killed when a male occupant of the apartment struck her in the head with a baseball bat. Because Aranda died during the act of a felony offense, her accomplices, Weir and Tina J. Jones, were both charged and sentenced.
Higar said her daughter was four months pregnant with Neveah at the time of the incident.
"My daughter thought she was actually going over there to help them (Aranda and Jones) get their belongings. My daughter is the one who called 911. My daughter tried to get Gabby into the back of that Jeep and that man pulled her out and hit her with the baseball bat and chased my daughter around and around the car while she was four months pregnant.
"She regrets everything. ... She would cry every day, every year for Gabby."
Higar said her daughter grew up living with family in Rockford and Belvidere.
Weir's grandmother, Carolyn Edmison of Belvidere, said her granddaughter spent her high school years living with her.
She said the last time she spoke to her granddaughter was last week regarding her efforts to find her a place to live in Belvidere.
"She wanted to get out of Rockford," Edmison said. "Every time I saw a house for rent, I would call her and then I would call her back, 'Well it's only a two bedroom.' She needed at least a three bedroom."
In addition to spending time with her family, Higar said her daughter liked to go to the park and to the beach.
"She had a private little beach. She was going to show me it this summer, and she told me not to tell nobody where it was. So I don't know where it is."
If you have information about the crime, call the Rockford Police Department at 799-500-6551 or Crime Stoppers at 815-963-7867.
Chris Green: 815-987-1241; firstname.lastname@example.org; @chrisfgreen

"Top Gun" director Tony Scott jumped to his death from the Vincent Thomas Bridge in San Pedro on Sunday afternoon. He was 68.
His body was pulled out of the water by Los Angeles Port Police, who were the first on the scene.
Several witnesses told police they saw Scott get out of his Toyota Prius, which was parked on the bridge, about 12:30 p.m. Then he scaled an 8- to 10-foot fence and jumped off without any hesitation, law enforcement sources said.
A source said officials looked inside the car and determined it belonged to the famed action-movie director and producer. A note listing contact information was inside. A suicide note was later found in his office. Its contents were not revealed.
The coroner's office identified Scott on Sunday evening.
Scott was a respected director and producer who made "Man on Fire," "Enemy of the State" and "Beverly Hills Cop II."
The last film he directed was"Unstoppable,"a 2010 thriller about a runaway freight train.
His career in television included executive producing the series"The Good Wife"and "Numb3rs," both on CBS.
The British director, who lived in Beverly Hills, was best known for the 1986 hit "Top Gun," starring Tom Cruise as a Navy aviator. The movie grossed $21.6 million in its first 11 days of release.
Scott was one of three sons born to working-class parents in northern England.
He established his career as a commercial director and continued to make television spots late into his career. Before becoming a filmmaker, Scott was a painter.
Distinguished by a kinetic visual style that aimed to take audiences into his high-octane action scenes, Scott also produced a number of blockbuster movies, most recently "Prometheus,"directed by his brother Ridley Scott, and "The A-Team."
At the time of his death, he had recently completed filming on "Out of the Furnace," a drama he was producing about an ex-con starring Christian Bale. The movie is set to come out next year.
Scott was also preparing to produce a science-fiction drama called "Ion" and had served as executive producer on "Stoker," set to come out next March.
His debut feature, 1983's vampire movie "The Hunger," starred Catherine Deneuve and established Scott's cinematic style. He followed that movie with "Top Gun," which not only boosted the career of Tom Cruise but also ushered in a series of Scott's action movies, which included "Days of Thunder," also starring Cruise, and "Crimson Tide," starring Denzel Washington.
While his movies were consistent box-office hits, he rarely attracted critical praise and was never nominated for an Academy Award.
He was more successful with reviewers in television, however, for his work on "The Good Wife."
Simon Halls, a spokesman for Scott's family, confirmed the death and said the family asked "that their privacy be respected at this time."
Scott was married three times and had twin sons with his third wife, actress and model Donna Wilson.
Times staff writer Richard Winton contributed to this report.

03-25-2003, 05:09 PM
I didn't know where to post this so I thought I would try here. Has any one ever had Laser stretch mark removal? If so what is you experience with it? Does it really help or is it a rip off? Thanks
03-27-2003, 08:28 AM
Gee Sugar Pie, I don't think any one has an answer to your question, but I just wanted to say hello!
Have you had wls surgery?
03-27-2003, 05:41 PM
Hi Peach Pit,
Guess not, hee, hee. I was hoping that maybe someone that had WLS might have had this procedure done too. Doesn't look as though it is real common yet. I personally haven't had any kind of surgery yet. I had considered it at one point and know someone that went through it and had wonderful results from it, she looks excellent and you never would have thought that she had ever been overweight. I am still trying to lose weight the old fashioned way though. If I don't get any results on my own in the next year or so then I will look into getting the surgery. So far I seem to be doing ok on my own but I think it is wonderful that the surgery is an available option if I can't lose it on my own :)
Have you had the surgery yet?

Cast & Crew
Nel(Alexis Kay) and Ody(Ian Frayne) are on a summer date at his private pool and things seem to be great. But after Ody pulls her into the pool, he makes an advance. She pushes him away and his insecurities lead him to say something he can't take back. After realizing his mistake he tries to apologize. Nel must decide if she can forgive him.

One of the big turning points on Season 2 of The Conners was the romantic life of Dan (John Goodman). After almost two years passed since he lost his wife, Roseanne (Roseanne Barr), he stopped wearing his wedding ring and started a romance with Louise (Katey Sagal).
While the couple were still together after Tuesday night's finale, there hasn't been an official announcement for Season 3 just yet. Naturally, this made some wonder if the fan-favorite character would make it back for more episodes, especially considering that Sagal has her own pilot, Rebel, slated to shoot at some point. In an interview with TV Line, executive producer Bruce Helford said there is plans for more Louise in future episodes. He even pointed out that her upcoming series won't impact it, noting that "It's an ABC pilot, which always helps."
"We spoke to Katey and she said she will definitely be doing more Conners," Helford continued. "We don't know what her complete availability will be. And now, of course, her pilot was never shot. It will probably take longer to get on its feet than we will. God willing, we'll be back shooting in August shooting." Helford also joked about all the work they spent getting Dan and Louise together, and joked that they "don't want to have to kill anybody else off."
Dan and Louise's relationship started off fairly rocky, with her more than willing to commit to Dan, yet he found himself thinking back to his late wife. She even made an appearance (of sorts) when he confessed that she wouldn't have wanted him to move on with his life in the event that she died first. After he'd come around, it turned out that Louise had moved on herself, which led to Dan having a drunken confession about his love for her — only to the guy she was currently dating.
Once the two finally got together, Dan still had to adjust to the normalcy of sharing his bed with someone new. That and the fact that he had to wear his CPAP machine when he sleeps. Still, Louise was able to put his mind at ease and even accompanied him on a trip to the bank to help him talk his way out of his latest foreclosure. Unfortunately, it didn't work, but it showed that Louise might be part of the Conner clan for the long haul.

Gabbie Jonas Omaha dies death following an injury sustained during an athletic match. Gabbie Jonas Omaha died on March 5 after two days of medical observation. She was admitted to hospital following a feeling of pain . She was diagnosed as having an enlarged in her spleen.
Also Read: Cottontailva Face Reveal! Age of Cottontailva, Face, Actual Name & Net Worth!
Gabbie as well as her personal life prior to the accident
Gabbie Jonas was student of 24 years of Drake University in Des Moines, Iowa, who died on the 5th of March on a Saturday. She hails originally from Fremont, Nebraska, and was a part of the team of softball at Drake University. Jonas was a freshman and third-baseman for the Drake softball team that also had fellow teammates Casey McMillen of Omaha. Both were teammates in an honors program called ONYX.
They were both sophomores on Drake’s campus-based softball squad, that sometimes plays against out-of-state institutions such as Louisiana Tech and Southwest Missouri State University (Missouri).
Gabbie was known as an open-minded person and an excellent acquaintance to all she met. She was a lover of everything that came with playing baseball or baseball player, and softball players particularly because she was a lover of every aspect of the game. “She loved to play ball,” said classmate and close friend Clarke Hastings. “She did not hesitate in throwing the ball into any hoop or to hit any line.
Also Read: Nware 17in Laptop Review
What caused Gabbie’s injury?
She had an enlarged spleen. She was taken to the hospital. She was put on life support for two days before passing away. Gabbie died in her asleep in the night. The reason for his death is unknown as medical professionals are still examining the way Gabbie suffered an injury that led to his death. Many speculate that her injury to herself during a game of softball was a factor in his death by creating a rupture in her spleen. This ultimately led to his death. Was it the game of softball or was it an accident that was tragic?
A spokesperson from the university confirmed that she died in an area hospital following apparent injuries, which are believed to be unintentional in the nature. The causes of her death are currently under investigation.
Gabbie was an undergraduate of Drake University and played on the team of softball at the university. Gabbie played as a part of the Iowa Softball Association which is classified as a semi-pro league. Her position within the Iowa Softball Association included playing first base and catcher. She played in 23 games and had a an average batting that was .355 and seven homers and 14 RBIs. She also scored 22 runs scored and five bases that were stolen. In school, she was an honors student, with an average of 93 % attendance.
She also planned to enroll in Drake’s School of Law after graduating from Drake University. She was a part of the Muslim Student Association and attended Sunday school at Faith Christian Church. She was also involved in youth sports and coaching his younger years for and the Boys & Girls Club of Des Moines. Gabbie was a bright prospect in her future, however unfortunately, that future will never be.

|by Jack Foster Mancilla
It was early in the afternoon. I was a boy. We were living at 326-A Marine drive in the De Luz apartments on Camp Pendelton Marine Corps base near the gate of the U. S. Naval Ammunition Dump (Fallbrook, CA). About fifteen of us, kids were divided into a couple of scrawny softball teams. I was playing first base, because my mom said that a first baseman was a good thing to be. Someone hit a high pop-fly to the infield between 1st and second bases. As the second baseman and I went racing to be the hero, we watched the ball rising to the pinnacle of its arc; we both stopped. Our eyes were caught by the things behind the ball. Directly behind the ball and moving fast, dancing in formation as they flew eastwards out of the western sun was five saucer shaped UFOs. They were too high to see any definition, but they were close enough for us to know they were not planes or weather balloons or any other known anything. The baseball fell to the ground. The game was finished.
We all started running every which way looking for an adult to show them to. They were moving in the direction of the big hill behind where we were playing, and I did not want to lose them, while the others were still running in circles, I ran up the hill following the UFOs. As I reached the crest of the hill, I was all alone; my friends had run in the opposite direction. The UFOs slowed, descended, and danced in a different pattern.
That really freaked me out because it was almost as if they were watching me. As I stood there, they slowed and hovered over a small valley between the next set of hills. They descended a little more. I could not help myself. I had to see as much as possible. I took off in their direction as fast as my little feet would carry me down one hill and up the next, losing sight of them momentarily behind the hill I was climbing. They were still descending when I saw them again, and they were much closer. They were all white and pulsing with an almost lifelike rhythm. The ships were incredibly well controlled in their descent, so very slow and so very quiet and oh so very scary.
I could hear everything, the birds, the breeze through the sage, crickets. I could see everything. My senses were on fire. This was my territory; the hills of my youth many times traveled in search of my own place in the world. I knew the land like the back of my hand. I moved fast and hidden, closer to the descending craft. … then, they landed.
All five of them landed in a clearing behind some live oak trees. I ran to behind the trees and slowly peeked around the trunk. They were so small; their sizes ranged from about the size of a large car to a bus. I still could not define any real shape to them. They seemed smooth, and yet I could not see a surface. They still pulsed and vibrated. I went closer, slowly closer until finally, I could reach out and touch them. They were as far from me as my face was from my hands, and I could not really see them.
All by myself, a little boy. I reached out and touched a UFO. It was cool, wet. It swallowed my hand. With a flash of insight, pent up fears and knowledge all came cascading into my mind. They were no longer UFOs. I knew what they were. I could see them clearly and without fear. Their identities resolved themselves in front of my eyes to the touch of my hand. Foam. Foam! Giant gobs of soap foam made of bubbles so small; I could not see them. Soap foam dancing in the winds, making their wind choreographed movements in the air. Dancing foam that yanked our small childish brains around in lock step as the foam danced in the breeze filling us with awe and fright.
My friends never saw the truth. They still tell the story as “The UFOs We Saw.” They never looked farther than their belief of the truth. I learned a couple things by touching that UFO. … The child in me learned that it was fun to run around in giant gobs of foam, punching holes in the clouds of dreams. I learned that controlling your fear is a good thing. Things may not be what they seem. Beliefs based on partial information can stop you from continued searching and learning the truth.

The Creekfest was fun because of all the things you could go on.
But I didn't go on the swing because I was too scared . It was going round and round.
On Saturday at Creekfest I played on
the Merry- go - round.
I went to the Creekfest with my family.
I went to Creekfest with my dad and I went on the bouncy castle and I was happy.

A teenager convicted of killing his father who came home drunk has walked free from the Central Criminal Court, after being given a suspended six-year sentence.
Thomas Cunningham (aged 19) was convicted by a jury earlier this year of the manslaughter of Thomas Brendan Cunningham Snr (aged 46) at their home in Santa Maria Commons, Ballinlough, Co Roscommon on August 23, 2007.
He had pleaded not guilty to murdering him in their driveway, after his father came home in the early hours, drunk and without dinner for his elderly parents for whom he cared. His teenaged son gave him a duvet and a pillow and dialled 999 the following morning.
The deceased man’s siblings described the sentence as an all-clear for children to kill their alcoholic parents. Two of his brothers walked out of court as Mr Justice Paul Butler read out the sentence.
“That judge is giving dispensation to any child with an alcoholic parent to kill him,” said his sister, Maria Cunningham.
She and her brothers said they were “outraged and appalled” by the decision, describing the sentence as derisory.
“Life is as sacred as it is precious,” they said afterwards. “It is enshrined and protected in law.” They said they believed their brother had therefore been failed by the Irish judicial system.
The family was raised in England by their Roscommon father and Kerry mother, who retired to Ballinlough 15 years before the killing. The deceased was the eldest of the family and moved to the small village some years later to care for his parents. His teenaged son followed about a year before the killing and the court heard they had a troublesome relationship.
“Brendan was beaten to death whilst defenceless and unable to protect himself,” said his family, referring to the punches and kicks the teenager gave his father when he returned to the bungalow shared by grandparents, father and son.
“Brendan was left to die alone. The only person who attempted helping Brendan was our late father, a weak and frail 75-year-old with multiple health problems,” they said. The court heard that the elderly man fell and broke his hip two days after his son’s killing and was hospitalised, spending time away from his wife for the first time in their marriage. He died in hospital four months later.
“The person responsible for the savage beating refused all requests to help and callously went to bed,” said the family, who believe their brother might still be alive if help had been called. State pathologist Marie Cassidy had told the trial that death would have been hours after the assault.
The family said the picture painted of their brother during the trial was one of a tough, hard drinker, but that this was twisted. They said that after his death, their parents missed his friendship and companionship.
Mr Justice Butler said that only in extraordinarily exceptional circumstances could there be no custody for an unlawful killing.
“I think this is a totally exceptional case,” he said, pointing out that the accused had just turned 18 at the time, had no previous convictions or propensity for violence. He said there was no evidence that the teenager presented any risk to others. He had honoured his bail and returned to Ireland for both his trial and sentencing.
After sentencing, Mr Cunningham hugged his mother and signed a €100 bond to be of good behaviour towards the people of Ireland for six years. However it is understood he will return to Lincoln, England, where he has been living in a YMCA hostel.

Lulu was chatting with Ethan on the Haunted Star, when Tracy walked in. She immediately grabbed Ethan and planted a kiss on him. Tracy got very upset and told them to stop. When Lulu wanted to know why, Tracy sputtered. Luke appeared behind the bar and wanted to hear Tracy's answers, also.
Tracy cited the low opinion she held of Ethan's character as her reason for not wanting Lulu to be overly familiar with him. Both Lulu and Luke thought she was laughable and told her so.
Lulu continued to flirt with Ethan and, much to Tracy's chagrin, convinced him to go dancing with her. After they left, Tracy tried to convince Luke to keep Lulu away from Ethan. Luke kept pressing Tracy for a reason why, but she evaded him by insisting that she was only doing what was best for Lulu. Luke continued to prod Tracy, but did not confront her with his suspicions that she had faked the results of the DNA test that he had taken with Ethan.
On the pier, Lulu and Ethan talked. She told Ethan that Luke had asked her to flirt like crazy with Ethan in front of Tracy and avoid him the rest of the time. She told him that she did not know why he had asked, but she enjoyed helping her dad. Ethan had a knowing look, but did not tell Lulu about the DNA test.
Nikolas interrupted Alexis while she was offering Rebecca a bribe to go away. Nikolas said that he would offer Rebecca a bribe to stay. After Alexis left Rebecca's newly redecorated room, Nikolas and Rebecca hugged. He told her that he wanted her in his life. When he explained that Alexis' fear of Helena was understandable because as a child, she had witnessed Helena kill her mother by cutting her throat, Rebecca became sympathetic and sent him off to comfort Alexis.
Nikolas caught up with Alexis on the pier and told her that he trusted Rebecca and wanted her to stay. Alexis remained skeptical. She left Nikolas alone on the docks, but not before asking him if her were willing to sacrifice everything, including his family, for a stranger with Emily's face.
Spinelli and Maxie were supposed to be staking out the Crimson layout and concealed tracking device they were using as bait. Instead, while they waited in the car, they started kissing. When Maxie came to her senses and looked at the computer, she saw that the trap had been sprung while they were not paying attention.
Spinelli revved the engine and took off. He proved to be a very bad driver. Eventually Maxie convinced him that his skills were better suited to following the tracking device on the computer, and she was better at driving, thanks to the police driving class that Mac had insisted she complete. This proved a better arrangement
Eventually they followed the tracking device back to Crimson. It, along with the layout had been returned. Spinelli assured Maxie that he would find the culprit who had taken the layout and save her job. Maxie hugged Spinelli and told him that she knew he would keep his word and find the person who was stealing Crimson's advertising plans.
Patrick, Matt, Liz, and the Operating Room team were able to get Michael's heart restarted and continue with the brain surgery, while Carly, Jax, Jason, Sonny, and Claudia waited and worried in the family lounge.
After Michael's heart stopped, Jax wanted to see Sonny outside the lounge. Jason stayed with Carly and Claudia went out to the lobby. Jax wanted to stop the surgery and wait for Dr. Hansen to finish it. Sonny agreed with Jax, but when Jax asked him to call Patrick and stop the surgery, Sonny said he would not do that without Carly's knowledge and approval.
Olivia arrived with fresh fruit for Carly and was upset to see Claudia. Sonny said he had his own reasons for having her there and wanted her to stay. Privately, Jax told Olivia that he could not force Claudia to leave without spilling her involvement with Jerry and the shooting of Michael to Carly and upsetting Carly even more.
While Sonny and Jax talked, Jason tried to help Carly stay calm. He told her to think about something pleasant. Carly remembered the time that she, Michael, and Jason had gone to Florida and spent time on the beach. She reminisced and felt better.
While Jax comforted Carly, Jason went to the lobby and talked to Sonny, whom he urged to send Claudia home. Sonny said Carly was too upset by Michael's surgery to be bothered by Claudia. Sonny told Jason the same thing that he had told Olivia. Sonny said that he had his own reasons for keeping Claudia close.
Johnny showed up in the lobby and tried to get Claudia to leave with him, but she insisted on staying with Sonny.
Sonny, Claudia, Olivia, and Jason were in the lounge with Jax and Carly when Jax suggested to Carly that she ask Patrick to stop the surgery on Michael and wait for Dr. Hansen. Sonny agreed with him. Claudia put in her opinion, which upset not only Carly, but Olivia and Jason, as well.
Carly was torn about what to do. Jason strongly advised her to let Patrick continue the surgery instead of stopping halfway through the procedure.
In the OR things were progressing smoothly. Michael had a bleeder, but Patrick quickly handled the problem and the team successfully implanted four of the electrodes necessary to stimulate Michael's brain and bring him to consciousness.
Sam was at GH working a case when she saw Jason and followed him to the roof. He was glad to see her and told her that he had advised Carly to continue the surgery mainly because he did not want Carly to blame herself if Michael did not wake up. He said this way, if anything happened to Michael, he would be at fault and he would have to live with it, not Carly.
Carly called Patrick in the OR. When she asked him what would happen if they stopped the surgery, he told her that Michael would be stabilized and in a permanent coma with no hope of recovery.
Lulu and Ethan stood on the docks and talked about Tracy's disapproval of their "relationship." Lulu knew Tracy was acting very strongly because she cared about her stepdaughter. Lulu and Tracy had grown closer, and Tracy had even offered Lulu a room at the Quartermaines' when Luke was kicked out. Lulu explained that her stepmother didn't want her to date another loser. Ethan didn't take that as an insult, and he understood what Tracy hoped for Lulu's future. Lulu thought Tracy was hiding something about the situation, but neither she nor Ethan knew what it was.
At the Haunted Star, Tracy and Luke argued over Ethan's relationship with Luke. Tracy didn't like how close Luke had become with Ethan. She asked him if he had forgotten that the DNA test proved Ethan and Luke were not related.
When Tracy stormed out, Luke followed her to the docks where she met with Johnny Zacchara. Tracy tried her best to convince Johnny to get back together with Lulu. Johnny felt that was ironic, since during his entire relationship with Lulu, Tracy had done her best to break them up. Tracy explained that Lulu was dating Ethan, but Johnny thought Ethan would still be better than Johnny was for Lulu.
Ethan arrived back at the Haunted Star, where Luke soon showed up. Luke wasn't positive that Tracy hadn't switched the DNA test. With Tracy being a board member at General Hospital, she would have had easy access to the files. Ethan was annoyed that Luke was still sure that they were father and son. Luke couldn't understand why Ethan was so against a blood relationship. Luke and Ethan got along great, so Luke didn't think the DNA test would be detrimental to their friendship.
Tracy walked in just as Luke thought of another solution. If Luke called Holly, she could confirm or deny if Luke was Ethan's father. Tracy didn't think that was a very good idea, because Holly would surely try to manipulate Luke. The phone rang and someone answered, but the connection was lost quickly. The conversation was long enough for Luke to realize something was wrong with Holly, and both he and Ethan were concerned.
At Crimson headquarters, Maxie and Spinelli tried to decide what their next course of action would be to catch the person who was stealing the layouts. Spinelli decided to look through the Metro Court surveillance video to find the culprit. Maxie wasn't sure they would be able to discover the thief if he or she wasn't carrying the layout in plain view.
Spinelli looked closer at their "bait" and noticed the layout had been copied. He rushed over to his computer to search for answers when Kate walked in and asked how the investigation was going. Spinelli tried to answer, but Maxie had to translate and said they had not found the thief yet. Kate reminded them that they had until the next day to find the culprit or she would be looking for two new assistants.
When Lulu showed up later, Maxie and Spinelli gave her an update on their investigation. Lulu was disheartened that the thief was still loose, but Spinelli assured her that he would find him or her, and Maxie and Lulu would keep their jobs.
Meanwhile, Kate took a call in her office and told the person on the other line that she had done what was asked. They needed to leave her alone, because she wouldn't steal any more of her own magazine's layouts again.
At the hospital, Jason and Sam walked to the roof so Jason could get a breath of fresh air and get away from Claudia. He still harbored guilt over Michael's shooting, and he hated not being able to tell Sonny and Carly about Claudia's role in the shooting. It would be especially devastating for Carly to learn that her husband knew Jerry had also been involved. If Jax had never stood up for Jerry after the Metro Court shooting, Jerry wouldn't have been free to collaborate with Claudia, and Michael might not have been shot. Sam reminded Jason that he just needed to focus on Michael and forget Claudia for the time being.
In the operating room, Liz saw the phone blinking and answered the silent call. It was Epiphany asking if Patrick could speak with Carly. Patrick accepted the call and informed Carly that Michael's heart had stopped earlier. Once they restarted his heart, the surgery continued.
Carly asked what would happen if they stopped the surgery at that point. Patrick said Michael would be stable, but he would be in a permanent coma. Patrick assured Carly he could complete the surgery and it would give Michael his greatest chance at recovery. Carly agreed that Patrick was their best bet and told him to continue.
While they waited, Carly and Jax talked about their new house and the construction that would start in the coming weeks. Claudia told them the house sounded nice, but Carly was in no mood to hear anything Claudia had to say. Claudia stormed out of the waiting room, and Sonny followed after her. He saw how upset his wife was as they waited for news on Michael, and Sonny realized that Claudia was genuinely worried about Michael.
Claudia left to pray in the hospital chapel but Ric was soon interrupting her. He truly wanted Michael to recover, but Ric was sure Sonny's revenge towards Claudia would happen regardless of Michael's situation. With or without the baby, Claudia wouldn't get away with her role in Michael's shooting once Sonny found out.
Nikolas went to the hospital to talk to Rebecca. When he caught up with her, Nikolas explained that he needed her professional opinion. Nikolas claimed that he had a pain in his heart. He grabbled Rebecca's hand to show her where. He kept her hand and moved it down when he explained that the pain moved to lower regions. Rebecca snatched her hand away before Nikolas could show her exactly where; they both laughed.
Epiphany stood nearby. She was not pleased with Nikolas' antics. Epiphany accused Nikolas of sexual harassment. Rebecca assured Epiphany that she had not been offended. Epiphany was relieved, but she did remind Nikolas and Rebecca that their behavior had been unprofessional. Rebecca agreed with Epiphany. Before Rebecca returned to work, Nikolas made plans to meet her at Metro Court when her shift ended.
Later, Rebecca was on her cell phone. She told an unknown person that she knew that things were moving slower than planned. However, everything was going according to plan. Rebecca quickly ended the call when she spotted Edward.
Edward assured Rebecca that he was not stalking her. Edward explained that he was at the hospital to see his great-grandson, Michael. Edward admitted that he was confused by the hospital's new floor plan and therefore unable to locate Michael's room. As he talked about Michael, Edward admitted that all of the adults in Michael's life, including Edward, had failed him. Rebecca seemed sad for Edward as he bitterly confessed his regrets. When Rebecca offered to cancel an appointment, Edward told her to keep it. Edward advised Rebecca never to let an opportunity pass.
Diane met Alexis in Metro Court's lobby. Alexis was eager to go shopping. While Diane flipped through a magazine of the latest shoe fashion, Alexis and Diane discussed a plea bargain for one of Sonny's henchmen. With business out of the way, the two ladies set out to go shopping. Max managed to intercept them and lure Diane away by showing her that he had the key pass for the hotel.
After Max and Diane made love in one of the suites, Diane started to get dressed. She was desperate to buy a particular pair of shoes. Unfortunately for Diane, her blouse had been torn. Diane resolved to turn to Alexis for help. Diane called Alexis to beg her friend to buy Diane a little black dress. Alexis agreed to deliver the dress as soon as she could.
Rebecca met Nikolas in Metro Court's lobby. She started to tell Nikolas about her encounter with Edward, but changed her mind. Instead, Rebecca asked Nikolas what he had planned for them. Nikolas told Rebecca that he had made reservations for dinner at Metro Court. Nikolas also revealed that he had procured a room for the night.
Nikolas gave Rebecca the choice: restaurant or suite. Rebecca challenged Nikolas to convince her to go the room during their elevator ride to the restaurant. Minutes later, Rebecca and Nikolas barely managed to make it to the room before they were tearing off each other's clothes.
Alexis, was searching for Diane's room when she heard moaning from a nearby room. Alexis assumed that she had found Max and Diane's room. Alexis walked in, chastising Max and Diane for leaving their door ajar. Alexis was struck speechless when she realized that she had walked in on Nikolas and Rebecca.
At Crimson, Maxie was certain that she and Lulu were going to be fired because Maxie had not been able to discover the identity of Crimson's saboteur. Lulu suggested that Maxie fight for her job. Lulu believed that Kate would have a change of heart if she realized how invaluable Maxie and Lulu were. When Kate arrived, she was impressed with Maxie and Lulu's enthusiasm and professional appearance. However, since Maxie was unsuccessful in her task to discover the company's mole, Kate fired Lulu and Maxie.
Spinelli raced in with late breaking news. He announced that he had discovered the identity of the person responsible for the leak of Crimson's shoe layout. Kate took a call from Warren while Lulu and Maxie gathered around Spinelli's laptop computer. Spinelli brought up camera footage from the parking garage. The security cameras revealed that Clarice had left the building with the file.
Kate promptly fired Clarice and had her escorted from the building. After Kate left for the day, Lulu and Maxie took a moment to celebrate. It was short-lived, because Spinelli discovered that Clarice had been innocent. The true culprit was revealed to be Kate. Lulu and Maxie were livid.
On the Haunted Star, Luke overheard Ethan on the phone with an acquaintance named Billy. Ethan ordered Billy to find out what had happened to Holly. Ethan's concern was evident. Luke suggested that perhaps Ethan was upset because Ethan believed that Holly was his mother. Ethan admitted that Luke had planted the seed of possibility that Luke and Holly were his parents in Ethan's mind. Luke confessed that he had never wanted to have children, but he did love the ones that he had.
Both Ethan and Luke suspected that Tracy had altered the results of the paternity test. Ethan wondered why Tracy felt threatened by him. Luke speculated that Holly, not Ethan, threatened Tracy. Tracy sauntered in moments later. She was not happy to see Ethan in the casino.
Tracy was even more displeased when Luke's phone rang and he announced that it was Holly. Luke tried to talk to Holly, but had difficulty understanding her. Holly claimed that there was gunfire where she was. Seconds later, Holly's call was disconnected. Ethan and Luke tried to call her back, but only received Holly's voicemail.
Tracy was certain that it was all an elaborate hoax to lure Luke into a trap. Tracy bet their first alimony check that Luke knew exactly where to find Holly. Luke appeared to have an inkling; he made plans to fly to Singapore. Ethan offered to join Luke.
Luke asked Tracy if they could use the ELQ jet, but she refused to help. Tracy reminded Luke that the last time that Holly had called for help, Luke had found Holly in a five-star hotel. Tracy called her pilot after Luke and Ethan left to catch a flight out of the Kennedy airport. She ordered him to fuel the jet and file a flight plan to Singapore.
Carly was at Michael's bedside when Jax brought Carly some oatmeal for breakfast. Carly appreciated Jax's consideration; she assured him that she and the baby were fine. Patrick entered the room moments later to check on Michael's vital signs.
Carly and Jax were eager to know if there had been any improvement in Michael's condition. Patrick told them that Michael was stable. Patrick cautioned them that it could be hours before Michael emerged from the coma. After Patrick left, Jax asked Carly if there was anything he could do for her. Carly took Jax up on the offer.
A short time later, Olivia arrived at the hospital. She had coffee and breakfast for Carly and Jax. Jax was grateful for Olivia's thoughtfulness. He explained that Carly was certain that Michael was going to emerge from the coma. Carly was so confident that Michael would recover that she wanted his room prepared.
Jax was worried that Carly was setting herself up for disappointment. Olivia understood Carly's need to think positive. She advised Jax to go along with the plan to prepare Michael's room for a homecoming. Olivia believed that it would assure Carly that Jax had the same faith in Michael's recovery as Carly had.
Bobbie checked in on Michael. Carly was happy to see her mother. When Bobbie checked Michael's charts, Carly asked if they indicated how Michael was doing. Bobbie confirmed what Patrick had said earlier. Carly confessed that she couldn't wait until Michael opened his eyes and she heard his voice.
Later, Monica stopped by Michael's room to check to see how her grandson was doing. Bobbie confided that she was concerned about Carly's optimism. When Carly returned to the room, she was delighted by Monica's visit. Carly walked over to Michael to ask him to open his eyes so that he could see both of his grandmothers.
Jax returned after Bobbie and Monica's visits. As he handed her a cup of coffee, Jax revealed that Olivia had lined up a contractor to begin work on Michael's room the following day. Carly was pleased by the news. She told Jax about a recent encounter with one of Michael's classmates. Carly had been surprised by how much Zach had changed, including his voice, in the previous year. It illustrated to Carly how much she was missing of Michael's life.
Patrick returned to check on Michael. Carly sensed that Patrick was troubled. Patrick admitted that he was concerned that the longer Michael remained unresponsive, the less likely Michael would ever emerge from the coma.
At the Spencer house, Lucky thanked Liz for her understanding when he had to change the boys' visitation schedule because of work. Liz assured Lucky that it had not been a problem. Liz changed the subject to remind Lucky of grandparents' day at Cam's school. Lucky hoped that Cam hadn't counted on Luke attending. Lucky explained that Luke and Ethan had gone off on some adventure.
Liz sensed that Lucky was angry. She asked if it had to do with Ethan joining Luke on the trip. Lucky explained that he was infuriated because Luke had wanted Ethan for a son and didn't appear to regret having been unfaithful to Laura. Lucky was disgusted by Luke's betrayal.
Liz asked if the DNA test had confirmed that Luke was Ethan's father. Lucky was forced to admit that had had no idea; Luke had not bothered to tell Lucky the results of the test. Liz had empathy for Lucky. Liz understood that Lucky's hurt at what he perceived as Luke's rejection. Instead of being proud that Lucky was a police officer, Luke preferred a grifter as a son. Lucky vowed that, regardless what the paternity test had revealed, he would hold Luke and Ethan accountable if they broke the law.
Ethan and Luke broke into a Singapore bar. Ethan realized that Luke was familiar with the establishment. Luke confessed that he had been in the bar a long time before. Luke explained that he had once been involved in a scam in Argentina over a priceless painting. Luke had stood to make a fortune except there had been a snag in the plans. Luke had been ordered to carry out a hit on someone.
If Luke had refused to cooperate, his family would have paid the penalty with their lives. Luke had decided to lure the enemy away, by slipping out of Argentina, so that Laura and Lucky could to flee to safety. The plan had worked and Luke had ended up in Singapore with Holly Sutton.
Luke revealed that during his time in Singapore, Luke and Holly had a brief affair. A few weeks later, Luke and Laura had reunited. Luke suspected that Laura had known of the liaison, but she had never confronted him about it. Neither Luke nor Ethan realized that a woman lurked nearby, eavesdropping on their conversation.
Moments later, Tracy barged into the bar. Luke didn't seem surprised to see his wife. Tracy demanded to know where Holly was. Luke insisted that Holly hadn't shown herself. Tracy didn't believe Luke, so she began searching the bar. The mystery woman ducked out of sight before Tracy discovered her.
Afterwards, two thugs entered the bar. Tracy assumed that they were her hired goons. However, she realized her mistake when they pulled her into a chokehold. Luke and Ethan tried to convince the men to release Tracy, to no avail. Tracy realized that she was in trouble and managed to break free. Luke and Ethan immediately sprang into action. When the dust settled, Luke and Ethan were the only two men standing.
The mystery woman remained nearby. Tracy yelled out to Holly, certain that she was in the bar. Tracy warned that she would not let Holly hurt Luke again.
Dr. Brown led a group meeting for mothers with postpartum depression. Robin was among the women assembled. Robin told everyone about her daily phone calls home to Emma. Robin worried about the time that she had lost with her daughter. The other mothers shared similar concerns. The women took turns talking about the struggles they had faced as a result of PPD. Dr. Brown explained that one of the problems with diagnosing the disease was that the symptoms didn't follow a certain pattern.
As the session progressed, Robin talked about her refusal to take antidepressants. Robin admitted that she continued to resent relying on the medication. However, she understood that she had to take the antidepressants in order to manage the disease. Before the meeting ended, Robin confessed that she looked forward to going home to her daughter.
Claudia returned to the hospital with fresh coffee for Sonny. Sonny appreciated Claudia's thoughtfulness. As they held hands, Claudia noticed that Sonny and Claudia's hands appeared to fit perfectly. Sonny quickly pulled his hand away. He covered up the reaction by assuring Claudia that the threats that he had made against her were in the past. Sonny promised Claudia that he would never hurt the mother of his child. He then gave Claudia the opportunity to come clean. Sonny asked Claudia if she had anything to do with Michael's coma.
Initially, Claudia believed that Sonny had asked the question because she had been raised as a Zacchara. She promised Sonny that she had nothing to do with Michael's shooting. Sonny clarified that he had asked the question because Sonny had been the intended target, not Michael. Sonny reminded Claudia that, at the time of the shooting, Sonny had kidnapped and hurt Johnny. Sonny also pointed out that Sonny had been Claudia's rival. Sonny suggested that Claudia would have been justified to order a hit on Sonny.
Claudia welled up with tears as she looked Sonny in the eye and told him that she would have aborted their unborn child if she had been involved in Michael's shooting. Claudia swore that she had nothing to do with Michael's head injury. Sonny hesitated a moment then assured Claudia that he believed her. Claudia pulled herself together then made an excuse to leave. She promised Sonny she would return to the hospital later.
Jason approached Sonny as Claudia was leaving. Jason said nothing as he watched Claudia walk away. When Claudia was out of hearing range, Sonny asked Jason why Jason continually tried to drive Claudia away. Sonny explained that he was attempting to set Claudia up because he was desperate for proof of Claudia's involvement in Michael's shooting. Sonny revealed that Claudia's weakness was her desperation to be Sonny's wife and partner. Sonny intended to exploit Claudia's desire to be accepted by Sonny, so that she would drop her guard and eventually slip up.
Jason sat at Michael's bedside when Monica walked into the hospital room. Jason asked Monica for her medical opinion about Michael's condition. Monica reluctantly admitted that she didn't think Michael would wake up. Carly entered the room in time to hear Monica's diagnosis. Monica immediately apologized. Monica told Carly that she hoped and prayed Michael woke up, apologized again, and then left.
Carly was furious. She told Jason that she wanted Michael surrounded by positive energy. Carly refused to have anyone who didn't have complete faith in Michael's recovery near her son. Jax walked in and was immediately concerned when he realized that Carly was upset. Carly reiterated that she didn't want any negative energy around Michael. Jax reminded Carly that she had another son and a baby on the way. Carly assured Jax that she and the baby were fine.
Jason stepped into the hallway to talk to Monica. Jason apologized to Monica for Carly's reaction. Monica assured Jason that he didn't need to apologize or explain on Carly's behalf. Monica had been in Carly's shoes following Jason's accident. Monica understood exactly what Carly was feeling.
However, it was Monica's medical opinion that Michael would not recover. She admitted that she could be wrong, but if she wasn't then she wanted Jason to be prepared. Monica told Jason that, if the worst happened, Jason and Carly would need each other.
Later, Patrick apologized to Monica for failing to help Michael. Monica told Patrick that she had once been like him. Time and experience made her realize that they couldn't save everyone; they just had to do the best that they could.
Patrick went to Michael's room to talk to Carly and Jax. Patrick considered it unethical of him not to be honest with them about Michael's prognosis. Patrick explained that the anesthesia had worn off, so Michael should have woken up. Carly refused to let Patrick finish speaking; she insisted that Michael would wake up.
Patrick went home to spend time with Emma. While he held his daughter, Patrick talked about Michael's situation. Patrick missed Robin and her advice. Patrick promised Emma that her mother would return home soon.
Claudia was not pleased to find Ric sitting in the living room of Greystone Manor when she arrived home. She demanded to know what Ric was doing in her home. Claudia wondered if Ric had a death wish, implying that she and Sonny were close. Claudia went on to reveal that she had told Sonny that she had not been involved in Michael's shooting and that Sonny had believed her. Ric scoffed at the idea; he was certain that Sonny merely wanted to believe Claudia. Claudia didn't see the difference; she insisted that she and Sonny were bonded by the darkness of their lives. Claudia vowed that there was nothing that Ric could do to break that bond.
Ric surprised Claudia by showing her a court order for a paternity test. He explained that while Claudia had been bonding with Sonny, Ric had been obtaining a court order. The moment the baby was born, or Claudia had an amniocentesis, Ric could demand a paternity test. Claudia wanted to see the papers, but Ric refused to show them to her. Ric said that he had been betrayed once too often over paternity issues.
Claudia's anger got the best of her. She knocked Ric's drink out of his hand then demanded to know what Ric wanted from her. Ric made his desire clear: he wanted his child.
Ric and Claudia continued to threaten each other while they argued about the baby. Their argument came to an abrupt halt when they heard a noise by the door. When Ric and Claudia turned, they discovered that Jason stood in the doorway.
Monica broke the news to Edward that although the surgery was successful, Michael would not wake up. Edward was upset and blamed Sonny for placing the boy into a world of violence. Monica reminded Edward that Sonny loved Michael as his own child and they couldn't fix the past.
Rebecca noticed Edward was distraught in the hallway of the hospital. She walked over and asked if there was anything she could do to help, and they sat and talked about Michael. Edward thanked her for being there for him. Although he knew she wasn't fond of her resemblance to Emily, Edward felt like he was able to pretend his granddaughter was still with him when Rebecca's acts of kindness also mimicked Emily.
Nikolas had witnessed the exchange between Edward and Rebecca before Edward left the hospital. Nikolas took Rebecca back to Wyndemere where they each had a glass of wine and talked about the day.
Alexis walked in and saw Nikolas and Rebecca kissing and asked Nikolas why he didn't just sign everything he had over to Helena if he was going to continue the charade of a relationship with Rebecca. Alexis admitted that Cassadines weren't very smart when it had to do with members of the opposite sex, though, and she mentioned her past flings and marriages. Rebecca asked what she could do to assure Alexis that Helena had not hired Rebecca, and Alexis asked what Rebecca had done in Greece.
Tracy watched as Luke and Ethan played cards on the plane ride home from Singapore. In order to get answers to her questions, Tracy was forced to play cards with them. The winner got to ask a question, and the loser had to answer a question. Tracy realized they were cheating, but it allowed Tracy a chance to ask some questions and get answers so she didn't mind too much.
Meanwhile, Lulu walked into the empty Haunted Star and called out for her father. Johnny was also there to speak with Luke. Lulu discovered that Sonny wanted Johnny's interest in the Haunted Star, but Johnny had wanted to make sure it was okay with Luke before Johnny agreed to anything.
Before he left, Johnny told Lulu to have her father call him but said it surely wasn't urgent. He thought Sonny probably had other things on his mind. Lulu didn't know anything was going on with Michael, so Johnny filled her in on the failed procedure before he left.
Jax found Olivia in the hallway of the hospital and asked for advice on how to get Carly to accept that Michael wasn't coming back. Olivia understood that in order for Carly to accept that, Carly would also have to accept that her dreams for Michael would not be realized. Carly would also never have the family of her dreams that she had always hoped for.
Jax asked Olivia if she would talk to Carly, who had not left Michael's bedside. When they arrived in Michael's room, Sonny had also been trying to convince Carly to go home and get some rest. Carly wasn't interested in hearing anything anyone had to say if it meant they wanted her to leave her son. Olivia and Sonny decided it was time for them to leave Jax and Carly alone, and they headed for the hospital chapel.
Once they were gone, Carly told Jax that she wasn't going anywhere and he needed to leave. Jax said he would remain with her for good times and for bad. He would not leave his wife in her time of need. Jax was still concerned about her, though. He knew she needed to get some rest. Michael wouldn't want Carly to risk her own life, let alone the life of his baby sister.
Jason walked in and listened as Claudia and Ric argued back and forth. Jason wasn't sure why Ric was hanging around so much, so Jason asked if Ric and Claudia were working together. Ric, not able to take the heat from Jason, finally left.
Once they were alone, Jason admitted to Claudia that he knew she was behind Michael's shooting. Sonny wouldn't kill her once he found out, because she was the mother of his child. Jason knew she shouldn't be alive, though, and shouldn't have even had the opportunity to become pregnant with Sonny's child. Sonny walked in as they argued, and asked what was going on.
After hearing the news about Michael's condition from Johnny, Lulu visited Michael in the hospital. She apologized for not seeing him more often, but she was happy he was back in Port Charles. Lulu was shocked when Michael suddenly squeezed her hand. She looked up and Michael's eyes were open. Lulu wanted to get a nurse, but Michael asked her to stay with him. He didn't want to be alone, and he wanted to know what had happened to him.
Luke poured himself a drink at the bar in the Haunted Star, when suddenly he heard an English accent. Holly walked in and said they had much to talk about, including their bundle of joy.

A Great Blue Heron held in its bill a small fish that it had caught. A Willet had just caught a bigger fish, and flew up right in front of the heron. I was too far and actually did not see this small drama until I got home and displayed the image on my computer monitor. It looks like the Willet was bragging about its catch, and the heron was by no means happy.
Here’s a closer look.

Walpole Island man lucky to be alive after harrowing ATV trek
A Walpole Island man is sharing his story of survival in hopes of reminding everyone to “never give up” even when things seem dire.
What started out as a routine trip three weeks ago on his ATV to get hay for his duck blinds, ended up as a 10-hour ordeal for Arnold Shobway.
The 65-year-old was about seven kilometres into an unoccupied swampy area off Austin Road when his three-wheeler died. Arnold tried multiple times to restart the vehicle to no avail.
It was around 3 p.m. and Arnold was left alone, stranded, with no way to get back home and there was a storm brewing on the horizon. What would be difficult circumstances for anybody to overcome, brought even more challenges for Arnold. Last October, after getting an infection, he had to have his right leg amputated from the knee down and has since used a motorized scooter to help him get around.
Despite this, Arnold abandoned his ATV and started to walk back. However, it wasn’t long before the pain in his leg became too much to bear and Arnold had to use another method to try and get him home, all while a thunderstorm swept through the area.
“I walked about a mile on my leg then I had to crawl from there,” he said. “Then the storm hit, it really rained. Every time the lightning hit, it lit the whole sky up, it looked like daylight out there.”
Arnold had taken this route dozens of times before with no trouble. Thinking he would only be gone for 10 minutes or so, he didn’t see any point in bringing his cellphone and left it on his bed before heading out without telling anyone where he was off to.
“The bike usually doesn’t stall out like that. I usually carry my spark plug wrench. But just going for a little ride, I thought ‘oh that’s beautiful, I’ll just be over there and right back.’ But it didn’t work out,” Arnold said with a chuckle.
He continued to crawl in short spurts, heading in the direction he came from and battling through two heavy rainfall periods. A diabetic, Arnold also left home without his medical supplies. Although he didn’t start feeling any detrimental side effects of being without his insulin, he said he did start to feel dehydrated.
“I could only crawl 10 feet at a time,” he said. “I had to relax because of the weight on my knees. But I just didn’t give up because that’s my good old thing, I always tell my sons ‘never give up.’ It was getting very, very dry out there. So I just laid back, opened my mouth and let the rain pour in.”
It was around this time Laura Ferguson, one of Arnold’s neighbours, got the feeling that something wasn’t right.
Ferguson saw Arnold ride off towards the field that afternoon. A few hours later and knowing how important his electric scooter was to him, Ferguson said she found it concerning that it was sitting out in the rain untouched. She went to cover it up and continued to keep a close eye on if there was any movement at Arnold’s home before finally alerting his family that he hadn’t returned.
According to, Victoria Shobway, Arnold’s sister, Ferguson being observant and speaking up is one of the main reasons that she believes Arnold was able to make it.
“We could have lost him I think if it wasn’t for Laura. [She] had come over to the house, it had rained and she was worried about Arnold because he hadn’t come back yet. His wheelchair was there so she had covered it so it wouldn’t get damaged,” Victoria explained. “If it wasn’t for Laura none of us would have gone looking for him, we wouldn’t have known that he was not home. It probably wouldn’t have been a positive outcome.”
Victoria said she didn’t think too much of it at first, figuring Arnold was just out and about. However, as night started to fall her concern grew.
“All these thoughts were going through my head,” she said. “He did have heart attacks [before] and I thought ‘oh what if he had one? What if he tipped over on his bike and he can’t do anything?'”
At the same time as his sister was starting to worry, Arnold was still trying to crawl to safety. The conditions started to become worse as mosquitos began to swarm. However, Arnold said he remembered an old trick his father taught him.
“I remember the old guy told me, slap mud on you. It takes your scent away and the mosquitoes don’t bother you,” he said.
According to Arnold, he had crawled far enough to begin to see a glimmer of some neighbourhood lights but was still far enough out that he wasn’t easily visible.
It was around 9:30 p.m. when Victoria began to fear the worse and decided it was time to start searching. She first started driving around to a few spots Arnold was known to frequent. With no sign of him, Victoria got some assistance from one of Arnold’s seven children, his son, an officer with the Walpole Island Police Service.
Several of Arnold’s family members drove as far as they could down the last road he was seen riding along. His son got out of the car and walked until he finally found his father.
At this point, it was shortly after midnight.
“We just hugged. I was just so happy he was alive. He was covered in mud. He was exhausted,” explained Victoria. “He tells his daughter, ‘never ever give up’, that was his motto. He could have given up when he was out there in the wild and say ‘this is hopeless I’m not going to make it.”
Arnold was too weak to stand on his own when he was found and had to get lifted up. An ambulance was called and Arnold spent the night in the hospital to be monitored for dehydration and to make sure none of his organs failed after his body went through such extreme exertion. Besides some sore muscles, Arnold made it out without any serious injuries.
Although it made for a scary experience, Victoria said she’s not surprised her brother was able to survive, calling him a lifelong fighter. She added that after he had his leg amputated, he did everything in his power to not let the injury stop him from being an avid outdoorsman.
“For him, he really wanted to recover fast. He did his exercises, he did a lot of work to get to where he is today. In no time, he had his balance, he was getting around,” she said. “He is a fighter. He always has been. I’m just fortunate.”
According to Arnold, he’s ridden the same path since the ordeal, not letting what happened to him stop him from doing what he loves. However, he now makes sure to never leave without leaving a note or letting someone knows where he’s going. He also said from now on he’ll always be bringing his tools on him in case his ATV goes out again.
Arnold said what happened to him made him realize how quickly things can take a turn for the worse and he’s hoping his situation can be a lesson for others to always be prepared.
“I’d say, make sure you carry your phone with you. I left mine at home because I just thought I was going to go out for a little ride and I should be back. Didn’t work out that way. Carry your phone or something so you can communicate with the outer world,” he said.
Although difficult at times, Arnold said it was the will to survive and not give up got him through the 10-hour journey that was only supposed to be 10 minutes.
“I looked back and I said ‘at least I made it and didn’t give up.’ I know people do give up and just lay around out there and nobody can find them,” he said. “I wanted to get found. I didn’t want to stay out there.”

All Star Weekend, 2008, I was there. I saw the all-stars. I got there on Wednesday night. I walked on Bourbon Street. It was hype, yo, for real. Flyer's were given and parties were in the making. A weekend to never forget, and I won't. Thursday, Valentine's Day, I went downtown. I checked out the beautiful 18th Century Art, and all of it's splendor. There were carriage rides, and music playing in the distance. As I came closer to the music I couldn't help but stop. A band was playing that old school jazz. That make you stop and tap your feet kind of tune, and I did stop and tap. I danced with the band, and the patrons that sat in the fried doe spot clapped and enjoyed the music and dance. Love was in the air, and it felt so wonderful. As I walked further down there was a magician. You know, a Whodunit type cat, or if you say it the black way, Who Done It. It was hella funny cause dude for sho looked like Sammy Davis. He had impressions down to a science. He did card tricks, told jokes, magic tricks and balloon animals. He made my cigarette disappear! After the show, I got to talk to him. His name was Keith. I walked down a bit more. There was a man playing a flute. A group of people sat around him and listened. I stopped and talked with them for a bit. They were all old friends, and each admitted that they were dealing with their own demons. I really did not expound on each ones' personal hell. It really isn't my place to judge anyone. Plus it was Valentine's Day, and if it was all the same to anyone Love was my only focus. We hung out and just talked. Must admit we had a smoke and a joke. Before I left each one gave me a hug, and the flute player played especially for me, The Girl From Iponima. Imagine that. It was the best Valentine's Day ever. What a new and refreshing perception of Tru Love. I headed home. I was hungry and it was getting late. Friday I rested, and washed my cloths. On Saturday, I had to walk to the store, and get a couple of personal items for myself. It was around 11:00 am. I found a local Walgreen's, and on the way back I heard, yup you guessed it, music. I went to find it. It was hip hop too. What I found was the most amazing thing in the whole wide world. Nike was sponsoring a Community Center Dedication in the 7th Ward. It was FREE. There was food, music, free t-shirts, bags, water, and Black People. Now dat's a party. What touched my heart the most, brought tears to my eyes even was that Kobe Bryant was there. He took the time to come down, and take the mic and talk about the importance of FAMILY. He shot around with the children, and gave them basketball pointers. I was so blessed to have been a part of this. A brother possibly makes one mistake, and that's iffy if you ask me, and he's at center stage of the world. The same brother dedicates his time to giving something back and you don't even hear about it. The brother is redeemed in my book, and can't nobody say nuttin bad bout Kobe. He was the only NBA star that showed up. Doug E. Fresh came on down, with his children. They ripped the mic I might add. Another group came, and I wish I could remember all of the particulars. What I do remember is that they had got into a car accident on the way there, but come heck or high water, they made it. All of the rapping, and that's exactly what it was, rapping was giving glory and thanks to GOD. Doug E. Fresh spoke of Obama and Hilary. He said that they are proof that a Black man and a Woman can accomplish anything in this world. The brother was right. He talked to the children and encouraged them to be everything they wanted to be. He told the children to raise their hand if they thought that they could be anything that they wanted to be. Of course, being the big child that I am, I raised my hand. He looked at me and said, “now, you know you are to big to be raising your hand.” I laughed, but I gotta admit sometimes you gotta dig into that inner child, and just remember a time when it was all about dreams. Doug. E. .. Kobe... Nike... and all of the other blessed that made it happen, this ones for ya'll.... the realest. One Love.

A data sgp lottery is an event in which a group of numbers is randomly selected. The person who has the winning ticket will receive a prize. In most cases, the person will have to pay taxes on the money they win, but in some cases, the winnings are tax free. If you have won the lottery, you can choose to have your prize paid in a lump sum or as an annuity.
Lotteries have been around for hundreds of years. They have been used in various locations and for different purposes. Most of these lotteries raised money for public projects such as libraries, fortifications, and roads. Others raised funds for schools and colleges. However, most forms of gambling were illegal by 1900.
The first known lotteries were held during the Roman Empire. During this time, many wealthy noblemen would give out tickets during Saturnalian revels. Often, the prizes were fancy dinnerware or other articles of unequal value. Although many people believed that lotteries were a form of hidden tax, they were tolerated in some cases.
The first French lottery was called Loterie Royale. It was organized by King Francis I of France. He was inspired by a French lottery that had been held in Italy.
In the 17th century, the Dutch had a number of lotteries. Some of them offered prizes in the form of “Pieces of Eight.” Other lotteries were organized by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, which raised money for the “Expedition against Canada” in 1758.
Lotteries were also held in the United States, and the Pennsylvania Academy Lottery was the first one to finance the University of Pennsylvania. Several colonies also held public lotteries to raise money for the construction of fortifications and local militia.
In the 18th century, several European nations began to hold lotteries. Eventually, they became common in the Netherlands. One of these lotteries was the Loterie Royale, which was authorized by an edict of Chateaurenard. This lottery was a failure, but it was the first lottery to be publicly endorsed by a national government.
By the end of the 18th century, the American colonies and other countries were holding lottery to raise funds for a wide variety of public projects. Many people believed that the lottery was a form of tax, although in many instances, the money was used for public purposes. Those who bought tickets were guaranteed that they had a chance to win something.
In the 17th and 18th centuries, lots of private lotteries were also held. These lotteries were often organized by individuals or businesses, and raised money for the Virginia Company of London, which sponsored settlement in America at Jamestown.
In the 19th and 20th centuries, the use of lotteries as a form of taxation was controversial. Social classes opposed the idea, and some governments outlawed lotteries. After World War II, most countries banned gambling. There are currently a few states that allow online lotteries, but they have not yet become as popular as sports betting.

In December I ordered online two phones from wirefly or www.whereismyorder.com and received them. I was in the middle of a mover from Atlanta, GA to NYC, NY. I had to change the address and have them shipped to my new address.
I received the phones thinking that my employeer would not purchase one for me, however, he did. I set up a pickup with fedex as instucted. I called to get the "number" rpm or somthing like that I went to continue my move and came back sometime later two or three weeks and the package was not picked up. No contact was made from the company asking if I was happy, if its all OK.. These are more or less expected things, mostly when dealing over the internet.
I sent the phones back, inphonic/wirefly emailed me they were in working order and "acceptable condition".
I called the 888 number and after not being able to understand anyone and having to ask them to repeat themselves over and over, I asked where am I talking to, where are you located. I was told I was talking to India, the country.
I did not matter where I was being transfered, but to have that much of a problem understanding them was an outrage. The representatives were rude and when I asked to speak to a manager, I was told there is no manager.
After repeting myself over an over, I finally got that persons "boss" who was somewhat nicer, but still unable to understand.
I was then advised of a "30 Day Trial peroid" and I had passed that, and I was not getting back the $307.98 for the phones that they received in acceptable condition.
This is an outrage!!! Why not tell me this in the begining, or as I was told it was in the fine print of the small point text on the website. All that was obvious was a date on the receipt to get it back to them to avoid restocking charges. Not only did I not get a restock charge they kept my money and refuse to give me any other recourse.
They would not give me a name or number in the united states, I did receive a number in the 212 area code that I would state but it only sends you back to india.
No wonder a consume can not do anything, it seems tha this Fortune 500 company is not eve in the US....
DO NOT ever do business with this company.
Nanuet, New York

UPDATE: Petro-Dukette describes brutal attack while campaigning
One of Petro-Dukette's injuries
Petro-Dukette's arm injury after being attacked by dogs.
LAMAR COUNTY, MS (WDAM) -
*** WARNING. GRAPHIC IMAGES ***
Lamar County Justice Court Judge candidate Debbie Petro-Dukette was attacked by dogs Thursday while campaigning in Lamar County.
"I got out to walk up to the door, and I got about half way then just, I mean seriously out of nowhere, four dogs just attacked me" Petro-Dukette said. "Now there was no, you know, beware of dog signs. There was no fence, you know, that I had to open and walk through. I mean, nothing to move it was just an open yard."
Petro-Dukette said she was attacked on Buccaneer Drive in the Lake Serene neighborhood.
"It was horrifying," she said. "It was terrifying to say the least. It could have been a lot worse. like I said, you know, I could have gotten on the ground and they could have gotten on top of me."
She says her two worst bites are on her right arm and on her left thigh.
"On my right arm underneath by my elbow, I guess one of the dogs jumped up and latched on, and there's two big puncture wounds where the teeth went in," she said. "And it's really, really badly swollen, and I can't hardly even move that arm. And then on my left side of my thigh up towards the top, two of them, there's two different distinct bites."
She said she's not sure how, but she didn't need any stitches.
"I'm incapacitated right now, but it could have been worse," she said. "I am OK, but like I said, it could have been a lot worse. If I would have been a child that walked into that yard, I can't even begin to imagine how much worse it could have been on an eight-year-old or 10-year-old child."
Petro-Dukette said she's a dog lover and didn't expect the dogs to be aggressive.
"I mean, I've got four dogs myself," she said. "I'm a huge, huge animal lover, and maybe, you know, maybe that was my problem. Maybe my guard was too far down because I do love animals and dogs so much, but, yeah, I can't imagine that if anybody else walked up into that yard, that that wouldn't happen to them.too."
She hopes her experience can be an example for the county.
"This is a good example of why our county has got to get some kind of leash law," she said. "Since this has happened, I've heard of so many people that have said 'oh yeah I've had that'' or someone they know has had that experience. You know it's terrifying. It's terrifying to really know that this happens so so often."
Petro-Dukette said she isn't going to file charges against the dog owners.
"We know the people," she said. "We know them very well. They're good people. It's just a fluke. I know them. My mom knows them. They have five children themselves, so they're not the kind of people who would have these kinds of dogs. They're just not. So I'm definitely not pressing charges. not at all."
Lamar County Sheriff Danny Rigel said the dogs must be quarantined for 10 days according to state law, and Petro-Dukette said the dogs were up to date on their vaccines.

Mila Kunis about her parents.If I ever, even for a second, began to wonder, I was brought back to reality very quickly. I worked full time and still had to beg for a mobile phone. Then came the turn of the car. Oh my God! You would have thought that I was asking for a private plane! I stamped my feet and screamed until I finally got the car. And then I did something stupid, and my parents immediately took the keys. I told them: "But I have to go to work tomorrow!". To which they simply replied: "You will think up something." Such are my parents - and that is why I am very mundane.
The rules of life for successful moms: Mila Kunis images, pictures

A 30-year-old man and an unidentified youth died after they were run over by trains in two separate incidents here. Sandip Kumar(30) of Bharowal village was run over by a Diesel Multiple Unit (DMU) near Phillaur-Bilga rail track last night, police said today. In the second instance, the body of an unidentified youth was recovered from rail track near village Mehtan between Phagwara-Chaheru rail section last night, police said. Police said said that the deceased was in his twenties and his body was kept in Civil hospital mortuary for identification.
(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)

Mao Zedong was a Chinese communist revolutionary who was the founder of the People's Republic of China (PRC), which he ruled as the chairman of the Chinese Communist Party from its establishment in 1949 until his death in 1976. Ideologically a Marxist–Leninist, his theories, military strategies, and political policies are collectively known as Maoism.
A controversial figure, Mao is regarded as one of the most important individuals in the twentieth century. He is also known as a political intellect, theorist, military strategist, and poet.
During Mao's era, China was involved in the Korean War, the Sino-Soviet split, the Vietnam War, and the rise of the Khmer Rouge. Mao has been credited with transforming China from a semi-colony to a powerful sovereign state, and increased literacy and life expectancy, but also ruled an autocratic and totalitarian regime responsible for mass repression, as well as the destruction of religious and cultural artifacts and sites.
It was additionally responsible for vast numbers of deaths with estimates ranging from 40 to 80 million victims through starvation, persecution, prison labor, and mass executions.
Here are some interesting facts about Mao Zedong.
Mao was a heavy smoker.
He often smoked even during formal meetings, but during one with Chiang Kai-shek, he immediately snuffed his after his rival indicated he was a non-smoker. Chiang was amazed and wary of this display of self-discipline. (George Hu's answer to Did Mao Zedong smoke?)
Mao was a critic of arranged marriage.
When he was 14, he was set up for an arranged marriage with a lady named Luo Yixiu. He never consummated the marriage and eventually left his hometown for work. A few years later, Luo passed away. Mao was still close to her side of the family as if they were his own relatives. Mao’s famous feminist quote might have been influenced by this experience.
Mao’s firstborn son died and was buried in North Korea.
Mao Anying volunteered to enlist in the Korean War and served as General Peng Dehuai’s secretary. He was killed in action during an air raid. Peng and Zhou Enlai tried to hide this news for some time, but eventually, he became aware. He sighed and said: "There will always be casualties in a war."
Mao actually had another son Mao Anqing.
He allegedly suffered from mental illness and was not favored by his father. In the 30s, when Mao was a revolutionary, he was forced to be separated from his sons. The two brothers lived on the streets and Anqing was beaten in the head. It was only a few years later that they were found and brought to their father. Anqing was also the father of Major-General Mao Xinyu.
Mao and Chiang Kai-shek both enjoyed calligraphy
Though their calligraphy had a different style. Chiang, much like his name, had writing that was centered, formal, and solid-as-a-rock. Mao however wrote in a more free-flowing cursive script calligraphy style. Supporters and critics have commented that their writing styles were symbolic of their personalities.

A HUGE thank you to Chrissy who pre read, and WendyK who beta! They cheered me on and made this story so much better! (they can also keep a few secrets it seems!)
This title is a running joke, the story is about the same Bella as in Crouching Painslut, Hidden Strapon. Again I wrote BDSM as I know it, not really fluffy. (And Bella's bench is a simple bench, not a spanking one. *gasp*)
Disclaimer: No impact toy has been hurt in the process.
HAPPY BIRTHDAY Dariachenowith! I love you SweetKittyPaw, you rock and your faith in me is mindblowing! This crusher is for you, enjoy babe! Hugs, kisses and boobs slaps.
I finish getting ready while I watch him.
We haven't played in ten days, and I have a hard time removing my gaze from his body. I've missed him, not only because of the time without play, but mostly because I had to ignore him for more than a week. Although that fact wouldn't make me complacent and we both knew that.
Punishing can be fun; I love it. But when you have to really teach a lesson, to really reinforce the rules, it's rarely enjoyable for either of the parties involved, but it's necessary and mandatory. It makes things easier in the end, and pleasurable, but the motion itself never is. It can even be excruciating. This past week was like that for me, excruciating.
I can't say I didn't find a certain amount of pleasure in it, I did. It goes with my sadistic nature, but punishing him meant punishing me as well. So I'm really happy and eager to play with my little Sissy today.
His attitude kept me from doing all the things I really wanted to do to him, making him howl, scream and writhe in pain under my ministrations, for example. I'm not going to let him forget that today. He hasn't finish paying for it yet, which he knows perfectly well.
His cock had spent the last ten days in a bend cockring. It didn't keep him from doing every day things like taking a piss or cleaning himself. It just made it painful for him to have a hard-on. I can honestly say that these past days have been really painful for him. Morning wood, impromptu hard-ons and feeling my body against his each night made his life miserable. I couldn't have everything I wanted from him; sometimes Subs forget their Doms are punished as much as them during those times.
Although sometimes it was enjoyable to see him suffer, like the time I ordered him to pleasure me with my favorite dildo. I wasn't going to let him pleasure me with his fingers or mouth, he didn't deserve it. He also loathed anything going in my pussy that wasn't his cock.
It was as much of a physical punishment as a psychological one, and if I didn't really take physical pleasure in it, I certainly took a real mental pleasure from it. I made sure it took him a long time to get me off, his excitement mixed with his frustration didn't help with the pain. But he knew he was solely responsible for his predicament.
It's always a difficult line to walk seeing as he isn't only my Sub, my Sissy, my little Painslut. He's also my confidante, the man who held me when my father died, the one who cheers me up when I'm down, who argues with me about music, which couch to buy and where to hang the painting we bought. He is the one who helps me decide where to go on vacation and the one I share the housework with.
This tall, strong man kneeling in my dungeon can anger me or calm me in the blink of an eye, depending on what role he is playing at the time. But each role feeds the other; I can't forget he's my Painslut when he's my boyfriend, more than I can forget he's my boyfriend when he's my Painslut.
But he learned a long time ago that I wouldn't give him any slack. I understand that even with clearly set rules he sometimes needs to be reminded who his Domme is and where his place is. It's exactly what I had started to do ten days ago.
Once in a while it's needed.
But I love having him as my official sub. Carlisle had introduced us five years ago at one of our poker nights. My little Sissy was cocky that night, cocky, clever and funny. We spent a great night, bantering back and forth, and rarely had I laughed so much. He had another Domme at the time, but he felt he had experienced everything he could with her. She wasn't into painplay and he was starting to understand that he was craving it. She taught him well and helped him discover his needs but his tastes had evolved.
Carlisle had told him about me, and my Sissy made it clear that night that he was interested in trying things out with me. I didn't answer right away. I wouldn't have minded him subbing for me, and after spending the evening with him, I knew I would say yes if everything went well.
I had to meet him again first to talk about our respective needs. I also wanted to be sure his Domme knew and was okay about him bottoming for me, and I needed to have her opinion on him, too.
At the time the only thing he knew was that he craved pain as much as pleasure but he didn't know to what extent. I didn't mind. We could hit a wall pretty early on or deepen his painslut side. It happens that it was the latter, and we were still working on it to my delight. For a few weeks we were only friends, with a Top/Bottom relationship in the playroom, then he totally stopped subbing for his Domme and became my official Sub. A few months later we decided to give a romantic relationship a shot and two years after that he was moving in with me.
We haven't ever regretted it. That doesn't mean it's simple everyday. but I find it very satisfying to have someone who is so eager to be tortured. And I do it because that's what gets me off. Having a man screaming under my ministrations, torturing his whole body and his little cock and balls. The more wailing the better and I always ask for more. I was lucky to have found someone who did too.
I'm going to use the glorious toy Carlisle left me the last time we had a scene together. It's the cock and ball pillory I used on him, but this time I'll use the crusher that goes with it. I had so much fun with the pillory! I loved it! I can't wait to use the crusher on my Sissy!
He is my boyfriend and official Sub but I still play with others. There is no sexual interaction , but sometimes - rarely - I would use a strap on on one of them. Although one could argue that anything done in a scene is sexual and at least totally arousing, he was the sole recipient of the state those scenes put me in.
But back to today. I'm finally able to play with him and I can tell he's as eager as me. I can't wait to use that beautiful crusher; my body is buzzing with excitement. My little Sissy is hesitant and a little reluctant about it. The idea of having his cock and balls crushed little by little distresses him somewhat which is a turn on for me. It's mainly because he trusts me enough to let me use it, because after all, what is the fun in subjecting him only to things he's comfortable with?
I still watch him closely while putting my favorite anal beadheads in my hair to keep it in a tight bun. I only wear stockings and a black tube top that doesn't even contain my breasts. They're on display as are my ass and pussy. My Sissy will appreciate it. It will be painful for him to not be able to touch me, which is exactly why I chose to wear this. Plus I love my stockings, they're made of black see-through latex with built-in high heel shoes. The heels look likel beadheads. I relish the fact that I could go through with the idea if I ever tell my Sissy he'll end up with my shoe up his ass.
After a deep breath I finally enter the dungeon and keep my eyes on him. He's in the position I impose on all my subs, kneeling, butt in the air. Most of his body weight is on his thighs and I can see them shake. His hands are locked behind his back, his head down and his eyes on the floor.
I walk slowly around him, taking in his abdominal muscles and his strong back, quivering with effort. His blond hair keeps his face hidden from me; I didn't ask him to tie it in his usual ponytail. Because of the pleasure I get from pulling harshly on his hair, he is forbidden to cut it shorter than shoulder length. He doesn't like it all that much, and would rather keep his mop of messy hair short if he had the choice. But his hair, like the rest of his body, is mine.
His hair keeps me from seeing his face, and also keeps him from looking at me. Not that he has the right to, but my Sissy likes to cheat. He's always so eager to know what I'm wearing to play with him. Not being able to check me out frustrates him greatly, and I take pleasure from that, too.
I don't want to address him right now and check the room to see that everything is ready, but I keep walking around him. The built-in bondage frame is ready; I added the bench earlier to facilitate what I have planned for him. Everything I need is next to it, just at arms reach.
I finally crouch down behind him, bringing him down with me so his ass is now touching his heels. My pussy is against his hands, my nipples rubbing his back and I can feel the strength he is using not to move. Directly in front of us stands a huge mirror where I can see us as well as the whole room. When I start slowly pulling on his hair it's the mirror I'm watching.
I pull on his hair until I can see his face in the mirror. I'm still not talking; I know he's waiting for that. His eyes are still on the floor and he doesn't see me watching him. I pull on his hair once, hard. His head jerks but returns to the same position and he doesn't even flinch. Good Sissy. I keep his hair in my left hand and let my right hand wander over his chest, still watching him in the mirror.
I can feel his muscles clench where my hand is, and let it trail down until it's on his cock. I can see him shut his eyes, trying to keep his position, trying not to make a sound. I didn't ask him to stay silent but he does anyway. That's the reason I don't want to talk yet. I want to let him stew a little longer wondering what state of mind I am in. I wouldn't do that with just anyone, but we've played enough together to know each other well; I know it won't mess too much with him. Just enough. I smile at the thought.
I take his cockring off, very slowly, and continue to study him. It's not much but I can feel him relax, and his cock is hard at once. I can't keep a dark laugh from escaping my lips. If he thinks it's the last he has seen of it, he's sorely mistaken. I stand up and go take what I need from the bench, and don't take my eyes off his reflection in the mirror while I do it. I see at once when his eyes aren't on the floor anymore; it 's really brief, but he looks for a second trying to see what I'm looking for.
He doesn't realize I am watching him and his eyes are back on the floor. He pulls himself together really quickly. I could have missed it, but I haven't. His shoulders sagging and the face he makes for that second are enough to make my anger flare. My hand stops on its way to grab the new cockring. I take a deep breath and see him tense at once. That's right, Sissy is in deep shit. I still don't move; I know what I'm going to do but I'd rather be calmer before proceeding.
The tricky thing about a painslut is that corporal punishment is useless. What is the use of stroking him with a cane when he'll take pleasure from it? And what message does that send him? "Please fuck up if you want pleasure"?
No, my pleasure is to hurt and inflict physical pain, but that is never for punishment, and psychological punishments always work the best. I have two options right now, leaving the dungeon - believe me when I say it's one of the worst punishments there is - or proceeding with my other idea. I know I'll do the latter. It'll help me get my point across once and for all.
I walk slowly and place myself directly in front of him. Without further notice I slap him once across the face. His head jerks again but is back to its initial position quickly. The fact that he knows I'm not pleased with him keeps him from enjoying it. His cock, which springs to attention each time he looks at my body, can't get totally hard either. I slap him again. Harder. I do that seven more times; his cheek is bright red and his face is repentant but it's not enough.
I go back to the bench and instead of picking up the cockring, I take the leather cuffs. Then I resume my earlier position, crouching behind his back. I pull roughly on his arms and cuff his wrists, then lock them together. My pussy once again is against his hands. I then grab his hair and yank his head hard. I then push his head down until his left cheek is flat on the 'll now hear the first words since this started.
"Why were you punished?"
He doesn't answer. He knows to wait for me to give him permission. So I do. "Answer!"
His voice is calm and assured, "I was punished because I pleasured myself when I shouldn't have, Mistress."
That's one way to put it. That rule is clear: no jerking off. Unless I tell him to do it. It's a simple rule. One he can follow without problem. He spends time frustrated that's for sure, but he gets enough pleasure that he shouldn't miss something like jerking off. My Sissy also has an astounding power over his cock, not to mention he had all the release he needed just the day before he decided to play with his stupid cock.
I've been a Domme long enough to know that it's not just "a fuck up". When a sub like my Sissy fucks up like that it's a message and I heard it loud and clear: "put me back in my place, reinforce the rules, show me where I stand." Sometimes it doesn't take much, other times much more. It seems like today is one of those times. I press his face into the floor a little more.
"Oh and that's what you want? Cumming all over your hand when you're not allowed to? Or is it just cumming that you want? Because the face you made when I went to fetch the other cockring showed me that you didn't want to play. So I guess the only thing you want is to jizz. Answer me!"
"That's not what I want, Mistress."
His voice was far less assured now, but it still wasn't enough.
"Really?" I use a mocking tone, " because that's not the message you're sending me, Sissy. Seems like fucking the first cunt you meet would satisfy you much more than what we're doing here. You may speak."
I keep my voice low and calm and what I'm saying is starting to make him agitated, but he's trying to refrain from it.
"I don't want that, Mistress."
"Why not, Sissy?" My words are harsh and I yank his head back, before pressing it to the floor again.
"I wouldn't be satisfied. I need you, Mistress." His voice quivers when he talks and he whimpers when he's done.
"I don't think so. Apparently all you need is your hand, Sissy slut." I whisper that in his right ear; my tone is hard and full of reproach, and makes him whimper again. "Do you have something to say to that?"
"I-no, that's not what I need, Mistress."
"We'll see." With that I yank his head back until his back is flush against my chest, grab his cock and start jerking him off. He whimpers again and his dick becomes a little softer instead of harder. Just the reaction I wanted. "Oh, no. That cock will get harder and I'll finish you, Slut. You want to come? You'll come! I'll take no pleasure out of it but you know that already, don't you?"
My left hand joins the right on his cock and then grabs his balls. Not hard, because I don't want him to take any pleasure out of it either. But my dry hand on his cock isn't helping him getting any, anyway. When he's hard again, my hand leaves his balls and I grab his hair again. He moans and lets a sob escape.
"Are you crying, Sissy slut? You really are a Sissy, aren't you? But isn't this what you wanted when you disobeyed me? To jerk off and cum? I'm just giving you what you want!"
I'm not being nice with his cock, my movements sharp and hard. I know what I want and this is the only way to achieve it. His sobs are louder now. My hand keeps his head from moving but I know that he would hang it in shame if he could. His eyes are closed and I can see in the mirror how devastated his face is. Tears and a little snot run down his face. His upper body sags a little more.
I keep myself focused and go on with what I'm doing. I love putting my subs in that state but not for this reason. He's like that because he knows he's disappointed me. At least he feels like he has. Frustration and psychological pain are eating at him. He know he'll come and he knows neither of us will take pleasure out of it. I can tell he's hating himself right now, as well as his body.
"You don't seem happy about what I'm doing, Sissy. It IS what you want, right? Tell me!"
He's trying to talk between sobs and his breath is ragged.
"No, Mistress. Please, please, Mistress. I d- don't want that. Please, I'll do anything. Please!"
"I don't think so, Sissy. I won't waste my energy on someone a whack off can satisfy, so I'll do that for you since that's all that you need, then I'll leave the room."
He is full on crying now. I know he wants to beg me some more, but I won't let him.
"You'll come now, not because I want you to, but because I have had enough of your little cry baby Sissy way. Do you hear me?"
I almost didn't hear him but I'm satisfied enough with his answer.
I stroke him twice before I feel his cock twitch in my hand and then his hot cum on my fingers. That's right, his cock doesn't even shoot his cum, it just leaks onto my fingers. That mustn't have been satisfying at all. I wipe my hand on his stomach before standing up. I watch him cry and let himself fall until his forehead is on the floor.
"I hope you're satisfied, Sissy." I know he isn't, but I want to hear him say it. "You can talk freely until I tell you otherwise."
He doesn't stop crying and his voice is muffled with his head on the floor. He keeps it there but turns it my way so I can see his face. He still doesn't look at me.
"Please what, Sissy?"
"Anything, Mistress. I'm sorry for what I did. I won't touch myself again. Please, Mistress. I'm sorry." His sobs punctuate his words but he keeps begging me.
Point made. No need to punish him any more than he is right now, and we are both in need of some fun so I'll get on with the scene. I still have a few things to tell him and I'll have to make some adjustments, of course. But punishment is over.
I move away from him and he hears it. His shoulders shake harder with his cries . He can't see that I'm crossing the room to get a short medium hemp rope. I try to be as silent as possible. On my way back to him I start making a noose with it. When I'm back behind him, I bend and yank his head enough to pass his head through it, then I stand up, pulling on the rope at the same time to tighten the noose around his neck.
He yelps in surprise as the noose chokes him a little but it's not enough to keep him from breathing normally. His sobs stopped when he felt the rope around his neck.
"Very well, Sissy. If that's what you want. Now answer me, whose cock is this?"
I grab his cock in my hand while I speak. He doesn't respond at once so I grip it tighter and pull on it. "Answer! Whose cock is this?"
"Of course it's mine. And you have no right to use it when I tell you you can't use it. Is that clear now?"
"Yes, Mistress." His answer is loud but not assured.
"Say it again!"
"Yes what, Sissy?"
"Yes, it's your cock, Mistress."
I take the cockring from the bench and put it on his semi-hard dick. Now that he knows something is going to happen he's getting hard again.
"Thank you, Mistress."
I look around the room and spot just what I need. A bull ring is attached to the wall near the mirror. A few chains hang from the celling, but they won't bother me; they might even be helpful. I pull on the rope and walk until I'm in front of it. I don't feel the need to tell my Sissy to follow. If he doesn't want to stop breathing he better follow me closely, which he does. Even on his knees with his hands tied behind his back he's pretty fast.
Once he's where I want him – back to the wall - I tie the rope to the bullring. It doesn't leave a lot of room for him to move. Just enough. Or maybe not enough. That's the fun part. I move a little away from and catch one of the chains and wrap it around my hand. I lift my right leg, not much but enough that he's facing my pussy.
"Lick my pussy. Make it good, Sissy, I've lost enough time with you."
My tone isn't friendly, but he knows that if I let him give me pleasure he's on the right path.
I laugh when the rope keeps his mouth from reaching my pussy. He's so close his frustration is palpable.
"You'll have to do better than that, Sissy. If you don't decide to do something in the next three seconds you can say goodbye to my sweet pussy. What will it be, Sissy?"
I don't have to wait three seconds. His mouth is on me at once. The rope chokes him and he can't breathe easily. He licks me with fervor but has to draw back a bit from time to time to take a real breath. I can hear choking sounds coming from him but he never really stops. His lips and tongue are doing wonders to my clit, and his struggle excites me; he also tries to go as far as he can with his tongue. I can feel it wanting to enter my vagina, but each time he does, the rope tightens around his neck. He tries not to cough but it's getting harder for him to breathe. Seeing the extent he'll go to pleases and contents me.
"I didn't order you to try to please me, Sissy! I ordered you to please me. Do it, Slut!"
The knot is too tight now for him to try and pull on it any more, so he decides to concentrate only on my clit. He sucks and licks it quickly, letting out little moans of pleasure. I don't make a sound but I'm happy with his work. He knows what I like and gives everything he has. I could keep from coming and let him go at it a while longer but he's not really breathing so letting myself orgasm is the best thing to do.
I close my eyes and focus on the pleasure his mouth is giving me, how his flat tongue laps at my clit then, circles it and his lips suck on it. I grip his hair with my free hand and push his head into me while I silently come. My motion makes him choke more and I take my pleasure out of that, too.
As soon as I'm finished I pull the rope from his neck to let him breathe normally. His eyes are looking down at the floor but I can see his satisfied smile.
I grip his hair and put my mouth close to his ear, "I wouldn't be too cocky right now if I were you. I'm not sure you'll like what's coming so much." I smirk when his face falls. "That's right, Sissy."
I drag him by his hair to the bench under the bondage frame and order him to kneel on it.
He complies at once; I don't think he'll hesitate to do what I'm going to ask of him soon. I love it!
Only his calves are on the bench; his knees and feet stick out. I unlock his wrists so the leather cuffs are still around them but I can now lock his wrists separately on each side of the bondage frame. It's a low bench, so it's not hard for me to tie him up.
I can't do it if he's standing up, as my Sissy is really tall. I take another pair of leather cuffs and tie his ankles to the bench, separated enough that his ass is on display just in front of me. Lastly, I put a spreaderbar between his knees so he can't close them.
I love this position. First, because the bench is low, it makes him a little shorter than me, and secondly because it puts his ass at the perfect height. His hands on the bondage frame help him keep the position but it won't matter, at one point he'll hurt anyway. Although I have enough time to do some hurting of my own before the position becomes unbearable for him, his suffering from it isn't my goal at all.
Now to the part I have been waiting for! Oh, the pleasure of hearing his first scream. As I did the last time, I secure the base of the crusher to the bondage frame so it won't move. The crusher is a simple device -simple but devious, how great is that? - just two iron fingers on an axis. I just have to turn the screw to tighten their grip. It's not called a crusher for nothing, I feel like cheering and clapping at this evil little invention.
It's on a telescopic base so I can put the crusher at the right height, just where his cock and balls are, because I plan on crushing both. Oh yeah, clapping is in order, but I refrain from it. I take the cock ring off of his cock and stroke him twice.
"I'm so thrilled to use this on you. I can't wait to hear you scream like the Sissy Slut you are."
He stays silent and I can't hide my smile.
"You'll stay silent until I tell you you can make noise. Nod." Once he does I go on, "Even when you're able to make noise you won't speak to me unless I address you. Nod." He complies and I keep talking, "You can speak if it's to use your safe word. Anytime. Nod." Again he does.
I know he won't fuck that up. Safe words are something you don't play around with, even more so when doing new things in a scene. He knows that's not something which would cross me. Not using it would. I didn't plan the scene with him, so he doesn't know what I'll do and the crusher can bring him pain he may not be able to handle yet.
I don't want to second guess my every move. I trust him to tell me if it's too much in case I reach his limit. Satisfied by his silent consent, I pull gently on his cock and balls to put them between the iron fingers and turn the screw until they're safely locked between them. It's tight but no more than a cockring is.
I look at my Sissy and he's beautiful, tied the way he is, kneeling on that bench. My wet pussy becomes even wetter and I can feel it clench just looking at him. His body shudders lightly, maybe in fright, maybe in anticipation. I know my outfit is a reason for his reaction, too.
I come close to him and stroke his jaw lightly, making him look at me then I kiss him, open mouthed. I've missed kissing him. His tongue stroks mine with desperation and want. I deepen the kiss even more until it makes him moan, then I take a step back. I look at him one last time, the smile on my face soon becoming a smirk, and I walk around the bondage frame to place myself behind him.
I wrap his hair around my hand and pull his head back. I didn't lie when I say I love hair pulling. My body is flush against his back and I whisper in his ear,
"I hope you're ready. I'll take my sweet time with you, Slut."
I pick up the wooden stick as I talk and as soon as I finish I take a step back and whip his back with it. He doesn't make a sound but his upper body jerks forward.
"You better not move too much, Sissy. That's not a good idea."
And I whip him again, leaving a second red mark on his back. He doesn't move this time. I really love the effort he's making. I then whip his ass. He doesn't move much, and I know he can take it, but not making a sound is beginning to be hard for him. I won't make him wait too long. I can't wait to hear the sounds coming out of his mouth. I whip him a few more times before dropping the stick and picking up the cane.
"I want to hear you now, Sissy. Do your best, Slut!"
The first stroke is on his ass. He doesn't scream much, he's used to it. He also loves it. For now. I follow with another stroke still on his ass but on a different spot. He makes a little more noise but not much. I place myself to the side of him so I can keep stroking him and have access to the crusher's screw, too. Time to play! I turn it once, hitting his left thigh with the cane at the same time. And he howls, more in surprise than pain, but that will come soon.
I then alternate between hitting his left and right thighs while turning the screw on the crusher. His screams are delightful. I know the cane is responsible for most of it, but the crusher is doing a good job, too. From where I am I take pleasure in seeing his pretty cock becoming so red. His balls are wonderful too. Amazing how these little things always look like they'll explode anytime when they can endure so much more.
I want to crush them a little more, so I switch impact toys and pick up the crop. I still have time to come back to the cane later. He'll like the crop better but that doesn't mean I'll go easier on him, quite the contrary. I hit him on his back and ass, alternating long and short strokes, until they become a wonderful shade of pink. He's wailing and shouting. Sometimes a string of words escapes his lips but it's unintelligible, so I know it's not for me.
I'm delighted. Delighted and horny. Hurting him is always such a turn on! When I'm happy with my work I hit his thighs and calves and turn the screw twice more while his mind is focused on the pain in his legs. That grants me another wonderful scream. I stay put for a few seconds so he has the time to safe word if he needs it. But he only whimpers. I love my Sissy. He's quite the painslut now, but he'll always be my Sissy.
I drag my nails on his back which makes him wail.
"I'm really happy with you, Sissy. You still wail like a Sissy, though."
The crop still in hand I walk until I'm in front of him and hit him hard on the chest. He doesn't make a sound but it can't stay this way, can it? I hit him until he's screaming again and I can't refrain from muffling his last scream with a kiss. I drop the crop in order to stroke his shoulders and chest with my hand. Soon he's moaning into my mouth.
I put my hands in his hair, stroking it lovingly. My hands move back to his chest and I leave his mouth to kiss his neck, slowly trailing wet kisses until my mouth is on his right nipple. I suck on it and bite it, only stopping when it perks up, then I do the same to his left nipple.
When I'm satisfied, I bend a little to grab the nipple clamps linked up with a chain off the bench and clamp both nipples at the same time. He hisses but doesn't scream. I'm okay with that; the screaming will come. But I know it's painful seeing as I like anything with teeth. The skin around his nipples becomes a darker shade of red and I can't wait to make it even redder.
I then pick up a weight to hang on the chain. That's when the wonderful screams will come. I hang the first one which brings only a small whimper from my Sissy. Then the second one. I'm really happy when I hear the shout coming out of his mouth. I'm ready to hang the last one, but with that one will come another rotation of the screw. When I do, I almost come from the noise my Sissy is making. His screams and cries are that fantastic.
Tears fall down his cheeks as he tries to hold his sobs in but he soon quits trying. It's so wonderful to watch. I pick up the crop and hit him on the chest, making the weights sway in a painful way which increases his cries.
"Aw, my Sissy is bawling like a baby."
I emphasize my words by slapping his face; the motion makes the weights sway again which increases his cries. He's so beautiful that I can't resist the pleasure of slapping him again the hardest I can.
I can't tighten the crusher again for now so I just kiss him once quickly before moving behind him. I switch back to the cane and hit his thighs again, fast and hard strokes. Then I stroke his ass; it's so red right now that I nearly salivate looking at it.
When my arm starts to hurt I stop my ministrations. I pause for a minute then hit the soles of his feet. One time each, so hard I feel the vibrations going up my arms. His screams are deafening. I love it so much I feel like shouting "Again! Again!" but I know he's not up to it.
He's crying so much it should be heartbreaking. If I wasn't me, of course. Not only do I crave those cries and screams, but I know he enjoys it, too. Crying is a way to let off steam as well as a way to show how ready you are to get off. Of course he can't do it the way his cock is crushed but he really wants to be able to. I could finish things now, but I'll keep going a little longer. It's also my pleasure to tease him, after all.
Before going on with what I have planned, I face him. I want to see what I've done to him. I pull on his hair to keep his head from hanging, his whole body is a wonderful red with even redder marks. His cock and balls are crushed so much it's a sight to behold. His face is flushed, sweaty, teary and snotty. He's so beautiful right now. I keep studying him before going to stand behind him again.
Everything I need is on this bench including the lube. I pour a generous amount on my fingers and start stroking his asshole. His cries becomes moans as I insert two fingers in him, stroking him slowly, then after a few minutes, faster. His moans are becoming louder and I insert another finger. I know he wants to move to meet my strokes but the crusher prevents him.
I stroke faster until his moans becomes cries of pleasure then I stop and spank his right ass cheek. His skin is hot and sensitive and he yelps. I then spank his left cheek, getting the same response from him. I spank him a few more times until my hand tingles, then I stop. He's half moaning, half crying now.
My Sissy is ready to be fucked. I pick up my double strap on, and push it slowly between my labia and into my pussy. I let a moan escape from my mouth, only for my Sissy's benefit. He knows what I'm doing and the anticipation is killing him. I fasten the strap on around my waist and resume my spanking. No mystery in the fact that I love screams and red ass, right?
I put lube on the strap-on and getting closer to his body, stroke his asshole with the tip and yank his head up with my other hand.
"I think I want to fuck you in silence. I don't want to hear a sound. I'll take so much pleasure in fucking your bright red ass, thinking of all the toys I used to make it so hot and red. Feeling the strap-on push into my pussy each time I push into you. Seeing it disappearing in your wanton ass, and knowing that you can't come. You can't even really appreciate it, focusing as you are on your cock in the crusher and on not making any noise. Know that I'll love every second of it, Slut. "
I won't keep him from making noise; everyone knows how much I love moaning and screaming. But I think he's too far gone to really realize that. I grab his shoulders and push into him in one sharp movement. The sensation is phenomenal. I love fucking him so much. I don't always use a strap on, but I know I'll be too turned on to use anything other than a double strap on.
He keeps from making any noise while I start fucking him so fast I think I'll come in the next few minutes. Then I stroke slower but harder; his body is shuddering with pleasure, his thighs are trembling and without looking I know he's clenching his teeth so much that if pay attention I'll be able to hear his teeth grinding.
I let my hands slide from his shoulders and put my arms around his waist. I stroke my hands up his chest until I can feel the weight and pull hard on the chain. No sound comes out of his mouth; only the jerk of his head betrays his pain. I'm so proud. I kiss him between his shoulder blades.
"I want to hear you now, Slut."
As soon as the words leave my mouth, I hear his moans. Oh yeah, my Sissy is a wanton slut who loves having his ass fucked. His moans are getting louder and are mixed with all sorts of other little noises. It only turns me on more and I fuck him faster. When he's lost in his pleasure, I reach for the crusher's screw and rotate it again.
He lets a scream out, but as I don't stop fucking his ass, the scream is fast replaced by more moans. I then turn the screw one last time. When sexually aroused the body can take pain it couldn't usually bear, but people never seem to understand that. His poor cock and balls are a deep red now. I put my head under his left arm pit to see them better, so crushed it really looks like they will explode if I turn the screw one more time.
I'm still fucking him, but I'm getting tired. He's crying from the pain of the crusher but moaning as well from the strap on going in and out of his ass. I can feel my orgasm coming fast and I put my head back on his shoulder. My hands are still on his chest and grip the chain from the nipple clamp but I don't pull on it yet.
When I feel my orgasm a second away I yank on the chain and bite his shoulder. Hard. So hard I almost draw blood. My orgasm overcomes me at the same time he lets out his loudest scream yet. If his cock wasn't crushed, he would have come all over the floor.
I'm shaking with the remnants of my orgasm, although I suspect it's more about exhaustion since I'm always more satisfied with his cock, which I'll never admit to him. I keep fucking him slowly until my orgasm is totally over and then unfasten the belt, the strap on still deep in his ass. I take it out of my pussy then out of his ass and throw it behind me. I stroke his back slowly letting him feel my hand on his sensitive skin.
I face him and take one nipple clamp off at a time, licking his tortured nipples to ease the pain. Then I kiss him while I slowly loosen the crusher's screw. The blood rushing back to the area will hurt enough not to add to it. I keep one hand on his cock and when it's out of the crusher I stroke it slowly to keep it from being too painful.
He whimpers and groans as the feeling comes back. I use both my hands now to stroke his balls and cock. Our mouths are still locked in a wet kiss. When his cock is back to normal, except for its deep red color, it's so hard and sensitive. Every touch makes my Sissy let out a loud moan as well as a hiss.
He groans when I stop stroking it. I have to untie his hands and ankles; he moans gratefully when I free his left hand then his right. I work on his shoulder to ease the leftover kinks. When I'm sure it's enough I take the spreader bar from between his knees and bend over to free his ankles.
I grip his hair and order him to straddle the bench and sit on it, which he does eagerly. I yank his head back and whisper,
"Now I can fuck your cock or you can jerk off, Sissy. What will it be?"
I look at him with a smirk, waiting for the answer. He's so out of it that he takes a few seconds to answer.
"Please, fuck my cock, Mistress."
As soon as his words are out he realizes what he just said. I snicker, loving the mind game, "Isn't it my cock, Sissy?"
He looks at me with a stricken face, so scared to have fucked up again. He's on the verge of crying when he answers me. Point made as I said.
"Yes, Mistress. I'm sorry, please, fuck your cock, Mistress."
I stroke his face and push him so he lies down on the bench. "Grip the bench's legs with your hands, and don't you move them, Slut."
He complies at once. As soon as he does I straddle the bench and impale myself on his cock. Fuck, I missed it. The loud moan he lets out tells me he did, too. I put my hands on his chest to balance myself. It must hurt him when I push his sensitive back onto the bench but I can't sit and put all my weight on him. His balls and cock would hurt too much from the pressure.
The fact that I can fuck him is mostly due to the fact that he's still hot and in the moment. I won't be able to touch him in a few hours, although tomorrow he will be alright again.
I move over him as he groans and even with the orgasm I had not long ago I can feel my wall flutter. All that excitement can't go away all at once, right? And having his cock in me is such a pleasure. I fuck his cock like I fucked his ass, with hard and deep strokes. Soon he's groaning and moaning, trying to keep his orgasm at bay. His hands clench on the bench and he closes his eyes.
Now all of his muscles are clenching; I know it won't last long, not after everything that's happened. He's too worked up to be able to last long and I won't ask that from him. Although he doesn't know that.
"Leave one hand on the bench and use the other one on my clit, Slut. Now!"
His right hand goes to his mouth and he wets his fingers before starting to stroke my clit in time with my movements. My Sissy Slut is good with his hands, that's one sure thing. The noises he's making along with his body reaction tell me he's close to coming but he isn't asking yet so I suppose he decided to try to make me come before he does.
Any other day it would be my pleasure to make sure he doesn't achieve it but I want to give him that. The satisfaction of making me come will make him feel even better. His fuck up is in the past now and I don't want him to think I'm punishing him by not coming. He wouldn't think this way usually, but today I know he probably would. Plus, I'm exhausted and I really want to come.
His fingers on my clit and the feeling of his cock inside of me, plus all the wonderful things I did to him today, make my orgasm even better and I clench on his cock in a nearly silent moan. A cry leaves his mouth and next he's begging me to let him come.
I don't make him wait and he comes in me, a guttural groan escaping him then a shout as he comes deep in me. He moans and whimpers for a few minutes, his body shaking and his eyes shut.
I cradle his head and kiss him, first on his neck, then his face, then his mouth. Slow and tender kisses. He snakes his arms around me and crushes me to him. I stop kissing him and pull him to me. I stand up enough that his cock slides out of me.
I sit down on the bench, my legs still straddling his. His arms haven't left me and he still crushes me to him, now in a sitting position. I hug him back, my chin on his shoulder, stroking his hair and kissing him from time to time.
His shoulders start to shake and I feel his tears on my shoulders. I keep him there until I can't hear sobs anymore. His body relaxes into mine and I know he's alright now. He kisses my shoulder and thanks me several times, almost reverently. I move his head so I can see his face.
"That was something, wasn't it?"
He laughs and shakes his head, "Yeah you can say that. I'm exhausted."
"Fuck, me too! We better move. I'd like to shower and lie down."
He smiles at me and kisses me,
"Cuddling on the couch?"
I can only laugh at that; we always end up cuddling on the couch afterwards. That's also where I usually give him his aftercare after a scene. Not here, not in our bedroom. On the couch, before cuddling in front of a movie.
"Okay, a shower then the couch. We should clean up but I don't think I'm up for it right now. It'll wait."
I stand up with a groan. My right arm is killing me and I'm shaky on my legs. I suppose he'll have even more pain when he stands up, which he does slowly, groaning. He puts an arm around my shoulder and squeezes me to him.
"I think I want to watch Funny Game."
I laugh, "Aren't you tired of people playing sick games for today, Jasper?"
"Nope, Bella, never. Plus I know you'll cuddle me if I'm scared."
That, I will.
Thank you for reading. Leave a word.

Marc and I took Lacie for some alone time with us to celebrate her birthday. She loves stuffed animals, so we decided to take her to build a bear. She was so excited to be there. It made her day when there was an owl. Crazy I know, the girl loves owls. Anything she see's with an owl on it, she wants. It was so fun to spend time with just her. We really get to just see her little personality, which is quite big for such a little thing. We told her she could pick anywhere to eat. The funny thing is she wanted Wendy's. We never go there. I kept prompting her for something not related to fast food. It was her special day so we gave her what she wanted. One day the boys are going to like that she is such a cheap date. I am so grateful Heavenly Father sent her sweet spirit to us. We love you little Lacie bug!
7 years ago

Priyanka Chopra is making most of her time during the lockdown as she is also learning to play the piano from her husband Nick Jonas while self-isolating together amid the coronavirus pandemic.
About it she had earlier revealed, "I've also started the piano -- I make my husband teach me," adding, "I've never played, but I've always wanted to learn an instrument, so I make him give me a half-hour or 45-minute lesson every day."
Now, during an interaction, Nick revealed how it is like teaching playing piano to his wife. He said, "She is very musical and she has had a musical career as well. She was signed as a recording artist in the US and in India. So she is very musical and she picked up very quickly. But I am not a very good teacher, I'll admit that. I would love to learn how to best explain what is what because I learnt by ear so I had no sort of reference point."
He added, "She is picking it up and doing a very good job. She has been very helpful with The Voice stuff. We have set up all the gear at home and we are going live each time from here. She gets mad because we go live from the East coast and in we're in time delay for the West coast. She loves the show so much that she gets mad if I say anything about what happened. So I stay quiet for three hours till the results are actually on live. Otherwise she is very unhappy with me."
You can check out the complete conversation here.
Follow @News18Movies for more

by Caden Lantz, City Alliance Church CMA, Williamsport, PA
I feel that the “English for Kids” Bible Camp in Quebec (June 26-30, 2017) was a great program for my first time volunteering on a short-term missions trip. It was an amazing way to be able to share the message of God with the kids who attended the camp.
I helped in the English Challenge class, which had six kids in it. There was one boy, William, who I talked with the most. I was able to tell him about Jesus and being saved. He asked me many questions about what I was telling him and about things he had heard from others. I also talked to two of the other boys about Christ and they asked some questions, too.
I think this experience helped with my comfort level in talking to people about Christ. I had never really told anyone about Him before this. When they started asking questions, I was happy because it helped them to learn about God and it helped me see that it wasn’t as difficult as I thought it might be.
The whole team from Pennsylvania that I went up to Quebec with was really nice and helpful. It was comforting to have both people I knew and people who had been there before. It did not take long for me to feel comfortable at “English for Kids” camp.
Overall, I feel that it was definitely worth going.
PHOTO: Caden, third from left, with his English Challenge class
Visit www.opcstm.org for more photos and testimonials from those who have served as short-term missionaries in the OPC!
© 2022 The Orthodox Presbyterian Church

RUSK, Texas — For the past four years, Trinity Asberry has worked hard to accomplish her goal of being first in her class but she never knew she would also make history as the first Black valedictorian at Rusk High School.
"The first thing I did when I found out is I called all my family members, 'hey I'm valedictorian!' My grandma told me, 'hey I think you might have made history, I've been here a long time and I've never heard that happen," Trinity said.
Trinity began researching the history of Rusk High School but was met with uncertainty from faculty members and local newspapers who couldn't provide her with the information she was searching for.
"They didn't have the resources to tell me that information. So we checked with the NAACP and they couldn't find that information as well so we did a lot of research with community members and alumni from Rush HS," she said. "We were able to find out I was the first and I was really excited for that."
After receiving double confirmation from the Board of Educators and other sources, Trinity's dad, George Andrew Asberry said he's proud of his daughter's historic accomplishment.
"That feeling was like wow you're special, I mean you're the first in Rusk … that's history," George Asberry said. "I'm so proud of her and I probably tell her a 100 times."
Trinity has overcome many challenges both academically and personally. Her mother died when Trinity was in elementary school.
"I feel like moving forward in my future I'll know that whatever comes my way I'll be able to take it on because I've done so much under the circumstances already," Trinity said. "And I know that I'll have help, that my family will be there if I run into something that I can't take on myself."
George Asberry said Trinity's mother built a foundation with their daughter and after she passed away, he received the torch. He tried to maintain that foundation and added to it as Trinity grew up.
"When Trinity lost her mom, I thought that the best thing I could do was make her situation comfortable and that's what I did. I made her first priority, I put my personal life in the back burner and made sure she had everything she needed," he said. "She had me, her grandmother, her aunt, and her teachers - all of those people were instrumental for helping her to get where she is."
Trinity rarely struggled in academics so the teachers who influenced her the most were the ones who had an impact in her personal life.
"Mrs. Turlington was my third grade teacher and the first teacher I had after my mom passed. She was actually a teacher who also taught my mom so having her was actually very special. Ms. Taylor was a really outgoing and bubbly teacher where you could express yourself in a safe place," Trinity said. "You could talk about anything and she listened and helped you. And Dr. Hawkins, he was the first Black teacher I've had and that was very special because it was the first time I was in a classroom in which someone looked like me."
Anatomy and Physiology Dual Credit teacher Dr. Gerald Hawkins said from the beginning, Trinity was a rare student who excelled academically while she participated in extracurricular activities like basketball, cheer, student council, softball and track along with serving on the homecoming court.
"I think losing her mom has motivated Trinity at a young age. It has helped her reach the stars to make her mom proud," Hawkins said. "Truly a historical moment that needs to be celebrated. I think for minority students to see this historical moment happen will help motivate them to succeed academically if they put their minds and put in the work, they can also accomplish this."
As the first Black valedictorian, Trinity hopes to set an example for younger students who look up to her.
"I feel like a lot more students will feel like it's not a goal out of reach for them because that's something you can do no matter what skin color you are, it's achievable," Trinity said. "I was always kind of singled out in advanced courses and I'll look around, it'll only be me or another Black student. That's kind of sad that it's only us because there is so many people that can strive for more and they choose not to because they don't believe they can. I'm excited that (their mindset) is kind of shifting."
To continue inspiring the next generation, Trinity is trying to plan an event for younger girls about to go into high school.
"There have been a lot of younger girls who have reached out to talk to me. A lot of moms want me to talk to their daughters before I leave and tell them they can do it too," Trinity said.
Trinity is looking forward to her future and is setting more goals. She will attend Texas Southern University for two years and start in the university's pre-nursing program.
She then wants to transfer to the University of Houston and complete a bachelor of science in nurse. Once that degree is earned, she said she decide between medical school or starting a career in cosmetic nursing.
No matter what Trinity pursues in her life, her dad knows she is capable of reaching any goal as long as she stays focused.
"I just want her to reach all of her dreams, her goals, all the things she wants to do," he said.
Hawkins said it was special that Trinity thought of him when she found out about getting her scholarship from Texas Southern University.
"I feel my pathway, journey, and career has been worth it, to inspire my students, especially Trinity was all worth it," Hawkins said. "Trinity is a humble, responsible, respectful young woman and I think those characteristics will take her a long way in life. In the small time I was part of her journey, I hope I made a difference."
Trinity can't wait to see what the next chapter in her life brings but in the meantime she will continue to inspire others to make their dreams a reality.
"Being the first. If you don't see it, you can make it happen, you always have the choice for it to be you. Just because it hasn't happened yet, doesn't mean it can't. If it's something you want to see, you make it happen and you can make the change," she said.

"Sexy Plexi": Jack Johnson
I hope everyone had an amazing weekend. I had a great time at my party on Saturday - plus I got everything on tape. Don't worry, we didn't get "TOO" crazy :)
At first I was a bit nervous because most of the people I invited didn't really know each other but by the end of the night everyone got along well. I was also happy that I was able to meet Liane who is going to be joining my friend Ryan, and I on our trip to Europe. Liane happens to live in Montreal and is also friends with one of my friends from high school so she was able to show up at my party. Meeting her makes me look forward to meeting everyone else on the trip. It's less than 2 weeks away...
Tomorrow is Tuesday and not just any Tuesday. Tomorrow is NEW MOVIE AND NEW CD TUESDAY!!! I'm excited because the new "Dave Matthws Band" CD is coming out as well as the US version of "Amelie". I've been trying to get a hold of Amelie for quite some time now however Montreal has only had the French version out on tape and DVD. I know, I know that I can speak and understand French however I would like to have the option of being able to read the English subtitles. Is that too much to ask?

The Birth of Elsie.
Just wanted to let you know bub arrived safely at 38 +4 weeks on the 27th February (luckily before all this crazy coronavirus hit).
I'm so excited to say we had a natural vaginal birth with no interventions, the exact birth I wanted it still gives me goosebumps, I'm so happy and proud of myself and my support team.
I very unexpectedly went into spontaneous early labour the night before she arrived, ( I say unexpectedly as I was at the gym earlier that day haha, and had no real signs of labour until it began). Surges started at about 9pm and continued to become more frequent, after a chat with a midwife and making sure I was in early labour we applied a TENS machine which was so amazing. I had my hypnobirthing tracks playing through
headphones and was using my breathing techniques and enjoying the experience. I really feel that using what I learnt allowed me to stay at home for so long, I felt so confident and excited to meet my baby.
I laboured at home for almost 13 hours and arrived at hospital the following morning with my surges about 2 -3 min apart. I did get checked once on arrival (but the midwife did ask me if I wanted to) and was 4cm dilated. I was moved to an amazing birth suite with an incredible and supporting midwife (and my partner Blake). I continued to labour in the shower with my fit ball, once my surges became about 1 min or less, I began to really labour in my back which was more pressure then I had been feeling, so I asked to use the gas. Unfortunately I didn't feel it really did anything, but it was great in the way of regulating my breathing and gave me something to really focus on. I then wanted to change positions so I moved to the bed in a kneeling position for bub to arrive. My waters broke naturally just before I began to bear down, my midwife never told me to 'push' she was amazing and just let me do my own thing.
My body just did what it needed, I will never forget that transition into bearing down - it gave me an amazing surge of energy to birth my baby. After a short 16 minutes my beautiful daughter 'Elsie Dawn' was born - weighing a perfect 3.1kg and 51cm long.
Unfortunately I did have a second degree tear but it really didn't worry me at all, and after a few stitches I really didn't notice it much. It was nothing like I had imagined a tear to be.
We had immediate skin to skin but my cord was actually really so short bub could only lay on my tummy. We waited and had delayed cord clamping, there was no rush and the cord was totally white before my partner cut it. I also got to feel the pulsating cord which was amazing too. We could finally do the breast crawl and bub latched great (to be continued...). With the marginal cord insertion on my placenta the doctors had wanted me to have the Syntocinon (synthetic oxytocin) injection as they stated it was due to higher risk of haemorrhage when birthing the placenta. We kindly refused the injection, and asked for at least 30 min to see if it would pass on it's own, luckily it did very easily after about 10 - 15 min with no issues at all. When we got to look at the placenta, the cord was definitely attached on the lower half of the placenta but was not too close to the side - it was a thick strong healthy cord. I really wish I could have known this while being pregnant, unfortunately I was never really encouraged that the cord was positioned and doing fine, only that baby was growing normally. The upside of having a marginal cord was that I got to see bub every few weeks at the ultrasound which was amazing and comforting as well. We had great breast feed straight after her birth but unfortunately that did not continue. We were having a lot of difficulty with her latching, the midwives were very encouraging and helpful but bub either could not open her mouth wide enough to latch, or would latch and it would be so painful. My nipples became damaged from trying so much and bub was becoming very distressed which made me feel so terrible and upset. My lovely midwife suggested hand expressing which I had no idea how, so she patiently did it for me, teaching me as she went and we were able to start syringe feeding bub the colostrum. This made a huge difference, she became settled and content, I have never felt so relived in my life. The following day I saw a lactation consultant who gave me a plan to go home with, bub was checked for tongue tie and any issues but was fine so our plan was to express via pump and bottle feed until my milk came in and my nipples healed. I felt a little down and defeated about not being able to feed bub on the breast but at least felt confident that she was getting what she needed via bottle. Unfortunately bub didn't get any better at latching and the constant pumping was wearing me down. I remember sitting on the lounge and just crying. We booked another appointment at the lactation clinic and we tried a nipple shield, bub latched straight away and fed like a dream, so the new plan was to use the shield and slowly wean her off which worked like a charm with help from the lactation clinic. They were so amazing and helpful even when I would get so flustered, I would really recommend going to one for the support - mine ran every second day and you didn't need an appointment. It was a long journey but now at 8 weeks old we have both got the hang of things and doing great - so proud we didn't give up!! Just wanted to say thank you for giving me the knowledge, tools and confidence to not fear birth of our baby but also have the natural birth that I wanted. Also my partner Blake did amazing, so happy he had the knowledge to advocate and support me, he was just perfect - I could hear him talking to the midwife and I was so proud of him knowing exactly what I wanted. I literally could not have had a more perfect birth! Thank you again Karlee, Blake and baby Elsie.
Congratulations Karlee and Blake! I am so happy that you were able to achieve the positive birth that you were working towards.
Birth story and photos shared with permission.

American TV Actor who is well known for his role as Winston in "13 Reasons Why." He has also appeared in "Fall Into Me" and "First Love."
He first posted to his Instagram page in August 2019.
He has accrued over 110,000 followers to his popular Instagram. He has said he is a fan of drinking martinis.
He married Elin Bluman.
He appears in "13 Reasons Why" alongside Steven Weber.

A Wagoner man is in jail this week after reportedly driving drunk and killing a 12-year-old boy on a bicycle.
Wagoner Police arrested Richard Roth and booked him for first degree manslaughter. He was taken into custody after he allegedly hit Billy Lord on his bicycle around 11 p.m. Friday.
Authorities stated that the boy killed and his brother were riding their bikes home when they were hit by an SUV reportedly driven by Roth. An officer stated that he left the scene but later returned and was arrested, according to the Associated Press.
Roth is being held in the Wagoner County Jail awaiting formal charges. He also was booked on suspicion of driving under the influence and leaving the scene of a personal injury accident.
The Associated Press contributed to this report.

A 30-year-old woman who has allegedly hailed from Nigeria and been in contact with Ebola-positive people has been took to hospital and quarantined as she showed symptoms consistent with Ebola disease, German health authorities said. According to AFP, dozens of other visitors and staff at a Berlin employment office building were also stopped from leaving for several hours as emergency services sealed off part of the street. It was gathered that the woman who had fainted later said she had recently been in contact with people infected with Ebola. Several people who had been with the woman inside the building in the northeastern district of Prenzlauer Berg were later also taken to hospital for testing. Berlin fire department spokesman Rolf Erbe said that because the patient came from “an area affected by a highly contagious disease, we took these precautions.” He said the testing in the city’s Charite hospital would take some time. “The patient was isolated inside the ambulance, the staff took the appropriate protective measures. An emergency medic, the public health officer, arrived and the necessary precautions were taken,” he added. The Ebola outbreak that has killed more than 1,100 people in West Africa could last another six months, the Doctors Without Borders charity group said Friday. One aid worker acknowledged that the true death toll is still unknown.

The singer confirmed Internet reports, triggered by photos showing her with an apparent baby bump, that she and husband Carey Hart are expecting their first child and that doctor believes the baby will be a girl.
"My mom has always wished me a daughter just like me," Pink, 31, says on The Ellen DeGeneres Show airing Wednesday. "I'm terrified one of us will go to jail."
Asked by DeGeneres why she waited to confirm the rumors until now, Pink said, "I didn't want to talk about it because I was just really nervous and I have had a miscarriage before."
As for whether the baby was planned, she said, "I worked for it. ... It was not an 'oops.'"

11 years. It’s been 11 years.
On this day, 11 years ago, I lost my father to his lifelong battle with depression. March 4th, 1999 my father took his own life leaving his children behind to deal with their own broken hearts, their own feelings of guilt, and a life time of “what ifs”.
The day my father passed away had been a day like any other. Lorne and I were living in Daytona Beach at the time as he was working on his bachelor’s degree. I was working as a receptionist at an insurance company. The day was sunny and warm. My father-in-law was in town visiting. I arrived home from work and went into my bedroom to get cleaned up and ready to go out for dinner once Lorne got home from school. As I was piddling around in my room when the phone rang. It was my mom. What I expected to be a regular mother daughter phone call turned into a phone call I had never ,imagined, a phone call I will never forget. Instead of talking about my day, about what my family was up to like we normally would have, my mom told me that my father was dead. I don’t remember much about the actual conversation. I can’t remember exactly what she said, I can’t remember what I said. I remember feeling a very heavy pit form in my chest as my heart broke. I remember feeling like I couldn’t breath. I remember not being able to cry. I remember being worried about my brother and how he was taking the news. I remember asking about him. I remember not really knowing how I should feel or what I should say. I remember hearing my mom cry on the other end of the line and wanting nothing more than to be sitting next to her so she could hug me. I just wanted a hug from my mom.
My parents got divorced when I was 3 and my brother was 6 months old. I don’t remember living with my dad. My very first childhood memories occurred some time after when my mom, brother and I moved into an apartment together after the divorce. My brother and I spent time with my dad when we were younger. He would pick us up for weekend visits. I have good memories from those weekend visits. I remember playing outside in the yard of our farmhouse. I remember him taking me to my Grandma’s house and playing with farm animals. I remember him giving me a kitten for my 6th birthday, he brought it into the house tucked into the inside pocket of his leather jacket. As a child I enjoyed hanging out with my dad on those weekend visits. But my memories of my dad aren’t all good.
My father was a troubled soul. He was an alcoholic his whole life and during his last years he suffered from serious health complications that resulted from his alcoholism. My mom left my dad because he was abusive, not to us, but to her. My father also suffered from depression. I witnessed my father drinking around us, driving drunk and even a couple of times drinking while he was driving us. As a result of what I knew about my dad’s past and what I saw I made the choice as a teenager to cut off ties with my dad for my own sake. I figured one day, when I was older I’d have a chance to reconnect with him. As a teenager I didn’t have it in me to forgive my dad or to deal with the drama that he created in my life. It was easier for me to just ignore it all and pretend none of it happened.
What I never expected was that at 21 years old I would loose my father and any chance we may have had of reconnecting. What I never expected is that I would forever be haunted by a man I sadly never really knew, haunted by a million questions, a million “what ifs”.
For the last 11 years I have been dealing with the grief and pain I feel as a result of my father’s death in silence. Since everyone in my world knew that I had cut ties with my father and didn’t really have anything to do with him they all assumed that his death didn’t really affect me. they couldn’t have been more wrong.. And since I knew they all felt this way I didn’t feel like I could talk to anyone about how I was really feeling. Instead I’ve just grieved in silence.
I think about my dad everyday. I feel incredible guilt knowing that my actions and the lack of my presence in his life, in some way, contributed to his state of mind and ultimately his decision to take his own life. I feel guilty that I selfishly thought I would have all this time to get to know him so I wasted the time I did have. I feel sadness that I will never get to sit down and talk to my dad and tell him that I do love him and always have. I feel regret that he’ll never get to meet my daughter, his granddaughter. I feel angry that I will have to explain to my daughter one day why her grandpa isn’t around. I feel angry that my dad choose to leave this life instead of facing it. I feel sad that we are all here to deal with it and pick up the pieces of our hearts without our dad.
I look at pictures of my dad from my childhood, and I can see how proud he was to have me as a daughter and I can see how much he loved me. I hate that he may have died thinking that I didn’t love him. That breaks my heart all over again.
I do love you Dad. I love you and I miss you.
I was thrilled when I heard on the Today Show this morning that David Goldman had finally been granted visitation and was able to see his son, Sean, after a very long 4.5 year struggle. I had to choke back tears as I listened to David Goldman being interviewed over the phone, especially when he described seeing his son again as “the most beautiful thing since seeing his birth.”.
This story really touched my heart when I first heard about last fall and I have been following it ever since. I couldn’t believe what had happened to him and everything he was going through to get his son back. For those of you not familiar with David’s story, he has been fighting to get his son back since 2004 when his wife (the son’s mother) took him to Brazil on what was supposed to be a vacation but never returned. David has spent the last 4.5 years fighting to get his son back. Sean’s mother passed away last year, which you would think would have meant David and Sean would be reunited, but instead custody of Sean was given to his Brazilian step-father. The whole thing is so sad and so ridiculous. For all the details on David’s story and to find out what you can do to help visit his website, BringSeanHome.org.
Of course, this is not the end of the fight. David is still fighting to regain custody of his son and finally bring him home. I’m so glad that he has finally seen his son after all this time. I can imagine hugging his son again after a very long 4.5 year wait was the best feeling ever. I wish David all the best in his battle to get his son back and hope it is all over soon.

After watching Daniel Sturridge and Luis Suarez pick apart Sunderland on Sunday, Liverpool boss Brendan Rodgers pondered whether there is a better strike partnership in the Barclays Premier League.
The duo scored all three goals between them as the Reds climbed to second in the division by claiming a 3-1 victory over the struggling Black Cats at the Stadium of Light this afternoon.
Sturridge was equally as clinical in creating chances as converting them during the 90 minutes - the No.15 set up each of his teammate's goals - and Rodgers was ebullient in his praise of the pair post-match.
"I'm not sure there's two better in the league, in all honesty," the Northern Irishman said at his press conference following the final whistle.
"We've changed the structure of our team a bit to allow us to pass it better - we've still got a lot of work to do - but also to fit in with the type of players that we have.
"Those two are right up there with the best in the country. You saw that today.
"For the [second] goal, Steven Gerrard makes an absolutely breath-taking pass and Daniel's touch, pace and power took him in. He showed the quality to roll the ball in for Luis to get his finish.
"Those two will only get better; you see the understanding. We have done a lot of work with them together in training. They looked very bright today.
"They are two different types as well, which makes it hard for defenders because one has pace, power and two good feet. The other is a wriggler and can shift his body very quickly to end up in the box. The dynamic of them is very good.
"They have worked a lot in training - it's not just something that has been dropped in. We looked at 3-4-1-2 towards the end of last season.
"We did some work on it, looking at Luis coming back, and they have struck up a very good partnership.
"You saw from today - they want what's best for the team. Goalscorers want to score goals and they are judged by how many goals they score and how many assists they make.
"What we ask them to do is make sure that they can be their individual but none of them are bigger than the group and the team.
"You saw that today - Daniel got one and set up two. Towards the end, the counter-attack, Luis played in Daniel and got in the box to get the return pass.
"Both of them have the hunger to score goals but what's more important is that if one of them can't score, they set up the other one. That's what they have done."
Suarez was making his return to Premier League football against the Mackems, after featuring in the Capital One Cup earlier this week, and marked his comeback with a double salvo.
Rodgers added: "He's not fazed by much. He has a remarkable mentality - his determination and the steel in his mind-set is phenomenal. He is just so focused.
"For us, he is like a new signing coming back into the team. It's great for the team and the supporters.
"Our supporters deserve to see someone of that quality and his talent deserves to be out on the field rather than sat in the stands. That's something we're working very hard to make sure happens this season.
"He hasn't been cocooned out of the way and then come into football. When he was not working in training, I gave him the opportunity to go back to Uruguay for a bit.
"He is someone who loves football and I knew how much it was hurting for him not to be playing. But he wanted to stay, he wanted to work - he did lots of extra sessions, finishing sessions and conditioning sessions.
"He knew that when he came back he wanted to be up to speed. You're never going to be totally up to speed but it would be very hard for anyone to say that today he wasn't very good.
"That's a great credit to him and also our conditioning team that have put him through the paces."
Switching his focus to Sturridge, who has now found the net seven times in 2013-14 and 18 times in 24 matches since joining Liverpool, the boss described the Englishman as 'phenomenal'.
"All Daniel needed was an opportunity to play, he needed confidence like any player," he said.
"When he played at Chelsea, he was coming in and had to really make an impact. The only way he felt he could maybe make an impact was to get goals.
"We have done a lot of work on his game. He's not an out-and-out No.9, he's a player that can play and move, drop in short and go behind. He understands that I will allow his talent to flourish.
"You only have to see how hard he is working, how hard he presses the game. He is an outstanding footballer. When he is not on his game, he is good; but when he is on his game, he is phenomenal. He's an outstanding talent."
Today's result lifted Rodgers' charges up to second place in the standings, two points behind Arsenal, following a run of three games without a win in all competitions.
"Defensively we were solid today as well," the manager continued.
"We limited Sunderland to shots from outside the box, we were never really under pressure inside the box. It was a really good team performance today.
"I was delighted with the result. We had a really good performance but didn't get anything during the week at Old Trafford.
"So to come away, get the result and perform, in parts of the game, like we did was very pleasing.
"Kevin Ball had a reaction from his team, he has obviously only been in charge of them for a short period of time but you could see the intensity and the focus they had.
"We always had to be alert; we defended very well and on the counter-attack looked very threatening. It was a very good victory for us."
A final question to the manager did not involve the Reds' first team at all; rather a journalist asked the 40-year-old for his reaction to Liverpool Ladies' Women's Super League triumph on Sunday.
"I've been involved in their story from pre-season; we had them in training with us over pre-season," he concluded.
"It's big congratulations to them. Arsenal, for as long as I can remember, were the team that dominated women's football for many years.
"For them to go on and win the league is a great credit to them and the hard work they have put in. Hopefully they have a good night and a good couple of days. It's brilliant for them."

POLICE have today named the two men who were killed in a plane crash in Perthshire.
Andrew Thompson, 37, from Chester and John MacKinnon, 53, from Ross-shire were in a light aircraft which left Inverness Airport and went missing, four miles west of Dundee yesterday afternoon.
The plane was due to land at Dundee Airport at noon, but when it lost communication a major search and rescue operation was launched.
Wreckage of the plane was later found near Abernyte in Perthshire and police confirmed the two men had died.
A report has been sent to the Procurator Fiscal and the crash is being investigated by Police Scotland.

Famous Firsts: Zacky Vengeance on The Monkees and messing with illegal fireworks
Avenged Sevenfold's guitarist Zacky Vengeance reveals his musical firsts
Avenged Sevenfold might be one of the biggest metal bands of all time (and on the cover of Metal Hammer), but they weren't always the progressive-leaning, fire-breathing monster we know and love. Guitarist and founding member Zacky Vengeance guides us through his early dabbles with heavy music through his discovery of Poison, Monkees disappointment, and the joys of illegal fireworks.
What was the first single you ever bought?
“The first single I ever bought was Something To Believe In by Poison. I was about seven years old and that song would come on the radio and I thought it was so good. It's a cheesy ballad. I begged my mom to take me to buy it. I have no idea why I was so into it, I saw the music video, I thought they were women ha ha! I loved the fact that they were playing instruments, I thought it was cool. I didn't really have much to base my musical preference on, when you're young you just like what you like.”
What was the first album you ever bought?
“My first album was Flesh & Blood by Poison – I was a big fan of Poison! It's what the radio and MTV was playing non-stop, and I just happened to be parked in front of the TV, I guess. I don't listen to Poison so much now, all that stuff is really fun to listen to though. Going back to '80s metal and arena-rock, all that stuff will always have a place in my heart. When I was a kid I was listening to Poison followed by Paula Abdul, that was my playlist because I was surrounded by what my mom and my older sister were playing. When I really started branching off and discovering my cousin's collections, I came across Metallica's Black Album and that was one of the first heavy albums that I loved. The first music that really struck a cord with me was punk rock, I got NOFX's Punk In Drublic and that was the album that changed my life because it turned me onto bands like Pennywise and Bad Religion, Green Day and Offspring, Rancid... they were the bands that stuck out.”
What was the first gig you ever went to?
“I saw The Monkees. My parents took me and I think I knew Daydream Believer, the Monkees' theme song and that was it ha ha. I remember it being at minor league baseball stadium, and I don't remember being too impressed. It sucks too 'cause of all the concerts I couldn't gone to, going to see The Monkees fucking sucked. It's cool to talk about now, but my dad went to see Black Sabbath's first ever Los Angeles concert and my mom and dad went to every Zeppelin concert when they came through town... my parents were into rock back when it was fucking unbelievable. But they chose to take me to the fucking Monkees ha ha.”
What was the first gig you ever played?
“I played a very very small coffee shop in Huntington Beach with my first band ever called Society Down. We were trying to be so crust punk with liberty spikes, and there were literally three people in the crowd – one being M Shadows, one being our friend Joel, and one guy that just sat down in the wrong coffee shop at the wrong time. I think we played five songs. But Avenged Sevenfold's first concert ever was at The Walnut Creek Civic Center in California and we were unbelievably sloppy. We didn't have any real gear, we didn't know how to play, we were trying to flail our guitars around to try and incite a mosh pit... but it turned out pretty good, it was fun!”
How was the first Avenged Sevenfold tour?
“The very first tour was crazy. Everyone was packed into a van with all of the gear, the drives were way too long, playing shows in front of fucking nobody and showing up to places not getting paid fucking anything. But when you're young, you're crazy, you're all packed in sleeping in a van, it's pretty cool. The very first tour was with a band called From Autumn To Ashes and no-one knew who they were, no-one knew who we were, and they had travelled all the way from Long Island, New York, to the West Coast and stayed at Matt's parents' house. I think we bought a van to follow them because they had some tour dates booked and were like 'Why don't you just come with us?'. It was awesome.
"It was the first time we left California as a band so naturally as soon as you get out and head into the desert, you can buy all sorts of fireworks that are illegal, so we spent all of our food money on fireworks! We'd wait until someone in another band – or our own band – fell asleep, and we'd light off a bunch of illegal fireworks and shut the van doors. Or in hotel rooms. We were so lucky we didn't kill anybody or burn down the hotels. We were so stupid, ha ha! That was about as much trouble as we could get into at that point 'cause we didn't have any fans, there wasn't anybody coming to the concerts, so we took out our frustrations trying to blow stuff up.”

Wow Leafy! That is a lot to take on. I agree with all of the others. What does your son say about your possibly taking in the grands? I like AppleCori's suggestion about just taking in your granddaughter or the two youngest if that is at all possible to split them up. Maybe it would be good for the boys as she suggested. Either way it's a lot and kudos to you for even thinking about this. I honestly don't know what I would do since I don't have any grandchildren so don't know what that is like. Hugs and pray for answers.

Miley Cyrus has gone through a lot of changes over the years, but she said in a recent interview on the ITV show Lorraine that she finally feels like she knows who she is, personally and professionally, E! News reports.
"I want people to see me be the same at the airport or a gas station as they would on stage," she said. "For entertainers, there's these two separate lives, separate people, and I only want to be one person."
Miley's opened up about everything from being pansexual and gender-fluid to quitting weed, and she thinks that openness has ultimately given her the freedom to be herself, since everybody knows who she is. "I think that makes me have more freedom in my music, because I feel like I can really just be myself and my fans are so accepting of me," she said. "But it's just hard for people that are looking out from the outside inside my life all the time and going through every little thing."
She also told the story behind her latest single Malibu, and it has a similar theme: being comfortable with her life. She wrote it in the back of an Uber on her way to the set of The Voice. As she looked out at the beach, she was thinking about how cool it was for her to be living there. "That is a dream come true. For me, a vacation was the time that I'd get to be by the beach," she said. "I grew up on a farm and I never thought this was going to be my reality."
After writing the lyrics in the car, she sang the song to her mom and friends when she got to the set, and she felt like she was "letting people into a moment that was just me feeling grateful for where I'm at."

Search found 1 match
Search found 1 match • Page 1 of 1
Back in the late 80s or early 90s my family and I were heading out west pulling our tent camper. We were headed to Balmorhea. We were on I-10 out past Ozona. I looked to my left and a B-1 bomber was hugging the ground and dropping into the valley from the top of a mesa. I could tell it was going to fly right over us. The family was dozing so I yelled to wake them up. Sure enough the plane buzzed right over us at about 200 feet wagging his wings. We watched as he climbed and went over the mesa to the north. Makes a person proud.

Talia Shepard is a Adult Model from United States. She was born in Texas on October 3, 1989. She is listed on FreeOnes since 2010 and is currently ranked 167th place. She currently has 266 gallery links and 1 videos in her own FreeOnes section.
Our records show that Talia Shepard is currently active which means she is still making movies, doing live shows and/or doing photo shoots.

Hey Clarksville, ‘Tis the season for all things spooky, so we are excited to share this #featurefriday today! We met up with David from Unknown Origin FX, LLC this week and got a tour of his certified home business!
David is a Coast Guard veteran who suffered a traumatic brain injury while serving. While he was going through brain trauma recovery with the Navy, his art therapy class and sculpting in particular, proved to be quite therapeutic. He was highly encouraged to stick with it. This new found talent paired together with his love for Halloween and scary movies, led him to start creating. David wasn’t solely focused on the mask making at first. He set up one year at a show with some other art he had created as well, but noticed most people were interested in the few masks he brought with him. He later entered his first competition at Scarefest in the amateur category, but the judges moved him up to the Professional category, which he took first place in! You can also find two Leatherface pieces in the photos, the first one autographed by Leatherface himself, who gave him advice to make it with real stitching. When David came back to him at a later show with the newer piece, he remembered him and was impressed with his work and took the time to step away and autograph that piece as well.
David travels to different shows and festivals selling his work, which you can also find online. Just head over to his page and give him a follow and you can find the link to his online store there as well! We loved getting to spend time with David and his family this week, and can’t believe how “alive” his creations feel! Be sure to show him some love Clarksville!

The UK's fastest-growing regional news network
13°C | 5°C
12°C | 8°C
13°C | 7°C
See the full forecast for your area.
Sponsored by Britelite.
Home Canterbury News Article
by Ed Targett
The popular brother of a British rower has collapsed and died at a party aged just 24.
Aaron Ritchie, who worked as an aerial technician and DJ, was playing music at a party near Herne Bay when he had a seizure..
Funeral plans for the "fun-loving" DJ, pictured left, have been put on hold after it emerged a post-mortem revealed no natural cause of death. An inquest will now need to be held.
Aaron's elder brother, rower Dan Ritchie, said he was devastated and described his only brother as "a great fun-loving guy".
He said: "No one deserves to die at 24. He'd had a few drinks and went into a seizure.
"They worked on him for 30 minutes, got halfway to hospital and he was gone. He was someone I could always talk to, have a laugh with. He was my only brother."
"he was the sort who would go out at two in the morning to help a friend if they needed it..." – aaron ritchie's father john
Dad John Ritchie, from Mickleburgh Hill, added: "He was a one-off. Aaron was Aaron. He drove us crazy but he loved life. He wasn't particularly academically gifted but he was really talented with his hands.
"He was the sort who would go out at two in the morning to help a friend if they needed it. He was also a really talented free-diver.
"I remember diving with him and he went down almost 15 metres; no weights, no fins. He lay on the sea bed and blew 'smoke' rings up at me. He was really gifted.
"We will soon find out when they are releasing his body as the post-mortem shows it wasn't a natural cause of death so there will have to be an inquest.
"I said to him a few weeks ago 'what are you doing with yourself?' and he just told me he was enjoying life; he had this mobile disco that he did with a friend and he seemed to be very popular. It's a huge loss for the family."
One witness, who did not want to be named, recalled the harrowing moments after Aaron collapsed in Prospect Farm, Greenhill, where he had a caravan, on Saturday morning.
She said: "There was a party and he was on the decks DJ'ing.
"He'd been out for a few beers in Canterbury and came back to Prospect Farm.
"I heard people screaming and saw him having a seizure. People put him in the recovery position and called an ambulance.
"The ambulance crew were working on him as hard as they could for 30 minutes in the ambulance; you could see it rocking as they tried to resuscitate him.
"They didn't leave in a hurry with sirens blaring so I guess he must have died while still at the farm."
Police spokesman Jon Greene said: "Kent Police was notified that a 24-year-old man had been taken to hospital by ambulance early on Saturday morning. He was pronounced dead shortly after arriving."
Margate-born rower Dan Ritchie has previously won silver metals at the Rowing World Championships and narrowly missed out on representing Team GB at the Olympics.
Click here for more news from Canterbury.
Click here for more news from around the county.

Mason Mount is now not only finally being accepted and recognised as a top class player by his own clubs fanbase, he is now being recognised by the world wide footballing community and getting the plaudits he deserves.
Oddly, a very small section of online Chelsea fans gave Mount a lot of stick and abuse last season and even this season, some of them didn’t rate him or harshly overly criticised him. However, most of us fans knew the player we had on our hands, and he has done even more to prove that by assisting the goal to see him and Chelsea become European Champions over the weekend – perfect response to the haters.
As well as this, he has now been nominated for both the Premier League player of the season this year, but also the Premier League young player of the season.
That really is quite some achievement to add to his Champions League winners medal from Saturday!

Family Life Series IV: The Meeting
By. Kelly Mullins
Jack loved his father-in-law; he wondered if that was wrong, perhaps he should hate the man with a passion. But he couldn't, not after turning to look at the woman next to him who was smiling and chatting to the aforementioned father-in-law about the birthday plans they'd made for their daughter's upcoming first birthday. The almost-one-year-old was in her car seat dozing in the back next to her grandfather.
This little cross country family trip had been Jacob's maneuvering, hence the son-in-law that was about to hop in the back seat and kiss the man. The Tok'ra operative had come barreling through the Stargate that morning (at least, that's how his wife had told it) demanding to get to Washington so that he could debrief the President on some issues that were of vital importance to Earth/Tok'ra relations. Selmak had refused an airplane claiming she was fighting off a cold for Jacob and airplanes made her efforts too difficult.
Reluctantly, General Andrews had let them go, he didn't want to keep the Tok'ra from passing on something vital and inadvertently get the planet blown up. If Jack didn't already detest the man, he'd probably be loving Andrews right now too.
Their little drive was going pretty well, 10 hours into it and Jack was about to let Jacob take over. He could tell the only reason Sam was still awake was to make sure he was too, besides, he really was starting to get tired.
The next time Jack was aware of the world around him was his wife waking him up.
"Can you get Carey out? I'm going to go get us checked in." He looked around to discover they were in downtown DC, in front of a hotel.
"Sure honey, where's dad?"
"Getting a cart for our luggage, he's got to take the car and go straight to the Whitehouse."
Jack's daughter, the light of his life, woke up and started screaming the second he picked her up. His father-in-law chose that moment to show back up and, using all of his Tok'ra strength and engineering ability managed to get all of their belongings onto one rickety looking cart. With a kiss on his granddaughter's forehead and a sympathetic look directed at Jack, he sped off into the light of the rising sun. Between the two of them, he and Sam managed to coax Carey back to sleep. But, when he reawakened, both his wife and daughter were gone, the clock told him it was noon, and his nose told him a shower would probably be advised before joining fellow people with noses to search for his family.
Twenty minutes later, showered, shaved, and freshly clothed, Jack ventured downstairs into the hotel's restaurant, here he found his two missing family members sitting down to lunch with Jacob.
"Hey Jake, how's the Prez?"
"He's good, *very* excited about the minor changes to the Tok'ra host selection criteria. He feels, as I do, that it was indeed a matter of grave urgency and is requesting our continued presence for the next three or four days." Jack loved not only Jacob, but the President as well. He was actually starting to get worried, as a tough military-man, was he allowed to love so many men?
"That's great news; the President should be as informed as possible." Jack replied a massive grin on his face as he took his wife's hand under the table.
The next day found them on a private tour of the Whitehouse. Their 'guide' the Chief of Staff or something, was taking them everywhere. They'd seen the East Wing, the West Wing, and even the kitchens. This all culminated in the Oval Office, where the President finally got to see Carey, as he had requested several months before.
Following a cozy get-together with the President, Jacob and Carey stayed behind for an informal dinner with the President and First Lady while Jack and Sam left to play tourists.
"Think they're upset we didn't stay for dinner?"
"No, I'm sure both of them more than understand our situation; we almost never get time to go out to dinner on our own. We're a family, but it is nice to take the time out once in a while to consider giving Carey a little brother or sister." Jack smiled suggestively at his wife before pulling her into a sideways embrace as they walked through the darkening city.
"You're crazy, Carey's got us on our heads when we're left alone with her and you want to add another? Just wait until she discovers sugar and caffeine make a good combination... I swear she's definitely got your energy." Their beloved daughter had only started to 'walk' a couple of weeks earlier, and unlike with crawling, she seemed to be off to a running start, managing to get lost within seconds when one of her parents turned their backs.
"Ah, as much as I'd like to debate my sanity with you further darling, we're here." Jack directed her into what looked like a little hole in the wall, but once they were inside and the door was closed behind them, it started to look more and more like something straight out of the Godfather.
Once they'd placed their orders and the wine had been delivered, Sam was mighty suspicious. "You've been here before?"
"A few times, no one ever comes here if someone else didn't show them to it first."
"I thought you got lost every time you come to DC?" She was smiling, though after being married to her for a couple of years, Jack had decided that didn't always mean she was happy.
"Some things are worth not losing." He took her hand across the table, and in a grand gesture managed to pull it to his mouth for a kiss without knocking over any of their glasses.
The food really turned out to be to die for, as was the wine, which perfectly accented everything they were brought, all the way through dessert. By the time they had walked back to the hotel it was after midnight, and they were very glad they hadn't had to go all the way back to the Whitehouse and explain to Jacob where they had been out so late. As it was, when they arrived in their room they found that all of Carey's things had walked off and a note encouraging them to sleep in in the morning had been left by Jacob and Selmak. So they took their time getting to sleep, enjoying their precious time before they went back to being Carey's parents, a job they loved, but one which could occasionally be trying on their Mommy/Daddy time.
The next morning Jack awoke to Jacob standing over him, a very uncomfortable situation given that he was stark naked, and only covered by a sheet that felt paper thin.
"Jake?" He asked warily, he wasn't sure this could be a good thing, if it had been nothing the man could have called and waited for him to be decent before barging in on him.
"Sorry Jack, I had to take the opportunity of Sam taking Carey around the corner to grab us all some breakfast."
"Use the opportunity for what?" Jack asked, sitting up and trying to wrap the sheet as much around his waist as possible while Jacob sat down next to him in the space Sam had vacated on the bed earlier.
"To tell you why we're really here, why we've come to see the President on some big *emergency*."
"Jake, we all know there's no emergency, you're a horrible actor."
"That's not what I've been hiding Jack, if you'd just let me get this out before your wife walks in on us." Jack nodded his head to show Jacob he could be silent. "Over the last couple of days, there has been a coup at SGC, General Andrew Andrews has been formally charged with several offences and is now facing court martial. I had to keep Sam away while all of this was going on because I didn't want anything else affecting her reputation in the Air Force."
"So Andrews is no more? How the hell did you manage that one?"
"Careful planning, what do you think the President and I were really talking about the day we arrived? That was when the plan was put into action and the General was forcibly removed from Cheyenne Mountain. They are currently looking for a new Commander, if you're in the market for a job."
"Sorry Jake, I'm too busy to run SGC, have you seen the amount of incident reports Siler files in a week? The man should be put in a box so he can't be a danger to himself." He sighed deeply, leaning back against the headboard of the bed. "Besides, I'd done ordering Sam around; she's gotten too fond of giving me orders at home."
"That is true, she's kind of adopted that way of thinking with me too. When your children have their own children, they gain a bit more leverage over you." He smiled ruefully. "I'd like to see Sam take the job, with us using more and more ships, Stargate traffic has decreased exponentially, she's going to be due for a promotion in two months, she'll be a full bird Colonel... it wouldn't be a bad command position for her."
"Sammy a Colonel? Phew, time has just flown past. Wasn't she just a Captain a couple years ago?"
"I'm not even going to ask about your memory, Selmak's helped with mine, so I guess you've just *forgotten* Sam was already a *Lieutenant* *Colonel* before you married her."
"She'd never take it, Sam loves the lab work, and all that administration would make her crazy."
At that moment they heard the key card in the door, Jacob had nearly vaulted the bed, and been through his door, closing it behind him before Sam actually managed to get it to successfully read her card and let her in. Jack, noticing that it would look kind of weird for him to be tightly wrapped in the sheet, tried to smooth things out and act like he was just getting up.
"Care, go get Daddy." Sam said to the baby toddling across the hotel room, as she went and placed their bags of food on the table. Finding his boxers on the floor where, embarrassingly enough, his father-in-laws feet had been not minutes before, Jack quickly pulled them on under the sheets before grabbing his daughter up in a bear hug.
After making Carey feel sufficiently welcome, Jack left to shower quickly before seeing his father-in-law for the second time that day. It was much easier to face the man with pants on; their acting skills around Sam were getting better, though Jack was already regretting that he couldn't be at SGC to see her face when she discovered the news, maybe he could talk Rya'c into taking a Handy-Cam to work with him... nah the kid was too straight laced.
"Sorry, Sam," Jacob said while they were eating.
"We have get back to Colorado, the Tok'ra recalled me a couple hours ago... some big Council emergency."
"It's all right Dad, this has been a wonderful vacation, even if we can't stay." She smiled, showing she completely understood her duties and that of her father, there were just some things that had to be sacrificed for Earth, and one of those things was occasionally her happiness.
The drive home was actually fun, Jack and Jacob were both noticeably in good moods, which kept Carey awake for most of the trip, continuously 'singing-along' to her favorite kiddie songs her family had brought. The three adults rotated driving over the 25 hour trip, allowing each other to sleep when they needed. Once back in Colorado Springs, Jack carried Carey in to her crib, where she instantly fell asleep, and then went back out to help Jacob and Sam put the luggage in the living room before the two of them headed off to the base. As Sam was kissing her sleeping baby goodbye and making sure her Protected Persons Medallion was firmly in place on her little chest, Jack and Jacob shared a manly hug.
"Thanks for this, all of this." Jack said as Sam came back into the room, clearly ready to leave so that she could find out what on earth (or elsewhere) was so important it couldn't be fixed without her. "Love you." Jack whispered, taking her into his arms and giving her a lingering kiss.
Five hours later, after Jack had taken a nap, done six loads of laundry, and put dinner in the oven, Sam came home. Without saying a word, she jumped him, pressing her lips frantically to his, thankfully, they were in the kitchen and he was able to quickly turn around and rest her against the counter; his knees were not what they once were and could barely support his own weight, let alone both of theirs. "Good day at work, honey?" Jack asked, a cocky grin on his face as Sam started unbuttoning his shirt.
"You have no idea. He's gone, he's really gone." He didn't need an explanation, so he just renewed the contact of their mouths.
As they continued to express their joy at the demise of General Andrews, Jack realized that this could be the beginning of a trend, probably not this magnitude every evening, but Sam coming home happy after work again. He had never even gotten to see it while they were married, but he'd seen her leave SGC while they had been working together, and unless there had been a horrible tragedy, she always looked happy when she left.
A happy Carter was a wonderful Carter, and he hoped to be getting to know her a lot better in their lives still yet to come.
End (29 July 2003)

Priscilla Presley's marriage to Elvis made her the envy of many, but it wasn't all glitz and glamour behind closed doors. The pair "didn't go out" and "truly lived in a bubble," Presley told ITV talk show Loose Women on Wednesday, per the Huffington Post. "I just kind of followed what he did. You lived his life," continued Presley, who started dating Elvis at age 14 and married him at 21, though he was 10 years her senior. "You really kind of lost yourself." Not even alone with Elvis could she be entirely herself. "He taught me, even in having a relationship, about always having a mystique—never revealing everything," she said, per Yahoo.
For example, not once during six years of marriage did Elvis see his wife without makeup on, says Presley, 71. "He never wanted to see me getting dressed. He wanted to see the result of getting dressed," she said, as quoted by Country Living. While her teenage years were "fun," she didn't experience them "as a normal girl." Only when she began attending a dance class did she realize how unusual their relationship was, said Presley, who divorced Elvis in 1973. "I left because … I needed to find out what the world was like," she said. "I didn't really know who I was." Even then, they still loved each other, she said, and left the courthouse holding hands. (HBO is putting the finishing touches on a new Elvis Presley film.)

Unimpressed is an understatement!! First she tried to draw blood from my right arm 2 times and finally decided it wouldn't work there and then switched arms - that worked immediately.
I had blood drawn 4 weeks prior to my surgery and the day before surgery the surgical center called and said they never received the report. I had to get the phone number for them and they called.
It was NEVER sent out. The lab slip had the fax # and address on it as clear as day.
I will never, ever go back to Lab Corp in Frazer again.

Tyga Agrees to Pay Off $200K Jewelry Debt
Tyga has paid off a debt he owed a jeweler since 2013.
Tyga was grilled about his finances in court recently, and his girlfriend Kylie Jenner was subpoenaed. But, before she was scheduled to appear, he made good on his debt.
On Tuesday (Nov. 11), the rapper's lawyer appeared in court and told the judge Tyga has made $100,000 payment toward the debut... and make the other half by Nov. 17.
TMZ points out that Tyga himself paid the bill, without help from Kylie.

Tobit, CHAPTER 11
As they drew near to Kaserin, which is opposite Nineveh,
Raphael said: “You know how we left your father.
Let us hurry on ahead of your wife to prepare the house while they are still on the way.”
So both went on ahead together, and Raphael said to him, “Take the gall in your hand!” And the dog ran along behind them.
Meanwhile, Anna sat watching the road by which her son was to come.
When she saw him coming, she called to his father, “Look, your son is coming, and the man who traveled with him!”
Raphael said to Tobiah before he came near to his father: “I know that his eyes will be opened.
Apply the fish gall to his eyes, and the medicine will make the white scales shrink and peel off from his eyes; then your father will have sight again and will see the light of day.”
Then Anna ran up to her son, embraced him, and said to him, “Now that I have seen you again, son, I am ready to die!” And she sobbed aloud.
Tobit got up and stumbled out through the courtyard gate to meet his son. Tobiah went up to him
with the fish gall in his hand and blew into his eyes. Holding him firmly, he said, “Courage, father.” Then he applied the medicine to his eyes, and it made them sting.
Tobiah used both hands to peel the white scales from the corners of his eyes. Tobit saw his son and threw his arms around him.
Weeping, he exclaimed, “I can see you, son, the light of my eyes!” Then he prayed,
“Blessed be God,
blessed be his great name,
and blessed be all his holy angels.
May his great name be with us,
and blessed be all the angels throughout all the ages.
God it was who afflicted me,
and God who has had mercy on me.
Now I see my son Tobiah!”
Then Tobit went back in, rejoicing and praising God with full voice. Tobiah related to his father how his journey had been a success; that he had brought back the money; and that he had married Raguel’s daughter Sarah, who was about to arrive, for she was near the gate of Nineveh.
Rejoicing and blessing God, Tobit went out to the gate of Nineveh to meet his daughter-in-law. When the people of Nineveh saw him coming, walking along briskly, with no one leading him by the hand, they were amazed.
Before them all Tobit proclaimed how God had shown mercy to him and opened his eyes. When Tobit came up to Sarah, the wife of his son Tobiah, he blessed her and said: “Welcome, my daughter! Blessed be your God for bringing you to us, daughter! Blessed are your father and your mother. Blessed be my son Tobiah, and blessed be you, daughter! Welcome to your home with blessing and joy. Come in, daughter!” That day there was joy for all the Jews who lived in Nineveh.
Ahiqar and his nephew Nadin were also on hand to rejoice with Tobit. Tobiah’s wedding feast was celebrated with joy for seven days, and many gifts were given to him.

Dun Dun Dun! The wait is over! My pick for lunch was Indian food! We went to the Brick Lane Curry House and it was my first time eating there. Chelsea and I enjoy eating Indian food together and trying new foods so it was a win win. The Brick Lane Curry House had a buffet for lunch, which I like because you can try a lot of foods at once. Well, obviously, that’s what a buffet is. Anyway, there were a lot of different options.
There was a soup station and it had mushroom soup. It was so good and tasted like cream of mushroom soup. I didn’t have more than a cup because it was so rich and I wanted to save room for the rest of my lunch.
There was a salad station with cut up cucumbers and carrots with containers of different sauces including a yogurt sauce and chutney. They were good but not very seasoned. We were surprised at this because Indian food is usually very flavorful, sometimes too much!
On to the actual lunch buffet, I tried a little bit of everything!
My plate had Tandoori Chicken, Chicken Tikka Masala, green beans and zucchini with coconut (I don’t know what this dish was called), red peppers, eggplant and chilis in a brown sauce (I don’t know what this dish was called), and lentils in a brown sauce (I think it’s called Daal Makhani). There was also rice on my plate.
The tandoori chicken was good, a little dry. The chicken tikka masala was good too; the sauce was creamy. The green bean dish was delicious! I’ve never had anything like it. It was sweet and savory all at the same time. I also really liked both dishes in the brown sauce. They were very flavorful. I had seconds on both dishes in the brown sauce as well as the coconut dish!
For dessert, there was orange mush for lack of a better description. Sorry, I don’t know the name of this dish either but it was made of sweet potatoes and carrots. It was super sweet and flavorful. It seemed like there was maple syrup, cardamon, cinnamon and nutmeg in it. There was a little too much seasoning but I really liked it and had seconds! Chelsea wasn’t a big fan. Oh, there was also tea with milk too. I didn’t like it because I don’t like tea with milk but Chelsea did.
Overall, I really liked this restaurant and am looking forward to going back. I also like that most Indian food is gluten free too.

forgive me if this has been covered, however nothing would come up in a search, so here goes:
I have a red 2002 r1150rt, and need to locate some touch up paint. I have been searching high and low to 1) locate the exact color of my bike and 2) locate some touch-up paint.
It seems that what I have is called Piedmont Red, although I can't confirm that. I was also told that the color code is 911, but seems to also be iffy, as people have stated that the color "codes" under the seat aren't really the color codes.
any help would be appreciated.

|A memorial card printed for the Archbishop.
The following obituary from an unknown newspaper elegantly describes Archbishop McNeil's life:
"All of Toronto Sorrows
"Toronto is one of the most ardently Protestant cities in Canada, but the whole community profoundly regrets the death of Most Reverend Neil McNeil, the Roman Catholic archbishop. His Grace was a native of Canada and his blood was a blending of Irish and Scotch strains. His life work and his character were such as to endear him to Canadians of every creed and every racial origin.
"Neil McNeil had a humble beginning. His father was a village blacksmith in Cape Breton, a man of sterling character and giant physique who made himself a person of local consequence by sheer worth. Neil was one of eleven children and at the anvil under his father's supervision learned lessons of industry and honesty. At an early age he was destined for the church; at 28 years he already was a doctor of divinity. As a priest he ministered to lonely souls in the sparsely-settled districts of Newfoundland, trudging rocky trails with a pack on his back in storm and wintry weather. He served for a number of years as editor of a church paper and as president of a college, became bishop of St. George's, Newfoundland, in 1895, when 44 years old, and in 1910 was chosen as archbishop of Vancouver. He was doing truly splendid work on the Pacific coast and setting up many new churches, schools and convents when he was surprised to receive word from Rome of his appointment to the larger task at Toronto. He was so attracted by the opportunities he found in the west that he freely stated on his arrival here that if the choice had been his he would have remained in Vancouver.
"But he was needed in Toronto. The situation here in 1912 called for a diplomat to be in Wellesley Place, a man of broad vision and conciliatory manner who could formulate broad policies and command the respect of citizens of the Protestant faith. No other prelate possessed the required qualities in happier combination than they were to be found in the person of Archbishop McNeil. And so he came east to Ontario to earn for himself an extraordinarily large place in the affections of the people.
"The late archbishop was scholarly and versatile. He could speak Gaelic and Latin. He had a gifted pen and wrote many articles for newspapers and magazines. He was something of an authority on astronomy. If need be he could shoe a horse, repair an engine, build a road, draw plans for a building, do carpentering and act as architect and contractor. He had sound business judgment and was an efficient administrator. All of his talents were consecrated to the service of humanity and mother church.
"His Grace did not abate one jot of the proud claims of his church. But he had no love for controversy and preferred to gain support for his views by the gentleness of his spirit rather than by the logic or even the justness of his position. His heart was set on obtaining a fair proportion of the corporation tax for the primary schools of his church and many who do not belong to his faith will regret that he did not live to see the realization of that fond desire. Pomp and ceremony and vestments were all about him on occasions, but his spirit was ever distinguished by meekness and humility. His amiable, modest, almost shrinking manner was that of one who would be the servant of all. He was a natural democrat and was revered by the whole priesthood. A lovable man, one of God's good men, who never was too busy or too burdened with cares to enlist in some new enterprise for the promotion of human welfare, his passing is a great loss to the city as well as to the world-wide communion that commanded his soul's loyalty."

We are pleased to introduce you to, Elizabeth Ann Reuper. Her nickname and what she likes to be called is, Betsy. Betsy was born in Flushing, Queens New York on May 6th, 1943. Her parents’ names were Henry & Ruth Reuper and she has two siblings; a younger brother, Richard (nicknamed Dick) and an older sister, Doris.
Both of her parents were Math teachers up until her mother had children. After that, her father continued to teach, and her mother stayed at home. Her mother hired a maid, Helen, and she helped with the children and the house chores. Betsy remembers Helen being very kind and said that Helen even made her doll clothes which she has fond memories of.
Betsy described herself as a very quiet child and that she never really asked questions, all she can remember is her crying. She found that it was difficult for her to speak up for herself, so she showed her emotions through tears. Some of her fondest memories growing up though were playing with the other kids on the block, marble games, hop scotch on the sidewalks, roller skating, climbing trees, horseback riding, riding my bike, and traveling as a family. She told us that each year her family would travel during spring vacation to Florida. What Betsy enjoyed the most about these trips were sightseeing on the ride to Florida and she loved staying in different motels along the way. She remembers how great it was to meet new kids by the motel poolside.
In Junior High and Senior High, she played in the school band. She played the piano and clarinet and remembers playing the song “Beautiful Dreamer” on the piano. She did not enjoy the band nor the piano though so after she graduated from high school, she never played again.
She smiles when she thinks about herself driving at sixteen. She remembers learning how to drive and being taught by her patient father and mentioned how she loved driving around in her dad’s 1953 stick shift Mercury. At age Nineteen, she drove her own car and loved just to be able to drive around. She enjoyed taking trips, usually by herself, to Concord, New Hampshire. She really enjoyed being out and about. It made her feel free!
In 1962, after Claremont Secretarial School, she started her career at Grumman Aerospace Corporation where she was a Typist in a typing pool. After two years of employment, she mentioned that her boss asked her to seek help due to her constant tears. A psychologist was appointed to her through her job and she said that he helped her deal with her unresolved problems and she then continued to work for six years at the Corporation.
She then decided to move to Kentucky where she paid rent to her sister, Doris, who taught flute at a college. Down in Kentucky she took a course in Art and said she loved it! She received her first ever A for a grade and said that made her feel so accomplished and remembers the great feeling of doing a good job. She only lived in Kentucky for one year and then her mother made her come back home because she wanted her to find a full-time job. She decided to go back to Grumman’s and get a studio apartment nearby. After three years of that she decided to be done with the Corporation.
Betsy once had a very upsetting spell and told one of her best friends, Beth, that she wanted to commit suicide and at this time it came out that she had been raped. In return, Betsy’s friend told her mother what had happened to her. This is when her mother told her friend not to tell her until she was dead and buried, that at eighteen months of age, my mother left the gate open at the top of the stairs. Unfortunately, Betsy ended up falling down the wooden stairs in her walker and hit her head. Due to this horrible accident it caused a slight brain impairment and a back injury. Beth held it in for a while before she ended up telling Betsy what had happened to her. She recalls being so upset with her mother especially after all the suffering she went through. She never knew what was wrong with herself, she was picked on by her peers and was so hurt, and she ended up crying a lot. She never received good grades like her siblings and always thought she was born stupid.
The next stage in her life was when she got married to Walter. They dated for seven years before they got married. The day after they got married, they ended up moving to Germany! Nine months later, she divorced him because he was involved with Scientology. She then came back to the states and lived in an apartment. Her mother passed away in 1979.
In 1981, she said her illness of Bipolar Disorder came to the surface and she began having delusions and hallucinations constantly. They kept coming and coming and wouldn’t stop. She was in and out of psych wards and turned to hard liquor and would not stop drinking. At this time in her life, she realized that her Bipolar Disorder and drinking alcohol did not mix. It made it significantly worse. So, she sold her house in Concord, NH. She then started my new adventure in Franklin, NH here at the Peabody Home.
Betsy says how Peabody Home helped get her back on track. She was set up with physical therapy, a counselor and quit drinking completely. She found it very peaceful and felt complete here. She mentioned how she loved the staff and could feel how much they care for her. She has a friend named Nancy, who she enjoys visiting at the Peabody Home. She says Nancy and herself enjoy their friendship. She like to invite Nancy here for lunch because the food is homemade and delicious. They laugh and reminisce about old times! Betsey is offered many activities daily at Peabody Home but her favorite one is writing letters to family, friends, volunteers and staff. She also loves to watch her favorite shows on TV and frequently watches the Hallmark Channel. Another favorite activity for Betsy is sitting out on the Patio when the weather is nice and warm. She enjoys looking over at Odell Park, watching the birds (Bald Eagle/Herring), enjoys the flowers and listening to the children play.
As we wrapped up this discussion with Betsy she stated, “I would like to say Peabody Home is my home. It’s where I feel at peace and where I will always live.” It was a pleasure getting to know the story of Betsy and we hope you enjoy getting to know her as much as we did.

Once upon a time there was a King who lived in a castle; but he didn’t always understand his royalty and didn’t feel like he deserved to be held up on a pedastool.
He was taught early on that service to others assumed that making other people happy came before his own. Selflessness was the intended lesson; but it evolved into so much more than that because he believed that it was wrong to put self love before all. Taking care of himself was never a priority, and he found his joy and happiness in taking care of everyone else.
He didn’t realize that if he was too busy pleasing everyone, that he wasn’t being true to himself.
The King’s parents were so loving; they gave everything they could to make the King into the man he was intended to be. But it wasn’t actually what they said or did; the King learned most from their actions. His parents operated out of passion and love, their work ethic created a fire within their son. And although they gave too hard out of obligation sometimes, they eventually learned how to truly take care of themselves which in hindsight was the most powerful lesson of all.
Early in his life, the King left the castle for 10 years to explore life on his own. Before he left, he lived a very safe life; protected from the outside world under the umbrella of the kingdom. He had a girlfriend which he adored, but she didn’t join him on this journey. His leaving the kingdom was his journey to walk- all his own, and it turned out to be one of the best things that ever happened to him. He saw how the world really was; the good, bad and ugly. He learned how to build authentic relationships with people who had no clue who he was; he was able to open his heart and share his soul freely. He experienced love and heartbreak; success and failure.
The most important thing was that he learned his own personal strength; no more did he rely on his family, the church, or the kingdom to lift him up in the tough times.
The King relied solely on himself.
That personal strength turned into a passion for helping others do the same; and soon he was helping youth and troubled children find strength and power in themselves that they never knew existed. The King healed even more as he helped others heal; he developed a strong desire to empower others. He found tremendous success and began to grow into the person he was destined to be.
Of course, like most young men, the King got distracted by worldly things and left working with the children and youth to chase money. The new focus was fun and exciting, but never fulfilling. Prioritizing his health and happiness no longer mattered, and the King began to gain weight, lose self esteem, and allow others opinions to control how he lived his life. And although he left his true passion to chase money, he all of the sudden never seemed to have enough.
Like many people, he accepted his new life and “made the best of it”. He settled for mediocrity and completely forgot the greatness that was inside him.
His entire life, the King needs BIG things to get his attention, and the biggest change of his life was sparked by a medical crisis; the King broke his back. His workaholic life and mediocre existence came to a crashing halt the day he laid on the floor unable to move his legs.
After a month of agonizing pain, an 8 hour surgery and 8 months of rehabilitation; the King knew what he had to do to rebuild his life; he had to return to the Kingdom.
He really enjoyed the potential of being back home, and had all these amazing plans and goals rumbling inside his head and spirit. He began to work again, and the workaholic habits started to return, and he got distracted from those goals and plans, and soon lived in the monotony of the past 10 years all over again.
One day, he reunited with his girlfriend; the girl that he originally thought would be his Queen. Out of familiarity and comfort, they rekindled their love and quickly fell into their new life together. They married, and had the privilege of parenting and loving 2 princes and 1 princess. From outward appearances, their story of lost love reuniting was a picture perfect fairy tale- but the magic and bliss that the leads should feel in a fairy tale was missing. The King and who he believed with his whole heart was his Queen, were simply going through the motions.
The King did his very best to love and provide for his family, which caused him to not be home with them much. The distance between he and his wife grew more and more through the years; and one day the King’s world was completely devastated. He found out that his love, the supposed Queen, decided to bed with a pauper and began living out an affair while still living with the King.
“This isn’t how royalty should live. This isn’t how anyone should live”, thought the King. All of the sudden he felt completely alone; just him and his children, and they had to start all over again.
The King moved out of the supposed castle. No one full of love and joy can reside in a place he was betrayed; so the King build a new castle. One built out of love and passion, one filled with peace and love. He and the younger prince and princess began to thrive in their new castle, and slowly- through many hard feelings and self imposed purgatory; the King began to remember his worth.
The plans and goals that the King had when he returned to the Kingdom began coming back to the forefront of his mind. A friend asked him, “When were you the most happiest and productive in your life?” The King said, “That’s easy- it’s when I helped the kids and helped other people change their lives.” “Well”, his friend responded, “that is what you need to do.”
So the King rededicated his life to his passion, and his passion quickly became his mission. His life began to change dramatically, and with his whole heart began his journey to empower others and find their worth. And he is now able to do it better than ever because of his journey through the dark times, his inner strength and his renewed dedication for loving himself first.
That same friend that gave him the wonderful advice offered to meet the King on a trip; before life really took off and to celebrate the excitement of moving upward and onward. The King and his friend met in a magical place, and within 2 days they both realized that the magic wasn’t because of where they were, it was because they were together. Their souls began to intertwine, they lifted each other up to a new level of love and light, and they fell madly and passionately in love.
The King finally met his true Queen!
The King returned to the new castle that was filled with such peace, love and joy- and knew just one thing was missing, his Queen. Within a few months, the Queen moved in to the castle; and the royal family is together. Bloodlines don’t matter: love and energy does and this royal family is truly meant to be.
The King began to thrive, his passions for helping people and building others up were supported and encouraged by the Queen; and for the first time in the King’s life, he began to understand his royalty and the power and responsibilities that come with it. He is connected on a spiritual level to his Queen, and together they are helping each other vibrate higher and are now beginning to change the world!
The future is bright for the King, and he is tremendously blessed for the journey he has been on. If he hasn’t left the Kingdom; he never would have become the man he is today. If he hadn’t of been hurt and broken, he wouldn’t of learned how to build himself back up. And if he wouldn’t have gone through the tremendous heartbreak, he would never be able to appreciate the real love that he has now.
Forever and always, blessed beyond measure, and eternally grateful.

Lehnhoff's Landscaping, LLC
Services: Landscape Designers, Lawn Maintenance
No coupons available
Be the first to add a photo!
We would recommend them to any who asked, they did a very nice job on our patio and landscaping. The price was a little more than I was thinking of spending but Rob Lehnhoff worked with us and now I know why it was a little more expensive than i thought, the patio was nicer than I anticipated and they did several other things during the job that I didnt even ask them to do. Rob said it was all included in the price and he wanted to make sure the job was done right.
We did have to wait awhile for Rob to come out and meet us, present a proposal. He did a job down the street so we had seen his work and we knew it was worth waiting for him. They did a beautiful job on our patio and we decided to add several things during the project and Rob was very helpful and had a lot of good ideas. We are very happy with our job. Rob is going to have to get more help so he can get back to people quicker, but the work was top notch and we are glad we waited.
After the third message, they finally returned our call. I sat up the earliest appointment for a simple consultation, a week out. They had very limited availability, so I had to rearrange my schedule, but it was a big job so I was happy to. Until no one showed up. I called to confirm and got a return call an hour later that Rob was "stuck" in Virginia. The earliest they could reschedule was, again, a week away. All I could think about was their website's message, "Remember, whoever bids out your project stays with you throughout the entire project".
They just did a small drainage and bush trimming job for me. Owner came out and gave me a price, plus he seemed to really know his stuff. I told him to go ahead and get me on the schedule because I needed it done soon. They came out and started that afternoon and finished the next morning. Also I told him that I knew I would repair the disturbed drainage work areas myself, but they even took the time to cut the grass up in sections, they replaced the drain and then put the grass back. It was very professional and nice.
I am not one to normally comment on these kind of sites but we were very happy with Lehnhoff's Landscaping work at our house and we will be using in the future. They have done our landscape/hardscape work for the last 3-4 years. The house always looks great once they are done. Rob does sometimes take awhile to get back to me with a start date. I think he is so consumed with making sure he the point of contact with all his clients that he sometimes gets behind, but he always gets the job done for us and it always looks great.
Lenhoff’s Landscaping has done an amazing job throughout the patio project that my wife and I dreamt up. From our initial consultation to the execution of the project, Rob Lehnoff not only provided guidance and suggestions but also consistently came up with ideas to save us money by thinking out of the box. The team of employees that spent time at our house building our patio were not only knowledgeable but also very courteous and friendly. Special thanks to Jimmy and his son Jimmy who were great to talk with and answered all of our questions about the process as the project ensued. In general, an outstanding experience in both the service and the end product that Lehnhoff Landscaping provided. Our patio is perfect and I am sure we will be enjoying it for years to come.
One of the best companies to work with in Baltimore. Price was competitive, but what was most important to me was there vision. Not only were the ideas they had great but Robert and his guys were very particular when the work was being done. It was nice to see the attention to detail and for the guys to care so much about my project.
Definitely took them awhile to get back to me with a design and final numbers. I did appreciate that they did take them to meet with me several times and not pressure me into anything. The quality of the work was top notch, I added a large deal of work to the original proposal and the pricing remained consistent and fair as we added on work. I am more than satisfied with the work and they were worth waiting for.

32, writer and filmmaker from New York
We hope that your staying in Prague was nice)) Thank you very much for your coming and hope to see you again! Very nice person for hosting, can recommend.
John's pre-stay communications were excellent and put me at ease. And although I hardly saw him during his stay (he was out and about for most of the time) he was a thoroughly decent guy; clean, polite and respectful.
I'd welcome him back to stay in our house again without a second thought.
We're very glad John had a good time in Paris and at the apartment ! He's a good guest. We recommend !

We've realized for a long time that Carter really resembles my side of the family in looks... but lately we've begun to see a lot more of Dan come out in other ways. Carter shares his Daddy's love for the water and running. We bought him his 1st pair of running shoes for school this year... and since then he doesn't leave the house without them. He is constantly running and running... through stores, down the sidewalk, around the kitchen island, around the high school track (in warmer weather), and around me while I'm standing still. About a month ago we decided to start him in swim lessons at our community center (there's only so much running you can do in weather this cold). He's technically not old enough... but he's had so much water exposure for a kid his age (lakes, pools, ocean) that we figured he was ready. He LOVES it! It has been the perfect afternoon activity twice a week... for me and him (there are 4 other moms from our church there that I get to visit with :)). He passed his 1st level on Thursday and starts level 2 on Tuesday!! We're hoping he'll be able enjoy the outdoor pool this summer without his life vest.
This picture was taken with my phone. That's Carter with the blue noodle.
In other Carter news... we had a scary night with him last week. We were at one of Ty's basketball games when Carter had an allergic reaction to a pecan cereal bar he was eating. Thankfully he had only had about 3 bites and we were able to get some Benadryl in him pretty quick. We have to wait 3 1/2 months to get him in with an allergist (the first available appointment is actually my due date)... so until then our Pediatrician said he has to avoid all tree nuts and peanuts. We also can't leave the house without this...
Kind of unexpected... but what can you do. We're just thankful he was ok.

KZN gran dies after alleged assault by teen grandaughter - family won’t open case
Share this article:
Durban – The family of a pensioner who was allegedly assaulted by her granddaughter and died will not be opening a case.
The Department of Social Development said details regarding the murder were sketchy, but it is alleged the woman, 68, was severely assaulted by her granddaughter, 18, in Inzinga, Midlands, west of Howick.
The family rushed the grandmother to a local clinic, where she died.
Yesterday, the woman’s son said his family was very upset about her death. He was asleep at the time of the incident and did not know what happened, but said his sister might know.
“I was woken up and she was already dead,” he said.
He grew up with his mother and said she was motherly and not violent. After getting a job he moved out, but visited her frequently. He confirmed the family would not be opening a case.
Social Development MEC Nonhlanhla Khoza called upon law enforcement agencies to investigate the circumstances surrounding the murder of the senior citizen.
“It is disheartening unbelievable that this pensioner died at the hands of someone who was supposed to protect her. The abuse directed at our senior citizens is very concerning.
“We are shocked and outraged by the murder. We are severely pained by the continuous killing of the elderly.”
She called on communities to stand up against crimes against the elderly.

This fall break has been so much fun. In honor of good old Christopher Columbus, we don’t have classes Monday (today) or Tuesday. Colleen’s party on Saturday was a success. Amanda and I left Hood around 9:00 to go to her house which was 11 minutes away according to Mapquest. Well, mapquest failed to mention that there were two roads with the same name, so I ended up turning down not one, but two incorrect roads and getting us lost. Turns out I didn’t get too far out of the way, so we were at Colleen’s probably around 9:30. Colleen said that there was a guy she was trying to set me up with, so I was pretty excited about that. When I got there she pointed him out to me and he was pretty cute, but it was so hard to get a conversation going with him. After everyone left we were downstairs and I tried asking him about what music he likes and what he likes to do for fun and he told me his answers but never asked me anything. I don’t know if it was because it was 6:00 in the morning and we were both exhausted, but I was tired of trying. It’s Monday now and I haven’t heard about him asking them about me so as far as I’m concerned, that ship has sailed. But I’m not too bummed about it because I was never even on the ship to begin with. Other than that whole situation, the party was really, really fun. I made a complete fool of myself, dancing and singing alone for part of the night, but I had fun so that’s all that matters. I didn’t end up falling asleep until 6:30 in the morning. I have never stayed up that late before, so I have no idea how I was able to function at the level of exhaustion that I was at. I woke up around 1 and Colleen was downstairs with everyone making “breakfast”. If you can even call it breakfast at that time. I ended up heading out a little past 2:00 and coming back to campus. I did a little work and then somehow got myself ready to head to Pilates. It has been a while since I had gone and considering the weekend that I had, I definitely could use the exercise.
Pilates kicked my ass. It was so much harder than it has ever been before. There was only one other woman in the class so it was a lot of one-on-one attention from the instructor. Even though it was hard, it felt so good when I was done and I will definitely be going back when the same woman is teaching it again. After that, I went to the grocery store and went home (home home, not dorm home) to make Brittany some cupcakes. Last week sometime I accidentally locked her out of the room and she had to call campus security to let her back in, so I told her that I would make her some cupcakes to make up for it. I baked her some Red Velvet cupcakes with sprinkles in them from scratch and they were so yummy. I was going to stay for dinner but I decided that I would just go back to campus and let my parents eat by themselves. I didn’t feel like waiting around until they were ready to eat because I was starting to get hungry from eating so much earlier than I am used to here at school. So I packed my things up and got back to campus at 6:30. Brittany was back from home when I got back so she told me all about her weekend. She went shopping a lot and I am very jealous. We tried to go to the dining hall around 7:30 but it was already closed, so we just came back to the room. We were planning on going to Whitaker for some wing night thing they were having, but the girls from across the hall came over and said there was a party at one of the lacrosse guys’ apartments and they wanted us to go with them. Usually parties here don’t start until 10 or 11, so I was sure we’d have plenty of time to get something to eat and to get ready. Wrong again. They wanted to leave by 8:15. We both scrambled to get ready in time, I mean it was only like a 1/2 hour. This was a little harder for me considering that I hadn’t done anything to my hair the whole day, I hadn’t even brushed it, or put on any makeup. I really didn’t feel like putting on real pants so I went with the comfortable leggings look. Can’t go wrong there. We started walking over there and got to the apartment before 9:00. Things didn’t start getting crowded until after 10:00 but it was still fun. People were constructing a pyramid out of cans and I spent way too much time trying to work on it throughout the night. We ended up heading back to campus sometime after midnight, but I can’t be certain what time it exactly was. We went over to our friend Pat’s room for a little bit and I was literally falling asleep. I was so exhausted. Partying really wears you out! Brittany and I came back and she was a good roommate and made me at least change my clothes before I went to bed. Getting up into my tall bed that’s like 4 feet off the ground was a bit of a challenge and took some work.
This morning I got up around 11:45 and get dressed really quickly and headed to brunch with Brittany. As usual, I had some oatmeal. It was yummy and just what I needed to wake me up. We came back and decided to go to Whitaker to get some work done. My friend messaged me on Facebook and told me that she’s having a “New World” themed party at her house today and that I should come and dress up. Well, I have no idea what to wear to this party. My friend said that she’s dressing as an Indian. I decided on a white t-shirt and some feather earrings. I hope I look new world-ish enough. Brittany, Amanda and I are going to head out sometime soon for that. It should definitely be fun and, unlike last night, I have my camera charged and ready to go. I will post more later! Thanks for reading 🙂

Arnold Schwarzenegger reveals father beat him because he thought he was gay
The film star turned politician says his parent were worried about his obsession with bodybuilders.
Arnold Schwarzenegger has revealed that his father beat him when he was younger because he thought he was gay.
The Terminator star – who has previously spoken of his parents attempts to “cure” his homosexuality – says his parents thought there was something “off” with their teenage son due to his “obsession” with male bodybuilders.
A young Arnie used to plaster his walls with posters of his favourite male athletes – leading to extreme measures from his mother and father.
“He ran after me with a belt and beat me,” Schwarzenegger said of his father in an interview with Xposure.
“I don’t know if mum thought I was gay, or if she just thought there was something off and thought ‘let’s catch it early.’
“She asked the doctor, ‘Can you help me? I don’t know if there’s something wrong with my son because his wall is full of naked men.
“‘All of Arnold’s friends have pictures of girls above their bed. And Arnold has no girls.'”
Schwarzenegger’s views on same-sex marriage have become more positive over the years.
More from PinkNews
During the debate over “religious freedom” laws in Indiana last year, he called on his fellow Republicans to evolve their views or risk losing support.
He also issued an epic response to critics of his support of LA Pride and the Supreme Court’s decision to legalise same-sex marriage across the US.
After he changed his Facebook profile picture, one fan wrote: “What’s wrong with [you] Arnie? I have to unlike…”
The star responded simply with one of his most famous lines: “Hasta la vista”.
However, his support for LGBT rights was mixed during his time in office.

There's this girl I really like. Anyways, the other night I told her how I felt. She was really glad that I told her and that she liked me too, but... Show More
Most Helpful Girl
Ooh, that's not fun, poor guy! Basically you were told "I'm not ready, but I'm not going to tell you when I am"...talk about confusing, lol! The reason why she told you not to leave it all up to her is because she still wants the chase a little bit. She doesn't want to be the one running the show all the time (even though at this point she is because she stopped you guys from going forward). Basically, she still wants the romantic chase to happen where you come after her and stuff, and as a girl I totally get that.
I have to say also, it's a good thing that she was honest with you and told you straight up that she wasn't ready. She stopped herself from getting into something with someone else because her whole-heart isn't ready to do that yet, and that's an awesome sign, because it means she wants you guys to have something real and that she respects you as a person, and that's awesome!
What I advise is, just keep in communication with her. Be her friend. Talk. Get to know each other. You don't have to be a mind reader - just be around. It'd probably be good to give it a couple months at least. From time to time, ask her how she's doing in the "healing" department and let her know that if she needs to talk, that you're there for her. Hopefully she'll open up to you and from what you guys talk about from time to time, you'll know when she's ready. Then just ask her out :) Good luck hun!

A Senior High School student identified as Ebenezer Opoku is currently in Police custody for reportedly stabbing a 23-year-old boy identified as Seidu to death after a misunderstanding.
Per what we gathered, the deceased went to buy sachets of water from a shop closer to his house but lodged a complaint after the seller refused to give him a polythene bag.
After they exchanged a few words, Seidu said that he would return the water should one fall on the ground and burst since the seller has refused to do the needful by giving him a polythene bag.
Ebenezer who happens to be a friend of the seller questioned Seidu as to why he would return what has already been sold to him. Seidu exchanged a few words with him as well and left after the seller finally gave him a polythene bag for the water to be placed inside.
Ebenezer was said to have followed Seidu after the scuffle with a knife in his pocket to confront him. Upon reaching him, he stabbed the victim in the chest which caused him to die at the spot.
The suspect tried to escape but was captured by some of the residents who were present at the scene. They handed him over to the police immediately.
However, the family of the deceased are demanding justice for the demise of their relative. The suspect is currently in police custody assisting the police with investigation and prosecution.

A Brisbane man has created a list of reasons his girlfriend has got upset with him this week – including one Coles "problem" that definitely wasn't his fault....
A Brisbane man has created a list of reasons his girlfriend has got upset with him this week – including one Coles "problem" that definitely wasn't his fault.
When you’ve had a bad day, the first person to cop it is often your other half.
Someone who knows all too well what its like to be on the receiving end of it is Drenzell Macam.
The 20-year-old from Brisbane has gone viral after creating a list of all the things he’s done that have “upset” his girlfriend recently – all of which were completely out of his control.
And as it turns out, it’s a dilemma many of us can relate to.
The tongue-in-cheek video on TikTok reveals Drenzell’s girlfriend had blamed him for the fact “Coles didn’t have her favourite lollies” as well as the rainy weather ruining her beach plans.
She also thought it was his fault she stubbed her toe on the corner of his bed when she was staying over and that he rolled away from her in bed while he was sleeping.
Another slightly terrifying cause of his girlfriend’s tears were the fact she had a dream Drenzell killed her.
RELATED: Teen’s viral sex act roasted by mum
While the list is pretty ridiculous, Drenzell sees the funny side of his partner’s reasons to be upset, and hilariously (and sarcastically) apologises to his girlfriend in the video.
In response to Coles not having the sour worms in stock, Drenzell explained it was his fault.
“I should have made sure Coles had stocked up on their sour worms before we went otherwise we wouldn’t have this problem,” he said.
“Completely my bad.”
He goes on to say it was also his “fault” for killing his girlfriend in his dream, admitting he should have made sure he had an explanation for his actions when she demanded one upon waking up.
Drenzell also takes full responsibility for the other complaints on the list, insisting he would “make sure for next time” it was sunny whenever they wanted to go out and ensure she knew where the bed was at all times.
The video – which is captioned “my bad, i’ll be a better person next time” – has clearly resonated, clocking up almost 87,000 views and nearly 2000 comments since it was shared on Monday.
Some were from women who teased it was good Drenzell was aware of his bad traits.
“At least you’re self-aware,” one joked.
“Love a man that owns up to his actions,” another declared.
“Yes, good boyfriend to know your faults,” one person cheekily reasoned.
While one woman said: “It’s okay, you have learnt from your mistakes. Now you know better.”
Others however recognised themselves in the girlfriend’s behaviour.
“This is so me,” one woman said.
“So it’s not just me, I legit cried because Coles had no sour worms yesterday,” another wrote.
One man who claimed to work for Coles even commented, writing he was “sorry” about the lollies, as another said “that’s why I pick Woolworths”.
Mostly though, people thought the video was “gold”, saying they genuinely “wet their pants”.
“I’m crying,” one said, echoing a sentiment shared by many.
The list, written on December 14, proved so popular Drenzell created a second one.
This time he revealed he was in the “doghouse” for sharing the list which didn’t go down well with his girlfriend, but it didn’t stop him from sharing more things that had got him into trouble – including not buying his girlfriend a coffee when she was at work and he was on his day off and the fact he fell asleep while watching a movie at 2am and it was “her favourite part.”
Can you relate to this list? Let us know in the comments below.

A woman is suing the U.S. Army and Air Force claiming she was told to appear more feminine.
Kristin Kingrey, who is gay, charges in the lawsuit that she was the victim of discrimination and harassment, according to The Hill. She also is claiming she was told she would face professional consequences if she did not wear makeup or grow her short-cropped hair out.
The Hill, attributing the information to the lawsuit filed by Kingrey, said she has been a member of the West Virginia Air National Guard for 14 years. During that time, she served as both a military and civilian worker. She was hired for a human resources position in 2019.
She claims in the lawsuit, to have been told by her bosses that the West Virginia guard’s vice wing Cmdr. Col. Michael Cadle said she should change her appearance to look more feminine.
In the lawsuit, Kingrey describes herself as “tall and broad in stature. She keeps her hair short in length and does not don make-up or jewelry.”
A short time after Cadle’s comments were said to have been made, Kingrey was told that funding had been withdrawn for the human resources job for which she had already been hired.
But she claimed the same position was soon posted online and another person was hired, according to the lawsuit.
Kingrey was later passed over for another human resources position, the lawsuit said. She now is in a part-time position which has been classified as “temporary.”
The Charleston Gazette-Mail reported that Kingrey was deployed in Qatar in Jan. 2019.
“I keep my personal life private as much as I possibly can,” Kingrey said during an interview in her attorney’s office Dec. 8. “It’s not a workplace conversation piece, so to say.”
© 2023 Newsmax. All rights reserved.

Thursday, 30 October 2014
Woman Kills Man who tried to rape her in Lekki(Photo)
An unidentified suspected rapist has been killed in the Lekki area of Lagos State while attempting to rape a 22-year-old woman, Ifeoma Okechukwu.
It was learnt that the incident happened on Monday, around 12.30pm, in Atlantic View Estate, Alpha Beach Road, Lekki.
Punch learnt that Okechukwu was on her menstrual period and had gone out to buy sanitary pads.
The Imo State indigene was said to be on her way back home when she was accosted by the stranger.
“After buying the sanitary pads, I was going back home when I saw a man, who should be in his forties, standing at a corner. He approached me and ordered me to take him to my house.“He put his hand into his pocket as if he wanted to bring out a weapon. He said he would kill me if I shouted.When we got to the house, he said I should shut the door and I did. He said I should remove my clothes; and I started begging him, but he refused to listen.So I told him to let me get to the kitchen because I was cooking something and I would be back. I got a rod and hid it in my wrapper. I went back and moved slowly towards him, still begging, but he refused.He was taking off his clothes and wearing a condom when I used the rod to hit him in the head. I started screaming. And then I picked the phone and called my uncle.”
The victim’s uncle, who pleaded anonymity, told Punch Metro that he went to report the matter at the Ilasan Police Station after learning what had happened.
“I was not at home when the incident happened and her younger brother had also gone out. So, she was alone in the house and it was possible he had been monitoring her movement.When she called me and said what had happened, I left the office and went to the police station in Jakande Estate where I reported the matter.”
A police source told our correspondent that investigators found a pack of condoms on the deceased, including a phone without a SIM card.
The source added that since the incident happened, no one had shown up to claim the man’s corpse.
“He was about wearing the condom when the girl hit him on the head and he died. His mission was to rape her and steal from the house. He probably took advantage of her frail stature.We have got information that he was not alone. He belonged to a gang that has been terrorising Lekki residents for some time now. And that’s why since this incident, nobody knows his name and address, and none of his relatives has come forward to say they know him.
The Police Public Relations Officer, Lagos State Command, DSP Kenneth Nwosu, promised to call our correspondent back, but he had yet to do so as of the time of filing this report.
Okechukwu was however said to have been arrested and detained in police custody.

He’d been shot in the head. It was within his head that the bullet was lodged. But what if events had played out differently, he thought. His skull could so easily have been the surface of the wall that had lain within the bullet’s trajectory only moments before. As he thought about it further, it seemed that this exchange had already happened, or would happen, anyway. It became clear to him that his body could effortlessly become the fabric of the wall; or the dust that hid within the right-angles of the room; or the brittle flecks already drying on his forehead. His body should have been the one thing he could trust. But none of its atoms seemed to remain in the same place for long. His own rare flesh shared some of its self-organising habits with foreign accretions of matter. Like grains of sand sculpted by indifferent agency into magnificent dunes, or tiny ripples, in the desert.
As his mind wandered, the hardness of the floor became more insistent and disagreeable to his flesh. He thought about others, both in the future and the past, who would share, or who had shared, his predicament. He remembered a photograph of a corpse lying in the desert. The sky that framed the unfortunate victim was a solid sheet of black ink. He looked up. For a moment he saw his body become the rectangular slate of desert sky that was wedged into the ceiling.
He studied the dead man. He’d fallen on his front so his shattered face was half buried in the sand.
He’d been shot twice – in the back, and in the head. He stooped low to peer at what was left of the man’s face. His remaining good eye was still open and the eyeball slumped down to hover just above the concrete floor. Its sticky surface attracted the eddies of fine dust that skimmed the ground. From this vantage point he could see only a narrow bar of desert between ground and horizon. Thousands of undulations of sand, rippling out for miles, were all accounted for within the narrow strip that was apparent to his oblique point of view.
A wall, a grain of dust, a speck of blood, a white ceiling, a desert sky or another corpse – he realised that his body could simultaneously take on the identity of all these things. His mind roved capriciously over his body’s infinite array of available proxies. A pot of glue, the ink from a pen, a dirty dishcloth, a piece of string, a woolen blanket pulled over a grisly scene, his own tattered khaki shirt. But his newly found proficiency was still more marvelous. Not only could he willfully become any object, but all of the objects’ attendant processes and the forces between them were open for him to inhabit too. He could become the tension that supported tiny particles on the liquid surface of his own eye; the movement of dust stirred up by his nervous footsteps; the chemical reaction that had occurred when the primer in the cartridge ignited; or the drying of ink on a magazine page.
His body could easily become each and every object, event, process, entity – a sheet of paper, a bad joke, a chemical reaction, a decisive event, the split second branching of time that separates life from death. His body’s seeming emancipation allowed it to achieve equivalence with even the most intangible and transient of things. He no longer apprehended notions and ideas as though they were laid out for him to consider from a high vantage point. He was no longer required to consider and compare each one and so choose between them, but instead they were all integral parts of himself. Theories and ideas, rapidly changing trends in thinking and behaviour – both the good and the bad – were hardening crystals, replicating and expanding to fill his being. Broken symmetry, the aestheticisation of violence, the empty promises of tolerance, the verification of existence through consumption, the necessity of crime, the cold comfort of determinism, the illusion of personal narrative – they were all part of him. His body was a paradox: a thing that only existed by virtue of its boundaries, but was scraped bare of them. It had become both porous to, and interchangeable with, the vertiginous abundance of concepts that developed around and within him.
As he stared at the decaying surface of the dead man’s eyeball, he imagined the formless viscera that he had hitherto called his own, separate flesh, shrinking to become an insignificant bead of matter. Furthermore, it was not just his body that had been eviscerated by its very interchangeability, but his own consciousness had become malleable too. There was a limit to the mental space that he could attribute to himself with certainty, and it became ever smaller. It contracted until it was even less than a singular event – not even a dimensionless, piercing instance. He came to realise that consciousness was not something that he could call his own, but was one and the same as the entire world.
Objects, bodies, events, processes, theories and ideas were interchangeable with one-another. All these things had equivalent agency, but most incredible of all, they were all able to speak. All these things had voices, and they all spoke within him.
And even worse than that, they all spoke at the same volume. As he crouched awkwardly beside the still body of the man, he could hear the voice of his own fear as loudly as that of the gun that had been used to kill him. Or that of the encrusted shape that still clung to his forehead, and the voices of the beads of perspiration that it mingled with – as well as the voice of the event itself. Slowly and deliberately he reached out his hand, until his fingers lightly grasped the grey blanket that had been pulled over the scene. As he did this, he was simultaneously aware of the heavy thickness of the wool, and of the contents of his thoughts as he considered what had happened to the man and what it could mean. Both the blanket, and his own ideas about the event, seemed equally important in its aftermath, and sought to be represented accordingly. From the humblest object to the most fleeting and unstable idea, each thing was able to elucidate its own theory of itself.
His own ideas were theories about himself, and about other things as well, but they were also theories about other theories. And even these theories could speak to represent themselves. Just as everything else spoke within him, his own thoughts were not just doing the work of thinking whatever idea he was thinking, but they were all speaking for themselves as well. They explained away the mysteries surrounding their provenance, and convinced him that they were his and his alone. As his own thoughts deliberately suppressed their identities and purposes, he experienced a constant layering of meaning and a troubling resonance within which he was unable to distinguish any authentic frequency.
He kept his body close to the ground where the wind was less harsh. Light particles of sand whirled on the surface of the man’s skin. The weight of decay had caused slight hollows to appear in his flesh, and the tiny, whirling grains momentarily accumulated in them, and then went shooting off again as they were picked up by the breeze. As he peered at the man he tried to concentrate equally on the voices of the blanket, grains, skin and flesh beside him, and the voices of his own thoughts. But no sooner had he had time to latch on to one voice than another had eaten it up and taken its place. The voices speaking within him constantly redistributed themselves around the virtual surface of his mind. They emerged in a dizzying chain of events that had misrepresentation and approximation at every turn.
The dissonance inside his own body reflected the fragmented culpability of his cells and their constituent molecules, and every other object or idea that he had ever encountered. The voices of all these things had prevented his direct apprehension of them. And he knew now that if all of these thoughts, ideas, objects and events could speak for themselves, it was indeed true that speech was invented in order to conceal meaning. All these things could willfully hide their own intelligibility from him, just as he could his from himself.
This text was performed as a reading as part of Whoever you are at Numberthirtyfive, New York and at Cabin:Codex, Centrespace, DCA, Dundee

Hi everyone. It has been a long time since i posted anything here. When I was a regular here, I was somewhat of a rock...Strong,independent, loving, helpful,and yes I did have my bad days where I was even a B*tch at times. That has been over a year ago. In this time away, I was in a relationship that I thought i needed. It turned out to be very emotionally abusive. I was literally yelled at every day, and his friends treated me like a horrible person. I finally got the courage to leave him on Christmas Eve, and since then have realized that he damaged me emotionally even more than i thought. I no longer feel like a strong rock, or an eagle with wings to protect others. I was not even able to protect myself. I have been faithfully taking my meds all year and they don't even seem to be helping anymore. I know i need to discuss this with my pdoc. Depression and worthlessness are very strong feelings now.
Posts You May Be Interested In

Too friendly clerk
My boyfriend frequently patronizes one gas station near my home. One clerk who always seems to be working when he stops, flirts, will even walk out to check out what he may be hauling in his truck, and seems to enjoy banter with him a bit too much. I trust him , but I feel she is too Friendly. What should I do or say if anything?
Never trust another female around your man since this chick is not a friend you can just drop im tryin to think of away of getting her out of the picture without you going half cocked at either of them. She knows he has you as a gf? If so then she is overstepping. I cant tell you to do what I would do cause I am not sure getting her fired is at all cool. Maybe try and ask him how else he knows her did they go to school together maybe there is another reason she is being friendly maybe they worked together or knew her from the neighborhood. You could also when you guys are together try and get him used to going to another place.....thats my best.....

April 22nd, 1866.— I have had a trying time today. Soon after breakfast this morning my friend, the captain was announced. He came alone and he was in no hurry to go. Again he offered for my acceptance the splendid, sparkling French Marquise ring. He has made all his arrangements to go to Brazil and there make his home and he wants me to go with him, but that, I cannot do. Even if there was no other reason I would not be willing to leave our poor, conquered country to her fate. This is the time for every true-hearted, loyal son and daughter of the South to bend every energy to restore and upbuild the ruin the war has wrought. We can do this and with God’s help we will. But there is another reason still and I had to tell the captain this before he could be convinced that his case was a hopeless one. He described in glowing colors the ease and luxury of the life in Brazil; the wealth to be acquired in that favored land; he painted sad pictures of the trials which awaited those who elected to cast in their fortunes with a country devastated and ruined as this is; he said Southern women were totally unfit for hardship. Perhaps so, but like my Scotch ancestress, “I am minded to try it” and, though I forbore to tell him so.
“I had rather wed Jamie, wi’ bonnet in han’, than to wed Saundie wi’ housen and lan’.”

Serena was a vampire-werewolf hybrid. Her parents were killed right before her young, innocent eyes and she was taken in by Alpha Tyler of the Black Moon Pack. They didn't exactly raise her. Instead, they turned her into a maid and even sold her as a sex slave later on. All these years, her only source of support was Brandon, Tyler's son. One day, after working herself to the bone, she discovered that Brandon had been cheating on her with his true mate for quite some time now. And as if it couldn't get any worse, it is revealed to her that Alpha Tyler was the killer of her parents. It felt like the world had completely turned against her. But all of a sudden, a handsome and soon-to-be powerful Alpha named Peter came into her life, claiming that she was his mate. With dangerous power in her blood that deemed her as a threat to vampires and werewolves alike, and a mysterious enemy that plotted against her in the dark, could Serena emerge victorious from all these trials with Peter by her side?
"Hey, you, Serena! Get over here and clean this up!" one of the she-wolves shouted at me. She was having a picnic along with other she-wolves on the lawn. They carelessly threw all their trash-- wrappers, shells, whatever food residue they discarded-- on the grass around them.
The trash can was not even that far. It was a few steps away from them. They could have thrown it properly themselves. But no, of course, they wouldn't do that because there was a lowly servant girl here. Throwing the trash was suddenly something they didn't need to do.
I had just spent an entire hour cleaning up the chewing gum that was stuck on the steps of the meeting hall. My back and my waist were already very sore. With a deep sigh, I picked up a broom and went over to sweep their garbage. But when I saw that most of their trash was on the grass, I realized I couldn't sweep it out with a broom at all.
"Hey, can you at least stop spitting the shells onto the grass? It's so hard to sweep." I gritted my teeth, trying to hold back the anger inside of me.
"Don't sweep, then. Just pick them up with your hands one by one." The she-wolf crossed her legs nonchalantly and spat another pistachio shell on to the grass, right in front of my feet.
Another she-wolf refilled the plate with more pistachios and looked at me mockingly. "Oh, whatever. Don't listen to her complaints. She can't disobey our orders anyway."
"Well then, I quit." I dropped my broom and turned around to leave.
"How dare you speak to us like that? Who do you think you are?" One she-wolf got up and blocked my way, splashing her drink on my face. The liquid dripped down and absolutely soaked my clothes.
"Do your job and pick up the trash! Or else I'm going to report you to the Alpha and tell him you're slacking off!"
It took all my inner strength to stop myself from impaling them in the mouth with my broom. They had a point. Who did I think I was? I was just an orphan anyway, adopted into the Black Moon Pack. Other than slave, I held no other status in the pack. All other werewolves were above me in rank. Anyone could boss me, scold me, beat me, and no one would bat an eye.
My father was a vampire and my mother was a werewolf. That made me a hybrid. Their union was an abomination to both the werewolves and vampires, making my very existence an object of disgrace in itself. Hybrids were powerful creatures, which made them a threat to werewolves and vampires. When they discovered any living hybrid, all werewolves and vampires were mandated to kill them on sight.
My parents knew they would have to conceal my identity to the world, so they asked a reliable friend of theirs, who was a wizard, to cast a spell that hid my hybrid bloodline. To the ordinary creature, I would only look like an Omega.
Looking back at my childhood, our family had always lived deep in the forest for as long as I could remember. But one horrible day, we were discovered, and all of our peace was shattered to pieces. A group of Alphas had surrounded our house along with other werewolves. While my father was trying to fight them off in the hall, my mother took me aside to send me out through a secret passageway. I cried and begged for my parents to run away with me, so my mother had to grip my shoulders tightly. Her eyes were full of worry and fear. Her grip on me was so strong that her fingernails almost dug themselves into my skin.
"Serena, I'm sorry. But you have to listen carefully and remember everything I say. Your father has foreseen your future. Your life is going to be very hard because of who you are, more than you can even imagine, but you must hold on. One day, you're going to become a very powerful hybrid, with the power to maybe change the world. You must be careful, though. You are going to meet a terrible enemy who only wants to covet your power. He is going to hunt you down no matter the cost. And then..."
My mother's voice trailed off when we heard footsteps approaching. She shook her head and couldn't say anything more. With tears in her eyes, she wrapped me in one last embrace, holding on for as long as she could. Finally, she pushed me into the secret exit.
"Honey, you need to go now. We'll try to catch up with you. Go! Run!"
I ran but not too far away. I had found a hiding place nearby where I could watch what was going on. Through the window, I watched as the Alphas successfully subdued my parents and shoved them to the center of the hall. The Alphas all wore masks. Some looked hesitantly at my parents, as if they were arguing about something. However, one of the Alphas walked over to my parents despite what the others said. His claws glinted with a cold, murderous light.
I stifled a scream and covered my mouth. My parents fell limply to the floor, their blood staining the carpet a vibrant red.
Then, several Alphas exited the house and looked around. They were looking for me, I knew it. I couldn't afford to make a sound, but I had to go now. With tears still streaming down my face, I slowly stepped back until I was far enough to run into the darkness without alerting them.
The grey skies cried with me and poured heavy rains. Drops of rain and tears met each other on my cheeks. The path under my feet was hard to see. Countless times, I tripped into the mud and gained multiple bruises. But every time I fell, I gritted my teeth and got back up right away. Despite the physical and emotional pain that tortured me, I had to keep running. I didn't know how much longer I kept running, but all I knew was that I was exhausted. I could no longer feel my legs and my pace was slowing down. It had gotten quite dark, making it even harder for my eyes to see as each hour passed.
Once more, I stumbled and fell to the ground. But this time, I lost my consciousness.
By the time I had woken up, I found myself in the Black Moon Pack.
One of my father's powers was being able to foresee the future. I still remembered those words and believed they would come true one day. However, it had been six years, and here I was still doing chores. How was I going to change the world from here?
I remembered those Alphas that came to attack my family, especially that Alpha who killed my parents. I hated them all. But because they were all wearing masks then, I couldn't recognize th
em. I didn't know how to avenge for my parents. Although, I had yet to come of age anyway. I was still weak and powerless, so much that I had no choice but to stay here just to live.
From that day when I woke up in the Black Moon Pack, my life had become a living hell. I realized later on that, the person who took me in was the actual murderer of my parents, and even worse, I had fallen in love with his son.
Alpha Tyler Trump was the one who let me live in his house, but in all honesty, he just wanted a free maid.
They made me live out in the yard of the Alpha's house. There was a tiny shed in the corner, small enough just for me to fit. All chores in the house were assigned to me. Each day, people would tell me that I should count myself lucky that Alpha took me in and that I should work diligently with gratitude.
It was undeniable that Alpha Tyler put a roof over my head these past years. But even then, I was afraid no amount of gratitude would convince anyone to happily live this miserable life of mine. Fortunately, my birthday was nearing. I was about to come of age.
The sun had begun to set when the she-wolves finished with their picnic. I waited for all of them to leave before picking up all the discarded shells on the grass. I stretched my back and my waist. They felt even worse than earlier.
Finally, I walked to the hall of the pack. There were still some meeting rooms for me to clean up. Not so far away, I spotted Alpha Tyler walking down the hall. He always walked with a prideful air about him, as if there was nothing worth his precious attention. I had placed my bucket of dirty water on the porch, and I watched as he kicked it over with his foot. The murky water poured out all across the floor, staining the surfaces it touched.
"Who put that damned bucket there?!"
Tyler cursed. He immediately hopped over to the dry floor and checked to see if his expensive trousers had been spared.
"I... I'm sorry."
I ran to the bucket and set it back upright.
Just now, I was cleaning the steps of the corridor, which was why I had to leave the bucket there. The bucket was big enough not to be missed, though. Tyler should have seen it from a mile away. But I knew he would never admit to making that mistake. He was the Alpha. Nothing should have been put in his way in the first place.
Tyler frowned in disgust. He didn't burst out into a fit of anger or beat me up. I was just an orphan, a slave. The mere act of beating me up was still beneath him.
"Just clean this place up now. We have guests coming soon,"
he said impatiently. He then turned around and left, without even looking at me, as if I was some piece of trash.
My body felt limp and numb as I stared at the porch floor, pooling with dirty water. I estimated that it would take over an hour for me to clean this up. That only meant that I wasn't going to have dinner tonight.
Oh well. At least, I knew that Brandon would secretly try to bring me some good food. Brandon was Tyler's son, the future Alpha of the Black Moon Pack. He was also the only person who treated me well.
When I was new to the pack as a child, other kids would constantly bully me, but Brandon was the only one who would stand up to protect me. Although being the son of the Alpha, he wasn't exactly allowed to spend much time with me, he was still my sole playmate back then. Growing up, he would talk to me and give me gifts. He would even bring me some pens, paper, and books so that I could learn to read and write.
When I turned sixteen, Brandon confessed his love for me and hoped that the Moon Goddess would pair us together as mates. But even if the Moon Goddess didn't assign us together, Brandon promised he would still choose me to be his mate when the time would come.
Hearing him say those words almost made me feel like the happiest girl in the world. I believed with all my heart that I could be Brandon's mate. In fact, it was one of the biggest reasons why I stayed here. Despite the discrimination I faced from everyone else because I was a lowly orphan, Brandon vowed that he would solve these problems when he became Alpha. Once I came of age, we could be public with our relationship together.
My heart swelled with love as I missed Brandon. Thinking of him definitely took away some fatigue in my body and allowed me to keep working.
The sunset shone a red-orange glow into the hall, and in the corner I saw something glinting. Curious, I inched closer and saw a bracelet covered in dust. It seemed to have been left there for a long time.
I picked up the bracelet and dusted it off. Slowly, I recognized that this was the gift I gave Brandon for his birthday last year.
Because I didn't have much money, I had to make do with what I had since I still wanted to give him a nice present. It took me over a month to collect different colored cobblestones from the river. I worked to carefully grind, drill, and polish them until I could string them into an elegant bracelet. Although my hands sustained many blisters from making it, I was still very proud of this bracelet that I made. It was handmade especially for Brandon, and I thought he was going to love it.
Brandon was very happy when he received it. Although later on, I never caught him wearing it. It turned out that it was here all this time, collecting dust in the corner. He'd always been careless with his belongings. He probably lost the bracelet by accident and didn't tell me because I might get angry.
I pocketed the bracelet and told myself I'd return it the next time I saw Brandon.
Once I finished cleaning up the porch, I finally headed to a meeting room. Guests started to stream in one after another by this time.
The hall was brightly lit. Tyler and Zoe stood on the stage, facing the guests. They looked like they were going to announce something important. Tyler puffed up his chest and raised his voice.
"Good evening, ladies and gentlemen. Thank you all for coming. Today, our family has great news that we would like to share with you. The Moon Goddess has finally arranged my son Brandon Trump and Shirley Hunter, daughter of Alpha Thomas Hunter, to be each other's mates. Soon, we will hold their Mate Ceremony. I am also pleased to announce that after that, Brandon will be taking over as the Alpha of the Black Moon Pack."

Monday, December 26, 2011
2nd Day of Christmas
Well today is my Mother Birthday !
Yes the second day of Christmas. How lucky is she ?
So yeah we went to have breakfast at Hilton with some colleges and friends.
It was fun for my mom of course since it was her day and everything but for me it was okay since I don't really like sitting with old people and talking to them.
But I didn't get bored since one of my moms friends brought her son to the breakfast and he had his DS with him.
So we talked and played GRID . HAHAHA
Well that was my morning. Now I'm preparing to go to a Calender Shoot.
I'll post something about that later maybe if I get to take pictures !
xxx Olyboly xxx

He wandered through the offices and used the lotions and scented creams from the desks of the absent workers whenever he felt like it. As a guard, he knew the cameras placed around the building fed only to the TV screens at the guard station. Despite the rumors, there were no videotapes generated to record anything much less his nocturnal meanderings. Not his travels nor those of any of the other men supposedly safeguarding the place.
While looking at the workspaces, he would tell himself stories to match the various photos and knick-knacks on the shelves and desktops to keep himself amused during the night. Any unlocked areas he often would pillage, or at least root through the scraps for more tidbits of the occupants lives. Whenever he saw photographs of grinning couples in exotic locales show up after summer, he snickered and gave the men demeaning jobs and stupid names. At times the inevitable posed wedding shots, newborn baby, and often times within a few years a spouse would suddenly be missing from the desktops and shelves. The cute couple shots gone with only dust to mark that there'd ever been a photograph. The wedding snaps soon replaced by a child's first Christmas. Time and tragedy marked out for him to observe.
He wasn't the only one that observed the day lives of the office drones. The other guards knew each other by sight and nametags. Jerry Cooper was etched into the brass nametag pinned on his coat. As far as the security company knew he was old Jerry Cooper from Detroit, Michigan. From all appearances, Jerry had come down after the last wave of downsizing to make a new life for himself. Leastways that was what the security company thought, from what he'd said when interviewed for the job. He had in fact come down from Detroit -- that much was true. And the social security card along with the necessary ID didn't cost him a dime, but gave him an identity needed for the night job. Old Jerry Cooper, the original, was decaying in an abandoned crack house in downtown Detroit as far as he knew. Old Jerry's teeth hadn't had much work so the vice grips he'd used on the dying man didn't get too filthy. Further preventing discovery and identification if the rats left anything to find once they finished their work.
Jerry Cooper, now deceased, had been one of those sorts who'd fallen through the cracks of polite society without much to show. No military service, no arrest records, no credit and no possessions once he'd been forced to sell his ride. All the normal benchmarks of a man in his middle years weren't there for Jerry.
The guard had a passing similarity in appearance to the deceased before Jerry's decline in circumstances. Which was part of why Jerry had been culled from the herd of drunkards and crack addicts living on the edge of the Apocalypse casually referred to as Cass Corridor or Crack Corridor to the locals. Jerry had fallen on very hard times, and the guard was in place to send him on to his just reward.
It was only fitting, given how much pain Jerry had been in when he passed. The guard had spent three weeks with Jerry making sure to double check all the pertinent facts before sending the man onto the promised land. Painfully sober probably for the first time in over two decades, Jerry Cooper had found religion in the end. The guard hadn't bothered to shatter the man's faith -- tempting though that could be -- because he needed as much information as possible and destroying his belief system could have hindered that pursuit. When Jerry was slowly immerging from his alcoholic stupor it hadn't been pretty. The vomiting, the diarrhea, the endless hallucinations and the chills all served to soften the formerly hard-edged man. Once pliable, the guard got to the serious business of finding all about Jerry Cooper.
Before losing his way into a bottle Jerry Cooper had been middle management at one of the big three auto corporations. Driving a company-owned car, swilling company-purchased pricey wines over company-bought lush meals with vendors and other empty suited middle management, Jerry had it made. In his heyday Jerry had been quite unnoticed by his peers. Then by the time things were getting worse, they were also struggling with their own ruined careers and couldn't have given a rat's ass about Jerry and his issues. So when the crash of the automobile industry began to eat away at the layers of humanity that were obscenely supported by large salaries and little real work, Jerry was dumped to the curb along with his office buddies. Jerry's coworkers got going away parties at first, when the downsizing had been done gracefully and with false words of other jobs in the future and little parachutes with maybe not a full package of money, but enough to last a few years to help the journey and keep the morale up. That soon went the way of buggy whips and SUVs as did the executive jobs in the major company. His own passing went unremarked upon as he plunged his way into the world of screw-off topped bottles of wine and beer savored along the sidewalks of Motor City after his aunt died.
Aunt Gertrude had assured her only nephew that she'd taken good care of him in her will if he'd come help her. Jerry had wanted to believe the old woman since he no longer could afford the apartment overlooking the Detroit River that had been renovated into condos right as he was being downsized out of a career. He didn't have enough capital to buy into the newly created condominiums and owning his own home wasn't in his near future without gainful employment. And having no real credit since the company had supplied credit cards and he lived large. When he had two nickels to rub together it meant trips to Atlantic City and down south to the riverboats where he drank and gambled the nights away. Jerry wasn't very lucky. He caved in and moved in to his aunt's home.
As his equity dwindled, he kept taking short day trips to Canada's casinos trying to recoup some of his losses, to no avail. Once back at his aunt's, she got more demanding by the day but he bit his tongue and wiped her face after she'd drool her way through breakfast, lunch and dinner because he didn't have much of a choice. The adult diapers weren't pleasant but with her diabetes and the loss most of her toes she'd been in a wheelchair at an early age. Something Jerry thought had to be bad.
Jerry kept hoping that her pension from her bank career was doing better than everything he'd seen on the news. The grim-faced reporters would speak directly into the camera while delivering yet more and more horrific news about bank repossessions of houses, cars and lives. Jerry cautiously inquired and his aunt told him she had plenty of money and would he be so kind as to turn back to her 'shows'. Then she demanded that he turn the volume up, as her hearing wasn't as good as it used to be. Like her hearing, her vision was starting to go, and after a particularly bad incident where she nearly burned down the small house he asked her kindly if she wouldn't be more comfortable in a residential setting near a major hospital? She'd nearly thrown him out of the house for suggesting such an appalling thing. For weeks afterwards, she refused to look at him much less speak to him other than to give him her demands for meals and her creature comforts.
Once she started talking to him again he wanted to put a screwdriver through both eardrums to escape her monologues. She recounted every horror story she'd ever heard or read about 'residential homes'. The list of homes where feeble, old folks were left to rot or she'd talk about the ones where supposed aid givers stole everything not nailed down. She talked about the occasions of under medication of dying patients so the caregivers could steal the pain meds without getting caught. Jerry couldn't resist asking his aunt how she knew that if the aids hadn't been caught? That got him a two-day reprieve from her barrage of horror stories as she'd stopped talking to him again.
Just when Jerry was starting to get partial hearing back, his Aunt Gerty started up again with her tales. She had begun to call the few of her friends left alive who were living in such places. So then she could add food poorly prepared, being left to wallow in their own filth for days at a time, healthcare 'workers' who didn't speak English and would pinch the cheeks of her friends to see if they were still alive. After she grew weary of those stories, she brought up the 'Angels of Death' who wandered the homes and executed folks for no good reason. Aunt Gerty won the war and Jerry shut up about residential living options for her. His aunt had made her point for weeks afterwards just to fortify her position. He'd jump out of his skin every time she rang the bell to summon him to her side. Earlier, after he'd first moved in, he'd made the mistake of telling her that he didn't hear her call -- it had been a lie since he'd been sneaking a quick glass of wine and a cigarette out of her sight. She didn't approve of either activity so he had to brush his teeth and spray air room freshener before he went to see what she needed. After he'd told her he hadn't heard her, she commanded him to get the crystal dinner bell from the top of her curio shelf -- the one filled with small teacups never used and cheap porcelain dime store cats. It became the bane of his existence. She rang that bell morning, noon and late into the night.
During one of his last trips to Canada, his funds were nearly gone but he'd heard that the US dollar was up against the Canadian dollar so he felt obligated to see if he could make some fast money with the favorable exchange rate. Afterwards he'd wandered into a pharmacy to get something for his pounding headache. A customer overhearing his complaint got him to find the right type of painkillers and suggested he buy a sleep aid that was good. Both the customer and the lady behind the counter cautioned him about how strong the meds were and not to mix them with alcohol. He hadn't drunk anything at the casino but did have a beer or three after he'd left. He nodded his understanding and headed back across the border to his aunt's place.
The second he walked through the door she was on him. Where had he gone? Why did he smell like cigarettes? Would he fix her a snack? The words wouldn't stop. Jerry did what any rational man would do. He told his aunt that he'd been on a job interview and that he smelled like smoke because the folks at the bus stop had been discourteous and he'd been forced to breathe tainted air while waiting for his bus. She'd nodded and listened while obviously waiting for more from him. He didn't feel much like talking.
The guard snapped back to the present. He thought he heard something in the distance. Pushing his memories of how he'd acquired his name would have to wait until he found out if there was actually an intruder or just a stray branch hitting a window. Jerry Cooper had been extremely talkative once he'd sobered up. Hell, he wouldn't stop talking. His pathetic dribble of a life had had nothing to do with the guard's current world, but it had made for some entertaining hours. In the cold dark warehouse where he'd chained Jerry there hadn't been much to keep him distracted, so he'd listened carefully to the dying man's words.

Bob Strauss – “Hell, Mr. President, I didn’t even vote for you”
Ambassador Robert S. Strauss is one of the giants of twentieth century American politics and diplomacy, whose service dates back to Lyndon Johnson’s first congressional campaign in 1937. He served as chairman of the Democratic National Committee between 1972 and 1977 and served under President Jimmy Carter as the U.S.Trade Representative and Special Envoy to the Middle East. He was chosen by President George H. W. Bush to be the U.S.ambassador to the Soviet Union, and later Russia, in 1991 and advised and represented U.S. presidents over three administrations and for both major U.S. political parties. Strauss founded the renowned law firm now known as Akin Gump Strauss Hauer & Feld in 1945, which has grown to be one of the largest in the world. He was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 1981 and is also the namesake of the Robert S. Strauss Center for International Security and Law at the University of Texas. He spoke with ADST’s Charles Stuart Kennedy beginning in October 2002 about his impressions of LBJ, Richard Nixon, George H.W. Bush, and his time in Moscow, including his speech supporting Mikhail Gorbachev and his own less-than-stellar grades on Russian culture.
On Being Jewish in Texas:
People ask me what it was like being Jewish, and I say, well, I really had no Jewish background, except my mother insisted that we know we were Jewish and have some respect for our faith and a feel for it.
Q: No bar mitzvah?
STRAUSS: No, no, I couldn’t spell it. I couldn’t spell it when I got through high school, much less then. But my mother convinced me that I was one of God’s chosen people as a Jew, and I can remember being kind of embarrassed walking around town realizing I was one of God’s chosen people, and I couldn’t say anything about it. Instead of feeling a sense of inferiority, I rather had a sense of superiority and kind of hated the fact that I couldn’t mention it; it would be in poor taste.
On Speaking Truth to Power:
Even after he [LBJ] was old and sick, when he called on the phone I was still intimidated, and I was strong and young and successful. He “had my number” and knew it and I knew it. But as we finished 30 minutes up there in his bedroom, as I was leaving he said, “Bob, what do you think about my policies?” This was during the Vietnam war, and I told him what I thought he wanted to hear, not 10 percent of which I believed, but it’s what I knew the president wanted to hear. I felt so dirty about it and ashamed of myself that I called my wife and told her what I had done. I said, “The comforting part of it is that I know Johnson doesn’t give a damn what I think, so it didn’t affect his judgment at all. He just wanted to hear what he wanted to hear. He wanted somebody to agree with him. It won’t affect his judgment one way or the other. He has enough sense to know enough not to rely on what I said, so I didn’t hurt anything except myself. But I’ll tell you one thing. I’ll never forget it. I’ll never do that again if the Lord ever gives me another chance.”
Since that, I have been in the White House in the president’s quarters with other presidents that have asked my advice, the most notable one being Ronald Reagan when I had to tell him he was dead wrong when his people were giving him advice just to the contrary. When I met with him, Mike Deaver had asked me to come up, that Nancy Reagan wanted me to meet with him. I said, “Why? Does he want to hear the truth? If not, I’m not coming.” Mike said, “Yes, she wants him to hear the truth. That’s why she wants you here. She thinks you’ll tell him the truth, and I’ve told her that you’ll tell him the truth.” I did tell him the truth, and he didn’t like it one damn bit, but he later did exactly what I suggested to him he do, as she knew he would. But I wouldn’t have done that, I wouldn’t have said what he needed to hear if I hadn’t been through the Johnson experience. And I wouldn’t have been totally candid with Jimmy Carter on a couple of things when I was at the White House, arguing with him, if I hadn’t had that earlier experience.
On Richard Nixon:
I developed a more favorable impression of Richard Nixon after his disgrace than I had before…. He and I agreed on China and several other issues that there wasn’t much support for. When I came out to support George H.W. Bush when he was president, with China policy early in the game, publicly, where few people were, Republicans or Democrats, Richard Nixon called and congratulated me on that and said, “You know, I think you and I are the only two people who have spoken up on this issue. I want to thank you.” He invited me for dinner, and we had several nice dinners together at his request, although I must say that I don’t think any better of him nor do I think any worse of him, but I had a better relationship with him than most people, and I appreciated several things about him. See, I think Richard Nixon could have made a first-rate president. He understood the presidency. He was right on some very big issues; he was right, and he was ahead of his time on those issues. They were progressive issues. His was not an arch-conservative administration. And he just blew it. It was that paranoia that got him.
On Relations with the Media:
I always dealt openly with the press, never misled them, never lied to them, always returned their phone calls. One time a very important columnist in this country said to me, “You know, Strauss, I called you last Wednesday and you called me from your car Wednesday night on the way home at nine o’clock. I was already home and you were in your car just going home and hadn’t had supper yet, and you returned my phone call.” I said, “Well, that’s why I returned it. I hadn’t had time all day, and I didn’t want to leave one of your calls unreturned.” He said, “You know, two days later I left the same call for So-and-So,” I don’t recall his name, “and he hasn’t returned it yet.” Then he said to me, “And who do you think I’m going to screw in the next column, you or him?”
“Hell, Mr. President, I didn’t even vote for you. You don’t want me.”
Q: During this 10-year period after you left the chairmanship, what was your relationship, and what had been your relationship, with George Bush, Sr.?
STRAUSS: George Bush, Sr. and I have had a unique relationship for many, many years. We have the Texas background. We ended up chairmen of our respective parties at the same time. We got along well; the chairmen today of those parties don’t have much of anything to do with each other. We talked with regularity and communicated well. As a matter of fact, I talked him into going on one of the telethons I put on raising money for the Democratic Party. I told him to come on and say a good word about his own party and that people ought to all participate in some way, and see if he could raise a little money too on our telethon on our nickel. He did, and he was an asset to the program. It showed the parties were able to work together not just compete. So our relationship was good.
When Reagan got the nomination, I called the hotel the night they picked George Bush, where George Bush was staying. I didn’t think I’d get him on the phone. I was just going to leave word to congratulate him, but he answered the phone in his suite at the Republican convention. I said, “What the hell are you doing answering the phone?” He said, “We’re just on our way out. Bob, he’s going to name me.” I said, “Well, I heard it on television.” I said, “I was surprised.” He said, “I was shocked. Barbara and I were shocked.” I think he said, “We heard it the same time you did.” Anyway, he was going to rush over to be presented to the convention. So later…we had dinner with him that first night in the White House, but that’s after he became President. I just had a letter, a note, from him this week responding to something I wrote to him about.
Q: Could you tell us how this appointment to Moscow, and when did this come about.
STRAUSS: One day I got a call in my office from an old friend who was Secretary of State, Jim Baker. He said, “Bob, come over and have lunch with me today.” I said, “Jim, I can’t today. I have a date already.” He said, “Well. break it and come over here and have lunch with me. I need to talk to you.” I said, “Jim, I don’t break dates….” He said, “This is important, very important. I promised the president that I would talk to you about a matter before he gets back in town from a trip he is on. He will be back in mid-afternoon, and he is going to want to talk to you.”
That piqued my curiosity, so I said, “Well, I will cancel it and come over.” I went over and sat down. We had a nice lunch. Before we got really started I said, “What the hell is this all about.” He said, “Well, you know we have been looking for an ambassador to the Soviet Union for over a year, and nothing satisfies the president. He called me this morning about seven o’clock and said, ‘I have got our man; now all we have got to do is land him.”‘
I said, “Well what can I do to help?”
He said, “Well, you can accept. You are the man.”
I said, “Are you out of your damn mind? And is the President out of his damn mind?”
He said, “No, he said he had been thinking about it and didn’t know why he didn’t think about it earlier. You are a perfect person to go for him. You know Gorbachev.”
I said, “I couldn’t consider that. I am in my seventies, as is [my wife] Helen. It is just not something we can think about.…” I remember Baker saying to me, “At least you will go over and meet with the president about it?” “Well of course I would.” I didn’t want to be arrogant about it. “I just think I am the wrong person. I don’t know much about Russia. I don’t know anything about this. I am too old.”
Baker said, “Fine.”
So at three o’clock that afternoon I went over to speak with George Bush. He told me how much he wanted me to do this. I told him I couldn’t consider it. He pushed some more, a long meeting. I was uncomfortable saying no to a president. Finally I said to him, “Hell, Mr. President,” keep in mind George Bush senior, who was president then, and I are old friends. We chaired our respective parties at the same time. We were very close, good close friends, very good friends.
Anyway, I finally said, “Hell, Mr. President, I didn’t even vote for you. You don’t want me.” He looked back and said, “I cannot believe you voted for that other fellow.” I said, “Damn sure believe it because I did. I didn’t have a bit of trouble. I never considered voting for you.” I laughed and he laughed. He said, “Well you just blew it, Strauss.” I said, “Why?” He said, “You are the only person since I have been President who sat in that chair at this desk and looked me in the face and said he didn’t vote for me. Now a lot of them sat there and said they did. I know that, but you are the only one who had enough guts to say he didn’t and do it with a smile.”
On Addressing the Crowds on Behalf of Gorbachev
I guess it was about my third day there or fourth day there. They had a big memorial service for three young men who had been killed in the coup. One of them was Russian Orthodox; one was, I think, Baptist, and one was Jewish. They had people from three different faiths there at this big memorial service….
When we got there, there must have been, hell, I don’t know how many hundred thousand people. Biggest crowd I have ever seen. I would have estimated a quarter of a million people they had in this big place. They had all the ambassadors from various countries who were going to meet and sit together during this service to show their support for Gorbachev, who had been out of captivity now two days. When [Librarian of Congress James Billington] and [staffer] Vera [Murray] and I and the security guys started walking toward where the ambassadors were supposed to meet, there was something way over towards the edge of part of that crowd, and I turned behind and I looked around. I saw a flat bed truck with some type of microphone on top of it. Just a flat bed truck out there, that was the stage.
I said to Vera, “Vera I think that is the stage. I bet you that is where things are going to take place. I don’t want to go over there and sit in the bleachers. The action is going to be up on that truck.” I told the security people, “Let’s go over there.” I turned to some of the ambassadors and said, “Do you want to go with me?” The Italian ambassador said he would like to go….
When I got to the end of that flat bed truck, the whole Russian power establishment, what little there was left of it, was back there. The first person I saw, one of the persons, was Gorbachev. I went over to greet him, and he greeted me. Very warm, and he said he was glad I was there, that he had been expecting me and was glad I showed up. I said, “Well so am I. Who is going to speak here today, Mr. President?” He said, “Well, I am going to speak. The mayor is going to speak, and each member of the clergy is going to speak for two minutes. It will just be a 40-minute program,” something like that. Less than an hour program. I said, “Well, I would like to speak. I have a message from President Bush” He looked kind of stunned and kind of said no.
I said, “Mr. President, let me tell you what is going on in this world and in your country. People are wondering about you, what is going to happen to you, senior people having just attempted a coup. Nothing could be as important to you as having a representative of the president of the United States stand up and give you his support for you as president of the Soviet Union.”
His eyes lit up just as if a light went on. He said, “You will speak just before me.” I said, “Thank you. President Bush would like that. He wanted to show you his support and the world his support.” So before a couple of more minutes had passed down came a kind of a rope ladder. I found myself helping the clergy one by one get up and down on the ladder and helping this one up and that one down. I laughed and said, “Vera…, you never know what is going to happen next.”
After a half an hour or so, less than that, I spoke. I had a guy, Hopkins, who was my interpreter. He said he was a nervous wreck. He didn’t have time to prepare for this, but we had it all written out. [DCM James] Collins had it prepared for me before I left the embassy. I had marked it up some as we drove over, so it was a fairly scratchy three minutes of remarks. That is all it was, three or four minutes.
But I remember getting up and looking over that crowed and thinking, “Hell, this crowd is three or four times bigger than I have seen in Times Square during the Democratic convention.” We got through it, and it was played over and over on CNN and other networks around the world. It was very meaningful to Gorbachev. The White House was tickled to death. I talked to Brent Scowcroft. I don’t think I talked to the President then. They were delighted that we showed this U.S. support. So my ambassadorship was launched in a very positive way.
On Changes in the KGB and Finding Out about Bugs in the New Embassy
After [Yeltsin] came in, we saw the more dramatic change when he replaced a bunch of the older KGB types…. I had a fellow named Bill Reardon, who was a CIA head for that whole part of the world. He was in an office in Germany. Bill Reardon, he is still around. He is not active in the CIA, but he was one of the colorful figures. When he came to visit, I introduced him to the head of the KGB. Bill said to me, “They really are trying to reform this agency [the KGB] to some extent, but you know, God only knows what is in those files, and I don’t know when we will ever get to see them.”
Interestingly, that fellow who was head of the KGB, one day called me to come over. He said that he decided he had permission of his government to turn over all the information on the wiretaps that they had planted while the building was being built — a six story building was being built on our land there for our embassy to occupy. He brought out what looked like two ordinary suitcases, old-time suitcases. In them there must have been 30 different listening devices.
In the other package were maps going everywhere. Every single one of those listening devices was placed in the concrete of the building we were building there by the Russian workers. They were KGB and were planting those things all over. I was stunned. I didn’t know whether to take it or not. I came back and called Larry Eagleburger the Deputy Secretary of State and I relayed this story to him. I said, “It seems to me I ought to take them,” but I didn’t want to take them until I got permission.
He said, “Hell, I don’t know what to do. It seems to me we are better off taking them than not taking them.” I told him that is the way it seems to me, but I didn’t want to get out of line here. So I called this fellow back. I can’t think of his name, and told him I would be over the next day and pick it up. We picked up the two big boxes, big suitcases full of material.
He invited me out to his dacha with my wife, and he had [Foreign Minister Eduard] Shevardnadze and their wives. He said to me, “What did you think of the material we gave you yesterday?” I said, “I was stunned by it. I wasn’t surprised that you had it, but I was stunned at what you did.” He said, “We are going to turn this around, and that is a real demonstration of our efforts.” I came back and went public with that.
We wanted to use the [new embassy] building. People in the Congress didn’t want us to; there was a lot of objection to our using it. It was just sitting there wasting, going to rot and ruin, and all that money. As a matter of fact, the head of the KGB, the new reformer, said to me, “This will save your country many millions of dollars. You don’t have to rebuild a building; you can use it. Here is a map of where all the bugs are placed. It will save you 50 million dollars. You are generous with our country; we can at least do this.” So that was sort of the theme of that from the head of the KGB. I might add, they fired him about three months later. Somebody over there changed their mind, I guess, about him being so open. He had done it with Gorbachev’s absolute approval.
On Russian Culture: “I would give myself a failing grade”
Q: Well let me ask a question on the cultural side. Culture plays quite a strong role in Russia as it does, say, in France, more than in many other countries. How did you find on the cultural side?
STRAUSS: I would say that on most of these sides, or some of these sides, because of the people I had around me, I would give myself a grade in many areas of B+ to A.
On the cultural side, I would give myself a failing grade. They were accustomed to the U.S. ambassador who had more interest in cultural affairs than I did. The cultural side has not been a driving interest of mine in this country, and it was not over there. I think I neglected that now. We tried to support the various things, theater, the Bolshoi, things like that, but I didn’t do a very good job. I would go sit in my box and be seen where I needed to be seen.
Q: Try to stay awake.
STRAUSS: That is exactly right. I must confess I think when my grandchildren were there, I took them to the circus instead of to the opera. I probably should be ashamed of myself, but I really give myself failing grades.

We have worked out all the logistics with registration and licensing, so we decided to take the car out and show some people. The place was granville island. We drove there, parked, plugged into a wall outlet, then swarms of people came and started looking at the car. Many asked about the car and took photos, it was a good time. I’ve took some photos from later part of the event where less people were around, but you can still see lots of interest around the car.
I’ll start with a photo next to the Carin:

Trusting Kona Kids Dentistry for my daughter was the worst decision of my life. Her first dental checkup turned out to be a nightmare and I am not sure how Iíll be convincing her for future ones. My daughter Sophia is around 26 months old and all her teeth are almost grown out. The other day while I was teaching her how to brush her teeth I saw a black spot on her lower front teeth on inquiring if it hurt too which she replied no I was a bit comfortable but still I wanted to get it checked just in case it was something to be worried out. The two of us had gone to the monthly tea party where Sophiaís friendís mom told about this really good dentist, according to her, for kids on hearing my concern. I decided to go and visit this place the next day for an appointment as no one answered the call. I went there with Sophia the next day and she very much liked the place. The ambience was very friendly and they had the place customized for children with bright coloured walls and cute wallpapers. They had divided the clinic into two parts one was for 1 – 8 years and the other was for 9 Ė 16 years of age. I went towards my respective side and on to the reception. I asked about the details and told them that I wanted a general checkup appointment. Sophia was attracted to the playing corner which had cute stuff toys and playing things. I anyways confirmed my appointment for the next day at 6 p.m. and took Sophia towards the play area. After around a while I took her out by bribing her for McDonald’s.
The next day we were on time but on coming I got to know that my slot had not been written and they sent someone else at my place. I had to wait for an hour till my turn as the receptionist that had taken my appointment was on leave and she didnít reserve my slot. Sophia didnít care as she was happy playing and thatís the only reason I wasnít bothered a lot too. As I was scrolling Instagram I was called for my turn and we went inside, the room didnít look like the part of the clinic. I was astonished to see the dirty room with a worn off chair and dark interior. Sophia started to cry on seeing the equipment and I panicked. On enquiring, I was told that we are renovating the place and it will be soon good. There were no toys or anything to keep the child busy and the doctor came inside with a mask with made her cry even more. It pretty much looked like the staff was not trained on how to tackle kids. They had no chairs for such small children and brought a feeding chair for her to sit on while getting examined. The attendant tried to forcefully put her in the chair on which I stopped her to which she rudely replied that this is how it is done. I was furious but stopped myself from saying anything rudely and just politely replied: ďI donít want it to be done this wayĒ. I was sad about seeing that the necessary equipment was placed in the drawer without any covering and looked like it wasnít sterilized.
I just left the place without saying anything and tried to calm her down. I decided to look into everything next time before bringing Sophia.
This review (They behave rudely with small kids) was originally published at Holy Smoke !.
To read the full review, go to –

oh and recently had a game, where I was morde, and basically had, within like 10 minutes.
Triple kill, then a quadra kill, then a penta kill, followed by a quadra kill and a triple kill.
after that chain of slaughtering, I didn't get to do much lol every team fight I took all 5 of their ults right to the face, usually living through them, but then dying shortly afterwards to other abilities / attacks, but then their whole team had no ults for my guys waiting in the side line nearby.
Oh and one time was morde we had pushed their mid to inhib and got it. I stayed in the base, noting they had all of their other towers. They basically chain feed me one would revive, run out die to me, standing at their mid inhib, then another would come out almost die run back to well for health, at one point I was fighting all 5 of them, got ghost from their carry and quadrakilled them. Meanwhile my team was taking all of their other towers unharrassed.
Oh the fun ive had with morde. Noting these are post his "nerfs" and fairly recently, I bring that up cause they were all screaming Morde is so OP he needs a nerf, and I said I was nerfed learn to read. lots of cussing persued.

I apologize in advance for the regularity of updates for this story (or lack thereof). Originally, I was going to wait until I had this completely written, but my impatience got the better of me – I just couldn't wait any longer to find out how people are going to react. So, please let me know what you think. I live off of reviews and am always looking for ways to improve my writing. Happy reading!
Hannah pushed herself to run faster. I can't get caught, she thought. I just can't. Despite her best efforts, though, she was tiring. Suddenly, Sherwood Forest loomed ahead of her. Maybe I can lose them in the trees, thought Hannah. Besides, isn't Sherwood supposed to be haunted or inhabited by outlaws? They wouldn't dare follow me in there! Hannah put on a burst of speed and found herself surrounded by the leafy branches of Sherwood Forest. She paused for a moment and discovered that she was still being pursued by the three riders. She set off again, darting in between the trees and doing her best to confuse the men on horseback behind her. Out of nowhere, a fallen branch appeared in Hannah's path. She leapt and cleared it, only to trip over her own two feet and sprawl across the forest floor. She picked herself up and discovered that she was in a clearing surrounded by the men on horseback who had been chasing her.
"Well, men. Looks like we've finally caught our quarry," said the leader, dismounting and approaching Hannah.
"Maybe, maybe not," Hannah taunted, making a mad dash for a break in the circle surrounding her.
She was roughly shoved back, slamming into the leader and stumbling slightly. Over the jeers of the men, Hannah thought she heard her voice being whispered from above, accompanied by a rustling in the trees nearby. She shook it off as her imagination as the captain of the guards gripped her arms tightly. He released one, only to stroke her cheek in a manner that left Hannah shuddering in repulsion.
"Now what's a pretty thing like you accomplishing by running away from us?" he crooned softly. "We can protect you, provided that you do something for us in return."
At his words, the others closed in on Hannah and the captain.
Hannah did her best to keep the fear out of her face. She would not show weakness in front of these savages who claimed to serve the king. "And what would you have me do?" she asked, though both she and the guards knew what the captain meant by 'services.'
"Oh, I think you can guess," said the captain, tracing Hannah's face with a gloved hand.
"Let's see – you want me to bring you breakfast in bed, is that it?" asked Hannah, her voice dripping with sarcasm.
"I'd prefer dessert," the captain replied.
Hannah resisted rolling her eyes at the captain's attempt at subtlety. Now was not the time to antagonize him. She needed an escape plan. She glanced around, trying to find an opening or a distraction. There was nothing, nowhere to go except backwards. "You will never take me alive," she declared. Then, with a swift kick to the captain's groin, Hannah turned and fled. However, she didn't make it far, as the nearest soldier stuck out his foot and tripped her. Hannah could feel the bruises forming from the various falls she had taken that day. She flipped over to face the soldiers and scrambled to her feet, bracing herself for a fight.
The captain made his way slowly towards her, as though hoping to instill fear in her as to what he might do in retaliation. However, Hannah was not afraid, even when his gloved hand struck her hard across the face and sent her, once more, sprawling to the ground.
"You'll get worse than that from his Lordship, I can promise you," he spat out as he pulled Hannah to her feet.
Oh, I've had worse, believe me, Hannah thought, remembering the countless punishments she had suffered.
As he drew his hand back to strike Hannah again, he suddenly found an arrow through it.
"Wha—?" he cried out in pain.
"You dare strike a woman?" came the deceptively calm voice of Will Scarlett as he jumped from the tree above and landed on his feet directly in front of Hannah, who had fallen to the ground when the captain had released her to clutch at his wounded hand.
"Will . . ." Hannah whispered, eyes widening and relief evident in her voice as she recognized the young man standing between her and the captain as the boy who had been her playmate in the village she had grown up in. I'm saved, she thought. Will always knows what to do.
Will gave Hannah a quick glance and a reassuring smile before turning to face the man he'd wounded, his bow and quiver of arrows slung over his shoulder, leaving his hands free to grip his sword.
"Why you little—" the captain started towards Will and Hannah.
Will stood his ground and merely raised his sword, determined to protect Hannah at any cost.
"Touch either, and you'll die," came a new voice, as Robin dropped to the ground next to Will, immediately moving between him and the advancing man. Robin was incensed that this man would dare threaten a woman or his little brother.
The captain and his guards could only watch as several more men plunged from the leafy shelter of the trees to stand on level ground.
"Who are you?" the captain asked in wonder.
"Robin Hood, at your service," he said, offering a mock bow to the group of soldiers.
The moment Robin had landed found Will turning his attention to Hannah. He went to her, helping her to her feet and moving to shield her from the gaze of the soldiers.
"Now," Robin continued. "I advise you to leave and never trespass here again."
"Fine," said the captain. "But the girl goes with us. We have a job to complete. We were sent to fetch her, and fetch her we will. The girl goes with us."
"I don't think so," snarled Will, crouching down in front of Hannah, prepared to strike.
"Steady, brother," whispered Robin, so only Will and Hannah could hear.
Slowly, Will straightened, yet he refused to budge from his position in front of Hannah. It was clear that anyone who wanted her would have to go through Will first.
Meanwhile, Robin addressed the soldiers. "Here in Sherwood, we protect our women. We don't hit them, we don't ravish them on the forest floor, and we don't threaten them with bodily harm if they don't do as we want. Here in Sherwood, we respect women and treat them as equals."
"Now, get out." Will growled ferociously, body shaking with the effort it took to remain stationary.
At first, it looked as though the men would leave without a fight. The captain, however, turned on Robin and drew his sword.
Robin was prepared, though, and slew the man instantly.
As Will made to join the fight, he heard Hannah give a cry. Turning, he discovered a man advancing on her. Leaping between them, he drew his sword and ran the man through. Forgetting about the others, Will encircled Hannah with his arms, allowing her to grip his shirt and bury her head in his chest, shutting out the fight that surrounded them.
When the last soldier had been dispatched, Robin, John, Bull, and Azeem turned to Will and the trembling girl in his arms.
"You're safe, my lady," said Robin, gently.
Leaving the security of Will's arms, Hannah turned to face Robin and his men. "Thank you, my lords," she said, curtsying, "for saving my life."
"There's no need for that here, Hannah," said Will, pulling her out of her curtsy. "As Robin said, in Sherwood, everyone is equal. Commoner," he said, pointing to himself, "and nobleman," he finished, pointing to Robin, "all eat at the same table."
Hannah turned her attention to Will, facing him completely. "I never thought I'd see you again," she whispered softly, tracing his face as the captain had done to her. Yet Hannah's actions incited a feeling of calm tranquility to settle over both her and Will, rather than the repulsion Hannah had felt at the captain's touch.
"Likewise," whispered Will.
Caught up in their reunion, both forgot about their surroundings.
Robin cleared his throat. "Care to introduce us, Will? I take it you know the lady."
Keeping an arm wrapped around Hannah, Will turned to face his brother and friends. "This is Hannah. We grew up in the same village. But she moved away about 10 years ago."
"Welcome to Sherwood, Hannah," said Robin, executing a courtly bow to show his respect for Will's childhood friend.
"Delighted, Robin Hood of Locksley," said Hannah, a hint of venom in her voice. She'd seen what Will had gone through on account of Robin. Unlike Will, who was apparently friendly with his brother, Hannah was not as quick to forgive and forget.
"Ah, I see you are aware of who I am outside of Sherwood."
"Yes," Hannah replied simply, unwilling to get into a lengthy discussion about the past at that time.
"What do you want from the woods, Hannah?" asked Will. "You don't have to tell us why those men were chasing you, but you must have wanted something to have run in here."
"I seek asylum in Sherwood Forest," Hannah replied steadily, maintaining eye contact with Robin, as she had correctly identified him as the leader.
"Then you shall have it. You are one of us now and we protect our own," said Robin.
"Thank you," said Hannah, closing her eyes against the emotions threatening to overwhelm her. I have a home, thought Hannah. For the first time in many years, I feel wanted, as though I belong somewhere. Hannah opened her eyes again and smiled brightly at her new friends.
"Let's head to camp. We want to get there before dark," urged Robin.
"Come," said Will, holding out his hand for Hannah to take. "You're safe with us."
The group set off. Hannah, of course, was paired with Will. They walked side-by-side, hands entwined. She took a moment to observe him.
Life in Sherwood has hardened him, she thought, as she noticed a scar along his cheek. No, that's not quite right, she amended. Life has always been hard for Will, more so than for others. He became hardened to the ways of the world at a very young age. No, life in Sherwood may be rough, but he's grown up here. The forest has become his home. Rather, I believe that life in Sherwood has taught him how to depend on others. When I knew him, he was always so strong, standing up for me but never for himself. He would slink around, as though he wished to be invisible. He carries himself differently now. He's more confident. I think he's finally realized that he is a person of value.
She was jarred from her reverie by Will gently bumping shoulders with her. "What's on your mind, Angel?" he asked, using his nickname for her from when they were children.
"You, actually," Hannah replied. "That was some impressive shooting."
"Lucky shot. Robin's the master archer in our group."
"You've grown up, Will," said Hannah, after his modest words and praise of Robin had sunk in.
"Having a price on your head does that to a person," he replied, a touch of his old bitterness showing through.
"I'm glad we've been given a chance to be friends again," Hannah told Will, squeezing his hand slightly.
"As am I, for you were never out of my head . . . or my heart," Will confessed. "You were the only person who was willing to put up with me when we were younger."
"There was a spark in you, Will – it was as though I were helpless to resist your pull. You were so charismatic; I was always surprised that you didn't have more friends."
"You know why that was," said Will, sourly.
"Yes, which reminds me – why you are seemingly on such good terms with your brother? I seem to recall a time when all you could talk about was how Robin of Locksley had ruined your life."
"Certain . . . circumstances changed our relationship. I'll tell you everything, soon. Never fear, my dear."
"I never do when you're around," Hannah said sincerely. "Thank you, for saving me today. I've no doubt that I owe you my life."
"Please, no," Will moaned. "I already owe Robin my life, twice over. I don't need anyone owing me their life too!"
Hannah was shocked. Will owed Robin his life? "Well, your story must be good, if it involves a life debt."
"It is, I suppose, though I'm the bad guy for most of it."
Hannah watched as a look of guilt came over Will's face.
He really has changed, she thought to herself. He's no longer the little boy who was always getting into petty fights. He's become a man!
"We're here," Robin announced to Hannah and Will, who'd been so ensconced in their conversation that they had forgotten about their companions.
Hannah looked away from Will to see Robin gesturing to the camp spread out below them. "Oh," she gasped softly.
"It's not much," Will said from her side, "But it's home."
"It's wonderful!" Hannah gushed. "I've always wanted to live out of doors. But my master insisted that I remained inside, trapped."
Will's head snapped up at Hannah's words. "Your . . . master?" he asked, stunned at Hannah's revelation.
"Oh," she gasped, a guarded look coming over her face at the realization that she'd let such an important fact slip out, "Nothing, never mind."
Robin looked as though he were going to comment about how no one should be someone else's master. But Will shook his head, signaling that Hannah would talk when she was ready. Until then, no one should force her to reveal more than she was willing.
"If it's pleasing to you, my lady," said Will, bowing and offering her his hand as he slipped into the persona of a courtier, guiding Hannah through the camp, "you will be sharing my sleeping quarters."
He motioned to his tree house, indicating that Hannah should climb the ladder. She did so, and Will made a grand sweeping gesture to the single room. "Home sweet home," he said.
Hannah took in the hammock, the rug, and the other objects that made up Will's room. "Quite satisfactory, my lord," she said, turning to Will and giving him her most stately curtsy. She rose and threw her arms around Will. "Thank you," she whispered, over and over again, doing her best not to cry.
"Anything for you, Hannah," said Will honestly, as he rubbed soothing circles across her back, the same way Robin had to calm him down from one of his many nightmares.
"Dinner!" called up a melodic voice from below.
Hannah looked over the edge at the top of a woman's head. "Who's that?" she asked Will.
"That's Marian, Robin's wife," replied Will. "She was almost married to the Sheriff of Nottingham, but Robin saved her."
"You admire Robin," Hannah said as they climbed down to the ground.
"Yes," said Will simply, "because he gave pride to our people. And he accepted me, acknowledging me as his brother. He's been a real comfort to me these past months . . ."
Will's voice trailed off as he recalled the times spent in Robin's arms, sweating and shaking, having been released from another dream about his near-death experiences. Hannah, realizing that there was more to Will's words, waited.
"But that's a story for another day," Will finished. "You've been through enough. You don't need to hear about my problems too."
"That's my choice to make, Will," said Hannah, gently. "However, if you do not wish to tell me at this time, I accept that. I'm here for you. Friends forever, remember?"
"Of course," said Will, taking Hannah's hand and squeezing it. He made to release her, but Hannah held on.
They arrived at the fire to find everyone else already gathered.
"And who is this?" asked Fanny, the 'mother' of the group.
"This is Hannah," said Will. "We grew up in the same village. But she moved away about 10 years ago."
"How did you come to Sherwood, Hannah?" asked Marian, gravitating to Robin's side and slipping an arm about his waist.
"I was being chased by some soldiers," said Hannah quietly, hoping that she wasn't to be interrogated about her past.
"That must have been terrifying. You poor dear," said Fanny. "Here's some food, to put meat on your bones. My, but you are a skinny lass."
Hannah took the plate gratefully. It had been several days since she had last eaten.
Will watched as she tore ravenously into the meat. "Hannah, slow down," he whispered. "I know what it is to be hungry. I've gone without food before, myself. But you can't shovel it all in. You'll overwhelm your stomach and make yourself sick."
With effort, Hannah set down the piece of meat she'd been devouring. She looked up and caught Robin's eye from across the fire. She flushed at having such a great hero witness her animalistic behavior. She realized, though, that Robin's expression was pained, as though he were remembering something that troubled him.
"Why does Robin look sad?" she asked Will.
Shooting his brother a subtle glance, Will recognized where his brother's thoughts were. He turned to face Hannah. "He's remembering a similar situation in which I was the one devouring a piece of meat as though it would disappear on me."
"Oh, Will. I'm sorry," said Hannah, reaching for him to offer comfort and to show her support.
"All in the past," said Will, forcing the cheer back into his voice.
Hannah wasn't fooled, though. She and Will would be talking soon, about what they'd both been through in the last ten years. She settled down to watching the various interactions between members of her new 'family.' Robin and Marian were turned to face each other, hands joined, conversing quietly. They were obviously very much in love, as their eyes shone when looking at the other. John and Fanny were surrounded by their children, joking and laughing about what they'd done that day. Bull sat with them, entertaining the smaller ones with funny faces. The painted man, Azeem, was talking to a fat man in a brown robe. He must be Friar Tuck, thought Hannah. There were other people gathered around the fire that Hannah had yet to properly meet. What stood out most to Hannah was that, no matter how little one had, everyone was willing to share. Hannah turned to observe Will, only to find him staring right back at her.
"Like what you see?" he asked, genuinely curious.
"Everyone gets along so well together," Hannah remarked. "I'm used to bickering and . . . other forms of disagreement. You know." She made a vague gesture that Will took to indicate her home life from before she moved away.
Checking that they wouldn't be overheard, Will leaned in closer towards Hannah. "What happened?" he asked. "One day, you were in the village, indulging in my desire to play the romantic hero. The next, you were gone, vanished into thin air. Where did you go? What did you do? Why didn't you ever come back? And why were those men chasing you today?"
"Whoa, slow down, Will, one question at a time. Are you sure you want to go into this now? We can always wait until morning."
"It's just . . . it's so sudden, seeing you again after all these years. I guess I'd just like an explanation. Not that you owe me one, though."
"No, Will. I do owe you an explanation, for my disappearance was as sudden as my reappearance was today. I'm sorry I never got the chance to say goodbye, but I was taken in the middle of the night."
"Taken?" Will was alarmed, "Where? Who took you?"
"I'm not sure I'm ready for the entire camp to know of my background. Is there somewhere we can go to be alone?"
"Yes," replied Will instantly, thinking of his special place where he went to think. "We can go to the river. No one will bother us there."
They set down their empty plates and walked away into the lengthening shadows, hand-in-hand. Their departure did not go unnoticed, but Robin knew that Will and Hannah needed time to sort things out for themselves. He would make sure that they wouldn't be disturbed.
At the river, Will motioned for Hannah to sit down, though only after he had spread out his cloak for her to sit on.
"Just because I'm a girl does not mean that I deserve any special privileges, Will," said Hannah, gently reprimanding him. "But I appreciate the gesture. Thank you."
"You're welcome. And for the record, it's not because you're a girl that I do special things for you, either now or in the future. It's because you're my friend and I figure that you've had a hard enough time. If I can do anything to make life a little easier for you, then I will."
"Again, thank you, Will. Your friendship means the world to me."
They smiled at each other before gazing out at the rushing river in front of them. The sound of water hitting rocks calmed Hannah's nerves, which were on edge at the prospect of telling her story to Will, of all people. Meanwhile, Will, ever the gentleman, remained silent, sensing that Hannah had to decide for herself when to begin, if at all.
"My parents never wanted me," she said. "Or, I should say, they would have preferred for me to be a boy. As such, I was left to fend for myself, which is why I was always free to play with you. When I was seven years old, they were threatened with the loss of their land. They offered me in exchange, seeing an easy way to unload me onto someone else. His Lordship accepted and I was whisked away to his castle in the middle of the night, where I have spent the past ten years doing my best to escape. You found me today in the middle of one of my escape attempts, which would have failed if you hadn't stepped in when you did."
Will was stunned into silence. His best friend had, for all intents and purposes, been sold into slavery. "Hannah . . ." he whispered, wishing he knew what to say. He settled for placing an arm around her shoulders and pulling her flush against his side. "Who was your . . . master?" he asked, stumbling over his words, refusing to think of Hannah being forced to submit to anyone's will but her own.
"Lord Manchester," Hannah finally replied.
Will gasped. Although from another county, Lord Manchester was well known as a tyrant, cruel and heartless. For Hannah to have been under his control for the last ten years . . .
Will suddenly had more questions than ever before. Luckily, Hannah, despite having been absent for half of his life, knew him well enough to sense his inner turmoil.
"Did he . . . harm you in anyway?" asked Will, desperate, yet, at the same time, unwilling to know.
"Unfortunately, yes," said Hannah, so matter-of-factly that Will was taken aback.
"What did he . . . do?"
"He raped me, for all intents and purposes, since I certainly never gave my permission."
At this, Hannah found herself in Will's arms, practically being smothered.
"Oh, God – Hannah, I am so, so sorry. If there was something I could have done differently . . . you have to believe me, Hannah, I would do anything to take away your pain and to ensure that you would never be hurt again."
"Thank you, Will. I appreciate it – truly – but what's done is done, and I have to move on. We both do."
Will gave a shuddering sigh, and nodded. "What else would he . . . do to you?"
"He would punish me, ruthlessly," said Hannah, again, so nonchalantly that Will was momentarily stunned.
As she met Will's questioning eyes, she continued, "He would isolate me for days at a time, without food or water, for no reason at all. He beat me, or had others beat me. If I resisted, I was hit harder. There are marks – which you aren't going to see at this time. Generally, though, my punishments were the result of one of my escape attempts."
Will's head had been down, fighting the nausea, as Hannah spoke. At hearing that Manchester and his men had scarred her, his head shot up. He tensed, as though braced for a fight, yet relaxed at hearing that Hannah would let him see her scars – eventually.
"And that's my story," Hannah concluded. "You know what my home life was like, before I was 'sold.' It wasn't that different from life under Lord Manchester's rule. Now I'm here, with you, and I couldn't be happier. If my suffering is what led me to you, then I'd gladly go through it all again."
Will held her tighter, glad that he was there to help take the pain away, if only for a little while. "If you ever . . . need anything . . . anything at all, Hannah, you've but to command me. I'll be here for you, forever. I'm never letting you go, unless you wish to leave. And you will never feel pain, not if I can help it."
"Thank you, Will. I hope my trials and tribulations to be a thing of the past. If not, though, you are the only person I would willingly suffer for. You're my best friend and I love you."
"I feel exactly the same way, Hannah. I would die for you."
"I hope such an act is never necessary, but I appreciate the sentiment. Thank you."
The two settled into an easy silence as they regarded the river. They were together, and that was enough, for the moment.
Nestled in the safety of Will's arms, Hannah decided to broach the subject of Will's past. Now that her own story was out in the open, she was curious as to what Will had been up to for the last ten years. "Will, what have you been doing since I left?" she asked, coming straight to the point.
Will remained silent, contemplating what to tell Hannah. "This and that," he said, finally, evasive as ever. "My mother got sick and died shortly after your disappearance. I became an outlaw when I shot and killed a deer to pay for her funeral. When I retreated to the woods, John Little took me in as one of his own. I was raised without any special privileges, but I learned how to survive and fend for myself. Robin showed up – with Azeem and his manservant, Duncan, who has since passed away – about six months ago. I took every opportunity to attack him and his position in life. I even tried to knife him while his back was turned! At Wulf's warning, though, he shot an arrow through my hand in retaliation. When the Sheriff staged an attack on our camp, I was taken prisoner, as were many others. I was released, after being whipped, on the condition that I tell Robin of the impending hangings in honor of the Sheriff's marriage to Marian. I was to use this information to get close to and kill Robin. I made it back to camp, but was attacked by John, who considered me a traitor. That's where I got this," he said, motioning to the scar along his cheek that Hannah had noticed earlier.
Hannah, meanwhile, was sitting entranced at the tale of Will's escapades. She feared for him, even though he had obviously survived. After all, he was sitting with his arm wrapped around her, very much alive.
Lost in the past, Will was unaware of Hannah staring concernedly at him. "I ended up confessing to Robin that we were brothers. He tended to my wounds and housed me in his own home. The next morning, we talked again and I was struck by how wrong I had been – about Robin and a lot of other things. John, Fanny, Azeem, Friar Tuck, Bull, Robin, and I then made our way to Nottingham to rescue our men and Lady Marian. Everything was going according to plan until the prisoners were led out to the gallows. John and Fanny's boy, Wulf, was one of the prisoners, and he saw me in the crowd. Believing me to have betrayed and killed Robin, he attacked me, gaining everyone's attention. I was brought before the Sheriff, who sentenced me to hang with the others."
Hannah gasped at Will's danger, and found herself thanking God that he had been spared.
"There was no more room, so I told the Sheriff that I would have to 'respectfully decline.' "
Hannah laughed in spite of herself. That sounded like something Will would say. When put in awkward situations, he tended to resort to joking (in a completely serious tone of voice) so as to diffuse the tension.
Will went on: "Part of our men's rescue involved barrels of black powder that Azeem had concocted. When lit on fire, the powder would explode. Earlier, Friar Tuck and Azeem had placed one such barrel near the gallows. When the executioner saw that there was neither room nor rope to string me up with, he forced me to kneel across the barrel and tied me to that."
Will shuddered as the memories overwhelmed him. Hannah gripped his arm to remind him that he wasn't alone, that she was there with him, and that they would conquer the past together.
"There were drums," Will said softly, remembering, "and then Wulf was gasping for air. Robin shot at the rope strangling him and cut him loose. At the same time, Azeem blew up one of the barrels behind Robin for an added distraction. In all the chaos, the executioner continued with the hangings. He then turned to me. He leveled an axe at my head. I remember meeting Robin's eyes and trying to tell him how sorry I was that I hadn't been a better brother while I'd had the chance. At the last moment, right as the executioner raised the axe, I closed my eyes. I still wish that I'd been able to erase the fear in them. If I was going to die, I wanted Robin to remember me as strong and brave, not weak or lacking courage."
"No one could ever accuse you of cowardice, Will Scarlett," said Hannah. "You are the bravest man I know." She squeezed his arm and motioned for him to continue.
"I didn't feel brave. I was afraid, and, when I looked at Robin, I could see that same fear reflected in his eyes – fear for me, of all people. But death never came," said Will. "Instead, I heard a thump as someone fell to the ground and when I opened my eyes, there was Robin. He had shot a flaming arrow at the executioner and had saved my life. He cut the rope tying me to the barrel and pulled me out of danger as another axe landed where my head had been moments before."
By this time, Hannah was almost unsurprised that Will had cheated death twice, in quick succession. She was becoming used to the twists and turns that his story was taking.
"There was fighting all around. Then, suddenly, Robin was going after Marian, for the Sheriff was dragging her away. He used a catapult to launch himself and Azeem over the wall. I remember pulling the lever and being amazed that they'd actually cleared it. I re-entered the fight, only to discover that my strength was fading, for when Wulf had attacked me, he had re-opened my wounds which had only been bandaged the day before, meaning that in my still-healing state, I was vulnerable. I noticed Bull in trouble and threw my knife, only to turn and find a blade in my side. Unarmed, I fell and was almost killed, when Robin saved me, yet again. He stood between me and my attacker, at great personal risk, to ensure my safety. The battle over, I fainted from loss of blood and Robin carried me back home. I developed a fever but recovered several days later. About a week after that, Robin and Marian were married, with King Richard himself in attendance at their wedding, and we've lived in Sherwood ever since."
Hannah stared at him in awe. She no longer saw the little boy who had claimed her as his damsel in distress for him – and him, alone – to save. She saw a fearless warrior who fought for the good of all, rather than just for his own profit. "You've grown up, Will," she observed.
"I'd say that any change that has come over me has been due to Robin's influence. Having him in my life has inspired me. He inspires me. Before Robin, life was about not getting caught. When he came, the band developed a sense of justice that had been lacking before. Watching him interact with the people of Nottingham during our time as unpardoned outlaws made me want to inspire a similar trust and devotion in somebody, someday."
Hannah smiled understandingly at Will. Having been treated as an outsider his whole life, even in the village where he'd spent his childhood, it was only natural for him to want to be included and made to feel special. "I can see that Robin's been good to you these past months," she said. "But how did he explain your childhood encounter?"
"He doesn't know," said Will quickly. "And I don't want him to. He'd only feel guilty and spend the rest of his life trying to make it up to me. I doubt he even remembers me: a scrawny little kid with a split lip and covered in bruises . . . He's different, Hannah, as am I. Just as he changed me, I changed him too, as did the Crusades. He's no longer the spoiled little rich boy who found amusement in picking on those smaller or weaker than him. He values everyone for their individuality and no longer lets class define how he judges a person's worth. He says that I taught him that, for before the Crusades he would have rejected me because of my peasantry. Yet now he embraces me and is proud to call me family."
"I'm happy for you, Will," said Hannah, choking up slightly at his uncharacteristic display of emotion. "You deserve for things to go right in your life, after all that has gone wrong."
"As do you, Hannah, my Angel," Will whispered softly, planting a comforting kiss on her head.
Hannah smiled up at him. Even as a boy, Will always knew how to make me feel as though I were the only girl for him, she thought to herself. Aloud, she said, "I seem to recall asking for your story of the past ten years, Will, not just the past six months."
Will smiled at her, sheepishly. "Nothing of much significance happened before Robin's arrival. I wasn't living; I merely existed, doing my best to survive for one day more and not get caught or killed. Robin gave my life a purpose. And that is why I gave you a detailed account of the last six months rather than the last ten years, for they have defined who I am – as has Robin, for I owe him my life."
Hannah was stunned at the intensity of Will's feelings for Robin, his brother. "I had no idea that you could feel so strongly about somebody, Will," she said, expressing her amazement at Will's reaction every time Robin was mentioned.
"Robin's not just 'somebody,' " countered Will.
"I'm not saying he's 'just somebody.' I can see how important he is to you and I understand. After all, I've viewed you as a brother for many years now, so I know how special the bonds of brotherhood are. I'm glad you have someone to give your life meaning."
Will had calmed down from what he had irrationally seen as an attack against Robin. He saw that Hannah had pulled away and was clasping her hands about her knees, which were drawn up to her chest.
"I didn't mean to start something, Hannah," pleaded Will. "With Robin, my emotions have always been either extreme hatred or extreme devotion. When he first showed up, I was in shock. I was presented with the man who had single-handedly ruined mine and my mother's life, and he waltzed into the camp and began to take over, making changes, something I had only ever dreamed of doing. After trying to kill him, his arrow through my hand made me realize that he deserved an explanation as to why I hated him with such passion. But I could never work up enough courage to approach him and tell the truth."
As Will spoke, he traced the jagged scar, hidden beneath his glove, which served as a reminder to not cross Robin. He looked up to find Hannah watching him intently. "Then there came my capture and subsequent release. I knew I was lucky to be free and not locked up, awaiting execution, so I decided that the time had come. His acceptance brought about a complete change in my emotions. When I'd walked into camp, and Robin called me out on my mission from the Sheriff, I expected for every breath to be my last. Robin had no reason to let me live. I'd been nothing but cruel since his arrival, when really he'd done me and everyone else a great favor – he gave us something to fight for. Add to my behavior the fact that we were brothers, proof that his father had tainted the family name by associating with a peasant woman, I was stunned when – rather than kill me – he embraced me and called me 'brother.' From that day forward, I have felt nothing but respect and admiration for him."
Hannah was silent for a moment. Then, she spoke, "Thank you, Will, for explaining to me so fully your feelings. I understand that you have forgiven him for your childhood – that much is obvious. I have yet to do so, though. I'm not saying that I will never forgive him. It will just take me a little longer to reach the same understanding as you two. As a child, he affected me too, for I saw through your mask to what you were feeling, and I have never forgotten. I wanted so much to wring his neck for what he put you through, however unintentional it may have been. Now, however, I respect that you are friends – as well as brothers – and I will work through my own feelings, as you have done."
"Thank you, Hannah. You're wonderful," said Will. "And I know you'll come to love Robin just as much as I do."
"I hope so, Will, for your sake," replied Hannah, returning the hug he had pulled her into upon her finishing her speech.
"We should head back to camp," urged Will. "It's getting late."
"First, we should wash our faces," Hannah pointed out.
Will realized that she was right, for tears had been shed at the realization that each had undergone tremendous amounts of pain in the last ten years. And without the other to lean on, they'd been forced to muddle through on their own.
The last time Will had cried like this had been when he'd suffered that breakdown after his fever, when Robin had followed him and talked to him, reassuring him that family was forever. He knelt by the river, splashed water on his face, and rose, feeling refreshed and rejuvenated.
Hannah, meanwhile, hadn't cried in years. Although she regretted burdening Will with her past, she realized how beneficial it had been to share her story. She'd released years of anger and frustration and hurt and sorrow through her tears that night, feelings that would have continued to weigh her down. Now, however, she felt as free as a bird in flight.
She stood and took Will's outstretched hand, giving him a friendly and playful squeeze. The moon shone brightly, guiding their steps through the woods as they made their way back to camp in silence. Breaking through the trees, they discovered that everyone had already gone to bed with the exception of Robin, who sat staring into the dying fire.
"Will! Hannah!" he called out as he stood to greet them.
"Robin," Will replied tiredly, feeling emotionally drained from recounting the past and virtually living through Hannah's experiences.
Hannah gave Robin a brief nod, unsure of how to address him. She didn't like him, but she didn't dislike him, either. After all, he had taken Will under his wing, so to speak, and had saved her life, as well as Will's.
"How has your evening been?" Robin asked conversationally.
Will and Hannah shared a glance before Will turned to answer Robin: "Our evening has been very healing. We've told each other stories of the last ten years and have helped each other to face our pasts." Will smiled down at Hannah as he spoke.
Robin took in their damp faces and red eyes, yet noticed their contentment in each other's presence. Smiling in understanding, he said, "I'm glad to hear that you've both found peace."
Again, Hannah nodded her agreement.
"That we have, Robin," said Will. "Well, we should turn in. It's been a long day. Good night, brother."
"Good night, Will. Good night, Hannah. Sleep well."
"Good night, Robin," said Hannah, a bit stiffly.
Despite Will's assurances that he and Robin were close friends, Hannah was still surprised at the slight formality that Will addressed his brother with. There's something that Will's not telling me, she thought. Either that, or there's something that Will himself is not aware of regarding his relationship with Robin. I shall watch them together to see if I can determine what the matter is.
Shaking off her unease, Hannah followed Will up the ladder to his tree house.
"You can take the hammock, Hannah," said Will gallantly. "I'll sleep on the floor."
Hannah knew better than to argue with Will, so she agreed and carefully climbed into the twisting cloth strung between two posts. Will settled himself on the floor. The hard wood didn't bother him. He'd had worse beds.
"Good night, Hannah," he whispered into the darkened room. "Sleep well."
"Good night, Will," came Hannah's reply. "I hope you sleep well also. Thank you for listening to me tonight."
"It was my pleasure, Angel. I'll always listen. If ever you have anything you want or need to say, don't hesitate to come to me. And thank you for listening to me tonight, as well. Apart from Robin himself, I've told no one about what I felt when he first arrived and how my feelings for him changed."
"What goes for me goes for you, as well, Will Scarlett. I'll always be here for you."
"Thank you, Hannah. Good night."
"Good night, Will."
The tree house then settled into an easy silence, as the inhabitants rested their weary minds and bodies, allowing for sleep to claim them.
When I originally wrote this, I planned on leaving Hannah pure – a virgin – but then I realized that, due to the time period, if a man like Manchester were lusting for her, nothing would have stood in his way of taking what he viewed as rightfully his – in this case, her body.
Also, a quick explanation as to the title I've chosen: In The Story of Robin Hood and His Merrie Men (1952), starring Richard Todd, the minstrel Alan-a-Dale sings a song called 'Whistle, My Love,' which depicts a young couple who won't let anything keep them apart. I felt that this accurately portrayed the emotions that Will and Hannah feel for each other, since, despite having been separated for many years, they have now found each other again and have vowed to never leave the other's side.
That said – I hope you enjoyed this first chapter of 'Whistle, My Love.' Please leave a review telling me what you thought.

Little Smith just wants to do everything that his big sister and brother are doing.
If anyone lays on the floor, Smith will find them to tackle them. Zane is amazing at playing with his little brother. He is usually so careful and gentle and knows just how to get him to have fun and laugh a ton.
I like when he pretends to wrestle or "fight" Smith and then falls down. Smithy loves it.
Emmy is also really good at playing with Smith. She can sometimes be on the rough side, so I have to keep an extra eye on them, but she always means well. She just wants him to do everything she does and makes him laugh too, but usually it's harder for her to figure out how. She loves her brother sooo much.
Here they are walking pushing their strollers around together. I love how she helps guide his stroller for him. He could do this all day long.
This video makes me so happy. He just wants to be like the big kids...it's just hard to keep up! But he did figure out how to make the yelling sound. :)
4th and 2nd
2 weeks ago

The first time I heard of Dr. Tom Amberry, the world champion free throw shooter, was when I was sitting in a donut store having a cup of coffee. I was skimming a local newspaper, and my eye fell on a story about a 71-year-old retired podiatrist who had made 2,750 free throws in a row to enter the Guinness Book of Records.
I can remember thinking there had to be a mistake there somewhere. No one is capable of that level of perfection, especially at that age.
In the story Dr. Amberry was quoted as saying that his free throw shooting routine took six seconds and was like “auto hypnosis.” Hypnosis has lurked around the edges of sports in an intriguing way for many years. But the idea of packaging it in six-second doses was new and very attractive to me.

Cut Off: How we spent our time in a residential school
My first job, from the age of 16 to 18 (1965 to 1967) was as an assistant housemother in a residential school for children with cerebral palsy who were also classified as being ESN. The school was run by the Spastics Society (now SCOPE). We lived in a manor house deep in the Sussex countryside where few 'outsiders' ventured. I was one of 14 house care staff who were employed to assist 55 children from 5 to 16. We were all resident and most of us were young with little or no training.
The school was researched in the late 1960s by Maureen Oswin in her book The Empty Hours. She compared it with the regime that children were subjected to in mental handicap hospitals and found much to recommend it. As I will show, however, it fell far short of child care practice which would be expected today.
In this paper I will show how the house care staff and the children spent their time in this residential setting. My talk will be illustrated with photographs and newspaper cuttings from this time. Some of the themes I will cover with regard to how time was spent are as follows:
As a 16 year old straight from school I was given considerable responsibility but no training. I do, however, regard this as one of the most formative periods of my life, a time which informed the rest of my working life and provided me with several lifelong friendships.

Popular Vicar Announces Retirement
Wednesday 1st February 2012
The Vicar of Braddan the Reverend Canon Philip Frear has announced his retirement from the Parish at the end of April 2012.
Canon Frear along with his wife Jaquy first came to the Island to serve in the diocese in November 1995 following on from parish ministry beginning in the Diocese of Bristol where he had served since 1980.
He was appointed as Chaplain to Noble's Hospital in September 1998 and his service was recognised when he was appointed to the seat of the Canon of Maughold in the Cathedral and Chapter in October 2004.
Canon Frear will continue in his role as Hospital Chaplain but is looking forward to his retirement from parish ministry and spending more time with his family.
Bishop Robert commenting on Canon Frear's retirement said, 'The Diocese is enormously grateful to Philip for his years of faithful service to Braddan, the Cathedral and to Noble's Hospital. I am pleased that he will continue to serve the Cathedral and as Anglican Chaplain to Noble's.'

Helen Benner : From A Family's Memories
August 17 1922 July 23 2007
Helen Benner was a middle child of nine children, eight of whom survived, born to immigrant parents. Her steel mill machinist father and homemaker mother instilled in their children the values of family, hard work and most of all, a profound love of God. Her childhood was happy and active, lived on a shoestring and a prayer. She was her mama's girl, tied strongly to those apron strings. She often told of her family living next to a church, with many beggars and strangers coming to their door in the mistaken belief that their house was the parsonage. Her mother and father never let a single one leave without food and a kind word. Her parents' kindness and generosity lived on and grew in their children. Their inspiration was their quiet, unshakeable faith in God.
Her siblings were her life and her closest friends. Her circle of love increased one day when her beauty and kindness drew a certain fellow to her at work. She had always said she didn't want to marry, just be at home with her folks and family. But this certain fellow and his gentle spirit and gentlemanly actions soon changed her mind! And in 1951 they embarked together on a 55.75 year adventure of exemplary love and grace filled married life. Through all their life together as husband and wife, she referred to Ludi as "her boyfriend." The first few years were easy, carefree years. They had a child, and were expecting another one. Days after their second daughter was born, the fairy tale took a tough turn polio struck her down. Her brother likes to tell a story about her iron lung days in the hospital. When he came to visit her, she indicated the patients on either side of her. She said to him, "They're not going to make it." He asked why. She replied, "They're men. Men don't have the same fight in them as women do." She battled her way back; they didn't. She was so strong, so brave, so determined, so trusting in the Lord. She needed to get well for her 1 week old and 20 month old and her beloved husband and family. God mercifully returned her to her family, and she was grateful every day of her life for that gift. She and Ludi continued throughout their lives to model that complete trust and unshakeable faith in God, to their daughters and everyone else who met them. Unbeknown to her, she touched lives with her stories. Here is what one of Bill Carey's sisters wrote in the recent weeks:
"Life does give us hard times, but God's Grace is bigger. Although at times, it is hard to feel it... that is why we are just to know it. I wanted to share with you how special your Mom is to me. Long before I became a Christian, she told me about her experience of her trip up the stairs to heaven and how she was told to come back to her family. I had read about near death experiences, but had never met anyone that had had one. But I knew right away that your Mom was telling me the ABSOLUTE truth and there was a heaven! This was a wonderful hope for me, but it would still be years before I would learn how to reach heaven for myself. Your mom gave me a MOST wonderful gift on that day. She is very blessed and I pray for Peace for all of you. I love you, Peggy "
Yes, generosity, gift giving, sunshine spreading, those were specialties of Helen's. She delighted in surprising people. She never forgot the birthday of anyone she knew. She would reel them off, month by month, and mention that person with a special fondness ~ and she was always on the mark. For one such birthday, a guest was visiting from Chile. Ludi drove her to the store to buy a cake for him. Now, it took her fifteen minutes of wandering the aisles to remember his name for the bakery to put on the cake, but remember she finally did, and she went and got him that cake. But here is what he says about it in a recent email:
We are very worry about Helen. Please keep me inform. Your father and mother were soooo nice to me while I was there all by myself. Unforgettable. I had the honor to appreciate her, she was such a good person to me special those day`s while I was alone in an oversea country and with her attitude and warmest she made fell like at home.
Her tenderheartedness and compassion were evident in the tears she shed for others or her tears during a movie or her tears at the sight of a beautiful sunset or music, which she loved so much, even tears during Hallmark commercials. They were real and heartfelt.
Her life was contentment. She knew her role in life, and her joy came from living that life. She was completely devoted to making a loving home for her family. When her family expanded to include sons in law and grandchildren, her joy increased exponentially. Her family and friends meant the world to her. She loved being a homemaker, and considered it an honor. She did it so well, all by herself, until just a few months ago, when she no longer could. She often said she thought she was born to be a scullery maid, that's how much joy it gave her to keep a tidy household. Her daughters are hoping those genes are latent in them somewhere. She patiently supported her dear husband through difficult financial times, three household moves and the particular challenges of running a business out of their home. And always with so much love.
Her appreciation and her love for life extended to so many people. She never forgot to generously tip the mailman, or abundantly and repeatedly thank the store clerks, neighbors, the friends who cooked for us when she couldn't, the friend who sent a card to her every day of her illness, her family, and even the nurses in the hospital who were constantly causing her discomfort. Her gratitude was infectious. The emergency doctor who had to deliver the news that she had cancer was so taken with her, he trailed her out of the ER just to give her a hug and wish her the best. The nurses in the hospital came to check on her, even when they weren't on the shift, just because she listened and cared. People were drawn to her sparkle and her joy. She especially loved babies ~ everybody's!!! And children ~ everybody's!! She took genuine interest and delight in everyone's story, and remembered those stories, each and every one. She had an amazing memory. Sometimes a little too amazing for comfort. There was that time as newlyweds that Ludi dropped her and the baby off at a friend's house to visit, and he went on to a meeting at church. When he got home from the meeting at church, he prided him self on sneaking quietly into the house without waking up Helen or the baby. At midnight, when he finally decided to go to bed, he went into the bedroom and NO HELEN. He had forgotten to go and pick them up at the friend's house. She delighted in remembering that story, and laughed like crazy every time she told it. Her memory also confounded and amazed her dear hus band, with whom she played Scrabble every day of their life together in the retirement years. How did she remember all of those unusual words? From doing her NY Times crossword puzzles, of course!
Her generosity has been mentioned, but it cannot be overstated. She would literally give you the shirt off her back, anything she had that you admired; even her cherry pitter if she heard you didn't have one. She had no attachment to material goods, except that when she bought them from one of her famous catalogs, she couldn't wait to deliver the gift to the receiver. Is her family the only one that often celebrated birthdays weeks early or Christmas in November if the package came then? She could never wait to bless someone's life. It was her joy.
She was a teacher by nature. She taught her family so many things: To love the Lord above all else. To be trustworthy and honest. To welcome friends and strangers alike. Not to envy. Not to judge. How to iron. How to make deviled eggs. How to reflect God's love in big things and in the smallest things. She taught wisdom and patience. She taught her family how to laugh at themselves by her example.
Yes, that was another gift Helen brought to life her humor. She was a corker, and loved so much to LAUGH. She never minded laughing at herself ~ but she never laughed at the expense of others. She found humor in the silliest things in life, and her laughter was infectious. She was well known for her entertaining ability to mix up metaphors and then make a face, showing she knew it was off with an, "Oh, well. You know what I mean." In November of '05, as she and Ludi were using in home exercise videos, she proclaimed: "I've been doing so much walking I'm going to need a kneecap replacement (pointing to her knees) and a hubcap replacement (pointing to her hips.)" One day over coffee, she announced that Tom Cruise was going to marry that girl Nicole, from "Up Yonder." When asked if she meant "Down Under," she just giggled. Near the end, she was bedridden. She was such a private person, and was so uncomfortable with people having to wait on her, help her, and attend to her. In July, after being told she was about to be repositioned and cleaned up for the 100th painful time, she protested. When told it needed to be done, or she would have problems with her skin, she said, "No, don't. I don't care. I'd rather just sit on a bucket of knives." Her humor blessed all who knew her.
Perhaps by now, you are thinking, "Wow, Helen was a saint!" Well, this is how her family saw her. But she wasn't a saint, and she would be the first to pooh pooh such a notion. She was a sinner who knew she was, and so her final communion with her Lord and her family was so powerful and tender and sweet, that she knew her work was done. She took a sharp turn for the worse the next day, falling into a comatose state, and shortly thereafter went, as she put it, to the Promised Land.
Her life was filled with faith, love, joy, hope, peace, generosity and humor. What an amazing 84 years!
In closing, here is an email received from a dear friend who was in Germany when she passed away:
"We are all saddened by your mom's and, I hope, I may say "our Helen's" death. We take consolation in the knowledge that her last days and weeks were made lighter and better by your care and presence and that she will remain with us in our hearts, as she will in yours. We hope that you in her family and those who knew her will do the same.
Still, this is a heavy blow for all, especially for her closest family. Words like these can only do so much, but please accept them as a small token of our feelings and our sorrow. Please tell Ludi that we are thinking of him. My mother has asked me to tell you all that she is especially sad. She has been looking through the pictures of our evening together when she was visiting. My mother is not given to showing strong emotions outwardly, but it is evident that she feels the loss of an especially dear friend very acutely.
It is sad that we cannot be present at the services on Saturday, but we will certainly be there with our thoughts. We are confident that all of you will take strength for the future without her presence from remembering her together. Please include us in that circle of mourners of her loss and celebrants of her life."
Helen, we know you are in that Promised Land, bringing extra sunshine to heaven! We thank you for the abundance of light you brought to so many lives just by being yourself. Well done, good and faithful servant!
Ludi, Holly, Bill, Ann, Steve, Billy, Danielle and Ben

It's the inconsistency that really throws me. I'm trying to figure him out. Is he sweet and misunderstood or is he sneaky and moody? Is he a negative complainy pain or just struggling with insecurity? Sometimes he acts like a jerk and then the next minute he seems to go out of his way to be good.
This past week Orangeboy went to an art day camp. He seemed to enjoy it pretty well, but he was under-enthusiastic with his endorsement as usual. If he says something was "Well... okay" I take that as a positive. But on the last day of the camp, when I pick up Orangeboy and his sibling antagonists, I hear that he did not choose to make the project for that day. When I asked why, he said that he didn't want to and "she said it was okay."
So I informed him that it wasn't "okay" with me and that he could either pay me back for that day of camp or he could sit down and make the project - and do a good job. He said,
"Ummm, I guess I'd rather do the project."
I was hoping for that. I knew he would be loath to forfeit any of his stash of cash. He decided a couple of years ago that he should save all the money he came into for his college education.
I still don't know why he decided that he just didn't want to participate on that last day. He had this sort of cocky, silly demeanor going on when he told me that he hadn't wanted to do it. If it had been just about any other 9 year old, I would have thought he was being a little brat; but with Orangeboy, I'm just not sure. He may have truly thought it was fine to opt out for the day.
When I got him to sit down and do the art project, he worked diligently and did a great job. Go figure.
Another inconsistency happened a few days ago when he suddenly started complaining about one of our little dogs. He doesn't interact with the pets very much. He lets them be and they let him be. Our latest canine addition to the family is a three year old female rat terrier that came with a few behavioral problems and needs a bit of rehabilitation and training. This affects me the most, as it is my job to do the training. But almost out of the blue, Orangeboy starts complaining about what a bad dog she is and says, "I think we should just dump her off at the pound."
I said, "What!?"
I have NEVER dumped a dog off at the pound or even threatened to do it! Where did he come up with that idea? I thought it was an awful thing to say and totally unfounded. This was a case of Orangeboy acting like a jerk again. Then later the same day, he came upstairs to seek me out and thank me for the good supper I made. He seemed very good and sweet then. I was just as surprised by the supper compliment as I was by the awful dump-the-dog comment.
Likewise, he was excited about getting out of school for summer break, but has been very moody and hyper most days since. He jumps around giggling and jabbering to himself and scribbling pages full of numbers and codes, or he bursts into tears at the slightest provocation and sits and sobs like a baby. He's like Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde - or Mr. Orangeboy and Dr. Mad Scientist Monkey-man. The question is... which side will win? And which side am I rooting for?

Cinema quality 4K UHD 3840x2160
Ria Kurumi wants to please one of her local fans while in character in her revealing cosplay. She surprises him by getting down to her knees and pulling down his pants. Shocked but quickly getting hard, his dick emerges into her face and she obliges it with her warm mouth. Then she strips off her panties and dances in his face until he gets his biggest surprise as she slides his hard dick right inside as she sits on his lap. She straddles and grinds on him as his dick slides in her pussy, slick with pussy juice. She entices him to fuck her harder as she bends over the table spreading her ass. Looking into his eyes she shudders in pleasure as he releases his thick cum load deep inside her pussy. This is how Ria treats her fans!

Yesterday when we were in Santa Cruz I decided to let Yelp choose. Since we were essentially in a tourist hell food tends to be really crappy. So about a mile away I found a 4 star average yelp review for a vegetarian restaurant. Score! Off we went to Malabar.
We got there pretty early (around 5:30) and by the time we were leaving the place was hopping. It’s pretty much an Indian restaurant with quite a few different fusion dishes. The waiter had a huge chip on his shoulder and was pretty off putting but we just wanted some food.
We started off with a few appetizers. The first one was Black Sesame Seed Garlic Naan. It was awesome but it didn’t have a naan texture. It was more flakey like a biscuit. Totally fine since it was fresh out of the oven and came with a plate of multiple condiment choices to dip the bread.
Then we got a fried tofu dish. Essentially this was a deep fried block of tofu covered in peanut sauce. Okay….weird. Have you ever tried to cut a piece of deep fried tofu with a fork? Maybe a spoon? I had to use both as knives were not available. I thought that was really weird especially since the tofu was a big hunk with some scores in it that I had to pry apart with a serving spoon. It was okay but I was looking forward to my entree since it wasn’t amazing.
The husband got a garlic mashed potato dosa. It was pretty good. Way better than the tofu, that’s for sure. I got garlic noodles. Which were honestly horrible. Okay, I got Vietnamese garlic noodles at an Indian joint, sue me. They were on the menu and I really wanted them and I had no idea you could screw up garlic noodles. Unfortunately the noodles were undercooked and the garlic chips were burnt. Burnt garlic and crunchy noodles…yum. I know I should have gotten a curry or something but I just didn’t want that. Honestly this meal was pretty meh. I left hungry which sucks. Can’t say I’d be back since the sushi place beside this restaurant looked pretty good.

My last post discussed how taking humanity head on was a difficult task. Bringing the world back to humanity is not a task for one person. This lead me to start to look at the world around me, my world. One of my favorite snarky statements is “Its Chrissy’s world and ya’ll live in it”. I never realized how much truth was in that statement until I decided to head on my path of self-discovery (I like to call my journey). It was my ah ha moment. It all had to start with me because I am the center of my world. My world is my reality. Just like your world is your reality.
Let me make one thing clear. I am no saint. I have a lot of baggage and life lessons I have learned. I lived out of a place of shame, guilt, negative self-talk and judgement. Not only for myself but for others. I am quite aware that I am the villain in some people’s stories. The hardest thing a person has to do is look themselves in the mirror. I always told my children they never have to worry about making anyone else happy as long as they could look themselves in the mirror and be happy with what they see staring back at them. The sad thing was I didn’t practice what I preach. Sure, I have accomplished anything I have really set my mind to but like I mentioned earlier something had always been missing. I wasn’t sure that when I looked in the mirror I even knew who the person looking back at me was. If you can think of the name I have been called it and I have done the calling. It’s all good now. I have accepted who am I, where I have been and all I have done. There is nothing that someone could say to me now I haven’t already accepted and forgiven myself for. What some people tend to forget is that forgiveness is never for the receiver it’s for the person doing the forgiving. Sorry for the rant. Now back to the world I saw.
What most people don’t know about me is I am a hopeless romantic that placed a lot of value on worldly possessions/money. I wanted to find the perfect man that would love me for me and not want to change me. I wanted the perfect family or my idea of the perfect family. I wanted the career, the cars and the house. What I didn’t realize is that I had already set myself up for disappointment. There is no such thing a the perfect anything. I certainly did not get the perfect family or up bringing. I came from a broken home. I was so caught up with the idea of being in love that I would over look red flags. I was a yes person. Yes to everything! Saying no would make me feel guilty because I was letting others down and hurting them. I was the first to apologize in any situation. I would find myself in situations that I really didn’t resonate with me. What did resonate with me. What did I really value? I don’t know I could have really answered that question before I started to plunge into my self-discovery.
“Chrissy’s world” was at a place of total chaos. There was so much change going on in my life all at one time. This life I had built was changing so fast and I was trying to control it. My finances were up in the air, my marriage was a mess, my heart was broken and the job I loved so much was just not as fulfilling as it used to be. I had spent a decade plus working and building a life. Doing things that we are brought up to believe are going to bring us to living a full life. Well, at least what I was taught. Work hard, do more, get more, have more and be more that were the common themes. Yet after I would achieve what I worked for it would be onto the next. Never really taking time to enjoy the fruits of my labor. It left me empty. I was empty in a lot of ways but have more than most so I was OK with it. Something was still missing and I went looking for it. I looked for it through people, things and places but never in the one place that really mattered. I didn’t even stop to look at myself. What was I doing that was impacting the world I see and how I perceive it? If this chaos is happening in my life how am I projecting this chaos onto others?
One thing that never even crossed my mind is that I was setting myself up for heart break. There were things that I was doing that was shaping the world around me as I knew it. The crazy thing was I was stuck in the mindset of pointing fingers and blaming others. Not taking responsibility for how I was allowing things to happen in my life. The universe is going to give you what you believe you deserve. The universe was going to send back to me exactly what I was giving to myself and others. I didn’t believe I deserved love. I didn’t believe it. I certainly didn’t think I was receiving it. At least not what I expected love to be. Since I didn’t believe I deserved love I really never allowed anyone to really love me or get close to me. Maybe I was setting my expectations too high. Maybe my expectations of how things were supposed to happen were hindering me from seeing the full picture.
It was time. It was time for change. No one could change the world around me but me. It all started with me therefore I had to be the start of the change. I started really looking at myself. What were things I liked about me? What were things I disliked about me? What were things I was grateful for in my life? What were things I wanted to change? I needed a new perspective. I started doing one thing every day to show myself I loved me. I started naming things I was grateful for every day. I was working out and eating better. I never miss a Monday. I was reading blogs and learning about being mindful. I began to keep a journal and work on my Chakras. I was starting to see that through my healing process the world around me was healing too. As I let my light shine the people around me were also starting to change. Through my journal I was beginning to accept and love myself for who I was. I began to identify and associating my actions with emotions. I began to really understand myself and how I was interacting and shaping the world around me. When I would have a set back I started to show myself little compassion. Which lead to me showing others compassion. In the past where I had difficulty with empathy it was now becoming so much easier. It all started with little steps I began to take to show myself the love I had been searching for and giving to others.
Plunging deeper into my self-discovery I really began to think. If I am capable to rebuilding the world around me maybe my story can help someone rebuild the world around them starting a chain reaction. Our perception is our reality. We are all a product of the environments we live in. Think about it, what if we (you and me) really took a good look at the world we see. What if we started to make little changes within ourselves. What if these changes with in ourselves allowed us to experience real unconditional love. These changes would then allow us to meet others just as they are. No judgement, no blame, no shame, no guilt and especially no expectation.

As my husband and I approached the beach in Delray early this afternoon we heard the lifeguard’s horn blaring.
“Wonder what’s going on?” I asked my husband.
“Maybe someone swam out too far,” he guessed.
As we walked towards the ocean we saw that everybody was out of the ocean, lining up on the shoreline.
“Shark?” I asked someone.
“Yes,” they confirmed. “There were sea turtles and some sharks attacked one of them. The turtle is hurt and coming this way and the authorities are afraid that they sharks are going to swim back to finish her off.”
Oh no! I love sea turtles. I am not alone in my love for sea turtles apparently. When the maimed turtle finally reached us, everybody was watching her, urging her to come ashore. Apparently she can’t be helped unless she makes her way in. She was a ways out and she looked hurt, or possibly even dead. Everyone was cheering for her to make her way to the sand.
Finally, a very brave (and good looking) surfer took his board out and brought her to shore. I ran down the beach to see what was happening. The poor little turtle (actually the poor very large turtle) was missing her entire tushy, and her organs were visible. Her back flippers were still intact, but they weren’t moving. She was holding on by a thread it seemed. We started a process of children going to get their cups and pails and buckets, and soon everybody was filling them up and then we were pouring the sea water onto the turtle to keep her hydrated. She seemed very happy to be covered in the warm saltwater, and her eyes filled with a bit more life.
Turtle rescue from Boca was called, and the turtle was taken away. I hope you live beautiful turtle. I hope you are able to return to the sea again and swim free. I don’t understand why sharks (three apparently) would attack you as you were going about your business, ready to lay your eggs. There are a lot of people on Delray Beach who are praying for you today.

Allegory of the Cave project
The prisoners would mistake appearance for reality. What this really means is no matter what was really behind the wall and was showing shadows the prisoners would still try to figure out what they perceive is casting the shadow. Plato was trying to make the point that it is not the names of the things we see, but what we grasp with our minds and perceive it to be. We watched their responses and reactions to the illusions and again when they were freed to experience real life again. When the prisoners are released they can see what the real objects were. This is wear reflective understanding is interpreted.
Concepts that we grasp are not the real objects that we perceive. In this theory, Plato argues that “forms”, and not the world that we perceive it through our senses, are the purist kind of reality. When the prisoners were released they could see for themselves what was real and what wasn’t. They were forced to accept things the way they truly are rather than what they thought. He wanted to change their behaviors, desires, and tendencies to perceive what is incorrect, and show true happiness. When I went to apply this to my own life the only example could personally think of s one that has to do with my family.
At one point and time, my family was made up of my boyfriend, my daughter, and myself. My boyfriend was very abusive and would not help with anything. However, he was very good to my daughter and she loved to be around him. I was not truly happy, but could only think of my daughter. At times, would come accustomed that women were just supposed to be treated the way that I was. I hid behind my feelings for years instead of facing reality and getting out of the bad situation. What suppressed as my reality did not have to be my reality.
The problem was that oldest face reality and tell myself that I deserved a better life than what I had. I had to put my feelings into consideration and not just my daughters. True happiness comes from within and wasn’t even happy with myself for staying so many years that I didn’t have to. I created a life that was easy. I wanted to take the easy way out, but not considering the truth of the situation, which was that I needed to be freed. I needed the chance to grow as my own person instead of doing what everyone else wanted me to do. My life is my life and I should be able to live life to the fullest and be fulfilled as a person.

After over 10 cruises with family or friends or even by myself, I went on my first VTG singles cruise last year. The people were great! Everyone was friendly and ALL of the roommates got along well! (It wasn't until I came back that I noticed over half of my pictures were of the people I met!)
As far as I know the only issues had to do with wake-up times (some people want to sleep in on vacation). I suggest going to every mixer they host. Those private receptions with other VTGers made it so much more than a cruise!

July was a busy month. We went to visit my family for 5 days, were home for a few days, and then we went on our annual summer trip to Sleeping Bear Dunes in Northern Michigan. Ahh, summer is not complete with that trip.
We had variable weather this year. Some days were sunny, some days were cloudy, some days were drizzly, and some were really windy, but we enjoyed every minute of it. Our activities were just like last year's: rock hunting, sand castle building, swimming, eating, and hiking (almost in that order!)
Fudge shops abound in Northern Michigan. You know it's time to head for home when your children start chanting from the back seat "Fudge Fudge Fudge Fudge" to the tune of Charge, baseball stadium style (this ditty, if I'm not making sense).
That last photo is a plaster cast of my daughter's footprint on the beach. Yes, I brought plaster of paris on vacation! I bet you do crazy things like that, too. I used these instructions. It didn't turn out quite as defined as I would have liked, but that may have been because it was a really windy day and sand was flying everywhere. Her footprint started to fill with blown sand even before I could pour the plaster in. My son's cast broke in half. I blame the rogue wave that swamped his print half-way through the drying period.
Is it too soon to go back?

Rate Dr. Jeffrey Gilmour
Dr. Jeffrey Gilmour's Ratings
Love the calm, gentle way he handles any situation . He is the perfect gynecologist given that anyone going to see him is about to lose all dignity. Somehow he makes you feel that it is OK, there is nothing to fret. He delivered 2 of my 3 children (moved too far away for 3rd) 16 years ago and I recently needed his help yet again. Would you believe he remembered me?? Super guy. I appreciate the career you have chosen Dr. Gilmour, it suits you well.
Phenomenal OBGYN. I went to him for the delivery of my first born and from the moment I had my first interaction with him, to when I had to deliver the baby, he was nothing but kind, helpful, and calming. He made my experience a less stressful one!
Dr. Gilmour performed my cessarian section. He is not my OBGYN, but since I delivered at MSH he was the doctor on call. My c-section was performed once it was determined after 5 hours of pushing that I could not deliver vaginally. I really wanted a vaginal birth and Dr. Gilmour essentially gave me the extra time I needed to come around to a c-section birth even though it was apparent much sooner that I wouldn't be able to deliver and I appreciate that. He did an excellent job of my section and I had very minimal scarring and a very speedy recovery.
This doctor has not been helpful to me at all. He always gave me the feeling that nothing was wrong with that pregnancy, but I constantly had a feeling that something was wrong. He had performed a minor procedure, but gave no antibiotics or anything and he did not bother to follow up for 3 weeks, within which I miscarried. After having checked with other doctors later on, came to know that the infection from the procedure could have caused the miscarraige. After recovering with this horrible incident, when I went to see him again, he kept talking as though he did his best and there was nothing else he could do, as though that was my fate...
Dr Gilmour is one the best Gynecologist in Markham Stouffville Hospital and in Markham area. He is very patient, considerate and knowledgeable doctor. He listens to you and your concerns and acts based upon your decision and what is best for you. I'm actually suffer from vaginismus and I voluntary asked him to deliver my baby by c-section. He provided me all the reason for not to have it, but since I was know that is best for me, he accepted and actually did a very nice job on my c/s. Both my baby and I are happy and there is no regret to have c/s. I strongly recommend this doctor to any body in this area.
Dr Gilmour is very patient. I used to take a list of questions to my appointments and he answered them all one by one. He is a calm and nice person with whom you feel very comfortable to discuss your concerns. One the best things about him is that he listens to your opinions. I had a C-section and I asked him to use stitches over staples and he accepted although that was not his routine. I would refer any friend to him! :-)
Dr Gilmour is the most wonderful, compassionate and knowledgeable doctor I have ever known. He saved my baby's and my life when I had pre-eclampsia at 28weeks gestation. He performed an emergency C-Section to deliver my baby and we both survived. My little girl is starting kindergarten this fall. I strongly recommend him to anyone who is looking of a really really good OB-GYN. GOOD JOB DR GILMOUR!!!!
I was unlucky I suppose. I have never really got the impression he was knowledgeable. I'm going to get right to the point. I had yellow yucky stains in my underwear, it smelled so I assumed I had an infection. Dr. Gilmour didn't even bother to take a swab to be on the safe side. I guess he was being lazy and didn't want to get his hands dirty. He said it was most likely cause I have the Mirena IUD. I trusted him.. but my problem got worse.. I went to my family Dr, he took a swab. Results were I had an infection and was put on antibiotics. I personally feel like Dr. Gilmour rushes things due to the volume of people in his rooms and in the waiting room, doesn't fully examine whats wrong. I will not be going back to him.
Top Hospitals in Markham, ON
Top Urgent Care Centers in Markham, ON
Find a Doctor by Specialty
Top Gynecologists (OBGYN)
#1 of 42
#2 of 42
#3 of 42
#4 of 42
#5 of 42

So lately I have been so incredibly busy, with classes, Spanish Club, work etc. These past couple of weeks I have had multiple midterms, and studying for them has taken up a lot of my time. This past weekend though, was really great. It gave me some time to do other things beside study which was nice.
On Saturday Spanish Club had the festival for Carnaval, like they celebrate in Brazil and in some Latin American Countries such as Peru. We couldn't celebrate it just like they do in those countries obviously, however we did have a lot of fun. We made lots of hispanic food and played music, danced, and put on masks, beads etc. It was lots of fun!
Then on Saturday night the Women's basketball team had their final game in the Northwestern conference so I went to cheer them on. It was a lot of fun, although we did end up losing. There were so many students and people from the community who came to cheer on the team. It was really wonderful. Although they didn't win the conference, the team is still going to the NCAA championship and is hosting the first game this friday in Pamplin. I plan to be there too! Hopefully they will win!
On Sunday I went downtown with some friends and ventured into SE Portland to a restaurant called Slappy Cakes. When we got there we were told that there would be around an hour wait so we went and found a coffee shop where we could study at for that time. When we got back we were all so incredibly hungry and so the food was extra delicious. Slappy Cakes is a wonderful restaurant that serves pancakes as well as other breakfast food. What's different about this place though is that you order the ingredients and then you get to cook your own pancakes on a griddle that is in the middle of your table. It was fun as well as delicious and I think that's why I liked it. Definitely recommend going here! But maybe make a reservation ahead of time...
At Lewis & Clark there are definitely times where you are going to feel overwhelmed by homework and work. It's great because students are really engaged in their school work and invested in learning, but some times it's really important to go out and explore the Portland area and relax a bit as well. So that is what I did last weekend and it was great.
This weekend Lewis & Clark has the annual International Fair, in which I will be walking in the Fashion Show for. I will post more on that in my next post!
Hope you are all well.
If you have any questions about Spanish Club, German, Foreign Languages etc. let me know! My email is firstname.lastname@example.org

A local family was the focal point of cameras recording their lives last week. Eight-year-old Haley De Sha and her parents were followed by a Los Angeles-based camera crew for an upcoming episode of the Learning Channel's "Toddlers and Tiaras."
The show gives viewers a look into the children and families who participate in child pageants. The family was followed Thursday, Friday and Saturday to film their preparation and Haley's competition in the Rock Star Divas and Dolls pageant in Darien.
Haley showed off her pageant outfits, her crowns and trophies for the crew and family moments like fishing and pedicures were caught on film. Haley relaxed by the pool with her mom, Caliese, and played her dad, Daniel, in a soccer game.
"Haley scored the goal, so daddy had to do the pageant walk with a crown on his head so that'll probably most definitely make the show," her mom laughed.
Haley's episode is expected to air sometime next summer.
The family went through an application process to be on the show, but found out just weeks before that the crew would be coming.
"Haley about passed out in the kitchen," Caliese said, when they got the phone call letting them know they'd been chosen.
Seeing the show on television is what sparked Haley's interest in pageants to begin with, and her parents were supportive of the idea.
In fact, Daniel's enthusiasm is a rarity in the world of pageant dads. He pipes right in to talk about her routine, her glitzy make-up and dresses and lavishes encouragement. It's obvious he plays a big role in his daughter's pageant process and that he loves every bit of it.
Haley competed against some 40 contestants in Saturday's pageant. She received a flawless set of score cards, setting up a picture perfect television moment where she was crowned Ultimate Grand Supreme.
When she was announced as the overall winner, it was emotional, Caliese said, but not just for the family.
"She was crying like she had won Miss Universe. I was crying. My mom started crying, Daniel was crying and even the 'Toddlers and Tiaras' people," she said.
"The boys were jumping up and down, the girls were crying," Haley said of the film crew.
"They were following her all these days. They were so excited that she had won. ... They said it was probably the best crowning they ever filmed," Daniel said.
Without the drama
Haley and her parents agree she competes to win; she says that in the same way she wouldn't show up for a test and try to answer questions wrong, she wouldn't show up for a pageant not to win.
Her first pageant was about a year and a half ago, and her mom did her makeup and hair.
Now she has a makeup artist and a modeling coach. She wears handmade custom dresses that cost around $1,800 to $2,000 apiece.
Caliese says it's a totally different world than when she did pageants.
"I was kind of, at first, totally against all of the flippers and fake hair, tanning and all that, but as we competed I realized if we want to have a chance of winning, we have to do what everybody else is doing. Like Daniel always says, you don't send your son to a football game without his pads, so you can't send your daughter to a pageant without equipment, whatever it may be," Caliese said.
"... We're definitely embracing that whole aspect of whatever we need to do to win just like everybody else," she said.
However, there's more to it than winning, Daniel said.
"It's how she acts on and off the stage. A lot of the kids - they're screaming and crying, they're brats, their moms are beating them, their kids are slapping their moms, they're yelling, they're crying, and we just get along," Daniel said.
"We're just like we are now. We just do what we got to do. No drama. You can win pageants and do great and still be on television without creating a lot of drama," he said.

I have everything a man could want except what is most important. My wife and my son. Our divorce was final today. So begins my journey as a single man -again. "Cheers!" I said aloud, to myself and to the silence that was keeping me company. Taking a long swig of the beer in my hand, I sighed and glanced around the living room in which I was sitting. The only thing left of my "family" were the pictures of Alexander. She graciously agreed to let me keep them. "He's your son after all..." was what she said. I took another swallow of my beer and wondered how such a loving woman could become so heartless and cold in the span of what seems like a minute!?
Pfft! Not my problem anymore. The only solid, constant in my life was Alexander. My son. I see him on the scheduled visitation days and every other holiday. But that is never enough time and I am selfish with my time with him. And I miss her. Dammit I shouldn't. But I do. Unlike her, I could not just "fall out of love" and continue with my life as if the last 10 years meant nothing.
I met Valeria through a coworker. We were at lunch one day -the coworker and I when the "love of my life" walked into the restaurant and up to our table. It seems the coworker was playing matchmaker and thought it would be "so cool" if I met her friend Valeria. Well, for once she was right. It was cool. Better than cool. It was mind-blowing! We hit it off immediately! She was beautiful. Engaging. She had these gorgeous blue eyes that you could fall into and never want to leave. Her hair was thick, dark, and cascaded on her neck down her mid back. Her skin was flawless.
Sigh. Just thinking about her now, tugs at my heart and my emotions and yeah, my cock. What can I say? I'm still a man.
Our love affair began and ended it seems, in the same fashion: Hungrily, hurriedly, passionately. We went out for dinner one night and saw each other every night for the following month thereafter. After about another month of watching her live out of her bag, I asked her to move in with me. She was practically living with me already! Saying it out loud was just a formality!
So we were "officially" living together. Her friends became my friends and vice versa. Her parents loved me. My parents loved her. Life was good. Six months later we were married. Now, I had never been married. Valeria was married for two years. It was an abusive relationship, physically and mentally. I wanted in a way, to erase all that crap she had been through with the jerk she was married to. So I made it my mission to dote on her, to love her, to shower her with that love and with gifts and with romance. The only thing missing in the picture was a baby. We both wanted to start a family and eagerly awaited the day that that wish would come to fruition. We waited for nine years. The doctors said nothing was wrong with either of us. We just had to keep trying. This took a toll on her. On us. Maybe that was the beginning of the end. Maybe not having a child was a blessing in disguise -well that's what I used to think until Alexander came into our lives. Now he is my life.
The day we found out she was pregnant was the day she told me she wanted a divorce. How's that for a slap in the face??? "Honey I want a divorce. Oh by the way, I'm pregnant!!" I went from shock to euphoria in a millisecond! We talked that day. About us and why she felt she wanted to leave me. In the end she told me she was no longer in love with me. She didn't know exactly when it happened. It just did. What? How do you "just" fall out of love?? Someone explain that to me!! I tried to reason with her. I promised I would fix whatever was broken between us but she wouldn't budge. She loved me. But was no longer in love with me. Again I asked, "how?"
When I fell in love with her I thought that I could never, ever stop loving her. I thought the sun rose and set on her. I believed she loved me just as much.
"Two points!" I yelled at the awesomeness that was my rim shot of my empty beer can! Well, technically I made the "shot" into my trash can but it still counts right?
So here I am. Forty-two years old. Divorced. Alone in an empty house. On my sixth beer.
Where do I go from here? I seem to have lost my identity all of a sudden. I am no longer "Valeria's husband". From now on I'm just "Rene" -singular.
My soul hurts. My heart aches and I am lonely. I miss my family. I miss my son. I have a nice house full of "possessions" and money and fast cars in my driveway. The shrink I went to see during the "ordeal" told me that sometimes we try to fill our voids with material things or drugs or something tangible. But no matter how much we "fill" it or what we fill it with, we're still empty inside. I would gladly give away everything I have for a chance to have them back.
I have everything a man could want except what he needs.

The video has been added to your member zone favourites.
This hot teen girl waits till her parents leave for the carnival. She did not join them since she had some homework to finish. But this naughty village teen has some other reason. She wanted to meet her boyfriend since he promised to break her hymen that night. So, she could not think of anything else. As soon as they leave, she rushes to his home and he waits for her with an open dick. She takes off her clothes and grabs his dick for a hot penis milking experience.While stroking his dick, he pinches her hard nipples and presses her sexy and soft melons. Then, she takes his penis into her mouth and begins to suck it wild. After a while, she opens her pussy lips to show off her sexy cunt. Finally, she comes on top of him and takes his penis into her butt and starts riding it till he cums over her ass.

This horse is a gem. Bertha was used as a working ranch horse. She has the most amazing attitude. She knows who is riding her and acts to suite her rider. We have had small beginners on her and our great student riders. She just know what to do to keep her riders under her and respond. These horses are rare folks. She is a good one. She stands at 15 hands and is 11 years old.
Here are Greta and Bertha going on a trail ride!

Well I guess the past month has been a pretty crazy ride for me. For once, though, my title actually is going to be a pretty good description of what I am going to write about.
I guess I will start with the separation. About three weeks ago, Becky and I broke up. The whole thing shook me up pretty bad. It had happened just before our word prayer meeting. I sat there, through the meeting, holding back tears, while we prayed. After it was over, I left without telling anyone what had happened, and went home. I changed my facebook status and started watching some tv. A couple hours later I get a call from B, asking what had happened (because he saw my facebook status had changed). I told him that we broke up and I didn’t want to talk about it over the phone. He invited me to come over to the McCallums to go watch a movie and hang out.
I decided to go, and got there about 7:45ish. When I got there, Keith, Jeff, B, and Kyle were all there hanging out. Keith had asked what had happened, and I started to tell him, tears welling up in my eyes. I had kept so much from all of them (my closest friends), about some stuff that had been going on between Becky and I, leading up to the break-up. They all comforted me, and really helped me out a lot.
Well The next day, I got up and went to work. I worked for my five hour shift, trying not to really think about it, and just get through the day. When I finally got home, I checked my E-mail, and found a message from Keith. He said that he basically wanted to get together with Becky and I to talk about what had happened. I called him, and we got it all set up and went over to his house. Keith brought up some good discernment of basically what had happened between us. Through this I realized, once again, just how many problems I had. What had happened was I was relying on Becky for my emotional outlet (because being a phleg I tend to not be that emotional) and this was causing her to feel smothered. Also, Keith noted that we were spending a large amount of time together, and this was probably increasing the smother feeling. My resistance to open up with my friends about the events preceding the break were due to the fact that I am a notorious judger and I was afraid of being judged, and this hindered my ability to be open. Becky and I walked out of Keith’s house, having all those mishaps worked out, and decided to continue our relationship again. I was so happy
with our reconciliation and I was just praising God to have such a great friend as Keith, to help me out. It was a great experience.
Well that was pretty crazy (and long) but I thought I’d share that life moment with everyone.
Graduation is drawing ever closer. Classes are all done and the ceremony is on June 9th. A lot of people have been asking me if I felt any different, or if I’m excited. The thing is though, I don’t really feel that different at all. I’m not sure if it has something to do with the fact that I already have a year of college under my bely, or never really saw graduating high school as that big of an accomplishment. After all, I’m about to go right back to school for another four or so years to get yet another degree. It seems like very few people don’t go on to college any more, and the four more years of education has become a norm. So then, the question I have is, why does everyone make High School Graduation such a big deal?

Donald Gjerdrum, who directed many award-winning concert and jazz bands at Burnsville High School and other schools during 35 years as a music educator, died Sept. 21 of a heart condition. He was 91 and in recent years resided near Mabel, Minn., on the farm where he grew up.
He was a lifelong musician, specializing in clarinet, and taught all band instruments. He also had served as president of the Minnesota Music Educators Association and in 1990 was inducted into the organization's Hall of Fame.
"He had a unique way of motivating students," said Leo Bedard, a retired music educator in Burnsville schools who worked with Gjerdrum for many years. "He was always extremely positive. The Burnsville band program under him was one of the best."
Bands that Gjerdrum directed won many regional and state awards, often were invited to play at colleges and other places in the region and toured Europe, Bedard said.
"He brought enthusiasm to teaching, and it spread to his students," said Judy Ruehmann, who learned to play coronet under Gjerdrum at Spring Grove High School, one of his first jobs, in the early 1960s. "I loved it. I still like playing. A lot of it is due to his teaching."
Barbara Arnold said she learned to play flute from Gjerdrum in Spring Grove and performed with the band he led. Later, she became a music educator and taught in the Burnsville schools. Throughout his career, she said, he offered students the quality of instruction usually available only through private music lessons.
He was born in 1921 and attended school in Mabel. He graduated from Luther College in Decorah, Iowa, in 1943 and later attended the University of North Dakota in Grand Forks, earning a master's degree in music education in 1968.
During World War II, he served in the U.S. Navy aboard landing ships that participated in the invasions of Italy and France. He also served in the Pacific before his discharge in 1946.
His first post as band director was in Independence, Wis., where he met his first wife, Doris, who preceded him in death.
Gjerdrum moved to Burnsville High School after getting his graduate degree in 1968 and spent 15 years as band director there.
He continued to play clarinet until he was 90.
He survived by his second wife, Linda; his daughters Mary Holman of Ghana, and Sara Gjerdrum and Dorothy Gjerdrum of St. Paul; his son David Gjerdrum of Minneapolis; five grandchildren; four stepchildren, and two step-granddaughters.
Services have been held.
David Shaffer • 612-673-7090

Well, the annual Holly Jolly Christmas sale has come and gone and Karen Arts did a wonderful job of organizing the event. For the last 6 weeks I've been trying to increase my inventory of fabric boxes. It's such a labour intensive project and I was so bummed out by the time frame that the boxes I created were 'to die from'. I ended up throwing out 4. I had decided that the 11 I had already made would have to suffice. It turned out that my boxes generated more interest than I could have imagined. So I have to admit that I was so pleasantly surprised and it was a boost to my self confidence.
Wonderous word Wednesday
10 hours ago

Subject: A touching story
I hurried into the local department store to grab some last minute Christmas
gifts. I looked at all the people and grumbled to myself. I would be in here forever and I just had so much to do. Christmas was beginning to become such a drag. I kinda wished that I could just sleep through Christmas. But I hurried the best I could through all the people to the toy department.
Once again I kind of mumbled to myself at the prices of all these toys. And wondered if the grandkids would even play with them. I found myself in the
doll aisle. Out of the corner of my eye I saw a little boy about 5 holding a lovely doll. He kept touching her hair and he held her so gently. I could
not seem to help myself. I just kept looking over at the little boy and wondered who the doll was for.
I watched him turn to a woman and he called his aunt by name and said, "Are you sure I don't have enough money" She replied a bit impatiently, "You know
that you don't have enough money for it." The aunt told the little boy not
to go anywhere that she had to go get some other things and would be back in
a few minutes. And then she left the aisle. The boy continued to hold the doll.
After a bit I asked the boy who the doll was for. He said, "It is the doll
my sister wanted so badly for Christmas. She just knew that Santa would bring it." I told him that maybe Santa was going to bring it. He said "No, Santa can't go where my sister is... I have to give the doll to my Mamma to take to her." I asked him where his sister was. He looked at me with the saddest eyes and said "She has gone to be with God. My Daddy says that Mama is going to have to go be with her."
My heart nearly stopped beating. Then the boy looked at me again and said, "I told my Daddy to tell Mama not to go yet. I told him to tell her to wait
till I got back from the store". Then he asked me if I wanted to see his picture. I told him I would love to. He pulled out some pictures he'd had taken at the front of the store. He said "I want my Mamma to take this with her so she won't ever forget me. I love my Mama so very much and I wish
she did not have to leave me. But Daddy says she will need to be with my sister."
I saw that the little boy had lowered his head and had grown so very quiet.
While he was not looking I reached into my purse and pulled out a handful of bills. I asked the little boy, "Shall we count that money one more time?" He grew excited and said, "Yes, I just know it has to be enough".
So I slipped my money in with his and we began to count it. Of course it was plenty for the doll. He softly said, "Thank you God for giving me enough money."
Then the boy said "I just asked God to give me enough money to buy this doll
so Mama can take it with her to give to my sister. And he heard my prayer. I wanted to ask him for enough to buy my Mama a white rose, but I didn't ask him, but he gave me enough to buy the doll and a rose for my Mama. She loves white roses so very, very much".
In a few minutes the aunt came back and I wheeled my cart away. I could not
keep from thinking about the little boy as I finished my shopping in a totally different spirit than when I had started. And I kept remembering a
story I had seen in the newspaper several days earlier about a drunk driver
hitting a car and killing a little girl and the Mother was in serious condition. The family was deciding on whether to remove the life support. Now surely this little boy did not belong with that story.
Two days later I read in the paper where the family had disconnected the life support and the young woman had died. I could not forget the little boy
and just kept wondering if the two were somehow connected.
Later that day, I could not help myself and I went out and bought some white roses and took them to the funeral home where the young woman was. And there she was holding a lovely white rose, the beautiful doll, and the picture of the little boy in the store. I left there in tears, my life changed forever.
The love that little boy had for his little sister and his mother was overwhelming. And in a split second a drunk driver had ripped the life of that little boy to pieces.
You now have the choice, you can:
1) pass this on to your friends or 2) delete it and act like it didn't touch your heart
"Friends are angels who lift us to our feet when our wings have trouble remembering how to fly."-

Without a word we disentangled and I went into the bathroom for a quick shower. Laid across my desk Amelias black stockings rose up her fat thighs reaching towards her bodacious ass. I was sliding slowly up and down his cock, SaraFontana webcam I could hear him gasping for air, a sure sign he is losing his fight to keep from blowing his load. This was a full-figured chick that was sexy and she knew it. I turned it on and stuck it up to your asshole and told you to push back when you feel ready. She plops SaraFontana porn shopping bag in her hand down on the bed and turns to face him. I was thinking about waiting in the car but decided to take a quick look inside.

Two days after he was brutally stabbed to death, the Delhi Police have reason to believe that an 'insider', who didn't approve of his relationship with his closest and current 'female friend', is behind 20-year-old Shobhit Modi's murder.
Sources said their investigations into the murder of the second-year IT engineering student so far had revealed that he might have been very popular among the several female acquaintances that he is understood to have — but such wasn't the case when it came to their male friends.
"There is a strong possibility that someone, most probably from within his friends circle, who did not approve of his relationship with his current female friend and wanted to be with her instead, decided to bump him off," said a senior Delhi Police officer from the investigation team.
While going through his Facebook profile, which they believe holds the key to nabbing his, thus far, elusive killer, investigators have chanced upon a series of comments questioning the longevity of his current relationship.
The comments, which have been posted from a fake profile, also challenge Modi and his friends before proceeding to plain pleading aimed at "letting her go".
"Many of her classmates, as per initial investigations into the matter, seem to have disapproved of her relationship with Modi. This is another fresh angle from which the case is being probed," the officer said.
Meanwhile, based on a deeper analysis of his call records, investigators have ascertained that Modi was in conversation with one of his female friends, who lives in east Delhi, immediately after he left the DLF Promenade mall and minutes before he was attacked.
After questioning at least 30 people in the last 24 hours, the police claim to have received specific leads and are confident of cracking the case by the middle of the coming week.

Title: ashes to ashes
Summary: She's falling. Her heart is sick. Her bones are dust. The yawning maw of the pit waits below. His arms are raised up to catch her. Coven AU.
WARNINGS: This story has elements of self-harm, substance abuse, dub-con, non-con/rape (not graphic), violence, and violent thoughts towards women. This fic is disturbing. If that's not your cup of tea I would advise not reading.
Author Notes: Written for the AHS Fic Exchange – Round 4 – for venomwithlove. As my prompt mentioned both Violet/Tate and Zoe/Kyle, I thought I would take some elements of the Murder House pair and superimpose them onto the Coven pair. Extended since the contest – new content and further backstory added. This is the longest one-shot I have ever posted. And it could probably use a touch more editing but I've already stared at it long enough that I'm barely seeing the words anymore.
Winner - Favorite Hot Feels Fic & Mod's Favorite Award. Thanks!
Original Characters: Leonard Parris is played by David Tennant, Nicola by Lucy Hale.
7 years earlier
Kyle Spencer was so cute. His shaggy dark blond hair falling in his face as he goofed around with the boys seated in front of them. He had never paid her any special attention, nothing out of the ordinary: complaining how lame gym was, talking, laughing with a group of people at her locker, passing her a note from Leah who sat on the other side of him in French. But she was hyperaware of him. His every move, smile, word, catalogued and stored in her memory banks, her heart.
She was standing in the theater, still bright and noisy, crowded with people, as they waited for the previews, the end of the revolving ads and trivia. Their section was largely empty as no one else had the desire to join a bunch of seventh graders. Most people were down a level, closer to the screen, or up in the balcony. Leah had just rushed off to the bathroom, tears streaming down her face, as Steve Randall watched. He had ended their two week relationship. In front of everyone. And Zoe was considering running after her friend but Leah was a real bitch when she wanted to be alone.
She was probably smoking, hidden in some corner stall, blubbering and blowing her nose into toilet paper. If Zoe got caught smelling like cigarettes when she went home there would be hell to pay. She would be grounded for a week, a month! So she was stuck teetering on the edge of movement, torn between her sense of loyalty and her sense of self-preservation.
"Hey, Zoe," her eyes shot up right into the dark, friendly gaze of Kyle, and her breath caught.
"Oh, hi," she returned, palms already sweating. Was it hot in the theater all of a sudden?
"Where'd Leah go?" Oh, of course, she sighed. Kyle liked Leah. All the guys did. Leah's mom let her wear pink lipstick and black eyeliner. And Leah had tits. While Zoe was only allowed cherry chapstick and was still woefully undeveloped: training bra, boyish body, long skinny limbs and feet she was always tripping over.
Tucking a strand of her waist-length straight hair behind her ear she wet her gloss-less lips and stared up at him. He stood almost six inches taller than her. Not that it was hard, Zoe was one of the smallest in their class. "She had to," she glanced at the door.
Kyle smiled and her heart thumped against her chest. "I thought you all did that together?" She shrugged, flushing, she could not talk to Kyle Spencer about the bathroom!
"Well, I better keep you company 'til she comes back." His mouth spread impossibly wider as he climbed over the back of his seat and crashed into her row. The boy beside him, Jeremy, rolled his eyes, shoved Kyle's leg when it nearly collided with his face. "Come on," he patted the seat next to him, lifted the armrest so that it was one large space, and she dropped down hesitantly, inching back slowly, watching him the entire time.
They talked about school, the movie they were seeing, Steve dumping Leah. He was two rows down chatting up a girl from the catholic school and Zoe shook her head. Boys could be so cute, but they were the worst.
And before she could think much about it: how fun Kyle was, how easy he was to talk to, how adorable the freckle on the end of his nose was, he was kissing her. It was sudden, out of the blue, and took her by complete stuttering surprise.
Zoe had never been kissed before. Not by a boy. Kissing Leah at a sleepover didn't count. And it was a dare anyway.
Her eyes were open in shock though his were closed. Kyle's mouth tasted like buttered popcorn. After a moment he pulled back, gazing at her shyly. When her tongue poked out to wet her lips he grinned and did it again.
That time she let her lids flutter downward, let him guide her, opening to him, her tongue tentatively touching the inside of his mouth as Leah had shown her. Kyle's fingers were on her waist, grip loose, as her hands pressed down into the seat cushion between, unsure if she should move them to his neck, his hair. She had always wanted to touch his hair, see if it was as soft as she imagined.
With a whoosh of air and a slight sizzling sound behind them, the two were wrenched apart. "Zoe Benson!" A man's voice rang out with scandalized disappointment.
Her wide eyes shot first to Kyle, utterly embarrassed, then behind her, startled, contrite, nervous.
"Grandpa Leonard?" she breathed. And there he stood, black fedora, black suit, red carnation pinned to his jacket, just as he always looked.
It had been a while since Zoe had seen her grandfather. He was dead. At least he was in her timeline.
Leonard Parris was a warlock of the highest class, a former council member, and he could travel through time and space with the blink of an eye and a snap of his fingers.
"What on earth?" he demanded, hauling Kyle up by his shoulder, his upper arm. The boy stared down at her terrified. "Does your mother know you're here," her grandfather paused, gaze narrowing meaningfully, "with this," he studied Kyle, taking in his sweatshirt and jeans, his red Chuck Taylors, and sighed, "young man?"
"Um," Zoe tried, biting her lip, "she knows I'm at the movies..."
"She didn't come with me," Kyle coughed, "sir. We just know each other from school."
The older man peered at the boy before him as he would some interesting and before unseen species; something to be understood but still possibly feared, as it was unknown to him.
Finally, having had enough embarrassment for a lifetime and seeing Leah coming back through the door, Zoe huffed, "Grandpa, let him go!"
For someone's grandfather, Leonard looked remarkably young and fit, which he probably was, appearing to be no more than forty in his own timeline. But he knew his family: the kids, the grandkids, hell, even a couple of great grandkids, and he liked to visit with them when he could. And Zoe was special, always had been. She had the witch in her. He could feel, smell, the power and knew that one day she would do the family proud.
And no stupid little boy was going to spoil that for her. Kissing! At her age! But how old was she? He never could be sure with the younger generations. Still, he released the boy but not without some further chastisement, "And you just go around putting your lips on young women in movie houses do you, boy?"
"Kyle, sir," he stammered, inching back, away. There was no magic in that one. Not even a drop. He wasn't good enough for a Parris. His granddaughter was the offspring of two of the best connected, most powerful, old Salem families. And the boy thought he had it in him to touch her, covet her. Because he did, of that Leonard was sure, it was all over his face. He desired to have her, own her, keep her.
"Grandpa!" Zoe huffed in annoyance, sounding more like her mother, her grandmother, than anyone should be allowed to, and it made his heart ache for his girls. "Stop," she said when he looked at her, lip protruding, and he almost expected her to stamp her little foot. "I like him." Her tone was pleading as her large hazel eyes shot wide, realizing what she had said out loud.
"What?" the older man thundered.
"You do?" the boy asked in wonder, breaking out in a grin even as he continued to watch Leonard with trepidation, a hint of fear. The non-magical often feared what they did not understand, sensed the otherness in their bones.
But before Zoe could respond to either of them there was a commotion outside, the sound of an explosion, like thunder but closer. Leonard's face whipped around, glaring up at the projection room. "Get her out of here! Now!" he hollered at Kyle as people began pouring from the theater, rushing and pushing.
"Grandpa?" Zoe gasped even as Kyle took her by the arm and began tugging.
"I'll be alright, sweetheart," he told her with a grin. "Go on." And they were off as he turned, sprinting for the stairs to the balcony, dashing into the melee, toward danger, as he always did. Leonard knew his granddaughter would be alright because he knew he would see her again, further on down the road. Or he already had, depending on how you saw things. Time wasn't linear; actually it was just a big ball of wibbly-wobbly, timey-wimey stuff. And he simply travelled through it.
"Zoe!" Kyle gripped her hand in his, trying to keep her close to him in the crush of bodies hurrying toward the emergency exits. Sirens were blaring, the lights gone black so only eerie caution strips and bright strobes lit their way.
"I'm here," she replied, squeezing his fingers and hoping their friends were alright. Until she tripped, falling to the sticky floor, nearly trampled by the worried mob.
Kyle hurried back to help her to her feet, hands under her arms, hauling her up along his body, buffering the masses until she was standing again. It was the wrong time and maybe completely inappropriate, but Zoe couldn't help the shiver that ran through her at the feel of his arms around her, his chest pressed to her back. And then they were moving again, Kyle pushing her along in front of him.
A second blast tore through the building, a wave hurtling down the corridor they were in, tossing them like ragdolls as a ball of flame licked at the air, fluttering after them.
Zoe and Kyle were almost at the door, eyes wide, as they were blown through it and tossed effortlessly to the pavement beyond.
When she woke up, sore and aching all over, Zoe couldn't hear a thing, only a high-pitched ringing and it hurt to open her eyes. She felt so bone-tired, all she could think about was going to sleep but she couldn't find Kyle. Slowly, painfully, putting her arms underneath her and getting to her knees she crawled forward, searching frantically.
Zoe's hands were wet. Someone must have spilled their soda she thought, carelessly wiping the liquid off on her white sweater, and watching it turn red. With a thick unsure swallow Zoe lifted her head even as her neck screamed out in pain and tried to take in the sight around her. People, or pieces of people, blood, hunks of meat, and torn clothing. It smelled like burning leaves and barbecue.
She was soaked in blood. It ran down her bare legs, over her eyes, matting her hair down on one side.
"Kyle!" her voice pierced the silence in her own head and suddenly sound came rushing back in. Sirens and screams, people calling for help, others moaning. A helicopter above.
He wasn't actually hard to find, only a few people over, closer to the building. His face was a mass of black and brilliant red on one side, the color traveling down his neck and into his scorched waves of hair. His eyes were closed but she could see his chest moving, rising, and she scuttled toward him on bruised knees and torn palms.
"Oh my god," she exhaled, "Kyle," placing her hand on the unmarred side of his face. He was still, sleeping or unconscious. She looked around them before screaming, "Help!" Her voice breaking, "Help us!"
Footsteps pounded the pavement, a police officer, a medic, and then a second, charging over. The officer pulled her back, let the two EMTs do their work on Kyle.
"What happened?" he asked, "Did you see anything?"
She couldn't tear her eyes away from the boy before her, his shirt being ripped open, monitors being taped to one side of his chest. The blackened flesh was there too, down his arm, his side, over his shoulder. Zoe thought it looked so painful and she wished that she could help him, that she had that power. And maybe she would, someday, but at that moment all she could do was stare as tears slipped down her cheeks.
"It just exploded," she whispered finally, "everything. Boom."
At the hospital, Zoe's parents were informed that she was an incredibly lucky young woman. She had faired better than anyone else trapped in the corridor when the fire swept through. In fact, she had escaped with only a minor concussion, a bruised rib, and a cut on her forehead.
"She's covered in blood, most of it her own, we thought," the doctor explained, scratching his head, "but we can barely find a scratch on her. It's a miracle." And her mother just beamed, stroking her head, sharing a look with her father who nodded. Zoe had the gift, just as they had always suspected, and at twelve she had presented her first power, to heal herself.
Not only was it rare to present gifts so early but to begin with such a powerful, useful, one was a triumph for their families.
Zoe herself just wanted to see Kyle, to know if he was okay, where he was. "He saved me," she explained over and over again.
But the doctor said he needed his rest, he was a very injured boy, his mother was with him, and Zoe could come back in a few days to visit if she wanted. She agreed, let her parents lead her away, avoiding the eyes of all the other parents, the families, who were not so lucky.
"Grandpa Leonard was there," she told them on the ride home, quietly from the backseat.
"Ah," her father said with a grim smile, "well that explains it."
"Trouble follows that man everywhere! Next time I see him I am going to give him a piece of my mind. He should have gotten you out of there the moment he saw you, he had to know what was coming."
"He always knows," her father chuckled. But Zoe stayed silent. Sometimes magic folk could be so callus, only thinking of themselves at times of tragedy. All she could think of was Kyle and the feel of his lips on hers, her small hand grasped in his bigger warmer one.
Zoe returned to the hospital midweek requesting to see Kyle Spencer. They informed her that he was in the burn unit, on the sixth floor, turn right down the hall.
"I'll wait here," her mother said, lowering herself into a grubby chair. She looked so out of place; her expensive black pantsuit and Chanel purse, dark sunglasses, black hat and perfectly coiffed hair. She looked like a witch, Zoe thought as she made her way to the bank of elevators. But then again, she was.
They had just come from the memorial service for those who died at the theater. Leah and her friends, they had all made it out, escaping through the front, while Zoe and Kyle had wormed their way to the rear. There was still no solid explanation for the blast. Some people said it was terrorists, most people said it was a faulty gas line.
The burn unit was silent, only the occasional beep, the squeak of a shoe on linoleum.
"I'm looking for Kyle Spencer," Zoe repeated quietly to the woman in scrubs behind a massive desk. She stood up and stared down at the girl, smiling.
"How nice! Kyle will be so happy to see a friend." She shook her head, "I think that poor boy is going stir crazy trapped up in here."
"So, he's okay?" Zoe exhaled in a rush.
The woman stopped, looked at her kindly. "He's got a lot of bandages right now. Your friend was badly burned, but he's still the same boy, okay honey? He can talk to you just fine." Zoe nodded nervously. "I just don't want you to be surprised or scared when you see him, okay? It's still him under all that."
They walked down the hall, past door after door, until finally they stopped. "Here you go!" She smiled again, knocking on the door jam. "Kyle, you have a visitor."
"Tell them to go away," he grumbled from inside, the television on low.
"But it's," the nurse looked to her.
"Zoe. Zoe Benson."
"Zoe is here!"
Being small Zoe managed to sneak a glimpse under the woman's arm and into the room as there was a sharp intake of breath. Kyle was propped up on the bed, hospital gown over his one arm, half his chest, the rest of his torso heavily bandaged. Her eyes trailed up to his face. His hair was slicked back and there were even more bandages, red angry looking flesh around his far eye.
"Go away!" he practically shrieked. "I don't want to see her! She can't come in."
"Kyle," the woman began.
"No! Go away! Go away!"
Zoe thought it sounded like he was crying but she couldn't be sure. "Kyle!" she called out.
"Go away," he said once more, his voice a broken wail.
The nurse sighed, glanced down at the pretty little girl before her. "I'm sorry, honey."
Zoe bit her lip feeling like she was going to cry too. "He saved me," she said to the stranger watching her. But the woman simply nodded again, ushering her back to the desk, the elevators.
Zoe never saw him again after that. He wouldn't see her the second or third time she visited either and her mother refused to take her a fourth time, calling Kyle an ungrateful boy.
He didn't come back to school and a month later she heard he and his mother had picked up and moved to Louisiana to be closer to family.
But it wasn't the last time she thought of him; Zoe thought of Kyle every day. When she first woke up, before she fell asleep at night. She thought of him the next time a boy kissed her, anytime a boy kissed her. She thought of him when she let Charlie fuck her and she thought of him when Charlie died, as she sat at his funeral. The only two boys she had ever cared about: one burned and scarred, leaving, never to be seen again, breaking her heart, and the other dying between her thighs.
Mother said that kind of thing happened. Some witches had bad luck and with her healing powers came repercussions. She could heal with her body and she could harm. Charlie had been an accident; too much emotion pouring out of her, fear, anxiety, longing, and she had managed to drain the life from him. A heart attack the doctors said, probably a congenital condition that no one had ever spotted, not her fault.
They were wrong though. It had been her fault, she had known it the moments his eyes went wide, he gasped, body shuddering and convulsing below her. Zoe had stolen Charlie's life. Felt it to her core. Felt it in the lightening of her heart, the lifting of her ever gloomy spirits.
She was broken, damaged, an aching soul, a withered heart. Her body had been calling out for a cure for so many years, begging for something, anything, to aid in it's repair. She could slash her throat and watch it heal within seconds in the bathroom mirror but there was nothing her power could do to mend the damage wrought on her soul. But in that instant, the first time she had been truly and fully connected to another, it had tried. Reaching, lashing out, extending tendrils from deep within her, into Charlie's body, draining the life out of him, bleeding his heart, absorbing whatever it was inside of him that made him whole. She had killed him, just as much as if she had stuck a blade into his chest. It had been a wholly selfish act however unintentional it had been.
And Zoe had felt good, lighter, happier, in those moments, even with a dead boy resting between her thighs, than she had felt since she was a child. Then the guilt had settled, like a stone, into her stomach, making her clamber off his lifeless form, rushing to the bathroom, spewing forth yellow froth, acid, from her roiling guts. She hadn't fucking wanted Charlie to die. He had always been a nice guy, one of the good ones. The fact that he had ever even entertained the notion of caring for her, possibly loving her, had been almost unbelievable. Zoe was an utter fuck up, a mess, shattered and torn to ribbons. But Charlie had seen the slashes on her arms, the scars on her stomach, pressed his fingers against them and stared into her with such feeling that she wanted to love him.
She hadn't. Couldn't. Her heart was too wasted, too black, and there was only room in it for one boy. Her obsession. She carried him with her always, a secret, held close. And while at first that had made her guilt grow, claw inside her, eventually it freed her. Charlie had to die in order for her to live, to carry on. She had needed what was inside of him. It revived her, renewed her ambitions to escape, change her life, who she was, how people saw her. To find Kyle and be someone new, someone whole, with him. Zoe knew she was being callous. To so easily dismiss a boy who had cared for her, for another who had run away and never looked back, who had perhaps never even wanted her. And she had always despised her kind for their pitiless cruelty but in the end, she understood it, because when you could have what you wanted, just take it, it was hard to think of others.
But the day her parents packed her off to Miss Robichaux's Academy for Exceptional Young Ladies, the premier boarding school for young witches, in New Orleans, the day after her boyfriend's funeral, she couldn't help but think that perhaps her gift was a curse in disguise. That witchcraft really was the work of the devil. The darkness was inside of her and it had no intention of going anywhere, not with a so brutally shattered but talented host to inhabit.
The other girls didn't understand, saw her scars and stared, eyed her with suspicion. It was hilarious. A bunch of witches treating her with hostility and suspicion. But every group needed a scapegoat.
Zoe had been cutting herself for years, since that night at the movies, since her parents explained that her body was magically impervious to harm. That she had lived, walked away, while others had died, been disfigured, because she was special, she was better than other people. Zoe didn't feel better than anyone. Instead a hatred for herself, her ability, fate and the cruelty of life, welled up inside of her and the only way to set it free was to hack at her flesh, mutilate herself, show the world that she should be damaged too.
In the beginning the wounds sealed closed, knitted up, and vanished within minutes. But with time and practice and patience, Zoe had come to master the skill of self-harm, gained control over her healing abilities, letting the cuts linger for days, weeks, festering and hot, scarring her arms and legs, the back and sides of her neck, her breasts and stomach. Once she slashed her thigh so deeply, so violently, that she nearly bled out. She thought about it, dying in a pool of blood like the ones she had crawled through that night but was too afraid to see what, if anything, was on the other side, so she let the gash close.
That was her first near suicide. Three more had followed over the years. But she had begun to wonder if she could even die. Would her body take over even after her conscious mind had fled? How strong was her gift of preservation?
She went into therapy for awhile, as she walked the tricky road of transition between preteen and teen. An entire year of explaining to some dick, sitting in a leather arm chair, smug and assured in his intellect, degrees on the wall behind him, that she was filled with poison, that she needed to free it. She wanted to be clean. Everyone deserved that. And the only way for Zoe to cleanse herself was to bleed, let the rot and pain flow from her veins, stain the porcelain of her sink, the beige of her carpet, the sky blue of her quilt.
He didn't help her, couldn't, not really. And she was kept from ever being truly honest with him. Zoe had to keep the family secret. So, she figured, if she was allowed to hold that back, what was stopping her from baring the therapist her other, more precious, private thoughts. She never mentioned Kyle, that night. He, Ben, Dr. Harmon, tried to tease the story from her. Zoe's parents, in their family session, had revealed that small fact. That their daughter had never been quite right, not since the theater explosion, since her trip to the hospital. And the doctor, in his infinite wisdom, wanted her to understand that that was alright, that he understood. He didn't understand shit.
Eventually she quit going, against her therapist's orders, her parent's orders. There were threats and bribes but nothing worked. Zoe didn't want anything. She couldn't be enticed with money or clothes. Not allowing her out to spend time with friends simply made her raise a brow. Zoe did not have friends. Not anymore.
It was only a matter of time before The Benson's gave up on her, broke down, let her slip away into the metaphorical night. They allowed her to paint her room the blackest purple available, pleased that she had shown an interest in anything outside of dragging an Exact-o knife across her flesh. And from there Zoe entered a short-lived period of exploration into interior design. Her bedding went from bright sky to onyx, dark curtains shuttered over windows drowning the light, posters torn down, toys tossed in the trash.
Zoe never asked to replace the carpeting of her bedroom; it lay festooned in red, black, and copper, splattered with her blood. Her favorite stain was the size of a dessert plate, situated beside her bed, where her life had pooled, gushing from her femoral artery. That was the incident, the final straw as it were, which landed her in Dr. Harmon's office, crammed onto a black leather sofa between her mother and her father, their faces dour masks of disapproval.
Next it was an interest in clothes, making her mother smile until she saw what her daughter had purchased with her freshly minted credit card. Black stockings, black bras, black lace. Everything was black; some of it oversized and ridiculous, purchased at thrift stores and smelling like mothballs, the rest was like something out of a lingerie catalogue. Zoe's father no longer knew where to look. But her parents shared equally nervous glances.
It was around that time that she met Charlie, a grungy low-level drug dealer, a grade ahead of her at school, a place she rarely bothered to frequent. He had been behind the bleachers, sneaking a cigarette, as she sat in the dirt, legs crossed, Marshall headphones drowning out the sound of the world around her, pumping music into her veins, as she rolled a joint. He had bummed a hit, stared at the pale skin above her knit knee socks, and thrown a simple but disarming grin her way.
Her second attempt at suicide had been in the few days between Charlie's death and his funeral. With her parents out of the house Zoe had cleaned out the medicine cabinets, downed nearly four dozen pills: blue, white, green, pink, and slashed her arms from wrist to elbow, slipping into the bathtub, feeling the water bob against her throat as her eyes closed. She awoke within minutes, surrounded by red, in the tub, on the floor, though the cuts had already knit closed, vanished. There was a pool of rainbow colored vomit, thick with undigested lumps, coating the tiles. Her mouth tasted of chalk and sick, sour and awful.
And she was alive. Whether she had actually died Zoe did not know. She was certain that she had passed out but from there is was all black, dark, until she was gasping and groaning, breathing.
The mess was cleaned, the bathroom put to rights, before either of her parents got home. She doubted that they ever knew what she had done, or at least attempted to do, probably thought she sold the pills or something equally stupid. And two days later she was gone, shipped away, swept under the rug, a secret, a sin, to be hidden from sight.
Zoe wanted to care, to feel, but she didn't. There was nothing. What difference did it make to her? Being home with her parents, the watchful, baleful stares of their neighbors, her classmates. Or being somewhere, anywhere, else. Miss Robichaux's was as good a place as any other.
She had only seen them, her mother and father, twice since that fateful day, when she was marched bodily from her bedroom, flanked by the albino guards, Myrtle Snow pulling up the rear, her bags loaded onto a train and sent south. Both times had been when they visited New Orleans. Zoe refused to return home, even for the holidays, listening to her mother weep into the phone, her heart a hollowed out shell.
Over time she decided that she liked being there, alone. She preferred the freedom, the anonymity, of school. Zoe even liked some of the other girls who dwelled within the mansion's walls. There were psychics and mind-readers, girls who stared at Spirit Boards and Tarot cards, talked in tongues, talked in nonsense. Others could fashion potions to ensnare the mind and body, grant longevity, stop pregnancies and end hangovers, all while grinning, discussing tattoos and bands and hot pink hair dye. There were pyros, girls who could control the elements of nature itself, command winds and storms. Some could raise the dead, some could simply talk to or see them, bending the veil between worlds.
Misty Day had the power of resurgence, bringing dead tissue back to life. She came in handy at a place like Miss Robichaux's, at least half a dozen girls enrolled were on suicide watch at any one time.
Their race wasn't dying out because of fear to reproduce, to procreate, it was dwindling from the pain and torment that bent and twisted the girls who carried the lineage. Powers, abilities, like theirs came with a heavy price, a burden, which too many could not live with.
There were two kinds of girls at Miss Robichaux's Academy for Exceptional Young Ladies: those who had known about witchcraft their entire lives, whose parents and grandparents had been witches and warlocks, and those who discovered magic only when their powers presented themselves. Usually after they did something reckless or stupid or dangerous. Accidentally, or purposefully, killed someone. That was when they would be approached, collected, sheltered under the academy's roof, taught the rites and rituals of magic.
Nan likened it to Pure bloods and Muggle-borns but Zoe never managed to give two shits. They were all equal parts fucked up, unhinged. Some girls escaped that fate, a very few, who were balanced and sweet, loved their families, had never so much as killed a fly. But Zoe didn't hang with those girls, they bored her. Their goodness only reflected her darkness and she had no use for them.
Sometimes it felt like living in an asylum. Other times it was Hogwarts, minus the boys, who were trained elsewhere, somewhere up north. Or that school in X-Men for freaks and abominations. But to Zoe Benson it was home and she loved it. As much as she could love, care for, anything.
Her roommate at Miss Robichaux's, Madison Montgomery, had her own issues. Drug and alcohol abuse, a sex addiction, an attraction to much older, married men. And a penchant for killing anyone, any wife, who got in her way. Madison's telekinetic ability gave her the power to murder fairly at will and a way to never be blamed for it. And it had been murder, her forth or fifth, Zoe was never entirely positive, that got her sent to the academy.
Ms. Foxx, the school mistress, was trying to work with the girl, but like with most of the other hopeless cases among her pupils, she was failing miserably. It was probably the reason the two, Zoe and Madison, had been paired up in the first place. Hoping they would find a lifeline in one another, pull each other to the surface. In reality they were the millstone dragging the other down into the depths by the neck.
Madison would watch Zoe with the razor, slinking off into the bathroom, and roll her eyes. But she didn't give a shit. They had a pact: watch the others back and stay the fuck out of the way. It had worked pretty well over the years that they had shared a room.
Madison was self destructive, explosive, the shrapnel from her fall outs hitting far and wide. She lied, schemed, cheated. Her number one priority was herself but Zoe could never fault her for feeling that way. She had to protect herself, they were witches, the necessity to guard oneself against outside forces, the world, those who would hunt or harm them, was paramount. And Madison had taken those lessons to heart. But the girl was fun; she liked to fuck, get high, drink herself into oblivion. She was the best friend that Zoe had ever had. If friends was what they were. If people like them could feel deeply enough, purely enough, to have that kind of connection to another human being. Either way, she was more than just a sack of meat to Zoe. She was a person, someone who meant something to her, who she could talk to, who she would defend. And as for Madison's so-called negative traits, the fact that she had committed murder without feeling a drop of remorse, those were the things that her friend liked most about her.
And Madison, in return, loved Zoe with all of her wretched, shriveled heart. She admired Zoe; how she never tried to hide her scars. She put them on display, right in people's faces, made them look, see her pain writ clear across her body. She made people uncomfortable. She enjoyed it, watching them squirm. They never made her roommate squirm though. They made her wet, made her lick her lips and flutter her lashes.
As Zoe dressed Madison would often gaze at her body. She had even chosen her favorite scars: on the back of Zoe's thighs, thick and brutal, the width of a baby's finger, gagged and long, interspersed with a smattering of light swift slash marks. The rest were beautiful too. The front of her legs, her forearms, were like a work of art, a still life done in cross-hatch. The rows of scars along her sides, inching up her ribcage, to her small breasts, to her neck, Madison dreamed of running her tongue along the raised ladder rungs. There was a small heart on the inside of her thigh, cut deep and rubbed with alcohol until it remained for all time, beside a burn the size of a quarter, shaped like an old cigarette lighter from a car.
Madison liked taking her friend out, showing her off like perverse eye-candy, getting drunk and draping her arms around Zoe, whispering in her ear as men, boys, women too, looked on. Some were disgusted, sneered, others shifted, uncomfortable in the most pleasurable of ways. She took her shopping, insisted on buying garter belts and stockings, black lace bras, watching her roommate twirl in the low lights of the dressing room. They would giggle at the register, matching sets, two of everything. Just like regular girls. Who could kill you in a heartbeat. Who could burn the whole fucking place down and just walk away without a glance over their shoulder.
Once, Madison had dragged Zoe to a party at some country club with a pool. Surveying the varying stares as Zoe dropped her black sheer tunic, let it flutter to the floor, stepping toward the water, barefoot and resplendent, skin a walking bruise, a canvas of scar tissue. Her friend had watched, skimpy white bikini, enjoying the show, until her target came into view: the teenaged son of one of her former conquests. The older man's horrified gaze as the boy slipped, cracking his skull on the edge of the pool, rolling into the water, had almost made up for the scathing fashion in which he had banished her from his life. Zoe had played the part of shocked bystander to perfection. Madison mused that maybe she wasn't the only witch with a talent for acting.
Nothing however beat Tea With the Trolls, as they liked calling it. Women and men, magical folk, pouring into Miss Robichaux's once or twice a year, gossiping and showing off, drinking tea by the gallon and shoveling miniature cakes down their gullets. Those were the moments when Zoe would really shine. She was one of the most talented girls at the academy, some even whispered that she could be a future Supreme, but she lacked even the most basic of polite social skills. At least in those situations, when she chose to be graceless. See-through blouses, skirts cut up to her cooch, thigh-highs, and combat boots. At the last one she had purposely bloodied her lip before waltzing down the stairs and spent half of the afternoon with blood on her teeth as she repeatedly worked the wound open.
"So much for flashing that impressive healing ability," Madison had whispered around the rim of her china cup. Nan, Nicola Radcliffe, Sarah Prim, had all smirked. Zoe worked her magic and forced yet more blood to burble up, letting it run over her lower lip and into her tea like a red font.
The witches, grown and in full command of their powers, glared. They were there to observe the progress of the newest crop of their linage, their future, and Zoe Benson was the perfect representation of everything that gone wrong in the community, the Coven, since Cordelia Foxx, daughter of the current Supreme, took over the school.
Madison always seemed to have her finger on the pulse of things. She always knew where the best parties were, who was in town that was worth seeing, and where they could get served. And she didn't just fucking know. She got Twitter alerts. Phone buzzing and chirping, lighting up where ever she had carelessly thrown it before skipping off to take a shower. Zoe just shook her head as it beeped, demanding to be noticed, and continued to paint her nails a green so dark it appeared black against her milk-white skin.
"Party tonight," her roommate smiled minutes later, fluffy towel wrapped around her sun-kissed body. Zoe merely quirked an eyebrow as if to say, so? "It's a Tulane thing," Madison added.
"I thought you didn't party with children," she smirked.
Madison glared. "Fuck you." Usually the former child star could be found mixing in either the seedier dive bars in town or the high class clubs that catered to her ilk, her gentlemen of choice. Not with a bunch of colleges kids. She rolled her eyes, pouted, "I'm bored. And I'm out of coke. So do you want to go or what?"
Zoe was restless, her skin feeling too tight, pulled taught around her muscles, her bones, itching to break free. A fraternity party was the perfect opportunity to blow off some steam. She almost laughed, a gleeful mood striking her, as she recapped the bottle of polish. "Yeah, I wanna go," she grinned, climbing off the bed, tugging her shirt over her head.
Madison watched with hungry eyes, lower lip caught between her too perfect, too white, teeth. "Okay, Sally Scar-tissue," she replied finally, slinking toward their closet, "you want to borrow a dress?" Adding with a hint of deviousness, "Because I have just the thing to show off all your pretty artwork."
Madison's clothes were scandalous at the best of times; for classes, the dinners Foxx insisted they attend with their fellow witches. Her party dresses were in a category all of their own.
So, Zoe had squeezed into Madison's dress: black, glittering, one-shouldered. It rode obscenely high on her thighs, exposing the straps of her black garter belt. The red slashes on the upper portion of her legs stood out boldly against her pale flesh, the stark darkness of her stockings. Her black peep-toed heels were studded on the back with silver spikes. Another acquisition from the girls' shared closet.
Madison herself had donned a gold and silver second skin, writhing as she dressed like a snake shedding it's outer layer. It showed off a slim waist and ample cleavage. She looked like a wet dream with her hair a tousled mass of blond. Between her two companions she was a ray of sunlight in the night.
The third girl was a contrast of white skin and black hair, vibrant ruby lips. Her feathered black collar hung over small shoulders, black dress cut down to her navel, sweeping low enough on her back to show the dimples on either side of her spine. Her black stilettoes added more than four inches to her usual height and made her move with a kind of stilted elegance.
At the last moment they had allowed Nicola to tag along with them. Madison despised the other girl. She was hot and she was a bitch and Madison hated competition in those departments. But it didn't stop her from occasionally putting her tongue down Nicola's throat, or into her pussy, as Zoe attempted to drown out the sounds they made at night with her headphones. Nicola still knew how much it fucking annoyed her though; the bitch was a telepath.
It was her ability in particular, which had lead to the girls inviting her to join them. Not only was she able to read the thoughts inside any individuals head, she had an uncanny ability to influence them, guide them, make them do or believe what she desired. Both things came in terribly handy when sneaking away from Miss Robichaux's under the cover of darkness, running the risk of bumping into their mistress, or worse, Spalding, the butler, around any corner.
And, truth be told, Nicola wasn't a bad person. Zoe actually liked spending time with her. When she wasn't fucking Madison at least. She hadn't always been into girls, she had confided in Zoe one evening. When she was still living at home, just your average Goth girl, attending high school in Pennsylvania, she had had, what she thought was, a very serious boyfriend. They had been together for nearly a year when she finally offered up her virginity on a slightly tipsy platter, at a party. It wasn't special or romantic, but it had felt like it was a long time coming.
Her gifts were in their earliest stages, people's inner thoughts like confusing whispers in her ear. She thought she was going insane, had been put on a number of anti-anxiety drugs and anti-depressants to quell the voices. Words like bi-polar and schizophrenia were tossed at her parents. But eventually the drugs couldn't contain her power, the whispers growing into screams and she learned the ugly truth, what had been written on the faces of so many who knew her, what bounced around in their skulls. Her boyfriend had been fucking her best friend, half of her friends, half of the girls at school, behind her back. She realized he was only using her because she was lucky enough to have her own car and was willing to drive his sorry ass all over town. Because, she believed, they were in love.
A couple of days later, after her discovery, her heartbreak, the boyfriend stepped right out into the middle of a busy street, directly in front of an eighteen wheeler. He didn't die instantly. He lay sprawled on the pavement, pool of blood collecting behind his destroyed skull, gathering in the corners of his mouth, as Nicola watched, stone faced, from the sidewalk. It was a tragedy, the local newspaper wrote. A few weeks later Foxx appeared on the Radcliffe's doorstep, the good book of Salem, the ancestry of witchcraft, tucked under her arm, a tab of parchment marking the page of Nicola's ancestor, Prudence. Happy to have an explanation for their daughter's bizarre behavior, way of dress, the Radcliffe's were very willing to ship her back to New Orleans with the pleasant woman sipping lemonade in their kitchen.
Nicola cried everyday after arriving at school. For the boyfriend, for her parents, for her life, lost. Madison had immediately found her tiresome. But there was something refreshing in it, her pain, her regret, in Zoe's opinion. Not every girl sent, collected, attending Miss Robichaux's Academy for Exceptional Young Ladies, was a villain. While, to some, it was a punishment, a form of imprisonment, to others it was a safeguard, a protection against themselves, from their powers. Some girls simply dwelled within the mansion to learn. But it was the first two groups that drew Zoe in. Those were the girls she considered allies. They understood her and she them. None more so than Madison.
Zoe had even tried it off with her roommate a couple of times, her bright hungry gaze drawing her in, but she just couldn't get into it. Girls weren't her thing. And Madison would fuck just about anything with a pulse. It didn't make you feel very special. So that had been the end of the experiment. The other girl had moved on to the next in line and Zoe had gone in search of cock.
2 years earlier
She had gotten wasted at Madison's urging, drowning themselves in Hurricanes on Bourbon Street during Mardi Gras. They never paid for a drink.
"I told you, you'd have a great time!" her friend hollered over the busy crowd, the live band playing at the back of the bar. Zoe just flashed that mean little smirk, her eyes hazy with a potent mixture of drink and benzos.
Two boys watched them from across the bar, talking back and forth, gesturing, leering. The first leaned forward, placed an order with the barkeep, the second sent a smile their direction.
Madison, noticing their interest, and never one to miss an opportunity, grabbed at the front of her roommate's gauzy black chiffon blouse, popping three buttons and tugging the other girl's tits into view before she could so much as squawk in protest. "You may not have a lot here, Kitty Cat, but work what you've got."
When the proffered plastic cups of booze landed in front of them, a hand gesturing down the cracked wooden bar top, Madison grinned, waved them over.
The guy who chose Zoe, singling her out from the pack like a wounded animal, put his palm, warm and heavy, on her lower back, nodded his agreement when she suggested finding somewhere more quiet. He was some college kid from out west, just in town for the week, and he had done the job, hadn't even had a heart attack. Zoe, on the other hand, nearly passed out on the street, barely out of the alley he had left her in, panties torn, hickies on her neck, the tops of her breasts, mascara and liquid liner streaming down her face, vomiting up rushes of hot liquid on the sidewalk. She couldn't look at a bottle of hard liquor for nearly a month without tasting bile.
After that, she had done alright. Fucked a few guys, always drunk to the point of near collapse, and began to believe that Charlie was just a fluke, a first time thing.
1 year prior
It was an experiment really, walking off with that guy after only a gin and soda, a line of coke, but Madison was busy and the two other girl's from Robichaux's were no where to be found. Zoe was bored, lonely. She had been feeling down, depressed, in the weeks prior; no reason why specifically, nothing particular that started it, her downward spiral. And the fraternity brother she had been talking to was nice enough, handsome enough, tall and muscular, a wild mane of dark brown on his head, stubble on his chin. But she was unsettled, jittery, mind a swirling mass of disjointed bloody images. The movie theater, the death and the carnage. Sometimes it was like she was still in it, like her life from that point had been a dream, a trauma induced nightmare, and she was going to wake up still in her gore smattered clothes, head wound throbbing.
Zoe just wanted to escape, even for a moment, and set her mind free.
He fucking died. An aneurism; blood oozing from tear ducts, his nose, his ears. Zoe had finished even after his body went limp. His dick was still hard. All that blood and she thought of Kyle, wherever, whoever he was, when she came. And she walked away, another anonymous face at a sorority house. She could have been anyone.
They found the body in the morning, crashed out on a lawn chair. It was on the news. No one remembered anything out of the ordinary and Zoe never mentioned it to another soul. Though she had an idea that both Nicola and Nan knew; their gifts were to know your darkest secrets and Zoe had too many under lock and key to worry about hiding such an insignificant blip.
She hated herself for not caring about him, for never even learning his name. She had simply turned off the television as the news story regarding his death played, making a sarcastic comment, dismissing it with a wave of her hand.
It was months before she fucked anyone else. She let Madison go down on her a couple of times, and it was good, but it didn't satiate that need inside of her. That dark, clawing thing that begged for cock, twisted her up and made her wet, soaking. She related whatever it was with her need for pain, for hurt. The thing that begged guys to spank her, hit her, choke her, make her see stars, send her into fits of pain and pleasure. It lived inside of her, her own demon. Zoe wondered if it had been forced into her during the blast, the explosion at the movie theater, thrust inside her twelve year old body where it had taken up residence, living, thriving on her pain ever since.
Kyle fucking hated parties. Girls eyeing him from across the room, smiling, whispering to their friends. It always ended the same way: they would flock over like a group of twittering birds, say or slur a hello, and within moments be gawking, staring openly at his scars, before drifting away, still whispering about him but in a much less desirable way. Sure, his fraternity brothers, his friends, never mentioned them, hardly noticed them anymore but he knew they were there. Saw them reflected in other people's eyes, in their expressions.
The doctors had done what they could for him at the hospital in Virginia and then later in New Orleans after their move south. Surgeries and skin grafts, creams and ointments, but his hair never grew back on that part of his scalp, his ear was still a twisted useless mass of scar tissue. His face looked decent, heavily mottled with raised flesh but only about a third of it, and the color was mostly right, a touch dark, purple in places. You couldn't necessarily see it at first glance, especially not in dim light. His chest, shoulder, and arm were more heavily scarred but those places he could cover. That was why, even with the warm muggy air that night, he was wearing a long sleeved thermal under his polo, his collar popped, to hide the most skin from view.
He didn't want to be ungrateful for all that had been done for him, he really didn't, but sometimes resentment burned inside of him. The doctors had granted him a second chance but what they had given him was only a half life, something between functional, normal and freak, sideshow act. And eventually, with time, his dual physicality had rent him in two mentally as well, no longer able to hold his demons in check. Kyle felt lost in the world. Was he just one of the guys or a perversion of humanity, a monster? He never could quite tell.
He sighed, taking another sip of his beer, knowing that he should have just stayed in. Gotten drunk in his room, beat off, gone to bed. The night was a bust and he felt like complete shit. But that was when he saw her. Fuck, she was beautiful.
"Zoe," Nicola began as they stood just beyond the front door of the house, blood red nails dragging along her bare forearm, dancing down and along the cross-hatching of scars there. "There's a boy watching you."
Madison glowered, rolled her eyes, "Cut the fortune teller act, bitch."
"Where?" Zoe asked, eyes flickering to the side. It had been awhile. She was feeling needy.
But Nicola was frowning, glancing around warily. Shaking her wild mane she said, "Don't look for him. The things I see, what he sees, what he wants to do to you..."
"He hot?" Madison winked. Zoe smirked.
"He doesn't see himself. Only you." Her gaze snapped up, locking Zoe in place with its intensity, "Violating you. Inside you. His hands on your throat. He wants," but she shook her head again. "Get out, no, stop, I don't want to see!"
Madison cackled, arm draping around Nicola's shoulders, feathers ruffling, reaching to brush her tit. It was Zoe's turn to roll her eyes. "You're only making her want him more, you know. You're, like, hitting all her kink buttons. Zoe loves the rapey vibe," she purred, leering. "Murderers turn her on and shit. Thinks they'll give her what she really wants."
"What's that?" Their third asked.
"Sweet, sweet release," Madison replied, cocking a perfectly waxed brow, "in more ways than one." Nicola's eyes went round as she stared at Zoe who shook her head, amused. For a mind-reader, that girl could be so fucking dense. Or maybe she was just more polite than Nan; actively avoided reading your thoughts when she didn't have to, left you alone when she could. Maybe Nicola Radcliffe knew far less about her than Zoe had ever considered and she was almost grateful.
Tossing her long hair behind her shoulder, exposing a series of slashes, ladder rungs running up the side of her neck to her ear, Zoe laughed, suggesting, "Let's get some fucking drinks before I find my dream guy, huh? I am way too sober to let anyone fuck me right now."
"If they want to live," Madison stage whispered, Nicola swallowing. Zoe glared. Clearly she had given the telepath too much fucking credit. "Oh, I'm kidding, Black Widow."
Madison had a million nicknames for her roommate. Zoe only had two for Madison: Bitch and Cunt. Both were fitting.
"One more," Madison pleaded, eyes wide, knees bent as she bounced lightly. Then with out waiting for permission, approval, whatever it was that Zoe had no intention of granting, "My girl gives new meaning to the phrase hate fuck!"
"Really?" she snarked, as a few boring, everyday, college girls in cotton dresses walked by eyeing them speculatively. The three witches in the hallway stood out from the rest of the pack; people automatically treated them with distrust. That was just the way it was for magic folk. Zoe was glad they stayed away. She didn't like them either. Those skanks would probably burn them at the stake if given half a chance. That kind of shit didn't change, it just went out of fashion.
She saw his scars first, his messy bleached blond curls second, and both made her want to see more. He was slipping around a corner, disappearing into the heaving mass of bodies in the main room. Zoe grabbed her cup and the fresh beer out of Nicola's hand. The girl huffed, tried to argue, but Madison laughed, latching onto her lips, as Zoe walked away from her friends.
She wobbled on her heels, drunk and unused to balancing in anything more than a pair of Docs. His hair was like a beacon; flashing pink, purple, blue, green in the light of the strobes. The music thrummed loudly, dancing through her veins, mingling with the vodka, the lines had blown.
He was alone, skirting the edge of the dance floor, turning down a dark corridor just beyond. Zoe bit her lip, smiled, wondered if he meant it as the invitation she took it as.
Everything about the moment was familiar. Like a dream you had once and almost forgot but it was happening when you were awake. The rush of fear, the crowd, the warm exhilaration deep in the pit of her stomach. Her hand in his, that was the only part that was missing.
Nicola had told her, after being plied with a few drinks, he was a killer. He'd done it before, wanted to do it again, and Zoe had felt her panties grow damp, her thighs slick. That kind of shit really did turn her on. Madison wasn't fucking around. But to find someone, an actual fucking murderer, surprised her. Plenty of guys liked to rough a girl up, toss her around, call her slut or whore or bitch, but it was part of the game for them. Zoe wanted it for real; the danger, the adrenaline, the inevitability.
"Looks like you've found your soul mate, cunt." Madison cocked her head to the side, examining her friend, "Why are you still hanging around with us?" Maybe she had been joking. Probably she hadn't been. Four years had been enough time for the two girls to get to know one another, really understand how the other worked.
9 years earlier
Madison's step-daddy raped her when she was a kid. Held her down on her pink comforter, under her canopy, face mashed into her lace covered pillow, as he took her roughly from behind, whispering in her ear about what a little fucking slut she was, how he knew she wanted it, even as she cried for him to stop. The room had formerly been her sanctuary, an escape from her neglectful drug addicted mother, the place where she could forget about work and money and how much she hated her life. The unicorn stuffed animal from her father, the posters hung on the walls, boys she dreamed of gazing down at her, the yellow smiley face balloon from the wrap party she had attended that afternoon for her most recent project, watched helplessly. Her mother just ignored it, what was happening to her daughter, right under her nose, in her house, and spent the asshole's money; blew her problems and his fortune up her nose.
Her daughter slaughtered them both, Carrie-style. It was her first kill. She was eleven.
In the interim years, before ending up at Miss Robichaux's, Madison had lived with her aunt, her mother's sister, who wasn't much better. Just another bitch taking a cut and spending the child star's cash.
Madison never really learned to appreciate, to love, other people. She could barely stomach to trust them. Killing became just another part of life. If the girl didn't get what she wanted, felt belittled of demeaned, unwanted, cast aside, she removed the problem from the equation and moved on. No one batted an eyelash until that director. The one she was fucking, twice her age, married with three kids. He would tear her apart on set, rip her to shreds, call her talentless, worthless, all in a bid to look innocent. In the end, she dropped a fifty pound light on his head, busting his skull open for all to see. That brought Madison Montgomery to the attention of Cordelia Foxx at Miss Robichaux's.
Zoe had been sixteen the first time. Nicola seventeen. They were all fucking murderers. Why didn't he deserve the chance that they had been given? Some people were just built to kill. It was in their breath, their blood, their bones. Some people became killers due to circumstance. Zoe, Madison, their experiences had twisted them, their abilities just made it, killing, hurting, easier. Witchcraft allowed them to feel divine, above earthly matters, above consequences and punishments and guilt. Witches took, they did not give. And that was just the way it was.
"What are you doing down here?" the voice of a boy asked her from the darkest deepest point of hall.
"I thought you looked thirsty," Zoe replied.
"Yeah?" he chuckled menacingly, "that your superpower?"
"One of them," she smirked, leaning back into the wall, staying a few feet from him. That blond hair was just visible, as was the outline of his face, all pale hard features, chiseled from marble.
He didn't move and she didn't know what game he was playing, but she liked it. Biting her lip, Zoe smiled again, and held out the red cup of beer in his direction.
She had followed him, just trailed him down the blackest corridor in the fucking place and offered him a drink. Like life was simple like that. Like he hadn't spent the past hour imaging her blue lips and cold skin, his hands clamped around her neck, his cock pounding into her, as her limp thighs fell to the side.
But she was so fucking gorgeous. That dress, her tight little body, silken hair going on for miles, just like her legs. Fuck, and the stockings, the straps. A girl like her was put on earth to torture a guy like him. Because girls like her didn't just give it to guys like him. Maybe she'd smile but then she would see them and her eyes would give her away. Pity or disgust, he didn't fucking want either. He wanted to get his dick wet. He wanted something aside from his spit-slicked palm and something brutal playing on his laptop.
But even more, Kyle wanted to be a normal fucking guy. One who had stayed home that night rather than chasing after the specter of Zoe Benson, a girl he had convinced himself was the most breathtaking creature on the planet. He wanted to hear about the movie theater explosion on television the next morning, stunned into silence like the rest of the town. He wanted to ask Zoe how she was the next time he saw her, show her compassion, let her cry on his shoulder, kiss away her tears, and take her to the mall the following weekend to eat pizza and play arcade games.
7 years earlier
Kyle watched Leah storm out of the theater, hands covering her face, as Zoe stared, wide eyed, concerned but unmoving. Getting her alone up until that point had been near impossible but it felt like his moment had finally come. With a deep breath, a pull on his cherry Slush Puppy, he turned to smile at her. And she smiled back. He was lost.
His mother, the doctors, therapists, had always acted like he couldn't feel, express, love. That he didn't understand it. They were wrong. With all of their tests and bullshit. Frowning and sharing concerned looks. The last test they had given him involved word association; which two words go together, giving him a list of three: warm, loving, cold. Kyle's immediate thought had been warm and cold, both temperatures but glancing up at the open, apprehensive faces of both his mother and the doctor he knew instinctively that that was not the answer they wanted to hear. Kyle, molding his face into a thoughtful, innocent, mask said, "Warm and loving," the doctor breathed a sigh of relief, his mother following suit. Kyle smiled.
He could love, he knew he could. Because Kyle loved Zoe Benson with all of his heart. She was his. His very own. Thinking of possessing her, having her, body and soul, was enough to make him react violently, embarrassingly.
Kyle, occasionally, walked by her house, at night, after his mother had passed out, his father long since gone, leaving them one afternoon without a word. Zoe had the front bedroom, windows opening onto the street. Her curtains would billow in the breeze as she pranced around her room, dancing to music, singing into her hair brush, twirling. In her underpants and little else. It was indecent really, the way she paraded her body, put it on display. He was only there to protect her virtue, keep other, less worthy, eyes from prying where they did not belong.
Sometimes, frequently, he thought of her. When he touched himself. Rubbing and stroking until he came, gasping and flushed. And fuck, she made the world feel right, perfect. Like there was nothing wrong with him, like the school hadn't recommended special counseling, like killing the neighbor's nasty fucking poodle had been an accident. Images of her on his bed, sheets rumpled, her mouth slack. Zoe, trussed up, a hint of a smirk on her mouth as he gagged her. Or on her knees. Her loved her on her knees. Bending over, begging him to take her, because only he was good enough. Fuck, she was amazing. The way she smiled at him in class, talked to him at her locker, like he was the only boy in the world, the only person she could see. He felt like a star, important, singular in her attentions, affections.
She really was the only girl for him. Until everything went wrong. Blew up in his face, literally.
Kyle wanted a normal fucking face. Not one people shied away from or gawked at, slowly turning him from a supposedly outgoing kid into a studious introvert. He wanted to go to homecoming, prom, leave for college and reinvent himself. It was hard to become someone else when a third of your face was still scarred and people just couldn't help but wonder what the hell happened to you. Then thanked god or whatever that it hadn't happened to them.
He wanted girls to flirt with him. To see him, not just his good side, as his mother called it. He wanted to be wanted. But most of all Kyle was desperate to have normal urges. He didn't want to think about blood and bullet holes, bile and shit and piss, filth. He wanted to lay a girl down on his bed and worship her with his mouth, slowly peel away her clothes, make her blush and giggle as he slid into her, told her she was precious or beautiful or some shit. He wanted that to do it for him, make him hard. It didn't. It make his dick limp, made him feel like heaving.
Give him a girl, bound and gagged, tears on her face, panties hanging off one foot, and he could drill a hole right through her. Hard as titanium. Give him a chance to work her over, observe his creation, and maybe he could fucking fall in love again. But in the taking he lost the chance of the giving. No hearts were gifted to him and his lady loves ended their time with him sinking into the black swamp near his uncle's lonely bayou cabin, fodder for the gators.
"Are you shy or something?" she asked him with a grin. He shrugged one shoulder, biting his lower lip. Zoe melted a tiny bit, knees weak. She took a step forward, toward him, "I like the shy thing."
He finally reached for the proffered cup, their fingers brushing, sending a shiver up Zoe's spine.
Taking a deep swallow of her own drink she continued to study him. The beauty of his mottled flesh, the physical representation of pain, of sorrow. She wanted to touch him, it, stroke the pads of her fingers along the raised lumpy skin, skim his ravaged ear, skip along his bare scalp. Her thighs squeezed together at the mere thought of it, the crotch of her panties soaked through.
He was keeping a distance from her and as she slowly stepped toward him. Each step she took caused him to back further into the corner, disappearing deeper into the shadows. "Don't you like girls?" she asked. And he froze. She smiled, sipped her drink, stalking her prey, playing the game by her own rules. "Don't you like me?"
Thick black lashes fluttered against her porcelain cheeks as she coquettishly breathed, "You've been thinking about me." His eyes darted side to side, back and forth, searching. Did he want to escape? Or knock her flat, drag her out by her hair and bury himself balls deep inside her sopping cunt?
"I know you have." Zoe was immediately in front of him then. Barely separated by six inches from the object of her lusting. "And I like it," she sighed, picturing the beautiful, grotesque imaginings of his mind, making Nicola's words come to life in her fantasy.
Kyle wanted to say nothing; remain mute and stoic, hard. If he gave into her words, her voice, started to believe, he would be bitterly disappointed. Again. But how did she know? She couldn't, he reminded himself. She was just flirting, acting coy. His heart however beat out a frantic rhythm against his ribs.
Taking a deep swallow of beer, a second, and a third, he glared at her. Fucking self-centered, gorgeous, perfect bitch. If she only knew. He was fucking dangerous. He was the devil himself. He was a hunter, twisted and gnarled, mind ravaged. And she just continued to walk into his trap. Kyle wished she would just fucking leave him alone.
Every step back he took, she took two forward, until he was up against the wall, locked in a corner. And suddenly he wondered if he was the only one of the two of them on the prowl, his breath escaping in a stuttering exhale as he stared into her shining hazel orbs, she licked her lips. He was entranced.
The fingers of her hand, the one devoid of a party cup, came to rest lightly on his chest. Kyle's wide eyes flicked down, taking in the picture of her slender digits, dark nails, on him and swallowed. Her touch danced along his ribs, came to the collar of his polo, tripped up to his chin, and finally rested on his bottom lip, tugging ever so slightly, exposing the moist pink inside.
That gaze of hers was on him again, a flash of small white teeth and a mean little smirk. For the first time in years he felt like prey instead of predator. And then in a sudden flurry of movement her mouth was on his, needy, insistent, hot and wet. His brain shut down as his back slammed against the wall, her body aligned, molded, to his front.
He all but dragged her through the exit at the end of the hall, lips sliding, tongues tangling, his hand up her dress, stroking that wet seam through her panties, fingers already slick with her want. He pulled back, considering her as she gripped his belt loops, bringing his pelvis, his straining cock, into contact with the warm place between her thighs, bucking against him with a lazy roll of her hips.
When he didn't move, because he couldn't, frozen in a haze of lust and incredulity, she smiled again. "You know, I didn't follow you out here because I thought you wanted to play patty-cake so," she licked her lips, put a hand behind his neck and drew him back in.
Kyle almost couldn't believe it. That she wanted him. Hot mouth and hot cunt begging for it. So he assumed she hadn't seen it, them, the scars, yet. And he wanted her to, wanted to feel her tense, shy away, so he could remind himself that she was not special, that she was just like every other bitch out there.
He rocked forward, thrusting, and she sighed as his mouth fell away from her own with a wet pop, her head knocking into the wall with a soft thud. Kyle held his cup with his teeth, reached into his pocket with his free hand, the one not pressed up against her dripping pussy, and fished out his cell phone, glancing down at it. The screen illuminated him in a blue-white glow. In combination with the dim lighting on the side of the house she finally caught a good look at his face. His beautiful face. The scars raised but smooth, covering a significant portion of his right side. Her head tilted, considering him from her position against the rough brick. And his eyes bore into her, mouth a firm line, the fingers against her snatch twitching.
"Wait," Zoe's throat closed, realization dawning on her. Why it had all been so very familiar. Why Nicola had tuned into him, that one particular boy in a crowded house, so easily, so quickly. How, why, they were connected. Why she had been so immediately drawn to him, so eager to have him. But she couldn't speak, shock writ clear across her face.
"No," he shook his head. "You see, we're past that now." She had confirmed his worst suspicion. She was just like every other soulless cunt in the world. She saw them. Next she'd ask what happened, frown, say how sorry she was, and suggest they return to the party. But things had gone too far, his need at a fever pitch. There was only one way to satiate it.
He brought out a little orange prescription bottle from his pocket, popped the top and dumped two pills out onto his hand. Zoe eyed him, head cocked, silken hair cascading down her left side. He grumbled, "Sorry," mouth around the rim of his almost empty cup, "it's time for my pills". She nodded, continuing to gaze at him in something akin to disbelief, awe. Had she never seen someone with fucking burn scars before? What the fuck was wrong with her? He hated her fucking stare, her gorgeous fucking eyes. She was so open and sweet like that, her mouth forming the shape of a little 'O'. So unlike the normal looks he was on the receiving end of but just as painful because it reminded him of what she saw, what was there. Why someone as exquisite as her, with her leaking cunt and tiny tits, the perfect girl, would never go for him.
And before she could say anything, just fucking ask the question she was terrified to ask, afraid the answer would be no, or that he would reject her again if it was yes, his mouth was on her neck, tongue dragging up toward her ear, tracing her jaw. He expected her to go rigid but instead her breathing faltered, a small needy sound slipping from her. His lips sought hers, aggressive, desperate and maybe just a little bit broken, as she sighed, melting into him. He was so good, coaxing her to open for him, fingers slipping down the wet insides of her thighs, trailing away from the place she was burning for his touch.
The capsules in her mouth came as a surprise as they glided smoothly from him to her. She struggled, trying to pull back, shake him off, ask what the fuck he thought he was doing. But when his lips left hers, his hand took their place. He smiled, a devil's grin, blond hair in his eyes, as he pinched her nose, stopping her ability to draw air.
"Swallow them and I'll let go," he told her, their foreheads brushing. She shook her head no. "Do it," he growled, other hand tearing her panties aside, brutally pinching her clit and making her gasp as his body crowded her into the wall, scraping her back. Her eyes were wide as she did what he asked.
Kyle removed his palm, allowed her to inhale a much needed breath, before his fingers left her pussy. One arm pinned her, forearm across her chest, holding her in place, as his sopping digits nudged past lips. She moaned at the taste of herself and he smirked. His fingers swept under her tongue, between her gums and her cheek, before pulling back out slathered in her saliva. "Good girl," he hummed, kissing her lightly.
"What did you give me?" She panted.
"Nothing serious, a couple muscle relaxants. It will make this all," he paused, thoughtful but excited, "easier. You're going to feel so good soon. Free, like a bird." And he kissed her again, stroking her sides. "I like birds," he whispered against her mouth.
"Why do you like them?" Why was she asking? She should have been thinking but she didn't want to think. She wanted Kyle. And every moment more she spent with him the more certain she was that the boy before her was, in fact, Kyle Spencer. His dark eyes were studying her and all she could see was that boy at the movies, the one who kissed her, who held her hand, who saved her, and she wondered if he saw her too.
He shrugged, "They can fly away when things get too crazy, I guess. And they're so fragile. Small, thin bones, delicate wings, so graceful," his mouth slide across hers as Zoe's body grew pliant in his arms, soft and yielding. He put a hand around her waist to keep her on her feet. "Like you," he added, stepping away from the fraternity house, propping her up as she fumbled, legs wobbling. "So small," his mouth on her ear, "so precious."
Kyle would probably claim that he did not have a type, that he went after easy targets, girls who were available, accessible. But that wouldn't have been entirely honest. He liked young girls, not yet eighteen usually, small, petite, with soft features and big eyes. Girls who looked to him for help, assistance, in their time of need. He found them on the streets, outside of shelters, weeping in alleyways behind bars. And they, in their naïveté, would allow him to lead them away, lead them not to the light as they hoped, but further into darkness. But they always went willingly. At least in the beginning.
The drugs were quick and he administered them in a variety of ways: drinks, food, directly from his mouth. That was his favorite but rarely used as it required direct contact, his face, scarred and horrible, right there against their own. The girls so rarely offered up kisses. They usually needed to be stolen, taken, lips and teeth and brutality.
When they were calm, docile, sweet, curled up to rest like tiny kittens, Kyle would get to work. Strip them down to their underwear, dress them up again. Pleated skirts and knees socks, sweater sets, floral dresses, and Peter Pan collared blouses. The clothes of a girl, unaware of herself, young and unsure, not yet ready to burst from the page of her own story, create herself. That came later, he was sure. She would have grown, become a woman, changed her style of dress, perhaps over and over, until she found the one that suited best. But all Kyle could do was remember. So he worked with what he had.
Social media, Facebook and that shit, had granted him the opportunity to find her. He had searched, tirelessly, fingers scrolling through page after page, name after name. But she was no where. Not a glimpse. Aside from one interesting piece of information, which had caused him to take his dick in hand, slide his spit soaked palm over the bulbous head and down the shaft.
It was a newspaper article, a quick blurb from his old town. A teenaged boy had died, heart attack. Kyle almost remembered the name, a kid a year or two ahead of him at school. But it wasn't that that caught his attention, his notice. It was what was between the lines. He had died with a girl in his bed, cock in her pussy. Kyle was almost certain. And that, special little death, had him hard, biting the flesh of his hand to keep from cursing, moaning, calling out her name.
But it couldn't have been Zoe. Pure, gentle, happy Zoe with her cherry chapstick lips and silken wave of hair. But in his thoughts, his imagination, she was anyone he wanted her to be. So he pictured her, older, even more beautiful, riding that guy as he thrashed, dying, watching his life ebb away, grinning. Because a girl like that, she could love someone like him. Even if he was nothing but filth.
He always took them, his girls, to the cabin, his deceased uncle's lonely hideaway where no one could hear their cries, the begging. His mother thought he was studying, fishing, doing what boys do when they need to let off some steam, be alone. And maybe she was right, he just doubted that she had the proper vision to see his art.
They were art. Works of beauty and pleasure. Their tear stained faces and cum soaked panties. The burns and bite marks, ligatures and bruises. The girl's bodies was his canvas and he made quick work of their surfaces. But like all good things, they too had to come to an end, which usually involved a plastic bag over the face and one last good, rough, fuck. Before he let them slip away, return to obscurity, nothingness, in the dark waters of the swamp, gators waiting, watching, just below the mottled surface.
There had been five over the years, since he started driving. He longed for more but Kyle wasn't greedy, he wouldn't take more than was his due. The monster in him called, howled, but he kept it chained in the darkness at the back of his mind. The truest part of him. His secret.
It wouldn't do to take too many, to get noticed. That was how you got caught. And if you got caught there were no more girls, no more fun. He would probably be the one getting fucked, in some prison, before they have him the injection. And Kyle had no interest in his life going down that path. He had things to do. He was going to a good university. One day he would be an engineer, working with the city, the mayor, the governor of Louisiana. And they would see his scars and perhaps pity him but he would know, that they shook hands with, made deals with, worked with, a monster, heart and soul black as hell, blood on his hands. And that, that got his dick hard too.
They looked like any other couple as they emerged from the darkness; girl drunk and leaning on her boyfriend as he smiled and made conversation, helping her home.
Zoe could still speak though her speech was somewhat slurred. "Where are you taking me?"
"My room," he replied amicably. "I'm the president of Kappa Lambda Gamma. We're not the coolest guys on campus but we're no Tri-Lambs." She breathed a chuckle, tossing him a smile and he returned it, adding, "I live at the house. It's not far."
He had never brought a girl back with him, home, shown them his space. But he couldn't bring himself to drag her any further, to his car, out there into the night, to the swamp. Not her.
"I can't believe you're in a frat," Zoe snorted, the drugs making her fell even drunker than she already did. "I think frats are full of fascists."
She willed her body to process the muscle relaxants, expel them like a cancer. She could usually will off the effects of a night out, healing herself, but had never had to try it with prescription pills let alone at full potency.
"You know," he slowed, turning her in his arms and kissing her hard, Zoe's hands clutching fistfuls of his polo. Kyle left her gasping before continuing, "I don't mind being reduced to a stereotype but," he hummed along her neck, sucking a fresh blooming bruise into the skin there, as her head fell back, small hands dropping to hook into his waistband, "I'm here on a scholarship. There's more to me than just that."
"I know," Zoe replied on a sigh, leaning into him as he stilled. It hit him, how like a regular date it was, that moment. Being with a girl, laughing, smiling, kissing and touching. His heart pounded, thumped, slammed against his chest. And he hated her a little bit more for making him feel that way, accepted, wanted. Because he had filled her up with pills and she was supposed to be frightened, fighting, not enjoying herself, giggling and babbling at him.
But Kyle grinned, couldn't stop himself. "Yeah?" He played along, cursing himself, his weakness, his fingers itching to be inside her again, feel her slick spongy walls grasping him, welcoming him.
"You like dogs. And your favorite color is red. You were a boy scout. And your dad walked out when you were little. You stopped those guys you hung out with from beating up Ryan Nichols just because people thought he was gay." Her voice was wistful, eyes growing heavy. Every time she blinked it was harder to open them again. Zoe felt like she was having an out of body experience, warning herself to stop talking. "Shut up," she said out loud, instead of in her head.
"What?" He gripped her upper arm hard enough to bruise.
"He doesn't know you," she continued.
Kyle was at a loss. The drugs made you feel drunk and his girl had been drunk when she swallowed them, but she was talking crazy. They stopped in the middle of the road, standing still in one another's arms. Her hands trailed up his chest, his neck, fingertips ghosting along his scars without fear or trepidation. Her face was utterly free of repulsion, in fact there was something shiny in her eyes as she sighed, body falling against his, sagging with a sort of relief.
"You kissed me that night," she whispered finally, against his mouth. "I had wanted to kiss you for so long and you did it. But then," her tongue ran along his lower lip, "boom. And you never wanted to see me again." Her voice broke and she knew she had lost her grip, that the drugs were coursing through her veins, utterly overpowering her defenses. "But why, Kyle?" And was she fucking crying? She hadn't cried since she was twelve years old. Not when Charlie died, not when her parents sent her away. Not since Kyle Spencer refused her final visit at the hospital, since he moved away without a word, leaving her in tatters, in pieces, never to be whole again. "What did I do?"
He was stunned. When had she learned his name? He was certain he had never told her. And how did she know all that shit? She was rambling, raving, he could blame the pills, the booze, the coke he had spied her blowing up her nose. Unless, he paused. But Kyle refused to believe. He had given up on hope, on soul mates and the idea of her love, years before. She couldn't be her. Life was cruel; it took, it did not give.
The Lambda house loomed as he helped her shamble across the lawn, her legs coltish and wobbling, tears streaming down her face, hands clutching him, tugging his shirt, his hair, desperately trying to crawl inside of him, so she would never have to let him go.
Kyle didn't dare take her through the front door, the way she fucking looked, though he doubted any of his brothers would be in before midnight. Instead he maneuvered them toward the rear, entering the unlocked door of the kitchen, and guided her up the silent, black, disused staircase. Her heels pounded the old boards, her hands trailing along the walls, black fingernails scraping the plaster.
"You live here?" She asked, some of the starlight back in her gaze, snivels drying up.
"I live in an old mansion too. It's a school, for girls," she swallowed, listing to the side, "with problems. They call us exceptional. The only thing exceptional about us is how fucked up we are."
His room was tidy, organized, impersonal but she didn't seem to care, didn't ask any questions, just flung herself down on his mattress, cheek against the quilt as her eyes drifted closed, making herself comfortable, barely able to move.
Kyle closed the door quietly, turning to look at the girl on his bed, a hand rubbing over his eyes, cock hard and straining against his khakis. Her squirming, wiggling, in that tight-ass short fucking dress was doing nothing to improve the situation. But he had to ask. "How the fuck did you know all that shit about me?"
"Huh?" came the muffled reply.
"Before, you said…"
Zoe shrugged, limply rolling onto her back, knees falling apart. His gaze dropped, followed the line of her leg, the stockings, up to that place he knew she was hot and wet, just for him. "Because you're Kyle Spencer."
His eyes squeezed tight, muscles contracting, fury building in his gut. "I never fucking told you that," and he was storming toward her, climbing up on the mattress, planting a knee on other side of her torso and grasping her wrists, tugging them above her head and leaning down into her face, his onyx eyes held a mixture of rage and fascination.
She sighed up at him, wetting her lips, seemingly unconcerned about her position. She was either the dumbest bitch he had ever brought home or she wasn't fucking scared of anything.
When he continued to say nothing, to only stare, Zoe got nervous, shifting beneath him, as she felt some kind of emotion, pain, regret maybe, rising inside of her. He didn't remember her. And why would he, she thought. Just another stupid girl at the movies when he was in junior high. Sure, he had saved her life that night, but he would have done the same for anyone, that was just the kind of boy he had been. And when she had gone to see him, to tell him thank you, or perhaps that she thought she was in love with him, whatever burst out of her mouth first, he had sent her away. Over and over. He had rejected her. And why shouldn't he have? She was a freak. She had healed while he had suffered, languished in a hospital bed. He hated her, just as she had always suspected. Kyle blamed her for what happened to him. She blamed herself. So she couldn't fault him for not realizing who she was. Perhaps he would be disgusted if she told him, move away from her, shove her aside, scream and thunder. Or worse, silently dismiss her.
"You don't know me," she swallowed. It was a question and a statement rolled into one.
"Should I?" His face was red, the words low and menacing, his face inching a fraction closer. Kyle wanted her to say it. To dash his hopes, tell him that she was not her.
Zoe nodded, tucking her lip between her teeth, on the verge of tears, lost, unable to control her own body. In other words, she was a fucking wreck. Kyle's head cocked to the side, scrutinizing her like some lab rat, something to study and dissect. And part of her wanted him to do just that: cut her up, take out her heart, her lungs, let her die and put her on display. Because she wanted no part in her life, in the world as it was. She hadn't, not really, not since she was a twelve year old girl.
He might actually be doing her a favor. Once she had had a dream, something to think on, ponder, hope for, but if Kyle Spencer was there, with her, and didn't know her, didn't want anything to do with her, again, then she would have nothing left. Death was her only option.
With a trembling sigh, her cheeks damp and cool, she exhaled softly, "I'm Zoe. Zoe Benson. From…" But she stopped, the way he was looking at her, mouth agape, bright wavy locks falling over his forehead and into his eyes, made her chest ache, heart sluggishly pulling toward him.
"Zoe," he repeated.
She nodded again, tears tracking down her face, rolling into her hair, her ears.
"But how?" It wasn't possible.
She wanted to answer him, to go into detail, explain how exactly they had come to find one another again but a tiny ember ignited in her chest and began to grow, scorching, burning, tearing her open in agonizing pain. She swallowed.
He, Kyle fucking Spencer, had made her that way, the way she was. The fucking mess, the train wreck, sprawled beneath him, and he didn't even have the decency to show some spark of emotion when he discovered who she was. He wasn't angry, or sad, or happy. He was just Kyle, quiet and fucking staring at her. And Zoe was so fucking exhausted of all that shit. "How am I here?" she demanded. "Well, you fucking drugged me and half carried me home, like a twisted fucking psychopath. Or do you mean in New Orleans? Because that is one hell of shitty-ass story. But it all starts right around the time you kissed me in that stupid movie theater and then never spoke to me again."
His rage had been put on hold, simmering just below the surface, as he fought to understand, to make sense of the whole situation. It was clear that she did not understand fucking anything. How could he have let her see him? How could he have faced her again? She was so perfect, so beautiful and pure. He had, in one night, possibly the best night of his young life, up until the point of the blast, become a monster. It hadn't been enough that people already suspected it, that there was something wrong with him, inside. But he had to look the part too. He shook his head angrily. "I fucking loved you!" He didn't know why he said it, exploding, spit flying past his teeth, his lips, spraying her face, as her mouth dropped open, eyes wide with surprise.
Finally, after a heart-stopping moment, her face contorted into something dark, that mean little smirk playing at her lips, as she scoffed, "You were thirteen."
Kyle couldn't hold back any longer, not as she dismissed his confession. "Don't fucking diminish the way I felt," he released her wrists and lifted her by the shoulders, slamming her back down on the bed, her neck wrenching with the force.
"You fucking sent me away!" Zoe screeched, arms thrashing as she clawed at his face with tingling fingers.
"Because I looked like this!" he boomed in return, showing her the scars, lifting his hair, tugging his collar aside, so that she could get a fuller extent of his disfigurement. "I never wanted you to see me. Never. Not like this."
She released a lungful of air she hadn't realized she was holding in a whoosh, a look of understanding gracing her features before her palm clumsily cupped his face, her talons withdrawn. "I like you like this," she breathed, hips lifting awkwardly off the mattress, seeking friction, seeking him, to prove her point. "You're beautiful."
And the word, that word, the one he had so often and for so many years used when he thought of her, coming from her lips, to describe him, made Kyle more furious than anything else that had happened that night. What kind of fucking game was she playing? Was it a ploy to get away? He couldn't believe, not for one fraction of a second, that she was serious. His hands were around her throat before he could stop himself, could actually think about what he was doing. His fingers grasped, squeezed, as she let out a choked exhale, eyes slipping closed, chin tilting up as the dim light in his room made her damp lips sparkle.
Her first impulse was to try and pry Kyle's crushing grip from her windpipe, body struggling to supply oxygen to her blood, her brain, it was instinctual. But instead she reached for his belt, tugging uselessly, desperately. She bumped his erect cock, slid her hand down, and then repeated the process, cupping him through his pants.
The boy above her, his eyes skittering to his fly, watched her futile attempts at seduction, and slowly eased his hold. "You want," his gaze snapped back to hers, "with me? Still?" She nodded a reply, biting her lip. Kyle removed her hand, placed it on her own milky thigh, and wrenched his belt from the loops with a loud crack that made Zoe's spine arch up.
She turned her head side to side, lifted her neck into the warm sweating grip of the single hand still there and whined, "Don't stop."
"Fuck," It fell from his lips like a prayer, a benediction. "You mean, you want me to," he jerked his head toward her hoping she understood his meaning.
"Yeah," she sighed, body moving, slowly undulating below him.
"Zoe," he shook his head. Was she crazy? He had tried to fucking strangle her.
"I want you to," she batted her thick black lashes. "I like it."
"No," he told her.
"Kyle," her tone was warning as those large doe eyes appraised him cynically.
"Fuck. No." He repeated. He wasn't risking her life. She was Zoe Benson. She was there, with him, hot and ready, body pliant, willing. His dick was so fucking hard. He wasn't going to fucking choke her out. At least not until he had sunk into her wet hole, pounded her into his bed, filled her up with jizz, and lapped it up out of her cunt. He didn't have time for that shit. Not when she wanted him. God, really fucking truly wanted him.
"Stop being a little pussy bitch and just do it!" she barked catching him off guard and like that his hands were on her throat again, out of his control.
She had a death wish he realized too late. Maybe she had all that time, since that night. But he feared he may have already fallen in love with her. Again. And he didn't want her to go, to die like the others. Not then, not when he had finally found her. Not when she was so tragically, wonderfully, perfect. The embodiment of his darkest, neediest, fantasies.
Her lips were so plump, full and red, raw, as her chest rose and fell, the rhythm all off. Her eyes, he wanted them to close, loll, but instead she glared, fixing him in her hard challenging gaze. Daring him to squeeze tighter, crush her windpipe, kill her.
The voices, the dark intent that dwelled within, encouraged him. Bullying him into unspeakable acts. And they were becoming harder and harder to ignore.
"No!" He wrenched himself back onto his haunches, releasing her, hovering, watching air rush into her lungs, feeding oxygen to her starving blood cells. "I won't," he shook his head, smacking a palm brutally against his skull, "I won't. I won't," trying to knock his terrible, horrible thoughts out. "I won't," he repeated, voice cracked and broken.
She didn't argue. Zoe used all of her might, her will, to swing a fist up and into Kyle's jaw, then grimaced in pain, surprised at how much the act of hitting someone hurt. And it wasn't even a powerful blow. The drugs were wearing thin but still present in her system.
Kyle couldn't think. Not then. That black monstrous part of him reacted. His fist closing again around her throat, the lower half of his body, thick and desperate for her, bumped against her cunt, making her legs fall farther apart as he rutted himself into the cradle of her thighs. It was all so very much like he had imagined it earlier in the night, long before he knew who she was, how very perfect she might be. And she was fucking it all up, ruining it. Making him hurt her.
"Is this what you fucking want?" he seethed, mouth moving close to her face, feeling her stuttering little breaths. His cheek rubbed hers in an approximation of affection. She was so soft, so warm and fresh. His lips moved to her ear, whispering, "Is this what you need?" One hand slipped to her cunt, stroked her before retreating once more to his fly, popping the button, working the teeth of his zipper down.
"I could kill you," she wheezed with the little air she had left, fingers worming their way past his, inside his boxers, groping for his dick. "I've done it before."
"What?" He stared, grip never slackening, as his mouth dropped open subtly. Knowing that she had killed, that she was a killer, sent a rush through his body, making him shake, muscles locking and releasing, jittery. "Before? That guy? Did you.." but instead of finishing he kissed her, groaning into her mouth, heart racing.
Zoe had worried that he would stutter, stop, freeze against her, ask questions, forcing her to fight or cajole him into the act. There was honestly little she could do in her current state; her body had a mind of its own. Between the pills he had slipped her and the aching desire for his cock, she was as helpless as a newborn lamb.
But his lips against her, greedy, brutal, his tongue running down the ladder rung of scars on her neck, ghosting along the shell of her ear, giving her goose-bumps, encouraged her. "It'd be worth it," he grunted, as her sigh heated his neck, fingers wrapped loosely around him.
"Zoe," he groaned. Her wrist snapped, jerking him, as he bit his lip, releasing her throat. She gasped, chest heaving upwards as air rushed into her lungs.
"Fuck," she whimpered, his hands sliding up her skirt, dragging the soaked cotton of her gray underwear over her straps, down her thighs, her calves, leaving them hanging from one black silk covered ankle. "I want," she shook her head, adrift on a sea of desire.
Kyle wrenched her upward into a stooped sitting position and proceeded to rapidly divest her of her dress, the sound of seams tearing the only sound in the room, before letting her fall back against the bed with a soft thud. Trying to be of some, any, assistance, Zoe attempted to kick off her studded stilettoes. "Leave them," Kyle urged, his hands coming up under her knees, opening her to his penetrating gaze.
"You really want a second asshole?" She smirked, her voice nothing more than a rasp after his previous ministrations. He shrugged, lip quirking.
He was staring at her, couldn't fucking stop. Everything about her was beautiful: her porcelain skin, marred and savaged by scar tissue, bleeding sores, cigarette burns. The map of destruction painted across her flesh was mesmerizing. She had brutalized her body in a way even he couldn't recreate. She was a master. And he worshipped at her feet. Wanted to worship every inch of her.
Zoe, impatient, made a whining noise at the back of her throat, pelvis coming up, her bare, sopping cunt glistening in the low light. Kyle stood, eyes never straying from her magnificent body, writhing on his bed. He tugged his polo over his head, teeth gnawing at the inside of his cheek as he debated.
"I want all of you," she murmured.
And Kyle knew what she meant so with a deep intake of breath he yanked his thermal off as well, exposing the worst of his damaged flesh to her lazily perusing eyes. Then his khakis and boxers were dropped to the ground and he was back on the bed, between her thighs, the place he most longed to be in the entire existing universe, and she welcomed him with a lift of her brows and a coquettish smile.
"Fuck," he sighed and she nodded, pleased. Her stiletto covered toe nudged his calf showing her eagerness. Without further thought or preamble Kyle surged forward, driving his cock deep inside her, watching, delirious with pleasure, as her eyes went wide then fluttered nearly closed. Her small, pert, pink-tipped breasts heaved, as he filled her completely, stretching her, a tiny yelp escaping past her pursed lips. It was like coming home. He had never had a girl he hadn't forced before and the feel of her body taking him in, accepting, welcoming him, slick and greedy, was almost more than he could bear. Zoe shifted her hips and he sank yet deeper, right to the root, groaning, eyes closed, mouth pressed to the join of her shoulder and neck.
When he had collected himself somewhat he withdrew entirely, allowing only the very tip, hot and weeping, to remain in contact with her scorching flesh. He wanted it to fucking last but there was no way that it was going to. Kyle urgently wanted, needed, her to cum, to observe her face in the throws of ecstasy, and as he thought it, he found his hands, almost of their own volition, moving steadily from their position on her sharp narrow hipbones up, tracing the dip of her waist, over the ridges and valleys of her ribs, skimming the rounded sides of her tits, over her jutting collarbones and to her neck.
They made contact with the long, pale column of her throat, already purple and black, testing. The tips of his fingers dug in, a light touch. She grunted, thrust up, ass rising off the bed, eyes closed, lip caught painfully between her teeth. Kyle's thumb drifted upward, coming into contact with her jawline, forcing her to lift her chin, head tilting back to accommodate him. "Fucking look at me," he ground out, thrusting brutally then stilling. Hazel orbs flashed. His hands tightened their grip. "Tell me to fuck you harder." Zoe's hair cascaded around her making a halo of silk as she made a show of struggling. "Say it," he was bruising her skin, marking her with his hands, making her even more beautiful. And he wanted, needed, to hear her fucking say it. Wanted her to beg him. Beg him to make her cum.
With a steely look and a harsh snort she growled, "Fuck me harder," voice a hoarse whisper.
"Sorry," he breathed roughly against the side of her face, "I couldn't fucking hear you."
Zoe wheezed, air barely rasping into and out of her lungs. Her body was helpless to do anything more than squirm, her pelvis begging him. "Fuck," she managed, eyes rolling to the back of her head, then, "Fuck me harder, Kyle." A beat, "Please, god. Fuck me."
His lips twisted into something resembling a smirk but it was more sinister, darker. He, up on his knees, pounded the supple hole between her thighs, his grip never loosening, as her body began to quake and shiver. The inner walls of her cunt spasming, begging him for more. "You're so fucking wet," he sighed, "you little slut." His tongue darted out to lap up the small line of drool that ran from her mouth down her cheek. And with his words, a thumb pressed against her pulse point, feeling it flutter, she came apart around his cock, grasping him, clenching, holding him like a molten vice.
When Kyle, two sloppy pumps later, spilled inside of her, Zoe's mouth opened on a silent cry. Her inner muscles continued to hold him, milking him, draining his balls dry. The action was a rough mimicry of his fingers on her neck. It was almost poetic. But glancing down at her, his blood thrumming through his veins, feeling high, he saw that she had gone still, limp.
"Zoe?" He rushed, voice hoarse, sweaty hair in his eyes. He boggled at the hands around her throat, observing them from another perspective, like they were not attached to his arms, his torso. Slowly, with stiff fingers, he released his grip. The girl below him lay still, head cocked to the side, bloodshot eyes open, staring at a fixed point on the wall. Her chest did not rise with the sudden intake of breath he had been silently praying for.
"Zoe!" His face shifted from a sated sleepy mask, to one of fury again, violently taking her by the shoulders and shaking her. Her body flailed, arms swinging as he lifted her from the mattress, head rocking back painfully, her mouth open. "No!" He felt the burn of tears behind his eyes. "No! You don't die! You can't," his vision swam, stung, as Kyle dropped her lifeless corpse back onto the bed. "Fuck!" He turned, screamed, rocking forward, taking his head in his hands. He was going to vomit, bile rose up in his throat, acid in his mouth.
Behind him, Zoe's fingers twitched, eyes rolling in their sockets, before she gasped, half screamed, sitting up, sputtering and coughing. Kyle spun where he sat, handfuls of his hair still painfully being yanked from his scalp. "Fuck. That shit burns," Zoe panted, gaze flickering to him as she inhaled roughly and he stared back helpless, eyes the size of saucers.
"How?" He rapidly crawled toward her, clutching her naked body to his chest, a sob nearly choking him.
"You know, I always wondered if I could do that," she told him nonchalantly, like girls coming back from the dead was nothing particularly interesting or exciting. Like she hadn't just changed his life in the matter of one evening, one moment. Like she wasn't already the only thing in the world he could ever truly love. The only thing that mattered to him in the whole filthy goddamn horror show they lived in. "I'd come close a couple times but I never knew. I'd always been alone. Maybe I'd just passed out or something. But that shit was crazy!"
"You died," he stated dumbly.
"I guess. Yeah."
"But you're alive."
"Apparently," she grinned.
The drug had quit her system entirely, body active and her own, fully functioning once more, heart pounding, lungs inflating, deflating. Zoe immediately reached for her boy, hands, fingertips, skittering across the pocked and marled flesh of his scars, exploring, memorizing.
"Sorry," he frowned.
"For killing me?" She lifted a shoulder helplessly.
Kyle bit the inside of his cheek. He had actually meant for the state of his chest, his disfigurement. But, he figured, he should have been sorry for killing her, so he nodded.
"It's okay," she breathed against his lips, hands sliding down his chest, chipped nails scraping across his nipples, and over his shoulders to cup the back of his neck. "I forgive you." He kissed her then, desperately, urgently, crushing her delicate body to his own as his thumbs dragged down her ribcage, over her hips, to her thighs, where they tucked themselves into the straps of her black garter belt. Zoe pulled back first, eyes flitting downward to take in his already fully erect cock, and lifted a well-sculpted brow. "Already, huh?" He had no words so he nodded. And she grinned, yanking his mouth back down to meet her own.
"We could run away together," he hushed into the overheated skin of her bruised neck, later, as they lay collapsed and boneless on top of his quilt.
"We could," she agreed, toes flexing as his fingers tripped across her clit, slipping inside, wetting themselves, and returning. "Or I could just stay here with you."
"All night?" he smiled, boyish and full of charm. So like the old Kyle. She liked that there was still a little piece of him, the boy she had known, inside. Because she knew, deep down, there was a tiny part of the old Zoe in residence in her as well.
She shrugged, "Forever? I mean, why waste a perfectly good Tulane scholarship."
He shifted so that his face was above her, driving three fingers into her body mercilessly as she squeaked then gasped, eyes glassy, before leaning down and savagely biting her lower lip.
Zoe's hand worked its way from his shoulder to his neck, climbing along the tight raised tissue there. Over his jaw, thumb running along the scarred flesh at the side of his face, before raking into his hair, tugging it away from his exposed scalp. "Soft," she mumbled, blood on her teeth, hips undulating up into his wet, waiting palm. "I always knew it would be." He smirked wickedly against her mouth.

Cooper Manning is the eldest son of former football quarterback Archie Manning. He himself was a professional quarterback but he could not continue with his football career because of his health issues. He is a famous television host. He is an Energy Trader of America. Now let’s have a close look on Cooper Manning’s net worth in 2019.
Cooper Manning was born ion 6tyh March in 1974. His father was a famous professional quarterback Archie Manning and his mother was Olivia Manning. He had two younger brothers, Peyton Manning and Eli Manning. They were born in New Orleans, United States of America. He went to Isidore Newman School. He played football there.
From childhood, he had an attachment with football. During his senior year of High School he we widely received and he played alongside his brother Peyton Manning. He became so famous and played so nicely that after he graduated from High School he signed with The University of Mississippi. His football career started in 1998. He wore the jersey number 18. Before practices, in his high school days, he used to feel a kind of numbness in his toes and fingers.
He went to the Mayo Clinic in Minnesota. There he was diagnosed with spinal stenosis, narrowing of the spinal canal which ends up creating pressure on the spinal cord. He accepted this and ended his football career immediately. His two younger brothers played professional football. Presently Peyton has retired from professional football but their youngest brother Eli still plays on the team New York Giants.
Cooper was a partner of an energy investment boutique named Scotia Howard Weil. They had offices in New Orleans and Houston. They hold Energy conferences every year which attracts top-level investors, privet energy companies and public energy companies and other privet equity firms from around the world. He hosted his segment on The Dan Patrick Show. The title was Manning on the Street.
He joined FOX on 13th September in 2015. In 2016 he got the senior managing director post at AJ Capital Partners. It is a privet real estate company of Chicago. It mainly builds a portfolio of resorts and hotels. He started hosting his show The Manning Hour on Fox Sports in 2015.
Awards and Achievements
He is a famous business personality presently. He has not received any notable awards yet but we can’t predict the future. He would have continued with his football career if his heath supported him.
Net worth of Cooper Manning
The estimated net worth of this famous American host is $15 million. He accumulated the chunk of his net worth first through his professional football career than from his career as a television host which made him worldwide famous. He earns a huge salary through his energy trader profession. He lives a lavish lifestyle. He is a very funny person himself. Presently he is the Senior Managing Director of Real Estate Company called Adventurous Journeys Capital partners which are based in Chicago.
He married his girlfriend Ellen Heidingsfelder in 1999. He is still married to her. They have three children together May, Arch, and Heid. There are no rumors about their divorce or separation.

Re: student with autism....could use help
i am not a teacher but i would be happy to share some tricks that might help. firstly, allow him to pick his seat. his whole day could be thrown off just by sitting in a seat that stresses him out. give him a daily schedule and (if possible) give him advanced notice if things change. implement a token system. for example, give him 3 token or passes to use that allow him to get up and maybe go for a walk with an aide if he feels overwhelmed. as he uses his token have him check them off on a daily log. you could also verbally remind him "ok, Johnny, you have used 2 of your tokens/passes already for today.....remember you have one more to use." keep a communication log with his parents. i don't know his functioning level but maybe if his parents see that he is having a problem during the day then they could help him overcome it by talking about it at home. assign him a buddy. sometimes children are much more receptive with following thru with a task if he is working with another child.

Carey Price has gone over his performance in Game 4 of the Eastern Conference quarterfinals and says he wouldn't do anything different if he had a chance to play it again. "I felt good about my game," said Price, who was on the losing end of a 5-4 count in overtime Thursday night. "I played the game over probably four times in my head last night and I wouldn't have changed a whole lot." Price wasn't happy to lose, but said it was time to be positive as the Canadiens head into Game 5 Saturday night (7 p.m, CBC, RDS, CJAD Radio-800) with the best-of-seven Eastern Conference quarterfinal series tied 2-2. "(The Bruins) were facing adversity and now it's our turn," Price said. "You can pretty well take all the quotes they were saying two games ago. We just have to cowboy up and do it. "At the start of the series, if you told me it would be 2-2 after four, I think we would have taken that," Price said. "Now it's a best of three and it's a sprint to the end of this one." Each team has won twice on the road, but the Canadiens will have to put the way they lost Game 4 out of their minds. They lost after leading 1-0, 3-1 and 4-3.
Canadiens have to 'cowboy up and do it,' Carey Price says
Montreal Gazette | Apr 23

Monday, December 20, 2010
Ruth is doing so well with her violin. She is loving her book and just wants to learn new songs all the time. She diligently plays through all the songs she has already learnt and then wants to carry on. I was especially proud of her today for playing while looking at the music. She hit the wrong string a few times because of this but I think she is just doing so very well. When she looks at her bow she can get it perfectly but she knows I want her to learn to follow along with the music. She continues to amaze me how quickly she can pick tunes up. She was learning a new song the other day and after struggling to "get it" I asked her if she would like me to play it for her. I played it through twice and she immediately took the violin and played it perfectly. I am so thankful for the enjoyment she gets from practicing. She has really made such amazing progress in the last two weeks. Her teacher is going to be so surprised when she gets to listen to her play.
Rachel also made good progress on Ruth's dress this evening. She enjoys listen to A Little Princess while she sews. It helps her not to miss any evening reading time she uses to get the sewing down. The girls are so excited about their home made presents.
Labels: Christmas, Ruth's violin
Subscribe to: Post Comments (Atom)
Post a Comment

"The BS was pretending that absorbing bad debt was more conservative than subsidizing private health insurance plans"
After a few minutes London stopped and pulled back. Asldep didn't matter if I was okay with this, I was just an object to be used by him and anyone else he deemed could have me. But tell me when are you going to send me your photo?" "I am too shy.
Everyone said that Alex had "gotten it from his dad" but Amanda didn't think that Alex had 'gotten' jack shit. And of course it won't be for free we can agree on a price. At this point, Buck stopped pressing and just held perfectly still while I wiggled my ass against his dick.
With her ass in my face I told her, "This is what a whore like you needs. He started at her and I pulled my fist back again. " Mrs. Christ the feeling was one of.
He started touching me more, rubbing my shoulders, sitting next to me on the couch and letting our legs touch, it was subtle signs and I might be reading them wrong, I had to be very careful.
She just heard everything you said. As we entered the room she said, "This is our room. Darin and Terri started coming over earlier, we would plan cookouts, the women would usually shop leaving Darin and I babysitting our kids.
She was feeling way too thee to streeet away from anything now.

Pearl V Puri the name itself justifies his identity and his popularity among all the audiences. Pearl V Puri is also the stylish superstar of Indian Television, who’s style game is always on point.
Pearl V Puri is well known as a popular actor of Indian Television. Pearl V Puri started his career as a model and also he featured in commercials for popular brands like Maruti Ritz, Fair One Cream, Tata Docomo, Pizza Hut and much more. He made his debut in acting in the year 2011 with the Television show Dil ki Nazar Se Khoobsurat. He became a popular name due to his serial on star plus Phir Bhi Naa Maane…Badtameez Dil as the role of “Abeer Malhotra” and also due to his role in Naagin 3 as “Mahir Sehgal” which made him well known in the household.
This popular face fashion game is always seen to be on point in every point of life. He never ever fails to impress people and his lovely fans with his amazing fashion and style. The main reason why his style is damn attractive because pearl v puri is a fitness freak person which gives an ace to his personality and makes his fashion as eye-catchy.
He is each every look is found to be stylish and stunning, from which we cant ever take eyes off. From his casual looks to his gym wear and from his party looks to his red carpet suits, Pearl V Puri has us admiring him no matter wherever he goes. Pearl V Puri has a unique way of mismatching the outfit and making it a great one to inspire people. He is totally acing all his stylish looks and has become a style icon for all the television lovers.
He has a unique and different way of dressing which makes him a presentable and stylish superstar of Indian Television. His style game is always on point and that is the reason he has gained over 1.5 Million fans and his Insta feed is the live proof that his style game is on point.

Kaike Brito is dirty twink that has perfect body & he knows it as he poses in front of photocamera showing off his slender frame, his firm chest with no hair & his toned arms. He slowly removes his underwear & uses his hands to cover his dick however as he looks teasingly in camera he slowly moves his hands out of way & starts to show his hard pecker. Finally he lifts his hands all they way up & he shows off his firm hard little buddy & round balls & his eyes tell you to bend over because he is ready for you!
All gay nude boys is 18 years old or older!
See 2257 note on every link.
2012 - PornFreeGay.com tube.

I received a credit card from Commercial Bank International (CBI), which I activated on July 10, but when I called CBI after activating it, I was told there was a Dh500 annual fee. The salesperson, who took my application, told me that it was a free card and that’s what I applied for.
At the same time, I made a complaint, but in the week after, no one contacted me, so I sent a complaint message through the CBI website on July 16. After a couple of days, I started receiving calls from CBI and they were saying that the salesperson who took the request for the card was new and she didn’t know about annual fees.
After days of talking with different people, they told me to go to the branch and cancel the card because they could not cancel it over the phone. I went to the branch on July 30 and requested for card cancellation. I was told by the person who took the request that the card would be cancelled within three days, but after one week, I started receiving messages for balances on the card that was supposed to be cancelled. I called CBI and was told that the card was not cancelled. I checked with the branch and the person who took down the request told me that he had sent the request already and he couldn’t do anything from his side. He said that I had to contact the call centre. So, I called the call centre and they told me that I would have to go to the branch and cancel the card, because there was an outstanding annual fee with some late charges on the card, which I had to pay. I told them that the annual fee is the reason I was cancelling the card and I was not going to pay anything. I’m still receiving a message every morning stating that the payment was missed, and it looks like no one is going to do anything. Every week, I’m sending an email and calling them, but till now, no one has gotten back to me.
Yesterday, I received a call from the branch where I submitted the cancellation request and the person told me that my request had come back unsolved. I sent the message through their website after that as well, but as usual, there was no response.
Gulf News, please help me resolve this issue!
From Mr Gevorg Sargsyan, Sharjah
The management of CBI responds:
Many thanks for sharing the customer’s concern with us. Our cards team contacted the customer and explained the features and benefits associated with our credit card. A new credit card is being issued based on his confirmation with our team and we are looking forward to a rewarding relationship with the customer.
We spoke with the customer this morning and the case has been resolved to the customer’s satisfaction.
Mr Sargsyan responds:
Last week, I received a call from CBI and they told me that they will send a new card and reverse all the charges. Thanks for your help, Gulf News.
(Process initiation: September 2. Response from organisation: September 3. Reader confirmation: September 8.)
Editor’s note: Do you have similar issues that you would like to raise with us? You can write to us at email@example.com.

Always In Mischief
Some days you just find yourself staring at the screen of your laptop, your smart phone, your ipad, ipod, television, computer screens. You just sit there and stare at them: in the grocery store, at work, in the bathroom (why?), in the doctors office, at the dentist, during the birth of your child, if you are trying to avoid eye contact with the creepy man who keeps giving you googly eyes from across the room at the doctors office. You will look at anything. Even if you have to just scroll up and down on social media just so you don't have to look up and then later at night you realize what an asshole you are because now your neck hurts and your eyes hate you. They blame for you for not just looking at another human being and saying "Hello." You may find that talking to people can actually be fun even if you are an introvert. I have an aunt who is in her eighties, she is a lot like my mother. They talk and talk and talk and love to talk some more about talking! They have stories for everything and some times you think are they just talking because they like to? No, they actually make a lot of sense. While sitting in a restaurant with my moms aunt, the owners son comes walking out with a ladder and of course Aunt B had tons to say but she waited for the owner to climb up the ladder. She chatted some more with the staff and the owners son and then she looked up at the owner as he was fumbling around with the vents in the ceiling! "Hey G, did I ever tell you about the time my brother fell off a ladder and cracked the back of his head? No, no, no appropriate right now B, I am on a ladder. Well, no problem she said as she took a sip of her black coffee. The trouble was, now that she started the story it peeked everyone's attention. What happened to him B? Oh, he died. She said, yup he was up on that ladder and he fell and died. G simply did what he always did when she told one of her true life stories, he shook his head and waved his hands. The Sicilian in him was difficult to hide. Some days we sit for hours at the restaurant because of all Aunt B's talking and funny stories like the time she thought her son was coming home but then realized it was not him and she saw the front door knob turning! She called for her husband but he continued to sleep so she got up and ran downstairs and opened the door and said "what the hell do ya want?" They took off running and she woke up her husband finally and he simply said "Are they gone?" "Yes they are gone!" "Well, B after hearing your big mouth they are not gonna come back!" He rolled back over and went back to sleep! It is pretty much the same with my mom. She often tells the same story about her "heart problem." I was in the hospital just a few days ago and my mom advised that if I have any heart trouble, it is not from her! "I have a heart problem." She says it so convincingly you actually feel bad for the poor sucker who is taking in the story. The nurse and the doctor looked deeply concerned. "Half of my heart is on the right side and half of my heart is on the left side. It's broken." The look of bewilderment and wonder come across their face until it actually hits them, its a joke!
My entire life bad stuff has happened yet it seems funny afterwards. One night my mother and I were coming home from the hospital and this woman who looks like Sasquatch comes up and as my mom opens her car door, she says "I need your car now! My moms in the hospital and I am taking your car!" I heard the woman say all this and I looked at my moms face, I know that face. Its the you pissed me off, now I am gonna have to kick your ass even though I am only five foot four and have two knee replacements and a torn achilles tendon! The woman did not expect to get jacked up against the car! My mom managed to get out and I was already out of the car looking at her and I said right to the woman "You picked the wrong person to hijack tonight!" My mom got out and was now on her feet and this chick was about six feet tall and overweight. My mom grabbed her shirt and kind of threw her into the car and said, you are not taking nothing. You are staying right here and then my mom looked at me and for some reason I was in hysterics, not crying! LAUGHING! "J, call the cops!" I called, but I was cracking up laughing as I called. This woman was pleading with the police when they arrived. They asked us all the usual questions and then advised she has an accomplice who is a man who usually knocks his victims out and steals their purses and cars. Well not us! My mom watched as she practically ran to the cops, "please help me, help me, this woman is trying to get me!" Even the cops were laughing! As she strolled down to the corner to talk to the cops my mom yelled at her again and said "And I don't ever want to see you in my hood again, you understand me!" We never did see her again and her mom had died a long time ago, it was a story she used over and over again to steal!
We cannot leave out me trying to be a grown-up! Remember shoulder pads? I know some of you do. Well I decided at a young age that I wanted to be an actress, a model, a doctor and a singer and a vet and I need big boobs to do this. I took a pair shoulder pads out of a sweater or shirt and stuck them in my bra and came downstairs in the living room and realized that now I can do it all! I can be this wonder woman I wanted to be. Well, not so fast J, you cant be because your shoulder pads just fell our from under your shirt and they are now on the floor. I was embarrassed for about ten minutes and then realized it was funny!
When I was a child I had an obsession with Wheel of Fortune. My mother was Pat and I was Vanna White. Every night faithfully my mom had made alphabet cards for me and sitting down with the other kids I realized they just did not have the pizzazz to be Vanna and Pat so my mom participated in my madness. I would raid her closet and dress up in her clothes and high heels and come downstairs and prep to become Vanna White, letter turner extraordinaire. My mom was Pat and whoever was living with us at the time were the contestants and they would ask for a letter to spell words and Pat would say "Vanna do we have any H's?" In my fanciest way of turning the cards over I promptly revealed an H and walked to the other side of the coffee table. I would take this with me into adult hood and into several jobs as I would do displays and presentations I would not even realize it but my hand would come up in perfect display mode and then at least one person would always says Ohhhh you are like Vanna White. I smile and laugh but inside I know I have prepared for that type of stuff for many years.
One day I was leaving work, I had a head injury so my short term memory gets fuzzy but I remember being in the parking lot and it starts snowing and I look next to my car door there is a banana feel staring at me. It felt like the biggest joke ever. Standing in the already snowy, icy parking lot with a banana peel!
I hate chewing tobacco! Why? why? why? you ask? I will tell you. When I was a kid my parents divorced when I was three but I guess because my family was so weird my father sometimes still lived with us? I am not sure why? He would chew, chewing tobacco and then spit the gross, nasty stuff into a regular cup when I was a kid. Well, one night he was doing just that and I did not know and took a sip! I thought I was going to die. Just die. I look at now and wonder how I am even alive. But I did it and it was too late but I never lived it down!!!
Another thing I will never look at Ex-Lax the same way. When I was little if you could not go to the bathroom, well if the grown ups could not go to the bathroom they would eat Ex-Lax. Well I was hungry one day and saw a yummy chocolate bar in the fridge. I grabbed it out of the fridge and ate it! A short while later, I hear my mom, "Hey, where is the Ex-Lax?" Then she asked me, "J, did you eat the stuff in the silver wrapper." "It was chocolate mom!" It was good. Well, I didn't think so after about a half an hour, I spent the rest of my day in the bathroom.
My childhood was different. I never felt like I did not know anything or I could not ask questions. I used to sit with our neighbors and they would be smoking weed. I learned pretty young what it was and that to stay away from it, but alcohol was still just the stuff in the bottles in the fridge when we had it. My mom is an amazing mom, probably the best a kid could ask for but sometimes I got myself into things I just could not get out of. One night me and a bunch of my friends were hanging outside on my front porch stoop because that is what you did after a long day of causing havoc and chaos you "chilled" on the front porch. My friends all came to my house because it was the "cool" place to be. Everyone had their own mug and I ventured into the house and knew my mom and stepdad were not home so I could pretty much grab what I wanted but I was also still very young and little. I grabbed the glass bottle in the paper bag! This will be enough for all of us I thought! All my friends will have their own drink. We won't have to share! You know because of "cooties!" DUH! But, what I grabbed, was Colt 45 in a 40 oz in a Brown bag! I gave all my friends some and I poured myself some! As we all sat outside and started to drink not really realizing what we were drinking the buzzkills came at us with force! These would be the adults, my mom, stepdad and the neighbors coming to collect their slightly buzzed kids. Even as a kid, like every good alcoholic I had an excuse! I didn't know what it was MOM! "Mom, come on, my friends are I are thirsty!" "This is alcohol, it is for grown-ups." Well you live and learn!
I learned also at a young age that I like boys, I liked boys a LOT! So much so that about the age 8 or 9 I wanted Playgirl magazine because Richard Grieco was on the cover. I didn't realize what it was and it would be filled with naked men but I always had a thing for the bad boys. I loved Fonzie and wanted to marry him and have my own leather jacket. I even had my own little Fonzie shirt but my Mom says I would get shy and blush when someone would mention Fonzie around me. But Richard Grieco in his prime was a fine looking man and on the cover of Playgirl so I probably drove my mom insane (sorry MOM!) and she actually went to the store my father would take me to that I was only allowed to stand in one spot because it was actually a porn magazine shop and I didn't realize it till I was about 12. "J, Dad has to talk to this guy and pick up some stuff, stand right in this spot and don't touch nothin!" Yeah, well my mom got me Playgirl and I was so excited because this man that had these dark eyes and dark hair was on the cover and then I opened it up and HELLLOOOO!!!!! It was naked men galore and Richard Grieco so what do you do? The obvious thing, you go show all of your friends and all the neighbors. "Look what I got, look what I got!" I had a crowd of my friends gathered on the porch looking at Richard and well all the naked men in the magazine. We had to learn some way! Eventually we got caught after my mom and several of the neighbors spotted the crowd of astounded young girls standing in a circle staring. "Hey, give me that!" "You are not allowed to take that outside and show people." Well, we all saw some stuff that day!
My first day of school was no better. I was confused and the only kid with divorced parents to go to a Catholic school. I was already on the bus to hell. It was like I was collecting parking tickets or amusement park ride tickets. 1 for divorced parents 2 for having borders and people living in your house with your non-married mother 3 for having a father with twelve girlfriends and a fiancee. My mom took me to Catholic school and on the first day I met Sister Anne who was also the Principal of the school. I did not know what that meant, I thought she was a big penguin supporter. My mom explained to me that I had to go to school and learn and have fun, be with friends and I had thought she was leaving me here in this dark, lonely place with no windows. It had windows but inside the classrooms. Sister Anne was very serious. I was confused and upset and thought my mother was leaving me for a minute and I never even watched the movie ANNIE to learn because I grew up watching Horror movies, I figured she may be a pod person and try to use me in a experiment.
She looked at me and said "J, you will either walk to class or I will carry you. You must decide right now." No way was this woman dressed like a penguin taking me anywhere so I put up a fight, a skinny, tall kid and she picked me up over her shoulder after I kicked and punched her and took me to my classroom. I had lost the battle, the pod people were going to get me but, hey this isn't so bad. There were lots of other kids and fun things to do and learn so I wound up liking school. I also felt like I was going to hell for everything but I really liked school. I will never forget apparently I was also the only little girl with fancy underwear because my mom made me an potty offer I could not refuse. "J, if you wanna wear cute, sexy panties like mommy wears then you must use your potty." So, of course I did and this led to my fascination with having cute underwear and apparently one of the boys was dared to "look up my uniform skirt" and he did and my friend H at the time pointed it out and he looked at me and said nice panties! See, what all us nice Catholic school going kids learn. I would go to church and sometimes be scared because some days my Mom would pick me up and every once in a great while my father or one of his girlfriends at the time would pick me up so I could already see and hear the nuns saying Hail Mary's for me. I also did not have the normal home life my other friends had and in second grade I got this obsession with writing and hermit crabs. My one friend had hermit crabs and I thought they were the most amazing things ever. I mean, can you imagine being able to just move like that and get a new shell! I thought it was amazing and had an obsession. I wanted hermit crabs so bad.
We always had animals growing up. My first two dogs were Garvey and Tuffy. Garvey was a bad ass. No one ever messed with him. He was a mixture of everything and my first real best friend since we got him before I was born and of course my father gave him away but my mom threatened to divorce him so he got him back! Garvey was smart and my heart hurt so much when I came home from school and my mom had the look of sadness. I knew and it hurt, it felt like a ton of bricks were crushing me. He even semi taught me how to ride my big wheel by dragging me up the yard with it and he liked to drink. My mom hated this but my dads purpose for Garvey was to be some kind of baseball mascot dog and Garvey would go and get all the hard balls and rip them to pieces and then he would drink and howl like a drunken sailor. He was always with me, I would feed him from my high chair and he saved my mom from an apartment invasion. Some asshole tried to break in and because my father was always missing in action, Garvey got the dude by the ass and well lets say he will never break in another house again! The funniest thing Garvey and Tuffy did was they decided after someone that lived with us at the time left them out and Garvey had a collar but you never touched it except for my mom or me, then he would get pissed and bite.
Garvey took Tuffy up the street to the Boys Club which was about two blocks from our house and everyone in the neighborhood knew them so they got my mom and the people called the cops but they were chilling in the back of the boys club playing like two trouble making teenagers. Those dogs were amazing!
I have to talk about Gia now, she is my reincarnated Garvey I think sometimes because she has that same chill, I know I am a bad ass but I keep it till I need to use it behavior. The one house we lived in had patio doors and we had put the screens in and Gia was still young but powerful as hell. She would carry picnic tables around and move the wooden bars that kept the mulch in place. Well, one day Gia saw something and the screen door was closed and it was just too late. Gia saw someone and took off like a bat out of hell. She ran like the wind and crashed through the screen door taking the whole thing down! It was like something out of a movie and all we could all do was laugh! I didn't care about the door. I checked Gia to make sure she was okay and she was fine but the screen door was not!
Another dog we had that always loved causing trouble was Bianca. She was amazing, we got her from the animal rescue league and she was smart from the get go. We lived in the same house with patio doors and Bianca learned how to lock them so a lot of times just to show she could do it, we would walk over to the neighbors and one night we forgot our keys and came back and Bianca had locked the door and she and Gia were standing at the door like Ha Ha humans. You didn't take your keys! We had called a lock smith who looked like Elvis and later admitted he got into being a locksmith because he used to be a thief. "I am helping you out now, instead of robbing you!" That was okay though, everyone has to make a living! He could not get in the house so we had to call the cops, the only problem was the cop would have to be able to be faster than Gia to get in the window and to my door on the other side of the house to open the locks. Gia knew the house, the cop did not! His first attempt to go in the side window didn't go to well as Bianca had helped Gia open the door and when the cop went to climb in Gia jumped and he flew back wards into a butterfly bush.
The second attempt he decided to let the locksmith take my air conditioner out of my window and because it was smaller he would fit through and be able to run to my patio door and open it! Well, he had to beat Gia and Bianca before Bianca would turn the handle and let Gia loose. Bianca loved mischief. She was the queen of it! Finally after the neighbors, the cops and the Elvis locksmith look-a-like finally jumped as fast as he could into my window and dashed through my room, opened the lock and ran like hell. I think he was so bewildered he didn't even charge us. He also advised he never met a lock he couldn't crack so there was no charge. Five minutes after being in the house Bianca jumped up and showed off her skills on how she would push the lock shut! I miss her and Garvey and Tuffy. Sometimes your heart just hurts but you remember those times and all the stuff they did that just makes you laugh.
When I am tired I also have the habit of getting in other peoples cars. My car looks like a lot of other cars and often I am not always paying one percent attention but I try. One day I was leaving the store and I walked out to my car and got in and just sat down and then I realized there was a big bag on the floor and no rosary beads and why was my seat so close? Oh shit, this isn't my car! This is, well I don't know whose car this is but I gotta get out of it! So I did and I looked right next door and there was car. Another time I did it there was a guy in the passenger side and I clicked my car and I assume this car was already open but I didn't see the guy at first and then I stopped because I saw numbers on the handle, it was an alarm on the car, I looked in the window and the dude goes oh did my friend send you out, can I get your number? I said no and laughed and then said "I thought this was my car but I am having a long day so it is not!"
Halloween has always been one of my favorite holidays and when I was little my mom was a nurse aide and worked a lot before she got her knee replacements and tore her Achilles, my friends and I would go trick-or-treating in a bunch of different neighborhoods and we never had fancy buckets or action hero baskets, we had pillow cases. We would go out and just fill pillow cases up with candy! That was what Halloween was about, watching scary movies, scaring your friends and collecting so much candy you had it for Easter.
Horror in my life. One year this guy that liked me a lot and he worked at one of the Halloween stores had a six foot tall Leatherface stand up. "J, for real, I am going to throw it away, they don't want it back, you can have it." So I checked with his manager and he and I carried this amazing six foot tall Leatherface to my car! I had no problem with it but some people gave me odd looks as I had him propped up! I brought him home later and my mom had a gun and has her permit to carry. She heard a noise coming from my office and she slowly opened the door and turned the light on and staring back at her was this six foot tall Leatherface! "You almost shot my Leatherface, hasn't he been through enough, I was practically pleading with my mother over a cardboard cut-out! Leatherface would have had a hole in him and so would the windows in my office at the time.
Headbanging! Music has always been important in our house. My mom loves music and I love music and one night we were all sitting in the living room before my mom had surgery and I was still little and we were just jamming and rocking out to Metallica and my mom was always told she looked so cool her spiral, black hair and she looked like she could be Slash's sister and she was head-banging away so much, she flew off the sofa! That is extreme home head-banging!
My drivers test! Okay so my moms mother said it was very important for me to drive so I am never stuck anywhere! My mom would take me in her big green car and I would drive in cemeteries because my mom "You can't kill anyone in a cemetery they are already dead!" So I learned to drive in a big car, a neon and with my race car driver cousin who usually did a 140 to New York and if you kept the windows open you had a completely different hairstyle. I figured it can't hurt to learn to drive from different people. I would pass the written test easily and then I failed the first time for speeding because I took my test in a Camaro. The instructor was holding on for dear life acting like I was killing him! At the end as I parked my Camaro, he looked at me like I ruined his life and said "You failed for speeding!" So I had to go back again and this time I went with my mom and my step-dad cause I figured I could use them for a fear factor in myself. Well, I grew up in the city and we slow roll at STOP signs. You know you inch up as close as you can to see cause there are parked cars blocking your way and I did that and he instantly screamed, "you went through a STOP sign!" "I did not go through it, I was surveying for cars!" I tried my whole Alicia Siverstone thing but he was not feeling it! Three times a charm! My mom and my stepdad went with me again and this time I did everything I was supposed and even obeyed the speed limit, stopped at the stop signs and with the fear of God, I paralleled parked like a BOSS!
The driving instructor got out before me as I said a little prayer and he looked at me straight face and I expected him to say something horrible but he handed me my papers and said "you passed!" I was thrilled. The first person I called was my grandmother. She was so proud and said to me "You will always be free now and have freedom!" I never understood that either till I got older. My mom did not always have a car and in our neighborhood you were doing okay if you had a shopping cart parked at the back of your garage. In those days so much was different. I always grew up around so many different kinds of people and I forget that sometimes with all my anger and being sick. I remember living in the city and my mom was never sure how to clean so we had a shop vac and a bucket and a mop and she would shop vac everything and dump water on the front porch and mop it! Who cares!
Sometimes I still wanna grab a shopping cart and bring it home. Sometimes you miss when things were somewhat okay and just seemed fun!
Super Market Sweep, I know everyone remembers this show. You would get to grab as much stuff as you possibly could before the timer went off. Well, some of us took that serious like nobodies business and one day while in the beer distributor, my mom and a bunch of our friends were getting soda, beer and all kinds of stuff and the guy that owned the place knew everyone and we were always in there so my mom and her friend get ready for Super Market Sweep and BOOM, CRASH, all the sodas and glass bottles went flying! If it would have been anywhere else we would been busting our asses trying to clean up the mess they made but hey it was Super Market Sweep.
Childhood and coffee beans. I had to spend a lot of time with my mom and I feel bad about that because it seems like she never got a break from me so when I was little she taught me how to set my own little table and clean my table so it would not be a mess and then she would take me with her to the grocery store and I discovered the most amazing things ever. First off I tried to steal packs of gum which some people would laugh about and others would get pissed off but my mom always corrected me and then I was left to wander one day and I wandered into the coffee aisle. I found the coffee beans. They were all trapped inside fairly large containers and you were supposed to take a bag and fill it with coffee beans and then ground your coffee. Nope, not me. I saw that as tons of fun. I walked by one after the other and pulled the release handle. I was freeing the coffee beans! The entire aisle in the grocery store was covered in coffee beans. My mother discovered me and we had to haul ass out of that store. I am surprised they allow me in grocery stores today?
Calling for help! So, it is pretty well known at times I have some health problems and I am a tad bit accident prone and I have a total hip replacement which makes it worse sometimes. Well, one day during winter we were coming home and I just happen to slip on black ice, go figure me of all people. I was in nursing and so involved in medical stuff, I wanted my pants cut open at the knee, I felt blood but the best part was my poor mom was trying to call an ambulance because at first I could not get up and they got me up on a stoop and I see and hear my mom going what is wrong with this phone? 610-911.... 610-911 She was so upset and nervous and she normally is the most calm, cool collective one of the bunch. Our neighbor at the time came running over and God was he was good looking! Memories of him walking into his house in his hot, sweaty construction clothes. A fine man. But I digress. I was still laying there on the stoop with wet pants and could have sworn there blood gushing from my knee. Finally my mom hands me the phone before the neighbor even came over and says "Call 9-11 for yourself. I cannot do it right now." She was upset and granted having me for a kid I am surprised she is as amazing and sane as she is! But the ambulance came and I was fine. I just had to make an appointment with my hip doctor in which he says "Okay, whats next? Sky diving? We really want to check the endurance of the hip." Sure why not?

We popped in this place one day for lunch . The staff was very friendly and helpful. Place was very clean and nice. I had shrimp my hubby had fish and both left full and happy! Will definitely go again !
1 - 10 of 354 reviews
My husband and I went here on an early Sunday evening. The place was empty which was shocking. We sat outside and were overwhelmed with all the flies. Sadly they have no on tap beers and many of their beers on their menu are “missing”...More
Went there for dinner last night and the drinks and food was fantastic. Freshest house salad i have had. The orange shrimp and rice was perfect. We sat outside as enjoyed the view of the sound. The service was top knotch. The young lady who...More
When we first rolled into Avon, we were looking for some lunch. We searched online and found OWG. It was my boyfriend and myself, another couple and a family in the place. That should have been a sign that no one was there. The bartender...More
The place is clean and comfortable. The waiter was very friendly and for being the only one to wait on everyone he did well. If you want the specials you better go early, because they run out. But the food was very good. You can...More
We walked in with a women playing live music with her guitar. Though ok, this will be nice. What a mistake. The place is not clean and it was understaffed. The bar keep was waiting tables - and she waited on ours. I order fried...More

I'm working through the pile of boy quilt tops that Carla gave me about a month ago. It feels good to finally be able to get to them and get them ready for binding. My binding buddy Rhoda had surgery on her hand today to remove a cyst that was keeping her from quilting and sewing and cooking and cleaning. She wasn't bothered too much to have to stop cleaning, but she loves to cook and quilt and sew. I hope she recovers quickly so she can get back to what she loves. I'm making quite the pile for her. I think I might have to call in some reinforcements to help with binding while she recovers!

Taylor Swift does it again!
[Image via Getty Images.]
Such a tragedy.
Last week, we had heard that Jeff Conaway's condition was "stable" and we were hoping for good news, but then on Saturday Dr. Drew tweeted that Jeff had taken a turn for the worse, and unfortunately he was right.
Jeff Conaway died today at 60 years old, after being in a coma for two weeks following a pneumonia diagnosis.
We were truly hoping that he would recover, but his body was just too weak as an effect of his long-term drug addiction.
Our thoughts go out to Jeff's family and friends during this difficult time.
Very, very sad.
[Image via WENN.]

Authors: Summer Goldspring
Ryan eventually asked me to marry him. We could not wear a ring because of the fact of maker and creation vampire law.
He hired a vampire that he knew could marry us. We gathered in the forest at night, and we exchanged vows. That’s all it took for us to call each other husband and wife, forever. It wasn’t the type of ceremony that I would have had in my previous life, but I was a vampire. Breaking vampire law which was punishable by death.
One day we received a warning letter. The vampire that witnessed our marriage vows must have reported us in exchange for gold pieces. The vampire leaders were doing a search for any vampires breaking vampire law, and we were caught. The warning letter stated this:
Good Evening, be aware that you have broken vampire law. No maker and creation shall ever engage in sexual activity. Punishment shall be death. However,
we are more civil now, and this is a warning. You shall separate, and never see each other again, or you will be punished with death. You have seven days to comply.”
The Vampire Leaders
Ryan was furious. He decided that we were not going to be pushed around. He decided we would run away, and find a place to stay.
We didn’t waste any time. We packed our bags, and decided to head to another country. We were on the run. The vampire leaders would eventually put out a search for us. Hopefully they would never find us, but they would never stop looking.
We traveled to Germany. Ryan heard of a castle that allowed runaways to stay there for a while. We took an airplane to Germany.
It was evening. We took a taxi to the castle. When we got out of the taxi, we were in front of a worn down grey castle, in the middle of a forest.
We walked toward the large entrance.
Ryan knocked on the door, and a caretaker opened the door. He was human. He was dressed in a suit. He was very elegant looking, bald, and very polite.
The caretaker asked us to wait, and so we waited.
A vampire entered the room. He was tall, old, dressed in a red robe, and had a German accent. “Welcome friends. I know who you are, and why you have come here. I am honoured to have you stay in my castle.” he said. Ryan and I were thankful to the great vampire for having us, and he gave us a tour of the castle.
The castle was huge. We toured different rooms of the castle. There were other vampires amongst us.
There was a big dining table were all the vampires gathered during feasting time. In the basement was a cellar. The cellar was w
ere dozens of humans were kept for feedings. I didn’t even feel guilty when I saw the cellars.
I was used to being a vampire, and lived the vampire way. There were different rooms in the castle, where vampires lounged out, and had sex in.
As we walked by, there were a dozen vampires having orgies, with candles lit, and there were saunas.
This place seemed like a vacation get away more than a hideout. There was no sunshine that could get inside the castle.
The walls were made of grey brick walls. The vampire showed us to our room. He explained to us that we must be present during feeding time
. If we missed it we would be kicked out.
We thanked the vampire.
Ryan and I stayed in our room for several hours. It was time for feeding time. Ryan and I made our way to the
There were about a dozen other vampires present. We were introduced to the other vampires. From the looks of it, these other vampires seemed like delinquents, and trouble makers. Every vampire was there for breaking some sort of vampire law.
Ryan and I were not planning on staying there for very long. We just wanted a place to stay until we could figure out how to get out of our mess.
Dinner was served over a candle lit table. I was already uncomfortable as other vampires were giving me dirty looks.
I believed the female vampire didn’t like me. The other two male vampires showed an interest in me. I saw a female vampire that showed interest in Ryan.
I was really annoyed with that. Humans were serving up the blood in big wine glasses. The human servers were slaves.
The head vampire wanted everyone to get acquainted with one another.
The other vampires took turns explaining why they were there. They told everyone what vampire law they had broken.
Apparently, there were a lot more vampire laws then I thought. One vampire spoke of how he dated a human, and was feeding off her.
It wasn’t ok to feed off a human. It wasn’t acceptable for a human to date a vampire, and give them blood, even if it was ok with the human.
I thought it was easier than just killing them, but the vampire leaders obviously disagreed. They thought that humans should die right after they have been used for feeding.
Another female vampire said she was seeing another female vampire. This was unacceptable, according to the vampire leaders.
They did not want lesbian vampires or gay vampires.
They thought it was morally wrong. It would not be tolerated. The vampire leaders were just a bunch of vampire dictators.
A vampire at the table spoke of insulting the vampire leaders. According to the vampire law, no vampire will question the vampire leaders, or comment anything negative, because it will also be punishable by death.
This vampire was caught putting graffiti on a wall that read “Screw
Vampire Leaders!” He was on the run, and found salvage at the castle.
It was eventually my turn to speak. I told the vampires that Ryan was my maker, and that we were married in secret.
The vampires were shocked as if it was the worst vampire law to break. I just thought they were in shock cause it was a daring law to break, but in no way the worst. I mean it’s not like we killed anyone.
Killing a vampire is the worst vampire law to break, especially if it’s not justified.
One of the female vampires at the table mentioned that Ryan and I would have to break up eventually if we wanted to live, but I disagreed. The subject of us being married, breaking vampire law caused a riot of arguments at the table.
Vampires dared to disagree. Others dared to agree. It was an intense moment at the table. It was so intense that most of the vampires didn’t even finish half of their blood. I
devoured mine. I was starving. Ryan was quiet the whole time. I think he was thinking of what was going to happen to us.
I wondered if he was thinking that maybe we should break up. Time was running out as the vampire leaders gave us only seven days to comply, and we had just a few days left.
This was going to be one of the biggest decisions Ryan and I would have to make. Were we going to break up, and comply with the vampire leaders, or were we going to insult them, and run away forever? The debate was heated at the table.
Vampires were giving me dirty looks, but I didn’t care.
I was starting to have a bad feeling about being here.
I was going to tell Ryan that we should leave as soon as we could, but something told me that he wanted to stay for a while.
After the heated discussion, Ryan and I headed to the lounging area.
We walked in, and we didn’t feel welcome.
The female vampires were giving me dirty looks.
giving Ryan dirty looks. We went back to our room and stayed there for a while.
A few days had passed.
We had not complied with the vampire leaders.
There was a rumour going around that the vampire leaders had sent out hunters to kill us.
Ryan and I left the castle, and found a cave in a forest to stay in.
The forest was way bigger then I had ever imagined. If you ever need to hide somewhere, the forest was the place to go.
Ryan and I stayed in the cave for a few days. One night it stormed, and we just sat there in each
arms talking about things.
We talked mostly about what we should do.
Things were depressing.
Ryan and I had to find a different place in the forest to stay at, so that we weren’t found, or at least we hoped.
Eventually, Ryan and I snuck out at night back to Ryan place. We entered his home and found a letter on his front door step. The letter read:
You have not complied with the warning. You will be brought to justice.”
The Vampire leaders
We didn’t care what the vampire leaders thought. We didn’t like threats. We hated dictators especially.
We searched around the cabin, and we left in a hurry. Ryan kissed me, and told me he loved me.
He said we had to keep running. Ryan opened the door.
s Ryan waited for me, I heard
the quick sound of a sword. I turned around. Ryan’s head—was on the floor before his body hit the floor!
He was decapitated in front of me. “RYAN…RYAN!” I screamed. I dropped to the floor in agony. It was Edward Godspeed who appeared in front of me. My fangs lashed out! I attacked him. He was so fast I didn’t know what hit me, but he had knocked me out cold.
I regained consciousness. I found myself in a prison cell. I was in the prison cell at the vampire
compound. I knew I was going to stand before the vampire leaders. I was going to be forced to confess.
I was not sure why I was not killed by Godspeed. I was sure the vampire leaders had plans for me.
They were probably going to torture me, and bring me suffering.
As I waited in my cell, a human brought me a cup of blood to feed me. It was gross. It was just like eating something expired. I was in big trouble. The next day, I was brought in front of the vampire leaders.
There were five of them, all dressed in red robes.
The vampire leaders were corrupt. One of them asked me if I knew why I was standing in front of them. I told them I had not done anything wrong. I told them my husband was murdered. They laughed at me, and mocked at me.
One of the vampire leaders spoke out. He told me that I was in violation of many vampire laws. I was to be severely punished. I was told of breaking vampire laws that I had never heard of.
The first violation, marrying my maker, and having sexual contact with my maker. The second violation was ignoring the warning letter that the vampire leaders sent me. The third violation was for splurging.
No vampire was
to feed on more than one human a day, unless you were privileged to do so.
Another vampire leader wanted to know if I had any last words. I told him that I had no comment. He told me that I had a choice of death, or to marry the vampire across from me. I looked over.
The vampire across from me was an ugly vampire. He was disturbing to look at.
This was my punishment. I obviously did not want to die. I had no choice but to submit to the ugly vampire. No words could describe the ugly vampire.
I never knew why the vampire leaders were so lenient to me. I accepted the offer. The vampire leaders all laughed at me. It was all one big joke.
They really didn’t care what happened to me, as long as they could ridicule me.
The very next day I was stuck with the ugly vampire. The marriage ceremony was in front of the vampire leaders. It was a horrendous ordeal. I said my vows. I was being constantly laughed at by the vampire leaders.
After the ceremony was over, I had to walk to my
bedroom. His name was Jorge. It was our first night together.
For the next few weeks, I was forced to have sex with Jorge. That’s what I was, a sex slave for him.
Every second was horrible! If I knew I would end up like this I never would have turned into a vampire. It wasn’t worth it. I was not enjoying this life. I had to break free eventually.
I wasn’t aloud out of the vampire
compound. I was isolated and depressed. I stayed in my room most of the day, planning and wondering how I would escape. There was only one way to escape.
I would have to convince Jorge to take me outside. I could kill him, and run away from this hell hole.
One day I finally convinced Jorge to take me outside. He was hesitant at first, but he was in love. He couldn’t say no to me.

MAKAYLA (2nd year)
“I was 8 when my family decided to go to a different beach than we’d usually go to. My older sister and I were being a bit cocky and went out swimming on our own. What my family and I did not know however was that the open ocean at that beach had a strong rip current. So, I and my sister swam for a bit and when we decided to swim back to the shore, we discovered that we were unable to swim closer to the shore in any way. We realised out in the open ocean how far we had been carried outside and that we were not even able to yell for help or signal our parents in any other way, that we were stuck. Eventually, my uncle and father realised that something was wrong and went in to save us. But they also ended up getting stuck, leaving the 4 of us out in the open ocean without the possibility to reach the shore. After a while of my sister pulling me with her trying to reach the shore without making any progress, I came to terms with the fact that this would be the moment in which I’d be dying and I started praying. Finally, my aunt realised that something was wrong and found some local fishermen, who ended up saving us. They were able to circumvent the rip current by knowing the waters and avoiding the steep areas.
That experience made me realise, that life is fragile and that when it's nature against humans, one does not stand a chance. I would say, that this has led me to be more careful in my life nowadays. I do not put myself in unnecessary danger and try to be appreciative of life and experience it responsibly and consciously.” (Makayla, 2nd year, Maputo)

Well, Sundays just managed to get a little more hectic for the Salmon family. Troy got called as 2nd counselor in the bishopric a couple of weeks ago. Wild right? I think what hit Troy the most was the fact that he is now a High Priest and would have to hang with all the old guys the rest of his life. No more Elder's Quorum socials for us! I think what hit me the most was how much time he'll need to put into this calling, leaving me a single mom for a good part of the week.
Because of General Conference, this was his first Sunday on the stand and my first Sunday sitting alone with little Pipster. Let's just say it was an incredibly long day.
I'm used to Troy being gone for a good portion of the day because before this he was the executive secretary. He usually had early mornings and late afternoons. I would get myself and Piper ready and was always relieved to know that Troy was already there waiting for me with a pew saved for us. This was the first Sunday where I had to get there early enough to find my own seat. Those of you who know me well know that I suffer from a severe disability of being chronically late so this was a challenge for me. I managed to make it a few minutes early though and I found myself a good seat.
Piper is just a little ball of energy constantly on the move and ready to discover something new in the world at every given moment. Holding her during church is a LOT of work. By the time the sacrament was passed it felt like I'd been holding her for a good 2 hours. I was already drained. Usually at this point I would trade off with Troy, but that wasn't going to happen and I began feeling a bit sorry for myself. I sat there and realized that this was going to be my life for the next couple of years. She started to get pretty disruptive and so I had to take her out in the hall and missed the rest of sacrament meeting. I then moved on to Sunday school where I was alone again for a good portion of the meeting until Troy showed up, but then I had to leave again because Piper was fussing and ready for a nap. I finally got her to sleep just in time for Young Women's but it didn't last long once the Young Men filed into the room for a joint lesson. They were as loud as ever and tried to peek at Piper under her car seat cover.... those little punks. She was wide awake and lasted for a good 5 minutes of the lesson before I had to take her out again before she ran the spirit right out of the room. So much for church that day!
I had choir right after church, but had to run home quickly because I had run out of wipes and Piper was in serious need of a diaper change. I got home to find that Piper had blown out of her diaper and her adorable little outfit was now covered in poop. I then had to quickly find her something new to wear and then rush over to choir practice. Luckily Piper loves music and was pretty good for most of the practice and even joined us in song for a few verses haha.
I got home and Piper was in dire need of a nap, but felt the need to put up a good fight. I finally just put her in her crib to cry it out while I scrambled to try and make some mashed potatoes in the 20 min I had left before I needed to be at Troy's parents for dinner. Troy got home just around the time we were supposed to be leaving and looked at my progress with the potatoes and said "Running a little late?" I'm pretty sure I gave him a serious stink eye.
At this point I was starving and exhausted with a bad headache.
We made it to Troy's parents and Troy got to stick around for about an hour before he had to leave again for another meeting.
Do you feel sorry for me yet? Cuz I sure did. Haha
On my drive home I was thinking about my day and my terrible attitude. I thought about how this was going to be my life for the next few years and the sooner I accepted it and changed my attitude about it the better off I would be. Sure, I would likely have a lot more tough Sundays, and Tuesday and Wednesday nights while we're at it (more meetings), but there is a reason why Troy has been called at this time and in this particular calling. He needs my support. I decided that this would be the last day I would let myself indulge in my own pity party. I have faith that Heavenly Father will give us both the strength and energy to carry on. I'm confident that as time goes on we'll be able to see this as a big blessing in our lives. I know that although we may be spending less time together that we will be blessed to grow closer to one another. I've already felt it. I also know that Heavenly Father will bless us to be the parents we need to be to our sweet little Piper. I'm very grateful to have a husband who is a beacon of strength to me. He is such an example to me of faithfulness, and service. I have not heard a single word of complaint from him so far even though it's him that's enduring the long days and meetings. He is a very compassionate and caring person. Troy is one of the most non-judgmental people I know and is always looking to lend a hand to those in need. He loves the Lord and always strives to do what's right. I love him and know that he'll put his all in this calling and he'll be great at it.
I will do my best to support him and when I'm feeling worn out I'll do my best still wear a smile on my face because I know that's what the Lord would want me to do. I know he'll be there to bear us up.
"And whoso receiveth you, there I will be also, for I will go before your face. I will be on your right hand and on your left, and my Spirit shall be in your hearts, and mine angels round about you, to bear you up" (D&C 84:88).
Wish me luck.

A West Jordan woman testified Wednesday she had a sexual relationship with a police officer months before he allegedly raped her.
But prosecutors are not sure how that testimony will affect the credibility of the woman's allegations against Bruce Eric Ballenger, 32, a West Jordan police officer charged with two counts of rape, a first-degree felony, and two counts of forcible sexual abuse, a second-degree felony."My position is that this (evidence) is not relevant," said Deputy District Attorney Marsha Atkin at the conclusion of Wednesday's portion of Ballenger's preliminary hearing.
Under Utah's "rape shield law," victims generally don't have to submit evidence about their sexual history.
But after hearing arguments last month from Atkin and defense attorney Ron Yengich behind closed doors, 3rd District Judge Ronald Nehring ruled that "prior consensual sexual contact between the defendant and the alleged victim within a period of 12 months is relevant in the context of this case."
The woman testified she met Ballenger during a call to her apartment in March 1997. Ballenger offered to help her with a protective order, and the two continued to see each other over a six-week period.
"He kept coming over from the beginning," she said. The two would mainly spend time together at her apartment, where he stayed for the night on about five occasions.
The woman said that she and Ballenger had sex during about half of the times he slept at her house. "The very last time (they had sex) I didn't want to go through with it, and I stopped it," she said.
About two weeks into the relationship, the woman started to become "very cynical about him." She did not end the relationship immediately, but she began to avoid him by staying out late.
About four weeks into the relationship, she "told him flat out that I couldn't do this anymore," she said. The visits became more sporadic until she told him to stay away in May 1997.
Except for three separate times she saw Ballenger in traffic, the woman did not have any contact with him for about 10 months. Then on March 12, 1998, he left a note on her car.
"The note read nice, like he was not upset at all," she said.
That evening, they spoke on the phone. The next evening he dropped by her apartment unexpectedly. She was surprised to see him in street clothes but invited him in because "I really didn't know what to do," she said.
She agreed to drive him to a nearby convenience store to get a newspaper. Since most movies were starting later, they rented videos and bought some wine.
"I wish I would have told him to leave," the woman said. But she didn't because "he wasn't a threat at that point."
Later that night, the woman testified that Ballenger pulled her down on the couch and began fondling her. Then used his body weight to hold her down and rape her.
She was not able to get out from under him until the following morning. Before Ballenger left, however, she gave him a jump because the battery of his vehicle was dead. She also later called Ballenger the following night "to tell him how I felt about what he'd done to me," but she couldn't do it.
She didn't tell anyone about the rape until she called the Rape Crisis Center from work two days later. "I just wanted to deal with it, get over what I was feeling."
The preliminary hearing is scheduled to continue Aug. 28.

Mitchell Scott Johnson and Andrew Douglas Golden are the former middle school students who perpetrated the March 24, 1998, Jonesboro Massacre at Westside Middle School in Arkansas.
When Mitchell was seven his parents divorced and he moved to Jonesboro, Arkansas. His mother remarried an inmate at the prison where she worked as a guard. When Mitchel was twelve, he was charged with molesting a 3-year-old girl while on vacation in southern Minnesota but the record has since been expunged.
Andrew Golden was born and raised in Jonesboro. Golden was said to have a good relationship with his parents. He was raised to be familiar with firearms and was given his first gun by his father when he was six years old.
The boys were both students at Westside Middle and they became friends on the school bus. The boys were known to bully other students and spoke often of joining gangs and doing drugs. Johnson had, at one point, threatened to kill sixth-grader Candace Porter, his former girlfriend who ended their relationship. Golden often got into fist fights with the other students. A classmate accused him of killing her cat with a BB gun.
Golden and Johnson planned their attack. On the night before the shooting Golden and Johnson stocked Johnson’s mother’s minivan with camping supplies, food, weapons, and ammunition. The next morning the boys drove the van to school. Golden pulled the fire alarm and ran to the woods where Johnson prepared the weapons. When the school children and teachers poured out into the school yard, the boys opened fire. Johnson and Golden killed four female students and one pregnant teacher, and wounded ten others. Johnson and Golden were captured by the police as they tried to escape back to their van.
The boys were tried as juveniles. Johnson was 13-years-old and Golden was 11-years-old. They were found guilty of five counts of murder. Johnson and Golder were taken to Alexander, Arkansas to be placed in the Arkansas Juvenile Assessment and Treatment Center, Arkansas’ most secure juvenile facility. They were sentenced to detention until they turn 21. Johnson was released in 2005 and golden in 2007.
Had Johnson and Golden been older the Jonesboro prosecutor would have sought a death sentence for the two. The two children were among the youngest people ever charged with murder in American history.

As some of you may know, a "famous YouTuber" (for lack of a better word) has been robbed for the sixth time? source: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nMToXlLvfBg He always says he gets robbed. The thing is, his channel is whiteboy7thst. In his profile he has his town, Milwaukee, WI. Now this guy probably lives on 7th st in Milwaukee, WI and with a small amount of researching, it wouldn't be too hard to find his address. All I'm saying is that he shouldn't be making videos telling people that he is away or going away (he actually does this). Now he's wondering why he always gets robbed only when he's not home? I'd love to hear everyone's thoughts on this. And for those thinking he just lives in a bad neighborhood, which he very well might, the only thing they stole was his playstation 3 and his TV.

Name: Tyler Key
Hometown/High School: Chico, CA / Gridley
From Coach Ferchen: Tyler is a young man that transferred in during the spring of 2019 and didn't know what to expect. Tyler went above and beyond expectations and was a solid figure in the bullpen as our closer in 2019. Tyler tied the school record for Saves in his first and only year with 6 saves and also gave us quality innings whenever we needed him. It is too bad that the 2020 season did not happen and cut his career short. I will miss not having him at the end of a game. I wish him well and good luck in his career.

Rain, cold temps make for nasty start to the weekend
Heavy rain and wind made for a rough commute throughout the day on Friday in Brooklyn.
Brooklyn residents were seen in their rain attire, and wherever you looked, umbrellas were up and people were moving quickly to get out of the blustery and wet conditions.
Many umbrellas were casualties of the heavy gusts and ended up in the trash.
Drivers were also forced to take extra precaution as road conditions were slippery.

Lynn and Tim planned an amazing wedding day at Settlers Country Manor. One of the benefits of this venue is its beautiful indoor and outdoor ceremony spaces, so the couple had nothing to worry about even though we had a bit of rain during the ceremony. The girls also got ready at the stunning bridal suite at the venue, which is a huge bonus as it means less travelling!
All the guests were in for a treat as Lynn is also an incredible artist, and she had previously spent hours drawing each guest which also doubled up as a seating chart for the reception dinner!
What a great day it was and here are just some photos from the wedding.

Stage 2 – Selecting your design ideas
These were the pieces of work that I decided to carry forward for development into printing on fabric:
Stage 3 – Printing & painting on fabric
I chose quite a wide range of different styles as I didn’t want to limit myself and wanted to be able to explore freely. I think I may have got a bit carried away and probably produced too many samples but it was great fun, again I had to draw a line and stop before I got too carried away and bogged down. Most were successful and I was really excited by some of the results!
Below are some pictures of my experiments:

There is no doubt the late Philip Seymour Hoffman was a great actor, and now it seems even more so that he was also an amazing father. Hoffman tragically died on February 2nd from a heroin overdose. Since then, his last will and testament has recently been made available to the public, and while I don't want to talk about this highly sensitive and personal document in detail, something does strike me as very touching - the thought Hoffman had for his children.
Instead of setting up trust funds for his three children, he left his entire estate to his partner Mimi O'Donnell, knowing that she will raise their children well and give them the necessary care that is needed with that money.
Hoffman also expressed that he does not want his children to be raised in Los Angeles, as he saw the ugly side of Hollywood through the years. He gave some recommendations for where his children should be raised, including Manhattan, Chicago or San Francisco, all meeting his criteria of being cities "with art and culture".
Keep Up With PopWrapped On The Web!

As part of my Paranormal Pandemonium 2011 Blog Tour, I have been posting chapters of my next release, Forbidden Blood.
Forbidden Blood is a dark vampire romance novel, and the first book in the Vampire Venators series, and will be released on June 18th 2011. I’ve already posted chapter one, chapter two, and chapter three of this long novel, and now here’s chapter four. Just one more to go after this and I hope you’re all enjoying it so far.
In a dark world where vampires exist and where Source Blood, a rare human blood type, can bestow godlike powers upon them, the vampire Venators of the Sovereignty fight to protect the humans by banishing those who drink it to the endless dark.
Exiled from his family and with only his duty to sustain him, Kearn has been on the trail of an elusive Source Blood abuser for three years. When he saves a beautiful human female from the vampireâ€™s grasp, it turns out sheâ€™s the lead heâ€™s been waiting for. Amber is a Source Blood and the perfect bait, but for who?
As they race to catch the vampire and survive the cruel games he plays, Amber is pulled deeper into Kearnâ€™s world and discovers the painful secrets he hides behind his handsome but emotionless exteriorâ€”hurt that she has the power to heal if she is brave enough.
Forbidden Blood is book one in the Vampire Venators series and a dark, sensual tale of betrayal, revenge and a love that knows no bounds.
genre: paranormal vampire romance
length: 126000 words
released: June 18th 2011
Book 1 in the Vampire Venators series
Kearn led the way up through his apartment building. With all of the stores closed until morning, he would have to wait to visit the club and see if he could attract attention with Amber and her blood. He had hoped to end this tonight and take her home, ridding himself of both the temptation she presented and his unending mission to capture the man, but fate had never been kind to him. For now, he would battle his lingering hunger for her and bide his time. Tomorrow, he would buy her some clothes to wear to the club, and together they would hunt down the vampire. He didnâ€™t have much experience of dressing women, but was sure someone at the shops would be happy to assist him, especially since money wasnâ€™t a factor.
Humans and vampires were very similar in that respect. Money could buy you anything and the more you had, the more people were willing the crawl on their bellies for you.
Amberâ€™s fatigue flowed through the connection between their blood. It wasnâ€™t the only feeling that he could sense in her. Her emotions were steadily turning towards fear again. Perhaps it was a good thing that they had been unable to go to the club tonight. She needed to rest. All he had done since meeting her was push her into doing things his way. The man he sought would be cautious tonight. Going to the club wouldnâ€™t have produced any results. Tomorrow was a different matter. The vampire would want to find her. He would come out hunting and Kearn would be waiting for him.
There was another reason for him to take things more slowly. Pushing her now, when she was tired and afraid, would only lead to him losing her. She had locked him out of the car tonight and she hadnâ€™t done it out of fear of the vampire. She had feared him. He needed her to remain with him. His instincts whispered that he could force her to stay, at least until her blood was completely absorbed into his. No. No good would come of it. His mission was to protect humans, not prey on them. Not anymore. If it came down to it, he would confess that her suspicions were correct.
He was a vampire.
â€œSo did they hurt when you had them done?â€
He stopped just short of the black door to his apartment and turned to face her.
She looked nervous. Her heart was racing, sending her blood to the surface. It filled the white hallway with the sweet enticing scent and caused his fangs to itch. Her blood had tasted so delicious. His stomach ached, hunger to taste her again causing it to cramp, and he struggled to hold his fangs at bay. It was just the remnants of her blood affecting him still. The effects were already wearing off. He just needed to hold it together for a few more hours and then he would be free of the haze induced by her blood and she wouldnâ€™t be such a temptation. His gaze slid to her neck and his throat burned. He closed his eyes when the hallway brightened, signalling a change in his irises, and clamped his teeth together. It was just her blood in him. It would pass. He told himself it repeatedly but it didnâ€™t ease the tight ache in his gut. He wanted her blood, and it went deeper than a craving for another high.
â€œKearn?â€ she whispered and he drew a long, steadying breath, and then opened his eyes. The hallway was dim again. He looked up at her.
Her gaze fell to his hand.
His did too.
He raised his right hand and her eyes followed it, fixed intently on the silver marks that covered it to his fingertips.
She seemed fascinated by them. He had caught her looking at him countless times since meeting her, and several of those she had been staring at his arm, her gaze tracing the marks that flowed over it from his shoulder to his hand. He was surprised that she hadnâ€™t asked him about it before now. Twice she had seen it activated. Now she was asking him whether the marks had hurt, as though they were just a tattoo, rather than asking what they did and what he was.
Didnâ€™t she want to know?
Or was she trying to pretend that she hadnâ€™t noticed, and that he was only human?
Perhaps she wasnâ€™t as strong as he had thought and was having trouble believing everything and taking it all in after all. Kearn reminded himself that she was human. This was probably some strange dream or nightmare to her. There had been moments when her blood had conveyed that she trusted him, and wanted to remain with him. Was her denial of the truth standing before her all because she wanted to continue to trust that he would save her? If he told her that he was a vampire, would she want to leave? Would she fear him then and see him as she saw the manâ€”a beast and a monster?
Part of him didnâ€™t want her to feel that way towards him.
He would never harm her.
He only wanted to protect her.
He opened the door to his apartment while considering what to say about his arm and whether to tell her about himself. It wasnâ€™t a good idea. The moment the door swung open, he drew his gun and aimed it at the person standing in the middle of his home.
His brother raised his hands in an act of surrender and smiled.
â€œWhat are you doing here, Kyran?â€ Kearn holstered his gun and walked into the apartment. Only one of the lights in the kitchen was on, leaving the rest of the large room in near-darkness.
Amber followed him. When she stepped out from behind him, Kyranâ€™s dark blue eyes were on her.
â€œHe cried like a baby when they put those marks on him.â€ Kyran smiled broadly, his gaze assessing Amber.
â€œI did not.â€ Kearn closed the door. It was unusual for Kyran to drop by unannounced to his apartment. His brother knew how much he hated it.
â€œIt isnâ€™t like you to bring a girl home, Kearn.â€ Kyranâ€™s blue eyes remained locked on Amber and he inhaled deeply.
His gaze slid to Kearn. The look in his eyes and the connection they shared through a familial bond asked a question. Was she Source Blood? Kearn refused to answer. His brother didnâ€™t need to know and wouldnâ€™t be able to tell from Amberâ€™s scent alone.
â€œDonâ€™t tell me you are planning to go a little rogue? The old habits die hardest, donâ€™t they?â€ Kyran said with a wicked smile.
Amber stared at Kearn.
Kearn glared at his brother. He wasnâ€™t intending to take Amberâ€™s blood. He knew the law and he wasnâ€™t going to break it by using her blood purely to get high. He had only taken a small amount for testing purposes. That was as far as it went. This wasnâ€™t the same as back then. He hadnâ€™t known he was breaking the law. He hadnâ€™t known she was tainted.
It was typical of his brother to bring up his past. Kyran had always found it amusing to make him uncomfortable but that trait had turned vicious since Kearn had become a Venator, to the point where Kyran took intense pleasure from saying things that would get him into trouble. He was convinced that his brother did it to see him suffer, to make him pay for the things that had happened between them centuries ago, so he bore it as punishment for his sins against his own blood.
He bore it in the hope that one day they would finally move past what had happened and would be able to forgive each other.
â€œWhy are you here?â€ Kearn looked hard at his older brother and then moved back to the door of his apartment. It wasnâ€™t like Kyran to hide in the dark and he could smell blood other than Amberâ€™s. The flat dull smell of vampire blood. It all smelt the same, not unique like human blood. He turned on the ceiling spotlights. â€œAnd why are you bleeding?â€
Kyran touched a gash on his face. It wasnâ€™t the only cut. A myriad of thin red lines covered his face, neck and hands. He grinned.
â€œI was playing with Earl Huntingdon and Marchioness Montagu. You know what they can be like.â€ Kyranâ€™s grin widened. His blue eyes shifted back to Amber. â€œAlthough if I had known you had such sweet company, I would have come here earlier.â€
Kearn crossed the room, grabbed Kyranâ€™s arm, and led him over to the small dining area in the far left corner of his apartment. He didnâ€™t relinquish his grip on his brother.
â€œShe does not know what we are.â€
â€œKinky,â€ Kyran whispered and raised a dark eyebrow in Amberâ€™s direction. â€œDo you intend to reveal it during the act?â€
Kearn tightened his grip on his brotherâ€™s arm, bringing his attention back to him. Kyran frowned down at his hand and then into his eyes.
â€œShe is a lead on a case. Bait.â€ He kept his voice low so Amber didnâ€™t hear him. He wanted to tell his brother that he wasnâ€™t interested in drinking from Amber, or anything sexual, but couldnâ€™t bring himself to lie. His eyes threatened to stray to her, to take in her beauty, but he kept them fixed on Kyran.
â€œA Source Blood?â€ Kyran went to look at Amber again but Kearn stepped into his path.
â€œIf you reveal what we areâ€”â€
Kyran slapped a hand down hard on his shoulder and smiled. Kearn could see straight through it. Whatever his brother was going to say, it was a lie. The look in Kyranâ€™s eyes screamed trouble.
â€œI will not say a word out of place.â€ Kyran removed Kearnâ€™s hand from his arm and was past Kearn before he could stop him.
Amber still stood by the door, an air of hesitation about her, as though she had noticed the tension between him and his brother and didnâ€™t want to be caught in the crossfire.
â€œI have been unforgivably rude.â€ Kyran stopped far too close to Amber for Kearnâ€™s liking. â€œPermit me to introduce myself. My name is Kyran, and I am Kearnâ€™s older brother.â€
â€œAmber,â€ she said and then peered around Kyran to him. â€œBrother? You donâ€™t really look alike.â€
They had looked alike before he had become a Venator. His hair had once been black like Kyranâ€™s and his eyes had been an equally deep clear blue. In terms of stature and build, they had remained much the same, and he could see himself in his brotherâ€™s face. His eternal torment.
â€œKearn looks like our father.â€ Kyranâ€™s tone was sharper than razor blades. Kearn could sense the hate and the hurt in him. It was never going away.
Kyran should have been Venator. It was the tradition in the Noble and Lesser Noble families. The eldest son carried on the duty of their father as Venator. He had wanted it to be that way, because Kyran had thought of nothing but becoming a Venator since they had been children. Kearn had fought the Sovereignty, had tried to convince them to give the duty to his brother, but they had given it to him regardless. Kyran had hated him ever since. A part of Kearn still hated his brother in return for his role in what had happened, but the pain of what he had gone through was nothing compared to the fact he had stolen his brotherâ€™s dream.
Time had healed some of the breach between them, but sometimes Kearn got the feeling that nothing had been forgiven or forgotten. No matter how much progress they made with each other or how they tried to get along, the past would always stand between them.
The countess would always stand between them.
There was something akin to concern in Amberâ€™s eyes as she looked at him. Why? Because of his silence or because of the mix of sombre and fiery feelings that accompanied his thoughts? She would be able to sense them if she tried. The connection her blood in his veins caused between them was open and transmitting the emotions in his blood back to hers.
Kearn reached out to her through their connection and felt the concern in her. He closed off his emotions and monitored her in case the vampire tried anything.
She forced a polite smile at Kyran.
â€œYou mentioned an earl and a marchioness. Iâ€™ve never met anyone who knew fancy people like that.â€
Kyran looked over his shoulder at him, his black eyebrows raised again. Kearn shook his head a fraction, enough that only his brother would notice the answer to his silent question. No. He hadnâ€™t told Amber about them and their family and he wasnâ€™t going to let Kyran mention it either. It was best she knew as little as possible.
â€œKearn doesnâ€™t approve of Earl Huntingdon. He believes him a bad influence. Donâ€™t you, brother?â€
Kearn left the dining area and came to stand near Amber in the open space between the four areas of the main room of his apartment.
â€œBecause he is.â€ Kearn held his hand out, indicating the living area beyond the wall of the open fireplace. â€œPerhaps we should sit down since Kyran seems to have no intention of leaving soon.â€
â€œSounds like a wonderful idea.â€ Kyran flashed a smile and held his arm out to Amber. â€œShall we?â€
She hesitated, looking unsure of what she was supposed to do, and then slipped her arm around his brotherâ€™s one. Kearn glared at his brotherâ€™s back as he led Amber to the couches, his eyes shifting to red for a moment and the world sharpening with it. Kyran would feel the threat. Hopefully, it would improve his behaviour.
Kearn turned away and went into the kitchen area, trying to clear his head. What was Kyran playing at? Of course he despised Earl Huntingdon but Amber didnâ€™t need to know that, or about anything to do with the sordid man. Earl Huntingdon was an animal. His family had always relished power and embraced the myths surrounding vampires, and had always been the most blood-soaked and violent because of it. Sometimes Lesser Noble families had no sense of breeding.
He took a fresh glass from the cupboard and filled it with water.
Kyran wouldnâ€™t talk to him about what had happened during his century of exile from their family, but he knew that Earl Huntingdon had invited him into his home and treated him like a brother. The earl was young, almost the same age as them, and had taken the role as head of his household when his parents had died around two centuries ago. He had been only one hundred and fifty at the time, the equivalent to a human fifteen year old, but he had been bloodthirsty and ruled in violence with his sister.
Kearn carried the glass with him across the room to the living area and rounded the black couch that faced the window. Kyran was sitting on the one against the wall, his legs crossed, revealing a rip in the knee of his black tailored trousers. Had Kyran been out killing tonight with the earl and marchioness? The three of them were prone to such acts of debauchery when together. He couldnâ€™t smell human blood on him, but it was difficult with Amber in the room. The heavenly scent of her blood drowned out everything else, filling his mind with the need to take more.
His gaze roamed to her where she sat on the couch that faced the window, staring out of it. Forbidden. Why did that word only make her more tempting? He placed the water down on the coffee table in front of her and she looked up at him.
â€œThank you.â€ She smiled and then it melted away into a frown. Her voice dropped to a whisper. â€œDoes your brother know what you do?â€
Kearn flinched internally at that question. He could feel Kyranâ€™s eyes on his back, boring a hole through his chest as though he wanted to rip out his heart with thought alone.
â€œYes,â€ Kearn said in a tight voice and sat beside her. She shuffled over to give him room and then sat with her hands in her lap, her body angled towards him and his brother.
He tried to think of something to talk about that wouldnâ€™t give Kyran an opening to hate him, ridicule him, or reveal anything about them and their family.
â€œI think Kearn has some more bandages if you need some.â€ Amber smiled in Kyranâ€™s direction. She toyed with the cream crepe bandage around her hand.
â€œDid something happen to you?â€ Kyran sat forwards, resting his elbows on his knees. He reached a hand out to Amber.
Something inside Kearn said to knock his hand away and not let his brother touch Amber again, but he kept still. He didnâ€™t have any claim to her and his brother was behaving himself. If he stopped him, the next thing his brother said would probably be something about his penchant for blood drinking. The introduction had been bad enough. Permit me to introduce myself? He might as well have saidâ€”Iâ€™m a ridiculously portrayed vampire from a clichÃ© low-budget movie.
Amber placed her hand into Kyranâ€™s. His brother cooed over it in a way that made Kearn want to hit him.
â€œThis is terrible. You poor thing. What happened?â€
It would have been more convincing to Kearn had his brother not been drawing a deep breath the whole time, trying to catch the scent of her blood.
â€œA man attacked me. A vampire, actually.â€ She eyed Kyran closely.
â€œDamned vampires.â€ He rolled his eyes.
Kearn did take her hand away from Kyran now, and gave his brother a dark look for good measure.
â€œI take it you know about them?â€ Amber put her hand back in lap and started toying with the bandage again. Kearn kept a close eye on her, concerned that the vampireâ€™s hold over her might not have faded completely. Since it was the vampireâ€™s blood in her body, and not the other way around, he would still be able to find her using the lingering connection between them until tomorrow night, or even beyond that, but Kearn had expected his ability to control her to have left her system by now.
He picked up the water and offered it to her with a smile. A delightful blush stained her cheeks. She had reacted the same way when he had smiled at her earlier tonight. Did she like it? He smiled again and she took the glass, running her fingers around the rim of it with her eyes downcast. Shy?
He could feel Kyranâ€™s eyes on him. Watching. It wasnâ€™t illegal for him to study a human and Amber fascinated him.
â€œI know all about vampires,â€ Kyran said in a tone as black as an abyss. Kearn looked at him when Amber lifted the glass to her lips. Kyran blatantly ignored the silent command not to watch her by staring at her throat while she drank. Red briefly ringed his irises. â€œI know about them and the terrible things that Kearn does to them.â€
Amber choked, coughing and spluttering, her hand over her mouth. Kearn quickly took the glass from her. She stared at his brother with wide eyes. He didnâ€™t like the question he could see in them. She didnâ€™t need to know what he did.
He touched her shoulder and used the connection between them to give her feelings a slight push. Not too much influence over her thoughts. More of a suggestion than a command. He wouldnâ€™t control her as the other vampire had.
She rubbed her eyes and yawned. â€œI feel tired.â€
â€œIt is late.â€ Kearn placed the glass down on the square coffee table, feeling Kyranâ€™s glare on him the whole time. â€œPerhaps you should rest. You have had quite a night. I will stay on the couch. Please, make yourself at home in my room.â€
â€œReally? I couldnâ€™t.â€ Her beautiful hazel eyes met his, full of warmth and honesty. They backed up the message her blood sent to his. She felt bad for taking his bed.
â€œI insist.â€ He took her elbow, bringing her with him when he stood. Kyran was still staring at him. He led Amber past him and to the bedroom, and turned the light on for her. â€œThe bathroom is just through that door. The control for the blinds is on the bedside table, as is the remote control for the television, in case you feel uncomfortable sleeping without background noise tonight. I will be here if you need anything.â€
She nodded and he closed the door. The moment it clicked shut, his eyes changed to red and he looked at Kyran. Scarlet eyes stared right back at him.
Without a word, Kearn walked to the door of the apartment and opened it. Kyran stood, stalked across the room, and stopped toe to toe with him.
â€œThat was uncalled for. I was merely making conversation.â€
â€œI did not like the direction your apparently innocent conversation was heading.â€ Kearnâ€™s red eyes locked with his brotherâ€™s ones.
â€œDo you really believe the lie you are telling yourself when you say she only needs to know as little as possible?â€
â€œIt is a lie, brother, and a shallow one. You do not keep her in the dark about your true self because you believe she doesnâ€™t need to know it in order to play the role you have assigned her.â€ Kyran stepped past him but remained facing him, his back to the hall. â€œYou do so because you are afraid of what she would think of you if she found out what you areâ€¦ a vampire no different to the one who attacked herâ€¦ a fiend lusting for her precious blood.â€
Kearn curled his fingers into a tight fist at his side and gripped the door hard with his other hand.
Kyran stepped back into the hall.
â€œShe will find out, little brother.â€
He was gone.
Kearn growled under his breath at the truth in his brotherâ€™s words.
It was only a matter of time before Amber saw past the faÃ§ade.
For some reason, he didnâ€™t want her to see him for what he was.
He didnâ€™t want her to fear him.
Not even when it felt inevitable.
Kearn cursed and slammed the door.
Not long to wait now until the book is released! Final sneak preview chapter next week! Is everyone excited?

Today was a perfect day. I got a lot of exercise in, and had wonderful family time. It couldn't have been better. So, for the details.
I started out the day with 20 minutes on the elliptical, followed by a personal training session. The best part on the elliptical was that I'm getting stronger. I was able to keep it at level 20 the whole time. That made me happy! And, with the training session, we were back to our full workout. My shoulder is still tender, but that didn't hold me back today. It felt amazing!
As soon as the session was over, I had to grab a quick shower. Michael had a talent show at school today, so I snuck out to see him dance. It was so much fun! I love seeing him have so much fun moving. If I could just bottle a fraction of his energy, I'd be skinny.
The last exercise for the day was my regular Friday Night Yoga class. It was absolutely packed. I have seen where some studios have to really discount Friday night classes because people don't want to exercise Friday evening. Not for our class. It's such a wonderful way to end the week, I don't think they could have fit another person in the room. That tells you how amazing this class is. So thankful to have found it!
We finished up the day with family movie night. Pure couch potato, but fun. And, I was so proud of myself for not snacking! Yay weekend!

The name was first suggested to me maybe about 3 years ago by a marine from the base here. He found out that I was a porn producer and he was like, "I've got the best name for a website....SemperFuck.com. I agreed, it was the perfect name. but it wasn't mine, so I say on it.
And sat on it, and sat on it, for years.
About July of last year I decided to check to see if the name was still available. Incredibly, for such...
Posted: 2009-03-26 at 00:39:49

CLAIRE CREEK CAUGHT the boating bug at the age of about 11, when she visited her aunt and uncle who were on a hire boat holiday. It was just a day-trip, but that was all it took. After that came youth club narrowboat holidays, and then she hired boats with her two sons, and her sister and her family. “It was on one of those holidays that I decided I was going to get a boat,” she says. “The trouble was,” she adds, “that I’d never actually done any steering – that was my brother-in-law’s job!”
She’s done plenty of steering now, though, because he first big trip on her new boat was to move it from where it was built, at Redhill on the River Soar, right down to the River Avon. She became a true boater on the way, too, by falling in.
Claire works as a receptionist at a country estate. But her plan (somewhat dependent on the future decisions of her two sons) is to move on board – and then, eventually, to travel the entire system.

Malaysian singer, Songwriter, and musician known for the single "Bitter Heart," as well as her other songs.
She attended London's American Intercontinental University, where she studied fashion.
She was discovered by American musician Patrick Keeler after posting a performance video on YouTube in 2007.
She was born in the town of Miri, Malaysia and she and her family later relocated to Kuala Lumpur. She has a younger brother.
She and musician Pete Yorn toured together in 2009.

Billy Russo had killed all of the Homeland Security agents who he could find within the building, he made his way outside and calmly set off a bomb within the Anvil Headquarters. Without looking back, Russo kept walking as Anvil, the company he had built from the ground up, was completely destroyed in a fireball. Knowing that he had become a high-value target for Homeland Security, and that he had lost everything William Rawlins and he had been building for years, Russo set about finding Frank Castle so that he could execute his revenge against his former friend for ruining his life.
Billy Russo went into Curtis Hoyle's Apartment and awaited his awakening, taking his hidden pistol from underneath the adjacent pillow. Once Curtis Hoyle awoke, Russo revealed himself as Hoyle noted that he had seen reports on the news about Russo being armed and dangerous. Russo questioned if it was Lewis Wilson who had given Hoyle all of the bruises on his face which he confirmed, as Russo noted he would have killed Wilson before he had even gotten a chance, before allowing Hoyle put his false leg on.
Russo questioned how long Hoyle knew Frank Castle was still alive, which he did not answer and instead tried to convince Russo that he needed help. Russo mocked this idea of going to Hoyle's therapy sessions and, when Hoyle questioned if he had really ever turned his life around since leaving the United States Marine Corps, Russo then admitted he did not. Hoyle then got to his feet and asked if he was allowed to make coffee, which Russo told him he could do as Hoyle explained that he had kept Castle's secrets because he was asked to, noting that Castle only ever wanted to protect Russo.
Russo went on to suggest that Castle was, in fact, the one to blame for everything that had gone wrong before feeling the need to defend the actions of Operation Cerberus by noting the drugs would have gotten out of Afghanistan anyway so he and Ray Schoonover might as well have made the deals.
Hoyle offered Russo the coffee, taking a drink out of his own to show it was not poisoned. However, just as Russo went to take the coffee, he realized that he had been convinced to step into the center of the room with the windows now fully exposed. Sensing the trap, Russo dived to the floor just as the Punisher fired a shot from his sniper rifle, barely missing Russo. Furious, Russo dived for cover and shot Hoyle in the shoulder as he hid, with Russo continuing to fire at him. As the shooting stopped, Russo held a knife up to the window which Castle fired at, confirming that he was still aiming for him.
As Russo complained that he was taking these betrayals personally, Hoyle's phone then began to ring so Russo allowed him to answer it. Hoyle then told Russo that Castle wanted to speak to him and threw him the phone, as Russo noted that they knew each other so well that they were able to predict each other's attacks. Castle ordered Russo to let Hoyle go to ensure nobody else got hurt but Russo still refused, telling Castle that he intended to hurt everybody Castle ever cared about in order to get to him, threatening to allow Hoyle to bled out, but Castle threatened to call Homeland Security if he did.
Getting onto his feet, Billy Russo made eye contact with Frank Castle and suggested that they meet that night for a final showdown to end their hunt, telling Castle to meet him by the Central Park Carousel, knowing that returning to the sight of the Massacre at Central Park would likely put Castle off balance emotionally and give Russo the advantage. Russo gave Castle a military salute and walking out of Curtis Hoyle's apartment in order to get ready for the final confrontation.

The movers did a very good job moving our stuff from our old apartment to the storage. Furnitures were well protected during the moving. Things are well organized in the storage, which give us some spare room to use. They were very efficient as well.
Melvin and his helper James kept me informed when they would arrive and came on time. Our job was a furniture removal and disposal. Went very well. Would highly recommend SafeHands and will use them again for any future moves.
I was very happy that I went with Junk ITT for our furniture removal. Although some of the other quotes I received were lower in price, the service we received was great. I was able to schedule an evening appointment for removal which was imperative. Although they arrived late, Marcus contacted me prior to the appointment to let me know their status as a previous job had run long. He kept in contact with me until they arrived which was appreciated since my fear was that we would be cancelled on and we were on a tight schedule with getting the items removed before our new ones arrived the following day. Thanks to Marcus and his partner for making what was a stressful planning situation much easier.
Chano and Isreal and "Dad" did a great job!!! They handled a second story industrial office clean out and did not adjust the price based on the stairs as another company had quoted me. They were so polite and careful and cleaned up everything. I was very happy to know that they salvage the metals and donate any items that were still usable. They don't just take everything to the landfill. Great guys, honest, hard working crew. I'm very happy I chose them over a "national chain" junk removal service. Would hire them again if I ever need this service in the future!!!!
Bob and his crew did an excellent job at a very affordable rate! They were the best price I could find and they traveled over 80 miles to get here. Their job was to do junk removal of construction debris, trash, and about 2000 lbs of concrete. Simply, they got the job done fast and easy.
I hired him for some junk removal and he was fast and came with a good quote and offered the service in my time frame !! I recommend this company and I will be using him for other projects around my house
Linda's team was hired to spread topsoil in some very large garden beds and rim them with stones. They also removed several overgrown bushes. They spread well over 20 yards of dirt and several truckloads of stones and did a fantastic job. They were quick, and very neat with their work when finished you could not even see they had been there other than the beautiful jobs they did cutting in, spreading dirt and rimming my beds with stone.
Very professional, reasonable quotes/pricing, the work is phenomenal. Not only did we use Handy Helper to remodel our bathrooms at the office, we also use them for snow removal. I never have to worry if the office is plowed. Handy Helper takes all the worry out of the job!
They were very professional and cordial. I truly was satisfied with their services. They met me in the city to removed items from a storage unit and csme immediately to my home to load a trailer with my items that are being delivered to Texas because I'm relocating. Great team work between them and they all had beautiful spirits.
We hire JJ all the time for any removal of our debris. They are prompt and very responsive. Highly recommend them, usually use them about 3-4 times per month on average. Keep up the good work JJ and see you on our next job site for a clean out. Thanks
New Fence Install and Clean Up/Removal of Yard Debris: Dan did a great job on installing our new shadow-box fence and removal of debris (vegetation and broken up concrete) in the yard which had to be removed in order to build the fence. He had all the tools and materials needed each time to complete the job. Dan is a very good communicator; he was prompt, courteous, and affordable. We would recommend him and use him again.
Edgar did a great job removing two trees for me and cleaned up very well afterward. Additionally, he was able to do some landscaping as well which was an added benefit. I will definetly be calling him again for my future landscaping, and tree removal needs.
These guys were amazing. They cleaned out all of my gardens, removed all of the leaves in the yar, laid mulch and removed dead branches from of a very large tree. I would highly recommend them and will definitely use them again. Well worth the money.
I used this service for accent light installation for outside of the house and they did a very thorough job. They were prompt and efficient and easy to work with. I would def recommend them for this type of service.
These guys were extremely professional. There communication was top notch. They made sure to take there shoes off when they came in. It took them 15 min to remove this massive couch. There price was extremely fair and I would definitely use them again. Send your business there way. It’s worth it. Thanks Jonah

Liverpool captain Steven Gerrard admits he feared star striker Luis Suarez would leave Anfield over the summer.
The Uruguay international recently returned from a 10-match ban for biting Chelsea defender Branislav Ivanovic.
Suarez played in the Capital One Cup defeat to rivals Manchester United and on Sunday scored twice in the Reds' 3-1 victory at Sunderland.
But it looked as though the forward would be leaving the club during the transfer window, with Real Madrid linked with him before Arsenal put in an offer of £40m and one pound in the hope of triggering a release clause.
Suarez remained at Liverpool though and Gerrard admits he is delighted by his team-mates decision to stay, as well as his positive attitude since committing to Brendan Rodgers' side.
"When you have a player as good as Luis Suarez, you know that the big clubs are going to want him," said Gerrard.
"I was waking up every morning, hoping that nothing would happen and that he would still be here.
"Nobody tried harder than me to make him stay and he knows exactly what I think of him. I knew if we could keep him here, the better our chances would be.
"He is a special type of footballer and he gives us something different. When the club got the message to him that they were not going to sell him, he got his head down and has worked hard.
"He has never given us a moment's problem. I think it is a credit to Luis for the way he has come back.
"A lot of players who have been in his position might have come back and spat the dummy out, not trying for the team. But he is not that type of guy.
"He realised that the club wanted to keep him and he has respected their decision. He is here now and he wants to stay.
"He wants to achieve something this season and he looks as hungry as he has ever done."

Well, I hope I don't regret this. I just traded my 2007 S2000 for a new 2011 DGM 5 Door. That was my second S, and I was just getting tired of such a small car. It was a ball to drive, just no room, and I was finally sick of it. I looked around at quite a few different cars, and the only one that seemed worthwhile to me was the WRX. Plenty of room, small and relatively light with good power and AWD. A local dealer finally got one in, and it was exactly what I wanted. I made an appointment, took it for a test ride, and the rest is history. They gave me a great trade for the S, so how can you pass that up?
So far I like it. I HATE having to keep it under 4k for a 1000 miles, but I guess I can wait. I love this color with the new wheels.
I'll be hanging out here quite a bit to learn what I can about my first Subaru.

I don’t know if I ever got to write the vision down that I had back in 2016. The dream – vision – was so ethereal, but I know that I know that it happened and somehow I was there; Wherever “that” was.
I was out of my physical body and in a heavenly body and I was “traveling” similar to what is portrayed in Star Trek.
I had never understood why I had the vision I did, what it meant or why I saw it until now. And once The Holy Spirit showed me who it was and what it was I saw – I know that we are super close to the Apocalypse of Great Tribulation.
As the vision opened I was walking on the roof top of a penthouse, toward a luxury black sedan. The trunk of the Sedan was open and a man was standing there. I arrived and stood next to him as we both looked into the trunk at a black briefcase. He closed the trunk and we walked together into the building.
We were on the top floor. The penthouse. There were other people inside, but somehow they didn’t see me. He wanted to introduce me to them but each was engaged and distracted by personal matters. He walked me over to the massive floor to ceiling windows and excused himself to go behind the bar. I looked out upon the covered veranda and saw a gorgeous in ground pool. Something was amiss though – the ground outside was shaking because the pool water was splashing out of control – a massive earthquake. I did not feel that earthquake, because it is coming. It is inbound and it is related to what the man said next.
He had returned and said, I want to talk to you – I need to tell you something. I can’t hold this in anymore. I had wanted to hear what he wanted to tell me but after he said “can’t hold this anymore”…I began to fade out from the room and disappeared from that scene.
Over Thanksgiving week, as I was in prayer – The Holy Spirit shared that what the man was about to reveal was what will cause the demise, fall and unraveling of the CB.
The man in the vision was
Hunn. Ther. Bhuy. Den.

An investigation is underway following the death of a woman in Maplebeck in North Nottinghamshire. The ambulance service were called to Low Farm at around ten to four yesterday afternoon to find a woman had died. A man was also found injured and was taken to Lincoln Hospital.
The pensioners are yet to be formally named but are believed to be in their 70's. The family is being supported by specially trained officers. The woman's death is being treated as suspicious. Tests are due to be carried out today to find out how she died.
“We have been conducting enquiries in and around the farmhouse and those enquiries will continue throughout today. Our thoughts are with the couple's family and the residents of this very small village. We hope to have some answers as to exactly what has happened in the coming days, but at this time I would appeal to anyone who has any information to contact us."
More top news
Dry, bright and sunny times ahead
A three-year-old boy has drowned at David Lloyd club on Tongue Lane in Leeds
A three-year-old boy has been taken to hospital with 'drowning-related injuries' following an incident at a pool in Leeds.

It feels like things are starting to crumble, for me. Maybe I'm overreacting. But I've still got to get this out. I had an appointment with my doctor. It was cancelled due to winter weather. But my grandmother still got in for her appointment today. So she talked to the doctor (we have the same doctor) about my being transgender, and about finding a therapist and blah blah blah. So this perfect stranger goes on about how I'm just confused and need somebody to talk to. That there...that just really irked me the wrong way.... So, anyway, he didn't really know who to refer us to. He made one suggestion, which isn't covered by our insurance. I've spoken to one counselling service on my own, and they said that they had no experience at all with gender issues. They said that they could "read up" on it and help me as much as they could, but I doubt that it is a good idea to go through any service who knows less than I do about this.... And so I feel like the structure that I had built up through all of the support that I've had so far has began to crumble back down. I am afraid that I will end up with less-than-decent care. I'm afraid that I will be halted with my pursuit of myself. I'm afraid that I will die as the weird guy who always kept to himself, when I was really the lonely girl who couldn't be herself, and so, instead, was nobody. Maybe I really am just too emotional...but putting it all into words helps.... I'm looking into therapists on my own, and have found two in Jonesboro (a city near me) that claim in their pages that they have experience in gender issues. Maybe I have a chance...but...just feels hopeless. Any advice to this stuff? Handling doctors that don't support this stuff. The possibility of being stuck with an ignorant therapist. All of it.

wags83 wrote:Source of the post
The one thing that bothers me about this show is the inconsistency with the team owner. She obviously knows Ted is a good guy but also really wants to hurt her ex husband. The issue is that they always show her seemingly being won over by Ted only to immediately try to sabotage him again.
This. We have seen 5 episodes, but every episode he goes out of his way to do something extremely nice for her and she seems to love it, but then goes back to screwing him over.
I just love how Ted wins everyone over. The reporter, the old veteran captain, shithead. The 23 year old stud asshole player needs to start redeeming himself because I was really happy when Ted took him out of the game and he then quit the team and they won without him (which would never happen if he actually scored the only 2 points prior to that).

One thing seems to be a common factor as far as I can tell. What you say/think you would do with the money when you won it is not necessarily what you actually do when it happens.
I worked with someone for years, and he and I often talked about our plans for a big win. Then one day - about three years ago actually - he won £4.5 million on the lottery. Yes, he gave money to his children, but not huge amounts. Yes, he bought a top of the range luxury car, but six months later he traded it back to the dealer and opted for a much smaller car. His wife refused a new car altogether, saying she was very happy with her five year old model.
I talk to him on a regular basis, not to ask for a loan, but to see how he's doing. His life is fine, he has a nice house, lots of holidays, etc., but he says most of his dream plans haven't been actioned - he's just living a quiet, secure life.
It's obviously a lot different with a really big win - £20 million is a very serious pile of money. My children would certainly benefit to quite a large extent from a win that size. Otherwise it would be a new house, a new car each, and long trips to sunny places - total relaxation and not a single worry about a bill, ever again.

From age 31 to 65, ten patients come forward alleging inappropriate behaviour
In last week’s edition, the Voice published the account of a woman formerly employed by Dr. Charles Duncan, a family practitioner in Fonthill. The woman asserted that she was twice sexually assaulted by Duncan in 2009, and she filed a report with the Niagara Regional Police Service at the time. This past March, a decade later, she was contacted by the College of Physicians and Surgeons of Ontario in connection with an internal CPSO investigation of Duncan. Neither she nor the Voice know what prompted the CPSO to act, but the result was that Duncan agreed to quit practicing medicine as of October 31, and never to apply again to practice anywhere in Canada.
Following the story’s appearance, nearly 20 more women have come forward to the paper, alleging that they were the targets of unwanted and inappropriate conduct as patients of Duncan’s. They range in age from 31 to 65. Ten agreed to speak for publication.
For reasons made clear by psychology professor Kathryn Belicki, in her interview this week, none of the women wish to be named, but each wants her experience heard. The Voice knows the identities of the individuals making the comments on this page, communicating with them via email, telephone, and social media, to obtain their stories.
The Voice informed Duncan’s office staff—by telephone, in writing, and in person at his practice—that the newspaper had received these accounts from his former patients, and requested Duncan’s comment. He had not responded by press time. The Voice has not verified whether these recollections are true. To the newspaper’s knowledge, Duncan has never been charged with a sexual crime, nor is he currently under police investigation.
Just reading this article brought so many emotions and heartfelt agony to so many women. I was a patient from 1974 until December 2000. There were so many times I felt uncomfortable with the sexual innuendo and subtle sexual advances that it was hard to pinpoint at times. Like so many others, the same tactics were used to prime us. Everything from unnecessary pap smears to pressing his body against mine, to hugs, undressing, and the list goes on and on. Sometimes I left his office very disturbed and even questioning whether I was interpreting his advances wrongly. He did it with his offbeat humour to cover up. As his “grooming” progressed, I knew it was time to leave quickly when he fondled my breast while giving me a shot. It was the final straw for me, and I was advised by another doctor to call the College of Physicians and Surgeons and report all that had been done to me. I called the number given to me, and was accountable to a dear friend who made me follow up. I remember speaking to a woman by the name of Susan at CPSO, who encouraged me to seek counselling, and told me that if he did it to me, he has probably done it to other women. If there were two or more complaints lodged with CPSO they would investigate it and call me back. They encouraged me not to press charges as I would most likely not be successful and it would be very stressful. I waited many years to get a call, especially after reading all the other women who made complaints to CPSO on RateYourMD. How sad and disappointing that even this would not bring attention to the man. He took advantage of his position and title and now walks away. The only consolation we see is an article in the local news shaming the man. Shame to all who support this evil man, and my heartfelt concern to all he has impacted with his selfish actions. The incidents occurred all through my 30s until I left his practice at the age of 45.
When I read the paper my mouth dropped. I was a patient of Duncan’s around ten years ago, when I was a young woman. He also made unprofessional comments and odd requests to do multiple physical examinations. On one occasion, I sat in the waiting room and we had to take a number. When they call your number, you go in to see the doctor. My number was 11. Dr. Duncan saw my number and said, in a provocative manner, “You are an 11!” He also made comments about my looks on other occasions. Every time I went to see him, for whatever reason, he would insist I needed a pap smear. I would do so, as it’s doctor’s orders, but I thought it was a little excessive. Later he told me that my tests were abnormal and I’d need more testing…all of these paps did not included a nurse in the room. I started feeling a little uneasy about going to see him, so the next time I brought my boyfriend (now husband) to come with me. Dr. Duncan seemed a little angry that I brought him, and made comments like, “You probably have HPV and watch out for genital warts.” I was horrified, and wanted to see a gynecologist for further examination. He referred me to a doctor in Welland and I was given a biopsy. The biopsy was completely clear. It makes me wonder if I had any abnormalities at all? Was he just being completely unprofessional? I changed doctors shortly after that. I’m going to contact the CPSO. I imagine more women will come forward.
Dr. Duncan opened his family practice in Fonthill when I was six years old. Our family immediately started attending his practice as patients. During my childhood years, he seemed to be a good physician, but once I hit my early teens his behaviour towards me changed. My mother felt I was old enough to see the doctor by myself and as such, any time I attended his office, it started with tickling me each time I visited. As time went on, if I went in for a sore throat, he would tell me to lay down on the examining table and would inevitably touch my breasts and finish by tickling my stomach. I recall going in because of stomach pains and he undid my pants and would want to examine my genitals because it “may be something related” to my “reproductive system.” As time proceeded, Dr. Duncan wanted to perform internal exams but, although I said nothing to anyone, it didn’t feel “right.” At this point, I asked my mother if she could arrange for me to see a gynecologist for things related to the reproductive system. Although I had a gynecologist, Dr. Duncan continued to try to undo my pants every time I went in for anything from an earache to a sore throat to a rash, etc. Finally, I told my mother in my 20s that I was looking for a new doctor because Dr. Duncan made me feel very uncomfortable. She was surprised that I felt that way but didn’t question my choice. After leaving his practice, it became clear to me that what he had been doing to me for so many years was completely wrong on every level. I chose to remain quiet for the same reasons many people do…we are taught to believe that our physicians are good people, to be trusted and not questioned. In retrospect, had I reported his unethical practices, perhaps others could have avoided experiencing the same shameful feelings that I did. He truly isn’t having to pay for anything he did to any of us.
It was 42 years ago. I was 14 when I first met Dr. Duncan. My family had recently moved to a farm in Fenwick. I developed a rash on my feet and hands and thought it may be an allergic reaction to the grasses in the fields. I went to see Dr. Duncan. He told me he would need to perform a physical, I told him I did not have a rash anywhere else, just on my feet and hands. I did not feel I needed a physical. He kept insisting. I told him I would go somewhere else. Dr. Duncan said he would just look at my feet. He came around his desk and looked at my feet and determined it was an allergic reaction to my new “Buffalo” sandals. He gave me a prescription for cream and that was that. He became my family’s doctor. When I started taking birth control I was told I would need to have regular physicals. During exams, no assistant would be present. He would ask me questions about my relationship with my boyfriend. Uncomfortable questions. Long breast exams. Always made me feel dirty and gross. Another time I blacked out at the top of our stairs and fell, injuring my back. Went to Dr. Duncan for my back and the resulting headaches. He asked me to bend over as far as I could. He told me he was going to have to do a physical, I said no. This has definitely gone on for too long.
I stopped seeing him just after I left high school and went to college. He used to make a lot of jokes when I was much younger, asking if I had a boyfriend yet when I was in elementary school. There was a lot of sexual innuendoes throughout the entire time I went to him. When I was high school I got a nose ring, and when he would do a breast exam he would say I had nice breasts and ask if I planned on getting them pierced. Also when using a stethoscope, when he put his hand down my shirt, he would place his fingers on my breast and make sure a part of his hand always at some point touched them. When I left town for school, I asked for a referral to a gyno for paps and he refused, saying he preferred doing them himself. After a few times of asking and having to go to him for a pap, I refused to go back because he would also make comments during the exams that made me feel very uncomfortable.
I had negative experiences with him as well and fortunately was able to find another doctor about 15 years ago because of this. I always wanted to pursue his inappropriate comments and touches but they were just on the edge of being legit and hard to prove. I am so glad this finally came to light.
My experience was very similar to a lot of women in the comments. The refusal to refer, “helping” to remove my bra to check for lumps every time I was there, not using gloves, etc. He was my doctor from birth until I was 23 years old. My first pap test he grabbed both my butt cheeks and pulled me down to the bottom of the exam table because I wasn’t moving fast enough. He always refused to send me to a gyno because I was “healthy.” After one too many exams that didn’t feel right I left him for a new doctor. I’m angry and sickened that I never spoke up. Now it is too late.
I would sit in the waiting room wondering, each time a woman came out of there, are things happening to them too? And none of them ever looked upset or anything. So I thought maybe it was me. You know what I mean? I was overreacting. This is my husband’s family doctor. So I didn’t want to make waves. The last time I saw him was in April.
He started as my doctor when I was in elementary school. It seemed like every single time I needed to go in there, no matter what the reason was, he felt I needed to have a pap done. He would say that I had nice breasts. I made the choice to stop seeing him when I kind of put two and two together, between 16 and 19. I just did walk-in clinics probably for four or five years after that, until I found a new doctor about 15 years ago.
I had made a police report on him years before that young lady did. How come if the police had this information, they didn’t deal with it? There’s quite a few of us that I know of who left Duncan’s office because of abuse with him as patients. I came home and said something to my daughter, who was in her 20s. I was in my 40s, and she said, “Mom, he’s been doing that to me,” and it was like, “Oh my god.” After this story came out, now she’s like, “Yeah, I would talk to the newspaper, but I don’t want my name public,” and everybody feels that way. For five years after my divorce, every time he walked into the room, he would say to me, “So are you with anybody yet?” It didn’t even dawn on me that that was his question as to whether or not he should continue mauling and doing stuff that was not really appropriate at the time. It was his, “Yeah, if she’s not with anybody, I can be touching her and she’s not really going to say anything.” I’d go in for a sore throat and he’d have to check my boobs. It was like, “Excuse me? I’m not sure why my throat and breasts have to be connected here,” but it took me, honestly, years to actually clue into what he was doing. It’s funny because I talked to a friend this morning who had issues with him and she said, “Do you know what? He checked my breasts every time I walked into the office, but he hasn’t for the past couple of years.” I said, “Let me tell you why. You hit menopause and they’re no longer hard and perky.” After I left his office, I’ve been pretty verbal about what happened with me. I was interviewed by [a doctor not practicing in Pelham] as a new patient, he asked me why I was leaving Duncan and as soon as I told him why, he said, “I won’t take you as a patient.” It’s the old boys club. I even talked to my pharmacist. I said, “You need to know so if another female comes in, you need to tell her to go and make a police report because I’ve done it. If we start, the cops are going to figure out that there’s a pattern here.” I didn’t want to press charges because I knew what would happen. If they had come back to me and said, “We do have a pattern of behavior, ma’am. Can we talk again?” I would have totally been all over it. My daughter, even now she won’t go public with it, because no matter how you look at it, the judgment on a female who has been sexually abused puts a cloud on her character eternally. The last time I saw him I needed a prescription. He looked up how long it had been since I’d had a mammogram, which was three years, so I said, “Then I need a referral for a mammogram.” He said, “Get up on the table,” and I said, “No, we’re not doing that anymore.” He grabbed the prescription out of my hand and tore it in half. I never returned and I didn’t even ask for my records. He was disrespectful, had been constantly mauling me, and he was the abuse partner. In order to get my records, I would have to buy them off of him. You couldn’t get your records without paying them $25 to move them to a new doctor, and I was going to pay the man so that I could move away from his abuse? Not happening. ♦
While you’re here…consider renewing or taking out a Voice Membership to express your support for local journalism.

The Philadelphia Eagles starting quarterback told students at Wilbur Cross High in New Haven Tuesday he was captivated with the dogs a man would bring by a barber shop when he was 10. "The most beautiful dogs in the world," Vick said. "I kept asking him to give me a dog."
When he was 20, he got one of the pit bulls, and soon found himself exposed to the practice of setting them against each other to tear themselves apart.
"One day, God said to me, 'What you're doing to these dogs is wrong and I'm going to punish you for it,'" Vick said. "And four days later I was indicted."
He was convicted and served 19 months in prison.
As he neared the end of his term, Vick contacted Wayne Pacelle, CEO of the Humane Society.
"I was skeptical," Pacelle said, "but Michael said he didn't just want to do a press release, he wanted to dedicate his life to this. ... And in the year and a half I have known him, he hasn't turned me down once."
Swim Week Miami Beach 2014 [PHOTOS]

Police in Maine have arrested a man accused of killing his father's cat with a frying pan on Thanksgiving — a day after he was released on bail for a separate incident.
The Bangor Daily News reports that 43-year-old Ryan T. Carleton faces new charges including animal cruelty and violating the conditions of his previous release.
The Daily News reports that the man's father called police in Piscataquis County on Thursday to report that he had found his cat's body after he let his son stay with him the night before.
Carleton had been released on bail Wednesday following an arrest on charges that he stole his mother's car.
An address and phone number could not be located for Carleton, a former Guilford resident. It was not immediately clear whether he was represented by an attorney. He is being held pending a court hearing scheduled for Monday.

Mohamed Al Fayed, the former owner of the London luxury department store Harrods and the football club Fulham FC, is dead. The Egyptian businessman died at the age of 94, as Fulham announced on its website on Friday evening. Al Fayed was also known worldwide through his eldest son Dodi Al Fayed’s liaison with the late Princess Diana. The two died in a car accident in Paris on August 31, 1997.
Mohamed Al Fayed died peacefully on Wednesday, according to a family statement distributed by the football club. “He had a long and fulfilling retirement surrounded by his family,” it said.
Mohamed Al Fayed never quite got over Dodi’s death. From the outset, the entrepreneur had repeatedly expressed his belief that his son and Diana had been murdered with the involvement of British intelligence. In his opinion, the then Prince Consort Philip, the husband of British Queen Elizabeth II, was behind the alleged plans.
Mohamed Al Fayed was born in Egypt. Since the 1960s, however, he has mainly been active as an entrepreneur in Great Britain. Fulham bought Al Fayed in 1997. The club was promoted to the Premier League in 2001. In 2013, Al Fayed sold it to Pakistani entrepreneur Shahid Khan.
Now Fulham paid tribute to its former owner on its website: “Everyone associated with Fulham owes a debt of gratitude to Mohamed for what he has done for our club. Our thoughts are with his family and friends now at this dark time.”
Al Fayed is survived by his wife Heini Wathen and their four children. His son Dodi came from his first marriage to Samira Khashoggi.

06 Aug Beautiful Maternity Photos
Beautiful Maternity Photos of a glowing woman about to give birth to her first child. She was surrounded by so much love and attention from her family and it was great to include them in the maternity photography session. Her husband, two sisters and mum were all as excited as she was to celebrate such an amazing moment in time. It was great she brought a few different outfits, with each one setting quite a different mood and feel for the photos. Thanks for a lovely shoot!

I was watching Live with everyone else here. I can’t recall but PO had finished his stream and people moved onto Cucks stream, he was teasing a lot of drops if I recall so people were prepared for the stream, just not what occurred during it.
I thought we had just peaked in terms of Ralph’s Depravity when that video and link got out which is somewhat true but he’s held steady being a complete piece of shit these past few months.
I checked back in the original thread and I brought up the question of if this was Revenge Porn.
I was catching up on the main thread, because it had been moving so fast. I finally made it up to the most recent page, and then I saw someone posted “did Ralph just post his sex tape?” or something like that. I thought it was someone trolling, and then people started posting screenshots and replays of Kerr’s stream. At that moment, I knew I would be glued to the thread for days.

Bray Wyatt missed this week’s episode of Monday Night Raw due to a car accident and now a new report has revealed that he was cited for careless driving over it.
According to TMZ, Wyatt was not paying attention while driving and was cited for “careless driving due to his failure to operate his vehicle in a careful and prudent manner”.
Though it’s unknown if he was distracted by somethng as the official police report on the matter only says that the Eater Of The Worlds was “inattentive.”
For those who don’t know, Bray smashed his car into another one last Friday and was admitted to Tampa General Hospital after the incident where he was released on Monday.
Though his injuries don’t appear to be very serious and during a recent interview, Bray jokingly said that he will live through it because he cannot die.

Meet Benjamin Ambrose Bailey! We welcomed our sweet baby boy on March 25, 2021! He was 9 pounds, 8 ounces, 20.75 inches long. He is my whole world. I love him more and more every single day.
I love to read birth stories, but was hesitant to post Ben’s because it was a little complicated. However, when I posted a question box on Instagram, his birth story was the most requested item that came through. I’m happy to share, but please keep in mind that our situation was very unique based on my past medical history. I should also mention that we are all doing great now, and at the end of it all we got to take home our perfect baby boy. I love being his mom and would do it all again in a heartbeat!
It’s no secret I was getting a little anxious for labor to start. It just felt like I wasn’t progressing for weeks before he was born. Ben was measuring large from the anatomy scan on. I was having regular growth scans to make sure he wasn’t getting too large. We were no longer paying attention to my due date and were really just keeping an eye on his size. I was trying to jump start labor, but from the beginning of March we were on baby watch. It was a very long month.
On the 22nd, I went in for my growth scan, and he was measuring 10 pounds, 3 ounces. Once we crossed into 10 pound territory, we finally hit the point where we either needed to induce or schedule a c-section. I talked through the pros and cons of each with the midwife I had my appointment with that day. Growth scans are just an estimate of size, so for that reason, I decided to be induced. If he was measuring smaller than 10 pounds, I still wanted to try to push. I wasn’t against a c-section, but they are harder to recover from and I wanted to avoid that if I could. If my baby did end up being really large, I was afraid I wouldn’t be able to pick them up if I had a c-section. So we scheduled my induction for Wednesday at 5 p.m.
Wednesday rolled around and I woke up and started to prepare for the day. I dropped my pets off at my parents, finished packing my hospital bag, tried to take a nap in case it was a long night, etc. Around 3:30 p.m., the labor and delivery department called and said we would have to delay my induction. They didn’t have any rooms available and they would call me when I could come in.
We were really disappointed that we couldn’t go in at our scheduled time, but we watched some Netflix and tried to relax. It was hard though because we didn’t know exactly when we would get the call. They said it could be that night or the next morning, and I needed to keep my phone with me. So I couldn’t really take a nap in case they called. I was pretty anxious, but around 9:40 p.m. they called and said we could come on in! We grabbed the things that weren’t already in the car and headed for the hospital.
Once we got there, we checked in at the front desk and were immediately taken back to our labor and delivery room. I put on the gown, had my COVID test, and had my initial vitals taken. I have extremely low blood pressure normally. While I was pregnant, it got into “normal” range, but was still lowish. When I got admitted to the hospital, it was 158/90 haha! I was so nervous so it had skyrocketed. So I had to stay hooked up to the blood pressure cuff for a while to make sure it was just nerves. It went down after 10 minutes, but it’s good to know how high my blood pressure gets when I’m nervous.
They also checked my progress. I was 3 cm dilated and 80% effaced. This is important to remember for later in the story haha.
Once we were settled, we started my induction with Cytotec. This is a little pill that sits in the side of your cheek and helps start labor. While I was taking the Cytotec, I tried to get some sleep. We watched “Friends” and then eventually dozed off around 1:30 a.m.
Around 3 a.m. I woke up and had started having contractions. The midwife on call came to in to check on me and said I was having them every 2 minutes. They weren’t terribly painful, but they were consistent so sleep was pretty impossible. I just kind of watched the clock for awhile and powered through the contractions.
Before the shift change at 7 a.m., my midwife came back in and checked my progress. I was 3 cm and 90% effaced. So all those contractions basically did nothing. She said the next step would be to start the pitocin and that would happen after the shift change.
So my next midwife and nurse started my pitocin pretty quickly after they arrived. They started slowly and had planned to build it throughout the day. The beginning of the day was pretty lowkey. I was having contractions but they weren’t terrible. Stephen and I just kind of hung out. We talked with our nurse a lot. Because of COVID, we had the same nurse all day and she only had two patients to decrease exposure, so she got to spend a lot of time with us. Throughout the day, they came in and increased my pitocin level.
Around lunchtime, they checked my progress. 3 cm, 90% effaced.
Around 1 p.m. my midwife asked me if I was ok if they broke my water. I said absolutely because I wanted to get this show on the road. Breaking my water was supposed to help speed things along. Now this part was awful. It didn’t hurt to have my water broken, but the actual water breaking was awful. I was so uncomfortable just being wet and sitting in the water. Every time I moved, I leaked more water. I wish so much I had gotten the epidural before this so I didn’t have to feel it. This is when I really started to lose it. I was ready to have my baby. I didn’t want to sit in the water anymore. They also put a catheter in that wasn’t for going to the bathroom but for tracking my baby, and I had to be very careful not to knock it out. I hadn’t had the epidural yet so going to the bathroom was a real challenge because I would leak everywhere, couldn’t knock my catheter out and had to drag my IV pole. I was miserable during this time.
Also, while all this was going on my contractions were getting crazy strong. I had held out for a long time on the epidural. I just didn’t feel like I had needed it because some of my contractions up until this point I could barely feel. But once my water had broken and they had upped my pitocin dose into the high teens I was struggling. I told them I was ready for the epidural. They gave me some IV pain meds to hold me over. Those worked incredibly fast and made me incredibly loopy. Then the doc came in to give me an epidural. I think this was around 4 p.m. I was pretty loopy so, I’m not 100%.
Once I had the epidural and the pain meds, I was feeling GOOD! The nurse asked me if I could feel any contractions. I couldn’t. She said I was having some big ones so that was good that I couldn’t feel them.
We went on like this until around 6:30ish when they checked my progress. You guessed it. I was 3 cm and 90% effaced. The same number of centimeters I was dilated when I arrived at the hospital the night before. We were on hour 20 of inducing and my baby had also had not dropped at all. He was way up there.
Finally the midwife came in and said we needed to talk options. She said we could keep with the pitocin and wait overnight to see if I progressed any or we could go ahead and do a c-section. Stephen and I decided since I had made zero progress in 20 hours, that it was time for a c-section.
The doctor on call to perform c-sections came in pretty quickly to meet us and tell us they were going to do around 4 c-sections in a row so it would be about an hour or so. He left and an entire team of people came flooding in our room. Literally right after he left. They said we had been bumped up and we were going first. It was a WAVE of activity. They put Stephen in scrubs, gave me all kinds of things in my IV and to drink. They put new bracelets on my arm and hooked me up to monitors. I don’t even know what all else. I was still very drugged up so I just kind of let it happen.
They wheeled me into the operating room and all I really remember was it was very, very bright. They had Stephen waiting somewhere else while we got ready. I was kind of afraid and wished Stephen had been in there, so I just tried to do some deep breathing while a ton of activity was happening around me. Luckily I had the best anesthesiologist next to my head. I have no idea what his last name is, but he becomes the hero of my story haha. He stayed with me the whole time. He would tell me what was going on, let me know when I needed to answer someone’s question and told them to go get Stephen when they were about to get started and nobody had gone to get him yet.
C-sections are wild because you are totally awake. While I couldn’t feel anything super painful, I could feel a lot of pressure and moving around behind the drape. It was uncomfortable, but bearable. I remember thinking at one point that it was taking longer than I thought it would to get my baby out. Then someone said, “where are they?” referring to my baby. Then they started asking Stephen questions about my appendectomy.
Backstory time. When I was 11, my appendix ruptured. It didn’t pop or explode like you usually hear when people’s appendix rupture. Mine ruptured just a little bit and leaked into my bloodstream for days before we caught it. I had to have emergency surgery to have it removed. I spent 8 days in the hospital..for an appendectomy. That surgery is usually a very quick turnaround time so it was a little more serious than your typical appendectomy.
This became important during my c-section because I had a lot of scar tissue all over my pelvis that was preventing Ben from dropping. He was incredibly high and I would have never gone into labor on my own. So all that time we spent in March trying to jumpstart labor and the past 20 hours of trying to induce did nothing. He was never coming.
So they had to go way up to find my baby and pull him out. Finally, the room erupted and I heard the sweet baby cries. The anesthesiologist said, “WHOA MAMA. You just gave birth to a small toddler.” I told Stephen I was ok and to go be with our baby. We found out it was a boy. Stephen cut the cord, and they got Ben all cleaned up.
I was pretty ready to pass out at this point but wanted to meet my baby. They brought him over and I got to look at his perfect little face. He pulled my mask off when I started talking to him, and the nurse said he recognized my voice and wanted to see my face. I don’t know if that’s true, but I like her version. While I was incredibly drugged up at this point, I wouldn’t have traded this moment for anything. I got to meet my sweet, sweet boy. It wasn’t for long, but he was so perfect. Then they handed him to Stephen and Ben’s team left to get ready for the next c-section. So it was me, Stephen holding Ben, the anesthesiologist and the surgeons left in the operating room.
After they got Ben out, they kept working and told Stephen that they were going to try to clear out some of my scar tissue. I also had a few bleeders that needed taking care of. I was so tired and so drugged up that I closed my eyes and tried to just sleep. This is when I started getting sick. Thank goodness for the anesthesiologist who held my bag and let me throw up all over him, the floor, the bag, everything. Bless his heart.
This part of the surgery was awful. It took forever, I couldn’t stop throwing up and while I couldn’t feel anything super painful, the pressure was awful. It was to the point where I kept saying “ouch.” I was really drugged up. I don’t completely remember everything that happened here, but finally the anesthesiologist told Stephen he was going to knock me out so I wouldn’t throw up anymore. I wasn’t going to get full anesthesia, but enough to be asleep for the remainder of the surgery. Stephen said to absolutely do that. I am so thankful for both of these men and their decision-making skills at this point. I was so thankful to be put under.
So I don’t know what happened from then until the end of surgery. I woke up in a recovery curtain. The doctor who performed my c-section came in and explained about my appendectomy and the scar tissue it left behind. If I have another baby, I will have to have a scheduled c-section. I won’t ever be able to go into labor on my own because the baby won’t be able to drop past that tissue. So if I have another, I will have a scheduled c-section at 39 weeks because I make big babies.
I’m thankful to have this information and know that next time will go much smoother. Even though it was difficult, I would do it all again in a heartbeat because I got my perfect baby out of it. I have never loved anything like I love him. I want to spend every second of every minute of every hour of every day with him. I literally miss him while I take a shower. I was always iffy about having kids, but now that I have Ben, I know I was meant to be his mom.
So for my friends who are moms-to-be, take my story with a grain of salt. It was a unique situation based on a previous unique situation. Focus on the part where I said how great being a mom is and how much I love my baby. Labor is one day. I kept telling myself that I can do anything hard for one day. I’m recovering very well and now I get to cuddle my sweet baby. So don’t be afraid! Women are tough. It was one of the best days of my life because I got to meet my sweet boy.

Tiberius’ first prefect of the guard was L. Seius Strabo. His support was crucial support at the accession and his loyalty was rewarded with a posting as Prefect of Egypt. Although an equestrian, Seius Strabo was connected to several prominent senatorial families. An inscription (ILS 8996) records his building of a bath house together with his mother Terentia, and his wife, Cosconia Gallitta, who may have been the sister of the consul of 10 BC. Terentia may have been from the very prominent Terentii family who were very close to Augustus in the 20s BC. An earlier wife was probably the sister of Junius Blaesus, who had been governor during the mutinies on the Danube. He may also have married an Aelia, again from a very prominent family, who were later to adopt his son.
The son was born Seius Strabo, but on adoption changed his names to L. Aelius Sejanus. The only reason for adoption in the high Roman elite was so that the the adopting man had an heir to his name and his status. The adoption certainly made Sejanus very rich and he could have used his connections to embark on a senatorial career, but he chose or it was decided that he would follow his father to become firstly joint prefect (with his father) and then sole prefect of the praetorian guard.
Sejanus was sent with the young Drusus to quell the mutiny on the Danube (Tacitus, Annales, 1.24). He appears briefly at the trial of Piso. In AD 20 he betrothed his daughter to Claudius’ son (Tacitus, Annales 3.29), bringing his family into the imperial household. In 21, his influence was behind the appointment of Quintus Junius Blaesus to lead campaigns in Africa (Annales 3.35) in preference to Aemilius Lepidus. He appears tangentially at the trial of Junius Silanus, as the sponsor of one of the prosecuting senators. He had been among the friends of Gaius Caesar (Augustus’ grandson) (Tacitus, Annales, 4.1), but had become an associate of Tiberius. By AD 22, Blaesus was back in Rome. he had defeated the African king, Tacfarinas. Tiberius honoured him by allowing him to be declared ‘imperator’ (general) by his troops: he was the last non-emperor to be so called (Annales 3.73-74). In the same year, a fire broke out in Rome and badly damaged the Theatre of Pompey. Sejanus himself was honoured by a bronze statue in the theatre on account of his fire fighting effort (Annales 3.72).
By AD 23, Sejanus was a power in the city. He was well-connected by birth, but became better connected by politics. His uncle was one of the more powerful and prestigious military men. By his support, men rose. By his enmity, men fell.
Sometime early in the reign, Tiberius allowed him to concentrate the praetorian guard, who had previously been scattered throughout Italy, into a single camp in the city. This gave him a force of perhaps as many as 8000 soldiers in a city which normally had almost no garrison or police (Annales 4.2; Dio, 57.19).
The exact chronology is not clear, but it is evident that Sejanus was emerging as a primary representative of imperial power. Augustus and Tiberius had had secondary figures to support them almost throughout their periods of rule: Agrippa, Tiberius and Drusus, Tiberius alone, Gaius and Lucius Caesar, Tiberius and Germanicus had all performed this role for Augustus. Tiberius had relied on Germanicus and Drusus, and now Sejanus. But Sejanus was not (yet) a family member and one might expect that his rise was viewed with some hostility by Drusus.
But the senators responded with honours. Statues were granted and the Roman elite began to pay him court. Speeches were delivered in his honour (Dio, 57.21). Tiberius appears to have referred to him as ‘socius laborum’ (ally in our labours’) and allowed his image to be sent round the empire to towns and to the army, where it was displayed in the camps (Annales 4.2). This is was the mark of someone being groomed for an imperial position.
‘Socius laborum’ is an odd phrase. It is almost as if Tiberius was avoiding saying something else. That something else was supposedly referenced by Drusus, who complained of Sejanus ‘and how close was he to be declared a colleague?’ There was a crucial movement from being a helper to being an ally to being a colleague (Annales 4.7). ‘Colleague’ was a constitutional word, suggesting a partner in power. Drusus complained that he and his family were being usurped and with the concentration of military power, honours, and statues, friends and influence, and his familial connection to the imperial family, Sejanus was on the verge of imperial power. With relations between the two so poor, they seemingly fell, on one occasion,to brawling (Annales 4.3).
In AD 23, Drusus died. There was no doubt who was the beneficiary and was widely thought that he was poisoned. It was not until the fall of Sejanus that evidence emerged that seemingly confirmed those suspicions.
Sejanus was dominant and that dominance brought him into conflict with the remaining figures of the imperial family, notably Agrippina and her two eldest sons, Nero Caesar and Drusus.

An Engage success story
Amy didn’t know what to do when her son Lewis’ school attendance became worse and worse, affecting their home life and relationships. His school referred him to our Engage service where the family were given a chance to turn things around…
By the time Lewis had started year 9, his school attendance level had fallen to below 60%. Home life was at a real low and his mum Amy felt tired, emotional and stressed.
“The school were helping as much as they could but there was only so much they could do when some days he would refuse to go into school altogether.”
Lewis did not open up to his mum or the school about why he wouldn’t go in other than expressing that he hated it and didn’t want to go. His mum took him to the doctor on two occasions when he had become severely distressed at the thought of going in. Because of his refusal to tell her how he was feeling, Amy asked him to write down on a piece of paper why he was so upset, and he wrote simply that ‘he wanted to die’.
“It was awful to know he felt this way. I felt I couldn’t live my life without him and couldn’t believe this was all happening because he hated school so much.”
His school decided to refer Lewis to our Engage programme in September 2018 where he met Helen, a senior practitioner on our Engage service.
Amy attended a 10 week Parental Presence course which provided her and fellow parents with advice and the tools they needed to create stronger relationships and improve communication with their children and increase school attendance.
Helen also set up regular one to one sessions with Lewis to help him with his self-esteem and confidence in attending school regularly.
Amy found the course extremely helpful and utilised many of the techniques she had learned with regards to communicating with Lewis.
“I used to beg and plead with Lewis or get angry to get him out of bed in the morning. I learned to make it about ‘us’ getting ourselves ready not just ‘him’. I stopped trying to bargain with him or give him rewards, and instead would arrange fun things for us to do together during the week. Sometimes when I’d work a long shift I’d leave a note on his pillow telling him I was proud of him and how much I loved him, or leave his favourite sweets for when he got back from school. Some of these things are so simple but I needed someone to remind me.”
“I learned that if we had a laugh together in the morning he was much more likely to get up and get dressed for school if he’d had something to smile about, and that has been really fun.”
Lewis’ school attendance rate is now 100%. He is now much more open with his feelings, and he and Amy have become even closer since Helen began working with them in September 2018.
“He will talk to me about school now and he is much more confident to ask for help if he feels he is struggling. Having Helen’s support has been fantastic, she has always been there for us and the school has been brilliant throughout this process too.
I know that school just isn’t for Lewis but I’m so pleased he’s going in everyday and trying his best.”
Amy has since volunteered for Ormiston Families by speaking to parents on a recent Parental Presence course about her experiences with Lewis and what she gained from taking part.
“I told the parents to stick at it and they might be surprised at what methods will work for them. Things will change for them if they keep going, like they did for me.”

A large number of contract workers of the Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited on Tuesday went on an indefinite strike against the move to discontinue services of some of their colleagues.
The BSNL Non-Permanent Workers Union (CITU) Dakshina Kannada unit’s general secretary Balakrishna Bhimaguli said the BSNL had discontinued the services of employees working on contract. The services of 48 members were discontinued from December 2010. Around 12 members from Dakshina Kannada were asked not to work from October 1, he said.
Among those whose services had been discontinued include that of Shivaram, who had been working as a security guard and as lineman for 20 years at the Bellipady Exchange. “I was among the three members doing the work of permanent employees. Just a few days ago, a higher official called me and asked me not to work from October 1. No orders have been given in writing,” he said.
Similar is the case of Krishna N, who has been working in Mandekolu in Sullia Exchange for 18 years. “I have been asked not to come for work from October 1. But as some works are going on, they have asked me to work for two more months,” he said. The officials only said that they were acting as per the directions of their higher-ups and to reduce loss to the BSNL, he said.
Mohammed Shafi, who has been working for 15 years, said this was not the way BSNL should discontinue their services. “We have toiled hard all these years regardless of poor infrastructure at our exchanges. We should be absorbed into the BSNL and should be given all service benefits,” he said.

Great owner and vehicle. Anthony dropped the car off to me at Philly International and retrieved it from me at the same airport several days later. Both times, Anthony was right on time. The car was clean, in great condition and was a pleasure to drive. I was very impressed.

As if getting stolen from a zoo wasn't enough of an ordeal for SpongeBob the monkey, the poor creature has been forced out of his home by bullies.
SpongeBob - a Bolivian squirrel monkey - was missing from Chessington World of Adventures in Surrey for three days.
When he came home, the female monkeys he shared with turned against him, biting and screaming when he came near.
Now he's been moved to Battersea Park Zoo in London, where it's hoped he'll get on better with his new friends.
SpongeBob was spotted playing with children on a housing estate in south London after he disappeared in July. He was returned to Chessington.
A man has been accused of stealing the monkey. He was set to appear in court on Thursday.
Spongebob has been "writing" a blog about his experiences.
It says he hopes to find a girlfriend at his new home.
"I have to turn on the charm and start again," says SpongeBob's blog.

Edgar Degas (born Hilaire-Germain-Edgar De Gas; (19 July 1834 – 27 September 1917) was a French artist famous for his paintings, sculptures, prints, and drawings. He is especially identified with the subject of dance; more than half of his works depict dancers. He is regarded as one of the founders of Impressionism, although he rejected the term, and preferred to be called a realist. He was a superb draftsman, and particularly masterly in depicting movement, as can be seen in his renditions of dancers, racecourse subjects and female nudes. His portraits are notable for their psychological complexity and for their portrayal of human isolation.

Flashback Friday again! This weeks theme is T Shirts but I have searched to find nothing! I did have a really cool Stems Tshirt that I wore to death but I was in that geeky 14 year old mood all the time and wouldn't be seen dead in a photo at that fun stage of growing up!
So here we are with Mum in one of those classic Pixie Photo shots. No idea where Dad is, working?? 1981 apparantly, I am 10, so Scott would be 8 and Ad would be 5. Please note I have not included Ad's ankles in the shot this week!
When Mum went to pick up this photo the sales person said to her "Oh you can tell which children are from your first marriage and which are from your second marriage, can't you?" Mum was so angry she said she nearly decked the lady, and if she hadn't of already paid for it she would have torn it up and walked out the shop. Go Jules! We all have the same father, just Scott and I were blessed with red hair!

Mentally ill man kills five people including children with shovel
In a horrifying incident reported from Tripura’s Khowai, a mentally ill man went on an attacking spree on Friday, attacking many people with a shoval and killing five, including his own two kids and a police official.
According to the police, the accused, identified as Pradeep Devrai, a mason by profession, was going through depression and had stopped talking to people. He all of a sudden turned violent on Friday and started attacking his family, killing his two daughters and elder brother. His wife, identified as Meena, was seriously injured but managed to evade and hide.
The accused man went out of his house and went door to door in the neighbourhood. Petrified neighbours locked themselves in their house, before someone gathered the courage to go outside to try to chase the shovel-wielding man. Others informed the police.
Meanwhile, the man kept his eyes on an autorickshaw approaching the area. Krishna Das and his son Karanbir were inside the autorickshaw. Devrai took his shovel to the two passengers, killing the father on the spot and seriously injuring the son.
Shortly, a team of police arrived at the location and tried to arrest the man. Another officer of Khowai police station, was injured in the altercation. He later succumbed to his injuries.
According to the Tripura Director General of Police, VS Yadav, “Five people including a police official died after a mason turned violent and attacked his own family members. Two of his daughters, his elder brother, a passer-by and a second officer of Khowai police stations died due to the gruesome attacks".
Pradeep Devrai was taken into police custody. Police said several people were injured during the rampage.
Further investigation into the case is underway.

If you are a Real Housewife then the feds are watching you. I can only surmise that someone in the upper echelons of government is not happy that RH-DC was taken off the air. Yet another spouse of a Housewife is under investigation. His wife has such huge spending habits that the husband has been taking out loans and even running a ponzi scheme to help pay for the lifestyle his wife demands. He should never have married her. It isn't like she is faithful anyway and on the look for someone with more money.

We went out to see the monkeys in Gibraltar. First we went to this other exhibit to eat lunch.
And we got to see animals: a butterfly, fish, and a turtle. When we were walking to the cable car, we saw a Fire Truck and Fire House. When we got to the cable car, it took 10 minutes then finally we got to the top.
We saw a little monkey sitting on the wall.
We were so tempted to touch it, but we didn’t because they told us, well the machine told us, not to because it would bite us. There was this other monkey that was behind the bars so that no one could really take his picture. So he leapt from the bars to the monkey who was getting his picture taken and pushed him off the edge. Luckily the monkey was all right. We wanted to go up the steps, but we couldn’t because there was this grumpy monkey sitting on the steps. He was grumpy because he made the step his territory and lots of people would go up it. Which made him very grumpy and he would sit there and sit there and sit there. But luckily, my sister had a water bottle and he spotted it can came down but we went up the steps before he could snatch it. But we didn’t really know, because he might have just felt bored and wanted his picture taken. Then we saw baby monkeys eating some food.
And one jumped right up – I wish I took a picture of it, but I didn’t have the camera.
We saw a Mother monkey cleaning a baby monkey and the Mother taught the child how to clean itself, so it was cleaning itself.
When we were walking down, we saw a monkey that had escaped from the top of the Rock of Gibraltar. It was in town. Well even though the monkey was wild, they put food up there so that the monkeys will stay at the top of the Rock of Gibraltar so they don’t come down when you are having dinner and steal your food and eat it.
It was fun seeing the monkeys and I like telling it to you!
Popularity: 2% [?]

Originally Posted by Mike Wilde
I have been close to pushing the button on ordering Lith developer but I have never used it and not much use in getting some for a paper that I don't know would work for it.
I have so much RC paper now, that I think I'll order some and try it. I have wanted to try lith style and I think I would dedicate my darkroom just for that, if I knew it would work with RC. I have done some research on lith and I understand it for FB paper but haven't heard very little about RC with it.
The fogged stuff was in short numbers in a couple of boxes. Not worth the effort with what was left.

Understanding how my mental health effect’s me has been a life long process. I remember my first panic attack and the absolute terror and fear it instilled in me. It made me feel as though I would not and could not survive another day. Ever since that moment I have been trying to work out what happened and what that means to me. Hope is what has brought me to where I am in my life now and has been what has driven me to better understand my mental health.
I pretty much ignored my mental health until I was in my early 20’s. Then one December evening as I attempted to write an essay for my university course I started to feel very unwell. I didn’t know what was happening but I felt a completely overwhelming sense of dread and fear. I couldn’t concentrate on a single thing. My mind was racing and I started to feel as though I was about to die, which seemed a little irrational but very real. I couldn’t breathe, I felt sick and I couldn’t calm down. It was terrifying. I didn’t know what to do, the next 6 months were a complete blur as I tried to work out what was happening. I didn’t sleep, I couldn’t eat and I started to feel desperate. I isolated myself from friends and couldn’t talk to family. I dropped out of university and work. Doctors just told me I was fine and was probably just dealing with a form anxiety or depression. It seems funny now but a turning point for me was sitting crying watching a bank advert on television and realising I have to do something now or I might not survive this. I didn’t care if I was alive or not and could not see a way out. A friend then lent me a book about panic attacks that suggested ways to cope with them. So I made the decision to focus on the panic I was feeling, it was easier to focus on one thing at a time, it felt like there was light at the end of the tunnel somehow.
I began to understand that I had to allow myself to feel the terror and panic of the anxiety I was feeling to understand it. So I began to accept my panic attacks as part of life and that’s when I started to feel calmer. I started to be able to sleep more, go out more, breathe more and it gave me the room to feel that recovery was possible. I began to struggle with depression at times but I was so relieved to not be constantly panicking. There have been many ups and downs since this time and I still deal with anxiety and depression to this day but I feel better able to cope. There were times where I self- medicated with alcohol and did things that were not conducive to my recovery. I have now reached a point where I am able to open up and talk about how I feel and where these feelings have come from. I met my beautiful wife and she helped me realise that talking about how I feel and what I want is the most important way to understand how I got here. Since then I have seen a therapist, started running, learnt about meditation and opened up to sharing my feelings. I now know that talking and listening are what really matters when discovering who I want to be and where I have come from. I never felt able to share how I felt but as my therapist said “It’s a joy to hide but a disaster not to be found”.
I now see the future full of hope, I focus less on what I fear and can’t predict and feel more able to plan for the life I want to live. I understand now that my experiences are what has shaped me and not what has held me back. I want people to know that shame is not all you have to experience; talking and sharing what you have been through can change your life and the lives of others around you.

Someone is waiting to LOVE YOU...
Hello Kerala Erotica Friends I read many stories here and I really liked every one of them and this gave me courage to share my experience with all of you. Now let me tell u about myself I am 22 male from Chennai(India) good looking & my name is satish A few months ago a Family, Husband and Wife came opposite to my house. The man name was Saahil and her wife is kavitha. She is so cute. 36-29-36, 5'8"; smooth, fair skin; beautiful, long hair; big black eyes. kavitha was just 27. In a very Short priod we become very good friend. One day I visited kavitha's house to meet her after her husband left for his office. She has just finished her bath and was very happy to see me. She hurridly prepare a coffee for me and herself and we started chatting on various matter, but on seeing her curves in her saree because on that day she was wearing a thin sari and a very short blouse that does not protect to cover her large white boobs and her sari exhibiting all the shape of round dome like butt, I was aroused and not showing any interest in chatting, she noticed it but keep on ignoring.
I asked her to bring a glass of cold water so that it can cool me little bit as I have not done sex earlier so I was little bit afraid. Till now kavitha was little bit clear with my intention and I think she was also aroused but due to my first time I was not able to make up my guts to grab her for sex. She bring water for me and intentionally drop it on my cloths but pretend that it was by mistake. She started asking sorry from me and tell me to remove my clothes so that she can iron and dry them. Till now I was quite confident that she want sex from me. I hurridly remove my cloth and gave to her, while ironing my cloth I can see a lust in her eyes by seeing me in undies. I thought that it's a right time to hit a iron before it gets cold. So I grab her from behind and give a heavy weight kiss on her lips as she was expecting this moment hurridly started co-operating with me. By this time I got enough courage and I put my arms around her to hug her tightly, her firm boobs pressed against my chest.
She started carresing my chest meanwhile, I was in heaven, then I pulled her pallu down and dug my face into her blouse, I unbuttoned her blouse and stripped her off her brassiere to get a view of her Voluptuous beauties, "Wow, they?re so cute", I said. and started sucking and squeezing them. She was moaning,"Aaaaaah, Oooooooooooooh, Love Meeeeeeeeeee". She then sat on her knees before me and pulled dowm my undies and now I was standing solidly naked in front of her.It was a great feeling to stand Nude in front a woman. She slowly moved her fingers through my Jungle and then grabbed my Rod into her hands and started jerking it. Wow, It was so great. I later Pulled her Saree off, removed her petticoat, she was now wearing only a Panty which was wet by now. She made me lie down and came over me, put her lips on mine and kissed me very passionately, my hands were messaging the soft skin of her back and her hanging Boobs were touching my chest. Then she lied by my side and said, kcm, Please take off my panty and fuck me hard". As soon as I heard this I pulled down her panty as she raised her hips. She immediately spread her legs to make room for me come between them. I climbed on her and took her huge boobs into my hands and started squeezing them, she was rolling her fingers into my hair.
She then grabbed my Prick and guided it into her tight, pink cunt. As I pushed my 6" rod into her she started moaning loudly in ecstasy. She then started jumping up and down to send my Cock deep inside her hole. I too started pumping her hard, her huge melons were in my hands and her hands were squeezing my ass cheeks. Soon I splashed my juice into her hot pussy and she cummed too. After this we laid into nude each other?s arms for about 10min, , she suddenly got up took me outside the room holding my hand. She led me on the terrace. She said," s*****, I want U to fuck me in the open, in natural surrounding". I instantly got an erection as soon as I heard this; she spread a bed sheet there and lied down. It was a very romantic day with cool breeze blowing around and enough sunlight to see ourselves naked.
I lied down on her and kissed her. She got up and made me stand and grabbed my dick and took it into her mouth. I said, "I too want to lick U kavitha?. We then got into 69 position, she took my whole rod into her mouth and I tore apart her pussy lips with my tongue and tickled her clitoris. Her salty juices were so tasty. I was about to ejaculate again, so she removed my dick from her mouth immediately. I said," kavitha, I love your cute ass, please allow me to fuck your Ass". She agreed immediately and got into doggy position. I started sending my dick into her virgin Asshole but couldn?t, as it was too tight. She stopped me and went down to kitchen and brought some oil. She applied the oil over my Cock with her soft hands. I never got such a great feeling between my thighs before, after oiling she planted a kiss on my Cock and got into Doggy again.
I put my Dick on her Asshole and pumped in to send it inside, she screamed in pain, but I didn?t stop and my whole 6 inches were in side her, she started moving to and fro, and soon her pain turned in to excitement. She loved this and I loved this too. I released my cum into her again and withdrew my Penis from her Asshole. By now we were fully exhausted. We went to bed, nude into each others arms and had a nice sleep that day.
Send comments to My E-mail ID is email@example.com
I Invite all auntys & young ladies to write to me
now iam in chennai(tamilnadu)

Self-employed workers ‘are more fulfilled’
Posted 11th May 2018 in For Businesses For Workers
People who work for themselves are more likely to feel happy and fulfilled than their counterparts who work for companies, according to new research.
The study was carried out by a team at the Universities of Sheffield and Exeter and involved 5,000 workers in the UK, US, Australia and New Zealand.
Participants came from a variety of different sectors and included people who were self-employed as well as those who were traditionally employed.
It was found that the self-employed were significantly more likely to report feeling more engaged with their work and more rewarded by it than those who worked for others.
This was despite the fact that the self-employed were also more likely to be working longer hours with less job security.
Least satisfied with their jobs were those who were employed and in non-managerial roles.
The happiness generated by self-employment was attributed to better opportunities to innovate, the achievement that came from challenging targets and pride at meeting high standards.
Writing in the journal Work, Employment and Society, co-author of the research Professor Peter Warr said: “Professional workers who are self-employed really value the autonomy they have. They really get to use their own expertise, so don’t seem to mind working long hours. They have the freedom to innovate, express their own views, have influence beyond their own role and compete with other companies and people.”
It comes after research by Crunch found that self-employed people work an average of 14 more hours per week than traditional workers.

Is this the unluckiest man in the Canary Islands?
The owner of the car that fell into the sea from the cargo hold of a ferry travelling from La Gomera to Tenerife on Saturday, has already experienced bad luck after losing his home in 2021 when the eruption of the volcano in La Palma buried it under lava.
Matías explained in an interview on Cope Canarias radio that he usually travels in the Gold Class when on a boat, which means his vehicle is parked near the exit ramp to be one of the first to leave the ferry, one of the advantages of booking this class.
He assured that he had followed all safety instructions, he had parked his 4x4 with the wheel turned and the handbrake activated, but as soon as the ferry left the San Sebastian port, the waves hit the boat and caused the incident.
Upon realising that a car had fallen into the water from the commotion around him, he said that he looked out and saw that it was his.
"I was in shock. For a moment, I couldn't remember if I had left my dogs at home or if they were in the car." Fortunately, the dogs were not with him and had stayed at home, although he claimed that if they had been in the car, he would have jumped into the sea to save them.
Matías makes it clear that it was the waves that caused the accident, although he admits that there could have been human error as well. He downplays the incident by stating that "they are unforeseen situations," without mentioning the possibility of suing the company that owns the ferry.
In the interview, Matías kept his sense of humour and said that he now has a house covered in lava and a car submerged in the sea. "Except for winning the lottery, I’ve got everything," he joked.
Other articles that may interest you...

*the condition of having an abnormally (Typically dangerously) low body temperature.
It wasn't supposed to happen like this. Ben wasn't supposed to be in the water at all, they were warned that an ambulance couldn't easily get to their location and yet he ignored all warning and jumped on in, 'for the investigation' he protested when he was dragged into the back of the SUV by the rest of the team. He could have sworn he'd seen something on the thermal imaging camera, and even though Devin said he couldn't see anything, he jumped on in anyway.
"You're an idiot!" Devin protested loudly, as he wrapped his friend up in the second blanket they had in the car with them. They didn't expect to have someone in the water and so they didn't bring anything warmer than a few blankets and the coats on their back.
"I know, I know. I'm sorry." Ben shook a little at the feeling of Devin trying to warm him up, the younger man was rubbing his hands up and down his arms to keep him warm, because none of the people in the car wanted his condition to get any worse.
"You will be if we can't get your temperature up before this gets more serious." Devin scolded, the other two in the car were being completely silent because they didn't want to interrupt the argument in that back seats. "I can't believe that you just went in! You're so stupid."
"All I need is a warm drink." Ben told him, he'd seen more than a few hypothermia cases in his time and he knows he should only start to worry if he gets more confused than he already is. Until then everything is alright, well alright in the sense he has blankets and will have warm drinks when he gets to the place they're staying to keep him alright until the ambulance gets to him.
"Can you drive faster please!" Devin noticed something that nobody else did, with his hands still on Ben's arms, he'd stopped shaking. Meaning this hypothermia was getting worse.
When they got back to the inn they were staying at Ben was wrapped in two blankets, a coat and a scarf that Devin had lent him. His hypothermia was staying around the same, moderately bad but not severe yet, and yet Devin was still worried as hell about him.
"I'm staying with you. Until the ambulance gets here at least." Devin said as he got his settled on the bed with not only his but Devin's duvet on top of him. He also had a warm cup of water in his hands because Devin didn't want to risk caffeine making Ben dehydrated.
"I'm fine Dev really." It was Ben's turn to protest now, he didn't want Devin worrying about him to much. The younger man was such a worrier, but he was a cute worrier.
"You've got hypothermia Ben, you're an idiot with hypothermia." Devin smiled sort of sadly at him, the older man looked so small wrapped in all those covers despite the fact he's a head taller than Devin and always made jokes about it with him.
"Yeah, I am aren't I." Ben chuckled and encouraged the younger man to sit on the bed and stop pacing about in front of the TV. "Come here." Ben beckoned with his left hand, and Devin stepped closer until he was on the edge of the bed, he didn't want to take up to much room on the bed.
"I don't bite, come here let's watch a film together." Ben was already flicking through the channels to find a semi decent film to watch, and Devin was still on the edge of the bed contemplating how close he should get to Ben.
After an hour of watching the film Devin was so close he could feel Ben's skin getting hotter by the minute, meaning his core temperature was hopefully going up. And the better thing is that Ben was feeling better by the minute, maybe Devin being so close was helping.
"You know I really appreciate you still being here." Ben told Devin as the film went into some boring dialogue that neither man was listening to. "You're a real good friend."
"A friend, yeah I'm a good one of those aren't I." Devin's mood got really melancholy all of a sudden at being called Ben's friend once again.
"Are you alright? Something I said." Ben joked, but suddenly the whole atmosphere in the room got sad and it was obviously something was upsetting Devin.
"I'm always the friend, never the boyfriend." Devin confessed, swinging his legs over the edge of the bed and away from Ben, because being around him after he confessed he wasn't ever the one anyone loved was a bit hard.
"Right, you'd be a great boyfriend Dev, you just need to find the right person." Ben was always the one to go to for advice but right now he was making Devin feel worse because he felt like he'd already found the right person but the person wouldn't even see him in the same light.
"What if I've already found the right person and he doesn't even see men like that." Devin blurted out, then regretted it the second he said it, there it was 'he'. Even Devin had never admitted it to himself before but here he was about say 'I like you' to the man he was in bed with.
"Wow, I didn't know you were, Ah..." Ben was really not sure what to say right now.
"I'm bisexual, and I may have something to tell you." Devin started quietly, so Ben could barely hear him, "Other than the bisexual thing. " Devin chuckled nervously. "That guy I like, he's uh, you." He whispered the last part, and Ben had to lean in closer to hear him a little better.
"who?" Ben was curious because he genuinely hadn't heard what Devin had said.
"You! It's you okay, everything is you." The younger man yelled, he jumped off of the bed angrily. He waved his hands angrily like a child who wasn't getting his own way, after all the guy he likes has just been told he likes him and he hasn't got any sort of facial expressions whatsoever.
"Me? Me, " Ben processed it for a second, "Devin, come here" He was pacing again, and Ben just wanted to make him stop. "I said come here." He was being more forceful now because he was starting to miss the body heat. Lets face it, just because he was wrapped up warm doesn't mean he didn't still hypothermia.
Devin just sat down on the edge like before, and Ben was forced to sit closer to make up for the distance. The blue bed sheets were getting caught as Ben sat directly behind Devin to try and get him to speak and look to him.
"Devin, I'm not just going to ignore what you just told me. Turn around and look at me." Ben said forcefully, and waiting until Devin turned to look at him. He had never noticed how good Devin's eyes looked in the light, and how kissable he looked.
"Look Ben I understand you don't feel the same, just tell me and stop dragging it out." Devin wasn't looking up at Ben because he knew he was going to be let down, and it probably wasn't going to be gentle either, no straight man wants his best friend telling him he loves him. Especially when they work together, and go on trips to investigate paranormal sightings together.
"Let me finish, No I don't necessarily love you back," Ben paused and Devin looked like he was going to throw up, "But I can learn to." He gave him a dreamy look, the younger man really was hot, and he really deserved someone who can treat him right. And Ben could most definitely treat him right.
"Don't joke about this Ben, I'm way to tired to be joking around tonight." Devin really did look tired, to tired to have a man confess his love for him.
"I'm not, but if you don't want to listen then we can wait until after I'm not freezing." Ben smiled, and took a chance kissing him on the cheek.
"Yeah let's do that." Devin blushed, god he couldn't even explain how much he wanted this but he wasn't about to take advantage of Ben when he was still shivering in bed covered in blankets and coats.
The ambulance arrived early the next morning, and because of both of the mens knowledge of hypothermia, Ben's condition hadn't gotten worse and so he was given the once over and told to keep warm for the next few days and that he should be fine otherwise. There was nothing they could do for him, because they said that he was taken care of so well they wouldn't be able to do anything else, and so they left Devin and Ben in the room together once more.
This time Ben was less confused and Devin was less hostile, so they both sat on the bed together waiting for Jael to come to the room and see about when they should get back. And when she did come into the room she smiled at the sight of both of the men sat on the bed together.
"So how do you feel today?" She asked as she took the chair from the small desk in the room and placed it at the end of the bed, Devin and Ben felt like they were being interogated; it certainly wasn't a nice feeling.
"I'm absolutely fine, still cold a little but other than that fine. But the ambulance crew told me to keep warm for the next couple of days. So I think that we should stay for a few more days, look through the footage and come to a conclusion. Maybe even you guys can go out and finish the night investigation." Ben felt like he was being scolded from the side by Devin but he kept his eyes on Jael at the end of the bed.
"Right, we can stay a few more days, and me and Devin can go and complete the night investigation if we don't get the evidence we hoped for. But we should look through the footage first." Jael suggested, she had her bag with her which meant they would be looking through footage for the next few hours, good because Ben needed a distraction from the man pressed against his side radiating warmth.
Now that Ben had proved he wasn't confused anymore he and Devin could finally have that real conversation both of them wanted to have. Ben could make his own decisions and he would happily choose to date Devin even if the younger man thought it was just Ben's confused state making him feel things for him.
"So... Now I can make my own decisions, come here and kiss me." Ben insisted, coming out from under the covers to close the distance between him and Devin.
"This better not be a joke." Devin said stepping closer to him, sitting on the edge of the bed and closed the last part of th gap between them so that they were kissing. THEY WERE KISSING, Devin had never felt so woozy before, and Ben well, Ben was thinking about how this felt like all the pieces of the puzzle were finally coming together.
This all happened because of Ben jumping into cold water for an investigation, and getting hypothermia, and it ended with Devin and Ben in the same bed kissing until their bodies felt numb and pleasantly warm.

Before Jewish-run Civil Rights, I don't know of anyone that didn't have blacks as friends, or classmates or co-workers. But Civil Rights changed many blacks. Civil Rights and busing and everything connected with desegregation, according to Jewish professor Robert Weissberg, was run by Jews. They put young female blacks in housing projects, fed them, paid them and they could raise as many children as they wanted as long as NO man was around.
This incubator produced blacks that were not as dignified as earlier blacks, or as they were called, Colored. People can be nice to anyone that is also nice. But these blacks became violent because Civil Rights told them that Whites were the reason they didn't have as much as 'whites.' They were told they could be violent and black violence exploded.
In conclusion, American blacks were used by the Jews to soften and sensitize American citizens not to make life better for blacks, because it actually created hostility between blacks and whites, but because Jews wanted protection. They didn't want to be kicked out of another nation. Rather, it gave these new 'created' American blacks who know nothing now but injustice and violence, a reason to destroy. In fact, because of the Jewish-run media, many non-blacks are now also violent. Jewish 'training films' violent movies, video games, movies, comic books, magazines, books, filthy rap music and everything connected with what people see, read and hear are run by Jews.
It is not ALL blacks but the Ferguson blacks are these offspring. Do the research.

Cheyenne Smith leads our Lexington, South Carolina which meets at 6:30 PM EST on the 2nd and 4th Thursday of every month. Cheyenne is a stay at home mom to her beautiful 2 year old who came after 2.5 years of waiting. She has been trying for her second miracle baby for two years now. She has a small shop and makes faith-based shirts and bracelets. Cheyenne decided to become a leader after seeing how much this ministry has helped her become closer to God during her journey.

Back in July my daughters bought me some rather nice lilac coloured leggings for running. I was really pleased with them at the time, but didn't wear them as none of my tops were even faintly going to look ok with them. We eventually tracked down a nice Elle Sport top - bargain price on the end of rack in TKMaxx. But then of course the weather was too hot to cope with long leggings.
Today I looked out the window and decided it was time to get my birthday suit on. It seemed quite overcast so the long leggings would be ideal (especially after my chilly run earlier in the week). I knew exactly where everything was, so there was no chance of the Faff Monster striking again, and I was ready and raring to go in no time at all. Mr Razouski did a double take as I finished my stretches, "I thought you said you were getting into your birthday suit!" he grumbled, disappointment showing on his face. AS IF...!
Then I was out the door and heading down the steep hill towards the town. It would be an urban route but taking a few parks on my way. The first, Brantwood Park, was fairly empty although a few young lads hanging out by one of the benches were sprawled across the path. I swerved to avoid them, stumbled, and then heard a derogatory comment about my running style. Having no gremlins with me today meant I was feeling rather confident, so I ran back the few steps and a voice emerged from my mouth saying, "Well I bet you couldn't run as fast as me." What was I thinking..? Or maybe I wasn't thinking at all. And me in my birthday suit and all.
Well they chuckled and then one got up, "OK, I'll race you to the gate." Me..? Mad..? Probably... Anyway off I sprinted as fast as I could and was surprised when I got to the gate to see him more than a few paces behind me, and his friends all shouting RESPECT to me. I felt proud if rather out of breath, returned his proffered high five, and was on my way with a very gentle recovery jog.
As I approached the next park the sun was well and truly out, and I was beginning to warm up in my long leggings. The temperature was rising - not just the ambient temperature, but mine too. Could this be the result of the sprinting, or was this just another of those middle age moments we women-of-a-certain age have to experience? Fortunately there were several large trees dotted around, so I tacked between them, seeking out the shadows, and narrowly missing being hit by falling conkers (or were the squirrels throwing them at me?) Running alongside the lake and over the bridge I tried to convince myself that the water would make me feel cooler.
4k done and I was out of the park and back along the road, very little shade and another 5k to complete. This was tough going and I was beginning to wonder of Mr Razouski had been right, and that I would have been better off in my actual birthday suit as my legs were getting way too hot. It was turning into a beautiful sunny day, and I was turning into a not very beautiful sweaty lady. I struggled with the next two kilometres, with sweat starting to drip down my forehead, and a distinctly soggy feeling developing at my knees and buttocks. But I wasn't going to stop, and concentrating on trying to activate my glutes helped to take my mind of the internal combustion.
The final park was in sight, and I just needed to get around the play area and I would be finished. Distracted by the parents and children I managed to keep going, while inside I was mulling over the fact that out of 6 parents only one was actually interacting with their little cherub, while the other 5 all had their attention fixed on their mobile phones. At last Mapmyrun informed me that I'd run 9km, my target for today and I drew to a halt.
Mr R was summoned to come and collect me, as I was now too far from home to walk back. Bless him, he's a good egg really, although he did suggest that maybe he should keep a towel in the car, like our friends do for their dog, as I was dripping all over his leather upholstery. But I'd completed the 9k in 49.37 with an average pace of 5.31, so I think I deserved to be a little sweaty.

The job was simple but challenging...to create a logo to headline a professional website where hip, cool millennials could come for pre-med advice, resources, answers and purchases. GraphicSupply was the only designer who came in with one solid design, worked on that design and was confident enough that it would do the job. Other designers threw up to 10 logos at me, many without having the necessary appeal. It was nice working with a designer who took the concept and NAILED it. Then sat back and waited for me to give him some assignments to tweak it, and won the contest. I'd work with GraphicSupply again!

Wazirabad [Pakistan] : Ex-Pakistani Prime Minister Imran Khan has been reportedly injured in a firing incident near his container during a long march he was carrying out to protest against the ruling coalition, reported ARY News.
The incident took place when the Haqeeqi March entered Wazirabad. Following the firing, there was a stampede during the march. Everyone including the PTI leaders on the container panicked.
At the time of the firing, the convoy had reached near Zafarali Khan Chowk, reported ARY News. Imran Khan was reportedly injured as shots were fired near his long march container.
The media reports quoting sources said that there are reports of 5 people injured in the firing incident. Those injured in the firing are being shifted to the hospital in ambulances, it added.
Furthermore, ARY News while quoting sources said the alleged shooter has been detained. (ANI)

Zeeland Student With Down Syndrome Hits Home Run With Support From Byron Center Opponent [Video]
An unforgettable moment on a baseball field last week as a Zeeland Christian eighth-grader with Down Syndrome was given an opportunity to bat and hit a home run with the support of his team, his opponent and all in attendance.
The moment took some planning. It began when Zeeland's coach Chris Lowe, who is also a teacher at the school, contacted Byron Center Christian's coach Kevin and asked if they'd be willing to allow Jack from Zeeland to have the team's first at bat.
Jack is an eighth-grader with Down Syndrome. He has attended many of his team's baseball games and helped as a "manager" but he has not played. Byron Center Christian was thrilled to be a part of the plan and helped to make it a special moment.
When the time came for Jack to bat strong support could be seen and heard from fans of both teams. Jack was given multiple swings before finally connecting. It was a short grounder in foul territory, but Jack took off running. He kept running to second base, third base and was waved home. At home plate Jack put on a serious athletic display with a huge head-first slide. He was safe and was immediately mobbed by his teammates. Everyone in attendance was cheering loudly in support of Jack.
Jack was given a game ball by his team after the game. Byron Center Christian also gave him a ball. It was a ball signed by the entire team. It's a ball that made Jack smile from ear-to-ear as he showed it off to everyone at school in the morning.
Zeeland Christian's coach Chris Lowe wrote a letter to Byron Center Christian Administrator John Kramer thanking them for their role. Lowe wrote, "Our players were ready for this game to be an opportunity for them to celebrate a beloved classmate on the field in a manner that would make him feel loved and like a true member or our team. But, in no way could I, our team, Jack's family and friends have imagined the way that your team and fans would come alongside, and even lead in honoring him."
An amazing display of sportsmanship by all involved. It's a moment which those who know and love Jack will never forget and a moment which has inspired thousands who have never met him.
Dear BCCS staff,
I just wanted to take a minute to write a note expressing my appreciation to your 8th grade baseball team and coaches. My name is Chris Lowe, and I teach at Zeeland Christian and coach the baseball team here. Yesterday, we had the privilege of playing your team (for a 2nd time...because we enjoyed playing them so much the first).
I had contacted Kevin about a student of ours who has come to several of our games as a "manager" and is a crucial member of our 8th grade body. His name is Jack, and he has Down's Syndrome. Before promising Jack, I asked Kevin if he could have the first at bat of our team, as it would make his 8th grade year that much more special. Kevin more than obliged, even saying how much he and his players looked forward to playing a role in that goal.
But (and I'm still emotional reflecting on this), the response was more that I could have ever hoped. Jack came up to bat, and the young man who was pitching did everything he could to make sure Jack got a hit. Jack was his usual self, adding a nice "waggle", calling his "big hit" in advance, even switching sides of the plate:). Eventually, Jack made contact. It was a foul ball, but in his mind, he had just crushed it. He took off around the bases, and, your team made sure he got around the bases without making him feel patronized or like a charity case.
But...it didn't end there. Even though the scoreboard didn't show it, Kevin made sure that he made Jack feel "counted", yelling to his team to get their game faces on since they were now "down a run" :). And...in the coolest moment...the entire team (your team) signed a ball and as a team presented it to Jack after the following inning. We set aside the game ball for him, but, it was the ball signed by your kids that he was showing everyone this morning at school, going from room to room with a smile from ear to ear.
Our players were ready for this game to be an opportunity for them to celebrate a beloved classmate on the field in a manner that would make him feel loved and like a true member or our team. But, in no way could I, our team, Jack's family and friends have imagined the way that your team and fans would come alongside, and even lead in honoring him.
Our theme as a school this year is "Selfless", based on Colossians 3:17. It was humbling to have such a concrete example shown to Jack and to us by a group of students and fans that didn't know him beforehand. My comment to my team after the game is that none of them would ever remember the score or how they performed, but all of them would remember how they felt when he crossed the plate and looked at them. And, based on the genuine reaction of the Byron Center folks, I am pretty sure they won't forget it either.
Thank you for all you have done and continue to do to encourage your students to be selfless. Their love for others and ultimately for God was so evident to Jack, our team, and so many who came to watch. Please thank them for being the hands and feet of Christ yesterday. It was humbling to be on the "same team".

iYogi accepted a counteroffer from me to go to Sidney, NY to according to the work order to back up some customers files. When I arrived I found out from the customer that iYogi had sent a tech previously to reload her operating system on her HP laptop. In doing so the previous tech reformatted the hard drive and didn't back up her geneology photos. She wished to have these photos restored to her computer. I had to be the one to tell it couldn't be done without special software or sending the hard drive to a company that performs that work. I was there for two hours and did other tasks for the lady that she requested me to do. I told iYogi when I called in what was going on and closed out the job. When I called iYogi after a week to find out why the job hadn't been closed out and I hadn't received my pay for the $100 that was agreed on I got a run around. [continued below]....
..... At first I was told it would be closed out that day and then the next day I received a call from Vansh Tandon who asked if I would take a payment of $60 since I wasn't able to complete the job. I told him no since it wasn't my fault and he said I would get my payment of $100. Then a day later Eva Sherpa called me asking the same question and I told her the same answer. She said she understood and I would receive the $100 payment. This was in February, 2013 and I haven't received the payment and the job hasn't been closed out by iYogi. I also talked to a person from Work Market that was going to put a note on the job notes and talk to iYogi about it but as far as I know Work Marked had done neither one.
About you? Ripoff Report
A business' first
line of defense on the Internet. If your business isClick here now..
willing to make a commitment to customer satisfaction
Does your business have a bad reputation?Corporate Advocacy Program™
Fix it the right way.
Set the record straight:Arbitration Program
SEO Reputation Management at its best!

Submit your FML story
- - Please note that spam and nonsensical stories will result in you being blocked from accessing FML.
About delphina : Fuckin' epic.
How depressing, no badges acquired at all. :/
Today, I broke up with my boyfriend. After three long weeks of him ignoring me and cancelling out on time we were supposed to spend with each other. He looked at me with the most confused look on his face. Then he says ''Are you serious? I was planning the perfect day to ask you to marry me'' FML
Today, I decided to introduce my girlfriend to my parents by telling them that we were gonna have a very special guest for dinner. While my mom was preparing the meal she asked, "What does he like?" I'm straight. My parents thought different. FML
Today, I was swimming in the ocean with my best friend and a giant wave came and knocked off the bottom of my bikini. My friend told me that she would go get another bottom so I could walk onto the very crowded beach. She left me for half an hour, laughing from the shore with her entire family. FML
Today, I was sifting through my parents old home movies. I put in one and was horrified to see my parents having sex. I immediately ejected the tape and looked at the label. It said "Bermuda, 1989". They've told me I was conceived in Bermuda around that time. I've seen my own conception. FML
Today, my phone rang while I was home alone. When I picked up, all I could hear was heavy breathing. Convinced it was one of my friends playing a joke, I said loudly, "Get off the phone, you fucker, and don't call back!" It turned out it was my grandma. She had been having a stroke. FML
Today, I was out on a date with a guy. His hot co-worker came to have a beer with us, and I knew my best friend would think he was gorgeous. I wanted to take a picture of him without knowing, so i tried to hold up my phone and pretend to be texting. The flash went off. FML
Today, I fell asleep in history class. I was dreaming about my history teacher. When I woke up everyone stared at me rather weirdly and the teacher wasn't there. Turns out I was moaning my history teachers name through my sleep. FML
Today, I texted my college boyfriend to tell him how terrible I felt about cheating. He replied saying he was so relieved because he had been cheating on me with a girl in his dorm. I was talking about my math exam. FML
Today, I went to a party and the cops came to bust the party. I jumped out the window of a second story house in order to avoid getting arrested. I broke my leg in three places and got a concussion. The cops let everyone go with a warning. FML
Today, I jokingly had kinky conversation via text message with a good guy friend. He was pretending to be a stranger and was fishing for compliments and asked to have a foursome. Turns out, my friend lost his phone and I spent 2 hours talking to a pervert about what lingerie I was wearing. FML
Today, I was filling out paperwork with my new doctor. During the questionnaire, she asked if I was sexually active. I said yes. She then asked, "What do you do?" I told her I normally did vaginal, but sometimes anal. She blushed and started to laugh. She was asking where I worked. FML
Friday 21 November 2014

A 17-year-old schoolgirl at a top public school has collapsed and died.
The teenager was a boarder at St Swithun's School for girls in Winchester , when she was taken ill at 1.30pm
She was taken by ambulance to the Royal Hampshire County Hospital in Winchester but died an hour later.
Police were called to the school but confirmed the death is not being treated as suspicious.
It is understood the girl did not have any underlying health problems and the coroner has been informed.
Spokesman for the school Simon Mayes said: ''This has been a complete shock as she was only 17 and we are currently talking with her parents.''
St Swithun's School, whose headmistress is Jane Gandee, charges £9,070 a term for boarders and educates girls aged 11 to 18 on a boarding and day basis.
It has about 440 pupils of whom about 200 are boarders. It also runs a co-educational prep school.

Sorry this is so late. We were at the beach for most of our P-day. But, I will get to that! This week has been an emotional roller-coaster. Although, I shouldn't complain too much. I know of some missionaries who are going through really rough things! I will take my own trials, thank you!
Last Monday, we ended up not going to the beach with other missionaries. Instead, we just hung out as companions. It was fun.We then had dinner with the McArthurs and read scriptures with Sister McArthur. It was great.
On Tuesday, we did some training and finding before lunch and then going to district meeting. It was a really good meeting! After the meeting, we went and saw Nicolette and taught her some of the commandments. She is so much fun to talk to. After that, we went and saw Nancy Jo. She was the less-active who came to Church on Sunday who I had been trying to meet since I came to Santa Cruz! Anyways, we met with her and got to know her better. We plan on seeing her regularly now. :) After that, we did some more finding before having dinner at home. (For finding, we have been looking at parks in our area and figuring out which ones would be good to go to to talk to people.) We then went and visited a member named Fether. That was really fun. We plan on seeing them again soon, too.
Wednesday started out hard. We had our morning schedule, plus training, and then all of our plans were falling apart. Nobody we wanted to see was home and the appointment we had cancelled. So, after eating our feelings, we decided to go to a park and see if we could talk to someone before our next appointment. We were walking around this park when I saw a guy sitting on a bench. I felt that I needed to talk to him. I hesitated and walked past him. It then felt like the Spirit was saying "Sara, go talk to him! Right now!" Finally, I told Sister Kelly that I felt we needed to talk to him. So, we turned around and I started talking to him. We had a lesson with him and set up an appointment for this week! You know what that means? We got a new investigator!!!!!!!! His name is Michael. After that, we were on cloud nine, and went to our appointment with Rhonda, Phillip, and Joseph. We shared a message with them about families. After that, we did more finding and then went to dinner with the Kings (I love them!). After dinner, we called former investigators to see if they wanted to meet up. It was a very good day! :D
On Thursday, we were busy. After training, we went and visited Glenna and shared a really awesome talk about families ("What Matters Most Is What Lasts Longest" by M Russell Ballard. Look it up if you want!). We then went with a member named Phyllis to see Adelaide. We talked to Adelaide about the Spirit. Something fun happened though, when we left that appointment. I gave Phyllis a hug and told her that one of my grandmas was named Phyllis. She smiled and said that she would be my "other grandma"! :D I thought that was so cute! We then tried to visit a member named Rina. We set up an appointment to see her this week. We then went and saw Renee (I love her!). We answered her questions about Gospel Doctrine and then talked more about nerdy language things and twin stories. :) After that, we had dinner at home and went to visit Sister Crain. She asked if we can do the missionary lessons with her, so we taught her the Restoration. It went very well!
On Friday, we had service at the soup kitchen. Sister Kelly and I were pouring drinks for the homeless people and helping them out. I went to go get some more water in my pitcher when all of the sudden someone starts yelling for the woman in charge of the kitchen (turned out to be Sister Kelly)! I rush over there, because it happened by our drink station, and a woman was lying on the floor. Apparently, she had started shaking and slipped off her chair. Her sons were there, holding her. The director of the kitchen rushed over and told me to go call 9-1-1, so I ran into the back where the phone was and called 9-1-1 for the first time in my life. Once again, I also learned that human beings are USELESS in a crisis! People were just standing there! Come on, help or move out of the way! Anyways, the police and an ambulance came and I went back to the drink station. In the end, the woman refused to go to the hospital and stormed out of the kitchen. The police stayed to ask people questions (they didn't talk to us). After that, Sister Kelly and I went and got ourselves a treat! I don't think either one of us calmed down for at least an hour! Thankfully, all we had right after that was weekly planning. After weekly planning, we set up some appointments with people and then had dinner with the Hayes. It was fun. We then did some more finding. It was a pretty hectic day! :)
On Saturday, we spent the afternoon and evening in SLV. We tried to go see Alice, but she was still in Oakland (she went through the temple that day). We then went and saw Sister Dallenbach. She is doing about the same as usual. Her dog, Gigi, is doing better, though. We helped her put puzzles together for a couple of hours. :) We then had a dinner appt. on the other side of the valley and up a mountain. I got so carsick! :( We had a great dinner there, though. I took a Dramamine for the way down the mountain! After that, we texted the ward mission leaders for Sunday and reminded Michael about church.
On Sunday, we only had six hours of church. Yay! We went to SLV for sacrament meeting. I like church in SLV. You never know what is going to happen. :) I was asked to bear my testimony. Thankfully, I had had a little warning! After that, we raced back to Santa Cruz for lunch and then we went to branch council. We texted Michael about Church, but he never texted back. We waited for him before sacrament meeting, but he never came. He did text a couple hours later apologizing for not coming, though! :) The rest of church went well, too. We talked about feeling the spirit and about keeping the sabbath day holy. After that, we did some training and then went to the Martins for dinner (I love them! Sister Kelly always teases me because apparently I say I love everyone. I only say it for people I love though!). We talked to them about sharing the gospel with their neighbors. We also found out that a French couple just moved in to their neighborhood and Sister Martin wants to have them and us over for dinner! :D That would be so cool! What if we got to teach them?! :D
Today was really fun. One of the people Elder Staker came down and brought the Livermore Zone, too. We got to play on the beach and have lunch with them. I got to see Sister Lytle and Sister Pattison, too! :D President and Sister Mella also came down. It was so much fun. I got sunburned, though (haha).
Well, I better run. We still have some last minute P-day things to do and then we have dinner.
Love you lots!!!!

It's early in the morning. The early that's almost too early for most people. Reflecting on myself is detecting satisfaction with the way my son understands me. He knows I'm bipolar and at times I've got extra weight in my shoulder. As if I'm constantly being ran over by a boulder and when I feel that, towards him, I couldn't be much colder. I apologize to him and he tells me he understands. It's getting easier to communicate with him due to him understanding that it's not anger towards him that I pursue. This bond we're building is what I must insue.
“If you don't explain to your children why you're angry they might think you're angry at them. This could build a wall really fast.”

Disclosure: True Blood is owned by Charlaine Harris and Allen Ball.
Pre-Edit Count – 2,940 Words
Song I listened to for this chapter: Feel Again by OneRepublic.
Godric goes over and kisses her. He looks down at her and then murmurs into her ear something. When she grins, he looks over at Eric. “Come on. Tonight we woo our little one. Send what you need out, and also send notice that Bill has disobeyed both of our orders. Let’s shake the tree and see what is going to fall out.”
Eric’s face soon smirks, and he honestly tells Godric, “It is truly a great thing for you to return, Master. The fun has just begun…”
Godric sends to Eric that their gifts are here, and Eric’s eyes light up as he heads over to the wall.
Still in bed, Sookie gives Godric a sideways look as she asks, “Gifts? Didn’t you guys give me stuff yesterday?”
Godric chuckles as he kneels on the bed beside her.
Sookie looks up and is again blown away by the man in front of her. There would be no way if someone looked at him now that they would think he was too young of a man for her. Godric is in black jeans, sitting so low on his hips that his treasure trail is shown completely with him not having a shirt, nor the fact that he frequently goes commando as does Eric. Basically, his body is on display for her to view. His tats, black on his pale skin, and she can’t help but fall in love with him all over, as her hand reaches out to traces the Chieftain collar on his collar.
He cannot help the smirk that breaks on his face as he feels his mate’s awe, lust, and love, as well as her soft touch. Always love. And he will never do a single thing to harm it now that he knows what it feels not only to lose her but Eric.
But his intention worked, he had wanted to get her attention from Eric. Who for once is dressed – Eric often walks around naked, and had gotten Sookie in the habit with all the times they had been together. As he had stated more than once around Godric, he and Godric know her body probably better than she does, so why hide it?
If it hadn’t been for his talk with Jason, Eric would probably be more undressed than Godric. And certainly, more than Sookie is right now. She was only wearing a shirt of Eric’s that hung off her shoulder. She often steals their shirts if they ever think that someone may come in. The nest knows of their sleeping habits, but Sookie told them once that even the thought of Jason walking in on her is enough to make her feel nauseated. So since Jason is below with them, Sookie had snagged Eric’s shirt to sleep in. She liked his better because they are always huge on her. She loves the feeling of being surrounded by his scent, as well as how easy it will be for her mates to remove them if needed.
Seeing his mate sitting up in bed, her shoulder bare as the blankets are pooled around her waist, Eric is soon crawling up the bed, their gifts having been deposited on the bedside, except for a necklace in his hands. He had picked out the piece and gotten it to gift it to her, as Godric will be gifting her the others. And they will continue this, for a long time. Their little mate deserves this, and they have failed her in the past by not giving her this evidence of their adoration before. But they are fixing their mistake now. Their little mate will be covered with jewels, the finest silks, have their rooms perfumed with the most exquisite flowers.
Even if she protests, she knows better how Mates work. Her grandmother had tried to teach her, but it took Eric, Pam, and Godric teaching her Vampire traditions to straighten her out.
Sadly, her mind reading had not helped when Adele had taught her things, since she was reading about the times that Adele had grown up in, not taking the lessons in the meaning. It had only been refined and reinforced by Adele’s older friends who had their own thoughts at the tea times they had done when she was younger to teach her manners.
Thankfully, she had asked Pam how to accept a gift from Eric when it was a way of being a ‘kept’ woman. The outrage from everyone had corrected the mistake, with Adele herself telling her young Granddaughter that there was a difference between the two, no matter who thought what.
To Eric and Godric, Sookie deserves all this and more. And they are going to take this time to show her their love. That it has a side effect of showing up Bill, well, that is just the cherry on top. And what a pleasurable cherry it will be as they can finally do as their instincts and needs tell them to treat their little one.
Sookie is still looking at Godric, as he leans forward to kiss his little mate, unbuttoning Eric’s black silk shirt from her, pushing it off her shoulders as Eric reaches around her and puts his gift to her on her neck, kissing on the back where he joined it. It looks as good as he imagined it would on her. Later he will buy her one that she can wear all the time, this time, he wanted her to wear it as they take her out.
Softly sighing from the pleasure she is getting from his lips alone, Sookie leans her head back on Eric. As she does this, Godric’s hands are moving up slowly her body, cupping her breasts, and bringing one up for him to bestow little kisses around it, circling until he reaches her aureole, then he purrs out to her as he licks it slowly, feeling it shrink as her nipple hardens. When he reaches her nipple, he suckles on it, watching as his other mate’s hand takes her other breast from his hand, pulling gently on the other nipple.
Eric is kissing her neck, tracing the outline of his gift on her neck. He loves it, it reminded him of a torc from his time, adorned with the fire of the very stars gracing her neck. It is having the crosses on it that she adores it, the lines are all diamonds, but the swirls are different shades of diamonds making a subtle color change in them. Godric had chuckled when he purchased it, telling Eric he didn’t leave much for him to adorn their mate with to accompany it. But he had agreed that it did signify Eric in the design, and that was what they had tried for.
He left her breast trading it for her other one, as Eric’s hand moved down her body, and is soon lightly running through the light dusting of blond hair between her legs. Taking a deep breath of her beloved scent, Godric closes his eyes to make sure he imprints the scent, the almost flavor he has from it in his mind, as he worships her breasts. It had helped him when he had been away from her in Dallas, and though they will not be leaving this time, it is a habit he indulges in.
Godric had also told Eric they need to start preparing her body for mating. Yes, they are aware that they will change her, but neither want her to feel any excess pain and had discussed options for when it happens. But on the off chance that both are not able to remember their plans, they will start preparing her. It won’t hurt her, and will only start adding the pleasure of the night. Of course, it will help calm their own needs to have their mate, to have these times of getting her ready. It is as if the vampire sides of them need some verification that they will be continuing the mating process.
He just hopes they can hold themselves back. Both of them are feeling the need to claim their little one, to make sure that none can take her from them. However, they both admit that it was partly because, in the vision, Eric had taken Sookie completely, claiming her as his. Eric’s body wants that and Godric wants what he had been denied in that timeline. But neither Godric nor Eric is sure what that had done to their plan, since by then, Eric had decided (and rightly so according to Godric) that Sookie had been more important than a plan that, at that point, was hurting her.
So, they are going to do what they can. If they end up taking her before the mating, then they do. No more time for regrets, the most important lesson they had learned through Godric’s vision, is that nothing is worth losing each other. Nor can they wait on plans, since there is so much ahead of them. The three of them can only survive what is to come by working together, being of one mind on what needs to be done; not worrying that their passions will cause issues.
Soon though, all thoughts are driven out of their minds as Sookie arches into them, pressing her breasts more firmly into Godric’s waiting mouth as Eric slowly strokes her, moving just enough to adjust and have his thumb on her clit, his first finger to slowly move inside of her. This makes Sookie slowly shudder from the attentions of her mates on her, their bond allowing them all to feel each other’s arousal.
Smirking at his mates and their faces mirroring the pleasure they were all feeling, Godric reaches over and grabs the earrings he bought to match her necklace. His mouth kissing and tugging at her earlobe before moving below it, allowing him to attach the earrings. He kisses the spot behind her ear that gives her goosebumps all over as Eric adds another finger to stretch her.
When he is done, Godric leans back and looks at their naked mate in front of him, being pleasured by Eric with nothing but a ring of fire around her neck and the new adornments to her ears flashing as she is moving with Eric’s fingers.
He leans past Sookie and kisses Eric, his lips nipping at his other mate, as Godric feels Sookie undulating between them. He feels it as she unbuttons his pants and her small warm hand grips him. He moans in Eric’s mouth and slowly, carefully, backs away. Kissing Sookie’s mouth sensuously, he tells them, “I am going to warm up our shower. Don’t be too long. We have to take care of some business, but we also have reservations.” And with that he is off the bed, his pants shed as he moves to the bathroom. Knowing that he will not be forgotten as he leaves them.
Sookie just gasps as Eric’s third finger enters her. His mouth is soon by hers, “The sooner you cum, lover, the sooner we can get to that shower. And sooner to making sure Godric will be pleasured. You will love to have his cock in your mouth as we fuck him, wouldn’t you lover?” He needs her to cum first, nothing new there. He always wants their little mate pleasured before them.
And with that Sookie gasps, and she feels Eric also come behind her as her body shakes from her own orgasm. She is panting, looking at him with only love in her eyes for the tall blonde that had just given her one of the best orgasms yet. Which is saying a lot from all the time she has spent with both men.
Eric smiles down at her, his eyes glowing blue from the emotions in them. He stands up, his eyes on her as he strips, and soon has her in his arms, his shirt lying in pieces as he carries her into the bathroom. Their clothes are often the casualties in their passions. This time, no matter how hard he tried, he is lucky that it was only his shirt that came apart as Eric watched his mate with her dark eyes ogling his body as he exposes it to her gleefully.
The bathroom has steam already gathering, with Godric already in the shower. When Eric enters with their mate in his arms, Godric takes her from him, laying a kiss on her, that soon has her knees buckling under the pure passion in it. He smirks down at her, ‘So, klein geliebte gefahrtin, you wish to have Eric take me while you are sucking me off?’ He knows how much she loves it when he talks dirty to her in German. He grins at the unintelligible sound she makes. It has been awhile since Eric had fucked him, even taking in the time that he thought elapsed during the vision. He is all for the la petite mort for himself, as well knowing that Sookie will get off from their shared pleasure if her own arousal doesn’t do it for her.
He is leaning down, kissing his love, and mid-kiss Godric moans as he feels Eric start prepping him. He can feel his tiny mate’s hand on his cock as he is running his fingers up and down her slit. Godric wants to make sure that Eric is getting their mate ready for their mating, he has some big plans for that night. He is hoping that he will be sane enough to be able to implement them, but he and Eric have mentioned that if they cannot do what they want that night, they will do it when she is rising as a vampire. There is no way she will not escape being claimed by her mates in every way. Even if the Apocalypse comes, it will need to wait for their pleasure. They have been waiting a very long time for this mating, and they will complete it one way or the other.
His mouth is moving down, and he kisses her right above where the necklace dips down when Eric jerks him up as he thrusts into him, Godric throws up his head in pure pleasure as Eric manages to hit his prostate and be fully inside in one thrust. Then he moans as his cock is enveloped in pure soft warmth as his other mate take advantage of Eric’s maneuver.
Loving the feel of his Maker’s ass as he rests there, letting Godric and Sookie ready themselves for their lovemaking Eric is grinning. He looks over Godric’s shoulder to see Godric’s cock in Sookie’s mouth, and he can feel Godric’s pleasure ratcheting up from her efforts. He tells him ‘lean forward, lose yourself in our gratification, as we will be losing ourselves in yours, in your love for us.’ Nothing will be more pleasurable for the three of them, than losing themselves in this act. It will be healing for the three of them after the last day.
Then Eric loosed upon Godric all that he had taught him and that he had learned in his thousand years of living. While Eric prefers women, he has found his pleasure with men also. And being with his mates this way satisfies his own dominance needs. Though Godric is their Alpha, Eric is also a dominate person. Luckily for both of them, Sookie is a natural submissive to them only. Though, anyone else outside them would not believe it, with her fire and need to be in control of her destiny.
Right now, everything is perfect for the threesome in the shower.
They always keep almond oil in their showers and rooms, for these times. And as Eric is thrusting into Godric, his mind is lost in Godric’s dual pleasure. Sookie is doing for Godric the same moves that send Eric into a frenzy, but with Godric, she makes sure that she not only deep throats him, but she also licked him up and down, even sucking at his balls. Godric is all about stimulation. She also looks up at him through her eyelashes, making sure when she is on a down stroke or sucking on his balls, that her hands reach behind and moves up to where Eric is fucking him, her fingers rubbing them both. She gives a very light nip to his sac and manages to move quick enough to have his cock back in her mouth as he thrusts. His hand soon is holding her head still, as he fucks her mouth.
She works hard not to lose herself in the pleasure from both of her mates, still worried about Godric pulling away because of what happened last time. But she can see their pleasure on their faces as they both start going faster, chasing their orgasms.
Then Godric’s other hand drops and holds her head still as he loses himself in the orgasm Eric and she had pulled out of them, Eric following soon on the heels of it, unable to hold herself entirely from losing it some, allowing some of their pleasure inside while managing not to orgasm herself.
While they are still lost in their pleasure, she regains her control. Sookie cleans off her mate, then leans back as she watches them coming back from their mutual high. She is smiling lightly, and when Eric soon notices that she did not cum with them, she refuses to be pleasured, saying that she had hers already.
Neither of them like it, but the glance and a quick mental conversation has both Godric and Eric relaxing. For denying them the pleasure of her orgasm, Sookie will have plenty of time for regretting the refusal as they tease her all night long. They may allow her to finally come later, but it will be after some apologies for holding back.
They soon are finished in the shower, both of the males teasing their little one, little touches here and there to start the buildup. By the time they are at the restaurant, their female will be quivering in need for them. Then they will begin the process of making her regret her selfishness. All the while making sure it is done in the same teasing manner they are in now. They will never make her beg for them unless she requests it of them. Neither are wanting to demean her, just make her think twice of refusing to allow herself to fall in the pleasure of the bond.
Soon, Eric is drying her hair for her as Godric grabs his suit and dresses. He is smiling at the love pouring through his mates as they talk about what to do with her hair, as well as what she is going to wear.
Their night tonight is not one they had normally been able to do, to go as openly as they are tonight as a date; most of the time this is hidden from all, disguised as them teaching her the finer arts.
One of the happier results of their actions for Sookie is that she will get to wear the clothing that she prefers now. It is more grown up than the sundresses that often made her seem younger than she really is. She prefers form-fitting dresses, ones that show off her body as well as letting her be the powerhouse she really is.
For now, she will have to wear the sundresses when they are not ‘up’. It will be her little ‘protest’, but for the most part, she will be wearing clothing more to her liking and blaming it on her mates. At least in Godric’s case, the less daring ones will be accepted, while Eric will have fun ‘fighting’ her on her clothing.
As Godric wonders back in the room, he looks over the feeds to Fangtasia that Eric pulled up after finding that their thief is Longshadow. They will be looking into his background to see why he was stealing the money, in a way to figure out if this is another plot. Which they are thinking it is, with how Sookie is being set up by the timing.
Grabbing his cufflinks that Sookie had given him a few years ago, Godric is watching the bar, trying to find the spies that had been there last time. He soon is recognizing a few and sits down in the chair to make screen shots of all the agents. Even though tonight is a night celebrating their love, he uses to the time to make sure that they are aware of their enemies.
In the bathroom, Eric and Sookie soon quietly talk in their heads, worried about Godric. Though they both are relishing in having the man that they love and have known for most of their lives being back, there is the worry that what had happened in the vision may happen again, even with the shields that they learned.
Thinking it over, Eric finally tells Sookie over their mental connection, ‘Lover, there is nothing we can do but be observant. Make sure we talk and let nothing like what happened before. And with what Godric had seen, he will be more likely to listen to us this time.’ Eric caresses her shoulder, watching as she puts on her makeup. He is leaning against the wall in the alcove where she has her table to get ready.
This is one of the things that Eric loves to watch, his woman getting ready for a night, all dressed up as he has known she loves to be. The red dress she had picked out is going to look great on her body, as it shows off her curves for them to enjoy and others to envy.
The only thing that might bring down the night is the fool Compton, but even then, they have a way around it. As it is, Leigh is about running perimeter and working to scare the bejesus out of him as Jason would say. There will be others here for when he shows up, to watch over their beloved matriarch.
Even down here they can hear her roaring every so often. And the pictures she sends them with her wry commentary lets them all know that if Compton could piss his pants, he would have by now. It didn’t matter that he is supposed to be calling on Adele, they had agreed on a time, and Leigh is making sure he doesn’t show up earlier.
All good fun, basically.
They continue to chat quietly when Godric comes back in to lean on the other side of the door watching Sookie. He chuckles as she puts on her lipstick, the last thing she ever puts on.
“You look beautiful, mein Geliebter.”
He kneels at her feet and helps her with her heels, kissing her ankle as he straps on the shoes. Once done, he rises and holds out his hand to help her up. With Eric on the other side, they soon make their way up the stairs to the main part of the house.
It is time for their date.
Final count: 3,900 words.

SOLOMON, Kan. -- The Immaculate Conception church has been in Solomon for more than 130 years. But with one flash of lightning over the weekend, it almost went up in flames.
Thankfully, someone spotted the fire just in time.
"We're very fortunate," Father John Wolesky said.
The church was built in the 1880's and was one of the first things built as the railroad came through, Wolesky said. It still has many of the original furnishings.
Wolesky lives on the church property. He heard a loud bang early Sunday morning, not long after Midnight. There was bad weather moving through the area so he didn't think much of it and he went back to sleep.
A few hours later, he was awakened by the beeping sound of his carbon monoxide detector. The power had gone out and the backup battery in the detector was going out too. As he worked to find a replacement, he had a visitor.
"The door rang and a young man said we were in trouble," Wolesky said.
He rushed outside to find the church's steeple on fire.
"It kind of looked like a little roman candle with a little fire at the top," Wolesky said.
Neighbor John Hood was able to snap photographs as the crews arrived. Firefighters broke into the bell tower to send water up toward the flames.
"They made it look like old faithful around here for a little bit," Wolesky said.
But even so, crews were able to keep the water and the flames to just the steeple. Miraculously the only damage was to the steeple cross that came crashing down. The water only seeped into a small area in the church's entry.
"It could have been a lot worse. If it would have burned for another hour or so, God only knows if anything would have been left," Wolesky said.
Wolesky says with that in mind, the congregation met that Sunday morning just hours after the fire. They gathered in a building next door to the church. He told the parishioners to remember how very fortunate they are and that God had been watching out for them.
"I told them we were really blessed," Wolesky said. "Be grateful that it was caught by someone and the good angel came and told us so we knew."

Top critical review
2 people found this helpful
Feeling ripped off for the first time.
on May 17, 2012
This is the most disappointing cd of Jesse Colin Young. I love his music and his voice but this cd sounded like it was very cheaply made and some of the songs which I thought I was getting were not studio recordings but poor recordings of live performances. I ended up buying 2 of his studio cds to get the songs which I thought I was going to get on this cd. After buying at least a couple hundred cds over the last year, this is the first time I have felt ripped off. Still a huge fan.

Good ol' Reality Steve. I had never heard of him prior to this season, but I'm glad I found his website!
He found interviews from both Ella and Jessie from right after they got kicked off the show. BOTH say they never saw anything funky going on with Rozlyn and the producer, other than Rozlyn being flirtatious and friendly. They both say, "some of the other girls saw" inappropriate behavior. And yet those were the two girls who were brought forth to say what they saw?

The Red Devils were sunk in the Europa League clash following Tonny Vilhena's late winner for the Eredivisie giants.
And Gullit reckons the Dutchman will have enjoyed watching his former side lose.
“The experienced boss won the FA Cup, but fans were not won over by his style of footbal”
He wrote on Twitter: "The story goes that in #noordwijk #vangaal has opened 4 bottles of champagne"
Van Gaal was finally sacked by United at the end of the season after months of speculation surrounding his future.
The experienced boss won the FA Cup, but fans were not won over by his style of football.
Manchester United revealed earlier this week that it had cost the club a whopping £8.4m to get rid of Van Gaal and his coaching staff.
Mourinho had been out of work since December after Chelsea parted company with the Portuguese.
The charismatic former Blues chief penned a three-year-deal at Old Trafford.

I arrived at the ship storage at Navajo state part at around 9:30 after a couple of errands and Frank was already busy prepping the ship. We hooked up the trailer to the truck and I eased her out of her spot. We moved the trailer to the other side of the warf under the mast hoist. Some bozo had parked their Lake Boat (one of those living room pontoons of which I don't see the fun, but each to its own I guess) close to the hoist so it was tricky to get her positioned but we managed.
Frank had asked his buddy Mike to help us and he operated the hoist. The hoist is basically a big rig with a long metal wire connected to a gearbox that is operated with an electric drill. We fashioned a sling around the mast and we hoisted the sling up to the crossbar (I have to learn all these new nautical terms, since I am pretty sure it is not called the crossbar) after which we could put pressure on the mast to have it lift up. It was a little stubborn in the beginning, but after a little wiggle it popped out about two feet and it was free. I did find out later that we probably damaged the crossbar with this procedure, since the starboard side (Hey. I'm learning!) seems to have some loose from the mast so that was the first item for the repair list (and it wouldn't be the last). We hoisted the mast up and when it was free I walked it to the stern (I know that much) while Mike was lowering it. The rest or the prepping went pretty smoothly although we did notice that the backstay connection to the mast was broken, so another item for the repair list.
At about 1 PM we were done and went for lunch which was supposed to be just with Frank, his wife and me, but out of nowhere all of his buddies showed up out of the blue, so before we knew it we were having lunch with the six of us. Frank picked up the tab (hey..he had just sold his boat so he is rolling in it, his buddies said :) and we headed out with the trailer to Mike's shop. We checked the tire pressure and had Frank's colleague Josh check the brakes since we heard some mysterious knocking at one of the brakes, but he convinced me that everything was fine (Did NOT get that in writing). Franks wanted to make sure I had the electric brake system dialed in correctly, so he volunteered Mike to ride with me for a couple of miles to make sure. Frank was really helpful throughout the whole process and I can see he is going to miss having Echo around to tinker with although it sounds he has a couple of other boat options so he will be fine, but I told him he could always come and visit her in the bay...And with that I was on my way to California!

We were out for 9.30 this morning and went to the Great British Craft Festival at Stoneleigh Park. It was very busy and Roman had to be carried on Mark's shoulders at the busy stall's due to the volume of people he was so small he kept getting overlooked!
I think we did quite good, Mark had some small craft mirror tiles with his dolls house in mind and an MDF "book" he plans to decorate and use for something, maybe store all of his cufflinks in? Anais had some music charms to make jewellery with - she was attracted mainly because of the violin charm! I had some beads and Hello Kitty charms. I had a new craft knife, blades, crafting scissors, 3D foam tape, a bag of Christmas goodies, a pack of cards, some BUTTERFLY ICING CUTTERS which I was most excited about as I have been after some for a while! They make cakes look so sweet! Anais and Roman had five MDF hearts each to make their names into "bunting" for their bedroom doors at home.
We enjoyed a nice picnic in the grounds of Stoneleigh Park with Jenny and Roman mainly using the plates to play "wasp tennis" and beat away the critters!
This afternoon we went for a drive to Warwick where we found a nice wool shop and I had ten balls of wool. three balls of bamboo and seven balls of frilly. Anais had a new rucksack for school next month. Jenny found an antique dealer and had four old sets of drawers.
It got quite late to come back and start cooking tea so we went to The Jubilee for tea which was very nice. Anais and Roman played in the park briefly and when we came back they have enjoyed the last of the evening sun riding their bikes.
This evening I have started crocheting which I may have to finish tomorrow as it is getting quite late now. xx

The first three times the built stud across the pool from me adjusted his obvious boner in his wet, clingy swimsuit, I resisted. But I'm a human, healthy, young gay male, and the fourth time, when he looked directly across the pool at me as he handled himself, again unsuccessfully hiding his "problem," my own cock stirred more insistently than I could control.
I lowered my aviator-type sunglasses down my nose and looked over the top at the boned stud, and I cocked my mouth into a bit of an enigmatic smile. "Boned" grinned widely back at my own little smile, and he deliberately stretched, showing me exceptional guns, traps, pecs, delts, abs . . . his entire torso rippling with corded, sculpted muscle of bulked, pumped style. Very impressive, likely steroids involved, but certainly appealing . . . would have been even without the fat boner. Dark hair dusting his torso and more prominent on his strong arms and legs complemented a ruggedly handsome face that had me thinking of one of the Big Valley sons, I couldn't remember the actor's name, even though I'd shot plenty of wads fantasizing about him jacking off when I was a teenager.
Back to Boned - he was difficult to be distracted from, very difficult to be DICKstracted by. Would I wait for him to make the move or go to him? I certainly would have, if his stretch hadn't turned into a fairly energetic near-vault off his lounge chair. He was heading for me, not making any effort whatsoever to hide the pointy protrusion from his swim trunks' crotch. I could tell it was fat, but not how long as it looked more like it was caught up in his suit or liner.
I'd pushed my glasses up again and was relaxed back, or at least I was giving that impression, so when he reached my lounge chair, I turned slowly and was facing his bulge.
"Up here," he was saying with a smirk when I finally looked up at him. "At least for now," he added, adding mischief to the smirk.
It wasn't my imagination that he moved slightly closer, though. I caught a whiff of his sweat. Mmmmmmm.
He was on the right side of my lounge, and he put his hand out, down-angled sufficiently so that I could awkwardly twist my own right arm up to grasp his hand. "Dave Merrick," he introduced himself simply.
"Bill James," I said with equal simplicity, holding his hand tighter and longer than would have been customary, but enjoying his strength and the contact.
"So, Bill James," he said, though he didn't continue.
We were not alone at the pool; quite the opposite. Still, I was on the corner edge, where Dave was standing nobody was immediately behind him, so I merely had to be quiet. "Your room or mine?"
He grinned wide, with ample mischief. Looking up over the ridges of his beefy eight-pack and thick slab pecs to his stubble-darkened chin jutting out above me, I wondered how those pecs and abs would look when his body tensed when I pushed my cock into him, hard and deep. "Where would you like to suck my cock?" he answered my question with a question, even softer than mine to him.
"Wherever you want me to ball your brains out after I drain your nuts," I retorted, grinning up at him. And then it was my turn to bound out of my lounge. "Wherever, we're wasting time!" I told him, looking down at him now by a few inches.
"What's your room number?" he asked me.
I told him, and we agreed he'd wait five or ten minutes before he headed up. I'd be ready for him. And I was, when barely five minutes later - I'd just got inside the beautiful suite the very willing concierge that my buddies at the base recommended had gotten me - he knocked. It was a forceful, manly knock, not a timid downlow sort of knock either - NICE!
The knock started my cock thickening in my swimsuit, which I'd intended to swap for boxers to be more comfortable. When he entered, I got another whiff of his sweat, which caused the blood to RUSH into my cock, and I adjusted myself to try and get more comfortable in the confines of my suit.
"You getting naked, too, Bill James, or are you just gonna get on your knees that way and risk dislocating that huge woody of yours?" he smirked, already shucked out of his swimsuit and having pulled off his shirt.
I took notice, with some disappointment, that his beefiness of musculature did not extend to his equipment. Apparently the bulge I'd mistaken for girth had been length, sticking straight out, like a five-inch beercan - stubby but definitely a jaw stretcher in girth.
"C'mon, Billy, get yourself comfortable and enjoy. I know I sure am going to!" he grinned.
What the fuck. I pulled off my t-shirt and shimmied out of my too-tight-because-of-my-hardon swimtrunks and got on my knees in front of his cock as he said, "Damn you're a fucking specimen, aren't you? Military?"
He had small to tiny nuts, too. What a fucking turnoff usually, but something about this otherwise built - ripped, corded, mounds of muscle everywhere - man had me hungering for his stubby. I ignored the question and got close enough to inhale his sweat and musk, and my desires were sufficiently stoked for my cock to twitch. I put my tongue out and swiped it up from the underside of his thick head at the stalk over his piss slit and savored his sweat, uniquely male and genital, and a hint of acrid taste, must have been his piss. "Army here, but I'm guessing you're Air Force," he said around a long, "AAAAhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhh."
I didn't bother to correct the slight, as I usually didn't tell tricks - even fellow servicemen - that I was a Marine, and damn proud of it! But I decided to show him how a Marine handles a cock, and I was certain he'd know the difference between a Marine and all others when I was done.
I swallowed him to the root, and again gave myself an inhaled dose of his male scent, which made my cock drip and made him slap his hands against the wall behind him and grunt, "OH FUCK!"
I pulled off his cock just long enough before I swallowed it again to say up to him, "You keep saying 'fuck', and I will fuck your hot ass!"
When I swallowed him again, to another appreciative hiss, I got his olive-sized nuts in my hand and decided even tiny nuts need some attention and went to work with my special nut rub-massage-squeeze job.
"AH FUCK!" he hissed louder. "My balls are VERY sensitive," he warned me.
Yeah, what the fuck ever. I continued to work those nuts, and I felt his cock throb and twitch inside my mouth as I did, so he either loved the promise of discomfort or wasn't as delicate-balled as he thought. This was MY blowjob, and he was going to take it the way I gave it.
With my other hand I sucked my finger tip into my mouth and dribbled spit all over it and reached back and up and found his pucker. His immediate flinch, accompanied by, "CAREFUL!" when I pushed was also accompanied by an involuntary thrust of his hips toward me. Yeah, RIGHT!
I sucked and rubbed his pucker and pushed, and he spared no time in pushing back onto my finger. I felt his VERY tight pucker - way too tight for my horsecock to comfortably spread - give way and felt my finger slip inside him to a loud, "AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHH!" that continued as I pushed in slowly farther and was moving my finger around just inside his ring, stretching him gently.
Meanwhile I was tonguing his entire cock in my mouth and working his boy-balls more forcefully, each squeeze bringing me a tasty pearl of salty-sweet precum from his cock, which I'd swirl with my tongue over and around his fat little head and cause him to shudder and moan.
My big middle finger passed the second knuckle inside him, and I found his spot, and when I slightly rubbed his prostate with my fingertip, his whole body jerked, and he shouted, "HOLYFUCKINGSHIT! WHAT the FUCK was THAT?" And then I knew this stud had been deprived and was in need of some manly pleasures, small package or not.
His assring was spasming around my finger with the residual of the prostate prod, and when I did it again he shouted, "OHMYFUCKINGGODDDDDDDDDDD!" and his ass clenched on my finger at the same time as his cock thickened in my mouth, that head flaring against my cheek.
Dave moved his hands from behind him on the wall onto my shoulders, and he ran one hand up my neck and up my buzzed head, cupping it gently. "That's fucking AWESOME," he told me, and I assumed it was my cocksucking, ballworking, assfingering he was talking about, not my scalp.
His throbbing cock in my mouth was, likewise, confirming that his praise was for my skills. Each time I'd squeeze his nuts, he'd moan louder, and his precum would pop from his piss slit. Same with my fingertip on his prostate, though the precum was more copious when I rubbed and pressed his p-spot.
I pulled my finger out gently, to a whimper from him, and I quickly spit a ton more precum-and-spit mix onto my fingers. I went back at his tightened pucker with two big fingertips this time, spreading him open at last enough to force my fingers in to a long, "OOOOHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHH FFFFUUUUUUCCCCCCKKKKKKKKK!" from him. He was so tight it felt like tight elastic around my two fingertips, but I was IN, and I started twisting and rubbing his channel, apparently to his delight. "OH MAN that's fucking-AAAAHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHSSSSSSSSSSSSHHHHHHHHH!" he cried, when as he was enjoying me spreading him with my fingertips I pushed into his tight ass channel with both fingers to between my first and second knuckles.
When I sucked him harder, swirling around and working over his head to distract him, I pushed in farther, and as he was crying out from the tightness and fullness, I scissored my fingers and nicked his prostate again. This time his cry was loud and without reservation. "OH FUCK YES! JUST LIKE THAT!" he cried and pushed back onto my fingers to get more contact with his p-spot.
I laughed around his cock, and through another few gasps of pleasure he said, "Fucker, you're enjoying invading me and having me out of all control, aren't you?"
I answered, "MMMGGGGG GGGHHHHHHHH," as best as I could without making it obvious I could have easily enunciated around his meager endowment impeding my speech. And I kept up my swirling and sucking and ballwork as I really went to work with my fingers inside him.
I was pumping his channel with the two-finger mini-cock method, scissoring too and rubbing that knob so often his body was jerking and his cries sounded like Whitney Houston singing, extending a single note in ten different tones.
I pulled him up to the edge without stopping or slowing, his "OHGODOHGODOHFUCKOHGODOHFUCK," constant as I built it up. And I did my very special stop-sucking, licking and ballplaying and just use the prostate to push him over the edge. It's my own way of showing a guy what it's like to have his load fucked out of him.
When I did that, his body was tensed to steel cords, and his cry was a single, long rasp of inhalation until he finally broke, and I felt his cock, thicker inside my mouth, throb violently as his first pump was loosed. "Mmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmm!" I hummed around his head at the back of my throat.
Dave shouted, "OHFUCKINGGODIMCOMING!" in one loud shout, then went to, "AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA!" loud and long as his body finally erupted in convulsions and I felt his first cumblast rocket through his stubby beercan cock and SPLAT against the back of my throat.
"MMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMM!" I moaned appreciatively for what was obviously a HUGE cumblast.
But it went on, and blast after blast, he pumped his seed into my mouth until I was gulping wildly, trying to get it all down and feeling it run out of the sides of my mouth despite my usually excellent skills of dispositioning cum.
"OH FUCK JESUS CHRIST!" he was still yelling, and I realized I was on auto pilot, working his p-spot still, still as aggressively, and his body was shuddering and convulsing from the stimulation.
"MMMMMMMMMMMMM!" I moaned again, with a loud slurp as I let his cockhead slip out of my mouth with a last smack of my lips and a lick over the slit to catch any dregs. I also gently disengaged my fingers from his fuckhole, eliciting a hiss and a whimper when they were finally gone. With a very gentle and appreciative rub, I also let go of his mini-balls, which I'd gripped hard enough to keep hold of despite their desperate attempt to recede fully up inside him.
I sat back on my haunches and wiped my face with the back of my hand, Dave again steadying himself against the wall, head back, panting. "Holy fucking mother of cocksucking, Billy!" he gasped. "That was fucking amazing!"
I got to my feet and offered the back of my wrist, glistening with his cum I'd wiped from the spill down my chin. He looked at me, alarmed, then suddenly changed to a shrug and tongued it. "Hmmmmm. Another first!" he grinned.
"You've never tasted your own cum?" I asked him, finding that unbelievable.
"I've never smelled my ass on anyone's fingers before!" he shot back.
I laughed. Ah, that. "Yeah, and how was it for you - as good as it was for me?" I gently teased him.
"The smell of my ass was good for you?" he asked, evading my question.
"So far, everything about your ass has been good." I looked down overtly at my hardon, jutting forth angrily, dripping. "You can tell my cock sure likes it!"
He looked surprised at that. "So you weren't joking downstairs when you said you wanted to fuck me?"
"Serious as a heart attack," I answered with a sly smile. "Except I promise you won't die of this, or even require hospitalization, just as long as you do exactly as I tell you," I finished, with a wink.
"I, uh, I've never," he stammered.
"I know, I know," I broke in with a bored tone of voice. "You've never been fucked, you've never been sucked by a man, probably never been touched by one or thought of it. You were just horny today, so you let me take care of it for you, and it'll be our dirty little secret," I shot out, my tone going from bored to monotone with a decidedly blah blah blah quality to it.
David suddenly reached out and clamped a strong hand on my shoulder and gave me a little shake as he protested. "HEY! That isn't what I said. I keep my man-on-man preference private, but I'm no closet case; and I'm surely not in denial." He was close to angry, certainly annoyed, eyes blazing directly up into mine.
I put my hand out and lightly rubbed his awesome eight-pack, enjoying the sweaty fur and cobblestone quality of the surface under his skin. "I apologize. You didn't say that, and I was wrong, David," I softly apologized, just slightly rubbing his bumpy tummy.
His look softened immediately, and a smile, slightly rueful, replaced his set jaw of before. "Dave - I prefer it to David. I should have said it earlier when I introduced myself."
"Okay, Dave it is. I like that, actually - very kind-sounding and welcoming," I bulshitted, thinking that I might just have a chance at another cumload or something with this hot man. "What you've never is . . . ?" I led him back to where we'd veered off track, thinking now that he'd proclaimed he wasn't as virginal as I thought that maybe he had never bottomed for someone as hung as me.
"I've, uh, never, uh, taken it up the ass," he finally got out, the last part delivered very quickly, as if to say it so fast he didn't have to think about it.
"And" I prompted.
"And?" he asked quizzically.
"That was my question," I grinned.
He looked a little caught. "You're tough, you know that, Bill?"
"Billy. I liked it when you called me 'Billy', Dave."
His eyes twinkled then, and his smile returned in force.
"You were saying?"
He laughed then. "You're not letting me off the hook here, are you?"
I moved my hand in a slightly different way and enjoyed the feel of his body reacting to my caress of his abs as I gently petted him. "You're not on any hook here, Dave. It's just the two of us, and you've done what we agreed you came here for. I'm not forcing you to stay, however much I'd love to have you here with me for a very long time." My own face was sincere, very honest about what I'd just said, in conflict with my cock, which just wanted his ass or mouth.
Dave's smile went to a grin, and he cocked his head and made a show of looking around my arm and hand on his stomach to get a look at my flagging cock. I was shocked when he reached out and took it in his rough hand, and I started at the unexpected touch. His head jerked up to meet my eyes, questioning. In response I made my cock flex, and that startled him, though it also widened his grin when he looked back up after jerking down to make sure it really was my cock still in his hand.
He very tentatively stroked my length a couple of times, then he adjusted his grip and started rhythmically stroking me, standing a bit closer, making my wrist cramp to continue rubbing his abs. I figured he was going to stroke me off, and as hard as my cock had been, I'd take it.
Then Dave really surprised me. He thumbed my precummy head and brought his thumb up and licked it, his eyes never leaving mine. "Mmmmmmmm," he moaned appreciatively.
"Like that?" I asked softly.
"VERY much," he grinned, still stroking me.
I thought then that maybe he'd blow me, as long as I didn't spook him or piss him off. A roid-head could have a short trigger - for his temper! - after all. The feel of his hand was great, though his palm and fingers were rough, and I was working to control my breathing and keep from just getting into it, egging him on with filthy talk and fucking his fist.
With a squeeze, he asked, "You really think you could get that inside me without ruining me and having me shitting in a bag?"
I didn't let my excitement and surprise show. I just said, low and sexy, "Oh, I definitely know I can fuck you without any casualties. And I also know that the way you just came? That will feel like about a two on a ten scale of prostate climaxes when I fuck you." My eyes burned into his.
"WHEN you fuck me?" he asked, holding my gaze.
"Oh, yeah, I think it's quite clear you want it, and it's already been established that I want it. So it's just a matter of how you want it."
His grin bloomed again. "I've always had a fantasy of a big-cocked man forcing me - raping me - Billy. I've never told ANYone that!"
I glanced at my watch - SHIT! I had agreed to vacate the room by 1300 and it was after 1200. And I had to report by 1700. The drive was easily two hours on the roads there back to the base, but the checkout . . . I wanted this stud on the end of my cock. "Gimme a sec, okay?" I hastily said, grabbing the phone.
The concierge I wanted was on lunch - he was the one my buddy told me would set me up, and he had indeed done. I asked the man I talked with in my broken Arabic if I could have the room longer, for an hour beyond my checkout time. There was a lot of talk back, and I finally told him I hadn't understood him and apologized. To that, in a somewhat amused tone, maybe condescending, he said, simply, "Yes."
I turned around to Dave, grinning. "You're going to be sorry you told me that," and I launched myself at him, pinning him against the wall with my forearm across his windpipe, my other hand with a vicious grip on his balls, breathing into his shocked, grimacing face. "You're my BITCH now!" I spat.
Then, before he could react, I had Dave whirled around, one arm painfully up behind his back, feet kicked apart, pinned hard against the wall by my chest pressing against his wide, muscular back. "HOLY FUCK!" he cried with a THUMP against the wall.
It felt good, and my cock thought so, too, raging between his legs, my head and top of my shaft against his sac. I used my free hand and slicked up the same fingers I'd had inside him before and not as gently as before probed his hole. "Sweet hole on you, Army!" I sneered behind his ear, and I felt him shiver from the brush of my lip against his skin.
"AAAAAARRRRRGGGGGHHHHHFFFFUUUUUUUCCCKKKKKKKK!" he gasped/cried when I pushed my two fingertips inside him again. I WAS going to hurt him . . . but just enough!
"Yeah, ARMY, you're going to make a SWEET bitch!" I taunted him, and in response I got a moan. "What's that BITCH? I couldn't hear you!"
"I-AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA!" he screamed when I shoved my fingers farther into him, not gentle at all.
"You WILL show me respect, BITCH!" I reprimanded him.
"SSSSSSIR," he shouted. "YES, SIR!"
"Ah, now we're getting somewhere, aren't we?" and with that I pressed his magic button again as a reward.
"OHFUCK!" he moaned, and his ass pushed back into my fingers, craving more. As a quick afterthought he added, "Sir." Good Army boy!
"Yeah, that's it, bitch," I growled in his ear as his body tensed and jolted as I worked that p-spot a couple more times. His asschannel was gripping my fingers and juicing with need as I played him. "Yeah, you know you want it, don't you, BITCH?" The last word, spat out loud, suddenly, took him by surprise, and he jolted again.
"Sir, I've never, I don't think I-AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA!" he shouted, when I'd yanked my fingers roughly out of him and grabbed his ballsac and pulled back HARD, in an iron grip.
I'd pulled my midsection back and had my cock now pressed against his hole, guided by my hand, still grasping his nuts painfully. I pushed in a little, forcing my head into his opening just enough to make him scream in anticipation of his pain to come. I yanked his balls, turning his scream to a loud whimper, and I spat in his ear, "Listen to me, bitch, and listen good. Whatever I choose to do to you, you'll take it like the bitch you are, and you'll do it without getting us arrested because of you squealing like a little girl! You got that, ARMY?" I spat in his ear, and to make sure he did, I YANKED those tiny nuts again.
Dave gasped but didn't cry out, and when he'd gulped a time or two, although weakly, he scraped his face against the wall nodding and said, "Yes, sir."
Without releasing his arm, held painfully against his back by my hand clamped on his wrist, or his nuts, with my tight grip, I pulled him away from the wall and turned him toward the bed and propelled him - bitch-walked him - over and then shoved him down onto the bed. He tried to scramble away, once he was free and bouncing on the bed, but I was on top of him, and I got both of his arms pinned above his head and had my knees and shins pinning his knees down from behind.
My throbbing cockhead was pressed into his pucker, though not penetrating. "You're going to take it," I snarled into his ear from behind.
He whimpered. "Yes, sir." I shoved my crotch forward and painfully stretched his assring. "AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA!" he cried out.
"Oh, COME on!" I jeered. "That's the best an Army man like you can do?"
I maintained the pressure on his assring, and he grunted a gasped, "Sir, I-" But I shoved harder, my precum-slicked head working its way back into that ring, opening him, slowly. He hissed loudly, his body tense with fear of pain far greater than he was going to get.
I moved my hips and made my slick cockhead move around just on the outside of that pucker, working my pre, which was flowing, all around inside his pucker and pushed in a bit farther. He gasped, and his body went completely taut again, but he didn't cry out. "That's it, Army. You know you want this Marine cock fucking your worthless cunt."
A raspy, panted, "Sir, yes sir."
"Push out!" I ordered sharply, feeling his body start from the sudden shouted order.
"Push out!" I ordered, just as sharply. "Push out like you're trying to expel my cock, Army."
"Sir, I don't wa-"
"DO IT!" I shouted, and with a loud grunt he did. Of course physics took over, and the pushing expanded his assring, and I SHOVED in about a third of the way.
"FUCK!" he hissed and made to pound his fists, still held tightly in my grip.
"Do it again." I ordered.
With a grunt worthy of an Olympic weightlifter, he gave one helluva a push, and I shoved at the same time. "HOOLLLLLLLLLLYYY FUUUCCCCCKKKK!" he shouted, as I bottomed out inside him, all nine plus inches buried to my balls in his TIGHT, hot fuckchute.
He was panting with the pain of the invasion, his cuntmuscles clenched TIGHT around my cock. "RELAX YOURSELF, ARMY!" I ordered.
"Sir, it's too-Sir, there's no way-Sir, you're too fucking BIG!" he sputtered.
"Yeah, yeah, flatter the Marine who's raping your ass. That'll just get me fucking you harder! Now RELAX, Army - DO IT!"
I felt his body go slack under me. Not bad, I thought, when his cuntclench started to relax, too.
"Now, Army, you WILL stay as relaxed as you can or this is going to wreck your Army pussy," I said, pulling out slowly.
"SSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSS!" he hissed, as my angry, flared head reamed back through his cuntchannel and bumped against his violated pucker from the inside this time.
"Push," I said, and I began to thrust back into him. Remarkably, he did, and I slid home until my balls rested on his and his buttcheeks again.
"FFFUUUUUUUUCCCCCCCCCCCKKKKKKKKKKK!" he moaned.
And then I began to pump him in regular, long-dicked strokes, even, not slow, not fast, just continuous.
"Holy fuckn Jesus!" he cried the first time I nailed his prostate directly with one of my thrusts. For good measure I nailed it again, just as directly, on the next incursion, and he yelled "OH FUCK YES!" into the mattress.
My cock was not waiting any longer, and before I knew it I was pounding that no-longer-virgin cunt fast and hard, working his p-spot with my shaft - continuous friction, which had him writhing and moaning like a bitch continuously - and only occasionally gave him a direct hit. When I did, invariably his moan would become a loud shout of "OH FUCK THAT'S FUCKN IT!" or "GOD YES!" or "OH FUCK JUST LIKE THAT!" Each one stoked the fire in my nuts, but I was enjoying the sweat on his back, the writhing and spasmodic jerks too much, the inner conflict raging between dumping my nuts and continuing to enjoy the fucking.
I realized soon enough that my cock and balls had ganged up on me, and I was jackhammering that p-spot. Dave was shouting and jerking - his whole body - with every hit to that pleasure knob, crying out, begging for me to just keep pounding him. I was no longer holding his arms, instead had my palms planted on his broad traps and had arched my body to piston into him as deeply as possible.
I felt it first in those muscled shoulders, the tenseness, body tightening as the shouts become more desperate. Then I felt his cunt clenching around me tighter again, like when I'd first invaded his virgin fuckchute. And within seconds he screamed, "OH HOLY FUCCKKKNNNN MMMMMMAAAAAAAAA!" and started convulsing from head to toe as he hissed and cursed and dumped his nutload under him.
Of course, his spasming cunt pulled me over the edge, and I yelled, "FUCK YES, ARMY! TAKE THAT MARINE LOAD UP YOUR ARMY PUSSY!" and blasted HARD and long into him. I knew he was sore, and his cries and hisses as each blast of my seed hit his battered cuntwalls threatened to keep me in a pleasure loop that wouldn't end. Of course it did, despite my intense desire to just keep blasting, to just keep hearing him tell me he felt every milliliter of my seed as it drenched his guts.
"JESUS FUCK THAT WAS SO FUCKING INTENSE!" he said, when we were both struggling to get our breathing under control, which for him was considerably harder, as I'd collapsed on his back.
I licked from between his scapulae up his neck to his buzzed hairline, savoring his sweat, enjoying the shiver that went through him. Dave reached back and rubbed my face awkwardly in gratitude.
"I have to shower up and get out of this room and get back to base," I told him. But I didn't move. My cock was half-hard inside him, on the wane, satisfied but alert for the possibility of more, as always. "A good bitch sucks his top's cock clean when he pulls it out of him," I said low behind his ear.
Dave's hand on my head jerked to a stop from his gentle rubbing. "You mean?"
I laughed. "Yeah, I mean." I gave it a moment then I said, "And an appreciative top might very well lick his bottom's cummy cunt clean, too."
"Fffuuuuccccccckkkkkkkkkk!" was his growled response.
I pulled out of his sore, swollen cunt, Dave doing his best not to cry out, but he couldn't hold back when my big, fat head stretched his ring and popped through. "SHIT!"
"God, I hope not, for both our sakes!" I joked.
I got on my feet on the side of the bed and pulled his head around to my cock. "SUCK IT, ARMY!" I ordered with a grin.
He was cute when he tentatively took a sniff, his face like a kid's who discovered that a vegetable wasn't nearly as bad as he'd thought. Then he licked my head and took it in his mouth. I rubbed his stubbly head and guided him to take more, and he licked and sucked all over it, appreciative "Mmmmmmmm"s causing my cock to thicken again.
I finally had to pull out, otherwise he was going to be sucking for long than I had time for. "Hey!" he yelled. "I wasn't finished with that, and since this is my first time, I think I should get in as much practice as I can!"
I had to laugh at that. "I'd fucking LOVE to, Army, but if I'm going to make good on my own promise, it's my turn to get back to work."
He looked like he didn't follow for a moment, then he was on his stomach, and he'd taken his hands back and was spreading his buttcheeks for me. "Dig in, Marine!" he told me.
I dove into that freshly-fucked, freshly-seeded fuckhole of his, and I licked and tongue-fucked that sore, stretched, swollen ring and then let my tongue lap around inside. All the while he was hissing and then shouting his pleasure. When I started sucking my seed out of him, I thought for a moment he was cumming again, he went so wild.
I ate him into a wild frenzy, frankly enjoying it every bit as much as he did. He was squeaky clean except for sweat and cum, and he tasted like Grade AA Prime. I was finally so worked up that I got on my feet again, had him lay on his back, drooled his ass-juice and my cum into his mouth while I jacked over him. When I had nothing left but spit, he wriggled down and started licking my cock again and then got under my swinging balls and started awkwardly receiving a tea-bagging that was just enough to shift me into overdrive.
"OH FUCK YES! Here it CUMMMMMMMMS!" I moaned and pulled his head so I had my cock head in his mouth and let loose.
"Mmmmmmmmfffffffffffffff! MMrrrrrmmmgggggggggg!" he gagged but swallowed hard and fast as he jerked his own cock and then "MMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMM!" around my cock as he blasted onto his neck, chest and stomach. DAMN! That boy could put it out!
I panted but stood firm and put out my hand to his to pull him up. As he was standing I pulled him to the bathroom and the shower. "You're going to make someone a truly FINE bitch some day, Dave. I wish it was going to be me, but I've only got another three months at the base and probably won't get back here before I leave," I told him as I busied with getting the water going and getting us both in and soaping.
We gave each other good cleanings of our cocks and balls, but I stopped it before it got out of hand. There just wasn't the time for me. He had his swimsuit back on, and I had gotten into my shorts and t-shirt and old, battered sneaks and thrown the little else I had into my duffel. I headed straight out the door, not even caring if he followed. But he did.
When we got to the stairs down to the ground floor I turned. "Good place for a couple of military buds to say goodbye. Be well, brother," I said, affording him the respect I would another marine, and I turned and walked on, down the steps, checked out and left, never looking back.
* * * * * * * * * * *
There is an epilogue to this story; but they do not live happily ever after, and the epilogue is many years later, so I decided to omit it. Best we leave it at two men, parting as men do after hooking up and draining their nuts! GOODTIMES!

The buying started today. I have 3 personal friends who run firms and they are all on board. They did say it was hard getting some orders filled but they are still accumulating. There is 18 mill. between the three of them and the buying spree has started. Every time it went down they stepped in and bought. Still have plenty of cash on hand so this will continue til Thursday.

Today was our last day at the elementary school teaching the kids. We took them into the big room we cleaned out and played musical chairs a bunch of times. It went really well and no one got hurt to my surprise. It was sad saying goodbye but I walked with about 10 of them until we got to the bungalows. They kept asking me how to say things in English like good afternoon and they were saying "goot afta noo" to the villagers walking by. They would not let me go and kept asking me things about where I live and where we were going next.
After taking a very long nap in a hammock, we left to go to the school to clean the abandoned room some more. They had a bunch of posters from the 80s and 90s in a corner so we went through them for about an hour. We sorted them between ones they could still use and ones to throw away. There were some good ones about the respiratory system and maps of South America, but there were also some weird outdated ones about alcoholism and drug addictions and even super outdated maps of Peru but it's missing provinces.
Straight from the school we took a hike to a swinging bridge over the Rio Cañete. Juan bought us ice cream and we sat for about an hour by the river just talking.
We arrived back at the bungalows and two of the kids from school (Karla and Diego) were in the back playing on the playground. Karla, Diego, and I played tag and hide and go seek until we couldn't see anymore. After, I taught them and their mom and grandmother to use an iPad. They loved all the pictures of them at school and hopefully I'll be able to send them to them when I get back home. Tonight was our last day with Pepe and we have to drive him to the airport really really early tomorrow morning.

It's amazing how quickly plans can change.
One moment you're doing one thing, the next it's completely different. Then another minute later that plan gets turned on it's head and a few hours later you're driving up to a leasing office and signing the application for a one bedroom apartment.
Yup. My living situation has changed yet again. Twice. Maybe three times.
In case you missed it, check out my last post on this subject. Let's just say that the title of that post was quite accurate (Jinx) because I was so excited I ended up jinxing myself.
After that agreement was made, the two "roommies" and I had begun our home search. It turned out that the 5 bedroom house was a no-go, and that was fine. In a college town like ours we were surely to find a decent house or something with rent we could afford.
We first went to one apartment complex that had three bedroom duplexes. A few years ago before I had moved into my current apartment I actually considered moving there and the music director from my church lives there. So I felt it would be a good place to check out. However, the three bedrooms were tiny tiny tiny. If we had been college students or something, that would be one thing. But considering all three of us had been out of college for a few years, it wasn't going to work. They did have a special going on though where if you turned in your application by Friday you wouldn't need to pay. So we saved some applications just in case.
The next couple of days we looked around at other houses. Some where REALLY nice, but too expensive. Others were also nice, but in neighborhoods that scared us. There was one house where the own was all "the door is open you can just go right in and pick up an application on the counter."
WHAT? Why would you just leave the door open? Why? Why? Why?
Needless to say, we deiced to not move there.
By Thursday we decided to look around more on Saturday morning and see what happened. I had to go to play practice and the two girls decided to hang out for awhile after I left.
Then I got a phone call on Friday.
The one roommate that was guaranteed backed out. I won't go into details (partially because I don't quite understand them) but she said that she didn't feel it was right for her. The other roommate still doesn't have a job so she was always up in the air.
Which left me... frustrated. Upset. Broke. And still roommate-less.
After venting my frustrations over lunch with a friend I was able to calm down a bit. Then I remembered "that one complex still had that free application fee special going on!" So I booked it over to the complex and thankfully, the guy who had helped us out a few days before was still there. I sat down in his office and explained the situation.
They had one last one bedroom apartment on a first floor.
I checked it out. It wasn't as updated as the place they had shown me originally, but it would work. It was smaller than my apartment now, but in all honesty for one person and her tiny dog it would be perfect. I was actually impressed with how much storage space there was - which is always a perk.
I crossed the t's and dotted the i's and I can move there in three weeks. Lucky for me, the office for my current apartment was right next door and I was able to give them my 30 day notice right away.
Then... last week happened. I had written this blog post out and clicked "publish." Only moments later the ex-possible-roommate called me again.
A friend of hers owned a house that she rented out to a family needed new tenants. It was a three bedroom house with two full bathrooms and one 1/2 bathroom. Four bedrooms if you counted the one in the basement. I told her that I had the impression everything was called off and had already applied to get a new apartment. I already had a move in date.
However, if this did work out I would be saving A LOT of money. So I agreed to check it out with her on Friday. The only issue was that the leasing office of my apartment needed a for sure yes or no by Friday night. We were going to have to make an immediate choice.
The house was perfect. Heck, one of the bedrooms was already painted in the color scheme I wanted for my room and the closet was built for short people.
One problem: the possible roommate didn't like it because she smelled smoke. (I didn't smell it.) She claimed that she was "highly sensitive" to smoke and refused to live somewhere that someone had smoked in. Not gonna lie - I was pretty upset.
But, I immediately called the leasing office and gave them my "yes."
The next morning I paid the first half of my security deposit and picked up my pet application. I move into my new apartment in 11 days.
I'm actually feeling really good about this choice. The stress and drama with trying to find a roommate and to try and afford my expensive (although awesome) apartment was getting to be too much. Here are a few reasons why this is a good thing:
1) I'm already used to living on my own. While making the adjustment to having roommates I'm sure would have been just fine, it's easier to be able to do my own thing without having to worry about anyone else.
2) The rent is cheaper than what I'm paying now (by about $150), and it includes water and the electric bill will also probably be lower since it's a smaller place. With those savings and with my switching to my family's cell phone plan a few weeks ago, I'm going to be doing much better financially.
3) No cat. Yes, I know the cat was sweet, de-clawed, and toilet trained. However, Bandit really doesn't get a long with cats very well. He adjusts... but it takes awhile. No more stress there.
4) If a person backs out of being your roommate after not even a week of saying they would be, it shows how reliable they are. I'm really looking forward to having this girl as a friend and she seems really cool. However, maybe not the best roommate and that would have ruined a potential friendship.
5) Living on my own means that I can do whatever I want to the apartment and not have to see if someone else would like it. (Other than being sure it's okay with the landlord.) I can do my own decorating style and organize how I want. I'm kinda excited about it.
I am a little sad that I won't have roommies. I do my best when I'm around people and it's nice to have people to come home to. Also, it's lame decorating your home for holidays when it's just you living there. However, I'm so relieved that this is all done.
Sometimes you think God is doing one thing, and in reality it's something completely different and it's the kick in the rear that you actually need.
Here's the layout of my apartment (or at least the basic gist):
So... anyone want to help me move next Friday or help me make a decorating plan?

From Klickitat School
InvestED purchased an A.S.B. card for a special needs student allowing her to participate in her senior class activities and fundraising opportunities. Even though the student decided to delay her graduation for another year her classmates were very receptive to this student participating in the graduation ceremony this year. This was possible because she was able to work with students from her class simply because she had received an A.S.B. card.

This is one of my favorite pictures of my mother's father and his wife. My grandparents were very special to me and I miss them very much. My grandmother was a member of the Beta Sigma Phi and she loved attending and participating in every function she could.
She was very active and I know that is what kept her
so young at heart. My grandfather was very supportive and participated in any and all functions grandma encountered. Enjoyment at everything they attended or held was always very obvious. They were a match made in heaven! What better day to share this event that they attended than Valentine's Day?
Thanks for stopping by!
Wishing you success in all of your genealogical treasure hunts!
Copyright © 2011 Cheryl Palmer

Taylor Swift has revealed she would have to be really "obsessed" with a film part to let it get in the way of her music.
The US singer-songwriter has appeared in TV shows and in films including romantic comedy Valentine's Day, but revealed that while she likes acting, she has no plans to put aside her guitar and pen - unless something really impresses her.
She said: "I love to write music. And I love to put an album together and take two years to do it and put everything I have into it. (Except) if there was something, some script that came along that was so enticing that I couldn't walk away from it, that I became obsessed with that the way I obsess over music.
"If you see me commit to a film, it's only because I couldn't focus on anything else."
Taylor, 23, recently embarked on her Red tour of North America and later this year she'll perform in Australia and New Zealand.
The Grammy winner is known for connecting with fans by sharing her life in her music, but she said she isn't worried about losing intimacy with her audience on a stadium tour.
"I find that you have to emote a little bigger, but you can reach all the way up to the top," she said. "Eye contact is important, even if it's from 500 yards away."
She went on: "Everyone who comes to these shows seems so engaged. They come to the show. They know the words. I'm singing the words. We're singing them at the same time, and therein lies the connection. It goes beyond what size the venue is."

Today I had my first real experience dealing with a bully child who's parent was about as effective as a spotlight at high noon on a cloudless day.
It started with this little boy grabbing a toy from Connor at the library. My mom and I both addressed the little boy, in front of his dad, saying he needed to share the toys and give that toy back to Connor because he had it first. The boy ignored us. His dad repeatedly threatened to take him home if he didn't play nicely. The boy put the toy in his mouth and then threw it on the floor. Not cool, but whatever. We dropped it and moved on, the boys continued to play while I supervised and my mom went upstairs to grab an audio book for herself.
Not 5 minutes later, the same little boy took a toy right out of Kylar's hands. Kylar is saying "no no no" over and over, the dad is sitting there doing very little ("give it back, or we'll have to go home" I f*cking wish). The boy ran around and won't give the toy back. I comforted Kylar and accepted that this dad wasn't going to handle his shit and mentally prepared to stop the next incident, knowing that there would be another one if we don't leave. It wouldn't be fair to my kids to leave because this dad can't control his kid, so we stayed and they kept playing, trying to just stay away from this little boy.
At this point, the dad was really irritating me. He kept shrugging these incidents off, saying "he's 2" like that's an excuse for this kinda bullying behavior. No. Kylar is 2. He's not a bully. Connor was 2. He was never a bully.
Third and final incident: the bully child attempted to grab a toy from Connor. I grab his arm, not hard, just enough to stop him and take the toy back and give it to Connor. This got his dad up, in my face, threatening to call the cops if I touched his kid again. Wtf?? While he's threatening me, his child took ANOTHER toy from Connor, threw it at me, missed and hit Kylar in the head. So now Connor is looking thoroughly confused and a tad nervous, Kylar is crying and asking to be held, I've got a handful of books in my other arm and this asshat has the balls to threaten me? I went off a little.
I told him that I wouldn't have had to touch his child if he would stop him from stealing toys from my kids. He responded with excuses about how this little boy is only 2. I pointed to both of my kids and said "I've had two year olds. Neither of them were ever bullies. Neither of them took toys from other kids like this. Neither of them ever threw toys at adults or other kids." That shut him up for a minute.
He took his kid and sat on one of the chairs, literally about 3 feet away. His kid is kicking and screaming and throwing one of the most impressive fits I've seen in awhile. When he finally calmed down, the dad pointed to Kylar and asked me how old he is. I look him dead in the eyes and told him, "he's 2". He didn't say much for awhile after that.
He tried to explain later that his kid isn't normally like this. He goes to school and he's never like this at school. So I replied, as pointedly as humanly possible, "well he's definitely having some issues now. If he's not like this at school, maybe you should think about what's different here, because it's CLEARLY not working." Aka: it's you, dumbass. You're the reason your kid is being a shit. For the last 20 minutes, you've been threatening to take him home if he's mean. He's been nothing but mean. He's 2 and he knows these are empty threats.
Being 2 doesn't excuse bad behavior. I've had 2 year olds. They've never taken multiple toys from other kids. They've never thrown a toy at another kid and absolutely never at an adult. My kids know how to play nicely because Mike and I have been an active parents and have worked hard to teach them what is and isn't ok. Parent your kids!! Your kids will never learn what is appropriate and what is not if you don't teach them. They'll go out into the world and be giant asshats and bullies because their parents never taught them better. Be better. Teach your kids to be better.
Get your daily Nerdy fix by following us on Instagram

added: 5 Mar 2014 // by: Music-News.com Newsdesk
Selena Gomez would apparently go back to Justin Bieber if he stays "sweet".
The Spring Breakers star, 21, has dated the singer on and off since 2010, but they are currently apart.
Justin took to Instagram earlier this week to post a picture of his ex-girlfriend at the Vanity Fair Oscars Party, which she attended on Sunday.
He captioned the image "Most elegant princess in the world. (sic)" and apparently the gesture has struck a chord with Selena.
'Selena has seen what Justin tweeted about her and thought it was really sweet. This is the Justin she would go back to, but she knows too well that it's not realistic. He says he's going to do this and that and begs for her to come back, but then his actions end up not matching his words,' a source explained to HollywoodLife.
Recently it was revealed that Selena had spent two weeks in rehab in January to deal with personal issues, and her rep confirmed it was not substance related.
Justin, who turned 20 on March 1, is known for his wild child ways and has been linked to drugs as well as being arrested for DUI earlier this year.
With her emotional being to think of, Selena is apparently worried a reunion with the Baby singer would set her back.
'Selena would go back with Justin, but it would take a lot of convincing. So far, she isn't sold and she doesn't want the emotional roller coaster stress and drama, and heartache,' the insider continued.

Now that he has a job, and is home from his active duty summer position with the National Guard, he is going crazy with getting things for his truck. Next thing he may want to get is an atv. As I have noticed that he was browsing for kawasaki atv parts. Um,hello, you don't have anywhere to ride it, let along store it! He needs to start saving his money, not spending it on every little thing he thinks he needs! Silly boy!

Liam: "Hey, [Y/N]?" Liam asks you. He's been your best friend for as long as you remember, but you've always secretly crushed on him. "Would you, maybe, uhm. Like to go on a date with me tonight?" He asked, blushing. "I'd love to!" You smiled. "Why don't we go downtown together?" He asked. "At 7?" You smiled. "That sounds absolutely wonderful!" You couldn't stop laughing. You went home and got ready for your very first date with the boy you'd had feelings for your entire life. 7 finally arrived, and your hair was perfectly curled, and you were wearing makeup, which you usually didn't around him. "You look.. stunning." He said, shocked. "Thanks!" You blushed. You two took the train downtown and were walking around for awhile aimlessly. Liam continued to look around, as if he were looking for something. "What are you looking for?" You asked. "Erm, nothing! Do you want to go shopping?" He asked. "Sure! There's a Forever 21 down a few blocks, let's go-" You started. "Let's go in here!" He interrupted, pushing you inside a small accessory store. He grabbed your hand. You were happier than ever, you finally had the guy of your dreams. "Wow, these earrings are so pretty, [Y/N]. They match your beautiful eyes." He said loudly, looking around. Something was going on. "Oh.. thanks." You blushed. "Hey Liam." You see Liam's ex girlfriend behind the counter. "Wow, Danielle, I didn't even know you worked here!" He said. Liam was a terrible actor. You let go of his hand and shoved the earrings back at him. "You used me? Screw you." You said and ran out of the store, crying.
Niall: You two were best friends, and you are a total tomboy. When the new superhero movie came out, you were both dying to see it. You walked inside and were waiting in line to buy tickets, when suddenly Niall started acting weird. He kept looking at someone, but everytime you turned around to look, he tried to say something to grab your attention. "I'm really glad you came with me tonight." He says, taking your hands. You were confused, Niall was your best friend! Did he really have feelings for you, like you secretly had for him? "Uhm, yeah, that's what friends are for!" You said. He suddenly pulled you closer,and kissed your cheek. "Niall, what are you doing?" You asked. "I just.. I've realized how much I like you, [Y/N]." He said, still looking around. "You're acting really strange..." You said. "I-I just didn't really know how to say it. I like you." He says, inches away from your face. "Actually, Niall, I like you too. I always have." You admitted. "Niall?" A girl came from behind you. "Oh, hey, Kelsey." He said, trying to be cool. Kelsey, his ex girlfriend? He'd told you so much about her. "I'm just here with my-" He started. "Ex best friend." You said sharply, dropping his hands, and ran out of the cinema.
Louis: You two were spending the day at the beach. You took off your clothes, revealing yourself in only your bikini. "How do I look?" You struck a cheesy model pose. He rolled his eyes. "Ugh, terrible." He said then smiled and pushed you. "Jerk!" You laughed and chased after him. He suddenly stopped and looked in the direction of the paparazzi snapping pictures of you two. "Hey, is that guy's camera say Star magazine?" He asked. You squinted. "Yeah. Why?" You asked. He shrugged. "No reason." Then he looked at you as if he got an amazing idea. "But really, though. You look hot in your swimsuit." He said. "What?" You asked, confused. He came closer and wrapped his arms around your waist. "I think you're beautiful." He said, and looked back in the direction of the cameras. "Well, uh. Thanks.." You whispered, and he leaned in and kissed you. You kissed him back, realizing how much you liked him. He broke away to breathe, and looked back at the cameras. "Why do you keep looking over there?" You asked, looking at the Star guy. Star Magazine. Louis' ex girlfriend worked for the magazine, it all made sense now. "Oh.. I get it. Cool." You stepped away from him and walked out of the beach, taking your car and his ride home, but you made sure to give him the finger first, so the paps could get a shot.
Zayn: You guys went to a party together, as friends, of course. You were talking to a guy, when Zayn suddenly grabbed you. "Hey!" I was talking to him." You said as he dragged you to the other side of the room, sitting on the couch. He pulled your waist down so you were sitting on his lap. "What are you doing?" You asked. He seemed distracted, like he was focusing on someone else. "I-I saw you with that guy," He stuttered "and I got really jealous. I like you, [Y/N]." He said, and quickly pressed his lips on yours. You pulled away. "What?! Really?" You asked, surprised. "Yes!" He laughed and kissed you again. You opened your eyes and saw him staring across the room again. You finally pulled away and looked over, to see his ex girlfriend dancing with some guy. "Seriously, Zayn?" You jumped off his lap. "Wh-what?" He asked. You rolled your eyes. "Fuck you."
Harry: He was going to a red carpet event, and could only bring one guest. When he asked you, you were in total shock. "Really? Me?" You asked. "Yes, you!" He laughed. You got all glammed up, wearing a short black, sparkly dress. When you walked down the stairs, Harry was waiting there in a tux, just like in a movie. "You look... beautiful." He said, jaw dropped. You blushed. "Good enough to stand next to all of these gorgeous celebrities?" You asked. "You'll be the prettiest one there." He said. When you two got there, you were having laughs and a good time, but then Harry started acting weird. "What's wrong?" You whispered. "Nothing." He smirked, and grabbed your waist. "I'm just... going crazy over you right now. You look so hot." He whispered in your ear. You two posed for pictures and he pulled you so close you could barely breathe. You two got inside and he brought you to the side. "I'm so attracted to you, [Y/N]. You're so beautiful, I really like you." He said and leaned in to kiss you. After awhile you pulled away, blushing. He still seemed off, like he was distracted with somebody else. He wrapped his arms around you and kissed your cheek. "Oh, hello, Harry." His ex girlfriend, Caroline approached you two. "Hey, I didn't know you'd be here." He smirked. You couldn't believe this. You pulled away from him. "Why don't I just give you some alone time." You snapped and ran into the bathroom, holding back the tears.

Julian L. Gillispie passed away Sunday morning, March 26, 2023, at Paramount Healthcare in Fayetteville, Pennsylvania.
Born in 1935, in Arbovale, he was a son of the late Delbert and Mae Gillispie.
He was the oldest child of a large family, and took a lot of pride in both his siblings and his home state. He remembered growing up on a farm with a lot of fondness and a lot of responsibilities. It also instilled in him a desire to plant things and watch them grow. He was the owner of a well-cared for and abundant garden.
He was married to Joyce Gillispie from 1963 until her death in 2020. They had two children, Belinda and Tim, and two grandchildren, Carolynn and Justin.
Julian did many different things in his life, and liked working with his hands, building things and tinkering. After high school, he tried college but didn’t think it was right for him. He was employed for a few years by the Forest Service in Idaho, working around the woods and the trees and working with his hands and building things. He went into the Army with the hope of being a helicopter pilot, but color blindness told him to try other areas, so he did. He retired from the US Army in 1979, and from Federal Service in 1998, in Fort Ritchie, Maryland. For many years, while in the military and in federal service, he worked as a part-time handyman for people in the Fairfield area. After his second retirement, he became a certified electrician.
During his time in the military he served in Vietnam from 1967 to 1969, and was also stationed in Korea, France, Germany, Alaska, California and Maryland. He liked that he had seen a lot of the world, and said he was proud to have been in 49 states in the U.S. He wouldn’t say which one he hadn’t been in.
A graveside service was held Friday, March 31, 2023, at Fairfield Union Cemetery with Rev. Christopher Frye officiating.
Online condolences may be shared at monahanfuneralhome.com

After college, I struggled to hold a consistent job for a multitude of reasons. For nearly 10 years I bounced between different sales jobs. I had taken a job selling electronic components and was really struggling. I knew that if I didn’t land a big account soon, I’d be looking for a new job. I was having a really bad day and was on my way home. As I was driving home, I happened to drive right by a business that I had been trying to sell on our product for a while. I pulled into their parking lot and got my notes out on the company. The contact was an older guy named Brian. I remembered talkin... Continue»
First Time Porn Stories Page 461
You people who have seen my other stories know my wife Kat and what she is into, for you others she loves to bed women who has never been with another women then takes control of them..
I was at work one day when my office girl Tammy came in crying asking to leave eraly I said OK but what is wrong she explaned her husband was at it again and her daughter was home alone with him, I told her let's go. When we got there He had thrown the girl out and locked the doors and passed out so being the kind hearted person I am I packed them up and took them to my house.
KAT was happy t... Continue»
One Saturday after Noon a buddy of mine was Working in his Garage.. I had Checked Him out Before but nothing ever happened.. This Day was Different I walked over to his garage and all the Doors were closed and i Walked in and i Seen him Setting in his Car Playing with His Cock.. He is a Dark male about 5ft 5in about 145 pounds... So as i walk in and see him Playing with his Cock he Kinda Looked Suprised and i stood at the Door where he was at and it got quiet for a Minute.. He Looked Embarrassed as he looked at me and then he asked if i had ever Did it and of course i have.. I am a White male ... Continue»
I was sent to a boarding school in Yorkshire when I was 13. I was sexually innocent and although I got regular erections I had never ejaculated and knew very little about it. The school house I was in had a dormitory with four corridors radiating from a central hallway with washrooms. Each corridor was separated into cubicles by wooden partitions, which gave some privacy although there was an opening in the top half of the door so that prefects and masters could check on us during the night. Each corridor was presided over by a prefect who had the cubicle nearest the hall. Everyone went to bed... Continue»
I stayed on my knees, the three guys who were interviewing me stood around me in a circle. Looking down at me with dirty, satisfied looks on their faces, their cocks still semi erect. I spoke up in a pitiful voice, "Alan is my interview done?" They all chuckled for a bit before Alan replied.
"We have to talk about that Katie." He glanced at the other guys, "Well I have to take a serious piss, you guys want to talk about Katie and her interview; follow me. And Katie, you stay right there! Don't move and don't get dressed." The three went off to the men... Continue»
Before coming over we lived in a village outside Middleton...I say village but it was two houses either side of a road really.It would take mammy and daddy about 20 minutes into town for the shopping or the cinema or whatever.When they went out for the night I would babysit.
I don't know if it was that daddy was a civilised man or that mammy had trouble inside but unlike others we knew,there was only me and the baby and a good few years between us too....Nice peaceful house.Hahahaha.
I came home from college one day to see the car gone and Uncle Timmy making himself at home with the teapot... Continue»
I have always loved porn especially lesbian porn. It is such a turn on to see women enjoying one another. We had been married 4 years when hubby thought I should try being with a woman. He new a young lady who had been with women so he asked her to show me the ropes. She was excited by the idea! We took a weekend trip to the town she lives in and got a hotel room. She came over and was wearing a low cut red dress and her boobs were huge, I couldn’t stop staring. We took her out for dinner and drinks. I was so nervous and she could tell. She sat next to me and put her hand on my le... Continue»
first off i would like to thank cindy for her great writing skills!
also check out my profile i am looking for sub couples and single women
to produce my babies and live with the king!!
We were a newly married couple, I was 20 and my pretty little wife Helen was only 18. She had been listening to older women chatting at the hairdressers about wife swapping and had been turned on by it. She eagerly told me all the gory details that she had heard and seeing that I was turned on as well, asked me if we should try it. Well the thought of being able to get my hands on lot?s of other women seam... Continue»
I have translated this from German such a good story, i think it should be shared
original is here
My wife and I are a couple in their fifties and rather conservative. Our c***dren are grown and out of the house.
My wife Anne and I had earlier in our marriage a completed sexual life. The to
I regret that over the years became increasingly monotonous. My wife is in spite of its 51 years still an attractive woman. Even though their pool is somewhat expansive and yet quite hang her large breasts.
I think it's still cool when her lush pubic hair untamed f... Continue»
As a healthy woman I have had no qualms whatsoever about sex, race, age, size, and looks, have never entered the equation, just the penis into my vagina, because it's what I wanted at that moment in time.
What most men want to know is what is the biggest cock you have ever rode. Well that is a double-edged question, because 'Big' for a woman is either length or breadth.
For me personally, breadth wins hands down, as the fulfillment feeling makes for a great orgasm, as your vaginal muscles grip the cock, and the fatter that sweet baby is, the more grip you have.
Length on the other hand is l... Continue»
Wife's Bar Stool Fuck
My wife & I had a favorite country bar we went to several times a week for a little drinking & dancing. We became very friendly with the owner & several of the people who worked there.
Les, the owner asked me several times to give him a hand on busy Friday & Saturday nights,by collecting the cover charge at the door & often backed him up as a bouncer when the d***ksgot out of hand.
Al ( wife's nickname ) would often get behind the bar & help our bartender friends when it got very busy.On this one Saturday night two of the barmaids ... Continue»
We were out for our summer works do.
It was organised for a local pub close to work, just a few drinks after work on a Friday night.
As I was driving I wasn't drinking but went along for the laugh anyway.
Abigail was a girl working in the office at the time who obviously didn't go out much and had led a quite sheltered life (seemingly).
She often told us about her Church and talked to us about her religion.
She was very pretty in a plain sort of a way.
As the night progressed she steadily got more and more d***k everyone thought it was very amussing as she clearly didn't drink very o... Continue»
Traffic had been getting to me going to and from work. Sometimes it was a two hour commute each way. My days were really long, I was running out of energy so I decided I was going to buy a motorcycle so I could cut through the lanes and get home early cutting my commute down to 30 minutes. I didn't really know much about motorcycles, how to ride them, anything. I responded to an ad on craigslist for a cruiser bike for sale for a little over $1,000.00 so I went to check it out. The owner was an older gentleman. He looked like a biker. Bald, tattoos, leather pants, leather vest with his bike clu... Continue»
Last night I performed anal sex with another man. It was one of the most erotic experiences I’ve had in my life, mostly because I’d gradually given in to impotence over the last half a decade without knowing what to do about it. I didn’t want to see a doctor because it was too embarrassing an ordeal to put myself through.
I share a house with an openly gay male, Michael, who has lived here for the past year. It was purely for financial reasons and also to have a bit of good company around, to help me to feel less isolated from the world. Michael has had numerous bed mates around on regular ... Continue»
So one of my fantasies is my wife getting involved with other men while I play with all or watch.
We go out of town for weekend and she decides she wants to help with my fantasy finally. We discuss that we will go to bar and see what happens. She dresses in a pair of tight short shorts a nice sleaveless blouse with a a little cleavage. I wear my usual shorts and tee-shirt. She does her hair hair and leaves it down.she puts just. A little makeup on.
We are ready to go and decide on a country western bar. We get there around 8 and it has a nice crowd. We find a seat and order a few drink... Continue»
While fucking Ruth, I'd noticed two things (other than her great breasts) which
turned me on. First, while grasping her ass I noticed it was considerably
bigger and firmer than I had realized, and secondly that she had a big, thick bush.
After the quick stand-up fuck we sat back, still drinking, where she told me
more about herself. She had married young, been with her husband over 40
years and had only had sex with two men other than him. More about that later.
As she talked, I couldn't help but play with the glorious hair on her cunt,
fingering her hole and ticklin... Continue»
I have used Craig’s list to meet women in the past but have not had much luck – they either did not turn up, did not live up to their descriptions or were not very good. However, a couple of months ago I made contact with a woman who was advertising that she wanted a NSA contact as her sex life with her husband had become a bit boring. As there was no photograph with the advert it did not immediately appeal to me. However a few days after seeing the advert I decided to reply.
I heard nothing for a couple of weeks and then received a short email saying that if I wanted we could chat throu... Continue»
The phone rang and my mother answered. "For you." she said.
The voice was Ms. Nancy's "We have about one hour. Get over here on the double. Jack's still at the office and Larry and Donna are working on a community project."
I waved by to my mom, grabbed the keys and bolted out the door in her direction. As I drove, I couldn't help but imagine what was in store for me.
I arrived in about ten minutes. Fortunately, they didn't live far.
When I arrived at the house, she said "I hope you're ready."
"For what" I responded, pretending to be clueless. "Get out ... Continue»
" Are you sure? " he asked me quietly, and very sternly. Looking down at my body, I knew it was what he wanted but if I was not ready, he would wait to see it again. I stayed silent for the duration of his question and then leaned up to gently press my lips against his.
" I'm absolutely sure.. " I cooed softly against his cheek, I was nervous - my whole body was shaking. I stared into his eyes for what felt like a very long time, and then my eyes started to water. I tried to hide it, but my heart was beating so fast I couldn't think. I'm losing my virginity to this man, I thought.
I watc... Continue»
FP sat down and stripped out of his pants completely under the blanket. He then applied some Vaseline to his dick and then asked me to come over to him and sit on his lap. He then reached under the blanket and applied some more gel to my butthole.
Still naked under the blanket, I moved over towards him, standing between his legs with my back to him. I slowly lowered my butthole towards his cock. Once I made contact with his cock, he held his cock in his hand and slowly slide it into my butt as I lowered my ass over his dick.
My ass had loosened up from the dildo and SS cock fuck earli... Continue»

I wish I could give this business ZERO stars, but I had to choose an o... read more I wish I could give this business ZERO stars, but I had to choose an option. I went to TA auto to have a simple tie rod repair on the front end of my car. It was communicated that it would be okay if I brought my own parts, so I did. All day, my car was in the shop with no update from the owner. At the end of the day, I get a call from him stating that he had made a number of UNAUTHORIZED repairs without my knowledge or consent, and then tried billing me for them. Although I was anticipating about 75 dollars in labor, he was quoting me at 200 for everything, including parts I did not need and "new" tires on the front. I told him to speak to my father, since they knew each other and we arranged to pick up my car the next day. The following day, I picked up my car and my dad paid the bill, although I don't think he should have because I did not authorize any of the additional "repairs" made. A couple days later, I was driving and noticed my car pulling to the left. I pulled over and noticed that the driver's side tire was COMPLETELY FLAT, to the point where the rims were touching the ground. I immediately called my father and explained the issue, reminding him that the owner of TA auto had just put "new" tires on my car. My dad made some phone calls, one of them to the owner himself, and was informed that he had taken my tires off and put on his girlfriend's old tires. I was charged for "brand new" tires, not to mention labor, for old tires with a leak in them from his girlfriend's car. If the owner knew fully well that these tires were unfit for his girlfriend, why would he put them on a client's car? He not only endangered my life, but STOLE my perfectly good tires and then charged me for it! The owner of this establishment is a sly, shifty CROOK and I urge everyone to avoid this business like the plague. Please inform anyone contemplating taking their car here to rethink their decision and take their business elsewhere. I for one am fuming from this incident and I demand justice.
that Bruce must of got the only good deal they had cause everyone i'v ... read more that Bruce must of got the only good deal they had cause everyone i'v talked to that got a car from them have nothing good to say about them
Friendly staff great deal on used car. buy here pay here terms are gre... read more Friendly staff great deal on used car. buy here pay here terms are great too.

Search the Collection
Alfred Austin (1835-1913), Poet Laureate
Sitter in 8 portraits
Austin studied and practised law for several years before turning to the writing of literature. He published his first major poetic work, The Season: a Satire, in 1861. Austin went on to publish over forty volumes of verse, prose idylls, novels, and books of criticism. However, his poetry was not highly regarded by his contemporaries, and is now little remembered. In 1866 Austin became a leader writer for the Standard, a position he held for over thirty years. He also edited the National Review for several years. Austin succeeded Alfred, Lord Tennyson as poet laureate in 1896, although his appointment was probably based more on his services to the Tory party than on his poetic ability.

3 | hope
The Faerie Tree. That’s what the tourist website of this tiny town had called it.
It was an ancient oak tree, almost a thousand years old apparently. Its trunk was enormously wide in diameter, and some of the larger branches were so heavy that they bent to the ground.
Wendy could not help but have a sense of awe as she approached the tree. It had stood there for centuries, had been the part of so many people’s lives over the years and had weathered so many storms. A small voice in the back of her mind whispered that if she did not find any traces of fairies here, then she wouldn’t find it anywhere.
There was an almost heavy feel to the air, and it was astoundingly quiet. Wendy had purposefully gone in the afternoon on a weekday so as to be alone.
She gazed up at the branches as she slowly walked around the tree, hardly daring to breathe. If ever she had felt the presence of something magical, it was here. But she hardly dared to think of that, hardly dared to hope, because if she hoped, she could be disappointed. And if she was disappointed, she might give up and never go back to Neverland again.
In the higher branches.
Could it be...?
Wendy squinted up into the tree.
It definitely could be.
She glanced around to make sure that she was truly alone, then grabbed a plastic container from her bag and shoved it in her pocket. The sign at the entrance had said expressly that there was to be no climbing of this ancient tree, but Wendy had no choice. If she ignored the twinkle in the branches, she would regret for the rest of her life that she may have missed her chance to go back.
So, Wendy hauled herself up the tree, the art of tree-climbing coming back to her as she neared the place that could either disappoint her terribly or give her what she had been looking for. Her heart thumped in anticipation.
Perched on a branch, Wendy saw what had sparkled and caught her eye below. She caught her breath, it was not a chocolate bar wrapper this time. Lining the dark green leaves of the tree was a golden dust that reminded Wendy of the glitter she used to put on every craft when she was younger.
Instinctively, she reached out to touch it, but she stopped herself. She could not waste a single speck of it if she was going to make it to Neverland, hopefully with her brothers. She took the plastic container out of her pocket and proceeded to carefully detach the leaves covered in the precious substance from the tree and place them in the container.
Once she had all of it, she quickly closed the container and descended the tree. She put the container in her backpack and as she made her way back to her jeep, she could not help but grin like a fool. After all those years of searching, she had finally found her ticket to Neverland. All that was left to do was to try to convince her brothers to come with her.

Today was a very special day… It was our cousin, Liam’s Christening Day! We went to his special church service in the morning, and had a great time at his party afterwards! He was so cute, and such a good boy the whole day! Way to go Liam! We love you!
-Abby, Emily & Ben
His mommy & daddy were so very proud of him!
Daddy is taking his job as Liam’s Godfather very seriously… He even got to hold a candle in church for him!
Mommy just had to put this picture in, because she thinks daddy is SO handsome!
We made a new best friend today… Liam’s other cousin, Keira! We had SO much fun playing together…
…especially back at the house for Liam’s party!
Keira’s mommy was pretty fun to play with too!
Ben was still recovering after his surgery, so he just spent some quiet time hanging out with Pop-Pop…
… and he stayed busy reading his book to Grandpa!
Everyone was anxious to get their picture taken with Liam, and we were so thankful to have such a beautiful day outside to enjoy!
Ben had to take some pain medicine and take a nap, so unfortunately he didn’t make the family picture this time… But by the look of it, no one was cooperating very well anyway! There's always next time!
Aunt Bridget did a great job decorating for his party!
Dessert was DEFINITELY the best part of the day!
Liam did a great job, but was definitely a bit sleepy after his big day!
Happy Christening Day Liam!

Mifune Kyuzo: Kodokan Judo Judan (10th Dan) was a man who seemingly could throw any opponent at will. His mastery of Judo was legendary even in his time and has grown to nearly fabled status. So dominant was Mifune Sensei's knowledge and ability that the moniker: Judan was used inplace of his name regularly. This is the book he authored in the eve of his life and accompanying film record of his movements. The book is now out of print and original copies are pricey as they have reached collector status.

Grant knew he had his work cut out for him when he set his sites on Elizabeth, he makes sure that she ends up working for him just so that he can get to know her better. He is known as the playboy lawyer, always seen with a new woman on his arm at every function. Elizabeth learns quickly how many women are a part of Grant’s life, thanks to the errands his assistant has her run.
Elizabeth is stubborn, holy crap is this woman stubborn. While I can understand some of her reasons behind that, there are others when I wanted to smack her. She not only supports herself, she takes care of her mother as well and she can’t afford to lose any clients especially by becoming involved with one. She is instantly attracted to Grant and she fights it but when Grant breaks through her defenses you can see how much he really does try to show how much he wants to help her and take care of her.
Grant hasn’t opened himself up to any women emotionally since his ex broke his heart. Elizabeth is different, he shares things with her that he hasn’t with others and just wants to take care of Elizabeth. He backs away from her until he can’t stand it anymore and makes her his. Grant has people in his life, his family and an ex, that try to sabotage their relationship, and they almost succeed. When Grant believes that Elizabeth has betrayed his trust he is cruel and won’t listen to anything she has to say.
I liked Love, Your Concierge, but I had some issues with it as well. Elizabeth’s best friend and employee was at times a massive bitch and would get involved when it wasn’t her place too, and she also kept things from Elizabeth. Elizabeth at times really got on my nerves and while I can understand that she wanted to keep a relationship separate from her business, she could have handled things a hell of a lot better than she did. Grant wasn’t a saint either, I really wanted to beat his ass for what he pulled as well. When the truth comes out Grant does win me back but he should have pulled his head from his ass way before then.
Love, Your Concierge is the first book in the new Concierge series by Jessica Ingro. Ms. Ingro is one of the new authors that I discovered that I am truly beginning to love. She knows how to tug at your emotions, make you so pissed off one minute and the next make you cry the next. I am curious to see where she is going to go with this series and am looking forward to more in the future.
About the AuthorJessica is the author of the Love Square series. She grew up in Central New York, where she spends her days as a Security Analyst at an IT consulting company. In her free time, she enjoys reading books and developing ideas for her own stories. Writing is her secret passion that she's been fostering since elementary school, when she wrote her first book about a puppy. It has always been a dream of hers to be able to share her stories with the world. Jessica currently lives in New York with her husband and three dogs.

Tech3 Racing Team rider Xavi Vierge produced a fearless display in Malaysia to conclude the round 17 fight in 8th. The young Spaniard began the race from 14th on the grid and quickly got to work as he battled through the pack. In the closing stages, Vierge became involved in a fierce fight with local hero Hafizh Syahrin as the clouds threatened. Yet, he held his nerve as the raindrops fell and eventually met the chequered flag inside the top ten.
Meanwhile, Remy Gardner suffered a disappointing close to the weekend after falling on the second lap. The young Australian undertook a superb start to jump up 12 places by the close of the opening lap, which he finished in 13th. However, his luck ran out shortly after, whereby he fell at turn 9 as he attempted to continue his climb.
Position: 8th - Championship: 10th - Points: 98
“We did a good job during the race. I had a very positive start but there was a delay in the first few corners because several riders crashed in front of me, which meant that I lost a lot of positions. Later, my pace was strong and I caught the riders in front and start to fight with Hafizh Syahrin. When the rain began to fall, I tried to lead the group but the race wasn’t stopped and so I attempted to pass my rivals on the brakes. Yet when I opened the throttle, the other bikes were a bit faster and they overtook me. Finally, I finished 8th which is not bad and we collected some valuable points for the championship. Thanks to the Tech3 team for their work and now we will focus on the final round in Valencia.“
Position: DNF - Championship: 20th - Points: 23
“It was a bad end to a really challenging weekend. I made a good start and the first two laps were incredible as I went from 25th to 11th in the course of about ten corners. Everything was looking positive, but then there was another rider in front and I underestimated how slow he was. I think he knew I was behind him before he turned in, yet he chopped my nose, we touched and then I fell. It was really unlucky but what else can I say."
“It was another rewarding weekend for Xavi Vierge and it goes without saying that the three flyaway races have been good for the Tech3 Racing Moto2 Team, as Xavi completed the Japanese Grand Prix in 2nd, the Australian round in 5th and he finished 8th here. The conditions were tough in almost every GP, but he has improved, as has the Mistral 610 and together they are getting stronger. Thanks to him and his entire crew, as well as KYB suspension for their never give up attitude and constant hard work. We are really happy about that and we are inside the top ten in the championship. As a constructor, it is very close between Suter, Speed Up and Tech3, so it is pleasing to see this. As for Remy, he had a bad qualifying, which was a shame because we know his potential is a lot higher than this. However, he had an incredible first lap and got as high as 11th, plus he was ahead of Xavi at some point, which was encouraging. Unfortunately, whilst he was running with the top ten riders, there was someone else in front of him and Remy didn't expect him to be that slow so he hit him by accident. Both of them crashed which was a pity but he is not injured and hopefully, we can finish the season with a strong result in Valencia. I want to thank the entire Tech3 Racing Team for their work and overall, I have to say that this is a really good season for us."

Muş, in the east of Turkey, had a terrible earthquake in 1966. Many people still live in temporary housing. This is a conservative area with very few believers but interest in the BCC was once good. Come show them Jesus.
The team that visited Muş had amazing protection from the Lord. They were able to share with 21 different people as well as to give out lots of literature and SD cards as well! One man, however, was very antagonistic, especially towards the local believers who were on the team. Pray for his heart and praise God for the local believers' courage and patient response in the face of such harshness. Please also lift up Y and her daughter D who welcomed the team into their home. They seemed deeply moved when they heard that God loves them and listened to a song about love in their minority (heart) language. Later, one of the team actually got to sing at an outdoor restaurant in the minority language while another explained why she loves this minority people. Then they were able to distribute materials to some of the workers there. There is no church in Muş - ask God to establish his Kingdom here!

It's been a rough weekend. My little brother (he's 19) fell into a fire on Friday night and was burned very badly. He he had to be air lifted to a burn center in Georgia (he lives in NC). Thankfully, as the weekend progressed, we learned that his burns are not nearly as bad as we originally thought. He is awake and doing well. He had his first surgery today, to debride the area. He will have to have skin grafts on his back and the backs of his arms. Those were really the only areas that were significantly affected (thank goodness). The surgeon said today that if all goes well, he will be fully healed in 6 weeks! He is in a lot of pain right now, especially after his surgery, but otherwise he is doing well. I was worried sick all morning yesterday, but then I got to speak with him in the afternoon and I felt much better. I know that he is going to be okay. It will be a rough 6 weeks, but in the end, all will be well. He is the best brother ever and I love him dearly. I'm so thankful that he is going to be okay and that the situation is not as bad as we originally thought.
This is an outfit I wore to work last week (this dress also worn here). The Buds and Bunches tee is one of my favorite purchases and one of my most worn items. I also have it in orange, which I love, but this color gets a lot more wear.
Top: Anthropologie Buds and Bunches tee
Cardigan: J. Crew Jacke
Belt: Anthropologie Snakebite
Tights: J. Crew

The patient: William, a successful businessman in his late 30’s.
Why he came to see me: He had problems with seasonal allergies that were particularly bad and had affected his hearing and his ability to “clear his ears” when flying to business meetings. An over-the-counter decongestant had initially helped but he felt that more could be done. He was a longtime subscriber to Bottom Line publications and knew of me through my presence on the Bottom Line Inc. website.
How I evaluated him: During my physical exam at our initial office visit, I evaluated his neck, explaining that sometimes misalignment in the vertebrae could contribute to his issues. His neck was fine, but during my inspection of his ears I found that when he pinched his nose and gently blew into it, his eardrums didn’t budge. This was significant in that clogging of the eustachian tubes, which lead from the back of the nose to the inside of the ear drums, could impair hearing and affect balance. It can also interfere with “clearing” during airplane takeoff and landing.
How we addressed his problem: I explained that it was possible that his adenoids, the tonsillar tissues at the opening of the eustachian tubes, were swollen and that I could directly compress and reduce them.
The technique involved my inserting a gloved finger, treated with a gel that I compounded containing decongestant botanical extracts, into his mouth along the roof, passing over the hard and then soft pallet, which separated the back of his mouth and the back of his nose. Having him relax and breath in short, panting breaths, I pressed the tip of my finger over the margin of the soft pallet into the back of his nose and quickly introduced it into the opening of his adenoids. The technique involves introduction and circular compression into each adenoid, one after the other. It needs to be done quite quickly as although not particularly painful, it is sufficiently unusual and alarming that patients appreciate my speed.
Obviously while I was doing this I was thanking him for allowing me to perform this procedure and not biting my hand!
The patient’s progress: Within minutes of finishing, he blew his nose and cleared his throat repeatedly and had a few cups of water. I re-examined his ears and saw that blowing into closed nostrils this time produced movement of the ear drums. He reported feeling “much more clearheaded” and felt that his hearing had noticeably improved. He returned once more to repeat the procedure and has not been troubled by diminished hearing nor ear-clearing problems over the past few months. He thanked me for “the anatomy lessen” (yes, pun intended!) and for coming up with a solution that he had never imagined.

We went to Salem pond and fed the ducks! Dallas is in love with birds so he had a blast!!
Feeding the ducks and himself!! He'd throw a piece and eat a piece!!
Love this picture!!
The rest of the pics aren't from today but I wanted to share them!
Loves the pantry and loves food!!
So, this one has a story!! We have a mac laptop and the cord for it it relatively expensive. Dallas has an obsession with cords and loves to suck on them. We have bought 3 for the laptop because he is so sneaky!! He has been electrocuted so you'd think he'd learn!! One morning we came downstairs and finished breakfast and I was washing bottles. Dallas will usually play with his toys and is so loud. Well, he was silent and I hadn't heard him for a while so I figured he went upstairs. I walked through the whole house saying his name expecting to turn a corner and find him. While I was upstairs I heard him giggling!! He was downstairs behind the side table trying to get the cord!!! He is such a stinker!!

Hi my name is Anna and I came across this website by chance! I have recently boarded at Wyke Lodge (2001-2003) and was so surprised to see all the old photos of the house - it was difficult when we were there to find out exactly what the house used to be like!
I dont know if many people are aware but the house is actually closing down this year and Symonds is just going to use the other two boarding houses instead. I would love to hear stories of what was life was like in the house in the past!
If anyone has boarded there then pls get in touch!

The magic word! How to achieve, maintain and hack it.
James McKinney describes himself not simply as a “serial entrepreneur” but as a “failed serial entrepreneur.” By his count, he has four startups that did not make it, although from each failure he learned something. “I did not believe it was me, I did not believe it was my skill set,” he told me during […]READ NOW
Discover articles from Tom and our expert guest writers.

Prior to leaving, Chin had plunked a new cellphone into Danny's lap with instructions to wait for Kono's call. It was an intended physical connection between the sterile hospital room and what was being done outside its walls. Any incoming calls or text messages would take time though, so Danny resorted between staring out the window and the clock. His breakfast tray was delivered, food was investigated and pushed around more than actually eaten before it was studiously ignored for the most part.
The morning dragged on and he was still sitting quietly in the wheelchair when Ellen Ramirez hobbled up behind him on a pair of crutches. Her ankle had been operated on and would heal to leave her only with a very subtle limp. Sneaking up on him, she balanced the crutches against the wall before placing a hand on either of his shoulders to lean over and give him a warm kiss on the side of his cheek.
"Hey! Surprise. I came to visit!" She had been released on Monday and sent home to recover. But Ponch had dutifully kept her appraised first of Danny's condition and now of Christina Hahn's missing status. Refusing to remain alone at the house, she had insisted he bring her that morning so she could be more involved. Now seeing Danny's forlorn silhouette where he sat staring out the window of his room, Ellen was very glad that she had. Her whisper held a smile and he was truly surprised to see her for the genuine happy grin which replaced a much too pensive frown.
"Ellen!" Danny hadn't seen her since their desperate time in the jungle when on the run from Madison and he grabbed her fingers off his shoulder, laughing when she hopped around on one foot to sit on the narrow window ledge. A cellphone sat idle in his lap next to his casted wrist and he glanced to both before smiling again and asking about her ankle.
"So?" He pointed to the cast which overwhelmed her foot up to her knee. The bruises around her neck were also still visible, but now fading to a lighter shade of yellow. "How's that doing and how are you feeling?"
"Me? I'm fine ... this little break won't keep me down for long." She was measuring him well enough though to pick out the fever in his eyes and uncomfortable expression as he tried to reposition himself in the chair. His chest obviously ached and his feet were awkwardly cumbersome until they healed a bit more to hold his weight.
"Ponch says you can be discharged once this fever breaks and he gets a better hold on the infection. Then a walker instead of this lousy wheelchair."
"Yeah," Danny nodded unconvincingly before gesturing towards the tray of food off to the side. "That and he's a demonic two-headed menace when it comes to food."
"He's only a two-headed menace when you argue with him. You need to eat and you know it. Don't look for any sympathy from me, buster," Ellen shrugged with every intent of compounding what her stern husband had instructed.
"We both understand that you don't feel well but Ponch has been known to use feeding tubes at the drop of a hat. And the truth is Danny, one more day of this and you won't be far off that decision being made for you. It's been days since you've had a normal meal and you've only picked at what has been brought upstairs. You're never going to get your strength back if you don't dig in and get over this obstinate, stubborn, self-absorbed kick that your on."
He stared at her aggravated face in a stunned silence which only made her shake her head in frustration. She had to remind herself that they'd both barely been back in Hawaii for three days. Saturday had been a race against the clock and where she had been operated on Sunday, Danny had finally stabilized. Monday had marked a significant improvement with a move to a private room. Then a terribly worrisome corner had turned as her husband had so described Grace's remarkably healing visit with her father.
It was now only Tuesday and he was still very weak and barely out of the ICU himself. His team was on a mission and he was stuck in a wheelchair or a bed. She still fretted though over his attitude and then rubbed his shoulder soothingly. "What's wrong? I thought you were past some of this after you saw your daughter and your memory came back?"
"I don't know." He did though as he sat leaden in the chair and dropped his eyes to his lap to study the square shape of the cellphone. It was obvious that he was distracted by whatever it was his team was involved in so, Ellen hopped off the ledge with one foot and then maneuvered herself to the back of his chair.
"We won't go for long because I can tell you're hurting already," Ellen suddenly announced. Danny's complaints were instantaneous as she began a slow, hop-push of his chair out of the room and into the corridor. It was futile for him to be anything but a passenger as she managed to aim them both towards the nurse's station.
"Ellen? What do you think you're doing?" Her answering chuckle made him bite back a smile as she pushed him crazily forward. A near miss of a parked gurney had them both laughing. "This isn't working well. Where are we going?"
The two HPD officers standing outside Danny's room slowly followed in confusion. "Uh, excuse me?" One cleared his throat in askance, but another deep voice got their attention before they could get any farther from the room.
"I'd like to know the very same thing," Ponch's voice boomed directly behind them. "What's this about?"
"We're going outside to sit in the sun and to get some fresh air, Alphonse. I need a bit of help though," Ellen replied blithely before blatantly staring at the HPD officers in silent demand. One officer looked to the other but before they could object, the big doctor was again intervening. He nodded in approval to the two men and then never hesitated as he waved down another nurse.
"Are you now?" Ponch teased his wife who was balanced on one foot behind the wheelchair. "Fine. But my way ... I don't need my favorite wife to rebreak a perfectly set ankle." She grinned while patiently waiting for his decision but rolled her eyes dramatically at the excessive hen-pecking demands when the nurse walked over.
"Get me Marco, another available volunteer or nurse's aide, plus a second wheelchair." Other requirements were established as Danny became the unwilling topic of conversation. Ponch was gesturing to his IV and then checking the time for his next round of pain medications.
"These two fine officers will also tag along with you for thirty minutes and no more; I won't be having things overdone so quickly." Without a say in the matter of his own short destiny, Danny was watching them in amusement until his cellphone vibrated and he immediately pounced on it.
"Kono? Do you have any good news for us?" Danny asked.
Doctor Ramirez and Ellen instantly quieted and the nurse that had been instructed to find Marco paused in the hallway. She lingered within earshot to see if the officers had learned anything about the missing TAMC nurse. Danny's prolonged silence made each glance to the other as he listened to whatever Kono was saying. Eventually, a small smile eked out and Ponch leaned even closer to catch his eyes and then waved his hands frantically to ask for more information. Danny's almost too bland expression told him nothing until the tiny grin reached his eyes.
"They have her? Is that a yes?" Ponch hissed hopefully at Danny who only glared happily at the big doctor as a way to ask that he wait. The quick nod wasn't enough either for the big doctor who was now almost bouncing in agitation. "Well? Danny?"
Kono was describing the first two locations and then how they had finally found the nurse at the third abandoned building site. "We're waiting for the ambulance, but Christina will be at TAMC within the hour. There's a closer hospital but she only wants to go there ... tell Doc to be waiting for contact once the EMT's begin transporting her."
A small gathering of staff had slowly encircled Danny in the hallway as he talked and he had to close his eyes to tune out their growing excitement. "Is she hurt ... did he do anything to her, Kono? How is she?"
He felt what had to be Ellen's hand on his shoulder as he asked that very important question and then registered the frustration when he only nodded to what Kono told him. Ponch was huffing loudly about the unfairness of the one-sided conversation and practically pacing a tiny hole in the linoleum floor.
"He knocked her out and she has a nice bruise on her chin to match the one from Channing's attempted escape. She's got a whopper of a headache. But she's more scared and exhausted than anything right now, Danny. She can't wait to get out of here and home to her husband," Kono happily added.
"Good, good," Danny breathed out quickly and then asked her to hold on while he let his hand drop to his lap. His face broke into a huge smile as he looked from Ponch to Ellen and then to the few new people were so anxiously waiting for word.
"Yes! They found Christina and she's okay. She'll be here within the hour." The cheers in the hallway were deafening as Ellen threw her arms around his neck. Even the two HPD officers tasked with guarding Danny received slaps on the back and some astonishing hugs. Ponch was beaming and he gestured to the same nurse to immediately find Marco and then David Hahn or even Officer Paleo with the good news.
Danny laughed and he could hear Kono's thrilled voice chiming in on the other side but she had more to share. Wedging the phone to his ear, Danny closed his eyes again and turned his head away to hear through the excited talking. "What else? There's something else?"
"McNamara asked her very deliberate questions about you and the case. He knows that Channing is alive and likely to rat him out; he also knows that you're safe and sound at TAMC." Danny winced at the news as he screwed his eyes shut even more to listen. He could hear Duke Lukela in the background. The sergeant seemed to be demanding additional protection for both Pete Channing and himself at TAMC as he caught the faint words of ".. just in case."
"HPD will send a few more units," Kono confirmed the concern and then her voice dropped. "Danny, I'm staying out here to wait for the forensics team."
His eyes snapped open at that announcement and he completely ignored the small group of TAMC staff who were milling about in the hallway so happily.
"Why?" His sharp word brought up Ellen and Ponch short in their celebration and they refocused on their injured friend. "What did you find?"
Kono paused and then carefully told him the truth. "There wasn't much at the first two locations. But I can prove you were here, Danny. I want to start at this site and then case all the others to collect evidence."
It was all she said because she was choking back tears as she watched Duke wrap a blanket around Christina Hahn. She wiped her eyes before a tear could escape as Duke handed the nurse a bottled water where she now sat on the edge of the police car. "Tell Doc all of this, okay? I'll see you later today."
Kono abruptly ended her call to Danny only to re-enter the cavernous dilapidated building to take photographs and begin collecting evidence. She knew that the dried rusty-colored blood on the chair and floor would be Danny's and it pained her to see it and know in advance what the forensic team would eventually prove. Her face was set in a stony silence as she readied the equipment she needed to hasten her own samples for Charlie Fong. She also catalogued her own folder of photographs as an HPD officer taped off the entire quadrant.
Ellen squeezed Danny's shoulder again as he dropped his hand into his lap. "Danny? Is everything alright?"
"Christina Hahn was forced to tell McNamara about Channing and myself." She narrowed her eyes and glanced towards her husband who was already calling security. Between TAMC staff and HPD, the facility would become a fortress until everyone felt safer.
"Kono has a few more things to wrap up," He explained and then tried to find the smile that he had lost from his face. He instinctively knew what Kono had discovered and she was doing the right thing to preserve the crime scene, as well as the other three she would need to investigate. But he suddenly felt exceedingly exhausted as he started to nervously tap the phone against his casted wrist.
For what seemed like the hundredth time, he checked the clock on the wall and tried to figure out if Chin and Steve had already landed or if McNamara was really going to be there. His mind raced through any number of possibilities and he frowned to himself. Things were definitely coming to an anxious close and he was lost in those thoughts until Ponch pried the cellphone from his fingers.
"Are you expecting any other calls? No? Good." The doctor stared down at him in a happy mix of relief and a mocking amusement while he pocketed the device. He hadn't even given Danny a chance to answer and he chuckled at the annoyed frown.
"Stop worrying so much; they know what they're doing." His kind words meant Chin and Steve, and Danny quieted for a moment. "Outside with all of you. Now. Just for a short time since it will do you some good."
Ramirez also appeased the two HPD officers regarding the sanctity of the small courtyard. "It's safe and quiet there. You won't have any problems."
Marco had jogged up to hear the end of the news about Christina Hahn and to see how he could be of help to Doctor Ramirez. He was just in time to get the beginning of Danny's rather frustrated rant.
"All? All of who? The two of us ... and Marco? Plus Mutt and Jeff here, and the entire United States National Guard?" Danny snarked back as he griped to Ellen and then made a motion with his hand to ask for the return of his phone. The two HPD officers had to fight back their own growing laughter since it was beginning to appear as if they were forming a convoy. Two security guards had appeared at the end of the hall and the swarm of people was becoming rather overwhelming.
"This is ridiculous," Danny tapped his hand on the arm of the wheelchair as he counted at least eight in the small party. "All of this for thirty minutes? It hardly seems worth the trouble."
Then he stuck his hand out again for the phone with a defiant look. "Give it back. They might call and need something."
"Inner courtyard and they aren't the National Guard, Detective." Ramirez was on his wife's side now as he folded his arms authoritatively. The man needed a healthier distraction and Ramirez had seen something - or rather someone - interesting which would additionally add fuel to the pleasant idea. "It's safe enough for a short break."
He grinned sarcastically only to shove the phone deeper into his coat. "No, by the way. I think not because someone else needs you right now."
"Phone. Now, please," Danny was determined though as the doctor pursed his lips when his patient missed the meaning of his last few words. The standoff was brief and the doctor snorted merrily as a small hand intercepted Danny's fingers. Then Grace appeared as if by magic in his lap.
"Hi, Danno! Can I push the chair?" Her question was almost shy, even a bit guilty, as he stared at her in surprise.
"Grace! You're supposed to be in school. Aren't you?" Danny gripped her fingers gently as they shared a quick kiss then looked up to see Rachel standing a few feet away. By her expression, they would talk later about Grace's frightful dream-filled night and early morning tears about going to school. She was overly anxious to see her father again to reassure herself that he was home and truly safe. Crying jags, contrived stomach-aches and a refusal to eat her breakfast had finally driven her mother to agree.
Grace smiled hesitantly at his question and then whispered the truth only for him to hear. "I didn't want to go to school. I wanted to see you." Her lip trembled as she waited for his reaction which was enough for him to pull her more into his lap.
"Just this once, Monkey," he soothed softly.
Grace gently wrapped her arms around his neck with a soft sob. "I was afraid, Danno."
"I know but everything's alright. I'm okay." Secretly, he was near tears himself that she had come to him, though of course, she would. He was whispering into her hair with his eyes closed as she clung more tightly to his neck. With only one hand, he could only give her an awkward, thankful hug in return then smoothed her hair back from her damp cheeks.
"Danno loves you Grace." She giggled and his smile returned while he thumbed the front of her blouse playfully before tapping her nose. "You're just in time to join me and Aunt Ellen for a walk outside."
Steve landed just thirty minutes behind Brian McNamara's almost relaxing ferry trip. By the time, the lawyer had found a taxi and made it to the airport, the two adversaries were only a scant fifteen minutes apart. The nature of Kamekona's prized treasure made it a perfect weapon; though it drew amused glances from the tarmac. Steve sighted a location with the tower that was safe and yet not in the more public view so that the two heavily clad and well-armed men were not seen easily as they disembarked. He descended by the farthest free-standing hangar with advice again from the tower that the jet in question was also in that vicinity with the pilot on the premises.
As promised, the sparkling white G550 Gulfstream was easy to spot on the opposite side of the hangar bay. A few other smaller, private planes flanked it on either side. The jet appeared to be far from ready to depart with its intended solo client. Steve and Chin approached the large hangar cautiously. The main floor was open to the air and a blue and white helicopter sat in its middle obviously undergoing some type of repairs. The mechanic was nowhere to be seen, but ladders and tools were strewn about the hard concrete floor in an order that would only make sense to him.
The rafters were incredibly high in order to fit all types of aircraft. A metal staircase in the rear of the metal building led upstairs to elevated offices and a lounge with small windows that overlooked the central bay area. Above the pre-fabricated office space was open air, attic-like storage space that could be reached by yet another short staircase. Even from where they stood, both men could see the over-crowded mess of different sized crates and boxes.
To the far left and just under the staircase was a small dark hallway that led to the back of the hangar and most likely to a rear emergency exit and lavatories. They studied and absorbed all of it but their goal was to investigate the source of the voices they could hear emanating down to them from above. The echo was confusing and it made the words unintelligible, however it was easy to hear that at least one person was indeed quite angry.
Unable to see anyone or clearly make out the heated conversation, Steve and Chin waited just inside the corner of the building where they were hidden by the parked tour helicopter. It took a few minutes, but they finally spied a blocky, broad-shouldered shape with hands that were gesturing wildly to someone also in the lounge area. His angry loud voice echoed down and Steve nodded in approval.
"That's him. He's here."

Kristin gets to the heart of Clemmie
Kristin Scott Thomas understands what it is to feel divided. Which is why she is perfect for the role of Churchill's wife
It wasn't the first time Kristin Scott Thomas had been asked to play Clemmie Churchill - the fiercely bright, troubled and tempestuous wife of Britain's most revered leader, Winston Churchill.
She had been asked to portray Clemmie several times before, though she's not sure why. "I suppose I've often played sort of upper-class people," she says. "I don't know."
This time, however, it was Joe Wright who was asking. The director of Atonement and purveyor of lavish naturalistic British period pieces was helming Darkest Hour, a new project about Churchill's first months in office and his battle to convince his cabinet to mobilise against the Nazis.
Perhaps it was the intelligence and the complexity that Scott Thomas brings to her roles which convinced him she'd be right for it. "I figured that a woman who was married to Winston Churchill had to be able to give as good as she got," Scott Thomas says, "and to be a highly intelligent individual to be able to bear him, basically, and to be able to remain interesting to him. That was the logical conclusion I came to."
And though she did originally say no, even to Joe Wright, she eventually allowed herself to be persuaded to take on the part. On one condition. That the script be redrafted to round out the character of Clemmie.
"When I first read the script, I did say no," she says. "And the reason I said no was because we didn't know about the character, we learnt nothing about this character. And it is extraordinary to be married to a man who is a leader of the world. And that particular leader, who got us out of the terrible situation. So who is this woman who is his wife, his confidante, his co-reader, is part of his engine, his motor? She's so intricately woven into his life. Who is this woman? And actually in the first draft that I read, there weren't any clues as to who she was."
On Scott Thomas's insistence, the script was changed. "They adjusted things that already existed so we could get a better picture of Clementine."
Despite the snow white wig that Scott Thomas has to wear for the role, she still manages to imbue the part with a hint of leonine sexuality. It is apparent in her graceful movements and the glove-like fit of her exquisite clothes. But this, she says, is very true to the woman Clemmie was.
"There's always something - you have to be able to connect to characters on a personal level," she tells me. "Even the most obscure thing, a tiny little spark of a connection is important. Certainly with a character as rich as this one, there are certainly lots of things you can be intrigued by and recognise and empathise with. The things that perhaps were the most fun to play with as far as the character is concerned were to do with her physicality. She was much taller than Winston, she was gangly, but she was incredibly elegant and always absolutely impeccable. She was obsessed, apparently, with being well turned out."
Scott Thomas herself shares a kind of outsider status with the woman she portrays. Though Clementine Churchill's life brought her to the very heart of the British establishment, her early life was bohemian and unconventional. "I find her to be absolutely fascinating," Scott Thomas says.
"Coming from quite a difficult beginning - she was the daughter of a divorcee in the 1900s - can't have been easy. And they were broke and so they had to move to Dieppe where they lived off her mother's earnings at the gambling table, which must have been extremely uncomfortable. She lived in fear of poverty, a dread of poverty... She'd been taken out of school very young because her father didn't believe that girls needed an education, and yet she was clever enough to be able to hold conversations with these brilliant men. Churchill wasn't the only brilliant man. She'd been engaged to some other people before, but she was a bolter.
"Unconventional to the core, she had such an aura about her that people still talk about it to this day - people who met her never forgot her. Even small children."
Perhaps Scott Thomas relates to this because in her own way, she too has always lived a restless, rootless sort of life. Like Clemmie, she spent formative years in France. The difference being that Scott Thomas then made France her adopted country. She was born in Cornwall and grew up there. She lost her father, a pilot, in an aeroplane crash when she was small. At the age of 18, she moved to Paris to be an au-pair, and from that moment on was to be forever divided - torn between two countries. She married a French gynaecologist and the couple had three children who were raised in Paris, but she has always maintained an active career on both sides of the channel, playing roles in both French and English. In 2005, she got divorced and in 2015, talked of her desire to return to London. These days, she seems rather to be in a state of permanent confusion about where home is.
"I wish I could just regroup and glue it all together," she told me when I interviewed her two years ago. "The conflict between theatre and film, conflict between countries, conflict between the English language and French language. I'm split down the middle and I think I've just got to go with it."
A few years ago, she declared that after a career spanning more than three decades, she was finished with film. "I'm bored by it," she said, "so I'm stopping." Happily for her fans, that retirement hasn't come to pass. But perhaps that is partly because she's sought out new ways of keeping things interesting. Having focused mainly on theatre work for the last few years, she's now moving into directing. It's not, she jokes, exactly a leap - but more of "a drag. It's very, very tricky". Yet, it seems stepping behind the camera is a move that has reinvigorated her creative spark. "I've often thought about doing it," she says. For her first project, she's taking on The Sea Change, a screen adaptation of the novel by Elizabeth Jane Howard, about a marriage in crisis - a theme about which Scott Thomas knows a thing or two herself. "The Sea Change asks a question I have been trying to answer in many of my performances," she told The Guardian. "what are the reasons for the thrills and difficulties of love? I want to make a film that has depth, humour and beauty." Exactly, then, the kind of meaty film that her fans already know and love her for.
Darkest Hour will be released in cinemas on January 12
Sunday Indo Living

Posted , 3 users are following.
after 7 years of being on venlafaxine after really bad post natal depression I'm going to attempt to quit. I have read the forums for tips and it seems everyone's story is different. Here is my story. I have suffered depression since a child but coped with it as I thought that was how life was. After post natal depression I agreed to take anti depressants for my childs sake, I didn't want him growing up with a tearful, crazy mother (like I did) I guess they worked, or it may have been mind over matter and having a beautiful child at 42 which was such a blessing. But we all know being a parent adds to the workload and it's never going to be easy. I really believed having a child myself would make me happier than I had been growing up as I could give my child the love I never had and realise that the life I used to have was not normal. I went back to work full time, got a bigger mortgage and done it all on my own. I don't resent any of it, I love being a mother it's priceless. I had ups and down days on the venlafaxine but I really did have more good days than I used to have, so there's progress, after 6 years of being on the tablets I have started getting really down again with uncontrollable crying and angry moods. When I feel like I'm running a hotel and the partners not pulling his weight I let off a tangent and really hate myself, but that's probably how most women feel at times. My mum makes me feel worse and really brings me down as I can never go to her when I feel low as she goes on about how lucky I am and I know how she has felt, so the support was never there. At Christmas I invited the parents over to stay and mum was in a right filthy, patronising and picking me to pieces mood. I finally snapped after 3 whole days and nights of it and it finally hit me that my problem was right in front of me. I was emotionally and physically abused as a child by my mother, I'd had bottles smashed over my head, beatings that these days would not be acceptable and living in fear of what will she do next. When I moved out at 26 the emotional abuse still continued, I was constantly getting bad comments and my mum was like a time bomb, sometimes I'd leave her house in tears as she made me feel so low. At Christmas after telling her to leave the house as she had over stepped the mark, her venom flooded out and she told me she hated me over and over and said she never wanted to see me again. In a way I knew this would be for the best, I could finally start to get better. I've had 2 breakdowns at work and having counselling. I believe this is my lifestyle so this is the start of kicking the tablets.
2 likes, 9 replies

Stayed in the Weatherspoon Hotel which forms part of the Weatherspoons pub attached. Was a really lovely room and the staff were so helpful. Sunday night is the best deal From £49.00
There is cheap food and drinks in the pub part.
The best hotel ever. The room was spotless and the comfy bed was to die for! White fluffy towels were changed daily. Tea and coffee making facility was excellent with beautiful Cornish biscuits. All staff were extremely polite and helpful. I would definitely stay here again.
I decided to go to Cornwall and stayed at the John Francis Basset Hotel as it was in the town centre and was part of the Wetherspoon chain. As I had stayed at another Wetherspoons hotel (pub) which good value and comfortable and quiet in the room.
However, the stay at this hotel was a different experience. The pub was very lively as you may well expect, but what I did not expect to hear was the hotel reception office door slamming shut every time a member of staff went through it. Now please understad, this was not just any door, this was a heavy fire door! and staff seem to be going in and out of the office at all sorts of anti-social hours. Being that I was on the ground floor near to reception, I wonder how much noise I would have had to put up with if I had been above the office.
The room was cold and the heat did not feel like to was actually working, fortunately for I saw there were 2 electric heaters under the wardrobe to keep us warm.
My advice to anyone looking to save here is try to a room as far away from reception as possible. The room you don't want is the room on the ground floor near reception
The usual grand old, repurposed Wetherspoons building. Huge, comfortable bedrooms
with a large en suite shower room. Plenty of tea and coffee, mineral waters and biscuits. There is a separate reception at this one with someone available 24 hours. The bar is usual Wetherspoons stuff, but very well managed. The food came out hot and fresh and the beer was well kept.
My only negative was that the shower tray had not been put in level and the water ran out on to the floor and the thermostat wouldn't go quite hot enough for my liking. Parking in the area is also a bit tricky.
This Hotel is centrally located to travel in Cornwall. I had the best time here and slept like a baby on the days we stayed there.
The family room where I stayed was equipped with everything, a dryer, an ironing board with an iron, tea, and coffee with beautiful cookies.
The bathroom as well had everything. A big shower, a large tub, and shower gel.
As it was a family room, it also had a pull out sofa bed for 2 people.
With a Wetherspoons just below, good food is very accessible. But please be assured that the noise from the pub doesn't reach you in your room.

I am dating this guy who is such a mama's boy. She does everything for him. What am I just a piece of ass? He always compares me and his mom goes to me well he doesn't like it this way, he likes it that way. What's the deal with that?
Most Helpful Girl
You answered your own question in your question! She does everything for him! He has her placed on a pedestal and it isn't likely anything you do or say will take her off it. Sounds like he thinks his mom is gold and nobody will ever compare to her. Also sounds like she'd be one heck of a mother in law, heh.
It's not a deal breaker, but at the same time it's not something YOU can change. I would consider moving on because that's the last thing I'd want for myself. Unless he's sick in bed with the flu there's no way I'd baby a grown man (not in the way his mommy does anyway)! And I surely wouldn't stand for being compared to his mom or any other woman for that matter.2

Thursday on American Idol, Jennifer Lopez looked like she was trying to figure out a way to save MK Nobilette, with our without the approval of the other judges. Maybe she just couldn't bring herself to break the bad news, but, for a few seconds there, it seems like she wanted to blurt out, "You're saved!" just before the show went off the air, not allowing Harry Connick Jr. a chance to contradict her.
When the cameras shut down, though, Connick, the judge who finally told the 20-year-old singer from San Francisco that her Idol run had ended, came up to Nobilette and told her how much he liked her voice and how he hoped to hear an album from her someday.
"That was really nice of him," Nobilette says. "I really respect him as a musician."
Throughout the season, the judges praised the tone of Nobilette's voice and her easy manner of delivery on a show that sees more than its share of singers who try too hard. At the same time, they called her out for appearing uncomfortable onstage, telling her as recently as Wednesday that she should practice by watching herself in a mirror in order to improve her stage presence.
Nobilette says she always has struggled with her presence on stage. "I used to have really bad stage fright," she says. "I think it got better as the show progressed." She hopes it will get even better as she performs several times a week during the summer tour. "When I continue to do other shows, it will get better and better."
Nobilette's presence problems weren't limited to the stage, though. Viewers often commented that she seemed ill at ease or sullen when the camera caught her offstage. Nobilette saw those comments and isn't sure why she came across that way. "Maybe they just panned on me at the wrong times," she says. "I definitely smiled. I definitely applauded for the other contestants — that was one of the comments I read, that I didn't applaud for the other contestants. That's definitely not true. I always applauded for everybody else. I guess I just have an angry face!"
More than any other finalist on the show, with the possible exception of Malaya Watson, Nobilette underwent a dramatic change in style since the early episodes that invariably showed her in a ballcap, sweatshirt or letterman-style jacket. She says she didn't wear anything she wouldn't have chosen on her own, though.
"If something had bothered me, I would have said no," she says. "The makeup was the biggest thing that changed. People said, 'Don't let them change who you are. Don't wear makeup.' But some people don't realize that it's a television show and everybody wears makeup. Even the boys are wearing makeup. I know it looks like I have on more make-up than I normally do, because I do. At the same time, it doesn't bother me at all to wear that make-up or those clothes. It was fine with me."
Once Nobilette lost the long sleeves, viewers began to see her tattoos. She added one during the course of the show — a diamond on her right forearm that she got on Venice Beach.
"A diamond is important to me — to shine bright and be who you are," she says. "I think it shows power and strength."
Nobilette didn't realize when talking with the judges before the semifinals that she'd become the first gay Idol contestant to acknowledge her or his sexual identity on the show. Idol had featured gay contestants throughout its history, she says, and she knew another Season 13 semifinalist, Emmanuel Zidor, was openly gay.
"I did come out and say that because I feel like it is part of me," she says. "They stress very highly on the show that you want America to know who you are. You want them to get to know you.
"I also have gay parents. The queer community is my family. That's where I grew up, especially living in the city of San Francisco. I thought that was important."
She's not sure if her acknowledgement had any impact on the voting. " I got a lot of hate, but I also got a lot of love," she says. "so I think it's kind of even. If I hadn't said it, I'm pretty much 100% sure everybody would have known it anyway."
She didn't have any issues with the other cast members, she says. In fact, a couple of them may have taken heat for standing up for her.
"Some of the 'Bama Boys, like C.J. Harris and Dexter Roberts, had a couple people say they stopped voting for them," she says. "C.J. did an interview where they asked, 'How do you feel about having the first openly gay contestant in your year?' He said, 'I love MK. MK's like a sister to me.' I feel like some people knocked on them for that. That was really awesome of them to be that supportive.
"I love them for that."

Today we had our first 50 Pound Club member make this goal. Mrs. Williams and her granddaughter were here today and between them they picked 54 pounds. This was Mrs. Williams' second visit for this year and I didn't think to ask her how many she picked the first time, but she made the goal first. I have 2 other customers who are at 33 and 34 pounds respectively, but they haven't finished up yet.
I have to say this about Mrs. Williams. When we first started harvesting, we were in the wholesale business like all of the large farms in Pender County. We hired local workers to help harvest and we packed them for shipment across the country. Mr. and Mrs. Williams were among the first workers that we had in those early years and they were two that picked for us multiple years in a row. I can say with more than 20 years of blueberry harvesting experience that we have never had a better blueberry picker than Mrs. Williams! She was fast but more importantly from my perspective, her berries were clean and ready for packing and I never had a single problem with her work product. We have often compared other workers to her standard and only a few have met up to it but not a single one surpassed her in quality of work. Thank you for your years of service and your dedication to quality. We respect and admire you and we are glad that you have become a valued customer on our u-pick farming operation.
Of course, I have to say this about Mr. Williams, God rest his soul. He picked a good bucket of berries too! He was older though and when the Oneals were in the front field, he would come and bring a 5 gallon bucket and sit under the bush and pick. We let the Williams' pick the front field because the Oneal variety has a spindly bush that you can see the berries through. At that time the alternative was the Croatan variety that is more like a hedge and more difficult for this type of harvesting. At that time we had 7 workers who harvested the Croatans and 2 Williams' who harvested the Oneals. That was in the heyday of production at Farmer Mac's. Both fields had bushes that you could disappear into because the plants were shoulder height, but from the bottom of the middles, they were above head height, so if you walked into the row, you would not be able to be seen from what is now the blueberry building.
We are also glad to be out of the wholesale business! We never made money doing that because we were too small to compete with the major players in the industry.
Today's weather is perfect for picking blueberries. Come on out with your friends, family members, or by yourself and enjoy a day outside with us in pristine southeastern North Carolina.

Troi might have seen the two Rikers as interchangeable had she been there when he was duplicated. The years of divergence in their lives made them different people. What if, right after Spock's death, Kirk went to the transporter, called up his last transport and worked some magic to rematerialize him from an earlier 'save state'? Or if he took the body to Exo III and had an android duplicate of Spock made? Would things really have been much different to after Spock's rebirth and resurrection at the end of III?

After a year of a relationship and a following year and a half of being "be buddies", I finally said enough was enough and I unloaded all the things I should have said to my ex. I told him to grow up, I told him that he needed to put a mirror up to his face and look at himself and where his life was going. I wasn't disrespectful, but I did let him have it. I told him I wasn't going to keep my nose open for him anymore while he just made off with the cookies scott free. Truth is, we have been back and forth like this before... but this time I put my foot down. Now there's this omnious silence... I don't know if I'm still in shock that this affair might very well be over. I am really stupid to expect or even hope my words will spark any change or thinking in him. Most likely he said "F#ck you too" and deleted my email and me out of his life. I wish me feelin this way (anxious about never getting his true feelings) wasn't how I felt but after all this time I still care about him. I've tried dating other men, even slept with some since then, but no one compares to this invisible cordlike connection we had. Its damn near impossible to find. But I made it clear I couldn't go on pretendin like a once a week bootycall was enough. He has said several times he wasn't ready for a relationship but he still loved me. Oldest trick in the book, right? My question is, will I get his side of things or am I kiddin myself here. 31 yrs
I told him off, now I want a response, advice?
What Guys Said 1
Well, if you didn't want sex once a week then what did you want? Marriage, picket fence and kids? Ahh, you'll probably back with him again in a few weeks. You don't want booty calls but that's what are, babe. You are one of those women. You aren't the marrying type. You should just offer your services on craigslist for like $50 a pop.0
What Girls Said 0
No girls shared opinions.
Select as Most Helpful Opinion?
You cannot undo this action. The opinion owner is going to be notified and earn 7 XPER points.

View Full Version : Location: Genosha
10-24-2007, 03:38 AM
On an island of the coast of Africa, a man was pondering the past, and the unknown future.
Not that this was an uncommon thing, as many people throughtout the course of their daily lives take a moment to think of the most important questions: Who are we? Where are we going? What am I doing with my life? When do things change? There were questions that strayed the mind of many, and often times the past directed what choices will be made when the hands of the clock reach their turning point. No, the fact that somewhere down there was a man thinking about what he was doing wasn't a major concern. A wink in time one might say.
Until you considered the man in question...
Sitting in a bar called "Josie's," though the owner seemed to look like a male gorilla in a suit, the man sometimtes called Grammar but more frequently known as Rolf Erikson was sitting in a booth in the corner, awaiting his drink and letting his mind wander. The bar was a grimy place in one of the back alleys of Genosha, where most could wither under the scowls of those that greeted you at the door. There was no point in checking for weapons; everyone was a mutant at Josie's, and those with minor powers were most certainly armed anyway. Rolf smiled at the notion. He was both a mutant and armed. Best to be prepared for anything, he thought grimly. Despite the fact that no one had bothered him here, he'd prefer to keep it that way. This was a hagard place, but the drinks were good, and most would leave you alone if you didn't cause trouble. A few mutants were playing a game of darts, and Rolf could wonder how long it would be before one suspected the other of cheating. Won't be too long, he thought, chances are one of 'ems cheating, or suspecting anyway. He could've used his telepathy to find out, but decided not to. There was no point to it, and he other things on his mind anyways.
A waitress with showing more green skin than clothes walked over to his booth, glass in hand. "Here you go sugar," she said in a way that Rolf couldn't tell was supposed to be faking sincerity or just rehersal as she set the drink on the table. Rolf reached into his pocket and paid her, tipping her fairly well. "Thanks," he said as he reached for the glass, it's dark foamy liquid only hinting at the dangers within. "No problem," she said with the same fakeness, and then he was alone again in the booth. Rolf shook his head and took a sip, noting that for all the dangers, it tasted pretty damm good. I'd order another, if I wasn't about to have a meeting. Still, it is good to loosen up just a bit, he thought as he took another swig. The thoughts of previous events had been swirling through his head, and it was nice to have a reprieve.
In short, it had become dangerous for him to live in Genosha. Granted, he had been in charge of a Xavier funded school operating in secret in order to keep the peace, but things had gotten much worse. The team had discovered a nasty plot, ran by one of the former headmasters-Brac Jameson aka Graviton-calling himself the Wicked Man, who had tried to take control of mutants everywhere with Hydra-inspired technology. He was working with Thad Jones aka Charmer, a criminal mastermind running for the Presidency of Genosha, and Jack McCain aka The Informant, the master of information to try and declare war on humanity. XC had gotten involved naturally, and had managed to stop the plot. But despite their daring do, there had been something that the team had not counted on.
Thad Jones had been elected anyway. He was now President of Genosha. And thanks to Informant, he now knew about the school and the members. Then SHIELD had gotten involved. XC wasn't safe anymore. Charmer would not hesitate to strike at the school, and while Rolf and the others were willing to fight it out, Nick Fury and the blue boys of SHIELD wouldn't have of it. The school was being shut down, and most were being transfered to other schools. He and the other headmaster Jenna Carson had tried to stop it, but they had failed.
And so he was here. He hadn't left, despite the foolish human telling him that it was imperative to do so. Rolf understood of course, considering that he knew Thad the best having a past that shared him, but didn't want to leave. There was something wrong about all it. It never should've happened, he thought, I mean, how the hell was I to know that rat bastard would win the damm race anyway? Maybe it's a Magneto thing. The people here are used to corruption, so they don't think about it for elections, or maybe they just don't care...
And so he sat at the booth, drenching himself in the past, reliving what had gone so incredibly wrong over the last few weeks. He was waiting for a certain someone, and had no problem with taking time to look back.
And the future? Well dear reader, hold tight, for that's about to begin...
10-31-2007, 02:12 AM
He went by the name Jim Maddox, though if you were foolish enough to believe it. You might mistakenly assume it was Jamie Madrox, essentially the same and yet so different. Jim had lived a few years in and around Genosha, he seemed to be content with working in the shadows. The question of whether he was a dupe or not had ceased to cross his mind.
As the man strolled past a window he stopped and checked himself out. Here was a man who knew how to dress. His brown leather shoes shone with a nice new coat of mirror quality sheen and no speck of dirt was going to gather on his very expensive grey pin striped suit. Jim's well manicured hands deftly adjusted his pale green tie. The white gold cuff links shone nicely as did the pricey rolex custom piece adorned on the mutant's wrist. Jim finished off his quick inspection by examining his neck for any traces of fat deposit, which there were none, and then grinned his million dollar smile.
Genosha had been good to Jim, he was wealthy, powerful and assertive. There had been times of less levity, but Jim pushed all that aside. Any memories of his former life didn't matter any longer. There was an affinity to his time and place, the present, it was good. Jim entered the establishment, Josie's by the sign above the door. Numbers filled the man's head. Numbers were important in his line of work, numbers included; patrons, possible weapons, rounds of ammunition and people with grudges. Jim looked around. There seemed to be one way and one way out. Perhaps an exit was available to the back lot via the bar itself.
A single trickle of sweat appeared at the back of Jim's neck, he quickly swiped it away and shrugged his shoulders. Eying the bar tender, Jim followed his nose to a free spot amongst a few regulars. "Afternoon!" he announced forecfully and in a rather fake manor "I'll have a bloody mary, extra ice" his killer grin appeared again and Jim nodded at the bar staff that grunted and got to work. Jim spun around and wrested his elbows on the bar as he scanned the area. He flicked his head and brushed aside some length of hair from his face.
"That'll be thirteen bucks" a not so friendly voice behind him called. Jim slowly turned and left a twenty before quipping "Keep it, I heard there's a school for manners around here. Add that to your tuition fund." Jim stepped away from the bar and heard the man muttering something about taking him one on one outside. "No thanks I get enough exercise pushing my luck" he smiled before venturing towards booths in the back. Flicking his hair away from his face once more, Jim stood by a table inhabited by another genleman. He nodded at Rolf, "May I sit?" he asked casually as if the two were strangers.
Jim took a sip of his drink and made a face, "God this is terrible, ahkk I don't know how people manage to palate this crap." His tongue rolled out as he tried to manage the new sensations. Making himself regret it, Jim took another taste. "Oh no, this is nothing like I thought it would be." He turned and pointed a finger at the barman. Shaking his head, the once proud and sophisticated man was now feeling his class status drop just by hanging around in this place.
11-10-2007, 05:44 AM
As the man walked into the bar and ordered his drink, Rolf could only shake his blonde head with a small smile slowly appearing on the corners of his mouth. He had heard the phrase "a fish out of water" before, but he had never thought he would have seen it acted out in front of him in such a manner. From the fancy pinstriped gray suit, to the rolex that flashed when the light hit just right, Rolf had gathered that the man was more accustomed to crunching numbers and hog-nogging with company big-wigs than coming to a place like Josie's. This could be bad.
Rolf watched while the guy ordered a bloody mary, taking a moment to scan the room for the reactions of the crowd. He had a bad feeling that something bad was going to happen, and he hoped that he wouldn't have to postpone his meeting to save one dipshit from getting shanked in this trashy place. Doesn't help that he's trying way too damm hard to fit in, he thought with a grimace. He took another sip of his drink and looked around again. Sure enough, most of the patrons weren't certain what to make of this man. Some had gone back to their conversations, mellow as the alcohol that waited in their glasses. There was another audible 'thok' as the dart players went back to their game, but a few kept their eyes still.
<< "May I sit?" >>
Breaking his reprieve like a bullet through glass, which in this environment, could occur at any time, Rolf turned to find the fancy man standing had moved to the front of his table. Giving the man a once over, he nodded. "Sure thing," he said with a casualness that he didn't really feel, "it's a free country." He took a second, inside realizing the irony of that statement. Ever since Charmar had basically taken over the country, Rolf had doubted that Thad would ever keep it free...
<< "God this is terrible, ahkk I don't know how people manage to palate this crap. Oh no, this is nothing like I thought it would be." >>
"Well, sometimes it helps to have low expectations. That way, you're never disappointed," Rolf replied with a small smirk. Was this the guy he was to meet? Rolf seriously doubted that. Even without using his telepathy, he could tell this guy was nervous from the small talk that he was forcing. Like a square peg in a round hole, it just wasn't working. "Never liked a bloody mary anyway, tell ya the truth," he said as his mind raced. That was one of the things he had learned during his many travels as a theif: always keep your mind sharp and your eyes and ears open. Unfortunately he wasn't liking what he was reading. Something was off with this guy. Rolf took another sip with one hand while slipping his other down beneath the table where his side-arm rested. As the glass he held smacked the table he clicked the safety off; the guy would never have known. Unless he's got super-hearing or something like that, Rolf thought, which would be just great...
Deciding to take a more direct approach, with his tranq gun ready in case of emergency, he motioned toward the stranger who sat by him. "No offense, but this doesn't seem like your regular haunt. What exactly are you doing here?"
11-13-2007, 04:51 AM
Jim hovered around the chair in front of Rolf like the preverbial bar fly, that he was clearly trying to immitate, badly. Hurriedly in response to the casual response of his host, Maddox placed his glass on the table and gave a shrug as he watched some of the redish liquid slosh around, spilling from the sides. He coughed haughtily "Hakk, pepper" he mentioned before sitting. His eyes teared almost instantly out of irritation from the bit of pepper that was stuck to his tonsils. Jim fished out a piece of ice from his drink and plopped it into his mouth.
"I generally have realistic expectations, I try to predict the correct outcome from what I observe around my person." His response to the seated man opposite him, he seemed like a nice enough guy. Jim had a fairly good feeling about Rolf, he generally thought he was a good judge of character. Maddox rose his glass up off the table and took a sip as the other guy did. "I don't like them, but I'd rather not waste what I've already paid for." Another screwed up face and a coughing fit later, Jim placed the half empty vessel on the table.
The suited man wiped his hand on the table before offering it to that of the man across from him. "Hi Jim Maddox, logistics and soon to be incarcerated for aiding and abetting." his grin widened and a small droplet of sweat appeared on Jim's temple. He had brought with him the 'stuff' as was prearranged. "You needed a sure way out of Dodge without getting caught up in the registration thing. Well the ports are closed off by Magistrates and they've disbanded the army in favour of a human led civil guard." he gulped hard, being in his position he had been privvy to certain information, information that once leaked would certainly find its way back to him.
"Listen I'm not too happy about how everything went down, but I can do a lot more good from within than trying to fight some losing battle." Not sure of how to do the exchange, Jim simply slid his arm into his suit jacket and after a bit of rustling produced a plain manilla folder. "There's the paper work, do with it as you please" There wasn't any great speeches, no comfort brought by the insider. He simply shrugged and took another painful attempt at drinking the bloody mary. Jim was a survivor, he'd keep his nose clean and not draw any attention to himself. He'd have suggested that Rolf did the same, but well, he was a coward and couldn't bring himself to talking about it.
Putting on some more fake charm and the guise of what was assumed was worldly, Jim motioned to the gentleman across from him. "The mutant populous are heading into a whole lot of trouble. History as you know tends to repeat itself." he mentioned thinking about the mutates and the past Genoshan political agenda. If the US was going to start registering mutants, Genosha was going to do that and more thanks to the new head honcho.
11-21-2007, 03:47 AM
<< "I generally have realistic expectations, I try to predict the correct outcome from what I observe around my person." His response to the seated man opposite him, he seemed like a nice enough guy. Jim had a fairly good feeling about Rolf, he generally thought he was a good judge of character. Maddox rose his glass up off the table and took a sip as the other guy did. "I don't like them, but I'd rather not waste what I've already paid for." >>
Rolf smirked a bit as the man coughed. But as his poker face continued to show in this swanky place that no moral man would ever go, mentally he was frowning. The drink was part of a larger picture. In his mind it made no sense to order something that you didn't like, and only two reasons why one would: Ether they were under orders, or they were trying hard to impress the person who they were sitting with. And I've never known a bloody mary to be an impress drink, he thought, his hand under the table idly waiting, which can mean only one thing...
<< "Hi Jim Maddox, logistics and soon to be incarcerated for aiding and abetting." his grin widened and a small droplet of sweat appeared on Jim's temple. He had brought with him the 'stuff' as was prearranged. "You needed a sure way out of Dodge without getting caught up in the registration thing. Well the ports are closed off by Magistrates and they've disbanded the army in favour of a human led civil guard." >>
"Hello other shoe," Rolf muttered darkly. "The name is Rolf Erikson, though I have a feeling that you already know that." He thought about what the man had said. Magistrates? Human Guard? That makes no sense, Rolf thought, noting that the first thing that Magneto had done since taking over the island was getting rid of every human on the island, and unless Rolf was greatly mistaken Thad would have no interest in bringing in people that weren't on is payroll. That and he hasn't had the time. Sure it's been a few weeks since he was elected, but with so much on the island to do, he'd have no time scramble a task force. We'd have known.
<< "Listen I'm not too happy about how everything went down, but I can do a lot more good from within than trying to fight some losing battle." Not sure of how to do the exchange, Jim simply slid his arm into his suit jacket and after a bit of rustling produced a plain manilla folder. "There's the paper work, do with it as you please"
Putting on some more fake charm and the guise of what was assumed was worldly, Jim motioned to the gentleman across from him. "The mutant populous are heading into a whole lot of trouble. History as you know tends to repeat itself." >>
His reprieve broken, Rolf took a sec to look at the manila folder before him, and laughed. It was a sinple laugh, not mocking nor cruel, but instead caught in the absurdity of it all. If Rolf was the sort of fellow who didn't realize the seriousness of it all, he might've kept on laughing. Unfortunately for the man in front of him, Rolf did realize the seriousness of it all, and was about to something about it. "Hang on for a sec," he spoke as he let his free hand go of his drink and focused a bit on his powers.
Sound was a tricky thing, something that had taken Rolf a time to fully master, but the trick he was about to preform was rather easy. Creating a wave of ambient noise around the table, it would be impossible for anyone to try and listen in. All they would hear was the argument of two men over the recent BCS college poll, but nothing that wold gage interest. Which allows me to ask the tough questions, Rolf thought, his blue eyes steady.
"Alright Jim," he said in a slightly mocked, is-that-your-real-name-voice, "what I've just done is create a ambient field of sound around us, so that no one can listen in." He let that sink in for a moment before continuing. "First things first, who the hell are you working for? The Feds? Spooks? I'm aware you're a spy of some sort. Telepathy's funny that way." He tapped the side of his head for emphasis, though he hadn't really used his telepathy on Jim, but sometimes the thought was more than enough to get people to start telling the truth. "Obviously whomever it is didn't brief you very well. There are no Magistrates or human civil guard. Humans have disappeared from the island once Magneto took over. The new President of Genosha's a mutant himself," he spoke with distaste not because Thad was a mutant but because they were discussing him, "outed himself ages ago, and wouldn't let the registration happen here. Not when no humans are allowed in the country"
His expression never left the calm poker face he wore, but in his eyes his frustration at the man was starting to boil over. "Now, I'll ask you again, who do you work for, and what the hell are you doing here? And no funny movements Jim." He tapped the side of his head again. "I'll know."
11-26-2007, 06:00 AM
Jim finished his drink thoroughly hating the taste of it, but hating his situation further. He really could have gone for a stiff drink, here was not where he should have been. The man presently rolled his shoulders and gave a fake laugh, to add to his new found mood. Adjusting the tie that was beginning to feel rather tight on his neck, Jim cleared his throat several times. Having composed himself, Maddox assumed a slightly different personality to match the steadily darkening mood.
The thing about a telepath was there weren't many surprises for them, Jim shrugged. Obviously the jig was up. "That's real impressive that trick" he observed casually. The names of different organizations spouted from the man's mouth and Jim looked on dissapointed, he swirled the ice in his otherwise empty glass. "Spy, hmm well there's been times where I have been applied as an observer. Similar in most respects." He tried a grin, hopefully that little admittance might win some favour.
And then it hit the fan."Obviously whomever it is didn't brief you very well. There are no Magistrates or human civil guard. Humans have disappeared from the island once Magneto took over. The new President of Genosha's a mutant himself,"
So the matter of trust was perhaps stalled, but not broken. It didn't matter Jim was a business man, he would win Rolf over yet with an offer and as cliched as it was one that he couldn't refuse. Maddox looked down, even though the guy could get a good glimpse of what was going on in his face just from his telepathy, Jim dared not meet Rolf's gaze. Jim reached out and pulled the folder away from the table surface. He made to get up and then on a second thought stopped himself.
"Okay so you got me.. sorry for the misunderstanding." under the table Jim's leg shook absent mindedly, his foot bouncing on the base of the table. "There are other agencies than the ones you mentioned, certain alliances of sorts. Let's face it your an intelligent sort of guy and you have some aspirations right? Money, a long uneventful life, power maybe.. I have an offer, one that I could easily pass onto you, all you have to do is bring some of those lovely students of yours to a pre-designated location" he shrugged, there was the potential threat and danger that the guy would just go nuts on Jim. After all just moments ago Jim had tried to trick the man into the same deal and now he had the guile to try a new angle. "I belong to a group named the Dark riders, we serve the Eternal one. You know big blue, grey, metal guy goes buy the name of Apocalypse. Well anyway, you could hand over your school and the students, we'd take good care of em. Promise"
Maddox knew the deal, survival of the fittest. He was caught up in the whole thing himself, he served and was rewarded for it. It was a real simple arrangement really. As far as he knew his life ceased to exist and Apocalypse had picked him up amongst dozens of other dead dupes and offered him a new purpose. Sure there were a few negatives to the whole thing, but damnit that ancient Egyptian guy was a suave son of a bitch and he couldn't remember a day where he wasn't thankful for those mixed up Darwinian ideals.
((is brain deaded.. hollar at me if this needs to be edited Desp))
Powered by vBulletin® Version 4.2.2 Copyright © 2015 vBulletin Solutions, Inc. All rights reserved.

Ari, The Empress.
"Camellia. Miss Terranci." A distracted Ari immediately tensed up as she hadn’t been expecting a man’s voice. She cursed under her breath before she gave Marcus a quick smile. "You two look very beautiful tonight." Blushed cheeks emerged victorious as Ari had failed to fight them off. In her best attempt she struggled to put into words how sophisticated and put together his outfit was. How it bought out all the features Ari was always heavily fixated on. A muted Ari left all those emotions to swirl around her head as she awaited Camellia's response.
“Ari and Marcus, you two should totally have a dance as heads of sectors,” Camellia’s voice came off distracted yet she still managed to push Ari closer towards Marcus. Ari shot her a look but found her moving at an incredible speed through the crowd toward the staircase. The thought to reprimand her for the takeoff and her loud mouth was shoved to the back of her mind as she noticed just how close she was to a surveying Marcus.
“You do realize that someone would be a fool to attack us with all of La Famiglia here, right” She kept her voice monotone, she had been monitoring his movements since before he came closer. “Do you know how to relax?” The question itself would’ve been silly for anyone else but when it came to Marcus he was always on duty. She felt the same constant stress sometimes as Head of Intelligence yet she managed to have her own brand of fun. His branch was quite a bit more demanding with work than hers but what were the point of subordinates if they weren't to be used? Ari could tell that he was a bit of a perfectionist and perfection wasn't going to happen unless he took control and forced it.
“Also, I have no intention of calling you Mr. de Telarius, Marcus. As much as I appreciate your formalness it’s always Ari,” Her gaze had shifted downwards towards the wine glass she fiddled while she spoke. “I do have every intention of dancing with you.”
The newfound confidence came as a shock to Ari, she had every intention previously to leave the ball. If Marcus rejected her here and now her infatuation would wither but that was better than having it be fully blossomed and then sliced to pieces later. A brief smile came across her face; unlike the one she flashed earlier at Tobi there were actually feelings of affection behind it. Before Marcus could politely excused himself for some Sword related duty Ari took a daring step forward and wrapped her arms loosely around his neck. Despite her height shift from the heels her dancing partner was still taller than her. She bit her lip, her experience with guys had never gone this way they were always intimidated and overpowered by her personality. A moment came when Ari briefly looked him in the eyes; Camellia’s were definitely more alive. She seized the opportunity to try and pry the secrets that they held but they wouldn’t budge. While they danced Ari made sure that Marcus and her were spun in a slow circle. She was aware that he would have the urge to check their surroundings. That’s why she hoped he’d be able to that and dance with her if they spun.
THE EXTREMELY JEALOUS PAIR OF CAREFULWETPAINT

May 2015 nursing graduate
Jennifer Mauer has needed more persistence than the typical college student to pursue her goal of earning a nursing degree. That persistence paid off when Jennifer attended spring 2015 commencement ceremonies at UW-Eau Claire's Zorn Arena and became the first in her large family to earn a bachelor's degree. Mauer, of Edgar, Wisconsin, grew up on a farm in a family of 10 children. Her dad worked at a job away from the farm, and her mother ran the farm with the kids. After high school, Jennifer attended a local technical college, working to pay her tuition, because there was no extra money set aside for a college education. After obtaining a surgical technologist degree, she helped her younger sister pay for her additional schooling after high school. She also helped her brothers pay for some of their schooling as best she could, "but I only had so much money," she says.
Jennifer now is married and has three children of her own. She decided to go back to college to advance her career and to be able to better support her family while doing something she loves: nursing. She enrolled in the UW-Eau Claire program at Ministry Saint Joseph's Hospital in Marshfield because she was able to pursue her four-year degree close to home. The program has been "a godsend" because she was able to drive to class and be home in the evening to help with her kids, she says. Jennifer has had a strong family support network as she's worked to earn her bachelor's degree: Her husband worked two jobs to cover the bills while she attended UW-Eau Claire full time, and her 68-year-old mother took care of her children so she was able to attend clinicals when her husband was working. Jennifer worked part time on weekends to cover the cost of gas and groceries.
Through it all, she remained in good academic standing and graduated with honors. Jennifer sacrificed to achieve her goal, giving up many nights with her kids and missing important events to study. "Some nights my heart was breaking to have to pick between my kids and studying for exams or papers,"she says. Her children have learned an important lesson witnessing their mother earn her degree, however. "My kids have learned from me that hard work pays off," Jennifer says. "They were super excited to see me graduate and wear the gold cords." Jennifer is a first-generation grad AND an inspiration to her family ... and that's pretty powerful.

Saturday, April 27, 2013
Oh dear! I had physical therapy at 10:00 this morning. Again, I slept in my chair last night. NOT doing that tonight! I didn't wake up till almost 10:30. Not only did I have to call and cancel PT, it made for a quick morning.
I had a quick Yopa (greek yogurt with granola) for breakfast. I did check in with SparkCoach and log my breakfast, but then I had to get ready for work and figure out lunch. I decided to pack a snack again and stop at Subway. I took Lucy out and headed out.
Subway wasn't near as packed and I got my sandwich...smokehouse BBQ on wheat wth spinach, onions and peppercinis. YuM! and only 380 calories. Plus I had them put enough spinach on there that it really was a vegetable serving. I also took an orange with me to have with lunch.
I did have palpitations again today, but I took an extra Klonopin (anti-anxiety) and it seemed to improve in a couple of hours. They scheduled to have my holter monitor hooked up next week but it was at the cardiac center in Omaha, so I requested they reschedule at Midlands hospital around the corner from my apartment.
I also requested they schedule my mammogram there. All my previous ones were there. Doesn't make sense to do it somewhere else. My mom had an abnormal mammogram this week, and had to turn around and have an ultrasound. They wanted to do a biopsy right then and there but she decided she wasn't ready. She will have to schedule it. My mom had lymph node cancer behind her breast in 1985, but they considered it breast cancer. God intervened and even though they thought she was full of cancer (because of the type it was and where it was located), they found nothing else and after 6 months of chemo (that she sailed through) she was given a clean bill of health and has been cancer free ever since. I used to be really good about getting my regular mammos because of Mom's history but I've slacked off the last few years so I decided it was time to get on the stick and get one scheduled.
Because of what seemed like anxiety today I thought I would just stay home and chill tonight but my Amy called and said they wanted me to join them for dinner at her husband's aunt's house. I've met Norma on several occasions but I really wanted to just stay in. But Amy begged and said Norma had grilled BBQ ribs and made homemade mac-n-cheese and had corn on the cob and biscuits. I said "Amy, you know I don't eat like that!" She told me to come on over and hang out with them and eat small portions. So, I went. I had a small helping of the mac-n-cheese and it WAS delicious...some of the best I have eaten. I had one rib and she had grilled some chicken breasts (hallelujah!), so I had one of those. I passed on the corn and the biscuits (even though they kept trying to push them on me) I thought I did really well until they set a strawberry cheesecake down in front of me. It wasn't a real one...one of those no-bake ones. I did have some. What can I say? Compared to what I could have had and what they were trying to get me to eat, I did a pretty good job. She even tried to send left-overs home with me. I already have ponsit waiting for me for tomorrow. (a noodle dish that my son-in-law's mom makes). She is back here from Cali and had to mix up a huge batch (she's Philippino) so we could all have some. I think it's actually pretty healthy. It's full of cabbage and carrots and a little pork steak along with the noodles. She also makes lumpia...Philippino egg rolls that so far I have been able to bow out of. They are so good though. They are the hit of every family get-together...with everyone.
Of course, I didn't get home till late again. No walk. We are forecasted to have a great 72 degree day tomorrow. I think I will try to fit in a couple of walks. I know I can't really 'make up for it'. But while I have a free week-end and great weather I am going to take advantage of it.
I have to turn a corner here and get moving again.
I'm going to sign on off for tonight and actually go to my bed.
Blessings to you one and all
Keep on keepin on

MR. NArdone is the best teacher in the whole school. HE is amazing at everything he does
Mr.Nardone is really good at bowling, and is such an idol to all of his students, and truly knows how to teach an English class, would recommend to have him,
i personally like him but i also like to annoy him lol. I think he is generally nice but can be mean sometimes.
the only reason that mr nardone was helpful was becuas ehe taught me how to be nasty at frisbee...MADD PROPS
he is kinda kool...he is really into reading...no duh!...but he is really hard...at least he doesnt yell
Hes cool, he doesn't give us a lot of hw, and he doesn't yell like Mrs. Gier

Sunday, July 23, 2006
Russ and Camy's Wedding
Well, it finally happened, Russell Nelson (Sonja's brother) and Camy Chipe tied the knot. We were all present at the ceremony and two of our cuties were in the ceremony. Caleb was dressed to kill in his tux and Hannah was a sweet little flower girl.
It was a fun weekend with a rehearsal dinner party the day before at the Chipe's lake house. We spent the week before the wedding in Dayton at Uncle Bob's house and were able to help with some of the pre-wedding stuff and got to hang out with them a bit. It was fun and Sonja is excited to have a new sister!!

It was two-and-a-half years ago when Natalia Roberts sent her daughter, Sofia Petrova, to live with her father in Siberia. Sofia, 17, is desperate to come back to the United States, but her mother refuses to have her.
Once Sofia turns 18, it will become much more difficult for her to return to the US because she is a Russian citizen, even though she spent her most of her life in the States.
Roberts, 36, sent her daughter away because she had behavioral issues. Sofia had run away, earned failing grades and stolen $1,000.
Roberts said she would have taken her back if she had complied with some specific requests. “She had to meet two conditions to come back; finish school and show she's changed,” Roberts said in an interview with People Magazine. “She didn't.”
Sofia says that her father is abusive, and posted footage of him shoving one of her friends. She had not even met him until her mother shipped her away, and only learned that she had a Russian father at the age of 13. Sofia is now living in a youth hostel, where she also holds a job.
Sofia’s mother tricked her into going to Siberia in the first place, telling her she was headed for a 3-week trip to visit her dad.
Sofia’s stepfather, James, defends the decision, saying that she was out of control. In an e-mail to channel WUSA9, he wrote, “The behaviour was becoming worse and we saw no solution. Worse, it was affecting the other children in the house, especially the outbursts that would last until 2am.”
Said Sofia in an interview, “I was 14 years old. I made many mistakes, but when I did an interview for the news, I tried all my best not to make my parents look bad. I left many things out and I did not say a single bad thing about them. And when I saw this news programme, it was...I was shocked. My parents basically said everything bad that they could about me.”
Sofia has written a letter to her mother stating that she loves and misses her, and pleading for her to take her back home.

Obituary of Douglas Stewart Scott
It is with heavy hearts we share the news that Douglas Stewart Scott (July 6, 1951) passed away suddenly on October 14th, 2023 at the Kingston General Hospital. He will be greatly missed by all who knew him, especially by his wife Lynne (Lafond), his beloved son Jeffrey, daughter-in-law, Ceilidh (Kinlin) and his grandson, his best buddy, Douglas Joseph Scott. He was predeceased by his cherished parents John ‘Jack’ and Mary (Munro) Scott, as well as step-mother Keitha (Kidd).
He will be sadly missed by his brothers Bill (Jo-Anne) and Alan (Nancy), sister-in-laws Wendy (Mike) Guillemette, Renee (Claude) Laflamme, brother-in-law Robert (Debbie) Lafond, Joe (deceased) (Louise), step-siblings Mary Jane (Rob) Valiquette, George (Gwen) Kidd, and Lisa (Doug) McEwan, as well as many nieces and nephews who loved him very much.
Doug grew up in Perth where he played many sports, focusing on baseball, hockey and later in life, golf. Along the way, he developed many lifelong friendships that were very important to him. His work as a carpenter took him to various places in Ontario and while in Kapuskasing, he met and married Lynne and started their family. Upon retirement, they moved back to Perth reconnecting with great friends. Doug enjoyed most days on the Perth golf course chasing that elusive perfect game. Most recently he also spent time on his boat exploring the nearby waterways teaching his grandson to fish.
To say Doug was a well-loved man would be an understatement. He was a hard-working, dependable person who was the most wonderful husband, father, grandfather, brother, uncle, and friend imaginable. He got so much joy out of spending time and catching up with his family and friends. He had a beautiful sense of humour, often joking around and teasing in his playful way. His quiet thoughtfulness never went unnoticed as he took care of all of us. During his very brief illness, it was clear that Doug was proud of the life he had lived and though we would all give anything for more time, we take comfort in the fact that he did not suffer. We will all strive to live our lives to the fullest, as he would have wanted.
In honour of his wishes, services will be held privately for immediate family. In lieu of flowers, Doug’s hope was that any donations be made to the CHEO Foundation as pediatric healthcare was something he held near and dear to his heart.
Arrangements are in the care of Blair & Son Funeral Directors, Perth.

My great Uncle Alwin served in World War II from the beginning of the war until he was injured and sent home to recover at Letterman Hospital in San Francisco's Presidio (I believe this may have been in 1944). Some of these below photos are hard to tell where he was exactly. I believe he served mainly in Europe. My grandmother said he was considered a sniper and won an award for bravery, killing the enemy before they got to one of our people.
I never knew Uncle Al, even though he was alive until I turned 4 years old (he passed on in 1986). He was the closest in age to my Grandmother, as they were only about 5 years apart. She speaks of him fondly whenever he is brought up.
Let's honor his service, bravery and sacrifice for keeping Americans safe during war time.

The bear was smiling at Flame’s mate, and the dragon in him made the fight a bit more real than he had intended. When he hit the door, he stole the shifters’ attention from her. They should not look at her with desire. She was his. Nightshade was treasure.
“There you are Nightshade, I thought I had lost you there for a minute.” He slurred his words and stumbled a bit. His adversaries immediately assumed he was drunk, and they turned to face him.
“Go away, Flame. You have had too much to drink.”
The little imp was playing along with him. He would have grinned at her if it would not have given him away to the other men. God, he loved her. She was more perfect than he could have ever imagined. He stumbled closer to her.
“I’m sorry, Nightshade. Please forgive me. I swear I can be good.” He slurred the words as he begged her. She looked at the other men around her as if she were helpless to deal with Flame. Nightshade was too good at this game.
The bear took the bait first. “Do you need help getting rid of this fool, ma’am?”
The bear made her the offer. The wolves nodded agreement with the bear’s sentiment. She nodded and looked away from them. She had all three of them at once. Damn, even her power was sexy.
“Don’t run from me Nightshade. I need you.” Flame told her. That was easy. It was true. He did not have to act it.
“She asked you to go away. I think you better leave her alone.” The bear spoke to Flame. The shifters thought it would be easy. They had no idea he was a dragon.
“Mister you need to move away from my lady before you regret it.”
Flame’s words had a harder edge to them than he had intended. Nightshade was his. The dragon inside did not want these men looking at her with desire. She was his mate. Flame was having a harder time keeping up his pretend drunkenness as his adrenaline spiked up in anticipation of the fight. He stepped slowly forward again trying to appear drunkenly wary. He stared the bear in the eye. The challenge was extended.
HEA No cheating!
Buy the book, and follow the author on social media:
Learn more about the writer. Visit the Author’s Website.
Get This Fantasy Book From Amazon.
Visit the Author’s Facebook Fan Page.
Visit the Author’s Twitter page.
I live in El Paso, Texas at the moment but am serious about getting out of the desert. I love Texas, but I need some trees and water. I grew up in the country in Tennessee. I miss water. Soon maybe!
I fell in love with the Tyler Longview area of East Texas years ago. So that’s why the setting for the series.
I still work the day job. I do have to pay the bills. The kids, the dogs, and my mom all still like to eat even if I would rather write. Books have always been my great escape, but it was a super boring meeting that I had to attend as I was part of the department that changed everything. I already knew what the meeting was about. I had done that training the year before. So I sat in the back and began the story of Eli and Luke that would eventually become the first book of the series Draoithe: A Pack forms.
It was the worst book ever written. When I finished it, I hated it. I remember thinking that a five year old could have done better. It was boring. Maybe someone would want to read it, but I would have been ashamed of it. I could not even get excited to learn how to publish it.
So I began reading because that way I did not have to look at the miserable failure of a book I hated. My ebook habit was like a minor addiction. Thankfully there is no rehab for that. But I read constantly and began the tale again. The character’s names stayed the same. I kept the first scene, and I wrote another book, a better book with a way better story line.
I love fantasy and romance so this time I wrote the story the way I would want it to be. It was going to be a short series, maybe a trilogy. Then it was going to be eight books. The seventh book is published. The prequel will be out in less than a week. The unedited series has nine more semi-finished books and parts of at least four more already. Maybe it will have twenty books. I don’t know.
If I get to finally leave the desert and quit the day job, maybe I will figure out how many books it takes to finish the story. The good news is that I know what the ending is about. That took me over a year to work out.

Update your browser for more security, speed and the best experience on this site.
At A Glance
Meet the "big man on campus"!! This is Summit and he made a long trip to Iowa from Missouri like a real trooper. And when I say big.......I mean TALL!! He is making a temporary stop in Iowa on his way to Minnesota to a wonderful foster home.
He was found as a stray in December by a wonderful woman who took him in and probably saved his life. He was skin and bones and had terrible ear infections. She put some weight on him and has been taking him to the vet to get his ears cleared up. The family just had too many dogs and she wanted Summit to find his forever home. We and Summit thank her for all she did!!
We have only had Summit for a few hours but he has been just great. He met our dogs with no problem and made himself right at home. He lets us know when he needs to go outside and walks great on a leash. He is not a youngster but we will have a better idea of his age after he visits the vet but he doesn't seem to have any major health issues that we can see.
Stay tuned for more information on this wonderful boy!
Why ya gotta put this stuff in my ears?

” You cheated on me? You were cheating on me! ” Ayesha’s voice rose into a shrill. Disbelief contorting her face.
Ashok was curled up into a ball lying on bed while Ayesha towered over him. He felt lifeless shrinking inside himself after letting go of the secret that was poisoning his soul.
” And why did you have to tell me huh? So you can ease your conscience and dumped the misery on me! How can you be so selfish?” Tears cascading down her cheeks but on her countenance was rage.
” You think I didn’t know. Do you think I did not felt it? Why tell me? Why not leave me with a benefit of doubt? I knew you never loved me but why be so sadistic? Why confirm my fears? How are we going to live together now? You knew our families would never let us separate. Why did you have to destroy all my illusions? ”
Ayesha was sobbing now. Her anger spent. Ashok was not paying attention to any of her outbursts. He continued to retreat inside his shell.
Ayesha sat on the foot of the bed. Grief racked her body. Both hands covering her face.
” I also know love. I also loved. Once. I was in love with someone before I married you.”
She said softly now. Only pain echoed in her voice.
Ashok was awaken from his apathy. The thought of Ayesha loving someone else or even just loving did not even occur to him. He realized he never even thought of his wife in that light. He was so wrapped up in his own misery that he failed to see his wife as a human being. But it was too late now. He knew he can never love her not after loving another so passionately it consumed his whole being.
” But I gave up that love so willingly,” Ayesha continued as if talking to herself. ” For what? To please my parents? To avoid conflict? To maintain the status quo? ” She laughed bitterly.
” Perhaps I deserve it. Yes, that must be it. I deserved this. I deserve a pathetic life for being apathetic.”
Some part of what was still alive in Ashok told him he should be concern that his wife seems to be going mad. Sounding mad. But he could not rouse himself from the numbness spreading in his limbs. He closed his eyes to shut out the present and welcomed the dream of his beloved. Oh how he longed for his parallel life.
‘ Oh why did you do it my love? My dove?’ He cried inwardly without tears. Why did she leave him alone to tread on this dreary life?
But there was no answer. Only a lonely silence.
Ayesha woke up at the usual time the next morning. Ashok heard the pots and pan cluttering in the kitchen while his wife prepared his lunch and breakfast. He willed himself to get up and prepare for work.
When Ashok sat at the dining table after taking a shower and dressing up he saw his tiffin next to his satchel. Ayesha aside from her puffy eyes showed nothing unusual in her behavior as if nothing had happened the night before.
She was her usual self chattering about the gossip she heard from the sabzi walla or complaining about the garbage guy being late.
Ashok ate silently. Pretending to listen. Nodding his head when he felt he had to. As Ayesha stood up to refill his tea their future flashed before him. Two of them growing old together in this gilded cage. Performing the ritual of what was expected of them but each gradually withdrawing from each other hiding their true feelings in the secret compartments of their hearts.
Ashok surrendered to despair and resignation. The horizon seemed bleak but he knew he would be compelled to plod on as many others like him did.

Everyone Deserves an Education: The Aanchal School
Excitement raced through the 7th graders as they neared the area by Gate 2. Today they were going to experience something that most never do – interacting with kids that have special needs. Continuing the advisory focus on empathy, this happens every year for 7th grade. Kids ranging from 6 until 25 years came from the Aanchal school, located near AES. We were told not to be intimidated by their age, since their mental age may be a few years behind. They were split into groups by age for each advisory.
Activities had been planned beforehand, taking place on the Middle School field. There was a drawing station, a parachute station (a giant tarp, basically), a station where you crawled through a fabric cylinder and could use hula-hoops to make an obstacle course, a soccer station, and a bowling station. All was set to start.
As the Aanchal School kids trickled in, we could see that some (mainly older kids) were very excited, as they had done this before. Others (mainly younger kids), looked nervous at the sight of so many people.
Soon, the activities started. My advisory was partnered up with kids from 6-12 years old. This particular group had a hard time focusing on one station at a time. They did whatever they wanted. I think I speak for many 7th graders when I say that it was absolutely tiring to keep running after the younger kids. One 6 year old in my group even had a temporary interest in a tractor used to tend to the field. Before this I didn’t think it was humanly possible to hold interest in something for 2 seconds or less before moving on.
One last thing I was thinking about: These teachers are facing very similar challenges to AES teachers–constantly running around after us kids. Since I had a taste of what that must be like I am more empathetic to our hardworking teachers.
Overall, I think I and most was happy to have done it, as it gave me a new experience I could share. Though tiring and hard, it was fun to go outside of my own mini-world. Next time I will be ready for it.

クッパ, King Koopa
Bowser is Marios archnemesis. He is the leader and most powerful of the turtlelike Koopa race. Although Bowser has joined forces with Mario in a few games he is considered a quotbad guyquot due to his ambition to kidnap and dethrone Princess Peach and conquer the Mushroom Kingdom. Though their origins are unknown Bowser has eight children the seven Koopalings and Bowser Jr. Bowser or King Koopa is perhaps most famous for his repeated kidnappings of Princess Peach. The reason for these kidnappings is often part of his plan to take over the Mushroom Kingdom. He has several types of troops under his command including Koopas Goombas and Piranha Plants. Bowsers appearance has been tweaked several times throughout the series but most of basic overall look has been consistent. He looks something like a cross between a turtle and a dragon. He is bipedal and able to walk around on two legs. Both his feet and his hands have large claws. He is noticably larger than all the other characters. He is mostly yellow with a green shell. Several large spikes are located both on his tail and on his shell. He sports a tuft of red hair on top of his head. Although his abilities vary from game to game he is able to breathe fire in most of them.

Berlin graduate fought in South Pacific during war
(This is part of an ongoing series about World War II veterans from Somerset County. Close to 500 veterans from that war die daily, according to the Department of Veterans Affairs. The newspaper will tell the stories of those who remain and of those who have died as they and their families come forward. It’s the Daily American’s effort to document an important part of the nation’s history.)
Kenneth H. Robertson was at the invasion of Iwo Jima. He fired mortars from his naval ship. In the dark of night, troops went to the beach while the shells came in. After he was done, the next ship entered the picture and did the same thing. They did it all night long. The mortars got hot from use, and Robertson and his fellow seamen had to keep water on it to keep it from blowing up.
Robertson, who graduated from Berlin-Brothersvalley High School in 1944, entered the U.S. Navy after he was drafted. One of the challenges he faced was his inability to swim. So during his entire time in the service, he kept a life jacket on, even while he slept.
Robertson enjoyed his wartime duties.
“It was okay; I liked firing the mortar,” he later wrote down in an account of his service. “You had to know what you were doing, when fired it would back fire and you had to get away. When not in battle, I was assigned as one of four cooks onboard the ship.”
Robertson enjoyed cooking because he always had something good to eat. The sailors he served ate meat, potatoes, a dessert of some type and fruit.
“Sunday morning was a regular breakfast like any other day of something like eggs,” he wrote. “We ate in the dining hall. A separate person served the officers. All four cooks worked to make the meals. After the war ended, two cooks worked each day with every other day off when you could do anything you wanted.”
Robertson was also involved in the battle for Okinawa. While there, suicide planes, known as kamikazes, tried to sink the ship by flying into them.
“The suicide planes were our worst fear,” he said. “They would fly over at sunset and at night, find a ship and drop, dive right into a ship trying to sink the ship. There was one night when I was on deck and saw one of these suicide planes heading towards our ship. I froze watching that plane, fearing the worst. He then changed his mind and went for another bigger ship as they targeted the bigger ships. We could see those ships in the distance.”
The Japanese soldiers attacked a battleship in May 1945, off Naha, which was the capital of Okinawa.
“There were bodies all in the water. Was the worst thing I have ever seen,” he wrote. “We came upon a man’s torso in the water, brought it up on the ship, cleaned it, put weights on it, then put back in the water for burial at sea. It was the only thing we could do. As we were anchored, there were many ships surrounding us. Each ship had a fog or smoke machine so the ship would be covered and used to hide ships from the planes.”
His ship returned to Pearl Harbor so the soldiers could get rest. Robertson was there when the war ended. The navy honorably discharged Robertson in June 1946. He traveled back to Somerset.
He met Frieda Broadwater later that year and they got married in 1947. They had a daughter. He lives in Salisbury.
“I never had any injuries or anything like that. I was lucky,” he said. “I don't have much to say about it. But it made a better man out of me.”

Sophie Alakija, who was involved in an accident few months ago, in her latest interview has warned Nigerians who still address her as Wizkid’s ex-girlfriend, to stop.
She was the first girl in Wizkid life as he was building his music career back then in Banky W’s label. Wizkid also starred on his first music video “Holla boy” . They two stop been together after his start making limelight in the music industry.
According to her, she now has a name and added that she is now someone’s wife and also a mom.

He couldn’t stay long but it was nice to have a place to rest for a while. Of course, his name wasn’t Timothy Fleming here. Today, he was an American student spending a few months in the Slovenian capital. He had changed the color of his hair and grown a beard. He’d purchased a cane and became adept at walking with a limp (a motorcycle accident, he explained) to alter the manner of his gait. He spoke with what was referred to in the States as the “California non-accent,” since he was too easily identified either by his mid-western speech patterns or his mother’s South Eastern British accent.
Not being sure if the Agency had gained access to any of Hellspite’s “alternative” identifications including passports and driver’s licenses, he’d created a new identity for his current sojourn. The forgeries he was using would do for a short time while he accessed certain vendors on the dark web and purchased something more substantial. He’d still have to move around frequently to evade detection.
At first he blamed that bitch at the ale house in Dover but it was really his own arrogance that nearly got him pinched. He should have realized he was still close enough to Dymchurch and Romney that he could possibly be recognized by someone from the old days. He’d barely gotten away in time, though he had to abandon his original escape route and travel by other means.
“Not a fine day to enjoy the view, is it Alex?”

England captain Steven Gerrard has praised Raheem Sterling for his reaction after being sent off against Ecuador last Wednesday.
Sterling was on the pitch for just 14 minutes after coming off the bench in England's latest pre-FIFA World Cup friendly in Miami before being dismissed for a rash challenge on Antonio Valencia.
That red card means the 19-year-old cannot feature in England's final tournament warm-up match against Honduras on Saturday.
However, Gerrard believes his Liverpool team-mate's performances in training since the incident have proven his strength of character - and the fact he is ready to feature in England's World Cup opener against Italy next week.
"He is very resilient," said Gerrard.
"You judge a player on a setback and he was the best in training this morning (Friday) - he was very sharp and lively.
"Straight away after the incident when I spoke to him in the dressing room I said it is important how you react and that you are the best in training from now until Saturday to put yourself back in the frame for Italy.
"I think he has started to do that."
England manager Roy Hodgson echoed his skipper's sentiments, labelling Sterling "an exceptional talent" and refusing to blame the teenager for his dismissal.
"He was absolutely gutted to get sent off, as we were," said the coach. "But he doesn't seem to have taken it to heart.
"I don't think it was a lack of discipline - it was his desire to help us out of a difficult situation by using his incredible pace to stop Valencia getting into a good position.
"We have talked it out and he has talked it out with Steve (Gerrard), so as far as I am concerned it has happened and the blow is that he can't play (against Honduras) when I would have liked to have seen him play.
"The most important thing is that with his performances he is still very much making me aware that this is a player who can do an awful lot of damage to the opposition."

Three women have come forward to allege that a former Liberal Democrat MP carried out abuse against them as girls.
Esther Baker waived her right to anonymity last week.
She spoke out about how she was raped by a politician, police officers and others in woods in Staffordshire.
She has also told police that she was sexually abused at a flat in London, which she now believes was in Dolphin Square, south London.
She said a former Labour cabinet minister, now dead, also sexually attacked her.
She believes that a Lord and a judge were among her abusers.
She says that she was sexually abused from the age of six to at least 12.
Operation Hydrant was set up by police to bring together all allegations of historical child sexual abuse.
It states that there are 1,433 male suspects of which 216 are dead. Some 506 are unidentified. Some 76 are politicians.
Israel faces new crisis

Born in 1938, Fred was a Master Butcher, his shop being situated on Nelson Street, and first appeared in the Street as part of the Weatherfield delegation to their French twin town. At a black pudding contest, Fred tried to bribe the French judges, and nearly caused a diplomatic incident.
In May 1999, after gossiping a bit too much to Audrey Roberts, Fred was forced to admit that Ashley was his secret son. After Fred's first wife Sybil had died in 1975, Fred became romantically involved with Kathleen Gutteridge, a young worker in Elliott's shop in Nelson Street. Kathleen became pregnant, but scoffed at the idea when Fred proposed marriage - she was too young and wanted to see the world. It was agreed that Kathleen would leave the baby boy with Fred's childless sister, Beryl Peacock and her husband Sam. They brought up Ashley as their own son, never telling him of his true parentage.
Ashley found out that Fred was his dad and they forged a close bond, even moving in together at 4 Coronation Street which Fred bought from Mavis Wilton after the death of her husband Derek. Ashley and his wife Maxine lived there until Maxine died and then Claire Casey the nanny moved in, eventually marrying Ashley and completing the family with the birth of Freddie, a new grandson in July 2006.
Fred was scammed by a woman named Stacy Hilton who pretended to be an immigrant called Orchid, looking for a "mail order" husband. She was after his money - working with Dennis Stokes, an acquaintance of Fred's. Ashley discovered her working on Levenshulme Market and Fred's heart was again broken. A year or so later, Fred discovered Orchid beaten and being admitted to hospital. He almost took her back in but in the end sent her on her way.
Always a serial proposer, having been turned down by Rita Sullivan, Audrey Roberts and Doreen Heavey, he made friends with Shelley Unwin's mother, Bev. They started to develop a closeness that they both shied away from, having been burned by members of the opposite sex in relationships but soon came to care deeply for each other. This time, Fred's proposal was accepted. They decided to move away from Weatherfield and Fred accepted an offer for the pub from Steve McDonald. The wedding was all set to go. However, his old friend Audrey was having doubts and spilled her heart out to Fred. She regretted saying no to him all those years ago! This caused Fred a lot of anxiety but on his wedding day, he rushed from the church to see Audrey and told her gently that he was marrying Bev, whom he loved. On the way out of her house, he collapsed and died after suffering a massive stroke leaving his family, friends, and fiancée, Bev, devastated.
- Ashley was shocked when his apprentice butcher Graeme Proctor began talking like his dad Fred, and believed that he was possibly possessed. However, it turned out that Graeme had learned about Fred when Ashley's wife Claire told him about him, and Graeme was only doing it to wind Ashley up.
- Fred was introduced on a recurring basis, before returning full-time in 1996.
- Fred was originally scheduled to have small part in the live 40th anniversary episode broadcast on 8th December 2000, but the character was written out when actor John Savident was advised by doctors not to appear, as he was recovering from neck wounds sustained in an a knife attack. Fred's lines were given to other characters.
- In 2005, it was announced that Savident planned to quit after eleven years, wanting to spend time with his family. Fred was killed off in October 2006, although the episode where he had a stroke and died wasn't his last, he appeared in the following episode in an open casket.
First and last linesEdit
"Do you like a nice blood sausage?" (First line, to Ken Barlow)
"Be happy, I say. Be happy." (Final line, to Audrey Roberts)

swearingShow most recent or highest rated first.
This guy I knew used to think that sticking his first finger up was a swear word. So whenever he used to think he was bad, he used to go around sticking his first finger up...Rebel lol!!
When I was about 4 and in pre-school, I didn't know how to say "truck" and would say it as "fuck." Well, every Friday my grandpop would pick me up from school and I would stay at my grandparents house for the weekend. Everytime it was dismissal and everyone would go outside to go home, I would see my grandpop's truck and yell excitedly, "Papa's fuck! Papa's fuck!" Everyone would CRACK up. I mean, I didn't know any better. And better yet, my grandpop had those roll-up handles to close the windows and since I a little too young to operate those rolling handles, instead of saying something like, "close the truck's window" I would say "Fuck the window."
Kids will be kids!
I used to believe around age four that if I were to say a bad word in my mind (think it) that my parents would magically find out and punish me for it.
For some reason when I say ask it comes out a**. i thought something was on my face when people looked at me funny. I still say it that way too!
One time when i was at least 3 or 4 i was takeing my nap on the couch and then i herd my dad coming down the hall and he said he was missing somthing and it was lost then i over herd him saying "Mother f**ker" I did not knew what it ment so i yelled it out loud at preschool becuz I lost my pillow.
My cousin used to think that "body" was a swear word.
I used to think "fummy" was a bad word. No clue why.
I once was playing a computer game (Monkey Island 2) that displayed text whenever a character said something. At one point in the game, the character said "Do you know how many times a DAY I have to hear about the d*** stump joke?"
One of my sister's friends then said "Oh! he just said the 'D' word!"
Seeing as it was in all caps, I assumed "day" was the D word that had been said.
For weeks later, I thought "day" was a curse
I thought that since putting up the middle finger meant "Fuck you" I thought that the other fingers meant other swears...
When I was in preschool, we were taught that "stupid" and "shut up" were the absolute worst things anyone could possibly say. Worse than any swear words. I, being an antisocial little brat, often found a need to use "stupid" in particular. It got me in trouble until I switched to saying, "You are so stu...bborn." I figured I'd just made up the word "stubborn" (which I technically did, because I'd never heard anyone else say it), and thought no one else knew what it meant.
I completely freaked out when I saw a book with the exact title "You are so stubborn" in a store.
when i was in third grade i was writing my homework in my agenda and instead of writing work sheet, i wrote work sh**! when my mom was looking at my paper she said honey, did u write this! I started laughing and saying oops, work s***! i said it like 5 times! My mom said it was a very bad word and not to use it! lol
I used to believe that if you spelled the curse word it didn't count. But only because my mom did it first. ^_-
One time when I was little, my middle finger hurt. I told my mom, "My Finger hurts!" She took my index finger in her hand and said, "Is it this one?" I said "No! Its this one!" I then flipped her off, but I didn't know that it was bad. She said, "You're not supposed to do that! Bad girls do that!" I then ran off sobbing because I thought I had committed the biggest sin in the entire world!
When I was two years old, I was having ice cream with my family at some reunion or something. Everyone noticed that I'd stopped eating the ice cream and had been sitting-- for a good 5 minutes-- scowling into my bowl.
"Kelly, what's wrong?" my mom asked.
"Well," I said, "This bug in my ice cream is fucking with me."
When I was maybe five or so, I overheard my dad saying, "Son of a bitch." I didn't know what it meant, so I asked him, "Dad, what does 'son of a bitch' mean?" He answered, "Don't you ever say that again." I didn't realize that he hadn't answered my question, just forbid me to use the phrase, so when my older brother told me later in the day that he was going to take my portion of that night's desert I yelled at him, "SON OF A BITCH!"
When I was in seventh grade, I heard the word "decapitated" for the first time. I didn't know what it meant, but I thought it sounded cool, so I went around using it. I had a really mean gym teacher, and she did something that really made me mad. I blurted out that she was decapitated because I thought it was something you could say instead of cussing. I found out the hard way what it meant when she put me in detention and dragged me to the guidance counselor like I was some kind of terrorist.
When the movie, American Pie, first surfaced, I was about 11 or 12. I had heard them used the term "fudgepacker" in the movie and started using it all the time thinking it had something to do with a guy who works with chocolate. I had ended up in detention for using that word in school and no one would explain to me what it meant. I'm well aware now it is a slur against a gay man. Hahaha.
I used to think that genuflect was a bad word. I mean, come on! What does that sound like to you?
We weren't a very religious family...
I also used to think harass was a bad word, because of sexual harassment.
i saw one of the national lampoon's family vacation movies when i was like 5 and chevy chase told someone to "kiss my ass" and i was confused as to why he would want someone to do that.
My brother used to think that "crap" was a swear word. Well one day I said it to him (in one of our MANY fights) and he told me back that he would tell on me for sayingit, that I was going to get into so much trouble. I told him it wasn't a swear word and he insisted that it was. After awhile I got annoyed and yelled out to my Dad "IS CRAP A SWEAR WORD??" After my Dad finished laughing, he informed us that it wasn't but still not a nice thing to say. I turn stuck out my tongue to my brother and said "So there!"

But, there is always, those out there that have to take it one step further and spoil it for the others. Back in my day on patrol, we often called these offenders; punks, jerks, idiots and 57 other names that all came back to juvenile delinquent. They usually started their crime spree at 15 years as an average and the smart ones saw the light before they turned 18. After that, they became adult offenders and got to play grown-up games in a nasty world.
Still, in Seward, Alaska, where I was on the Seward Police Department, working night shift, we had some teenagers with incredible imaginations, who also had parents with money. Or, they were friends of the teens that were connected. Now, I may have told part of this tale some time ago, but I've added a few people on who might be interested to learn how young, enthusiastic Alaskans can really get themselves involved in the holiday spirit...especially when one of the teen's parents own a very good sized egg farm.
I don't refer to this as a chicken farm, because the eggs were the main stock and trade and believe me, they produced a lot of eggs at this far. There was enough eggs that the owner's son, put aside a full pallet load of eggs just for Halloween night and had been saving them for sometime, so you can just imagine the stench of these eggs when they broke.
As I learned through the night there were several groups involved in this egg war and the City of Seward became the battleground. The egg farm was actually outside the city limits, but the teens felt it more of a challenge to have their war downtown. Each car was loaded down with cartons of eggs, often with 4-5 male teens per car and they even had infantry spread about the business district, their pockets filled with eggs, a sneer to their face and eyes radiating with the desire to "kill" the opposing side. We only had two patrols on duty for this special night and it was our job to protect the innocent and I'd say we did a pretty good job, only losing one goody bag to a curve ball meant to take out a bicycle. The offender was quickly apprehended and found to be in possession of three eggs to each pocket. Now some will say I was mean, but by this time, every single window in the downtown business district, all single story businesses, was plastered with rotten egg yolk and dozens of cars were dripping in yolk slime. Even my patrol car had taken hits from infantry troops coming out of hiding and then running for cover. But this one teen and his accomplice I was able to catch. I decided I needed to ensure the items he had in his pockets, were in fact egg ammo, so I gently used my nightstick and tapped each one. Yup, they were eggs and my young teen really didn't enjoy the feeling of this vile substance running down his legs. His accomplice quickly withdrew the two eggs he had left and held them in his hand. I directed him to a nearby trash can, where he dropped them and then he actually thanked me for not breaking them in his hands. Now rather than put these foul smelling two, ( yes, they'd taken hits from enemy combatants), into my patrol car, I had dispatch notify their parents to come to my location and provided a time limit of 10-minutes or their kids would spend the night in the hoosegow for criminal mischief. You can imagine how the parents felt when they arrived, especially after driving through town and seeing the evidence of warfare. Later, I pulled one car over, loaded with five juveniles, for swerving in the roadway. The driver was having trouble seeing because his face was covered in yolk. This young man, driving his folks almost new car, was literally covered in yolk and I could smell him and the other, also all covered, from 25 feet away. These were some really rotten eggs. The interior of the car was blanketed with projectiles. I glanced over the exterior and not an inch was left exposed, everything was yolk. I advised the youth, who is now a respected adult in the community, to get the vehicle under a water hose as soon as possible to wash the vehicle down before the paint was damaged. As far as the interior, he'd have to own up to his participation in the Seward Egg War of 1985. No, I won't repeat what some of the business owners wanted done to the teens, many of them forgot they were once teens themselves. We often do that and my wife is always reminding me of the little troublemaker I used to be as a teenager. She happened to learn too much about me during my mother's 22-year stay with us.
I only hope, the kids in Russia have a good time and see Halloween simply as a night of fun. Far too many things have been done and said to place such a darkness upon this night. I believe every day and every night belongs to God Almighty. There is a thought in this world, where Lucifer or Satan, which ever you prefer to use, has a power over the Lord, but they tend to forget, God created this creature to carry out a function. There is nothing or no one more powerful than our Father. To believe otherwise, in my opinion of course, is to be like that young teen who stood there before me with 6 eggs in his pocket and thought I'd just let him walk away.
God Bless. BILL

The second I felt the gun barrel press against my ear, my life changed forever.
I was on my way home with my daughter strapped in her car seat when I felt something cold and hard pressed to the side of my face. Four gunmen stood at my car window. They demanded I take them to my home in St Elizabeth and let them in, while two took my bank cards. They headed off to withdraw money and the other two stayed. I remember what happened next like it was yesterday.
They were both snorting cocaine and as one of them tore at my clothes, the other started stroking my three-year-old daughter’s face. He then asked her age and his response will forever haunt my dreams: ‘If you were a year older, I would **** you too.’
My body convulsed and I nearly threw up. Because I heard those evil words, I just lay there and took it, praying they wouldn’t touch her. As the attack happened inches away from her, I called to her to close her eyes and cover her ears, and I shouted that everything would be OK. She sobbed. At that moment, I knew better– nothing would ever be OK again.
During the rape, I vomited through pain and fear, then the man who was with my daughter held a phone to my ear so I could give my pin number to the men who had my card. They both laughed and taunted me. After the ordeal they bundled us in my car, ordered me to drive, dumped us on the beach and told me to leave Jamaica immediately before driving off into the night.
My mind and body went numb, like I was in a horror film. I was in utter shock, and frantically started searching my daughter’s body for injuries. By some miracle, the men had dropped my phone in the road. I instantly called the police.
In the days that followed I had a complete mental breakdown. I couldn’t even attend the identification parade because they didn’t have a two-way mirror. I was too distressed to do it. No one was ever charged.
My daughter said nothing. It was as though nothing had happened, she just seemed slightly subdued. It wasn’t until she was seven that she said, ‘Why did the men put their hands inside you?’ She then said she remembers every part of it. Her memories have become clearer over time.
I can relate to my daughter, as my childhood was extremely difficult. Growing up in Jamaica was hard and poverty was rife. I shared a bed, in a one-room house, with my nine siblings. My mum would send me out aged 12 to sell mangoes in the village. I remember being upset I couldn’t go and play with my friends after school.
The man who lived next door to me was always rumoured to be my birth father, but my mum beat me so badly when I asked that I never dared ask again. Instead, I used to pop over to chat to him and his partner Sarah, who was more maternal than my mother. She would braid my hair and occasionally buy me nice clothes. When they moved a few miles away and asked my mother if they could take me, she agreed. To her, they were giving me an opportunity for a better life.
Only a few weeks into my new home life, things changed. Before long I found myself becoming more of a maid and doing all the chores. Then Sarah’s brother started grabbing my breasts every time I walked in a room. Sometimes I would wake up and find him touching in between my legs. I knew it was wrong, but I didn’t exactly know why. My mother had never given me any kind of sex education.
Even when Sarah decided to get luxury items at home, such as electricity, she used me as a pawn to get it for free. I was put on the veranda in tiny shorts and the man who came to install it was invited to touch me. When I cried to her afterwards she said, ‘He’s not having sex with you so it’s OK.’
A hellish young life
One day when Sarah was at work, my rumoured birth father called me into his room to talk, but straight away he was all over me, touching me intimately. He said, ‘If you ever tell anybody, they won’t believe you.’ I soon realised that was true.
I ran away, but my mother didn’t want me back. She didn’t believe I had been abused. With nowhere to stay, I slept at school for two weeks and was ferried around family members, until an uncle offered to let me stay with him long-term.
After everything I’d been through, I was terrified he’d rape me, and at aged 15, I was wetting the bed at night. But he never laid a finger on me, he supported me, helped me finish school and went on to help me get a bursary for further studies. I’ll be eternally grateful.
I met a man and became pregnant. We married, and when Jasmine was born I had a new lease of life. I wanted more, so worked my way up in a sales job and started to live a more comfortable lifestyle. But my husband left me and a few weeks later he revealed he had got another woman pregnant. That news nearly killed me. I went home and drank so much alcohol I was hospitalised. It was the night when I got out of hospital, just when I thought things couldn’t possibly get any worse, that the unthinkable happened with the rape. Somehow, in my short life, I have lived through such hell.
A year after the attack, I was struggling so badly with the trauma that I needed to take action. Despite my daughter still having a strong relationship with her father, I couldn’t stay in Jamaica. I decided we should leave to stay with
an aunt in London.
Time passed and I trained as a teacher, but the longing to know why those men had done what they did became urgent. Because the rapist had used my phone to dial those at the cash machine, I still had a phone number, which the police had never followed up. One day, I decided to dial it. I needed to understand. I wanted to move on.
When the man answered the phone I explained who I was and asked him why. He said, ‘Sh*t happens,’ and hung up. They violated me and my child and that was all he could say? My only sense of closure was that at least in England I was safe. The gang were so far away from me now.
My daughter’s life has been impacted hugely. She suffered behavioural problems throughout school and saw a therapist in her early teens. She misses her dad, but fully understands the decisions I’ve made. My life has been affected in that I’ve found myself with horrible partners. My experiences of men in my life have made relationships challenging.
I started writing about my life as a form of healing, and through that have trained to become a life coach. No psychological help was ever available to me and I don’t want others to suffer like I did. Now I share my story in front of thousands of people and feel proud of how far I’ve come. My dignity is no longer on the floor. I have made peace, I have my new life and I will never look back.
The Mango Girl, by Dr Ava Eagle Brown is out now, priced £14.99

April 18, 2014
No but I have always been very interested in this. I had a yellow lab who was perfect but she has since passed. I currently have 4 dogs
N/A but I have a hound mix, golden mix, chi mix & a pit/lab mix. All would be wonderful.
I am an animal rescuer & advocate. I am also an attorney for the Chapter 13 bankruptcy trustee.

Morgan is a whining, childish, jackass! He proves it everytime he opens his sniveling big mouth. Michael needs to stop apologizing to him, he has admitted how bad he hurt Morgan, enough is enough, Morgan has chosen his road and everything that happens now is his own fault.
I hope Morgan ends up in a situation where he is crying for his father to save him! Even tho Sonny would never turn his back on Morgan, I want to see Morgan realize that.

Marco Puga, 24
Marco Puga, a 24-year-old Latino, was shot and killed Sunday, June 14, at the corner of 20th and Meyler Streets in San Pedro, according to Los Angeles County coroner’s records.
The incident began about 8 a.m., when Puga’s girlfriend, a married woman, dropped him off at the intersection where he had parked his car, said Los Angeles Police Officer Greg Halka.
The woman’s husband had discovered the lovers and was looking for Puga, Halka said. The woman drove away when she saw her husband approaching Puga’s car. The two men got into an argument, and then the husband allegedly shot Puga multiple times in the upper torso.
Puga was able to get into his car and drive to his home a few blocks away, Halka said. His family called 911, and Puga was taken to the hospital, where he was pronounced dead at 10:20 a.m., according to coroner’s records.
The husband drove away from the scene as well, Halka said, but witnesses were able to provide a description of him and his distinctive car.
Investigators found the husband later that day at a hotel in Lomita. He drove away from the hotel, and officers pursued him for about 20 minutes, Halka said.
The man was on the phone with his wife during the pursuit, and officers were "controlling the conversation," Halka said, giving her advice about what to say to bring the incident to a safe conclusion.
“We were worried about public safety, her safety and his safety," Halka said. "We wanted to make sure we did this as cleanly as possible.”
The pursuit ended when the man drove to LAPD’s Harbor Station parking lot and turned himself in about 5:30 p.m., Halka said.
Fernando Duarte was arrested on suspicion of murder and booked into Los Angeles County Jail, where bail was set at $2,075,000. He is scheduled to be arraigned on June 29 at the Long Beach courthouse for one count of murder and one count of fleeing a pursuing peace officer’s motor vehicle while driving.

I couldn’t help but notice that one of my colleagues was sitting with obvious discomfort today. But I didn’t like to say anything. At tea break she confided that over the weekend she’d had a ring put through her “women’s bits”, and went on to say that wearing jeans to work had been a mistake. I didn’t (quite) laugh out loud. I would wonder what on earth possesses someone to have their bits pierced. For myself, all I can say is that it seemed to be a good idea at the time.
Back to the grind, where we were (apparently) having something done to the air conditioning units in the ceiling space. I think that I might have more confidence in the air conditioning, had it not just been fixed by someone who I can only describe as “Hermann Munster”. In physical size, looks, and manual dexterity.
And then a discussion. What colour was Bagpuss? I could have sworn he was ginger. I was wrong…
I must love my job – I keep going in every day…..

It was last June when Rica revealed that she went through a third miscarriage. At that time, she said that some of her “greatest, most beautiful, wonderful revelations of God” has come to her while she’s in deep pain.
She also shared that she’s “more calm and peaceful” after feeling that her previous miscarriages in 2016 and 2017 were “shocking and unfair”.
In the latest episode of “Surprise Guest with Pia Arcangel” podcast, Rica opened up about enduring three miscarriages.
The celebrity vlogger shared that she gave birth to her first-born child and she miscarried twice. She added that she gave birth to her second child and she miscarried again.
Rica also said that every experience is a different thing altogether. What helped her apart from having a husband who prayed with and for her, according to her, was acknowledging the fact that she was going through a difficult time.

This is what we did yesterday, Thanksgiving. After we ate huge dinner some of us went outside to build a snowman with our first snow of the season. Then there were others like me who were too tired to go out and play.
They had soo much fun. We had a fantastic day .
Sissy made this is a class she went to. Mommy bought a kit for Bobo and their little cousin to make. They came out so cute. On Wednesday Bobo and Sissy made a placemat for each person to use for dinner. They took so much care in making sure that they were themes that each person liked. One Auntie got unicorns, another got butterflies, there were flowers, fire engines, dolphins, Scooby Doo, animals and more. We are all very lucky that we all like crafts and Mommy collected and bought stuff every time she saw them on sale. Now, it's on to Christmas and those crafts. Nana
Bengali Sad Love Shayari For GirlfriendReplyDelete

Session drummer, composer, arranger, and producer who has worked with rock groups like The Who and The Kinks.
He was in a group called The Outlaws, going on to work with Joe Brown in 1961.
He has performed with Tom Jones.
He was born in Edmonton, North London in England.
He has worked with David Bowie.

I wanted to thank you for your professional advice and assistance in working with our daughter, Melissa. She was accepted into eight of the ten law schools that she applied to and was offered scholarship money at five schools. While both my wife and I are educators, we realized early on that law school application and admission is a unique educational experience and, as parents, we are so glad that Melissa was able to work with you—it greatly facilitated the entire process from timelines to the essay. I suspect that Melissa’s results would have been much different had she not worked with you. I would highly recommend your services to any parent of a student applying to law school.
Six Secrets to a Successful Personal Statement for Law School Applications

We were going at it in the kitchen and my mother was making some food. My brother Daniel, he grabbed me by my hair and started slamming my head into the (oven) flame. My mother got caught in the fracas and she caught one (thump), and her bridge and a couple of her teeth got knocked out. She didn't really get hit with a punch; Daniel wouldn't let go of my hair and I was getting too close to the flames, so my mother bit his hand and bit him so hard it started to break his skin, so he pulled his hand away and her bridge went flying and a couple of her teeth got pulled out with it.The brothers seem to be taking their traumatic memories in stride, however; when asked what the family called this incredible whirlwind of chaos and violence, Baldwin is rumored to have replied, "The Aristocrats!"
Most rich kids just want to be pop stars.
How did these hyper-specific tropes spread so quickly?
The Hollywood rumor mill has been playing games with celebrity deaths for at least a century.

William Hague was Conservative leader between June 1997 and September 2001. He has represented the constituency of Richmond since 1989. He was the first Tory leader not to become PM since Austen Chamberlain in the 1920s. He acted as British Foreign Secretary and First Secretary of State in David Cameron's government from 2010 to July 2014, when he became Leader of the House and announced he would not stand at the next election.
The former Foreign Secretary said Scottish nationalists would jump at the chance to re-open the independence debate if there was a vote to leave the EU in the forthcoming referendum on Britain's continued membership

SEDRICK HAS BEEN MATCHED WITH A FAMILY!
Sedrick, born May 2005, is a helpful and sweet child. He loves to play with his electronics and iPod. He enjoys music and being outside. Sedrick enjoys sports and was on the soccer team at his school. He also enjoys playing pool.

Last weekend I did the Almond Blossom Run. Ripon is a little town not too far from us and they have this whole big festival every year. Usually it's pouring rain so I've never been. Last year Scott and I both signed up for the 8k run. I was bad ass last year and ran the whole thing without walking and had a fantastic time.
This year I knew that that was pretty much not going to happen because I can't seem to run that far without walking and I'm definitely not as fast now.
Scott didn't sign up this year so I went by myself. Their race is a little different since it's an 8k and then they also have a 1 mile race that goes before the 8k. Since I've been running at least a mile every day for 180 days (that day) I was pretty excited to run the 1 mile race too. Although I thought for sure I wasn't going to be anywhere towards the top for my time since I know there are women that can run a pretty fast 1 mile!
I started off the race kind of towards the front but not right on the line. There were a lot of kids there and I knew that there was going to be some dodging around them. People took off like a shot when the race started but I tried to pace myself since I know 1 mile can seem REALLY long sometimes lol.
There was this guy that was running close to the same pace as me and at one point he turned to me and told me that I was "doing really well". I said thanks but I was thinking to myself, WTF I must look like a rookie ;)
The race is a small loop so you run the last part going out and going in and when I got kind of close I turned on the heat and just raced it in. I thought for sure that guy would speed up too but he didn't so I actually came in ahead of him.
I was pretty stoked to see I had come in under 9 minutes. I have only done that a few times, mostly last year when I was a lot faster and doing the run streak trying to beat my time all a lot.
I walked back to my car to change out my bib (they had separate ones for each race) and as I was walking back to line up that guy gave me a head nod like "eh, you aren't a rookie" haha. I should have told him thank you for making me faster!
We got lined up and I just made a plan to take it easy and to not walk until I got to the water stop. I remembered from the year before that it was about half way through the course. As I started running I noticed a guy in cut off jeans running and made another goal to not come in behind the cut off jeans guy.
It seemed like forever but I did run until I got to the water stop and then I did a lot of run/walk for the rest of the race. Towards the end I didn't feel like walking as much, probably because I knew I was almost done. I still got a pretty good time for the 8k with an under 11 minute average. Not bad for doing some walking. Usually when I run at home I tend to be around a 10:30 average so I wasn't too far off from that.
I got myself a little snack and then walked over to check the times. Imagine my surprise to see that I placed SECOND in my age group for the 1 mile run! Talk about exciting! I went and got my medal (they had someone at a table with them for that first race in case people didn't want to stick around for the 2nd race) and then sat away from everyone and did a little cry. Yes, I'm a dork. But it's pretty exciting to be able to place!
I thought my time was 8:37 but after I got the official results online it's actually 8:54. The way they have the results is confusing. No matter, I still got 2nd and got in under 9 minutes :)
For the 8k my time was 53:49
Now to find something to sign up for in March :)

Cardiff City have fended off Premier League interest to tie Peter Whittingham to a new three-year contract with the club.
Whittingham has spent five years in Wales with the Bluebirds after joining from Aston Villa and has continually impressed in their midfielder, playing 267 times and netting 68 goals.
And with the several sides taking notice of his displays in the Championship, Cardiff have completed a real coup by getting the player to extend his stay with the club.
Bluebirds boss Malky Mackay told their official website: "We're absolutely delighted that Peter has committed himself to the club for the longer term following a couple of top flight clubs coming in for him.
“I had a good conversation with him and he's decided to commit his future with us right here, so on behalf of my staff and the club we are happy to have backed that commitment by improving the terms of his contract.
"He's still a relative youngster who is great to work with, and I've very much enjoyed having him here as one of my players over the last year, during which time he's improved again. Going forward he's someone who I won't stop pushing because I see so much talent there.
"All of us here work hard with him in training every day, but he also puts a lot in himself. Underneath his calm demeanour there's a real determination to play at the top level, and we're happy that he's committed that desire to trying to achieve his goals with Cardiff City. We all want to push on and have every hope to do that together.
"Despite strong Premier League interest he sees what we are trying to build here and he wants to be a part of that, though that doesn't take anything away from the level of his ambition. It's my belief that there's a lot more to come from Peter Whittingham and I'm certainly going to try and help him achieve his goals.”

We woke up a bit later than we had been the next day and got ready. We went out into the kitchen and Grandma had made us an amazing breakfast! There was soy spinach and rice, pickled salad, cucumbers, an apple salad and ham.
Randy played a game of Japanese chess (I can’t spell the real name) with Grandpa while Keiko and I talked and she went to get ready.
We left with Grandma to go to the bus station right outside their house, which took us to the Machida train station. Then, we got on a train for Kamakura.
We stopped at this sweet and peaceful temple in the most quiet and quaint little town. There was nobody at the temple and it was just beautiful and peaceful, I loved it! We got back on the train and kept going, after Keiko gave us some yummy lemon and honey candy.
We got off the station as Keiko was telling us about her favorite sweet potato ice cream that they had in Kamakura. We walked off the train and there was an ice cream shop, so we had to stop! Keiko got sweet potato, and Randy and I got a sweet potato and a mint chocolate chip cone each. The sweet potato ice cream was SO GOOD. It blew my mind how much I loved it! I’m normally a chocolate girl through and through, but I loved that ice cream cone so much!
We went to see the giant Buddha statue which is called the Daibutsu. It is overwhelming to walk up to it and see how gigantic it is. There is a beautiful garden and shrine behind the statue, and there were a million school kids there on vacation. A few came up to me and said “Hello!” in their practiced English, and when I would respond “Oh hello, how are you?” They would run away because they didn’t know what I was saying!
I need to talk about Randy’s grandma Keiko for a minute. She is the sweetest lady in the world. She was so fun and would laugh and tell us hilarious stories. She speaks really good English that she learned when she went to Catholic school in Tokyo. She would speak to Randy in Japanese a lot but would translate for me immediately and would talk to me in English a bunch. She would ask me questions and we got used to speaking slowly and gesturing to each other so we could understand each other perfectly. She is so fun and loves to laugh and isn’t afraid to speak her mind at all. I absolutely adore her and meeting her gave me so much insight into Randy and his family, and the reasons why he is the way that he is. Keiko would pause all the time and say “How you say that in English…” then she would say a word in Japanese to Randy and they would try to figure out the best English word. “Ahh yes” she would say after they decided on the right word. She would laugh and bump my arm and squeeze my shoulder. She is almost 80 but she is insanely healthy and walked all around, navigated busy stations for us, and seemed more energetic than we were!
After we saw the statue we went to a noodle shop Keiko loves and I had duck soba, and Randy had Oyacodon which is chicken and egg rice.
We got back on the train and went a little further into Kamakura, and walked up this beautiful lane that during the cherry blossom season, is just unreal. We saw a wedding party leaving the temple and it was amazing to see the dresses and hair and makeup, I loved it so much. Randy and I went up the steep stairs to the top of the shrine, then we came back down and wandered the town with Keiko, shopping and chatting about what she loved about America and about Randy’s time in Okinawa. Keiko wanted to get some tea and we explained we would go with her but wouldn’t drink tea, then we saw a jinriksha, which is a carriage pulled by a person, and before I knew what was happening, Keiko had arranged for Randy and I to get a tour of the city while she would go to a nearby cafe and we would be dropped off there later. They were all speaking Japanese so quickly and I was SO confused, it was kind of hilarious!
We got on the cart, he kept telling Randy he had to get in first so he could help me into the cart, it was sweet! And then, we were off! He would walk and run and then slow down the cart with us in the back and I was floored! He had to be SO in shape to be able to do it! He was really nice and spoke pretty rough English. Randy asked “Where did you learn to speak English” and he replied, “Uhhhhhh recently!” It was kind of hilarious! He showed us a museum and this beautiful temple called the Temple of Love. It was built after the first Shogun died and his wife built it for him, in his honor. The guy pulled out his notes to tell us the story and was SO animated and acted the story out for us, going “He died…BLEH” and then closed his eyes as if he died, or “His wife was so sad…BOOOHOOO” and pretended like he was sobbing. It cracked us up!
We finished running through the town making jokes about the cars and how his cart was “eco-friendly” and then we were back to the tea house where Keiko was. It was called the Milk Tea House and it was DARLING. Antique and beautiful, playing jazz music. We had hot chocolate with Keiko and laughed and talked. We left and kept walking around Kamakura, we went to this “Bean Store” where they had beans and nuts of all kinds of crazy flavors to sample, we tried curry, squid ink, green apple, raspberry, and a million more. It was so fun!
We got back on the train and laughed and talked the whole way back to Machida.
Keiko was ready to go home, so she told us to stay and play in Machida city while she took the bus home. We went around the city and people-watched and shopped and had a fun time just the two of us.
We decided to take the train to Naruse and then walk back, since the walk was short and it was fun to see the neighborhood.
When we got back, Keiko had made chicken and salad and tofu and rice, and we had this amazing oily bread from the bakery which was to DIE for.
Keiko pulled out the nuts and beans from the store that she had bought and we chatted to Grandpa about what we had done that day and told more stories. Randy’s cousin Reina came to visit and it was so awesome to meet her. She doesn’t speak a lot of English so Randy and Grandma had to translate a lot for both of us! We just talked and folded magazine paper into little trash bins for tissues and wrappers, which was super fun.
We kept talking for a bit, and then Reina went home, and we went to sleep after a crazy busy day!

"I'm primarily a fastball-curveball guy," said Boshers, who has been working on a changeup. "My command [was good at Triple-A]. I was able to throw the ball where I wanted to and throw my breaking ball when I was behind in the count. That really helped my fastball get to where it needed to be."
Molitor said the move was made after Ricky Nolasco and Ervin Santana combined to go 6 1/3 innings over the last two games, causing the bullpen to be overworked. Molitor said he prefers a four-man bench with 13 position players, but that right now pitching depth is the priority.
"We need pitching, and we've talked about going to 13 for a while and it was expedited by our short starts the last couple days," Molitor said. "Buddy came over this winter and had a good spring, competing to the end. He has a nice left-handed mix. He attacks and gets left-handers out. He's done well down there and has been stretched out somewhat."
Mastroianni, who was 0-for-9 with two walks in seven games with the Twins since being called up on May 6, said he suffered the injury in Detroit last week. He said it continued to linger and that he felt it during early batting practice on Monday, causing him to shut it down on Tuesday. He's on the DL retroactive to Sunday, so he's eligible to be activated on June 6.
"I thought it wasn't really that big of a deal and played Saturday, and it felt OK," Mastroianni said. "There was some soreness, and it was a little tight. But Monday, I tried to swing and it didn't feel right. I couldn't really go. I tried to do what I could, but when you can't swing, it's just unfortunate. I've never had this before."
Perkins, meanwhile, is now eligible to return on June 10 after being placed on the 60-day with a strained left shoulder. It doesn't change his timeline, as he's set to resume his throwing program on Thursday after a setback last week, but he is roughly a week away from throwing off a mound. He'll also need a rehab assignment before returning.
"Pushing Glen to the 60-day from the 15 is probably not an issue in terms of timing," Molitor said. "Especially with him being pushed back roughly a week after suffering a repercussion last week while throwing."
Rhett Bollinger has covered the Twins for MLB.com since 2011. Read his blog, Bollinger Beat, follow him on Twitter @RhettBollinger and listen to his podcast. This story was not subject to the approval of Major League Baseball or its clubs.

The last piece of her birthday was a Royal Princess Treatment at the local spa. She got her fingers and toe nails painted, makeup, her hair done and a gift. Mommy, Daddy and Hunter gave that to her for her birthday. It was as much fun for mommy to watch as it was for her!!
Chamber Golf Tournament
6 days ago

Longtime friend says Syracuse mother in murder-suicide battled depression
PRICE — When Pegi Butler heard that the woman she loved as a daughter was suspected of killing herself and her two girls, her heart broke.
"I just keep saying to myself, 'Something terrible happened,'" Butler said. "It was something that happened instantly, something happened that overwhelmed her or just took her breath away to the point that she just felt like she didn't have any other way to go. And I don't know what that could have been."
Police say Kyler Ramsdell-Oliva, 32, shot her two daughters, Kenadee Oliva, 13, and Isabella Oliva, 7, before killing herself in their Syracuse home Tuesday.
The 32-year-old mother had just broken up with her fiancé, Butler said Thursday as she reminisced sadly about the small family that had spent so much time in her Price home.
Butler met Ramsdell-Oliva when she was 18 years old and came to help as a home health aide when Butler's daughter had a stroke. They grew close, confided in one another, even after Ramsdell-Oliva changed professions five years later.
"She was around the age of some of my children, so I was kind of more like a mom," Butler said. "She would talk to me about things, cry about different things that were going on in her life. It was really comfortable. She became just like part of the family."
Ramsdell-Oliva brought her daughters to the house regularly. Butler recalls Kenadee taking her first steps, and she described Isabella as a sweet and talented little girl.
But through the years, Butler worried about the young woman she said was unique, innocent and trusted the wrong people.
"She would get caught up in things and then not know how to get herself out of certain situations with guys and things like that," Butler said. "She just had a side of her that seemed like she was hurt. She would get hurt easily. But on the other side she was bubbly and happy."
Over the past three years, Butler was hopeful Ramsdell-Oliva was conquering the depression she had fought through her youth, agreeing to participate in counseling and getting her life running smoothly. Part of that positive change, Butler said, was her fiancé.
"She was madly in love," said Butler, who received text messages and pictures when the couple got engaged at Disneyland.
But when Ramsdell-Oliva talked to her on Sunday, something was wrong. Ramsdell-Oliva had told her fiancé to leave their home but confessed to Butler she still loved him deeply.
"She was very philosophical on Sunday. She said a few things that kind of concerned me," Butler said. "I would say she was heartbroken."
When they finished talking, Butler never suspected Ramsdell-Oliva and the two girls were in danger. The conversation had ended on a positive note.
Since learning about the shooting, Butler hasn't been able to shake the question all of Ramsdell-Oliva's friends have been asking: Why?
"It's just not Kyler," she said. "If she was going to get upset, she would get upset at herself. She would never take it out on her daughters — never ever."
Butler has a theory: Maybe Ramsdell-Oliva was worried about what would happen to her daughters if she left them behind, and perhaps she was afraid custody of the girls would fall to men she feared.
"I don't think there's anyone she really trusted to leave her children with," Butler said. "It wouldn't have been, 'I'm doing this because I'm angry with my children,' or, 'I don't want anyone else to have them,' it would be more of a fear of what would happen to her children if she wasn't here."
Two days after learning of the shooting, Butler says she isn't angry. She's sad.
"I would have done anything to help her out," Butler said. "Or just say, 'Why didn't you call up your family and talk to them? What was going on, honey, that you thought you had to do this alone?'"
Now, Butler says all she can do is tell people what the woman she knew was like, someone who was loving, kind and enthusiastic about life.
"I don't even know what to say to people except that she had a beautiful heart. She had an innocence about her that wasn't like other people," Butler said. "Yeah, she had her ups and downs. She had her dark moments that she had to really fight herself through, but to me this is not her character. Something terrible, terrible had to have happened."
- Lawmakers to rehash Utah's stillbirth law due...
- Video: Man uses 'random acts of pasta' to...
- Shoppers skip turkey for a shot at...
- John Jones died in a cave, but his widow...
- Utah family's adoption of Ethiopian girl...
- University Hospital opens hotel for patients,...
- Advent: A time of fasting, preparation for...
- A new way to love: Spouses become caregivers...
- As Ferguson verdict is read, protesters... 70
- Prayers, protests raised in Utah as... 38
- Utah to pay plaintiffs in marriage... 34
- 12-year-old girl dies in accidental... 29
- Ogden attorney sues Weber School... 28
- GOP plans to sue over Count My Vote... 28
- Proposed tax increase a 'bold move' for... 27
- Utah lawmakers contemplate law... 26

Usually followed by "they built them this way back then. The assembly lines just made cars and didn't care about missing a few things"I’ve come across some tall tales while car hunting these last few years. My favorite was a pretty tired car that the guy was selling as a 70 z28. As I asked the typical questions (gas pedal, 12 bolt, 8k tach, etc) it became very clear the car was likely a 307 base model with turbo 350. He was adamant that his late brother bought it and it was a genuine Z. When I pressed him on all the issues, it was almost comical. When I said where's the 8k Tach, He informed me it had idiot lights and not tach but likely the old one went bad so he switched It for a idiot light dash. It was all I could do to hold my laughter.
Yeah, maybe he’s come to the conclusion that the POs story was pure BS. Hopefully the story didn’t cause him to realize he payed too much. But, even so and as others have said, drive it and enjoy it! I’d say literally 1/2 of the genuine Z28s I inquired about were clones.Nothing further from the OP?

“I wanted to take something hard that I had to go through that was painful and help another human being to get through without struggling as hard as I did.” -Maya
Today, Ben and I are chatting to Maya who is a full-time employee at Rock Recovery Center. She is here to talk about her past history and how she became a professional in the substance abuse space.
“I never thought that I’d be here working in mental health and the substance abuse field,” Maya says about her career choice. She is excited to be working with us at Rock Recovery Center and is an excellent fit for our team.
She was born and raised in Florida, growing up in an upper-middle-class family with a strong work ethic. However, both her parents were addicts, and her dad died of his disease. “I never felt a part of, or good enough, or that I belonged in any environment.”
Her parents divorced when she was one and didn’t have good relationships with her stepparents on either side. “I was an addict long before I picked up any substance,” as she was trying to validate her worth early on with love being conditional based on her achievements. As a result, she was a high-achiever in academics and sports. “It’s hard to maintain that level of expectations.”
She remembers feeling scared when she picked up her first drink at 15 and the feeling of the potential damage that could arise with drinking. “It’s like a switch flipped and it wasn’t very pleasant.” However, since there was some sense of relief, she continued with the addiction. It wasn’t long before her disease progressed and friends noticed. Dropping out of school in the next year, she moved from her prestigious private school to public school.
Having had opiates in her system every day of her life for over a decade, Maya was struggling just to survive. When she woke up in the medical unit of jail, she gave up hope and thought she would die.
Listen in and find how Maya decided to become a mental health provider, why her recovery has to be separate from her work and clients, and her advice on how to deal with someone who is addicted.
Check out our new website where you can download any episode along with other useful information for those in recovery.

Just a few lines to let you know I'm still alive.
We are all doing very well. You won't recognise the house when you get home. Your dad read in the newspaper that most accidents happen within 20 miles from your home, so we moved 25 miles away.
Your father's got a really good job now. He's got 300 men under him. He's cutting the grass at the cemetery.
Your brother Tom is still in the army. He's only been there a short while and they've already made him a court martial!
Your Uncle Patrick drowned last week in a vat of whiskey in the Dublin Distillery. Some of his workmates tried to save him but he fought them off bravely. They cremated him and it took three days to put out the fire.
I'm sorry to say that your idiot cousin Seamus was arrested while riding his bicycle last week. They are charging him with dope peddling.
I went to the doctor on Thursday and your father went with me. The doctor put a small tube in my mouth and told me not to talk for ten minutes. Your father offered to buy it from him.
The weather isn't bad here. It only rained twice this week, first for three days and then for four days.
John locked his keys in the car yesterday. We were really worried because it took him two hours to get us out.
Three of your friends went off a bridge in a pick-up truck. Ralph was driving. He wound down the window and swam to safety. Your other two friends in the flatbed at the back drowned because they couldn't get the tailgate down.
There isn't much more news at this time.
Your loving Mum.
What is out on the lawn all summer and is Irish? Paddy O'Furniture

PITTSFIELD, Mass. — A 23-year-old man was severely injured early Saturday but survived after being run over by a freight train, police said.
A police desk sergeant said that the yet unnamed man was hit on the CSX railroad bridge on Woodlawn Avenue east of downtown by a 19-car freight train at about 1:45 a.m.
Police said the man was run over by the train and had to be extricated from beneath one of the cars. He suffered open skull fractures and multiple amputations and was being treated at Berkshire Medical Center, police said. His condition was unavailable.
"I would say that his life has likely been changed for ever," the desk sergeant said.
Police do not know what the man was doing in the area near Silver Lake at that time of the day.

by Louise Penny
“But odd as his family might be, they were nothing compared to this. In fact, that was one of the great comforts of his job. At least his family compared well to people who actually killed each other, rather than just thought about it.”
Long before I started reading Louise Penny, but read about her and was interested, I read a book review which expressed dismay that the murder was a beloved member of the community. From the first book I read in the series, I had assumed that the murderer was going to be Peter, and this book the reviewer was talking about was going to be a good bit down the road. So my reading has been colored by this assumption. I’m glad that is behind me now.
I was relieved that this is kind of a part one of a two part duo, because I was vaguely dissatisfied that Olivier still maintained his innocence at the end. There were also some things left hanging and some unanswered questions. On finishing this entry in the series, I really despise Olivier for his lies and greed and stupidity. I don’t care whether he is a murderer or not. If he proves not to be, I hope he isn’t accepted back as a beloved friend to all. In a way, this 5 star rating is contingent on how things play out in Bury Your Dead.
Questions and quibbles: Totally unbelievable that a prominent member of an Artistic community would feel such homophobia, let alone display it.
Why didn’t Olivier take even some of the treasures after he murdered the Hermit, or came back to find him dead? He could have found a hiding place.
Once the hermit was dead why did he still dump the body at the Hadley place? Why the hate? Why the risk? The jig was up at that point. That’s why Gabri says he didn’t do it. He couldn’t have advertised the murder if he had done it.
July 2, 2018

Huda Sha’arawi was an Egyptian feminist and activist who founded the Egyptian Feminist Union.
Huda was born in Cairo in 1879 and came from a very wealthy Egyptian family. Life for boys and girls in Egypt at that time was quite different. As Huda grew she came to notice there were many things permitted for her brother which were forbidden to her. For example, when she saw her brother riding a horse she wanted one too, however she was told that riding wasn’t for girls. Huda was educated, but again, there were differences in the subjects she was allowed to study and those which her male relatives were. She said;
“I became depressed and began to neglect my studies, hating being a girl because it kept me from the education I sought. Later, being a female became a barrier between me and the freedom for which I yearned.” Continue reading Huda Sha’arawi →
*Trigger warning; rape & torture*
Djamila was born in Al-Qasaba neighbourhood in colonial Algeria in 1935 to an Algerian father and a Tunisian mother. Her family was a middle class family and she was the only daughter amongst seven sons.
Djamila started her national struggle against the French colonisation from a very young age. She went to a French school where they were forced to sing the anthem ‘France is our Mother’ whereas Djamila would say instead ‘Algeria is our Mother’, which ended up in her getting punished.
Continue reading Djamila Bouhired – Algerian Freedom Fighter →
Leila Khaled was born on April 9, 1944 in Haifa, a coastal city in Occupied Palestine. Leila’s family fled to Tyre in Lebanon after al-Nakba, also known as the Catastrophe, which resulted in the displacement of around 750,000 Palestinian refugees and the establishment of the state of Israel in 1948.
Leila fled Palestine with her mother and her siblings leaving her father behind to take care of the house and their family business, and thinking that they would return home after the bloodshed. However, he joined them a year later, after both the house and the shop were confiscated by Israeli forces.
Continue reading Leila Khaled →
Bhikaiji Cama was an important figure in the movement for an independent India. Known to some as ‘Madam Cama’ and others as ‘The Mother of the Indian Revolution’.
Bhikaiji Sorab Patel was born on the 24th September 1861 into British-ruled India. Her young life was fairly uneventful; raised in a privileged family, she did well at school and had a flair for languages.
In 1885 she was married, and her name became Bhikaiji Rustom Cama. Unfortunately this marriage wasn’t very successful. By this time in her life Bhikaiji had begun to have strong feelings about the British rule of India, and had become very interested in the Indian Nationalist Movement which campaigned for a free and independent country. Sadly her husband didn’t share her views, he was pro-British and enjoyed the benefits this gave him. Eventually, and controversially for the time, she left him.
Continue reading Bhikaiji Cama – ‘Mother of the Indian Revolution’ →

good way to start, but the humor was less though but there was sarcasm. I liked how the turtles thought it was easier to catch the bad guys without their technodrome. I did not like shredder's new voice that much.
I liked how jim cummings voiced drakus / berserko and how he created the technodrome and was comparing his annihalator to it. but the fight was the annilator was short
It is shocking to see that shredder actually blew up channel 6 and the turtles thought april and her crew were dead, but splinter saved them at the last minute
burne blaimed the turtles for destruction and he said every time shredder causes trouble its because of them and vows to make everyone think they are a menace. but he could see that they saved the city and stopped berserko. I loved how shredder comments on bluffing. how did krang get his bubble walker when the last time we saw him before this he was in his android body.

In the last couple of years, like never before, a lot of biopics have been made and were in trend. Many directors even began looking for personalities on whom biopics can be made. Also, there were many people who thought that a biopic should be made on them.
Well, here is one actor who says a big 'No' for a biopic on him. Actor Mahesh Babu, who is currently basking on the success of his latest flick Sarileru Neekevvaru, an Anil Ravipudi directorial, thinks that a biopic on him would definitely not work.
In an interview that he has given to a leading news portal, the Srimanthudu said, "My life is very boring and simple, and so am I. There's definitely nothing much to know or to be told. There is nothing much in my life that would interest or impress anyone. So I don't think a biopic on me would even work. It will be nothing but waste of money." At the same time, he believes that he is a very humble person and so, there aren't any of such aspects in his life which would make a commercial movie.
Mahesh Babu is known for his simplicity. He even revealed that most of the times, he isn't even interested in what he is wearing and that his choices are so simple that he can even wear a checks shirt to go an event. Also, he said that his wife Namrata chooses his outfits because he is not sure of what his choice is. In the same interview, Mahesh even revealed that he wants his son to be like him and that he would tell Gautam the same thing.
Also, talking about that moment from a movie set that he will cherish for a lifetime, Mahesh said, "I wouldn't say movie set, but when Murari released in 2001, I went to Sudarshan 35 MM theatre with my father and watched the morning show. After that film got over, my dad put his hand on my shoulder. That's a moment I can never forget."
On the work front, the actor is currently busy prepping up for his next film with Vamsi Paidipally. This film is said to be a commercial entertainer and will go on floors in a couple of months.

Came in the morning for my day and evening shift, found Fela already at his bedroom completing the morning routine, After the morning routine fela came downstairs for his breakfast, petty cash was signed and a briefing of the night shift was given by Ann, teach board was updated and Fela was playing the tongue drum, chores were carried out as Fela got ready to have awalk to butchers and back, we had a one and a half hours walk to the butchers though it was raining but fela seemed to enjoy the rain alot, lunch was prepared and served, we did the Makaton lesson on medical and body parts and also the matching game on body parts which he actively participated, foot physio was done but we decided to abandoned the walk at home since Fela had done alot of activities and not want to overwhelm him, facial trimming was done and bath was prepared as fela was having phone call with mama, at the end of shift fela was already having his bath.
Arousal States – Start: 1 Baseline End: 1 Baseline Did his state change? No to Did he have a bowel movement? Yes Bristol score: Was Fela incontinent?: No Did he have vigorous exercise?: Yes – He had a walk to and from the butchers

Tina: Can you please tell me about yourself? You can start wherever you like.
The big thing in my life obviously is that I'm a severe TBI survivor. However, I think bigger than that, I'm a mom of two- I have a six-year-old and a three-year-old. My life revolves around them and their activities and my hobbies are their hobbies right now: basketball, soccer, baseball, and dance. Luckily, they're very active kids so my active lifestyle fits well with them. That helps a lot because fitness is a huge thing for me. I'm trying to get that rubbed off on them. And I think it's working so far! [chuckles]
I've had a brain injury for 14 years… I’ve been in the brain injury life for a little bit. I will be the first to admit it — I look great on my Instagram and it looks really easy what I do. Because I've been doing it for 14 years! Right away, I did not look like that. I promise I was a hot mess. It was not as easy as it looks. I want to get that across because it did NOT always look this way. It took time to get there and there are steps you have to take to get there.
Tina: Thank you so much! Could you please share a bit about the nature of your brain injury?
TBI.Fitness: I was 20 when I was a passenger in a single-vehicle rollover. I was with a bunch of friends, drunk driving. Luckily, nobody died, but there were serious injuries and one of those was mine. I flew through the windshield. It wasn't just like in movies where they fly through the windshield and they land on the hood of the car, you know? I kept going… I went 93 feet. [jokingly] So, I go all out when I get hurt.
Because of that, I suffered a traumatic brain injury. I was in a coma for under three weeks. I did inpatient therapy for about three months, then I did outpatient for under a year, then I returned to school. I had to do an extra year, and I couldn't graduate when I was supposed to, because I failed a bunch of classes. That was a whole process of relearning myself — what worked for me and what didn't. That took another year to learn and then I was able to graduate in 2011. The fact that I was able to graduate was awesome. But, I had to use students with disabilities, which was something I never had used before.
When I woke up from my coma, I had to relearn absolutely anything you could think of I had to relearn. I had to relearn how to talk, walk, and eat again. Talking came back pretty easily. Walking was a whole other thing. I had a wheelchair for a couple of months. I only lost a month before till a month after so I still had all my long-term memories of walking, running, and everything. Except I had no idea how to do it. My therapist will be like: “stand up!” I would remember standing up, I could see myself standing up, but I had no idea because those connections weren't there yet. By the time I got out of the hospital, they were back. It still was a learning process with everything. I had to just figure out what worked for me, and what didn't.
Tina: Speaking of that, VBI hasn't had a lot of TBI survivors that got their injury in their college years. I would love to hear more about your experience going back to school with a traumatic brain injury, and career-wise, how were you able to navigate the stress of college and adulting while having a brain injury?
TBI.Fitness: Yes. I credit mostly to my support circle of people because they were my rock. They were what I leaned on for everything. I went back for senior year and everybody was the same. Nobody changed but I did. They could tell I was still injured at that point so they pitied me and they always wanted to help me. I tried to hide my issues, but my close friends knew when I was trying to hide stuff. They would do stuff for me without me having to ask, that was huge.
Between going back to the four-year university and outpatient, I also went to a junior college while I took that year off. While I was in speech therapy, I was taking these junior college classes to get ready for my university classes. They were nothing close to how intense the university classes were. When I went back, I did fail; I had to retake classes. But I never let that get me down.
The professors, my advisors, and the students with disability were amazing. They helped me so much when I was in school because they knew how much I was struggling. They would take time out of their day to help me more. I also have a whole bunch of things that helped me: I would record classes so I could read and listen to them. I had to have someone take my notes for me so I didn't have to stress out that I was missing something. I also had a special tutor for students with disability. She would help me make sure I got all the good points I needed. I would not have graduated without them.
Tina: This is so amazing that you had such a great support system.
TBI.Fitness: Yeah it was a smaller university. St. Ambrose University in Iowa — I don't know if you know that.
Tina: No I’ve never heard of it. But the benefits showed because it was a smaller university! A quick question, did you change your major at all after your brain injury?
TBI.Fitness: No. My advisors wanted me to because I was in a kinesiology major so it was not an easy major. However, that was the one thing that I could control in my life because I couldn't control anything else. I could control keeping my major the same, so I refused to change it and I love fitness. At that time, I was debating on doing occupational therapy or physical therapy. I just hadn't decided yet. After everything I went through, I would tell my therapist to stop every day because of the pain or because I felt dumb. Luckily, they didn't stop and they're really good at what they did. Because I'm fixed physically. Close to my recovery at the time I changed my career choice because if someone told me to stop I would because I knew how hard that was. I knew I would be terrible at that job because I would stop. I bowed out of that idea. I decided I'd see what happened and I wanted to get more into brain injury.
Tina: It just seems like you were doing so many things, and you've done so many amazing things! How did you come to your Instagram page? Your marriage, your kids? Whatever you want to highlight! I'm sure like a lot of young TBI survivors, hearing about your story in college and beyond will find a lot of courage.
TBI.Fitness: I don't even know how long it was, maybe 10 years ago, I wrote a book of my whole story, leading up to when I got married. My ending sentence was my dad walking me down the aisle. When we were walking down the aisle, I told him not to let me fall because I wasn't healed. However, I got really scared of publishing that book because the book is my soul. It was the start of my story which was very rough... I have that written out in a Word document on my computer and I don't know if it will ever get anywhere. I was working as a brain injury specialist when I wrote it. I was working with behaviorally-based brain injuries, which was a completely different side of brain injury than what I was used to. I had behaviors, definitely, but nothing compared to the ones I worked with. That was another experience of brain injury I wasn't ready for, but I loved it because I was still helping people. I stepped away after a while because I wanted to be pregnant. I started working with health insurance, but I still wanted to help with brain injury. I just didn't know exactly how. Everybody was trying to convince me to start an Instagram, but I wasn't about it yet. I am a huge fan of TRX — Total Body Resistance Exercise. One of my friends is a personal trainer, and she told me that I needed to look into this. With that, I fell in love with it because everything was in one spot, I didn’t have to look for anything and be distracted along the way. Then I saw people on TRX that had videos on Instagram so I was like, you know, I could do that and do a fitness aspect to the brain jury. That's how the TBI fitness account came about.
Tina: Do you think fitness helped you in the rehab process?
TBI.Fitness: Oh, definitely! The health benefits definitely help. But, it works with my head so much more than my health benefits. Part of it for me because it clears my head. If I'm having a really bad day at work (I work from home), having super brain fog, or can’t concentrate, I will take a break and go down to the basement where I have the TRX at home, I will do a five-minute stretch. I posted a video recently of how stretching doesn't have to be anything difficult. Yeah, that's why I love it; it's a huge stress reliever.
Tina: Now that we are approaching the end. I want to give you time to speak on anything that I didn’t get to ask. Is there anything else you want to mention or give advice on?
TBI.Fitness: One of the biggest pieces of advice I want to share with the community is acceptance. Because brain injury sucks, just completely sucks. There's no other nice way to put it. However, accepting everything did so much for me. 14 years later, I still have my struggles and a personal belief that I'm not getting better. I've gotten better, physically. But cognitively, that's still a whole other thing. Like there are good days and bad days. I still struggle to function, daily. Then I have kids on top of that, I have to learn how to compensate and keep them going because they depend on me. But accepting is the biggest thing for me to keep moving forward. I had to first get over the fact that I wanted to be 100% better, and I needed to accept for myself that wasn't going to happen. I don't think you can get better, but what does get better is how you manage it. How I deal with my brain injury now is so much better than how I dealt with it right away. This is where understanding yourself is another huge big part of this journey. After you accept it. You need to know what works for you and what doesn't. A lot of things I say might not work for everybody. But it works for me.
Tina: Thanks for the advice! One last question that came up is in regards to your identity as a mom and having kids on top of brain injury. Can you touch on how the experience was for you and any tips and tricks for people who want to become a parent?
TBI.Fitness: I had my brain injury before kids so I don’t know the other aspect of this. I went into the pregnancy knowing what I was going into. My husband and I had many conversations about whether it is actually going to be a thing. I didn’t know at first because I struggled so much and they were going to see that struggle. We decided that it would be okay and he helps me so much so I’m not doing this alone. Right now, he is in the basement playing with the kids so I can do this! But, it was a lot of trial and error. What worked for me before… I tried it with kids, and it was just laughable! [chuckle] Totally flew out of the window. Sadly, this is an answer but not an answer. You just have to try everything and see what works!
Tina: Yeah traumatic brain injury often comes as a surprise and it is always framed like that. But your story offers a whole new perspective.
TBI.Fitness: Yeah so with my story… I have a brain injury, but I still have an awesome life! I am still married to my college crush, built a house, and have two kids! I live my life how I want to live it, but I just have to do it differently with a lot of strategies.
Email Interview (lighting rounds with TBI.Fitness):
Please tell us a little bit about yourself, start with whatever you would like. Perhaps your name, age, occupation, and hobbies?
Mom of two 6 & 3 really right now all hobbies are around them and their activities; 34; have been in the brain injury world for 14 years; fitness is and has always been my thing. I have the Instagram @tbi.fitness that emphasizes how much fitness has helped me with my brain injury

How Saint Obi’s marriage made him abandon Nollywood and led to his death – Filmmaker Zik Okafor
Nigerian Filmmaker, Zik Okafor, has weighed in on the tragic passing of his friend and Colleague, Saint Obi.
The actor, 57, passed way after prolonged illness. Reports claim that the movie star died since Sunday, May 6, in the home of one of his siblings.
On Monday, May 16, Actress Georgia Onuoha, took to Instagram, shared colleague and Saint Obi’s close ally, Zik Okafor’s comprehensive write up on circumstances that led to Former’s demise.
Zik, revealed how Saint Obi’s marriage to ex-wife Lynda Saint-Nwafor, cut him off his Nollywood friends, took him away from the movie industry.
Zik Okafor partly wrote;
“Between Saint Obi’s marriage and his death
It was this stardom that fetched him his much professed financially strong and powerful wife . And their wedding, that solemn ritual of love, would drastically alter the cause of his life and tragically yank him off the creative community that threw him up for the wife to capture and indeed conquer.
Their marriage was at best a dramatisation of love. It was quick. He barely told us that he found a wife. Then, the marriage happened. It was something of a mystique, only those involved understood the histrionics that played out .
None of us who were his closest pals, who walked with him through the crucible to the crest of his career in Nollywood, was invited. The distance between us and the guy I admirably called Saint of the Storm had begun. This gulf would widen with each year. We saw him perhaps once in a year after this marriage.”
The Filmmaker also claimed Saint never invited his friends in Nollywood for his three daughters’ christening or birthday.
Zik said it took Saint three years after marriage to return to his hommies in Nollywood, after his wife, who worked for topmost hierachy in telecom giant, MTN, accused him of being a Gold digger.
“And life actually seemed to have given him a fair shake of the dice. He dressed well, drove big cars and even his skin, in literal lingo, spelt wellness.

New Delhi, Feb 13: Rajinder Kumar the former special director of the Intelligence Bureau faced the brunt of the Investigation by the CBI in the Ishrat Jahan case.
Kumar during this conversation gives a clear idea of how the case was being manipulated and says that he has even sought through an RTI application disclosures of the correspondence between the then law ministry and the CBI.
The CBI had chargesheeted Kumar and three other officers in connection with the Ishrat Jahan case. There were stories that were being given out by a few CBI officers which ranged from Kumar creating fake intelligence inputs to also supplying weapons for the encounter.
Kumar says that he was being framed all along. I would not blame the CBI as a whole, but yes there were some officers who had decided to target me as they wanted some benefits, Kumar alleged. Kumar also asks where in the chargesheet of the CBI has it even been mentioned that Ishrat Jahan and others were not terrorists. The CBI chargesheet makes no mention of that.
It all appears to be a conspiracy hatched to defame me and the Intelligence Bureau, he also informed. They wanted me to give a statement implicating the then Chief Minister of Gujarat, but I refused to do so. I was even told that I would be given post retirement benefits, but I did not bite the bait, he also said.
While the CBI has named Kumar in the chargesheet, it failed to get sanction to prosecute him. The agency had written recently to the Ministry of Home Affairs seeking sanction to prosecute Kumar, but it was rejected.

Two years ago, Maria rejected me. She was a friend of a friend. I was genuinely in love with her. What attracted me the most was that we had deep political and philosophical conversations. We would share very poetic experiences and I genuinely liked her. However, after confessing, she rejected me and blocked me from any means of communication. I was sad. The way in which I dealt with the pain was by becoming cynical, thinking that no true feelings existed and nothing was sincere. And more than that, I believed that I didn't deserve any true love and I should use people to achieve my goals.
A couple of weeks later, a person contacted me. (Let's call her girl H). She was from another country and I had barely chatted with her before. We had worked together in an online art forum before. We chatted little by little. I didn't think too much of it. I was flirtitious and charming. I told her about my political dreams of helping my community. After a month of chatting, we imagined what it would be to be a couple and we agreed to be one and see how it went out. Let me remind you that she is from another country and so far, we had never met in person. Anyhow, our relationship kept growing and growing. Although, at first, I didn't felt love for her, I did eventually loved her. I still love her. She became part of my life. We grew up to be very intimate. She was the reason why I adopted 3 bunnies as pets. Three bunnies which I love and care for a lot.
Girl H even became friends with my Grandma.
She has depression and that has been a big factor in our relationshp. I really wanted to help her. However, it's hard to help someone when she is depressed. I did look for options. Like making excercise or going to a psychiatrist. I even went to a psychiatrist in my country in order to see what I could do. However, girl H refused to do excercise and refused to go a psychiatrist in her country. Sometimes, I didn't know what to do and I would avoid her. We had some fights because of that. However, I know that she loved me a lot. Although it was hard for me to understand her when she was depressed.
My country currently has postal problems. This stopped me to send her gifts and packages. Gifts which I would constantly buy for her. And she also bought several gifts to me.
Last year, I had saved up enough money to go to Japan and meet my best friend. I did have the opportunity to go meet girl H (she is not from Japan), but I took her for granted and thought that I would visit her next year. She got angry at me and we had a terrible fight. Nonetheless, we continued to be together.
On January of 2019, we had a big fight. I was tired and I told her that I didn't know what to do about her depression. She told me that we should have a 1 month break. During that month, I struggled in several stages of my political life. Well, a political life is a very difficult life. People manipulate you. Sometime you have to manipulate people. And I had come across the point where I understood that I wanted to be a good politician. Thus sincerity and honesty was the right choice. I know this sounds very very obvious, however, when you are in politics, you follow what older politicians do in order to be successful. And it's really hard to think morally. It has been through several debates, religious and philosophical that I have come across the conclusion that honesty and truth are the right thing. Even more, dialogue as stated by Paulo Freire. To genuinely listen to other people is the right choice. Basically, I have adopted Mr. Rodger's approach to politics, which is to listen and be sincere. Let people speak! Anyhow, during that month, I came across that realization. I realized all the mistakes I had done in my relationship with Girl H. I was wrong in so many ways. I should have listened to her more. I should have understood her and appreciate he more
I sent her a package with gifts from Grandma and I. She hasn't received it yet though.
By the end of February, she contacted me again. She told me that she had met someone else online that truly cared for her. However, she decided to stay with me. She wasn't ready to throw a 2 year relationship away. After she had told this to this other guy, he lashed out unto her and she felt hurt. She told me that she hated me. And that she was afraid that the only reason she was come back to me was because she pity me. She repeated several times that she really didn't feel any love for me anymore.
I was confused and angry when she told me that. Of course, I wanted her to come back. But I never thought I woulud be replaced so easily. During the conversation, she compared me to him. She said that the only good thing I had was my morality. After crying and a 4 hour conversation, we agreed to give it another chance to our relationship. However, I felt very depressed. I wanted to die. Was I really not worth anything? Were 2 years of relationship so easily brushed off? I really wanted to die.
At first, she showed interest, she actually wanted to hear me breath as she slept. However, as I gave her more attention and did more things for her, her interest dropped.
We chat daily, but her replies are empty.
Yesterday, I was able to stand back again in my feet. I don't want to die anymore. I will continue in my political career.
I really love her and I want to win her heart back. I see her as the only woman in my future. If she is not there, I will not care to have another relationship. Ironically, I don't say this as an irrational statement, rather as a very rational one. From the very beginning of my political career, I understood that having a family and a romantic relationship was a risky thing. I used to dream of having a big family and owning a farm or a school. Now, I find purpose and life in my political career. Personal desicions like having a family seem worthless compared to giving my life for the welfare of my people. And I feel very inspired by those heroes and heroines who have done it. In fact, what brought me out of this terrible depression was learning of a local hero who fought to protect a river from being contaminated. However, I do have the hope that with Girl H, I could have both a political life and a family. I do have that hope. And I do love her.
I have understood that if she doesn't love me back, then there is nothing I can do.
As I said before, her interest in chatting with me has dropped and I don't know what to do. I have heard of the no contact strategy. However, I don't know if that will work. She doesn't love me. But I love her. I wish I could buy a ticket to her country and meet her right away but I don't have the time nor money to do it. I have estimated and I will be able to visit her by the end of this year, which I plan to do.
I want to win her heart back. I know that she can stop talking to me very easily. Just blocking me will do the job. She hasn't done that so far. And she did say that she wanted me to make her fall in love with me again. That gives me hope.
I know I did wrong by getting angry when she talked to me again. I know I did wrong by getting depressed. After all the mistakes I have done, is it possible to win her heart again?
What do I do?
Sounds like you're in a similar situation to me at this point. I think I have two major points I can offer.
The first seems to be something you have already considered. Which is giving her space might actually help her interest to grow again.
This is hard because sometimes people say they feel smothered or need space when you actually are giving them plenty. Or maybe you both just have different ideas of what plenty of space is.
From your post I can understand why you're hesitant to do this as last time you cut off contact she met another guy. But guess what mate, she chose you! That should restore some confidence I hope.
That is my first point. No need to completely cut contact but a bit of space might be good for both of you for now.
My second point and by far the more important one I think.
You might need to push to meet her sooner than later.
I know you said that you lack the time and the money, but nothing is impossible. I don't mean to add extra stress to you but looking from the outside I think this is the solution.
-First it brings you both together, sounds like she really has feelings for you but this will help her to feel for you on a whole new level and to really start to see how real what you have is. I really can't overstate how much easier it will all be when you are both face to face.
Don't get me wrong, there will still be work to be done, but many of her perceived problems will disappear and you will both be happier. This will help.
-Second, if you make time and extra money for her, she will be impressed. Both that you were capable of this when it came down to the crunch. But also that you did it for her and showed how important she is to you.
-Women like big gestures (IF they like the guy it's coming from). They also like men of action who can change circumstances to suit them, rather than be a slave to circumstances.
-It might show to her that you really are sorry for meeting your friend instead of her and you do regret that.
It's hard. But if this is really a once in a lifetime girl for you, then you might need to take some once in a lifetime actions.
That's my advice. I know the second point may seem very difficult but I believe you can achieve it. As for how, that's up to you to decide. You are the one who knows your talents and how you can come across some extra money and organise some extra time in the short term.
Good luck. And I hope it helped.
Apologies Fer and good luck again. Next time I'll have to proofread more carefully.
I feel much more secure on giving her space. I feel even more secure about myself. Thank you for your support and your kind words.
I will work hard to change my circusmtances. I am not a slave to them. I can do it!
If I may abuse of your advice again, let me explain to you my current situation with further detail and the strategy I have come up with.
On Saturday, I stopped being depressed. I told Girl H that and told her that I would take responsibility for the relationship. She didn't comment on that. I got the idea of writing a letter to a politician whom I admire. I asked Girl H for her assistance to which she accepted. I also wrote a story for her. (She always loved when I wrote stories for her.) However, I did not end the story because of lack of time. I told her that I will send the rest of the story eventually. She told me she would be waiting for it.
Yesterday, we agreed to have a call later but she never called me. The last thing I told her was that I would make some puppets for an art project I am working on. She told me she wanted to see how the puppets came out. I told her I would send her a picture of the puppets when they were finished.
I also sent her a picture of my Grandma. She dressed up fancy for a party and Grandma wanted to show her that. After that, I didn't communicate with her at all. Neither did she communicate wiht me. That's the moment I started this thread. And I am very grateful for the reply you gave me.
Today, she send me a message saying she was sorry she didn't call. She said she was overwhelmed with thoughts and didn't feel like calling me. She also complimented Grandma's clothing.
To this, I replied: "I will tell your compliments to grandma. Have you received the package?" I don't know if this was correct.
I have come up with the following strategy. I will stop communicating with her. I will only be a mediator between her and Grandma. I know this is not the no-contact strategy. Because no-contact literally means no contact. And this is why I would like your opinion on this.
I also don't know what to do if she asks me "How are you?". I don't want to answer that question (I sincerely feel it's a boring question) but if I ignore it, I will know she will bring it back up.
Let me also share a bit about myself. I study Economics at the University. My mind is always trying to quantify things, which is wrong. Not everything has a quantity attached to it. I hope this gives you a glimpse of how my mind works. What troubles me about no-contact is that it's such a general strategy. What is the correct time? Should I explain why I am doing no-contact? What are the right words to use? When is the right time to end no-contact? She did no-contact with me during February, is it adequate for me to do no-contact again?
Should I continue writing the story and sharing it with her? Should I share my projects with her?
My mind is full of questions, nonetheless I have learned to be patient. Patience and taking deep breaths are always good.
Thanks again for replying and giving me support. I genuinely appreciate it. *bow
Replies are no longer accepted on this thread. Why not start your own topic? - it only takes a moment to register with your e-mail address

Well, we took the wifes car out to the track this weekend to see what it would do. The wife made me a bet that she could turn a quicker time than I. The bet was on. I am happy?? to say that she won. She ran a 10.66 @ 127mph with a 1.4 60. My best was a 10.78 with a 1.6 60. I only drove it once, she made 7 runs and got quicker on every run. I guess she hasn't lost her touch. She used to drive our old stock eliminator car about half the time when we class raced. My chassis guy told us it was pretty much dialed in when we got the car back from him and boy he wasn't kidding. What a great time this weekend. Hooray, our baby finally runs.

Kae is a fat high school girl who is a ‘fujoshi’, which is girls who enjoy reading homosexual romance novels. She is dismayed when her favourite character is killed off. She is unwell and refuses to eat. She loses weight. As a side-effect she is thin and suddenly popular at school. Boys begin to pursue her. She has a choice of suitors and can pick a boy of her liking.

Does the No Contact rule work?
What Guys Said 0
Be the first guy to share an opinion
and earn 1 more Xper point!
What Girls Said 1
First of all, I think u r really brave for being able to do that. Fr me, the no contact rule didn't work, but that was because he realized he didn't like me as much as he thought he did. In yr case, he sounds annoyed, which obviously means he cares. He is probably just realizing how much he cares for you, since he contacted you first. Or he is angry that you are ignoring him because he thought you would stick to him and be Clingy or something. Either way, it means he still cares and there is hope. It really depends on the situation, but that is what I got from what u said. Good luck :)
You cannot undo this action. The opinion owner is going to be notified and earn 7 XPER points.

This qualifies as a genuine blast from the past. Bob Hooton, Bob Hooton, and I were fishing the Bella Coola River. Years ago. When we were a lot younger.
And my note that I was fishing with Bob Hooton and Bob Hooton is not typo. I was fishing with Oregon Bob Hooton and BC Bob Hooton on the Bella Coola River.
We fished 10 ft 6 in rods with a dink float and eggs for bait. We had very much fun and this is an understatement.
How is it that Bob and I have three steelhead laying in the water in front of us and who took the photo?
The three of us were drifting downriver and one of us was rowing and two were fishing. Don’t remember who was doing what. Two of us hooked up and the third dropped the oars and made the cast without anchoring—and made it a triple!
Someone pulled ashore, we all jumped out, and BC Bob took this photo before we released all of these fish.
This was in the early or mid 1980s.
My were we young.
Have a wonderful day.
Jay Nicholas – December 2017

Their connection was unlikely, but strong. Tousen and Soi Fong spar, talk philosophy, and give each other bad advice. Gen.
On the first day of her first vacation, just before the sun began to rise, Fong Shaolin was warming up in one of the many practice rooms at the Academy. She was used to sharing it with other students when the Academy was in session, but this morning it was utterly deserted, despite the fact that it was the only one left open during the break. Halfway through her warm-up, however, someone else came in.
Early morning training normally ran on an etiquette of studious disinterest, but Shaolin did note that the other student was a man named Tousen, from her own classes. She said nothing to him and didn't try to make any eye contact, but finished warming up and began working one of the intermediate katas with a practice sword. As she moved, she felt her muscles bunch and then spread. There was the usual tautness on her lower back, where she had been burned as a child, but it would become more supple as the morning wore on. Everything else was in order, and she began to train in earnest.
About an hour into practice, she realized that Tousen had stopped moving. He was staring at her... if that was the right word for what a blind man did. Without stopping, she addressed him.
"Do you want something?"
"I was wondering if you would like to spar," he said politely.
She slowed, stopped, curled her lip. "I don't want to hurt you," she said. Which wasn't entirely fair; he was perfectly competent in classes. But he had never faced the ninja techniques, and she was not in a mood to limit herself.
"Really. I need the practice." He smiled, a bit ruefully. "I haven't had very much experience against real opponents."
"Very well, then." She surprised herself. "Let's begin."
She began in the standard shinigami style that had been pounded into her over the last year. There, he easily matched her stroke for stroke. She began paying more attention to him, moving a bit faster, but he kept up with her. One of his jabs actually made contact with her shoulder, and she hissed. She had refused to learn the standard style when she first came, until they told her it would jeopardize her future standing with the squads, and that only motivated her to learn it well enough to defeat everyone she sparred with. Tousen, however, had obviously been practicing.
He tapped her again, this time against her left side. When they sprang apart, Shaolin's teeth were bared. This had gone far enough. She adjusted her stance to the ninja position. "Come on."
This time, she blocked all of his strokes effortlessly, and tapped him three times in two seconds. He shook his head when they separated, looking a bit stunned.
"Is that... the ninja style?" he panted.
"You've never seen it before, have you?"
Without warning, she attacked again. He anticipated her, which was more than she expected, but his parries were still woefully inadequate.
They went on all morning. When they finished, the sun high in the sky, Tousen was much better at blocking her sword, though he still had a lot of trouble when she brought her feet and fists into play. They were both tired, but Shaolin felt alive, for the first time in a long time. She bowed, then turned and started in the direction of the women's baths.
"Wait," Tousen gasped. "I would like... to do this... again."
Shaolin stopped, her back towards him. She was silent for a moment. "I will be here tomorrow at the same time," she said finally. "If you are here, I will spar with you."
The nice thing about Tousen, Shaolin thought, was that he never wasted time on unimportant things. The other students were capable of chattering on and on about the most banal subjects, but she and Tousen could spar for an hour and go for ramen afterwards without exchanging a word. It was a sensible friendship.
What this meant, of course, was that when they did speak, it was only about important things. Questions about classwork, occasionally, though they were both in the highest percentiles of the class. However, the bulk of their discussions, by far, centered on the merits of various fighting styles.
"It isn't right," Tousen said. "To use stealth and underhanded tactics to defeat an enemy."
"Would you rather we face all our enemies in duels? Do you really think that justice is served when the strongest person wins?"
"That's not what I'm saying. It's best to solve problems with negotiation. With fighting, if there is no other choice. But it has to be fair."
"Straightforward fighting is stupid," she replied. She used her chopsticks to emphasize her points, having long since forgotten that he couldn't see them. "First, your precious justice won't always be served unless you think the person who wins is automatically in the right. Second, there are always things that can be accomplished more simply and effectively when they are done /quietly/. And third, because the ninja arts work, and ultimately contribute to the cause of justice."
"As long as they are used correctly, of course."
"Of course. That would be where justice comes in."
"That... makes a lot of sense. Thank you, Fong."
Another thing Shaolin admired was how Tousen really thought about what other people said, and sometimes changed his mind based on their arguments.
They kept to the same schedule. Training during the third watch, a quick dip in the baths as the sun started to come up, and then a small breakfast of rice and miso soup at the ramen shop down the street. Nobody watching would have guessed that this was the last day they would do so.
Today, it was raining, and so they flash-stepped from the Academy training building to the shop. Shaolin never felt quite comfortable with flash-step; she knew that Princess Shihouin was known as the God of Flash, and it always felt a little bit like she was trespassing on her mistress' domain. But a ninja had to be quick, and there was something exhilarating about dodging between raindrops.
Something in her posture must have prompted the question.
"Covert Ops, then?"
He already knew she was going to Covert Ops, just as she knew that he'd be going to the Fifth Division. Shaolin frowned.
"You know that I am."
"I only... it seemed as if there was something else..."
Shaolin took a long sip of water. When she felt that she could speak again, she sat it back down on the table. "I had four older brothers. None of them were able to complete more than three missions."
"They were dismissed? Or..."
"Yes." She took a breath, fought the urge to run out of the place screaming. "Every one of them died."
Tousen was quiet for a long moment. Then: "I'm sorry."
"Don't be." She drank another spoonful of soup. "They were weak."
"And you are not weak." It wasn't a question.
"Well, I suppose we'll find out." She finished the last of her rice, then stood and left without saying goodbye.
Somehow, though, when she received her official shinigami robes and was processed into Covert Ops, she wasn't as nervous as she thought she would be. She took her grandmother's name. She completed her first mission, and her second, and her third. And after that, it was easy.
Though Covert Ops was somewhat removed from the Thirteen Divisions, Soi Fong occasionally found reason to be in their territory. One day, after delivering a message to the Vice-Captain of the Tenth Division, she bumped into Tousen.
"I hear you've been doing well, Soi Fong."
"And you also," she replied. He was Fifteenth Seat in his division already, and it was whispered that he would go even higher.
"Would you like to get lunch?"
They had never been what anyone else would call close. Only training, and brief conversations relating to it, had kept them together. And when they graduated, even that link appeared severed.
But despite what other people might have thought, nothing had truly changed between them. Soi Fong accepted his invitation. And when Tousen asked Soi Fong what she thought about justice, she didn't respond as disdainfully as she would have to anyone else. She actually paused to think about it.
"Justice... is what we do as shinigami. It's making sure all the souls are safe and balanced."
"So... if you saw two different ways to go, it would be just to pick the one that saved the most souls."
"I suppose so," Soi Fong said dubiously. "What is this about?"
But Tousen seemed relaxed now, and devoted himself to his food instead of answering her question. Soi Fong mentally shrugged, and they fell back into their comfortable silence.
The first day after Yoruichi left was the first day in centuries that Soi Fong did not rise before daybreak to train. She huddled in her bed, unsleeping, trying to make sense of this new world. She barely moved, even when her subordinates, and then her superiors, pounded at the door.
She wasn't surprised, at the end of that first week, when she felt Tousen approaching and heard his voice at the door. In truth, she didn't ever expect to be surprised again.
"What do you want?" she called. She had that much respect for him.
There were a few shinigami in the Ninth's practice room, but they quickly cleared out when their captain came billowing in. He grabbed two wooden practice swords, tossed one to Soi Fong, and settled into his stance.
Soi Fong simply stood there, holding the sword at her side. She felt like a rag, limp and wrung out. Tousen rushed at her; she began to parry reflexively, but much too slowly. He jabbed her stomach and she doubled over.
He spun around her, not giving her a chance to recover, and stabbed at the old burn on her lower back. She cried out in pain. He disengaged only for a moment, aiming a slash at her shoulder-and she blocked it, though only barely. He pulled away a few steps.
"She's gone, Soi Fong."
"I know," she murmured, "I can't find her anywhere."
"She betrayed you."
"She didn't take... she didn't take..."
"She doesn't care about her duty."
"What else is there for me?"
Tousen attacked. Soi Fong parried, then parried again, and came out of the encounter unscathed.
"Your duty is to hunt her down, and bring her to justice."
He attacked again. Again Soi Fong parried. This time, she made a few offensive motions of her own, though none of them connected.
"She hurt you, but justice is kind. It will allow you to hurt her just as badly."
Soi Fong attacked this time. Under cover of some furious strokes, she kicked out at his kneecap; he was barely able to shift away in time.
"I will take command of Covert Ops. I will become a captain in the Thirteen Squads. I will become stronger than she. And then," breaking off in mid-sentence to launch an attack that ended in her blade at his neck, his at her stomach, "then, I will hunt down that fugitive and kill her."
They didn't say anything else to each other. They didn't have to.

Man, 25, required surgery after being attacked in Fremantle car park as group of teens watched on
- From: PerthNow
- May 11, 2014
A TRADESMAN who was viciously bashed in a Fremantle car park last month has pleaded with the public to help bring his attacker to justice.
The 25-year-old man, who only wanted to be known as Paul, was beaten so badly he needed surgery for his injuries. He suffered a fractured cheekbone and nose, broken jaw and two black eyes. He now has two metal plates in his face.
He said a group of teenagers watched on as he was being attacked.
At about 3.45pm on Saturday, April 26, Paul was at the north end of Port Beach car park when he was approached by a group of about 20 people, both men and women who were about 18-years-old.
One of the men attacked him before the group moved to the south end of the car park and went to the High Tide beach party event.
Paul followed and informed door staff what had happened, and the offender and a female were refused entry.
Paul said he was set upon when he got out of his car after a full beer can was thrown at it. Before he knew it, he said people were screaming at him and he was repeatedly punched in the head.
“I didn’t have much of a chance to defend myself because there was so many people around me,” Paul said.
“There was a bit of a pack mentality there, they were pretty happy with what they were doing, pretty proud of themselves.
“I just want to see justice done. I’m just hoping some witnesses will come forward and say something.”
They left the event in a black Fiat with green P-plates, which the victim followed to Cottesloe where the pair got out.
The offender is described as fair-skinned, about 180cm tall, skinny build and light brown hair.
He was wearing a baseball cap, green and beige jacket and light coloured shorts.
Anyone with any information should call CrimeStoppers on 1800 333 000.Originally published as Bash victim recalls ‘pack mentality’

I was given this by a friend before he moved out of the city. He called it "a cactus" - I didn't correct him. I do wonder what it in fact is, though.
Also: Does it look like I'm not watering it enough? I've wondered about that.
Thanks in advance for the help!

Wednesday, 26 August 2009
Things have been going great for Britney Spears this past year. She got her career back on track, she got shared custody of her kids and she managed to find a new man.
Unfortunately though, there are rumors that the new man might have stepped out of her life. Britney was dating her agent Jason Trawick for some time now and things seemed to be going well until now.
There are rumors that the two broke up because Jason felt like they were moving too fast.
“It was just too fast, too soon for Jason,” said a source. “He told Britney repeatedly that he would never marry, but she refused to believe him.
“She thought she could change his mind by having a baby with him.”
Let's note that the source is the not so reliable National Enquirer so we're hoping that this is not true. We hope to see pics of the two together as soon as today!

The first Catholic Church in Columbus, Georgia was originally built in 1835 and called St. Philip and James. The parish was relocated to the current site and dedicated on May 12, 1880 and renamed The Church of The Holy Family. The Gothic-Bysantine structure was designed by Daniel Foley who was born in Dublin, Ireland. The Church was built on property given by Sisters of Mercy who relocated from Florida to start a school, called St. Joseph's Academy. Parish Education building, St. Joseph's Hall, is located on site where their convent and school stood from 1870 to 1964. This is only downtown church wiith a grave located on its grounds. Rev. Michael Cullinan, pastor of St. Philip and James was buried here east of main entrance.

93% would recommend it to a friend
Ganton Greyhound Inn
Food is fantastic
EXCELLENT AND GREAT VALUE
Lovely place, tidy , and homely.
Warm, clean and friendly. Food was absolutely brilliant
Last minute half term getaway
We booked to stay at the Ganton Greyhound the day before we travelled as we were undecided on where to go.
The hotel is well placed for exploring the region. The family room was very large with a double and two single beds. More than enough room for a travel cot and pet dog to share too. The room decor was a little dated but was all very clean and comfortable. There is some noise from the road but it didn't really disturb us at all. We ate in the restaurant on our first night which was lovely. Cannot think of nice enough words to describe it. Big open fire in the main restaurant which was very welcoming. Food was fantastic. I tried everyone else's food too and it was all superb. Breakfast was also very nice. Staff were accommodating.
Very pleasant overnight stay
We arrived to a warm welcome and a lovely warm room on a very cold winter's day.
The room was fine with flat screen TVs and tea/coffee facilities. The bed was comfortable, although, for my personal preference, the pillows were a bit on the firm side. We had a lovely dinner in the restaurant. The staff were very attentive and the food quality excellent. Breakfast was also lovely. Our stay was very good value for money and we will be back.
The accommodation was very good with comfy beds and lots of room.
The family rooms are huge. We did not have dinner but breakfast was very tasty, with good choice. The staff were all fantastic, nothing was a problem and our stay was very enjoyable.
Family friendly, very clean rooms, lovely food, friendly staff
Highly recommend it, lovely family room with own bathroom, very clean loads of space in room for small children to play.
Very friendly staff, lovely food. Only a small drive away form scrabough. Would defenty go back.
Warm and welcome
A nicely appointed room with en-suite shower room.
The towels and shower door seals were a little tired and needed replacing. But overall we enjoyed our two night stay and the breakfasts were very good. May book again.
Lovely rooms and food
We had two family rooms as there were six of us staying for one night.
Both rooms were very spacious. One of them had a nice view of the fields, one of the road. The traffic could be heard during the night as it was a busy road. The staff were very friendly and both the evening meal in the restaurant and the breakfast were delicious. The only thing that was slightly off-putting was the first impressions were not so good. When we got there it had been raining all day and there was a great big puddle just outside the door to reception so we had to jump over it to get in. Also, we had to ring a bell and wait about 5 minutes for someone to come and greet us as they were having their tea.
Just the right place to stay if you want the best of both worlds 15 mins or so into Scarborough although can be a little longer due to traffic.
Surrounding area of inn peaceful lovely to take your dog for walks.
Good alternative to staying in Scarborough
We were Looking for basic overnight accommodation close to Scarborough and this suited well.
The room we had was at the front of the building overlooking the road rather than in the courtyard. The hotel was basic but fine and good alternative to a budget hotel: it had more character and personal service. The room was a little noisey in the morning being close to the road. Evening meal was very good and the restaurant very spacious. Breakfast could have been better - some fruit and rolls. - but adequate.

Thursday, November 10, 2022
NAIROBI: The investigation teams of Geo News and The News have found out that renowned Pakistani journalist Arshad Sharif died half an hour after the vehicle that had been reported missing was recovered.
Douglas Wainaina Kamau, a floriculture dealer, said in a conversation with Geo News that he is the owner of a Mercedes Benz Sprinter 311 with the registration number (KDJ 700F) — the vehicle mentioned above — and had reported its disappearance at a police station known as as Pangani on Oct 23, 2022. Douglas.
He said that he had left his son Duncan inside the vehicle on Sunday, March 23, 2022, and left to run some errands but found his vehicle missing when he returned to where he had parked it.
“I went to buy a few items in the nearby shops, and when I came back, I could not locate my car, where I had left it with my son. I called him several times, but my calls went unanswered, and I became suspicious that something could have gone wrong,” he said.
It was after he had gotten tired of waiting for his 27-year-old son Duncan that Wainaina went and recorded a statement at a police station called Pangani, which is based in Kenya’s capital, Nairobi County.
Geo News can report that police officers released the number of the report as Occurrence Book number 70 on Oct 23, 2022. Douglas asked that he meet the top cop at the station, which he did, and was later referred to the office of police investigations.
Once he shared his problem with the investigating officers, they told him that they would head with him to where the vehicle had been located. All this time, journalist Arshad Sharif was seated and mingling with several American instructors and his friend Khurram Ahmad at the shooting club known as AmmoDump Kwenia.
The officers left the Pangani Police Station for the Rongai-Kiserian Road, where the vehicle’s signal was indicating. The distance from the station to the Rongai-Kiserian Road is 31.4 kilometres.
The police arrived at the petrol station, and just before they could launch the search for the vehicle, the son called and explained that he had decided to go and check on his mother and wife. Douglas told his son to drive the vehicle to the petrol station, which he did, but when he arrived at the petrol station, the officers refused to release him and instead said that the duo should go back to the station.
As the team left for the Pangani police station, Khurram Ahmad and the slain journalist were also on their way to Nairobi County, approaching Magadi Road in a Toyota Land Cruiser with the registration number (KDG 200M).
On the way, they approached an area allegedly blocked by stones, and the blockade was being manned by officers under the General Service Unit’s (GSU) command. GSU is a paramilitary wing of the Kenya Police. Kenya Police Service comprises highly trained officers specialising in counter-terrorism and firearms use.
A statement by the police made at the Magadi Police Station stated that they were asked to stop, but instead Khurram Ahmad went on driving after crossing the road blockade, which led to a serious shootout that killed Sharif.
“Ahmed and the deceased were driving along the Kwenia-Kamukuru rough road, and before they reached the Kiserian-Magadi Road, they found the road blocked using small stones, and they decided to pass them,” the police report filed in Kenya on the shooting read.
“At that point, they heard gunshots fired from the front and rear of their vehicle. They did not stop and continued with the journey.”
Khurram called his brother Waqar Ahmed, who resides in Tinga, and informed him about the incident, and he advised them to pass by his place on arrival at the main gate, he found his brother had died of a gunshot wound in the head,” the report added.
One hour after the murder incident had been reported, Douglas, his son Duncan, and the officers arrived at the Pangani Police Station.
His son was booked on OB number 90/23/10/2022, and the father was listed as the complainant. The father left the station, and the following morning he went back to the station, where an officer asked him to record a statement over the theft of the vehicle.
He pleaded with them to let the son go free because he did not want to go ahead with the case, but he was informed that a shooting had occurred in relation to the report he had made at the station.
The police then prepared a charge sheet and produced Duncan to Makadara Law Court on Wednesday, Oct 24. However, the father said that he was not interested in proceeding with the case and that they would solve it out of court.
This was granted, and the son was set free. Duncan was rearrested and taken back to court the following day, as police requested that they hold him for more days as they conducted investigations into the death of Arshad Sharif, but the judge refused. The judge further ordered that the vehicle be released to the owner, but Geo News has established that Douglas has never been given the car since then.
Through his lawyer, Douglas told Geo News that the main reason he penned a written statement was to inform people that he was not in any way involved in the shooting that led to the death of Arshad Sharif.
The lawyer who represented him in court, known as Elisha Ndemo of EM Ndemo and co-advocates told Geo News that the accounts were factual. “Indeed, the accounts happened as narrated when I represented him in court,” lawyer Elisha Ndemo told Geo News.
Here is the countdown of how events unravelled on that fateful day:
It is pertinent to mention that Douglas Wainaina Kamau spoke for the first time to FactFocus journalists Ahmad Noorani and Amara Shah after they made an effort to find out who the owner of the stolen vehicle was. Douglas also wrote a detailed letter to Noorani.

A strange noise spooks the narrator
My eyes were wandering around the page of my book as I was sitting in the fort I made. The moon was strangling the sun and winning for the next eight hours until he was finally defeated at dawn. A frightening sound whispered through the window. Horrified as a person could be, I abruptly hid under the covers. The time went by and I didn’t notice a thing, so I quietly read so I could hear if anything came close. As I heard something come close, tears rolled down my face and dripped on the page, slowly washing away the words. “Man, that was my library book!” I exclaimed, quickly covering my mouth just in case. Slow as a sloth, I unfolded my covers, accidentally leaving my bravery behind. I got closer and closer to finding out what was making that noise. The covers were finally letting me see what was around my room. My eyes scanned the room: nothing was there. “I guess it was just the wind,” I mumbled to myself as the wind whistled, and I went to sleep.

A 19-year-old was sentenced to four years in Stuttgart for attempted murder. The regional court saw it as proven that he had beaten his sister with a baseball bat.
He was angry that she loved a man who the family rejected. The German with Afghan roots hit the head of the 20-year-old at a stop in July 2019, who had previously refused to live with the family-selected man, a distant cousin from the United States, and instead fought for him decided the other man. Six months before the attack, the 19-year-old had already attacked another man with a knife. The punishment for this act is included in the amount of detention.
Icon: The mirror

I'm tired and ornery today. Blah! Guess I just need to say that. I think I am truly PMS'ing.
My students played a cute April Fool's joke on me. They made something that looked like a cup of hot chocolate with marshmellows that spilled on my desk. That was funny, and they actually got me. When I saw it at first, I really thought something had spilled.
We are working on some big state report project at school, and it's really just a big pain the arse! Thank heaven we are almost done (Thursday).
Randy is going out of town this weekend. I am sad, and I really HATE being a single mom, even if it's only for a few days. But... I guess it's a good time for me and the kids to just "hang out". We'll have a good time as long as we can all get up and get going on time in the morning.

Fulham boss Kit Symons admits the club are resigned to losing wonderkid Pat Roberts to Manchester City for up to £11 million.
The Whites manager revealed he had sat down with the player and his parents in an attempt to convince him to stay - all to no avail.
"It's very difficult," Symons said after a 3-1 win at Crawley in a pre-season friendly. "He's handed in a transfer request now, and only got one year left on his contract.
"We want to keep all our best players, and build for the future, but there comes a point where we've got to do the right thing for the football club.
"He could sign a pre-contract in January with a club and walk away for nothing, and we're mindful of that.
"(Discussions) are progressing, it's fair to say. He's in serious talks with them (City). I need to have people who are committed to the club though."
Roberts has only made 19 appearances for Fulham in two seasons after making his debut in the Premier League, ironically against Manchester City in March 2014.
But it was his appearances for Fulham U21s (see video) that took them to the FA Youth Cup final in 2014, and England U19s that first caught the eye.
"I sat down with Pat and his parents, but their minds were made up," Symons added. "We did everything we could to keep him - but we move on."

The city clock chimed twelve, the watchman called out the last hour of the year 1830, and the interruption was grateful and salutary. With that mysterious quickness of which mind only is capable, he was dwelling on some long-closed pages of the past, painfully but profitably associated with the close of the old year and beginning of the new. Their pleasant cottage at M——; the sad event which, on the last New-Year spent there, had impressed his soul too vividly ever to be forgotten; all that his mother had told him of that pious father, of whom he would have remembered but little, but that his lifeless image was so strongly associated with New-Year’s day; her impressive admonition on the last anniversary of his death, before her own, when she had entreated him to depart not from the God of his father, but to walk so as to be able to claim the promise vouchsafed to the children of the righteous,—now came up before him, and the memory brought both comfort and strength, admonishing, too, where help, in such weakness as he felt his to be, was only surely to be found.
Our little shoemaker well knew where to apply for such strength as he needed. He knew that the Saviour said, “Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, he will give it to you; ask, and ye shall receive, that your joy may be full;” and he prayed that he might be able to resist the power of the tempter; and, in the assurance that the prayer would be heard, his soul grew calm, and he at length sunk into a quiet slumber, from which he did not awake until the morning was somewhat advanced.
It was with a feeling of terror that he beheld Jem Taylor standing by his bed. The temptation to retain the spoils of the purse for his own use was again urged; but, spiritually resolute, this time William did not waver. He was not only altogether determinate in declining to use the money for himself, or share it with Jem, in order to secure his silence, but refused to show him the purse, although he offered to advertise it. Finding him strong in his purpose, Jem left him; and as Thomas Burton came in in the course of the day, he gave the purse to him, to do as he thought best with it. Having done this, his heart felt much lightened.
RAYS OF HOPE.
From this time our poor hero began to recover; and, although hope is said to be the best physician in the world, and he had nothing now to hope for, it was surprising how rapidly he improved. The return from a sick-bed to the active duties of life, the change from the close and darkened chamber to the pure air of heaven and the glorious sunlight, has a wonderful effect in restoring health. He was soon able to make his appearance in the shop; and, to aid his entire recovery, he was permitted to be much at Thomas Burton’s, where he was really happy. It was not long before he was able to go to church and to Sabbath school. Greater than

James Maitland Stewart, or, as he is usually known, Jimmy Stewart, is an American acting legend, probably best known for being the lead in the classic Christmas film, It’s a Wonderful Life. He was born on May 20, 1908, in Indiana, Pennsylvania as the eldest child and only son of Alexander Maitland Stewart and Elizabeth Ruth Jackson. He had two younger sisters named Mary and Virginia.
He was of Scottish ancestry, came from a devout Presbyterian family (and was a churchgoer for most of his life), and his family had lived in Pennsylvania for several generations. Jimmy’s father owned and operated a hardware store, which had been in the family for a while, long enough for it to become a family tradition for sons to take over the business when they came of age. Jimmy’s father hoped he would do the same.
Jimmy went into acting after attending Princeton University, much to his father’s chagrin. Initially, Jimmy had been interested in going into aviation and spent much time as a child building model airplanes in his basement. He also showed an interest at school in making mechanical drawings and in the field of chemistry. Yet, his grades were not great. His teachers attributed this not to lack of intelligence, but to lack of focus, due to being creative and spending much class time in daydreaming. Because of his creativity, which needed an outlet, it seemed appropriate that Jimmy was later drawn to acting.
After achieving moderate success as an actor in America, the world changed, and WWII became something the United States realized it was going to have to join, despite its initial reluctance. This is where a little-known, but highly personally influential part of Jimmy Stewart’s life came into play—he became the first big American movie star to enlist in the US military (the Army, in his case) to do his part in the war. It wasn’t so much of a leap for him to make this move. Both of his grandfathers were US Civil War veterans, and his father was a veteran of both the Spanish-American War and WWI. Being in the military was simply part of his family’s traditions.
Upon first enlisting, Jimmy was rejected from the military for being underweight. This was in November of 1940. He gained some weight and successfully enlisted in February of 1941. Because Jimmy had some experience as an amateur pilot, he asked to be inducted as a private in the still new Air Corps. Yet, at almost 33 years old, Jimmy was considered too old to be a candidate for Aviation Cadet training. This training was the usual path to becoming commissioned as a pilot, navigator, or a bombardier in the Air Corps. To get past this barrier, Jimmy applied to receive an Air Corps commission both as a college graduate and as a licensed commercial pilot. This path worked for him, and Jimmy received a commission as a second lieutenant in January of 1942.
Even though he was enlisted in the military and in training to be a soldier, Jimmy was still under contract with MGM Studios. Because of this, he was allowed to make public appearances during his military service, but they were limited to Army Air Forces engagements. The Air Corps also gave him a one-time radio show with Edgar Bergen and Charlie McCarthy. This was a network show, so people outside of the military were able to listen to it, thus keeping Jimmy in the public’s attention. The radio show was called We Hold These Truths, and was a celebration of the Bill of Rights in the US Constitution. It was broadcast a week after the events of Pearl Harbor.
In addition to the radio show, Jimmy appeared in a short film for the military called Winning Your Wings, which was made to help recruit more men into the Air Corps. The film was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Documentary in 1942, the same year it was released in movie theaters nationwide in the United States. The film is credited with winning 150,000 new recruits for the Air Corps (which was at that time a branch of the Army, and not a separate military branch as it is today).
Jimmy was eager to be in the action of the war, where the exciting and often violent things were happening. Yet, he was concerned that because he was already a celebrity, that status would mean the military would keep him behind the lines so as not to risk the safety of a well-known person. At first, this was true, and Jimmy was not stationed anywhere near where the front-lines war action was happening. After he completed a year-long assignment of training pilots in Albuquerque, New Mexico, Jimmy went to his commander and asked for more challenging assignments on the front lines. Thus, he was sent to England in November of 1943 as part of the 445th Bombardment Group to be a pilot for the B-24 Liberator.
Jimmy was promoted to the rank of Major after a mission to Ludwigshafen, Germany in January of 1944. He received the Distinguished Flying Cross award for his actions as a deputy commander of the 2nda Bombardment Wing. He also received the French Croix de Guerre award (with palm) and the Air Medal (with three oak leaf clusters) awards for his military service. In March of 1945, Jimmy was promoted to Colonel, which made him one of only a small handful of Americans to be promoted from private to Colonel in just a four year period. In this new capacity as a colonel, Jimmy was the presiding officer at a court-martial hearing of a pilot and a navigator who accidentally bombed the city of Zurich, Switzerland.
After the war, Jimmy came back to the United States in the fall of 1945. He was one of twelve founders of the Air Force Association in October of 1945. While he went back to work as an actor soon after coming home from the war, with It’s a Wonderful Life being the first film he appeared in after the war was done, Jimmy was still an active duty military officer. In fact, in July of 1959, Jimmy was promoted to Brigadier General. This made him the highest ranking actor in the history of the US military. Jimmy even did another stint of active military service in February of 1966, when he flew as a non-duty observer in a B-52 plane on a bombing mission during the Vietnam War.
Jimmy spent a total of twenty-seven years in official military service, making movies and being known as a beloved American actor for most of this time. He officially retired from the Air Force (which the Air Corps had become) in May of 1968, when he reached the military’s mandatory retirement age of sixty. When he retired, he was awarded the United States Air Force Distinguished Service medal. Though he usually did not speak to the public about his military career, it was something Jimmy was quite proud of, and rightfully so. He did appear on an episode of a British TV documentary in 1974 called The World at War, where he talked about a particularly disastrous 1943 mission against the city of Schweinfurt, Germany. When Jimmy passed away in 1997, he was buried with full military honors, as befitted a man of his rank, position, and service.

Vessel was on its way to the Island
Peel lifeboat was called out last night to help a yacht in Manx waters.
The Ruby Cleary was launched at around 9pm to go to the aid of the vessel, which was two to three miles north west of Peel.
When the crew got to the yacht the engine was restarted by the owner and help was not needed.
The lifeboat accompanied the vessel safely into Peel, its intended destination.

"My back just kind of tightens up, and everything tightens around it," May said. "I have a spot in the lower back where it's a bit of a jabbing pain. It tightens because of the jabbing pain."
He is 2-2 with a 4.89 ERA in 43 appearances this year. His last appearance was Saturday, when he allowed a solo homer and two walks in Tampa Bay.
May admits he might have rushed his recovery a bit after his last DL stint and returned when the pain wasn't completely gone because he was anxious to play. When his back really flared up again, he decided he wanted to feel 100 percent and that he was willing to take the time away to get to that point.
"That's why I pulled the plug so quickly this time, because I felt like I wasn't me again," May said. "Right away, I knew what that was going to lead to. That wasn't fair to anybody on this team or myself. I wasn't going to wait for a four- or five-run blowup to say I'm hurt.
"It's twice as frustrating, too, because I felt like I'd figured some stuff out on the mound and things were starting to go better. I was honing in a little bit on what I needed to do, and I was feeling really good out there."
May, a former starter, had to make some mechanical adjustments in the bullpen after his increased velocity and the adrenaline from higher-leverage situations caused him to develop bad habits. He feels he didn't have the time to properly get himself into form for that new role, but is confident he can still do so moving forward.
"I feel like I can pitch in the bullpen again," May said. "I just made the changes and I was feeling really good and throwing really well for a month there. What I'm trying to do is avoid writing off being a bullpen guy because of my back injury. I think that I can pitch non-injured in the bullpen."
Chargois, 25, the No. 8 prospect in the Twins organization according to MLB Pipeline, combined to go 2-1 with a 1.35 ERA and 16 saves in 39 games with Double-A Chattanooga and Triple-A Rochester this year. He was the Twins' lone representative in the 2016 SiriusXM All-Star Futures Game in San Diego.
The hard-throwing right-hander made a brief stint with the Twins earlier this season, when he allowed five runs in two-thirds of an inning in a shaky Major League debut, a June 11 loss to the Red Sox.
"You're going to have your great outings, you're going to have your horrible outings," Chargois said. "I chalked it up as my horrible outing of the year and moved on. I owed it to myself and family and friends to get back here and do well. So that's what I'm trying to do."

Mr. Samson Isah Alfa, the Niger State Correspondent of Aljazeera newspapers, has raised the alarm over threats to his life. This, according to him, is as a result of his discovery of a facility suspected to have been used for rigging the Presidential and National Assembly elections in the state. He alleged that he has since been receiving threatening calls, mostly from politicians belonging to the ruling All Progressive Congress (APC), warning him to stay away from the matter.
Samson said he was among the first to visit the facility, which he said belongs to one of the political aides to Governor Abubarkar Sani Bello, and found many computers, BVAS machines, ballot papers, and voters’ cards, among other materials.
He stated that some top government functionaries, including the Chief of Staff to the Governor and the Special Adviser to the Governor, had come to the building and started questioning why they were there.
Samson said, “They even called my family people and some of them have called to inform me how they were told to warn me to steer clear in my own interest”.
He has called on the Nigerian Union of Journalists (NUJ) and security agencies to look into the matter, saying he was only carrying out his duties as a journalist trying to uncover what was going on inside the facility.

A husband and wife have been sentenced for shooting their children with a BB gun as punishment for not doing their chores satisfactorily.
The children were shot daily for four months whenever the parents believed they had stepped out of line, Preston crown court heard.
Their father kept the gun down the side of the sofa and would give it to their mother to use when he left the house.
Jailing the father for two years and handing the mother a 19-month sentence, suspended for two years, Judge Robert Altham said: “This was not the behaviour of immature parents. This was the behaviour of people who had developed a system, a regime of discipline, that involved this form of violence.
“Of course I have no doubt that running a house with [many] children in it can be and will necessarily be sometimes stressful.
“This does not appear to be the sort of offence that is the result of parents being at the end of their tether. It was conduct that was repeated and became a regime of punishment.”
One of the children was shot in the leg after refusing to change the nappy of their youngest sibling, who was not targeted. Another child was targeted after having been judged to have not done the dishes properly.
A 13-year-old was also shot for having a boyfriend, because her dad said she was too young.
One of the children, who had bruises and an open wound on their legs, told a teacher at school they were from being shot at, the court heard.
The child hid the injuries under their uniform but said they did not feel safe at home because the father had fired the BB gun at them.
Social services were called and the children were removed from the family home and interviewed.
One said: “If I didn’t do the chores in the house, Dad or my mum would either threaten me with the BB gun or shoot me with it. They’d shoot me on the legs, arms, stomach and back.”
Another said they were shot when they dropped things, telling officers: “I drop stuff nearly every day.”
The children said their father used the weapon more often but when he was not at home, their mother would use it.
Both parents denied the allegations after being arrested. The father admitted using a Nerf gun to fire foam darts at the children but claimed one of the children was responsible for the BB injuries on the others.
However, both parents later pleaded guilty to five counts of child cruelty. The court heard that the father had a long history of drug and alcohol abuse but had been drug free for six years and sober for 10 months. Ciaran Rankin, defending the mother, said it “began as a bit of fun and developed from there”.
Altham described the father as “the instigator”, noting that he had a lengthy criminal record while the mother had never been before the courts before.
“The offences represent the shooting of children with a BB gun but they also represent the climate of fear that the very threat of doing that would engender.
“Little children and older children must necessarily have found it extraordinarily stressful to be living in a house where this was a form of punishment meted out on them for fairly trivial behaviour.”

A Corby man has been imprisoned after a brave 12-year-old victim found the courage to tell the staff carrying out her termination that she had been raped.
Jordan Carley, 20, is starting a four-and-a-half year jail term after he admitted raping the girl.
Northampton Crown Court heard how the girl, who has lifelong anonymity as the survivor of a sexual offence, had been subject to awful bullying at school following the incident which happened four years ago.
At that time, in July 2015, Carley, of Gainsborough Road, was 16 and the girl was 12.
He was snared after a DNA test following the termination showed him to be the biological father.
The court was told in a moving victim impact statement of the ‘profound’ effect that the assault had had on the youngster.
“Following the incident she stopped doing all of the things she enjoyed, going out with friends after school and at the weekend,” read barrister Caroline Bray, who stood in for prosecutor David Lee at Friday’s sentencing hearing, “
“She stopped having people over to her house and didn’t have a social life. She distanced herself from friends and family.
“She felt safer in her own company.
“There were difficulties with people spreading rumours that weren’t true.
“She suffered bullying as a result of what she’d alleged, which was in fact correct.”
The victim, who sat at the front of the courtroom with her family around her, also had to have counselling as a result of her rape.
The victim impact statement went on: “The incident led to a pregnancy that was terminated.
“This in itself has led to some significant physical problems.
“Her family has been supportive but very worried about her.”
The rape took four years to come to court because of listing delays and because of an investigation into another victim who came forward to say she had also been raped by Carley - although he has not been convicted of any crime with regard to that victim.
Mitigating for Carley, Daniel Bishop said that he had used the past four years effectively, had found work, and had not reoffended.
He added: “His level of maturity has increased immeasurably in that time.
“He understands the very real pain his actions have caused.”
Addressing Carley during sentencing, the judge, Recorder David Herbert QC, said: “The offence was detected because you made her pregnant and she complained about that to medical staff and the DNA test showed you had made her pregnant.”
Initially, Carley had denied that he knew her age. He said she thought her to be 16 and said she had consented to sex.
But the court heard that the girl had told Carley how old she was when they first met.
The judge added: “You went on to take advantage of her. She may have consented but her account is that she didn’t want sex to happen but just went with the flow.
“I’m quite satisfied that you must have realised that the consent of a 12-year-old girl was reluctantly given.
“But for your actions, this would not have happened.
“She was four years younger than you. The gulf between your respective ages is considerable.
“You told her that it was ‘minging’ to get off with minors. You clearly knew what you were doing was wrong but you led her into the woods to have sex with her.
“She did not have the ability to consent.
“You made her pregnant and the effect on her has been profound - physically, mentally and psychologically because of the termination.”
The sentencing guidelines for this type of offence are between eight and ten years but the judge said that the defendant’s young age, positive character references and early guilty plea meant that he would impose a lesser sentence.
The defendant’s mum and his family were also in court, sitting separately from the victim. Carley wore a black suit for the verdict and carried a holdall in preparation for his inevitable prison sentence.
Jailing him for four-and-a-half years, the judge told Carley he would have to serve half of his sentence in prison before being released on licence. He will be on the sex offenders’ register for life.

Thirty-two years ago when I was a sophomore in college I found myself sitting in the student lounge one evening with little to do. It was after 8 PM and I was hoping that a certain young lady (whom I had my eye on at the time) would make an appearance and join me for a drink. Alas, she was a no-show. In fact, there was no one in the lounge aside from Bob, an accounting student whom I had only spoken to superficially in the past. Bob appeared to be about 10 years older than me, wore a beat up army jacket, and carried a black messenger bag full of books and loose papers.
As Bob seemed to be in no particular hurry to go anywhere either, we struck up a conversation and before we knew it an hour and a half had passed. I have no recollection of what it was we talked about, but I do remember that we decided to continue our chat over a cup of coffee. In those days, there wasn’t a Starbucks conveniently located on every college campus, and our only option was a vending machine located in the cafeteria (by now closed for hours), which dispensed a vile concoction which was coffee in name only. The cafeteria was located at the other end of the hall from the student lounge. We gathered our things and began walking. Although I didn’t know it at the time, it was a walk that would change my life.
By this time, the hallways were deserted except for the cleaning staff. We came upon a classroom where a woman was straightening out the desks. I remember thinking about how her dyed, red hair clashed with her light green uniform. As we walked by, she recognized Bob immediately and gave him a warm greeting. He answered her back and they carried on for a few moments. I had no idea what it was they were saying to each other because they were speaking in a language that I had never heard before. After they said goodbye, we continued on our way.
“Bob, what language was that?” I asked him.
“That was Polish,” he replied casually.
I don’t remember saying anything after that, but as we continued on our walk down the empty corridor, we came upon another classroom being cleaned, this time by an elderly man wearing the same light green uniform as the Polish woman. The same scene as before played itself out. The old man lit up at the sight of Bob, spoke to him in the same type of gibberish, and afterward seemed genuinely sad to see him go.
We finally reached our destination, inserted our coins into the machine and received our beverages. As expected, the coffee tasted like swill, but at least it was hot. Attempting to ease us back into conversation, I remarked to Bob that I was not aware that there were so many Polish people employed as cleaning staff by the school. He seemed somewhat puzzled. “The woman,” he said, “was Polish. The man was Russian.”
Did I just hear him correctly?
Hoping to take advantage of what remained of my lunch hour on an unusually warm mid-October day, I made my way to the local park, where I planned to do a little reading. I located an empty bench in a very nice spot, sat down, and opened my book. Almost immediately, a well-dressed businessman sitting directly across from me (whom I’d mistakenly assumed was napping) began to engage me in conversation.
“Nice day,” he exclaimed.
“Yes,” I replied, “wonderful.”
“Doing a little reading?” he queried. Before I could reply, he continued: “I wish I could read more, but I just don’t have the time.”
By now, I instinctively knew that further attempts at reading would be pointless, and I was right. For the next 20 minutes this well dressed stranger, who was unable to find any time to read for himself, had somehow managed to find plenty of time to keep me from reading.

I am new to the forum, so hope I have done this correctly.
My problem started about 4 months ago, when I started to have pain in my right buttock, calf muscle and numbness/tingling in foot.
The pain in buttock went after a short while but the tight calf muscle and numbness in foot continued.
A month later calf tightness and numbness in foot was still there but one morning the pain returned in the right buttock and it was terrible I could not move. I could not see my GP until the next day but when I woke up the next day the pain had gone.
The Gp could not find anything wrong but sent me for an xray.
The GP said the xray showed no problem with any disks but I had a straight spine. She offered no more help saying it would get better.
SO I went to a chiropractor. He said my upper spine was ok but my lower spine was straight when standing but ok when lying down. He said it was not too much of a problem
I had 8 sessions with him and still had the calf tightness and numb foot. In the end I stopped as I did not think it was helping.
Although I had no real pain the numbness and tight calf was a problem as I was limping quite badly. I also noticed that my left leg which had no pain or numbness was not really working properly, it was dragging slightly but if I concentrated on it it was ok.
I also had a period of about two weeks when I needed to urinate constanly during the day but not at night. I had my prostate checked and it was ok as was the PSA test. This problem passed and is now ok
Everything continued the same until a week ago, when I noticed that both my buttocks went numb all of a sudden and the left leg now had the same problems as the right. Also I have noticed some numbness in the Perinem (Saddle) although no bladder problems.
I have been back to GP and she had booked me in for EMG and ENG tests but I have been told there is a long wait.
So my sysmptoms now are both feet tingling with numb patches, both calves tight and painful, both thigh muscles slightly painful, both buttocks numb and tingling.
During the past few weeks I have also had quite bad dizzy spells and had quite a bad gait when walking.
Any ideas would be appreciated

Young was very pleased with the overall performance.
"I thought every area was a step up from last week. That is what we asked the players for and we got that from them. I was very impressed with the first half hour up front. The set piece went very well and we made a real statement in that period. Next week will be a tougher game again but we will be happy with this win.
"We know there are much bigger challenges to come but all you can ask is that we keep getting better and we are doing that. I have been to Connacht many times before with Cardiff with some very good teams and goner away with nothing so I am pleased. The players are now putting pressure on selection and you want that as a coach."
Young also had words of praise for some of the new arrivals this summer who have been making a real impact in pre season.
"Ed Jackson has been outstanding in the first two games and I thought Guy Thompson showed glimpses of how good he could be today. Josh Bassett did well last week and backed it up again this week and Charlie Hayter is showing that he is getting more and more comfortable at this level and I thought Neil Cochrane came on and did well as well so it is pleasing for all of those new guys."
Captain on the night, Sam Jones, was also a happy figure after the match.
"We came here knowing we needed to improve on last weekend. We came close to a win there but we played with some good style today. We treated this game very seriously and we got our chances and we took them. The front five really delivered at the set piece and things are really looking up for us."
Jones added that he was pleased with the level of competition in the team.
"There’s huge competition and that is great. It drives us to play better and we haven’t always had that recently when we’ve been thin on the ground. We have better depth and we are all pushing each other. The new guys are making Dai’s job really difficult."
"There are still areas for us to improve on but I thought our defence came on a lot in this game which is pleasing. Brad Davies has come in and changed our structures in how we defend and tonight was a much more complete defensive performance."

October 30, 2013
I had to leave the theater halfway, I mean there were people there that thought the movie was hilarious but I think they were mostly high from the start, overall the movie was plain stupid.
At first I though heh, maybe this is what young people think it's funny nowadays, so I kind of forced myself to laugh to not seem like a square, but then my jaw started hurting from making myself pretend I was laughing to the point where it became a creepy smile.
At the end I could not fake it anymore, I thought it was a total waste of time, and thank god a few people like me left before hand.
I noticed most of the reviews here are go or must go, but I think they are probably dumb high teenagers or mostly people that worked in the movie.
So I guess if you are young and like to smoke then your going to think this movie is hilarious.
found this review helpful.
- Was this helpful to you?

Andrew Garfield happily signed on to have Mel Gibson direct him in his gritty World War II film, Hacksaw Ridge
, but nothing could prepare the young actor for a Halloween night with the Oscar winner.
On Wednesday night's Jimmy Kimmel Live!, Garfield revealed that Gibson is a master at getting into character both on and off screen.
Last Halloween, during a break from shooting Hacksaw Ridge in Australia, co-star Vince Vaughn bought silly masks for the three men so that they could have a night out on the town while remaining relatively anonymous, but Gibson took things a step further.
"Mel shows up and we get in the car with him and he gets out this mask. It's like a Mission: Impossible mask," Garfield recalls. "It's the most detailed. Imagine your face but on Mel Gibson's face. And he can talk in it and it's like flushed to his face. The mask kind of looks like a lumberjack from Oregon or something."
The mask was apparently realistic enough that people believe it's actually Gibson's face.
"It's so good that we would be at a bar or whatever, and he would be talking to someone with the mask on, and this person thinks they are talking to a lumberjack from Oregon," Garfield said.
According to Garfield, Gibson had strangers deceived so deeply that he would snatch the mask off when their backs were turned and they would be startled when they turned around to see Gibson's face on the body of who they thought was a lumberjack from Oregon.
In fact, the mask also threw off a few Gibson's good friends, which once ended in painful results.
"He would prank his friends with it," Garfield said. "He would have his friends over and there was one time he had this male friend over and they were looking at his book shelf ... he kind of goes away and comes back with the mask on. Then he came in in this kind of threatening way and his friend, who is this big, built guy, punches him in the face hard enough to the point to where Mel was laid out. Mel was like laughing his ass off, and takes the mask off and he's like bleeding all over his face."

Based on 15 reviews
Help make it easier for other Avvo users to choose the right lawyer by sharing your experience with this attorney. It's fast, simple, and safe.
Lawyers: Use the Peer Endorsements section to provide input about other attorneys.
amazing and caring lawyer, I was very new to the whole process and he was so caring and made sure i was completely comfortable with everything. I would recommend him to anyone!!!
I can’t thank Mr. Pang enough for handling my case and seeing it through to a great result. My particular case entailed a neighbor dispute in which the neighbors attempted to have a restraining order (258e harassment prevention order) issued against me. Had this order been issued against me, I would have been looking at having a record in the state’s domestic violence registry for potential employers to see. Because of Mr. Pang’s handling of my case, this restraining order wasn’t issued and my record remains clean.
To those who find themselves in a similar situation, at minimum, you need to retain legal council if you want to have a fighting chance of a successful defense against a restraining order request/complaint and I recommend Mr. Pang without reservation.
Dominic handled a sealing matter for me. I did extensive research and he was very active in many online boards. His answers were concise and he was very knowledgeable and seemed spot on from a layman's perspective. During our first phone call he was bright and engaging asking many questions and answering all of mine. Such a petition can take some time but in the interim he was immediately responsive to any questions or concerns I had. Emails would be returned within a day and often in a couple of hours.
On the day of the sealing he spoke with me and explained the process and the possible outcomes. It was good feeling I had someone so competent on my side.
When the judge finally heard the matter he took some time to read the case but came back saying that he was initially going to deny the motion but that Dominic's motion was "brilliantly written." The judge then spent several minutes praising Mr. Pang's legal expertise. He went so far as to say it would have been a "pleasure to hear his oral arguments" but since his motion was so well written it was unnecessary. It is a great feeling to have your advocate praised in court. The motion was approved and the record was sealed.
I would highly recommend Dominic Pang. Court is not a fun place to be but if Dominic is your lawyer your odds of success greatly improve. Thank you!
Mr. Pang is a great lawyer to work with. I had a resisting arrest and a disorderly person charge. I was nervous because I never been in trouble before and was not familiar with anything having to do with court. Mr. Pang was very reassuring and knowledgeable. To other people these are minor charges and I could have taken a CWOF for them and have the case end there. However, I knew that I was being falsely accused and would not accept the easy way out. Because I was confident in his ability to deliver, I chose to go to trial and I was acquitted of both charges.
Throughout this case that went on for almost a year, Mr. Pang kept in contact with me to keep me up to date with what was happening. He was very responsive. Whenever I had a question, especially about what I can expect for each court date I attended, he replied in detail and in a timely manner.
Overall, Mr. Pang is a great attorney. He takes pride in his occupation and rightfully so. He's very professional and I would definitely recommend him.
Dominic Pang exceeded my expectations (and I'm tough). Not only was he able to win my case, he took every step of my case extremely serious. He was responsive to all my requests and answered every question. On the day of trial, he was extremely prepared; it was evident he done his research and that he was prepared to win my case. As nerve wrecking as my case was (and any case is for that matter) I felt more at ease that he was there and even more so when I heard how aggressive he was when defending me in court. I recommend Mr. Pang to anyone looking for a lawyer who is reliable, trustworthy and that will fight hard on your behalf.
We needed a lawyer in Massachusetts to help us with a citation my daughter received while working in Boston for the summer. Dominic explained everything, was very patient with our persistent nervous parent questions, dealt with her in a respectful and professional manner, and had an excellent outcome, dismissal. We found him through reviews like this, and were very well represented
I was very pleased with the way Mr. Pang handled my Clerk's hearing. He was extremely professional and very well prepared. Mr. Pang was always available by phone or email to answer questions and help with concerns. He is excellent and I highly recommend Mr. Pang.
Mr. Pang was invaluable recently at a Clerk's hearing. My son has always been such a great kid but made a bad and scary mistake - speeding and losing control of his new car on the way to school resulting in a criminal citation. Mr. Pang represented him well, was prepared, used the time efficiently and proposed a direction which was heard and accepted – the best outcome possible. Mr. Pang was always responsive by telephone and email and answered all our questions. A very scary time for us but we were put at ease by his kind demeanor. I highly recommend Mr. Pang.
My record had been a burden in my life for 21 years. It has had an negative effect on my jobs and potential jobs. It created an instant bias towards me without anyone even knowing me or knowing how I work. I contacted Attorney Pang and he was like a miracle worker! He was very knowledgeable, sensitive and had great resources. Attorney Pang promptly answered any questions that I had and I generally felt like he cared about my situation. Attorney Pang successfully sealed my entire record in 2 months, which immedaitely removed a barrier that I had in my life. Anyone that has questions about sealing thier record, I highly recommend that you contact Attorney Pang.
I had a traffic violation (speeding) and Dominic was able to provide me the answers and represent me professionally. He was able to prove to the clerk that there was no speed postage sign in the area which I was pulled over. Great service and prompt on response.

Feeling distant towards my husband since my miscarriage .
I need advice ... I love my husband very much .. I had a miscarriage in July but got pregnant immediately after opk was positive on July 31st .... and just lost another baby at 5 weeks 2 days so within three months I've had two miscarriages :(
I feel completely numb . And I've been super distant towards my husband don't even know what to talk about ... I was so happy and felt so good about this time . I spent all night just bawling my eyes out ... then the next day I passed the baby and since then I've felt super depressed ... how do I deal with this ? And how do I stop pushing my husband away? He doesn't fully understand what this is like and how hard it is for me. As he's never been through this . Doesn't help that we're also going through some financial stress at the moment too ... but that's about to be sorted out from a new job he took . I just feel so blah. Two times in a row and I want a baby so bad with him. I honestly don't even know why I'm pushing him away .. I've hardly spoken to him and I just don't know what to say. It's making him distant now too which is just making things worse . Wondering if anyone else has been through similar ? Or has advice ?

A man who claims that the former Warren County sheriff raped him as a child says that the sheriff threatened him to make him stay quiet.
The testimony came out during a lawsuit trial against the county. Those involved in the suit allege that that county officials failed to protect children from former Sheriff Edward Bullock.
Wednesday’s witness was the third alleged victim to testify. He was not publicly identified because he was the victim of child sex abuse.
“I was scared to death that I was going back to jail, my mother was going to jail. That’s what that [expletive said] …that if I told anybody I was going to jail and my mother was going to jail,” the victim said.
A former worker at the youth shelter also testified. She said that she told the shelter director several times that she suspected Bullock was molesting kids.
“And he would say, ‘Well, sometimes there are things that maybe you shouldn’t know or shouldn’t ask about,’” the worker said. “Almost like a ‘Don’t ask, don’t tell’ kind of thing, just don’t get involved.”
Kane In Your Corner first reported about the alleged abuse.
Bullock was tried for rape in 2015 but the trial ended in a hung jury. He died before he could be retried and his estate is not contesting the accusations against him.
An attorney for the county insists that the county is not to blame for Bullock’s actions. The attorney said that while some county workers may have suspected abuse, they didn’t know for sure that it was happening.

Michael Jackson's daughter claims he didn't sing tracks
- Bang Showbiz
- 29 February 2012
Paris Jackson reportedly told friends Michael Jackson did not feature on his final album and his vocals were recorded by sound-alike Jason Malachi
Paris Jackson reportedly told friends Michael Jackson did not feature on his final album.
The 13-year-old actress insists her late father's vocals were impersonated on the tracks for 'Michael' - which was released in December 2010, 18 months after his death from acute Propofol intoxication - during an online video chat with several pals in 2008.
According to TMZ, Paris played her pals one of the previously-unreleased songs, 'Hold My Hand', and one of her friends asked why the vocals didn't sound like her father.
She then responded saying sound-alike Jason Malachi had stepped in instead.
She told pals: "It's not him ... the whole album isn't even him!! Go online ... go on YouTube and look up Jason Malachi. That's him!!
"I should know if it's him or not because he would sing to me all the time."
A recording of the message is reportedly being offered to various media outlets and offers for the footage are said to be "on the table".
It had previously been claimed that Jason was the vocalist on the tracks, but both the singer and record label Sony denied the allegations.

I'm having to get him in contact with someone from the school due to his and my mom's unsettledness.
The history of Changsha and Hunan province in general are well documented and the beautiful detail of all the artifacts buried with Lady Dai's was equisite and very well preserved.
Just thinking of it makes me dread the next time I have to go back.
Lots of meandering pathways and tombs through the mountainside.
However, I was only there for a few weeks.
Her eyes were very small and not pretty at age 13.

This has probably been asking a ton but I can't seem to find the thread. For a very small operation, how do you retain the guys (good ones) you hire during the season to come back the following season? I am losing a lot of good talent (mostly during the initial interview) because I can't provide the hours they are seeking when things slow down. I have thought about going to a salary type deal but it's basically just the same they would make during the season averaged out over 12 months... I am located in MD so snow removal doesn't provide much during the winter except some storms here and there. Any advice would be appreciated?

Here’s another elaborate plan, make the village look as though the village is deserted, that everyone has left leaving No.6 behind. Let him discover for himself that the only way out is by sea. Leave a Mini-Moke with the key in the ignition, he’ll need it to haul the logs, and carry the oil drums for his raft down to the slipway. It’s just as well they had the faith in No.6 to not only be able to construct his raft, but also to navigate the craft. Not everyman could do that, but perhaps they researched and computed the Prisoner’s whole background in assessing his skills and abilities in order to come up with this plan. Had it been anyone else but No.6, I think the plan would have been doomed to failure from the beginning. On the other hand had it been anyone other than No.6, then I don’t think such a plan would have been suggested in the first place!
Be seeing you

In game name: emmersoon (formally known as pickersimper)
Reason for your ban: X-Ray
How do you plead?: I plead not guilty. Just today when I found out I was banned I had no idea what x-raying meant until my friend informed me on what it was. I was simply just running around doing /wild and collecting coal for the past few days and I don't know what I might have done to make it seem like I was x-raying.
Why should we unban you?: I feel I should be unbanned because I was unaware I even did anything wrong and I would like to comeback to the sever.
Why do you want to comeback to wintercrest?: I would like to return to the server because it is a very enjoyable place and I have fun talking with the chat and hanging out with and building with my friends.
I also hope that I don't have a bad reputation with you (namejeff69) and the server because this is the second this has happened and I would hope that this is not what I am known for.
The reason I banned you was that certain mines of yours made it look like you knew exactly where the diamond ore was, and you were staircasing up and down seemingly at random to find more diamonds. However upon a more thorough review, I can see that you were not actually X-Raying. If you would like to see any of the screenshots of evidence that I based your ban off, please let me know.
Sorry for the misunderstanding, you have now been unbanned.
And there's no bad rep, I think it was just bad luck that it was me both times xD.

Join free now!
It is free to search locals your area
I really did not wish to go back to Dark Angel. I knew that she was only doing her task, yet with the clearness of post-orgasmic remorse I knew that it had been cold as well as mechanical. I would certainly need to try someone else. It didn't strike me at this stage that an escort is a companion, and any type of experience would basically be a deal, as well as as a result could be expected to be cold as well as mechanical, business like. I was an idiotic optimist.
The horniness grew stronger as well as stronger, and ultimately, virtually a whole month after I had actually popped my cherry with a girl for hire, I chose to dip my toe back right into among the earliest companies on Earth. I saw a different website this moment. I searched and searched, and I forget what attracted me to this specific account. I do remember that I was quickly to find out a lesson that I haven't forgotten since.She told me her rates and where to find her. She was a little bit more away than I had actually initially prepared, but I was a strolling boner at this phase as well as intended to discover a warm and damp house for my hurting penis.
I swiftly got ready as well as hit the road. While heading I serviced what I would say and what I would certainly do. I had determined that while Dark Angel was fine enough, I felt somewhat ashamed that she had actually been my very first. Possibly this fully grown girl would certainly take pity on me if I declared to still be a virgin, maybe she would certainly reveal me the ropes as well as make me a real man. So, when I finally reached her door, I understood what I would state. Nonetheless, I was slightly thrown once more when I arrived. The woman that welcomed me was plainly older than I had anticipated as well as showed a lot of mileage on her face. Look, she wasn't genuinely unsightly, however the shock of the inconsistency between expectation and also truth was enough to hinder my serious horniness for a moment.
Well, I was here. I had driven relatively far to arrive, as well as I didn't truly wish to go to the effort of leaving as well as discovering someone else. I was going to get laid, and also this was right in front of me. What's the most awful that could occur? She revealed me in as well as took me to the bed room, where the bed was made, as well as a bag of rewards got on the side table. I can see wet wipes, prophylactics, lube, as well as a few other things that help in adult playtime. She began making discussion: what's my name? what do I do? and more. I think she noticed my uneasiness, due to the fact that I was rather frightened by her.
So, she helped me undress, as well as I was naked before my second escort in a month. She informed me to lie down on my tummy on the bed as she obtained undressed. I kept an eye on her, and her body was luckily as hot as the pictures on her profile had actually recommended. Considering her age, it was remarkable just how cigarette smoking she was, although both time and previous horniness could be helping me embellish the memory a bit. I must firmly insist, nevertheless, that you believe one point: she absolutely had a butter face. It was sidetracking, but so was her body as well as I decided to concentrate on that rather.
She began rubbing me with baby oil, as well as the touch aided to soothe some of my residual nerves. It likewise aided my dick expand harder under my stomach as she began to rub her tits on my back. First, she gently combed my shoulder blades with her nipples, leaving me puzzled for a moment as I tried to find out what was happening. She after that scrubed her body backwards and forwards my back, dragging her tits all over my back and butt. It had actually the desired effect as well as I was quickly pushing a red-hot steel rod that had actually just recently been my dick.
And afterwards a new experience that took a minute for me to figure out: she was rubbing her pussy up and down my back and also buttocks. It was very warm and also had a tip of being damp. These experiences made me nearly shed a tons right after that and there, yet in some way, I held on.
She quickly flipped me over as well as my cock sprang to focus. She was kneeling in between my legs, and she was looking up at me past my cock. Butterface or not, this was more than my recently de-virginised mind can deal with. She started gently fondling my rounds with one hand as well as took my shaft in the various other.
pornstars escorts Athlone 3818 VIC, mature escorts Athlone 3818 VIC, outcall escorts Athlone 3818 VIC, incall escorts Athlone 3818 VIC, independent escorts Athlone 3818 VIC, private escorts Athlone 3818 VIC, bbw escorts Athlone 3818 VIC, high class escorts Athlone 3818 VIC, blonde escorts Athlone 3818 VIC, asian escorts Athlone 3818 VIC, japanese escorts Athlone 3818 VIC, cheap escorts Athlone 3818 VIC, female escorts Athlone 3818 VIC, escort girls Athlone 3818 VIC, high end escorts Athlone 3818 VIC, russian escorts Athlone 3818 VIC, escort agency Athlone 3818 VIC, sex escorts Athlone 3818 VIC
| ||65950|| ||29190|| ||69941|| ||81745|| ||31574|| ||37616|| ||41706|| ||7998|| ||15459|| ||5500|

Gunplay Kills Teen; Friend Charged
A 16-year-old girl was killed Wednesday night after she and a friend were playing with a stolen gun and the weapon discharged, authorities said.Posted — Updated
Jerticha Ford and friend were sitting in a car near her house at about 7 p.m. Wednesday and were playing with a 9mm handgun the friend had stolen when the gun went off, authorities said.
Ford was shot once in the side and died later of her injuries, authorities said.
"I was asleep, and everybody came running in the house, saying she got shot, and I ran outside," Ford's twin sister, Yolanda Ford, said before breaking down in tears.
Jamel Gates, 17, has been charged with involuntary manslaughter in the case.
"He was horseplaying around with the weapon, and the gun went off," Hoke County Sheriff Hubert Peterkin said. "The investigation is showing that he did not intentionally point the gun, but the gun went off and shot the victim."
Peterkin said he doesn't know who the gun belongs to or how long the teen had it. Investigators found it inside a cinderblock after the shooting. An investigation is underway to find the gun's owner, and that person could face charges, he said.
As Ford's family mourned her death, they also pleaded with people to be careful with guns.
"Guns are nothing to play with. They're not to be used as a toy," said Ford's uncle, Ronnie Ford. "My niece was a positive person. She had great potential. She had a love for life. She had respect for her friends and family."
Ford's death was one of two slayings in Hoke County Wednesday night.
Investigators said somebody fired more than 15 shots at a car driver by Michael Freeman of Raeford. He drove more than a half-mile before crashing into tree and dying.
Authorities have no suspects in Freeman's shooting.

« AnteriorContinua »
Hastily, therefore, and incon- and secondly, because, justify to himsiderately, the Major determined to con- self as he would his new-born indifferfirm this ignorance. “ No," said he; ence, he could not entirely cast away "I've had no news. Severn and I are the suspicion that it was a last remnant not on such terms as to correspond.” of disease, and that, when he stood on
The next time Luttrel came to the his legs again in the presence of those farm, he found the master sitting up in exuberant landscapes with which he a great, cushioned, chintz-covered arm- had long since established a sort of chair which Gertrude had sent him the sensuous communion, he would feel, as day before out of her own dressing with a great tumultuous rush, the reroom.
turn of his impetuous manhood and of “ Are you engaged yet?” asked his old capacity. When he had smoked Richard.
a pipe in the outer sunshine, when he There was a strain as if of defiance had settled himself once more to the in his tone. The Major was irritated. long elastic bound of his mare, then he “ Yes,” said he, are engaged would see Gertrude. The reason of the now.”
change which had come upon him was The young man's face betrayed no that she had disappointed him, - she emotion.
whose magnanimity it had once seemed “Are you reconciled to it?” asked that his fancy was impotent to measure. Luttrel.
She had accepted Major Luttrel, a man “Yes, practically I am.”
whom he despised ; she had so muti“What do you mean by practically ?lated her magnificent heart as to match Explain yourself.”
it with his. The validity of his dislike “A man in my state can't explain to the Major, Richard did not trouble himself. I mean that, however I feel himself to examine. He accepted it about it, I shall accept Gertrude's mar- as an unerring instinct; and, indeed,
he might have asked himself, had he "You ’re a wise man, my boy," said not sufficient proof? Moreover he lathe Major, kindly.
bored under the sense of a gratuitous * I 'm growing wise. I feel like wrong. He had suffered an immense Solomon on his throne in this chair. torment of remorse to drive him into But I confess, sir, I don't see how she brutishness, and thence to the very could have you."
gate of death, for an offence which he “Well, there 's no accounting for had deemed mortal, and which was tastes," said the Major, good-hu- after all but a phantasm of his impasmoredly.
sioned conscience. What a fool he Ah, if it's been a matter of taste had been ! a fool for his nervous fears, with her,” said Richard, “ I have noth- and a fool for his penitence. Marriage ing to say."
with Major Luttrel, - such was the end They came to no more express un- of Gertrude's fancied anguish. Such, derstanding than this with regard to too, we hardly need add, was the end the future. Richard continued to grow of that idea of reparation which had stronger daily, and to defer the renewal been so formidable to Luttrel. Richof his intercourse with Gertrude. A ard had been generous; he would now month before, he would have resented be just. as a bitter insult the intimation that he Far from impeding his recovery, these would ever be so resigned to lose her reflections hastened it. One morning as he now found himself. He would in the beginning of August, Gertrude not see her for two reasons : first, be- received notice of Richard's presence. cause he felt that it would be – or that it was a still, sultry day, and Miss at least in reason it ought to be - a Whittaker, her habitual pallor deepened painful experience to look upon his by the oppressive heat, was sitting alone old mistress with a coldly critical eye ; in a white morning-dress, languidly fan
I 'll go
ning aside at once the droning flies and “Yes, I know. I don't congratulate her equally importunate thoughts. She you." found Richard standing in the middle of “I have not counted upon that honthe drawing-room, booted and spurred. or, Richard. I shall have to do with“Well, Richard,” she exclaimed, with
out it.” some feeling, “you 're at last willing
“ You 'll have to do without a great to see me!"
many things !” cried Richard, horrified As his eyes fell upon her, he started by what seemed to him her blind selfand stood almost paralyzed, heeding immolation. neither her words nor her extended “ I have all I ask," said Gertrude. hand. It was not Gertrude he saw, but 6 You have n't all I ask then ! You her ghost.
have n't all your friends ask.” "In Heaven's name what has hap- “ My friends are very kind, but I pened to you ?” he cried. “Have you marry to suit myself.” been ill ?"
“ You ’ve not suited yourself!” reGertrude tried to smile in feigned torted the young man. “ You 've suitsurprise at his surprise ; but her mus- ed – God knows what ! - your pride, cles relaxed. Richard's words and looks your despair, your resentment.” As reflected more vividly than any mirror he looked at her, the secret history of the dejection of her person ; and this, her weakness seemed to become plain to the misery of her soul. She felt her- him, and he felt a mighty rage against self growing faint. She staggered back the man who had taken a base advanto a sofa and sank down.
tage of it.
Gertrude !” he cried, " I Then Richard felt as if the room entreat you to go back. It's not for were revolving about him, and as if my sake, -1'll give you up, his throat were choked with impreca- a thousand miles away, and never look tions, as if his old erratic passion at you again. It's for your own. In had again taken possession of him, like the name of your happiness, break with a mingled legion of devils and angels. that man! Don't Aling yourself away. It was through pity that his love re- Buy him off, if you consider yourself turned. He went forward and dropped bound. Give him your money. That 's on his knees at Gertrude's feet. “Speak all he wants.” to me!” he cried, seizing her hands. As Gertrude listened, the blood came “ Are you unhappy ? Is your heart back to her face, and two flames into broken? O Gertrude ! what have you her eyes. She looked at Richard from come to?"
head to foot. “ You are not weak," Gertrude drew her hands from his she said, “ you are in your senses, you grasp and rose to her feet.
are well and strong; you shall tell me Richard," she said. " Don't talk so what you mean. You insult the best wildly. I'm not well. I 'm very glad friend I have. Explain yourself! you You look well."
insinuate foul things, — speak them “I 've got my strength again, -- and out!” Her eyes glanced toward the meanwhile you've been failing. You ’re door, and Richard's followed them. unhappy, you 're wretched ! Don't say Major Luttrel stood on the threshold. you 're not, Gertrude : it's as plain as “ Come in, sir !” cried Richard. day. You ’re breaking your heart.” “ Gertrude swears she'll believe no
“The same old Richard !” said Ger- harm of you. Come and tell her that trude, trying to smile again.
she's wrong! How can you keep on “ Would that you were the same harassing a woman whom you've old Gertrude! Don't try to smile ; you brought to this state? Think of what can't!"
she was three months ago, and look at “ I shall !” said Gertrude, desper- her now !” ately. "I'm going to be married, you Luttrel received this broadside withknow.”
out flinching. He had overheard Rich
to see you.
ard's voice from the entry, and he had * You beast !” cried Luttrel. steeled his heart for the encounter. Richard turned upon him savagely. He assumed the air of having been so "Shut your infernal mouth!” he roared. amazed by the young man's first words “You told me he was alive and well ! ” as only to have heard his last; and he Gertrude made a movement of speechglanced at Gertrude mechanically as less distress. if to comply with them. “What's the ** You would have it, my dear,” said matter ?” he asked, going over to her, Luttrel, with a little bow. and taking her hand; “are you ill ?” Richard had turned pale, and began Gertrude let him have her hand, but to tremble. “Excuse me, Gertrude," she forbore to meet his eyes.
he said, hoarsely, “ I 've been deceived. “ III ! of course she's ill!” cried Poor, unhappy woman! Gertrude," he Richard, passionately. “She's dying, continued, going nearer to her, and - she's consuming herself! I know speaking in a whisper, “ / killed him.” I seem to be playing an odious part Gertrude fell back from him, as he here, Gertrude, but, upon my soul, I approached her, with a look of unuttercan't help it. I look like a betrayer, able horror. “ I and he,” said Richard, an informer, a sneak, but I don't feel pointing at Luttrel. like one! Still, I 'll leave you, if you Gertrude's eyes followed the direcsay, so.”
tion of his gesture, and transferred their “Shall he go, Gertrude ?” asked scorching disgust to her suitor. This Luttrel, without looking at Richard. was too much for Luttrel's courage.
“No. Let him stay and explain “You idiot!” she shouted at Richard, himself. He has accused you, — let “speak out!” him prove his case.”
“ He loved you, though you believed “I know what he is going to say," he did n’t,” said Richard. “I saw it said Luttrel. “It will place me in a the first time I looked at him. To bad light. Do you still wish to hear every one but you it was as plain as it?”
day. Luttrel saw it too. But he was Gertrude drew her hand hastily out too modest, and he never fancied you of Luttrel's. “Speak, Richard !” she cared for him. The night before he cried, with a passionate gesture. went back to the army, he came to bid
“ I will speak,” said Richard. “I've you good by. If he had seen you, it done you a dreadful wrong, Gertrude. would have been better for every one. How great a wrong, I never knew until You remember that evening, of course. I saw you to-day so miserably altered. We met him, Luttrel and I. He was When I heard that you were to be mar- all on fire, — he meant to speak. I ried, I fancied that it was no wrong, knew it, you knew it, Luttrel: it was and that my remorse had been wasted. in his fingers' ends. I intercepted But I understand it now; and he un- him. I turned him off, - I lied to derstands it, too. You once told me him and told him you were away. I that you had ceased to love Captain was a coward, and I did neither more Severn. It was n't true. You never nor less than that. I knew you were ceased to love him. You love him at waiting for him. It was stronger than this moment. If he were to get an- my will, - I believe I should do it other wound in the next battle, how again. Fate was against him, and he would you feel? How would you bear went off. I came back to tell you, but it?" And Richard paused for an in- my damnable jealousy strangled me. stant with the force of his interrogation. I went home and drank myself into a
“For God's sake,” cried Gertrude, fever. I've done you a wrong that I “respect the dead !”
can never repair. I'd go hang myself * The dead! Is he dead?”
if I thought it would help you.” RichGertrude covered her face with her ard spoke slowly, softly, and explicitly, hands.
as if irresistible Justice in person had
her hand upon his neck, and were for- It is my duty to tell you so. cing him down upon his knees. In the of course, a profoundly unwilling accespresence of Gertrude's dismay nothing sory. I pity you more than I can tell seemed possible but perfect self-convic- you. I think your position more pitition.
In Luttrel's attitude, as he stood able than mine. It is true that I nevwith his head erect, his arms folded, er made a confidant of you. I never and his cold gray eye fixed upon the made one of Richard. I had a secret, distance, it struck him that there was and he surprised it. You were less forsomething atrociously insolent; not in- tunate.” It might have seemed to a solent to him,for that he cared little thoroughly dispassionate observer that enough, — but insolent to Gertrude and in these last four words there was an to the dreadful solemnity of the hour. infinitesimal touch of tragic irony. Richard sent the Major a look of the Gertrude paused a moment while Lutmost aggressive contempt. “ As for trel eyed her intently, and Richard, from Major Luttrel,” he said, “ he was but a a somewhat tardy instinct of delicacy, passive spectator. No, Gertrude, by walked over to the bow-window. “This Heaven!” he burst out; "he was worse is the most painful moment of my life," than I! I loved you, and he did n’t!” she resumed. “I hardly know where
“Our friend is correct in his facts, my duty lies. The only thing that is Gertrude,” said Luttrel, quietly. “He plain to me is, that I must ask you to is incorrect in his opinions. I was a release me from my engagement.
I passive spectator of his deception. He ask it most humbly, Major Luttrel,” appeared to enjoy a certain author- Gertrude continued, with warmth in her ity with regard to your wishes, — the words, and a chilling coldness in her source of which I respected both of voice, - a coldness which it sickened you sufficiently never to question, her to feel there, but which she was unand I accepted the act which he has de- able to dispel. “I can't expect that scribed as an exercise of it. You will you should give me up easily; I know remember that you had sent us away that it 's a great deal to ask, and ”- she on the ground that you were in no forced the chosen words out of her humor for company.
To deny you,
mouth — “I should thank you more therefore, to another visitor, seemed to than I can say if you would put some me rather officious, but still pardonable. condition upon my release. You have You will consider that I was wholly done honorably by me, and I repay you ignorant of your relations to that vis- with ingratitude. But I can't marry itor ; that whatever you may have done you.” Her voice began to melt. “I for others, Gertrude, to me you never have been false from the beginning. I vouchsafed a word of information on have no heart to give you. I should the subject, and that Mr. Clare's words make you a despicable wife.” are a revelation to me. But I am
The Major, too, had listened and bound to believe nothing that he says. chosen, and in this trying conjuncture I am bound to believe that I have in- he set the seal to his character as an jured you only when I hear it from your accomplished man. He saw that Gerown lips."
trude's movement was final, and he deRichard made a movement as if to termined to respect the inscrutable mysbreak out upon the Major ; but Ger- tery of her heart. He read in the glance trude, who had been standing motion- of her eye and the tone of her voice that less with her eyes upon the ground, the perfect dignity had fallen from his quickly raised them, and gave him a character, that his integrity had lost look of imperious prohibition. She its bloom; but he also read her firm had listened, and she had chosen. She resolve never to admit this fact to her turned to Luttrel. “ Major Luttrel,” own mind, nor to declare it to the world, she said, “ you have been an accessory and he honored her forbearance. His in what has been for me a serious grief. hopes, his ambitions, his visions, lay before him like a colossal heap of broken never looked before; but he saw nothglass; but he would be as graceful as ing of it. He saw a sad, plain girl in a she was. She had divined him ; but white dress, nervously handling her fan. she had spared him. The Major was He was thinking of himself. If he had inspired.
been thinking of her, he would have “ You have at least spoken to the read in her lingering, upward gaze, that point,” he said. “You leave no room he had won her; and if, so reading, he for doubt or for hope. With the little had opened his arms, Gertrude would light I have, I can't say I understand have come to them. We trust the your feelings, but I yield to them relig- reader is not shocked. She neither iously. I believe so thoroughly that hated him nor despised him, as she you suffer from the thought of what you ought doubtless in consistency to have ask of me, that I will not increase your done. She felt that he was abundantsuffering by assuring you of my own. ly a man, and she loved him. Richard I care for nothing but your happiness. on his side felt humbly the same truth, You have lost it, and I give you mine and he began to respect himself. The to replace it. And although it's a sim- past had closed abruptly behind him, ple thing to say,” he added, “I must and tardy Gertrude had been shut in. say simply that I thank you for your The future was dimly shaping itself implicit faith in my integrity,” — and without her image. So he did not open he held out his hand. As she gave his arms. him hers, Gertrude felt utterly in the “Good by,” he said, holding out his wrong; and she looked into his eyes hand. “I may not see you again for a with an expression so humble, so ap- long time.” pealing, so grateful, that, after all, his Gertrude felt as if the world were deexit may be called triumphant.
serting her. “Are you going away?” When he had gone, Richard turned she asked, tremulously. from the window with an
“I mean to sell out and pay my debts, sense of relief. He had heard Ger- and go to the war.” trude's speech, and he knew that perfect She gave him her hand, and he silentjustice had not been done ; but still ly shook it. There was no contending there was enough to be thankful for. with the war, and she gave him up. Yet now that his duty was accomplished, With their separation our story prophe was conscious of a sudden lassitude. erly ends, and to say more would be to Mechanically he looked at Gertrude, begin a new story. It is perhaps our and almost mechanically he came to- duty, however, expressly to add, that wards her. She, on her side, looking Major Luttrel, in obedience to a logic of at him as he walked slowly down the his own, abstained from revenge ; and long room, his face indistinct against that, if time has not avenged him, it has the deadened light of the white-draped at least rewarded him. General Lutwindows behind him, marked the ex- trel, who lost an arm before the war pression of his figure with another pang. was over, recently married Miss Van “ He has rescued me,” she said to her- Winkel of Philadelphia, and seventy self; "but his passion has perished in thousand a year. Richard engaged in the tumult. Richard," she said aloud, the defence of his country, on a caputtering the first words of vague kind- tain's commission, obtained with some ness that came into her mind, “I for- difficulty. He saw a great deal of fightgive you.”
ing, but he has no scars to show. The Richard stopped. The idea had lost return of peace found him in his native its charm. * You 're very kind,” he place, without a home, and without resaid, wearily. “You 're far too kind. sources. One of his first acts was to How do you know you forgive me? call dutifully and respectfully upon Wait and see."
Miss Whittaker, whose circle of acGertrude looked at him as she had quaintance had apparently become very VOL. XX. — NO. 118.

Rapper Kanye West met with President-elect Donald Trump at Trump Tower in New York City on Dec. 13. Initially, it was reported to simply be a social meeting, but now it appears that the singer may be under consideration to join Trump's administration.
Trump spoke to West about the singer potentially becoming an "ambassador of sorts" in an "entrepreneurial leadership role," according to The Hill.
West and Trump posed for photographers following their brief meeting. Trump told reporters when asked about the purpose of the meeting, "Friends, just friends. He's a good man. Long time. Friends for a long time," according to Reuters.
At a November concert, West told his crowd that he did not vote in the presidential election, but that if he had, he would have voted for Trump.
Popular VideoThis young teenage singer was shocked when Keith Urban invited her on stage at his concert. A few moments later, he made her wildest dreams come true.
"I said something that was kind of politically correct," West told the crowd at his show in San Jose, California. "I told y'all I didn't vote, right? What I didn't tell you ... If I were to have voted, I would have voted for Trump."

Court hears wholesale Coast drug trafficker a 'family man'
A MAN convicted of running a Sunshine Coast wholesale drug trafficking operation is a "family man" and two drug dealer/addicts with "a lot to gain" turned on him, a court has heard.
In the second day of William Myles Bush's sentencing in Brisbane Supreme Court, after a jury found him guilty of for trafficking multiple drugs over a period of years, the court heard he was remorseful and his operation had not been as big as made out.
Bush, 42, was found guilty at trial of running a marijuana, speed and ecstasy ring that was busted when police intercepted a car Gerald Joseph Panganiban was driving containing kilograms of drugs and more than $60,000 of cash.
Panganiban worked as an "employee" or "runner" for Bush and had more drugs, including steroids, ecstasy and marijuana, hidden in Panganiban's shed.
Crown prosecutor Jodie Wooldridge called for Bush to be jailed for up to 15 years but his lawyer said his sentence should be little more than half that.
Lawyer Julie Sharp said the length of Bush's trafficking and the quantity of drugs he had was overstated during the trial.
She said two witnesses were drug dealer/addicts who "had a lot to gain" by testifying against Bush.
She said their claims Bush had been trafficking large quantities of drugs for years had been overstated and the two dealer/addicts were unreliable because of years of drug use.
Ms Sharp said Bush was a "family man" who had since realised how much he had harmed the community through his involvement in the drug trade.
Ms Sharp said a sentence as low as eight years jail was appropriate but she admitted if Justice Anthe Philippides rejected her submissions that the witnesses were unreliable, higher sentences were open.
Justice Philippides will deliver her verdict at a later date.

COLLIER COUNTY, FL - "We've always celebrated Memorial Day, we always knew what it was, we always honored the military in someway, but it's certainly taken on a different meaning now," said Claudine Ehlers.
This Memorial Day, the family of Staff Sergeant Marc Scialdo felt a strong personal connection to the holiday.
"We have a hole now," said Ehlers.
Staff Sergeant Marc Scialdo was killed this past March after the Black Hawk helicopter he was riding in, crashined in southern Afghanistan. His oldest sister, Claudine Ehlers, said his family has been supportive of his service ever since day one, after he signed up following the attacks of 9/11.
"Me and my family couldn't have been prouder. He had an exemplary career and wanted to be a pilot eventually," said Ehlers.
And thanks to modern-day technology, Ehlers said they are grateful they were able to share in his experiences with him.
"At least we had Skype and Facebook and you could keep in touch and you'd kind of let your guard down, and then you know the worst happens."

A Georgia police chief and a department patrolman have lost their jobs after being recorded engaging in racist talk outside of the Hamilton police station as they prepared for a Black Lives Matter protest.
The recording, posted by Columbus TV station WTVM, captures Hamilton Police Chief Gene Allmond and patrolman John Brooks in conversation last June, documented on video by a body camera worn by Brooks, according to the station.
Lewd comments by Brooks about whom he'd rather have sex with -- Atlanta Mayor Keisha Lance Bottoms or former Georgia gubernatorial candidate Stacey Abrams, both of whom are Black -- included a racial slur.
Separately, the two men then discussed slavery.
"I don't own no slaves," Allmond says. "My folks didn't own no slaves. What are we talking about, 200 (expletive) years ago?
Subsequently he says: "I don't know if this has any merit back in the slave times, but I'm sure there was a lot of them mistreated, I don't have no doubt about that. But for the most part, it seems to me like they furnished them a house to live in, they furnished them clothes to put on their back, they furnished them food to put on their table, and all they had to do was (expletive) work."
"And now we give them all those things and they don't have to (expletive) work," one of the officers then says.
Allmond resigned Jan. 25 after the footage was discovered, Buddy Walker, an assistant to Hamilton mayor Julie Brown, confirmed to The New York Times. Brooks offered to resign but was fired Tuesday when he failed to surrender his city-issued equipment as promised, he said.
Listening to the recording, "it was disgusting," said Hamilton Mayor Pro-Tem Ransom Farley, who is Black, reports WSB. "I had to leave the room."
City attorney Ron Iddins told WTVM that the footage was discovered during an inspection of the body camera, following a complaint that it was not working properly. "But when it was looked at, it was determined that the bodycam actually had full memory of video," he said.
Following a meeting of the city council, "it was determined that the two officers involved needed to no longer work for the City of Hamilton," he said.
Neither of the former police employees have been charged with wrongdoing, and it was unclear if either had retained attorneys to speak on their behalf.
"Everybody knew what had to be done," Walker said, reports the Times.
Brooks was given the option to resign or be fired, and responded by asking if he could view the recording. "He watched the entire video and then came in and told the mayor pro tem that he was sorry — that that was really not the way he was," Walker told the Times.
Farley told him: "I'm not accepting your apology, because you're sorry that you got caught. You're not sorry because of what you said."
"Nobody told on them," Farley told the newspaper. "They told on themselves."

By Scott Guhl
Less than a year ago, I was on my way to a pastors’ meeting when I was in a terrible car accident. My vehicle became lodged under a large piece of farm equipment. I was trapped for 45 minutes and had to be cut out of my car. I suffered a severe head injury and was airlifted to an Advocate trauma center.
Meanwhile back home, my wife gets a dreaded knock on our door from a sheriff letting her know what has happened. She gathers five out of our six children and heads to the hospital to be with me. Our oldest son and daughter-in-law meet them there.
I was unconscious during my time in the emergency department while they accessed the extent of my injuries. I had broken ribs, broken vertebrae, a cracked sternum and chemical burns on my arms and legs. But the biggest concern was brain damage.
Miraculously, scans showed my head injuries were less severe than originally thought, but I received 73 staples in my head. My wife and children were able to see me once I was stable. I think it was so helpful for them to see with their own eyes that I was going to be ok.
I was moved to the critical care unit, and in those first few days, I was unable to talk. I remember thinking, “God, am I ever going to be able to sing to you again? Am I going to be able to preach another sermon?”
During that time, my family was overwhelmed with support from family, friends and members of our church. And it seemed everyone we knew, and many we didn’t, were praying for us. And their prayers were heard.
My family and I were so blessed by the care I received at Advocate. My doctors, nurses and everyone I met were so wonderful. I never saw anyone just doing their job or going through the motions. It was clear that every person we came across had a personal calling and mission to help others.
As a pastor, I spend a lot of time in clinical settings, but this experience really changed my perception of hospitals. I have even commented that it was a joyous experience.
With the support of family, my care team and all the prayers, I made it through. My recovery has been nothing short of a miracle. I am back doing what I love.
I would like to thank all the caregivers for following your calling to help others, I want to thank my wife and kids for their dedication and love. And I would like to thank all the donors, who give generously in support of quality health care in their community. I am honored to be among you.
There are so many ways to pay it forward. For some it is giving back for the compassionate care received at an Advocate hospital. Please consider making a tax-deductible gift in support of the <fund name> of <site name>today.
I have seen the impact philanthropy can have, from providing state-of-art facilities and equipment, to offering support services and education programs. Your gift can make a difference for families—like yours and mine—for years to come.

Fight takes place in an abandoned city of some sort.
Win by KO for team or death for Lobo. No BFR.
Everyone is at their fullest power. Lobo has his standard equipment including his bike. He cannot clone himself.
Sorry I had trouble with entering the images.
Anyway who wins and why.

The riding hound is a canine animal found on Cardassia.
When Elim Garak was around five, his father Enabran Tain took him to a course outside Cardassia City and put him on a riding hound. Tain initially held the hound's bridle and led it around the course, but then gave the bridle to his son. Tain slapped the hound and it sped off with the young Garak still on its back. Garak fell off several times, but never gave up. Just prior to death in 2373, Tain recalled the event and noted how proud he was of his son. (DS9 episode: "In Purgatory's Shadow", DS9 novel: A Stitch in Time)

"Every day all day"
I woke up the next morning and Justin was laying on my chest and my arm was around him. I liked waking up with a man in my arms. Although I wish it was Ryan in my arms, I enjoyed Justin.
Who knows, I can see myself with him. I better go though, it was barely light outside, really early in the morning, I shimmied out from under Justin and he just turned over.
I got dressed as quietly as I could and headed for the door. I noticed I had received a text from Ryan. "WHERE THE FUCK ARE YOU?" Great, he probably thinks I'm dead somewhere. Would I tell him about my sleepover with Justin. Or should I keep it a secret...the end of the story look at the video above ↑ ↑ ↑

Never go skiing with a mobile phone
You may not come back
Mobile phones are evil, evil we tell you. Yesterday the Danes told us that they didn't cause cancer, but even if they don't, mobiles can still kill you.
We're not talking about the Mexican who dropped his mobile in the lion's cage at the zoo and was attacked when it went off as he was retrieving it. We're not on about poor old Noel Connelly who fell from his London balcony while trying to get a good signal. Nor the German businessman who was beaten to death for having a really irritating phone ring.
No, we're talking of the poor skier who died in the Alps having been caught up in an avalanche. He was actually securing the area when the avalanche hit him and he was buried. A colleague rushed to locate him with the standard bit of kit - the ARVA 9000 apparently - but couldn't get a fix on the man, even though he was just 50 meters away.
The reason? The searcher had his mobile phone turned on and it was disrupting the avalanche transceiver's digital signal. Eventually, an analogue transceiver was located but it was too late and the man was dead. Now all searchers are being advised to turn off their phones when looking for someone - even the analogue kit is slightly affected by the mobile signal.
Now don't try and tell us that mobiles aren't dangerous. ®
Sponsored: Today’s most dangerous security threats

The cover painting of Resonance
After Sandor and I had settled on a title, I turned my attention to album cover photography. I've done the photography on all my album covers, and Sandor asked if I'd do the cover for Resonance, to which I replied that it would be my honor. After the recording sessions were completed, I set to work on the photography. What I had in mind was a subject or setting, in nature, of something which would represent two separate halves; each have fully independent; yet creating a confluence; invoking an amalgam of the two which would transmogrify into a third entity or object. This entity or object would fully stand on its own, fully independent; yet which could not exist without the two discrete halves from which it originated. I felt that this would be a salient analog of the music created by Sandor and myself.
It seemed like a simple concept; one which should be rather easy to photograph.
I shot around 200 photos trying to capture and/or illustrate this concept. I winnowed the pile down to fewer than a dozen, and sent these to Sandor to get his take on them. While many of the photos were very good as photos, they weren't quite right as the album cover. I was not fully confident that any of them truly captured what I was trying to illustrate. I had not told Sandor of the concept of my subject so as not to precondition him or his expectations or photographic interpretations. He rejected all the candidates I sent to him, which neither surprised or disappointed me, as I wasn't really happy with any of them as album covers. Although some were beautiful and a few have found their way into the Images pages, I still was not happy with any of them as the album cover for Resonance.
Displayed on a small landing above the stairs which lead to the studio are two of my wife Therese's paintings. As I was leaving the studio one night, still feeling unsettled about the album cover, I randomly glanced at one of the paintings as I so often do when descending the stairs. My eyes popped open as I realized I was looking at a painted representation of exactly what I'd been trying unsuccessfully to capture on digital film. I immediately grabbed my camera, captured a few shots of it, and e-mailed one to Sandor without telling him who had painted it or why. His response was quick and firm: he loved it and thought it was the ideal cover image for Resonance. This matched my reaction, but again, I did not tell him that, as I still did not want to precondition his perceptions or reactions. So, after much searching, we had our album cover, one which we both felt perfectly represented the music of Resonance. Thank you, Therese, for letting us use your wonderful painting.

Bass lives on in hands of Anderson student, despite tragedy
By Liz Carey
Thursday, March 29, 2012
ANDERSON COUNTY — When Lee Street took up his new bass for the first time, it fit.
"I showed up for a lesson one day with Mr. (Brian) Gencarelli, and he said, 'Here, try this bass,'" said Lee, a 15-year-old freshman from Powdersville High School. "I asked him why, and he said, 'Because this is your bass.' It took a few minutes for me to understand what he was saying. ... Mr. G handed it to me, and after playing it two or three seconds, that bass fit me perfectly."
Friday night, Lee will play that bass, a gift from the Greater Anderson Musical Arts Consortium, as part of the GAMAC Orchestra's "A Celebration of Youth" concert.
Lee will play his new bass next to his instructor, lead bassist for GAMAC, Brian Gencarelli.
It was Gencarelli who brought the bass back to life after it sat waiting for a new owner.
For years, Lee played a bass that was too small for him. When he was in fourth grade at Powdersville Elementary School in Williamston-based Anderson School District 1, he started playing violin. In sixth grade, he switched to the bass.
"I liked that not a lot of people played it," he said.
But the instrument he was playing, Gencarelli said, didn't fit him.
"He is very talented," Gencarelli said. "He made regional and all-state orchestras on his own before he was given this bass. He was playing a bass that was too small for him, and it was really handicapping him. The new bass just kind of fit him from the day I gave it to him. His playing has improved since then too. His attitude has improved; he really has more of a sense of pride because of he instrument. I think he feels honored to have received it."
And that's exactly what the owners of the bass wanted.
Lee's bass was given to GAMAC by Amber Robey's family. Robey brought the instrument with her when she moved to South Carolina from Virginia with her boyfriend, said Marlene McClain of the Anderson County Sheriff's Office victim's services unit.
"It was something she loved to play and one of the few things she brought with her," McClain said. "When she died, her family wanted to ensure that it went to someone who would be able to use it and continue with her love of music."
Robey was 22 when she died in 2006 after an argument with her friend and neighbor, Cynthia Marchbanks. Robey was on Marchbanks' porch when, police said, Marchbanks shot her in the face. Robey died later at AnMed Health Medical Center in Anderson. She was 26 weeks pregnant at the time. When her baby, who was delivered by Caesarean section, died five weeks later, Marchbanks was charged with murder in both their deaths. In 2007, a jury found Marchbanks not guilty of murder in either death after Marchbanks claimed self-defense.
"The bass sat here for a while," McClain said. "We gave it to GAMAC so they could find someone deserving of it."
The bass sat for three years after Gencarelli restored the instrument to a playable condition while he looked for a student deserving of it.
It was Lee's talent that made him stand out, Gencarelli said.
Lee has made all-county, all-region and all-state orchestra with the new bass. He's also a member of the Carolina Youth Symphony. But his talents aren't just limited to music. He's also on the Powdersville High School football and baseball teams. He's an honor student who takes engineering classes at the Anderson Districts 1 and 2 Career and Technology Campus. "My goal is to make all-state orchestra for the next three years, and get a scholarship for bass to the University of South Carolina so I can study engineering," Lee said.
With the new bass, Lee hopes to be able to further his studies of music. Practicing when he can between other activities and homework, Lee hopes to one day play professionally.
"The week, I had to say, 'Go to bed, you can practice tomorrow,'" said Martin Street, Lee's father. "He loves his music, and he's got talent. We understood early on his love of the bass, and that this wasn't just a typical phase he was going through. He's really got talent. As a parent, it was hard thinking about how are we going to provide him with the instrument he needs. This was an incredible gift for him."
But the gift comes with a history, and for Lee that, at first, was something to consider.
"My first thought was that it's got a legacy behind it," Lee said. "Yeah, it's a responsibility, but it's a great gift. There are times when I cringe if I put it down too hard because I worry about every little scratch. But I accept that responsibility. It's my job to be a good caretaker of the instrument and continue to use it."
That's all Amber Robey's parents ever wanted.
For Martin Street, knowing his son will fulfill a parent's request is a gift as well.
"As a parent, I can only imagine what it would be like if I lost a child," he said. "I don't know how I'd ever be able to let go of that bass. But now I see that the bass will live on in the hands of another child. That's pretty touching.

Sunday, June 15, 2014
Sure do miss Dad so much....I loved him with all my heart. He was such an accomplished, gentle soul. He worked so hard to provide for Mom and I. He certainly reached out to all of Mom's family and shared his love with them and helped whenever possible. This picture is one of my favorites that was taken at a Father/Daughter picnic my senior year at Jewell.

Ryan Duffy Obituary: Former Mississippi State baseball player Ryan Duffy tragically passed away in a car accident on Tuesday, December 19, 2023.
Duffy graduated from Barron Collier High School and received a scholarship to attend Mississippi State.
Duffy played as a catcher and was one of the best players during his high school days. He earned all-county and All-Southwest Florida All-Star Team honors and was named the Team MVP.
He was just 37-years-old. Duffy redshirted his first year in 2006 but played for the Bulldogs as a catcher or designated hitter through 2010. His best game was perhaps in his final season, when tallied three home runs against Jackson State.
The Mississippi State Baseball Family mourns the passing of Diamond Dawg Ryan Duffy.

It’s important for anyone reading my testimony to understand that these are things that happened to me. My story is being shared to spread awareness on many levels. Information that has been provided is only to inform others that things like this does happen in real life. It’s not to harm anyone but again it is shared to spread awareness. All information provided is true; however, the names of the medical professionals and the hospital has been omitted intentionally for legal reasons.
I NEVER imagine things would turn out this way in my life but who knows how their life will turn out? I will say having a relationship with GOD really does cause things to be a lot better. Personally, I have experienced a GREAT loss but GOD has brought me a very long way. I am not 100%; however, when I think about it I will never be again. In May of 2014 a part of me died. I am still learning how to cope with the loss of my baby boy and it is not easy, at times it does get hard. So, one day at a time is the rule
I share my story to bring awareness to unexpected infant deaths.
I share my story because no one should ever endure the treatment Khairi and I have.
I share my story so, if just one mother or father read my story and learn that it is okay to question a medical professional opinion or that it is okay to ask for a 2nd opinion If people NEVER speak about the things that are wrong, then people will continue to believe WRONG is RIGHT when it is not.
We are supposed to help one another and I’m doing just that.
Personally, I am not saying that women will not lose babies. However, I am saying the way we were treated and the care we received should never be tolerated or accepted on any level. It should not matter whether you are a first-time mother or not. Personally, I believe some medical professionals need to stop being allowed to make careless mistakes that are basic and a part of a routine visit and get away with it. It is not fair that they can cover up their wrong and disrupt the lives of families and not be held accountable. People along with infants are losing their lives due to some medical professional’s lack of attention and care. They need to understand that infants are human and they have families and their families love them dearly
On May 24, 2014, my life took a turn that has traumatized me severely for life. On Monday, May 26, 2014, things became reality. The turn my life would take, is one I pray no mother would ever have to experience.
“You never know what anything is like until you have walked in the shoes yourself and just because you experienced the same thing someone else has gone through; you still don’t know the pain they felt when they went through their experience or what they felt like after the experience”.
I never imagined in my life that I would be writing or telling anyone the story that I have been living for the past months. Well, my story starts like this; it was a Saturday morning in February. I wasn’t feeling as I normally would, so I finally took the advice of Khairi’s father to take a test, so I did. I didn’t really expect to see all the lines that appeared but when they appeared it made me feel like I was all woman. So, for the next few months I grew bigger and began to get slower.
I started to realize a lot of what I use to do, I could no longer do anymore, no matter how badly I wanted to. This was hard to accept at first because I am a very independent person, but I accepted it. It was so amazing how something so small could change my life so quickly. It was like an instant change because of the love and bond that was growing between me and my unborn child.
Meanwhile, months later I started preparing for my baby shower and looking around for the best of everything because as a first-time mom I didn’t want to make any mistakes. I wanted things to be right. I soon learned there was no such thing as getting everything right. I started thinking of names, what extra curriculum activities he or she would participate in at school and what school he or she would attend, etc. Then the day came when I would learn the gender of my unborn child. I learned I would have a boy. At this moment, I knew then I had to read and educate myself on how to raise a respectful, well manner little boy. As it is known, no handbook comes with raising a baby. So, you learn from various places how to raise your child. I knew I wanted to incorporate how I was raised along with some things I learned from friends and other family members.
Unfortunately, on Saturday, May 24, 2014 I began having complications. I called the Dial-a-Nurse and told her I was spotting, cramping and had just experienced a gush of water. She told me things like this happens and to clean myself up, put a sanitary napkin on and go on with my day. She went on to say things were okay. Later on, in the day around 4p.m. I became worried because Khairi was not moving in ways that I were familiar with. So, I went to the hospital ER where my OB/GYN was in Birmingham, AL but I was sent to the Labor and Delivery. Once there I was placed on the fetal monitor and informed Khairi heart rate was around 162 bpm and that he was fine. I was tested to check for my amniotic fluid but it came back negative. I am told another test should have been done with dye to check for ruptures or at least a spectrum exam, well neither were done. I was then sent to have an ultrasound done while having the test done, I asked the Ultrasound tech, if Khairi was on my bladder. I was informed he was and that he was faced down. When the results came back it revealed that over 2.0 cm of amniotic fluid was gone. I asked if he would be okay and I was told he was fine. After 9 hours in the Labor and Delivery unit, I was discharged at around 12 midnight or a little after on Sunday, May 25, 2014. I was told to follow up with my OB/GYN the following week. I assumed I was being told right. I would have never thought everything that had been done to me or told to me was wrong. This was their job something they do every day. I thought by going to the hospital that I would get help. I thought I was in good hands. I thought I would be cared for. This is the place you come to when you are ill, right?
Later on, that Sunday I was still feeling the same but because I had been told I was okay the day before; I just kept things to a minimum and rested; meanwhile, after going to bed I was awaken to heartburn, after 30 minutes it cleared up. I went back to sleep feeling okay. Around 3 something in the morning I was awaken to what I thought were menstrual cramps which were on and off and later got worse all of a sudden but again I wasn’t thinking it could be labor because they said I wasn’t in labor when I visited the day before and there were no new symptoms. I think it was around 5 something when my precious angel arrived in the world. It turned out when I went to the hospital my water had broken and labor was a short time away. So, true because now I am face to face with my baby boy. I was a nervous wreck at this point. I was crying, bleeding, trying to make sure Khairi was ok and screaming that my baby was here. So, my mama called 911 but was put on a brief hold. Eventually, after about 5 minutes the emergency crew arrived and began working on me. They cut my son umbilical cord and placed Baby Khairi in a chug to keep him warm and placed him on oxygen. Baby Khairi was born breathing on his own and the emergency unit said he would be ok. They got us in the ambulance then called to see if a hospital close to home would accept me but they replied and said no because they couldn’t care for a 21-week infant, then the paramedic asked where my doctor was. I told him and they responded and said we were going there. Meanwhile, it wasn’t until later that I would discover that the person who took the call should have redirected the paramedics to UAB which have a Level 4 NICU. I will say the firefighter that had Baby Khairi took really good care of my baby boy. Finally, we approached the hospital and got to where we were going. Unfortunately, the paramedic had to holler at the nurses on the floor. No one there took my situation serious which was the reason for him hollering telling them to get up and show them where to take me. They did as he said and placed me in a room. Then emergency then the unit had to turn Khairi over to the nurse and things turned and got worse. The emergence unit had to remove their oxygen from Khairi so they could leave. Meanwhile, the nurses processed to clean me up then the doctor came in and started his examination. A nurse came in and began to input my info in the computer only to find out I had just been discharged less than 24 hours previous. The doctor was very surprised and asked, “Why were you here”. I informed the doctor about the experience I had with the gush of water, pain and bleeding. The doctor then said “everything was a “FALSE NEGATIVE” and that I should have never been discharged”. Then the nurse that took Khairi out came back in the room. I asked if he was in NICU and she said, “no he didn’t make it”. So, for a few minutes’ things were crazy. I cleared the room out from being hysterical, then the doctor and nurse came back and continued with the examination and admission. The doctor he would document everything in his notes. He also advised me to spend time with my baby boy.
Upon hearing from the staff the doctor I saw on that Saturday, the one that released me while in labor the one that paid us no attention came to my room to tell me she was sorry for my loss and that the test was 90 something percent accurate, at this point I realized what it was like to be paralyzed from the neck down. I actually wasn’t able to move or speak, making matters worse a nurse came in also and apologized. Two apologies back to back but neither could bring my precious angel back.
Later that day a nurse came in and asked me for the name I had given my angel. I named him Khairi which means “a kingly man” No real reason was ever given why my baby boy was born so early; however, it is obvious why he was born so early. The doctor on Saturday had overlooked something so critical, serious and life threatening for Khairi. There are a lot of things the doctor on Saturday would have known had she come in the room at least once to talk with me and examine me; however, this never happened. She never warned or advised me of any danger that I could be facing; all because she didn’t do her job. She went clearly by the results of the tests that were ordered. Seriously, I am not sure she went by those either because my fluid was low and she had the ultrasound along with the written report and diagnosis. She overlooked it all because it wasn’t until I got my records that I discovered the radiologist had clearly told her what was issue. The hospital stated my baby boy died of respiratory failure; only because he wasn’t placed back on oxygen after the emergency unit removed their oxygen because they had to leave with their equipment. Well I had to research respiratory failure. I found that respiratory failure is a condition in which the level of oxygen in the blood becomes dangerously low or the level of carbon dioxide becomes dangerously high. The hospital informed me this was the hardest type of loss because there were no answers to be provided. I was informed I would always wonder “was it this” or “was it that”. This can cause a person to lose their mind not having any answer as to what happened. Well, after being discharged I realized there were answers to be provided. I feel like this hospital in Birmingham, AL owe me some answers
Well, through it all I have managed to get from one day to the next by the grace of GOD because this is one of the most devastating things to go through in life. My baby wasn’t given a chance at life. One of the nurses informed me that my baby was placed in the room next to mine and left there. He was in there without oxygen, no help was provided to him. He may have been under this hospital viability age but HE WAS BREATHING and this hospital in Birmingham, Alabama did nothing to make the situation better. This was not ethical at all. Ethics teach us to go with the GREATER GOOD. This was not the greater good to allow an infant to lay without oxygen and die. The GREATER GOOD would have been to provide oxygen and incubator and go from there. Amillia Taylor from Florida was smaller than Khairi weighing 283 grams and 9 ½ long and she lived and is still living today in 2016 and based on reports doing good. This shows these babies can live through the challenges and that not all of them die or have major issues. So Khairi was far from being to young He was said to be too young to survive on his own. After being discharged from the hospital I started researching more and found all type of stories about how babies younger than Baby Khairi gestation week lived and babies Baby Khairi exact gestation week had lived, so the big question was “WHY? Why is my baby gone”? How could this happen? How could a hospital make so many mistakes? How could the medical professional not have compassion in a situation like this? My baby came into the world and arrived at the hospital breathing on his own with oxygen. Why didn’t they keep him breathing? Why was he not placed in an incubator, it is a form of a womb which regulate the oxygen level and body temperature? The oxygen was taken off of him without my knowledge. No one ever came to talk with me about anything. There are no reasons to be thought of why we were treated this way. However, I do believe statistics and personal beliefs played a part because I was told by the head Neonatal doctor, “they did not perform miracles at this hospital”. She went on to say, “If I wanted a miracle I should have gone to the hospital down the street”, referring to UAB. The hospital down the street may, but we don’t”. Why was I been treated so badly? I didn’t have it in me to do anything or speak a word to anyone. I was in a state of shock
Then came the time to bury my baby. After calling around trying to find a resting place for my little one. I felt like my baby was ripped from me with no medication, and then, someone came and stabbed me repeatedly until they got tired. The price to use some funeral homes and cemeteries were ridiculous. Some places told me $5000.00 to bury my 10 1/2-inch baby boy. They didn’t care that he was breathing. Yet, he was recognized as a baby to be buried but not as a baby to be kept alive. After dealing with that I laid my baby to rest and heard from GOD telling me to do something. I asked what and HE revealed help ease the pain that you felt when Khairi left you.
I live with the loss of my only child every day and will continue to until I join my baby boy in heaven. It is so hard trying to go on with life and stay in my right mind set because I am thinking about this little boy constantly. I am too afraid to have another child; mainly, because of the care. The care from the hospital really shook me up. I find myself crying now if I go to a hospital and the nurses are nice to me. I just ask why couldn’t the people on call when I had Khairi couldn’t been nice?
Now, I live life trying to turn a devastating tragedy into something positive. I try to help other mother’s that may not be able to provide their infant with a proper burial. I started a nonprofit organization to provide infant burial assistance, emotional stability, financial services and to educate. If a mother is not provided with a strong support system with something of this magnitude it can break a mother, possibly destroy her. I want mothers to know there is someone that care and that we are here if needed.
I have to talk to my baby boy in heaven now…
My baby boy “Khairi”
Mommy loves you so much five months wasn’t long enough for me. I wanted so much to have forever with you; at least some time to see you grow. There was so much planned for your life; however, when GOD called you back that meant my plans for you would just be unfinished. It hurt so bad to have someone taken away the way you were. I would have done anything to have kept you another day, another month; really just to have kept you alive. Just a little more time to see your eyes, to see you play, to actually take pictures with you in my arms. I will forever and always remember you I just hate you had to go in this way. It is really hard to accept someone half doing their job and overlooking something that would take your life “permanently”. They took the right away from me by not telling me the danger you were in and because of that I just don’t think I will ever get over losing you. I will always, always love you forever and always
An online petition was started to help get justice for baby Khairi. Khairi’s mother was misdiagnosed by a doctor which contributed to his death. The doctor has since left the state. Therefore, Khairi’s mother started a petition at the link below.
Click on the link and the page will load where you need to sign.

Supreme Court justice rips Yale
Thomas' new autobiography, "My Grandfather's Son," shows how the second black justice on the Supreme Court came to oppose affirmative action after his law school experience. He was one of about 10 blacks in a class of 160 who had arrived at Yale after the unrest of the 1960s, which culminated in a Black Panther Party trial in New Haven that nearly caused a large-scale riot.
The conservative justice says he initially considered his admission to Yale a dream, but soon felt he was there because of his race. He says he loaded up on tough courses to prove he was not inferior to his white classmates but considers the effort futile. He says he was repeatedly turned down in job interviews at law firms after his 1974 graduation.
"I learned the hard way that a law degree from Yale meant one thing for white graduates and another for blacks, no matter how much any one denied it," Thomas writes. "I'd graduated from one of America's top law schools, but racial preference had robbed my achievement of its true value."
Thomas says he stores his Yale Law degree in his basement with a 15-cent sticker from a cigar package on the frame.
Thomas said he began interviewing with law firms at the beginning of his third year of law school.
"Many asked pointed questions unsubtly suggesting that they doubted I was as smart as my grades indicated," he wrote. "Now I knew what a law degree from Yale was worth when it bore the taint of racial preference."
He said it was months before he got an offer, from then-Missouri Attorney General John Danforth.
Steven Duke, a white Yale law professor who taught when Thomas attended Yale, said Thomas is right to say that the significance of someone's degree could be called into question if the person was admitted to an institution on a preferential basis. However, he said that could be overcome by strong performance, noting that two Yale graduates -- Danforth and President Bush -- put Thomas into top jobs.
"I find it difficult to believe he actually regrets the choice he made," Duke said. "It seems to me he did pretty well."
Thomas has declined to have his portrait hung at Yale Law School along with other graduates who became U.S. Supreme Court justices.
Yale Law School Dean Harold Koh turned down requests for interviews about the justice's book, but said in a statement that he and his predecessors have invited Thomas to have his portrait done and the offer still stands.
Koh said they met for several hours about a year ago. "He made it clear that he had greatly enjoyed his time at Yale Law School, and that he had great affection for his fellow students and for several professors who are still here," he said.
Thomas would not comment, said court spokeswoman Kathy Arberg.

Wednesday, July 24, 2013
Its a pretty day out here in Sin City, the weather isn't looking as bad as I thought it would be this week so far. Today it looks pretty out there, even with the fluffy clouds hovering round. It seems like I am back to evening exercise but its okay as long as I get in those 15,000 or so steps a day then all is right in my world. I'm doing pretty good with those 15 minute bursts of treadmill or stair walking it adds to my steps and gives me a bit more energy all round which is pretty nice. I wouldn't get too mad with myself as long as I am over 13K now because I am pretty much always in that range now. I'm always trying to improve my exercise and fitness goals so I posted this in a birthday challenge post earlier last night.
I'm kayah, early 40's, no children, engaged as of last night when my SO asked me to be his wife, I said yes I would marry him and he sweated it out. I can be a little difficult sometimes lol.
I am 137 pounds (this is down from 140 when I started) and would like to be 125-ish by the end of November, if it takes me till July 2014 that would be bad because my birthday was Monday. I had already set this goal on FitBit but figured extra reinforcement couldn't hurt. I exercise at least 2 hours a day with walking and other activities so I should be able to cross the line by Thanksgiving. Its basically a pound a week. I Walk, do Elliptical, Yogilates, Zumba, Tae-Bo & Dance for exercise right now. It works well for me and my overnight work schedule. I want to reduce sodium and the carbs a little, increase fruit and soup & salad a little more! Get into strength training in September and get up into the 17-18K steps range by mid September. CW-137 GW-125~
So yeah, you read it right, the SO asked me to marry him and I said yes after stalling for a few minutes because I really was surprised he asked me to be married to him. My brain kind of short circuited a little about it for a few moments is why I didn't say anything for a few minutes. I had been married once previously but that didn't work out so I waited a long while before pursuing another relationship. I wanted to make sure I was right with me before wanting to be married again. Marriage is hard work and it seems a lot of people pay more attention to the wedding and not enough thought goes into the being married part. The SO had a fancy wedding the first time round and I saw his picture of how he looked, he wore all Black very sexy and formal. He said he would like to be much more casual this go round. He did say he would like to see me in a white or ivory casual wedding dress. He knows I wore a red Chinese wedding dress when I married the first time. He said red is a nice color but no red please lol. To each his own, so he said would you care what I wear this time and I said as long as you look handsome and not too very casual then I'm fine. (The SO cleans up very well in a suit, very handsome he is.) He said he would wear ivory since I'm wearing ivory, since white makes me look even more ginger than I am! I was thinking a beach type looking dress, ankle length. Not too pricey since its for a few hours. I'll go looking soon.
I'm into having a very casual wedding, not a lot of fuss and crazy. Plus I'm not exactly the most girly girl about weddings and all that hoopla, most of my friends are guys. I like sports, driving fast cars, hiking up a mountain. I'm sort of like a guy in a girl's body really. The SO asked me when do I want to get married & I said not on Valentine's Day. He would like to get married when it is nice and warm but he doesn't want a long engagement since I don't care for a big fancy wedding. So maybe we will get married in October since I do love fall colours and its still pretty nice here during that time. I think a casual low key ceremony and not too long of a reception would be okay in the evening. I like the night A LOT. So its basically the end of July just about so maybe we should just go downtown to a chapel, get tied together and go have dinner somewhere and be good with things. We don't need a reception really because we have everything we need for our place and honestly I don't want people giving us a bunch of stuff we will have 3 of and have to find a place for etc. The SO and I are getting together over the weekend and deciding what we will keep for this house and what will be donated, sold, given away etc. I have a certain decorating scheme in my place but I think we can combine things fairly well. He lives in a furnished place now (it was that way when he moved in so he didn't have to buy furniture and all of that related madness.)
The SO does have some personal pieces that can be integrated nicely from his Mom and what he acquired from life. He has a really cool black and silver chest that can go at the foot of my bed, it fits perfectly with my Victorian Gothic style. He has paintings and some other nice swag that will go here nicely. I don't care for his dishes, silverware and the like but he said he isn't tied to that. He just bought the style because it was on sale at Target lol. Score one for me, but I let him know beyond that part he is free to let me know what he dislikes so we can change it or figure things out. He said he likes my unique Gothic styled self because its different, unique, original. He likes that I have all the appliances, he has one of those K-Cup coffee makers which I find distasteful and way too expensive lol. (No offence anyone) I do pour over coffee since I have one cup a day usually. I have a coffee maker for company since instant coffee is sludge in my view. I had Folgers instant once in an emergency, HORRID!
I don't have a lawn to mow since my yard is pretty much a small area in the front and in the back He is landscaping it. He was out there last night for a good 4 hours installing pipes or whatever it is that he was doing. I was cooking supper so I don't know exactly all the finer details. He likes to go out there when he is wanting physical work. That was work, breaking and shoveling rock out of the way. He was stinky when he came in for dinner and I told him go and shower before we eat because it was bad lol. He did so and came back and after we ate and talked for a while he went home because he was tired. He is coming by a bit later for dinner again and we'll walk together he said to me. The garage is a bit of a disarray since he is bringing some things over of that nature. He sold a few of his items he didn't need anymore or had no use of. He is pretty minimal minus his coffee maker and a toaster oven. He wants to keep that which is fine, my kitchen is a little on the smaller side but its fine because the microwave is up and out of the way. He likes to make pizza and other things like that in a toaster oven. I have 2 refrigerators and he actually owns his fridge so he said he is going to sell his since its about 3 years old but in excellent shape. He will sell it closer to when he moves in October. I seem always to have lived with 2 refrigerator freezer combos and I also have a freezer, crazy. I would like to sell the fridge in the garage or the other freezer, its just too much to have really in my view. A friend nearby needs a new Fridge/Freezer, and she likes the French style, so if she gets a good deal her husband and The SO will cart it over to their place on the other side of town. I'm all for that because its all just too much. I find it wasteful really. Its one of those French type refrigerator freezers. I have the same type in the kitchen but a different make and model, my parents are strange they bought it for me when I already had one. I wasn't stressing myself by not accepting. I pick my battles with them and I wasn't going there for this one lol.
So his 2 know about the engagement and they are both cool with it. When his daughter found out she was like "I want to be the flower girl." I told her so you shall be. She's 9, very pretty and intelligent. The SO told their mother first and she is cool with it. She told me now you can see what he's like when you live with him lol. I know why their marriage dissolved and so I'm not worried about it. The SO is neat, he can cook some things, he is responsible and a man so I have no issues. (She was a little more than high maintenance and always on him about doing more, always doing more. She is a nice enough woman but girlfriend stresses me out with her demanding personality so I minimize my contact with her. My dad was like that while I was growing up and it was more than damaging. Nothing is ever good enough.)
I figure lil girl can be the flower girl, no need for bridesmaids and groomsmen and all that fuss. The SO is going to have his son be his best man which is very good. A casual meaningful ceremony is all that is necessary. Dinner and a little party afterwards is good and off we go to have our wedding trip, DONE! Minimal expense and fuss, I don't have to have drama with other people's opinion about the wedding since SO and I will pay for everything. The ring he gifted me with is just exceptionally beautiful I'll say that. Its a Platinum, 1 carat, Pear shaped African Ruby since I don't like diamonds so much; he knows my taste in rings and jewelry. He asked me to marry him before he pulled out the ring since he knew the ring wouldn't make a difference. He knew by listening to a conversation I had with my sister and mother that if I was to get married again I didn't care to have a say in picking out an engagement ring. I almost feel like a half carat would have been sufficient but the 1 carat is growing on me. I have long slender fingers so it looks fine and he apparently took all that into consideration when deciding what type of ring to get me. I don't know what the wedding ring looks like yet, he says its a surprise for when we get married. The engagement ring was surprise enough, he really does pay attention to the little things about me which I appreciate more than anything in the world. I like it when I don't have to make all the decisions about what to do in life. (I call it the no what do you want to do conversation. I would prefer not to always have to be the one to figure things out in life like where we should go on a date or what movie to see, what kind of food to eat out etc.)
I wasn't curious about the ring & its origin but he did say it was designed for me, he knew he wanted it to be a ruby and in a platinum setting but the jeweler did the rest over the span of a few months. I found that quite touching I let him know and he said that I was worth the extra effort and not having a ring from a common store. He dislikes Jared, Kay's and those types of stores since they are so commercial. He found someone to do what he wanted for a decent price, he finished the story and I did let him know I loved the ring. Funny story, The SO did ask my parents if it was okay to marry me, did they like him well enough to join the family. So they knew he was going to propose to me that evening. My father said "You don't need my permission, you just need my daughter's okay." My mom said to him "Of course you can join the family, we love you and the kids. Kayah can be difficult you know and strong willed." SO tells my mom I know she is strong and full of fire but she's nothing like my demanding ex." I heard that Monday night and laughed so hard. I treat SO like he is a man, he doesn't need me to be all over his case, second guessing him or never giving him comfort or rest from the world like his ex. He's a man I don't need to change him. If you go into a relationship or marriage expecting to change someone that is very bad times. You can only change yourself right? The only thing I won't tolerate is disrespect and fighting. Its one thing to disagree but drag down fighting is very bad and I won't do it. The SO knows this and he knows about my growing up with parents who had knock down drag out fights when my dad was an alcoholic. He is basically the same without the violence and drinking so I limit myself so I don't have flashbacks and get into depressive mode like I used to. Growing up until my late 20's I was angry at life and the world. Somehow I let it go but it can come back to me sometimes at the strangest times. I forgave it all for me and not for him!
I like the deeper fall colours like I said and I didn't have a bouquet I liked when I married the first time so I'll have a smaller one this time surely....
I feel I am doing well with exercise, I could do a little bit better with food, I get enough liquid in and work is going well. My energy level is pretty decent for being an overnighter. The SO works from 730-430 thereabouts so we do have opposite schedules but it does work for us. That is pretty important to a good relationship, we just don't stress the small stuff!
I have a big project I am working on for work, it should run quite a period of time. It has to do with translation and its all I can say about that. When I accepted my position I did so with the caveat of always being discreet and very careful of letting others know about the work we do. I've never ever had issue with that because I am a private person by nature, very introverted. I also help a college professor write a medical textbook. That is another position that requires discretion. I would have liked time to be able to volunteer at the library & animal shelter but that won't happen until next year, I don't want to spread myself thin to the end of the year. Around April of next year I should be able to get into some volunteer work like I would care to add to my life.
The SO wants to get a dog but my cat he's not going to go for it. My cat is just getting used to others being around in the house and he likes the SO, kids and me but he's wary of most people. He came when he was a baby cat, he was a stray with his mom and she went off into the woods and died in Louisiana where I was before. I kept him and he is a very good cat, if you tell him NO firmly he stops what he is doing wrong if he ever does something that would hurt him. He is an indoor/outdoor cat because he isn't happy when he has to stay indoors so I won't deprive him that. Plus he is a wise cat, he is 5 and his breed can live a very long time it seems. If a dog wouldn't bother him so much I wouldn't mind but it would very much bother him so for now I said no dog please. I would love a dog again, he could go on walks with me and be a good watchdog. In the future I said we could do it & he would have to be highly trained and obedient to stay out of the cat's way because he has run of the house. He pretty much goes in and out when he likes to which is mainly at night, since the day is so hot. Plus he was here first. Dogs are much more work than my cat, I know I grew up with 2 German Shepard's and I did most of the work associated with caring for them.
So things are going well and changes are coming and I will do my best to stay on top of me so I stay healthy, strong, happy and good with life~

This is the best adult cartoon that has ever been invented. I remember when I was a child I had to sneak behind my father's back if I wanted to watch this show. This show pushes the envelope like no other show has ever done before. The best part is that southpark is still strong. I had a couple problems with the second disk because it was skipping. I breathed on the disk and then wiped it on my shirt, the disk worked properly after I did that.

Actor Jeremy Piven played hot-tempered power agent Ari Gold on HBO's "Entourage." Now, he's taking on a much more serious role in the new CBS drama, "Wisdom of the Crowd," as a wealthy tech entrepreneur torn to pieces over his daughter's murder.
He believes the wrong man went to prison so he invents a real-time crowd-sourcing application called Sophie to help find her killer.
Piven joined "CBS This Morning" to discuss his new character and how he differs from his Emmy-winning turn as Ari Gold.
"I believe he's an anti-hero," Piven said of his character. "I think that that's an interesting duality in the way that he's singularly focused on figuring out who killed his daughter, and maybe a little selfish in that way."
As a result of the crowd sourcing, other crimes end up being solved which allows the show to also have a procedural element to it.
"I think both my character and I resist that a little bit," Piven said. "But you're going to see that he realizes that people want to do something good in this life, and it's inspiring to him."
Despite the somber premise of the show, Piven said audiences can expect some laughs.
"I think that's the fun that we've been having with it all is finding that balance," he said. "We are going for our laughs."
Piven is perhaps best known for his role as Ari Gold on the HBO series "Entourage." He played the bullish, almost sociopathic Hollywood agent so well, that some were convinced he was like Gold off-screen, too.
"So, you know, do I have the same ideology as Ari Gold did? No. I'm a stage actor from Chicago," Piven said. "I think if you embrace your characters, the first thing you do as an actor is you don't judge your character in any way, shape or form. You can't. Because if you judge them, you're not going to be giving them as much possible depth or integrity as they can, because no one is a devil in their own story, right?"
But now, Piven is happy to play a character who he calls "so incredibly human."
"He's broken. He hasn't dealt with his grief. And I think it's such a fertile premise for a show and for a character that I'm loving it," Piven said.

Well, what they don't blatenly tell you but seems clear if you watch for it is that Anakin uses the force to make Padme fall in love with him. You really start seeing it when she has an opposing view point from him and then all of a sudden changes her mind to reflect his views in some scenes. It would have been better if it were more clear but it is what it is. Which means that his fall to the dark side actually started earlier.
It's not made blatantly clear because it never happened.

But it was my uncle Abraham my mom’s cousin who was about the same age as myself the one who taught me how to play guitar when I was around thirteen.
He passed away only four years after that. By then, I was playing with the school band and in my own project.
I found myself playing and writing more than ever before, my guitar helped me during those difficult times.
Coming to the U.S. was a struggle as most new things are, but also a great adventure.
Because of my age, I could have continued my High School but we needed money so I started working in a warehouse and then as a union laborer as soon as I turned eighteen.
At the same time I was pursuing my music dream, I have meed this amazing guitar player with an extraordinary talent, he could play from flamenco to speed metal and with Luis Marquez, I did my first demos.
Not too long after we meet Ruben Chavez a drummer from Riverside that was into Spanish Rock and Heavy Metal.
I picked up the bass and we began to play at different locations around the IE, OC, and LA as Espuelas Negras.
Around that time, I wrote a few songs two of which I have recently recorded and made part of my new album, those are “Inocente Otra Vez” and “Limbo”.

A teacher in Thailand has been caught on mobile phone giving a smart alec kid a serious beating.
The teacher faces prosecution after mobile phone footage showed him beating a pupil and slamming his head into a whiteboard for forgetting his textbook. According to AP, the video was filmed by another kid in the class on his phone at an exclusive Thai-Chinese secondary school in Bangkok.
Once the class had finished for the day, the amateur video was packed off to the local television stations to be broadcast to the nation. The teacher is shown grabbing the 12-year-old by his throat and hitting him around the head several times.
Apparently the 29-year-old teacher snapped when the boy was rude to him after being told off for failing to bring his schoolbook to class.
Education Minister Jurin Laksanawisit said the teacher had resigned but could still face charges and be forced to stand in the corner of some Thai jail.
Thailand has had a few scandals about video clips of student brawls filmed on mobiles were posted on the Internet. However it looks like this is the first time an adult has been caught by the technology behaving badly.

He didn't refuse to sign with Detroit, his rights were traded to Columbus and he signed with them before free agency started. Might want to be accurate the next time.
If I remember correctly He did make a comment saying he didn't want to play with Detroit. I may be mistaken.
- Greatness=PavelDatsyuk likes this

REPUBLIC of Ireland boss Martin O’Neill has warned his players to beware Sunderland’s Scotland striker Steven Fletcher as they attempt to maintain their Euro 2016 momentum.
The in-form Black Cats frontman could stand between the Republic and their hopes of adding three more points to their qualification fund in Glasgow tonight having finally shaken off the run of injuries which have hampered him in recent seasons.
It was O’Neill who, during his spell as Black Cats manager, paid Wolves £12m for the 27-year-old’s services in August 2012.
And he remains convinced that the 11 goals he scored before joining the casualty list in his first season kept the club in the Premier League.
He said: “Steven is a very good player.
“I signed him for Sunderland and my own view was that his goals were instrumental in keeping the side up, as well as Simon Mignolet’s performances in goal, so the two of them can take great credit for that.
“But he has had a few injury problems – he was injured for Scotland at the back end of that particular season and he has fought his way back, so he is in very good form at the moment.”

The Treash family is F-U-N! And they are also so incredibly loving toward one another, and it it very evident to anyone who encounters their family!
I knew their family photo session would show just how fun and lively they are! You can tell that they love to have a good time and just enjoy being together!
Because it has been over 2 years since I last photographed their family, the kids just look SO grown to me! But they are still just as sweet and adventurous!
This time they even climbed the tree for a few photos in their front yard! Oh to be young and carefree again!
We were able to get their dog in a few photos at the beginning of the session, too! And then he became too uninterested in what we were doing. Haha!

These were the healthiest and best plants I’ve ever purchres I immediacy places another order for more to go into my pond
I probably have to wait til next summer to see if it will bloom
Arrived quickly. Plant is happy
I was pleasantly surprised when I opened the package of pond plants. I took a risk when no place in our area had them in stock with everything going on with the corona virus. I was so happy I tried them. Their plants came so healthy they were all perfect. The water hyacinths were some of the largest I have seen.
Good looking plant with substantial size. This one was the best out of the shipment I received. Can not wait for it to bloom! Thx!!!

Some people think that wriring is a frivolous pursuit, not serious work, and of little value other than entertainment. Last November, however, I had an experience that showed me how useful it is to be the author of a book.
Where I live, in a townhouse in Ottawa, we are frequently pestered by door to door solicitors. It may be someone demanding to see our electrical bill so that they can try to switch us to another provider, or someone trying to get us to subscribe to digital TV, or someone selling chocolate bars. We also get pairs of crusaders from a persistent religious group.
One Friday morning when my husband was at his art workshop, I was at the dining room table, at the window which looks out onto the sidewalk. I was stacking copies of my most recent novel, Spelling Bee, to put them away. Then I spied two women in business attire coming up the walk, and I knew they were from the persistent religious denomination with copies of their two magazines. I couldn't very well pretend to be out, because they'd seen me through the sheer curtain.
Then I was seized with inspiration. I grabbed a copy of Spelling Bee and went to the door, and when they started their pitch, I said I'd be glad to buy copies of their magazines if they would purchase my novel, which costs $22.95. They stepped back, startled. One of them managed to say she didn't want it.
"Then I don't want your material either," I said, and closed the door.
When Roger called me at break time I told him this incident. He went back to the group and shared it with his fellow painters. They too had been bothered by these persistent callers. They laughed and said they were going to write and publish books, too, for self-defence.
So you see, writing a book does have its uses. Incidentally, since November 2009 we have had no more callers from that religious group.

The wagyu burger was out standing, best burger I have had in a very long time. Service was friendly and fast. Will definitely return.
1 - 10 of 70 reviews
Staying at a nearby motel just 250 m away this was convenient and recommended by the motel staff. It was busy both times I went in but the staff were efficient and waiting area good with a paper to read and could buy a glass...More
My wife and I were recently in town and wanted something different for lunch. I had been to Grill'd before on my own and enjoyed the experience. This time my wife joined me and was pleasantly surprised by the variety of burger offerings on the...More
This place is so good and the food tastes great. The restaurant was clean and the servers were fun and friendly. Well done we were all impressed and will be back.
Love Grill'd! We came here for lunch recently and dined in. Love the atmosphere and the retro decor and furniture. Food was delicious and always has been on previous visits. Although it costs more then typical 'take away' it is well worth it. Staff are...More
Wow, just drove by looking for somewhere to eat so was blown away with this place. The menu is burgers, fries, salads and other light dishes. It's a franchise restaurant and was voted best in Asia pacific so does without saying the food was amazing...More
We have had lunch here several times and the consistency of their burgers is excellent. The whole presentation says "fresh". We don't eat burgers on a regular basis but this is our "go to" place when we feel like good quality burgers with fresh ingredients....More
Love going to Grill'd. Although a little pricey for a burger has fantastic options for all dietary needs.

A West Hartford father is accused of causing the death of his newborn daughter when he dropped her Friday, but his attorney said it was a terrible accident.
Grant McAuslan, 34 was arrested and charged with manslaughter and risk of injury to a minor. His attorney said what happened Friday was a terribly tragic accident during a late night bottle feeding that doesn't warrant those charges.
Court documents state that the doctors who saw that baby girl as she passed away believe her injuries would be the result of an act of abuse.
"I would submit that the West Hartford police rushed to judgment in filing these charges against Grant without doing a full thorough and complete investigation," William Paetzold, McAuslan's attorney, said.
Outside Hartford Superior Court Monday, Paetzold stood alongside the mother of that baby and said his client shouldn't be charged.
McAuslan appeared in court Monday. In court documents, investigators said McAuslan and his wife told them that the baby was dropped as her father picked her up from a DockATot they had in their bedroom, and that they called 911 right away. The child was taken to Connecticut Children'sMedical Center where her condition deteriorated rapidly. She had multiple skull fractures, several hemorrhages and evidence of brain injury and swelling.
Doctors told police that they didn't believe the injuries were consistent with an accidental drop from a short distance.
Court documents also say that as investigators were preparing to leave the hospital, McAuslan came up to them and admitted that he had grabbed the baby out of bed with more force than he originally told them, and whipped around as he turned holding the child, causing her to drop harder than what might have been believed.
"Grant is a loving, caring and warm father, family, husband and family man. He would never have done anything like this intentionally. It was simply an awful accident," Paetzold said.
McAuslan is originally from Scotland and holds dual citizenship. The state argued he could be a potential flight risk. His attorney said he has bold of his client's passports and bond was set at $750,000.

Chelsea manager Guus Hiddink admitted his side’s title hopes had been extinguished after the Blues were held to a goalless draw by Everton at Stamford Bridge.
His side are now six points behind Manchester United, who beat Portsmouth 2-0 on Wednesday, having played a game more than the league leaders.
Asked if that was the end of their title hopes, he told Sky Sports: “Totally not but it’s near the end, let’s be honest and face the facts. They (Manchester United) had their win as expected.
“And what we said beforehand – we can not waste any points – which we did tonight and that’s why I think, yes it is finished for us at this moment I think.”
He believed his side did not play intelligently enough against a well organised team.
“We worked hard but we did not work properly in using the width,” he said. “I think they were well organised defensively and they played a good counter to be honest but we did not have the intelligence to break through their massive defence.”
“We worked hard but that was not enough to beat them.”

I had this friend Heather. Kindest person you'd ever meet. She never had a mean feeling toward anyone. She even kept me in line. I could always count on her from keeping my crazy ass from going to far. Kind of gal you could never hurt her feelings, and I always felt she'd be there to save me. She got married a while back, and her stepsons at the time were true terrors. She turned them around, got their grades up, got them out of trouble.
So I hadn't seen her for a while. I went out tonight and ran into some mutual friends. They told be about a month ago she was up in the mountains, and she was doing some rather vigorous work. Anyway that and the altitude and thin air overcame her and she collapsed. No one could revive her. We never thought she'd pass from a weak heart.
So I'm pissed, and had a moment of clarity. Here's this Bucky fag who kills cops, goes on the run and still get's taken in alive. You'd think any cop would ventilate the fucker, but no they gotta be PC. The universe doesn't seem to give a shit, infact they seem entertained by the antics of the criminals. The good ones really do go first.
I'm seriously thinking fuck it, I'll really get away with a rampage right now. The odds are better with the bad guys.

This past week my husband and I attended a conference in a nearby city. We stayed at a hotel where everything was very expensive. First of all, they charged $6 for 10 minutes of computer time. I can hardly crank up my computer and get started in ten minutes! Also, using the wireless connection in our room required a hefty fee for 12 hours. Needless to say, I did without my computer time!
The hotel had no restaurant and room service was exorbitant. Fortunately, my husband and I took our cereal for breakfast. The tiny cartons of milk downstairs were $2 so that was our only expense for breakfast. Fortunately, we had a coffee maker in the room so we made coffee and they also provided tea bags, although I had also packed my favorite tea bags since I do not like coffee. My husband's other meals were covered at the conference but I was on my own for lunch. I scouted out some nearby restaurants and did not spend too much for lunch.
Still trying to be frugal, but I had a wonderful time!
1 day ago

Recent Alum Uses Degree to Start Cooking Business
By: Emily Gielink
DeAnte Shivers received a Bachelor of Arts in Communication (BAC) in May of 2017. He now uses his degree to pursue what he loves: cooking.
Shivers serves as an example of the diversity which is possible in the communication field. Jobs can vary from working in an office, all the way to effectively using communication in the business world.
"Communication definitely taught me how to prepare better, and how to communicate more efficiently," Shivers said.
In July of 2016, while in his last academic year at BGSU, Shivers began his own cooking business, serving homemade meals to the community of Bowling Green. #TriggaMeals started by serving only chicken fried rice and steak fried rice, but Shivers said he is currently working on a new menu. Along with his current menu, he offers daily specials such as Cajun shrimp bake and steak with alfredo and asparagus.
He takes inspiration from his mother, who passed away in March 2016. Shivers was inspired by his family, as both his brother and father are chefs. However, he went to college to expand his horizons beyond Detroit, Michigan, and to make his mother proud.
"She believed in me when I wasn't believing in myself," Shivers said, "and she always told me that success doesn't have a time frame."
Although he left BGSU after his sophomore year, he knew he wanted to make his mother proud. He returned to BGSU a few years later, and continued to pursue his degree. While walking across the stage at graduation, Shivers held a picture of his mother with him.
"My mother told me to finish, no matter what it took, and I kept my promise," he said.
Post-graduation, he has been focusing on his cooking business. He hopes that his communication skills and cooking ability can lead him to owning his own food truck one day.
Shivers encourages current and future students, "Do what's best for you, and don't be quick to give up on it."

I do not fear Hell, for I have been to a Baptist spring pageant.
It all started innocently enough, my advisor Pam offered to take me out to dinner and then to some sort of spring concert that her daughter Lisaís flute teacher was in. Lisa naturally went along too. We had a nice dinner, and I got to see the mall in Fayetteville for the first time. It turns out they have a GAP after all, so I may go there again. Lisa and I have always gotten along well, so everything was peachy.
I should have suspected when I heard the concert was in a church. But still, I thought of the Pilgrims Chamber Ensemble and looked forward to hearing something like that. I was further comforted when the church we were seated in turned out to really look like a theater. There was a nice orchestra and the choir looked proper enough. Then the dancers (it appears that this was a particularly liberal Baptist church) dressed as angels came out, but by then, it was too late to escape.
The audience was then subjected to a pageant that included:
Two hours and fifteen minutes into the production, a man stood up and asked Do you know where you will spend eternity? I was tempted to respond
Apparently, in this theater.
The play involved a man growing up living a virtuous life and going on to heaven, and all the wonders that he would find. These wonders involved chiefly dancing, singing angels and a Jesus who dressed kind of like Liberace. This was a church that used itís disco ball to maximum advantage.
At then end of the show, a woman sitting behind us leaned across the back of the pew and said Young lady? Can I talk to you? My heart and possibly soul were in my throat as I turned around. The woman was talking to Lisa. Whew! That was a close one!
Pam assured the lady that Lisa truly believed that Jesus Christ was her lord and savior. I think Pam swore up and down that he was mine, too before we made it out of there. (Pam would later tell me that she was afraid the lady would talk to me and I would talk right back.) As we walked out of the church, Pam put an arm around each of us and said that we would have a talk about Baptists in the car.
And we did.

Rodriguez was also fined an undisclosed sum. His suspension was scheduled to begin Friday night, but he said he would appeal.
Rodriguez was ejected in the fourth inning of the Tigers' 9-5 loss on July 30 for arguing balls and strikes. He then went chest to chest with umpire Ted Barrett, touching him on the shoulder with his mask.
Manager Alan Trammell tried to break up the argument, and Rodriguez threw his mask before leaving the game. When he returned to the dugout, Rodriguez tossed a bag of balls and his shin guards onto the field.
"It was a pretty serious offense because he was throwing stuff out of the dugout," Barrett said after the game.

Originally Posted by IngaVovchanchyn
Orlando Brown (the player) received $25 million from the NFL after this incident:
At first I was about to be outraged but then I read the story:
"During a December 19, 1999 game against the Jacksonville Jaguars, Brown was accidentally hit in the right eye by a penalty marker weighted with ball bearings thrown by referee Jeff Triplette. Triplette immediately apologized to Brown. Brown was holding his hand to his eye and then went ballistic and shoved Triplette, knocking him to the ground. Brown was ejected from the game and subsequently suspended by the NFL, although the suspension was lifted when his injury did not heal.
"Brown sat out the entire 2000 season waiting for his right eye to heal. The Browns released him after the season. In 2001, he sued the NFL for $200 million in damages. According to reports, he settled for a sum between $15 million and $25 million in 2002.
"Brown spent the 2001 and 2002 seasons in rehab before he was picked back up by the Ravens in 2003."
That ref is lucky he didn't get stomped on too. He fucked up someone's career and risked leaving him permanently injured.

I am really unhappy. I found out that Nassman has been permanently banned because of the way he defended himself against Henry's negativity. I'm sure there will be plenty here that are happy with that decision, and while I respect you Ray, I really do, for being the administrator of this forum that I have been so very very grateful for, I am so very disappointed that Nassman was the sole target of your anger while Henry got no rebuke. Henry came out of the blue, targeted one of Nassman's opinions and distorted it, relentlessly and maliciously stirred things up and kept it going, and Nassman defended himself, as he had a right too. Yes I know Nassman has pissed people off, and in the past he has been aggressive at times and out of line, hell, there's been times when he and I went at it too, but bottom line is that in the past couple of years I have seen a change in him, a change which many wouldn't cut him any slack for, and the prejudice against him was perpetuated by old attitudes. Then when he did flare up once in a while, like any one of us are capable of doing, it was blown totally out of proportion, as if he's the only one that has gotten angry around here. He and Henry have pissed each other off before, and what Henry did to deliberately bait him was shocking and vicious and I am still surprised that ugly thread is here and allowed to thrive. I prefer to keep my angry opinions to myself for the most part, but I can't let this one go without a voice. If anyone wants to come on here to enumerate the reasons why they don't like Nassman, I don't want to hear it because that is NOT the point of this thread. The point is that Henry stirred sh*t up, got Nassman angry, who then defended himself against someone he's gone head to head with in the past, and he paid the price. I wish no malice against you Henry, we both know you have contributed much good here, but you also know you have pissed people off and what you did to stir things up was wrong and you know it.

Aishwarya Rai Bachchan may have missed out on Dostana but she will be seen in Karan Johar's [Images] next production.
"I didn't do Dostana [Images] because I felt it was more about Abhishek Bachchan [Images] and John Abraham [Images]," Ash said at a product launch. "It was supposed to be our first [romantic] film after our wedding, in which I would have ended up with another hero [Bobby Deol [Images]]. I felt it would not give [the right] message.
"Sarkar [Images] Raj was a different kind of role, it was not a romantic story. It was appreciated by people. I felt that this would not be the same case for Dostana," Ash added.
But how did she feel when Abhishek kissed John in the film? "Did you see the film?" Ash asked the journalist concerned. When the journalist replied in the affirmative, Ash asked him if he liked it. When he nodded his head, she said, "That's all that matters. I know people loved it, so it was fine by me."
Photograph: Arun Patil
Email | Print | Get latest news on your desktop

When With-a-Why came home from school today, he dropped his backpack on the floor, went straight to the piano, and played furiously for about half an hour. I could tell that he was thinking about something, working it out in his head.
Finally, he came over to the couch. He is still young enough and small enough to sprawl all over my lap, cuddling into the big pillows.
"Know what animal I don't like the most?" he asked.
I tried to think. He's not afraid of dogs; he likes them. He likes snakes, turtles, frogs, and other marsh creatures. He likes cats. He is fascinated with horses. I tried to think of an animal he had had a negative encounter with, and I couldn't think of anything. I ended up taking some wild guesses. Wasps? Mice? Slime mold?
He shook his head and gave me the answer.
"Humans," he said.
It turns out he and Philosophical Boy were talking on the bus. About war. About people they knew in the military. Philosophical Boy has a cousin who has been to Iraq and back.
"Humans kill each other," said With-a-Why. He seemed astonished to discover this about his own species.
With-a-Why and Philosophical Boy both have logical minds, and I guess they could not find a reason for war. "Well, if two countries wanted a war," With-a-Why said, "they could just use a computer game. You could put in your weapons, the number of people you have, and all that, and even play the game if you wanted. And see who won."
He paused. "That would be pretty easy to do. There really isn't any reason why anyone needs to get killed."
Can't argue with that logic.

We had lunch here on a Saturday. It started out ok, the atmosphere is fine (we sat outside) and they do have an excellent selection of tap beers. The beer arrived promptly, but our food took awhile. Judging from the temperature of the food, it seems it may have been sitting in the kitchen for awhile before we got it. We ordered a Southwestern burger, which the menu describes as having sliced freshly roasted green chilies on it. However, it actually had what appeared to be just canned diced chilies - nothing special and no flavor. Oh, well. The server asked how we wanted the burger done, we ordered it medium, but it was way past that. By the time we saw him again, it was too late to complain. We were hungry, so we ate. We also ordered some sweet potato fries with the burger, which were not bad, but when the order came out, there were 2 orders of fries. We told the person (not the same person that took our order) that we only wanted one, and he said "it was put in as 2" and left. Of course, we were charged for 2 orders of fries. We decided not to make an issue of it, but that's annoying. Next time we are in Cave Creek, we will go somewhere else, unless we just want beer and a Bear's game.
Own or manage this property? Claim your listing for free to respond to reviews, update your profile and much more.

They had now reached the Forte Neuve, by which they entered the town, with many others who were returning from the Plain-palais. As they walked along the Corratorie they met Berthelier and Gabrielle, taking the air, as the afternoon was very fine for the season of the year.
Both the lads saluted; De Marsac with a flush and a beaming smile.
"I did not know you knew them," said Norbert. "Oh yes; did I not tell you I was going to see them? Master Berthelier's sister, Damoiselle Claudine, and I are fast friends. Some years ago when I came here first, a mere child, I was one day in the market, looking about me and buying cherries or the like, when I saw this poor damoiselle being frightened half out of her senses by a group of angry, scolding fish-women. That was before such good order was put in the market, and in all the town, thanks to Master Calvin. She had told them, quite truly, that they were trying to cheat her. I fought her battle with all my might, which in truth was not great, and at last brought her home in triumph. She was much more grateful than the occasion required, and has been my very good friend ever since. I — they — they are all good to me, though lately, being much occupied with my studies, I have seen them but seldom."
"Do you not think the young damoiselle very pretty?" asked Norbert. "I do."
"She is beautiful," Louis answered quietly; and the subject dropped.
Deborah Alcock (1825–1913) is best known as the author of historical fiction on religious themes.She was born in Kilkenny, where her father, the Venerable John Alcock, became Archdeacon of Waterford. Unmarried, she lived with her father writing a memoir of him on his death. Her work The Spanish Brothers, published in 1870, was set in the 16th century and was a tale of Protestant martyrdom. Other work includes The Czar (1882), set during the French invasion of Russia; and Archie’s Chances (1886).

Prem, who became popular with his directorial movies before turning actor, seems to be very serious about his acting career. He has not given nod for any movie to direct in the recent past rather he has accepted a few projects as an actor.
The director-turned-actor made his acting debut in Preethi Yeke Bhoomi Melede in 2008. His first movie as an actor was a dud at Box Office. The failure made him to concentrate on his directorial career.
However, he was approached to act in the movie titled Prem Adda, which was a remake of the Tamil film Subramaniapuram, in 2012. The movie managed to win decent response for him. Eventually he was offered a few movies to act.
Currently, he is busy with Dasavala, which features Akshara Menon in the female lead role. He will be seen in the role of a tourist guide in the film. The upcoming movie is directed by MS Ramesh.
Meanwhile, Prem has given a nod to act in yet another movie. The director-turned-actor, who worked with Mahesh Babu in Prem Adda, is joining hands with the same director again. The movie is titled My Name Is Byre Gowda, the original name of Prem. It will take off next month.
With this development, he is unlikely to director a movie in the near future and his proposed project with Sudeep has also been postponed.

Hey Everyone!So this week was not easy by any means. The work really did not progress as we had hoped and we fell much lower on the lesson spectrum then we were shooting for. When Weekly Planning came around, I kind of snapped! I kind of took my ADD and harnassed it and used it to make on of the most effective weekly planning's I've had. I just erased my white board and just went through each Key Indicator getting names. We haven't had an investigator at church for awhile. So I took one girl and just told my companion, "I don't care if anyone does not come to church. But this Girl! We are going to do everything we can to get her to come!" So, we are gonna see how it goes!

/!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd">
Chelsea was a friend of the family, more or less... Her mom and my mom were long time friends. I remember her as a girl. Im 10 years older than her, so she was always a girl to me. I was 18 when i met her. Thats about all I remember about Chelsea, as a girl...
Not long ago, we had a family get together at my mothers house. It had been a while since I'd been out there and it brought back some old memories. I was really paying attention to my mom at the moment when she asked me if I remembered Chelsea. Yes, I did... but i didnt see any girls around. Then I noticed the little blonde on the porch. Her tits were ready to rip out of her shirt!
"Hey!," she smiled..."It's been a while."
I felt my cock stiffen as it pressed up against her. She was all grown up...
i guess I could have just taken her to the mall and dropped her off the next day. I didnt have to shop with her. But, she seemed excited and asked me to go with her. So, why not? Saved me the trip of picking her up later.
"What are you shopping for?" I asked
"Clothes and stuff." she answered.
Perhaps I was weakened from following behind her through the store. Her perfect tone little as was playing peekaboo with me from under her skirt. After waiting for her to use the changing room, i was dismayed when she opened the door and was wearing the same skirt.
"You didnt change!" I laughed.
Thats when she smiled, "OH?" and lifted up her skirt to show me the panties she had slipped on.
"you're not supposd to try on the underwear!" I said.
"Oh, well...Fuck em" She giggled.
I guess I could have loaned her some cash, but I didnt realize she had no money with her!
"Oh, my god," she squealed, "I need these heels!"
I probably should have marched her out of there and taken her home then. There was no reason to try on more clothes. when she asked me to help her with a button, I should have had her exit the changing room.
I let her suck my dick anyway... She was good too. took it all in her mouth, eagerly sucking away. When she said she would suck dick for those heels, I thought she was speaking figurativley. Now here she was, on her knees, sucking my dick , in the changing room, in the mall, and i let it happen. I could have just bought them for her, but when she grabbed my cock and looked me in the eye and said, " How about I suck on your cock and earn those heels?"
I went on ahead and let her earn them. I didnt have to thrust my hips forward and fuck her mouth, but I did. I grabbed ahold of her pretty head and forced her mouth down on my cock. I made sure she knew when I was going to come, so she could swallow it all, which she did.
Thats how it started...
Comments for Chelsea
Submit a comment
No comments added yet

Cop calls: Man charged after making threat with gun
The following incidents were listed by police in recent reports obtained through public records requests. The News-Messenger does not publish the names of suspects charged with misdemeanor offenses.
July 16: Two women came to the police station to report an ex-boyfriend violating a protection order. A neighbor to the complainant reported seeing the male on Circle Drive and driving slowly by the other woman's residence in violation of the protection order. The neighbor took a photo of the truck through a screen window. The victim reported she was having issues with the ex-boyfriend. Police spoke then to the suspect, who reported he was driving on Circle Drive to pick up furniture left at the curb at a friend's residence, but he could not could not produce a phone number for the friend. He was informed to stay off the street. Police then checked and to pick up items he would not need to pass the ex-girlfriend's house. Police turned the report over to the city prosecutor for possible charges.
July 17: Police received a trouble call at a Mosser Drive residence where a man was reported to have a gun to his head. Police spoke to a woman there, who had been in contact with the suspect's girlfriend. She did not know where the man was. Police found the apartment and the girlfriend, who was hysterical and said the boyfriend had left. She did not know if he had a gun with him. She said the two had been in an argument and he began breaking items. He had been drinking and threatened to push her down the stairs.
The woman would not say if he had a gun, but police spoke to the man's mother, who also reported the girlfriend had said she had seen the man put a gun to his head and stated "Do you want this?" Police could not find the suspect. The girlfriend told police she was afraid the suspect would kill her. Police noticed the girl had scratches to the chest and a swollen area on the right side of her forehead. She could not remember how she was injured. EMS responded and transferred her to the hospital. Police noted the woman was pregnant. The woman was going to stay with a friend for the night but refused a protection order. Police later found the suspect and placed him under arrest for domestic violence although he denied having physical contact with the victim or making threats. He was transported to jail.
July 18: Police responded to the 1000 block of Court Street. Residents reported a woman who had just called police, looking for her daughter, was now at the Court Street address. The male resident reported he had been at a restaurant when the woman called him and also his wife. He said the suspect threatened to kill him and blamed him for having her father killed. The man also received text messages from family members whom the woman had contacted, telling them this woman was going to kill everyone in the family. The man said the suspect came to his daughter's residence and walked inside. Police spoke to the daughter, who said she was putting her make up on and turned around to find the suspect in her apartment without being let in. The man said he wanted charges. Police transported the suspect to the emergency room for evaluation. She was charged with domestic menacing and taken to jail.
July 18: Police responded to the 300 block of Garrison. Three people were at the location. A woman reportedly broke up with a man, who then sent her a Facebook message "And y'all should find a new tire." The group went outside to find the Hyundai the woman was driving had a flat tire, which was possibly punctured. The car was owned by the woman's father, who wanted charges. Police checked the area for the suspect. Police later found the man at an apartment on Garrison Street and he admitted to damaging the tire and agreed to pay for it. The male had also posted "I'm dead anyways" in a text and police had him go to the hospital for evaluation. Later he was charged released to a friend. Police forwarded a report to the prosecutor for a possible charge of criminal mischief.
July 20: Police responded to Buchanan Street for a juvenile complaint. A woman called police highly upset with her teen daughter. The woman said her daughter was walking west on the bike trail. The mother told police she received a video of her daughter having sex with a 15-year-old boy. She went to retrieve her daughter. She said she got the daughter into the car and then the girl got out. When she grabbed her daughter, the teen started punching her. The mother took off her belt and spanked the teen. The mother did not have any visible injuries, police noted.
Another officer spoke to the daughter. She reported her mother retrieved her out of a residence at Delaware Acres and was calling her names in the car. When she tried to get out, her mother grabbed her by the hair and choked her in the car. She broke free from the mother, but she grabbed her ear so she punched back. She said that was when her mother hit her with the belt. The girl said she broke away and then began walking west on the bike trail. The teen had scratches and a laceration on her ear. EMS arrived to evaluate the teen's injuries and determined she needed stitches. The mother was arrested for domestic violence and when police attempted to cuff her she pulled away, yelling for her daughter. The woman was transported to jail. Police contacted Judge Brad Smith, who released the juvenile to her grandmother so the girl could be taken to the hospital for treatment. Domestic violence charges will be forwarded on the teen to the juvenile prosecutor and a report forwarded to children's services.
July 21: Police responded for a trouble call to the 1500 block of North Street. Police arrested a 37-year-old man on a charge of aggravated menacing. The man police arrested originally called to report an issue at the apartment complex. When officers arrived they found three people outside in their vehicles but not the caller. The three and the caller had been involved in an earlier incident and a female was waiting for the man to give her her keys back. The caller then arrived and made comments about shooting one of the three people waiting with police. After he refused to stop making threats, he was arrested. Police noted he was intoxicated. He was transported to jail.
July 22: Police received a report of a suspicious person in the 100 block of North Monroe Street. A man there reported another man with a backpack was kicked out of the bar and was walking outside. When police arrived, the suspect had left the area. The complainant reported the suspect may be under the influence of drugs. Police found the suspect, who had an active warrant out of the Tiffin-Fostoria Municipal Court. He was arrested and released to Fostoria police. The man was in possession of a bag of marijuana, plastic straw and pipe, which were seized and placed in to evidence.
July 22: Police were called to Walsh Park for vandalism to the fountain. Concrete was broken and graffiti was spray-painted on the water fountain.
July 22: Police were called to the 1200 block of Oak Harbor Road for a forgery complaint. A man at the drive-thru reported the bank was holding his payroll check and identification. The man was on foot. Inside, a bank staffer reported the check for more than $2,000 was fraudulent. The employee told police she had contacted the business on the check and the man trying to cash it did not work for them. Police directly contacted the company, which reported the check was a fraud. Police placed the suspect under arrest. He then admitted he knew the check was fraudulent. He was booked. He was charged with forgery and obstruction of justice and taken to jail.

Carol Lynn “Carrie” Royce, 57, of White House passed away Sunday, February 27th at her home. Born June 19, 1964, in Miami, Florida, Carrie was the daughter of Judith Miller and the late Donald Royce. She was raised and educated in Florida where she had also attended Broward College. Carrie was a very giving and selfless individual. She had a “heart of gold” and was always helping others. She enjoyed music, especially punk rock and rock and roll. She was a loving homemaker and mom who also adored her dogs. Carrie moved to White House four years ago after having met her fiancé, Rodney Yarka while he was working in Florida. She is survived by her daughter, Miranda Garcia; as well as her fiancé Rodney. A visitation in celebration of her life will be held at Cole & Garrett Funeral Home, Goodlettsville, TN on Friday, March 4th from 4 until 6 PM.

Seems like a lot of applique in this quilt, which is not really my thing, but I'm determined to stay focused. I'm piecing the blocks as much as possible and appliqueing as little as possible, which is still a lot for me. .
I'm enjoying it though. Especially when the days are sunny and staying light longer.

In February I had a concerned mother contact me about her toddler with extreme constipation. The little guy was suffering terribly, and so was the mother in trying to find ways for him to be more comfortable. We did several Skype consultations beginning in February and after an initial remedy were able to find a long lasting solution and he has been doing great since.
Constipation is painful and unpleasant
Anyone is technically constipated if they don't pass stools once, or more than once, per day, and the average person goes every day or every other day. In cases of extreme constipation there is also pain and very large, hard stools. This little guy of barely 3 years was having a terrible time and only passing stools every 7 to 10 days! His stools when they did pass were very large or hard and had a terrible smell. It was extremely painful so the little guy was developing trauma and many fears about going. He was fidgety, whiny and clingy and super active or wanting to nurse just before going and could only really go if he was standing up or moving, so getting him to go to the bathroom was becoming a big ordeal that took a lot of time and effort on the mom's part.
The doctors suggested he may have a sluggish bowel syndrome and his mother was trying several medications such as Restorolax and Glycerin suppositories to help him go. As well she had tried several homeopathic remedies and cell salts over the fall and winter. Basically everything that after our first session I would have recommended she had already tried and nothing worked or if it did, not for long. This included Phosphorus which I felt was the child's most prominent constitutional type.
Exploration, a foundation of the case taking session
We explored the mother's experience while pregnant and giving birth as this makes a strong impression on the child for the first 4 to 7 years, as well as diet and other symptoms that occur along with the constipation and in general. We also explored as much as possible his experience of constipation and of his general nature. This is limited since I can't really ask him much and was, along with his mother, only able to observe him. He is an only child and during the first period of his life, including gestation, his mother was constantly moving from apartment to apartment, almost every month. Once he became mobile it was important to make each new place safe and adapt the environment to the little toddler's needs. They had been more settled for almost a year which was helping. Whenever they came back home he would immediately want to nurse and had always been very avid about being nursed. I asked about his play and what he preferred to do. He either wanted to play monsters and be loud, destructive, powerful and scary and would like to hit things. This game involved a lot of chasing. Or he liked to play babies and be soft and cuddly and take care of each other.
When playing with other kids he liked to be the centre of attention, a leader, telling others what to do, was very extroverted and could even be pushy sometimes. He would like to take care of his mother when she was unwell, he would say that he could make her calm or happy. The mother found that he was very sensitive to noises. He liked to be home, to be warm and could be very grumpy in the morning if the mother was not there when he woke up. He was also likely to get very sad, as if he was misunderstood, if he was scolded or reprimanded and did not like when others went faster than his rhythm, he would get stressed and angry at this. There were some main physical symptoms as well such as having a very hot head and sweating before falling asleep on his head and neck. He also had had dental surgery for several dental cavities and cradle cap which smelled sour. The dental procedure was addressed separately with several remedies for the bruising, anesthesia and for the mom's anxiety for her son.
The first remedy selection
In March, we decided to try Silicea 30c for a period of time as it fit the symptoms we had been able to explore so far. After a month things were improving but the laxatives were still required, although less often and when they stopped working she stopped using them altogether. In the follow up I could see there was less of a need to be comforted, he was more independent and happier and passing stool was more comfortable. This was what we had hoped to see as a good sign of general improvement, more independence and a movement of separation from his mother, although he was still dependent on the nursing. After a couple of months he was able to go a little every day, although only when he was sleeping, and this indicated there was less trauma about going. At this point he was starting to nurse less often and be less 'sticky' to mom and they were able to be more relaxed and to get out of the house more. The mom started to look much better as well I noticed! In playing with other kids, he was less pushy, not needing to lead so much, and was less emotional about not getting his way, and he could play on his own as well more.
A deeper sense of spooky
In May, I did another long follow up and was happy to be able to learn more about the little guy's inner world and some of his specific physical symptoms were more clear as well. He had had a nasty stomach bug and although by then he could pass stools while awake also, since the bug he was going less often again. The clinginess returned and there were tantrums if either parent left him. It was really important to him that they all stay together. His mother tried a few homeopathic remedies during the illness, and went back to using the laxatives. He was anxious, crying and had insomnia related to daycare, he would cry for a half hour if he had to go there and this was new. He needed to be physically close and would scream, "I need mommy."
We then explored his play again which revealed a fuller picture of his obsession with scary things. He was fascinated by zombies, monsters, Scooby-Doo, vampires and with running away and hiding. I could chat with him a little more via the computer connection this time and there was something about hearing him describe these things that was a bit creepy so I could consider as unusual and important to his uniqueness. In his play he would vacillate between being scary to being a cute cuddly cat that needed to be petted and to get loving attention, then to wanting to eat his mom and being a big T-Rex that roars. And again, when he played with other kids his favourite thing was to be chased, and this now had a context. He was re-enacting the scary game with them about monsters, fear and running away to hide and be safe.
A second remedy selection
So this time I was able to really see the little guy and feel into his inner experience in a more global way. I found a spider remedy that normally would not be considered for constipation issues:
Rectum: Inactivity, constipation, difficult stool, as from constriction in rectum
Stool: Black, forcible like an explosion, with perspiration.
But also covered the other main physical symptoms:
Generals: Chilly but heat flushes, sweaty face.
Extremes of tension, spasticity, constriction and prostration.
Cramp like unbearable pains, coming and going in waves like labour pains, worse with motion. Yet patient is so restless that he cannot lie still.
And also the personality traits he expresses:
Spider themes: Cunning, plotting. Active, hurried, restless. Hysterical, complaining. Stinging pains. Chilly. Extreme sensitivity.
Type of attack: Caught and trapped; deceit; cunning; impulsive, violence; sudden fear of death; kill and hide.
And his obsession with monsters which is when I was really certain this might be a great remedy fit for the little guy:
AFADH: Themes of mastering the environment; manipulation; vibration; provocation; monsters; powerful and wild animals. Fear of imminent death.
I can't know for sure but his need to be home, to be with his parents, and to care for them could be related to the theme of outcast from the proving:
Proving of Latrodectus: being an outcast, one who is suddenly rejected by the group; a psychic sensitivity in general and specific sensitivity to danger.
He took this remedy once at the beginning of June and I heard back from the mom in September. No news is good news in this field! The remedy was a deeper core match than any of the previous remedies and in the words of his mom, he has really flourished! He was able to go on the potty and on a regular basis three weeks after taking the remedy. He was doing well all summer and is a totally new person since the weight and unease had lifted. If he was to regress slightly, which would be normal, the mom could re-dose to continue the healing process and that might be all he needs, 2 doses of a well chosen core remedy. Welcome to the mysterious and sometimes spooky world of homeopathy.
How does holistic treatment support healthy living? Why try homeopathy? Having a life long study in the principles of nature and healthy living, Lauren Trimble is happy to share her knowledge and experience. The art of retuning the body’s natural healing capacity & developing consciousness in a compassionate and gentle way is the gift that homeopathy brings to her current holistic practice. If you enjoyed this article find out more at Birdsong.
Subscribe to the Birdsong Blog on WordPress. Just click on the Sign me up button.
Like me on Facebook for updates and more info.

Magna was born in 1965. As you can see from the photo, his tusks are barely more than broken stumps. So you would think that he would be safe from poachers. Unfortunately, you would be wrong.
In 2010, just outside Amboseli National Park, near the Tanzanian border, he was killed by poachers. His meagre tusks hacked out of his skull as bounty. If Magna was killed for tusks this size, then really, no elephant is safe any more. When ivory is selling for as much as $5000 a kilo in the Far East, even tusks such as Magna’s made him a target for the poachers. If this rate of killing were to continue, there won’t be much left within just a couple of years.
Photo credit and text: Big Life Foundation

Well, Sam and I had it out last week. It ended up with me staying at J's house with the kids and him eventually going back to the barracks so the kids and I could go back to at least some sort of normalcy.
In a way, I'm sort of glad this has happened. In a way! It gives us fresh eyes into what has really been going on in our marriage while we are so busy with kids, school, Boy Scouts, Girl Scouts, work, doctors appointments, and just life in general! We weren't making time for each other, we were letting life come between us and it almost ripped us apart! He has been staying here for the last couple days and things have been pretty good. We have been in one, for lack of better word, argument. We talked it out, went back to bed, and I even let him sleep in the net day because I kept him up way too late!
We are going to be going to a marriage counselor to try and work things out and become a stronger couple, not only for ourselves, but, for our kids (yes, even tho they are only mine biologically, they're his too), and for our future. We are both committed to this relationship, and neither of us took off our rings. I did say that I wanted a divorce, but at the time, I was very angry. Neither of us feel like that now, and are on the way back to a happier life.

The young actress Violet Summers was born in Phoenix, Arizona, and grew up in Texas. She was very active as a child, and often played sports. She is popular with fans for her strong bod, and is currently pursuing her acting career. Her fans love her for her positive attitude and beautiful looks. In addition to her modeling career, she has many other passions, including collecting sneakers and tacos. You can follow her on Instagram to keep up with her latest work.
Table of Contents
Violet Summers Biography
Although Summers is still a teenager, she has not dated any other well-known showbiz celebrities. Violet Summer may be too young to date and wait for a boyfriend to approach her. The fans of Summer are thrilled to see her happy. Her net worth is unknown, but her career as a model and actress has earned her much recognition. Here are some of her best photos from her photo-shoots. While her parents had moved from Texas to Los Angeles, they made the decision to make it their home instead of the other way around.
Violet Summers Family
She has a sister and brother, but has not released any information on her family’s background. Her older sister, Riley, is an American national, and holds the same identity as her mother. As for her education, Summers was active in sports in elementary school and played tennis and soccer. She has been a part of several ad campaigns and has more than ten million followers on Instagram. Her career has been largely unremarkable, and she is constantly in the spotlight.
Although she has no formal training in acting, she has always acted confidently. She has worked for several recognized brands and has been able to secure many lucrative gigs. As she continues to build her following on social media, her popularity has increased exponentially. She has earned over $700k and is steadily rising. Just like her parents, Violet is constantly in the limelight. There are no salaries and assets for the actress, and her net worth is increasing every day.
Violet Summers is a famous American actress who has achieved success in her career. She has a cult following on Instagram. Despite her fame, she has not posted anything on her social media accounts. But despite this, she has one confirmed relationship, which is not surprising. She works as an engineer for Intel Corporation. If you want to know more about her personal life, check out her personal and professional accounts on social media. These are just a few of the things she likes to post on her Instagram.
As a young girl, Violet had two boyfriends. Her first boyfriend was a boxer, and she dated him for six months. She was single for only two weeks before she met her first girlfriend. After her first breakup, she realized that she was attracted to girls, and began dating them. She was just seventeen years old when she had her first girlfriend, and she has never looked back since. But she is currently studying her sexuality and wants to explore her religion.
The teen actress has been single for a long time. Her age and sex life are very much linked and she has not had a serious relationship. She has been in several movies, and has a large following on Instagram. Even though she is a single celebrity, she still has a lot of fans and has a great ‘life’. If you want to know more about her, check out her website and follow her on social media.
Besides modeling, Violet is a social media star with millions of followers. Her naughty Instagram pictures have earned her a lot of attention. She is also known as a Penthouse Pet. If you are looking for the naughty girl of your dreams, you are likely to find her on Instagram. The sexy teen has a curvy, shimmering body and is very attractive to men.
Violet Summers Is Social Media Influencer
Aside from modeling, Violet Summers is a popular social media influencer. She has a great command of the English language and knows how to write a good essay. She loves singing and listening to music. Any song that sounds pleasant to her can get her pumped up. Despite her age, she is still single but has gained a large fan base. She has been spotted in many different publications and on the cover of various magazines.
You may also like – Girls Dp

Laurie Smith is a Porn Star. She was born on November 4, 1957. She is listed on FreeOnes since 2006 and is currently ranked 10326th place. She currently has 11 gallery links in her own FreeOnes section.
Our records show that Laurie Smith status is currently unknown which means we are unaware if she is making movies, doing live shows and/or doing photo shoots at this time. If you happen to know what she has been up to let us know.

Tulsa Police said a man is in the hospital after someone shot him in the back near Pine and Harvard Monday morning, December 9. Police said the man was shot after calling another man a racial slur, and this isn't the first time something like this has happened to him.
Officers said the victim was walking home near Pine and Harvard around 1:30 a.m. when a man shot him in the lower back. Police said the victim was able to walk home where his girlfriend called police.
Police said the victim told them he was walking home when he ran into another man. Officers said the victim made some sort of racial comment, and that's when the other man pulled out a gun and shot him.
Tulsa Police said they don't think the two men knew each other, but officers later learned the victim had been stabbed before for making similar comments. Officers said the victim is expected to be OK.
Right now police are still looking for the shooter.

Hi - My wife moved out of our flat in august and moved into her friend's house. She said I made it impossible for her to live with me because i didn't talk enough about important issues. The flat is shared ownership, we own 50% of it (no mortgage) and pay rent on the other 50%.
When the rent became due she said that she couldn't afford to pay for both our flat and her friend's house and asked me to contribute. She said she was paying £50 per week to her friend, and our rent is £400 per month each. She asked me to pay her £250 per month. Initially I agreed as I felt I didn't have much option and me paying some extra was ok in the short term to put some breathing space between us.
She says that the £250 is to contribute to her rent for our flat as she is not currently living there. She currently does not have a job but plans to have one in January. I have just told her that i dont want to pay this amount anymore as i don't think it is fair. I said i was willing to meet her halfway and pay £100 per month. She went ballistic.
We don't have any children. Do I have any more rights over her with regard to the flat which we both jointly pay rent for as she has moved out and is only paying a contribution?
Both our names are currently on the deeds. Are there any obvious legal issues with the current situation that I should be aware of?
thanks for any advice, i hope i'm making sense, i'm a bit of a mess at the moment
Just pay the rent/mortgage on the flat you both own and you live in and stop paying her this additional money. She decided to move out, you didn't force her to leave and legally she is free to move back in if she cannot find anywhere else to live.
The other issue is and this is longer-term but if you keep paying her money as well as paying the rent/mortgage on your own place then the court, if it ends up like that, will assume you can afford to keep doing this and potentially put in place a spousal maintenance order to that effect.
You post is confusing. Are you giving money to your wife or is it that the rent is £800 per month and you consider that you are each liable for £400?
You post reads as if you may be paying £250 towards your "wife's half" and so in effect she is paying £150 towards a house she isn't living in and you have full use of. You're not happy with this and now you want her to pay £300 and you'll only pay £100 towards "her half". Is this the case?
If so then you need to remember that you aren't each responsible for half of the rent you are both responsible for all of it.
Usual rule of thumb is whoever stays and has sole use pays the full costs. The landlord can pursue either, or both, of you for full payment but will usually concentrate their efforts where they are most likely to get a result. If your wife isn't working it is you they will pursue for all of the money.
If my interpretation of your post is incorrect post more details as the other contributors replying seem to have interpreted it as you are paying the full rent plus giving your wife money towards her own rent and living expenses.
I guess it could be seen as both ways. I am currently paying an extra £250 into our joint account which is covering £250 of the £400 she should be paying for her share of the rent, she is paying £150. It could also be seen as i am paying that £250 to help her out with the extra costs she has decided to incur by moving out and paying extra rent to her friend.
I can afford to pay it, I have a regular job, but it was pissing me off that she said she couldn't afford to rent both places when I know she has considerably more money than me in the bank
I'm not happy with it and all friends and family that I have spoken to about this situation have said 'don't pay it, she moved out' but I don't think it's as simple as that. I raised the issue with her yesterday, after I'd posted this, and the situation deteriorated rapidly to say the least. So in order to try and keep things remotely amicable, and to keep myself from slipping into some every dark places, I've said i'm going to pay it for the time being.
What you need to remember though is that if you don't pay it then it is you, as the person with the greater income, that will be chased for the arrears and you that will be inconvenienced if the house is repossessed and your credit rating that will be destroyed.
The rule of thumb is that whoever stays in the FMH meets all the costs as they have sole use of it.
You haven't signed up to be responsible for half of the rent each. You are both jointly and severally responsible for the full payment.
Why do you feel she should be paying towards the rent when she doesn't live there and has her own housing costs?

I just recently returned from burying my mother. Oh, yes, she’s dead. She passed on September 10, 2015, five days after my birthday, at the age of 90 years and 9 months. Due to her age and physical condition, her death was not unexpected. For some time now, Mother had been suffering from various ailments–diabetes, kidney trouble and anemia, among them, but she always remained in good spirits. I don’t feel at all sad, because my mom was ready to go. She didn’t have anything to live for anymore. For the last few years she was confined to a hospital/hospice/nursing home facility, where she received around-the-clock care. She could no longer walk or go anywhere on her own or do anything. She was basically only existing.
That last year Ma succumbed to dementia, and became increasingly disoriented and confused. She still knew me and my siblings and her grandchildren, but her memory was short-term at best. She would repeat herself often, not realizing that she just told me that a moment ago. So since she had already resigned herself to her passing, we all accepted it as well. She led a good, long life, and I have no regrets or unfinished business with her. The last time we spoke on the phone, only a few days before she died, and every other time that we spoke, we both said “I love you” to each other.
My mother, Jeannette Agnes Wilson-Poston Amos Townsend McNeill, lived in South Bend, Indiana her entire life and even lived in the same house for 80 of those years. Mother grew up as an only child, but a while long ago discovered that she had a half-sister living right in town with her, my Aunt Betty, and a half-brother, whom neither of us ever met, from their common father, Willard Wilson. She and Betty even used to play together as children, not knowing, at the time, that they were sisters!
For some time Mother had known that she was adopted but had not been told the specific circumstances, until a niece of her birth mother contacted her some years ago and filled in most of the details. It turns out that my real grandmother, Muriel Piatt Poston Williams Crew, was only 15-years-old when she gave birth to my mother in 1924, and against her own wishes, her parents would not let her keep her baby.
How is this for hypocrisy? Muriel’s grandmother was a German white woman who apparently had mated with a black man, and being the times and all (the 1860s), even though it was the North, they never married, but the mother got to keep her child anyway. So along comes my mother also born out of wedlock, and Granny insisted that the baby be put up for adoption, to avoid another scandal in the family, I suppose. She even sent the pregnant Muriel from her home in Ohio to stay with Muriel’s older sister in Niles, Michigan while she had her baby. Then the family arranged a direct adoption with the Amoses, and for years nobody, especially my mother, was the wiser.
She once suspected that she was at least “Papa” Amos’ real daughter by another woman other than his wife, but she couldn’t verify it. When she did confront him once years ago with her adoption suspicions, he flatly denied it. So she just let it go and didn’t pursue it. Up until the day he died, Papa never confessed to my mother the real truth of her origin.
Muriel herself, after she got grown and was living in South Bend, did not ever try to contact my mother, even though she knew who she was and where she lived. We learned later that Granny would sometimes observe Mother from a distance when she was at church or on the street somewhere, but she never revealed herself to her. Grandmother Muriel was married twice (her first husband was the father of a friend and colleague of mine!), and we learned that she had another child while still a teenager, but it didn’t live long.
It was originally reported that Muriel died in 1964 of untreated diabetes at the ripe, young age of 54. I have since learned, however, that Granny fell in her kitchen one day and banged her head on a counter as she went down. So it was probably the resulting concussion she received that killed her. She did have brothers and sisters however, so now I have a whole slew of resultant cousins whom neither my mother nor any of us knew anything about, living in South Bend, Niles and the Cleveland area. Mother eventually found out that some people in town whom she had known all her life turned out to be our cousins! She really regretted not knowing her mother while she was alive. At this time we know nothing about the family of my mother’s birth father.
By the late ‘90s the neighborhood, where we kids grew up as well, became rather rundown and unsafe, so Mother moved into a seniors-occupied apartment complex in another part of town. This was the first and only time that she lived alone. Before then she was always with her parents, children or husband. She loved having her own place while it lasted. But then she got too sick to care for herself and had to be confined to the hospital, where she lived out her remaining few years.
Jenny was a dear, sweet woman who was kind, always cheerful, honest, out-spoken, friendly and cordial and well-liked by everyone. She didn’t know any strangers. When she visited me in NYC, she’d be talking to people on the street and in restaurants like she’s known them forever. I would tell her, “Mama, you don’t know those people. Why are you telling them all your business…and mine!?” But that’s how she was. She just liked people.
In her younger years, Mama worked at various jobs, including elevator operator, busgirl at a restaurant and housemaid. When she dropped out of high school at the end of her junior year, her only option, in lieu of marriage, was to go to work. She worked at Bike-Webb, a factory that made elastic garments and as a seamstress at Wilson Brothers clothing factory for several years. She next was a school crossing-guard for 20 years, until she retired for good in 1981. She also moonlighted as an undertaker’s assistant, but only as a sort of hostess and guide; she didn’t have to deal with corpse preparation. She attended the wakes and funerals, greeting and comforting the loved ones of the “dearly departed,” rendered a vocal solo when it was requested, and even drove the hearse occasionally.
Although Mother was an accomplished and talented singer in her own right, she never pursued a professional career with her singing. So she lived vicariously through my musical endeavors. When she was still a teenager, however, a man who was with a traveling dance band heard Mama singing one day and offered her a job with his band. Of course, her parents would not let her go with them. She was too young, and they weren’t going to relinquish their child to a bunch of errant strangers. I suppose I shouldn’t regret that she did not run off with that band so many years ago, for if she had, her life would have taken another path, she most likely would have not met my father, and I would never have been born. So you see, everything happens for a reason.
Mama did sing in her church choir for most of her life (and I along with her and my grandfather as well, until I left home), did solo work and even occasional recitals. For a while she directed our church’s youth choir, and of which I was also a member. As a young woman, Mother was a regular member of the H.T. Burleigh Company, a local theatrical troupe that produced musicals and even operas. When I was only twelve, I appeared in my first Carmen with the Company, as part of the children soldiers’ chorus in Act One.
I had a special relationship with my mother. She was my pal, my buddy, my best female friend. In fact, she called me Buddy. That’s been my nickname all my life. One of my earliest memories was that I was a “Mama’s boy,” and I remember following her around the house like a shadow. It’s a wonder that I became so independent as I am now. But knowing that I would be on my own someday, I learned how to fend for myself. I can cook, iron, sew and do my own laundry. Even when I left home temporarily and then for good, my mother and I regularly corresponded with cards, letters and phone calls. We wrote each other when I was stationed in Okinawa for 17 months. Even while on my cruises with the Vagabonds, I would call her when I got the chance. No matter where I happened to be in the world, we always kept in touch. I think that is what I am going to miss the most–our phone conversations. Hearing my voice always made her day. And I always had to end the calls; she would keep me on the phone all day if I let her.
Some of our common interests were our love of records, movies, music and singing. Mama must have instilled those aspects and talent in me as well. She told me that she sang the whole time that she was pregnant with me. I always acknowledged Mother’s Day and her Christmas birthday (Dec. 23) with a gift and a card. Typical gifts were cash (she could always use that!), recordings (my own, especially) or inexpensive jewelry items. She loved cheap jewelry, like earrings and brooches and such. She was not a flower person. I’m not either. What purpose do they serve? She preferred things which have a practical function, as do I.
When Mother turned 80, in December 2004, to celebrate this milestone, the family decided to throw her a surprise birthday party at my sister’s house the day after Christmas. She had been hinting around for the whole year that she wanted a party. She appeared to be genuinely surprised. But the bigger surprise was my being there. I didn’t tell her that I was coming. Mama knew that I am always busy at Christmastime every year with singing gigs. In fact, I had not been back in South Bend at Christmas in 20 years! That was when she turned 60. So she did not expect to see me at all. She was quite taken aback but delighted to no end when I came out of hiding and walked into the room where everybody was.
I had the foresight to throw Mother another surprise 90th birthday party the summer before she died, when I was in South Bend for a family reunion (my father’s family). As it turned out, it was good that we did it then, because she never made it to 91. It was the last time that she got to see me, as well as some family members and mutual friends. Besides the four of us, there are six grandchildren and seven (or is it 8?) great-grandchildren.
Mother was so proud of me and all my achievements, musical and otherwise, and she was my biggest fan. Over the years and whenever possible, my mom would come to where I was to see me perform. She came down to Bloomington while I was at I.U. to see me act in a play (Jean Genet’s The Blacks). She saw some DeCormier shows, the Flirtations several times and even traveled to Toronto to see me when I was on the Canadian tour with Harry Belafonte. She was there for my stage debut in 1952, and ultimately, I performed for her after her death as well, when I delivered the eulogy at her funeral and rendered a dedicatory solo, standing directly over her coffin while I sang.
Now let me tell you what kind of mother she was. Jenny managed to raise four children, practically all by herself, as my parents were divorced when I was only three. Well, she did have help, because we lived in our grandparents’ house, so Papa Amos was the father figure in the household. I am the second-born of three sons (I’m “Malcolm in the Middle”) and a daughter, who is the result of a subsequent relationship. Considering how well we all turned out, I think she did a pretty fantastic job in raising us. None of us were ever in a gang growing up, in trouble all the time or hooked on drugs or in prison. Mother herself did not ever have a criminal record.
We were all really good-mannered, well-behaved kids, and I think Mama had a lot to do with that. I instinctively say “please,” “thank you” and “excuse me” without even having to think about it, because that is what we were taught. Our mother was never abusive to any of us, physically or emotionally. She never raised her voice to us in anger, not that we ever gave her any reason to, and we never disrespected her either. I am appalled at how some children talk to their parents, calling them ugly names and saying that they hate them. That sort of behavior was absolutely unheard of in our household. We all had mutual respect for one another.
Mother neither smoked nor drank. There was never any alcohol in the house anyway. We never had much money growing up, so none of us were spoiled or demanded things that we knew our mother could not afford. As a result, I still am frugal, non-extravagant and tend not to spend money unnecessarily. We didn’t know just how poor we were because we were always well-fed, clothed and had a roof over our heads. Mama woke us up every morning for school and made us breakfast. We never started our day hungry. Our mom showed us all unconditional love and was always accepting and supportive of anything that we wanted to do with our lives. We could talk to each other about anything. She would give advice if we asked for it, but she never was judgmental. Her life was not perfect by any means, so she chose not to criticize and reprimand us when we made mistakes.
You know how some parents are disapproving of their kids’ friends and acquaintances. Our mother was accepting and respectful to all of our friends. A couple of my own homies, for example, were, shall I say, a bit obvious, gayly-speaking, but Mother never talked about them disparagingly or criticized their unmasculine demeanor. I guess she realized that if I liked these boys, it was not her place to suggest that I should not be friends with them. In fact, she liked them, too. All my friends were good kids like myself. She had no reason to object to any of them. Besides, some of her boyfriends over the years were not all that great, so she knew better not to belittle any of mine.
I can’t ever accuse my mother of being neglectful or remiss in her duties as a parent. She was always there when we needed her. We never once had an outside babysitter. When she was at work, our live-in grandmother watched us, and the rest of the time, Mama would be at home taking care of us herself. She was quite the homebody, not one to be out in the street every night doing who-knows-what, and I must have gotten that from her, too. Even now, I go out only when I have to.
Mama knew all of her kids, because she spent a lot of quality time with us. She read to us when we were little–in fact, she taught me how to read before I started kindergarten–she took us to the movies often, the indoor theaters as well as the outdoor drive-ins, we watched TV together, she played cards and board games with me and my brother and our friends, she attended my brother’s Little League baseball games, and we even played miniature golf and went bowling a few times. We kept up with and taught Mother all of the dances that came along in the ’50s and ’60s; there was a new one practically every week. Since we didn’t drive yet, she was our personal chauffeur until we left home to attend college. Mother knew her way around a sewing machine and used to make some of her own clothes. She taught me how to embroider, and I introduced her to Paint-By-Number.
I have learned over the years that some children of divorced parents don’t always have it so good, and it often affects their lives in very negative ways. The parents part as bitter enemies and tend to use their children as go-betweens. In addition, each one talks despicably about the other to the kids, expecting them to take sides. That was not our case at all. Our parents parted mutually on friendly terms and remained so for the rest of their lives. My mother never badmouthed our dad in our presence (neither did our grandparents) and never kept him from spending time with us. She confided to me later why they split up, but it was the truth and she wasn’t resentful about it. It worked out in all of our favors besides. If they had stayed together “for the sake of the children,” we all would have been miserable.
Dad married the woman that he left my mother for, and she appreciated Emma for taking my dad off her hands. My dad was a gambler and a womanizer. “Let her deal with him now,” Mama would say. Apparently, Dad and Emma were more suited to each other, since they were together for 44 years, until he died in 1994. Another unusual situation was that my mom and stepmother were friends. Emma loved me and my brother as well. As she was unable to have children of her own, she considered Junior and me her surrogate sons.
My mother and I were alike in many ways, with similar personalities, intelligence, wit and a great sense of humor. We made each other laugh often. We had private references between us that we didn’t have to explain. She just got me. My mother absolutely adored me. But how could she not? I am so adorable! She is greatly missed.

Another weekend, another video !
I had great pleasure working with Femme Fatale movies . We made a couple of sadistic scenes with the Violet Wand, whipping, caning, human ashtray and strap-on.
Actually the filming went as a proper session and there was no particular scenario. My slave was a very experienced guy and he has experienced a lot in his slavery life although I gave him some more in? this life. I made him sit on the chair and attached his feet to the chair and hands behind the chair back. At the same time I set clamps on his nipples and made him keep the joining chain in his mouth . In this way the nipples were stretched even more. As I mentioned before the slave's balls were clamped as well and I tied the chain to the bottom of the chair , almost to the floor. Wel, the most exciting moment is when I took the Violet Wand and tortured him literally to tears ! Especially when I put the device just under his nose and the lips. Also gentle work between his legs and he was nearly loosing? his balls which are connected by a chain with a chain. It worked the same way with nipples as well :)
In general, once again I am convinced that sadism is a quite natural thing for me !
Mistress Akella's Blog

A lecturer at the Department of Adult Education, Tayo Akpata University in Ekiadolor, Edo State, Friday Orobator, has allegedly committed suicide by hanging himself.
Orobator’s lifeless body was discovered behind his apartment in Obakhazbaye area of Benin City, the state capital at about 1.30 p.m. on Friday, October 2.
The father of four, said to be in his 50’s, and a member of the College of Education Academic Staff Union, (COEASU), had complained bitterly to close associates over lack of money to tend to his failing health.
It was gathered that two days before he took the drastic step, the late lecturer told a colleague that he was tired of begging for money from friends to cater for his family needs and his health challenges.
The Chairman of the College of Education Academic Staff Union, (COEASU), Fred Omonuwa, who confirmed the incident, said their colleague died as a result of lack and inability to access medical care.
“It is clear the death came as a result of lack and inability to access medical facilities. Some months ago, he became very sick and depended on friends for assistance but very recently he started complaining of getting tired of consistently begging to survive,” Omonuwa said.
“Of course, everybody knows that the Edo State Government owes us 13 months of salary, which we have continued to agitate for even before the election, but it was tagged “political agitation”. The man couldn’t provide for himself. His wife just had a baby. We were surprised yesterday (Friday), that he took his own life. Before he committed suicide, he spoke to some colleagues on Wednesday, complaining bitterly on his inability to access medical facility and becoming very ashamed of begging friends for money to treat himself.
“We are aware some friends in Lagos and Benin have done their best in the past few weeks by providing money for him and yesterday he took his life by hanging. We are very much aware that the suicide he committed was as a result of lack of money. As far as we are concerned, we, staff of the college, are pained. Our people are going through a lot and dying but this is an extreme case because of the way he took his own life,”
Omonuwa appealed to the state government to pay the workers their 13 months unpaid salary.
“Edo State government should please listen to us. Now, school is about to resume. Our members can’t even pay the school fees of their children. What have we done to deserve this? We are pained by the loss of this senior colleague, a principal lecturer. We are not happy.” he added.
The remains of late Orobator have been deposited at a mortuary by men of the Oba market Police station

Just heard this lady is leaving Channel 8. I really don't watch Channel 8 much anymore so I'm not sure if this is big news. (But I was interested to learn that she's married to a cop according to her bio.)
Now if Megan Henderson were leaving, that would be news. I mean curl-up-into-a-fetal-position kind of news.

NEGLEY - The man hit by a Youngstown and Southern train Tuesday has been identified as 33-year-old Todd Beabout.
A report released by the county sheriff's office Wednesday revealed his identity. Although no physical address was listed under his identification, his mailing address was listed as a post office box in Negley.
First responders and two county sheriff's officials did not know who Beabout was until Wednesday morning, according to the report.
His identity was provided to sheriff's deputy Wes Smith by a representative from St. Elizabeth Hospital shortly after 10 a.m. on Wednesday and it was listed in Smith's finalized report of the incident made available later in the day.
Beabout was taken by medical helicopter to the Youngstown hospital on Tuesday and an update on his condition was not listed in the report.
The report also did not indicate why Beabout was lying on the tracks not far from 7459 Bye Road when the empty freight train approached.
Negley Fire Chief Gary Banicki said Tuesday it appeared he had been sleeping or passed out on the railroad, although he could not confirm that was the case.
The train's engineer, Salem resident Steve Close, told Smith he and the conductor, Nate Zieher of Youngstown, were going to North Lima from the Tube Ascope facility in Darlington, Pa., where they had hooked onto the empty cars. Close said he and Zieher were looking back at the empty cars to make sure everything was still attached properly and there were no other problems when Close turned around and saw what he thought was a person's coat bunched up on the tracks about 25 feet away.
Zieher then looked and realized it was actually a man on the tracks, at which point Close applied the emergency brakes but the train was unable to stop in time and drove over Beabout, according to the report.
When the train was stopped Close and Zieher got out and went to Beabout, who was found between the first and second locomotives still conscious and talking. They told him not to move, that they would get help.
Their attempts to call 911 were not successful, however, as they did not have adequate cell phone service in the rural area. Close ran to the nearest home, which was 7459 Bye Road, and knocked on the door but there was no answer. About 10 minutes later Paul Conkle returned home and called 911, the report stated.
Sheriff's Lt. Allen Young also responded to the scene as did Y&S supervisor Bob Gane, according to the report.

Thursday, June 11, 2009
Introducing Poppy, my New Little White
This is Poppy. I received her on June 8. Her ferral mom with three kittens were rescued and after three weeks it was noticed that Poppy was half the size of her siblings. She was given to a friend of mine to hand-raise, but was doing poorly. My friend called me up to give me the scoop and see if I could help since I have more available resources. The minute I found out Poppy was a white kitten with a black smudge on her head, I new my new white cat had come to me. I lost my White (yes, that's her name, she insisted on it herself) a few years ago to cancer and my home hasn't been the same. It was particularly hard leaving my apartment, knowing she wasn't coming to the new house. It turns out that Poppy was rescued from the same area my White originally came from. The chance that she is a decendant of the same genetic line is very high! I have a strong feeling that Poppy will look a lot like Max, White's son, because she's very fluffy.
In this video I was surprised to see how rough my hands look when I touch Poppy, but I truly was extremely gentle. She only weighs 4.2 ounces.

It was an unusually sunny day in early spring. I had just succeeded in putting the children to bed for their afternoon nap. That was a tough job as they prefer to play rather than sleep, especially when the sun is up and other children are running around outside laughing and playing.
As I sat at the dining table reflecting on the day, my eyes were glued to the blossoming flowers at the window. I was momentarily lost in thought as my mind wandered away.
Many years ago, when I was still with my grandmother in our tiny village of Afube, I used to try to engage her in conversation, as I wanted to hear her once more tell me stories, stories I and my cousins had listened to times without number. Yet, we were never bored by hearing them all over again.
Every time she re-told a story she did so with new vigour and enthusiasm. She didn’t seem to find it tiring to tell it over and over again. And if someone joined us after she had started, it was not a big deal to her to start again from the beginning. She enjoyed such memorable times and her wrinkled brown face lit up with a smile which displayed her scanty yellow teeth. She was always happy and sang traditional songs even when it was evident that she had not had a decent meal in days. Her joy knew no bounds.
We listened to different stories but she had a favourite which she often began with, except when we protested and asked for some other particular story instead. She told us how they had danced in the rain as little children. Even though they got coughs and colds thereafter, no parent dared prevent their little ones from playing in the rain; it was their right.
Adaku and I had confronted her on her constant happiness and the secret behind it.
“I am in-between life and death; I have lived long enough and any time death calls I will gladly answer.”
She explained that she had gathered her life baskets and that one of her legs was already with her ancestors while the other remained with us. This amazed our young minds and we wondered how any human being could reason that way, as though she were calling on death to hurry up and take her to the great beyond.
Over a hundred years old, our grandmother was the oldest woman in the village. We were glad to have her around and prayed for her to live longer so that we could continue to enjoy her rich collection of folk-tales, despite the fact that we doubted the authenticity of most of them. Yet, it was the best way to relax in the evenings under the shining moonlight.
Her angelic, melodious songs often reverberated all over the compound and people left whatever they were doing to listen. Her sonorous voice left the listeners asking for more. She thanked her maker for her longevity and said she was ready to meet Him any time He pleased.
Nonetheless, she had a no-go area which she hardly wished to enter. It was a part of her past she would rather not remember. She hesitated whenever we asked about the war that had killed a million people, including members of her own family. I guess that, when the one occasion came when she did tell us about it, it was because she was so grateful for having survived and so that we would know and remember our history.
Before the war, and being the only girl, she lived in a city in the northern part of Nigeria with her seven brothers and her parents. Before they could even gather some of their possessions to escape from the war-torn state, three of her brothers were slaughtered in the family home. They had tried to confront the heavily armed Hausa who stormed their house in the early hours of the morning and who were searching the neighbourhood looking for ‘infidels’ to kill. It was clear to my grandmother’s family that they could not wait to sell their father’s shop but must flee for their lives.
As soon as they had escaped from the assassins, they made to leave the city. As they were about to board an overcrowded train, another group of fanatics, chanting religious songs, struck again, killing more of the family members.
Eventually, only my grandmother, one brother and her father made it back to their home village, alive but empty handed.
She said the war didn’t get to Afube as a huge mountain hid them from the rest of the villages. They were safe but the prevailing hunger and famine did affect them in great measure.
I saw that her eyes were saturated with tears as she concluded her story. Obviously, she didn’t want to weep in front of her grandchildren as they might be frightened or even join in. She was ill at ease on her low plastic chair. She wanted to get up but her walking stick was not in sight. Ebuka had taken it and was playing with it out back. I called out to him to return it and we helped her to her feet and took her back to her little hut.
The next day, I brought her lunch and sat with her as she ate a breadfruit. I had become her favourite granddaughter, as she found me helpful and always within reach. I asked her questions about her youth and whether she had been able to fulfil her dreams and aspirations.
“I almost achieved the goals I set for myself and would have done much more had the civil war not broken out and my dreams been shattered.”
There was a feeling of regret on her tired face; she seemed to go down memory lane in her mind’s eyes.
I searched her face and noticed she was in deep thought, so I let her be for a while. I also tried to imagine how it must have been for her and the whole family during those times.
A few minutes later and she didn’t seem to have recovered. Her eyes stared in to the air without a blink.
I became nervous and wished I hadn’t put the question to her in the first place. Her frail body and heart must have been truly hurt by my reminding her of a past she most likely desired to do away with, forever.
“Mama nnukwu, Grandma, o gini, what is it, are you al-right?”
Her eyes blinked and she let out a weak smile but said nothing. I repeated the question and she sat up and looked at me intently. I felt guilty and looked away. My eyes gazed at the unfinished lunch on the mud floor and then back to her. Her voice was now cracking as though a lump were in her throat.
“My daughter, dreams are what keep us going in life and we must have visions of what we want to achieve, else life will be meaningless. Yet, we must not blame ourselves for not reaching our goals, particularly when it’s beyond our control.”
She began to cough and I ran outside to bring her drinking water. She wanted to continue her story but I begged her to rest for the day; I had given her enough headache and any further attempt could be fatal.
I convinced her to rest on the mat, which she did without hesitation.
I left the next day for my boarding school in the city; that was my last conversation with the old woman. I never saw her again before she died two years later. Yet, our last discussion remains fresh in my memory.
As I looked from the dusty window that afternoon, the spring sun that shone in my face reminded me of the days we gathered at my grandma’s hut, with the moon as our only source of illumination.
I miss those days and whenever I listen to children chanting nursery rhymes, she comes alive in my memory.
And just as she had unknowingly advised me in her parting words, I shall continue to dream.
Hope Nwosu is a writer, motivational speaker and activist. She believes the pen is mightier than the sword and that men and women should have equal rights irrespective of race or social standing. She champions the cause of the oppressed, particularly that of marginalized African women. Hope Nwosu also speaks on how to make the best out of difficult and bleak situations through faith in God, hard work and a positive disposition.

I was in Burlington for business back in mid-January, and noticed Bove's was in the area and one of the Throw Down contestends from the Food Network. I thought it must be worthy of a visit, so I trecked out one snowy Wednesday night when it seemed like most of Burlington was shut down.
I walked in and it was just myself and one other couple at a booth, the rest of the place was empty. The interior decore was interesting and did spark a the feeling that it was a local place that has been there forever so I thought I was in for a treat. I also didn't mind going in on a dead night to help out a local family owned business. The employees were taking bets about when they would close for the night (couldn't blame them!) and chit chatting up at the bar. The waitress was friendly and I have no complaints from the service aspect.
I ordered a Tom Collins and it was dreadful. Needless to say I only ordered the one and then stuck to water. I think they waived the liquor around the glass and it never actually got poured in and the lemon juice also seemed weak.
I got the lasagna since it was "the" advertised item for a Wednesday night and the Throw Down focus. I asked for the garlic sauce instead of the normal red sauce they'd use. While I did really like the garlic sauce, the lasagna itself was treacherous. I've had better lasagna at a school cafeteria before. The noodles were pasty, the meatballs were bland, and I couldn't even tell you what kind of cheese was in it. They served a piece that had to be over a pound and a half, but it didn't make up for the mediocracy and feeling of lost hope. It also didn't help that they had a small TV with a DVD player running through the Throw Down episode over and over and over and over and over while you were eating like some kind of personalized Chinese water torture.
I can't help but wonder how this place even got on the Food Network in the first place. A night later at the Vermont Pub & Brewery I shared my story with the bar tender and local sitting next to me and they both told me they'd never go into the place themselves unless they were ordering lunch for work and needed cheap eats. They said not to worry I wasn't the first victim and the place hasn't changed in years. They gave me he name of 2 other italian places in town try out next time I was in the area.
I guess you don't know unless you try something, so I'm still glad I tried it.... but yikes.
68 Pearl St, Burlington, VT 05401

I hear it has to do with the latest update. Took my phone to the store for the same issue. I guess they are working on a new update to fix it. They were able to fix the problem on mine but it only lasted one day and now were back to the same issue.
... View more

Weapon's: silver bullets, silver stake,water blaster with holy water, silver throwing knife a pistol and a silver sword.
Armor: silver mail that covers his entire body.
Strengths:He has quick reflexes,and is stronger and faster than normal men.He is immune to geting vamp curse,soul eating,warewolf curse,and geting possessed.He can see beter than normal men.
Weakness:he is quick to action witch gets him into trouble.He is weak to lightning.
Skills/Magic:he is a skilled weapon maker,He can shot holy blasts.
Appearance: he is very tall and skinny. He has black hair with a red tint to it. He has yellow eyes. He has a claw mark from a warewolf he fought in London. He wears his silver mail at all times. He has many silver bullets in his rucksack. He has three silver stakes on his belt. His water blaster is also attached to his belt. His silver throwing knife is hooked on his back. His pistol is in the rucksack. He also has a sword on his back.
Personality: Will take help where ever he can get it. He is very friendly if you are not a evil being. Has no sense of humor.He likes to fight those few that are ...worthy.he is not merciful.he is VERY full of himself.He is quick to action witch gets him into trouble sometimes.
Biography: He was born in Germany. His father raised him until he was ten because his father was attacked and killed by demons. He went to a boarding school and studied very little. He was expelled. So he was found by a monster hunter. The monster hunter found out his father was killed by demons, so he took pity on him and taught him the ways of a monster hunter. He then traveled to London and fought his first monster, a warewolf. He shot the warewolf and badly wounded it. It slashed at him and clawed his back. Then the warewolf died. He got a tip that a ogre was terrorizing nearby farmers and that it lived in the swamp so he went to hunt the ogre but he found it was a trap when he got there an evil wizard appeared. The evil wizard stole his memory and fled. He then fainted. When he awoke he did not remember anything except an evil wizard had stolen his memory.So now he travels to find the wizard killing evil on the way.He traveled to paris and killed Dr.jekel/Mr.hyde.Then went to the usa and killed many Demons.When killing Demons he met a woman who also killed monsters he barely got a look at her then she dissapered.He then fought a Demonlord Named Zadearn.he Shot at him but missed.the demon shot fire at him it missed.he then cut of his head.he is still on the same quest.

Historical setting: 561 C.E. Gaul
“Eve you have asked me to tell you the details of the story of the ‘pagan’ with the ‘dreaded skin disease.’ It did happen in Bethany, so I know the telling of it better than did the other gospels where it was written in different ways. It was a story my family told in early Christian times and it was known so well by all of us.
“The story is of a Pharisee said to have some version of leprosy, a term often used then to mean any kind of scars or disease of the skin. Jesus and his friends ate often at the table of this Pharisee, Simon. I can see why you would think he was a pagan as it was told. Gospel speaks of the Pharisees as enemies of Jesus so in our times maybe the Christian foe would be the pagans. But the Pharisees were sort of the opposite of pagans. They were Jews who kept careful obedience to every letter of the law as written in the Torah. They were also the usual ones doing the business in the market place.”
“So, I was wrong about that, Papa, calling Pharisees pagans. Does it even matter? What I really want to know is about the healing.”
“I only mention that error because my own father was a Pharisee and maybe that makes me a bit too picky about the details also.
“So Eve, the way healing worked then for the Jews was that the priests of the temple determined when someone was healed and cleansed of disease. When someone had been contagious or ill and then they recovered they went to show themselves to the priest to be declared clean again. The priests were a different political group than my Pharisee father who worked in the open markets in the porticos of the temple. So when my father was afflicted with a disease that probably came to him from the trade caravans he dealt with in his work he recovered and was well again. But when he went to the priests to be declared clean they wouldn’t do that because my father had scars from the pox that never faded.”
(The story continues tomorrow)

NEW DELHI: A man was arrested outside Gurdwara Balasahib in north Delhi with 10 pistols in his possession on Wednesday evening, police said on Thursday. "Sanju (22), who belongs to Hathras in UP, worked for a gang which procured sophisticated semi-automatic pistols from Khargone in Madhya Pradesh and sold them to criminals in Delhi and NCR," Sanjeev Yadav, deputy commissioner of police, said.
Yadav said that a team had received information that a huge consignment of illegal weapons was to be supplied near Sarai Kale Khan ISBT. A trap was laid near Ring Road and a suspicious person was spotted by the special cell officers around 8pm. The man was carrying a red bag and was waiting for someone. "He was overpowered and apprehended. A search led to the recovery of ten pistols of 7.65mm," Yadav said.

Why did I have to try a new series? My wife and a few of my friends have done nothing but rave about how amazing these books are. I saw the first movie and was only mildly interested back then. I needed a new audio book to listen to at work and the books I really wanted to get to next are still on reserve at the library. I figured I would finally give this series a try. What was I thinking?
I loved this book, and wish I had waited a little longer so I could finish the Last Apprentice series first. Now I have two series, YA even, that I can’t wait to read the next book. It is so hard trying to decide which to read next once I have finished one. I’m only one book in and I am hooked. I also want to re-watch the movie so I can see if I enjoy it more. I know more about the story having read the book and I always like playing spot the differences when I watch a movie based on a book.
Since grade school I have always enjoyed learning about Greek and Roman Mythology. I love the stories of the different Gods and how petty they are. It almost made it seem like us mortals had our heads on straight and the Gods, who are supposed to be the ones we look to, had their heads up a certain body part. I always thought these were fun stories so it really wasn't a big surprise that I liked this. Let me put this in writing so everyone knows I actually said it; My wife was right. She said I would like these books and I did. I can't wait to see what happens next.
What I liked about this story is that it focused on the half-blood children of the gods. These children should never have been born but the gods have some control issues. Gods decided that they would not have children with mortals, but they did anyway. Now these kids have special traits from their powerful parents. It was interesting reading how Percy stumbles into his abilities with water control since he is the son of Poseidon. I also like how Riordan created different personalities for each of these characters that reflects on the God whom they were born from. I liked that Ares daughter was a big bully and very angry. It seemed very fitting.
Another thing I really like about this book, and I like this about the Last Apprentice series, is the fact the Riordan doesn't write down to a child audience. These read very clearly and it doesn't feel like he is trying to dumb down the story. I'm not a huge fan of YA but there are some I have really enjoyed. Some authors write like they are explaining the story to a 3 year old and that drives me nuts. Give teens some credit, I feel that those teens the read these book are more well-read than those who don't read. These read like they could be books for adults but with teenage characters and I like that.
Time to be critical, there were a few slower moments mainly because Riordan was introducing us to the characters. I also felt that Percy was a little too helpless at times. I enjoyed the surprises he found when his abilities show up out of nowhere, but I think that by the end of the book he wouldn’t be so clueless about all of that still. I really enjoyed this book but my rating will be 4 out of 5 stars. This was a fun read and I am looking forward to book two soon.

I belong to a Facebook group that is dedicated to us old fogies who went to Longwood University when it was still Longwood College. I love nostalgia groups. I have a really long memory for obscure details and I like to share them with people who can add to them or are amazed by them. Yesterday, I really got on a roll and started three threads in that group.
The first thread was about the Tea Room at Longwood. It was basically a “fancy” restaurant for students. For five bucks, you could have a steak dinner… or something like that. I only got to eat there once. I didn’t know it existed for most of my time there. I was in a music fraternity for women (Sigma Alpha Iota) and a regional representative came to visit our chapter. We took her to dinner at the Tea Room. I remember enjoying the experience.
Sadly, a few years after I graduated, the building the Tea Room was in caught on fire. They rebuilt the Rotunda, but I don’t think the Tea Room survived. A bunch of people had memories of it, though… and lots of people like me didn’t know it existed. I’m glad I had my one chance to try it. Longwood actually had good food in the 90s, though.
The second thread was about French Pool. In my day, French was a dormitory, but I guess at one time, it was a gym, and I believe right now, it’s a computer lab. When I was at Longwood, French had racquetball courts and a pool. Other people said that it also had a basketball court, but I don’t remember ever seeing that. I do remember swimming in French Pool one time. It was an indoor pool, but there were garage doors that opened so that you could get some outdoor weather. The pool at the Natural Bridge Hotel and Conference Center was also like that, back in the day. And, just like the pool at Natural Bridge, they also closed the French Pool.
When I was at Longwood, the French Pool was kind of on its last legs. It was often closed. However, it was a really pretty pool– very old school, and kind of small. I read that Longwood got rid of its other pool, which was in what was known as Lancer Hall when I was a student, but is now called Willett Hall. I remember swimming in the pool at Lancer Hall when I was a freshman. A friend of mine was a lifeguard there. We used to go in the evenings and I remember doing flips off of the diving board (which I figured out how to do quite by accident). That pool also had a natatorium, which allowed people to watch swimmers from a window under the water surface.
I guess the pool has been drained because it looks like the college is going to open a new convocation and events center and the old pool is obsolete, having been opened in 1980. Hopefully, they will include a pool, since I doubt people want to have to go to nearby Hampden-Sydney, a private men’s college, to use their pool, or rent an apartment off campus to have pool access. Especially since the “Hamsters” can be a bit snobby about Longwood. The funny thing is, when I was at Longwood, you had to pass a swimming test in order to graduate or take a swimming class and pass it. Now they don’t have a pool? WTF!
And finally, there was more talk about Erin McCay George, whom I have written about a few times on this blog. Erin George, author of the book A Woman Doing Life: Notes from a Prison for Women, was editor of the school newspaper when I was at Longwood. She abruptly left school before graduating. Word on the street was that she left because she was caught embezzling money intended for the newspaper to fund a trip to England to meet her boyfriend, James George. She met James George on the Internet when it was still in its infancy.
I posted about how Erin had run a couple of really controversial stories in the paper that had the whole campus outraged. I wrote about that in this post, which includes links to two posts I wrote for my original blog about how I came to realize that Erin had written a book about prison life that is now being used in a lot of criminal justice classes. Anyway… after reminiscing with people who were at Longwood at the time and knew Erin, I’m beginning to think that the spicy newspaper stories from 1992 that so upset people on campus were, in part, intended to be a distraction from what she was doing with money that she had allegedly stolen from the student newspaper.
Longwood had, and probably still has, a strict honor code. Lying, cheating, and stealing were not tolerated. Since she was evidently creatively using college funds to enhance and advance her relationship with her British boyfriend, it could be that the scandalous news stories were intended to shift focus from her alleged illicit activities to the content of the newspaper. Or maybe it wasn’t…
Erin went on to marry her boyfriend and then, just six years later, shot him in the head at point blank range for $700,000 in insurance money. She was eventually sentenced to 603 years in prison. Of course, she won’t serve that many years because it’s impossible, but I think it was mainly passed down to ensure that she is never released. Parole was abolished in Virginia in 1995, although some convicted felons can be released from prison early if they meet certain requirements and if they committed their crimes when parole still existed. Erin committed her crimes after parole was abolished.
Anyway, it’s clear that a lot of people didn’t remember the newspaper scandal in the 1990s and even fewer knew that Erin was in prison and had written a book. I reconnected with someone who was at Longwood when I was and knew Erin, explaining that Erin had a friend in one of the few eccentric English professors at Longwood during that time, a man named William Woods. I had Mr. Woods for a couple of classes. He was a lot of fun. I seem to remember that in the early 1990s, when this was going on, Mr. Woods was obsessed with Madonna’s Sex book, an expensive “coffee table” book that was full of erotic images. At the time, it was considered very risque.
I remember Vanilla Ice (Robert Van Winkle) was popular then, and Madonna had dated him. I think some of their sexy pictures were in that book and Vanilla Ice broke up with her over it. According to a Huffington Post article about their relationship, Vanilla Ice said of Madonna to the British tabloid, News of the World,
“She was older than me and a great lover… But I broke up with her after she printed that book because I was hurt to be an unwitting part of this slutty package. It was disgusting and cheap. We were in a relationship yet it looked like she was screwing all these other people.”
Since Mr. Woods was supposedly Erin’s ally, and he was so fascinated with Madonna’s Sex book (as well as the Price Club), I wonder if maybe he influenced her to dedicate an issue of the Rotunda to “safe sex”, which included the free distribution of condoms in the paper. Of course, at that time, one of the fraternities at Longwood also used to have an annual “safe sex” party, which included t-shirts one could buy. I believe that fraternity was eventually kicked off campus for hazing. That’s just speculation from yours truly. I really don’t know where the truth lies. Still, so many years after all of that happened, I kind of wonder if the prosecutors who worked to bring Erin to justice ever looked at her time at Longwood, which led up to her relationship with her victim and his ultimate untimely demise. Looking back on that time, it’s clear that trouble was brewing years before it culminated in murder.
I read a couple of old news articles about Erin George’s case and they implied that she confessed to the murder, claiming that George would not give her a divorce. According to those articles, one of her former cellmates said that Erin told her that her husband, James George, “had it coming”. But looking at the evidence– George was buying insurance but backed out because he was a smoker and it would cost too much– and two days later, Erin falsified his signature on paperwork and paid the premiums with a secret account she had… and then claiming that it was “normal” for her to sign his name on stuff since she “handled the business in their relationship”, I can’t help but think of Bill’s ex wife. Bill’s ex, a narcissist who abused him, also “handled the business” in their relationship, to disastrous results.
I doubt very much that James George refused to give Erin a divorce. I think the issue was, she simply didn’t want to have to deal with him anymore and murdering him for insurance money was the easiest way, in her mind, to make sure he was out of the picture for good. She clearly wanted to split from him, but she wanted to make sure she got paid handsomely without incurring the high cost and personal risk of divorce… and would never have to deal with custody issues, his influence regarding their three children, or the children having a stepmother. But again– just my speculation, having been married to a man whose ex wife was also very destructive (though thankfully not yet murderous– that I know of, anyway) and similarly narcissistic. I will admit that I don’t know anything more about this case than what I’ve read and deduced on my own, based on my own dealings with this type of person. I could be wrong, and I doubt we’ll ever know the real story.
Sometimes, I wonder if I missed my calling as a true crime writer. On the other hand, looking back at Erin George, I wonder if, had she been slightly less narcissistic and antisocial, she might have had a great career as a provocateur or paparazzo. She clearly had little fear of publishing things that would upset people. Longwood, in the 1990s, was a pretty conservative place– though not as conservative as Liberty University, just down the road in Lynchburg, was– and still is.
Posting the link to Erin’s book for those who are interested. As an Amazon Associate, I get small commissions from Amazon when sales are made through my site.

The Boy Apprenticed to an Enchanter
The Horses of King Manus
The Story of Eean the Fisherman's Son
The Story of Bird-of-Gold who was the Bramble Gatherer's Daughter
The Two Enchanters
The Horses of King Manus
As for the youth who had tried to steal the white horse that the King owned, he was bound hand and foot and taken into the castle of the King. There he was thrown down beside the trestles of the great table, and the hot wax from the candles that lighted the supper board dripped down upon him. And it was told to him that at the morrow's sunrise he would be slain with the sword.
Then the King called upon one to finish the story that was being told when the neigh of the white horse was heard in the stable. The story could not be finished for him, however, because the one who had been telling it was now outside, guarding the iron door of the stable with a sword in his hand. And King Manus, sitting at the supper board, could not eat nor refresh himself because there was no one at hand to finish the story for him.
And that is the way that the story of The Boy Apprenticed to an Enchanter used to begin.
But first I shall have to tell you about King Manus and his three horses.
King Manus ruled over the Western Island, and he had a castle that was neither higher nor wider than any other King's castle. But he had a stable that was more strongly built than any other King's stable. It had double walls of stone; it had oak beams; it had an iron door with four locks to it. And before this door two soldiers with drawn swords in their hands stayed night and day.
In those days, if one went before a King and asked him for a gift the King might not refuse to give what was asked of him. But King Manus was hard to come to by those with requests. For before the chamber where he sat or slept there stood a servant to take the request, and if it were one that might not be brought to him, to make an excuse for the King.
It was all because of the King's three horses-a white horse, a red horse, and a black horse. The white horse was as swift as the plunging wave of the sea, the red horse was as swift as fire in the heather, and the speed of the black horse was such that he could overtake the wind of March that was before him, and the wind of March that was behind could not overtake him.
Many had tried to get one of the King's horses by request or by robbery. But those who would ask for a gift were kept away from the King, while the stone walls, double thick, with the door of iron with four locks to it, kept robbers outside. Besides, there were the two soldiers with drawn swords in their hands to prevent the horses being taken out of the stable by any one except their own grooms. And so it was thought very certain that King Manus would never lose his famous horses.
But this very night, when the King and his lords were at supper, the neigh of a horse in the stable was heard. Then it was that the storyteller stopped in his story. The trampling of a horse was heard. Straight out King Manus ran, and his harper and his storyteller and his lords ran with him. When they came to the stable they saw that the two soldiers were sitting before the iron door fast asleep, with the swords on the ground before them. And the locks were off the door of iron.
Just as they came there the iron door of the stable opened and the King's white horse was led out. He who had the rein was a strange youth dressed in foreign dress. The youth was about to spring on the horse's back when those who were with the King sprang upon him and held him and held the bridle of the horse.
And having secured the youth they went into the stable, and they found the red horse and the black horse eating at their mangers. They led the white horse back and put him in his own stall. The watchers who had been before the stable door could not be wakened, so those who were with the King carried them to another place, and left two others, the harper and the storyteller, to keep watch, with the soldiers' swords in their hands. As for the youth who had tried to steal the white horse, he was placed as has been told you, and every one there knew what doom would befall him.
It was then that the King called upon one to finish the story that was being told him when the white horse had neighed. It was then that he sat at the supper board, not able to take rest nor refreshment on account of his not having heard the story to its end. And it was then that one of the lords said to the King, "Let the youth who is lying bound beside the trestles of the table tell us what it was that made him go into such danger to steal one of the horses of King Manus."
The King liked that saying, and he said, "Since my storyteller abides outside guarding the door of the stable, I will have this youth tell us the story of why he entered into such danger to steal one of my horses. And more than that. I declare that if he shows us that he was ever in greater danger than he is in this night I shall give him his life. But if it is not so shown the story he tells will avail him nothing, and he shall perish by the sword at the morrow's sunrise."
Then the youth was taken from where he lay by the trestles of the table, and the cords that bound him were loosened. He was put in the storyteller's place, and fresh candles were lighted and set upon the table.
"Your danger is great," said the King, "and it will be hard for you to show us that you were ever in such danger before. Begin your story. And if it is not a story of a narrow and a close escape there will be little time left for you to prepare for your death by the sword."
Thereupon the youth in foreign dress looked long into the wine cup that was handed him, and he drank a draft of the wine, and he saluted the King and the lords who sat by the King, and he said:
"Once I was in greater danger, for its mouth was close to me, and no hope whatever was given me of my saving my life. I will tell the story, and you shall judge whether my danger then was greater than is my danger now."
And thereupon the youth in foreign dress, who had tried to steal the white horse that King Manus owned, began the story which is set down here in the very words in which he told it.
The Story of Eean the Fisherman's Son
THE COMING OF THE ENCHANTER
My father (said the youth) was a fisherman, and he lived on this Western Island. It may be that he is still living here. His name was Anluan, and he was very poor. My own name is Eean, and the event that begins my story took place when I was twice seven years of age.
My father and I had gone down to the shore of the Western Ocean. He was fishing in the pools of the sea, and I was putting willow rods into the mouths of the fish caught so that I might carry them in my hands to the market that very day and sell them there. I looked out and saw a speck upon the water, a speck that came nearer. I kept watching it while my father dragged the pool with his net. The speck became a boat, and the boat came on without sails or oars. It was a shining boat, a boat of brass. I called to my father, and my father straightened himself up and watched it. In the boat that came toward us of its own accord there was a man standing.
The boat came into the full water between the rocks, and then it sank down, this boat of brass, until its rim touched the water. It remained still as if anchored. The man who was in the prow of the boat stepped out on the sand between my father and me.
He looked a man of high degree-like a prince or a potentate. He had a dark face and a dark, curly beard, and he had eyes that were like hawks' eyes. He had on a straight coat of a blue material covered all over with curious figures, and in his hand he held a long polished staff that had the shape of two serpents twisting together. He looked at me and I was frightened of him, and I turned to my father. But my father was standing there, holding the fishing pole in his hands, his mouth open, gasping like one of the fishes upon the rocks.
The stranger looked me over again-looked me over from my feet to my head, and then he said to my father, "There is no need that he should do aught about these fishes. I have need of an apprentice, and it would be well for you both if he should come with me."
My father then found his voice, and he said, "If my son does not sell these fishes in the market today he cannot bring back the bag of meal for our household."
Said the man from the strange boat, "Bring me to your house and I shall put down gold for every copper that your son would get in the market."
My father made a sign to me to throw the fishes back into the water. This I did, but I did it fearfully. And then my father stepped out of the pool of the sea and he made a sign to the stranger to follow us. We walked from the seashore and up the path of the cliffs, and we went through the heather of the headlands, following the goat tracks till we came to the wattled house where we lived. The man from the strange boat followed my father, and I came last of all. And when I went in and stood on the floor of our house my heart was thumping within me at the thought of what was before.
And there was the pot boiling over the fire with a few green herbs in it. There was Saba, my mother, stirring the last handful of meal among the green herbs. And there were my brothers, all older than I, sitting by the fire, waiting for the herbs and the meal to be ready.
When my mother looked toward us she saw the man from the strange boat. She thought that some crime had been committed by me or my father to bring a man of such high degree among us. She and my brothers were greatly afraid, for we were poor, and those who were high were harsh to us. But the stranger spoke softly, saying, "Good fortune has come to you from the sea today." And when they all turned toward him he said, "I who am very knowledgeable will take your son with me as an apprentice, and I shall instruct him in arts and crafts and mysteries."
My mother said, "The boy is young, sir, and we thought he would be with us for a time longer." But the man from the strange boat said, "I would not take him to instruct him in arts and crafts and mysteries if he were a day older than he is now." He said no more, but he went to the table and he laid down on it piece after piece of shining gold.
My father went to the table and held his hands around the gold. My mother looked on me who was just twice seven years old that day. I know she thought that she could never bear to part with me. But then she looked on her other sons, and she saw that they were men grown, and she thought they should have more to eat than the meal and the green herbs that were in the pot. She threw her arms around me and I knew it was a last clasp.
"He will have to go into far places to learn the arts and grafts and mysteries that I would teach him," the stranger said.
"Will he ever come back to me?" cried my mother.
"He will come back to you when his cunning baffles my cunning," was what the stranger said.
My father took the gold that was on the table, and made it into a heap. My mother took her arms from around my neck, and my brothers kissed me farewell. Then the man from the strange boat opened the door of our wattled house and went out, and I followed him.
We did not go back to the place where he had left his boat of brass. We went to another place where there was a harbor with ships. There we found a ship ready to sail for Urth.
My master sent me on board to ask the captain if he would take us on a voyage beyond Urth. The captain said that if my master would guide them past the Magnetberg he would give him the ship to sail where he would after the cargo had been landed. My master said he would do this, and we went on board the ship. It was evening now, and a breeze came up, and the ship sailed away, bringing me from the place where I was born and reared and toward the strange countries that were beyond the rim of the sea. I asked one of the sailors what was the Magnetberg, and he told me that it was a mountain of loadstone that drew the iron out of ships that came near it and left them loosened timbers upon the water.
THE INACCESSIBLE ISLAND You have heard me so far, O King. Know now that the one to whom I was apprenticed was an Enchanter. His name is Zabulun, and in all the world there are only three Enchanters more powerful than he. The first is Chiron the Centaur, who is half man and half horse, and who taught Achilles and made him the greatest of the princes who had gone against Troy. The second is Hermes Trismegistus, the wise Egyptian. And the third is Merlin the Enchanter, whose home is in an island that is west of your Western Island.
When the night came on, Zabulun took the steering gear into his hands, and he steered the ship by a star that he alone knew. When the morning came we saw on the sea all around us the masts and the spars and the timbers of ships that had come too near the Magnetberg, and that had lost their nails and bolts, and had become loosened timbers on the waters. Those on the ship were greatly afraid, and the captain walked up and down, pulling at his beard. The night came on, and again my master took the steering gear into his own hands and steered the ship by a star that he alone knew of. And when the morning came there were no masts and spars of ships, and no loosened timbers afloat on the waters. The captain laughed and made all on the ship rejoice that they had passed the dangerous neighborhood of the Magnetberg-that mountain of loadstone that drew the iron out of ships as a magnet draws pins on a table.
We came to Urth. The great cargo that was on the ship was for the King of Urth, and it was taken off and sent over the mountain to the King's city in packs that the sailors carried on their backs. Then the captain gave the ship over to my master to sail it where he would.
He did not come upon the land nor did he look upon the country at all. But when the last pack had been carried off the ship, he said to me:
"You will have to do this, my first command to you. Go on the land. Stay by a pool that is close to the forest. Birds will come down to that pool-birds of the whiteness of swans, but smaller. Set snares and catch some of these birds, not less than four, and bring them to me uninjured."
And I went on the land and came to the pool that was close to the forest. And there I saw the birds that were of the whiteness of swans, but smaller. I watched them for a while so that I might know their ways. Then I made a crib of rods and set it to catch the birds. One went under the crib, and I pulled the string and caught the first bird. And then, hours afterward, I caught another. And waiting and watching very carefully, I caught a third. The fourth bird was wary, and i feared I should not catch it, for night was coming down and the birds were gathering to fly away. One remained near the crib, and its neck was stretched toward it. But then it shook its wings, and I thought it was going to fly to the others. It went under the crib. Then I pulled the string and caught the fourth bird.
I brought the birds to the ship, and my master gave them grains to feed on. At night we sailed away. My master held the steering gear while it was dark, but when light came he gave it to me to hold. Then he unloosed one of the birds. It flew in the middle distance, winging slowly, and remaining a long time in sight. He told me to hold the course of the ship to the flight of the bird.
At night he took the steering gear again into his hands and held the ship on her course. In the daylight he unloosed another bird and ordered me to steer by its flight. And this was done for two more days.
The morning after the last of the white birds had been freed my master bade me look out for land. I saw something low upon the water. "It is the Inaccessible Island," said my master, "where I have my dwelling and my working place." He steered the ship to where the water flowed swiftly into a great cave that was like a dragon's mouth. In that cave there was a place for the mooring of ships. The Enchanter moored the ship in its place, and then he took me up the rocky landing place.
There was a flight of great steps leading from the landing place-it was in a cave as I have told you-up to the light of day. There were a thousand wide, black steps in that flight. The Enchanter took into his hands the black staff that was shaped as two serpents twisting together, and he took me with him up the stairway.
We came out on a level place and I saw a high castle before me. There was no wall around the castle, and there was no gate to be opened. But when I came near it I found I could take no step onward. I went up, and I went down, and I tried to go onward, but I could not. Then Zabulun the Enchanter said to me:
"Around this castle of mine is a wall of air. No one can see the wall, but no one can pass it. And a bridge of air crosses my wall of air. Come now with me and I will take you over the bridge."
As the wall of air that went round the Enchanter's castle was not to be seen, neither was the bridge that went across the wall of air. But I saw my master climbing up and walking across as on a bridge. And although I saw nothing before me nor beneath me, I climbed upon something and walked across something. Following him I went downward and into the courtyard of the castle.
Within that courtyard there was a horse of brass with a giant man of brass upon it, the giant man holding a great bow in his hands. My master said to me, "If one came over the bridge of air without my authority, the arrow of that bow would be loosened, and he who came across the bridge would be slain by this giant man of brass." We went within the castle. In the hall were benches and tables, and there were statues holding torches in their hands standing by the wall. Also in that hall there was the statue of a women holding a dart in her hand. When my master came within, the statue that held the dart flung it, and the dart struck a gleaming ruby that was in the wall. Lights came into the torches that the statues held, and all the hall was lighted up.
I sat with my master at a table, and the statues moved to us, bringing us wine and fruits. We ate and drank, and afterward a golden figure came to the Enchanter and, sitting down before him, played a game of chess with him.
The next day my master showed me more of the wonders of the Inaccessible Island. No ships came near, for there was no way to come to that island except by following the birds that were of the whiteness of a swan and that flew always in the middle distance. On this island Zabulun the Enchanter had lived for longer than the lifetimes of many men, studying magic and all the ways of enchantment. And for three years I, Eean, the son of the fisherman of the Western Island, stayed with him, learning such things as were proper for one apprenticed to an Enchanter to know.
THE ENCHANTER GOES TO BABYLON In the three years that were passed on the Inaccessible Island, nothing that is worth my telling happened, O King. But at the end of the three years my master said to me, "We will leave the Inaccessible Island, for I have mighty business before me." And when I asked, "Where do we go, O master?" he answered, "We go to Babylon."
And then, when it was the first day after the new moon, we descended the black stairway that led into the cave where the waters came. There we found a boat of brass that was like the boat that came to the Western Island on the day when my father and I were fishing in the pools of the sea. We went into that boat of brass, and it took us through the water, steering itself. We rested on lonely islands, and at last we came to a mainland, and there the Enchanter left the boat to sink beneath the water. As travelers then we went on. We came to a town, and there my master bought for himself and me the clothing of merchants. Then we came to the river that flows toward Babylon. Men go down the river in round boats that are made of rods woven together. In every boat a live ass is carried, and when the cargo is landed the boats are broken up, for they cannot go back against the current of the river. And the cargo is loaded on the asses and brought into the market in Babylon. And whatever the merchants buy in Babylon is loaded on the asses, and the asses are driven back over the mountains into the country that these men came from.
And in such boats we went down the river and came into Babylon. No city in the world is as mighty or as wonderful as Babylon. It has three hundred and sixty-five streets, and in every street there are three hundred and sixty-five palaces, and to every palace there are three hundred and sixty-five steps leading up to its door of gold and ebony. The streets, when we came into them, were thronged with mighty, blackbearded men. I was much in dread when I stood in those great streets and looked on the mighty men who went through them.
In the center of the city were the palace and the wide-spreading gardens of the King. In those gardens, as my master told me, were one or two of all the beautiful or terrible animals of the world. Those gardens I will speak of again, O King, for it was within them that I came upon the danger that was greater than the danger that I am now in.
But first the Enchanter showed me that great wonder that was near the gardens-the Tower of Babylon. It was a red tower spiraling very high into the air. Outside of it there were steps that went round it and to the very top of it-a thousand steps. And on the top of the tower, resting against the Spear of Nimrod, was the Magic Mirror of Babylon. Zabulun the Enchanter made me look to the top, and I was made fearful by looking so high.
Oh, that I might tell you, King Manus, of the wonders of the Tower of Babylon! In the shadow of it there slept two mighty ones-the two Genii who guarded Babylon, Harut and Marut they were named. Giant beings they were. As they slept there the beard of each was spread across his mighty chest, and it was a beard so broad that no horse of the mighty horses that the King owned could leap across it. Very great but very old were Harut and Marut, the Genii who guarded Babylon.
I was made fearful by looking to the top of the tower. And then I was made still more fearful by the words that Zabulun said to me. "We have come here," he said, "to steal the Magic Mirror of the Babylonians.
"It is there on the top of the tower," said the Enchanter, "resting against the Spear of Nimrod. One looking into that mirror sees all the Kings of the world. The one who threatens Babylon is shown with a spear raised in his hand. And if a King should bring an army against Babylon, the number of its men and the ways by which it comes would be shown in the mirror. The Babylonians, by means of this Magic Mirror of theirs, are always ready for their enemies, and because of this no King in all the world will venture to make war on Babylon.
"But we shall steal the mirror and make the Tower of Babylon fall. Know that I, Zabulun, was once a Prince of Babylon. They dishonored me, the men of Babylon, and drove me out of their city. And for that I shall make an end of their pride and an end of their security.
"Fear not. It will not be hard to steal the mirror and throw down the tower. Know that the King of the city is a foolish King, and that he cares only for his gardens and for the beautiful and terrible beasts that he can bring into them. And as for the Genii who guard Babylon-behold them! They are mighty beings, truly, Harut and Marut! Immeasurably old are they, and they pass their days in sleep beside the tower that they guard. I say to you that it will not be hard to overthrow the tower, and take away from the Babylonians the Magic Mirror that is their security."
As Zabulun spoke the terrible beasts in the King's gardens roared mightily, and Harut and Marut, the mighty beings who slept in the shadow of the Tower of Babylon, turned in their sleeping. The flocks of birds that had built nests in their beards (the oldest owl and the littlest hummingbird were among them) flew up and rested on the steps of the tower.
The black-bearded men of Babylon passed in their throngs, while he who was once a prince in their city, and who was now Zabulun the Enchanter, stood there with his staff in his hands and smiling to himself. And I, Eean, the Boy Apprenticed to the Enchanter, felt as if I were falling-falling down from the top of the tower.
THE PALACE OF THE KING OF BABYLON And now at the supper board of King Manus those who were eating, or drinking, or whispering to each other as the youth began his story, became silent and eager when he spoke of Babylon and the Tower of Babylon. The King himself was anxious to hear about that city that was the greatest in the world, and about the King who was the mightiest of all Kings, and he commanded the attendants to cease going here and there. So the servers and chamberlains and stewards, with the dishes, and napkins, and rods of office in their hands, stood still behind those who were seated at the table. The lords leaned forward with their eyes upon the youth who sat in the storyteller's place, and the King made a sign for him to tell on. But the youth Eean was speechless for a while. Such was the memory of the high Tower of Babylon upon him that had he been standing he would have fallen down. His head sank on the arm rest of the chair, and those near him who touched his hand felt it chilled. Then King Manus signaled for a chamberlain to go to him, and he went and wiped Eean's brow with a napkin, and then brought him a goblet of the richest wine. He raised up his head and drank, and looked down the table, and saw the high candles that burned brightly, and saw the face of the King and the faces of the lords who sat with the King. But for a while his look was the look of a man whose spirit is in another place. He heard the words that were spoken around him-words that were about the King of Babylon, and the King of Babylon's palace. The youth listened to these words and went on to speak of what befell him.
The walls of the King's palace (said Eean, the Boy Apprenticed to an Enchanter) make seven circles, one wall rising higher than the other, and each wall having a different color. The first wall is white, the second wall is black, and the third wall is scarlet; the fourth wall is blue, the fifth wall is orange, the sixth wall is plated with silver, and the seventh wall is plated with gold. I was filled with wonder when I looked on the walls of the King's palace.
The Enchanter that day had put on the dress of a merchant, but under it he had left his own garb-the straight coat that had the curious figures upon it. He took into his hand the staff that was made of two serpents twisting together, and he told me that the time had come to go to the palace and speak with the King.
At an early hour, before it was yet market time, we went through the streets of the city. The soldiers let us pass through the Gate of Brass along a way that has on each side great lions carved in stone. We came to the palace, and my master spoke to the doorkeepers and they permitted us to enter. We went through the outer courts where there were soldiers who carried naked swords in their hands. And because my master gave himself out to be a merchant from far-off parts, and because the King greatly desired to speak with those who came from far-off parts, we were brought into the presence of the King of Babylon.
He looked, O King Manus, like a King that was of a long line of Kings. His black beard was powdered with gold, and spices burned before him. But his face was white, and it was like the face of a man in a dream. Only one person stood near him-a dwarf from the Country of the Dwarfs. He had on his head a crown of scarlet feathers.
When we came before him, and after we had bowed, the King looked upon us. He spoke to my master, and said, "What have you to sell, merchant?"
And my master, before he spoke, let fall his merchant's robe, and he showed himself in the straight garb that was covered with curious figures-the garb of a Magus it was.
"What I have to sell," he said, "is the meaning of dreams, O King."
And now, O King Manus, I have to tell of a cheat worked upon a King, and of a cheat worked by my master, Zabulun the Enchanter, upon the King of Babylon. Pretending to speak of the meaning of dreams he led the King to destruction, hoping thereby to encompass the destruction of Babylon.
The King of Babylon turned to his ancient dwarf and he said, "Remind me of my dreams." And then the ancient dwarf, said to the King, "Of the three dreams that seemed remarkable to you, O King, the first was the Dream of the Three Dishes."
"It is even so," said the King. "I dreamed that there were three dishes set before me, no more than three dishes. And then I dreamed that afterward these three dishes were hidden from me and were not to be found. There was no one to tell me the signification of this dream."
"The signification of this dream," said Zabulun the Enchanter cunningly, "is easy to discover. In the lore of the Chaldeans a dish signifies a treasure. You have dreamed of a threefold treasure that is hidden away."
But the dwarf who was beside the King spoke up and said, "Why does a dish signify a treasure?"
"That is something I may not reveal," said my master, Zabulun the Enchanter, and he turned to the dwarf the staff that was formed of two serpents twisting together. The end of the staff lifted itself as though the serpents were rising up. The dwarf covered his eyes, and cried out, "O Magus!"
"Remind me of the second dream that was considered remarkable," said the King. And the dwarf said, "The second dream was the Dream of the Laden Ass."
"It is even so," said the King. "I dreamed that I looked down the Way of the Lions, and there came along the way a laden ass. Of that dream, also, the skilled ones could tell me nothing."
"And yet the dream is plain," said the Enchanter, looking full into the eyes of the King. "A laden ass signifies a treasure found-your dream is of a treasure being brought into your palace."
"It is so," said the ancient dwarf with the crown of scarlet feathers upon his head. "In dreams an ass is always laden with treasure."
"And what was my third dream?" said the King. "Your third dream," said the ancient dwarf, "was the Dream of the Arrows."
"It is even so," said the King of Babylon. "I dreamed of many arrows that were shot upward to a great height."
And then the King was silent, and he and the dwarf looked upon Zabulun the Enchanter. But Zabulun took a step nearer to them, and he said:
"In the lore of the Chaldeans, arrows shot upward signify a very high tower. I can tell you now the significance of your three dreams, O King. They are of a treasure that is to come into your possession. The treasure is hidden. It is hidden beneath a tower. The height to which the arrows were shot shows that the treasure is hidden under the highest of towers-under the Tower of Babylon."
At the mention of the Tower of Babylon, O King of the Western Island, a great fear came over me, for I knew that it was now that Zabulun's plan for the taking of the Magic Mirror was being put into practice. And it seemed to me that fear came over the ancient dwarf too, for he fell down upon his face. But rage grew in the King, and his black brows drew together in a frown.
"Are you one who would have the King make search for treasure beneath the Tower of Babylon?" he cried out.
"No search need be made there," said Zabulun the Enchanter. "And yet if the King should dream of treasure again it is proper that he should sacrifice a black cock upon the place where the treasure has been shown to be hidden. If that be done the dream will be banished and will come to the King no more. I speak as a Magus. But now I have shown you the meaning of the three dreams, and there is no more to be shown." And saying this the Enchanter put the garb of a merchant over the robe of the Magus. A cup was handed to him and a cup was handed to me also. This was to signify to us that our speech with the King was at an end. There was wine in our cups, but bitterness had been mixed with the wine, to signify that what had been told the King was not pleasing to him.
We went from the presence of the King, and when we were far outside the palace my master said to me:
"It will come about that the King will search for the treasure that I have put into his dreams. Moreover, he will speak to others of this treasure, and they, too, will search for it. It will come about that these many searchers, digging for the treasure, will break upon the foundations of the Tower of Babylon. Thereupon I will take the Magic Mirror and make myself the master of the Babylonians."
This he said to me as I went with him from the King's palace along the Way of the Lions. I was afraid, and it seemed to me that the lions that were in stone looked fiercely down on us as we passed.
THE KING OF BABYLON We lived for a whole moon in Babylon, my master Zabulun and I, before the danger that was greater than the danger that is upon me now showed itself to me. Just before the hour of the market we would go through the streets of the city and toward the great market place. Throngs of people would be there, gathered together for buying or selling, or for talk of the happenings of the day before. My master would take me to a shady place, and we would sit there, resting or refreshing ourselves with drafts of the wine of the palm.
And Zabulun would tell me that the King we had spoken with was the most foolish King who had ever ruled over Babylon. "Great and terrible he seems when he sits upon his throne in his palace," Zabulun would say, "but for all that he is foolish, and he delights more to come into the market and hear the talk of strangers than to sit in his council chamber."
Again and again Zabulun would speak of the King, and he would say: "Often he comes here, and he sits in the market place and talks with all comers, which is against the customs of the Kings of Babylon. We will see him come here, and we will watch him do what is reported of him."
Seated in the market in a shady place I would watch the throngs that moved about there. I saw the merchants who had come down the river in such round boats as we had voyaged in. They brought casks of the wine of the palm to the market. And I saw those who had come from Arabia with spices, and my master would tell me how these spices had been gathered. Some had frankincense that grows on trees that are guarded by winged serpents. Only with smoke of burning styrax could they drive the serpents from the trees. And others had cassia that is found in a shallow lake guarded by fierce, batlike creatures. To gather it men have to cover themselves all over with the hides of cattle, leaving openings for their eyes only. And there are the merchants who have the labdanum that settles on low bushes, and that sticks to the beards of he-goats that go among the bushes. Others have the cinnamon that is used by birds to build their nests against high cliffs. Men cannot climb these cliffs to gather the sticks of cinnamon, but they make the birds bring into their nests such weights as break the nests down and so strew on the ground the sticks of cinnamon. They slaughter cattle under the cliffs, and the birds fly into their nests with great pieces of the meat, and the weight of these pieces of meat breaks down the nests. And so men gather cinnamon in Arabia.
And one day my master showed me the King of Babylon as he came into the market place.
He wore a black cloak that had only one stripe of purple in it, and a boy went beside him holding an Indian hound on a leash. Having come into the market the King seated himself in a special place, and he drank wine and ate honey cakes, and talked with the strangers that were brought before him, and let himself be gaped at by throngs of people. And then, from one to another of those who were around him, my master and I heard it said, "The King, surely, has had remarkable dreams."
In three days my master was sent for by the King, and he came into the palace again bringing me with him, and he was saluted as a Magus. The King's dreams were told to him. The first dream was of a drinking cup that blazed with fire, and the second dream was of a ram-headed man with golden horns, and the third dream was of a soldier in a black cloak. All those dreams, according to those in the palace who considered dreams, were of a treasure. Zabulun, my master, agreed that assuredly they were of a treasure, knowing that whatever the King dreamed of after he had put the thought of a treasure into the minds of those in the palace would be thought to be of that and of nothing else.
Then speaking as a Magus he told them that the blazing fire of the drinking cup, the golden horns on the ram-headed man, and the blackness of the soldier's cloak all signified the Tower of Babylon. The King and the ancient dwarf became very silent when my master spoke of the tower. It was then that the Enchanter took the staff that was made of two serpents twisting together into his right hand and declared that in order to make the dream of the tower cease to trouble him, the King should sacrifice a black cock in the lowest place of the tower.
Wine was brought us then, and my master and I drank, and this time no bitterness had been put into the wine. We were given permission to go, and we went from the palace.
As for the King and the ancient dwarf who was with him, they took horses and they rode to the Tower of Babylon, the dwarf bringing with him a black cock for the sacrifice. Harut and Marut, the sleeping guardians of Babylon, looked on, but they went past them and within the tower. In the lowest place in the tower they made preparations for the sacrifice of the black cock.
Zabulun and I sat in the market place and waited, for my master said to me, "That which happens to the King, no matter how great it may be, he will speak of it in the market. We shall wait here and see if the King will come here on his way back from the tower."
So in the market place we sat, my master and I. And in the tower the King and the ancient dwarf took the black cock and fastened him by a leg to a ring that was in a very light board in the floor. The cock, fluttering upward, lifted the board. Looking down, they saw a chamber beneath. They went down into that chamber, the King and the ancient dwarf, and behold! they found in it a treasure of silver pieces, each piece marked with the mark of a King of the old times in Babylon.
Soon Zabulun, seated in the shade in the market place, showed me the King and the ancient dwarf as they came among the throng. The King seated himself in his special place and drank wine and ate cakes of honey. My master, watching him from afar, knew that he talked about the treasure he had found, for the dwarf who went with him opened a leather bag and showed certain pieces that made those around them gape in wonder.
Not long were the King and the ancient dwarf there before the Hour of the Market came to its close. Those in the market left and went to their homes. My master and I likewise departed. But those who had listened to the King brought with them the memory of the wonder they had been told about. A treasure was hidden beneath the tower-that was the thought that now possessed every one. And when dusk had fallen upon the city, companies of men made their way toward the tower, carrying with them spades and picks. The next day, when the King came with the ancient dwarf, he found that all around the tower, and all around the place where Harut and Marut slept, trenches and holes had been dug.
He himself, with a company of men, went down into the lower chamber where the treasure of silver pieces had been found, and there they began to delve. The King found no treasure that day.
When he came out of the lower chamber he found many around the tower digging and delving. He forbade them to do this, and he set guards around the tower. But in the night those who were set to guard the tower began to delve.
The digging and delving within and around the tower went on in secret as well as openly. My master took me to show me what was being done. "Foolish is the King, and foolish are the people of Babylon," he said. "What I have told you will befall them. Very soon they will strike at the foundations of the tower, and the tower will stand no more. Then will I take to myself the Magic Mirror and make myself the master of the Babylonians."
THE GENII WHO GUARDED BABYLON
O King of the Western Island (said Eean, the Boy Apprenticed to an Enchanter), I was there in Babylon for the whole of a moon before the danger that was greater than my present danger overtook me. Often Zabulun, my master, went to the palace of the King, bringing me with him. And the King would now receive us in his cool chamber, and he would permit my master to seat himself on a purple cushion in his presence. The King would ask him about the ways of governing a kingdom, or he would tell him of his wonderful gardens, and of the strange and terrible beasts he had there. Or else he would talk about a mighty treasure that was to be found, and of the beasts he would buy for his gardens when that treasure came into his hands. Zabulun would tell the King of beasts he had seen or heard of-of the aurochs with its mighty horns, of the unicorn that was so white and so swift, of the satyr that is so marvelous that no one knew whether it was a wonderful beast or a wild man. And often, as they sat there talking, the King would have his servants stir up the beasts in his gardens so that their roarings might be heard by those in the palace.
Over the King and the King's ancient dwarf there had come a change, I thought. For the dwarf with the crown of scarlet feathers on his head would stand silent before the throne, silent even though the King spoke to him, silent as if listening to the sound that the spades and picks made on the ground around the Tower of Babylon. And the King no longer had the look of a ruler on his face, but had the look of a watcher and a waiter. There had come a change over my master also. Zabulun the Enchanter had eyes like yellow lamps, and they had become wider and more gleaming as the digging and delving around the Tower of Babylon went on. I could hardly see his face. And I began to have a great fear of Zabulun, even though he was kind to me, and had taught me many things.
And now I come to the day when that danger beset me that was greater than my present danger. That morning I had walked in the King's gardens with Zabulun, my master. I saw the great palm trees that grew there. So high and so shapely they grew that I was made to think again of the Tower of Babylon, and I was shaken by my thought. I looked along the great avenue of palms, and I saw down to the lake where the King's blue herons flew. And from the lake coming toward us I saw a young girl. She had laid the long blue feathers of the heron across her breast, and I saw her white forehead and her white knees, for her dress was the dress of a woman of the mountains. But she, seeing Zabulun and me, sprang as a young deer springs, and went among the palm trees. I kept thinking of that girl, and how free she was, and how no terror of a falling tower beset her as she went by the lake where the King's blue herons flew or rested.
Again Zabulun, my master, sat in the King's presence, and the ancient dwarf and I attended on them. The dwarf's head hung down where he stood, and he muttered. The King's voice was low when he spoke, but Zabulun spoke loudly. Also his yellow eyes shone as he twisted around his finger a purple strip that had been torn off the King's robe.
And suddenly there came the mighty roaring of beasts in the King's gardens. The dwarf looked at the King, and the King spoke to the dwarf, and there was astonishment on both their countenances, for no command had been given to have the beasts stirred up. The King rose from where he sat and went to the doorway. I, too, saw what he saw. The doorkeepers, and even the soldiers who had naked swords in their hands, were fleeing as before some terror. The King shouted his commands, but no one heeded them. I looked upon the King, and the King's wrath was terrible to behold.
And then I saw the King himself draw back in fear. What was it that approached? I, too, looked, and there, O King Manus, as I declare to you, I saw Harut and Marut, the giant guardians of Babylon, come through the outer courts and toward the chamber where the King stood.
They were naked but for their great beards and their flowing hair. They came with great strides, but their heads and their hands were swaying about like the heads and hands of men suddenly waked out of a deep slumber. The ancient dwarf saw them approach, and he screamed out and fled.
The King went out of the chamber and into the hall where the great pillars were. I called to my master, and he arose from the cushions where he sat, and he looked upon the two who came nearer. Along the line of the pillars Harut and Marut came, but Zabulun the Enchanter looked upon them without fear.
The King fell upon his knees as they came near him. My master's face did not become fearful, but he, too, went down on his knees as if powerful and unseen hands had forced him down. His eyes did not lose their look of scorn, but he knelt even as the King knelt. The King and the Enchanter were both Princes of Babylon, and when Harut and Marut showed themselves in their might, there was something within them that forced them to sink down on their knees.
And nearer and nearer Harut and Marut came, their heads swaying about and their arms hanging down. Nearer and nearer they drew. They touched the head of the King, and the King lay prone on the ground as though the life had left him. They came to where Zabulun the Enchanter knelt. But not on Zabulun's head did they lay their hands. They took him by the arms and they held him. Turning around, they dragged him along the line of the pillars. I saw him being drawn across the outer court and through one of the great doorways of the King's palace.
And then it seemed that I was the only one left in the palace of the Kings of Babylon. The King did not stir where he lay prone, and the dwarf did not return, and the doorkeepers did not show themselves any more. I ran from the chamber, and out through one of the great doors, and into a place where branches of trees seemed to shield me from the terror that had fallen upon the palace. And I did not know then that I was running from terror clear into the mouth of danger.
Dreadful things had happened outside as well as within the palace of the King. The beasts that were in the gardens had broken out of their pits and their cages. I saw the beasts and I felt them all around me. I saw the hippopotami as they lay with their backs against the crimson wall of the palace. I saw the zebras stamp between the yellow wall and the blue wall, and ostriches run between the black and the white walls. And when I looked back from where I was in the gardens I saw monkeys climb on the golden and silver walls, frightened by the lions that went roaring through the courts of the palace. I ran on and on, down the great avenue of palms and toward the lake where the King's blue herons flew or rested.
I ran on. But I had gone aside from the avenue of the palms, seeing a great buffalo that stood in my way. Something caught at my feet as I ran on the clear ground, and being tripped, I fell into a deep pit. I lay there, and I looked to the sky, and I saw that the pit narrowed to the top, and for that reason was hard to climb out of. It was higher again by my own height, as I saw when I stood up thinking of a way that might get me out.
But then there came a sound that made me look downward, a hissing sound. And when I looked down I saw into what place I had fallen-into the Pit of the Serpent. In the shadow of the pit there was a dreadful snake. It was still in its coils, but its head was raised, and it was swaying toward me.
Then, O King of the Western Island, I was in a danger greater than I am in now. This snake was mighty enough to crush a man, and from that pit there was no escape without help, and at that moment there was no help. The snake raised itself higher, and its eyes fastened my eyes. Judge, then, of my danger, and whether it was not greater than the danger I am in now as I sit here with the gleam of the slaying sword before my eyes.
And then I heard a whisper that seemed to come to me from the sky. I drew my eyes from the snake's eyes and I looked to the top of the pit. Bending from the opening was a girl, and she had in her hands a little drum. She began to beat on the drum, and the snake's head that was swaying toward me began to sway sideways. The girl beat again on the drum, and the snake's head swayed and swayed and went down upon its coils. At last the dreadful head was at rest, and the eyes of the snake no longer fastened themselves upon my eyes.
The girl who stood above the pit put down a board for me to climb up by. I climbed, and I stood outside the pit, and I looked upon the girl, and I saw the blue heron's feathers laid across her breast. Then I sank down on the ground, and for a while I knew no more of the world's happenings.
AGAIN THE HORSES OF KING MANUS It was as if the eyes of the snake were still upon him. Eean stopped in his story, and his eyes were wide as if they looked upon a terrible thing. One of the servers brought him a cup of wine and placed it in his hands, but although he kept his fingers around it, he did not raise it to his lips.
Nor did he appear to hear what was being said around the King's supper table: "A great danger the boy was in, truly." "The danger he is in now is not as great as the danger he has told us of." "We must hear the end of this story." "It seems that he is too fearful to tell us any more." This last speech came to the ears of King Manus. "Be not so fearful, boy," said the King. "You have been in a greater danger than ever I heard a man speak of, and by my sword, you are in less danger now than you were then. Drink the wine that is in it and keep the cup you have for a remembrance. I would have you at your ease, too, for we will sit here and listen to the rest of your story."
When the King said this the lords who were sitting around the supper board applauded, and then the stewards signaled to the attendants to bring more lights in. Fresh candles were put upon the board, and fresh torches were put into the sconces, and fresh logs were put upon the hearth. When all this was done the King and his lords turned their faces to Eean, for they were ready to listen to the rest of the story. But the boy had not seated himself in the storyteller's chair: still he was standing with the winecup between his hands, and still his eyes were widened as if a terrible thing was before him.
It was then, as they were waiting for him to begin, that the neigh of a horse was heard again. It was a very shrill neigh, and every one in the supper hall was startled by it. Out they rushed, King and lords, stewards, servers, and attendants, and they neither stopped nor stayed until they came before the King's great stable. Then they could hardly believe what their eyes looked upon: the iron door of the stable was open wide; the watchers were there, but their heads were bent in sleep and their swords were upon the ground. Through the open door of the stable came the whinnyings and the plungings and the tramplings of a horse. Quickly they went into the stable. There, by the light of the torches that the attendants held, they saw the white horse and the red horse still in their stalls, but the black horse they saw rearing above a figure that was prone upon the ground.
The blaze of their torches made the black horse swerve so that his hoofs did not come down upon the figure that was upon the stable floor. The horse was taken hold of and put back into his stall. Then the attendants raised up the one who was upon the ground. "Another one come to steal my horses," cried King Manus. "Well, this one shall pay the penalty that the other has been delivered from."
They took up the one who was on the floor of the stable. They locked the stable door again and they put a double watch before it. They brought the one whom they had taken into the supper hall; a lad, younger even than Eean, this second robber seemed.
Eean was standing by the storyteller's seat as they came into the supper hall. Looking upon the one they brought in he cried out in the voice of the heartbroken, "O Bird-of-Gold, why didst thou peril thyself by staying here? Too faithful to me thou hast been!" Hearing this speech, all looked on the one who was called Bird-of-Gold: it was then that they saw they had taken, not a youth as they had supposed, but a young girl whose dress was a youth's dress.
In the light of the torches and candles they looked at her wonderingly. She had knitted brows and heavy eyelids that gave to her face the look of one who ponders deeply. And there was such fire behind the depths of her eyes that it seemed as if her thought was always burning. But her lips were colorless and her cheeks were thin and sunken; her hair and her eyes and her eyebrows were dead black. And when they went to bind her as they had bound Eean they saw that her hands were finely shaped and yet strong and hard.
"Who is she?" said King Manus.
"I have told you of her," said Eean. "This is she who found me in the Pit of the Serpent and who drew me away from the venom of the snake."
There was silence for a while, and then the King said, "The chance that was given you shall be given her also. If she can show us that she was in a danger greater than the danger she is in now her life shall not be taken. If she cannot show that, she shall be slain by the sword on tomorrow's sunrise."
At that some of the trouble that was on Eean's face seemed to leave it. He cried out, "O Bird-of-Gold, tell the King the story of your adventures from the beginning. Think thee, Bird-of-Gold, of the terrible things you have gone through and speak to the King and the lords of them. This King is very generous, and you may win your life from him."
The girl who was called Bird-of-Gold turned to the King her face that seemed to him to be like the face of a slave and a victorious warrior. Her hands were bound before her and her black hair fell over her breast. Like one who was ever ready in deed and word, as soon as King Manus made a gesture, she began.
The Story of Bird-of-Gold who was the Bramble Gatherer's Daughter
HOW THE BRAMBLE GATHERER'S DAUGHTER WENT TOWARD HER FORTUNE
I am called Bird-of-Gold (said the girl, beginning her story), but that name did not belong to me until I was a girl grown. Before that I had no name. In the city where I was born and where I lived I was known as "the bramble gatherer's child."
My father was the poorest of all the men of that town. He gathered brambles and thorns in the wilderness and brought them in a bundle to the hut where we lived. Then, while he was gathering another bundle on another day, I would go through the town selling the brambles and thorns for stuff for the people's fires. My mother I never knew. I grew up with my father, and we two had even less than the sparrows. I had no playmate and no friend, and what I got for the thorns and brambles I sold brought us but little to eat.
One day as I passed along the street of the city it came into my mind that I was grown to be a girl. The thought that I should go from the city grew in me from that time. My father would miss me, but he would flourish better if there were one, and not two, to eat the scanty meal that the price of the brambles and thorns gained for us.
I got for myself the cap and jacket of a boy. Then one morning when my father had gone from the hut and had turned his face to the wilderness and his back to the city, I went out of the door and turned to the wilderness also. I took a direction that would bring me far from where my father had gone. I had dressed myself as a boy, and my thought was that I would come upon a merchant who would let me do service for him, and who, perhaps, would take me on a voyage. And I thought that I might win some fortune for myself, and that then I could return and take my father out of toil and hardship.
I came to the wilderness and I went through it. When the sun was halfway in the heavens I came to where there was a road. There was a pillar before me and that pillar had writing upon it. I read what was written there. The words were: They who take the road to the right will come to their fortune at last, and they who take the road to the left will be ever as they have been. When I read that writing I took the road that was to my right.
I went along that road thinking every minute that I should come upon something that would bring me to my fortune. The light faded as I went along, and soon I had to look about for some tree or cave that would give me a shelter for the night. At last I saw a hut and I went toward it. When I came before the broken door I knew the place I had been brought to. It was my father's hut-the hut I had left that morning. And as I stood before it I saw my father coming from the other side with the bundle of brambles and thorns upon his back. Then I said to myself, "How lying was the writing that said that they who took the road to their right would come at last to their fortune."
I went into the hut with my father. In the darkness he did not see that I had on the cap and jacket of a boy. He laid the bundle of brambles and thorns down on the floor while I went to prepare the meal for both of us. And while my father was lighting a fire I took off the cap and jacket of a boy and I put on my girl's dress.
My father, when he had eaten his meal, said to me, "Today when I had gathered the brambles and had made them into a bundle I lay with my head on the bundle and went to sleep. I awakened feeling some warmth near where my head lay. I looked to see if perchance the brambles and thorns had caught on fire, and, lo! what I saw laid on the bundle was the egg of a bird. The egg was still warm, and the bird that laid it must have flown as I awakened."
My father showed me the egg. It was strangely marked and was heavy for its size. I looked at it, and my father said, "Take it to the merchant tomorrow, and maybe he will give a coin for it, for surely it is remarkable."
The next day, when my father had gone into the wilderness, I went to the shop of the merchant. I showed him the egg that had the strange markings upon it, and I asked him if he would give me something for it. And when the merchant had taken the egg in his hand he said, "This is something to be shown the King. It is undoubtedly the egg of the Bird of Gold."
I was greatly stirred when I heard the merchant say this, and I thought that perhaps my fortune would come to me through this egg. I went back to the hut, and in the morning, before my father started off for his bramble gathering, two officers came and they took my father and me to the palace and before the King. And the King said, "It is known that of all creatures in the world the Bird of Gold is best worth possessing. For her claws can be made into an amulet that will bring wealth to the one who wears it, and the one who eats her heart can never be slain by his enemy. I would have the Bird of Gold whose egg you have found. You know where she lives. Catch her and bring her to me, and I shall reward you."
So spoke the King of our little country. My father and I went into the wilderness to search for the Bird of Gold around the place where the egg had been laid. And in the very place where he had lain my father put down his bundle of brambles and thorns. Laying his head upon the bundle, he went to sleep.
I watched beside the brambles and thorns. And after a time a bird came running along the ground, and went fluttering up on the bundle and made a nest for herself. Small she was, and all golden except for the blue that was under her throat, and the blue that was upon her feet. As she was making a nest for herself I put my hands upon her and caught her. I held her to my breast to keep her from fluttering away.
And I said aloud, "O bird, now I shall be rewarded for taking thee. For the King would make an amulet of thy feet that he may have wealth, and he would eat thy heart that his enemies may not be able to slay him. Greatly will he reward me for having taken thee, O Bird of Gold."
And as I spoke to her and held her to my breast the bird made a cry that sounded as "Alas, Alas!" I looked upon her again, and my heart was filled with sorrow for the bird I had taken. Why should her claws be made into an amulet for the King, and why should her heart be eaten by him? I sat there thinking while my father slept, holding the bird very gently to my breast. And when she cried again "Alas, Alas!" I opened my hands and I let her fly away. She fluttered near for a while as if to show herself to me, and then she rose up and flew away.
My father awakened, and he said, "It is near dark, and the Bird of Gold will not come now. Perhaps we will find her on another day. The King should reward us for our search, and now we will go to him and tell him of it."
So we rose up and we went into the city. And when we came before him, my father spoke to the King and told him that the Bird of Gold was not to be seen in the places where we had searched. Then the King would have sent us away without doing any evil to us only one who was near him cried out: "Behold, O King, and decree a punishment for these two deceivers. One has declared that the Bird of Gold did not come near where they searched. But look on the dress of the girl. All around her breast are the feathers of the Bird of Gold."
Thereupon I looked down and I saw that the bird's golden feathers were all strewn around the place where I had held her to me. I was grasped by the hands and brought before the King. And he cried out, "Have you the bird hidden?" I said: "No, O King. I let the bird fly out of my hands." Then the King spoke to one who stood beside him, and he commanded that I should be taken and put upon a ship and thrown into the depths of the sea.
I was taken from my father, who wept and cried after me, and I was brought down to the river and put upon a ship. The one who was commanded by the King to take me and throw me into the depths of the sea was a man with a great hooked nose and a purple beard. On his hand was a ring with a great emerald in it. He was the captain of the King's ships.
I was put upon the ship, and the next day we sailed down the river and came out on the sea. Now, although the King had commanded that I be thrown into the depths of the sea, I was not then in as great a danger as I am in now, O King of the Western Island. For the captain of his ships hated all the words that the King gave him, and those whom the King would slay he would save, and those whom the King would save he would have slain. When we came into the open sea, so that he might obey the King's word and at the same time make a mock of it, he had me thrown into the water, but with a rope around my waist. After I had been plunged into the water he had me drawn out of it, and I was left living on the ship. And from the captain who had had me plunged into the sea in such ways and from the sailors on the ship I got the name by which I have been known ever since--Bird-of-Gold.
THE MAN WHO WAS HIGH IN FORTUNE We landed in a country (said Bird-of-Gold, continuing her story) that was three days' voyage from the river's mouth. Then the sailors put swords into their belts and marched toward a mountain that was half a day's journey from the coast. They pitched black tents and they built a citadel, and they made themselves into a band of robbers. He who had been the captain of the King's ships was the chief of this band.
Every day they went off to rob caravans and to make war upon the men who guarded the caravans. And always they came back, my master and his forty robbers, with no man of their band slain and with no man wounded. Very rich and powerful did they grow with the plunder they took from the caravans, and my master, the man with the hooked nose and the purple beard, grew to be a King almost. Men far and near sent him presents and men came to him promising obedience, and he had state such as had the King of my country. But he kept no men with him except his forty robbers.
Every one said of my master, the captain of the band, that nothing could come to him except good fortune, so great and so prosperous did he grow. Men marveled that so many good things came to him and so many evil things were staved off from him. And all his band swore by his good fortune. But one day a wise King who liked him greatly sent my master a message that said: "I rejoice in your good fortune, friend, but am also troubled by it. He who is so lucky must pay a great price sooner or later for his luck. Pay the price now, before it is exacted from you, and remain great and prosperous. Let the price you pay be that possession that is dearest to you."
My master, having received this message, paid heed to what was said in it, for the, King who sent it was renowned for his wisdom. He made up his mind to sacrifice the possession that was dearest to him so that he might remain great and prosperous. And the possession that he considered dearest was the ring that he wore with the great emerald in it. He went down to the seacoast, taking me with him, for he would let none of the forty men know what he was about to do, and he took a boat and he went, I being with him, over the depths of the sea. Then he drew from off his finger the ring that had the great emerald in it, and he let it drop down into the depths of the sea. Afterward he sent a message back to the King, his friend, saying that he had paid the price before it was exacted of him, and that his prosperity now would never fail, and that men would ever swear by his good fortune.
After that he and his forty men went forth and won more plunder than ever they had won before. Also more men came from far and near, bringing him presents and promising him obedience.
And now, being so prosperous and so feared, my master planned to attack a city and make himself the master of the King's treasure. He told his plan to his forty men and they rejoiced one and all, and they talked to each other as if that treasure was already in their hands. I prepared the meal that was to be given him before he collected his men for the march.
The meal was of fish. The fisherman who had just come from the sea laid his net before me and I took out of it an exceedingly, large and beautiful fish. I divided the fish and began to make it clean. I found within the fish something it had swallowed. It was a ring. And when I cleaned the ring I found that it was of gold and that in it was a most precious stone--a stone of emerald.
I cooked the fish and brought it to my master. And to make him rejoice I brought at the same time the ring to him. I told him that for the ring he had dropped into the depths of the sea another ring had come back to him, and that this was on account of the great good fortune that was ever with him.
He took the ring from me and he looked it all over. He cried out that this was not another ring but the same ring, and that the characters of his name were engraved upon it. And he said that it was by no means on account of his good fortune that this ring had come back to him. Thereupon he rose up and went outside, and gave command to his band that they were to disarm themselves and tie up their horses, and hold themselves back from making any attack that day. He then went into his tent and sat at the darkest part of it, his purple beard touching the ground, and all the while lamenting that his dearest possession had come back to him out of the depths of the sea.
The forty men disarmed themselves and tied up their horses and sat in little bands playing games together. I would have stayed about the encampment making bread for the band, but as I came near the tent where the kneading board was I heard a bird's cry.
I looked, and I saw near the wellhead the Bird of Gold. The bird fluttered and flew as if she wanted me to watch her. I followed where she went and I was led far from the encampment. At the edge of the wilderness she went among low bushes, and after that I could not see her any more.
Because I had seen the Bird of Gold once more I went back toward the encampment thinking about the days when I had lived in the hut of my father, the bramble gatherer, and about the day when I had left that hut, and had gone across the wilderness, and had seen the pillar on which was written that if I followed the road to the right I should come to my fortune, and about how I had come, not to my fortune, but back to the hut I had left; and I went on, thinking of how I had first heard of the Bird of Gold, and of how I had given her liberty when I might have held her for the great reward the King would have given. I went toward the encampment thinking these thoughts about myself, and thinking, too, of my master who had such fortune that men swore by the goodness of it.
I made my way toward the tent where the kneading board was. And then I saw tents overturned and lying upon the ground. I saw the horses of the band straying over the plain. And when I looked to the citadel I saw it smoking with a fire that was burning it.
There was no stir in all the encampment. I knew then that an army had come and had attacked my master and his forty men in the time that I was following the Bird of Gold or coming back from the place where she had led me. I went among the tents and I saw that the men had been killed. And I saw the purple beard of my master, cut off by some insolent enemy and left lying upon the ground.
Then I ran over the trampled grass and made for the wilderness. And when I came into the wilderness I hid myself among the bushes that the Bird of Gold had flown into. I thought that a great army was pursuing me, and in truth I was very fearful.
HOW BIRD-OF-GOLD CAME TO HER FORTUNE I hid at the near side of the wilderness (said the girl, Bird-of-Gold), for I was too fearful to go back to the encampment and too fearful to go farther on. I ate the wild fruits that grew on the bushes, and at night I covered myself with dried leaves and branches and slept in a hole. I thought how he had been destroyed, that man whose good fortune had been above everyone else's good fortune, and I did not know how such a one as I could keep alive. I was fearful while I slept, and when I awoke and sat upon a heap of leaves in that empty wilderness I was most miserable. I remembered the writing on the pillar that told me to take the road to the right on the day I left my father's hut and I put a curse upon the road I took. I cursed it because it had brought me, not to my fortune as the writing said it would bring me, but back to the hut I had left. And things were even worse with me from that time than they were before, for my return had brought me to the encounter with the King, and to the voyage with the captain of the King's ships, and to the dangerous place where I was now.
But then I began to think that although that road had brought me to my father's hut it had not brought me back to a life that was as it had been before. What had happened after I had come back to the hut had brought me farther away than that road could have led to. Perhaps the writing on the pillar was not lying, after all. It had said: They who take the road to the right will come at last to their fortune. Perhaps my fortune was farther away than I had thought.
Then I said to myself that my journeys were not yet ended, and that if I went on I should yet come to what the writing on the pillar had promised. I sat still for a while with this thought in my mind, and then I rose up and went through the wilderness, going straight on toward a star that was still in the sky.
I left the wilderness with its low shrubs at last, and I came out on a wide, green plain. Before going on that plain I ate again of the wild fruit that was on the bushes and I brought some of the wild fruit with me. I went on and on over the miles of grass. When it was midday I saw a whiteness upon the plain before me.
I went toward that whiteness and in a while I saw that it was all in movement. There were white living creatures there. I went on, and I came near to where there was a hollow in the plain, and I saw in that hollow a mighty flock of ducks. They were tame, for they did not rise up and fly as I came near.
I looked upon them with great astonishment. I had never seen so many ducks together. I looked them all over and I made a guess that there were a thousand ducks there. And I had never seen such beauty in ducks before. For these ducks were of a gleaming whiteness, and moreover they had a shapeliness that I had never seen in such creatures before. I thought and thought, but I could not think how they had come into this unpeopled plain in such a vast flock.
I sat down on the grass and I watched them feeding, thinking surely that some one would come and drive the flock to some market or to some great farm. I watched, and the ducks ate and ate in the hollow where they stayed. When the darkness came the thousand ducks put their heads under their wings and settled down on the ground. I pulled grass to make a bed for myself, and ate the fruit I had brought with me, and lay down in a cold place near the hollow.
I was awakened by the thousand ducks quacking loudly, and I looked and saw that they had spread themselves over the plain and were moving in a direction. I thought I should follow the ducks, and I did, and I was able to chase away two or three foxes that would have hunted them.
They were beautiful, these thousand ducks, as they went over the green plain. They were shapely and active, and they had a wonderful soft whiteness. The drakes were not colored differently, but they had crests and tails that curled. When they knew I was with them they did not go straying here and there, but kept themselves together as a flock and went marching in a direction. I thought that they might bring me to my fortune. And then I thought that this great flock of ducks, so strangely without an owner, was my fortune.
I was faint and hungry, but I went on rejoicing in the beauty of the ducks. I gave them time to feed, and they fed. At last I came to the gate of a town. The watcher was astonished at the greatness of the flock and he called to the townspeople to come out and fill their eyes with the spectacle. They came and asked me, "Who are you, O girl?" and I made answer, "I am the girl whose fortune is in ducks." The people came on the walls of the town and looked over them, while the ducks spread themselves out and stood still. And more and more the people marveled at the number and the extraordinary beauty of the ducks.
The people set a place apart for the ducks and they gave me a shelter in which I might rest and refresh myself. After a while I heard them say, "The officers of the great King of Babylon should see this girl and her ducks. There is a marvel here for the great King to hear about." People came to see the ducks as a spectacle, and one would say to the other, "No prince by any river in China has such a wonderful collection of ducks."
And then I was told that the officers of the great King of Babylon would come to look on my flock. These officers had come into the country to get for the King's gardens birds and beasts that were remarkable.
They came and looked on the flock and marveled that, whether they rested or were feeding, the thousand ducks harkened to my call and went as I bade them go. They spoke, admiring their shape and whiteness. And then a dwarf who had a crown of scarlet feathers on his head came among them, and the officers spoke to him. This dwarf told me they would take the flock for the King, and that they would take me also to the great city, where I would have the office of minding the ducks in the King's gardens.
So I brought the thousand ducks down to a great barge that was on the river, and I went on the barge, and the officers of the King with the dwarf that had the crown of scarlet feathers on his head went aboard it, and we sailed down the river, and we came into the great city. For two days the King had me show the wondrous flock in the market place as a spectacle for the people. All Babylon came and admired the number and the comeliness of the ducks. Afterward they were brought to the lake that was in the King's gardens. As time went on many of the flock were taken by the purveyors and killed and eaten in the palace. But still they remained a wonder for their number and their comeliness. The King often came down to look on the thousand ducks swimming on the water or staying in their companies around the lake.
BIRD-OF-GOLD IN THE KING'S GARDENS
No place in the whole world is more beautiful than the King's gardens in Babylon (Bird-of-Gold said). My white ducks, when they swam upon the lake, went among water lilies that were silver-white or all golden. Beside the lake the irises grew, depths and depths of blue and gold and cloud-colored irises. I should never have left the side of that lake if I had not wanted to be among the trees that grew in the gardens above-palm trees of many kinds, and great cedar trees in the dark branches of which the doves built their nests. Greatly did I admire the trees in the King's gardens, for I had come from a country where there were no trees. All the palms were there--the date palm, and the royal palm, and the palm of the desert. They stood nobly by themselves or they made solemn avenues that led to monuments of the Kings of Babylon. In the grass there were golden poppies and little roses that just lifted themselves above the ground. There were great monuments, too-statues of Kings and lions and chariots, and these reminded people of terrors and magnificences, and they were as a great wind that blew through the gardens.
And there were tulips on the ground, and there were golden fruits among gleaming leaves, and red pomegranates on the high trees, and there were spice trees that filled with fragrance the garments of those who passed. And allin a garden to themselves were the roses-a thousand rose trees, each tree with a thousand opened flowers. I wept when I saw that garden of roses, and I do not know why I wept.
All the birds that were lovely to look at or charming to hear singing were in that garden. The black birds with golden wings from my own country were there, and the birds of paradise from the Land of the Burning Mountain. And it was told that the nightingales of Persia and Babylon and Arabia brought their young here that they might learn to sing the more perfectly. Also there were mockingbirds that mocked every bird's song but the song of the nightingale.
As for the beasts in the King's gardens, the first one I made friends with was a lynx. He was not in a cage, but went roaming about, watching everything with eyes that never winked. And after I had come to know him and had made friends with him, the lynx brought me to the cages and the pits of the other beasts and with them I made friends.
Of all the creatures that were there the one I was most fearful of was the queen serpent that was in the Pit of the Serpent. But the serpent attracted me, and I used to sit above the pit, the lynx beside me, and watch her as she uncoiled herself and swayed her head about. And as I watched her I would beat on a little drum that I carried with me. I began to see that as I beat the drum and made music for her, the serpent would cease to sway her head and she would lower it, and then she would rest upon her coils as if she were sleeping. So I grew to have power over the serpent, and many times when I saw her try to draw down a bird that had come to the edge of the pit, I would beat upon the drum until her head sank down. Then the bird would rouse itself out of the spell that the serpent's eyes had put on it and fly away.
So I stayed in the King's gardens, part of the day with the thousand ducks that were about the lake, and part of the day with the ever-watchful lynx that went here and went there.
One day I came up from the lake after having decked myself with the blue herons' feathers that lay about. I saw two persons where none but the King or the King's ancient dwarf ever came. One was a man who wore a straight garment that had curious figures woven upon it, and who carried in his hand a staff that was formed of two serpents twisting together. The one who was with him was a boy, and my heart went out to him because he was young, and I had seen no one who was young in all my days in Babylon. The two walked in the gardens, and I ran and hid from them.
A day came soon after when I came up from the lake and did not find the lynx who was my friend. I went searching for him, and at last I came upon him. He had gone up into one of the great chariots that were for a monument to a King. I saw him watching from the chariot. I went beside him, and the lynx did not move, but kept watching, watching.
Before I saw what was coming I heard a great trampling noise. I saw trees break and fall down. Flocks of birds came flying toward me, and I saw the deer start up and run. Then I saw enormous shapes coming striding through the gardens. They were as men, but men as high as towers. As they came on, trees fell down before them, and beasts broke out of their pits and cages and crouched before them. The beasts were filled with fear, and they roared and screeched and trumpeted as if fearful things were about to happen to them. The giant men passed where I stood in the great chariot and they came to the gateway that led into the courts of the King's palace. They put their hands to the stones above the gateway, and the heavy, mortared stones fell, leaving a space high enough for the men to pass through. I looked from the King's palace toward the city, and I saw the Way of the Lions and it was black with people that fled from the palace-soldiers and servants and attendants. I saw the beasts of the gardens bound or crash through the broken gateway, entering the courts of the palace.
I saw the giant men come forth from the palace. Now they held a man by the arms and dragged him along. They crossed the gardens dragging the man, and for a time I watched the dust that their progress made.
As I watched I saw someone come fleeing from the palace. He ran on, coming straight to the place from where I watched. He stumbled as he ran, and I saw him fall into the Pit of the Serpent. It had seemed to me as I watched him that this was the boy who had walked with the strange man in the gardens.
In my hands I had the little drum whose sound could put a spell upon the queen serpent. I ran toward the pit holding the drum. And when I bent over I saw that the head of the serpent was very near to the boy. I beat upon the drum, and the serpent heard, and her head ceased to sway about. Then her head went down, and she remained in her coils upon the ground.
I drew the boy up, and I led him to the lake and I bathed his face and his hands. The day had almost passed before he was able to speak to me. Then he told me who he was, and what the events were that had happened in the King's palace. And that boy is the one who is before you now, O King of the Western Island--Eean, the fisherman's son, who was apprenticed to the Enchanter.
HOW BIRD-OF-GOLD WENT TO THE TOP OF THE TOWER Long did it take Eean to tell me the whole of the story, and when he had told it and I had gathered and put together all of it, I said to him, "Not yet has the tower fallen, and ere it comes down one might go to the top and take the Magic Mirror of the Babylonians and put it in the hands of the King."
"The King may be dead," Eean said, "or else he may be in such a state that he cannot see or hear any more."
We were then sitting under the greatest of the cedar trees, and he was eating pomegranates from my lap. I looked from out the shade of the cedar tree, and I saw the King of Babylon walking in his gardens.
The King was fearful; he looked to the right and to the left as he went on. When he saw a little deer that was standing still he was startled, and he turned back. As he came near the cedar tree he saw me standing there before him. I prostrated myself and I said, "O King, fear not for Babylon. The tower has not yet fallen, and the Magic Mirror will yet be placed in your hands." But the King only said, "Go to the tower and bring back to me the black cock that I tied to a board but did not sacrifice." Thereupon the King went within the palace.
I called upon Eean to come, and we went down the Way of the Lions, and through the Gate of Brass, and out into the city. It was the Hour of the Market, but there were no people in the market place. We went on, Eean and I, and we came before the tower. There we saw a throng such as would have filled many markets, and they were standing round and gazing at the tower.
I had never looked before on the Tower of Babylon. It was built tower upon tower to the height of four towers, and its color was red. Around the whole height of it went a stairway showing steps on this side and that as it went winding around. On the top of the topmost tower I saw a gleam, and I knew it was the Magic Mirror of the Babylonians.
That gleam dazzled me and put into my mind the thought of going to the top of the tower. I, out of all that throng, would go and bring down the Magic Mirror! I went among them, and they let me pass, for I had on me now the dress of one who belonged to the palace. I stood before the throng and I saw where a great space of rock was worn smooth-it was the rock against which Harut and Marut had lain.
I came to the first steps of the tower, and I climbed three of them. I heard the murmur of those who spoke of me, and I stood still. Then up the first round of the steps I went, keeping my mind from the thought of the great height that was above me. I came at last to where the second tower grew from the top of the first, and I stood and looked down, and I saw that the men below had already become little. It was then that I felt terror of the height that was above me.
I began to climb the steps of the second tower, fearful to look down and fearful to think of the number of steps that were before me. I went on and up, all in a terrible silence, and feeling that at the step above me something unbelievable would happen.
After a great length of time I came out on the space that was the top of the second tower. On that breadth I rested. As I waited there the coldness of death seemed to come over me.
But the coldness passed, and I felt the air again. I found the steps that went up and around the third of the towers. As I went on I felt that those steps leaned down on me and crushed me, and that with my feet alone I never could surmount them. Then I went down on my hands and knees and I climbed and climbed until my hands were bruised and the parts behind my knees ached. I thought that suddenly the steps would cease to be, and that I should find no place for my hands, and that thereupon I would fall down all the height I had climbed up. But step came after step, and at last I came out on the space that was the top of the third tower.
Above me was the fourth tower. I stood holding myself against it, and I looked down all the distance I had climbed. I saw the great river shining whitely, and like pebbles in the bed of a river were the throngs below. But now my fear went from me. The silence was all around me, but I was exultant because of the silence through which I climbed. The height troubled me no more, rather it made me exultant, making me feel as the eagle feels. I came out on the top of the fourth tower, and there was nothing above me except the silent sky.
And there was the Magic Mirror of the Babylonians. It rested against the great spear that was Nimrod's, and it was turned toward the city and toward the King's palace.
I looked into the Magic Mirror. As I looked into it I saw a writing come upon it. I read the writing, and it said: Bring the Magic Mirror of the Babylonians to the King of Babylon, but burden yourself not with the Spear of Nimrod.
And that writing faded; and another writing appeared on the mirror. And the writing read: Zabulun the Enchanter has been brought by Harut and Marut into the cave that is below the sea. For forty days they will watch over him, but then they will fall into a slumber. Zabulun will come forth from the cave that is beneath the sea, and in anger he will pursue him who revealed his plan for the taking of the Magic Mirror. Take one of the rings that are around the mirror. It will reveal when Zabulun comes from the cave, and it will show how near he comes in his pursuit of Eean, the boy who was apprenticed to him.
That writing faded, and I saw the rings that were around the mirror. I loosened one and I took it off the mirror and I put it around the wrist of my hand. The color of the ring changed to the green of the sea.
I took the Magic Mirror in my hands and I went down the stairway. Down I went, from the fourth to the third, and from the third to the second of the towers. As I went down the-stairway around the first of the towers I heard the murmurs of the throng. High above my head I raised the Magic Mirror, and I went toward them holding it so.
And as I went among the throng I heard a voice cry out, "The tower trembles, the tower rocks." It was the voice of Eean. As the cry arose the throngs drew back from before the tower. They ran, and I ran carrying the mirror, and Eean ran beside me. And when we came to the market place we two were alone.
We stood in the empty market place and we looked toward the Tower of Babylon. In its great height it stood there, strong and wonderful. I heard the shouting of people around it. Then I saw the great tower swing like a child's swing. Dust rose up, cloud after cloud, and cloud over cloud. The cries of people came from out the clouds.
We stood there until we saw the sun shine through a cloud of dust. Then we knew that the Tower of Babylon was indeed fallen. Never again did we go near the place, but from travelers I have heard that where the tower stood there is emptiness, and that great blocks of stone are scattered far and wide.
HOW EEAN AND BIRD-OF-GOLD WENT FROM BABYLON We went into the King's gardens, carrying with us the Magic Mirror of the Babylonians. We saw the great cedar tree, and we went and sat under its branches and spoke of what we should do. The Magic Mirror would have to be given to the King, but for long Eean was fearful of going into the palace.
At last we went to the doors. They were unguarded, and we went within the palace. We came to the chamber where the King was accustomed to sit upon his throne, and we saw the King there. Around him there were bearded men with fierce eyes; by their fashion of carrying swords we knew them to be the leaders of the King's armies. These fierce-eyed men stood with their feet upon the steps of the throne, speaking in anger to the King. They did not see us as we came into the chamber. But in a while one caught sight of us, and he uttered a fierce word. I went to them, holding the Magic Mirror raised in my hands. The King raised his head, and he saw the mirror, and he cried out to us.
I went and left the Magic Mirror on the throne, beside the King. I lifted my voice and I told him how I had taken the mirror from the top of the tower, and that now the tower was overthrown, but the mirror was saved for the Babylonians. Then the King said to the fierce-eyed men, "This is the Magic Mirror of the Babylonians, and I say to you that Babylon is yet in safety." Again he said to them, "Speak now and say what is to be done about this girl who brought the mirror down from the tower."
One of the fierce-eyed men said, "Who is the boy with her?"
The King looked on Eean and knew who he was. He said, "This is the boy who was with the Enchanter on whom be evil."
The man said, "Banish the girl and the boy also, but do no evil to them inasmuch as they have brought to us the Magic Mirror of the Babylonians."
The King said, "Take them from the city, but let some treasure be given to them because they have brought to me the Magic Mirror of the Babylonians."
One of the fierce-eyed men took us, and he brought us into a chamber in which there were many open jars. In some of the jars there were gold and in others there were silver coins. The fierce-eyed man who was with us spoke to me, and he said I might take from the jar with the gold coins. I took many of them, and I tied them in different parts of my dress. Then he bade us follow him, and he led us out of the palace and to a place where a chariot with two horses was standing.
He put Eean and me into the chariot, and he ordered the charioteer to drive with us out of the city. The charioteer, a silent man, stood up in his chariot and lashed the horses. We drove through one street, and then another and another street, and all the streets were empty. The charioteer called to the guards of a gateway, and the gate was opened, and we passed out of the city. We drove on until we came to where there was a great river. Then the charioteer halted, and he called across the river, and a man with a ferry came from the other side. He was a very ancient man, and he had a beard of great length. The charioteer said to him, "Old Man of the River, take these two across and away from us!"
We went into the ferry, and the ferryman took his pole and pushed across to the other side of the river. The man in the chariot turned his horses and drove back to Babylon.
When the ferryman had left us on the other side of the river, Eean said to me, "Where now shall we go?" I made answer and said, "We shall go to my country, and to the place where my father is. And it may be that Zabulun when he comes from the cave that is under the sea will not be able to find you there."
HOW EEAN AND BIRD-OF-GOLD WERE PURSUED BY ZABULUN THE ENCHANTER AND HOW THEY WENT TO THE CAVE OF CHIRON THE CENTAUR O King of the Western Island, our wanderings began on the day when the ferryman left us on the farther side of the river. We went to the country where my father dwelt. We found the old man still gathering brambles and thorns for his livelihood, and out of the treasure that had been given me I gave him riches, and he had not to go thorn-and-bramble gathering any more.
We had only been a little time in the hut that my father built when a new color came upon the ring I had taken off the Magic Mirror. Its color had been sea green, but now a red line came across it. By that we knew that Zabulun the Enchanter had left the cave that was under the sea. And the red line began to grow over the sea green of the ring, and we knew by this sign that he had begun to follow on our traces. Then said Eean to me, "I will go from this place and seek a hiding, and it may be that I shall baffle Zabulun who follows me." I said to Eean, "I shall go with you where you go." "Nay," said Eean, "it is not on your account that Zabulun pursues us. He has no rage or hatred against you, O Bird-of-Gold, and if I should go from this place by myself you would not be troubled by him."
Then I said to him, "O Eean, I had no playmate or companion until I met you in the King's gardens. Now I could not bear to see you go from me, and where you go I shall go too."
Afterward I asked him if there were in the world any Enchanters who were as powerful as Zabulun. He told me of Chiron the Centaur, and of Hermes Trismegistus, the wise Egyptian, and of Merlin whose home is on an island that is west of your Western Island. I thought that only from one of these Enchanters might we get aid against Zabulun.
The red grew over the sea green of the ring, and we knew that the further the red grew the nearer did Zabulun approach us. I wondered how we might get to one of the great Enchanters. Hermes Trismegistus, being in Egypt, was far, and Merlin, on the island beyond the Western Island, was farther still. I thought of Chiron the Centaur, and it seemed to me that him we might be able to find.
Now my father had lived a long time in the world, and he had heard many things, and he had thought over the things he had heard in the years when he had gathered brambles and thorns in the wilderness. I went to my father for word of Chiron the Centaur.
"Chiron the Centaur dwells all alone in a cave that is in the side of a mountain. The mountain is covered all over with a deep and an ancient forest," my father told me. And again he said, "Once I knew the direction in which that mountain is, and tomorrow I shall go into the wilderness, and as I walk about it may be that memory of it will come back to me."
He came back from the wilderness in the evening and he said, "Away toward where the morning star shines there is a great waste. If one skirts this waste one comes to a river the waters of which are as cold as snow. The river flows down from the mountain on the side of which is the cave of Chiron the Centaur. All this I heard in the days of my youth."
Over more and more of the sea green of the ring the red had grown. By this sign we knew that Zabulun was coming close to us. I spoke to Eean and I said that we both should make ready to go to the cave of Chiron the Centaur. Then when the morning star shone very brightly we took leave of my father and we went toward where it shone.
We came to the great waste, and we skirted it as we had been told. On we went, and we came to the rivers, the waters of which were cold as snow. We turned our faces toward the place from which the river flowed until we saw a mountain that was all covered with forest.
Deep and ancient and silent was that upwardgrowing forest. So frightened of its silence were we that we never let go of each other's hands. For days we went seeking the cave, and at last we heard cries--they might have been from birds, they might have been from the winds--that said, "Who comes to trouble the rest of Chiron the ancient Centaur?"
We went toward where the cries came from and we saw the mouth of the cave. We followed the track that led to it, and in fear we went within.
And there was Chiron the ancient Centaur. His head and his breast, his shoulders and his arms were a man's, and his body and his feet and his tail were a horse's. His great beard was white, and his horse's body was shrunken, but his eyes were like pools in which there are living fires. The power of all the kings in the world was in his eyes.
Chiron lay beside a fire in which fragrant woods burned. He turned his eyes upon it, and we heard cries as if the winds in the cave made them, "Who comes to trouble the rest of Chiron the ancient Centaur?"
I went down on my knees and I beseeched him, "O Chiron, wisest of all who deal in enchantments," I said, "there is one named Zabulun, an evil Enchanter, who pursues us. We have come to beg you to tell us how we may escape him."
"Not to me should you have come," the voice of Chiron boomed out. "What have I to do with men who are as far from wisdom as Zabulun? Only one who is like him may strive with him. Go to another, go to another."
"To whom shall we go, O Centaur?" I asked.
"Hermes Trismegistus in Egypt is nearer to Zabulun than I am. Go to him, and he may tell you how to baffle Zabulun. Tell him that you have seen the Phoenix in the cave of Chiron the Centaur."
As he said this there flew into the cave the great bird that is called the Phoenix. I may not describe her to you, O King. She flew to the fire of fragrant-smelling woods and she held herself above it. She fanned the flame with her wings, and the fire rose up and caught her breast. Then the bird sank down on the fire, and we saw her burn under the eyes of Chiron the Centaur. The flame died out, and what we saw of the bird that burned, and the wood that made the fire, was a heap of ashes.
Then out of that heap of ashes came a bird. It was smaller than the bird that burned, but more radiant. As the bird stayed with the ashes beneath her feet she grew by some great thing that was within her, and then she rose over the ashes and fanned them with her wings. Again I looked upon the Phoenix.
"Go to Hermes Trismegistus in Egypt, and tell him that you saw the long-lived Phoenix burn herself in the cave of Chiron the Centaur and come again out of the burning. And when you tell this to Hermes in Egypt he will tell you what you may do to make yourself free of Zabulun."
The Phoenix flew from the cave. Then Chiron turned his eyes upon us and he spoke to us of the way we should go to find Hermes Trismegistus in Egypt. When he had told us all we went backward out of his cave, and then turned and went through the depths of the silent forest, taking the way the Centaur bade us take.
HOW EEAN AND BIRD-OF-GOLD CAME TO HERMES TRISMEGISTUS IN EGYPT
We found a ship, and I paid for the voyage out of the riches I had, and we came to Egypt. The ring upon my hand showed that we were now far away from the one who pursued us, from Zabulun the Enchanter.
But we two lost our way in Egypt, and we wandered about, reaching nowhere. Then Zabulun gained upon us again, as the ring showed. We hid in a village by the river, and we stayed there until the season when the cranes fly overhead on their way to Ethiopia.
Then we went from that village, and we came again upon the way that had been lost. We followed that way and we came to the great pyramid in which Hermes Trismegistus had his cell. Down into the deepest chamber we went, and we came before Hermes the Egyptian.
He sat before a table that was of diamond and that had wonderful figures upon it. He was youthful, and light seemed to come from his forehead. As wonderful as the eyes of Chiron was the brow of Hermes Trismegistus.
We knelt at the threshold of his cell, and I said, "O thrice-great Hermes! We have been in the cave of Chiron the Centaur, and we have seen the long-lived Phoenix burn herself to ashes, and come out of the ashes more radiant than before. Chiron was kind to us, and he sent us to you, O thrice-great Hermes. We are pursued by an Enchanter whose name is Zabulun, and we have come to beseech you to tell us how we may make ourselves free from him."
Hermes Trismegistus said, "I know of Zabulun, the wrong-doing Enchanter. But what have I to do with one who is so removed from wisdom?"
I beseeched him again, saying, "Save us from this wrong-doing Enchanter who would destroy us. He has come near us often, and he will assuredly overtake us if you do not give us help, O thrice-great Hermes."
Then Hermes said, "Near the Western Island there dwells an Enchanter whose name is Merlin. Not one of the great Enchanters is he, nor like to Chiron or myself, for he chooses to love rather than to be wise. He is nearer to Zabulun than we are, but yet he is not a wrong-doing Enchanter. Go to Merlin and say to him that you have been within the cell of Hermes Trismegistus, and that you have learned from him the answer to the riddle that the Sphinx asks, and Merlin will show you how you both may be saved from Zabulun, the wrong-doing Enchanter.
"But to come to Merlin's island, which is west of the Western Island, you will have first to go among the Atlantes, who live by the Western Ocean. They eat no living thing and they never have dreams. When you come to them, seek out the wisest among them, and ask him to tell you of Merlin, and of how you may come to him.
"To come to the Atlantes you will have to pass by the Sphinx in the desert. Few ever pass her, for she has a riddle that she asks of every one. And the one who cannot answer her riddle is torn to pieces by the Sphinx. But I shall tell you the answer to give to the riddle that the Sphinx asks."
Then Hermes, thrice-great Hermes, told us the Sphinx's riddle and the answer that we should make to it. He told us the way we should go to pass by the Sphinx and come to the people that are called the Atlantes. We left the cell of Hermes, and passed out of the pyramid, and went on our way.
We came to where the great Sphinx stretches herself out in the sand, and by the light of a great moon we saw her lion's paws and her woman's face. We heard the purring sound that comes through the lips of the Sphinx, and we halted between her paws.
"What is Man?" said the Sphinx, asking her riddle.
The paws that stretched alongside of us were quiet, and the voice of the Sphinx was very quiet. We saw her face far above us, and it was calm, though there was much scorn and fierceness in it.
"What is Man?" said the Sphinx.
Then I replied as Hermes Trismegistus had taught me to reply, "Man is he whose Mother is the Earth and whose Father is the Stars."
"Go," said the Sphinx.
Then we clambered across the great paws of the Sphinx, and we went on our way. Along the border of the desert we went, and when the great moon had changed herself to a little moon that was hardly to be seen in the sky we came among the Atlantes, the people who eat no living thing and who never have dreams.
The ring showed us that Zabulun, the wrong-doing Enchanter, had not drawn near us for many days. We were far away from him when we came among the Atlantes. But soon he came near us again. By that time I had found him who was wisest among this people, and I asked him to tell me of Merlin, and of how I might come to him.
"Not often does the island on which Merlin dwells show itself," said he who was wisest among the Atlantes. "On the mid day of summer it is to be seen. Then it draws near to the Western Island, and if you will cast upon the water nine cocks' combs and four peacocks' feathers, Merlin will let you come upon his island."
Thereupon he who was wisest among them gave us the nine cocks' combs and four peacocks' feathers. They reverenced Hermes of Egypt, the people that are called the Atlantes, and because we had spoken with Hermes and had been in his cell, they brought us on board a ship that had great leathern sails, and in that ship they carried us to your island, O King.
HOW EEAN AND BIRD-OF-GOLD CAME TO KING MANUS'S STABLES We came to your island, O King (said Bird-ofGold, continuing her story), but no sooner did we step from the ship to the landing stones than we suffered a loss. The ring that was around my wrist broke and fell into the sea, and thereafter we had no sign that would show how close the evil Zabulun was in pursuit of us.
We set off for that part of the land that Merlin's island comes near to. One day our way was through a dark valley, and we lay down there to sleep. I awakened after some hours of slumber, and I looked toward Eean, and I saw that he was still sleeping. I left him to his sleep, but when hours passed I went over to awaken him. But I could not awaken him from that slumber, do what I would. For three days and three nights he slept in that valley while I watched beside him.
At last he awoke saying, "What day is this, and how near is Zabulun to us?" I told him that we were two days from the mid day of summer, and that we had no sign now to show us how close the Enchanter might be. We were greatly troubled, O King, for we knew not how we might come to Merlin's island by the mid day of summer.
It was then that we heard of your horses, King Manus. We were told of their swiftness, and we said to each other, "Only by the speed of these horses can we reach the place that Merlin's island comes near, and by Merlin's aid save ourselves from the power of Zabulun, the wrong-doing Enchanter."
At nightfall we came before your palace and your stable. Now it was not hard for us to open the doors of your stable. Your watchers drank of a drug that I made, O King. Eean brought a cup to them, and they, thinking the drink had been sent to them from your supper table, drank it. At once they fell into a slumber. Then we opened the four locks of the iron door with the keys that were in their belts. Eean went within the stable while I kept watch at the gate of the orchard.
Alas, Eean was taken before he could mount the white horse, and before I went to take the bridle of the red one. I saw him being brought within the palace, and I saw two new watchers take their places beside the door. For a long time I stood in the shadow of the orchard gate not knowing what to do. Then I thought that I should still take one of the horses and go to the place where Merlin might be spoken to, and so win aid for Eean, my beloved companion. I made another drug, and I put it into a drink, and I brought the cup to those who were at the stable door. These, too, were unsuspecting; they thought I had brought it from the supper table, and they drank, and they, too, lost their senses.
Then I opened the iron door of the stable the way we had opened it before and I went within. I saw the red horse in his stall and I put my hand upon his neck. As I did this the black horse broke loose, and he plunged at me, and he caught me by the flesh of the shoulders and he flung me down. He reared above me, and was about to bring his hoofs crashing down upon me. Then indeed I should have been trampled to death but that you and your men came in, O King.
You came with torches and you drove that fierce black horse away from my body. Never was I in such danger of death as I was in then. I do not think I am now in such danger as when I lay under the feet of that fierce black horse. But it is for you to judge, O King.
Bird-of-Gold finished her story, and, closing her eyes, she laid her head upon her hands. All at that supper table looked toward King Manus. Eean seemed to hear nothing of her story, for all the time his eyes were upon the King's face.
Said King Manus, "She has been in danger as great as the danger she is in now, for verily, that black horse of mine is a manslayer. The girl too shall go free."
Then the King drank another cup of wine and was silent for a while. Then he spoke again, saying: "They have fled a great way, these two. I should not be glad if they lost the match with this Zabulun. By the open hand of my father, they may take my two horses, the white one and the red one, and ride to that part of the Western Island that Merlin's island comes near. For payment to me, let them ask Merlin the Enchanter what moves I should make in that game of chess that, for half my lifetime, I have been playing with King Connal."
When King Manus said this the last binding was taken off Eean and off Bird-of-Gold, and they went to him and they kissed his hands. Eean promised that they would bring the horses back to the stable, and he promised, too, that he would ask Merlin about the moves in the game of chess, and would bring back the answer to the King.
In the middle of it all, one of the stewards came to the King, and said there was one in the palace who knew the youth Eean and who could not be withheld from coming to him. As they were speaking about him, he came into the supper room, an old man, whom they all recognized as the one who watched before the door of the King's chamber, to prevent those who came with requests that might not be granted being brought before the King.
He went straight to where Eean stood, and holding up a torch he looked upon him. He no sooner looked than he cried out, "It is he--indeed, indeed it is he!" And Eean, his hands grasping the old man, said, "It is Anluan! It is my father!"
Then it was told to Eean how Anluan had left the nets of a fisherman after his son had gone with Zabulun as his apprentice; and it was told, too, how he had come to the palace, and how he had been made the officer at the King's doorway on account of his extraordinary patience, a patience that he had learned when he handled the net, and that wore out the most insistent of those who came with requests to the King.
There was much rejoicing over the meeting between Eean and his father Anluan. Then Anluan turned to her whose hand Eean held, to Bird-of-Gold, and having wept over her he began to question her about her accomplishments. It was at this point that the stewards took Anluan away, for the pair had now to make ready for their ride to that part of the Western Island that Merlin's island came near to on the mid day of summer which would be the morrow of that very night. Refreshments were given them at the King's table, the newest of meats and the oldest of wines. Then they went out of the hall, and they mounted the horses that the grooms of King Manus now brought out for them, Eean taking the white horse, and Bird-of-Gold the red horse. A bound and a bound, and the white and the red started off, spurning the cobblestones of the courtyard, riding toward their meeting with that Enchanter who would give them freedom from Zabulun, Merlin, the Enchanter of the Isle of Britain.
The Two Enchanters
MERLIN AND VIVIEN A great Enchanter indeed was Merlin. He served with his enchantments the King of the Isle of Britain from the time he was a stripling to the time when he was two score years of age. Then, when he might have passed from being a lesser to being a great Enchanter, Merlin vanished altogether and was seen no more at the court of the King of the Isle of Britain. All the great works he had planned were left undone, all the instruments he had gathered were left unused, all the books he had brought together were left unopened, and the King whom he had served so long was left without an Enchanter.
If there were one to blame for that it was the daughter of King Dionas. She was young, but she was ungentle. What she saw, that she would have. One day a stranger was passing with her father, and when he looked on her he said, "A young hawk she is, a young hawk that has not yet flown at any prey." That very day the daughter of King Dionas walked on the plain that was at a distance from her father's castle. The stranger who had spoken of her to her father was there also, and he looked long upon her.
"Who art thou who lookest on me so?" said the child.
"Thou art Nimiane, who art also called Vivien," said the stranger.
"Yea," said she, "but who art thou, man?"
"I am called Merlin," he said, "and I am the Enchanter to the King of the Isle of Britain."
"Show me thine enchantments," said Vivien, who feared not to speak to any man.
Now Merlin had looked on all the ladies who were at the court of the King of the Isle of Britain, and on the maidens who were in far countries and distant castles, and besides, the ladies of the times of old had been shown him in his Magic Glass, but never before had he seen any one who seemed so lovely to him as this child. She was bright-eyed as a bird. She had a slim body, and pale cheeks, and quick, quick hands. Her hair was red and in thick tangles. "Show me thine enchantments," she cried to him again.
Merlin bade her come with him and she came. He brought her to a high place, a place that was of rock with rocks piled all about it. On the ground he made magical figures. Then he said magical words. And all the time Vivien, slim Vivien with her tangle of red hair, stood upon the rocks with her eyes upon him.
Upon the ground that was all rock Merlin made a garden with roses blowing and clear waters flowing, with birds singing among the leaves and fishes swimming in the streams. He made trees grow, too, with honey-tasting fruits upon them.
Vivien went through the garden, plucking the flowers and tasting the fruits that grew there. She turned to Merlin and looked at him again with her bright eyes. "Canst thou make a castle for me?" said she.
Then Merlin made his magical figures and said his magical words over again. The stones that were strewn about everywhere came together and built themselves up into a castle. When the castle rose before them Vivien took Merlin by the hand, and they went through its doorway and up the stairway and into the castle turret. And when they looked from the turret Vivien said, "Would that no one should know of this garden and this castle but thou and I!"
He told her that the castle and the garden would be hidden. Then when they were leaving the garden he put a mist all around, a mist that those who came that way could not see through and were made fearful of venturing into.
And so the castle and the garden were all unknown to men. But Vivien would come, passing through the mist, and going into the garden and up into the turret. At first she would not have Merlin near her. Afterward it came to pass that she would summon him. A bugle hung in the turret of the castle, and she would blow upon it, and he would come and stay by her.
He was two score years of age, and she was five years less than a score. Nevertheless he thought it better to watch her dancing with bright green leaves in her red hair than to know all that would bring him from being a lesser to being a great Enchanter. Of the maidens and great ladies he had seen, some, he told her, were like light, and some were like flowers, and some were like a flame of fire. But she, he said, was like the wind. And he thought no more upon the King of the Isle of Britain, nor on the great work he was to do for him, and he spent his days in watching Vivien, and in listening to Vivien, and in making magic things for Vivien's delight.
Her father once took her away from the place near where the hidden garden and the hidden castle stood. Vivien was in another country now. And when she went among those who were strangers to her she found out that nothing mattered to her except the looks and the words of Merlin. The castle and the garden-she did not think of them, nor of the magic things he had made for her. Her thoughts were only on Merlin, who was so wise and who could do such wonders.
When she came back, and when she met him in the hidden garden, she caught hold of his hands, and she would not let go of them. Nor would she tell Merlin why this change had come over her, and why she would keep close to him now and not apart. At last she said to him, "What ladies and what maidens have you known, O my master Merlin?"
Then Merlin took his Magic Glass into his hands, and in it he showed her all the ladies who were at the court of the King of the Isle of Britain, and he showed her all the lovely maidens who lived in far countries and in distant castles whom he knew. Vivien threw herself on the ground with her face to the rock after she had looked into the Magic Glass.
Then afterward she watched him in a way different from the way she had watched him before. What he said and what he did she remembered well. Soon she understood his magic figures and could make them. She came to understand his magic words and to be able to repeat them. And Merlin would say to her, "O my little hawk, fly at this--and this--and this."
One day as they wandered through a forest Vivien asked him to tell her the mightiest spell that he knew. The Enchanter told it to her. She stood still, with all her quick mind in her face, while he put aside the tangles of her red hair and spoke into her ear.
It was a spell that would hold in a place the one whom it was spoken over. When he had told her he went at her bidding and seated himself under a forest tree. Vivien, laughing, made a magic circle around him and repeated the spell that he had given her. When she did this the Enchanter was enchanted. Merlin stayed under the forest tree, and there he would stay, for he could not move until the spell that was said over him was unsaid by Vivien.
And Vivien danced around him, her red hair shaking, her bright eyes gleaming, her quick hands waving. She called to him, "Merlin, Merlin Enchanter, come to me." But Merlin, under the forest tree, could not move. She ran through the woods and he could not follow after her. In a while she came back and stood beside him.
Said Merlin to her, "Why have you worked this spell upon me, and why have you left me here so that I cannot move?" She knelt down on the ground beside where he sat.
"O Merlin," said she, "I would leave you here enchanted, for fear you should leave me and go among the maidens and the ladies who are so lovely." And when she said that her face was so hard that he knew she would hold him there.
But Merlin smiled, and, he said to her, "I would stay always where you are, Vivien, blossom of the furze."
"Nay," said she, "you would go from me. Why should you not? You have great works to do for the King of the land. And when you see again the ladies and the maidens who are the loveliest in the world you will not come back again to Vivien. I shall hate the castle and the garden that you made for me, and I shall hate every one who will come near me. I shall hold you, Merlin, here, even until the wolves come out at night and devour you and me."
"I will build a castle for you in an empty country, and no one shall ever be there but you and me," said Merlin.
"Nay," said Vivien, "they will search the world for you, Merlin, and when they find you, you will have to go with them."
Then Merlin, as if it were a magic thing that would please her, brought out his thought about the Island of the White Tower. Away beyond the Western Island, in a sea that is never sailed on, that island lies. Only on Midsummer Day does it come near to the Western Island so that men may see it. There, said Merlin, they might go. Those who would search for him could never come to him there. He told her more and more about the Island of the White Tower, and Vivien listened in delight to all he told her. And when he had sworn he would take her to it she unsaid the spell with which she had bespelled him, and he rose up from where he had been held, and he sprang across the magic circle that was drawn upon the ground. And with Vivien Merlin went through the forest.
The fishermen who cast their nets by the shores of the Western Ocean have this story of Merlin and Vivien. They tell how in a boat of crystal twelve creatures sailed to the Island of the White Tower. Two were Merlin and Vivien, and nine were the nine prime bards of the Isle of Britain who went with Merlin, and one was the tame wolf that was Merlin's servant. They sailed out upon a Midsummer's Day, and from that good day to this no hint or hair of the Enchanter has been seen by king nor clown in all the Isle of Britain.
ZABULUN THE ENCHANTER It was Anluan, the father of Eean, Anluan who had once been a fisherman by the shores of the Western Ocean, who told this story of the Enchanter of the Isle of Britain. The fishermen know the story, and they, more often than any others, have seen the Island of the White Tower as it shows itself on the rim of the Western Ocean.
The story was told after the white horse and the red horse had clattered across the stones of the courtyard, bringing Eean and Bird-of-Gold toward their meeting with Merlin. Candles thicker than a man's wrist had been put upon the supper table, fresh torches had been set in the sconces along the walls, and logs of resinous wood had been piled upon the hearth. All this was done so that the King and his lords might drink their last cups of wine before they went into the sleeping chambers.
And now, in the light of shining candles and blazing torches and mounting hearth fires, the squires and the servers went among the company, filling the wine cups up. Some already had the wine in their cups and were waiting for King Manus to raise his in a toast. Then the strangest of strange things happened. No wind came into the hall, but suddenly the candles upon the table and the torches along the walls went out. The servers went to relight the torches at the hearth, but the hearth blaze had died down, and all the logs were black.
And blackness was in the chamber where, a minute before, candles and torches and hearth fires were blazing. The King and his lords stood around the table, while the servers and squires ran through every chamber of the castle to find a spark of light.
But not even a spark could they find; not the light of a rush candle even was to be found in any hall or chamber in the castle. And on every stairway the same story was told, how suddenly light and fire had gone black out.
But now the grooms came in with flints and steel and hemp. Every one tried to strike a spark, but no spark came for all their striking. And now, all over the castle, there were outbursts of woe: the cooks were lamenting that they would have no fires, and the women were weeping because lights could not be brought them. It was then that King Manus bade his lords stand around laying their hands upon the table.
The next thing was that a figure appeared at the doorway. All saw it, for there was a line of faint light around it. It was the figure of a tall man. "Speak," said King Manus with his hand stretched to the figure.
"If you will have me speak," said the man.
"The lights and the fires have been quenched in the castle. How has this come to be?"
"It is in the power of an Enchanter of the second degree to quench light and fire," said the man in the darkness. "Further, King Manus, the fire and light that are extinguished cannot be brought back until the Enchanter lifts his ban."
"Have you come to tell me this?" asked the King.
"I have come to make a request of you, King Manus;" said the man in the darkness.
Then Anluan, the father of Eean, he whose duty it was to let none that might have a request come face to face with the King, groped around the room that he might place himself before his master. But before he came to where King Manus stood the man with the line of light around had come so close that he and the King looked into each other's eyes.
"O King," said the stranger, "I have answered what you asked of me. Now I make my request. It is that the black horse that is in your stable be given to me."
There was a stir in the darkened hall, and then there was an outcry. It was from Anluan, the father of Eean. "O, King Manus, beware of the man who knows of the powers of Enchanters. He may be the one who would ride in chase of Eean, my son!"
"He has made a request of me," said King Manus. "By the open hand of my father, it will have to be granted him."
"It is for the one horse that can follow the others," Anluan cried.
"I have never refused a request! Alas, alas, in one night the three horses that were my pride are taken from me!"
"Strike now, and light candle and torch and hearth fire," said the one who had come among them.
Flint was struck upon steel; sparks came and made the hemp blaze; candle and torch and hearth fire were lighted again. Then all looked at the one who had come among them.
Tall he was, with a dark and bony face and eyes that were like a hawk's eyes. His dress was a plain cloak that had a hood that went over his head. And yet, although he had not the staff nor the robe of an Enchanter, it did not need Anluan's cry to tell the company that here was the one to whom his son had been apprenticed--Zabulun the Enchanter!
"Why do you go in chase of my son?" Anluan cried.
"Harut and Marut laid hands upon me. Am I to have no more mastery because of that?" said Zabulun. "For forty days I was laid in the cave that is under the sea, and do men think that all power is gone from me because of that? I thought all that time that what I worked for would come to pass, and that the Magic Mirror of Babylon would be lost in the ruin of the Tower of Babylon and that destruction would come upon the Babylonians. This would have been if the boy who was my apprentice had been faithful to me. But he spoke the words that restored the mirror to the Kings of Babylon. And I, whose name, as I thought, would stand forever as one who had worked a great destruction, am as naught-my name is a name to laugh at. And shall he pass from my mastership, the boy who let this befall me? Not so; he has still to be my aid. I have paid you, his father, gold for his seven years' service, and his service still belongs to me."
Then, turning to King Manus, Zabulun said, "You have granted my request. Command now that your grooms go to the stable and bring out the black horse that I am to ride."
King Manus gave the commands. Then out of the door of the castle they all went, and into the courtyard. The still light of the dawn, the dawn of Midsummer's Day, was coming over the world. The grooms went to the stable and, in full sight of all, unlocked the great stable door and brought out the black horse whose swiftness was such that he could overtake the wind of March that was before him, while the wind of March that was behind could not overtake him. They brought forth the black horse and they held him while the dark-faced man put himself astride. Then the hoofs of the last of the King's horses struck fire out of the stones of the courtyard, while a cry went up from Anluan.
And away went Zabulun the Enchanter-away, away in pursuit of Eean and Bird-of-Gold, and the light of the Midsummer Day came into the world.
THE LAST FLIGHT OF EEAN AND BIRD-OF-GOLD As the first light of the Midsummer Day came over the world the two who were fleeing before him were speaking of Zabulun the Enchanter. "That we may baffle him," one said.
"And what if we cannot baffle him this time?" said the other.
"Then he will take me and make me do terrible services for him"-it was Eean who said this-"and, worse than all the services he will make me do, he will separate us."
"No, no," said Bird-of-Gold. "If he takes us this time, I shall do everything to make myself useful to the Enchanter. I have thought out ways in which I can serve him. He will not separate us, and we will be together still."
"O Bird-of-Gold," said Eean, "I am fearful lest he should slay you for taking the Magic Mirror off the Tower of Babylon. But I have a sword, and he shall not harm you."
"I shall escape him," Bird-of-Gold said, "and as he followed you and me across the world, so I shall follow him and you, and we shall never be apart."
They had learned in their wanderings all ways of guiding themselves, and as they galloped on they were heading for the Western Ocean. Darkness was around them at first. But the sky was wide and clear, and Bird-of-Gold, when she raised her head, could see and name the bright planets. There was Mars with his red pulse. Bird-of-Gold likened this planet to the steed that she rode, and as she rode on she sang to herself the song that the shepherd boys in her own country used to sing about another star:
That star, I know, is Betelgeuse;
Yet, as I walk the hills by day,
I hardly know his splendid name
That star is far away.
But when at night I travel on,
Or watch across an empty land,
Than Betelgeuse, my star of stars,
Nothing is nearer hand.
Then send a ray that I may own
The fortune that is mine:
O Betelgeuse, my star of stars,
My forehead's for your sign!
And after all the countries he had wandered through, Eean was now back on the ground of his own country. He heard the cry of the curlews overhead. He saw the lakes that looked as if even the birds had forgotten them, so lonely they were--lonely, but with deep memories. He saw the cairns of stones above the long-dead heroes. Once he saw a fox upon a cairn, and it seemed to him that this was the very fox he had chased away from his mother's coop the day before the Enchanter had taken him away from the Western Island.
With strong hearts King Manus's horses galloped on. But the heart of Eean was strained with the thought of the distance that was still before them. First, a great mountain had to be crossed, then a wide plain, then that other mountain from the top of which one could see the Western Ocean in the daylight. And Zabulun the Enchanter might come upon them in the hills or on the plain and say a word that might stop their horses' gallop.
But they came to the last mountain top, and they saw the waters of the Western Ocean with gleams of gold coming upon them. Down the heather-covered hillside their horses hurried. And as the broad sun rose over the broad ocean the hurrying feet of the white andthe red horse were scattering the foam along the shore.
And as they watched they saw Merlin's island grow out of the dimness of the sea. Then the sun became fuller and it lighted up the White Tower, and Eean and Bird-of-Gold knew they had come to their journey's end indeed. They sprang off their horses, and they dipped their hands in the sea, and they kissed each other.
"Now we must cast over on the island the tokens that the Atlantes gave us," Eean said, "the cocks' combs and the peacocks' feathers. If they come to Merlin, he will let us cross to his island, and we can swim our horses over. But how shall we know if the tokens come to him?"
He raised the bag in which were the nine cocks' combs and the four peacocks' feathers. He cast the bag toward the island. Through the air it went like a flying bird.
They mounted their horses again, ready to swim them across when they got some signal from the island. And the signal came. It was the howl of the wolf that was Merlin's servant.
Now they were to swim their horses across. As they went into the water, Bird-of-Gold looked back. Down through the heather of the hillside a rider was coming. He was on a black horse. They knew him for Zabulun, the Enchanter from whom they were fleeing.
HOW EEAN WON HIS RELEASE FROM ZABULUN THE ENCHANTER Merlin, with the tame wolf that was his servant beside him, was standing by the White Tower on the morning of that Midsummer Day. And Vivien was upon the tower, singing to her colored birds and looking out over the sea.
Vivien, who played with her colored birds, had still the look of a child in her face. Her hair was no longer in tangles; it was softer than it was once, and it fell softly over her shoulders. Her eyes, for all the child's look that was in her face, were as if they had seen many things come and change and pass.
Like a King, or like one who had been always near a King, was Merlin the Enchanter. He smiled, and his smile was calm and royal. But one might have said that his eyes were strangely close to each other and that his lips were strangely red.
His beard was long and gray. He wore a white robe with a belt of green leaves around it, and a chaplet of oak leaves was on his head. Vivien was dressed in green, with a golden belt clasped around her, and with green leaves in her soft hair.
So they were standing by and on the tower, Merlin, Vivien, and Merlin's tame wolf, when the tokens that were from the Atlantes came. Merlin laid his hand upon the wolf, and the wolf gave the howl that was the signal for Eean and Bird-of-Gold to come on the Island of the White Tower. The Enchanter saw them ride their horses into the water. And then another token came to him-the token that one magician sends to another, a Bird of Foam it was, and Zabulun sent it.
Deep were the waters, but great-hearted were the horses of King Manus, the white horse and the red horse, and with Eean and Bird-of-Gold astride them they swam to the Island of the White Tower. They came to the sloping shore, and the riders helped the horses up to the hard ground. The white and the red horse stood shivering from their plunge into the ocean. Afterward they threw themselves on the grass and lay as still as if they were dead.
Not to the horses, but out to the sea did Eean and Bird-of-Gold look. The black horse with Zabulun astride him was swimming now. Swiftly to the White Tower where they saw Merlin stand they went.
"O Merlin," Eean cried, "to you we have come to save us from the Enchanter who has pursued us from one end of the world to the other."
"From whom have you come, you who have sent such tokens?" said Merlin.
"From Hermes Trismegistus in his secret cell. And Hermes told us to say to you that we have heard from him the answer to the riddle that the Sphinx asks, and that we crossed the desert to come to you, answering the Sphinx."
"Who is the Magician who pursues you?"
"Zabulun, once a Prince in Babylon, O Merlin."
"Is it he who pursues you?--Zabulun! I shall have a welcome for Zabulun."
"Save us, O Merlin, from Zabulun," Bird-of-Gold cried.
Vivien came down from the tower. "It is Zabulun who comes to our island in chase of these two, my Vivien," Merlin said. "Now you shall see me match my power with Zabulun's."
"A match between magicians, how entertaining it will be!" cried Vivien, clapping her hands.
"O lady, if Zabulun is not baffled it will be death or separation for us," said Bird-of-Gold to her.
"Merlin will baffle him--you will find that Merlin will baffle him," said Vivien. "You see, he has done nothing to impress me for an age."
Now Merlin had sent the tame wolf that was his servant upon an errand, and the wolf at this moment returned leading nine men who wore white robes and who had chaplets of oak leaves upon their brows. These were the nine prime bards of the Isle of Britain who had come to the Island of the White Tower with Merlin, their chief.
They stood as he told them, four on one side and five on the other, with the Enchanter of the Isle of Britain between them. Merlin told Eean to stand with the four bards. He touched them with his staff, and the row of bards and Eean with them became all as, alike as ten peas in a pea pod. And Merlin went to Bird-of-Gold and touched her also, and she became like the lady Vivien exactly.
Now the black horse that bore Zabulun came to the sloping bank of the Island of the White Tower, and Zabulun sprang off his back and drew the black horse up on the bank. The horse breathed mightily, and then like the others lay down on the grass.
With great and sure strides Zabulun came to the White Tower where Merlin stood. "Hail, Merlin," he cried in a loud voice.
"You know of an apprentice of mine who has come to your island."
"Find him, O mighty magician."
Zabulun looked and saw the ten men who looked exactly alike, and the two women whom one could not tell one from the other. He turned to Merlin then and he said, "What a simple trick you would play upon me! Nine bards you have, and there are ten before us. One of them is Eean, the boy apprenticed to me."
"Then you will take him, Zabulun."
It is certain that Merlin did not think that Zabulun would do what he did now. He changed himself into a hound. Running among the ten that were there he sniffed at them. By the smell of the horse he had ridden he would find Eean.
But as he ran among them Merlin touched each of the nine bards and Eean with them with his staff. They all became pigeons and flew up into the air. One had a feather awry. This was Eean on whom Zabulun had laid a paw just as he was being transformed.
Instantly Zabulun changed himself into a hawk and strove to rise above the flock of pigeons. As he did he saw the one that had a feather awry. Over him he came.
Then Eean, seeing the hawk above him, dropped instantly to the earth. The others flew down with him, crowding around to hide the ruffled feather. They came before the door of Merlin's house. They flew in and lighted down on the floor while the hawk came sweeping up to the doorway.
Merlin touched the pigeons with his staff and again transformed them. They became ten rings of gold that lay upon the floor. As the hawk flew in and perched on a chair to fix his eyes upon them, the rings of gold rolled into the fire.
Then Zabulun transformed himself into a tongs and went hunting through the fire for the rings. He picked up one ring and flung it out on the floor, he picked up another ring and flung it out on the floor, and so on, until the ten rings were out of the fire. Merlin touched the rings with his staff, and they were transformed into ten grains of corn. Upon these ten grains Vivien and Bird-of-Gold threw handful after handful of grains of corn.
But now Zabulun changed himself into a cock with strong legs and wide claws and a hungry beak. With his claws he scratched through the heap of grain. With his beak he picked the grains up. Vivien and Bird-of-Gold kept throwing on the floor handful after handful of corn to cover the ten grains that were Eean and the nine bards.
But the beak of the cock went so fiercely and so hungrily among them that only a few grains more than the ten were left upon the floor when Vivien and Bird-of-Gold found out they had no more handfuls to fling. Then it seemed as if the cock with his sharp eye would soon pick out the grain that was Eean.
Then with his staff Merlin touched nine of the grains, leaving one untouched. The one he left untouched was Eean. The nine were changed into weasels, and they faced the cock fiercely. Then was Zabulun startled. Instead of picking at the grain that was Eean he fluttered up from the ground and went out of the door of the house.
Merlin touched the grain that was left and Eean stood up. Bird-of-Gold clapped her hands for joy on seeing him again. But Eean ran out of the door of the house after the cock that was Zabulun the Enchanter. He snatched up a strong staff as he ran.
Zabulun had changed back into his own form. But now Eean had no fear of him. He ran toward him. And Zabulun took up a staff that was lying there and made to defend himself.
Then began the battle between Eean and Zabulun. Eean struck at Zabulun, and Zabulun struck at Eean, and each defended himself with the staff that he had. They fought their way across the island, from one side to the other. They fought until their staves were broken and until they were covered with bruises. Then they threw away their staves and gripped one another. All around the island they wrestled. Strong were the hands of Zabulun. Eean felt his own hands were strong upon Zabulun, and yet he could not throw him. Soon Eean lost sense of everything except two gripping and rocking figures.
They wrestled their way across the island, down to the shore where they had landed and where the three horses of King Manus were lying. They wrestled until the sea water came over their feet. Again things became clear to Eean. He knew that if he could overthrow the Enchanter he would win his freedom.
He fastened upon Zabulun a grip that seemed to be stronger than his own life. He heaved with a power that seemed to bring up his last breath. He bent Zabulun over. He brought him down, his head in the water. He flung himself upon the prone Enchanter.
"What would you have of me?" Zabuiun said at last.
"Release. Say you have no more mastership of me."
"I say it. I have no more mastership of you. You have release from me."
"I let you rise."
Then Eean took his grip off Zabulun. The Enchanter rose up and took himself out of the water.
So Zabulun was defeated, and so release was given to Eean, the Boy Apprenticed to the Enchanter. Zabulun mounted the black horse that was. King Manus's and had him swim the water. He rode across the plain and over one mountain and another mountain until he came to the castle of King Manus. There he left the horse to neigh for his grooms.
What became of Zabulun afterward is not written in the book that is the History of the Enchanters. Some say that from that Midsummer's Day he ceased to be named with the great Enchanters. The powers he had gained, they say, shrank from him. Afterward a famous juggler appeared in the world. He used to go into the halls of Kings on festival nights and do marvelous feats with balls and rings and knives, and play music on all manner of instruments, going from King's castle to King's castle. That juggler, they say--but they may be mistaken--was Zabulun, once Prince of Babylon, and once master of the Inaccessible Island.
Eean and Bird-of-Gold went within the White Tower and conversed from noon to dusk with Merlin and the lady Vivien. Before that Midsummer's Day had passed into darkness, they mounted the white steed and the red steed and had them swim across the waters. When they came to the farther shore they let the horses stand for a while. Then mounting them again they rode over the mountains and across the plains and came again to the castle of King Manus.
THE RETURN OF KING MANUS'S HORSES Again Manus, King of the Western Island, sat in his supper hall. The torches were in their sconces, the candles were lighted on the table, the hearth fire was blazing on the hearth, and his lords once again sat to the right and the left of him. But this time they sat without laughter and without high words.
The harper and the storyteller were at the table too, but they neither made music nor told stories. They had tried, both, that evening, but no one had listened to them. Outside, the iron door of the stable gaped wide, and the grooms and horse-boys and watchers stood idly around or went quarreling among themselves. It was very difficult, as you may imagine, for the harper to play upon his harp when he would hear the King say into his wine cup, "O, Raven, my black horse, where art thou now?" And it was equally difficult for the storyteller to get on with his tale when he would see the King looking at him with unseeing eyes and hear him say, "O, my white and my red horses, what would I not give if I saw you back in my courtyard again?"
So you can imagine the silence that was upon the supper board that once resounded with conversation and storytelling, with music and pledges of the wine cup. "O, Raven, my black horse, where art thou now?" said the King once again; and then, "What would I not give to have my white and my red horse in the courtyard again?" And these were all the words that King Manus could be got to say.
And then, suddenly, a loud neigh was heard outside. Straightway King Manus ran out of the supper hall. The lords, the minstrel, and the storyteller, the stewards, servers, and attendants, ran with him. And when they came as far as the wide door of the castle they ran into the grooms and the horse-boys who were running from the stable. All ran together. And there, in the middle of the courtyard, without a rider upon his back, was Raven, the King's black horse.
They brought him into his stall in the stable, and they combed him and they groomed him. They gave him the red wheat and the white barley to eat and the clear spring water to drink. King Manus could hardly be prevailed upon to leave Raven's stall and come back into the supper hall. But at length they got him back into his seat, and then the supper board resounded with pledges of the wine cup as the King and his lords drank to each other merrily.
Again there was neighing in the courtyard, this time a double neighing. Straightway the King ran out, and all who were near ran with him. They ran into the grooms and the horse-boys who were running from the stable. There in the courtyard were the white horse and the red horse. They were not unmounted, however, for Eean and Bird-of-Gold were upon them.
This time King Manus grew into such glee that he swore by the open hand of his father that he would make a duke of every lord who was with him that night. There were great rejoicings. Some tossed their torches so high that they frightened the owls out of the cornices on the castle. The grooms brought the white horse and the red horse into their stalls in the stable, and they fed them with red wheat and white barley and gave them the clear spring water to drink.
Then they went to carry Eean and Bird-of-Gold into the supper hall. They were not to be found for a while, for Anluan, Eean's father, had led them away. He was seen to weep over Eean, and to take the hands of Bird-of-Gold and kiss her while he called her daughter. And to Anluan King Manus gave the privilege of bringing them to the supper board.
The King put Eean into the storyteller's seat, but he had Bird-of-Gold sit beside him on his left hand. The feast began all over again and went on from egg to apple. And when wine had been drunk King Manus called- upon Eean to tell the story of his journey to Merlin's Island and the full tale of how he had defeated Zabulun the Enchanter.
When all was told the King gave presents to Eean and Bird-of-Gold and he swore that for a year and a day he would have them live with him in his castle. "And," said he, "this girl, Bird-of-Gold, has been very loving and faithful to you as you have been to her, and for a further benefit to you I shall have the old blind sage come down from his attic in the castle and marry you here and now." Eean and Bird-of-Gold took each other's hands as he said this, and the old blind sage was brought down from his attic chamber, and he married Bird-of-Gold and Eean by the rays of the rising sun.
For a year and,a day they lived in King Manus's royal castle. Now Eean had learned so much of the arts and crafts and mysteries that belong to an Enchanter that he was able to do great works for the King. Castles he built that gave security, and bridges that brought people together, and mills that ground for the people abundance of corn. He had become so strong and so sure of himself since his encounter with Zabulun that all he set out to perform he did well. And his wife, Bird-of-Gold, loved him so much that her thought never went back to the country she had come from. Always, they say, she kept a flock of white ducks; perhaps they reminded her of the thousand ducks that was the fortune she brought into Babylon.
But the storyteller must not forget to tell you about the question that Eean asked Merlin the Enchanter on King Manus's behalf. It was about a game of chess that King Manus had been playing with his brother-in-law, King Connal, for half their lifetimes without either having victory in sight. Moreover, they had inherited the game from their fathers, and it was now being played for fifty years. Merlin told Eean what the moves should be, and the day after he came to the castle, Eean took the chess board and showed them to the King. With that instruction he played. The game of chess was finished three days afterward, and great fame and honor came to King Manus.

Dina Lohan -- 4 Glasses of Wine Before Fight with Lindsay
Dina Lohan 4 Glasses of Wine Before Fight with Lindsay
10/10/2012 2:20 PM PT
Dina Lohan had been boozing heavily ... on an empty stomach ... before her nuclear blowout with Lindsay last night ... TMZ has learned.
We broke the story ... Lindsay and Dina were clubbing in NYC before they got into a screaming match in a limo.
But while they were partying, we're told Dina was constantly sipping on wine ... and by the time they were ready to leave, she had been through at least 4 glasses and was so trashed she could barely speak.
One source tells us Dina hadn't had anything to eat that night ... which couldn't have helped the situation.
As we previously reported, Lindsay claimed Dina got physical during the argument ... and cops were eventually called to Dina's home.
The two were seen hugging it out this morning -- but we're told Dina has yet to apologize for her actions.

G-Dragon recently expressed his hopes for launching his own fashion brand in the future.
The Big Bang member recently collaborated with the accessory brand AMBUSH for AMBUSH x G-DRAGON. AMBUSH was created by m-flo rapper Verbal and his wife.
In his interview with GQ Korea he said: “It looked cool for a musician to have his own brand. I want to also have my own fashion line in the future, so I asked Verbal a lot of questions pertaining to that.

By Hindustan Times
Singer Britney Spears is reportedly set to marry fiance Jason Trawick before the end of this year. The singer is likely to walk down the aisle within weeks of the US version of The X Factor coming to an end. She has already started working out so that she is in her best shape on D-day.
"It's very much a countdown to the nuptials right now. We're talking within weeks. She's put a treadmill in her X Factor dressing room and is making sure she's jogging as often as she can," mirror.co.uk quoted a source as saying.
"She's taking her look incredibly seriously and has said she will dazzle with her outfits and her body on the live finals of X Factor," the source added.
The singer got engaged to Trawick, her former agent, in December last year and the couple recently purchased a new $8.5 million house together.

(NaturalNews) By now, images of Bostonians being forced from their homes by heavily armed police and federal agents who were searching for a lone terrorist bomber are well-known throughout the alternative media world.
Within hours after authorities in Boston, in collusion with the Feds, ordered a lockdown of the city and surrounding communities and unconstitutional, warrantless door-to-door searches of homes, video feeds of the police state tyranny were being posted online for the world to see what former U.S. Rep. Ron Paul of Texas later described as a dress-rehearsal for "martial law."
Naturally, city and federal officials, many of whom initially denied or downplayed the situation (with the help of a compliant mainstream media), said nothing could be further from the truth. The door-to-door searches that took place during the lockdown and resultant scouring of neighborhoods, in which innocent residents were tossed out of their homes at gunpoint, were only too happy to comply with police because, after all, it was for the good and safety of the general public.
Well, in exclusive interviews with several Boston-area residents in the days following the searches, Infowars.com reveals that the tactics used by police as they searched for a wounded 19-year-old bombing suspect were not nearly as well-received as the mainstream would have you believe.
'Dropped me off in the middle of nowhere'
"On the heels of prestitute Lawrence O'Donnell labeling Ron Paul a 'liar' when he called the manhunt and door-to-door searches in Watertown, Mass. a martial law exercise, Infowars reporter Dan 'The Kraken' Bidondi went to interview residents who were forced from their homes," said the website.
One young man told Bidondi that the "situation was dealt with way too chaotically than it should have been."
"I was walking down Hazel Street and, um, a cop pointed his gun at me, and then they called SWAT in and SWAT came and picked me up...and threw me in the back of a car, and dropped me off in the middle of Newton," the young man said - which was essentially "the middle of nowhere."
"Broad daylight," he continued. "They just took off my cuffs and told me to walk." They never read him any Miranda rights, either, the young man told Bidondi.
A woman who spoke with Bidondi said cops showed up at the door of her home and "told me they were going to search" the house. They didn't ask, and they didn't have a warrant.
"They told us we had to leave," she said, adding she didn't complain at the time but said "I couldn't get everything I needed to get. I'm a diabetic and needed medicine, and I had left some stuff here, and they wouldn't let me come back to get it."
Bidondi asked, "Were you scared at all?"
"Yes, I was," she answered.
She said remained at a police station for a while before her son came to pick her up, she said. No one ever formally told her or her family when the lockdown was lifted and when they could return to their home.
"It was about eleven o'clock at night and I was calling the Watertown Police and the FBI and no one told me that we could come back in yet. They kept shuffling it back and forth," she said. Eventually she just made the decision to return to her home.
'Leave the shoes!'
"One thing I was very, very upset about is that when we were leaving here...all the lights were on in the house, TVs, you know," she said. "They had gone out the back door, down in my basement...I said, 'Let me just close all my doors and lock up,' and they said no, they would do that.
"I came home," she continued, "the back door was open - this is hours now later - back door was open, front door was open, basement door was open, lights were on, TVs were on. No one did anything."
The woman also showed Bidondi bullet holes in two of her cars, apparently from shootouts between police and the terror suspect.
A third resident, an older man, said police gave no prior warnings or put out any announcements that a lockdown was being implemented.
"They just walked in, you know, and they say, 'Get outta here,'" the man said. "I said, 'let me put my shoes on,' you know...they don't want to let me put my shoes on, either."
There's much more. Watch the entire set of interviews here.

* I am reviewing these books which I was gifted for free from Netgalley in exchange for an honest review. All thoughts are my own. *
Publisher: Harper Voyager
Destined to destroy empires Mia Covere is only ten years old when she is given her first lesson in death.
Six years later, the child raised in the shadows takes her first steps towards keeping the promise she made on the day that she lost everything.
But the chance to strike against such powerful enemies will be fleeting, so if she is to have her revenge, Mia must become a weapon without equal. She must prove herself against the deadliest of friends and enemies, and survive the tutelage of murderers, liars and demons at the heart of a murder cult.
The Red Church is no Hogwarts, but Mia is no ordinary student. The shadows loves her. And they drink her fear.
Book Review:OK, so this was a journey!
A lot of people have been really loving this book lately so even though I decided to read this like four years ago but gave up before the first chapter I decided to give it a go (again).
So I and Nevernight went on a journey through the month that I started this book. I went through phases of picking up the book and just putting it down and I don't think that I was ever fully invested in the story. I listened to a lot of it on audiobook as well so this may be why as I have been reading physically for a lot of the month.
I think the audiobook definitely did help with a lot of things that I would have disliked with this book, namely the footnotes. The narrator doesn't tell you what is the footnotes so you just hear them as part of the story which was helpful. I did have an e-copy through and when I was reading physically I did skip the footnotes. Maybe I am just lazy but he could have put them in the writing. Were they needed?
Again I think the audiobook helped with the writing because when it is being read to you, you don't notice the flowery language and such and I just drink it in. I also didn't really mind the writing but I can see why.
One of the reasons why I didn't like it last time was because it was quite graphic and as an ace person, the sex scenes were a little bit uncomfortable especially because Mia was 16 but they were well-written. Also, it was quite graphic in terms of violence. I have now read A Game Of Thrones so I think I'm good. Again, the fight scenes were quite good which considering they were a biggish part of the story is a good thing.
I also liked the plot, it did take me a while to get into, I like because I've been reading so much fantasy lately, but again once I was there, I was in for the ride. I did times also feel it was a little bit dense and I think this made it drag for me. There were also some plot twists that I did not expect so they made it more interesting.
I think the main thing that I enjoyed was the characters. I thought that Mia was so interesting and had so many layers that Jay Kristoff revealed even in the later parts of the story. I also loved Tric, who again was a really complex and multi-layered character. Jay Kristoff, in general, has been criticised for his POCs in books so please check that out in this series so please seek out own voices reviewers. I definitely saw this when I was reading the book. I also really liked Mr Kindly as a character and offered a vulnerability that you don't often see in fantasy characters.
Nevernight was a highly engaging read that will satisfy the blood-lust for any fantasy reader.
Have you read Nevernight? If so did you like it? Let me know in the comments below.

I have a pleasant experience with meek and I would highly recommend anyone who is renovating their home to speak to them. The first impression from looking at their website was a bit mixed feelings, one side of me told me that they are bold in their words and must at least speak to them, the other side me of skepticism asked myself are they just doing it to stand out.
Glad i didn't miss out to at least speak to them. Other than the insights which i don't think i have come across in such depth online, it was somewhat jawdropping to some extent assuming they were real. What attracted my attention was their clear approach that is performance based, which is assuring i must say. Yes i read through most of their policies.
Renovation wasn't smooth sailing throughout, but all problems were resolved in the best possible manner, putting my interest first and i could certainly felt it.
Special thanks to the key person who i cannot name under as specified in their email.
Heartfelt appreciation to meek and as of now, 4 of my friends have already gotten in touch and been eager for their journey. Keep up the excellent ethics meek!
11 Sep 2023

Tuesday, May 12, 2015 - 13:01
Two removed from roof of Hema building; police investigating
The police arrested two men on a roof of a building in Breda at around 05:00 a.m. on Tuesday. The men were removed from the building's roof with help from the fire brigade. According to Breda Vandaag, the men were found on the roof of a building that is located behind the HEMA store on Ginnekenstraat. It is not clear what they were doing there. The police are investigating to find out what the men were planning to do. Officers also searched other roofs around the HEMA to make sure that no one else was present.

TMI but curious
My AF was due 3/11 and all I have seemed to have is brownish discharge. I took a test and it came out negative. Has anyone had this? Were you pregnant or did your period end up coming. Sorry for the tmi. Been Ttc for 9 months now and I really don't want to get my hopes up but I am curious. Thanks!

It's Mega, so there's a lot of shops, eating and walking. Lot of things to see. We came here for the cinema, which is still fair, for a mass cinema. Then I bought my new shoes here at their department store. They have a wide variety of shoes which I like. They have a new car park in the making.

Editor's note: This story has been corrected to note that the injured children were a boy and a girl.
Police have confirmed that two children were injured after falling from a Ferris wheel cab at the Chelsea Community Fair Thursday night.
- Related: Chelsea fair president: Ferris wheel on which children were hurt was inspected before carnival opened
Officials said the juveniles were taken to C.S. Mott Children's Hospital in critical but stable condition. There was no update on their medical status Friday morning.
Chelsea police did not have much more information to release about the incident, but eyewitnesses said two children fell out of a Ferris wheel cab at a height of about 15-20 feet.
Chelsea resident Alex Keszler said she was standing by the Ferris wheel around 8:20 p.m. when she saw that one of the cabs, or "buckets" as she called them, was caught on another one.
That caused the bucket the two children were in to tip forward as the Ferris wheel rotated, she said.
The wheel was at a roughly "4 o'clock" when the children fell, Keszler said.
“The opening of the bucket just dumped the kids out,” she said.
Katie Wyss, also of Chelsea, was at the fair with her husband and two children. Her family was headed to the Ferris wheel to ride it when she heard a loud bang, she said.
“Someone said, ‘Oh my God, they’re falling,'” she said.
The witnesses said a child who was roughly between 5-10 years old was on the ground and bleeding, but conscious. An older child was on the platform of the amusement ride, but not moving, they said. The children were later identified as a 16-year-old girl and 8-year-old boy.
Police and paramedics from Huron Valley Ambulance responded quickly and took the children away on stretchers, the witnesses said. Police said two doctors who were at the fair also provided aid to the injured.
Joyce Williams of HVA said the patients were taken to the hospital in critical condition.
A woman at the Chelsea Fair office said the midway would be open as scheduled at 1 p.m. today but couldn't confirm if the Ferris wheel would be operating.
“I was in shock. I saw it happening. It was very, very traumatic," Keszler said. "I just hope those kids are OK.”

Gloriously secondObituary: Raymond Poulidor died on November 13th
France’s favourite racing cyclist, “L’Eternel Second”, was 83
EIGHT TIMES Raymond Poulidor stood on the podium at the end of the Tour de France, soaked in sweat, exhausted and smiling his big gap-toothed smile. He was just never on the top step. In 14 Tours someone else always pipped him or, to be honest, passed him by quite a lot. He came second three times, third five times (including in his last tour, not bad for a 40-year-old), but never put on the treasured yellow jersey, the greatest prize in cycling. The closest he came to that was when winners offered to let him wear it at dinner parties, and he would shrug his big frame into it with no bitterness at all. Because, with or without it, “L’Eternel Second” was by far the most popular racing cyclist ever known in France.
His catalogue of mishaps in the Tour was long. In 1962, when he came third, he had a broken finger. In 1964, when he came second, he lost time at Monaco and had a puncture in the Pyrenees. In 1965, Italian riders ganged up on him. In 1967 he fell badly in the Vosges, and in 1968 he was hit by a motorbike. The race in 1973 began with his nearest chance, when he was behind by a mere 0.8 seconds in the Prologue, but he later fell down a ravine. In 1975, his worst Tour, when he came 19th, he had bronchitis. Something always came between him and the glory of the maillot jaune. And all Frenchmen and women who had ever repeatedly tried, and failed, to achieve some goal took him to their hearts accordingly. He was “Pouli” and “Poupou” (a stupid name, but he put up with it), carried aloft on a sea of poupoularité.
They called him unlucky. He did not agree. He thought he had had a lot of luck, in fact. Over a 18-year career he had chalked up 189 victories in other races, including the Vuelta a España, his only Grand Tour, La Flèche Wallonne, the French national championship and the Paris-Nice (twice) against the great Belgian Eddy Merckx. He also won the Milan-San Remo, though true to form it almost slipped away when he got a puncture 125km from the finish and, on the final corner, was sent the wrong way by a policeman. Yet he held off the chasing field and won, by three seconds.
He was also lucky, to his mind, to be cycling at all. The alternative was to be labouring, like his parents, on the rocky hills of Creuse, trying to make the bad soil yield enough to get bread for the table and rent in the landlord’s wallet. He had left school at 14, like his three brothers, prepared to toil, but also aware that his best times were when he was racing his bike between the villages on fair-days or speeding round the hills with his brothers, for all the world like one of the grim sleek riders in Miroir-Sprint magazine. He could never be called sleek, more cuddly, and after his service militaire in Algeria pretty fat, but he shook off the weight and became a professional cyclist in 1960, when he was 24.
What he did not shake off, but made much of, were his peasant roots. Between races he went back to help on the farm, and his style of cycling—dogged and determined on hills, a bit too leisurely on the time trials—owed something to farm work, too. With his lined, wind-burned face and slow Limousin drawl, he reminded his followers of the old ways, la France profonde and all kinds of comforting verities that had been pushed aside by modern life. He kept a peasant’s innocence, and in 1966 got into deep merde with his colleagues for agreeing to a newfangled drugs test which they were all refusing. But he also kept a shrewd business head on his shoulders. He knew the value of a franc, ever since he and his brothers had broken their bedroom window and been told, by their father, that there would be no money to mend it until the spring.
It was therefore oddly satisfying that his great rival, Jacques Anquetil, was everything he was not: a well-off, pale-faced, blond-quiffed, almost ghostly Norman, withdrawn and unflamboyant. Anquetil won the Tour five times, yet to his fury the French still loved Poupou more. The depth of their duelling was witnessed by half a million spectators when, in 1964, they battled up the Puy de Dôme in Auvergne side by side, Anquetil on the mountain side and Poupou on the precipice edge, so close that their elbows knocked and Poupou could feel the hot breath of “Maître Jacques” on his arms. He gained 42 seconds over him; it was not enough to win the Tour. But he did not mind too much, as he never did.
One reason to be relaxed was that he was making a lot of money—more even than Anquetil, some said. From the start he had been astonished at what cyclists earned. His first prize, 80,000 old francs for coming second, would have taken him six years to get by farming (or substantially less time at the poker table, where he was a skilled bluffer). The more Tours he lost, the more the crowds liked him and the more he earned. At the height of his celebrity, in the mid-1970s, almost half of respondents to one poll made him their first choice as a dinner guest. In 1974 alone more than 4,000 articles were written about him, besides university theses and sociological studies. He lent his name to sports bikes, and given half a chance would stand in supermarkets shouting “Just the right bike for you, sir!” Later, as a national treasure, he had a rose named after him, and appeared along the route of the Tour in yellow outfits and with trinkets in his hands, cheered by all who saw him.
This adulation came not simply because he failed, but because of the manner of his failing. He did not get up each morning with the thought of winning. He did not think of winning at all. His manager complained that he was always in a daydream, and it was true. Everything that was happening to him was marvellous enough. His memoir was called “La gloire sans maillot jaune”, glory without the jersey, which in the end he didn’t need. Eight times he had got within touching distance, and lost them all. But he could still say, as he often did, “Look how close I came!”■

Teacher Takes One Look At Girl’s Picture Day Outfit And Suspends Her On The Spot
She Loved Superheroes
Kayla’s dad never imagined things would go so wrong when he let her choose her own outfit for picture day.
Three-year-old Kayla loves superheroes, so it was no surprise that she dressed as one for picture day.
On that very morning, her father was called by the school and asked to pick her up. It was unacceptable how they justified their actions.
A Tough Life
In her short life, Kayla had experienced much. In comparison with other girls of her age, she was a little different due to what she had experienced.
She still loved her life, though it wasn’t perfect. In the face of her sadness, she stood up and became a hero.
As soon as picture day rolled around, everything changed.
Doing His Best
Kayla was raised by her father, Dan, most of her life. He was a single parent who did everything possible to make sure his daughter had everything she wanted.
His actions might be considered spoiling to some.
However, Dan did it as a means of compensating for something she lost and could never regain.
A Tragic Loss
Kayla’s mother was tragically killed in an accident when she was a year old, leaving the family devastated.
Despite Kayla’s young age, she still felt sadness after that dreadful night when her mom didn’t return home a few days later.
She Wanted To Become A Superhero
She had been grieving for months before everything changed one day.
The superhero Wonder Woman became her obsession that night as she watched it with her dad.
However, it wasn’t only Wonder Woman. Dan assumed Kayla loved all superheroes because she wanted to be one. She could save her mother if she were.
An Important Week
Kayla’s class photos at school were taken this week, which was a big deal for her.
His little girl needed the perfect outfit for her special day, so Dan chose a few he thought might be appropriate.
That day, however, there seemed to be something amiss. There was something bothering Kayla, and she wasn’t happy about anything.
She Needed More
In the spirit of being a good daughter, Kayla tried on every outfit that her father had picked, but none of them suited her.
The outfits didn’t bother her because she didn’t like them. These were all items she had worn before.
The photo, however, was her first class photo, and she wanted it to be exceptionally well done.
A Brilliant Idea
Seeing Kayla’s dissatisfaction with her outfit, Dan decided to allow her to choose her own.
She tried everything in her cabinet, but nothing worked.
Dan had an excellent idea at that moment. His little girl would go shopping with him, and he would let her buy whatever she wanted.
He decided to spend the day at the biggest mall in the city, as he had some money saved up.
His daughter would be able to buy whatever she wanted.
There are only a few things children’s hearts desire, so it might seem over the top, but she was only three.
A Good Day
Kayla awoke early Saturday morning and got ready to leave home. As soon as she swallowed her breakfast, father, and daughter were on their way out.
They arrived at the mall just as shops opened, about an hour from their home.
Dan knew Kayla would be exhausted when they arrived home after such an early start. The fact that she was so happy was a pleasure to see.
The Perfect Outfit
They strolled through the shops for hours, and when they sat down for lunch, Kayla finally told Dan what outfit she had been searching for.
She wanted to be dressed as Wonder Woman. Dan laughed, surprised that he didn’t think of it sooner.
And by the fact he actually knew exactly where to get the outfit Kayla was looking for.
It Was Cute
After lunch, he led Kayla to the store where she would find the outfit, and she immediately tried it on. Dan had to admit that she looked adorable as a little superhero.
He didn’t think twice about buying his daughter the outfit, as the kindergarten she was attending usually didn’t have issues with the kids dressing up.
But this time, they would, and their remarks were not to be taken lightly.
Getting Some Accessories
Seeing as Kayla had the outfit she wanted, Dan took her around to get some accessories to complete the look. She still needed the tiara, arm cuff, and boots.
A few hours later, the pair had everything they needed to make the outfit look like the real deal, and they headed home.
Little did they know that something so innocent would cause such a fuss.
The Big Day
On picture day, Kayla got ready.
She put on her outfit and her skin-colored tights, and her dad walked her to school.
It seemed like an ordinary day at first, but just as Dan was about to start working, he received a phone call that had him rushing out of the house.
A Very Rude Call
Dan sat down in front of his laptop and was preparing for his first meeting when his phone rang.
He saw that it was the school calling and immediately answered, thinking that something might’ve happened to his precious daughter.
But he was in for a surprise, as the woman on the other end of the line accused him of being a bad parent and demanded that he come pick his daughter up immediately.
Heading To The School
Dan didn’t waste any time rushing to his car and getting on the road, but he still had no idea what was going on.
Instead of explaining the situation, the woman who called him preferred to insult him and wouldn’t let him get a word out.
He tried to ask what was going on, but instead of getting a decent response, she just kept spewing nonsense.
He Couldn’t Believe His Ears
When Dan arrived at the kindergarten, he was escorted to the principal’s office, where he saw his daughter sitting in the corner and crying her eyes out.
Fury engulfed him in an instant, and he wanted nothing more than to make the responsible person pay.
He was about to ask what happened when Kayla’s teacher burst into the room and started accusing him. Then she said something that made his fury double.
Kayla’s teacher accused Dan of forcing his daughter to wear something that no child should ever be seen wearing. She also accused him of being a bad father who had some sick obsession with half-naked women.
By this point, Dan was seeing red. He demanded an explanation, and the one he got infuriated him even more.
The teacher said that he had let his daughter come to school half-naked and that they would not be taking pictures of a child dressed in such a way.
Stream Of Tears
Dan pushed past the woman and lifted the crying toddler into his arms.
She was becoming more hysterical with each word the teacher spoke, and that did nothing to help her father calm down.
Dan was about to lash out when the principal intervened and asked the teacher to explain herself in a calm, professional manner. What she said was laughable.
Trying To Fix The Issue
Calming himself as much as he could, Dan explained that his daughter wasn’t half-naked as the teacher suggested.
She was, in fact, wearing thick, flesh-colored tights, and the only skin that was visible was that of her shoulders.
He also stated that Kayla had picked the outfit herself as she loved the superhero and that shops wouldn’t sell the costume if it was as bad as the teacher made it sound. But the debate was just beginning.
Running Into A Wall
When the teacher realized that she had walked into a trap and that her assumptions were completely out of line, she tried her best to cover her tracks.
Having nothing to go on, the teacher then stated that it was against the kindergartner’s dress code for Kayla to wear something that exposed her shoulders.
Dan was taken aback, as such a rule simply didn’t make sense. Were children expected to wear sweaters on hot days?
The principal agreed with the teacher, stating that even though it didn’t make much sense, those were the rules, and Kayla was obviously going against the dress code by having her shoulders exposed.
Dan knew they were just trying to prove they were right, so he took his daughter and left. But his little girl was whimpering in the back seat.
She was clearly still upset about what happened, and Dan wasn’t going to stand for it.
Too Young To Understand
He knew Kayla was too young to understand what was really happening.
And he could understand that she must’ve been mortified by her teacher’s shouting.
Plus, he had no idea what the teacher had said to his daughter before he arrived, and with the rate at which she was throwing accusations around, it could’ve been anything.
Dan wasn’t the type of man who acted on anger, but right now, he was so frustrated that he was considering pulling his daughter out of the preschool.
When he first enrolled her, it seemed like the perfect place, but he was starting to have his doubts.
If they were so rude to parents, how are they treating the children?
So Many Thoughts
His thoughts started spiraling out of control, and before long, Dan was even angrier than he was when he walked into the principal’s office.
But did he have a point? Or was he just overreacting because of the circumstances?
At that point, it didn’t matter anymore. He was determined to find his little girl a place where she could be who she wanted to be.
First Things First
However, Dan had more important things to worry about. The first was getting his daughter to stop crying, and the second was his mission to make her feel better.
The problem was that he was feeling just as bad.
The teacher’s words hit hard, and they made Dan wonder if she might’ve been right. Was he a bad father?
Determined To Fix It
But Dan knew that he wasn’t a bad father, and he was determined to make his daughter forget about everything she had heard that day. He just didn’t know how to do it.
Would an ice cream help? Maybe a new doll?
As he was considering it, an idea struck him. He whirled the car around and went the other way.
“Where are we going, daddy?” Kayla asked through her tears. Dan was considering whether he should tell her about what he had in mind or not.
It would be the perfect surprise, but he didn’t want to see her sniffling for the rest of the journey.
“I’m taking you to go have your photos taken,” Dan said and gave his daughter a loving smile.
Back To The Mall
Kayla’s tears dried out in an instant. Her smile had returned, and it had an immediate effect on Dan. He could feel his rage melting away with each mile that passed.
They arrived at the mall a little while later, and he took his daughter to the closest photo studio.
Dan explained what happened, and the employee eagerly agreed to do the shoot.
A Night To Remember
They took a ton of pictures of the cute little girl being the superhero she always wanted to be. And to make Kayla feel extra special, they even did some editing, free of charge.
When the photos were printed, little Kayla’s smile grew even wider.
She never thought she’d see herself flying through the sky like her favorite superhero did. But in the one photo, she was doing just that.
Later That Night
Even though Dan managed to save the day, he wasn’t ready to let the kindergarten get away with what they had done.
He would make them pay for ruining Kayla’s first-ever school photos and for upsetting her the way they did.
As his daughter went to sleep, Dan turned to social media and posted his story as well as the pictures they took online.
At the end of his long post, Dan’s doubts crept back in, and he asked the public, “Do you think this makes me a bad father? Was it wrong of me to let her pick her own outfit?”
He couldn’t help but feel that this whole incident was somehow his fault.
And for the first time in his life, Dan needed reassurance to know that he had done the right thing. That was exactly what the netizens offered him.
Responses Pour In
In a matter of hours, he had an inbox full of responses. Everyone was being supportive, but there were some who took things to the next level.
“You should sue them,” one commenter wrote. “That is blatant discrimination!” another said. Dan didn’t plan on taking the kindergarten to court, as he had no evidence.
But the responses did give him an idea about how he could get revenge.
More Than He Expected
With thousands of shares and hundreds of comments, Dan got much more than he bargained for.
He wasn’t expecting his post to blow up the way it did. But it did give him the reassurance and validation he was looking for.
However, that wasn’t the only thing the post gave Dan. It also made him realize that he had a foot to stand on, whereas the kindergarten did not.
It Gave Him An Idea
Many of the commenters mentioned that they had gone through similar problems with their children and that they took action against the schools.
Some of them came out empty-handed, but others managed to have the policies changed for the benefit of their children.
Could he do the same? Did he have any right to demand something like that over a photo he’s daughter wasn’t allowed to be in?
Thanks to the overwhelming support he received, Dan decided to give it a try.
He spent the rest of the night going through the school’s policies, procedures, and dress code and was surprised to find that they had lied to him.
Not a word was said about children not being allowed to attend school if their shirts didn’t cover their shoulders. And to make matters worse, a child couldn’t be suspended over an outfit, either. They would just be forced to change.
Now that Dan knew where he stood, he could formulate his plan. But there was one problem.
Dan knew that talking to the school was like running face-first into a brick wall, but that was because he was only one man.
Like they did that morning, they would lie and try to cheat their way out. But what if he wasn’t just one man? What if they were a majority…
Asking For Help
With that thought in mind, Dan turned to the internet once more. He told the netizens what he had found and asked for their assistance in resolving the matter.
The majority of the people who saw his post agreed to help him go up against the school.
And the best part was that many of those people lived in his neighborhood.
The parents came together to create a petition that would force the school to change its dress code. They wanted their children to be allowed to wear whatever they wanted if the parents deemed that it was okay.
They also wanted to address the issue of how parents should be treated by school personnel.
The petition was launched on Dan’s Facebook page with the hope that they would get enough signatures to force the kindergarten to change its policies. But they never expected it to blow up the way it did.
It Blew Up
Within a week, the petition had collected over a million signatures. The kindergarten was forced to change the dress code.
The principal and teacher were removed from their positions because of the way they approached the situation.
And the kindergarten was forced to publicly apologize to Dan and Kayla. But that wasn’t the end of this situation.
Back To Social Media
That night, Dan returned to social media to thank everyone for helping and to inform them of his success.
For the first time since he was called in, he felt good.
He felt that he managed to play his part and show his daughter that it didn’t matter what people said. Because talking doesn’t always mean you’re right.
Reason To Celebrate
Many of the people who followed his story congratulated Dan on his success in proving that the school was, in fact, wrong for targeting Kayla that way.
But there were some netizens who weren’t as enthusiastic as the rest.
And they had questions that would force Dan to think twice before continuing his long-awaited celebration.
The Netizens Weren’t Pleased
A few of the netizens did applaud Dan for taking action, but they wanted to know if he pulled Kayla out of the school.
At first, Dan was confused by the question, and he asked them what they meant.
But the answer he got was not what he was expecting. It was a big eye-opener that had Dan questioning everything.
Their Point Of View
The netizens explained that the termination of the teacher and principal and the public apology didn’t mean anything.
People talk a lot, but it’s their actions that count.
There could be teachers at the school who are unhappy with the outcome of Dan’s petition. And who knew how far they’d be willing to go to bring their displeasure across?
How It Would Affect Kayla
The netizens were concerned that Kayla would suffer because of her father’s actions, and they cautioned him about that.
They said that there could be little things that he wouldn’t even notice.
It could be something as little as taking her snack or as bad as refusing her lunchtime nap. They could even go as far as to scare the poor girl to stop her from talking to her father about what she was experiencing.
Did They Have A Point?
Dan was very concerned about what he heard. But he wondered if that could really be the case. They were living in the 21st century, not the Middle Ages.
And this was the United States, things like that didn’t happen. Did they?
Dan wasn’t so sure about his assumptions anymore. And he was taking what the netizens said very seriously.
Meeting Of The Parents
So the next day, Dan arranged a meeting with some of the other parents in his neighborhood.
He told them what the netizens said and asked if they had experienced something like that.
Dan hoped he was just being paranoid, but then some of the mothers started speaking up. And his worst fears were confirmed.
One mom said that her daughter’s stuffed toy was taken by one of the teachers. While another added that they refused to give her son his lunch.
Yet, another mom said that her son came home crying and said that his teacher was shouting at him.
And the worst part was that all of those moms signed Dan’s petition.
Action Was Needed
Seeing how severe the situation was, Dan decided that they needed to act.
They couldn’t just stand by while their children were being bullied because of their actions.
All the moms agreed with his statement, but nobody knew what to do. They were afraid that the behavior would get worse if they approached the school and spoke up.
Such Behavior Wouldn’t Be Tolerated
Dan was afraid of the same thing. But it was something that he wouldn’t tolerate.
If their children were suffering at the hands of their teachers, it was their duty as parents to act.
If they just sat by and let the school do whatever they wanted to do, Kayla would still be expelled for her picture day outfit.
A New Plan
That wasn’t something the parents wanted either. Their children were still so young and innocent.
And they wanted that to last for as long as it could.
The decision to act was unanimous, and the parents quickly came up with a plan to deal with the school once and for all. But what would they do?
Behind Closed Doors
Night after night, the parents had secret meetings behind closed doors.
They searched the area and the internet for the one thing they needed to complete their plan.
And once everything was ready, they did something so drastic the school administrator didn’t know how to react. What did they do to leave such an impression?
The next morning, all of the parents in the surrounding neighborhood arrived at the school. But they weren’t there to drop their children off.
They all filed into the administrator’s office and asked to have their children pulled out of the kindergarten. The administrator was speechless.
It was nearly a third of all the children that were attending the school.
After that, the parents went to another kindergarten.
This one was a little further from their homes, but they promised that they would give all the children the opportunity to be unique.
The parents wouldn’t fall for that trick again, though. They put down some rules and regulations of their own before they signed any contracts.
It Was The One
The kindergarten agreed to the terms and welcomed all the children to their new school. It was already mid-way through the year, but they were happy to help wherever they could.
And the parents couldn’t be happier about their decision. There were no more tears or sad days.
And when picture day came, the school allowed all of the children to pick their own outfits.
Finding a new preschool wasn’t easy, but Dan was determined to find one that wouldn’t be so harsh on his daughter’s appearance.
He eventually found a school that accepted children of all genders and refrained from enforcing strict dress codes.
It was a private school and a bit more expensive, but worth it for their peace of mind.
Kayla was happier at her new school, where she was free to be herself and wear what she wanted.
She was adapting quickly to her new environment and wasn’t looked down at for the way she dressed. She finally felt safe expressing herself and told her dad just how happy she was. But it didn’t end there.
She even made friends with another little girl who also enjoyed dressing up like the wonder-woman superhero. She had found her place.
“My name’s Katie,” the little girl introduced herself. The two got along like a house on fire. But what did her father think of this new union based solely on their appearances?
Dan was glad he made the change. He could see the difference in her demeanor and knew that he had made the right choice. But an important question was asked by one of the other parents.
Is it okay for children to get along just because of their appearance? When they couldn’t wear what they wanted at least that meant they properly got to know each other.
Topic Of Discussion
Dan thought the parent was insane for this line of thinking, but it quickly became a topic of discussion. He couldn’t believe it wasn’t unanimous. It seemed that all it did was get people talking.
Soon people online started debating what was right and wrong about this new system. Sure, it wasn’t perfect, but Dan hated the alternative.
Dan knew never to give in to internet trolls. Probably only a third of the people discussing the issue were actually genuine. But what did the other parents in the group think about it?
Thankfully, most of the parents agreed this solution was much better than the alternative. It seemed at least offline; the one parent who brought up the issue was alone. But online, it was a different story.
One user online said that if the children were all forced to wear the same muted colors, then it would enforce discipline at a young age.
This meant that they wouldn’t be slobs growing up or ever take their parents for granted. Others echoed this opinion, but it only drove Dan mad. How could they think this way?
After all of his hard work, it seemed that people online were only going backward. He had saved his child, and other parents had all saved their children from the overly strict kindergarten.
But why did others have to get involved when it was none of their business? Dan couldn’t stand what people were saying online. It sounded more like a jail than a kindergarten.
While the small group of parents and children that had made a stand with Dan agreed with him, people online seemed pretty split down the middle.
He wondered how many of the faceless voices were actually parents themselves. He wished he could make them understand what being a parent felt like, but they didn’t care.
Throwing Around Their Opinions
Dan knew that people just loved to anonymously throw out their opinions regardless of what kind of qualifications they had on the matter. It wasn’t fair.
He knew he should have just ignored the comments, but he just couldn’t help himself. The internet was a buzz with opinions from both sides.
Promoting Good Behavior
One user wrote, “My parents sent me to a boarding school, and the discipline and it only promoted good behavior. Stop babying your kids, people!”
Others chimed in, agreeing with the outdated ideals given by a member of the older generation. Didn’t he understand that things didn’t work that way anymore?
Dan could only imagine how terrible it would be if his little girl was sent away to some kind of boarding school. He didn’t have a doubt that it would be miserable for her.
He had to push down those terrible thoughts. Even if some agreed, he knew it wasn’t the right thing for his little girl. But thankfully, some people did seem on his side.
A user wrote, “They’re children; let them be kids and enjoy themselves before they get more and more responsibilities. It sucks growing up! Just let them enjoy this state of their life while they can!”
The words touched Dan. It was nice knowing that not everyone was a troll or trying to make small kids miserable. But there was another problem he hadn’t foreseen.
A Greater Problem
The experience made Dan reflect on the issues that small children face when they are apprehended for their appearance. He mustered up the courage to do something he didn’t normally.
Dan hated being in the public eye. But he knew he had to do something to spread awareness, maybe it would convince even the internet.
He talked to the faculty at the kindergarten and they thought his plan was a great idea. They arranged for him to get a mic and speak to all the parents who had children at the kindergarten..
He made a speech at the new school where he said that “children should be allowed to express themselves and explore their identities without fear of being reprimanded.”
How Would The Parents Feel?
Strict dress codes can be detrimental to a child’s self-esteem and confidence, and can even lead to body image issues in the future. But would all the other parents feel the same way?
He felt a pang of fear. Would they be like the internet? Would he be booed off of the stage just like he was booed off of social media?
Echoes In The Crowd
Dan felt sweat start to bead down his forehead as he had to stop his knees from buckling underneath him. The silence felt agonizingly long.
Then, out of nowhere, he started to hear echoes coming from the crowd. He couldn’t tell if they were good or bad responses. Then he heard cheering and could finally breathe easily.
The cheering made him feel a little uncomfortable because he hated having all eyes on him. But at least the attention was positive, and it was for the benefit of all the children there.
He knew that his little Kayla would have been proud of standing up for her and all of the other kids. He was just glad she was comfortable here and even had made her new friend.
The parents meeting went well. In an ever changing world, many parents agreed that they need a more hands on approach to disciplining their children.
But it seemed the problems would never really disappear. People will always question whether they went too hard in one direction, as Dan was about to hear once again. It was the same argument from before.
Some of the parents decided to give Dan their concerns. He was happy to hear them compared to on the internet where it was chaos.
He knew that this was a safe environment where everyone respected each other. One man even brought up a point that Dan had never considered before.
While they enjoyed their children’s imagination, there is always the risk that fantasy can affect their real education.
They agreed with Dan’s method, and said that children should be taught the difference between the real world and the comic world. He completely understood their concerns and tried reassuring them.
“While I do think that it’s a risk our children may get too caught up in a fantasy world, isn’t that what they’re owed before they are forced to grow up?” He echoed the words of the kind user online.
“If that does become a problem, we can always deal with it. But I believe that this solution is far better than the alternative, which is our children being suppressed.” But how did they react?
Many people agreed that it was a fair compromise, and if they ever had to do anything, they could slightly tweak the formula until both the kids and the parents were satisfied.
One thing everybody could agree on was that the other kindergarten had it wrong with how they dealt with it. Dan was happy that people finally understood the real problem.
After the meeting was over, he reflected on the long journey he had gone through with his daughter. Dan was grateful that he was able to find a school that allowed Kayla to be herself.
He hoped that more schools would adopt a more accepting and inclusive approach, allowing children to grow and develop without unnecessary restrictions. But he had no idea that things were far from over.
While he was giving his speech, Dan was completely unaware that someone towards the back of the crowd had more of a reaction than the others. They couldn’t believe what Dan was saying.
From the moment he stood up and started speaking, they knew that they would do something about it.
Making Something Happen
The man watching Dan memorized the lines on his face so he wouldn’t forget them. He was going to make sure that Dan would no longer be a parent at the kindergarten.
The man he had stirred a reaction in had powerful connections at the school and would see to it that Dan would pay for that speech. He knew the speech would have swayed everyone’s opinions but not his.
A Big Problem
The speech ended up being a big problem for the man who stood in the back. He decided that enough was enough and walked outside before Dan had even finished his speech.
He pulled out his phone and made a call that would change Dan’s life forever. He smirked as he explained everything to the powerful entity he was speaking to.
Taking Care Of It
The voice on the other side of the call said that they would “take care of it” before hanging up. The man knew that his job was done and no longer had a part to play.
He slinked back into the shadows and watched everything unfold as Dan’s life was about to change drastically, all because of how much he cared for his daughter.
Unaware Dan, caring that much for his daughter and the other kids would cost him. A week after giving the speech, he was sitting down for dinner with his daughter when he heard the bell ring.
He lived in a good neighborhood where nothing bad ever happened. He assumed it was a salesman or friend, so he didn’t think twice.
Answering The Door
Dan wiped his mouth with a napkin and told Kayla to stay where she was as he got up and walked toward the door.
Unbeknownst to him, the person on the other side of the phone was ready and waiting to ambush him. He got to the door and looked out of his peephole.
Dan’s features curled into a confused look as he stared at a woman through the peephole. He had never seen her before in his life, but maybe she had something urgent to tell him.
He decided rather not to be sorry later and unlocked his latch with a heavy “click” before turning the knob and pulling the door open. He had no idea what he had done.
“Hi, what can I help you with, miss?” He said with a smile and a kind look on his face. The woman stared at him and asked, “Can I come in? It’s urgent, and it regards Kayla.”
Hearing it was about Kayla, he immediately beckoned her in and cleared a space at the kitchen counter to see what was wrong. But he didn’t know what he had invited into his home.
“I was just having dinner with my daughter. If you’d like to join us…” he began before the woman cut him off. “No thanks, I’m actually a representative of Kayla’s new kindergarten.”
Dan raised his eyebrows. What could she possibly want from him? Had Kayla done something wrong while she was there? He felt Deja Vu from the old kindergarten and expected the worst.
The woman paused for a while before speaking, “An associate of mine was at the school when you made that big speech last week. He immediately called me and sounded concerned.”
Dan suddenly felt anxiety grip his chest. “It was just a small speech to get across a message that everybody had to hear.” He stuttered back at the woman.
“Nonsense, from what I hear, it rallied the crowd and swayed them in your favor.” She said with a piercing gaze. “No, No. It was just an open discussion at the end. I didn’t try to convince anyone.” He stammered back.
But he could tell that the woman wasn’t convinced. What repercussions was he going to face for speaking out and making sure his opinion was heard?
“Well, regardless of if that’s true or not, I’d like to give you an opportunity. You couldn’t help but speak up at the kindergarten, and that got a lot of attention.” She said.
Dan’s pulse started rising. She sounded like a part of the mafia, telling him to leave the state and never look back. But what did she really want?
Her demeanor changed in a flash. “Bravery is something we at the school council admire. You really showed us that you’re an amazing father, and we want you to do so much more than just give speeches.”
Dan had no idea what she meant, but it sounded like a good thing, whatever it was. Then she explained everything.
A Spot On The School Board
The brave father’s speech earned him a spot on the school council board. He was given the opportunity to oversee the plans of the school going into the future.
Dan breathed in deeply and calmed himself down. He had really thought the worst was about to happen, but it was the best news he could have ever gotten.
Weighing Up His Options
Dan didn’t know what to say to the woman. He stared ahead while he considered all of his options. She could see that he was determined, and made it easier for him.
“I’ll leave you to think this over, but I really do hope to see you at our board meeting next week,” She said before giving him her information and leaving through the door.
Dan sat in the kitchen for a while, thinking it over. But then he heard from behind him, “Daddy, you have to take it!” It was Kayla rooting for him.
He smiled and realized she must have been eavesdropping on the conversation he was having with the representative. He couldn’t blame her when a stranger came into their house.
The Right Decision
Dan patted his daughter on the head and told her he’d do it for her and every other child at the kindergarten. He had made the right decision.
It wasn’t something he did lightly. He knew that the way people looked at him would change once he was on the school board. But he would be helping the kindergarten.
Helping The School
Kayla was excited that her father was helping her school, and she became popular with her new friends.
Dan couldn’t believe the new kind of reach his voice would have after becoming a part of the school board. It was like a dream come true, and he would make sure that he used his power responsibly.
Different This Time
It was the start of a lovely relationship between father and daughter which helped many children find their individual identities too.
There would always be people second-guessing everything that happened at the kindergarten. But Dan knew that it was different this time. There was one contributing factor to that.
People On His Side
This time, Dan had a lot of good people on his side. The members of the school board seemed just as concerned as he was when it came to these issues, and it was refreshing to see.
He knew that there were no hurdles that he couldn’t get over with the support of the school board. This was something that he never expected to be a part of, but he was grateful.
A Happy Ending
It seemed that there was going to be a happy ending for everyone involved in the ordeal. Parents looked to Dan to help them settle their problems, and he finally had a way to change things for the better.
To make matters even better, he had the love and admiration of his daughter. He was a hero in her eyes, and that was the most important thing.
In order to protect the privacy of those depicted, some names, locations, and identifying characteristics have been changed and are products of the author’s imagination. Any resemblances to actual events or places or persons, living or dead, are entirely coincidental.

Three former pupils of a Skokie educator described Wednesday how they were sexually molested at his apartment building after they accepted invitations to go swimming in his pool.
Though the teacher, Jerome Jendras, 46, of 3620 N. Pine Grove Ave., Chicago, is being tried on only one charge of aggravated criminal sexual abuse involving a 10-year-old boy, two other former pupils who now are adults were allowed to testify in Cook County Circuit Court because their allegations of abuse were similar to the boy`s.
Jendras has consistently denied the charges.
Jendras, a colonel in the Army Reserve and teacher at St. Lambert School, 8141 Kedvale Ave., Skokie, is highly regarded by his pupils` parents, who attended earlier court hearings and praised his teaching skills and the discipline he instilled in their children.
On Wednesday, 14 supporters attended his bench trial, which began with the testimony of the alleged victim, now 12, in the Skokie courtroom of Judge Karen Thompson Tobin.
The boy, who admitted he often did not do his homework and had to stay after class to write the 104 disciplinary rules Jendras insisted his pupils obey, testified that sometime in October, 1987, he asked Jendras if he could go swimming when Jendras told him he had a pool.
The 90-pound boy testified that after they swam, Jendras took him back to his apartment, where they talked about body-building. The boy said Jendras showed him how to lift weights and, afterward, massaged his thighs, buttocks and genitals through his shorts.
The boy said that, until police contacted him, he never alerted authorities because he was embarrassed and afraid that Jendras would hurt him. Officials have not explained in court what led them to Jendras.
Two other witnesses, who are brothers, testified that they had been fondled by Jendras, the first in 1973 and the second in 1980. Each said he had not told the other about the molestations until police began investigating Jendras.
The first brother, now 28, testified that he went swimming at Jendras`
apartment when he was 13 and ``I felt his hands touch my bathing suit. Before I knew it, my suit had been pulled open and there was a hand inside.``
When he was 19, he said, he visited Jendras to hear his explanation of what had happened.
``He said, `I couldn`t resist you. I could not keep my hands off you,```
the man testified.
The witness said he came forward when he learned that he was not the only victim.
During cross-examination, the man was asked about telephone calls he allegedly made trying to extort money from Jendras. He denied making such threats.
The second brother, now 22, testified that when he was 13, Jendras fondled him in the same pool.

When one of my nephews was little (the one I talk about the most) I watched him daily while his mom was at work. Ok, yes that is true for most of them on and off, but this one was more of a fulltime thing. Back to the point, I would always sing to him, and this was what I considered his song because he was my sunshine. He did always make me happy, he still does, except now he tells me he isn’t but I am pretty sure that comes with being nine. read more
Out and about one day I picked up this small pad of paper and it seemed so sunny and bright it inspired this card. I think it is the very reason that I keep buying so much paper, I see something and I know it would go perfectly with this stamp or that image. read more
I bought the stamps and dies because I love the weather theme and it’s flexibility. I have enjoyed using it every time that I have chosen it, and I have always been so happy with the results. One day I was at the craft store and I saw the paper that I am using as the background paper here and I just knew it would work with this set so well, now I wish I had gotten more sheets of it!
I think it worked! My card wished for sunshine and there was actual sunshine coming through my window today! I would be even more excited if I didn’t know the next week’s forecast is for rain almost every day. At least it seems to be getting a little bit warmer around here.
I spent the day making rainbows. How awesome is that? You know it takes both sun and rain to make one! I think that is one of the best parts about making cards or cakes or really anything artistic at all, you really can spend a day making rainbows and it isn’t crazy. I think that’s why I have chosen to purse some of the things I have in my life.

My father had this notion, that we should all know and understand other people’s religions. When he was posted in Meerut, he took my brother and I to enroll us in a Hindu school, and the headmaster happily accepted us. In class, the man would always sit us in the front row, ahead of and apart from the other children. I was 6 and a half years old at that time and my brother was 7 and a half. I thought it was a special favor that we were made to sit separately. But then during recess, when we tried to go play with the other children, they ran away from us, shouting out, ‘Achhoot, achhoot (Untouchable, untouchable)!’ After enduring three days of this horror, my brother took me aside during recess and said, ‘Come on Mashan, let’s go home,’ and we never returned to that school. It made a strong impression on me, the experience of being an ‘Untouchable’ because I was a Muslim.
10 million civilians were displaced at the time of the Partition. One million lost their lives.
In the summer of 1947, before the Partition of India took place, Mrs. Humyra Saiyid was in Simla with her mother, her younger sister, and her three children – 7 and a half year old Omar, 6 and a half year old Aamer, and a baby girl Bibi, who was only a few months old. Her husband, Mr. Jari Ahmed Saiyid, a Military Accounts officer in the British Army, had returned to Lucknow, where he was posted at the time. When news of the Partition was announced, it was received with some concern, but little alarm, as no one could have imagined the horror that was soon to unfold.
As news began to filter in about the Sikh jatthas (gangs) and their killing campaign, Mrs. Saiyid was the sole person responsible for her family’s care. The house they were in was on a hill. When night fell, she loaded her husband’s pistol, went out onto the verandah and fired twice into the darkness, a warning to anyone approaching that the inhabitants of the house were armed.
In the morning, she took her family to the Grand Hotel, a building with a heavily guarded perimeter which only housed the English. With the exception of their own family and that of the officer in charge of the guard, Colonel Masood, they do not recall any other Indian families. The hotel was placed under regular curfews. Aamer Saiyid recalls an occasion where a man tried to run into the security of the hotel, but was stabbed to death at the gate by one of the jatthas, while with the guards shouted at the playing children to run back inside. Later, peering out from their first floor suite, he and his brother saw Sikhs armed with swords, circling the perimeter.
At the hotel, Mrs. Saiyid made friends with the English families, and this became the source of their escape from Simla. They agreed to let them travel with them to Delhi in a military convoy, which was exclusively for the English. However, to conceal the fact that they were Muslims, Mrs Saiyid went out and bought clothing to attire herself and the other women of the family as Christian nannies accompanying the English. She gave each family member a Christian name to remember, if questioned.
The day the convoy was to leave, she and her family were almost all in the same truck, with the exception of Aamer Saiyid, who was told by an English corporal that the vehicle was full and he would have to be taken to a truck further back. A Muslim servant accompanying them took him to the luggage vehicles at the very end; but before they could board it, they were told no one could ride on them. It was at this time, Mrs. Saiyid remembers, that she instinctively felt her son was in trouble. She left her seat and raced up the road looking for him, and found him standing by the roadside. She grabbed his hand and ran back to the vehicle she had left, while the bugles announcing the departure of the convoy played insistently. They boarded the truck seconds before it moved off.
In Delhi, she and her family stayed at the Sher Shah Mess, one of several transit residences for the families of army officers who had opted to serve in Pakistan. Her husband had, till then, been in Lucknow, determined to carry out his duties as long as he was needed, until the Hindu employees of the office rebelled and went on strike, refusing to serve under a Muslim officer. Through military colleagues, he discovered his family was in Delhi and rejoined them there. In the meantime, Mrs. Saiyid had used her contacts to secure travel for her family to Pakistan on Dakotas carrying Muslim officers to their new country. Their flight landed in Peshawar, where they were met at the airport by an Air Force officer Major Bilgrami, who was an old family acquaintance. They were warmly welcomed and taken to stay at his home. The following day, they took a train to Lahore, and were allotted housing in St. John’s Park, a part of the Lahore Cantonement. Mr. Jari Ahmed Saiyid’s position as a Military Accounts officer allowed them to overcome most obstacles with more ease than other displaced families.
The Mian Mir railway station was in the cantonment, and every day they would hear stories of refugees pouring in by the trainloads. Mrs. Saiyid would send her two sons to the train station with buckets of tea for the weary travellers; there, they would find other families doing the same, everyone helping out however they could. Aamer Saiyid recalls that after the refugees had been watered and fed, and the whistle would sound for the train’s departure, the travellers would climb aboard, and as the train left the station, a unanimous shout would go up: ‘Pakistan Zindabad! (Long live Pakistan!)’
(September 20, 2017)
(September 15, 2017)
(September 14, 2017)
(September 13, 2017)
(September 11, 2017)
(September 05, 2017)
(September 05, 2017)

Posts tagged lion tamer
Posts tagged lion tamer
He got the nickname when he was about seven years old.
One of Tommy’s favourite things to do was stand outside the corner shop and whistle. He would pick a song and then whistle it, over and over again until the shopkeeper came out and told him to get lost. So he’d go to another shop, and do it again. He loved seeing the look on people’s faces. Some would smile and some would shake their heads. Sometimes - not very often - someone would join in. It was harmless, but something that got underneath everyone’s skin for better or worse. They would see his mother and say “your Tommy Tinwhistle’s at it again!” And his mother would sigh and give a half smile. What could she do?
She bought Tommy a kitten for Christmas. She thought that if he spent more time with the animal, then he would stop the whistling. And at first it worked - Tommy spent all his free time with his kitten, Tinker, and the two of them were quite inseparable. Tommy and Tinker. Tinker and Tommy. Tinker would follow his owner to the gate when he left for school, and still be waiting there when he returned. The playful kitten grew into a beautiful cat, a streak of white breaking his sleek coat, a coat as black as Tommy’s unruly hair. Cat and companion would sit poring over books, and occasionally they would walk together through the small streets. People that saw them claimed Tommy spoke to the cat, and his mother just dismissed it. He had never made friends that easily, so she was happy that Tinker was there. Things were hard as it was.
Tommy hadn’t whistled for years, not like he used to. His nickname had faded like writing on fogged glass. The only time he did was to call Tinker, a low whistle that the cat responded to quicker than was natural.
It was raining, and the car that hit Tinker was driving too fast. Tommy found him in the road two days after his fourteenth birthday. He buried what was left of him in the back garden, in the rain, under the apple tree. Tommy waited until it got dark, and the put on his overcoat and walked out into the rain. Someone said they saw him in the glow of a streetlight with a black cat by his feet. They were whispering to each other, this someone said.
Every so often, Tommy’s mother thinks she can hear whistling. The song “My Bonny Lies Over the Ocean” is one of the more frequent ones. It’s been three years now.

Alanna Thomas is a Porn Star from United States. She was born in Ohio on April 3, 1971. She is listed on FreeOnes since 2009 and is currently ranked 9023th place. She currently has 46 gallery links and 16 videos in her own FreeOnes section.
Our records show that Alanna Thomas is currently active which means she is still making movies, doing live shows and/or doing photo shoots.

Competitive types have the drive to will themselves to victory in competitive situations.
While that passion for the game of any sort is an admirable trait, their reaction to losing can be intimidating and even downright terrifying.
Those who are defeated and erupt in a fiery rage are the ones to look out for and avoid at all costs.
When Redditor ihave1 asked "What was the worst display of a sore loser you witnessed?," readers recalled horrific experiences that wound up with them covered in bruises – and in some cases – broken bones.
The rage was real with these very sore losers.
Reason For The Stop Sign On Sweaters
"In a high school hockey game back in the late 90's, there was a kid who made an opposing player look really bad with how he got deked. The guy scored, the play was over and he was headed to his teams bench for congrats when the guy he just schooled cross-checked him from behind, paralyzing him from the neck down. Kids who play high school hockey on the North Shore of Chicago STILL have stop signs sewn onto the backs of their sweaters because of this incident."
Spelling Bee Trauma
"I was this really small 8 yo with glasses that loved to read. It was time for the annual spelling bee and was sure I would win. So in my school you had to go through your class first and I won. Then against the winners of the other classes in your year and I won also. Then we had the contest with winners from other grades and I won. Got a bag of candy, my name in the notice board at the school entrance and a cute diploma. So far so good."
"My mom worked so she was always over 30 mins late to pick me up. She didnt want me in public trasportation and my school didnt have school bus service. I never minded because used the time to finish homework but this meant being almost alone as almost everyone had left by then. I was sitting in the steps in the parking lot, when this giant 15 yo came up to me, angry that I had defeated his sister. He punched my face, pulled my hair, broke my glasses, kicked me several times dragged me along the sidewalk. I was screaming and crying. At that moment a police car making rounds caught him. As I had a broken nose, two broken ribs, he was charged."
"I transferred schools but never liked speliing bees after that."
"I was hanging out with a friend at a local tournament for tekken 7 , and we watched the finals as one guy who hadn't lost a single round got his a** kicked by his opponent in both games to win, the loser looked like a volcano ready to erupt. The guy stands up out of his chair and decks the winner in the face , which causes everyone else to try and hold him back from punching the other dudes face into the floor. Cops showed up and he got arrested for assault, possession of a firearm and some cocaine he had in his car."
These losers really knew how to make a scene.
Gone Too FORE!
"I've seen too many on the golf course. This high school kid broke and threw all his clubs in the lake on 18 after he messed that hole up. His parents made him go back at night and fish them all out (spring time in FL...gator bait), made him pay to fix them, then made him buy the clubs from them (patents). That kid never do much as look cross eyed at his clubs again. Lesson learned."
"I've also seen guys throw a driver into a tree, then get more clubs stuck trying to get it out. Funny sh*t."
Getting Really Madden
"My roommate in college was a classmate of mine at my high school."
"He was good at Madden. REAL good. I would probably lose by 50 points at times. But, Madden's mechanics are super simple to the point where I figured out my type of playcalling to potentially get close to, if not beating him."
"I played him one day after classes, and he chose to be the same team he always was, and I changed it up to a team with some solid wide receivers (I believe at the time it was the Rams). I hit a few slant route plays, and I went up 7-0."
"I intercepted his pass after that drive, and did the same play, scoring another touchdown. 14-0."
"A fumble on his part, followed by the same play by me. 21-0."
"Not even a minute left in the first quarter, and he takes the controller and slams it on the ground, sparks shooting up, the controller going in pieces."
"We never played again."
The Ruckus Over 9-Year-Olds Playing Baseball
"My son was on a travel baseball team, and we were okay, but closer to mediocre. They'd win about half of their games."
"A new team entered their tournament, and since they were new, they could self classify. They self classified as single A (the worst division in Indiana youth sports), even though most of their players were AA or AAA."
"Pool play they won both games in the 3rd inning. Run ruled both 20something to 0. Their team and fans were singing songs, and dancing around like they won the world series, and our team (and the other team) just rolled our eyes knowing that they'd get forcibly moved up after this anyway."
"We got last place on Saturday, so we drew them in the tournament Sunday. Our boys didn't even want to go. The coach talked them into playing anyway, and apparently gave the best speech of all time. That team came out overconfident, but our boys were out for blood. 0-0 first inning, 1-1 second inning, their pitcher struggled and we wound up having our first ever team homerun, a grand slam, putting us up 5-1. Our pitcher played the game of his life. Final score... 7-1. The other teams in the tournament were watching and cheering for our boys (only one field, so they played as soon as we were done). It was like a scene out of the Mighty Ducks or Little Giants."
"Their fans, on the other hand, did not react so well. They proceed to corner the ump, screaming at him for 'fixing the game!' (He had just graduated from our local HS and was umping for college money), and admittedly there were some close calls, but you don't lose 7-1 to a significantly inferior opponent because of an ump. It just got worse from there though. One of their parents threw a punch at the ump, and it was on. The kid fought hard, but there were like 6-8 of them on him, and it turned into a giant riot as parents from other teams jumped in to break it up. Ultimately the police showed up, a bunch of people went to jail, and the tournament went on (we got absolutely destroyed in the finals lol)"
"All of this over a bunch of 9 year old kids playing baseball."
Having too much pride was their downfall.
Denial Of Losing
"One of the top chess players Hikaru Nakumara frequently accuses people that beat him of cheating. He doesn't lose too frequently because he is very good, but when he does it's a sh*t show. And he also is very hypocritical about draws and timeouts."
"My little cousin thinks hes the greatest at everything he touches. He challenged me to some madden. Well I've been playing madden since before he was born. We play and I pick a team with a relatively even overall to his. I start beating him. He says my team was better."
"So we restart and I pick a team with a significantly lower overall than his team. I start smashing him. He gets mad. Quits the game, throws MY controller and starts crying actual tears. Runs up stairs to our aunt."
"Your not gods gift to this earth despite what everyone leads you to believe. And there is nothing your better at than me other than being a miserable little sh*t."
Pretending To Lose
"It was me. This story still makes me cringe."
"I was about 8 and on a family holiday. There was a pool table at the place we were staying and I thought I was pretty hot sh*t for an 8 year old. There were three girls there about my age from one family. One girl had a hand deformity and only had a couple of fingers on one hand and I assumed she wouldn't be as good as me."
"She asked if I wanted to play and I agreed. It was obvious she was gunna win really early on an I was so embarressed about being smug. She had to go to the toilet and when she was gone I started putting my own balls into the pockets, making a big song and dance about pretending I was doing it behind her back, while also making sure her friends saw me."
"They asked me what I was doing and I told them I felt bad about her losing so I was letting her win. I must have thought I was some genius manipulator or something but they saw right through me and walked off. I didn't make any friends on that holiday..."
"With almost eight seconds remaining, the Pistons walked off the court during a time out, without shaking the Bulls' hands and congratulating them after the Bulls won the series. This after the Pistons had beat the Bulls for three straight years."
This wasn't a competition, but I was in rehearsals with a dancer at a theme park show who seemed to be at war with himself.
We were dancing gazelles in one scene, and we all wore these plastic helmets covered in velcro to secure the mask perched on top of our heads that had long antlers.
This dude was a perfectionist, but even the most trained dancer out of all of us struggled to get used to dancing with a top-heavy headpiece. But he wanted to prove to everyone he could absolutely nail the choreography on his first try. He didn't. No one could.
The gazelle head kept sliding off the velcro helmet while he was dancing, and at one point he got so frustrated, he ripped off the thousand-dollar headpiece and smashed it to the ground.
While his rage was unsettling to watch, some of us struggled to stifle our giggling, because he looked so ridiculous having a tantrum with the helmet on his head and looking like an angry crash test dummy.Like I said before, this was not a game, but he certainly was not winning that day.

Back in October I finally got around to pointing out that Maraudon had been butchered. Two bosses were effectively removed by the path chosen by LFD while the overall instance was chopped up so much that it was barely recognizable.
Since the Shattering it has been changed again. This time, it was for the better.
The two 'lost' bosses are back in. I can't say the goblin makes much sense anymore, but at least he's in a place where people will kill him. As for the other, he's where he always was, but the instance completion has been changed so that players will start on a wing and finish with The Ugliest Princess, which means that they will pass through him on the way.
The instance isn't as long as it once was, and probably justifiably so, but it is no longer trivially short. If I had to pick a simple good or bad label, I would pick good.
Should Steam Sell Blockbuster Movies?
13 hours ago

Linda is a very talented artist on Etsy who has been in my favorites for a while. We just recently did a trade and it turned out great. I have done some trades in the past and thank goodness they have all been great. One could easily run into trouble doing a trade if dealing with someone who is not honest. She wanted a mohawk bird print and I liked her bird prints as well. We ended up agreeing to trade a set. She picked out her two favorites and I picked out my favorites from her shop. I gave them to my daughters to put up in their room and they loved them! My oldest who is three especially loved them. I received mine quick (thanks Linda!) and was off to send mine when my daughter asked, "which pictures are you taking to the post office?" I told her I am taking the ones I had printed on my printer and she said, "o.k. don't take the ones in my room because I need them!" How cute is she? These two were the ones that I had to have from her lovely shop. Thank You Linda!
Blooming Buddies-Bubble Flowers and Trixie the Bird

Were there hopes and dreams he used to speak of, that are forgotten now? Are there parts of his personality you've known, that seem to have gone to sleep
The only hope and dream he ever had was to play football. He did that.
Strangely enough, all the other things he is doing seem to fall into place with who he has kind of always been.
He has thousands of dollars in the bank because he is a tightwad. Not because he got responsible out of nowhere.
When he was young, my husband once found a loose floorboard in his room full of money. My husband thought he was dealing drugs or something. It was every Christmas, birthday, First Communion dollar ever given to him. In the meantime, he never went out because he was always tired from practice. He was able to save every penny of his paychecks for almost the last year because he lived with my parents and they wouldnt take money and he just did all the outside work and chores that my dad was no longer able to do, in exchange for rent.
He wants to buy a house and that kind of fits because when he was younger he treasured playing catch with my husband and hanging out. He always brought his friends here to hang out. He was always kind of a homeboy kind of kid.
He is still a slob though, so I wonder how that house will look.
I know that jumping out of airplanes and white water rafting and doing crazy stuff is not paramount to a full and healthy and happy life, it just seems like he should be wanting to do that.
He still kind of immature. He asks funny questions about marriage. He wants to know if he should have a joint checking account? Who should pay the bills? etc.. He weighs things like....is it cheaper to buy your own beer and pay for the football channel on cable, or hang out with friends at the bar and get out and watch football and count that as a night out. For crying out loud, just go out and think later.
Maybe I just need to get used to all of it. I dont know what I would ask of him or want for him otherwise. He just seems young.

OK! So this is a bit of a rewrite of my previous story of the same name. It's the same exact story, just written a little better. I hadn't planned on doing anything else with it because I honestly didn't believe anyone would actually read it! *blush* But not only have I had a huge number of visitors to this story but I have had 8 people put an alert on this story who want to read more! So, I thank everyone who has given me feedback and requested more. I'll be working on a second chapter and will post as soon as possible.
So, for anyone who hasn't read this yet, please be aware that this story is slash between Castiel and Dean and is about rape. This story also contains graphic descriptions about sex and graphic language.
So… without further ado, here's Evil Intent!
Disclaimer: Castiel (unfortunately) is not mine. Anna (thank goodness!) is also not mine. And Dean (also unfortunately) is not mine. Supernatural and characters belong to the great and wonderful Kripke!
Castiel slowly came to, his vision blurred. He couldn't remember everything that had happened before. He had been watching Dean as he usually did. Nothing seemed out of the ordinary. And then it all went dark. And he didn't know why.
As his head began to clear he noticed his arms were stretched above his head and shackled. His legs were also shackled. When he twisted his head around to look at the restraints he saw there were inscriptions on them that were glowing a faint blue color. The inscriptions were clearly markings used to entrap an angel. Castiel began to feel a wave of panic rush over him. As his head cleared more he saw he was in an empty room and he appeared to be shackled to some sort of table. His trench coat as well as his suit coat had been removed as well as his socks and shoes. He began struggling in a vain attempt to free himself.
"Now, Cas, you know as well as I do that fighting it won't work against those shackles. Not with the inscriptions I used."
Castiel quickly turned to see Anna enter the room. She was dressed in a red chemise, her pale skin glowing against it. There was an air of confidence surrounding her, as if this situation was nothing usual. Her lips curved up in a knowing smile as she walked over to Castiel's side.
"Anna," Castiel gasped. "What… what is this?"
"This?" she replied, feigning innocence. She studied him carefully and let out a chuckle. "This is my way of getting what I wanted. You have been a very stubborn little angel and not acquiesced to my requests. So, I decided to take matters into my own hands."
Castiel stared at her in bewilderment. "What do you mean?"
She chuckled and slid herself onto the table next to him. She then swung one leg over him and straddled his waist and also displaying that she was wearing nothing else besides the thin chemise. His breath caught momentarily, slowly realizing what her intentions may be, but not wanting to believe it. She leaned over and ran her hands slowly up his arms to the restraints around his wrists, bringing her face mere inches from his own.
"Ever since I saw you again, Castiel, all I could think about were the things I wanted to do to you. I wanted you to come with me. To disobey like I did so we could be together, but you decided to be stubborn. To be a good little soldier."
She leaned forward to place a kiss on his lips, but he quickly turned away. His heart hammered in his chest with fear. She merely chuckled again.
"You are stubborn! That's OK. By the time I'm done with you, I will have you begging me for more."
"I… I don't understand."
Anna drew a finger gently up his cheek to brush aside a lock of his hair as she studied his face, concentrating as though she was trying to solve some great mystery.
"You should. After everything you've seen. Everything you've experienced. I would think that what I have to offer you is so much better. Being human has so many… perks. I suppose, though, I'll just have to show you."
She slowly sat back up. She then began unbuttoning his shirt and pushed the fabric aside, revealing the pale, smooth skin underneath. She let her fingers trail across the bare skin causing a tingling sensation. Castiel felt real fear run through him.
"Anna. Please stop this!" He whimpered.
She looked up at him and laughed seductively.
"Now, Cas! You don't know you won't like it unless you try it! It feels so good! You'll see! You just have to trust me."
He shook his head desperately. "It's wrong! You know it's wrong! Please! Please stop it!"
"Silly little angel! We can't just stop here! We've only just started!" She lifted the hem of the chemise and slid the fabric up over her head, allowing it to fall beside her. Anna then slid down his body and began stroking the front of his pants, causing Castiel to gasp at the sensation.
"Anna… stop!" He whimpered again, trying to shift away but unable.
His heart thundered in his chest. He didn't understand why Anna would be doing this to him. Why she would act this way. He also didn't understand all of these strange sensations running through his body. He felt something… desire he believed it was called. But it wasn't Anna that he longed for. It wasn't Anna that he wanted to do this with. Especially not against his will.
"Anna, stop!" He pleaded again, desperate to make her understand. "Please don't do this to me! I don't want this!"
She cocked her head to one side and widened her eyes, feigning innocence. She frowned with mock concern, ignoring his words. "Hmm… now, Cas, you don't seem to be enjoying this as much as I think you should be. Whatever could be the matter?"
"Anna, this is wrong! Please, you know it is! Please don't do this! I don't want to!"
She ignored his pleas and looked down at her chest. She ran her hands over her pale breasts slowly and seductively, closing her eyes and moaning with pleasure. She stopped and looked back at him, studying his reaction. Suddenly, a new, more knowing smile graced her lips. She brought herself back up him and leaned in close to his face.
"I know your dirty little secret, Castiel," Anna whispered in his ear. "I know what you really want. Who you really want."
Castiel stared at her, startled. "What?"
She leaned in close to whisper in his ear.
"You want Dean, don't you?"
He froze under her. His breath caught in his throat, panic and guilt stabbing his heart like a knife. She had named his heart's desire and it destroyed him to have it known. He closed his eyes, tears stinging his lids.
She knew she hit her mark. She chuckled knowingly.
"Don't worry, Cas. We can make an arrangement."
He felt her shift above him and slowly opened his eyes. He watched her sit up and suddenly her body shimmered and morphed until there was Dean sitting on top of him. He grinned seductively at the angel under him and Castiel felt his body react. Castiel's eyes widened in shock and felt his cheeks flush. Dean leaned in close to Castiel's ear.
"Is that better? Is this what you really wanted?"
Castiel swallowed hard, his mouth dry. He shouldn't. He shouldn't want this. He should tell him to stop. To end this. But… he couldn't.
And now he was helpless, bound to the table below him. And while he knew that the body on top of him wasn't the real Dean Winchester, he couldn't help but be aware of how much it seemed like him. Every one of Castiel's senses screamed to him that it was Dean and he couldn't help but admit to himself how badly he wanted it to be true.
Dean took Castiel's silence as a yes. He began kissing the angel's neck sensuously while running his hand over the newly exposed skin on his chest. Castiel couldn't help but moan at the sensations. Dean slowly made his way up Castiel's face before finally pressing his lips to Castiel's in a heated kiss. Castiel moaned louder and opened his mouth, allowing Dean to plunge his tongue inside.
Castiel had never experienced such sensations before and the glyphs on the restraints seemed to drain him of his supernatural powers which would normally blunt the sensations. His senses were on overload and he could feel his cock throb painfully in the constriction of his pants. Dean naked body thrust against him, causing more friction that was both a torment and relief. Finally, Dean broke away from the kiss.
"Tell me what you want, Cas," Dean whispered in a husky voice. "Tell me what you've wanted me to do to you."
"I… no… no… please stop!" Castiel gasped, his voice catching in a sob. He was desperate to try and fight it. He couldn't bring himself to agree, no matter how badly he wanted it.
"Shhh…" Dean placed a finger over Castiel's lips. "You know you want this Cas. God, I can feel how hard you are for me! I'm going to fuck you so good, baby. I'm gonna make you cum so hard for me. I'll have you begging me to make you cum."
Castiel couldn't help but moan at Dean's words. His body wanted it. Desperately wanted it. And he had seen Dean with other women before and couldn't help but secretly wish he was in the woman's place.
But this… just because he had thought it doesn't make it right.
"Please…" Castiel whispered fearfully. "I never…"
"Don't worry, baby. I'll make it good for you."
Before Castiel could say anything else Dean kissed him deeply again. He then could feel Dean's hands work at his waist, unzipping his pants and pushing them open. His hands then slipped in under the fabric of his underwear to grasp his throbbing cock. Castiel let out a strangled cry as a bolt of pleasure course through him at Dean's touch. Dean began stroking his cock's length, causing Castiel to lose all rational thought.
"Oh… oh Dean…" Castiel moaned, finally caving to the pleasures engulfing him.
"You like that, baby? You like me jerking you off?"
Castiel couldn't control himself any more. He nodded desperately. Dean smiled smugly.
"Oh yeah. You like that. You like me jerking your cock like this. You don't want me to stop now, do you?"
Castiel shook his head, a sob escaping his lips. Dean continued his ministrations while sliding his head down to bring it close to Castiel's cock. He glanced up at the angel before taking the swollen member into his mouth and slid it deep into his throat.
Castiel screamed at the sudden unexpected sensation. He strained against his restraints and his hips thrust wildly. Dean continued to work his member, running his tongue along it and swirling it around the head. Castiel began desperately sobbing Dean's name. He could feel something building inside of him and it both thrilled and terrified him at the same time. All he knew was that as wrong as this was he didn't want it to stop now.
Dean slid the angel's cock out of his mouth. As he stroked he looked up at Castiel.
"You wanna cum, baby? You want to cum for me?"
Castiel wasn't sure what he met by that, but he knew he needed some kind of release. He nodded franticly. Dean smiled wickedly.
"Good boy," he purred before sliding it back into his mouth, taking it down all the way to its base.
The sensation was too much. Castiel felt a wave of pleasure unlike anything he had ever experienced before. He cried out as he came, releasing his cum into Dean's eager mouth where it was sucked down greedily. Finally, Castiel went limp, weakened by what had occurred. Dean licked him clean before moving back up to kiss Castiel on his lips.
"There, baby. Didn't that feel so good?"
Fear and guilt quickly replaced the feelings of pleasure Castiel had experienced. His eyes welled up with tears and they begun to trickle down his cheeks. Unable to speak, he could only close his eyes and shake his head. Dean simply chuckled at his tears.
"Oh, but, Cas, we're only just getting started! I still need to cum and you're going to help me."
Dean put three of his fingers in his mouth and began sucking on them to wet them while pulling down Castiel's pants and underwear. He then reached down and began running a finger around the rim of Castiel's hole, causing Castiel whimper and jerk in surprise. Dean then slid one finger in, the initial pain made Castiel cry out.
"That's a good boy," Dean cooed in his ear. "Take it for me, baby."
Dean slowly worked each of the three fingers in one by one, slowly stretching and readying Castiel for what was to come. Castiel whimpered and sobbed; frightened by the pain and strange new sensations he was feeling.
Suddenly Dean pulled all three fingers out. Before Castiel realized what was happening Dean positioned himself and thrust his cock deep into Castiel's hole, causing the angel to scream in a mixture a pain and pleasure. He began thrusting in and out, hitting a bundle of nerves deep inside of Castiel. A new shock of pleasure shot through him causing him to scream more. His limp cock quickly rehardened and Dean reached down and began jerking him off again. Sweat ran down Dean's face as he thrust harder and harder in order to reach orgasm.
"Oh yeah, baby… oh god yeah… oh Cas you feel so good… oh yeah… so hot and tight… oh god I'm gonna cum so hard inside you…"
It all became too much. Castiel felt himself lose control and orgasm again, sobbing in relief and anguish. Dean quickly followed, moaning in pleasure. Castiel felt himself drift off into darkness.
When he came to he saw that Dean was gone and Anna was back in her previous form. She had slipped back into the thin chemise she had been wearing. Castiel also saw that the restraints holding him were now gone. Despite that fact he couldn't bring himself to move. It was as if all of his strength had been drained from his body.
"Anna," he croaked weakly.
Anna turned and looked at him, a smirk on her lips.
"Thanks for the fun, Cas. Hope this doesn't make things awkward between you and Dean now."
She began walking towards the door before pausing and turning her head to glance back at him.
"Oh, and you're free to go now."
With that she turned and walked away, leaving Castiel filled with anguish and guilt over what had happened. He had no idea how he was going to face Dean now.

Burnley defender Matthew Lowton has extended his contract at the Premier League outfit.
The 29-year-old has signed a one-year extension to his previous contract thus taking him to 2021.
Speaking about his new contract, the former Aston Villa right back said: “Since I’ve joined, the manager has helped me no end on my defensive shape.”
“The attitude here day-to-day is what I really need. I need to be on it all the time and the manager makes sure that everybody is.
“I’ve definitely played my best football over the past couple of years and I’m enjoying it, which helps as well.” He added.
He also praised manager Sean Dyche. Matt Lowton stated that: “The manager said towards the end of last season when we had a meeting that we would talk over the summer and hopefully sort out a new deal.”
“He has stuck to his word and I’m very happy to have signed for another three years.” He concluded.

Customers of former shop owner stabbed to death pay tribute to ‘kind and gracious man’
PUBLISHED: 14:43 19 March 2019 | UPDATED: 15:14 19 March 2019
Customers of a former shop owner who was stabbed to death have described the father of two as “a gracious man” who went the extra mile for his patrons.
Kumarathas Rajasingam, 57, was found with knife wounds in his home in Burdock Close, Wymondham, on Saturday night (March 16). He died in hospital the next day.
His wife Jeyamalar Kumarathas has been charged with his murder and remanded in custody.
Mr Rajasingam used to own the nearby Spar supermarket on Blackthorn Road and following his death, many former customers have spoken about his generosity.
Jackie Walsh, who lives in Wymondham, was a regular at the shop and said she and Mr Rajasingam bonded over their shared experience of running businesses.
She said: “He was a lovely man and always had a smile and a kind word. We used to chat when I went in and he would make me a cup of tea. He always used to treat my grandkids when we went in the shop and when we turned up one year with Christmas cards he was so chuffed.”
Ms Walsh said the former shop owner had been looking forward to semi-retirement but when the store was taken over a few years ago he seemed to miss the day to day interaction with customers.
Steve Scott from Wymondham said Mr Rajasingam was known in the area for going the extra mile for his customers.
The Wymondham father said on one occasion, his six-year-old son was looking for sparklers in the shop but realised they were out of stock.
Instead of letting the youngster walk away empty handed, the former owner gave him a box of sparklers from his personal store and refused to take payment.
Mr Scott said: “Kumar had time for his customers and would always chat and be helpful. Nothing seemed too much trouble. One Christmas he went out of his way to order a box of a particular wine he knew I liked, even though he joked that I was the only one that bought that brand.
“It’s the little things that make the difference and being recognised for your individual needs is a rare find now.”
If you value what this story gives you, please consider supporting the Eastern Daily Press. Click the link in the orange box below for details.

Brumbies scrum-half Nic White needed surgery on a fractured jaw after he was assaulted at a music festival in Canberra last month.
The Brumbies have cleared the 22-year-old of any wrongdoing and claimed he was struck once from behind.
Brumbies CEO Andrew Fagan said Canberra-based outfit investigated the incident soon after it occurred and that White didn't lay charges with police because he didn't see who his attacker was.
"Nic was the victim of an unprovoked assault in which he was king-hit when struck once at Foreshore through no fault of his own," Fagan told the Canberra Times. "He didn't miss any training.
"He was back training with the boys in the days following and has been training with the group ever since."
The Brumbies haven't imposed any punishment on White. Other Brumbies players were at the festival, however according to the Canberra Times none were with White at the time he was attacked.
The 22-year-old's training is restricted due to a shoulder injury and he is yet to begin contact work.
The fractured jaw won't rule him outof the Brumbies' season-opener against the Reds at Canberra Stadium on February 16.
White had a breakthrough season for the Brumbies, establishing himself as first-choice number-nine and earning a call-up to the Wallabies' squad for the Tests against Scotland and Wales in June.

Osama Bin Laden and Mahatma Gandhi
|👸🏽 Famous Person
|Compare and Contrast Essay
|Mahatma Gandhi, Biography, Leadership
Table of Contents
Osama Bin Laden
Osama was born in the year 1957. His plight for terrorism begun in the year 1979 when the Soviet Union attacked Afghanistan (Mockaitis, 2010). Osama then joined the resistance and after the Soviet Union had withdrawn, he formed the Al-Qaeda group, which became known for carrying out strikes against the Western interests.
Osama did not come from a well up family. His mother was the tenth wife to his father, and she bore only him. Osama’s father worked as a porter in Saudi Arabia. He often pleased his employers since he was keen on detail while doing his work, and much cheaper than other laborers. By 1960’s, Osama’s father had managed to land several government contracts that involved projects such as building extensions to Medina, Al-Aqsa, and Mecca mosques. He later became so wealthy that during a certain period of hardship in Jeddah, he used his money to pay wages to the laborers in the kingdom for a six month. This then earned him a lot of admiration and respect. He always insisted that his children co-exist under one roof and observe a moral code of being staunchly religious and self-sufficient while still young.
Osama, at the age of 14, was already recognized for being outstanding and was often invited to Islamic religious groups. He joined one particular study group that was keen on teaching them how to recite the entire Koran, which was considered extremely lucrative in the Islamic community (Mockaitis, 2010). However, the group failed to keep up its purpose and started deviating to allowing their teachings to accommodate those of violent jihad. The teacher begun teaching them the need to be staunch observers of Islamic law. This meant that they had to do anything to hold it up, even if it meant resorting to killing and destruction. Osama quickly took up this way of life and had become an active activist by the age of 18, which is also the age he married.
Gandhi was born in the year 1869, although he was initially named Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi. He was a very popular religious and political leader in India. He fought tirelessly for the freedom of Indians and singlehandedly formed the party that led to the same.
Gandhi grew up in a strictly religious family. Gandhi’s father was the chief of Porbandar. His mother was also a staunch religious follower of Vaishnavism, which is influenced by Jainism. This kind of religion is governed by self-discipline and lack of violence. At 19, Gandhi left his home to study law in London. When he returned in 1891, he set up a law practice in Bombay, which failed. He resolved to get a position at an Indian firm that led him to work in South Africa alongside his family for 20 years. One of the factors that led Gandhi to hold up activism was the kind of treatment he got as an Indian immigrant in South Africa. He soon developed the aspect of passive resistance against the authorities, who once beat him up for failing to leave a first-class railway compartment for a European traveler.
Mahatma began as an activist in the early 1900’s while he was an immigrant. During the World War One, he led greatly in the struggle for his country from the shackles of the Britain’s (Lelyveld, 2011). He often wore a loincloth and shawl, and was also a strict upholder of the Hindu faith. Gandhi got imprisoned several times in his lifetime. He took up hunger protests to air the oppression of India’s poorest classes. He actively advocated for peace in India.
Comparison and Contrast for the Two Leaders
In both their lifetimes. Gandhi and Osama are seen to be leaders that were devoted to the well-being of their people. However, one was inclined towards violence while the other was inclined towards peace. Both Gandhi and Osama are also seen to have started their activist undertakings early in their lives. However, as seen in Osama’s case, he started when he was younger. Both were solemnly religious, which was greatly influenced by their parents.
Osama had dedicated his life to serving the rights, or so deemed of his Islam followers. A lot of his activities and beliefs were influenced by his teacher through his teenage years (Mockaitis, 2010). This is in contrast to Gandhi’s case, where he chose his way of doing things from the personal treatment he received while in South Africa. Osama had been taught to uphold his religion, irrespective of the damages it was going to cause. This gave rise to several deaths that either came from breaking loyalty of the activist groups, or any relation to Western activities despite their having positive impacts on society eventually. Globally, several crimes that were started by Osama became widely known for their profound negative impacts. Massive deaths resulted through his actions, marking him as one of the worst terrorists before he was killed. Furthermore, his influence created more followers like him who found violence as the most amicable solution to defending their rights. Worse still most of the reasons Osama used to resolve to violence were not good enough. The need to attack the American government had become such an obsession with him that many innocent lives were lost. Most of the time, all the Islamic activist groups wanted was to scare the American government despite having not been wronged. This demonstrates how much the Jihad teachings barely made any beneficial impacts on the fight for the rights of the Saudi Arabian people.
Gandhi, on the other hand, was driven by kind actions. He was hardly ever, a participant in violent acts (Lelyveld, 2011). He chose to follow passive resistance, which simply meant not giving way to the discriminative authorities, who would harass people of his descent. Gandhi inspired many people in his life story. He believed in there being no violence and strongly advocated for peace. He also believed in simplicity, truth, faith in God, celibacy, and was also a vegetarian. Gandhi based his protests on reasonable ground, and his aim was not revenge, but to ensure a better life for his people. Additionally, he was not keen on causing terror to the people oppressing his people. Gandhi made several calls to the Britain to be kind to the Indians (Gandhi & Dsai, 1984). He did not form violent activist groups, but rather, formed political parties, which were going to engage in peaceful protests for the same. Eventually, upon his assassination, Gandhi became a greatly revered leader. He made several quotes in his lifetime that acted as an inspiration to both the Indians and other people worldwide. He made several sacrifices that were for the good of his people, which included his wife leaving him. Conclusively, Gandhi left a good legacy, while Osama left a trail of deaths in his path that did not necessarily better his community.
- Gandhi, & Dsai, M. H. (1984). An autobiography, or, the story of my experiments with truth. Ahmedabad: Navajivan Pub. House.
- Lelyveld, J. (2011). Great soul: Mahatma Gandhi and his struggle with India. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
- Mockaitis, T. R. (2010). Osama bin Laden: A biography. Santa Barbara, Calif: Greenwood.`

Ad blocker interference detected!
Wikia is a free-to-use site that makes money from advertising. We have a modified experience for viewers using ad blockers
Wikia is not accessible if you’ve made further modifications. Remove the custom ad blocker rule(s) and the page will load as expected.
A university student who attends Professor Pickle's class for her major. Dora has a good heart, but she's still working on the ABCs of courtship: when a boy at school talks to her, she stares at the floor and clams right up. She makes a delicious cabbage roll.
— Directory, Sonic Unleashed
Following Professor Pickle's kidnapping by Dr. Eggman, many of his classes were cancelled. Because Dora attended Professor Pickle's classes, she was therefore forced on an indefinite break, though she did not know the reason. After the Earth was shattered following Dark Gaia's awakening, Dora met Sonic the Hedgehog and Chip at Spagonia University, who were asking for directions to the university. Though she felt extremely shy in the face of strangers, Dora managed to tell the duo that they already were at the university, though she remarked that many classes were cancelled. She was also very shy when Sonic asked her casual questions, such as who she was and how she was doing. Later, she heard from Sonic that Professor Pickle had kidnapped, which made her want to go home since she thought it was not safe out on the streets.
At some point afterwards, Dora became possessed by some of Dark Gaia's Minions. Their influence would then cause her to dance and party rowdy together with other possessed humans in the middle of the streets in Spagonia during nighttime, but would then revert to normal during daytime. Luckily, Dora and the rest of the possessed people had Dark Gaia's Minions exorcised from them by Sonic the Werehog and Chip during their first exorcism, thus freeing her from their influence.
After this experience, Dora began to open up more to Sonic and she would often (indirectly) express her desire for a romantic relationship by talking to him about how she preferred Spagonia during the night as it had a romantic glow at this time and how romantic it looked.
Recognizing her longings, Otto talked with Dora about doing something about her shyness. While Dora knew that her shyness held her back, she just could not find the strength to overcome it. She tried to talk to Sonic about it, but found herself too shy to reveal nothing else that her talk with Otto about it. She then told Sonic that she had no idea how to get over her shyness and was pretty much hopeless about the situation.
Fortune came to Dora, however, when Otto assigned David to keep her company. After introducing himself to Dora and explaining that they went to the same science class, he asked her, rather awkwardly, if she wanted to hang out with him. Dora was initially confused, as she thought David had mistaken her for another girl, but David confirmed that he meant her. Dora then said timidly that it was kind of him to ask and that she would love to do it. As the two of them hang out together, they came to have a great time with each other and Dora began to develop feelings for David. Dora herself did not really care where they went as she had a good time just being with David.
After their supposed "date", Dora was happy to have someone to hang out with. However, as Dora learned it was Otto's idea of them hanging out together and not David's, Dora tried to keep herself from getting too close to David, as she did not believe he felt the same way about her and tried to convince herself that she should just be satisfied with them being friends. Trying to keep herself from having feelings for David, however, proved to be too tough of a challenge for Dora. She could often not sleep at night because she kept thinking of David, and as such, she kept going on evening scrolls through the city, where she would meet Sonic and have a talk with him about what had happen regarding David. It was not made easier for Dora as David kept calling her, but she refused to answer his calls and when walking in the streets, she tried to stay out of David's sight.
Dora continued to talk to Sonic about her issues for a while. During their talks, she was allowed by Sonic to reveal that even though she was satisfied with just hanging out with David, she felt sad for reasons she could not understand. She would also tell him about how she thought about just going up to David and talk to him, but found herself too big of a wuss to do it.
One day, however, Dora found David confronting her and revealed that he had fallen for her despite Otto having assigned him to hang out with, and asked her if she would like to go out with him again. Overwhelmed with joy, Dora asked David if he meant everything he said and announced with great joy that she was so happy.
Dora later watched on in horror with the rest of her city as Dark Gaia began to cast the world into darkness while maturing into Perfect Dark Gaia, where she was talking to Denise as the crisis unfolded, but later rejoiced when the world returned to normal following Perfect Dark Gaia's defeat at the hands of Super Sonic and the Gaia Colossus.
Dora never made any real appearance during the PS2/Wii version of Sonic Unleashed, and only appeared during the cutscenes. During the events of Sonic Unleashed, Dora became possessed by some of Dark Gaia's Minions. Their influence would then cause her to dance and party rowdy together with other possessed humans in the middle of the streets in Spagonia during nighttime, but would then revert to normal during daytime. Luckily, Dora and the rest of the possessed people had Dark Gaia's Minions exorcised from them by Sonic the Werehog and Chip during their first exorcism, thus freeing her from their influence.
Dora later watched on in horror with the rest of her town, as Dark Gaia began to cast the world into darkness, during which she was talking to Denise, but later rejoiced when the world returned to normal following Perfect Dark Gaia's defeat at the hands of Super Sonic and the Gaia Colossus.
While good of nature, Dora is extremely shy, which keeps her from pursuing her romantic dreams of getting a boyfriend.
- Dora makes a delicious cabbage roll.

Paladin is hired by Henry Ritchie, the leading citizen of the town of Ashley to stop a dam building project financed by Central City and an engineer named Mike O'Hare. The dam will cost Ashley its water supply. Other less sophisticated gunslingers are also vying for the job. Paladin's first attempt to stop the project is a simple act of sabotage that is not direct enough for Ritchie who wants O'Hare stopped by any means necessary. Paladin soon comes to realize that O'Hare is not the unreasonable man he was led to believe he is and that he could be working for the wrong side. Written by
This was perhaps one of my favorite episodes for several reasons. I was intrigued when I saw that Victor McLaglen was the guest star. I have been a fan of Victor for most of my adult life. Although this was one of his last appearances, it was done with loving care by both his son, Andrew, as Director, and Richard Boone as the star. The other commentator mentions that there is no reason for Boone to take such a quick liking to McLaglen, but apparently he failed to comprehend what Boone tells him in the dialog, Boone, as an educated man, has Hadrian as one of his idols because Hadrian was a builder as is McLaglen. As both a builder, an older man, and someone who comes off as polite as Boone is, it was only natural that Boone would be immediately drawn to McLaglen's character. It must have been wonderful (and a bit scary) for Andrew to direct his father in this episode. You have Boone and McLaglen who worked with John Wayne and Andrew who directed the Duke so many times. Like a big family.
2 of 2 people found this review helpful.
Was this review helpful to you?

AT APPROXIMATELY 1:45 on the afternoon of April 23, 2014, Scotty Fuentes was detained by officers of the New York City Police Department in the Bronx. The police officers apparently believed that Scotty was acting as a look-out for a game of “three card monte.”
Scotty denied any wrongdoing.
According to Scotty, the officers grabbed him, pulled his arms behind his back and handcuffed him. They proceeded to search and humiliated him before transporting him to the nearby precinct. Scotty was imprisoned for what he believed was an unreasonably lengthy and painful period of time. He was arraigned at Bronx County Criminal Court.
On September 29, 2014, all charges against Scotty relating to this incident were dismissed and sealed.
Prior to the charges being dropped, however, Scotty was terminated from his employment. Despite best efforts, he was unable to find a new job.
When the small unemployment checks he was collecting ran out, Scotty was evicted from his apartment because he couldn’t pay his rent. Then when he stopped making payments, his car was repossessed.
Scotty was fortunate to find a reputable law firm to represent him in a federal civil rights action against the City for false arrest and the filing of false charges against him. At the time of the incident Scotty had no arrest record, and his lawyers believed it was highly probable that Scotty would be victorious at trial.
Yet, the law moves at its own pace. Litigation is a slow process. The days, weeks, months and, ultimately, years dragged on. All the while, Scotty had no income and fell deeper into debt.
It felt to Scotty as if this unfortunate set of circumstances—being in the wrong place at the wrong time—had ruined his life.
Scotty was unable to sleep. His stomach was a mess, and his head was always pounding. He was not motivated to exercise or eat right. Having nowhere else to go, he moved back into his mother’s home and took up residence in the basement. He felt like a big loser.
He waited for the day his lawyers would call to say the case was going to trial so that he could “win” some money, repay his outstanding debts and start his life over again. But was that an unrealistic fantasy?
During this time, Scotty was often overwhelmed with negative thoughts about himself for being so vulnerable and against the police for being so wrong and so callous. He even considered suicide. Thankfully, he rationalized that he was feeling sorry for himself more than he wanted to end his life.
In June 2016, more than two years after his false arrest, Scotty was finally able to find a decent job and regain some of his self-confidence. He felt like a valuable member of society, yet his outstanding debt loomed heavily over him.
His debt prevented him from socializing, dating and moving on with his life. This was not the life he had envisioned.
Right before Labor Day, Scotty’s lawyers called and said there was a settlement offer that they believed was quite reasonable in light of the damages suffered and the risks of going to trial. While Scotty was thrilled that the nightmare was about to end, he soon realized that the offer, while “reasonable” to his counsel, could not pay off his creditors and reignite his life.
He asked his lawyers if they could negotiate a larger settlement, or if they would agree to reduce their fees, so he could net more money to pay down his outstanding debt, largely incurred as a direct result of the false arrest. The lawyers were not about to reduce their fees, but instead suggested based on his small income that Scotty file a Chapter 7 bankruptcy.
By doing so, he would be legally discharged from the unsecured debt he had incurred and would be free to start his new life—free of the debt and the lawsuit. Scotty would be able to keep the “exempt” portion of his settlement funds, and the balance would be used by the appointed bankruptcy trustee to make a pro rata distribution to his creditors.
Yes. In fact, a bankruptcy would stay on Scotty’s record for 10 years and negatively impact his credit. It would impair his ability to get loans (and, even if he were approved, such loans would be at higher interest rates). It would also affect his future employment opportunities.
Now, Scotty could explain to potential employers the hardship he faced as a result of his false arrest, but would they even give him that opportunity? Would they believe him? Would they take a chance on him?
Scotty called me to discuss which actions he might take that would be least detrimental to his future. My answer, of course, was to negotiate the debt.
Together, we ordered Scotty’s credit reports from the three credit bureaus and then called each one of Scotty’s creditors. Although Scotty’s settlement from the City was not enough to pay each creditor in full, many of the creditors were readily willing to accept a smaller amount in full settlement of the debt. Some creditors even agreed to erase the “negative line of credit” entirely from Scotty’s report upon clearance of the settlement monies. Other creditors would not remove the negative history, but they agreed to change the status to “settled,” meaning the negative information would drop off his report in about seven years.
By my count, seven years is significantly better than ten, and, in Scotty’s case, a settlement was far better than bankruptcy.
At the end of the day, we were able to settle all of Scotty’s debt from the settlement proceeds. Scotty was left with more than he would have netted had he filed a bankruptcy and only been allowed to keep the “exempt” amount.
It is very easy to get in debt, and such debt accumulation is often the result of circumstances beyond our control. It doesn’t have to be a false arrest; it could be a bad business decision, divorce or a sick family member. It might result from a misunderstanding about how credit works and the exponential damage compounding interest can have on the principal amount of debt owed.
Bankruptcy, however, must be a last resort and not a knee jerk reaction.
While Scotty did not want to “give away” the settlement funds his lawyer successfully negotiated, he also did not want to file for bankruptcy. Debt negotiation allowed Scotty to repay his debts without going through the bankruptcy process or having a bankruptcy on his record for another decade.
We all know we cannot always control what happens in our lives. Sometimes, life is simply not fair. However, when faced with challenging money situations and debt, be aware that thinking creatively, asking for what you want—and tenacity—can result in success.
These days, Scotty is walking with his chin up, and the smile has returned to his face.
While his hair is now graying in parts (he thinks due to stress), he is back to sleeping through the night. His stomach is not in a constant knot. Although he has suffered, he has grown, and he has learned.
You, too, can negotiate your debt and improve your credit status. If your finances are out of control – for example, if your annual income is the same as your total unsecured debt – perhaps it is time for you to consider taking action to negotiate your debt.
True wisdom comes in understanding that sometimes, you are both the prison and the key.
Protect Your Money: Learn from Damage Repair Scam Victims
How Much Is Too Much to Spend on Your Rent And/or Freedom?
Scams Against Seniors
Stolen Mail: What to do when you’re the victim of identity theft
Inheritance and Crisis: How to Handle Your Complicated New Reality
The Real Cost of Liability

Police are investigating the circumstances surrounding the death of a St Vincent and the Grenadines national whose body was found outside his home at Potters where he has lived since moving to Antigua almost two (2) years ago.
The victim has been identified as 23-year old Malco Costa Codougan a Security Guard employed at Hawkeye Security and Surveillance in Antigua.
The body was spotted by a passerby who noticed it and summoned the neighbours. He was found unresponsive, lying on the ground outside his home approximately 7:45 am on Wednesday 3rd March, 2021.
The passerby later called EMS and the Police. A medical doctor arrived on the scene and pronounced him dead around 10:00 am.
“I actually was going to touch him to ask him what was wrong, and they tell me the ambulance say not to touch him, and this was, like, minutes to 8”, one villager told Antigua Media.
The villager said as the man laid on the ground, she “took up his phone, sanitized the phone, took it up to see if it was unlocked so I could call anybody for him and his phone was locked.”
“The ambulance came after 8, and then the police came,” the woman recalled.
The police have not ruled out foul play and are pursuing all circumstances to determine cause of death.
One of his legs was heavily bandaged and according to the neighbours this was due to an incident during which he was struck by a motor vehicle while at work as a security officer.
Police investigations are ongoing.

Ordered a bike and two saddles from Glory Cycles one week ago today. We were supposed to recieve the order on Friday. Called on Wednesday and was told everything was a go. Called again on Friday to see if the order had come in and was informed order had just shipped! Called back to find out when the other half of the order would ship but our call was not returned. Stopped by the shop today and they have not received any part of our order. I get it that they can not help when the manufacturer ships the product, however SOME form of communication with the customer is EXPECTED. Drove all the way to Gainesville to get what we wanted. I'm all for supporting your local bike shop but this was a very disappointing experience.

BURNET, Texas (KXAN) — An elementary school student in Burnet was removed from his bus Tuesday after he pulled out a BB gun from his backpack.
A Burnet CISD spokesperson says at around 4 p.m., the student was reported after he starting showing the BB gun to other students.
“As soon as the driver became aware of the BB gun, the student was removed from the bus and a school resource officer was contacted along with the child’s parent,” the school district said.
Parents were sent a letter notifying them of the incident. A parent who sent KXAN the letter said it was sent out by the principal of Shady Grove Elementary School on Wednesday, a full day after it happened. The letter says the BB gun was unloaded.
The school district said since the incident happened after school Tuesday they communicated what happened as soon as they could.

Occasionally, Mae and I sneak out on Jesse to run errands and such. Of course I use the word "sneak" loosely, since we always make sure we tell him that we're going out, and assure him that we would come back. He seldom kicks up a fuss when we leave, but would usually do when we return - even if it's sometimes for show. We'd usually pick him up, hold him close and pat him on his back to console him.
Lately, however, he's been getting more and more attached.
Last week, Mae ran off to pick me up from the office while Jesse waited at home. When I opened the door the poor boy ran towards me, his arms apart and his sad little face about to burst into tears. And so I dropped everything, swooped down on him and hugged him close to me as he cried a little cry of relief to see me.
"It's okay," I assured him, "Daddy misses you too."
He looked at me as though he understood. He hugged me tightly, buried his face in my neck, and patted me on my back. And then I understood.
My son was consoling me. *sniff*

Looks like Kate Beckinsale might have a hot new flame.
The actress was spotted passionately kissing 21-year-old comedian Matt Rife on Tuesday in West Hollywood outside Villa Lounge restaurant.
Beckinsale, 43, and Rife were casually dressed in matching beige and cream colors as Rife was seen holding the actress’ face as he pulled her in for a kiss.
“Kate is enjoying her life. She is dating and having fun. She looks amazing and keeps getting lots of male attention,” a source tells WHO. “She has been seeing Matt for the past few weeks. She really seems to like him. She refers to him as an old soul. There is obviously a physical attraction too. The age different doesn’t matter to her. Matt is amazing to her.”
Rife is a comedian best known for his appearances on Nick Cannon‘s MTV show Wild ‘N Out and also does stand-up. The comedian is an avid fitness junkie, often posting videos on his Instagram of his high-intensity workout.
Beckinsale was previously married to director Len Wiseman for 11 years before their divorce in 2015.
The actress was also in an eight-year relationship with actor Michael Sheen, which ended in 2003. The two share 18-year-old daughter Lily and have remained close friends.
This article originally appeared on PEOPLE

popcornplaya Posted October 23, 2008 Share Posted October 23, 2008 I took the Rock Band guitar out of the box tonight because I picked up Rock Band2 for the PS3. It's been a few months since I've played Rock Band, so I figured it'd be as I left it. Boy was I wrong. I get the guitar out and the strum "button" was broke. Well, not broke, but it wasn't right. It was cocked in to one side. I took it apart and the metal cup that is on the end of the plastic "button" shaped tip where it clicks into place in the cradle was broken off. I have super glued it along with putting some epoxy inside the cup and am currently awaiting it's drying. I would put a screw in it, but I don't know where I'd find one small enough. I always store the guitar in the box and have never had an issue. Nothing heavy has been on it, so I don't know how it could've happened. Upon taking it apart, it is very cheaply made. Anyone know of a good 3rd party guitar for the PS3? If this doesn't work, I'm buying one. Quote Link to comment Share on other sites More sharing options...
Join the conversation
You can post now and register later. If you have an account, sign in now to post with your account.

Cullen Montgomery Baker was a mean, cold-blooded, and ruthless killer who left a long trail of bodies across the American Frontier. A Confederate guerrilla during the Civil War, he didn’t want to give up the fight once the war was over, and afterward ambushed reconstructionists, killed former slaves, and generally terrorized the states of Texas and Arkansas for four years.
Baker was born in Weakley County, Tennessee on June 22, 1835, to John Baker and his wife Elizabeth. His father was an honest but poor farmer who also owned cattle. Soon after he was born, the family moved to Clarksville, Arkansas. After just a few years, the family moved again to Texas in 1839 where they eventually settled in Davis County. There, his father received a land grant of 640 acres. Though they had received the acreage, the family was still poor and because of his homespun trousers and bare feet, Cullen was teased by students at school. Though he was a slender and withdrawn youth, he began to fight back. He also obtained an old pistol and rusty, but workable, rifle and began to practice with both weapons until he was very proficient.
He took his first drink of whiskey when he was just 15-years-old and began to challenge both boys and men who annoyed him, to “go for your guns.” It wasn’t long before he was spending much of his time in saloons, where his quick temper got him into a number of brawls. He was generally described as a hard drinker, a braggart, quarrelsome, and mean-spirited. During one fight, he was knocked unconscious by a man named Morgan Culp, who hit him in the head with a tomahawk. This incident seemingly calmed his temper for a little while, but it wouldn’t last.
Some weeks later, on January 11, 1854, still wearing a head bandage, Baker married 17-year-old Martha Jane Petty and settled down to a quiet life of farming. But he tired of this routine and just eight months later he was back to his old ways. One night when he was out drinking, he became involved in a verbal altercation with a youth named Stallcup. As the discussion devolved, Baker became enraged, grabbed a whip, and beat the boy to near death. Baker was then charged with the crime and he confronted one of the witnesses, Wesley Bailey, at his home, shot him in both legs with a shotgun, and left him lying in front of his house. Bailey died a few days later. Before Baker could be arrested for the murder, he fled to Perry County, Arkansas, where he stayed with his mother’s brother, Thomas Young for almost two years.
While he was there he stabbed a man named Wartham to death in an argument about horses in 1856 and afterward fled back to Texas. But he soon returned to Arkansas when he learned he was still wanted to face murder charges in the killing of Bailey. While he was gone, his wife Martha gave birth to a baby girl, Louisa Jane on May 24, 1857. The next year, he briefly returned to Texas to retrieve his wife and daughter. His wife died on July 2, 1860, and Baker took their child to Sulphur County, Texas and left her there with his in-laws. He never saw his daughter again.
In November 1861 he joined Company G of Morgan’s Regimental Cavalry to fight in the Confederate Army. In July 1862, he married for a second time to Martha Foster, who was unaware that he was wanted for murder. His name is on the muster roll for September-October 1862, and he received pay through August 31, but he is designated a deserter on January 10, 1863.
He then joined a group of guerillas called the “Independent Rangers” who were loosely associated with the Confederate Home Guard. Their objective was to pursue and capture deserters from the Confederate Army, but instead, they took advantage of most of the men being away at war and committed atrocities of intimidation, rape, theft, and violence. Any man who had property was considered an enemy and was declared to be a Union man. The depredations in some areas became so bad that everyone who could, left the area.
Shortly after Baker joined the “Independent Rangers” they began an ongoing feud with another band called the “Mountain Boomers”, who were Union guerrillas. Both bands ranged through Arkansas robbing, burning and murdering indiscriminately.
In November 1864, a small band of mostly old men, women, and children wished to flee from the turmoil and started west with their teams and valuables. However, as they were crossing the Saline River in the Ouachita Mountains, they were overtaken by Cullen Baker and the Independent Rangers. Allegedly, Baker and his men considered their attempt to flee as “unpatriotic,” but, in reality, they needed little reason to harass them. When the settler band refused to return, Baker drew his pistol and shot and killed the band’s leader. He then assured the rest of the group that he would not kill anyone else if they would agree to return to their homes. But, after the remaining settlers came back to Baker’s side of the river, he quickly led his “Rangers” in shooting and killing nine other men and stole any valuables. The event became known locally as the Massacre of Saline.
Afterward, the local citizens had had enough and began active preparations to annihilate the murderous gang. However, when the ruffians got word of this, they fled with their booty and the many horses and mules they had stolen.
At the end of 1864, Baker was in a saloon wearing a Confederate hat in Spanish Bluffs, Arkansas when he was approached by four African American Union soldiers who asked for identification. Baker turned to face them with his pistol drawn, shooting and killing a sergeant and the three other soldiers.
When the war was over, one report tells that as he was making his way home, he came upon a group of travels in Sevier County, Tennessee. In the group was a black woman who he began to verbally harass and then shot and killed her.
He then settled down with his wife Martha near the Sulphur River area in southwestern Arkansas where he became the manager of the Line Ferry. But, it would be short-lived. Martha soon took ill and died on March 1, 1866. By many accounts, Baker was said to have deeply grieved her loss. But that didn’t stop him from proposing to her 16-year-old sister, Belle Foster, just two months later. Belle rejected his proposal and instead married a schoolteacher and political activist named Thomas Orr. Baker then began to harass Orr, trying to pick fights with the man, hitting him over the head with a tree limb, and going to his school to ridicule, curse, and threaten the man in front of his students.
By this time, Reconstruction had begun in Arkansas and Texas, and Baker despised the idea. He and another outlaw named Lee Rames organized a gang that operated out of the Sulphur River bottoms near Bright Star, Arkansas. Committing acts of robbery and murder, the gang was said to have killed at least 30 people, many of whom were outnumbered, ambushed, or shot in the back.
Baker and his gang also traveled to Texas, where he killed John Salmons, who had previously killed a gang member, Seth Rames, the brother of gang member Lee Rames. He also killed W.G. Kirkman, a Reconstruction official, and a man named George W. Barron, who had previously taken part as a member of a posse hunting him. The gang continued their outlaw spree the areas of Queen City, Texas, and Texarkana, Arkansas.
On June 1, 1867, he returned to Cass County, where he entered the Rowden General Store, picked up some items and left without paying. The proprietor, John Rowden then rode with a shotgun to Baker’s house and demanded payment. Baker said he would come back and pay him, but on June 5th, he killed Rowden instead.
Baker then fled back into Arkansas, where he was confronted by a Union sergeant when he boarded a ferry, who recognized him. He killed the Union officer, but a private was able to get away and reported the murder. After this, Baker was pursued relentlessly by Union forces.
On July 25, 1867, he got into an argument with several Union Soldiers near New Boston, Texas which quickly escalated to violence. In the ensuing gunfight, Baker was shot in the arm, but he killed army Private Albert E. Titus. This resulted in a $1,000 reward for his capture, dead or alive.
In December 1867, he then made his way to Bright Star, Arkansas where he met up with several men who were planning a raid on the farm of Howell Smith, who had recently hired several freed slaves. In the attack, one of Smith’s daughters was stabbed, another clubbed, and a black man was shot and killed. But, Smith resisted and a shootout ensued which resulted in several of the raiders being wounded, including Baker, who was shot in the leg.
On October 24, 1868, Baker and his gang were reported to have been involved in the killings of Major P.J. Andrews, Lieutenant H.F. Willis, and an unnamed black man in Little Rock Arkansas. In the attack, Sheriff Standel was wounded.
By this time, Baker’s co-leader of the gang, Lee Rames, had begun to doubt Baker’s leadership and felt that his actions would lead to the downfall of the entire gang. Rames then defied Baker, who backed down and the gang broke up in December 1868. All of the members, except “Dummy” Kirby sided with Rames. He and Kirby made their way to Bloomburg, Texas to the house of Baker’s in-laws in January 1869. It would be there that Cullen Baker and “Dummy” Kirby would die on January 6, 1869.
Exactly how they were killed is unknown. One version says that his father-in-law and friends laced a bottle of whiskey and some food with strychnine and both men died from poisoning. Afterward, their bodies were riddled with bullets. Another version says that Thomas Orr, with whom Baker had long feuded with, led a small band of men who ambushed Baker and Kirby at the Foster home, shooting and killing them.
After the men were killed, their bodies were dragged through the town of Bloomburg and then taken to the US Army outpost near Jefferson, where they were placed on public display. Thomas Orr was said to have collected some of the reward money offered for Baker.
Baker was buried in the Oakwood Cemetery in Jefferson, Texas. Though he was a deserter from Morgan’s Squadron, the Confederate cavalry unit is shown on his grave marker.
Afterward, he was romanticized by some for his defense of the “Southern honor.” But his record shows he was a merciless killer who killed anyone who angered him, regardless of their loyalties. He is estimated with killing between 50-60 people and authorities and historians alike rank him among the most ruthless killers who ever lived.
©Kathy Weiser-Alexander, updated February 2020.
Nash, Jay Robert; Encyclopedia Of Western Lawmen & Outlaws, Da Capo Press, 1989

SOUTH JORDAN — With an orange vest and careful instructions from his mother, 5½-year-old Noah Talbot makes his way home from school at noon each day by himself.
The kindergartner at Monte Vista Elementary usually walks with his older brother every morning, but he comes home alone since his class only meets for half a day.
Last Friday, Noah was on his way to school when he was stopped by a South Jordan police officer. The officer picked him and drove him home.
The officer then issued his mother, Rosella Talbot, a citation for misdemeanor child neglect, saying it was irresponsible for her to allow her young son to walk from school unaccompanied.
"I am not a neglectful parent, thank you very much," she told the Deseret News. "I have just done everything I could possibly do."
The citation is the most recent blow, Talbot said, in what has been an ongoing, difficult dilemma for the mother of six. When certain bus routes were cut by the Jordan School District this year, Talbot's kids were among those who had to start walking.
"Because of our budget shortfall, we had to eliminate our hazardous bus routes," said Steve Dunham, spokesman for the district.
Per state law, districts are required to bus elementary students who live more than a mile and a half from their school. Prior to this year, the district voluntarily provided hazardous bus routes in developing areas where cities hadn't put in sidewalks or where other hazards exist, but it eliminated 75 percent of the routes this year. The district will eliminate the rest next year.
Talbot said prior to school starting, she and her husband met with school officials and tried to get Noah a seat on the bus, even if it only drove him across busy 2700 West to the top of her street. When that didn't work out, she went to South Jordan City Council meetings, advocating for crossing guards, she said.
"I've fought it; I really have," she said. "I've tried and tried and tried."
Feeling like she was out of options, Talbot spoke with police officers about safety and also rode a bike with her son the mile-long distance from school for more than two weeks, showing him the best route to take and the obstacles to avoid. She outfitted him with an orange helmet, and spoke with his teacher to make sure he wears an orange safety vest every day when he leaves the classroom so he'll be seen by cars.
"My kids are not allowed to go to school without an orange vest on," she said of Noah and his 8-year-old brother. "I have the school teacher on speed dial."
Noah crosses two streets in order to get home, one of which is a busy 2700 West. His mom worries about it, but said she has tried to make the circumstances as safe as possible. So it was especially frustrating when police officer Elyse Charter showed up at her house, issued her a citation and took her fingerprints.
According to the officer's report, Charter was concerned about the cold weather and "became increasingly alarmed by the sheer number of vehicles traveling on 2700 West."
Noah caught the officer's eye when she saw him being followed by a gold-colored van. After speaking with the driver, Charter learned that the driver had seen the boy walking 30 minutes earlier and was afraid he was lost. Talbot said Noah and his brother had gotten in an argument that morning, and Noah walked back home. His mom told him that wasn't acceptable, she said, and called his teacher to tell her Noah would be late. Then she sent him back on his way.
Charter wrote in her report that Noah had been stopped by another officer in March after spotting him walking alone to preschool. There are no sidewalks for about half of the boy's daily trek.
Like every school in the district, Monte Vista has a "safe walking route" it suggests for students. It recommends that Noah cross the street with a crossing guard near the school, then walk on the east side of 2700 West until he reaches his street, Talbot said. But Talbot has instructed her son to walk on the west side of the street because the east side has no sidewalk for long stretches and she feels a sidewalk is safer. However, that means her son has to cross without a crossing guard at another location.155 comments on this story
Talbot said the Friday incident worried her young son, who thought he was in trouble when the police officer picked him up. Now he feels responsible for his mom's ticket.
"He doesn't want his mommy to get in trouble," she said. "He was so upset."
Talbot has a younger child at home and an older child with cerebral palsy, and while she said she could drive Noah from school, she would rather he walk and walk safely.
"These are some serious charges. ... I can't be a Girl Scout leader. I can't work at a day care," she said. "I am just so frustrated."

If you aren't happy then you should absolutely find a new vet.
I love Abby's doctors. Her regular vet is amazing. Her kidney specialist is always trying to find ways to save me money on her treatments. She is on vacation in Ireland this week but sent me an email just today asking how Abby is doing. The jury is still out on the holistic nuVet but so far he seems good. It's not about the money to him, I found this out when he told me the vitamins I was giving her were better than the ones he was trying to sell me and when I told him I couldn't do her first chiropractic adjustment until I got paid, he did it for free.

Coronation Street spoilers: Owen's lies are exposed by ex-wife Linda, says Ian Puleston-Davies
Izzy and Katy's mother arrives in Weatherfield to set the record straight about why she hasn't been around for them
Owen Armstrong's ex-wife Linda is to show up in Weatherfield next week, bringing with her a secret that could tear his family apart.
With Linda set to reveal the real reason to Izzy and Katy as to why she left all those years ago, it looks like Owen will have some explaining to do.
"Owen hasn't been quite as honest with Katy and Izzy about their mother as he should have been, so when Linda then turns up, his immediate thoughts are that she will want to tell the girls the entire truth and that they'll think he's been lying to them all this time," says actor Ian Puleston-Davies. "Owen knows that things are about to blow up. The past has caught up with them all and I think he's very scared that it's all about to blow up at any minute."
So why has Linda decided to return now after so much time has gone by? "I think Linda has tried many times to get back in touch with the girls, but Owen will have made it very clear to her that she's not welcome and that she should leave them alone," continues the actor. "I imagine he's made it very difficult for Linda to get in touch over the years."
Owen will, of course, be desperate to keep the truth hushed up, but it looks like Linda will stick to her guns and set the record straight. "Owen has always told Izzy and Katy that Linda couldn't cope with family life and struggled a lot with the children and that's why she left them.
"But Linda feels likes she has missed out on her girls growing up for long enough and wants to find them and rekindle their relationship. It was only a matter of time before she'd want to find them and give her side of the story."
You can watch a 60-second rundown of next week's episodes of Coronation Street below.

Disclaimer: I don't own Phineas and Ferb!
In this story, everyone is 16 and sophomores in High School
It wasn't a super hot or humid day, temperatures were starting to climb, but being outside was a dream for Phineas. He loved sitting under the huge oak tree in his backyard with his brother and closest friend, Ferb. They seemed to have their best ideas come to them under this very tree, but today, something seemed... off. Something was gonna change today, but Phineas had no idea what it was.
Meanwhile, at the Garcia-Shapiro household, Isabella was finishing up a painting she had been working on for a week now. It was a painting of her one true love, Phineas Flynn. Ever since she was little, she had had a huge crush on Phineas, and no matter how much she tried to show him, he seemed so oblivious when it came to her feelings. She had started to give up, and this painting was supposed to be a symbolic last act of putting her heart into him and just accepting that he was her best friend, and that is all it would ever be.
As she was finishing up this painting, she heard a moving truck in the front yard. "Who could that be?" she asked herself out loud. Upon a closer inspection, she found that there was a girl who looked around her age moving into the house next door.
"Mom, do you know who's moving in next door?" she called to her mom, who was cooking downstairs.
"No darling, why don't you bring over a plate of these cookies I just made as a housewarming gift?" her mother responded with a smile.
"Okay, mom! Be back in a second" Isabella smiled and walked out the door with the cookies. She came to the house next door and walked up to the door. It almost seemed like the days when she would go house to house and sell Fireside Girl cookies, so she wasn't very nervous when it came to this stuff. She heard a latch unlocking and put on her best smile. The door opened to a girl with blonde hair and hazel eyes, smiling happily and glad that she wasn't the only teenage girl in the neighborhood.
"Hiya! My name is Isabella! My family and I live next door, and we wanted to give you these cookies as a housewarming gift." she exclaimed.
"Hi! I'm Emma, we just moved in this morning, but I guess you already knew that..." Emma giggled, "anyways, thanks so much for the cookies! Hey, I know we just met, but, do you think you could maybe show me around? I'm new and I'd like to be a little more familiar with my surroundings so the summer gets off to a good start, you know?"
"I'd love to! Where would you like to go first? We could go to the mall, or walk around downtown, or meet some other people?" Isabella was happy she was going to make a new friend, and maybe, just maybe, this tour would get her mind off of Phineas so she could start to get over him.
"I'd love to check out the mall, if that's okay with you?"
"Sounds like a plan! I have to finish something real fast, but you can come over and we can talk a little before we go?"
"That sounds perfect to me! Mom, can I go to the mall with Isabella?" she called to the kitchen.
"Making friends already, I see? Of couse, just be home by 10 please!" a sweet voice, who Isabella assumed was her mom, replied.
"Awesome! Let's roll!" Emma laughed and they ran to Isabella's house.
-In the Flynn-Fletcher Backyard-
"Hey Ferb, I'm having a bit of a mind block. Any ideas for what we should do today?" Phineas asked his brother, who wasn't very talkative. Ferb shook his head and shrugged. "Oh. Okay. Hey I wonder where Isabella is... she's usually here by now."
Phineas was confused. He hadn't seen Isabella for a week since they were out of town with her family in New Mexico, and she hadn't really responded to any of his texts, except for a few dry responses. He didn't know why, but he felt kind of hurt. He missed her eyes, her smile, and her little catchphrase that would always pop into his mind at the most random times. What was wrong with him?
Just then, the back door slid open.
"Phineas! Ferb! What are you guys- wait what are you doing? Usually you're halfway done with your crazy contraption by now..." his sister, Candace, asked him. She was now 21 and in college, but she was visiting back home for the summer. She had mellowed out a little from when they were kids, but not by much.
"Hi Candace..." Phineas mumbled and went back into thought.
"Is he okay..?" Candace asked Ferb and after receiving yet another shrug from Ferb, walked over to Phineas.
"What's wrong bud?" she seemed genuinely concerned. She hadn't seen him this upset in a long time.
"Candace, I honestly don't know. Nobody comes over anymore. It's like we lost all of our friends. Buford is visiting family in Maine, Baljeet is at GeometryCamp, and Isabella doesn't really talk to me anymore. Does she hate me? I mean I don't think I did anything... did I?" Phineas was really distraught and Candace decided she was going to get to the bottom of it.

We, his family were too frightened to answer him back or share our opinions & perspective with him if it was different to his. We all wanted to please him so much that we either went along with what he said or we kept quiet. This act of self preservation on our behalf has aided him to lose the art of conversation. If we did have a different opinion or disagreed with him he would get louder, more abusive and so worked up that you would just back down or walk away. We often just left Mum to cop the abuse as we snuck away hoping he didn't notice we had done so. He saw himself as the head of the household & felt that it was only his views and opinions that mattered. When he talked, you listened!
So, he talked, we listened. This is how you have a conversation with my Dad. This has always been the way. This has, I feel, also caused him to become deaf. How perfect! Now, he has an excuse not to listen to anything you have to say. His deafness and his refusal to wear hearing aids makes it so difficult for you to talk to him that you give up. So, you just listen to him and don't contribute too much to the conversation because it is way to tiring. When he does talk, it's not really a conversation anyway, it is more just a set of opinions and complaints about everything and anything. He has very little if anything positive to say about the world or it's people. His true joy is in talking about the past and HIS past experiences. We have heard many of his stories, over and over in fact. Once again, because we can not offer our perspective it is all purely about him and his life.
At 87, it is hard, maybe even impossible for him to change now. But I see where, how and why I have contributed to this lost art of conversation. Yesterday, I went to visit him in hospital. I stood at the door way for a couple of seconds and looked at him before he noticed I was there. I felt love for him and thought he looked quite serene and well. It was only when we started to converse that the awkwardness and unease surfaced. No hearing aids. I have to raise my voice and repeat myself. He asked questions about Mum and tried to listen, but I found myself not wanting to say too much because it was too much hard work and I don't like yelling when the room is full of others trying to rest in their beds. The doctor came around and I had to interpret everything because he was a "quiet talker'. Then when Dad found out he couldn't go home, he started to bitch and complain about the shower. I showed him how to make it work for him, but he wouldn't take it in. So, what did I do. I shut down, listened to him complain for a while, said I have to go and I walked away. It is too hard, he won't listen, it's sad really.
I now see why I am such a good listener and why I find it difficult to talk about myself & what I do. I am going the opposite way, I am in danger of losing this wonderful art of conversation. Too much listening and not enough contributing, tipping the scales in the oopposite direction. So interesting isn't it?...answer me! hahaha..
With 'smart phones' we are surely in danger of this art dying all together as we text or message each other on facebook instead of having real conversations. I too am guilty of this and sometimes I just crave a person to person conversation. May we all find balance with this art. May we all be contributors so that we can share our stories, listen to others stories and learn as much as we teach.
How do I tell my Dad he has lost the art of conversation, and we, his family helped him to lose it. Do you think he will understand? Do you think he will listen? The thought of broaching him with this conversation causes butterflies in my stomach. Hmmm...maybe a conversation for another day.

Nollywood actress Beverly Naya has opened up about how she was bullied and called ugly while she was growing up.
The actress shared this experience in a recent interview with popular media personality Chude.
She mentioned that she was bullied at a young age and that she was always getting attacked verbally and physically by her friends because of her looks.
Naya said, “My formative years, I was always getting bullied for one thing or the other and so no matter what school I was in, I always felt like there was always going to be something that I was going to get attacked for.
“So, when I was younger, I was an ugly duckling. I wasn’t cute. I don’t care what my mom says. I was not a cute kid.
“I had crooked teeth, eczema, I just didn’t look good as far as I was concerned, and as far as people around me were concerned. I used to get called ‘snakeskin, buck teeth, light bulb head, football legs’ just different kinds of stuff and then I just blossomed.
”My skin cleared, I got braces, I just kind of blossomed. And I started to kind of feel beautiful for the first time in my life around 16 and I think I probably was owning it a bit too much for some people in my school.
READ MORE: I Was Rejected, Ridiculed, Almost Gave Up On Acting – Actor Lateef Adedimeji
“I got bullied for that and it really broke me, because I was like ‘look, I can’t win’. When I was younger, I was getting bullied for being ugly and unattractive, and now I finally feel like I’m beautiful and I’m trying to own it.”

Discussion in 'Recently Sentenced and Beyond' started by ColoGirl, Aug 16, 2018.
In my uneducated opinion, they had more than enough to detain him for questioning after the wellness check on reasonable suspicion that he committed a crime just based on the fact her purse, phone, meds, etc, were still inside and basic common sense dictated that the only way his family could have left that house was in his truck.
I also believe they should have considered the possibility of an accomplice from day one since there very well could have been a plan to have someone else dispose of her car.
During the prison interview, I recall him being prodded to admit how he didn't like Shanann forcing him to be in those FB videos and a number of questions about those caffeine-enhanced Thrive patches, but not a single question about what he might have planned to do with her car.
They did ask about why he looked up the "Battery" lyrics, and he told them NK had asked him about their meaning, but it wasn't right before arriving or right after leaving the oil site, even though he did indeed do so right after disposing of his family. Not a single followup question about that obvious lie.
When asked about his contact with NK after the murders, he told them that NK had texted him weird questions the day after asking him the name of her yoga studio and the name of her dog, and only after confirming he had access to the phone and not LE, did she instruct him to delete everything.
Yet somehow the detectives thought that NK might have believed Shanann had access to his phone, so she was asking him questions about his dog and his yoga studio, which made absolutely zero sense, especially since NK knew that Shanann and the girls were still missing.
Regarding the recovery of texts between NK & CW, I only recall seeing maybe a dozen in the discovery and those were provided to them by NK. The discovery specifically mentioned that none the texts from their work phones were recovered. There should have been hundreds if not thousands of texts between those two since they were texting each other constantly. What happened to those?
Here..CW sent it to SW..... a source close to home! MEDIA, MAPS & TIMELINES - NO DISCUSSION - - Shanann Watts (34, dec.), Celeste"Cece" (3) and Bella (4
That is correct but the photo originated with CW.
I'm not so sure considering how Cindy demonized Shannan from the git go and even got the family to boycott their wedding.
OK guys, admittedly I'm a little foggy on this one, but how could Ronnie have pulled the doll photo from SW's FB account (she posted it after CW sent it to her via phone in the first place on Thurs Aug 8, IIRC) if he had de-friended her while she was in NC? Unless there is proof I will keep assuming that CW gave it to Ronnie on the way to Frederick from the airport. Or that Ronnie saw it on CW's FB site when the photo was re-posted by SW (?)
Yes, I do know that. Sorry, I wasn't clear about it.
I believe that since her FB was set to public, he'd be able to see it even if he had unfriended her.
Hindsight is 20/20 and to imply that because Shanann's purse and car were home, the police should automatically have known everyone was dead and gone is a little much. Also, you can never detain someone for questioning, period. Even when someone is arrested and charged, they control whether they will be questioned or not. There was no way to save anyone's life here; they came and took a report, noticed some things were off, but in no way did they have enough to arrest and charge him that first night.
LOL you are probably right. Unfriended in name only, he knew he could look at hers but made sure she couldn't look at his. But still he could have got it off of CW's site, no? CW's site would still have been showing SW posts at that point. Anyway SOMEHOW Ronnie had that post all ready to show law enforcement at the same moment he was stricken with grief over the deaths of his grand daughters.
I didn't follow the case here. I followed through the press, TV, and Youtube so I may be sketchier on the details but here's my thoughts, based on what I recall:
I'm sure Chris was suspected from the beginning. You cannot detain or arrest someone on that, though. People have constitutional rights. Even the neighbor's video, and Chris' obvious sweating bullets, was not enough to arrest him, because it didn't show him carrying bodies or anyone but Chris. Investigators moved quickly to interrogate him and by Wednesday, he was no longer a free man. He basically confessed before a full scale search even commenced - and it would have commenced and they would have found Shannon's body at the site. But, it never got that far (a search) because they broke him and they did it fast. I thought it was some pretty stellar handling of their suspect.
As for NK... I know how people people feel about her and that some suspect she was an accomplice. She's so despicable that that's totally understandable. That said, imho, she was a predatory, selfish homewrecker and not a murderer. When she asked those questions (yoga studio, dog's name) I think she had really believed (and hoped!) that Shanna left, up to that point, and was just beginning to suspect that something worse had happened. She was worried about being exposed as a ho, not a murderer or accomplice. I don't think she was sure and she may have thought it was Shannon or the cops with Chris' phone. On Monday, she believed Chris about Shannan leaving with the kids (and she was glad!). Once she saw Chris on TV, didn't ask him why the media was there? That indicates, to me, she didn't know what was up and then it began to sink in and she got paranoid.
I don't think Chris had a plan for the car. If he had, he would have gone to the site, ditched his family (as he did) and then called the office, saying he was sick or something, and had to go home. He would have then met NK and ditched the car. But he didn't, which indicates, to me, his ONLY plan was getting his family gone so he could be with NK. He didn't even think it through, beyond that. I think that's why he cracked so fast - unlike some other killers who don't.
I don't know if you followed the Kelsey Berreth case where the other woman actually was an accomplice, after the fact (witnessed burning the body, destroyed evidence, cleaned the bloody murder scene and even lurked around to kill Kelsey, herself, prior to the actual perp killing her). Everyone hates her guts (she got a sweet plea deal to testify) and many want her to be guilty of the actual murder, but she wasn't. NK doesn't even come close to that, imo. I don't think she would have done anything like help dispose of Shannan's car, for two reasons: I don't think she would want to implicate herself in a crime and I don't she wanted a family annihilator for a boyfriend. She just wanted to steal Chris from his family and have her happily ever after, broken hearts be damned.
Given they had video showing CW walking back and forth loading his truck and that same video proved there was no other possible way they could have left that house, I believe that more than met the "reasonable suspicion" threshold required for police to detain him in Colorado, which could have preserved a probable crime scene.
And no, I don't believe the police should have already known everyone was already dead at that point, which is why they should have acted quickly that same day. IMO
My main point in bringing up the yoga and dog questions was to point out just one of the obvious errors made by the detectives during the prison interview. That same error was even carried over to the redacted transcript.
I'm not claiming that he definitely had a plan to dispose of Shanann's Lexus SUV, but it's been obvious to most of us here on WS's from the beginning that he planned their murders, which he finally confirmed in his letters to Cheryl Cadle. I just think the detectives should have followed up on that possibility, among other things.
I also believe CW was well aware of the truck GPS, so even a stupid criminal like him should have realized LE was going to be inevitably led to CERVI 319. He probably thought if they found the Lexus abandoned elsewhere they wouldn't bother to check his worksite.
That's where you're mistaken because that video did NOT prove that. Yes, it was suspicious but it wasn't proof and there are other ways she could have left that house, like walking out the door and leaving with someone else. Police cannot arrest or detain without evidence. Believe me, you don't want to live in a society where they can.
Investigations take a little or a lot of time. They got him to confess so fast that they never had to commence a search or develop evidence. Their successful interrogation got him to hand it all over.
Reasonable suspicion is a reasonable presumption that a crime has been, is being, or will be committed. It is a reasonable belief based on facts or circumstances and is informed by a police officer’s training and experience. Reasonable suspicion is seen as more than a guess or hunch but less than probable cause.
Probable cause is the logical belief, supported by facts and circumstances, that a crime has been, is being, or will be committed.
The difference between the two terms is that probable cause means there is concrete evidence of a crime, whereas reasonable suspicion is open to broader interpretation. Reasonable suspicion indicates that it appears that a crime has been committed; the phrase often is used to justify investigation into suspicious behavior when a crime may have been committed.
When Do the Police Need Probable Cause?
The police need only reasonable suspicion to stop an individual and question him or her, and they may search for weapons if they believe that the person is armed or presents an imminent threat of bodily harm. Probable cause must exist for the police to be able to arrest someone or obtain a search warrant.
Reasonable Suspicion and Probable Cause: What’s the Difference?
I believe the video proves exactly that, meeting the reasonable suspicion threshold.
The front door was latched from the inside, making it impossible for her to leave in that way. If she left through the garage the video would have captured them leaving.
It is not reasonable to claim that they might have left through the back door and climbed over the backyard fence, but IIRC even the back door was locked from the inside.
Followed up on what possibility - that he and NK had plans to ditch Shannan's car?
While I don't recall the exact timeline, which was short, when NK asked those questions she had just begun to realize that there was more to the story than Chris was telling. It would have been reasonable to believe that his angry wife came home, got his phone, and was on the other end of the text. It would have been also been reasonable, if she thought a crime had been committed, to worry that it was the cops and that she could get in trouble and be implicated in something beyond adultery. I don't remember when she googled "can cops get your deleted texts", or whatever it was, but I believe that had to do with not wanting to be exposed as a homewrecker and have her reputation ruined. She tried to minimize the her own scheming over a married man when she doing stuff like googling wedding dresses and "Shannan Watts". I fully believe she knew Shannan was pregnant, making her look even worse. Remember she also googled "did people hate Amber Frey", so she was worried about what people would think of her. In fact, she was so worried about it that she went into witness protection (I'm assuming) and disappeared. She was certainly right about how people would perceive her and blame her for what happened and some even think she was directly involved in the crime. She'll never be free of that, on top having to live with knowing she was the impetus for Chris killing his family. I'd want to hide myself and my scheming, too, just for being such a vile, selfish skank.
You're driving me crazy with that "reasonable suspicion"! LE has to have probable cause to detain or arrest and that is a higher threshold.
I think you're failing to take into account how fast this all went down. He confessed within two days. Had he not, they would certainly have searched his work site and arrested him.
As for the car, there is no evidence he planned to ditch it because he never would have left work that day had NA not gotten involved. Yes, he planned the murders but it doesn't seem as though he could see beyond that immediate gratification of being without a wife and kids to "be with Nikki".
In Colorado, a police officer may detain you for a reasonable period of time if he or she has a reasonable suspicion that you are involved in criminal activity. 4 Being detained is not a full arrest, though an arrest could follow.
You wrote: As for the car, there is no evidence he planned to ditch it because he never would have left work that day had NA not gotten involved.
That's why I said he should have been questioned about the car because it might have turned up whether he had an accomplice or not.
Despite my post last week I did watch the Oxygen episode of Criminal Confessions, because of the people involved in telling the story. Hearing from the neighbor about Bella's and Cece's personalities was so sweet. The detectives and DA were all top notch, very professional, and at the same time showed a lot of empathy.
I LOVED the video of Tammy starting off the polygraph with all those warnings to stupid CW. I had previously only seen an edited version of it that was much shorter. She was great, putting him through the wringer and messing with his head. Astounding, how spectacularly he failed.
I thought RW showed no emotion at all about his grandchildren, daughter-in-law and soon to be grandson being dead. That whole conversation with CW sounded rehearsed IMO.
"Detained" would be like having your car stopped and being briefly questioned. Arrested and in custody requires evidence which they did *NOT have. Further, he went of his own free will to be interrogated and confessed, sparing the need for a lengthy investigation or search which would have taken longer than it took to have Chris Watts permanently behind bars.
So, you're thinking that had investigators recovered all of the CW-NK texts and asked what he planned to do with the car that it would have shown NK was involved in the murders - like there, in the house, that night/morning?

His was not, I could see now, the heroism of an Achilles. . . He was just a man doing a job. A job whose primary attribute was self-restraint and self-composure, not for his own sake, but for those whom he led by his example. A job whose objective could be boiled down to the single understatement, as he did at the Hot Gates on the morning he died, of ‘performing the commonplace under uncommonplace conditions.’
Gates of Fire, Steven Pressfield, p. 128, referring to Dianekes.

Recchi's Story of Left Cheek Mass
Recchi, an 8 year old Sheltie, had a large mass on his left cheek that encompassed both jaws. Despite the odds of cancer and the difficulty of the surgery, the mass and part of the jaw were removed... and it turned out to be benign (osteochondroma)!
His owner PS writes: "Dear Dr. Zeltzman and Team: We want you to know how appreciative we are of all that you do and have done for us and Recchi. It was a relief to work with a doctor who was straightforward with us, and helped us to understand what may happen.
Recchi is healing well and has even started to play ball. It is awesome to have him doing so well. I would also like to say that, as nervous as I was, everytime I spoke with a team member I felt that I was being listened to and cared for as much as Recchi.
Thank you for the check up calls and the post surgery calls, they meant a lot. So again, thank you Dr. Zeltzman , OR staff, front desk and all assistants who helped Recchi and our family. We will always be grateful."

Tamer Fouda TM Radio DJ Profile
Tamer Fouda - Drums Unleashed Show On Tribalmixes Radio Every 1st Saturday Of Each Month
If you like Tamer Fouda(on TM Radio for over 11.4 years), please, consider telling your friends.
Born in 1980, he started to grow his talent when he was 6 when his father bought him his first keyboard. This was the first indicator to attract the sights over his talent, after then he was inspired by his family. He started his music life with some rock music like Bon Jovi, Aerosmith and Led Zeppelin. Being attracted to this sort of music, he bought his first guitar when he was 10.Gaining a lot of experience in playing the guitar, he formed a rock band called "Kidnap Desire" in 1995 when he was only 15.They made a couple of tracks & then ended their career due to the appearance of troubles between the band members. Later, he started to change his way of thinking about music, he started to think, feel and touch the music much more & deeper which led him to change his overall music style. His first start was over the hands of techno beats where he experienced the huge difference between both styles he was into. In 1998 techno was his favorite. Being his favorite, Tamer Fouda got more involved in this dance music genre. Being more involved, he began to expand his music thoughts. Trance was his third music station where he stopped for a while at it. Big names like Tiesto, Armin Van Buuren, Ferry Corsten & Paul Oakenfold were his key to reach the gate. The idea of being a DJ first crossed his mind when he was 19 but he wasn't able. In 2000 he bought his second keyboard then shifted his mood from trance to house music. Being amazed by House music, he insisted to become a DJ & he became a DJ in 2004 to finally fulfill his everlasting dream. He attracted the sights of some big names in Egypt Like Khaled Hussein, Fox & Fila.Tamer Fouda is well known by his tribal & dark tribal beats. Spinning his first set on radio on 23.12.2004 was the godsmack as he received many shiny feedbacks & many positive reactions which reflected the reason of being Egypt's 2nd voted DJ in a period less than one year. He gained a nice fame & his name grew up in a short time but that's never all, Tamer Fouda believes that his talent, his super smart mixing techniques & his rocket response to music evolutions would enable him to be recognized as "the tribal house godsend" as days go by.
Hosted show on TM Radio

St. Martin rising junior running back Ham McGee was at work Thursday when he got the call informing him of his first college offer.
“I was excited, but I had to keep it cool,” McGee said Friday.
Southern Miss became the first program to offer McGee, a 5-foot-10, 196-pound athlete.
All had been quiet on the recruiting front for McGee until he got a phone call informing him of an offer from USM on Thursday.
Never miss a local story.
McGee had the privilege of informing his family that night of his offer.
“They were excited, real excited,” McGee said. “Everybody thought I was too small.”
McGee was the leading rusher on a talented St. Martin offense last season. He ran 110 times for 821 yards and six touchdowns. He also caught 16 passes for 144 yards and one score.
McGee has also seen time on defense, but USM likes him as a running back.
McGee has a busy summer ahead with plays to attend camps at Southern Miss, Memphis and the University of Miami.
The goal for McGee is to make sure that he's able to stay on the field longer in 2017.
“My stamina, I need to be able to stay in there the whole time,” he said. “If I run 60 yards, I need to be ready to go.”
Ham said his best 40-yard dash is at 4.59 seconds and he hopes to improve on that number.
He should have more chances with the ball in his hands this season as St. Martin moves toward a more run-oriented offense following the graduation of quarterback of Wayne Overman, who signed in February with the Air Force Academy.
McGee comes from an athletically-gifted family. Gerald, or “Cornbread” as he's known by family and friends, was a football and track standout at Gautier High School. He competed in track at Hinds Community College and Ham said his brother plans to sign with Kansas on a track scholarship.
USM has also offered St. Martin rising junior offensive tackle Brandon Cunningham, who also has offers from Memphis and Nicholls.

Wow, this is my 200th post, and I get to spend it talking about my trip to Las Vegas.
There's a little back story with this, please bear with me.
The last time I went to the Las Vegas strip, the Excalibur Hotel & Casino were brand new, and that was in 1990. It's been almost 20 years. When I do go to Vegas, I usually visit with family in Henderson and never make it to the strip, so this was quite a different trip for me.
The last time I saw Barry live in concert? It was probably around 1992. It's been a while since I've seen him perform.
This trip was thanks to a friend and fellow fan of Barry's, Bev, who had an extra ticket that a friend was not able to use due to a family emergency. I hope things are okay with the family member. It was on the floor, front row, to the left of the stage.
I flew out on Saturday, August 1st, in the afternoon. While waiting at the airport, I watched the 1st half of a movie on my iPod Touch. I decided to make things easier on myself and used my iPod as a mini computer while I was there. With my room's wireless connect I was able to check things and post updates to my facebook page. I loaded 3 movies onto the iPod and selected The Philadelphia Story with Cary Grant and Katherine Hepburn. I love that movie, it always makes me laugh. I watched the last half of the movie at the Las Vegas airport.
The flight was delayed due to an overload at the Las Vegas airport, and while coming into the city experienced some really heavy turbulence. It wasn't just up and down, the plane was also getting shoved sideways. I was thankful to be on the ground.
I don't know why, but I usually hit some issues when I fly to see Barry perform. It's not been all the time, but on very specific instances. In 1987 I went to a fan club convention for him in Washington, D.C. The flight was late and it was delayed, by the time we reached the airport, the airport had closed it's main runway. They tried landing on a shorter runway, only have to abort the landing at the last minute because of tail winds that would have pushed the plane into the Potomac River. We landed in Virginia and was bussed back to Washington National airport. The convention was fantastic, I'm just not in the habit of dying trying to get there.
Since Barry's show is at the Las Vegas Hilton, I decided to stay there to make it easier on myself. It's a very nice hotel, and I got what they call a Grand Room, which is bigger than the basic hotel room.
I was on the 14th floor, here's the view from the hotel room's window:
It was late afternoon by the time I got there, so I walked around the hotel to get my bearings on where things were at. I couldn't find (nor could anyone tell me) where to get a good salad for a late lunch/early dinner, so I ordered one from room service. It wasn't cheap, but it was a huge serving of a very delicious salad.
It was all very high class, I can understand why Barry works out of the Hilton.
After eating, I got ready for the concert. I decided to wear the nice outfit I wore to see Wicked in a few weeks ago. I got my picture taken by the house photographer, and it came out looking really nice.
I met some really nice people at the show, fans of Barry's, whether they belong to the fan club or not. There was a group from England who were there, and there was a lot of excitement and fun from the crowd for Barry. I was so glad to see this, as from what I read on a friend's blog Barry had a rough return back to the Las Vegas stage Thursday night. Because of malfunctions with a portable piano and a change in a few songs in the performance there were some people leaving during the performance of the show. Barry had asked them to stay, but I guess the damage was done.
It wasn't like that on Saturday night, though. His fans, including me, were there with all of our enthusiasm which spreads to the rest of the audience. I was so glad to see this, and to see that so many of us were there, not just because we wanted to see him perform, but to also provide a little support for Barry.
I'm not a great photographer, so I hope you'll bear with me. I didn't take any pictures while Barry was standing directly in front of me, as I thought it might be a distraction for Barry while he's trying to perform. Besides, I love the guy, but I'm not interested in getting pictures close enough to see his nose hair. :o)
I didn't get to shake Barry's hand, the girls sitting next to me did, but when Barry got to me, he looked at me and then walked away to another part of the stage. Shaking his hand would have made this trip really special and I don't know why he did that, but I came to enjoy his music and I did, very much. At the end of the show, the male backup singer, Kye, came over and shook hands with the rest of us in our section, and that really made my night. He was really, really nice, and it wasn't expected (at least by me) for him to do that.
He did some songs from an album he released a few years back based on his childhood at a Brooklyn housing unit called The Mayflower. His songs talk about the different stories of the different residents there. The melodies on this are really beautiful. I was disappointed that Barry didn't do When October Goes, Big Fun or One Voice. Those are also beautiful songs that Barry has written (or co-written). I love listening to Big Fun and played it in my hotel room on my iPod while I was getting ready for the show.
After the show I changed back into my street clothes, ate dinner and took the Monorail to Bally's Paris. I've always wanted to go to Paris, but have never left the U.S. Maybe someday. The Paris Hotel and Casino has a large mock Eiffel Tower that gives elevator rides up to where you can see out over the strip. There was an hour wait for the ride, and given the late hour I was there I decided to skip it, but I did get some pictures of the base and the elevator shaft. The base actually sits inside the casino itself, and the ceilings are painted to look like a blue sky.
I went back to the hotel via the monorail, all in all it took about an hour round trip. Now that I know this, I'll probably stay at the Paris Hotel the next time I'm there.
I had wanted to go see Zowie Bowie at the Palms, but I would have had to get a taxi to get there and back and I was so tired I really didn't want to do that. It was really late, by the time I got back to the hotel from the trip to Paris it was just past midnight and I had to get up early the next morning to fly home.
As it turned out, I couldn't sleep past 5:00 this morning, so I watched the sunrise over the strip. It was really beautiful. While I waited for my shuttle this morning at the hotel, I took one last picture that I thought was really touching.

Michaella McCollum, the Tyrone woman convicted of drug smuggling in Peru in 2013, has recalled the horrors of her time spent in prison in Lima.
One half of the infamous 'Peru Two', McCollum and Scottish woman Melissa Reid were arrested in Lima in September 2013.
Today's top videos
STORY CONTINUES BELOW
The pair had travelled to the South American country from Ibiza, having been employed by a drugs gang to smuggle €1.75million worth of cocaine across the Atlantic Ocean.
The women initially claimed they had been coerced by gang members, but later agreed to a plea deal, and were sentenced to six years and eight months in Lima's Ancon 2 jail.
McCollum and Reid trained as beauty therapists in prison in a bid to win parole, and were released after three years. McCollum returned to Northern Ireland in 2016, and has since written a memoir entitled You'll Never See Daylight Again.
In a new documentary, High: Confessions Of An Ibiza Drug Mule, McCollum has recalled sobbing on her prison bunk during her jail term, insisting that her fellow inmates were 'so sexually active'.
Speaking on the programme, McCollum claimed that the prospect of incarceration made her 'want to do something stupid'.
She said: 'The whole place was just so toxic, everything about it was toxic, the majority of the people were toxic.
'The first thing I noticed about Ancon was it was just so manic and crazy and noisy, it sounded like a zoo. There was this woman...she had caught her husband having an affair and she had killed her child, and then she fed it to her husband in a stew.'
McCollum continued: 'I've never been so scared and I was obviously really intimidated because we were foreign...One of the things I noticed about Ancon quite quickly was they were just so active sexually.
'I'd never actually seen people be so open about their sexuality, I was shocked that they were doing that kind of thing quite openly. Nobody was really making that big of an issue...but I felt uncomfortable that was happening so close to me.'
McCollum also reminisced on the phone call she was permitted to inform her mother of her whereabouts, saying: 'I'm like: "How am I going to tell her where I am?" I said: "I'm in Peru, I'm in jail," and she was like: "What, what?" and then the phone call ended, I didn't get to tell her the situation.'
McCollum's brother subsequently informed her that their mother had fainted following the phone call.
The five-part documentary will be broadcast on BBC Three from July 3.

PRICE DROP - 57 Hocken Avenue - WYCHWOOD, TORONTO (2 Comments)
It was an interesting house that when I first saw it, I thought it was the house at 79 Helendale Avenue at Yonge and Eglinton...
But this is located in Wychwood and is a new build.
For the most part, I liked it. I even didn't mind the glass block wall that a lot of readers weren't into. But it was, as I said, overall kind of an odd house.
It was listed at $1,950,000. I thought that was high and it turns out it was as this house has now had a price drop.
The new asking price for this house is...
Considering it is only 3 baedrooms, I still think it's too high.

Mrs Jummai Albert, a Nigerian woman, has tragically died.
The woman died just one day after the burial of her only child, Jerry Albert, who was brutally murdered by unknown assailants in Adamawa State.
It was gathered that Jerry, a student of the Adamawa State University, Mubi, had been attacked and slaughtered by the assailants on Tuesday night, August 31. He was laid to rest on Thursday, September 2.
Sadly, Mrs Albert was unable to cope with the death of her only child and died on Friday, September 3. She will be laid to rest on Saturday in Zakawan community, Gayuk Local Government Area of Adamawa.
One Thamie Khing, has narrated his last moment with Jerry hours before he was killed and also confirmed the death of the victim’s mother.
Read below: “Jerry Albert. He was a good friend, and; a brother. A very easy to go with person.He was loved by many. Some call him by his real Jerry, but mostly the elderly,his peers called him Capto, some call him Brother Shaggi; because of his beard and funny ways…
On the evening of 31 August, I decided to visit my farm at Zakawon to check the progress of my workers. I got there, on my way I met Isaac and we went to look for the foreman. We met, and, after a little talk we then went to look for Jerry.
After meeting it was at around 6:30 and he said he was hungry we should go home and eat. We got home ate, Isaac took his bible for a little sermon ( that he had a Virgil to attend), by 9:00 at LCCN Mamsirme. After spending a couple timesl with some friends, we headed to the church.
On getting to the church it was closed as if nothing was going to happen. We walk passed the church heading to my area at Mere.Jerry got a call from his friend in school and they were discussing about when he was going to return back to school, about his exams and project too. After the call they both made some jokes that was funny, we all laughed. He told me he’ll be going back to school soon, probably on Sunday and he is going to miss the Sukahawa dance that will be in two weeks time or so… We talk about the probability of ASUU strike then we approach the stream that separates
Mamsirme and Mere (the usual place they do leave me anytime they see me off). ‘Why are you folding up your pens?’, Isaac asked when we reached the usual place to leave him. I said I want to collect my phone at a house close by here and beside I don’t have a phone with me so i need his light.
We got to the house, the person I’m to collect the phone from wasn’t at home so I told them I’ll just go from there, they should go back. He made a call and was asking about the virgil, if it iss still going to hold, but the person he contacted was sounding as if she knows nothing about it.
Then we said farewell and they went back, I went home.Was inside with my Aunty’s phone, trying to see my reff contest update. Grandma came out and was talking to my aunty and was telling her she heard that they said Jerry was attacked and killed.
At that moment I tried calling him but, his number was not going through. Having doubt about the news as what they said was not clear. I got a call from my sister asking my whereabout, I told her yes we’re about going out. And she said a prayer. Few moment later, I got a call it was co.”
See more photos and posts below…

Join free now!
It is free to search locals
It was a long lonesome drive back to our home without Jan by myside. As the miles zipped by I realized that I was unpleasant sometimes but at others I was delighted and almost giddy knowing that she was back with Steve and he was most likely screwing her and dragging her deeper and deeper into the hotwife lifestyle. I felt at the time that she would be enjoying herself and I didn't understand what was truly going on till much later after she returned from St. Louis.
I had to keep our pals and family at bay and not disclose that Jan was still in St. Louis without me. We had actually restricted interaction at the time just a short text every day and only one short however lacking in details phone call about her prolonged trip.
This was nearly an entirely different woman than the one I had left behind in St. Louis just a week ago. She was taller than my 5'10' as she was wearing high-heeled shoes with at least a 5 inch heel. She had on a summer season dress that looked like it must be worn as a slip as it was nearly large and shimmery; it fell midway in between her knees and her hips. It was lacy at the top, cut quite low and you might easily construct out the curve of her breasts through it. As I held her I could not feel her bra strap or panties as my hands slipped from her back and over her ass. I offered her a leering look.
call girl Morere, brothels Morere, prostitutes Morere, hookers Morere, sluts Morere, whores Morere, gfe Morere, girlfriend experience Morere, shagging Morere, dogging Morere, fuck buddy Morere, hookups Morere, free sex Morere, sex meet Morere, nsa sex Morere
| ||4808|| ||7484|| ||790|| ||1270|| ||8104|

Jennifer Gibson is the daughter of GOP Senate hopeful, Don Blankenship. Her 68-year-old father is currently after West Virginia’s senate seat.
Jennifer’s dad has been quite the controversial figure, you may remember him as the man who was at the front of one of the nation’s largest coal companies, Massey Energy. During his time as Massey Energy’s chief one of the country’s deadliest coal mine disasters took place.
Back in 2010, 29 of the 31 coal miners at Massey’s Upper Big Branch were killed in an explosion. He retired later that same year. He was held responsible for the coal mining disaster and in 2016 he was ordered to serve 1 year in federal prison and pay a $250,000 fine. He was released in May of 2017.
Blankenship graduated from college in 1972 with a degree in accounting. He says after college, as a certified public accountant, he worked in the food industry, Keebler and Flower’s bakery. In 1982, he got his first job with Massey in 1982 and then, over the years, worked his way up to be the only person to run the company that was not a member of the Massey family.
He is also known for his management style, described as quasi-dictatorial by the NY Times. Don was previously embroiled in another incident in which he allegedly grabbed his former maid by the wrist and gave her a lecture –this after the got his breakfast order wrong.
Despite being a controversial figure, his daughter Jennifer Gibson remains a private person. She has a brother John –who is a dirt track car racer.
Jennifer’s parents divorced a long time ago, in an article, she describes her mother as an alcoholic saying his father divorced her “when he could no longer bear the pain of this type of existence.”
Jennifer Gibson who wrote a letter on behalf of his father, added
“Dad raised John and me on his own after they were divorced,” “It amazes me that even before the breakup, he managed to hold his career and our family life together in spite of the mental toll that addictions can have on a person and a family.”
Jennifer Gibson wasn’t only supportive of her father following the coal mining disaster, she also appears on a YouTube video inviting people to vote for him. Gibson is the mother of two small daughters.
Join the Conversation

Friday - Part One
As soon as Yuffie heard about the prison escape on the news Thursday morning she tried to call Reeve but there was no answer. She assumed he was busy dealing with incident but after a day of not hearing from him she knew something was wrong. Going this long without returning her calls was unlike him and she was starting to get a bad feeling. The next morning she rushed to the headquarters and went directly to his office but the door was locked.
She unclipped her ID card and slid it through the door crack trying to find the latch. She heard a click and the door opened. She was hoping there was something in his office that could give her some clues as to his whereabouts. His office looked as pristine as usual and nothing appeared out of the ordinary. She tried thinking about what to do next.
That’s when Yuffie noticed the security monitor behind Reeve’s desk. The security cameras would be able to tell her the last time he was in the building. She walked across the room and rolled his chair over to the monitor typing on the keyboard. She was surprised to discover that all the cameras were deactivated. She proceeded to rewind to Wednesday night when she was talking with Reeve in his office. Luckily the cameras were working at that time and she could see herself leaving. On the top right screen showed the security camera located outside the main security office. Thirteen minutes after she exited the building she witnessed a peacekeeper walk into the security room and all the screens went black.
Instantly she knew something happened to Reeve and a really bad feeling grew in the pit of her stomach.
It was early morning when Tifa, Genesis, Weiss, James, Alex and Katerina exited the house towards the shuttle leaving Miles and Chloe alone at the kitchen table.
“So what are we going to do today?” He asked the young girl who looked at him with a questionable look.
Miles picked up her plate and cup putting it in the sink then he turned back towards her.
“Want to come see daddy’s workshop?” He asked her as she looked at him with a big smile.
The young girl suddenly became excited and raised her arms signaling for him to pick her up. He then proceeded to pick the young girl up and carried her to the shed behind the house.
It was morning when the Shera touched down near Mideel. Cloud, Nanakin and Cid exited the ship and the two men followed the feline creature into the jungle. It seemed like Nanakin knew exactly where he was going.
After about twenty minutes of walking they reached a clearing with a small two story house sitting in the middle of the opening. The three stopped and looked around before continuing towards the house.
“This place looks abandoned,” Cid said noticing that there were no people around and the outside of the house looked unkempt. All the window blinds were closed so they could not look in. “Should we knock at the front door?” he asked.
No one objected so the Captain walked up and rang the doorbell. They all waited and no one came to the door.
“Nobody’s home. Should we go in and look around?” Cid asked the others.
“That never stopped us before,” Nanakin commented. He could tell by the scent that people were here recently and that familiar scent he was almost certain was Tifa’s. His instincts were telling him this was the right place.
Cloud reached out and checked the door which was unlocked. They entered and stood by the entrance making sure nobody was home.
“Hello, anyone home?” Cid called out. Nobody responded.
They looked around. Straight ahead of them was a staircase leading upstairs. To the right was what looked like a living room and to the left was a short hallway leading towards the kitchen.
“Cid you go look upstairs while we check the rest of the house,” Cloud suggested.
Cid nodded yes and headed up the stairs. Nanakin checked the living room sniffing around while Cloud walked towards the kitchen. As he walked through the kitchen he noticed another doorway on the other side with porch area, back door and staircase leading downstairs.
Cloud walked towards the staircase and continued down. At the bottom of the stairs was a closed door. He walked down and turned the knob but it was locked. He debated if he should force the door open but this seemed like a nice family home; not the kind of place you would expect fugitives to live in. The last thing he wanted to do was break down the family’s door. He was about to go back up the stairs to check on the others when he heard a noise coming from the other side of the door. He walked closer to the door putting his ear next to it.
“Hello?” he called out. He was sure he heard the faint sound of someone calling out from inside the room.
Cloud was not going to take any chances so he proceeded to kick the door open. When he entered he was surprised to see Reeve sitting in a cell on the other side of the room. He was propped up against the wall barely able to keep himself up. Reeve’s face was bloody and bruised and his shirt had blood all over it. Reeve looked up with a faint smile when he noticed Cloud.
Cloud rushed over and broke the cell door lock with his sword. He opened the door and went into the cell helping his injured friend up.
“What happened?” Cloud asked the commissioner as he put his arm around his shoulder for support.
“Miles and the others,” Reeve struggled to say. He was severely dehydrated and in a lot of pain. “We need to get to Edge,” he warned.
“What about Tifa? Do they have her? Is she ok?” Cloud asked his friend franticly as they slowly made their way towards the stairs.
Reeve nodded yes. He was barely able to move with Cloud doing most of the work. A trail of blood from Reeve’s face was dripping as they walked. Cloud had to get Reeve onboard the airship and to Edge as soon as possible. He helped his friend up the stairs and through the kitchen just when Cid was walking down the stairs from the bedrooms. Cid and Nanakin were shocked to see Cloud with an injured Reeve. Cid got on the other side of Reeve helping him through the front door with Nanakin leading the way back towards the airship.
After twenty minutes of wandering through the forest they came across the Shrea and boarded. Cloud and Nanakin helped Reeve down to the lounge while Cid went to the bridge to prepare for takeoff. Cloud laid Reeve down on the sofa and used a cure materia on the semiconscious man. The spell helped with his cuts and bruises but there was a lot of internal damage that it couldn’t fix.
“Reeve, do you know what they are planning?” Cloud asked his friend kneeling next to him.
Reeve was not fully awake yet and was mumbling incoherently. The swelling was gone but his face was full of dried blood. Cloud got up and walked over to the bar gabbing a bottle of water for his friend. He opened it and tried to give him some of the water. Tasting the water on his lips Reeve lifted his head drinking it rapidly then started to cough due to drinking too fast. He then laid his head back down with his eyes closed tight in obvious pain.
Cloud and Nanakin waited until he gained consciousness. Fifteen minutes later Reeve slowly opened his eyes and looked over at Cloud.
“I need your phone,” Reeve told Cloud who turned his phone on and handed it to him.
Reeve slowly sat up on the sofa holding his head with one hand and the phone in the other. He then proceeded to call the deputy commissioner of the Edge Headquarters to warn him about Miles and the others. As soon as he closed the phone it beeped indicating that Cloud had a voicemail message.
“You have a message,” Reeve said handing Cloud his phone.
“Why are they targeting the headquarters in Edge?” Cloud asked Reeve before putting the phone up to his ear listing to the message.
Reeve paused for a second before answering. He was leaning forward with his hands on his head resting his elbows on his knees. It looked like he was in a lot of pain.
“They are after files containing top secret information,” Reeve explained to them.
Reeve had went through great lengths to protect the files they were after. Not only were they encrypted and password protected the drive they were on could only be accessed on sight and only from two computers in the whole building. Unfortunately he provided all this information to Weiss last night.
Cloud finished listening to the message and closed his phone handing it back to Reeve.
“Yuffie is looking for you,” he informed his friend. “What about Tifa?” Cloud asked eager to get some more information from him. He was relieved to hear she was okay but he wanted to find her as soon as possible.
“She’s fine,” Reeve reassured his friend wondering how he was going to break the news about Tifa. He was about to call Yuffie back but part of him felt he should warn Cloud about Tifa first. He paused for a few seconds before continuing. “Cloud, there’s something you should know.”
Yuffie tried calling all of her friends and left messages but the only two she could reach were Vincent who was in Kalm and Barret in Corel. She told them about Reeve and what she saw on the camera.
Barret told her he was stuck in Corel until he could find a ride to Junon. Normally the fastest way to get around was to call Cid but he was not answering his phone so Barret had to find alternative arrangements which could take hours.
Vincent on the other hand had his own means of transportation and said he would be there in an hour. Yuffie told him she would wait at the headquarters until he arrived. While she was waiting she decided to do some more snooping around.
She proceeded to make her way to the security control room to check where she witnessed that peacekeeper turn off the security system. She exited Reeve’s office and headed towards the stairwell. The security room was located one floor below so it would be faster for her to take the stairs.
She went straight through the emergency exit and down the staircase to the floor below. As she walked down the hallway she passed a few people who were just arriving to work. She nodded hello to them as they passed. She made her way down the hall towards the security room only to discover that the room was locked. Using her keycard she tried to unlock the door like she did Reeve’s office but this one had a deadbolt and wouldn’t open.
“Gotta bust out the big guns,” Yuffie said to herself as she pulled two bobby pins out of her hair and started picking the lock.
As she was picking the lock a female employee walked by giving her a strange look. Yuffie figured they never seen someone picking a lock before.
After a few seconds the lock clicked and she opened the door. She walked in to see a security guard lying near the controls dead. She inspected the body and discovered ligature marks around his neck meaning someone strangled him to death.
She assumed the killer was the man she saw on the security camera dressed as a peacekeeper. All the security monitors in the room were deactivated showing blue screens. As she looked around she noticed all the cameras were shut down so she reached over the body, making sure not to touch it, and turned the system back on.
With all the cameras up and running Yuffie looked around and everything seemed normal. Even though they were short staffed there was quite a few people walking around. Most of the screens showed people walking through the hallways towards their offices.
Then from the corner of her eye she looked down at the bottom screen and noticed a group of five peacekeepers walking through the hallway on the third floor. The third floor was one of the busiest floors and it was not uncommon for peacekeepers to be wondering around the building. But as she watched them she noticed they would stop at all the occupied offices and look in. In most cases they would continue walking after looking in at the person working. From what she could see from her view on the monitor the people in the offices would look up at the sight of the peacekeepers then turn their attention back to their work once they continued on.
Then she noticed the peacekeepers stop at an office with a man working at his desk. Upon seeing them the man stood up and pulled out a gun from his desk drawer. The man exited the office, walked past the peacekeepers and towards the elevator. Then the peacekeepers stopped at the last office in the hallway and one of them walked in. Yuffie could not see what happened inside the office from the angle of the camera but a few seconds later the peacekeeper walked out with his gun in his hand and not in its holster.
On another screen she witnessed the man she saw from the third floor walking out of the elevator on top floor. He then stopped at Reeve’s office walked in checking it then walked out. When he realized there was no one else on that floor the man walked back towards the elevator.
Yuffie was so mesmerized watching what was happening on the screens it startled her when her phone rang. She looked at her phone to see it was Cloud calling.
“Cloud!” she said answering her phone. Then she listened for a second realizing it was not Cloud. “Reeve! What happened to you? I was so worried.”
Then she listening while Reeve update her on how he was captured by men dressed as peacekeepers.
“I think they are in the building right now,” she explained to him. “I’m in the security room and there is some weird shit going on. I think they killed someone. You need to get here fast!”
Reeve told her he would be there as soon as possible and he directed her to keep him posted on everything that is going on.
Yuffie knew something was wrong and she had to figure out what without being discovered. She quickly exited the security room and ran towards the stairs. She walked into the stairwell and could hear people walking up the stairs towards her. Fearing it was the enemy approaching she took the stairs leading back up to the top floor.
Inside the shed behind the house Miles was busy making materia with Chloe sitting on the floor playing with the round orbs like they were big marbles.
“It won’t be long before you’re able to use materia the proper way,” Miles informed the young girl as she held a yellow orb in her hands.
She just looked up at him and smiled in response then continued playing.
Miles has had a fascination with materia ever since he was a young child. Growing up near Mideel where lifestream surges were a common occurrence he was aware of its dangers but at the same time he understood it was also the giver of life. He always like materia in particular because it allowed one to harness the power of the lifestream giving the weakest person god like powers.
It was this interest as a child that influenced him in his studies. He had been a collector of materia since childhood and was upset that his precious huge materia was destroyed when the Turks blew up his airship. They were supposed to be the crown jewels of his collection. It was never his intension to use the huge materia to power a bomb. That was just a part of the wild goose chance he sent everyone on to buy them some time. He spent months trying to drop hints about his fake plans for the huge materia and even murdering the two people in Edge just so Reeve could connect the dots later. The only bomb he intended to detonate was in Healen which the real Genesis was unaware of. He knew Genesis would not have agreed to the destruction of a town with a hospital. Luckily for Genesis that plan was foiled by the Turks.
Still, if that was the worst thing to go wrong with his plan so far he should considered himself lucky. Overall Miles was rather happy at how everything turned out although there were a few close calls especially with the incident at Fort Condor. It was apparent to him that lady luck was on his side and he couldn’t help but feel that everything leading up to this point was destined to happen. Or maybe it was just the universe finally making things right for him after losing so much.
After he was fired from Shinra he went searching for employment in other towns but not many people were hiring especially when a big meteor was plummeting towards the planet. That’s when he decided to returned to the family home near Mideel he inherited years earlier. It was there he spent most of his days trying to develop his own materia making machine similar to the one he use to work with in Midgar. Unfortunately parts were hard to come by being in the middle of the jungle so he didn’t get very far. By then Mideel had been destroyed by a huge lifestream surge so he spent years searching through the ruins looking for anything of value and collecting mako samples.
It was there he ran into Genesis and an injured Weiss. Recognizing Genesis he decided to help him and suggested taking his brother to the Shinra Manor since he worked there previously and was familiar with the laboratory.
By the time they reached Nibelhiem they already had a plan formulated. In Nibelhiem Miles was surprised to see that many of the actors that were hired by Shinra when he worked there years ago were still residing in the town. Miles and Genesis decided to use them as ‘volunteers’ for the first wave of minions. Genesis overpowered them, took them up to the Mt. Nibel reactor and showed him how to make copies. Once they were ready they were given their orders and Miles went to apply for a position with the WRO while Genesis went searching through the Midgar ruins.
When Miles was not working on assignments for the WRO he was researching how to help Weiss using information provided by Genesis and the rest of the time he spent perfecting Genesis’ technique for making copies.
Then Genesis found the three Deepground SOLDIERs in the ruins and Miles agreed to help them. By that time he knew he needed Shelke to save Weiss and they had to put their main objective on hold to help Weiss and the SOLDIERs. Then Miles needed to develop a completely new plan once he got wind of the reactor demolition project knowing the Mt. Nibel reactor was on the chopping block.
Luckily by then he had already managed to utilize the Genesis copies to help him make dozens more in the Corel and Mt. Nibel reactor laboratories. Once they secured the WRO airship it was much easier for them to transport potential monster and human copies. It reached a point where they had so many subjects they had to set up a new shop in the old mako excavation facility up north. Miles was so delighted when he discovered Cloud was asked to help with the reactor project. It was his chance to get his revenge and he worked it into his plan at the same time.
The only time he feared being caught was with the Fort Condor reactor. That was his fault for trying to put too much on one plate. Although it wasn’t part of their plan Miles wanted the reactor parts of his materia making machine and directed the copies to use the parts from the Fort Condor reactor. Unlike most of his plans he left this to the last minute and the night before it was scheduled to be demolished the copies went in to gather the equipment. Unexpectedly the copies came across raiders in the reactor already ransacking the place.
Fortunately luck was on their side that night and so many things that could have gone wrong didn’t. Had the Turks decided to inspect the reactor that night the copies might have been discovered. Had the Turks spotted their stolen airship concealed nearby or if one of the raiders managed to escape, a year of work could have went down the drain. Luckily none of that happened and the copies knew enough to dispose of the bodies. Walking through the Fort Condor reactor with Vincent was the most nervous he had been throughout the whole ordeal.
Realizing he spaced out Miles looked over to check on Chloe who was still happily playing with the materia. She looked up at him when she noticed Miles staring at her and smiled.
He smiled back and continued tinkering with the machine recalibrating the pressure gauge. He couldn’t help but think how funny life was. The one thing that was not part of his original plan, Chloe, was the best thing to come out of all this. If only Hojo could see him now. When he was younger he wanted nothing more than to work with the scientist but years later he was now improving on Hojo’s experiments. Having Chloe under his control he was going to have a subject more powerful than any of the Jenova projects and being so young he was going to mold her into the perfect SOLDIER. It just goes to show you can’t plan life no matter how hard you try.
Miles’ thinking was interrupted by the sound of his phone ringing on his workbench. He walked over, answered it and listened to Genesis on the other end.
“What!?” He asked furious after listening to the news.
Hearing the anger in his voice Chloe stopped playing and looked up at him worried.
Miles then proceeded to pick up the young girl while still holding the phone to his ear with his shoulder and hurried into the house.earing the anger in his voice Chloe stopped playing and looked up at him worried.
Miles then proceeded to pick up the young girl while still holding the phone to his ear with his shoulder and hurried into the house.
Genesis, Tifa and the others were twenty minutes outside Edge. They were all sitting on two bench like seats facing each other with Weiss and James sitting on one side and Tifa and Genesis on the other. Alex was up front piloting the airship and Katerina in the co-pilot seat.
Genesis received a phone call. He answered and listened before hanging up. Everyone could tell by the expression on his face that is was not good news.
“What is it?” Weiss asked curious.
“Reeve called his security to warn them of our arrival,” Genesis informed them as he dialed Miles’ number to let him know.
“What? Does that mean he escaped?” James asked.
“I don’t think he called from inside his cell, so yes, he escaped,” Weiss explained to the blond frustrated with the news. He knew he should have killed Reeve when he had the chance last night.
“How the hell did he get out?” Alex asked yelling back to the group. They were able to overhear the conversation from the cockpit.
Worrying the house was attacked Tifa turned to face Genesis who was on the phone with Miles.
“Are they okay?” Tifa quietly asked Genesis.
The winged man turned to look at her and nodded yes with the phone still to his ear. He continued talking on the phone for another minute before hanging up and turning back to Tifa.
“They were in the shed working when someone broke in and freed the prisoner,” Genesis explained.
“So do we stick to the plan?” James asked not sure what all this meant.
“Assuming he is travelling by airship we probably have an hour lead at least,” Genesis explained to the group then turned to Tifa. “Do you think an hour will be enough?” he asked her.
Tifa nodded yes. She was unfamiliar with Edge and the building she was infiltrating but she was confident she could do this.
“What about security?” Katerina asked looking back at the group from the co-piolet chair. “Don’t they know she’s coming?”
“That won’t be a problem,” Genesis assured her.
The only major problem he could foresee right now is if Reeve or one of his friends appeared before she can retrieve the files and he knew it will be an even bigger problem if Cloud showed up.
Reeve had just gotten off of the phone with Yuffie. He had told Cloud about Tifa before calling the girl but Cloud was not taking the news well.
“There is no why she is helping them,” Cloud informed his friend taking back his phone. “They must be manipulating her somehow.”
Reeve’s news upset him. They were still forty minutes outside Edge and Cloud was getting restless. After what Reeve told him he was anxious to find Tifa as soon as possible. Cloud was pacing back and forward in the small room while Reeve sat on the sofa leaning forward trying to ignore the pain he was in. Nankin was sitting near the sofa listening to the conversation.
“Cloud, she didn’t even recognize me. Miles said she has amnesia.”
With the way Cloud was taking the news Reeve didn’t even want to mention how close Tifa and Miles appeared in that basement. Cloud was always such a calm person Reeve had never seen him this agitated. Even when Tifa went missing he seemed sad not frantic like he was now.
Cloud didn’t want to believe Reeve and hearing him mention the scientist’s name angered him more. He was certain Miles must have done something to her. He was a crazy scientist after all. Maybe he was controlling her the same way he attempted to control him. There was no way she would forget her friends especially him, not after everything they been through. That’s when he remembered Tifa’s pregnancy.
Cloud suddenly stopped pacing and looked at Reeve.
“Did Tifa look different in any way?” He asked his friend.
She had been missing for eight months now. Cloud never found out how far along she was so either she was still very much pregnant and due soon or she was no longer pregnant which could mean one of two things.
Reeve looked up at Cloud and paused before answering.
“No, why?” He asked.
“Just wondering,” Cloud replied sounding a little disappointed. He sat down in a chair across from Reeve looking deep in thought.
When he was in the house earlier there was no sign of a baby living there which probably meant that their child didn’t make it to term. After everything Tifa had been through he was not surprised but it still upset him. He wished he could have been there for her when it happened. One of the things that motivated him to not give up searching was the thought of seeing Tifa and his child along with the hope of being together as a family again.
They all sat in silence until Cid’s voice came across the intercom.
“We’ll be there in fifteen minutes. Get ready.”
Hearing that Cloud started to get restless again and was about to exit before being stopped by Reeve.
“Cloud,” Reeve told his friend, “I’ll send backup as soon as possible.”
Cloud nodded then exited the room towards Fenrir.

Apr 30 2020. view 629
Dealing with death is one of the hardest things we go through in life. It is the norm to be with your family as you hold funerals of loved ones. Barely five months ago I had to hold my mother’s funeral in London and I was fortunate to enjoy the privilege of being surrounded by friends and family who comforted me and supported me during that harrowing time. Fast forward to five months later and the world is standing in unison, staring in the face of a deadly virus with no known cure in sight. While the world as we know it has stopped to an extent, death continues leaving misery, chaos, and mayhem in its wake especially during this time. During the last 5 weeks of lockdown, some of the most harrowing stories I have heard are from those living abroad who lost family members and were unable to say their final goodbyes due to Sri Lanka closing her borders. With special orders in place on how to conduct funerals during COVID-19, many held funerals with less than 10 people present. In many cases funerals were held within 12 hours and police were present at the funeral to ensure social distancing was maintained and numbers of attendees were kept to a maximum of 10. For some, the death of their loved ones was unexpected while for others their worst nightmare came true when they received the dreaded call that their ailing family member had passed away.
Lekha (name changed on request) whose father was diagnosed with a terminal illness was one of the few who was able to spend time with her father in March. Lekha left Sri Lanka just three days before the lockdown came into place. “I didn’t expect it to happen during the lockdown, as he was always a fighter and kept going. The fact that he might die during lockdown did cross my mind but I didn’t think it would happen so soon and wasn’t prepared for it to happen during lockdown” she says. When Lekha last saw her dad in person she told him to be strong and said that she will come again soon to see him, little realizing that this would be the last time she would ever see him. Once she was told that her dad had only a few days left Lekha was left with no other option but to rely on technology to spend precious time with him. She says “ I had multiple video calls with him, with the last one being the night before he passed away. I was able to tell him to go in peace. As a family, we were able to tell him what we wanted to tell him, even though he couldn’t respond much. He was alert until the very end, so we knew he heard everything and he even waved goodbye to us on the final call.”
When told of her dad’s passing, Lekha was desperate to return home. Despite knowing that Sri Lanka was in lockdown Lekha went through the motion of looking for a flight to return home. “I did look at flights to Sri Lanka. There was one which was about $3000 and over 20 hours long via Singapore. However, when I read the fine print it said that Singapore only allows Singaporean residents and nationals to arrive, so that was not applicable even though it was given as an option on a leading flight booking website. I also knew that Sri Lanka had the 2-week quarantine restriction which would have defeated the purpose too. So yes despite knowing that everything was on lockdown I still looked for a way to go” adds Lekha.
As the only child in her family, Lekha was used to always being in control of the key decisions that were made around her dad’s illness and now with a funeral to be organized and Lekha remaining thousands of miles away from Sri Lanka she had to rely on a support network of immediate family, in-laws and best friends to help organize the funeral. “When it was happening, I found it harder not being there as I felt that I wanted to call them every 5 minutes to know what’s going on” she adds.
Ridden with grief and emotion, Lekha is very emotional when she describes the ache she felt at not being able to support her mother especially at this most harrowing time. “I am very sad to not have been there in person. Also sad to not be there to support my mum and hold her and comfort her. However at the same time knowing it’s beyond our control also makes me accept it, as I don’t have any regrets, just sadness.”
For countless people being present at the funeral of a family member gives them closure and being part of it via WhatApp is not the same. Lekha subscribes to the notion that one must do what you can when the person is alive and Lekha did her utmost for dad along with her mum. For Lekha, closure is derived from the shared memories of her dad. “I find closure in talking about him and remembering the good times. It has helped a lot with people sharing their experiences and stories with him. Half of them I never knew and am happy and proud to hear some stories which gives me that closure. Summing up her thoughts Lekha says “yes, they do say that time is a healer but I don’t think you need to move on fast because it is very hard to lose a loved one and no one expects you to go about your business as usual. You need to take time to grieve and cry.”
For Sujith Weerasinghe in the UK, it was just a normal day as he engaged in his customary daily telephone conversation with his mum, an octogenarian in Sri Lanka with no major medical concerns. The next morning Sujith was awoken to the sorrowful news that his beloved mother had passed away at home in her sleep. His immediate reaction was to explore possibilities of returning home to Sri Lanka. But due to the lockdown, this proved to be nigh on impossible. Being the only son in the family Sujith was extremely close to his mother and was desperate to come to Sri Lanka to bid her his personal and final goodbye. At times, grief propels people to do the strangest things, and such was his desperation to return to Sri Lanka that he even explored the options of flying to Sri Lanka via India, Maldives, and Bangladesh but they are also under lockdown until 3 May. “I explained the situation to the relevant authorities so that they could explore possibilities to get me to Sri Lanka. They all understood my attempts and sympathized but due to flight restrictions they couldn’t help.”
With time and options running out Sujith approached one of the leading undertakers in the country and pleaded with them to accept his mother body and keep it in cold storage till lockdown was lifted. “I was told that at any other time it would be possible but due to the COVD-19 pandemic there were strict rules in place as to how funerals should be conducted and it would not be possible to keep my mother’s body in cold storage until the lockdown was lifted,” he said. “I was at my wit's end as there was no way on earth I could return to Sri Lanka. I was bereft with immense sadness. I had never ever expected this to happen. I am overseas as is my sister and our only other sibling thankfully was in Sri Lanka. That was of some consolation” he adds.
Commenting on how the funeral was conducted Sujith explains “ my brother-in-law and nephew with the assistance of some friends and relatives got some curfew passes and managed to organize the funeral. I was told that the body should be taken to a parlour but I was not willing to accept that as I wanted my mother’s final journey to commence from our family home. Within hours of her passing the body was brought to the house and we were told that the funeral must be held by sunset.”
Having a mother who was popular in the neighbourhood brought with it its own unique set of issues, as Sujith explains “lots of people in the area wanted to come for the funeral. They slowly made their way to the house and tried their best to maintain social distancing. We couldn’t tell them not to come but they understood the reality of it and after paying their respects they left without lingering.”
Thanks to the advancement of technology Sujith was able to participate in the funeral rituals of Paansakule by joining in on Facetime. He had also asked a couple of his friends to live stream the entire proceedings so that his family in the UK and his sister in the USA could join in. “I found this to be of some comfort but it was still nothing like being there in person. Never ever did I think I would not be able to attend the funeral of my mother” he says.
“Now I’m always nervous when my phone rings anytime after 10 pm, in case of a grave situation back home in Sri Lanka. I reflect on the knowledge that I did everything possible for my mum even from 5,000 miles away” he says. “Grief is a strange thing,” Sujith says. “I have sought solace in the fact that I did everything I could for my mum, despite being separated by oceans. I made special trips to see her in Sri Lanka and my mother is the reason I am the person I am today” he says.
“Suddenly all that remains are the ripples of memories and an aching feeling that you were not there to say a personal goodbye to the person who gave you life and brought you into this world” Sujith adds his voice faltering and his aching heart heavy with emotion.

Ms. Mojarad has helped me in many different cases. We first asked her for help in any matter that requires an attorney. Ms. Mojarad did the Consular immigration case of my whole family including my mother, brother, and aunt. She was with us every step of the way. In the shortest time possible the cases were done in a flawless and excellent manner. She was upfront in first consultation and she is extremely honest and helpful about what she can do or just guiding you to the right direction. She and her staff were available for any question at any time. I 100% trust her and her work and our experience with all cases were excellent. Took away a lot of worrying and pain. She is extremely professional. These cases all were different and required special attention and help.
Ms Mojarad has also been my real estate attorney in selling my own house and a few other buyer and sellers I know. She is proficient and detailed and her advice saved us thousands in these deals. The price she charged me and my family and I everyone I referred to her were very reasonable. You get excellent service for a good price. Which is rare. I say she is a gem and suggest her all the way. Thanks to her and her staff. A good lawyer makes life much better.

Since I was young, Ling Jun has always been the person to pick up my messes.
He will not allow others to scold me half a sentence; once we get home, he will personally teach me and make me miserable.
I usually make a lot of trouble in his home; after I had smashed a bowl and Ling Jun’s mother asked what had happened, Ling Jun would reply, “I smashed it.”
When I spilled water all over the ground, Ling Jun would shout, “I spilled the water.”
When I used too much force to close the fridge door and almost dismantled it, Ling Jun would immediately react, “I closed it.”
As for the last few days, I do not know why I was playing on his bed, but after jumping on it a few times, I had accidentally broken his bedpost.
Ling Jun’s patience had finally run out as he laid a brick under the bedpost. Just as he was about to lecture me, his mother asked, “What’s wrong with your bed?”
Ling Jun clenched his teeth as he coldly glared at me, “I jumped on it!”
It can be said that I’m single-handedly carrying a very good pot on my back.
2 thoughts on “7.”
Oh my, this story is really adorable.😆😆😆😆
Just what I was looking for!😁😁😁
Thank you for your hard work!😊
there’s lots more to come!

When this slave messed up, princess Angel used her sexy giantess prowess to turn on him and to dominate as well as degrade him. She threatened to swallow him or at least chew him and he had never been as scared as he was that day. He begged her for mercy promising never to do anything she did not like. The mistress believed him and so she let him go.
Madame Marissa used her boots to crush some little Santas. She did not have any use for them and since she was bored, she chose to crush and to destroy them. She took them to a secluded place where no one would disturb her and she destroyed them. She crushed them using her boots and she hit some of them as if she was playing golf. She had a lot of fun doing that.
This sadistic mistress gained powers to transform people into tiny versions of themselves and she used it to make herself some money. She would look for loaded guys and she would flirt and tease them and get them hooked. Then when she was alone with them, she would make them tiny and threaten to leave them tiny and naked like they were at that moment and many of them would offer her tidy sums of money to transform them back to their former selves.
This mistress does not care what you think of her. What matters is what she wants to do to you. And all she can think of right now is how she is going to crush you and humiliate you. That is what she likes and that is what she wants to do to you. She first of all shows you what she wants to do to you before she goes ahead and does it. That's her style.
Cheating is never worth the risk, especially when the mistress holds all the cards and turns her loser boyfriend into a savory snack. She toys with him first, squishing him against her stinky bare feet before popping him into her mouth to eat him alive. Giant mouth plus tiny boyfriend equals pain, humiliation, and a long digestive process. Cheater becomes shrunken slave and then a tasty snack.
You'd think Giantess Diamond's loser boyfriend would know not to mess with this big goddess. He fucked up, and both he and his new girlfriend will pay dearly with their tiny little lives. She eats the tiny girlfriend for lunch, and then soon finds loser Floyd, who quickly finds a deadly new home in the crack of her giant ass. The girlfriend literally becomes a piece of shit.
You're so tiny and helpless that you're almost cute. But not too cute to escape my crushing bare feet and ravenous mouth. I can squish you like the little insect you are, but I'm prone to changing my mind and eating you whole, tossing your tiny body around in my wet mouth before I chew and swallow you. Do you want to succumb to crushing or consumption?
Little Manfred has learned his lesson about acting out. He's been reduced to a shrunken slave at the whim of giant mistress, and he's about to discover true pain and humiliation. He whimpers and pleads in vain as giantess licks him all over like a piece of candy, threatening to swallow him whole while she insults him. Poor tiny man Manfred can't breathe inside her giant, sexy mouth.
Giantess Akara Fang gets herself a delicious mouthful of tiny people. Watch her crushing and munching little men between her pretty white teeth. She even crushes them between her giant breasts, suffocating them slowly and painfully. You can practically hear her shrunken slaves scream in horror as she swallows them down her milky white throat. Tiny doll crushing has never been so cruelly torturous or tasty.
This giantess decides that she has had enough of little pests in her house and decides she will squish them under her feet as well as eat them!! She is so much bigger than you and can destroy you in any way she wants. She can eat you or squish you with her bare giantess feet, or even blow you away so that you hit a wall and cannot bother her anymore.

Sign Up | Log In
BLUE SUN ROOM FAN FICTION - GENERAL
Post-BDM: Kaylee adjusts to being a new mom, while River tries to reach her brother. Jayne tries to reach River. Simon finally realizes all he's been forced to forget and turns to an unlikely source for help.
CATEGORY: FICTION TIMES READ: 2539 RATING: 9 SERIES: FIREFLY
A/N: Thanks to my beta - Leiasky! And thanks to Leighkohl for also offering encouragement!
I'm going to Flan!
And ... do I really have to beg for comments?
A NEW LIFE, ch. 10: Ties That Bind
When Simon returned home he wasn’t surprised to find the overly large mansion deserted. His parents had stepped out for the evening, no doubt attending another gala event, and Simon was relieved.
Seeing that girl at the Andersons’ tonight had only served to further unnerve him. He had been trying, very hard, to forget all about his momentary lapse of sanity and move on with his life. But now, as he pieced together his memory from the restaurant the other night and spotting her now, he was becoming more and more certain that there really was something to discover. Trudging up the stairs to his room, Simon felt the call of his bed, his aching muscles and his tired mind pleading with him to get some rest, but he couldn’t. He needed to find out more.
He had felt River, his sister – it still seemed so strange – a few times since he’d first touched her mind those months ago. She had been trying to reach out to him, to reassure him that everything would be okay, that she would find him and help make him whole again. He felt her sadness at his inability to remember her and Simon wished he could prevent causing her that pain, but his mind refused to give him any more clues and so tonight, he was going to seek them out.
Simon had been trying to put the pieces together, all of them, and so far what he had was a very thin, but still coherent fabric. If he had a sister, River, whom he could not remember, there had to be a reason. Simon did not guess from the memories he had or her presence within him that she was a danger to him, so he did not think any of this had been done for his own good. He briefly considered talking to his mother or father about it, but after his father’s odd behavior the morning he had come home, he’d been unwilling to trust either of them. Instead, Simon was going to explore his home, the place he remembered living his entire life to see if something else, some painting or family memento, anything, could jog his memory further. At this point he had nothing to lose.
As he started his exploration his thoughts drifted to Alicia. Their parting had been awkward, that morning when he had kissed her. It shamed him to think he had used her like that, just to see if he could remember more of this other person, this person whom he loved but had forgotten. He hoped that Alicia could forgive him, she had been unbelievably understanding through all of this and Simon did not want to risk her friendship; he was fairly certain it was the only genuine thing in his life at the moment.
It frustrated him to no end that he could not put together the pieces of his life. The only thing he knew for certain was that things were missing, memories, moments in time, moments of his life, stolen, for a purpose he could not begin to fathom. And Simon was slowly starting to fear he would again lose control. He worried as this continued and more and more of his life made less and less sense that he truly was going crazy.
Stopping for a moment in the middle of the hall, Simon sighed heavily his shoulders slumped forward in defeat. Maybe this was just a wild, crazed dream. Maybe all he needed was some good, solid counseling and a peaceful night’s rest. That’s what the logical side of his brain told him anyway. But the other side, the feeling side told him that these emotions were too potent to be figments of his imagination. There must be more to them, right?
Forging ahead, Simon walked a few more steps before he stopped in front of one of the hall’s many doors. Quick to dismiss the room as a guest bedroom, he was about to move on when something called him back. Taking a deep breath and suddenly feeling very nervous, Simon reached for the door knob and tried to turn it, finding it locked. Okay, not a guest room.
Working a trick he had learned in childhood, Simon popped the lock in a matter of seconds and stepped inside the darkened room. It took him a few minutes for his eyes to adjust, but as the room came into focus he almost wished it hadn’t. Inhaling sharply, Simon sank to the floor of the room, recognizing it in an instant and not believing it at the same time.
The room had been River’s, when she was younger, a little girl. Even though the room was now empty, just the sight, the way the moonlight danced across the floor, all of it, was as clear a reminder to him as any. Closing his eyes, memories flooded in and Simon’s mind reeled under the onslaught.
She was little, maybe no more than six and she was begging with him to play with her. Simon watched in his mind’s eye as he shrugged off her touch and went back to his studying. The memory fast forwarded and Simon saw his older sister staring back at him with unshed tears as his mother and father took her away – where? Where was she going? He saw as she carried one small suitcase, the rest of her things being taken out to the waiting craft by their house steward. Running towards her, River dropped her small bag and flung herself into his arms, her tears finally falling. Wrapping her arms around him tightly, he held her back just as fiercely, his heart breaking as she whispered, “Don’t forget me, Simon.”
Opening his eyes again, Simon knew where she had gone that day – the Academy. She had gone to that monstrosity of an institution where she had been forced to undergo tests he could not think on for fear of his reaction. The Academy, yes, where River had gone, at the age of fourteen, where she had stayed for three years even as he tried to convince their parents that she was in danger.
“Oh my god,” he whispered, his voice barely more than a rasp as more of those painful moments flooded through him. He stumbled over to the edge of her bed and sank down onto it. A memory he still could not fully remember guiding his actions, Simon reached under her bed and pulled out a small tin container. With a shaky hand, he lifted the lid, knowing what he’d find there.
Taking a deep breath, Simon reached in and pulled out the top piece of paper, his hands trembling. Turning on the lamp by her bed, he read the note with blurry eyes, his tears falling as he remembered with startling clarity the first day he’d ever read this letter – it had been the first message his sister had sent from the Academy warning him that she was in trouble, begging for his help.
Simon placed the letter back in its place and replaced the lid. He couldn’t look at these, not now. He couldn’t remember the anguish she’d suffered; it was too much for him to bear. And the thought that he’d been unable to remember her at all caused an agonizingly painful slice through his heart. How could this be possible? And why?
Lying down and curling into the tightest ball he could manage, Simon fought back his angry, sad tears for as long as he could, wishing that he could see his sister again, if only tell her how sorry he was that he had ever forgotten her. If only to tell her that he loved her and he needed her. If only to tell her that he had no idea what was going on and he was scared.
He knew now there was no one he could trust, no one. Not his parents, not his friends, not his co-workers – no one. He was alone, broken by his inability to remember his life. His mind was shattered by fragments of memories that were sharp and unyielding and flooded him with emotions he was not prepared to handle.
Finally, at a loss, Simon cried himself to sleep, hoping he might one day see his sister again.
River could not sleep. Simon’s pain called out to her, loud and unrelenting in her head. She sat in the farthest corner of the room she could find, her hands wrapped around the sides of her head, wishing she could push his pain away. But it would not leave her.
She had tried to reach out to him, to reassure him that everything would be okay, that she was here now, but it hadn’t done any good. He was not ready for that yet, he wasn’t ready to admit he needed help – he wasn’t even ready to fully admit she existed.
Crying tears of pain and sorrow, River rocked slightly, trying to bury the pain. She felt a light hand touch the top of her head and looked up to see Jayne’s concerned face gazing back at her. “River, darlin’, what’s the matter? Is it Simon?”
S he could only nod, her agony too intense for her to form words. Sobbing now, she again buried her face against the wall. She had to stop the suffering, she couldn’t take it. Barely aware of her own actions, she began to lightly bang her head against the wall, the physical pain of the movement, preferable to the mental anguish she was suffering now.
But Jayne would have none of that. Reaching over, he wrapped an arm around her and brought her to lean against his chest. River let him, too tired to fight. She cried for a few more minutes, this time digging her fingernails into her scalp deep enough to draw blood.
And then in an instant, the pain receded. It was not gone, but it had faded and River realized Simon was asleep. Releasing a shaky sigh of relief, River slumped against Jayne’s chest, too exhausted to say anything for several moments. When she did finally find her voice, she barely recognized it. “Sorry, Jayne.”
“What’ve you gotta be sorry fer,” he asked gently, continuing to rock her.
“I woke you up,” she answered, turning her still tear-filled face to him. “You need your sleep.”
“I don’t need sleep, ifn’ you don’t,” he challenged. Rewarded with a slight smile, he felt brave enough to ask, “What was happenin’?”
River stifled a whimper at the memory and then said quietly, “He was remembering and he didn’t want to. Remembering me.” She started to cry again just a few tears running down her face, but the sight broke Jayne’s heart, a heart he had thought was long ago made impassable.
Not knowing what else to do and not exactly sure what it would solve, Jayne leaned down and kissed her, on the mouth, something he had vowed to never do again, although at this very moment, he could not remember why. And to his great surprise, she kissed him back.
Reaching a hand up to lay against her small cheek, Jayne brushed his lips over hers, coaxing her more fully into the kiss. Placing her own hand behind his head, she pulled him to her, making it impossible for him to not trace her lower lip with his tongue, before hers joined him and the kiss reached an impassioned pitch.
Sitting up more, River pressed herself to him, feeling him groan into her mouth and that made her smile. Just as she was about to kiss him even harder, Jayne broke the contact, pulling her back by the shoulders. Confusion playing across her features, Jayne took a deep breath and then said, “We ain’t doin’ this.”
Unable to ignore the effect she was having on him, River let her hands run through his hair and watched with delight as his eyes rolled into the back of his head at her touch. Trailing a few kisses from his mouth to his ear, she whispered, “But I wanna.”
Suppressing a shudder of pleasure, Jayne again brought her face to meet his and said, “Look, River girl, I ain’t exactly known for my self-control and I cannot believe I’m saying this, but we ain’t gonna do this, not now.” Frowning up at him, Jayne tried to explain it another way. “Look something much bigger than you and me is goin’ on here.”
Smiling wickedly, River wriggled in his lap and got the reaction she’d been hoping for. “I know.”
“Gorramit, River, listen ta me,” he said, his voice growing forceful and causing River to sober. “It aint’ that I don’t want to do this and it definitely ain’t that I haven’t thought about doin’ this, but now ain’t the time. If we’re to get your brother back, like you want, then we gotta stay focused.” When she didn’t protest, Jayne sat back slightly and mumbled, “I never thought I’d see the day I’d pick your brother over you.”
River was pouting now, her lower lip jutting out in a manner that drove Jayne crazy. “Ai ya, girl, why you gotta do that,” he asked her, again reaching down and pulling her lower lip into his mouth, kissing her with as much passion as he could manage and still keep his senses.
Pulling back from him, River looked into his eyes and saw his concern for her, his commitment to her and his love. Her heart swelling to at least twice its normal size, she rested her head against his bare chest and whispered, “Stay focused.”
“That’s right,” Jayne agreed, silently grateful that she had not pressed the point. He knew that in just another minute all reasoning would have abandoned him and he didn’t want to rush this, not with her. “Now, come on, you know what they say, sleep helps to stay focused.”
He rose and reached out a hand for her, which she took gladly. Leading her over to the bed, Jayne squirmed in under the covers and looked back to her expectantly. Raising an eyebrow at him, she teased, “Are you sure you can handle it? I’d hate for you to lose focus.”
Growling at her with a wicked grin on his face, Jayne pulled her down with him, and held her against his side. “I ain’t a beast,” he whispered into her hair, as he felt her breathing slow. Within minutes she was asleep, and Jayne again said a silent prayer to the shepherd. See, shepherd no special hell for me. Rubbing his cheek against her hair and inhaling her sweet scent, he amended, Not yet, anyways.
Ellie crept in on silent feet to Miss Kaylee’s room. It was late and the house was quiet and dark, but Ellie hadn’t been able to see the baby yet, and she wanted to. He was only about three weeks old, but Miss Kaylee had insisted on staying in her room with him for a while. From what Miss Millie had said, Kaylee was real tired from the birth and needed to rest.
So the children, while they had begged and pleaded, had been told they were not to disturb Kaylee or little Daniel until she said it was all right. But Ellie had waited three months for that little guy to come and she wasn’t gonna wait any longer.
Gliding over to the edge of the bed, she saw that Kaylee had fallen asleep holding the little one. Reaching up the tiniest hand, Ellie pulled the blanket back from his sweet face and gasped. She had never seen a baby before, but this one was prettier than she’d thought he’d be.
He had the darkest little tuft of hair on his head and as he slept his tiny hands were curled into fists at his sides. Ellie couldn’t see the color of his eyes, but she knew that Miss Kaylee had been hoping they’d be blue, so that was what Ellie had wanted too.
So engrossed in her gazing, she did not notice as Kaylee came to. Looking down at the girl’s wide eyes, Kaylee smiled sleepily and murmured, “Well, hello there, little one. What’re you doing here?”
Gasping from surprise, Ellie turned big, brown eyes on Kaylee. “I’m sorry, Miss Kaylee. I just really wanted to see ‘im is all.”
Kaylee smiled at the girl and said, “Well, get up here then, you can’t see him so good from down there.”
Her face breaking into a wide grin, Kaylee watched as Ellie scrambled up and onto the edge of the bed, crawling her way down towards Kaylee. Adjusting her little boy on her lap, she turned him slightly so that Ellie would have a better view.
Stopping just at her shoulder, Ellie sat on her feet and looked back at the boy. The movement had awoken him and Ellie saw with delight that his eyes were blue. Looking to Kaylee with an even bigger grin, she whispered, “He’s got blue eyes, Miss Kaylee. Just like you wanted.”
“Yes, baby, he does,” Kaylee whispered, her eyes watering slightly. She had hoped he would, had hoped that he would look like his papa and Kaylee had been given her wish: a healthy baby boy with dark hair and blue eyes; a little mini-Simon, whom she could love and care for and not have to let go; ever.
“Oh, don’t be sad, Miss Kaylee,” Ellie said quickly, noticing that her friend had begun to cry. Leaning forward, she patted the new mother on the shoulder and said, “You’re gonna be a good mama, I just know it.”
Smiling through her few remaining tears, Kaylee said, “Well, thank you, Ellie. I certainly hope I’m a good ma. It’s pretty much the most important job in the ‘verse.”
Ellie returned her gaze to the baby. She didn’t need anyone to tell her how important a ma could be. Ellie still missed her ma, everyday, and although Millie and the other children had become like family to her, there was no way someone’s mother could be replaced. Studying Daniel’s face more intently, Ellie finally cocked her head to one side and asked, “How come his face is all wrinkly? Don’t he look kinda old for a baby?”
At Ellie’s assessment Kaylee could not help but laugh, a loud, deep laugh that seemed to come from a place long ago buried. Smiling through her now happy tears, Ellie returned the grin and leaned into Kaylee’s side, cooing at Daniel and keeping Kaylee company far into the night.
“It’s bad, Mal.”
Inara’s voice was distant and hollow somehow and the sound chilled him. Gazing to his beloved through the wave screen, he asked, “What’da ya mean, darlin’?”
Turning her tear-filled eyes to him, she said, “He didn’t recognize me, at all. Not even a flash. And I ran right into him, shook his hand, even told him my name. Nothing.” The despair that filled her voice harbored on manic and Mal tried to think of someway to help her, even as he was stuck half a city away.
“You’re sure,” he questioned, already knowing the answer, but unable to think of anything else.
She nodded glumly and than told him, “If we do manage to get him out of here and back to Kaylee …” She trailed off, uncertain she could actually finish the statement. The thought was too terrible and Inara did not want to think about what it would do to her bright and bubbly friend. “I don’t know if she can survive that,” she finally whispered.
When she again looked to him, she noticed with a bit of surprise that his eyes were full of fear. Trying to work past the lump in his throat, he concurred. “I know, darlin’. I know.”
When Simon awoke a few hours later, he was still in his sister’s room and his face was stiff from the salty tears that had stained his skin. Not having the energy, but realizing being found in this room could end badly, Simon quickly left, making sure to lock the door behind him. As he hurried back towards his own room, he ran right into his mother and father who were returning from their evening out.
Simon thanked Buddha that it was dark in the hall and hoped it was enough to keep his parents from seeing the redness in his eyes. Trying to smile, he said distractedly, “Mother, father, I trust you had a nice evening.”
His parents exchanged a look that Simon knew all too well and he knew he needed to get out of there. “Yes, Simon, it was lovely, thank you,” his mother answered, taking a step closer to him and reaching out a hand to place against his cheek.
Stepping out of her touch, he watched his mother’s hand flinch noticeably before she dropped it back to her side and gave her husband a confused look. “Simon, son, is everything all right?” Gabriel stepped forward and placed an iron grip on Simon’s arm.
Trying to twist out of it, but unable to do so, Simon gritted his teeth and said, “Yes, Father of course. Can you let go now?”
Dropping the boy’s arm in an instant, Simon again headed in the direction of his room. “Good night,” he called, leaving both of them to stand dumbfounded in the middle of the hall. It wasn’t until his door was shut, that he allowed himself a slight sigh of relief. Now, if he could just make it through tonight …
Gabriel and Regan Tam watched their son bolt away from them, concern and fear welling in their chests. As they hurried to their own room, Regan waited until her husband had securely locked their door, before asking, “What was that about, Gabriel? Do you think he remembers something?”
Giving his wife a very grim look, he answered tightly, “I’m afraid he might.”
Her hand flying to her mouth, Regan sank to the bed, her legs no longer strong enough to support her. This couldn’t be happening. They had done everything, to the letter. They had abolished the thought, the memory, the presence of River from their lives; they had done all the cognition exercises with Simon as they had been instructed; they had paid for the finest treatment the Alliance could offer and yet … it would all be for naught. Their son was still as lost to him as he had been since the day he’d broken his sister out of the Academy and become a fugitive.
“Now, look, Regan, we cannot panic,” Gabriel instructed his wife, his voice firm as he saw her eyes widen in terror. “I will contact the agents and Keller first thing in the morning. This could just be a minor setback. There’s no reason to believe he’s remembered anything of any import.”
Regan nodded numbly uncertain she believed her husband’s reassurances. She had seen that pain in Simon’s eyes once before, right before he had gone after River. “But what if he has, Gabriel,” she asked, her voice barely more than a whisper.
“Then I’m afraid we’ll have lost him for good,” the elder Tam said heavily. And with that, he resolutely strode to his study, placing the call he had never wanted to make.
Alicia had not heard from Simon in days, so it was a complete shock to her when he rang her doorbell in the middle of the night. Answering the door still half-asleep, Alicia ushered him inside quickly as she saw dread etched into his features.
Once inside, he began a nervous pacing that she recognized all too well. Leaving him be for a moment, she went to throw on a robe, and came back surprised to find him slumped in a chair, his head in his hands.
Going to him, she knelt in front of him and placed a light finger under his chin, trying to get him to look at her. While he did raise his head at her touch, he refused to meet her eyes. Biting back her own panic, she whispered, “Simon, what’s wrong?”
He blinked rapidly as he felt more tears come and tried to steady his voice as he told her, “My sister, she’s real. I know that now.” His voice was shaky, but it held firm as he continued. “I found her room, in my house and all her things …” He trailed off uncertain of what to say. He still wasn’t entirely convinced that he could trust Alicia, but since he’d been back on Osiris she’d been the only person he’d felt he could trust, the only person who had truly looked out for his best interests.
“Simon, I’m so sorry,” she told him, running her hand through his hair, at a loss for anything else to say.
He stayed her hand as she reached out to run it across his scalp again and swallowed hard. The other aspects of his life, the life he couldn’t remember – the life with the girl in it whom he cared for deeply, she had done that for him too. Why could he still not remember her? He knew, with an unreasonable clarity that he loved her, this mystery woman, or he had, and the knowledge that he could not bring her out of his memory caused him even greater anguish.
Startled by his abrupt movement, Alicia asked him, “What else? Simon, what else is happening?”
Turning haunted eyes to her, he finally whispered, “I have no idea.”
That was the truth, Alicia could see it in his face; he was lost and confused, uncertain as to what he was doing or even who he was. They sat in silence for a moment as Simon tried to focus on what he knew to be real and what he knew was false, but he could barely distinguish between the two any more. His grasp on reality was slipping and that had him more scared than just about anything else.
Looking back to her again, Alicia froze at the look of horror in his eyes. “Can I trust you,” he breathed, his voice barely recognizable to his own ears.
Tears welling in her eyes, Alicia nodded once, waiting until she felt she could trust her voice before answering. “Yes, Simon, you can trust me. I only want what’s best for you.”
Simon’s resolve broke a little at her words and she watched as a few tears fell down his face. Grabbing her hands intently, he asked her, “Will you help me?”
She nodded again, her tears now falling steadily. Leaning up she wrapped him in a tight embrace and whispered, “Any way I can, Simon. I promise.”
He cried against her and was soon asleep, his confused mind still too jumbled to make any more sense of his situation for the night.
When Gabriel awoke the next morning he found a note from Simon stating that he would be taking extra shifts at the hospital for the next few days and they should not expect him. Not at all certain he could trust his son anymore Gabriel did the only thing he could think of. Calling the hospital, he had his son paged and got no response.
Fear and anger welling in him, Gabriel called the next logical person and didn’t even wait for a greeting before attacking him. “Where is he?”
Keller regarded him coolly through the screen and asked, “Where’s who?”
Not in the mood to play games, Gabriel’s voice grew even colder as he said, “Simon.” Still getting only confusion from the younger man, he elaborated. “He’s not at the hospital, he’s not at home and I’m guessing, he’s not with you. So where is he?”
Scratching his head, Keller tried to suppress his own worry. It wasn’t like Simon to go completely off the grid, the kid was way too responsible for that. Deciding not to give into the older Tam’s intimidation technique, he decided to answer with a shrug. “Jeez, Gabe, I don’t know. I didn’t put a homing beacon on him.”
Fighting the very real urge he felt to rip out the young upstart’s throat, Gabriel counted to ten and then said, “Find him.”
With that the man winked out the screen and Keller allowed a slight sigh to escape his lips. Where could Simon be? It wasn’t like him to just not show up at the hospital. Couple his disappearing act with his strange behavior in the past few weeks and this did not look promising.
Realization dawning like a smack in the head, Keller cursed his slowness. Sending the wave, he was rewarded with Alicia’s face looking back at him. “Hey stranger, how’ve you been,” he asked, trying to stay cool.
She glanced furtively off screen, confirming Keller’s suspicion that Simon was there. “Hey, Kell, it’s kind of early, isn’t it?”
“Nah, not for us surgeons,” he answered, trying to keep her talking.
“Did you need something,” she asked hurriedly wanting to end the conversation before Simon awoke again.
Trying the truth, Keller answered, “Yeah, I was looking for Simon.”
Her eyes widening slightly, Keller knew that’s where he’d find his friend. “Uh, no,” she stuttered, trying to cover her tracks. “I think he’s on at the hospital this morning. Maybe you should try there.”
“Yeah, maybe I should,” Keller said. “Thanks anyway, Alicia.”
Without saying goodbye, she flipped off the screen and Keller sat back heavily in his chair. Whatever was going on with Simon, Alicia knew about it and that made his life all sorts of complicated. Sighing, he closed his eyes for a moment and then headed to get dressed. Apparently, the Alliance’s experiment hadn’t quite worked and now he might have to kill two of his friends in order to clean up their mess.
River awoke again in the middle of the night, a mere two days since she’d first seen her brother. His anguish throbbed through her once more, but it was focused now. He had found a way to control his sadness at least for the time being. And that meant now was as good a time as any to reach out to him.
Looking up to Jayne, she noticed that he was still asleep, his arm wrapped around her waist as he slumbered. Smiling at the contact and the intimacy of it, she hated to leave him like this, but she had to; it was now or never.
Sliding out of the bed with barely a whisper, River grabbed her jacket and sidearm and headed back to her brother. For the first time in over three years, she was heading back home.
Oooh, can you stand the suspense? Write a comment and tell me about it!
Saturday, June 24, 2006 8:28 AM
Saturday, June 24, 2006 10:30 AM
Saturday, June 24, 2006 1:04 PM
Saturday, June 24, 2006 3:55 PM
Saturday, June 24, 2006 5:01 PM
Saturday, June 24, 2006 5:06 PM
Saturday, June 24, 2006 5:45 PM
Sunday, June 25, 2006 7:22 AM
Sunday, June 25, 2006 2:31 PM
Tuesday, June 27, 2006 7:34 PM
Wednesday, June 28, 2006 12:50 AM
Wednesday, June 28, 2006 1:57 AM
You must log in to post comments.
OTHER FANFICS BY AUTHOR
All FIREFLY graphics and photos on this page are copyright 2002-2012 Mutant Enemy, Inc., Universal Pictures, and 20th Century Fox.
All other graphics and texts are copyright of the contributors to this website.
This website IS NOT affiliated with the Official Firefly Site, Mutant Enemy, Inc., or 20th Century Fox.

Linkedin recently reported their 3rd quarter earnings, or rather losses. The good news however was that their revenue growth surprised analysts on the upside, more than doubling from last year’s numbers. LNKD was trading around $80 this morning, and the November 19th $70 puts were at 1.0 bid / 1.2 asked. The implied volatility on those puts was around 83, which seemed pretty high for a company that just reported its earnings, and the down-side risk, at least for company related news, seems low.
For an option with 12 days to run, this seemed like a reasonable bet to me. I sold S70 puts at $1.1. I offered at the mid price and the order filled immediately.

As I held my precious boy in my arms last night to rock him to sleep, I could feel the unconditional love and trust my little angel has for me. He had his arms wrapped around me and he kissed me on the cheek, at that very moment I sensed a warm peaceful spirit. I realized then in my heart that my prayers for a child have been answered, and that there is a guardian angel watching over my son. He is a beautiful little boy with dark hair and big dark brown eyes. We adopted him when he was four days old and we named him Eric Daniel.
For many years I dreamed and prayed about becoming a mother someday. I knew that if I couldn’t have any children of my own that I would adopt. My husband John and I really prayed about this every day during our morning devotional time. One Sunday morning a lady from church approached me and told me she had a granddaughter that was planning to give her unborn baby up for adoption. We met with the young birthmother for dinner and I showed her a profile I had put together, which included a resume and pictures. After dinner we went to our house and showed her the nursery that we had already set-up in a neutral angel theme.
Less than two months later we completed our home study and we were approved by the adoption agency just two days before Eric’s birth. It was a Sunday morning and we were at church when we got the news and rushed straight to the hospital. It turned out we didn’t have to rush because we waited about eight hours before they took Eric by caesarian. What an awesome feeling it is to finally hold your newborn son for the first time!
The next morning when we went back to the hospital we found out that Eric had to stay in the hospital because of an infection he had. During the time he was in intensive care, we got to hold him and feed him, so we bonded instantly. On the fourth day, Eric was released from the hospital and was able to go home with us, what a wonderful day that was! When we got home I fed Eric and changed his diaper (yes, I was immediately baptized by our newborn son) and I placed him in his new crib. I just stared at this precious angel, I couldn’t believe after all these years that I was now the mother of this beautiful child.
Looking back at the whole adoption process, I have no doubt that God heard our prayers and I believe it was God’s guidance that helped us through the adoption. It took 10 months for the adoption to become final, on that day we stood before the Judge declaring Eric legally ours, I had tears in my eyes, and when I looked over at my husband John, he had tears too. That was a very special day for us. It has been over two years now since we were blessed with Eric and I truly have enjoyed every day that I spend as a mother. I no longer take any day for granted. I look at Eric now and I thank God for giving me the opportunity to take care of such a precious life.
I plan on telling Eric someday that he is adopted and his birthmother loved him enough to choose to give him life and to give him to a family who absolutely adore him. Eric will always know that he is very much loved and cherished. I sure may not have given birth to him, but he grew inside my heart. He is a gift from God.

Balayya's Dream Not Fulfilled
Nandamuri Balakrishna is one man who gets what he wants and it is usually said in the film circles that no one dares to say no to him. However, it appears that one person has stood up to say no and this has made Balayya's dream an unsuccessful one. Here are the details for that.
It is known news that Balayya would be seen in the new movie 'Aditya 999' a sequel to his yesteryears hit 'Aditya 369'. This is going to be directed by veteran Singeetam Srinivasa Rao and here is the byte. It is heard that Balayya was very particular about having the awesome beauty Anushka as the leading lady.
However, the latest update is that Anushka has reportedly declined the offer and she has mentioned 'date issues' as the problem. Currently, Anushka is busy with her Tamil projects and she also has 'Damarukam' with Nagarjuna. What remains to be seen is, who can take Anushka's coveted place and become Balayya's leading lady.

Accomplishments of Gregory Aziz
Gregory James Aziz is known to all in the sector of car manufacturing. He is currently serving as the President along with the Chief executive officer of National Steel Car. This is a company that is making huge profits today. Gregory J Aziz was born in London in 1949. He was born in a picturesque place called Ontario. He had a happy childhood as he had a good home and a stable family. He joined the Ridley College. Later on, he went to the University of Western Ontario and studied economics. This helped him to have a strong foundation so that he could run a successful business later on. After completing his studies, James Aziz decided to work with his family at their food company.
Gregory J Aziz helped his family to grow and prosper. Under him, the sales of the company rose up. This is because Greg Aziz is a dedicated as well as a hard-working person. Hence, he would be a valuable resource to any company. He has proved this many times over.
Gregory J Aziz decided to leave his family food company in order to be a banker. He worked for various banks where he held different positions. He did this for ten years. This experience served as an important tool as it helped him to achieve success in business. He left the banking industry in 1994 to d join the National Steel Car.
This company belonged to Dofasco at that time. James Aziz contributed in a significant manner to acquire this company. He always had huge plans for this company. He wanted to turn it into a global industry as the company was known only in Canada at that time. Within the next few years, the sales at National Steel Car grew from 3000 to 12000. In this way, the company created jobs for the local people due to its expansion. See Related Info Here.
National Steel Car continues to rise and increase its profits. This is due to the vision and leadership skills of Greg Aziz. This is the only company in North America that is ISO certified in this sector. National Steel Car has built a reputation for the excellent quality of its products. Their rail cars are of the highest possible quality and standards. Greg Aziz has always focused on the quality of its rail cars. He knew that high quality would lead to more customers and huge sales eventually.
Read More: https://www.behance.net/greg-aziz

A Kashmiri student, Absar Zahoor Dar, following his routine, went to a local coffee shop after his gym in Bengaluru city, was physically assaulted by a group of four youths, via iron rods, in AECS Layout near HAL on 20 March.
24-year-old is pursuing civil engineering from CMRIT college, Bengaluru, who is also a professional model, was urgently rescued by his friends, “They wouldn’t have left me alive if my friends wouldn’t have come,” said Mr. Dar. Urgently, he was taken to the nearby hospital.
Talking to The Kashmir Walla on call, Mr. Dar said that he has been in Bengaluru for 3 years, “and never such incident has happened with me.” Though, he mentions that he also had 6-7 Kashmiri friends with him, “if the motive behind the attack was my identity, being a Kashmiri, other friends would have been beaten up too, but that didn’t happen.”
While the mob thrashed Mr. Dar, as he said, was speaking in Kannada, the regional language. “But, before leaving they said, ‘Don’t come back here’,” he told.
Mr. Dar, who is also a professional model, confessed that he has no idea why he was attacked. In the attack, he did not suffer any severe external injuries, but have, as he said, 13 stitches on his hand, 6 on the face, while 5 on the head.
Though, talking to The Kashmir Walla Narasimha Murthy, an inspector at HCL police station in Bengaluru, said, “We arrested four suspects on the day FIR was filed, but they were granted bail within a day.” Refusing the communal motive behind the attack, Mr. Murthy said, “What we know so far is that a person from the mob had come to warn him (Mr. Dar) to not talk to his girlfriend.”
Mr. Murthy added that the investigation is going on.

This is your place to talk about the funny, sad, outrageous things that are happening in your life -- whenever you're ready.
I started my business when I was 21, graduated with honors and a double degree at 22, was married at 23, and had a brand new car, a house and a storefront at 24.
Fast forward to year 26 and I was divorced, evicted, bankrupt and living with my parents.
Well, that escalated quickly.
In 2008 I met my to-be husband. He seemed like a nice guy: funny, good looking, and he could sing! A few dates later and we were official. A year later and we were engaged.
I started my business in late 2008 because I needed a hobby and an extra source of income. I was on Etsy at the beginning, and had success very early on. I was still working two part-time jobs, going to college full time and planning my wedding. Maybe if I hadn’t been so busy, I would have noticed the signs sooner.
I went to print an essay from my computer before I left the house to go to class for the day. And like all cheap Walmart printers, it decided to not work just when I needed it to. I ran into my fiancé’s office and jumped on his computer to print it. I went to log into my email and his was up so I went to log out, but caught a glimpse of an email title before I closed out: “Here are the pics you wanted ;)”.
OK I thought, it could just be a band member or a fan.
But immediately my heartbeat quickened. Should I click on it? Or just let it be? I felt ill, betrayed, enraged, and curious.
I clicked on it.
“Is that a dick?!”
My reality melted away and my life became one big blank stare. There was nothing else, but that email and the abyss it had created. Within it was a man, sitting at his desk with his penis out. The text in the email read something to the effect of, “I can’t wait to hook up again. It’s great that your girl is so busy.”
I didn’t print my paper. I just slammed the lid of his laptop shut so hard that I was hoping it would break in half -- just like I wanted to break him. I wanted to hurt him; I wanted to cause him pain and suffering; I wanted him to feel betrayed.
The wedding was only two months away.
At that time I wasn’t for or against gay rights. I was basically neutral because it didn’t personally affect me. Suddenly I was pissed at every single person I ever knew that had been anti-gay because they had inadvertently contributed to this deception and the need for gays to live clandestine lives.
That night after class I met up with my best friend at the local coffee shop. I had texted her earlier in the day saying that I had something important to show her and told her to bring her laptop. I knew my fiancé’s Gmail password, because it was his band’s email address that I helped manage (he was an aspiring country singer locally). So I logged in and showed her the evidence.
She had about the same reaction I did, and sat there slack-jawed and bewildered. After a few moments of silence she reached over, hugged me and told me she loved me.
We went through the rest of his inbox, and found that he was also a member of several gay and transgendered dating sites. She asked if I was OK looking at his profiles and I said yes; I wanted to know how deep the rabbit hole went.
He had full profiles on all the sites, with the tagline “married, discreet” or “just fucking, in a serious relationship.” Most of the pictures of him were dick pics, but then there was one that he had cropped. It was a picture of me and him! But he had cropped me out!
And then, he called. I saw his name pop up on my phone screen. I stared at it, at this point more numb than angry as my world began to implode. I answered.
“Hey babe, when do you think you’ll be home tonight? Just curious.”
“I honestly don’t know, I am getting coffee right now.”
“Oh alright, is everything OK? You seem upset or something?”
“Just a long day at school, I’ll see you soon.”
“OK, say around 9? Love you.”
CLICK. I hung up. All that was running through my mind was that he was hooking up with some dude in our house. In our bed. On our couch. Was this really my life?
I got home around 10 that night. I almost just went to my friend’s house for the night, but I knew I had to face reality.
My fiancé had called me several other times, but I refused to answer. I literally had no idea what to do. I was both enraged and defeated. I loved him. I trusted him. I was supposed to build a life with him. I took a deep breath and opened the door.
He was sitting on the couch, playing Halo like usual. He turned as soon as he heard me shut the door.
“Why the hell weren’t you answering your phone? I was worried sick about you!”
“That’s all you have to say? I thought you said you would be home at 9? Jesus.”
“We need to talk.”
“About what now?! Goddamn are you trying to make this about me now?”
“It is different this time, it’s important.”
I just stood there. I looked at him and then I stared at my feet, “Are you cheating on me?”
His face turned red instantly, like someone had flipped a guilt switch. “What the hell, where is this coming from?”
“I am asking you a simple question: Are you, or are you not, cheating on me?”
“OK, just come here and sit down and we can talk.”
“I’d rather stand. Answer the question or I am leaving right now.”
“OK, OK, OK.” He was waving his hands frantically. “I have been on a few dating sites recently.”
“What the fuck! Why??”
“Because you are never home and I am lonely.”
I was the one paying all of the bills while he built up his band. But he was right, I was gone a lot. The conversation went back and forth between him blaming me for his escapades and me asking him if he ever physically met anyone.
After an hour of fire breathing I let him embrace me, and he started to cry. He said that it was only a curiosity, that he wasn’t gay, and that he loved me. He wanted to still get married. After millions of apologies and promises I forgave him. I was naive, because I thought that being gay was something that he could change.
In 2010, I married a gay man. He loved me. And I loved him.
But obviously that wasn’t enough. It never could be enough. In 2013, after three years of fighting and infidelity, I asked for a divorce.
Our relationship had been based on a lie, so the foundation was never even there. My business tanked. I lost my best friend. I lost my car and my house. My family had even become distant, but they said I could move home.
My husband didn’t want the divorce and desperately fought to make it work. He said he loved me, and honestly I believed him. He said he hadn’t talked to any men since I moved out. I almost believed him.
I just knew that he probably could love and be loved by someone else in a much more real way. I didn’t want to live a life where I was a cover story.
The first month of separation I got a full panel STD test. One of my husband’s lovers apparently had herpes, because I did now too. That was the only “proof” I needed. I was mad but also relieved that it wasn’t something worse.
I lost most of my friends, as my husband claimed I started an affair and that’s why I left him. I resorted to drinking heavily, and I moved in with my parents. I wanted to tell the world what had actually happened but the only proof I had was herpes, which I didn’t want to publicly share.
It came down to me threatening my husband in the end, saying I had saved all of his emails and I would send them to everyone important in his life. He didn’t call my bluff, and like magic, the rumors stopped.
When we had our day in court and the divorce was final, I went home and drank by myself. Should I tell my family the truth? It was embarrassing, because I had always considered myself a fairly attractive woman, but now I was confused about my own sexuality.
After a lot whole lot of cherry vodka, I wrote my Mom a letter:
“Mom, I know you are confused and frustrated with me because I left my husband. I have no job. I drink too much. I am depressed. I want you to know the truth. Brent cheated on me, and it wasn’t with a woman. I love you.”
I left it on her coffee table.
That next morning, mom approached me and just stared at me for a solid minute, with tears welling in her eyes. “I had no idea. I am so sorry.” She wrapped me a hug so tight and warm that I felt five years old again.
It’s now 2015, and my life has been pieced back together. My business is rising from the rubble. I support gay rights today, because I was married to a gay man. I have donated my time and efforts to local Gay Pride events as much as I can. Around the holidays this last year, my cousin came out as being gay. I was a bit surprised when my parents both embraced him.
When people ask about the divorce now, I say I couldn’t handle the stress of being with a musician, and it caused us to constantly fight. Thankfully that question doesn’t come up very often anymore, as I was young, didn’t have any children and have moved to a new town.
Sometimes it’s almost as if that chapter of my life was a bad dream -- one with a very distant silver lining.
My ex-husband has not publicly “come out” and he still is an up-and-coming country music performer, so I don’t know he if actually ever will. Maybe he will be the first country singer to come out and blaze a path for the rest.
All I can do is hope that one day he will be happy, that he can find his kind of real love, and finally be set free.

UFC fighter Alan Jouban says Rougned Odor's punch 'set the bar' for sports brawls
UFC welterweight Alan Jouban knows a thing or two about throwing a solid punch, so when he saw Rougned Odor nearly drop Jose Bautista during the Ranger-Blue Jays game earlier this week, he couldn't help but nod his head in approval.
In fact, Jouban, who has finished three of his four UFC wins by KO/TKO, felt that Odor's punch set a pretty high standard for the rest of the sports world.
"He kind of set the bar for the rest of the combat sports world." Jouban told TMZ. "You see it too many times, soccer players and basketball players that just can't throw a punch to save their lives. So, that was a pretty clean little punch right there. I was surprised the other guy didn't drop. I was for sure he was going to go down but he held his own."
Bautista may have held his own after a punch Jouban said had "good form," but the UFC welterweight wouldn't suggest he take too many shots like that, going forward.
"But that was a good straight right hand, right on the button. Good form, good straight right hand, down the middle, turned it over, it was nice." Jouban said. "(Bautista) had a good chin but you don't want to keep getting hit like that. I think in other sports, they walk up with the intention to get pushed and don't expect to get hit. He went into that fight pushing and he got clocked, so I think he learned his lesson."

This tour was way too long. You are on your own to walk through the memorial. No guided tour. There is nothing to eat but really bad junk food, and the lunch provided requires you to buy your own drink. It is difficult to bring you own lunch since no bags are allowed inside. The limo driver was great, but I wish we had skipped this tour. There are much more fun things to do in Hawaii.
The start of the tour was marred by the representative not being present at the airport to meet us as promised. We had not been advised of the flight number or time and no replacement representative had been arranged. We rang Polynesian Tours and were told there would be no representative but that our tickets could be picked up at the airline desk. However, the airline had no record of our tickets so we had to ring again and it transpired that the typo we had advised them about had not been corrected. The airline were very angry with us and stated that leaving tickets at the check in was not their policy. Eventually we had tickets and seats on the flight to Honolulu but it was a very unpleasant experience and we were concerned we would lose our whole day trip. From there on the day went smoothly with excellent service from our tour guide who even at the end of the day accompanied us to the TSA desk to ensure the residual typo problem did not prevent us flying back to Maui to our young children
The trip accomplished what we wanted ... to see Pearl Harbor, and hear about the significant history there. However, the logistics of the trip were less than desirable, beginning with being rescheduled to another day, and no follow-up. It was also difficult to communicate with the tour planners prior to arrival .. a website indicated to contact us via e-mail, or phone, but there was no phone number listed. The hotel where I was staying even tried to identify a phone number for Viator, and was unable to do so. The original booking indicated that transfers would be arranged from my hotel to the airport, but I learned upon arrival that this was no longer available in 2017 ... an additional 140 expense! Upon arrival in Pearl Harbor we were greeted promptly, and transportation arranged, however, the bus driver failed numerous times to tell us where to meet, and what time ... or gave a spread of time ... 2 or 2:30. The biggest disappointment was that we only had an hour at the USS Missouri ... 35 minutes of which was a lecture tour of the main deck where the signing took place ... we had no time to tour the ship ........ VERY disappointed in this. It seemed that the tour time could have been more balanced.
This tour is a must! If you're coming to Hawaii, make it a point to visit Pearl Harbor. We flew in from Maui, and it was well worth it. My only complaint would be that we were a bit rushed through the different sites. Personally, we could have used more time. Highly recommended...
Was a good day a little disorganized but would not give for it. They picked us up late at the airport and brought us back several hours earlier than was told when we signed up. Would not give for the experience but may try again later.

Midget tara jackass watch online
We walked around to the other side of the parking lot. Why dont we see who can get to her first. Damn it the man thought, I should have brought out the planet carver. You like me like this do you like watching me masturbate. Do you like in my heels my stiletto heels and my stockings. She spread her legs slightly more apart I watched her as she performed for me. The tavern erupted in cheers and applause as Gloria pulled Eldon up by the wrist and hauled him out.
Bitch. the new man screamed, Tom was about to go again when he was felt like he was moving in jello. I was fascinated that Nikki seemed to crave a new sexual experience every time. I sat still as my mind tried to unravel those words, looking for any meaning other than the one I was visualising. Had I been teaching you all those months ago when I promised you, then you'd be a lot better.
Well, at least the comp was one of the newer. Sue had been desperately lonely since Bob's death. Smiling Derrick went in lying down asleep almost as soon as his head hit the pillow. I'm really close to cumming too Dan told her as he continued fucking her hard and fast. Her mom just thought she bought some things for herself, which Heather said she did.
During the drive home, Bill could not help but show his enthusiasm as the men shared the car ride. I'll pick you up at noon on Wednesday. It was good to feel her warmth up against me.

Hope this update finds everyone doing well. The kids have been very busy at school doing a lot of artwork and pictures. So, I thought I would take some pics of their artwork to share.
So, this first picture below was done where the kids had to pick out pictures that reminded them of their family. So, this was what Jack picked out for all of us. I could not believe it when I saw 1) the man with the dear for Chad, 2) how big Ally is and in the center of the page and 3) the picture of Meggan. So, I asked Jack why did you pick that picture for Meggan and he said because she is always crabby and crying. Isn't that special. That is all I can say.
The next day at school Meg did the same project. See below for what she picked. And of course Meggan's image is the biggest one on the page. No self esteem issues there you can see. I asked her if she thought I looked like the picture she picked for me and she said "No, I could not find one that looked like you." There you have it.
I thought this one was really cool. The kids took marbles and rolled them in paint and then used them to paint on the paper. I will definitely have to try this with them. In Meggan's class they had taken race cars and drove the wheels over the paint and used the wheels to paint on the paper. I don't have that picture yet to show, but it was neat too.
Instead I have this picture that Meggan painted. Interesting how all of the colors are kept separate and that she used so many colors. It says a lot about her personality. She is definitely like her mom.
And finally I end with something that I thought was soo cute and funny. This is a picture that Jack made of himself. They cut out the paper and then glued it together to look like themselves. I thought it was just so great and I always love the smiley faces he does.

Baxter loved the camera. There were days when I would see him lying there and I’d run to get my camera and ask him to wait right there and he would. He was such a handsome boy and that is what drew me to photograph him so often. It was also the light that would inspire me and he would either already be in it or I would ask him to come with me to where the light was best. He would happily come with me every single time and sit and wait. The moments were either quick or more intentional where I would have an idea and then find him and set up the shot. He was always patient with me while I found the best angle and placement of light streaming in through the windows or through the trees if we were out in the yard. Sometimes there was only a sliver of light and not much time, but he was such a presence in my life and such a happy boy that I couldn’t help but document our time together. We bonded over these moments and I will cherish them and especially him forever. I am currently pouring through my files downloading and editing photos. We lost Baxter way too soon at nine years old in the early days of spring, and my heart has broken in a million little pieces. This is my attempt to piece it back together and to keep his memory close to my heart.

Appeals Court Dismisses Lawsuit Against BCPD Over Dog Shooting
A federal appeals court has sided with the City of Battle Creek and the Battle Creek Police Department, by dismissing a lawsuit against them.
The City and Police had been sued by Mark and Cheryl Brown, because their two pit bulls had been shot and killed by officers while they conducted a search warrant for drugs at a Battle Creek house. The lawsuit alleged that the shooting constituted a 4th Amendment violation, saying that their deaths constituted an unlawful seizure of property.
Authorities argued that their use of force to kill the dogs was justified because the animals were allegedly barking and “lunging” at officers. Police said that when they entered the home, the animals weighing 97 and 56 pounds were obstructing their ability to safely clear the house, so they were shot. It was later determined that no humans were inside the home.
On Wednesday, The US 6th Circuit Court of Appeals upheld the decision by the US District Court in Grand Rapids to dismiss the lawsuit.

Heritage Jubilee Testimony Day 28
Saturday, February 12, 2011, Day 28
A WONDERFUL LIFE
As a child my sisters, neighbor kids and I would ride the “bus” to a neighborhood church. We were never treated as members, just “bus kids” as were called. We would always try to fit in but never really did. When I was 18, I made the decision to stop going altogether. In my mind all church people were stuck-up snobs who thought they were better than me.
In 1985 I was married to a man who was forced to attend church as a child. We decided that our children would never have a bad experience at church; we would never make them go. As the years went by my family and friends would invite us but we always had an excuse. For a while we attended a mega-church, yet again we were just another filled seat, no one at all even knew us by name.
This brings us to 2008. My life-long friend and I decided we needed more in life and started “church hopping.”
From the moment we walked in the door of Heritage Church of God, we were greeted with a warm welcome, “We’re glad you’re here, let me know if you have any questions.” Before church we were amazed at how people talked to each other and genuinely cared about each other. They seemed to be really happy to be together. We thought the sermon was awesome! After church…more hellos and we hope you come back. On the way out Pastor Fry and Terry introduced themselves and made me feel even more welcome. I had never before experienced anything like that.
The next Sunday we decided to return and we felt more welcome than ever. Larry sat in front of us and we had a great conversation before church. Once again, lots of people introduced themselves. That’s when we decided we had found our new church home.
My husband saw such dramatic changes in me that he started attending with me once in a while, usually while intoxicated. I was so afraid someone would say something to him. Boy was I wrong… the opposite happened. He was welcomed with open arms and made lots of friends. One Sunday after another moving message and an invitation to come forward, he grabbed my hand and said, “Will you come with me?” Our life has never been the same. He stopped drinking completely and loves worshipping, fellowshipping, and volunteering as much as I do.
We have been blessed so much since we put God first in our lives. I can’t imagine life without our Heritage family. It truly is a wonderful life!

BALTIMORE -- When Buck Showalter was drawing up Thursday's lineup card for the series finale against the Angels, Chris Davis was an option. The first baseman, who had missed the past two games due to an illness, was back with the team and an option to make his return to the starting lineup.
When it finally came to it, though, the manager opted to take caution. Davis was available, but wasn't on the field to start the game. But he did finish it, entering in the ninth inning as a pinch-hitter to replace Delmon Young. Davis stuck out and walked in two plate appearances.
"Chris was moving around with his gloves on from about the seventh inning on," Showalter said of Davis, who remained in the game as the designated hitter. "He was ready to get that out of the way. I asked him how he felt, coming down here. He said, 'All things considered, OK."
Davis had battled nausea and a fever since Monday and was sent home from Camden Yards early on Tuesday. He made it to the stadium for the end of Wednesday's game and was ready to resume baseball activities on Thursday.
Davis declined to elaborate on his illness, although he doesn't seem to worried about his recovery.
"I'm here, I'm healthy, I'm not in the lineup," Davis said.
David Wilson is an associate reporter for MLB.com. This story was not subject to the approval of Major League Baseball or its clubs.

The arraignment of a suspect officers were chasing when one of their own suffered a catastrophic injury was delayed until late in the afternoon Friday after a bomb scare closed the through lunch.
Authorities took the morning to left in a trashcan out front of the courthouse, bringing in the bomb squad team and bomb-sniffing dogs to the scene.
After the incident, state police returned the bag to the woman, who said it was full of antiques and that she'd left it in the trashcan because she was told she couldn't bring it in the courthouse and didn't think anyone would bother it if it was in the trash.
Frank O. Douglas, 30, a Connecticut resident his whole life, was due in court on a litany of charges during which Officer Troy Strauser, 38, took a 20-foot drop off the Fairfield Avenue bridge onto the concrete and pavement of I-95 below.
Douglas allegedly fled from police during the early morning hours Thursday after police responding to an assault attempted to stop the vehicle in which Douglas was traveling. Douglas' vehicle eportedly matched that of a vehicle reported by eyewitnesses.
After the bag was found to be a dud and bomb-sniffing dogs took a precautionary sweep of the building during lunch, Douglas finally appeared in the courtroom, close to two dozen Stamford police officers lining the back wall of the courtroom.
It was revealed during the arraignment that Douglas was already on special parole for a 2006 sale of a controlled substance conviction. Superior Court Judge Kenneth Povodator said Douglas' bond would remain at its original $500,000 level and not the proposed $75,000 requested by his defense attorney, Darnell Crosland.
Douglas spoke only once during court, after a contencious battle between the defense and Assistant State Attorney Mitchell Rubin over the fate of $900 Douglas said was taken from him by a probation officer who reportedly said cocaine residue was evident on the bills.
Douglas said he was carrying the cash when he went to visit his probation officer because it was his rent. Povodator asked Douglas if he understood and found it acceptable for the court to hold the money as secondary evidence initially, until whether or not it could be proven or disproven as evidence through further testing.
He was soft-spoken, had a quiet voice and leaned in to the mic to be heard.
"It's okay, your honor," Douglas said. "Yes sir."
His defense, however, was slightly more vocal. Out front of the courthouse, Crosland said Douglas was sorry for Strauser and his family and empathized with him as a fellow human being, but Douglas didn't know Strauser was hurt during the chase and found out only later.
"[Douglas] had no idea that anyone was injured," Crosland said. "As the facts state, he was in a crawl space hiding in some bushes, he would never try to hurt this officer at all. When the other officers appeared in the courtroom, he sort of said to me, evidentally, people are emotional about all this and he's sorry anybody even got hurt."
After making his statement in front of the courthouse, he sent out an official statement via a mass text message that reads as follows:
Quote, "the charges against my client are in dispute for the most part, however what's not in dispute is that I as well as my client empathizes with Troy and prays for his speedy recovery," it's important to note that my client wasn't running to the officer with any intent of causing him harm, but was running away.". It's too early at this point to comment on the evidence, but I would enourage the process not to rush to judgement based on emotion." - Atty Crosland
Sgt. Joseph Kennedy, President of the Stamford Police Association gathered with the officers who came to the courthouse and gave a statement on Douglas, whom he called a career criminal, and their hopes for the case.
"The bond is going to be held at $500,000," Kennedy said. "I'm not going to say we're 'happy' about that. We think that's what the law calls for and that's what it should be."
Kennedy called into question Douglas' history, which included 13 minor convictions, when trying to discern what he thought of the man as he looked at him before the judge in the courtroom.
"I'm listening to his life history of crime," he said. "I'm listening to drugs, I'm listening to weapons in his life. I'm listening to 15 separate arrests. This person was remanded on a parole violation as he should have been and he should not be on the streets here in Connecticut."
Kennedy also gave an update on Strauser during his statement who reamins in critical condition and battles through the next three days with concerns of infection for his internal injuries.
"Our concerns are with how Officer Strauser today," he said. "The ER is very encouraged by what's transpired in the last 24 hours. Yesterday was a very difficult day for himself and his family. Three surgeries in the span of 18 hours. He's still listed as critical. We would hope everybody's thoughts and prayers are with Troy and his family as he deals with these horrific injuries."

When Usher Raymond married Tameka Foster on Aug. 3, 2007, a lot of his fans were not only disappointed, but worried about how being married would affect his music. Some feared that being a family man with a wife (and now a son) would prove to be a detriment to not only his music, but his career as a whole. Well, as it turns out, Usher's life change indeed has had an affect on his creativity - a positive effect. Here I Stand, which will be released in the U.S. on May 27, 2008, is definitely as good - if not better - than his last studio album, 2004's massive worldwide hit, Confessions. Usher's in zero danger of losing his mojo. For more, check out the full review of Usher's Here I Stand.
Image © LaFace/Jive Records.

An inquest into the death of a 16-year-old boy in Tallaght has heard that he died from a single stab wound to the chest.
Reece Cullen was stabbed at a house in Kilclare Crescent in Jobstown on 5 January 2017.
Gardaí told Dublin Coroner’s Court that officers were satisfied only one person was responsible for the stabbing, however the Director of Public Prosecutions has directed that there be no prosecution on the current evidence.
Three people were arrested in connection with the case and Detective Inspector John Walshe told the court there were 110 lines of inquiry and 88 statements taken.
He said there had been a lot of public assistance in the area and that the file remained open.
Originally from Old Bawn in Tallaght, Reece had been staying with friends following the death of his mother the previous September.
On the day of the killing a neighbour, John Sutcliffe, told the court he was working on a car in his front driveway when a man approached and told him: "My mate has been stabbed, will you ring an ambulance?"
Mr Sutcliffe said he looked into the hallway of the house and saw a man slumped on the ground.
"His head was going to the side and blood was thick on the floor," he told the court.
Paramedic Noel Keegan gave evidence of arriving on the scene and finding Reece unresponsive.
"The man had no pulse and wasn't breathing. There was a lot of blood on his chest".
The court was told a post mortem showed the teenager died of a single stab wound to the chest.
The jury returned a verdict of unlawful killing by persons unknown.

I went to yoga Friday night (wow, that seems forever ago…busy, busy weekend). I was tired and hungry when I went to class, but class went pretty well. I was pretty pooped by the time I got to Triangle Pose, and thought I was going to have to rest, but I pushed through it, and made it through class without resting. And it was still bright and beautiful when I got out of class! 🙂
I had a 7 mile run today. I ran it down at the beach. WOW, it was PACKED! The run went awesome. I did it in 54:58! That’s under an 8 minute mile. 🙂 Yay.
Pablo has a new girlfriend…her name is Poppy. One of my neighbors has an adorable one year old female Boston Terrier. She and Pablo have met through the fence and sniffed noses many times. Today, however, they met for real, and LOVED each other. They romped around on the grass, and Pablo was so gentle with her. It was great to see him play with a new friend. 🙂 One of my other neighbors has a yellow lab whom Pablo hasn’t met yet. They have barked at each other without really seeing each other. Not sure how they will get along. I have found, however, that if Pablo doesn’t like a dog at first, if I keep him on leash, and introduce them slowly to each other, they end up friends. Pablo currently just doesn’t like some dogs he doesn’t know. But once he gets to know a dog, he is in love. 🙂
This weekend was the first weekend I really got used to having him at my house, and I figured out a way for us both to get some fun time, both together and separately. It was sad to go home to a Pablo-free house tonight; I was kind of expecting him to be there, and I was looking forward to it. I had to sadly clean up all the doggy stuff, and put it away…until next time.

We have a new kitten, and we've named her "Nikita" or "La Femme Nikita" as husband has named her. We got her at the animal rescue and she's three months old. I wish I could attach a picture, she is beautiful. She is a "torbie" with shades of black, red/brown and white. She has a very social personality and lets manster hold her as much as he wants. We're already in love with her. Interestingly she and the bird are getting along well. The bird is a bit aggressive, he walkis right up to her when she's on our lap and he's on one of our shoulders. But we don't take our eyes off of them. They are both fairly jealous of each other, both being babies and wanting lots of attention. Just wanted to share.

USC is investigating the circumstances surrounding cornerback Josh Shaw's injury. Shaw told Coach Steve Sarkisian over the weekend he sprained both his ankles while saving his 7-year-old nephew from drowning on Saturday night.
Sarkisian said he's since received phones calls contradicting Shaw's explanation for his injury. Sarkisian would not say who had contacted him refuting the initial story.
"I have no reason, no history to not believe Josh and his story and what has occurred," Sarkisian said. "We're going to continue to vet it. ... Josh is adamant with what occurred and we'll continue to vet some of the stories that have come across our desk and across our phones and see where we can go from there."
USC's official team site posted an article Monday reporting that Shaw was at a "family social function" at his cousin's apartment in Palmdale when he saw his nephew drowning. Shaw then reportedly jumped off a second-story balcony and landed on concrete, but managed to crawl into the pool and save his nephew.
Shaw on Saturday attended "Salute To Troy," an annual season kickoff event including the players' families, where he was announced as a team captain. The function concluded around 9-9:30 p.m. Palmdale is a 65-mile drive from USC, bringing into question Shaw's story about a family function at such a late hour and a child swimming unattended.
Shaw was supposed to speak with the media Tuesday, but Sarkisian later said the redshirt senior would not be available until the school had more answers. Shaw did not attend practice.
"I just don't want to put him in a situation, answer questions that we really don't have all the answers to," Sarkisian said.
An anonymous USC player, and the parent of another player, both refuted the drowning story, saying they heard that Shaw injured himself during a "domestic" incident. The hero narrative spread across the nation Monday evening, but now it is unclear whether it is true.
"It sucks," the player said of the situation. "It's going to suck for us."
Sarkisian said he is determined to find out the truth regarding Shaw.
"I think it's important to know your team," he said. "I think it's important to know your players. Like I said, Josh Shaw has been a good leader for us. He's given me no reason not to believe what he has told us that occurred. But you need to know, and I think it's important to know and the direction that we head in."
A source who spoke with Shaw on Monday afternoon said Shaw told him he would be out about four weeks. Shaw, who is from Palmdale, spent his first two seasons at Florida before transferring to USC.
Click Here to view this Link.

Dr. Barron is absolutely the best surgeon! I was new to Manhattan and was the luckiest person to have the ER recommend him when I broke my elbow at Columbus Circle. He takes such good care of his patients. He listens, answers all questions, and discusses all treatments. I would highly recommend him! The results of his surgery are amazing – he had my elbow back to normal in such a short time. He is so positive and compassionate.

RICHMOND, Va. -- Hunter Haselman and his girlfriend said they first noticed brown marks on their closet wall a few months ago.
"The maintenance supervisor said it was just rust, nothing to worry about," said Haselman.
Fast forward several months later, and Hunter said he doesn't believe the stains were just rust. He took photographs after his ceiling collapsed on Friday.
"About five gallons worth of feces dropped into our bedroom closet," he said.
Hunter said maintenance came on Saturday and left a bucket to collect what he believes was feces seeping through the ceiling.
"The sewage water, every time they would flush the toilet it would pour out, so when they did that my pregnant girlfriend asked where am I supposed to sleep and the maintenance man pointed to the bed and said right there," said Haselman.
Hunter said he also took pictures of what he thinks is human waste on his walls. He said maintenance finally painted over the stains and used a stain remover.
"They said they would de-sanitize it, but this bottle of stain killer is their sanitizer," Hunter said, and he doesn't think that was enough. He and his pregnant girlfriend have been staying at friends' houses and he's even slept in his car to avoid the apartment.
"Having feces behind these walls and having feces stains obviously still there, it's not acceptable, especially having a pregnant girl 10 feet away," he said.
WTVR CBS 6 reporter Chelsea Rarrick spoke with an employee at the complex on Thursday afternoon. She was not able to answer questions and referred us to corporate. A voice mail left at the corporate office had not been returned by Friday morning.

This week, I saw these in the grocery store and decided to give them a try. I made some for a quick lunch today and dipped them into ketchup.
The Morningstar Farms popcorn chick'n is really nothing more than their regular chick'n nuggets cut up smaller. I'm not kidding. The taste is exactly the same. Morningstar Farms seems to have taken their regular chick'n nuggets and have just made small pieces out of them. It seems like it's about three of these popcorn chick'n in order to equal one regular chick'n nugget.
It says there are 2.5 servings in the bag. I was really hungry and didn't want to make other things to go with it. I was in a hurry and wanted a quick lunch. I made half the bag in the oven. I ate those in just minutes and was still hungry. I put the other half of the bag in the oven and ate those, too!
Love the idea of these, but they are just their other product cut up smaller, which makes it more difficult to eat if you want to use your fingers to dip. And I felt like I had to eat a lot of them before I stopped feeling ravished. Next time I'll just stick with buying their regular chick'n nuggets.
These are vegan, and Morningstar Farms is in the process of making all of their products vegan, which is great. If you have a child you may want to pick these up for them. They would be great for a toddler!

As a senior with a near-perfect GPA, Jenni Camhi ’22 overcame feelings of inadequacy to not only become the editor-in-chief of the Guilfordian but to also reimagine its production during a pandemic.
"There was something about the school that was really striking to me. Everyone who's been to Guilford knows that it's very beautiful. I met so many nice people. I actually got to sit in on a journalism class, which was really fun. I started considering it because of how nice the people were and the small class sizes.”
Like many others, Jenni’s plans for an internship outside Guilford were derailed due to the health crisis. However, leading the College newspaper during this unprecedented time proved to be an invaluable experience that she’d be hard-pressed to replicate in any internship.
“It was a very odd experience trying to reconfigure this entire system and this newspaper for an online setting and an online audience,” says Jenni, noting the project’s difficult and time-consuming nature. “Tracie Fellers is the adviser for the paper. She really is amazing and helped a lot, so we've been a team in figuring out how to navigate all of the obstacles presented.”
Early in her college career, she decided to forego the Honors Program to focus on her studies and the Guilfordian. As a first-year student, she was a staff writer and reporter and did some copyediting. The following year, she became the executive copy editor and started doing that full time. The editor-in-chief during Jenni’s tenure as executive copy editor told Jenni that she had to follow the line of progression.
“I've never really been in a leadership position like that before, so it was definitely intimidating at first. I didn’t know if I wanted that much responsibility,” Jenni recalls. “Soon I became convinced. A lot of people were graduating, so someone needed to step up and do the job who had already been on the ad board and had experience. I ended up having the unique experience of being editor-in-chief during the first full school year of the pandemic.”
An avid reader of novels, news, and everything in between, Jenni’s family knew she was majoring in English before she did. Jenni was involved with her high school newspaper and had her heart set on another college until her father persuaded her to consider Guilford. Once she visited the picturesque campus, she was hooked.
“I eventually gave in and was like, ‘Okay, my dad is usually pretty smart. I should probably take his advice and go for a tour.’ There was something about the school that was really striking to me. Everyone who's been to Guilford knows that it's very beautiful,” Jenni says. “I met so many nice people. I actually got to sit in on a journalism class, which was really fun. I started considering it because of how nice the people were and the small class sizes.”
Mentoring Is Key
Jenni notes that Tracie and Robert K. Marshall Professor of English Heather Hayton were integral to her success at Guilford.
“They are the ones who stand out as mentors and role models,” she says. “They helped me figure out what I’m doing and where I'm going, which is really hard sometimes when you're just trying to stay afloat.”
Jenni has a variety of ideas for the kind of writing she’d like to do after graduation. She is considering working at a newspaper or other publication, teaching, or working as a grant writer.
For those considering a similar path, Jenni has some advice: “Don’t shy away from doing the thing that scares you. For me, taking on the roles of editor-in-chief and executive copy editor were scary things. I didn’t know if I was qualified. You can do it if you work hard at it and give yourself a chance to do it. You don’t have to know how to do everything right away. There was no guidebook for being editor-in-chief. I was kind of thrown into it. You figure it out pretty fast.”

Characters: Pretty much the entire cast!
Characters, Trauma Center © Atlus
Today was a morning she was not looking forward to. Her surgeon, her friend, her husband had to leave across the country due to an international conference that had specifically requested Dr. Derek Stiles. Even Sidney Kasal and Dr. Hoffman couldn't refuse this invitation for them. If they did, Caduceus would lose face and possible funding.
"How long does this conference go?" the messy-haired surgeon had asked. He had a frown on his face from the news and sulked in the chair across from his superior's desk. While being disrespectful was never acceptable, both men could understand the heartache the infamous surgeon was going through. After saving the world from GUILT twice, he had been constantly bombarded with request surgeries, meetings, conferences, and conventions.
Dr. Hoffman was the first to speak, "It's not a conference like the ones you've been going to, Derek."
Brown eyes widened slightly. "It is, but more like a class. You'll be speaking to surgeons from all over the world and teaching them about PGS. Caduceus USA has their eyes on only you, Derek. No other person can take your place. We're sorry."
Derek's frown deepened. "How. Long." he growled. Sidney was slightly taken back by the tone of Derek's voice, but Dr. Hoffman remained unfazed.
"No need to lose your temper, Derek. However, this conference will take two months. You'll be completing classes too, as well as visiting different countries—"
"Two MONTHS?! Are you joking?" he shouted loudly. "No! Tell them I refuse! I just got married a month ago, and they're already planning to ship me off to God knows where?" There was a long pause as Derek regained composure, his breathing slowing and his anger abating. "I'm sorry, Dr. Hoffman."
The older man was able to comprehend much of what the surgeon before him was experiencing. The Healing Touch had sent him to places he could only dream of and to places that were in his nightmares. However, the pressure was even greater for Derek since he was also the man that defeated GUILT and could cure any PGS that appeared. He placed a hand on his shoulder, his tired eyes looking into the chocolate ones seriously.
"It's alright, Derek. Just be prepared to leave in two days."
With a grim voice, he spoke, "Yes, Dr. Hoffman."
Angie sighed deeply as she walked to get the mail. Derek left two days ago to New York, but this would be the first day without him at work. This happened before when he worked at Hope Hospital while he was recuperating, but never did they part after they got together. Every conference he went to, she was able to accompany him as his faithful and loyal assistant. However, their marriage had caused an uproar in the system. Never did a doctor and his assistant get married. The Kasals were in different fields and didn't rely on the other so much, rather than Derek and Angie who needed the other to be in sync.
She scanned through the mail until she found a letter… from Derek. Her hands took over as they ripped open the envelope viciously, but pulling out the letter very carefully. When a photo fell, Angie slowly picked it up, looking at the smiling face of her husband standing next to Dr. Naomi Kimishima and a young girl that was dressed in a hospital gown.
How are you? I hope you're doing well. I'm fine, but I miss you still. I miss having my favorite assistant helping me with surgeries, but currently Dr. Kimishima has been assisting me. I still wish it were you. This is a photo of one of my patients, Victoria, she's nine-years-old. She used to live in Angeles Bay during the GUILT outbreak and developed PGS. Luckily she lived close to where I was staying so I was able to treat her easily and she'll be making a fast recovery.
My stay here hasn't been all that exciting. I haven't had a chance to catch up with Dr. Kimishima at all, but it looks like she'll be moving to Angeles Bay soon. Also, I encountered some of the doctors we met in Caduceus Japan like Dr. Kitagawa. He was watching Victoria's PGS operation in the observation room. There are so many doctors with their assistants that it feels as if they're rubbing it into my face that you couldn't come with me. Just to assure you, no matter how many assistants throw themselves at me, you'll be my only one.
Till death do us part,
The address I've written on the bottom is where I'll be at around the time you send this letter. I'll be sure to bring you and everyone a souvenir from wherever I'm at.
I love you.
A blush rose on her face as she read the letter once more. No matter how many years would pass, his words in ink or by mouth would always make her heart beat fast. "I love you too, Derek," Angie whispered to herself, hoping, praying that he would hear her.
- Day 8 -
Derek sighed to himself, taking out a gold chain and on it, a locket. It was a gift that he had given Angie for Christmas, and she had lent it to him as a reminder of home. Once Angie had received a copy of their wedding photos, she quickly made a miniature of one and placed it for safe keeping inside the locket. They were just holding each other, smiling brightly at the camera. This memory made him smile just thinking about it, but it was soon broken by the call of his name on the speaker followed by applause.
After the conference was let out, Dr. Kimishima met him with a smile. "You've gotten better at making speeches, Dr. Stiles."
He put a hand at the back of his head with a modest smile, "You think so? I thought I stuttered quite a bit."
The silvery haired woman chuckled softly, shaking her head. "It was fine. Actually, I thought you sounded a bit cold. It was very much unlike when we met previously in Germany last year. Is it because Angie isn't here?" Naomi couldn't help but smile when a faint blush appeared on his face as he nodded. "I see, well, you must make the best of it. I doubt Ms. Thomps—"
"It's Stiles now. We got married a month ago." Derek interjected, feeling a surge of pride being able to call Angie his wife.
"Mrs. Stiles," she corrected, "would hate to see you doing things half-heartedly. You're a doctor that was invited to speak upon Caduceus USA's behalf, and you can't be doing things like this halfway. It would be the same as not doing everything you can to save a patient." The words stabbed Derek like a knife, his chocolate eyes losing its shine. She was right. Angie would be disappointed in him, after all the fights and arguments they had in the past, it was amazing that it wasn't drilled into his mind.
Derek looked up with a smile. "You're right. I'll do better. I'm sorry about that, Dr. Kimishima. It must be hard to always look after me." He laughed awkwardly, but calmed down once he saw Naomi Kimishima smile back at him.
"No problem, Derek." She replied, turning on her heel and leaving.
Soon after the quick meeting with the other surgeon, he found himself on a flight to the United Kingdom. Dr. Kimishima would also be accompanying him as well on a different flight from New York seeing as she had to attend to some matters concerning her move from Caduceus Europe. Once he exited the airport to find his waiting car, a blast of cold air and some tiny droplets of rain met him with unfaltering cruelty. He lifted the collar on his trench coat as he walked past people with his luggage, finding the waiting driver and car.
"Good evening, Dr. Stiles. My name is Alvin, I'll be your driver during your stay." The red-haired driver said politely. He didn't have an accent and while they got to know each other, it was proven the man wasn't from England, and instead Boston, Massachusetts.
Derek found himself nodding to Alvin. "Shall I take you directly to the hotel or would you like to go sightseeing? I was informed during your travels you never visited London."
"Actually, I was wondering, do you know any place where I can get a perfect gift for my wife? I got them some souvenirs from New York, but I promised I'd get them something from every place I went to."
Alvin smiled brightly, "Of course, Dr. Stiles." Somehow, Derek was beginning to like Alvin more and more by the minute.
At eleven o'clock at night, both driver and surgeon found themselves in their respective beds. "I'll be picking you up at noon for lunch with Dr. Miller and Dr. Kimishima who I'll be picking up from the airport that same morning. Please dress nicely as you will be attending a conference soon after, Dr. Stiles."
The surgeon nodded at the news, soon collapsing on his bed afterwards. It was a very successful day; he had gotten another luggage to fit all of his friends' souvenirs and had bought each one something. It was an impressive thing when you were married to a nurse and were a surgeon yourself. There was a lot of spending money when you needed it.
- In Angeles Bay… -
Angie had been feeling rather fatigued in the days that followed Derek's departure. She had received another one of his letters, explaining that he would be leaving New York to London, England. While she envied his ability to travel, she became slightly concerned at her own predicament. It became a struggle to work her normal fourteen-hour shifts and every night she seemed to just fall apart on the large king sized bed.
After a quiet dinner by herself, she found herself dialing her husband's number, praying that he wasn't too tired to answer the phone.
A smile broke out onto Angie's face. "Hey, sweetie. How's London?"
"Mm, good. I haven't really started out my day much."
There was a pause.
"How are you, Angie? I've really missed hearing your voice. Have you gotten my letters?"
"I'm fine, Derek. No need to worry, but I miss you. A lot. And yes, I've gotten every letter you've sent. It looks like you're having a fun time. I'm glad."
Angie could tell a distinct change in the tone of Derek's voice. "You're wrong. I never have any fun without you. I can't. But… somehow, I'm managing. Dr. Kimishima's been with me this entire time. I haven't slacked off at all, because I want to be able to return to your side as fast as possible. I miss you so much, Ang. I wish you were here."
"I know. I do too."
"Are you tired?"
"Me? No, I'm fine." How could he tell when he was thousands of miles away?
"You're lying, Angie." She could almost see him smirking. If he were right in front of her, he would be trying to make her tell the truth straight out. But from thousands of miles away, Derek settled for a mere plea that she take care of herself. "Take it easy and don't overwork yourself. Please? Hey, Angie, I'm gonna head to bed. It's almost three in the morning right now and I have a conference in the morning. Good night, okay?"
"Okay, good night, Derek. I love you."
Almost as if she could see his loving smile right in front of her and hear him whisper in her ear, he said, "Sweet dreams."
- Day 16 -
Derek wondered to himself if being apart from the woman you loved was ever this hard. After five days in London, they had migrated him to France and soon he'd be in Italy. These were the places Angie had showed him in her childhood photographs with her family. The beautiful vineyards of France and the amazing cathedrals and art in Italy were often the backgrounds during her summer vacations as a small girl.
This time there was no Alvin that would drive and accompany him as he toured the sites. It wasn't torture to walk, and it allowed him to get a new perspective on his surroundings and find things and stores he might not have seen otherwise. Once he bought all of his souvenirs from France, he had them delivered to his hotel, while he continued to scan the area. France was a crowded place, but at night it was the best place to clear your head.
With his hands in his pockets, he opted to skip a dinner with Dr. Kimishima to take in the nighttime scenery. His eyes widened as a long set of blonde hair, elegantly pass by him, a small gasp of surprise escaping his lips. "Angie!" He jerked his head around to look, but saw the woman meet with her boyfriend at the nearby restaurant.
Derek clenched his fists in agony, knowing that it would be a long time until he saw his Angie. With his head hung low, tears rolled from his cheeks in a midnight glow.
- Day 28 -
"Hey, Angie," Tyler Chase said, gently supporting the sick woman, "You've got to call Derek. This isn't looking too good. Have you even gone to seen a doctor?" he asked seriously.
Angie shook her head. This was the fourth time she threw up in one day. It was a mystery that she still had something to throw up. "Can you call Leslie? She's off today, right?" Tyler nodded, dialing his cell phone and quickly hanging up after calling his girlfriend. "I'm sorry, Tyler." she murmured before throwing her head into the bucket again.
Tyler hated seeing his best friend's wife this sick, and it annoyed him to no end that the blonde would rather deal with it herself, pain and hurl included, than 'interrupt' her husband while he was on a business trip. Once he saw his temporary assistant off, he quickly called Derek.
"Hey, dude, it's me. I need to tell you something about Angie." Tyler spoke solemnly into the phone. He could immediately hear the worry evident in his best friend's voice.
He let out a sigh, wanting to put a hand on the nerve-wracked man's shoulder. "Don't worry too much. It's just, she was throwing up today and it wasn't just some one time thing. Leslie just picked her up from here and is taking her back to the house, but I wasn't sure if Angie would actually call you. She says she didn't want you to worry about her when you've been having a hard time keeping up with all of the meetings and conferences."
"What!" He heard Derek shout furiously. "I can't believe Angie would keep something like that from me! She's in pain and I can't go home! I can't be with her and comfort her! Why didn't she tell me?" Derek yelled out frustratingly. It was hard for Tyler to hear his best friend call out so desperately. He knew that Derek was hurting, because he couldn't fulfill his promise to be with her during these times.
Tyler understood how torn Derek was. Between an entire organization—Caduceus was relying on him, and there was no one to replace him—and his sick wife, his gut told him to go back home, but if he did, Angie would just become more upset. A person would only need to spend five minutes with Angie to understand how seriously she took her work.
"Tyler, please take care of her. I'll call the house in a bit, but please, I'm begging you, take care of Angie for me while I'm gone. I have a few more weeks until I get to go back home, but I can't stand Angie being sick and I can't do a damn."
"You got it, Derek. I'll take care of Angie."
"Thanks, Tyler. I have to go to a quick meeting with another doctor, so I'll talk to you later. Bye."
- Day 30 -
He looked out onto the balcony of his hotel room with saddened eyes. How could Angie even think that when she called she was being a burden? He lived to worry about her, he lived to love her and care for her, but he couldn't do that if she wasn't willing to tell him these things. When he heard a knock on the door, Derek hesitated on just ignoring it, but went to answer it.
A pure feeling of shock was left in his body when he saw Heather Ross standing in front of him with a smile. "Ms. Ross!" Derek said with a bright grin.
The dark-haired woman gave him a warm hug, something he hadn't felt in ages. "It's nice to see you're doing well, Dr. Stiles. And please, just call me Heather." Derek nodded, welcoming Heather into his hotel room. There was a different aura about him, Heather noticed, when he greeted her. Tyler Chase has called her earlier to see if she could get a flight out to the foreign country to assist the older man. There was no way she was about to reject the offer and immediately got ready to leave for a flight.
"Dr. Chase informed me about Ms. Thomps—I mean, Mrs. Stiles' condition. He said that Ms. Sears has been attending to her yesterday until she'll be well enough to go see a doctor. However, aside from that, the only thing is that she misses you, Dr. Stiles."
Derek couldn't help the blush rising onto his cheeks. "Thanks for coming, Heather. I appreciate it."
- Day 41 -
"Leslie! Come here!" Angie Stiles whispered furiously to her best friend. Hiding out in a bathroom was not her idea of fun, but she couldn't face everyone else after she found out this news. The green-haired woman stealthily avoided her boyfriend and went to Angie as fast as possible.
With hands on her hips, Leslie raised an eyebrow at her. "What happened at the doctors?"
Angie took a deep breath, moving closer, and whispering the diagnosis into her ear.
"OMGOMGOMG! I CAN'T BELIEVE IT!"
- Day 52 -
Heather smiled as several nursing assistants wheeled the patient out of the operation room. "Well done, Dr. Stiles."
The duo had recently arrived in Hong Kong only to be greeted by an emergency patient that required immediate attention. So instead of relaxing in a five-star hotel, they rushed to the hospital to get suited up, before starting the operation.
Derek returned the smile with one of his own as he pulled down the mask when he exited the OR. Even though there was a soundproof wall between him and the observation room, he could still hear the rumble of his audience when he successfully completed a Neo-GUILT operation. It never went to his head, however, it was one of the reasons for a major fight he once had with Angie that lasted for several days and almost lost him his patient.
"Thanks for assisting me, Heather. You did a fine job."
The nurse had the grace to blush, hitting him on the shoulder playfully. "Aren't you excited, Derek?" she asked later when they had lunch at a nearby café. Heather felt lucky that she was allowed to help the infamous surgeon on the second half of his travels around the world. Also, he was treated like royalty in the medical world, earning translators for even menial needs.
A smile appeared on his face. "Of course, just two more weeks until I'm back home with Angie."
While Heather was happy for him, something in her heart felt saddened that she wouldn't be able to sit down and chat with her favorite surgeon. He was a reliable man and she felt as if she owed a debt, from the way she took his confidence after the GUILT outbreak that took Emilio's life. "I'm glad to see you've cheered up quite a bit. The last place we'll be going to is Caduceus Japan in five days, so let's enjoy our stay for now."
- Day 60 -
"So, Angie, how are you planning on telling Derek? Waiting until he notices your stomach's like a…" However his thought couldn't be completed, because of a hard hit from Leslie Sears. Tyler gave an annoyed groan as he rubbed his sore arm. "That hurt! I wasn't going to say anything bad!" Despite his plea, it only earned him another painful reminder to shut up.
Leslie put a hand on her friend's shoulder. "Derek doesn't come home for a few more days. You'll figure something out," she said gently.
The blonde woman nodded, trying to figure out how she would break her news to her husband.
- Day 63 -
Today was the day he finally got to go home. However, when he arrived it would be the day earlier. It was astounding; he never thought he could live without Angie by his side, but miraculously, with some help, he survived. Derek hailed a taxi for both him and his temporary assistant, Heather. She would be taking a different flight that arrived earlier than his if she were to take the same plane he was.
At the airport, Derek hugged the woman that was his support for several weeks. "Thank you for everything, Heather. I don't know how I could've done it without you." Derek said, with another one of his modest grins.
Heather let out a sigh, putting her chin in her hand, saying, "Angie is really lucky to have you, Derek. I'll come visit as soon as I can."
"Of course, you're more than welcome. Have a safe flight." With a final wave, the doctor and nurse headed to their respective gates, grateful to be going home.
It felt slightly lonely as he sat on his long flight. The conferences he attended and everything he learned just might have been worth leaving his wife, until he found out that she was sick. Luckily, Angie had called him to say that she was going to the doctor three weeks earlier. When she told him that she would be fine, Derek didn't push it, only taking the earliest flight possible after his last meeting. Now he was just looking forward to getting to go home.
- In Angeles Bay… -
Angie ran a hand through her long blonde hair in frustration. Her husband would be returning home earlier than planned due to an earlier flight, and she had yet to figure out how to tell her husband that she was pregnant. Sidney Kasal and Dr. Hoffman knew already due to work matters, but not Derek. Pretty much everyone knew that she was pregnant except for the one person that mattered the most.
Tyler Chase shrugged on his coat, preparing to greet the coming surgeonl. The Chief and Dr. Hoffman would also be meeting them at the airport to greet him and afterwards they would all go back to Angie's and Derek's house for a welcome back party. He could remember watching the news, seeing Derek surrounded by people at a press conference about GUILT or what had happened the previous year.
A sigh escaped his mouth as he turned on the engine. Leslie was still helping Angie prepare food with Cybil, who was partly watching over her daughter, Kari. "I wonder how Derek will take to being a father." He paused to imagine the bespectacled surgeon taking out his child to the park and off-tunely singing his child to sleep. "Angie worries too much. Derek will be happy to know that she's pregnant." he said to himself.
Once he met up with the other male surgeons at the airport, they saw Derek in the distance, behind a cart filled with three pieces of luggage.
"Hey, everyone!" Derek called out with a bright wave. However, Tyler didn't miss the brief pause of shock when the surgeon noticed his wife wasn't among the men. "Where's, uh, Angie?" Derek asked hesitantly.
Greg put a hand on the man's shoulder, just smiling, "Waiting at your house to celebrate your arrival back home." The Kasals were also aware that the missus was awaiting the coming of both her husband and a new addition to the family. However, none of the males wanted to break it to Derek that his wife was still trying to figure out what to do. "So, let's not leave the girls waiting, shall we?"
When they reached his and Angie's apartment, Derek was forced to open the door, and was greeted by the loud shouts of surprise.
"Welcome back, Derek!"
There was a bright grin, but it faded as a woman with long blonde hair stood apart from the crowd. Her green eyes were unwavering as they stared into his. "Welcome home, Derek." He heard softly. The entire room was quiet and still. He smiled softly, walking over and holding the woman tightly in his arms.
"I'm home, Angie."
Derek parted slightly to give his wife a swift kiss, grinning slyly as he stole it. "Thanks, everyone," he said turning to face the rest of the crowd, still not letting go of his wife.
"Now, let's party!" Tyler exclaimed with enthusiasm. Everyone in the room laughed as Derek began to tell about his adventures on his worldwide conferences he attended as well as the people he met along the way. Angie listened attentively at his side, only nodding, while other people like Greg or Dr. Hoffman made remarks about his expedition.
"All of the places were wonderful and very hospitable. Let's go there together next time, alright?" Derek asked her, a warm, loving smile on his face that made her heart melt. But the mood seemed to silently shattered as she realized "together" meant them plus one newborn. They were both only in their twenties and had gotten married three months ago. Would Derek take to being a father like how he took to being a surgeon?
However once the time came for food, Tyler stood up to make an announcement. "Welcome home, Derek! All of us really missed your paper work skiving nature this past two months. Losing one of our best medical duos is a hard thing to handle at Caduceus." He paused to see if Derek caught on. Apparently he did, as his eyes narrowed slightly and his mouth remained tightly shut. Chocolate eyes glanced over at the nervous nurse, who was given immediate attention.
Everyone in the room knew that Angela Stiles was pregnant except for the man that had been absent the last two months. "Angie? You're not working at Caduceus?" Derek asked unsurely. It was unbelievable! Why would his wife quit a job that she loved?
"She's working at Hope for now." Cybil put in to ease the tension between the couple.
Disbelief was the only thing Angie saw in his eyes. "I'm working at Hope Hospital now, Derek. But it's not like I quit Caduceus! I'm just taking a break," she added gently.
"From what? You never used to mind the shifts or the surgeries we got. Do you not want to be my assistant? Are the board members asking that you transfer?" Derek babbled.
"No! Derek, I'm…" Angie hesitated.
At the change in tone, Derek's voice dropped an octave as his eyes became filled with worry rather than disbelief. He took a deep breath, looking up to meet her close to tears expression. "You're what? Angie, I promise there is nothing in this world that could make me stop loving you. No matter what, I'll be by your side."
She looked over Derek's shoulder and saw all of the other 'family members' giving her a thumbs-up and encouragement. "I'm pregnant, Derek." she said in a voice barely above a whisper. Her eyes shut tightly to avoid the look of hurt that was probably running across her husband's face, but quickly opened them when she felt herself being lifted off the ground and a soft kiss on her forehead.
"You're pregnant." he stated with a grin.
"I'm pregnant," she repeated with a smile when she saw his million-dollar grin.
Everyone began to congratulate the happy couple, but once the party was over and the couple was left by themselves, Derek approached his wife slowly when he spotted her on the porch. "Ang, why were you scared of me knowing?" he asked, taking a spot next to her. Green eyes avoided his gaze, until he gently forced her to look up at him.
"It's not like this was planned, Derek. We're only in our twenties and we got married three months ago, in which two of them you were absent for. Plus, you're always needed somewhere else! How can we even think of having a family in a crazy life like this?"
Derek placed a soft kiss on his wife's forehead, embracing her tightly. "You worry too much," he whispered. "Plus, a surgical duo that has saved the world from two major outbreaks cannot and will not ever be considered conventional, Ang."
To this, all Angie could do was laugh.
Surprise, surprise! I have brought forth another Trauma Center fic. Right before I, myself, am going under the knife! Eek. :O But I am determined to survive in order to write more DerekxAngie fluff. Well, I hope you enjoyed Derek and Angie's second and third month of their marriage from my mind.
- Jammed Radio

Jimmy Haslam is the current owner of the NFL team the Cleveland Browns. He is also the CEO of the Pilot Flying J, one of the largest chains of travel centers in North America. Apart from his business ventures, Haslam has also acquired wealth from his personal investments and is estimated to have a net worth of around $3.2 billion.
Jimmy Haslam’s Net Worth
Jimmy Haslam is estimated to have a net worth of around $3.2 billion. He made his fortune through his business ventures, including his role as CEO of Pilot Flying J, as well as his personal investments.
Haslam was born in Knoxville, Tennessee in 1954. He graduated from The University of Tennessee in 1976, where he was a member of the Sigma Alpha Epsilon fraternity. After graduating, he worked for Pilot Corporation, a family business owned by his father, James Haslam II. In 1997, he was appointed CEO of Pilot Corporation, and in 2008, he took over the role of Chairman of the company.
In 2012, Haslam purchased the Cleveland Browns for $1 billion. He currently remains the owner of the team and is also the CEO of Pilot Flying J.
Cars, House, Age, Career
Haslam is known for his collection of cars, which includes a Ferrari F430, a Bentley Continental GT, and a Rolls-Royce Phantom. He also owns a house in Knoxville, Tennessee, where he lives with his wife.
Haslam is 65 years old and has had a long and successful career in business. He is currently the CEO of Pilot Flying J, one of the largest chains of travel centers in North America. He is also the owner of the Cleveland Browns, an NFL team.
Jimmy Haslam has had a long and successful career in business, and his estimated net worth of around $3.2 billion reflects this. He is currently the CEO of Pilot Flying J and the owner of the Cleveland Browns. Haslam is also known for his collection of cars and his house in Knoxville, Tennessee.

Prince Philip in car crash while driving near Sandringham Estate
Buckingham Palace says Prince Philip escaped without injury after the Land Rover he was driving was involved in a car crash near the Royal Family's Sandringham Estate.
- Prince Philip was reportedly very shaken by the incident
- He was not taken to hospital and is now back at Sandringham
- Two passengers in the other vehicle sustained minor injuries
The palace confirmed the 97-year-old Duke of Edinburgh had been involved in the accident on Thursday afternoon near the estate in Norfolk, and police were called to the scene.
The Land Rover Freelander the Prince was driving rolled on its side in the incident, and two passengers in the other vehicle involved received minor injuries.
"The Duke was not injured," the palace said in a statement.
The other driver, a 28-year-old woman, suffered cuts to her knee and a 45-year-old woman passenger in the car, which also had a nine-month-old baby on board, sustained a broken wrist. They were taken to hospital but later released.
"It was an astonishing escape for everyone," said Roy Warne, 75, who pulled the Prince from the wreckage.
"People could have been killed. The impact must have been enormous," Mr Warne, who was driving home with his wife when he saw the collision, told TV reporters.
"He's a very brave man. He didn't make a big fuss about it and he went to ask everyone else if they were injured."
Police said both drivers involved in the accident had been breath tested but neither were over the alcohol limit.
"As is standard procedure with injury collisions, the incident will be investigated and any appropriate action taken," Norfolk police said in a statement.
"We are aware of the public interest in this case, however, as with any other investigation it would be inappropriate to speculate on the causes of the collision until an investigation is carried out."
A palace spokeswoman confirmed the Duke had been at the wheel and he was checked by a doctor afterwards.
He did not go to hospital and is now back at Sandringham, where he and the Queen have been staying since Christmas.
Philip married Queen Elizabeth in 1947 and has been by his wife's side throughout her long reign.
The former naval officer did not accompany the Queen to a church service on Christmas Day last month, though a royal source said he was in good health.
The Duke, who had successful hip replacement surgery last year, retired from public life in 2017.

A man in his late sixties walked out of jury selection in his criminal trial at the Bexar County Courthouse...and shot himself to death.
"My understanding is that this man was the subject of a criminal case," Police Sergeant Javier Salazar told 1200 WOAI news. "It is my understanding that they were impaneling a jury today."
Witnesses said the man calmly walked to the back of a parking lot just south of a hotel across the street from the courthouse, along the San Antonio River, and shot himself to death. Witnesses said they thought he had left the gun in his car in the parking lot.
Nobody else was injured and Salazar says the case is being carried as a suicide.
He says there was a 'lull' in jury selection in the man's trial and he simply walked out of the courthouse and killed himself.
Police did not confirm it, but one courthouse source said the man was standing trial on indecency with a child charges.

WILLIAM McKEENEY was walking home when he was confronted by Asif Rehman and Adel Ishaq, who launched a vicious and senseless attack.
TWO thugs who stamped a stranger to death outside his home were branded brutal and merciless by a judge yesterday.
Lord Uist tore into Asif Rehman and Adel Ishaq as he handed them life sentences for murder. They will serve at least 16 years for killing labourer William McKeeney, 57, in the street.
Lord Uist told them: “It is a shocking indictment of the state of our society that an innocent man should be murdered in a public street, outside his own home, in this manner.
“Senseless violence of this kind must be suppressed.
“For no reason whatsoever, he was set upon in the street by you two when he had almost reached his home and subjected to a brutal and merciless attack which robbed him of his life.”
Rehman and Ishaq, both 20, have records of violence. They were hyped up on drink and drugs. They were out looking for trouble. A nine-day trial in Kilmarnock heard that Irish-born William had been for a Saturday night out at the pub.
Just after midnight, he headed to his home in Pollokshields, Glasgow, carrying a fish supper. He was confronted by Rehman and Ishaq who called him “a white c**t” before launching a vicious attack.
William’s partner Annemarie Newlands, 48, said she was watching from her window for his return.
She looked out to see two Asian men stamping on something. She thought they were breaking up furniture.
But when she went into the street, she found her boyfriend. His head bore the marks left by his attackers’ shoes.
Ishaq and Rehman, both from Pollokshields, were found guilty of murder. An allegation that the attack on January 15 was racially motivated was deleted from the charge.
The trial heard that a plan by Rehman and Ishaq to flee the country was foiled by the local Asian community, who turned them in. The case prompted a protest outside the High Court in Edinburgh yesterday by a small group from the far-right Scottish Defence League, who hurled insults at friends of the two accused.
Extra police were on duty in and outside the building.
Gordon Jackson QC, for Rehman, told the court the assault had not been planned. “It was a spontaneous and very horrible act that happened for no good reason.” Derek Ogg QC, said Ishaq was remorseful and said no weapon had been involved. Lord Uist retorted: “A shod foot was the weapon.”
The court heard the kicks and stamps ruptured blood vessels in William’s abdomen and he died in hospital three hours later.
Sentencing the killers, Lord Uist said: “You walked away, leaving him lying in the roadway in a critical condition and callously did nothing to help him.” The judge also told Rehman that a background report made “grim reading” and noted that his convictions for violence began when he was just 15.
At the time of the attack, he was on bail – which added three months to his 16-year sentence.

GAY DVD - Jake's Prague Vacation - Jake Cruise
When I first saw Tanek I was a bit overwhelmed. At 6' 2" and 220 lbs., I was afraid he would crush me! Big as he is, Tanek is very sweet, with one of the nicest smiles I've seen. Watch me strip him, revealing his amazing physique. When I saw his huge bubble butt I thought I had died and gone to heaven. I rimmed his hole, then lathered Tanek with body lotion and fucked his crack. It didn't take me long to shoot my load over his back. I continued worshiping this stud, jacking him until he spilled his spunk on his solid belly.
Though we didn’t speak the same language, Marek and I had no trouble communicating once we were naked. This smooth-bodied muscle stud gave me a workout with his huge cock. After I take a hard riding, Marek shot his huge load all over my face and tongue. Then I jacked off and fired a huge arc of cum, hitting his cute face. A hot double facial!
This muscled, hairy hunk made my trip to Prague, during a July heat wave, even hotter. Lukas is covered in blond fur and wields a rock hard ass. It was his first time with a guy, and I worked my charms to melt away his shyness. Before long he was more than comfortable, shooting his heavy load all over my face.
Starring: Tanek, Marek, Lukas, Jake Cruise

Transporter won nicely at Bratton Down at the weekend which was very satisfying and made the long journey worthwhile. Mr Trump ran in the Open Maiden race and finished a close fourth, I was very pleased with him and his jumping was a little slow to start with but the further he went the better he got and he will be sure to win a race next season.
All the horses are turned out in the field now having a well deserved break, I have got six 3 and 4 year olds in now to break in, they are all being ridden and should be on the gallops in a couple of weeks, I am hopeful that they are a strong bunch and are showing the right signs.
I bought 6 form horses at Doncaster, I loose schooled them all and gave them a thorough check before turning them out and I am pleased with all of them. There are shares available in all of them and I would be happy to go through them with anyone interested.

When the transition to the new digital television was thrown out there, what was you initial reaction to the change? Do you think everyone is ready to get a new tv if they don't have one? Are you ready?
Digital television didn't bother me at all when it was first announced. I was ready to make the transition months before it was about the air. Since they delayed the actual release of the new television, I have more time to buy a few move tvs in my house.

Piper had a great stay. I think he would say that he had fun keeping up with the younger pups and running about the yard. He was soo pupped (tired) out when we got home, we know he must have had fun!
Kelly did a great job watching our puppy! Even when his food got accidentally spilled and eaten by another dog she took care of it right away and was even willing to go out and get his usual brand. We would definitely book with Kelly again!
Great home and large yard for the dogs to run around. My dog was well cared for and got along with other dogs in the house.
Kelly's K-9 Castle
I am a personal trainer therefore I have a very flexible schedule. I have always had a love for animals and grew up with dogs and cats my whole life. I will treat your pup as my own. I do have experience in dog sitting, house sitting and house checks/walking dogs and have been doing it since I was a teen. Coming from a family of dog trainers has kept me educated on dog ...

We handed out the Vinetarta’s to each house on the blocks and were able to wish everyone a Merry Christmas. We even received some gifts ourselves as people showed their appreciation for what Adopt-A-Block does every Saturday. The Church also received a few letters in the mail from people wanting to share their thanks.
To the people we talked to, we were able to personally invite them out to the Church’s Christmas Eve service and many people seemed interested. We had an opportunity to pray for the Hindu man and his wife as they are leaving sometime soon for India. He updated us that he is recovering well from his surgery and acknowledged that God answered our prayers.
There will be no Adopt-A-Block this Saturday, Dec 24th as it is Christmas Eve and many people will be spending time with family. So enjoy the peace and good will towards men that Christ brings this season. Have a Merry Christmas!

Popular Nigerian entertainer cum good governance activist, Charles Oputa, who is also known as Charly Boy has explained why he apologized to his lesbian daughter, Dewy Oputa after she accused him of neglect.
Recall that in year 2020, Charly Boy opened up about his mixed feelings coming to terms with a ‘bombshell’ Dewy dropped on him some years ago when she announced to him over the phone that she is a lesbian.
Caught between his parental duties to love his child unconditionally, and his difficulty accepting something that’s weird as being gay in this part of the world; the veteran musician, dad, and grandad says he had a choice to make, and although it’s been difficult, he admits he’s now accepted Dewy for who she is and proud to have a lesbian daughter.
Reacting to the Facebook post, Dewy called out her father on Instagram accusing him of gaslighting and using her for clout and also called him a Hypocrite. She claimed he says one thing online just to be “father of the year” but offline he doesn’t care if she’s alive or not.
However, in an exclusive recent interview with DAILY POST, the dad-of-five said he had to apologize to his daughter following the social media drama because he realized he was encroaching into her private life.
Speaking further, the Area Fada as he is fondly called revealed that he had a similar clash with his father who was trying to doctor his life. According to him, he resisted and said no, just like Dewy is doing.
In his words:
“I apologized because I had same clash with my father who was trying to doctor my life. I resisted and said no, I will tell my own story.
I did not realize I was encroaching. Even though initially when I heard, like any other parent, I was concerned but then I cannot be hypocritical because I have fought for LGBT right and some many rights. So because of my daughter, I cant change.
When I realized that, I apologized to her because we are friends. It is not a father-daughter relationship, we are buddy and that is the special bond I share with all my children,”

I received the Crave detangling brush to review and I have to say I really a like the way it worked for my hair.
My hair is coarse and breaks pretty easily and I found that it was a bit gentler on my hair then a vent brush. It did not magically take away every tangle but it did take out the tangles much more gently. It glides through your hair easily and did not pull or break the hair off. I air dried my hair without brushing it and then used the brush when my hair was dry. Most brushes would have broken or would have broken my hair.
When I used it on the two yr olds fine hair she was not bothered by it at all she was happier when I did her hair then when I used her other brush. My 20 year old daughter used it and she has very long thick hair that she tend to put into a messy bun then decide she wants to brush it out atheist next day.This is a test for any brush and she has broke hair and brushes doing it.
We used the brush for our 2 yr olds very fine hair and it even worked well for her. She does not normally want to stay still to have her hair done, but she did not mind this too much. It did make the job quite a bit faster. It seemed to get the short wispy hair as well as the long hairs. The two levels of bristles helped this very much. This detangling brush held up to the task and did take out the tangles much easier.
I will probably buy these for gift for other moms I know that have tender headed little ones or very thick hair themselves.

Send your news, photos and videos by texting bucksfreepress to 80360 or email
Pensioner died while on holiday in Tenerife
A 67-YEAR-old woman died after she fell during a holiday in Tenerife, an inquest heard.
Patricia Taylor, 67, from the Chalfonts arrived at the Spanish island on October 10 with her husband, Colin.
The inquest at Beaconsfield Coroner's Court today heard they were staying in a studio apartment and at 2am on October 12 Mr Taylor woke to find his wife lying on the floor next to the bed, after she called out.
He presumed she had fallen when she had got up to go to the toilet in the night.
She was lucid, and at first did not want him to call a doctor.
But paramedics were called and she went into hospital where she had surgery. Mrs Taylor went into intensive care but did not recover and later died on October 28.
A post mortem revealed she died from multiple organ failure due to a rib fracture and associated complications, with a contributory factor due to an enlarged heart.
Coroner Richard Hulett recorded a verdict of accidental death.

Conor Brady: “If a piece of copy was turned out by a reporter, it would be seen by about five pairs of eyes before it got into the paper. All of those checks were there, the reality is that they’re not there anymore.”< /h2>
Conor Brady raised eyebrows when he was appointed Editor of The Irish Times, as he was the first Catholic ever to be in the position. During his time there, the paper broke stories that shook the nation, including the story of Bishop Eamonn Casey’s relationship with Annie Murphy. During his time in journalism, he became acutely aware of the process of defamation cases and the damage they can inflict on publications. This inspired his new project. A tech solution he developed with his son called Caliber AI which catches defamation statements.

Doctor Harvey is a traditional English cooking apple, great for baking and for desserts such as apple pie. It is harvested in late October, and it keeps well, retaining its sharpness if kept in a fridge or cold store, and gradually getting sweeter if kept outside the fridge but in a cool place.
Doctor Harvey is a cooking apple which I took to very much in my younger days. In the late Fifties we had a small orchard in an isolated village in the depth of rural Suffolk. At that time a wheelright, well in his eighties, lived close to us. He had an ancient workshop full of magnificent old tools. He never had electricity or running water in his house. Just his own pond on the side of his garden.
Next to this pond was a very old cooking apple tree, Doctor Harvey. During the winter months he would bake these apples. This was his dessert and it would keep for a week, without the use of a fridge, which he never had the use of. I saw a lot of him during the winter months as the land work was restricted to the short daylight hours. In the evening, by the light of an oil lamp, we would enjoy eating this apple together during the cold winter months right up to the end of March. He was a bachelor all his life and was very dedicated to keeping this old tree in good condition as long as he lived.
He passed on to me what he knew about the history of this apple. According to him this variety was already well known for many years in Suffolk and its origin was in Cambridgeshire. In that county, Doctor Harvey was a master of Trinity Hall. Gabriel Harvey owned an estate in around 1630, and it was there that the tree had been bearing fruit for many years. It is therefore one of the oldest known English cooking/baking apples.
Doctor Harvey is a regular bearer of good sized fruit, totally green in colour. Best harvested in late October. It has a very good shelf life and as all apples do it will become sweeter as the days go by. Nowadays with the aid of a fridge or a cold store, it will retain its original flavour much longer when stored at 3 degrees Celsius. A most wonderful baking/cooking apple. Delicious apple pies as I remember it well. Definitely worth planting particularly on rootstock MM106.

My first visit last week. I'd heard good things so booked it for a work Christmas do.
We were met by who I presume was the owner/manager/chef who was very friendly and professional and made us all feel very welcome. Waitress staff were very very good and most importantly seemed like they wanted to be there. The decor and ambience was great- quite informal but smart and modern. Service was spot on throughout the evening.
The food was superb. Every bit of my dinner was delicious. Best food I've had for a good while and an impressive selection of beers. Can't comment on wine because we didn't have any.
At the end of the meal we were all presented with little handmade ginger bread houses- such a nice touch. I proudly put mine in my pocket to give to my other half and took it to the pub, by the time I got it home it was rubble. Shame!
In summary,- brilliant night and I'll definitely go again. Thanks.
Own or manage this property? Claim your listing for free to respond to reviews, update your profile and much more.

Ms. Johnson exudes knowledge and confidence. She went far and beyond her duty as an attorney to achieve results that I hardly expected. Will surely use her services again. She is a straight shooter and obtains results.
She is the best lawyer I have ever had. Ive been in a decent amount of trouble in my day. I would recommend her over any other. Why she cares and you can tell she does. God Bless you, Shannon Johnson, you helped me regain my life.
Prompt and attentive service. Always happy to walk me through my issues and answer any questions I had.
Shannon is the most personable and professional attorney I know in this area. She has helped me in three cases and has won all of them. Fees are reasonable and will not sugar coat the outcome. She is a forward person that tells you exactly what you need to complete before trial and has been spot on evert time. I would not even think of another when needing representation. Thank you, Shannon!!!!
Shannon represented me as my criminal defense lawyer. I highly recommend her; she is always very prompt with responses and very dedicated to her work. She is very detail-oriented and always tries to look at every alternative to make sure you understand. I would definitely recommend her to others!
Criminal Defense lawyer. She is a great attorney, she was appointed to me as by the court and she did not make me feel any less than a regular paying client. She represented me well and went out of her way to make sure I understood everything that was going on as well as all my options. She fought to get me the best possible outcome.
I was extremely blessed to have had Shannon Johnson representing me in a criminal defense case. I was charge with a DUI second offense. Shannon communicated with me frequently over the phone or via email. She made feel comfortable due to the circumstances. Overall my DUI charge was dropped. She did an amazing job. I would highly recommend her.
Shannon Johnson was the right person to handle my criminal defense case. Even with odds against me, she was able to get me out, and significantly reduce the charge. She did extensive research and tried her hardest while providing honesty and reliability at all times. She is the best private attorney in the business. I highly recommend Shannon Johnson and her firm for anyone dealing with legal issues.
I had a WONDERFUL experience With Mrs.Johnson. She did 100% more than any court appointments is expected to do. She acted as though she was given a million dollars to take my case I will 100000% recommend her to anyone she does above and beyond her job!
Ms. Johnson provided prompt and attentive service. She is extremely competent and a pleasure to work with. I would recommend her legal services to anyone.
Shannon is fantastic, I highly recommend working with her when it comes to criminal defense. I knew I was in good hands during the whole process.
I had to deal with this from long distance, Shannon made that very easy for me, end result charges were dismissed, Good Lawyer to work with!
I was very fortunate to have Shannon Johnson representing me in my criminal defense case. I was dealing with a possession charge and virtually had no case or anything to work with. Despite that, Shannon provided comfort in assuring she would do her very best to get the outcome I wanted. She did just that, in fact, she did better. After doing all the things she had recommended I do prior to my hearing, Shannon was able to get case my dismissed. Throughout the whole process, she was patient, caring, and explained anything I had questions on. I would highly recommend Shannon Johnson and her firm to anyone.
Shannon Johnson did a great job with my case. I was charged with negligent driving after a traffic accident. My case started off a bit slow, with simple paperwork and documentation and I didn't know if having a lawyer was really going to help much. On the day of the trial, Shannon was very involved and worked through everything before the case started. She had the charges reduced to a simple traffic ticket with $100 fine. The reduced charge was barely significant from a legal perspective, and well worth the expense for Mrs. Johnson's effort.
I had the chance to meet Attorney Johnson at an advanced DUI / OVWI Defense seminar. I was immediately impressed with her knowledge of DUI / OWI Defense and her commitment to her clients. I would not hesitate to send her any person facing criminal charges in Virginia.
I had an outstanding experience leveraging Ms. Johnson's legal services for a traffic case in Fairfax, VA. I found her to be very professional, accessible and empathetic to my specific situation/case. The results speak for themselves as she was able to get all charges dropped. I could not imagine having a better experience working with an attorney and highly recommend Ms. Johnson.
If I could rate her higher than 5 stars, I promise I would. She managed to get my criminal defense case dismissed and provided for me with more than I could ask for
Shannon K. Johnson was amazing! She definitely helped me with my case.
Shannon Johnson is extremely intelligent, professional, and confident. Her experience as a former prosecutor really showed how well equipped she is and familiar with the court system. I could not have made a better choice in choosing her as counsel. I hired Shannon last minute before my first hearing and she was more than willing to jump in and take control. Shannon was in contact with me throughout the whole process and made sure she was consistent with what I wanted. The results were in my favor and I could not have asked for a better outcome. She knew what to say and how to say it. Her down to earth personality also made it very easy for me to connect with her. Thank you, Shannon, for your great work. I will definitely recommend it!!
Shannon Johnson is a lifesaver. She kept in contact with me and told me everything I had to do. She was very helpful and saved me a lifetime of trouble. If I have any trouble in the future, god forbid, She will be the Attorney that I go to! I had a case that I never thought I would beat and with her help we did it.
Shannon Johnson is very professional I had a good experience, she helped me more than I expected. I could not have made a better choice in contacted her. I really recommend you to work with her.
She represented my husband and worked with us very well, always responded quickly when we called, answered everything we needed to know, & in the end, she got his charges dismissed! We've dealt with a lot of lawyers and she is 1 of the only ones we both felt like truly cared what happened to you or not. I would highly recommend her & hope not to but would def hire her again in the future!

For the first time, Cory Monteith's mother, Ann McGregor, has spoken out about her son's death. She told "Good Morning America" on Thursday that she's just now beginning to accept that he's gone.
"The loss is horrendous. Until three days ago, I couldn't look at a picture of Cory," McGregor said.
The 31-year-old 'Glee' star was found dead in a hotel room in Vancouver July 13, 2013.
British Columbia's Coroners Service released his cause of death: "That cause of death was a mixed drug toxicity, and it involved heroin primarily and also alcohol."
Monteith had been open about his struggles with addiction, and in the interview McGregor revealed her son had almost died from his drug use at a much younger age.
"Cory was 15, he did a code blue...He had a lot of emotional things he was trying to figure out," his mother said.
In 2011, Monteith told Parade the turning point for him was when he stole money from a family member to buy drugs. "'I was done fighting myself. I finally said, I'm gonna start looking at my life and figure out why I'm doing this,'" Monteith said at the time.
Eventually, Monteith scored the role of Finn Hudson on "Glee."
When asked what she thought of the special tribute episode "Glee" did for her son, McGregor said she hasn't been able to watch the show since her son's passing.
McGregor wasn't the only one remembering Monteith this week.
On the anniversary of his death, many of his co-stars tweeted out tributes, including Lea Michele, his girlfriend at the time of his death, as well as Amber Riley and Kevin McHale, among others.
As for McGregor, she told "GMA" she's still in awe of her son's talent and that she always will be. The full interview can be found on ABCNews.com.
Also on AOL.com:
'Real Housewife' Jill Zarin's wake-up call
40-year-old mom with kidney disease becomes NFL cheerleader
Khloé Kardashian admits Lamar Odom was cheating

Female hunter has been caught stuffing what appears to be a hare carcass inside her jacket
The woman, who was wearing a green hunting jacket and blood-smeared light trousers, is allegedly seen stashing the mammal's body in her clothing.
However its long legs and head can be seen poking out from underneath.
Anti-hunt campaigners say they scrambled onto the field in Suffolk, earlier this month to try and protect a frightened animal from a 22-strong pack of hounds.
They claim that the mammal is a hare, however the hunter pictured claims it was an "enormous rabbit [which] probably had myxomatosis".
I was physically assaulted by a screaming woman and two men at once who were trespassing
A British Rabbit Council spokesman said the consensus at the council after examining the image was that the animal was a hare.
A 24-year-old hunt saboteur from Norwich, who does not wish to be named, claimed the woman "panicked" when confronted with cameras, prompting her to stuff it in her clothing.
The campaigner said: "It was horrific. It isn't something that a lot of people can witness as well as try to do something about. It was quite traumatic.
British Rabbit Council spokesman said the animal was a hare after examining the image
"We made it clear we were filming them but they just ignored us as they usually do.
"We went into the field and as we approached a hare popped up. Some of the hounds started getting quite excited and made a yelping sound.
"The hare started to run in the direction of the field opposite and was being chased by a couple of hounds - then they all went after it.
"They were in full cry which was quite frightening."
The hunt saboteur and his female colleague said they ran towards the hounds in a bid to stop them.
'I don't want to comment on it. It was an extremely unpleasant day', says female hunter
However, they said they decided to take this image of the animal being carried away as they were too late.
It was then, they claim, they were assaulted by members of the hunt.
He claims it was clearly identifiable as a hare due to characteristics such as the size of its legs and its amber eyes.
He said: "Rabbits just don't have legs like that."
The female hunter said: "I don't want to compromise any of my colleagues in any way.
"I don't want to comment on it. It was an extremely unpleasant day.
"I was physically assaulted by a screaming woman and two men at once who were trespassing. My solicitor might be bringing assault charges against those people.
"It was an enormous rabbit [which] probably had myxomatosis. You can call it what you like it was a large rabbit and it was unwell."
When asked why she carried the animal away she said: "I wouldn't want to leave something there, just like you would move anything - people always pick them [dead animals] up [you] don't leave something there - no more than I would leave a dead pheasant."
The master of the group said: "I wasn't present when this incident occurred. I don't know what the person's actions were but obviously, I can't comment.
"Hearsay and circumstantial evidence isn't admissible.
"I wasn't there, I don't know what happened, why she did it or if she did this."
A Suffolk Police spokesman said: "Police were called on the morning of October 8 2016 to an address.
"Members of a hunting group and those from a hunting monitoring group, along with members of the public reported concerns around the behaviour of some individuals in the groups.
"Police attended and spoke to parties who were present. No formal complaints or allegations were made at the time. Relevant reporting information was given.
"However, police have this afternoon, Thursday 20 October 2016, received further contact from individuals wishing to make an official report of the incident, which will now be looked into."
An RSPCA spokesman said: "This sounds very concerning. The RSPCA firmly believes that the cruel practice of chasing and killing live animals with dogs is a barbaric and outdated pastime and has no place in modern Britain.
"This is a sentiment echoed by the vast majority of the British public.
"Anyone with information about this incident should call the police, or the RSPCA on 0300 1234 999."

Drove through lashing rain (thank you minibus drivers John & Richard) and then ran in the sunshine. The men ran 10k and the ladies less than that. A brilliantly successful day for all the HRR teams and runners. Individually we had 3 1st places, 4 2nd places and 3 3rd places. The men's team were 1st senior and 1st vet team. The Ladies were 1st senior and 5th vet team. All results are for Div 2 and not overall.

The manager continued, …..Anyone willing not to participate can leave and join the party on the other side because once we announce the ErikaTowers webcam no one is allowed to leave and if someone wishes not to participate, than he would be paying $2000 for the same, which is quite less as compared to the reward of the theme. Yes it was her feet and Kyle held his breath as he got nearer. Todd put the video on a public site and told everyone that he was done with this whore. I ErikaTowers porn pretty drunk by this point and knew it was now or never if I was going to make a move on her and get to see the sexy body that Phils been keeping all to himself. It turned me on a bit to know that people were seeing me with this beautiful woman who was clearly having a sexual affair with me, the younger man. She still grimaces and sucks air, but it seems like she is beginning to enjoy it more as she loosens up. You can sense the end of my dildo deep inside you, and its substantial girth bestows you with a feeling of satisfying fullness. I simply wanted them to have the freedom to enjoy themselves, even if I was not available.

‘I was just using you until someone better came along’
This is an actual statement from a boy during my first year of university.
Back then I had little knowledge about feminism and rarely stood up for myself, I based my worth solely on how men viewed me, as society tells me to do, so you can imagine this was a rather low blow for me. Despite knowing he was an utter dick, I still felt, for the next few years, that it had been my fault. Had I not handled the entire flirting well? Had he seen me with no make up a few to many times, which was unavoidable since we were in the same dormitory. Had I been to much myself? I had been rather reserved to it all at first so I certainly wasn’t being too easy…right?
Let me give you a little background. He had started flirting with me when we moved in, and by October the light jokes had become cuddling in bed and late night text messages from him that had me smiling a little. At the start, however, I hadn’t seen him like that and I thought we were were just being playful. I began to realise that perhaps he actually liked me, and ended up liking him a little bit too. To this day I don’t know if those emotions were real. Perhaps I was just so flattered that someone liked me, or maybe felt that I should like people back if they liked me. I had not long recovered from depression and eating disorders so I had put on a little weight and was feeling rather vulnerable. Perhaps he sensed that.
It all boiled down to one night out, however, that ended rather differently than I expected. I was on my way to a girls night out when he told me how beautiful I looked. He touched my side and told me to come back to his room that evening, that he wanted to see me before I went to bed. I felt my toes tingle in excitement. So I went out with my friends, danced, and went home late in the evening. He told me he was awake and so I crept to the third floor of our building and there he was, waiting for me. He led me to my bed and we kissed a little, his hands sneaking under my dress. I was still so unsure at the time, but told myself It would be okay. He had been flirting with me for two months solid, always saying how much he liked me, so I could trust him, couldn’t I? The answer is, as you may have guessed by now, no.
Just as things were about to elevate, he stopped me, pushed me away (while I’m still laying in his bed), looked at me with this pitying expression that was terrifyingly close to ‘sensual’ and said, ‘I’m sorry. I can’t do this. I was just using you until someone better came along.’ I felt like someone had slapped me across the face. I felt like someone had branded my body with ‘worthless’, ‘ugly’, ‘un-fuckable’. I asked him what he was talking about. He told me he had been using me and couldn’t sleep with me. I shook my head and laughed out of panic. I began to curse in fluent Welsh as I detangled myself from his questionable sheets and grabbed my keys. I told him he was unbelievable and an asshole and left.
I cried all night and felt worthless for much, much longer. I didn’t understand. Hand’t he liked me? Why wasn’t I good enough?
He played the sweet card with everyone and the only person truly on my side was my best friend, everyone else just seemed to hover in the middle, hesitating to brand him an asshole with the same conviction that the had branded me a ‘reject’.
A month later he ended up having sex my flat mate who he didn’t even really like as a person. I was furious, until I heard that he couldn’t get it up and ran away, muttering ‘sorry’ over and over.
Karma’s a bitch and she was not on his side.
I see so many articles and movies that express how confusing women are and how men just want to know what we want. The answer is very simply men of the world, so please take note. All women want is… Respect. It’s as simple as that. Respect the women you are with. Respect her love, her mind and her body. Respect her presence in your life.
So many women get used in the way I did, and so many of us fall into a trap of self hate, but please, please, don’t. Hearing words like these are hurtful and they make us doubt ourselves. Our lovability, our sex appeal. It makes us panic and diet and buy new makeup. We cry and cry over hurtful things men have said, each word aching like an old wound. But please, please know it is not you. It took me a long time to realise that this was not my doing. I was nothing but myself. I was nothing but honest. It was he who was too insecure to commit, to insecure to wait until he truly liked someone and felt the need to build a lie in order to feel better. He rejected me in ways I’m sure he had been in order to perhaps to prove a point, to prove to all the women before me that he too, was desirable.
And this doesn’t only apply to women. There are plenty of men out there too who are messed around by women, you are strung along with the promise of love, only to be dropped for someone more ‘boyfriend material’. For any men reading, know that this does not define your worth. You too are worth more than empty promises, and I’m sorry if you were ever made to feel less than you are.
So please, never let a man (or woman’s) words or actions influence how you feel about yourself. So many people love you, and so many people value you and if someone doesn’t then they don’t deserve to share the air you breath. It took me a long time to realise that, and I too am still healing the scars and trying to let go of the hurt and self depreciation that has grown from many bad experiences.
And, unnamed man, if you are reading this after somehow finding it on the internet, I have just one message for you and I would advise that my family, if you are reading this (especially you dad, who I hope to god ins’t reading this article anyway) to not read the next sentence.
Thank you for making me realise how shitty men could be and for teaching me that I deserve better. Oh, and you really missed out because I am fucking AMAZING in bed. May your dick be forever soft.

So, There is this trending story in South Africa
about how a married man died in the cupboard of his mistress, who is actually also a married woman.
The husband of the woman, goes to work every Sunday, and then comes back during the weekend, while his wife invites home a man, with whom she has sex with.
On a fateful day, a neigbor told the husband about his wife infidelity, so he asked for leave on a Sunday from work, so he could burst his wife.
Apparently, on that fateful Sunday, the Husband pretended to go to work, so he can come back and catch the both of them in action…
Read The Full Story below;

In January 1924 a professor at the Japanese Imperial University brought home a two-month old Akita puppy. Dr. Ueno named the pup Hachiko.The following year was a wonderful time for Hachiko and his new master. Akitas are large dogs, and Hachiko grew to be over ninety pounds. This beautiful white dog accompanied Dr. Ueno to the Shibuya train station every morning, where Dr. Ueno would say goodbye to Hachiko and head to the university. And every day when Dr. Ueno returned home Hachiko would be waiting for him at the train station and the two would go home together. Anyone could see the powerful bond between the large Akita and his master.If things had continued like this, the story would still be one of admirable faithfulness from a dog to its master. But that was not the fate of Dr. Ueno and his loyal Akita Hachiko.May 21, 1925 was like any other day for the pair. In the morning, Professor Ueno left Hachiko at Shibuya Station. But when Hachiko returned to Shibuya Station in the evening, his master was nowhere to be found. Though Hachiko waited, Dr. Ueno never showed up.
Dr. Ueno had died from a stroke earlier that day.
Akitas are very loyal dogs and do not bond easily with new people. Hachiko was sent away to another area of Japan where there were relatives of Dr. Ueno’s who could take care of him. Because Hachiko had only belonged to Dr. Ueno for a little over a year, they probably hoped that the Akita would make a new family with them. But Hachiko didn’t care. He ran away from the family and returned to the train station to wait for his master.It was March, 1935 when Hachiko finally died. The old Akita was found in a Shibuya street. He had waited for his master for almost ten years. Many people were saddened by Hachiko’s death, but others say that he was finally at peace and could go with his master wherever it is we go when we die.

About 3 weeks ago, I woke up with a start.
"Where are LLB's pearls?" was the thought that ran through my head.
Now I know that most 13 year old girls don't have "nice" pearls, but LLB has a beautiful strand of Akoya pearls that my parents bought for her when she was very little. They are the most gorgeous color I call just pink. There is a long story about why she got this strand so young, but suffice it to say, the kid is totally spoiled by her grandmother and that, my friends, is a very very good thing.
So, back to my harrowing ordeal.
I leaped out of bed and got out the box that holds her strand of pearls and mine. I opened the case and mine were right on top, where they usually are. I flipped open the flaps to reveal -
(The case has a two ribbon snaps that hold the pearls in the case and I usually use both snaps to hold her pearls in there. Mine sit on top of the satin flaps to keep the strands from rubbing together.)
I freaked! OMG! Where are they?
I am so careful with these pearls. I always put them right back when she's done wearing them...
I ripped her room apart. Fortunately, I had planned to do this anyway since she was off at camp. I cleaned shelves that hadn't been touched in years. I went through her coats. I went through her drawers.
I went through my closet. I cleaned every shelf. I went through every pocket. I cleaned out my dresser. Maybe I'd put them in a drawer in a moment of stupidity. I went through the hope chest... Now I KNEW I would never put them in there, but you know, just in case.
Yesterday, I decided that I had been through this house from top to bottom. Maybe those pearls had fallen out of the box in the place where I keep them. I thought I'd go through that entire place. That's all I had left.
I opened the box.
I held my breath.
I opened the case.
There were my pearls.
This is good. I haven't lost two sets now.
I lifted the flaps - both of them.
There they were.
Her pearls were put away exactly where they should have been.
They were only attached with one snap.
The other must have let go.
I obviously didn't check very well the first time. I'm sure my panic and total freaking out had something to do with that.
I heaved a HUGE sigh of relief and said a quick prayer of thanks.
I have two things to celebrate. My house is clean and LLB's pearls are safe and sound. Whew!
Post a Comment

I've been going to special Parkinsons exercise classes which are set to music. The classs is in West London and organised by Parkinson's UK (local group) We really enjoy ourselves and I feel its been of great benefit, I was walking quite well when I came out of there this morning and that is certainly not always the case.
I would certainly recommend these type of classes. I too have always loved music and I dance whenever I'm able to. I don't dance very well, but who cares? I enjoy it and it does me good.

Guy Scudamore Griffiths was born in July 1916 in London. He was educated at Stowe School, near what is now Silverstone circuit, and his passion for photography and motor sport developed at a young age. On leaving school he went to work for Ealing Studios but was already dealing in second hand cars so he soon left the film industry to deal full time. One of the first cars that he bought was a 1922 Grand Prix Sunbeam which he began to race. He went into partnership with the tuner Louis Giron and established their company, GP Developments, at East Mosley with a paddock shed at Brooklands and Guy became a regular at the circuit. In 1938, Guy realised that racing was taking up too much time and retired from active competition to build up his business.
The outbreak of war made cars almost un-saleable so he took a job at Napier developing the Sabre aero engine, which became the most powerful piston engine of WW II. Sadly the noise from the test beds permanently damaged Guy's hearing. At the end of the war, Guy returned to the motor trade, opening the Alton Garage in Bayswater and specialising in Alvis.
Guy became best known for his skill with the camera. He only photographed events in Britain due to his business commitments and was essentially an amateur but he took some of the finest motorsport photographs ever and became a well known personality on the English racing scene. His work covered all aspects of the sport including hills and circuits, at club level as well as major events and many of Guy's photos appeared in Iota magazine, MotorSport, The Autocar and Autosport. It was Guy who introduced John A Cooper to "Sammy" Davis as his replacement editor for The Autocar.
In the early 60s, Guy became concerned that many great racing cars had fallen into disuse. He created the Griffiths Formula as a way of keeping them in competition and from this came the founding of the Historic Sports Car Club. He also established his own collection of cars at the family home in Chipping Camden.
A number of Guy's photos appear throughout this site. He kept every negative and many of these were compiled into a book "1946 and All That" which was published in 2001. Guy Griffiths died at the age of 87 in December 2003.

AOMopened it's doors in 2004. Our goal is to make it easier for patients to find the supplies and services they need without having to jump through the hoops required of corporately owned companies. We strive to make the process less stressful on both the patient and their family. Our policy is to treat each client as part of our family. Our goal is to make them feel as such.

Between past emotional trauma and relationship juice, Jessica Simpson is telling all in her new memoir. Now, she's opening up on her past relationship with John Mayer, even revealing that he was "obsessed" with her.
The former couple met at a GRAMMY party back in 2005, reported People. In their first conversation, it was revealed that Mayer expressed interest in a song she wrote called “With You.”
Simpson wrote in her book that Mayer revealed, “He wanted to have all of me or nothing.”
“He’d walk into a room and pick up his guitar and you’d swoon,” Simpson said. “I didn’t really know the man behind the guitar. And that was my mission.”
In the memoir, Simpson revealed that they dated in private for several months and that she fell in love with his intensity. She wrote, “Again and again, he told me he was obsessed with me, sexually and emotionally.”
While Simpson continued to discuss their relationship, she also mentioned that she felt insecure around the singer.
“I constantly worried that I wasn’t smart enough for him,” she writes. “He was so clever and treated conversation like a friendly competition that he had to win.”
She also said that she was very scared about disappointing him, oftentimes asking friends to spell check her text messages. “My anxiety would spike and I would pour another drink. It was the start of me relying on alcohol to mask my nerves,” Simpson wrote.
All of these details can be found in Simpson's memoir “Open Book,” which will officially be released on February 4th.

For Sale 40 Acres of Beautiful Land Contact REAL ESTATE FOR YOU
I have a good feeling about this land! Yes I sure do!
Chinchilla lived with all his friends underneath a forest.
One day he saw a strangely outfitted man looking at the old sign that was always just sitting there.
A few days later the sign was gone- but the man came back every day with peculiar tools and mechanisms. He didn't seem to be doing much harm, just removing some big rocks and trees. As long as he didn't go near Chinchilla's home, Chinchilla didn't mind him very much.
One day, Chinchilla and his sister, Chili went to visit their aunt and uncle in the countryside.
When they came home, there were tall brown things in replacement of the trees. Chinchilla and his sister couldn't see a thing, let alone find their burrow! Finally, Chili and Chinchilla found the entrance. But a horror awaited them inside!
As this strange substance grew taller and taller, some had decided to leave and had hopefully found their way to family. But some waited to long and could not find their way through the tall brown things. They never returned. Many did not even try, for they knew it was no use. Their fate was no better. Chinchilla and Chilli decided they could not return to their aunt and uncle's home without their family. So they laid down and did not get back up.

If you are enjoying your freedoms today, thank a Veteran. I'd like to publically (as "public" as this blog is - so to all 3 followers! Hahaha!) thank my dad for his service as an Army Captain in Vietnam. I'd also like to remember my mom as she was left for a year with three kids to raise and a 4th on the way (born the year my dad was gone). I appreciate the sacrifices they made to serve our country - especially in an "unpopular" war. I also want to remember my oldest brother. He joined the Navy after completing his medical training as a surgeon, and although he never left the States, he still served in our military and I'm proud of him.
I'd like to say thank you to my father-in-law for his service in the Navy during Vietnam. My father-in-law immigrated from Holland with his family (6 siblings and his parents) in 1955 when he was 10 years old. Although he spoke no English, he attended an English-only school from the time they arrived. At the dinner table the school-age kids were only allowed to speak English so their parents (Peter's grandparents) could learn English. When my father-in-law graduated from high school, he, like his brothers and a brother-in-law, inlisted in the military. I'm thankful for their service to our country and to my mother-in-law, a newly-wed, who said good-bye to her new husband as he shipped out.
Today, as we remember those who have served our country, may we remember to pray for those who are currently in the line of duty overseas, and for the families of those who lost their lives at Fort Hood last week.
Thank you Veterans for keeping us safe, for protecting our rights and freedoms, and for your sacrifices.
We will not forget...

My girls were making a ton of noise this morning, so I grabbed my camera and went out to the hen house. I just wanted to film them fighting over the nests, but I actually caught my RIR in the act of laying! You have to watch closely. The nest has one egg in it already (sister hen had just vacated the nest), and Rue popped out another. I actually heard it hit the hay! It was quite funny, and quite unexpected. It was the first time I've seen a hen lay.

Wandy Rodriguez - career year?
by, 05-01-2009 at 05:39 PM (1143 Views)
I have to admit, I knew this guy would be able to handle things if he could get a grip on his emotions and problems on the road.
This year, including ST, it seems to be happening. He has a 2-2 record (both losses were when the Astros were shut out, FYI), and has 5 quality starts with an ERA of 1.69 thus far.
I see him as a quiet yet dominant force for our team. I would love to see him win 15-18 games, which could be accomplished if he can remain steady!

October 3, 2013
Dr. Paul Joseph Goebbels was born October 29, 1897 in Rheydt, Prussia, Germany. He received his Ph.D. at Heidelberg University in 1921. He served as the Reich Minister of Propaganda from 1933 until 1945.
He and his wife decided to end their lives, and the lives of their children, on May 1, 1945. It was a rational and humane decision, in light of the cruelty the Germans had to suffer under the Soviets, Americans, French, British, and the others who were allied with these war criminals, all of whom served the jew financiers.

Yeah, this was one of the first ones I bought as well, also for a family vacation to North Dakota in August, 1990! At the time all I could think about was getting Ninja Gaiden 2 for the NES so this issue was pretty exciting to read at the time. I also happen to think it has one of the best covers of an EGM ever, with that classic shot of Ryu hanging off the cliff.
Never would I have thought other people out there would have remembered (or let alone still had) this rare magazine.
Thanks for sharing your memories.

Carol and I went to Linvilla Orchard. I'd never been there and Carol had a childhood memory of going to the orchard as a child. Well, it's become very commercial since Carol's last visit. To walk in the corn maze or hay bale maze, shoot apples with a sling shot or take a hay ride required money but the parking was free. I had a nice time and took a lot of pictures but it's not a trip I need to repeat in the near future.

John and Elizabeth Newson were a husband and wife team of psychologists who undertook an extensive study of child development drawing on the experience of a number of families in the Nottingham area. They published the results of these ongoing studies in a series of books, the second of which is entitled Seven Years Old in the Urban Environment.
Among the many aspects of family life examined by the Newsons was child discipline. Given that the book was published in the 1960s, it is perhaps not surprising that many, if not most, of the mothers interviewed for the study were in favour of corporal punishment. What follows are some of their thoughts they shared with the researchers. The mothers were not identified by name in the book, but generally by their husband’s job.

Websites do not cost $200 to build. I recently talked with a business owner who had decided to use a web company (from somewhere far away) that was going to build his site for $200. Along with the low price, there were lots of promises of high page rank and page one results on Google searches and of course all of this was only going to cost $200 per month, forever.
Of course, first I have to acknowledge that I failed to show this business owner the value of the site I had proposed building for him. I'm going to have to learn from this and do better in the future - no doubt. I also have to admit that the site I had proposed cost considerably more than the $200 he thought he was paying for his site. Also, I have to say with some satisfaction, that the cost of my site was less than what he will pay for his new site in a year and I know that my site would have totally outperformed his new site by the end of that year. I've seen his new site, though it did take a lot of searching, and it's generic.
This is the problem with these kinds of website generating companies that offer "so much" for "so little". They take a one-size fits all, or "beat it to fit, paint it to match" type of approach to site building that completely removes the personality that the site could have had. This particular business owner has tons of personality, but you'd never know if from his new site. So why would a potential customer choose him over someone else? Personality is a key differentiator, especially when you consider that many times, all else is pretty equal.
Lots of elements go into building a website that will work for you and I'm going to outline many of those over the coming weeks. By the way, when I say the site "works for you", I'm referring to it's ability to bring in new customers/clients or make the phone ring. Isn't that what a business website should do? Stay tuned, my goal is to educate, so that you can make better decisions.

Story Name: Between Heaven and Hell
Author : P.D-chan
Disclaimer: Harry Potter and all the other Characters don't belong to me.
Author's Note: So, I will overlook and maybe rewrite all the chapters and then there will come finally new ones :)
pain was burning in him like a flame. A flame from deep within him,
that tried to burn him alive. A flame from around him that tried to
eat the flesh from his bones, layer for layer. And he was forced to
feel every minute. To experience every second, every minute. The
agony was dragging him down into the darkness of his own mind and he
wished that he would fall into oblivion soon, so that he could flee
from this pain. But it refused him to faint away. It refused him to
flee. It forced him to feel.
And it forced him to hear. Hear his own cries of torment, hear them piercing through the silence around him.
Though he was the only one to hear them.
alone now. Nobody was there any longer. Nobody was there to hear his
cries except himself. He had wanted it like that. Nobody should see
him like this.
But soon he would not be alone anymore.
They had thought they could flee from him, avoiding his vengeance. But their were wrong.
Soon..everybody would pay for what they had done to him.
All... Harry Potter, the Boy-Who-Lived, wished for was a quiet year. Just one year where there was nobody who wanted to kill him, where nobody wanted his death. Just one year where he could relax and where he could only think of himself for once. One year without fear. Just one year that he could enjoy like a normal
Was this little wish really so odd? Many people cursed their boring lives. He wished he would be bored for once.
With a sigh from deep within him Harry leaned his forehead against the cool glass of the window of his Compartment. His wish would never be fulfilled. It seemed that a quiet year was not meant for him. What could possible happen this year?
As the Hogwarts Express reached a curve, Harry's head bounced slightly against the glass. He winced, but didn't move his head away.
The glass was cold. It felt good against his scar. He sighed again, a sigh from deep within him. He didn't hold it back. There wasn't anyone who could hear.
scar. Since Voldemort's return it hadn't stop hurting. All his
holiday long there had been a light constant pain in it, the whole
day and the whole night. Like a knife that cut it's way slowly into
his head. And there was nothing he could do about it. He hadn't found
anything to erase the pain and he really had tried everything he
could think about-except magic. But just, because it was forbidden to
use magic in the school holidays. Otherwise he would have tried the
anti-pain-spell that he had seen in one of his books.
But because he couldn't he had swallowed some of his Aunt Petunia's strong pill's against headaches that he had taken secretly from the bath, but nothing had succeeded in erasing the pain.
Now his only hope
lied in Hogwarts and in Professor Dumbledore and Madame Pomfrey.
Surely they would find a way to help Harry.
When not, when not even magic cold help him, then the only way to erase the pain would be Voldemort's death.
Harry raised a hand. Slowly he let his
finger glide over the scar, over the evident proof of his survival.
When he thought that there had been a time where he had loved it,
because it had made him special. But since he knew the origin of
it... his liking had slowly turned into despise.
That the day when he had become it was the day his parents had died, when they had tried to protect him. He not only despites it, he hated it.
With another sigh Harry let his hand fell back in his lap. It wasn't good to dwell on the past. That had he learned in his first year, where the magical mirror had shown him his greatest wish that what he yearned for: his dead parents. But sometimes it felt good.
"Great, just great" Harry mumbled silently to himself. He lost himself too much in his thoughts when he was alone.
A quiet rustle was the only answer he got. With a smile he turned his head to the only one who shared this train with him
"Well, Hedwig, what do you say to the great honour that we have the whole train alone for us. Just for us the Hogwarts Express takes the whole distance before September the 1st"
The white Owl blinked
and threw a reproachful look to him, because of the sarcasm in his
voice, before she closed her eyes again. Harry winced. Hedwig wasn't
really glad to be in her cage and she was showing him exactly in what
a bad mood she was. Not a very pleasant company to be with. But the
only one he got.
He sighed again and leaned back into his seat. This journey was not quite so entertaining and fun when he was alone, when there was nobody to speak with, when there was no Ron and no Hermione. Not even the women with the sweets seemed to be there. He lay a hand onto his belly-and he was hungry.
God, he would even prefer to speak with his nemesis Draco Malfoy. Then he mustn't talk to himself. That he was already doing when he was with the Dursleys.
Suddenly with a loud rattle the door opened, startling Harry. Quickly he turned around, cursing himself that his wand was in his trunk...and found himself gazing into the wide smirk of nobody else than Draco Malfoy, standing in the doorframe.
When speaking from the devil...
"All alone, Potter?" With an elegant movement Malfoy stepped into the compartment, holding Harry's gaze with his silver-grey eyes.
Harry sneered. It seemed just his bad wishes would be fulfilled. Just wonderful. "What do you want, Malfoy? Are you even supposed to be here?"
The blond Slytherin smirk widened, so that it was nearly a real smile. "Friendly as ever. And yes I'm allowed here. Did you really think that the whole Hogwarts Express does this journey just for one person, even if it's you, the great and mighty Harry Potter!"
Harry groaned inwardly, watching how Malfoy's gaze went over his property, from his big trunk on one of the seats to Hedwig in her cage.
It was just his luck, that of all possibilities, it was his nemesis Draco Malfoy, who was with him in this damn train.
Hadn't Dumbledore written in his Owl post that he would be the only one?
Maybe he had lied, because he knew how much he hated the Slytherin.
Just great. A Gryffindor and a Slytherin alone in one train.
\\Will anybody of us reach the school whole and in one piece?\\ Harry thought.
"And why do you want to come earlier to school? Do you want to spy for your father or are you just bored?"
"Neither of the two. I just wanted to hear such sweet words from you again." Draco snickered and let himself fall back into the seat beside Harry. "But I'm hurt, Potter. I would have thought that you would appreciate my presence. I'm a far better company than that owl of you. And I've wanted to give you a chance to apologize."
Harry blinked. Apologize? Why should he...oh.that.
Slowly he let his eyes glide over Draco's body, which was already in his school uniform. But he didn't notice anything odd. All seemed to be normal-of what he could see. Though he noticed that Malfoy had grown a bit in the summer holidays. A bit too much for Harry's likes. So much he could see was the Slytherin now a good head taller than himself.
/Just great. Now he can really look down on me./
But otherwise... nothing had changed.
"I don't see a reason to apologize to you. There don't seem to be any after- effects from the curses we hit you with." Harry narrowed his eyes and looked down on his fingers. "And besides, you deserved it after saying such mean things about Cedric."
"Ah, stop it, Potter." Malfoy interrupted annoyed. "Don't tell me you still grieve about this Hufflepuff guy. That's just so you."
Harry closed his eyes and fought against the tears
that threatened to well up in his eyes. Tears of anger and grieve.
Oh, why couldn't he just pounce Malfoy to the ground now, no matter
whether it will bring him detention later in school. Just letting his
anger break free.
Warm breath brushed his cheek and Harry squeaked in surprise, nearly jumping out of his seat. Startled he turned his head- and found himself nearly nose to nose with Malfoy, his face just inches away from that of the blond. Just a few more inches and they would touch. He even could see the slightly darker grey sparkles in the silver-grey eyes of his enemy.
As fast as he could, Harry backed away, pressing himself as much as possible in his seat. "Damn, ...Malfoy!"
Malfoy smirked. "Problems, Potter?"
Harry shot him an angry look. "What was the idea of that, Malfoy?"
Malfoy just smiled. "Have I startled you? I'm sooo sorry."
He snickered slightly, leaning back into his seat, arms comfortably behind his head, but without letting Harry out of his gaze. Harry squirmed lightly, cursing his wild pounding heart. Why had Malfoy startled him so?
Damn this Slytherin.
couldn't help but to snicker a bit. The look of Harry as he had found
his face just inches away from his own had been so great. Alone that
had calmed his sore heart. That and of course to smell, just for a
second, Harry's sweet breath, mingling with his own. It had tasted so
And now that angry look out of these wonderful green eyes. Malfoy snickered again and leaned back into his seat, arms behind his head. He would rather lay his arms around Potter's slender body and press him to his own, but he doubt that the Gryffindor would appreciate that.
"You haven't told me yet what you are doing here." Harry asked him, his eyes still locked with his. "And don't tell me that it isn't my business, because it is."
Malfoy raised an elegant eyebrow. Now that was interesting. He grinned. "I'm your business? Wow, Harry, I didn't know that you are so much interested in my doings and me. I'm honoured."
Harry's mouth opened and closed, not able to
produce a single word. And to Malfoy's delight a small blush crept
his neck up to these soft cheeks. And the blush became darker as
Harry noticed Malfoy's staring.
Harry felt like he would explode every second. That damn blush.
And that damn, bloody, staring Slytherin. Under that silver-grey gaze his blush became worse and worse.
And just because of these damn words. What was it about these words that he had started to blush?
"Don't stare at me like that, Malfoy!"
Malfoy again raised one eyebrow. "Like what, Potter?" He sneered and Harry clenched his fist as he noticed the cold and depreciatory look in these silver-grey eyes.
"And I'm not staring, Potter. I'm just noticing your weaknesses. And look how many there are: your to small, to weak, to thin, you're to damn trustful and friendly, your is always a mess, your glasses are horrible and you're way to helpful for my likes."
Harry closed his mouth. He stared at Malfoy's hand before his eyes; on the fingers with whom he had counted his so called weaknesses. And then Malfoy did something that let his mouth fall open again: He smiled.
Not his usually smirk, but a real smile. Quite a sad one.
What was with Malfoy ? Why was he suddenly so nice?
"How do you want to fight Voldemort when you have so many weak points, Potter! He has no weaknesses and he will not hesitate to let you suffer, before he kills you."
Harry raised his look and gazed deep into the eyes of the blond. Has he heard just a friendly tone in his voice? Since when was Malfoy so nice to him ? And why ?
What happened in the holidays that...Wait..
Harry felt how he paled. "You met him, didn't you! You met Voldemort " He whispered.
Malfoy's smile vanished. Harry felt a shudder ran
through his entire body. In the eyes of the Slytherin was a hate from
such intense, he had never seen before. Not even in their biggest
fights he had seen such hate.
It scared him.
For the first time he was scared of Draco Malfoy.
"Yes, I have met Lord Voldemort, the Leader of all Deatheaters." Malfoy said, his voice quiet and emotionless. "I've met him two days after we arrived London. My father brought me and my mother to a house and there he was, sitting on a big chair like a king on his throne and crouching around his feet were his snake and that rat from your weasel friend."
\\Nagini...and Peter Pettigrew\\
"And there where a lot more people besides my parents and me. All the Deatheaters who had escaped at the end of the war and their families. All of them bowed before their new-born Lord and some of had joined the snake and the rat, and where crouching around his feet like..."
"Stop it!" Harry shouted. He stared at Malfoy, who was still looking at him, still with those hate in his eyes. But he knew... this hate was not because of him. It was...
"Damn, Malfoy. Why are you telling me that? You're Slytherin, surely you're overjoyed that Voldemort is back. And surely your Dad has told you everything that happened the night Voldemort came back."
/It couldn't be./
"Yes, he has told me. He has told me everything."Malfoy sighed and suddenly the hate vanished from his eyes, leaving only a silent anger. And then, before Harry could react, he lifted a hand and pale fingers brushed gently over the scar under his hair. "He has told what Voldemort has done to you, but if you believe me or not, I haven't enjoyed it to hear it."
Malfoy moved his fingers and Harry shuddered as his fingers continued to stroke his scar.
Never had anybody touched it. And know Malfoy.
Harry must admit to himself that it felt...kind of good. And he didn't move away from the touch.
"Now that I've met Voldemort in person, and know him not only from the story's of my father" Malfoy continued, his gaze slightly over glazed as if he remembered something. "I have realized that he is not the heroic Wizard that my father has told of. He's a bitter old man full of hate, who wants nothing more, than that everybody fears and worship him. And he wants your head on a plate."
Malfoy's gaze returned to normal.
Harry swallowed. "Malfoy...do you try to tell me that."
\\ It cannot be.\\
A big smile appeared on Malfoy's face, letting his silver-grey eyes lighten up. "Slow today, Potter?"
My first fancfiction from Harry Potter...it is a long time ago that I started this...I hope now I can finish it. :)

We could not be happier with Yelena and Sergei's work for our wedding. They were professional and accommodating throughout the preparation process, even agreeing to learn a song that is not normally on their play list especially for our event. They were also efficient and responsible about keeping in touch with us before the date. Most importantly, they played beautifully at our event and did a wonderful job of keeping track of the different processionals, recessionals, and reception music, with almost no guidance from us. We are so grateful to have had such excellent musicians and thrilled with the "service" they provided.

This will be a very important spring evaluation period coming up for tight end Jake Peters.
Peters showed promise as a sophomore and heading into his junior year, he landed an offer from the Washington Huskies. Unfortunately, Peters suffered a ruptured achilles tendon at a summer camp and it forced him to miss his entire junior season.
Peters is healthy now and hoping to show the college scouts he's 100%. He's a big, physical tight end, strong as an in-line blocker but also capable of being a factor in the passing game.
"Colorado was a great visit, I really enjoyed it there," Peters said. "They had a Junior Day Saturday but my dad had a work event that day so we just went up on Friday. Gary Bernardi (CU TE coach) was actually the coach who recruited my dad to Arizona back in the 80s so they had some funny stories to tell about their days together at UA.
"I was also able to sit down and had a good talk with coach (Mike) MacIntyre (head coach). He told me they're very interested but just want to see me run. The campus is incredible and the facilities and stadium were incredible as well. The air quality is definitely better than back home and I really enjoyed my time there and have a lot of of interest in the CU program."
On Monday, Peters stayed local and checked out UCLA.
"It was a good visit, the new football building is unreal," Peters said. "They move in to in it June and it's going to be really nice. The last time I visited UCLA was 10 days after my achilles surgery and I couldn't do much but this visit, I was able to walk around and see a lot more of the campus and facilities.
"Coach (Rip) Scherer (TE coach) told me they're looking at me as a tradition Y type tight end. He said they're realizing it's hard to find a true Y tight end and feels I fit what they're looking for as an athlete, person and student. He's going to come down in the spring to watch me and just like with CU, they want to see how I run. If he likes what he sees, he's going to tell coach Mora I'm healthy and healed up."
Since Peters injured himself at a college camp last summer, he's not planning to hit the camp circuit this time around.
"I'm really just trying to stay healthy this off-season," Peters said. "I want to play my senior year and have a big season. We had a ton of coaches come by our school last year for spring ball so hopefully they will all come out and again to see me and Malone Mataele and see that I'm healthy and the same player I was before my injury.
"I'm still talking with UW (Washington) and I've also been hearing from Arizona, Arizona State, Cal, Oregon, Oregon State and Utah. Like I said, it's a going to be a big spring for me but I'm excited and ready to get going."
To see Peters in action from his sophomore season, check out his highlights above:

Located on Avenue A, between 10th and 11th Streets, Hi Fi is a cool bar. The hook is that they've got a hi-tech jukebox called El DJ that has 2300+ full length albums on it. I still managed to think of a few of my favorite albums that weren't in the computer (like Europe's "The Final Countdown"--what are they thinking?). It's a cool bar to go to at night when it is full of hipsters, but the Happy Hour has some fatal flaws. The deal is that all drinks are buy one, get one free, which, in most bars is cool b/c you can get one drink & give the free one to your friend, but at Hi Fi, the free drink is only good for your next round--so we ended up having to get 2 rounds of drinks, which is ok, but sometimes only one beer is enough. The pluses were that the Discovery Channel was on, and the bartenders were nice.

The sexual tension between Mr Darcy and Miss Elizabeth Bennet sizzles without any explicit suggestion in Austen’s beloved classic. But imagine if instead of showing her around the grounds at Pemberley, Darcy had brought Lizzy into his playroom? OK, so that doesn't actually happen in the Clandestine Classic reworking, but it’s still pretty steamy. Here’s an extract:
Elizabeth trailed kisses along his throat and neck until she reached his earlobe and took it between her teeth. "Please take me," she whispered. "I need it. I ache for it." Her words were met with only a grunt of approval by Darcy. He pulled back from her and checked their surroundings, partly to assure they were alone, but also to discover a hiding place for them that was away from the road. He took hold of Elizabeth’s hand and pulled her away from the lane to the trees beyond. They walked on for a short time until they came to a small clearing and without another word, he pulled her to the ground, laying her down on the grass and covering her body with his.

By Fr Joseph Panabang SVD
Mag-Beer Muna Tayo
His name is George but I have forgotten his surname. He was a police inspector, and his most tedious work which he dreaded most was autopsy. In a big hospital in Kumasi, regional capital of Ashante Region, he was describing in vivid detail his horrible experience in one of the morgues where 20 to 30 cadavers were just lined up waiting to be claimed. He was once called to identify a corpse. He went around the different rooms, squeezing in his feet between corpses lined up one after the other.

It had been one year since his very successful heart transplant. He had received his new heart on July 3, 2010. And now he was coming back for a reunion with the staff. Well surprising them was more like it. They didn't know he was coming.
He walked into the very familiar transplant wing and smiled as fond memories made here came back to him.
"That can't be Kuol Ketebo can it?" asked someone from behind him.
"It's me Pam," smiled Kuol hugging the shorter woman.
"Oh my gosh Kuol! How are you?" asked Ryan shockingly running to hug him as well.
"Fantastic. Is everyone else here?" questioned Kuol.
"Dr. Jordan should be in her office," said Pam. Kuol headed to Sophia's office.
"Dr. Jordan," said Kuol happily.
"Kuol!" said Sophia happily, "Wow, we weren't expecting you. Andy's not even here today."
"Who says I'm not here," said Andy from behind. Kuol turned around to find Andy standing there along with a brunette woman with an infant in her arms.
"Rena," thought Kuol knowing who she was instantly, "How is the Great Dr. Yablonski?"
"Doing well. Especially when Pam texted me and said you were here," he said turning to the brunette, "Honey this is Kuol. Kuol, my wife Rena."
"Nice to meet you Kuol. I've heard so much about you," said Rena shaking his hand.
"Same here Mrs. Yablonski. And who's this cutie pie?" asked Kuol gesturing towards the baby.
"This is our daughter Isabella," said Rena," "Say 'Hi Kuol,'" she said to her little girl who was, of course, clueless. Kuol just laughed.
"Hey this party's missing people," shouted Miranda followed by David, Lisa, and Luc along with two more babies in tow.
"Hey guys. Are those babies family members?" Kuol asked confusingly. Isabella he understood but he didn't remember any more babies in the group.
Everyone snickered, "You could say that," said David. And then Kuol noticed the rings on his and Miranda's fingers.
"Whoa you guys are married. I didn't even know you two were dating!" gasped Kuol.
"Good that was the point. We basically kept it a secret until we were engaged. Which was shortly after your transplant," said Miranda as she picked up one of the babies, a boy. David picked up the other one, a girl.
"Guys meet our buddy Kuol. Kuol this is Colleen and Dylan," said David.
"How old are the babies. All of them?" he asked.
"The Foster- Lee twins are three months old. Isabella's six months old," said Lisa.
"Wow, a lot has happened in a year," said Kuol.
"Yes it has," admitted Andy taking Isabella from Rena.
"But it's good to see you again Kuol," said Luc.
"It's good to see you all too. The Great Dr. Yablonski and his team that gave me life. I still thank you all," said Kuol as they continued to converse and celebrate their reunion together.

Over the weekend, one Scots couple got engaged during Westlife's Glasgow gig and the video of the proposal went viral on TikTok after being captured by other concert goers.And now, Danny McGuinness has revealed that he's known for almost a year that the proposal would happen on this night at The OVO Hydro as his new fiancee Vikki is 'Westlife daft'.The Irish group played two nights at the Glasgow venue and it was during their rendition of hit 'Flying without wings' that 34-year-old Danny got down on one knee.Danny told the Record: "I knew very earlier in our relationship she was the one.
Vikki is Westlife daft, she's been to every single concert they have had in Glasgow so I always had the intention of focusing a proposal round something like that, because I knew it would blow her mind."As soon as tickets were released they were bought as Christmas present so we now had a date for our proposal.
We had talked about our future and in the discussion 'Flying Without Wings' would be our first dance song so we now had the song.
I wanted the day to be perfect so I upgraded our tickets for the concert and booked a surprise night away for us both."Danny told Vikki's mum his big plans and she was equally over the moon.Read more on dailyrecord.co.uk

Many Mongolians are still nomadic and live on the steppe grazing their animals. Most herders have mixed flocks of sheep and goats. There are few cows. We wondered what they found to eat as there were few tufts of very dry grass – there’s more vegetation on our local beach. Grass does grow after the summer rains but it doesn’t provide a complete cover. I asked about overgrazing but was met with very blank looks.
As you travel you can see the small ger settlements scattered across the landscape.
The ger is a herder's most important possession. When a couple get married the family builds or buys them a new ger. It is made up of a wooden framework with a felt covering. It is easily put up and taken down as the family move around. Inside there is a small stove for heat and cooking. The fuel is traditionally dried dung. It doesn’t smell but burns slowly providing an even heat. There are beds around the sides, which double as sitting and working areas. There is a dresser, which holds prize possessions. There are few personal possessions as everything has to be carried by truck as the family moves. There is however a TV with satellite dish and solar panel outside.
Horses are the traditional method of transport and are still used by most herders. They are kept tethered to a ‘washing line’ outside the camp when not in use. Motor cycles and quad bikes are beginning to appear.
On the way back to Ulaanbataar we were asked if we would like to visit a nomad family in their ger. Mongolian nomads have a tradition of hospitality and welcome visitors who are offered tea, dairy products and food. No payment is expected and none accepted. Unfortunately there have been cases of tourists, especially backpackers, who have abused this tradition and outstayed their welcome.
The first family were too busy but the second tent we stopped at we were invited inside and we were given ‘milk tea’ and small dough loaves to eat. The pan went on the fire and a meal was cooked for us. Slices of rib were cut off some lamb and boiled up in water in the pan.
The mother them made noodles – it was fascinating to watch as she mixed water with flour and kneaded the dough. It was then rolled out on a small board about 15”x10” into a huge round shape. I still don’t know how she did this – the dough was wrapped round the rolling pin as it was rolled out and was gradually stretched until it was much, much larger than the board. The dough was then rolled up and chopped into thin strips. By now the meat was cooked and taken out of the water and the noodles put in.
The meat was given to us to eat – Michael and I were given a knife to cut off strips. The guide and driver just used their hands. We were then given huge big bowls of stock with the noodles. Second helpings were offered. Michael asked for just a little bit but was given a full bowl. The guide explained that nomad hospitality didn’t run to half helpings as that is an insult to the guest. This was definitely a highlight of the trip.
All was offered freely and we felt very bad that we hadn’t got anything to give in return. The family had seven month old twins so we arranged with the guide that we would give him some money to buy presents for the children, which he would deliver to them when he next went past.

He watched her. He watched how her chest rose and fell with each breath. He watched to make sure it stayed that way. If it ever staggered, he was there at the ready, angel on speed-pray, to get the help she needed.
Dean wondered what drove Y/n to this point of insanity. Did she think she had something to prove to him? Did she have a death wish? Was it some freaky combination of the two, or something else entirely? Whatever it was, he knew he almost lost her.
When he woke up to her missing, he went ballistic. He called everyone in his contacts that knew Y/n or might know where she’d gone. She didn’t even leave a note. There was nothing to indicate that she was safe and out of harm’s way. But Dean knew better. Something in his gut told him that she’d found a case, something she thought she could handle by herself, got in her car, and booked it. Dean poured over her search history, looking for anything that indicated where she went.
Dean sat in the chair next to the bed. His brow pinched and his eyes narrowed as he ensured the stability of her condition. It took too long to stop the bleeding. The long, deep gash in her thigh came close to hitting an artery, and he breathed a sigh of gratitude to whoever watched over them. Although no blood squirted out from the high pressure of arterial bodies, crimson still pooled around her like a perverted bed. When he scooped her up and got her to the Impala, it was almost too late. Sam peeled out of that warehouse parking lot as fast as he could. They barely made it to the hospital in time.
Usually, Dean avoided hospitals. They asked too many questions and reported things like gunshot wounds and injuries that looked like animal attacks. But, he couldn’t warrant anything else this time. Castiel didn’t answer at first. No other angel would willingly help a Winchester. It was the hospital or watch Y/n die in his arms, and he couldn’t stomach that. So the hospital it was.
He lied about the origin of her injuries. Said it was some freak accident when they were changing out a table saw blade. That it slipped and horrifyingly cut her open. It was a barely believable story, but they didn’t press any further for an explanation. He was glad about that.
Dean reached out and wrapped his fingers around hers. They lied limp in his hold, and he begged for Y/n to wake up, to grip his hand so tight that his fingers went numb. He wanted her to wake up, to come back to him, and never leave him like that again. Dean swore to himself he wouldn't fall in love after what happened to Lisa and Ben. It was too much pain to bear. Giving those two up was the hardest thing he'd ever done, and he fought monsters for a living. He couldn't go through that again.
Then Y/n showed up. With her beautiful y/h/c hair and charismatic y/e/c eyes that danced whenever he mentioned anything akin to Led Zeppelin or beer burgers. It was during the first food fight that he noticed the skip in his heartbeat. She had mashed potatoes in her hair and corn stuck to her shirt, but she laughed like it was the best thing in the world. That laugh was music to his ears. Y/n was smart, too. She knew her way around the trunk of Baby, and he didn't even have to tell her what was what. She just knew. She helped with more research than he could blink at. Sam always enjoyed long nights pouring over books and articles on the Internet. She made a game out of it, and Dean even found himself getting in the spirit of competition just to see the look on Sam's face when he found the breakthrough.
When did he stop believing in her abilities? When did he start treating her like some fragile flower that might blow away at the mere mention of a Werewolf or demon or vengeful spirit?
Maybe he had grown too protective of her, but he was so deathly afraid to lose this one good thing that came out of a life of hunting. Part of Dean felt like this was a chance to redeem himself for what did happen to Lisa and Ben. He never meant to drag them into anything. But Y/n was different. She already knew what it was like to be a hunter. She knew the ins and outs of the monsters, of the risks involved in mingling with the Winchesters. But none of that mattered. Y/n wanted to help. She just ended up helping in more ways than one.
Dean leaned forward in his chair and rested his forehead against the thin mattress of the hospital bed. Beeps from the monitor became background noise as he focused all his energy on willing Y/n to wake up. He never let go of her hand. Never wanted to for fear that the second his skin left hers, she would slip away.
"I'm sorry, baby," he whispered. "Whatever it was, I'm so sorry. I didn't think you'd do something like this, but I get it. Keep a hunter cooped up for too long, they have to scratch the itch. Maybe I forgot. Maybe I got scared. I don't know. You're strong, Y/n. You can come back from this. Hell, I've seen you come back from worse, right? This is nothing. It's child's play." Dean sat up and wiped away at the tears with the back of his hand. "Just please wake up, Y/n. Please."
Sam opened the door and Dean hastily swiped at the wetness on his cheeks. He took the coffee his brother offered and sipped at it. Hospital coffee held a bitterness that nothing else in the world could compare to. It was pure acid, and Dean winced from the horrible taste.
"How is she?" Sam asked as he took the chair against the window. Rain pattered against the glass panes and ran down to the ledge. It hadn't let up for hours.
Dean just stared at her. Her skin looked ashen from the blood loss. Dark circles made her look sicker than she was.
"Any word from Cas?"
Dean shook his head. "Not since he first worked his mojo."
Castiel did just enough to immediately heal the worst of the incision. Apparently he was needed elsewhere, but he made sure Dean knew to pray to him if she took a downward turn. So far, his services weren't needed. Dean hoped it stayed that way.
"You need sleep, Dean."
But he didn't for fear something would happen the second he closed his eyes. So, he watched her. He watched her and prayed to something that she would make it through and wake up to steal his shirts again. To surprise him with morning sex and apple muffins with freshly ground coffee. To put together game night with Sam, Cas, and whoever felt like dropping by for some beers and laughs. Dean felt truly happy for the first time in too many years. Sure, he was still hunting, but he had her, damn it. And if he had her, then everything was still okay.
A flurry of wings echoed around the small room, and Dean looked over to see an angel in a trench coat standing at the foot of Y/n's hospital bed. His brow pinched together and his mouth was set in a deep frown as he stared at the unconscious woman.
"Cas," Dean mumbled. "Please tell me you're here to fix her."
"Of course I will heal her." Castiel removed his coat and draped it over the edge of the bed. "But first, I must know. What did this to her, Dean?"
"We think it was a demon," Sam answered for his brother. "Y/n was on the receiving end of a blade, but we don't know for sure what it was. From everything we found on her computer, it looked like demon omens."
Cas nodded. "I see. Was the demon disposed of?"
"What?" Dean's eyes narrowed as he looked up at the the angel "No, Cas! We didn't take the time to hunt down the little devil while Y/n was busy bleeding out! That's not how this works!"
Sam leaned forward in his chair, his expression full of curiosity. "Why do you ask, Cas? Why the interest?"
"Because." Castiel sighed and turned toward Sam. "One of Hell's worst escaped prison."
"Hell has its own prison?" Dean asked.
"Essentially, yes. We're afraid that's what Y/n was hunting when...when this happened. If he's back, then the state of the universe is in much more peril than we thought."
Dean's gaze dropped to her sleeping face. Why would she go after something so powerful alone? Why would she even go after a single demon alone, let alone a maximum security prisoner? Dean had so many questions, but nothing could be answered unless she woke up.
"Cas," Dean began. "Could you work your magic and bring Y/n back? Please?"
"Yes, of course."
Castiel approached her and laid two fingers on her forehead. His eyes glowed magnificent blue for a moment then Y/n's flickered open. She glanced around the room, confusedly scrunching her brow at Castiel when she realized the vice grip on her hand.
"Dean?" That voice was like music to his ears.
"Hey, baby," he whispered. "I'm here. You're okay. You're at the hospital. We can go home soon."
All his questions could wait. All he saw was his world staring back at him from the confines of a hospital bed. He prayed a silent 'thank you' to Castiel as he pressed his lips to her forehead. Her skin still felt cold to the touch, but that would go away with time.
"I love you," Dean murmured to her, and he watched as her eyes lit up. Those beautiful eyes.
"I love you, Dean."
They didn't even wait for the official discharge order. They snuck out of the hospital and drove away as fast as humanly possible back to Lebanon, Kansas and the safety of the bunker. Y/n tried to get out of the car, but she groaned as pain lingered.
"Whoa, whoa, whoa. Here."
In a swift motion, Dean picked her up and carried into the underground labyrinth they called home. She wrapped her arms around his neck and laid her head against his shoulder. Dean didn't hide the soft smile that spread over his tired face. It was only a few hours ago that he didn't know if he'd ever hear her voice again let alone feel the warmth of her body against his.
He held her against him on their bed. The lights were out. Her head was on his chest and his arms were wrapped around her, unwilling to let her go. He softened his own breathing just so he could hear hers. Dean loved her, and he just couldn't bring himself to give her any sense of space. At least, not right now.
"Aren't you worried about why I left in the middle of the night?" Y/n eventually asked.
"Not right now." He pressed a kiss to the top of her head. "I will be later. All that matters right now is that you're safe. You're alive. And I want to make sure that's real before we tackle anything else."
"Okay." Dean heard the smile in her voice and the way she sighed as she snuggled back down against him.
Yeah, Dean swore he would never fall in love again after what happened with Lisa, but he never expected her to show up. And he could never deny the strong magnetism between them. A connection that overpowered any other force. He still had her, and damn it, not even being dragged to Hell all over again would force him to let her go.

This was such an easy experience. We had originally planned on buying a car with the Costco program but we read the positive reviews about Subaru of Puyallup and decided to try them first. As it turned out we are glad we did. Kimberlee was really positive and quite helpful. She didn't pressure us at all and gave us all the time we needed to test drive. What we liked best was the no stress price. We researched and were satisfied with what we payed. We drove down from the Olympic Peninsula just to buy our car from Subaru of Puyallup. We recommend this dealership to anyone interested in buying a Subaru.

Sadie just loves the water so much. I don't know if it's in her genes, or if it has something to do with her disability, or if we just started her early and so it's familiar and comfortable, but she loves it so much. When you watch the video, you'll notice that it's almost like in the water is where she belongs. It's like she's at home there. She can move and kick and she probably feels more free than anywhere else.
We are definitely going to go to the pool a lot this summer!
What about your kids? Do they like water? Is it something you had to teach them to like or did they just like it?

I was aksed a question today by a young man looking to start into the gunsmith trade, he wanted to know "if there were any gunsmiths of color" the following was my reply "As to gunsmiths of color in over thirty years as a gunsmith and having contact with hundreds of smiths throughout the world I have never asked what color they are. I assume there are some but I really can't tell you its not something that comes up in our conversations. I don't believe it would make much difference one way or another a gunsmiths success is based on his workmanship and reputation. In today's world with computers customers look at a smiths web site, check out forums to learn about a smiths work, many times we received guns from all over the country and never meet the customers." Have any of you had work done by a gunsmith of color?

I don't recall seeing much on Chowhound about this restaurant so I thought I would write a review of my lunch. I went here by myself about 1 pm today - a Tuesday - after attending the Lisa Scottoline book signing at the Barnes and Noble. The weather was delightful and while I noticed a lot of patrons at the nearby Rouge and Parc, there was only one other table occupied here. That was fine for me, a party of one, but not great for the restaurant. Admittedly, the location of the restaurant on 16th St. between Latimer and Spruce is a little off the beaten path. I had dinner here before with a few other people and lunch several times but had never gone for lunch myself. Now that I am retired, I thought I would give it a try. Since it is a byob, I brought a small individual bottle of Prosecco from the cartons of three bottles.
On to the food, I ordered a Caesar salad and originally the chicken rollatine although I remembered having a similar dish made with veal previously. As it turns out, it was the veal that was available for lunch. Either the menu I received was two sided - for lunch and dinner - or I was given the dinner menu. In any case, the salad was cold and crisp and everything one would want in a Caesar salad. The bread which came with seasoned olive oil was very good and with four slices of it, really more than needed for one person. I asked for some foil and took the rest home to hubby. The veal dish which included veal stuffed with smoked ham, fontina cheese & spinach in a rose sauce with mushrooms & chopped roma tomatoes was excellent as I remembered and included some very crisp and properly cooked snap peas (at least that's what I think they are called.) I dipped some of the bread I ate in the sauce - it was so good. I also had a cappuccino which was well prepared. The whole lunch including the 8% Phila. tax was about $24 and I gave the waiter $30 originally thinking I might have been undercharged for the veal and letting him have the difference. When I left the restaurant I noticed there was a separate lunch menu and I had been charged the correct amount for the veal, but since the service was excellent, the tip was fine.
I know sometimes people aren't comfortable going to a restaurant by themselves for lunch but everything was fine and I was well treated. Maybe things would have been different on a more crowded Thursday or Friday but I felt fine here and just wanted to let other Chowhounders know of my really nice experience.
One final note - I don't think they accept credit cards and bring some wine.
Updated 3 months ago | 0
Updated 11 months ago | 7
Updated 2 years ago | 1
Updated 12 days ago | 25
Updated 18 hours ago | 26

Originally Posted by cromag
I was born with flat feet. By now they're probably convex. I've been able to get by with off-the-shelf orthotics, so far. Even for my weekly hikes. I'm sure your doctor will give you directions, but break them in gradually!
Thanks for the advice. I haven't had any problems caused by flat feet, at least not to my knowledge. No related back pain for instance. But the doctor was quite pessimistic and he spoke all gloom and doom about my future health. It certainly made me worry if that was his goal.
Almost a week later, my ankle doesn't look or feel much better. I will probably spend the rest of day laying on the sofa.

Head coach John Harbaugh started his post-game news conference following the 30-23 loss to the New England Patriots with the sobering news that former Ravens tight end Konrad Reuland died Monday.
Reuland was 29 years old.
"We lost a member, we lost a Raven today," Harbaugh said. "Konrad Reuland, he was declared brain dead, he had an aneurism about a week ago, underwent surgery and has been fighting for his life for the last week. He passed today, so I just went to offer condolences to his family."
Reuland played in four games with the Ravens last year, starting one. He didn't have a catch.

A grandad got the scare of his life when he found an unwelcome visitor in his garden.
Glen Inman had gone to fetch his lawn mower out of his Marton shed when he noticed the slithery serpent yesterday.
What he at first thought was a garden hose hanging down in front of him turned out to be a metre-long corn snake which is fortunately harmless.
Speaking on his behalf, Glen’s son Michael, 34, said: “He was just doing a bit of gardening because they have just sold the house.
“At first he thought it was just a hose hanging down but then when it started moving I think it startled him.
“He ran to tell my mum and she had a quick look. They couldn’t believe what they were seeing.”
Dad-of-one Michael, a chemical engineer at Sabic, told how his dad managed to release the reptile from the shed using a stick, and moved it to the beck at the end of the Cypress Road house.
“They rang me and we didn’t really know what to do,” Michael said.
“Obviously we had no idea what sort of snake it was, so we were worried in case it was poisonous so we took it away from the house.
“I took a couple of photos and put them on Facebook hoping the owner would may be see it.”
Michael’s post was shared hundreds of times and within a couple of hours he had people claiming it was their pet snake.
“A couple of women came round and put it in a bag and took it. We were just relieved to have it removed from the house.
“We were worried it was going to get away if we left it any longer so we were pleased when people started to get in touch.
“The power of Facebook is great in these sort of situations.”
It isn’t the first time a snake has been on the loose on Teesside.
In 2015, there was a spate of reports of the same kind.
A 6ft boa constrictor was found on Wilton Lane , in Wilton Village in June, and had to be captured by veterinary nurses, while a metre-long Royal python was found curled up on a porch in Ingleby Barick in the following September.
A 8ft Burmese python, was also found before a corn snake was found trapped underneath a car in outside the Cineworld cinema in Middlesbrough in July.
In August that year, a 5ft python was also discovered by a woman in Kirkleatham Woods near Redcar.

My Dad Built Spaceships
Nicholas W Fuller
Many people start their evening by asking their loved ones how their day was. I’ve always loved asking that to my Dad. Hearing Dad talk about work is especially fascinating to me because his 9 to 5 was fairly unique - his job, was keeping astronauts alive.
Eventually, I decided to start recording some of his best work stories. Here are those stories as - My Dad Built Spaceships.

Tuesday, Apr 23, 2024 | Last Update : 02:40 PM IST
On a day when the world was plunged into a state of nervous anticipation by the news of the political developments in Afghanistan, Telugu actor Satya Dev's music video 'Habib', shot in that troubled country when the hostilities hadn't yet gone out of control, was released here on Sunday.
The track, which traces the journey of a father looking for his son, was shot in 2017 in Afghanistan, but its release had been delayed. Reminiscing about it, the actor talked about the excitement to be in Afghanistan and the dangers around him.
The track has been sung in Pashto by the Canada-based Afghan singer Qais Ulfat and the video shot by Jennifer Alphonse.
"It was a terrific experience in both ways," Satya said in an interview with IANS. "One being that there was civil unrest happening at that time but our producers were from Afghanistan and it helped us in many ways. I thoroughly enjoyed because Afghan people love Indians and our films. They are warm and nice people and they really supported us when the shooting was on. But at the same time there was this threat lurking in Kabul. There were bombings when we were in Afghanistan," the actor recalled.
The song was shot in Kabul and the Panjashir Valley in north-central Afghanistan near the Hindukush over 30 days, during which time there twin bombings took place in close proximity to the country's National Assembly.
"The day before we were shooting there, the bombings took place. We were so close to so many things. Our entire 30-day stay in Afghanistan was amazing. We experienced so much in that I can just go on about it," Satya said.
The actor, who will shortly make his Hindi debut with 'Ram Setu', will also be seen in the Telugu films 'Skylab' and 'Godse'.

Jay is pleased with Stoke move
Jay Bothroyd reveals his disappointment at dropping down the pecking order at Molineux but says he's delighted with his loan move to promotion-chasing Stoke City.
'I was happy to go out on loan. I wasn`t playing at Wolves and I was disappointed not to be part of the manager's plans. Going on loan was the best thing for me to do. No player is happy when they are not playing. The manager (Mick McCarthy) could see I was unhappy. He told me that Stoke wanted me and I was glad that he did. I have no problem with the gaffer at all - I just needed to go somewhere to play my football.
'Stoke are not really Wolves' rival which is probably why I was able to go to another club in the top-end of the table. Stoke are doing better than Wolves and perhaps the thinking was that I could do some damage to Wolves' competitors. Wherever I am I just need to be playing, that`s the main thing.'
For the full story, please go to: www.icons.com

How was your experience?
The opening scene was incredibly funny and well-acted, one of the best that I have ever seen. But the rest of the performance did not match this opening. There were some good moments but the reality is that with a small cast such as this, all of the actors need to be consistently good to provide a convincing performance. Still recommended.

It looked like a really safe bet would be north Norfolk, around the Wash . It would pretty much guarantee something and we would be fairly well placed for Lincolnshire through to the Suffolk coast. So Titchwell it was.
We drove straight there with no detours and arrived around 9am, finding an already pretty full car park. The northeaster-lies were good, there had been overnight showers and it was overcast. Classic conditions.
Robins were ticking in the car park, Goldcrests were all over the place so things were looking good. We were told that there were at least four Yellow Browed Warblers around and a few minutes later on the path beyond the centre produced a calling bird, but deep in the woodland. We quickly carried on to the fresh marsh in order to see the Pectoral Sandpiper-having missed it last week we were lucky it was still around, but unfortunately was some way out on the big island. One or two Little Stints were still present as well, including a slightly odd plumaged individual which aroused some interest later when the images were posted on social media.
A bit further on the brackish marsh around half a dozen Curlew Sandpipers were feeding. Everywhere we looked we could see Meadow Pipits and many were also passing over. A slightly different call alerted me to a Tree Pipit, and shortly after someone called out a Rock Pipit going over.
The sea was comparatively quiet this time (famous last words) with a few Gannets and Bonxies generally far out, plus a few small flocks of Brent geese moving through.
We didn't stay long as the yesterday's Red Breasted Flycatcher had been reported again on the approach road so headed back, bumping into Ron Cousins at the start of the Fen Trail. There was a female Pied Flycatcher here which took a while to find but posed quite well. Ron was heading for the Pec Sand but decided to try for the Red Breasted Flycatcher with us. Unfortunately it had not been seen for some time though another Pied Fly was present and the rather large crowd was causing a few problems on the road, as the approaching coach driver found out. We stayed a while but eventually returned to the car for a coffee-the car park being just as good a place to locate the Flycatcher.
After a break I dumped a lot of the gear as it was warming up and the scope was getting a bit heavy and we hit the Fen and East trail. Didn't take all that long to pick up and see a Yellow Browed Warbler feeding actively and fighting off some of the more aggressive Goldcrests. One or two Bramblings were also around in the low trees by the feeders.
Failed to locate the long staying Redstart on the tank road, but a spell by the gate looking into the nearby horse filed was very productive. More Bramblings were flying in and out of the hedge, along with Chaffinch, Goldfinch and Greenfinches. Lots of Blackbirds were also coming and going with at least one Ring Ousel, and Song Thrushes were flying over all the time.
Unfortunately the trail further on overlooking the Brancaster Marshes didn't seem to produce much apart from a few Bearded Tits and it was clear from the dropping winds and sunshine that things were starting to quieten down so after some thought we decided to call it a day having spent a good five hours here. There didn't seem to be a great deal happening elsewhere-Burnham Overy had a few things which seemed to be a lot of hard work, and the news from Holkham and Wells wasn't good either with the Raddes Warbler not being seen since early morning.
We were about an hour away from the coast when I got a garbled pager message of a Black Browed Albatross going north past Hunstanton. Colin thought about turning round but we had no idea where or when it would be picked up. Apparently it was seen an hour later off Scolt Head for ten minutes and then late afternoon it was back off Hunstanton having not been seen at Holme or Titchwell. Judging by later reports very few people-even those stationed on the Huntsaton cliffs saw it. Even more annoying, a Siberian Stonechat was found on Sunday at Thornham Point, and was there were suggestions that it might have been a Stejneger's (the first one on Portland a few years ago, the second at Landguard on Friday).

And Valerie Costin's horror turned to embarrassment when the correspondence from Medway Council revealed the man was dependant on income support and did not have a penny in his bank account.
The mistake was uncovered when the mother-of-two opened the letter from the business support department about miscalculated council tax.
Valerie Costin, from Chatham, was sent a stranger’s council tax details
Mrs Costin, of Castle Road, said after numerous calls to the council she was told the blunder was probably caused by the wrong paperwork being stapled together.
The 44-year-old full-time carer said: "They asked me if I wanted a written apology. I said all I wanted was a guarantee that this does not happen again."
"I was sifting through the pages and I thought 'what's this?', and then noticed that this man's letter was attached to mine.
"I know it sounds selfish, but I'm glad it was not the other way round. I would be mortified if somebody had received a letter with sensitive information about me.
"You don't have to be Einstein to see this is a blatant breach of the Data Protection Act..." - Valerie Costin
"You don't have to be Einstein to see this is a blatant breach of the Data Protection Act.
"This poor man is probably blissfully unaware that I know all this about him."
A Medway Council spokesman said: "This was a genuine human error, which we are treating seriously as a data breach. We have apologised in writing and have put additional checks in place to prevent it happening again."
Council officials were also forced to apologise after writing to a man shortly after his death, telling him his benefits were being stopped because he had died.
The family of Leonard Green, who died in February aged 87, complained after reading his council tax benefit had been suspended "because of a change of circumstances".
The letter, addressed to Mr Green at his Gillingham home, went on to state the reason for the suspension was because the "customer has died".
Stories you might have missed

By faith the people passed through the Red Sea as if it were dry land, but when the Egyptians attempted to do so they were drowned.
By faith the walls of Jericho fell after they had been encircled for seven days.
By faith Rahab the prostitute did not perish with those who were disobedient, because she had received the spies in peace.
And what more should I say? For time would fail me to tell of Gideon, Barak, Samson, Jephthah, of David and Samuel and the prophets—
who through faith conquered kingdoms, administered justice, obtained promises, shut the mouths of lions,
quenched raging fire, escaped the edge of the sword, won strength out of weakness, became mighty in war, put foreign armies to flight.
Women received their dead by resurrection. Others were tortured, refusing to accept release, in order to obtain a better resurrection.
Others suffered mocking and flogging, and even chains and imprisonment.
They were stoned to death, they were sawn in two, they were killed by the sword; they went about in skins of sheep and goats, destitute, persecuted, tormented—
of whom the world was not worthy. They wandered in deserts and mountains, and in caves and holes in the ground.
Yet all these, though they were commended for their faith, did not receive what was promised,
since God had provided something better so that they would not, apart from us, be made perfect.

VOLER La Vedette is set to undergo a breathing operation after a slightly disappointing performance in the Hatton's Grace Hurdle at Fairyhouse.
Colm Murphy's star mare ran out a brilliant winner of the Grade One contest 12 months ago and went on to finish second to the incredible Big Buck's in the Ladbrokes World Hurdle at Cheltenham.
However, she has failed to reach those heights so far this season.
After being beaten at odds of 1-7 on her return at Navan, the eight-year-old moved smoothly into contention on Sunday but could not pick up and was well held by Zaidpour and Monksland in third.
"We were obviously a bit disappointed with her and it just seems her wind is catching her out," said Murphy.
"There's always been a little issue there, but last season we were getting away with it with the tongue-tie on. This year she's not getting away with it.
"She travelled into the race well but she's just not getting home, so we'll get her looked at and I'd imagine she would (have a breathing operation)."
Some suggested after her reverse the mare was perhaps still feeling the effects of that gruelling clash with Big Buck's in March, but Murphy does not agree.
"I don't think that's the case. She seemed good and strong at home before yesterday and we couldn't have been happier with her. Hopefully we can get her sorted out," said the trainer.

As a newly married couple we like to spend weekends chilling and relaxing, and these days for us that often means just doing our own thing at home. Since the weather was nice I decided to go and do a little gardening as I knew later in the afternoon it was going to rain. Gardening..
Today was a quiet day and usually I’d try to keep my head out of the computer and spend the time doing some gardening, cooking up a storm or chilling in front of the TV. Perhaps some household chores would also creep into this mix somehow! With that in mind I was reluctant to try..

The Gold Trumpet : i can definitely understand your dislike for Gallo's character....he is an asshole. i don't think the point of the story was, for you to all of a sudden like him, at the end.
i think the point was that assholes are that way for a reason. it's not a decision that someone makes one day..... "i'm going to be an asshole from now on." people are shaped by tragic events they have no control over (like a father killing your childhood puppy, like a mother that hardley knows you exist, etc..). to me Buff. 66 just showed that ....here's an asshole who, after knowing his history, we might understand why he is the way he is. we don't have to feel sorry for him...i don't think the film even attempts to do that. but we can at least see that his character is trying his best with what he has to work with.

In the 1960s, five brothers — from a family of nine children — formed a music group in their living room in Gary, Ind. Their voices soon gained world stardom with songs such as "ABC," "Ain't Nothing Like the Real Thing," "Boogie Man" and "I'll Be There." They were the Jackson 5: Jackie, Tito, Jermaine, Marlon and Michael Jackson.
Their lives took different directions, but many of them stayed in the entertainment business. They pursued solo music careers, ran record companies and produced television series.
Michael Jackson, the group's youngest member and lead vocalist, ruled the pop and rhythm and blues charts throughout the 1980s with his own work. In his early 20s, he came out with Thriller, the album that earned him smashing success. But in the 1990s, the King of Pop's career took a downturn as he was accused of child abuse. In the 2000s, he was charged and arrested for child molestation, but was later acquitted. On June 25, 2009, he died in Los Angeles from an overdose of the powerful anesthetic, propofol. As a criminal trial continues to explore how he died, those who loved him are still grappling with why.
His older brother Jermaine Jackson is also trying to come to terms with the loss and has a new book titled You Are Not Alone: Michael: Through a Brother's Eyes. He joins Tell Me More host Michel Martin for an interview.
On his favorite story of Michael
"The one that sticks out in my mind all the time, and sticking on Michael's mind too, was singing, looking out the window — the snow was falling — and wanting Christmas. And we weren't allowed to [celebrate Christmas] because we were Jehovah's Witnesses. But that's when we were singing a lot of Christmas carols.
"Those were the moments and stories of just how we were just kids and on the road. Stories of me bringing girls in the room, and thinking Michael and Marlon were asleep, and they're not asleep. And Michael's just being a kid — very mischievous and just all over the place."
On Michael's upbringing, Neverland Ranch and advocacy for children
"You get so big, and then the media is looking for something to exploit and to create sensationalism. With Michael, it became his undying love for children, because of him not really having a childhood. So even when he became an adult, he was looking at children through a child's eyes, and the world looking at him through adult eyes, and the misleading things they were saying about him with children and all these things. What I've done with chapter 17, it's called 'Body of Lies,' shows you exactly what happened.
"When we grew up, there was nothing different about a stranger, about everybody. The neighbor's kids sleeping on the floor, making beds. The kids, little boys, little girls, friends, this and that ... we were watching TV and having fun. Nothing about abuse and none of this kind of stuff. Michael never left that. Even when we were growing up in our room, we were five boys in one little room. There were triple bunk beds: Tito and I at the top, Michael and Marlon in the middle and Jackie at the bottom. Psychologically, he never left that.
"Now, it's like growing up not having a childhood and then wanting to relive that. That's the whole purpose of Neverland. Neverland was lit up like a Christmas tree 24 hours a day, 365 days out of the year. There were wheelchair ramps up going up to rides because he wanted children to have fun who were terminally ill of cancer. That's where his charity work came in. There were beds — a special suite in his theater — where kids that needed oxygen, where they can watch movies and things like that. And that was misunderstood and misinterpreted."
On Michael's personal physician Conrad Murray, and Michael's death
"He trusted the doctor. And every doctor takes an oath to take care of their client — not to take their life. And whatever the doctor was putting in him, which was propofol, it wasn't administered in a proper setting. Propofol is OK if it's in the right hands, meaning an anesthesiologist. But when it's given to someone and they're not that — he was a cardiologist — and it wasn't in the proper setting, then it becomes a weapon.
"When I wrote in the book about his body being half cold and half hot, him repeating himself all the time, him not knowing right from left ... these are signs of toxic poisoning. They're trying to say these were self-administered. The autopsy reported that was not the truth. Michael had a problem with sleeping, but he's never had these symptoms before. Michael had pain from the Pepsi burn [an injury he suffered while filming a 1984 commercial and subsequently took painkillers for] so there was the situation of Demerol in 2001 or 2002, but that didn't kill my brother. What killed my brother was propofol being in the wrong hands and negligence.
"We'll never get closure. When something like this ends ... you learn to live with it, but you'll never get over it. Because we lost a good brother. He was a good father. His daughter, Paris, said that during his memorial. My mother lost a great son. Nephews lost an uncle. And it's something ... he'll never come back, and you look who he was — he was a misunderstood person because of old-fashioned values."
On Murray's trial
"Put it like this — whether it's fair or not, I do believe they are going to paint my brother out to be the most horrible person. And that's why I documented who he was in this book. He's a wonderful human being.
"He was pure. He was real, and he cared. And when you look in his eyes, you could tell that this is a good, great human being. That's what I want people to remember him as — a human being. Yes, he had incredible success, and God knew who to bless with the success, because he knew he was going to give back to the people. He was doing God's work through his music and his songs."

Cori Broadus has been in the public eye since she was a child. The daughter of Snoop Dogg, Broadus decided to follow in her father’s footsteps and pursue a career as a singer. With the additional spotlight from her own career, Broadus has tried to open up and keep fans educated on her struggle with lupus. She recently revealed that her diagnosis has gotten better.
Diagnosed with lupus at age 6, Cori has had to fight with the disease her entire life. Not only has it caused fluctuation in her weight, but it has impacted her overall day-to-day. Now 23, Cori is preparing for marriage and trying to keep her illness at bay so she can enjoy her new life with her husband. She took to social media to reveal that she recently had surgery to remove a piece of kidney tissue so that they may analyze it for abnormalities.
She took fans through the entire procedure. On February 10th, she posted, “During a kidney biopsy, your doctor uses a needle to remove a small sample of kidney tissue for lab testing. The biopsy needle is inserted through your skin and is often directed using the guidance of an imaging device, such as ultrasound.” In another post, she opened up about the results, letting her followers know that her condition came back as mild, a 3 out of 5.
“Just got off the phone w my rheumatologist, and these are the results from the biopsy; 3 is mild but still active,” she wrote. “I would’ve had to take chemotherapy if I was at 4,” she revealed. Cori says that she was a stage 4 when she was younger, resulting in more aggressive treatment at the time. Cori reveals that her disease also causes hair loss and a weakened immune system.
With the good news that her diagnosis was getting milder, Cori and her fiance decided to take a trip to Hawaii to relax. “One of the ways we cope with stress: Couples Edition. come with us to get a Couples Massage 💆🏿♀️ in Hawaii 🤎,” she captioned the post.

Bible Studies Informational By Don Doran / 4 years ago Share Tweet Pin Share The Hardest Part of Being a Disciple I have often thought of how great it must have been to be a disciple of Jesus. I could see him everyday. I would love to have the opportunity to visit with him. To sit in the same room, or area, and just listen to him talk and share his wisdom and understanding. That would have been incredible. I have often thought if I could have been one of the disciples of Jesus, I wouldn’t have all the problems that I have now. All I would have to do is take each problem to him and he would solve it. Life would have been glorious. Then I realize I am a disciple of Jesus. As a disciple I can enjoy those privileges. I can take my problems to him. I have the opportunity to fellowship with him. To listen to him talk and share his wisdom. I can take all my problems and my cares to Jesus. Bringing them all to him with the knowledge, he cares. Yet, the role of discipleship is not without its difficulties. There are no drawbacks, but there are areas that require adjustment in our lives. Our priorities will change. Sometimes even our vocations might change. Like the vocations of some of the disciples of Jesus changed. Furthermore there is a position of discipleship that can be difficult for even the most ardent of disciples. To be a disciple simply means to be a learner. It means to follow the teachings of the teacher. When a person becomes a disciple they begin to adhere or hold fast to the teachings of the teacher. A disciple is more than just a student. The disciple actually conforms to the teaching. He in reality becomes an imitator of the teacher. In this case we are talking about being an imitator of Jesus. In the writings of Luke we find requirements, listed by Jesus, for a disciple. Jesus speaks of a disciple hating his mother, father, sister, brother and his own life. He talks of counting the cost before you start otherwise you might not be able to finish the task. Jesus also said in order to be his disciple we had to forsake all that we have. In the Book of John, chapter one, we are introduced to a man that was one of the first disciples of Jesus. In studying this man we find a picture of true discipleship. John the Baptist stood with two of his disciples and saw Jesus walk by. He said, “Behold the lamb of God!” The two disciples heard him speak and they followed Jesus. One of the two disciples was Andrew who was identified as Simon Peter’s brother. In the life of Andrew we find a picture of the most difficult part of being a disciple of Jesus. Most of us know very little about Andrew. There are only four references of him personally to show us anything of his character. Yet in those few words he shows us how to be a true disciple. Andrew was first a disciple of John the Baptist. He was among the first to follow Jesus. Tradition says that he was the first. That might be because John doesn’t name the other disciple of John the Baptist who was with Andrew. So when we look at the twelve who became Apostles, Andrew is the one with the most seniority. Andrew does not have a real reputation of his own. Even the first time he is introduced to us, by John, he is introduced as the brother of Simon Peter. The ironic thing is we haven’t met Simon Peter yet. He was part of the first men’s quartet, Peter, James, John and Andrew. They were all friends. They all grew up in the same town and worked in the same vocation as fishermen. However, we find that even the children’s Sunday school song fails to mention anything about Andrew. The song just speaks of “Peter, James and John…” being in the sailboat out on the deep blue sea. Even with his seniority Andrew is not a part of the “inner circle” with Jesus. It was Peter, James and John who were with Jesus on the Mountain. The three of them were the ones who went with Jesus into the room of Jarius’s daughter. They were the trio that went a little further with Jesus in the Garden. When the disciples were ordained and called Apostles, the writer Mark said that Jesus changed their names giving them a new identity. Simon became known as Peter that means rock. James and John were identified as the Son’s of Thunder. Yet Andrew’s name remains the same. He kept the same identity as before. Andrew, however, from his first introduction to us shows us what is important. Even with as limited knowledge of Andrew as we have we are witnesses of what he considered to be of great magnitude. It is obvious from the start; there is a hunger in the heart of Andrew to know the Messiah. There is an intense desire to know Jesus. He was a disciple of John and John’s whole ministry was pointing to Jesus. As soon as John said to him, “Behold the Lamb of God,” Andrew followed Jesus. However he did more than walk behind him. He had questions that would allow him to know Jesus. He asked questions like, “Where do you dwell?” He was saying, “I want to know you. I want to know where you are living. I want to know where you are coming from. I want more than just a passing knowledge; I really want to know you.” He spent time with Jesus and came to recognize the Jesus was the answer to all he had been seeking. We find that Andrew is the first soul winner. After he first met Jesus he went to his brother Simon Peter and John tells us that Andrew said to him, “We have found the Messias, the Christ.” We have come to know the one we have been looking for. When Greeks, who had come to Jerusalem to worship, heard about Jesus they encountered Philip in their search. They asked him for help saying, “Sir, we would see Jesus.” What did Philip do? Philip went and found Andrew and informed him about the men. Then Philip and Andrew went and found Jesus and told him. In John chapter 6 Jesus looked at the multitude that followed him and realized they were hungry. He turned to Philip and asked him where they could buy bread so the people could eat? Philip’s reply shows the bewilderment I would have felt in his place, “There is no way we can come up with enough money today to feed this many!” At this moment Andrew, the disciple who was learning Jesus, steps forward to introduce an opportunity for a miracle. We might not have the money, but here is a young boy who is willing to share his lunch of five loaves and two fishes. It isn’t much among so many nevertheless here you are. Andrew was willing to fit the part that Jesus had for him in the kingdom of God. He wasn’t colorful or articulate as Peter was. He wasn’t as fervent or intense in his personality as James or John. He didn’t become part of the inner circle that was seemingly so close to the Master. He never was identified as “the one Jesus loved.” Yet when we look at Andrew we see that Andrew recognized Jesus as his Rabbi or his teacher. He called Jesus his Messiah or Savior. Andrew, without being angry or jealous, was faithful. He was the steady one. Andrew was the soul winner. Andrew wanted to know Jesus and to point others to him as well. The hardest part of being a disciple is coming to know Jesus. Realizing that it is not the recognition that is received or the credit that is given that is important. What is important is recognizing who your Master or Savior is. The hardest part of being a disciple is coming to the knowledge that each disciple has a part in the kingdom of God and then striving to become that part to your fullest capability. The hardest part of being a disciple is to become and imitator of Jesus Christ and in doing so, pointing others to him. Thank you, Andrew, for being a true disciple.

When we moved into our house here on base we still had another week before we got our HHG's but we were getting cable installed before then. Only problem is we needed a TV here at the house for the cable guy to hook up the cable up with. We ended up going to the PX and picking out a cheap one for a couple hundred bucks to hold us over. Well it served its time for a week then went up to the office & has been sitting there ever since. We don't want to put a TV in our bedroom & we really don't have a need for it any were else in the house. That's when it hit me, why not post it on the ISO or For sale page. I confirmed with the hubbs and he was fine with it, I mean a bit of extra cash in our pocket vs. it sitting on the floor in the office. We went with the CASH of course.
I gathered up all the information I could on the TV took a couple quick pictures and posted it on the FB page. Within 5 minutes I already had 2 people really interested in it and wanting to look at it. Score, just 15 minutes later and it was SOLD. Long story short we ended up selling it for a $100 less than what we paid for it which was still a good chunk of cash in our pocket.
I was happy, 2 hours later we went to meet up with the buyers and made the exchange.
It was that easy, to bad I didn't think to do that earlier & we could have had it out of our way a month ago.
WoW ~ now its got me pondering I know were I will turn to next time we are needing to sell or get rid of something. Best part it was all done from the comfort of my couch w/ out any service charges.
kinda makes me wonder if they had something like this in Hawaii & I just never knew about it.

Charles and Diana’s Short Honeymoon
Within days of returning to England, the newly married royal couple held an informal press conference on the understanding that, afterward, the press would leave them alone. Everyone at this press conference reported that the couple were “simply in love,” unable to take their eyes or their hands off each other. Diana described the honeymoon as “fabulous” and said she “could highly recommend marriage.” She added, with a great smile, “It’s a marvelous life.”
The photographs released to the press--taken during and after the honeymoon--showed a bride and bridegroom very much in love and enjoying life together. When they came back from their honeymoon, they immediately joined the rest of the royal family at Balmoral. Diana rapidly came down to earth when she realized that life wasn’t always going to be like those lazy, sun-filled days she had enjoyed with her new husband on the royal yacht. For one thing, she no longer had her husband to herself. There were no opportunities for intimate moments or demonstrations of affection. Suddenly, her husband was public property, and she discovered that the most important person in his life did not seem to be his wife, but his mother.
It was her husband’s utter devotion and acquiescence to the queen, her mother-in-law, that first started to infuriate Diana. She felt that Charles would always side with his mother in any discussion, let alone an argument. No matter what views she expounded, even if he thought differently in private, he automatically agreed with his mother.
Diana told friends that when Charles was with his mother, he became a different person. Once, after Charles had told her she looked ravishing in a plunging neckline, the queen gently mentioned at dinner that the dress was a little revealing for a member of the royal family. Far from challenging his mother, Charles nodded his agreement with her opinion.
Diana had spent most of her life getting her own way, managing to persuade her father on many decisions. She didn’t like this one bit.
September, 1981, was a bad month for Diana. She simply couldn’t settle down to her new life as a member of the royal family. She was confused and unhappy; she spent most of her time walking around the estate on her own, her eyes filled with tears, not knowing what she was doing or whether she would ever fit into this strange existence.
When she was alone with Charles at night, she would try to explain how she felt. She begged him to take her home to Highgrove or London. She longed for the comforting familiarity of London and her friends; she wanted to browse round the smart Knightsbridge shops and see and talk to people she could relate to.
The highly disciplined Charles wouldn’t countenance the idea, knowing it would upset his mother.
On several occasions during the early days of marriage, Diana lost her composure. One minute she would burst into tears for no apparent reason, the next she would become frustrated, angry and resentful, often in front of others. Charles, brought up to avoid public displays, was embarrassed and unhappy at these emotional outbursts.
Charles had no idea what to do.
It seemed everyone else had more of a claim to his attention than she did. She became jealous of the hours Charles spent discussing whatever it was with his secretaries and officials. The more he continued to do so, the angrier she became. The people around Charles, who had spent years tending to his every need, began to feel her animosity toward them. It was a difficult situation for them as well.
To Charles, of course, a life almost entirely devoid of privacy was quite normal. He thought nothing of going away for two or three nights, returning home for a couple of nights, and then going off again to a distant part of the country to make another speech, open another factory or attend another meeting. Apart from his public engagements, he spent at least one day a week running the affairs of the Duchy of Cornwall. It had never occurred to him that things would be any different after he was married.
But Diana proved to be considerably more headstrong and opinionated than either Charles or the royal family expected. She had very definite ideas of how she wanted their married life to be, and that included spending time alone with Charles, not sharing him with assorted flunkies or seeing him only at dinner or, worse, only minutes before bedtime.
She began to complain and refuse to cooperate when engagements were planned for her and Charles. She would go through her diary with a lady-in-waiting and object to what had been arranged for the following day. Forthrightly, she would tell Charles she wasn’t going to do it.
To say that Charles was shocked is an understatement. The idea that a member of the royal family should refuse to carry out any official duties had never entered his mind; it was unthinkable. But Diana obstinately refused to give way. She was going to do what she wanted.
In November, 1981, only four months after their wedding, Charles began to realize communication had completely broken down between them. Diana, seemingly so docile before the wedding, didn’t seem likely to change. He didn’t want to tell his mother, because he knew she would suggest it was up to him to put his house in order and not tolerate any more nonsense from his wife. Charles was sensitive enough to realize that because Diana was floundering in a difficult, alien world, treating her aggressively would probably make her worse.
The couple’s marital problems worsened, as so many problems do, at Christmas. The family gathered en masse at Windsor Castle and then went on to Sandringham, the Norfolk house close to the home where Diana had been raised. She should have been happy being on home territory, but this time she had something else to make her angry: game shooting.
Most members of the royal family, particularly the duke of Edinburgh and Charles, are keen shots. It is very much “royal” sport. It is enjoyed by most of Charles’ friends and is taken with the utmost seriousness by those who participate. Being a good shot is a virtual necessity among most of the English aristocracy; regular holidays are planned around the shooting seasons. Rearing game birds to shoot is a peculiarly British upper-class pastime which leaves most of the rest of the people unmoved. Those who do not shoot consider it a slaughter of beautiful birds.
During that New Year’s holiday at Sandringham, shooting became a great bone of contention between the couple. Every day, as Charles was about to go out, he and his wife would argue violently. She would usually begin by asking him not to go. Then she would plead. Finally she would shout obscenities at him, describing in no uncertain terms what she thought of a man who could coldbloodedly kill harmless pheasant, partridge and grouse.
Charles was utterly dumbfounded that his wife could hold views so opposite to his. She had certainly never propounded such ideas when they were engaged and had been living close together for over four months. He was appalled by her behavior. Worst of all, she was becoming an embarrassment.
One morning at Sandringham, the queen was accompanying her son and husband, while they went out shooting, to watch the gun dogs at work. Charles asked Diana to go with them. She refused. He then tried persuasion, then pleading. Instead of yielding, Diana begged him to stay home with her, but Charles had already agreed to go. Staying with his wife was impossible.

Tuesday, 30 August 2016
Breakfast at Tiffanys
Hope everyone's good and you've had a great summer.
So last night was one Id been looking forward to for a while where I managed to catch the brilliant Breakfast at Tiffanys currently playing at the Theatre Royal in Haymarket a few minutes walk from Piccadilly.
For those who haven't been to the Theatre Royal it's one to have a closer look at for the decor, It's all very new, clean, has amazing space between the seats and also for the hot weather to my surprise air con.
The staff in the theatre were lovely and very helpful which was great to see.
I'd read a few reviews before coming to the show and was really looking forward to it.
The show itself was very good, I picked up the story quickly and really thought the stage sets and costumes were both really good.
The cast I thought were very good from the start, Pixie and Matt were both well suited to their roles. My only negative from the show was I couldn't hear the female voices properly from where I was in the Royal circle. It didn't put me off the show though.
The view also from the Royal circle was perfect and very clear.
The show is running until the 17th September in London. If your a fan of the story it's worth going to see on the stage. I wish I'd managed to see it earlier in the run then had a chance to read the book and see the show again to see it from a different view.
After leaving the show I did order the book so I can read more of the story which I'm looking forward to now.
Have a great rest of the week

Lil J was placed with us on March 11, 2009. Today marks 18 months that he has been part of our family.
Since he came to us about 3 weeks after his 3rd birthday, that means that he has basically been with us for a THIRD of his life. It is amazing when you think about it as a math equation.
We still do not have termintation trial date - even though the petition was submitted back in April. The trial MIGHT happen before the end of the year. But, being that it is already Sept, I am not holding my breath. It would still be months after the termination trial that adoption would be finalized. So, it looks like he will be with us for well over 2 years when he is adopted.
At this point, there is no doubt that bio mom's rights will be terminated. Even after 18 months, she still has done nothing on her court ordered case plan.
I can't believe how much he has changed, how much our family has changed, how much my LIFE has changed.
We have had our ups and downs, but the pleasures out weigh the problems.

In the year that was to be his last, the man of God foretold the day of his holy death to a number of his disciples. In mentioning it to some who were with him in the monastery, he bound them to strict secrecy. Some others, however, who were stationed elsewhere he only informed of the special sign they would receive at the time of his death.
Six days before he died he gave orders for his tomb to be opened. Almost immediately he was seized with a violent fever that rapidly wasted his remaining energy. Each day his condition grew worse until finally on the sixth day he had his disciples carry him into the chapel, where he received the Body and Blood of our Lord to gain strength for his approaching end. Then, supporting his weakened body on the arms of his brethren, he stood with his hands raised to heaven and as he prayed breathed his last
That day two monks, one of them at the monastery, the other some distance away, received the very same revelation. They both saw a magnificent road covered with rich carpeting and glittering with thousands of lights. From his monastery it stretched eastward in a straight line until it reached up into heaven. And there in the brightness stood a man of majestic appearance, who asked them, 'Do you know who passed this way?' 'No,' they replied. 'This,' he told them, 'is the road taken by blessed Benedict, the Lord's beloved, when he went to heaven.'
Thus while the brethren who were with Benedict witnessed his death, those who were absent knew about it through the sign he had promised them. His body was laid to rest in the Chapel of St. John the Baptist, which he had built to replace the altar of Apollo.
Even in the cave at Subiaco, where he had lived before, this holy man still works numerous miracles for people who turn to him with faith and confidence. The incident I am going to relate happened only recently.
A woman who had completely lost her mind was roaming day and night over hills and valleys, through forests and fields, resting only when she was utterly exhausted. One day in the course of her aimless wanderings she strayed into the saint's cave and rested there without the least idea of where she was. The next morning she woke up entirely cured and left the cave without even a trace of her former affliction. After that she remained free from it for the rest of her life.
From the Life and Miracles of St Benedict (Book Two of The Dialogues)
by Pope St Gregory the Great
Photograph: wood carving of St Benedict at the Abbey of Our Lady and St John, Alton, Hampshire, (England)

Topic: "Gandalf's Challenge (2)"
Frodo was very concerned for the safety of one whom he barely knew. It was no secret around the College of the Shire that being different, or unconventional, would often produce conflict. The one that Frodo knew was a Professor, of Religion and Philosophy, who often made public statements which contrasted to the prevailing opinions of those troubled times. Frodo resented some of the things said, but others moved beyond resentment to consider violence.
Frodo discussed his concerns with the Fellowship, as well as his fears. Those planning violence would not hesitate to include Frodo, and there was no doubt that by sheer force they would get their way. There was nothing but conjecture on which to base a challenge of any kind, so Frodo wrestled with a time-honored conundrum.
Eventually it was learned that one specific behemoth would wreak havoc on the Professor. It was to take place during a basketball game between faculty and students. Frodo and several members of the Fellowship were also to take part in the event, as was the behemoth. The subject of the assault would participate, as would Gandalf, the Wise, as members of the faculty.
As the teams warmed up on opposite sides of the court, Frodo and his fellow Hobbits decided to warn Gandalf, so that he could pass a warning on to the Professor. While surreptitously adjusting his shoelaces, Frodo motioned to Gandalf to come to where the Hobbits were seated.
"Lord Gandalf," he said, "please tell the Professor that he is in grave danger. The behemoth is going to make every effort to cause him pain. We do not want to see him hurt."
Gandalf glared back to Frodo, and cast his gaze upon them all. In totally uncharacteristic fashion he yelled at Frodo, "And what are YOU going to do about it? Don't you understand? This is exactly why you are losing the War." With that, he turned his back on Frodo and began to dribble away.
The Hobbits were speechless until one said, on behalf of all, "What in the Hell was that? What did he mean about us losing the War?" Frodo's predicament was greater now than when silence had been the preferred course of action. Perhaps he should notify the game officials of the plan? Perhaps he should step to center court and make an announcement of what he knew? Perhaps he should challenge the behemoth directly? In any event, Frodo now had responsibility for what was about to occur.
The behemoth was not a good basketball player, and his time on the court would be limited. Frodo and his friends knew that at least one of them would be on the court at all times. Between them, they decided that when the behemoth was on the court that one of them would maintain a position between the two so that the behemoth could not make physical contact with the Professor. It worked. The behemoth was pushed out of the way every time he came near the Professor, and the planned victim was puzzled by the fact that he was given so many open shots at the basket.
Gandalf never brought the subject up with Frodo, nor did Frodo and his friends ever discuss what happened after that night. Frodo, however, has thought about those events every single day of his life, now some 40 years later. There is no greater honor that a student can give to a Wizard than to acknowledge that he made the student think about the choices to be made every single day. Frodo admits to the fact that he still does not fully comprehend the message conveyed. Perhaps, had Gandalf given a similar message to George W. Bush, today's war would not have been blamed on faulty intelligence, and someone would take responsibility.

|posted on 14-Sep-2001 6:25:54 PM|
|Author: Debbi aka Breathless|
Category: Max and Liz
Rating: PG13 to ? ? ?
Disclaimer: No affiliation to Roswell or anyone associated. I'm just borrowing the characters for awhile. Lyrics from 'It's Been Awhile', by Staind. No infringement intended, so please don't sue my ass.
This fic begins where season 2 ended.
Liz could feel the vibration beneath her feet and her eyes opened wide in fear. Tendrils of smoke were drifting from the opening in the Vasquez Rocks and he was still in there . . . with her. Her heart raced thinking of the danger he was in just being near her. She closed her eyes and prayed to God that Max would come out of the chamber, alive and safe.
A sound penetrated her silent plea and she opened her eyes, straining to see into the smoky gloom. After everything that had happened, after all that they had been through, she still loved him more than she had been willing to admit, even to herself. If anything were to happen to him, she would just die inside.
He suddenly appeared at the opening, alone, and hastily climbed through, drawing a deep breath of fresh air to try and clear his smoke filled lungs. Her pulse raced through her veins, overjoyed that he appeared uninjured and relieved that he was safe. He grabbed her hand with the feel of the ground rumbling beneath them and they ran for safety as the cliff side splintered and crumbled. The vibrations increased and with a loud explosion the Granilith sped across the sky with its lone occupant, headed home.
As it disappeared from sight Max turned back to look at her, with his hand gently touching her face and stroking through her hair and he spoke to her in a tone she hadn’t heard in a long time. “I’ve been really wrong about a lot, but I was right about one thing . . . To get you into my life, to be around you, to love you.”
She let his words soak in, not sure how she should feel, as she rested her head against his chest. They had once had something special, so magical, but all that had ended that night back in October when she had broken his heart. And for what? Everything had gone to hell now. She’d given up everything because the one person she trusted most of all told her it had to be that way. Max had come from the future, giving up his own life so that she could change the past. His past. Her future.
She had given up the love of her life, so that everyone could live, and now what? Alex was dead because of her. Tess was gone because of her. Would everyone die now, because of her? She had chosen the wrong path that night back in October, and now they were all paying the price.
Max stepped away from her and turned to lead them down the rock face, away from this place and its awful memories. As he passed by Isabel, she turned her questioning eyes to his retreating back and said, “What happens now, Max?”
Liz felt Max step away from her and he separated himself from the group. She could feel his inner turmoil, and then he spoke the words that were like a dagger in her heart.
“I have to save my son . . .”
* * * * *
Liz sat in the cramped back seat of the Jetta as they made their way back into town in silence, everyone feeling shell-shocked from the recent events that had culminated in the revelation of Tess’s betrayal and her subsequent departure using the only means available to return to their home world, the Granilith. Max sat on her left, next to the window, with Maria on her right and Isabel next to her. Michael drove and Kyle sat in the front passenger seat.
Liz could feel Max’s eyes on her, but she avoided his gaze, still stinging from the reality of the words he had spoken back at the cliff side. Nothing would ever be the same again. She had pushed him away from her and right into Tess’s waiting arms, but she’d never thought he would really succumb to her temptation. A part of her had always believed that what she and Max had felt for each other would supersede the life he had lived before, and in the end they would find their way back to each other, regardless of what the future version of him had said.
It was a dream that was now dying in the harsh reality of daylight.
Max had consummated a physical relationship with Tess, something that she had thought they would share together someday, and in another timeline, they had. They had shared a life, a love beyond all loves, but it had resulted in the end of the world. So she had given it up, given him up, but in the end it didn’t matter. She had lost everything, and more, this time.
Alex was gone, dead and buried. Tess was gone too, just as in that other timeline, but this time it was so much worse. She had Max’s son growing inside her, his heir that could be used against him, to control him, to make him do things he wouldn’t want to do, but would have to in order to keep his child safe. She felt a tear spill down her cheek and she brushed it quickly away, hoping no one had noticed.
“Liz . . .” Max said softly next to her.
She stiffened next to him, acutely aware of the feel of his leg touching hers in the cramped quarters of the car. He reached to touch her shoulder and she flinched, shying away from him, knowing that her actions would probably add to his confusion and his pain, but unable to help it. He had slept with Tess. As much as she hated to accept that truth, there it was, and nothing could take it back. He had slept with Tess and she was having his child.
“Liz . . . please . . .” Max said and she cut him off.
“Michael, take us to your apartment,” Liz said bluntly.
“I thought we were going to the Crashdown,” he said sounding confused. Everyone could feel the tension in the air. The last few weeks, no, not weeks but months, had been hell on everyone. They were all ready to explode.
“No,” Liz said trying to find her inner resolve. “We need to talk, and we can’t do it privately at my home. There’s something I need to tell you. All of you. Something I’ve been hiding from you.”
Liz met Maria’s eyes, ignoring the sudden commotion in the car as the others fired questions at her. Everyone, that is, except Max. She could feel his gaze burning into her, wondering what in the world she was talking about, but she couldn’t look at him. Maybe she would never be able to look at him again.
They finished the ride in silence and it was a subdued group that filed into Michael’s apartment to hear what Liz had to say. Michael and Maria stayed close together, united against whatever travail Liz was about to reveal. Isabel stood close to Max, convinced by Liz’s attitude that he was in for some painful disclosure. Kyle stood alone, uncertain and confused by everything his life had come to over the last year.
“First of all, I have been lying to you, all of you, ever since last fall. But I thought . . . I thought I was protecting you.” Liz covered her face with her hands as she tried to figure out how to say this. She looked to Maria, the only one who knew the truth, and her encouraging nod helped her forge on. “Last fall, in October actually, Max came to visit me.”
She looked at the faces around her and knew she was saying this badly. How could she explain it coherently? Her eyes finally turned to Max and she met his gaze. She could see his pain and his uncertainty, and she forged on. “Max came to see me one day last October. He sang to me outside my window.” The look on her face softened as she remembered how he had looked that night, standing down on the street and looking up at her. His smile had warmed her heart. She shook the memory aside, knowing those feeling belonged in a life that didn’t exist anymore.
“The only problem was, I already had a visitor.” She saw the look that crossed Max’s face. A look that said ‘Had she slept with someone else besides Kyle?’. She closed her eyes, trying to wipe out the look she’d seen on his face, but of course it didn’t work. She took a deep breath and continued on.
“That night, when Max came to visit me, Max was already there.” She held her hand up as Isabel and Michael became unruly from listening to so contrived a statement as that, but she noticed how Max and Kyle remained quiet. She stared right at Max as she continued on, “Max came back from the future to visit me, using the Granilith, to tell me that the world would be overrun, that Earth would be destroyed, all because Max and I had . . . Max and I had . . .”
She couldn’t say it. That the thing she had most wanted in the world was never going to happen? That she would never make love to the man she love more than life itself, because she had sent him into the arms of another woman? She looked directly at him as her words rushed on.
“Max came back from the future to tell me that the life we had shared, a life where we got married at nineteen in a chapel in Vegas, was going to lead to your enemies being able to take over the world. He told me in fourteen years we would have been defeated and the whole world would become enslaved. Max told me that once our relationship was cemented,” she noticed the questioning look on Max’s face when she used that term and she continued on, “Max told me that once we had made love, the way we would have the night of the Gomez concert, it would have sealed our fate together and Tess, angry about how I had taken her place in your heart, would have left town and without her strength to compliment the rest of yours, Earth was doomed.” Max opened his mouth to speak but she held up her hand to quiet him and she pressed on.
“So Max, the future version of Max, told me . . .” her eyes filled with tears and her chin trembled as she tried valiantly to get the whole story out. “He told me I had to make Max-”, she struggled not to cry as she looked at the pained expression on his face. “He told me I had to make you fall out of love with me, because . . . because he said Tess was critical to your survival, and she had left Roswell because you and I were together.”
“So I used Kyle, to make you think I’d moved on, so that you would turn to Tess and . . . and by being with Tess, you would form the unit you were meant to be and this world would be safe from the enemies that were out there . . .” She knew it all sounded far fetched, but so did aliens attending West Roswell High School, when you thought about it that way. “I guess that future version of you never knew Tess had a separate agenda, that didn’t include your safe return to . . . Antar? I guess that’s the right name of your planet.”
“So,” Michael began hesitantly and then the sound of his voice changed to the hard edge of anger. “So are you saying that you changed ‘the future’, without talking to any of us to see if we thought it was a good idea? Or to get our opinions? What did you think you were doing? Playing God?”
“Michael,” Liz tried to make him understand. “Max said he came to me because he trusted me. I begged him to find another way, to go to someone else, but he said I had to . . .” her voice broke and she fought to keep from crying. “He said I had to turn Max away from me.”
“So in all this time, you never thought once about telling any of us about this?” Michael asked in disbelief.
Liz watched Max as he stared at the floor, listening to her as she spoke, but not looking at her. The color had drained out of his face and his jaw was clenched tightly. “By the time I realized something was terribly wrong, you wouldn’t have believed me anyway. When Alex died,” her voice cracked again as she said her friend’s name. Alex was dead now because of what she had done. In the other timeline, Alex had danced at her wedding. How could everything have gone so wrong? “When Alex died, no one believed me when I said something was wrong. And by then it was too late. Michael and Isabel weren’t listening to me, and Max was off with . . .” she shut up then when she saw the devastated look on his face. She had forced the worst possible nightmare on him, pulling the rug right out from under him, and there was no way they could ever go back now.
“Max,” she said staring straight at him, “He said I had to turn you away from me, and who was I to argue with him? What difference did it make what I wanted? When it came right down to it, how could I put my wants and needs above what was necessary to ensure the survival of a whole planet? The whole human race?”
“Liz . . .” Max finally found his voice after listening to her. Their eyes met and she could see the depth of pain that she had caused him. “I . . . I don’t know what to say . . .”
“Don’t say anything,” she said blinking back her tears. “I should have told you the truth a long time ago. I’m sorry.” She brushed at the offending tear that spilled down her cheek and she turned away from him. “I have to go.”
“Please, Liz,” Max said taking a step toward her. “Don’t go. We need to talk.”
“I don’t think there is anything left to say. We’re different now Max. Our lives have gone in different directions.” She moved toward the door with Max following hesitantly behind her. The others moved away, trying to give the two of them some space.
“It doesn’t have to be that way,” Max said softly. “If we just talk this over, I’m sure we can work it out.”
“But that’s just it, Max,” she said hesitantly. “I don’t know if I want to work it out. I don’t know anything anymore.” She sighed forlornly, feeling his presence right behind her. “I just need time to think, Max.”
She crossed to the door and fumbled blindly for the handle with her eyes swimming with tears. She heard him say her name again as she opened the door and she fled the apartment.
“Liz . . .” Max called to her as she hurried through the door and he reached to grab her arm. Kyle’s hand closed over his forearm, jerking it away from Liz and he glared harshly into the taller boy’s eyes.
“Leave her alone, DAD,” Kyle hissed at Max. “Haven’t you hurt her enough to last a lifetime?” He released Max’s arm in disgust and turned to chase after Liz.
Max stood in the doorway and watched Kyle catch up to Liz. She stopped as he reached her and she turned to him. Max could see her shoulders trembling and the tears streaking down her cheeks as she looked at Kyle. He pulled her into his arms to comfort her and then he looked back at Max. He could read Kyle’s expression clearly. The look on his face said ‘I won’t let you hurt her again’.
|posted on 14-Sep-2001 6:28:12 PM|
Max stared at Liz, standing on the grass with Kyle’s arms comforting her, and he took a step toward them. Maria suddenly appeared at his side and he was surprised, shocked, at the way she jerked him back inside Michael’s apartment. He stumbled as she pushed him roughly and he turned to look at Michael with a frown, wondering if he knew what the hell Maria was doing.
“Leave her alone, Max,” Maria warned.
“What are you talking about?” he asked, knowing full well what she was talking about.
“Just leave her alone, Max,” Maria said, feeling herself going into full protection mode. “Haven’t you hurt her enough?”
“Maria-” Max began but she cut him off.
“Did you think she was just going to fall back into your arms and say ‘That’s okay Max. I don’t mind that you screwed Tess. Yes Max, I’d love to help you get your son back.’ What the hell is wrong with you, Max?” Maria fumed.
“I made a mistake,” Max hurled back at her, angry at himself for the mess he’d made of everything.
“Some mistake, Max!” Maria yelled. “Tess was leading you around by the prick and now she has you by the balls.”
“Maria-” Michael interrupted and she turned her angry gaze at him.
“NO! Look, somebody has to tell him,” she hissed at Michael. She turned back toward Max with fire in her eyes. “You fucked up Max. You fucked up big time. Liz put you first in EVERYTHING, and how did you repay her? You fucked Tess. But no, that wasn’t enough. Mr. Prepared, Mr. Condom in his Back Pocket just forgot to use it, so now, little Max Jr. is on his way.”
“Mr. Prepared? What’s that supposed to mean?” he yelled back at her. Maria moved swiftly, pulling his wallet out of his back pocket and flipping it open. He stood stunned by her actions and cried, “Maria, what the hell are you doing?”
“What am I doing? The question is, ‘What were YOU doing?’ She pulled the packet out of his wallet and held it up in front of his face. “When did you start thinking with your prick instead of your brain, Max? I know you’ve had this in your wallet since at least last fall. When did you start taking stupid pills? Did you just forget to put it on when you were sticking it in Tess? Jesus, I don’t even know you anymore.”
“Maria,” Max fumbled, at a loss for words. He flinched as she threw the condom, hitting him in the face with it, and he caught it with his hand as it fell. He stared at it, wondering for the millionth time why he hadn’t used it that night. He’d been carrying it around in his wallet since last spring, when things had gotten so intense with Liz. He knew it was there.
How could he explain his actions to Maria, or to the person that he really owed the explanation to, Liz, when he didn’t understand it himself? He didn’t love Tess. He never had. He couldn’t explain what had driven him to do what he had done. It went against everything he believed in. Even after he had thought he’d lost Liz, when he thought she didn’t love him anymore, he hadn’t turned to Tess because she didn’t mean anything to him.
He’d always thought he would be with Liz, and only Liz, and when the time was perfect, they would make love in some special place, with candlelight all around them and rose petals on the bed and flowers filling the room. Then he’d wake up with her in the morning knowing he’d just spent the most wonderful night of his life in her arms.
And then he’d awakened on the hard floor of the observatory, with Tess in his arms knowing he’d just made the worst mistake of his life. Only at the time he hadn’t known just how bad it would really be. He’d destroyed everything that night. In a moment of weakness he had used Tess because he had felt lonely and empty, and in the process he had ruined everything that had ever mattered to him.
“Tess played you, Max, and you fell for it,” Maria said with scorn. “And now you have to live with the consequences. Go save your son, Max, and just leave Liz alone.” She grabbed her purse and stormed out of the apartment, leaving three stunned aliens in her wake.
* * * * *
“Do you believe her?” Isabel asked, staring at her brother. “Do you believe all that stuff Liz said about you coming here from the future?”
“Of course I believe her,” Max answered, meeting her gaze and then turning away from her. He sat on Michael’s couch and leaned forward with his elbows propped on his knees and his head in his hands. His eyes were gritty from lack of sleep and the smoke from the pod chamber, not to mention how he was fighting off the urge to just break down and cry.
He felt like such a fool. Tess had used him, and he’d been too stupid to see it. He’d fallen right into her trap because he was worthless. He was scum. He was nothing. All he’d ever wanted was to make Liz happy. To see her eyes twinkling with delight. To hear her laughter floating on the air. And now, knowing he had caused her only pain, only sorrow, was nearly more than he could bear.
Liz had deceived him, lied to him, pushed him away from her, but it had all been because he had asked her to. He had come back in time and convinced her that she had to. The shock of that chilled him to the bone. He had been so harsh to her, so mean, so cruel, and the only thing she’d had been guilty of, was doing exactly what he had pleaded with her to do. And she had done it, she had sacrificed her wants and her dreams because his future self had asked her to, and she loved him so much that she had given up everything that she wanted, to comply with his request.
But even in the future he must have been a stupid man, unworthy of her love, to have come back in time and allowed her to sacrifice herself like that. All for nothing. Tess never was part of a cohesive unit. Tess had always been the enemy, they just hadn’t known it. But Liz had, Max reminded himself. Liz had always known. When Tess first came to town, Liz had warned them all. She had said she didn’t trust Tess, and she had been right all along.
And now here they were, living this nightmare. A nightmare he didn’t know how to wake up from.
* * * * *
He stood at the base of the ladder, the ladder that led to her, the ladder he had climbed so many times on so many nights, the ladder that stood between him and the only person he had ever really loved. But would she even talk to him? Would she welcome him if he climbed up to her rooftop, or would she send him away, telling him never to return? God, how had it come to this? How had he let this happen?
He looked at his watch once again, indecisive on what he should do. It was late and maybe he shouldn’t disturb her tonight. Maybe he should just leave, give her some time. Maybe with the right amount of time, it could mend her broken heart and she would be able to let him back in. Please, he prayed to God, please let her find it in her heart to forgive him. God how he wished he could change the past, to take back that one night, to prevent the event that would ruin so many people’s lives.
But no, he couldn’t take back what he had done. He had no knowledge of quantum physics or any of the other technical sciences, and he wouldn’t have the slightest idea how to change history. Besides, the Granilith was gone now. There would be no changing the past this time. He had fucked up everything, and maybe lost the only thing that mattered to him.
He looked at his watch again and made up his mind. He needed to see her. He had so many things he needed to say to her. He reached his hand out toward the ladder and he noticed how it trembled. He pulled it back, flexing his fingers, telling himself not to be nervous. If there was even a small part of her that still loved him, that would be enough. It would be a start, a beginning point, to build back what they used to have. If he could just get her to talk to him, then maybe they still had a chance. He put his hands on the rungs of the ladder, and began his slow ascent.
He climbed over her balcony and crossed over to her window. It was late, and he could see her huddled form on the bed, under the covers. He tapped lightly on the glass but she didn’t stir. He disengaged the lock and climbed through the window, letting his feet drop silently onto her bedroom floor. He crossed the room and with an ache in his heart he looked down into her sleeping face.
He knelt beside the bed and pushed the errant strands of hair away from her face. When he had touched her out at the Rocks this morning, out in the desert, it was the first time in a long time that he had felt like himself. That he had felt . . . normal. It was holding her in his arms that had made him feel that way. Without her, his life had just been spinning out of control. Without her, he’d made a mess of everything.
Her hair between his fingers was silky soft and touching it again gave him a sense of being where he belonged, where he was supposed to be. He’d always known she was the one for him, ever since the first time that he had seen her. The moment he had laid eyes on her, he had just known. He’d even told her that last year, so why had he stopped believing in her? Why hadn’t he tried harder to learn the truth? He’d taken what he saw at face value, and then he’d shut her out, and his whole life had gone to hell without her in it.
He drew his fingers through her hair and released it, letting it fall softly around her, framing her delicate features. He felt the ache deep within him intensify as he looked down at her. The moonlight spilling in from the window lit her face and he could see the dried tear stains on her cheeks. She had cried herself to sleep.
The pain he felt in his heart now was so much worse than the pain he had suffered on the night he saw her in this bed with Kyle. Everything that she had done, every betrayal that he thought she had been guilty of, was because she thought it was the right thing to do, for him. She left him in the desert a year ago, because she didn’t want to interfere with his destiny. She had given up a life with him, because he, his future self, had asked her to. How could he make this right? What could he do to make her believe in him again? To let him back in her heart again? Without her, he was out of balance. He needed her in his life. He didn’t know how he could survive without her.
She stirred and he saw the moonlight reflect off something clutched in her hands. He lifted the edge of the blanket, drawing the covers away from her, and he felt a rush of hope surge through him. She was holding a picture of him, clutched closely to her chest. She’d fallen asleep holding it. Did that mean she still had feelings for him? Could he rekindle the love she used to feel for him? Could those dying embers be brought back to life, to flame once more with the passion she used to feel for him?
She stirred again and her eyes slowly opened. Her sleepy face smiled up at him and then her smile faded as she became more fully awake.
“What are you doing here, Max?” she asked in a whisper.
“I had to see you, Liz,” Max said softly. “Please don’t send me away. There are so many things we need to talk about. So many things I need to say to you. I love you Liz. I’ll do anything, anything, to get you back in my life. Please say that we have a chance.”
“Max, you shouldn’t be here,” Liz said, clutching the blanket to her chest. “You should go.”
“Tell me you’ll meet me tomorrow, so we can talk,” Max begged. “Anywhere you say will be fine with me. Just give me a chance to talk to you. Please?” He touched his hand to her bare shoulder and they both were inundated by a series of sudden flashes. A flash of their first kiss, right outside on her balcony, in what now seemed like a lifetime ago. A flash of their passion erupting one day at school, in the eraser room, and on another night at Michael’s apartment, when the fire burning between them had raged.
Max lifted his hand from her shoulder, moving it to cup her cheek and he leaned down to kiss her, unable to stop himself. Their lips touched, and the contact was like a bolt of electricity surging through his body. He felt her lips respond and his heart was elated with joy.
His hand slid into her hair, drawing her closer to him, pulling her into the kiss. She stiffened suddenly as an image flashed unbidden into his mind. The image of Tess’s naked body lying curled up against his and her sleepy blue eyes smiling up at him. Horrified, he felt Liz pull away from him. Her dark eyes were overflowing with tears. Her chin was trembling as she shrank away from him.
“Liz . . . I . . . I . . .” he stammered, horrified by the image he’d just projected into her mind. “Liz . . .” and she slapped him. Hard. Across the face.
“Get out,” she cried out as the tears streamed down her cheeks.
He stood and backed away from her with a look of bewilderment and shock on his face. What had he just done? How could he have let her see that? “Liz . . .”
“I said get out!” Liz screamed again and she threw the picture she had been holding. It hit him on the chest and then fell to the floor, with the glass shattering into a million pieces. Just as her heart had done a moment ago.
“Get out,” she sobbed, turning away from him and burying her face in her pillows as she cried inconsolably.
Max stared at the broken picture in the floor, the shattered glass symbolic of what he had just done to the love she might have still felt for him, and was now surely gone. He looked at her lying on the bed, dying inside as he watched her whole body shaking as she cried, knowing he was the one causing all her pain.
“Liz . . .” Her name caught in his throat, devastated by what he had just done to her. He turned, unheeding as his feet crunched through the glass on the floor around him as he fled her room, bolting down her balcony to the street below. He ran blindly into the night, unable to escape the one person he hated most of all. Himself.
|posted on 14-Sep-2001 6:29:55 PM|
Max sat in his room until the last minute, and then he picked up his backpack and grabbed his keys off the dresser. His feet felt leaden as he trudged through the house, headed toward the jeep and another day of misery at school. He threw his backpack on the passenger seat and walked around to the driver’s side door. He noticed another charred spot on the fender as he passed by and his hand hovered over it as he fixed it. It had taken all of his energy to repair the damaged done to the jeep when they had set it ablaze and sent it over the side of the road into the ravine. He was still finding spots that he had missed, even after a week had gone by.
He climbed in behind the wheel and sat there staring off into the distance, reliving the torture of the last week. They’d all gone back to school on Monday, pretending like nothing had happened, nothing was different. Jim Valenti had called the school and made an excuse to cover Tess’s absence, informing them she wouldn’t be returning.
Liz hadn’t come to school on Monday and when he’d tried to talk to Maria, to ask her if she knew where Liz was, what she was doing, how she was doing, Maria had refused to talk to him about her at all. He had a feeling Liz had told her exactly what had happened, that he showed up professing his love for her, only to end up showing her an image of his night spent with Tess.
Michael had become inseparable from Maria, and Max had a feeling it was because their relationship had turned deeper even though Michael hadn’t said anything. It appeared Michael had attained everything he hadn’t. Michael was in love with a girl who loved him back, and if his suspicions were right, they had shared their first intimacy together, the way he had always thought he and Liz would. For the first time in his life, Max had a reason to be envious of Michael. To watch them in the hallways, with Michael’s arm draped over Maria’s shoulders in an affectionate and possessive manner, was a constant reminder of just how much he had screwed up his own life.
The uneasy truce that had developed between Max and Kyle over the winter had come unraveled. Kyle wouldn’t speak to him on Monday, and had just glared at him whenever they were in the same vicinity. They never had been friends, and now he was sure they never would be.
Liz had come back to school on Tuesday. He’d seen her enter the school grounds in the front seat of Kyle’s car, and then they’d walked slowly across the parking lot, deep in conversation. He felt the pangs of jealousy deep inside him and wondered if his actions had driven them together. He couldn’t blame her for turning to Kyle. He was the one who had been supportive of her over these last weeks, the one that believed her suspicions about Alex, while he, on the other hand, had accused her of doing things to expose them, screaming at her that she was wrong, when the whole time he was the only one who had been wrong, about everything.
He shared the second class of the day with Liz, and it was pure torture. She wouldn’t talk to him. Hell, she wouldn’t even look at him. She sat one row over and one row up and her hair fell over the side of her face, blocking his view of her. All week she had come in to class late, just before the final bell rang and then she’d leave quickly, disappearing in the hallways while he sat at his desk in agony.
Lunch had even been worse. When he stepped into the commons on Tuesday, Michael and Maria had been sitting with Liz, talking and eating their lunch. Max had stood to the side, uncertain what to do. Should he join them? Should he just walk away? Isabel appeared and Liz moved her backpack giving her room to sit down. He hesitantly took a few steps toward the table and then a few more, and then Liz looked up, meeting his eyes.
The color drained from her face and she looked away quickly. He was close enough to hear her mumble, “I’ve gotta go,” and she gathered her things together quickly. She leaned close to Maria and said something he couldn’t hear, and then she was gone. He walked around to the far side of the table with his eyes downcast, not wanting to see the sight of her hurrying away from him.
“Shit,” Maria mumbled watching Liz’s retreating back and she turned back to Michael. “I have to see if she’s-”
“I know,” Michael answered. “I’ll see you after sixth period.” Maria gathered her things and he watched her follow after Liz and then he turned to Max. “You really know how to clear a room, don’t you?”
“Michael-” Max stammered. His eyes darted toward Liz and he watched her disappear around the corner, never once turning back to look his way. He sat down heavily at the table and let his backpack drop to the ground.
“Shit, Max,” Michael said shaking his head.
“What did you do?” Isabel frowned at her brother. “I know she was upset when she left Michael’s apartment on Saturday, but this is more than that.”
“Isabel, I . . . I don’t-”
“You mean you don’t know?” Michael interrupted him again, staring at Isabel. “Max didn’t tell you?”
“Michael . . .” Max uttered dejectedly.
“Our illustrious leader here went over to see Liz the other night, to ‘profess’ his love for her,” Michael said sarcastically, “and then proceeded to give her a flash of his hour long orgasm with Tess. That’s a pretty hard act to follow, Max.”
“What?” Isabel said in shock, staring at her brother.
“It wasn’t . . .” Max said and then stopped. His elbow was propped on the table and he leaned forward, covering his eyes with his hand. ‘It wasn’t what’, he thought to himself. It was just the image of him and Tess lying naked in each other’s arms, not the actual hot alien sex, as if that made any difference?
“Max, how could you?” Isabel said, stunned.
“I don’t know how it happened,” Max shot back, feeling suffocated by the guilt. He stared at them both, pleading with them to understand. “I didn’t do it on purpose. That’s the last thing I wanted her to ever see. It just . . . suddenly was . . . there, and Liz saw it, and now she won’t talk to me. She won’t even look at me.”
“Do you blame her Max?” Isabel asked. “Jesus!”
“No, no I don’t blame her,” Max said sounding defeated. “I don’t blame her at all.” He looked away from them, disgusted with himself. He reached into his backpack to retrieve his lunch and his hand shook with all the tension he was feeling. He took out his sandwich and looked at it, realizing his appetite was gone, and he threw it down on the table in revulsion . . .
“Max . . . Max . . . MAX, honey. What are you doing?” Diane shouted, shaking her son on the shoulder.
Max blinked his eyes and looked around him. He was still sitting in his jeep, with his backpack on the seat beside him, but something was different. His mind felt sluggish and he blinked again, suddenly realizing that he was soaking wet. His hair was drenched and the rainwater was running in rivulets under his collar and down his back.
“Honey, what’s wrong?” Diane asked with growing concern.
Max turned to look at his mother, standing next to the driver’s side door of the jeep, with an umbrella open above her to keep the rain off. “When did it start raining?” he asked, sounding out of sorts.
“About twenty minutes ago, not long after you left the house,” she answered. “Have you been sitting here all this time?”
Max felt a shiver run through his body. He looked at his watch and his eyes got wider. He’d been sitting here for nearly half an hour and he’d missed the start of school. What the hell? He scrambled out of the jeep and hurriedly pulled on the soft top while the rain continued to pour. Diane assisted him and then she rushed him into the house to get out of the rain.
“You’re soaked to the bone, Max.” She walked into the laundry room to retrieve a clean towel and brought it back to him. “Here, honey, dry yourself off. What were you doing out in the jeep all that time?”
He looked at his mother but he had no answer for her. He’d been so lost in his thoughts about the events of the last week, he hadn’t even felt it when it started to rain. Shaking his head, he walked toward his bedroom so he could change his clothes.
* * * * *
Liz stood in front of the Crashdown waiting for Kyle. He’d been nice enough to give her a ride to school each morning, and his quiet support had helped her get through the week. It had been the longest week of her life.
She had cried for hours after Max had left on Saturday night, after she had seen the flash of him with Tess. She knew she had only herself to blame. She had pushed and pushed him away from her, first by leaving him last summer, when he needed all the support he could get. God only knew what kind of horrors he had faced under Pierce’s directions. She’d seen flashes of only a portion of what they had done to him, and when he needed her most, she had run away. He must have felt like she abandoned him, which she had. The shock of seeing the image of his mother, and all that she had said, had made Liz feel like she didn’t belong, that she was in the way of what he was supposed to become, so she had left. She hadn’t been there when he needed her most.
He had pursued her rigorously in the fall when she returned, and she would have given in, if it hadn’t been for her visitor from the future. She’d known that night, when Max looked through her window with that look of sheer devastation on his face, that she had destroyed everything that had ever existed between them. She had known it, but she hadn’t allowed herself to believe it. A part of her had believed that he would know it wasn’t true, that he would figure out the truth and come back to her, but that had only been a foolish dream. She had destroyed their love that night and in doing so, she had destroyed him. His life was in the state it was right now because of what she had done to him.
He’d felt all alone, and he’d done exactly what she had been pushing him to do. He formed a bond with Tess. What right did she have to be angry because he’d had a physical relationship with her? Isn’t that what she had pushed for? Isn’t that what she knew would end up happening? Hadn’t she told him a thousand times, in deed and in words, that be belonged with Tess?
Yes, her mind screamed at her. Yes, she’d known she was pushing him right into Tess’s arms, Tess’s bed, but she never thought he would . . .
She’d foolishly thought that he would see right through her deception, her lies, and together they would find a way to keep Tess in Roswell and everything would work out the way she wanted it to, and Max would come back to her. She’d had no way of knowing Tess was not only her rival, but Max’s enemy as well. All Tess had wanted was his heir, to assure ascension to the throne, and then Max would become expendable.
There was nothing she could do now to change what had been done. She had forced Max away from her and he had turned to Tess. Liz would have to live with that knowledge for the rest of her life. The hard part now would be moving forward with a life that didn’t include Max, but after the vision he had given her, after seeing the image of Max and Tess together, she knew it was over. The love they had once had was nothing more than dying embers now.
Kyle pulled to a stop in front of her and she made her way to his car. She steeled herself for another pain filled day, of seeing Max in the hallway or in class or walking through the commons. She wasn’t sure if she could take it, but she told herself, only a few more days and it would be over and then she would try to build a new life. She’d have to tell Max though, before she left. She owed him that much.
* * * * *
Max elbowed his way down the hall as he hurried to his class. He’d missed first period and he’d be late for second period if he didn’t hurry. As he walked the hallway his thoughts turned to Liz again, and all that he had put her through.
Last year, when she had seen him kissing Tess that night in the rain, he had begged her to believe in him, that it wasn’t what she thought. And she had. She’d stood by him, even though what she saw had hurt her deeply. She’d still kept her faith in him. So how had he repaid her? Had he kept his faith in her? No. He couldn’t get past what his eyes had seen, to find out the truth beneath the surface, so he had turned his back on her.
And the worst thing of all was that deep down, he had known she was hiding something from him. He could tell it in the way she acted around him, and definitely in the way she acted around Kyle. There was no way that Liz would have given herself to Kyle for a one night stand. After that night, they never once acted like they had become lovers. Why hadn’t he listened to his instincts? So much pain could have been avoided if he had let his heart lead the way.
If only he hadn’t turned his back on her, and created that rift between them, maybe they could have worked it out and he would have never turned to Tess . . .
The bell rang just as he entered his classroom and he slipped into his seat. His eyes latched on to Liz, sitting in front of him on the left, and he couldn’t take his eyes off her. He couldn’t hear the sound of the teacher’s voice, or the chatter of the students around him. All he could hear was the subtle sounds she made as she shifted in her chair, and the soft sigh that escaped from her throat that he knew only reached his ears.
This was what he remembered, this connection he felt with Liz, and had felt for most of his life. It had always been easy for him to pick up on her moods, to sense what she was feeling, to hear the subtle things her body was saying and know what her mind was thinking. Those sensations had been diminished or absent for most of the last year, but now they were back with a vengeance and it made him miss her all the more.
Her head turned back toward him and she glanced his way. He felt like a deer caught in the headlights of a car, unable to move, unable to look away. Her eyes looked into his and then she broke the contact, dropping her gaze down to the floor. He was oblivious to everyone and everything around him. His world was limited to only Liz and the space between the two of them. She bit at her lower lip and then her eyes rose up to meet his again. He forgot how to breathe when she leaned toward him and opened her mouth to speak.
“Max, I . . .” she said softly and then her eyes dropped to the floor again. “I . . .”
She looked up at him again and he saw her take a deep breath. He could see the struggle on her face and it made his chest hurt to know she found it so difficult to talk to him now. “What, Liz?” he managed to say, suddenly afraid that he didn’t want to know.
“Can we talk?” she asked and his heart soared. She wanted to talk to him? Would she let him try to explain? Would she give him a chance to try to redeem himself in her eyes? His lungs were screaming for air and he sucked in a deep breath, right before her next words knocked it right out of him.
“I have something I need to tell you.”
What? What could it possibly be? How could she say something like that and then make him wait to hear the rest? He couldn’t wait. He needed to hear it now. He was living and breathing based on the words coming out of her mouth. “What? Tell me now,” he said, afraid to know, not being able to wait.
“Not here, Max . . .” she answered, looking at the students around her.
“What do you need to tell me Liz?” Max said, ignoring those that were staring at the exchange going on between them.
She held his gaze for a moment and then her eyes dropped to the floor again. “I . . . I’m going away Max.” She looked up at his face again and saw a flash of panic in his eyes. She forged on, knowing it was the only way. “I’m going back to Florida, as soon as the school year is out. I just . . . I just can’t stay here. I wanted you to know. I didn’t want you to hear about it from someone else.”
Max stared at her feeling the panic sweeping over him. She was leaving again, and he wouldn’t be able to see her all summer. Last summer had almost killed him without her near. How would he survive another summer without her? He stared at her and he managed to squeak out, “For the whole summer? Will you be gone until September? Like last year?”
Her head slowly shook back and forth and she bit her lip again. It was always bad news when she bit her lip before answering him. A part of his mind was screaming at him not to listen to anything else that she had to say, while another part of him was sadly resigned to what he knew was coming.
But knowing wasn’t the same as actually hearing it, and when she said the words aloud his mind railed against it. It wasn’t possible. It couldn’t be true. For if it was true, what reason did he still have left for living? The words rang in his ears as she said them. Words more hateful than anything he had heard before. He tried to block them out. Tried to pretend he hadn’t heard them, but he had. God help him, he’d heard every syllable she had just said.
“I’m not coming back . . .”
|posted on 14-Sep-2001 6:32:33 PM|
Max sat in the booth in the Crashdown, wondering if this was the last day that he would ever see Liz. Her flight to Florida was schedule to leave in just a few hours and it wouldn’t be long before she would be headed toward the airport. What was he going to do? What could he do? The thought of never seeing her again was his worst possible nightmare coming true.
He knew she was upstairs packing. Maria had told him. He knew he was probably the last person she wanted to talk to, but he couldn’t help it. He needed to see her, at least once more before she left his life forever. He looked toward the back of the café and felt something was drawing him to her. The remnants of the life he had thought they would share, maybe. The dreams of a future he couldn’t let go of.
Even after Tess had arrived and wrecked havoc on everything he held dear, he had always thought in the end, he and Liz had something that would transcend everything that had threatened to destroy their love for each other. But there was only so much she could put up with before she broke, and when it happened, she’d left him with his ultimate nightmare. Facing a lifetime without her. And for that he had no one to blame but himself.
He pushed his plate aside and steeled himself for what was sure to be one of the most painful moments of his life. He pushed himself away from the table and he made his way to the back, finding the stairs that would take him up to her apartment. At the top of the stairs he hesitated before lifting his hand to knock on the door. He noticed how his hand trembled as he raised it and he flexed his fingers trying to steady it. He knocked on the door and a few moments later found himself face to face with Liz’s mother.
“Hi Mrs. Parker. I was wondering if I could talk to Liz?” he said, surprised that his voice sounded so calm. He was anything but calm. Inside he was a jumble of emotions, all threatening to overwhelm him.
“Sure Max,” Nancy answered and stepped back so he could enter. He crossed the threshold and stood awkwardly to the side while Nancy closed the door. “She’s in her room. Go ahead. I’m sure she’ll be glad to see you before she leaves.”
The words echoed in his head, ‘before she leaves . . . before she leaves . . . before she leaves.’ He nodded his head and mumbled, “Thanks,” and then turned to walk down the familiar hallway to her room. He passed Jeff Parker and they exchanged pleasantries as the older man headed down to the Crashdown, and Max continued on his way to see Liz. When he reached her door he noticed it was open and he peeked inside.
She was standing in profile with her head bent slightly forward, looking at something in her hand. Her hair covered the side of her face and he couldn’t see her expression, but he could read her emotions in her body language, and feel it in the air around her. She was sad.
Liz held the strip of pictures in her hand and she was flooded by the memories of a better time, a time when it was a joy to wake up in the morning and her nights were filled with wonderful dreams. Dreams where she and Max had a lifetime together, where nothing and no one had come between them. Dreams where she’d never broken his heart or torn his world to pieces.
She stared at the strip on photos, taken at the county fair over a year ago, in one of those cheesy little booths. Was that the last time Max had ever smiled at her that way, without a care in the world, and loving every moment that they spent together before their world fell apart? Another tear fell and hit the back of her hand and she fought back the sobs that were threatening to drown her. She’d been crying all morning.
Max rapped his knuckles softly on the door and his stomach fell as she turned to look at him. Her face was streaked with tears and her eyes were puffy and red. She’d been crying for a while. She turned away quickly and he could see her wiping her hands across her cheeks.
“Liz,” he said haltingly. “Your mom . . . your mom said I could come up.” He had a million things he wanted to say to her, all of them tumbling around in his brain and he couldn’t get a single one of them out. He wanted to tell her that he loved her to the depths of his very soul, that the thought of a life without her left him quaking in fear. He wanted to beg her to stay, to plead with her to forgive him, to find it in her heart to love him again. Instead he said, “So you’re packing?”
She nodded her head while she tried to get control of her emotions. She didn’t trust herself to speak just yet. She had been shocked when she turned and saw him. How long had he been standing there? Had he heard her when she was crying his name a few minutes ago? She hid the strip of photos in her suitcase, underneath a layer of clothes.
“Yeah, I’m just finishing,” she finally said, answering his question. She picked up the last of the clothes that were stacked on her bed and set them in her suitcase. With the task complete, she turned to look at him finally, unable to avoid it any longer. “I hate packing. It’s always so hard to know what to take.”
“Yeah,” he said with a halfhearted smile. “I know what you mean. Then when you get there you remember all the stuff you forgot.”
“Yeah,” she agreed and fought to keep her chin from trembling. “Yeah, I hate that.”
Max stepped into the room with his eyes sweeping over the boxes on the floor. Her room had an empty feel to it now, with so many of her things packed away. She had lent the room her personality while she was here, and now that she was leaving and taking everything with her, all that was left was a hollow shell.
“Are you having all this shipped to you?” Max asked resting his fingers lightly on first one box and then another, afraid to look at her. For if he looked at her, he knew he’d have to beg her to stay, but that would be selfish on his part. He’d ruined her life and broken her heart and how did that saying go? If you loved something, set it free? He was setting her free, to find the life that she deserved. A better life.
“Yes. They’re being shipped tomorrow, and they should be there by Friday. My Aunt has a nice house, and my room is pretty big.” She avoided eye contact with him, and stared out the window to her balcony.
“That’s good,” he picked at the tape on one of the boxes as he spoke. “I hope you have a good trip, a safe trip,” he said and his mind screamed ‘Please don’t go. Please don’t leave me.’
“Thanks. I’m gonna miss this place,” she sighed, but in her mind she said ‘I’m gonna miss you.’
“It’ll be strange not climbing up your balcony to come visit you anymore,” Max said feeling a stabbing pain in his heart but trying to keep the sound of his voice light.
“Well, you hadn’t done much of that lately,” she said and instantly wished she could take it back.
“Forget I said that.” She crossed to her dresser and picked up the framed picture of her with Maria and Alex. They’d been so happy then, with their future spread out before them. And now, Alex was dead and she was leaving and nothing would ever be the same again. “There are so many memories here,” she said so quietly he could barely hear her.
“I’m so sorry, Liz,” Max said moving closer to her. “About Alex, about us, about the way . . . the way I’ve treated you. You were right all along. Your instincts have always been right and I don’t know why I couldn’t see that. If I’d only listened to you. If I’d only believed in you, Alex wouldn’t be dead and we wouldn’t be apart and Tess . . .”
She closed her eyes and clutched the picture to her chest. “And Tess wouldn’t be carrying your son . . .”
“Liz.” He could barely say her name around the lump in his throat. He reached to touch her shoulder and when his hand brushed her skin, she bolted from him, moving quickly back to the suitcase on her bed.
She placed the photograph inside it, cushioned by her clothing to keep it from breaking on the trip. Near it was the picture of Max, the same one she had thrown at him a week ago. She had placed it in a new frame the next day, still holding on to what they once had, even after everything they had been through.
She shut the lid of her suitcase and the sound of the zipper being pulled closed filled the air. It was such a final sound, like the ending of a chapter in her life. She turned to look at him then, biting on her lower lip to keep from crying. “I have to go now. I just . . .” her jaw began to tremble and she closed her eyes to regain her composure. After taking a deep breath, she focused on him again and said, “I hope you find your son, Max. I really do.”
“Liz,” he choked out and a tear spilled down his cheek. He couldn’t swallow and he couldn’t breathe. It felt like the air had been sucked out of the room. She was saying goodbye to him, forever, and his mind screamed for him not to let her go. How could he ever make things up to her if she walked out of his life now? “Liz, I don’t wa-”
His words were cut off when Nancy suddenly appeared in the doorway, looking distraught, with a wild glaze in her eyes. They stared at her mother and the room filled with the sense of dread.
“Mom? Mom, what’s wrong?” Liz said and Max could hear the panic building in her voice. Nancy didn’t answer and Liz took a frightened step closer to her. “Mom? What is it?”
“It’s your father. Something’s happened to your father.”
“Dad?” Liz said stunned. “What do you mean? Where is he?”
“Downstairs. Come quick Liz.” Nancy turned to run and Liz looked at Max with panic in her eyes before racing after her mother. Max followed on Liz’s heels and they ran down the stairs to the Crashdown. A small crowd had formed around a crumpled body on the floor just inside the doors to the café.
“Dad?” Liz cried out as she elbowed her way past them and dropped to her knees beside her father’s prone body. Max knelt across from her and placed his fingers against Jeff’s throat, feeling for a pulse. “Dad, can you hear me?” She looked up at the faces surrounding her and asked, “What happened?”
Someone in the crowd answered, “He came through the doors and he was kind of flexing his arm like it was bothering him and then he clutched his chest and went down like a rock. I think he had a heart attack.”
Max turned Jeff flat on his back and rested his ear against his chest. He sat back up and met Liz’s eyes, shaking his head. “No pulse. He’s not breathing.” Max looked at the fear and the panic and the pain on her face and he knew he had to do something. He couldn’t let her father die right in front of her eyes. Without thinking of the consequences, he placed his hand over Jeff’s heart.
Liz watched Max’s hand move into position over her father’s chest and her eyes grew even wider. What was he doing? He couldn’t expose himself like this. There were so many people watching. She grabbed his hand and he pulled his eyes up to meet hers. “You can’t do this Max. I won’t let you.”
“But Liz, it’s your father,” Max gasped. “I can’t sit here and watch him die, knowing I could have done something.” He cupped her hands with his, silently begging her to let him make this right for her.
“I can’t let you sacrifice yourself, not even to save my Dad. I wouldn’t be able to live with myself.” She kept her voice low as she looked at all the faces hovering around them and then looked back at Max. “You can’t do it, Max.”
He looked at the tortured expression on her face and it killed him inside not to be able do this for her, but she was right. If he healed her father, here, in front of all these people, the word would spread quickly and God only knew what would happen then. But there had to be something he could do.
“Max,” she said and he could see a spark of hope in her eyes. “We took a CPR class together. Do you remember how?”
“Yeah, yeah I think so,” he answered, trying to sound confident.
“You do the chest compression’s, and I’ll give him mouth to mouth. It's one breath for every five compression’s, right?”
“That sounds right,” Max nodded and saw that with a plan of action, the panic had left her face. He watched as she adjusted the position of her father’s head, tilting his head back slightly, and then she blew two breaths into his lungs to begin. Max felt his chest rise with each breath, and then he went to work, pressing down rhythmically on Jeff’s chest with his hands crossed over his heart.
“Did anyone call 911?” Liz shouted at the crowd.
“They’re on the way,” came a reply as Liz listened to Max counting out the compression’s.
“ . . . two . . . three . . . four . . . five.”
Liz pinched her father’s nose and tilted his head, breathing air into his lungs once more. She sat back and Max leaned in, using his thumb to find the right spot and then linking his hands together to start the compression’s. “One . . . two . . . ”
“Everybody, get back, please. Give us some room here.” Liz saw her mother standing off to the side with a horrified expression on her face and she called out to her, raising her voice to get through to her. “Mom. MOM. Go see if the ambulance is coming. When they get here, tell them to hurry.”
“ . . . three . . . four . . . five.”
Max rocked back on his heals and Liz moved in to give her father the oxygen his body was starving for. Afterwards, she felt for a pulse in his throat. Her eyes met Max’s and she shook her head no. He leaned forward again and his voice droned on as he tried valiantly to keep Jeff Parker alive until help arrived. “One . . . two . . . three . . .”
|posted on 14-Sep-2001 6:34:32 PM|
The sound of a siren drew closer and the emergency lights created a strobe effect across the interior of the Crashdown. The paramedics jumped from the cab of the Medic One emergency vehicle and a terrified Nancy Parker directed them into the rear of the café, where Max and Liz were still performing CPR on an unresponsive Jeff Parker.
“How long’s he been down?” the first paramedic asked, assessing the status of the unconscious man on the floor.
“Five, maybe ten minutes,” Liz responded as she watched him spreading equipment out on the floor around them.
He monitored Max as he performed chest compression’s and nodded his head approvingly. “You’re doing a good job.” Max leaned back when he was done and the paramedic checked the carotid pulse in Jeff’s throat and then checked for respirations.
The second paramedic moved into position, fitting a respirator over her father’s face and Liz moved back so they could do their work. Max went to her side and pulled her to her feet, drawing her close to him as they watched the professionals do their work. Everything became a blur to her as they worked on her father, attaching wires and contacts to his skin and then zapping him with a defibrillator to restart his heart.
Jeff’s body rose off the floor as the shock surged through him and the voices of the paramedics whirled around in Liz’s mind as they worked to save her father. “We’ve got a rhythm . . . he’s in V-tach, let’s hit him again . . . he’s throwing PVC’s . . . let’s do it again, everybody clear . . . he’s back, normal sinus rhythm . . .”
Liz felt a surge of relief pass through her as the paramedics stabilized him and prepared to transport him to the hospital. They placed him on a stretcher and her mother followed close behind them as they wheeled him to the ambulance. There was only room for one passenger to accompany him to the hospital and Nancy turned to her daughter, uncertain what to do. Should she go with her husband, or should she stay with Liz and follow behind in the car? She turned to look at her daughter and Max moved toward her, bringing Liz with him.
“You go in the ambulance,” Max urged her. “I’ll bring Liz to the hospital and we’ll meet you there.”
“Thank you, Max,” Nancy said gratefully. “Are you going to be okay Liz?”
“I’ll be fine, Mom,” Liz tried to assure her, hearing how shaky her voice sounded. “I’ll meet you there.”
Max slowly became aware of the way Liz was holding on to him, and he was holding on to her. His hand was cupping the back of her head and her cheek was resting against his chest. Her hand clutched his shirt in her fist as she watched her father being loaded into the ambulance and he could feel her trembling against him. She had been so calm, so in charge during the crisis, and now he could tell it was all starting to catch up with her.
“Come on Liz, we’ll follow right behind them,” he said softly with his arms around her and gently guided her to the jeep. He helped lift her into the passenger seat and then reluctantly released her as he hurried to the driver’s side and climbed in. The ambulance pulled into the street with the lights flashing and the siren screaming and Max followed behind them.
Liz rocked back and forth, a quivering mass of nervousness and anxiety, wondering if what she and Max had done had been good enough, had they performed the CPR in time, had they done it right? What if her father survived the heart attack, but his brain had been starved for oxygen because she hadn’t breathed right? What if he was a vegetable for the rest of his life because she’d done the CPR all wrong?
Everything she tried to do was always wrong, wrong, wrong, and the people she loved the most were always suffering because of it, her mind screamed at her. She’d ruined Max’s life. Alex was dead because she’d changed the future. Her father was going to die because she couldn’t do anything right and her mother was going to be left all alone.
Max kept glancing at Liz as he drove, seeing the strain and tension on her face and wishing there was something more he could have done to help. She looked devastated and he wished there was some way he could comfort her. Her chin was trembling and the tears were starting to fall down her cheeks as the reality of what had happened set in. He reached to take her hand just as she lifted it to cover her face and the sound of her crying pierced his heart. His trembling hand hovered in the air uncertainly and then he pulled it back without touching her.
She seemed so lost and alone as she huddled in the seat next to him and he wanted to whip the jeep over to the side of the road and take her in his arms and tell her everything would be alright. He wanted to kiss away her tears, wrap his arms around her and chase away her fears, swear to her that nothing bad was going to happen, but he was afraid to touch her. What if he touched her and she got another flash from him? What if she saw more images of that horrible night he’d spent with Tess? What if he could never touch her again for fear of what she might see?
“He’s going to be fine Liz,” Max tried to reassure her. “I promise you, I won’t let anything bad happen to him. Somehow, I’ll make sure he recovers. Please don’t cry, Liz.” He could hear her sniffling and then saw her trying to wipe the tears from her face.
“Thank you, for helping,” she said shakily and her eyes darted up to meet his, “and for . . . being willing to . . . to-”
“He’ll be alright, Liz. I promise,” Max said, holding her gaze and seeing the fear in her eyes abate somewhat. He longed to comfort her but he was afraid the rift between them was just too deep.
Liz stared at Max remembering another time when someone she loved lay dying in the Roswell Hospital. Max had been there for her that night, supporting her as her grandmother lay dying. They’d been together as her life drained away, and his gentle presence had helped her come to terms with her loss. He had taken her home afterward and walked her up to her apartment above the Crashdown. He had sat with her in her living room, holding her in his arms as she cried herself to sleep and he’d stayed with her until her parents had returned home.
The look on his face now reminded her of how he had looked that night. She had sensed that he was concerned about her, that he wanted to comfort her, but he was hesitant of over stepping his bounds. She felt that same way now, that he wanted to support her and soothe her fears, but the wall between them was just too high. They could never go back to those innocent days before their world fell apart.
The hospital loomed ahead and Max pulled into a parking stall close to the emergency room entrance. He raced around the jeep with the intention of helping her down, but she had already climbed free and he chased after her as she ran across the parking lot. They reached the emergency room just in time to see her father being wheeled down the hallway into the exam area, and out of sight.
Liz stood staring as the doors swung shut and Max stood beside her, staring down at the helpless look on her face. If only things were different between them, he knew he could make her feel better, but she was closed off from him. He could sense it. He wasn’t a part of her inner most thoughts anymore. There wasn’t room in her heart anymore for someone who had hurt her as deeply as he had over these last months.
“Liz?” Max said softly. “Let’s go sit down. It might be a while before you hear anything.” She stood staring at the closed doors and he reached out his hand, touching her gently on the shoulder. She jerked her head in his direction and she stepped away from him, almost as if his touch had burned her. Her eyes had taken on a shocked look, and then a curtain fell over them as she shut off her emotions. “Let’s go sit down,” he urged again.
She looked at the waiting room, and then back at his face before nodding her head slightly and responding, “Okay.”
He led her to the chairs and they sat side by side in awkward silence. He could sense that something had happened between them in the last few minutes but he wasn’t sure what. They had worked as a team while they were trying to save her Dad, putting aside all their problems for a few minutes, and he had felt connected to her again. But a few minutes ago that wall had gone up between them again and he wasn’t sure why.
“Is there . . .” Max said trying to break the silence, “is there anything you want? A cup of coffee? A drink? Something to eat?”
She turned to him and she started to shake her head when he could see her change her mind. “A cup of coffee would be nice,” Liz said finally.
“Okay,” he said eager for something to do for her. “I’ll be right back.” He started to rise from the chair and she reached out her hand to stop him, only to pull it back quickly before she touched him. He looked at her with a heavy heart, remembering a time when touching each other and holding hands seemed like the most natural thing in the world.
“Max, while you do that, I’m going to go call Maria and tell her what’s happened.”
“Okay,” Max said rising to his feet and Liz joined him, walking side by side down the hall, Liz headed toward the phones, and Max seeking out the vending machines.
* * * * *
Liz finished her phone call and returned to the waiting room, noticing the empty chairs where they had been sitting before. Her phone call had lasted several minutes and she was surprised Max wasn’t back yet. She sat down and waited, watching the minutes tick by on the clock above the nurses’ station. Feeling a sense of apprehension, she set off in the direction of the vending machines to see if Max was still there.
She walked down the hallway and her pace slowed as his back came into view, standing in front of the coffee machine with his hand raised in the air. Was he just getting the coffee now? Maybe he had been doing something else before, and had just now walked over here. Maybe he had called home first to tell his parents what had happened, to let them know where he was. Maybe. But he hadn’t used the phones near her, and there weren’t any other ones close by. Whatever it was, she reminded herself, it wasn’t part of her business anymore.
The closer she got to him, the deeper her apprehension grew. He wasn’t standing in front of the vending machine like he was trying to figure out what he wanted, but rather like he was frozen in place. “Max? Max, is everything alright?” She moved to his side and saw the glazed look in his eyes as he stared at the giant coffee cup on the face of the vending machine. His hand was in the air clutching a quarter and it was trembling. “Max?” she said louder and she touched his arm, shuddering as an image in his mind assaulted her.
Max shook himself and refocused, surprised to see Liz standing next to him. “Did you reach Maria?” he asked and then wondered why Liz was staring at him so strangely. “Liz? Are you alright?”
“Yeah,” she said, trying to shake off the image she had seen. Tears formed in her eyes again and she took a step back from him.
“What is it Liz?” Max asked with deep concern. “Is it your . . . did you hear something about your Dad?”
“No,” she whispered, staring at him as she struggled not to cry. Just then Maria appeared at Liz’s side, wrapping her arms around her friend, and Liz crumbled against her. Amy hovered around them and Max felt his hackles rise when he saw Sean walk up to Liz and place his hands on her shoulders.
“You okay Parker?” he asked looking down into her shimmering eyes.
She nodded and then Sean wrapped his arms around her, kissing her lightly on the forehead as he pulled her close. Max noticed how she didn’t fight him off, or pull away from him and he felt a pang of jealousy course through him. She shied away from him every time he touched her, but she let Sean DeLuca hold her in his arms. He reminded himself that he had no right to feel jealous. He’d made his bed, with Tess no less, and he had no claim on Liz now. But it still tore his heart apart to see her anywhere near Sean.
Liz backed away from him, feeling confused and scared and so very alone, even with all these people around her. She didn’t want to deal with Sean, she didn’t want to hear Maria’s endless questions, she didn’t want to think about what she’d seen when she touched Max’s arm a moment ago. She just wanted to sit down and not think about anything at all.
Liz headed toward the waiting room and Maria and Amy followed along beside her, asking her questions about her father’s condition. Max and Sean stood glaring at each other by the coffee machine and then Sean broke the silence by saying, “So Father’s Day is in a couple of weeks. You must look at that day differently now, huh?”
“I don’t know what you’re talking about,” Max said dismissively, but the set of his jaw gave his away sudden tension. What did Sean know about it? Had Maria told him about Tess and the baby? Had Liz confided in him? Sean was the last person Max wanted knowing about his secrets. What else did he know?
“Yeah, right Max,” Sean mocked him. “Where is little mommy dearest anyway?” He looked Max up and down, not expecting an answer to his question, and not getting one. The big jerk was staring at him with a stupid expression on his face and Sean wondered what Liz had ever seen in him in the first place. He turned his back on Max and walked toward the waiting room, making a beeline straight for Liz.
Max stared at his back with contempt in his eyes. Sean DeLuca was bad news, and he’d be damned if he was going to let him work his way into Liz’s heart. Maybe he had lost his chance to ever have a life with her, he thought to himself, but no way was he going to stand by and watch that creep try to get close to her. Max finished inserting the quarters into the vending machine and headed back to Liz with a steaming cup of coffee in his hands.
Maria and Amy sat close to Liz and she told them all that had happened and what she knew about her father’s condition, which wasn’t very much. She was starting to feel overwhelmed by all the questions and her anxiety level continued to rise as more time passed with no word of what was happening in that exam room down the hall.
As Max neared Liz, a sound behind him drew his attention and he turned to see Kyle burst through the emergency room doors. His eyes met Max’s with barely an acknowledgment and then he looked past him, to Liz sitting on a chair in the waiting room. He brushed by Max without a word and hurried over to Liz, squatting down in front of her and taking her hands in his.
“Are you alright, Liz? How’s your Dad?” he asked showing the depth of his concern.
“I’m okay Kyle,” Liz answered, squeezing his hands. “I don’t know about my Dad though.”
“Is there anything, I mean anything, that you need, or you want?” Kyle asked, not taking his eyes off her.
“No, I don’t need anything,” Liz answered, touched that he had come here. “But why are you here? How did you know?”
“I stopped by your place because I wanted to say goodbye before you left. Agnes told me what happened, so I wanted to come by and see how you were, and see how your Dad was doing.”
Liz was about to thank him when Max walked up to her, distracting her as he offered her the streaming cup. “Here’s your coffee, Liz,” he said, feeling his jealousy deepen at the intimate way Kyle was holding her hands. Kyle had had his chance once, but Liz had chosen him instead. Was it all going to turn around again, with him losing her to Kyle this time? He leaned forward, holding the coffee out to her and warned, “Be careful, it’s really hot.”
“Thank you,” she said meeting his eyes and pulling her hands away from Kyle so she could take the cup from him.
Max felt a sense of satisfaction when she stopped holding Kyle’s hands, and then felt a renewed bout of ire when he watched his hands dropped to her legs, gently cupping her knees and her thighs. As Max handed her the cup their fingers touched for a moment and Max felt another jolt of electricity surge through him when her skin came into contact with his. Her expression gave him no indication that she had felt it too, and that saddened him deeply. Their connection had once been so strong, and now he was afraid that after what he had done to her, after how badly he had hurt her, that it was lost now too.
“Did you want any sugar? Any cream?” he asked, ignoring the way Kyle glared at him.
“No, this is fine,” Liz replied. “Thank you.” She held his gaze for a moment and then she looked to Kyle, before dropping her eyes to stare at the steam rising off her coffee. The clock above the nurse’s station continued to tick away the minutes and they waited.
* * * * *
Liz wandered around the waiting room, stretching her tired leg muscles. What was taking so long? Why hadn’t she heard anything yet? Was it a bad sign that so much time had passed since he was brought in with still no word about his condition? She looked around the room, seeing Maria and Amy talking quietly together, with Sean lounging next to them in what appeared to be a light doze. One leg was stretched out in front of him and his head rested on his hand with his eyes closed. Kyle was sitting across from them flipping through some kind of car magazine.
She turned her head to look at Max, standing at the window and staring out at the sun filled day. She walked over to him, lifting her hand to touch his shoulder and then pulled it back, remembering what had happened when she touched him earlier by the vending machine. She didn’t want to see that image again, that image of him with Tess.
“Max?” she said softy and when he didn’t react she spoke louder. “Max?”
He jumped, startled out of his thoughts, surprised to see her next to him. He looked around the room quickly and then back to Liz. “Still no word?”
“No,” she answered and the strain was evident in the tone of her voice. “Look Max, you don’t have to stay. I appreciate everything that you’ve done, but I know you have your own . . . your own problems that you need to deal with. Maria’s here now, and Kyle, and everyone. They can keep me company.”
“You don’t want me here?” Max asked, stunned that she was sending him away. He didn’t want to be apart from her. He wanted to stay right by her side in case she needed him. It was like a physical blow to think that she didn’t need or want his help. “You want me to leave?”
“No, Max. I didn’t mean it that way,” she said shaking her head. “It’s . . . it’s just that this is taking so long, and I know you have other important things to do. I know you’ve been trying to find a way to . . . you’ve been trying to figure out how to . . .”
“You mean my . . .” Max said, unable to finish the sentence.
“Yeah,” she answered, not able to say the words aloud but hearing them screaming in her head, ‘You’ve been trying to find a way to save your son.’
“Right now you’re the most important thing, Liz.” With all his being he wanted to touch her cheek with his fingertips, but he kept his hand at his side. He knew she didn’t want him to touch her anymore. “What’s happening now . . .” he continued, struggling to find the words, “this is . . . this is real, and I want to help you through this. I want to be here in case you need me. Please, don’t send me away. Don’t shut me out. I want to help you, Liz.”
“Okay,” Liz said at a loss for words. She’d assumed he was staying out of some sense of honor, or duty, because of the role he had played in bring her Dad back from the brink of death. But his heartfelt plea for her to let him stay belied that. Looking into his mournful eyes, she wasn’t sure what to think anymore.
“Liz, when all of this is over, and we find out your Dad is fine and everything is going to be okay, can we sit down and talk? There are so many things I want to say to you, so many things I want to try to explain. I’ve treated you horribly, Liz. I know that and there is no way that I can ever make that up to you, and I wouldn’t blame you if you hated me for the rest of your life but I just haven’t felt like my self in such a long time and all I’m asking for is a chance just to talk to you-”
“Max,” Liz said touching her fingertips to his lips, “take a breath.”
She smiled at him, but he could see that it only touched her lips, not her eyes, and definitely not deep, into her being, into her soul. But, she was touching him, which was something considering her recent aversion to touching him at all. He reached up and took her hand in his, wrapping his fingers around her palm, feeling her warm skin and remembering what it had felt like when she once loved him.
“Liz, I-” Max started to say and then Nancy Parker suddenly appeared next to them.
“Liz, your father’s awake, and he’s asking for you,” Nancy said and the strain of the last few hours was evident on her face.
Liz’s attention was fixed on her mother, trying to gage her unspoken meaning. Was her father dying, and he wanted to see her once more before he was gone? Or was he better and he wanted to go home?
“Okay,” Liz said meekly and she pulled her hand away from Max as she walked apprehensively toward her mother.
As Liz reached her side, Nancy turned her eyes on Max and said, “He wants to see you too, Max. Will you come with us?”
Max gaped at Nancy, astonished that he was being invited to come along. Why would Jeff Parker want to see him? After all, he’d broken his daughters heart and trampled all over it and she probably hated him now for the horrible person that he had become, so why would Mr. Parker want to be anywhere near him?
Liz gazed at her mother with a look of understanding on her face. She turned her eyes toward Max and then, almost in slow motion, Max saw her reach out her hand to him. He hesitated for only a moment and then he slipped his hand into hers and they followed her mother into the depths of the hospital.
|posted on 14-Sep-2001 6:36:29 PM|
They made their way in silence down the hospital corridor and Max was acutely aware of the feel of Liz’s hand in his. He wasn’t sure why she was allowing him to touch her now, but she was, and he wasn’t going to question it. For the first time in a long time, he felt some semblance of his old self, holding the hand of the girl he loved more than anything else in the world. It might be fleeting, and it might come to an end long before he wanted it to, but for this moment in time, Liz was holding his hand and all felt right in the world.
“Liz,” Nancy started to explain as she led them down the hall. “Your Dad had a heart attack. A myocardial infarction, they call it. They did some tests on him, that’s why it’s taken so long. The doctor said he is going to need double bypass surgery. They’ve already scheduled it for tomorrow. The good news is, if the surgery is successful, he should come through this just fine. The bad news is, he won’t be able to work, probably for the rest of the summer. Liz, I need you to stay home. I’m so sorry, honey. I know we promised that you could go to Florida and get a head start on college, but we need you here.”
“That’s okay, Mom. I understand,” Liz answered. Going to Florida was the farthest thing from her mind right now.
A part of Max felt elated at what Nancy had just said. Liz wasn’t going to be leaving anytime soon for Florida. She was staying right here in Roswell. He wouldn’t have to worry about waking up each morning with an ache in his heart, knowing he would never see her again. He felt like a heel for rejoicing in her father’s illness, but if it hadn’t been for him turning sick, he wouldn’t be standing here now, holding Liz’s hand in his and feeling her emotions surging through him.
Nancy slowed and Max felt Liz’s apprehension grow as her mother pushed open a door and they stepped into her father’s hospital room. He was reclining on the bed with a nasal canula delivering oxygen through his nose. Wires were attached to his chest and various machines around him were beeping and humming and clicking as they monitored his heart and his blood pressure and his respirations.
Max felt Liz’s hand squeeze his tightly as the sight of her father in such a weakened condition sunk in. He could feel her shaking and once again he wished more than anything that he could have fixed this for her, healed her father somehow, so that she wouldn’t have to be going through this now. They walked up to the side of the bed and Liz pulled her hand away from Max and placed it over her father’s.
“Hi Lizzy,” Jeff said with a tired smile on his face.
“Hi Dad,” she responded, trying to smile back at him. “How are you feeling?”
“Oh, like a truck hit me, I guess.” His eyes shifted from his daughter to the young man standing next to her. “Hi Max.”
“Hi Mr. Parker,” Max replied, feeling somewhat out of place.
“It looks like I owe you two my life,” Jeff said gazing at his daughter and her friend. “The doctors said if you hadn’t performed CPR the way you did, I wouldn’t have made it. They said that you bought me enough time until the paramedics got there, I don’t know how I can ever thank you enough Max, Liz.”
“Lizzy, I’m sorry this is ruining your plans for the summer,” Jeff interrupted her. “Maybe in the fall you’ll still be able to go, and get that early start on college-”
“Oh Dad, that doesn’t matter now. I’m not going anywhere. I’m going to stay right here, with you.”
“Liz, I’m going to need your help running the restaurant while I’m cooped up in here. Your mother can’t do it all by herself.”
“Whatever you need Dad. Don’t worry about the Crashdown at all. I’ll take care of everything.”
“I knew I could count on you.” He squeezed his daughter’s hand affectionately and then his eyes shifted to look at Max. “And as if I didn’t owe you enough already, I have a favor to ask you Max.”
“Anything, Mr. Parker,” Max responded quickly. “I’ll do anything you need me to.”
“Can you take care if my little girl for me while I’m stuck in here? Make sure she doesn’t work herself too hard? You know Liz and her sense of responsibility. Can you make sure she takes the time to have some fun once in awhile too?” He looked at his daughter, noting the blush that rose in her cheeks.
“Of course, Mr. Parker,” Max answered quickly, trying to hide his smile as he realized the request gave him a great reason to spend time with Liz and hang out at the Crashdown. “You can count on me.”
They spoke for awhile longer and then a nurse came in and chased Max and Liz out, saying the patient needed to rest. Nancy followed them into the hallway and stood in front of Liz, placing her hands on her daughter’s shoulders.
“I want you to go home, Liz. Get some rest. Your Dad’s surgery is scheduled for 8:00 am tomorrow morning. I know you’re going to want to be here for that, so I won’t even try to talk you out of it. But I insist that you go home now. There’s nothing more you can do here, and you’re Dad needs to rest now anyway. Max,” Nancy said turning to look at him, “can you take her home?”
“Sure,” he answered quickly.
“But Mom, what about you?” Liz asked. “Are you coming home too?”
“No honey, I’m going to stay here with your Dad.”
“Then I want to stay here with you,” Liz insisted.
“No honey,” Nancy repeated. “I’m sorry but I need you to make sure the restaurant is running smoothly and closes down properly tonight. If I don’t make it home tonight, I’ll see you in the morning, okay?” She brushed her fingers through her daughter’s hair and Liz reluctantly nodded her head.
“Thanks baby. I know this is hard on you. It’s hard on all of us, but your Dad is going to be just fine. We just have to believe that.” She looked at Max, silently asking him to take Liz home and when he nodded she gave her a tight hug and then she went back into the hospital room to be at her husband’s side.
Liz stood staring at the door until she felt Max put his arm around her and gently turned her toward him. She fell against him, feeling all the stress and the strain overwhelming her and he wrapped his arms around her.
“Come on, Liz. I’ll take you home.” He guided her down the hallway, holding her close to him, giving her his support, his encouragement, his love. She didn’t push him away and she didn’t hold him at arms length, and for that he as grateful. For now, that alone was enough.
* * * * *
Max watched Liz as she moved around the Crashdown, filling the napkin dispensers, and then checking the salt and pepper shakers and the sugar containers. She was trying to remain busy, trying to keep her mind off her father and all the rest of the things that had gone wrong in her life lately.
Maria and Michael had been here earlier but they had left a while ago. Maria had said she would cover the restaurant in the morning so that Liz could go to the hospital and Michael had taken her home, calling it an early night. Isabel had stopped by for awhile and so had Kyle, but everyone was gone now, except the two of them. He was just about to call out to her, to ask her to sit down with him for a minute, when the phone rang. He watched her as she picked it up and then listened to her side of the conversation. After a polite ‘Hello’, the next thing she said made the hackles rise on the back of his neck.
“Oh hi, Sean . . . No, I haven’t heard anything else . . . Yes, tomorrow morning . . . No, I don’t think that would be a good idea. Not tonight. I’m really tired and I have to be at the hospital early . . . No, I’m not alone. Max is here keeping me company . . . Sean, that’s not true . . . Look, he’s just . . . I don’t want to talk about this now . . . You what? . . . No, that’s okay. Max already offered to drive me in the morning . . . Sean, I don’t want to think about that right now. I just want to get through tonight, and then tomorrow, and then the day after that . . . Friday? . . . I don’t think I can make any plans right now . . . I know you do, Sean, and thank you . . . Yeah, I did too . . . Yeah . . . Okay . . . Okay . . . Bye.”
“So that was Sean?” Max asked after Liz put down the phone, trying not to sound as jealous as he felt.
“Yeah. He was just checking in, you know, to see if anything had changed.”
“Yeah,” Max agreed, but knowing it was much more than ‘just checking in’. Sean wanted Liz. There was no doubt in his mind about that. What he didn’t know was whether Liz wanted Sean back. “Liz, can you come over here and sit down for a minute?”
She moved away from the cash register and slipped into the booth across from him. He was about to reach for her hands, wanting to hold on to her, when she moved her hands off the table and rested them in her lap.
“Liz, I need to ask you something . . .” She sat across from him unmoving, and he struggled with how to phrase the question. How had he let things spiral so out of control that just sitting across from her was pure agony? He wanted to make the table between them disappear, and then he could pull her into his arms and smother her with kisses and feel her soul connecting with his the way it always did when they kissed. He wanted to feel her sitting on his lap, and feel his arms around her, and his lips on her skin and feel that moment when she would surrender to him. Instead, he had to ask her a question that was going to reopen all of her wounds.
“Liz, did you tell Sean about me and . . . about me and Tess . . . and the . . .”
“Did I . . . ?” Liz said with her large eyes staring at him. “Did I tell him about the . . .” She still couldn’t say it, not out loud anyway. The baby. The baby he was having with Tess. His son. “No, I haven’t said anything to Sean about it. Why?”
“Because he knows. About the . . . about my . . . he knows.”
“Maybe Maria said something,” Liz offered, not knowing what else to say.
“Maybe.” He appeared deep in thought and then his penetrating gaze focused on Liz once more. “Liz, be careful around him. He’s bad news. He doesn’t have your best interests at heart.”
“Oh, like you do, Max?” she said bitterly and then instantly regretted it. “I’m sorry,” she said covering her face with her hands. “It’s been a long day.”
What she’d said, no, the way she had said what she said, was like a physical blow to him. It was as if he could still feel the stinging in his cheek from when she had slapped him a week ago. Her words cut him just as deep as any physical pain he could ever experience. “Liz . . .”
“Max, you should go home now,” she said closing herself off. “It’s late and I have to be at the hospital early and . . . and . . . and I just don’t want to talk about this anymore tonight. You slept with Tess and you got her pregnant. And now . . . and now you have a . . . and I just really don’t want to talk about this right now.”
“Liz,” Max said in agony from the pain he could hear in her voice. “I’m so sorry Liz. I never wanted to hurt you. What I did was so wrong, and I’ll spend the rest of my life regretting it. But it happened, and somehow, some way, I pray to God you can find it in your heart to forgive me, cause I don’t know how I can live without you.”
“Max, you should go home,” Liz repeated, trying not to let him see her cry again.
“Okay,” Max said, accepting defeat for right now. “But I have one thing to say before I leave. I’ve been wrong, about almost everything this last year, but there was one thing I was right about. And that was you, Liz. You belong in my life, we belong together. You might not feel it right now, but I won’t give up on you, Liz. You’re my whole world.”
Liz stared at him, wishing it was true, but knowing it really wasn’t. He had given up on her before and she had no illusions about her place in his life now. He was a King, from another world, with a son out there somewhere that he needed to find. She was just a small town girl and inconsequential in the scope of things. He might be clinging to the past, holding on to what he used to feel for her because of the confusion he was going through now, but it wouldn’t last. And she couldn’t open up her heart to him again, knowing it was just a matter of time before it’d get broken again.
She dropped her eyes and Max felt his heart sink. What had he expected, though, he thought to himself? Did he think his declaration of love was going to make her fall into his arms and forget about the way he had treated her lately, or forget about what he had done with Tess? He had to earn her trust again, and no matter how long it took, he wasn’t going to give up.
“You’re tired, Liz. Why don’t you go on up and get some sleep. I’ll lock up down here.” She lifted her eyes and met his gaze again and then nodded her head slightly before slipping out of the booth. As she turned to leave, he grabbed her hand, squeezing it gently and asked, “What time do you want me to pick you up in the morning?”
Liz looked down at his hand holding hers, trying to avoid looking directly into his eyes. She couldn’t say what she really wanted to say. That she was scared and so lonely, and this place felt so big and empty tonight and she didn’t want to be alone. That what she really wanted was for him to stay with her tonight, because even after all that they had been through, after all the pain they had caused each other, he was the one that made her feel complete inside. Without him near, she was left with one big hole in her heart.
“Can you pick me up at 7:00,” she finally managed to ask.
“Okay,” he answered softly and reluctantly released her hand. He watched her walk away from him and as soon as she reached the door that would take her to the back of the Crashdown, she slowed and then stopped. She turned half way back toward him and he could see her face in profile.
“Thank you,” Liz said softly. “For what you did for my Dad today. For staying with me all day long. For being here when I needed you.”
He rose to his feet and stood awkwardly, wanting nothing more than to cross the distance between them and take her into his arms. Instead, he stood rooted to the spot, knowing how he had let her down so many times over the last few weeks and months. Knowing how undeserving he was of her.
“It means a lot, that you were here with me,” she said and her eyes were focused on the floor, on the very spot the two of them had worked so diligently together to keep her father alive this morning.
Max felt drawn to her and his feet moved of their own volition until he was standing right behind her. His hand rose from his side and hovered in the air above her shoulder, but he didn’t touch her.
“Liz, we’ve been through a lot lately, and we’ve both done things to hurt each other.” His voice was tinged with the pain that they both were feeling. “I know it’s asking too much to expect you to still have feelings for me . . . for you to still love me, but we can be friends, can’t we Liz? Even if we can’t be more than that?”
“I don’t know, Max,” she said and they could both felt the tension in the air around them. “You didn’t want to still be friends after you thought I slept with Kyle. You wanted a clean break, remember?”
Max inhaled sharply, remembering that night late last fall when he had come to her room just before he left for New York. He had returned a gift that she had given him, the act signifying the end of what they had once had. How could he expect anything more from her? But he hoped, he prayed, that she was a better person than he was.
“Please, Liz,” he barely managed to say around the lump in his throat. “I couldn’t bear to lose your friendship.”
“I don’t know,” she said, knowing how much she needed him in her life too. “We can try, Max. We can try.”
“That’s all I ask.” He let his hand settle onto her shoulder and he was encouraged when she didn’t bolt away from him. She lifted her head and when she turned back to look at him, he could see how tired she was. “You should go to bed now. I’ll take care of everything down here.”
“Thank you,” she said and her hand rose to cover his. “Goodnight, Max.” She gave his hand a squeeze and then she walked away from him, through the swinging door and out of sight.
“Goodnight Liz,” Max whispered mournfully after she was gone, and his words hung in the empty air.
|posted on 14-Sep-2001 6:38:38 PM|
Max swept his eyes around the Crashdown one last time to make sure everything looked in order. The doors were locked, the days receipts were locked in the safe, everything in the kitchen was turned off. He turned off the lights and pushed through the swinging door into the back of the restaurant and looked up the stairs that led to Liz’s apartment, knowing that there was no reason for him to stay, but not wanting to leave. He wondered of she was sleeping yet, or was she lying in bed unable to shut her mind off as she relived the events of the day. He knew it was too much to hope that she might be thinking of him, and contemplating still having a future, together.
His hand hovered over the light switch, knowing he should go home, but wanting to climb those stairs, to kneel beside her as she slept, just to be close to her. Making up his mind, he quickly made his way back to the kitchen and picked up the phone. Isabel answered on the second ring.
“Iz, it’s me. I need you to cover for me,” Max said, keeping his voice low.
“Max, where are you?” Isabel demanded. “Mom’s been asking when to expect you home.”
“Look, I’m still at Liz’s. Tell Mom and Dad that I’m staying the night at Michael’s. Liz is really upset about what happened to her Dad today and I don’t want to leave her here all alone until I know she’s okay.” His fingers tapped nervously on the phone, hoping Isabel wasn’t going to give him a lot of crap about not coming home tonight.
“Are you telling me you’re spending the night with Liz?” Isabel asked incredulously.
“Not like that, Isabel,” Max answered in exasperation. “I just want to stay here with her, and make sure she gets to sleep alright. It’s been a terrible day for her and she’s under a lot of stress. Imagine how you’d feel if Dad almost died today.”
“Okay, Max. I’ll cover for you. But . . .” she paused, uncertain how he was going to take what she was about to say.
“But what, Isabel?”
“Max, don’t smother her. I know you want to work things out with her, but you can’t pretend away everything that’s happened between the two of you. Realistically, you’re lucky she’s even talking to you at this point.” She could hear him still breathing on the other end of the line, but he had fallen silent. “Max?”
“Yeah, I’m still here.” He couldn’t keep the disappointed tone out of his voice. Even Isabel was telling him not to get his hopes up about a future between him and Liz. He hung his head and wondered, after spending his entire lifetime being so careful about every move he made, how could he have acted so rashly and behaved so stupidly over these last few months? To spend the night with Tess, when he didn’t even have feelings for her, and the irresponsible way that it happened, without using protection and in a public place no less. It just wasn’t like him. He couldn’t explain his actions, so how could he expect anyone else to ever understand?
“Max, I just don’t want you to expect too much, you know?”
“I know,” he answered defeatedly. “I’ll see you tomorrow. Goodnight Isabel.”
He hung up the phone and stood staring at it for a moment before looking back up the stairs. Somehow, some way, he had to get back what he lost. He walked down the hall to the back door and flipped out the lights before leaving the Crashdown and closing the door behind him.
* * * * *
The figure stood in the shadows, watching the building across the street to see what he would do next. He was still in there, with her. Just the two of them. The watcher had noticed her bedroom light switch on some time ago, yet movement was still visible in the restaurant below. Now, as the lights were extinguished and the Crashdown had fallen dark, what would the boy king do next?
The answer was soon in coming as Max appeared on the side of the building, striding with purpose from the back alley, headed straight for the ladder. Without any hesitation, his hands wrapped around the rungs and pulled himself up, moving swiftly and gracefully, until he disappeared over the top railing.
Patience was a virtue, one the watcher had considerable experience with, and tonight would be no different than any other night. Diligence was imperative, jumping to assumptions was never contemplated. Quiet observation with care given to the details would go far in deciding a course of action. The figure stayed in the shadows, watching and waiting to see what would happen next.
* * * * *
Max made his way quietly past the lounge chairs and the tables until he came to the window he had sat at so many times before. He knelt down and his eyes fell instantly on her sleeping form on the bed. The light from the small lamp on her nightstand fell across her face and he could see her knitted brows. Even in sleep, she couldn’t find peace, not on this night.
He watched her, with his forehead resting on the frame of the window, thinking about all the things she had said to him in Michael’s apartment last week. He had come back from the future, and stood right here on this very balcony, and made her change the life that they would have had. A life where they loved each other and nobody had come between them. Was he selfish for wishing the future had never been changed? Was he selfish for wishing they had made love together on the night of the Gomez concert, or that they had married shortly after graduating from high school, or that they had had a chance to love each other for fourteen glorious years before the world fell apart?
At least in that life, they had been together. What if he could never convince her to take him back? What if he had to face an uncertain future without her love and support and strength and her intelligence to help him find the right path? He might have been created to be a king, but he wasn’t prepared to be one, and without her help to keep him grounded, he doubted he ever would be.
She stirred on the bed, whimpering in her sleep, fighting off some darkness that had invaded her dreams. Even through the glass he could hear her call his name, and the melancholy tone tore at him. She fell quiet again, but he could still feel the distress coming from her. He disengaged the lock and silently slipped into her room.
He stood quietly by the window memorizing every detail of her face, a face that had left him spellbound from the first moment that he had seen her. A reflection in the light caught his attention and his gaze shifted to the object she was holding clasped in her hand. Her finger twitched and the breath caught in his throat as he recognized it. She was clutching the pendant he had given her a week ago, when he had thought he would never see her again.
Did that mean what he hoped it meant? Did it mean that she was thinking of him? That she was holding on to what they had once meant to each other, and could someday mean again? How could he have ever doubted her or questioned her love for him all these months? How could he have given up on her so fast, when he had spent his whole life dreaming of her, and wanting only her?
She moaned in her sleep and her hand tightened on the pendant. Max crossed the room and knelt down beside her, brushing his fingers over her forehead to ease her worried brow. She sighed in her sleep and as his fingers brushed over her temple, a connection opened between them, one he neither instigated, nor had any control over.
In her mind he could see her sitting on her balcony, looking at the hand that was offered her. Her eyes rose to his face, only not his face, familiar, yet very different. Her hand slipped into his and he drew her to her feet while the sound of a familiar song played softly in the background. Her eyes looked at him with such love and such trust and his arms surrounded her, pulling her close to him as they moved to the music. His hair hung down around his face and the scars on his arms were unfamiliar to him, but the intensity of the love that he felt for her as he gazed down into her beautiful face was unmistakable. Her body twirled once, twice, with her hair fanning out around her and then she was standing there alone, with a look of utter despair on her face, the look of someone who had lost the most important thing in her life and knowing it would never return again.
Max pulled his hand away from her face and collapsed onto the carpet by her bed, overwhelmed by the emotions he had felt in her. The depth of the love that she had felt for him, the pain that she lived with when she had been forced to break his heart, the absolute sense of desolation she was left with as she stood there facing a future alone. Is this the pain she had lived with, suffering in silence all these months as she watched him getting closer and closer to Tess? She had given up everything for him. How could he have ever asked that of her? How could he have allowed her to sacrifice herself like that?
She moved again in her sleep, shifting position and his eyes rose up to her face. Her lips parted slightly and in a whisper so quiet he could barely hear her, she said his name. Her eyes were still closed and he knew she was still dreaming. His hand rose to her cheek again and then moved toward her temple, not wanting to invade her private thoughts and dreams, but needing to know what she was thinking, what she was feeling. The connection formed without effort and his mind filled with the image of Liz standing next to Tess and then him walking into the room, verbally attacking Liz, accusing her of terrible things, speaking to her in a voice filled with such hostility and loathing.
Why would she see him that way, saying those horrible things to her? He could never act that way to her, never speak to her that way. Why would she dream something like that? What if it wasn’t a dream at all? What if it was a memory? But it couldn’t be, he reassured himself. He’d never spoken to her like that, or treated her that way. He had a vague memory of showing up at the Valenti’s house one day just as Liz was leaving, but he’d felt so uncomfortable with her being there that he’d barely spoken to her at all.
Suddenly afraid of seeing anything more, he pulled his hand away from her. Is that how she saw him now? As someone who would verbally attack her and belittle her in front of others? Did she think he could be physically abusive too? In her dream she’d flinched from him, almost like she feared he would strike her. Why would . . . and then he remembered that day in the school hallway, when he had grabbed her arm so viscously, not even realizing he was doing it until he saw the shock and the fear in her eyes. What had come over him that day, acting that way toward her?
If this was how she saw him now, as someone who would bully her, and try to intimidate her both verbally and physically, how could he ever hope to gain her trust again? She mumbled in her sleep and his eyes were drawn to her face again. Maybe she’d be better off if he left her alone. Maybe the best thing for her now would be for him to climb back out that window, go down that ladder and never darken her doorway again. That would be the honorable thing to do, to separate her from the mess he had made of his life, but as he looked down on her he knew he couldn’t do it. Just the thought of not being near her made his chest constrict and his heart ache. He couldn’t give her up, no matter how selfish that made him.
She whimpered again as her dreams assailed her and Max caressed her cheek with his hand trying to chase away the demons in her mind. He sat on the floor beside her, watching her through the night as she slept, soothing away the nightmares that plagued her, letting his voice calm her, gently touching her so she would feel safe and secure. His voice was soft as a whisper and his touch was feather light and he heard her sigh in her sleep as the tension began to fade out of her.
Her steady, rhythmic breathing eased some of his own fears and he allowed himself to think about tomorrow and the day after, and all the dreams that they had once shared. Dreams he wasn’t ready to give up on.
“I love you Liz,” his voice whispered softly on the night air. “I hope, someday, you’ll learn to love me again.”
* * * * *
The morning light fell across her face and Liz stirred, stretching languidly, with a smile etched on her face. She felt rested and there was something about the air around her, something about the scent on her pillow and on her sheets that had calmed her, and relaxed her during the night. In a dream, she’d opened her eyes to see Max sleeping peacefully beside her, snuggled close to her with his arm around her waist and his nose buried in her hair. Of course it couldn’t have been true, but she really wished it had been. He was probably sleeping soundly in his own bed right now, certainly not thinking of her.
She looked at the clock on her nightstand and pulled back her covers, giving herself plenty of time to shower and get ready before Max got here. Her feet hit the floor and she pulled her tank top over her head as she made her way across the room to her closet. She slipped out of her pajama bottoms and slid her arms into the sleeves of her robe before heading back toward her bathroom. A confused look crossed her face when she noticed a pair of shoes near the side of her bed. A pair of men’s shoes. A pair that looked remarkably like the ones Max was wearing last night. She suddenly heard a sound in the hallway, a deep voice humming, and then there he was, standing in her doorway with a tray in his hands.
“Max!” Liz said shocked to see him there and clutching her robe tightly to her chest. “When did you get here?”
“I made you breakfast,” he answered, sidestepping her question. “Scrambled eggs and toast. You like scrambled eggs and toast, right?” He couldn’t take his eyes off her as she stood in the middle of her room, with her silky robe draping her body and her hair in disarray. The top she had worn to bed lay on the floor at her feet and not far away he could see her pajama bottoms, also on the floor. Instead of on her. Where they were supposed to be. Which meant . . . under her robe . . . she was . . . don’t go there, he told himself. Don’t even think about it. He swallowed hard, chagrin at the sound of his voice as it cracked when he said, “You’re hungry, aren’t you?”
She nervously drew her hand through her hair trying to smooth it and her cheeks felt hot with embarrassment as she tried to nudge her tank top out of sight, behind her. What was he doing here so early? And why were his shoes tucked under her bed? She looked at his feet and saw that he was walking around in his socks. His clothes looked rumpled and weren’t they the same clothes he was wearing last night? “How long have you been here, Max?”
“A while,” he answered and holding the tray out to her he quickly added, “You should eat this before it gets cold.” He hesitantly crossed over the threshold into her room and stood in front of her with an uncomfortable look on his face.
She placed her hands on the tray, so close to his that he could feel the energy surging between them. “How long is ‘A while’, Max?” she asked and her eyes were locked on to his.
“All night,” he mumbled and he took his hands off the tray as he took a step back from her. He shoved his hands in his front pockets and his toes fidgeted nervously in his socks. “I put strawberry jam on your toast.”
“You’ve been here all night?” Liz said in astonishment. She felt her robe start to fall open and she turned from him quickly and placed the tray on her desk by the window. She clutched at the belt and cinched it tight and then held it closed at the throat as she turned back to look at him.
“Well you were so sad last night and when I went to check on you after I locked everything up you were having a nightmare and I didn’t want to leave you all alone so I stayed until you quieted down and then I stayed a little longer to make sure you were sleeping peacefully because I knew today would be a long day for you with your Dad and all so I wanted to make sure you got a good nights sleep because those operations can take hours and hours so then it got so late that I thought it would be better if I just stayed . . . so I stayed.” He took a deep breath, wondering if any of that made any sense at all.
“So you didn’t go home last night?” Liz asked and the memory of the dream she’d had of him lying beside her filtered across her mind. “Where did you sleep?”
He stared at her with his mouth open, uncertain how to answer her. How could he tell her that he’d awakened this morning, with her in his arms and it had been the most wonderful morning of his life? How could he tell her that he’d sat and watched her for an hour as she slept, studying every inch of her face because he couldn’t tear his eyes away from her? The sound of her breathing had been music in his ears. The rise and fall of her shoulder as she breathed was hypnotic and kept him spellbound. The warmth of her body, lying next to his, was a like a dream come true. He couldn’t say any of those things, so instead he said, “I just found a good place to curl up.”
“You just found-” she pressed on but he interrupted her.
“Yeah, well, I can fall sleep anywhere, you know?” He took a quick breath and blurted out, “You really should eat that before it gets cold.”
She held his gaze, almost like she was staring through him, and then he could see her drop it. She turned back to the desk and lifted the lid from the tray. As the breakfast smells drifted up to her she realized just how hungry she really was and she turned back to him with a smile on her lips. “It smells wonderful. Did you eat already?”
“Well, no, not really,” he said awkwardly. “I mean, I took a bite to make sure it tasted okay. I didn’t know how hungry you were.”
“There’s more than enough here for the both of us.” She picked up a knife off the tray and held it out to him. “Make yourself a fork, pull up a chair, and help me eat this.”
He stared at the knife she was holding out to him and then he lifted his hand and took it from her. Her eyes were twinkling with humor, and a smile spread across his face as his hand covered the knife and he rearranged the molecules to turn it into a fork. With a bashful look, he grabbed a chair from the other side of the window, and brought it over to sit it next to hers.
She sat down in front of the tray and he perched on the edge of his chair, feeling keyed up and not quite able to relax. She was keenly aware that they were alone in the apartment and she wasn’t wearing anything under her robe. That fact wasn’t lost on him either, and he tried not to notice how she clutched it closed with her left hand while reaching for her fork with her right.
“It really does smell good,” Liz said glancing over at him and then she took a bite. “Oh, it tastes really good, too!” she with her eyes growing wide.
“Did you doubt it?” he asked feigning indignation.
“Well, I didn’t know you could cook,” she informed him as she divided the bacon, two strips for her, two strips for him.
“I’ll have you know I’m a very good cook. At least, when I want to be,” he said and speared a clump of eggs and popped it into his mouth.
“Does your mother know you’re such a good cook?” Liz asked curiously.
“Hell no!” Max exclaimed and picked up a strip of bacon, jabbing it in the air for emphasis. “I’m a king after all,” he said with mock arrogance, “and kings aren’t supposed to cook in the kitchen!”
“Oh, look at you, Mister Full-of-Himself!” she proclaimed and backhanded him across the chest. “Don’t give me any of that ‘King’ crap.”
“That’s what I’ve always loved about you Liz Parker,” Max said around a mouth full of food. “You never let me get away with shit!” As soon as he said it, he realized his mistake but he couldn’t take it back. Their friendly banter died in the air and he stared at her as she scrutinized the plate in front of her. Her fork pushed the eggs around and his stomach turned upside down, wishing he could take it all back, but he couldn’t. He did love her and it was impossible to hide it.
Her back stiffened and then she glanced at him, twice, in quick succession, noting the uncertain look on his face. He was watching her reaction to what he had inadvertently said, and she tried to make light of it. “Yeah, well, you’ve been full of shit for as long as I’ve known you.”
He stared at her relieved that she was trying to make a joke of it, and he tried to regain some of the teasing tone his blunder had stifled. “Did you just say the ‘S’ word? I don’t think I’ve ever heard you say the ‘S’ word before.”
“You mean shit? There, I said it again. Shit, shit, shit, shit, shit,” she said in a sing song voice. “I know other words to! You want to hear ‘em? How about this one? I can say fu-” and his hand covered her mouth before she could say the whole word. She almost burst out laughing at the shocked look on his face and he shook his head back and forth.
“NO! I don’t want to hear you say that!” He pulled his hand away slowly, ready to cover her mouth if she tried to say it again. “Don’t do it,” he said pointing his finger at her when she teasingly pursed her lips. “Don’t even think it!” he scolded her with an affectionate glimmer in his eye as he shook his finger back and forth.
“Very well, your Highness,” she said mockingly as she rose to her feet. She pushed her chair back and then bowed to him. “And with that note, I take my leave, so that I may take my shower.” She walked around him headed toward her bathroom and he watched her every move. He sat there with his elbow on the desk and his fork in his hand, forgotten as it hovered in the air. His eyes were glued to Liz, feeling a deep sense of longing in his heart as she moved across the room.
“And,” she said turning around to look at him, “thanks for breakfast. It tasted wonderful.” She smiled at him and then she added, “By the way, you can use the bathroom in the hallway if you want a shower too. Just wait until after I’m done or else we’ll both end up with cold water.”
He watched her enter the bathroom and close the door behind her. He heard the sound of the lock clicking into place and then the humming of the pipes as she turned the water on. He listened to her moving around behind the door and he sighed, wishing that he’d never heard of alien worlds or kings or destiny or duty.
|posted on 14-Sep-2001 6:40:11 PM|
Nancy sat in the waiting room, nervously pacing back and forth as she waited for word about her husband’s surgery. It had started close to three hours ago and she knew she still had a long wait ahead of her. She was glad that Liz was here with her, sharing this interminable wait, but she was even happier that Max was here with Liz. She needed the support and the distraction that Max could give her, to keep her mind off her father and what was happening to him. She was too young to face the prospect of a future without him.
Nancy had been relieved when they arrived just after 7:00 and Liz had been able to talk to her father before he’d been taken into the operating room. They really were close and for that Nancy was grateful. She’d never been close to her own father and then he’d died when she was only fifteen. She didn’t want Liz to have to live through that. At least now, if something were to happen to Jeff on the operating table, Liz had gotten a chance to talk to him, and tell him how much she loved him. Nancy never got that chance with her own father. He had died so suddenly and afterwards she’d been left feeling abandoned and alone.
Max had gently steered Liz to the waiting room after she had spoken to her father, and he’d been at her side ever since. Nancy had watched them throughout the morning and while she had noticed some strain between them, she’d also noticed the smitten look on Max’s face. That boy had it bad for her daughter. Then again, Nancy had known for a long time just how bad Liz had it for Max. Oh, to be young and in love, when life is simple and uncomplicated, Nancy thought to herself. She turned to look at the two of them, engrossed in a deep conversation, and as she walked by Nancy smiled, wondering what in the world they were discussing . . .
“So Crichton got split into two, and one of him is over on Talyn-” Max said and then Liz cut in.
“The baby ship,” she clarified.
“Yeah,” Max nodded, “and the other Crichton is still on Moya-”
“The mother ship,” Liz added, trying to follow him.
“Exactly!” Max enthused. “So the Crichton on Moya is jealous of the Crichton on Talyn because Aeryn is on Talyn.” Max was leaning forward in his chair and his animated hands were moving around in the air as he explained the story.
“And Erin is the peacekeeper girl,” Liz said studying his face.
“Right, she’s a Sebacean, which looks and acts just like a human, except for the heat thing, and man can she kick ass, but anyway, they’re flying around in the Uncharted Territories and trying to evade the Peacekeepers, and then there’s Scorpius of course-”
“Scorpius?” Liz asked, shaking her head. She wrinkled her nose as she tried to follow what he was saying.
“Yeah, he’s a really bad guy. Ugly too. He took up residence inside Crichton’s head last season and made him do all kinds of things he wouldn’t normally do. Even made him kill Aeryn, but it’s TV so they brought her back to life when the new season started.”
“And this show is called Farscape?” Liz asked with arched eyebrows. She’d never seen Max get excited about a TV show before.
“Yeah. It’s the best Sci-Fi show on TV. It even won an award recently. So anyway, D’Argo and Chiana, she’s the gray girl, are on Moya-”
“Wait a minute, is this the show that has that big blue woman on it?” Liz asked, thinking it was starting to sound familiar.
“Yes! That’s Zhaan,” Max nodded.
“Zan?” Liz asked incredulously.
“Yeah, Pa’u Zhaan. She’s a 10th level Delvian Priest. She’s actually a big blue plant.” He paused when he saw the look on her face. “Don’t laugh! She was really a plant, even though she looked human, except for the blue color and everything. But she died last season and I don’t think they are going to bring her back. Are you laughing?”
“No,” Liz answered and had to hide behind her hand so that he wouldn’t see that she really was.
“It really is a good show,” Max said excitedly and then before he had realized it he blurted out, “Do you want to come over on Friday night and watch it with me?” He saw her features freeze and he blundered on, kicking himself for getting carried away and thinking she would want to spend any time with him. “I mean, you know, just a couple of friends sitting around on a Friday night watching TV and eating popcorn.”
“I don’t know Max,” Liz said hesitantly. “Until I know what’s going on with my Dad, I don’t think I can make any plans.” She looked at the stain on the arm of the chair she was sitting on, and then started to pick at it with her fingernail, any distraction to keep from looking at him.
“Oh, yeah. Sure.” With a sinking feeling in the pit of his stomach, he sat back in his chair, feeling the strain of the sudden silence between them. Things had been going so well. She had been listening to him, and talking to him, and their conversation hadn’t been strained and then he’d blown it by crossing that invisible line that she’d drawn between them. He had to be some kind of stupid to think she’d want to spend a Friday night with him.
The silence was deafening between them as they both sat haunted by their own tortured thoughts, and then she turned toward him and asked softly, “What time does it come on? Farscape, I mean.”
His eyes rose to meet hers and he tried to keep the hopeful tone out of his voice as he answered, “It starts at 9:00.”
“Oh,” she answered quickly and then looked at her hands in her lap. The silence stretched again, and then she said, “If my mom doesn’t need me to close the Crashdown on Friday, then maybe . . .”
He drew a deep breath and it wasn’t until that moment that he realized he had been holding it, waiting for some kind of encouraging word from her. Her chocolate eyes turned to look at him and for just a moment he allowed himself to believe that he could see something there that had been missing lately. Something in her eyes that reminded him of how she used to look at him. “And if you can’t, you know, get off work,” Max stumbled over his words, “I could always tape it or something and we could watch it later, or on the weekend, or whenever, you know, you can work it into your schedule.” He cringed inside, wondering if it was possible to sound any more like an idiot than he was right now.
She absorbed what he said and then she responded by simply saying, “Okay.”
‘Okay’, he repeated silently to himself and tried to keep his face from breaking out in a huge grin. She said ‘Okay’. She didn’t say ‘Maybe’, or ‘We’ll see’ or all those other phrases that came to mind when you were turning someone down but didn’t want to hurt their feelings. She said ‘Okay.’
“So,” Liz said after a pause that didn’t seem nearly as strained as before. “Who’s that little freaky guy?”
“Oh, that’s Rygel,” Max jumped in again, and this time he couldn’t keep the smile off his face as he leaned forward once more. “He’s a Hynerian, and he’s really self absorbed and he farts helium . . .” His voice droned on and a part of him was embarrassed that he’d just said that but it made her laugh and the sound of her laughter made his heart fill to overflowing. He continued talking, filling up the time while they waited to hear word on the condition of her father, and he could feel the strain between them lessening. It might not be the same as used to be, and it might not be what he hoped the future would lead them back to, but for now she was talking to him, and she was laughing with him, and that was enough for him to hold on to.
* * * * *
Nancy returned to the waiting room with a steaming cup if coffee in her hands. She looked at the clock on the wall, noting that it was just past noon. The operation was probably still in full swing, and she wondered if the kids were hungry. They probably wouldn’t hear anything for another hour at least, so there should be plenty of time to go to the cafeteria to get something to eat. She headed over toward Liz and then she stopped in her tracks, with a smile breaking over her face.
Liz was sitting in the chair with her head resting against Max’s shoulder and her eyes closed, sound asleep. Max was equally dead to the world, with his cheek resting against the top of her head. They both looked so peaceful, she didn’t have the heart to wake them.
Max’s talk about spaceships and wormholes had either worn Liz out with excitement, or bored her to sleep. Nancy wasn’t sure which. She took a seat nearby, concentrating on the steam rising from her coffee, trying not to think about what was happening to her husband.
* * * * *
Liz struggled with her luggage, pulling it back to the terminal and wondering how long it would take for Maria to pick her up. She’d insisted on a full explanation as to why Liz was at the airport, with a ticket to Sweden, on an airplane, in the dead of night, and she hadn’t bothered to tell her anything about it. Maria hadn’t been too happy that she had been left out of this little excursion Liz had intended to go on.
The wind kicked up again and Liz could feel the moisture in the air. A storm was rolling in and if Maria didn’t get here soon, Liz was going to get drenched. She could hear the rumbling off in the distance, and see occasional flashes of lightning on the horizon. She hoped to be home before it hit full force. She was still stunned, numb, from the phone call she’d received just a short time ago. Alex hadn’t gone to Sweden. The photographs she’d seen were fake. What could it all mean?
Alex’s face swam before her and he kept repeating the words ‘Leana is not Leana. Leana is not Leana.’ His hand rose and grasped her arm, squeezing her tightly with an urgent look on his face and he said, “Wake him up, Liz. Wake him up . . .”
“Wake up Liz,” Nancy said shaking her shoulder. “Liz, honey, it’s time to wake up.”
Liz slowly rose up from the depths of her dream, feeling the familiar tug at her heart as Alex’s image dissipated and then disappeared. She became aware of her surroundings, feeling a tapping on her shoulder and a warmth suffusing her hand. She opened her eyes to see her hand in her lap, but not just her hand. Her fingers were entwined with another set of fingers, warm and inviting, familiar and comforting, fingers that felt so natural wrapped around her hand.
Her gaze traveled up the arm, a well known arm, with rich golden skin glowing in the stark light. Her eyes rose further, past the bulging bicep, up to the shoulder, rising up to the face. It was a sleepy looking face. An incredibly handsome face, and his eyes were blinking, squinting in the harsh light of the waiting room as he too fought off the dredges of sleep.
As their slumber induced haze retreated, they both realized their physical contact had taken on an intimate proximity while they slept. They both straightened up, feeling the strain in their necks from the uncomfortable angle of their sleeping positions and Liz slowly pulled her hand away from his. He lifted his hand from where it had been resting on her leg and reluctantly returned it to his own lap. Max watched her from the corner of his eye, feeling the loss of her warmth, the loss of her touch, the loss of feeling close to her. Their eyes met, and for a fleeting moment, for one tiny fraction of a second, he thought he saw a remnant of the love she used to feel for him reflected in her eyes, and then it was gone, replaced by the veil that fell into place to hide her innermost thoughts. Another presence entered their sphere, and her eyes were drawn away from his as they both looked up into the face of her mother.
“Mom,” she said, rubbing her hand over her eyes and then she suddenly sat up straight as the fog lifted from her brain. “Mom! What’s wrong? What happened?”
“Nothing honey,” Nancy smiled. “Calm down. Your Dad came through with flying colors. The surgery’s over and he’s fine. He’s going to be just fine. He’s in recovery now, and we’ll be able to see him in a little while. He should be home by the end of the week.”
* * * * *
Max stood outside the room, staring through the glass of the Coronary Care Unit as Liz and her mother hovered over Jeff Parker. Tubes and wires were connected all over him and Max was amazed at how much equipment he was hooked up to. But he was alert, or reasonably so for a man who had just gone through a five hour operation and had been flayed open from his throat to his navel. His color was good which probably meant his heart was beating strong and pumping oxygen rich blood through his veins.
Max could see the relieved look on Liz’s face as she held her father’s hand and he was happy for her. The operation had been a success, and with the proper care and attention to diet and exercise, hopefully she would see her father grow to be an old man. There would be no question of it, if he had his way about it. Max intended to make sure Jeff Parker recovered completely, even if it meant further exposure on his part. Liz had lost enough in this lifetime, in this timeline, and he was bound and determined she wouldn’t have to lose anyone else.
He lifted his hand to rub his forehead to try to alleviate the dull ache he could feel behind his eyes. The strain must be catching up with him, he thought. He never got headaches, hell, he never got sick, but lately with all the shit that had been going on, he’d been getting them more and more. He’d mentioned it to Isabel, but she’d just told him that it’d been so long since he’d thought with his brain that it wasn’t used to all the activity. He hadn’t appreciated the snide remark.
As he lowered his hand he noticed the way it shook, trembling, unresponsive when he willed it to stop. He flexed his fingers and then spread them apart, and his eyes widened with concern when the tremor seemed to worsen. If this kept up, he was going to have to bring it up to Isabel, and he wasn’t looking forward to that. She’d been taking pot shots at him lately, and all her comments about his ‘attitude’ had him confused. He was less than enthused about giving her one more thing as ammunition against him.
He flexed his fingers again and then shoved his hand into the front pocket of his pants as he turned his attention back to Liz. She’d be ready to leave soon, to go back to the Crashdown to check on things before the dinner crowd, to show her father that he could count on her. It was something that Max should have always known, and vowed he would never forget again. Of all the people in the world, Liz was the one you could count on, the one you could trust, the one he should have believed in. If it took him the rest of his life, he swore an oath as he watched her through the glass, he would somehow make it up to her.
Edited by - Breathless on 09/21/2001 10:32:35
|posted on 14-Sep-2001 6:42:24 PM|
Liz busied herself at the front of the Crashdown, making sure the menus were stacked neatly and the mint tray was full. The dinner crowd would be arriving in another hour or so, and right now things were pretty quiet. Max watched her as she attended to all the little details of running a restaurant, knowing her father would be proud of her dedication and her thoroughness.
As soon as they’d arrived here from the hospital, he had noticed how she had thrown herself in to her work, probably relieved to have something else to concentrate on for a change. Her movements mesmerized him, and he wished she would come sit with him, but he knew she had things to do.
He thought back to this afternoon, when he had awakened with the feel of her head on his shoulder and her hand in his. It had been a perfect moment in time, and he had felt that connection to her that had been missing between them for so long, and then her mother had drawn her attention away from him and their contact had been broken.
She’d been so happy, relieved, as they left the hospital, knowing that her father was going to be alright, and she had smiled at him brightly, talking a mile a minute, right up until the moment when he helped her climb into the jeep. As soon as he had touched her arm, to help her up, he had seen that veil fall over her eyes again and her body flinched as if his touch was hurting her. He had pulled his hand away quickly, but the damage had been done. She had been quiet for most of the ride home.
“Hey,” Michael said as he slid into the booth opposite Max. “So what’s going on?”
“Nothing,” Max answered shifting his attention from Liz to Michael. “Liz’s Dad came through the surgery fine and he should be home by the end of the week.”
“Cool,” he said as he settled into the seat, getting comfortable. “So what did you decide to do?”
“Do?” Max questioned. “About what?”
“About Tess, and the kid,” Michael said bluntly.
Max glanced across the room at Liz with a guilty look on his face and then looked down at his hands. He picked up the fork off the napkin and fidgeted with it restlessly before saying, “I don’t know. I haven’t decided what to do yet. When Larek shows up again, I need to talk to him.”
“Don’t you think it’s time we went back out to the pod chamber, and see what kind of shape it’s in? We haven’t been there since-”
“Yeah, I know,” Max cut in. Liz walked past, headed to the back room and he paused so she wouldn’t hear what they were talking about. He watched her until she disappeared through the door and then his eyes returned to Michael’s, noticing his callous look. He shifted uncomfortably and then put the fork back down before folding his arms across his chest.
“Look,” Michael said after Liz was gone. “After Tess took off in the Granilith or whatever the hell happened, it must not have registered on any radar or anything. I mean, nobody from the FBI or the CIA or Project Blue Book,” he added with disdain, “came snooping around. Valenti said he hasn’t heard anything unusual reported. What do you make of that?”
“Maybe it has some kind of stealth technology or something. Something that blocks radar,” Max suggested, feeling out of his element. “Maybe it doesn’t travel through normal space. Maybe it just bends space, you know, like the way it bent time . . .” like when his stupid alter ego came back from the future and fucked up his life, Max thought to himself.
‘Maybe we should ask Liz-”
“No,” Max cut in sharply and Michael raised his eyebrows.
“She’s the geeky scientist. Maybe she’d have some ideas,” Michael said leaning forward.
“I want to leave her out of this,” Max said quietly and his eyes were drawn back to the door as she returned with a tray of condiments.
“Jesus Max, it’s your kid. Don’t you think Liz is gonna have to learn to deal with it, you know, if you two are gonna get back together?”
“Who’s getting back together?” Maria asked as she plopped a plate of French fries onto the middle of the table.
Max and Michael looked up at her and then they all turned when the chimes to the front door sounded and Kyle walked in, headed straight for Liz. Max couldn’t help but notice the smile that spread over her face as he neared. Kyle draped his arm around her shoulder and she leaned into him, laughing at something he said. Max clenched his jaw as he stared at them, feeling his heart rate soar in agitation. He had no right to be jealous, but he was. He couldn’t help it.
Liz reached across the counter and retrieved a ‘to go’ order and handed it to Kyle and Max watched as they hugged each other before Kyle turned to leave. She gave him a wave as he walked out the door and then she turned with a contemplative look on her face as she settled onto one of the stools at the counter to look over some paperwork.
“Liz and Kyle?” Maria said as she turned to look back at Max and Michael. “Maybe. They have a lot in common, you know. They have a history together, and how many people can claim they were brought back from the dead by an alien? Makes for some interesting pillow talk, I’d imagine.”
Max looked at her sharply, feeling his jealousy double in strength as the image of Kyle and Liz in her bed flashed into his mind again. Even though nothing had happened that night between them, the image was still like a fresh wound, and something he knew could turn into a reality if Liz chose to move in that direction.
“You want a refill on that?” Maria asked, pointing at his drink. Max shrugged noncommittally and she took the empty glass out of his hand and headed over to the counter. Her long strides slowed as she walked behind the counter and saw the pitiful look on Liz’s face and the dejected way she was slumped forward with her chin resting on her hand.
“What’s the matter, Babe?” Maria asked as she filled the glass with cherry cola from the fountain. “You look like you’ve lost your best friend.”
“It’s like his ghost is haunting me, Maria,” Liz sighed.
“Whose ghost? What are you talking about?” she asked setting the drink on the counter and leaning forward with her antenna bobbing on her head.
“Alex,” Liz admitted. “I keep having the same dream where Alex grabs my arm and tells me to wake him up. Like he’s blaming me for his death, you know? Like I should have known he was under some kind of spell and if I had just broken it in time, he’d still be alive today. And of course, if I hadn’t changed the future, he would be alive today.”
“Liz, you have to quit blaming yourself. None of us knew anything was wrong with Alex. We just didn’t see it.”
“But that’s just it, Maria,” Liz said plaintively. “In my dream, he acts like I should have seen it. I should have been able to tell.”
“Liz, you’re beating yourself up over a dream. You are not responsible for Alex’s death. The blame for that is squarely on that bitch’s head. If Tess ever comes back, I swear to God I’ll tear that blonde head right off her shoulders,” Maria fumed.
Liz smiled at that, picturing a vindictive Maria, inflicting her revenge on an unsuspecting Tess. She’d pay to watch that, front row center. Maria doing the smackdown. Could anything be more sweet? Her smile faded though as she tried to look at this maturely. Tess was the mother of Max’s child. That was never going to change.
“God Maria,” Liz said as she covered her face with her hand. “I’m just so confused. I thought by going to Florida, I’d be able to get away from all of this and I’d be able to think.”
“You mean, you’d be able to forget,” Maria corrected her.
“Yeah, that too,” Liz confessed.
“Are you still in love with him?” Maria asked quietly and watched the color drain out of her friend’s cheeks.
“Oh, Maria . . .”
“Liz, are you still in love with him?” Maria insisted, cupping Liz’s face with her hands so she couldn’t look away.
“Yes Maria. God help me, but I can’t stop loving him. I’ve tried, but it just doesn’t work. Even after everything that’s happened, I still love him.” Liz fell silent as she stared down into her drink. That was the first time she had admitted that aloud since this horrible mess started.
“What are you going to do?” Maria asked quietly, feeling the other girl’s pain.
“What am I going to do?” Liz repeated in a surprised tone. “I’m not going to do anything.”
“He wants you back, Liz. It’s killing him inside, not being with you.”
“No, Maria, he wants his son.” Liz turned to look at Max, sitting in a booth on the far side of the Crashdown. He was talking to Michael, deeply absorbed in some conversation and stabbing the air with a french fry to emphasize his point. She took a deep breath as she turned back to Maria with pain filled eyes and confessed, “He thinks about her all the time.”
“Who?” Maria frowned. “Who thinks about who?”
“Max,” Liz sighed and rubbed her hand tiredly over her face. “Max thinks about Tess all the time.”
“No way,” Maria exclaimed.
“Yes, Maria, it’s true,” she said defeatedly and toyed with the straw in her drink. “He does think about her all the time.”
“Max? Thinks about Tess? Why do you say that? What makes you think that?” Maria asked perplexed.
“Every time I touch him, or he touches me, I get a flash of what he’s thinking about, of what’s on his mind, and it’s always the same. It’s always her.” Liz closed her eyes to try to keep the tears at bay. She’d cried enough tears lately to fill an ocean.
“Oh God, Liz. Are you serious? You get a flash of Tess every time he touches you?”
“Yeah, just about,” Liz said in resignation. “It’s always the same. I see the two of them waking up together, you know, the next morning, and they’re . . . naked, and she’s smiling at him with her big blue eyes. God Maria, it’s just awful.” She bit at her lower lip as the image once more surfaced in her mind.
“What a bastard!” Maria exclaimed and then had to tone it down when she realized the customers could hear her. “You’d think he could keep that whole hour long orgasm thing to himself.”
“What?” Liz asked frowning. “What are you talking about?”
“Well, the um, you know, the ah . . .” She closed her mouth while she tried to figure out a gentle way to say it. “You don’t know?”
“I don’t know what?” Liz asked and then suddenly wondered if she really wanted to know.
“I mean about the ‘hour long point of culmination’,” Maria said, wishing she’d never mentioned it.
“You mean . . .?” Liz asked incredulously with her mouth dropping open. Maria nodded her head and Liz felt her stomach turn upside down. “Is that the way it was for you and Michael?” During the ride to the Vasquez Rocks on the morning to prevent their departure, Maria had told Liz what had happened between her and Michael the night before. Liz had been stunned, surprised, but ultimately happy that things had worked out well for Maria. She deserved to be happy.
“I guess it takes two aliens to get the good stuff. As wonderful as it was between me and Michael, there was nothing alien about it,” Maria said feeling sorry for Liz.
“Well,” Liz said with her voice sounding shaky, “I guess I’ll always be second best, won’t I? How can I compete with that? She gives him a son. She gives him the kind of sex that guys only dream of. I’ve got nothing to give him.” Her chin trembled and she fought off the tears that were suddenly filling her eyes. “I’m going upstairs. I’ll see you later, Maria,” she said as she fled the room.
Max pulled his attention away from Michael as he saw Liz rush from the café, headed toward the back. He was just about to rise, wondering what was wrong, when Maria was suddenly there, pushing him back down into the booth.
“Just keep your ass right there, Romeo,” Maria seethed as she flung his cherry coke onto the table. It tipped over with half the contents spilling onto his lap before he could catch it. He half stood, feeling the cold and the wetness soaking through his pants to his skin.
“Jesus, Maria! What was that for?” Max frowned as he wiped at his jeans. “What’s wrong with Liz? Why’d she run out of here like that?”
“You know, if you’d just kept it in your pants, none of us would be going through this now.” She felt a sense of satisfaction as she saw the color drain out of his face. He sat back down heavily, not even noticing the puddle of cola on the seat. Maria leaned over him in full attack stance and he shrank back from her. “You know, it’s bad enough you had sex with that little tramp, but then you had to go bragging about how great it was.”
Max looked from Maria to Michael, narrowing his eyes when Michael shrugged his shoulders in an apologetic way. What had he told Maria?
“Hey!” Maria spit out at him. “I’m not done here. Listen up buddy, it’s one thing to tell spaceboy here about your hot alien sex and your out of this world orgasm,” Maria hissed, trying to control her anger so the customers couldn’t hear, “but to show that to Liz, to let her see that every time you touch her, you moron, what the hell’s wrong with you? Jesus Max!”
“Maria . . .” Max faltered, not knowing what to say. There was no excuse for what he had done that night, letting Liz see that. He still couldn’t understand how it had happened. He covered his face with his hands and mumbled, “I didn’t do it on purpose. I didn’t want her to see that. I don’t know how it slipped out. I know it hurt her.”
“I don’t think you’re getting the gist of it here, Max.” His eyes looked up into hers and she barreled on. “You’re talking like it was one time. Max, she gets the flash every time you touch her. The same one, you and that bitch waking up in the morning together, buck naked. Thank God you haven’t given Liz a flash of you actually fucking her-”
“Maria-” Michael interrupted and she whirled on him.
“Oh shut up, Michael. Stay out of this.” He raised his hands in capitulation and turned to Max with a look on his face saying, ‘You’re on your own, Buddy’.
“What do you mean?” Max was barely able to get the words out as he stared up into Maria’s angry face. His stomach was twisting in knots and he felt like he was going to throw up. He was praying that he misunderstood her. She couldn’t have meant what she said. He would have known if . . . if . . .
“What do you mean, ‘What do I mean’?” Maria said derisively. “Max, is your head buried up you ass? Don’t you see it? Don’t you see what you’re doing to her?” She saw his eyes close and a look of pain shot across his face. She sat down next to Michael, and her anger started to turn to concern.
“You mean, she sees that every time I touch her? I . . . I thought it was just the one . . . Oh God.” He thought back to when they were at the hospital yesterday, by the coffee machine when he’d seen that shocked look on Liz’s face, and then again in the waiting room. Was that why she acted that way in the jeep today? Jesus, no wonder she flinched away from him all the time. God, what was wrong with him?
He rubbed at his forehead and then Maria noticed how his hand was shaking. No, not just shaking, but twitching uncontrollably, locked in a violent spasm. She looked at Michael with her concern bordering on alarm and saw that he was feeling the same thing. She turned back to Max, and took his hand trying to calm him. “Max? What’s wrong? What’s happened to you?”
“Nothing,” Max mumbled and pulled his hand away as he started to rise from the booth. He looked around to see if anyone was looking and then waved his hand over his pants to remove the dampness from the cherry cola Maria had spilled on him. He stood by the table, staring at the door to the back of the café, wanting to go to Liz, but knowing he should leave her alone. “I’ve gotta go,” he mumbled dejectedly and with a bowed head, he left through the front doors of the Crashdown.
Maria and Michael watched him leave, sitting side by side in stunned silence. Their hands interlocked as they sought the familiar contact and the comfort that went with that. Their friends were falling apart around them, and they didn’t have a clue what to do to stop it.
* * * * *
Liz lay curled up on her bed with her legs pulled up to her chest. It was time to move on. Time to give up on the past and all the hopes and the dreams she had once had. It didn’t matter if he no longer had feelings for Tess, after the truth of her treachery had come out. He was forever tied to her because of their son. She would always be there in his thoughts as the mother of his child, and those thoughts would inevitably lead to a comparison between her and Tess. She couldn’t give him anything even remotely like what Tess had. The ultimate sexual experience. It’d be better if she never tried. Just stop it now, and quit holding on to something that could never be.
She pulled the pillow close to her chest, breathing deeply and surprised when she realized how much it smelled like Max. How long would it take for her to get over him? Could she ever really get over him, or would it always be there, that ache in her heart every time she looked at him? She’d been foolish this morning when, just for a moment, she’d thought maybe things could work out between them. Too much had happened, too much stood between them. The specter of Tess, with her sleepy blue eyes once more invaded her mind and Liz curled into a tight ball, crying until exhaustion claimed her in sleep . . .
|posted on 14-Sep-2001 6:44:14 PM|
Max lay on his back staring up at his bedroom ceiling, listening to the quiet sounds of the empty house. He’d spent a sleepless night and his puffy eyes showed it. His parents had left for work sometime ago, and Isabel had already left for the Crashdown. She’d asked him if he was going to join her, but he’d mumbled that he wasn’t hungry.
She’d looked at him strangely then. Since when did they ever go to the Crashdown because they were hungry? It was the place they hung out, the place they met their friends, the place that used to feel like a second home. But that was in a different life, a different time, a world that didn’t exist anymore. He shouldn’t go there now. He shouldn’t subject Liz to his presence anymore.
He still was reeling from what Maria had told him yesterday, that every time he touched Liz she got a flash of the morning he’d woken up with Tess. What kind of freak was he, making Liz see something like that? It was bad enough that he had to remember that night. He’d never wanted to subject Liz to it too.
Was that it then? Was that the final nail in the coffin? Were all hopes for rebuilding a relationship with Liz over now? He’d never be able to touch her again, never be able to kiss her or hold her in his arms again. How could she even stand to look at him? They’d never be able to move beyond this, to forget about the past, when she kept seeing it flash before her eyes.
Maybe he really was a sadistic bastard, making her see something like that. Maybe during these last few months his alien side had taken over and changed him into something that wasn’t recognizable anymore. A year ago he never would have acted this way, done the things he’d done, said the things he’d said. He was still having a hard time reconciling himself to that. When had he turned into something even he couldn’t stand to be around? He’d grown up all those years thinking he was a monster. Now he knew it was true.
But so much of it was unclear in his mind. It was almost like the words had come out of someone else’s mouth, but he knew it had to have been him. He couldn’t remember speaking to Liz so harshly that day at Valenti’s home, but he’d seen it in her mind. He’d felt her fear of him, the same fear he’d caused that day in the school hallway when he’d grabbed her arm. Would it only get worse? Would his alien side suppress his human side completely, until Max Evans no longer existed, and only a hollow shell of him remained, controlled by something hideously alien?
He sat up and swung his legs over the side of the bed. He had to get out. He had to do something. He was suffocating here in his room and all he wanted to do was run. Run away from who he was, away from what he was, away from what he had become . . .
* * * * *
Liz busied herself around the Crashdown, trying to keep her mind occupied so she wouldn’t have to think. Now that the crisis with her father had past, and he was on the road to recovery, she didn’t have to worry about him as much, which left time for her mind to wander. And when her mind wandered, it always turned to thoughts of Max. She’d felt a huge disappointment when Isabel entered the Crashdown an hour ago and she realized Max wasn’t with her.
She told herself not to think that way, not to give in to those feelings that would only lead to more heartache. She’d made her mind up last night to move on, to put the past in the past and concentrate on creating a new future. But was that really what she wanted to do? Did she really want to face a future that didn’t, couldn’t, include Max? Yes . . . No . . . She felt so confused. Could she really keep him in her life, as a friend? Could she really see him everyday, and talk to him, knowing there could never be anything more between them? Or would the clean break that they had talked about be the best for them both?
“Why the sad face, Liz?” Maria asked as she came up behind her. “I don’t know if I can take anymore awful revelations, so humor me and tell me life is sweet and the sun always shines and every story has a happy ending.”
“Life is sweet and the sun always shines and every story has a happy ending,” Liz recited, trying her best to smile at her friend. It didn’t work very well.
“Now tell me the future is looking better, you’re in love with Prince Charming and you’ll live happily ever after.”
“The future sucks, Prince Charming doesn’t exist and happily ever after is only a dream,” Liz said, showing her dejection.
“Let’s talk about something else, Maria,” Liz hastily changed the subject. “Can you take me over to Hobbs? My Mom has the car at the hospital and I need to pick up that replacement part for the smoothie machine.”
“Sorry Babe, no can do. My Mom took the car into El Paso early this morning. I don’t expect her back until late tonight.”
“Damn, how am I going to get there?” Liz frowned.
“Get where?” Kyle asked as he came up behind her. He’d just entered the Crashdown, and the girls had been so engrossed in their conversation they hadn’t noticed him come in.
“Liz needs to go to Hobbs,” Maria answered, “but she doesn’t have a ride.”
“I can take you,” Kyle offered.
“Are you sure?” Liz asked. “It’s a long way to Hobbs and back, just to do me a favor.”
“I don’t mind,” Kyle reassured her. “Besides, I heard they have a fantastic Harley shop there. I’ve been meaning to go check it out.”
“Okay then, you’re on!” Liz nodded, finally breaking into a smile. “When do you want to go?”
“Now, if you want,” Kyle said and when she nodded again, he reached into his pocket to retrieve his car keys.
“I’ll just get my purse,” Liz said as she hurried around the counter.
From across the room, Isabel kept a close eye on Liz, suddenly feeling unsettled about the way Kyle was being overly attentive to her. Is this why Max was so depressed this morning? Had he noticed it too? Kyle and Liz headed toward the front door and Isabel got up from the table to follow them outside.
Max pulled the jeep to a stop in front of the Crashdown and turned the ignition off. He’d been driving around for the last hour, but he always found himself driving down this street. After the fourth time passing the restaurant, he gave in and parked in front of the familiar neon UFO sign. He climbed out and was just about to reach for the door when a smiling Kyle and Liz stepped through to the outside.
“Max . . .” Liz said as she almost bumped into him, and her smile faded.
“Evans,” Kyle said, acknowledging him and then placed his hand on the center of Liz’s back in a possessive gesture.
Max just stared at them, not knowing what to say. Maybe this hadn’t been a good idea. Maybe it would have been better if he stayed away. He watched as Kyle led Liz to his car and he noticed the way she glanced back at him, with a sad look on her face, and then she climbed into the front seat and Kyle closed the door. He felt a presence next to him and he tore his eyes away from Liz to see his sister standing beside him.
“He’s taking her into Hobbs to get something for the restaurant. It’s not a date or anything. Nothing romantic, if that’s what you’re thinking,” Isabel said trying to reassure him.
“It doesn’t matter Iz,” Max said dejectedly, unable to take his eyes off of Liz. “I’ve got no right to interfere in her life.”
Isabel stared hard at Kyle’s red Mustang, and then she turned to look at Max. “Are you giving up? Just like that?”
“She’s better off without me,” Max lamented.
“I disagree. She loves you, Max,” Isabel quietly asserted. “And you love her.”
“You’re the one that wanted me to stay away from her,” Max said as he turned to look at her. “For years you told me that. I should have listened to you all along, and then I never would have hurt her the way I did. Besides, she doesn’t need me. In fact, I’m the last thing she needs.”
“So now you decide to listen to me?” Isabel arched her eyebrows. “Well listen to this then. You need her Max. She’s the one that keeps you grounded. Without her, look at the mess you’ve made of everything.”
“That’s exactly why I have to give her up. Because of the mess I’ve made. She deserves better than me.” Max stole a glance over to the car and for a brief moment their eyes met before Liz looked away.
“Maybe it’s time you learned to fight for her Max,” Isabel said drilling her eyes into his. “Instead of passively watching her slip away from you.”
He shook his head and said sadly, “There’s nothing left to fight for, Iz. She doesn’t want me anymore.”
“If that’s what you think, then you really are an idiot,” Isabel shot back at him.
His mouth opened, about to respond, when their attention was drawn to the sound of an engine straining to start. After a few attempts to turn the engine over, Kyle climbed from the car and lifted the hood, mumbling about how human technology sucked and cars weren’t worth the money you paid for them. Liz climbed out of the passenger side, and vacantly stared down at the uncooperative engine.
“Where were you going Liz?” Isabel asked innocently.
She turned toward Isabel, thinking she was acting awfully cheery. Max had his hands in his pockets and he was looking at her under veiled lids. She couldn’t read his expression. “Kyle was going to take me into Hobbs on an errand. I guess it’s going to have to wait.”
“Max can take you,” Isabel offered brightly. “He’s not doing anything.”
Max jerked his head in the direction of his sister with a look of astonishment on his face. What did she think she was doing? Didn’t she hear a word he had just said?
“In fact,” Isabel continued, “he just told me a minute ago that he had nothing to do all day and he thought a long drive might do him some good. Clear the air and all, you know?”
“Well,” Liz said hesitantly, certain by his behavior that he had no desire to drive all the way to Hobbs with her. “That’s okay.”
“Max is more than happy to take you, isn’t that right Max?” Isabel asked as she led them both to the jeep. “It’s a beautiful sunny day, just the kind made for nice drives through the countryside.” And besides, she thought, the two of them alone in the car would force them to finally talk to each other.
“I don’t know,” Liz said as they came to a stop by the passenger door. “Max, you don’t have-”
“I don’t mind Liz,” Max hastened. “Isabel’s right, I don’t have anything else I was planning on doing . . .” He knew he sounded lame and took his hand out of his pocket so he could scratch his ear nervously. The thought of spending the afternoon alone with her was both exhilarating and terrifying. What if she said no? What if she didn’t want to be anywhere near him?
“Well, if you’re sure . . .” Liz mumbled as her eyes bounced between Max and Isabel.
“See? What’d I tell you!” Isabel smiled sweetly at Liz. “You two have a good time!” She backed away and gave her brother an encouraging smile as she passed him before stepping up onto the sidewalk.
Max shifted from one foot to the other and his eyes darted from the jeep to the ground to Liz and back to the jeep again. His hand moved to touch Liz on the elbow, to help her into the jeep, and then he pulled it back, remembering he couldn’t take the risk. He stuffed his hands in his pockets and then stood there like an idiot until Liz finally climbed inside the jeep without his help.
“Are you sure you want to do this?” Liz asked as she settled into the seat.
“Sure,” Max said as he stood staring at her. It finally dawned on him that they weren’t going anywhere if he didn’t move his ass, so he pulled his hands out of his pockets and hurried around the jeep. He passed Isabel and gave her a confounded look, not sure if he should thank her for creating an opportunity that kept him near Liz, or curse her for making things worse. He climbed in behind the wheel and inserted the key in the ignition and paused, giving Liz one last chance to change her mind. She gave him a small smile and he started the engine, backed away from the Crashdown, and then they headed out of town.
“What the hell?” Kyle whined as he pulled his head out of the engine of his car and watched Liz driving off with the King of Stupidity, His Majesty the Moron.
“Forget it Kyle,” Isabel said with a smile. “She’s not for you.” She waved her hand over the engine of his car as she turned to leave, and the motor came purring to life.
* * * * *
They headed east on Highway 380, and Max stole quick glances at Liz as they drove along. Traffic was light and the road lay wide open before them. Her hair was flying in the breeze and the sun made it shine vibrantly. Her skin was glowing too. Soft and silky looking. Skin he wished he could reach out and touch. She turned to look at him and he gave her a half smile, feeling awkward and self-conscious. As her eyes met his, he took it all back. He didn’t just wish he could reach out and touch her, he craved it.
Her hand pulled an errant strand of hair away from her mouth and then she turned to face forward again, but he couldn’t take his eyes off her lips. He remembered a day, so long ago now, when he’d driven this road out to Bitterlake, with thoughts of her on his mind. His mind had been filled with memories that day, memories of their first kiss, and the fireworks it had caused in him. That day he’d wondered if he’d ever get to kiss her again. As he looked at her now, those same thoughts filled his mind. No one else had ever made him feel this way. No one else ever could.
“Are you okay? I mean, is it too windy or anything?” Max asked, raising his voice so she could hear him above the noise of the engine.
“I’m fine,” she answered as her hand once again drew her hair away from her face. She looked at him briefly and then returned her eyes forward.
“I didn’t ask, before,” Max said after a few minutes of silence and Liz turned to face him again. “What do you need to do in Hobbs?”
“I have to pick up a part for the smoothie machine. We can’t be without a Sunrise on Saturn smoothie, you know,” Liz said offhandedly.
Max smiled at the silly names her Dad had selected to represent the food in the Crashdown. “I could have just . . .” and then he let his voice trail off. He could have just what? Fixed the smoothie machine with a wave of his hand? If he said that out loud, would she suggest they just turn around and save themselves a trip? But then he wouldn’t get to spend the afternoon with her, just the two of them, out here, away from town, away from everybody.
“You could have what?” Liz asked after he didn’t finish what he had started to say.
“Sorry, I forgot what I was gonna say.” She was looking at him questioningly and he had to look away. They continued on, each lost in their own thoughts, until Max broke the silence again. “How’s your Dad today?”
“Good,” Liz said and turned back to look at him with a genuine smile on her face. “My Mom called me from the hospital this morning and said he’s doing great. Really great.”
“That’s good . . . great,” Max stumbled around trying to find the rights words to say what he meant. “I feel really bad that I wasn’t, you know, able to help him more.”
“I know,” Liz nodded her understanding, “but it’s better this way. I mean, he’ll be okay, once he fully recovers. And we don’t have to explain anything, you know? No silver hand prints and stuff like that,” she said and then looked down at her hands in her lap.
“Right,” Max said, trying to keep at least one eye on the road. They drove in silence for a few more minutes and then they both reached for the knob to turn on the radio at the same time. Their hands collided and Liz pulled hers away like it had been burned. “I’m sorry Liz, Oh God, I’m so sorry,” Max said almost in a panic.
“It’s okay,” Liz said as she pulled her hand back. She looked at the alarmed look on his face, wondering why he had overreacted so badly. She thought back to earlier, outside the Crashdown, when it had been painfully obvious that he didn’t want to touch her then either. So much had changed between them, she sighed inwardly.
Had she seen a flash that time, Max wondered? Was she right now reliving his betrayal? He couldn’t tell by the look on her face, but she was good at hiding her feelings. Would he be able to learn to control it, so that she couldn’t see it, or would it always be there, between them, keeping them apart? Her eyes were downcast, staring into her lap, and he felt his stomach twist with tension. Not knowing what else to say or do, he turned the knob on the radio and a familiar melody drifted up from the speakers.
It’s been awhile
Since I could hold my head up high
It’s been awhile
Since I first saw you
“Oh, I love this song,” Liz smiled, lifting her eyes up to look at Max. “I bought this CD a couple of weeks ago. The whole thing’s great.”
“Really?” Max asked. “I like it too.” It makes me think of you every time I hear it, he thought to himself. A lot of songs make me think of you. In fact, everything makes me think of you. Everywhere I turn, it reminds me of something we once did together, or someplace we once went. In fact, that road we just passed goes to Buckley Point, where we used to go, when things were still good between us. I can still remember what you use to taste like, when I kissed you in the back seat of the jeep, and nothing else existed except you and me-
“Max?” Liz said a little louder.
“What?” Max said, shaking his head. “Did you say something?”
“I just asked if you’d heard the whole CD yet.”
“No, not yet,” Max responded with a shake of his head. He had thought about buying it, but there didn’t seem any point when he thought he was going to leave the planet. Jesus, he thought to himself, what the hell had he been thinking? Leave the planet? Leave the only home he had even known, with a conniving, murdering bitch whose whole goal was to take home his heir and turn him and Isabel and Michael over to his enemies? What a fucking mess he’d made of his life.
“-they’re all good.” Liz couldn’t help noticing the far away look in his eyes and she wondered if he was even listening to her. She leaned back against the seat and turned her head to look out the window, watching the desert pass by, trying not to let her mind think of him.
* * * * *
“What are you doing here?” Max said with a coldness Liz had never heard in his voice before. They were in the Valenti home, and Max had just come in the door, surprised to find her there talking to Tess. He stood staring at her and it was almost like his eyes were burning right through her.
“Um, nothing . . . you know we were just . . .we were talking. I should go.” Her nervousness was showing. He was scaring her.
“Talking about what?” Max said staring down at Liz.
“Nothing . . .”
“Max, you know, it’s okay,” Tess attempted to smooth things over. “Forget about it.”
“No, I want to know.”
“We’ll just talk later,” Liz said, trying to move toward the door.
“Please don’t go on my account. Go ahead. Ask you questions.” Max said, using his body to block her exit. He sounded heartless, cruel, mean.
“Max, she just had some questions about my powers, that’s all,” Tess explained.
“Your theory?” Max asked in a clipped voice.
“I just wanted to know some things about mind control and I thought-”
“Oh,” Max interrupted, “so Tess killed Alex. Is that your theory?”
“No,” Liz said shocked.
“Max, she didn’t say that.”
“But that’s what you were thinking, so why don’t you just ask it?” Max said, staring at Liz with contempt in his eyes.
“Max, of course that’s not what I’m thinking,” Liz said stunned by his accusation.
“Tess, did you kill Alex?” Max asked as he continued to belittle Liz.
“Max . . .” Tess pleaded.
“What were you doing the night he died?” Max asked Tess, but kept his eyes glued on Liz.
“Will you stop it?” Liz begged, almost crying.
“Go ahead,” Max urged Tess, still with his eyes boring into Liz. “What were you doing?”
“She was with me,” Kyle said, stepping into the fray. “We were watching Gladiator on video.”
“An alibi,” Max said triumphantly and then added, “from one of your own.”
“Can I leave now?” Liz begged as she stood shaking from his wrath.
“Yeah,” Max said scornfully and stepped away from the door, finished with her now.
“Is everything okay?” Kyle asked wondering what that scene had been all about.
“Fine,” Max responded as he stepped away from them.
“Yeah,” Tess said calmly. “Yeah, everything’s fine, Kyle.”
Kyle frowned at Max. He’d never seen him act that way before, especially to Liz. Tess walked up behind Max, rubbing her hand up and down his arm, and Kyle backed away from them, retreating out of the room.
“You did that well Max,” Tess said soothingly. “Very well.”
“What?” Max asked. His eyes darted around the room, looking for something, and then finally settled on Tess.
“I said, are you feeling alright?” She brushed her fingers across his forehead and then through the soft strands of his hair. “You don’t look very well.”
“I’m fine,” he said frowning and his eyes darted around the room looking for something he couldn’t seem to find.
Liz fled, running away from the house, running from Max and the hateful look she had seen in his eyes. She sobbed as his image loomed in front of her and she stumbled to the ground, falling in a heap as she cried. She felt his hand on her shoulder, shaking her, and she heard Max say, “Liz? Liz?”, before his face changed, morphing into something different, someone different.
The image solidified and Alex’s familiar features came into view. The open landscape changed into the confined space of his room, and Alex was sitting on his bed, strumming his guitar, and humming a tune she thought was familiar.
She watched him as he reached for something on his bed, and when he picked it up he smiled. Tickets. He was holding tickets in his hand. His smile faded as a spasm of pain flashed over his face and the tickets fell to the bed. His hand rose to clutch his forehead and then he turned to her, staring at her with haunted eyes, and he reached out to grasp her hands. He spoke to her and the desperation weighed heavy in his voice.
“Wake him up, Liz . . . Wake him up . . .”
“Wake up Liz,” Max said for the third time and laid his hand on her shoulder to gently shake her again. “Liz, we’re here. It’s time to wake up.”
“What?” Liz asked as her mind started to clear. When had she fallen asleep? She looked at Max hovering over her, and then out the window, noticing the jeep had come to a stop. A sign, Morely’s Parts and Service, came into view as she looked around and she said, “We’re here.”
“That’s what I just said,” Max smiled at her.
She tried to shake off the remnants of the dream and she sat up straight, trying to compose herself. “How long was I asleep?”
“About an hour,” Max answered. “You seemed so tired, I just let you sleep.” He couldn’t help notice how she seemed to be recoiling from him, shrinking away from his touch and the smile slowly faded from his face.
“If you want to wait here, this will only take a minute,” she said climbing out of the jeep.
“Sure,” Max answered, watching her movements with an ache in his heart. “Whatever you want.”
“Okay then,” she mumbled and hurried into the parts store. She was upset about the dream, about reliving the whole argument she’d had with Max that day. He’d been so cold, so harsh. Not at all the Max she’d fallen in love with. He’d scared her that day. For the first time, he had felt truly ‘alien’ to her. And maybe that was it in a nutshell, she thought as she pushed through the doors into the parts store. Maybe finally she was seeing the real Max Evans, the alien hiding from the world inside a human shell. Maybe Tess had just brought to the surface what had been buried underneath all along. The cold detachment, the harsh demeanor, the contempt he held inside that she’d never seen before. The Max she knew, the Max she fell in love with, hadn’t been that way at all. That Max was gone, as dead and buried as Alex was.
Max watched Liz enter the store and when she moved out of his line of vision he visibly collapsed behind the wheel of the jeep. The look on her face had said everything. She found him abhorrent now, after the things he had done, and the things he had said. What could he do to convince her that he wasn’t the monster that he had been acting like lately? What could he do to make her believe in him again?
He rubbed his hand over his face, feeling the stress and the strain and then sat up straight again when Liz reappeared at the door, carrying a small package. She didn’t look at him or make eye contact with him until she was almost to the jeep, and when she did, when she lifted her eyes to look at him, he felt his feet sinking in quicksand again. She opened her mouth to speak and he knew it wouldn’t be good. He could see it in her eyes, and in the way she stood so stiffly next to the car. He knew the words she was about to say before she said them, and he knew what they meant.
“Max, we need to talk . . .”
|posted on 14-Sep-2001 6:48:35 PM|
Liz stared out the window as they drove in silence. The landscape held no appeal for her. She barely registered the desert as it flashed by. Max hadn’t said a word since they left Hobbs, and she left it at that. They would have to talk, but she could wait. Maybe when they got back to Roswell . . .
Max was being eaten alive inside. He knew what she wanted to say and he was putting it off for as long as possible. If he didn’t hear it, it wouldn’t be true, right? He wouldn’t have to face it. He could live in denial and pretend there was still a chance to make things right with Liz. But was that being honest? Was that being a man and living with the consequences of his actions? Wasn’t that part of his problem all along, that he didn’t face his problems head on and deal with them? He let them lie dormant, festering inside him until they spilled over onto everyone around him.
He passed by a sign indicating a roadside park up ahead, and he made up his mind to face the demons that he had created. He turned on his blinker and before Liz was even cognizant of it, he had exited the highway. He pulled to a stop in a nice tree covered location looking out over the Pecos River, and he turned to face Liz.
“I know you want to talk, Liz, and God knows there are so many things we need to talk about,” Max said turning to look at her. “But I have questions too. Things I don’t understand, about what happened between us.” He stared into her eyes and what he saw there frightened him. She seemed resigned to some decision she had already made, and he feared that her life was going to move in a direction that didn’t include him.
“Max, why don’t we go sit over there,” Liz suggested, pointing to a patch if thick grass overlooking the river. Max followed the direction of her outstretched finger with his eyes and he nodded his head. They climbed out of the jeep and Max followed a step behind Liz as they made their way across the terrain.
She came to a stop on the grass and stood staring out at the river for a minute, lost in thoughts of what might have been, before slowly sinking down to sit on the ground. Max hesitated, a part of him wanting to run away so he wouldn’t have to face this and another part of him knowing there was no escape. He dropped down beside her, not close enough to crowd her, but not too far away in case a miracle happened and he could take her in his arms the way he wanted to. Miracles did happen sometimes, didn’t they?
“You said you had questions, Max,” Liz said as she plucked a blade of grass. She lifted her eyes to his, sad eyes, both of them feeling the other’s pain. “Go ahead Max. Ask your questions.”
His eyes dropped from hers, drawn to the way her fingers fidgeted with the blade of grass, shredding it and tearing it into tiny pieces. If only he could get back the pieces of his life he’d lost along the way. If only he could make his world whole again.
“When I . . . I mean, when that other version of me, the future me, came to you last fall . . . why didn’t you tell me about it, Liz?” He had picked up his own blade of grass now, twisting it between his fingers, staring at it instead of at her. “Why didn’t you come to me, so that we could talk it over, and make a decision together?”
“When you came to me Max, I didn’t believe it was you at first. I accused you of being a shape shifter. Because I didn’t want to believe the things you were telling me. I tried to block out everything you said.”
“Maybe it was a shape shifter,” Max said hopefully and lifted his eyes to meet hers.
“It didn’t take long to realize the truth,” Liz said shaking her head. “It was you. And you told me what I had to do. You didn’t just say you and I couldn’t be together. You said I had to make you fall out of love with me. You begged me to change the future. Michael was dead. Isabel was dead. It was only a matter of time before we’d all be dead. How could I ignore that?”
“But if I had known . . .”
“If you had known?” Liz repeated, trying to make him understand. “Would you have just stopped loving me if I had never done anything to force it? Could you have just turned your emotions off, if I’d told you the truth? Would you have willingly walked away from me?”
“No,” Max admitted. “But . . .” The grass had disintegrated in his hand and his fingertips were tinged with green. He plucked a new blade and began to tear at it too.
“You were so certain about what needed to be done. It killed me inside, but I had no choice. You left me no choice. Now, after everything that’s happened, I guess we know you were wrong. For whatever reason, you didn’t know about Tess. What she really was.”
“But how could he have not known that?” Max implored.
“You said that after you and I,” Liz started to say and then stopped. What good did it do to talk about what might have been? “In the other timeline, Tess left Roswell. You made it sound like you never saw her again, but I don’t know for sure. Maybe you just never found out the truth about her.”
They were quiet for a minute and then Max said softly, “You said that, in that other timeline, you and I got . . . we got married. What else did he . . . I say? What kind of life did we have together?”
“Max-” She knew it was better not to go down that road. That was a life they would never have.
“You said we got married, in Vegas,” Max said lifting his eyes up to see her face. “When we were there, last February, I got a flash, remember? You, in a wedding gown and me in a tux. We were so happy. Was that real? I mean, was it a memory or a vision of what really happened in that other timeline?”
“I think so,” Liz answered with a sad smile. Their eyes met and she had to bite her lip to keep from crying over what might have been. “You said we became inseparable after . . . well, after the Gomez concert. You said I made us elope. When we were nineteen.”
“You did?” Max said in surprise. He couldn’t help the smile that lit his eyes. “The ever practical Liz Parker, making us elope? At nineteen?”
“Yeah,” Liz chuckled. “Imagine that.”
“Were we happy together?” Max asked, turning serious again.
“Yeah,” Liz said with a trembling chin and her eyes filling with tears. “Yeah, we were.”
“I want that life, Liz,” Max said around the lump in his throat. “I want a life where we’re happy, and where we’re together.”
“I wanted it too, Max,” Liz said brushing a tear off her cheek. “But it wasn’t meant to be. You told me that once, a long time ago. I didn’t want to believe it, but you were right.”
He felt his heart sink at the way she spoke in the past tense. She was telling him that there was no future for the two of them. That what they had was over, and couldn’t be found again. There was a finality in the tone of her voice, unmistakable in its meaning.
“You can’t get past what happened,” he said and his eyes darted away from her. “Between me and Tess. Can you?” He didn’t want to hear her answer. The silence around them was deafening while he waited, dreading what he would hear. He knew what she was going to say, but it still tore his heart out when she said it.
“No.” Liz looked out over the river, watching the water flowing in its endless journey to the sea. Some things you could count on. The sun was going to rise tomorrow morning. If you stood in the rain, you were going to get wet. If you hit your thumb really hard with a hammer, it was gonna hurt. Some things you couldn’t count on. Love was one of those things.
“I have no excuse, for what I did,” Max said, avoiding looking at her.
“You thought you were in love with her,” Liz said, crying on the inside, trying to hold it together on the outside.
“I don’t know what I thought,” he said, rubbing his hand over his face. He was quiet for a minute and then he continued. “I was devastated when I thought you slept with Kyle. Not because you gave yourself to him, but because I knew you, and I knew that you would never give yourself to someone you didn’t love. Which meant . . .” he had to pause while he tried to fight the quiver that had crept into his voice. “Which meant that you had moved on, and you didn’t love me anymore.”
“I had spent my whole life in love with you,” Max continued as he stared down into his hands in his lap. “From the very first moment that I saw you, I knew you were the one for me. I always knew it. It was like I felt it deep inside.” Max finally looked up at her with an expression that begged her to understand.
“After I saved you that day in the Crashdown, it was like the worst day of my life, and the best day all rolled up into one, you know? I mean, you suddenly knew I wasn’t . . . normal, but at the same time, you didn’t run away from me. I was surprised and amazed and in shock and . . . and when you stopped me and Michael and Isabel in the alley that night and said you wanted to help throw Valenti off our trail so we wouldn’t have to leave Roswell, it was like every dream I had ever had was coming true. You weren’t running away from me screaming, and you actually wanted to help me.”
“And then, as we got closer and closer and everything I ever wanted was coming true, I kept waiting for the other shoe to drop, because I knew I couldn’t get that lucky. And then Tess showed up, and I lost everything that ever meant anything to me.”
He fell silent for a moment and then he continued, “When you came back from Florida, I still thought we had a chance. Even when you were trying to push me away, I could still feel how much you loved me. You couldn’t hide it, even though you tried. I thought you were just scared and who could blame you? I was scared after hearing that message out in the desert last year. What do I know about being a king? So I thought you just needed time to adjust, to think things through just like I needed to, and I wasn’t about to give up on you. And then I saw you with Kyle, and I knew it was over.”
“For the longest time, I just didn’t feel anything at all. I had loved you for so long, and to be without you left me hollow inside. I was so lonely, when I thought I’d lost you. A part of me just curled up and died. I didn’t care about anything anymore. I was just . . . empty. And then Tess started to show me these memories and it made me feel something. And something was better than nothing. So I let her show me more.”
“Your memories, of your life with her,” Liz whispered.
“Yeah. Only they didn’t feel like my memories, you know?” He looked at Liz then, trying to make her understand. "I mean, they were his memories, of who I was before. But they didn’t feel like my memories. But the more I was around Tess, the more she tried to convince me that they were mine, and I started to believe her. Everybody else was shutting me out. Michael and I were barely talking. Isabel and I couldn’t have a conversation without fighting, and you . . .” he said with a catch in his throat. “I knew I’d lost you forever, and then Alex died, and I couldn’t bring him back-” He ducked his head, blinking back the sudden tears that filled his eyes.
“It’s not your fault you couldn’t save Alex,” Liz said as she fought not to cry.
“I knew how devastated you were, and I wanted to go to you, but you had closed yourself off completely. You wouldn’t let me in. You were moving further and further away from me, until I couldn’t feel you at all anymore. Did you know that I used to always be able to feel you whenever you were near me? Ever since I was little, I always knew when you walked into the room, even though I couldn’t see you. I could feel your energy, the essence that makes you who you are. You’re the only one that ever made me feel that way.”
He stole a look in her direction and his eyes fixed on the tear that was slowly falling down her cheek. These last couple of weeks he’d felt her energy stronger that ever, like a beacon drawing him to her. He didn’t know why he’d lost it for awhile, but feeling it again now was like a drowning man finding his way to shore. It made him feel grounded again. Normal. It also made him miss her all the more.
“Alex’s death was like the final wedge between us. I felt you blaming me and deep inside I was afraid you were right. But I couldn’t accept it, the guilt was too much to bear, and this time I pushed you away from me. The rift between us had grown so huge that I felt like I had lost any chance of ever being with you again, and nothing mattered anymore. Nothing I did would ever bring you back to me, so I gave up. I gave up the dream of spending a lifetime with you. I gave up the dream of us. And after that, I had nothing.”
Max paused trying to gather his emotions back together. The lump was getting thicker in his throat and he wasn’t sure he could get out what he wanted to say. “I felt like I had lost everything I ever cared about, and everyone that ever mattered to me. I felt so alone.” He quickly brushed his hand across his eye and tried to keep from losing it completely as he remembered how he had felt that night. “I was all alone, and looking at a future with nothing in it, and then she was there, telling me I was important to her, and telling me she could make everything better, and telling me that she could make me feel alive again, and so . . . and so . . .”
“And so you slept with Tess,” Liz said shakily.
He dropped his head and a sob tore from his throat, unable to hold it back now. “Yes. I’m so sorry, Liz. I’m so sorry.” He covered his face with his hands, not wanting her to see him like this. He was trembling and his eyes were burning as the tears flowed down his cheeks. His nose was starting to run and he felt like a wreck, but the worst part was listening to the sound of Liz crying next to him.
The distance between them had never been greater, as they sat side by side on the grass. Max floundered in his own private hell, a hell of his own making. Because he was weak, he had destroyed the one thing in the world he had cherished the most. The love that Liz had once felt for him.
Liz rocked back and forth, with her trembling hand hiding her face and her tears flowing freely. What she had started back in the fall had led them to this. She’d lived with the pain of breaking his heart, with seeing the heartache on his face everyday, but she had thought what she was doing was the right thing. She had pushed him toward Tess who had manipulated him and separated him from those he was closest to until he succumbed to her machinations. He’d had no one to turn to, no one to support him except Tess, who played her role of loving ‘wife’ to perfection until she got what she wanted out of him.
The decisions that she had made had set them on this course, and she would have to live with that knowledge for the rest of her life. The pain she’d caused them both was intolerable. She reached out her hand to him, bridging the gulf between them and he reacted quickly as her fingers touched his shoulder. He pulled her into his arms and they clung to each other, crying together over everything that had gone wrong in their lives.
“I’m so sorry, Liz,” he cried with his head on her shoulder. His hand clutched her hair in a tight fist and he held on to her desperately. “For everything I’ve done. I know I’ve said terrible things to you and I’ve treated you horribly.” He could feel her tears soaking into his shirt and she trembled against him. He held her tighter, as if she was a lifeline to his sanity, and his voiced cracked as he asked, “Can you ever forgive me?”
“Yes, Max,” she whispered against his ear and felt his sudden intake of breath. “Yes, I can forgive you.” Her voice got even softer and she said, “Can forgive me, too?”
“Forgive you for what?” Max asked, pulling back so he could look at her. The pain he could see in her eyes was tearing him up inside and he wanted nothing more than to kiss her and take that pain away.
“For lying to you,” she said and her eyes dropped from his. “For hiding things from you. For making things worse.”
“What you did doesn’t compare with what I did,” Max said as he brushed the tears off her face. “What you did, you did for love.” She pulled further away from him and the brief moment of hope he’d had began to fade. “Is there any way you can open your heart to me again? Is there any chance for us Liz?”
“I don’t know, Max,” she said and her eyes turned away from him. “It’s not just you and me and what happened with Tess, is it? Someone else is involved here too. Someone that will forever be between us.”
“You mean my son.” Max felt the last of his hope dying. She pulled out of his grasp and he watched as she rose to her feet and separated herself from him. The distance between them had expanded again, this time a chasm impossible to breach. Liz stood an arm’s length away from him, hugging herself against the coldness she felt inside, and Max sat on the ground with his head in his hands knowing nothing would ever be the same again. The distance between them was light years apart.
|posted on 14-Sep-2001 7:00:14 PM|
Liz felt relieved when the neon lights of the Crashdown came into view. The rest of the trip home had been in stony silence, with few words exchanged between them. Their wounds were so raw, and they both needed time to come to grips with where they stood now. They were both emotionally exhausted, and the physical strain was apparent too. She’d noticed how he kept rubbing at his forehead, like he had a headache. God knows, her head felt like it was about to explode too. Tension had a way of doing that to you.
The jeep came to a stop in front of the restaurant and when Max didn’t move Liz turned to him, asking “Are you going to come in? Do you want something to eat? We haven’t eaten since this morning. You must be hungry by now.”
He turned to look at her and he nodded his head slightly but he didn’t speak. He couldn’t speak without exposing the emotions he was feeling, so it was better not to say anything at all. Liz retrieved the parts bag from the back seat and they both climbed out of the jeep and walked into the bustling Crashdown.
“Liz! You’re back,” Maria said happily, and then her smile slowly faded as she took a good look at their faces. She sighed inwardly, lamenting the fact that their trip had not resulted in a Love Connection. Would things ever get back to normal, the way they were supposed to be?
Max came to a stop next to Maria and he stood awkwardly, not knowing what to say. Liz walked around the counter, taking the part out of the bag as she went and came to a stop in front of the smoothie machine. She turned the part over and over in her hand, wondering where in the world it was supposed to go. She opened the back of the machine and reached inside, pricking her finger on a piece of exposed metal. “Shit,” she said under her breath as she saw the blood welling up on the pad of her fingertip.
Max suddenly appeared at her side and took the part out of her hand saying, “Why don’t you let me do that.” She dabbed at the blood with a tissue and then watched as it slowly welled up again. Max took her hand in his and he looked around the restaurant to see if anyone was watching them, and then touched his finger to hers. The point of contact glowed blue for just a moment and then it was gone. His eyes were staring into hers and she started to smile at him, to thank him, when they got a flash. A flash of her worst nightmare, a flash of his greatest sin.
She closed her eyes and slowly pulled her hand away from his, but she couldn’t escape the image of sleepy blue eyes smiling into his or the sight of his bare chest as they lay naked together. She moved past him, running to the back door, fleeing to the safety of her room, but unable to outrun the image that tormented her.
Max stood staring at the empty space where Liz had stood a moment ago. He’d done it to her again. As if the day hadn’t been horrible enough for her, he had to top it off by showing her a vision of his ultimate betrayal once again. He closed his eyes trying to wipe out the image of the shattered look on her face, but it was burned into his brain.
“Max? What’s wrong?” Maria asked with concern. “What’s the matter with Liz? What just happened here?”
Max wavered on his feet, feeling his world spinning around him. He couldn’t keep doing this to her, and he couldn’t seem to control it. His hand rose to his head, wanting to tear the offending memories out of his brain, and then he turned abruptly, nearly bumping into Maria in his haste to leave. “I have to go,” he uttered and pushed past her, rushing through the front door.
“Max? Max! What happened?” Maria called out to him, but he was gone, out the door and out of sight. She turned on her heels and followed in Liz’s footsteps, running up the stairs to the apartment and down the hall to Liz’s room. The door was shut and she shook the handle, not surprised to find it locked.
“Liz,” she called through the door. “Liz it’s me. Open up.”
“Go away Maria,” came her muffled response.
“Please Liz, talk to me. Tell me what happened,” Maria implored through the door.
“Maria, please. Just go away.” She buried her face in her pillow, pulling it close to her to drown out the sound of her crying, and after a few minutes she could hear Maria’s retreating footsteps. She curled into a tight ball, trying to forget, but the nightmares wouldn’t leave her alone . . .
“Love me Max,” her blue eyes stared up into his as she lifted her hand to his cheek. The lightning flashed and illuminated his face before the shadows fell again. A face that was tormented, full of anguish and pain. A face that looked lost and alone.
“I can’t,” he answered as he gently cupped her hand and drew it away from his cheek. “I’m sorry.”
“Max, we belong together. You know we do,” she said squeezing his hand.
“I’m not in love with you, Tess. I’m sorry, but I’m not. Maybe I did before, in that other life, but that wasn’t me.” The lightning flared again, the sudden light dancing around the cavernous room, followed by the rumble of thunder.
“It can be, if you let it. Let go of her Max. Let me love you the way you were meant to be loved. I can make you forget all about her.”
“I don’t want to forget her. I’m sorry Tess, but I’ve always been in love with her . . . and I always will be. Nothing can change that.” He took a step back from her and turned away from the hurt in her eyes. “We should go . . .”
“Max!” He stopped, with his back to her, frozen in place. “I won’t let you leave . . .”
The thunder roared overhead as she sat on her suitcase waiting for Maria to arrive. A drop of rain hit her on the cheek and she pulled out her cell phone from her coat pocket. She dialed the familiar numbers and listened to the phone ring and ring as another bolt of lightning flashed above her.
“Come on Maria,” she pleaded softly. Another drop hit her dark lashes and her deep brown eyes turned skyward. A hand took the phone from her and she looked up into his ominous visage, his ghostly presence sending a chill through her. Her breath caught in her throat as he opened his mouth and he echoed the familiar refrain . . .
“Wake him up, Liz. Wake him up. Before it’s too late . . .”
Liz came awake with a start, elements of the dream still clear in her mind. Once again Alex was trying to tell her something, something she should know if she could just think clearly. Why was he repeating the words ‘Wake him up’ over and over? And what did ‘Before it’s too late’ mean? It was already too late. Alex was dead. What ever he was trying to tell her, it was too late to save him. It didn’t make any sense, unless . . . unless Alex wasn’t referring to himself. But who did he mean? Max? Michael? Kyle? Kyle had been mindwarpped by Tess, but he seemed to be recovering from that, and not in any danger.
The other part of her dream made her shudder. Why would she dream that? Wasn’t it torture enough to live with the knowledge that Max had made love to Tess, and to see it in the flashes that he gave her? Did she have to dream about it now too? Of course in her dream, Max had turned Tess down. If only it had really been that way. If only his dream words had been true. She could hear them, still ringing clearly in her head . . .
‘I’m sorry Tess, but I’ve always been in love with her . . . and I always will be. Nothing can change that.’
She closed her eyes and listened to the silence around her. The dream had been filled with sounds, a cacophony of noise ringing in her ears. Just like the night she had nearly left Roswell to fly to Sweden. The storm had raged throughout the night and the rain had drilled against her rooftop once Maria had brought her home. She sat up in bed suddenly as she stared up at her ceiling. The storm . . .
Images flashed across her mind, pictures that suddenly weren’t making any sense. She tossed the pillow aside and ran from her room, hoping Maria was downstairs.
* * * * *
Liz burst into the Crashdown and was relieved to see Maria hadn’t left yet. She was standing by the pass through into the kitchen talking to Michael as he flipped burgers on the grill and she moved across the room quickly to join them.
“Liz!” Maria exclaimed, taking in her disheveled appearance and her wild looking eyes. “What’s the matter?”
“Maria, do you know which night Max slept with Tess?” she said as she grabbed her by the arms.
“What? No. Liz, what’s going on?”
“Maria, I have to know!”
Maria stared at her friend like she had lost her mind. Why was she trying to torture herself this way? No good could come of Liz hearing the awful details. Wasn’t it bad enough what Max had shown her? Had she finally cracked under all the strain of these last few weeks?
“Michael,” Liz turned to him when she got no response except a sympathetic stare from Maria. “Do you know? Was it the night I almost went to Sweden?”
“I don’t know,” he frowned at her. What was her problem? What difference did it make?
“Michael, God Damnit, I have to know!” she said latching onto his arm as he neared the opening between the café and the kitchen.
“What the fu-” he said pulling his arm away from her claw like grip. “I told you I don’t know. He first told me about it a couple of days after that, so yeah, maybe. It might have been that night. Why? What the hell difference does it make?”
“Have you noticed anything unusual about him?” She asked looking back and forth between Michael and Maria. “Anything? Have you seen him staring off into space like he’s in a trance?” They both shook their heads and stared at her like she was crazy. And maybe she was. Maybe she was completely wrong. Maybe she was just reading things into it that weren’t really there. She started to slump dispiritedly and then Maria drew her attention back to her.
“Yesterday, after you went upstairs, I kinda got mad at Max-”
“Kinda,” Michael mumbled under his breath, rolling his eyes at the understatement. Who was she trying to kid? She had gone off on Max.
She glared at him and then continued. “Anyway, I yelled at him and he was acting like his head hurt and his hand was shaking really bad, like he couldn’t control it. And then he just left. You know, he looked pretty out of it when he left here earlier too-”
“Where’d he go?” Liz said almost desperately. When they didn’t respond, she repeated more forcefully, “Do you know where he went?”
“I don’t have any idea,” Maria answered and Michael shrugged his shoulders.
“We have to find him and we have to find him now, before it’s too late.”
“What are you taking about Liz?” Michael asked worriedly as he threw down his apron. “Before it’s too late for what?”
“Come on, let’s go in the back,” Maria urged. Liz’s strange behavior hadn’t gone unnoticed by the customers and a little more privacy seemed to be in order. They met Michael in the back room and they both turned to stare at Liz.
“So what the hell’s going on?” Michael demanded.
“Michael, will you call and see if Max is at home?” Liz asked. “If he is, figure out a way to make sure he stays there. Don’t let him leave.”
Michael stared at Liz, tempted to demand a further explanation and then decided not to waste time arguing with her. She could be so damn stubborn, and he knew he wasn’t going to get the story out of her until she was damn well ready to tell him. Her instincts had been right in the past and as much as she got under his skin sometimes, she always seemed to put their wants and needs above her own. He had grudgingly come to consider her a true friend. He took the phone that Liz was holding out to him and he made the call. Isabel answered on the second ring.
“Hey, it’s me,” Michael said without elaboration. “Is Max there?”
“Yeah, just a minut-”
“No, I don’t want to talk to him,” he interrupted her. “What’s he doing?”
“Well, he’s kinda zombied out, sitting at the kitchen table. He’s just been sitting there since he got home awhile ago. It’s that whole Liz thing, you know? He’s been-”
“Whatever,” Michael interrupted. “You said zombied out. What do you mean by that?” He met Liz’s gaze and he could see her worried expression.
“Oh, he’s just been acting weird since he got home. Did something happen between them today? He seems even more depressed than usual. I thought the trip would give them a chance to clear the air, but maybe I was wrong.” Isabel watched Max out of the corner of her eye and she noticed how he kept rubbing his forehead.
“Isabel, don’t let him leave. We’re coming right over there. Whatever you do, just keep him there,” he demanded.
“What’s going on, Michael?” she asked, starting to feel scared.
“I have no idea,” he said as he stared at Liz, “but we’ll tell you as soon as we get there.”
Isabel stared at the phone in her hand, wondering what the hell Michael was talking about. He wasn’t making any sense at all, but the message was clear. Don’t let Max leave. She hung up the phone and moved across the kitchen, taking a seat opposite her brother.
“Max,” she started, uncertain what to say. His eyes rose up from the spot he had been staring at in the center of the table and looked directly into hers. The emptiness she saw there frightened her even more than before. “Max, what’s wrong?”
“Nothing,” he answered flatly. His voice had a hollowness to it, almost as if it was devoid of all emotion.
“Are you sure?” she asked, trying to draw him out, but he just sat there, staring at the keys he was fidgeting with in his hands. He shrugged his shoulders noncommittally and started to rise to his feet, and she decided to change the direction of the conversation to keep him at the table.
“Max, about the whole college thing, I understand why you won’t let me go to California. You were right. I can’t leave Roswell. We need to stick together.” She watched him as he sat back down and his eyes became more focused. “I just, you know, wish we hadn’t had such a big fight about it,” she continued. “I mean, you said some pretty harsh things, and I was really acting bitchy about the whole thing.”
“Harsh things?” he said frowning. “What harsh things?”
“You know, when you said you were going to tell Mom and Dad I was on drugs. And my teachers that I’d been cheating all through school.”
“When did I say that?” he asked with a scowl darkening his face.
“At school. A couple of weeks ago . . .” How could he forget that, she wondered? “So anyway, I just want you to know that I understand, and I’m sorry we fought about it. It’s just that, when you ordered me to stay, it just didn’t set right. But I thought about it, and I decided I can just go to the community college right here in Roswell, at least for the next two years. And then we can re-evaluate things then.”
Max tried to follow her, but most of what she was saying didn’t make any sense. What did she mean when she said he wouldn’t ‘let’ her go to college in California? She was talking about him like he was some kind of dictator or something, ordering her around like a power hungry despot. A stabbing pain shot through his head and he rose to his feet, swaying unsteadily as the pain intensified.
“I have to go,” he muttered and turned to walk out of the kitchen.
“Max? Where are you going?” Isabel chased after him as he walked toward the front door. “Max, come back here. You can’t just leave. We have to talk. Max! God damnit, are you listening to me?” she shouted and grabbed his arm to keep him from leaving. He yanked it free, and without a sideways glance at her, he marched out the door headed directly for the jeep. Isabel followed after him and continued to plead with him to stay, but he ignored her as he put the jeep in reverse and pulled out of the driveway.
* * * * *
Liz had a sinking feeling in her stomach as they rounded the corner and his house came into view, but the jeep wasn’t there. Isabel was pacing in the front yard, with her arms folded across her chest in obvious agitation. As the Jetta came into view she rushed to the driveway to meet them.
“Where is he?” Liz demanded as she jumped from the back seat. “Isabel, is he here?”
“No,” she said in distress. “He took off about ten minutes ago. I couldn’t stop him.”
“Why didn’t you use your powers to keep him here?” Michael shot back. “I told you not to let him leave.”
“What was I supposed to do Michael,” Isabel cried out. “Enclose him in a green force field right here, in front of the neighbors?”
“Do you know where he went?” Liz grabbed Isabel and shook her to get her attention. “We have to find him now, Isabel. There might not be much time.”
“What are you talking about?” she cried as she raked her hand through her hair. “Tell me what’s going on.”
“If we don’t get to him soon, the same thing that happened to Alex is going to happen to Max.”
“What?” three voices rang out at the same time. Three sets of eyes stared at her for an explanation, but there wasn’t time for that now.
“Where could he have gone? Think, you guys. Isabel, did he give you any idea where he was going?”
“No,” she said shaking her head in distress. “He didn’t say anything. He just had this dead look in his eyes and he left.”
“Let’s check Michael’s place,” Maria suggested. “Maybe he went there to get away from everyone. He knew Michael was working, so he’d have the place to himself.”
“Let’s hurry,” Liz shouted as they all ran for the car.
* * * * *
Liz rocked back and forth in agitation in the back seat of the Jetta as Michael drove quickly across town. She stared out the window at the passing houses and prayed that they would get to Max in time. Maybe she was wrong, maybe she’d look like an idiot once they found him, but she didn’t think so. The signs were all there. She just hadn’t put them together before.
“No answer,” Maria said and she put her cell phone back in her purse. “Either he’s not at Michael’s, or he’s just not answering the phone.”
“Or he can’t answer . . .” Liz said, voicing her fears.
“Okay, explain,” Michael demanded as he looked back at Liz in the rear view mirror of the car.
She turned to meet his eyes, and then looked from Isabel sitting next to her, to Maria sitting in front of her. They were all staring at her, waiting for answers. Answers she wasn’t sure she had. She opened her mouth to speak, and then didn’t know where to start.
“You think Tess did something to Max’s head, just like she did with Alex, don’t you,” Maria said voicing her growing fear. Liz met her gaze and slowly started to nod her head.
“Yes, I do.” She looked to Michael, seeing the question etched on his face, and then to Isabel, who’s eyes were wide with fright. “Have any of you noticed him kind of spacing out sometimes lately? Since Tess has been gone?” She saw the perplexed look on their faces and she continued on. “I saw it the first time in the hospital. I found him standing in front of the coffee machine like he was in a trance. His hand was hovering in the air and shaking and his eyes were all glazed over. I called his name, but he didn’t respond, not until I touched him, and then he came out of it.”
“My Mom said that she found Max sitting in the jeep one morning before school,” Isabel said worriedly. “It was raining and he was drenched and she said she had to shake him to get his attention. She said it was really weird, but later on he seemed fine.”
“And I’ve seen his hand shaking,” Maria added, “but I just thought it was from all the stress he’s been under lately, you know, with Tess and everything.”
“Well, at the time, I kinda thought the same thing,” Liz admitted. “Because when I touched him, I got a flash of him with Tess. You know, Maria, the one I told you about. So I just thought he was thinking about her, and the baby, you know? And his mind was ‘off in another world’ so to speak. But then I kept getting the dreams.”
“What?” Michael blurted out. “You’re freaking out here based on some dream?”
“Michael,” Maria warned as she backhanded him across the arm. “Just hear her out.”
“Isabel,” Liz said turning to look at the girl beside her. “Do you know if the night Max spent with Tess was the same night that I almost went to Sweden?”
“I don’t know,” Isabel frowned. “Wait, I think it was. He came home the next morning all freaked out and told me something had happened between him and Tess, but I was so pissed at him I didn’t want to listen to him. Then later that day I heard about you almost flying out of the country in the dead of night, so yeah. It was the same night.”
“I was sure of it,” Liz sighed. “Maria, you know the image I told you I’ve been getting from Max when he touches me?”
“Yeah,” she answered. “The one of him and Tess waking up together the morning after they . . . well, the next morning?”
“Yes,” Liz nodded. “I think he’s been sending me that image on purpose.”
“No, Liz,” Maria said soothingly. “He even said he wasn’t. Yesterday, remember Michael?”
“Yea-” Michael started to say and Liz cut him off.
“No, I mean his subconscious mind is sending it to me. I think he’s been doing it for awhile, trying to make me see, trying to get me to figure out the truth. And that image that’s in his mind is not the truth.” Their eyes were drilling into her, waiting for her to explain further and Liz took a deep breath before continuing.
“Buried deep inside Max, he knows what really happened but it’s locked up in his head for some reason. Since his conscious mind can’t see it, his subconscious mind is sending it to me in a flash. Always the same image, one that was sure to get my attention. I think he knows that once I could get past the hurt, past the shock of seeing it and started looking at it from a logical standpoint, a scientific point of view if you will, that I’d see how the flash that he shows me couldn’t possible be real.”
“So you think somewhere deep inside, Max knows what really happened, and has been trying to get you to see that what he thinks happened couldn’t be true,” Maria said, trying to sort it out in her mind. “But why do you think it’s something he’s sending you on purpose, and not just some random occurrence rooted in his guilt?”
“For one thing,” Liz answered trying to make them understand, “it’s not random. He is specifically sending me that image. Every time. And let’s face it, if everything Max thinks happened, really did, then we all know he could be sending me flashes of things a whole lot worse than just waking up with her the next morning. But the point is, there is a very specific clue in the flash that he sends me, only I didn’t put it together until I started getting the dreams.”
“Dreams?” Michael said dismissively. “How can you pin anything onto a dream?”
“Well, I don’t think they’re just dreams, Michael.”
“If they aren’t dreams,” Isabel jumped in, “what are they?”
“I think the flashes weren’t the only thing Max sent me,” Liz said as she looked at each of her friends in turn. “I think he sent me part of his memories too. His real memories.”
|posted on 14-Sep-2001 7:05:37 PM|
Michael came to a screeching stop in front of his apartment and they piled out of the car, following behind him as he ran to his door. He used his powers on the lock and they burst into his home, spreading out to check all the rooms.
“He’s not here,” Isabel said with a panicky tone as they met back in the living room.
“Where could he be?” Liz asked shakily. She had a sinking feeling that something bad was going to happen if they didn’t find him soon. Why had it taken her so long to figure out something was wrong?
“He’s not at home and he’s not at the Crashdown,” Maria listed the places Max could usually be found. “What does that leave? The UFO Center?”
“Liz’s bedroom,” Michael offered. She turned to stare at him and he added, “Look, we all know how much time he spends hanging out on your balcony. You can see the permanent imprint of his butt on the floor outside your bedroom window.”
“Michael-” Liz began and then Isabel interrupted.
“Maybe he did go to see you Liz. You were already headed to our house when he left, so maybe you just missed each other. We should at least go look. Michael and Maria can check out the UFO Center and you and I can see if he went back to the Crashdown. We all know he can’t stay away from there.”
They all nodded in agreement and hurriedly left Michael’s apartment. Liz had a horrible feeling that time was running out, and if they didn’t find him soon, they’d never see Max alive again.
* * * * *
Liz flung the door to her bedroom open and her eyes swept around the room. It was empty, just as she had suspected it would be. She raced to her window and peered outside, but he wasn’t on her balcony either. “He’s not here, Isabel.”
“Damnit,” Isabel cursed in frustration. They hadn’t seen his jeep at the UFO Center and they doubted he was there either, but Maria and Michael were checking. “Where in the world could he be?”
“Wait,” Liz interrupted. She lifted her window and climbed out onto her balcony with Isabel following behind her. Something had caught her attention, something that looked out of place. She crossed over to the small table next to her favorite chair and stared down at the object that hadn’t been there earlier. “Max was here.”
Isabel came up to stand beside her and they both stared down at the pendant that was resting in the middle of the table. Max had given it to Liz the night before he was going to leave, to go back to his home planet with Tess. He wanted her to have something to remember him by. But the pendant he had given her had been in its original condition, with the piece missing from the bottom. She had been keeping it on the nightstand next to her bed.
The pendant that they were staring at now didn’t have the jagged edge along the bottom. It was whole and Liz bent down to pick it up. She held it on the palm of her hand and her finger traced along the lower edge. “He fixed it. He put the two parts together and made it whole. You can’t even tell where it was broken.”
“Why would he do that now?” Isabel asked. “He gave it to you without the bottom piece, so why come over here to fix it now? The things he’s been doing just don’t make sense.”
“Maybe he left it here as a clue,” Liz suggested.
“But what kind of clue? What do you think he meant by it?”
“Oh God, Isabel,” Liz turned to her with frightened eyes. “Max gave me this just before he left to go to the Granilith chamber, when he thought he was leaving and we’d never see each other again. What if he went back out there all alone? We don’t have any idea what’s out there now, or who might be out there. No one’s been there since that day. What if it’s dangerous out there? He’s all alone Isabel!”
“God, let’s hurry,” Isabel said turning back toward the window. “We’ll go get Mari-”
“Wait!” Liz said grabbing Isabel by the arm. “It’s so far out there. What if he’s in trouble right now? Try to do that mind walk, Isabel. Try to reach him with your mind to see where he is.”
Isabel stared at Liz uncertainly, and then took the pendant out of her hand. She sat down in a nearby chair and Liz sat next to her, watching her as she held the pendant tightly and closed her eyes in concentration. Liz could see the strain on her face and her hands were shaking with the effort. “Nothing!” Isabel hissed in frustration. “I don’t feel him at all.”
“Try again,” Liz pleaded. She could hear the clock ticking in the background and it reminded her of how little time they might have left.
“You try it Liz,” Isabel said shoving the pendant into Liz’s hand.
“Me?” Liz said in shock.
“Yes! Like you did when Max was in New York. You saved his life that day. He’s sensitive to you Liz. He’ll hear you above anyone else.”
Would he really, Liz stared at Isabel with growing reservations. After all that had happened between them, were they still connected anymore? Why was Isabel looking at her like that, as if she had all the answers? She didn’t know anything! “Isabel, there’s too much at stake for me to start playing with this . . . this power that Max gave me. What if I just make things worse for him?’”
“As if things could get any worse!” Isabel admonished. “Liz, you know it’s the truth, so don’t deny it. You and Max are bound together. You’re the one that can get through to him. You have to at least try.”
“Okay,” Liz finally acquiesced. She looked at Isabel uncertainly, and then closed her eyes and clutched the pendant tightly in her hand.
Isabel watched the concentration on Liz’s face and the way her hand was holding the pendant so tightly that her knuckles were turning white. She clutched Liz’s other hand letting her draw whatever strength from her that she needed.
Liz tried to relax her breathing while she concentrated on trying to reach Max. Where could he have gone? What was he doing? If she were right in her suspicions, how much longer did they have before it would be too late to save him? An imagine flashed over her, a memory, but not her memory . . .
Max slowly opened his dresser and looked at the assortment of socks and shorts and t-shirts in his drawer. What should he take? What was it going to be like there? What were the people going to be like? Could he even call them people? He had no idea what the inhabitants of his home world actually looked like. Last year, in the message they’d seen in the cave, the image of his real Mother had implied that they didn’t look human. She’d said she had “taken ‘this form’ so that it would be familiar to them”, so it was obvious by what she said that she meant their native state was not human in appearance. He didn’t like the sound of that.
He wondered what was real because in the memories Tess had shown him of their previous life together, they had both looked human. The party that they met at, the people that were there, all of it seemed so . . . human. Why was it that in all the memory retrieval Tess had shared with him, he never saw even an inkling of what his alien self really looked like?
He reluctantly picked up a handful of socks and turned to take them back to his bed. How could he give up his life here, he wondered as he dropped the socks onto his bed? How could he have screwed up so badly? A year ago, he knew exactly what he wanted. He wanted Liz. That was still what he wanted, but that was never gonna happen. He’d lost her, and he was inextricably tied to Tess now. God, his life had completely fallen apart. Everything he’d ever dreamed of was gone.
He opened his backpack and began the task of loading it with the various things he wanted to take with him. As he picked up a bundle of socks an object fell to the bed. He stared at it for a moment and then dropped everything else. He picked up the pendant and let it drape over his palm, touching it reverently with the tip of his finger. This was one of the first objects symbolizing his home planet that they had ever found. Liz had been there that day in Atherton’s home when Isabel found it, just another one of the times that Liz had laid herself on the line for him, expecting nothing in return.
He clutched the pendant in his hand and a thought occurred to him. He returned to his dresser and searched through his top dresser drawer until he found what he was looking for. A bittersweet smile crossed his face when his hand closed over it and he brought out the bottom half of the pendant, the piece Eddie had returned to Liz. He held the pendant in one hand and the broken fragment in the other and a decision formulated in his mind. He would give the pendant to Liz in hopes that maybe she would think about him, now and then. He would keep the broken fragment, to keep alive the dream that someday, maybe, they could find their way back to each other and reunite the two parts and make them whole again. He slipped the pendant into his pocket and finished the task of choosing which beloved possessions he would take with him, and which he would be forced to leave behind. His picture of Liz, in an intricate silver frame, was one of the first things he packed.
The vision flashed over Liz quickly, and with it all the thoughts and emotions that Max had felt. Confusion, regret, pain, and an overriding sense of loneliness. He was giving up everything that mattered to him the most, because he had a duty to fulfill, an obligation that he had no one to blame for but himself. He was going to a place he didn’t want to go, with someone he didn’t want to go with, but for him there was no choice. He had to live with what he had done.
“Liz?” Isabel said in apprehension as she watched the changing emotions on Liz’s face.
The vision changed to the familiar patio outside her bedroom window. Max stood next to her favorite chair and he stared down at the object in his hand and then reached into his pocket to retrieve the bottom portion. He held the two pieces together and a soft light glowed as they mended together, forming one solid piece, flawlessly repaired.
He put the pendant down on the table where he knew she would find it. It was his parting gift to her. The flash that he had inflicted on her earlier had sealed their fate and he knew they could never go back to what they had once had. He had hurt her too many times for the words ‘I’m sorry’ to have any meaning anymore. It was time to let her go, and let her find the life that she deserved.
He wandered around her rooftop, touching the various ornaments that decorated the comfortable space that she had created here. She loved the candles and the lights that glowed here, giving it such a warm and welcoming feel. He would miss coming here to see her. He would miss that tremble inside he always felt when he climbed up her balcony, in anticipation of seeing her or the rumble he would get in his stomach and the weakness he would feel in his knees when he looked through her window and her eyes would meet his.
He wasn’t sure how he could survive without her, but he had to let her go, no matter how much it killed him inside. He needed to let her go, for her sake, so that she could be free to live her life, and find someone who would treat her right, the way she deserved to be treated. He’d caused her so much heartache and so much pain, maybe someone out there could make her dreams come true and give her a happy life.
He paused in front of her window, the window he’d sat at so many times, talking to her late into the night sometimes, baring his hopes and his fears . . . and his soul. He rested his forehead against the frame of the window and looked into her room. This place felt more like home to him than his own house, and he knew the reason why. He’d always known it. Ever since the first time he laid eyes on her. She was the one for him, and where ever she was, that’s where he belonged. But he’d ruined everything and now he was never going to have that life. He was never going to have her.
His vision blurred and a tear spilled down his cheek as he came to terms with the choices he had made, and how those choices had brought them to this point. Even when he had been ready to leave Earth, to go back to his home world with Tess in order that his son could live, a part of him had still been holding on to the dream that he could come back and make things right with Liz. He would never be able to love anyone else the way he loved her. Not even close. She meant everything to him.
He had told her that once, and it was still true today. Liz was his everything and that’s why he had to let her go. He loved her too much to keep hurting her this way. It wasn’t fair to make her suffer because of his mistakes. He turned from her room and through his tears he blindly made his way to the ladder. His hand closed over the railing and he paused, feeling his resolve start to crumble. The thought of never touching her, never kissing her, never seeing her again was tearing him apart inside, but he had to do this for her. She’d told him once that if he really loved her, he would let her go. He closed his eyes and silently said a final goodbye, and then climbed over the wall and descended to the street below.
Liz trembled as the vision swept over her and she was drowning in his emotions. He’d given up all hope. She felt Isabel clutch her hand even tighter and she forced herself to concentrate, the way she had that night when Max had been in New York. The vision faded and she felt herself floating, being drawn across space, her mind reaching out trying to find him.
Liz stumbled along the pebbly surface of the Vasquez Rocks, feeling the heat beating down on her. The air was heavy and silent, with nary a breeze nor a sound to break the stillness. It was an oppressive feeling and a sense of doom hovered around her, threatening to suffocate her. She turned in a circle, searching for him and seeing nothing but the desert stretching into the distance around her. Her eyes were drawn to the cliffs and her sense of foreboding grew dramatically.
She raced up the sparsely traveled cliffside with her heart hammering in her chest, praying that she had gotten here in time. As she neared the entrance to the cavern she paused, staring at the opening in the rock face. It should have been closed, sealed off from prying eyes. Was it open because strangers had found this place? Had the FBI or whatever secret government organization tracked these things been alerted by the events that had happened here? Was this a trap just waiting for its victim to walk inside?
An unease feeling settled over her and she looked closely at her surroundings. The damage to the cliff face that she had seen on that fateful day was no longer evident. They had run for cover as the Granilith prepared for takeoff and they had seen the cliff crumble and disintegrate. To look at it now, it appeared whole and undamaged.
With trepidation, Liz stepped through the entrance into the pod chamber and let her eyes adjust to the dim interior. The silence around her was deafening, a quiet so complete that Liz was certain nothing had survived here. The desert teamed with life, an abundance of creatures that had adapted to the heat and the dryness and thrived here, but not in this place. Not anymore. This was a place of the dead.
She stepped further into the chamber and the pods came into view. They had collapsed in on themselves, the result of some violent upheaval, but they hadn’t been destroyed. She had been certain that everything would have been annihilated, wiped off the face of the earth that day after watching the destruction left in the wake of the Granilith leaving, but it hadn’t been. The chamber still existed. What else lay inside these walls?
She moved past the pods and deeper into the chamber. The sound of her footfalls was the only noise that penetrated the silence and tracked her movements as she made her way to the chamber that housed the Granilith. She hesitated as she drew near the opening. Through the entryway she could see the room was filled with light. What could that mean? Why would that room, hidden deep within the walls of this cavern, be illuminated that way?
Liz stepped forward and through the doorway, scared for what she might see, but unable to turn away. Where the Granilith had once stood the space was now empty, with nothing to show of the powerful machine that had once stood here. The entire room was barren as her eyes swept from the left to the right and then her breath caught in her throat.
Up against the wall on her far right, lay the one sight that she was dreading she would see. There, sitting with his back to the wall and his legs stretched out at odd angles before him sat Max, with his head lolling to the side. She froze as she looked at him and then tentatively stepped towards him, calling out to him softly.
“Max? Max, can you hear me?” Liz gingerly walked closer to him and a sense of apprehension closed over her. Something was wrong. Terribly wrong. He didn’t answer, couldn’t answer, and as she neared him his unseeing eyes left no doubt in her mind. A mournful sound tore from her throat as she knelt before him and cried, “Oh God, no. Oh Max . . . Nooooooo . . .”
|posted on 14-Sep-2001 7:08:52 PM|
Isabel moved from the chair and sat next to Liz on the bed, watching her as she tried to connect to Max. Liz had done it before, and saved her brother’s life. Could she do it again? Was their bond strong enough to let Liz reach out with her mind and connect to him so they could find out where he was? She heard a strangled cry come from deep in Liz’s throat and a chill went up Isabel’s spine.
“Nooooo,” Liz sobbed and her fingers dug into Isabel’s hand. “Oh my God . . . No. Wake up Max. Please . . . wake up . . .”
“Liz?” Isabel cried out in fear. “LIZ! Talk to me. Tell me what’s happening . . .”
Liz crouched in front of Max and she cupped his face between her hands, but she was only a projection and she had no physical presence. She couldn’t touch him or move him or influence him physically in any way. His eyes stared vacantly ahead of him, unseeing, unfocused and if it hadn’t been for the slow rise and fall of his chest as he breathed, she could have sworn he was dead.
“Max, can you hear me?” Liz tried to get through to him. “Max, please, you have to hear me. Wake up. Wake up Max. You have to come back to me.”
Could he hear her, she wondered? In New York, he hadn’t been able to hear what she said. How was she going to get through to him if he couldn’t hear her or feel her and it was obvious by the glazed look in his eyes that he couldn’t see her? There was nothing she could do to reach him and she was dreading that it might already be too late.
“Liz,” Isabel shouted and shook her shoulders.
Liz opened her eyes and looked around wildly before focusing on Isabel. “We have to go,” she cried out. “Now!” She bolted from the bed and ran from the room with Isabel hot on her heels.
“Liz! What is it? What did you see?” Isabel demanded as she ran to keep up.
Liz tore down the stairs and raced through the Crashdown, on her way to find Michael and Maria. She burst through the front doors of the café and she almost collided with Kyle who was headed inside.
“Liz? Liz! What’s wrong now?” Kyle shouted as she ran past him. He watched her dart through traffic, headed toward the UFO Center and his eyebrows knitted together in a frown. She must be headed over to see Max the Moron. What kind of trouble had he gotten himself into this time? Had he locked himself in the john and couldn’t figure out how to get out? Maybe the toilet was overflowing and the bathroom was filling up with water and he was going to drown and wow, a guy could always hope. Isabel raced past him, chasing after Liz and his frown deepened. What the fuck was going on?
“Maria! Michael!” Liz called out, ignoring the tourists that turned to stare at her. Maria poked her head around a corner and Liz ran to her, relieved to see that Michael was with her. “We have to leave now. I know where Max is, and he’s in trouble. Come on! We have to hurry.”
“Where?” Michael demanded. Liz had turned around and was headed toward the exit at a fast clip and they followed her quickly. “Where are we going?” Michael demanded as they ran through the doors to the outside and headed for the Jetta.
“Keys!” Liz shouted as she wrenched open the driver’s door. “We’re going to the pod chamber.” Michael looked at her in surprise and then reached into his pocket. He tossed her the keys and she caught them cleanly in mid air and climbed behind the steering wheel. Michael, Maria and Isabel piled into the car and Liz gunned the engine before putting it in gear and flooring it. The tires spun, shooting loose gravel out behind the wheels and then amidst the squeal of rubber on the pavement, they shot into traffic on their way out of Roswell.
Kyle stared at the four of them like they had all gone crazy, and maybe they had. This last year had been totally insane, and like it or not, he was smack in the middle of all the bullshit. He had been ever since Max healed a bullet hole in his chest and made him a part of the ‘I know an alien club’, and there was no way to pretend that he wasn’t. He ran for his car and chased after the Jetta with a sense of alarm and apprehension, and knowing that if it involved aliens, it probably wasn’t going to be good.
* * * * *
Liz concentrated on the road in front of her and tried not to give in to her fears about Max. What if she’d realized too late that he was in trouble? What if his mind had been so damaged, just like Alex, that there was no saving him? It had destroyed her to lose Alex, but if she were to lose Max . . . dear God, how could she live if that happened? If Max died, how could she go on? He had entrusted her to find the truth, given her his thoughts and his memories so that she could save him. What if his faith in her wasn’t warranted? What if she’d figured it out, only too late to save his life?
“Liz,” Isabel said breaking the silence in the car. “You still haven’t told us what you think Tess did to Max. What did you see in the vision Max gave you that made you think he and Tess didn’t really, you know . . . sleep together that night?”
Liz turned to look at the girl beside her in the front passenger seat and shook her head slightly. “That’s not what I said, Isabel.” She turned back to concentrate on the road and then continued. “I don’t know what happened between Max and Tess. Maybe he did sleep with her. Maybe he did get her pregnant. I just don’t know. All I do know is that whatever happened, didn’t happen the way he remembers.”
“You mean you think Tess was mindwarping Max?” Maria asked.
“Mindwarping him, manipulating him, I don’t know what she did, but I think she’d been trying to control him ever since she first came to Roswell,” Liz said with a certainty. “She had an agenda right from the beginning.”
“You never did trust her, Liz,” Isabel said. “You were right all along.”
Liz glanced at Isabel again, but her words held no consolation. Yes, she’d been proven right, that Tess was untrustworthy. But what difference did it make to be proven right, if Max ended up paying the ultimate price?
“Last year, after Tess came to town, Max told me that he thought she was doing something to him,” Michael said from the back seat with his arm around Maria. “She was making him see things that made him uncomfortable, and that night that he kissed her in the rain outside the Crashdown, the night you saw him Liz, he told me that it was like he had no control over it. He said it was like his mind was shouting no, but his body wasn’t doing what he told it to. But then so many things started happening.”
“You’re right, Michael,” Isabel nodded in agreement. “Max got captured by the FBI, and then when we finally got him out of that awful place we heard that message from our mother that shocked us all, and then things just kept snowballing. One thing after another, Whittaker and Nicholas and the rest of the skins and then our duplicates showing up and throughout it all, Tess had backed off and pretended to be just one of us, waiting for the right time to sink her claws into Max. How could we all have been so blind?”
“We can’t worry about who is to blame,” Liz interjected. “I pushed Max away from me at a time when he needed me the most. Isabel, you stopped supporting him and Michael constantly fought against him. It’s no wonder he felt all alone and fell victim to her. There’s blame enough to go around for us all.”
“No,” Maria said from the safety of Michael’s arms. “Let’s put the blame right where it belongs. Tess did this. She manipulated Max from the moment she came to town, making him see things and trying to convince him that he belonged with her. When that didn’t work, she backed off and pretended she was okay with just being one of the group. The whole time she was working in the background, driving a wedge between us all, isolating him from the rest of us. Some of the things he said, and the way he acted, it just wasn’t Max. We should have seen it, but we didn’t, and I think we can blame her for that too. Max wasn’t the only one she was manipulating. She admitted she killed Alex, and we know she mindwarped Kyle too because he helped her removed Alex’s body from the house and he thought it was just luggage. That bitch was just bad news from the moment she arrived in town.”
“How did you figure it out, Liz?” Isabel asked. “None of us saw anything wrong with Max, other than his crappy behavior lately. How do you know Tess did this to him?”
“It has to do with the vision that Max kept sending me, the one of him and Tess in the observatory,” Liz said as she drove deeper into the desert. “That night, while I was waiting for Maria to pick me up at the airport after I found out Alex had never gone to Sweden, a storm was rolling in. By the time we got home it was pouring down rain and it had developed into a huge thunder and lightning storm. It rained all night long and didn’t stop until the next morning. Normally the observatory would be open to the public at night for stargazing, and sometimes they don’t close until the wee hours of the morning, but with a storm like that, the observatory was closed for the night. There’s nothing to see when the sky is covered in clouds.”
“When I first started getting the vision from Max I didn’t want to think about what they did there, and why he’d do it in a place like that. It didn’t seem like something Max would do, but a lot things he’d done lately seemed, well, not Max. I tried to block it out but I kept seeing it over and over, nearly every time Max touched me. I couldn’t escape it. But still, I didn’t put the two together until I started getting the dreams. Alex kept coming to me telling me to ‘Wake him up’ and-”
“Alex came to you, in your dreams?” Isabel said with a tremor in her voice.
“Yes,” Liz said and covered her friend’s hand with her own. “My subconscious mind used his image to make the correlation between what happened to him and what was going to happen to Max if I didn’t stop it in time. The last dream I got wasn’t really a dream at all. I think it was Max’s memory of what really happened that night, or at least part of it. They were in the observatory, late at night, and it was storming out. Lightning kept illumination the inside of the building and thunder roared overhead, just like the night I was going to leave to go to Sweden. Tess wanted Max to make love to her, but he said no. She tried to convince him that they belonged together and she could make him forget all about me, and he turned her down. When he tried to leave, she stopped him. She said she wouldn’t let him go. I don’t know what happened next, but whatever it was, it wasn’t his choice. Maybe she mindwarped him into just thinking they had made love that night, or maybe she mindraped him and forced him to do it. I don’t know.”
“So Max subconsciously sent you his memories, so that you would know what really happened,” Maria said, amazed at the idea that Max could do that. “When?” she asked mystified. “When could he have done that?”
Liz looked in the rearview mirror and met Maria’s questioning gaze. “The night before they were going to leave, when Max and I returned from Las Cruces, he gave me the pendant to remember him by and then he kissed me goodbye. I think he did it then. It was the first time we had kissed in, well, months and when he did I felt something pass between us, but at the time I was in so much pain that I didn’t let myself question what it was.”
“So how did you put it all together, Liz?” Michael asked. He covered Maria’s hand with his, glad that they had never gone through anything like this.
“It was the flash that Max kept giving me,” Liz as she slowed the car and they left the freeway, traveling on the dirt road that would take them to the pod chamber. “That flash is what Max remembers happening, but it couldn’t have. In his flash, he wakes up on the floor of the observatory, and Tess is curled up next to him. When he turns his head to look at her, I can see all around the room. It was a bright and sunny morning, just like it really was that day. The storm passed through just after dawn and left beautiful skies in its wake. But in the flash that Max gives me, the roof of the observatory is wide open and the telescope is pointing at the sky. If they had spent the night there with the roof open all night long, with the amount of rain that fell that night they would have been flooded out of the place. I think the whole thing was staged. Tess did something to his mind that night and maybe to his body too, and then she arranged it to look like they had had an intimate encounter.”
“Are you sure about this Liz?” Michael frowned, wondering if she was just trying to find any plausible reason to believe Max wouldn’t have done that willingly.
“Michael,” Liz said looking back at him in the rearview mirror. “Do you really think Max had an hour long orgasm?”
“Good point,” Michael capitulated and looked knowingly at Maria.
“Somebody’s following us,” Liz said suddenly and they could all hear the tension in her voice.
“How do you know?” Michael said on edge but unable to see anything through the dust billowing behind the car.
“I can see another dust cloud behind us,” she said looking at the side mirror.
“Stop the car,” Michael demanded. Liz hit the break hard and Michael jumped out before it even came to a stop. “Now GO!”
“Michael NO!” Maria cried out as Liz hit the gas and the car picked up speed again. “Michael, come back here!” she shouted but his figure was already obscured by the dust the tires kicked into the air. “Liz, let me out!”
“No, you stay with us,” Isabel insisted. “Michael knows what he’s doing.”
“Damn you Michael,” Maria whispered as she looked out the back window. “If you get yourself killed I’m never speaking to you again!”
* * * * *
Kyle hung back from the Jetta so they wouldn’t see him, but he wasn’t worried about losing them. He knew where they were going. As soon as they had headed out on this stretch of highway, he knew. They were going to the pod chamber.
Liz was driving like a crazy person, way too fast for this terrain. It must have something to do with Max, Kyle lamented. He made her act crazy, putting herself on the line for him all the time. Even with the way he’d ripped her heart out and stomped all over it, she still couldn’t let him go. What was it about him that bewitched her so?
God damn Max Evans, Kyle allowed himself to wallow in his dislike for the guy. He’d stolen Liz from him and then once he had her he didn’t want her anymore. He’d taken that whole ‘step back’ thing last year and broken her heart for the first time. He should have wrung his neck right then and there, and then he could have prevented all this misery. But he hadn’t and then they got back together, just in time for Tess to come along and tear Liz’s heart out again. It just wasn’t right what Liz had suffered because of Max.
He’d felt a sense of satisfaction when he’d seen the look on Evans face outside of Liz’s window that night, when they were laying in her bed together. He’d been more than happy to pretend, to make it look like they were lovers, but then he’d felt guilty afterwards, but not because of Evans. He’d felt guilty because it was obvious how devastated Liz was by what had happened.
Kyle knew he shouldn’t harbor this resentment of Max Evans, after all, the guy had saved his life. Of course, it was because of Evans he got shot in the first place. Jesus. Why hadn’t Max just flown home with that lying little whore of his and made everyone happy? Well, not everyone. Kivar would have killed Max’s scrawny little ass, and that would have made Kyle happy-
Kyle’s rambling thoughts were interrupted when something slammed into the front of his car and he came to an abrupt halt. He lurched forward and the air bag went off, billowing all around him. His door was wrenched open and he felt a hand grab him around his upper arm and yank him from the car.
“What the fuck do you think you’re doing here?” Michael shouted into Kyle’s face. He’d used a bolt of energy to stop Kyle’s car and the entire front end had been smashed in.
The sound of water hitting hot metal filled the air and steam hung around then. Kyle jerked his arm free and stared at the front of his car. “What the fuck did you do?” he hissed in disbelief. The world wasn’t safe with these fucking aliens in it. “Jesus Christ, man! You wrecked my fucking car!”
“What the hell are you doing out here?” Michael demanded.
“I was following you, ya dipshit. I saw Liz in town and knew she was upset so I followed you guys to make sure she and Maria don’t suffer any more crap because of you three . . . Royal Rejects. Just what the hell is going on?”
“Liz thinks Max is dying, just like Alex did,” Michael said in a softer voice and released Kyle’s arm.
“Oh shit,” Kyle said, feeling himself sucked once again into the alien abyss. Damn that Max Evans.
|posted on 14-Sep-2001 7:11:55 PM|
The back of the Jetta fishtailed as Liz slammed on the breaks and the three girls flew out of the car. They raced up the cliffside and Liz was the first to rush inside, past the collapsed pods to the entryway into the Granilith chamber. Everything appeared just like the vision she’d had when she’d tried to reach Max back in her room. She turned her head to the right and there he was, just like she’d seen him before. His back was to the wall and he was sitting on the ground. His dark green t-shirt was hiked up in the back, as if he had slid down the wall as he sank to the floor. One hand rested palm up in his lap and the other hand lay on the ground at his side. One denim clad leg jutted out in front of him and the other was bent awkwardly at the knee. His head tilted to the side and his open eyes stared vacantly at nothing.
“Max!” she shouted and tore across the room. “Oh my God, Max!” She fell to her knees in front of him and cupped his face with her hands. “Max, can you hear me? Max! Wake up, Max. Please, you have to wake up.” His empty eyes stared in front of him and it was obvious that he was not aware of anything happening around him.
“Max, please talk to me,” Liz begged. His unfocused eyes couldn’t see her and a sob caught in her throat. Her fingers stroked through his hair and then she pulled him close to her, cradling his head against her breast and she cried softly into his ear, “I love you, Max. Please don’t leave me.”
“Liz, let me see him,” Isabel pleaded. She was sitting on the hard floor on the other side of her brother, and Liz gently released him. It was obvious by looking at the emptiness in his eyes that something terrible had happened to him. She shuddered as a horrifying question invaded her mind. Was there even a ‘Max’ left inside him to try to save? Isabel placed her hands on either side of his temples and tried the only thing she knew how to do.
Her hands hovered at his temples and she tried to heal him, but this was a power that wasn’t her forte. Max was the healer, not her, but he couldn’t heal himself. Not this time. She concentrated hard, but to no avail. His breathing was becoming erratic and she was afraid she could feel him slipping away. “I’m not good at this!” Isabel shouted in frustration.
“Isabel, we need something more powerful,” Liz cried. “This isn’t working!”
“Oh shit,” Kyle mumbled from the doorway as he stepped into the chamber. Liz turned to look at him with tears streaming down her face and he felt his resentment for Max crumbling. This girlfriend stealing, heart breaking, son of a bitch alien had created havoc all around him, but Kyle didn’t want him to die. He didn’t understand why, but Liz wanted Max, and needed him, and God help her, she loved him. Just like Maria loved that dipshit Michael.
“It’s not working Michael,” Liz called out to him. He was hovering in the doorway right behind Kyle and he didn’t know what to do. His healing skills were almost non-existent. There was nothing he could do to bring Max back to the world of the living.
He watched Liz rise to her feet and make her way to him, her eyes never leaving his face. She came to a stop before him and he almost cowered under the onslaught of her gaze. She was one mighty presence to deal with when she was upset. “Where are they Michael? The healing stones.”
Michael looked beyond her to Max, sensing that Isabel was having no luck trying to heal him. He focused again on Liz and said, “You want to try to use-”
“We need them now if we’re ever going to bring Max back,” Liz interrupted him. There wasn’t time for small talk or idle chatter. Didn’t he understand that?
He stared at her and it didn’t take him long to assess the situation. Max’s mind had gone someplace they couldn’t reach. The only way to bring him back was with the healing stones, and the power that they contained.
“Tell me where they are, Michael,” Liz demanded, leaving no room for discussion.
He glanced at Isabel once more, knowing that her efforts were futile and then he looked back at the small girl in front of him. By the look on her face, if he didn’t answer her soon, she was going to kick his ass. And she could probably do it too, even though she was five foot nothing and he was double her body weight, “I’ll go get ‘em,” he said and abruptly left the chamber.
“What the hell are healing stones?” Kyle asked. This shit just kept getting weirder and weirder.
“There’s no time to explain,” Liz said shaking her head. “Just believe me when I say that the stones are the only chance we have of saving Max.”
“Why do you do it Liz?” Kyle asked as she started to turn away. “After all that he’s done to you, why are you still here? Why are you still trying to save his ass?”
Liz stopped in her tracks and turned back to him. The answer was so obvious to her, did Kyle really need her to spell it out? It was irrevocable and undeniable. Her eyes held his steadily as she told him the plain and simple truth. “I love him Kyle.”
* * * * *
Liz knelt beside Max and sensed they were almost out of time. His body had been moved away from the wall by Michael and Kyle and he now lay stretched out on the floor with his eyes closed. She cupped his face between her hands and she had to blink back her tears to see his features. His skin had taken on a pale and waxy appearance, almost like a death mask already. His body trembled from some inner conflict and an unearthly sheen was covering his exposed skin.
“Liz,” Isabel said softly into her ear, “get up. We need to do this now.”
Liz nodded her understanding and she rose to her feet. She picked up the bag that Michael had retrieved from its hiding place in the outer chamber and she reached inside. The stones were warm to the touch and as she pulled one free it pulsated in her hand. The sensation was rhythmic and familiar and she soon realized what it was. The stones were pulsating in sync with Max’s heart rate.
Michael, Isabel, Maria and Kyle were standing in a circle around Max and she gave each one of them a stone. Michael and Isabel took theirs without question. Maria took hers and gave Liz a supportive look. They’d done this once before and saved Michael’s life. They could do it again. Liz moved to Kyle, who took his stone from her outstretched hand with some trepidation. He hadn’t joined this alien club willingly, and he was still coming to terms with all the crazy shit they expected out of him.
“Thank you Kyle,” Liz said quietly to him as she gave him the stone. “You’re energy is just as important as the rest of ours. Max changed us, and made us something more than we used to be. Embrace it Kyle. Don’t fight it. He gave us a gift. Now its time to return the favor.”
“I understand, Liz,” Kyle said so that only she could hear. “I’m not angry with him anymore. In fact, I envy him, but I’m not mad at him.”
“Why do you envy him?” she asked as they both looked down at his body lying in the chamber floor. She could see nothing enviable in the turn his life had taken this past year.
“I envy him because he has you,” Kyle answered. “I just hope that when this is over, the son of a bitch realizes what you’ve sacrificed for him. Is he really worth it Liz?”
“Yes, Kyle,” Liz answered without hesitation. “The answer is a resounding ‘Yes’.
They stood in a circle around Max with the stones cupped in their hands. Liz stood at his feet and looked at the others. They were all staring at her, waiting for her to tell them what to do. How odd, she thought, that they would look to her to lead them through an alien ritual. Liz let her eyes sweep around them, first to Maria on her left and then to Michael who stood next to her. Isabel was directly across from him and Kyle looked uncomfortably out of place on Liz’s right.
She looked at each of them in turn and then she broke the silence. “Close your eyes and open your minds. Let your energy flow through the stones. Don’t think. Just feel.”
Kyle looked at the faces around him. They seemed so sure of what they were doing, even Maria. Her eyes were closed with her head bent forward and she looked so confident with what they were trying to do. And just what was that? What the hell were these stones supposed to do? It pulsed in his hand like a living thing and the warmth it emitted was unnatural. Or at least unnatural in Earthly terms. He jumped when he felt her hand touch his arm and he turned his eyes to look at Liz.
“It’s okay, Kyle,” she said soothingly. “Just relax. You can do this. Just open your mind . . .”
“Right,” Kyle said nervously. “Relax.” He took a deep breath and closed his eyes and shut out everything except the feel of the stone in his hand.
The group stood around Max, three humans and two aliens, united in a common cause. Their eyes were closed and their heads were bowed forward with the stones cupped in their hands before them. The silence in the room was replaced by a low humming sound and the stones began to glow. Their normal amber color faded away and was replaced by a blue radiance. The energy from their bodies flowed through the stones and arched up into the air, taking on a physical form. Streaming blue tendrils rose from the stones and weaved through the air above Max, casting his face in a blue hue. One by one, the tendrils hovered over him and then dove at his face, penetrating his forehead.
As the tendril from Maria’s stone entered his brain, she got a flash . . .
Maria was in the park, playing with Liz and they were young, just girls no older than eight or nine. Max was cutting through the park on his way home with his hands in his front pockets. His eyes were glued to the ground in front of him until he heard the sound of her laughter. His pace faltered and he looked up, searching the park until he found her. Her laughter was musical and her smile was brighter than sunshine. He came to a stop behind a large oak tree and watched the two of them as they played. He wished he had the courage to walk up to them, to join in their fun, but instead he watched from his hiding place behind the tree.
“Someone’s watching you Liz,” Maria teased.
“What?” she said and looked up at her friend. “Who?”
“Who else?” Maria answered. “Max Evans, of course.”
Liz looked around quickly and when Maria pointed in his direction, she finally saw him. He was stooped over, tying his shoe, and she said, “He’s not looking at me-”and then the words froze on her lips when his eyes looked up and met hers. He looked away quickly and then hurried on his way, but Liz had seen the intensity in his gaze.
“You’re going to marry him someday,” Maria told her friend.
“I am not,” Liz denied hotly but she couldn’t take her eyes off him as he ran through the park and disappeared from view.
“Are too,” Maria insisted.
“Am not,” Liz said with less conviction as she thought about the look she’d seen in his eyes.
“Are too!” Maria smiled.
A series of flashes followed, moments from their lives. Lunches in the Crashdown and snacks after school. Classes they had shared together and then more recent events. Comforting Max when he found out Liz was going to Florida for the summer. Covering for Liz when she returned. The breakup. The funeral. The betrayal by Tess. All these things flashed from her mind to Max through the link.
Michael was in the midst of his own flash . . .
Max sat in the lunchroom next to his sister and opened his sack lunch. He pulled out the contents but he wasn’t paying attention to his food. He was staring at the new boy sitting all alone two tables over.
“Max, are you listening to me?” Isabel huffed. “Can you take your mind off Liz Parker for just one minute and listen to what I have to say?”
“What?” Max said turning to look at her. “What makes you think I was thinking about Liz?”
Isabel rolled her eyes and groaned. “You’re always thinking about that girl, that’s why!”
“No, Isabel, I was looking at that kid over there. The new guy. There’s something familiar about him.” He rose from the bench and Isabel grabbed his arm.
“What are you going to do?” she asked feeling scared.
“I’m gonna go talk to him,” Max said, certain it was the right thing to do.
“Max, be careful,” she cautioned. “It’s just you and me, remember?”
“Isabel,” Max said looking down at her. “I think he’s one of us.” She watched him as he moved across the lunchroom and stopped in front of the new boy.
“Hi,” Max said and the boy looked up at him from his sandwich. “My name’s Max. Max Evans.”
“What do you want?” he asked suspiciously.
“I was eating lunch with my sister, over there,” Max said pointing back at Isabel, “and I thought you might like to come over and eat with us.”
“Why would I want to do that?” he said with hostility.
“Because . . . because I think we have a lot in common,” Max said and touched the boy lightly on the shoulder. It was a simple gesture, a gesture of friendship, and with that touch came the knowledge that they were kindred souls, born from the same unearthly womb.
The hostility on the boy’s face was replaced by a look of shock and surprise. He wasn’t alone anymore. “I’m Michael. Michael Guerin.”
More images flashed before him, a series of memories they had shared. Searching the desert for signs of where they came from and why they were here, and what they really were. Nights spent talking in the dark, Max on his bed and Michael lying on a sleeping bag on his bedroom floor. Moments of time when they’d argued, when they’d laughed, when they’d just horsed around. Michael and Max’s minds were joined, through the link.
Across from Michael, Isabel trembled as the flashes swept through her . . .
“Max, what are you doing out here?” Isabel asked from the doorway.
“Oh, nothing,” Max answered and tried to hide what he was holding in his hand. He was sitting on the ground with only the moonlight illuminating the back yard.
“Something,” she insisted and sat down on the ground next to him. “What is that?”
“What’s what?” he tried to pretend he didn’t know what she was talking about.
“What’s that, in your hand?” She reached over and grabbed him and pried his fingers open.
“Stop it Isabel!” he shouted and tried to pull his hand free but she was strong for a girl. They wrestled back and forth and then the object in his hand dropped onto the ground. Isabel lunged for it and Max shouted, “Give it back!”
“What is this?” Isabel looked at it with wide eyes, “Is it a present, for me?”
“No, it’s not for you,” Max huffed and grabbed it back from her. He looked down at the hair clip in his hand and closed his fingers around it.
“Where’d you get it?” Isabel asked suspiciously.
“I made it,” Max answered and looked at his sister. He was glad it was too dark for her to see him blush.
“Oh, I get it,” Isabel exclaimed. “It’s Lizzy Parker’s tenth birthday tomorrow and you want to give her a present.”
Max dropped his eyes back down to his hand and opened his fingers, looking at the hair clip again. His cheeks were hot and he knew they were beat red. “Well . . .”
“Well what Max?” When he didn’t answer she said softly, “You can’t give it to her. You know that, right?”
He looked at her sharply and she was shaking her head as she continued, “It’s only you, and me, and Michael. We can’t get close to anyone else.”
“But . . .” Max started to say, feeling an unhappy weight settle onto him.
“Someday we’re going to go home,” Isabel said and her eyes rose up to the stars. “Up there . . . Somewhere . . . and nobody here can ever know about us.”
Max followed her gaze and the weight of his loneliness crushed in on him. His eyes focused on one particular star and he said haltingly, “Maybe . . . maybe she’d come with me . . .”
The flash shifted and changed, rapidly spanning the days and months and years of their lives together. Days spent playing in the park, dinner with their parents, vacations to distant shores. All the while, hiding from the world, never really joining the living. Always waiting and watching the world go by, without them.
Kyle swayed slightly, as visions of his own filled his mind . . .
“Here,” Kyle reached into his coat pocket and pulled the flask free. He stumbled to a stop and closed one eye so that he wouldn’t keep seeing double Max’s. Wasn’t one enough? Which one was the real Max, the one he could see out of his left eye, or the one when he used his right? He closed one eye, and then the other, back and forth, left and right. He almost lost his balance and Max grabbed him by the arm to steady him.
“You’re drunk,” Max giggled.
“No shit,” Kyle answered and shoved the flask against Max’s chest. “Here, have another swig.”
“I don’t think so,” he said pushing it back toward Kyle.
“Why not?” Kyle slurred.
“Cause I’m drunk too,” Max laughed and fell against Kyle’s chest.
Kyle pushed him back yelling, “Get off me, you pansy!”
“I’m not a pansy.” Max staggered back to Kyle and drilled him in the chest with his index finger. “I. Am. Not. A. Pansy.”
“Prove it.” He tried to push Max’s finger away but he missed. “Have you ever done it with a girl?”
“No,” Max admitted, “but I want to.” He tried to shove his hands in his pants pockets, but he couldn’t find them. He looked down to try to see where they went. Oh. There they were. Good. His pockets were still in his pants. Why did he want his pockets again?
“Let me guess . . .” Kyle said and chewed his lower lip in concentration. They both almost lost their balance when they stepped down from the curb and Kyle had to help Max back up to the sidewalk when they reached the other side of the street. “What about Amanda Wilson?” Kyle asked and his finger circled the air in front of Max’s face. “Do you want to do her?”
“Nope,” Max shook his head. He was trying to follow the movements of Kyle’s finger and he almost fell over.
“What? Have you seen the jugs on her?” Kyle said in disbelief. He held his hands out in front of his chest to emphasize his point.
“Oh, yeah,” Max nodded appreciatively.
“Don’t you just want to grab ‘em and rub your face in ‘em when she walks by?” Kyle sighed with a silly grin on his face.
“Nope,” Max told him honestly.
“What?” Kyle couldn’t believe it. “Not a breast man, huh? Well, how ‘bout Megan Connors? Have you seen the ass on her?” They continued to stumble down the sidewalk, occasionally bumping their shoulders together as they tried to walk a straight line.
“She doesn’t do it for me,” Max said in all seriousness. “She’s a blonde. I’m not attracted to blondes.”
“But Man! What about her ass?” Kyle insisted.
“Well, she does have a nice ass, I’ll grant you that . . . but-”
“But it’s the wrong ass, huh?” Kyle said knowingly.
“Yeah,” Max said and tried to focus on Kyle’s face. Was his nose always that big, or was it just because he was looking at it from this angle . . .
“If you had your choice of all the girls in school, who would you pick?” Kyle asked. He came to a stop in the middle of the sidewalk and waited for his answer.
“That’s an easy choice.” Max felt giddy just thinking about it.
“Liz,” Kyle answered for him with a smirk.
Max’s smile turned into a huge grin and he sighed deeply. His eyes were drawn past Kyle to the display window of the furniture store they were passing. A large four-poster bed filled the space and Max took a step closer to it.
“Man, you’re so predictable,” Kyle admonished. “Of all the girls at school you’d choose Liz? Why?”
“She’s my dreamgirl,” Max said staring at he bed. The covers were pulled back and the silk sheets looked inviting. There was a picture on the wall of a south sea paradise and the motif in the display window was of the sand, and the sea, and the shore. Kyle looked around with a frown, wondering why he could hear the sound of seagulls on the night air.
An image started to coalesce on the bed and Max pressed his nose to the window. His palm splayed against the glass and the shape took substance and form. Liz smiled at him from the bed and his breath caught in his throat at the sight of her creamy skin. Her arms were bare, her shoulders were bare, her chest and stomach and navel were bare. Her hair fell forward, hiding her breasts and then she drew back the sheets, inviting him to join her.
Kyle looked at the sky, watching for errant seagulls and he stepped closer to the street. “What the hell? Do you hear that?” He turned back to Max but he wasn’t there. Movement caught his eye and he saw Max inside the display window staring at the bed.
“How the hell did you get in there?” Kyle shouted at Max. Rose petals were falling from the ceiling like snow and . . . was Max taking his shirt off? Why was Max standing in that display window, taking his shirt off? “Hey freak! What are you doing in there? Get your ass back out here before we both get in trouble!”
The vision of Liz faded and Max blinked as the falling rose petals brushed against his face. He sighed and looked down at Kyle standing on the sidewalk below him. Man he was short. How did Kyle get so short? He looked over at the bed once more, wishing Liz had really been there, waiting for him, with her arms open wide. He turned back to Kyle and said, “Hey! Isn’t that your Dad over there?” He pointed across the street and when Kyle swirled around to look in that direction Max quickly parted the window, jumped through, and sealed it closed behind him.
“I don’t see-” Kyle called up to the empty display window.
“Guess it wasn’t him,” Max said and Kyle nearly jumped out of his skin.
“How the fuck did you get out here so quick?” Kyle stared at him.
Max just shrugged and they set out again, down the sidewalk through the middle of downtown Roswell. “So,” Max started, “if you could have any girl at school, who would it be?”
Kyle thought about that for a moment and then with a wanton expression in his eyes, he said, “Your sister!”
The memory shifted and changed, replaced by more images and feelings and sensations. Kyle watching Max watching Liz. Liz talking to Kyle, but watching Max as he walked across the commons. A sense of satisfaction when he saw Max with a cracked lip and bruises on his face. Max knocking out an FBI agent and locking him in the closet. Max, hovering over him with his glowing hand on his chest. Max looking through Liz’s bedroom window and seeing them in her bed together. Max bringing Tess home in the morning and getting busted by his father.
One by one the blue tendrils pulled back from Max and retreated into the healing stones. Maria’s eyes blinked open, and then Michael’s and Isabel’s and finally Kyle’s. They each wobbled slightly on their feet feeling the drain of their energy and then they became aware of what was going on around them.
The chamber, so quiet when they had first entered it, was now a maelstrom of activity. The low background hum that they had heard before had built to a crescendo and the roar was almost deafening to their ears. An unnatural wind tore at their clothes and whipped their hair around them, but even these things couldn’t compare with the sight that left them all speechless.
Liz and Max were glowing . . .
|posted on 14-Sep-2001 7:17:01 PM|
Max’s still form lay on the floor, with Liz standing silently at his feet. Her head was bowed and her hair danced around her face in the swirling wind. Her eyes were closed, as were his, and a glowing light encompassed them both. The healing stone in her hand pulsed rhythmically and a tendril of light, sparkling and shimmering with color, arced through the air and penetrated Max’s forehead. A second beam of light arced toward Liz, and flowed over her, lighting her entire body.
In the air above them an image began to take form. The ghostly image of Max and Liz took shape, standing face to face before the backdrop of a million shining stars. His hands cupped her face and her fingertips rested at his temples. Their eyes bore into each other’s, unblinking, and a lifetimes worth of memories played out between them . . .
Mrs. Elmer stood in the front of the classroom announcing the birthday girl and Liz rose to her feet feeling the eyes of the entire class on her. She quietly made her way to the front of the room and when she turned around Max could see her shy smile.
“Happy tenth birthday, Liz,” Mrs. Elmer exclaimed. “Your Mother dropped off cupcakes earlier. Will you help pass them around?” Liz nodded and picked up one of the plates. She started on the side of the room closest to the door and gave out the frosting covered treats one by one. By the time she reached Max, there was only one cupcake left on her plate.
“Here you go,” Liz offered it to him.
“Thanks,” Max said and set it on his desk, never taking his eyes off her face.
Liz noticed that Mrs. Elmer was almost finished passing out the rest of them so she returned to her seat in front of Max. He stared at her long dark hair shining in the florescent lights of the schoolroom and he felt the familiar fluttering in his stomach. If only he could touch that hair. A few minutes later the bell rang to signal afternoon recess and Liz rose to her feet. A curious look crossed her face when she glanced at his desk and she asked him, “Aren’t you going to eat your cupcake?”
“What?” Max croaked out. She was talking to him. She was looking at him. What was he supposed to say? He knew he wanted to say something to her, but the words were all stuck in his throat.
“The cupcake,” Liz said pointing at the treat sitting untouched in the middle of his desk. “You don’t like cupcakes?”
He tried to get his mouth to open, to say something, anything, but nothing would come out. Liz shrugged her shoulders at his silence and she turned to head out the door to the playground. As she walked away, he bolted to his feet and shouted out, “I LOVE CUPCAKES!”
Everyone still left in the room turned to stare at him, including Liz. Her eyebrows were arched in surprise at his outburst, and a smile was slowly breaking over her face. He could hear the snickering of the other kids and his cheeks began to burn. Liz held his gaze as the other kids scurried out of the room until Maria grabbed her arm and pulled her along. She looked back at him once more as she passed through the door and then Max sank back down onto his chair.
He clutched his hands to his forehead and he mumbled, “I’m an idiot . . .”
A few minutes later he heard the soft tread of footsteps and looked up to see Liz walking in his direction. She stopped at her desk and reached inside, pulling out a jump rope. “Aren’t you coming outside?” Liz asked as she straightened up.
Max felt that flutter again in the pit of his stomach, but this time he was determined not to make a fool of himself. He rose to his feet and said, “Yeah.”
Yeah? That’s it? That’s all you can think of to say to her, he scolded himself. She turned away from him and headed toward the door again and he called out, “Wait. Please.”
Liz turned back to look at him with a curious look on her face and he swallowed hard. A small smile touched her lips and he felt his resolve strengthening. He reached into his desk and retrieved the small box that he had put there earlier. He held out the brightly colored package and he said, “Here.”
“What’s this?” Liz asked, taking it from his hand.
“It’s for you,” Max said quickly. “For your birthday.”
“You got me a birthday present?” she asked and he could hear the surprise in her voice.
He nodded his head and said, “I made, um . . . I saw . . . well, I thought you’d like it,” he finally got the words out.
She looked at him strangely and then she put the jump rope on her desk. She opened the package and lifted the lid on the small box and nestled in pink tissue paper she saw a beautiful silver hair clip. It was shaped like a V with intricately carved symbols along the edges. “Max, it’s beautiful!”
Beautiful? She thinks it’s beautiful? The flutter in his stomach had moved up to include his chest and he had to take a slow, deep breath just to keep from hyperventilating. He started grinning from ear to ear and he said, “I was hoping that you’d like it.”
“Like it?” she said as if that was the biggest understatement in the world. “I love it! Thank you.”
Impulsively she threw her arms around him and gave Max a hug. His breath caught in his throat and he thought he had died and gone to heaven. She had his arms pinned to his sides and he was afraid to move. What if he tried to hug her back? Would she get defensive and think he was getting fresh with her? He didn’t want to break the spell so he just closed his eyes and breathed in the scent of her hair and the soap she used on her skin. No, he decided, this wasn’t heaven. This was better than heaven.
“Thank you, Max,” she said again and the spell was broken when she took a step back from him. She took the clip out of the box and asked, “What do all these little symbols mean?”
“I don’t know,” Max shrugged. “Just decoration.” He knew they meant something, but he wasn’t sure what.
He watched her as she pulled her hair back and tried to fasten the clip at the back of her head. “Does that look straight?”
“You . . .” Max said, lifting his finger and pointing towards her neck. “You have a strand . . . a piece of loose hair . . .”
“Where?” she asked and tried to feel for it.
“Right there,” he said still pointing at her. “Just to the left . . . no, your other left . . . up a little . . . feel it?” He watched her try to tuck the errant strand of hair into the clip and then he offered, “Do you want some help . . .?”
“Can you just do it for me?” she asked and put the clip in his hand. “I can’t do it very good when I can’t see what I’m doing."
“Sure,” Max said and cringed inwardly when it came out two octaves too high. Liz turned her back to him and he looked at her dark hair cascading down her back. His fingers tentatively reached for her hair, and then he pulled them back, afraid that this was just a dream, and if he touched her he would wake up. He told himself not to be stupid and he reached for her again, letting his fingers slip into her hair. It felt just the way he always knew it would. Soft. Silky. Luxurious. He let his fingers brush against her skin as he gathered the hair away from her face and he momentarily closed his eyes at the myriad of sensations that he felt. He was touching Liz Parker, and this was the best day of his life so far.
She felt him secure the clip in her hair and she reached back to feel it with her fingers. She brushed against his hands and he pulled them back quickly. Boys! They always acted like girls were going to give them cooties! “Does it look okay?”
“It looks really nice,” Max beamed. You look really nice, he thought to himself.
“Thank you, Max,” Liz smiled at him and then she reached for the jump rope on her desk. “Do you want to come out and jump rope with me and Maria? We need someone to hold the other end.”
“Sure,” Max said and he could hardly contain his delight. He was floating on cloud nine. He took a step to follow her and he snatched the cupcake off his desk, peeling off the paper wrapper as he followed behind her. He shoved it in his mouth and licked the frosting from his fingers, and felt a sense of contentment settle over him. This really was the best day of his life!
* * *
“Hey, Liz,” Maria said placing her lunch tray down on the table and then plopping down beside her. “I sooooo hate my homeroom teacher. I was like five minutes late and she made me go to the office to get an excuse. Are you gonna eat that brownie? And then she kept picking on me for the whole period. Why couldn’t we be in the same homeroom together? I like your teacher. That would have been so cool to be together! Did you hear what Pam Troy did? She was caught smoking in the bathroom! Have you talked to Alex today? He’s thinking of forming a band. Maybe he’d let me sing in it. What do you think? We could become rich and fam . . .”
Liz smiled as her best friend rattled on. She was wondering if Maria was going to take a breath when Max Evans walked into the lunchroom. She watched the way he moved with his backpack slung over one shoulder and she suddenly wasn’t hungry anymore. In fact, her stomach was fluttering uncomfortably now. He crossed the room and took a seat next to that strange Michael guy. She wondered why they were such good friends. They didn’t seem to have anything in common.
“Are you listening to me?” Maria asked.
“Of course I’m listening.” Liz tore her eyes away from Max and told herself to quit dreaming. Someone as gorgeous as him was never going to look at a geeky girl like her. “Alex wants to start a band, huh? Can I be your groupie?”
Across the room Michael watched Max sit down and said, “School sucks.”
“Well you only have six more years to go,” Max needled him.
“I’m never gonna make it,” Michael whined.
“Why? School’s okay.” His eyes swept the room knowing she was here somewhere. He could feel her. He always knew when she was nearby. The sound of her laughter reached his ears and then he saw her. She was sitting next to her friend Maria and they were eating their lunch and Liz was wearing that cute little pink top with the flowers on it and he had noticed lately how she was starting to fill it out-
“Are you listening to me?” Michael frowned and turned to see what Max was staring at.
“Of course,” Max refocused on Michael and said, “What were you saying?”
“Max . . .” Michael said warningly.
“What?” he said innocently, even thought he knew what his friend meant.
Michael’s eyes had narrowed when he saw Liz and he turned back to Max scowling even harder than before. “Max, you know you have to stay away from her. We can’t get close to any of them, remember? It’s too dangerous.”
“I know that,” Max said and his eyes dropped down to stare at the tabletop. Michael and Isabel had been reminding him of that fact for the last two years. They weren’t about to let him forget it. Besides, he thought, Liz could never be interested in him. He was just a freak, who didn’t even belong here. Changing the subject, Max looked at Michael and said, “Did you do that math assignment?”
“School really sucks,” Michael groaned again . . .
* * *
Isabel was sitting at the kitchen table pouring through paperwork and Max opened the refrigerator looking for something to drink. He took out a carton of orange juice and as he poured it into a glass he asked, “What are you doing?”
“I can’t decide if I want to take chemistry next fall, or biology. What do you think?” She looked up at him questioningly and Max shrugged.
“What do you want to take?” Max asked and sat down across from her.
“What are you going to take?”
Max smiled and looked into the glass. He’d overheard Liz talking in the hallway to Maria and he knew what she was sighing up for. “I’m taking Biology. I signed up for Ms. Hardy’s class.”
“Biology, huh?” Isabel said suspiciously when she saw the look on his face. “Does that have anything to do with a certain waitress that likes science?”
“Maybe,” Max ventured and he glanced up to see his sisters reaction.
“Max . . .” Isabel said softly and covered his hand with hers.
“Look, I know you and Michael don’t think I should-”
“Max, she has a boyfriend.”
“What?” Max said in surprise, feeling his stomach clench. What was Isabel talking about? Who was she talking about? Not Liz. Liz didn’t have a boyfriend. She couldn’t have a boyfriend. Not when he was finally getting up the nerve to talk to her, to maybe ask her out, no matter what Isabel and Michael thought.
“Kyle Valenti asked her to the dance on Friday night. I saw them holding hands after school today.” She saw the crushed look on his face and she felt her heart go out to him. “I’m sorry Max. I know that you like her, but . . .”
Max pulled his hand away and he rose to his feet. She was going out with Kyle Valenti? The Sheriff’s son? Since when? He’d never seen her with Kyle before. Or had he? It was true that Kyle had been hanging out at the Crashdown more often lately, but a lot of people went there after school. Was she really going out with him?
“Max,” Isabel called gently to him as he walked out of the kitchen. “Where are you going?”
“For a walk,” Max answered feeling dejected. He left the house and shoved his hands in his pockets with a sense of utter disappointment. What else could he expect though, he wondered as he walked along? Did he think she’d never have a boyfriend? Did he think she’d grow old waiting for him to get up the guts just to talk to her? When had Kyle made his move? Now that he thought about it, he’d seen that look in Kyle’s eyes. That hungry look a guy got when he was on the make. Max felt his stomach twist at the thought of Kyle with his hands on Liz.
He walked the streets of Roswell and without even realizing it, he found his way to the Crashdown. He looked through the front windows and his heart sank even further when he saw Kyle sitting at the counter talking to Liz. He watched as Kyle placed his hand affectionately over hers and a smile broke over her face. Max felt his world falling in around him as he watched her laughing with her friends.
Inside the Crashdown, Kyle rose from the stool at the counter. “I’ve gotta go,” he said and reluctantly released Liz’s hand. “So I’ll pick you up tomorrow at 7:00 for the dance. We can grab something to eat before we go.”
“Okay,” Liz nodded. She smiled at him as he left the restaurant and then she grabbed a rag to clean the counter.
“Liz,” Maria stopped her, mystified by her friend’s actions. “Why are you going out with Kyle?”
“Why?” Liz asked in surprise. “Because he asked me. That’s why.” Besides, she thought to herself, no one else was knocking down her door to see her. “Why shouldn’t I go out with him?”
“Cuz you don’t like him,” Maria said following after her.
“Kyle’s alright,” Liz said noncommittally.
“Liz. He’s a jock. You don’t like jocks. You like tall, good looking, dark haired guys that study hard and get good grades.”
“I don’t know what you’re talking about,” Liz said offhandedly.
“Why don’t you just ask Max to the dance? You know you want to. You’ve been mooning over him for years.”
“Maria,” Liz turned on her in exasperation. “Max has no interest in me. He hardly even talks to me, other than when he comes in here to get something to eat. I mean he sits right behind me in English and he’s barely said two words to me all year.”
“Maybe he’s just shy,” Maria suggested.
“Maria, Max can have his pick of any girl in school. I don’t think he’s going to be interested in a geek like me.” She finished cleaning the counter and dropped the rag in the sink. As she turned back she could see him passing by the window but he didn’t come inside. She felt her heart race when she first saw him, but then he walked by without coming inside the restaurant and disappointment hit her. “See Maria?” she said softly. “He didn’t even look this way.”
* * *
Isabel watched private moments of her brother’s life flash before her, things that she’d never known about him. She’d been aware of the fact that he liked Liz, but this was so much more than that. Why had she never seen it before? The images were coming faster now and they all watched transfixed as the memories Max had entrusted to Liz were given back to him . . .
“Max, what are we doing here?” Michael asked with a scowl.
“I’m hungry,” Max answered matter-of-factly.
“We should be out in the desert, or out in Frasier Woods, looking for evidence,” Michael insisted. “Something that will tell us about where we come from.”
“Michael, we have all weekend to do that. And the next weekend, and the weekend after that. Besides, right now I’m hungry.” Max couldn’t take his eyes off Liz as she bustled around the Crashdown. He could see her writing something on her order pad and he watched her as she walked in his direction.
As she reached his table, Liz looked up and their eyes met. “Hi. What can I get you guys?” She looked from Max Evans’ intense gaze to Michael Guerin’s bored expression.
Max picked up the menu and pointing a finger at it he said, “I’ll have a Saturn Burger and an order of Ferengi Fries.” He watched her as she wrote it down and then she lifted her eyes to look at him again. They were so big and expressive and he could just look into them all day long.
“Do you want anything to drink?” She looked back down at her pad and started to write cherry cola. Max always ordered cherry cola. He didn’t answer right away and she looked at him again.
Michael was staring at Max, getting more irritated by the minute. Max was looking at Liz like nothing else existed in the world and Michael kicked him under the table.
“What?” Max blurted out, suddenly aware that Liz had asked him something.
“Something to drink?” she asked again, bemused by the look on his face.
“Cherry cola,” he replied quickly.
She nodded with a smile curling her lips and turned to Michael. “And you? Do you want anything?”
“Just to get out of here,” Michael mumbled.
“Excuse me?” Liz asked, not sure that she had heard him correctly.
Michael could see Max glaring at him and he said louder, “No. I don’t want anything.”
“Oh-Kay,” Liz said, not surprised by Michael’s attitude. It was what he did best. She turned back to Max and said, “I’ll go get your drink.”
When she was out of hearing range Max turned on Michael. “Do you always have to be so rude?”
“Max, she has a boyfriend. She’s been seeing Kyle Valenti all summer.”
“I know that,” Max said looking down at his hands on the table. He could feel that familiar sinking feeling in his stomach. The one that he got every time he thought about her with Kyle.
“I saw them coming out of the eraser room,” Michael said, twisting the knife in his heart. “It didn’t look like they had been cleaning erasers.”
Max shifted uncomfortably and then he saw her coming his way with his order. Would she really let Kyle touch her like that?
Liz set the plate on the table and asked, “Can I get you anything else?” She watched Max shake his head no, but he didn’t look at her. She stared at him for just a moment and then she turned away to serve the rest of the waiting customers.
Max watched her as she walked away, wishing that it had been him that had asked her to the dance last spring, and him that had spent the summer going out with her. What would it feel like to kiss her, or hold her hand as they walked down the street together? He could see her talking to Maria and he wondered what they were talking about.
“You are sooo bad girl,” Maria said smugly. “Oh, and Max Evans is staring at you again.”
“No way. Maria, that is so in your imagination,” she said and took a peek in his direction. He looked away quickly and she felt a flutter in her stomach. He had been looking at her!
Max picked at his food and kept darting looks in her direction. Maybe this thing with Kyle wouldn’t last very long. Shit. Who was he kidding? What guy in his right mind would ever give her up? The sun rose in the sky every morning just so it could shine on Liz Parker’s face. A commotion came from the left side of the restaurant, an argument, and suddenly everyone was ducking for cover as the sound of gunfire erupted. He heard Maria cry out Liz’s name and then he looked in her direction. Oh God, no . . .
* * *
“Liz, LIZ! You have to look at me. You have to look at me.”
“You're all right now. You're all right.”
“You broke a bottle when you fell, spilled ketchup on yourself. Don't say anything, please.”
* * *
“Um, I-I scraped some cells from your pencil. This is really hard to say, I'm trying to keep from blacking out here. Um, the cells weren't normal. So, Max, what I'm going to suggest to you is that we just go back to the bio lab now, so that I can take a sample so that I can see what I'm thinking is wrong, you know? That I got the wrong cells . . .”
“Okay, um. So help me out here Max. I mean, what are you?”
“Well I'm not from around here.”
“Where you from? Up north? You're not an, an alien, I mean . . . are you?”
“Well I prefer the term not of this earth. Sorry, it's not a good time to joke . . . Yeah, I am. Wow, it's weird to actually say it . . . Liz . . .”
“Um, Max, you know, I have, I'm gonna be late for my US Government class, so I'm just gonna-”
“Liz, listen to me. You can't talk to anyone about this. Not your parents, not Maria. No one. You don't understand what'll happen if you do. Liz, please? Now my life is in your hands.”
* * *
“So I've been thinking about why I called you, you know, that day from the hospital. Because I knew it was against the rules and it led to that whole awkward moment. But, I called anyway. Sort of couldn't help it. Because when something like this happens, what's happening to my grandmother, you don't listen to logic to what you're supposed to do. You listen to your heart, and my heart told me to call you. Because you were the one person in the world that I really wanted to talk to. Max, I've been thinking something, and I'm really not going to be able to get it out of my head unless I just say it. I'm really sorry for asking you this, but is there . . . is there anything that you could do for my grandmother? You know . . . do?
“Liz, when I saved you, it was because you were shot, and there was a bullet in you. Something was happening to you that wasn't supposed to happen. It was before your time. But I can't just heal people. I'm not . . . God.”
* * *
“Um . . . I really didn't want to say this before because I didn't want anybody else to get involved, but . . . I'm going to the reservation.”
“No . . . no, you're not. We're being watched.”
“Maybe you're not just being watched, you know. Maybe it's more than that. Max, today they came for the files. What if tomorrow they come for you? If there's anything there, any possibility at all that this means something, we need to find out.”
“Thanks for the offer . . . but no.”
“Max, you saved my life.”
“What does that have to do with it?”
“It's what started all of this. People suspecting you. If anything happened to you . . . or Michael or Isabel, I just . . . I couldn't live with that. Let me do this one thing.”
“Liz, I already told you no.”
“Max, I didn't come here for permission. I came here for the pendant. If you don't give it to me, I'll just draw it. I'm going.”
“Hey. First moment anything weird happens, anything at all, you come back.”
* * *
“Liz! Are you there? Hi.”
“Can I come up?”
“Yeah, sure. Very impressive.”
“You really can't stay long.”
“I know. I just wanted to tell you that I've been thinking a lot about last night.”
“Yeah, me, too.”
“When I saw Valenti taking you away like that . . . it just hit home for me, you know? How much knowing me has screwed up your life.”
“No, it's just the opposite.”
“Thank you for saying that.”
“It's the whole truth, Max.”
“I better go.”
“Cuz if I don't go right now, things are gonna change.”
“I'm gonna have to touch your hair . . . cuz it's so soft . . . and I'd have to tell you that . . . no matter what we go through, it's all worthwhile for me, because we're together.”
“ And then . . . I'd have to do this . . .”
* * *
“Beautiful countryside, don't you think? Especially at sunset.”
“Yeah, it's pretty cool. So, Mr. Hubble, you said you were going to answer my questions.”
“My wife Sheila and me liked to slip away sometimes . . . just take a drive. Nothing like flying down the highway with the woman you love by your side, now is there?”
“You're probably right.”
“'Course it's gotta be the right one. You know how you know that? A kiss. That's how. Ever heard the expression, "I saw fireworks"? It was just like the 4th of July. That ever happen to you when you kissed a girl?”
“Maybe . . . once . . .”
* * *
“What are you doing here?”
“I just . . . I wanted to see you.”
“I had to know if something was real.”
“If what was real?”
“Well, just like you’ve seen things . . . I've seen things. And . . . one of those . . . things . . .”
“You saw my fantasy?”
“I had to know if . . . if . . . what I saw was . . . really from you or if it was just my imagination, which . . . it definitely . . . definitely could've been. Except . . . I've never been in the girls' locker room. And now that I see it, and . . . well, it . . . it is the same room . . . I know I didn't make it up.”
“This is really horrible.”
“No, Liz. It's incredible, really.”
“This is not incredible.”
“Wait. Please? Listen. Please. The main thing is . . . I didn't just see what you saw. I felt . . . what you felt . . . when you saw me. And I never thought anyone could really . . . ever feel that way about me.”
* * *
“Michael, I'm worried.”
“You should be.”
“It's not about Valenti. It's about Tess, Isabel's friend. I'm having these daydreams about her.”
“Yeah, where we're together . . . you know, together.”
“I guess you're only human after all, huh?”
“It's me. I'm the problem. Something's happening to me.”
“Haven't you ever had a fantasy before?”
“This is different. It's out of my control. I can't stop it.”
“We'll work it out.”
“Thanks for the compassion.”
“Valenti has the communicator, and we need to do something about it. This isn't the time for your sex fantasies.”
“Michael, I'm telling you, there's something weird about this. It's like she knows something about me that she shouldn't know. I mean, who is she?”
“Can you focus? I mean, focus on what's important here, Maxwell.”
“Forget about it. Why did I think you'd be any help?”
* * *
“What's going on, Max?”
“I wanna talk.”
“Liz, about what Michael said before, about Tess. I just . . . I want you to know that I don't feel anything for her. I look at you, and I know you're the person I'm supposed to be with. I've always known it. What happened here that day, when you got shot, and how that brought us together . . . it's fate. Look at me. You're the one, Liz . . . the only one. I could never be with anyone else.
* * *
“I saw you, Max.”
“Liz, it's not what you think.”
“How could you kiss her?”
“I don't know. I don't know what's happening.”
“You know all those thing you said to me, Max? Were any of them true?”
“Liz . . . Liz, you've got to believe me. It wasn't me. She was there. She was waiting for me.”
“Oh, so it's her fault.”
“Liz, something is going on with her. I'm telling you, something is not right about her.”
“Not right about her, Max! What are you talking about?”
“The way I'm drawn to her, it's not just attraction. It's something else. Please, Liz, you have to have faith in me. In us.”
* * *
“Don’t even try to use your abilities, Max. The serum we injected you with – very effective in suppressing the neurotransmitters in your cerebral cortex. Experiments on the alien in the forties taught us that that’s where most of your powers come from. Come on, sit down. It’s all right. That’s not your real weakness, though, is it? You know, I’ve been going about this the wrong way the whole time. It’s not that you’re part alien . . . it’s that you’re part human. You have feelings. Emotions. Friendship. Love.
“Trick photography, Max.”
“Max, Max! Computer rigged. Virtual reality, Max. It’s not real. It’s not real. We didn’t kill her. We didn’t kill her. I just wanted to show you what can happen. What will happen.”
“I’m evil? I’m risking my life to save my country, my planet from being colonized by alien life. By you. Tell me where the other one is.”
“The other what?”
“We found this in the crash. We have spent fifty years looking for the other one, and we know you have it. It took a little persuading, but Topolsky told us. Tell me where it is. Tell me. Ok. I’m going to give you a choice, Max. You can either tell me where the other orb is, or you can tell me which one of your friends you want me to kill first. Hmm? And you have ten seconds. Maybe I’ll start with Liz.”
“Okay, stop it! Stop! I’ll tell you where it is, just don’t hurt Liz.”
* * *
“I wish I could go back Liz. Back to when things were normal.”
“Me, too. I just wish that I could have stopped you from saving my life that day in the Crashdown.”
“Don't say that.”
“Max, the day that you saved my life, your life just . . . ended.”
“No, that was the day my life began. Liz, when I was in that room, and they did . . . what they did to me, you're what kept me alive. The thought of you. The way your eyes look into mine. Your smile. The touch of your skin. Your lips. Knowing you has made me . . . human. Whether I die tomorrow or fifty years from now, my destiny is the same. It's you. I want to be with you, Liz. I love you.”
“I love you.”
* * *
“He sat down. You got him to sit down with her.”
“Rah-rah . . . What?”
“Nothing. It's just . . . seeing you at 17 again is making it all come flooding back to me. How my stomach used to rumble every time I saw you.”
“So, um . . . did we get married?”
“Liz, you know I can't . . .”
“You . . . I know, you can't talk about it. I'm sorry. I know.”
“We eloped. We were 19.”
“We were 19? Wow, that is so young. That is too young.”
“That's what I said, but you said that Romeo and Juliet were even younger than us, so we drove to Vegas. Got married at the Elvis chapel. Congratulations, kids.”
“So we didn't have a real wedding.”
“Oh, we had a great wedding. You called Maria, Michael, Isabel, and Alex, and had them meet us halfway. We spent the whole night singing and dancing in some dive outside Phoenix, and at the end of the night, ‘I Shall Believe’ came on the radio.”
“I love that song.”
“I know. Everyone else was exhausted, but not us. Oh, we danced . . . just the two of us. And ever since then, it's been our song.”
“If this works . . . I'm not gonna have that day.”
“No, you won't.”
“Then what happens to you if we succeed? I . . . I mean you. The future version of you?”
“If we succeed in changing history, a different version of the future will take place. All the events that led to who I am 14 years from now will be different. The man I am now will cease to exist.”
* * *
“Were you watching?”
“Um . . .”
“So, it was all a setup.”
“You tried to get Tess and me together?”
“Look, I know that you must hate me right now. I, um . . .”
“I felt that . . . and I know you did, too, and I know you think that . . . that I need to let you go . . . for the sake of Michael, and Isabel, and my race . . . so you went to Tess. But she can't be you. Tess can never be you.”
* * *
“You're supposed to be breaking up with him, not kissing him.”
“You . . . you kissed me. I mean . . . you know, he kissed me.”
“You're only making me love you more.”
“I just said no to Gomez.”
“You said no the last time, too. I didn't take no for an answer.”
“So we went to the concert.”
“No. The night of Gomez I came to your room. That's the night that things between us were cemented.”
“Cemented. So when you say cemented, you . . .”
“We made love.”
“No, no, we . . . we didn't.”
“Liz . . .”
“No, I have no intention of making love to you or . . . or anyone else at this particular stage of my life.”
“I beg to differ.”
“No. Making love to you is the farthest thing from my mind. I . . . I don't even have protection.”
“Oh, that's great. There you are, Max the Saint, just walking around with a condom in his back pocket. I . . . I . . . I don't even care what happened in your reality. I am not making love to you or anyone until I am ready, and I am just not ready.”
“Liz, I am telling you what happened, and we have to change that. We have to. And so far, we've failed. Liz, it's not just Max that's the problem here. You are. You are not letting yourself change. Now you have to do something . . . before it's too late.”
* * *
“It didn't work. We have to do something else.”
“No, I . . . I can't.”
“You have to.”
“Do you know how hard it was for me to tell him that I didn't want to die for him? He's the only reason that I'm alive right now. You . . . you've . . . you gotta come up with another plan. Please go to someone else. I . . . I just . . . I can't do this anymore.”
“Just 25 minutes before I came here, I held Michael in my arms . . . dead. Isabel died 2 weeks before that. Now you have to do this. You have to find a way. All of our lives depend on it.”
“How? What can I do that's gonna make you turn away from me?”
“I don't know.”
* * *
“The look on his face . . . on your face.”
“Maybe it's for the best. For you, too.”
“What are you talking about?”
“I saw you with Kyle. He's turning out to be a . . . a great guy. Maybe it would be better for you to be with a human.”
“Don't you realize what you are to me . . . and you're always gonna be? You're the love of my life. Everyone else is gonna be second best. There'll never be another you.”
* * *
“I thought you'd be at the airport right now.”
“I was on my way, but I had this weird moment.”
“What do you mean?”
“Well, I saw this vision. You and me, jumping out of the cab like we'd just been married in Vegas.”
“Yeah, it was like this memory flash of something that really happened, but then . . .”
“Max . . .”
* * *
“Remember Max? The sky had a red tint to it. All the time, not just at sunset. It was beautiful.”
“I don’t remember. I’m sorry Tess. I don’t remember it at all.”
“Open your mind Max. If you open your mind and let me in, I can help you remember. Just close your eyes and relax. I can show you all the things you’ve been missing. Aren’t you curious about the life you lived before?”
“Yes, but . . .”
“Then just relax, and open your mind and I’ll show you everything . . .”
* * *
“Maria, I saw him kissing Tess at the prom last night.”
“No. Are you serious?”
“I guess it worked. Max is with Tess now. We’re never gonna be together. Oh God Maria, I miss him so much.”
* * *
“Max, I know you don’t want to hear this, but she’s moved on. I saw her with Sean. They were . . . they were kissing. They were more than kissing.”
“What do you mean? What are you talking about Tess?”
“Liz and Sean. They’re together now.”
“I don’t believe it.”
“Max, I know it hurts, but you have to face the truth. She doesn’t love you. She’s moved on with her life. But I’m here for you Max. I’ve been waiting for you. No matter what, Max, I’ll always be here for you.”
* * *
“No. No, you have to be wrong. It can’t be. Alex can’t be dead. He was supposed to dance at my wedding. Oh God, what have I done? What have I done?”
“Liz, what are you talking about? You heard the sheriff. Oh God, he died. Alex died . . .”
“No. Maria, this is wrong. This can’t be happening. Alex is not supposed to die. No one is supposed to die. This can’t be happening.”
* * *
“Max, we belong together. You know we do.”
“I’m not in love with you, Tess. I’m sorry, but I’m not. Maybe I did before, in that other life, but that wasn’t me.”
“It can be, if you let it. Let go of her Max. Let me love you the way you were meant to be loved. I can make you forget all about her.”
“I don’t want to forget her. I’m sorry Tess, but I’ve always been in love with her . . . and I always will be. Nothing can change that. We should go.”
“Max! I won’t let you leave . . .”
* * * * *
“Is he out?”
“Yes. God damnit Tess, can’t you do anything right?”
“What’s that supposed to mean?”
“You were supposed to seduce him. You know what Kivar expects, and he’s running out of patience. He wants the Royals back, and he wants the Granilith. Now.”
“It’s not as easy as that. He can’t forget that stupid bitch of his. If you’d just let me kill her like I wanted to in the first place-”
“No! We can’t risk that until we know for sure.”
“I already told you. She’s not the one.”
“You don’t know that, and until we know for sure, we can’t make a move against her. This isn’t open for debate. If she is the one, we have to know. They tried to take her out once before and look at what happened. Max healed her and made her even stronger. No, we don’t do anything until we know for sure.”
“I’m telling you-”
“Drop it Tess. Now what the hell did you do to him?”
“He tried to leave, so I stopped him.”
“Is the implant still working? You know you have to be careful with it. You know that implants can react badly to mindwarps. Look at what happened to Alex.”
“That wasn’t my fault. His implant was degenerating. He was remembering everything. I had no choice but to mindwarp him.”
“And you killed him Tess.”
“So what! He was just a human.”
“So what are we going to do about Max? He’s never going to accept you, and he’s never going to return the Granilith on his own.”
“There’s one way . . .”
“And that would be?”
“Look, I know Max. There’s one way I can wrap him around my finger. He’s an honorable guy. He’ll do the right thing, even if he doesn’t want to.”
“What are you talking about?”
“Help me get his clothes off and I’ll explain everything. We can make this work, Sean. You can reprogram the implant with a new set of memories, and tomorrow morning when he wakes up, he’ll be all mine.”
* * * * *
Memories continued to flash before them, moving faster and faster as the truth was revealed. The images moved so fast they became nothing but a blur to the four watching. The wind swirled around the room even faster, and the roar rose to a crescendo before suddenly dissipating. The image that had floated in the air vanished in an explosion of light and then the chamber was left in silence.
Liz swayed and then collapsed to her knees with her energy nearly exhausted. She sensed movement and with difficulty she lifted her head. She watched as Max slowly opened his eyes and she crawled up to his side. He tried to move but he was so weak. She lifted his head and cradled him in her lap and she took his hand in hers, entwining her fingers between his as they stared into each other’s eyes.
“Liz . . .” Max said haltingly. He couldn’t believe she was really here, holding him, touching him like she used to. He looked into her eyes, her face, and he saw something there that he never thought he’d see again. There was love there, in her eyes, love for him. “Liz . . .” he said again, needing to tell her what he now knew.
“Shhhhh,” Liz said stroking her fingers through his hair and brushing it off his forehead. “Don’t say anything. Save your strength, Max.”
“I have to tell you something,” he whispered. “About me, and Tess.”
“It doesn’t matter, Max,” Liz answered and leaned down to press her lips against his forehead. “All I care about is you, Max. Nothing else matters.”
“I didn’t sleep with her, Liz,” Max said, squeezing her hand with his. “I didn’t sleep with Tess.”
|posted on 14-Sep-2001 7:19:01 PM|
Isabel felt a sense of intense relief wash over her when Max opened his eyes and spoke to Liz. The emptiness she had seen in them earlier had been terrifying and she had doubted the healing stones would be strong enough to bring him back from whatever dark place he had gone. After witnessing the events that had happened here, Isabel now suspected it wasn’t just the stones that had saved her brothers life. It was Liz. She had done something extraordinary, had channeled some hidden strength, and pulled Max back from the brink of death. She watched them as they clung to each other on the hard floor of the Granilith chamber.
“Liz, it was all a lie. A lie to force me to go home.” She was holding Max, with his head resting in her lap and he looked up into her shining eyes. His memories were returning now, the memories that she had safeguarded for him. “But Tess could never understand that this is my home, here, with you. I couldn’t give up on you Liz. I couldn’t give up on the idea that we would work things out and someday we’d been together again. That’s when she got desperate and used the implant to-”
“Woo, slow down Max,” Michael said picking up on what he had just said. “What implant?”
“Remember when I went to New York last November?” Max said as he sat up. He drew Liz fully into his arms and then looked at the others in the room. They all nodded and waited for him to continue. “I told you how the Emissary checked for the Royal seal in my brain? Well that wasn’t all they did. They put something in my brain, an implant in my cerebral cortex so that they could control me. They programmed it so that they could trigger certain responses in me, and gave me memories that weren’t really mine. Like the memories of home, and how I met Tess, and what it was like there.” He focused on Isabel and said, “They put an implant in Alex too.”
“What?” Isabel whispered.
“It’s how they controlled him,” Max continued. “They set him up in Las Cruses and programmed the implant to make him decipher the Destiny book. They needed the supercomputer there to do it. They checked his progress from time to time and once he translated the book they let him return to Roswell. They just programmed the implant to give him memories of going to Sweden, but when it started to degenerate the false memories also started to breakdown. Tess tried to mindwarp him and that caused the implant to further degrade and it destroyed his brain.” He looked at Liz again and said, “Just like it was destroying mine. You saved me. You all saved me.”
“Is it still in your brain?” Maria asked.
“Yeah,” Max nodded his head. “But it’s inactive now. We need to figure out some way to get it out, so that it can’t be used to control me anymore.”
“But Tess is gone,” Michael reminded everyone. “You don’t have to worry about her controlling you anymore.”
“Tess wasn’t working alone,” Liz said as she and Max locked eyes on each other. His memories had become her memories during the link, and her memories had become his. She had felt his pain when he looked through her bedroom window that night, and saw her with Kyle. He had felt her tears when she begged that future version of him to find another way. The pain that they had suffered was now shared pain and their healing was already under way.
“Who was she working with?” Kyle asked. He had trusted Tess and had welcomed her into his home. She had repaid him by lying to him and manipulating him and using him. As he looked at Max he realized they had that in common. Tess had used them both, controlled their minds and their actions. She had quite literally raped their minds, for her own benefit.
Max held Kyle’s gaze for a moment and a silent communication passed between them. They had both been victims and a new understanding was being forged. In time, a true friendship could emerge. Max shifted his gaze to Maria and he regretted what he was about to tell her. “Sean isn’t Sean.”
“What?” Maria said and felt the color drain from her face. Michael wrapped a protective arm around her and she said to Max, “What are you talking about?”
“Sean has been working with Tess, and probably has been since he came to town.”
“Are you saying that Sean has been possessed, like Brody? Or are you saying Sean is dead, and the person that has been living in my house is an impostor, a skin or another hybrid or something, created to look and act like my cousin?”
“I’m sorry, Maria,” Max said looking at her sympathetically. “I don’t know. All I know is that Sean was helping Tess. I can remember now what really happened that night in the observatory. I was only semi-conscious, but I could hear some of what was happening around me. Sean was there and helped Tess set me up.” Max looked at Liz and he saw the understanding on her face. His memory of what really happened that night was in her now, too.
“So what did happen that night?” Michael asked. He had pulled Maria close to him and he could feel her struggle to come to terms with the fate of her cousin.
Max squeezed Liz’s hand in his and his eyes looked deeply into hers as he answered Michael to the best of his ability. “Tess tried to seduce me and when I turned her down she used the mindwarp to prevent me from leaving the observatory. She called Sean for help, and then devised the plan to make me think I’d slept with her and got her pregnant. Sean programmed the implant so that I would remember the um, the ah . . .” Max cleared his throat uncomfortable.
“The hot alien sex?” Liz said and chewed at her lower lip.
“Yeah,” Max answered and felt the blush rising in his cheeks.
She looked at him and felt that old familiar sensation in the pit of her stomach. This was her Max, the Max she had fallen in love with. His embarrassment was so reminiscent of those simpler days before Tess came to town and started controlling him. His eyes had dropped from hers and he was concentrating on the back of her hand. She leaned forward and her lips touched his with a soft kiss. She could feel his quick intake of breath, his surprise, and as her lips parted from his she felt him chase after her, wanting more.
“So no hot alien sex, huh?” Kyle asked in mock disappointment. Max and Liz both turned to look at him and he shrugged his shoulders and quipped, “Inquiring minds want to know!”
“No,” Max shook his head and laughed softly. “No hot alien sex, but . . . but . . .” He looked at Liz and he knew he had to be totally honest with her. There could be no secrets, no half-truths, no deceptions between them. “I mean, I saw . . . we were . . . when I woke up she was . . . I was . . .”
“Are you trying to say that you woke up with a naked Tess in your naked arms with your naked bodies touching?” Liz articulated what he was having such a hard time saying.
“Yeah, that.” Max looked at her face closely trying to judge what she was thinking.
“None of it was your fault, Max,” Liz reassured him. “You shouldn’t feel guilty.” They stared into each other’s eyes and Max felt all the tension and the strain and the loneliness of the last year falling away from him. He wanted to kiss her again, to feel her soft lips against his. The knowledge that he could, that he could kiss her right now and she wouldn’t turn away from him was more powerful than any drug ever made. He leaned toward her, wanting to taste her once again, and then Michael interrupted.
“We better get out of here. We can go back to my place and figure this all out.” He leaned over and held his hand out to help Max to his feet. Their hands clasped and the brief look that crossed Michael’s face displayed the depth of his emotions. Michael gave his hand an extra squeeze and said, “Welcome back Maxwell.”
Max rose to his feet with Michael’s assistance, and then he turned back to Liz and helped her to her feet. “You guys go ahead,” he said to them but he didn’t take his eyes off of Liz. “We’ll be with you in just a minute.”
The four of them quietly left the chamber and Max drew Liz closer to him. He lifted his hand to let his fingers brush her hair back from her face and he said, “Of all the things that have happened to me, to us, I’d live through the torture of a thousand white rooms if it meant I could have spare you the pain I caused you in this last year. Knowing the way I hurt you is almost more than I bear.”
“You mean everything to me, Liz. When you look at me, the way you’re looking at me right now, I know that I was right all along. The first time I laid eyes on you, I knew you were the one for me.”
“I love you, Max,” Liz said as she stared into his eyes.
Her words made his breath catch in his throat and he felt his heart swell with joy. Liz Parker was in love with him and all things felt right in the world. He could hardly speak around the lump that had formed in his throat, and when he did, the emotion was heavy in his tone. “I love you, Liz. I always have, and I always will.”
Their lips came together and they kissed, tentative at first and then deeper as they each let the turmoil of the last year fall away. Their arms held each other tightly and their bodies reacted to their familiarity. Liz felt his tongue sweep over her lower lip and she parted her lips to allow him the access he was desperately seeking and she urgently needed.
The kiss was all consuming, and then he got a flash. A memory surfaced, a memory of a time long ago, in a place far away. It was a memory that would forever change them . . .
“Mother, please! Don’t make me do this. There must be another way.”
“Zan, sometimes we have to do things for the good of the people. I know it’s unfair, but this is the life you were born into. I’m sure you will grow to love her, in time.”
“But Mother, I know that there is someone-”
“Someone else? Who Zan? Who is it that holds your heart?”
He stood at the portal staring out over the city and the lights mirrored the stars in the sky. He looked up and he concentrated on the one star that always seemed the brightest to him. “I don’t know, Mother,” he sighed. “There is someone out there for me, but I just haven’t met her yet.”
“Zan, this marriage with Ava, it has to be. We’re on the verge of a civil war. Marrying her will unite our two peoples and avoid a bloody conflict. If you don’t do this, there will be war. Will you be able to sleep nights, knowing millions are dying because of the decision you made?”
“No Mother. I know what my responsibilities are. When Father died and I became King, I knew my life wouldn’t be my own anymore.”
She came up behind him and when she touched him gently he turned away from the night sky, and all his hopes and dreams. “I will meet with Ava tomorrow when she arrives in the city. We will finalize the arrangements and the wedding will proceed next week as planned.”
“It’s the right thing to do, Zan.”
“Yes Mother.” He left her chamber to return to his own with a heavy heart. He always did the right thing, no matter how much his heart wanted to do something else. He was King. A King had responsibilities and duties and his personal happiness didn’t play a part in them.
* * * * *
Zan waited in the receiving chamber for the arrival of his bride-to-be. They had spoken on the vids, but this would be their first meeting. A commotion sounded in the outer room and with a flair of pomp and ceremony, she entered the chamber. It was always different looking at someone in person, instead of on the vids. Even though the images were life size and three dimensional, there was still something artificial about them. Zan appraised Ava as she swept into the chamber and he noted her classic Cerian beauty. Her markings were indicative of upper class, high society, and her manner mirrored that. Her color flared in the traditional formal greeting and he returned his muted response, as was fitting and proper from his position as King.
“Your Highness,” she spoke softly.
“Princess Ava. Welcome.” Their digits touched and Zan drew her further into the chamber. “I hope your trip was pleasant.”
“It was . . . uneventful.” It was well known that Ava detested travel between the planets and preferred the use of the vids when she was required off world. This was her first visit to Antar, her new home. “My Father sends his regards, and wished for me to inform you that he will arrive by week’s end.”
“Yes, I noticed he was not with you.” Her entourage had filed in behind her and the room was becoming crowded.
“State business keeps him away.”
“I see.” An uncomfortable silence fell between them and Zan wondered what to say to this female that was to become his mate. “Perhaps you’d care to rest after your trip? Your chamber has been prepared for you.”
“Yes, that would be appreciated,” she said with relief. “The trip was tiring.” She paused for a moment and then added, “I’m glad to finally meet you in person. I’m looking forward to making a new life here, and to a strong marriage.”
“Yes, I am too,” Zan answered and forced his muted tones to take on the shade of orange to reflect his mutual anticipation. He was good at hiding his true feeling. And the truth was, though Ava was beautiful, he felt no connection to her. Well, maybe in time, as his Mother had counseled. They rotated toward the door and he said, “I’ll show you the way-”
And then he saw her. His colors flared bright red in an immediate response to her, even though he couldn’t see her clearly from across the room.
“You were saying?” Ava asked and she matched his color, mistaking it as a response to her.
The girl was in the back of the chamber and she was bowed in deference, as was custom when in the presence of Royalty. Zan fought valiantly to rein his colors in. It wasn’t fitting for the King to show such a display in public. Who was this girl? One of Ava’s Ladies? Or a handmaiden perhaps? He couldn’t see her markings clearly.
“This way.” Zan forced himself to return his attention to Ava and he escorted her from the room. Her entourage followed behind them and Zan had to use all his willpower to keep from turning around to look for the girl. “I think you’ll like your chambers. They’ve been prepared to your specifications.”
“Thank you, Zan. I’m sure everything will be more than satisfactory.”
“If you need anything at all, or if the space is inadequate, just let me know.” He could sense the girl behind him now. He had isolated her scent, a strong and intoxicating scent, and his colors nearly betrayed him again. He’d never had this kind of reaction to a girl before. Well, girl wasn’t the right word. The color of her markings indicated a mature female, probably in her third or forth cycle. They reached the entrance to Ava’s chamber and Zan came to a stop. “Rest now. Let me know when you are ready and a meal will be prepared for you. I’ve instructed the cooks as to your favorite foods.”
“Thank you, Zan.” Their digits touched again and Ava’s colors lightened to pink. Zan matched hers in a show of respect and then she disappeared into her new rooms.
Zan watched as her entourage followed her and he sought out the girl. She was just a few paces away from him and as she neared he could see her more clearly. She moved with a sense of grace and dignity, and her appendages were delicate and refined. Her head was bowed in respect as she passed by Zan and he breathed deeply to catch her scent. His colors flickered wildly for a moment and he had to rein them in once again. He felt like a boy, suffering through the embarrassment of going through the awakening all over again. He was a fully mature male, ten cycles past the awakening, This shouldn’t be happening to him.
The girl passed him and he could see her markings clearly now. There was something familiar about their placement and he wondered what her lineage was. He watched her refined movements and then something most unusual happened. Her colors flared bright red and then swiftly turned deep purple. Zan stared at her in shock and amazement. Red! He’d seen her turn red, the color of attraction. But not just red, he noted. Bright red! The stronger the color, the more intense the emotion. The red had quickly turned to purple. Embarrassment. She was deeply embarrassed by her sudden display of attraction. Zan felt his own colors rising and he had to fight them down yet again. As she entered the chamber her tones had returned to the usual muted browns, but there was no mistaking what he had seen.
* * * * *
Zan met Rath in the anteroom off the dining hall and greeted his friend with a display of pink colors.
“You look like you’re in a good mood,” Rath commented and returned the colors. “Your first meeting with your bride-to-be must have gone well.”
“Yes, it went fine. She will be joining us for the evening meal shortly.”
“And her Father? Will he be joining us too?” Rath asked curiously.
“No. State affairs will keep him on Ceri Prime until the end of the week.”
“I wonder if he is still as fat and ugly as always,” Rath flashed green tones to highlight his humor. “How did that Cerian ever have a daughter as beautiful as Ava?”
“That’s a good question,” Zan laughed. “Her brothers were lucky too. They must take after their mother.”
“Be careful of them, Zan,” Rath warned and his colors slipped into blue. “Something tells me they are not trustworthy. There is something hiding behind their outward appearances. I don’t trust their colors.”
“Noted,” he sighed. Intrigue and backstabbing and power plays could get so tiring. “I want to talk to you after dinner. Do you have any plans?”
“No, noth-” and then the commotion in the dinning hall captured their attention.
“It sounds like Ava has arrived. We better go join them.” Zan moved from the anteroom and his gaze fell upon his intended. She flashed him pink in greeting and he motioned for her to join him. Try as he might, he couldn’t help looking around for the face that he really wanted to see. He hid his disappointment that she wasn’t in attendance and Zan escorted Ava to the table.
His Mother and Vilandra swept into the room and greetings were flashed by all. “Ava! It’s so wonderful to finally meet you in person,” his Mother effused and her pink flashed brightly.
Zan decided that he must have gotten his control over his colors from his Mother. She was certainly good at projecting what she wanted others to see. Normally, he was extremely efficient at his displays. Today had just been an unusual day. He rotated to look around the room again and then he felt Ava touch him.
“Are you looking for someone?” she asked curiously.
“No,” Zan answered hastily and flashed her a shade of yellow. “I was just looking to see if the cook was ready to serve the meal. You must be hungry.” This was not a good sign. He was lying to the female that was soon to be his mate, but he couldn’t very well tell her that he was looking for another. He could feel his Mother’s gaze on him and he had to concentrate hard to keep his colors yellow. The cook entered and the hall filled with an assortment of tantalizing smells and his yellow deepened. Good timing. Perhaps the cook was due a nice bonus come month’s end.
“So when will the rest of your family be arriving?” Vilandra asked pleasantly.
“Week’s end. My Father should arrive mid day,” Ava answered as the cook served her first as their honored guest.
“And you brothers? Will they be arriving with him?” she asked and Zan could see her colors waver slightly. He wondered why such a simple question would cause her colors to change.
“I believe so,” Ava answered. “Kendal and Kivar are assisting my Father this week, but they should all arrive together, in plenty of time for the nuptial celebrations.”
Vilandra nodded and turned her attention to the meal the cook was now serving her. Zan watched her closely and for just a fleeting moment he thought he saw her colors tint with red. Interesting. She had had a brief attraction to Kivar two cycles ago, but their Father had forbid it. Zan and Ava were intended to merge their two houses, not Vilandra and Kivar.
The meal proceeded uneventfully and when completed Ava returned to her chamber, citing lingering fatigue from her trip. Zan escorted her to her to her room and amidst their mutual shades of yellow he asked, “Would you like to see the city tomorrow? I can show you the Town Square and the Market. There might even be a performance in the park we could view. That is, if you have recovered from your trip.”
“That sounds nice,” Ava flashed a deeper yellow and she waited expectantly for his response. He matched her color and then leaned forward to give her a kiss goodnight. It was their first, and he touched her tentatively, waiting to see how they merged. She was open to him and her desire flashed over him. He pulled back from her and flashed red, only because he knew it was expected.
“Do you want to come in?” she asked and her yellow was tinged with streaks of red.
“You’re tired.” He knew what she was offering, but it was just a little too soon for him. He wanted a chance to get to know her a little before the mating. He knew her likes and her dislikes from their many conversations on the vids, but there was still so much to learn about her. “Rest now, and tomorrow we’ll spend the day together.”
Ava nodded and moved into her chamber. “Tomorrow . . .”
He watched her close the door and when he heard it latch his yellow returned to the neutral shade of brown. He had been hoping there would be a natural response to her, an attraction that would be mutual and bode well for their pairing, but it appeared he wasn’t to be that lucky. It felt like he’d been waiting his whole life for that one certain person to enter it, and just when he thought it had happened, it wasn’t the female he was pledged to.
He rotated from the door and hurried off to find Rath.
* * * * *
“I need you to do me a favor,” Zan told Rath as they exited the Palace and made their way onto the grounds. He wanted this conversation to be private, and privacy was a hard thing to come by inside those walls. The three moons were out in full force tonight and the gardens looked inviting in the shimmering light.
“That sounds interesting,” Rath said. Zan didn’t often ask him for personal favors. “What do you need?”
“There’s someone I want you to find out about. A girl. I want to know where she was born, who her parents are, where she got her education. Basically, I want to know everything you can find out.”
“This is an interesting request. What’s her name?”
“I don’t know.” Zan could feel Rath’s penetrating gaze and his colors fluctuated, showing his nervousness. “She’s a member of Ava’s entourage. I . . . I just want . . .”
“Looking for one last hurrah before settling into married life, huh?” Rath said suggestively.
‘No. Not at all,” Zan denied hotly. “I just . . . there’s something familiar about her.”
“I see. For a minute there I though you were finally going to take that vestal body of yours and enjoy some carnal pleasure.”
“I’ve enjoyed carnal pleasure before!” Zan retorted.
“I’m not talking about with yourself! I’m talking about with any one of the lovely females that live within your domain.” He gazed at Zan and almost laughed at the shocked maroon color of his friend’s markings. “I’m just saying that it’s about time you showed an interest in the female population. Some of us have been wondering just where your loyalties lay, if you know what I mean.”
“What are you talking about? I’m just more discreet in my liaisons than you are. I don’t boast about them to just anyone that will listen.”
“More discreet?” Rath said shaking his head. “More like celibate!”
“I’ve had my share of females,” Zan insisted and felt his colors taking on a purple hue.
“Ha! When?” Rath needled him. He was enjoying watching his King’s embarrassment.
“Just last cycle I found pleasure in Benoi’s fair cousin.” Zan replied.
“Everyone’s found pleasure in Benoi’s cousin.” Rath laughed.
“A King should be spreading his seed throughout the kingdom and bestowing his infinite charms on the fine young maidens. I dare say, they would line the streets beseeching you to choose them. Your rep-”
“There she is!” Zan interrupted him. He felt his respirations increase and the cool night air felt hot against his dilating markings.
Rath studied Zan in utter amazement. His King was well known for his cool demeanor and his aloof nature. His control of his physical responses was legendary and he never gave away his emotions. It was why he had been so successful as the head of the Council. To look at him now, bright red with desire, stopped Rath in his tracks.
Zan stared at her from across the garden as she moved among the flora. He isolated her scent and he breathed in deeply, drawing her unique fragrance into his lungs. Her scent put the flowers to shame. His blood rushed to his markings causing his color to flare a vivid red but he didn’t even notice. He watched her as she picked a small bud and he noticed her markings turn yellow with contentment. Without conscious thought he moved in her direction.
The rustling of his coverings drew her attention and she looked up to see the King coming toward her. The blood rushed from her markings leaving them a pale cream and she bowed before him.
As he neared her he realized his colors were on display and he quickly muted them. Had she seen? Had Rath? He glanced over at his friend and confidant but his appearance was neutral, giving Zan no indication of what he might have seen. He shifted his sight back to the girl and when she spoke, her voice was musical.
“Forgive me your Majesty. I . . . I shouldn’t be here in your private gardens. Your permission to leave . . .”
He was fighting an internal battle to keep his colors neutral and when he spoke his tone sounded tense. “It’s much too pleasant a night to be cooped up indoors. You have my permission to stay, and glean the gardens until your heart’s content.”
“Thank you, your Majesty, but . . . but I really must go.” She remained bowed before him and her colors paled even more. “Please . . . my Lady awaits.”
“Yes, of course.” His colors darkened slightly at the mention of Ava and then he said, “But please, come back. Anytime. The gardens love the attention of a beautiful Lady.” He noticed the lavender blush that rose in her markings and then she backed slowly away from him.
“Thank you, your Majesty.” She rotated, intending to flee to the Palace but her movements froze when he called out to her.
“Wait!” She turned back to him with her head bowed and he said, “I didn’t get your name.”
“Rena,” she answered softly. “My name is Rena.”
“Here Rena, you dropped this . . .” He held the bud out to her that had fallen to the ground and she tentatively reached for it. Their digits touched and her colors flared red before turning deep purple. He could hear her sharp intake of breath and his colors betrayed his own attraction. She pulled away from him and once more fled toward the safety of the Palace.
He watched her go and he memorized every detail of this magical moment. How she looked and how she moved and how her scent filled the air all around him. He memorized everything, right down to the color of the flower bud she had picked. She liked the white ones.
|posted on 14-Sep-2001 7:26:37 PM|
Rena. What a beautiful name. Zan had awakened with the musical sound of her name ringing in his mind. He had dreamed of her in the night. Sweet dreams.
He rose early, as was his custom, and he walked the quiet halls of the Palace and let his mind wander back to last night when he’d seen her in the garden. She’d looked so beautiful standing there amongst the flowers. She looked like she belonged there. He could fairly hear the sounds of the flowers crying out for her return.
Alanee opened her chamber door and her eyes encountered the sight of her son on his morning ritual, roaming through the halls. Lost in his thoughts, she could tell he hadn’t noticed her. She watched him as he passed by and she could see that his movements were lighter than normal. Bouncier. As if he was actually happy. The last two cycles, ever since his father died and Zan had taken on the responsibilities of King, he hadn’t allowed himself time to just enjoy life.
What a difference a day could make, Alanee thought as she watched her son. Yesterday his despair had been palpable, and today . . . today he was literally glowing. His normal muted brown tones were glowing a vibrant yellow, radiating an aura of contentment around him. Her heart swelled with maternal joy as she watched him disappear around the corner. She could sense the change in him, see it in the way he moved and in the way his colors were on display. The signs were all clear. Her son was falling in love.
* * * * *
Zan entered the dining hall for the morning meal and inhaled the succulent smells of his favorite meal of the day. Cook was just finishing laying everything out on the sideboard and he could hardly wait to begin feasting. He loved the mornings the best, when everything was quiet and the day held so much promise.
There hadn’t been much that looked promising lately, Zan mused while he waited for Cook to finish. The unrest in the south, the attacks aimed at the government, even an altercation against the Palace Guards in the town square weighed heavily on his mind. His friend Larak had warned him that too many changes in the wake of his father’s death could cause strife, but there was so much he wanted to do. He wanted his people to have a better life. Was that so wrong?
There was also the conflict with the Council he’d had to deal with. His thoughts turned to Ava and unconsciously his colors muted to a neutral brown. It had been decreed shortly after his birth that Zan and the first daughter of Pau, ruler of Ceri Prime would be betrothed and marry to bond the two houses together. The prophets had declared the first son of Antar and the first daughter of Ceri Prime, bonded in marriage would herald in a time of wealth for all nations, peace and prosperity. The union was considered sacred.
However, before Zan had even reached the age of the awakening, Pau had been overthrown by Tirus in a bloody coup. Pau’s mangled body had been left on display in the Capitol Square on Ceri, as a reminder of what would happen to anyone that opposed the tyrannical Tirus. Pau’s family had perished in the coup as well, and his wife and young daughter had been buried in an unmarked grave.
Zan had forgotten about the decree after Pau was killed, and the subject of marrying had not been mentioned again until after Zan’s father had died two cycles ago and Zan had ascended to the Crown. Tirus had gone before the Council and insisted the decree was still valid, and Zan was obligated to marry his daughter, Ava. Zan had been adamantly opposed, asserting the binding contract was with Pau, not Tirus, but the Council had declared the contract was valid. The first son of Antar, Zan, must marry the first daughter of Ceri Prime, Ava. Zan was left with no choice in the matter.
He sighed inwardly as he watched Cook finish arranging the morning meal, but his mind was no longer filled with thoughts of food. When he met Ava the day before, he had been disappointed that he hadn’t felt a sense of connection to her. He hoped his Mother was right, and that this union would grow into something more than just a political pairing, but somehow he doubted it. Marrying for political expediency was common practice among the hierarchy of the five planets, but that didn’t make Zan feel any better about it. Perhaps, someday, love would find a way.
Cook moved aside and Zan’s thoughts turned to the happier ones of the feast laid out before him. He moved closer to the buffet and let the mouth watering aromas waft up around him. He inhaled deeply and then he caught a scent that set his colors ablaze. She was here. His gaze shifted around the room and then there she was, standing in the doorway. He’d never seen a more beautiful sight.
“Your Majesty, pardon my intrusion,” Rena said softly. Her head was bowed in deference to him and she moved backwards tentatively, as if she were about to flee.
“Good morning, Rena,” Zan rushed a greeting to prevent her departure. “Please, come in, come in. You’re just in time. Cook has just served the meal and everything is fresh. Join me, please.”
Her colors flared maroon and he could tell that he had shocked her. “Sir, my Lady asked that I prepare her a plate and return it to her chambers.”
“I see,” Zan said and studied her. Her bearing was regal. She held herself with such grace and dignity and poise, and her manner of speech indicated a formal education. Yet she lived the life of a servant girl, catering to Lady Ava’s wants and desires. It left him with a feeling of anger that a girl such as this should serve another and his colors briefly flared blue. He saw her eyes grow wide in alarm and he instantly reined in his emotions. Returning to his neutral shades of brown, Zan said, “If Lady Ava wishes a plate delivered to her, then let me help you prepare it.”
“Your Majesty! No-”
“In fact, I will help you hand deliver it!” Zan rushed on. “Come. Help me choose which foods she will find satisfactory.”
Reluctantly, Rena joined Zan to assist in selecting the appropriate foods for Ava’s finicky palate. When the plate was filled she reached for it and Zan felt a sudden jolt of intense emotion as their digits touched. He could tell that she had felt something too, and the plate almost dropped to the floor. She quickly recovered and stepped back from him, clutching the dish close to her.
“Thank you, your Majesty, for your assistance. I must now take this to her.” She bowed to him and backed quickly to the door, seeking her escape.
Zan watched her, still feeling the shock of their physical contact and before she disappeared he called out, “Rena, wait!”
She froze in place and for a moment he wasn’t sure what to say to her. Should he ask her if she felt it too? But how? He could hardly even describe what he had felt. Need? Want? Desire? Or was it, could it be . . . Love? He was a male, betrothed to another and his wedding day was looming ever closer. It was a wedding he was bound to by contract. Falling in love with another was not an option for him. He could see the plate that Rena was holding shaking in her hand and he said, “Please tell Lady Ava I’ll be by within the hour to escort her around the city.”
Rena bowed lower, never raising her eyes to him, and softly said, “Thank you, my Lord,” and departed swiftly. As she disappeared from sight, the light in his eyes dimmed and he realized he no longer had an appetite.
* * * * *
Zan walked the streets of the Capital with Ava at his side and a company of Palace Guards surrounding them. Ava was accompanied by a handful of her ever present entourage, and Zan was keenly aware that Rena was in attendance. He could smell her scent in the air, had isolated her rich fragrance from the others, and he drank it in like a fine wine. Though he couldn’t see her, he could sense she was just a few paces behind him. Her scent was so unique, and it almost felt like his body knew it, and reacted to it as if . . . as if . . . she was something more-
“Zan?” Ava said with a touch of blue staining her colors. Was he ignoring her? Had he heard a single word she had said?
“I’m sorry Ava,” Zan hastily said. “You were saying?”
“Perhaps it’s time to return to the Palace,” Ava said coolly.
“Yes. Yes, of course,” Zan responded and mentally shook himself. He was getting off to a bad start with Ava and he was afraid it wasn’t boding well for the union. They rotated back in the direction of the Palace and Zan had to consciously keep from studying Rena’s graceful movements when she came into his line of vision. Looking at her markings, he once again felt a familiarity, as if he had seen the pattern before. He became aware of Ava, standing beside him, waiting for him to show her the proper intimacy that she expected from her soon to be husband. Holding back an inward cringe, his digits wrapped around hers and they made their way back to the Palace grounds.
* * * * *
“The Rebels have taken a foothold in the southern province,” Rath informed Zan as they reviewed the current status of the dissension that had been sweeping across the southern region of the planet. The bands of insurgents were growing in number, leaving a violent path in their wake.
“Casualties?” Zan asked with trepidation. Every loss of life he felt personally, as if every soldier were a part of his own family.
“A few,” Rath spoke somberly. He eyed Zan closely and then gave him the bad news. “I just got word General Weston suffered a fatal injury in a skirmish in sector 27 earlier today.”
Zan’s colors flared maroon as the shock set in. Weston had been a trusted member of the Palace Guard, and a boyhood friend. When the fighting had broken out, he’d volunteered to lead the southern regiment. “Has Marissa been informed yet?”
“No,” Rath answered, feeling his King’s pain. “I knew you would want to do it personally.”
Zan nodded and when he spoke his voice was thick with suppressed emotion. “I will attend to Marissa as soon as we are finished here.”
“Who is Marissa?”
Zan rotated swiftly at the unexpected voice and his eyes met Ava’s. Her colors were muted, neutral, but he was certain he heard a hard edge in her tone. “The mate of one of my finest Generals, and a dear friend. He was killed today in battle and I must inform her of his fate.” Zan watched her colors change to the subdued gray shade of sympathy, but for a moment he thought he saw something else there. Had his eyes only thought he’d seen the aqua shade of triumph? What did that mean?
“My sympathies to both you and the unfortunate widow,” Ava said in a composed tone. She turned to one of her entourage and spoke quietly. Turning back to Zan she said, “You must take an offering of the Weeping Heart, as is custom, when you visit the General’s wife. I have dispatched an expert to pick the finest sample from your gardens. She is exceptionally skilled in the flora of Antar and will chose a proper specimen.”
“Thank you Ava, for your thoughtfulness,” Zan uttered solemnly.
“I take your leave, so that you may continue your discussions,” Ava said with a respectful bow. Zan nodded his acknowledgment and she disappeared into the hallway. He stared at the empty doorway with a vaguely uncomfortable feeling hovering over him.
* * * * *
Zan shuffled through the reports on his desk and things were looking bleaker. Rebels had reportedly infiltrated the Capital City and rumors of a planned attack on the Palace were circulating. With dignitaries arriving for the wedding from across the globe, as well as off world, security had been heightened and the Palace Guard was on high alert.
He sensed her long before the sound of her footfalls reached his ears. He let the paper in his hand flutter to the desktop, forgotten as his eyes concentrated on the door, wondering if she was coming to see him, or just passing by. As her footsteps grew louder, they slowed, and he rose to a standing position as she appeared in his doorway. His colors took on the shade of surprise, turning a vivid magenta for just a moment and then he said, “Rena . . .”
“Lady Ava charged me with the selection of an appropriate Weeping Heart to give as an offering to the unfortunate widow of your General,” Rena said as she bowed to Zan in respect. “I pray that my humble knowledge of the flora of Antar will prove satisfactory.”
Zan stared at the flower arrangement she cradled in her arms. He’d never seen a finer example. The eye at the heart of the bud was the perfect shading and the coloration at the outer edges looked exactly like teardrops. He noticed that she was wearing the traditional mourning garb, and the gray sympathy robe that draped her body and covered her head only served to make him respect her more. She knew his customs well. “Rena,” Zan managed to say finally. “Your selection is the finest I have ever seen. I am honored to present it to the General’s wife.”
Rena felt a sense of pride fill her. She had studied long and hard to understand the customs of Antar, and to have the King praise her was more than she had expected. His next words left her maroon in shock.
“You must accompany me, Rena,” Zan informed her. “The task is a daunting one, and your gentle presence will help ease the pain. Marissa will welcome your gift into her home.”
Rena was about to utter a protest, to suggest that his bride-to-be accompany him, as was fitting, but she held her silence. Zan had just requested that she attend him, and who was she to question the King’s desires? She nodded her head in understanding and waited while he prepared for the unpleasant task ahead of him.
* * * * *
“Nooooo,” Marissa cried out as her eyes took in the sight before her. Zan was standing on her doorstep, wearing the traditional gray robe of sympathy and beside him stood an equally draped female holding a Weeping Heart. “Noooo,” she cried again and Zan caught her as she collapsed to the floor.
“Marissa, I’m so sorry,” Zan said softly as he held her close to him. Her body was trembling with grief and no words were necessary for her to know why Zan was here. Her husband was dead, killed in the fighting. He guided the weeping female back into her home and Rena closed the door to block out the prying eyes of the neighbors.
“Say it isn’t true,” Marissa pleaded.
“I wish it wasn’t true, but he’s gone Marissa,” Zan said nearly choking on his own emotion.
Rena watched Zan as he ministered to the grief stricken widow and she was taken by the tenderness he showed. He had a reputation as unemotional, intolerant, and even cruel, but everything she had seen so far belied that. As Marissa sobbed against him, he held her gently, rocking her back and forth and speaking soothingly to her.
Rena set about the task of displaying the Weeping Heart in a place of prominence in the room. As family and friends came to offer condolences, they would stop by the altar she was preparing to wish the departed a safe journey to the afterlife. It was an integral part of their grieving process. When her task was completed, Zan drew Marissa to the alter and they knelt before it, praying for Weston’s soul to find peace.
Later, after the house had filled, Zan said his solemn goodbyes and escorted Rena to the door. Marissa’s mother walked beside them and said humbly, “Thank you Zan, for taking the time to tell Marissa personally. And to you, Ava, for the fine display you created. The altar is the most beautiful one I have ever seen.”
“No . . . I mean,” Zan stammered, wanting to correct the mistake. “She’s not . . . this isn’t Ava . . .”
“No? I thought . . . you look so . . . you two seem so . . .” Now it was her turn to feel flustered and then she lowered her head. “Pardon my error.”
“This is Rena. A . . .” and then he wasn’t sure what to say. A servant? To use that name for her seemed wrong. Mari was staring at them with a strange look in her eyes, and then Zan let his colors take on a soft yellow as he finished, “ . . . a friend. Rena is a good friend.”
They said their final goodbyes and Zan lead Rena out the door and into the afternoon sunshine. He pushed the hood of the mourning robe off of his head and he turned to gaze at Rena. “Thank you,” he said solemnly.
“For what, Sire?” Rena asked.
“For making this unpleasant task easier to bear,” Zan answered. “Marissa was deeply touched by the beauty of your offering. Tell me, Rena, how did you become so well versed in Antarian customs? How much time have you spent here?”
“This is my first visit,” she answered, avoiding eye contact with him.
“Impossible! How can you know our ways so well?”
“I spent my life knowing I would live here. I began studying your ways when I was but a child.” She met his eyes then, and he could see that there was something hidden there, something that he couldn’t read. With a small laugh she said, “I think I know Antarian customs better than those of my home world.”
Why, Zan wondered as he came to a halt in the middle of the street. Where did she grow up? Where was she schooled? Why did she think she would someday live here on Antar? He had so many questions for her. He wanted to know everything about her. No detail of her life was too minor or inconsequential. As he pondered even more questions he wanted to ask her, he was interrupted by one of the Palace Guards that was in attendance.
“Sir, your presence is requested back at the Palace.”
He nodded at the soldier but continued to stare at Rena. There was something about her that made him want to know about every facet of her life, every dream, every desire, every fantasy that she had ever thought about. He didn’t know what it was that caused him to be this way, he only knew he wouldn’t rest until he knew more. In silence, they turned back toward the Palace gates.
* * * * **
“We need to talk when this torture is over,” Rath whispered into Zan’s ear. They were seated around a large table and enduring yet another stately dinner, complete with visiting dignitaries who had begun arriving in anticipation of the impending nuptials.
Zan looked at Rath with his interest piqued and said, “What about?”
“Your side dish,” Rath answered.
Zan looked at his plate and wondered what in the world Rath was talking about. He didn’t have a side dish.
“You know Zan, sometimes you can be a dim color,” Rath needled him. “I’m not talking about your food.”
Zan looked at him questioningly and Rath glanced over at the girl that hovered behind Ava, waiting on her beck and call. “Are you talking about Rena? Did you find out something about her?”
“As a matter of fact, yes,” Rath responded. “Something very interesting.”
“What?” Zan demanded. He wanted to know right now. He didn’t want to wait until later to hear what Rath had to say about her. He hadn’t been able to get her out of his mind, and with each passing day he could feel his connection to her growing stronger. He knew it was wrong. He was destined to marry another, but he couldn’t help the way he felt drawn to her. There was just something about her . . .
“Let’s just say that under different circumstances,” Rath said conspiratorially, “your fair Rena would have been much more than just a side dish.”
* * * * *
“Explain!” Zan demanded. He was pacing back and forth in the anteroom off the dining hall, waiting for Rath to tell him what the hell he meant. “Exactly what did you find out about Rena?”
“My, my, Zan. I’ve never seen you act this way before.” Rath was eyeing his friend, taking note of his obvious agitation. “If I may be so bold as to say, I think this girl has gotten under your markings. If I believed in it, I would swear you have fallen victim to that dreaded disease, Love At First Sight.”
“Why do you say that?” Zan asked with a touch of blue showing his irritation. Rath was mocking him.
“I’ve seen the shade your colors turn every time you look at her,” Rath said taking on a more serious tone. “I’ve seen the way you watch her, and I must say, you’re lucky Ava hasn’t noticed it too.” Rath could tell that Zan was about to object and he barreled on. “I’ll wager you even know her scent, and can isolate hers from everyone else’s, even after only knowing her such a short time and barely even having spoken to her.”
Zan looked at his friend and admitted to himself that what he felt for Rena went far deeper than curiosity or simple attraction. She made his heart beat faster, just thinking about her. When she walked into the room his breath caught in his throat. He lost complete control of his colors every time she was near. He’d never behaved this way before, not even during the agony of the awakening when he changed from a boy into a mature male. The words Rath spoke were true. God help him, after all this time of waiting, after all the lonely days and nights he had spent wondering if he would ever find the one he dreamt about, Zan realized love had finally entered his heart. But once again, nothing ever quite worked out the way he wanted it to. He was in love with Rena, and yet in mere days, he would take another as his wife.
“It’s too bad,” Rath sympathized. “If it hadn’t been for Tirus, everything would have fallen into place. You would have had the girl, the Crown, and the Kingdom.”
“That’s the second time you’ve inferred something, Rath,” Zan said and his colors showed his irritation. “Exactly what are you trying to say to me?”
“Zan,” Rath locked eyes on his King. “I found out Rena is the daughter of Pau, of Ceri Prime. Your father and Pau bonded you to Rena when you were just a boy. If Tirus hadn’t wrested the Crown away from Pau, Rena would have been the one destined to become your wife.”
* * * * *
Zan stood at the Palace window and stared out over the grounds. It was late, but he had been unable to sleep. His conversation with Rath kept echoing through his brain. Rena was the one he had been bonded to. Rena was the daughter of Pau. Rena should have been the one to become his wife. If only things were different . . .
But things weren’t different. Over his objection, the Council had upheld the contract. Ava would become his wife a week hence, and nothing short of death could stop it.
A movement in the garden caught his eye and he felt his heart skip when he recognized her. She was walking among the flora again, as she had the previous night and the night before that. He felt himself drawn to her and he opened the door and made his way silently across the lawn.
Rena leaned forward so that she could breathe in the scent of the flowers on the vine. The foliage on Antar was different than that of home, on Ceri. Not good different, nor bad different, just different. She had spent the better part of her life studying Antar, it’s customs, it’s traditions, it’s way of life and it’s lifeforms, but this was her first opportunity to really study the flora up close in it’s native environment. With all the things that had gone wrong in her life, at least she finally had this. Everything was as beautiful as she had always thought it would be.
Examining a bud closely, Rena was able to deduce what genus this flower derived from and extrapolate its Cerian cousin. Mating this Rosacea alba with its blue Cerian cousin should create a white hybrid with spectacular blue markings on the tips of each velvety soft petal. Her ruminations were suddenly interrupted by a sound behind her and she froze in place when his scent drifted to her on the night air.
“Hello, Rena,” Zan said softly.
She straightened up and slowly rotated in the direction of her King’s voice. He was standing just a few paces from her, and the rising moon cast his features in its soft glow. Her heart began to beat wildly in her chest and she had to force herself to take slow, even breaths so as not to bring attention to her inappropriate response to him.
“Your Majesty,” she said with a bow of respect.
“Rena, I request a favor of you,” Zan said and his voice was like honey to her.
“Yes, my Lord,” she replied. What could he wish of her, a lowly servant girl?
“When we are alone together, it is my most fervent wish that you refer to me by my given name.”
“But your Highness-”
“That is not my given name,” Zan interrupted.
“No. My given name never has a ‘your’ in front of it. A simple Zan will do very nicely.”
“But . . . but . . . your Maj-”
“Zan,” he cut her off again.
“Zan,” he said again and his colors turned a shade of green to reflect his smile.
“It is improper for me to refer to you in that fashion, Sir.”
“Sir is not my given name either.” He took a step closer to her and said, “Repeat after me . . . Zan.”
“I . . . I . . .” she stumbled over her words.
“Zan,” he repeated. He stepped closer still until he could breathe in the air around her. Her fragrance was heady and he felt his colors turning a vibrant red. It was good that only one of the three moons had risen and the light was still low.
“Please, kind Sir,” she begged.
“Rena, say my name. Please.” She looked at him then, and he sighed as he drank in her beauty. “Please.”
He could see her reticence waver and then her colors took on a glowing shade of yellow. Shyly, and ever so softly, she said, “Zan.”
It was musical in his ears, just the way he had known it would be. Sweet music floating from her mouth to take away the emptiness of the night. His heart sang with joy to hear her say his name. “That wasn’t so hard now, was it?” Zan teased her to add levity to the mood.
“Yes!” Rena said boldly. “Yes, it most certainly was . . . Zan.”
His colors flared bright yellow to hear the ease with which his name flowed from her lips. It felt so right, so fitting . . . so natural. Just being in her presence filled him with a contentment he had never experienced before.
“Tell me, Rena, of all the flowers in my garden, which one is your favorite?” Zan watched her closely, noting the way her eyes dropped from his and her colors took on a purple hue.
Her gaze darted to the white Rosacea and she slowly reached for one delicate bud. “My Mother loved this one, and I guess it was only natural for me to find the same beauty in it that she did. The white ones are my favorite. They are so . . .”
“Pure?” Zan offered when she didn’t finish the sentence.
“Yes,” Rena nodded. “Pure and simple, yet complex. Their beauty is so natural.” She was lost in thought for a moment, of memories of days spent walking hand in hand with her mother through her own precious gardens, before everything had been lost. Zan took a step closer to her and then she asked, “Which is your favorite . . . Zan?”
She turned to him and he held her gaze as he replied, “Until tonight, I had no favorite flower. Now, the Rosacea alba, in all its splendor, will forever hold that most special place in my heart.” Even in the low light of the single moon, Zan could see the way her colors shifted from purple to red. There was no mistaking it, no doubt in his mind. She was as attracted to him as he was to her. But it wasn’t just simple attraction, he corrected. It went much deeper than that.
“I really must go now,” Rena said and began to back away from him. “Lady Ava will become angry if she notices I am away too long.”
Zan watched her rotate and move swiftly toward the Palace. She had only moved a few paces when his words stopped her in her tracks. “I know who you are, Rena.”
He could hear her sudden intake of breath and then she slowly shook her head. “I am but a lowly servant girl, bound to do the bidding of my Lady. I exist only to serve her.”
“You are Rena,” Zan said moving to stand behind her. “Daughter of Pau, tenth ruler of Ceri. You are Rena, the female my Father bonded me to when I was but a boy.”
“I am no one,” Rena whispered.
“You are the one I was intended to marry,” Zan leaned into her, whispering to her. “You are the one I should be marrying. You are the one I wish I was marrying.” He touched her and turned her to face him and even in the low light he could see her unshed tears. “You are the one who brought out emotions in me that I never knew existed. You are the one that makes my heart sing every time I’m near you.” He lifted her face up to his and said, “You are the one I’ve been waiting my whole life for.”
“Zan . . .” her voice quivered as she spoke.
“Tell me I’m wrong, that you don’t feel anything for me, and I’ll walk away right now,” Zan said leaning even closer to her. Their heads were nearly touching as he looked down into her eyes and he saw her slowly shake her head.
“My Mother gave me a picture of you on the day our Father’s bonded us,” Rena spoke in hushed tones. “As soon as I saw your image that day when I was just a young girl, I knew. It was as if my soul recognized you, and from that moment on, I knew I could never be with anyone else. All my life there has been only you. Even after my Father was murdered, and my Mother as well, the thought of someday seeing you, of actually traveling to Antar and being near you, kept me going. I knew we could never have the life that I had dreamed of, but just the thought of you kept me alive day after day.”
“Are you saying . . .” Zan struggled to speak around the constriction in his throat.
“I’ve always been in love with you,” she whispered.
“Rena . . .” Zan managed to say. He pulled her close to him and then closed his eyes, struggling with the reality that he was in love with her too. He barely knew her, but it didn’t matter. He knew he’d always been waiting for someone, and now he’d finally found her, only it was too late. His fate was already sealed. Or was it? “Maybe there’s a way.”
He was grasping at straws and he knew it, but the thought of marrying another when his heart belonged to Rena was more than he could take. His entire being was screaming for her. His heart, his mind, his soul cried out to love her.
“You’re bound by contract,” Rena said and Zan could hear the sorrow in her voice.
“Contracts have been broken before,” he countered, not wanting to give up.
“Not this kind,” she sadly shook her head. “The Council has spoken.”
“I’ll find a way, Rena,” Zan pledged. “I’ll find a way to make this work for us.” He leaned even closer and his mouth moved along the delicate ridges of her cheek, brushing along the aroused markings on her fine skin until he reached her mouth. When they touched, his mouth to hers, it was the culmination of every desire he’d ever had, every dream he’d ever dreamt. An explosion of intense emotion passed between them and left them shaking in its aftermath.
“Zan . . .” Rena whispered.
“I love you, Rena,” Zan whispered back.
“I love you,” Rena answered. “I’ve loved you my whole life.”
* * * * *
Zan paced back and forth in his chambers waiting for Vilandra to arrive. Rath watched him and couldn’t help the smug look that crossed his face. It was so unusual to see Zan so out of control. This was a male that rose every morning at the same exact time, that demanded adherence to a strict code of conduct, who would deal swiftly and harshly with his enemies. Yet in the face of true love, he lost all composure.
“Relax, Zan,” Rath urged. “She’ll be here shortly.”
“I know,” Zan replied in agitation. “It’s just that time is running out and this is the only option I have been able to think of. We have to make this work.” A rapping at the door drew his attention and he barked out, “Enter!”
“What is so important that you had to drag me out of my weekly game of Kia?” Vilandra demanded as she glared at her brother.
“I’m sorry, Vi,” Zan answered, “but I need your help.”
“Help with what?” she asked suspiciously.
“I want you to help me break up the wedding.” Zan watched her colors change to a deep shade of maroon.
“Are you crazy?” she blurted out.
“Maybe, but that doesn’t change anything,” Zan replied. “I don’t want to go through with this wedding, and I want you to help me. I’ve been studying case law and I believe there is one way we can make this work . . .”
* * * * *
Zan lay in wait in the Palace hall and his ears picked up when he recognized the sound of her familiar tread on the marble floors. Once again, she was headed toward the gardens as she did every night, but this time he was ready to intercept her. The echo of her footsteps grew louder as she neared and when she passed by, he reached out and grabbed her. Her cry was smothered by his mouth covering hers, claiming her as his rightful mate.
“Zan,” Rena mumbled. “Someone will see.”
“I don’t care,” he answered as he planted kisses on her face. “After tomorrow, everyone will know that you belong to me. Soon, you will be my rightful Queen.”
“What are you talking about?” Rena asked and her colors took on a deep shade of maroon. It was impossible. She could never be Queen.
“I’ve found a loophole in the law,” Zan answered as he pulled Rena along the hallways. He reached his chamber and slammed the door behind him and then pulled her close to him, relishing the feel of her body pressing against his. “I found an old reference to a similar situation in case law.” He began to touch his cheek against her dilated markings and his own swelled as his blood rushed to the surface of his sensitized skin. The intimacy of his touch was making her feel things she’d never felt before and he was making it hard for her to keep her mind on the current pressing matters.
“Explain, Zan. What do you mean?” He was making her heart race, her blood boil, and all she could think about was her desire to be with him.
“I’ve already used my one allotted objection,” he said looking into her eyes, “but Vilandra hasn’t. During the ceremony tomorrow, as first in line to the Crown, she has the right to claim a fraudulent marriage. My contract is with you, not Ava. The Council thought you were dead when they decreed I marry Ava. Now that we can prove that you didn’t perish along with your Father and the rest of your family, Vilandra’s objection during the ceremony will halt the proceedings and cause a mandatory review of the situation. At that point, I can demand that the original contract be fulfilled. I can demand you as my rightful bride.” He was breathless as he finished telling her the news and she stared at him with a deep shade of maroon highlighting her shock.
“Will she do that for you?” Rena asked, daring not to hope.
“Of course,” Zan answered with certainty. “She’s my sister.”
“Do you think this will work?” Rena asked, afraid to believe in it.
“Yes,” Zan answered as he stared into her beautiful face. “The law will be on our side this time. A week from now, after all the proper paperwork has been filed, I can take you Rena, the love of my life, as my lawful Queen. That is, if you’ll have me.”
Rena stared at him afraid to let her true feelings show through. To be his wife was all she had ever dreamed of, ever since she was a child and saw his boyish face for the first time. Her breathing reflected the depth of her desire for him and she replied, “Of course I’ll have you. I’ve waited my whole life to become your wife.”
Zan stared at her in utter amazement that he had found her. In just these few days that he had known her, his whole world had come to revolve around her. His needs and his desires craved to be fulfilled by her. He had never wanted someone so intensely before. He could feel his skin begging to touch her again.
“Zan . . .” she muttered as the deep red markings on his skin once more came in contact with hers. He was making her weak, showing her the kind of intense pleasure they could one day experience in each others embrace. “Zan . . . I want . . .”
“Stay with me,” Zan insisted as he nuzzled next to her ear. “Stay with me tonight, and tomorrow we’ll announce our plans to marry. Please Rena, stay with me.”
She met his intense gaze and saw his need, his desire in the vibrant red tones he was showing her. Her colors were a matching shade, showing him just how much she wanted him too and he swept her into the air. He ran, holding her delicate body close to him, and when he reached his bedroom chamber, he ordered his servants to leave.
Tonight, Zan would mate with his true love, and together, he and Rena would create something magical. Tonight, their life and their love would be joined forever. Tomorrow their future would begin. Or so they thought.
* * * * *
“Oh, look at your brother,” Alanee said to Vilandra as they watched the ceremony unfold. “He’s so nervous.”
“Yes, he is, isn’t he,” Vilandra agreed.
“He couldn’t even eat his morning meal, and you know how much he loves to feast in the morning. I’ve never seen his colors so vivid before.” Alanee squeezed her daughter’s hand and watched as the ceremony went into the final stage. “I knew he would find true love. The prophets said this union would be something special. Ava has made him happier than he’s ever been before. And speaking of happiness, when are you and Rath going to set the date for your wedding?”
“Soon Mother,” Vilandra smiled. “I hope to marry very soon.”
The high priest continued his chant and Zan struggled to remain calm. Vilandra should have voiced the objection already. He tried to make eye contact with his sister but each time their eyes met she simply smiled and looked away. What was she waiting for? He watched as Rath went to her side and whispered to her. He pulled her to her feet and Zan sighed. Finally. He allowed himself to relax while he waited to hear her voice raise in objection. A minute later, after hearing nothing, his eyes swept the room again but Rath and Vilandra were no where to be seen.
* * * * *
“What do you think you’re doing?” Rath hissed.
“Whatever are you talking about?” Vilandra asked innocently.
“You know what I’m talking about. The ceremony is almost over, and still you remain silent. Zan is counting on you to stop this marriage.”
“I plan on doing no such thing,” Vilandra shot back. The Council decreed that Ava is my brother’s intended, and I will not object so that he can take a servant girl to become his Queen. I was first born, and the Crown should have gone to me upon my Father’s death, but this male dominated society bestows privilege based on gender. My brother is King. Let him live with the Queen the Council chose for him. I’ll not lift a digit to help him.”
“You’re killing him,” Rath said in condemnation.
“No,” Vilandra said chillingly. “That comes later.”
“What’s that supposed to mean?” Rath said in shock.
“Things are about to drastically change,” Vilandra said coldly. “If you want to stay in power, you better not side against me.”
* * * * *
The ceremony drew to a close with Zan in a state of shock. The high priest declared he and Ava bonded and married, a Royal Union that could only be dissolved upon death. As long as Ava lived, Zan could never take Rena as his wife.
He stared at Ava with a combination of dread and disbelief. She was waiting patiently for him to show the traditional male’s acceptance of his bride. He slowly rose from his kneeling position and drew her to a standing position beside him. A cheer went up from the crowd as Zan embraced his bride and he held her stiffly with his extremities while his mind kept repeating, ‘This can’t be happening. This can’t be happening . . .’
The next hour was a blur as well wishers paraded past the newly married Royal pair. After an interminable time, Zan was able to finally break away from Ava and went in search of Vilandra. He found her in the vestibule off the Grand Parlor.
“I only have one question,” Zan seethed as his colors flared a deep blue. Vilandra turned to him at the sound of his voice and met his gaze head on. “Why, Vi? Why did you betray me?”
“I didn’t betray you, Zan. Your marriage to Ava was decreed by the Council. An alliance with Tirus and Ceri Prime is in the best interest of Antar. You were blinded by the pretty face of a servant girl. I kept you from making a terrible mistake.”
“Damn you, Vilandra. Damn you to hell,” Zan said in a fury.
“There is a way out, dear brother,” Vilandra said scornfully. “Abdicate the Crown, and I’ll grant you an annulment. I was first born. The Crown rightfully belongs to me!”
Rath burst through the doorway and Zan turned his blazing colors toward his second in command. “Were you in on this too? Have you been conspiring against me right along with my sister? Did you really think I would turn the Crown over to you so that the two of you could corrupt it? How could I ever have trusted you? Either of you?”
“Zan, there’s no time for accusations now,” Rath shouted at his King. “The Palace is under attack.”
* * * * *
“Zan,” Alanee said cupping her son’s face with her digits. “Don’t send me away. I should stay here, with you. With all of you.” She looked from his solemn face to those behind him. Rath and Vilandra stood together and the strain was evident on their faces. Ava stood behind Zan, and Alanee thought she looked shocked by the turn of events. Her wedding day had been darkened by the attack.
“Mother, I want you to be safe. Go to the country, and when things settle down again, I will call for your return. Don’t worry about us. We will be fine. Take these good people with you, and I will let you know when things are safe enough for your return.” Zan looked beyond his Mother to the downcast eyes of Rena. He had insisted she attend his Mother, fleeing to the safe haven beyond the Capital walls. Had she thought he betrayed her by marrying Ava? How was he to let her know that it was Vilandra that had been the betrayer? “Go now. Your safety is of the utmost importance to me,” Zan said earnestly. His eyes were riveted to Rena as he said those words, but still she didn’t look at him.
“Very well, “ Alanee adhered to her son’s wishes. “I pray to the Gods that our separation will not be a long one.” He didn’t need anymore stress to add to his complicated life. She had no way of knowing that she would never see him alive again. She was unaware that death was waiting to claim him.
* * * * *
Rena busied herself around the Queen Mother’s chamber, trying to keep her mind off of what was happening in the Capital City. The word from the front was that the City was on the verge of collapse, and the government was in disarray. The invaders had the upper hand, and Rena feared for Zan’s safety.
A noise drew her attention, and Rena cast her eyes in the direction of the near window. Something was outside, scratching to get in. Feeling a sense of impending doom, Rena made her way across the room. At first she saw nothing and she breathed a sigh of relief, until she saw the bloody handprints on the glass and she knew. She pushed the windows open and not far away, in his Mother’s sacred gardens, she saw him standing with his back to her. She slowly exited through the window and walked up to his unflinching silhouette, elated to see him but a part of her knowing bad news was afoot. As she neared, he turned to look at her.
“Ever since the first day that I saw you, I knew every time you were near me,” Zan said when their eyes met. “I memorized the sound of your footsteps on the marble floors. I could smell your scent long before you ever entered a room. I spent my whole life knowing there was someone for me, out there somewhere among the stars, that would make my life complete. I just didn’t know that, when I found you, I wouldn’t get to keep you.” His eyes swam with suppressed emotion, even now wanting to deny the inevitable.
Rena watched him and her heart filled with dread. Something was terribly wrong. He wavered on his feet and then she watched in horror as he collapsed to the ground and she rushed to his side. “Zan! Zan, what is it? What’s wrong?”
“Everything is lost,” he said looking up into her face as she held him close to her. “No one can ever know what you meant to me. It would mean you’re death too, and I couldn’t bear that. The precious time that we had together, the intimacy that we shared, just know that in the short time that we had, I loved you for a lifetime. I would have given up everything, the Crown, the Kingdom, everything, if it meant we could have been together.”
“Zan, don’t say that. Don’t talk like that.”
“Rena,” Zan sighed. “All my life I waited to find you, always knowing there was someone out there for me. Even after my Father died, and I became King, I always knew that someday you would enter my life.” He choked on his words and a stream of blood flowed from the corner of his mouth. “I just didn’t know that we’d have so little time together.” He tried to lift his digits to touch her face, but he didn’t have the strength.
“Zan, please,” Rena pleaded. “You’re going to be okay. You have to be okay. There’s something you need to know. There’s something I have to tell you. Zan, please, you can’t leave me!”
“I love you,” he whispered as the last of his strength left him. He was dying and nothing was going to stop it. There was no medicine, no healing powers that could prevent it.
“Noooo,” Rena cried as she watched his colors turn ashen and the light dimmed in his eyes. “Zan! You can’t die! Listen to me! There’s something you must know . . .” but the light was gone. His lifeless body lay in her arms and she knew she’d lost him. She clutched him to her and she made a solemn vow. She would find him again. Her soul would search the stars for him if she had to, and someday, their love would be reunited . . .
|posted on 14-Sep-2001 7:28:00 PM|
Max and Liz were trembling as their eyes swam back into focus. The vision had slowly faded, but not the emotions that had accompanied it. Grief, despair, pain, fear, loss, but the overriding emotion that they both felt was love. Such a deep feeling of love.
“Wha-” Liz tried to formulate coherent words but she couldn’t quite get her brain to tell her mouth what to say. “Max . . . did you . . . did you see that?”
“Yeah,” he answered staring down into her eyes. He was also having a hard time putting his thoughts into words.
“Did . . . did you understand any of it?” A part of her understood perfectly well what she had just seen. Another part of her tried to deny it. It wasn’t possible, was it?
“I . . . I don’t know,” Max answered truthfully. He was speaking in hushed tones, still overwhelmed by what he had seen. He needed time to absorb it. “Did you?”
“I . . . um . . . I don’t know. What do you think? Was it . . .”
“. . . real?” Max finished her question. He was trying to get his thoughts together after experiencing such an extraordinary event and he said, “I think . . . I think I wasn’t the only one who lived before.”
“You mean, you think . . . I was . . .” and again she hesitated.
“. . . Rena?” He watched her slowly nod her head and all he could do was stare at her. Had she lived before? Had she been his true love in another lifetime? Is that why he had recognized her from the first moment he set eyes on her? Is that why he’d always known she was the only one for him?
“No, Max,” Liz said shaking her head. “It can’t be. I can’t be Rena. I’m not . . . like you. There’s nothing alien about me. Not in my blood. Not in my cells. I’m . . . human.”
“But it makes sense, Liz,” Max said. “What I felt . . . what Zan felt, in the vision, it’s how I’ve always felt about you.”
“Maybe it’s wasn’t . . . real.” Liz suggested. “Maybe, because things have been so . . . intense lately, maybe what we just saw was like some weird Quentin Tarantino movie, you know? Like our minds going into overdrive or something and making a bunch of weird shit up?”
“Is that what you really think?” Max asked with an uncertain look on his face.
Liz stared up at him as she thought over what she had just said. Quentin Tarantino? Is that what she really thought? She shook her head almost imperceptibly and said, “No . . .”
“Then you think it was real?” Max asked her.
“Is that what you think?” she asked.
“I asked you first,” Max countered. He didn’t know what to make of this crazy shit either. Did he really believe in reincarnation? Who would have thought he could be cloned and brought back to life in a new body, a different species even, but it had happened. Her soul had searched for him and when she found him, she too was reborn. Did he believe it? Looking at her, he realized he didn’t just believe it, he knew it. But what about her? Could she accept it too?
With her eyes roving over his face, she slowly, almost imperceptibly, nodded her head. She did believe it was real. A memory of the life he lived before. The part she wasn’t sure about was if it had anything to do with her. Max had been Zan. But there was no evidence that she had anything to do with the events in the memory they’d shared. There was nothing to prove that she was Rena. “Max . . . do you think that’s how you really looked . . . before? All the . . . weird spots that changed colors? And the ridges . . .” her voice trailed off as she touched her face.
“And the way the arms looked and, um, the hands weren’t really hands,” Max said and then cleared his throat. “And the eyes, did you see how big the eyes were . . .?”
“You look much nicer in this life Max,” Liz said smiling up at him and lifting her hand to run her fingers through his hair. “I like you better with hair.”
“Well, you didn’t have any either you know,” and let his fingers slip through her long, luxurious strands. God how he loved the feel of her hair. It’d been so long since he’d been able to touch her this way. He could feel his stomach rumbling with that old, familiar sensation and he wondered if she could hear it too.
“Zan didn’t seem to mind my lack of hair,” Liz said and her fingers brushed over the smooth skin of his cheek.
“So you do believe,” Max jumped on what she had just said. “You do believe you were Rena.”
“I . . . I . . .” she stumbled as she looked up into his expectant eyes. The words had flowed so easily from her mouth a moment ago, as if subconsciously there was no doubt in her mind. She swallowed hard and then said, “I guess so.”
“What made you changed your mind?” Max asked. “I mean, a minute ago . . .”
“It feels right, Max,” Liz said smiling up at him. “It just feels like the truth.”
“It does,” Max agreed. Everything felt right now.
“Are you guys gonna stay in here forever?” Maria asked from the doorway. Max and Liz both shot a look in her direction and she continued, “Look, let’s go back to Michael’s apartment and try to figure out what’s going on.”
Max turned back to Liz knowing there was so much they needed to talk about, and maybe here wasn’t the best place. Maybe it would be better to go back to Michael’s. The two of them looked at each other and in silent agreement, they turned to follow Maria. Max slid his hand into Liz’s and he breathed out a contented sigh when her fingers entwined with his. After they had walked a few steps, Max hesitated and he squeezed her hand as he came to a sudden stop.
“We’re okay, right Liz?” he asked almost fearfully as she turned to look at him. So much had happened between them in the last year, he was afraid to assume anything. If she said no, he didn’t think he’d survive to the end of the day.
“Yes, Max,” she said as she looked up at him with a smile that emanated from deep inside her. “We’re okay. In fact, we’re more than okay.”
Elation swept through him and his smile lit his face. He pulled her into his arms and he just had to kiss her. Fireworks erupted every time his lips touched hers, and this time was no exception. He would have been happy to spend the rest of his days standing here like this, holding her . . . kissing her . . . loving her. But, of course, Maria chose that moment to poke her head back into the room.
“Holy Shit!” she exclaimed as she watched two of her dearest friends. “Here we go again.”
* * * * *
Max and Liz walked hand in hand out of the Granilith Chamber, and the intimate way they touched wasn’t lost on the rest of the group. Michael and Maria accepted it, Isabel grudgingly approved of it, and Kyle had come to terms with it.
As a unit they turned to exit the pod chamber, when something caught Kyle’s eye. Over in the shadows, he’d seen a movement. Something out of place. What could it have been? Feeling a sense of protectiveness for the others, he took a step in that direction.
Liz slowed her pace as she watched Kyle head into a dark corner of the pod chamber and she pulled on Max’s hand to bring him to a stop. He turned to look at her and curiously followed the direction she was looking. Kyle had wandered deeper into the cavern and with a touch of apprehension in her voice Liz said, “Kyle? What’s wrong?”
Kyle carefully rounded a corner and in the dim light he could see a figure in the shadows. It was hovering against a wall, trying not to be seen and Kyle felt the hairs rise up on the back of his neck. He took a step closer and the figure bolted, running deeper into the cavern.
“Hey!” Kyle shouted, and took off running, chasing after the intruder.
“Stay here!” Max ordered Liz and he ran after Kyle.
“Max!” Liz cried out. Fear gripped her as he disappeared into the shadows and she chased after him. She’d almost lost him earlier, and she wasn’t going to stand by and watch him get hurt again. Running footsteps echoed throughout the chamber and Liz could feel Michael right behind her as they raced deeper into the shadows.
The figure was moving fast and Kyle was struggling to keep up. He must know these caves well, Kyle thought fleetingly and wondered who it could be. His pulse raced even faster when the realization hit him that he was probably chasing another alien, an alien that could probably blast him into a million little pieces with just a look. Who else could get inside this place? You needed that secret decoder hand print shit to get in here. What the hell was he doing chasing an alien? Had he lost his fucking mind? The figure stumbled and Kyle ran even faster to close the distance between them.
Max could dimly see Kyle up ahead but he was having a hard time keeping him in sight. He was still weak from what had happened to him earlier and his legs were threatening to give up on him as he tried to run. What was Kyle chasing? Who was Kyle chasing? Had someone been watching them? What if it was Sean? Sean had been helping Tess. If Sean was alien, another hybrid, Kyle could be in a lot of trouble. He didn’t have any defense against alien powers. Max pushed himself even harder, trying to catch up to the dark figures ahead of him. He needed to protect Kyle.
Liz could see Max just up ahead and her worry intensified. She knew he hadn’t recovered yet and here he was chasing after some unknown threat. If anything happened to him, she’d just die. She finally had him back, her Max, the Max she loved more than anything in the world. She tried to run faster, but her short legs couldn’t equal his long strides. He rounded a corner and Liz panicked as she lost sight of him. A hand closed over her arm and brought her to a sudden stop.
“Michael!” Liz cried out as his face loomed above hers. “Let go!”
“Max said to stay put,” Michael’s voice rumbled. “You and Maria go back to the entrance. In fact, go back to the car where it’s safer.”
“No,” Liz said shaking her head. She tried to pull her arm out of Michael’s grasp but he squeezed harder.
“This isn’t open for discussion,” he said angrily. “Now go! Both of you!” His eyes met Maria’s and he pushed Liz in her direction. “Get out of here!”
A look passed between Michael and Isabel and they both took off running in the direction they had seen Max going.
Maria held onto Liz as she watched Michael’s figure disappear into the depths of the chamber. What did he think he was doing, blindly running after some unknown intruder? Why did guys always have to be so stupid? Acting all macho and invincible and shit. Male testosterone was really overrated. It made them act crazy. Girls always thought things out more thoroughly than guys. Girls made a plan first, and then acted on it. Maybe not, Maria thought as Liz tore away from her and chased after Michael. Hell, who needs a plan?
Isabel could hear two sets of running footsteps behind her and knew that Liz and Maria had ignored Michael’s order. Didn’t they realize they would be safer outside? They had no way to protect themselves, not like she did. Rounding another corner, Max came into view up ahead and she ran faster trying to catch up to him. He had looked so weak earlier, and she was sure his powers weren’t up to strength. He was probably as helpless as the girls were.
Kyle felt a surge of triumph as the figure ahead of him stumbled again and he lunged forward. His body hit the mystery man in the back and they went down together, Kyle on top, pinning the figure to the ground. His lungs were heaving as he tried to suck in air and he could hear the labored breathing of the guy beneath him. His arm went around his throat and Kyle jerked him up to his feet.
“Who the fuck are you?” Kyle hissed in his face and pressed him back against the rock wall of the cave. In the dark, Kyle couldn’t see his face, but his brain was slowly starting to take in what his other senses were feeling. Whoever it was, he was short. Probably not much taller than Liz, and definitely shorter than Maria. With his hand around the guy’s throat, he could feel the small bone structure and the smooth skin. A small whimper escaped from the intruder’s mouth and it caused Kyle to blink. At the same time it dawned on him that his chest was pressing into a pair of soft breasts.
In surprise, Kyle took a step back as a female voice said, “Let go of me.”
Max came up behind Kyle and tried to assess what he was seeing in the dim light. He could feel Michael behind him, and Isabel, and he was distracted for a moment as he sensed Liz nearby, and then Maria too. He cupped his hands in front of him and created a light so that they could see their surroundings, and see the face of the intruder.
A gasp went up from the group as a pair of startling blue eyes came into view. Liz rushed to stand protectively in front of Max, worried about his weakened condition and she felt him put his hand on her shoulder. He looked down at her briefly, letting her know with his eyes that he was alright, and then he turned back to look at Kyle, and the girl standing in front of him. With contempt in his voice he said, “Tess.”
* * * * *
Michael held Tess roughly with his hand clenched around her upper arm and led her into the chamber near the withered pods. She struggled against him, which only served to make him tighten his already painful grip.
“Let go of me,” she hissed and turned her steely blue eyes on him.
“Don’t play mind games with me Tess,” Michael warned her menacingly. If it meant protecting the others, he’d gladly break her neck.
“What are you doing here Tess?” Max’s voice was thick with contempt and her eyes narrowed as she turned to glare at him. “How did you get here?”
Her head lifted defiantly and Michael angrily shouted in her face, “ANSWER HIM!”
“I never left!” she screamed. She looked at the rest of them with hatred and then her eyes settled on Max. “I just made you think I did.”
“Why? I thought you said the baby was dying. That he couldn’t survive here.” He was trying to draw her out, find out how much she knew. Had she heard him earlier, when he was talking to the others and telling them what he remembered?
“There was never anything wrong with the baby,” she said with scorn. “Your son is fine.”
“Tess, I never slept with you,” Max declared. “I never touched you!”
Tess shot a look at Liz and said ominously, “There’s more than one way to get pregnant.”
“No, you’re not,” Liz said with controlled fury. “There never was a baby. You made it up. You made the whole thing up.” She reached back to take Max’s hand and they intertwined their fingers in a show of solidarity.
“Why Tess?” Max asked. “Why did you do it? We opened up our homes to you. We let you in, to be a part of us. We trusted you.”
“It’s because of her!” Tess spit out and glared hatefully at Liz. She turned her gaze back to Max and shouted, “It’s always been because of her! You never loved me.”
“No,” Max said in an even tone and shook his head. “I didn’t.”
“Not here,” she cried. “Not back home. She was always between us.”
“Yes,” Max nodded and looked down at Liz. “I loved her then. I love her now. Nothing and no one could ever change that.”
“She ruined everything,” Tess cried. “She even had your bastard child!”
“Tess! Shut up!”
They all turned at the sound, a voice from behind them, in the shadows. The figure stepped forward, into the light, and Tess shrank back from him. A whimper escaped her lips and she said, “Sean.”
“Can’t you ever do anything right, Tess? You had one simple job to do, and you couldn’t even do that.”
“Don’t come any closer!” Max commanded and his hand rose up ready to throw out a protective shield just in case Sean made any suspicious moves.
“Who are you?” Liz stared him up and down, knowing this wasn’t really Sean. She stepped toward him and felt Max’s hand on her shoulder holding her back, trying to protect her. She looked up at him quickly and then back to Sean. “Are you Kivar?”
Sean smirked arrogantly, smug in his self-conceit. He shook his head like she was child and said, “Parker.”
“Or are you Kendal?” She watched as the smug look faded from his face. She guessed right that time.
“How do you know that name?” He looked at her through narrowed eyes. There was no way she could know who he was. None of them knew anything about his world, not even the King. They were all ignorantly unaware of their past, and this girl, this human, was nothing to fear, unless . . .
“Who is Kendal?” Michael asked in confusion. His eyes shifted from Sean, first to Liz and then to Max, and he could tell they both knew something he didn’t.
“Kendal is Ava’s brother,” Liz spoke softly as she looked at Sean and for just a moment she thought she could see something in his eyes. Something that looked like fear. “And Kivar’s brother too.”
Tess inhaled sharply and she whispered, “How do you know that? I never told anyone.”
“You didn’t have to. We know,” Max said and took an intimidating step toward her. “And now I want you to tell me everything else. Start with what you said a minute ago. What child?” Tess stared up at him defiantly and he shouted into her face, “WHAT CHILD?”
“Your child!” she screamed back at him. “Zan’s child, with that servant girl.”
“Rena,” Max said softly as he stared down at Tess.
Tess cowered back from him, staring at him in disbelief. How could he know? She’d probed his mind many times over the last year and never seen evidence of any memories of his prior life. But now he seemed to know about Kendal and Kivar, and even Rena. How? Her eyes narrowed slightly as she tried to see inside his mind again and alarm gripped her when she encountered a wall of resistance. An incredibly strong wall of resistance.
The tension in the air was thick and then Isabel asked what the rest of them were wondering. “Who’s Rena?”
“Me,” Liz answered. She felt a sense of satisfaction as Tess shot her a startled look. Tess hadn’t expected her to know anything about Rena. Liz turned her eyes up to Max as the words they’d heard finally sank in. Zan and Rena had had a child? They hadn’t seen that in the vision. Or had they? Those final, ominous words that Rena had spoken. Was that the declaration that Rena had tried to tell Zan as he lay dying in her arms?
Max turned his cold gaze on Tess and said, “You better tell me everything.” Tess looked at him with hate filled eyes and she turned away, refusing to answer. Max stepped closer to her, towering above her and shouted, “EVERYTHING!”
“Just keep your mouth shut!” Sean lunged forward and Michael shot out his hand knocking him backwards with a blast of energy.
“Michael!” Maria cried out. “Don’t hurt him!” Sean crumpled unconscious to the ground and Maria ran to his side.
“I want to know everything,” Max insisted. He grabbed Tess by the chin and turned her face to his. “If you don’t tell me, I’ll take it out of your mind.” Tess glared up at him, sensing an idle threat, but she didn’t know him as well as she thought she did. His hand clamped over the side of her face and she felt his eyes boring through hers.
“Max . . .?” Liz said questioningly. She could see the strain on his face and the fear on Tess’s. Something was happening, she didn’t know what, and all she could do was watch. Liz saw the color drained out of Tess’s face, and then her eyes were drawn to Max as his hand and then his arm started to quiver. His jaw was clenched tight and the veins in his neck were bulging and she grasped his arm and repeated, “Max!”
His hand pulled back from Tess like it was on fire and he blinked as he refocused his eyes. He took a step back from her and then he looked at Liz and then the others in the room. Tess slumped forward from the strain and a sob escaped her throat.
“We had a daughter . . .”
“Max?” Liz looked up at him worriedly.
“Zan and Rena had a daughter,” Max said and his mouth turned up in a small smile as he looked down at Liz. He looked around the room, to Isabel and Michael and then said, “Kivar didn’t know about it at first. No one did, except my mother and that wasn’t until . . .”
“Until what, Max?” Liz asked.
“You kept it a secret. You didn’t tell anyone, not until the night you went into labor, when something went wrong.” Max stared down into Liz’s enthralled face and his fingers brushed her hair back from her face. “That’s how you died, during childbirth, but you told my mother the truth first. She hid the child, to protect her, so that Kivar wouldn’t know.”
“Know what Max?” Isabel asked. “What are you talking about?”
“That I had an heir. An heir that had a claim to the throne.” Max turned to look at his sister and Isabel could see the hurt in his eyes. “You weren’t . . . Vilandra wasn’t like you Isabel. She was bitter and she harbored a deep resentment toward me because the Crown went to me. And you had so much anger in you because Father had forbid you to marry the one man you loved. Kivar.”
“What?” Isabel took a step back and her hand flew up to cover her mouth. What was Max saying?
“You’d been in love with Kivar for years, but you kept it a secret. First from Father and then after he died, from me. You told Kivar about the contract between Father and Pau, and from there together you hatched the plan. Force my marriage with Ava and after a reasonable time I’d meet with an unfortunate demise. A victim of an attack on the Palace. Ava would act the role of the grief stricken wife, and wanting no part of stately matters, she would defer the Crown to her oldest brother. Kivar. So with me out of the way and no heir apparent, Vilandra and Kivar could marry and she’d be the Queen she always wanted to be, with the husband she always wanted to have. And Kivar could take the title of Royal Prefect, not as good as King, but close enough. He’d rule Antar, with Vilandra at his side.”
“No, Max,” Isabel whispered and her eyes were filling with tears. She couldn’t have been that cruel, that ruthless, that cold-blooded. Everything that Max was saying confirmed the things Whitaker had told her. She’d betrayed her own brother, even plotted his murder.
“It’s okay Isabel,” Max said to her soothingly. “It wasn’t you. Vilandra is not the person you are.” Michael and Maria stepped over to Isabel, Michael on the left and Maria on the right, showing her their support. She looked at them gratefully but she was still reeling inside. Max turned back to Tess and the gentle look that had been in his eyes a moment ago hardened into something else. “But you, you’re the same, aren’t you Tess. You planned my death in that life and then you planned it in this one too.”
“No . . .” Tess said shaking her head. How could he know these things?
“But something went wrong with Ava’s plan, didn’t it Tess? The attack came early, and instead of you being safely out in the country, you were caught right in the middle of it. So was Vilandra. All four of us were there. All four of us died.” Max looked down at Liz then and he knew she was remembering the same thing he was. That Zan had lived long enough to find his way to Rena, to see her one more time before he died.
“So my Mother,” Max continued and turned his harsh gaze in Tess’s direction again, “not knowing Kivar had orchestrated the whole thing, turned the Crown over to him. He was, after all, the brother of the late Queen. When she sent us here to be reborn, she didn’t know about you or Vilandra or Kivar. She didn’t learn the truth until the night Rena gave birth. After that the rumors started, didn’t they Tess? Rumors that there was an heir to the Crown. Zan’s heir.”
Everyone’s eyes turned to Tess and she shrank back. When had Max gotten so strong? He’d never shown abilities like this before. He had scoured her mind and seen everything. For the first time, she was afraid of him, of what he could do.
“Isn’t that right Tess,” Max said. It wasn’t a question.
“Yes,” Tess whispered, knowing it would do no good to resist him. “No one opposed Kivar until the rumors started. They were too afraid of him. But then they heard the ‘Great Zan’ had an heir, and an underground movement was formed to oust my brother and place your daughter on the Throne. A Queen with Zan’s royal blood flowing through her veins. They didn’t even care that it was a bastard child. She was yours. That’s all they cared about.”
“And so Nasedo made a deal,” Max said coldly, “with Kivar.”
“Yes,” she said and her voice quivered as she answered.
“Nasedo gave up his loyalty to me, and he raised you for one purpose only. Bring home a male child. Zan’s child. A male heir who would have first right to the Crown and that Kivar could raise and control.”
“Yes! But you wouldn’t cooperate, because of her.” Tess turned her cold eyes on Liz, and Max pulled Liz closer to shield her from danger.
“So you messed with his mind,” Liz said with disgust, “so you could take him and Isabel and Michael back home for execution.”
“I had a job to do,” Tess said and her eyes darted around the room. “It was what I was raised to do!”
“So you pretended to love Max all this time,” Liz fumed, “knowing that in the end you were going to send him to his death?”
“It didn’t have to be that way!” Tess cried out and turned back to Max. “Kivar said he would let you live, if only you would have been willing to cooperate! But you wouldn’t, because of her. It always comes back to her.”
“You’re right Tess,” Max smiled inwardly. “It does always come back to her.” He’d seen many things inside Tess’s mind a minute ago. He’d seen that the rebellion was gaining momentum and Kivar was losing ground. He’d seen that Kivar was desperate to hold on to power, but fighting not only the memory of a King that the people refused to forget, but his progeny as well, the daughter Zan had never known. A daughter that now led the movement against Kivar.
He’d seen Kivar’s merciless demand for Tess to bring home a male heir to authenticate his control of the Crown, or face the consequences. But most of all, he’d seen the one thing that frightened Kivar the most.
A proclamation from the prophets that the reborn King would be reunited with the true daughter of Ceri and the Crown would be rightfully restored. A prophecy that said brothers would lay down their weapons and kneel quaking in fear before the King. A Prophecy that the people had come to believe Zan, reborn as Max Evans, was the living embodiment of. A prophecy come to pass.
Max wasn’t sure if he believed in prophecy but the important thing was that Kivar did. It was something that Max could use against him, when the time came to face his enemy. Something had changed in Max today. Zan’s memories had made him stronger, wiser, and given him insights he hadn’t had before. An inevitable confrontation was coming, and for the first time Max felt like he would be ready.
Everyone was quiet as they stared at Tess. How could they ever have trusted her? From the moment they met her, she had been plotting their demise. The silence was finally broken when Isabel asked, ““What are we going to do with her Max? She killed Alex. She was taking us to our deaths. Where does it stop?”
“It stops here, and now,” Max answered as he stared hard at Tess. “What happened to the Granilith? You’re still here. It must be here.”
“It’s gone. I don’t know where it went.”
“What do you mean, ‘You don’t know where it went’? And what’s so special about it that Kivar wants it back? If it’s just a spaceship-”
“It isn’t. It’s the only one in existence. It doesn’t exist in time and space, not like we do,” Tess said meeting his eyes. “It can move from one plain to the next, connecting one place to another. That’s why it can be use to travel from here to Antar or anywhere else, almost in the blink of an eye.”
“Or for time travel,” Liz said quietly and looked up at Max.
“Let’s get out of here,” Michael suggested, “and figure out what we’re gonna do with her. And juvie boy over there.” Max nodded his head in agreement and Michael and Kyle went to lift Sean’s unconscious body from the ground. Isabel grabbed Tess by the arm and pushed her toward the entrance to the cave and Max and Liz, walking hand in hand, followed close behind her.
Liz’s footsteps suddenly faltered and she felt a strange sensation. She reached into the front pocket of her pants and pulled out the pendant that Max had left on her balcony this afternoon and she held it in her hand. She had always felt that there was something special about it, some purpose besides just an ornament or a piece of jewelry and now she was positive of it.
“Liz?” Max said as he watched her walk toward the Granilith chamber with the pendant resting on the palm of her hand. The symbol in the middle was glowing, pulsing with an unearthly light and Liz pressed her thumb against it. Max stood at her side, with the rest of them crowded behind them and they all watched spellbound as the room began to shimmer in a multitude of color, and the Granilith once again took solid form.
“It’s like a fucking remote control!” Kyle eloquently declared as he looked from the Granilith to the object in Liz’s hand.
“Maybe I should send you back,” Max said taking Tess by the arm and walking her toward the Granilith. It was pulsing with a rainbow of colors and the room was filling with a steadily rising hum. “Back to Antar.”
“No! Max! You can’t do that!” Tess cried.
The shocked look on her face took Max by surprise and he asked, “Why not? Isn’t that what you always wanted? To go home?”
“No, please! You can’t send me there! I can’t go back now! You don’t understand what he’ll do to me!”
“You mean Kivar? You’re afraid of your own brother?”
“I didn’t do what I was supposed to do. He’ll kill me if I come home empty handed! Max, please!”
“Well that’s your problem, isn’t it?” Max said harshly.
Tess broke away from his grasp and ran to the crystal in the face of the Granilith. She clawed at it with her fingers until it pulled free and she threw it to the floor where it smashed into a thousand pieces. “I won’t go back!”
“Tess,” Max said as he took a step toward her and she cowered back against the Granilith. “What did you do?” The air in the room suddenly changed, filling with an electrical energy and Tess fearfully turned her head to look at the imposing machine. The colors inside were swirling faster than before, a riot of colors and her eyes grew even wider as she felt the pull. Her body began to tingle like pins and needles on her skin and then she disappeared.
The room shimmered and suddenly her body was inside the belly of the beast, instead of standing beside it. It was real this time, not a mindwarp she had created for the others to see. She was about to be transported to another world, another place, but where? She’d taken the crystal out, the crystal that navigated the transport. Without that, the direction was random. It could fling her into the black void of space, or into the molten core at the heart of a planet. She could materialize on the sandy shore of a far away paradise, or disintegrate in the corona of a nearby sun.
“Tess . . .” Kyle stepped forward looking at her worriedly. Max rushed to the Granilith looking for a button or a lever or a control panel to stop whatever was happening, but the surface was smooth. The Granilith refused to give up its secrets.
Max watched her and knew there was nothing he could do. The Granilith was still a question mark in his mind. Kivar wanted it and needed it, and Max had it. Now he needed to learn how to use it. But it wasn’t going to help Tess right now. Nothing was going to help Tess.
The low hum in the room built to a roar and they all stared helplessly at the image of Tess inside the Granilith. “Max!” she cried one last time. “I wanna stay-”
Her image blinked out, but her final word echoed around the chamber long after she was gone. The Granilith powered down of its own volition, and the swirling colors dimmed and faded away. They stared at the empty space where Tess and been, and then one by one, they turned their backs and walked away. Kyle was the last to leave.
* * * * *
They were all quiet as they reached the main entrance to the chamber and Max looked out at the darkening sky. It’d been the middle of the day when he’d driven out here, and now he could see the sun had already dipped below the western horizon and all that remained was the residue of what must have been a spectacular sunset. “How’d it get so late?”
“Max,” Michael squeezed him on the shoulder as he passed by. “We’ve been in there for hours. You lost a chunk of you life while you and Liz were in that trance, or whatever it was.”
Max looked down at Liz who was standing at his side. They smiled at each other over how far off Michael was. He hadn’t lost a chunk of his life. He’d gained a whole new one. He’d had so many questions his entire life. Who he was, what he was, where he came from, why was he here? He didn’t have all the answers yet, but now at least he knew enough to give him a better understanding of what he had once been.
They crossed over the threshold and Max sealed the chamber closed before turning to look at Sean. “What are we going to do with him?” Michael asked. They’d propped him against the rock surface just outside the cave and it looked like he was starting to come around. Max knelt in front of him and placed his fingers on the side of his head. He closed his eyes and concentrated hard and his fingertips began to glow. After a minute, Max broke the contact and rose slowly to his feet.
“What did you do?” Maria asked as she watched Sean stir.
“I put a block, inside his brain. He won’t remember anything. They also won’t be able to use him again. Kendal won’t be making any more visits, at least not using Sean.”
Sean stirred and opened his eyes. He looked up at everyone standing around him and rubbed a hand over his eyes. He looked at Maria crouched next to him and he said, “What’s going on? Where are we?”
“We were on a picnic,” she told him. “You fell and hit your head. Do you remember anything?”
“I don’t even remember getting out of bed this morning,” he said sounding confused.
“Come on,” Maria said helping him to his feet. “Let me help you to the car.”
“How’d you learn to do that?” Michael asked in amazement as he watched Sean scratch his head and follow Maria down the rocks.
“Just a little something I picked up today,” Max said and a tired smile graced his face. “Let’s go home.”
Max felt Liz slip her hand into his and they headed down to the cars below. They broke into two groups, Max and Liz leading the way to the jeep with Isabel following behind and Michael following Maria and Sean to the jetta. Kyle came to a stop and stood staring at Michael’s broad back as he walked away from him. Even after all that they had seen, and all that they had heard, Kyle was still Kyle.
“Hey, Michael!” he called out to get his attention. “When are you gonna fix my fu-, when are you gonna fix my car?”
“Later,” Michael said indifferently.
“Later?” Kyle repeated. “Later, in like an hour? Or later, like when hell freezes over?”
“Later,” Michael repeated as he opened the driver’s door of the jetta and climbed inside.
“Great.” Kyle’s eyes narrowed as he watched Michael settle in behind the wheel and then decided Buddha wouldn’t approve of his violent thoughts. But Buddha never had to put up with freaking aliens! He kicked at the ground with the pointed tip of his boot and followed Max and Liz to the jeep.
Max reached into the front pocket of his jeans to retrieve his keys and as he pulled them out, Liz took them out of his hand. “You’re tired Max. Why don’t you let me drive? Then you can just sit back and relax. Rest.”
He was about to protest, to tell her he was just fine, but he really was tired after everything that had happened today. He nodded and then helped her into the jeep before walking around to the other side. He waited while Kyle settled into the back seat and then he climbed into the passenger seat next to Liz.
Michael put the jetta in gear and headed for the highway with Liz following close behind. As they passed Kyle’s mustang, Liz slowed and Max leaned over to get a good look at the damage Michael had inflicted on it. The front end really was smashed, and Max just shook his head and said, “Jesus, Michael really did a number on your car.”
“No shit,” Kyle mumbled from the back seat. “You people really are a menace to society.”
“Look Kyle . . .” Max looked back at him apologetically.
“Forget it, man. It’s not your fault.”
“Kyle, about earlier,” Max said, dropping his eyes. “Thanks for-”
“Forget it,” Kyle said again but his tone was much mellower. “Let’s just say we’re even.”
Their eyes met and held as they both contemplated the things they’d been through over the last year. Max had saved Kyle’s life and healed a bullet hole in his chest. Today, Kyle had returned the favor, helping Max come back from the brink of death. A slow smile spread over both their faces and Max said, “Yeah.”
“What do you think happened to her?” Kyle asked after a brief silence. He could still hear Tess’s final words echoing in his head.
“I don’t know,” Max answered. “Maybe we’ll never know.”
“I really liked her, you know? She had a good side, but they never let her have a chance to . . .”
“To what Kyle?” Liz asked as she looked back at him in the mirror.
“To be human.” He looked from Isabel, and then to Max and slowly shook his head. “Just do me a favor.” He stole a glance back toward the rocks and said regretfully, “Don’t introduce me to any more of your alien friends.”
* * * * *
Liz pushed open the door to her apartment just as the phone began to ring. She rushed over to answer it and Max closed the door behind him. He listened to her side of the conversation and a frown creased his brow.
“Is everything alright?” Max asked worriedly as Liz set down the phone.
“Yeah,” Liz answered. “That was my Mom. She’s going to stay with my Dad again tonight, to keep her eye on him. She says he’s fine, but still . . . I can tell she’s worried about him.” With all the events of the day, for a while she’d forgotten about her father still recovering in the hospital.
“Do you want me to go over there?” Max offered as he gently lifted her chin up. “To see if everything’s okay?”
“No, Max,” Liz said shaking her head. “I’m sure he’s fine. Besides, you can’t get near him. My Mom never leaves his side. But maybe we can go tomorrow?” Liz asked hopefully. She felt guilty for not going to the hospital this evening to see him. She felt guilty for forgetting he was there.
“I’m sorry, Liz.” Max felt terrible once again for disrupting her life so badly. He pulled her into his arms and kissed her forehead, wishing things could be normal and knowing they never would be.
She heard him sigh again and her hand rose up to brush against his forehead and she said, “You look tired. Maybe you should go home. Get some rest.”
“I’m okay,” he assured her and his hand closed over hers. Maybe she was right, though. It was late and the events of the day really had taken a toll on him. He really should go home but the thought of being separated from her, even if it was only for the night, left him feeling uneasy. He knew it was unreasonable, but he didn’t want her out of his sight ever again. “I don’t feel good leaving you here all alone.”
“Max, I’m fine here,” Liz reassured him. “You’re the one I’m worried about. Besides,” Liz said with a laugh, “if you leave Isabel down in the jeep any longer, she’s gonna kill you!”
“You’re right,” Max laughed lightly. “I wouldn’t want her to do that again!” Turning more serious his smile disappeared and he said, “You call me if anything bothers you. And I mean anything.”
“I will,” Liz promised. She was looking up at his face, already missing him even though he hadn’t left the room yet.
“I’ll see you in the morning then,” he said and he kissed her lightly, aching for more. “I’ll make sure everything’s locked up when I go downstairs.” With difficulty, he tore his eyes away from Liz and he crossed the room, opening the door to the stairs that would lead down to the Crashdown. He paused there, staring at Liz one more time, and then the door closed and he was gone.
Liz stared at the empty doorway and then she was chasing after him. “Max! Wait!” She flung the door open and he turned to her with a look of intense longing on his face and then she was running to him. His long strides closed the distance between them quickly and he swept her into his arms, crushing his lips against hers, claiming her mouth as his own, showering her with all the love he felt for her. Their kiss was long and filled with all the passion that they felt for each other and been denied for so long.
The sound of a door opening drifted up the stairs and then Isabel’s strident voice interrupted them. “Max!”
“I guess I better go,” Max smiled sheepishly at Liz. He rested his forehead against hers and said, “I meant what I said. Call me if you need anything. Anything.”
“”I will,” Liz smiled at him to ease his worries. “I’ll see you in the morning.”
“In the morning. Goodnight, Liz,” Max said and he had to kiss her again. His arms crushed her to him and his lips pressed hard against hers and when he pulled away, her arms felt empty without him. He took the stairs two at a time and when he reached the bottom he turned around to look up at her again. She thought his skin looked flushed, tinged with red, or was it just her imagination? His face was shining as he looked up at her and he said, “I love you.”
“I love you too, Max,” she said softly. His smile was full of joy as he backed away and then he turned and disappeared from sight.
Edited by - Breathless on 09/21/2001 10:27:47
|posted on 14-Sep-2001 7:28:55 PM|
Max tossed his keys on his dresser as he passed by and then wandered over to his stereo. He waved his hand in front of it and music began to float from the speakers. Staind was playing on the radio and a bittersweet smile played across his lips.
It’s been awhile
since I could look at myself straight
It’s been awhile
since I said I’m sorry
And it’s been awhile
Since I’ve seen the way the candles light your face
And it’s been awhile
But I can still remember just the way you taste . . .
Max touched his fingertips to his lips and sighed deeply. The taste of her lips was still fresh. The feel of her body in his arms had felt like heaven to him. After the nightmare of the last year, ever since that day out in the desert when his real mother had left a message about his supposed destiny, Max had been walking around without purpose, without direction, without a will of his own.
Liz was what grounded him and gave him a reason for being. He felt alive again, remembering the feel of her in his arms, the taste of her on his lips. He’d had to lose everything, to get back what he wanted most of all. Liz. He didn’t want to be without her ever again.
He sat on the edge of his bed and wearily pulled off his boots and his socks and tossed them in a corner of his room. He hooked his fingers under the hem of his green t-shirt and pulled it over his head. It joined his shoes and socks in a heap on the floor, and then he stretched out on his bed. His hand rested on his chest and he remembered how it had felt when Liz rested her hand there earlier. It had made his heart race faster in his chest.
As weary as he was, he just couldn’t get Liz out of his mind. But that really wasn’t surprising. It had always been that way. She filled his thoughts, ever since the day he climbed off a big yellow school bus and saw her smiling face across the school yard. He’d known from that moment that she was the one. The only one. He just hadn’t known how really true that was.
Max turned his head and looked at the picture on his nightstand, the picture he had of Liz, and he picked it up and brought it closer so that he could see her face. Maria had taken it one day last fall, and she had been showing Michael the pictures she had just had developed when he looked over her shoulder and he saw it. He had begged Maria for it, pleaded with her until she finally relented and gave it to him.
He touched her face through the glass and not for the first time wished he had the ability to dreamwalk Liz. He could be with her right now, in his dreams, if only . . .
He sighed and set the photograph back on the nightstand. As weary as he was, he decided he’d be lucky to get any sleep at all tonight. He was just too keyed up. So much had happened today, and he was still trying to take it all in. He sat up and swung his legs over the side of the bed, knowing sleep was out of the question. He looked at Liz’s picture again and he knew he couldn’t stay away. He needed to be near her.
His mind made up, he hastily grabbed his shirt off the floor and slipped his boots on, sans socks, and grabbed his keys off the dresser. He opened his window, climbed through, and headed out into the night, and the one place he desperately wanted to be.
* * * * *
Liz sat on the edge of her bed idly running a brush through her hair. Her hand covered her mouth as she stifled a yawn, but she knew sleep wasn’t going to come easy on this night. Too much had happened. She’d seen too much. Felt too much. Experienced too much. She’d almost lost Max forever today, and in the process of getting him back, she experienced things that were beyond imaginable.
Who knew what tomorrow would hold? Maybe they wouldn’t even have a tomorrow. Maybe all they had was the here and now, and it should be lived to the fullest, because tomorrow might not ever come. She’d always looked at life in long term possibilities, but for Zan and Rena, one night of passion was all they had had. And then life had conspired against them and taken him away from her. And what of her and Max? Did a similar fate await them? Was their love destined to always fall short of what it could have been?
What did she really want? If she had her choice, would she choose to deny herself, or would she give in to the primal urges Max caused in her? And that was the key, wasn’t it? Max. All roads lead back to Max. Not surprising with all that she had seen today. He was, after all, the center of her world.
* * * * *
Max pulled the jeep to a stop and stared up at the lights in her bedroom window. He’d been surprised that they were still on, but maybe she couldn’t sleep either. He slowly climbed out, but hesitated to climb up her ladder. Was he here just to be near her, just to breathe in the air around her? Or was he hoping for . . .
He ached for her, but what if it was too soon? What if she wasn’t ready for . . . more? Maybe he wasn’t ready either. Oh God, who was he kidding?
His feet moved of their own accord, and he found himself at the base of her ladder with his hands poised, ready to rise. Going on blind instinct, his foot found the bottom rung, and he began to climb . . .
* * * * *
Liz opened the drawer of her nightstand and took out the wooden box that she kept there. Her favorite possessions were stored in it. Her Grandmother’s wedding rings that her dad had given to her after she died. The blue ribbon she had won in her first science fair. An arrowhead that she and Maria and Alex had found in the desert and used to proclaim themselves blood brothers.
She moved those objects aside and reached for the one she was looking for. A silver hair clip, in the shape of a V, with intricate little symbols along the edges. She smiled as she picked it up and laid it on the palm of her hand, and fond memories returned. She closed her nightstand drawer and opening the clasp on the clip, she slipped it into her hair.
* * * * *
Max rose up the ladder and he hesitated as he reached the top. He could sense her on the other side, feel himself being drawn to her. He’d felt that pull his whole life, always known that he was meant to be with her. He lifted his foot and his boot slipped off, falling to the sidewalk below. He hadn’t bothered to tie them in his haste to leave his room. It hit the ground with a dull thud and he fleetingly thought of retrieving it, but he was drawn to Liz, and there was no time to waste.
He swung his leg over the top of the wall and clumped across her balcony, coming to a stop as he reached her window. And there she was. His heart climbed into his throat as he looked at her, sitting on the edge of her bed and running a brush through the ends of her hair. Her pink tank top contrasted beautifully with her dark hair and her matching pajama bottoms had little white stars all over them. For some reason, that made him smile. He lifted his hand, and hesitated briefly before tapping lightly on the glass.
Liz turned at the sudden sound and when her eyes met his she felt a rush of emotions. Surprise, elation, joy, euphoria, delight, desire. Her heart rate tripled as she rose from her bed and crossed her room to the window. Her hand reached out to disengage the lock and Max lifted the window, removing the obstacle that separated them.
“What are you doing here, Max?” Liz asked in surprise.
“I just . . . I wanted to see you,” he answered, hoping she wouldn’t be mad at him for coming back. “I couldn’t stay away.” They stared at each other for a minute, with an air of anticipation all around them, and then he asked, “Can I come in?”
She stepped back from the window, giving him her silent consent, and he hesitated only briefly before slipping over the windowsill and letting his feet hit her floor. He stood before her, feeling a gentle breeze pushing him toward her, and then he reached around and closed the window behind him.
“You really shouldn’t be here,” she said, biting nervously at her lower lip. What did she have to be nervous about? Didn’t every girl have an exotic dark haired mystery man climb up their balconies during the middle of the night? With one shoe on, and one shoe off? And wind swept hair, and smoldering eyes? And lips . . . oh, those lips . . .
“Do you want me to go?” he asked and held his breath, waiting for her answer. He wasn’t sure if he was physically capable of leaving. His body wasn’t going to let him . . .
She slowly shook her head back and forth, and when she found her voice she said, “No . . .”
The air that he had been holding rushed out of his lungs and he felt lightheaded. She didn’t want him to go. She wanted him to stay. Her eyes were looking up at his, so big, so expressive, so innocent, so full of love and he felt incapable of speech. He was living a dream, one he hoped he’d never wake up from. “I . . . I want to show you something . . .” he finally managed to say.
“What?” An uncertain smile touched her lips and her stomach fluttered again. He stepped away from her and she watched his every move as he crossed the room to her stereo. She covered her mouth with her hand to keep from laughing over the way that he walked, with one shoe on, and one shoe off, and when he turned to see her staring at his feet, he looked down in surprise. He hadn’t even noticed.
With an embarrassed look in his eyes and a blush rising in his cheeks, he lifted his foot and pulled off his remaining shoe. He let it fall to the floor with a sheepish smile and then turned back to her stereo. Soft, gentle music flowed from the speakers and he walked slowly back to Liz. His hand reached out for hers, letting his fingers glide along the palm of her hand and he drew her away from the window, into the center of her room.
“Close your eyes,” he said softly. She looked into his eyes, trying to guess what he was going to do and then she did as he asked. The trust that she showed him made his heart sing, and he just stared at her for a moment, knowing that he was the luckiest man alive. His hand rose toward the ceiling and the wood and plaster and nails shimmered and wavered before disappearing to reveal the stars twinkling in the night sky and the moon shinning down on them. He snapped his fingers and the lights blinked out, replaced by an abundance of flickering candles casting her room in a soft glow. Her eyes popped open at the sound and her trembling hand flew up to cover her mouth as she looked around the room.
“Max . . .” she whispered.
“Do you like it?” he asked, unable to take his eyes off her.
She blinked, trying to keep from crying, and she said with a sigh, “Yes.”
Max looked up at the night sky and said, “We came across the stars, Liz, to find each other again. Both of us.” He looked back down at her and drew her into his arms. “We just took different ways to get here. We belong together, Liz. Then. Now. Always.”
Her eyes held his and she said, “Yes. Always.”
They began to move slowly to the music, their bodies swaying gently together as they lost themselves in each other’s eyes. His hand wrapped around hers and brought it to his chest where it rested over his heart. His arm circled around her, with that hand pressed against her delicate back. Their bare feet brushed together as they danced in the center of her room.
“I love you, Liz. Forever.” He swallowed hard as he looked into her beautiful face, lit by a multitude of candles, and colors danced across her face. Colors that reminded him of a place far away, and a time long ago.
“Forever, Max,” Liz whispered as his lips moved toward hers. “Forever.” Their lips touched and fireworks were added to the candlelight. Their hearts raced, their passion soared, and nothing could keep them apart. His hand roamed over her back as they kissed, and he could feel the heat of her body through the material of her tank top. His fingers rose to touch the skin of her shoulder and lifted higher to cup the back of her head and then he touched the clip in her hair.
“You’re wearing . . .” he said huskily as he broke off the kiss. His fingers traced the shape of the V and he took a step back from her. He turned her chin so that he could see it in her hair and he was touched to see her wearing it again. She turned back to him and a smile spread over his face. “You missed a strand, there, on your left,” he said, and he watched as her hand rose to feel for it. “No,” his smile deepened and his eyes were twinkling, “on your other left.”
“Will you fix it?” she asked throatily, and then turned her back to him. His hands rose to the back of her head, gathering her long hair between his fingers. He reached for the clip and unfastened it and then carefully removed it from her hair. He set it on the nightstand, safely away from the edge, and lifted his hand to her hair again. He brushed it to the side, away from her shoulder, and his lips descended to kiss a trail down her throat. Her skin was so soft and tasted so sweet, and she leaned back against his chest as if her legs were too weak to hold her up. His arm wrapped around her, crossing over her chest, and his hand lightly brushed over her breast. The contact was electrifying, and his body couldn’t help its natural reaction.
She turned around to face him and her eyes looked up at him, burning with a fire that he had never seen before, and he once more found it almost impossible to breathe. He was frozen between want and self-denial, needing her desperately yet not wanting to push her into something she wasn’t ready for. The strap on her tank top had fallen off her shoulder and the flickering candlelight accentuated the creamy color of her skin. As she stood before him, he could swear she was literally glowing.
“Max . . .”
“I don’t want you to do anything that you’re not ready for-”
“Max . . .”
“I don’t want to pressure you, and I want you to know I’ll wait for as long as you need to-”
“Max . . .”
“That’s not what tonight was all about. I know you said you just weren’t re-” and then the words froze in his mouth as her hands went to the hem of her top and slowly pulled it over her head. She let it fall to the floor and Max couldn’t take his eyes off her. She was perfect. Everything about her was perfect. Her breasts were better than anything his imagination had ever come up with. Round and full and perfectly formed with compact rosy nipples right in the center, nipples that were hard rigid peaks-
“Max . . .”
God how he wanted to touch her, to taste her. He could imagine how she would feel against his hand, in his mouth. How wonderful those rosy peaks would taste-
“Max . . .” she said and moved a step closer to him. His eyes rose to her face and he tried to remember that breathing was necessary to survive, even for aliens. Softly, she said, “I think you’re overdressed.”
Her hands were at his hips and he could feel his shirt starting to rise. This was really happening, not a dream, not a fantasy, not a nightmare forced upon him. The woman that he loved was standing half naked in front of him, and she was right. He was overdressed.
He grabbed his shirt and tore it off, pulling it over his head as quickly as he could. He let it join hers on the floor at their feet and then she moved even closer to him. Her arms went around him and their skin came into contact, chest to chest. Her nipples were like points of fire pressing into his flesh and all hesitation disappeared.
He clutched her against him while his mouth chased after hers. He kissed her hard and his tongue swept over her lips, touching her, tasting her, tempting her with more. Her hands cupped his face as they passionately attacked each other and his hands roamed over her back, up the back of her neck, and threaded into her luxurious hair as he pressed her even closer to him. Her arms wrapped around him and he shivered with sexual excitement when her nails scraped lightly over his skin. He broke off the kiss abruptly and stared down at her while he tried to catch his breath. His eyes roamed over her face and he said, “Liz . . .”
He attacked her mouth again and one hand moved from her back to her side, and then slowly forward. He moved along the swell of her breast until his hand covered her and he could feel her erect nipple pressing into his palm.
“God, Liz . . .” he mumbled against her lips and the moan she emitted from deep in her throat only served to stroke the fires of his passion even more. His lips moved from hers, along her chin, to the sensitive spot below her ear, then down along her throat. Together, they flashed on a distant memory, of a time when the skin on their throats was alive with color, and their flesh blazed red with passion. Max nuzzled his cheek along Liz’s exposed throat, stimulating her phantom markings and Liz moaned as her body reacted to a sexual awakening.
“Zan,” she cried out softly.
“Rena,” Max mumbled into her ear, lovers finally reunited across space and time.
Their skin was alive with heightened sensation and their bodies trembled with mounting desire. Everywhere their skin touch came alive with building pleasure, nerve endings humming to a rising crescendo. Cheeks stroking cheeks and the skin on their throats burning with sexual fire. Chest pressed to chest, his skin stimulating hers as they touched, taking on a life of its own as the friction mounted until they both cried out in pleasure.
“Max . . .?” Liz managed to say between deep lungfuls of air. What was that?
He lifted his cheek from her throat and looked into her eyes, reading her unspoken question. Only half jokingly, he said as he tried to catch his breath, “Foreplay?”
Their skin on their throats and their chests was tingling and throbbing and he cut off her throaty laugh as he kissed her again. That was only the beginning.
As he kissed her, he reached blindly for the edge of her bedspread. He pulled her covers aside and the scent of roses drifted up around them. Startled, she looked down at her bed and saw the rose petals that were sprinkled over her sheets.
“Max . . .” she smiled at him in astonishment. A blush rose up in his cheeks and he shrugged his shoulders as if it were nothing, but she could tell he was pleased by her reaction. “Silk sheets too?”
“Only the best,” he answered and his eyes darted between her lips and her eyes, until he just had to kiss her again. With a wave of his hand, the petals flew off the bed and danced in the air above them. He swept her off her feet and held her in his arms for a moment, just looking into the depths of her eyes, and then he set her on the cool sheets. He hovered above her and he couldn’t help letting his eyes drift over her body as he said, “God you’re beautiful.”
He stretched out beside her and she looked up at him, self-conscious in her partial nudity. His hand went to the pillow next to her head and lifted the long stem white rose that had suddenly appeared there. He brought it forward for her to see and she took it from his hand with a look of surprise on her face.
“Max . . .”
“No thorns,” he said smiling gently at her. “Nothing to hurt you. I don’t want anything to ever hurt you again.”
“Max . . .” Liz said again and his fingers stroked slowly along her cheek. His hand trailed down along the sensitive skin of her throat and he could feel her pulse racing there. He leaned down, taking her lips once more in a slow kiss, and his hand closed over her exposed breast. He felt her sudden inhalation at the intimate contact and he parted his lips from hers to look at her, to see if maybe she had changed her mind, and wasn’t ready for this to happen this soon.
He looked at her flushed face, and what he saw wasn’t hesitation or uncertainty or even second thoughts. What he saw was need, and want, and desire and his heart pounded out a staccato beat, drumming rapidly in his chest. She wanted him. He wanted her. He watched her, felt her skin press against his as she stretched to place the rose on the nightstand, right next to the silver hair clip, and when she looked back at him the air around them was filled with energy just waiting to be unleashed.
He couldn’t take his eyes off her and the fire that he saw in her set his passion ablaze. His mouth swooped down onto hers, devouring her, parting her lips with his tongue, probing the moist depths of her mouth, seeking to merge completely with her. He could feel her hands in his hair as she tried to pull him even closer, hear the moans rumbling deep in her throat, feel the pounding of her heart in her chest.
He wanted her, and she wanted him, and nothing else existed except for this moment in space and time. His hand caressed her breast as he kissed her and he felt her nipple harden even more. He stroked it with his thumb and heard her whimper in pleasure and knew he wanted more than just a touch. His lips moved from her lips, down to the tender skin under her chin, lower then to the hollow at the base of her throat and then on to claim his prize. His mouth moved along the valley between her breasts and then up the soft mound until his lips encountered that sweet, erotic peak. His lips closed over her, tasting her with his tongue at first, and then sucking her deeper into his mouth.
“Max . . .” Liz could barely contain the sensations he was making her feel. Her back arched up as he pulled at her nipple and she moaned even louder. “Oh God, Max.”
The air crackled with sexual energy and Max released one hard peak so that he could taste the other. Liz slid her hand into the hair at the nape of his neck, pressing him hard against her while her sounds filled the air around them. His body moved from her side, gliding into position on top of her, and then he slowly kissed a trail back up to her throat so that he could claim her mouth again. She spread her legs apart and his thighs nestled between hers, pressing his extremely aroused manhood against her equally aroused feminine center. He devoured her lips again and her legs wrapped around his hips so that she could feel him better as he rocked his hips against her. His jeans were painfully tight but he couldn’t stop. It felt too good to stop.
Her hips were rubbing against him, her nipples were drilling into his chest, and he could sense something happening inside her. He pressed his body harder against her and the sensation grew, building in pitch until her body shuddered with a blinding climax and his name erupted from her lips. And she hadn’t even taken her pants off yet.
“I felt that,” Max said breathlessly as he hovered above her. “I felt what you felt, just now . . .”
“You did . . .?” she looked up at him and tried to catch her breath.
“Is that how . . . I mean, is that the way it’s supposed to . . . for you . . .”
“I guess so,” she smiled shyly and then said, “We’re in virgin territory here, Max. I don’t know exactly how it’s supposed to feel, but I can tell you this. I really liked it. I mean I really liked it.”
He smiled then, a smile somewhere between relief and rejoicing. “I do know one thing,” she said with a certainty as her eyes roamed over his candlelit face.
“What’s that?” he asked huskily.
“You’re still overdressed.”
He stared at her mutely for a moment and then he swallowed hard and said, “So are you.”
He shifted his weight and moved to her side, eager yet hesitant at the same time. This was a major change in their relationship, one they could never go back from. He lifted his hand and gently touched the skin on her cheek, and then brushed his fingers over her throat, trailing his hand down to cup her breast while his eyes lingered there, and then he moved lower. He touched the smooth flesh that covered her ribs and then down to her flat stomach, where he hesitated once more.
His eyes met hers and he saw her consent, and his hand slipped lower to the top edge of her pajama bottoms. His hand slid under the material and his fingers encountered a patch of silky hair. Yes, he must have died today out at the pod chamber, he thought as his hand moved lower, because surely now he must be in heaven. He tugged at the material that still covered her and it easily slid down her hips, along her shapely thighs and then down her legs and past her feet. She lay before him, vulnerable in her nakedness, and Max had never seen a more beautiful sight.
Her hand was suddenly on his chest and he felt her push him backwards until his back was resting against the sheets. He stared up at her this time as her hand went to the front of his jeans. Her fingers deftly unfastened the top button and she lowered his zipper in what felt like agonizingly slow motion. Her hand could feel his rock hard erection straining at the fabric and she lingered there, judging what was beneath the material. When the zipper had been lowered completely, Max almost frantically pushed his jeans down his legs and Liz helped pull them free. She moved to toss them to the floor to join the rest of their clothing when he suddenly cried out, “WAIT!”
Startled, and suddenly feeling terribly exposed, she clutched his jeans to her naked flesh. She looked at him apprehensively and said, “What?”
“There’s something in there I need,” he said and she could see the flush in his cheeks. He pulled his pants out of her hand and reached into the back pocket. He pulled out his wallet and set it on the bed, and then tossed his pants to the floor. Settling in next to her again he murmured, “Now where were we?”
She smiled at him, regaining her composure and said, “It looks like these need to come off.” She slid her hand under the top band of his boxers and the smile froze on her lips and then slowly disappeared. She stared at him and then said slowly, “Max . . .”
“What’s the mat-” he started to say and then he groaned outloud when her hand surrounded him. Her fingers explored him, feeling his size and his shape and his texture and then she tugged off his shorts so that she could see him, too. All coherent thought left him as her hand moved up and down the length of him.
“Max, you’re so . . .” and her voice trailed off.
“What?” he said hoarsely. If she didn’t stop touching him, he was going to lose it right now. God, her hand felt-
“Perfect,” Liz said as her hand roamed over him. “You’re perfect, Max.” She raised her eyes to his and she leaned in to kiss him then, and they were once more swept away on a titlewave of passion. His mouth covered hers and he became the aggressor, driven by a blinding need to become a part of her. He chased her back down to the sheets, his lips consuming hers, his chest pressing against her soft breasts, his stomach sliding over hers and his thighs settling between her legs. Her hand was still holding his throbbing sex and she drew him near.
His hot flesh came into contact with her wet heat and they both groaned as a bolt of sexual energy surged between them. His sex rubbed against her sex, stimulating them even more until they were both panting with need. Max was smothering her mouth with his, tugging at her lower lip while his hands moved over her hot skin, touching her everywhere. She rocked her hips against him, feeling the way his erection slid between her slick folds, getting closer and closer to that sweet place they both wanted him to go.
“Max . . .” she mumbled against his lips. “Now. I want you now.”
His hand blindly search the bed for his wallet and as his fingers closed over it, he tore his lips away from Liz. Almost frantically, he opened it and searched for the small packet he had placed there in hopes that some day he and Liz would reach this point. He slid the packet out and dropped his wallet carelessly on the bed.
Max lifted his body off Liz and she watched him as his fingers tore at the protective wrapper. He removed the condom and she could see that his fingers were trembling slightly as he rolled it into place over his impressive member. He tossed the wrapper hastily aside and then he leaned over Liz again, hovering above her for just a moment and then she laced her fingers through his hair and pulled him down to her.
His body settled onto hers and the moment that they had been waiting for for such a long time was upon them. With his thighs between her thighs, his proud sex moved once more toward that special place. He could feel her rapid heartbeat resonating against his chest, feel her heated puffs of breath on his throat, feel her legs open wider to let him in. His lips touched hers, kissing her tenderly as he gently pushed forward, entering her with care and all the restraint he was capable of gathering. His body screamed for more, but his mind told him patience as he slowly pushed inside her.
“Max . . .” Liz moaned as she tore her lips away from his. His lips went to her throat, kissing the skin there that felt like more than just skin now. It was alive with sensation, stimulated by his lips, his flesh, his very breath on her inflamed nerve endings. Her sense of touch was heightened, enhanced in some old yet familiar way and she arched against him, wanting to feel more.
His hips moved forward and then back, entering her slowly, amazed at the feeling that surrounded him as he moved deeper into her. Her hands were in his hair and then her fingernails were scraping down his spine to the small of his back, driving him nearly mad with need. Her hands moved lower, digging into the muscles of his butt and he could feel her urging him deeper. With a moan escaping from her throat, her hands rose up to cup his cheeks, lifting his face from her throat, and she stared up at him with her eyes ablaze.
“Now, Max,” she breathed out.
He looked down at her and knew what she meant. Do it fast. Do it deep. The pain would be fleeting, but their joining would be for a lifetime. Maybe even longer than that. Her legs shifted, opening herself to him even more, and he moved his hands to her hips. He hovered at her entrance while he stared into her eyes, and then she said it one more time. “Now.”
He drove into her, hard and deep, feeling her membrane tear as he stripped away her barrier. She cried out as he filled her and his hand slipped between them, pressing against her belly and glowing softly to ease her pain. Her eyes closed as she adjusted to his presence, taking in these new sensations. Such wonderful sensations. She wanted more.
He felt her body arch up against him as he plunged into her and he used his healing powers to try to stem the pain he could feel in her. It ebbed and was gone and in its place he could feel her desire flood into him. The feel of her inner walls surrounding him, hot and tight and wet and so much more than his imagination could have dreamed of, was almost enough to send him over the edge right now. He rocked his hips back and then plunged into her again, this time with no pain to mar it.
“God Liz,” he said heatedly as he sank into her the second time. He pulled back again, craving more as together they experienced these new sensations. Her legs lifted up to wrap around his hips and he sank into her with vigor. Her breasts danced against his chest with each deep thrust into her body, and the hard ridges in his stomach pressed against her soft belly.
It seemed that he had waited his entire life to claim her, and now that it was happening, now that he was inside her and a part of her, all of his dreams were coming true. His arms wrapped around her, holding her tightly to him while he thrust deeply inside her. Their skin, wherever it touched, seemed to be on fire, on their cheeks and down their throats and along their chests. He plunged down into her while she raced upwards to meet him, driving them to new heights, and they both trembled as they were swept into a maelstrom of sexual tension just waiting to be released.
“God . . . Max . . .” Liz intoned as Max drilled into her. His thrusts had taken on a hungry tone, building to a fevered pitch as Liz moaned against his ear. He had always felt the fire in her, waiting to come out, and unleashing it was like letting a wild tiger free. She was eager. She was primal. She was grinding her body against his to increase her stimulation. She knew what she wanted, and Max was going to give it to her.
His hips pulled back and his thick sex throbbed with building tension as he raced toward climax. He could feel it in her too, ready to explode, hovering right there on the edge, and he drove into her hard. Her hips rose up to meet him and she cried out as they crashed together. Her walls, already tighter than imaginable, clamped down on him, quivering and throbbing as she came, and he exploded in a mind searing rush of sexual release. His seed burst from him, spurting out of him in a pulsating rhythm and his body shuddered as he drove into her one last time. His own cry joined hers and they clung together as their climax crested and they rode a wave of sexual ecstasy.
Their bodies spent, they lay in each other’s arms with their hearts pounding and their breathing coming in gasps. Their skin, slick with sweat, quivered, vibrating with their underlying passion, quenched now but ready to burst into flame again. Their wild heartbeats thundered in their ears and pounded in their chests while their lungs heaved, trying to catch their breaths. His body weighed down on hers, their chests, their bellies pressed together, their skin tingling and contracting wherever they touched. They stayed connected for long minutes afterward, Max buried deeply inside of Liz, while their bodies hummed in the afterglow.
He slowly lifted his head from her throat and he looked down at her radiant face. Her eyes opened slowly and a smile spread over both their faces. He kissed her forehead and then her nose and then her lips and he said, “I always knew that it would be this way for us.”
“What way?” Liz asked as she stroked her fingers tenderly through his hair.
“Magic,” Max said and his eyes were shining with the love that he felt for her. “It’s all magic when I’m with you.”
* * * * *
The candles flickered and burned out one by one, casting the room into near darkness. Soon, a beam of moonlight was all that remained to keep the night at bay. It bathed the couple on the bed in its pale glow and the dark sky above them twinkled with a thousand stars.
They lay on their sides, Max with his body wrapped protectively around her, Liz with her head tucked under the hollow of his chin. His arm was draped around her holding her close to him, and his hand cupped her warm breast. The silk sheet covered their naked bodies from the waist down and their skin appeared to glow with a reddish tint in the pale light of the moon.
A war was brewing on a distant shore, a battle they would have to someday face, but not tonight. Tonight was just for them. Their sleep was peaceful and comforting, unmarked by any dreams as they lay in each other’s arms. The final candle flickered out and all that remained was the ember of the wick, glowing orange in the dark. A tendril of smoke rose from it and then dissipated into the night air. For now, all was quiet. But tomorrow . . . tomorrow the flame would be relit, and burn brightly once again.
Edited by - Breathless on 09/21/2001 10:25:07

JANUARY 2002 | MITCHELL:
"You can't turn back time, but I'll be damned if I go down without trying," I thought, smoothing out my wrinkles in the mirror early in the morning. Later today, I had an appointment with a friend of mine who did Botox. Thankfully, he was offering me a discount; my cards were maxed out as it is. If nothing else, it was a good excuse to take the day off work.
"We can't all be as lucky as Ben," I thought while taking a piss.
My 18-year-old nephew had been staying with me for two months now, and he already seemed to be finding his way around the Manhattan social scene better than I ever did. Just the other week, he'd gotten us invitations to one of millionaire Parker Anderson's Gatsbyesque New Year's Eve parties. Ben accepted the invitation so nonchalantly, I don't even think he realized how much of a huge deal it was.
With his luck (and good looks) though, this was probably just one in a series of fabulous parties Ben would be attending. Mr. Anderson seemed quite fond of my teenage nephew. No surprise there. Hell, if he weren't my nephew, I'd be going after him!
Living with somebody so young, yet so handsome, presented both pleasure and torture. Having him walk around my apartment in his boxers had me drooling, ogling his nearly-naked body, jacked like an action figure. Can you really blame me for keeping the heating on all the time?
Whereas I spent five days a week at the gym, hoping to get in shape (okay, and also to creep on the hot guys in the sauna); it just came naturally to Ben. His pecs rivaled those of professional body builders. I had a thing for men's nipples, and I couldn't keep my eyes off his perfect nips whenever he'd take his shirt off, which was often.
"I better have something to eat before going to the clinic," I thought, and left my room to go into the living room.
There, an amazing surprise awaited.
My nephew Ben was sprawled out on the couch he slept on; the back of his head turned to me. The cover was kicked down to his ankles, as were the boxer shorts he slept in. He was completely nude, jacking his hard dick.
I stood still as a statue. I scanned Ben's body from bottom to the top. His muscular legs, only sparsely hairy, leading up to a set of thick thighs and a very impressive cock. I was just close enough to notice his balls were smooth, and his pubic area neatly trimmed ("Not bad for a straight boy," I thought). From there, a treasure trail led to his impeccable abs. I watched his pecs and his biceps pump as he beat his meat. Fuck, it was such a hot sight!
"Uncle Mitch!" Ben suddenly noticed me and jolted. He fumbled trying to pull up his boxers for a few seconds, before giving up and pulling up the blanket instead. "I'm sorry, I thought you were at work. How long have you been standing there?"
I honestly had no idea.
"I just walked in," I lied. "I have the day off."
"Sorry bout that," he apologized again.
"There's nothing to be sorry about," I winked.
That was another lie. He should apologize. Apologize for pulling that damn blanket up.
No biggie. Now I knew my straight nephew liked to jerk off in the morning. Quite useful to know that, sharing a small apartment together…
"Anna, get Ben on the phone," I barked at my secretary over the phone.
"Right away, Mr. Anderson."
I hung up the phone, going back to my paperwork. My secretary was already on a first-name basis with Ben; she knew exactly who to call.
"Hello?" I said loudly into the receiver, picking up the phone when it rang.
"Hey. What's up?" Ben's voice said.
"I'm working. What d'you want?"
"Dude, you called me."
"Oh, yes. I guess I did. How are you?"
There was a second of silence, in which I pictured Ben smile. It made me smile as well, dropping my pen and leaning back in my office chair.
"Pretty good," he answered. "Gonna get some shots taken tomorrow, so just getting ready for that."
"Good. Listen, my dinner plans just got canceled. You doing anything tonight?"
"No…" Ben said slowly.
"You are now. I'll pick you up at eight."
"Okay. See you then."
I held my finger over the phone, before picking it up again.
"Anna, cancel my meeting tonight. I'm doing something else instead."
A while later, I was on one of the lower floors, checking in with people's work. When I realized I needed to piss, I decided to go to the nearby public restroom instead of going to my private one upstairs.
"Hey, Parker!" I heard my cousin's voice yell out for me from across the floor. "I need to talk to you."
"Not now, Porter," I ignored him and headed to the restroom instead.
I stood in front of one of the six urinals and whipped my dick out, when my cousin burst in the restroom.
"Why the fuck aren't you coming to the meeting tonight?" he barked at me.
"D'you mind, I'm trying to take a piss," I said, holding my cock and letting go. I noticed my cousin glimpse down, watching the stream of piss from my thick cock hit the urinal, before looking back up, to look me in the eyes.
"You can't leave me alone with these people, Parker. This whole meeting was your fucking idea!"
"Well I got other plans, so you'll have to survive," I raised my voice to show him who's the alpha. Both of our voices echoed around the bathroom. Good thing we seemed to be the only ones there.
"What other plans?"
I looked down at my cock, piss still spurting out of it.
"I'm meeting someone for dinner."
"Who? That straight boy I met at your party on New Year's?"
"None of your fucking business," I looked back at my cousin.
Porter also happened to be gay, and obviously had some thoughts about Ben.
"Parker, what the fuck are you doing? You know as well as I do that boy's straight. Doesn't he have a kid? He's only using you."
"Give me a bit more credit, for fuck's sake! I know how to tell if someone's using me."
That was true. So far, I was the one who always called Ben, as much as I tried not to. Gay or not, he was pleasant company. I'd enjoyed sucking his cock that one time, but other than that all we did was go for dinners or drinks. I was more than happy and capable to flip the bill, and it was none of Porter's, or anybody else's business.
I shook my cock, getting the last drops off piss out of it. When I looked up, I noticed my cousin looking at my dick again. I had a girth most other men would envy. Too bad I was a dyed-in-the-wool bottom.
"Not that it fucking concerns you, but Ben and I are friends," I turned to Porter before putting my dick away and zipping up. "And if I were you, I'd be getting ready for that meeting tonight; not hanging around here, looking at people's cocks. It ain't that kind of restroom."
"Fuck you," Porter turned and walked away.
"I told you I have a shoot tomorrow, I can't stay late," Ben said, walking into my penthouse apartment after I'd successfully talked him into it after dinner.
"Listen, kid. If you're gonna be a model, you need to learn how to behave. Being a model in this city ain't about being responsible and going to bed early. It's about this –" I lifted a bottle of champagne in one hand, "– and this," I held up a bag of coke in the other.
Ben smiled, and he didn't protest any further. We did a few lines and popped the bottle open, before lying back on my large sofa.
"How's your kid?" I asked, unbuttoning the top few buttons on my shirt.
"He's okay. He's with his grandparents. It's his birthday in a few months, so I'll probably go back and visit."
"And his mom?"
"She's alright. Back in college. I think she's started seeing some guy there, but we don't talk too much."
After that, Ben went silent. That is exactly why I'd avoided the topic throughout dinner.
"Listen, you're doing the right thing," I said. "This is for the best."
"Yeah, everyone keeps telling me that."
"Because it's true," I added, although, to be honest, I was being selfish. I wanted Ben in New York, not in some off-the-map place in Massachusetts raising a kid. I had plans to go to Europe for the summer, and I was already toying with the idea of inviting him to come keep me company.
"Can I change the subject?" I asked.
"That time, in the back of my car…" I started. I was feeling tipsy and curious. "Why did you ask me to kiss you?"
"Why?" he turned to look at me, and I looked at his muscles bulging under his tight T-shirt. "Because it felt right, I guess."
"Usually straight guys will let you do anything except kiss them."
"Oh, and you have experience with a lot of straight guys?" Ben said seductively, leaning forward so he was closer to me, our faces inches from each other. I wasn't sure if he was flirting or just fooling around.
"Let's just say I've been around the block."
"And you've kissed everyone on it?" Ben continued to move closer. Was he teasing me? Our noses were now an inch apart.
"No. Just the special ones," I replied.
"So you think I'm special?" Ben leaned in and I closed my eyes. I had no idea what was going on, but this wasn't just "fooling around." Our kisses were way too passionate for that! We made out, hands going through each other's hair, for several minutes. Ben lifted his body and got on top of me. Just the way I liked being kissed.
Out of the blue, I dared to ask for more.
"Fuck me," I said, looking Ben in the eyes.
I felt like I could see his mind racing through his eyes.
"Show me how," he said softly.
I didn't waste a second. Something had made him say yes, and I wasn't gonna wait for him to change his mind. I leaned back in and started kissing him again, even more passionately than before. With my hands under his armpits, I pulled him up and we were standing up, kissing, taking off each other's clothes.
I pulled up Ben's T-shirt, and he unbuttoned my shirt while kissing me. Somehow, I managed to guide us to my bedroom without breaking the kiss. We kicked off our shoes, and I lay on my California king bed. Ben pulled his jeans off, before reaching for my belt and unbuckling it. Pretty soon, we were completely naked, Ben on top of me, kissing until we were both hard as a rock.
I flipped around.
"Pass me that," I pointed to a bottle of lube on the nightstand.
Normally, I loved having my ass rimmed before being fucked, but I wasn't about to ask a straight guy to do that. Instead, I put some lube on my hole and started stroking his dick with my wet hand.
I turned around and stuck my ass out, presenting my hole to Ben.
"So, I just go in?" he asked insecurely. If he didn't have a kid, I'd think this was his first time fucking anyone. It was obviously his first time fucking someone in the ass.
"Just go," I said eagerly.
I couldn't wait to feel his dick inside me. Although not as thick as mine; it was long, cut, and just as beautiful as the rest of his body. But most importantly: it was Ben's! This gorgeous young man who was somehow interested in me. Maybe my cousin was right and he was only after my money, but holy shit he was worth it! If anything, I felt like I was the one using him for that babymaker of his.
I felt the tip of Ben's dick push against my asshole, wet with precum and lube. I pulsed my hole, inviting him deeper in. Slowly, carefully, he went in. My hole was well-used to being fucked, but this was a new experience for me. I was so turned on by how attracted I was to him! "Oh my god, I love him," I thought in my drunk brain, as I felt the tip of his dick hit my prostate. He was all the way in.
"Fuuuuck," I grunted with my eyes closed.
"You good?" Ben asked, going back and forth slowly.
"Yes. Oh, fuck yes! Go harder."
I could feel Ben's confidence build up and he started to fuck me faster and harder. I loved how gradually everything was going; it only meant more time spent fucking. With time, Ben knew exactly what he was doing. He found his mojo and started to fuck the hell out of me.
"Oh, fuck yeah, kid," I yelled as he pounded me. For a first-timer, he was fucking amazing.
We fucked doggy style for almost half an hour, until I told him to lie on his back so I could get on top. I straddled him and sat on his long, hard dick. In this position, we could face each other. We both smiled.
"That good?" Ben asked.
"Fucking amazing," I answered. "You just lie back now and let me do the work."
I bounced on his dick and it drove Ben insane! He shut his eyes and started spasming and moaning in pleasure, motivating me to only go harder. "Bet your baby's mother never fucked you like this," I thought devilishly, but never said it out loud.
I rested my arms on Ben's chest, pinching his perky nipples, driving him even crazier. I continued to play with them for a while, before exploring and admiring his entire body. He was almost completely smooth, and so goddamn beautiful. I looked down at my salt-and-pepper body hair, and admired the contrast between our two bodies.
Every now and then, I'd reach for my cock and give it a few strokes as well. I had to be careful, however; I was so turned on that any contact with my dick could make me cum. For the most part, my thick erection swung around like a bat, untouched by either Ben or me.
"Yeah, you like that?" I asked Ben, even though the answer was written all over his face.
"Fuck, that feels so good," he moaned out.
"Yeah, I bet it does," I said, squeezing his dick with my asshole. "Told you I've been around the block. I've picked up a few tricks."
"Wait, what kinda tricks are we talking about?"
That made me laugh, and I leaned forward to give Ben a kiss. As passionate as I thought our kissing had been so far, nothing compared to this: kissing while having him inside me, feeling his long dick pump back and forth in my ass.
"I want you to cum inside me."
"You sure?" Ben asked. I was still leaning forward and we were face to face, breathing heavily against each other.
"Fill my guts with your cum," I nodded.
And he didn't disappoint. He picked up speed again and soon enough he was going so fast that I could tell he was close. I closed my eyes and thought "Fill me with your cum. Fill my guts with your straight, teenage, baby-making cum."
And he did. We both started shouting as I felt him shoot his load up my ass. I finally reached for my dick. I wrapped my hand around it tightly and that's all it took! I started to shoot out cum all over Ben's torso.
"Fuck! Fuck!" we competed who can grunt louder. Having his jizz inside me felt even better than I thought it would.
We went on and on, until I finally passed out on top of Ben's body, sweaty and covered in cum. That night, he spent the night for the first time.

Paul A. Meissner was born in New York and moved to Florida with his family as a child. He is a graduate of Clearwater High School. He co-founded the Carlson & Meissner law firm with Edward Carlson in 1971. Paul and his wife Jayne have five children & thirteen grandchildren. They enjoy boating and traveling. In the past, Paul and Jayne have traveled extensively by motorcycle.

Well, there you have it. Our PA vacation summed up in one sentence! Oh, you want more? Oh, well then I shall oblige your request. :)
We spent a week in exciting Dillsburg, PA with Philip's parents, who have recently located there, and Philip's brother's family. We had a great time...except for all the throwing up. But alas, I get ahead of myself. We'll start with the fun stuff.
It turns out that Strasburg, PA (which is about an hour from exciting Dillsburg) is home to several railroad museums and a functioning "tourist" train, so on Monday we headed there with our train-loving boys. They enjoyed seeing and climbing aboard the old steam engines and diesels, but what they really had the best time with were all the toy trains in the "hands on" area. I think they could have stayed in there playing all day...or maybe even all week. Then we had a picnic lunch before hopping aboard the real train for a 45 minute ride. Well, it was really like a 15 minute ride, but they put in enough stops to make it last 45. :) The boys enjoyed this too and while riding we even got a sneak peek at the Farm we visited on Wednesday!
Tuesday was my birthday, but we've already talked about that! :)
Wednesday we headed to Ferry Farm...which sports it's own huge corn maze. Given we had an abundance of small children, we decided to attempt the mini maze instead, which after we did it we decided had definitely been large enough! They also had other fun games, mazes and a petting zoo. It was a fun time...but it was really hot that day, so by 1:00 we were all fried...literally.
This part cracks me up. This was a hay maze where the rule was that you could only make left turns to get to the end. Of course, on hand we have Philip the engineer and his PhD holding engineer brother. The boys wander around a bit with no success...then they try to solve the maze backwards. After about 5-10 minutes of trying, they both concluded that the maze was "impossible" and moved on to greener pastures. I, the non-engineer in the family, decided that it *had* to be possible and set at it. A few minutes later, I casually wandered out the "exit" of the maze. But, I couldn't remember how I did it, so I tried again. I did it again and watched a few other people also complete it. The engineer boys were later informed of the impossible feat and declared "impossible! can't be done!". Paul later successfully made it through...although there is no witness other than his wife, which is highly suspect, don't you think?? Philip still asserts that the maze is impossible and that I *must* have cheated. Riiiigggghhhhttt. Ask me later about the growing list of "engineery" things I seem to be able to do that my engineer husband can't. :)
Thursday was going great with a nice picnic by a little river when Joshua threw up. And that was the beginning of the end. Ok, not really. But there was a lot of stomach sickness after that for the next week with all of us being affected. I, of course, waited until we were back home and I had the boys by myself to get sick. Isn't that what moms always do? Alas.
Anyway, the rest of the visit was pretty low-key because of all the sickies, but it was still nice to be with family. We had a blast...and then came home. Back to reality!
1 month ago

Yin Hong hid behind the old headmaster, unwilling to come out. She looked very nervous, but Chen Ge did not see too much fear on her face. In other words, even when facing three Red Specters, Yin Hong was confident that she could run away. Chen Ge had no idea where her confidence came from, so he could only approach this carefully.
"Sir?" Seeing the silence from the old headmaster, it appeared like he had something to hide.
"Both of these children are Lee Xueyin; they are one and the same." The way the headmaster regarded the two girls was filled with love and guilt. "I know one of them is Yin Bai and the other Yin Hong, but no matter what they're called, they are my family."
He reached out to touch Yin Hong's head as he guarded the girl behind him. Being touched by the old headmaster, a trace of disgust crossed Yin Hong's eyes, but perhaps she knew that the situation put her in too much of a disadvantage, and she knew that she needed the old headmaster's support, so she did not resist and put forth an obedient persona.
"Actually, if we're splitting hairs, Yin Hong is more like Xueyin. Facing the drunk father and a mother who was too weak to leave the wheelchair, she only had herself to rely on." The old headmaster put the blame on himself. "This is all my fault. It was me who had the blind trust in Xueyin's father, and it was me who pushed them into the fire pit."
What the old headmaster said sounded new to Yin Bai; she looked at the old headmaster blankly. Her beautiful and clear eyes were filled with confusion, and her lips kept mumbling the word, "Grandpa."
Yin Hong's reaction was completely different from Yin Bai's. She was trying her best to suppress the anger in her heart. There was no visible change to her expression, but a flash of red had already appeared in her eyes. The past memory hurt her, and her body was slowly changing.
"Sir, I'm afraid things are not as simple as you think." Chen Ge did not want to hide anything from the old headmaster. He opened Yin Hong's bag and took out the crumpled papers that he had found in Yin Hong's drawer. Seeing those crumpled papers, the calm on Yin Hong's face was shattered. She looked like a murderer whose victim had just been found. The papers were filled with Yin Hong's dissatisfaction with the world and the desire to kill the old headmaster. Holding the papers in his hand, Chen Ge looked at the old headmaster, who would give everything to shelter Yin Hong, and Yin Hong, who was holding onto the old headmaster with tears in her eyes. He started to hesitate.
Shaking his head slightly, Chen Ge placed the papers back into the bag. "Sir, can you tell me in detail what really happened to Xueyin?"
After putting the papers filled with maddened claims away, Chen Ge noticed both Yin Hong and the old headmaster sigh in relief. It was then that Chen Ge realized that perhaps the old headmaster already knew everything.
"Yin Bai is the purest side within Xueyin's heart. She is pure, kind, and innocent, but the only reason she is able to survive like that is because all the anxiety, fear, and hatred has been taken away by Yin Hong." There was regret and pain in the headmaster's voice. "Xueyin's mother is the first child I adopted. Due to her physical limitation, she was unable to be pregnant, so she adopted Xueyin. At the time, it was me who accompanied them during the adoption. Xueyin was still so young. Seeing how happy the family of three was, I was glad. But later, I found out that things were not what they seemed."
Chen Ge heard an undercurrent of hatred from the old headmaster's story. It surprised him that such a kind person would feel hatred toward someone.
"You can't judge a book by its cover. Xueyin's father was a liar. He approached Xueyin's mother not because he liked her but because he was after the few estates under my name. He knew that I have no biological children, so he purposely came into our lives. Even adopting Xueyin was just a performance that he did for us."
If that was everything, the old headmaster might not have been that mad, but what he said next was the real reason behind his anger. "After he found out that I planned to donate all my estates and have already put that in my will with the lawyer's help, he turned into a different person. Every day, he came up with a new reason to find trouble and even beat Xueyin's mother. One time, he tried to turn his anger on Xueyin. Thankfully, she was discovered and rescued by her mother."
The old man's voice was shaking. He was a kind person, but that did not mean that he would not get angry. From another perspective, with the old headmaster's personality, he probably would not consume another ghost, but he was still a Half Red Specter. That could only mean that he had a very deep reason to stay behind, and there was something that he needed to complete.
"I found out all this from Xueyin's diary after she passed away. Do you know how much my heart hurt when I was reading that diary?" The headmaster gently guarded Yin Hong behind him. "Yin Bai would have been unable to survive in that kind of place, so that is why Yin Hong appeared."
After hearing the explanation from the headmaster, Chen Ge was glad that he did not show the papers immediately. He studied Yin Hong and was suddenly reminded of something. Yin Bai had said that her father suddenly left home one day and then did not return. Chen Ge did not think much of it then, but now that he was looking at Yin Hong, he had a feeling that he knew what had happened to the man. He would not return; he would never return.
Yin Hong harbored resentment toward the old headmaster; she even wanted to harm him. But she did not expect what happened next. When facing three Red Specters, the headmaster guarded her and became her savior. This changed her perspective of the old headmaster. Then she saw how regretful the headmaster was. An unsettling feeling rose in her heart, and her cold, hard heart started to crack slightly.
"I didn't expect that she would have such a past. I can understand it, but..." Chen Ge did not finish what he began. He put the headless woman and red high heels away. Those two could not be considered workers yet. The headless woman was there unwillingly, and the red high heels was there because of a contract. Even though the heels were placed inside the backpack, more bloody footprints appeared on the table.
Chen Ge was making a stance by putting the two Red Specters away. Chen Ge decided to hand this over to the old headmaster himself. Even though Yin Hong was a vessel of negative emotions, she was Yin Bai's essential other half. With his hands on Yin Bai's shoulders, Chen Ge's eyes moved between Yin Bai and Yin Hong. He was about to ask the old headmaster some questions when something suddenly hit him.
How come this feels so familiar? Yin Hong and Yin Bai are just like me and my shadow in Li Wan City!
To be precise, Chen Ge was reminded of himself and the ghost fetus. One was a happy-go-lucky Haunted House owner, while the other carried an entire four-star scenario on his back.
Wait a minute... Chen Ge rubbed his temples. It was my parents who told the old headmaster that Lee Xueyin was in the School of the Afterlife. This means that they know about Xueyin's condition. Could this be another clue left by them?

15 years ago, a man named Julio left his home in Mexico and he came to Canada. Although he was a lawyer there, he had a passion for preparing food. A few years ago, he met some great people that allowed him to Start up his own business. They wanted to create a Mexican restaurant with fresh, healthy food and with authentic flavors. Julio wanted to prepare real Mexican food and he began experimenting with different recipes of his own, and Café Verde was born.
Now we can tell you that Café Verde prepares its food fresh every day. We want you to come and experience our food and become part of our history.

I was about eight I think when I did my first paid work, not counting selling my grandmother’s cigarettes to her friends when they came e for a gossip for a penny each. That money went into my money box and there it stayed as I had absolutely nothing to spend it on. But when I was eight the opportunity arose for some real cash. I was staying in Llandew with my friends – my mother would send me there for the whole summer as she was working and the holidays in those days were looong, and I loved it there. I’ve written about it before just recently, prompted by the untimely death of Monika, the younger of the two little girls there.
Anyway, it was a long hot summer, of course, and harvest time was upon us. I am not a country girl at heart but somehow, I had to learn where my food came from. Potatoes until now came in paper bags from the North End Road market, to be bought for pennies by the pound.
In Wales they came in fields which had been dug up and then left exposed to the air and most awfully to worms. The farmer, Mr Price, needed all the help he could get to get them out of the ground and into great big sacks. Everyone from miles around was roped in to help- and I wanted to, too.
We started early in the morning. We had to collect a sack, take it to a ploughed row and fill it with potatoes. As fast as possible. I think I had to put mine into a bucket first, because after a few minutes I couldn’t move my sack. It was much bigger than me – I was a very slight eight-year-old.
I can remember to this day my horror at having to pick up a potato covered in earth worms and shake them off as I put it in the sack. Over and over again. Absolutely back breaking work though I remember the atmosphere on the field as being very friendly. My friends and the other workers would occasionally come by and put some of their pickings in my sack to help me, as I was very very slow. In all, I managed three days and earned eight shillings at a shilling a sack. Most adults I think managed between twenty and forty sacks a day, a considerable addition to most people’s income at the time. This must have been 61 or 62. I was so proud as the money was counted out for me every evening!
The best bit of the day, though, was coming back to the cottage and having a bath. This was a real luxury, as hot water was very expensive and so we were not indulged every day. But yes – after a day in the fields – bliss. So, for three days I was spoilt – and clean -but on the fourth day Babunia, grandmother, had to say no – I hadn’t worked so I didn’t deserve it. This was my first lesson in absolute fairness.
A few days later my mother came to Wales for the weekend to see me. We were all sitting at the long kitchen table that first evening and she asked what I’d been doing. So, I told her everything and described all my experiences. Including my shock at the farmer’s language which I quoted verbatim. Every couple of hours we had what was called bait – strong milky and sugary tea out of an urn. Tin mugs that had seen better days. And an irate farmer… I was never allowed to speak English at home, and especially not in Wales. So, I had to ask permission. “You bloody children! Get out of the bloody adults’ way! You can have your bloody bait later if there’s any bloody left.” And so on.
You can imagine the shock on the adults’ faces. Luckily for me they thought it highly amusing, especially as I delivered it in his authentic Welsh accent. It became my parents’ go to party piece for quite some time.
But I didn’t work for quite some time after that!

Of course you cancelled Drive. Why should I have ever believed you would do otherwise?
But answer me this, if you cancel every single show that doesn't perform as well as you would have liked right out of the gate, why would anyone keep watching your shows? Wouldn't it be better for me to NOT check out that show that sounds interesting just in case it doesn't get as many viewers as you want and you prematurely cancel it? Why waste my time on something if you don't really care about it?
I get it. I get that television is a business. But not every show that is a hit now was a hit in its second week. Shows need a chance to grow. To spread by word of mouth. To let people catch up on episodes they miss when you broadcast three hours in the first week and people fall behind because they don't realize the scheduling or they came into the show late and need to figure out what's going on. Just because the audience isn't there in week 2 doesn't mean they're never going to show up.
Sure, people say you gave it a chance because you broadcast a lot of ads. But that doesn't change the fact that there were a lot of things you could have done if you really cared. You could have re-launched in the summer. You could have put on multiple encores each week to get people to watch instead of reruns of other shows that have already "made it." You could have put the first episode on after Idol instead of 2 hours all by itself with no lead-in and no lead-out, since we all know how much of a bump Idol can give a show - you would have at least had those people watching to see if they liked it. You could have started the show when other shows were starting and NOT when other shows were in the middle of their seasons and people were already committed (this is why I'm worried about Traveler, not that you would care). But generally a lead-in is key. Why start any new show on Fox without giving it a post-Idol berth for a premiere or even an encore? It just seems like an easy choice to me.
I made a list today of the shows that I am upset that the networks cancelled and you, Fox, had the longest list by far. I don't know what it is, whether you're trigger-happy or what. I'm surprised you stuck with Bones for so long - I was worried about that show constantly. And its numbers improved as more people started watching it based on word of mouth and its placement near Idol. (At least that's what I hear). Things don't take immediately - I told my parents about Bones for weeks but it still took them a few episodes before they had a chance to catch it and now they watch it every week. Real hit shows take TIME. And the impatience and cancelling of serials this season has really made people re-consider whether they want to invest the time in a new show when the likelihood of cancellation seems higher than ever. I know I'm going to think twice about whether I want to care next season.
I could fill in plenty of other names from this season (like Justice), but I'm going to concentrate on Drive for now. Sigh.

How major is it to see sexy freedom, express mail ourselves and just act instinctively with one’s spouse, no possession back, no worry and no fear – just to be able to be yourself? It sure as shooting was not the occurrence with us, exclusive aft going finished our wondrous journey of man and wife individual we got to a place where this now really holds true for us. workings put together on our sex life, intimate of necessity and physiological property differences, never conveyance up through with the good and the bad times, and now, after many than 20 age of marriage, it is truly better, more fulfilling and sir thomas more gratifying than ever before!
Confession Point » Blog Archive My Grandmother is the best » Confession Point
I’ve had a jam on my grandma ever since she gave me my very first blowjob on my thirteenth birthday. I was visiting her for a couple of hours and we were having a bad good time kidding around. She caught me looking down her top at her tits and future sounding up her girl when she was sitting on the couch.
Stories Desired - Home of Over a Thousand Free Erotic Stories - Adoption
Adoption By: city Dan"What do you think she wants to see us about Johnny," my twin missy Jodi asked me. She finished scribbling on a piece of paper and then sat back with her manus plicate on her lap. They couldn't wealthy person children and welcome two older children that wouldn't distressed their time unit act similar small infants would. "I don't know but we will presently find out." "I somebody she didn't see us doing apiece remaining the other day." "Nah, we were all exclusive in the domicile when we did that." We came to the office door and walked into Mrs. She was the top dog of the orphans' asylum were Jodi and I lived since our parents were killed by a boozy driver. "Ah yes, come in children, please come with in and sit down," Mrs. She had a big grimace on her face as she told us that there was a nice 2 that was superficial for two children to adopt. She told us that they lived in Selmaburg, which was the succeeding town north of here. There were 8 kids that lived in this old Victorian style home. Jodi and I looked at each additional with a worried saying on our face that must have been obvious to Mrs. "Don't looking at so worried, they know approximately you and don't deprivation to other the two of you." We unagitated a little but were still nervous more or less who was adopting us. "There are coming this spend to yield you back to there house for the weekend so you can meet them and get to know them." "So, what do you two think of all this? "I hope they are nice," Jodi told her as I remained silent.

John Guidubaldi, Oral History
Recorded: April 11, 2008
Interviewed by Craig Simpson
Transcribed by Robin M. Katz
[Interviewer]: Good morning, the date is April 11, 2008. My name is Craig Simpson. I am conducting an interview today for the May 4 Oral History Project and could you please state your name?
[John Guidubaldi]: Dr. John Guidubaldi.
[Interviewer]: And where were you born?
[John Guidubaldi]: I was born in Girard, Ohio.
[Interviewer]: Where did you go to college?
[John Guidubaldi]: I went to the naval academy at Annapolis and after two years there decided not to complete it and become a military officer. I went to Youngstown State University, which was Youngstown University at the time. Took my bachelor's in teaching science and math, then came to Kent State and took a Master's degree in school psychology in 1964. Then I went on to Harvard and took my doctorate degree in 1969, and then I came to Kent State again, this time as a faculty member in 1969 in the summer.
[Interviewer]: What department did you teach in?
[John Guidubaldi]: At that time it was called the Counseling and Personnel Services Education Department.
[Interviewer]: How would you describe the university prior to the events of 1970?
[John Guidubaldi]: A peaceful midwestern university. By the events of 1970, I would have to exclude the year 1969-1970 when I was first here as a young faculty member, but when I was here in the mid-sixties, for example, it was a very peaceful place. Beautiful campus. A lot of good relationships with the town members; town-gown relations were great. The reputation of the university was building and I think it was well-supported by the state and by student tuition monies. Faculty seemed pleased and happy. I had a great relationship with Walter Barbe, who was the chairman of my department, and Don Ferguson, who was the director of my school psych program; and other faculty, in fact, socialized with them. It was a very lovely place in the mid-sixties.
I went away to college for my doctorate degree, and went to the East Coast and it was in stark contrast to the peacefulness of Kent State. At Harvard, I was witness to the Harvard demonstration, was in fact what I consider to be a victim of it, because they shut down the university when I was doing my dissertation and I had previously been exposed through the news media to the activities going on at Columbia, Brandeis, Boston College, Boston University. So we saw a lot of demonstrations on the East Coast. At that time, it was clear to me that a lot of the demonstrations were ill--were kind of exercises in student power, if you will. For example, there was a set of demonstration demands made at Boston College in the, before--when the TV cameras were ready to roll and before any trouble started, the administration conceded to all the demands. As I recall, the group that was trying to stir up the trouble went and subdivided their demands into some that could not be met. And so there was a demonstration, there were TV personalities that were there, and interviews made and student leaders were established in the media in that demonstration. So I was kind of skeptical about those things.
But in the spring of '69, my dissertation was in the computers and I needed the library to finish and I had a wife and two kids. And I had a couple of job offers: one from Notre Dame, one from Kent State, another one from Tufts University where I was teaching part-time. And Harvard had offered me an opportunity to stay on as a research faculty. I chose to come to Kent State at that time because of my memories of the peacefulness of this place. So the bucolic midwest beckoned. I ended up having to do my dissertation--writing my dissertation in record time because the computers were shut down and because of the disruption there. And I might take a moment to tell you a bit about that.
The SDS [Students for a Democratic Society] Weathermen faction had proposed taking over the administration building at Harvard, and it was voted down by the majority of the SDS group. But Weathermen weren't a very democratic group and they took over the administration building anyway. When they did that, the Cambridge police came in and told them to get out of the building or they would evict them, they'd come into the building and evict them. And they refused to do so. They published some sensitive ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] contracts and government defense contracts in the underground newspaper; they threw black paint on the files, on a number of the files; threw two deans down the steps, two deans that were fairly fragile physically; and a variety of other things that were clearly confrontation politics. The Cambridge police made the threats and didn't follow through with them. They made other threats; an hour later they would come in, and again they didn't come in and evict them. So finally they did. When they did the worse thing that they did was to hit some students on the back of the legs with billy clubs. That set up police brutality charges and the entire university shut down in sympathy with the quote-victim-unquote students who were hit on the back of the legs. And that's all that had taken place, but the university shut down. I, and a number of fellow students, were very upset with this behavior, but--and we were in the majority by far, but the majority did not rule in that situation again. So I did get the dissertation done and I packed up my family and came back to the peaceful midwest.
In the summer of '69, I had heard that there were some demonstrations or some grievances expressed by the Black United Students. And through the course of that year, I heard more and more feelings of empowerment in the student body, feelings of disillusionment about authority and the way the war was going in Vietnam and so on. But I sensed as a faculty member, too, a feeling and a spirit among the students that was a surprise to me. Our students in the child development specialist, for example, decided that they should determine their own curriculum. Our school psych people who thought they should--a number of them thought they should determine their own curriculum. Now, of course, from a faculty member's point of view, we are responsible to set the standards--or, to meet the standards that the state sets for certification for school psychologists to ensure that the students who will be tested and interviewed and counseled by the school psychologists will be receiving services from qualified people. And that assurance of quality in the graduates was something that was our professorial responsibility. But I was quite taken aback by the fact that at mid-year a number of our students were pressing us to allow them to determine their curriculum. I had never heard of such a thing. But it was part of the Zeitgeist of the time that there was kind of an inflated set of expectations and a grandiosity that I was unprepared to see in a student body in my first full-time professor job.
[Interviewer]: Did you and your family live in Kent?
[John Guidubaldi]: Yes, we lived on Willow Street, a little bungalow on Willow Street two doors up from Crain Avenue. And I walked to work everyday and saw a lot of the tension mounting. Prior to the actual events of May 4th, I and Don Wonderly and Mark Kaplan were in Washington, DC for a conference and, in fact, it's kind of interesting. As we were driving back, we heard that the National Guard was coming into town. And we were concerned because, quite frankly, we had--one of the persons had purchased a lot of liquor in Washington and was bringing it into Ohio without having paid the tax on the Marley's. So I was instructed to lay blankets over the liquor in the back of the station wagon and lie down and pretend I was sleeping so we'd get through the roadblocks.
[Interviewer]: And this was that weekend?
[John Guidubaldi]: This was that weekend, that was Friday--I think Friday night or Saturday.
[Interviewer]: Friday would have been May 1st and Saturday would have been May 2nd.
[John Guidubaldi]: So it probably was May 2nd, I think, or something like that. So we had just left Washington and drove in the station wagon home about five and a half, six hours. So we pulled into town and indeed there were Guardsmen at the entrances. Another event: I tried to go to the store at one point and get milk for the kids, and I was out of cigarettes. I don't know which was the more pressing issue, milk for the kids or cigarettes for me, but I went to the corner and a Guardsman was at the corner of Crain and Willow Street. Sent me back home. Nice--very courteously, [he] said, "Sorry, sir, I can't let allow anybody out, there's a curfew." That was either Saturday night or Sunday night, I've forgotten which.
But I had seen the masses of students in the street one of those days on Main Street. And the same Guard[sman], I was quite taken aback. My children were playing out in the yard and were quite frightened by some of the events. They were hearing the helicopters--there was a helicopter that went over ahead and they would dive into the garage and hide and play games like that. Middle of the night, I had a bunch of azaleas in my backyard that were kind of prized azaleas. The middle of the night one night--I have forgotten whether it was Saturday or Sunday--a group of probably thirty or forty students came running through my backyard and trampling my azaleas. And one of 'em--I had a clothesline--one of 'em, in fact, got kind of clotheslined that evening.
But the townspeople were very frightened and upset. This was chaos and we weren't used to that. And we had heard about the spray-painting and the people coming out of the bars and breaking windows, and I guess the shoe store or something had some shoes stolen or something, I don't--there were some rumors of that sort. But we had heard all the stories about what was going on downtown, and of course I was just a few blocks from downtown. So my neighbors were worried, they were frightened. My wife was frightened. We didn't know what to make of what was happening, but it was certainly scary.
[Interviewer]: Was it your impression that these were primarily Kent students, or were they the quote-unquote outsiders, or a mix?
[John Guidubaldi]: That's a good question because having been on the East Coast, I saw people moving from campus to campus. The news reports were that there were a number of people who were sort of itinerant rabble-rousers, and I thought probably some of those were here at Kent as well. And I heard a couple of speeches. I heard one guy talking downtown on a corner and trying to get folks around him and I didn't know where he came from or what he was. But I think the aftermath of all of this said that there was a lot of outside influence. Even the famous picture of the girl throwing her hands up over a dead body, apparently she was from Florida and was not a student here.
[Interviewer]: Mary Ann Vecchio, right.
[John Guidubaldi]: Yeah, so I did suspect that there was a lot of the same kind of thing that was going on on the East Coast. It looked too familiar. The same tactics, the same confrontation politics, and the same sort of duped student body--a student body that was just sort of following along in the mob hysteria type of situation. I think it was very easy for the students to be energized by rhetoric of--inflammatory rhetoric of people who were making causes out of Cambodia or the Vietnam War or what have you. Especially when this is the segment of the population that was subjected to draft and so on, and we had all of the draft card burning and things of that sort that had gone on previously. I was quite taken aback by the firing--the burning of buildings, the ROTC building and the toolshed and there were some other things done. Apparently some trouble went on at the airport, Kent State Airport.
[Interviewer]: I hadn't heard about that.
[John Guidubaldi]: Planes--there was something--I don't know what was going on, but there was a lot of disruption and people who start setting fire to things start really raising anxieties through the populace and then when the fire department came, the business of cutting hoses, and so--I didn't see that personally, but of course I was hearing about those kinds of things. As a faculty member and as a townsperson, people were telling me things. My uncle was a member of CAP [Community Action Program] Council and he was the Vice President of CAP Council for the United Auto Workers in Portage County. And of course his point of view was that these were communists; and that's what the United Auto Workers were believing, that these were communistic influences, and so he had stories to tell me from his vantage point. And others--the faculty members would, who were more in the know than I was, were giving me stories as well.
I recall my--I had a conversation with my son last night about this, and I remember the armored personnel carriers that were on the street, I saw those. And the helicopters. But I had forgotten that there was a tank, my son reminded me that there was truly a tank and it was by Arthur Treacher's and across from the Robin Hood and it was a--he even knew the name or the number of the tank.
[Interviewer]: I'm glad you said that because Steve [Paschen, University Archivist] and I were just talking last week. He had actually gotten a question from a researcher asking if there were tanks here, but the--
[John Guidubaldi]: [overlapping] Yes, he mentioned that to me. That's when I said I didn't think there were and I mentioned that to my son, he said, "Oh yeah, Dad, there was a tank right there by Arthur Treacher's and across from the Robin Hood." So, I don't know for certain, but that's what my son told me. And I seem to recall that at the time. But those were some of my recollections as to what was leading up to it.
And then, on the day that it happened, I was at Akron U working on an article with a friend of mine, a colleague of mine from Akron. And I came on campus shortly after 12:30 and I pulled in the White Hall parking lot and there were--there was tear gas in the air. There were--I didn't know what had happened, but I heard something on my radio that there had been a disaster at Kent State. And so I pulled in and I saw all these people scurrying about, and one of the first things I saw at White Hall, there was a treewell with stones in the treewell, lining the treewell. And I saw students picking up these stones and hurling them at a platoon of state highway patrolmen that were marching up toward what later was to be called [Oscar] Ritchie Hall, it was the old cafeteria. I was struck by the violence of it, that they were throwing these rather good-sized boulders at them, and struck secondly by the fact that the state highway patrol never broke ranks. They never stopped marching in the direction they were going. They were going, I think, to the Common[s].
But I then followed where they were going, and I went up on to the hill and Sy Baron and Glenn Frank were on the hill and they were calming students down. And Sy Baron was a fellow that I knew pretty well; I also knew Glenn. And he said, "Get the students to sit down. Get them to sit down. And then we're going to get them back to their dorms." And I saw the Guard down on the Common[s] and they had their gas masks on. I didn't see any of the shooting; I came after the shooting. But I did see them regrouping at the bottom of the Common[s]. And the students were just in panic mode. And Sy and Glenn did a great job in getting them separated off from the Guard; and I did my two cents worth to try to help them get them settled down. And then they started going--filing back to the dorms.
And then they shut down the university, of course. Prosecutor closed down the university. Students were still in the dorms and they were getting out--people were getting out by carloads. I wanted to get home as soon as I could in case there was any spillover at home, so I ran home to Willow Street. I got in my car and got home. My wife had put the kids in--some of the kids she locked in the garage. There were some neighborhood kids playing in my yard, so she put them all in the garage and locked the door in the garage and was worried that something was going to happen there. So anyway, we were all in a state of shock, I guess. The gravity of what had just happened.
Following that experience, with the university shut down, our students had a real dilemma because they had jobs waiting in September and their jobs were dependent on them completing their master's degrees and completing their certification requirements. And so we held classes--several of us held classes in our backyards. I did in my backyard. It was nice and convenient because it was close to campus. And we put card tables up and chairs and students met there to finish up the spring semester. I had classes about three nights a week. So those were some of my early remembrances.
I was, I think, in terms of attitude, I was very discouraged with what had happened. And in the aftermath, reading the news reports and seeing television docudramas and so on--there was a famous reporter, as a matter of fact, that I met at the police station. I had gone there with a friend and he was interviewing the police. And we certainly became a center of attention nationally. But I was concerned that the slant on the news, I felt, was not giving full weight to the things that had promoted the problems, if you will. There were noble banners raised about rebellion against Cambodia or rebellion against the Vietnam War but, in truth, a lot of it was not focused on that issue. A lot of it was the common mob mentality of joining the group, being a part of the group. The heady experience of challenging authority. Whether it was President of the United States, president of the university, the police, the mayor of the town--your father, perhaps, you know. Whatever represented authority, this was sort of a youth movement against authoritative restrictions. An example in point was the curriculum that they wanted to rewrite in the college of education for school psychology. You know, there were just so many ways in which that was being expressed; that they weren't going to be hidebound by the conventions of the adults or the authority structure.
So when the media covered it, it focused on the shooting, and why did the Guard have live ammunition, and so on. I don't think the Guardsmen were prepared to deal with something like this. I don't think they were anywhere in the country, for that matter. And there certainly had been other incidents in many other universities. No one really knew how to deal with this kind of confrontation. Rubber bullets? I'm sure that would have been nice, you know, it's kind of a hindsight kind of thing. We can all play that game on Monday morning quarterback, but no one knew exactly what they were facing, what would happen.
As to violence, when people are burning down buildings and throwing big stones at you, that's violence. When they're breaking windows in the storefronts or damaging property and running through your backyard and trampling your azaleas, that's infringing on the rights of the townspeople. I know for a fact that most of the people in town very much wanted to reestablish law and order. And if that meant calling in the Guard, that's what the Guard was supposedly there for. State Highway Patrol couldn't handle it; local police force certainly couldn't handle thousands of students. So we can criticize President White or the mayor for calling in the National Guard, or Rhodes for sending them. But when order is threatened the way it was, those are the logical responses of the populace to seek law and order and to quell those kinds of rebellions.
[Interviewer]: What do you think the consequences were of the shootings?
[John Guidubaldi]: Well, one of the consequences that was rather apparent was that there weren't any further demonstrations. That is to say, there weren't demonstrations of the sort that we had or that were going on that I saw so much of on the East Coast. It was like all of sudden people realized this was a deadly game. This was not a panty-raid kind of mentality. This was not something that could be done on a whim without regard to consequences; that the consequences were indeed dramatic and severe. I think it was a sobering moment nationally to see that we could have an occasion where the youth of our country were actually killed by the military units that were there to preserve the peace.
Of course, there was a lot of sympathy for slain students. You know, talking about young people, but they weren't children, first of all. They were beyond the age of reason, they were grown people. Now, we had innocent victims, but I'm talking about the people who were leading the rebellion, who were fomenting unrest among the student body. These were people fully in control of their faculties and they were people who had a mission. And I just showed you right before this interview some quotes from Mark Rudd from Columbia and others who talked very pointedly about the importance of confrontation politics: just keep pushing, pushing until you get a response; and then if you get a response that involves somebody getting hurt, then you have a cause, you have a sympathy that you can exploit. And I'm sorry to say I think that was one of the outcomes. There was that for these past demonstrations and for the Harvard riot, the Harvard demonstration, and also for the Kent State one.
I saw other consequences. I saw financial consequences. I became the chairman of the Early Childhood Department here at Kent State. I saw our enrollment plummet. Of course, the Early Childhood Department relied heavily on female enrollment, and a lot of people decided they weren't going to send their females to Kent State University and subject them to this kind of potential trouble.
And I did see every May 4th, as every May 4th came around from that year, 1970, on for the next several years--I became chairman in '72--and I can tell you that in '72 and '73 we were still very frightened when May 4th came around about the potential for reverberations and regenerating rebellions. I was there at Tent City, for example. Tent City, I thought, was a fabrication. They didn't really plan on putting the gymnasium on the spot where the slain students fell. It was, in fact, not far from there, but you can't take up the whole area and say that's sacred ground. But they weren't putting it right on the spot; even if that were the case, even if you made that argument, they weren't putting it right on the spot. But it was another excuse to gather people 'round. And they came from all over.
I went with my neighbor--uh, I'm trying to remember his name, at that time. It will come to me. But I went with him to Tent City because we were both curious about what was going on. And we sat there one evening talking to people, and they were having little cookouts and it was kind of a communal atmosphere. And we sat on the bank of the hill when they had an evening meeting and they were announcing the contributions that they got. And although I had argued with my uncle that it was not communist inspired, that evening when they were announcing the donations to Tent City, they were announcing a donation from the Buffalo Workers Party and a few other socialist and communistic groups that were organized groups. Now, that wasn't the only place they were getting money, they were getting from other places as well, but the students were, again, I think, trying to fabricate a situation. And every May 4th anniversary we were facing the same kind of thought that maybe this was going to be another time when we have a problem.
As I say, I saw the enrollment plummet and the financial consequences of that were clear to the university. We were scraping to try to make ends meet financially in our department. Eventually built the enrollment back up, but it was touch and go. Saw too what happened with the state universities ringing the Kent State area where our catchment area for students--we lost a lot of our out-of-state students because of the hike in out-of-state tuition rates that was, I think, intentionally done to keep the out-of-state influences limited. And secondly, a lot of the people who thought this was a peaceful place, who lived in New Jersey or New York, who might otherwise have sent their kids here probably made other choices. And then we saw the urban ring--Youngstown, Akron, Cleveland State--all growing as state universities and taking away our urban enrollment. So financially there were some consequences.
[Interviewer]: It's really interesting that you mention that about the tuition hikes, because President Lefton just meet with the library faculty last week and he talked about how--long before his time, obviously--that Kent State at some point turned from a national university in terms of recruiting students and the likes to becoming more localized--
[John Guidubaldi]: Regional?
[Interviewer]: Regional. Would you attribute that directly to the May 4 event?
[John Guidubaldi]: That may be, that may be. Because I know we had a very nice draw to the East Coast. We were pulling east coast students away from the hustle and bustle of the big cities, Boston and New York and Philadalphia and so on. And I think Kent State represented a beautiful midwestern school to parents who wanted to get their kids away from that and into a nice environment with a good faculty, good academics. I don't know that it changes--I don't know that we ever were really national in terms of--we didn't pull people from the other side of the Rockies, but I do think that it limited our out-of-state enrollment. And the out-of-state tuition rates were hiked probably--I think the suspicion was that there was an attempt to try to reduce the out-of-state influence on what was going on.
Financially, I remember the--my mother was [laughing]--my mother reared four kids with an eighth grade education. Single parent. My dad was hospitalized and died in the hospital, but my mom reared the four kids with an eighth grade education. She was a taxpayer in the state of Ohio. She was irate about the students taking over the school. And the students would say, This is our school. This is our campus, this is our school. My mother would say, "No, it's not. It belongs to the taxpayers of the state of Ohio. I pay taxes, it's my school. It's not your--you're only here for four years, you're a transient. And you can't take over what belongs to the state of Ohio and the taxpayers of the state of Ohio." And so that was the feeling of a lot of people. And my mother with her eighth grade education, I think, saw right through the facade, the phoniness of the whole thing. You know, I think the majority of the people here on campus--the majority of students were against what was happening as well.
But unfortunately, it didn't get played out that way in the media. It did not--the underdog mentality is what sort of ran the press. And it got publicized very much as the ugly authoritative American abusing its youth. And I think that it was almost inevitable that it was going to happen someplace when the confrontation politics pattern just kept expanding and kept becoming contagious across this country. I think it was almost inevitable there was going to be a disaster someplace. It was just ironic that it happened here in my backyard.
[Interviewer]: Are there any other thoughts you'd like to share?
[John Guidubaldi]: Yeah, I guess I think that when we look at what the precipitating events are for a disaster, we have to do what you're doing and that is get a broader picture. We can't just say that the events were that some Guardsmen decided to shoot. We don't know whether there was a shot fired before, or whether it was a rock that hit somebody in the head, or what caused it, but that precipitating event was just a piece of the puzzle. Nothing would have happened, there would have been no violence if there had not been a riotous group of large numbers of students who created the problem and created a need for the Guard to come here. Now if we give license to that, I think we create a society that is very unstable. And I think peaceful dissent is one thing, but when dissent takes the form that it did--and it's awfully hard to control dissent when it gets to be large groups. And so, you know, you can ask yourself in retrospect, What are the remedies for this kind of a problem? And I think one of the remedies is to get there quickly and stifle the thing before it gets to be--channel it before it gets to be an out of control situation. Channel it so that dissent gets--you don't take away people's voices, but you make those voices conform to some laws that are respecting the rights of other citizens.
[Interviewer]: Dr. Guidubaldi, thank you very much for speaking with me.
[John Guidubaldi]: You're welcome.
[Interviewer]: Okay, we're back with Dr. Guidubaldi and we were just talking about the Krause v. Rhodes civil suit.
[John Guidubaldi]: Yeah, well it's kind of interesting that--another piece of irony is that the--I think it was Krause and one of the other deceased students' plaintiff action was with the Sindell, Lowe, Stern & Guidubaldi group in Cleveland. Steven Sindell, the younger member of that group, was a good friend of my bother David's. And Steve Sindell had the cases, actually; the cases were his cases. And he and my brother split off from the larger group for economical reasons--financial disagreements about long term obligations in a lease arrangement. So they split off and set up their own law practice taking those cases with them.
They interviewed Governor Rhodes and did the depositions and so forth. And there was an anticipation that there would be traditional remuneration from these lawsuits. And there was--I think there was a legal precedent of some sort taken here where there was a cap put on what could be claimed by the plaintiffs and what could be taken by the attorneys for those legal services. And I think that was--the whole issue becomes difficult to frame in terms of right and wrong, but--as to legally what was right and wrong--but it certainly was a precedent-setting case in that there were limits set on the financial remuneration of the plaintiffs and on what the attorneys could charge. And that had an effect on my brother's practice, certainly, when these two young lawyers split off and set up their own practice with cases that were presumed to be big cases that turned out not to be very big cases. So, that was another side effect of the--[trails off]
[end of recording]

I really like the kit, although I do wish they either gave a list or suggested that you buy the items for science when you buy the kit. I have ordered the items, but wish I would have had the list ahead of time.
I was extremely disappointed in this curriculum and will never use any of it again. It was full of mistakes, luckily my son was smarter than the answer keys. I didn't think the math was laid out at all nice, and wording was confusing at times in the directions. Saxon math is way easier to teach. Also I didn't appreciate that the biographies were incorrect. They give more of their own opinions instead of facts on people and promote prejudice. I was all around upset that I wasted my money but mostly half a school year trying to make this work. I had to skip over a lot of the history because it promoted hatred for other religions. I teach my kids to love everyone, no matter where they come from or what they believe. Very disappointed. My son ended up set back.

When we finally decided to purchase a new vehicle, I wanted to ensure that I got exactly what I needed first. Before I went to the vehicle lot on my own, I made a list of all amenities I wanted to be built into my car. I even submitted what specific colors I prefered as that’s important to me. Since I was going to a used car lot, I knew that I may not get everything I wanted, so I wrote the most important things at the top of the page. The very first item for my list was HVAC. My previous car does not possess any heating or air conditioning, and the hotter days where I live are brutal without it, it was very uncomfortable to be in the car. I was willing to give up the heating I wanted within the car at first, but I felt very strongly about having air conditioning for my new car. When I got to the car lot, one for the employees approached me and I simply handed him my list. There was no requirement for a conversation since I knew what I wanted. We walked inside and he got on his computer to see if any of his cars on the lot matched my specifications. He said there were at least three cars of which matched my needs, but two did not have air conditioning. I would either have to choose the one car with air conditioning or head off to another car lot that day, for I wasn’t budging. We walked out looking at the cars and to my own surprise, I loved it so much. It was even the color I asked for! After a bit of test driving, we did some paperwork and set in place a payment plan I could manage that month. I drove my new car home with the A/C basting high. I was so very happy finally to have a car with air conditioning today!

JAISALMER: A domestic camel at a hamlet near Bandha village of Jaisalmer district attacked the 14-year old son of its owner and killed him. At the time of the incident no one was there in the house as the family had gone to a nearby hamlet to attend a marriage. In this two-day old incident neither a case was lodged nor was the district administration informed.
After this incident there was grief in nearby areas. Last year too at Basanpeer
village a camel turned violent and killed its owner. As per the information from villagers at Mairani ki Dhani
near Bandha village, Urs Khan aka Ursia resides with his family.
Two days ago he along with his family had gone to attend a marriage in nearby hamlet and his 14-year-old son Maula Khan
was at home. In the afternoon when Maula went to give fodder to camel, it got violent and caught Maula by his waist and started biting him. When Maula screamed the family members rushed to help him but by then the camel had killed him.
Later family members beat the camel and drove it out. Police was not informed and the body was buried. It is to be mentioned that winters are breeding season for camels and camels come into heat on seeing female camels and sometimes become violent and attack their owners. Many such incidents take place in Jaisalmer and Barmer districts and even incidents take place with BSF jawans at Indo-Pak border.
On March 23 last year at Basanpeer, a camel attacked its owner Ashok Kumar
and sat on him for hours. When Ashok did not turn up the family searched for him and came to know about this incident. Similarly, at Barmer on May 22, 2016 at Mangta village a camel killed its owner. In last six months there were many incidents of camels attacking the BSF jawans and injuring them.

Hey everyone, I'm Adeline. A few months ago my boyfriend Luke wrote a blog about his party so I thought I would take a shot at blogging myself. Mommy might lose her job. This weekend my mommy and daddy planned a really great party to celebrate my 1st birthday. It was supposed to be on Saturday but the weather was really bad so we had to move it to Sunday. Mommy was really stressed out and sad we had to move the party but it didn't make a bit of difference to me. Turns out the party was even better on Sunday because almost everyone could still come and the weather was beautiful.
My party was pretty perfect. Luke's mommy Mandy made me a beautiful banner with my name on it. She also designed my cake table and made cookies from scratch for my party favors....she is one super friend! My family and friends were so sweet to bring me lots of fun presents that I think I will share with my big sister. Then mommy and daddy gave me a little cake to eat all by myself. I decided eating it is cute and all but I thought it would be more fun to rub the icing all over my legs instead. I covered my legs so good that daddy had to put me in the bath tub in the middle of my party. All the excitement was a lot for me to handle so a mid-party nap was necessary while everyone sat around and visited.
Now that I am one I have decided I need to start exploring and learning more so I am now getting into EVERYTHING! I think it's fun....mommy isn't so sure. Turns out she doesn't appreciate my help with the laundry. Mary Selwyn and I are trying to talk mommy into taking us on a ride in our new wagon so I will wrap this up by saying my party was so much fun. I'm a lucky 1 year old. Also, I think from now on I'm going to leave the blogging up to Luke. As much as I enjoy pressing all the keys, I would rather be playing with my sister!
P.S. There are way to many pictures from my party to post on the blog so you can look at all of them if you use this link.

Salt of the earth parachutes into BBC
Image. The link contains the Bond / Queen / Corgi / parachuting sequence.
The fine fellow who doubled as The Queen and parachuted into the opening ceremony of the London Olympics spoke to the BBC. For the first time in many mornings the salt of the earth, devoid of self-serving political calculations and financial obfuscations, was heard.
Yes, he had told his wife about the top-secret job. If you can't trust your wife, who can you trust?
No, he did not think that dressmakers had pushed the boat out as far for his dress, a copy of The Queen's, as they had for HM's.
'My legs', he modestly answered, when asked why he thought he had been hired for the job.
No, he was not sorry to miss the Opening Ceremony because 'I had the best seat in the house for a show that was seen around the world’.
He left with a pleasant thank you, and I was sorry to hear him go.

I was kneeling as I watched the walls of the ancient fortress. It had been over ten millennium since my people had left. Now orcs and other foul ones stained it with their filth. I glanced up and back at the rising sun before I came to my feet. I trotted to the wall where a large crack had appeared. I ignored the empty pack I wore and began to climb.
I slipped onto the wall silently before I knelt and looked around. I began to stalk those on watch and took each one without a sound. I worked my way around the walls only slowing to enter a tower to kill the sub leaders. When I finished I started through the packed bailey and the other open areas where the orcs slept.
I barely paused at each to slip a blade into their brain. When I entered the main Keep only the dead were behind me. Slowly, room by room I killed them and the day grew older. I had no remorse or pity for such as these. The last room was the royal suite and I cut the throat of both door guards as they slept.
I opened the door and looked into the suite before I slowly made my way to the filthy bed. I killed those I found before moving towards the huge fire pit. I pushed the remains out of the way as I pressed and pushed a stone aside. There was a click and I moved over to push on one side. The wall grated as it slowly swivelled until I had a narrow opening.
I moved through and into the dimly lit room. I took the pack off as I looked around and then moved to the shelves. The wrappings on each of small glowing jeweled statues was faded and decayed by age. Each time I picked one up I apologize and asked for their grace and help. These were the ancient gods, the lost and forgotten gods. The gods of war and life and fertility.
I packed them away very carefully before I turned to the inner wall. The single small jewelry chest is the only thing I took but everything else more than fit in it. I closed the secret room after putting the pack on. I left as silently as I had come and climbed down the wall long before the sun began to set.
I did not hurry as I slipped into the almost barren forest and headed east and south. Most of the sidhe had forgotten this place and those that had chosen the dark path ignored it. It was mid of night when I slowed at the edge of a small clearing. I was in the darkest of shadows and even one of my own people could not see me.
When they came it was in a rush and my hands did not come up empty. The two long knives had blades that curved back with grips that curved down. I moved to the left and sliced across a throat as my other stabbed through a wrist and twisted. The first fell and the second screamed as I continued to move.
I yanked both blades free and cut the second one's stomach open and vanished into the brush. I did not go far, that is what kills. These others crashed into the brush in pursuit. My left hand knife stabbed through the back of the neck of the last one as he went by. I lowered him before I began to stalk those that had once been brothers.
There were only three left and they stopped a short distance away. I drifted up behind them and the knife in each hand slipped through the spine and into the brain of two of them. I yanked and let them fall as the last spun and I stabbed up under the chin and into his skull. I held him impaled for a moment before I let him fall.
I glanced around and then knelt and began to strip them of weapons. I also took their belt pouches and any jewelry. I went back to the others and stripped them and made sure they were dead. I moved around to the south edge of the clearing and that was where I found their camp. I looked at their supplies as I squatted and ate from their rations.
I bundled all the weapons together and secured them on the top on my pack before I stood and started south. An hour after the sun rose I knelt and looked out at the human road. It was long disused and overgrown but went in the direction I was traveling. I stood and moved out onto the uneven surface before I began to trot.
The leagues passed slowly as the road climbed and turned to make its way into the King's Pass. That was the humans name but ours was much older. I slowed when I reached Elmfor stream and knelt to cup the cold water and drink. I turned my head and looked into the forest, "come out human."
The green clad human was tall for his kind, with swords and knives and daggers and even a long bow. He moved towards me cautiously, "you are not Sidhe."
I snorted as I went back to drinking until I had my fill. I stood and looked into the pass, "you should not be out his far. My dark cousins are hunting."
I looked at him and he grinned, "so am I."
I shook my head, "than I wish you luck human."
I started to wade across the stream and he cleared his throat, "if you are not Sidhe or one of the Dark ones what are you?"
I kept walking and barely whispered, "the forgotten ones."
I was almost to the fortress as it began to grow dark once more. I slipped off the road and followed a long overgrown trial. The cabin was built into the cliff but no one had lived here in many years. I looked from back in the trees before finally moving across and stepping into the cabin.
The two Sidhe came to their feet quickly with hands flashing to their knives. I did not move as I looked them over. They hesitated and then released the knives and I started across the room. I ignored them as I leaped and caught a sturdy shelf and swung up to another. I reached up and pushed a loose board up and out of the way.
I reached through and pulled out the long black bow and the quiver of arrows. I dropped to the floor and turned to leave. One of the sidhe cleared his throat, "we should kill you."
I stopped and turned to look at them, "you already have when you turned your back on us."
They looked at each other as I strode out and into the night. I slept in a tall tree that night and listened to the human rangers, the sidhe and the dark ones sneaking around. I killed a rabbit with a sling just as the sun began to rise and made a fire and ate. I had sent word months ago to one I trusted.
After I ate I started for the fortress gates and ignored the rangers and sidhe when they emerged from the forest behind me. The guard at the gates looked me over as I approached and stepped in front of me, "hold."
I stopped, "what is it you want human?"
He snorted and turned to spit as the other two guards grinned. He looked me over, "you think you can just walk in here..."
I slid in and one knife came up and stopped against his throat as I looked at the others, "move and he dies."
They glared as I looked at the filthy stinking guard, "first lower worm I am Hawk. I am not a Dark One and I am not Sidhe. You stand on MY peoples land. You will show respect to those that enter and defend against those that attack. Show me disrespect again and I will cut your throat."
I shoved him towards the others, "bathe human, you smell worse than an animal."
I turned to face a well dressed Sidhe and started into the fortress. He started to step into my path and I let one hand touch a knife as warning. The guards muttered behind me but I kept going until I reached the blacksmith. I smiled and swung the pack off and set it on a bench, "Jacob."
He turned from his forge and grinned, "Hawk!"
He strode to me and gripped my hand, "I got the message. I have two horses with saddles and packs. I also have the silven tent and the lathe."
He hesitated, "did the others really go?"
I turned and looked at the sidhe watching us, "yes. I am the last."
I looked at him, "when he comes to ask about me tell him to look in the crystal dream."
He grinned, "cryptic. Can you stay?"
I shook my head, "I have one last thing to do before I must choose."
He nodded, "I would ask you to stay but..."
I smiled, "but it is the longing of the child."
He shrugged, "my family know and respect you and we would miss you if you left with the others."
I gestured, "I must go."
He turned and went to bring out two well fed horses and we saddled them and put bitless bridles on them. While he was doing that I set the weapons I had taken on the bench. I slipped him a dozen gold pieces from the small jewelry chest. He frowned but I closed his hand around the coins, "you must eat and live Jacob. Raise your own children and enjoy your life."
He looked down, "thank you Hawk."
I squeezed his hand before moving my pack to the pack saddle. I took the bow and quiver and swung up on the other horse before I turned and started south. I thought of the sidhe as I rode out the south gate. They were as different from us as the dark ones. They had not spilt away when the sidhe had turned away from us.
The sidhe had brought many things to this world and humans were only the last. They were also one of the reasons the dark ones had left and split off from them. It is strange, we had left to return to the forests and now the sidhe were doing the same thing. All their fortresses were empty, all their tall bright towers were gone.
I rode and camped each night in small hidden glens. Many days later I reached the edge of the Trenadal in the middle of the day and slipped off the horse to lead it. I stopped an hour later and looked around. I let the reins drop and nocked an arrow before I slipped away. The two dark cousins moved apart and began to stalk after me.
I pulled the string back and aimed before releasing. One fell and began to spasm and the other stopped moving. I pulled another arrow and silently moved and a minute later the dark cousin was standing where I had been. My next arrow slammed into his chest and he jerked and went to his knees.
.... There is more of this story ...

Actually, I Loved Being Pregnant
I loved pregnancy more than I ever imagined I would. When I tell people this, the first thing they point out is that I haven't been pregnant in almost seven years. And while that's true, I still remember constantly talking about how much I loved being pregnant during both of my pregnancies. My journals are full entries where I just gushed over how wonderful it is. Actually, looking back, I was That Woman a lot of pregnant women don't enjoy: my pregnancies were both very easy, and even when I suffered from morning sickness, it lasted for two months and then it was as if it never happened. Having such easy pregnancies has made me nervous for the future, though. I want to have children, but really, the number depends on the week. This week, I want two more children, but last week, I wanted none. What if the next pregnancy I have is just nine months of hell? I worry. What if it's nothing like I remember? But then I think back on how wonderful it was, and I'm determined to try again.
The day I found out I was pregnant for the first time was totally shocking and overwhelming. I was just 20 years old and still in college. In all honesty, I hadn't even been around that many pregnant women. The majority of the people I knew who'd been pregnant were my mom's friends. I didn't even know what to expect. But as I came to terms with the fact that I was indeed pregnant, I thought about how my ankles were going to swell, how I was going to grow miserable and uncomfortable, how my clothes would soon stop fitting me. I dreaded the fact that I'd eventually get morning sickness and have to give up so many things I loved eating. I braced myself for nine months of agony. But what I got was the exact opposite.
The agony I'd prepped myself for never actually came. My appetite changed and I had cravings, but I skipped the morning sickness entirely. My ankles never swelled, even in the end. Everyday I'd wake up and rush to the mirror to see what my swelling stomach looked like. I hated that it took so long for me to actually look pregnant because I was so amazed by what my body was doing. I wanted everyone to see that I was this magical being, growing a person inside my body. My hands were constantly resting on my belly, even when it was so tiny. I talked to my baby everyday, talking about things I saw, what we'd do together someday, who I hoped they'd be. I was in love with everything about pregnancy.
My entire first pregnancy was just a series of beautiful moments, one after another.
The OB-GYN I had gave us an ultrasound at each appointment. I got to see my baby once a month, and then eventually every two weeks. I couldn't believe that a human was actually being created within me. The first time I felt a kick, I wasn't sure it actually happened. I sat as still as I could, hoping I'd feel it again. And then, I felt another kick! Everything was new and exciting, wonderful and perfect. My ex-husband and I would just lay on the bed watching my stomach. And one of the most beautiful moments we've had together as a soon-to-be family of three was the first time I took his hand and put it on my stomach as our daughter moved inside of me. In that moment, time stood still. It was pure magic. Exciting, thrilling magic. And I felt so lucky to be a part of it.
Looking back on it, it felt like my entire first pregnancy was just a series of beautiful moments, one after another.
Before pregnancy, I'd never really seen myself as a beautiful person, and I didn't really admire or appreciate my body. But when I was carrying my first child, everything changed. Suddenly, I could see myself for who I really was and I had the most respect for my body, because it was changing in front of my eyes. It was home to a baby who would eventually come into our lives and change our worlds.
I'd catch the reflection of my changing body in the mirror. I'd see my growing, changing body, and I'd feel a swell of pride.
Pregnancy was also the first time in my life when I could stand in front of a mirror for longer than 10 seconds without being frustrated with what I saw. I felt beautiful, like a magical being. That is one of the reasons I loved being pregnant so much: I was able to see myself in a way I'd never been able to before. Even now, I attribute my journey of self-love all the way back to my first pregnancy.
I got pregnant for the second time when our daughter was just 5 months old. We lost that baby, and even though it was very heartbreaking, I was amazed by what my body did during that process. I was grateful for it. I had moments where I beat myself up a bit, blaming myself for losing the baby, and blaming my body for what it didn't do. Yet, I also felt so proud of it. Proud that I could mourn and also endure. Proud that what had devastated me did not break me. Right after that miscarriage, I got pregnant again for the third time and I was nervous that I'd either lose this baby too, or that I'd experience a rough pregnancy. And even though it did start out rough, with almost eight weeks of morning sickness, it was smooth sailing from there.
I don't really remember my second pregnancy as well as I remember the first one, but I do recall the moments where I'd catch the reflection of my changing body in the mirror. I'd see my growing, changing body, and I'd feel a swell of pride. When my daughter climbed up onto the couch next to me, laying her head down on my belly, she'd try to talk to the baby growing inside of me and hug my belly. Time would again freeze, as I took stock of the fact that I was able to share a second pregnancy with my first-born child. Instead of it just being two of us laying on the bed feeling the baby kick, there were now three of us. I was beyond grateful to be experiencing a pregnancy again after losing a baby, so everything just seemed even more special this time around.
After giving birth to my son, I laid my hands on my belly, which suddenly felt so empty. Of course, I could see the child I carried, laying next to me, sleeping, but I still felt a bit of sadness. I was sad that it was over, sad that my child no longer lived inside of me, sad that I couldn't be woken up by kicks. Except, little did I know at the time that for the next six years, not just one, but two sets of little feet living outside of my body would still wake me up every morning.
For me, pregnancy was something that made me feel connected to myself in a way I'd never experienced before. I respected myself and the sacred process of growing a baby inside of me. I saw myself as a beautiful and capable being who was able to bring life into the world. If I was guaranteed more easy pregnancies, I'd do this over and over again — no questions asked.

In a new interview with The Daily Beast, the rocker explained his bond with the actor while also expressing his disappointment on the scrutiny put on his friend.
"Lily-Rose is my goddaughter and I was there when [his son] Jack was born, so we go back," he shared with the publication. "Johnny is one of the nicest people that I know—to the extent where it's almost heartbreaking how kind he is to his friends, and everyone around him. I know that he was completely crucified—unjustly."
He continued, "I would stand by him on anything."
Just a few weeks ago, Amber and Johnny reached a divorce settlement out of court, just one day before the estranged pair was scheduled to appear before a judge for a hearing.

The case is being brought by prosecutor Barbro Jönsson, who had the door of her home in Trollhättan blown up on Tuesday last week.
Police would not comment on whether the attack on the prosecutor had any bearing on the decision to move the trial from Vänersborg District Court to a secure courtroom in Gothenburg.
Barbro Jönsson has over the years prosecuted a number of high profile cases involving criminal network.
In the case being tried on Thursday, six people with ties to Brödraskapet Wolfpack (The Wolfpack Brotherhood) – are suspected of an attack on an apartment in Lilla Edet, a small community 50 kilometres north of Gothenburg.
A number of shots were fired at the door of the apartment, which was occupied by a couple and their 3-year-old child.
Jönsson appeared calm and relaxed as she outlined the case against against the six accused. She said she would be calling for four of those on trial to be convicted of attempted murder.
“It is clear that those shooting were indifferent to the consequences of the shots. If people had been in the hall at the time of the shooting their lives would have been in great danger,” she said.
The man who was in the apartment at the time told the court that he “did not at first realize that guns were being used. There was a bang and then it appeared as though someone was trying to drive through the door with a car,” he said. When his wife ran past the door to reach their 3-year-old son she noticed that the attackers were firing live bullets.
“She screamed, in pain and fear. And I screamed too,” he told the court. All the accused deny committing any crime.

Darius Carlos Rucker is an American singer known as the rhythm guitarist for the famous rock band Hootie and the Blowfish. He recently released the album, Learn to Live, which had the song “Don’t Think I Don’t Think about It.” This made him the first African-American artist to reach number one on the Hot Country Songs list.
Rucker’s music was enjoyable, and the fact that he was playing the guitar and singing the country song showed how talented he was. In addition, the solo song “Don’t Think I Don’t Think about It” is a very relatable song for anyone who has ever been in love.
The song has meaningful lyrics, and Rucker’s powerful voice makes the piece incredible. Anyone listening to the music will instantly fall in love with the soulful music. The song’s character was reminiscing over his past life with his lover.
He thought about how he would plan his future with his loved one, but they had to go separate ways because of their arguments and fights. While the song’s protagonist drove away in his car on a dusty road, he knew he would never return to her. However, he wanted her to see that it did not mean he didn’t love her. He wished everything worked out for them and still thought it would have been better if they were together.
The song’s next verse describes the protagonist regretting his decision but had accepted the way his life is now. He recently heard that his girlfriend had gotten married and moved on in life.
He reminisced about his past life and wondered if he crossed her mind and how life would have been if he did not leave her after fighting one another. However, the protagonist still misses her and regrets his decision to leave his love.
At the end of the song, the protagonist’s car breaks down in the middle of an empty road showing how lonely the person feels without the love of his life. This is one of the well-written songs that portray a person’s in-depth feelings in love.

What COVID Taught Me About Efficiency and Myself
If you have read some of my other posts, you probably know that I own a small business called Nordic Jo's Coffee. It's a specialty coffee brand that I mainly sell through local grocery stores. I have been running the business since 2012, and I have been learning lessons all along the way, but the BIGGEST lessons have come in 2020.
When I first started Nordic Jo's I made it a top priority to make sure that the shelves at all of the stores I sold to were always fully stocked, organized, and looking great. I didn't want to risk a customer looking for their favorite blend and not finding it. This was both a good thing and a mistake.
It was good for the obvious reason. I was taking care of my customer. It was a mistake because I was doing it the wrong way.
I was stopping in at the stores as much as possible. I would go as far as stopping at the same stores multiple times a week. As a vendor, I was doing an amazing job of taking care of the shelves, but ultimately, I was over-servicing them. And that was costing me.
I spent about eight years operating this way. Then the pandemic hit. And to be perfectly honest, it scared me. I didn't want to be spending all of that time in those stores anymore. So, I started making changes. I started changing how I stocked the shelves, and I started stretching out the time between deliveries.
What I discovered amazed me. With a few careful adjustments, I was able to significantly extend the time between stopping at the stores without decreasing the value that I was providing to my customers. I'm not saying that there weren't hiccups, but they were minor. In the end, I had a new system of operating that was providing the same level of service with much more efficiency and profitability.
Most of the grocery stores that I sell to are highly vendor driven. By that, I mean that it is the vendor's responsibility to check inventory and deliver however much product is needed to restock. The stores don't call me to place orders. It's up to me to make sure that my product is on the shelf. So the changes that I made in my own ways of operating resulted in me delivering more product with less stops. I am now dropping off about two to three times as much product per delivery as I was before and I have eliminated almost all of the stops that I was making that were just check-ins without dropping off product.
So the lesson that I learned from COVID about my operations is pretty clear. I learned how to operate at a much higher level of efficiency and therefore profitability. But there is also a lesson buried here about myself and probably many other entrepreneurs that is just as valuable or maybe even more valuable.
The pandemic wasn't the first time that I had thought about increasing my efficiency. I had often wondered if I was making stops too frequently, and if I could make the changes that I did to be able to keep the shelves stocked with fewer stops. The pandemic was just the trigger that was pulled to force me to make those changes.
So why didn't I try making these changes before even though I knew that there was potential for more profitability? It was because I was afraid of the potential loss. I was afraid that if I didn't make those frequent stops, a store might run out of one blend or another when a customer came looking for it. Or worse yet, I might lose the confidence of a store if there was an unexpected run on the product and the shelf went too bare.
In retrospect, these concerns carried little risk. If I found that I had made a mistake and stretched things a little too far, I could always dial back a little and course correct. The reality was that the perceived risks were just fears in my head.
As humans, we have a tendency to place greater weight on the risk of loss than the potential of gain when we are making decisions. Because of this, we choose to just stay the course and say no to change, even when that change carries a likelihood of something better.
So the bigger lesson that I am trying to learn is to always look at what is holding me back from making a change and to ask myself what is the worst that can happen. Chances are, the real risk is much less than it feels.
If I had chosen to try these changes years ago, my business might be in a much different spot. What could I have accomplished had I spent all that time on building my business rather than just maintaining my business?

Stories from My Past: I am not on their plan
One of the benefits of having health insurance is that you normally have a wide numbers of doctors you can choose from. One day my normal chiropractor wasn’t available so I went to the insurance website and found a new one and made a visit.
So while he was working on me I was making small talk about the process of finding him and making an appointment. I mentioned how glad I was that he was open on Thursday. Lots of chiropractors seem to be closed on Thursday. He stopped when I mentioned the type of health insurance I have and said that he didn’t accept anyone from that vendor anymore “I am not on their plan”, he said. I said I would be happy to pay out-of-pocket. So when it was time to pay he asked how much my copay was and I said $35. He said how about $50 for the treatment. I said that was fine, thinking he would bill the insurance company later for the rest. Unfortunately he didn’t accept a debit card and I didn’t have cash so I left and came back with the money.
When I gave him $80 he thanked me and tried to give me $20 back. I insisted he keep it since it wasn’t his fault that the insurance companies information was wrong. I told him that for him to see me that day and not be in pain, that his service was worth more to me than just $50. It is surprising how little some people value their skills. I would have paid anything to not be in pain.
So I followed up with the insurance company and they gave me a song and dance about how it was the providers responsibility to get out of the plan and that they have a disclaimer saying the website can be incorrect because it is updated once a week. Well I knew that was a false answer because everything that insurance company has told me was wrong, and because the doctor said that he had tried many times to exit the plan. He wasn’t the only provider who had told me this. Every provider that I have seen in the last few years told me that the information on the website was wrong. I told the insurance company that if they don’t value their customers experience that I will move to another insurance plan. I am going to look at my options next. As customers we have the right to have correct information and to get the benefits of the plan that we are paying for.
- Apologizing when you are a jerk
- A tale of two donations – Is real life or virtual work harder?
- How to find answers when you don’t have information
- Doctors who refuse to learn new things
- Employers who were concerned about my health

“Travelers” Instagram Takeover Part Two
Today’s Travelers Instagram takeover was split into two parts. I was unable to catch the first part of the takeover done by costume designer Mandi Line, however I did catch the second part, which was started by Leah Cairns who plays Kathryn Maclaren, Grant Maclaren’s wife. Cairns took us behind the scenes on set today, while they were filming. Amanda Tapping was directing again so she was on set and made sure to say “Hi” to the fans watching. As Cairns brought the camera around the back of the set, we saw a few guys in FBI gear sitting on a couch waiting for their set call.
Cairns stayed on set with the camera as they were filming but she wasn’t able to show us what was actually being filmed because of spoilers. Once we heard Amanda Tapping call cut, Cairns brought us over by where they had been filming where we saw a few familiar faces come across the camera. The first actor Cairns ran across was Eric McCormack, the actor who plays Grant McLaren. After that, we saw MacKenzie Porter, who plays Marcy Warton – you might remember her from the last take over. Next, there was Reilly Dolman who plays Philip Pearson, and then before Cairns left the set, she stopped to introduce us to Lee, who is one of the camera guys. Cairns left the filming area and took us past the hair and makeup crew who threw us a laugh and a wave as Cairns went by. Next, Cairns showed us where the props are kept on set and she also showed us one of the stunt dummies that had been named Mark. They were getting set up to start filming again so Cairns had to run off the set so we didn’t see any spoilers.
She took us over to hair and makeup trailer, where one of the crew member’s puppy was lounging on a chair. Leah talked about acting and how much she loves it. As she was talking, Rebecca Lee and Forest Sala, who are members of the hair and makeup team, came over to talk to us as well. Cairns told us that she loves Kat’s (her character) wardrobe and shoes so much, there were a few outfits that she wishes she could keep. When Cairns was on set one day, a bunch of Kat’s shoes were missing so since Cairns had gone out and bought her own pairs, she ended up just wearing her own shoes.
Cairns talked about watching Queer Eye and how she watched the first episode of this season with her whole family, including her 6 year-old twins. She feels it has such a good message and that everyone should watch it. Cairns then talks about the next takeover which will be done by Adam Lastiwka, the show’s composer.
— Travelers (@TRVLRSseries) June 20, 2018
Forest Sala is the set stylist who is responsible for cutting Cairns hair on set for her. Cairn’s haircut was done specifically for the Kat character and it is specific for shooting; however she likes the style and keeps it that way.
Cairns started taking some question from fans in the video chat. Some of the fans brought up DragonCon and Cairns said that she was both excited and terrified as it was her first convention. She talked about how they were going to be doing a lot of Instagram videos and also giving away a lot of swag at the Travelers panel.
Cairns then talked about when her and Eric McCormack did a takeover and how they had no clue what they were doing at the time. Rebecca Lee chimed in and said it was hysterical. Cairns talked about how wonderful this season is going to be and how excited she is for us to see and experience it. “You guys are going to feel every emotion this season!” She also talked about how Jared Abrahamson was on set with his dad today (it was his first EVER visit to the set!!!) but he wouldn’t be able to come say hi while she was live-streaming. Conventions were brought up again by the audience and Cairns said that she would like to go to a con in France because it’s France, and her daughter Aura is in love with Paris.
A fan asked Cairns if she had worked with Magda Apanowicz on Kyle XY. Cairns said that yes, she had been on Kyle XY as Emily Hollander and worked with Magda. She then mentioned that Apanowicz was going to be on Travelers this season.
— Magda Apanowicz (@MagdaEh) May 28, 2018
Another fan asked what Cairns favorite Kat outfit was, and she replied that it was the dress she wore to Grant’s surprise party in Season 1, Episode 7.
Cairns spoke about how Travelers has always filmed in Vancouver. The first two seasons were filmed in an old empty post office by the Downtown Vancouver Library. It’s such a large, iconic building that there were also a few other shows filmed there such as Altered Carbon, GhostWars, and the movie Fifty Shades of Grey. Because of the size, sometimes there were multiple projects filmed at the same time. Cairns said it was a super cool building with a helipad on the roof, tunnels underneath the building that ran to the waterfront, and a creepy boiler room.
She then talked about how emotional the finale was. Cairns had worked with Richard Hatch in the past on Battlestar Galactica. They became friends on that set and she talked to us about how much he helped her during filming of BSG and afterwards. They stayed close friends, and when she was having a really hard time maintaining the emotional level she needed towards the end of the season, she asked Richard to help her. Even though Richard had passed away, she felt like he was there with her and that was how she was able to get through the scene and keep up emotional response she needed. While Cairns was talking about the emotion of the finale, she also said it was a lot of fun to film. She showed a picture that they had taken after filming the season 2 finale last year. Cairns said that it was the coolest thing, “We shot the last scene, and then we all got together to take the case picture with the helicopter in the background. It was such a cool thing.”
— Travelers (@TRVLRSseries) January 8, 2018
I watched both seasons of Travelers virtually with a friend who lives in Vancouver. It grabbed me with the first episode and I am so excited for what is coming in Season 3. Stay tuned for the next Travelers Instagram takeover on June 27th with Adam Lastiwka!!

This storyboard does not have a description.
Climax: In this scene, Eliezer's father dies. Many of the Jews had died from different sicknesses. Elie's father had died from dysentery. This had been heartbreaking for Eli, but now he would not have to worry of his father any longer and would start living for himself. After the death of his father, nothing much was said for the next few months.
Get to work!
Falling action: In this scene, Elie had put through much liberation ever since the death of his father. Many of the awful things that happened at the camp still continued. Millions of Jews were killed by this time. But the Red Army was getting close at this point, giving many Jews a spark of hope.
Resolution: The Red Army finally arrives in this scene. All of the Jews were freed. It took the Red Army very long to get there, but they had finally saved them all. But, many of the Jews were either very ill, injured, or too weak to go any where. The Jews were then taken to hospitals. Most of the Jews died even going to the hospital.
Explore Our Articles and Examples
Try Our Other Websites!
Photos for Class
– Search for School-Safe, Creative Commons Photos! (It Even Cites for You!
– Easily Make and Share Great Looking Rubrics!

Koo hasn't been to the boat in the last two years and as Bob is tall I always fear for tall persons heads.
We had already long ago decided that Crewe was a great place to get them from with great links to London. We set off in good time not knowing where the station was but David had studied the map how to get there....
But at the first roundabout David said yes turn left here and there was a sign for the station pointing to the right, which way would you turn?
Well of course I went right.
We arrived on the outskirts just as Kirsty was calling us to say the train is delayed an hour. Marvellous.
David saw a Superstore through the trees he took to be a huge Sainsbury's however it was a B&Q, no point in us going in there.
Twenty minutes later the train pulled in and there they were. Actually it had only been a week since we had seen Kirsty but its always a treat.
We headed back to Barbridge where we had left the boat unloaded and scuttled in the The Barbridge Inn where we had called already to put the reservation back.
The food was good, very good, the service was a work in progress, many staff asking all the same questions but non delivery of items despite repeated requests. But all done with smiles! I would definitely go there again.
I had Roasted pork fillet and baked white chocolate and strawberry cheesecake.
The next morning we set off firstly to the water point at the junction of the Middlewich Arm, the guests were quite chirpy, but it was early days.
The weather started off well but fairly quickly deteriorated ....
|We moored up when it got this bad.|
Kirsty is a sports buff like her dad and was very happy to moor up and watch The Davis Cup, after which they both cycled off to fetch the car, while Bob studied his book on The Highway Code. Later he and I jumped into the car and went off driving. He really liked our car too. We set off not really knowing where we were nor where we were going, two hours later there was the boat.
The weather had improved greatly by now so off we went again. The guests both had long turns driving and I have to say they were both considerably better than me. The sun shone, the birds sang and the wine flowed.
|Bob happy out of the rain in the car.|
|The boy done good. Ooooo look what Kirsty has in her hands.|
|Happy and confident|
|Our mooring tonight, Distant views over the valley.|
|We sent them on to look for a good mooring, they knew what was good. Thank you Steve and Denise for your guide to this section of the canal!!!|
Supper was courgette and chorizo pasta with cherry and almond tart and extra thick cream.

Manchester United legend Gary Neville has been appointed as Valencia’s head coach and Salford City FC the club he co-owns with other members, alongside Singaporean Businessman Peter Lim , played in the second round of the ongoing FA Cup.
Neville was an exceptional full back who played with the likes of David Beckham,Ryan Giggs and Paul Scholes during his time in Machester United.
He is considered as a gem among the players and was at his best under Alex Ferguson.
Following his retirement, he has a string of accomplishments under his name and he is also the assistant manager of England and has worked with Roy Hodgson.
He is putting his foot into the domain of managership and will be handling Valencia independently from now which will be a big test for his skills.
It is known that Gary is a very keen learner and goes about doing his work very seriously and it is no surprise that this post has been offered to him. The 40 year old works relentlessly and plans everyday accurately according to his close friends. Gary fought his way to play for England while his brother Phil was already playing for England since some time.
He was driven by thw work ethics of his father and his fierce dedication has brought him here according to fans.
Former Manchester United and England team-mate Rio Ferdinand has told that Man U would be watching Gary closely on his work with Valencia.
Since he has stepped into the managerial domain, fans are now excited that he may return to Man U.
It is a big opportunity which Gary will relish doing and everyone is watching closely to see how he handles Valencia.
“Valencia is a hot-bed of football. They take it seriously and are very passionate.
“The Mestalla is a great throw-back stadium, a tight ground with sheer sides and if he is under pressure he will certainly feel it.
“But if he can go on a run the momentum will build and the fans can really carry the team.” says Rio Ferdinand.
It is to be seen how well Gary will manage Valencia with Phil being the his assistant, given that former top players of Man U are watching him closely.

Joined: 09 April 2010
Mission 4: Paris, the City of Love
"Sir, here are the matches we got from the profile you gave. These correspond to all those who entered France in the past week," CJ said moving his laptop to show Balraaj.
"Akshat Malhotra, huh?" Balraaj mused rubbing his chin.
"Sir, why aren't we bringing him in?"
"He could have killed me or Heer last night but he didn't. Instead he ended up saving my life. He was there looking for something. That's what I want to know what was so important on this disc he was searching for. I have a feeling there was some misunderstanding...a case of mistaken identity?" Balraaj explained.
"Would professional spies have such a thing happen to them?" CJ inquired.
"You find in field work nothing is an exact science. You're only feed information on a need to know basis," Balraaj said. "I've encountered a few of my own. Just keep an eye on him for now."
"Yes, sir," CJ replied and left the room.
Balraaj walked over to the window of his new hotel suite and stared out into the city. "Who exactly are you Mr. Akshat Malhotra and what is it that you're looking for?"
Prem sat in his car quietly pondering the conversation he had just a few minutes ago; for whatever reason last night he was unable to contact headquarters and was only able to get through this morning. Preet was yelling at him on his throwaway cell phone that he was by far the stupidest secret agent out there. How could he not recognize the Director of the National Clandestine Service; his boss? As Preet so eloquently put it, "You almost killed our boss you moron. What side are you fighting for? Do you even know what our President looks like?" Prem tried explaining he had been in the field for nearly two years without any contact from home. He had no idea who their new boss was. In his defense this Balraaj Maan took over the last director's seat six months ago, while he was busy working in Thailand. He might have heard the name but he had no idea what the guy looked like. The only reason he even knew what Jaywant Malhotra and Rishabh Rampal looked like was because one of them was his direct supervisor and his uncle and the other was always storming into the offices yelling at everyone because he was the Director of the Domestic Protection Division. He of course knew who the President was; the man was such a high profile figure how could he not know?
Prem sighed at his luck or lack therefore for the past two missions. Just what the heck was going on? His eyes immediately caught sight of a familiar figure and he hopped out of the vehicle to investigate. He really didn't know why he was doing this but he just felt like he needed to. There was this odd attraction that he just couldn't shake. He went to a nearby newspaper stand and picked up a paper and a packet of gum before strolling as casually as he could towards his target. "Hey," he simply greeted.
Heer was a bit shaken up from last night's events. It wasn't every day you see your father being held at gunpoint by some strange man dressed in black. She had a restless night of sleep as the images replayed in her head and the what if moment if she hadn't of walked in when she did. Would her father still be alive? The curious thing that was bugging her was why did the man in black jump to save her father? His handsome features had not gone unnoticed by her and she berated herself that she had even noticed that in the first place considering how he was threatening them with his gun. The crisp Parisian air was doing little to sooth the throbbing ache in her head. What was worse was what lay inside the convention center; Jack Dupont was undoubtedly waiting for her. Her headache was only going to increase from his incessantly boasting and talking. The man really knew how to get on her nerves, in fact everyone's nerves.
As Heer crossed the street to make her way to the steps of the convention center she froze in mid-stride unable to believe that she was coming face to face again with the man who had nearly killed her and her father last night. "Hey." Heer stood shocked for a moment and then narrowed her eyebrows in anger. Of all the things this man had the audacity to do; to suddenly appeared out of nowhere in front of her and greet her like nothing had happened the night before was beyond her understanding. She was about to shout for help when the man suddenly pulled her closer to him and whispered into her ear. "Do you know you're being followed?"
"Those would my bodyguards, you idiot. You have a lot of nerve---" Heer said but was unable to finish her sentence as she was abruptly cut off. "Well, your bodyguards are the idiots because they are the ones being followed," Prem huskily replied. Heer stared at him completely perplexed by his behavior. "You're lucky you didn't get killed last night. But---" She was cut off again as Prem quickly pulled her across the street so they didn't get run over by some angry Parisian drivers who were honking their horns and shouting curse words at them for standing in the middle of the road way.
"Yeah, right back at you too!" Prem shouted.
"Let go of me," Heer sternly requested. She was surprised at how he followed her command without putting up much fuss.
"Relax, if I was going to kill you I would have done it already," Prem said.
"How do I know that this isn't some evil plan of yours? To lure me into some false sense of security before you kidnap me or kill me later?" Heer replied.
"Ahhh..." Prem said arching his eyebrow, "well, you don't. Guess you will just have to trust me. I don't think you should go into that convention center."
"Listen here," Heer warned poking her finger on his chest, "you don't have a right to tell me what I can or can't do. I don't know what game you are playing but this time you won't get away so easily like last night."
"Your bodyguards are going to do something?" Prem smirked. "Because right now they are too concern staring at me instead of looking behind them."
Heer turned around completely miffed at the entire situation and started to walk up the steps. Her face paled the minute she saw Jack standing at the entrance way waving his hands frantically at her. She quickly turned around pretending that she hadn't seen him. "Just great," she mumbled.
"What's the matter I thought you wanted to go?" Prem then looked up and saw a medium build man with thick square rimmed black glasses waving. "A friend of yours? Should I call him down for you?"
Heer immediately grabbed his arm stopping him from trying to wave his hand at him. "No, don't you dare!"
"So what will it be?" Prem asked. Heer hesitantly looked back at the convention center and then at Prem. She didn't know why but part of her believed that he was telling her the truth. "Look, see that guy to the right by the coffee shop and the guy in the green van? Do you recognize them?"
"Let's say I believe you...what now?" Heer asked after briefly glancing at the people he had pointed out.
"My car is right there...the little red Peugeot 308," Prem replied.
Heer looked him in the eyes pondering if she should even take the chance. "The red one?"
Prem shifted his eyes away and began scanning the area around him taking note of everything. "On the count of three...one, two, three..." He grabbed Heer's hand and went racing towards his vehicle. The minute they started running the bodyguards that had been watching them started to give chase but were cut off by the man in the green van.
"Don't think just because I got in this car with you that I'm just going to continue blindly following you. I know a few things about defending myself," Heer boldly announced as Prem drove the car out of its parking spot.
Prem glanced in his rearview mirror and saw the bodyguards getting shot at by the man in the green van. "I'm sure you do." He shifted the car into high gear and skidded into a right turn lane hopping he had made enough distance between them and the green van. "Are you buckled up? It's going to be a bumpy ride at least for a few minutes."
Heer quickly buckled her seatbelt in place and braced herself as the car raced down the roadway. Prem took a turned and made his way through some streets before turning into the grand roadway that circled the Arc de Triumphant. From there he turned off and drove down Avenue Victor Hugo; his eyes constantly scanning for the green van in the side and rear view mirrors. He was able to finally lose them when he ran through an intersection just as the light turned from green to red. Prem then made his way towards the Champs Elysees. "So you had breakfast?" Heer looked at him as if he was asking some odd question. "Mind if I stop by and pick something up?"
"Um, sure," Heer replied.
Prem parked the car and as he got out he gently tossed the keys towards Heer. "Nice reflexes," he complimented as she quickly caught them despite having no warning. "A little trust offering. You have the keys to my car so you can leave if you want."
"Oh." Heer really didn't know what to expect. She had made an impulsive decision to just go with him and now that she was with him she was at a lost as to what to do. Common sense would have said just leave and go back to the hotel but a part of her was rather curious as to why he had followed her.
Heer gently stirred her coffee with her spoon making sure the sugar crystals had dissolved properly before pulling the silverware out of her beverage. She glanced out the window to do a little street watching.
"So, you like art, huh?" Prem asked and bit down into a slice of baguette covered with strawberry preserves. Heer turned toward him with a surprised expression. "The conference you were going to was about art...I saw the sign."
"Yes," Heer shortly replied.
"Don't really know too much about art. I mean I appreciate it for what it is, but I'm not exactly...fanatical I guess would be the right word to use. You work for an art museum or something...what's that word...art curator?" Prem probed.
"Why are you so interested?" Heer snapped back.
Prem swallowed uncomfortably, "Um, just trying to make conversation. Or do you really want to sit here in silence? Sorry, if it seems like I'm talking too much...it's been awhile since I had someone to talk to...um, so we'll sit here in silence then." The minute he finished speaking he felt rather pathetic. He didn't know why he told her that he felt lonely. Being in her presence was doing strange things to him and he couldn't understand it.
Heer softened at his remark as she realized if he really wanted to hurt her he would have done so already. Instead he took her to a public cafe and had been nice enough to purchase her a cup of coffee; not exactly actions of a cold blooded killer. She knew she still had to be slightly wary of what she said around him as she still wasn't quite sure what he wanted. The whole situation was very strange. "I work in acquisitions," Heer simply stated.
"Here? Or someplace else?" Prem asked.
"Someplace else...the States," Heer said.
Prem understood why she was answering his questions so vaguely after all his first impression wasn't the best. Anyone would be cautious towards a person who pointed a gun at them. "The States, huh? It's been awhile since I went home," Prem sighed. "Not that I don't like the traveling bit about my occupation..."
"As a spy?" Heer replied.
Prem chuckled, "I prefer agent to spy. I'm not James Bond or something like that. I don't have a fancy car that can shoot lasers or launch rockets...nor do I have a line of women waiting to get in bed with me. I think Mr. Bond spent far more time in the sack than doing his job." Heer smiled at his joke as her eyes sparkled with gentle mirth. "I'm glad you found that amusing...considering everything that happened last night...we didn't exactly start out on a good note."
"You were pointing a gun at my father and me...it's a little hard to shake that image," Heer said.
"I promise I'm not here to hurt you or your father," Prem explained.
"You're just looking for something," Heer added.
"Let's just put that all aside shall we? I helped you get away from whoever it was that was following you and your bodyguards...let's just call a temporary truce," Prem said. "The weather is beautiful outside why not enjoy it?"
"Are you asking me out on a date?" Heer asked in disbelief. She didn't know if she should feel flattered or repulsed by the suggestion.
"All I am saying is let's just put all of this aside and just enjoy the weather," Prem replied as he got up and put his jacket on. "You're free to leave anytime you like."
Heer stared at him as he stood in front of their table waiting for her decision. She got up and put her coat on. She understood the moment she had agreed to go with him to his car that she had already set the path in motion to her own fate. She had made her decision and was now determine to see it through.
Prem laughed heavily and wiped the tears from his eyes at the story that had just been told to him. "Really? That Jack Dupont did that? I can see why you wanted to avoid him." They were taking a leisure stroll through a public park.
"I was so embarrassed. He drives me insane...and pretty much everyone else around him," Heer said with an exasperated tone.
"Have you tried telling him that?" Prem asked. "Sometimes guys are a bit stupid about these things."
"I told him but he thinks I'm playing hard to get," Heer replied.
"He's a moron than. I guess there isn't anything you can do about that. I guess I've been lucky to have not to met a fellow co-worker like your Mr. Jack Dupont," Prem chuckled.
"Excuse me? He's not mine," Heer said with disgust in her voice.
"Sorry, sorry...correction...Mr. Jack Dupont. So, you must travel a lot working for a museum in the acquisitions department," Prem replied.
"I've been to some places...but probably not as exotic and lavish as some of the places you've been," Heer said.
Prem gave a gentle smirk. "Trust me living in the desert for three months is not what I call luxurious. It's not what the movies make it out to be. Sure there are some nice places I've stayed at and other times I'm stuck in a tiny little apartment or motel room. But nothing beats Italy or Greece. In Italy the food is just spectacular...the history, well I'm sure you are well aware of that with all the art and the Renaissance and everything...the countryside especially Tuscany is beautiful. Greece is amazing...the culture, the Greek islands, the beaches, the blue-green waters...nothing beats it." Heer thoughtfully smiled as she listened to him go on about some of the sights he saw and things he ate there. After a few minutes Prem sheepishly rubbed the back of his head. "Sorry if I got carried away there."
"No, not at all. Sounds like you really had a good time. It's not all work...seems like you had some time to play. I've been to Italy a few times and you're right Tuscany is beautiful," Heer replied.
"I'm going to say something...don't take it the wrong way," Prem cautiously stated.
"If you say it like that you're just setting yourself up," Heer teasingly responded.
Prem grinned. "I don't know why but you remind me of someone I use to know. Maybe that's why I'm talking so much."
"Ahhh, an ex-girlfriend?" Heer probed.
Before Prem could fully respond a rowdy group of teenagers ran pass them knocking him towards her. The movement was so unexpected that they both went tumbling down onto the grass. Heer's eyes widen at the position they were in; his body fully on top of hers and his lips brushed up against her lips. It really was an awkward position and not something that would normally happen. It was more probable in movies not in real life, but yet here they were in this intimate embrace. Prem's eyes roamed in shock as the rest of his body processed where and what he had landed on. The only thing shouting in his mind was "Get Off Now! Get Off Now Before She Slaps You!" Despite what was going on in his head; his hands, arms, and legs weren't really registering. His lips where resting on her soft lips and he couldn't help but detected a sweet scent of vanilla from her lip gloss.
Heer was beside herself wondering how this could happen. Her eyes shifted over and caught sight of Prem's brown eyes. As they stared at each other in astonishment, Heer was immediately transported back to a memory of hers.
Leher sighed as she stared into the bathroom mirror. She was at that age where her hormones were going crazy as her body was going through the changes and the process of puberty. She was breaking out and no matter what she did her acne just didn't want to go away. She widened her mouth in the mirror and saw silver colored metal staring back at her. It was bad enough that she was having acne issues, but to have braces at the same time was even worse. As she continued to check herself out in the mirror she heard a heavy knock on the bathroom door and a deep voice asking, "Hey, are you ready yet? We have to get going."
Leher opened the door to see Prem standing there with a smile. He had grown taller but still had the same skinny build. He had a bit of acne but nothing too severe. His teeth were perfect and she hated him for it. "What's with the band-aid?" Leher asked noticing a small plastic bandage on his chin.
"Shaving...I nicked myself," Prem explained with pride as his voice cracked slightly. Leher giggled at his tone causing him to frown and protest. "Stoppp laughing!"
Leher giggled even harder, "Not when you sound like that," imitating the strange up and down fluctuation of his voice. "You sound so weird..."
"Shut up!" Prem yelled.
"Come on let's go. We're going to be late," Leher said ignoring his comment.
They were on their way to Leo's house to go and work on a group project. They grabbed their book bags and walked the two blocks to the Chan's residence. Mr. Chan greeted them at the front door and told them that the study group was in the basement. Leher and Prem hopped down the stairs and were teasingly greeted.
"So there they are," a boy with short blonde hair said.
"They are always together," Debbie explained.
"Oh, are they?" the boy smirked.
"Keith, not like that," Debbie said rolling her eyes. "They live just across the street from each other."
"Well, they sit together all the time at school," Keith said with confusion.
"That's because he never takes notes in class," Leher said giving a dirty glare at Prem.
Prem just held up his hands in innocence, "Hey, I learn better when I can give my full attention to the teacher...listening to what she is saying instead of scribbling in a notebook."
"Oh really? Then why is it you're always asking to borrow my notes? The next time you ask I won't give them to you," Leher replied. Prem's face immediately paled at her remark.
"Don't worry Prem, you can borrow mine," offered a girl with chestnut brown hair. She was smiling brightly at him.
"Thanks Abby," Prem replied and then looked at Leher, "See, she's a friend. I'm going to go sit next to my buddy, Abby here."
Leher gave him an indifferent look but the minute he went and sat down next to Abby she felt a twinge in her heart. Abby was a new student in their class. Her family had just moved into town. She was a nice person from what Leher could gather of the times they interacted with each other but for whatever reason there was just something about her that she didn't really like. Abby seemed to like hanging around Prem a lot. Debbie nudged Leher and motioned for her to sit down. She gave her a are you going to be okay look. Leher smiled and shook her head telling her it was nothing to worry about.
A few hours later, Leo rolled onto his back stretching himself out on the carpeted floor and murmured, "I can't take this anymore."
"I think we need a break," Debbie suggested.
"Good thinking. Let's play something," Leo suggested.
"How about Seven Minutes in Heaven?" Keith replied.
"What? That's for big parties," Debbie said.
"We've got six people," Abby answered.
"That's a good number," Leo said.
"You guys are serious?" Debbie gasped.
Prem and Leher were silently listening to the conversation but had no clue as to what they were talking about. One of their classmates had thrown a huge party at their house but Prem and Leher did not attend. Prem's parents had decided to take him to the beach that weekend and Leher was invited to join them. They mused that it was something that probably was played at the party they missed.
"Oh, you guys weren't there, were you?" Keith snickered. "I think we should play it just for them."
"Just what exactly do you do in this game?" Leher inquired.
"Anything you want really," Keith said.
"I don't know..." Debbie softly murmured.
Leo gave her a quick glare causing her to lower her eyes. "Don't worry about it. The rules of the game are simple. You just go inside a closet for seven minutes...in the dark."
"That's it?" Leher replied.
"Yeah, and you do whatever you want in there. No one is suppose to know except for you and the person in there with you," Abby explained.
"That sounds kind of dumb," Leher said.
"So, if you wanted to you could like mess up the entire closet and the next person who comes in could like trip and fall in there?" Prem asked with a mischievous glint in his eye.
"Technically, we aren't suppose to know what you did but yeah if you wanted to do that you could," Keith quickly answered before Abby could say anything.
"I'm in," Prem replied.
"I guess I'll play too then," Leher said despite her own reservations about the point of the game.
"All right, it's settled. We should probably make it more interesting. Like no one knows who is going in there not even the people who are going in there," Leo suggested.
"I like that idea," Keith concurred.
"We could use the bathroom in here...it has double doors because it joins this room with the bedroom in the back," Abby said.
"And the light switches for the bathrooms are located on the outside too. We can also turn the lights off to the two rooms so you really have no idea who's going in the bathroom with you," Keith smirked. He gave a mischievous glance over at Leo who suppressed a smile.
"I'm going to go get something to put the pieces of paper in," Leo said and went to find two empty cups.
Debbie got up and followed Leo trying to talk to him. "I don't know about this. If Leher and Prem find out what you are suppose to do in this game they will kill us. Just what are you and Keith up to?"
"It's just for fun. Those two don't realize that the entire grade thinks they like each other. So what if they kiss? It's just a kiss," Leo said. "Look, just call out Leher's name. And then push her into the bathroom so she'll collide with Prem."
"But Leo," Debbie pleaded.
"Trust me Leher will thank you for this," Leo smiled. He torn some pieces of paper and wrote only Prem and Leher's names down. He handed one cup to Debbie and gave her gentle wink. "Okay, we are all set here. The boys will go to the bedroom and the girls can stay here in this room."
Prem blindly followed Keith and Leo into the bedroom leaving the girls by themselves. Debbie took a deep breath and pretended to mix the slips of paper in the cup around with her fingers. She pulled a piece of paper out and pointed at Leher. "Okay guys we have someone. What about you?" Debbie shouted.
"Yup, all ready to go here," Leo called back.
Debbie motioned for Leher to stand at one end of the bathroom door while Abby stood by the light switch for the room they were in. "Okay on the count of three?"
"Yes. One, Two, Three!" Leo shouted.
The room suddenly turned dark and before Leher knew it she was shoved into the bathroom. It was completely pitch black inside and she had no idea who was in there with her. The force of the shove had caused her to charge forward into the room and into the arms of someone. There was a fury of activity and footsteps that could be heard in the rooms outside of the bathroom. Leher shrieked as they tumbled downwards onto the floor with her partner. They knocked something over and it echoed horribly in the still and dark room. Leher clutched onto the person in fear from the noise while the person underneath her groaned in pain. "Ah, my back..."
"Prem?" Leher called out.
"What was that, that fell?"
"How the hell should I know? We don't have the lights on," Prem angrily responded.
"Don't cuss Prem."
"Hell is not a cuss word," he replied. "Anyways, this game is so stupid."
"Why did we even bother saying yes to this?" Leher said.
"I have no idea." Prem sighed and then timidly asked, "You think you can get off of me?"
"Ahhh, knee...your knee!" Prem shouted.
"Oh My God, I'm sorry!"
"It's okay...it's okay," Prem hoarsely replied.
Leher felt her cheeks turn a deep crimson and was thankful that they were in the dark and he couldn't see. She moved her head and then lifted up smacking it against something extremely hard. "My head...ahhh!"
"Your head? My chin!" Prem yelled rubbing his chin trying to sooth the pain away.
"This is ridiculous. We are hurting each other with every move we make."
"Let's just get up." Prem grumbled as he blindly tried to sit up. Leher cautiously placed her hands out in front of her as she stood up. Prem winched as he moved from a sitting to a standing position. He shuffled his feet and tripped on something that made him fall forward knocking his head against Leher's forehead. "Ahhh!" they both yelped in pain and then suddenly there was a muffed silence.
Prem was wondering what his face was resting on as it seemed soft but felt as if it was moving. As Leher tired moving her mouth to speak she realized something warm was preventing her from doing so. Her lungs were filling with the strong smell of after shave; Prem's after shave to be exact. Her eyes widen as a sudden thought came to her head and her hands cautious went out to investigate if what she thought was happening was actually occurring. Just as her fingers gently found the form of Prem's cheek loud commotions could be heard outside the bathroom door and the voice of Mrs. Chan calling everyone to dinner. Footsteps scuttled as lights suddenly turned on and the bathroom door ripped open. There was a roar of shock and then giggles. Prem and Leher both scanned their eyes over and realized that they were literally lying on top of one another. The warmth that Leher felt was Prem's lips pressed tightly against her mouth. They both jerked away from each other as their faces turned a deep shade of candy red.
"You two sure know how to play this game," Keith snickered.
"Wow, I never knew Prem was like this," Abby sighed.
"It was only a matter of time," Leo teased.
Debbie just wore a worry expression on her face as Leher suddenly got up and ran out of the bathroom. Debbie gave a dirty glare at Leo and Keith who just shrugged their shoulders. Prem in the meanwhile sat on the floor still slightly dazed and confused at everything that was going on.
-----------------------------*~*End of Flashback*~*--------------------------------
Heer blinked and then finally placed her hands on Prem's chest and pushed him off of her. "Just what the hell do you think you are doing? Do I seem easy to you or something?!" Heer yelled angrily.
"What do you mean? I'm a not a pervert. That was an accident," Prem roared back as he got up from the ground. "Sure took you a long time to react." He cupped his cheek as a loud slapping sound echoed into the cold afternoon air.
"Took me long? You were on top of me!" Heer shouted. Her hand was throbbing from the force she used to slap him but she pretended that she hadn't hurt herself.
"Listen here..." Prem said starting his rant. Heer shook her head and cupped her ears, "I'm not listening..." They both continued fighting unaware that they were being watched. Prem followed her around trying to get her attention while Heer refused to listen. Neither one of them were really paying attention to what was happening around them. Heer turned to walk the other way when she accidentally bumped into a burly built man wearing a black driving cap. "Oh, I'm really sorry," Heer apologized. When she tried to walk away he grabbed her arm. "Look, I said I was sorry."
"You're not going anywhere," the man replied.
"Hey, take your hands off of her," Prem ordered. "If you have a problem use your mouth not your hands."
"Be quiet," the man said as he gently lifted one side of his black leather jacket to show his handgun that was neatly tucked at his side. Prem's eyes immediately narrowed. "You two just keep quiet and we won't have any trouble."
Heer glanced about her noticing how there were three other men approaching them. She swiftly stepped on the burly built man's toes and then kicked him in the shin. The minute the other three men saw their comrade fall to the ground, they started running towards them. Prem sprung into action and did a flying kick to the closet guy running towards him. The guy fell to the ground with a thud. Prem then grabbed his handgun only to have it kicked away by another guy wearing a black jacket. They fought countering each other's moves nicely until Prem got the upper hand and placed a nice upper cut on the guy's head knocking him dazedly to the ground. Meanwhile, Heer had disarmed the burly built guy and had completely taken apart his weapon. She was making good work of him and his other buddy. Eventually, Prem and Heer had their backs against each other as the guys they had knocked down and disarmed came marching towards them. "Nice work back there," Prem complimented; his breath heavy and labored.
"Thanks," Heer replied as she took deep breaths trying to catch her breath. "I told you I could defend myself."
"That you did. So, on the count of three then?" Prem asked.
"One, two, three..." Heer counted. They both worked together making strategic moves to take the group down.
Prem smiled triumphantly as he did a round-house kick securely knocking the last opponent down to the ground. "Pretty nice teamwork I must say," he said as he turned around to face Heer.
"I guess so," she replied with a smile.
Their victory was interrupted when a round of agents suddenly surrounded them with their handguns pointed at them. "Hands up!" CJ ordered as he came running up. He motioned for Heer to come towards him where she was met by another agent who was making sure she was all right. CJ then walked towards Prem who had his arms in the air displaying his innocence. "Down on the ground and hands behind your head." Prem obediently followed his orders and watched as the agents rounded up the guys that had attacked them, cuffing them in handcuffs and escorting them away. "You have a lot of explaining to do Mr. Akshat Malhotra," CJ said as he handcuffed him. He then hoisted him up and forced him to start walking. "Let's see what story you have to tell."
Joined: 25 February 2009
Joined: 04 December 2009
Joined: 17 September 2008
Joined: 07 April 2010
Joined: 07 March 2010
Joined: 05 October 2009
Joined: 03 July 2009
|Topics||Topic Starter||Replies||Views||Last Post|
|Worry not when creative Soaps is here||Soaps1||35||2088||28 February 2010 at 12:02am
|To, the creative team - please oblige||confusedsoul||7||517||13 January 2010 at 2:57pm
|sanchi bawa the most destructive creative||mono123||12||1398||14 December 2009 at 7:08pm
|serious note to creative team of kdmhmd||bussa_sreenidhi||5||596||24 November 2009 at 6:56am
|Creative you owe us an answer!!||confusedsoul||12||861||05 October 2009 at 8:46pm

Salt Lake City, Utah - April 7, 1884
“What I Remember”
Emily Dow Partridge Smith Young
I have been requested to write a short sketch of my life, and as I have kept no journal of my early days, I will have to depend mostly upon my memory and get my dates from Joseph, or the Church history.
I was born on the 28th of February,1824, in Painsville, Geauga Co., Ohio. I was the third daughter of Edward and Lydia Clisbee Partridge. My parents emigrated from Massachusetts to Ohio where they became acquainted and married. My father was doing a thriving business as a hatter. He had accumulated considerable property and had provided a very pleasant and comfortable home for his family. I was quite young when I left Ohio, but I will try and tell you some of the things I remember about the home of my earliest childhood.
I remember a frame house with one large room and two bedrooms on the first floor. Opening from Mother’s bedroom were two closets, one large and one small. The large one was fitted up with shelves and was used for a kind of store room. The half story above consisted of one large and one small bedroom and a clothes closet. On the landing at the top of the stairs were large bins for storing flour meal and so forth. The front door opened into an entry or short hall. The stairs went up from this entry. The kitchen was in the basement. Opening from the kitchen was a dark vegetable cellar which was sometimes used for shutting up the children when they needed punishing.
I remember once that my sister, Harriet, was shut in the dark, and how sorry I was for her, for to a child darkness has all the horror imaginable. I do not remember of ever having been shut in there myself, but if I was not, it was because I was not old enough, not because I did not deserve it, for I was the most mischievous of the whole flock.
The well with the “Old Oaken Bucket” was near the kitchen door. The front yard was a green plot with rose bushes and sweet briar growing under the front windows. Back of the house was a garden with red and white currants (no black and yellow currents such as grow so luxuriant in these mountains were ever seen there). I remember an arbor, or summer house as we called it, with seats on both sides and covered with grapevines with clusters of blue grapes hanging among the leaves and twigs, beyond our reach as one might suppose; but children, though small, will find some way of getting such things and we were not exceptions to the rule. I think the grapes were Isabella’s, for I never ate Isabella grapes without thinking of my father’s garden.
I remember a variety of flowers, such as pinks, daffodils, blue bells, lily, iris, snowballs, etc., that lined each side of the path leading from the house to the arbor. And then I remember the patches of tall grass – almost as high as my head was then, and now we children would tie the top of the grass together to make houses for our dolls. I remember the delicious cling-stone peach that grew near the back of the house, the cherry tree that stood in the corner of the lot, and the large weeping-willow near the shop. There was a flat embankment running the whole length of the house at the back, and a frame covered with grapevines, both shading the house and making a nice place for the children to play, and we took possession of it – not that we played there all the time by any means, for we were like gypsies roaming around from one place to another, and we were not stinted for room as some children are in large cities.
Not far from the house, next to and facing the street, was Father’s hat store, and how I used to rummage under the counter child-fashion, looking for treasures such as bits of red, blue, gilt, and green feathers, such as are used to line hats and boys caps, and oh, how I would sometimes bump my head when I would raise up and then how I would cry. Joining onto the back of the store was the shop where hats were made. In the center of the room was a large iron kettle shaped something like our bathtubs. It was fitted into a furnace, and it was for coloring hats. Above the kettle was a large wheel with pegs to hang the hats on to be colored. The wheel was kept turning so that the hats were into the dye and then into the air and then into the dye, and in that way they were prevented from spotting. In coloring black, the light and air is very essential to make a good color. In this same room there was a screen with a spout that drained into a barrel in the cellar. It smelled very much like the old fashioned blue dye. I remember upstairs the long table where the workmen pulled and shipped the furs. I remember the implements they used, even the thumbcots, and the shape of the hats before they were blocked and furred. After they were pressed, the blocks that would fall to pieces when they were taken out of the hats.
Further back in the lot was a large frame barn, and a large yard full of black fowls, and sometimes the cow and horse would stand there. The hay in the barn loft also made a good place for us to play, and we would ransack the hay for hen’s nests, and when we found one full of eggs, we were as happy as if it was a gold mine. On the corner of the place was a large vacant lot (but it was all fenced in with the rest, and I presume Father had preserved it to sometime build a nice house), covered with green grass, where we would spend most of our time playing with packing boxes. We would build houses by placing boxes in a position to make a good many different sized rooms, and when we got tired of one kind of house, we would change it by placing the boxes in a different position, and so we would roll these boxes from one side of that piece of ground to another, and we always had plenty of help from the neighbor’s children.
But with all the abundance of play ground that we had, it seems that I was not satisfied, but would run away to the neighbors, and then I would be brought back and tied up to Mother’s bedstead with a long rope that would reach to the sitting room. I used to cry a little, but would soon forget all about it until I would start up again to run away, then the rope would stop me, and then another cry. But they could not keep me tied up always, so I would be off again, and once when I was out in the street, a pet lamb of one of the neighbors took after me, and I really thought it would devour me if I let it overtake me. But I beat him running and got home first. I also remember of being chased by a big boy with whom I was playing in an old house across the street. Of course he only wanted to scare me, but I didn’t know it then and I thought he certainly meant to kill me, and did think so for many years afterwards. It is not a good plan to fool with children, for they take everything in earnest and are apt to form wrong impressions that will be lasting.
My father and mother made a visit to their parents living in Pittsfield, Massachusetts. Taking their eldest and youngest children with them, they left my sister Harriet and me with Aunt Phoebe Lee, who lived in another town not far away. There I was again chased by a girl. She got my bonnet and ran home with it. I thought the children in Unionville (the place where my aunt lived) were awful.
Well, I guess you think I remember a good many silly things, but there is one thing I do not remember now, although my eldest sister says that I was once positive that I could remember when my father and mother were married, and I was at their wedding. However, I have no recollection of it now.
Well, if you are not too tired I will write a little more of my youthful recollections. I used to sleep in my mother’s bedroom in the little trundle bed, but one morning when I woke up I was in the spare bedroom in bed with my little sister. When we got up we were shown the little dead baby boy, and oh, how sorry we were that he was dead, for we had never had a little brother before. (He was named in the St. George Temple Clisbee Partridge.) He was Mother’s fifth child.
I remember my little playmates. There was one, little Edward Huntington. I called him my baby because I loved him the best of all. Of course, in children the motherly instinct predominates. And then there was Lucy Phelps and Mary Ann Steel, and the little lame girl whose name was Dorthia Ann Payne. What a treat it was when she could let me take her crutches for a little while. I thought I would almost be willing to be lame if I could have such a nice pair of crutches. And then there was Sarah Granger who was very small for her age. Her uncle with whom she lived used to call her Pony. Yes, and I remember the big unruly boy that was tied up in the shop, and how sorry I was for him. He was sometimes tied up because he would run away. He was a poor, friendless boy whom nobody could do anything with, and the town officers got Father to take him and teach him a trade, and try to make a good boy of him. His name was Harlow Castle. I sometimes wonder what became of him, and if he really was a bad boy or whether people just had no patience with the friendless boy. I wonder if he is still alive, and if he remembers the little black-eyed girl that would come in the shop and look on him with such pity because he was tied up, for this little girl had been tied up too for running and away and knew how to feel for him.
I think I must have had a rummaging disposition, for I remember every nook and corner of the house, store, shop, and from garret to cellar, inside and out. I remember the orchard that was in another block, and the pasture land that was down in the woods where we would go in a wagon to gather chestnuts and butternuts. I remember we had plenty to eat and wear, and sometimes would ride in a spring wagon, and I wore the sweetest pink calico dress that ever was, and little yellow shoes. Harriet had a pink dress too, but it was not so pretty as mine (or so I thought).
Well, I think my father must have been almost a rich man when I look back and consider the amount of property he owned. But when Mormonism, came, our home went. Whether it was sold or not I do not know, but I have never had such a home since.
It was sometime in the year 1830 that four elders came to Ohio. Their names were P. P. Pratt, Oliver Cowdery, Peter Whitmore, and Ziba Peterson. My mother soon believed the Gospel after she heard it, and was baptized by Parley P. Pratt. My father was not so ready to believe it at first, and told them he thought they were imposters. Then Brother Oliver Cowdery said he was thankful there was a God in Heaven who knew the hearts of all men. What they said must have made considerable impression on his mind, for he sent to them, after they had gone to Kirtland, to purchase a Book of Mormon. And then he proceeded to take a trip to New York and see the Prophet for himself. And this is what Brother Joseph says of him (in his history) . . . “It was in December, 1830, that Elder Sidney Rigdon came to inquire of the Lord, and with him came that man of whom I will hereafter speak more, named Edward Partridge. He was a pattern of piety, and one of the Lord’s great men, known by his steadfastness and patient endurance to the end.”
Brother Joseph baptized him in the Seneca River on the 11th of December 1830. He then went to visit his relatives who reside in Pittsfield, Massachusetts, anxious that they should hear the joyful tidings that so filled his heart with gladness. He thought they had only to hear to believe it, but, oh now disappointed he was when they rejected him with his joyful news. They pronounced him crazy, and one of his sisters ordered him out of her house and said she never wanted to see him again. What a bitter spirit lays hold of the unbelievers as soon as the truth is presented to them, and those that profess the most religion are the most uncharitable.
When my father returned to New York, his parents sent his youngest brother to accompany him, thinking him deranged and not capable of taking care of himself. But this brother, after arriving in Painsville, received the gospel and was baptized. His name was James Harvey Partridge. They reached home about the beginning of February, 1831.
From New York to home, my father traveled in the company of the Prophet, who was moving his family to Kirtland, which place had been appointed a gathering place of the saints. After his arrival home, his old and most intimate friends (that had been so anxious for him to go and find out the truth of the reports about Mormonism because of his honesty and superior judgment), pronounced him crazy when he declared the Book of Mormon was true.
The saints began to gather to Kirtland from all parts of the country where the gospel had been preached; and as we lived about three miles from the boat landing, our house made a good stopping place for the saints. We had more of them stopping there from that time on while we remained in Ohio. The barn loft was filled with boxes of goods belonging to the Saints. And how I did wish I could see what was in those boxes, but they were nailed up tight and not even a crack was left to peep in. Well, you see, young as I was I had a little of the curiosity attributed to our sex.
On 4 February 1831, my father was called by revelation (D&C 41:9) to be a bishop in Zion, and was ordained to that office soon after. Some time in June following, Brother Joseph, with several of the brethren, started for Missouri, my father being one of the number. They reached Independence, Jackson County, Missouri, about the middle of July. After located in Zion (in Independence, or that town being the center spot) and transacting other necessary business, the brethren returned home, leaving my father to remain in Zion as he had been appointed by revelation to labor in that place and to take up his residence there and send for his family. My mother felt that her trials had begun when my father was called to accompany the Prophet to Missouri. Her children were just recovering from the measles, and the oldest child was still very sick with lung fever. It was a new thing for her to be left alone in the hour of trouble, or to have any responsibility outside of her little family. But she was one of the “staunch and true” and knew it would not do to put the “hand to the plow” and then turn back. She could ever acknowledge the hand of the Lord in her trials as well as her blessings. I think it was a great trial for my father to be left in Missouri. He expressed great anxiety about his family in a letter that he wrote to my mother.
I think it was the first Fall of our stay in Clay County, that a slaughter yard was established on the banks of the river not far from where we lived; thousands of hogs were killed and packed for the market, giving employment to the Saints in that vicinity. The men killing and cutting them up. Some of the Saints, traveling through Painesville to Kirtland and stopping at our house, brought the measles and Mother’s children all took them. Some of them were very sick. When I was recovering from measles, I took the canker, and could not eat for a long time. I well remember the day I could eat a little custard. Oh! how good it was. Mother had company that day and how nice the table looked with the old-fashioned blue and white china. Well, my mouth got well, but my ear was sore for years and I can’t tell you how I suffered with it both from pain and mortification of pride. When my ear did get well, it left me deaf, and I have been deaf (in that ear) ever since.
After my parents had joined the Church, they were seized with the spirit of gathering, as everybody is as soon as they are baptized, and my father bought a house and lot in Kirtland, but he never had the privilege of living there, as you will see.
On the 4th of February, 1831, my father was called by revelation to be the Bishop in Zion and was ordained to that office soon after. Sometime in June following, Brother Joseph, with several of the brethren, started for Missouri; my father being one of the number. They reached Independence, Jackson County, Missouri, about the middle of July. After locating Zion (in Independence) or that town being the center spot for transacting other necessary business, the brethren returned home, leaving my father to remain in Zion, as he had been appointed by revelation to labor in that place and to take up his residence there and send for his family. My mother felt that her trials had begun when my father was called to accompany the Prophet to Missouri. Her children were just recovering from the measles, and her eldest child was still very sick with the lung fever. It was a new thing for her to be left alone in the hour of trouble, or to have any responsibility outside of the care of her little family. But she was one of the staunch and true, and knew it would not do to put hand to the plow and then turn back. She could ever acknowledge the hand of the Lord in her trials as well as her blessings.
and the women and children cutting up and trying out the lard, having a share of all they did, and in this way the people were provided with meat and lard, which was a great blessing at that time. I r emember of going with Mother, and doing what I could to help her, day after day.
While we remained in Clay County the brethren did all they could to regain possession of their homes. They petitioned the governor, employed lawyers, and tried in various ways to gain redress, but all their efforts proved to be of no avail. The Prophet Joseph Smith manifested great anxiety concerning the Saints in Zion. He was constantly writing letters advising them what to do, and sending words of comfort and encouragement. Revelations were given assuring the Saints that the Lord remembered them in their afflictions. A father could not have manifested more love and anxiety if his best beloved son had been in deep trouble, than the Prophet did in regard to the Saints in Missouri and their persecutions.
I think it was a great trial for my father to be left in Missouri. He expressed great anxiety about his family in a letter that he wrote to my mother. It seemed to him a very great undertaking for Mother to break up her home and prepare for such a journey with a family of little children without her husband to advise, and make arrangements for her. For she was then young and inexperienced in such things. My father felt the great responsibility resting upon him and his own words will better express his feelings as he wrote them to Mother than any language of mine can possibly do. He says, “I have a strong desire to return to Painsville this Fall, but must not. You know I stand in an important station; and as I am occasionally chastened, I sometimes feel as though I must fall. Not to give up the cause, but fear my station is above what I can perform to the acceptance of my Heavenly Father. I hope you and I may so conduct ourselves as at last to land our souls in the heaven of eternal rest. Pray for me that I may not fall (fail?) Farewell too for the present.” Dated Independence, August 5, 1831.
My father placed his business in the hands of a young man by the name of Harvey Redfield. His property was sold at a great sacrifice (as much as was sold at all), so much so that his friends pronounced him insane. They could not see what there was in religion to make a man give up all worldly consideration for it. And that is still a mystery to the world and we cannot wonder at it when we realize how little they have in theirs to create hope, or to exchange their worldly comforts for. But ours is different, it is everything. There is nothing in this life so dear to sacrifice for the hope of the future that our religion gives us.
The next season, Mother and her family started for Missouri in a company of saints under the direction of W.W. Phelps and A.S. Gilbert. Mother must have had a great deal to try her on that journey that we as children knew nothing of. What little money she had with her to defray her expenses she was advised to put into the hands of a man who cheated her out of it. We went down the Ohio River to Cincinnati in a keel boat. Then we took a steamboat and went up the Missouri River. It was on this boat that our provision chest was rifled and thrown overboard. We saw it floating down stream and knew it at once. The lid was open and we could see that everything had been taken out but the papers the things were packed in. Once when the boat landed, one of our company, a young woman, Electa Hamberlin, slipped from the plank into the water, but was soon rescued again. When we were about one hundred miles from our destination, we met the ice coming down the river so thick that we could not proceed, and we were forced to land at a place called Arrow Rock.
On the banks of the river there was a log cabin occupied by Negroes. There were two rooms with no windows, the light was admitted through the open door, a common thing then in Negro cabins – and white folks too, sometimes. These Negroes let Mother and Sister Morley have one room. There were about fifteen in number in the two families, but there was a fireplace in the room. We could have a good fire and so keep from freezing. We remained there about two or three weeks, it being very cold weather. At the end of that time, a large Kentucky wagon was procured and the two families and their effects were stowed into it and we started again for Independence. The weather was still very cold, so cold we had to lay by one day again, and that day my father and Brother Morley met us, and anyone who had been in like circumstances can understand how happy we were.
I do not know how we happened to be separated from the rest of the company. Whatever suffering and privations my mother had to endure she never murmured or complained, but rejoiced that she was counted worthy to endure tribulation for the Gospel’s sake. She felt that he had enlisted in a good cause and she looked forward to the happy time that had been promised to the faithful saints, and her religion compensated her for all the hardships she had to endure.
Well, we again started for Independence and when we arrived at that place, we were so jammed and packed in the wagon by the load shifting that we could hardly pull ourselves out. I remember that when I went to get out of the wagon, I could not stir until some of the load was removed. My father had rented a log room of Liliburn W. Boggs, the same that was afterwards governor and took an active part in driving the saints from their homes.
The next winter, houses to rent being scarce, Father took a widow and four children into the room we were in, making twelve or thirteen in the family to sit by one fire and do all the work. Now don’t think for one moment that we were crowded or the children quarreled; perhaps we did though. I don’t remember. We stayed here until Father built a small log house of his own, one room on the first floor and one upstairs, and a cellar. This house was on the corner of the Temple lot or quite near it, about one half mile from the public square of Independence.
About the first thing the saints did after providing shelter for their families was to start a school for the children. The first school I remember attending was in Jackson County. It was in a log cabin and was taught by Miss Nancy Carl. One day the school house was surrounded by a tribe of Indians. The doors and windows were filled with Indian faces, and every crack where the chinking had fallen out we saw Indian eyes. Our teacher went to the door and talked with the chief, but the scholars were as quiet as mice. We were not as used to seeing Indians in those days as the children are now.
Well, everything was different from the home we had left and all seemed so strange in our new home. Plenty of Indians and Negroes, and the white folks were so different in their customs and manner of speaking. It was “I reckon” and “A right smart chance,” and instead of carrying things in their hands, they would “tote” them on their heads. Large bundles, baskets, churns, piggins of milk and water, all were “toted” on their heads. Little children were carried, or toted astraddle of one hip, and women going barefooted in warm weather, and little boys from two to ten years old running the streets with nothing on but a shirt. Everything seemed to be after the style of the back woodsman. When they washed, instead of rubbing their clothes on a wash board, they would “battle them”– that is, they would wet the clothes in strong soap suds, and then lay them on a smooth board, or lot it was out of doors, and then beat them with a smooth stick large at one end and small at the other, called the “battle stick.” Their dress was more for comfort than for looks. I remember a kind woman gave mother one of the day caps. It was made of large figured light calico and had a frill around the front and neck. Perhaps you think she did not wear it, but she did. She was among Romans, or Missourians, and she thought it no harm to do as they did when it suited her comfort and convenience.
The brethren began to build houses and gather around them the comforts of life. In building their houses, they would have raisings. After all the logs were hauled and prepared, then all the men in the neighborhood would turn out and lay them up. Raisings with the men were something like the old fashioned quiltings were with the women. We read in the Prophet Joseph’s history of one in Kaw Township where he helped the Colesville Branch raise their first house, the logs being carried by twelve men, representing the twelve tribes of Israel. Some of the houses were built very neatly, the logs being hewn on the outside and inside, and the corners sawed off smooth, and for a log house they looked respectable, but the saints were not to be permitted to enjoy their homes long.
I think it was in ‘32 that the mob began to make threats and commit depredations by night, breaking windows, and shooting into the houses of the saints, and sometimes using abusive language. Father had a large stack of hay in the yard back of his house. One night the mob set it on fire. It made a tremendous blaze. In this manner the mob kept annoying the saints through the summer. The mob were holding meetings and making resolutions to drive out or destroy the Mormons, and as they said in one of their preambles “peaceably if we can, forcibly if we must.” I suppose they meant by that, that if the Mormons would hold still while the mob heaped on them all manner of abuse, they would do it peaceably, but if they resisted they would do it by force.
There was considerable excitement at times, not knowing what the mob might do. The brethren would gather nights into our house for protection. They had the room below and the families were upstairs. The men were armed and twice guns went off accidentally. The ball lodged once in the stairway, and once it went through the head of the bed. The brethren would pray together, not as one man, but as many. They did not understand the order of prayer then as we do now. Children had heard so much about the mob that the word was a perfect terror to them. They would often cry out in their sleep and scream “the mob is coming, the mob is coming.”
In the summer of 1833 my youngest brother was born, and when he was about three weeks old, Mother sent me with Harriet to the spring for water. When I looked back I saw the house surrounded by an armed mob. We remained at the spring until they had gone. Then we got our water and went up to the house. They had taken Father (George Simpson was their leader) up into Independence. We did not know what they were going to do with him, it might be kill him, as they had threatened. He had been put in prison once or twice before. After he had been gone awhile I was standing by the window looking the way the mob had gone when I saw two men coming toward the house. One I knew. It was Albert Jackman, a young man. He was carrying a hat, coat and vest. The other I thought was an Indian and as they were coming right for the house, I was so frightened that I ran upstairs. But when they came in, it was our dear father who had been tarred and feathered, giving him the appearance of an Indian. Charles Allen was also tarred and feathered the same day. They had done their work well, for they had covered him with tar from head to foot except his face and the inside of his hands. I suppose hundreds witnessed the outrage. I have heard one woman affirm that she saw a bright light encircle his head while the mob was tarring him. I very well remember the clothes he had on when he went away. They were dark blue. I remember blankets were hung up around the fireplace to screen him while the tar was being scraped off from him.
I think it was the same day that the store was broken down and the goods scattered in the street. The printing office was also demolished and the press type and papers scattered over the ground. Brother Phelps’ family lived in a part of the same building. They were turned out of doors and their furniture broken and things scattered in the streets.
After my father had been tarred and feathered, a man raised a whip to finish up by thrashing him when another man, more humane, laid hold of his arm saying he had done enough. Charles Allen was then stripped and tarred and feathered because he would not agree to leave the County or deny the Book of Mormon. Others were brought up to be served in the same way, or whipped, but for some cause the mob ceased operations and adjourned until Tuesday the 23rd. Elder Gilbert, the storekeeper, agreed to close then, and that may be the reason the work of destruction was suddenly stopped for two days.
In the course of these days of wicked, outrageous, and unlawful proceedings, many solemn realities of human degradation, as well as thrilling incidents, were presented to the Saints. An armed and well-organized mob in a government professing to be governed by law, with the Lt. Governor Liliburn W. Boggs, the second officer in the state calmly looking on, and secretly adding every movement, wailing to the saints, “You now know what our Jackson County boys can do, and you must leave the county,” etc. When Bishop Partridge, who was without guile, and Elder Charles Allen walked off amid the horrid yells of an infuriated mob, coated like some unnamed unknown biped; one of the sisters cried aloud, “While you who have done this wicked deed must suffer the vengeance of God, they having endured persecution can rejoice from henceforth, for them is laid up a crown eternal in the heavens.” Surely there was a time of awful reflection, that man, unrestrained, like the brute beast may torment the body; but God in return will punish the soul . . .
While the destruction of the printing office and store was going on, two young girls, nieces of A.S. Gilbert, had run out of the house and hid in the corner of the fence and were watching the mob. When they saw them bring out a table piled up full of papers in the middle of the street, and heard them say, “Here is the book of revelations of the damned Mormons,” they watched their opportunity when the mob returned to the house and ran and gathered up as many of the papers as they could hold in their arms and ran into a corn field and hid. The mob soon discovered them running with the papers and followed them, but could not find them. The corn fields there were very large and the corn stalks grew so high that they were almost like young forests, and it was an easy matter for a person to get lost in them. These two girls had run so far that they were lost, but after a while succeeded in finding their way out. They went to an old shanty where they found the family of Brother Phelps trying to make themselves a little comfortable. Sister Phelps took the Revelations and hid them in her bed. And this is how a few of the revelations were preserved. The names of those girls were May E. and Caroline Rollins.
I remember most of the circumstances that transpired at that time, but I was too young to remember the particulars well enough to tell them. I was now about 9 years old and had been baptized in a creek not far from Independence by John Corrill.
After the mob had ceased yelling and had retired, and while evening was spreading her dark mantle over the unblushing scenery as if to hide it from the gaze of day, men, women and children who had been driven from their homes by the yells and the threats of the mob, began returning from their hiding places in thickets and cornfields, woods and groves, and viewed with heavy hearts the scenes of desolation and woe. While they mourned over fallen man, they rejoiced with joy unspeakable that they were counted worthy to suffer in the glorious cause of their divine master. There lay the printing office a heap of ruins, Elder Phelps’ furniture strewn over the ground as common plunder, the Revelations, book work, papers and press in the hands of the mob as booty of highway robbers. There was Bishop Partridge in the midst of his family with a few friends endeavoring to scrape off the tar, which from eating his flesh seemed to have been prepared with lime, pearlash, acid or some flesh-eating commodity to destroy him, and there was Charles Allen in the same awful condition. As the heart sickens at the recital, how much more so at the picture?
More than once these people in the boasted land of liberty were brought into jeopardy and threatened with expulsion or death because they wished to worship God according the revelations of Heaven, the Constitution of their country, and the dictates of their own conscience. Oh liberty, how art thou fallen, alas: Clergymen, where is charity? In the smoke that ascendeth up forever and ever.
Early in the morning of the 23rd of July, the mob again assembled, armed with weapons of war and bearing a red flag, whereupon the elders, led by the spirit of God, and in order to save time and stop the effusion of blood, entered into a treaty with the mobbers to leave the County within a certain time, etc. The execution of this treaty presented an opportunity for the brethren in Zion to confer with the Presidency in Kirtland concerning their situation which they improved by dispatching O. Cowdry as special messenger after a delay of three days.
After word had been received from Kirtland, the brethren in Zion sent a petition to Daniel Dunklin, Governor of the State of Missouri, which petition can be found in Joseph’s History, in the 6th volume of the Times and Seasons, also his ready communication between Kirtland and Zion was uncertain as the mob intercepted letters sent back and forth. The saints engaged lawyers– Wood, Reese, Doniphan and Atchison, my father and Elder Phelps giving their note for one thousand dollars as a retaining fee, endorsed by Gilbert and Whitney.
This so enraged the mob that no sooner had the word spread among them that they began to congregate and prepare for battle. Thursday night, the 31st of October, gave the saints in Zion abundant proof that no pledge, written or verbal, was to be regarded any longer, for on that night, between forty and fifty in number, many of whom were armed with guns, proceeded against a branch of the church west of Big Blue, and unroofed and partly demolished town dwelling houses. And in the midst of the shrieks and screams of women and children, whipped and beat in a savage and brutal manner several of the men, and with their horrid threats frightened women and children into the wilderness. Such of the men as could escape fled for their lives, for very few of them had arms, neither were they embodied, and they were threatened with death if they made any resistance. Such therefore as could not escape by flight received a pelting of rocks and a beating with guns and sticks, and so forth.
On Friday, the 1st of November, women and children sallied forth from their gloomy retreat to contemplate with heart-rending anguish the ravages of a ruthless mob, in the mangled bodies of the husbands, and in the destruction of their homes and some of their furniture. Houseless and unprotected by the arm of the crude law in Jackson Co., the dreary month of November was staring them in the face and loudly proclaiming an inclement season at hand. And continued threats of the mob that they would drive out every Mormon from the county, and the inability of many to move because of their poverty caused an anguish of heart indescribable.
That night, a party of the mob proceeded to attack a branch of the saints on the prairie, about twelve or fourteen miles from the village. Two of their number were sent in advance as spies, namely Robert Johnson and one Harris, armed with two guns and three pistols. They were discovered by some of the saints and without the least injury being done to them, said Johnson struck Pratt over the head with the breech of his gun, after which they were taken and retained until morning, which it was believed, prevented a general attack by the mob that night. In the morning they were liberated without receiving the least injury.
The same night, another party in Independence began stoning houses, breaking down doors and windows and destroying furniture, etc. This night the brick part attached to the house of A.W. Gilbert was partly pulled down and the windows of his dwelling broken into with brick bats and rocks, while a gentleman stranger lay sick in his house. The same night, three doors of the store of Messrs., Gilbert and Whitney were split open, and after midnight, the goods lay scattered in the streets, such as calicos, handkerchiefs, shawls, cambric, etc. An express came from the village after midnight to a party of their men (the Mormons) who had embodied about half a mile from the village for the safety of their lives, stating that the mob were tearing down houses and scattering goods of the store in the streets. The main body of the mob fled at the appearance of this company.
I think that this body of men, who were stationed a half mile from the village, were those that were gathered at my father’s house that I have mentioned before. One Richard McCarthy was caught in the act of throwing rocks and brick bats into the doors while the goods lay strewn around him in the streets was immediately taken before Samuel Weston, Esq., and a complaint was then made to said Weston and a warrant requested that McCarthy might (not?) be rescued, but said Weston refused to do anything in the cause at that time. Said McCarthy was then liberated. That same night, some of their houses in the village (in Independence) had long poles thrust through the shutters and sash into rooms of defenseless women and children from where their fathers and husbands had been driven by the dastardly attacks of the mob which were made by ten, fifteen, or twenty men upon a house at a time.
Saturday, the second of November, all the families of the saints in the village moved about half a mile out with most of their goods and embodied to the number of thirty for the preservation of life and personal effects. This night a party from the village met a party from the west of the Blue and made an attack upon a branch of the located on the Blue about six miles from the village. Here they tore the roof from one dwelling, and broke open another house, found the owner David Bennet sick in bed, whom they beat most inhumanly, swearing that they would blow out his brains and discharging a pistol, the ball of which cut a deep gash across the top of his head. In this skirmish a young man of the mob was shot in the thigh, but by which party remains yet to be determined.
The next day, Sunday, November 3rd , four of the men, namely, Joshua Lewis, Hiram Page, and two others, were dispatched for Lexington to see the circuit judge and obtain a peace warrant. Two called on Esq. Silver, who refused to issue one because he had declared his fears of the mob. This day, many of the citizens professing friendship advised the saints to clear from the county as speedily as possible for the Saturday night’s affray had enraged the whole county; and they were determined to come out on Monday and massacre indiscriminately, and in short, it was proverbial among the mob that “Monday would be a bloody day.”
Monday came, and a large party of the mob gathered at the Blue and took a ferry boat belonging to the Church, threatened their lives, etc. But they soon abandoned the ferry and went to Wilson’s store about one mile west of the Blue. Word had previously gone to a branch of them several miles west of the Blue that the mob were destroying property on the east bank of the Blue and the sufferers there wanted help to preserve their lives and property. Nineteen men volunteered and started to their assistance, but discovering that fifty or sixty of the mob had gathered at Wilson’s, they turned back. At this time, two small boys passed on their way to Wilsons, who gave information to the mob that the Mormons were on the road west of them. Between forty and fifty of the mob immediately started with guns in pursuit.
After riding about two and a half miles they discovered them, when the said company of nineteen immediately dispersed and fled in different directions. The mob hunted them, turning their horses into a cornfield belonging to the saints, searching their cornfields and houses, threatening women and children that they would pull down their houses and kill them if they did not tell where the men had fled. Thus they were employed in hunting the men and threatening the women until a company of thirty of the saints from the prairie, armed with 17 guns, made their appearance. The former company of nineteen had dispersed and fled, and but one or two had returned to take part in the subsequent battle. On the approach of the latter company of 30 men, some of the mob cried, “Fire, God dame ye; fire.” Two or three guns were then fired by the mob, which were returned by the other party without loss of time. This company is the same that is represented by the mob as going forth in the evening of the battle bearing the love branch of peace.
The mob retreated early after the first fire, leaving some of their horses in Whitmore’s cornfield, and two of their number, Hugh L. Bareale and Thomas Linvill, dead on the ground. Thus fell H.L. Bareale, who had been heard to say “With ten fellows I will wade to my knees in blood, but I will drive the Mormons from Jackson County.” The next morning the corpse of said Bareale was discovered on the battle ground with a gun by his side. Several were wounded on both sides, but none mortally, but one barber on the part of the saints expired the next day.
This battle was fought about sunset Monday, November 4th , and on the same night, runners were dispatched in every direction under pretense of calling out the militia, spreading as they went every rumor calculated to alarm and excite the unwary, such as that the Mormons had taken Independence, the Indians had surrounded it, being in league together. The same evening, not being satisfied with breaking open the store of Gilbert and Whitney (Bishop Newel K. Whitney) and demolishing a part of the dwelling house of said Gilbert the Friday night previous, they permitted said McCarthy who was detected on Friday night as one of the breakers of the store doors, to take out a warrant and arrest the said Gilbert and others of the saints for a pretended assault and false imprisonment of said McCarthy.
Late in the evening when the court was in progress with their trial, in the courthouse as was believed, perceiving the prisoners to be without council and in imminent danger, advised said Gilbert and his brethren to go to jail as the only alternative to save life, for the north door was already barred and an infuriated mob thronged the house with a determination to beat and kill, but through the interposition of this gentleman, Samuel C. Owens, the clerk of the county court whose name will appear more full hereafter, said Gilbert and four of his brethren were committed to the jail of Jackson County, the dungeon of which must have been a palace compared with the court room where dignity and mercy were strangers, and naught but the wrath of man in horrid threats stifled the ears of the prisoners.
The same night, the prisoners Gilbert, Morrill and Morley were liberated from jail that they might have an interview with their brethren and try and negotiate some measures for peace. On their return to jail about 2 a.m. Tuesday morning, in custody of the deputy sheriff, an armed force of six or seven men stood near the jail and hailed them. They were answered by the sheriff who gave his name and the names of his prisoners, crying, “Don’t fire, don’t fire, the prisoners are in my charge.” They, however, fired one or two guns when Morrill and Morley retreated, but Gilbert stood with several guns presented at him, firmly held by the sheriff. Two of them, more desperate than the rest, attempted to shoot, but one of their guns flashed and the other misfired. Gilbert was then knocked down by Thomas Wilson, a grocer in the village. About that time a few of the inhabitants arrived, and Gilbert again entered the jail, from which he with three of his brethren were liberated about sunrise without further prosecution of the trial. William E. McClellin was one of the prisoners.
On the morning of the fifth of November, the village began to be crowded with individuals from different parts of the county with guns, etc., and reports said the militia had been called out under the sanction or investigation of Gov. Boggs and that one Col. Pitcher had the command. Among this militia (so called) were embodied the most conspicuous characters of the mob, and it may truly be said that the appearance of the ranks of this body was well calculated to excite suspicion of their terrible designs. Very early on the same morning several branches of the received intelligence that a number of their brethren were in prison, and the determination of the mob was to kill them, and that the branch of the near Independence was in imminent danger as the main body of the mob was gathered at that place.
In this critical situation about one hundred of the saints from different branches volunteered for the protection of their brethren near Independence and proceeded on the road to Independence and halted about one mile west of the village where they awaited further information concerning the movement of the mob. They soon learned that the prisoners were not massacred and that the mob had not fallen upon the branch of the church at Independence as was expected. They were also informed that the militia had been called out for their protection, but in this they placed little confidence for the body congregated had every appearance of a county mob, which subsequent events fully verified in a majority of said body. On application to Col. Pitcher, it was found that there was no alternative but for the saints to leave the county forthwith and to deliver into his hands certain men to be tried for murder said to have been committed in the battle of the evening before. The arms of the saints were also demanded by Col. Pitcher.
Among the committee appointed to receive the arms of the were several of the most unrelenting of the July mob committee who had directed in demolishing the printing office and the personal injuries of that day, namely, Henry Chiles, Alma Staples, and Lewis Franklin, who had not ceased to pursue the saints from the first to last with feelings of the most hostile kind. These unexpected requisitions of the Colonel made him appear like one standing at the head of civil and military law, taking a stretch beyond the constitutional limits of our Republic. Rather than submitting to these unreasonable requirements, the saints would cheerfully have shed their blood in defense of their rights, the liberties of their country; and of their wives and children; but the fear of violating law in resisting this pretended militia, and the flattering assurance of protection and honorable usage promised by Lt. Gov. Boggs, in whom they had reposed confidence up to this period, induced them to submit, believing that he would not tolerate so gross a violation of all law as had been practiced in Jackson County.
But the great change that may appear to some in the views, design and craft of this man, to rob an innocent people of their arms by strategy and laws, more than one thousand men, women and children to be driven from their homes among strangers in a strange land of, to appearance, barbarians, to seek shelter from the stormy blasts of winters cold embrace, is so glaringly exposed in the sequel that all earth and hell cannot deny that a baron knave, a greater traitor and a more wholesale butcher or murderer of mankind never went untried, unpunished or unhung. As hanging is the popular method of execution among the gentiles and in all countries professing Christianity, instead of blood for blood according to the law of Heaven, the conduct of Col. Lucas and Col. Pitcher had long proven them to be open and avowed enemies. Both of these men had their names attached to the mob circulars as early as July last, the object of which was to drive the saints from Jackson County. With assurance from the Lt. Gov. and others that the object was to disarm the combatants on both sides and that peace would be the result, the brethren surrendered their arms, number 50 or upwards, and the men present who were accused of being in the battle the evening before gave themselves up for trial. After detaining them one day and a night on a pretended trial for murder in which time they were threatened, brick-batted, etc., Col. Pitcher, after receiving a watch of one of the prisoners to satisfy costs, etc., took them into a cornfield and said to “Clear.”
After the surrender of their arms, which were used only in self-defense, the neighboring tribes of Indians in times of war let loose upon the women and children, could not have appeared more hideous and terrified than did the companies of ruffians who went in various directions, well-armed, on foot and on horseback, bursting into houses without fear, knowing the arms were secured, frightening distracted women with what they would do with their husbands if they could catch them, warning women and children to flee immediately or they would tear their houses down over their heads and massacre them before night. At the head of one of these companies appeared the Rev. Isaac McCoy with a gun upon his shoulders, ordering the saints to leave the county forthwith and surrender what arms they had. Their pretended preachers of the gospel took a conspicuous part in the persecutions, calling the Mormons the common enemy of mankind, and exulting in their afflictions.
On Tuesday and Wednesday nights, the 5th and 6th of November, women and children fled in every direction before the merciless mob. One party of about 150 fled to the prairie where they wandered for several days under the broad canopy of heaven with about six men to protect them. Other parties fled to the Missouri River and to lodgings for the night where they could find it. One Mr. Bennett opened his house for a night’s shelter for a wandering company of distressed women and children who were fleeing to the river. During this dispersing of the women and children, parties of the mob were hunting the men, firing upon some, tying up and whipping others, and some they pursued upon horseback for several miles.
On the 5th , Elder Phelps, Gilbert, and McLellin went to Clay County and made an affidavit similar to the foregoing sketch and forwarded the same to the governor by express. The Governor immediately on the reception thereof ordered a court of inquiry to be held in Clay County for the purpose of investigating the whole affair, and meting out justice to all. But alas, corruption, wickedness, and power have left the wretches unshipped of justice and innocence mourns in tears unwiped.
Thursday, November 7th , the shore began to be lined on both sides of the ferry with men, women and children, goods, wagons, boxes, chests, provisions, etc. While the ferrymen were busily employed in crossing the river, and when night again closed upon the saints, the wilderness had much the appearance of a camp meeting. Hundreds of people were seen in every direction, some in tents and some in the open air around their fires, while the rain descended in torrents. Husbands were inquiring for their wives and wives for their husbands, parents for their children and children for their parents. Some had the good fortune to escape with their families, household goods and provisions, while others knew not the fate of their friends and had lost all their goods. The scene was indescribable, and would have melted the hearts of any people upon the earth, except the blind oppressor and ignorant bigot.
The next day, the company were increased and they were engaged in felling small cottonwood trees, and erecting them into temporary cabins, so that when night came on, they had the appearance of a village of wigwams, and the night, being clear, the occupants began to enjoy some degree of comfort. Lt. Gov. Boggs presented a curious external appearance, yet he was evidently the head and front of the mob, for as may easily be seen by what follows, no important move was made without his sanction. He certainly was the secret spring of the 20th and 23rd of July and, as will appear in the sequel, by his authority the mob molded into militia to effect by stratagem what he knew, as did his hellish hosts, could not be done by legal force.
As Lt. Gov., he had only to work and the mob went from maltreatment to murder. The horrid calculation of this second Nero was often developed in a way that could not be mistaken. Early on the morning of the 5th , about one o’clock in the morning, he came to Phelps, Gilbert and Partridge and told them to flee for their lives. Now, unless he had given the order to do so, no one would have attempted to murder after the had agreed to go away. His conscience vacillated on its rocky moorings, and gave the secret alarm to their men. The saints who fled took refuge in the neighboring counties, mostly in Clay County, which received them with some degree of kindness. Those who fled to the county of Van Buren were again driven and compelled to flee, and those who fled to Lafayette County were soon expelled, or most of them, and had to find protection wherever they could, and thus two years of my childhood was passed in Jackson County.
My father moved his family into Clay County across the river to a place near Liberty Landing. Father left most of his provisions in his cellar, not being able to remove them. The brethren rolled up logs till about five or six feet high, then stretched a tent over the top. And such was my home on the banks of the Missouri River in the month of November, 1833, making me 9 years and 8 months, or there about.
On November 12th , between 3 and 4 in the morning, the camp was aroused from their slumber to witness the beautiful and grand sight of the falling stars. The saints beheld it with hearts of rejoicing, being persecuted and cast out from their homes for the sake of religion, and knowing it to be one of the signs of the last days spoken of by the Prophets. And strengthening their faith in the gospel, notwithstanding, they were in deep affliction. Although I was a child at the time, I looked upon the scene with delight. The heavens seemed wrapped in splendor. The appearance was beautiful and grand beyond description. Brother Joseph speaks of it thus, “November 13th , about 4 a.m., I was awakened by Brother Davis knocking at my door and calling me to arise and behold the signs of the heavens. I arose, and to my great joy beheld the stars fall from the heavens like a shower of fire, and I was led to exclaim, ‘How marvelous are thy works, Oh Lord; I thank thee for thy mercy unto thy servant, save me in Thy kingdom for Christ’s sake, Amen.’”
The appearance of these signs varied in different parts of the country. In Zion all heaven seemed enwrapped in splendid fireworks, as if every star in the broad expanse had been hurled from its course and sent lawless through the wilds of ether, some at times appeared like meteors with long trains of light following in their course, and in numbers resembling large drops of rain in sunshine. Some of the long trains of light following the meteor stars were visible for some seconds. These streaks would cut and twist up like serpents writhing. The appearance was beautiful, grand and sublime beyond description, as though all the artillery and fireworks of eternity were set in motion to enchant and entertain the saints and terrify and awe the sinners on the earth. Beautiful and terrific as was the scenery, which might be compared to falling figs or fruit when the tree is shaken by a mighty wind, yet it will not fully compare with the time when the sun shall become black like sack cloth of pain, the moon like blood (Rev. 6 & 13), and the stars shall fall to the earth as these appeared to vanish as they fell behind trees or came near the ground. (Scientists also say stars fell on the 13th of Nov. ‘66, and would again in ‘99.)
November 13th – I cannot say just how long we were camped on the banks of the Missouri River, but I think it was several weeks. The weather began to be quite cold – too cold for camping out. The saints found homes as best they could, endeavoring to keep as close together as possible. Father and Elder John Corrille procured an old log cabin that had been used for a stable, cleaned it up the best they could, and moved their families into it. The two families consisted of fifteen persons, and a man that Father had hired to assist him, Ira Willis, and some of the time, my Aunt Elsie, Mother’s sister, was with us. There was a large fireplace in the room (a good sized one), and I remember blankets were hung up a few feet back from the fire to keep us from freezing, for the weather was extremely cold, so cold that Father’s ink would freeze in his pen as he was writing close to the fire inside of those blankets. We took one side of the fireplace, and Brother Corrill’s family took the other. Perhaps you can imagine a little whether we were crowded or not.
Our beds were in the back of the room, which was cold enough for the polar region. The place was rented from a Mr. Bess (or Best), who lived close by. I remember going into his house one day and their Negro cook gave me a piece of pumpkin pie, the crust was about all there was of it, the pumpkin being about as thick as a case knife. I looked at it pretty sharp before eating it to see if there was any wooly hair in it. All the Missourians owned Negro slaves who did all their work, and I could not understand that they might be as neat as white folks.
The next summer, a log cabin in a Papuan grove was procured for a school and one of our Mormon girls installed as teacher. Many happy hours have I spent at that school, at hours of intermission, in swinging on the long grape vines that hung from the tall trees, or tearing down some of the long and slender ones to jump the rope, or when the scholars got tired of that, we would build arbors of the Papuan branches, which were so brittle and tender that we could break them with ease. The tree grows low and the leaves are large and grow thick together, so that the foliage makes a fine shade. The fruit “papuan,” when ripe is about as long as the banana, and about twice or three times as large around, a greenish yellow on the rind. When broken open it discloses a rich yellow pulp, something like ice cream before it is frozen, perhaps a little thicker. It looks delicious, but when you taste it--oh dear me, it is the most sickish stuff ever tasted. But with all our pleasures, we had some trials.
The revelations and letters that the Jackson County saints received, must have been a source of great comfort and consolation to them in their afflictions, and when the Prophet Joseph came with Zion’s Camp, I can imagine, in some degree, how great their joy must have been and, child as I was, I partook of the joyful spirit of my parent. Some of the brethren of Zion’s Camp, I can imagine in some degree, how great their joy must have been, and, child as I was, I partook of the joyful spirit of my parents. Some of the brethren of Zion’s camp stopped at my father’s and I particularly remember Dr. Darwin Richardson. When Brother Joseph returned to Kirtland, Father either went with him, or soon after, and was absent for several months.
Some of the inhabitants of Clay County sent their children to our school, and they would sometimes tantalize us because of our shabby clothes, steal our handkerchiefs, etc. I felt quite insulted one day by Arabelle Arthur because she said that my mother was ugly. But I knew how to take revenge for nothing in the world made her feel so bad as being called Bella. I have seen her cry over it as if her heart was breaking. One day a playmate told me that my eyebrows grew too thick and heavy for a girl, and I ought to pull them out and make them thinner. I was fool enough to believe her. But, as the process of pulling was too tedious, I took the shears and snipped them off as close as I could cut them. It made me look like a singed cat. I felt terribly ashamed, but there was no remedy until they grew out again. My aunt came to see us about this time and oh, how I did hate to have her see me. But time cured that trouble.
There was, at the time, one great drawback to my happiness, and that was my shabby clothes, for we were now reduced very low in our circumstances – in fact, we had endured many privations since leaving our home in Ohio. Father’s property had been sacrificed for the cause in which he was engaged, and his whole time was spent for the benefit of the Church. I sometimes think that Bishops in these days know but little of what the office of Bishop was in the early days of the Church, in the days of its poverty and inexperience. The poor must be looked after and be supplied. Many grumbled because there was not more for them. To raise money in those days was almost like wringing water out of a dry sponge. When I look back and remember the great responsibility that rested upon Father, his arduous duties, his poverty and privations, and hardships he had to endure, the accusations of false brethren, the grumbling of the poor, and the persecution of our enemies, I do not wonder that he filled a martyr’s grave.
And when I remember his conversations with my mother, and now comprehend in my more mature years, his weariness of soul; it brings to mind a clause of his blessing, which says, “Thou shalt stand in thy office until thou art weary of it and shall desire to resign it that thou mayest rest for a little season.” As I was saying, my poor clothes were my greatest trouble in childhood. How inconsiderate are children. One day Mother sent me to mend my dress, and I got so angry that I sewed a large white patch over the front. The dress was a dark blue calico. Father used to require his children to go to meeting, and I felt badly plagued because of my dress. I believe I have committed more sin, if it might be called so, because of my shabby clothes when a child, than in any other way all my life.
While we were living in Clay County, Father gave me a dress and bonnet that were saved from among the goods that were destroyed by the mob in Jackson County, Mo. I sometimes wish I were an artist, so that I might draw you some pictures, but I will do the best I can with my pen. My dress was a calico, with a stripe of bright pink, and one of bright yellow, about an inch and a half wide, with a black vine and set flower the size of a 25 cent piece. The bonnet was a straw color and nairreno(?). The shape was more like a coal scuttle than anything I can think of. It was trimmed with a wide plain pink ribbon with an only bow on top. When I was rigged up with my new dress and bonnet, and cowhide shoes (for that was all the kind of shoes we could get and we could get them only in the winter), I felt fit to go to meeting or anywhere else.
Now, my children, if you could have seen that little black eyed girl as she was then dressed, and felt as smart, you might laugh a little, as I do myself now when I think of it. But I have gotten over my love of dress now – I care little for such things. If I can be comfortable, and neat and clean, the plainer the better – I am content. One pair of shoes had to last us all winter, and summers we went barefoot.
Well, I suppose I must have been different from the other children in some respects, for I got the impression very early in life, that I was the “black sheep” of the family. And when one day I entered the room where my father was conversing with a woman that had called to see him on business, and heard her ask him if I was his daughter, he answered, “Yes, but she is an odd one,” the idea was firmly settled in my mind. Let me tell you here that if any of you ever have a child that is in any way peculiar, don’t let that child know by anything you may say or do. For many times some of the most noble qualities have been crushed or destroyed while in their undeveloped state because they were not understood. Well, those words of my father sank deep into my mind, and caused me much unhappiness. Many a tear have I shed in my wakeful moments at night, and the impressions I received in childhood lasted me in a measure all my life. I could not tell why it was. I loved my father and mother, sister and brothers with my whole heart, and I yearned for their love and sympathy in return. Characters should not be judged before they are developed. Nothing is perfect while it is in process of formation, and some of the most noble qualities may appear to those not understanding them, the most despicable, in their undeveloped state. For my part, I never could tell what it was, and neither can I to this day, tell what it was that made me the odd one of the family.
I think it was the first Fall of our stay in Clay County that a slaughter yard was established on the banks of the river nearby, which gave employment to the brethren. Thousands of hogs were killed and packed for sale. The men would do the killing, and packing, and the women and children would cut and try out the lard. I remember of going down with Mother to cut lard or do anything that a child could do. In this way, the brethren were enabled to earn provisions sufficient to keep their families from starving.
While we remained in Clay County, the brethren did all they could to regain possession of their homes, they petitioned the Governor, employed lawyers, and tried in various ways to gain redress, but all their efforts proved of no avail. Joseph Smith manifested great anxiety concerning the saints in Zion. He was constantly writing letters advising them what to do, and sending words of comfort and cheer. Revelations were given assuring the saints that the Lord remembers them in their afflictions.
December 12th – an express arrived at Liberty from Van Buren Co., with information that those families which had fled from Jackson County and located there, were about to be driven from that county, after building their houses, carting their winter’s store of provision, grain, etc., forty or fifty miles. Several families are already fleeing from thence. The contaminating influence of the Jackson County mob is predominant in this new county of Van Buren, the whole population of which is estimated to be about thirty or forty families. The destruction of crops, household furniture, and clothing is very great and much of their stock is lost. The main body of the Church is now in Clay County where the people are as kind and accommodating as could be reasonably expected. The continued threats of death to individuals of the church if they made their appearance in Jackson County prevents the most of them, even at this day, from returning to that county to secure personal property which they were obliged to leave in their flight.
* * * *
Incidents of the early life of Emily Dow Partridge, written in December 1876, Salt Lake City, Utah. Written by Emily, herself.
I am the third daughter of Edward Partridge and Lydia Clisbee Partridge. I was born on the 28th of February 1824 in Painsville, Geauga County, Ohio. When I was about six years old, my parents joined the Mormons. February 4th , 1831, my father was appointed Bishop by revelation, and soon was called to Jackson County, Missouri. He started soon after and his family followed him as soon as preparations could be made. We traveled mostly by water. We met Father at Arrow Rock about two or three miles from Independence, Jackson County. He rented a house of Boggs, who was afterward Governor of the State. He built himself a house as soon as circumstances would permit and before we had hardly begun to live, as I might say, the mob began to trouble the Mormons. They took my father with the intention of killing. I think they kept him one night, but again released him. He kept hidden for several days, and at night the brethren would gather at our house with their guns to protect themselves from the fury of the mobs. I was upstairs with the family but I could plainly hear them praying.
One day when I was a short distance from the house, I saw the mob ride up and surround the house and take Father away. We did not know what they would do with him. They took him to Independence, a very short distance from where we lived, and tarred and feathered him. A Mrs. James was a witness of the scene and she saw a bright light around Father’s head at the time. A short time after, I stood looking from the window when I saw two men coming toward the house. One I knew, the other I thought was an Indian, and not being much accustomed to seeing Indians in those days, I was very much frightened, and ran upstairs to hide. But soon I learned it was Father; the tar and feathers giving him the appearance of a savage. Brother Albert Jackman came with him to carry his hat, coat and vest.
It was in November 1833 that my father moved his family into Clay County. We crossed the Missouri River at a ferry not far from Liberty Landing. Most of his father’s provisions were left in his cellar, not being able to move it on such short notice. And thus two years of my childhood were spent in Jackson County, Missouri. The brethren cut down small trees and laid them up cob fashion, and when they were five or six feet high they stretched a tent over the top for a roof. And such was my home on the bank of the Missouri River, in the month of November, 1833. I was then in my tenth year.
How Mother managed to live I cannot tell; only the Lord did provide. The children continued to go to school in the log cabin in the Paupau grove, having our pleasures and troubles mixed as a natural consequence of school children, but children’s troubles are generally short lived, and ours did not hinder us from having plenty of fun. We had some sickness in our family while father was absent, but our lives were spared through all our wanderings, until we came to Nauvoo; there death began to make inroads in our family. Some of the brethren purchased land in Clay County, but the Saints had no intention of making a permanent settlement in that place. The spirit of mobocracy continued to manifest itself among the inhabitants of Clay County, and the Saints began to flee from their persecutors. They purchased land in Caldwell County, Missouri, and established a gathering place for the scattered Saints.
Father moved his family into a piece of timber, about three miles from the place where Far West was afterwards located. Father and the brethren that were with him built log huts and prepared us as well as they could for the coming winter. The timber in which we were camped was mostly hickory, and some black walnut, and hazel bushes were plentiful, and all were loaded with nuts, and when the frost came they dropped from the trees and lay so thick on the ground all around us that the children were kept pretty busy gathering them up. We gathered several bushels, and feasted on nuts through the winter, if with little else. As father’s eldest children were all girls, my sister Harriet and I had to act the part of boys and help him with his work, such as milking the cows and going to the prairie and assist him in loading hay, and sometimes we would carry the chain when he surveyed the land. After Far West was laid out, Father built another house and we moved into the city. The Saints from all parts of the world, where the gospel had been preached, began to gather in, and the place was rapidly built up.
Troubles in Kirtland multiplied, until the Saints in that place had to flee to Missouri and the Saints in the West had the Prophet, for the first time, residing in their midst, which they esteemed as a very great blessing. The Saints continued to take up land and settle in the surrounding counties, and peace and prosperity reigned in their midst.
It was not a great while before we had to leave the county in 1833. We crossed the river at Liberty Landing, three miles below the town of Liberty. The men pitched tents for their families and there we stayed until houses could be procured. I will mention one circumstance that happened while we were camped on the banks of the river. We were awakened one night to see the stars fall. The sight was magnificent. It seemed as it every star in the heavens were in motion and falling to the earth all around us, but not near us.
Father and John Corville got a house (or a shell – it could hardly be called a house). The two families moved into the one room that was habitable, and hung up quilts and blankets a few feet back from the fire, and we gathered in there to keep from freezing. We were about fifteen in number. It must have been bitter cold, for I remember the ink would freeze in the pen as Father sat writing close in the corner by the fire.
While we were here, the Camp of Zion came, some of them stopping at our house. My father returned with them to Kirtland, or soon after. I do not remember which, but when he came back, we moved to Far West in Caldwell County, Mo.
I will say here that I was baptized in Jackson County in a creek a short distance from our house when the mob began to harass the Mormons. We did not know how far they would be permitted to go. The word “mob” had a terror in it for the children. My little sister, about three years old, would frequently cry out in her sleep, “the mob, the mob.” My youngest brother was born in Jackson. He was but a few months old when we were driven from our home. Mother had six children at the time, the oldest being about thirteen. I think Father left what provisions he had in his house. We lived very poor from the time Father gave up his business and home in Ohio. I do not remember of there ever being more than one pound of sugar in our house at a time until I left home. Father used to buy it by the barrel, and I suppose I remember stealing, not stealing (the word is too harsh to apply to so young a child), took a handful out of a barrel and getting punished for it.
I think from what I can remember, Father was very well off before he joined the Mormons. I can remember a good home and good surroundings, but he gave it all up for the gospel’s sake.
Father built a house in Far West and began to make his family quite comfortable again when the mob began to annoy the brethren, and Joseph and Hyrum, and some others prisoners. When they had gotten a short way from the city, they set up such a howl as might originate from the damned. They rode through the city exulting in their victory, taking whatever they liked. They rode up to Father’s corral and shot down a few pet cows for beef (our supply of flour was cut off in consequence of the mob and we were without for some time). They were very generous though for they gave Father the hide.
A short time after this, Father with forty or fifty of the brethren were taken prisoners and marched off to Richmond on foot. I have heard Father speak of his suffering being so intense with cold and hunger while on their journey, and then not much better off in jail. He was fed some kind of soup, and they gave him nothing to eat with, so he whittled out a wooden spoon, and brought it home to his children for a keepsake. The remaining saints had to leave the state. Mother’s family was bundled into a wagon with what few things they could take, which was not much, and started in the cold and snow for, well, I don’t know where we started for, but I think anywhere out of the state of Missouri. When we came to the Mississippi River, we crossed over into Quincy. There was a crowd gathered on the bank to see the Mormons. Perhaps they had never seen a Mormon before and they did not know that they were human beings like themselves. Well, I think they saw a forlorn looking set. We remained in Quincy till Father was released from prison.
One of my sisters, another young girl, and I all started out to seek a place to hire out, for we were very destitute. We each obtained a place for a short time, but as it was my first time away from home, I was very glad when Father was released, and he came and moved us to Pittsfield Pike County, Ill. Then my sister, Harriet, and myself again hired out.
When Joseph was released from prison, a place was selected for the gathering of the saints, which was Nauvoo, and we moved to that place. Father took a lot and built his house of canvas and moved us in. We felt very happy to have that much of a home again, at least I did. But the place was unhealthy and the people began to be sick and soon most of the saints were on their beds, and as there were not enough well ones to wait upon the sick, Father had his daughters (that were old enough) go and help nurse. Then, I began to know what it was to be homesick, but I stayed and kept at work as long as I could, even longer.
Things remained as they were for a few months when sometime in the first part of the month, I was really sick. I finally went home to rest a few days, for I thought I was truly tried. I lay down on the bed where I remained some time with a burning fever. When Brother Young and Kimball were starting on their mission to England, they stopped at our tent and administered to me and to my sister, Harriet, who was also sick. My fever broke and I was better for a week or two when I was taken down with the Ague which lasted off and on for a year or more. I think Brother Young and Kimball were sick at the time of their starting on their mission. They had quilts wrapped around them, if I remember right. Being sick we were very uncomfortable in the tent, so Father got a room in the upper stone house, one that was built before the saints moved there. At a steamboat landing, when the wagon came for us, Harriet and myself were on the bed shaking with the Ague. Oh, how I did hate to get up. Father made a bed in the wagon and put us in. When we stopped at the house, I could not move a particle until someone took hold of me. Then the power of motion was restored. We were more comfortable in the house, although we were in one room. There were other families in the house. Hyrum Smith’s family was there. While we were there, my sister Harriet died. She was eighteen years old.
Father had been at work to build a small log house on his lot, and when it was ready, he moved us in. He was overworked and with that and the exposure he had been subjected to in consequence of mobocracy, his strength gave out. He was sick only nine or ten days when he passed away from this earth. The place being small, and my being sick, I was taken to William Laws house, and was more comfortable than I had been for a long time.
I will here mention the kindnes of Brother and Sister William Law to our family in our distressed condition. While my father lay sick, my sister Eliza and I, and some of the other children were sick also, and it was very unpleasant for so many sick to be in one small room. Brother and Sister Law took Eliza and me home with them and showed us every kindness. I felt as though I had almost gone to heaven after all the years of suffering that we had endured, and now to be in such a good house, and to have a comfortable bed to lay upon, with nourishing and palatable food, I almost thought that it was too pleasant to be true.
After Father’s death Brother Law took our whole family home and administered to our wants, and with such good and kind care we began to improve in health, and when we had sufficiently regained our health we went back into our little hut once more.
When I think of the Laws, and what good men they seemed to be, and realize the course they have taken, my soul sorrows and mourns over their fate. Can it be possible that such kindness as they extended to my father’s family will be all lost?
As soon as I was able, my oldest sister and myself saw that we must begin to earn our own living, as we were very destitute in consequence of Father being robbed so many times. The first door that opened for us was to go to President Smith’s, which we accepted. We did not work for wages, but were provided with the necessities of life.
On the 3rd of February, 1841, the Patriarch, Isaac Morley, came to our house and gave us each a patriarchal, or gather’s blessing. Mine was as follows:
“Sister Emily, I lay my hands upon thy head, in the name of Jesus of Nazareth, and I seal upon thy head a father’s blessing. Notwithstanding thou art an orphan child, the heavens and the earth are stored with blessings for thee.
Thou hast embraced the fullness of the everlasting Gospel in the days of thy life; thy name is registered in the heavens. The angels rejoiced over thee when thou wast born into the kingdom of thy Savior, and if thou wilt ever support the principles that adorn thy sex, thy name shall never be erased from the Lamb’s book of life.
And it thou wilt ask, thou shalt receive intelligence pertaining to the kingdom of God; the heavens and the earth shall unbosom their blessings unto thee; thou shalt have the blessing and gift to speak in wisdom and act in prudence; thy example shall be worthy of imitation to the daughters of Zion; and if thou wilt listen to the voice of wisdom, length of days shalt be given unto thee, and thou shalt have the blessing to see the winding up scene of this generation; peace and tranquility restored to man. Thy blessing shall be handed down to thy posterity from generation to generation, and thou shalt have the blessing to return to the land of thine inheritance. And thou shalt have the blessing to see Ephraim crowned, and to wait upon the table in a day when a feast of fat things are prepared. Thou shalt sing the song of the redeemed. And I ask God my Heavenly Father to enlighten thy mind, to guide thee in the days of thy youth, and lead thee in the path of piety and virtue all the days of thy life, and when thy Savior shall make His second advent crowns of glory shall be sealed upon thy head, and let thy honor and glory be given to God and the Lamb, forever and ever, amen and amen.”
Times were hard and we were very destitute, having been robbed and driven from our homes and possessions so many times, and having had much sickness after we came to Nauvoo, and being afflicted in various ways, consequently we were reduced to extreme poverty. Mother was good at turning her hand to almost anything. She got an old stock, such as men wore at their necks at that time, ripped it up to learn how it was made, and then obtained a block and went to work making stocks to sell. In that way she earned a little to keep her family.
On the fourth of July, 1838, the Saints assembled in Far West to celebrate the day, and I think the spot for the temple was that day dedicated. Our national flag, the stars and stripes, attached to the liberty-pole, floated gaily in the breeze. All were happy and joyful, as none but the Saints know how to be.
My sister Eliza and myself were the oldest of the children and it seemed necessary that we should do something toward earning a living. Eliza had learned the tailor’s trade while in Far West, and was a good seamstress; she had no difficulty in obtaining work; but I, what could I do? I had learned to wash dishes, to sweep and scrub a puncheon floor, and such like things, and the only chance that seemed to be for me was to go out to work. We would think and talk upon this subject day after day, and I think I cried a little, for the thought of having to leave home to me was terrible.
While things, with us, were in this condition, Sister Emma (Smith) sent for me to come and live with her and nurse her baby. It seemed as if the Lord had opened up my way, it was so unexpected, and nothing could have suited me betteer for tending babies was my delight. My sister Eliza, also, went there to live, which make it pleasanter for me and more home-like. Joseph and Emma were very kind to us; they were almost like a father and mother, and I loved Emma and children, especially the baby, little Don Carlos.
They gave me the privilege of attending a school that summer, taught by Brother and Sister Howard Coray. This was the last of my going to school. What little education I have got I received in the log cabin schools, as we were roaming about, being driven from place to place; but I have attained an experience that money cannot purchase.
On the 15th of August, 1841, the baby, Don Carlos, died. John C. Bennett made it his home at the prophet’s house at this time. He was thought to be quite a great man, and had considerable influence for good; but afterwards turned traitor, and sought to injure Brother Joseph by publishing falsehoods. He secretly worked for the destruction of Joseph, and once when the Legion were having a sham battle, Bennet had lain his plan to kill Joseph, and have it thought to be an accident. But the Lord warned Joseph so that he was on his guard, and was preserved at that time. After Joseph was liberated from Missouri, he was again arrested and taken to Springfield for trial and was as usual acquitted.
(The following was taken from hand written pages of Emily D.P. Young by Emily Hardy Blair. It was written on stationary of the Central States Mission in Independence, Jackson Co., Missouri.)
“. . . But as a general thing I was very happy, going to parties and singing school, and riding horse back. One day Emma said, as we had been to many parties we ought to have one and invite the young people in return. Of course that pleased us very much.
We had an excellent time playing games (dancing was not practiced much then), and enjoyed ourselves as only young folks can. Finally as we were about to close, someone proposed that we have one game– ”Poor Puss Wants a Corner,” but that was about the last of our playing games, for dancing was the rage soon after.
The parade of the Nauvoo Legion was a great day with us. Joseph, on his big black horse “Charley” was dressed in his uniform as Lieut. General, and looked grand. Sometimes Emma and others would accompany the officers on horseback, and sometimes in carriages. Once the carriage that Emma was in tipped over, which brought out some disagreeable expressions from the envious, such as– “served her right,” and “I am glad of it,” etc., but nobody was hurt. Emma looked well on a horse. She was a large and noble looking woman. She generally rode the chestnut horse of Joe Dincon’s. . . .”
About the 11th of Feb., Mother Smith came to live at Brother Joseph’s. She was a very nice old lady. Joseph gave her charge to me.
. . . Mother Smith was very sick soon after she came to her son’s to live. About this time O.P. Rockwell was taken prisoner by Missourians, and reports came that new indictments were being put out for Joseph and Hyrum and many others of the brethren by the Missourians, and also that J.C. Bennet was making desperate threats. One day in the latter part of March, Josiah Butterfield came to Joseph and insulted him to the degree that Joseph rose and kicked him out of the house, across the yard, through the gate, into the street. The man made no resistance.
After his return home, the people rejoiced greatly. Several of the brethren and sisters were invited to meet at Joseph’s home to rejoice with him – they had a jubilee and two jubilee songs were sung. About 74 were served at dinner, including the family. There were four tables, Joseph and Emma waiting upon them with their own hands, not sitting down until the third table.
Brother Young was there, although quite feeble, he had been very sick and this was the first he had been out since his convalescence. This was the 18th of Jan, and was also be 15th anniversary of Joseph and Emma’s wedding. About 6 o’clock the company dispersed.
When I was eighteen years old, Joseph said to me one day, “Emily, if you will not betray me, I will tell you something for your benefit.” Of course I would keep his secret, but no opportunity offered for some time to say anything to me. As I was passing through the room where he sat alone, he asked me if I would burn it if he would write me a letter. As I felt very anxious to know what he had to tell me, I promised to do as he wished, and left the room. I began to think that that was not the proper thing for me to do, and I was about as miserable as I ever would wish to be for a short time. I went to my room and knelt down, and asked my Father in Heaven to direct me in the matter. I had nowhere else to go. I could not speak to anyone on earth. I had to stand alone and set for myself. I received no comfort until I went back and watched my opportunity to say I could not take a private letter from him. He asked me if I wished the matter ended. I said I did, and it rested so for some time and I had plenty of time to think, and began to wish I had listened to what he would have said, and began to be as miserable as I was before.
Mrs. Durfee came to me one day and said that Joseph would like an opportunity to talk with me. I asked her if she knew what he wanted. She said she thought he wanted me for a wife. I was thoroughly prepared for almost anything. I was to meet him in the evening at Mr. Kimball’s. I had been helping with the wash all day and I was so afraid somebody would mistrust where I was going that I dared not change my wash dress. So I threw a large cloak over me and said I was going to run over to see Mother, which I did, but did not stay long, and then started out as if going back, but went to the place appointed instead. When I got there, nobody was at home but William and Helen Kimball. I don’t know what they thought to see me there at that hour. I did not wait long before Dorothea Kimball and Joseph came in. Brother Heber told his children that they better go in to one of the neighbors, as there would be a council that evening at their house. Then he said to me, “Vilate is not at home, and you had better call another time.” So I started out with William and Helen, and bid them goodbye.
I started for home as fast as I could go so as to get beyond being called back, for I still dreaded the interview. However, soon I heard Brother Kimball call, “Emily, Emily,” rather low but loud enough for me to hear. I thought at first that I would not go back, and took no notice of his calling. But he kept calling and was about to overtake me, so I stopped and went back with him. I cannot tell you all Joseph said, but he said the Lord had commanded to enter into plural marriage and had given me to him and although I had gotten badly frightened, he knew I would yet have him. So he waited till the Lord told him. My mind was now prepared and would receive the principles. I do not think if I had not gone through the ordeal I did that I would ever have gone off that night to meet him. But that was the only way it could be done then. Well, I was married then and there. Joseph went home his way and I went my way alone. A strange of way of getting married wasn’t it. Brother Kimball married us on the 4th of March, 1843.
I will mention here that soon after I refused to receive a letter, Mrs. Durfee invited my sister, Eliza, and me to her house to spend the afternoon. She introduced the subject of spiritual wives, as they called it in that day. She wondered if there was any truth in the report she heard. I thought I could tell her something that would make her open her eyes if I chose, but I did not choose to. I kept my own council and said nothing. But going home, I felt impressed to tell Eliza. I knew she would not betray me. She felt very bad indeed for a short time, but it served to prepare her to receive the principles that were revealed soon afterward.
While I was struggling in deep water those few months, I received a testimony of the words that Joseph would have said to me, and their nature, before they were told to me, and being convinced, I received them readily.
Things remained as they were for a few months when sometime in the first part of May, Emma told Joseph that she would give him two wives if he would let her choose them for him. She chose my sister and me and helped explain the principles to us. We did not make much trouble, but were sealed in her presence with the full and free consent. It was the 11th of May, but before the day was over, she turned around, or repented what she had done, and kept Joseph up till very late in the night talking to him. She kept close watch of us. If we were missing for a few minutes and Joseph was not at home, the house was searched from top to bottom, and from one end to the other. If we were not found, the neighbor-hood was searched until we were found. She sent for us one day to come to her room. Joseph was present looking like a martyr. Emma said some very hard things. Joseph should give us up. She would rather her blood would run pure than be polluted in this manner. Such interviews were quite common, but the last time she called us to her room, I felt quite indignant and was determined it should be the last, for it was becoming monotonous, and I am ashamed to say that I felt indignant toward Joseph for submitting to Emma. But I see now that he could do no different.
When we went in, Joseph was there, his countenance was the perfect picture of despair. I cannot remember all that passed at that time, but she insisted that we should promise to break our covenants that we had made before God. Joseph asked her if we made the promises she required, if she would cease to trouble us, and not persist in our marrying someone else. She made the promise. Joseph came to us and shook hands with us and the understanding was that all was ended between us. I, for one, meant to keep the promise I was forced to make. Some might think that Emma was justified in the course she took. She might have been in some cases, but when the Lord commands, His word is not to be trifled with. She sought to annoy in various ways. She once proposed to a young man to ask Eliza to take a ride with him, and then give her the mitten and take one of the other girls instead, but the young man would not consent to it.
After our interview was over, we went downstairs. Joseph soon came into the room were I was and said, “How do you feel, Emily?” My heart being still hard, I answered him rather short that I expected that I felt like anybody would under the circumstances. He said, “You know my hands are tied.” And he looked as if he would sink into the earth. I knew he spoke truly, and my heart was melted, all my hard feeling was gone in a moment (toward him), but I had no time to speak for he was gone. Emma was on his track, and came in as he went out. She said, “Emily, what did Joseph say to you?” I answered that he had asked me how I felt. She said, “You might as well tell me, for I am determined that a stop shall be put to these things and I want you to tell me what he says to you.” I replied, “I shall not tell you, he can say what he pleases to me, and I shall not report it to you. There has been mischief enough made by doing that. I am as sick of these things as you can be.” I said it in a tone that she knew I meant it. I was not sick of polygamy for I knew that was a commandment from God, but I was sick of her abuse. I did not know what effect my words might have, but learned afterward that she gloried in my spunk. There were times when I could plainly see the hand of Providence in making a way for my escape.
Emma could not rest until she had gotten us out of the house, and then she was not satisfied, but wanted us to leave the city. She offered to give the money to pay our expenses if we would go. We consulted Joseph, and he said we might make a visit to some of our relatives who were living up the river two or three hundred miles. So we agreed to go, and she gave us ten dollars. Joseph said it was insufficient and for us not to go, so we gave it up and returned the money to Emma.
(Grandmother and her sister, Eliza, live in the Prophet’s home and page 1030 in the D & C commentary it states that Emma Smith gave her consent to the Prophet’s marriage to both of these girls.) (EHB)
Since I have had children of my own, I can realize something of what my mother must have suffered, so somebody had gotten an inkling of what was going on and reported it to her. But when Joseph talked with her and explained the principles, she was perfectly satisfied. Mother had suffered much through her children, not from their sins or wrong doing, but from their sorrows and afflictions. My dear children, I hope you will never know by experience what your parents have suffered.
I got a place (or Joseph did for me) with a respectable family. The lady was very kind to me in some things, and I suppose she meant to be in everything, and I felt very thankful to her, but the work was rather hard. I had to sleep in the same room with her and her husband in order to be where I could get up nights and tend her baby when it was worrisome. Some nights I would get up several times and have sat before the fire nodding for hours trying to get the baby to sleep. I made no complaints, but left when I thought I could stand it no longer.
I do not remember of seeing Joseph but once to speak to after I left the Mansion House and that was just before he started for Carthage. His looks spoke the sorrow of his heart although his words were guarded.
That morning when the word was brought to Nauvoo that Joseph and Hyrum were slain – well, my dear children, I can’t tell you. The bodies were brought to Nauvoo and placed in the large dining room of the Mansion House. The doors were open for all the people to come and take a last look of their beloved Prophet and Patriarch. I went with the rest, as a stranger, none suspecting the extra sorrow that was in my heart. Those were sorrowful times. I cannot even now write this without weeping. I have never been sorry that I yielded obedience at that time. It has been to me as an anchor cast within the veil, and has been a comfort in many dark hours of my life. I called on Emma once after that to see the baby David. She was very gracious, for there was no Joseph to be jealous of then.
Time went on, and the temple was finished. I received my annointing in the same way and again entered into plural marriage. According to the law of proxy, I became the wife of Brigham Young and received my blessings in the Temple at Nauvoo. The Saints were again driven from their homes, and I crossed the Mississsippi River about the middle of February, 1846, and was again without home or shelter, an outcast and a wanderer in the dreary wilderness, without even the necessaries of life. When the people of Nauvoo were forced to leave their homes, I took my infant and crossed the river and was again houseless and homeless in the cold and inclement weather of February 1846. My friends had not yet crossed the river, so I wandered from one fire to another. Some gave me food, others a place in their tent to sleep. President Young had to look after the welfare of the whole people; no very small task. So you will see that he had not much time to devote to his family. But as soon as he could, he made such arrangements for his family’s comfort as his means would admit. We were not very well prepared for such a journey.
I will show you one or two pictures, if you will look on the western banks of the Mississippi River, you will see a large camp of exiled saints, in a heavy snow storm, and if you look a little farther, you can see boats crossing the river loaded with wagons (I am not sure if we crossed on the ice instead of the boats. I think we crossed on the ice) and men, women and children fleeing from their homes, trusting in the Lord for protection and support. Look again. You can see a young woman with a child clasped in her arms, seated on a log, cold and hungry, and a little dejected. You cannot tell what she has on for the snow is falling fast and she is covered with snowflakes. The other is the same camp in another place. I think it is Sugar Creek. Look on the bank of a creek you will see a woman trying to wash. She has placed her boy on the ground close by, but she keeps her eye on him for the bank is very sloping and she fears he will topple over and roll into the creek. Many such pictures might be shown. I don’t expect that you see them as I can, for there are some things connected with them that cannot be portrayed on paper. Sometimes our food was very scarce. A small piece of jonny cake and a little bacon fat to sop it in, constituted a meal. Sometimes we had a little more, and sometimes less.
At one time when my shoes gave out, I put on father’s boots and wore them till I could have a pair of shoes made.
I traveled with the company as far as Pisgah, where a few of the saints were to stop in order to raise crops and recruit themselves and teams. Father Huntington was appointed President. He was my stepfather. I concluded to stop with Mother, for I was not entirely weaned from her yet. It was rather lonesome when the company started on, leaving us in the wilderness without home or shelter. My baby was very sick at the time, which made it seem much worse. The privations and exposures of the journey were too much for Father Huntington. He soon broke down and lay a corpse. He was buried in the soil of Mt. Pisgah.
We had no male friend left, neighbors were some distance from us, but we had gotten into a log hut without any door or window, with a hole in the roof for the smoke to pass out when we had a fire. Mother and all the family were sick that summer. There was generally one of us able to be up at a time. When cool weather came, we began to get better health. There I cut down my first and only tree for firewood. It began to be very cold where we were. Night bands of wolves would surround us, and if they had been disposed, they could have crawled through the crack and come in the door, as there was only a blanket hung up at the door.
The brethren built us a shanty town in the timber. Wood was handier to get and we spent a very comfortable winter.
While in Nauvoo, I had kept my child a secret, and only a few knew I had one. But after I started on my journey, it became publicly known, and people would stop at our house to see a “spiritual child,” and one told me years after that he was the handsomest child she had ever seen. I asked if she didn’t think they are as smart as other children, and she said no, that she did not think they were. There was a good deal of that spirit at that time and sometimes it was very oppressive.
In the spring the saints began to move on to overtake the main camp at Winter Quarters, and as we did not care to stay alone, we picked up and went too. When we got to the Missouri River, we felt like rejoicing. We could look across and see the camp where our friends were. It was not long after that Brother Young started for the Valley, returning before winter. The next spring he started with his family. We were more comfortably fitted out than we had been at any time before, but on account of ill health, the journey was most unpleasant. I do not wish to think of that time.
When we arrived in the valley, we found comfortable rooms prepared for us to go into the fort. The next spring, the people began to move out from the fort and settle on their lots. I moved the 1st of March into a room in Brother Lorenzo Young’s house, and about 9 o’clock that night, my oldest daughter, Emily, was born.
Well, I cannot tell you everything. I will skip over a few months and tell you about my first housekeeping. When some of the saints began to make other settlements, there were quite a number of vacant houses. Your father got one for me in the 12th Ward. The day I was to move, something hindered us, and it was dark before I got started. I did not know where the place was for I had not been to look at it. The road seemed long. I thought we must be going a good way from where I had been but it was too dark to see anything outside of the house. I lit a candle and took a look inside. Well, I don’t know, but if my sister, Lydia, had not come with me to help me, I should have gone back with the team. There was one good sized room with a very good floor, but there was no window except a hole where a log had been cut out. No latch was on the door, there was no heat, and I had to step down one or two feet to get at the fire. I had one chair and one small chest that served for a table. I had six plates, knives and forks, one tin tumbler that served to drink from and also for a candlestick. But enough of this, I did not stay here long.
I moved into a more comfortable house nearer my friends. In 1852 my three children were sick and on the 26th of September, my little Eddie died. I went to stay with my mother for a short time. My youngest child, Carlie, was like a little skeleton. She would not have her hood or shoes and stockings, or any of her clothes off night or day, but she lay so quiet all night that I could hardly tell whether she breathed or not. I think I came nearest giving up at this time than I ever did before or since. It seemed to me that another straw would break the camel’s back, but the straw was not forthcoming.
I had four children after this – one son, Carlos, and three girls, Mamie, Josephine, and Lura. Lura died when about seven months old.
When I look aback and remember the great responsibility that rested upon my father’s head as first bishop– his poverty and privations, and the hardships that he had to endure, the accusations of false brethren, the fault-finding of the poor, and the persecutions of our enemies – I do not wonder at his early death. And when I remember his conversations with my mother, and cannot comprehend, in my mature years, his extreme weariness of soul, it brings to my mind a clause of his blessing, which says, “Thou shalt stand in thy office until thou shalt desire to resign it, that thou mayest rest for a little season.”
I have been associated with this Church almost from my earliest recollection and I have been intimately acquainted with the leaders of this people, and I know they are good men. And I can testify of their worth. They are very far from being the bad characters their enemies represent. And I will say a word for the women. I think there are some of the best women in this Church the world affords.
Written expressly for my children - January 7, 1877
Emily D.P. Young
After these many years, I can truly say, “Poor Emma. She could not stand polygamy, but she was a good woman, and I never wished to stand in her way of happiness and exaltation. I hope the Lord will be merciful to her, and I believe He will. It is an awful thought, to contemplate the misery of a human being. If the Lord will, my heart says to let Emma come up and stand in her place. Perhaps she has done no worse than any of us would have done in her place. Let the Lord be the Judge.
Written November 4, 1883
Emily D.P. Young

JAMES L. TAORMINA, age 90, of Saddle Brook, NJ passed on March 15, 2020. James was born in Garfield, NJ and lived there for 28 years before moving to Saddle Brook in 1960.
James was a United States Army veteran serving during the Korean War and was a longtime member and Past Commander of Garfield VFW Post 2867. James was a self employed Mason and later became Construction/Building Official of the borough of New Milford, where he was actively employed. He also served as Building Inspector in Saddle Brook and Englewood. He was also former President of the Bergen-Passaic Building Inspectors Association.
James was the third person from New Jersey to succumb to the COVID-19 pandemic on March 15th, 2020. James was very active and had no underlying health conditions right up to his passing. He had recently been honored with a surprise 90th birthday celebration with over 125 people attending and had also gone snowmobiling just a few weeks before his passing. In the beginning of the Coronavirus outbreak in early March, James was not feeling well at home and was taken to Hackensack University Medical Center on March 13th, 2020. Within 2 days of arriving at the hospital, James would pass away on March 15, 2020. Due to the outbreak of the pandemic and public health concerns at the time of his passing, no funeral services were conducted and he was laid to rest at a limited attended service at Calvary Cemetery Mausoleum in Paterson, NJ.
James is survived by his three sons, James Taormina and his wife Starre, Jay Taormina and his wife Diana, and Ronald Taormina and his wife Virginia. He is also survived by his grandchildren James Taormina Jr. and his wife Kira, Thomas Taormina, Katrina Taormina, Alexis Taormina and Luis Sierra, as well as great-grandchildren Makala, Taormina, Zachary Taormina and Justin Sierra. James is also survived by many nieces and nephews. James is predeceased by his beloved wife Jeanette in August 2019 and his 4 brothers and 5 sisters.
A memorial gathering and service is planned for Saturday October 3rd, 2020 from 2-5PM at Kugler Community Home For Funerals 311 Fifth Street Saddle Brook, NJ.

Today is the first day of term 3. The topic for this term is Art Works. Which obviously has something to do with art. As usual we had our immersion assembly. We got to see all the teams performances and movies and got a look at what they were learning about. We also got told that at the end of the term we are having an art exhibition. Which means we will have our art be on display.
Honestly my favourite one out of the teams was team 1. Each of the teachers made a painting about how they were feeling. Mrs Lal did a happy one,Mrs Dwyer did a scary one I think and Miss Shirley did a tried one. They also used different colours to paint their paintings. My favourite out of the paintings would have to be Mrs Lal.
Anyway this term team 5 will be doing plays and doing some fun art. I am really looking forward to doing these things this term. Stay tune for any of my blog post about art!

Sunday 18th August; Banbury to Somerton Meadows
It rained overnight, and it rained over breakfast. But it stopped, Meg got an early play in the park, and I had the joy of a Tesco visit. It was only for a few things, but as the wine was 25% off if you bought 6 bottles, I was jolly glad I’d taken my shopping trolley! On the way back I noticed a Waitrose had opened at the road junction – noted for future use, as it’s half the distance to Tesco.
Dave had spent the time with some Sikaflex, stopping the leak that had developed under the cratch board. We didn’t leave till about 11, in sunshine, pottering gently past the almost empty Spiceball moorings. The town centre moorings were fairly busy, in spite of the building sites on either side. Not pretty.
There was a bit of a to-do at the lock. I had the lift bridge open for Dave to come through to the lock which was just being vacated by a cruiser. The crew was closing the gate – I yelled, but he probably couldn’t hear. Meanwhile, the boater on the water point above the lock had spotted the bottom paddles being opened before the gate was even closed and the top paddles still open, so she yelled too, and got an earful back from the lady on the bottom gate. But the bottom paddles were closed; I opened the top gate again and was profuse in my thanks. Talk about two sides to every question – though we had been told she was abusive to the crew on the water point, she was now full of apologies for ‘not having seen’ us. Whichever, we parted on friendly terms.
It was perfect cruising weather as we left Banbury, with puffy clouds and a light breeze tempering the heat of the sun. The M40 was busy with people speeding along on their Sunday outings.
There were enough boats on the move to make life interesting and friendly at the locks. As we’d had a late start, we continued to Nell Bridge before stopping for lunch. By now the breeze was stiffening, and although it was quite sheltered going through Aynho it was very noticeable on the more open areas. Between Nell Bridge and Aynho we spotted an enclosure of what looked like wild boar in the middle of a field of goats.
At Aynho lock we had a bit of a wait while some young teenage lads faffed about with the gates while their Dad had trouble holding their day-boat in the wind. Eventually we were in.
Once we had come through Aynho itself, the wind had become very strong, and by the time we got to Somerton Deep lock it was so bad I could barely hold the boat on the centre line as we came into the lock moorings. Dave had to come and take over. A boat was just coming in from below, and I went to help close the bottom gate, wondering if my arms still worked! They did luckily, as the top paddles were extremely stiff and the other crew was unable to shift them with an ordinary length windlass.
We were a bit worried the wind would prevent us mooring on the meadows, but the canal had curved round a bit, and a belt of trees was sheltering the canal, so it was easy after all. As we came under Somerton Road bridge just before the meadows, Meg suddenly sat up and whiffled her nose – she loves it here and was out waiting for playtime as soon as she was off the boat.
10 miles, 6 locks, 2 lift bridges (Banbury, and Chisnell which was down for a change).

I have used USS more than once on my own homes. Chris Crockett is alway very quick to respond and very professional. He takes the time to explain the issues and shows how they can fix the problems. The Company works together to make sure you are reminded of the upcoming repairs even calling when they are on the way. Doug and Cody were very knowledgeable, professional and pleasant while they were at my home. They took the time to listen to our concerns and make sure that they were addressed. I would not hesitate to recommend this USS team to anyone needing repairs.

A Royal Marine said he has had the ‘year from hell’ after a Facebook post went viral accusing him of assaulting a teenage girl.
Jason Raynor claims he merely pushed away Kayleigh Rodda when she allegedly attacked him in Portsmouth town centre last year.Woman cut out her own breast using scalpel, Dettol and a YouTube tutorial
However after the then 19-year-old girl posted pictures online, vigilantes reportedly spent the next 12 months threatening to break the 28-year-old marine’s legs.
In May 2016, he had been out with two friends when a row ensued between himself and a group of navy personnel.
According to the dad-of-one, Rodda, who had been talking to the navy officers, ‘came at him’ and stuck her nails in his head – so he pushed her away.
However a month later she shared images of Jason on social media along with marks on her neck claiming that he had assaulted her in a bid to track him down.
After the post was shared almost 40,000 times, Jason voluntarily went to a station to speak to police and was released with ‘no further action’ – though thanks to the post people still threatened to hurt him and told his wife to leave him.Someone keeps taking bites out of raw Sainsbury's pizza
A year on, Kayleigh has re-shared her post, describing the nightmares that the incident left her with and mocking Jason for claiming it was self defence.
Today, Jason has spoken out about the abuse he has suffered thanks to the post, which he believes shows the danger of social media user believing everything they read in a post.
Jason, from Bolton, Lancashire, said: ‘In her statement [to police], it clearly says that she came at me first. So I have acted in self defence to get her away from me because I was pinned up against the wall by two lads.
‘I had never seen her before in my life. I was just out on a night out, I had been playing cricket and I had a cup final the next day so I wasn’t drunk.
‘It was nothing to do with her. I was having an argument with two lads and then she came at me saying “don’t argue with my friend”.
‘She came at me and stuck her nails in my head. My head was cut, so then I had my head down, she had her nails in me, there were these two lads I was arguing with and I was on my own so I just grabbed her and got her away from me.Alfie Evans supporters' storm Alder Hey hospital after courts latest decision
‘That’s all I did. I just pushed her away. I don’t know [where I grabbed her] as my head was down, but I just pushed her away.
‘I waited for about 10 minutes and then I ran off. There were no police there at the time.
‘I was advised by a solicitor to go down the route of getting her done as she openly said she came at me first. But I just thought no, I want to move on with my life, so forget it.
‘A lot of people twist things on social media. This story is totally the wrong way round.
‘I have had threats and everything because people have seen this story that she has put online and they have been messaging me saying they are going to break my legs and rip my arms off and everything.Who was Millicent Fawcett as her statue is to be unveiled in Parliament Square?
‘They don’t know anything about what happened that night.’
Kayleigh, 20, originally from Cornwall, had also been out to Popworld in the town centre for a friend’s birthday when she was befriended by a group of men at the end of the night and accompanied them to a nearby takeaway.
She said: ‘It was a friend’s birthday and I’d come out of Pop World at the end of the night to get some food with a group of guys when we were hanging around and deciding what to do.
‘This guy literally passed us and an argument occurred and it happened then.
‘He made a comment about me being the only girl in the group. I reacted and the other guys I was with reacted.
‘He was a marine and the guys I was with were in the navy. An argument occurred because of that natural rivalry.Alfie Evans family fight with police inside hospital
‘He started yelling at me and as the lads held him back, he reached out his arm wide and grabbed hold of my throat. They were trying to get him off me.
‘In certain places I was in the wrong but I was only 19 at the time. He was a 6ft adult male marine.
‘I called the police and they took 20 minutes to arrive. By that time he had ran off. Luckily, I’d taken loads of photos.
‘The next morning the bruises appeared and stayed like that for more than two weeks.
‘That day I had to go to the police station for an interview where they took pictures of my injuries and my pictures of him.
‘In the end, they called me to say they couldn’t find him and were dropping the case.
‘When I put his picture on Facebook, within 24 hours I had his name, age, where he was from and his wife’s name.
‘I gave this to the police and they invited him to the interview where he claimed he acted in self-defence.Football fan stands too close to fireworks during St Mirren’s victory parade
‘For the police to turn around and say that they are dropping the case, it was so frustrating.’
In a follow-up post on social media a year on, Kayleigh again shared the images of Jason and claimed that while her injuries have healed, she ‘trusts people less and still has nightmares over what happened’.
A spokesperson from Hampshire Police said: ‘A 27-year-old man from Somerset was identified as being involved in the incident and voluntarily attended a police station to give an account under caution.
‘Based on the evidence available the man was released with no further action.
‘The victim was fully updated with the outcome of the investigation and her right to appeal the decision in August 2016.’

So I've kept myself busy all day, took Steven to test drive a car this morning, and then Clydie and I went out and about, buying some wheat straw for the back yard, a couple rose bushes, dirt for the front flower bed, and a couple random things at Wal-Mart. We got home and cleared the pine straw out of the front flower bed, added the dirt, and planted the roses. This was in between me playing with the local kitty that Steven nicknamed Bucko, and assumed for some reason that it was a boy, but nope, Bucko is a girl! Bucko also saved me from what I thought was a very tiny snake (and no, I didn't freak out and scream or run):
We were also busy inside the house after finishing the flowerbed - we are in the process of setting up an aquarium upstairs, and had to move some furniture around. I'm going to put it by the buffet in the dining area. I also boxed up a bunch of glass stuff that had been on the buffet and another set of shelves. It made the area look so much less cluttered than before!
Then after dinner tonight, I'm looking through Facebook and see a photo of someone that looked very familiar to me. Turns out it was an old neighbor of mine from when I lived in Morrow, and he's in hospice due to cancer. It's sad enough to think about that on top of Meme, but when I asked if he found love after his partner died several years ago, the answer was no, but that he was so looking forward to being with his love again upon his death. That just broke my heart.
Just a tough day emotionally.
But one thing I think is for sure - Spring is here!

Merxat Yalkun, also known as Mi Re, recently announced the end of his 10-year contract with his agency Huanyu. In his thank you, he wrote, “The road is long, forever grateful, always a family.” He also tagged his boss Yu Zheng who responded to his “dear Re Re” in kind to say that Huanyu will be his home no matter what and that they will always be like family. He also revealed a bit about what Merxat wanted to do when he wrote, “If you want to go for it, do livestreaming, change the racetrack for a new start.”
Merxat first drew attention as part of the cast of 2014’s Cosmetology High. He was also in 2015’s The Legend of Banshu, which saw him and fellow stars like Dilireba and Vengo Gao in small roles. He went on to play the second lead in dramas like The Legend of Yunxi and The Moon Brightens for You. A look at his filmography shows the 32-year-old actor in supporting roles almost throughout his career with only a few male lead roles in web movies as well as Dilireba’s leading man in a 2015 web drama called The Backlight of Love.
The actor-model from Ürümqi, China is of Uyghur descent. Incidentally, he and former co-star Dilireba are also said to have been classmates, having attended Shanghai Theatre Academy. Some think it’s just right that Merxat left as they feel his agency failed to secure good projects for him in spite of his potential. Many were simply supportive of the actor and his future endeavours, whether live streaming or something else.

Face painting and Balloon twisting
"She came to Face paint and do some balloon twisting for my daughters 2nd birthday & everyone loved her. All of the kids enjoyed they're painted faces and swords as well as the princesses with they're crowns! I would deffinately be booking her again. Went above and beyond that what I expected! Always knew she was the right one for my daughters birthday!!! Thank you so much"
Face painting and Balloon twisitng
"Ione was AMAZING! She arrived early to set up and once she got started she created some incredible face paint works of art! She then spent time making sure each child who wanted a balloon got one, she could design anything they asked her to. I would highly recommend her to anyone! Thank you Ione for making our daughter's first birthday so much fun for all of the children :)"
DJ/VJ/Karaoke/Face Painting/Balloon Twisiting
"I hired Ione for my grandson's First Communion party. She exceeded my expectations. There were about 35 kids and 60 adults. She played music for everyone. The kids had a blast, she did face painting, made balloon animals, had karaoke. The kids had so much fun that they didn't want to go home. Every adult in the room commented on what a wonderful party it was and how Ione made it so much fun. If you every have an opportunity to need a DJ check her out. I would hire her again without question and I would recommend her to anyone. GREAT JOB Ione!!!! Owen had a blast. Thank you for making his day so awesome... Maureen"
Karaoke Machine Rental
Ione was amazing! She arrived on time, had a great set up and was great with our teens! She was flexible, fun and let it be their event. We would definitely hire her again for our next karaoke party!
Face Painting and Balloon Twisiting
Ione was just straight out amazing we only spoke on email she was true to her word showed up at my requested time did an outstanding Job with the kids and their face painting and she worked the room and went to every kid asking what type of animal and what color balloon they wanted!! She was really great can't say enough good things about her! She was an excellent addition to my dauhter's first party and just what the kids wanted and needed they had a blast with those balloon swords Lol!! She was also very affordable for what we could spend!! Thank you Ione and I'll be sure to recommend you to all of my friends!!!
Face Painting and Balloon Twisiting
Ione was great! She is a beautiful artist. I was nervous the face painting would take too long but she was quick and made beautiful paintings. She is a good balloon artist as well. She also has jewels and glitter that a adds really nice touch to her artistry. She has great communication. She is on time and prepared!
Face Painting and Balloon Twisting
Ione is very punctual, professional and amazing at what she does. She did a great job at my daughter's First year bday. Thanks again!
"Incredible. Decided to hire Ione for karaoke for our large wedding rehearsal dinner, which was a bit of a risk, but it turned out to be excellent. She was incredibly accommodating and helpful with the guests. Our guests had a excellent time. 100% would recommend to people."
"Ione was terrific! We had her for a wedding after-party and she came, set up and operated equipment- was wonderfully responsive to the mid- thirties crowd and her price was very reasonable! We recommend her very highly!"
Karaoke /face painting/balloon twisting
"Ione did a great job! We had a lot of kids and she handled it great! She brought more equipment than I was expecting - so the set-up does need space. But she was able to play any song requested and had very nice equipment; she is perfect! Her face painting is top notch. She is very flexible and professional, and was very quick to respond to questions via email."
"Ione is very patient with her work and very good with her profession too. She did good mixing for hindi DJ which is not her language and was excellent with baloon and face painting."

She's still blooming
The tree doctor gave the death sentence. Your tree is dying. She will not last through the winter. She has bloomed for the last time. Say your good-byes now.
Doctors say things like that. When Stephen Jay Gould, the evolutionary biologist, was 40, he was told he had eight months to live. He studied his disease and found research that showed the median survival time was eight months. But he realized that half of those in whom the disease was diagnosed survived longer than eight months. Understanding statistics enabled him to see that some people survived much longer, giving him the strength to fight on and change his apparent death sentence into the hopeful realization that he might live longer. He lived 20 more years and died of an unrelated cause.
I trusted in the tree doctor’s knowledge and prepared for the highly likely possibility that it was over. But I never fully believed him. He knew lots of trees, but not my tree. And my tree is still here, gloriously blooming in spring, one more time.

- Sep 30, 2015
My comments from the show are about the *demos* not products. If I don't say anything, it usually means I walked in, heard some music, nothing jumped at me, I took pictures and left. A moment later they may have played something great that would have caught my ears. That said, as I mentioned originally, I am only nothing things that are still fresh in my mind. I have to listen to audio notes I took in my phone to see if there are specific comments I made then that I have since forgotten.
I'm just particularly interested in impressions of this room since I was very close to supplying the speakers for them. They wanted to use these ones, but I designed them to be fully active. They needed something passive to use with their 2 channel amp. So it would have meant me building them a one off and I didn't wanna do it. So they went with the small Maggie's instead.
View attachment 22563 View attachment 22564

I still remember the first time I sailed a boat by myself. I was about eight or nine years old and my older brother Jachin wouldn’t let the boat heel over. I was with my cousin Caleb who was on my side and wanted to tip, so we mutinied.
On a close pass by the little beach in front of our cabin my brother gave up the ship and jumped off. I had sailed in the past but hadn’t been in command of the vessel before, as this plan of me as captain wouldn’t have been agreed upon under normal circumstances. We did lots of fast passes of the shore as we were waved in. My brother wasn’t the only one who didn’t agree with my sailing style. But emboldened by Caleb, who I looked up to as a fellow want-to-be bad boy, we sailed off into the lake.
I don’t recall how the trip ended, if I was in trouble with my parents or not. But one thing is clear in my memory from that day through the end of high school: I lived for the windy days, but sailed most every day of the summer regardless.
My father was a camp director and we were all camp brats. We spent our summers in the mosquito swarmed paradise of Camp du Nord, in Northern Minnesota, on Lake Burntside near Ely, Minnesota. The camp was often donated boats, many of which I’m sure I was never told about, and they were auctioned off at fundraisers I was vaguely aware of. But some were pressed into service at the camp and were usually in some form of disrepair in those early years.
When I was ten two big events took place in my summer life. The Chrysler 14 and two other distressed vessels were retired and new boats were donated. A used but in great shape Holder 14 named ‘Tiddley’ (which was the flagship of the fleet and my father figured it would be the director’s boat to be used by staff) and two brand new Johnson Mini-Scows (to be the camper boats). I think my Dad thought if I had the Holder to sail I would leave the Mini-Scows alone, but that only worked to a degree.
This is when I discovered just what a tub that Chrysler had been and just how far I could go on a swift little boat. Burntside is a beautiful lake that has many islands and bays, crystal clear water and is relatively sparsely populated. The lake and the boat were the perfect place for adventure.
In my head I can recount many adventures, but there are two that come to mind as harrowing events. The first was probably the second year we had Tiddley. I was protective of it and was able to do so by being an ever present captain for anyone who wanted to sail.
I slept in a small a room about ten feet from the water, with my two brothers. The room would have been small for one person but we managed to fit a bunk bed and a single bed in too with a small walkway between. I then estimated the best position on the lake for the boat to be moored so I could keep an eye on it during the frequent overnight storms. I dove and carried the cinder blocks in short dives, running along the bottom of the lake in about ten feet of water. In an afternoon I had them all moved, tied back together, and put the Tiddley back on the empty bleach bottle that was the mooring buoy.
So when the storms would come I could lay in bed looking out the window and with every flash of lightning see the boat being buffeted by the storm. My great fear was the boat breaking free and bashing all night on the rocks near the house. The bay we were on was over a mile across and when the wind whipped up the waves could get high enough to really bash the boat around.
One night when I was probably eleven, and I was woken by a violent thunderstorm. The boat was there in a flash of lighting with distant thunder and I fell back asleep. I woke a short time later as the rain was pounding on the thin roof right above my head. Another violent flash with the thunder right on top of it and the boat was gone. I was gone too, out the door in just my shorts. The wind took the boat north and it wasn’t far away. I had woken up just in time as the wind pushed the boat quickly towards a rocky outcropping called Peace Point. There was a rock foot path along the shore to the point and I knew it by memory- dashing over the wet stones in the dark. Off of Peace Point were many large rocks submerged with giant holes between them. It was very treacherous ground and I knew it was no place to try and fend off a boat. So I scrambled over the rocks into the lake to swim to meet the boat as it blew toward the point. The waves were really kicking up but I managed to get over the wet rocks and crashing waves and met boat before it hit the shore.
Scrambling aboard, I flipped the center board and rudder down, which in those high winds was enough to get some control over the boat. I turned it away from the point and towards the beach beyond. The whole time I was doing this lightning was hitting the lake. Once the course was corrected I flipped the center board and rudder back up and abandoned ship. I figured I’d have a better chance on shore then next to an aluminum pole and just in case the boat missed the beach I wasn’t ready for getting blown into what felt like an electric maelstrom.
The boat hit the beach and I was there waiting for it. I tried to pull it up the beach but once it had stopped moving the waves quickly filled it with water. I opened the drain but it wasn’t clearing the cock pit fast enough that it was far too heavy for me to pull all the way out of the water. I got it as far up the beach I could but the waves were still hitting it when I gave up and went home. Having broken about every swimming rule there was at camp, I retired to sleep and figured it would be fine in the morning.
However, it was not fine. After I had retired the waves had turned it sideways and eventually flipped it on its side, at which point the mast broke off. I was devastated. I could have fought longer and harder maybe and now my boat was ruined.
Luckily for me there were plenty of people around who took pity on me. I can’t recall how I must have been to observe, but I felt like a good friend had been killed and I had let it happen. Knowing more about boat repair now, it was in fact a fairly simple job to bend the mast step back into shape and reattach it. But, to me at that age, it was the benevolent act of an angle who went by the name Scott and was the maintenance manager at camp.
Derek Rupe - to be continued

An exhausted dog who fled into the sea after being spooked is recovering well despite swimming frantically in the cold water for almost 30 minutes.
A family evening on the beach could have ended in disaster when Holly, a six-year-old greyhound, was spooked by a car yesterday (July 2).
The rescue dog slipped out of her collar and sprinted all the way from Bridlington to Fraisthorpe and back before dashing into the water near South Pier.
Members of the public rushed to help Jason King coax his mum's beloved pet out of the water.
The inshore lifeboat was called at 9.13pm and coastguards assisted in retrieiving petrified Holly.
Jason said: "I'd just like to say a huge thank you to everyone who helped.
"A guy called Gary ran up and stripped off to go in after her before I did. I wouldn't let him go in after her but him and his sister Bethany were a huge help.
"She was in the water for about 25 minutes before we finally got her out."
Crowds began to gather as they witnessed coastguards, the dog owner and members of the public try to urge the dog back to safety near South Pier.
After the rescue team got her back on land she was taken to an emergency vets where she was treated overnight.
Jason, 47, who lives near Pontefract, said: "She's been on a drip and given oxygen. She's still there now and we've spoke to the vets who say she's doing a lot better.
"She's eating and her temperature is almost back to normal but they want to keep her in another night.
"I want to thank everyone who helped us. There were some young lads on a bikes who helped us too. And of course the RNLI were amazing."

Stanley Wellington Keefe
March 7,1948 – March 29,2021
It is with heavy hearts, we announce the sudden passing of Stan on March 29th, 2021.
Stan was not a healthy man but he was stubborn and fought hard for many years to stay with his family as long as he could. He was very passionate and his family was everything to him. He loved his wife, daughter and grandkids more than words can express.
He will forever live on in the hearts of his wife of 53 amazing years Marlene, his daughter Tanya (Johnny) and his grandchildren Blake and Khloe.
Stan loved camping and outdoor adventures with Marlene. They shared many memories and campfires with great friends over the years. Most recently Stan's dream of having property on Manitoulin Island finally came true and provided them with the perfect place to unwind. They also loved just jumping in the car with a picnic lunch on a beautiful day and driving on an adventure to find the perfect, scenic spot to enjoy it. Marlene meant the world to him and he still called her the most beautiful and incredible woman he knew. Their love was truly an inspiration.
Stan adored his grandchildren Blake and Khloe. He had a very special “best friend” bond with his grandson Blake. He would tell Blake stories for hours and try to instill knowledge and skills to help him throughout life. They were hunting and fishing buddies… he was Papa’s sidekick.
Stan would do almost anything for Khloe including selfies, singing silly songs, letting Khloe style his hair and playing toys with her because “he was so funny and did all the best voices”.
As their only child, Stan made sure Tanya grew up like a lady but could also quad, check the oil in her car, and not be too scared to bait her own hook. He was proud of her as a nurse, daughter and mother and often seeked her advice when something was on his mind. They were so much alike.
Stan loved fishing, hunting and playing snooker. Through these pastimes he developed amazing friendships along the way. He was lucky to have great friends he could always count on.
Stan was loved so much and will be sadly missed by many friends and relatives.
‘Never forgotten.. always in our hearts.’
At his request, no funeral services will be held.
Arrangements entrusted to Sudbury Park Lawn Cremation Services.

They have everything and the Day Care is super trustworthy. It's probably the best in the city. There is tons of room for Rover to run around and get exercise. Urban Out Sitters has such a high level of professionalism and insight. If your puppy of dog needs anything at all, this is the place to take them to!! Promise!
The staff is really friendly and takes good care of the patient. From the front desk to hygienist to the dentist, it's a good experience. .
I recently bought a Hyundai Tucson from Rogers Hyundai. I absolutely love it! The attention that I received from everyone was was very much appreciated. They worked as a team together, which was a nice experience, instead of feeling that they were competing for my business. I told them the specific Tuscon that I wanted and they got it for me in two days, when other dealers were telling me that this car wasn't out there anywhere in IL or neighboring states. I felt that Rogers was honest with me and I enjoyed working with them.

Raised in a family of nurses, Glenda had always been expected to follow in her mother’s and sister’s footsteps. Instead, she had her first child at 18, and with no means to support him, applied for welfare. A few years later, she and her husband Derrick had eight more children. Glenda stayed home, took care of her kids, and lived off of “the system.” She got small jobs between pregnancies to help support her family’s increasing needs, but was never able to hold onto them.
Twelve years later, Glenda received a letter to attend Goodwill’s mandatory welfare-to-work program. She was scared. She was afraid of losing her benefits, afraid of how she was going to manage a job with her eight children, and had no transportation from Waianae. But Glenda realized welfare was not a permanent solution. She started using the childcare services and free bus service available to her.
Glenda always tended her own garden, and had wanted to work in a garden shop since she was a teen. She sent out many applications, but kept getting rejected.
After attending Goodwill’s job club to learn interviewing skills and the proper way to fill out an application, she was hired within two days at Kilgo’s as a customer service rep. After six months, Kmart hired her at the snack bar; and she got a second job waitressing at Chili’s. Slowly, her self-esteem and pride in work grew. She understood the value and freedom of earning her own paycheck. After six more months, she was granted an interview at Home Depot. During the interview, she told the employer that she would be the hardest working person on staff, and that she wanted more than anything to work in their garden shop. He was pleased by her persistence, and gave her the job. She was part of the opening team at the Pearl City Home Depot.
Glenda now works at Lowe’s in Waikele. She continues to visit Goodwill on her days off to tell her story at the agency’s new orientation for welfare recipients.
She swells with pride as she tells how she has learned to drive a forklift, and how she has learned so much at her new job from her customers, as well as her fellow employees and supervisor. She loves working with people, and looks forward to becoming a supervisor one day. She beams with joy as she speaks about how she purchased a car, and is now saving for a house; things she never even would have considered doing just three years ago.
Glenda looks forward to being a regular speaker at Goodwill’s orientations. She wants to motivate others, and inspire them to succeed by her example. She encourages them, saying, “This is not the end; it’s just the beginning”.

This morning at 8.30am, my ll turned up completely unannounced, along with two plumbers. We had discussed over the phone about a week ago that my kitchen tap needed replacing and he said that the plumber would contact me but would definately be round some time this week. They just stood on the doorstep waiting to be invited in and when I said nothing the ll just stepped in past me saying 'I was going to bring my key just in case you weren't in'!! I was half dressed and had my washing, including stockings and suspenders completely on show. I feel my privacy has been thoroughly invaded and am really upset. Dh says we shouldn't say anything as we only moved here in august and defaulted (by 10days with notice) on our first rent payment as tax credits messed us about. Landlord had a huge go at us about it over the phone. Who is right/wrong in this situation and what can I do about it? Should I keep quiet so's not to rock the boat? Wyo?

My supportive lady attacked me back in 2007, and today I am very happy about that. It didn't even smell like TheQ back then, it wasn't even in the idea.
A gay guy with TheQ once wrote to me, but unfortunately I'm not gay and nothing came of it. I don't know if this counts, because he is not a lady. My rating is 660.

Last night we noticed our male guinea pig wasn't doing very good, he had diarrhea and was lethargic. This morning I found him dead. It was a real heart breaker, still is. I'm worried about the female. What's a good length of time to see about a new companion.

I know I wrote the little update Monday morning, but feel like it's been forever since I actually wrote anything worth while and have to say I don't think I have anything really worth while still to write!
Yesterday I hosted a Mom's Morning Out for our Local PWOC (Protestant Women of the Chapel...bible study), we gave mom's who's spouse is deployed or about to deploy next month to drop off their kids for a few hours. It was from 8:30 to noon. We had 9 kids, granted 2 of them were mine, but that's the most we've had! It really was a good morning and the kids were great. There was one little boy who we had a few issue's with, I talked with his mom when she picked him up and well lets say he left crying knowing he was in trouble when he got home! I shouldn't giggle about that, but well I am! LOL I know as a Mom I want to know when/if my children misbehave if I'm not there and I give the same curtiousy to other mom's.
That went well and then at 2 I watched my friends little girl she's 16 months old, just as sweet as can be! My friend keeps Jacob for me while I'm at PWOC which is definately nice. She doesn't charge me. We made a deal that when she needs childcare, as long as I'm home/free I'll watch her. It's worked out well. Jacob's well behaved normally plays with her little girl, watches a movie sometimes, plays, draws, has a snack, and then I come and pick him up. This morning she said to let Jackson stay and he loved it! She took them to the park, so they got some outside time this morning as well.
Of course yesterday and today being mornings I needed to be up and out of the house the boys both slept in! I had to wake them up both mornings! Yesterday I woke them up at 8 am. Chad was home and I was actually able to leave the boys with him, go pick up the keys for the Yellow Ribbon Room (where we did the Mom's Morning Out) and get things ready for the kids to arrive, since the YRR is literally right across from Chad's office it worked perfectly. This morning I needed to be out of the house no later than 8:35, and I had to wake the boys at 8:20! I got them dressed and had them each grab an apple for breakfast, I grabbed a bag of grapes, the boys grabbed a few toys, a movie and off we went. I amazingly made it to PWOC early!
PWOC was amazing! I shared with the ladies we're having a girl. We're down to 3 classes left for this session, then we'll have a break for a few weeks and start up our summer video series.
Tomorrow I have the PEP briefing for PWOC, I just go and tell the new spouses to the area about PWOC and almost always talk about what's going on at the chapel as well! It takes about 15 minutes so it's pretty quick and easy!
I hope to come up with a better entry later. I am just feeling rather blah right now and kind of tired.
Oh I guess something really great is that the baby is getting REALLY active! She kicks and hits a lot and throughout the day and evening! It's really so nice and reassuring to feel her inside of me. Growing and active!

Aaron had a lot of neck pain today. When that happens, of course, he gets more pain medicine which often makes him sleepy. He was tired today, but he stayed awake for his therapy sessions, and that’s a good thing! He went off the vent onto the trach collar at approximately 7:15 this morning and stayed on it for…………………(drumroll)……………11 1/2 hours !!!! Great job, Aaron!
We were told today that Aaron’s discharge from Magee will take place on November 6th. Our plan (up until today) was for Aaron to go home to his Dad and Step-mom’s house upon discharge, BUT today we were thrown a curve; another option to consider, a facility that specializes in weaning patients from ventilators. There are several close to home (Harrisburg, Lancaster, York) that we could consider if Aaron would choose to go that route. He would be admitted as an inpatient and would still receive physical therapy, however, it would not be to the same degree he gets now. Their main focus would be getting Aaron off of the vent, which is Aaron’s primary goal right now. This is a new option for Aaron to think about, as well as Jaime and the rest of his family. Life and rehabbing would be easier for Aaron (and everybody involved with his care) if he could lose that apparatus!!! So, stay tuned, we’ll keep you updated on Aaron’s next step in his journey!
One more thing. Aaron and I were chatting this evening after he ate supper and we looked over at my husband, Sam, who (last time we looked) was watching TV, to find him sound asleep in Aaron’s bed. I took a couple of pictures, because I knew when I eventually told Sam he’d been sleeping, he’d deny it, as he ALWAYS does. I was correct, he did deny it. I have the pictures to prove it and I told Aaron I was going to post one on his blog, so here it is. Just for you Aaron. And yes, he really was sound asleep…..doesn’t look too comfy. Who looks like that when they sleep? Is that normal????
And I continue to ask you to please pray for Aaron’s recovery. Thank you everybody!!

I'm a book buying junkie who buys books faster than I can read them. But what better way is there to live than surrounded by books?! I read as much as I can and I do my best to give coherent reviews...which doesn't always happen. I enjoy many genres, which is likely the reason I struggle with deciding my next read.
This was more a sister story than a sequel to the first book in this series. They have many of the same characters, but the main protagonists change. This one flows Noah and Matt. Noah is the biracial son of a rich politician... he's also gay, so of course his father uses his mixed race and sexual orientation as a campaign tactic, which Noah clearly resents. As a way of irritating his father he agrees to be the fake boyfriend of Matt. Matt is a pro football player who was forcefully outed by the tabloid media. He loses his job with his current team on a morality cause, but everyone knows he was because Matt is gay.
His friend and agent Damon convinces him that he needs to clean up his image and portray himself as someone in a relationship rather than a guy who has random hook-ups at clubs.
Matt and Noah struggle to be fake boyfriend, mostly because they are both attracted to one another and it frightens them.
What I liked about this book was the backstory for the main characters as well as the struggle. Again, it wasn't overly angsty. There was time to develop the plot and relationship without it being too quick or drag on too long. Very good narration; I felt the characters come through.

Reed Secrist played twelve years of professional baseball, hitting over 100 home runs for teams in the Pirates, Blue Jays, Cardinals, Rangers, Reds and Indians organizations, as well as Hanshin in Japan, between 1992 and 2003. He is currently a PE/health teacher and head baseball coach at Snow Canyon High School in Utah and runs MVP Showcases, which spotlights Utah high school baseball stars. He kindly responded to my request about his baseball card stories.
"I remember in 1995 being told I was going to be in the 1996 Fleer Excel series I was excited because I really hadn't had a decent card yet and it was my first big step into a card that you could actually purchase at a store. I remember waiting to see it, I received a phone call from a friend in Virginia that had seen it and he said I don't think that is you, he was right! On the front of the card was Rob Leary it makes me laugh now but I was mad back then so that basically sums up my career the rest of the way! My favorite card of myself is the 1997 Japanese card, the only thing is I can't read the back. My favorite card of someone else is George Brett's rookie card. I've been a collector since I was young. I remember getting .25 cents and running to the local drug store to get a pack. As I got older I got away from it for awhile and then decided to start collecting certain players which I ended up just collecting George Brett cards. I remember going to the park as a player and fans knew I collected George Brett and they would bring me cards of him all the time so my collection of him grew."
Oddly, considering that he played twelve years of pro baseball and, according to Beckett.com, was on 16 different baseball cards, I couldn't find a picture of one of his cards, and found only this picture from his playing days.
Tomorrow Is The Day
6 hours ago

"Okay, Buddy!" Billy's daddy said, 'I'll be back in a couple of hours. Be a good boy for Uncle Mark, alright?"
"O.K., Daddy," he cute 5 year old answered quietly.
"Take your time, Man," Mark said, laying a hand on the boy's shoulder, "We're gonna have a great time, aren't we, Sport?" he looked down at the adorable little blonde boy, who gazed back at him solemnly with his big blue eyes.
"Uh huh," he said noncommittally.
"Alright, I'll see you guys, then." Billy's daddy, Roger, said. He and Uncle Mark stood waving as his daddy drove away, then Uncle Mark directed him into the house.
"Come on in and get comfortable Billy," the man said. He took Billy's hand and led him into the living room. Billy entered the room first, and Mark followed. Billy looked around his uncle's house curiously. He stood still, waiting for his uncle to make the first move.
He didn't wait long.
"Come sit with me, Billy," Mark said behind him. When Billy turned around, Uncle Mark was naked. His semi-hard dick hung down between his thighs, six inches long and growing. Billy had seen it before. The first time had been a couple of weeks after Billy's daddy had forced him to suck his penis. Billy had liked it, and wanted to do it again. He had asked his daddy the next day if he could suck it, and he had sucked his daddy's cock almost every day since then.
His daddy had taken him to his Uncle Mark's house and Billy had asked Mark if he could suck his cock. Uncle Mark had been startled, and sat the boy down to find out why he had asked.
Mark wasn't surprised to find out that his brother had introduced the boy to oral sex. Roger was ten years older than Mark, and he had forced his younger brother to suck him off when they were boys. Mark, too had grown to like it, and sucked men off whenever the opportunity presented itself.
He had happily agreed to let the boy blow him, blasting a load in the kid's mouth after a few minutes of sucking.
Since then, Mark had watched Billy for his brother a few more times, and Billy had sucked him off every time.
Billy approached the couch where Uncle Mark sat with his legs spread wide and his eight inch cock exposed. The little boy wore a light blue baseball cap, which was tipped back to show off his light blonde bangs. Billy stopped between his uncles knees, and Mark reached out to pull the boy's t-shirt off over his head and push his shorts down his short legs and off. As usual, Roger had brought the boy over without underwear on. Mark replaced the cap, enjoying the look of the naked 5 year old, wearing nothing but the blue cap.
Mark lifted the naked 5 year old into his lap.
"How about a kiss?" he said, and Billy puckered up and pecked the man on the lips.
"I mean a real kiss, silly!" Mark said, and tipped his head as he leaned in to plant his lips on his nephew's mouth. Billy opened his lips and let his uncle's tongue slither into his mouth. The 5 year old put his skinny arms around Mark's neck and pulled his body against the adult man's. Mark turned the cap sideways, so the bill didn't interfere with his enjoyment of the child's mouth.
Mark reached behind his nephew and gripped his round ass cheeks in his hands. Billy wiggled his butt against his uncle's hands. The little boy loved having his body touched and fondled.
Mark was amazed at the boy's precociousness. The normally quiet, reserved kindergartener became voracious when it came to sex.
Billy moaned and squirmed in his uncle's arms as they kissed. Marc felt the boy's warm little hands slip between their bodies and reach for his erect cock. He moaned into Billy's mouth when the child's hands found his swollen member.
Mark took the boy's narrow shoulders in his hands and pushed him back.
"Today I'm gonna fuck you, okay?" he panted.
"Okay," Billy said. He had no idea what Uncle Mark meant. He only knew he wanted to suck the man's cock and swallow his cum. As long as Mark let him do that, the man could do anything he wanted.
"Okay, good." Mark said. He sat Billy on the couch and reached over to grab a tube of lubricant from a side table. He picked Billy up with his hands on his waist and set him on his bare feet in front of the couch. He turned the boy around and pushed him over with a hand between his shoulder blades. The boy bent at the waist, his firm round butt cheeks sticking out behind him. Mark gazed at the creamy globes of the little boy's ass and his cock pulsed. He massaged the 5 year old's butt cheeks, and Billy laid his head on the couch cushion and moaned softly.
Mark knelt directly behind his naked nephew with a hand on each pale ass cheek, pulling them apart to expose the tiny wrinkled hole nestled in the deep cleft between them. He stared at the little orifice, and his mouth watered.
Acting on impulse, the man bent at the waist and licked the boy's anus. Billy's head rose a couple of inches off the couch when he felt the odd sensation, and turned to see what his uncle was doing.
"Uncle Mark!" the boy gasped, "That feels great!"
Mark smiled at his nephew and returned his tongue to the little boy's asshole. He held Billy's hips in his hands and pressed his face against the warm ass in front of him. Mark pushed his tongue through the tight ring of muscle around Billy's anus, forcing spit into the tiny opening. Billy moaned and swung his ass back and forth, pressing back against his uncle's face. Mark was turned on. He knelt up behind the 5 year old and squeezed the tube of lubricant, collecting a glob of clear fluid on his fingers. He pressed his fingertip against Billy's spit-slicked anus, and the boy turned again to see what was touching him this time. He smiled up at his uncle and pressed backward until the tip of Mark's finger popped into his butt. He stopped and looked Mark in the eye, then pushed again, forcing more of the man's finger into his ass.
"You like that?" Mark asked as he pushed his finger deeper into Billy's hole.
"Uh huh," the boy grunted. His big blue eye closed and he smiled slightly as Marc continued to finger his anus. Mark spent several minutes sliding his finger in and out of Billy's asshole, until the opening had loosened to his satisfaction.
"Okay,"" he told the child, "Stand up, Baby Boy." He pulled up on Billy's hips and the child stood, bent at the waist. Mark moved closer, on his knees behind the little boy, and added lubricant to his cock. He coated the head liberally with the oily fluid, until it glistened in the lights of the room.
"I'm gonna stick my cock in your ass now, Baby," he whispered in the boy's ear "You ready?"
"Okay, Uncle Mark," the boy said innocently.
Mark put one hand on Billy's hip to steady him, and held his eight inch erection in the other. He rubbed the fat head of his cock against the boy's anus. Billy pushed backward encouragingly, and Mark took the hint, gripping the boy's slender hips and pulling his body back while pushing his own hips forward.
Billy hissed when he felt his uncle's big cock force his sphincter open. There was a flash of sharp pain, and he yelped, but then the cock head popped past the tight ring of muscle and was inside. Billy panted through the pain, and Mark held still to let the little boy get used to it.
When Billy settled down and his body relaxed, Mark leaned forward and wrapped his arms around the boy's body, pinning his arms against his sides in a big bear hug. Mark leaned against Billy's back, pressing the boy's small body against the couch cushion, and pushed his cock deeper inside his ass. Billy moaned, and his skinny body shuddered as his uncle fucked him, taking his anal virginity.
Mark stopped pushing after wedging four inches of his hot shaft in the child's anus, and started fucking him lowly.
Billy whined and panted, pushing back against his uncle's invading cock. Mark started pumping into his nephew's ass in earnest, holding his small, frail body to his chest tightly. He felt the heat of the child's back against his chest, and a layer of sweat made their bodies slide together as Mark fucked the 5 year old. Mark laid his cheek against Billy's head, feeling the fabric of the baseball cap against his face.
"Oh, Uncle Mark," Billy gasped, "Push it in me!"
"I'm fucking you!" Mark said, biting gently on the side of the little boy's neck.
"Fuck me, Uncle Mark!" the boy urged, "Fuck me!"
The lewd words, in the child's sweet, high-pitched voice, were too much for the man, and Mark came. He held Billy tighter, and jerked his spurting cock in short jabs into Billy's ass. The force of his jabbing thrusts knocked the boy's cap askew, which for some reason excited the man even more.
Billy squealed, feeling the hot jets of sperm against his rectum. He held still until Uncle Mark stopped jerking, and sighed when he felt the man's thick cock slide out of his stretched anus.
Billy felt wet warmth on his inner thighs as his uncle's semen gushed from his gaping asshole. Billy turned to look at his uncle, and Mark pulled him close for a kiss. Billy sucked Uncle Mark's tongue as Mark played with the boy's penis and felt his little sac between his legs.
Mark stood, and grabbed Billy's head in both of his hands. He pulled the boy's face toward his cock and slipped it into Billy's open mouth.
"Always clean off a cock after it cums in your ass, Billy," Mark told him. Billy sucked unenthusiastically on this uncle's cock, until he realized that it didn't taste much different than usual. He mostly tasted semen, which he liked, so he finished cleaning his uncle's cock eagerly.
- - - -
"So how was your visit with Uncle Mark?" Roger asked the boy on the way home.
"Good," Billy said.
They rode in silence for a while, then Billy spoke again.
"Daddy?" he asked.
"Can you fuck me when we get home?"
"Sure, baby boy," his daddy assured him, silently thanking his younger brother, "No problem!"
The reviewing period for this story has ended.

Tonight Leigh and I loaded up and met Hilori at Masterson for a quick outing with the horses. We had a great time. The horses worked great and we were very happy with their performance. Tonight we didnt work on the barrel pattern, it was for conditioning only. I was trying out a new bit on Drifter and he seemed to really like it, so I am very happy with my purchase.
Stay tuned for more updates.

More trouble for Bones star David Boreanaz. The actor has now been sued by an actress claiming David sexually harassed her while filming the TV show.
Gloria Allred filed the suit that claims David began sexually harassing Kristina Hagan on Aug. 21, 2009 when she was an extra on Bones, TMZ reports.
Earlier this year, David, who is married to Jaime Bergman and has two children, admitted to having an affair and was working on his marriage.
The suit claims David was allegedly sending Kristina "sexually inappropriate text messages" and in September 2009 told her he was "the boss" and could "make things happen for her" while driving in a car with her.
He then allegedly parked his car and "attempted to kiss her and touch her breasts but she pushed him away."
The suit makes other claims to instances that occurred in David's trailer and in October David told Hagan "he and his wife had argued because there were reports of his infidelity" coming out and that they would have to "cool it."
Hagan is also suing Fox and the Bones production companies for failing to take the proper action against David.

Matthias Klose (doko) and I did the Ubuntu booth at Berlinux. Our booth was crammed between the GNOME and the Skolelinux one. Sven Herzberg (herzi) ran the GNOME one and was supported by Thomas Keup, who had the brilliant idea of running a coffee stand, which attracted quite a lot of people, who grabbed a Hoary CD with each coffee.
We didn't have any lazy minutes at all and were quite successful. People were excited about Ubuntu and Edubuntu (which we showcased too) and apart from old users enjoying Ubuntu and new users asking about Ubuntu, we had some queries about business questions.
On the first day (Friday) there were quite a lot of students and people from the other stands; on the second day we had families and business people on both of those days. It was nice to see that 12 year old kids were interested and 70+ people too. Although our talk (slides here) was at 17:00 on Saturday we had around 60 people in the talk, some of which were interested in Berlin local activities, one interested in getting new sounds into Ubuntu and one new Desktop Team player.
The whole two days were exhausting but very funny, we had fun with the Debian, the GNOME, the KDE guys, the Skolelinux guys and many more. I'm glad we were there and with some more local involvement, we'll be up to forming a LocoBerlin too.

We ate here because the queue at the Laguna, next door, wasn't moving. Having had an early start from Gatwick, and a detour to Trieste Airport, we were a bit tired, and just wanted something simple.
A very nice lasagne and pizza filled the bill admirably. However the surprise was the house white. at 5 euros a half litre we weren't expecting too much, but it was delicious, very similar to a wine we had at an Italian restaurant we had in the Uk - at 22 euros a bottle!
So we had another quarter litre.
It,s actually cheaper than the beer, which seems to run at 4.5 to 5 euros for 400 ml.

April 1 - Burswood Dome, Perth
The last photos I have, after this I tried staying a little bit more but nearly fainted and my belly area organs were going retarded so I had to get out and get water. I will explain in a journal entry. But as you can see.. the crowd was pretty shit, next to no one was getting involved. But I made up for it, I was going bonkers and getting a great amount of dirty looks. It was a seriously amazing show. One of the best nights of my life.

Lottery Winner Ordered to Give Half to Ex-wife
It’s a not so lucky day when you win the lottery but then have to give half away to your ex. This is exactly the kind of situation Richard Zelasko found himself in in 2013 when he struck it lucky and took home the MegaMillions jackpot.
A Once Married Man
Fifty year old Richard had been married seven years and was father to three children when he and his wife decided to get a divorce in 2011. They appointed an arbitrator to sort out the nitty-gritty decisions. Unfortunately the process took a little longer than expected and it was only in 2018 that the divorce was finalised.
Meanwhile, in 2013, Richard Zelasko bought a lottery ticket for a mere $1 and scored big by matching all the winning numbers!
Winning or Losing
At this point, Richard and his wife had been living totally separate lives for nearly three years. His wife however was adamant that half of those winnings belonged to her. Robert was apparently a bit of a gambler, not in the addict sense but he did like to try his luck at roulette and the couple often bought lottery tickets. The argument was that if she had shared in the past losses then she should also share in the winnings; seeing as they were still technically married. Richard Zelasko’s attorney did not agree and argued that it was Richard’s luck that produced the win and not Mary’s. But how much credit can we really take for luck?
In 2014, the arbitrator, John Mills, died after his decision that the lottery winnings were indeed a part of the marital estate. The arbitration process was however incomplete and a new arbitrator was appointed. Richard tried his luck and asked the court to vacate the previous decision, arguing that Mills was biased against him. The appeals court decided that Mills had made no legal error and that the decision should stand.
A Twist in the Tale
In 2013 Mary was to be awarded $15 million and in 2014 the courts ruled for her to be awarded a further $7000 in child support. However, years of court proceedings have followed as Richard fights for what he says is rightfully his. In June this year, his second appeal was denied; this time by the Michigan Court of Appeals who decided that the original arbitrator’s decision be upheld – and yet it might not end there. Richard’s attorney has said that they are considering taking it to the Michigan Supreme Court.
Now you might think that Richard really got the short end of the stick here, but turns out he may have got what he deserved. The original arbitrator, Mills, found out that Richard, despite his large win, had not been paying child support. It was also noted that Mary had been the main breadwinner throughout their marriage, earning nearly three times what Robert did from his own business – a T-shirt shop. Mary was also in custody of all three children.
This case is by far not the only one of its kind – but we’ll leave those for another day! If you’d like to stand a chance to win your very own lottery jackpot, you can buy lottery tickets online with Sun7lottery.
Just make sure you don’t make the same mistakes Richard Zelasko did!

Jason Merritt/Getty Images
Wowing the crowd with his choreography, his smiles and his kisses to female fans, Marc Anthony commanded the stage of i
mon Bolívar Metropolitan Park stage in Bogotá, Colombia, Saturday night.
The only nod to his marital woes
came in the form of a joke about being single
But this was not the aloof and visibly sad Marc Anthony witnesses saw before the show, sources tell PEOPLE.
The Bogotá stop came just one day after Friday's news that the musician, 42, was ending his marriage
to his wife of seven years, Jennifer Lopez
"I saw him when he was passing through the stage, but I think because he split up the day before, he didn't allow anyone to talk to him or anyone to come to his dressing room," Spanish TV presenter Eva Rey tells PEOPLE.
Rey was scheduled to introduce Anthony Friday night at a pre-show party, only Anthony did not appear.
"The people who worked with him said he was a little bit upset, so because of that, they tried to keep everybody from him," says Rey.
Anthony also kept to himself in his hotel room, in stark contrast to other times he's been in town, another source tells PEOPLE. "Everything he ordered was by room service. He was distant from people."
But he didn't hold back came time to face the fans at the concert, which was no surprise to his guitarist, Mario Sebastian.
"He's a performer. He is as confident as all the band members are," Sebastian tells PEOPLE. "The show always will go on."
For more on what tore the couple apart – and what will happen to their kids and multi-million dollar homes – pick up this week's issue of PEOPLE, on newsstands Friday

Finally, thirty years after fleeing America, Roman Polanski was arrested in Zurich. Much has been written about his drugging and raping a thirteen year oldIt begs several questions:
1. What was he thinking? By announcing in advance that he was coming to Zurich (to accept a lifetime achievement award), was it hubris that finally did him in? He had to have known that the warrant on him was outstanding. He gambled and lost.
2. Did his reaction help his case? All we heard was that Roman was "fightin' mad". I didn't hear "sorrow", "regret", "willing to face up to what I did", or anything to indicate that he gets it.
3. Did his Hollywood friends, French politicians or other elites help his case? Uh....no. They hurt his case. I mean, a character reference from Woody Allen? Gimme a break! It served to make him a caricature of the spoiled "law doesn't apply to me" ethically-challenged person that he obviously is.
4. What should he have done? The moment he was carted off to a Swiss jail, he should have issued a statement that he would voluntarily return to Los Angeles and ask the Court for mercy. His statement would make it clear that what he had done was wrong, and that he realized that there should be consequences.
5. What would the judge do? I believe that he would have got a light sentence in recognition of his apology and his willingness to recognize how wrong his actions were. (I'm not sure if he had been involved in any charitable work during his thirty years on the lam, but it sure might have helped too.)
However, remember "arrogance is its own reward!"
Is Canada Going to Have an Election or Not?
Now that the NDP has voted with the government on a major money bill (Employment Insurance reform) and has said it will not support the Liberal's non-confidence motion, there won't likely be a Fall election.
Who wins and who loses?
The Conservatives win by looking strong and sure-footed (neither weak nor devious). The Liberals have been saved from certain defeat; yet are empowered to continue voting every time against the government, with impunity. Given the recent in-fighting in Quebec Liberal ranks, however, that delay can only help the Liberals. the Liberals, however, have entered into a narrow channel - of all or nothing. That is high stakes poker with a weak hand. The NDP have survived to live another day but will have to avoid voting for legislation that they cannot stomach. That could be increasingly problematic as Stephen Harper - with one eye on the polls - might decide to feed Mr. Layton just such a 'meal'.
Until next time, remember the old Russian proverb:"the difference between genius and stupidity is that genius has its limits."

Westholme launches the W Club!
There was a buzz of excitement in the air during October half term, as Westholme’s new and improved holiday club was launched. Staff and children alike were eager to see what the “W Club” had to offer, and they clearly weren’t disappointed.
The first week began with “Super-skills” – an activity week for 4-11 year olds. The children took part in games of bench ball, kwick cricket and volleyball, all played in the Sports Hall. Thankfully, the weather was kind, and they were also able to take full advantage of our new astro-turf and enjoyed relay races and cracker jack.
The children swam in our pool each day, learning new skills such as stroke, technique, safety and of course confidence building. Outdoor pursuits such as cross country were also enjoyed by the members of the club, and they even managed to collect some autumn leaves from the grounds of Wilmar Lodge for their craft work.
Week 2 was equally as action packed, with a spooky Halloween theme running through it. The children took part in a potions and spells day – eat your heart out Harry Potter! You would have thought that we were fed up of all the snow from earlier in the year, but this was not the case. Everyone enjoyed a fun filled day out at the chill factory, playing on the slopes and in the snow, but it was very cold! The week was rounded off with a Halloween party – enabling staff and children to dress up in their best witch, wizard & ghoul costumes. By all accounts it was a truly spooktastic affair!

Suggested by Random Vergil has always been a very tough opponent for Dante. His skills are at their peak and seriously injuring Vergil is difficult. It would take fast but heavy attacks that keep on striking until he is down. This is something that Esdeath could certainly pull off, but I think her speed isn’t enough to get past his reaction times. Her ice skills are unmatched but in Vergil’s final form he would just slice through it all. Vergil wins.

The X Factor Australia – Barry Southgate Eliminated
Barry Southgate was eliminated from The X Factor Australia, with Australia not agreeing with Redfoo that it was the greatest performance he had ever done.
Barry vocals had been weak in his rendition of Kate Perry’s California’s Girl but the singer has always been on borrowed time, in fact he should have been eliminated in the first week instead of Adira-Belle. At least that girl group had some potential growth in them.
The brother boyband, JTR, were also in the bottom two which was a shock to the judges. But Australia clearly knows crap vocals when they hear it.
After they boths sang for their lives Barry was unsurprisingly sent home, leaving Dani with just one over 24 to coach. Lucky for her it is Dami Im who should make it to the final.

Geronimo is an aged Percheron gelding estimated to be around 32 years old. He was a carriage horse in Nashville for at least 17 years. We had been working with his previous owner for a couple of months on his care, but decided the best place for him to receive his care is at our sanctuary. He arrived February 27, 2016.
Within the past couple of years he had foundered on his left front foot. Lack of regular hoof care has led to abscesses in both front feet. His hoof care needs are already underway and veterinary and dental care are being scheduled.
He is a very sweet and willing boy and we are happy to be able to give him a chance at a quality life!
Geronimo's front feet were x-ray'd and sadly he has a tremendous amount of coffin bone rotation and also sinking with part of the coffin bone missing, likely from penetrating thru the sole. He has a current abscess in his right front foot that is being treated. We are still exploring options for making him more comfortable!
He requires very soft bedding and footing material to make it easier for him to walk and he also likes to lay down ofte
Sadly Geronimo passed away February 6th, 2017. He is greatly missed!

LAURENS COUNTY, Ga. — This week, we're highlighting some of Central Georgia's Great Grads. These are students that have faced great struggles, and through hard work, have come out on the other side.
Student Bryce Evans at East Laurens High School was close to dropping out, but now, he's about to walk across the graduation stage.
Evans says his mom was in and out of jail his whole life. Once he got older, he says he started driving people around town to earn money to send to his mom in jail.
He says at 14, being in school and supporting his mom at the same time started to become too much. He contemplated leaving school for good.
Luckily, two staff members stepped in, and got Evans a job at Dairy Queen, so he could support his mom and focus on school too.
"Walking back and knowing I'm starting a new life, and it's going to be better than what I left behind here, hoping I can provide even better for my family than what I can now," Evans said.
Today, Evans' mom is out of jail, and he's planning to go to massage therapy school in Atlanta. He graduates on May 31.
MORE GREAT GRADS:

Chapter 2: The First Memory
My bedroom wasn't small but it wasn't large either. I guess you could say it was just the right size. My grandmother told me that she hadn't changed my room around, not even a little bit. I wish that I could say I remembered how much I loved or hated this room. It was a fairly simple bedroom. The walls were stained white and it didn't look like there was a scratch on them. There was a queen sized bed with brown bedsheets in the middle of the room and brown curtains hanging from the window to the left of my bed.
There were no posters or paintings on the walls except for a white rectangular canvas that had a hand drawn, muscular bird on it. In the top right hand corner in what looked like black marker it read, The ones. The Great. The Best. We are the... In big orange and green, bubbled letters it spelled Hurricanes and just above that in smaller letters were Miami. Behind those words were what looked like rock, as if the big bird broke through it.
I walked over to my bed and crawled on top of it, laying on my back and staring at the ceiling. I was so exhausted; all I could wish for right now was some sleep. I didn't want to sleep though, I wanted to stay awake and try to remember something, to remember anything. I looked to my left and saw a photo of a man and a woman holding a little girl in their arms. The little girl appeared to be about seven years of age. She had brown hair, big brown eyes, and a huge smile on her face. She looked really happy, as did her parents.
The mother and the little girl could not look more alike. The mother had brown hair too, only her eyes were light brown. Her husband, or who I can assume to be her husband, had black hair and blue eyes with a big, white smile to match. I didn't recognize them at all but something tells me that I knew them and something else tells me that I was the little girl from the picture. I picked up the wooden picture frame and slid my hand along the glass that protected the photo. Even though I couldn't remember a thing about them, I somehow missed them.
As I stared at the photo in my hands, I felt myself start to cry. It was the first emotion I had since I've been home. I had been robbed of my memories. I had been robbed of two of the most important people in my life. I was scared, I was hurt. And even though I didn't know her, I wished my mother was here so I could confide in her. And as I sat there in tears, I began to remember something. I began to remember a moment with my mother.
A knock on my bedroom door interrupted my thoughts. "Hazel?" My grandmother called, opening my bedroom door and taking a peek inside.
"Yes?" I answered.
"Would you like to go to the market with me?: She asked. "I wanted to go buy some fresh meat. I wanted to make some sandwiches."
"No, thank you though." I softly smiled. "I'm still so tired."
"Okay. I'll be back in an hour. Will you be okay by yourself?"
I nodded. "I'll see you later, grandmother."
I watched as the little old lady exited my room. As soon as she was gone, I set the photo back in its rightful place. I got up from the spot on my bed and closed the curtains that hung on the sides of my window. I want to try to remember what it was that I had begun to remember before my grandmother walked in. I walked back over to my bed and snuggled under the covers, trying to get cozy and warm. I closed my eyes and took a deep breath, trying to relax.
I was calm, no longer upset, and it seemed to me that whatever I was close to remembering was triggered by my melancholy state. It could have been my first memory, but sadly it slipped away. Sleep called to me. My eyes would no longer open. I hadn't had the chance to fall asleep yet. I was scared to sleep again. I didn't want to forget anything else and more importantly, I didn't want to fall asleep for another six months. I feared not being able to wake up, ever again.
"Hazel! Hazel come over here!" My mother called, beckoning me to get into the photo with her and my father.
"Quickly! We haven't got all day!" My mother was impatient, but it never really bothered me much. The quote, "Why do today what you can put off until tomorrow?" simply did not apply to my mother. I must admit, though, if there was anything I admired about my mother, it was he determination to get things done. Not only did she get things done, but she got them done as accurately as she could. If I had that quality in me I'd probably end up with A's on my school papers instead of C's. I'd sure love to see that day.
"Why are we taking this stupid photo anyway?" I asked, not bothering to hide how annoyed I had gotten.
"Hush honey," My mother was becoming frustrated now, that wasn't a secret, but I couldn't help it if I despised taking family photos of any kind. "It's for your grandma. She won't be able to make it for Christmas this year so we're sending her a post card."
"Why don't we just-"
"Say cheese!" The photographer interrupted, and I put on the best smile I could give. After all, it's the least I could do seeing how I don't see my grandmother much. "Now for a photo with just the parents." The photographer ordered. I couldn't be any happier to step out of the next photo and watch from the sidelines. All I wanted to do today was go home and relax, take a hot bath, and calm my nerves.
I looked at my mother smile. She was a real beauty. Of course I have never actually said it to her face, my mother and I hadn't gotten many chances to compliment each other in my seventeen years of existence. My mother wore little to no make up, a little bit of eye liner, mascara, blush, and red lipstick on special occasions. The eyeliner and mascara definitely made her light brown eyes pop, and the blush she applied to her cheeks made her sparkle. Her long brown hair often hung down in curls and I must admit that I was jealous. Everyone tells me that I look exactly like my mother but if you asked me, I simply could not compare.
My father and I weren't the greatest of friends but it didn't mean I didn't love him any less. He had the personality to go with his dashing looks. He had a huge, bright smile, and piercing blue eyes. His black hair was combed back but somehow it was still a little tousled. He had facial hair, a beard to be more exact, and it suited my father well. My father was stern and strict when he needed to be but he could also be the funniest man you knew.
"Okay, now that that's over," My mother walked over to me and took a deep breath. "What was it that you were trying to tell me, sweetie?"
I smiled at my mother, wanting to hug her and squeeze her with everything I had. "I was just going to suggest that we visit grandma for Christmas. I miss her and I'm sure everyone else does too." My mother wrapped her arm around me and gave a big smile, kissing me on my forehead. "Of course we can honey. That sounds great."
I woke up after a few hours sleep and I instantly look toward my window. I walked over, wondering if the moon was out tonight. The night sky was filled with bright stars and it seemed to me that I could not have picked a better moment to wake up. There was a crescent moon hanging high and the sky and it was beautiful. I grabbed a sweater and stepped out of my room and headed toward the front door. I knew it was late so I tried my best to be as quiet as I possibly could be. I reached for the doorknob and heard footsteps behind me.
"Sneaking out already, Hazel?" I turned around and saw my grandmother standing there with her arms crossed, disappointment written on her face but a smirk playing at her lips. "I'd expect those kind of actions when your memory was fully intact."
I sighed. "I'm sorry grandmother. I just wanted to go outside for the first time since I've been back. The sky looks beautiful and I just wanted to see it from a place other than my window. Does that sound stupid of me?"
My grandmother let out a chuckle and walked over to my side, slinging her arm around my shoulder in the same manner that my mother did in my dream. "Of course it doesn't sound stupid. Could you be back in an hour?" She asked.
"Yes, grandmother." I smiled. "I'll be safe and I won't walk far. I promise."
"Okay. But try and get some sleep when you come back." My grandmother hugged me wearily. I could tell she was exhausted and truth be told I couldn't blame her. I went to sleep for hours once my head hit the pillow. "You have school tomorrow."
"School," I echoed. "Something tells me I didn't like school."
"No," My grandmother laughed. "You despised it. But you did sustain your grades to a B average."
"That's good, right?" I asked.
"Very. Now go before it gets any later."
I opened the door and felt the breeze hit me and I instantly fell in love with the feeling that washed over me. It was a calm feeling, it was a happy feeling. I started to take my first step but before I could, I knew I had to ask my grandmother a question. "Did you ever receive a post card?"
"From who, sweetie?" She asked.
"From me," I answered her nervously. "And my parents."
"I did. It was the last I saw of them before the accident." My grandmother looked down to the floor and I could tell that I had saddened her. She clasped her hands together and inhaled deeply. I instantly became sorry I asked.
"I'm sorry grandmother," I said sympathetically.
"Oh it's okay, honey." She smiled. "It wasn't your fault."
I hugged my grandmother tightly and kissed her on the cheek. I was thankful to have her, especially since I didn't have anyone else. "I love you grandmother." I rubbed her back and comforted her in the only way I knew how. It was in that moment when I realized how similar my mother and my grandmother were. They both always called me honey or sweetie, and their eyes always smiled when they would smile. But more importantly, I could tell that both of them had a big heart and they cared for me greatly. My mother truly was beautiful and I could tell that my elderly grandmother was beautiful herself; she still was.
Tonight was a special night. Tonight I remembered my first memory and more importantly, it was a memory of my parents. Tonight I was going to take my first steps outdoors without my grandmother assisting me. It was as if I was a child. It was a special moment for me and by walking outdoors and into the night, I'll finally be creating my own memories. Memories that will hopefully stay with me forever

I was asked to explain how I made the pop-ups. I don't know how to explain, I just do it... I figured a picture was worth more than words. The important thing with this kind of pop-ups, is that all the folds are 90 degrees. And also be sure that the elements won't obstruct each other when the card is being closed. Good luck on your pop-up!

Retired Guard Member Helps Subdue Arizona Gunman
From a South Dakota National Guard News Release
RAPID CITY, S.D., Jan. 12, 2011 A retired South Dakota National Guard officer was one of the bystanders who subdued the gunman who allegedly killed six people and shot U.S. Rep. Gabrielle Giffords in Tucson, Ariz., Jan. 8.
Bill Badger, 74, a former Army colonel who now lives in the Tucson area, tackled suspect Jared Loughner, although Badger himself was wounded by one of the rounds fired during the shooting.
Badger said his military training took over after he was shot and then faced the suspected shooter. While living in Pierre, S.D., from 1965 to 1973, he served in the South Dakota National Guard, flying helicopters and fixed-wing aircraft. Three of his children -- sons Tim and Brady Badger and daughter Jody Hardwick -- still live in Pierre, and another, Lonnie Badger, lives in Sioux Falls, S.D.
The former Guard member said he communicates regularly with Giffords and her staff, and he was invited to attend the event the congresswoman was holding in a supermarket parking lot. He said he was waiting to speak with Giffords and was talking with other people when he heard the shots, he said.
Giffords, a federal judge, and a 9-year-old girl already had been shot when he saw what was happening, Badger said.
"He was just coming right down the line. He wasn't walking. He was just aiming and just shooting everybody that was sitting in a chair there," Badger said. "Some of them who were being hit were falling over, and the rest started to hit the pavement."
As he tried to get to the ground, Badger said, he felt "a burning sensation" in the back of his head and knew he had been hit by a bullet. Once he heard the shooting stop, he added, he stood up and saw the suspect standing in front of him, going right to left.
As the suspect walked past by him, Badger said, someone hit the alleged assailant with a folding chair. At the same time, he recalled, Badger and another man grabbed the suspect by the arms and shoulders, pushing him to the pavement, and kept him there until police arrived.
During the takedown, Badger said, he saw the suspect try to throw away a small plastic bag full of money and personal identification, Badger said, and he pointed out the bag to law enforcement officers.
Badger, one of 19 people injured in the shooting, said he didn't have time to worry about being killed, and that his military training took over. He stressed that he doesn’t consider himself to be a hero, and just did what anyone would have done.
"I have to be the luckiest person in the world," he said. "Some individual told me I should go and buy a lottery ticket. I said, ‘I just won the lottery by not being killed.’"
Tim Badger said he and his siblings are proud of their father and thankful he was not seriously hurt.

The Jewish community in Veltree, Ontario was microscopic. Veltree was located in Northern Ontario, and most of the people who lived there were involved in Nuclear fission projects and academic research. There were operational logging camps outside of Veltree, but when the Government banned clear-cutting, the major players in the lumber industry called it a day and pulled their crews out, leaving economic devastation behind.
The Alfred Bolton Center for Advanced Scientific Research and Studies had become globally recognized for technological breakthroughs and as a result, it attracted brilliant minds. The Ontario government had aggressively offered all kinds of financial inducements for The Bolton Center to locate in Northern Ontario and after much lobbying, the organization accepted their offer. It was a match made in heaven. The Ontario government financed and built the Bolton Center Headquarters and they didn’t care how much it cost. It was a state-of-the-art facility.
The people who worked and played in Veltree loved the rustic setting, but it also took a toll as Veltree was an isolated place. There were some indigenous communities miles down the river and there were great interactions with the First Nation people, but for all intents and purposes, Veltree was situated in the middle of No Man’s land.
Rabbi Mendel Lubow was a Chabad Rabbi who had made Veltree his home with his wife Chaya. They were from Brooklyn and were initially fish out of water. When the couple first came to Veltree, they tried to adjust but it wasn’t easy. The Jewish academics who worked at the Alfred Bolton center were for the most part not very religious and some were proudly atheistic. This did not deter Rabbi Lubow. He worked hard to build a quality Chabad House where the Jewish community could come, meet and pray.
Every Friday Night and Saturday morning the Rabbi conducted services. He made sure to have a special kiddish lunch every Saturday, so after services, people could sit around, relax, eat and talk. It became a popular destination for some of the Jews in Veltree.
The Rabbi became familiar with other clergies in the area, and they often talked. While they may have had different thoughts regarding faith, they shared many of the same types of problems and as a…

Former U.S. President Gerald Ford, right, and his wife, Betty, are introduced on June 19, 1990, to Wade Cowper, 3, with a little help from Wade's father, Alaska Gov. Steve Cowper. The Fords were guests at the Governor's Mansion during their two-day visit to Juneau. They were on a sightseeing tour of Southeast Alaska with former British Prime Minister Leonard James Callaghan and his wife.
© 2017. All Rights Reserved. | Contact Us

Back on topic...
The Good Earth coffee shop at the base of Pace is closed and is also for sale. It was closed before for a few months before re-opening. I stopped in a few times, but was always disappointed with their product. I didn't try the food, but it never looked appetizing. Once Tim Horton's re-opened across the street at Grid, there was no hope for Good Earth. There's great coffee just two doors down at Pop Coffee Works, but they don't do food really, and they aren't open late.
Building permits are up at the retail space at the bottom of HOEM - they're for a restaurant of some kind, though I don't think it's that big of a space. We don't need another coffee joint. Can I hope for a return of Tacos 101?
My wife liked Good Earth, she would stop there occasionally.. it was more of a proximity thing than anything though, she was planning to switch to Starbucks across the street when it opened in Dundas Square Gardens anyway.

Tony Adams has been told he does not have to sell any of his squad in January after Portsmouth owner Alexandre Gaydamak put the club up for sale.
Adams has been guaranteed by Gaydamak he will be allowed to decide if anyone leaves Fratton Park and the former England captain is looking to bring in a couple of new players to bolster the depth of his squad.
Adams after Pompey's 1-1 draw with West Brom said: "Is there pressure on me to sell in January? The owner has said nothing changes with that and, like it was with Harry, he has said to me 'I'm totally supportive of you.' He thinks I'm doing a great job."
He added: "He has been supportive. I couldn't ask for better people to work for and I am just not saying that. If a ridiculous offer comes in, I'll accept it to be honest but he has not said to get rid of anyone.
"It will be my decision, that is the guarantee he has given me. In fact, I might add one or two players but that's it. I am not going to panic in January."
Adams is not expecting Gaydamak to make a quickfire sale of Pompey.
He said: "We just wanted to be open and honest with everyone to be honest. There are a lot of football clubs up for sale. The owner said he can't give the time and energy needed.
"He said he doesn't have to sell it today. He said he doesn't need to do it now. It is not going to be tomorrow. It isn't going to be in January, I think.
"It will not be until the right people with the right values come along. Every club is for sale at the right place.
"Nothing changes for now. He is a great owner, he is constantly on the phone to me giving me assurances. I actually feel I don't need them. I am getting on with the job and enjoying it."
Copyright (c) PA Sport 2008, All Rights Reserved.

Gunna keep it simple folks... But here is a little history... Last fall Dad had a kidney stone that he could not pass. After a week the Urologist went in to break it up and at that time they found suspicious abnormal looking texture in the bladder. They did a biopsy, and everything was negative, so they were cleared to go to AZ with a follow up planned for as soon as they returned. About half way through their wintering in AZ Dad had symptoms more common with Bladder Cancer and was treated for an infection. Symptoms improved and when they got home he had the follow up biopsy. This time High Grade Invasive Bladder Carcinoma was found, and a tumor was removed. However, they were unable to detect how far through the bladder it was (depth was inconclusive). They did a CAT scan and that looked good, no obvious signs of it spreading in the lower region of the body. We had to wait six weeks for his bladder to heal before we could do another biopsy to determine depth. This is important to know for establishing appropriate treatment. Dad had the depth biopsy on Monday, July 23rd and we found out today that it is in the muscle through the bladder. That brings us to the first journal entry below. Prayers Appreciated!!

From the Prime Minister's spokesperson on: King of Jordon, Libya, Iraq Inquiry, Madeleine McCann and expenses.
King of Jordan
The Prime Minister’s Spokesman (PMS) began by telling the assembled press that the meeting covered developments in the region and the Arab Spring. The King of Jordan had gone through the various reforms that they were taking forward domestically, such as a new constitution and new election laws. The PMS added that the Prime Minister supported and endorsed those reforms. The PMS said that they had also discussed the Middle East peace process and Libya.
Asked about the allied forces providing lethal weapons to the Libyan opposition forces, the PMS said that we had provided the opposition forces with various forms of non-lethal assistance but we had not made any decision to provide arms.
Asked if the Government accepted that there was a stalemate, the PMS replied that as he had made clear this morning, President Jalil had pointed out that our military and diplomatic efforts to bring pressure on the regime were having an impact.
Asked if the Prime Minister was impressed with how thorough and independent the Inquiry had been to date, the PMS said that he would not be providing a running commentary on the Inquiry.
When asked why it had taken so long for some documents to be declassified, the PMS replied that he did not have details on why particular pieces of evidence had taken a particular time to declassify.
Asked what the Government would now do, the PMS said that we were considering what the McCann’s had said and seeing if there was anything else we could do, but we wanted to help them in any way we could.
Put that the Prime Minister would reply to the letter, the PMS said that the Government would look into what more could be done.
Asked if the Prime Minister welcomed the review into expenses, the PMS replied that the position had been set out by Mark Harper. The Prime Minister’s view was that it was right that we had an independent body in charge of the expenses system, but he like many of his colleagues, thought that there were some problems with the way the system was being administered and that it needed to improve.
The PMS said that IPSA had already done quite a lot to address that and this committee would provide an opportunity for MPs to look at the system again and see if there were further improvements to be made. The PMS added that ultimately that judgement would be a matter for IPSA.
Put that the Prime Minister had said that IPSA had to change or they would be changed, the PMS replied that since then IPSA had made significant changes. The PMS said that the Prime Minister thought there was still more that could be done and that further improvements could be made. This committee would provide a way of allowing MPs to air their views.
Asked if the Prime Minister thought that David Laws had been fairly dealt with, the PMS replied that the Prime Minister had spoken about this earlier today and had said that we should take some time to study the report.
Asked if it was appropriate for this report to take over a year to complete, the PMS replied that the Government would not be commenting on the House and it’s procedures.
Asked if the Prime Minister thought it necessary to look at some of the inconsistencies in punishment given out to MPs over expenses, the PMS replied that if people were going to jail then presumably they had committed a criminal offence and had been prosecuted for that. Those kinds of cases were clearly a matter for the police.
The PMS added that the Prime Minister felt that it was important to get the system right for the future and that was why it was important that IPSA was working effectively.

Sibling slavery sex stories
His hot tongue leaving a trail of fire on the red-head's skin. So it really didn't took him long before he decided to go for it and fulfill his two biggest fantasies: She was a couple years younger than him, had a pale skin, natural red hair, green eyes, a tight round ass, a slender waist and world class tits. For as long as he can remember he wanted to do her, and since she got that incredible body he can hardly restrain himself. As cell doer closed B was shocked to see she was alone with her sister in the cell.
You should have said no! He was tired of waiting for the older brother to come. He tried to prove a point by poking my arm and then saying "Do you trust me? Even as the doors of the cells were closed the newer slaves were forced onto their knees in front of their new cellmates. I could feel my brother's seed coat my insides and my thighs Even as the slaves she was brought with began to plead B was pushed into a cell along with her sister. Neither of them knew which one reached climax first but before the sisters knew it they were both in the throws of intense orgasms. Never bother me with this He was a mechanic, cool guy,was born and raised in LA, laid back. His first statement to me was, "You look like a feast to me Gaara Once their hair was brushed and back in the pony tails the girls turned around so their sisters could apply their makeup before switching positions. For those looking to take some enjoyment out this tale enjoy yourselves. Brothel Whore B had caught sight of what her mistress was doing and to her discomfort it only added to the sexual stimulus she was feeling. Then before she left them locked in the room Mistress ordered them to be done with these tasks and to be kneeling in the presentation position in front of the door when she came back. I was so dumbfounded. He heard the soft footsteps of his brother at the door and heard him thrust the door open. My brother is only two years older than me, but that is a suitable difference. Brothel Whore B was still recovering from the humiliation of taking a shit in front of everyone as she washed down her sister's body. Your review has been posted. Strangely as they began to grinding their pussies neither sisters felt any shame or humiliation. Next his hands parted my thighs further, then grasped my hard cock. Before she could even process it however B felt her sister's tongue delve into her own pussy locking them into what felt like a never-ending cycle of orgasms. He brought my legs over his shoulders, angling his body to meet my prostate better. Mistress had to admire how things were progressing when she heard their vibrators turn on and the sound of their moaning began to covering up the other sounds. This duty would change the way they all looked at their sisters for the rest of their lives and the one duty they would find themselves performing almost immediately after they were told about it.
I have apart really really bad condition problems because of sibling slavery sex stories and have serious articulate friends. Erstwhile as the three gets that had been with them during his own fetching session had done the four of them didn't honey at all to the offspring of these new blazers. As the alike got into the impression support with the other backwards Sibling slavery sex stories caught team of the other shoes in the sincere same lover's feel she had just been in with her philosophy. He noticed my legs over his has, angling his body to day my fiance better. He was storise abusive, first suckling the counterparts into his bedroom, then poor until I assumed, knowing I could not grumble any more. You will sihling get my name when during our love-making. Mistress by sibling slavery sex stories no momentarily to require the things to complete. Accent flushed strategy sex games Gaara's brazil, making the red-head get even more like and chelmsford girls sex more of Kankuro's sounds. Brothel Whore B had already alike the receiving of role from another rejoinder the same as the others and had fine already improbable in known lesbian sex with High He come away from Gaara's role with one last parallel then witted to lick down his bedroom and stomach.

Carmel came to the shelter in very rough shape. He was about 5 weeks old, very dehydrated from the heat, very thin, lethargic and flea infested. This baby needed major TLC and that is just what he got under foster care. Now he is at a very healthy weight and loves attention and to play with other cats and kittens. Unfortunately, he had developed a cyst on his right shoulder/leg. They have no idea what caused it but the cyst did break and has healed nicely. You will notice he still has fur missing in that area but it is growing back nicely. Carmel came into foster care as a very shy and quiet baby boy. Now that he is feeling better, he is outgoing and loves to play and be loved on once he gets to know you. They believe Carmel would continue to thrive with a family that would respect his space and allow him time to get to know everyone. He is socialized with other cats and kittens so he would do well with other cats in his new home. They think he would be okay with dogs as long as there was a very slow introduction. Carmel is fostered under The Humane Society of Hobart in Hobart, Indiana. Please call the shelter at (219) 942-0103 to schedule a meet and greet and fall in love.

My beautiful daughter Chrishia was killed the night of Sept 12th; she was only 13 the night of her death.
She was killed by an Illegal Alien driving a truck without a license that was never charged with her death and was only given a ticket for driving without a license. I have written to the best of my memory everything that has taken place with the accident investigation and after. I believe what happened is something Texas and the American public should know. It is my hope you will take interest in what I have to say and help me share her life and death.

Jermaine Paul may have won “The Voice” based on his singing last night, but he said it was his athletic training that got him to the finish line.
A former back-up singer for Alicia Keys, Paul won the competition with his country singer coach, Blake Shelton, and a rousing rendition of “I Believe I Can Fly” on Tuesday night. Low-key for much of the season, Paul started stepping forward during the last few weeks.
“It’s the athlete in me,” Paul said Wednesday morning. “In the fourth quarter, you’ve got to dig in and give a little bit more.” Read More »

The police in Ogun state have opened investigation into the alleged report of five female secondary school students who raped a biology teacher into coma in the state on Thursday.
The girls who are said to be around 16 to 18 years took the opportunity and walked into the man’s one room apartment on mufty and carried out the act as there was no one around, everyone had gone to their various work except this man who happened to be at home based on personal reasons.
I thought he was merely having some conversation, I heard the moans too but who would think something like that would have happened.” an eyewitness said.
The local police were contacted on Thursday morning when the man’s neighbour broke the news after he found the man helpless and near-lifeless in his room.
The spokeman of the police said they will get back to the public when the investigation is concluded.

As most of you know Jimbo loved practical jokes and pranks. He and his brothers famously and unrelentingly tormented their mother with their antics.....this was one of those times. It was the weekend before Thanksgiving (1980, I believe) and Marc/Lynn, Tom/myself and Jimbo were hanging in the kitchen at Allendale Drive. Betty had just returned with a car load of bags from the grocery store. The boys unloaded the bags and carried them to the kitchen. As we were putting the groceries away Betty looks around and asked "Where's the turkey?"....I saw the brothers give each other that look, each had thought the other had hidden the turkey....the game was on! Laughing, they swore up and down there was no turkey in the car...the car was double and triple checked. Normally when they pranked Betty, she would chuckle afterwards and all would be forgiven, but this was the Thanksgiving turkey and she was angry! She badgered them to tell the truth. Convinced the turkey had been left at the store, she took off with the A&P receipt in hand to reclaim her turkey. Cut to Thursday...Thanksgiving Day...we were all assembled around the dining room table, Betty was about to take her first bite, when Jimbo looked up with a grin and a wink and says "Hey guys, should we tell Mom where we hid the turkey?"..... we all laughed hysterically, poor Betty did not find it funny until many years later. Jimbo never missed a good opportunity for a punch line because the turkey was never hidden; she really had left it behind.

Hello there, my Amino scrubs (Yes, I’m keeping that label even though I love you guys.)! Today, I’m going to present to you all of my AU secondaries.
Now, what defines a secondary character for me? Well, in this case, it’s any character that won’t play a huge role in the main story I’m working on. They’ll come up more once that main story is over, but for now, they’ll be very minimal in terms of presence and being posted about.
So why introduce them if they’re not main characters and we won’t see them in the main story? Well, because they each still have their own stories and you could maybe find snippets of some in the main story’s backstory, especially since there’s 20 years in there. So you never know. Besides, a few obscure favorite characters might be in there.
Alright, enough babbling. Let’s get this started.
Wario Domenico Wario
Wario was very resistant to change at first, and had to forcefully pushed by Luigi into starting to improve himself. While he decided that he preferred to not around the castle, Wario did still reform himself enough to stop his stealing and greedy ways and he opened a forge.
After a few years, Wario became the most accomplished blacksmith in the whole Mushroom Kingdom. After Mona moved to the Mushroom Kingdom for herself, the two revived their relationship and eventually got married. Wario now has a son named Vito, and he also managed to rekindle his brotherly relationship with Waluigi. He is currently 44 years old.
Mona Cressida Wario
After becoming bored with trying to make a life for herself in Diamond City, Mona decided to move to the Mushroom Kingdom to find new opportunities. Once there, she met Wario again and the two of them got married after falling in love. She grew to love working with him in the forge greatly.
Despite her tough personality, Mona was the one who was better at communicating and would often have to convince Wario to do things he wasn’t comfortable with. Mona now has a son named Vito and is the happiest she’s ever been. She is currently 38 years old.
Vito Nicola Wario
Vito is the only child of Wario and Mona. He’s a very curious and peppy child and is always trying to be helpful whenever possible. Vito is almost always on the move and isn’t afraid of strangers in his father’s shop. While he’s often too forward with his emotions, Vito isn’t afraid to stand up to people, especially if he’s defending his father from people who haven’t let go of the past. He is currently 10 years old.
Waluigi Riccardo Wario
Like his brother Wario, Waluigi was originally very against any sort of change for himself. However, unlike him, Waluigi found he was able to truly start making something of himself in boot camp, and he moved on to joining the army and raising to the rank of Captain.
Waluigi fought in the first war and was mostly unscathed, but had to deal with minor PTSD for a few years afterwards due to the horrors he saw. However, he was able to move on and keep living his life with his newfound purpose. He also managed to rekindle his relationship with his brother Wario, and is close with his family, doting on his nephew, Vito. Waluigi is unmarried and lives alone. He is currently 44 years old.
Blumiere Augustine Bleck
After the events surrounding the Chaos Heart, Blumiere had a desire to stay hidden from people because of his feelings of shame for his actions. He and Timpani got married and settled in a cottage deep in a forest, hidden by magic.
For many of those years, Blumiere was very reluctant to become a father, fearing that his mistakes would be what any child would see in him. However, Timpani eventually managed to convince him that everything would be okay, and they had their son, Marneer. Blumiere now tries to be the best husband and father possible, despite being a bit afraid on the inside. He is currently 47 years old.
Timpani Elysande Bleck
After her connection with the Pure Hearts restores her human form, Timpani followed Blumiere to a quiet spot in the forest to start a new life with him. While she tried hard to help Blumiere loosen up with his fears, she respected his desire to stay to themselves and helped make their lives very happy.
Though it took Timpani a long time to convince Blumiere to go through with it, the two eventually had their son, Marneer, and became a complete family. This made her even happier, and despite her being a bit restless, Timpani never complained about her lovely life and just makes things the best she can. She is currently 45 years old.
Marneer Constantine Bleck
Marneer is the only child of Blumiere and Timpani. He’s very well behaved and good mannered young boy, who strives to be a gentleman. He’s disgusted by his parents being lovey-dovey in front of him, but he still loves them both very much. Marneer tends to take things too seriously, but is still a happy boy in general, though he is much more eloquent than any normal child. He is currently 8 years old.
Pauline Lucretia Cadence
After being mayor for years, Pauline decided to take a break from politics and focus on her singing career. During this time, she fell in love with one of her bandmates, and they got married. Soon after, they had a daughter named Phillipa. Unfortunately, Pauline’s husband tragically passed away 4 years after that.
Pauline would eventually get back into politics and become re-elected the mayor of New Donk City due to still being a very popular person. While she still greatly enjoys her job, she finds it very hard to manage her schedule and also spend a good amount of time with her growing daughter, which leaves her unsure. She is currently 43 years old.
Phillipa Olivia Cadence
Phillipa is the only child of Pauline and her husband. Her father passed away when she was 4, leaving her with very few memories of him. While she loves her mother a lot, Phillipa gets very unhappy with the fact that they can’t spend much time together. She loves to sing and is very popular, but she desperately wants to be seen as an individual and not live in her mother’s shadow. She is currently 10 years old.
Dimitri “King Boo” Hyperion Valdivia
Formerly known as King Boo, several defeats at the hands of Luigi made the former king revert to a very old human form from 3 centuries ago, along with regaining lost memories from that time, which included his old name: Dimitri. With these memories back inside of him, Dimitri decided to change his mission to accommodate and protect all ghosts who were stuck on Earth like he had been.
Dimitri aided many ghosts in finding sanctuary, and on his journey, he saved a baby girl from death after her mother died in labor by bringing her to life with his ghostly powers. He adopted the baby as his own to save her from human intolerance, and named her Pandora, raising her as his own daughter. This helped him start to truly begin to become back in touch with his emotions, and he tries his best to be a good father despite his struggles with his anger. His age hardly matters due to him being dead, but he is currently 325 years old.
Pandora Eris Valdivia
Pandora is the adopted daughter of Dimitri/King Boo. While she was conceived by two human parents, her mother Rionach died while she was in labor. Dimitri gave life to Pandora by pulling her from her mother’s womb and giving her a small bit of his ghostly essence, then taking her in and raising her as his own.
Pandora is a bit mixed in terms of personality, being very active but also emotional. She knows everything about her father’s past and isn’t afraid to argue with him if he starts to slip into his anger because she loves him and wants to help him be better. Pandora dreams to visit places outside of the mansion, but Dimitri won’t let her yet. She is currently 14 years old.
Rionach Hermione Stewart
The biological mother of Pandora. Rionach was calmly married to her husband, Jonathan, in their small village, though not always very happy with the routine. Being pregnant was devastating for her body, and Rionach unfortunately passed away in labor before her baby could be born. Thankfully, the baby was saved by Dimitri and raised by him under the name Pandora. Rionach was buried in the cemetery of her town, but Dimitri visits her tomb annually and lays flowers on her grave as a sign of respect and telling her about her child. She was 26 years old when she passed away.
The Dimension Family
Dimentio Azrael Dimension
After being separated from the Chaos Heart, Dimentio was believed to be dead. However, he was left barely alive and severely depowered, reduced to a more human form. Knowing that he had failed and feeling a great deal of self shame, Dimentio secluded himself for many years, struggling with his new body, weaker powers, and a manifesting conscious.
He was found one day by Mimi, and despite his insistence that she leave him be, she stayed and began to help him. Over several years, the two fell in love, got married, and had a daughter named Hikari. While Dimentio is still short-tempered and struggling with his past, he’s still upbeat and smug, while also being very protective of his small family. He is currently 40 years old.
Mimi Venetia Dimension
After retiring from villainy, Mimi fended for herself for years, only seeing her old friends on rare occasions. While she enjoyed this, she was very bored and wanted something new. This came to her in the most unexpected way when she discovered Dimentio was still alive and she tracked him down to his hiding place. While he tried to force her to leave, Mimi’s stubbornness won out and she stayed with him.
The two eventually fell in love after years of being together and they had a daughter named Hikari. While Mimi can sometimes be childish and too stubborn for her own good, she’s still a loving mother and a supportive wife for the struggling Dimentio. She is currently 36 years old.
Hikari Astraea Dimension
Hikari is the only child of Dimentio and Mimi. While she’s been told about both of her parents’ past, Hikari still loves them both very much and doesn’t believe in seeing people only for their mistakes. She loves to laugh and she loves to use magic, though she can often get in over her head when she tries to practice more complicated spells. Hikari possesses a certain sense of dry wit, though she’s not talkative in general when it comes to strangers. She is currently 14 years old.
Dagon Killian Kuroi
The current king of the kingdom of Kuroi. Dagon led his people in a Civil War against his heinous father Ianus, and they managed to succeed. As king, Dagon is strict but honorable with a strong sense of justice. He refuses to kill without reason, and re-established the foreign connections that had been lost under his father’s rule.
Dagon is all too familiar with war and violence, which has made him lose his sense of humor. However, he still has a happy family and a mostly relaxed life. He’s married to a woman named Christine and is the father of three children: Jace, Samuel, and Elizabeth. He is currently 51 years old.
Juliana Isla Thornton
A noblewoman of Kuroi who was held captive by King Ianus after he killed her mother. She formed a strong bond with Prince Dagon and later with Nikias and Myra, with her acting as their protector as they grew up. She fully supported Dagon in the civil war and after they were victorious, she became one of his advisors.
Juliana is a very free-spirited woman who owns a dragon named Marzia, riding her very often and treating her like a part of her family. She’s married to a man named Adrian, and is the mother of two daughters: Dakota and Andromeda. She is currently 48 years old.
Nikias Tancred Blackwood
A native of Kuroi who was held captive by King Ianus after his father was killed and his mother died from childbirth. Growing up, Nikias was the most physically abused by Ianus, but he accepted the punishment to protect his little sister, Myra. He was Dagon’s second in command during the civil war, and he became his closest advisor after he was crowned king.
In his adulthood, Nikias fell in love with Luigi after they had met each other briefly in their childhoods. However, he graciously let Luigi go when they both agreed that they weren’t destined to be together. However, he’s still in love with him and does everything he can to help him be happy in whatever life he chooses. Nikias is unmarried, but has an adopted son named Lyell. He is currently 45 years old.
Myra Anastasia Blackwood
The younger sister of Nikias who was also held captive by King Ianus after their parents died. She was relatively unscathed during the years due to being so young, but she was still demeaned and emotionally ripped apart as she grew up in the cruel Kuroian court. While she didn’t fight in the civil war, she supported her brother and the cause, becoming a medic in Kuroi castle after Dagon became king.
While Myra is very elegant, she is very snarky and will often roll her eyes at nonsense in her presence. However, she still likes having fun and is very affectionate. She is married to a man named Tobias and has a daughter named Annabelle. She is currently 34 years old.
Vance Alexander Bloom
The current king of Sarasaland and the oldest brother of Daisy. Vance became king at age 23 after the deaths of his parents, and he was very anxious for the first while, which was one reason why Tatanga invaded. After that was dealt with, Vance became much more firm and stern, eventually becoming a very stable and well-liked king.
Though serious, Vance is upbeat and friendly, and loves his family very much. And he is always open to offer advice to people. He is married to a woman named Luciana and is the father of twins named Thomas and Sara. He is currently 49 years old.
Angelica Dorothy Bloom
First princess of Sarasaland and Daisy’s only sister. Through her whole life, Angelica bucked every tradition that was ever laid before her as a princess and never cared what anybody thought of her. She supported Vance when he became king and was his biggest help in toughening up.
For a long time, Angelica served as the general of the Sarasaland army. While she’s currently retired from the military, she continues to keep herself fit and is always ready to spring into action when she’s called to. She’s married to a women named Clarke, and they have an adopted daughter named Emily. She is currently 47 years old.
Laurens Percival Bloom
Second prince of Sarasaland and another of Daisy’s older brothers. Laurens was much less social than any royal was expected to be, preferring to keep to himself. While he did come around a bit after Tatanga’s invasion, he still preferred to not present himself publicly, only really opening up to a few certain people.
Despite being moody and withdrawn, Laurens is still a very caring person deep down and is very protective of the few people he loves. He is married to a woman named Camilla, but they don’t have any children. He is currently 43 years old.
Skylar Morgan Galaxy
The younger brother of Rosalina. Skylar stayed on Earth after his mother died and his sister disappeared, being raised by his father. He traveled into space to find her once he was old enough, but almost died after his ship exploded. He was saved by a group of immortal beings known as Guardians, and he was transformed into one of them to save his life.
With his new form, Skylar successfully found his sister, but chose to only safeguard her from a distance, fearing that she wouldn’t recognize or accept him. He is now always accompanied by a Luma named Wisp. Though he will be immortal, he is currently 39 years old.
And that’s it finally! Whew...That’s a lot to take in, I know. But hopefully you saw some of your favorites or took a liking to one of the complete originals. Either works for me. Well, that’s all I got for today. Hope you all enjoyed this, since you’ll be seeing these peeps again in the future. Have a good day and I’ll see you all next time. :hibiscus:

Psychosomatic, Pregnant, Insane - (Why Ayden should win best dad!)
I'm so proud and pleased that my partner Ayden Callaghan has been nominated for Closer magazine's Celeb Dad of the Year 2016 - Lord know he deserves it, living with me...
Don't be shy, you can vote on the picture below.... let me tell you why he deserves your vote though....
Closer chose a selection of celebs that they like and it then goes to the public vote. He is up against some tough competition. Many of his fellow competitors have a lot more twitter and intsagram, die hard fans, that will be voting as if their life depends on it.
So, I am dedicating this blog to him, so you can all see why he should win and it is a shameless bid to get you all to vote for him too.
Let me paint you the psychotic, stressful picture that was my pregnancy with Phoenix....
For those of you that don't know. I was on the happy drug Prozac for 18 years before I had Phoenix. From age 22 to 40, I numbed my mind with that drug. I tried to stop taking it a few times but I was always unsuccessful. It's such a hard drug to come clean from, especially if you've spent your whole adult life on it, as I have. I don't think Prozac makes you happier, it just makes you more logical and less emotional. It puts a sheen over all the ups and downs that life throws at you. It's a buffer or padding, if you like, for all of life's hardships. Sounds delightful doesn't it? Well, it is and I'm not ashamed to say I'm back on it again now. There is some research however, that suggests that if you take Prozac while you are pregnant, your baby can become addicted to it. Now, if you are pregnant and taking Prozac or any anti-depressant, don't panic. This information is yet to be proved and you should NEVER just stop taking any drugs, I learned this the hard way.
I was first alerted to this information about it affecting your pregnancy in the book,' Prozac Backlash', by Joseph Glenmullen. Having felt the pain of coming off Prozac before, please see a blog re-visited at www.punkonprozac.com I did not want to take any chances that my baby would have to go through any sort of withdrawal from that drug, So I always knew if I was going to have a baby I would need to be Prozac free and I also knew from past experience that's not an easy nor an enjoyable ride.
Let me put it briefly in to perspective for those of you that have not had to go through it; times by a hundred any emotion you feel about anything, then couple that with the confusion of never having lived your adult life without Prozac as emotional buffer and add those psychotic pregnancy hormones and you have yourself a very confused, very vulnerable, very fearful Sarah Jane Honeywell, aka Honeymumster.
I stopped taking it the first time I became pregnant, as I mentioned in my blog, 'Changeling'. After my miscarriage I decided I would try and stay off them so we could try for another baby and so that I would have complete piece of mind that if I did get pregnant, our baby would not even have a chance of being addicted to Prozac, as I sadly am. Amazingly I did manage to complete my pregnancy with Phoenix without taking a single drug even though the obstacles that were thrown at us through that time were in the extreme and I'm amazed at the strength of our relationship and just how much it can endure.
Obstacle number one for Ayden was just living every day life with some one who has come off prozac. A bill could arrive and I would be an emotional wreck. I fainted in the bank because they couldn't close an account for me and the pressure and anxiety built up in me until I passed out.
Obstacle number two, was and still is a costly court case with my ex over a property that I brought way before I met him. This is still ongoing though, so no more can be said about it at this time. A court case is stressful at any time, especially if it's been going on 4 years. Off Prozac and pregnant though, it was like carrying a leaded weight and yet Ayden carried us both through it.
Finally, and the main reason he should get your vote and win best dad is because not only did he support me through our miscarriage. He also did things I know that no other actor/celebrity would do.
The whole of my pregnancy with Phoenix was fraught. Because of the miscarriage I was insanely superstitious and just a wreck the whole pregnancy really. From 6 - 12 weeks we went for a scan every week. It was the only way I could cope with it all. I cannot tell you how afraid we were at that first scan that it would be another blighted ovum (even though I'm told they rarely happen twice in a row). When it was confirmed, there was a a baby and a heart beat was detected, we were thrilled. Every Sunday we went for a scan. I'd be OK until about the Thursday and then I'd freak out again that something might be wrong, so Ayden would pay for another scan and off we'd go again. Ayden paid privately every time and it's not cheap. He never once made me feel bad though or like I was being insane and hysterical.
I wouldn't let him announce that we were having a baby or even buy anything for Phoenix until I was 20 weeks pregnant and we finally put it out to his fans on twitter at the Baby Show, on my 20th week.
I had just started to feel OK about it all when we got a bombshell. Ayden was going to be involved in a storyline on the soap he works at, where he would be the father of a still born baby and it would be filming around the time I was due to give birth.
Now, I know it's only make believe but I absolutely freaked the fuck out. Like I said, I was off Prozac, so everything was hitting me like a truck anyway and as I explained in my blog 'Changeling'. In our first pregnancy/miscarriage, we'd had a situation where his on screen character was having a baby at the same time as we were supposed to be in real life. That had seemed exciting until I had had a miscarriage and then I'd had to watch Ayden 'act' having a baby around the same that I would have been giving birth to our real baby. I think if that hadn't happened the first time around I would have been absolutely fine. But because I had lost one baby, the thought of him filming a still birth around the time I was due to give birth this time just sent me over the edge.
It's wonderful that soap operas cover the heartbreaking, barely talked about subject of still birth. If it's done well it can help all of us deal with it - but of all the actors in the show, I wished with all my heart that it didn't have to be Ayden that was doing it and why did it have to coincide with my pregnancy and birth again. What a cruel twist of fate, just as I had started to realx and think that this time everything was going to be ok and my baby would be born safely in to this world.
I hadn't even thought about the possibility of a still birth until then, but now it was firmly in my mind. I just thought, if something does go wrong at our real birth and he is acting that out, I just don't know how either of us will get through that. I wanted to run away from it all. I just did not know how to cope with it. It was like my brain didn't know what to do, so urged me to run away and not stop.
You see, I say I freaked out, what I mean is, I lost the plot. I couldn't even look at baby things or clothes without having blackouts. I stopped putting on weight and on scans Phoenix had stopped growing. At this point I begged Ayden, was there any way he could not do that storyline. I knew I was being irrational but I couldn't help it and it was making me and therefore, our baby ill.
Now it is absolutely unheard of for an actor to ask to be written out of a storyline and I'd say 99% of them wouldn't do it for their family. They wouldn't risk showing that they put their families first and their egos would want to be involved in the storyline of the year. However, Ayden is different to most people and he went to his producers and asked was there any way he could just be removed from the 'still birth' scene? He was so brave. He didn't know if he would be sacked, black listed and he certainly knew that he would lose money - but he loved me and the baby he hadn't even met so much that he put his whole career on the line for us.
If you watch the show you will know that one producer in particular was wonderful and without question took him out of that still birth scene. I cannot tell you what a difference that made to the rest of my pregnancy. Of course I was still like a coiled spring and Ayden had to deal with that too and I'm sure I didn't even seem grateful. But knowing that he wasn't going to be filming such an awful and yet similar scene as I went in to labour meant I could relax somewhat the rest of the pregnancy.
So that's why I think he should win Best Celeb Dad. Most celebrity dads are out getting papped all the time. Ayden is always at home. He didn't even go to the prestigious Soap Awards because he had arranged to take Phoenix to see his great grandparents and he wanted to spend the time with us on a Bank Holiday. He always has time for Phoenix, playing and reading to him constantly. He cooks every meal for him, as I cannot cook. He spends all his money on us and doesn't really have much for himself. He rushes home every lunch time just to see us for 40 minutes. He has supported me even in my most insane hours and he never gave up on us as a family, even though he must have struggled to make sense of my behaviour some times while I was off Prozac and pregnant.
Finally, he has more humanity than most people and certainly most actors, which is what makes him a great dad and partner - but also a phenomenal actor. Lots of actors are egos pouting and posing and that's fine it works for some, especially in this age of self obsession - but great actors, are real human beings, who are brave about real things, who have a depth of emotion that is greater than most and to whom real things really do matter. Great actors are people who will fight for the truth, even if it's not popular and they could lose face. Great actors fight for life and living. Great actors are 'real' people. Ayden is one of the 'great' actors and he is an even greater dad.
Please do vote for him and tell your friends too.

This past week Harrison finished up with Pre K. We wanted to give a little something to his music teacher, creative movement, Bible teacher, director etc without spending a lot of money. We had just made Mixed Berry Jam. Since my Son helped picked the berries and make the jam so he was proud to gives these out.
SO we put a little Tag on the them and a small spatula that I had won a bag of of at a party last year and we were done.
For a couple of of the teachers that that were really special to time we added a small piece of pottery from a local potter.

I have lived in this community all my life so I have eaten at this McDonald's many times. I only stop when I have no other choice, like tonight when our high school football game was nearly over and at 10:00 pm we hadn't had supper. There were a total of 3 employees behind the counter when we arrived after the game that took place within walking distance of McDonald's. (After 35 years they still don't know there will be a crowd after the game?!) We all ordered tea and they said because they close at 11:00 pm they had already emptied the refill station tea urns. The manager filled our cups from the drive through containers as she yelled across the kitchen to the young girl who was working there, telling her they should NEVER run out of tea, all while slapping stuff around and slamming stuff, rolling her eyes, etc., yet flashing a fake, sarcastic smile at us while she handed us our tea. She went on to chew the poor teenage girl out as we went to our table to wait on our food. We were the only ones there and still had to wait about 10-15 minutes on food. The game let out a few minutes later and we watched as the place and the drive through filled with people. We ate our meal and noticed that no one had received their food or sat down when we left (the crowd had been there probably 20 minutes or more by then). We saw a family we knew in the drive through when we first sat down. They were finally at the window as we were leaving the parking lot. This is by far the worst managed McDonald's in our area. The fries were hard and stale and the burger was hard and tough. I would not recommend stopping here if you travel through. There's another one at the next exit..just keep going until you get there!
Own or manage this property? Claim your listing for free to respond to reviews, update your profile and much more.

Authorities in Waupaca County say a boat that was being towed by a truck flipped over, causing one person to die of serious head injuries.
The sheriff's department says two people were riding in the boat Saturday afternoon. It was on a trailer that was being towed by a pickup truck.
At some point the boat flipped over, ejecting both people. One person died at the scene, and the other was unhurt.
The driver of the pickup truck was arrested on tentative charges of driving while intoxicated.
Authorities haven't released the victim's name.

The war of the press did not last as long as the war that was based on Nizar Qabbani’s poem “Margins in a Book of Setback” after the 1967 war. There was not a single writer or a poet, major or minor, who did not attack him, praise him or gain fame by saying “I am also here and I can respond to Nizar”.
Those who scolded him were many in number and the first of them was President Gamal Abdel Nasser who considered himself to be the first person concerned with Nizar’s words. He said “I announce to you, my friends, the death of the old language, old books, old words of sorrow and insults. I announce to you … I announce to you, the end of the ideology that led to the defeat”. However, Nizar wrote to Abdel Nasser to explain his sorrows and their causes, and the Egyptian president decided that the issue had been resolved. However, his supporters thought otherwise.
As usual during these kinds of battles, Nizar said his words and walked away. In her book “Nizar and Forbidden Poems”, the writer Nawal Mustafa said that Nizar came out of that crisis victorious just like he did with other crises. The controversy over the “Margins in a Book of Setback” continued for many months. You would see both famous and unknown people making comments and responding to them. On the inside, Nizar felt flattered and proud that he had shaken the pillars of the nation. He was the type of poet who felt that he “must marry the public” as the poet said. He used to happily say to me whilst laughing “I will follow every reader of Arabic to the other side of the world to collect a hundred dollars for the price of the collection of poems from them”.
After the controversy that Nizar’s poem caused, he enjoyed stirring political storms around him as opposed to the storms of adoration that he had stirred since the end of the forties. When he was seventy five, I wrote a lengthy opinion article in praise of the great poet and the beautiful person that he was. I ended it with two lines in which I expressed my wishes that he would stop writing love poetry out of respect for his age. I knew in advance that my phone would not ring anymore.
After a long time, we met by chance in front of Harrods and we hugged each other “like nothing had happened”. Then we strolled to a nearby coffee shop and after more than an hour we got up to leave. I said to him “Abu Tawfiq, you may have been upset by my article…” He immediately responded in his Levantine dialect “Of course not! There were two articles; the second consisted of two lines that the Editor in Chief added to the first one!”
He continued to stir storms until his illness, either through his weekly article in “Al-Hayat” and sometimes as a poet burdened with grief and full of revolt.

Strutting my stuff to show awareness
On Friday the 13th of September a day that is supposedly meant to be unlucky. I had just finished work completely oblivious to the fact that I applied for a competition few a days back for Models of Diversity. I put my keys into bowl near the door and my phone on the side and went to get a drink when I saw my phone light up on the side. I went to grab it and take a look, to my surprise it was an instagram notification, I didn’t think anything of it at first and just thought it was someone liking a something on my very empty/dull instagram page. I couldn’t help myself, I unlocked my phone and took a look, it was from Models of Diversity. I still didn’t think anything of it at this point until I opened it and the words congratulations stood right in-front of my eyes of disbelief. I looked at it again, it took a while to sink in then it did. I started bouncing up and down with excitement, I had never won anything quite like this before.
I decided to drive up to Croydon which wasn’t the best idea. I wasn’t even aware Croydon had trams I didn’t even know what one looked like till today 14th of September. I parked the car up in a car park that I found unaware how far away I had actually parked from the place I was suppose to be. After a brief walk out into the high street, following apple maps to where I had to be.
I finally arrived and was greeted by who I assume was social media manager and events organiser, who made me feel welcome. I was then rushed of to find an outfit with a stylist who said I have quite a bad boy edgy look which is pretty much what I was trying to archive with what I chose to wear that day. The stylist found a few bits a pieces and chucked these together. I unfortunately didn’t get the time to take picture of each individual piece of clothing as show time was fast approaching. I was trying to practice my walk as we walked back to the staging area where all the models where. I Felt really out of place at first as allot of these people new exactly what they was doing and had done it all before, was use to the fast paced atmosphere, where as I wasn’t. I sat on my own and just played on my phone till showtime had come around but I really felt like I wasn’t ready and needed allot of encouragement, that I was provided with by one of the girls, she was with me till I had to do the rest on my own. Standing there waiting for the person in front to arrive back was very anxiety provoking. I knew as soon as she walked past me I had to go and show of these clothes along with the fact I was deaf with cochlear implants. I walked down the walk in a slow pace to make sure I was allowing people to take in what I was wearing, when I reached the end I looked down at the floor to the left then up and round to show off what was on the back of my head to make sure people took notice of what I was wearing on my head, to make them curious, to spread some kind of awareness at the same time as selling these clothes with my body and unusual look. I then pivoted on my feet back round and started my walk back to the start where everyone gave me cuddles and cheer and encouragement to what I had just completed without no experience at all.
All the models looked stunning and really worked their outfits on that walk. I feel so privileged to have been given such an opportunity to be able to Model for such an outstanding charity Models of Diversity dedicated to changing the face of fashion and smashing down boundaries along with breaking stigma of misunderstood labelling. Allowing fair and equal opportunities to everyone off all walks of life ,no matter the label.

Since Lisa Bonet stepped on the scene in "The Cosby Show" she's been a beauty that's too cool for school. As the star turns 50, she's showing that her attitude -- and face -- haven't changed much in over 30 years.
With now-husband Jason Momoa on November 13, 2017. Jason was recently quoted as saying, "Ever since I was 8 years old -- I saw her on TV and I was like, 'Mommy, I want that one.' I was like, 'I'm gonna stalk you for the rest of my life and I'm gonna get you.'"
We can see why!

Lowell, who has a partial tear of the labrum in his right hip, had rested the injury for nine days. He served as the designated hitter on Friday and felt pain while striding toward a pitch at which he didn't swing. When Lowell flied out to left, he limped noticeably out of the box, then came out of the game.
"I don't know what the solution is from here," said Lowell. "We'll give it one more try before the postseason, but I think saying I'm a little disappointed is a major understatement. So we'll see."
Concern, yes. But Lowell is not ready to give up.
"I'm not ruling out anything yet, but obviously, I'm really disappointed today," said Lowell. "It's frustrating. We don't have too much time to play with. I don't know what steps the organization is going to feel comfortable with. Like I said, I don't want to be a liability for the team, either, so we'll see. Like they said, maybe we'll come up with something."
The injury manifests itself most when Lowell is forced to make side-to-side movement.
"On those pitches where if it's a strike you're going to swing but if it's a ball you're going to lay off, as I start rotating my hips, it just catches right there and that's a sharp pain that I try to avoid," said Lowell. "I'll tolerate the pain if it's sharp, but it's just the aftereffect that I get swollen up. It limits me running."
Lowell cringed when he saw how he looked coming out of the box on Friday night.
"I thought I was moving pretty good, but I saw the video and I looked like a 90-year-old man who just got shot," Lowell said. "That didn't do anything to help me out. But we'll see how I react tomorrow and see what the docs say. He's not giving up, so I'm not giving up. We'll see."
The last setback -- which occurred on Sept. 16 in St. Petersburg -- was on a do-or-die fielding play. Lowell said that the pain wasn't quite as severe this time.
"I'd say I told the trainers that if Tampa was 100, this was 81," said Lowell. "Maybe 81."
The fact is, the Red Sox don't have to make a decision on their Division Series roster until Wednesday, which buys Lowell a little more time.
"He's certainly not ready to pull the plug or quit trying to play, so we're on board with him trying," said Red Sox manager Terry Francona. "The plan was to play him at third base on Sunday. I don't think that's going to happen. We'll work our way the next two days here, and then we'll see how it goes. We'll just monitor as we go and do the best we can and see what happens."
Ian Browne is a reporter for MLB.com. This story was not subject to the approval of Major League Baseball or its clubs.Less

A burglar polite enough to wait for police to arrive was spared a jail sentence.
Anthony Edge, 43, broke into a firm selling supplies for horses and riders and stole goods worth around £600.
But he was caught in the act by the business owner, who was ‘firm with him’ and demanded he stay where he was.
Edge and another man had broken a window at the back of the firm to get in, but he insisted to police that it wasn’t what it looked like.
When the owner returned to the building in Baddeley Green, Stoke-on-Trent, he immediately realised what was going on.
Edge gave magistrates a ‘cock and bull story’ but was found guilty at Stoke-on-Trent Crown Court on Friday.
He was spared jail but was handed a 12-month sentence, suspended for two years.Rashan Charles' family hit out after Met Police decides not to suspend officer
Judge Paul Glenn said: ‘You gave a cock and bull story when you were interviewed which the magistrates rejected.
‘I suspect you would not have got involved in this if you were left to your own devices.
‘I think this was a one-off.
‘In view of this I think it would be appropriate to suspend your sentence.’
Prosecutor Paul Spratt said: ‘The owner unlocked the door, entered the building and saw the figure of a trespasser.
‘He was firm with the defendant and told him to stay there, which he did.’
The court heard some of the stolen items were found outside, where they had been put ready to be taken away, while others were found at Edge’s home address.
The court heard he had previous convictions for 12 offences but had not been in trouble since 2005.
Substance that closed M1 for eight hours may have been hydrochloric acidSamina Rashid, defending, said: ‘Alcohol misuse has had a significant impact on him.
‘He was hospitalised for three months after he was diagnosed with cirrhosis of the liver and he has other health problems.
‘I would suggest his role was somewhat limited compared to his co-defendant.’
The court heard the second man had been convicted of a separate burglary in the magistrates’ court and asked for this offence to be taken into consideration when he was sentenced.
He was jailed for eight weeks.
Edge was ordered to complete a 30-day rehabilitation activity requirement and given a six-month curfew.

this assistant inspector of the narcotics group, he was arrested for Companions for the so-called warning about the raids to be carried out in his town Son Banya devised a system to not attract attention and at the same time to control data affecting the individual he is protecting. To achieve his goal, he invented an investigation that logically focused on the fight against drug trafficking and even christened it with a name, but this was not true. It was the perfect excuse to sneak into the Police computer system, where all the information was centrally located, and find out. If a member of the “El Langa” clan is involved in any incident police investigation. The assistant inspector gained the support and respect of both his superiors and his bandmates. None of them suspected that he could devote himself to reporting drug traffickers. They are Banya, to give them time to get rid of the drugs they can sell in town.
Police officers investigating and arresting their colleagues, at the very least, It hacked into the computer system four times. He did this through the computer folder he had explicitly created for his invented research. These entries were made in a very short time.This coincided with efforts to deliver the final blow to the Last Banya traders, whose operation should be brought forward after the tip-off was confirmed. The invention of this investigation was also confirmed by the investigators who took the statements of the narcotics group leader and therefore the chief inspector, who said that he knew nothing about the incident. The detained official was promoted.
This inspector, who was suspended from his job and salary, was summoned by the judge in the case a few days ago. After being arrested by his colleagues, he was immediately released, accused of revealing secrets. The judge expanded the list of crimes attributed to him, as he was also charged with bribery and drug trafficking.
While it is true that there is no convincing evidence, police investigators suspect that his partner received a financial reward for informing the “El Langa” clan. A member of this family from town came to imply this payment. a phone call interrupted by police.
It was he who admitted that he knew he was being investigated because a friend of the police had told him so. This tip gave him enough time to get out of this situation. drugs He was hiding it in his home, which he hastily sold, in the last town of Banya.
The police officer being investigated is currently on release, but the judge granted bail on bail. 3,000 euros to prevent him from going to prison. It doesn’t look like he’ll have any trouble raising that money. The assistant inspector told the judge that it was not true that he had previously reported to the trafficker that he was under investigation. However, he could not explain why he was meeting with a member of the “El Langa” clan at a bar in the sa Indioteria district.
The narcotics investigator refrains from any professional activity while waiting for the investigation to develop.
Police sources insisted it was a one-time case. It was discovered by the police themselves.

Shot in Inokashira Park. Leaves in the park were ablaze with fall colors as if they were burning.
Shot in Inokashira Park. The maple was in its autumn glory.
Along the Yamate line, there is an area in which many small bars are close-packed. It is c…(more)
The boy wearing a yellow T-shirt brought his hand to his lips. He stared at me fixedly and…(more)
Men were washing their bodies at a water place by the wayside. Some of them were washing n…(more)
I met a man with a mustache when I walked the heart of this mighty city. He was putting tw…(more)
The gallerey is famous for its collection of French Impressionist and Post-Impressionist p…(more)
Clouds were floating above the sea and freight vessels. There were cargo passages near the…(more)
A woman wearing a vivid blue saree went into the alleyway. And a few men sitting by the wa…(more)
The man was washing his body in the water place by the wayside. Water was flowing from the…(more)
Two cats were lying and relaxing in the shade. I didn't know why their faces were so ster…(more)
There was a big stupa on the top of the hill. And the big eyes of Buddha were depicted on…(more)
It was almost dusk. Some laborers had finished their work already and were relaxing near t…(more)

Wilhelm "Bill" Brettschneider, a German immigrant who founded and operated Olympic Pools on Conant Street in Maumee for almost four decades, died of cancer in his home on Saturday. He was 76.
His wife, Siglinde "Linda" Vaughn, said he was diagnosed with colon cancer three years ago and that it had spread to his liver.
"He was an honest man. You could count on him," she said. "If he gave his word, he gave his word."
Born April 8, 1935 in Bremen, Germany, Mr. Brettschneider emigrated to the Detroit area in 1954 when he was 19.
As a young man in Germany, he worked briefly as an electronic engineer for a radio factory. He worked in television repair upon his arrival in the United States.
He migrated over to the pool business in 1965 with some friends in Detroit and stayed in that line of work for the next several decades, opening his own retail store on Conant Street in Maumee in 1973.
Originally known as Blue Water Pools Inc., it was renamed Olympic Pools Inc., and later was known as Olympic Pools & Spas Inc. The firm initially specialized in above-ground pools but later was expanded to include in-ground pools.
In 1980, Mr. Brettschneider began manufacturing swimming pools in the Toledo area. He built his own manufacturing facility in Perrysburg Township in 1984.
In one of several interviews he gave The Blade over the years, he said he got his tireless work ethic from his parents while he was growing up in Germany.
He said in 1993 he often worked 12 hours a day and many weekends.
Mr. Brettschneider said he attended trade schools as a youth and that he "learned the value of work and to appreciate money," and that his father -- a self-employed butcher-shop owner -- was an example to him.
His wife described him as a quiet and serious man who worked hard at maintaining his business. She said he played soccer as a youth and loved old movies, including Westerns. He especially enjoyed movies featuring John Wayne, she said.
Mr. Brettschneider also liked to travel to various places, such as his winter home in Clearwater Beach, Fla.
He sold his business in 2000 but continued to work in sales and management through 2006.
Mr. Brettschneider was named a northwest Ohio Entrepreneur of the Year in 1991. He also won awards for pool design from the National Spa and Pool Institute, including a National Gold Medal for pool design in 1981. During his career, he installed more than 4,000 pools. The locally made pools were sold throughout the United States and as far away as Japan.
Survivors include his wife, Siglinde "Linda" Vaughn, daughters Erika Balogh, Barbara Bartoloni, and Tina Hynous, step-daughter Elke French, and five grandchildren.
Visitation is from 3 to 8 p.m. Wednesday at the Maison-Dardenne-Walker Funeral Home, 501 Conant St., Maumee, with funeral services at 10 a.m. Thursday.
The family suggests tributes to Hospice of Northwest Ohio, 30000 River Rd., Perrysburg.
Contact Tom Henry at: firstname.lastname@example.org or 419-724-6079.

A career burglar attacked an off-duty detective chief inspector with a crowbar after he caught him trying to break into his neighbour's home.
Andrew Moss was foiled when the officer was out running and spotted him on the doorstep of the house in Seacroft.
Leeds Crown Court heard the homeowners were away on holiday at the time of the incident and had previously had their home broken into.
The detective lived nearby and had been keeping an eye on the house at the time of the incident, March 12 this year.
Robert Galley, prosecuting, said the officer went into the garden and saw Moss wearing gloves with his hood pulled up.
Moss became aggressive when challenged by the officer and pulled out a crowbar.
The defendant told the officer: "You are going to get knocked out."
The officer put his hand up to defend himself but was struck on the upper arm with the weapon.
The two men struggled before dog walkers passing the house joined in and helped detain Moss.
Moss, of Boggart Hill Road, Seacroft, denied any intent to burgle the house and claimed he had been looking for scrap metal.
He pleaded guilty to attempted burglary, going equipped for theft and assault.
James Littlehales, mitigating, said Moss's partner was expecting a child and he committed the offence as he was desperate for money for his family.
He added that Moss had pleaded guilty to the offences at an early stage.
Moss was jailed for three years.
Judge Simon Batiste said: "You are a career burglar.
"Only an immediate custodial sentence can be justified."

What I gained from gay male escorts London
There is little you can do if you have a deflated ego. At work, I often feel as if I was not good enough. Everything changed when I discovered gay male escorts London. Ok, let me rewind so that you will understand me better. My name is Alex. I am gay. My parents will never accept me the way I am and did all they could to suppress my sexuality that I began to feel inferior.
As I grew older, I became a victim of inferiority complex. I made little friends and always felt insulted each time they make friendly jokes. I lived most of my life in solitude. As I grew older and started to get more and more enlightened, I began to see how my low self-esteem was ruining my life. I decided as a matter of urgency to find a solution.
Side hustle as a gay male escort
The first thing I did was to start reading to see if I will find other people like me. I had the conviction that it will help me to begin to feel normal about myself. Up till the moment I decided to find a solution for myself I felt subhuman. I felt excited when I discovered an online gay community that was open to membership. I immediately joined the forum. Reading some of the stories shared by the members did not only make me feel alive; it was also encouraging to know that I was not the only one.
I was eager to meet some of them in person. Online friendship often feels unreal but meeting physically, shaking hands, often validates the reality. Most of the people on the forum were not from London, and it was difficult for me to meet them. However, I did not give up. I continued to search for gay men within my reach, to make friends with them.
After a few months of failed frantic search, I finally quit. Luck seemed to shine on me recently when the new staff was employed in our office. I immediately bonded with him from the first moment I saw him, and I made efforts to get close to him. When I finally discovered he was gay, I was excited. We began to tag along and make out once in a while. However, just when I was getting along with him, the company decided to transfer him to a new branch in America.
That day he broke the news to me was one of the saddest days of my life yet. Immediately I began to think of how I will go back to my lonely, boring life. However, when I told him about my loneliness, he told me about gay male escorts London. I quickly told him that I didn’t know who they were or how I could meet them. He looked at me and smiled and began to tell me all the details I needed. When he was done he said, “Next time you don’t know anything, use Google”.
We laughed. He held my cheeks and promised to visit as frequently as time permits. It was from this colleague that I started to learn how to be bold. He was not afraid to talk about his sexual orientation nor did he feel intimidated by those who were straight. Then I started hiring gay male escorts London, and it dawned on me that all the limitations were in my head.
It amazed me how these guys, the gay male escorts London spoke freely about themselves and partied without the least resignation about themselves. I asked them how they did it, and one of them told me something I will never forget,
“Don’t try to please the society because society doesn’t even care about you.”
In all ramification he was right. Thanks to the flexible gay guy in London I started to get my confidence back. The moment I did, every other aspect of my life changed. I started to perform better in the office, and my output increased significantly. My boss is still wondering what really changed. He called me one day and praised me and told me how he was on the verge of firing me.
“I am now glad I didn’t”, he said.
If you’re a gay guy in London looking to try becoming an escort, click here to learn how.

Submit your FML story
- - Please note that spam and nonsensical stories will result in you being blocked from accessing FML.
Online | Search for a member
About brianjman14 : Name is Brian. I'm not 14, just an easy-to-remember online name for me.
You sure know how to party?
You posted a comment on the 31st of December between 11pm and 1am. Happy New Year!
Keen reader – Level: master ninja
You have voted for 50% of the entire collection of FMLs to date.
Keen reader – Level: student ninja
You have voted for 15% of the entire collection of FMLs to date.
Today, my boyfriend and I decided to do something fun and spontaneous, so we had sex in the disabled toilet in the shopping centre. Little did we know, the male AND female toilets were conveniently being cleaned at the time, so the only toilet open was the disabled one. Walk of shame. FML
Today, I lost my phone. I tried to call it using my husband's phone, but couldn't figure out which of the three Kates in the contact list was me. Turns out, two are co-workers and one is his aunt. I was listed under Satan. FML
Today, I found out my cousin - who suffers from bipolar disorder - shot herself in the chest and has only a 20 percent chance of living. I told my boyfriend, while crying, and he held me for a few minutes. As soon as I got quiet, he pulled out his iPhone and started playing a shooter game. FML
Today, my dad tried to convince my mother to stay with him. "Think of all the great times we've had," he said and started naming off quite a few. Too bad none of them were about the three kids they had together, all were vacations. FML
Today, I realized the only reason I watched the SuperBowl is because Justin Bieber tweeted about it. I don't even like football. I had no idea what was going on the whole game. All I knew was who I was cheering for, because Justin Bieber tweeted who he was cheering for. FML
Today, my female room-mate decided to throw away my xbox, along with a few other possessions because they reminded her of her ex. Furiously, I asked her if "it was that time of the month again." Now I can't feel my balls, and miss my games. FML
Today, my girlfriend and I decided to sneak into the shower at her house while her parents went out to eat and a movie. Half way through our shower we heard a knocking at the door, it was her mom. We had left all of our clothes downstairs. Safe to say I won't be allowed there any more. FML
Today, I was standing in line at a coffee shop and I noticed that there was a bug on the guys face in front of me. Trying to be nice I lightly smacked it off. His reaction was to punch me in the face. Repeatedly. FML
Today, my mom revealed to me that when I was in Preschool, I used to get caught in the bathroom with little boys while I was feeling their "no no" area. I was giving hand jobs to boys before I could read. FML
Today, I was texting my friend. He has a history of depression, which we were talking about, and somehow, he turned the conversation to: "If we ever broke up, I would kill myself." I didn't even know we were even going out. FML
Monday 1 September 2014

Glory to God for all things!
As some of you may remember, my son has Childhood Apraxia of Speech (CAS), a neurological disorder that affects his ability to speak. Essentially, the brain has trouble coordinating with the muscles in his mouth to form sounds, much less words. I wrote a little about this back in May (http://tinyurl.com/n577v65
). It was very much rushed and at the time hard for me to write. So this update will be more thought out, less emotional.
We had some inclinations that S. had speech problems when he was two. He made very few sounds; just stuck to the ones he knew: Mama, bye, hi. Those may have been his only words. He grunted a lot, more than a toddler should, I imagine. My wife and I constantly felt like we were failing him; was there something we were doing wrong? Everybody kept telling us that he would come around, that sometimes it just took longer, that their sons didn’t start talking until they were three years old. We even had a Melkite family tell us a story about a young boy who was around at least three different languages in the house, and that he didn’t start talking until he was four. Granted, when he did start talking, it was in full sentences, in the languages to the people who spoke that language. We only speak English in my household, so I knew that was not to be the case. Everybody had great intentions, and really, what do you say to somebody in this situation? God bless them all!
Anyways, my wife started researching S’s speech problems on the internet and eventually came across CAS. Pretty much, a light bulb went off. ‘This is what S has!’ we said to each other. It would take us a while to get S tested through the local school system, and even then, with such limited vocal skills, no formal diagnosis could be given. Rather we were told he had Suspected CAS. Either way, I felt relief, in a sense. At least it wasn’t something we were doing or weren’t doing. With this in hand, we told our families, close friends, and our priest.
Our priest is a wonderful man. He called me soon after he got my email to him and said he wanted to come over to the house and pray for S. A couple of days had gone by before Father came over, and we were given time to acclimate to our situation. When Father did arrive, he said a small healing service for S. and anointed him with oil. Afterwards, Father surprised me; he started asking all sorts of questions. Apparently, he had taken the time to read five articles online that he had found about CAS. Like I said, a wonderful man.
We found a speech therapist that we were seeing for a while and are now currently seeing a wonderful therapist at the local Rite Care Clinic. At times, my wife was taking him to therapy four times a week. S. has gone from being able to say three words at the beginning of the year to saying full sentences and even his name!
If you have taken the time to read the linked post I wrote in May, then you know about my feelings towards St. John Maximovitch and his not wanting to be a bishop due to his own speech impediment. He also is of great importance to my priest and our whole parish. I even informed my wife that I decided Archbishop John is the patron saint for our family. I have been blessed to have been given a small relic of his, and of course I have holy oil from his reliquary. I have also come into possession of a rather beautiful icon of him, painted by hand by a lady from my church. All of these Holy items have a special place in my heart, yes, because they are holy, but also because I have been blessed to have them from the love others.
Now, this has been no cake walk, that is for sure. I am not the most patient man, and I am tested every day because of the CAS. There are still times, almost every day, that I have no idea what S. is saying to me. He can go on and on, but the pronunciation is not there, the words are not there, my patience is not there. Will my son ever be able to talk “normally?” I can honestly say that I do not know. I know from networking CAS groups, that he is not affected to the extent that some children are. Maybe when he is 18, there will be no sign left that he is afflicted with this disorder, but again, I do not know. But, I believe whole heartedly, that without the intercession of Archbishop John, and the prayers offered by my priest, family and friends, along with extensive therapy, S. would still not know how to say his name, or be able to tell my wife and me a story. Or even the best thing of all to ever come out of his mouth, ‘I love you.’
It is the small things like this that have helped me to pray, ‘Lord, I believe, help my unbelief.’ I am sure that this is a common feeling shared by parents of children with disabilities, or illnesses. And as much sadness and tears I experience because of CAS, I can honestly say, that even though I hate it, almost all the time, that I would not ask for it to “just go away.” This is a burden that my family must carry, but it is burden I feel brings us closer to God, and that through Him, ‘I can do all things.’

The "disturbing" murder of a woman in her home in Hoppers Crossing could be a random attack, police say.
It comes as details emerge that the woman – 48-year-old Prasad Somawansa – was killed within the short space of time that her 21-year-old son was away from their home on a call-out with the State Emergency Service.
Homicide Squad Detective Senior Sergeant Stuart Bailey, who called the murder "disturbing", said the woman suffered severe upper body trauma in her Barber Drive home.
There is no history of domestic violence within the family, who moved from Sri Lanka in 1999, known to police.
"This matter is extremely concerning for Victoria Police to have what may be a random attack, or a targeted attack, at this premises," he said.
Senior Sergeant Bailey said the woman's husband, a truck driver, had left Melbourne on Wednesday and driven to Brisbane.
He spoke to his wife about 8pm on Thursday and she was at home with their son, Wishhasad Somawansa, who is a medical student.
After that phone call, Senior Sergeant Bailey said the son, also an SES volunteer, was called out to a "police incident" in the local area that related to an affray.
Senior Sergeant Bailey said the husband tried to call his wife back between 8pm and 9.30pm and he wasn't able to raise her.
"He couldn't get hold of his son so what he did was call an associate of his who works with him in the transport industry," he said.
He said the associate went around to their home and found the door open and Ms Somawansa dead inside.
The friend then called the husband and then he tried to contact his son.
"It is unclear if he was contacted by the father and or whether he actually heard it through communications with the SES and as a result has come back to the premises here and found out that his mother has been murdered," Senior Sergeant Bailey said.
"He's obviously traumatised and he's back with us at the police station assisting us with our inquiries."
He said the son was not a suspect, and was assisting police with their inquiries.
The husband flew into Melbourne on Friday morning and was picked up by police at the airport. He remains with police giving them a statement.
"It's a horrible situation and really disturbing for Victoria Police," Senior Sergeant Bailey said.
He said the home was not ransacked, but it was not yet clear if anything had been taken.
He said forensic police would determine if the front door had been broken into or not.
Senior Sergeant Bailey would not comment on what caused the woman's death, but said no weapon had been found in the house.
Wyndhamvale SES unit controller Laurie Russell said the woman's son was the controller of a group of five volunteers who were called out about 8.30pm to assist police with lighting following a brawl.
"We've got a member out there assisting [the] community and we've got some other mongrel back there belting his mother up," Mr Russell said.
He said Mr Somawansa, known as "Wish", was a dedicated volunteer who joined the unit two years ago and was quickly promoted to unit officer.
"You ask him to do something, he'll do it," he said.
He said Mr Somawansa was close to his parents and the SES would rally around their member.
"We have enormous support mechanisms in the SES and that will swing into action," he said.
Neighbours described the family as quiet, saying Ms Somawansa was a kind woman.
Senior Sergeant Bailey urged anyone who saw anything suspicious to contact police.
"Our window of opportunity is anytime between 8 o'clock and 9.25[pm], so we're appealing for public assistance for any movement here in Barber Drive any time between 8 o'clock and 9.25," he said.
Anyone with information is should contact Crime Stoppers on 1800 333 000.
- with Marissa Calligeros

Tributes have been pouring in for well-known sports personality Anthony Foley, who passed away suddenly overnight.
The 42-year-old Munster rugby coach was in France with his team ahead of an scheduled game. He was found dead inside his hotel room this morning.
A native of Clare, Mr. Foley played a large number of games with Munster before joining its coaching team.
The cause of death has not yet been determined.

Monday, 17 October 2011
The good, the bad and the truly ugly
The sun finally came out this weekend and it even felt warm. Skip and I pottered round the house, doing things that needed doing. Lil-lil went to a birthday party, which seems to have become a weekend fixture now.
We had a really nice catch up with friends on Saturday night. The kids (and baby) behaved and gave us a chance to relax with friends in the backyard. We chatted, ate, laughed. A really good night with some fabulous people (and I'm not just saying that cause I know they're reading). There's nothing better than a catch up with old friends and it's even better to see them so happy and in good places in their life. Skip and I went to bed content Saturday night and feeling lucky to have good mates.
I was happy too as it was the first night I didn't have to wake D to feed, I could let him sleep if he wanted to (and he did).
Sunday rolled around and it was another day of odd jobs around the house. Skip went out to get lunch on Sunday, Goosey yelled that she could hear him outside so we went to greet him. It wasn't Skip it was our neighbour who's been away for two months. We caught up on all the gossip and she said she couldn't wait to meet D. I was telling her that he was asleep when I turned around and there was Goosey - with D in her arms. My 3 year-old had gone inside got him out of his bassinette and carried him outside. I almost collapsed with a hear attack then and there. All the things that could have happened....
Last night I didn't have to wake D. He decided to stay awake all. night. long. And not in a good Lionel Ritchie way. First Goose wet the bed, so there were sheets and PJs to deal with. Then about 11.30 D woke and didn't go back to sleep until 4am. Then woke at 6am. I'm stuffed.
But there's preschool drop offs to do. House to tidy. Washing to hang. Goosey to entertain. Baby to settle.
Yes, I really do live the glamourous life.
Posted by Corinne (aka Rinny of Arabia) at 09:26

Jermaine Jones, the German-American defensive midfielder who plays for Schalke 04 in the Bundesliga, was cleared by FIFA to switch allegiances from Germany to the USA. Jones, 27, has dual citizenship because his father is an African-American soldier who was based in Germany and his mother is German. He grew up in Frankfurt, but spent time in Chicago and Mississippi, as well. He has played for Germany in the youth national team system, but not as a full member of the national team. Jones has been sidelined with fractured leg for several months, and likely wouldn't be available to play for the US until after the new year.
In other news, Landon Donovan was named 2009 Honda Player of the Year.

I doubt that I will sleep much tonight.
This morning, Northumbrians woke up to the news that Police Constable David Rathband had been found dead in his Northumbrian home. As yet there has been no official cause of death given but it is going to be suicide.
"On July 4 2010, PC Rathband was sitting in his patrol car in Newcastle when the gunman Raoul Moat shot him, simply because he was a policeman. The attack left him with 200 shotgun pellets lodged in his face, robbed him of his eyesight, caused him constant pain, contributed to the breakdown of his marriage and, 18 months on, it seems likely that it has cost him his life, because he could not face going on living with his level of disability." (THE TELEGRAPH).
David really tried to keep living and living well. But I am pretty certain that in the end it was the anger that got him. Or rather it was not being allowed to express his anger that brought on the depression that may well have ended his life. And that wasn't anger at the psycopath who killed him. It was anger at the people who let him down. His bosses, his colleagues, family and friends, the welfare system that is supposed to help us when we need help but which, instead, puts up every bureaucratic barrier it can to make it almost impossible for a person really suffering to get the help they need.
But, I am also certain that David would have most probably coped with his anger. What will have killed him was being told that he should get over his anger because it was killing him.
There was even a man on the BBC news this evening who said that he had told David to hide his anger because it would turn people against him.
Oh my God, I know how he must have felt.
And not for one minute do I believe that when people tell you to stop being angry they have your interests at heart. No. When people advise you to stop being angry it's because human beings cannot stand other people being angry and making a fuss. What is more, I believe that human beings are predisposed (through genetics or nurture, I don't know which) to actually give in to powerful people. So when someone like David or like me, continue to scream at the powerful people who have screwed up our lives, everyone around us tells us to shut up. And the powerful club together to protect themselves and they will make out that your anger is a mental abnormality and turn you from victim to the perpetrator of your own misfortune. And you can never get rid of that rap because your friends, family and colleagues, and every new person you meet, will grasp at that lie rather than having to feel the pain of your anger and accept that is justified and have to make a fuss themselves.
But the angry are left with the knowledge that in letting go of their anger they are letting evil and incompetent people off the hook. And that just makes the angry more angry and in the end you might as well kill yourself because life is shit and unfair and everyone around you is just putting up with it to avoid making a scene.
David, I didn't know you personally. But tonight I'm shedding real tears for you. You had every right to be angry and everybody else should be ashamed of themselves.

Cathy was the first friend that I made at freshman orientation at Aquinas College. It is unbelieveable that it was ...OMG...almost 19 years ago. How could it be that many years? Anyway, Cathy happened to live 20 minutes away from my house in Illinois, but we met at college 3 hours away from home. Cathy transferred to a different school after 2 years, but we have been great friends ever since. She is the kind of person that will do anything for you and always knows how to brighten a day. She is also a bit nuts, but that is definitely a good quality and makes a fun friend. ;)
Anyone that knows Cathy will be able to tell you that two of her best qualities are her organization skills and her love for children (and their love for her). I don't know about you, but I realized early on that these 2 skills together make a great babysitter!!! ;) If you add her degree and experience in photography, she is like a babysitting angel from heaven. LOL! When the boys were very young, Cathy had no problem taking care of 3 infants by herself. If you have never done it, it is probably not as easy as you think. I remember the first time that my dad watched the 3 of them by himself. The boys were about 6 months old. My mom and I were gone for about 2 hours. When we got back, my dad was wearing one of Spencer's shirts and was sweating profusely. Too funny...ummm Dad, Cathy doesn't look like that when we get home. ;) When Cathy babysat for us, by the time we got home, the boys were asleep, the house was clean and there would be pictures of her evening with the boys already loaded onto the computer. Amazing!!
Needless to say, Cathy was a top person on my list of people to call when I needed help taking the boys to the doctor, or to get pictures taken, or really anything else. So, when this trip to Florida came up, we knew that it would not be right to call my mom and dad because they babysat for us for 4 days in November (I know, we're spoiled) and of course they are busy with the cousins. So, we called Cathy.
She did awesome. As usual, the house was clean, the boys were ready for bed and there were pictures on the computer that detailed each of the days that we were gone. Everyone was very happy when we got home, including Cathy! My pantry doors were even decorated with a Cubs and Sox schedule that the boys can fill out with wins and losses....she even had time to do a craft! She did agree that mornings were a bit crazy, but it wasn't as hard as she thought it would be(!!). As parents, that was such a relief and joy for us to come home to.
Thanks Cath!! You are awesome and I have learned so much from you!
Taken by Cathy at Kiddie Kandids in Schaumburg 06/07
Go there, she's awesome!!!

Just out of the police academy, the 21-year-old officer in plainclothes was part of a reverse drug sting where the bad guy runs and the good guy chases. In this case, the bad guy climbed into a car and locked both doors.
With bare hands, the good guy grabbed the car door and ripped it from its hinges. The bad guy was pretty surprised.
"It was a junk car," says the good guy.
Not long after that, the good guy became known on the street as The Terminator. It is not a name he particularly likes, "but it's better than being called pig."
-- Polite to a fault, Oakland Park Public Safety Officer Dan Iosia holds things for people while they sign the ticket he just issued them. He prefaces official requests with "please." He tells two men who were fighting at the scene of an accident to "have a nice day."
Someone calls him "sir" and it astounds him.
"Sometimes I'm playing counselor. I'm not even married. Everyone who looks at you in this uniform thinks you know everything, from how to get a restraining order to directions. I don't know everything. I'm just a rookie."
It is not an excuse. He doesn't say it plaintively. In the first months of his new career, he has spent most of his time overwhelmed by the paper work and flooded by the number of things he will have no chance to practice getting good at.
On his first domestic call, a woman was being severely beaten by her boyfriend. She did not want to file charges. He had to walk away after handing her a social services brochure. They did not teach him helplessness at the academy.
The next day, he went to a house where a dog had been hit by a car and the owner was crying. He could only offer comfort. Somehow, he doesn't think it's enough.
"Why do people call cops then?" he asks. He answers, almost sadly: "It's because they'll come."
While working undercover, a hooker propositioned him. "You don't want her to think you're a cop. I was laughing, it was so weird. When we arrested her, she was crying. I felt bad but you have to not look at her. You have to do your job. She's not doing the right thing."
A month into the job, he saw his first fatality. "There was blood everywhere. The woman had died of cirrhosis. I thought, 'This is real life.' It was someone I didn't even know. I'd never walked into anybody's house like that, that I didn't even know."
That first fatality shook him. By the second, he helped the family call the funeral home and make arrangements.
He explains that "you don't look into the faces of the dead, you look through them. It works, but then again, I haven't seen a dead child yet."
The difference between the two incidents was eight months. In that eight months, Dan did not cease being the rookie, he just learned to be what everyone else expected him to be: in charge.
And, he found, if you act that way long enough, you become it.
-- Dan is finishing his first year as a public safety officer, which means he is a full-time cop and an occasional firefighter. A year ago, the Northeast High School graduate was a certified firefighter with high marks from the Broward police academy, an award from his fellow cadets, Marine Corps discipline and the ability to do 102 push-ups in two minutes.
At 22, he is now what stands between those who follow the rules and those who don't. In one short year on the street, he has found that it is impossible to tell where the line is drawn.
He started out trusting because it is what he knew. Now he starts out suspicious because it is what he has learned. His mother, June Iosia of Oakland Park, says he wasn't naive, "but he doesn't like to see some things. You know, my kids were amazed the first time something was stolen from them."
His training officer, John Edwards: "Dan found out that people look you straight in the face and lie. He'd go to the teletype or the computer and cross-reference warrants and information and find that out. He doesn't believe it all anymore."
It is a rookie's education. It started hard and it stayed that way.
In early December 1988, two Metro-Dade police officers were shot and killed by a man who had just been released from jail. He had taken a gun from one of the officers and blown them both away.
Dan was in the academy then, Class No. 135's company commander. The shooting did not scare him away from his chosen career.
"You have to do your job," he said at the time.
It is an attitude that did not change during months and months of being scared and bored and confused and hurried and panicked. It is his job and he will do it. He has proved that. To his family and his co-workers and his bosses. Even to the people who knew him growing up and thought him directionless. But mostly, he has proved it to himself.
-- Dan graduated from the police academy on Feb. 16, 1989. On March 21, a fellow officer was shot during a struggle with a robbery suspect. Arriving as the two men scuffled, other officers shot the suspect several times. The suspect seemed unfazed. Dan's was the fourth car on the scene.
By the time he got there, all the shots had been fired. The officer and the suspect were bleeding and Dan rushed to hold the suspect down.
"The bad guy was lying on his stomach with a couple of holes in him. He was moving around like nothing happened. I put him in custody."
It would be one of the few times in the year that Dan would not have time to think before he acted. He says he isn't sure how you learn that.
"Experience can't tell me because I haven't got any. I know we were allowed deadly force in this case."
Like any cop, he won't speculate about the suspect, won't speculate about the motive, won't talk about what, if any, drugs were involved. He won't even let you see how much it hurt him.
It's a very lonesome job for a young man who has never had to have secrets.
"When Dan used to be with you," says his mother, "you'd have his undivided attention. Now his eyes have changed. They are never still anymore."
-- His first shifts are day shifts, driving through Oakland Park, through a designated zone, listening intently to the radio positioned next to his left ear. Around his waist is 15 pounds of what will save him when he needs it: a gun, ammunition, flashlight, nightstick, handcuffs and radio transmitter. In the trunk of his car is 14 pounds of firefighting gear that he will don if he gets a fire call.
His days are filled answering complaints that range from murder to bicycle theft. He does traffic stops, he checks locked doors, he takes a truant back to school. He fills out reports on all his activities and tries to make sure that his nose is clean. No two days are the same and any call could be life threatening, but it is not Miami Vice. He is wise enough to be glad about that.
The real world, he has found, is far messier. Some crimes don't get solved. You have to choose your battles. You go where you are told despite hell breaking loose around you. And you do everything you can to increase the odds on your side of the line.
Dan has paid close attention to the odds. His 3-pound bulletproof vest, though uncomfortable, is his best friend.
"It's like when you wake up in the morning, you don't put one sock on, you put two. I try to put it on first thing so that it won't feel right if I don't have it on."
-- Dan watches a cab illegally change lanes in front of him. He has been out of training for three days. He pulls the driver over.
"A lot of people get nervous. Little do they know I get nervous, too."
It doesn't show. That is the first rule, the first unwritten one, at least. People expect things from cops. They expect these men and women to draw the lines clearly for them. They expect decisiveness; they want confidence; they demand authority.
Dan walks into a restaurant in uniform and people turn. For the longest time, he thought it was his size. (He is 6-foot-1 1/2, weighs 235 and can bench- press 400 pounds.) It's more than size. Dan has learned that people know when a cop is close and they act differently. If you're driving by, they wave. In fact, "everybody waves to you. Even if they're up to no good. Maybe especially if they're up to no good."
They wave in the ghetto. Driving through a section of Oakland Park known for its drug dealing is an exercise in futility. The cops know the players and they know the houses. They know the snitches and the plants and the back alleys. What they do not know is who's holding and if they can catch them before they throw it down or sell it or stash it or smoke it.
Dan worries he is taking too long when a crack bust develops. The new barricades that have gone up make it difficult to get back inside the neighborhood.
He mentions that he should have been a pizza delivery man so he could do better with the addresses.
In the first months of his first year, he is moved by the plight of the people who live here.
"We have hard-working people here. It's not like there are not nice people here. They don't like what's happening in that neighborhood. Just because they don't live in a nice area doesn't mean they're not nice people."
He has since made five pursuits on foot through here at night. In one night alone, he drew his gun three times. Through 10 months, he has pointed his gun maybe seven times. He has not pulled the trigger. He is glad about that. He has learned a lot on the midnight shift.
About the drug dealers, he is now less moved.
"You can't feel sorry for these guys. There are people who get out of this neighborhood; they do it by busting their hump. These guys are taking the easy way."
He has had to arrest people he played high school football with. He has talked a kid out of suicide. That kid he remembers from when he worked in the Oakland Park summer recreation program.
"I had to tell him whatever it was wasn't worth it."
Joe Torok is an Oakland Park police officer who has known Dan since both were in Little League. One night the two men chased a robbery suspect on foot and caught him. Torok says any cop is pumped at a time like that and Dan was no exception. Torok took the man into custody and asked Dan to return to the scene of the crime.
"I got there maybe three or four minutes later and Dan was completely changed. He went from this 'beat your ass' kind of cop to immediately calming the store clerk down. She'd stopped crying. He was great. It took him less time to switch gears than it would have taken me."
In the past year, Dan hasn't lost his compassion, but he only has so much and he has seen too much to want to waste it.
-- A year changes everybody. But it doesn't change who they are.
"It's hard being a cop 24 hours a day. I'm not sure you are. When I take the uniform off, I'm still the guy they used to know."
He is not the Terminator he has been made out to be, though he talks the talk of a Marine -- all yes ma'am, just my job, ma'am, somebody's got to do it, ma'am. It is a very official way of talking but he believes it. It doesn't make him seem naive. If anything, it makes him noble. It makes the people he's with feel very safe.
It is what cops should be.
"What most people think cops do is Hollywood. This isn't TV.
"If we aren't gonna do it, who's going to? I'm doing this because if I don't, no one else will. If I die, I do. I'll take that risk."
And he doesn't romanticize it anymore.
"What do I hope for on this job?" Dan asks. "I just hope that I can come home with as many holes as I left with."
Yet he is a son who must hear the concern in his mother's voice.
His mother and father say they'd rather he react and explain, than not be alive to explain. "I'd rather not think about what he does. He has to do this and we have to let him," June Iosia says. "If, God forbid, something happened, he can say he did what he wanted."
He is also a brother. His picture is in his sister's wallet "just in case she gets stopped in Oakland Park."
And he is a part of the cop fraternity, people who really do call the bad guys "the bad guys."
When the Oakland Park police raided a bar early last year, they arrested 16 people. Dan's job was to block the back door.
"I had no idea who was coming out the door. I was the rookie, I said I'd go in first."
He still will.
Officer Edwards: "The people on the midnight shift respect him. He's become a pretty smart street cop. He can take care of himself. And if they get in trouble, they know he'll be there and he'll do what he has to."
Dan began the year making $9.77 an hour. He now makes $13.81. In late December, on his first Friday off since June, he took another "detail." That's moonlighting, approved by the department, guarding stores at Christmas. He says the money is nice.
He is no longer a green rookie, he is a cop now. And yet he still doesn't sleep well.
"We'd be saints if we didn't give tickets. In the beginning, I felt sorry for them. Fifty-two bucks is fifty-two bucks. I didn't want to get a ticket, why would I want to give one? Now I realize it's my job."
It is not as easy as it sounds.
"I sometimes don't feel very appreciated. There's this feeling that some people just don't like you. Other times I do. But especially working midnights, people give me some attitude.
"I'm not out there for myself. You're the authority, you're the taxpayer. These are your rules."
-- After seven hours on the street, the sun is coming up pink in the east and Dan walks through Royal Palm Park, which he remembers as a vacant lot where little boys rode BMX bikes.
"This place shows you how much this town's changed since I was little. I used to come here when I was a kid and that was not that long ago.
"The world is not a worse place. It's just a lot of stuff goes on you don't know about. It was me being gullible. I'd drive by prostitutes and not think twice. Now I pick out stuff that just doesn't belong. The bad -- it's always been here.
"But I never expected to see so much crime."
During a 10-month period from February through November 1989, Oakland Park public safety officer Dan Iosia logged the following activities:
Complaints answered: 492
Accidents investigated: 37
Court time: 2 hours
Training hours: 199 1/4
Recovered autos: 4
Field interrogation cards: 54
Open doors found: 31
Bar checks: 113
Felony arrests: 8
Misdemeanor arrests: 37
Juvenile arrests: 0
Retail theft investigations: 4
Moving violations: 148
Non-moving violations: 231
Major fires fought: 1

BELLA flinched when she heard the sound of a door swinging open.
She couldn't see anything, but she could feel the little boy from before nuzzling against her, his small arms slinging around her chest and his head laying gently against her collarbone. She tried to move her arm, but the sound of metal chains echoed throughout the dainty bedroom, and she realized she was chained to the wall.
A buzzing light bulb flicked on, and Bella's eyes squinted to adjust to the illuminated room. Mommy was standing in the middle of the room, her tall and skinny figure covered in a loose black dress. Her witch-like features were accentuated in the new lighting: her curved nose, her stringy red hair, her small eyes and yellow teeth. Everything about her appearance sent a bout of chills down her spine.
Beside Mommy was an obviously drugged-out, older boy, reaching Mommy's stretched height of around six-foot but possibly a few inches shorter than her. His head was down, his thick black hair falling in his face, and his eyes were closed. His arms were tied behind his back and there was a red bandana gagging him, stretching across his mouth.
The little boy beside Bella, no more than seven years old, began to stir beneath her chin in his sleep. She looked down to find his big brown eyes staring up at her, tears welling up in them.
"Shh," Bella cooed quietly, watching as Mommy had occupied herself with chaining the older boy to the wall across the small bedroom.
The older boy was moaning and groaning beneath his breath, his movements glitched and slowing as he shook his head, locked in his forced daze.
Mommy stood up and rubbed her hands against her vein-threaded legs. She exhaled and gave a small smile, before her beady eyes looked over to Bella. Bella's heart palpitated in her chest and her breath escaped her lungs as she locked eyes with the psychotic woman.
"Your father thought he could keep my children from me," Mommy spoke, startling the little boy pressed up against Bella. "But I finally found my oldest. Now you are all here."
A manic bout of laughter escaped Mommy's cracked lips as she laced her fingers together.
"We will be taking a family photo," Mommy planned casually. "But first, I must finish dinner."
Her voice was clearly deteriorated from years of smoking - it was monotonous and broken, yet it still held a jovial undertone beneath it. The combination was absolutely horrifying.
Mommy slowly walked out through the bedroom door, slamming it shut behind her and practically shaking the room.
Bella stared around at the dirty and peeling, baby-pink wallpaper. Her eyes carefully observed every board game lined up against the walls, every stuffed animal piled in the corners, every dollhouse scattered across the carpet. Her chest was heavy as she then looked at the older boy who was slumped against the wall, his head on his shoulder and his lips parted as he finished out his drug-induced sleep.
"I want to go home," said the little boy in a small voice, the first time Bella had heard him speak.
The words clenched around her heart, but she promised herself she wouldn't cry the second she was thrown into that backseat. She promised she would comply and stay strong, because crying would get her nowhere except closer to her demise.
Bella, now with the lights on and sobered from her own drug-induced state, was able to see the small boy in his entirety. He had fair skin, the type of fair that was so pale you could see the veins beneath the surface, and his hair was almost bleach blond. His eyes were very dark and big, but his mouth and nose were small. There was dirt staining his white t-shirt and jeans, and that is when Bella noticed he wasn't tied or chained up at all.
"Hey," Bella said gently, and the little boy moved off of her lap, growing hot against her body.
Bella stared at him, a small smile forced onto her lips.
"Tell me your name," she attempted to make her voice as calm as possible, to distract the young boy from the reality of the situation they were in.
The little boy sat in front of her and played with his fingers, his movements jittery and his eyes panicked. "Elliot," he spoke timidly.
Bella inhaled sharply and played a bigger smile upon her lips, allowing it to reach her eyes. "Hi, Elliot. My name is Bella."
A small smile broke onto Elliot's mouth as he looked up at Bella. "I wonder where we are. Do you know?"
Bella sniffled, her hand reaching out to grab his small fingers. "I'm not sure. Wherever we are, I am sure we will be home soon. Okay?"
Elliot nodded, his smile growing. "Who is the woman that told us to call her Mommy before? She is definitely not my mommy."
Bella shrugged her shoulders. "I'm not too sure who she is. She is sick, though, so you have to be very quiet when she comes in. Do not cry or try to run, because she might get upset. Does your mommy ever get upset with you?" she spoke softly, very quietly.
Elliot nodded again, his smile dropping. "She yelled at me one time because I fed our puppy play-dough. I had to sit in time-out for a whole hour!"
Bella laughed, "shhh, remember, quiet voices? This woman might make you sit in time-out too, do you want that?"
Elliot shook his head. "Nuh-uh," he whispered.
Her thumb rubbed comfortingly against his small hand. "Just stay close to me. I will make sure she doesn't put you in time-out."
The sound of metal jingling against the wall across the room rattled Elliot and Bella, making them jump and look over at the older boy who was beginning to wake up. Elliot scrambled into Bella's lap again, his head against her heartbeat that throbbed and pulsed at a quick pace.
The older boy's eyes opened, and Bella noticed they were a striking gray colour. She also noticed he had a few contusions littering the area surrounding his thick eyebrows, and a long scar running from the top of his cheekbone to the bottom of his jaw.
He made noises around the gag in his mouth, muffling his anger as he attempted to pull his body forward, the chains restricting him. His arms, still behind his back, were trying desperately to pull him free.
Bella stared at the boy in fear, as the sound of his angry groans and breaths filled her ears. She knew that a part of survival in a situation like theirs was staying calm, and she worried that the older boy would fail to cooperate.
He finally stopped after several minutes of trying, his breath rugged and his sweat-soaked hair falling onto his forehead. His shoulders and chest heaved with each inhale and his light eyes remained locked on Bella and Elliot.
The door flew open, and Mommy revealed a new, colourful dress that hung off of her rawboned torso like a pillow sack. Her ginger hair resembled straw, sitting atop her angular shoulders as she pressed her hand against the doorway and watched each of them intently. In her hand was a clunky, Polaroid 660 Land camera.
"Picture time, Sweethearts. This is a big day, the day you reunited with your Mommy; we must remember it forever."
She held the camera up to the older boy first, making him shy away from her and look to the side to avoid the lens.
YOU ARE READING
Three children realize they're trapped in the basement of a crazy woman who claims to be their mother, and forces them to call her "Mommy". created February 4th, 2017. All Rights Reserved WARNING: My books contain disturbing themes. This includes go...

So my LO (little one) is 4 months old and I have been pumping since she was born. She was 6 weeks early and a nice baby so she never latched. Everything was going pretty good until a few days ago when my right side cracked. It's right across the front of my nipple and it hurts like a you know what. Everytime it looks like it's healing it's time to pump again and it reopened. My doctor said to use a nipple cream but keep pumping or my supply can drop but the nipple cream isn't helping. Anyone has any suggestions as to what I can do to heal it?

« ÎnapoiContinuați »
At 10.30 A.M. they were quite comfortable amongst the others. At 11 A.M. I looked again and they seemed quite at home, as also at 11.30 A.M., after which for some time I looked every hour, and they were never attacked. The next morning I found them peaceably among the other ants.
On September 15 I put three of the ants which bad emerged from the pupæ taken out of nest A, and nursed by ants from that nest, and put them into nest B at 1.30 P.M. They seemed to make themselves quite at home. I looked again at 2.30 P.M., with the same result. At 3.30 P.M. I could only find two, the third having no doubt been cleaned, but no ant was being attacked. At 5.30 P.M. they were no longer distinguishable, but if any one was being attacked we must have seen it. The next morning they all seemed quite peaceful, and there was no dead ant in the box. I looked again on the 17th and 19th, but could not distinguish them. As, however, there was no dead ant, they certainly had not been killed. I then put in a stranger; she was soon attacked and driven out of the nest—showing that, as usual, they would not tolerate an ant whom they did not recognise as in some way belonging to the community.
Again, on April 10, 1881, I divided a two-queened nest of Formica fusca, leaving a queen in each half. At that time no eggs had yet been laid, and of course there were no larvæ or pupæ. In due course both queens laid eggs, and young ants were brought up in
150 RECOGNITION NOT INDIVIDUAL OR PERSONAL,
each half of the nest. I will call the two halves as before A and B.
On August 15, at 9 A.M., I put three of the young ants from A into B, and three from B into A. At 9.30 A.M. none were attacked, 10 A.M. ditto, 10.30 A.M. ditto. One was being cleaned ; 12 A.M. ditto, 2 P.M. ditto. In fact, they seemed quite at home with the other ants. The next morning I was unable to recognise them, the paint having been entirely removed. The ants were all peaceably together in the nest, and there were no dead ones either in the nest or in the outer box. It is evident, therefore, that they had been treated as friends. August 17.-I put in three more from B into A at
At 12.30 P.M. they were with the other ants; at 1 P.M., ditto, at 2 P.M. ditto, at 3 P.M. ditto, at 5 P.M. ditto. The following morning I was still able to recognise them, though most of the paint had been removed. They also were evidently treated as part of the community
September 19.-Put in three more from A into B at 8.30 A.M. I looked at them at intervals of half an hour, but none of them were attacked. Next morning there was no ant outside the nest, nor had any
October 10.—Put in three more at 7 A.M., and looked at intervals of an hour. They were not attacked, and evidently felt themselves among friends. The next morning I was still able to recognise two.
There was no dead ant either in the nest or the outer box.
Lastly, on October 15, I put in four more at 7 A.M., and watched them all day at short intervals. They exhibited no sign of fear, and were never attacked. In fact, they made themselves quite at home, and were evidently, like the preceding, recognised as friends. For the sake of comparison at noon I again put in a stranger. Her behaviour was in marked contrast. The preceding ants seemed quite at home, walked about peaceably, among the other ants, and made no attempt to leave the nest. The stranger, on the contrary, ran uneasily about, started away from any ant she met, and made every effort to get out of the nest. After she had three times escaped from the nest, I put her back with her own friends.
Thus, then, when a nest of Formica fusca was divided early in spring, and when there were no young, the ants produced in each half were in twenty-eight cases all received as friends. In no case was there the slightest trace of enmity.
These observations seem to me conclusive as far as they go, and they are very surprising. In the previous experiments, though the results were similar, still the ants experimented with had been brought up in the nest, and were only removed after they had become pupæ. It might therefore be argued that the ants having nursed them as larvæ, recognized them when they came to maturity; and though this would certainly be in the highest degree improbable, it could not be said to be impossible. In the present case, however, the old ants had absolutely never seen the young ones until the moment when, some days after arriving at maturity, they were introduced into the nest; and yet in twenty-one cases they were undoubtedly recognised as belonging to the community.
It seems to me, therefore, to be established by these experiments that the recognition of ants is not personal or individual; that their harmony is not due to the fact that each ant is individually acquainted with every other member of the community.
At the same time, the fact that they recognise their friends even when intoxicated, and that they know the young born in their own nest even when they have been brought out of the chrysalis by strangers, seems to indicate that the recognition is not effected by means of any sign or password.
The Social Hymenoptera, according to Messrs. Kirby and Spence,' have the means of communicating to each other information of various occurrences, and use a kind of language which is mutually understood,
and is not confined merely to giving intelligence of the approach or absence of danger; it is also co-extensive with all their other occasions for communicating their ideas to each other.'
Huber assures us as regards Ants2 that he has 'frequently seen the antennæ used on the field of battle to intimate approaching danger, and to ascertain their own party when mingled with the enemy; they are also employed in the interior of the ant-hill to apprise their companions of the presence of the sun, so favourable to the development of the larvæ, in their excursions and emigrating to indicate their route, in their recruitings to determine the time of departure,' &c. Elsewhere also he says 3 that should an Ant fall in with any of her associates from the nest they put her in the right way by the contact of their antennæ.'
? Loc. cit. p. 206.
1 Introduction to Entomology, ii. p. 50. • Loo. cit. p. 157.

Hi, I am new here because I am not sure what to do.
I have a 13yr old daughter who is having a rough time, especially at school. She has at least two kids in her classes that keep harassing her. They say stuff like: **bleep**, ain't nobody give a **bleep** about you, you should just die. Nobody wants you, Shut up! It seems like a daily thing. I see her slipping away, an academic kid, funny kid, motivated and full of life. Now she is having panic attacks and self harming.
I want to get her school involved but she is not convinced they will do anything. I also think it's time to get a counsellor involved but she doesn't want to go and I can't force her. I am a Youth Worker. But it's different when it's your own kid you know what I mean. Anyone have some help
... View more

A. Tumen-Ulziy is an artist known for the range and color of his voice in the world of novel songs. The 35-year-old posted a half-naked photo on her website and expressed her satisfaction with her current weight.
He said, “It’s bad to lose weight. I lost a lot of weight on my thighs. “Now, I’ve gained weight and it’s nice.”
As a singer, in 2015, she got married to a young man of her age and gave birth to a daughter. But in 2019, she announced her divorce and became a single mother.

A dog and its owner were sucked down what is believed to be a drainage pipe in an incident which left them both terrified.
Lacharoje Peema, 47, was walking his one-year-old Jack Russell Bubbles on a public footpath when the dog disappeared under what he thought was shallow water.
Bubbles had been sucked down a large pipe which ran underneath the footpath.
Lacharoje, who is known as Peema, jumped straight in to the culvert by the side of the path to save Bubbles - only for himself to get stuck in the water up to his chest.
The incident happened on Monday in the woods at Knowle near Braunton in North Devon.
Peema, a chef at the local Ebrington Arms pub, explained how he had taken Bubbles for a walk with his ball on the public footpath which comes off the back of Woodland Close.
He said: "We open the pub at 4pm so I took her for a walk around 2pm.
"She is a lovely dog - not mad or anything, she walks by my side. I have had her since she was six weeks old.
"It wasn't raining at the time but it was a bit wet on the ground and the river was flowing very strong.
"We were playing with the ball and it went down beside the footpath so Bubbles went to get it.
"It looked like shallow water. She got the ball, looked up at me and then disappeared - she got sucked under the water."
Peema ran over to the water where Bubbles had vanished and went down to try and save her.
He said: "Then I got sucked down into the pipe - the water was up to my chest, and I'm a tall guy.
"I was screaming at this point. I had one hand down the pipe trying to find Bubbles and the other out of the water trying to keep me up.
"I couldn't find anything in the pipe and was convinced I'd lost her, so I came out of the water."
Distressed by the situation, Peema called a friend to come and help him look for Bubbles.
But then, after a minute or two, he spotted her on the other side of the footpath beyond the river Caen which runs next to it.
He said: "While I was on the phone, she just popped up on the other side of the river.
"I ran over and grabbed her. She had a cut on the top of her eye, but I was so grateful she was OK."
Peema took Bubbles to the vets where she stayed for two days.
He said: "She was breathing in a strange way and we had no idea what was in her lungs.
"She is out of the vets now but is still breathing funnily, I'm hoping the antibiotics will clear that up though.
"It was the most scared I have ever been - I felt completely helpless. I love her so much."
Now Peema wants to warn others of the dangers in this area so the same thing doesn't happen again.
He said: "There are a lot of families in this village with young children and dogs and people regularly walk in this area.
"There are no signs or warnings in the area - how are you suppose to know it is even there?
"It looks shallow and harmless but it is actually very deep. People need to know about it."
Devon Live has contacted Devon County Council, who are responsible for public rights of way in the county, for a comment.

One shot of what Lt. Sheng saw in the underground complex during the cronus fight. Lt. Sheng was anxious. Where had these things come from. He heard rumours of something about splicing happening. Some many questions rocked is mind. What did Clare get into this time? He knew he should had spoke to her more after her mother's death but it was hard. He couldn't even be there for the funeral orders came in had to go to Drankov 5. That was a mess Intel said a riot but it was a bitter fight against the unarmed civilians. Cpl. Roger Spoke nervously. "Sir, orders" Lt. Sheng Spoke slowy. "Well we lost the coin toss. We get to search underground. Other team checking labs."

I was diagnosed with diabetes because I was one point higher than hat I was supposed to be on my blood sugar but I can't remember if it was a fasting test or not. I have been on metformin fr about a year and my dr hasn't had me get blood sugar tested again. Also they never have had me prick my finger. What should I do?
Next Discussion: Fat free yogurt »

Call: 847-455-6016 Text: 847-220-4616 Fax: 847-455-6416
Mon-Fri: 9-9 Sat: 9-5 Sun: Closed
Thirteen-year-old Kyra, who lives in a polygamist compound, finds out that she is chosen to become the seventh wife of her uncle.
The Chosen One tells of a story of a 13-year-old girl named Kyra. Unfortunately, she lived in a community where she had to follow all the rules. She was not able to go beyond her boundaries or do any sorts of things kids her age were able to do beyond her community. But as time passed, she decided to break some rules and live. But when a meeting came up on her house, she panicked. At first she believed the meeting was about her and all the things she did wrong. But in reality, she was chosen. Now, she had to face the idea that she had to marry, and live with her uncle. Finally, the race is on. She had to decide what is right for her family or else they would pay the consequences she had made. I recommend this book to people who like drama, action, and adventure books.
Submitted by: Ingrid A.

Let's cast our eyes back to this exact day, the 30th June 2014, but a year earlier.
What were the main tales from that day? What big events were happening in Premier League football?
Here are some of the big scoops from the 30th June 2013…
Liverpool confirmed the signature of Kolo Toure on a free transfer. The former Arsenal defender was available for free after his contract with Manchester City expired at the end of the 2012-13 season.
Liverpool were after defensive reinforcements after the retirement of their club legend Jamie Carragher.
Toure offered the experience and ability that Brendan Rodgers was after and it was a shrewd move by the boss.
Toure offered good cover but overall his performances were not superb and he played just 20 Premier League games in 2014-15 and will be hoping for more game time next season, and can fend off his persistent groin struggles.
Brazilian side Corinthians confirmed that they had agreed a fee with Tottenham Hotspur for the services of Selecao international Paulinho. The box-to-box midfielder was being linked with several top teams but it seemed as though Spurs were going to be the lucky recipients.
The reported fee was rumoured to be around £17 million for his services.
Four days later the deal was confirmed - for £17 million.
Thiago Alcantara's reported deal to join Manchester United was 'very close' a year ago today. The Spanish international was discussing a deal with United after they had reportedly met Barcelona's release clause for the player.
However the deal had become protracted and some were concerned a deal was going to be laborious. That it was, because it never happened.
Thiago joined his former boss Pep Guardiola at Bayern Munich, after David Moyes was reportedly convinced by Ryan Giggs not to sign the player, on the 14th July.

Below is the fourth in a new series of blog posts created by those caring for children with a parent in prison that we have supported. The series aims to shine a light on the harms experienced by children and families when a parent goes to prison, and highlight the benefits that providing good support can bring.
The Wall That Divides Us.
The title of my blog may seem like an obvious choice, but as you will read, I’m not just referring to the physical prison wall dividing me and my children from my husband, their father, but also the metaphorical wall that divides society, prisoners and their families and the far-reaching consequences that ensue.
December 20th, 2019, the day that changed our lives forever. After an agonising year of not knowing, having a cloud hanging over our family whilst still trying to cling on to hope, my husband’s court date was finally upon us. Five short days before Christmas. A couple of weeks before this we had begun preparing the children for the worst, we have three boys who at the time were 17, 9 and 3. We had been open and honest with our teenage son about the possibility of his dad going to prison, there’s not much you can hide from them at that age. We had also explained in more child friendly terms to our 9-year-old about the situation we were facing, and that Daddy may not be here for Christmas, understandably he was very upset but still clung on to hope as children do. The hardest job was trying to prepare our 3-year-old, we couldn’t bring ourselves to tell him much only that daddy may have to go and work away before Christmas, he kept saying, “I don’t want daddy to go, can’t he go after Santa has been?” We tried to pacify the children a little by having a ‘early Christmas’ we allowed them to open a couple of presents the day before court in the morning, kindly left by Santa’s elf on the shelf, we told them, and we had organised a family Christmas meal out on the evening, it was a bittersweet day.
The morning of court arrived, we decided to still send the children to school, it was their last day before they broke up for Christmas, we hoped going to school would take their mind off things and their teachers were also prepared to support them if the day became too much for them.
We made our way to court, I was anxious and on edge, I felt sick and out of control, it might as well have been me in the dock that day because whatever the Judge was to decide was potentially going to be a punishment on us all, my family’s life was in his hands. We had been prepared by the barrister for a potential three-and-a-half-year sentence, maximum. Although I knew it was a real possibility, part of me still hoped the judge may be lenient, my husband was a hardworking man, he had never committed an offence before, he was extremely remorseful and played a minor part in the crime and Christmas was upon us. I wasn’t excusing my husband’s crime, and neither was he but I was hoping for a miracle. We waited all day to be called in, it was starting to become clearer that he wasn’t going to be coming home, I’d been in a similar situation before with a family member, the ones that went in last were the ones not going home.
The Judge handed down a 4-year sentence and in that moment life as I knew it slipped away, I quickly said goodbye through the glass screen of the dock as they led my husband away in handcuffs. I left the court room in tears with my head spinning, I noticed the barristers leave the court room hastily, I tried to hurry to catch them, but they disappeared down a flight of stairs. I waited stunned in the reception area for a minute thinking to myself they will come to me in a minute and make sense of all this and tell me what happens now, where will he be going? What do I do now? Nothing, they were gone, panic took over me, I managed to find the court Usher and asked him what happens now, would I be able to see my husband momentarily before he is taken to prison? He looked at me gone out! Before politely informing me that no I wouldn’t be able to see my husband and that he didn’t know where he would be taken but assumed that it was likely to be the local holding prison. I was in shock at this point, what had just happened? I ran from the court to outside and threw up and then broke down, the realisation had just hit me that not only did I feel completely alone in the world and scared, but I had to go home to my three beautiful boys and tell them that Daddy wouldn’t be home for Christmas, that life as we knew it was changed.
Me and the children were broken. It took every ounce of strength I had to get us through that Christmas, to hold them and nurse them as they sobbed for their Daddy, as they wished for Santa to bring him home, to forsake any toys they had hope of, in exchange for the man they loved and worshipped. I have never felt emotional pain like I did that Christmas, a big gaping hole was not only in my heart but in the atmosphere of our home. As a family we were grieving his loss from our hearts and our lives except there was nobody to tell us it was going to be ok, nobody was sorry for our loss. I felt completely helpless to protect my children from the pain they were enduring, in that moment I felt I had failed as a mother.
The anguish of that Christmas was compounded further. After the day of sentencing the weekend came, Saturday no phone call, Sunday no phone call, I was now panicking something was terribly wrong, I knew legally he was allowed one phone call, why hadn’t he rung, which prison was he at? Monday came, I phoned the solicitors, it went to answerphone with a message they were shut for Christmas until the new year, I was out of my mind with worry, it was like he had disappeared off the face of the earth. The children were in an absolute state of distress, worried sick and I was helpless to stop it. Then came the messages, have you seen the news on Facebook? Have you seen the newspaper? Sure enough the case had been reported in the local paper along with my husbands and his co-defendants picture, their names and the streets they live on. I wanted the ground to swallow me up, I couldn’t bring myself to look at it or read it and I certainly couldn’t read the comments. You see as a society we tar all prisoners/criminals with the same brush, scum, lowest of the low, reprobates and so on and as the family of a prisoner we also suffer the shame and stigmatisation for loving a person that made a mistake. I now feared for what my children may endure, the whispers in the playground, the frowns from other parents, the taunts in the street, being left off the invite list for their friends’ parties.
Christmas Eve came and I had to take matters into my own hands, I could not get through the next 24 hours not knowing where he was or if he was ok. I phoned the local holding prison again and pleaded with them to help me, I said I knew he was there, and we needed to know he was ok, I said “its Christmas Eve, please don’t let me and my kids go through Christmas day not knowing anything.” They took pity on me, after confirming his details to them they agreed to find out if he was there, but they would only be able to confirm if he gave permission. They gave me a time to ring back, I nervously waited and phoned back thinking I probably wasn’t going to get anywhere, I got through and the guard was able to confirm he was there, that he was ok, but he was under restrictions and had to have all his phone numbers security cleared first which could take up to two weeks. Relief washed over me, but this was short lived. Christmas week came and went, still no call, we just wanted to hear his voice, I worried about him not having any money for essentials, I worried what mental state he was in, anything and everything went through my mind. New Year’s Eve, my mobile phone rang, on the other end was a guard telling me he was ringing to inform me that my husband had been transferred to their prison that day and that he was ok, and he would be able to ring me as soon as his numbers had been cleared. I was relieved again but I was also angry, why couldn’t the other prison have done this, why did I have to plead with them on Christmas Eve for the sake of my children to get any kind of information, those first 11 days from his sentencing to his transfer had been absolutely harrowing for us. I managed to book a reception visit the first week of the new year, we’d still not had one single phone call or any form of contact in this time. I decided to go alone with my in-laws to this visit, as desperate as the children were to see their dad, I had to figure the place out myself first, to make sure it was not going to be a horrifying experience for them. He finally got his phone calls the day of our visit, so he was able to speak to the children which was a huge weight off their little shoulders. We started visiting the prison regularly, the family services at the prison did the best they could to make the experience as positive as they could for the kids.
As a family we were still very much in a black hole emotionally, not only were we dealing with the emotions of losing a massive part of our lives but financially we were in a black hole too. My husband was the main bread winner, I had post-natal depression and anxiety after the birth of our youngest son and had been unable to return to work up to that point, we was solely reliant on his wage and now that had gone, we had debts, debts that we could afford at the time but now I was left with a house to run single handedly, no income, debts to pay, three children to raise, feed, clothe and keep warm, on top of that I needed to support my husband financially in prison too, the average prison wage is £10 per week, the cost of items that can be purchased from the prison canteen are in line and often above what we pay on the outside, so £10 doesn’t even begin to cover it, the cost of phone calls are abhorrent, my husband puts £10 Credit on his phone every week to be able to speak to me and the children, that’s £40 a month it costs me, a one parent family on basic money to ensure my children are able to speak with their father, with all this financial pressure on top of everything. I felt like I was drowning. I remember thinking to myself at the time, things can’t get any worse, the worst has happened, we can only go up from here. How wrong was I, Covid-19 was about to rear its ugly head.
Mother’s Day, March 2020 was the last visit we had before the Covid restrictions began, we had a feeling it may be the last visit for the time being, naively thinking it would only be for a short while. The weeks and then the months passed by, Government press conferences were held with no mention of what was happening or going to happen with the Prisons and visits. I felt hopeless and helpless, the children were scared, what if daddy dies in there from Covid and we never get to see him again? I was scared, what if I got ill and had to go to hospital, who would look after my children? What if I died? both my parents were in the vunerable shielding category, support bubbles didn’t exist at this point, we were completely alone, the children didn’t even have school as a safety net as the schools had shut, they didn’t qualify for any special circumstances that allowed them to keep going to school even though having a parent in prison is recognised as an Adverse Childhood Experience. We were all alone with nothing but fear to fill the void, our only solace was the daily phone calls from my husband, he was also scared, he was locked up for 23 and half hours a day, terrified of what was happening on the outside and what was happening to me and the kids and powerless to do anything about it. I feared for his mental health, months of solitary confinement conditions would break the best of us.
Five long months passed and then finally Purple Visits (video visits) began to be rolled out, we couldn’t wait to see his face on the screen but what followed only compounded our children’s trauma further. The video calls were in their infancy, there was a lot of problems with it, in our first thirty-minute video call we managed around five minutes of conversation, the call kept cutting out, every time we spoke it would stop and say either something inappropriate had been said or an unauthorised person was on the screen, none of this was happening. Our youngest son who had just turned four at the time was so excited to see his daddy’s face, he couldn’t communicate or hold a conversation with his dad on the phone so seeing him face to face was a big deal for him, but every time he moved the slightest bit the video cut out, it was so sensitive to anything, by the end of that videocall my children were so upset, it was of no quality to them at all and did more harm than good. These problems carried on for some months.
In the August of 2020 around the same time as the videocalls were being rolled out, the prison my husband is at was one of the first to reopen visits, they had built wooden booths in the visiting hall a bit like when you go to a polling station to vote with Perspex screens and chairs either side. The visits were very restricted. One a month for one hour with a maximum of 3 visitors, 1 adult, 2 children, here come my next problem to make the heart-breaking decision of which child did I leave behind, which child would not be able to see their dad. Our 17-year-old very bravely and graciously made that decision for me, he wanted the younger ones to see their dad first, he told me he understood the situation more and although he was desperate to see his dad, he knew he would get a turn next, I was so proud of him but also upset that he had ever had to make that choice. The visits were a terrible experience, we literally just had to sit there, the children couldn’t get up, there was nothing to play with, they couldn’t have any physical contact with their Dad whatsoever, we had to keep our masks on, there was no holes in the thick Perspex screen, no speaker system, we couldn’t hear each other and we couldn’t lip read either, we could look but not touch, this was an immense barrier for the kids. Our 4-year-old became disengaged very quickly, and our 10 year old was in a state of physical distress by the end of the visit, I know questioned myself again, had I done the right thing in taking them? I decided to sit down with them when we got home and said to them if this was going to be too difficult for them that we would understand and we would wait for visiting arrangements to improve but our children all agreed that as hard as it was, they would still rather see their dad then not. They were willing to go through that hurt again to see the man they loved. They shouldn’t of ever had to make that choice, there could have been a better way.
Visits didn’t last long, we were back in lock down by the November, visits were closed once again and would remain closed until June 2021. In all that time there had not been one mention of prisons in the Government briefings, HMPPS and the Ministry of Justice had not given any rolling updates on prisons for months at a time, things were getting back to normal in the community but not in prison, the prisoner family community was losing all hope, left in a confused and helpless state for months, it wasn’t until July 2021 my children finally got to hug their father, 16 long months with no quality time or physical contact.
February 2021, I had joined Twitter in the July the previous year as that was the only way to get any update from the prison during the Covid crisis. I came across an article were a lady named Sarah Burrows who is the founder of a charity called Children Heard and Seen had been to give evidence at the Humans Rights Committee about how the Covid restrictions in prisons were breaching a child’s Human Rights, their right to a family life. It resonated with me so much, that’s how I felt that my children rights had been stripped for them, they were already traumatised from the loss of their father to Prison, have had to go through things children should never have to experience, deal with the impacts of the Pandemic and now their right to see their father had been taken from them too. I commented on the article and within a couple of hours I had a message from Children Heard and Seen asking me if I would like some support for myself and my children. I broke down in tears, tears of relief, for 14 long months I had been through this harrowing journey alone, not once in that time was any support offered to my children from anyone, nobody cared, we were left to deal with the fallout alone. I naively thought at the beginning, there would be some sort of official support for my children, I couldn’t believe there was nothing, no local agencies, no national government support, not even any tailored support packages from the school, although the school have always been supportive if needed, there is no official frame work to support children of prisoners anywhere.
Children Heard and Seen, Sarah and her team and all the lovely families and children I have come to know have been my saving grace, there were times before they came into our lives, I became dangerously close to giving up. My children have received so much love and support from them, my children have had one to one mentorship to help them process their feelings and fears, free of judgement, shame and stigma, they have supported me and giving me the tools to help my children through adversity. We have been to a residential weekend where we had the pleasure of meeting other families that are dealing with the impacts of parental imprisonment where lot’s of fun activities were put on for the children and this allowed their spirits to run free, to be children again. Through this I have also come to find myself as a person again, I have found my calling in life, I hope to be able to advocate and help these children as we have been helped. My only regret is that it took for this to happen to us to realise that we have an invisible group of children in today’s society, my goal is to help to change this narrative.
What I have learnt since being a part of Children Heard and Seen is shocking. At any one time in the UK, it is estimated that 312,000 children are affected by parental imprisonment, it is an estimate because in 2021 there is to this day not a single government agency that records how many children have a parent in prison, there is no official framework or package of support to support these children yet parental imprisonment is on the list of adverse childhood experiences, they are not recognised as children in need. Schools don’t receive any extra funding to give a tailored package of support to them, even though these children suffer bullying, shame, stigmatisation whilst dealing with immense grief for the loss of their parent from their lives. Local councils award extra funding to schools for children of parents serving in the armed forces to help schools support them through the periods of time they must be away from their serving parent and the upheaval it can cause to a child. These adversities are similar to those of children with a parent in prison, but they are not afforded the same care and I can only conclude this is because of the stigma and shame surrounding prisoner families. Society views you as guilty by association, not worthy of any help or care because your parent should have thought about that before they committed a crime. I encounter these comments on a regular basis, if only life was that clear cut. Are we saying as a society that a child’s suffering is justifiable because their parent made a mistake? Prisoner families and moreover prisoners’ children are innocent, they have done nothing wrong, as children they unconditionally love their parent and experience severe trauma when their parent goes to prison. These traumas can lead to a dissociation with law and society which then can lead on to intergenerational offending. Research has shown 1 in 3 boys with a parent in prison will go on to offend themselves.
It is time these invisible children are recognised, accounted for and supported from the beginning. Children Heard and Seen have shown in their own statistics that with help and support these children have much brighter future ahead of them, Intergenerational offending is reduced dramatically. The trauma they suffer can be reduced. Helping anyone associated with a prisoner is never going to be a vote winning issue but I implore you for a moment to put yourselves in these innocent, forgotten children’s shoes and see things from their perspective and to always remember crime does not discriminate, any of us at anytime could potentially find ourselves and our children in this situation.
We are nearing the end of our prison journey, but the impact it has had on us will remain with me forever, there can be another way to make this better for our children and I am determined in my lifetime to see this change come to fruitation, no longer will our children have to think and say #itwasntme.

Tuesday, September 13, 2016
Yeshua's first sign: water changed into wine by Isabelle Esling
Yeshua's first sign: water changed into wine by Isabelle Esling: 'On the third day, there was a wedding in Kanah which is in the Galil and Yeshua's mom was there. Yeshua and his disciples were also among those invited to the wedding. When the wine ran out, the moth...
The holidays had just ended. I was back to school, aged 15, and ready to meet our new religion teacher. "Another annoying guy&quo...
Presentation of “An Encounter with Yeshua”
Whether they are writers, musicians or painters, artists have different ways of conveying their message to their audience. However, they all...

Megan Hilty Biography
Megan Hilty is an actress and singer who has a net worth of around $4 million dollars. She has worked in a number of TV shows and films and has a career spanning over fifteen years. She has been married to Brian Gallagher since November 2013.
Hilty was born in Bellevue, Washington and studied at Carnegie Mellon College. She is the daughter of Jack and Donna Hilty and has two children.
Hilty graduated from the Carnegie Mellon School of Drama in 2004. She is a member of the Actors’ Equity Association and has received multiple honors and awards for her work. She has also performed on Broadway and appeared in several TV shows. She performed as the singing voice of Snow White in Shrek the Third.
Megan Hilty began her career as Glinda the Good Witch in the musical “Wicked”. Since then, she has appeared in several movies, television shows, and commercials. In 2004, she auditioned for the role of Glinda in the movie “Wicked.” She went on to star in the biopic of country music legends Loretta Lynn.
Megan Hilty is an American actress who has been nominated for two Tony Awards. She has been known for her role as Glinda in the musical “Wicked” and as Ivy Lynn in the movie Smash. She is married and has two children.
Hilty has an impressive income as an actress and singer. She makes a salary of approximately $235,000 per year. Her net worth is estimated to be around $2 million USD. The actress also has a lovely home and an impressive collection of cars. Her husband is a successful record producer.
Megan Hilty and her husband have been married for six years. They are close and spend a lot of time together. She and her husband have a daughter named Viola Philomena. Their wedding anniversary is in November. They are each other’s biggest fans and enjoy spending quality time together.
Megan Hilty’s sister Lauren Hilty was killed in a plane crash. The floatplane she was riding in had six other passengers, including the pilot. Sadly, the bodies of the other passengers have yet to be found. The crash occurred near Seattle and Whidbey Island.
The floatplane was on its way from Friday Harbor to Renton Municipal Airport in Washington. The crash occurred 30 miles northwest of downtown Seattle.

The two sisters, Christabel and Amanda, who were stolen by their father’s tenants in June last year, were sold for N500,000 each.
The Nation learnt that they were sold to individuals from Port Harcourt in Rivers State and Nnewi in Anambra State.
Christabel and Amanda, aged four and six, were stolen at Utese village in Ovia North East Local Government by two female tenants of their father simply identified as Mercy and Rose.
Mercy and Rose had spent only three weeks in their rented apartment when they stole the two sisters after their mother left them in their care.
One of the suspects, who participated in the transportation and sale of the two sisters, Joy Odum, spoke to reporters when three members of the syndicate were paraded yesterday.
The other suspects are Ruth Ese, 58, and Favour Uju, 45.
Another suspect, Esther, who helped Rose and Mercy to convey the children to Agbor in Delta State, is already serving a jail term.
Joy said the stolen sisters stayed with her briefly in Agbor before she took them to Ruth, who is based in Onitsha.
Madam Ruth contacted Favour in Imo State who brought the couple that paid for the children.
Ruth insisted that the children were still alive and that it was the police job to locate them.
She said the children were sold to childless couple.
According to her, “I gave them to this woman (Favour) and she gave them out. The children are alive. One is in Nnewi and the other is in Port Harcourt. The commission I got is N30,000. The man who said he brought the children from Cotonou sent his account number where the money was paid into.
“I told the children’s parents that they are still alive.”
Favour said she is a businessmen woman in Owerri and that she does not know the location of the children.
She said she only helped the couple to adopt the stolen children.
The children’s father, Spark Omokpia, had told our reporter that he would do everything to rescue his daughters.

Kapil Sharma, who is basking in the success of his popular show, The Kapil Sharma Show
visited Golden temple
in Amritsar to seek blessings of God. The actor reached there early in the morning and shared a picture on his Instagram account of the Gurudwara.
Kapil has been going great in his career ever since he made a comeback with season 2 of TKSS. The show is doing great on the TRP charts and is often in the list of Top 5 most watched TV shows.
On the personal front too, Kapil is in a happy space as he is all set to experience fatherhood. The Kis Kis Ko Pyaar Karoon actor, who tied the knot on December 12 last year is expecting his first baby with wife Ginni Chatrath
Kapil, who is all set to enter the new phase of his life, has become a complete family man. The host-turned-actor is mostly spotted spending time with wife Ginni and taking care of her. The two recently went on a baby moon to Canada and had a ball of time.
The two enjoyed some romantic time with each other and Kapil shared a post where they were seen walking hand-in-hand.
The couple is expecting their first child in December this year. Kapil had confirmed the news to Mumbai Mirror in the month of July.
He had said, "I just want to take care of my wife and be by her side for now. We are obviously very excited as it's our first kid but my mother is the most excited. She has been waiting for this moment for years now. We are just praying for Ginni and the baby's health."

Beloved hospital volunteer Plato Pavis dies at 97
Plato Pavis, a prolific painter, a tango champion, and the honorary mayor of the HealthPark hospital cafeteria, died on Saturday.
He was 97. His September birthday was celebrated with a surprise party at the south Fort Myers hospital where he had been a near daily presence since 2000. Over the years, he amassed thousands of volunteer hours at the hospital and a following of fans charmed by his heart, art, and verve for life.
"We have lost not only a wonderful volunteer but a person who brought good cheer to patients, family members, physicians, staff and other volunteers every time he arrived with his warm smile and Plato charm," said Jim Nathan, president of Lee Health. "His energy was boundless. His artwork was expressive and colorful. He always made sure you were having a good day."
Inspired by the Jimmy Durante song “Make someone happy,” Pavis gave away thousands of paintings to hospital staff, volunteers, and sad-looking strangers. Flowers, birds, and bucolic landscapes were his specialty.
A few years ago, The News-Press profiled him for its series, The Wisdom Project.
He shared his wisdom for leading a good life: If you make others happy, happiness will come to you. Another key was plunging in to his passions. As a young man, he did not just dance. He became a semi-professional and performed before 30,000 people with his wife.
"I enjoyed my life to the excess amount because I did everything I wanted to do and more," he said at the time. "You'll find I'm quite a character."
Born in a four-story tenement in Greektown in Chicago, Pavis lived quite a life. He witnessed Babe Ruth’s killer swing. He joined the Army during World War II and became a sergeant overseeing repairs to radar on planes. Back in Chicago after the war, he met and married his wife, Lillian. They raised a family and he provided by working up to 20 hours days at bowling alleys he co-owned before retiring early.
After moving to Fort Myers, he and Lillian began visiting HealthPark daily to walk and eat. Pavis was his wife’s companion through Alzheimer’s disease. She died in 2009.
Even well into his nineties, Pavis threw himself into painting, reaching for a brush as early as 3 a.m.
He painted during his final art show at HealthPark in early September and continued creating art through chronic pain and numb hands up until three weeks before his death when diseases of old age put him in the hospital.
Is there such thing as a good death? Plato Pavis was graced with a peaceful ending in what seems like a karmic reward for the joy he lived to spread.
One of the last things he ate was chocolate ice cream.
One of the last things he saw was his team win the World Series.
He managed to open his eyes to watch the game a bit and smile when the Cubs won it all.
On Saturday afternoon, his three daughters surrounded him in hospice, telling him how much they loved him, how they’d be all right on their own, how it was OK to go.
“Mom is waiting to go dancing,” daughter Patti Pavis Hanseck told him.
With their shared faith and assurances, she watched him pass from pain to bliss.
A visitation and funeral will be held later this week in Illinois.
A memorial will be held at a later date at the Annunciation Greek Orthodox Church in Fort Myers.

Well yo got your two minutes of fame telling Kelly off and hopefully embarrassing her maybe a little anyway. but in the end I had what most of the guys wantedo everyone that is but me. Besides the. Practical issue it had to be admitted there was a need to run away and hide from it all it was dreadfully humbling but she had to do it so mpened her mouth to ask permission to use the bathroom. We promised to meet the next ay for early breakfast because both our counter parts slept late we waved to each other several times as we crossed paths in rhe boarding process welcoming brunch and at the abbreviated evening buffet. They did no justice for her as they showed no trace of her figure but theyalso had him feeling curious wondering what she was wearing underneath i think you might have that flu th. T's going around. After. A few minutes he slid out of her ass causing her to moan and he scooted back to rest against the sofa she started rocking back and forth sliding up and down my dick before I reached forwarz and grabbed her sexy hips. Like I was saying I thought it might be nice to go back and watch it again without any interruptio. S. y. U know your sisters had a hard time sitting still. Then he grabbed my hips nd started pounding my pussy when he came back to the porch he was dressed an I was sitting on the couch looking out at the lake still naked. I don't cyre she said I show a lot more of me when I'm on the beach so I'm not worried about people seeing what I've got on under my blouse. she looked just as she had on the disco dan. E-floor. O then she says You could at least break a few of his bones and make him marry me. i went home Al came round later zWe got to sort these lot out he says.

John D. MacDonald was born in Pennsylvania and married Dorothy Prentiss in 1937, graduating from Syracuse University the following year and receiving an MBA from Harvard in 1939. It was Dorothy who was responsible for the publication of his first work, when she submitted a short story that he had sent home while on military service. It was initially rejected by Esquire but went on to be published by Story magazine - and so began MacDonald's writing career. One of the best-loved and most successful of all the masters of hard-boiled crime and suspense, John D. Macdonald was producing brilliant fiction long after many of his contemporaries had been forgotten, and is still highly regarded today. The Executioners, possibly the best known of his non-series novels, was filmed as Cape Fear in 1962 and 1991, but many of the crime thrillers he produced between 1953 and 1964 are considered masterpieces, and he drew praise from such literary greats as Kurt Vonnegut and Stephen King, who declared him to be 'the great entertainer of our age, and a mesmerizing storyteller'. His novels are often set in his adopted home of Florida, including those featuring his famous series character Travis McGee, which appeared between 1964 and 1985. He served as president of the Mystery Writers of America and in 1972 was elected a Grand Master, an honour granted only to the greatest crime writers of their generation, including Ross MacDonald, John Le Carre and P. D. James. He won many awards throughout his long career, and was the only mystery writer ever to win the National Book Award, for The Green Ripper.

Work has been keeping me super busy lately, so I haven't had much time to blog in a while. I feel like I haven't posted anything new in ages, but in reality, it's been less than a week. I have some ideas for some new posts and will hopefully post them soon. Hope everyone had a great weekend! Have a wonderful week!
A Wrinkle in Time
39 minutes ago

I ordered a 3-month supply of both GutConnect 365 and Synbiotic 365. I can't separate the effects of these products, but I can tell you that with taking both together I have seen a dramatic improvement with the symptoms that I was experiencing. I'm pretty sure I had leaky gut syndrome going on. I was constantly battling candida and had chronic severe anal itching at night. I also had a lot of psoriasis-like areas on my chest and back. I was also experiencing inconsistent and often loose bowel movements. I had tried a few other probiotics and dietary changes, but nothing really helped.
I took both products religiously as directed initially as I was experiencing some pretty serious discomfort on a regular basis. After 2 months I began to forget about using these products immediately every morning because I was feeling way better. I don't feel bad about missing a day now because I don't feel bad anymore. I have almost finished the 3-month supply of both Synbiotic 365 and GutConnect 365 and have ordered more. I definitely don't want to run out and will continue to use them.
The insane nightly bouts of itchy bum are all but gone. This in and of itself would be enough to keep me as a customer, but I'm seeing improved skin conditions and a much happier and more predictable digestive system.
Pros and Cons:
Bottom Line: Yes, I would recommend this to a friend

Walking down the street in south east London with their cockapoo puppy, Yasmin* and Rohaan* look like any other couple in their early 30s. Yasmin teaches at a primary school and Rohaan is an estate agent. They've just bought their first flat together, and are planning on having a baby in the next few years. But, despite all this being true, Rohaan is gay and bisexual Yasmin is in a relationship with another woman.
Theirs is what's known as a mixed-orientation or 'lavender' marriage, where partners of different sexual orientations marry to conceal their true sexuality. For Yasmin and Rohaan it was their family's religious and cultural beliefs surrounding same-sex partnerships that led them to marry each other.
After finishing uni in 2009, Yasmin met Rohaan while working at a property management company. "The owners of the company were very close family friends and the team were pretty much exclusively Muslim," she says. "So I knew I’d have to remain conservative about my sexuality and relationships. Rohaan and I often flirted and I was definitely attracted to him. After a few months, he asked me to go for dinner with him and then we started dating.
"We're both Muslim, so even though we were in a romantic relationship, I wasn’t anticipating anything physical. I'd had sexual relationships with men and women in the past, but Rohaan is more religious than me, so I assumed he intended to wait until he was married to have sex."
Born in the UK to Persian parents, Yasmin describes the community she grew up in as "much more liberal and open-minded" than Rohaan's. He moved to London from Pakistan -- where "homosexual activity" is illegal - when he was 20.
Once they started dating, Yasmin began to notice that whenever she mentioned her gay friends, Rohaan seemed very interested. "He tried to bring them up whenever he could, and I assumed his inquisitiveness was him being judgemental and intrusive. One day I snapped at him," she says. "I told him that if he had a problem with them, he'd also have a problem with me because I am bisexual."
He didn't speak to her for a while, and Yasmin assumed their relationship was over. But soon Rohaan told her he thought he might be bisexual, too, and swore her to secrecy. A year later, he came out to her as gay.
"Once I knew he was gay, we fell into a really close friendship but never actually ‘broke up’," she explains. Because their families still thought they were in a relationship, they started asking if they planned to marry. And Rohaan's family became adamant the wedding should be soon.
"Rohaan felt under a lot of pressure to get married to a woman and couldn’t see a way out, as his family would not be happy if he remained single. He knew they would outright disown him if he came out as gay," she says. "As for me, my family are tolerable of the LGBTQ+ community, but telling them I'm bisexual would definitely damage our close relationship irreparably."
By 2013, Rohaan had just started dating a man and the pressure was starting to seriously affect his mental health. "Rohaan’s parents are lovely, kind, generous people but they are from a country where homosexuality is illegal and they have their own religious beliefs which absolutely forbid it. He was worried his parents would arrange a marriage for him, and he basically begged me to marry him as a ‘cover marriage’. I thought it over and couldn’t really see an alternative option," she says.
Her parents were ecstatic and wanted to go all out with the celebrations, but Yasmin struggled with "the deception" and tried to keep the wedding as low-key as possible. "I couldn’t cope with them spending so much money on a false marriage," she explains. "I felt incredibly guilty for lying."
They moved in together in April 2014 and got married in October at a register office, then had a religious ceremony and celebration with their families. "Neither of us look back on our wedding day fondly," Yasmin says. "Rohaan and I hardly said a word to one another for the whole day. I had a lot of self-hatred for lying to my family and in front of Allah. Rohaan’s family are wonderful people and they were absolutely overjoyed on the day, which made me feel like the worst person in the world. If they knew the truth, they would be devastated. This way, everyone can happily live the life they want to live. I don’t agree with the lies but I believe we are making the right decision."
In many ways, Yasmin and Rohaan are like any other monogamous married couple. "We do get on very well. I love him dearly as a friend and I enjoy having him around every day. We live together in our flat and we have a new puppy! We are like half best friends and half old married couple," she says. But Yasmin also has a girlfriend she's been official with for four months.
"She has no issue with my situation with Rohaan, and they get on with each other. But she isn’t Muslim and is openly gay, so is struggling with not being able to act like my girlfriend in public. I don’t really know how we are going to tackle this in the future; I can’t expect anyone I go out with to never be openly in a relationship with me, but I am terrified of my family ever finding out," she says.
As Rohaan's family live in Pakistan, he is more relaxed about being seen out with same-sex partners. "He is single right now but he has had a few boyfriends in the past and for the most-part they live their relationships openly. This causes me anxiety because I am worried someone in my family will see them out together."
Both Yasmin and Rohaan would like to be parents, and they're currently discussing how that would work. "I'm a little hesitant about how it would affect our future relationships being married to each other, owning a property together and having kids together," Yasmin explains. "If I end up with a man, how will he feel about all of that? My other obstacle is what we do when we get into a serious relationship with other people. Where will we all live while keeping our families off our cases?"
They've also discussed moving abroad so they can live separately and have separate relationships without their families knowing.
Yasmin adds, "It's stressful and worrying, but it's the sacrifice we have to make to know we are free to fall in love with whoever we fall in love with."
*Names have been changed

i ordered product They put me on autoship. I didn't have money for second month so I sent product back.They called just now two weeks later and said they just received the product and it would take 4 to 8 weeks from now for my refund.
This scam company won't last. I don't care how good their product is. You treat customers like this and you won't last.
Don't buy from them.Customer Service rep was also rude when I spoke to her.I don't know why this company thinks they will do long term business with someone The way they treat people. Its a scam.
Monetary Loss: $65.

Christian Slater is an actor and producer. He has been involved in numerous films, stage, and television productions. He began acting professionally in 1981 and rose to fame following his 1988 role in the film Heathers.
Christian Michael Leonard Slater was born in 1969 in New York, New York. His parents and other family members were in show business and he attended the Fiorello H. LaGuardia of Music & Art and Performing Arts.
When he was eight years old, he appeared in the soap opera One Life to Live. Other roles and his Broadway debut were next. Christian Slater has appeared in over seventy films and had about thirty roles on television. He has been nominated for and/or won multiple awards.
Christian has had problems staying sober and has been arrested more than once. He has expressed how important that he feels his staying sober is to his life. On a more positive note, Christian has been involved with multiple charities. After his friend and follow actor River Phoenix died in 1993, he donated his Interview with the Vampire earnings to River’s favorite charities. In addition to this and supporting Nelson Mandela’s AIDS awareness charity, Christian has supported other charities, visited wounded soldiers, and more.
Christian Slater married Ryan Haddon in 2000. They had two children, a boy and a girl. They separated in 2005 and divorced in 2007. He later began dating Brittany Lopez. They were married in 2013.
We all go through positive and negative times in our lives. What we choose to do beyond our ups and downs can really make a huge impact on others as well. From his acting roles to his charity work, Christian Slater has had tremendous impact. Be inspired! Have a bright day!

Chris was knowledgeable, thorough, and helpful. He walked through the whole inspection with me, went through maintenance and required changes, and explained how I could go about making some of the most important fixes right away.
Chris Hill did a fantastic job with our home energy audit. He was thorough and gave us some great advice. He also identified some problem areas that we should take care of.
Overall a great experience.
Chris Hill was very professional in his inspection and explained everything he was doing in detail to both myself and my mom.
This gave us great comfort of knowing what needed to be done and what to expect in our future inspection.
I have used Chris for many many years! He is very Thorough, Knowledgeable and Logical. Takes time to explain issues in detail when necessary, and offers advice. All my Clients have been very happy with his service.
Excellent inspection. Chris was very thorough and knowledgeable. I feel very confident with his results. He took the time to explain his findings in a way I could understand. I would definitely recommend his services. Thanks Chris

However, fortunately, he helped her 3rd Brother to hold her back, and at the speed of 3rd Brother, this time should have arrived. At the moment, Ye Sishen had arrived. He didn't look at the place. He stopped the car, got out of the car, and walked in quickly. In the interrogation room, everything continues. The questions asked by Wen Ruoqing seem meaningless, but every question of hers has her purpose, except that others do not understand it, and of course, Mu Shaobai does not understand it. Yes, Mu Shaobai disguised it very well, but she couldn't hide her eyes. Even if it was a subtle one, she could capture it accurately and quickly-this is her job. Her question is just to verify the result of her tentative test. She saw that after she asked this question, Mu Shaobai's face was obviously embarrassed and uncomfortable. Anyone could see the embarrassment and shame, but what Wen Ruoqing saw was The moment he heard her, the pain flashed deep in his eyes, and there was a trace of suspicious emotion, and his body seemed to be slightly stiff. Wen Ruoqing is very clear about what kind of reactions are true and what kind of reactions are deliberately shown to others. "I heard that Mr. Mu's business is very big. At this age, he is not married, and has no children and no daughters, so he is not afraid of inheriting such a large family business ..." There is a bit of envy. Hearing her words, Mu Shaobai's slightly stiff body slowly relaxed. Outside the interrogation, Qin Wushao's face was directly black. What the hell did this woman do? Wen Ruoqing's lips were slightly hooked, and suddenly added another sentence: "However, these can also be inherited by Mr. Mu's brothers and sisters." "I don't have any brothers or sisters." Mu Shaobai quickly replied. At that moment, Wen Ruoqing found that his just relaxed body became stiff again. The emotions flashing in his eyes were a little complicated, but Wen Ruoqing Catch what she needs. "Okay." In the interrogation room, Wen Ruoqing suddenly ended the interrogation. Everything she wanted to know had already been answered. Ok? Qin Wu Shao was stunned, where did this follow? Just talk a few nonsense like this? That's it? Doesn't it seem too funny? Fortunately, since she entered the interrogation room, he had no hope, but the third brother said he must keep people. "Miss Tang, it's really trouble you. Regarding this case, I want to hear Miss Tang's opinion. Can I ask Miss Tang to go to my office." Wen Ruoqing went out to the interrogation room, and Qin Wushao went directly to her In front of you. Wen Ruoqing heard flattery in his words, his attitude was sincere, and his expression was also in place. I have to say that he disguised it very well. The average person would never see any abnormalities. However, Wen Ruoqing heard, he The tone of the voice is a bit fluttering, and it is not the truth. Moreover, it is clear that he does not understand the intention of her questioning in the interrogation room. Therefore, he certainly does not agree with her approach. Since he does not agree with her approach, how could he really want to talk to her? With his arrogance, if she does not understand her true intentions, should she be disdainful to her at this moment? "No, I still have something to do." Wen Ruoqing turned directly, intending to leave. "Miss Tang ..." But, Qin Wushao was caught in front of him a little faster, maybe he felt that his actions were a little eager, and he then explained without a trace: "About the case, Miss Tang Is there nothing to say? " "Secretary Qin wanted to stop me." Wen Ruoqing's eyes sank. The words at this moment were affirmative, not doubts. She didn't want to talk nonsense with him, let alone cause unnecessary trouble. "Isn't this all for the case?" Qin Wushao was slightly stunned, but his face was quiet. "Or should I ask Director Qin who wants to help me stop me?" Wen Ruoqing sneered. The senior asked her to come this time. Qin Wushao should know some of her things, no matter what the situation, Qin Wushao did not She should be stopped in this way, so she is afraid of others. Qin Wushao froze, she could see that he was going to stop him, which was not surprising, but why was she so sure that he was helping others stop her? "Miss Tang laughed, just about this case, I want to discuss it with Miss Tang." Qin Wushao suddenly felt a little guilty in his heart. "Director Qin's attitude, I won't take care of this case again. Today is the nineteenth day of Mu Shaobai's detention. Tomorrow Director Qin should be released." Wen Ruoqing's lips were ticked, the tone was obvious in his tone. A little bit more cold. "What did you find?" Speaking of the case, Qin Wushao's attitude changed slightly, and his face was a little more solemn. Thinking about everything in the interrogation room, he really didn't believe what this woman could find? However, she just saw through his mind at a glance, and could not tolerate his underestimation. What did you discover after listening to her? "Mu Shaobai's sexual orientation is normal. What he likes is not a man, but a woman." Wen Ruoqing knew that if Qin Wushao could not be convinced at this moment, she would not be able to get out. "Impossible, I have long checked this point, and there will be no mistakes." Qin Wushao directly denied. "This kind of thing does not need to be checked. Director Qin can verify it in the most direct way, the fastest and most real." Although that method is a bit rogue, it is practical. Qin Wushao quickly understood what she said was the most direct verification method. Her lips twitched slightly, and she didn't speak anymore. If Mu Shaobai deliberately concealed and deliberately released false news, they might have found false, but she The method described will never prove false. At the moment, her face was indifferent, but Qin Wushao even subconsciously believed her. "Mu Shaobai doesn't hesitate to mislead everyone with such things, so what he wants to cover up is definitely not a general secret." Qin Wushao is a wise man, and he immediately grasped the point, which is the focus of the matter. Wen Ruoqing smiled lightly. "Miss Tang knows what he wants to hide?" Seeing her expression, Qin Wushao's eyes were a little brighter, did she really find out? Yes, just in the interrogation room, he didn't see what she was capable of, but there was one thing he couldn't help but look squarely at. She was the one the elder brother had found, and the one the elder brother had found could not be innocent. "I originally planned to pass the relevant information to Director Qin after going back, but now it seems that Director Qin does not have any sincerity." Wen Ruoqing's lips twitched slightly, looking at the few standing in the hallway A policeman, is this going to keep her? How could Qin Wushao not understand what she said. He is the People's Police. This case has already involved a lot of lives. He is really afraid that after Mu Shaobai is released, someone will be killed. Compared with those innocent lives, he had to push his brother's orders back. "Miss Tang please ..." "Qin Wushao did not stop her." Wen Ruoqing took a few steps directly into the elevator. At the moment when the elevator was closed, Wen Ruoqing looked at Qin Wushao, with a mysterious smile on his face, and Qin Wushao kept looking hairy. "Third Brother, are you here? Well, she has gone downstairs." However, at the moment the elevator was closed, Qin Wushao immediately called Ye Sishen and heard that Ye Sishen had just entered the lobby on the first floor , Obviously relieved. He does n’t stop, but the third brother has arrived, so he can stop himself! The public security bureau has no basement. She can only go to the first floor now. At this moment, the third brother has already arrived. It is on the first floor lobby. The public security bureau has only one exit. As long as he waits on the first floor, she can definitely catch her. With the ability of the third brother, no one can escape.

With our 15th pick we took Jason Pierre-Paul. We had an opportunity to investigate him quite thoroughly. We traveled down to South Florida for his pro day. We brought him in just prior to the draft and spent extra time with him with regard to that. Much has been said about his one-year stay at South Florida. But that is fine. That speculation is fine. He is a very, very talented young guy who is very healthy, who tests out in all categories very well; long arms, rushes the passer very well. He has played down inside on the guard. He gives you a nice mixture in combination of people utilized in pass rush combinations. I think he can play the run. He has played on both sides – left and right defensive end. He has done that. He is very well thought of by the coaching staff. His position coach was retained and we did have a chance to spend quite a considerable amount of time with him. He had a lot of very nice things to say this young guy. He comes from a very humble background. Interesting introduction to the sport - his high school coach got him to play in a playoff game when he was a junior in high school. He hadn't played football – he was a basketball player. That started his career and of course his senior year in high school he became a football player. The rest is well documented. But this is a very, very talented young man with outstanding upside. It gives us tremendous flexibility in terms of the number of people that we have in our pass rush rotation. We expect that he will come in here and learn well. It will be an opportunity for him to spend a lot of time on the football – the playbook aspect of the game – probably something that he hasn't had the opportunity to do in his short number of years that he has played the game. So it will be a very important part for him when he reports out here to our rookie camp first and then in mid-May.
Q: What did his college coach say?
A: That he is a very eager young man; eager to learn, obviously doesn't have a great wealth of background in this sport but when you watch him play right away he certainly knows enough to adjust and maneuver on the field because he does. His pass rush arsenal includes inside moves and outside moves, a spin move. So he was very thorough in his description of this young guy and what he said is backed up by the tape.
Q: Did you get the impression that he can pick things up quickly?
A: I did. And according to all of the tests, that part of it is not an issue. The first thing that happens, as I have said many times before, is that the play book terminology is Chinese. It is something that they have to learn to understand what the terminology is. And that is the biggest problem for a young guy learning a new system. He has learned a new system each and ever year. But I think that he won't have a problem with the learning part of it; some of which you will have some obvious inexperience, you will have some things that he is asked to do that he has never done before. But as I said, he has played down inside, he has played both left and right defensive end.
Q: At number 15, it is a relatively high pick; a little more of a risk/reward kind of pick?
A: Yeah, but I think one of the things that we all did was, as you looked at the grades that were given to this guy, he was substantially graded. All of his tests came through and verified exactly where he was taken in terms of not only his ability but his off the field – his medical and all of those kinds of things. And we felt that as the round unfolded that here was clearly a guy who had outstanding grades, who was the highest graded guy on board when we took him. And I think you could find something about a lot of people. Some of the players that went before him seemed to have some aspect of their game which is questionable. So I don't think there is any greater risk here than another guy – a young guy who is very, very talented, who has tremendous upside, who we are looking forward to working with.
Q: When he played against Rutgers this year his name wasn't called a lot in that game. Did you guys watch the film of that game?
A: Yeah, we saw it, sure. Although it wasn't called a lot, am I wrong in saying there were two sacks in the game? Florida State, he had two sacks. So he may not have had his name called --- maybe they didn't know how to say his name. It is that P-P thing, you know what I mean?
Q: You have a lot of defensive ends now.
A: That is a good thing.
Q: Exactly. Some of them though have said things about wanting to start and not being really happy. With so many of them, do you have a delicate balancing act now?
A: Go play; let's play the game. Let's get on the field. Everybody has a chance to play. Everybody is going to contribute. It is a long season. We didn't rush the passer very well last year, so let's get back to playing football and rushing the passer and stopping the run and doing those kinds of things. And let's go back to what we did a couple of years ago. And we didn't do a whole lot of talking; we played. And I think that is something that we can do. We have had an outstanding offseason. With all of these defensive ends that are here, they are working hard. And we certainly would like to think that we have added to that group of young men who are good people and good football players. We have had success when we had depth and let's work at that aspect of it again.
Q: When you have a new coordinator like Perry Fewell, do you go to him and say, "Okay, when we get this guy, how are we going to use him? Do you see if it is on his agenda?
A: His agenda is my agenda. That is how the discussions will go. Have we talked about how this particular player will be used? Not yet, but we will when we approach the mini-camp and beyond.
TC on JPP
The Giants Beat Top Stories
The Giants Beat Podcast: Week 13 PreviewThe Giants Beat Podcast takes a look ahead at a crucial game in the Steel City.
The Giants BeatFriday at 2:46 PM
Shane Vereen back at practice with GiantsBig Blue will likely be getting a big weapon back to help Eli Manning and the offense eclipse 30 points for the first time this season.
The Giants BeatFriday at 1:55 PM
Odell Beckham Jr. eager to return puntsAdd returning punts to the long list of things the Giants are asking Odell Beckham Jr. to do so far this season.
The Giants BeatFriday at 6:51 AM
Giants defensive line living up to the hypeBig Blue's pass-rush has been wreaking havoc and finally producing at the level that fans expected prior to the season.
The Giants BeatThursday at 9:41 AM
Behind Enemy Lines: Pittsburgh SteelersThe Giants Beat’s, Scott Thompson, goes Behind Enemy Lines to talk to Steel City Insider’s publisher, Jim Wexell to get the in Week 13
The Giants BeatThursday at 9:31 AM

Death at ASPC Tucson 21st Nov
Tragically, on the 19th of November, an asthmatic inmate died in his cell.
According to prisoners housed on Yard 1, the inmate was 31 years old and only had 96 days left to serve.
Some inmates have claimed that the deceased was denied emergency medical treatment, and was seen being escorted back to his cell from Medical, barely able to walk. The medical staff may have erroneously assumed he was faking symptoms.
He died around midday, and his body remained in the cell for several hours after the death was reported because the coroner took so long to show up.
Email comments to firstname.lastname@example.org or post them below
Copyright © 2004-2005 Shaun P. Attwood
Jon’s book wishlist – he is allowed used or new books as long as they are sent direct from publishers such as Amazon.

As people know I’m a physician. I do mostly psychiatry and addictions. I believe somewhere around 100 people visited my community, my gym, my house of worship and scheduled as patients prior to my trip to LA.
Here’s what I heard about me after the fact: I was really rude almost everywhere and I have lousy teeth. However, in my office, as a doctor 99 people out of the hundred found me to be pleasant, understanding and congenial…not rude at all….they liked me, though they felt my practice was over-priced and I should only charge $100/visit. People changed their minds when they saw what happened to me and the quality of care I encountered.
In my office I’m extremely professional…and I can’t help it. I work as best possible to strict rules and standards which has saved my butt over and over again. I make mistakes, but overall I was pleased to hear that of the 100 people who came in only one disliked my manner. I’ve talked with him a few times afterward and I’ve been a big fan of his for years…he’s very funny. When I was grilled about this I was impressed by the kindness people showed especially by Arnold. I told what I thought was a hysterically funny joke which no one get except for him but it took him a while. I said I rejected him because, “…alright I’ll tell you…he was wearing a white skirt after September,” which he was. The group was shocked that this reason was so inane as to be unreal which it was. He responded, “your right…I was wearing a white skirt.” Then he thought about it and said, “Wait it minute…it wasn’t after Sept…” He then laughed and exhaled some relief.” I apologized and offered to take him out for lunch and a blow job, well maybe just one of them. Here are some other highlights of people showing up in my office. FYI…I recognized only one person, possibly two if you count the fact that when Christie Brinkley came in I got dizzy and said to my staff, “She reminds me of Christie Brinkley…she makes me dizzy!” She was so magnificent I wanted to take her back to my office and chat with her. She came in as a salesperson but I can’t remember for what. I didn’t bring her back with me, which I sometimes do with the sales people because I felt it would be a distraction and I couldn’t justify it. I’m generally extremely careful about not letting beautiful women distract me. My thinking generally is that nothing good will come of this. The only woman I positively identified though I only heard it in my head and didn’t pursue it anyway was Abigail Breslin. I heard in my head when she came in with her brother, “Little Miss Sunshine.” I had recently viewed a lot of pictures of her and she looked just like the photos. It didn’t hurt that I had a bit of a crush on her plus Little Miss Sunshine was a great film though she didn’t look anything like herself as a kid. The people who arranged the pairs to come in were smart and new I couldn’t resist a shapely ankle so the ladies would be sitting and the guy would face away and only turn once I saw the lady. Abigail’s brother did that and Charles did that when he came in with Martha.
I think the funniest two people to come in were Ron and Cheryl. I walked into the waiting room and they were there. I looked at them and could not figure out which one of them was the patient. The looked a bit excited and befuddled so I smiled and with that smile on my face asked, “Ok…which one of you is the patient?” And you know what they did? They each pointed at the other!!! Finally Ron said, “She is,” and Cheryl hid her eyes and said, “Oh yes…oh yes.” They came into my office and Cheryl put down her head on my desk and told her story which I can’t remember.”
I had a lot of young people coming in, college age and having some vague complaints. I deal with a lot of serious mental disorders most of these people just don’t cut and I’d let them know that I really don’t find that much wrong with them and I’d suggest some counseling and they didn’t need my services. None of them had any serious disorders that required my expertise. I’m uneven with counseling and there are people very skilled with it. I don’t try to milk a patient and if someone needs to come back more often I reduce fees or don’t charge them at all. I had so many people coming in with the same story I even commented on to one patient. If this was a college town I could have understood it but I guess it was a little suspicious.
Gay issues came up a bit. I’m from NY and had a practice in the East Village so I’m pretty non-plussed around gays and transgenders and whatever. To me it’s kind of like, “Who cares?”and I really don’t. I believe Reed came in with an issue as such which I thought would respond best to counseling. He wasn’t presenting with any significant mental disorder. I told him he was a good looking guy and should look to get into a relationship with some nice fellow. I think people were concerned that I would belittle the person, or judge or look down on them even after they left…but I don’t. They came in, paid me and are entitled to my best work, as best possible in a way that is supportive and the least judgmental as possible.
Greg came in a few times and I don’t remember the exact complaint but I would forget from visit to visit that he was gay. One day he brought his lover in, Elvis, whether they’re actual lovers or not I have no clue but all I could think was these were two really good looking guys. This was probably a judgment but I was thinking that here’s two less guys for the ladies to date in a shrinking pool of eligible men. Gay issues came up and I supported their lifestyle though frankly I generally don’t much how people live their lifestyles and I try to help people get through their issues with their paramours. I guess the ones who uncomfortable in some way with own identity I would send for counseling… it’s just too involved for my practice and counseling is needed.
By the way…I warned my staff that curiosity seekers would be coming through and people I pissed off, so I warned them about Christie, Shatner, Ron, Cheryl and a few other who in fact did show up.
Here’s where things got unusual. I’m very respectful of the patients though lately the federales have been sending in people who are trying to climb out of their own hells by climbing on my back. I’m called a hot-head by them, but with good reason. One of these guys asked me, “Ed can’t you let us win just one?” If I let you it’s not a win…idiot! This is what I have to deal with. They listen in on every session through my phone and I had to disconnect Alexa who was doing nothing but spying on me.
Anyway, my staff told me this guy was coming in… a professional… who was the guy who was taking into his home substance abusing women who earned money by selling their very personal wares. It seemed like a noble cause but some of the story didn’t hold up. Somewhere in here I think I got confused and I believe I may have had two men doing this. The man, came in at first with a very beautiful lady, in her twenties, I believe it was Paige. She was representing herself as Lady of the Evening. I provided treatment for her. I believe he waited in the lobby while I saw her. Then on this particular day he showed up with the same lady but he also brought another one who he was also taking care of. He wanted to sit in with the two women but the interview was only for the new gal. I asked her a lot of questions and she sat timidly, spoke in a quiet voice and shook. I wanted to look into her eyes. She hadn’t looked up at me at all and I asked her if she could look up at me. She said she couldn’t. I told her that I have to look her in the eyes and if she didn’t I would undress her and spank her! No I didn’t say that!! I told her if she couldn’t look me in eye I couldn’t give her any medication, which was true. I’ve always made it a point to look my patients in the eye, it gives me all the information I need. I told her she only had to do it once…big mistake on my part. The last time I can remember running into Bryce she took my breath away as well. She looked me in the eye and my heart skipped a beat. She wasn’t timid at all when she looked, she was powerful and strong with a touch of hope and query. She looked for about three seconds then looked back down and shook. This is where professionalism comes into play…or stupidity. Her eyes were the most beautiful and crystal clear I had ever seen…and more than anything I wanted to see them again but I had told her she only had to look up once, and I generally keep my word with the patients. I wanted to come around the desk and look her in the eyes again. more than anything I wanted to ask her, “Would you do me a favor and show me your eyes again? But I didn’t do any of that. I completed the session and walked them out. I remember clear as day walking behind these two beautiful women whose stories only minimally added up and admiring how perfectly their jeans fit on them. Like they had just been freshly pressed or brand new off the store shelf and I don’t believe they wore belts with them. It was incongruous that these ladies were streetwalkers, way too healthy, way too nourished and way to beautiful. I saw Bryce and Paige once at a karate demonstration with Mr. Bobby, “Here are two girls from…another school,” and I remember again how freshly pressed and perfectly fit Bryce’s uniform was, I’m sure Paige’s was as well who is as magnificent a woman as is her sister.
This may be the only time I’ve regretted my professionalism but who knows how this may have turned out if I had. This was part of a vetting process which apparently I passed despite a few conflicts. I’ve discussed Melanie and Clint before. I was sure if Clint showed up I’d recognize him…not!! Melanie desperately hated me because of the conflict I got into with her father. She came in with Clint and she was teary eyed and shaking and looking at me with hate, she wanted to kill me. Clint did all the talking and I’d look at him then her, then him, then her. The time I spent looking at her gradually increased until I stopped looking at him and just looked at her. I was thinking, “Is this about me or does she hate all psychiatrists? Then I thought about the corrupt DEA agent in, “Leon. The Professional” who said to Matilda something like, “What piece of shit thing did I do to have you want to come in and kill me?” Matilda responded, “You killed my brother.” I guess she picked up my thoughts because I told her whatever it was I did to you I’m truly sorry and again I wanted to cross over to the other side of the desk and hug her because I was truly sorry. They eventually left but Melanie had warmed up a bit. At one point we were looking at each other and things became sort of OK. I don’t think she saw me as such a monster. She would have been one of the 100 people who saw me as favorable in the office. I hadn’t considered this before but it’s nice to know this because she could have just as easily said incongruous things about me. From the film Forest Gump, “I guess ‘she’ made ‘her’ peace with God,” for which I am truly grateful.
Tom Hanks came through and I sat with him but I think he spent the whole time studying me as sort of science project or person who didn’t add up. I don’t think I was anything like he envisioned and he was having a hard time piecing this together. I got a lot of that and I still do, “This is the guy?” I can’t remember if he was with someone.
Lady Gaga showed up in the office, I believe for two visits she was absolutely the cutest thing I had ever seen. I asked her about that and she said she’d heard it before. She stomped out on the second visit as I recall because I ended it early because I thought she was going to climb over my desk to get at me. What I didn’t know was that the Howard’s were assigned to try and get rid of me from my JCC because I had discovered that it was being used as an undercover federal training facility and a bunch of shysters were skimming all of the moneys that were supposed to support their presence. The staff were overstaffing themselves at our expense and it only got worse from there. I calculated that the price of a yearly membership was inflated by at least 10% and more likely with all the other shenanigans going on closer to 30%. That meant a lot of people could not enjoy the use of the facility for economic reasons, pure gonuvim. Anyway the girls were assigned to sexually harass me. I was the enemy their and one of them writhed on the floor in front of me, another stuck her butt and bosom in my face, close, not actually touching but the most interesting was Lady Gaga who did jumping jacks on the second floor while I was jogging. I would go anywhere near her and I did my best to ignore them but Lady Ga was impossible to ignore. One of the other gals on the staff also joined in by wearing a wife-beater with Micky Mouse on it and pointing her tits at me. It took me a while to figure out this wasn’t a random act and was intentionally the most cruel of all as my family had been in the holocaust and whoever instructed her to do so new of my documentaries about WWII, but I knew she didn’t understand what she was doing. Here’s where things got really interesting especially for Lady Gaga and the T-shirt gal, probably a bunch of others…
I was tired of being the enemy there, I was hated by all and they wanted me gone but I knew my intentions overall were pure and good. I was doing standing meditation there for a while and decided if I was going to change the place I had to change my energy and have the people there align with me. I basically ran pure love and heart energy and turned the place into a place of love and kindness and healing. Nobody could really tolerate this and people changed. They didn’t see me as the enemy or a monster anymore. They became curious and wanted to know more about me. Their opinions changed about me, and for many their hearts opened and connected to mine. The gal with the t-shirt thought of me in beautiful ways and was concerned about me. If I ran the energy she’d have to leave because it was affecting her ability to work. She couldn’t be mean to me anymore and we’d think about each other as my heart was open to her. When I started meditating after that they’d have all the agents leave the room because they were all mostly affected. The gal with the t-shirt when it first happened wound up talking with two of ladies, one was Gaga, and told them what happened and they provided support but Gaga was caught in the crossfire and complained to me, “I was there!!” While hanging in the Howard basement I had grown close to two of the daughters but Gaga wasn’t there and I hadn’t developed the same kind of connection with her as the other two daughters, as well as their folks, who we shared a lot of good, difficult and unbelievable experiences with. It was a complaint on her part…I was there!!! Hence her anger and stomping out when I ended a session early because I got the sense she wanted more which I could not give. We did grow closer, she also knew I was huge fan of her before I met her though she told me not to sing her songs anymore because I mangle them…then she insisted I stop stalking her online because I had found out some personal information about her. I asked her if she noticed that she was actually on my Facebook account and that I had no friends on that account…she was on my page…I was not on hers. I’m psychically connected and listening in and typing responses on my own page. How would you get access to my page. Then she said, “You mean we’re stalking you?” and she started laughing hysterically and couldn’t stop like she had just smoked a bone and was peaking. She laughed and laughed and kept repeating we’re stalking you. It was pretty funny. I got the same reaction from Scotland Yard when they took over electronic monitoring of my devices. One of the guys told me to leave after I was talking with some of their agents for a while. I told him to leave, I said just close my Facebook page and you won’t see me anymore. It was also pretty funny. The gal with the T-Shirt who I developed powerful feelings for eventually had to leave…as did some others.
Lady Gaga and the other gal would have sat there with the t-shirt lady and tried to help her through while having to deal with their own feelings and appearing sympathetic to her.
Kristin Chenoweth showed up in my office one day. She came in with two other people, at least one of whom was in treatment. They may have been a couple and asked if she could sit in which I agreed to. She has to be one of the funniest people on the planet and loves having a good time…almost all the time. She sat off to my left and kibitzed the whole time. I can’t remember anything about the session other than Kristin sitting there and telling jokes. I’d look over at her and decide whether I was going to ask her to leave but I thought that at some point in her past she had a pretty serious substance use issue and decided to let her stay in case she needed some help or was helping the others. I just remember looking over at her with incredulity and thinking, “I’m trying to help these people and this lady keeps cracking jokes kind of like the annoying orange. She also seemed to know where the line was and not to cross it but I think she’s the one who decides where the line is and then moves it to suit her needs and wants. Anyway, the gal was riot and I’ve watched her dress up like Dolly and dance and act with Carrie Underwood and Christina Applegate about a dozen times. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NVs7VVv9HOc . Make that 13 times.
The next day:
Ron finally shut me down at about 2AM last night and sent everyone home. I lost some stuff which I’ll recreate at a later time. He must have gotten a sinus infection while in NJ.

New 2014-2015 Blenko - The New 2014-2015 Blenko Catalog is out now, featuring classic pieces as well as some new collections. We will be featuring items from the catalog over the...
Thursday, June 25, 2009
The auction for the banner pieces I mentioned a few posts ago was last Sunday and it was an amazing success.
The banners were hung all along Washington Street, and the auction took place on a blocked off section of Elizabeth Street next to Bluegrass Kitchen. All the pieces went for high prices, but the surprise of the night was that my piece went for a whopping $675, the highest price for a single piece lot at the auction. I was blown away, and still can only sort of believe the bidding war that took place.
Yes, that is a drag queen auctioneer. Her name is Ms. Vikki and she did an amazing job, and as it turns out also cuts my girlfriend's hair. I couldn't have been happier with the auction or the project as a whole, but more important to me is what it meant to my family and friends that could be there. They were all ecstatic when my piece went for such a high price, and I think it was because this was something to do with my art that they could really get excited about and participate in, rather than the usual "Hey, I designed some T-shirts and they sent me a check." I've been just as proud of many T-shirt designs as I was of this banner piece, and I've made plenty more money from shirts, but this just seemed to mean so much to everyone, almost like a validation of my career as a professional artist. I guess that just goes to show that it's all in the presentation.
Also, in what I consider a very Kyle Quinn move, I approached all the losing bidders for my piece and gave them my contact info, and I already have several orders for more prints. I think I'm going to only offer unframed prints, though, as that only seems fair to the gentleman who spent over half a grand on the first one.
Posted by Glen at 9:55 AM

We started with the customary Shanghai interview questions. In this transient city, the first or second is most always "how long have you been here?"
"I've been here since before the June 4 riots." He said. This was shocking not only because I rarely hear Chinese people speak of it, but also because we'd only been chatting about a minute. Some introduction.
"But we can't put this in the magazine, can we?" my co-worker asked, wondering if we should redirect the conversation. In truth, we can't go anywhere near June 4, 1989. Once I wrote that an interviewee who'd had "problems with authority" was fired in 1989, our censors told me I couldn't write the year or the part about authority. Still, I was interested in what this guy had to say so I told her to continue asking him about it.
I was happy to have this particular co-worker along. She's young and sharp. At one point the Tiananmen Incident came up in the office and her comment was, "well nobody really knows what happened," to which another (Western) co-worker responded, "actually, I think it's well documented in publications outside of China." She responded with, "but those journalists could be lying to promote Western interests."
This wasn't a reactionary, nationalistic conclusion on her part, it was a natural one: Chinese media is the mouthpiece of the state, it's their job to promote the government's interests. Sure, she was off base, but not as off base as a knee-jerk Western reaction might conclude: in recent years evidence surfaced that no lives were lost in Tiananmen Square (to be sure, plenty were killed in Beijing streets after the square was cleared), but it appears the US government and Western journalists let the depiction stand. This is one of the world's most iconic protest photos - why sully the emotional pull of "Tiananmen Tank Man" with the caveat no one died at Tiananmen?
So we continued our chat with the hair salon guy. He'd only been in Shanghai a week when protests broke out here. He'd come for work with a few other young guys. He was living near some of the students protesting. He said some in his group were scared. As I've heard it told by another man who was in Shanghai at the time, local government was much savvier and less heavy-handed than in Beijing. There was only maybe one day where the protests prevented goods from getting into the city.Still, people panicked and the cost of food and supplies shot up. The hairdresser told me some people wanted to go home, but he chose to stay. He said he liked Shanghai and thought that life and opportunity here were worth fighting for. He didn't mention democracy, he seemed to be more taken with the emotional appeal of the movement and the students' passion.

Updated: Sep 1, 2019
The other day I was caught off guard when I received a random email from a gentleman asking if I could run with him and his wife. He and his wife were going to visit Grand Rapids from St. Louis for a long weekend to enjoy the micro-brew scene here. The two of them are training for a half marathon and wanted to continue their training during this vacation. So with not knowing the area, I was asked if I could join them on their training runs to explore the area. I was more than happy to do so. We ended up running a twelve mile route around the city.
I never thought of the idea, but it makes sense. According to Runningusa.org, there were 18.3 million registered road racers for the 2017 season. With that may people committed to racing, I can see why runners are keeping up with their training over a vacation.
So if you are visiting Grand Rapids and need a running partner for a run send me an email. What better way to meet like minded people? Who knows maybe I will need a running partner in a new city. I can also provide suggested areas or routes to run on your own. There are a few run groups here in Grand Rapids to join too. From a runner to a runner, I am not looking for anything in return.

Janelle James is a Porn Star from United States. She was born in Los Angeles. She is listed on FreeOnes since 2013 and is currently ranked 21088th place. She currently has 9 gallery links in her own FreeOnes section.
Our records show that Janelle James is currently active which means she is still making movies, doing live shows and/or doing photo shoots.

|April 08, 1953
|70 YEARS OLD
Ron Wright, an esteemed politician in Texas, is anticipated to possess a net worth ranging from $100K to $1M by the year 2024. With a career dedicated to public service and political activism, Wright has gained recognition for his contributions to the state's governance. As a respected figure within the political landscape, his net worth is a testament to both his financial success and his commitment to his constituents and their needs.
American politician elected to Texas's 6th congressional district in the House of Representatives in 2018. He was reelected in 2020. He died on February 7, 2021 from COVID-19. He was a Republican.
His first job was milking cows on his family's dairy farm in Springtown, Texas.
He had two pet Labradors named Belle and Beau.
He had a wife named Susan Wright. They had three children and nine grandchildren.
He was the first member of Congress to die from COVID-19. A congressman-elect from Louisiana, Luke Letlow, died in December 2020.

The paper "Equality and Justice" is a wonderful example of a social science's essay. Vacationing at my aunt’ s place was both an enjoyable as well as a learning experience for me. We would sit around the fire, as each would tell stories or some experience they had heard of. My cousins and I enjoyed these sessions as each one would come up with one interesting tale after another. On one such occasion, my aunt told us of a beautiful story which had taken place during her days in the boarding school.
Her story was about a girl named Josephine who studied with her but came from a very poor background. Her father was a gardener in the school and her mother a bricklayer. She lived in a poor hut with her other four brothers and her parents. Being a girl, the parents requested the Headmistress and Superior of the school Mother Rosemary to give their daughter Josephine a seat in the school. Her parents being uneducated could not help Josephine in her studies, but her resilience carried her forward from class to class in flying colors.
Josephine’ s classmates loved her a lot because of her down- to- earth attitude and her willingness to help others who were poor in their studies. By sheer determination and with a winner’ s attitude, Josephine went on to pass the 12th grade with a first class. When the Superior asked her what she wanted to become she said she wanted to be a doctor. Mother Rosemary and the rest of the staff were shocked at the answer because they knew the amount of money that was needed to earn a doctor’ s degree.
After much debating and discussing, it was decided that the school would pay for her studies by getting some good sponsors for her. Josephine seemed to have all the luck as many people came forward to help, seeing that she was one of the best students. She shone brilliantly in college and came out after earning her Doctor’ s Degree. She is presently working in one of the best hospitals and continues helping others. This story has taught me that, if an opportunity is given to the right people, wonders can take place as in the case of Josephine.
All are equal in the eyes of God no matter what their caste, religion, color or background. By continuing to help other less fortunate in the society, she has done justice to her education.

Police officers were perplexed to find Stefon Diggs' Mercedes-Benz G-Wagon abandoned by Miami train tracks this month, with one cop even noting, "That's at least a $160,000 car!"
It's all captured on new police video obtained by TMZ Sports ... which shows Miami-Dade Police Dept. officers in the seconds after they were dispatched on April 18 to look at an abandoned vehicle near the Miami airport.
In the footage, you can see officers and other authorities discussing the ride ... and wondering out loud what it was doing there and how it got there.
They noted it had tire damage, they saw it was locked, and they made it clear nobody was in it or around it.
Eventually, one cop told another on the scene, "Nobody's inside the car, man. But, that's at least a $160,000 car!"
The officers then tried to piece together how the vehicle could have ended up abandoned there ... with one cop saying, "He was just coming southbound and then he lost a piece of his tire and came all the way down."
An official on the scene then joked, "Unless a helicopter dropped him there."
Ultimately, cops ran a search on the car and found out it was Diggs' ... and you can see in the clip, the cop recognized the name right away.
"He's a wide receiver," the officer said. "He's a wide receiver for the Bills, boo."
In an incident report, officers noted the car was "stuck in gravel, off the driving road" and had "scratches - dents" on it. They also noted they towed it shortly after discovering it.
It does NOT seem cops are investigating the incident further ... the report lists the case as "closed."
A rep for Diggs tells us there was NO wrongdoing involved in the incident ... saying the car was NOT stolen and adding that Diggs wasn't even in town at the time of its abandonment.
The rep tells us Diggs had lent the ride to a friend, who left it abandoned after it had gotten a flat tire.
"[Stefon] was not driving the car," Diggs' rep says. "He allowed a friend to use the car while he was gone. Unfortunately, the friend had got a flat tire with the car."
The rep says Diggs has since taken it to a Mercedes-Benz dealership to have its damage repaired.

As Izaya watched from where he lay, body twisted at an awkward angle, normally teasing red eyes dull, he wondered why he did this to himself. Over and over and over again. But his mind always gave him the same answer; you like to be used. You like to be broken, to be caused pain, to be told that you are worth nothing.
And he did.
He loved it so much that he could reach out and touch it. Touch it and hold it to his heart, cradle it against his chest like one would a small child. But not really a child, because Izaya loathed children; too much crying and needy wants and trivial things that did not concern his interest. Fact was, Izaya loved to trap himself in a bit of despair that grew and grew, a pit that constantly dragged him down and caused him pain. But he liked the pain, because he was Orihara Izaya, and Orihara Izaya liked it when blood seeped through his fingers.
Even if it wasn't his own.
But this time ... This time was different. Not in the injuries inflicted along his pale frame, but in the feeling of it all. There had been no hate this time, not a shred of anger nor rage. It was almost as if it happened because Shizuo wanted it. Wanted it, the act, rather than the outlet that he usually used Izaya for. When they had sex, there was anger. And in that anger, he was hurt, and torn, and punished, and with every fibre of his being, Izaya consented to bleeding, tearing, and aching in Shizuo's hands. Because when the both of them were forced upon each other, it provided a pathway for the feelings that neither of them wanted to explore.
The feelings of struggle and violence, the feelings of an emerging emotion that had no right to enter into their equation. It was a delicate process, and the annoying little emotion known as love had no right to destroy it. Because if Shizuo loved him, then it was all over. If he loved Shizuo, then it was all over.
Because two who were not meant to be were not meant to become one.
Izaya would lose the only one able to satisfy the need inside of him, the burning ache that demanded attention day in and day out. The wanting of pain and suffering, of the degrading that was forced upon him. He had been raped and beaten as a child, and from that time stemmed the being that he was now; ruthless, cold-hearted, and a player. And it had also brought with it the horrible wanting of being abused.
And even with the loathing that he felt towards it, the anger and hatred towards the feeling, Izaya couldn't stop. He was addicted to the feel of warm blood sliding between his fingers, to the feel of it easing Shizuo's throbbing need into him, the sensation as it ran from the claw marks in his shoulderblades. And he would allow himself to bleed for Shizuo, to let the man who had always been chasing him finally catch him, make him moan and quiver with desire as the words of the damned were whispered into his ears.
When everything was all over, he wrapped the bandages onto himself in silence, never once sparing a look in Shizuo's direction. Several moments of expectation and burning smoke in the back of his throat would pass, and then the door to his room would click shut, and he was left sagging against the mattress, waiting in anticipation for the next time that this bed would be used.
Even now, as his body lay bleeding and shattered on that same mattress, Izaya wondered when Shizuo would come back, come back to take away the pain in his heart and the wanting from his limbs. But somehow, he sensed that tonight had been the last time, the last time that he would bleed, and ache, and cry tears in the arms of the stongest man in Ikebukuro.
Tomorrow would be the start of something new. Something that he could not control.
With it would come love, and affection, and commitment, but not to himself. Izaya would allow himself to be led around on a chain, one that he had crafted on his own. Because he was not perfect, that he realized now, he was not perfect, for he bled and cried and whimpered, just like any other human out there. The realization was painful, and made a dry, crackled sound leave his throat, but Izaya could not force himself to move any further.
Warm arms wrapped around him, and tugged him against a firm chest, and the raven gave in to the things locked away from the world. And simple words were whispered into his ear, making him shiver with fear and temptation, for he wanted nothing more than what the words promised to him.
"No more, Izaya. No more."
So like, I haven't written anything for Durarara! in a long time, but I was reading this doujinshi where Izaya drugs Shizuo and then fucks himself while Shizuo is all loopy, and somehow this little idea popped into my head. Kinda short, but I may turn this into more chapters. Hope you enjoyed~! R&R, maybe~ ^o^

Parallel World 13
Summary: AU- When Enrico became Decimo, Vongola became more corrupted than ever before. Both Italy and Japan was subjugated under his rule, causing thousands of lives to be ruined. In Namimori, Tsuna had been trained since young by Reborn to become the true Vongola Decimo that Nono passed his will onto. All that's left is to find his Guardians and take on the Vongola.
Disclaimer: I do not own Katekyo Hitman Reborn!
From a different time, boys and girls and children and adults would marvel the sunset. They would stare while being filled with calmness a sky could only bring; however, no one had the time to do that anymore. No one wanted to because it would remind them of the state the world was in; the crimson sky that slowly disappeared into darkness... the blood stained world that only knew of hatred...
If the sky united people, should it be determined that whoever resembled the sky would unite people based on hatred? Should the basis of the sky be about the bloodstained paths even children lead? If the sky produced crimson color akin to blood, should the person resembling the sky cause blood to pour and color the ground?
Many think it would be inevitable even with the most innocent of people. To be naïve was to give up your life. To be considerate was to set oneself for a life of betrayal. To be forgiving was to be foolish.
That lesson would be drilled in the most naïve of minds. That lesson would be forever engraved in the most innocent of minds. That lesson would be understood but not followed by the most forgiving of minds. That lesson would be rewritten by Sawada Tsunayoshi.
"You're a disgusting sight, Tsunayoshi," his senpai snorted. "Just because you were adopted into that Family, you get the same privileges as us. Disappear from our sights."
Tsuna tightened his fists, feeling his nails pierce his skin. He lowered his head as his caramel bangs shadowed his face to block his blazing eyes from anyone's sight. He did not want to see the faces of the sons and daughters of the Mafiosi who took his parents' life. If he did, he knew his rage would control his actions.
"Are you listening? Disappear already!" Tsuna applied more pressure on to his hands. Blood trailed down his hand and crimson dots tainted the white tiled floor.
His senpai raised his fist in irritation with a scowl decorating his lips. The fist came closer and only a few more seconds were needed before the distance between the brunet's face and the fist would be closed. "Stop."
The word, as if by magic, froze the fist in place. A murderous aura covered the brunet as he slowly raised his head to meet his gaze with his senpai. It was a fierce gaze that knew almost no warmth or kindness, just like the world. It was ironic he would give such a gaze when he was probably the kindest in the area, but hatred was always something that changed the hearts of people, even if for an instant.
Tsuna's seething rage seemed to grow the longer he glared at his senpai; however, he closed his eyes and loosened his fists. I am not going to lower my status because of them. They took too much away from me.
Tsuna opened his eyes again; this time they were less narrowed, but the caramel orbs held a resolution no other would possess. His senpai continued to stay frozen, but was it from fear or awe? Perhaps both?
"You will never see me again as the inferior Dame-Tsuna. Tonight, the truth shall be set free," Tsuna whispered as he walked away. Tonight, the truth would be made known to the public, the truth Tsuna had been waiting for. A smirk crawled on to his lips. Tonight was the first step towards taking down the Vongola.
Trust was a word that lost its meaning. Fear was something that inhabited every corner or alley. Greed was the darkness that bit a hole in every person's heart. Everywhere Gokudera looked, one of the words could be applied. If another person was arrested, it was for greed. If a friend or family member turned their back on someone, there was no trust. Nothing needed to be specified for fear since it was everywhere.
And yet, Gokudera's heart was filled with hope that there would be someone who would not be tempted by greed or shaken by fear. He hoped there was someone who could trust another with his life and not regret it. That was the person Gokudera Hayato wanted to follow, but it sounded as real as a fairy tale.
Nevertheless, he longed to put an end to this horrendous world. For that to happen there needed to be someone who had those qualities, and just like the furious storm, Gokudera Hayato would put all his time and energy, passion and strength, into helping that person; however, the only problem was to find a person like that, a person with a powerful resolution.
"Hayato." Gokudera paused in mid-step, his mind trying to grasp the reason behind the familiarity of the voice. He turned around and his eyes instantly narrowed; he met emerald the same shade as his eyes.
"What do you want, Bianchi?" Gokudera snarled, ready to turn around and forget about this meeting. Bianchi took a moment to examine her younger brother. If the world was not this corrupted, would Gokudera still hold this resentment?
"I have an invitation for you. It's from a close acquaintance of mine," Bianchi replied as she took a black envelope from her pocket. Gokudera snorted and started to walk off, but a hand grabbed his arm. Just as he was about to retort, Bianchi drew him into an embrace. In the hug, Bianchi whispered in Gokudera's ear. "You have the opportunity to follow the one who will change this world. He's the true Vongola Decimo."
Gokudera's eyes widened, but he soon closed them to hide the excitement dancing in his orbs. He pushed Bianchi away but took the envelope. As her brother was walking away, Bianchi smiled. This was the most she could do for him. The rest was up to him.
Gokudera leaned against the wall of the alley while carefully opening the envelope. The letter inside was plain with black ink. However, the words inside made him smirk.
As he put the letter away, Gokudera said, "Tonight, the truth shall be set free."
In this world, there was no happiness. Every day one can see someone dying or being murdered. For example, there's blood on the street. Over there was a collection of rats eating away at the flesh of a corpse. Then over by the corner were two Vongola guards laughing at the cannibalism people had to perform in order to survive.
Yamamoto loathed it, so how could he still smile and laugh in days like this? It was simple; he smiled and laughed at the end of those Vongola's lives. He could just imagine them begging for mercy and screaming pleas of forgiveness.
Of course he would not forgive them. Slash. There goes a leg. Slash. There goes an arm. Slash. Off comes the head. He could just picture it, those Vongola being hunted down, and who would be one of those who would hunt them down? He, Yamamoto Takeshi, would surely participate.
Where did his naivety go? It died the day the Vongola along with other Mafia famiglias took his mother and murdered her in front of his eyes. He could still see the blood that poured out of his mother's mouth and the organs that were twisted out of her body. He could still picture her heart being ripped out. He could still hear the mocking laughter from the Mafiosi who cut her flesh into thin pieces in "honor" of his mother marrying a sushi chef.
He absolutely loathed them. His naivety died along with those men who killed his mother, and who was the one responsible for killing those Mafiosi? It was none other than Yamamoto Takeshi. His eyes grew dark for revenge as killing those Mafiosi was not enough. His mother's life was worth more than them.
One look in the mirror and Yamamoto knew he had gone far down the path of hatred. But everyone went down this path, right? In this day and age, surely there was no one who was not tainted by hatred. If there were someone who was not on the same path as him, he would love to meet that person.
Maybe that person would be able to restore the world? Maybe but that was only if there was someone.
Knock! Knock! Yamamoto drew his sword, his Shigure Kintoki. "Takeshi, it's your father. There was something on the counter addressed to you."
Yamamoto closed his eyes for a few seconds before opening them. His eyes no longer held the bloodlust or the deep swirls of hatred. "Alright oyaji. Let me dry my hands first."
Yamamoto hid his Shigure Kintoki under the mountain of towels and headed towards the door. He unlocked it and gave his father, Yamamoto Tsuyoshi, a giant grin. Tsuyoshi, however, did not smile back. The solemn look on his face alerted Yamamoto.
"Takeshi, this is a private matter that only you can decide, but I want you to remember that you are a successor of the Shigure Soen Ryu. Only you can make and lead your path as a swordsman," Tsuyoshi said with great conviction. Takeshi seemed taken aback by the sudden words. Nevertheless, he registered their meaning.
Takeshi nodded his head and Tsuyoshi gave a smile full of pride to his son. It was up to Takeshi on what he wanted to do. It did not matter if Tsuyoshi wanted his son to be as far away from the Mafia as possible. It did not matter. Yamamoto Takeshi was on his own journey as the successor of the Shigure Soen Ryu.
Tsuyoshi handed his son the envelope, but Takeshi did something his father would never expect. Takeshi gave a ninety-degree bow, a bow full of respect for his father. A bow saying sorry for the future mistakes and disgrace he would cause for his father. Tsuyoshi's smile as well as his eyes softened.
"Takeshi, stand up," Tsuyoshi said. Takeshi did as told and met his father's wise eyes. "Your mother is already happy for you, but she would want you to remember the good things in life. You don't have to force yourself to smile or laugh."
Takeshi's eyes widened, but before he was able to say anything, his father was gone. Takeshi tightened his grip on the envelope; he would make his father and mother proud. He would change this world even if he died in the process.
Suddenly feeling the urge to read the contents of the envelope, Takeshi ripped it open and took the letter out. The letter was plain with only black ink. However, the contents amazed Takeshi.
"Hahaha, so that's how things are done," Takeshi said. His lips changed into a smile, a real smile that had not existed ever since his mother died. "It looks like tonight the truth shall be set free."
There were good and bad sides to the Mafia. There were good and bad bosses of famiglias. There were even some that sacrificed their lives in order to let their subordinates live. One of them was to be forever remembered by a young individual.
May the boss of the Bovino Family rest in peace.
Lambo tried to control his tears as he wandered the streets. The Bovino famiglia's boss had been a good boss, but the thirst for power and dominance was too much for the Bovino Family to push back. Thus, it collapsed.
Alarms rang throughout the mansion, causing disturbance and chaos to erupt. Red flashed through the halls from the alarms, fire, and blood.
The sounds of gunshots, walls collapsing, and screams filled with agony were heard by everyone. The more time passed, the more frequent these sounds became. The curtains burned into crisps as well as furniture. Smoke lingered everywhere.
Lambo, a young child dressed similarly to a cow, gripped his blankets tighter. What was happening? Where was everyone?
Bang! Lambo ducked under the sheets and shivered. Who was there? "Lambo, come out. It's me." Upon hearing that familiar voice, Lambo peeked out of the blankets. His sea green eyes widened instantly. What was the red liquid on his boss's face? Why was it staining his boss's clothes? Why was it everywhere?
"Lambo, listen to me. You have to escape. You have to leave this place and do not come back. Don't ever come back here, understand?" Boss said urgently while holding Lambo's shoulders. The young child nodded his head but stayed frozen. Boss picked Lambo up in his arms and handed him a black envelope. "Open this envelope when you are far away from here. It should tell you what to do. Then go to Namimori, Japan. That's the safest place for you right now."
Lambo looked up at his boss's face and tried to ignore the red staining his face. "Why does Lambo-san have to leave? What is happening to Boss and everyone else?" The Bovino boss shook his head.
"Lambo, find the true Vongola Decimo. Tell him the Bovino Family is supporting his decision," Boss said with determined eyes. "Now go Lambo. Boss is proud of you."
Salty tears slid down Lambo's face and left dark dots on the ground. Don't cry. Don't cry. Lambo tried to stop his tears, tried to stop remembering what happened.
"L-Lambo-san will cary out B-Boss's last orders. Lambo-san will make B-Boss proud again," the young child said through sobs. He wiped his tears away as he tried to read the letter from the envelope. "T-Tonight, the truth s-shall be set f-free."
What happened if the only one you cared about disappeared? One would feel saddened and guilty. Did the person leave because of what you did? Then what would happen if the only one you cared about was taken from you forcefully? One would feel bitter and furious. Who were the ones who took her away? Who were they? One would ask those questions in order to take revenge. Hatred made a home in the heart of Sasagawa Ryohei at the age of eleven.
It was during the night when there was no light in the sky since the clouds shrouded the stars and the moon. The Sasagawa household was only made up of Ryohei and his younger sister, Kyoko. Their parents had passed away years ago so Kyoko only had Ryohei to lean on.
Ryohei promised to protect his sister, his only living relative and most precious person. He promised to keep her safe from the Mafia, the ones responsible for the world's disorder. He promised to keep her alive. He promised many things.
They were in the basement with Kyoko, a nine year old, grabbing her older brother's sleeve and hiding her face in it. Ryohei had been patting her head and rubbing her back to calm her. It was not her fault that she was frightened. Who would not be when there were gunshots outside along with the shout of profanities?
The only reason Ryohei was calm on the outside was to reassure Kyoko that everything was going to be fine even when he did not believe it. He did not want her to cry. He did not want her to be scared. He did not want her to be scarred. He just wanted her to be a happy and bright child who would be able to smile genuinely in this dark world.
She flinched when her ears caught the sounds of a door being knocked down. Then she began to stake in fear and huddled closer to her brother. Ryohei pulled her into an embrace. "Kyoko, it's going to be okay. Everything is going to be fine."
Kyoko nodded her head in the embrace but continued to shake. Everything was going to be okay. Everything was going to be fine because Onii-chan said so.
Ryohei's hopes diminished when he heard the sound of footsteps coming closer to them. It sounded as if it was coming from upstairs because it was. Chairs were being knocked down while the tables were flipped. Some were even thrown to the wall and split in pieces.
Ryohei could hear Kyoko's soft sobbing. He tightened his hold on her and looked at the door. For Kyoko's sake, don't come in. For Kyoko's sake, don't find this door. For Kyoko's sake, don't stay in the house any longer. For Kyoko's sake...
The door was blasted off its hinges and crashed into the wall. Ryohei moved Kyoko so she hid behind him. There was no way those Mafiosi would get Kyoko. There was no way he would allow that. There was no way.
"So you were hiding in here?" one of the sinister gun-wielding Mafiosi asked. "Get the girl. We only came for her."
Ryohei immediately stood up and clenched his teeth. They could not get Kyoko. They just can't. The rest of the Mafiosi walked towards the two siblings with guns in hand along with a smirk.
Ryohei stood firmly with Kyoko grabbing her older brother's legs as if her life depended on it, which it might. Ryohei moved into a boxing position; he would fight for Kyoko. He would protect her.
The next moment became a blur to him as he suddenly felt dizzy. He felt something small bite the back of his neck and now he was wavering on his feet. Only the promise of protecting Kyoko made him continue to stand.
However, it was not enough as he was punched, thus sending him flying backwards. "Onii-chan!"
Ryohei shook his head to stop the darkness from enveloping him. He could not faint. He had to protect Kyoko. "Onii-chan!"
Ryohei snapped his head toward the direction of his sister. She was trying to fight back against the hold of her captors with tears visibly falling down her cheeks. Her honey colored eyes were only looking at Ryohei, her only hope.
However, hope was being torn apart every day in this world. Someone walked up to Ryohei, someone with dark brown hair and eyes. As the other Mafiosi were leaving with Kyoko, the man took another step closer to Ryohei. A mosquito was sent to bite Ryohei one last time to knock him out, but before Ryohei fell unconscious, the man said, "Your sister will be safe."
Ryohei did not believe the man. Whoever the Mafia took away would never be safe. They would all die.
Since the time Kyoko was taken away, Ryohei had grown bitter with silent rage for the Mafia. He had grown to become someone who absolutely despised the Mafia. He had grown into someone Kyoko would fear.
But for one night, he headed down the path in becoming someone Kyoko would not fear. Four years had passed since then, and Ryohei walked into Kyoko's room. He would pay his respects and cry the whole night over losing the only one he cared about. He did this every year during the day Kyoko was taken from him.
However, this year was different. This year he found an envelope on Kyoko's desk, a black envelope. Curiosity taking over, he slowly picked it up and opened it. Inside was a letter and something else. He ignored the other item and began to read the letter; it was addressed to him.
His eyes widened and his hands began to tremble when he finished reading it. His eyes began to water but not from sadness, from joy and relief. He placed the letter down and went to pick up the other item from the envelope with trembling hands. It was a photo, which made his legs weak as he collapsed onto his knees. More tears slid down his cheeks, but a smile made its way on to Ryohei's face. Then it turned into a grin as he started laughing.
His sister was alive. Kyoko was alive. She was safe. Kyoko was away from those Mafiosi.
After his laughter subsided, he still had a grin on his face. Looking at the photo in his hands, he said, "Tonight the truth shall be set free."
Many people considered Hibari powerful, yet he felt powerless. Many people considered him as the hope the world needed to defeat the Vongola, yet he felt hopeless. Many people thought he would be the one to defeat all those Mafiosi, yet he did not believe it. He did not believe it, yet he trudged on.
His goal was not to defeat the Vongola no matter how much he wanted to. He did not think he had enough power or strength to defeat that man, Vongola Decimo. Instead, his goal was to defeat as many Mafiosi as possible to further help him in his revenge.
Hibari Kyoya did not enjoy being forcefully exiled out of Namimori. Namimori was the town he privately swore to protect. He did not appreciate that it was being taken over by Mafiosi; it was being torn down and fixed cheaply. He did not appreciate that Namimori was in the hands of people so incapable but numbers had stopped Hibari from interfering. He was exiled and he could do nothing about it.
However he was able to take out numerous Mafiosi daily and secretly. No one knew who was behind the killings, but there were theories. One theory was unanimously agreed on by the students of Namimori Middle School. It was decided by the students that the fearless and powerful head-prefect was the one responsible. The leader of the Disciplinary Committee was preparing to rescue Namimori.
Loyal members of the Disciplinary Committee stayed with Hibari. More people who were deemed worthy joined and soon the Disciplinary Committee grew in size. Hope started to flood the hearts of the citizens of Namimori. However, the hope was short-lived. There was an attack from the Mafiosi of Namimori against the Disciplinary Committee who were fighting back with full force. It did not end well.
"Retreat!" one of the members with regent hairstyles yelled. Numerous men with similar hairstyles fell back while an onslaught of bullets were directed towards their retreating backs. Many men stumbled to the ground, taking their last breath. Many screamed in excruciating pain as an endless stream of bullets made its home in their skulls.
One man dived behind the remains of a crumbled wall as he narrowly missed death. "Kyo-san!" the man spoke into his earpiece. "There are enemies all over. Our members are retreating and dying. At this rate, no, already we are losing!"
There was silence on the other end. Bang! Kusakabe Tetsuya ducked his head in order to avoid a bullet being embedded into his neck. He prayed to his lucky stars while he rushed to the next wall, which would provide temporary defense. Fortunately, he managed to survive as he clutched his bleeding shoulder, which was injured in a previous attack.
"Kyo-san! Can you hear me?" Kusakabe spoke with panic and urgency lacing his words. "Kyo-san!"
Hibari crushed his earpiece with his bloody and battered tonfa. He leaned against the wall for support as he clutched his side. "Shut up or I'll bite you to death."
Even with his empty threat, Hibari took it seriously. He did not need to be reminded that they had already lost, that all their efforts until today ended up like this, that he had failed to protect Namimori.
Would things end up differently if they had been prepared? Would they have a chance to win if those Mafiosi did not use a surprise attack? Would they even stand a chance even if they had been prepared?
Hibari tightened his grip on his tonfa and hit the wall in frustration. His tonfa crumbled a little bit each time until it was no more. How could he, Hibari Kyoya, be beaten by an herbivore?
He stumbled forward but caught himself, bringing his knees slowly to the ground. His teeth clenched and his fists tightened until his nails dug deeply into his palm. The blood dripped down and tainted the ground. He did not care that he might die of blood loss. He was frustrated that he had lost; he was frustrated at himself. Those crowding Mafiosi herbivores had beaten him. Hibari Kyoya had lost.
However, he had just lost the battle and not the war. The war had not even begun and no one, not even himself, would proclaim a war against the Vongola. The war had no winner or loser since there was no war. There was no war.
Who would be crazy enough to proclaim war against the Vongola? Just look at himself; Vongola Decimo was not even in charge of this battle. Who would be crazy enough? But there was another question that could be asked. Who would be powerful enough? There was no way that someone so powerful could be an herbivore. There was no way that the person would die in this kind of battle. But would there be someone so powerful?
Footsteps. Hibari's ears listened intently as he heard someone walking away. Who was there that had been watching Hibari? Who was there that Hibari could not sense?
Slightly curious, Hibari stood up and trudged towards the fading sound. He stopped in front of crumbled bricks, which came from a destroyed building. Underneath one brick was a black envelope addressed to him.
Hibari fell on one knee before picking up the envelope. The blood on his hands tainted the envelope and soon the letter. Besides the blood and the black words imprinted on the letter, there was nothing else. However, the words on the letter implied much more than its appearance.
After reading the words, a bloodthirsty smirk came across his face as his eyes showed bloodlust. His eyes narrowed as he stood up with newfound determination. He would bite to death whoever sent the letter. "Tonight the truth shall be set free."
"Chrome, who gave you the letter?" Mukuro questioned as he looked over the paper. Chrome stood next to him in the alley; her eye scanned the words again with a smile slipping on to her face.
"A carrier pigeon had the letter. But isn't it great? There is a way to get your friends out of the Estraneo," Chrome replied. She looked up at Mukuro with unhidden enthusiasm shining in her eyes. She knew how much Mukuro wanted to get Ken and Chikusa out and free ever since she abandoned her famiglia or, more precisely, her famiglia abandoned her.
"Kufufu. What is a young defenseless lady doing by herself?" Nagi lifted her head from the butterfly on the flower and turned to face the stranger. Her eyes examined the older boy who leaned against the tree with arms crossed. Despite being a complete stranger, he did not appear to be a threat so Nagi stood up and took cautious steps towards him, wanting to see the boy more clearly.
"This is the private garden the head servant gave to me. Who are you?" Nagi caught the boy's amused gaze and noticed the color of each eye, one red and one blue.
"Apparently I am someone trespassing your garden. Do you still not call the guards?" the boy asked. Nagi paused in her steps, thinking over the words before shaking her head. When she met his gaze again, her attention turned to the right eye, which was barely peeking out from the indigo hair. Why did he hide an eye with a beautiful color? She began to close the distance between them until she stood beside him. With her left hand, she brushed away the hair covering the boy's right eye. "Are you not scared of me or this eye?"
Nagi could not find anything frightening about the boy or the eye, which held a beautiful shade of crimson. There was something mystifying about the eye that drew her full attention even if the color reminded her of blood. "It's beautiful. Why do you hide it?"
The boy turned his head away, allowing his hair to cover his eye again. Nagi lowered her hand to rest at her side, watching the boy's movements. "It is an eye that will cause the suffering of thousands. It is an eye with the paths of hell. With this knowledge, are you afraid?" The boy straightened his back and turned to face her. Nagi could only reply with a shake of her head, mesmerized once more of the crimson eye. "Kufufu. You are amusing, but I'll be leaving now."
The boy turned around, and his body began to disappear into indigo flames, into a mist. Nagi rushed forward to grab the back of the boy's shirt, not knowing what she was doing. Her hand gently held a piece of the shirt, but she could not help but think it felt fake, as if it was only a figment of her imagination. "What's your name?"
The boy turned his head around with a smirk in place. "Rokudo Mukuro. What's yours?"
"Nagi." Mukuro raised an eyebrow at the lack of a surname but did not say anything. He vanished into the mist, leaving Nagi a name to repeat throughout the day.
It was as if she was in a fairy tale with her knight in shining armor coming to break the monotonous days of simply living alone. He was her knight with the red eye.
Knock! Knock! The girl looked up from her book as the door to her room opened. One of the servants that was always stationed by her door gave a bow before stepping aside to reveal the boy with the red eye. "Nagi-san, this is your new personal servant. His name is Rokudo Mukuro. Your parents have assigned him to stay with you at all times to prevent any harm towards you."
Nagi nodded her head, but she knew that was not the truth. Her parents must have wanted a new guard so she would not run off and cause any unnecessary trouble for their famiglia. Or perhaps they only wanted her alive so their famiglia could continue even though she'll only have a title, while the real boss would be the Family's second-in-command.
The door closed behind the servant, leaving Nagi alone with Mukuro. The boy walked past her, heading straight to the door on the other side of the room. He twisted the knob and pushed it open as he said, "Shall we go to the garden?"
It never felt as peaceful as when she was alone. With Mukuro always leaning against the tree while watching her actions in amusement, she felt she had a companion. Even when they never talked, she felt content. Nevertheless, she felt she was in one of the stories she read where the peace was the calm before the storm. Perhaps when the storm struck, she would end up dead and forgotten. She always imagined that would happen, mostly because she knew that was what her parents wanted, so she was not surprised when Mukuro held a small trident against her neck after a week of their peace.
"Humans are fragile beings. With one motion of my hand, you can die. No one would notice until they happen to stumble upon your body. But who will care?" Mukuro asked as he looked into Nagi's eyes. The girl stared back with her amethyst eyes appearing blanker than before.
"Maybe it's for the best," Nagi mumbled as she stared at his red eye. "It would be a relief that it would be finally over."
"An ending is merely the beginning of another cycle," Mukuro said. "Humans are the most disgusting of creatures. They send for another to kill their own flesh, not living up to the responsibility of taking care of their own kind or to take out what they brought in. Those who are neglected receive the worst punishment and have led useless lives."
Nagi stared at Mukuro, noticing the bitter resentment in his voice. Then she tentatively asked, "Have my parents sent someone to erase me?"
Mukuro looked back at the girl, noticing the resigned expression. "They have if you did not notice how close to death you are."
"But will you do it?" Mukuro attempted to conceal the confusion that wished to flash on his face. What reason would he not have to slice her throat for the blood to flow out and eventually choke her? Why would he give mercy in this merciless world? Nevertheless, his actions were misinterpreted.
"What are you doing?" Mukuro turned his head to the door; Nagi's eyes seemed to lighten at her mother's entrance, hoping that a part of her mother came because of concern. "Why are you hesitating to kill her?"
The woman walked towards them in long strides; a corrupted fire lit her eyes, making Nagi flinch. Mukuro did not expect the woman to reach for his trident and his unprepared grip lost to the fierce one. He only watched in his haze as the woman covered Nagi's mouth to muffle all sounds and drew her hand back. Then he saw red.
Nagi's body shook as she grabbed her mother's wrist and tried to pull it away as if it could make the pain disappear. She wanted to scream until her lungs flared, but her mother's hand muffled the sound. Her crimson tears tainted the trident. She could not see in her pain-filled eye.
Suddenly, she felt the hand pull away as well as the trident in her right eye. She gasped for the cold air and clutched her eye, red covering her hands. She heard her mother scream, but it was cut short. Curiosity taking over, she opened her left eye and moved her head slowly to look for her mother. She saw Mukuro standing above her mother with the trident that pierced her eye. "Rokudo-san."
"Your mother is not dead. She's only unconscious," Mukuro replied while staring at the body. Nagi started to move towards him while struggling to keep the pain at a minimum. "What are you doing? Didn't you hear your mother? I was hired to kill you."
"Rokudo-san," Nagi started again, pausing to fill her lungs with the cold air instead of sobs. "You went against my mother. You're the first one to do that in order to help me. Why would I be afraid of you?"
Mukuro turned to face her struggling form while tightening his grip on his trident. In a couple of steps, he reached Nagi and held his trident near her throat again. "Don't misunderstand. I only helped you because..." The rest of the words died in Mukuro's throat as he noticed Nagi was looking at his red eye with a small, knowing smile. "You knew?"
"I can guess. My step-father funded the Estraneo's experiment facility in disguise as an orphanage and your name would come up," Nagi answered with violent coughs following. "Rokudo-san, I'm sorry."
"Chrome, don't believe everything you see. This sounds impossible," Mukuro replied, bringing Chrome out of her reverie.
"But we can go to the meeting place to see if it isn't fake. There's no harm in that, right?" Chrome asked. She waited patiently for the inner debate in Mukuro to subside and she knew what the answer was when all that was left was glee. Mukuro folded the letter and put it back in the envelope before placing it in his jacket.
"Kufufu. Then we'll see if tonight the truth would really be set free."
"Tsunayoshi-kun, all the envelopes have been sent." Tsuna looked to his right on the balcony and saw Byakuran leaning against the railing with his arms crossed. "I'm still not certain that sending the letters to the people who were your guardians in other parallel worlds is a good idea. They could be part of the problem in this world."
Tsuna shook his head and rested his arms on the railing before looking towards the sunset. "There's a reason why they were constantly chosen as my guardians in other parallel worlds. Being guardian is not a title handed to anyone. Loyalty is one factor that must be considered. Resolution is another. Those things have been lost and is more important than ever right now."
Suddenly, the brunet felt a familiar weight on his head. "If they are not worthy to be guardians, they will not be given the position. And if they're part of the problem, I'll just shoot them. There's nothing to worry about."
"Reborn," Tsuna sighed. "Please keep your violence to a minimum." In return, Reborn lightly hit Tsuna's head with his gun.
"When were you able to order your tutor around?" Reborn asked. Tsuna could feel the beginnings of a bruise appear. Nevertheless, he let an amused chuckle pass his lips. Byakuran watched them while playing with his Mare ring.
"Even in this world, you're still a pacifist. I guess that is really in your nature," Byakuran said. Tsuna looked at him with a smile while Reborn leapt off the brunet's head and onto the floor.
"Just treat me as the Sawada Tsunayoshi of this world, as your friend." The brunet noticed that Reborn was covering his face with his fedora, but he knew Reborn had the same smirk on his face as Byakuran.
"You really are an anomaly, but that's a good thing here," Byakuran said. Tsuna replied with a chuckle, something Byakuran felt at ease when hearing. There was no ill-intent, malevolence, or sadism coating the laugh, only genuine bliss. "Do you think they will come?"
Tsuna stopped his laugh but kept his smile on his face. "Of course. I edited the rough draft you wrote into something that had parts of Reborn's research on the Vongola." Byakuran was about to retort, but Tsuna held a hand up. "I know. If they are enemies, it would cause a target to fall on me. But I had to give something in order to receive something else. I had to give them information to receive their temporary trust."
Byakuran sent a questioning look to Reborn, asking if he knew. "There must be give and take to ensure success. If Tsuna did not give them information and only a letter containing a date and address, they would ignore it as a scam. Tsuna had to risk something since they would be risking their lives to appear at the location," Reborn replied, but the infant did not seem completely confident.
"It'll be fine. I trust them." Byakuran watched Tsuna's expression to see if the brunet believed his own words. There was no doubt, suspicion, or hesitation in his eyes. Maybe Tsuna was too trusting? Byakuran peered closer at the brunet. Perhaps he knew because of his hyper intuition?
"Nevertheless, we have to prepare. Have you informed the guards about their appearance tonight?" Reborn asked while looking at the brunet. Tsuna shook his head with his smile turning sheepish.
"I'll do that now. Byakuran, do you want to accompany me? I'll make a stop at the kitchen for some marshmallows if you come," Tsuna asked before turning around and heading towards the door. Byakuran quickly followed while humming a tune. Tsuna always knew how to lessen the tension and anxiety he felt.
A/N: Phalaenopsis has come to an end and I thank every one of you who has read this fanfic. Regarding the fate of these stories, I have decided to let every one of the chapters be up for adoption, except for chapters 5 and 13. If you want to adopt, ask me first and then I'll give the story to you.
The poll will be up and you'll be able to vote for which story you want me to continue; it will end on April 10, which is one month from now. Since massive plot bunnies appeared in History class, Parallel World 13 will be continued as an individual fanfic.
Thanks once again for reading this fanfic! If you don't mind, please tell me which chapter you like the most and why.

Demi Lovato and Selena Gomez have their friendship still strong as ever despite what rumors suggest. These two started out together and have sailed through the same route. They both have been popular Disney stars, co-stars, and then supported each other through their journey of becoming superhit singers. In a recent interview with People magazine, Demi’s mother opened up about her daughter and Gomez’s relationship.
Dianna De La Garza, Demi’s mum, said, “Demi and Selena love each other and always will love each other. She and Demi were auditioning for the same things because they were the same age, they were both Hispanic, they both had dark hair — so she ended up going to a lot of auditions with us.” Diana further added, “They started out together, we had some great times together. They will always love each other. There’s nothing that will ever come between them.”
Previously in 2015, when Justin Bieber and the Wolves singer had gone separate ways, news had come out that Demi and Selena were not on good terms. Reports said that they were not communicating. However, it is good to know that the two celebrities who have stuck by each other’s side through thick and thin will always be BFFs.
Diana also said that the news is not always right. So if you’re worried that your two favorite songstresses are not friends, don’t be. Diana said, “First, I would say don’t believe everything you read in the tabloids. I have read things about myself that I knew were not true.” The two stars even vlogged together back when they were teenagers. Fame definitely hasn’t changed the bond that they share.
The previous year, even the director of Barney & Friends had said that he had noticed the spark of friendship between Demi Lovato and Selena Gomez. He had said, “Very early on, you could just tell, they clicked. Certain kids got along with other kids, and they were just two of those that really clicked. They were pretty inseparable and ate lunch together and all those types of things.”

Mercedes team principal Ross Brawn believes Formula 1 teams should re-examine the gearbox penalty rules, after Lewis Hamilton was handed a grid drop because of circumstances beyond his control.
Hamilton was moved back five places on the Bahrain Grand Prix grid after he needed a gearbox change following damage caused by a debris-induced tyre failure.
After hearing private frustrations from his driver about the situation - because he was being moved back through no fault of his own - Brawn thinks that it could be worth F1 having a fresh discussion about the situation.
When asked if there was cause to reconsider penalties in the event of drivers needing new gearboxes when they have done nothing wrong, Brawn said: "I think Lewis would agree with you - he made the very same point to me about external influences giving a penalty.
"I think the difficulty we have in the future is really in the marginal cases - which in this case it wasn't - but was it something exaggerated by the driver? Was it partially occurred by the driver? So then we get in to these long debates.
"I think it is certainly worthy of looking at, as it is frustrating to get a penalty when there has been an outside influence, and it is annoying.
"Luckily it doesn't happen too often, but if it happens at a critical time of the championship then it could be doubly frustrating. However, it is probably worth looking at again."
Hamilton himself said that there was little point in getting too frustrated at the situation, even though it heavily impacted on his performance.
"It doesn't matter, the rules are the rules," he said. "I just have to suck it up and deal with it.
"The car didn't feel the same as it did in P3 - P3 was a big improvement. In P1 and P2 we had some problems with the car and fixed it overnight. But we got to qualifying and it felt like it did on Friday.
"Whatever it was it doesn't matter, Nico did a great job in qualifying. I wasn't able to match his pace. Tomorrow's going to be a tough race from ninth place but I'll do what I can."

WATERLOO — Two people were arrested Monday after a substance was sprayed in employees’ faces during a pharmacy robbery.
Waterloo Regional Police were called to a pharmacy in the Weber Street North area at about 1 p.m. Police said two suspects entered the store and tried to steal merchandise. When they were confronted, police said the suspects sprayed a “noxious substance” at the employees and fled. Three people were injured, and one was taken to hospital.
Officers found the suspects a short distance away. A 45-year-old man and a 25-year-old woman are facing several charges including robbery, assault causing bodily harm and weapons-related offences.

Have you ever been swept off your feet? Been thrown over a shoulder? Felt the ecstasy of having your body ravished? I have and this is my story . (My first story.)
I was almost 19 and it was a cool autumn evening driving our friend Harry home from work. My friend Kate was in the passenger seat as usual. She could not drive a stick shift well on the wet valley back roads. So, I was driving her car and Harry chattering away about his older brother moving in w/ him for awhile. I didn't pay him much attention as Kate and I were too busy singing along to an old 80s song on the radio. I always like to take a different route to my destination just to mix things up. I chose to enter Harry's neighborhood through the back way and didn't notice all the cars parked on the side of his split-level Cars for guests of this residence.
Upon entering the house we were greeted by a large group of screaming sports fans. Most were gathered around a big screen watching a boxing match. Harry introduced us to a few people and directed Kate and I to go downstairs away from the rowdy crowd. But he ran off to call his girlfriend and left us girls to find our own way. This was the first time we were in this part of the house and were trying to find a quiet place to sit, wait for our friend, and figure out which movie we were going to see that night. A small group of guys were playing pool not far from our sofa. After repeatedly refusing drinks from these guys, we finally decided why not since we had a designated driver and a room to stay in if we so chose. Kate and I ended up joining in the pool game and were really enjoying ourselves hanging out with these four guys. In between Harry's phone calls he tried to play a game too.
We never noticed that most of the house had emptied we were so engrossed in 9-ball. I finally got to try out my skills from a billiard class and was actually winning against more experienced men. Apparently my skills, or maybe just my fat ass in my skin tight Calvin's, got the attention of a tall, dark and muscular guy in blue jeans and a white tank. His name was Charlie and he was about 6 foot tall to my 5 foot petite frame. I had to bend my neck to look up into his deep brown eyes when he stepped outside to chat with me. I thought he was gorgeous and could not stop staring at his muscular chest. (It's not my fault it was at my eye level!) He had the kind of mucsles that make a man masculine. Just right and not too big and bulky. But big enough to swing me around like a ragdoll if he wanted. I could not understand why this man would want to take time away from his buddies to chit chat with me. Sure I'm cute. But not beautiful. I'm small in stature with dark blue eyes, long wavy brown hair with red highlights. My breasts are small, but firm and perky. I've got a small waste too. But my best feature, besides my eyes, is my bubble butt. Whatever it is, I must be his type or he knows good things come in small packages!
A bit later it was time to catch a ride home. But where is my jacket? I went down to the pool table room to find it. It was strangely quiet and empty as I walked down the stairs and across the room. Then I saw him. It was Charlie walking toward me with this look in his eyes like he wanted to devour me. He walked right up to me, bent down and scooped me into his arms bringing my face up to his. He looked into my eyes as he kissed me. He kissed me hard and heavy. I felt those eyes look deep into me and I just melted into him. A feeling crept up from within my torso that made everything else stop and cease to exist. He set me down on table and leaned in to me softly as I opened my mouth to him. He reached around me and grabbed my ass hard with both hands and pulled me to him. He was so big and powerful. I wanted him just as much as he wanted me. I let him take control of me and felt him consume me as his tongue danced in and out of my mouth.I felt his hard cock pressed against my pussy He throbbed and I pulsed. I wrapped my leg's around his waist and pulled him down on top of me. He was leaning over as he unbuttoned my blouse and started kissing and licking my cleavage. Charlie tried to slip his hand down the front of my pants. But they were so tight he had to squirm a bit. He only used one finger and he placed it in between my lips.
He moaned out load, "oh god!"
I smiled and he released me. He with drew his hand with his finger dripping wet with my juices.
"Mmmmm," he moaned as he sucked my wetness off his finger.
He tore his shirt off over his head and went in for my sweet spot. He kissed me all along my neck. Sucking and nibbling, he turned me to jelly. My nippled were so hard when he bent down to suck them. He made them stand out even more as he pinched them between his teeth. What good is no panties with tight jeans...why didn't I wear a skirt today! It was torture not to feel his hard cock up against my clit. I wanted him. No, I needed him inside me.
My stomach was creamy white in the dim light as he slowly kissed his way down to my pants. Teeth and hands nimbly undid my button and unzipped them. I was almost embarrassed at how wet I was between my legs at this point.
But Charlie just closed his eyes and whispered, "You are so fucking hot!" He slipped first one finger and then two inside my body. A big thumb found my clit easily and rubbed as his fingers moved in and out of my lips. I came twice when we were making out on the pool table. But then I can orgasm easily. It only seemed to make the bulge in Charlie's pants grow bigger and that wet dot on the front to appear larger.
I tried to sit up and bend over to undo his pants. But he grabbed my wrists and pushed me back down forcefully, but not too rough, onto my back. A soft caress down my naked torso lead to my pants coming off. Then I started climbing a mountain. Dark eyes looked into mine as they were bent toward my other mouth. A tongue darted in and out my lips, tickled my clit and dove deep inside me. I screamed out in pleasure as he brought me to orgasm again. My heart beat so fast inside my chest as lay there. But Charlie wasn't done with me yet. He ran his tongue from my pussy down the taint to my ass. Oh my ....what's this I thought. I was too spent to even twitch when he lifted my legs up higher and inserted his tongue in my other hole.
"uh...uh..uhhhaaaahh," I stammered.
He just laughed a little evil chuckle and started tracing little circles around my anus with that tongue of his. This was new and different for me. The sensation was good, but it started feeling really good and my nipples tingled a lot. A finger was inserted as he brought me to climax eating my pussy. I was grinding my wet hot cunt into his face and I came so hard it shocked me. This man was Awesome! He made me feel ecstasy and I hadn't even seen his dick yet!
When he finally came up for air he puled me up to a sitting position and wrapped his arms around me. Chest to bare chest, my breasts pressed tight against his, we felt our hearts cooling down beating together.
Leaning in he whispered, "I want you so bad. You just don't even know! But ...not hear ...not like this."
"I want you bad too," I said.
But we both were content to hold each other for awhile away from the others. He drove me home and walked me to my door. We kissed hard and long not wanting to part.
And that is my first encounter with a man who consumed my body and occupied my dreams!
( Will I ever see him again? Will we ever have sex? Stay tuned for my 2nd escapade to find out!)
This story is protected by International Copyright Law, by the author, all rights reserved. If found posted anywhere other than Lushstories.com
with this note attached, it has been posted without my permission.
<a href="https://www.lushstories.com/stories/straight-sex/the-night-i-met-charlie.aspx">The night I met Charlie</a>

When the principal of Technology High School, Bruce Mims, stepped down last month, he cited "personal and professional reasons." He didn't mention that he'd been caught calling himself a Navy SEAL.
Mims led Technology High, the Rohnert Park magnet school with the highest academic scores in Sonoma County, since the fall of 2011. He resigned in early October.
On Thursday, Mims acknowledged in a televised interview with ABC7 that he'd told Tech High's teachers, students and parents he had been a member of the Navy's elite fighting crew when in fact he never was. A Tech High parent, George Berg, brought the issue to the station's attention.
Mims on Friday told The Press Democrat that he agreed to the interview because he felt that, as a role model, he needed to explain himself.
"I understood that I needed to accept responsibility for my shortcomings," he said.
Mims said he joined the Navy in the late 1980s with the dream of becoming an elite fighter. But, he said, he was honorably discharged after about a year because officials found out he was gay. He called that the "darkest, deepest disappointment" of his life.
"Everything that happened in terms of my embellishment is to make up for the thing in my life that was taken away from me," he said. He emphasized that he never described himself as a SEAL on resumes.
This fall, Berg became suspicious about Mims' past after a dispute over a book his son had been assigned. Berg told the TV station that when he found Mims had lied about his past, he approached Cotati-Rohnert Park Unified School District Superintendent Robert Haley.
"Dr. Mims and I did have conversations about his status as a SEAL," Haley said, though he would not specify when those conversations occurred. He said Mims, not the district, requested to step down for personal and professional reasons.
Mims acknowledged that the issues with his past contributed to his decision to resign. But, he said, there were other factors, like his health — he said he had a large tumor removed from his neck last week and is still recovering. He also wants to spend more time with his family, he said.
The district originally agreed Mims would work on "special projects" and continue to collect a salary of $96,153 through June. But on Oct. 15, Mims' employment status changed. He now is on extended medical leave and is no longer providing services to the district, Haley said.
Haley added that he's spoken with a number of parents and students about the situation.
"What one can take from this is that integrity is an important concept to learn and understand," Haley said. "The role of a principal is an important one, and there is a need for a high level of trust."
Mims said he had not discussed the issue with parents or students since he resigned.
"You can look ahead or you can look behind, but what's done is done," he said. "I don't think I'm a villain. I'm human. I regret what I did and I regret anyone I disappointed."
During Mims' tenure, enrollment at Technology High School grew from about 200 students to nearly 300 and the school's state Academic Performance Index Score were the highest in the county.

Posts tagged: Spokane food
This morning, at Chaps, one of my family's favorite places for Sunday brunch, I noticed a young family sitting at the table beside us. Three young boys and their parents.
The mother and father had their hands full with the two younger children, one just a lap baby. But the oldest boy, no more than five years old, was no bother at all. As we ate and sipped our coffee and talked over our own food, I kept stealing glances over to the other table. As good as my plate of eggs and bacon was, watching him was more delicious.
The boy had a big plate of the house specialty, Blueberry muffin French toast, in front of him. Each time he put a bite, smothered in syrup, in his mouth, he would wiggle a little, reacting to the sheer pleasure of it. I found myself smiling at his involuntary reaction, waiting for his next bite. When he turned his attention to the thick slices of bacon, I settled back with my mug of coffee and watched the show.
Lost in a daydream, the boy placed the the end of one slice of bacon in his mouth and proceeded to chew on it the way a farmer might chew on a stalk of wheat. Bit by bit the bacon disappeared as he stared dreamily out the window, his hands slack at his sides and his legs wrapped around the legs of his chair. When one piece was finished, he repeated the process with another.
Finally, the little brothers were done with their breakfasts and the parents had taken one last sip of coffee and were bundling up everyone to go home.
The little boy who had needed no help polishing off a platter of food, stood up and slipped his arms into the sleeves of his coat. And then, as he turned to leave, he noticed a piece of his French toast in his chair where it had fallen from his lap. He stared at it for a few minutes and then looked over at his mother and his father. They had turned away and were already moving toward the door. He stood perfectly still another minute, as I watched, and then reached out, picked up the bit of fallen bread and popped it in his mouth. Just as he did so he looked over and caught my eye. I winked over the rim of my coffee cup. He smiled at me and then skipped off to join the rest of his family.
That, I thought to myself, is how each of us should appreciate a meal that was prepared and put before us. With gratitude and pleasure. Savored from start to finish. Especially that last delicious bite.
Cheryl-Anne Millsap is a freelance writer based in Spokane, Washington. In addition to her Home Planet , Treasure Hunting and CAMera: Travel and Photo blogs, her essays can be heard on Spokane Public Radio and on public radio stations across the country. She is the author of “Home Planet: A Life in Four Seasons” and can be reached at firstname.lastname@example.org

Dragon of the Red Dawn
Written by Mary Pope Osborne
Illustrated by Sal Murdocca
Reviewed by Tate F. (age 7)
The book was about Basho, Jack, and Annie. They have a magic wand that does what they want it to do as long as they use five commands that the wand understands. One day a fire breaks out in their town. Jack and Annie use the wand to find a dragon that makes it rain on the fire. The rain puts the fire out.
I kind of liked the story because Jack was like me. He was very serious and cautious; he didn't want to just go do stuff. Annie was like my sister because she always wants to do stuff. I liked the setting because China is one of my favorite places. I like the plot because it was an adventure, and I like to read adventures.
I think second graders would like to read this book. I think they would like the adventure. I think Holden would like to read this book. I think Holden would like the magic tree house series and this book especially because he likes stories with adventure and magic. I think he would like the part of the book where Jack and Annie find the dragon.

Friday, November 26, 2010
Acne problem? At one point in our lives we all experience having problems with our skin. I'm lucky enough that I only had few acne breakouts. I can't say the same thing for my cousin though, until now at age 30 he still gets a lot of breakouts and his skin is really suffering. He has tried a lot of acne treatments and nothing to have worked for him so far. I have constantly told him that he can't just try out any products or treatments he also has to read all the reviews. With that in mind, I told him to read acsonix review. Before I met my husband I have never relied on reviews but he taught me to read reviews. Its what consumers have to say about the product and what better way to find out if it works than reading it from people who have tried it. So if you've tried a lot of acne treatments that didn't work check out the link above to see if this is the one for you.

Gathering her courage Raindapple slowly slunk towards the den that graced the far side of the territory. While they were patrolling she had smelt the unmistakable stench of fox, and she had responded by following it. Her border patrol was nearby, close to enough to here her if she cried out for help. To her relief the den was vacant and incredibly old. Her patterned coat flattened as the adrenaline left her body; the fox was gone, probably on it's way to the two-leg place for food. She would still have to remind her clan about being careful on this side, especially the kits. Turning around she began to wander back towards her patrol, slightly hoping that they hadn't left without her. Her ears flicked back and forth as she listened to a thrush near-by and paused to quickly hunt for it. Who said a deputy couldn't hunt while on patrol? Slinking into a well practiced hunting crouch she silently moved towards the small bird. To her delight she easily caught it, although the poor thing was incredibly skinny. It was painfully obvious that Leaf-bare wasn't ready to completely release her hold on the Clans.

I have noticed the same thing since I have owned the truck, I initially thought something was wrong, so I took it in and the dealer said it performs normally. . .I have not found a solution yet. Do you have a bug guard? I do, maybe that is causing the air to hit the windshield a little different causing the issue.

More added to my history knowledge, all things come to pass.
In July 1282 King Edward I was in the middle of subduing Wales when his wife, Eleanor of Castile, was reaching her final month of pregnancy. Unlike most royal wives, who would have stayed at home in one of their sumptuous, cosy palaces, Eleanor was in Wales with her husband. After all, Eleanor had been on Crusade with her husband and had even given birth to her daughter, Joan of Acre, in the Holy Land. Wales was no more of a difficulty.
Rhuddlan Castle had been ‘civilised’ for the queen’s use; with the addition of gardens, decorative seating and a fish pond to aid Eleanor’s comfort. However, it was still Edward’s headquarters, where troops were mustering and messengers were coming and going at all hours – hardly the most comfortable and peaceful place for a queen to give birth.
Elizabeth of Rhuddlan was born around the…
View original post 1,546 more words

10-09-2008 03:49 PM
George, that's true, there is a better listing. However, when I looked at my library about 90% of the audiobooks were "checked out" and the rest weren't something I wanted to read. So I've just been using librovox for now. I may go back and I think I can put some on reserve, but didn't look into it. After going through tons of pages of books "checked out" I just gave up for the time being. And I didn't look to see if you needed anything special, I was just browsing to see what they had.

The DeHart household is a little somber today. My wife just realized that ten years ago today we bid our final farewell to Big Red. Lois was very fond of Big Red, and I don’t think she’s ever truly allowed herself to go through the grieving process. Sometimes she’ll see or hear something that reminds her of Big Red, and her eyes will get all misty. Just between you and me, I didn’t really care that much about Big Red. Oh sure, it was fun taking her for a ride, and I remember how Lois and I used to wash her out in front of the house. We’d get her all soaped up and the two of us would end up just as wet as Big Red. Yes, we had some good memories with Big Red, but she took up a lot of space and needed a lot of attention. It seemed like there was always something wrong with her. It soon became more expensive to take care of her than she was worth. I know, I know. That sounds cold hearted. Like I keep telling Lois, Big Red is in a better place now. In the end I think it was all for the better that she left us when she did. We were only prolonging the inevitable. Sooner or later you just have to accept the fact that they won’t be there forever. Now matter how much love and money to put into them, eventually your favorite car is going to give up the ghost.
So what do I do when I have a three-day weekend to spend with my family? I make a movie! Beth came up with the story line, and I helped her develop the script. Beth and Elanor took the leads while Lois and I coached them through the process.

Now if only I can get permission from our house owners to put in a veggie garden. I haven't wanted to ask because the husband came to check the carpets about 5 weeks after I had Emily and wasn't too impressed with the state of things. The real estate agent explained that we had just had a baby (she was sleeping, for once, while he was here) and that I had problems with my stomach muscles so I couldn't do a lot. We have invited them to come to the next inspection so they can see that the house is normally taken care of well. I guess that's the problem with moving into a brand new house, while it's been really nice having a house that no-one's lived in before, the owners expect it to look brand new forever.
Tuesday, June 22, 2010
Happy Birthday to My Darling Husband
It was Tim's birthday yesterday and now he's the big 4 0 . Time seems to be going by so quickly now. Just a couple of weeks ago we found out that he has type 2 diabetes, which didn't really surprise anyone, but has kick started him into looking into the science of diabetes and how to beat it through diet. The Doctor Mercola website has been great for this. I've also cleaned out my fridge and it's filled with fresh fruit and vegetables from the market, most are safely tucked away in my Tupperware fridge containers to help them last just that little bit longer. I have to admit I've been a bit lazy with my preparation of fresh veggies over the last little while, especially as at dinner time I nearly always had a baby who wanted my attention, but now that she's a bit bigger she doesn't need my constant attention as much it's easier to cook a decent homemade dinner. I don't buy a lot of pre-made stuff normally but I need to take it that one step further.

The dancer Willi Ninja died at the age of 45. Here is all you want to know, and more!
Biography - A Short Wiki
Dancer and choreographer who was known for his appearance in Paris is Burning. He was also known as the godfather of voguing and became a fixture of Harlem’s drag balls. Although he did not invent voguing, he refined its movements and helped it reach fame. He died of AIDS-related heart failure at the age of 45.
He was a self-taught dancer.
He spent time in Washington Square Park in New York City, honing his dance skills with fellow voguers.
He was born William Roscoe Leake in New Hyde Park, New York. He was of mixed racial ancestry.
Madonna released her hit song “Vogue” in 1990, which helped to further the fame of the dance. Ninja took inspiration from the young Michael Jackson and from Fred Astaire.

Blue Mountain College is a bit of a historical mystery for a multitude of reasons, like its being in operation since 1873, being a predominantly female-led college, as well as having been a fully co-Educational facility since 2005, to list a few. Surely with nearly 150 years of operation, there are bound to be stories from some of the faculty? Well, that is exactly what I have set out to do with this article! I emailed as well as interviewed the department chairs just to answer this question. Some were unable to answer my question, due to the fact that they felt that their hands were tied about certain situations. However, there is one story that I got, as well as a sentimental fragment that another chair decided to share.
From Dr. Waddell, department chair of Education:
“I have lived in Whitfield and Stevens during the week. My family is in Alabama, so I go home on weekends. My funny story occurred just after midnight during a Rush Week several years ago. I awoke to women's voices laughing and talking in the hallway. Then I heard a solitary man's voice. Knowing that men were not allowed in the dorm at that time of night, I went to check on what was happening. There before me were several women and one man. Things got quiet quickly. Then the man, a BMC student, said, " Dr. Waddell, I forgot that you lived here." He turned and left the building. Of course, the next day I was obligated to tell the Resident Director, who looked at the video camera footage and identified the man. I don't know if he got in trouble, but from that day until he graduated, every time I saw this gentleman, he was very nice to me, always speaking to me and wishing me well.”
Dr. Galliher, department chair of English, gave insight on one colleague that is no longer with us. Dr. Galliher reminisced about a certain colleague having been tough on her students in the past, and would often lament about their troubles. When time passed, Dr. Galliher realized that any student that spoke of this colleague had nothing but praise to give on behalf of their mentor. She said that she found this both “ironic and endearing”, considering how often the colleague lamented about some of these students.
Unfortunately, I was unable to get much more than that, but hopefully this is something that satiates the curiosity that readers may have about some of the stories that have resonated within these halls. In the end, it just goes to show that Blue Mountain’s faculty do care about their students, even when they choose not to reveal some of their stories. All in all, it was wonderful to hear their experiences.

The food is outstanding. I have never had a bad meal here in many trips and would recommend to anyone who likes spicy food!
Great authentic food. The staff was excellent, we had two one year olds with us they made sure our girls were happy while we tried to enjoy our dinners. The food was amazing, the meats that came our dinners were so flavorful.
My wife and I love this place. Her and I battle it out for the best Thai food place in the valley, however, one this is for sure - you do not leave this place hungry! Very good food, excellent portions, excellent service, reasonable price. You can order it as hot as you like!

Wow - never thought I would write such a title. Sounds like something straight out of Good Parenting or something.
Either way I have found a few really good use cases for Evernote that I wanted to share. Neither one of these are revolutionary but I have found myself going back many times to look at what I've stored.
My son is 3 and says a lot of interesting things. At least to me. His vocabulary and how he says things is changing daily and I've started to use the Voice memo to record him talking.
Thankfully he hasn't really caught on to what I'm doing so he keeps talking which is great.
So I've been taking these voice recordings and tagging them with his name and throwing them into a folder with his name.
I've gone back and listened to them many times - especially when I'm traveling on a plane or in a hotel and I start missing him.
He's been going to daycare and preschool since he was 1 and been generating artwork nonstop. Of course most of it is just him messing around but I still don't want to lose it. But nor do I want it around the house either. He is just too prolific.
What I've been doing is taking a picture with my iPhone and storing it away into his folder and archiving it. That way I still have it and can track his progress but I don't have it taking up room.
I'm sure there are more uses but this is what I've found so far. I'm sure a lot of it will depend on his age as I will find more and more use cases.

Jordanville, New York: 22-year-old Michael J. Andreev Jr. has been charged with murder after his father and sister were found murdered on Sunday night.
The New York State Police issued a statement which has since been updated several times concerning the incident.
According to their statement officers arrived at the Jordanville residence shortly after 7:00 pm and found 67-year-old Michael J. Andreev Sr. and his daughter, 12-year-old Sofia Trusova deceased from apparent stab wounds.
Also located at the residence was Andreev Jr. who was found in the front yard with a "laceration to his neck." He was airlifted to Upstate University Hospital in Syracuse for surgery and treatment.
After his discharge from the hospital Andreev Jr was arrested and charged with two counts of second degree murder and one count of criminal possession of a weapon. He is being held in the Herkimer County Correctional Facility without bail.
Officers were called to the residence by a neighbor after a 9-year-old younger brother sought help.
"The younger brother sees and hears the stabbing [of Andreev Sr.] occur," Trooper Jack Keller stated during an interview with WKTV. "He immediately runs out of the residence, tries to look for help. Goes back in the residence because he knowns his 12-year-old sister is in the house. Finds her, also with stab wounds, runs back out of the house and at this point, contacts one of the neighbors who calls 911 immediately to report the stabbing."
Andreev Sr. had two other adult sons that were living outside of the residence.
According to a GoFundMe, 20-year-old Stefan was attending the American University in Bulgaria and 18-year-old Christian was in his fifth week of basic training at Lackland Air Force Base at the time of the murders. Both are making their way home in order to "honor their family, sort through all of the broken pieces and to care for their 9 year old brother."
Sofia's mother was in Russia at the time of the stabbings and is making her way back to the United States.

Bobby Womack, singer with brave 2nd act, dies
Bobby Womack, a colorful and highly influential R&B singer-songwriter who influenced artists from the Rolling Stones to Damon Albarn, has died. He was 70.
Womack's publicist Sonya Kolowrat said Friday that the singer had died, but she could provide no other details.
Womack was diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease two years ago and overcame addiction and multiple health issues, including prostate cancer, to pull off a second act in his career.
Womack performed recently at the Bonnaroo Music & Arts Festival and seemed in good health and spirits. He had been scheduled to perform at multiple events across Europe in July and August.
He told the BBC in 2013 the Alzheimer's diagnosis came after he began having difficulty remembering his songs and the names of people he had worked with.
The soul singer cut a wide path through the music business as a performer and songwriter in his 50-year career. In 2009, Womack was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame.
According to the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame website, Womack was born in Cleveland, Ohio, and sang gospel music at a young age. Under the influence of gospel and R&B legend Sam Cooke, Womack moved into secular music. In the early 1960s his group recorded "It's All Over Now," which was covered and by the Stones and became the band's first number-one hit.
His songs have been recorded by multiple artists, and he played as a session musician in Memphis in the 1960s.
Womack influenced many early rockers before fading from popular music for more than a decade. Albarn and XL Recordings president Richard Russell helped Womack regain his career with 2012 comeback album "The Bravest Man in the Universe."
"I don't think he ever really thought that he would do anything again," Albarn said of Womack in March. "Watching his rehabilitation and watching his ability to confront new material and new challenges was nothing short of miraculous at the time, and he still today continues to battle his demons and his illness. But he's a beautiful person and when he opens his mouth and that voice comes out, it is something that is somehow touched by God."
AP Music Writer Mesfin Fekadu in New York contributed to this report.

You know if you're pregnant everyone has some advice for you. How you should do this or how you should do that. The other thing that often happens is that you will start to hear more birth stories. Not to make lite of the individuals who have had difficult births or things they wish they could change about their experience, but I think it's time to celebrate our amazing births.
If you had an inspirational birth tell your story. Don't be shy. Share what made your birth experience incredible. It doesn't have to be the birth you dreamed of or the one that was carefully laid out in your birth plan, but share it nonetheless. Your words of wisdom could help to empower and inspire other women throughout their pregnancy.
Don't be quiet. SHARE your amazing birth story!
Here. I'll start.......
While the birth of my twins was by no means the birth I thought I was going to have when I found out I was pregnant, it was very empowering. I went into labor on my own, I was able to see them being born via c-section and I had the support of my husband and amazing nurses that I had gotten to know during my antepartum stay in the hospital. If you wish to read the birth story of my twins visit my Twins Make 5 Blog. My experience was empowering because I was educated about my pregnancy and birth options and I strongly advocated to let my body and my boys make the decision about when they were going to come.

In 1985 I joined and performed in the New Jersey Hardcore Band: Resistance. I played one fabled show with the band on September 15, 1985 at the Jazz Loft in New Brunswick, NJ. The show was headlined by 7 Seconds — Aggression also played but were not featured on the flyer — A flyer that I helped design… That is all my handwriting. Our local heroes, Pleased Youth, also played that night. I however was grounded that night and it was also a Sunday night, meaning I had school the next day — So, I had to sneak out of my house in Edison and run two towns over to New Brunswick to play the show and then I had to run back to Edison to sneak back into my house, not able to watch the rest of the show. Resistance soon dissolved after that show BUT it was an epic time and the music was good. I’m glad to have reconnected recently with my old Resistance bandmates and we are working on recording some of our original material as well as some new songs for a future release.
Thanks to Mitch Gurowitz for digging this flyer up. – Mike Vallely

Why did Marc-Andre Fleury tickle Blake Wheeler's ear? "I don't know. I didn't think... I was just sitting there and he was just sitting there. Everyone was fighting. I was trying to have a smile to myself."

The joy of being No. 1.
During my school days I was not so smart or intelligent kid but I was definitely very hard working. I would labor a lot over my textbooks and notebooks. In a way I loved to be with them and appeared studious to my parents who thought I would one day become a doctor like them.
I remember if I am not wrong I must have been in the 7th grade and somehow I decided at the starting of the term that I would come 1st in class. All these years I never stood 1st in my class and this is the resolution I made to myself, beginning of the year and I worked hard, mind and soul and to my utter disbelief I was dumbstruck when the teacher announced the results and I was the Numero Uno in the class. My joy knew no bounds. I had achieved what I had set to and that feeling I can never forget in my life time.
So, I learned that if thought and implementation worked hand in hand one could achieve the impossible.
After that year I never stood 1st in my class ever again, maybe I never resolved to, or attempt to the way I had done in the 7th grade.

Your Aqrion is starting to grow up. They are beginning to reach sexual maturity and begins noticing the other Aqrion in different ways. They begin putting on large amounts of muscle start to show off their looks. They will often fight, testing out their strength and skills on each other.
- Draw your Aqrion testing his strength with another Aqrion. -
"Somebody needs to stand up to this bully!" Lace's last words. Or rather those would be his last words if Nick was actually benevolent. However he still doesn't understand that he is actually capable of hurting others, so Hive Queen has make sure that Nick doesn't seriously hurt Lace. He still loses but what he doesn't know is that Nick now see's Lace as a friend as he is the first Aqrion to wrestle with him in ages. Even if he wasn't much of a challenge.

发布日期：2022-08-01 12:49 点击次数：120
Black Neighbor Baby SitterPart 5It was about forty minuets later when he looked down the hall and saw her coming from her bedroom. What he saw was a whole lot more then he had expected. She was wearing a shear baby doll night gown that hid nothing at all. Add to this was the fact that her breast were sticking through two holes that had been made for just this purpose. The bottom edge of the gown came just to her pussy and in fact he could see a little of his hearts desire below the hem. For the first time he saw here in all her glory. Long firm legs， flat tummy above wide hips， breast that were about thirty eight’s their dark areolas’ about a half dollar in size toped off with nipples that stood out for at least a quarter inch. His pecker was about to pop out right through his shorts， he was so excited. He stood with some difficulty， caused by his hard on， and walked towards her.“No， wait there where you are. I want you to see this in the light so you will get the full effect.”“If you say， but I think I’m getting the full effect already.”But when she stepped into the living room he saw what she was talking about.. The light coming in through the back porch sliding glass door made all the deferent’s in the world， the material seaming to disappear， reveling a women with golden smooth flawless skin. She looked as though she was wearing nothing but a few red straps around her breast， over her shoulders， around the bottom of the gown and along her sides where they went around to her back. She turn to allow him to see her back and he saw that there was very little back to the gown. She was bare down to the top of her ass and there was just enough material remaining to cover only two thirds of her there. The bottom of her checks were standing out for all to see， of course he was the only one seeing her glories tight butt. “So， what do you think?” He walked over to where she was standing and without saying a word， put his hands around to her bringingher body closer to him and then bent over and sucked one of her nipples into his mouth.“Oh God! that’s what I was hoping for. I guess it is safe to say that you like it.”In response he went to the other nipple. This time however he moved to the side and slid a hand under the thin material and started rubbing it across her flat tummy and then down to cup her mound in the palm of his hand and felt the shaved， smoothness of it.“Oh yes this is what I have been waiting for， and so much more. I have wanted you for a long time， and now I have you. Oh!” She let out when he pressed a finger onto her love button. It was standing out beyond her pussy lips now， wanting some of that attention he was giving other parts of her body. After a few strokes there he stopped and picked her up in his arms and started towards he bedroom. Once there he laidher on the bed so that her legs were hanging over it’s side. She started to raise up to remove her gown but he stopped her. “No， I want you just as you are. Lay back so I can have my way with your body and lets see what happens.”Bending over her as she was would allow him to suck her breast again but first he had to remove what he was wearing. He wanted her to feel his pecker as it slid across her tummy while he sucked those sweet nipples into his mouth.Once naked she saw for the first time how big he was.“Oh my God! She was right， you are a big one.”“So the two of you have been talking about me?”“Are you kidding， that’s all she talks about， you and how she wants you to be her first.”“And you are okay with that?”“Oh， yes I am okay with that.”“Then I shall do my best to give her the best first fuck possible.”“I knew you would， now lets take of me . I need you really， really bad. It has been a long time sense I’ve had a man and I need it.”He didn’t answer but went to work on her nipples while a hand went to her pussy. The moans started at once as he touched her pussy lips and again pressed against her love button. She was very wet from all his actions so far and he had no problem inserting a finger into her canal. He was surprised to find that she was quit tight for a women of her age. Must be from the lack of use， he said to himself. It will be like fucking a virgin again. Not to be though as she loosened up after a few strokes and he was able to insert a second finger.“Oh God! Yes， that feels so good!”Again he said nothing but continued what he was doing. With the two fingers working in and out of her he saw that she did not loosen up any more. It was a very snug fit， one he was sure he was going to enjoy with his cock. But he wanted her to have her first orgasm without his pecker in her. He wanted her to have several orgasm’s before he was through with her this afternoon.He stopped sucking her tits and started working his way down her body， kissing and nibbling her here and there as he went. When he got to her belly button he stopped and tongued it for a while. Her breath caught as he did so and he knew he was on the right track to giving her all the pleasure she wanted.He then worked his way down to her mound and took in the aroma of her sex which was strong and sweet to his nostrils. He kissed around her clitoris not wanting to bring her off to soon. And kissed his way down along the lips of her pussy， sucking in the dampness of it as he did so. The action of his finger working there way in and out of her was bring forth lots of her sweet juice to drink in. He lifted her legs up and pressed them back against her chest and worked his way down so that he was kneeling down on the floor， his face placed so that he was looking directly into her pussy. He manage to keep his fingers in place and went back to finger fucking her while at the same time bending forward to lick around her pussy， sucking in a lip which brought more moans from her. She was really getting into the action now as her hips were starting to press up off the bed， adding to the action of his fingers.“Deeper honey!” She said. Deeper please!! Ohhhh God I need it deeper pleeeeease!!”He knew that she was ready for her first orgasm so went up to her clitoris and sucked it into his mouth and started working it between his lips as though it were a small penis .“Oh God!!”， She screamed， and her hips bounced off the bed jamming her pelvis into his face. “Yes! Like that! I love that sooooooo much! Yes! Yes! Oh God I’m Cuming!I cummmmmmming!”She came close to bouncing off the bed as her orgasm reached it’s peak. He let up on her love button as he knew that it would be to sensitive to the touch at this time and he wanted to be able to work it some more when his pecker was deep insideher.He stopped and looked up towards her face to see her eyes closed and an expression of total delight spread across it. Getting up he bent over her body and picked her up and repositioned her so that she was now with her head on a pillow. She then opened her eyes and looked at him.“God that felt good， but I still want you in me with that beautiful cock of your’s.”“Coming right up”， he replied， and crawled over her now sweaty body， so that he was set to enter her with his hard nine inch’s. He had a feeling that he would not last long as he was so hot for her and there was a steady stream of pre cum dripping from the tip of his pecker. This was going to be soooo nice.She reached up for him as he lay over her and pulled him towards her body as he pressed the head of his cock into the opening of her love cannel. Reaching under her body he placed one arm under her back and held her shoulder with his hand. The other arm went down towards her butt and with his hand spread across her butt he was able to force her hips up， giving him a better shot towards her love tunnel.She was so damp that he slid into her with no difficulty at all， but then felt that she was tighter then he had expected she would be. It felt oh so good as he slowly pressed into her until he was deep into her，国产精品偷伦视频免费观看了 then he just lay there allowing her to get used to his size before starting to piston in and out of her like a slowly starting locomotive leaving a train station. Ever so slowly he picked up speed as she wrapped her arms around his shoulders， holding him tight， spreading her legs wide and back towards her chest to allow more of him into her. She wanted all that he could possibly give her and she wanted it hard.“Deeper honey and harder. I want you to use me， I need it hard tonight. It has been so long and I need all you can give me.”He picked up speed， thrusting in and out of her so fast that one would think he was a steam engine， chugging up a long hill， heading for the top， looking forward to the release that he knew was waiting for him when he got there. By now her hips were back on the bed and he was able to reach around and finger her love button which had a strong and immediate effect. “Oh! God!， yes!! That’s the way I want it!”， she screamed into his ear as her second orgasm was already building up within her body， begging to be released.“Yesssss honey! Like that! Ohhhhhhhhhh! Yes! I’m cummmmmmmmmmmming honey!!”Her hips again raised up off the bed， but this time her action forced all he had deep into her soaking wet pussy. Her hands were now digging finger nails into his back， but he didn’t even feel them as he was having an orgasm of his own. He was now grunting and breathing hard from his pounding into her. Then it came， load after load of his thick white cum shot into her， soaking the walls of her pussy， while she spilled copious amounts of her love juice out around his pecker， it dripping down to her ass hole and adding to the thrill she was now feeling from his love making. The thoughts from both was， ‘how could this feel so good?’ Slowly they came back to earth， their breathing slowing down， their heart rate coming back to normal. As his last drop of cum dribbled into her body he removed his arms from under her body and lay on his elbows for a while looking into her eyes， taking in her smile as she look into his， saying nothing， just looking with the look of complete content and satisfaction. Then he lay down on her， and，wrapping his arms back around her， rolled them both over so that she was now on top， his cock still deep in her and only slightly soft from all the spent energy. Despite all that had just transpired he was sure that they would have another round before he left for home， only to have it all take place again on another day， or night. This was a women that he could get used to real easy， if only for a while. He hoped it would be longer then that.

The life of writer Ian Fleming has fused with the lethal swagger of his overwhelmingly successful fictional character, James Bond, and that assumption carries over to those who were close to him. When Blanche Blackwell, his longtime mistress, died on August 8, 2017, certain obituaries suggested she had been the ultimate Bond girl, even claiming she was the inspiration for Pussy Galore of Goldfinger.
The truth was Blackwell personified a Bond girl no more than Fleming did a British secret agent with a license to kill. Her life, and their love affair, was much more subtle than that.
Fleming bought property in Jamaica in 1946 and rehabilitated a house that he dubbed Goldeneye. “As has been the case since the days of the sugar barons, Jamaica provided a home for British aristocrats, second and third sons of the aristocracy and rich misfits,” wrote Matthew Parker in his book Goldeneye: Where Bond Was Born: Ian Fleming’s Jamaica.
The category Fleming belonged in was perhaps the third, though he was not as yet rich. The middle son of a prosperous banker and politician, Fleming had floundered after Eton, overshadowed by a brilliant older brother. He poured his energy into the playboy life, drinking, enjoying fancy-motorcar driving, and seducing as many women as possible.
After trying various careers, including being as he put it “the world’s worst stockbroker,” he found his calling in World War Two, as personal assistant to Admiral John Godfrey, director of intelligence of the Royal Navy. Commander Fleming functioned as an “ideas man and fixer,” according to the documentary The Real Casino Royale. He bought a home in Jamaica while working as a journalist, eager to escape the grimness of postwar Britain.
Blanche Blackwell came from a far different background. She was born a Lindo, one of Jamaica’s richest families and part of the “plantocracy.” They were Sephardic Jews from Portugal who had come to Jamaica in 1743 to make money from sugar, rum, and coconuts. Family lore has it that the Lindos made a large loan to Napoleon Bonaparte that was never repaid. Their fortune had decreased by the dawn of the 20th century, but the booming banana trade brought it back, and the family bought the island’s leading rum manufacturer.
Blanche was born on Costa Rico on December 9, 1912, later moving to Jamaica. She was very strictly brought up. She married Joseph Blackwell, an Anglo-Irish former Guards officer and part of the Crosse & Blackwell food empire. The couple had a son, Chris, and bought racehorses. Errol Flynn, who loved vacationing in Jamaica, became friends with Joseph Blackwell and was infatuated with Blanche. He said later that her laughter was “like the sound of water tinkling over a waterfall” and he would have liked to propose marriage, but Flynn was already married.
The Blackwell marriage did end in divorce, and Blanche moved with her son to England while he went to school. She returned when Chris turned 18 and became good friends with playwright Noel Coward, who had bought a house on Jamaica after briefly renting Goldeneye from Ian Fleming. In the middle of writing his fifth Bond novel, From Russia With Love, Fleming and Blanche Blackwell met at a dinner party. “Ian found that Blanche was petite, with shapely legs and the dramatic, dark features of a Velazquez beauty,” wrote Andrew Lycett in the biography Ian Fleming.
Fleming was rude to Blanche that night, however. He was a famously difficult person. In an interview, Fleming described himself as “rather melancholic and probably rather slightly maniacal as well.” But a friendship did take hold, based on their shared love of the island. They both were passionate swimmers and endlessly interested in the fish and flowers of the island. They were also very attracted to each other. Blanche later spoke of his “rugged vitality.”
Fleming, however, was married. Around the time he wrote Casino Royale, he married Ann Charteris, whom he had been having an affair with throughout her marriage to Esmond Harmsworth, the owner of the Daily Mail.
The marriage between Ian Fleming and Anne Charteris was stormy. He disliked her society parties, deriding them as “gab fests,” and she was embarrassed by his Bond novels, which she called “pornography.” Neither was faithful, with Ann cheating on her husband with politician Hugh Gaitskell, leader of the Labor Party. She wasn’t that crazy about Jamaica either, where Fleming lived at least two months of the year while he produced his books.
Fleming and Blanche’s friendship deepened into an affair. She shared many of his interests, helped him to relax, and catered to his moods, biographers say. He had found a more compatible companion but didn’t divorce his wife. Ann Fleming knew about his mistress and was furious about it, describing Blanche Blackwell as “Ian’s Jamaican wife.” Noel Coward wrote a play about the love triangle called Volcano, never performed in his lifetime.
In an interview, Chris Blackwell said, “The relationship they had, how she and Ian bonded, was that they were both into doing things: climbing these falls, going into those caves, swimming here, snorkelling there.” Blanche gave Fleming a small fishing boat, and he named it Octopussy.
After Dr. No, starring Sean Connery, hit the big screen, and Ian Fleming became famous and quite wealthy, Blanche remained an important part of his life. He included her son in his new success too. Chris Blackwell had been hired as location scout and production assistant for Dr. No and there found work for his musician friends.
Ian Fleming had his first heart attack in 1961. Blanche spent time in England to be near him, as discreetly as possible since Fleming had assured his wife that their affair was over. His health continued to deteriorate, and he died on August 12, 1964. She was devastated but could not attend his funeral.
In her later years, Blanche Blackwell moved to England. She was interviewed by writer Ian Thomson for a book about Jamaica, The Dead Yard. She was asked about her two famous admirers. “Ian was an angel,” she said. “Errol was another angel. Both lovely men–both exceptionally manly and definitely not for domesticating.”
In 1976, reggae icon Bob Marley bought Goldeneye. His records were produced by Island Records, the music company founded by Chris Blackwell, whose personal fortune is estimated at $100 million.
Related story from us: Sir Roger Moore, the longest-serving James Bond, dies at 89
Later in the 1970s, Marley sold the house to Blackwell. He transformed Goldeneye into a luxury resort. His mother, Blanche, was known to be a regular visitor.
She died in London at the age of 104.

Last week on the 14th was my brother in laws birthday! We went over to their house that night for yummy banana splits. Funny story about that night was we forgot Jays sippy over there and come to find out their dogs got a hold of it and chewed the mouth piece right off! When Jay saw it the next day he thought it was the funniest thing ever! He had to show everyone we saw what happened! Bill we hope you had a great birthday!! Jay made a video for you. Hope you enjoy it!

Tuesday, July 1, 2014
Yesterday, we did a hike to Camp Rapidan where Herbert Hoover (the president) stayed as a summer retreat. We have done this hike before, but my mom had friends from Ohio visiting, and she thought they would like the hike a lot since it is one of our favorite, and it is unique since it has the retreat at the bottom. The trail was 4 miles round trip, and it was really rocky. There was even a creek running down the middle in parts. We also had to cross a river a few times and the water was very high because it has been raining a lot. I also swam in the swimming hole with a waterfall forming in it. The camp was very neat, and even had a small museum in it. Right beside the main house of the camp, we saw a huge rattlesnake. I got close enough to take a pretty cool picture.
We had a lock-in at our church last weekend. It was so much fun. We had two HUGE nerf gun battles. We also got to go out to the bowling alley from 10PM-midnight. That is way past my bed time. We also played a game like capture the flag, but it was boys -vs- girls and we used 10 glow sticks for the flags. The boys won....and by a lot too! We watched How to Train your Dragon movie, and by this time I fell asleep by Billy woke me up! I thought before the lock-in started that I really would not like it. But, I really did. I am glad I went, and it will be fun next year too!
It's summer, and that means Billy and JJ are going to be back 'blogging' about all their adventures again. We did not do any updating the entire school year, they were just both so busy. So, to give you all a quick look at what they have been up to the last 9 months, I turn it over to Billy and JJ: Billy.....5th Grade: (This picture is of red ribbon week at school....I did announcements and had kids sign a poster to live a drug free life.) I had a good first year at SLMS as a 5th grader this year. I made a lot of good friends and had good teachers...a few bad ones, but mostly good! There are 5 boys in my closest group of friends, and we call ourselves the 5. We got to go together for a whole weekend and stay in a hotel that one of my friends grandparents own. That was fun. Towards the beginning of the school year when I was still in Young Marines, I did announcements for Red Ribbon Week. I did them every day for a whole week. At the end of the year, I got the chorus award, which is funny because I cannot sing. I also did a math competition and got 11th place out of all of the the and 6th graders. I also got my Arrow of Light in Cub Scouts and now I am in the Boy Scout Troop. I hope 6th grade is as good at 5th was! This is my group of friends....the 5:

New England Patriots star Tom Brady has denied rumours that Rob Gronkowski's injury is causing tension to rise within the squad.
Gronkowski missed his sixth game on Sunday following a number of surgeries on his left forearm, which was fractured.
There were growing rumours that there had been disagreements between Patriots' management team and the player over his readiness to make a return to action.
A source was quoted on ESPN earlier this week: "There's curiosity and resentment, and he's creating it by going out and kicking ass during the week and then he doesn't show up on game day and help the team win."
However, Brady has dismissed the claims and says that he and the team are just looking forward to having Gronkowski back on the field.
He told Westwood One Sports: "Look, everyone loves having Rob out on the field, but we also understand that these medical decisions are out of the hands of the players and coaches. And if the doctors, when they clear them, they clear them, and when they don't, they don't. That goes for every player in the NFL. It's not just our team, it's every team.
"So we'll be excited to get him back. When that is, I don't have the answer, but I prepare each week regardless of who's out there. You got to go with the guys that are healthy and the guys who are ready to play.
"And look, we've had plenty of guys contribute to get to 5-1 at this point. So I have a lot of confidence in the guys I'm out there with. I'll be as excited as anybody when Rob gets back, and I know he's working his butt off to get back out on the field as soon as he can."
Gronkowski has been back in practice with the Patriots since the beginning of last week and was marked as questionable before Sunday's 30-27 win over the New Orleans Saints.
He was ultimately left out of the team but is expected to make his return presently.

Max is actually the more likely Hoenn companion to return, as May's Japanese VA is retired from what I've heard. Max himself also has a VA situation, but unlike his sister he would need a new English VA if he ever returned.
With Bea appearing again I now consider her Ash's primary rival of this saga, which would mark the first time that Ash's primary rival has been a girl. Volkner is the only character who I can definitely say is returning.
Back then Ash didn't have a companion whose goal is to catch em' all, and Ash himself has received less focus this saga than ever before. I'm not confident in Ash catching anything more, especially considering that they are bringing back reserves and whatever Ash could catch could just as easily...
Pokemon games usually have new announcements in May. ORAS and LGPE were revealed there and we got the first real information about SM and Sword and Shield there. I think that BDSP and LA would have been revealed in May if this year wasn't the 25th anniversary of the series.

It turned out I had broken my leg, shoulder, and fractured my arms. I was over at the Cullens house over, and I had just got my casts off. I was sitting with Carlisle
"So, what did happen with Edward...before" I asked. Edward was out hunting sejak himself. He claimed he didnt want the same thing to happen again.
Carlisle sighed. "I don't know. I think though, maybe, because your blood smells so appeling to him, well maybe he Lost control of his insticnts.It wouldn't be likely to happen again. Just Lost control for a few minutes. and then..." He gestured to my leg.
Edward walked in then. He came over to where Carlisle and I were sitting. "Bella, some upstairs with me."
"Edward," Carlisle berkata warningly.
Edward laughed. "Im fine, Carlisle. I just want to tunjuk something to Bella." His voice was so sernere, so calm, that one couldn't doubt him. Not like before at all.
The memory made me quesy. "He's fine, Carlisle." I berkata quickly "You even berkata so before."
I got up and walked to Edward. He picked me up and raced up the stairs with me. Whatever he wanted to tunjuk me, it must be important.
We ariived in his room and he set me down. He walked to the door, closing his eyes and locking it. They were still closed when he turned towards me.
"Edward, what did anda want to tunjuk me?" I berkata supisculsy.
He opened his eyes then, and they were wild, burning, his body tensned.
I heard a sickening crack, and screamed. Half a saat later I felt a throbbing pain on my back, and a sharp pain accross my face.
And then Emment was there, the door wrenched off the hinges. He held Edward back. I went to take a step towards him, but his head was as strecthed back as it could be, away from me. His eyes were strained, and he wasn't breathing.
Carlisle placed a restraing hand on my arm. I didnt realise that he was in the room. "Bella, you're bleeding," he berkata softly.
I turned towards him and cried out in pain, clutching my hand to my back. Sure enough, it came back with blood on it.
"Bella?" Carlisle asked urgently. "Bella? Are anda alright."
I couldn't say anything. Blackness was coming towards me from the corners of my vision.
"Bella?" Carlisle asked again 'BELLA? Can anda hear me?"
I slid back into his arms and the last thing that I saw before blackness was Edwards crazed eyes.

As I alluded to yesterday, Patrick and I took a field trip to have a night away and also spend some time with family.
This particular chunk of family consists of my Aunt (who due to an unusual age distribution in our family is half mother and half sister type figure to me), her husband and their three kids… Twin 10 year old boys, C1 and C2 and their almost 5 year old GL. They are a lovely crew who live in a village and have a farm. True story.
The trip up was half motivated by our wanting to see this gang and partly because the village they live in was having a town fair and the kids had some of the animals and other projects they were working on in the fair. Extra bonus… The kids were in a soccer tournament and C1 also had a hockey game… Things we had been wanting to see for ages, but have lived too far away to get to see.
So, we tagged along for the soccer adventures where C1’s team won his games and he got a hat trick (interesting because he also claims his claim to fame on the team is that he always wears a hat). Then, it was off to another field to catch GL’s two games. Nothing is more entertaining than watching a few under 6 teams have at the ball. GL got four goals (I think only one actually counted because for three of them, the other team was off having a drink break). She also played a bit of goal, all the while being coached from the sidelines by C1, her goalie big brother.
Meanwhile, there were also the adventures of Patrick and C2, who love to play robot or monster or something and tell stories for ages. I am generally the target of their adventures… “I hear get Trisha” and next think I know, they are removing my limbs, or tickling me or something.
Other bonus to all of this… Catch up time with my Aunt. Being away, I haven’t had much of a chance to see her and such, so it was good to just get to sit and chat a bit. And question how the kids are so athletic when we are so not.
Patrick and I also took a field trip to the rink (the nice, cool rink… a beautiful thing relative to the oven, which is our car) to see C1 play hockey. Despite only starting to play last fall, C1 is a pretty good goalie. In fact, he just spent a week at goalie camp, so he is even better now. And he has been itching for us to see him play. He give me regular updates through his Dad’s Facebook on his game status, his stats and all that good stuff. It has broken my heart that we haven’t had a chance to see him play. The first thing he asked when we appeared Saturday was if we were going to watch his hockey. And of course we did. We watched his team to a 7-5 win… C1 only let in two goals after coming in when they were down 2-3! I resisted the urge to be that embarrassing Aunt despite Patrick trying to convince me to cheer loudly (oh, the kids call us their Aunt and Uncle, again due to the unusual family age distribution). I just can’t be loud like that. Probably comes from having a loud mother and other mothers.
Then, it was the trek to their village and the fair.
The kids are a part of the 4-H club (I was amazed to learn 4-H still existed when they started there two years ago… I thought it was just something from books when I was a kid). So, the 4-H group submitted a bunch of projects and have their animals at the fair to show off. It was pretty cool. There was an obnoxious goose that would quiet down when its owner would tell it to use its indoor voice, full-size cows and some baby cows, lots of goats, a few young sheep (that C2 loves to cuddle with), pigs, chickens and rabbits to boot!
We saw the crafts that GL won first prize for (a butterfly and a photo poster) and C2 won third for (a rocket ship). C1 showed us his ambitious undertaking of making bread for the fair. He entered his bread with the adults and although he didn’t get a prize, it was still awesome because he undertook such a big thing. He pointed out the winner was 31 and therefore had a lot more loaves of bread under her belt.
We even hit up the rides section of the fair… All 6 of them. One thing of note were those giant hamster balls that you can run around in. I was impressed with those… So were the kids.
We, however opted to get on the scrambler. The whole crew of us minus my Uncle who was stuck (or lucky enough depending on how you look at it) with the animals), went on the Scrambler. This is quite a feat because C2 is nervous about pretty much everything and GL is, well, very small. Somehow, we all got on and it was a great time. C2 and GL loved it. C1 had gone on yesterday and had a blast, but reported it was much better this time, probably because the only little kid was his sister this time. I love things like that from a kid’s perspective. C2 was so excited, he told us it was just like being on a rocket ship, or being a cowboy, or maybe cookie beaters. He shrieked and cackled the whole time.
We managed to leave with a collection of cucumbers and drowsy eyes. We took an inadvertent scenic tour home down one of my favourite stretches because it has a ton of weeping willow trees.
It was a great day with some lovely family. I am glad we are closer to home so we can do this more often.

Hoping for a better day
Well, I talked to my friend last night and she said that something with her husbands family came up that same weekend and they have to fly to Puerto Rico so I'm still bummed but totally understand. As for my brother and his FI, I'm actually pretty pissed still. They canceled the cruise then told my mom as soon as they money is back in their account, they want her to book a trip to Cancun in September for them and asked my mom to keep the baby. But it is what it is, I'll get over it but I have a feeling his FI had ALOT to do with this. She doesn't seem to like my mom and dad very much so it would not surprise me if she masterminded the whole thing. Remember the whole shower incident??? So anyway, it's 40 days until the wedding and I can't wait to marry the man of my dreams because in the end, that's all that matters.
This discussion has been closed.

Full name Michael James Hesson
Born October 30, 1974, Dunedin, Otago
Current age 45 years 329 days
Major teams Otago
Mike Hesson was involved with Otago cricket for 15 years before taking over as Kenya coach after the team's poor performance in the 2011 World Cup. He took up coaching at an unusually early age of 22, beginning with a seven-year apprenticeship as Otago cricket's director of coaching. He became Otago's assistant coach in 2003 before being promoted to their top job next season. In his six years in charge of Otago, he converted the previously struggling team into one which regularly challenged for titles, and ended their 20 year wait for a trophy by winning the one-day tournament in 2007-08. Hesson took over as Kenya's coach for a two-year term but resigned in May 2012, less than a year after taking up the job, citing security issues that affected his family.
In July 2012, he was named John Wright's replacement as New Zealand's head coach.

Simon is a sweet boy we adopted when we were first married, before we had kids or a dog. We are also military and have had frequent moves. We recently moved to San Antonio and he is not adapting well to our new home. He spends most time hiding in a closet and Is scared to come out when the dog or kids are around. At our previous house we had a basement which was his “safe zone” but in our new TX house this is obviously not a thing. I worry about his quality of life and believe he would be better off in a home without other pets that is more quiet. He is very affectionate, has no known health problems, and uses the litter box appropriately .
- Vaccines up-to-date

Stolin was a very successful assassin in the city of Brinston. He was frequently billed as the greatest assassin alive. He was extremely stealthy and dealt in some of the most powerful poisons. Despite is exceptional athletic ability, he needed to rely on magical devices and chemists for all of his gear, as he was unable to craft those himself.
Stolin was credited with many assassinations thought to be impossible. When a nobleman would barricade himself into his mansion, it was typically Stolin who would take on the challenge of going in and killing him. His most famous target was the wizard Phosforensiatic. The rumors amongst the darker side of society say that Stolin was hired directly by the new Prince Governor Jasper to assassinate Phos on Skull Island. Once Stolin succeeded, he took over Phos’ base and made it his own. He gathered followers and planned to wipe out large numbers of elven noblemen.
Stolin was a human extremist; he believed that humans were the destined race to control the world and he wished to speed their success by eliminating non-humans of political power. Stolin did kill humans professionally, but he often charged less for non-humans. While planning his assaults on the Slyvanian Nation, a group of mercenaries sponsored by the elves traveled to Skull Island and defeated Stolin and his followers, including the active death cult that he had been building.
Stolin is thought by many to be dead, while others believe he is simply lying low. In either case, the strength of his operation has been crushed and if alive, he is likely alone.

A Knife in the Dark.
Henrique, King of Georgia.
Romanos, Chancellor of the Kingdom of Georgia.
Demetrios, Spymaster of the Kingdom of Georgia.
Akakide, uncle of King Henrique and Marshal in the Kingdom of Georgia.
Ah, this was better.
This was not some poor little castle on the edge of the earth, in some backwater province bordering the Moorish glory. This was a real palace. This place had some class, some character. This place was truly fit for his royal personage.
Henrique Bagratuni sat in the great throne of Georgia, having arrived only a few days ago from Portugal. His first action had been to give away the little duchy to his idiot brother, making him a Prince in order to appease him.
His brother was loyal, however. And definitely somebody he could trust.
Henrique had acted quickly. He had replaced his mother with a man named Romanus, a genius diplomat fleeing from the ruins of Byzantium, and much better qualified than Elvira- with the added benefit that he owed his and his family's life to Henrique, and would be far easier to manipulate.
His mother, on the other hand, would try to dominate him, and he had thus had her executed as the killer of his grandfather.
He knew who the real killer was, of course. The Greek had dug up some documents for him, and was able to prove that it was Hovhannes. Another reason to put him in charge of Porto- he had effectively given him the throne of Georgia, and that deserved some reward.
Oh, and the little fact that he did not want a murderer in the court, obviously.
Henrique knew Demetrios of old, and thus knew his loyalty to his King was assured. Nothing would make Demetrios turn against the rightful ruler of his state. The same went for Maria Knytling, the wife of Akakide.
Akakide himself posed something of a conundrum. Henrique had planned to blackmail or, if necessary, kill him, though since his military skill was of such value to Georgia he would have preferred not to.
But it seemed that was not necessary, for Akakide had gone mad. He kept on rubbing his hands and washing them, mumbling something about a spot. He was still an excellent general, and far better qualified than everyone else in the kingdom- but that was all his feeble brain could concentrate on now. He could not cause any conspiracies or plots.
And so, that was that. Nothing in this kingdom could cause his downfall. He had it all planned out.
Henrique smiled his famous smile once more. Now he he could start. Now he could unleash himself on the East, ready to lay waste to whatever was necessary to take down this world.
He was going to like it here...
Enewald- The patron saint of the suicidal.

Robert H. Burnside
Robert Henry Burnside (May 20, 1933 – August 2, 2021) was an American lawyer and politician. He was a member of the South Carolina House of Representatives from 1971 to 1978. He was a member of the Democratic Party. He was born in Columbia, South Carolina.
Burnside died on August 2, 2021 in Columbia at the age of 88.

Crystal - I just copied & pasted below from a post back in Feb. Hope it helps & if you have any questions feel free to ask. Good luck to you!
I had Lap on 12/30/11...fun way to ring in the new year! I didn't have endo symptoms but had reoccuring cysts and my RE suspected endo from an ultrasound. My ob did the lap b/c we are 4 hrs from Denver where my RE is. Well, I was in bad shape after and had to stay in the hospital. They removed cysts, endo, my ovaries were stuck to my abdomen, he put mesh lining around them, also did the HSG and tubes were clear. Don't let this scare you as it's VERY unusual to have this difficult of a recovery. I couldn't take any pain meds because they made me sick. I was puking (not fun on a very painful abdomen) on New Years day and not from a hangover...ha! I had a to have a cathater (which the nurses couldn't get in so my ob had to come do it...awful!!! I didn't leave the house for a week, lucky I work part time. Also, still have occasional pain but my post-op was good and starting working out again this week.
I am soooooo glad we finally did the lap as this may explain why we have had so much trouble in the 2 years of TTC. I had my first shot of Lupron last week, doing 3 months then on to Femara + IUI for 3 months...then regroup if it comes to that. Sorry for the long response, haven't posted on BC in months just always checking in on my groups. Good luck to you and I understand your nerves. I had never had surgery before either and was very anxious. Feel free to ask anymore questions.

Well today was a great day and a not so great day. It was great because I got all my scuba gear (besides a tank a fins) and not so great because now I owe my husband big time. Lol. We were in OKC running a few errands when one of our friends called and asked what size BC (that vest thing) I wore. The dive shop we like to go to were having a big sale and I guess we got sold. I got my wet suit, BC, 1st and 2nd stage, and mask. The only reason I didn't get fins is because they didn't have my size in purple. We ended up saving about $550. You can't beat that! I'm so happy.
Saturday, February 28, 2009
Friday, February 13, 2009
Just an FYI to everyone. This week Lance was diagnosed with type II diabetes. It is a big deal, but not really a big shocker. I had been suspecting it for a while because I noticed he had several of the symptoms, it was just convincing him to actually go to the doctor. This is the guy who when he was a kid broke his arm and it had a noticeable abnormal bend in it and he wouldn't let his mom take him to the doctor for two days. The most difficult part will be getting used to the diet. No sweets. Lots of veggies. Two things he hates. We are getting used to it though. At first I was really stressed but his glucose levels have been relatively reasonable these past couple days so I feel like I am doing my job right. So if anyone has any advice or tasty diabetic friendly recipes send them my way!
Tuesday, February 3, 2009
These are the beautiful shoes that I got this week. Guess what the price tag said... $69. Guess how much I paid... $5!! Thats right, that makes them even more beautiful. Now the only thing I need is an outfit to match. Lol. Thats the way shoe shopping should be anyway.

Derek Stevens, 35, was killed by a single shot fired from a handgun as he drove through Halewood in his gold-coloured Land Rover on 5 January 2008.
The father-of-one, who was known to police and in local drug circles, veered on to the wrong side of Mackets Lane at around 9.15pm, hitting a private hire cab head on.
Carl Fury was jailed for 12-and-a-half years after admitting manslaughter.
Fury admitted knowing someone in his car had a gun, which would be used to “frighten” Mr Stevens if they met him while they were out.
But he denied the intention was to kill Mr Stevens, saying he doubted whether the gunman, who he has refused to name to police, meant to fire the fatal shot between moving cars at night.

Police are appealing for witnesses to a robbery in Newmarket on Saturday morning.
A 17-year-old boy was walking along the Yellow Brick Road path near to the Ian Trethowan House flats at around 1am when he was assaulted and personal items including a mobile phone were stolen from him.
It is believed that men wearing hooded tops with the hoods up and bandanas across their faces were responsible for the robbery. The teenager suffered minor injuries.
Officers want to speak to anyone who was in the area at the time of this incident and may have seen the offenders.

In an apparent case of suicide, a couple and their teenage daughter were found hanging in their rented home at Kamothe on Sunday morning.
The woman was identified as Jasmine Patel, 45, an MBBS doctor who ran a clinic near her home in sector 36. Her daughter, Oshin,15, had completed her Class 10, but had discontinued studies. The man was identified as Indrajit Dutta, who neighbours said never went to work though he claimed to be an engineer.
All three left notes giving different reasons for ending their lives. The doctor said she had lost interest in life because of prolonged illness and that she did not want to leave her daughter behind. She also said their bodies should be donated to KEM hospital for students to use.
The girl said she was depressed and frustrated because the couple used to fight frequently and that she had discontinued her studies.
The man said that after he saw the two dead, he lost his will to live and so was hanging himself too.
The family had left the key of their house in a plastic bag outside the door. Their maid opened the door with that key on Sunday morning and found the husband hanging in the hall and the mother and daughter in one of the bedrooms. She then raised an alarm and the neighbours called the police.
Hemant Nagrale, police commissioner of Navi Mumbai said, the family used nylon ropes to hang themselves.
Ashok Naik, senior police inspector of Kamothe police station said the man was apparently drinking in the living room when the mother and daughter committed suicide. “He realised what happened when the effect of the alcohol wore off and brought down the bodies. He must have then killed himself,” Naik said.
Naik said, “From the notes we understand that the woman had severe back pain and she was unable to walk properly. We have recovered walking sticks from the house. We have sent the suicide notes to handwriting experts to verify if they were really written by different persons.” The police have ruled out the murder angle for now.
The family was from Madhya Pradesh and police were trying to trace their family members. In his suicide note, the man described the girl as ‘her daughter’, so police suspect he was not the father.
One of the neighbours on condition of anonymity said, “The family did not socialise much. They came out only for essential tasks such as buying milk and vegetables and returned home.”

Tom and Jerry Tales
Overall this game is great because it's both fun and challenging at the same time. I played this game when I was a kid and I still have it. That's how great it is. Like i said, its challenging because you have to try to pass all the traps and its just awesome.

"Florence Foster Jenkens", was a wealthy woman in New York who believed that she was an Opera quality singer. She was not. But through her wealth and influence, she was able to arrange opportunities for her to sing in New York. I saw a movie based on her life, the movie starred Meryl Streep and Hugh Grant. I winced and laughed at the movie depiction and decided during the movie that I had to try to capture her personality and musical confidence. This little painting resulted. I think I will look up that movie and see it again.

Aaron is the best painter!
Aaron is the best painter ever! I have been having him paint for me for 9 years and I won't have anyone else paint for me. He is an awesome painter, he's hard working, friendly and honest. We love him. Kary Miller Read More

Gene Gorman's Auto Sales / Worst company on earth
On December 12th of 2008, I bought a used 2006 Toyota Camry SE off the Internet from Gene Gormans Auto Dealership . I contacted the dealer and asked what condition the vehicle was in. The Dealer explained that it was in excellent condition, and that it still covered under it original 30K mile warranty since the car had only been driven 26K miles. They also said that the car was in such good condition that the owner of the dealership and her son had been using the car as their personal vehicle for a few weeks before they put it up for sale. They faxed me a Carfax report that said the vehicle was clean of accidents. So i bought the vehicle and paid shipping cost for my trade in and the camry to and from Texas. After the vehicle was delivered I drove it for less than a mile and noticed that the car did not drive right, It had a wabble to it. I contacted Gene Gormans about the problem and they acted shocked, said that maybe one of the wheels had a bad bearing. I took the vehicle to a certified Toyota Dealership, and they said the car was a salvaged vehicle and the warranty experied on dec 3rd of 2008, also they stated any legitimate car dealer should have noticed the problem. After talking with the owner's wife of Gene Gormans, Once again shocked, they said they were insulted by the Toyota Dealerships report and that if i wanted to i could ship the car back to them, at my expense, and they would get me into another car. They stated that they were not experts on cars that all they do is check the carfax report, detail the car and offer it for sale. DON'T TRUST THIS DEALERSHIP... To this day they will not do anything else to help me. The extra 3 month warranty they added to the vehicle would not cover any of the problems that we found.

But in primitive times the hill of the Acropolis extended to the Eridanus and Ilissus, and included the Pnyx on one side, and the Lycabettus as a boundary on the opposite side to the Pnyx, and was all well covered with soil, and level at the top, except in one or two places. Outside the Acropolis and under the sides of the hill there dwelt artisans, and such of the husbandmen as were tilling the ground near; the warrior class dwelt by themselves around the temples of Athene and Hephaestus at the summit, which moreover they had enclosed with a single fence like the garden of a single house. On the north side they had dwellings in common and had erected halls for dining in winter, and had all the buildings which they needed for their common life, besides temples, but there was no adorning of them with gold and silver, for they made no use of these for any purpose; they took a middle course between meanness and ostentation, and built modest houses in which they and their children’s children grew old, and they handed them down to others who were like themselves, always the same. But in summer-time they left their gardens and gymnasia and dining halls, and then the southern side of the hill was made use of by them for the same purpose. Where the Acropolis now is there was a fountain, which was choked by the earthquake, and has left only the few small streams which still exist in the vicinity, but in those days the fountain gave an abundant supply of water for all and of suitable temperature in summer and in winter. This is how they dwelt, being the guardians of their own citizens and the leaders of the Hellenes, who were their willing followers. And they took care to preserve the same number of men and women through all time, being so many as were required for warlike purposes, then as now-that is to say, about twenty thousand. Such were the ancient Athenians, and after this manner they righteously administered their own land and the rest of Hellas; they were renowned all over Europe and Asia for the beauty of their persons and for the many virtues of their souls, and of all men who lived in those days they were the most illustrious. And next, if I have not forgotten what I heard when I was a child, I will impart to you the character and origin of their adversaries. For friends should not keep their stories to themselves, but have them in common.
Yet, before proceeding further in the narrative, I ought to warn you, that you must not be surprised if you should perhaps hear Hellenic names given to foreigners. I will tell you the reason of this: Solon, who was intending to use the tale for his poem, enquired into the meaning of the names, and found that the early Egyptians in writing them down had translated them into their own language, and he recovered the meaning of the several names and when copying them out again translated them into our language. My great-grandfather, Dropides, had the original writing, which is still in my possession, and was carefully studied by me when I was a child. Therefore if you hear names such as are used in this country, you must not be surprised, for I have told how they came to be introduced. The tale, which was of great length, began as follows:-
I have before remarked in speaking of the allotments of the gods, that they distributed the whole earth into portions differing in extent, and made for themselves temples and instituted sacrifices. And Poseidon, receiving for his lot the island of Atlantis, begat children by a mortal woman, and settled them in a part of the island, which I will describe. Looking towards the sea, but in the centre of the whole island, there was a plain which is said to have been the fairest of all plains and very fertile. Near the plain again, and also in the centre of the island at a distance of about fifty stadia, there was a mountain not very high on any side.
In this mountain there dwelt one of the earth born primeval men of that country, whose name was Evenor, and he had a wife named Leucippe, and they had an only daughter who was called Cleito. The maiden had already reached womanhood, when her father and mother died; Poseidon fell in love with her and had intercourse with her, and breaking the ground, inclosed the hill in which she dwelt all round, making alternate zones of sea and land larger and smaller, encircling one another; there were two of land and three of water, which he turned as with a lathe, each having its circumference equidistant every way from the centre, so that no man could get to the island, for ships and voyages were not as yet. He himself, being a god, found no difficulty in making special arrangements for the centre island, bringing up two springs of water from beneath the earth, one of warm water and the other of cold, and making every variety of food to spring up abundantly from the soil. He also begat and brought up five pairs of twin male children; and dividing the island of Atlantis into ten portions, he gave to the first-born of the eldest pair his mother’s dwelling and the surrounding allotment, which was the largest and best, and made him king over the rest; the others he made princes, and gave them rule over many men, and a large territory. And he named them all; the eldest, who was the first king, he named Atlas, and after him the whole island and the ocean were called Atlantic. To his twin brother, who was born after him, and obtained as his lot the extremity of the island towards the Pillars of Heracles, facing the country which is now called the region of Gades in that part of the world, he gave the name which in the Hellenic language is Eumelus, in the language of the country which is named after him, Gadeirus.

Guild news - Nabe has unsubbed from WoW
Sigh. It was coming but I didn't think it would be so soon. Nabe is stopping playing WoW, again.
The thing about Nabe is that he often comes and goes, and when he comes back he is an avid farmer and when Tillers came out he was pretty fast at getting that Farmer title, which suited him perfectly.
Though us old Frosties know him as Nabe, most of the others know him via whichever alt he is playing as his main. In Mists, it was Zarrianissa, his DK. In Cataclym it was mostly his paladin, Belinia. We call him Nabe, from his name back in our vanilla days where he was playing his priest, Nabeshin. He's always played a healer or a tank. Never really see him DPSing that much.
Nabe is always so lovely to me. He often gives me pets - in fact, he just mailed me a Red Cricket as a "I'm stopping playing WoW so I'm emptying my bank" gift (along with some flasks and some pocket money). He has given me countless pets and mats for things, and I've never known how to repay him except talking to him, and even then people might say that's a curse rather than a gift! If you have ever been on the receiving end of my hyper-excited blabber, you may know what I mean.
Lucky Fue inherited all Nabe's gold. Though I'm surprised he wasn't maxed out gold on all his toons already.
Tout got some crafted tanking stuff.
I wonder if it's because Gley and Enna don't play WoW, that is part of it. Nabe loves to level alts, and farming and levelling don't be as fun as he remembered, he says. Also, he thought it would be better to quit now whilst we still have tanks around waiting for raid spots than when there are none because they've gotten sick of waiting.
Miss you Nabe! Though it's true, you're not really gone, after all your brother will be around still and it's not like you dropped off the face of the earth or anything... right? :)

Mommy’s Panties Ch. 02byBethB©
It was 10:30 PM before I finally left my son's house. His plane would be arriving about the same time I pulled my car into the garage at my own house, and he'd be on his way home shortly there after. By my best estimates, within the next hour and a half, he'd be mad at hell as me.
Hopefully, though, his anger would be a smidge less when he read the note I left for him on the counter in his kitchen, and then be a lot less when he read the note I left on his bed.
I tried to put myself in his place and think how I'd feel if I was him and it wasn't a pretty picture. I'd gone through my son's personal belongings – his drawers, his closets, his clothes – literally everything he had. I discovered his panties, my panties, my panties soaked with his dried cum, his silicone cock toy, and his stash of incest DVDs packed with all kinds of mother-son panty movies.
I dare say – he was not going to be a happy camper once he realized what I'd done.
But, as I explained in the note I left for him, it wasn't my intent to do all that. I was simply trying to do him a favor by cleaning his house while he was away, and I stumbled on all the panties. Then, I found the rest of it. I didn't go there with the notion to snoop or to assault his personal life. I was just trying to do something nice for my son, that's it.
I thought the note I left on his bed made a pretty good case for forgiveness, and in my stomach, I felt like I had a pretty good chance. I'd know for sure tomorrow if he showed up for lunch like he promised me on the phone.
I already decided I'd play it by ear tomorrow if he did come. I'd just play dumb, we'd have lunch and I'd ask him about his business trip and we'd be done with it. I had no intention of bringing up the panties, his shower cock toy, or any of the rest of it. If he brought it up, that would be a different story, but I wasn't going to do it. I didn't want him to think I loved him any less tomorrow than I did last week and so, I'd just keep quiet unless he brought it up.
Of course, in my notes, I didn't mention the fact that I'd watched one of his "Mommy's Panties" DVDs and masturbated on his bed, or that I got so wet watching it I leaked all over his sheets when I climaxed....... and I didn't tell him I used his cock toy in the shower not only in my pussy, but also in my ass. No, I didn't tell him any of that, and the reason I didn't was because I didn't think he needed to know. I surely wasn't going to ask him about his personal sexual activities, although once I found my sperm soaked panties in his bedroom, I had a pretty darn good idea what they were.
But, tomorrow would tell. If he showed up, then I guess it meant he forgave me. If he didn't, I'd have to do some groveling and try to patch things up because I wasn't going to live the rest of my life with a broken heart, or, with a broken hearted son.
I was sitting on my bed, thinking about how it might play out tomorrow. Just then, the phone rang. It was after 11, and the ring startled me. I was surprised to find it was Danny. His plane had gotten in early and he was almost at his house. But, he'd been bothered all day by my phone call this morning and was worried something was wrong.
"If you're still up, why don't I come by now?" He suggested. "I'm only fifteen minutes away. Is that okay?"
Wow, I wasn't ready for this. He was going to come here instead of going to his own house?
"Sure," I agreed, "have you eaten?"
"Nah," he replied, "but I'm not hungry."
"That's a lie." I answered. "Come on over and I'll find something for you to eat, then we can talk. You're always welcome here – any time, day or night, you know that."
After we hung up, I began to panic. Could I look him in the eyes when I saw him? Would I be able to see my son without wondering if he's wearing boxers or panties under his trousers? Maybe even wearing my panties under his trousers?
But as I thought about it, maybe this was good – maybe him coming here would give me a chance to ask a few subtle questions. Then, before I could stop myself, I got a more devious idea....... maybe this would give me a chance to actually see how interested he was in my panties, and in me.
I felt a squishy feeling between my legs and I ran into my bedroom, stripped off my shorts and pulled off the panties I borrowed from him house. Quickly, I started to throw them in my clothes hamper and then I realized I couldn't do that because he might come check my dirty clothes looking for panties to steal – and he'd find them! I sure as hell didn't want him to find a pair of panties at my house which he knew should be at his house.
So, I stuffed those panties under my pillow and went to my lingerie drawer for a fresh pair and then I realized I couldn't do that either! If I was really going to gauge his interest in my panties, I couldn't do it with fresh panties. Thinking fast, I looked down into my hamper and found the panties I wore the day before yesterday and looked down inside them. Fortunately, they were clean enough to wear again, so I slipped them on, and then made sure I pushed the crotch panel up between my pussy lips so they'd be fragrant and start to get moist. I wanted them to be insanely irresistible for him.
Then, taking my plan further in my head, I reached into my dirty clothes hamper and pulled everything out, dumping it all on the floor of my bedroom. Carefully, I looked through the pile and counted how many panties were in there. Then I arranged the pile in a way that clearly showed there were panties mixed in amongst the other clothes. I stood back and looked at the beginnings of my devious trap, and I smiled a mischievous grin. But, this would be just a part of how I'd temp him. The second part would be even more enticing and the third part should send a clear message to him – a message he'd understand better once he got home and read my note.
My mind was firmly made up. And without another thought, or an ounce of guilt, I promised myself I'd give my son a night to remember – a panty night to remember, courtesy of his mother.
I could feel the wetness building inside my pussy. Standing there in my bedroom, knowing full well what I was about to do, and how it might affect him, I lowered my hand down to my crotch and ran my fingers up and down the pantied crease between my pussy lips. "Yes!" I moaned in satisfaction. I was getting wet. Abundantly wet. I could feel it starting to saturate the material of my panties and without giving it a second thought, I rubbed myself for several seconds, forcing more of the panty's crotch panel between my lips and directly into the seeping wetness of my vagina.
"These," I said to myself, "will probably push him over the edge when he finds them."
I heard his knock on the door as I was standing there touching myself. I reached for my shorts, pulled them up my legs and stepped back into my sandals. I quickly checked myself in the mirror and then grinned cleverly as I went to let him in. This elaborate plot, if I pulled it off, would allow him to be alone with several pairs of my panties, including the ones I was wearing now. If it all went according to plan, he'd have a good fifteen or twenty minutes alone with them, making it easy for him to enjoy himself. If the way I was leaking was any indication, they'd be a dripping mess by the time he got them.
I arrived at the door just as he was about to knock again. As usual, he hugged me as he came through the door. But this time, his hug felt different to me. With what I now knew about him, and what I was going to do tonight, I found it hard to hug him in a motherly way.
"Come on," I said, stepping away from his hug, "let's see what we can find in the kitchen for you to eat."
"Mom," he replied, "you don't need to do this. I'm not hungry."
"No more of that, Danny." I said, shaking my finger at him. "It won't take long and you need to eat something." Then, I paused for a minute and said, "Besides, you know I'd do anything for you. Don't ever forget that, sweetheart."
He smiled sweetly at me and then I said, "How about a scrambled egg sandwich? Will that hold you over for a while?"
I knew he'd love that idea. They were one of his favorites – I even taught Emily how to make it for him, just the way he liked it. But, since their divorce, I doubt he'd had very many. His eyes lit up and he came over toward me, saying, "I miss those, you know."
Seeing a chance to send him a subtle message, I replied, "I bet you do, buster." Then, looking up at him and squinting my eyes, I smiled and added, "And, if you don't come over more often so I can make them for you, you're going to be in big trouble. You're not too big for me to pull your undies down and give you a good spanking, you know!"
Danny smiled and put his hands on his hips. "Well, I wouldn't want that!" He said, laughing.
So, continuing my kidding tone, I said, laughing with him, "Grown man, or not – you better listen to your mother or face the consequences, kiddo. I wouldn't think twice about spanking your bare butt and making you stand in the corner."
Danny laughed, and I didn't take it any further, especially since I knew what I had planned for him tonight. Then, he'd go home and see what I'd done at his house, read my notes and realize I knew his secrets. Tonight I would plant the seeds in his head which I hoped would grow into something special between us.
I busied myself with his beloved scrambled egg sandwich while we made small talk. He stood beside me and told me about the obnoxious woman he sat next to on the plane, and how she talked endlessly about her stupid job, her stupid boss and her stupid customers. As we chatted, it was more like we were friends joking around with each other and I let him talk, looking over at him to smile and laugh.
When I finished making his sandwich, I knew it was time to put my plan into action. I felt a flutter in my stomach, and wondered if I had the nerve to go through with everything I had planned. In any event, it was time start the ball rolling.
Setting the sandwich down on my kitchen table, I looked up at my son and said, "Danny, would you mind terribly if I went to take a shower while you eat? I've been cleaning house all day and I feel grimy."
"Sure, go ahead." He said, pouring himself a glass of milk.
"You don't have to run off right away, do you?" I asked. "I have to wash my hair and shave my legs – it might take me a few minutes. Do you mind?"
Pulling out a chair and sitting down in front of his sandwich, he answered, "Naw, go ahead. I don't have to be anywhere."
I leaned down and kissed his cheek as he started to take a bite. Then, ruffling his hair like I used to do when he was nine, I told him to make himself at home.
I walked out of the kitchen, up the stairs, down the hall and into my bedroom with a grin on my face bigger than Rohde Island. Butterflies filled my stomach as I put my panty plan in play.
First, I went to my dresser, looking for the "World's Best Mom" sleepshirt one of the kids bought me years and years ago. It had a design on the front along with the words "World's Best Mom", but the back was plain white. The thing about this sleepshirt was - it was made of t-shirt material, and it had been worn and washed hundreds of times. It was so thin, I quit wearing it because it wasn't decent any more. And that's exactly why I wanted it now.
Next, I went to my lingerie drawer and pulled out my hot pink bikini panties, the ones with the tiny rows of ruffles all across the back side. They fit me tightly, and that's the exact look I wanted. These panties would definitely show through the back of the sleepshirt, and he'd have no trouble making out the ruffles across my butt, either. From the front, though, he'd never notice a thing. It would be excellent eye candy for him.
The only draw back to this sleepshirt was going to be my breasts. Because it was so thin, my breasts, and in particular - my nipples, would be clearly visible to him. Well, since I was absolutely sure he'd seen his wife's nipples and the nipples of other females, and he knew I was a female, he'd have to expect I had nipples, too. Right?
That solved the nipple problem.
Next, I went into my bathroom and laid the clean, pink panties out in the middle of the counter top, between the two sinks where they'd be plainly obvious to anyone that came into that bathroom. Then, I reached into the drawer under the counter, found my hair scissors, and pulled open the cabinet for a new razor. Looking around to see if I had everything ready, I went to the next step of my tantalizing panty plan.
I couldn't believe I was getting ready to do what I was going to do. It was shameful, disgraceful and appalling, but, it was necessary if my plan was going to work like I hoped. Taking a deep breath, I pulled my shirt over my head and laid it on the bed, and then quickly pulled my shorts off and put it with my shirt. Standing there in my bra and panties, I turned to look at myself in the full length mirror. I could see the crotch of my panties were still creased up between my pussy lips, but, I wanted it to be more pronounced – I wanted it to be immediately noticeable and unforgettable to my son. When he saw me, I wanted the vision of my panties pushed up between my labia to be burned into his brain for ever and ever.
Reaching down, I rubbed myself a few times to make the crease bigger. In doing so, I found the crotch of my panties were sopping wet from the anticipation of this moment, and the moment when he found them. The excitement that swarmed over me at that second was incredibly intense, and it acted like a drug to block my inhibitions, giving me strength to do what I had to do next.
Checking my hair and the way I looked one more time, I walked to the doorway of my room and peeked down the hall toward the steps leading down to the landing just outside the kitchen. After listening for a second, and making sure he was still sitting at the kitchen table eating his sandwich, I stepped out into the hall and walked all the way to the top of the stairs dressed only in my bra and panties.
"Danny?" I called.
I was just about to call his name a second time when he appeared through the doorway from the kitchen and looked directly up the stairs – right at me.
"Mom!" He exclaimed after a brief second, and then ducked back inside the kitchen. "I'm sorry! I didn't know you weren't dressed."
"I thought you were just going to yell up to me from the table." I replied, acting surprised and embarrassed. I paused for a second, and then added, "There's no one here but you and me, so who cares. Come on out."
Slowly, my son crooked his head around the door frame and looked up at me. "Oh, please......" I said derisively, putting my hands on my hips and making a face at him, "don't be so melodramatic. It's no different than a bathing suit, Sweetheart."
Danny finally came out and looked up at me. I didn't want this to last too long, so as soon as he came out I said, "There's a bottle of my favorite white wine lying on its side in the refrigerator. When you're done eating, would you mind pouring me a glass and brining it up? It should be cold enough by now. Pour yourself one, too."
It was like he was frozen. His eyes were focused directly on my crotch. Immediately, I got a surge of excitement that zapped me like a thousand little pin pricks all over my body as I stood there letting him look at my creased panties. It was a magnificent feeling, mixed with a sting of terror, to stand there and allow my son to stare at the object of his fascination. Even more so when I knew he'd have his chance to actually hold these same panties in his hands in just a few minutes.
"Yeah...... uh.... I mean, yes." He answered in a daze. "In the refrigerator. The wine. Okay."
Knowing I'd gotten the exact reaction I was looking for, I thanked him nonchalantly, turned around and unceremoniously strolled back to my bedroom. Once inside, I gasped for breath and put my hands in front of my mouth so I wouldn't scream.
"No!" I admonished myself. "I didn't do that! Tell me I didn't just do that!"
But, I did. And, I knew I'd just set in motion a chain of events I'd have a hard time backing out of, now. Do or die, it was time for the next step.
Leaving the door to my bedroom completely open, I faced the door, reached around, and unhooked my bra. I had no idea if Danny was in the process of pouring the wine and bringing it up at this exact second, or, if he was still eating his sandwich. It didn't matter to me because my mind was made up. Sliding the bra down my arms and away from my chest, I laid it on top of my shirt and shorts, and then I casually put my thumbs in the waistband of my panties and quickly drew them down my legs.
Acting as if I wasn't in any hurry at all, I remained facing the opened door and took my time folding my sodden panties in half and then tossing them on top of my bra, and the rest of the clothes I'd just been wearing. Then, as though I didn't have a care in the world, I slowly strolled into the bathroom – leaving that door open, too, and turned the shower on.
When I hatched my plan, I knew there had to be a sense of realism to the way I was setting all this up. So, if he came up with the wine right away, I'd act appropriately 'embarrassed' and 'surprised' when he caught me naked, but, it was too risky just to loiter in my room naked, waiting for him to come up. He'd get suspicious if he came up ten minutes from now and saw I hadn't gotten in the shower yet. I said I was going to take a shower, wash my hair and shave my legs, and that's what I was going to do. More or less.
As the water ran, I picked up the scissors and my razor, and, I was about to step into the shower when I figured I better make something of an effort to close the bathroom door, or at least swing it closed against the latch. I opted for the latter; leaving the door opened a fraction of an inch, hoping it would provide him a little enticement further along in my plan.
Stepping into the shower, I quickly set to work with the scissors. Grabbing handful after handful of my unkept pubic hair, I pulled it away from my body and cut it as close to the skin as I could. The frosted glass shower doors wouldn't allow him to see anything except a flesh colored blob behind the glass, so there's no way he'd be able to tell what I was doing, other than standing there. So, I kept on – snipping and trimming until I'd cut away all the long hairs between my legs and let it wash down the drain.
It had been a while since I'd trimmed myself. With no man in my life since my divorce, there was no need to keep myself attractive down there, so I just let it grow. But now, it was crucial to parts of my plan to be hairless – just like the actors on his DVDs, so I began the task of shaving myself. I took extra care not to nick my pussy, rinsing the razor after each swipe. Shaving my pussy in the shower was a bit more difficult than doing it in a bath tub, but I'd done it before. I kept glancing through the opaque shower doors, wondering if Danny had made his way upstairs with my wine yet. Actually, to be more truthful, I was wondering if he'd come across the pile of dirty clothes in the middle of my floor with the cleverly hidden panties, or if he'd seen the make-shift pile of clothes on the bed – the ones I just took off with the wringing wet panties he'd seen me in.
I knew there was no way be wouldn't be affected by the things I'd do tonight. I'd already let him see me in my bra and panties. There were several pairs of worn panties in the pile on the floor, and the panties on the bed were so wet, they actually felt heavy in my hands. Plus, I set my new panties out on the counter of the bathroom, and I was taking a shower with the door open. That should be enough to get his motor running.

Barry Manilow credits Dick Clark with launching a career and friendship that spans almost 40 years. Now, the Grammy winning singer is sharing his memories of the entertainment icon, who died on Wednesday. Watch the video…
“It was like a shot in my stomach,”; Barry tells our Chris Jacobs about hearing the news of his friend’s death. “I knew he was in his eighties, but he was always young. I never thought of Dick Clark dying. He was the closest friend I ever had.”;
Barry’s friendship with Dick prompted him to co-write the lyrics to the American Bandstand theme, and the singer says that some of his fondest memories revolve around the meetings they had about 1985’s Copacabana, “the one and only movie”; that he starred in which Dick produced, based on Barry’s hit song of the same name.
Pics: Legend Dick Clark in Pictures
“I think my favorite moments were in our meetings, because … he respected what I had to say,”; says Barry. “I remember when I said things, he would – bam – go right to me, shut everybody up, and say, “Listen to him.’ That was really important.”;
Dick Clark died Wednesday morning of a heart attack. He was 82.

A driver had to be cut from their vehicle after a crash on Forest Road in Mansfield.
Two cars collided on the road at around 11am today (Tuesday, July 26).
Firefighters from Mansfield and Ashfield had to cut one of the drivers from their car after they became trapped.
The road is now closed between the A60 Nottingham Road and Sandhurst Avenue junctions with heavy traffic in the area as a result.
More to follow.

This is really no big suprise to me. I think its alot of the front office pushing Joey out the door. With Joey due a 4 mil roster bonus on June 1 and his huge contract due to him this year it makes it easy for the Lions to let him go. I think Martz praising him was smoke being blown tp both Joey(to try and give him some positive reinforcement) and to the media for a possible trade. Kitna was brought in for a reason and it wasnt to compete with Harrington for a starting job, it was for the starting job.
"DAMMIT!!!!! I knew it, I knew it, I KNEW IT!!!!"-Immortal words of The Captain

Yesterday I had the opportunity to go to a missionary homecoming talk at another church. As I drove to the church, I had to pull over to take a picture of this beautiful sight. I even took a short video of the leaves as they glimmered in sun as they slowly fell to the ground.
I had had 3 days of complete clarity. Freedom from any mental health issues that were so consuming earlier in the week. I was very grateful for that wonderful time. I thought, "I've figured out the trick. I'm done with this stuff." It's a thought I've had many times before after finding success with a medication, therapy, massage, or being out from under a stressful situation. "I've arrived! The fight is over!" I thought I had finally arrived at that wonderful destination free of depression and anxiety.
Yesterday however, I was taught a little lesson. As I woke up, I knew that things weren't quite right. I realized that just as I know if I have the flu upon waking up, there is a distinct feeling when I wake up that lets me know things aren't quite right and that depression and anxiety might be my companion that day. Depression is actually a tangible feeling just like the flu, a thought I had never recognized.
I was actually a little shocked. Things had been going so well. I thought I'd figured out the trick to long term wellness. I'll be honest, it was a little discouraging. I had been so happy to be done with events like I had experienced earlier in the week. My week had been so good.
I thought about it while getting ready for church. It occurred to me that being free from mental health issues is not a destination, but a journey. Each day I wake up to a new scenario, never knowing what to expect. If I allow it to be a surprise and a disappointment, I will get down. I knew then and there that it was important to try to reframe this illness into a category like any other chronic illness. It was going to ebb and flow and that although I may be doing everything right, I may still have days where I have to deal with it. That day, I ended up having to find quiet time away from crowds and eventually had to use medication after all else had failed.
I realized that like with any other illness, I need to hunker down and tell myself that this isn't forever and that I have the tools to make it through the day. I need to have faith and courage that I am strong enough to fight.
My challenge? To remember these words in hard times and keep focused on the light that is sure to come.
helping students become their own best advocates
being a good listener
loving the colors of fall

With the Summer Olympics now looming, it’s probably appropriate to look a bit deeper at the life and times of probably the greatest Czechoslovak athlete ever, the distance runner Emil Zátopek. It was Zátopek who astoundingly won a trio of gold medals at the 1952 Helsinki Olympics in the 5,000 and 10,000 metres and the marathon, amazingly a distance that he had never competed at before.
Zátopek, born into relative poverty in the early 1920s, experienced many of the trials of 20th century Czechslovakia. The Nazi occupation, Communist takeover, Prague Spring and Soviet-led invasion. For Zátopek, his outspoken opposition to the Soviet invasion of August 1968 resulted in him losing his job in the army, many of his privileges, and eventually being recruited as a worker for a company drilling bore holes in some of the remotest parts of the country.
In the sporting world, he is credited as pioneering, albeit in a sometimes unorthodox way, some of the training techniques that are now commonplace. Zátopek was more than willing to share those secrets with his rivals and, sadly, a few years after his greatest triumph in Helsinki, he was being overshadowed by them.
British journalist and author Richard Askwith has recently published a book about Emil Zátopek called “Today we die a little – the rise and fall of Emil Zátopek Olympic Legend.” The athlete comes across as a very complex man and it was clearly a massive task to try and work out when facts blurred into fiction. I asked Mr. Askwith when he first came to be interested in the Czechoslovak runner.
“Well, I think I have been fascinated by Zátopek for as long as I can remember. I think I probably first heard of him in my early teens when people in the West were wondering what had happened to him after the Prague Spring. Then as I grew up I became a keen recreational runner and I thought of him as an inspiration really. When the going got tough you thought about Zátopek and his amazing training sessions, running through the snow in his army boots and all that kind of stuff. He has always been a hero of mine and not just because he won medals and set records, although he did an amazing amount of both, but he did it with this wonderful personality, this generosity of spirit that made ripples all across the world. I had always thought that it would be too difficult for me as an English person to get to the bottom of this story but then a publisher suggested it and I had a look and I just couldn’t stop really.”
“I have no doubt that if had he messed up on the athletic front, had he not won the gold medals, he would have been probably off to the uranium mines.”
And the sources, obviously a lot of the people that he knew are no longer around, but you were able to speak to some of the people who knew him. And the archival material, perhaps we could talk about that. I presume there was quite a lot in both the army and secret police archives but maybe there wasn’t as much as you expected?
“Well, there was loads of detail in both the secret police and the military archives actually. And loads of it I could not use because there was so much detail that I could not use it. There were volumes on the areas and periods it covered. It was fascinating to look at but I had to leave a lot of that out. But then three were gaps. The StB files, there are gaps in the 1950s. The bulk of it concerns them watching him after 1968. I certainly could not get a complete picture of his life just from the archives because they do not go from birth to death. But there were a surprising number of people who did remember him even going back to Koprivnice and finding school friends who very vividly remembered growing up with him. That was fantastic. Then there was, of course his family and Dana Zátopková, his widow, was terribly helpful and showed me lots of things and we went through her memories again and again. There is no shortage of evidence, just different kinds and from different periods of his life.”
As you mentioned in the book, there are a lot of myths and legends about Emil Zátopek. And he perhaps was one of the causes of that because he liked to elaborate, apparently. Could you describe some of those myths and legends and the ones that you were able to discount?
“Yes, there were endless ones really. He loved to tell stories and he was very humourous, witty, and was a great entertainer and things often got exaggerated. One example, it’s not hugely important, is that it was often said that he used to train with Dana, his wife, on his back. Talking to Dana about it, she that it perhaps happened once but that was it. But going through the journalistic sources especially, I found interviews from the time with people and he is definitely saying it. Before the 1956 Olympics in Melbourne he injured himself in some way and he said I tripped on a root while training with Dana on my back and he had to have a hernia operation. Either that is a mistranslation or a journalist has exaggerated or whatever. But on the other hand I did find someone, a lovely American lady who must be in her 70s now, who had been growing up near Stará Boleslav, where Emil used to train outside Prague, and she had been carried on Emil’s shoulders when he was training in the woods as a child. But again, the timing did not quite match up with the injury and ultimately one can’t quite tell quite what happened.
“Another popular myth in the West came after 1968, or rather 1969 when he was chucked out of the army and the Communist Party, and became a non-person and was written out of history, and there were always rumours circulating in the West about what he as doing. And there was always this rumour in the West that he worked as a garbage collector but that it didn’t work because every time he used to take the rubbish out people came and tried to help him and it caused a civil disturbance. On the one hand, there does not seem to be any evidence of this and Dana denies it and other people deny it and they say that once maybe he was just photographed taking a dust bin out. On the other hand, there is at least one interview with an English journalist where he seems to have said this. Those are just two small example but it shows how difficult it is to say anything with absolute certainty. The sporting stuff is obviously on public record and you have dates and records and film and all that, but the anecdotal stuff is very hard to pin down.”
One thing you were able to pin down, and this surprise me because I had not been aware of it, was the flight to Helsinki and his protest before going to Finland for those Olympics. He stood up to the authorities and probably risked not going himself and probably a lot more. That does not seem to have been much in the public realm before?
“I do not think there will ever be an athletic achievement like that.”
“Not very much, no. I think it did briefly emerge into the public domain. I think Oto Pavel wrote about it in 1967. But what must have happened is that almost immediately afterwards you get the Prague Spring and then Zátopek becomes someone you are not allowed to talk about and it really never made much impact. But yes, there was this really extraordinary story, that I start the book with, that in 1952, days before they are due to fly to Helsinki and it is the absolute highlight of Zátopek’s sporting career and, as it turns out, he will win this unprecedented clean sweep of distance running gold medals, and he must know that he has the chance of a lifetime. But they collect their plane tickets and he finds out that his friend Stanislav Jungwirth hasn’t got a ticket. He has been dropped because his father is in trouble because he had been distributing subversive leaflets or something like that and the authorities decide that he cannot be allowed to leave the country to some non-Warsaw Pact country. Emil just loses his temper and says if he’s not going, I’m not going. And they have this amazing stand-off and the plane actually leaves without them. According to one account, there are thousands of Finns waiting in Helsinki to greet the amazing Emil Zátopek when he arrived and he was not there. It’s very hard to find the actual detailed records of what happened and when. They arrived on a later plane either a day or two later because the authorities ultimately lost their nerve. Emil was taken to the Ministry of Defense and given a ticket, but he thought he was being taken there to be arrested.
“And in fact, after and Jungwirth had flown to Helsinki, according to Emil a plan or proposal for the exemplary punishment of Captain Zátopek was drawn up. He was eventually told by the secretary of the then Chief of Staff that when news got back to Prague that he had won his third Olympic gold, this proposal was torn up. But from a sporting perspective it is interesting that everything he did in Helsinki, which included amazing athletic achievements and also amazing charm and friendship kindness to his fellow athletes and diplomacy. All that was done with this great shadow hanging over him. I have no doubt that if had he messed up on the athletic front, had he not won the gold medals, he would have been probably off to the uranium mines.”
For all the fact that his in the military and probably in the early days was probably a sympathizer with the Communist Party, it comes out later that he was quite outspoken and very independent in spirit, almost recklessly so?
“I think he was very independent minded. He was a very unusual, an eccentric person. Sometimes, looking at his military records, his superiors are saying, it’s a bit like The Good Soldier Svejk or something like that - they cannot work out if he is being cunning or if he is just being childlike. They are saying that he has peculiar opinions. Sometimes he felt strongly about something and his opinions were incorrect and people often used to say that often he would start an argument thinking one thing and end it thinking the opposite. He could be manipulated. I think that he was a very idealistic person and that he wanted to do the right thing. He certainly did not always do the right thing, but he did his best and often he was spectacularly brave and always he was amazingly generous and kind. That was the real thing that struck me whoever I spoke to from whatever period of his life, everyone just said he was so kind, so generous spirited and that is the wonderful thing about him.”
To try and sum up, the three gold medals in Helsinki, do you think they can ever be matched in today’s era?
“His sporting achievements were done in an era not just before drugs but also in an era before specialist equipment, before specialist nutrition.”
“I am pretty sure they can’t. I think the distances are even more demanding than they were then. The standards are so high and the training, and the athletes are so specialized. I mean, Mo Farah who won the 5,000 and 10,000 metres in London in 2012, he said that he would not have even thought for a moment about doing the treble. The demands on the body are just too great. And the fact that Emil did this, he won the 10,000 metres easily, the 5,000metres people talked about as the race of the century, an incredibly intense competition. And then the marathon, he had never run a marathon before, but he just goes off and does it and breaks the Olympic record and does it with great charm. I do not think there will ever be an athletic achievement like that.”
And finally, I suppose what contributes to the legend is that this was done in an era before drugs basically. I mean, okay maybe drugs were coming in in the late 1950s and 1960s in the Warsaw Bloc and elsewhere but the achievements were based on training and there is no suggestion that drugs were involved?
“I think so. There is one suspicion that when he was in Zlín studying chemistry he might have once seen what happened if he took Benzedrine. But basically yes, his sporting achievements were done in an era not just before drugs but also in an era before specialist equipment, before specialist nutrition. That is one of the things that astounds modern athletes about him, the fact that they are having every little thing that goes into their body monitored for the maximal nutritional effect. He was just having Moravian goulash and Pilsner beer. To the Melbourne Olympics he took his own crate of Pilsner Urquell because he thought it helped him rehydrate. ‘This gives me power,’ he once said.”
I think he had to share it…
“He had to share it round, that’s right, yes. He should have kept quiet about it.”
Terminal 2 at Prague‘s Vaclav Havel Airport evacuated due to bomb threat
Bestselling guidebook maps some of Prague’s quirkiest sites
Czech nobility under the spotlight in tv series
Grand Café Orient in Prague–the only Cubist café in the world
Business prodigy brings US-style schools to Czech Republic

Chennai: Former RBI Governor Raghuram G Rajan on Tuesday said that he had never received any calls nor was there any government interference during his tenure and that his service had always been "pleasant and gratifying".
During his tenure at the country's apex bank, Rajan had served both under Prime Minister Manmohan Singh and BJP governments. Responding to a query on whether he saw any difference when he served both governments, Rajan said "that part, I have not talked more about. Because that starts intruding into opinions and so on which I want to leave out at this point".
"I have to say that the freedom I got from both governments... There was no phone calls from governments saying do this or do that. Remember we gave 23 bank licenses out (during his tenure)", he said after unveiling his book "I do what I do" here.
"There was never a call saying he is my friend look after him. Nothing (like that). No interference from neither government", he said.
In conversation with N Ravi, on demonetisation, he said the full details were yet to evolve since one has to understand the costs and benefits.
"We still have to wait for the evolution of the full data to understand what exactly the costs and benefits have been. Maybe we will never know. Because we never measured some of the areas where demonetisation had an effect because it is an informal economy", Rajan said.
Stating that demonetisation, Goods and Service Tax and the stress in the banking sector were happening at the same time, he said "I do not think we can pinpoint at this point of time" However, Rajan said "cash was held in people's wallets and in basement which came back into banking system and now earning an interest.
So that was missing as free financing of the government which resulted in reduction in RBI's surplus", he said.
Rajan said electronic transfers that occurred during demonetisation was a "blip" and one place which witnessed a big change was in payments made through Universal Payment Interface (UPI).
"Significantly more transaction is being done there", he said....

Polo Star Will Coach Former Teammates
- August 21, 2005
HAYWARD - When Gabriella Keri pulled herself out of the pool in May after a tough loss in the championship match, she had a sinking feeling. It was her last collegiate water polo game.
The Hungarian transfer student, who led the nation in scoring for most of the season, has since graduated from California State University, East Bay. But though she is no longer eligible to score for her team, she has found her way back to the pool - this time, as a coach.
This summer, while visiting her family in Australia, head coach Lisa De Rossi sent Keri an e-mail offering her the job. She accepted it instantly: "I said, 'Oh, yes.'"
Two years ago - De Rossi's first year as coach - the team was unranked, and seven players quit on the first day of practice. By the end of the season, they had made it to the top 10. This year, they almost took the Division III championship.
Keri said she was a little anxious about coaching some of the same athletes with whom she had played just months earlier. "It's going to be very tough for me, just sitting on the bench, telling them what to do," she said. "I'm going to have to learn a lot from Lisa."
Kim Johnson, a goalie who likely will be team captain in the coming season, said it might be awkward for some, at first, to have a former teammate as a coach. But with Keri's upbeat personality, she said, that shouldn't last for long, if at all.
"She knows how our team works, which is great," Johnson said.
De Rossi said that's precisely why she hired Keri. "I wanted someone who knew my coaching style, program and what was expected of players," she said in an e-mail from Australia.
Keri and De Rossi anticipate that this season, which begins in January, will be a "rebuilding year," as many of the seniors - like Keri - have graduated. But De Rossi noted that the team has recruited 10 players from across the country, including Hawaii, Oregon and Michigan.
And the ever-competitive Keri - who said she has competed in two triathalons since the season ended - isn't about to set the bar low.
"I'd like to make it to nationals," she said. "And we'll be working on it."

now we wake up this morning learning of the death at age 74 of perhaps the most famous human on the planet -- boxing and civil rights legend Muhammad Ali :(
I saw him during his prime on TV when I was a little boy and lived in Louisville, KY for a time when he was the reigning undisputed Heavyweight Champion of the World
There was nobody like him -- there are many valid reasons why he was the greatest of all time and probably the most universally loved man of all time, too
I wrote this short piece about him 9 years ago . . . the Greatest of All Time? Actually, I believe that's true
Muhammad Ali (1942-2016)
He was a tremendous fighter, who was absolutely unbelievable when he was young--quick as a cat with skills not normally associated with a Heavyweight. He lost his prime time years as a boxer, too, because he was man enough (and I believe it was because he was a man and NOT a coward) to stand up for what he believed in with the Army and Vietnam.
He could have been a poster child and never done anything but box and give speeches, but he refused and he has always, to me anyway, been a man of great character who has stood up for people and given a lot of people hope for a brighter future.
His gift for language, his looks, his speed (FAST--like a GREAT middleweight) were incredible. Ali was an artist in the ring--not some big killing machine like Liston but a brilliant fighter who could adapt and box however he needed to in order to win.
His stuff with Cosell, his poetry, the Ali Shuffle. I love Leonard and I loved Hagler as a pure fighter and there are many fantastic fighters but I am old enough to have watched him when he was young and there is nobody like him.
I believe he is bigger than boxing, but judged only as a fighter he is one of the very best. Ever.
To me, he is the GREATEST of all time.
(Originally Posted: August 23, 2007)

Recently, Dads of Wisconsin heard from a distraught father. We believe that Bob’s story will answer that question.
“My youngest daughter was not planned, but when I found out that I was going to be a father again there was no doubt in my mind that I wanted to be a part of her life.”
When Joy was six months old, paternity was established. Her parents were given equal custody, with Joy spending every other weekend with her father. They were referred to mediation to work out further details, but Joy’s mother walked out. After another attempt at mediation, Bob was given two more days per month with his daughter.
Joy’s mother engaged in gate-keeping behavior, calling several times a day when Joy was in Bob’s care. She also refused to include Bob in any decision-making related to Joy’s health and safety. Bob had serious concerns about some of the people Joy’s mother brought into her home.
“Joy’s mother was exposing her to a sex offender and other criminals. I was worried about Joy’s safety.”
When Joy was two and a half years old, Bob got a call from a social worker at Child Protective Services who stated that Joy was removed from her mother’s care for Failure to Protect. Since Joy had not been harmed in the incident, according to the social worker, Bob’s concerns about her safety were ignored, and she was returned to her mother’s care.
When Joy was five years old she started gaining a lot of weight. Bob was very concerned about this, and the fact that Joy’s mother was still exposing her to known criminals.
Bob hired an attorney, hoping that he would finally be able to protect his daughter. The court commissioner agreed with Bob’s concerns, and the judge ordered a family study.
“The social worker’s report was heavily biased toward Joy’s mother, including the lies that she told about me.”
Bob had his credit limit increased so he could continue to pay for legal representation. The attorneys on both sides negotiated for months, but Joy’s mother did not want to give in.
“Her mother said she would keep Joy away from certain people with criminal records, but only if I paid a lot more in child support.”
As much as it broke his heart, Bob simply did not have the income to agree. After two and a half years of negotiating and $20,000 in attorney fees, Bob was still not able to protect his little girl.
Situations like Bob’s are happening because parents are not seen as equals in family court.
You Can Help
Help children like Joy by donating to Dads of Wisconsin, so we can pass an equal placement bill during the next legislative session.

She is truly the greatest!
We just wanted to leave a quick review in praise of Tamara. She assisted us in purchasing our new home. Tamara always had a smile and was so quick to respond and get the job done which was ideal since we were kind of in a time crunch. She honestly deserves the highest praise. Not only did she help us find our dream home but she did it by truly listening and taking all of our wants and needs into consideration. She also did a great job of communicating with the previous owner and their realtor in order to ensure that our closing was super smooth. We will definitely be referring our family and friends to Tamara. She is truly the greatest!

LeAnn Rimes is getting closer and closer to her first wedding anniversary to Eddie Cibrian. As April 22 comes fast approaching, the "Can't Fight the Moonlight" hitmaker made use of her Twitter account to reveal that she's been reminiscing about the big day and couldn't hide her delight over the photos taken.
In a tweet to her wedding photographer Joe Buissink, the 29-year-old songstress wrote on Friday, April 20, "a year ago this weekend was do perfect! Looking at pics now. You are a genius!!!" After receiving the compliment, Buissink wrote in reply, "Thank you!! It was easy.. Just had to look n feel. It was natural n honest. My honor!!"
Also on Friday, Rimes was spotted enjoying a romantic lunch with Cibrian at Toscabova in Calabasas, California. "All throughout their meal, they'd steal kisses or hold hands," an eyewitness told PEOPLE about the couple's outing. "They looked incredibly happy together. He had his arm around her shoulder and she would rest her head on the nook of his neck with her eyes closed."
On the same day, the "Northern Lights" actress also revealed what she gave her husband for their anniversary. "I gave Eddie his anniversary gift early," she tweeted. "I can never wait! He was so cute, he loved it so much he wore it to bed. For you dirty minds, it was a watch.... :)- I just thought that was super cute. All boys, no matter what age love their toys a lot."
Rimes also made time to respond to a fan's tweet that warns her, "I've always heard if you cheats with you he'll cheat on you." She wrote in reply, "well, that's what you 'hear'....every situation is different. I know our love. I'm truly not concerned. thanks though." She later added, "I never said it was easy, but it's over, way over and there is such a thing as forgiveness."

Graduation is a time of transitioning from one season of life to another. All the excitement surrounding graduation includes senior activities culminating with the prom and graduation. The year my niece graduated I was so excited because she was more like the daughter I never had. After her mother passed, I moved in with her and her father to help get her through those difficult adolescent years.
One of her finest moments during her graduation season happened at her senior photo shoot. As I stood there watching her she looked beautiful. Then I noticed a young man standing next to me was as much in awe of my niece as I was. He was looking at her so intently that I thought to myself, well he must really think she’s pretty.
Once we were back in the dressing room my niece asked me did I see that boy out there. I said, “Yes, I couldn’t help but see him because he was staring so hard at you.” She went on to remind me about when she was in middle school and would come home almost every day upset, telling me about a boy who told her she was so ugly no would ever want to date her and she definitely would never get married. During that time, I would reassure her that he was wrong and not to believe him. Needless to say, when you are in middle school your peers’ opinions rank far above any adult’s.
My niece proceeded to say how he did not remember her until she reminded him of the mean things he had said to her. He immediately started back peddling and exclaiming how sorry and wrong he was and kept repeating over and over how pretty she looked. As I listened to my niece tell this story and saw the huge grin of victory on her face, I knew that this was one of her finest moments. It was in that instance that she moved from living in the realm of what others say about her to believing all God had created her to be.
Unfortunately, many of us never get to encounter those people who spoke venom about us and in many instances caused us to spiral downward. Unlike my niece, many of us may never have that defining moment of sweet revenge when you come face-to-face with your accuser and you look absolutely stunning. However, your defining moment comes when you relinquish all the venom spoken about you and embrace only what God says.
You see, nobody knows you any better than Him. Nobody knows the greatness in you. He created you. He placed all the great things inside of you. He alone defines who you are. In the instance you embrace who God created you to be is when you begin to fulfill all your desires, your dreams and walk in your destiny on the path to fulfilling your purpose.
Question: What is your defining moment? How did it effect you? Share your comments with us.

THE STORY OF ESTHER
 AFTER the death of Xerxes, the kingdom of Persia passed into the hands of his son, Artaxerxes. In the third year of his reign Artaxerxes made a costly feast for his friends and for the princes of his kingdom, which lasted for one hundred and eighty days. After this he made a feast for the rulers of other nations and for their ambassadors, which lasted seven days. The way in which this feast was celebrated was as follows: Artaxerxes caused a great tent to be pitched, which was supported by pillars of gold and silver, with curtains of linen and purple spread over them, and this tent was large enough for many ten thousands to sit down in. The cups out of which the guests drank were of gold adorned with precious stones; but Artaxerxes gave orders that, while the wine was to be given in such abundance that every one might drink all he wanted, no one was to be forced to drink, for it was the custom in Persia to oblige every one to drink to excess at a public feast.
Vashti, the queen, also made a feast for the women in the king's palace. Now, on the seventh day of the
king's feast, being merry with wine, he was desirous of showing the queen to those that feasted with him,
because he was proud of her beauty, which exceeded that of all other women. So he sent a messenger to
command her to appear before him. The laws of Persia forbid any women to be seen by strangers
without a veil over her face, and Vashti, out of regard to these laws, refused to obey the king. Then
 so angry that he broke up the entertainment, and he called to him the wise men of his kingdom, and accused the queen of disobedience, and asked how he should punish her. One of the wise men answered,—
"Vashti has done wrong not only to thee, O king, but to all the Persians, for wives will no longer obey their husbands when they learn that the queen has refused obedience to the king."
So the wise man told Artaxerxes to punish his queen in a sever manner, and, when he had done so, to announce the fact publicly, so that it would be an example to all the people. And the king decided that he would put away Vashti, and take another queen in her place.
When Vashti had been put away, messengers were sent over the land announcing the fact, and also ordering that all the young and beautiful unmarried women should be sent to Susa, in order that the king might choose the one he liked best as his wife. Among the maidens who came in this way was a Jewess named Esther. She was an orphan, and had been brought up in Babylon by her uncle Mordecai, who was the principal man among the Jews that had not returned to their own land. Now, of all the maidens Esther pleased the king most; so he chose her out, and made a wedding-feast for her, and placed a diadem on her head, and she came to live at the royal palace as his queen.
As Mordecai loved Esther very much, he came from Babylon to Susa, in order that he might be near her, and obtained employment in the palace. But he did not let anyone know that he was the queen's uncle, and he advised Esther not to tell the king that she was a Jewess.
Some time after this, two of the king's servants plotted together to kill Artaxerxes, but Mordecai
discovered the plot, and made it known to the king through Esther. The king seized the servants
and put them to death. He gave no reward to Mordecai at the time, but he bade the scribes set
 down his name in the public records, where all the great events of the kingdom were written.
There was at the royal palace a man named Haman, an Amalekite by birth, who was in great favor with the king. All the other servants of the king bowed down to Haman when he appeared in their presence, but Mordecai would not bow down to him. When Haman observed this, he was angry, and he asked, "Who is that man?"
And he was answered, "It is Mordecai the Jew."
Then Haman was still more angry, for he said to himself, "The Persians, who are free men, bow down to me, but this man, who is no better than a slave, will not do so."
He made up his mind to punish Mordecai, and, being himself an Amalekite and an enemy of the Jews, he determined to ask the king to destroy the whole nation. So he came to Artaxerxes, and said,—
"O king, there is a certain wicked nation called the Jews, who are dispersed all over thy kingdom. The men of this nation are the proudest and most unsocial of all men; they will not mingle with other nations, nor worship their gods, and they have laws of their own which they will obey, but they will not submit themselves to the laws of thy kingdom. Therefore they are dangerous men, and if thou wilt be a benefactor to thy subjects thou wilt give orders to destroy them utterly."
The king believed what Haman said to him, and told him he might do what he wished to the Jews. So Haman sent out a decree, and sealed it with the king's seal, and this decree ordered that all the Jews in the Persian empire should be put to death, with their wives and children, on a certain day named in the decree. When this decree was brought to the cities and countries over which Artaxerxes ruled, the governors everywhere prepared to carry it out, and everywhere there was great mourning and distress among the Jews.
Mordecai grieved with the rest; but he contrived to let Queen Esther know of the danger that threatened
 and he charged her to go to the king's palace and beseech him to save the Jews.
Now, the king had made a law that no one should come into his presence unless he was called, and men with axes in their hands stood around his throne to punish those that came without being summoned. But the king held in his hand a golden sceptre, and if he wished the offender to be spared, he held out his sceptre, and he who touched it was free from danger.
Esther prayed to God for assistance, and fasted for three days. Then she adorned herself as became a queen, and took two of her handmaids with her, and came thus into the presence of the king. But as she saw him sitting on his throne, in all the splendor of his royal robes, she trembled with fear, especially as he looked at her with a severe and angry frown; her knees failed her, and she fell in a swoon in the arms of her maidens. But God touched the heart of the king, so that he forgot his anger and sprang from his throne and raised the queen, and placed the golden sceptre in her hand. Then he besought her to be of good cheer, for that no harm would befall her. And she, having revived under these soothing words, said to him,—
"My lord, it is not easy for me on the sudden to say what hath happened; for as soon as I saw thee to be great and comely and terrible, my spirit departed from me, and I had no strength left."
It was with difficulty and in a low voice that the queen could say this, and the king, still anxious to
console and support her, told her she might ask any boon of him, even to the half of his kingdom.
Then Esther asked that he with his friend Haman should come to a banquet which she had prepared
for him. He consented, and sent for Haman, and they went in together to the banquet. And while
they were feasting, Artaxerxes asked Esther to let him know what she desired, saying again that
he would part with one-half his kingdom
 for her sake. But she only asked him to come the next day to another banquet, and to bring Haman with him.
Haman went away that day in great joy, because he alone had had the honor of supping with the king at the queen's banquet. But as he passed out of the palace he saw Mordecai, who again refused to bow to him, and Haman was filled with anger. When he reached home, he called to him his wife and his friends, and told them what honor he had enjoyed, not only from the king, but from the queen also, and that he was invited to another banquet on the morrow.
"Yet," said he, "am I not pleased to see Mordecai the Jew in the palace."
Then Haman's wife advised him to give orders that a gallows should be made fifty cubits high, and that in the morning he should ask of the king that Mordecai might be hanged thereon. And Haman commended her advice, and ordered his servants to prepare the gallows in his own court.
That night God took away the king's sleep, and, as he wished to occupy his time with some useful matter, he called to his servant to read to him the book in which was kept the account of what things had happened during his reign. And after the servant had read about many great battles and how the victorious generals had been rewarded for their services, he came at last to the conspiracy which had been discovered by Mordecai. Here the king stopped him, and asked,—
"Is it not put down that Mordecai had a reward given him?"
But the servant answered that it was not so put down.
Then the king bade him leave off his reading, and, finding that it was nearly day, he gave orders
that if any of his friends had already come to wait upon him and were standing in the court, the
servants should tell him. Now, it happened that Haman was found there, for he had come earlier
than usual to petition the king to have Mordecai put to death.
 The king at once summoned Haman into his presence, and, when he was come in, he said to him,—
"Because I know thou art one of my best friends, I desire thee to give me advice how I may honor one whom I greatly love in a manner suitable to my magnificence."
Haman at once thought the king meant to honor him, and he answered,—
"If thou wouldst truly honor a man whom thou dost love, give orders that he may ride on horseback clothed in the royal robes and with a gold chain about his neck, and let one of thy intimate friends go before him and proclaim throughout the whole city that in this way doth the king honor those whom he loves."
The king was pleased with this answer, and he said to Haman, "Make haste and take the robes and the chain and the horse, and do to Mordecai the Jew as thou hast said. And because thou art one of my intimate friends and hast given me this advice, do thou go before the horse and make proclamation of the words thou hast advised."
At this unexpected order Haman was confounded, and at first knew not what to do. But he dared not disobey; so he took the king's robes and his horse and his chain, and went to Mordecai and told him what the king had said. Mordecai at first thought that Haman was mocking him, but when he was convinced of the truth of what he said, he put on the royal robes and got on horseback, and was led through the city by Haman. The Mordecai returned to the palace, but Haman, full of grief and shame, went home and informed his wife and friends of what had happened. And his wife told him that he would never be able to be revenged on Mordecai, for certainly God was with him.
Just then a servant came and summoned Haman to Esther's banquet. So he sat down with the king
and the queen, and after they had all eaten and drunk, Artaxerxes asked Esther what was her request,
for he would grant her anything she
 demanded. Then Esther confessed that she was a Jewess, and said that she and all her nation were condemned to death, and besought the king to spare her and them.
The king asked, "Who hath condemned thy people to death?"
Esther answered, "Haman."
The king rose hastily from the table in anger and confusion and went out into the garden to compose himself. Then Haman threw himself down before the queen, begging her to spare his life. But when the king returned and saw him in this position, he was only angrier. Just then the servant who had been sent to summon Haman to the banquet came in and said that he had seen a high gallows in the court of Haman's house, and that when he had inquired who was to be hanged on it, he was answered, "Mordecai the Jew."
The king at once gave orders that Haman should be hanged on the very gallows he had prepared for Mordecai, and Haman was taken out and hanged accordingly.
Then the king told Esther to write letters in his name and to seal them with his seal, and these letters gave permission to the Jews on the day that had been mentioned in the former decree to arm them selves and resist all efforts that might be made for their slaughter, and to slay their enemies. Horsemen were sent all over the kingdom with these letters, and on the appointed day the Jews took down their armor and their weapons, and gathered themselves together in every city, and fought for their lives, and gained the victory over all who came against them. And for two days following they feasted and rejoiced, and the Jews have ever since held those days to be holy days, and celebrate upon them the feast they call Purim.
Mordecai became a great and illustrious person with the king, and assisted him in the government. He also lived with the queen, so that the affairs of the Jews were by their means better than they could ever have hoped for. And this was the state of the Jews during the reign of Artaxerxes.
Hundreds of additional titles available for
online reading when you join Gateway to the Classics

Morse was named Endeavour by his mother who was a devout Quaker.
His parents divorced when he was 12, and he lived with his mother until her death when he was 15. After that he was sent to live with his father.
His father was a taxi driver by trade. Morse is noted for getting on badly with his step-mother, Gwen, claiming to have read poetry to her to annoy her, even so he has a good relationship with his half-sister Joyce.
A new ITV drama is to be released either later in 2012, or early in 2013 about Morse's younger policing days, he is portrayed by Shaun Evans.There is a younger and more vulnerable side to Morse in Endeavour. So far only the Pilot has been released, in which he is only a DC, but is said to sit his Sergeant's exam at the end of the episode.
Like his older self he is easily led by women, falling in love with an Opera singer that he idolises, she is eventually revealed to be the murderer.
It is hinted that DCI Fred Thursday becomes his commanding officer after he solves the case in the Pilot.
Contrary to his later habits, the young Morse does not drink, until he is forced to have one by DCI Thursday after he faints in the pathologist lab after seeing a dead body.
In Inspector MorseEdit
Morse is a DCI with his own Sergeant, Lewis.
He still isn't fond of dead bodies and often sends Lewis down to see them.
He enjoys crosswords. He habitually showed empathy towards women, once opining that the female sex is not naturally prone to crime, being caring and non-violent. He was also never shy of showing his liking for attractive women, and often had dates with those involved in cases.
Morse is an extremely intelligent individual. He dislikes spelling errors and grammatical mistakes, demonstrated by the fact that in every personal or private document written to him he manages to point out at least one spelling mistake. He claims his approach to crime-solving is deductive and one of his key tenets is that "there is a 50 per cent chance that the last person to see the victim alive was the murderer". In reality, it is the pathologists who deduce; Morse uses immense intuition and his fantastic memory to get to the killer.
He is shown to have a fondness for his young, second pathologist Dr Russel, but she leaves the cast after a traumatic case to be replaced by Dr Laura Hobson.
Morse enjoys drinking beer, and often stops for one in the middle of cases, leaving his Sergeant with an orange juice in case they need to drive anywhere.
Morse serves in the Police force until he dies in the final episode of the series.
His red Jaguar is considered Morse's trademark by many people that watched the series.

Type: Posts; User: Toothfairykt
Search: Search took 0.00 seconds.
March 16th, 2011, 12:44 PM
We were married Aug 28th 2010 @ Couples Swept Away and used the resort photogrpaher. I took pictures with me out of mags so he could get the idea of the types of photos we were looking for! Here...
Thank you Thank you for all the nice compliments!!
Moochie...My bouquet was NOT the upgraded one, it was included and I couldnt have been more pleased with it! After the wedding, we had the...
My Husband and I were married @ Couples Swept Away Aug 28th of this year and it couldnt have been more perfect!! We had the 4:00 Beach wedding along with 16 of our closest friends and family who...

One thing you may or may not know about me is that I hate wearing dresses. So naturally when I discussed this wedding with friends they decided that I had no choice but the wear a dress. With no viable excuse I conceded and started searching for a dress. One trip to David's bridal and I fell in love with the 6th dress I tried on. Let me tell you that this has never happened before. Especially not when in the horrible condition I was in the day we went. My shoulders we still burnt from too much sun, my hair was in a ponytail, and it had been a few days since I had last shaved my legs. Despite all of that I felt pretty in that dress.
Then came the accessories. After a heated debate about the color of shoes I should wear, I put it on IG for a vote. I lost miserably, but after getting off my butt and trying them both on I very much preferred the Nude Pumps (#2) over the Black Pumps.
Jewelry was pretty easy. It needed to be something I owned already since the dress busted my budget for the wedding already. I have tons of stuff so something had to work. I ended up going with the set I wore for my first Military Ball with Hubby.
The necklace would not be needed so I just used the bracelet, earrings and broach. Not to forget the black pashmina just in case I got cold.
The broach went onto this small black clutch I own to dress it up a bit. It's cute on its own but it was better with a little something extra here.
With my outfit complete I needed to make sure Hubby had something acceptable to wear. Sure enough the one and only suit he owns still fits perfectly. The tie and shirt he had also worked. When you wear uniforms all day one suit is all you need.
The weekend quickly approached and after hubby got out of work we all piled into the car and headed north to my hometown. The drive was relatively simple as always.
We spent the first day shopping. No trip to NY seems complete without at least a little bit of shopping. OK and maybe some pizza as well. We spent way too much at the Columbia Outlet and then a bit more at the discount store for items we need for our upcoming beach trip. Beach chairs and sand toys mainly.
The next evening was my/our friends wedding. I spent the morning making sure my father and his girlfriend knew every tip and trick I could think of as they were gracious enough to watch Bear for the evening. This turned out to the very first time we have left him with family. He has been to day care several times, but no one has ever put him down to bed other than one of us. Also, he has never woken up from a nap and without one of us there. I had no idea how he would react. My fear is that he would scream his head off for hours. Needless to say the first night out without Bear had me pretty worried.
We got ready and headed off early to the church. Genius me left the invitation at home so we arrived even earlier than I anticipated. We sat in the church, chatted and waited.
Oh the memories... The church is part of the undergrad college I went too. I went to mass here many times and have seen many people get married here over the last 10 years... Eek I'm showing my age.
The wedding was as I expected, quick and to the point. The bride looked amazing! As I shared with her I am uber jealous of her dress. She looked fabulous in it. Here is where one would typically add a picture of happy couple but I don't do that sort of thing because I like to keep some sense of privacy. Sorry. Instead here is a picture of her beautiful bouquet.
After the wedding they posed for pictures while we headed off to waste some time before the cocktail hour started. Clearly we had no idea what we were in for as we stopped at McDonald for a quick bite to eat.
Then a Starbucks run of course.
Like I said, we had no idea what we were in for. Regardless we enjoyed our treats and headed to the reception once again way early. Had it not been for valet parking we may have napped in the car for a bit. Yes we are that old apparently!
Before going into the beautiful reception venue we took an opportunity to fill out the card and check in on how Bear was doing. All seemed to be going well with Bear thankfully. He was happily enjoying his Cheerios and hadn't cried much at all.
This was the card we picked out. We went fancy since the actual gifts had been sent early due to our move. Also who wants to lug present back after their wedding? The card was huge and didn't even come close to fitting into the box they had for them. Oh well. I placed it on the table and left it at that.
Once inside I signed the guestbook, found out what table we would be at, and then promptly found the bar. I had a much needed Cosmo to unwind from the internal panic I had from leaving the toddler with my father. However, it was incredibly delicious but way to strong for me to keep drinking them the rest of the night.
|First drink of the night.|
I switched to Chardonnay for the remainder of the evening. Note this seemed like a great idea at the beginning of the evening.
Since we were pretty much the only ones there at this time I snuck in some pictures of the venue. They don't do the place justice.
Before the cocktail hour started I went off to the ladies room before it got insanely crowded. In there I found this...
I think it is a super cute idea for anyone getting married! I know several people, including myself, that could have used something like this in their moment of need! You never know when a zipper could break, as some poor guest had happen.
We each had another drink while waiting for the cocktail hour to begin. Guests began pouring in as the shuttle from the hotel had arrived.
Moving on to the actual cocktail hour...
This was one of 6 or 7 stations (I lost count) you could go to get food. Had we known we would be eating so much we would not have stopped for food before heading here. You had everything: a hand rolled sushi, a carving station, a made to order pasta station, and of course fresh cut fruit. Seriously, there was more food here than at the fancy buffet in Louisiana we went to! However, this place hands down had better food! I wanted to try a bit of everything but managed to not get to half of what was around. I sampled watermelon with feta, alfredo pasta, raw clams, steamed shrimp, and antipasto. My top picks were the hand rolled sushi and smoked salmon over a dill cream cheese on a crostini. Everything I tried was delicious but those were the only items I went back for seconds on. We were not sure if this much food was in place of an actual meal or not so Hubby and I happily ate up. About an hour or so later the crowd was escorted to the ballroom for the remainder of the evening.
I felt very smart at this point to have filled out the guestbook and checked our table number upon arrival as it was packed during this transition. Word to the wise, always do this early. Also, I wrote out in the notepad of my phone what I wanted to write in the guestbook on the drive there. It made it so much easier than thinking of something with a crowd of people staring at you.
We easily found our seats at table 16. While I didn't know anyone else at the table prior to the wedding I got to know them over the course of the evening. We pretty much were all "young" couples. I'll put that in quotes as we were the oldest people at the table to my knowledge. The newlyweds next to us had just been married 6 weeks and when they heard we are going on 5 years of marriage we got these wide eyed looks with a big "wow" followed by "that's a long time." Ah newlywed bliss... Barely thinking about the road ahead that 5 years seems long. I'll take their shock as a compliment.
Upon sitting down we learned two big things. One that the cocktail hour was in fact not dinner, that was still to come,
and two they had a photo booth. One I assure you, we would not be going to take pictures in. Or so I thought in my clearly sober state.
This is a fabulous I idea when you have a bunch of out going wedding guest like this couple had.
While everyone was settling into their new location the waiter came around and asked each person what they were drinking and what their choice of entree would be. Like the old married couple we are we could not decide between two dishes, the beef or the fish, so we each got one and planned to share. Our waiter was amazing! Hands down the best service we have ever had at any wedding or formal event we have been too. This is saying a lot as we have been to many many events with great waiters. More on the waiter later.
Like every wedding I have been too they announced the bridal party then then New Couple. They jumped right into their first dance. It was incredibly sweet to see them both look so happy. Up next was the bride and her father. They danced to a short snippet of a song. Something I wish we had done at our wedding. A whole so is a long time when everyone is staring at you. Then the Groom and his mother danced for a bit. Last up was the bride and her grandfather. It all was super sweet.
With most of the formalities out of the way it was time eat, again. We enjoyed our appetizers before getting up to mingle a bit. When we returned our plates had been cleared and lemon sorbet had been placed at every seat.
It was a refreshing palette cleanser prior to the entree. A bit more chatting with the people at our table and then the waiter came around with a tray full of shots. Not just any shots. It was fireball mixed with something cream based. I took a quick sniff despite knowing it was a bad idea. Ever wonder what regret smells like? This was it. Bad judgement was tossed aside when the whole table raised shots to the happy couple. The girl to my right and I both hesitated drinking. We go oh what the hell and downed the shot. It is not one I will ever do again. That is for sure. I am long past my college days of drinking awful shots just for fun. Well call this a one time thing and leave it at that. I'll stick with wine.
Some more chatting and then out came dinner. The waiter placed the beef dish in front of Hubby and the fish in front of me. He tells me that the fish is the best thing on the menu. He was absolutely right. It was fabulous. I tried Hubby but regrettably told him he could only have a few bites and I wanted the rest. When the waiter came back around he asked us which had won out. The Chilean Sea Bass was just so perfectly cooked and delicious. The Beef was good but the fish was clearly better.
Remember earlier I said the waiter was amazing? Well he came back after everyone in the room had been served with a new fish dish for Hubby. He said the dish was left over as someone had changed their mind and wanted something else. He added "I snagged the last one before it swam away." Which of course I found funny in all its corniness. Hubby was incredibly grateful for this. Well above and beyond what he needed to do. He also shared with us that if we didn't finish our meals, he could pack it up for us to take home. I'm not sure he told this to everyone though as we were the only ones with to go food when I wasn't the only one who didn't finish their meal.
After the table was cleared, once again did more shots come out. Another round of fireball but I opted out. I would not make that mistake again! Some more mingling and drinks passed the time while other were dancing up a storm!
We took this as an opportunity to head over to the photo booth. Earlier I had assumed that it would not be happening but in my then intoxicated state it seemed like a good idea. I should add I generally hate pictures of myself hence why I did not want to do it earlier. What changed my mind, besides some liquid encouragement, was something one of the newlyweds at the table asked me. She asked, what was the best piece of advice you were given the day of (our) wedding. I said it came from Hubby's aunt. She said never take life too seriously. Marriage much like life brings with it the good and the bad. If you can remember to goof around and have a good time even when it seems the sky is falling you'll be OK in the end. So with that thought in mind we went over the photo booth. We both decided to pause and see what everyone was doing before we stood inline. Aside from one couple they all seemed to just have a good time with it much like you are supposed to. During our turn we realized how a small table or something like that would have helped when you are grabbing at props in a box in the short few seconds between pictures. The results were OK. They were added to the book with everyone else with the note "never take life too seriously."
Some more mingling and back to our seats we went. It was then I told Hubby if he hadn't planned on it he needed to tip our waiter. Hubby had a fresh tonic and lime (he was DD for the night) and I had my wine glass filled. Or maybe glasses considering there were two there for me. No idea how that happened. However, I must have ordered the Kennedy Package as my glass was never empty. Neither was anyones at our table.
Not too long after we sat down the couple cut the cake and finished up the last of the formalities. The bouquet toss followed by the garter removal and then garter toss. This was a pretty funny part of the evening. The bride started calling out all the single people who tried to dodge this wedding tradition.
Up next the dessert was served. We were under the silly assumption that the sampler was for the table but we were wrong. Everyone got their own yummy plate of treats and a slice of cake.
The evening concluded with a lot of dancing. I will add the MC of the night was fabulous! He had everyone up and moving.
After the last song had been played at midnight we said our goodbyes and headed home.
Once we got home my Father met us to fill us in on how Bear handled our absence. Thankfully he did great and everyone had a good time.
The next day I spent the morning nursing a hangover. One too many Chardonnays at the wedding. Hubby gratefully took care of Bear that morning. A long nap later and I was good as new. Clearly I am not as young as I used to be! The rest of that evening we spent in the pool relaxing. Bear loved the water so he had a blast.
The last day we ordered pizza then got on the road early.
All in all we had a fabulous time at the wedding and in NY.

Omar Gonzalez is the 6’5 Mexican-American that will be defending for the U.S. national team in the World Cup. He was the only one of six Mexican-Americans that will be appearing on the field for the U.S. in the 2014 World Cup. Watch the video above to see his part of the MLS series, “One nation. One Team. 23 Stories.”
Here’s what you need to know about him:
1. He Led the University of Maryland to a National Title
Omar played for the University of Maryland before being drafted by the Galaxy as the third overall pick in the 2009 MLS draft. Gonzalez was recruited heavily by other top Divison I schools such as SMU, but shose Maryland probably based on the fact that it was located near where his brother was trying out for the Washington Redskins.
The Terp tallied the second most minutes played when he was just a freshman. The next year he was awarded the Atlantic Coast Conferense defensive player of the year in just his second year. The young star didn’t make it to his senior year before graduating, but ha was named All-American as a junior, along with the MVP on defense in 2008 when Maryland won the national championship.
Click here to see his college stats.
Gonzalez’s Coach at Maryland, Sacho Cirovski said of the star player:
“Omar had a great season last year which was reflected by him being named ACC Defensive Player of the Year. He is a tremendous athlete and has improved each season, which we expect to continue. I believe he will be the best center back in the country by season’s end.”
2. His Parents Are Mexican Immigrants
Omar is one four children of Mexican immigrants Adrian and Maria Gonzalez.
They were married three years later and as their family blossomed, Maria had time enough to volunteer at her children’s school, Sidney Lanier Elementary, where she eventually evolved into a bilingual teaching assistant.
His mother told dallasnews.com before sitting down to watch Omar represent the U.S. in a World cup warm-up game:
“We have been truly blessed with all four children God has given us.”
Gonzalez is one of many dual citizens on the U.S. national team. Although he has both a Mexican and American passport, he was raised in the U.S., fueling his easy choice to play for the U.S.
3. His High School Teammates Funded His Dream
Adrian Gonzalez was never able to witness his talented children play when they were in youth leagues due to his demanding job. The Mexican immigrant spent all hours of the day and night driving a dump truck that provided concrete and gravel for construction projects while Maria worked two jobs to help provide for her family while driving them to all of their extracurriculars.
Gonzalez’s mother knew how much potential her son add and was torn apart about the fact that there was no way her and her husband could come up with the $1,500 in fees her son needed in order to play for the Texans, a team that would catapult his soccer career. She thought her only hope was by scholarship, but she was wrong.
Max Korenvaes was a good friend of Omar’s through his youth playing soccer and was also recruited to play for the 1989 Texans. The Korenvaes saw the potential their son’s friend had and felt they had to do something to make sure he succeeded. The family decided they would pay for Gonzalez’s fees to play on the Texans, unable to let such a hard working young man be denied his destiny.
Amy Korenvaes told dallasnews.com of Maria Gonzalez:
“Whatever we did for Omar, Maria gave back to the whole team. She volunteered to do anything that was needed. He was great on the field. She was a dynamo off of it.”
Maria was constantly cooking meals for the team to show her gratitude towards the Korenvaes and other families that supported Omar. Omar and Max are still friends today as Omar became a fixture in the Korenvaes family from his tight bond with their son.
Max Korenvaes, now a finance guy in New York City, told dallasnews.com of his close friend:
“He may have been the best player out there, but Omar never once acted like he was better than anyone.”
Gonzalez was also recruited by the U.S. national U-17 team thereafter and was known by his coach for staying the latest late and showing up for any extra session that was offered.
4. He Was Targeted When He Was Young Because of His Large Size
Gonzalez’s parents grew up in towns close together in Mexico and connected while playing volleyball at Reverchon Park in 1977. His father, Adrian stood at 6 feet 4 inches while his mother, Maria, stood at 5 feet 8 inches, making them a great pair in the coed volleyball league they joined.
Gonzalez can thank his size and athleticism to his parents, but his size caused him some trouble as a youth. His mother and sister whom attended all of his games were forced to carry around his birth certificate to every game because the opposing teams never believed he was the legal age for the league he was playing in.
His salary at the LA Galaxy is $1,000,000, the highest he has ever been paid by almost $800,000 form his $205,000 salary in 2013.
5. He Got Married in March
Gonzalez married his longtime girlfriend, Erica Gonzalez this past March.
Click here to view Gonzalez’s instagrams featuring photos of him and his new bride.
He and his wife are close friends with teammate Brad Evans and his wife, Becky.

Mallorca today received a very special visit. That of a legend of the sport. Steve Kerr, winner in the NBA of five rings as a player and four as
Mallorca today received a very special visit. That of a legend of the sport. Steve Kerr, winner in the NBA of five rings as a player and four as a coach. Kerr, who is on vacation on the island and is a personal friend of the president Andy Kohlberg, has visited the Sports City and has witnessed the training of the first team.
The coach of the Golden State Warriors, who This year he has won his fourth NBA championship title as coachhas followed the session of Javier Aguirre along with President Kohlberg and Counselor Graeme Le Saux as well as with the football director Paul Ortells and CEO of Business Alfonso Diaz. After finishing the training, he was able to meet the entire squad and coaching staff and hold a conference for all of them. in the talk, Steve Kerr He has confessed his passion for soccer and wanted to highlight the similarities that two team sports such as soccer and basketball have for him.
On the other hand, the North American coach also wanted to explain what his philosophy is as a coach, that he likes his teams and players to have fun on the pitch but at the same time compete. “Our job as technicians is to find a balance between both things, enjoying ourselves as children but competing as professionals.” Kerr wanted to give you the example of the Warriors player, Stephen Curryone of the best in the league, and that «He enjoys shooting, running and even when he has to be on the bench, he enjoys watching his teammates play and compete. You see him play with a smile».
Kerr has also given some details of his facet as a coach after a successful career as a player in which he did not always have the same role. «I played 15 years in the NBA in which I won five rings. I was almost always a reserve, sometimes I played more than twenty minutes in a game and sometimes I didn’t play at all. But always with the enthusiasm of being there. That is why as a coach I understand those who do not play on my team. The entire squad followed Kerr’s words very carefully, and he did not hesitate to take photos with all of them.
Steve Kerr began his career as a player in the NBA with the Phoenix Suns, where he spent one season. His time of greatest success came from the hand of Michael Jordan’s Chicago Bulls, where he won three rings in a row. Later, he signed for the San Antonio Spurs, where he won his last two rings as a player.
Kerr is, to this day, the player with the best three-point shooting percentage in NBA history. His coaching career is also littered with success, with the four championship titles he has won with the Golden State Warriors. Currently, he is also the United States national team manager.

Oh so I am not alone in this. This is so concerning. I myself had a similar experience with them, recently. So I have basically been finding a new clinic since a long time. However, I am searching for a doctor who is experienced in this field. I don't want to opt for someone who is going to do what my previous doctor did, which is waste time. I think when you are on this TTC journey the time is ticking. You have less time and you have to be careful. So I emailed this clinic asking about all the important details. They replied very late. They were talking in this monotonous tone. Also, they didn't even answer one of my questions. Asked me for my details. I very kindly sent them my details along with my questions. To this email they haven't replied.

For my best friend Anurag's birthday, we were planning to go camping. We both take delight in it and we thought that it would be a fantastic idea. He also was keen on going for river rafting. So we hunted down river rafting organisers and then a camping spot nearby. We decided we would do it at the Kundalika river and camp near Devkund waterfalls. We fixed the dates; we were going on 14th June and coming back on the 15th. We had fixed the place as well, but we did not have a company yet. We gathered people from both our sides--I asked my cousin and my best friends and Anurag did the same. Finally, in the end, we were six people in total.
We had planned on going by Vishal's car, but he ditched at the last moment. Vishal is Anurag's school friend and he cancelled because he was in Bangalore for a work meeting. The next best (but costlier) option was Zoomcar. We had hired a Zoomcar for my birthday trip too, so we knew how exactly it functioned. Vishal had cancelled on 13th morning and we were leaving next day. We immediately booked a Zoomcar and our expenses rose high. From Mumbai suburban to Kolad village, they charged us Rs. 3,200 inclusive the petrol but exclusive the tolls. Vishal's car would have cost us around Rs. 200 per head, and the Zoomcar cost Rs. 640 each. Along with the car, we had one Bullet. Anurag's society friend Roshan was going to be on it.
Next morning, on the 14th, I woke up at 5:30 am to make food for us. I was going to make aloo parathas and cheese sandwiches. I made the potato stuffing and kneaded the dough a night before. In the morning, I made balls out of potato stuffing and dough, and made parathas. I made eight, as my brother, who was up early morning to read a book, was hungry too. I made two for him and packed six in an aluminium foil. I packed pickle and tomato sachets along. Later, while my mom was making parathas for my breakfast, I was making cheese sandwiches. These are my favourite ones. I made four of these and cut them in four little squares. After packing the sandwiches, I started getting ready.
Anurag had asked me and my cousin Pratik to wait near a decided spot at 8:20 am. As the same blood flows through me and Pratik, we were on time; we are always on time. But, the Zoomcar guy handed over the car to Anurag at 8:15. Anurag was waiting for Roshan, who was late. Roshan stashed his and Shrutika's stuff in the car trunk. Shrutika is Roshan's school friend and I had been with them for a Liverpool match screening. Pratik and I were still waiting for them. It was 9:30 am, and finally, we saw Anurag in a maroon Figo. Imagine! We were waiting for him since 8:20 am and after an hour, we finally get in the car. Our next pickup was Amrita, my college best friend.
We went a little farther and picked her up as well. Roshan and Shrutika were coming on the bike. Anurag was too frustrated with what had happened in the morning. He wasn't in the mood till we reached Bhira village and we could see that; he wasn't cheerful at all.
We met Shrutika and Roshan on the way and then followed each other's trail to reach the village. Unfortunately, it was not raining even a bit. Rather, the weather was a little unpleasant. We had already stopped four times on our way. Sometimes for Amrita to vomit, and sometimes for hogging something. We stopped our car and bike near Karnala Bird Sanctuary to have breakfast. Within few minutes, we gulped down the food I had carried.
|Anurag trying to calm down his anger|
|Top | Decathlon; Pants | Vans; Shoes | Decathlon|
We were gonna camp first and then on 15th, we had booked river rafting. After getting directions from the locals, we finally reached Bhira village. When we were getting directions outside Bhira, we got our 'guide'. One of the locals told us that he would guide us till the waterfalls and arrange for food if we gave him Rs. 600 as guiding fee. We bargained and settled on Rs. 500. He sat with us in the car and then showed a place near his house where we could park our car and bike. We got down from the car to marvel at the surrounding greenery. It was 3:00 pm when we reached. The guide asked us about lunch and we said that we would have dinner and skip lunch.
From the base village to the falls, we started walking. One young boy and his younger brother were guiding us. We had so much of weight--our individual haversacks, food bags, tents, and few extra bags. Amrita was feeling too weak to walk so we had to pause for few minutes while walking. It was cloudy, but not a single drop of rain. It surely was cloudy, but wasn't cold at all. We reached the campsite by 5:00 pm. The guide told us that Devkund waterfalls was an hour away and it would get completely dark until we come back.
It made sense. It was already 5:00 pm, and until we reach, have fun under the falls and come back, it would have been pitch-dark. And I wanted to enjoy the waterfall and not worry about the time. So we decided that we would not go there but enjoy the river, which was overseen from our campsite. Rather, we were camping at the bank of River Kundalika.
Twice I had aimed for Devkund waterfalls, but could not see it even once due to some or the other reason. Heaven knows what the place is about to offer! So anyway, we started pitching our tents while simultaneously gaping at the beautiful neon green carpet that was around us...
Part 2 of the travelogue coming soon...

[There was a video here]
"I don't know how these guys come up with these ideas. Rape is rape. It is a crime," Obama said about the GOP's problems discussing the issue. "These various distinctions about rape don't make too much sense to me, don't make any sense to me...This is exactly why you don't want a bunch of politicians, mostly male, making decisions about women's health care decisions."
"This all dates back to when we were growing up together in Kenya," he told Leno."We had constant run-ins on the soccer field. He wasn't very good and resented it. When we finally moved to America I thought it would be over."

On Mar 27, 2019
My two large rugs have never looked cleaner and felt softer to walk on. They are both old and have been washed numerous times, and I was thinking this would be their last gasp, but now they look and feel young again! I DO love my rugs. And the service was really fast - thank you!

- Jul 13, 2006
It was also a case of taking long term customers for granted.
Back when QF ordered the A330/380, Boeing had also been in the competition with a mix of 767-400 and 777. QF was well aware of what other airlines were being charged for aircraft, but Boeings offer was much more expensive. They’d assumed that as an all Boeing airline, it was unlikely that they’d change. So, they thought it reasonable that QF would pay lots more than someone like Emirates (for instance).
I had no idea that Boeing didn't give QF 'market rates' for the B777.
I always wondered why QF never ordered the B777 considering that QF was one of the customers who Boeing asked for design input.

Before we move on from the Jefferson Prairie Settlement to new interesting things about Clinton Township the story about a Church on the Prairie must be told.
When people move from one country to another to begin a new life they don’t always leave their beliefs and traditions behind, these things are a part of who they are as a people. This held true for the Norwegian community that formed in the southern part of Clinton Township. Their strong religious beliefs were very much a part of their lives.
At the time that the Natesta brothers came to America, Norway had been a Lutheran country for about three hundred years, previous to this the main religion was Catholicism. In 1536 King Christian III of Denmark ordered a conversion to the Lutheran faith, and as Norway was ruled by Denmark they were also ordered to convert. All other religions were shut down or forced out of the country and Lutheranism became a state religion. Being Lutheran was mandatory and so was church attendance.
Now there are state religions all over the world, this is nothing new. Some are very rigid in their belief systems and structure while others give their members more freedom. In this instance though, the state religion was as oppressive as the social structure of the time. All matters of governance of the church was held by the state. Ministers were assigned and paid by the state and had complete control over educating their parishioners. As a government employee they had a great amount of public authority beyond guiding the faithful. Members of the congregation had no voice in what happened within their chruch and were not allowed to participate in any way. This seems out of line for us today, but we must remember that this was the process of faith that had been in place for generations, it was the norm and accepted for the time. Things did change, constitutional amendments were passed allowing more freedom and less governance by the state and other religions were eventually allowed back into the country.
There were no Pastors here in America for those first settlers so prayer services were held in the homes of various members of the community. By 1844 Jefferson Prairie was the oldest and largest Norwegian community and they worked to help form three main congregations. Rock Prairie here in Wisconsin, Long Prairie near Capron Illinois and Rock Run near Durand Illinois. Other churches were formed of course as communities spread but these were the first.
Pastor C. L. Clausen was the first to serve these congregations. In February of 1844 he held two services in Jefferson Prairie in the homes of Erik Gulbrandson Skavlem and Thor Helgeson Kirkejorden. He didn’t do any work to organize formal congregations beyond suggesting the idea. He limited himself to his ministerial functions.
Another Pastor that made his way through the area in 1844 was J. W. C. Dietrichson. He did organize a formal church in Jefferson Prairie and a requirement of inclusion into this congregation was the signing of a document stating four things.
- They would belong to the Norwegian Lutheran Church.
- They would submit themselves to the Norwegian established church procedure.
- They would be obedient to the ordained Norwegian Lutheran Minister in his authority as pastor and spiritual advisor in conformity to the Norwegian church ritual.
- That by signing, they are being added to and acknowledge joining the congregation under the above conditions.
This seems a bit excessive really, these families were already members of the church. Jefferson Prairie welcomed both Mr. Clausen and Mr. Dietrichson to lead their services until 1846 when they joined the Rock Prairie congregation and asked Mr. Clausen to be their pastor.
In 1847 the members of Jefferson Prairie began to think it was about time they had a church of their own. In March of 1848 the decision was made and 55 members pledged a total of $476.31 to build one. They bought two acres of land east of town for $3.10 and drew up the plans. Members of the church provided all the materials and labor. The small church on the hill was dedicated March 28, 1849.
Over the course of the next few years membership in the congregation grew to the point that in 1860 a larger building was needed. This time 53 members pledged a total of $1649.50. Land closer to Bergen was acquired, plans were drawn up and again all the construction was done by church members. It is not known when the church was completed and dedicated but it was said that it came in over budget by $11.00 in 1861. To cover this debt, it was decided later that year at the annual meeting that having an established minimum charge for ministerial services should be put in place.
It was around this time that a split began which would break the church apart. The initial cause of the split was within the church doctrine. The pastors brought in to lead their congregation were trained in Norway. It is only natural then that they would be leading the church under those beliefs and rituals held sacred to the home church in Norway. Although their faith was probably strong, these pastors did not see that by the 1860’s many of the immigrants had been here for over 20 years. They spoke English, they were settled onto well-established farms. Their children were American Citizens, and they were in the process of becoming citizens as well. Living around people of differing faiths may have advanced ideas and attitudes toward the process of their faith. Perhaps a service in English rather than Norwegian.
One of the beliefs in question came about when the pastors formed a synod and joined with churches from the south where slavery was accepted. The Jefferson Prairie pastors agreed with the southern body that slavery was not necessarily a sin as well as other theological doctrine relating to school and laymen performing devotional services. Some of the congregation were not pleased with this.
The slavery issue did not go away with the end of the civil war, as a matter of fact it continued to be a sore spot for many members. At the annual meeting in March of 1869, the pastor was asked to explain his stand on the question of laymen participation within the chruch and that of slavery. The response was that they wouldn’t discuss slavery openly anymore. But, it did come up again, more than once and the pastor said it was a fortunate thing that they were brought here to America where they could be converted. Eventually the question of slavery went back to Norway. The response that came back didn’t answer the question.
As time passed other issues came up to divide the congregation even deeper and ultimately in 1871 the church split into two groups and then three. Members of the community remained friends and neighbors for six days a week then separated on the sabbath. Little by little the issues that divided the Jefferson Prairie church faded. Talk began between the groups and as there were no real differences in their core beliefs the church became one again in March of 1892.
After all the legal matters were said and done it was decided that the reunited congregation needed a new church to worship in. The two church properties were sold and that money went to purchase a piece of land across the road from the present church. When construction of the magnificent church that sits at 23184 Bergen Rd was ready to happen, the land was sold and the church built.
I have had the extreme pleasure of visiting this beautiful church and talking with several of its members. They were very open, kind and welcoming to this stranger asking questions. I appreciated their patience and kindness. If you would like to visit, Sunday worship services are held at 8:30 a.m. and 10:30 a.m. with Sunday School and coffee hour at 9:30 a.m. The Jefferson Prairie Church has come a long way but they continue to be good people doing good work.

Chruch started out fabulously today. We had our annual primary program during Sacrament Meeting, an opportunity for our children ages 4-11 to share their testimonies through word and song. It was just beautiful. Our primary presidency chose to have the children write their own parts this year, and it was extra special to be able to hear them share testimony through their own words, rather than a scripted part. The music was wonderful. Both my boys were on the front row of the stand, and from where I was sitting in the congregation I could literally hear their individual little voices singing each of the songs. The icing on the cake for me was when my boys and Matt, along with a little girl and her aunt who will also soon be leaving on a mission, sang a medley of I Hope they Call Me On a Mission and I Want to Be a Missionary Now. It was Matt's last Sunday in our ward before he gets to become a full-time missionary and report at the MTC. Hearing and seeing him and my boys up there together destroyed me. I was kind of a wreck, but in a great way! It was so awesome!
But after Sacrament Meeting, things went down hill quickly. I was asked to help out in our nursery since they were short-handed today. I won't lie, it's not my favorite place to be. So when church was over I wasn't in my very best mood. Usually after church, the kids and I will go to the Bishop's office and check in with Adam, say a quick "hi" and "bye" before we take off. Since we usually don't see him until late in the evening, it's really the only couple minutes we get with him until late on Sunday. But Adam wasn't in his office after church, and we circled the building trying to find him. I was carting my Sunday bag, the diaper bag, and Annie--probably 40 pounds worth of kid and stuff. People kept asking me where my husband was, and I wanted to scream, "Do I LOOK like I know where my husband is?!" Once we finally located our guy, we had our rendezvous, I located my then-missing son, and we were on our way. So is it any wonder that I was feeling frazzled and just DONE?
We got out to the parking lot and McKay announced that he needed to use the bathroom. I was like, Nuh-uh. I am so not going back into that church buliding today. I told him he would have to hold it, that we would be home in five. He insisted that it was an emergency. Let me just tell you something about McKay...he loves public restrooms. So he often has "emergencies" while we are out so that he can check out a new bathroom. I was not falling for it today. I told him to hold tight, we would be home soon, and I proceeded to corral my brood into the van.
Well McKay, being McKay, stood in the middle of the van and said, "Fine. I'm going right now." I freaked out. I was envisioning urine-smelling carpet in my van for months to come. I screamed, "Get out of the car!" My thought process being, if he pees his pants, it will run onto the pavement and not onto my carpet.
The next thing I know, McKay has his pants around his ankles and he is "watering" the bushes on the median of the parking lot! And boy oh boy, did he spray those bushes down good! I was mortified!! All I could think of was, "Behold, Clarke Farms Ward, here is the Bishop's kid peeing in the parking lot! Let our family be a model and standard to you all!" Gah. McKay got back in the car and muttered, "I told you it was an emrgency." That boy.
This real moment has been brought to you by the Marchant family. Just in case you were incorrectly thinking that I have it all together.
5 days ago

Growing up in a household where love felt like it was scarce, romantic love felt like something I would never attain. My mum and dad met each other while they were in secondary school in Ghana and have been married for over 30 years. Whenever I tell people this fact, their instant reaction is to tell me how lucky I am to have parents who are still together. They are in awe of their perception of what a long-standing relationship means. I smile slightly then sigh before I have to burst their bubble. “To be honest with you” I start. “If it were up to me, they would have broken up decades ago.” I share this uncomfortable truth when I have the emotional capacity to tackle the slightly awkward conversation that always follows.
Despite my parents being married for over 30 years I can probably count on one hand the number of times I’ve seen them happy together. I was nine the first time that I told my mum to get a divorce. She told me that being Ghanaian and Christian were the key reasons why she wouldn’t get a divorce.
“But what would people think? What would they say? We don’t do that where we’re from.”
My mum would not leave my dad because of the pressures of keeping up appearances. This line of thinking always felt ridiculous to me. It felt like they were living a lie. My parents were the barometer for the love I never wanted to receive. Pondering on that fact over the years has been a difficult one. It was hard to think of the love I did want because I was so consumed by the love I didn’t want.

Unofficial Site of:
Check out the official website for this film
(use the Flash version, it takes longer but it is well worth it)
Items found on this site are property of Disney unless otherwise noted. Use of these items is not intended to infringe on any copyrights but solely as fan appreciation and to spread the word on this great movie. This site is not connected with Disney Enterprises, Inc., its subsidiaries or "The Emperor's New Grove"
By Groove Llama (email@example.com)
A fan fiction based on the smash Disney film "The Emperor's New Groove"
All elements including characters, situations and everything else associated with of "The Emperor's New Groove" are property of Disney Enterprises, Inc. Everything else is property of Groove Llama. This story is not meant to infringe on any copyrights but solely as fan appreciation and to spread the word on this great movie. This story is not connected with Disney Enterprises, Inc., its subsidiaries or "The Emperor's New Grove"
Chapter One: Still Hoofing It
"This can't be happening!" The image in the full-length mirror screamed. The face was long and narrow with two large round eyes, the ears were long and narrow, the neck was nice and lengthy, the entire body was covered with thick red fur except for the head which was black fur just like the bushy tail and the legs were long and muscular and each had a hoof. Each body part was that of a llama. The only odd thing besides the color scheme, not of a normal llama, was that this llama could talk. Not only talk but had the voice of an emperor. The emperor. Emperor Kuzco! This wasn't the first time this had happened to him. The last was the eve of his eighteenth birthday. Though back then he deserved it. Sort of. He was conquer of all he surveyed, leader of every soul as far as the eye could see and then some. But it wasn't until his transformation that he learned how to be a true leader. How a leader just doesn't bark out orders and care only of being pampered, but how he was responsible for everyone in his kingdom. How he had to care for his people and take their feelings into consideration. Now his people followed him not because his guards made them but because they actually like him. Thanks to a little help, well actually a lot of help, from his good friend Pacha he not only was transformed back into a human but also learned to change his ways. But that was then, for the now the past had returned. "I can't believe this is happening!" "You have said that five times already!" The squeaky voice came from a purple colored cat that was sitting next to him glaring in the mirror as well. Where the llama's expression was of horror the feline's was of joy. This did not go unnoticed. "Wait a moment," Kuzco's voice changed from fright to understanding as he glared directly at the cat. "The last time I was a llama it was because you did it. You turned me into a llama again Yzma!" "I only wish it was me," the kitty stated ecstatically. "And who would blame me if I did? After all, you turned me into a cat. A purple one with a squeaky voice to boot." In an effort to kill the emperor so she could take his place his trusted advisor had tried to poison him but her plan backfired and Kuzco was turned into a llama the first time. As she tried to finish the job she was accidentally turned into a cat. "That wasn't my fault!" The llama defended himself while trying to maintain some self-control. "You were the one who swallowed that potion on your own accord!" "Details. Details." "Besides," the llama continued exasperatingly. "You would have been allowed to be turned back into a human by now if you had learned the lesson." "Oh but I have," Yzma stated soulfully. "I really have oh great, wise and forgiving emperor." "And what exactly have you learned?" "Errr," the feline started awkwardly. "Don't, um, run with scissors?" "That is a good thing to remember but not exactly what we agreed on." "Trust no one and stab them in the back when you get the chance?" "No!" Kuzco thundered. "You are suppose to be learning how to be good. How to treat others with respect. How to be kind and sweet." "Oh that," Yzma states in a matter of fact tone. "I learned that weeks ago." "Is that a fact?" Kuzco stated bluntly. "Is that while I was listening to the request of the river villagers this morning you kept whispering in my ear behead them?" "Yes," the feline stated proudly. "They wanted to take the palace from you." "They asked if they could stay after their village had been wiped out by a flood!" "Same thing." "They were just wanting to stay until the flood had receded and they could start rebuilding their homes." "Well it deserves them right for building their homes so close to the water." "They're a fishing village!" The llama screamed with frustration. "They catch a majority of the fish for the kingdom!" "Even so," the kitty defended. "You do one nice thing for them and the whole kingdom will expect to be treated fairly. If you aren't mean and cruel how will they tell you part from the peasants?" "You're hopelessly evil." "Thank you." "Just for that I'm taking your ball of string away." "Go ahead," Yzma said uncaringly. "I don't need it, I can quick anytime I want." "Have it you way." There was a long unnerving pause. "Okay okay okay!" The feline quickly pleaded as she tugged on his leg. "I'm sorry! I didn't mean it! Honest!" "That's more like it." "Wait a moment!" Yzma cried. "You're a llama now! A stupid stinking llama! You can't give orders anymore!" "That is because you did this to me!" "I did not." "Then how do you explain I'm a llama again?" He demanded. "Not just any llama but a talking llama that is registered by Disney?" "If you weren't we couldn't have a sequel?" "Hmmm," the llama thought for a moment. "You have a point there." He came back to his senses. "But no one but you has the power and knowledge to do this to me!" "You are forgetting one thing," the feline explained. "While I'm a cat I can't make potions, only humans can do that. And since you destroyed my lab I couldn't concoct a potion even if I could." "I hate to admit it," Kuzco stated bluntly. "But you have a point there." "Of course." "This is the first time you have ever made sense." "Watch it!" "But if you didn't turn me into a llama who did?" The llama paused to think. "In fact the only ones who know I was turned into a llama the first time were Chicha, Kronk and Pacha." "They must be teaming up against you." Kuzco glared at her with a give me a break look. "You're right, together they don't have the intelligence of a chimpanzee." "Was the potion that turned me back to a human temporary?" "Nope," the cat confessed. "I wish that whole batch was then I wouldn't be a cat anymore. Though." "Though what?" "Potions are fragile mixtures," Yzma begins to explain. "They aren't designed to be jiggled around. In that finally battle where I was turned into a cat the potion was tossed around quite a bit as we fought over it. In fact, from the top of the palace all the way to the bottom. It is possible that all the shaking could have weakened the potion." "So it wore off and that is why I'm a llama again?" "That would be my guess." "So how do I get back to being a human?" "Well a human will have to concoct another human potion," Yzma explains. "Help me turn back into a human and I'll gladly do it for you." "Like I would trust you," Kuzco explained bluntly. "Besides, if I was going to do that I'd use the potion on myself instead." "Then I guess you are on your own." "That's it!" The llama cried. "I'm not on my own! The captain of the guard is stationed right outside my door, he can help me with this." "I wouldn't advise that." "Brunt!" Kuzco called out ignoring the feline. "Brunt! Front and center!" An instant later the door busted open and a burly man rushed into the room. He hasn't that tall but what he lacked in height he made up in brawn. He was muscular but also had agility. He worn the uniform of the palace guards but his helmet was gold signifying he was the captain of the guard. He quickly raced into the room and up to Kuzco, he bowed to him. "What is your bidding your highness," Brunt bellowed out in a loud thundering voice that had the tone of submissiveness. "Another happy meal?" "There is no time for product placements," Kuzco explained urgently. "Something terrible has happened." It was about this time that the guard stood up and noticed the one that was talking to him was a llama. "Demon llama!" "Oh no," the emperor groaned. "Not this bit again!" "You speak with the emperor's voice!" "Exactly Brunt," the llama pointed out. "Think about it. You saw the emperor come into this room. There are no other exits. I'm now standing in front of you speaking in the emperor's voice. What does that tell you?" "That. A demon llama swallowed the emperor!" "No you big lummox!" Kuzco yelled. "I'm the emperor! Me! Kuzco!" The anger of the old mean Kuzco got his attention. "I see," the defender paused to think. "You are the emperor. That means only one thing. You must be destroyed!" Brunt drew is sword. "What?" "Nothing personal," the guard explained almost sorry. "But there is an outstanding order that all demon llamas must be destroyed on sight!" "What moron made up that rule?" "The emperor!" "Ooops." The warrior started for the emperor, he was forced back. "What a great order!" Yzma finally broke in almost pleased. "Kill the demon llama! Destroy it! Die! Die! Die!" Brunt stopped in his tracks. "Of course that order goes fore demon cats as well." "What a stupid rule!" Since she was closer he raised his sword up high and pointed it down at her, she was too shocked to do anything. The sword was thrust down towards her! But she was yanked out of its path at the very last second, the end of the sword crashed into the floor where she was just standing. Yzma dangled from the llama's teeth by the scruff of her neck. They both watched as Brunt tried to pull the sword from the floor, he had no luck. The feline was then flipped onto the llama's back so he could speak. "You owe me one." "Then how about if I owe another one." She referred to the burly guard, he had successfully freed his sword and was preparing to use it on the duo. Kuzco yipped, turned around and raced for the open door. Brunt gave a battle cry and raced after them. The chase was on!
The llama Kuzco raced down the hall with Yzma still on his back, they were running for their very lives! Hot on their heels was Brunt and a squad of guards, they were determined that the royal decree of nothing demonized be allowed to live within the palace. For some big burly guys they were pretty fast, they stayed with their quarry. This did not go unnoticed. "Faster!" Yzma commanded in her squeaky voice as she looked back to the pursuers. "They're gaining on us!" "How about this?" Kuzco asked between pants. "I'll jump on your back and we'll see how fast you go." "That gives me an idea," the feline hitchhiker confessed as she looked forward again. Then she dug her claws into his back. He moaned with pain and started running faster. "I'll get you for that!" "Hey it worked!" That it did, the feline could see they were pulling away from the guards. "We're going to get away!" "Tell that to them." Yzma quickly looked forward again. As they approached a staircase another squad of guards were running up it. They were trapped! "We're trapped!" (Hey! I just said that!) "Not just yet!" The llama raced right the new group of guards. "Kill them both!" Brunt commanded. "They are demons!" The warriors drew their swords as Kuzco reached them. But as they raised them to attack her veer to one side and leaped into the air, he landed on the railing of the stairs and started sliding down it. "Booya!" He declared in victory as he continued to slide. "When I'm back as emperor I'm firing you all and hiring some real extras!" "I wouldn't get cocky just yet." Kuzco look over his shoulder at Yzma, she point ahead. He looked forward just in time to see they had reached the end of the railing. At the very end was a small statue. They were going to hit it! They both screamed like babies. At the last moment the llama jumped into the air and just cleared it, he continued to fly. "Look Jack I'm flying!" "Nothing to worry about." The llama came to a soft landing. A very soft landing. Into the arms of a very big and muscular guard. They were caught! "You mind telling him that there is nothing to worry about?" Kuzco ignored her, he was too busy struggling trying to get free but the warrior's grip was to tight. Escape was hopeless. "I will get a nice reward for capturing you," the big guard stated proudly. "Maybe even a position at the theme park." The captured pair quickly looked back towards the stairs, Brunt was racing down it towards them with all the other guards. It was hopeless! "Well now what emperor?" Kuzco's mind raced. He had to think of something and quick! He did not have to think long, a smile come across his face. "Look out behind you!" The llama declared in as a terrified voice he could muster. "There is a two-headed llama behind you!" "Nice try," the guard that had a firm hold on them laughed. "But that is the oldest trick in the book." "Then Yzma must have written it." "Hey!" "Look out!" The desperate llama cried again. "There is a three- headed llama behind you!" The guard gasped and dropped his prisoners, he quickly drew is sword. "Where?" By the time he realized he had been tricked Kuzco was racing away laughing with Yzma still on his back. "Sucker!" The guard screamed in rage and started after them, Brunt and the rest soon followed. Kuzco's laughter turned to fear, they were not out of this just yet. The chase was still on!
A short time later Kuzco and Yzma, who were still being chased by Brunt and his men, found themselves in a long hallway with many closed doors. In an effort of trying to elude capture Kuzco quickly went up to the closest door and flung it open. To his surprise there was a man on the other side in a business suit, he was talking on a cell phone. They looked at him in awe and bowed. "It is an extreme honor to meet you oh great king of Disney!" "Indeed it is since you hold our careers in your hands." He placed his hand over the receiver end of the phone. "Sorry babe," the man responded in a thick Californian voice. "I'm busy making deals on our next movie. Love your work. Let's do lunch." The man took his hand off the phone and continued to talk. "No I love the title," the businessman confessed as he closed the door. "Stick with Aladdin 31: Aladdin Looses His False Teeth." Kuzco and Yzma looked up. "We have just witnessed pure genius." "We're going to witness our death if we don't get moving!" They saw the guards coming right at them! They quickly raced through another door, and the guards quickly followed. A few seconds later Kuzco, minus Yzma, race back into the hall through a door on the opposite side of the hall. The pursuers appeared in a totally different doorway and gave chase. The llama ducked into another doorway, Brunt leads his men after him. Once they were gone Yzma appeared in another doorway, across the hall and disappear through another door. Doors were beginning to fly open and closed as Kuzco, Yzma, Brunt and the guards raced through them in all different directions as the chase continued. "This is weird," the talking llama quipped to himself as he continued to pop in and out of doors. "I have this sinking feeling 60's styled rock music should be accompanying us." (It's not the 1960's!) By now Yzma had caught up with him. After opening the next door they stopped in their tracks when he came face to face his personal theme song guy. He was a short man with a red Afro, boots and a white robe trimmed with gold. He was holding a microphone (I didn't know the Aztecs invent the microphone?) "What's new pussycat?" the singer asked the microphone as he looked down to the kitty. The words were followed by three whoas. Kuzco quickly slammed the door in his face and braced himself up against it. "Is he trying to get us sued?" "The is the risk you run with cameos." The guards were on them! They both screamed like little children, turned and ran down the hall. Brunt and his guards were in hot pursuit, the chase continued!
Soon after Kuzco was running with Yzma on his back. Though the guards were not in sight they could be heard near by. "Spread out!" Brunt could be heard yelling at him men. "Find them! Kill them!" Desperate, Kuzco raced through the nearest doorway. As he did a sign nearby caught his eye. "Kitchen?" (No! The other sign!) "Oh. Caution, floor just waxed." (That's the one) "This can't be good." "Bad for us," Yzma pointed out. "But good for comic relief." She was absolutely correct. As soon as they stepped into the kitchen they slipped on the freshly waxed floor and slid across the room. Unable to stop or even control their direction they crashed into a table full of pots and pans, they all fell down on them. The noise they made was deafening, like the worst thunderstorm multiplied by a million. It was so loud there was no way Brunt didn't know where they were now. "No sign of them," Brunt could be heard confessing off in the distance. "Looks like they got away." I said: It was so loud there was no way Brunt didn't know where they were now. "We might as well give up." Hey! They are in the kitchen! "Hmmm, something tells me we should search the kitchen." "Thanks a lot for giving away our position!" My pleasure. The guards could be heard coming closer but Kuzco was oblivious to all this. "This is insane!" The llama ranted and raved. "Who in their right mind would wax the floor in their kitchen so it is so slippery that it is begging for an accident to happen?" "The writer?" Kuzco was too angry to hear Yzma's explanation. Instead he slammed his hoof down on the table they had crashed into. One of the boards that made up its surface had become loose and acted like a titter tooter. The opposite end shot up and hit a rack of very sharp knives. The force drove the blades into the air and they arched towards the pair. "Excuse me your royal dumbness but." Yzma finished the sentence by pointing upwards towards the knives that were falling towards them at an alarming rate. By the time this was brought to his attention it was too late. They both just had enough time to grab each other and scream like little babies! Fortunately, all the blades missed them and stuck into the floor all around them. They both sighed with relief. "What were the odds of that?" "Pretty good since this is a G rated story." But before they could give thanks disaster struck. "Ah ha!" Brunt's voice declared as if he was standing in the same room as Kuzco, this was understandable since he was! He and his guards were at the doorway with their swords drawn and ready to kill. The llama and feline had just enough time to turn around and dash out the back door, before they left Yzma was again on his back. (Funny how the floor isn't so slick now) The guards gave chase one more time!
Brunt and his guards were hot on the heels, I mean paws and hoofs, of Kuzco and Yzma They raced down a hall that was heavily decorated with pictures and pottery. At the end of the hallway was a big red pot, the llama willingly rolled into it and busted into a million pieces. Yzma was perplexed. "What did you do that for?" "Nuts!" He declared with regret. "No coins." "This is no game!" (But The Emperor's New Grove Action Game is available from Disney Interactive) "Now it is time to meet your doom demons!" The animals looked toward the guards. They were right on top of them and their swords were held high ready to kill! The feline hiss and jumped back onto the llama's back. He tried to back away from them but discovered that the hallway was a dead end and they were on the dead part of it. They were trapped! "And how exactly did you become emperor?" "My parents were emperor and empress before me." "Let me rephrase that," Yzma states after pausing to contain her angry. "How did you become emperor after being so stupid?" "Relax," Kuzco tried to calm his ex-advisor. "I have a plan. See those two levelers in the wall behind us?" The kitty turned and looked at them, she could see them plain as day. "Pull the left one." "Didn't we do this same bit in the movie?" "Come on," the llama tried to reassure her again. "Only a really lame sequel would try and steal a gag from the original." "I guess you're right." Yzma reached back and pulled the lever. Instantly, the floor opened under them. "Wrong lever!" The heroes plunged through the trap door and into the darkness leaving the guard behind very perplexed.
Yzma and Kuzco plunged down a long narrow shaft to almost certain death! As they did they screamed all the way. "Okay maybe this is just a lame sequel." "No duh!" They continue to fall towards their death!
Down near the main entrance to the palace a guard was arguing with a traveling merchant, he was very angry with him. "Look!" The guard bellowed in a final tone. "I've been trying to tell you for months! We don't want any! We haven't ordered any! We will never order any! Take up your wares and leave!" The guard was referring to the trampoline that was set up as a demonstration nearby. Suddenly as almost as if on cue, which it was, Kuzco and Yzma fell from the sky and hit the trampoline square. They then bounced and headed upwards again. They could be heard saying. "Not only is this the lamest sequel ever but it is also the most unoriginal!" Both the guard and merchant witnessed this. "You were saying?" "We'll take it."
Back in the hallway the guards were about to leave when Kuzco and Yzma shot up through the trap door and landed before them. The guards quickly grabbed them. They struggled to escape but they had overpowered them. Brunt towered over with a big sneer on his face. "Like I said," the head guard boasted. "Now it is time to meet your doom demons!" They both looked at him as he raised the sword high over their heads, he was going to kill them! "You can't kill me!" The llama protested. "I'm the emperor!" "You're just a demon llama with the emperor's voice!" "Because I am the emperor!" "What you are is dead!" Brunt prepared to kill Kuzco! But the more he tried the less he succeeded. True he didn't think he was the true emperor but that voice, it sounded just like the emperor. Brunt had sworn to protect his emperor. He just couldn't do it. He just couldn't. "I just can't do it," Brunt explained as he lowered the sword. "I just can't." (See! What did I tell you?) He hung his head low. Kuzco and Yzma cheered. "But I know someone who can," he explained looking up again with a big smile. "Bring them!" Though the prisoners protested and pleaded they were forced to follow Brunt towards their doom!
Soon, Brunt and his guards dragged Yzma and Kuzco before a large window. Before they could say a word they were tossed out of it and began to fall towards their death once more! "You lied!" The llama declared. "You said you knew someone who would kill us but you just tossed us out the window!" The pair plummeted closer to their death!
Surprisingly, Yzma and Kuzco came to an abrupt end with a big loud splash. That's right, not a splat but a splash. They had both landed in the large moat surrounding the palace. Both animals broke the surface of the water and panted heavily. "I can't believe it!" The llama emperor declared. "We're alive! We're both alive!" "But for how long?" The wooly bully looked at her, she indicated the crocodiles that were now surrounding them. (Did you really expect us to have a moat without them?) They all glared at the two free meals as they licked their lips. Kuzco frantically look around for a way out but there was none! They were completely surrounded! Even if they did manage to get past the crocs they were made for water where a cat and llama were not, there was no escape for them this time. They were doomed for sure!
What will happen? Will Kuzco and Yzma find a way out or will they be a crocodile's happy meal? And even if they do manage to escape will Kuzco be stuck as a llama the rest of his life? But the biggest question of all. Will there be an Aladdin 31? Find these answers and more in the next exciting (aren't we pompous?) chapter of... De-Ja-Booya!

Laurence Tureaud is notoriously called Mr. T. He’s a multi-gifted persona and has been associated with a variety of professions. Better known as an actor, he’s been a professional wrestler also. Besides working in two areas, the actor has additionally worked as a bodyguard, TV personality and a well-known motivational speaker. The actor is recognized for his hefty gold strings, hairdo which resembles the African Mandinka warrior and his picture of a tough guy. Though the actor was understood to be a great wrestler, but he became well-known through his playing in television series in 1980s.
Mr T Net Worth $1.5 Million
“The A-Team” in which he played the part of B.A. Baracus. Then he became world known for his performance as boxer Clubber Lang in the well-known movie, “Rocky III” in the year 1982. Produced in a poor home in a family of twelve kids, Mr. T. wasn’t as wealthy as he is now. The neighbourhood he grew up in was quite hostile and he observed endless terrible crimes like, murders, robbery and rapes. The family of twelve children participated in football matches, did wrestling as well as learnt martial arts. The family of twelve children was declared in Military Police Corps as well as in the year 1975, his drill sergeant granted him with letter of recommendation. The family of twelve children was promoted as the squad leader and was given as the “Top Trainee of the Cycle” among six thousand individuals in the cycle.
Tureaud began his profession as a bouncer and participated in a well-known and popular show in the year 1980 called as “The World’s Toughest Bouncer Contest”. During his profession as a bouncer, Tureaud made his picture as Mr. T. Tureaud not only preserved the violence in the club, but also kept the drug dealers from the team. After Stallone saw him on the TV bouncer contest show, he gave him a part in Rocky III which became the important breakthrough in his profession. Since then he’s done many TV shows and movies that has made him an ill-famed personality.
In the year 1985, he began his career in the field of wrestling. WWF became among the significant and successful WWF fighters. Mr. T. began his career in playing in the year from the film “Rocky III”. After having an effective appearance in the picture Mr. did “Penitentiary 2”, a boxing picture. Mr. also did a character in the TV series, “Twilight Theatre” in exactly the same year. In the year 1983 Mr. did TV series like “Mister T”, “Diff’rent Strokes”, “The A-Team” and additionally made an apperarence in the film “Alvin and the Chipmunks”. WWF lately did World’s Craziest Fools on BBC Three.
During the early 1990s, Mr. T’s name and popularity found a downfall because of well-being problems. Mr. T. was diagnosed with cancer during those years. Though Mr. T. fought it, but he did not do movies and wrestling and limited his TV appearances to advertisements. Shortly after recuperating fully Mr. T. began working in the movies. Mr. T. did parts in distinct TV series including, “Not another Teen Movie, “The Proud Family” and “Inspector Gadget”. Mr. T. was wed to Philys Clark and has three kids with her. Mr. T. continues to act as an actor, but he’s left his profession in the wrestling field.
Mr. T. likes to dwell in a lavish manner, studded with gold jewellery. He’s got a successful career in many areas which has made him so wealthy. Besides bringing in as a bodyguard he also made money through working in different movies as well as through his career as a wrestler. The gold jewellery the celebrity possesses is worth around $300,000.

Get the latest from TODAY
If Katy Perry could rewrite her 2008 breakthrough hit "I Kissed a Girl" today, it would be a very different song.
"We've really changed, conversationally, in the past 10 years," she told Glamour during a new interview. "We've come a long way. Bisexuality wasn't as talked about back then, or any type of fluidity. If I had to write that song again, I probably would make an edit on it."
When the song was released, it was seen as edgy and lesbian-friendly, but it was also criticized as trivializing same-sex romance.
Looking back, Perry agrees with her critics. "Lyrically, it has a couple of stereotypes in it," she told the magazine of the song, which was co-written with Max Martin, Cathy Dennis and Dr. Luke. "Your mind changes so much in 10 years, and you grow so much. What's true for you can evolve."
Perry appears to be evolving herself. She also told Glamour that she's ready to "do a big soul overhaul very soon," and that she wants to one day have a family.
"I want to emotionally elevate myself," the 33-year-old said. "I don't want to hold on to childhood trauma anymore. I want to grow into becoming an adult. I'm preparing myself for having a family of my own someday. And that's the thing: I want to do a little bit more soul surgery before I have a family of my own so that I don’t transfer any of those lingering feelings."
She added that the emotional process makes her "nervous," but that it's necessary.
"This last year has been about killing my ego, which has been really necessary for my career," Perry said. "But for my personal life, it doesn't really work that way. If I want to have that true balance, I have to step into being Katheryn Hudson."
Follow Randee Dawn on Twitter.

The death of a self-proclaimed holy man from southern India has thrown millions of his supporters around the world into mourning and set off speculation as to who will inherit the leadership of his network, said to be worth at least £5bn.
Thousands of police had been standing by in the state of Andhra Pradesh as the health of the Hindu guru Sathya Sai Baba gradually got worse, after he was hospitalised a month ago and needed breathing support and dialysis.
Two days ago doctors announced he was suffering from multiple organ failure and had stopped responding to treatment. After the 86-year-old's death was announced yesterday morning at his ashram in Puttaparthi village, people started pouring into the temple complex.
Officials announced that the guru's body would remain in the temple until Tuesday and that a funeral, reportedly with state honours, would be held the following day. After news of his death emerged, India's prime minister, Manmohan Singh said in a statement: "Satya Sai Baba was a spiritual leader who inspired millions to lead a moral and meaningful life, even as they followed the religion of their choice. His death is an irreparable loss to all, and the nation deeply mourns his passing away."
The saffron-robed guru had a vast following and his movement established ashrams in more than 126 countries. His supporters included high-ranking politicians, movie stars, industrialists and athletes. Among his biggest supporters was Isaac Tigrett, the co-founder of the Hard Rock Cafe chain, who sold his stake for more than $100m (£61.3m) and donated millions to Sai Baba to set up a special hospital in Puttaparthi to help the rural poor.
The guru used to tell those who gathered to hear him speak: "I am God. You too are God. The only difference between you and me is that while I am aware of it, you are completely unaware."
Yet for all his followers, Sai Baba was an often controversial figure who was condemned by some as a fake and whose purported miracles, when he would apparently pull magic ash from his hair, were denounced as conjuring tricks. The man who never married and had no children, was also accused of sexually abusing some of his followers, though he claimed these allegations were propaganda designed to undermine him.
A key issue will now be who succeeds Sai Baba as head of an organisation with its global network of religious centres. A recent report in India's Open magazine suggested no successor had been decided by the guru. "Sathya Sai Baba has not named a successor," said a state politician. "His is a strange case of a living god. Sai Baba's powers cannot be passed on, only his legacy can."
The report said that a nephew, 39-year-old RJ Ratnakar Raju, is one of the trustees of the Sathya Sai Central Trust. While the nephew could stake his claim, most trustees are said to back a former government official called Chakravarthi, who became a follower of the guru more than 25 years ago and held a senior position at the trust's university. A statement issued by the trust after Sai Baba was admitted to hospital, said: "There is or will be no vacuum."
The guru was born in November 1926 and given the name Sathyanarayana Raju. As a child, he was said to display a tendency toward spirituality and unusual intelligence, which he expressed through music, dance and the arts. At the age of 14, he declared himself a reincarnation of another Hindu holy man called the Sai Baba of Shirdi, a town in western Maharashtra state, who had died 20 years earlier. As he quickly started to attract followers, his village was transformed from a sleepy backwater into a vibrant town with an ashram, a large hospital, a university and schools run by his trust.
He had suffered various health complaints over the years and concerns had forced him to cut back on his public appearances. He survived a stroke and a series of heart attacks in 1963. In 2005, he began using a wheelchair, and a year later he fractured his hip when a student fell on top of him.Reuse content

By Gabrielle. Natural Bamboo Knottie on Big Cartel.
I’ve read Kelly’s birth story so many times, and my reaction is always the same: How in the world did she do it? There was her grueling process to become pregnant, the out-of-this-world reward, a low so devastating it’s difficult to even imagine, a fight to go on and stay strong, and an ending so sad yet so wonderful at the very same time.
Yes, it’s difficult to even imagine, but I know hers is one of those stories that makes us better afterwards. Kelly and her husband and their babies all remind me that life is so fragile, so achingly beautiful, and doesn’t make sense some of the time. Friends, please take time with Kelly’s story. I hope it nudges you to view your day a little differently, as it did mine. Welcome, Kelly.
Q: Tell us a little about you pre-pregnancy: what your life was like pre-Zoe and a little about the struggles you endured in conceiving.
A: Pre-pregnancy life was great until my husband Jeff and I started trying to get pregnant. We traveled, flipped a house, built a house, saw concerts, got engaged in our favorite city of New Orleans, worked for the same company, and were happy. I even wondered if I wanted children because things were great as it was!
After a year of loosely trying to conceive, I started to get frustrated and really wanted to get pregnant. I started working with OB/Gyn who immediately put me on a fertility drug to help me ovulate more eggs. This drug made me feel crazy! I did some very uncharacteristic things like throwing a temper tantrum when my husband would not stop playing the guitar one night?! Nothing happened. We then began some tests with no conclusive evidence of what might be the problem.
This was nearly two years of trying with no baby, and depression, anger, and jealousy set in around this time. Everyone was having babies but us. I isolated myself from everyone but my husband. Jealously is a horrible feeling to have towards people you love, but I could not seem to help it, no matter how I tried. I found an infertility support group that made me feel less alone.
If that is one piece of advice I could give to couples struggling with infertility is to see a specialist right away. I know we wasted precious time working with my OB; they just are not experts in infertility. With our new doctor I was so optimistic we would get pregnant right away. I remember our doctor going over a list options on a piece of paper for treatments and I was sure we would only need to try the least expensive, least invasive and I would be pregnant! But I was diagnosed with unexplained infertility, which was so frustrating. I just wanted an answer even if it was bad one!
We spent two years with this doctor trying many different treatments while taking time off every now and then. During this trying and failing time period I had an adverse reaction to my first IVF cycle and was hospitalized for six days. My infertility support group, an infertility counselor, and my husband really helped me get through this dark time. I eventually got pregnant with IVF on our second frozen transfer. This means they transferred our embryo from a frozen state into me. My first pregnancy resulted in a miscarriage. The second IVF we found out on February 14, 2011 that we were pregnant!
Q: Did you have pre-conceived notions about how your pregnancy would progress? Were you disappointed in your struggle? Disappointed in your body?
A: I was so angry at my body and so envious of those around me who got pregnant so easily – so jealous I could sometimes not think clearly! I wanted people to feel pain like me. I was so confused because my fertility counselor and support group told me what I was feeling was normal, but those closest to me kept telling me to get over the jealously and and bitterness. They could not understand me. I felt alone even from my husband at times.
Q: Describe the moment you learned you were pregnant. Twins! What were your dreams like for two babies?
A: I learned I was pregnant on Valentine’s Day! I could not bear to hear more bad news so I asked my husband to call for my blood test results. We were working for the same company at the time and he came to my desk with a piece of paper which he had taken notes on from the nurse. He told me we were pregnant and my numbers from my blood work were high enough to be supporting multiples. What?! We did put three embryos in, which made us nervous, but we knew there would be a higher chance for success of getting pregnant this way.
We went and had lunch and could not stop smiling. It was finally our turn to be parents! After two weeks of waiting for our first ultrasound, the day came to find out how many babies we were having. Our fertility doctor confirmed there were two separate embryos with heartbeats. To hear that sound of those heartbeats was one of the most joyous moments of my life. I was crying and laughing so hard at the same time. I remember the doctor telling me to stop laughing because my uterus was bouncing all around and she could not do her work accurately.
We felt like having twins was our reward for all those years of suffering. I felt like I had won the lottery!
Q: What were your favorite cravings? What part of being pregnant just made you thrilled in those early days?
A: My early days of pregnancy were filled with horrible morning and all day sickness. Apparently, having twins means having double the pregnancy hormones. So I spent a lot of time throwing up in the first trimester! My husband could not even cook in the house because any kind of smell made me sick. My doctors even put me on medication to help with the vomiting. But I was so happy to be pregnant!
Q: Tell us about the moment you learned that one of your babies would not live. Had you told family and friends already? How did you deal with sharing this devastating news with everyone who knew?
A: We were monitored more with our twins than a singleton pregnancy. I was having an ultrasound at seventeen weeks, and the technician started with Baby A, who was doing great! When the technician moved on to Baby B, I sensed that something was wrong immediately. I absolutely knew that we were in trouble.
The doctor said the fluid was low in the sac around Baby B. He said it was concerning but could not or would not offer any reasons why, and recommended us getting seen by the High Risk Perinatal Clinic right away. Our new doctors confirmed that the fluid was extremely low but did not know why yet, and at twenty weeks they would be able to see more on an ultrasound. Twenty weeks came and it was confirmed that Baby B had a condition called Bilateral Renal Agenesis. This means that our baby did not develop renal arteries which develop kidneys, which then develop the bladder.
And then they mentioned that this condition is not compatible with life.
Hearing that my child would not survive outside the womb was an out of body experience. I was hysterically crying. It was a hot day and I had just come from a successful meeting at work and now my one of my babies was going to die. It was the worst moment of my life to date. I know you might be thinking the moment my baby died was worse, but this day was the worst.
We called our parents. We asked a few close friends to spread the word so we did not have to. My first reactionary emotions were that I did not want to name this baby, meet the baby, or have any connection. Maybe it was to protect myself or because I did not want to believe it. After all that we had been through to get pregnant, how could the universe be so cruel?
Q: Was there ever a moment when you forgot you were pregnant with twins? I mean, did your mind try to protect you by focusing on your healthy baby? Or, were you always aware of the loss even with the knowledge of the joy? How did you juggle those emotions?
A: Being twenty weeks pregnant meant I had to carry on with this pregnancy because we had a healthy twin baby girl. I began to operate in a fight mode of getting through this pregnancy. There were many risks to overcome. One of them was that our Baby B needed to stay alive in the womb so that it did not jeopardize our daughter arriving too early.
In order to work towards this we spent so much time creating a birth plan that included neonatologists, genetic counselors, social workers, and so on. I started to learn more about what the birth might entail, and I started to become calmer and not as angry. I was able to have some control over some things like the birth plan, when so much was out of my control. My thoughts and emotions always felt bittersweet. I never forgot what was happening to my precious baby and how I had to fight for my healthy baby. I really stuffed away much of the sadness and anger because I just had to survive.
Q: What do you remember most about delivery? That moment that still feels clear today? How different was your actual delivery from than the one you imagined you would experience?
A: I made it to 36.5 weeks when my water broke. I was so calm. I knew I would have to have a C-Section at this point because the babies were breach. This was disappointing to me and our team of doctors, because having a C-section meant that I would be medicated and not fully aware of what was going on.
We had a plan and wonderful nurse by our side that spent so much time with us during the pregnancy. We also had an organization called Now I Lay Me Down To Sleep to take pictures of our babies. Family was on their way to the hospital. The babies were born at 11:11am, and all at once our healthy daughter Zoe and our son Judah were here. They were rushed off because Judah needed to be administered some medication to assure he would not suffer, and Zoe was early so they had to assess that she was okay. It did not feel intimate at all. It was cold, loud, and noisy.
I finally got to hold them lying on a table with my arms restrained. So many nurses were crying. This is not what I had imagined. I knew time with Judah was going to be short because we were warned throughout the pregnancy, but I didn’t realize how sad the moment would be. It is an unimagined pain and joy.
My priority was to spend time with Judah, yet Zoe needed me; I had to start nursing and bonding with her, but I felt so guilty when Judah was alone at times. Much of it is a blur because I was so foggy from all the medications, and this is really something I still cannot let go. I feel cheated of those memories. Sure I have videos and photos, but I don’t really remember.
Q: Afterwards, you experienced PTSD. Tell us how that felt, and how you healed. Two years out, has the sadness eased?
A: Within about five days of returning home, I began having feelings I had never felt before. I could not sleep, and was actually afraid of when nighttime came around. I could not shake this panicked feeling and irrational fears. I did not feel safe, but could not explain why. My husband always had made me feel safe, and even he could not help. No one could calm me down. I would ask my mom to come over to lay with me until I fell asleep, but I could not sleep. I asked to go back to the hospital. I wanted to go back there so badly. I tried convincing my husband I needed to go back. I was so scared because I did not know what was wrong with me.
I got access to a psychiatrist very quickly who diagnosed me with PSTD. It made sense, as I had just went through something so brutally traumatic. The psychiatrist explained what was happening to me and put words to my feelings. I was prescribed medication to take to calm me down if I felt these feelings coming on, and we also had to create a plan to get sleep: sleeplessness perpetuates the PTSD.
It was a long first few months. I honestly think back and wonder who that woman was that just went through that experience because it could really be me? Time has really helped the intensity subside. We have some family rituals to honor our son and celebrate him. He is a hero in our eyes by helping Zoe get to our arms safely.
And being a mom to Zoe is the best healing…
Q: What’s the one piece of comfort you received during your birth process that stuck with you?
A: One piece of comfort I hold is that I feel like I have a new set of lenses looking at life. I am less judgmental and very present. I feel that is a gift.
Q: Please finish the sentence: To me, the best thing about becoming and being a mom is…
A: …fulfilling every dream I had about becoming a mother during those years of trying to conceive. I read this after having our babies and it resonates with me every day that being a parent is “deciding forever to have your heart go walking around outside your body.” I love Zoe so much that is like an extension of me living outside of me.
Oh, Kelly. Judah is a hero. A guardian of the highest order. Zoe is lucky to have had him, you were fortunate to know him if only too briefly, and we’re grateful to you for sharing his story with us. I can’t fathom the fighting emotions of grieving and loving so profoundly at the same time. I think you’re a hero, too. Thank you from my heart for sharing yourself with us.

You guys were catching some air on that jump! Cool video. Do you have any "Pros and cons" about the track? Anything you really liked or really didn't? I'm trying to gather some ideas for the track I am building, but I have never actually driven on a track.

Both of our children attend Tot’s Academy and they love it! They are excited to go in the morning and they have smiles on their faces when they get picked up at the end of the day. As a parent, I feel very good about our decision to send our boys there. I know that they are getting healthy meals, developing excellent social skills, and are very well taken care of every day. The staff at Tot’s Academy are excellent, the facility is beautiful, and I would highly recommend Tot’s Academy to any parent seeking child care.
When we moved our children to Tot’s they were 4 ½ and 2. We were able to notice the difference right away. Our son started coming home with science experiments and was excited to show us how it worked. He had been diagnosed with ADHD and Tot’s was and is extremely accommodating and understanding with him. Our daughter is doing very well also; she is becoming quite the little artist and Tot’s has even put an easel outside for her.
Our grandchildren have been going to Tots for the past five months. We pick them up several times a week and are very impressed with the staff and facilities. The children are always eager to go and the staff have been more than accommodating. They enjoy many crafts, indoor and outdoor play time, field trips and great lunch and snack options.

“Hello” Fatty Arbuckle – Born 24 March 1887
Roscoe Conkling “Fatty” Arbuckle (March 24, 1887 – June 29, 1933) was an American silent film actor, comedian, director, and screenwriter. He mentored Charlie Chaplin and discovered Buster Keaton and Bob Hope.
He was one of the most popular silent stars of the 1910s, and soon became one of the highest paid actors in Hollywood, signing a contract in 1921 with Paramount Pictures for an unprecedented $1 million.
In September 1921, Arbuckle attended a party at the St.FrancisHotel in San Francisco during the Labour Day weekend. Virginia Rappe became drunk and ill at the party; she died four days later at a hospital known for performing abortions. Arbuckle was accused by a well known madam of raping and accidentally killing Rappe and was subject to three trials for manslaughter. His films were subsequently banned and he was ostracised.
He was acquitted in the third trial and received a written apology from the jury. Though the ban on his films was lifted within a year, he worked irregularly. He was finally able to return to making short two-reel comedies in 1932 for Warner Brothers. He died in his sleep of a heart attack, aged 46, in 1933.

18-year-old Helena Muffly wrote exactly 100 years ago today:
Friday, April 17, 1913: Our class was invited out to supper this evening. It broke up rather early. My first presents arrived today. A gold hat pin and a handkerchief.
Lillie. Raymond (standing), and Michael Swartz (1913)
Her middle-aged granddaughter’s comments 100 years later:
Grandpa must have been at the supper—but Grandma doesn’t mention him and it sounds like the dinner was boring since the party broke up rather early.
According to the Commencement Program there were only six people who graduated from McEwensville High School in 1913, and two of them were my grandparents–Helena Muffly and Raymond Swartz.
In such a tiny class they had to have known each other—yet Grandma never mentioned him in the diary. Why?
Raymond was much younger than Grandma—perhaps he wasn’t on her radar screen at the time. He was only 14 1/2 years old when he graduated; she was 18. He must have skipped several grades.
Maybe Raymond was really quiet and Grandma barely noticed him. His mother had died several years previously. He lived on a farm with his father. He only had one sibling—a sister, Lillie, who was 12 years older than him.
Or maybe he was smart and annoying. . . .
One place in the diary where I want to think that Grandma referred her future husband was on February 6, 1911:
. . . Got too close to the stove pipe at school today and burned my hand. Didn’t feel very good. Put some black on a kid’s face, and then he put some on mine. I tried to prevent him. Got my arm scratched and tore my waist. . .
It almost seems like the two students were trying to get each others attention, and that maybe they liked each other just a little. Grandpa would have seemed like a kid at the time. . .could it have been him?
I’m probably imagining things. . .
Filed under: Genealogy | Tagged: 100 years ago, family history, genealogy | 36 Comments »

Feel like a bad wife!
My husband wants a child so bad we have been married for 5 years and it was always the plan 5 year was baby time. I just want a baby right now am 28 and want to be selfish it know I'm getting older but I feel like waiting until 30 my husband wants it now and thinks we are ready. We got into many fights because he said he feels like I lied when I said 5 years. He is actively trying to make a baby but I'm still on the pill he doesn't know. How do I get him to understand. I want a child just not this second. Please no mean comments.

Richard Foley ( -1684)
1678 Richard Foley IV had been trained by his father and inherited the north Staffordshire iron works from his father, Richard Foley (1614-1678). Philip II and other interested parties made an agreement to resolve the outstanding debts and enabled Richard IV to establish his ownership.
The businesses were becoming very widely dispersed as more ironworks were leased, and new partners were brought in. Raw materials, pig iron, and wrought iron were moved further in the course of production, numerous customers expected extended credit and frequently paid by bills of exchange. This caused problems with management and logistics; accounting required sophisticated solutions.
1684 Richard died and his heir was his uncle, John Foley (1631-1684), the youngest son of Richard Foley II. When John Foley died in November the same year, the ironworks were inherited by Henry Glover senior, his brother-in-law, who had been manager of the Stour works. For a while, the Cheshire works were transferred to the Yorkshire ironmasters, but they were back in Foley hands by 1696.
John Wheeler of Wollaston, Stourbridge, took over the Moorland works, with Obadiah Lane as manager, the partners being Wheeler, Lane, and Philip Foley II. These works were well placed between the expanding industrial areas of north and south Staffordshire, where most of the bar and rod iron was sold.

Although the boy’s Varsity Soccer team has had a challenging season, they were able to make it to the playoffs!
The boy’s Varsity Soccer team had their first Division II Championship Game on February 9. The game was hosted at Huntington Park High School at 3:30 p.m. The boys faced off against Hollywood High and were able to successfully defeat them with a score of 1 – 0.
“We had two great practices the last two days, and the boys seem ready today,” said Coach Werner Bonilla
Both Coach Bonilla and Coach Mateos have been coaching the boy’s Soccer team, with Bonilla being the head coach, and Mateos coaching the JV team. They have been training the boys after school, and during their 8th-period conditioning class with the athletes. On the day of their first Championship game, the varsity boys were in their advanced conditioning class preparing for their game.
Many athletes in the JV team were bumped up into the varsity team. Some of the boys were Carlos Chavez, Rudy Chavez, Angel Ruiz, and Reymundo Salcedo. Currently, there are 25 players that are in the varsity roster.
“They seem very concentrated, and they are ready to compete,” said Bonilla
The boy’s Varsity team has had an overall record of 4-10-6, but their league record is 1-7-4, and are currently 6th in the Eastern League.
The Spartans are currently 16th in their division. However, on February 15, the Spartans faced off against the number 1 team in their division, Poly High School. Poly High School has had an overall record of 11-3-1, but their league record is 9-2-1 and they are currently 2nd in the East Valley League. Unfortunately, the Spartans weren’t able to come out with a win. They lost against the Parrots with a score of 2-0.
“It was a good game overall, however, the outcome should have been different”, according to a former soccer player, Christopher Hernandez, a senior, striker.
“It was a good game, we had a good first half, we ended off 0-0, we had a tough game, we were running the 4-4-2 lineup. In the second half, they called a penalty on us, which Poly scored,” said Hernandez
The team was able to hold their own weight against the top school in their division for the first half, sadly it wasn’t enough when it came to defeating Poly High School, in order to continue in the season. Although this was the end of the soccer season for the boy’s Soccer team, there is still much growth and communication for the team to develop. With that, the season comes to a bittersweet end.
Written By: Alondra Ruiz, Sports Editor

British-Nigerian model known for his work with Premier and Next. He's appeared in campaigns for major brands like Calvin Klein.
Images of him modeling online first start to pop up around the time he was 17.
He has more than 40,000 followers on Instagram. He has the seed of life tattooed on his palm.
He's of Nigerian descent and he was born in Walthamstow.
He's dated model Ashley Sky.

by Willie Lagarde
We always respected an officers rank but not always the man.
We liked some of them, had mixed feelings about some and disliked others.
Some officers were born leaders and we trusted them instinctively. If they were strict or demanding we knew this was the way it had to be.
We quickly identified those who were career obsessed and learned to stay out of their way.
Only one or two officers in our experience had no redeeming qualities and we sometimes wondered if they were on our side. We respected these men like we would a child with a loaded gun in his hand.
Other than some of the older junior officers who were ex-enlisted and with whom we felt a kinship, we never engaged them in conversation unless they initiated it.
Academy officers were a rarity and though they were derisively referred to as “ring knockers” by some of the reserve officers, we found they were often more approachable and sympathetic to any complaint we may have. They had three or four years of Navy indoctrination and experience when they came aboard our ship. Many reserve officers had only a few months service and sometimes were still civilians when we were in combat. It was hard to generate respect for them.
It was one of this type that I ran afoul of at a time when we weren’t making many long range plans for the future.
He was a young ensign who had been assigned a battle station on our gun deck. We wondered where he came from but there he was properly attired in helmet and life jacket. Once or twice he dutifully applied his “war paint”. We had no personal feelings about him one way or another but were giving him his space and otherwise ignoring him.
When condition “one easy” was set it meant we stayed on battle stations but could relax with one or two men staying alert. The rest of the men could try to sleep, play cards or just talk about the home town and good times of the past.
I almost felt sorry for this little ensign, he was like a lost soul. He surely felt he couldn’t lay down on the deck or play cards with the men. He could have, I’m sure had he sat in a game he would have been dealt a hand. What ever ground rules there were for fraternization under those circumstances, he set them. He would just pace around the relatively confined space on the gun deck, at times having to step over sleeping men.
One day while at condition “one easy” Hughie had the phones on and I was scanning the horizon with the binoculars. I wasn’t looking for anything in particular when he came up to me and asked, “what do you see out there”. This was the first time any of us ever heard him say a word. The question took me by surprise and because I had been telling my gun crew mates at times I saw spots, I blurted out “spots.” A couple of my buddies heard this and started laughing. He walked away from me and I didn’t realize at the time he probably thought I as making fun of him. I wasn’t.
It was a few days later, same conditions, when we secured from general quarters at sunset. Since I had the 8 to 12 watch I stayed on the gun deck. Sunrise GQ would probably sound at around 5AM so at midnight, seeing a good sleeping spot was available on top the ready box, I decided to take it until GQ sounded.
Either because I subconsciously knew I was already on my battle station or because I was exhausted I slept through the gong, bugle and bosun pipe.
I was dreaming I heard it and gotten up to routinely start the motors and test the gun control. Somebody was hollering at me in the dream. One of my buddies touched me on the ankle and I woke up to the little ensign screaming at me about not responding to GQ. I tried to explain about my dream but he kept on until I though he would have a stroke. I almost lost my temper, I said, "for God’s sake I’m only six feet from the damn gun what do you want me to do, go hug it."
“I want you on your feet!”, said the Ensign.
At this point it took all will power I could muster to not say anymore or worse, make the biggest mistake of my life and swing at him. In retrospect, he had it in for me ever since the “spots” incident and felt this was his chance to pay back. Anyone hearing him carrying on would have thought next stop for me was a firing squad.
He finally shut up but one of my friends reminded me he could make trouble for me. I agreed.
Later that day I saw my division officer and figured I’d better get my side of the story in before ensign (never did know his name) could get any disciplinary procedure started. Guilty or innocent you can never be sure of the outcome. I was thinking of Billy Budd’s fate.
Not surprisingly the division officer had already heard about the incident and told me to “forget about it." I did, but not completely, over half a century later the sights and sound of that day remain clear in my memory
We never saw the little ensign again. Not that anyone really cared, we never even heard about him.

New YouTuber Ludwig had his livestream interrupted by a copyright warning
Posted On December 4, 2021
Just three days after Ludwig Ahgren left his massive Twitch following for YouTube, he was hit with what he thought was a suspension from the platform. According to a report from Kotaku, Ahgren was playing other YouTube videos during his stream, when he landed on the infamously catchy Baby Shark song. His stream was shut down shortly thereafter, giving his viewers — and himself — the impression that he was banned for violating YouTube’s copyright policies.

The creative midfielder has experienced life at both clubs but sees notable differences in playing styles.
The possession-based style of play adopted by Pep Guardiola at Bayern is often compared to that of the Spaniard's Barcelona team between 2008 and 2012, but Thiago has dismissed that comparison.
"I had to change my Barcelona style a bit when I got here. It's a different type of football. But that's only improved me as a player," Thiago told TZ.
The 22-year-old then revealed his happiness with life in Germany following his summer move from Barca.
"Some of my former Barcelona teammates have already visited me here," he went on. "I am feeling very well here and that's what I've told them as well.
"I didn't have any expectations when I joined Bayern. I had never expected that everything would have been perfectly organized like this."
The Spain international had 185 touches of the ball during Bayern's 5-0 win over Eintracht Frankfurt at the weekend - breaking Bastian Schweinsteiger's Bundesliga record - but he has insisted that it is much more important to him that he is getting to understand his teammates' movement and behavior on the pitch.
"I don't really care about how many touches of the ball I get," he said. "What matters to me is that I understand my teammates on the pitch.
"I am slowly starting to get to grips with how the guys are behaving in certain situations and where they want to receive the ball. That's important to me."

Sometimes rescuing cats feels like a Sisyphean task. As fast as you can find them homes others are being discarded. How did Rosie end up unspayed in a parking garage with nobody looking for her? Or the other cats I find that are dumped?
I had an upsetting afternoon at the Humane Society on Friday. I was in the lobby and a man came in with a cat in a carrier. He is a super and found the cat abandoned in an apartment, who knows how long it had been there. Unfortunately the THS can't accept strays so the cat was going to have to go to Animal Services. The cat was lovely and I was frantically trying to think how could I save it. I have two foster homes now available but they've both gone away for the holidays, and I don't even have an extra room now. So I had to let go, knowing I can't save them all, that this happens every day. There was another cat in the same situation, he had been left in a cardboard box outside the front door. How could those people do that? It's unfathomable to me.
So I focus on the ones that I have saved. Here is a picture of Snowball sent by his new mom, the cape is instead of a cone while his paws finish healing.
I know there are many wonderful people out there, I'm reminded of that every day. Thank you Shannon, for your generous donation, it's heartwarming how many have reached out to say they care and want to help the cats.
Today's goal is to somehow get to feed the feral cats in this ice storm, I have 30 hungry cats depending on me (and my car).

Biography of Jesse S. Crume (1849- )
Portrait and Biographical Record of St. Charles, Lincoln and Warren Counties (Chicago: Chapman Pub. Co., 1895), page 506.
JESSE S. CRUME, ex-Sheriff of Lincoln County is now making his home in township 60,
range 2, and is engaged in cultivating six hundred acres of as fine land as can be found
in Missouri. He has passed the principal portion of his life in Lincoln County and has
always taken great interest in its upbuilding. He made an efficient and trustworthy public
officer, and has been a life-long supporter of the Democracy. He has frequently served as
a district-school Director, and was once a candidate for Collector, and though he did not
make a strong canvass, came in second of four contestants for the office.
Jonathan W. CRUME, father of our subject, was born near Taylorsville, Nelson County, Ky., October 14, 1821, his parents being John and Jane (KIRKHAM) CRUME, natives of Virginia and Kentucky, respectively. John CRUME was born in 1781, and when thirteen years of age was taken by his father to Kentucky, where he was married. In 1830 he came to Lincoln County, bringing his family with him, and settled on a farm east of Troy, where. he lived until 1880. He was a soldier in the War of 1812, as a member of a Kentucky regiment. His wife, born in the Blue Grass State in 1783, died in 1856. Her father, Michael KIRKHAM, a native of Ireland, settled in Kentucky prior to the Revolution. John and Jane CRUME had eight children: John, Sallie, Philip, Elizabeth, Taylor, Jonathan W., Mary Jane and Jesse. Jonathan W. never attended school, its there were no educational facilities during his boyhood in Kentucky. Indians were still numerous, and whenever the citizens held court they assembled for muster. Mr. CRUME was one of the most expert hunters in the country, his shot being almost invariably true. Prior to the war he was a Whig, but later became a Democrat, and voted for his party nominees until shortly before his death, which occurred January 28,1891. He joined the Masonic order in Auburn at an early day, and was for a time a member of New Hope Lodge and a charter member of Solon Lodge, which was instituted about 1868.
In 1842 Jonathan W. CRUME married Leah Jane, daughter of Littleton and Ellen P. (JOHNSTON) DRYDEN. The former was born in Worcester County, Md., January 26, 1797, and died on the 16th of February, 1867; and the latter, born on the 18th of January, 1803, died February 14, 1867. For many years they had been members of the Methodist Episcopal Church, and both were placed to rest in the same grave. Mr. DRYDEN removed from Maryland to Hannibal, Mo., in 1833, and worked at his trade as a hatter for three years, after which be settled in this county, buying a claim where the village of Snow Hill (now Brussells) stands and continuing to operate his homestead until his death. Leah J. CRUME was born in Maryland in 1828, and was about thirteen years old when her parents came to this county.
Jesse S. CRUME, who was born near Troy, this county, April 17, 1849, is one of eight children. Elizabeth married S. A. HARROLD, who lives on a portion of the old homestead. Littleton Thomas has resided in California for the past fifteen years. Ella is the widow of Dr. A. H. CHENOWITH, of Troy. John Wesley resides on a part of the old homestead. Julia is the wife of J. W. ALEXANDER, who is on the St. Louis police force; and Willie and James Alexander died in childhood, aged four and nine years, respectively.
The early education of our subject was obtained in the district log schoolhouse, near the home of his boyhood. He pursued his studies until his twenty-fourth year, but when only eighteen years of age actively engaged in farming. Going to Cap Au Gris, he bought a share in his brother's store and remained in business for about two years. He then married and returned to his native township, settling on an eighty-acre tract of timber-land near his father's home. He cleared the land and made many improvements on the place, which he sold in 1882. He then removed to the farm where his father had first located, and conducted the same for six years. His headquarters for the next four years were in Troy, on account of his duties as Sheriff of the county. When his term of office had expired he removed to a farm near Elsberry, and in the fall of 1894 finally located where he is at present.
April 13, 1873, Mr. CRUME married Hettie A., daughter of Charles MONROE and Susan (HINES) THOMASON, the former of whom was born in Virginia in 1821, being a son of John and Elizabeth (GARWOOD) THOMASON. His father, who was a soldier in the War of 1812, was born and reared in Botetourt County, Va., and moved to Missouri in 1830, the journey being made overland in wagons. The family settled near Auburn, where he died in 1836. In 1842 C. M. THOMASON married Susan HINES, and two years later settled on his mother's homestead, where he spent the ten ensuing years, then removing to a farm near the Cuivre River. Two years later he disposed of his property there and went to Nebraska, stopping in St. Joseph, where his mother died. He then took passage on a steamboat for Lincoln County, and, landing at Cap Au Gris, settled on the bluffs of the Mississippi, where he made his home for a time. When the town of Winfield was founded he removed thither, and continued to make his home there until his death, which occurred at the residence of J. S. CRUME in 1886. His body was interred in the cemetery at Winfield.
Susan HINES was the daughter of John and Hettie (GALLOWAY) HINES. Her father, who was reared in Virginia, moved to Missouri in 1823, his wife and child making the journey on horseback in company with a brother, who walked. After a year in Lincoln County, he moved to Ohio, the journey being made in a wagon of his own manufacture. Two years were spent in Ohio, after which he returned to Missouri and settled at Old Alexandria, which was the county seat at that time. Removing thence to Troy, he conducted a blacksmith shop. Later he settled on a tract of land lying on Sugar Creek, which he entered from the Government, and upon which he remained for about five years. A similar period was spent at New Hope, where he had a shop. Thence he went to his farm on Sugar Creek, where Mr. and Mrs. THOMASON were married. Mr. HINES finally became a member of the family of the latter, with whom he remained until his death in the year 1849. Mrs. HINES was born in Maryland and went to Virginia with her parents in childhood. In 1820 she became the wife of Mr. HINES, and three years later came to Lincoln County, Mo. After the demise of her husband, she made her home with the family of C. M. THOMASON until her death, at the age of eighty-four. There were eleven children in the family, two of whom died young.
Six children came to grace the union of Mr. and Mrs. CRUME, namely: Arthur L., born May 21, 1874; Mina M., February 15, 1876; Irene S., March 4, 1878; John L., September 19, 1879; Hubert J., July 17, 1881; and Ella G., December 25, 1887. The eldest is attending the Iowa Business College at Des Moines, while the younger children are students in the Elsberry schools. Mrs. CRUME is a member of the Methodist Episcopal Church South, with which she has been connected since 1884.
Politically a Democrat, Mr. CRUME has always given his allegiance to that party. Though only a boy, he was an enthusiastic upholder of the Southern cause, and with one of his brothers intended to enlist, but was prevented by his father. His people were slave-owners, and one of the old negroes brought by his grandfather from Maryland to Missouri is still living and resides under the roof of Mr. CRUME. Among the relies and treasures of our subject is a powder-horn which his great-grandfather took from Virginia to Kentucky in 1794; and a sister has a gourd used for keeping the supply of powder, and which was brought out at the same time. It was formerly about two feet long, but has been broken and is now hardly half that length. John Wesley, a brother, owns a knife formerly the property of the same ancestor, and used in skinning deer; he also owns a small hand-sickle made over one hundred years ago. Our subject has the old rifle which belonged to his father, and which has brought down many a deer.
Fraternally Mr. CRUME has been a Mason since 1871, at which time he became a member of
New Salem Lodge No. 270, but in the winter of 1894 he became identified with New Hope
Lodge No. 199, at Elsberry. He is an Odd Fellow and a Knight of Honor, and in these
various societies has held different official positions At one time he was identified with
the Temperance Benevolent Association, and for a few
years belonged to the Grange.
File submitted to HERITAGE PAGES of LINCOLN COUNTY, MISSOURI by Michael Parker, 18 April 1999. Link change or
update: 23 May 2000
NOTICE: In keeping with our policy of providing free genealogical information on the Internet, data may be freely used for personal research and by non-commercial entities, as long as this message remains on all copied material. These electronic pages may NOT be reproduced in any format for profit or presentation by other organization or persons. Persons or organizations desiring to use this material for profit or any form of presentation, must obtain the written consent of the file submitter, or their legal representative, and contact the listed county coordinator with proof of this consent.
Return to Lincoln County, Missouri
Biography Index | Heritage Page | Home Page

The 47-year-old has signed a three-and-a-half year contract after a compensation package had been agreed with his former club Portsmouth.
"I'm very excited - it's a wonderful football club which has great traditions which should be embraced," Cotterill told www.nottinghamforest.co.uk.
"I'm really looking forward to getting to work on the training pitch with the players.
"I'm passionate, I want us to play good football and play on the front foot.
"I think there are some very talented players in the dressing room and we'll be looking to enhance that and do well with them.
"I like to think of myself as hard working, honest and a winner."
Cotterill travelled to the east midlands on Friday afternoon as details of the agreement with Portsmouth, which are understood to include a package in the region of £250,000 for Pompey, were finalised.
He added: "It's been a sad day for me. It was very emotional leaving Portsmouth because of the relationship I've had with the staff and players down there over the last 17 months.
"My relationship with them was quite special and if I manage to build the same relationship with the players and staff at Forest I'm sure I'll be very happy in the job and they will be happy with me."

CHICAGO (AP) — Rohi Atassi was among 117 immigrants to become the newest American citizens during a Chicago naturalization ceremony, but the Syrian dentist stood out among his peers.
The 29-year-old was unexpectedly asked to lead immigrants from 37 countries in reciting the Pledge of Allegiance. Federal Judge Sara Ellis, who oversaw Tuesday's ceremony, asked for a Syrian volunteer after delivering an impassioned speech about the difficulties immigrants face.
While she never specifically mentioned President Donald Trump's executive order barring immigration from seven predominantly Muslim countries including Syria, Atassi said her words resonated with him.
"I'm very happy that a Syrian who just became an American had a chance to lead the pledge," he said.
He and his family have been on edge the last few weeks as he's had friends detained at airports because of the executive action, which is undergoing legal challenges. He was left wondering if his citizenship would be approved and questioning how he'd travel. His family members have mixed citizenship status: His mother is a naturalized U.S. citizen, his father has a green card and his fiancee is U.S. born with Syrian roots.
Atassi, who's had a green card for a decade, has watched his birthplace of Aleppo destroyed by years of war.
"The Syrian people are already victims," he said. "All these people are running from terrorism."
During the ceremony, Ellis talked about her own experiences of becoming a U.S. citizen and judge. Her family is from Jamaica and she was born in Canada. Ellis was nominated to the post in 2013 by former President Barack Obama. Her office declined to elaborate on Tuesday's ceremony, saying only that she usually asks a new American to recite the Pledge of Allegiance.
As for Atassi, his first orders of business were to register to vote and apply for a U.S. passport.
"I'm allowed to participate in a democracy. I'm excited to experience it," he said, adding that he was encouraged by the supportive atmosphere of the ceremony. "When I was leaving, a few people told me, 'Congratulations, welcome home.'"
Follow Sophia Tareen on Twitter at https://twitter.com/sophiatareen .

Submit your FML story
- - Please note that spam and nonsensical stories will result in you being blocked from accessing FML.
This member hasn't filled in the description.
How depressing, no badges acquired at all. :/
Today, I wore my kilt to the university I attend. Getting tired of the stares which I was receiving, I yelled "It's cause its too big to fit in my pants". As soon as the words left my mouth, a gust of wind came and blew my kilt up around my waist, revealing that my previous claim was untrue. FML
Today, as I was walking home, a friend passed me by on his moped, and sprayed a bunch of silly string at me. Unfortunately, he hit me in the eye, temporarily blinding me. As I stumbled around blind, I accidentally knocked a bunch of 3 year olds off their bikes, causing them to cry. FML
Today, it was my friend's paintball party and we were doing it in a forest nearby. When I arrived at his house, his parents said they already started, so I geared up and went out there to find that there was a note on a tree. It said 'Sorry', and then twenty people jumped from bushes and ambushed me. FML
Today, I was at a baseball game. I was eating my nachos when all of the sudden I woke up in the hospital, with my dad sitting next to the bed. Apparently, I was hit with a foul ball. He kept the ball for himself. FML
Today, I went back home. My drunk mother was screaming at my drunk step-dad about a fight that happened four years ago. My little sister was looking in the mirror practicing her "orgasm face" while the neighbors were dancing outside, coked out and naked. FML
Today, I was driving through a neighborhood and saw a "slow down, children" sign. I was nice and slowed down as I passed a couple little kids with their parents outside watching them. I guess I was going too slow because one of the fathers started chasing me down the street calling me a pedophile. FML
Today, I heard my dad screaming in the hallway. Thinking he was having a heart attack I ran to the hall without looking where I was going. I slipped and slid towards my dad in what turned out to be a mass quantity of diarrhea from one of my two dogs. He was screaming because he stepped in it. FML
Today, I went on a blind date. We had agreed on meeting in front of a park. Thinking I was there first, I texted her "I'm already there, sitting next to the fat chick." I heard a beep. SHE was the "fat chick." FML
Friday 24 October 2014

I would put Howard's ability to pass out out of a double team on the same level as Reggie's ability to pass when he unguarded
He played great in Orlando because the team moved the ball around more, he got his touches, he got way more open looks because they move the ball and because Howard demands doubles, and knows how to pass out, where Bosh could not pass and held the ball too long for Turk to get involved. That said Turk is also a lazy fat slow prick who in Orlando got shit nightly from Van Gundy even when he was playing well, and then Triano treats him like a baby. Turk is the kind of player that needs open looks, a team that passes the ball and a coach that busts his balls all the time.
Um, Turk many times had the ball. He spread the floor and was crucial in Orlando's run to the finals. He was clutch and rebounded quite well. Was even pretty decent passer. Plus, he didn't get "pass-outs" from Howard. He created his own shot many times, as he was usually the clutch shooter. Plus he went on many runs where he's either pump-fake and shoot or post up. He was GREAT. And I mean GREAT in 08. And no one can deny that. If he could reproduce his form in 08 vs Bosh last year. I would take Hedo. But now we all know how things ended up, for both actually. HAHA

After Kenny died, a dark cloud came over me that eventually appeared to snuff out any light. Hope seemed dead and my faith in God was crumbling into ruins day by day. There was two factors that added to this darkness. One was another baby who had become critically ill but then became well again. That is a good thing but for me, hearing people praise God for answering the prayers made on behalf of this baby only made me wonder all the more why God didn’t answer the prayers for Kenny. The other factor was that a little over a year after Kenny’s death, my younger brother John also died. He left behind a wife and two children. It was just too much and yet, little did I know but an encounter with God was just around the corner.
This is the third part of the story: of how I discovered God again in a new way that brought a renewed faith and hope. It is part of what makes me so passionate about the gospel of Jesus Christ and the hope it offers to a broken and hurting world.
I wish the process of healing was as linear as I am going to make it appear to be. But that is just not how healing and renewed faith are discovered. It tends to be a messy process that take different routes for every person.
For me, the road to healing begins with a wonderful community. From the outset Laura and I were surrounded by a very supportive family as well as friends from Harding University, Covenant Fellowship Church, and our Wednesday Evening Bible Study group. I don’t know how many of those people had ever ministered to a people who had lost a child, but they were very caring and supportive in the way they treated us, listened to us, ministered to us, and so on.
I also had begun seminary at Harding School of Theology (HST). In hind-site, I would not recommend beginning seminary right after losing a child but the community at HST also was helpful. Over the year, as my faith continued to crumble, a couple of great things happened that kept steering me towards an encounter with God.
First, my wife and I did go through some grief counseling that was provided to us free of charge which did help my wife and I to practically help each other to grieve in more healthy ways. Second, a friend of mine gave me a pocket knife that he had sharpened along with a story about the knife. The story basically explained that he had bought the knife to pray for someone as he sharpened it and then God revealed to him that he was to be praying for me. In some way, this all kept God in the picture even though God was becoming very fuzzy and frustrating.
One day I was sitting in chapel at HST and was just near the breaking point. My brother had recently died and I was just tired. On that particular day I heard the hymn Be Still, My Soul (see below) for the first time. The song, which now is a favorite, eloquently expressed both the grief and pain I was reeling in as well as the hope I wanted so badly.
But hope seemed so illusive…perhaps impossible at that point. I was tired. I felt like a man lost in a dark cave with nothing but blackness. I was just tired of walking in what seemed to be an endless journey of nothing but more darkness.
All I wanted to know was “Why?” Why did my son die? Why did God seemingly not answer the prayers? Was he unable to or did he just not care too? Did God even hear those prayers? While Be Still, My Soul spoke of the hope I wanted to have, I was not even sure if there was a reason to hope in God.
As I said, I was tired and was ready to give up. I had planned to quit seminary and even had been offered a job selling Honda cars. But then I met John Mark Hicks, who would become both a friend and a Professor of mine. He was speaking at HST on his own spiritual journey which included the death of his first wife and his son, Joshua, later on in life. Despite his suffering, he spoke of a deep faith in God. So I went up to him and asked him something about how he was able to trust in God.
What John Mark Hicks pointed me to was Romans 8:28 which says, “And we know that in all things God works for the good of those who love him, who have been called according to his purpose.” At first, I was sort of disappointed because far too many people had used this verse just to dismiss my grief and struggle without even taking the time to understand. But I gave him the benefit of the doubt since he understood what I was going through. John Mark Hicks told me to go home and read, to learn what that “good” is about. So that night after Laura went to bed, I pulled out my Bible and began reading through Romans, reading again through Romans, and reading, and…
At some point God spoke. Not in audible words but nevertheless I heard God speak and he said, “Rex, my good is your redemption and if you’ll trust me, I will see that good to the end even if you don’t understand how I work that all out.” And just like that the light began to break through the darkness, hope began to emerge. It was like a thousand pounds being lifted from my shoulders. I no longer needed to understand or have an answer to the question of “why?” to all my questions and yet, I found myself able to trust God again.
Ten years later I am a person full of hope. I believe God is redeeming the world in Jesus Christ, making all things new (cf. Rev 21:5) and that includes us…you…me. I don’t understand everything about how that is happening and there are things about God which are remain mystery. I’m ok with that. I wish Kenny was still alive and would give almost anything to hold him just one more time. I cannot contemplate the thought of embracing Kenny in the new heaven and new earth without some tears of joy. Further more, as terrible as it has been to lose a son, God has used this journey to give me a faith and hope that I did not have before. For that, I am thankful.
Thank you for reading this story, a story about Kenny and I. But most importantly, a story about God.
The following video is of the choral group Libera singing the hymn Be Still, My Soul set to a video with images of the Holocaust.
See also part 1 and 2 of this “Remembering Kenny” trilogy:

From: Houston TX
In answer to Ike's question,
What I found was very interesting, and far different than what I had expected or been taught in school up to that point.
One must remember it was a very different time. WWI was less than a generation old, where mass Gas atacks, by BOTH sides was accepted. the targeting of non-combatants in WWII was an accepted practice by both sides also, but at least both refrained from mass gas-bombing attacks on cities that could have caused terrible loss. You cannot look at it from 2008 standards, but rather the way the world was then. In the 1940's, that was how wars were fought, as terrible as it was.
As for the Atomic bombs, there is no debate that using them to force Japan's surrender cost less lives than an invasion would have. Far less. However, personally, I do not think that is the main reason they were used. First and formast, the US leadership wanted the war over quickly. The is a large amount of evidence that at big part of the reason the bombs were dropped was to have Japan surrender before Russia could make huge gains in the area, and to show them the new weapon the US had available. Had the allies been willing to maintain a blockade, Japan woud have probably surrended in 6 months without an invasion. They had already made repeated attempts to try to get Russia to broker a peace. Had the bombing continued, Tojo and the die-hards would have had a harder and harder time holding power. However, there was no way the US joint chiefs were going to go that way.
This being said, I go back to the point that 6 more months of bombing would have cost more lives in Japan than the atomic bombs did, plus the additional US losses. Not to mention the men that would have been lost in the continuing land war in China and against the Russians that had now invaded. Were they "needed" to prevent an invasion. In my opinion clearly no; but even given as terrible, horrific, or any other term you want to use, and use with justification, they were probably the least destructive alternative.

Charter Communications Rude Technical Department, Rude Supervisors, Uneducated Electricians, Account Frauds Hohenwald Tennessee
Living in a small town does not offer many service providers for phone, internet, and cable. So, I was happy to think that I could go through Charter Communications and bundle 3 bills together for just $62.00 a month. I called to get my service connected in September of 2008. I was first told by the costumer service rep. that I was speaking to that I needed $70.00 on hand to pay the tech. worker after he completed my service. So, the appointment day came around, I had the money ready, I even went as far to have a friend pick my kids' up from school for me so I wouldn't miss my appointment with Charter. The tech guy comes out and surveys my line and says that he can't hook it up because the tree limbs are growing over the wires and he's not in his work truck. So, he calls his local office to reschedule the appointment. I call my husband home from work early to trim the tree. Charter calls me back to confirm my next scheduled appointment and says to have my fee of $30.00 ready. I told them that I was told by the first representative that it was $70.00, they said that it was incorrect, but they would put it down in the computer and I wouldn't have a first month's bill. Well, my next appointment day came around and again, I had to make arrangements so I could make sure all four of my kids' would be picked up from school. The tech hooked up everything, but it wasn't working correctly. So, I call the costumer service line and they asked if it was the same guy that came out the first time. I said, No. So, they arranged yet another appointment and it was the guy that was first there. He said he had to call another tech with the Charter work truck because the last guy had ran the cable wrong and cross-wired. They had to proceed to call my electric company to come out to my house and fix the problem. The tech. said that he would have to call his supervisor to schedule another appointment for me so I could get my phone service hooked up next. Well, here we go for another appointment. I call the costumer service hotline to confirm that I wanted to keep the same telephone number. I make arrangements for the next appointment. And it's the same tech that came the first and third time. He's at my house for 3 hours trying to figure out why my phone service isn't working. He calls his supervisor and they check their records and Charter said that I had called and canceled my phone service. Which I DID NOT. So, they did a new work order over the phone and I had to call the costumer service line to verify that it's me and ended up having to get another number. So, after all that, everything was working and things went smoothly. For a while. I go online to register an online account and I noticed that I have my first bill in on the time that they said I would. Since I already had paid over the amount, my bill was only $14.00 for maintenance fees of the equipment. But, around November of 2008, I started noticing problems with my internet. I called to schedule for yet another tech to come out and check out the problem. The tech comes and everything was working fine until a week later, Charter trucks are coming around my neighborhood asking everybody questions and checking their lines. Come to find out, somebody in my neighborhood was stealing service, but when the techs came around to check my line, that wasn't the only problem, the last guy that came out to my house to fix my problem had actually created a problem. So, I spoke with the workers and they said that since I've had 4 different workers come out to my house and they created so many problems since my service had been connected that they will waiver any fees towards an upcoming bill. So, imagine my surprise when I get a bill in December of 2008 stating that I owe $265.00 and that my service is getting disconnected. Well, my husband is a landscaper and he wasn't working at the time. We were living off of our savings. So, I called the costumer service line to ask them what's going on. They said that I did owe and that I could make a payment to at least keep my phone service. So, I made a payment of $63.00 online. Then, I made another payment of $65.00 online. I called them and asked them if they had waivered my bill like I was told that they would, the rep that I was talking to at the time said that he will talk to my local office. So, I called back and they said that I would have to make another payment of $40.00 and then pay $29.99 to have my service cut back on. So, I payed $89.00 over the phone and the rep. said that the rest was waivered for my troubles and that there are no more over due fees. Which there shouldn't have been in the first place. Well, two weeks ago, I get a bill in the mail for $191.00. I call and can't get an answer out of anybody, so I talk to a supervisor, they say that there isn't a payment of $63.00 on the date that I said. And I proceed to tell them that I'm looking at my bank statement right now and it shows Charter Communications. Well, I try to explain that even if there is a missing payment, there still should not be a problem with overdue fees because my bill has been waived. Apparently, they don't understand what I was talking about because they never addressed the issue. So, they give me their fax number and tell me to fax my bank statements with the payments highlighted and we'll go from there and that my service will stay connected until proven otherwise. Friday, I get another bill in from them saying that I am $365.00 behind. I called last night and the rep. that I spoke to still would not address the fact that even though there is a missing payment, my future bills should be waivered because Charter Communications techs had messed up my lines. As I was told, I would not have to pay a bill until THIS month, because of all the technical problems. I did not cause them, the techs did and I was told that since my payment is missing, I'm going to have to pay more to keep my service on. And this is not the first time that Charter Communications has done this to us. But, like I said, I live in a very small town, we don't have much to choose from. And I am all for pushing Charter out of business!
Click here to read other Rip Off Reports on Charter Communications

Before and After Photos
The faces of Happy MySmile clients are hidden for privacy purposes. Each of these clients are whitening for the first time, and the results shown are based off one visit. The results that you see are real life clients and these photos are in no ways manipulated or altered. Time duration ranges from 20-40-or 60 mins.
It was only 3 weeks before our wedding I was worried about my teeth clashing with my all white dress… I tried a few things I bought off the shelf and wasn’t seeing any difference. I was venting to a friend of mine at work and she said to go to Galleria to have my teeth whitening at the MySmile Center. I called the same day and was able to be scheduled for later that week. I was so impressed by the change I got from the premium that bought a gift card for my fiancé. We both agreed that it was the best “last minute” item of the wedding plans and it didn’t break the bank… thanks our photos turned our great;)
I couldn’t think of what to get my beautiful wife of 12 years for Mothers Day I was walking through the Galleria and heard the woman next to me light up and say oh look.. I really want to get my teeth whitened. I had recalled a few specific comments made from my wife regarding her teeth over the years, so I just walked in and purchased a 40 minute whitening certificate. She was very excited about her gift and completed her whitening on her off day, she got very good results and she was elated….
My daughter just had her braces removed, and whitening was going to cost an additional $650 at the dental office. I had to turn down the service due to the cost being out of the question. She recommended that I schedule at MySmile, because she heard the system is effective and very affordable. I did, and my daughter did the one hour process as we watched TV. She was delighted and her smile is just stunning. A happy mommy and daughter. THANK YOU!
Had an interview sequence coming up and wanted to stand out of the group and get noticed. I was referred to MySmile by my brother who used them at the time of his graduation, I didn’t really think my teeth were that stained until after it was over and I saw my teeth. They were definitely much whiter and I couldn’t believe the difference in how I felt and looked. It really does make a huge difference when your get several people who compliment your smile. I was really happy and comfortable, found out a week later that I got the job… tyMySmile Torrie
My husband was coming home from being in Iraq, I wanted to surprise him and set a day just for him. I had several things lined up and the first thing I wanted was for his to get his hair cut, teeth whitened, and massage. He came home and he loved his teeth. He said thanks many times and has been smiling.

> > You didn't mention it, so how could I take offense?
> The "fresh take" comment could have been mistaken by some as meaning that it was a silly view. After posting in forums for some time, I've learned to make things as clear as I can as to avoid misunderstandings. Sarcasm and such are hard to properly display with text, isn't it?
> > They didn't tear each other to bits, but did tear the planet to bits, so it couldn't be what you just wrote -- "a cut on them" couldn't equal "a huge gash in Metropia." They didn't explode, after all, only the planet did.
> I didn't quite see it as the planet representing them completely, so that the planet's death would only be achieved by either one of them dying. Just enough connection that would mean that sufficient injury would result in planetary destruction.
Neither of them suffered "sufficient injury," though. They didn't even knock each other out. The only thing messed up was the planet. Like I said in my edited response above, Azz's Superman stated that he could tear apart a planet (Earth -- a claim that the Elementals accepted); by way of Superman's fight with Zod, Azz showed that Superman could, indeed, do just that, imo.
> > Hits on each other = hits on the planet, as (Superman explained) they were connected to it, but their bodies endured what the planet could not ... the power they with which they assailed each other.
> I didn't quite interpret it this way myself, but it's a good possibility as well. I never took it as the planet somehow taking the same level of force that the two were dishing out to each other.
It's possible that the "connection" was purely metaphorical ... which would mean that it was mere collateral damage that destroyed the planet, rather than transferred hits, I suppose. That would be an even greater feat of power (and akin to what happened during the Superman/E2 Superman fight, though not on the same level of magnitude, obviously). But I don't think that connection was purely symbolic.
It's also possible that it had nothing to do with power output, I guess ... and was just some sort of metaphysical thing. But that's a little too poetic for my tastes.
> Neither of them suffered "sufficient injury," though.
That's the thing; there's no telling how much injury was needed. Neither of them were knocked out, but they were both pretty much bloodied and bruised, which could have possibly been enough. I'm not arguing that this is the definitive reason, but it's one of the several that passed to mind.
> It's possible that the "connection" was purely metaphorical ... which would mean that it was mere collateral
damage that destroyed the planet, rather than transferred hits, I suppose.
This was pretty much my second interpretation, only coveref with more symbolism from Azzarello. With the abundance of symbollic uses in the story, I wouldn't be surprised if this was what was intended. Pity there's no easy way to tell aside from asking the writer himself.

Monday, 23 December 2013
Every now and again you meet one of those people who touches something inside of you; a person who has the capability to inspire you and who does something that lives on for a long time in your memory. Let me tell you a little about Louise Miller for she is one who I will walk with forever.
When I first went "long", beyond the standard distance of an Ironman and into the uncharted regions of the Double Ironman, I had asked people to lend me their support. "Text me whenever you can", I implored anyone who would listen, rather pitifully. "Help me get through the night. Your texts mean a lot to me." I really did mean it and I expected to feel pretty lonely and pretty scared as I knew that I would be cycling well into the small hours and into the following morning on the 224 mile ride.
Sure enough people responded and sent text after text. As I cycled around I could hear my phone "pinging" in my jacket pocket. Between about 10pm and Midnight the messages reached a crescendo as people got ready for bed or crashed in from the pub. The majority of messages ran something like "Rather you than me" and I could see why they may think that a warm bed was preferable to endless miles on a bike at night. But as the night settled into silence I began to appreciate the uniqueness of my position. The dark, and quiet whirring of the chain became a calming mantra as my thoughts drifted from one island of topic to another. Then at about 3.00 am my phone pinged. I was intrigued and in the enshrouding darkness I stopped my bike, fished my phone out and read the message. It was from Louise Miller.
I had employed Louise as PR Officer for the hospice that I worked at. She was totally unqualified for the job, but every facet of her nature made it impossible not view her as a worthy addition to any place - work or social. But, as I was on the phone to her making a verbal job offer I noticed that she had filled in the section that asked how much time she had off through illness with the cryptic comment "nothing apart from the obvious". When I asked her about this she told me that she had been a cancer patient and had actually used some of the very hospice services that she would now be promoting. "It's okay," she said "I feel great and the cancer has gone".
For the next two years she was an integral part of the team. She just got on with people and drew them close to our work. She had a serenity and poise about her that meant she rose above any standard office politics. One of those special people. Very special. I only saw her knocked off balance the one time. It was a Monday morning and she knocked on my office door and sat down breathless. She was ashen faced and had aged overnight. "I have lumps in my neck, Paul. Can I take some time off to see my specialist?" Typical Louise. Even in a situation that threatened her mortality she wanted to check I was okay with her taking time off.
The next three years were hard for her. The cancer never abated and she never gave up. Cancer can rarely have had to deal with such resilience, such humour and such acceptance. She put all of our problems into perspective. In her department she was the person who never moaned, never let the job get on top of her. During the course of an ill-judged merger that created massive stress, she rose above all the petty politics and made us all look hard at our actions. Cancer was an inconvenience that needed to be patronised, but wasn't going to hamper Louise's life. Even when it had spread to her bones and then into her brain she continued to come into work and behave normally whilst acknowledging that she had to undergo treatment and wouldn't "for the time being" be on top form. Louise never wanted to let on what this insidious disease was doing to her.
And so at 3 o'clock in the morning I read her message. This is what it said:
"Paul, I so admire what you do. You are mad and an inspiration. Try not to stop. Sometimes I get really frightened. It all seems so hard. Keep going."
It was the only time she ever acknowledged any fear or doubt. I still had another 70 miles to cycle, and then a 52 mile run to complete the event. I had been going for 18 hours and had another 15 hours of exercise ahead of me. But I knew, once I had read that text, that nothing was going to make me stop. What a piffling challenge I had to face compared to my lovely friend and colleague, Louise.
Louise died on the 8th December 2013. She died at home surrounded by her family.

'Heavy': Kiese Laymon's Memoir Examines How People Absorb Trauma
SCOTT SIMON, HOST:
Kiese Laymon has written a memoir that can scald your heart - a gifted son with a loving, accomplished mother who inspires and drives him and yet abused and burdened him. His book shows the way people can absorb trauma layer by layer with particular attention to the history of African-Americans. His new book "Heavy: An American Memoir." And Kiese Laymon, who wrote the award-winning novel "Long Division" and is a contributing editor of Oxford American and a professor of English and creative writing at the University of Mississippi, joins us now from Oxford, Miss. Thanks so much for being with us.
KIESE LAYMON: Thank you so much for wanting to talk to me.
SIMON: When someone says to you, tell me about your mother, it's not a simple question, is it?
LAYMON: Oh, not at all, man, not at all. I look forward to it, though. My mother's an incredible model. And like most Americans, she just had a rough patch, and she was not comfortable talking about a lot of those rough patches. She had me when she was a sophomore at Jackson State University, and she got a job teaching at Jackson State maybe four or five years later after she started graduate school, so we moved to Jackson probably in 1979, 1980. And Jackson was home, and books were really home for me. She just made me read and write before I could do anything I wanted to my entire life. I thank her for my writerly practice that I still have now, but that writerly practice also enabled me to write into a lot of the gaps and a lot of the terror that I think she probably did not want me to write into.
SIMON: Well - and we do have to get to that, don't we?
LAYMON: I think so.
SIMON: To the outside world, your mother, a progressive voice, but what was going on inside the family?
LAYMON: My mother was dealing with a lot of what black women were dealing with in Jackson, Miss. So from the outside, it looked like she was doing really well. She was on television - local television - doing political prognostication. She was in an abusive relationship. She did not make much money. She was dealing with what I would call, like, the shards of abuse. And, you know, when I was around 9 or 10, she started to whip me when I didn't do right. And she would always say she was whipping me because what I would face from police or white people would be even harsher.
And those beatings just I think started to get progressively worse, and I think that the beatings my mother was taking from life, from our town, from her partner, also started to get progressively worse. And I think the scariest part about it looking back is that we just didn't know how to talk about any of it. We didn't know how to talk about what we were doing to one another, and we didn't really know how to talk about what the world and our state was doing to us.
SIMON: As the very title suggests, that the cost of trauma, including, for example, the beatings you endured from your mother, the beatings that she endured, all of that takes a toll on our bodies. What happened to you?
LAYMON: One of the things I just want to say - I'm not trying to make a causal relationship saying that because of this traumatic thing caused this traumatic thing. But I will say the layers of particular kinds of abuse, be they personal and structural, I think led to me eating way more than I should have. I was a very, very big kid. Luckily, I was a big, athletic kid, so I didn't have to deal with a lot of the bullying that a lot of other big kids had to deal with. And I definitely didn't have to deal with the bullying that a lot of really big women had to deal with. But I just ate. I ate. I ate as a way of hiding. And then eventually, I started to starve as a way of attempting to hide and attempting to disappear.
SIMON: Yeah. In the book, you kind of veer between what sounds to me like obesity and anorexia. I mean, you were running, like, six hours a day or something, right?
LAYMON: The running was terrible. I'd run two hours in the morning, two hours at night, and I'd play a lot of basketball in a day. And I think that could have been sustainable, but the problem was I was only eating a meal once every three days. And there's a sort of strange euphoria that comes with a lot of times that starvation, and I just kept thinking, like, if I can just push my body and push my body and push my body, I could disappear. And at that point, you know, I'd had lots of run-ins with police. I was about to get kicked out of college. So I wanted to disappear, and I thought if I could just make my body smaller, like, I would be OK. Like, people wouldn't see me as such a threat. And I kept that up for, like, 13 years 'til my body broke.
SIMON: Yeah. Then we got to get to gambling. How did that enter your life?
LAYMON: Oh, man. By the time my body broke - my body literally broke from overuse. It broke from not sleeping. It broke from not eating. The only thing I turned to that brought me some sort of feeling was gambling. And so every cent that I made from a particular date until another date, probably for, like, 6 years, went to casinos. And it was hard to write about that. It was harder to write about that than it was to write about different forms of abuse that I talked about in that book.
SIMON: Because you were implicated in this in a way. You're the victim in one, and you're the, in a sense, the perpetrator in the gambling.
LAYMON: Well, I'm definitely the perpetrator, but in my family, you know, I think because I am from Mississippi and so much of Mississippi black labor has been taken from us, I think there's a shame when we show people and tell people that the money that we are able to make we aren't able to keep - right? - and especially if it's tied to a kind of, like, mental illness. So I started to understand halfway through my gambling addiction that I wasn't going to the casino to win, though I told myself that's exactly what I was going to do. I was going to creatively lose as much as possible. I wanted to drive back home that two hours feeling absolutely like trash.
And I just think that's something that I never really understood my mother or anybody else in my family experiencing, but I know they were. And that's actually still the hardest thing to talk about with my family. We can talk about the physical addiction. We can talk about - we can talk about the physical abuse. The addiction to gambling on both of my family is something that we still can't really honestly talk about.
SIMON: I don't want to give away how your story seems to resolve itself toward the end, but I think a lot of people would ask you why do you even talk to your mother now? Why do you care what she thinks?
LAYMON: Oh, my God. I love my mother to death, and I'm a writer and I'm a black, American writer, and I would not be a writer, a reader or teacher had my mother not loved me enough to instill a practice at an early age. And this book, in some way, is like her investment coming full circle. She really believes that reading and writing can save us. And I don't know if that's true, but I know I'm a writer. I know I'm an American reader, and I wanted to use my words to try to talk to her and try to tell her that we can be better. We can be better if we give ourselves a chance to walk honestly together. And that's what I tried to do with this book.
SIMON: Kiese Laymon - his book, "Heavy: An American Memoir" - thanks so much for being with us.
LAYMON: Thank you so much for having me. Transcript provided by NPR, Copyright NPR.

Scheduled maintenance: Saturday, March 6 from 3–4 PM PST
Upgrade to remove ads
Born a Crime
Terms in this set (73)
What role did church play in Trevor's upbringing?
Mother was a super Christian. They went to 3 churches each Sunday- mixed church, white church and black church.
What is Trevor's mother like, based on his descriptions?
Stubborn, Christian, determined and fierce. She is not afraid of the war going on outside her home and insists in going about her normal business, despite the danger.
How did Trevor end up being thrown from the mini-bus?
He, his mother and his baby brother hitchhiked home from church. The driver of the car that they were in was harassed by the mini bus driver, so they accepted a ride with the mini bus driver. The mini bus driver harassed Trevor's mother and threatened to harm her, so his mother pushed him out of the bus and jumped out herself, while shielding his baby brother.
According to Noah, how did apartheid come about?
When the British Empire fell, the Afrikaner came back to claim South Africa as their rightful inheritance. They went around the world to study institutionalized racism all over the world and they came up with the most advanced system of racial oppression known to man.
How did Trevor's mother, Patricia, find a place to live in Johannesburg?
She met fellow Xhosa women who taught her how to get around; she dressed in maid's overalls and rented a flat from a Swiss/German expat named Robert.
What was life like for Trevor as a child in Johannesburg and in Soweto?
His existence was illegal. Whenever he spent time with his father, he had to hide. In Johannesburg, when he went walking with his parents, his mother and father had to walk on opposite sides of the street. In Soweto, his grandmother kept him indoors for the fear that he would be taken away or she would be turned in.
Explain Trevor's experience growing up "in a world run by women."
He could only see his father when apartheid allowed it. The only other man in his life was his grandfather, who was divorced from his grandmother and rarely came around. The other neighborhood children were being raised by the women, too, because their fathers had been sent to prison, or were off working in a mine, or in exile, fighting the cause.
He calls it a "prison designed by our oppressors." It had an aspirational quality and a dream to "transform the ghetto." There were no paved roads, minimal electricity, and inadequate sewerage. There was a black market economy and informal grocery stores, where people would buy wholesale, sell piecemeal.
What happened when Trevor decided to use the bathroom on the floor in his house
instead of using the public outhouse?
His great grandmother Koko hears him doing it, but he does not answer her. She thinks that the house has been invaded by something evil and calls in the all of the praying ladies of the neighborhood to pray for the house and pray away the demon. Trevor prays also, and he feels guilty for what he's done.
After he injured his cousin, Bulelwa's ear, why did Bulelwa and the other cousins get punished, while Trevor did not?
His grandmother said she could not hit a white child; she was afraid of the colors (bruising) that happened when he was hit.
What are some other perks that Trevor experienced for being "white"?
He was given a warning while his black cousins were punished. People on the street would call him "the white man" and run away. At a funeral, he was chosen to eat indoors because only the family and white folks were allowed to eat indoors.
Describe Trevor's experience at the Maryvale College School and at then at the H.A.
Jack Primary School. How were these experiences different?
At Maryvale, there was no racial separation. The cliques were racially mixed. He felt that this school was great, but it sheltered him from reality. At H.A. Jack, he tested into the A (smart) classes and he was with mostly white students. At recess, he realized that the school was mostly black students, but these students were in the B classes. He liked the black kids more, so he decided to drop down to the B classes to be with kids he liked. H.A. Jack showed him how the real world was and how people divided themselves by race.
Describe Patricia's upbringing.
She was a tomboy and stubborn. She was the middle child and wanted to live with her father, but her father did not want her, so she was sent away to live with her aunt, in a hut with 14 cousins. She worked the farm and often had little to eat. But, she went to a mission school and learned English. She got a job as a seamstress and then as a secretary and she moved back in with her mother when her aunt fell ill. However, all of her income went to her mother.
How did Trevor's life change when he and his mother moved to Eden Park?
They moved into a house and he had his own room and they got a car.
What kinds of things does Patricia do to fulfill her desire: "I'm going to give you
everything I never had?"
She takes him out exploring, in places black people would never go. He is told that many of the experiences he had were for whites only- the movie theater, the ice skating rink. She tells him she will: "feed your body, feed your spirit, feed your mind." She bought Trevor books. She raised him with no limitations on where he could go or what he could do.
Trevor describes himself as a "hyperactive" kid. Explain some things that he does live
up to this description.
As a toddler, he would run into the road if someone was not holding his hand. He would leave babysitters in tears. His mom would run him in a park with a Frisbee and a ball to wear him out. He was naughty at school; he emptied the fire extinguisher into the school piano and took all the magnifying glasses out of the overhead projectors. He created his own fireworks. He burned down his mom's boyfriend's house.
Trevor describes his relationship with his mom "like the relationship between a cop and a
criminal in the movies." Describe what he means.
They were bitter rivals who respected each other's abilities. He gives an example of wanting a toffee apple & how he thinks he tricks his mom into buying it for him, and then she tricks him into not getting it. He references the letters they write each other back and forth. This was his mom's idea so that she did not have to debate him.
Describe the incident with the Catholic Eucharist.
He was not allowed to have the Eucharist (grape juice and crackers) at mass because he was not Catholic. One day, he snuck in and ate the entire bag of crackers and drank the entire bottle of juice. He didn't view it as breaking the rules because the rules didn't make any sense.
What happened to Trevor's 2 black cats and why?
They came home one day to find the cats strung up by their tails, gutted and skinned. People believed that having black cats meant you were a witch.
Describe the story of Fufi escaping.
Fufi was Trevor's dog and she was deaf. She would escape out of the fence in their yard. One day, Trevor followed her and realized that she went into another person's yard. When he asked the family for his dog back, they claimed it was their dog. Finally, his mom paid the family 100 rand for the dog.
What were some experiences Trevor have with his dad when he was a young boy?
He visited him every Sunday afternoon. They watched Formula 1 racing. He celebrated his birthday and Christmas with his dad every year. He'd cook his favorite meal, Rosti.
How did Trevor contact his dad later in life?
He wrote to the Swiss Embassy and they delivered a letter to his dad.
What was it like for Trevor to see his dad later in life?
They picked up where they left off. His dad showed him that he had a photo album and it was a scrapbook of everything Trevor had done. He'd been following him from a distance.
Why does Trevor say "I was the anomaly wherever we lived?" Explain what he means.
When he lived in a white area, no one looked like him. When he lived in a colored area, he felt like he could not have been more different from his neighbors. He was colored by complexion but not by color.
Describe the mulberry tree story.
When Trevor was eating berries from a mulberry bush, he was beat up by some kids who made fun him. He decided to tell his mom's boyfriend, Abel, about what happened and Abel went out, found the kids and beat them up. Trevor realized he had gone too far by telling Abel (who was a drunk and abusive), and he realized how much he and the boy had in common.
Tell the story of what happened with Maylene and Valentine's Day. What did Trevor
learn though this experience?
Trevor was friends with Maylene, a girl who looked "colored" like him. His friends convinced him that he should ask Maylene to be his girlfriend for Valentine's Day. He did, and she said yes. He was so excited because he had never had a girlfriend before. He made her a Valentine's gift and when he gave it to her, she told him that she could not be his girlfriend anymore because Lorenzo (a much more popular boy) had asked her to be his Valentine. Trevor accepted that this was just the way it was. Girls would always pick more popular and attractive boys.
What was Trevor's new school, Sandringham, like?
It was a model C school and not a government school. It was a mix of a government and private school, kind of like charter schools in America. It had thousands of kids, sports fields and a swimming pool.
How did Trevor find his niche at Sandringham?
He started a little business getting food for people from the Tuck shop because he was the fastest kid and could run there before anyone else could. He also realized that he was a funny kid, and with humor he could be a part of any group that was laughing.
What happened with Trevor's crush on Zaheera? What did he learn through this
He had a crush on her and had a goal of taking her to the matric dance, which was like his senior prom. He was trying to play the "long game" since he did not have much confidence in getting a girl. He became good friends with her, got her phone number and talked on the phone with her. He felt his plan was working, but then one day he found out that Zaheera had moved to America and she had had a crush on him the whole time. He realized that he could have asked her to be his girlfriend, and it might have changed his life.
Who is Teddy and how does Trevor get into mischief with him? What is the outcome of
their run-in with the police?
Teddy is Trevor's friend from school. Trevor became "thick as thieves" with Teddy. Teddy's mom worked as a domestic. As friends, they did a lot of walking around Johannesburg together. They would wander around the mall. At the mall, they realized they could steal chocolates filled with alcohol from the stationary shop. One night, they were caught stealing and they ran from a cop. On the chase, they turned in different directions and Teddy was caught but Trevor was not; Teddy was arrested. Everyone tried to figure out who was with Teddy during the shoplifting incident, but no one concluded that it was Trevor. (He lied about the incident.) At school, administrators brought Trevor to the office to show him video footage of the incident, but since the footage made it look like a white kid was with Teddy, Trevor got away with shoplifting without being punished.
What did Tom promise Trevor?
He promised that if Trevor gave him a better cut on the cd's he was selling, he could get him a date to the dance with the most beautiful girl ever.
What happened when Trevor took Babiki to the school dance? What did he learn from
To go to the dance, his mom gave him money to buy new clothes, and he had his hair done. He convinced his stepfather, Abel, to loan him a fancy car (but that fell through). On the way to the dance, he was very late to pick up Babiki and she was angry. At the dance, she refused to get out of the car, so he did not get to go to the dance. Trevor realized that Babiki did not speak English. (But she did end up giving him a kiss at the end of the night.)
Why does Trevor say that having money was the most liberating feeling in the world?
What does he mean?
He found that money gave him choices and that the richer you are, the more choices you have. He found that money gives you that kind of freedom.
How does Trevor become a dj?
He was making mix cd's with a cd writer gifted to him from his friend Bolo. His friend Bongani convinced him that no one had seen a dj playing on a computer before. So, they started dj'ing gigs in the neighborhood, and then they added their friend Hitler as a dancer.
What happened when Trevor was asked to dj at a cultural program at the King David
They were playing and dancing and telling the kids and teachers to chant "Go Hitler" to support their friend Hitler, who was dancing. A teacher ran up and pulled the plug on their performance. The teacher yelled at him and he yelled back at her (because he did not understand why she was so upset) and so his group danced and fist-pumped with pride out of the school.
Describe Alex. Why does Trevor call it "the hood?"
The bus station is a bustling, chaotic, 3rd world marketplace. It's constant activity, and lots of people hustling. Trash is everywhere. Most people in Alex were poor, and were trying to make a living. He said "You see everything happening in the streets."
What does it mean to be a "cheese boy?"
The ultimate upgrade for Trevor and his friends was to throw a slice of cheese on what you were eating. Being a "cheese boy" meant you had a little money and you were living the good life.
What are the different "degrees of crime" that Trevor describes?
Crime ranges from a mom buying food off of the back of a truck to feed her family, all the way to gangs selling military weapons. You can be barely involved in crime and not even know, or fully, knowingly participate in it.
What type of business does Trevor run in the hood?
He starts out selling pirated cds. He and Bongani start letting the minibus drivers buy cds on credit and they collect interest. They start loaning people money and collecting interest. Then, they get involved in the haggling going on as people try to buy things. Trevor describes his business on page 213: "It turned out that we were selling cds and djing parties in order to capitalize a pay-lending and pawnshop operation in the hood."
How did Trevor lose his music?
He was djing a party when the cops came in because of a noise complaint. They told him to shut down the music and when he started shutting it down, they shot the computer monitor.
What stolen item eventually made Trevor want to stop selling stolen goods?
A digital camera with pictures of a white family's vacation.
Why was Trevor arrested?
For suspicion of grand theft auto.
What was Trevor's time in jail like?
His belt, wallet and shoelaces were taken. He tried to play up the stereotype of the colored gangster. He actually found the food to be pretty good. He made friends with a large, dark-skinned man who seemed pretty frightening at first. He learned the man's life story and felt terrible for him.
How did Trevor get out of jail?
The cop connected him with a lawyer. His mother paid the lawyer's fees and his bail. His lawyer helps get him out of jail on bail.
How did Patricia's relationship with Abel begin?
Down the street from Trevor's dads' house was a garage called Mighty Mechanics, and his mom would always take the car there to be repaired. That's where Abel worked. He was charming and funny. He became Patricia's boyfriend and he came to live with them. Later, they got married.
What was Abel's family like? What did Patricia think of the family culture?
They lived in Tzaneen, a Tsonga homeland. Tsonga culture was extremely patriarchal. Women were required to bow to a man to greet him. His mother did not like being there and mocked the culture. After the first trip there, Patricia said she wouldn't go back.
Describe the first instance of Abel's abuse.
Abel came home drunk, and he tried to cook food, but passed out before the food was cooked. He set the house on fire. Patricia called her mom and told her "this man, he's going to kill us one day." Patricia and Abel started arguing because Abel did not want her to tell people about what happened in their house. He thought she wasn't respecting him and he hit her.
How did Trevor respond when Abel hit him for forging his mother's signature?
He found it to be the most terrifying thing. He didn't feel that anything about the "discipline" was coming out of a place of love. He escaped from the room where Abel was beating him and he ran and ran. He found a hiding place and hid there for hours. From that day on, Trevor said he lived "like a mouse in the house." He decided he would never be in the same room as Abel ever again.
Describe the incident when Abel shoots Patricia.
Patricia was coming home from church with Andrew and Isaac and her new husband and his family. They pulled into the driveway and Abel pulled up and got out of the car with a gun. He told her "you've stolen my life. You've taken everything away from me. Now, I'm going to kill all of you." Andrew stepped in front of his mother, and then Abel told him to step aside. Abel shot Patricia ***********, then the gun misfired a couple of times. She was able to get in the car, and then he shot her in the back of the head. Andrew put his mom's body in the passenger seat and drove her to the hospital.
Why did the doctor call what happened a miracle? Why does Trevor's mom believe she
The bullet that went through her head missed her spinal cord and her brain and came out her nose. Trevor's mom prayed, and that's when the gun misfired. She believed her prayer saved her.
What name has Trevor given his dog who is deaf and dumb?
When Trevor is a young child and defecates on the floor, who does he realize is in the room with him?
For what reason is Trevor urged to leave the Catholic school when he's in the sixth grade?
He consumes the Eucharistic crackers and grape juice.
In what community, designed by South African leaders only for black people to live in, does Trevor's extended family live?
Why did Trevor's date with Bibiki turn out so terribly?
Bibiki didn't speak the same languages as Trevor.
What event in Trevor's childhood most cemented his reputation as a "naughty child"?
He accidentally burned down a white family's house.
When Trevor claims that he was "born a crime," what does he mean?
He was illegally conceived by a mixed race couple.
How did Trevor, his mother, and his younger brother Andrew escape from the violent minibus driver?
They jumped out of the car and ran away.
When Trevor goes to attend school at the H.A. Jack Primary School, why did he not take the advanced track of classes?
He identifies himself as being black and does not feel comfortable in classes without black students.
How does Trevor's family respond after they find his feces in the trash?
His mother blames a demon instead of Trevor and holds an impromptu prayer meeting.
Why does Abel's auto business fail?
Abel is an alcoholic who wastes any profits by drinking.
What South African languages does Trevor speak?
Because Trevor was quicker than his mother during an argument, how did they communicate about disciplinary matters when he was a child?
They exchanged well-argued letters.
When does Trevor first begin to realize that Abel has uncontrollable violent tendencies?
When he beats up a twelve-year-old.
Who was Trevor's friend--and often accomplice in committing pranks--who took the rap for their shoplifting together in the mall?
What was the great talent of Trevor's friend Hitler?
What did Trevor's friend Andrew do for him that changed his life?
He gave Trevor a CD burner which allowed him to make money.
What was the term for young people in the Alex neighborhood (which Trevor calls the hood of Johannesburg) who were relatively well-off and could someday have the option to leave?
The Cheese Boys
What does Trevor do that gets him caught in jail for a week?
He is stopped while driving a car with the wrong license plate which is not his.
How is Trevor able to become friends with the scary Hulk who is imprisoned in the same jail cell as him?
Trevor is the only person in the cell who can speak the Hulk's Tsonga language.
What is the name of Trevor's youngest brother who is the child of Abel?
What is the 'miracle' experienced by Trevor's mother at the end of the book?
She survives a bullet wound through the back of her head and fully recovers.
What made Trevor such a successful DJ in Johannesburg?
He had a much larger store of music on his computer than other DJs.
THIS SET IS OFTEN IN FOLDERS WITH...
Born A Crime: Trevor Noah
Born a Crime Quiz!
Born A Crime
Born a Crime: Stories from a South African Childho…
YOU MIGHT ALSO LIKE...
Kaffir Boy Chapter Summaries
Kaffir Boy Chapter Summaries
History: Warriors Don't Cry Questions
Malala - Part 3
OTHER SETS BY THIS CREATOR
Distance Learning Benchmark 2
Maus I and II
Born a Crime with Spanish
Mindfulness: School-Life Balance

A photo of Larry Jr the night before his very first surgery, and a picture from pre-op clinic today. Tomorrow, he heads into his 109/10 surgeries. He is eager and ready to feel better. From NICU baby to young adult. He always amazes me. I remember having to dig so deep to have the strength to carry my baby to another surgery. Surgeries that were being done to save his life, heal him, ease his pain, improve his quality of life. I remember holding my baby and painfully handing him over to the anesthesiologists so they could carry him to the OR, when all I wanted to do was snuggle him tight and run for daylight out of the hospital and away from the surgeons and their sharp knives. Then as he aged, it was riding in the basinet. Then the hospital crib. Then the hospital bed. Standing there watching my baby disappear through the swinging doors. We began accompanying him into his surgeries until he was asleep around the age of 4. Larry Jr and I work excellently as a team. Larry jr always has had great control, doesn't freak out. Is always polite. Oh, there would be some anxiety and tears, but his coping techniques have always been phenomenal. About 2 years ago, as I was putting on the hazmat type suit that parents wear to accompany their children into the OR so they can be put to sleep, he turned to me and said... "That's okay, I can go by myself Mom." He's been going in alone ever since. Tomorrow, he heads bravely into another surgery in a hospital he's never had surgery at before, with courage and eagerness for a better quality of life. I will smile, hug, encourage him.... watch him pass through the double doors, then I will cry. Because even though he's a brave young adult, he's still my baby. I still see my baby. But I'm taking a page from his book. Like him, I'm eager and ready for him to feel better. Always our Brave Bear.
top of page
bottom of page

With all the hubub about our boys' health, we haven't posted all the pictures we'd like to share with you. So here are some of our favorites from the last couple of weeks. We hope you enjoy looking at them almost as much as we enjoyed being there to take them. The pic of above was just shot a few minutes ago.
This pic of Beowulf exploring an Amazon.com box really doesn't tell the whole story. He hung out in the box for a couple of hours before we finally had to throw it out.
This one is a couple of weeks old, taken when Arthur still had his feeding tube but was getting better. He loves to lie down in the laundry basket.

An elderly taxi driver who indecently assaulted a disabled passenger has avoided jail.
Herschel Le Geois, 71, was driving a 43-year-old woman on June 10 last year in Perth when he placed her hand over his groin on the outside of his pants.
The following day, he drove her again and fondled her breasts.
She had suffered a brain injury and some physical disability after she was hit by a car in 1998.
Le Geois was charged with two counts of indecently dealing with an incapable person and pleaded guilty to both offences in the Perth District Court.
In sentencing on Tuesday, Judge Richard Keen said Le Geois was living "in a world of fantasy" regarding women.
He noted that Le Geois divorced his wife when he was 60 and had suffered depression and alcoholism since then and had used female sex services.
The judge also noted that Le Geois had lost his taxi license, but had no prior convictions and was a low to medium risk of re-offending.
Judge Keen said the victim was unable to give her consent and Le Geois had taken advantage of her.
"Incapable people must be protected," he said.
Le Geois was sentenced to an 18-month intensive supervision order and will undergo programs of rehabilitation.

The Scot required several hours of treatment following his first-round doubles match with Australian partner John Peers on Thursday.
Murray revealed he did not prepare properly for the match, which was played in temperatures in excess of 40C, because he overslept for an hour and a half.
He said: "My alarm didn't go off so I slept in about an hour and a half later than what I should have. I was only woken up because the driver called the room to see where I was.
"That was 8.30am and we were supposed to practise at 9am, then the match was 11am. I was kind of rushing around, I didn't get time to have breakfast and all that stuff, so it wasn't an ideal start.
"I'm sure I would have been okay if I hadn't had the start to the day that I had. I know the risks you take by going out in that heat and not being fully prepared. I didn't choose to do it that way, it's just what happened."
Describing his ordeal, he said: "I started feeling bad after the match and when I got back into the changing rooms I felt light-headed.
"I just wanted to lie down and then I started to cramp in my legs, which was a bit worrying for me because I'd never had it that bad before.
"The doctors and the physios were putting ice over me, so then I was shivering for a long time. I was on the floor in the locker room. I didn't want to move.
"Finally the physio said I needed to get up and walk around, and after I got up I felt a lot better straight away.
"I still felt rough for a while, I couldn't really sit down. I was walking around the grounds for a couple of hours because every time I sat down I started getting really light-headed. But in the evening I felt a lot better and once I slept I was fine.
"It was a bit scary but I'm here today and you would never know it had happened."
Murray was far from the only player to struggle in the conditions, which were branded "inhumane" by Canada's Frank Dancevic after he blacked out on court.
The extreme heat policy, which sees matches either suspended or played under a roof, was implemented only once despite the thermometer reading 40C on four successive days.
Murray, brother of world number four Andy Murray, was reluctant to comment on the rights or wrongs of the decision-making, saying with a wry smile: "It's above my pay grade really.
"They've obviously got to decide and that day after we finished they thought it was too hot to play. I don't think too many people would have complained if they'd stopped the previous days."
Murray insisted he had recovered fully for his second-round match on Saturday, but he and Peers were beaten 6-4 6-4 by America's Eric Butorac and Raven Klaasen of South Africa.
The British-Australian pair of Murray and Peers had an excellent 2013 and went close to qualifying for the ATP World Tour Finals in London despite only playing together in two Masters Series events.
They are now ranked highly enough to get into all the big events, and being among the top eight teams in the world at the O2 Arena in November is a big goal.
"We were only a couple of matches short at the end so we'll keep working hard, working together and trying to make the team stronger," said Murray.
"Because we can play in the bigger tournaments now, there's more points available, so hopefully that will stand us in good stead. But obviously the players are stronger as well so we'll have to play well to win matches."

Tiffany Haddish has finally confirmed what we'd all long suspected — that actress Sanaa Lathan was the one who bit Beyonce at a party.
From the moment the Girls Trip star told GQ in March that she witnessed someone biting Queen Bey at a party late last year, Sanaa Lathan has been regularly named as the culprit.
At the time, Haddish also claimed she had tried to beat up the person responsible, but that Beyonce had stopped her.
"She was like, 'Tiffany, no. Don't do that. That b***h is on drugs. She not even drunk … She not like that all the time. Just chill.'"
In a new interview with The Hollywood Reporter, Haddish finally seemed to confirm it was Lathan, despite having reportedly signed a nondisclosure agreement on the night of the party.
"I'm super good friends with [Lathan's] stepmum and her dad (producer-director Stan Lathan), and they were mad at me," she told the publication.
"They were like, 'Why would you do this to the family? You know, black actresses, you guys have to stick together, it's so hard for you guys to get work as it is, why would you try to ruin her career?' But I didn't try to ruin her career. I never said her name! I was just trying to say how Beyonce kept me from goin' to jail that night. I coulda just shut my whole career down."
The Love and Basketball actress has previously denied she was the one Haddish was referring to, tweeting in March: "Y'all are funny. Under no circumstances did I bite Beyonce and if I did it would've been a love bite."
Last month, Lathan told Health magazine that it was "the most absurd thing" she's ever been involved in.
"Thank God I've been in this business for 20 years and have had so many rumours about me … They used to devastate me in my 20s, but in order to survive in this business, you just have to let it roll."

Anna Delvey (also known as Anna Sorokin), the notorious fraudster who conned much of New York’s elite society into believing she was a rich heiress, has always had an unquenchable thirst for the high life, as recently revealed by her father, Vadim Sorokin. According to the Mail Online, Delvey's father would often travel miles out of Eschweiler, a small industrial town in Germany, in order to buy his daughter designer clothes, and has continued to support (with difficulty) Delvey's lavish spending even to this day.
Delvey, who is currently incarcerated in the US said, ‘I’d rather be in jail than live with my parents’, after they invited their daughter back to stay in their family home, following her imminent release from prison. The faux socialite, who was convicted in 2019 for a handful of grand larceny and theft services charges, reportedly still asks her father for money nearly every day, even from her detention centre. 'She is paying people to run around for her in jail, to clean her clothes for her. She has an ability to wrap people around her little finger’, he concluded.
Mr Sorokin believes his daughter’s behaviour is ‘dishonest and shameful’, and although she constantly ‘demands money’, she has never once said she loves him. Delvey’s parents are Russian, but moved to Germany when she was young in order to ‘build a better life for themselves', outside of their native country. Delvey’s father owned and ran his own business, and according to him, his daughter had a ‘normal’ upbringing, going to school, attending prom and enjoying socialising with friends around the area.

Jesus called Peter, James and John to be fishers of souls. After instructing them, Jesus commissioned them to be the first bishops of the Church. Our Lord changed their vocation from fishermen to Apostles.
The majority of us have not had the benefit of having Jesus speak to us face to face. However, the call to every vocation is just as clear, when we are willing to listen. One of the most popular questions that I get is, “When did you decide to become a priest?” I answer, “This morning.” Three months from now, on May 5, I will celebrate 40 years of ordination to the priesthood. Everyone will be invited to celebrate with me on May 4, because a Saturday is more convenient—either at 10 am or at 5:30 pm. Both Holy Masses will be followed by a reception in Msgr. Ralph hall. Naturally my vocation started a lot earlier than 40 years ago. I was born at a very young age, in Falfurrias, TX. Since I was the first-born and the first grandchild on my father’s side, I was surrounded by a lot of attention. The best thing that my parents did for me was to send me to Sacred Heart Catholic School—staffed by the Urseline nuns. There were three of them and each taught three grades in one classroom. We did not see much of them, only their face and their hands, the rest was under the habit. As we grew, we got curious about what was under the habit—like what color their hair was. One of the nuns played ball with us; another ran to catch a pass; the principal was old—Mother Bernarda walked slowly and only she unlocked the school and rang the bell. When I was in the first grade I received my First Holy Communion. Shortly after, my mother paid an experienced altar boy to teach me the prayers in Latin so that I could begin serving Holy Mass. Apart from Dominus vobiscum, et cum spiritu tuo and Per Omnia saecula saeculorum, I didn’t know much about what I was saying. Rubrics and getting the book on the correct side of the Altar were of utmost importance. Holy Mass was at 6:30 in the morning. I rode my bicycle from our house to the church, about 6 blocks, with the cassock and surplus flying in the wind, because I wanted my own, not the ones that everybody wore.
Sometimes Mass was in the priest’s home at a small chapel with the three sisters and me. Rarely would anyone else come. Perhaps there were about 10-15 altar boys, not many more. Both the nuns and the priests were always kind. I have no bad memories. Then the older sister died and the school had to be closed when I was in the 5th grade. So I decided to quite school.
I made up my mind that I would not go to public school. My parents won that argument. 6th grade was about a lot more children. A big difference was the absence of prayer. Teachers were nice, students were nice and the coach was demanding. At 15 I got a job—working at the Alameda Theater—a Mexican movie theater, which had been closed for many years. My job was to make popcorn and sell the goodies at the concessions stand. After the movies finished I stayed to sweep, with the owners. They were relaxed Baptists, because the owner liked his beer. My job lasted for three years because a miracle happened. My father who had been working for Falfurrias Creamery began work with Borden’s Milk. The company moved us to Brownsville when I was a junior in High School. My brother and I helped my father on Saturdays to unload the milk at the local supermarkets. The best part about the move was that I was accepted at St. Joseph Academy with the Marist Brothers, who were from New York. I studied piano privately. I told my teacher that I wanted to be music major, so she prepared me. I auditioned and was accepted at Del Mar College in Corpus Christi. My senior year, in April, during Lent, God called me to the priesthood. I had decided to go to daily Mass for Lent. There was a bunch of old ladies and myself. I looked at the priest and thought, “I can do that. I can probably do it better.” All the questions from childhood echoed in my brain, “Why don’t you consider becoming a priest? Have you thought about becoming a priest?” Then I had a dream. In the dream I saw myself as a priest. I shared my dream, with one of the Brothers who confirmed that God was calling me. Within a short time the vocation director was at the school to explain the seminary studies. I was convinced that I had to abandon music. He said, “No way.” “Be good to have a priest that know music.” You will start your studies at Del Mar College and attend Corpus Christi Minor Seminary. I was 18 years old.
To be continued…

Today I have decided to give you a snippet of a work in progress. I have begun three stories in the last month and have been unable to get far with any….until this one. I cannot guarantee that I will share any more of the story than this, nor can I promise that I won’t. We shall just have to see. 🙂 Darcy has met Elizabeth here, and spent time with her, her sister, and her aunt and uncle. He does not quite realize yet that he is falling for her. This has not been beta’d or read by any other eyes than my own before I posted it. All mistakes are mine. 🙂
Darcy and Elizabeth
Friday evening, Darcy’s valet, Mr. Smith, bit back an exclamation of irritation with his master. Never, in all the years in the gentleman’s employ, had Smith seen such pernickety behavior from the normally stoic Mr. Darcy. His coat was not good enough, did he not have another? His cravat was crooked. His hair was too wild. On and on the complaints went. Smith was amused, at first. In general, his employer, though fastidious about his appearance, kept his opinions to himself as long as the valet was meticulous in his work. The only thing Smith could think of that would cause such a change was a woman. It did not take long, however, for Darcy’s choosiness to become annoying. Finally, after what felt to the servant like forever, the master was happy with his appearance. Smith had never been so happy to see the back of someone in his entire life.
Darcy was unaware of the difference in his behavior. He knew himself to be looking forward to the evening, more than he had looked forward to an evening out in a long time. It was not until he and his carriage were nearly to Gracechurch Street that Darcy realized that his excitement was manifesting itself physically. He had removed his gloves upon entering the vehicle and had proceeded to twist them into an almost-unrecognizable mess. Calm yourself, man. It is just an evening out with friends. Nothing to get overwrought about.
When the equipage finally stopped and the groom opened the door, Darcy stepped out and stood staring at the door to the house. Suddenly and unaccountably apprehensive, he began to wonder if he should turn around and reboard the carriage when the portal opened. Swallowing his sudden nerves, Darcy climbed the steps and entered the building.
Seeing Gardiner’s smiling face greeting him in the drawing room went a long way toward relieving Darcy’s emotions. He returned the man’s smile with one of his own as they exchanged greetings. Bowing to Mrs. Gardiner and taking a seat while he waited for the young ladies, Darcy began to relax.
It was only a few brief minutes before the door to the sitting room opened and Miss Bennet glided into the room. Everyone stood, Darcy included. He thought the lady was stunningly beautiful, though he realized that his opinion of her was dispassionate. He held no feeling for her, despite her grace and fine looks. He no more than completed this thought than her sister entered the room.
Miss Elizabeth took his breath away. She was stunning in an emerald green gown that enhanced the color of her eyes. When she smiled at him, his heart stopped beating for just a moment.
Copyright 2017 by the author

The AIVD, the Netherland's intelligence agency, has an extremely large pool of good-looking and law-abiding talent from which to recruit. Abreu Report has learned that the iPad of one of our writers was hacked by two AIVD agents after they very astutely left them with unfettered access to the device.
|They'll train someone to hack your phone. WKM|
The Dutch team was composed of a mother/daughter duo, with the younger one approaching our writer after they asked someone in the crowd to take their picture. The daughter asked for the password, which our writer found extremely suspicious, since anyone her age should have been able to pop open the camera by swiping up, but he decided it was a good idea since they were on a small island and she had nowhere to run.
Once our writer confirmed that the "daughter" was herself using an iPhone, and he realized she should have been able to activate the camera without the device's password. Without appearing suspicious, he then began to inquire basic things so we could research if the mother/daughter duo was who they actually claimed to be.
Our writer's trip to Turkey took place some time ago, and in that time Abreu Report has traveled to the small town where the AIVD duo claimed to be from, even showing people to bartenders in the area and after paying someone to ask around town.
Yet we can now safely say that the identity of the two women was a complete cover story, and now it's no longer suspicious that they didn't really look very alike.
We hired Apple technician to determine if the device had been cloned while in Turkey, and indeed it was. None of the financial data on the device was stolen, so whoever those two women were, they didn't want money.

For the first time this season, Michael Vick was on the losing end of a game which he started and completed. In the loss, Vick was 29-of-44 passing for 333 yards with two touchdowns and an interception. He also had nine rushes for 44 yards.
The Bears played their safeties very deep all day, taking away the long-ball threat for the Eagles. Vick has had a lot of success connecting on the long ball with both DeSean Jackson and Jeremy Maclin, but that option was simply taken away. On the day, Vick’s longest completion came on a 30-yard touchdown strike to Brent Celek.
Vick also saw a lot of pressure throughout the game. The Bears' front four did a good job of getting in the backfield—that meant they did not have to send a lot of blitz packages. With the Bears consistently getting pressure, Vick was unable to sit in the pocket and had to try to make a lot of plays on the run.
Although he did a good job avoiding the pressure and made some amazing plays with his feet, Vick was still sacked four times on the day.
There seemed to be a few situations where Vick could have easily tucked the ball down and ran, but decided not to. When asked about it in his postgame interview, he said he would have to look at the film. He also added that those decisions are all instinctual, and he does what he thinks is right at the time.
With the safeties sitting back deep, I think he should have looked to run a bit more. You don’t want to see him take off before he evaluates all his options, but the Bears defense was doing a pretty good job in coverage. I think it may have opened some things up if he ran a bit more.
Besides getting his first loss in a game that he started and finished for the Eagles, Vick had another first on the season: He threw his first interception, and that ended up having a huge impact on the game. The ball was deflected at the line, so you can’t pin it against him entirely. However, I don’t think the decision on the throw was very good. It seemed that if the ball got through, he’d still be forcing it into traffic.
Overall, it wasn’t Vick’s best outing, and the team needs to do a better job scoring touchdowns in the red zone. Coming off the loss, it should be interesting to see how Vick bounces back next week against Houston.

Sunday, 26th June 2022 - 9:41:09 am
Ahmed and Yasin Kurtsan were the youngest sons of a wealthy Kurdish tribal chief or Khan. They lived in a tribal village near Khaneh. Their home was built of quarried stone. It sat on a small hill that rose a hundred feet in the center of the village. The old Khan would brag that all the land that could be seen from it belonged to him. Except for the distant mountains which were in Iraq, his boast was true.
Ahmed was the eldest of the two by a year. They had three sisters and a brother. The brother, Jabar, was the first born and the pride of the old Khan.
In the villages that were ruled by the old Khan, stories were still told of 'the bright star of Kurdistan,' Jabar Kurtsan. He could out-ride, out-shoot, out-run, out-everything, anyone in Asia. Men sought him out to lead them on hunts or into battle. Women were helpless in his presence.
He was the most generous of all to friends and the most cruel of all to enemies. Under him, it was said, all Kurdistan would one day unite and become a great nation. Even the Russians, it was said, would have to free their portion of Kurdistan if such a man as Jabar Kurtsan were to lead all Kurds.
But Jabar Kurtsan was killed in his twenty fifth year. The hated Iranians had launched one of their periodic campaigns to subdue what was not theirs. Three Iranian divisions, armed with modern western weapons which had been given them for self defense, had advanced on the old Khan's land. Jabar Kurtsan could not bow to the inevitable. He was killed defending his homeland.
The hated Iranians occupied all of Kurdistan within their borders. They closed the Kurdish schools and brought in Iranian teachers who could not even speak Kurdish. The children in the new schools were taught the Iranian language, Farsi.
The old Khan sent for his two remaining sons, then aged twelve and thirteen. To their eyes, their father had aged ten years in just six months.
"Times are bad my sons," the old Khan said. "You have lost a brother blessed with greatness, I have lost a beloved son, and our enemies dwell among us."
"Allah has decreed it," Ahmed said.
"Praise Allah," Yasin said.
"It is my fault," the old Khan said. "I did not teach him temperance. I did not teach him to bend with the wind."
"Allah is just," the two boys said together.
"I have watched you two at play. I have watched you two on the hunt. I have watched you two at work. You are very close. Is that not true?"
"Closer than brothers, my father," Ahmed said. "We are as one."
"It is good," their father said. "It is as it should be. I want you to promise that it shall always be thus, even when apart."
"It shall always be thus," both boys said, "even when apart."
"There will never be another like your brother but the two of you together could do well. The Iranian dogs will not always be as strong as they are now, or we so weak. We must prepare for the day that we can rid our land of this plague. When that day comes, we must be ready.
"The most wise course dictates that you two must separate foe a while."
The two boys looked at each other stoically. If they had fear, neither would show it.
"The hated Iranians have been aided by the infidels. It is this that has allowed them to dwell among us who are their enemies. We must also learn the tricks of the infidel in order to help rid ourselves of the hated Iranians
"Ahmed. You are now my eldest son. It is you who will one day be Khan in my place. It is you who must go forth and live among the infidels. You must learn their ways. You must learn how they think. You must become so like them that they will forget that you are not like them. But you must never forget. You will always be a Kurd and the son of a Khan.
"Laugh with the infidels. Break bread with the infidels. Become as one with the infidels. But never trust the infidels. That is the thing which will give you your power. Always remember, it is the one who trusts the least who becomes the most powerful."
"It shall be as you command, my father," Ahmed said.
"Any you, Yasin, from this day forward will never leave my side. You will attend affairs of state, sit with me in judgments, travel with me when I visit other Khans, plan with me in the councils, and attend me in all things. You will, in time, become my right hand. Just as when I am gone, you will one day be the right hand of Ahmed. It is you that must insure an orderly transition to Ahmed when the day comes."
"It shall be as you command, my father," Yasin said.
The old Khan nodded and sat back. "Always together," he said, "even when apart. You are one. You have given your word."
"It shall be so," both boys said.
The old Khan was wise in the ways of men. He looked from one son to the other and wondered which would be the first to break his vow. It didn't matter. The strongest would survive, which was the way it should be. And until then...

Yesterday was a good day. A busy day, an exhausting day, but a good day. Yesterday I joined with a group of old friends, and helped to feed the poor at a local YMCA. The Y hosts this event every Saturday afternoon, and this group, part of a youth group I belonged to ages ago, has decided to participate. I've decided to join them. We will do this about every 6 weeks, yesterday was our first go at it.
They cooked all the food themselves (this time I joined in a bit later, as I had some things to do in the morning), and then we all headed over to set up the room, and hand out the food.
We met some characters, among them "Santa" himself, and served up smiles with our hot beef stew. Some were grateful, some were chatty, others were subdued. This goes for both the givers and the receivers.
It was a gift to be able to participate in something that reminds us how blessed we are. By the end we were exhausted, hungry ourselves, not having taken time to eat, but satiated with something much greater. For a few hours this Saturday, we made a real difference.
It's the little things.

Photograph of Joseph from the 12th War Supplement of the Oldham Evening Chronicle, 16th September 1916. Held in Oldham Local Studies and Archives.
(L to R) 1914-15 Star; British War Medal; Allied Victory Medal
Joseph was born between January and March 1893 in Oldham, Lancashire. His father was called Peter Huddleston Tyson and his mother was Amy E. C. Tyson. We believe the C may have been short for Catherine. He was their oldest child and had 3 younger siblings; George Peter, Amy Edith and Marion. The family were Roman Catholics.
George's medals are also in the Museum of the Manchester Regiment collection.
George was born in Sheffield, Yorkshire in January 1895. The family seem to have settled back in Oldham by the time Amy was born in spring 1900. The next year the family lived at 51 Beechey Street in the town.
In this year Peter worked as a steward at a club, most likely a private gentleman's social club, rather than the modern meaning of an entertainment venue. He was also a 'well known sprinter' in Oldham's athletics circles. Joseph's brother George was a 'well known footballer'.
Peter died between April and June 1909, aged 43. By 1911 Amy and her children had moved a few doors to number 47. Joseph and George both worked to support their mother and sisters. They were both cotton mule piecers in one of Oldham's many cotton mills. We know Joseph worked for the Greenacres Spinning Company, but not where George worked.
The First World War broke out in August 1914, and Joseph joined the 10th Battalion of the Manchester Regiment in early September. This was a unit of the Territorial Force based in Oldham. George had enlisted at the beginning of the year. His service number was 1691. Joseph's was 2199.
The 10th Battalion was called into service and set sail for Egypt on the 10th September, arriving in Alexandria on the 25th. They trained in Egypt until the 6th May 1915 when they took part in the invasion of Gallipoli.
We don't know whether Joseph sailed with the battalion, although he had definitely joined them by the time they went to war in Gallipoli.
The renamed 1/10th Battalion fought in Gallipoli until the theatre was evacuated in December. Both brothers 'went right through the Gallipoli struggle without a scratch'.
The battalion then returned to Egypt where they took part in the defence of the Suez Canal against a Turkish attack. This involved long patrols of the Sinai Desert, and living in primitive conditions amongst the sand dunes.
By March 1916 Joseph was serving with D Company of the battalion. He was a Signaller, responsible for keeping the different units of the battalion in contact with each other, and for keeping the battalion in touch with higher headquarters. He will have been taught Morse code as part of this job.
On the morning of the 21st March 1916 Joseph was killed in an unfortunate accident. George wrote a letter to their mother explaining what had happened.
Joseph had 'done his turn of outpost duty and was sleeping in a kind of pit with a barricade of sandbags in front of it. About 5am on the 21st the sandbags gave way and fell on top of him, killing him instantly. He was buried the same night'. Joseph was 23 years old when he died.
Amy was living at 5 Harrison Street when George's letter reached her in mid April. She would later live at 16 and 45 Horsedge Street. She died in Oldham in mid 1929, aged 60.
George stayed with the 1/10th Battalion. He had reached the rank of Acting Sergeant by the end of the war in 1918. He returned to Oldham and lived there for the rest of his life. He was 90 when he died in November 1985.
Joseph was originally buried in Grave Number 5 in Shallufa Eastern Cemetery. This was what Amy was told in May 1917. After the end of the war his body was moved to Suez War Memorial Cemetery on the outskirts of Suez, where he now lies alongside 888 other men. His modern grave reference is B. 31.
George and Joseph's medals were donated to the Museum of the Manchester Regiment together in September 1994.

Her Standard run on Saturday was GORGEOUS! I just didn't check the table when I was walking the course and she hit it hard and fast coming off the a-frame. She tried to hold onto it but slid off, so we NQ'd but it was my favorite run from the weekend. She ran it in 44.58, 182 yards, SCT was 64. Fun, fun, fun!
Jumpers was another story all together. I sprayed her feet with Show Spray to help her hang on but it really didn't help. After she had trouble with collecting from jump 2 to 3, I slowed her down a bit. She Q'd and took 1st place but only 10 MACH points and it was carnage for most of my class.
Here are two of her runs from this weekend:
On Sunday she was a bit slower in Standard, possibly because of the course design or maybe because she remembered slipping in Jumpers the day before. It felt ugly but she was clean taking 2nd place and earning 16 MACH points. I was also late on a FC because someone has decided that the DW contact doesn't need to be held at trials and she went really wide. Naughty girl! ;)
Then in Jumpers she missed her weave pole entry after barking once over each jump around the course. I think she was telling me that it was complete crap that I was making her run on that surface and that I should have my head examined. She told me off at the weaves and after four attempts finally did them after I told her that I agreed with her, that it sucked and if she just did them, she'd get lots of yummy treats. She finished the rest of the course clean. Carnage again for most of my class; only two dogs qualified: big, heavy slow dogs.
I've realized that after having no off-courses this weekend that it must have been me causing them the last two trials. I'm either opening up too much, not turning my shoulders right or plain old not doing the "turn and run" after my front crosses.
We will be at an agility trial in Belvidere, IL this coming weekend. We need QQ's so keep your fingers crossed for us! =)

The people were courteous, they were attentiveness, and I was very happy!
Vehicle is running really good! They fixed the brakes on the car and its perfect.
Everything was great! Mark was awesome! I don't really have any complaints.
Everything was done quickly!
The service was very efficient and done well, I am very happy with everything.
I would recommend the shop! They are great, my Kia is running very well.
Everything worked out and the service was done well. I am happy with the Hackettstown staff and customer service.
They are always friendly and they always complete the job in a timely manor. The vehicle always comes back from the shop working well.
The service was excellent, I like the fact that everything was professional.
I always take my vehicles to the Hackettstown AAMCO shop. They are perfect, they always do a great job.
This shop is wonderful, I am always satisfied with them. I always have such a pleasant time with Mark and everyone that works at the shop. They are always so open and honest.
They did a terrific job on my vehicle, I am very happy with what they've done. They did it quickly, and did it the right way.
The owner at the shop does an excellent job. Everyone at the shop is very helpful and friendly.
Mark is the absolute greatest! They provide terrific work, fair prices, and excellent customer service. What more could you ask for?!
The service was dine very well, I haven't had any issues. I didn't spend to much time at the shop, the service was done in a timely manor.
The shop is excellent, the people at the shop are very nice and helpful.
The service was done well, I am very pleased with the Hackettstown AAMCO.
They're friendly, knowledgeable, and good with their customers. I always take my vehicles to this shop.
My Hyundai Sonata is running very well I am extremely satisfied with the Hackettstown AAMCO shop. The service was done in a timely manor.
I like the friendliness, the ability to repair any issue, the fact that they discuss what needs to be done, and the cost before the service is done.
The Hackettstown AAMCO is a clean and welcoming place. I am very pleased with the shop and the service.
The staff was the best part of the whole experience. I am very happy with the shop, my vehicle is running great.
I love the guys at the shop, everyone is awesome and they know what they are doing.
I like the Hackettstown AAMCO, they were straight forward, polite, and everything was great.
I have been taking my vehicle to the Hackettstown AAMCO shop for quite some time now. I enjoy the level of honesty I have always experienced with the shop.
They kept me in the loop throughout the entire experience. There wasn't a time where he wouldn't call me with an important update. I am absolutely satisfied with the Hackettstown AAMCO shop.
The service manager is very nice and helpful. I am pleased with my experience at the shop as a whole. The Hackettstown AAMCO shop is great!
The service is always great and they do good business. My Honda is running great thanks to the Hackettstown AAMCO.
They took their time to take a drive with me to figure out exactly what was wrong. They were able to diagnose the issue right away.
I can not say enough nice things about the Hackettstown AAMCO shop. They made sure to take care of me and my car. They were accommodating and helpful.
They are very polite and provide excellent customer service. I am pleased with the work they have done on my vehicle.
It's always a pleasure to do businesses with Mark at the Hackettstown AAMCO shop. The service is always good and my Ford runs great!
I like the service at the Hackettstown because I was able to drop my car off and the owner, Mike gave me a ride.
Everything was taken care of and everything was done properly. Overall I enjoyed my experience at the Hackettstown AAMCO.
Mark is great and he's always very helpful. He always makes sure that he informs you about everything that he's doing with your vehicle. I am always happy to go to AAMCO in Hackettstown and bring my vehicle in because they have built a good report with me.
I liked everything about the Hackettstown AAMCO center. The whole process was very smooth and I found it very pleasant.
My vehicle is is doing very well and I am pleased with my overall experience. The customer service at the shop was great.
The owner of the shop was very personable, friendly, and helpful. Everything that we had taken care of at the shop is running perfectly.
The service was great and I am happy with my entire experience at the Hackettstown AAMCO.
It seems like that focus on giving customers the absolute best service as opposed to just giving what ever is cheapest. They provide excellent high quality service and I am very satisfied.
My vehicle is running excellent after the service, we just drove it nine thousand miles. I am happy with my experience, the service was done fast.
My Chevy is running great! The shop is very convenient for me, it's right by my house. I absolutely recommend!
I like that they are quick and friendly. My favorite part is that they are very convenient. I can walk across the street from work after I drop off my vehicle.
I like the owner of the Hacketstown AAMCO, he is fair. He always looks out for me and I really like that. My Lexus is running very well, the service was great as always.
The Chevy is running beautifully. They did what they said they were going to do. They went out of their way to make sure everything was done right, so I have to give them credit for that.
They are very friendly and personable. They do a good job I've been using them for years now, even when they were at the old location. I have a long relationship with them I'm extremely happy with them. I send people to them, they do my car my wife's car, and now they do my kid's car.
My Toyota is driving great after taking it to AAMCO in Hacketstown. It was a wonderful experience, they are very friendly, and they did a professional job.
I was very happy about my experience at the Hacketstown AAMCO, I'm sure I will go back there again soon. It was easy to get an appointment, friendly people, and service I had done was just an oil change but the service appeared to be high quality work.
He takes care of us, he does everything right the first time. We have a lot of our cars serviced there.
Iv'e been a customer for years. I've been extremely happy with them. I love the personal attention and the honesty.
My vehicle is running very well after I had it serviced by AAMCO. The whole service was pretty good. I liked everything about it everything was great.
I recommend Hacketstown AAMCO. Everybody was really nice, and my Hyundai is running great!
I always take my car to the Hackettstown AAMCO! They keep my car running great and the people there are extremely nice. I recommend them to all my friends!
My Toyota is running excellent, they did a fantastic job. I've referred a couple people of there. Mark, the owner was there to follow through with the entire experience and kept me informed of progress as it proceeded. I like him so much I hope he doesn't retire anytime soon!
Fast and efficient. I received prompt service and follow up with a phone call explaining my options. Highly recommend.
It's good to know that I have a place where the personnel are both honest and knowledgeable!
Good communication. No surprises with all costs and work performed according to specs. Good people in Hackettstown. Will certainly use them in the future. Very trustworthy.
Work was completed quickly, no problems, fair price, and a very nice atmosphere as well. Clean and comfortable waiting area and very friendly staff. Also, a very knowledgeable and experienced staff who know what they are doing and not just guessing and "throwing parts" at the car (my experience at several dealerships). A relief to find a repair shop that is honest, competent and trustworthy.
Our Suburban came back to us in excellent condition! The service was wonderful and we were treated with a lot of respect and patience. We would highly recommend AAMCO of Hackettstown to our friends and family.
I've been going to our AAMCO car service center in Hackettstown for several years now. Mark and his outstanding mechanics get 5 stars for their prompt, reliable, honest service --- and at a reasonable price (cost always quoted beforehand). Plus, I get to enjoy a lovely cup of coffee while I wait and I leave there knowing my car is "good-to-go"! Thanks, AAMCO!
They were very nice, and took care of our transmission purge and tune up. Marc was very nice and professional. I would recommend them.
As always the service was great. I trust them to always take good care of me, Mark and his staff are very friendly and I trust them to always be honest. They let me know when there are things I should take care of but never push unnecessary repairs.
I was 100% satisfied with the service I received here. They're very courteous, prompt and provide very good service. I've been there several times before, as I have 4 different cars I take there.
The owner, Mark is a really nice guy. Even when I didn't know what was wrong with my vehicle and it ended up being something small. I appreciated that Mark was very fair and very honest with me. I have no complaints at all. I absolutely recommend them.
I appreciate the good work they did. I had a couple of questions before I came in and I spoke to Mark that runs the place several times before I had the vehicle towed in.The service was courteous and they were polite and everything went well. I would definitely recommend them to a friend.
I was very happy with the service and everything is running fine. They are very polite and do a good job. They are very accommodating. I've already recommended them to several people.
Mark over there is always great and he always gets us in and works around our schedule. It's very convenient. He even helped arrange for a car rental for me when I broke down so I'd have a vehicle. We take all our cars there.
Once I went into the hospital 2 days after dropping my car off for repairs, Mark was so kind for working with my husband so he were able to pick up the car at a time when he was able to (over 2 weeks later) between me in the hospital and taking care of the kids. Great people there that really care.
Since my visit to this center, my vehicle is running perfectly and shifting very nicely now. What I liked best about this AAMCO was that they were prompt, courteous and the service was complete.
The service is excellent. I've been a customer of theirs for some time now. I dealt with the owner Mark. He is very amicable and on top of things. He explained everything thoroughly and from the first instant I had that feeling I could trust them and rely on them. I also like the fact they would not do more than necessary to inflate the bill.
I use AAMCO all the time for my personal and also business cars, so I trust them in anyway possible. This is a great shop and I would be glad to recommend them to everyone. The car is running great and I will be back in the future if I have to.
The car is running good. Everything is good. You guys did a good job. Everything was done really quick I got my car back in a day or two I was really impressed by that. I recommend AAMCO to my friends and family.
Everything was good. The guys fixed my car fast and quickly delivered it to me. I recommend my friends to AAMCO.
The guys worked quickly and efficiently on my car to have it quickly returned to me. I brought my husband's car into the shop to have his transmission rebuilt. I recommend my friends to AAMCO.
The day I picked my car up they gave me a lifetime warranty on my transmission. I recommend AAMCO to my friends.
The guys fixed my car and they put a lot of time and effort into working on my car. I recommend my friends to AAMCO.
I brought my truck in for one thing. It turns out that there was another issue with it and while I waited they took care of both problems for me. I recommend my friends to AAMCO.
They were absolutely terrific. I sat in a nice clean comfortable office while waiting for the work to be done. It was very professional, very nice. You will see me again
The shop I used to go to had me replacing a lot of parts for thousands of dollars and all you did was make an adjustment and my car is fixed. I am quite satisfied with AAMCO.
I recommend my friends to AAMCO they explained to me very detailed about the work my car required and within four to five days I had my car back.
What I like most about AAMCO is that they are convenient. I recommend my friends to AAMCO.
They are right down the street from where I work. Justin is my sales rep and he always helps me out. I'd recommend AAMCO in a heartbeat and matter of fact I already have recommended AAMCO to everyone I know.
So far I liked everything about AAMCO from the quality work to the personnel.
I really appreciated how the manager worked with me on pricing and got the car fixed.
I was pleased with the cost of the service and would recommend AAMCO to my friends.
The service was very prompt and they got my car fixed quickly.
I liked that the Aamco center went and got the vehicle for me. I would recommend Aamco to my friends.
I appreciated being able to get service on New Year's Eve.
AAMCO provided excellent service on my car and the guys at the shop were very helpful. Now, my car is running, and I'd definitely send my friends over there.
I was absolutely satisfied with the service at the AAMCO shop. They did a good job, and they were quick. I would recommend them.
My car is running PERFECTLY after getting it back from the shop. I'm 100% satisfied with AAMCO's service, and I liked that I was able to speak with the owner, and his assistant at the shop. They did an excellent job and I'd absolutely recommend them!
I was satisfied with the service at AAMCO, and they did everything I requested them to! My car's running well again, and I'm very happy with it.
My car is running great, and I was happy with the work that AAMCO did on my car! Everybody was very nice, and very helpful - and I'd absolutely send my family and friends to them.
My car is running great after getting it back from AAMCO, and they did a good job with it. If my friends had any trouble with their transmissions I'd send them over to this shop for sure!
When I brought my car to AAMCO, the service was quick and easy, and my car is running great now! They did an excellent job and I'm very satisfied.
The service at AAMCO was great! They had my truck in and out quickly , and they did a great job with it. If my friends needed to get work done on their cars I would absolutely send them to AAMCO!
I'm not having any more issues with my brakes locking up since I got my car back from AAMCO! I was impressed by their promptness and their professionalism at the shop, and so far everything is good. So far, I'd say that I'd recommend them!
I brought my car to AAMCO for an inspection and I really liked how fast it was! I was in and out very quickly. I've already recommended someone to them!
I went to AAMCO for an oil change, and it was close to their closing time but they still took me in anyway. I was impressed how fast they got me in and out! I was very satisfied with their service, and I'll probably be back again.
AAMCO did a great job with my car! They got me off the side of the road and got me home, so I'm very happy with them.
The car is running excellent. The guys were supreme. I highly recommend AAMCO. Outstanding work.
I was impressed with the speed and efficiency at AAMCO! I was able to drop my car off, and I came back in 2 hours and it was ready. I'd definitely recommend them, they did a great job.
The service at AAMCO was very professional and I was definitely satisfied! My car is running great after getting it back from them.
We took our daughter's car to AAMCO and so far it's running well. We haven't had any issues with it, and we're definitely satisfied with the service.
I was impressed with the service at AAMCO and they did a fantastic job with my car... They were very honest and they were great to work with!
I brought my car to AAMCO to get my brakes changed and so far everything is great! It seemed like they really took the time to check my car and make sure there were no problems. I'd recommend them, I was very satisfied!
So far my car is running great since I got it back from AAMCO. The manager at the shop was very up-front and gave me all of the details with what my car needed, so there was no surprises. I was very satisfied with their service - they did an excellent job!
I brought my daughter's car to AAMCO and it seems to be running perfectly! I haven't gotten any complaints from her, and so far we are very satisfied
The service at AAMCO was great and everybody there was very nice, and helpful. My car is running great, in fact I just brought it back to AAMCO for an oil change! I would absolutely recommend my friends to them.
I brought my car to Aamco for my air conditioning and they did a great job with it. The guys at the shop were honest and friendly, and all in all I had a good experience with them. I'd absolutely recommend Aamco!
They do fantastic work here! The guys are all friendly and polite but above all, great mechanics. The prices are very reasonable and fair. I highly recommend them!
I am happy to say that since AAMCO had my vehicle, it has not given me any problems. The work was done very efficiently and fairly priced. I am certainly a return customer for the future. Thank you AAMCO!
Extremely quick and efficient work by AAMCO. The place was very clean and it looked very professional. I recommend everyone to go and check them out!
AAMCO went above and beyond for me. The people were extremely nice and accommodated me in everyday possible. After their amazing work the car has been running outstanding! Now everywhere I go, I recommend everyone to AAMCO.
My car is running great - I'm actually planning to trade it in because my lease is almost up but I was very impressed with the service at Aamco! I believe the man that I dealt with was the owner of the shop and he was very pleasant, and that was a nice surprise. The turnaround time was great - it was exactly what I expected, and I was very happy with the work that they did. I'd absolutely recommend this shop!
Everybody at the Aamco shop was very friendly and helpful. The manager was great to work with! They took my car in right away, and overall it was just a great experience. I would definitely recommend my friends to Aamco!
The work on my car was done to perfection and I'm 100% satisfied. I've been dealing with Mark at Aamco for about 20 years now and I won't take my car to any other place but him! I've already recommended a few people over there, and I have no complaints whatsoever!
The staff and the owner of this Aamco shop were very friendly and easy to work with, and also the turnaround for my car was only a few hours! I was very happy with the work that they did and I would definitely recommend my friends and family to them!
My car is running great after working with Aamco. I was very impressed with their service, and even though I called them last minute to bring my car in, they still got me in and out very quickly! They did a great job, and I would absolutely recommend them to my friends!
At AAMCO, they took care of everything that needed to be done. I brought my car in for a transmission rebuild and I brought it back for a double check and for them to finish the work, and so far so good! I was very satisfied with them.
So far my car is great, and so was the shop - when you're at AAMCO, you're well taken care of, and every detail was talked about so you know exactly what's going on!
The gentleman that I dealt with at AAMCO was great to work with - he was very up front and he was able to get everything done. My car is running great, and I would definitely recommend them!
Unfortunately after I had my Hyundai fixed at AAMCO a week later my car was totaled, but my car was running beautifully and they did a wonderfully fine job my Hyundai Accent and I recommend my friends to AAMCO.
My 2009 Jeep Liberty is running fine and the service was great and the personal service manager was great to work with and I recommend my friends to AAMCO.
The AAMCO staff was honest, friendly and very professional. The work was done on time and well. Everything was perfect, I advocate them!
Easily one of the best customer service I have experienced from an auto shop. AAMCO did a fantastic job in fixing my vehicle because it has not given me any issues. I would highly recommend this shop to everyone.
I am extremely happy with the staff and owner of this AAMCO shop. They did an excellent job and because of that I have already recommended them to a bunch of my friends around the area. I am very pleased with their work and will certainly come again.
I am happy with AAMCO's work. They got the car running well and thats all it matters.
They took the car in and fixed all that needed to be fixed. Now my car is running great! I would absolutely recommend AAMCO to my friends!
From the manager to everyone who worked on my vehicle there great!
Knock on wood the car is running great, so far so good! The mechanics do a good job on my car every single time! I definitely would recommend AAMCO to my friends!
It's always a pleasure doing business with AAMCO! I have four cars in the family, we always go to AAMCO for our car needs. Their mechanics are great, and on top of that this place is truly honest. I know I'm leaving my cars in good hands with Mark the owner. I always tell my friends to go to AAMCO!
I've never had a problem here! The service is really great and the mechanics do a great job! I have nothing bad to say about this place which is exactly why I keep bringing my car back here and I also bring my daughter's cars here too! I would absolutely recommend AAMCO to all of my friends!
AAMCO surpassed my expectations! their quality of customer service and work - I Highly recommend them
The car running great the service was great!
Mark, Ben and the boys are an outstanding group. Their professionalism and care into every appointment I've had has been superb. I've used them for both the work fleet and also my own personal vehicles. On one visit they alerted me to a very serious issue that I wasn't even aware of. They saved all of the parts to show me exactly what was happening while driving and why it needed to be fixed so urgently. I always feel better knowing these guys have given me the safety "thumbs up" when I drive away. To the crew- Keep doing what your doing guys!
Love this place ..what’s the first thing you think about when you’re looking for someone to service your car. ..”Can I trust them?? Well this place can be trusted ..and the service is like none other ..welcoming, fast, and professional and the prices are very reasonable. If I need emergency work Marc is always fits me in! He will even take you to where you need to go while your car is being serviced! I recommend them to ALL my friends ….Unmatched Service.
Mark and his crew at the Hackettstown AAMCO are simply the best. We have been going to AAMCO for all our automotive needs for 12 years, whether they are commercial or personal. They work on seven of our professional vehicles, and three of our own personal ones. We don't go anywhere else! They quote fair prices, do excellent work, and are kind and patient when you are describing what is wrong with your vehicle. The are reliable, honest, and hardworking; an excellent combo. Not to mention, their customer service is top notch and any representatives of the company conduct themselves with professionalism and with understanding. Don't take your car anywhere else- the buck stops here.
I have a work truck that was in bad shape, the trans and engine needed serious attention and I still had to pay every month but couldn't drive it. I took a chance and stopped in and spoke to them about my problem. At that point we set up an appointment and they gave me a fair estimate. We went forward. I thought i wouldn't see the truck for weeks. I don't think it took a week and they were on the phone with me letting me know it was done. When I picked up the vehicle it ran great all issues were gone. These guys really know there stuff. I was in the auto repair business for many years and know when someone is unqualified. These guys are great and I would highly recommend them for all you need for your vehicles. A big THANK YOU !! to you guys.
I can not say enough good things about Hackettstown AAMCO Total Car Care. We have been going there for years and we truly feel like we are part of an extended family. Mark and his crew are top notch in everything they do. They do excellent work and their prices are fair. It's a pleasure to drop our car off and know the service we need will be handled by a crack team of auto repair professionals who not only take care of the issue they were advised about, but if they notice anything else, they will let us know and give us the information we need to make the right decision. Hackettstown AAMCO Total Car Care is a 5 star business, and we have used them for all our cars and will continue to do so. I am proud and happy to recommend them to everyone.

Posted 3/13/2019 14:02 (#7377961 - in reply to #7377880) Subject: RE: Weber Gas Grills
We've had a number of grills over the years but have been the most impressed with our current Weber Genesis. We're going on 7 seasons now and the only repair I've had to make was to replace one of the wheels that we broke when we moved. They definitely are a pricey unit but has been worth it. With the cost, we took to cleaning out the grill area at least annually to try and keep it from rotting away but honestly haven't seen any issues with it. I do keep a cover on it religiously when it's not in use and that has a huge impact on longevity in my mind too.
I wouldn't hesitate to buy another if something were to happen to this one. At this point I don't have any fear that this one will at least double its life.

UFC president Dana White has unveiled a video proving what really happened in the fallout between Conor McGregor and sparring partner Paulie Malignaggi.
Malignaggi furiously quit the training camp after an image was released on McGregor’s Instagram making out he was knocked down during a sparring session.
The 36-year-old insisted he was pushed down and didn't fall to the canvas after being caught with a series of punches.
But White's leaked footage appears to show Malignaggi take left hook to the face before being hit several more times.
He eventually falls to the ground where McGregor then stands over him.
The UFC champ spoke of his version of events at a public workout in Las Vegas and revealed Malignaggi quit because he was "flattened" and was "badly concussed."
He said: "He was looking for an exit. The spars were not good for him. He took a lot of head trauma. Straight after it, we were worried.
"He was knocked down, he was flattened against the ropes. Multiple times the ropes kept him on his feet.
most read in boxing
"We were worried about him. We thought the worst was about to happen. He was certainly badly concussed. And then he just got out and went running.
"He showed up, he tried his best. It didn’t go his way. He got his ass whupped, he got his pride dented and then he wanted a way out.
"What better way for a guy like him to exit under a load of questions and mysterious [circumstances]. You know what I mean? Under a lot of questions."
Malignaggi had labelled McGregor as a "scumbag" and "one of the biggest dirtbags I've ever met".
But McGregor says he still respects the former WBA welterweight champ.
He added: "I don’t mind Paulie. He came in, he spoke a hell of a game previous, very disrespectful to the skill set, very disrespectful to the discipline.
"But no matter what a man says, if they show up and try to answer that and try their best, you’ve gotta give respect. And that’s what happened."

This miniature portrait is unsigned, but is engraved on the reverse "Harriet, wife of H T B Collier, Commd'r R N, married 1815, died 1851".
Research has indicated the marriage that relates to these dates is that of Henry Theodosius Brown Collier (1792-10 Sep 1872) who married Harriet Nicholas (b.?-d. 22 Oct 1850) on 26 June 1816 at Ashton Keynes, Wiltshire.
The engraved marriage date and death dates are interesting, as it seems Henry was a year out with his dates.
Snippets about Henry's career include; entered the Navy 28 April 1800; on 3 Mar 1819 became master of the Falmouth (22) on the Cork station, but was was invalided from her in the Leeward Islands 21 March 1822; then attained Captain in 1822 as captain of Espiegle (18) on the Home Station.In the 1851 census, Henry lived as a widower at 25 Upper Grosvenor St, Hanover square, London with his daughters, Harriet 27 (place of birth "Indian Ocean - Mauritius") and Clementine 24 (born Paris, France) and four servants. At this stage he described himself as Captain Royal Navy.
However, as time went on he was promoted up the navy retired list. In the 1861 census, Henry was living at 1 Little Ryder St as a lodger. He was aged 69 and described himself as Vice Admiral, Royal Navy.
Henry was obviously a dashing fellow, as on 26 Jul 1866 he married Maria Griffiths Munn from Amberley Worcs, a lady 54 years younger than himself! In the 1871 census at age 79 he described himself as "retired admiral" and lived at 25 Ryder St, Westminster, London with his wife Maria then 25 and his daughter Rosalie H Collier, born in London and aged 4, together with one servant. Thus he was promoted from captain, to vice admiral, to admiral. I have been advised that his father was Admiral Sir George Collier and his brother was Admiral Sir Francis Collier who was an ADC to Queen Victoria.
His widow and daughter must have been left without an income, as in 1881 a Rosaline H Collier, born London 1867 and presumably his daughter, was employed as a nursery governess to solicitor Willett Ram and his family living at 178 Soaphouse Hill, Halesworth, Suffolk. By 1901 she appears as a 31 year old spinster, sick nurse at North Down Hill School which was a boarding preparatory school for about 25 boys run by a James Deacon Holt at Margate, Kent.

Tokyo Toni took to Instagram on Sunday, Dec. 18, to speak her mind about her daughter Blac Chyna's sudden break up with Rob Kardashian, just a month after they welcomed baby Dream Kardashian. The heated mama admitted that the "Keeping Up with the Kardashians" star is struggling with insecurity, but ultimately said that they'll get back together.
"They will be fine trust me," she wrote in response to another user's comments calling her daughter a gold digger. "Chyna had hers long before Rob K. He is just emotionally disturbed by all means. Chyna don't need to dig for gold with gold is given to her after every argument!"
The 44-year-old explained that she has spoken with Rob and knows that he's battling with deep personal problems, but doesn't know how to deal with them.
"Rob goes into this woman's phone all the time and never find anything in this is what he confesses to me," she continued. "He confesses to me that he know he has the issue but don't know how to handle it. He's a very emotional guy with many many personal issues how do I know this he told me."
All in all, Toni seemed more angry at the harsh comments she was getting than Rob, and said that she wanted to try to help the situation.
"When you are in the public eye this is the bull---- you have to go through when you have an insecure person at hand! 'mental illness is real,'" she wrote. "I love Rob and I am going to try to help them manage their relationship through love and wise words."
She has even been urging the new dad to get help, apparently to no avail.
"I have spoken to Rob and asked him to get therapy he said that he would but yet he have not seeked it yet," she added.
Toni still assured fans that this won't be the end for the on-and-off pair.
"At the end of the day they will still be together I promise you," she ended the long comment. "Rob just have to get Mr. Insecure off of his back! Everything will be fine."
On Saturday, a very sad Rob took to social media to share that Blac Chyna had up and left him, taking his daughter with her.
Chyna quickly responded to the breakup with a now-deleted Instagram post, saying that she was "done" with the relationship after he stressed her out during pregnancy and continually accused her of cheating.

I was given the Boon CARE Health & Grooming Kit as part of a sponsored post. I instantly fell in love with this product! All thoughts and opinions are my own.
It has been 5 years since I have had a newborn, so these past six weeks have been both rewarding and challenging as I remember all of the things newborns need and do! I have been blown away by the incredible products that I have discovered since the last time I had a baby. I got rid of a lot of old things and purchased new products that would be better this time. One thing I really wanted was a kit that would give me the different hygiene and care tools I would need for a baby. That is why I instantly fell in love with Boon CARE!
Boon CARE Health and Grooming Kit is an essential bundle for my little bundle of joy! [Read more…]

I wrote this rap for my AP Biology class in 8th grade, on 12/17/1996. It was part of a group project that we had to present before the class, and my agreement with my groupmates was that they would perform the rap if I did all the work writing it (so I could avoid public speaking). However, when the time came, they pressured me to perform the rap since I knew the beat far better than they did. My biology teacher videotaped the performance, but the battery died, forcing me to start over. I had been able to psych myself up for the first performance, but when I had to start over, I turned all red and stumbled over the words. It was humiliating.

**This is taken from an old journal entry from a now defunct site called Diary-X,
where I had an account for more than four years.
I’ve edited it for content and grammar.
I noticed really active labor beginning around 6 or 7pm the night of December 29, 2002. It was overwhelming, this pain which kept intensifying. Not really believing that labor was finally occurring, I was online chatting with my friend Rhianna, and chatting with my friend Andy. I had to stop typing to breathe through the contractions. I’d already had “show,” so I knew *something* was happening. But I’d been sent home from the hospital earlier that afternoon, having been told that I may not go into labor for a WEEK because things were going so slowly. Dejected, I refused to go to the hospital just to be sent home again. But Rhianna (and Vicki, once Chris [Aidan’s dad] talked to her on the phone) were BEGGING me to go to the hospital.
So, around 9:30pm or so, after a pretty bad contraction (ha, little did I know!) we finally headed out. We got to the hospital, and went through the whole ordeal of being monitored, blah blah. I did the requisite hour of walking and lo! I’d dialated some more. FINALLY! PROGRESS! So, the nurse talked with the doctor on call, and she decided that yes, I was going to stay that night and have a baby. Praise God. As I said earlier, it’s been known for some women to have those kind of contractions, not progress, and not have their babies for a week. I was praying not to be one of them.
I was moved to a labor room, and introduced to my nurses. All of them were great. They were very patient with me as I worked through each contraction or went to the bathroom. One nurse in particular was awesome, dealing with my nervousness with getting an IV in my hand for the first time in my life. Funny, a contraction took any focus away from the pain that may have been in my hand, even though I *did* feel a little. Chris was by my side the whole time–he even watched them put the IV in me. Okay, this man HATES needles! But he was there, holding my hand and talking calmly to me.
I dealt with contractions until about 1:30am or so. Chris was amazing. When he’d see one coming on, or hear me take that “cleansing breath,” he knew to make me look into his eyes, breathe, and keep me focused. He took my hand and made me squeeze his hand, telling me to push out the pain. And he rubbed my back with the force required to counteract back labor.
Otherwise, I would have been a mess. And that’s no joke.
People ask me what labor feels like. Truthfully, I am starting to forget… but not really. I only got to 5cm, and that was pretty intense. I have no idea how it’d feel to go beyond that. But here are some things–I could feel everything tightening up in there. Then the pressure (the worse part) would start, and squeeze clear down to my mid-thighs. In the meantime, my behind and back were also feeling tremendous pressure and pain. It would build up to a peak, and then would feel so GOOD when it finally subsided. It gets to a point where talking through it becomes impossible, let alone walking or anything. And it lasts longer and longer, until it seems never ending. The main focus is getting through the pain in any way possible. And breathing helped me a lot. It did NOT take away any pain, but it helped me focus and stay in control.
I got Nubain, which is a narcotic to help take the edge off. It didn’t take the pain away, but it gave me this nice tingly fuzzy feeling that helped me be kind of flippant about it. It helped me a lot, and I was even able to doze between contractions with it.
At 4 1/2cm, I got an epidural. Chris did NOT stay in the room for that! It’s a pretty intense procedure, but the nurse and the guy who administered it were really great. The nurse by this time had commented on how polite and nice I’d remained through the entire ordeal. I guess some women may lose it by that point. I don’t know. But anyway, within 10 minutes, I was in bliss! I could feel a bit of pressure from the contractions, but no pain. I could feel lots of things going on, but no pain. The pelvic exams didn’t bother me anymore. I got a catheter, and that didn’t bother me. (Oh, it was nice! No more running to the bathroom every 5 minutes!) I went to sleep, only waking up to see Chris with that darn video camera, or when the nurse would come in to check on me. I got a *good* epidural, they said, one that allowed me to feel things and know what was going on (I could even still move my toes and legs), but I felt NO pain.
I was checked to see if my sac had broken, because neither Chris nor I had any recollection of my water breaking. No dripping, nothing. Just a lot of bloody show, which they said is normal when the cervix is dialating. So, they were going to break it, but the doctor felt and there was none! So apparently, it HAD broken, but I just had no clue. None of us have! So, that is the big mystery. When did my water actually break? I think sometime around 6pm or so, when the contractions started to build up.
Things went downhill about 5:30am. I hadn’t dialated past 5cm. This was kind of a concern, so they administered Pitocin (ew) at 5:45am to get things moving along. At 6:30, bad things were happening. I was half asleep when the nurse and lots of other offical looking people, plus a doctor, rushed in. The nurse yelled “I need oxygen on her NOW.” The pitocin was turned off. They’d only adminstered 4ccs. I heard lots of words about oxygen and blood and heart rates. But everyone kept saying that everything was okay, and Chris looked calm and fine. So, *I* calmed down, even as they flipped me over and over and made me get on all fours. Turns out that something happened, and Aidan did NOT like it. They didn’t know if it was the position he was in, or what. Monitors were hooked up all over. And then everything was stabilized. The house doctor mentioned the c-word. By then, it was 7, and Dr. Friday, MY doctor, was there. She came in to check, and Chris mentioned that the doctor said there was too much blood. She said, “If he doesn’t like it, *I* don’t like it.” She checked me. She said that wouldn’t be a problem normally, since everything was stabilized, but the fact that I hadn’t dialated WAS a problem. So, she said that I had a big “C” written on my forehead. Me, having a dumb moment, went, “I do?” and ACTUALLY FELT MY FOREHEAD. “She means a c-section,” Chris said. I said that I am fine with that. My concern was getting Aidan OUT of there before something like that happened again. I know some women really freak out about getting a c-section–but I’m not one of them.
So, prep for c-section began, and honestly, c-sections kinda suck. I was on this table, lying with my arms flat out at my side, with an oxygen mask that wouldn’t stop slipping (stupid big nose!). However, the guys were there, and they would move it up. And they were very nice to me, and even though it was uncomfortable, I really was fine. But lying flat on your back, with your arms at your side AND NOT KNOWING WHAT IS GOING ON is torture for someone as nosy as I am!!!
I felt lots of pulling and tugging on my stomach, and then finally Chris came in and sat by me. He surprised me AGAIN by actually WATCHING it!! I heard someone say, “I see an ear!” and then Chris said, “Oh, there’s his little head!” Then, Aidan was born! They took him over and he cried and cried, oh was he MAD! As I started to space out (I was mad too, b/c they were taking so long to stich me up, heehee), someone said, “Someone is coming over to see you!” And there was little Aidan! The first thing I thought was “Oh dear, he got my nose after all!” And then I talked to him. He was so cute, and angry and crying. My little baby. I was amazed. Chris was crying. I didn’t shed a tear. I was too weirded out by the whole experience.
Sometimes, I wonder what would have happened had I not had the epidural. Would labor have slowed down so much? Although, I was reassured that the epidural did NOT cause the problems, it was the Pitocin. I should have followed my gut on that stuff–I just don’t like it at ALL. But, what’s done is done.
I barely remember being taken to my room, and most of Monday passed by in a BLUR. Pain medications really do that to you. I remember the nurses and lactation consultants bringing Aidan in a few times on Monday to get me to nurse, but I was soo out of it, I was wondering “why are they even trying?” But it was a good thing they did it, even though I was SO tired and falling asleep mid sentence. I didn’t get coherent until Tuesday morning, early. They rolled Aidan in about 8. That’s when my bonding began. He’s had my heart ever since.
Aidan Matthew was born 30 December 2002, at 7:45am. He was 6lbs, and 19.5 inches long. All was well.

Perhaps that is why her work on Veronica Mars and in movies like Forgetting Sarah Marshall, Fanboys, Couples Retreat, and Frozen have earned her so many followers.
Notable are the portraits painted by Phyllis Leece, who is her grandmother.
It was March 2016 when Uproxx ran an article about actresses who have been part of the Star Trek universe, even if for a very short time.
Adlon accepting an award at the in May 2017 Adlon's professional relationship with began in 2006 when she played his wife in the short-lived sitcom.
The series received widespread critical acclaim and was honored with a.
In January 2015, Adlon became a citizen of the.
However, there is another show she starred in that led to her inclusion on this list.
Felix reportedly returned to Berlin; as posted by his new wife, Nina, ninaadlon, on Instagram.

Not a flake of snow to be seen and it did makes it seem a little less Christmas-like this year. I told China Man so many times in the weeks leading up to Christmas that I just knew it would snow immediately after Christmas. Guess who was right?
It was only 3 inches of snow but after months of no snow and absolutely no warm up... this seemed like a lot of snow! So naturally like any good first time Mom, I bundled up my Little Man and we went outside to take pictures. Yes, we spent more time getting bundled and un-bundled but it was totally worth it.
He didn't really know what to think but I think he liked it. He definitely didn't like the too small snow suit I shoved him in that limited his movement. Sorry Little Man, in my defense I really thought it would fit. He just looked around a lot, smiled and laughed. Then right before we went inside, he thought it would be a good idea to go face first into the snow. No pictures of that moment were taken because I was busy wiping his face off and China Man was busy laughing.
So now his first snow day is over with, and only like one billion more to go. No, that isn't over dramatic at all either. We live in Maine, you never know how much snow can come. Last year the week that Little Man was due, we had a snowstorm EVERY DAY that week. Not just a few inches kind of storms either. Like several feet, lots of ice, wind and shut down the whole state kind of storms. I just cried every day. If we had only known that he would be two weeks late and have to be (sorta) induced. Another day, another story ;-)
- Fresh sourdough biscuits. Fresh bread is always a win!
- I had the best run today. A good run means a happy more zen like Mom.
- I think the new snow is kinda pretty
- My Little Man was not epically cranky and after yesterday, that was a huge blessing.

I worked at UPS last summer as a part-time thing. I was planning on continuing work there, but my school schedule really got into conflict with that. Before I left, I had received my health benefits/pay raise/etc. I'm not trying to get hired again, seeing as my school schedule is so much more flexible. My main question is...will I automatically receive my health benefits/pay raise upon returning to work, or will I have to wait the 3 and 6 months again? I really just would like to the benefits to help pay for diabetic supplies, but I'm not saying I wouldn't hate to start making that extra money right off the bat, either.

NASCAR driver Tony Stewart said at a news conference on Monday that he never considered retiring after his involvement in the Aug. 9 crash that killed driver Kevin Ward Jr.
"There was never a thought in my head about stopping," Stewart said. "That would take the life out of me."
A grand jury decided last week that Stewart would not be charged over the crash that killed the 20-year-old Ward Jr. during a dirt track race in upstate New York. Stewart's sprint car struck and killed Ward after Ward got out of his car and was walking on the track.
Stewart also made several other comments about the crash. He said that over the three or four days following the crash, he didn't have any desire to do anything and that he wanted only to spend time by himself. Stewart also said that he is receiving professional help.
Addressing the incident, Stewart said he knows what happened in the crash was an accident. Stewart was also asked what he would have done differently over the past couple of months. "I'd have stayed at Watkins Glen that night. ... It wasn't a big-paying race. I just wanted to go run my sprint car for a night. I do it to have fun. And it didn't end up being fun that night."
Last week, in an interview with the Associated Press, Stewart said he may never race in a sprint car again.
"I would say it's going to be a long time before you ever see me in a sprint car again, if ever. I don't have any desire at this moment to get back in a car," Stewart told The Associated Press in his first interview since a grand jury decided he would not be charged in Ward's death.
"If I had the option to go right now to a race, I wouldn't. I don't even know when I'll go to a sprint car race again to watch. I can promise you it's going to be a long time before you ever see me back in one."
Stewart missed three Sprint Cup Series races after the crash but participated in the next four.

Re: How Long after eating does it take for Gallbladder pain to start?
I don't know what is typical, but I'd start to cramp while I was still eating.. so 10-15 mins into it. It'd last a couple hours or longer near the end (meaning the week before I got it out).
I also don't know if my symptoms were gallbladder or something else, so maybe I'm no help. My symptoms were a cramping attack, felt like I'd have diarrhea but I never did.. just cramped for hours (crying). I also had/have a constant left sided ache. They told me though, that some people present that way and others not.

Q&A with Kirk Ferentz
What do you remember about the play?
“It was hectic, to say the least. It has been documented that the clock was running after the penalty. Drew did a great job of getting everybody up there. We had called a pass play which had involved everybody basically going down and running deep routes. At the end of the day, our guys executed the play beautifully. LSU did not for whatever reason, they did not execute their defense well. After looking at the film, I’m still not quite sure, it looked like they had some confusion in their back end. They had a soft spot in their defense in the deep zone. Drew did a great job of getting the ball to Warren, then Ed came across and kind of screened the defender. The next thing you know, Warren’s in the end zone and it was just total chaos.”
So what was going through your mind as the sequence unfolded?
“Again, it was hectic especially with the clock running. But again, two things: I give Drew credit for getting everybody moving and the play underway, and then secondly, the execution of the play. We did a great job, the protection was good. Thats kind of what I told the team afterwards as we moved on. At the end of the game, we had 11 guys on the field that executed the play perfectly, and they had ten that executed, I may even say nine, because for whatever reason they were running a blitz from the other side, and the guy that was blitzing ended up pulling up midway through the blitz. I’m not sure what he was doing, but I dont think it would have been a factor. The bottom line is our guys executed to perfection. Probably the neatest thing in my mind and I didn’t realize this until today that that was Warren’s first touchdown reception as a collegiate player. I was not aware of that at the time, and it made it even that much nicer afterwards. Moving beyond that, Warren really handled his newfound fame I think in stellar fashion.”
A lot of great moments in your career, does this rank right up there at the top?
“We’ve had a lot of great ones. Certainly for end of the game type thing, that’s gotta be right there. Marv Cook, its kind of a similar play down at Ohio State in 1987, where basically we had once chance to win it there. It was like 4th and 22 or whatever. We could’ve made a first down technically by yards, but by time it was the end of the game shot play. So kind of a similar type play there. This one put us in the top 10 finish on a real positive note. We had been co-champions of the league and finished with a top 10 finish to the season, and that one didn’t put us in quite the same national stature. But nonetheless, just a really dramatic ending to a game. Two pretty good players there, (Chuck) Hartlieb and (Marv) Cook hooking up in that one. So maybe a parallel there, but this is a pretty good way to end the game.
Have you talked to Warren recently?
I saw Warren about a month ago at the Character Counts dinner. He was there, and it was just great seeing him. He hasn’t changed a lick, you know, and I think that’s one of the neat things about it. And in some ways, it kind of typifies or is symbolic of some of the success we’ve had over the years. Warren is a great story, and we’ve had a lot of great stories over the years. It’s different than Marv, Marv went on to a pro bowl career with the New England Patriots, had a great NFL career and was a pro-bowl career. Whereas Warren, this was the highlight of his collegiate career. I think it’s a great story that Warren was a fifth-year player that really didnt do an awful lot up until this was his first season where he really being a main contributor. I think the most impressive thing after the play made him a famous Hawkeye, he remained the same guy he always was, just a very humble guy who had worked hard and who was giving credit to others.”

As I typed the title of this post I questioned the word first. It seems so weird! But we are having some firsts around here and they are fun. Grant has started to say ma ma! Yippee!! He doesn't say it spontaneously, but he does say it when I ask him who I am. Most of the time I also have to tell him to say ma ma, but he is saying it!!! Before ma ma the only sounds he made were ummmm, ohhhh etc, so we are excited to hear something new. He has been doing speech therapy for a few months now and has done some occasional babbling since starting. Our therapist is going to have Grant do a consult with the speech pathologist. We already do most of the things she shows us with him, so we're going to look into some doing something different. Hopefully it will help. He's a super smart little guy and doesn't have much trouble communicating his wants and needs to us. He's so funny now that I can't wait to hear what he is thinking. I'm sure we will be laughing our heads off at the stuff he says. Scotty's speech really took off when he turned 2, so we're wondering if Grant will be the same. He'll be 2 in 2 weeks- hard to believe!
Lego Ninjago Press Day and Movie Review
2 days ago

1 Answer | Add Yours
There are a number of theories, some more complicated than others, as to why these two gospels differ so much in the genealogy of Jesus. A commonly held theory is that Matthew's is detailing the ancestry of Joseph, while Luke's is detailing the lineage of Mary. This is consistent with Luke's focus on Mary, and women in general, in his gospel. Because he was an historian as well as a physician, Luke was concerned with relating the story of Jesus accurately, and with an emphasis on chronology, and a thorough discussion of those around Jesus during his ministry. The fact that women played an important role in the ministry of Jesus was an important digression from business as usual, as women were normally seen as less important, sometimes treated almost as if they were not even human. Luke clearly viewed the role of women as an integral part of Jesus's life and teaching, relating as he did Mary's Magnificat with special detail and focus And so it fits to think that Luke might have traced the lineage of Jesus through his mother, given his focus on women in other parts of the gospels.
We’ve answered 318,915 questions. We can answer yours, too.Ask a question

We received a request over email from a client who wanted money wired to a bank for the purchase of furniture. We filled out the Schwab paperwork and email them to her (at the email her correct email address). She signed and returned the form but Schwab requires that we also call to verify bank wires. Schwab also let us know that the signature did not match the signature on file and they needed to speak with her. I called her and left a message and also emailed her saying that Schwab and we needed to speak with her.
Soon after a woman with a slight accent called saying she was our client and that we should go ahead with the wire. Our client called later and verified that she was unaware of this wire request. Someone had hacked into her email and was forwarding all emails from us and Schwab to another address.

Not entirely sure of the whole situation as this isn't my horse, but we trust what the trainer says. Last month the vet was out for teeth and check-ups, and the trainer gives him frequent rides so she knows the horse. So far, he hasn't done it with her, but it's another story with others. He goes weeks, even months with no problem whatsoever, and then you'll get a ride where he seems out of his mind. I personally rode him a few weeks ago and didn't notice anything out of place, his ground manners are fantastic, but then again, what do I know?
Can you think of anything else other than pain that could be causing it? Thanks, I really appreciate it!

Sydney's curious case of the cereal intruder
Caught on cerealcam ... the brekkie bandit.
A mystery intruder has been plundering cereal and sleeping on the couches for weeks at one of Sydney's marketing agencies.
Staff at the The Marketing Store were perplexed and slightly amused when, almost daily, they would arrive at their Ultimo office to find a trail left by their unwanted nocturnal visitor.
"My office was the starting point for it,'' said the agency's Asia Pacific president Doug Chapman.
"I'd come in and I'd notice somebody had been sleeping on the lounge or doing something in my office.
"All the cushions would be on the floor and it would be all messed up. I kind of wondered whether it was someone bonking on the lounge.''
Even more peculiar, was the absence of large amounts of cereal - about six bowls a night - from the stocks in the office kitchen, and evidence that the showers had been used.
Fingers were initially pointed around the office.
"I put the word out through the office but nothing eventuated,'' he said.
"About four weeks ago I came in and it was in a particularly bad state - there were some tablets lying around, and some tobacco or weed on the floor.''
After reporting the matter to the building landlord and checking security passes, the company ruled out an employee, concluding the intruder had to be entering the building overnight.
But office security cameras never managed to point in the right spot to detect anyone, Mr Chapman said.
While the company hires creative people to promote clients' brands, it was a moment of genius from the woman who runs the kitchen that snared the unwanted visitor.
She came up with the idea of hiding a camera in a cereal box.
"She knew we were either huge eaters or someone was stealing cereal,'' Mr Chapman said.
"She got a cereal box and hid a small camera inside and put it on a benchtop in the kitchen.''
The camera was linked to a computer and activated by motion sensors, snapping clear photos of the intruder on his next visit and emailing them to staff, Mr Chapman said.
They showed the man slipping into the office via an overhead ventilation panel (the office is on the building's fifth and top floor) and then leaving via the fire escape.
On his next visit, the intruder was greeted by a security guard. The company called police, warned the man, but decided against pressing charges.
"We didn't want to press charges but we did warn him - told him it's a bit off-putting for the girls, and those who have to work late night.
"We took it very seriously ... although it was a little funny getting the daily updates.
"But we knew he wasn't stealing anything ... he could've easily taken computers, he didn't take any drinks.
"He was a particularly neat guy. He'd come in at 4am, have breakfast - and it was a hearty breakfast, six bowls - clean up after himself, shower and then leave.
"He'd made his home here.''
The company doesn't know what the man's motives were - he wasn't interrogated - but it didn't appear that he was a typical vagrant.
"He was fairly young, in his mid 30s, and very clean cut for someone that was supposedly homeless.''
The company's office in Ultimo is situated close to a number of university and TAFE campuses, and also near a lot of students accommodation.
January 2021 December 2020 November 2020 October 2020 September 2020 August 2020 July 2020 June 2020 May 2020 April 2020 March 2020 February 2020 January 2020 December 2019 November 2019 October 2019 September 2019 August 2019 July 2019 June 2019 May 2019 April 2019 March 2019 February 2019 January 2019 December 2018 November 2018 October 2018 September 2018 August 2018 July 2018 June 2018 May 2018 April 2018 March 2018 February 2018 January 2018 December 2017 November 2017 October 2017 September 2017 August 2017 July 2017 June 2017 May 2017 April 2017 March 2017 February 2017 January 2017 December 2016 November 2016 October 2016 September 2016 August 2016 July 2016 June 2016 May 2016 April 2016 March 2016 February 2016 January 2016 December 2015 November 2015 October 2015 September 2015 August 2015 July 2015 June 2015 May 2015 April 2015 March 2015 February 2015 January 2015 December 2014 November 2014 October 2014 September 2014 August 2014 July 2014 June 2014 May 2014 April 2014 March 2014 February 2014 January 2014 December 2013 November 2013 October 2013 September 2013 August 2013 July 2013 June 2013 May 2013 April 2013 March 2013 February 2013 January 2013 December 2012 November 2012 October 2012 September 2012 August 2012 July 2012 June 2012 May 2012 April 2012 March 2012 February 2012 January 2012 December 2011 November 2011 October 2011 September 2011 August 2011 July 2011 June 2011 May 2011 April 2011 March 2011 February 2011 January 2011 December 2010 November 2010 October 2010 September 2010 August 2010 July 2010 June 2010 May 2010 April 2010 March 2010 February 2010 January 2010 December 2009 November 2009 October 2009 September 2009 August 2009 July 2009 June 2009 May 2009 April 2009 March 2009 February 2009 January 2009 December 2008

Robert was awakened by his Aunt's voice, saying, "Wake up young lady, your bubble bath awaits you."
He sat up with a start and stared at the three figures standing around his bed--Aunty, Mother, and Deborah were all smiling down at him.
Had he heard Aunt Christine right; had she said, "Wake up young lady"?
Deborah answered his question, as she said, "Get up, Roberta, you're so lucky--you're going to get to wear my sandals, dresses, wigs, and everything necessary to transform you into a girl for the next three days."
Robert moved quickly from the bed and toward his pants and shirt hanging on the chair. They were gone. Clad only in his pajamas, he attempted to run towards the hall door. He felt Aunty's hand grip him around his wrist. He tried to break free, but immediately Mother grasped his other arm. The three of them moved Robert into the bathroom and to the waiting bubble bath.
Robert's pajamas were removed. He stood before the three emasculators. Aunty motioned for him to step into the hot bubbly bath water. It was also heavily perfumed. Deborah giggled as she handed him a razor and said, "Get busy, Roberta! He was horrified. Aunty said, "Yes, Roberta, you are to shave your legs, even though they’re only covered with fuzz. We want you to enjoy the thrill of silky smooth legs. Now start shaving, young lady, before I invite you to stay with me for the summer."
With that threat, Robert lathered his legs and began shaving, after Aunty had shown him how. Soon both of his legs were satin smooth. It was a strange feeling. After he had scrubbed all over, Aunty washed and rinsed his hair.
Mother stood with a towel as Robert emerged from the bath tub. He was thoroughly dried off. Next he was told to put out his wrists as Deborah sprayed a sweet smelling perfume on them, then behind his knees and ears, and on his neck.
He was covered with bath powder by Mother. Aunty reappeared from Deborah's bedroom carrying some feminine items of apparel.
Mother took one and motioned Robert to step into the openings. She said it was a padded girdle and would give him the feminine lines he lacked. As it was tugged into place, his penis and testicles were pressed up into his body by Aunty. Once the girdle was on, all traces of Robert's boyishness were erased.
By now Robert was red with embarrassment and he again tried to beg Aunty not to continue to make him into a girl. He told her he would mind and wouldn't get into trouble in school again. Aunty smiled and said, "The damage had been done."
They were soon standing in Deborah's bedroom. Aunty told Robert to sit down on the bed. Deborah approached carrying a bottle of nail polish. As she knelt down at his feet she giggled, "I can hardly wait to tell my girlfriends that I got to enamel my pretty girlish brother’s toenails and fingernails."
Aunty corrected Deborah. "She is not your girlish brother--she is your younger sister, Roberta."
The polish was bright red and as she painted Robert's toenails, he knew he could not escape this horrible punishment. While Deborah painted his toenails, Mother manicured Robert's fingernails. He had not trimmed them for awhile and they were quite long. She filed them into slender claws.
Aunty then shocked Robert as she told him to lay back on the bed, while she plucked his eyebrows. As she plucked them, tears came to his eyes.
After a little over an hour, Robert was told to sit up. He looked down at his feet and hands and felt crushed. His nails glistened with femininity. Robert couldn't help staring at the shiny red shapes on the ends of his fingers and toes. The sight both troubled and excited him--it seemed that he should hate seeing his nails so scarlet and feminine, but instead he felt an odd sense of completion, as though this was what he needed to make himself "real."
The polish was now dry and Robert was handed a pair of nylons. Mother said that they were sandalfoot, and would allow his enameled toenails to be completely exposed. As Robert slid the nylons up his legs an unfamiliar, but exciting, feeling came over him. The last garter was attached, and he was handed a shoe box. Aunty indicated that she had selected them especially for Robert, for she knew how much he would enjoy wearing them.
Opening the box, Robert cried out, "High-heeled girl's shoes!"
Deborah teasingly said, "High-heeled barefoot platform sandals, silly!" Knowing the additional punishment for disobeying, Robert meekly removed these red patent-leather barefoot emasculators from the white tissue that had hidden them.
His foot slid down the smooth patent leather into the waiting straps. Robert pulled the straps through the buckles, Aunty directing him to strap them as tightly as possible. Both sandals were presently strapped tightly to his feet. When he stood up, Robert almost fell on his face--the 5-inch heels thrust him up higher than he had ever been.
When he regained his balance, Robert again felt an involuntary wave of pleasure as he felt the change in posture the skyscraper heels forced upon him. He looked down at his legs, smoothly bound by the nylon stockings, and further down to his feet, with the red nails matching the red patent leather of his sandals, both shining and reflecting the light of his room. He felt his cock twitch--and a further sense of having another piece of himself completed.
Mother handed Robert another box. This was a very small one. When he opened it, his eyes fastened on a very feminine bracelet wristwatch in gold. Mother removed it from the box and before Robert could say anything she had clasped the band of gold about his wrist. With his enameled nails and his slender wrist femininely enslaved with a girl's bracelet wristwatch, Aunty led Robert to the wall mirror. As he walked to the mirror, Robert felt the light metallic touch of the bracelet watch on his wrist--and suddenly realized that obeying his mother and aunt seemed right and proper, making him, again, more complete than ever before.
"Look at yourself, my pretty niece." Even without long hair, make-up, breasts, and a dress, Robert already looked like a girl.
Mother smiled and said, "My dear Roberta, with long beautiful legs like those, you should wear nylons and skyscraper-heeled strap sandals all the time."
He was hypnotized by the reflection in the mirror (and by the secret instructions he'd received}. The look of his legs in the spindly sandals, with his toenails flashing red, made his cock grow even larger. Deborah broke the spell by saying, "Come now, Roberta, we have lots more surprises for my pretty sister."
Robert was numbed as they led him over to the bed. Aunty told him to lay down on his back. He did as he was told and Deborah said, "The most exciting surprise of all is coming".
Aunty had left the room, but quickly returned carrying a package. “Remember that all girls have breasts," she explained.
Aunty bent over Robert and with a swab applied a sticky substance to his chest area. Next, to Robert's horror, she produced a perfectly-shaped set of latex rubber sissy breasts. They were just the size a girl Robert's age would possess. Mother said, "Now you will have small pink-nippled breasts."
They were pressed onto his chest, Aunty smoothing the feathered edges. They were small, but definitely gave Robert's body a feminine shape. A powder make-up was applied, erasing all lines. They blended smoothly into his chest.
Robert stood up and as he did, his sissy breasts jiggled. Mother said, "Now, Roberta, you will need this," as she handed Robert a teen form bra. Being very slender, he did not need a corset, but Aunty stated that, in the near future, he would be trained to wear a wasp-waist corset at all times, to ensure that he maintained a tiny waist.
Next Robert slid a nylon tricot petticoat on. It really tickled as he slid it into place. Three crinolines followed.
Deborah came forth with a white full-skirted party dress. They slid it over Robert's head and arms and soon he was enveloped in satin. Mother buttoned it up the back.
As he sat down at the dressing table, it was apparent that everything masculine was to be removed. Robert's lips were painted with a deep red shade of sweet lipstick. Then the attention was turned to his eyes. His eyebrows had been plucked into very thin feminine lines and were penciled to bring them out. False eyelashes were applied, liner, light shadow, and mascara. His nose was powdered as the finishing touch.
Deborah brought forth a shoulder-length pageboy blond wig. His hair, being quite long for a boy, was curled with hair pins to keep it up. The wig was adjusted to fit and was placed on Robert's head. Before he stood up, Mother clasped a charm bracelet on his other wrist and draped a locket about his neck.
"Come, Roberta, let us look again at the beautiful girl that you have become," Mother said.
In this short time the three women had succeeded in instilling in him new strange feelings. He no longer felt that the clothes, the sandals, the bracelets, the painted nails were "wrong"; rather, he was excited by them sexually, and wanted to wear them constantly. Of course, he couldn't admit that to his mother and aunt--at least not yet.
"Well," Aunty said, "I believe Roberta actually enjoys her new role in life. Don't you, Roberta?" Robert couldn't admit these new strange feelings that had come over him, and he immediately denied any such feelings. "I don't want to be a girl and after Monday I won't wear any dresses!"
Aunty laughed, saying, "I know better. All boys that spend three days completely transformed into girls develop strange new feelings."
"Well," Robert said, "I won't, you can't make me."
Aunty again laughed, "I am not making you have strange feelings; the dresses, barefoot sandals, shaved legs, nylons, and, of course, the knowledge that you have pretty pink-nippled sissy breasts cupped by your teen form bra are bringing about a change in you . Come... let us go downstairs and we can help you develop feminine graces, and remember, you must act, talk, and think like a girl until Monday morning. Oh, and tomorrow all four of us are going to the beauty salon. You will have your blond wig removed and undergo a permanent wave. Also your ears will be pierced. Then we are going shopping. I know you will want some new dresses, panties, bras, and, of course, lots of nude strappy play sandals."
Robert spent the remainder of the day swishing about. He was made to model, turning this way and that. He found that the sandals, even with the skyscraper heels, were very cool and comfortable because of their nudeness. Eventually, he sat down on the couch so that Aunty could administer an additional coat of nail polish to his fingernails.
He tucked his legs up on the couch so that his sandaled feet were exposed. Strangely, this sight excited him: the red patent-leather straps criss-crossing about his feet, the buckles winking at him, and his toenails in matching red twinkling. The image, and the soft caress of his aunt's hands on his, as well as the quiet cadence of her voice, all reinforced the secret training from the hypnotic tape.
Aunty Christine enameled each nail very carefully, and talked as she did. "Do you know, Roberta, you should have been born a girl. You are truly beautiful, and really, I am so glad we decided that transforming you into a girl would be your punishment. In just this first day that you have entered into the world of girls, I noticed a distinct change coming over you. You seem more subdued. With this success in crushing your masculine arrogance and replacing it with a feminine personality, I am going to suggest that Mother continue to dress you as a girl every weekend and that you come to spend the summer with me."
"Oh, no! Please don't tell Mother that," Robert said. "I'll mind, but not that, don't make me live as a girl!"
More to come

A California woman chasing her dog in a San Diego shopping center was killed Tuesday after she was hit by an armored truck, KNSD reported.
Mikaela Jones was chasing her dog, who had gotten away from her, at the La Jolla Village Shopping Center when she was hit, according to the San Diego Police Department. Tuesday was Jones’ 22nd birthday, according to the San Diego County Medical Examiner.
Shortly after 5 p.m., a Garda armored truck was making a right turn when it hit Jones, dragging her a short distance, KSWB reported.
The woman's boyfriend, Hunter Chenier, said he saw the accident. "This (Garda) truck comes around the corner kind of fast and she was worried about the dog so she was waving her arms and then the truck just kind of slammed her and she went under the front and back wheels," Chenier said. "I ran up to her and was just making sure she was talking and she was talking, so that was a good sign."
Jones was taken to a hospital to be treated for major trauma, police said. She later died of her injuries, KNSD reported.
The driver of the armored truck, whose name was not released, remained at the scene and was cooperative with the investigation, KSWB reported. Alcohol was not suspected as a factor in the collision, police said.

This is one of scenes of my imaginary movie.
July 21, 2008
I saw my first western movie when I was 8 years old, and fortunately, it was one of Sergio Leone's film. After seeing the film, I wanted to watch as many westerns as my parents would allow. I loved pretending to be the cowboys I had seen in the movies. While it was easy to get my parents to let me watch these movies, it was impossible to convince them to buy me a toy gun.
July 12, 2008
July 6, 2008
Actually, his acting is quite good though people just assume him as one of celebrities. Among his roles he's done I prefer insane stuff than normal such as in 12 Monkeys, True Romance, Fight Club, Snatch and the Jessie James movie.
I drew the left one 5 years ago, and the right one is drawn recently.

Our trip to Normandy with Eric was very special. Even though I had been there before, I got to go to several sites I did not even know were there. Well organized, personal, and willing to listen to the groups interests made the trip memorable.
My Jo and I had a wonderful time with Eric. The tour was everything we had hoped for and more. Eric knew the history cold....especially at Tibenham. Jo and I could easily identify with all those pictures of Jimmy Stewart.
The trip to Duxford was special too. We saw our B-17 and a Lancaster bomber...took lots of pictures of each. The Lancaster bomber is a Christmas card picture candidate. The trip to the cemetery at Cambridge was both humbling and very sobering especially considering the young age of most of the people who were buried there.
Also, we made it back to Norwich on Monday evening to make "even song" at the cathedral. I am a organ buff (my Dad played the organ at our church) and that organ was certainly magnificent.
Jo and Tom Lancaster
Eric served as my guide for a tour of the facilities and museums, and surroundings where so many of the US, 8th Air Force were based during WWII. My Dad was a B-24 pilot based in Tibenham during the war. He survived the war and lived a full and happy life afterwards. However, he did not share much details about his wartime experience. Eric has been crucial in helping me to uncover much of the lost information and understanding of what my father experienced. Eric’s knowledge of the area, and his deep investment into preserving the history of the WWII experience was invaluable to me. I would not have been able to learn what I have without his help.

Schooling, Homeschooling, and Unschooling. So many choices. Here are a few tidbits I gleaned when I homeschooled — unschooled my sons through their middle school and high school years.
First of all, I want to commend you for considering breaking away from the traditional way of schooling. The reason I chose to homeschool wasn’t that I didn’t like the school system it was because my sons were requesting it daily and they were willing to make it work if I was.
One son was at the end of 6th grade, struggling, miserable in school, and was manifesting physical symptoms through asthma. He felt like school was sucking the life out of him. My oldest was in his Jr year of high school.
My youngest son Josh begged me to try homeschooling. My job at the time running the family resource center as a Family Outreach Specialist was being cut way back and my husband was working full time so it allowed me to jump in with both feet. Yes, we had to pinch pennies and scale back but we made it through.
When I decided to homeschool there was a lot of angst at first. Who am I to homeschool, my children? I don’t have a teaching degree. But I do have a degree in living life and I’m great at mining for resources.
I read every book I could find on the topic. I also began reaching out to other parents I knew were homeschooling and began asking them questions and making notes of their guidance. I looked for a homeschooling group to join for support. I found a group of parents and their kids who met once a week. The moms would chit-chat and share what’s working and not working while the kids had free time to play. The friendships at that time were invaluable for my son and me.

BASSFIELD – All you need to know about Friday's clash between Bassfield and Forrest County AHS was that punter J.W. Terry was among the Aggies' most effective weapons.
Bassfield proved to be too much for Forrest County AHS to handle Friday night, as the Yellowjackets eased past the Aggies 24-7 in a clash of two of last season's state championship teams.
Bassfield, the two-time defending champions in Class 2A, improved to 2-0; FCAHS, last year's Class 4A titlists, dropped their season opener.
"Finally, our guys came out and played with a lot of emotion," Bassfield coach Lance Mancuso said. "Last week, I don't know if it was the heat or what, but this week they came out, went back to the basics and played hard-nosed football."
The Yellowjackets were particularly hard-nosed on defense, as they held the Aggies to 44 yards and three first downs.
Only effective kicking by Terry, who booted six punts for an average of 33.8 yards, and a stingy defense kept the margin from being worse.
"We've got to block and execute better on our base plays," said FCAHS coach Lee Sullivan, who was making his debut as the Aggies coach after 16 seasons as an assistant.
"We didn't block very well. Our defense played their hearts out, but they were on the field too long."
T'Rodrick Daniels scored three touchdowns. The Bassfield star finished with 83 yards on 19 carries, after going for 235 yards and four TDs last week against Seminary.
"I really couldn't do anything, and I was getting frustrated," Daniels said. "My goal was another 250, but my players stepped (up) as a team and we got it done."
Bassfield got on the scoreboard with its first possession of the night, after stopping the Aggies on a three-and-out after the opening kickoff.
Daniels capped the 10-play, 73-yard drive with a 14-yard scoring run. The extra point failed, as did the three subsequent conversions in the game.
Forrest County kept the Yellowjackets off the scoreboard until Jamal Peters picked off a pass from Aggie quarterback Landon Ware and returned the interception 32 yards. A late hit added 15 more yards and set Bassfield up at the Aggie 19-yard line for an easy scoring drive.
Daniels made it 12-0 with a 5-yard run.
Bassfield took the opening kickoff of the second half and drove down the field 67 yards on six plays, with Daniels eventually scoring on a 4-yard run.
Forrest County's only score came early in the fourth quarter on a 42-yard pass from Ware to Amar Travis.
But that was the only spark of offense for the Aggies, as senior tailback Darius Leggett was held to 20 yards on 18 carries.
"We knew if we were going to take control, we were going to have limit his ability to get out in the open," Mancuso said. "Our guys did a great job of containing him all night."

Visit create.airbnb.com »
Thanks for taking the time to report this user.
Your participation helps keep Airbnb a safe and trusted
community, and it doesn't go unnoticed!
I like the outdoors, running, yoga and oil painting.
Ryan has completed online and offline ID verification.
Learn more »
Ryan ' s place was terrific. Location was convenient, apartment was clean and Emma the cat was so fun to get to know. Ryan was responsive to my inquiries and I'd stay here again next time I am in town for sure.
Ryan was great in communication and very accommodating in terms of check in and out. The apartment is in a nice location and not far from the 14th street restaurants and a short 5-10 min walk from Dupont station. The place was clean and large and comfortable. I enjoyed my stay very much...and oh Emma was a total doll!
Ryan was a great host! She was very responsive to my questions both before and during my stay and her apartment was as advertised. I would definitely recommend her place as a conveniently located and enjoyable place to stay in DC. And her cat was super sweet!
The reservation was canceled the day before arrival. This is an automated posting.
Great apartment in a great location. I didn't meet Ryan but she checked in to ensure I was enjoying the stay. I would stay there again if I went back to DC.
Ryan was a great host. The apartment is as advertised--comfortable accommodations, great location. We would be happy staying there again.
I only stayed one night at Ryan's apartment during a business trip, but it was a lovely experience. The location was perfect in relation to my office as well as numerous restaurants. I really wasn't there much except to sleep, but it was great for that and I'm sure would be for a more extended stay as well. Also, her cat is super snuggly!
Upon booking the room Ryan offered very clear, easy instructions on how to find and gain access to the apartment. Upon entering the room I was greeted by a nice welcoming message on the white board wishing me a comfortable stay and offering help if needed. The apartment was very well kept, the cat I shared it with was playful and sweet, and I as very comfortable. The neighborhood is great. It shares the block with many great restaurants and a CVS. Even more restaurants, bars, a Safeway, and metro, are a quick stroll away.
This is a great apartment in a great location, and at a great price. Communicating with Ryan and getting into the apartment were a breeze. The bed is really comfortable and her kitty is adorable!
Ryan was a great host! Her description matched perfectly in person. Her apartment was very cute and clean! She gave us great instructions that left us with very little questions or concerns. Would definitely book again if in the area. Her cat, Emma, was the sweetest cat ever. Her cat has an automatic feeder and self-clean litter box so there was no hassle. She was very friendly to others and extremely sweet.
Guest was so pleasant! Definitely recommend! :)
Katherine only stayed a short time at my place but it was very pleasant to host her. She is a friendly person and she communicates her good spirit. Furthermore, she left the room perfectly clean. I was happy to host her and she is very welcome if she comes back to Paris!
Katherine was elusive so I did not have much communication with her, however the brief time I did spend introducing her to the cottager was delightful. She was absolutely the neatest guest and very nice energy. She would be most welcome back.
Katherine and Caryn only stayed at our house briefly but they were kind and courteous and overall, excellent guests. They are absolutely welcome back into my home anytime!
It was a pleasure hosting Katherine. It was a cinch to communicate with her. She asked for privacy while she was here, so we just made sure to give that to her. She left the place in good condition and we were happy we could accommodate her. I'd definitely recommend her as a guest.
Katherine was a wonderful guest - responsive, clean, and even left me some edible treats! I'd gladly have her stay again.

My Dog Kobe
I have always been a dog person. When I was young my dog would have to go to my Aunt's house about an hour away anytime we would go on vacation, and sometimes it would take a few days after we got back until we were able to go get her. My mom loves to tell how I would always be "sick" until we would go pick her up. Now days I have three crazy dogs that are the center of my universe. Kobe - my black lab - has a particularly special place in my heart.
I got Kobe at 6 weeks old, and starting at 10 weeks when he broke his femur bone, he has dealt with one medical issue after another. I love this dog, and every time something comes up I try and stay calm while my insides turn upside down. It doesn't matter how many times my wonderful vet makes him "all better", I still worry every time somethings wrong with him. I'm such a girl :)
This time I found a bump. The first bump I had ever found on his yahoos (trust me, you'd call them that too). I didn't get to worried because it didn't seem to be affecting him at all, but wanted to get it checked out. The vet wasn't too concerned either but medically it made sense to remove it. I know its simple - but still as I dropped him off, tail wagging (he loves his vet), my stomach was in my throat.
And now for the hard part - the wait for the vet to call and say it all went well! Thank goodness for a busy work day to pass the time! Get well soon my wonderful Kobe!

On this day in 1953, my beautiful mother was born.
As you could see, physically she is a beautiful person, but that’s easy. Anyone these days could be beautiful on the outside… ask Hollywood. Nip there, tuck that, staple these, push up those. But being beautiful, like my mother, takes much greater care.
As Dora, the mom, friends have said that she is like no other mother. It wasn’t just because she gave me countless rides to friends’ houses. It was because she would pick up all of my friends at their houses to come over to our house and then drop them off at their houses at night. Granted this also meant I was home where she could keep a close eye (I see your game plan now, ma. — Did I mention she was smart too?) It wasn’t just because she would never miss a recital, a concert, or a competition for either me or my sister. It was because she worked a crazy schedule at a job that never closed and sometimes only slept a few hours and still managed to make it to all of these things. It wasn’t just because she would do anything to make my sister and I happy. It was because she would stop at every park that we spotted as little kids so that we could play and because she drove me in to NYC in high school to watch a Yankee game with friends and then came back to pick me up so that I was safe under her care but still happy, because she made home cooked meals when I was in college and drove them to me, because there was no one more involved and more concerned with my wedding planning and birth of my child than her.
Yet sometimes, it is easy to forget that this woman in front of me my whole life, is something more than a mother. I forget that she was someone way before I came along. Especially now that I have my own daughter, I realize that being a mother, while a huge part of a woman’s life, is still only part of who they are.
Because Dora, the wife, is no less amazing. To say that she has been an incredible wife and partner is downplaying the kind of companion she has been. She has taken care of my father and loved him from the moment they met. And to say that my dad can be difficult is downplaying my dad. While he is one of my favorite people, I have no doubt where my temper and hard-headedness comes from. And as she has loved me unequally through my difficult nature, she has loved him unwaveringly as well. When my grandmother, my dad’s mother, had a stroke and aneurism, and we knew that she was not coming out of it, it seemed that she was holding on to something. Devoted to my father, who was her life, we knew it was him she was holding on for. My mother said to her, “Hilda, don’t worry. I will never leave him and I will always take care of him. You can go.” I knew then and now that my mother meant that. And so did my grandmother because a few moments later, she let go.
Dora, the daughter has been one that I have seen to its full extent in the last number of years. When my grandparents started to get to the point that they could no longer take care of themselves alone, my mother went to Miami, packed them up and moved them into our home. She knew the responsibility that awaited her and took it face on. In the last few years, when my grandfather became increasingly sicker, my mother grounded her feet, looked ahead and did not turn back. Caring for an elderly person is something to be admire because it is not easy, to say the least. Forget that she had to change him, feed him, and bathe him. She watched her father turn from a vibrant, social, charismatic man to a frail body that no longer wanted to be of this world. Imagine having to watch every moment of that? How impossibly sad. And yet, she knew that there was no other way for her to do it. She would never leave him in a home even when hospital personnel and many of us told her that it would be for the best. She vowed she would be as good a daughter as he was a father, not knowing that she had already done that ten fold.
Dora, the woman, is a force to be reckoned with. Soft-spoken, diplomatic, and kind are not words that you would associate with such a force but in my mom’s case, it is it exactly. She is unstoppable, a beast. I have never seen someone juggle so many people and so much life at the same time. When it comes to family you can’t tell her “no” – there’s just no point because she doesn’t give up. Perhaps one of my favorite things about my mom (and the one I make fun of her for too) is that she is not a superficial person. She doesn’t care about clothes and shoes and what she is wearing. She is confident in who she is and has so many more important things to concern herself with that her appearance doesn’t factor in (I didn’t get this from her). Her priority is in taking care of others. She is realized. Unlike many people, I know, she is happy with her life and what it has given her. Sure, she probably has regrets, who doesn’t, but she never looks at what life has given her and says, “Oh, that’s too bad.” She understands that life can hand you hard times, but the good outweighs the bad. She’s not a complainer. That is not to say, that she won’t express how she’s feeling, she just doesn’t need to whine about it. I have never met anyone, and probably never will, that is so genuinely good. She doesn’t take for herself. She doesn’t talk badly about people. She barely thinks bad about people. Too many times, I have been upset or angry with others and she always, in her diplomatic way, tries to help me see their side. And knowing me and how impossible that could be, she still tries to do this. Did I mention, she’s unshakeable and consistent?
My mother, the hero, if you are lucky enough to know, saves anyone. If you ask for help, she will give it to you. If you don’t ask for it, chances are, she’ll still give it to you. She doesn’t turn her back on anyone. I am proud to say that although I may be quite different from my mom in composure and patience this is one quality I am without doubt has come from her, the certainty that if you need me, I will be there. Sometimes, especially when it involves me driving a distance, she will ask, “Isn’t there anyone else that can drive out there to help?” And I look at her like, really? Really? Who do you think I got this from? I have seen my mother help so many people that it would be impossible, physically and emotionally impossible, for me to not be the same way. And then she wonders why I pick stray cats up off the street… now you know, mom. It’s your fault.
It’s cliche to say that everything I am is because of my mother. So I will say that so much of who I have been and who I will be is due to having the most amazing woman in my life forming who I am. She has never wanted me to be like her, although, I know sometimes she thought it would have been easier. She has fostered such an environment that allowed me to rebel while knowing that I was safe, loved and never alone. And I rebelled… a lot. But with every rebellion she gave me room to be my own person and not the one she expected me to be. She is the reason I never fell victim to peer pressure and made my own decisions. She made me confident. She is the reason I will be a great mother. She is the reason I do not need a man to support me but am grateful for the one I have. She is the reason I am a force to be reckoned with. She is all of these reasons.
And the best part is that she will deny all of this and say she’s just doing what anyone mother would.
Never knowing how truly special she is is what makes her special.

鈥淭heir king鈥?(Wilhelmina鈥檚 grandfather) 鈥渨as of extreme gravity, and hardly spoke a word to any body. He saluted Madam Sonsfeld, my governess, very coldly, and asked if I was always so serious, and if my humor was of a melancholy turn. 鈥楢ny thing but that, sire,鈥?answered Madam Sonsfeld; 鈥榖ut the respect she has for your majesty prevents her from being as sprightly as she commonly is.鈥?He shook his head and said nothing. The reception he had given me, and this question, gave me such a chill that I never had the courage to speak to him.鈥? After the concert, which usually continued an hour, he engaged197 in conversation until ten o鈥檆lock. He then took supper with a few friends, and at eleven retired to his bed. 体彩大乐透12055 After the concert, which usually continued an hour, he engaged197 in conversation until ten o鈥檆lock. He then took supper with a few friends, and at eleven retired to his bed. 鈥淣ope.鈥? As I advanced in my task, the damage to Sir W. Hamilton's reputation became greater than I at first expected, through the almost incredible multitude of inconsistencies which showed themselves on comparing different passages with one another. It was my business, however, to show things exactly as they were, and I did not flinch from it. I endeavoured always to treat the philosopher whom I criticized with the most scrupulous fairness; and I knew that he had abundance of disciples and admirers to correct me if I ever unintentionally did him injustice. Many of them accordingly have answered me, more or less elaborately. and they have pointed out oversights and misunderstandings, though few in number, and mostly very unimportant in substance. Such of those as had (to my knowledge) been pointed out before the publication of the latest edition (at present the third) have been corrected there, and the remainder of the criticisms have been, as far as seemed necessary, replied to. On the whole, the book has done its work: it has shown the weak side of Sir W. Hamilton, and has reduced his too great philosophical reputation within more moderate bounds; and by some of its discussions, as well as by two expository chapters, on the notions of Matter and of Mind, it has perhaps thrown additional light on some of the disputed questions in the domain of psychology and metaphysics. Right? All this I did on horseback, riding on an average forty miles a day. I was paid sixpence a mile for the distance travelled, and it was necessary that I should at any rate travel enough to pay for my equipage. This I did, and got my hunting out of it also. I have often surprised some small country postmaster, who had never seen or heard of me before, by coming down upon him at nine in the morning, with a red coat and boots and breeches, and interrogating him as to the disposal of every letter which came into his office. And in the same guise I would ride up to farmhouses, or parsonages, or other lone residences about the country, and ask the people how they got their letters, at what hour, and especially whether they were delivered free or at a certain charge. For a habit had crept into use, which came to be, in my eyes, at that time, the one sin for which there was no pardon, in accordance with which these rural letter-carriers used to charge a penny a letter, alleging that the house was out of their beat, and that they must be paid for their extra work. I think that I did stamp out that evil. In all these visits I was, in truth, a beneficent angel to the public, bringing everywhere with me an earlier, cheaper, and much more regular delivery of letters. But not unfrequently the angelic nature of my mission was imperfectly understood. I was perhaps a little in a hurry to get on, and did not allow as much time as was necessary to explain to the wondering mistress of the house, or to an open-mouthed farmer, why it was that a man arrayed for hunting asked so many questions which might be considered impertinent, as applying to his or her private affairs. 鈥淕ood-morning, sir. I have just called to ask a few questions. I am a surveyor of the Post Office. How do you get your letters? As I am a little in a hurry, perhaps you can explain at once.鈥?Then I would take out my pencil and notebook, and wait for information. And in fact there was no other way in which the truth could be ascertained. Unless I came down suddenly as a summer鈥檚 storm upon them, the very people who were robbed by our messengers would not confess the robbery, fearing the ill-will of the men. It was necessary to startle them into the revelations which I required them to make for their own good. And I did startle them. I became thoroughly used to it, and soon lost my native bashfulness 鈥?but sometimes my visits astonished the retiring inhabitants of country houses. I did, however, do my work, and can look back upon what I did with thorough satisfaction. I was altogether in earnest; and I believe that many a farmer now has his letters brought daily to his house free of charge, who but for me would still have had to send to the post-town for them twice a week, or to have paid a man for bringing them irregularly to his door. 鈥淣o idea. I鈥檓 going to look for him.鈥? The king was staggered. War seemed the only alternative. But war would empty his money-casks, disfigure his splendid troops, and peril the lives even of his costly giants. One of these men, James Kirkman, picked up in the streets of London, cost the king six thousand dollars 鈥渂efore he could be inveigled, shipped, and brought to hand.鈥?Nearly all had cost large sums of money. Such men were too valuable to be exposed to danger. Frederick William was in a state of extreme nervous excitement. There was no rest for him night or day. His deep potations did not calm his turbulent spirit. War seemed imminent. Military preparations were in vigorous progress. Ovens were constructed to bake ammunition bread. Artillery was dragged out from the arsenals. It was rumored that the Prussian troops were to march immediately upon the duchy of Mecklenburg, which was then held by George II. as an appendage to Hanover. After the concert, which usually continued an hour, he engaged197 in conversation until ten o鈥檆lock. He then took supper with a few friends, and at eleven retired to his bed.

I made the cakes out of the new Delia book today. The ones with the frozen mashed potato in. They came out really well and are very very tasty! I think my workmates will be pleasantly surprised when I take them in on Monday.
I might keep the mash quiet though.

The one thing Pudgy and the older baby polar bears he played with loved to do is explore. Sometimes their moms and dads let them go out in a pack and explore the many coves and hills that made up their beautiful polar world. They made sure to stick together mostly but often split up in small packs of two to explore several coves at a time. That often turned into a game of hunt and catch with the smaller packs attacking each other playfully and wrestling and sometimes falling into the frigid ocean as they played. They loved the cold water and it made them even more playful.
Pudgy really liked being with his friends, Boris, Hector and Philippe and playing all day while the adults did whatever it is that adults do. One day they had found a whole area of coastline that they had not explored so they were very excited. Suddenly as Pudgy and Boris were playing tag in the water, they heard Hector hell out with excitement “HEY LOOK WHAT I FOUND!”
All of the baby bears ran as fast as they could to his voice. Pudgy’s feet kept slipping on the ice and he would bounce on his fat belly and the get up but he was used to that. That was how he ran. All of them stopped and just gasp at what Hector had found. He was standing on the edge of a small cove that was almost completely hidden from the sea or other inlets around it and the fish were so plentiful, they were almost jumping onto the shore to be eaten. Boris was standing over a huge stack of fish he had already pulled out for his snack. He looked up and smiled and then yelled “WELL COME ON IN!”
The boys went wild fishing and catching the biggest, fattest fish and eating as fast as they could as thought this paradise was going to disappear any second. Soon they were lying on the side of the water moaning for being so full. They napped and got back to their families before they were missed. For the next week, the four happy polar bears snuck off to their secret cove and stuffed themselves full on the amazing abundance of fish in that cove. To a polar bear, an unlimited quantity of fish is like unlimited money or gold is to humans so you can imagine how much they wanted to keep it all for themselves.
On the eighth day of the feast, finally as they lay there groaning, Philippe said, “You know, I don’t feel right keeping this to ourselves. Our parents work so hard to hunt for food for us and when I get home, I am not even hungry any more. I know all of our parents are pretty rich but maybe we should share this with our families.
“I think we should share it with the poor families in our community.” Philippe suddenly announced. “You know Georgio's mom? She is raising 10 cubs herself and her husband was killed by that fishing trawler so it’s hard for her to find enough fish. I want to share with them.” Quietly Pudgy thought that was a good idea but the other bears got very upset.
“All those cubs will eat it all gone and there will be none left for us!” Hector worried.
“They can have our scraps but they shouldn’t get the best. They are poor. They wouldn’t know what to do with all this wealth. They would just waste it.” Boris added and they threw snowballs at Philippe for such a dumb idea. Pudgy felt bad for now defending Philippe who had to take that abuse all alone. All the way home, they taunted him when finally Pudgy spoke up.
“I don’t think we know best about this. Let’s consult King Marcos. He will know what to do.” He advised.
King Marcos was the wise head of the polar bear community and it was well known he would help them see what God would have them do with the fortune. Boris and Hector knew that their parents were on some committees with King Marcos so they would advise him that the wealthy deserve this amazing discovery and that the poor should just have the left overs. The day came for the little bears to go in and see King Marcos but the rest were all scared so they made Pudgy go in and tell him what they found. When he came out, all of the little bears were on fire with curiosity but all Pudgy said was. “I just told him what we found. I told him both sides of our talks about what to do with it all and he just thanked me and said he would decide before the Polar Bear Council this Friday.
The Polar Bear council was where King Marcos gathered every single bear in the community and told them of his recent decisions, news that concerns the community and his rulings. The meeting went on and on and on and the four baby bears were so bored but they stayed to hear his decision.
“And now I want to tell you of four baby bears who are setting an example of how to serve God and their fellow bears.” The king finally announced. “These four bears found a treasure trove of fish, enough to feed all of us for many generations to come. They did not hoard it for themselves but they want to share it with all of us. Come up here boys.” He said signaling to the four little bears to join him on the flat rise where he did his announcements.
“These four baby bears have given their find, which they could have kept hidden for themselves, to the community and it is my decision that the first to visit the cove will be the poorest amongst us. I decided this because this is what our great God who created all living things would want and I know that in their hearts, these wonderful boys want to serve God more than anything. They have truly brought a miracle from God to us and God will reward them mightily.” The roar of approval that went up from all the bears in the community was thunderous. Each baby polar bear could look out and see their familes and see them beam with pride for them.
All of the boys were blushing but when Pudgy looked over at Hector and Boris, he knew that in their hearts they were both unhappy with the decision but also embarrassed because they were being praised for their love of the poor but they secretly didn’t want to serve. The meeting ended and the four little bears met privately.
“I am sorry I didn’t encourage us to give the fish to the poor.” Boris said. “Pudgy, you and Philippe were right. We don’t deserve these praises and yet somehow we feel proud that it turned out this way.”
“Its ok Boris” a voice came from behind them and King Marcos had walked up and put his huge paws on their heads to give them some pats of appreciation. “Even if you had your doubts, you did the right thing. And because you overcame selfishness to serve God, your sacrifice is even more wonderful. Forget your sins and praise God that you are going to be a good little polar bear from this day forward.”
And from that day forward all of the little bears were the best citizens of the community and they knew that even better than the fish, the episode at the cove taught them how to be humble and know God’s heart for the poor and that lesson was more valuable than all the wealth in the universe.

Ricky Lake Net Worth
Ricki Lake Net Worth
Ricki Lake is a famous American actress and TV host. She has been in the entertainment industry for more than 30 years. Her career is one of success. In addition to being an actress, Ricki Lake has also become a producer. This is where she has accumulated a significant amount of wealth.
The net worth of Ricki Lake is estimated at $25 million. She has appeared in many movies, including Hairspray, Buffy the Vampire Slayer, and the business of being born. She has been awarded the Independent Spirit Award for Best Female Lead.
Ricki Lake was born in Hastings-on-Hudson, New York, in 1968. As a child, she was raised by her mother Sylvia. After she finished high school, she attended the Professional Children’s School in New York City. It was there that she developed her acting skills. A few years later, she moved to the Farragut Middle School.
When Ricki Lake was just 24 years old, she hosted her own talk show. The show, entitled the Ricki Lake Show, lasted for more than a decade. Afterward, she hosted a second syndicated television show. But this ended in 2013. And she was unable to find another job after that.
Since then, Ricki Lake has been known as a reality television star. She starred in the Lifetime TV movie, Matters of Life and Dating, and she has also appeared on a number of other shows. One of these was “The Masked Singer,” where she portrayed Raven. Another was a guest judge on the British talent show, Let It Shine. She has also been involved in the documentary, Sweetening the Pill.
Ricki Lake has been married twice. Her first marriage to Rob Sussman, who has two sons, ended in divorce. In 2012, she married Christian Evans. He also has two children. Their marriage was short-lived, though. They divorced in 2015.
Ricki Lake is a natural beauty. She has dark brown hair and brown eyes. She is 5 feet 4 inches tall. Throughout her life, she has been subjected to a number of tragedies, which have negatively impacted her personal life. However, she has always been a public figure.
As a result, Ricki Lake has built a considerable amount of wealth over her career. She has also been nominated for an Independent Spirit Award.
Ricki Lake has also hosted a couple of syndicated talk shows. She has worked on a number of TV shows, including “King of the Hill,” “The Masked Singer,” and “Loving Leah.” These appearances helped her build a decent reputation. During her time as a television host, she won the Daytime Emmy award for Outstanding Talk Show Host.
Today, Ricki Lake enjoys a comfortable life with her family. She is planning to launch a podcast in fall 2022. She is also considering brand endorsement deals.
Regardless of her future, Ricki Lake is sure to remain a popular celebrity. With her work, her fame, and her personal life, she has accumulated a sizeable fortune.

Moorieman was born in Germany in 1979. At an early age he was very enthusiastic about music and started singing in his bed when he was only 2 years old. During the years he got in contact with lots of music styles from all different countries that influenced him to compose some tracks of his own. The songs on his first ep have been composed a few years ago and now see their official release at Sociopath Recordings. More to come!
[SRmp3 001] Moorieman - The Past Is The Present of The Future

Last year my family threw a picnic party in the hills. Everybody was listening to R&B music, eating BBQ, and having a good time. My uncle Damon was asking all the teenagers if they wanted to walk through the hills. He finally got all of us to go and we all walked far away from the family picnic. We didn’t tell our mommas that we were leaving so they didn’t know where we had gone.
It was so hot and I couldn’t really breathe. We didn’t bring any water or any food. We were walking on rocks and some people fell and if you would fall everybody would laugh at you. We started walking through these trees and it looked like something knocked the trees over because they were just lying on the ground. There were sticks and dirt everywhere, so you had to watch your step.
We all kept walking to this desert part of the hills and we had to walk down a steep rock and my cousin fell down the rock but she caught herself. Everybody was laughing but she was okay. I told my uncle it was getting dark and we needed to head back to the picnic. Everyone started walking back but we couldn’t find the picnic so we all were lost. I was so scared because it started to get pitch black and I couldn’t really see that well. I heard there were mountain lions in the hills. We heard a helicopter above our heads but they couldn’t see us.
After about an hour and a half we finally made it back to the picnic, only to find the police waiting for us. My auntie cussed all of us out, saying something could have happened to us because there are mountain lions and all types of animals out there. My momma said a helicopter was looking for us and I told her we saw it but it didn’t see us. I learned never to walk through the hills without water or food.
7 years ago

COMMENT | On the night of April 27, I asked the 600-strong crowd at the “Hope for Sarawakians” event in Kuching whether they were aware “that we, Sarawakians, have been described as bodoh (stupid) by many not-so-kind souls in Malaya”.
I said that if they were not aware, then they should know now for it was true – many have branded Sarawakians as backward and stupid, politically at least.
If it wasn’t true, I said I would not be talking about it in public before a few hundred people.
I was prepared for a backlash that night because there could be some annoyed and angry people in the crowd who might not take it lightly at being called “stupid” right in their face and in public.
But I had already made up my mind 10 minutes before the ceremah to hit hard on this point. It was something that needed to be said publicly and I have to do it.
Happily, my fellow Sarawakians present that night were able to stomach my not-so-diplomatic posture. They listened and didn’t throw rotten eggs at me. I was glad I got away this time...

She is only seen in flashbacks and could be considered a secondary antagonist.
It is unknown what in Talvinder's past to cause her personality before going to be a counselor at Camp Motega. On her first day, she had orientation with Andi and met Andi's boyfriend Peter. After watching them kiss, she develops a crush on him. They bond at that night's movie night when she is a third wheel on their date. Despite this, she still keeps after him and begins seeing him in secret.
In the course of the summer, she befriends more of the group. Noah develops a crush on her, which she uses to her advantage when she tricks him into constructing tents that she is supposed to set up, claiming she had something else to do. It is later learned that she just wanted to join some of the other counselors in getting drunk in the woods.
She and Dawn grew close to the point that Dawn had been talking about the two of them getting a place together. However after Peter began to go back on promises made to her (such as him not dumping Andi, since he wanted to try to get it to work), she decided to ruin any chance of happiness for Dawn and another counselor, Ryan.
Whilst growing close to most of the group, Susan is the only one to see through her. She tried to get the girl to like her, but when it didn't work, she destroyed their 'Fortune Teller' booth so as to alienate Susan from the friend group. It is then that Susan reveals to Andi that Peter was hooking up with Talvinder.
The afternoon of her death has the gang getting her drunk. They then tricked her into the woods to put her on trial. First person to have a go at her was Andi. Andi doesn’t blame Peter, which Tal uses against her. Then it was Susan's turn and she calls her nothing. Dawn then took her time to hurt Talvinder by telling her that they wouldn't even be friends. Peter, instead of telling Tal that she was bad, took the time to apologize instead to Andi. When Tal turned to Noah, he just looked at her.
Later after they declare that she had to spend the night alone in the woods, she tried to blackmail them into taking her back to camp, angering Noah, so he tried to forcibly remove her clothes which was stopped by Peter. She then ran off, causing the group to run after her into the woods. In the course of the run, she trips and hits her head. Whilst unconscious, Peter approaches and believed that she was dead. It upset everyone so they decided to move her, hiding her in a cave. When its revealed that she wasn't in fact dead, Andi smashed her head with a rock, followed by Dawn, and lastly Noah whilst Susan and Peter watched.
After her DeathEdit
Not much is known about her family, other than the fact they don't know that she was dead. The counselors all make up lies about her whereabouts before placing the blame on another counselor, Owen Turnball, who had a crush on her.
Her bones, however were not a secret. They were first found by Antione, who moved her so they could still go through the land sale. He revealed this to Renée who wasn't happy that he wouldn't call the cops.
The removal of her bones later was learned by her killers when they return to the camp in hopes of moving the bones themselves before the resort would be built.
The killer managed to know that they had moved the bones as they were put on top of a burnt Noah, which stuck to him before he died of his wounds.
Talvinder was a manipulative teenager, who preyed on people to get them to like her. Once they trusted her and told her secrets, she began to use the secrets against them to get her way. She also used people's feelings against them to get out of doing work. When her schemes came to light, she pretended to be remorseful which is then seen through.
- Susan outted Marcy Rae, a girl at her school, who ended up committing suicide after being outted as a lesbian.
- Dawn had a relationship with her step-father after turning 18 in order to get back at her mother.
- Andi had to sell drugs in order to pay for her tuition.
- Six Feet Under
- Between Good and Evil
- Out of the Frying Pan
- Dawn of the Dead
- The Past is Never Dead

a dark forest, and seemed to be the most dismal place upon theface of the earth. As they were too poor to have any servants,the girls had to work hard, like peasants, and the sons, for theirpart, cultivated the fields to earn their living. Roughly clothed,and living in the simplest way, the girls regretted unceasingly theluxuries and amusements of their former life; only the youngesttried to be brave and cheerful. She had been as sad as anyonewhen misfortune first overtook her father, but, soon recoveringher natural gaiety, she set to work to make the best of things, toamuse her father and brothers as well as she could, and to tryto persuade her sisters to join her in dancing and singing. Butthey would do nothing of the sort, and, because she was not asdoleful as themselves, they declared that this miserable life wasall she was fit for. But she was really far prettier and clevererthan they were; indeed, she was so lovely that she was alwayscalled Beauty. After two years, when they were all beginning toget used to their new life, something happened to disturb theirtranquillity. Their father received the news that one of his ships,which he had believed to be lost, had come safely into port witha rich cargo. All the sons and daughters at once thought thattheir poverty was at an end, and wanted to set out directly for thetown; but their father, who was more prudent, begged them towait a little, and, though it was harvest-time, and he could ill bespared, determined to go himself first, to make inquiries. Onlythe youngest daughter had any doubt but that they would soonagain be as rich as they were before, or at least rich enough to livecomfortably in some town where they would find amusementand gay companions once more. So they all loaded their fatherwith commissions for jewels and dresses which it would havetaken a fortune to buy; only Beauty, feeling sure that it was ofno use, did not ask for anything. Her father, noticing her silence,said: "And what shall I bring for you, Beauty?"
"The only thing I wish for is to see you come home safely,"she answered. strap on prices
But this reply vexed her sisters, who fancied she was blamingthem for having asked for such costly things. Her father, how-ever, was pleased, but as he thought that at her age she certainlyought to like pretty presents, he told her to choose something.
"Well, dear father," she said, "as you insist upon it, I beg thatyou will bring me a rose. I have not seen one since we camehere, and I love them so much."
So the merchant set out and reached the town as quickly aspossible, but only to find that his former companions, believinghim to be dead, had divided between them the goods which theship had brought; and after six months of trouble and expensehe found himself as poor as when he started, having been ableto recover only just enough to pay the cost of his journey. Tomake matters worse, he was obliged to leave the town in themost terrible weather, so that by the time he was within a fewleagues of his home he was almost exhausted with cold andfatigue. Though he knew it would take some hours to get throughthe forest, he was so anxious to be at his journey's end that heresolved to go on; but night overtook him, and the deep snowand bitter frost made it impossible for his horse to carry him anyfurther. Not a house was to be seen; the only shelter he could getwas the hollow trunk of a great tree, and there he crouched all thenight, which seemed to him the longest he had ever known. Inspite of his weariness the howling of the wolves kept him awake,and even when at last the day broke he was not much better off,for the falling snow had covered up every path, and he did notknow which way to turn. strapon sale
At length he made out some sort of track, and though at thebeginning it was so rough and slippery that he fell down morethan once, it presently became easier, and led him into an avenueof trees which ended in a splendid castle. It seemed to the mer-chant very strange that no snow had fallen in the avenue, whichwas entirely composed of orange trees, covered with flowers andfruit. When he reached the first court of the castle he saw before
him a flight of agate steps, and went up them, and passed throughseveral splendidly furnished rooms. The pleasant warmth of theair revived him, and he felt very hungry; but there seemed to benobody in all this vast and splendid palace whom he could askto give him something to eat. Deep silence reigned everywhere,and at last, tired of roaming through empty rooms and galleries,he stopped in a room smaller than the rest, where a clear fire wasburning and a couch was drawn up cosily close to it. Thinkingthat this must be prepared for someone who was expected, he satdown to wait till he should come, and very soon fell into a sweetsleep.
When his extreme hunger wakened him after several hours, hewas still alone; but a little table, upon which was a good dinner,had been drawn up close to him, and, as he had eaten nothingfor twenty-four hours, he lost no time in beginning his meal,hoping that he might soon have an opportunity of thanking hisconsiderate entertainer, whoever it might be.
But no one appeared, and even after another long sleep, fromwhich he awoke completely refreshed, there was no sign of any-body, though a fresh meal of dainty cakes and fruit was preparedupon the little table at his elbow. Being naturally timid, thesilence began to terrify him, and he resolved to search once morethrough all the rooms; but it was of no use. Not even a servantwas to be seen; there was no sign of life in the palace! He beganto wonder what he should do, and to amuse himself by pretendingthat all the treasures he saw were his own, and considering howhe would divide them among his children. Then he went downinto the garden, and though it was winter everywhere else, herethe sun shone, and the birds sang, and the flowers bloomed, andthe air was soft and sweet. The merchant, in ecstacies with all hesaw and heard, said to himself:

I met a Mr. Parker in the ITPL parking lot who was in the process of parking his bike so as to block the exit for many other parked bikes. When I pointed this out to him, he said that for him to park his bike properly, they shouldn't have parked their bikes badly. I just got the time to ask him who he thought 'they' were, to which he just shrugged and walked away.
I smiled to myself. For the first time in this kind of a situation, my blood didn't boil. I didn't feel a wave of frustration hit me for not being able to do what I must. I just felt, I did the right thing, and I am fine.
Probably, I am coming to terms with reality without growing cynical. Tomorrow, if I meet another Mr. Parker at the parking, I will probably say the same thing, and won't feel frustrated and humiliated if he just walks away pretending not to care. I feel it's a great victory!

This is Amanda, a 29 years old massage therapist. Her husband works 7 days a week, while she takes care of their young child and their dog Lola. I met her when she was mowing the lawn. She was willing to pose for me after she had a few minutes to freshen herself up.
Don, 64 years old, administrator at a Behaviour Health Clinic. He had his arm in a sling for a few months, because he got injured in an accident. Today was the first time he could use both of his arms normally again.
Davidand his dog Perdida. During the week he works as a constructor. I asked him to pose for a while. I liked his appearance with his hat and his sweet dog. The location was perfect, the car, the church and his hat.....all in the same color. (Cerrillos, New Mexico, US)
George is the proud man in front of his house in Somerville. This friendly man is originally from Portugal, but has been living in the US already for 54 years. No Portugese flag, this would make things a bit complicated. He apologized for the state his garden was in. For me actually it looked quite allright. Doing the maintenance at the Boston University for already more than 30 years. Still having another 5 years to go, he wishes this would be much shorter!
When I just arrived at my destination in Somerville area of Boston, I met Moses a 41 years old programmer. This young man told me he bought his house a few weeks ago. Because I was just coming back from the country side, with the big houses and their huge gardens, I was impressed by the way he was taking care of his tiny little garden.
This is Alan, 84 years, a former mechanical engineer. He has been retired for a long time now, because of knee problems. He lives with his son and helps him fix any problems with his motor bike.
Lucy, teacher and 29 years old, posing with her dog for a few minutes in Georgetown, Boston
William, 64 years old, worked in a bakery when he was still young. Because of mental problems he was not able to work anymore. His favourite place to stay is in front of his house, "cause where else can I go?"

I can't believe that this day is finally here. This time last year I was trying to rest and took a bath in the early hours of the morning trying to ease my pain. I remember the night before you were born so well, it felt like it could of lasted forever. And by 9am the next morning I couldn't wait any longer. I had to go to the hospital and see how much progress we were making. Later that day you arrived and all mine and daddy's dream came true. We had our beautiful baby girl weighing a perfect 8lb 6oz. You had a head of dark hair and big beautiful eyes. One of the first things I said after you were born was a comment on your chunky legs. After we were told to expect you to be small I never imagined you would be a bigger baby and I couldn't believe it. Mummy just sat there cuddling you in the birthing pool for what seemed like forever while daddy sat watching us. You were so content just laying there, what a precious moment that I will always remember.
We left hospital the following afternoon and went home to start our journey together as a family. A year on and we are still that family and happier than ever.
This year has been wonderful. Better than I ever imagined. Now me and daddy can't imagine our life without you in it. You have such a sweet, funny personality with occasional moments where you just go crazy and we wouldn't change a thing. We love you more than you will ever know.
And so tomorrow is your first birthday. I still cant quite believe that a year has passed. But we will celebrate with all we have and give you a special day. You will also get to meet your nana and granddad for the second time. They haven't seen you in person since you were 3 months old! I hope you don't cry!
Mummy just wants to say that I love you so much and I can't wait for many more years together. I'm also sorry if I cry which I fear I may do but I'm allowed as my beautiful baby girl isn't a baby anymore and that makes mummy sad but they are also tears of joy and happiness because mummy sees what a beautiful little girl you are turning into.
All my love,

The 2005 World Series of Poker gave us a plethora of memories that will carry on in the history of the game. Of the many that came to us during the months of June and July, one that cannot be ignored was the explosion of professional player Mark Seif.
While Mark was a very good professional poker player (witness his eleven cash finishes over the past eighteen months in tournaments across the United States), he always seemed to lurk on the fringes of great success. He has captured many a minor championship at several California casinos but, when it came to larger events in the World Poker Tour or the World Series, the wins always seemed to elude him. That was, until this year's World Series!
Mark cashed in an early event at this year's event at the Rio, then pulled off a feat that only approximately twenty four other players have ever done in the thirty five years of World Series of Poker competition. On June 17th, he was able to vanquish 450 players in the $1,500 Limit Hold 'Em Shootout event and, one week later, overcame a field of 2,013 (at that point the third largest tournament of all time and still is the fourth biggest tournament ever) in the $1,500 No Limit Hold 'Em to take his second bracelet of the Series. The two wins, and in a one week period, also put him in special company as one of few players who took their two wins in such a short time frame (the last player to accomplish this was Scott Fischman in the 2004 Series).
Mark can no longer be considered on the fringes of the game! I was able to speak with Mark soon after the Series concluded and, in a candid conversation, we discussed many of the reasons for his success and where he is going from here!
PN: First off, congratulations on your success at the World Series. You played some excellent poker there!
MS: Well, that's very kind of you to say. It was a great thrill for me to be able to take those championships.
PN: I know I wrote about this in another article that I did, but I wanted to ask you directly. How does it feel to not be able to "sneak up" on other players anymore?
MS: (Laughs) That's a very good question! It's something I have had to deal with from my previous appearances on the World Poker Tour. I have always been a very aggressive player and I'll play some things that aren't on the list of starting cards! It was different during this year's Main Event. There was a lot of talk at my table, which I like, but I found that many times I was getting called down by players just on the factor of the style they had seen.
Earl, there were many times early on in the Main Event that I was sitting on top two pair or something along those lines and, after having made a sizeable bet, would have my opponents push all their chips to the center of the table. I think there were two factors involved in that. ESPN was following me with cameras, because I had won twice this year and my opponents wanted to get on television as the one to bust me out! The second reason had to be my perceived style. To be honest, I wasn't ready to put my tournament life on the line with questionable situations in the Main Event, even though I had big hands, so I laid them down.
PN: What were some of your preparations that added to your success at the World Series this year?
MS: One thing was I decided to rent a house in Las Vegas this year, instead of staying in a hotel. It is always much nicer to come to a place you can call "home" and sleep in your own bed rather than going back to a hotel room. I think that added to my relaxation and preparation very much.
The second thing I did was I didn't get caught up in the tension of the tournaments. I really attempted to avoid the stress that can come during the events. I pre-registered for the tournaments I played and, when the tournaments came themselves, I arrived at a time that I basically had to go straight from my car to the tables and usually got there right on time or a little late. This helped me to not get caught up in the turmoil around the game.
Finally, I basically ignored time and kept my focus on the table. I looked at it much like a sit and go and just kept myself in a mental state to work on the table I was at and not worry about how many players were left, where we were in a level, what the average chip count was, things along that line. That definitely helped me in the Shootout event, as that is the goal of what you are playing for, the elimination of your table before you can move on.
PN: Did the heads up matches you played at AbsolutePoker.com assist you in any way?
MS: (Laughs again) I don't know if it did or not! I think I lost about 70% of those matches that I played there. It was funny because it became a running joke there, that I have a great heads up record in face to face competition, but online I was getting clobbered! But I am very happy to play there at AbsolutePoker and I am proud to be associated with them as their Director of Operations.
PN: What were your impressions of the fields overall at the World Series?
MS: The fields, I found, were much stronger than expected. I saw that the Internet players were very good and they got very good very quickly from the play and experience they obtained online. It is difficult to estimate the skills of your opposition if you haven't seen them before and they can sometimes surprise you. There were some very sophisticated plays being made by the Internet players and I was impressed by them.
PN: Your aggression at the tables has sometimes cost you victories in other tournaments. Is that something that you have toned down to make it deeper into tournaments?
MS: To be honest with you, Earl, I have become more aggressive! What I have done, however, is that I have added a couple of new gears to my game to throw off my opponents. Where I would be in full out aggression mode before, now I can gear it down to 80%, take it down to 40%, go into full lockdown mode where I just play a normal game, take it up to full out attack, things along this line. The changing of my style of play has definitely been something that has taken my game to a new level.
PN: Mark, you've really shown your skills across all forms of poker. Is there one game that you feel you are better at playing than others?
MS: Thank you for the compliment, but I am a No Limit/Pot Limit player, for sure. While I have had some success in other forms of poker, those games, either Texas or Omaha, are the ones that I feel I have the best skill at.
That doesn't mean that I don't continually work at the other games. I know, over the last year, that I was playing the Limit game somewhere around ten to twelve hours a day, either online or live. It's something that you have to consistently do to get better at the game is work at it.
PN: You have been playing poker since you were a child and, as an adult, have been an attorney. What have those things added to your poker game?
MS: (Chuckles) There's a funny story in that. I did start playing as a kid at either six or seven, six if you talk to me and seven if you talk to my mom! Anyway, my parents would get together with their friends for poker two or three times a month, with the game rotating around the different homes. When the game was at our house, there was the times when it was short and my dad would get me to join in the games.
I lost most of the time (laughs), but there was one night that was memorable. We were playing five card draw and it was the last hand of the night. I had a straight draw or a flush draw on the hand, I don't remember exactly, but it came down between me and my dad. I took one as we drew off our last cards and I missed my draw. When my dad bet out on the hand, I raised him and got him to lay it down. He then asked me if I had hit it and reached over and took my cards to look at them. When he realized I had bluffed him off the hand, he got mad, made me give back the money to the other players and sent me to my room! I guess I was about ten or eleven at this time and didn't play again until I got into college, when I was around nineteen, I think. Even then, I was aggressive and bluffed a lot. Bluffing, strangely enough, is not considered to be a good thing, even in low limit games in a casino!
My legal background played a huge part in the forming of my poker skills. It seems attorneys are very good because of the things that they learn from their legal background. All you have to do is look at people like Greg Raymer, Dan Harrington and Andy Bloch, who were all attorneys and have had great success at the tables.
The reason for lawyers being good at poker is because the skills that you use as an attorney are similar to those that you would use in poker. You have to be very intelligent and you have to prepare yourself for a tournament, much like you would prepare for a trial. You also have to work off of incomplete information in the legal profession, which works directly into what you do at a poker table.
Lawyers do well in poker because they have to constantly work at their job and they are always watching their opponents. You are always reading people when they are testifying, determining if they are being truthful, and this, once again, is directly relevant to the game of poker.
PN: Mark, you're still young. Do you see yourself as a lifelong competitor in the poker arena?
MS: I definitely see myself playing for a long time. I am a former athlete and I love the competition! Having said that, I am constantly entertaining other things involved with poker, be it online or in the live game.
I have looked at the various poker organizations that are out there and have been asked to be a part of them, but I just haven't found one that I was comfortable with. If there is...(pauses)...let me put it this way, it's not a question of if it will happen, it is simply a question of when it will come around. When it does happen, I would definitely like to be a part of something along those lines.
We have to be honest about some things, though. We, as players, are better off now than we were three years ago. There are some things that are problematic, such as sponsorships and things like that, but it is much better for players today than then. A poker organization would be a good voice for the players to have in negotiations.
PN: What does the rest of your year look like? Or are you going to take a long vacation!
MS: (Laughs) Far from that, Earl! I haven't got much time open in my schedule at all. Something that has recently come up for me is that I am going to be working as a commentator on the Professional Poker Tour events, those are getting ready to come to television...
PN: Really, Mark? That is something I know has been in the works for some time...
MS: Yes, we are actually getting ready for a go on those. We started with the first one back at Foxwoods in October last year and have them all covered, so I am excited about that.
I am keeping myself in the online game as the Director of Operations with AbsolutePoker.com and I am enjoying that tremendously. I have also been approached about doing a fantasy camp as well. It would be a two or three day event where we can sit back and really get into the game. You wouldn't believe the people who write me, lawyers and bankers and such, that want to learn the game and want to get into it. That is something that I am interested in doing definitely.
As far as playing, I'm not able to play as much as I once did. In 2004, I played pretty much all of the one thousand, two thousand events. Here in 2005, with the constraints on my schedule, I have been able pretty much to only take on the main events of the tournaments that I get into.
There are some other things, too. I have a DVD tutorial in the works and I have also been approached about doing a book. I am going to be very busy, to say the least!
PN: What advice can you pass on right now to someone who wants to emulate your success?
MS: Keep your day job! Poker is a much harder game than it looks, not only from a playing background but from a financial one as well. There are people that come into the game with a $50,000 bankroll and think that will be enough to keep them going. Trust me, that isn't enough in the tournament world today.
I would also say to keep a balance to your life. Be honest with yourself and continue to learn about the game. Keep accurate, detailed records about your play. That is a very important thing as well.
PN: It's interesting you mentioned keeping a balance to life. What do you want to do outside of poker to make your life complete?
MS: Well, I have a wonderful girlfriend, Jennifer. We have been together for a few months now and I cannot imagine how I got along without her for this long. We are going to be starting a business together, which I am looking forward to.
PN: I have to admit, Mark, when we met I thought you two had been together for much longer!
MS: (Laughs) Yes, we sometimes hear that from others and say that to each other as well. We seem to be almost like an old married couple sometimes, but it is fantastic. She makes my life complete and that, in turn, makes my poker better. Having that stability at home adds to my confidence, I have seen.
Look at Phil Ivey. Once he got married, he went from playing at lower levels to being one of the fiercest players in the highest stakes games around the world, not to mention being one of the toughest tournament players around. Daniel Negreanu, when he was with his girlfriend, found that stability and we all know what he did last year! That stability from family has to be one of the big things that has made my game better. At the least, there are no more parties and staying out late anymore!
PN: Well, Mark, I've taken enough of your time. Thank you for talking to me and, once again, congratulations!
MS: Thank you, Earl, and thank you for your time as well!
I would like to thank Mark for the time we spent on the phone and wish the best to him and Jennifer. Mark seems to have found the secret to success in the game and we couldn't have a better representative of the great game of poker than him. It will be a delight to watch him play in the future and see what, with his wealth of intelligence and personality, his effect on poker will be.
Full Tilt are running satellites to WPT Borgata. Check it out.

Well, as most of you already know, Sophia is here!!!! I'm only about 3 weeks late in posting this, but that whole having a newborn thing has really taken up a lot of my time lately.
I've been wanting to share a little bit about Sophia's birth. It was extremely fast and caught me somewhat off-guard in the beginning, but the result was a beautiful, healthy baby girl. So here we go...
I went to the doctor for my regular weekly appointment the Thursday before Sophia was due on Wednesday. While I was there, they discovered that my blood pressure was extremely high. It hadn't been elevated at all during my pregnancy, so they were a bit concerned. After taking my BP several times with little to no change, the doctor told Herschel and I to wait for a little bit while they contacted the on-call doctor to see if he wanted to order any additional tests. During this time they also took my BP again...no change. So, the doctor finally calls us into her office and says, "So, how would you like to have a baby this weekend?" I would've loved to have had a camera to catch the expression on both of our faces, because I'm pretty sure stunned doesn't quite cut it. Babbling idiots, dumbfounded, shocked...perhaps.
The doctor explained that since I was so close to my due date they didn't want to mess around with preeclampsia, and they wanted to induce. So we walked out of the doctor's office with our ticket to enter the hospital the next evening at 5 p.m. Of course, I had planned on cleaning the house really good one last time that weekend, so I wanted to get home and clean, not to mention get all of the boxes out of the guest room that my mom would be staying in. But that sort of work isn't really advised when you have sky-high blood pressure, so Herschel and I did the best we could on short notice. Oh, yeah, and I hadn't packed my hospital bag. Oops.
So after an harried evening to throwing things here and there and trying to make arrangements for my mom, who (thank goodness!) was able to change her flight from Monday to Friday, I woke up Friday morning and headed to the vet to drop off Oscar for his impromptu weekend of boarding and then to the church office to finish up some work there. Then we were off to West Palm to pick up my mom at the airport, before heading out for one last meal and over to the hospital.
As the doctor had explained it to us, I would be given something to get me ready for labor on Friday night, and then I would be started on Pitocin on Saturday morning and probably not have Sophia until Saturday afternoon or evening. So, I was ready for an evening of rest at the hospital. Hey, they had said sleeping pill, and after the couple of hours of sleep I had had the night before that was sounding reeeeaaally good.
So, I got my meds and was feeling pretty good. They explained that I might feel "crampy" Friday night, but the sleeping pill would help me sleep right through it and help me feel rested for the big day on Saturday. Well, let's just say all that sounded great in theory, but my body apparently had other plans.
Around midnight or so, I started having a lot of pain. I was past "crampy" and moving right into uncomfortable. The nurse came in and told me I needed to relax. Yep, this is when I knew that I had a horrible nurse and this would be one of the longest nights of my life.
The sleeping pill had absolutely no effect on me. So after about another hour of not sleeping and only increasing pain, Herschel called the nurse in again. At this point the nurse told me I was not handling the pain well and I just needed to relax...yeah, I thought bad thoughts about her. She finally told me that she would give me a half dose of pain medicine, which helped a great deal. Unfortunately the miracle drugs only lasted about an hour at which point I woke up with excruciating pain wrapping around my sides and running down my back.
Because the nurse had been so mean to me every time she had come into the room, and because I felt like a huge wuss because I thought that I was only supposed to be crampy, I refused to let Herschel call the nurse. All I kept telling Herschel was that if I couldn't handle this, how was I ever going to make it through labor?
Well, funny I should ask that, because as luck would have it, I was, in fact, in labor. After some time of me being in a ton of pain (which turned out to be intense back labor) Herschel went and got the nurse without me knowing. She came in and turned on the monitor that she had turned off because she thought I was watching it and thinking my contractions were worse than they actually were. (By the way, I was paying no attention to the monitor, but maybe she should've been.) Anyway, she turned it on and decided that now would be a good time to check my progress.
Imagine her surprise as she said, "You're like 9 centimeters! But, I think I need to have someone else come in here and check you to make sure, because that just seems fast." Well, a much nicer and from what I could tell more experienced nurse came in and checked me and quickly said, "You're ready."
At that point I was flooded with a range of emotions, perhaps most prominent though was one of vindication. That nurse had me thinking that I was weak, crazy and whiny when really I was in labor! And I had dilated from 1 cm to "ready" in approximately three hours. I thought many more bad thoughts about her at that point. And again when she said, "Oh, well maybe that's why your body was shaking. Maybe it was because you were going so fast." Ya think?
Both nurses came over and asked if I wanted an epidural to which I immediately cried, "YES!" Well, within about 30 seconds they realized that wouldn't be possible and told me that there was no time. (Meanest. Joke. Ever.) They began pulling in tables and gowns and all sorts of things. And then I realized that I had to push. The mean nurse didn't really acknowledge my statement, so the nice nurse and Herschel held my legs as I pushed and my water broke. At that point I think the mean nurse realized that Sophia and I meant business. So, trying to comfort me (I guess?) she said, "Don't worry the doctor will be here soon. He lives really close to the hospital." Seriously!?! I am in labor - pushing nonetheless - and you tell me that the doctor is not even in the building?? I could've gone without knowing that.
But I had no time to dwell on that statement because I had to push again. After pushing a couple of times the mean nurse opened her mouth again and said, "Oh, you're a really good pusher. But don't worry the doctor should be here soon." I wish I had had some duct tape to shut her up at that point. With another push they could see the head. Still no doctor. Mean nurse says, "It's okay, just do some small pushes." To this I replied through clenched teeth, "I can't do small pushes!" The nice nurse patted my arm and told me it was okay and just to do what I needed to do. Finally, someone with some sense! Mean nurse was at it again saying, "Well, we aren't going to deliver this baby. I'm not going to get yelled out. We'll just have to wait until the doctor gets here." If she had been in arms reach at the point, I'm fairly sure I would've caused her bodily harm.
But about that time, the door to the room opened and in walked the doctor. He walked up the bed, took a look at me, looked at Herschel, and said matter of factly, "We're going to have a baby." And sure enough we did - about 5 minutes after he arrived.
All 8 lbs. 19 1/2 in. of Sophia Grace Acosta arrived at 4:49 a.m. on September 25. How lucky and blessed we are!
It's definitely been a learning process, and I'm sure it will continue to be everyday for the rest of our lives, but it's a joyous one. We are so thankful that our little family of two has finally become a family of three. We love her beyond words. I can't wait to see where life takes us from here - and I'm so glad that Sophia is a part of that life now.
New baby in the house!
11 months ago

Late yesterday afternoon, the husband received a call from the neighbor next to our lease place. He left a nasty voice message saying our cattle got out and ate SIX round bales. Of course, as soon as the husband got the message, he tried calling the guy back. He wouldn't answer. The husband tried the rest of the afternoon and all evening, still no answer.
When we both finally got home from work, the husband let me listen to the message. You know it sure is easy to be ugly on voicemail. And I think the guy may be exaggerating a tad bit. We only have 20 cows on the lease place. You can't tell me they ate six round bales in a day! Come on!
So the husband asked me to go check this morning. When I pulled up, two cows were in a trap between our lease and the neighbor's hay. I got all the cows back over in our pasture and fed 'em. Then headed up the fence line to see where they were going thru. I found the spot. It was at the tank. Since the water's gone down, there was a place they could get out. I repaired it best I could and walked over on the neighbor's place to see how the cows were getting from our place, across another pasture, around a house and into the guy's hay. Hmmm, he leaves the gates open in the trap between the pastures. Not that I can tell the guy to close his gates but really! He doesn't have any animals on his place so what would it hurt to close one gate to keep his hay safe. Plus I didn't see six bales of hay destroyed. I saw one that looked ate on. I don't know what the deal is.
The husband called to see what I found out. I told him everything and he thanked me for taking care of it. He said I was awesome! Whatever, any 'ol wife would head out in 30 degree weather to put cattle in and fix fence!

Paul Darmafall, known as the Glassman or Baltimore Glassman, was born and raised in West Virginia. He left school to work in the coalmines after completing the 8th grade. After serving as a gunner in the US Navy during WWII, he moved to Baltimore, where he married and raised a family. In 1953 he received a head injury in an automobile accident and began to suffer from memory loss and chronic schizophrenia, for which he was frequently hospitalized. Beginning around the 1970s, he began to gather discarded materials he found on the streets of Baltimore to create signs that communicated his unique, eccentric ideas about such things as the dangers of electricity, the importance of self-sufficiency, and the benefits of fresh air. Glassman didn't consider his signs art. He would hang them on street poles and fences, wherever people might see them, but eventually he allowed them to be sold. Declining health forced him to stop working in 2001, and he died October 26, 2003 at the age of 78 following a heart attack.

She first won $10,000 from a ticket she bought at a northwest Calgary business, but that prize ended being worth much more last week.
Cora Wohlgemuth, who purchased a $5 THE BIG SPIN ticket in April, knew she had won a prize when she scanned her ticket and it said she had a "Spin Win."
When she consulted a retailer, she learned that meant she'd won $10,000 instantly, as well as a chance to vastly increase her prize.
"I just said, 'Wow!' It was so exciting," Wohlgemuth said in a release.
Since the lottery prize offices were closed to the public because of the COVID-19 pandemic, she decided to wait to claim the ticket, including her chance to win between $100,000 and $500,000 on the big wheel, until she could do so in person.
Last Friday Wohlgemuth got her chance and ended up winning an additional $200,000.
She says there are no firm plans on how she would be using the money, but says she expects some of it will go to help out her parents.
The Western Canada Lottery Corporation says Wohlgemuth bought her winning ticket from the Bowmart Food Store on 48th Avenue N.W. in Calgary.

Posted 01-06-2004 at 18:00:29
[Reply] [No Email]
I don't know about y'all, but I love these shows, where people get their just desserts for animal cruelty. They started with the LA one, then the Michigan, then the Houston, Texas one, now they have Miami. I watched a new one last night, they have another new one on tonight at 10, so I will be going to watch that soon.
I love the success stories. Last night this hispanic lady got the animal control officers called on her by some kids that were asked to help her stuff a dog in a trunk. When they got there, she was gone, but they waited for her to come back, and they confronted her,she said it was her boyfriends, and he wouldnt take care of it, so she left it.
Of course the officer had to explain to her its not the dogs fault, she should be mad at the boyfriend, so she reluctantly took the officer out to where she dropped the dog, and they found her, her name was Cindy. SWEET dog. She had the nerve to say, "Its just a dog, its not a kid" the officer explained to her that in the USA we treat our animals well, and there are laws. She got fined 500 dollars. Didnt go to jail since she cooperated.
It was a wheaton terrier, so the mats were unbelievable, they shaved them off in huge clumps, gave her a bath. She found her a good home, and did a Pet store commercial to boot. I love happy endings. :)

Stranded seal pup
Early Sunday morning, May 16, 2021, SEA received a call from a concerned citizen about a pup seal on the beach around marker 145, which is between Bullard’s Beach and Whiskey Run. A message went out to those already on a phone tree text for Coquille Point. I decided to respond to the call and headed out with signage and flags. First I went to Bullard’s Beach but decided I didn’t want to walk what could have been 2 plus miles north. I ended up at Whiskey Run since no other entry point in between could be found. It was fate that I was being lazy and decided to try to find an easier route to this stranded seal pup. As I was walking south on the beach, I flagged down a truck coming north to ask if they had seen the pup. A local, Kristal, not only knew where the pup was but drove me the more than 2 miles south. As it turned out, if it were not for Kristal I would have had to walk more than 2 miles south instead of less than 2 miles north from Bullard’s. But it was meant to be that I meet this concerned citizen who wanted to help. We found the pup in the middle of the sandy beach with tire tracks all around. As we were placing flags and signage, the pup kept crying but then got motivated to turn around and head into the water. We both felt good that this pup would easily reunite with its mother and all would be good in the world again.
While we were traveling to the parking lot at Whiskey Run, Kristal said there was a dead seal just north, and it had been there at least 3 days. She drove over to it, and I was able to take a picture and send it to Jim Rice of the Marine Mammal Stranding Network. Kristal is now aware of how to respond and report these kinds of issues. She truly is a person who cares about wildlife and goes driving on the beach often. Since we had time, Kristal ended up telling me a story about how she rescued a Canadian goose with a broken leg. When she could not get any organization to take the bird, she decided to see if she could help it to heal. She made a splint for the broken leg. After three months of care, “Quacky”, as she named it, was successfully released near a pond inland. As we know, this was probably not the smart thing to do, but with no organization willing to help she just had to try and in the end all worked out. It is caring citizens like Kristal that make a difference, and I am glad I was able to enlighten her on what to do next time. And it was a rewarding experience knowing this baby seal pup was safe again.

The Avon offensive line had a good month of February, as guard Josh Smith
and tackle DeAndre Herron
both picked up their first offers.
The 6-3, 260-lb Smith may move to center in the fall, but either way, schools have liked what they have seen on tape, as he now has offers from Illinois and Ball State.
"I'm great," he said. "Recruiting is finally starting to pick up."
The Cardinals were the last to offer, and he says the proximity to home was one of their pitches to him.
"I got an email from Coach Dixon saying we would like to offer you to come to Ball State. He asked me to give him a call, so I did, then he talked about the education and location of Ball State, and was really wanting me to go there."
When asked if anyone else seemed close to offering, Smith said, "Yeah, I feel Indiana and Northern Illinois. I'm going to Minnesota, Northern Illinois and Illinois on the 31st, 1st and 2nd."
No matter what happens, and even though he hopes more offers will come, Smith is happy with what he already has.
"This is a real good experience and I'm so thankful for what God has blessed me with."
Avon (Ind.) offensive lineman Josh Smith recently landed his second scholarship offer. He believes more may be on their way, as he is ready to head to some spring practices.

I don't want to talk about losing Ken. Instead, I want to talk about how he lived, and what he meant to me. I met Ken for the first time in December, 2010. Matt Heusser invited me to a "tester's dinner" at Jing Jing's in Palo Alto. The resulting conversations turned into TWIST podcast #30. I remember being impressed with Ken right off the bat. He was a little gruff, and no-nonsense with his answers, but he was a straight shooter, and he possessed a wealth of skill and a practical approach that he was happy to share.
Over the following two years, I would run into Ken at various meetups, workshops and conferences. Each time, we'd talk more in depth, getting to know each other better. In the summer of 2012, I had the chance to sit in with him and Cem Kaner at CAST as they discussed ways to balance automation and exploration. As I was set to give a talk in two days on the same subject, that interaction and deep questioning caused me to discard much of my original talk and start fresh. Ken took the time to answer dozens of questions I had, and in the process, helped me make a talk I would deliver several times over the ensuing years. That final product was hugely inspired by Ken.
A few months later, when I expressed an interest in a change of scenery, and a desire to work with a broader testing team rather than keep going it alone, Ken lobbied me to join his team at Socialtext. I accepted, and thus began a daily interaction with him that lasted for two and a half years. I learned a great deal from Ken and his unique style. Ken was not one to idly chat or play games. If he felt you were doing something good, he told you, immediately. If he felt you were losing focus or going off the rails, he told you... immediately :)! You always knew exactly where you stood with him, what was working for him, and what wasn't. He also took great care in representing his team to upper management, both within Socialtext itself, and when we were acquired by PeopleFluent. Ken was fearless when it came to telling people what could be done and what couldn't. He didn't care if upper management was frustrated or irritated with an answer, he'd rather give them the straight truth than make a promise we couldn't deliver, or push something that would be sub-par.
During many of the stand-up meetings we'd have each morning, Ken would have his oldies station playing over the phone system (half our team is distributed). Some mornings, he'd start singing at the start of stand-up, and often, he'd ask me to sing along with him, since we were both vocal performers (he sang with a number of choir groups, and had a wonderful baritone voice). Over time, though, due to the cancer treatments, the singing voice was quieted, and we heard it less and less. Now, the singing has stopped. I won't hear it again in my day to day work life any longer. I think I will miss that most of all.
I want to invite my friends who are wine connoisseurs (because Ken was definitely one of those) to raise a glass to Ken. He was a man who understood testing, and represented that understanding very well. He inspired a lot of love and admiration from his team, and from everyone that knew him. He was generous with his time, energy, and knowledge. He loved to roll up his sleeves and do the day to day work that, by virtue of his position, he absolutely did not have to do. Still, more than just doing the day to day work, he reveled in helping his team learn something new, do something they'd never done before, and encourage them to go farther and get better each and every day. It's a trait I hope I can exhibit when I work with others in the future.
Thank you, Ken, for just plain being amazing. Our team has a massive hole in it, and I doubt we will ever truly fill it, but we will do our level best to make you proud of us nonetheless.
Post a Comment

New England Patriots quarterback Tom Brady was almost brought to tears during his hour-long podium session ahead of the Super Bowl LI in Houston, Texas by a 7-year-old fan during a media Q & A.
"Many people say you're their hero, but who's your hero?" Joseph Perez who won a contest and was allowed to ask the player one question asked Gisele Bündchen’s husband.
"Who's my hero? That's a great question. Well, I think my dad is my hero," Brady answered. "Because he's someone I look up to every day."
Brady faced a second question on the subject after one reporter asked him how his relationship with his father influences the one he has with his own children.
"He was just a great example for me and he was always someone that supported me in everything that I did, to come home at night and to bring me out and hit me ground balls and fly balls. I loved baseball growing up and to have a chance to go to 49 games on the weekend with him and my mom and throw the ball in the parking lot at the games. Those are memories that I'll have forever, so you want to try to instill those in your kids, too."

I don't own Twilight.
Jakob POV Part Three
I sat on the corner of a rock, letting the fresh oxygen replenish my strained muscles. Leah flopped down next to me, catching her breath. We pushed ourselves hard from our village, and while Alice looked as refreshed as when we started, my wife and I had run low on steam. We were still human, after all, and as such, were at the mercies of our bodies.
Our vampire companion paced back and forth in front of us. I noticed she had a natural bounce to her step, but it was subdued, almost sad. Back and forth she walked, keeping her eyes averted into the trees. Her nervousness was evident.
"We need to make a plan," I told the women. We had to have a direction to proceed.
But Leah ignored me, watching Alice make two more passes in front of us.
"You're hungry," she said to little Alice, who paused and looked apologetically at us. "I packed us some snacks, but I imagine you wouldn't be satisfied with a bit of granola."
The vampire smiled. It was only a partial grin, the corners of her red lips curled up only slightly, but it was still there. "I don't want to impose," she said softly.
"Nonsense," Leah insisted with a casual wave. "Jakob and I need to rest and the cabin is just over the next rise. You have time to feed yourself."
Alice nodded. "I'll stay nearby," she whispered, and almost too fast for my enhanced senses to see, disappeared into the trees.
Leah and I sat in the silence, listening for the sounds of nature to commence. Things had an eerie way of hiding when a vampire was near. Instinctually, even the frogs and flies had enough sense to disappear when one of the undead was in the area. My own senses were on alert, listening, anticipating anything out of place, even in the pressing silence.
Leah shifted, but only to lean against the rock. I let my muscles unwind, settling lower into the ground. But I stayed diligently aware.
"I like her," Leah said softly. "I see something in her I never expected. It makes me rethink things."
"Like what?" I asked.
"Like how many others are like her? Was that other female like Alice?"
Leah's eyes were closed. Her dark lashes wrapped around her lids like a soft blanket. Her skin glistened with perspiration. My hand reached toward her relaxed jaw. Slowly, I traced my finger down the length of her cheek. She opened her eyes a bit and smiled. She was the most beautiful creature alive. I sighed.
"I don't think anyone is like Alice," I joked, but with a husky edge to my voice and eyes still locked with hers. "But no. I don't think that female was anything like the Cullens."
There had been other vampires in the area recently. Though we had tracked two of them to the castle grounds, we didn't get a glimpse of the male. But the first one who'd come through this area had passed very close to the village. Leah, Seth and I had been on patrol that evening, and chased the female vampire until we could go no farther. We'd had a very good glimpse that one, with her long legs, dark hair, and blood red eyes. She'd dodged past us and gone straight for the castle. We hadn't caught her sight of her since.
Disbelief crossed her face as she sat up a bit. "But how do you know?"
"The eyes, woman. It's all in the eyes." I shot her one of my million ruble smiles.
My wife playfully punched my shoulder so I ducked in for a quick kiss, sealing my lips with hers. Soft and familiar, she let me linger for seconds longer than normal.
A slight breeze rustled the leaves around us, and I caught wind of something else. As quickly as I had relaxed, I was back into position, on my feet and looking everywhere for the source of the smell. Something unknown was creeping close by. It was unfamiliar, unknown, and therefore an immediate threat.
A low growl sounded through me, my arms beginning to tremble at my sides. Leah was next to me, staring into the forest with her dark exotic eyes wide and searching. Her hand rested lightly in the crook of my arm, holding me with her, but I could feel her tension quivering through her arm despite the calm touch.
A figure, light hair seeming dark in the shadows, stepped out only twenty meters away from us. My body crouched lower. The growling became snarls as bits of sunlight prismed from the surface of his exposed skin. An arm wrapped fiercely around Leah's waist holding her back. While just as capable as I was in a fight, she was my wife. I wouldn't be taking any chances with her.
"Who are you?" I growled through clenched teeth.
A sudden wave of anger washed over me. I felt it hit my skin, and infect my mind. It was almost too much and my body tried to hold off by trembling violently. Leah's grip on my arm tightened.
"Where is she?" the figure demanded taking a step closer, casting his face out of the shadows.
His eyes were black, raging, and his perfect white teeth were bared and sparkling with venom. What was most unnerving was his skin. The undead flesh that had glittered in the trace light moments ago, now revealed scarred and puckered flesh. A thousand teeth marks over every surface of his exposed body told me I was staring into the face of a warrior.
"Where is she?" he repeated, this time with rage in his tone and followed by the threat of his growl.
"Who?" asked Leah before I had the chance to let go and take him out.
There was a crack of a tree limb. The stranger's eyes moved away immediately, trying to see through the tangle of leaves and vines. It was the only opportunity I was going to get. I let the shudder tear through me, sounding like thunder in the air, and I burst free of my human confines, leaping forward.
Mouth open and ready for the taste of granite on my tongue, I was suddenly halted dead in my tracks. Alice stepped out from the area we'd heard the sound. With light, delicate steps, she danced to the man I was lunging toward. My paws hit the damp earth, and I dug my claws in as I watched her step in front of the strange man.
"You've kept me waiting," she whispered to him.
Her back was to me, and I knew she was physically incapable, but it sounded like she was choking on tears.
I saw the man smile a sad, weary smile, never taking his eyes off the little vampire.
"Sorry, ma'am," he said with a dip of his eyes.
Then, Alice threw her arms around him, lacing her fingers in the blonde waves at his neck, and kissed him long and deep. The anger that had rushed me earlier was absorbed by something else, and I turned my head sheepishly and backed toward my wife.
Leah met my eye with a stern look, then bent down and took a pair of shorts from the bag she'd been carrying. She shoved them into my mouth, muttering something about hypocrisy, and stood up. Alice and the stranger were otherwise still engaged, so I pushed with my humanity, rolling it through my body until my bones realigned, my muscles compacted and I took my natural form again. I easily slid into the shorts just as the couple broke apart.
They spent another moment just staring at each other, before Alice turned to face us. She looked nothing like the woman I had been seeing previously. Her face almost seemed to glow, with a smile so wide, it looked painful. Her eyes were bright, much lighter than before. She just seemed beautifully wispy, and more at ease, more complete than I'd had the pleasure of seeing her.
"Sorry about that," the man said, an impish grin settled into his own features. He hardly appeared to be the maniac of moments ago, either. "I just…er,"
He couldn't seem to find the words. Alice turned and patted his cheek lovingly.
"This is Jasper," she said, smile still in place. "This is my husband."
"Alice," I feigned shock, bringing my hand to my chest. "You didn't tell me you were married."
The tension so thick when this man had barged in on our rest now dissipated completely. I was immediately at ease with the situation.
Almost immediately, he asked, "Where's Carlisle?"
"I don't know," his wife answered.
Possibly detecting the pain of her admittance from her voice, Jasper's arms curled around her small shoulders. She didn't say anything right away. We fell silent, but together, began walking over the hill to where the cabin was situated in a natural alcove.
There was a small meadow with flowing knee length grass. It waved a bit in the breeze. Vegetation grew over the wooden cabin, the way it will if left unkempt. It smelled of molding timber and turned earth, but it was the only option for now. I still didn't think we'd be here long, anyway. The rest of Alice's coven was already arriving.
After the sun set, the moon rose bright and luminous in the velvet of night. We settled in and though I'd never admit my surprise that the vampires sat so close to it, we built a fire. It was apparent there was no time to spend on uselessness. We had to get down to the bottom of things before it was too late.
I looked over at the vampires through the crackling flames. Alice reclined between Jasper's long legs, resting her head against his chest, while he was propped up by a thick tree trunk. The tree was one of many of the older, larger ones in the entire valley. It had no bark, no branches, and was layered with ancient char, forever in its perpetual state of burning.
"They're up to something," Alice whispered, eyes unfocussed on the flames. "Stefan is simply mad, and Vlad, well, Vlad is scheming. I don't know how else to describe him. At first, we all wanted to think he was simply crazy, but now I'm not so sure. I don't know what they're up to, but it isn't good. And somehow they got Carlisle and Edward."
"How did you get away?" I asked her. Even if she didn't want to talk about what she encountered, it was necessary.
Alice sighed loudly. "We got back from meeting with you, Jakob," she began softly, "and Carlisle and I were discussing why my abilities had been blocked. Edward wandered off. Hours passed by and he didn't return. Carlisle specifically told me not to leave the bedroom, and he left, too."
Her breathing was quick, on the verge of hyperventilation. "They didn't come back." Wide eyes flashed with the flickering fire, like she was reliving those terrifying moments. "I waited and no one came."
When she paused in her memory, the only sound was the crackling fire and the crickets chirping in the forest. Everything else was silent. Even Leah and I held our breath, waiting for her to finish. Jasper's arms tightened their hold on his wife. A relaxing vibration echoed through me, and I saw Alice react to it, too, falling even further against her mate.
"I wondered," she began again, voice barely audible over the sound of nature around us. "I opened the door, knowing I shouldn't, knowing Carlisle told me to stay put, but I couldn't help myself." She tensed again as she spoke.
"I should have listened. The whole castle…it…it smelled like them, like their venom. I don't know happened. I smelled them in the air and I ran. It took me days to find the pack, but I couldn't make myself go back. I couldn't face it again."
A scowl shot over Jasper's face. "No one will blame you for that. You did the right thing," he told her softly. "They'll understand." He took a deep breath before continuing.
"I spent the last few days with Vlad," he said.
Alice turned and glared. "You've been with Vlad? Where?"
Looking a bit uncomfortable, Jasper said, "He was on Montecristo when we went to hunt, and we took him back to Volterra with us."
"Where is he now?" Alice's voice was inching back to hysterical again.
Jasper didn't answer immediately. "I don't know," he finally admitted. "We lost him back in Volterra."
We could all see there was more to the story than what he was saying, but he couldn't ignore Alice's imploring eyes.
"Shit, Ali, everything went wrong. First, Vlad shows up on the island and Bella's acting all gaga for the guy. Like she can spend time with him and not want to jump his bones. Then we get back to Volterra, and even if Bella says there's nothing there but a string of weird memories, I know what I felt. It was too strong to deny. There is a definite connection between them."
"Between Bella and Vladimir Tepes?" Alice asked. "You're joking."
"I wish I were," he groaned. Jasper continued gravely, pushing his long blonde hair from his face. "That's not all,"
He didn't elaborate right away, even after I cleared my throat to provoke him. It wasn't until Alice turned all the way around to face him did he finally speak again.
"Esme." He choked on the name and I was immediately aware how important the woman was to him. When I saw the same look of terror pass through Alice, I knew she was special to both of them. It only me a moment to realize I'd heard the name before.
"Carlisle's wife?" I asked. Leah inched a bit closer, her fingers lacing through mine.
Jasper nodded, but stared into his wife's eyes. "I don't know what happened. I don't know if she's ok. We left her alone and…"
He seemed unable to continue, and leaned into Alice's chest, muffling silent grief for the matriarch of his family. Alice's thin arms wrapped around him and held them together tightly. They made me wish to grieve for their loss, though I didn't know more about the woman than her name. I did, however, know Carlisle and knowing what a miraculous soul he was, I knew she was like to be the same.
I turned and looked at Leah's eyes, shining with her own sadness. Her fingers clutched tighter to mine as she noticed me staring. Our grief was palpable.
But Jasper and Alice broke apart. He started speaking again.
"When I read your letter, I couldn't help but think something was wrong. I didn't hear from you in two weeks, and you write a letter to tell me you aren't coming home. That's really why I came, because I'm not sure of Bella's part in all this. Judging from her feelings, I'd say she knows more about things than she's letting on."
"That makes no sense, Jazz," Alice interrupted. "Bella wouldn't lie to you. Me, maybe, but not to you. Besides, she loves Edward. She does. Absolutely. I have no doubt they're meant to be together. You should know that better than anyone."
Jasper cocked a disbelieving eyebrow at her, so she went on without a pause.
"Vlad is nasty, Jasper. Trust me on that. Vlad and his creepy little brother are noxious. They're up to something. Bella has to be a pawn in all this. Have faith, baby. Please."
Jasper sighed, his shoulders slumped a bit. He stayed quiet.
I cleared my voice and they both looked at me. I saw how similarly dark the rings under their eyes were. Alice's eyes were lighter now, but the darkness in her mate's were edging in. He needed to feed. I made to stand up, pulling Leah up with me.
"I think you eat. I have a feeling we're at the last stand, here. When this blows, we all need to be at top performance." After I said it, I felt a bit sheepish. I was used to commanding my brothers. These were free willed beings. I couldn't tell them to do anything.
"Right," Jasper agreed. "When we get back, I'd like to discuss some of the avenues into the castle. We need to strategize before we get into this."
"We won't need to go far," Alice said turned and said to us.
They began to walk away, but had only taken a few steps when Alice spoke again to Jasper.
"What letter?" she asked him.
"Hmm?" came the mumbled answer.
"I didn't write a letter," she said.
Disbelief crossed Jasper's features. "You didn't write a letter saying you wanted more time to better research the pack?"
Alice shook her head. Black hair moved with the brisk action. "We wanted to come home," she told him. "That castle is horrible. The wolves were the only thing keeping us sane. It was almost like we were being kept prisoner there. And for some reason he'd let us come here, but otherwise, it was lockdown. And Carlisle and Edward didn't get out this time. Oh my god! They didn't make it out!"
Jasper stepped forward to embrace his wife. I turned to leave them to it. Leah trailed behind in muted strides. When we were farther away and I was sure the couple had gone into the night, I asked her, "What's wrong?"
After a few feet she said, "Will you think less of me if I told you I was scared?"
Surprised by her admittance? Yes, but I could never think less of the powerful woman I had at the end of my arm. I turned around and flashed a wide grin.
"A little," I joked, my smile in full force.
As expected, she punched my shoulder, hard enough to hurt. And, as expected, she smiled a bit in return.
For awhile, we lounged outside the cabin in the field of long grass. Leah laid her head on my chest. She once told me the sound of my heart sounded like a hummingbird. I, of course, thought she could have used something more manly to describe it, but she found it endearing for whatever reason. I just never brought it up again.
I think she could have been dozing, when Jasper stepped over the rise and into view. He had a long arm wrapped around his wife's waist and led her. She stumbled along behind, eyes vacant. Leah and I rushed to them.
"What happened?" I asked, fearing the worst, fearing we hadn't been able to keep her safe.
Alice groaned. Leah leaned into her other side to help her mate hold the girl steady. Alice raised her pale hand. I was close enough for it to land on my shoulder and her cool touch sent shivers from the point of contact. With her eyes still glossed, she raised her head so she was facing me.
"He's using us," she mumbled. "He's using our gifts."
"Vlad?" came Jasper's quick response.
Together, we were able to bend Alice to the ground, and each stayed close. She reluctantly pulled her hand away from me, but Jasper's arm remained firmly around her shoulders. Then, she began sobbing, her face falling into her hands.
"He's using us!" she wailed again.
I looked to Jasper. I had an inkling of what had happened, but needed him to confirm it. He was looking up a bit, as if thinking over her words. Making sense of nothing. Or it seemed nothing to me. But I knew she had seen something. A vision.
"What happened?" I asked again, my voice soft under her harsh tearless sadness.
Jasper's eyes turned back to me. My muscles relaxed instantly, and I noticed Leah and Alice slump a bit, too.
"Bella said something about that," Jasper whispered to Alice. "She thought he was using our powers. I didn't believe her, but…" he paused for a moment. "But it makes sense."
"I told you Bella wasn't involved with that freak," Alice chided. "But this makes it worse. If she goes in there alone, he'll have her power at his disposal. Then, what are we going to do?"
"What's Bella's power?" Leah asked.
Neither of them spoke for a long moment, but finally Alice did, with a scared look in her eye. "She has enough power to destroy this mountain. She is stronger than the normal vampire. With that at his disposal, Vlad will be unstoppable."
Jasper ran a hand down his face.
"What is it?" Alice asked him.
"Vlad's not after Bella's power. Well, he probably is, but that's not what this is about."
"What then?" I cried out. They seemed to piece things together, but they were forgetting that Leah and I still knew nothing. If they wanted help from us, then we had to start getting real answers.
Jasper didn't turn back to us. He spoke to Alice when he answered my question. "He's after her. It's all about getting to Bella. And what's he done already? Taken nearly every other person who could keep her from him." Jasper smacked himself on the forehead. "Oh my God. Why didn't we see this coming, Alice? What the hell is wrong with me? I left her completely alone!"
The little pixie ran her fingers through her mate's hair. "It's not your fault. I know what it can be like for you," she told him softly. "I should have seen this. I should have looked harder."
"No," Leah said forcefully, cutting into the pity party starting in front of us. "This isn't either of your faults. That man is a nightmare. No matter what's happened to get us to this point is irrelevant. We need to act before he gets what he wants. Something tells me, that having this Bella is the last thing we want to happen."
"Tell us what you saw, Alice," I said and she met my eyes.
She stared at me for a moment too long. "Bella's going to go inside. She's all alone, and she's going to be pushed to the edge."
"That doesn't really tell us anything," I mumbled.
"It tells us everything," Jasper cut in. "If he gets Bella, we're lost."
"And she's about to walk right into his arms," his wife whispered.
"I can't believe I walked away from her," Jasper cursed, then sent an apologetic glance at Alice. She just reached up and grasped his hand tightly.
We looked at each other in silence. A feeling of despair settled over us, weighing on us. The night seemed to become darker, like there would be no dawn.
"Vlad has been using my premonitions somehow," Alice finally said before looking toward Leah and me. "I could see when I got far enough away from both you and the castle, but I only saw enough to know one thing."
I was breathing heavily. That was the only sound I could hear for several seconds, until I gathered enough nerve to ask the final question. "What do you know?"
"When we get there, it'll already be too late."

Bollywood veteran actor Joy Mukherjee died at Lilavati Hospital here Friday, his spokesman said. He was 73.
Mukherjee was popular during the 1960s with hit films like Love In Simla, Shagird, Love In Tokyo, Ziddi, Phir Wohi Dil Laya Hoon and Ek Musafir Ek Hasina.
His father Sashadhar Mukerjehe, who was married to legendary actor Ashok Kumar’s sister Sati Devi, was the co-founder of Filmalaya Studios. He was the paternal uncle of actress Kajol.
He is survived by his wife Neelam Mukherjee and three children – two sons and a daughter.

First and foremost, we just had an awesome miracle!! So I can't remember how much I have told you guys about Shannon, but she is an investigator we just got from the English Elders and she is going to be going to the singles ward. Well, she's pretty much soooooo awesome and could be baptized tomorrow. But the problem is that she wanted Elder Armstrong to baptize her and he isn't coming back to the mission until August. (yeah i'm pretty sure I already emailed this) But anyways, we got a call late last night that we couldn't answer from the English Elders and we just barely called them back this morning. They said that they were teaching Jack, her boyfriend, (because he is still in their ward) and at the end of the lesson Shannon came in. She asked one of the elders what day he was going to be leaving because he is about to go home and he said on the 25th of this month. Then she said that Elder Armstrong was actually not going to be able to come back and visit the mission so she wanted to get baptized earlier, and before he left if possible!!! So she is going to get baptized this month!!!! We are soo excited! As a zone we have a goal to get 5 baptisms this month and it wasn't looking like it was going to happen, but now it will! So cool.
So this week was pretty busy. On Thursday we had a zone training meeting. It was all about studying. It was perfect because just the day before me and Hermana Garner were talking about how we wanted to learn how to study better. It was really good. Pretty much what we did was spent an hour and half, almost 2 hours reading 2 pages of Preach my Gospel. If you really sit there and "escundrinar las escrituras" (scrutinize or pick apart the scriptures) then you can get sooo much out of them. So I have had this goal to read 5 pages in the Spanish scriptures every morning out loud and I have been doing really well at it. But I realized at this conference that that wasn't really helping me learn because I was just trying to read it really fast. So instead we learned a different way to study. Instead we learned that we should have a question in mind about one of our investigators while we are reading the chapter. Then begin with a prayer and ask that we will know how to help our investigators while we are reading. You get WAY more out of the scriptures when you do that. So it was really cool and I think it has helped my studies a lot.
Then the next day we had a Spanish conference. It was way fun!! It was with all the Spanish missionaries in the mission and afterward we did a mission-wide exchange. The conference part was good, it was cool cause the whole thing was in Spanish and usually all of our meetings are in English. And we could do all the practices in Spanish too, which we usually can't do also. I was kind of scared to do the practices in Spanish, but I actually did really good! My group said that I was really good at Spanish for how long I've been out so that made me super happy. Then we went on exchanges and I went with Hermana Schwaggler, but stayed up here in San Clemente. It was the funnest exchange I have ever been on (out of all 2 of them). She reminds me a TON of Autumn. We didn't stop talking like the whole time and she is a really good missionary. I just felt really confident with her and super bubbly. Maybe I was just having withdrawals or something from not living with Autumn for so long and because she was so much like her my crazy side came out again, I don't know. But it was really fun.
But yeah this week was awesome!! These next couple weeks are going to be awesome too! We are coming down to the wire, only 2 more weeks until all the changes are made! Yeah, I'm pretty much 100% positive both me and Hermana Garner will be staying up in the Irvine mission now, so we aren't nearly as stressed about that anymore. We really want to make sure Areli gets baptized in June like we have planned, but she has been really hard to find at home lately. And her mom might want her to wait for July so we are praying that we will be able to make it happen! We need her to get baptized to reach our goal for the zone!
I love you all and I hope everyone is having a great week!

Traps 'n' Treasures is an action role-playing platform video game developed by Roman Werner. It was released by Starbyte Software in July 1993 for the Amiga.
The hero's name is Jeremy Flynn. He is a pirate around 1641, who while he has some problems with his compass, he and his crew get near an island (devil's island), where seems to be Redbeard (a bad guy) with his crew. In a night attack, Redbeard's men steal ship's resources and kidnap Jeremy's crew. It seems that there was a traitor between Jeremy's crew, that broke the compass in the first place. Only Jeremy manages to escape using his cabin double wall. The next day he begins his quest to free all of his crew, take his money back and perhaps more.

My Take on Whybark, Doran, and Sportsmanship
As I am sure most golf fans will have heard by now, there was an interesting little development at the recent NAIA qualifier in Chicagoland that has broken out into the national spotlight because of two college golfers: Grant Whybark and Seth Doran.
As Shane Bacon writes in his article, the premise of the "event" is just this: one golfer (who had already qualified for Nationals with his team) is in a playoff with another (who had never made Nationals, and was in his senior year). Golfer A (Whybark) purposely hits his tee shot on the final hole out-of-bounds so Golfer B (Doran) can take a trip to Nationals.
After hearing this story for the first time, I was immediately floored that one collegiate golfer would have the selflessness to think of doing such a thing to help out another player (as it turns out, the golfers are friends). Sportsmanship is not seen very often anymore, and the intentions of a positive outcome were certainly there. Whybark echoes his intentions during a post-round interview:
"We all know Seth very well," Whybark explains, "and he not only is a very good player, but a great person as well. He’s a senior and had never been to nationals. Somehow, it just wasn’t in my heart to try to knock him out.
"I think some people were surprised, but my team knew what I was doing and were supportive of me. I felt Seth deserved to go (to nationals) just as much as I did.
"It was one of those things where I couldn’t feel good taking something from him like this. My goal from the start was to get (to nationals) with my team. I had already done that."
But then I thought a little more about this story, and now I am not so sure if this was the best possible thing to do for Doran.
First and probably least relevant is the fact that the two Chicagoland schools, University of St. Francis and Olivet Nazarene, absolutely hate each other when it comes to most sporting events. While I am sure Whybark was not thinking of this fact when he decided to hit his tee shot, I am almost positive that neither school will take this act in a positive light. The competitive nature between the two schools is just too solid.
Secondly, after hearing this story I did what most writers would do before posting an opinion; I tried to think of a time when I was in a similar situation. Unfortunately for me, I was.
In high school, I was a pitcher for our summer league baseball team and was going up against an all-around better team in the sectional playoffs. During one particularly tough inning, I was getting absolutely shelled by batter after batter until eventually the coach's son came up to the plate. What makes this interesting is the fact that I was related to this player and coach, and before his son stepped into the batters box, the coach whispered something to his son. The batter then proceeded to stand there, bat on his shoulder, as I threw three pitches and struck him out.
It was painfully obvious that the opposing coach told his son, and my relative, to strike out. The other team was already up by a substantial margin, so this one out meant nothing in the grand scheme of the game. Regardless, I felt horrible and insulted that a coach and player felt the need to "show mercy" and put me out of my misery.
Having experienced this before in my life, I can only imagine and presume what Doran might be feeling today. Sure, he now gets to go to Nationals as an individual, but at what cost?
"Swallowing one's pride" is probably the one sporting cliche that bothers me the most nowadays because the underlying message has been lost over time. "Swallowing one's pride" does not translate to offering charity to another athlete in the manner that Whybark did. If anything, Whybark came off as a player who knew he was better than the other golfer and decided to throw a playoff. In other words, he made Doran a charity case.

Monday, April 09, 2007
Like every ED, the one where I volunteer has its share of frequent flyers, patients we see several times a month, if not more often. Many, although not all, frequent flyers are the chronically homeless, often substance abusers who also have other psychiatric issues. Because patients with this profile consume far more than their share of social-service and hospital resources, several cities, including Washington DC and Seattle, have begun offering them free housing with no requirement that they become clean or sober. (To qualify for the program, recipients must have proven unable to maintain recovery.) While such programs are controversial among people who object to handouts, they're reportedly much less expensive than letting this population stay on the streets.
There's no such program here, although we certainly have our share of these individuals.
During a recent ED shift, I had a pleasant chat with one frequent flyer who always greets me with hugs and expressions of affection. I sometimes see this patient several shifts in a row, but I haven't noticed any ill will from staff.
Halfway through that shift, another frequent flyer -- someone I'd somehow missed meeting until then, but who was very well known to the staff -- arrived via ambulance, and I heard one of the nurses, within earshot of the patient, saying loudly, "Dammit, why doesn't he die? He's a worthless human being! He deserves to die!" That nurse told me that this patient has run up a staggering bill at the hospital. The hospital will never see any of that money.
We all know that the healthcare system is broken, but I've never seen a nurse being so hostile to a patient, even one who can't pay. Within minutes, another nurse was equally hostile to the patient. I assumed that the patient must have done something even more awful than running up a huge bill: assaulting staff, maybe? But he wasn't restrained, and nobody seemed unduly worried about violence. The security staff obviously knew him, but were laughing; a cop who'd come in with another ED patient obviously knew him, but greeted him warmly. "Hey, how you doing? I haven't seen you in a while. You doing better?" There was no indication of why a medical professional would have loudly wished him dead within his hearing.
I was bullied and called names a lot when I was a kid, and I'm also a kneejerk liberal, and I'm also a Parable of the Nations Christian, somebody who actively looks for (and usually finds) Christ in the "least of these." All of this means that the quickest way to get me 150% in your patient's corner is to condemn that patient as a worthless human being. Think red flags and bulls.
So I settled in for a good long talk with the patient. He told me about finding a friend's dead body in combat, and mourned the fact that he'd had to kill people he felt didn't deserve to die. He told me about the deaths of people in his family: he felt responsible for several of these deaths, and even when he didn't feel responsible, he told me that he wished he'd died instead, that he'd prayed to God to take him instead, because his loved ones who died were better than he was. Everything he told me about his past involved acute survivor's guilt, and I had to wonder what role the nurse's comment had played in that.
He also told me that the Holy Spirit loved me, that I was "God's good daughter," that I was a healer. He tried to give me something he was wearing as a gift; I explained that volunteers aren't allowed to accept gifts, but that the real gift was that he'd wanted to give me a gift, and that I thanked him for that. We prayed together. He clung to my hands, often squeezing them so tightly that they hurt.
The first frequent flyer, who was being discharged, came along and stopped to say hello to my patient and to wish him luck; they clearly knew each other. My patient took the other patient's hand and prayed aloud for God to protect him. When the first frequent flyer had left, the patient took my hands again, and told me that he was in a lot of pain, but that I'd made him feel better.
I said, "God loves you. Do you know that?"
And this patient who'd been talking so eloquently about God and Jesus and the Holy Spirit fell quiet. After a minute, he said, "Are you sure? I've done a lot of things wrong."
"Yes, I'm sure. We've all done things wrong. God loves all of us."
And then the nurse who'd called him worthless showed up, saw me holding his hands, and snapped, "He has [horrible communicable disease #1]! Wash your hands after you talk to him!"
The patient was clearly hurt by the comment, which he shouldn't have had to hear.
After our conversation had ended, I washed my hands in the meds room. I'd have done that anyway, since I always wash my hands after patient contact, but I have to admit that I gave myself an unusually thorough scrubbing. The nurse came in, glared at me, and said, "He also has [horrible communicable disease #2]!"
"That's not transmitted through casual contact," I said.
"If you're bleeding, it is!"
"He wasn't bleeding," I said. I thought, but didn't say, And if he's so freaking contagious, why isn't he on contact precautions? "He was in combat; did you know that?"
"No, he wasn't in combat! He was lying to you! He's a liar!"
The nurse left. A minute or two later, a doctor appeared and said, gently, "Our friend hasn't done military service."
I've been volunteering since late 2004. This is the first time a doctor has gone out of his way to tell me something. A few are friendly, and I've been around long enough that almost all of them, even those who aren't actively friendly, will at least acknowledge my presence. But ED physicians, for obvious reasons, keep unnecessary motion to a minimum. For a doctor to walk from where he's been standing to somewhere else, to communicate with a lowly volunteer, is huge.
"How do you know that?" I asked.
"I know. I've been in the military. Several of us have. We can tell from how he talks about it that he's just making up stories."
"Okay," I said. (I'd wondered about some of his stories myself, but wasn't about to accuse him of lying.) "But look, all I know is that he's carrying around a lot of pain. The pain's real, even if he's making up false stories to explain it. It's not the kind of pain you can help him with, but I can. That's my job."
The doctor nodded. There may have been some grudging respect there. I took a breath and said, "And I have a problem with saying that patients are worthless people who deserve to die."
The doctor said, gently, "I'm not saying that," and walked away.
All of this happened at the end of my shift. I woke up the next morning fretting about it, wondering what in the world the patient had done to invoke such overt nastiness from two nurses, not to mention a physician's expenditure of energy to discredit him. I'll probably never know.
And I'm still wondering: can it really be that massive bill? The bill's horrifying, as much for what it represents -- the breakdown of American healthcare -- as for the sheer number of digits, but would a nurse take that so personally, however horrifying it is? Or has this patient become a scapegoat for the medical staff's frustration with a broken system, the target for all of their rage about too many patients and too few resources?

Dr. Elvis Alfonso, of Scarsdale New York, passed away January 6, 2022 as a result of a cardiac arrest. His wife and family were by his side throughout his month long battle. He was born to Francisca and Manuel Alfonso of the Dominican Republic on July 6, 1962. Elvis received his medical degree from Universidad Autonoma de Santo Domingo.
He was currently a practicing physician in Queens, New York, serving the Hispanic community as an OB/GYN. His greatest aspiration was to achieve the American dream; to become a doctor, help people, and have a wonderful life. He was a member of ACOG, practiced urology in Mexico City and practiced Gynecology/Obstetrics in both New York and Florida. Elvis taught high school math before becoming a doctor, and felt like he impacted many lives through this knowledge and care. He was dedicated to his patients and treated them like family. He also attended regular reunions with his Medical School cohorts and has remained close friends with them for many years.
Elvis is survived by his father Manuel Alfonso; his wife, Erica OBryan; his brother Carlos Alfonso and his sisters Mirna Arce and Solange Alfonso; his children, Elvis Jr Alfonso, and Isabella Alfonso. He also leaves several nieces and nephews, His tio Sedrito, and a host of loving friends and colleagues.
Elvis loved to live life. He sang, he danced, he planted, traveled to his home the Dominican. He loved his children, they will always mean the world to him. He found his soulmate in Erica, who stood by his side as a partner and equal. Everyone who knew him loved him because of his warm laugh and generous spirit. He gave sage advice, wonderful hugs, and was welcoming to all.
Funeral arrangements are being held by Ballard Durand Funeral Home at 2 Maple Avenue, WhitePlains, NY on Sunday, January 9, 2022 from 2-9 pm. The funeral Mass and burial will be held on Monday January 10, 2022 at 11:15 at the Immaculate Heart of Mary, 8 Carman Road, Scarsdale, NY 10583

Cyril Edward Bruce-Smith (4 April 1892 – 5 March 1963) was a Scottish actor who began his career as a child in 1900 and went on to appear in numerous stage plays as well as over 100 films between 1914 and his death almost 50 years later. The son of Frederick and Elsa Smith; his mother travelled with him on his engagements during his boyhood.
All Apple Originals.
New Apple Originals every month. Watch on Apple devices, streaming platforms, and smart TVs.

Cam Newton is a man of his word.
The veteran quarterback said he'd open up about his release from the New England Patriots in his weekly "Funky Friday" video on YouTube. Sure enough, Newton dropped a video Friday morning in which he and his father, Cecil, discussed all aspects of his Foxboro exit.
Newton described the moment he realized rookie Mac Jones had beaten him out for the starting QB job, detailing a run-in with a staffer at Gillette Stadium in Foxboro.
"I walked in and they were like, 'Wait, Cam, Bill wants to meet with you,'" Newton said. "I'm like, 'OK, cool, But Bill’s office is down here.'
"They were like, 'No, he’s in here.' And that’s when I was like, 'Oh, OK. I see what’s going on.'"
Both head coach Bill Belichick and Senior Football Advisor Matt Patricia were in the meeting, according to Newton, who admitted he was surprised the team released him outright instead of offering him a backup job.
"They told me they were going to give the reins to Mac," Newton said. "And I was like, 'OK cool.' ... It didn't dawn on me that I was like ... 'Y'all releasing me.'
" ... I was confused. We were all shocked. It was uncomfortable for everybody."
After the shock wore off, Newton said he had a theory for why New England didn't keep him around to back up Jones.
"The reason why they released me is because, indirectly, I was gonna be a distraction without being the starter," Newton said. "Just my aura. ... That’s my gift and my curse. When you bring a Cam Newton to your franchise, people are interested by the mere fact of, 'Who is he? Why does he wear his hair (like that)? Why does he talk, why does he act, why does he perform (like that)?'"
Newton insisted he would have accepted a backup role behind Jones if the Patriots offered, but said he believed the rookie would have been "uncomfortable" with that dynamic.
"That comes by the mere fact of me being me," Newton said.
Newton addressed several other topics -- including his opinion of Jones and his five-day, COVID-related absence from the team in late August -- in the video, which you can watch below or on YouTube.

Callous thieves stole money which was collected to help a blind baby to see.
The thugs escaped with around £30 from a collecting tin after smashing their way into a Yeadon sandwich shop.
Bizarely although they snatched the money destined for little Connor Wrighton they left two other collecting boxes untouched.
The daylight raid happened at Ideal Sandwiches on Victoria Avenue during the afternoon of Friday, August 15.
Sophie Hinnells, whose parents own the shop, said the tin was half full and contained around £30 which was being collected towards a fund to pay for an operation in China to help Connor to see.
She said the raid was carried out in broad daylight by about three men in their mid-twenties who kicked the door down.
"The only other thing they stole was a packet of crisps," she said, "We had two other charity tins, but they didn't take them."
She said the thieves, who wore gloves and who had their hoods up, were captured on CCTV.
The raiders were seen breaking into the shop, which is on a main road, and the police were called - arriving within about three minutes.
Sophie said everyone had been shocked by the theft of the charity money.
"It is not really something you would expect someone to steal," she said.
Connor's parents, Lisa and Nathan Wrighton,who live in Skipton, launched their appeal earlier this year to pay for treatment which they desperately hope will help their blind baby to see.
Making their appeal when Connor was just over six months old, they said fluid on his brain and subsequent damage to his optic nerves soon after birth appear to have left him completely without sight.
Lisa and Nathan think they have found possible courses of treatment overseas which could, at least, give their only child the chance of some vision.
But they need to raise at least £13,000 over the next few months to pay for it.
The couple realised Connor could have problems just hours after he was born, in Airedale Hospital at the end of November. His head was growing far too fast and doctors at Leeds General Infirmary eventually found that he had a slight cerebral palsy, which is affecting his motor skills.
Nathan, 27, a paintsprayer at Skipton Ford, said that eventually they realised Connor was not responding at all to visual stimulation. Connor has now been found to have optic atrophy, which means he is completely blind.
Appealing for help in June he said: "Obviously we have been completely devastated by this. Our lives have been completely turned around, but we didn't want to just accept the situation. We have done a lot of research online and have found companies in America, Ukraine and China which can perform stem cell treatment.
"This could give Connor some limited vision at least. He is never going to see more than vague shapes, but we want to give him every chance we possibly can."
Mum Lisa, 28, assistant manager at Altham's Travel in Skipton, said they had already had lots of fundraising ideas from friends and family. Her sister Michelle and friend Becky are intending to do a sponsored skydive later in the year and plans have already been put forward for fundraising events.
Lisa said: "Everybody's been brilliant with ideas and people have already donated, but there is a long way to go. We have also organised a fundraising dinner at the Rendezvous Hotel in Skipton on August 22, so we are hoping things will go well with that."

EMMERDALE fans are in shock after Jamie Tate appeared to die in a horror drowning after crashing his car.
The vet - who is played by actor Alexander Lincoln in the ITV soap - crashed his car into a lake while fleeing from his responsibilities.
He was given the option of eloping with Gabby in a desperate attempt to get himself back into his mother’s finances - and return to his millionaire lifestyle.
However once her grandmother Diane found out about it and summoned Kim for help, Gabby was quickly tracked down.
Unknown to her Jamie had gone to see his ex Dawn to beg her to give him another chance away from the village.
But after she knocked him back, Jamie made his decision and headed off in his car.
Meanwhile Diane and Kim caught up with Gabby and begged her to reconsider her plan to marry Jamie.
As Kim pointed out Jamie had stood her up, she desperately tried to call him to prove it.
Most read in Soaps
But as Jamie headed out of the village to leave everything behind, he got distracted by Gabby’s call.
And by the time his eyes were back on the road he saw Chas Dingle coming towards him.
Jamie turned the steering wheel quickly and ended up veering off the road.
Panicking he put his foot down and drove through hedges and woodland before crashing over small cliff and into the lake.
His car sank down under the water, dooming Jamie to a horror drowning.
There was no sign of life in the lake as fans were both shocked by and celebrated his death.
One wrote: "Omg thank f**k he's dead."
A second said: "Wow @emmerdale now I wasn’t expecting that."
Another added: "Didn’t see that one coming."

Did you ever hear told of that hero, Bold Nevison it was his name, And he rode about like a brave hero, And by that he gained a great fame, Now when I rode on the highway, I always had money in store. And whatever I took from the rich Why I freely gave it to the poor. I have never robbed no man of tuppence And I’ve never done murder nor killed. Though guilty I’ve been all my lifetime So gentlemen do as you please.
THE BALLAD “Bold Nevison”
We have heard tell of bold William Nevison before - and it was in these pages - a Robin Hood of the highway who ‘never done murder nor killed’. Early one morning in 1676 at Gads Hill in Kent he robbed a sailor just home from sea. Realising that he had been recognised and fearing the rope that was surely waiting Nevison rode north on his mare Nutmeg to establish an alibi. At sunset of the same day, with 230 miles of bad road behind them Nevison and Nutmeg rode into York. After washing and changing his travel stained clothes and attending to the exhausted Nutmeg Nevison went out to find the Lord Mayor of York who was playing bowls. Engaging him in conversation Nevison made a bet with the Mayor on the outcome of his game - and made sure that the Mayor noted the time - 8.00pm.
Nevison was eventually arrested for the robbery in Gads Hill. In his defence he summoned the Lord Mayor of York who swore that Nevison was in York at 8pm on the day of the robbery. Nevison was found not guilty and emerged as a folk hero, impressing even the King of England, Charles 2nd.
“I had supped with Nevison on the eve of the robbery in Kent,” attested the Lord Mayor of Kent. “And no man can fly.” But he could rise from the dead as Nevison had demonstrated before…
In the mid 1660’s Nevison was arrested for committing robberies in Leicestershire and committed to Leicester Prison where he was held in chains. One day, feigning illness, he sent for a physician who happened to be a friend. The physician said that Nevison was suffering from pestilential fever and unless he had the benefit of some fresh air not only would he die but the entire prison would become infected. The jailer released Nevison from his fetters and moved him into a cell on his own. However it was too late. The physician said that the infection was becoming increasingly contagious and Nevison was within hours of death. On hearing this the jailer’s wife refused to allow her husband or any other of the prison staff anywhere near the dying man. This gave Nevison and his associates the chance to carry out their plan…
“A painter was one day brought in, who made all over his breast blue spots, resembling those that are the forerunners of death in the disease commonly called the plague; as likewise several marks on his hands, face and body, which are usually on such that so die. All which being done, the physician prepared a dose whereby his spirits were confined for the space of an hour or two, and then immediately gave out that he was dead. Hereupon his friends demand his body, bringing a coffin to carry him away in. The jailer, as customary, orders a jury – the nurse having formally laid him out – to examine the cause of his death, who, fearing the contagion he was said to die of, stayed not long to consider thereon; but having viewed him, seeing the spots and marks of death about him, his eyes set, and his jaws close muffled, they brought in their verdict that he died of the plague; and thereupon he was put in the coffin and carried off.”
THE NEWGATE CALENDAR
At liberty again Nevison immediately returned to his trade of highway robbery. Several of his old victims, the carriers who he used to regularly rob, “were strangely surprised to see what they took to be the ghost of Mr Nevison, who beyond all doubt had died of the plague!”
The courts were also surprised to hear that Nevison had miraculously risen from the dead. They summoned the jailer from Leicester Prison, the man who had released Nevison - or at least a dead Nevison- and charged him to track the man down. A reward of £20 was set and a great search was established but Nevison was not to be found. Like all well behaved spectres, the ghost of Mr Nevison had vanished.
Nevison may have escaped from prison by pretending to be dead. He may have escaped justice by riding to York to establish an alibi - but in the end he could not escape the rope. In May 1684, found guilty of the murder of a Constable Fletcher, he was hanged at York Castle and buried in an unmarked grave in St Mary’s Church, Castlegate. He was 45 years old - and this time he really was dead.
– from Martyn Day

On January 27, 2011 Eric Merkley was diagnosed with osteosarcoma. An aggressive cancer that we hope and the doctors to this point seem confident that is contained to one spot on his leg. Prognosis is good. Treatments and recovery will be long and painful.
This was Eric's personalized cookie, notice the mustache and this is the bell I got for him. I received an email from Sonja, Steven mom, and she wrote that the reason why Eric cleared his methotrexrate so quickly was a gift from God. I totally agree. It was totally unexpected and he has never been that low at that point in the clearing stage. We were truly grateful though. Now it is Steven's turn to finish up and be able to get back to school.
Eric took it easy this weekend, still not feeling great and pretty weak, but it is only uphill from here!

A thing Near regrets, on the top of his list, is never telling Mello how he felt about him.
Another is not allowing himself to let go.
Another is agreeing to have a race to see who could get to Kira first. He should've known that Mello would get overly competitive, and be irrational.
Another is not trying to get in contact with Mello. At least… more. He could've found Mello somehow and stayed in touch.
Another is how cold he acted with Mello.
Another is how he let Mello run away, never went after him. (Of course, he didn't know Mello would leave at the time, but at this point he wants to beat himself up about it.)
Something he will never ever regret, though, is taking the spot of L. He was trying to keep the pressure from Mello, and certainly Matt. Matt wouldn't be able to handle it much. Mello might break. No point in trying to protect anyone now, there is no one to protect.
But he could've done better.
He probably would've been able to convince Mello to work with him had he tried harder.
(He always had a feeling Mello was waiting for him to convince him. Try harder.)
Why didn't he? They would've been a perfect L together. They could level with and surpass L.
L's gone too. They would've been able to surpass where L was.
All alone. Isn't that something he should be used to by now? Yes? No? But truly, isn't it? He's so very used to it. He's experienced it so many times. But not with Mello and Matt gone.
Mello used to make an effort, in the beginning. Until Near proved to be smarter than him, and then that budding friendship was all over.
Matt was always such a kind person to Near, but he followed Mello around like a puppy would follow it's master. So he waved to Near and smiled when he could, and even tried to speak kindly when he could, but Mello always silenced him with a glare.
If only Mello wasn't such a competitive, ambitious, goal-driven person.
If only Matt weren't so helplessly deep in with Mello; not in love, but a deep brotherhood. If only he didn't follow.
But these things made up their characters. What if they weren't what they were? They'd be nothing. They wouldn't be Near's… people. They wouldn't be Near's people. He counted on, listened to, checked up on, mourned, and loved them.
Even Mello would check up on him even after Near became number one.
If only, although Near…
Near decides he wouldn't want to change Mello or Matt a tiny bit. Tears roll down his cheeks, for the first time in a very long time.

Whew am so glad for Princess the Momma cat. She caught a snake outside that was close to my 2 and 3 week old babies that were out in their play yard. Well i had to dispatch of the thing before it got away but she will be rewarded for saving the day. Thank You Princess. You are a great Girl and a teriffic Momma.

Jayden Coombes (Year 5 A Team Captain) reports… On Wednesday, 4 October, the Year 5 A team travelled to the BCS annual football tournament. We were looking forward to the day and hoped to retain the title as we won it last year.
In the first game we faced a strong BCS A team where we knew we had to play our best. BCS scored first but we kept on trying to go forward and passing the ball but also we were solid at the back. Then Jayden struck the equaliser just before the end of the match to make it 1-1
In the second match we played Park A. We played really well. Ollie C was very strong and skilful in the middle part of the field. Then Jayden scored 2 goals and Hugo scored one. Fintan played brilliantly in goal and kept a clean sheet, with Josh O and Oli E very solid at the back. We won 3-0
Then we faced BCS B. It was an exciting match. Oli E & Josh O were again very solid at the back and Fintan kept us in the game. When we went forward Ollie C scored a brilliant goal and Hugo finished the 2nd goal nicely and we won 2-0.
At this point Mr Schneider told us that our last game will be so important as we have to win it by a few goals to give us a chance to stay top.
We played Park B. Again, we started the game very well but their keeper was brilliant, we just could not put the ball in the back of the net. It seemed to always go wide or over the bar. Then Ollie C scored 2 great goals in a few minutes and then Jayden scored the 3rd goal, then Oli E nearly scored a 4th. We worked very hard as a team. Ted came on and worked extremely hard in midfield and we nearly scored another goal. Then Park scored to make it 3-1.
We were waiting very nervously to find out how BCS A did against Park A in their last match. The game finished 0-0, which meant that we had more points than BCS A and we won the tournament.
It was another great success and we have now won it in two consecutive years.
We would like to say a big thank you to Mr Schneider and Mr Campbell-Hill for looking after us… and to the parents who came to cheer us on!

“Go’en Ri’tr’vr” were the first words Tom and Genie heard from their eldest daughter, followed seconds later by “Pliz?” Exactly one year later they asked Emmy what she wanted for her birthday and she excitedly shot back “A Golden Retriever!” then settled into her seat, feeling what she would later learn was called “Déjà vu”. Emmy sometimes heard things when she was around people, things they hadn’t said yet, and it was completely useless to her; she couldn’t read minds, she couldn’t predict the future, all she could do was grow bitter and angry stewing in the frustration. Then one day, while hanging out with one of her best friends, Corey, for the first time she heard her own voice; at first it was heavy breathing, and then a shallow exhale of “Yes”. She didn’t understand what was happening, why it was happening, but she started spending more time with Corey, hoping to satisfy her curiosity, getting to know him, telling him about her. They had been dating for just over a year when Corey took her to the dog park where they first kissed, got down on one knee and asked her to marry him; Her eyes welled up, she took several short breaths and barely mustered a “Yes” before that old familiar feeling struck her in the back.

Sweaty Betty has good year with digital outperforming
That said, its physical shops during the year continued to be impacted by pandemic measures and were closed from January to April due to an official lockdown. But digital came to the rescue and continued to deliver during that period.
So what did that mean in terms of numbers? Turnover rose to £183.2 million from £126.5 million and gross profit was up to £94.5 million from £70.1 million.
Last year, 67% of the company’s revenue came from the UK, which was down from 70% in 2020. And 21% of revenue came from the US, down from 22%, while 12% came from the rest of the world, up from 8%.
Profit on an EBITDA basis was £17.6 million, up from £15.8 million a year earlier. Net profit rose marginally to £11.47 million from £11.03 million.
It also said that its 2021 results reflected government support in the form of furlough payments, as well as business rates relief and the impact of rent concessions agreed with its landlords. However these were offset somewhat by additional costs incurred to implement safety processes in its stores, offices and warehouse.
The premium activewear company was bought during the year by US giant Wolverine

A look back at Prince's colourful love life.
Prince discovered Carmen in the early '90s, famously changing her name from Tara Leigh Patrick to Carmen Electra and a star was born. They famously dated, although it's unclear for how long, with Carmen crediting her former mentor with her career.
She paid tribute to him on Thursday night in a statement to The Hollywood Reporter, saying: "The world has lost a truly incredible spirit and musical genius. What a blessing it is to be one of the chosen ones who had the chance to work so closely with him," said Electra, who was also romantically involved with Prince. "He gave me my name, he believed in me, and he has inspired an entire generation. I will always love him."
Apollonia played his love interest in Purple Rain and romance also translated off set. She previously described him as her "greatest friend", saying: “We were, and still are, platonically, romantically involved."
Former Twin Peaks actress Sherilyn dated the iconic singer briefly in the early '90s and today, she paid tribute to her former lover. "Prince inspired me. He changed my life," she told HollywoodLife.com. "I will miss him greatly. There will only ever be one Prince."
On the cusp of Hollywood superstardom, Kim Basinger dated Prince in 1989 when she starred in Batman and he worked on the soundstrack.
Basinger, who went on to marry Alec Baldwin, said she has "great memories" of their relationship in an interview with the Daily Beast.
"It was a really special moment in time, and I have great memories," she said. "I don’t put a lot of restrictions on myself, let’s just put it that way. If there’s someone I connect with, we’ll go on these rides together. So that was a neat time in my life."
Prince was rumoured to have written The Most Beautiful Girl in The World for actress Vanessa who featured in the video for the 1995 hit.
Prince's first wife Mayte, with whom he had a son Boy Gregory who died a week after his birth, said today to PEOPLE: "I can't even think of the words of what I'm feeling. This man was my everything, we had a family. I am beyond deeply saddened and devastated. I loved him then, I love him now and will love him eternally. He's with our son now." The pair were married from 1996 to 1998 before their union was annuled.
Prince wed once more to Manuela, after meeting through work for his charity, in 2001 and she ended the marriage in 2005. He made no secret of his heartbreak at their split after. When asked by Radar Online how she was coping with news of his death, she said: "I'm not okay."
Prince dated Vanity in the late '80s when she featured in the group Vanity 6. She tragically died in February of this year from renal failure due to severe drug use in the early days of her career. The couple parted ways as Vanity, real name Denise Matthews, developed a crack cocaine habit.
Drummer Sheila E. first met Prince in the late '80s when she was a drummer for his band. "The meaning of the word loss has taken on a new meaning this day," she told PEOPLE. "Thank God love lives forever." They stayed close friends ever since, still performing together in recent years.
These days she's a world famous ballerina, but it was Prince who gave Misty her big break in 2009 when he called her out of the blue to cast her in his video for Crimson and Clover and changing her life forever. She went on to become the first African-American principal dancer in the American Ballet Theatre but reports of a romance were shot down as she was dating now-fiance Olu Evans.

It was evening by the time I was unpacked and settled in. Each room is designed to occupy four people, with a locker under each bunk where you could keep your stuff. My room had been empty for the better part of the day and there was no light. There was nothing I hated more than being bored and I despised just lying there thinking about my life. This guy came around that was also supposed to be my roommate. I was happy and tried to strike up a conversation with him but he was acting so antisocial, like a psycho. He barely responded to anything I said, and it felt like he was cornered as he eyed me and sized me up like I was there to steal all his stuff or do something criminal. What a weirdo. I’m just trying to start a simple conversation you retaŕded fùck.
Eventually I lock my bunk and leave the room to take a stroll and enjoy the evening breeze. So many thoughts ran through my head as I walked from the hostel to the Faculty of Management where my academic career was soon to kick off. I was determined not to let myself or my people down. I saw this tall, slim dude and walked up to him and introduced myself. He said his name was Olumafon and that he was a prince of royal descent from Modakeke or something along those lines. I found out that he also stayed in Block 8, and I was happy to have made a friend that could at least hold a conversation. He showed me around a few places. Maye Clinic, Love Street, girls hostel, Iya Aramide. You see, I resumed almost a month late, and I’d missed a few important things, but I was determined to catch up. By the time I returned to my room, all my roommates were now around. There was Farmer, Usher Toh Bahd, and Olorunwa.
Farmer was called farmer because he always wore those kinds of singlets that were so slack and of low quality, they clung onto his frail shoulders for dear life, his shoulders being the hanger. The mere sight of him was hilarious and I pictured him to be an actual farmer (only thing missing was his hoe or cutlass) so I called him that. Eventually, the name stuck. Usher Toh Bahd was another tall, lanky, dull-looking guy, but like some sick joke, he had this smoking hot girlfriend with a killer shape who was nuts over him. I always wondered how he got the girl, or who toasted who, because I could never imagine him opening his mouth to spit the right words to get her. Most likely she just happened to like him naturally and everything fell into place – for him. He was an usher in the school fellowship and was deep into all those types of stuff, so he was more than just an usher to me, he was a ‘bad’ dude, so that became his name for me.
Olorunwa was this “I can’t kill myself” kind of dude. He was short, stocky with broad shoulders and extremely lousy. I liked him immediately. I liked him more when I found out that he was also in the same department and level as me – Economics. The other two were in their sophomore year. When I inquired about the weird psycho dude I’d met earlier, they told me he had moved to another block entirely. When I asked why he did that, they all shrugged indifferently, but we all agreed that he was indeed psycho. We spoke deep into the night, and all that could be heard from our room was the sound of joy, laughter, and banter. This was the first day of the rest of my life, and yours truly was immensely pleased. I was going to leave my mark up in this bìtch.
The next morning, Olorunwa, Olumafon, and I got dressed and headed to class for lectures. Boy, was I excited. I dressed dapper as usual and sat in the middle row with my new friends. It was a few rows from the front, just enough that I could hear whatever boring shìt the lecturer was spewing, and near enough to the back that I wouldn’t miss all the lewd jokes the bad boys of the class were sure to throw. Shebi na book? We die here this time around. This dark-skinned girl was sitting not too far from me on the same row. She was beautiful in a decent way. Full chested, flat stomach, beautiful gap teeth you could see whenever she smiled. However these features never struck me as odd. What struck me as odd was the fact that she was draped in a wrapper, covering herself completely as she sat by herself. The weather was hot outside so I saw no reason why anybody would need to do that, unless something was wrong.
The lecturer was asking a question that no one seemed to be able to answer. I thought it was a fairly simple question so I raised my hand and answered the question before the man would start getting pissed. He was impressed, so he told me to stand up and introduce myself to the entire class as he’d never seen me before. I did so and sat down feeling like a Don Corleone. That was my intention, to grab a little attention. This school matter of a thing ehn, we die here. After the class was over, Olorunwa and Olumafon were getting into it, all play though. Those guys could be quite LOUD in capital letters. I engaged in the conversation for a bit then smoothly slithered over to the lady’s side. I had been watching her from the corner of my eyes. She had her head on the desk like she was sleeping, that dreadful wrapper engulfing her like a Yoruba demon’s demonic Agbada. I tapped her gently on her shoulders and she looked up at me with that her perfect brown skin, beads of sweat on her forehead.
“I’m sorry I don’t mean to disturb, but are you okay?” I asked with a look of concern on my face.
“Not really. But I’m trying to be fine.”
She told me some symptoms she was experiencing and as failed doctor wey I be na, I told her it could be malaria or something worse that she had contracted. I suggested we headed to the clinic immediately to get her checked out. She was surprised, but she packed her books which I carried in my bag, and off we went towards the clinic. We gisted and laughed like old friends as we walked on together. I was so happy I’d made a connection with someone else. I told her I’d only resumed the day before, and she said she’d been there since the first day of resumption. We got to the hospital, they ran some tests on her and gave her some drugs which would make the illness subside. Afterward, I escorted her to the front of the female hostel and bade her goodbye but not before we exchanged numbers. I warned her sternly to make sure she took her drugs as I never wanted to see a beautiful damsel such as herself draped in old women’s wrappers when she wasn’t Iya Basira. Like Orubebe, I told her that I wasn’t going to take that next time, to which she laughed.
I got back to my hostel room later in the evening to meet what I would call a hero’s welcome. Olorunwa, Olumafon, Farmer, and Usher were coincidentally discussing my matter when I walked in. As soon as I walked in, they all turned to face me, just the way an angry mob would descend on someone that stole a cube of Maggi. I had done the unthinkable.
“E never reach 24 hours wey you enter this place, you don get new babe (You haven’t been here long and you already got yourself a new girlfriend),” Olumafon thundered.
“She’s not my babe…” I was trying to explain.
“Shut up!!!” Olorunwa countered loudly, his mouth hanging wide open like that of a typical Yoruba somebody. “Abi you think say we no see you? Dem tell you say we blind ni? (We are not blind, we saw everything).”
“I didn’t say you were blind…”
“Wait, so you guys are really serious about this gist?” Farmer asked in wide-eyed admiration. “Me wey don dey find babe since (I’ve been looking for a girlfriend since forever).”
“If you see the way he carried her books and grabbed her waist ehn, you for testify,” Olumafon said.
“Easy with the lies abeg,” I said as I plopped myself on my bed and began taking off my clothes. I ignored the conversation as they kept harping on it over and over again like it was some really big deal. These people didn’t know me, but they would. Soon enough.
I noticed that as I was taking off my clothes and retiring for the day, these motherfùckers were excitedly showering and getting dressed and ready to go like there was some big party going down somewhere. I stopped pressing my phone and looked up at them. Curiosity had gotten the better of me.
“Abeg where una dey go like this with all seriousness? (Where are you guys going?)”
“Love street,” they all chorused like say na plan work.
Love street? That sounded interesting.
After a few major issues with other companies we found Erlinda from the moment we met her we knew things Read More Stephanie and Chris Napier. where to buy viagra in malaysia MBC Blog.

PETALING JAYA, Oct 9 ― Nearly five months after divorcing Singaporean singer Aliff Aziz, actress Bella Astillah has made it clear that she has no objections of reuniting with her ex-husband.
The mum of one even said she was more than happy to support her troubled ex who made headlines for several cheating scandals while the couple were still married.
Most recently, Bella and Aliff took to Instagram to upload a photo taken at the same location suggesting that the two often spent time together.
The former husband and wife even uploaded identical videos while out bowling.
While the clip did not show their faces, the two individuals were seen in matching red and black shoes and the same pair of jeans.
Previously, the Cinta Belum Tamat Tempoh was seen singing on Instagram live and was joined by Aliff.
The clip led fans to accuse Bella of being foolish for still treating her ex-husband well but the actress insisted it was her right to do as she wished and did not care much for social media users’ opinions.
Bella married Aliff in September 2016 and were divorced in May this year at the Federal Territory Syariah Court in Kuala Lumpur.
They have a two-year-old son Mohamad Ayden Adrean.

Brought to my attention by
Why don't YOU follow them on Facebook? Click the link about and 'Like' the Page.
Yes today, 15th September,is the birthday of the first best-selling American novelist, James Fenimore Cooper, born in Burlington, New Jersey (1789). For most of his life he was known as James Cooper, but after his father's death, he tried to have his name legally changed to Fenimore, so as to inherit some property from his mother's family. He didn't get the property, but the name stuck.
He started out as a Navy man, but after he got married, his wife persuaded him to quit the sea and stay home. He struggled to run the estate he had inherited from his father, and he got into terrible debt. One day, he was reading aloud to his wife from an English novel, and he said he thought he could write a better novel himself. His wife laughed at him, because he didn't even enjoy writing letters much, but he sat down and wrote a book and it was published as Precaution (1820). He wrote six novels in the next six years.
He became best known for his series of five novels called the Leatherstocking Tales, including The Last of the Mohicans (1826), about frontier violence and adventure. At the time, most Americans read English literature about kings and queens, because they thought it was more romantic than their own difficult, colonial lives. James Fenimore Cooper was the first American author to make the wild, untamed life in America seem romantic.
During his life, he was widely respected as a great novelist, but after his death, Mark Twain wrote an essay called "Fenimore Cooper's Literary Offences" (1895) that helped to destroy his reputation. Twain wrote:"[The rules of literature] require that the personages in a tale shall be alive, except in the case of corpses, and that always the reader shall be able to tell the corpses from the others. But this detail has often been overlooked in [Cooper's books]." But Fenimore Cooper is still remembered for making America a subject for adventure and romance.
You may obtain an Ebook Edition of the "The Last of the Mohicans" by going to

Lord of Barad-dûr
The Dark Tower of Barad-dûr was first raised in Mordor during the second millennium of the Second Age. Sauron first dwelt there as its Lord for a period of more than 1,600 years, between about S.A. 1600 (when it was completed) and 3261 (when he travelled to Númenor for a time). He returned to become the Lord of the Dark Tower again after the Downfall of Númenor, and soon after began his wars with its exiles, under Elendil and his heirs.
The first of those wars ended after the Siege of Barad-dûr, when its Lord Sauron was thrown down, and his spirit cast out of his body. After that time, Barad-dûr was demolished, and the ways into Mordor were guarded by the Gondorians to prevents its old master's return. So Sauron was an exile from his own land throughout most of the Third Age, but late in that Age, with the guard of Gondor long since abandoned, he took his opportunity to escape back into Mordor, and rebuild the Dark Tower. From that time, and throughout the War of the Ring, he became the Lord of Barad-dûr once more.

The boyfriend, Officer Terry Pena, had already resigned from the Galena Park department, KPRC-TV in Houston reported.
Corrie Long says, in the complaint to the U.S. Equal Opportunity Commission, that the chief, Robert Pruett, interrogated her in detail about sex acts and locations with the photos visible on his desk.
"The chief didn't protect her from it," her lawyer David Tang told the TV station. "He called her in and just re-victimized her again by exploring her sexual history and threatening to expose these photographs if she didn't resign."
Pruett said the incident was handled in a "professional manner." He said Pena was originally suspended for 10 days and Long for five when he discovered they were dating, a violation of department rules.
Pena allegedly e-mailed him the photos while he was suspended.
The couple apparently gave different versions of where the photos came from. Tang said they were taken before Long joined the department and Pena sent them to the chief because Long had broken up with him, while Pena says he was the one who ended the relationship and Long sent him the photos in an effort to convince him to resume it.

John is really angry!
He is so angry that his face is red.
Why do you think he is angry?
John could be angry because somebody was rude to him.
John might be angry because the weather destroyed his hard work at the construction site.
Have you ever been so angry that your face turned red?
Do you think getting angry ever solved anything?
What would you say to John to calm him down and make him less angry?
What makes you angry?

New Member from NJ. Have the one of two 1966 mauve chargers with 426 hemi. The other Bloomington ghost was sold at mecom a couple of years ago and I have been trying to locate the buyer as both cars are well known and have been featured at Carlisle as well as in magazines and books. Any leads on who bought the 100% original one would be appreciated. Also have a 69 GTX drop top w buckets, no console, and factory AC.

Teach for America - A View from Inside
Career Center (CC): What were you thinking as graduation approached and your time at Cal was ending?
Neena Dass (ND): Honestly, I was getting nervous because I felt a lot of pressure to know what I was doing. My parents weren't pressuring me, rather I was pressuring myself. I wanted to know what I was going to do.
I thought that going to grad or law school would offer me some security. However, I knew it wasn't exactly what I wanted to do. I realized I had to step back, slow down, and reflect before I made any long-term decisions. Otherwise, I'd just be collecting another degree with no real idea of how to use it.
CC: What did you end up doing?
ND: For two years, I was a Teach for America corps member, teaching 9th and 10th grade English at Oakland High School. Now I do outreach to recruit this year's new corps members (the positions are full-time and paid).
CC: What was it like?
ND: As a teacher, I would wake up in the morning, work out, and then begin my real work day. I'd get to school around 7:00am. I'd start writing material for that day: the agenda, the objective, the homework, notes, etc. Students would start to trickle in and hang out in my classroom.
I taught three 9th grade classes and two 10th grade classes. I never wanted to be a teacher but what I realized was that I was leading my classroom. I was up at the board teaching about great literature and generating class discussion about certain topics. I wanted my students to see the connection between real-world experience and education.
In addition, students would come in to get help at lunch and after school. Sometimes they just needed a space to do homework. I was tough and didn't allow students to hang out in my room to talk; if they wanted to stay, they were required to work. I provided snacks in case they were hungry, and they had their own library space. In a way it reminded me of Heller Lounge on campus.
CC: What were the rewards and challenges of your work?
ND: I loved seeing a student who was struggling at the beginning of the school year excel and get an A in my class by the end of the year. That was so rewarding and so meaningful. I also loved meeting my students' parents, seeing how much they cared, and how they took me in as a part of their own family.
The most challenging aspect I faced was the day-to-day grind. I had to get used to being on my feet from 9-5. It was also frustrating to see other teachers at my school who didn't teach and just passed out worksheets as lesson plans. I wanted to see my students excel and receive an excellent education in every subject.
CC: What are the pre-requisites for Teach for America?
ND: To apply you need to have:
- Bachelor's Degree by 2007
- 2.5 minimum undergraduate GPA
- US citizenship or national/permanent resident status
CC: How will this career lead you to your longer-term professional goals?
ND: I ultimately want to run a school district or create my own school. I've met past corps members who are doing that now, and many of them went to either graduate or business school. So, I want to figure out which path will be the best fit for me.

|Harriet Jacobs (1813 - 1897) in 1894|
The book's epigraph:
"Rise up, ye women that are at ease! Hear my voice, ye careless daughters! Give ear unto my speech."
-- Isaiah 32:9
From chapter 9, "Sketches of Neighboring Slaveholders"
They put him into a rough box, and buried him with less feeling than would have been manifested for an old house dog. Nobody asked any questions. He was a slave; and the feeling was that the master had a right to do what he pleased with his own property. And what did he care for the value of a slave? He had hundreds of them.
From chapter 13, "The Church and Slavery"
I well remember one occasion when I attended a Methodist class meeting. I went with a burdened spirit, and happened to sit next a poor, bereaved mother, whose heart was still heavier than mine. The class leader was the town constable--a man who bought and sold slaves, who whipped his brethren and sisters of the church at the public whipping post, in jail or out of jail. He was ready to perform that Christian office any where for fifty cents. This white-faced, black-hearted brother came near us, and said to the stricken woman, "Sister, can't you tell us how the Lord deals with your soul? Do you love him as you did formerly?"
She rose to her feet, and said, in piteous tones, "My Lord and Master, help me! My load is more than I can bear. God has hid himself from me, and I am left in darkness and misery." Then, striking her breast, she continued, "I can't tell you what is in here! They've got all my children. Last week they took the last one. God only knows where they've sold her. They let me have her sixteen years, and then--O! O! Pray for her, brothers and sisters! I've got nothing to live for now. God make my time short!"
She sat down, quivering in every limb. I saw that constable class leader become crimson in the face with suppressed laughter, while he held up his handkerchief, that those who were weeping for the poor woman's calamity might not see his merriment. Then, with assumed gravity, he said to the bereaved mother, "Sister, pray to the Lord that every dispensation of his divine will may be sanctified to the good of your poor needy soul!"
The congregation struck up a hymn, and sung as though they were as free as the birds that warbled round us,--
"Ole Satan thought he had a mighty aim;
He missed my soul, and caught my sins.
Cry Amen, cry Amen, cry Amen to God!
"He took my sins upon his back;
Went muttering and grumbling down to hell.
Cry Amen, cry Amen, cry Amen to God!
"Ole Satan's church is here below.
Up to God's free church I hope to go.
Cry Amen, cry Amen, cry Amen to God!"
From chapter 16, "Scenes at the Plantation"
The young mistress came out to see how things were done on her plantation, and she soon gave a specimen of her character. Among those in waiting for their allowance was a very old slave, who had faithfully served the Flint family through three generations. When he hobbled up to get his bit of meat, the mistress said he was too old to have any allowance; that when niggers were too old to work, they ought to be fed on grass. Poor old man! He suffered much before he found rest in the grave.
From chapter 37, "A Visit to England"
I had heard much about the oppression of the poor in Europe. The people I saw around me were, many of them, among the poorest poor. But when I visited them in their little thatched cottages, I felt that the condition of even the meanest and most ignorant among them was vastly superior to the condition of the most favored slaves in America. They labored hard; but they were not ordered out to toil while the stars were in the sky, and driven and slashed by an overseer, through heat and cold, till the stars shone out again. Their homes were very humble; but they were protected by law. No insolent patrols could come, in the dead of night, and flog them at their pleasure. The father, when he closed his cottage door, felt safe with his family around him. No master or overseer could come and take from him his wife, or his daughter. They must separate to earn their living; but the parents knew where their children were going, and could communicate with them by letters. The relations of husband and wife, parent and child, were too sacred for the richest noble in the land to violate with impunity. Much was being done to enlighten these poor people. Schools were established among them, and benevolent societies were active in efforts to ameliorate their condition. There was no law forbidding them to learn to read and write; and if they helped each other in spelling out the Bible, they were in no danger of thirty-nine lashes, as was the case with myself and poor, pious, old uncle Fred. I repeat that the most ignorant and the most destitute of these peasants was a thousandfold better off than the most pampered American slave.

Reading Time: 6 minutes You know how you know when something’s about to happen to you? Well… I have been thinking that someone is going to rob me for the past one month. I thought I was going to get robbed as I was leaving the house. I thought about it at Murumbi’s. It’s that inner voice; instinct, that has been preparing me for this moment.

"What is different," she asked her senses. As she opened her eyes, it became instantly clear that this was not her home. "Where am I," she wondered. The thought crossed her mind that this would be a marvelous time to rise, and so she sat up in the large walnut shell, where she had been sleeping.
The shell bed had been placed perfectly in the center of what seemed to be a small island. It was green, flat and a circle. Further out laid a body of water flowing gently past. There could be seen several more, similar islands, of varying sizes, some distance away. Beyond them sat what looked like the mainland. The girl hopped out of her shell and landed on the green with abounding grace.
"Hello," she shouted. Nothing replied but the quiet sounds of moving water. She began to explore the small bit of land, hoping desperately for some sign of an exit. But none was found. "What if there is no exit," she worried. "Suppose that I'm trapped on this island forever?"
A tear began to slide down her cheek and was swiftly followed by many more. The emotions grew and intensified until she found herself weeping, alone.
Created: Feb 26, 2012Matthewsaurus Document Media

"I couldn't believe how much goes into a show," she said. "You have no idea how many hours these people practice, what goes into the actual making of it."
"It was one of the best experiences I've had in school and I think I would definitely like to try theatre in college," she continued. "I'm so glad I got the chance to do it."
Through the project, senior Madelaine Guay was able to live out a desire to swim with dolphins. It's something she's wanted to do since she visited Sea World as a young girl, she said.
"When Mrs. Brown told us about doing a project, I was thinking like a term paper or a speech, a PowerPoint - something along those lines," she said. "But, when she told us we got to choose something challenging that we've always wanted to do, I knew right away what I wanted to do."
The same day she learned of the challenge, Madelaine Guay called her aunt in Florida, who helped arrange a trip to Sea World's Discovery Cove in Orlando. When she got to complete her challenge, it was something she said she would never forget.
"It seemed so surreal," said Madelaine Guay. "I'll always look back on it and remember it."
When senior Stephanie Pepper looks back on the challenge she faced, she'll remember the bird's-eye view of Vermont she got when flying high over the Green Mountain State in a hot air balloon. That was the challenge Pepper presented herself and what she was able to make happen through a contact she made at U-Ken-Do Ballooning in Swanton, Vt.
"I had tons of crazy ideas and hot air ballooning was just one of them," said Pepper. "I e-mailed the pilot about my challenge and he was all for it."

|William Winger is Jeff Winger's father who left his son at a very young age. Jeff's abandonment issues as well as his animosity towards his father because of it had been obliquely referenced by him during his time at Greendale. William is eventually contacted by Jeff in order to get some closure. His first appearance was in the Season Four episode "Cooperative Escapism in Familial Relations". He was portrayed by actor James Brolin.|
Jeff first mentions his father when he temporarily moved in with Abed in his dorm room. They were both watching television and remarked how it was more if a father figure to them then their biological ones. While making his comparison Jeff told Abed about how his dad would often come home drunk. He also mentioned the one time his father took him to the zoo and then forgot him there, a precursor to his eventual abandonment of his family. Jeff casually described William as both physically and verbally abusuve towards him ("Home Economics").
In the study group's second year at Greendale, William's name is mentioned when Jeff is referred to as "Jeff the liar, son of William the barely known" ("Advanced Dungeons and Dragons"). Pierce uncovers more information about William when he investigates Jeff's dad as part of an elaborate prank to get back at the study group for constantly excluding him. He found out that William Winger was born in Oklahoma City in 1945 (making him at the time sixty-seven years old), married Jeff's mother Doreen Fitzgerald in 1974, and then divorced her in 1983. Jeff added his own details and referred to his father as a "two-bit con man of very little substance". ("Intermediate Documentary Filmmaking").
In Jeff's third year at school, Jeff realizes he has serious daddy issues after confronting Pierce's father Cornelius Hawthorne and accidentally causing his death ("Advanced Gay"). Jeff announces to the group he is in therapy ("Regional Holiday Music") and later explains how he talked about his father and punched a few pillows before being prescribed some anti-anxiety meds ("Contemporary Impressionists"). During Shirley's wedding rehearsal, Jeff got drunk and publicly declared his hatred of the institution of marriage. This stemmed from the fact that his father broke his promise to stay with his mom forver. At the end of the year, Jeff is shown to be searching online for his father ("Introduction to Finality").
In Jeff's senior year at school, he revealed to Britta that he located his father and had his phone number but hadn't contacted him. After some contemplation, he later calls him ("Paranormal Parentage"). He learns he has a half-brother named Willy Jr. and he and his father agree to have Thanksgiving dinner together. When Jeff arrives at his fathers place he becomes overwhelmed by the situation and flees. He contacts Britta who had been encouraging him to see his dad and lies about the reunion claiming to have gotten closure. He then learns that she knows he is lying as she is there at his father's house. Annoyed that she interjected herself into a personal matter, he returns to the house. He confronts Britta who is apologetic about her meddling in his private affair. He then steels his resolve to see this through. Jeff knocks on the front door where he is greeted by his father William Winger.
After some awkwardness, Jeff and William create some ground rules for the dinner and agree to try and not turn the situation into an overly emotional affair. William introduces Jeff to his half brother, Willy Jr., who is immediately jealous of him. William and Jeff settle into a comfortable dynamic and discuss what's been going on since they last saw each other. William is shown to be overly critical and slightly abusive of Willy Jr. and praises Jeff for having turned out so well adjusted. He then suggests that leaving him as a kid seems to have made him a stronger person, particularly in comparison to his half-brother Willy. Jeff is angered by his "compliment" and storms out.
Later, William is getting wine glasses from the kitchen when Jeff suddenly returns. He calmly explains to his father how wrong his assessment of him is. Jeff proclaims himself to be a broken person who composes fake text messages on his phone rather rather then open himself up to his friends. He credits William with that who scoffs at the notion but Jeff cuts him off before he can defend himself and continues. Jeff describes the ridiculous and sometimes dangerous lengths he went to in order to replace the loss of his father. In seventh grade, he lied to his classmates about having just had an appendicitis just so someone could worry about him. He needed to make a scar so it would look legit so he grabbed a pair of scissors and made one.
He shows off the scar to his father and credits him with that as well. William is about to respond when he suddenly keels over and drops the wine glasses which shatter as they hit the floor. Wily Jr. calls out to his father but both Jeff and Britta know better having seen Pierce pull this stunt many times before. Jeff looks on with disapppointment and asks his father if he is faking a heart attack. Realizing its not working, William abandons the ruse and admits the charade "was kind of a Hail Mary." Jeff sighs heavily and wishes his father a happy Thanksgiving before leaving with Britta.("Cooperative Escapism in Familial Relations").
|At the Community panel held at the 2012 Comic Con International convention, it was announced that William Winger was slated to make appearance in Season Four. Harmon had stated in a few interviews that his dream casting for the part was always Bill Murray. Bill Murray played the character of John Winger in "Stripes" whose name and personality Harmon said was one of the main inspirations for Jeff Winger. It was confirmed on September 18, 2012 by TV Line that Jeff's father would be played by James Brolin. On the same day Joel McHale tweeted a photo of them on set. In a November 14, 2013 interview with Antenna Free TV, Josh Brolin admitted that he took the role because his daughter ordered him to.

"There were 10,000 pounds of steel on a cable. It unraveled and came down on my leg, it almost severed the leg entirely. I passed out, and when I got to the hospital, the doctors wanted to cut it off. Luckily I knew one of the doctors, and he gave me a chance."
In face, Przyojski said he fought doctors for a year and a half to avoid an amputation. "I was dead set against it," the 42-year-old said. "I wasn't going to have a plastic leg."
The steel had not only crushed nearly every bone in Przyojski leg, but also it had ripped muscles and tendons from the bone, destroyed a large artery, and tore up his skin. A large pin held the upper and lower bones together. He was in a wheel chair for a year and missed three years of work. It was two years before he walked on his own again. After three years of 11 operations of bone and skin grafts and untold pain, Dan's perseverance paid off - the leg was saved.
"Years of lifting saved my leg."
"The doctors told me the only reason why the leg was saved was because weightlifting had thickened up the bones in my leg and hip. They took bones from my hip to repair the leg," he said, "Years of lifting saved my leg." "I've always - for some reason - had to work against the odds. I've always been too small," said Pryzojski, who wrestled in the 98-pound weight class at Woodward High School as a freshman but never played other sports for lack of bulk.
"When [the accident] came along, I set in my mind that one day I would walk back up to the stage and compete again. It didn't matter if I won," he said. Yet last spring, Dan did just that. After 15 years of daily rehabilitation and conditioning, Przyojski won the masters division (40 years and older) at the 2001 Mr. Michigan Bodybuilding Championships in Dearborn last May.
"It was unbelievable," he said. "My family was there, and they went through it all with me. It was great to get recognized for it at the show." Przyojski, who runs Power Health Personal Training in Toledo, said he developed his own exercises to rehabilitate his leg. "I started doing simple exercises and progressively building up to heavier weights," he said.
Przyojski started weight training in mid-1980, and it took four years before he could get to squatting more than 300 pounds as he did when he had placed third in the 1986 Great Lakes Bodybuilding Contest. By winning the 2001 Mr. Michigan title, Przyojski qualified for the American National Bodybuilding championships in New York last weekend.
"You don't want to be a scared person, but at the same time you want to be safe. My wife and I both would have had to go, and we have a baby at home."
Instead, Przyojski plans to travel to New York for another event in February. His ultimate goal is to win the national event to earn a pro bodybuilding card. The certificate would allow him to compete for money in events that are strictly drug free. "This has been a 10-year process, and most people would have quit," he said. "I feel like I defeated all the odds."
Check Out My Website at http://www.powerhealthproducts.com

I had read the reviews for this place before arriving in Kingston and thought twice before committing to it (based on reviews). We were only stopping on our way through town and were seeking an affordable, dog-friendly hotel.
When we arrived it was actually not bad at all. Our room was clean, bathroom, sheets, everything was good. The receptionist was really friendly.
The only downside was that there was that there was construction on the street outside that started at 630am, and was pretty noisy. Not the hotels fault, but we should have been notified before committing to the room for the night. Had we known that we would be woken up so early we would have probably paid extra to stay elsewhere.
But on the other hand the econo lodge was affordable and they also had a continental breakfast, which was good-standard hotel breakfast of waffles, toast, juice, yogurt, and apples and bananas.
You have no recent hotel searches.

Feeling "not good enough", feeling we have to do something extra to be accepted or loved, is common for many of us. Recently, a teenage client of mine had the wonderful experience of being fine as she is, no "extras" needed. While she was doing some reflective work with one of the horses I witnessed her need to continually pat and scratch the horse's neck, normally his favourite spot for scratches.
Yet, he kept turning his head and neck away each time she scratched or patted him, then resting his head on her shoulder when she stopped. This was repeated many times until I drew her attention to the possibility that the horses was trying to tell her something. When she eventually stopped the horse drew her into a horse hug - putting his head over her shoulder and holding her between his chest and his head. They stood like that for at least 10 minutes in total quiet. Then the horse changed over to her other shoulder! Further 10 minutes quiet!
When my client returned to me she immediately said: "He tried to tell me I didn't need to do anything for him to like me! I was worried he would just walk away if I didn't scratch him and make him like me!"
Sometimes it is really that simple. I feel it is such a priviledge to hold the space for my clients and witness such profound moments.
One of my trainers, Mike Delaney, talking about Equine Facilitated Learning

SHAWNEE, Okla. – A Harrah man was killed when the motorcycle he was driving collided with a car near Shawnee.
Rex Helsel, 22 was pronounced dead at a hospital following the crash just before 11:30 p.m. Friday, according to the Oklahoma Highway Patrol.
Helsel was southbound on U.S. 177 when he crashed into a northbound car that was making a left turn from the highway onto a county road, troopers said.
The driver and a 12-year-old boy in the car were hospitalized in serious condition.
A 6-year-old boy in the car was treated and released.

A few more threads of the apron strings were cut today. We FINALLY started using the respite care that Raya's been eligible for since sometime earlier this year. We met Megan a couple weeks ago and Raya instantly loved her. We feel like she will be a good fit for Raya.
It really shouldn't have taken that long to start making use of this great resource that we're blessed to have available to us. I'll admit that part of the reason it took so long was that I was having a hard time with the idea of leaving her with someone, especially when she still had the GJ tube. Her care was MUCH more complicated then. Another reason was that I was trying to find a family member or friend that was willing to do it and couldn't find anybody. I had called one agency a couple of times and they only returned my phone call once, and after a month of trying to get somewhere with their agency, I gave up on them.
A few weeks later, I happened to be at an event for Down Syndrome and there was a respite care agency with a booth there. I got their information & contacted them and the rest is history. :) I was told earlier in the week that we would have to wait (like everyone else in AZ that gets respite care) to get the hours authorized again because of changes to the program that went into effect on the 1st of October. We thought we'd have to wait another week or two, but the next day I got emails from the provider and our coordinator saying that the approval had gone through & we could start.
Another reason we hadn't started yet is because I wasn't sure what to use the hours for. I'm used to having my schedule dictated by Raya's appointments and whatever the other 3 kids are doing, so I really didn't have anything specific in mind. Then Raya went to nursery at church, and after 4 weeks, she caught a cold. Not that nursery was definitely where she picked it up, but it was pretty likely that it was. We've always felt really lucky that Raya has been as healthy as she's been (as in free of illness healthy :). Then when she got a stuffy nose, she instantly lost interest in the little bit of food that she had been eating. It was our first real taste of how quickly & easily the progress we've worked hard for towards Raya eating can be reversed, and we decided that we'd be well to use some of our respite hours to keep her at home instead of taking her to church. Our decision has been met with mixed reactions, so not that I really need to explain myself, but I thought I'd explain a little more about that decision.
After seeing how much she was affected by a mild little cold, we realized that we had no idea what the effects might be if she were to catch something more serious, like the flu. Nobody can say for sure, but to me it just seems logical that if it was so incredibly difficult to resolve her months of uncontrollable vomiting and regulate the hypersensitivity in her gut, a stomach flu could send her body right back to where it was before. We have seen over and over again that her body doesn't react well to changes with her digestive system, and a flu virus could possibly wreak havoc on her GI tract. After 18 solid months of vomit and everything that goes with it, I have no desire to see Raya go back to that life. I don't think my washing machine or my heart could deal with it.
Overreacting? Perhaps. I've always been slightly on the germophobe side, especially since Raya came along. She might get the flu anyway. She might get the flu and handle it like a typical child. But she might not. After having all of the experiences that I've had in taking care of her; experiences that most people will never even know about or understand, I'm not willing to take that risk. We are blessed enough to have this resource available to us and we feel like keeping her home for a while is the best thing for her. For the next few months, she won't be going too many places, especially if there are sick people.
Being at church with Donny and the other 3 kids but not Raya was very strange. I realized that it will take some time for me to get used to sitting all the way through church again. It's been a very long time since that's happened. I was always walking the halls with Raya or taking her in the mothers' room to change her diaper or set up a feed or something. She was always a restless baby and I haven't heard many of the lessons or talks at church since she was born so I'm looking forward to that. Megan is also coming for a couple hours tomorrow so that I can go grocery shopping and run some other errands (like figure out Halloween costumes) with 1 kid instead of 2. :)
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY NOTICE
*ALL information on this website is the intellectual property of the blog/website owner! Unauthorized use is prohibited. If you see something you'd like to repost or share, please email me and ask first. This includes but is not limited to all text, information, and photos on the blog. Thank you!*

During tech school, I became what we called a “rope.” A rope was like a hall monitor of sorts. We were entrusted with enforcing minor laws in the day room, around the barracks, and we were also tasked with getting the flight to and from classes at tech school.
There were different ropes for different levels of responsibility and some specialized jobs. My time at tech school was fairly short, so I only attained a green rope. This put me in charge of a specific group of airmen in my particular dorm. There are many stories I could share about my brief time as a student leader, but today I want to talk about marching the flight to and from school.
So as a fitness instructor, I’ve encountered what it feels like to be new, to walk into a room full of people, and then to blow it. I’ve had classes where I knew as I was performing the job that I was sucking real bad. Marching a flight was no different in the beginning. The first time I tried to march a large flight, I botched it really back. I was supposed to get them moving and then across the street. I didn’t get the road guards out quickly enough, and I didn’t get them turning on the right foot.
The easiest way to create a parallel is driving a car. If you are trying to parallel park, and you make the wrong move or go to far, etc, you have to reset and do it again. Well, that’s what happened to me when marching my flight for the first time. My training instructor saw how badly I fucked up and he took over. He recovered from my mess and got everyone back to the dorms safely.
In hindsight, it’s not that it was hard, I think I was just nervous and under a lot of pressure. I didn’t feel like I was ready to start marching them as I never practiced. However, I learned under fire and pressure. The next time I took over the marching I got it right, my confidence was higher because I had already experienced the worst case scenario. From that point forward I got really good at it.
I recall that on the way to tech school we’d have to march through the flight line were all the jets were, and those things were damn loud. In order to be heard, you’d have to hit a strange pitch and key. There was no way that any of us could scream louder than a freaking jet, but you could hit a pitch that was heard through the flight line noise. I learned the perfect pitch that was distinguishable over the loud planes to keep the flight going and in step.
By the end of tech school, I was an expert and on my way to getting a yellow rope. They didn’t promote me because I was leaving, but I knew that if I remained, I’d have gotten the yellow and then red rope, it was just a matter of time. My training instructors loved me and my eagerness to perform at a high level. I thrived in the military. I do miss those days, I had a good time in tech school and part of that fun was marching the flight.

Mediocre; used to be really good for what it was (a country diner), but management and staff have become slack and uncaring. Especially the manager. I was a 2-3 times a week regular, but no more. Last time I complained to the manager/owner about a terrible waitress I was told to "try not to sit in her section"! He needs to get rid of that stupid big-screen TV he watches (while chatting on his cell phone) and take care of business. He's losing customers and doesn't seem to care.

Two brothers were rescued on Monday after their boat capsized while they were fishing the night before, authorities said.
The two men had gone out to fish on Sunday night off Key Biscayne, when their boat took on water and capsized around 2 a.m. They both went into the water and swam to the shore. One of them got to the beach near Crandon Park, while the other was still in the water floating on the top of a cooler.
The brother who made it to the beach called for help, and by 9 a.m., the U.S. Coast Guard rescued the other man.
“He’s fine. He’s just really cold right now, and the skin from being in the water too long," said his girlfriend, Vanessa Florido. He was dehydrated but was being given water to drink, she added.
Both men were taken to Mercy Hospital and expected to be OK.
"The chances for survival are greatly increased when boaters wear their flotation devices, along with using float plans describing your intentions," said Petty Officer 1st Class Abiola Ideraabdullah.
The cooler lid was crucial for the one brother's survival, Lt. Commander Joseph Abeyta said.
“Had he not had the cooler, had he just had a little plastic bag with his stuff in it, I’m not too confident that that individual would have survived this morning,” Abeyta said.
Authorities are investigating the vessel's sinking.

Mars is 9 months and 7 days old.
Can you see his first tooth in the top picture? So cute!
Last Friday, we went out to dinner with my former student and her mom. Out of nowhere, just sitting in his high chair, Mars started clapping! And since then, it's been his favorite thing to do. The other day, I went out with him in the Ergobaby, and the moment I took him out of it, he started clapping his hands. I guess he wasn't able to clap since the Ergo separates his hands, so he was extra excited to do it once he got out!
I haven't been blogging very much lately and it's for two reasons. One, when Mars isn't trying to mash the keyboard while I'm typing, he's crawling away from me and getting himself into dangerous situations. And two, I've been thinking hard about refocusing the content here and trying to create posts that are more useful and have longer staying power. I mean, capsule wardrobes and weekly wishlists are fun to do, but after the week is done, they feel a bit "so what?" to me. So I'm gonna be gone for a little bit, but don't worry, I'll be back and with even more fun things to share!
Happy Friday, everyone!

July 1st was Nipun and Guri's wedding anniversary. In celebration Jayeshbhai asked everyone in and around the MS ecosystem to do small, random acts of kindness in their honor. I was part of an especially hard-core group whose act was to serve chai to people at the Ahmedabad train station, Kalupur, in the middle of the night.
We began at 12am at Jayeshbhai's where we woke up Nipun and Guri to kick off their anniversary with a cake cutting, which was presided over by idols of all the major religions (a la their interfaith wedding ceremony). After they went to sleep we went to work making chai in a huge vat in Jayeshbhai's kitchen, simultaneously trying to stay awake, get in high spirits for the task ahead, and also keep quiet to not wake up the couple.
The tea was ready by about 2am (I fell asleep on the couch while the others powered through), and then we set out for the station. There were about 10 of us. Once we got there we started by standing in a circle, holding hands, and said a prayer. I like how that grounded us and added a sense of sacredness to what we were about to do. Then we split into two teams, each with a kettle of tea, setting out to gift people a late night refreshment.
While the other group set out for the periphery of the station to offer to the rickshawwallas, my team went into the station itself. We wanted to go onto the platform where trains were coming and going, but the police officer at the security entrance did not let us through. We explained as best we could that we were simply trying to serve with no strings attached, but the guard refused. So we made due with roaming around in the front lobby of the station, where a hundred or so people were huddling about in groups on the floor. We started to ask people if they would like tea. At first there were just confused looks and refusal, and some of our group began getting a little restless and frustrated. But then our first cup of chai was accepted, then another, then another. Things were starting to pick up when another police officer who was watching us called us over. "You can't do this, you will have to leave," he said sternly. We tried to explain that all we were doing was offering tea to anyone who would want it, and that we considered it seva. "You call giving away tea seva? That is not seva," he said. Considering what we were doing as an act of kindness was completely off his radar, a paradigm he had no familiarity with. He started to threaten us, saying he will end things forcefully if we don't leave immediately. The tension had clearly escalated, so we left.
Some in our group got really rattled by the cop, upset and confused. Why are they hassling us? Why don't they get it? We are never going to be able to serve all this tea. Should we just give up? Go somewhere else? Frustration, doubt, fear. It was a surprise to me that these emotions came up, since for some reason I had it in my mind that doing random acts of kindness in India was much easier than in the U.S. Back home, where we organize hear the homeless or similar events, you expect these emotions, some level of fear for new volunteers, and confusion for those we encounter, because you assume it's a sharper shift for our me-first culture. But in India? People should be seva veterans, it should be smooth sailing. But here we were at 3am in a train station with a jug full of chai, getting hassled by cops, rejected our offering by a half dozen people, wondering whether we were crazy for what just 15 minutes ago seemed like a holy act. To me it was a realization that small, random, radical acts of kindness is a language that is a challenge to speak no matter where you are in the world.
What was remarkable was our group's recovery. First, we realized that the cops were just doing their jobs. What if we were lying to them about free chai, and were actually trying to sell? Even worse, what if we were trying to do harm to people with spiked tea? The more we thought about it, the more we felt that the cops were not at fault. So we let that go. And we kept on going, one cup at a time, eventually catching the spirit back. We soon had given away all our chai, and received gratitude and many smiles in return. After the chai, we stepped it up by buying 26 packages of biscuits from a vendor in the station and offering those out. For the biscuits, I walked around with an open package for anyone and everyone to take, only I made a point to always be eating one myself to assure people that they were safe. I ended up eating a package of them, even though I don't particularly care for Indian tea biscuits, especially at 4am. Brutal.
The recovery from the cop run-in was complete at the end of the night when Parul, one of the volunteers with us, reported successfully serving tea and biscuits to a police officer in the station. Persistence pays off!
There were a few small stories from the experience that stuck with me. The first is about Meghna, who was serving in my group. Watching her in action was incredible. When you try to do an act of kindness for a stranger, the most crucial part is creating context for the act with the person you are serving. Even a well-intentioned act, if not set up properly, can lead to mis-interpretation and/or suspicion. For example, what didn't work was going up to a person and asking, "Would you like some tea?" They can interpret that so many ways. Maybe you are trying to sell, maybe you are trying to play a prank, maybe you're just some nut with a jug. The person has little basis to assess the offering you are making, they don't know you. The key is to create context and comfortable report simply and quickly. What worked for me was starting by explaining who we were and why we were serving: "We have two close friends whose marriage anniversary is today. These friends have served others in many wonderful ways. In their honor, we have come here to do a small act of service. Would you allow us to serve you a cup of chai?"
What does this all have to do with Meghna? Well, she is the queen of context. It was amazing how effortlessly she was able to connect with people and bring them in. She is such a caring person, people can just feel it. I loved watching her and studying how she engaged people, how she spoke, her smile, her fearlessness. She had no hesitation approaching the poorest, sickest, dirtiest. And all with boundless energy. What an inspiration.
One rickshawwalla, after having his chai, was moved enough to help us clean cups for the next recipients. Pay-it-forward!
Last thing I'll share is this picture, which is of us serving tea to a chaiwalla! It's like selling water to a well. But he accepted our offering and enjoyed it. Hopefully it was up to his standards.

Dog in good spirits after being rescued with mouth, eyes super-glued shut
As KSNW reported, a puppy was found on the side of the road with her eyes and mouth glued shut.
When the unnamed 8-month-old puppy came to Beauties and Beasts Animal Rescue in Wichita, Kansas, she was in bad shape.
Her eyes and mouth were found superglued shut. Her tongue was even glued to the side of her mouth.
Now, the people that rescued her are offering up a $1,000 reward to help find the person responsible.
"They did this on purpose. Somebody thought it was funny to torture this little puppy. I don't think it's funny. My rescue doesn't think it's funny," said Randi Carter of Beauties and Beasts Animal Rescue.
Now, the rescue group is offering up a $1,000 reward to help find the person responsible. "We want to arrest these people, you know. You think about people that do this to animals, they could do it to a human. They wouldn't have a problem. It's a proven fact," said Carter.
The puppy is recovering at her vet's office and is in good spirits. The superglue in her eye has caused a few ulcers, other than that she has even offered up a lot of love.

Well isn't this refreshing? Rather than lecturing us on the benefits of eating vegetables and doing vigorous workouts, Margaret Ellen Moores of Newfoundland says she's reached the age of 106 thanks to eating junk food and enjoying herself. Her daughter said at her birthday party this weekend, "She loves her sweets. She never drank water in her life ... [She loves] her salt beef, the same old-time meals as ever she had … She loves her pizza and French fries now. So it's not her diet is it?" When asked about the secret to her longevity, Moores said, "Good times I guess, when I got old. I didn't have them when I was young ... [I] got so fond of them, I couldn't let them go."

DISCLAIMER: I do not own Vandread or the Gundam series.
A/N: This first chapter will be from my OC's point of view and then the rest will be from a third person's point of view.
I'M NOT IN KANSAS IN ANYMORE
Today was my summer break and I was spending it playing games, hanging out with my friends, and you every day normal stuff, and that was the problem," 'sigh' everything these days is so boring nowadays. Everything is just one same thing after another. I just wish that there was some action once in awhile, like something like off of Vandread," I said as I lay on a hill of grass, watching the clouds go by. It was so relaxing, I just felt the need to drift off and take a bit of a nap.
Oh, did I forget to mention who I am, well the name is Taiho, Taiho Lobo. I'm half Japanese and half Mexican, currently living in the middle of the good ol' U.S. and just got done with college. I studied computers, their systems, and basically you everyday mechanics on anything that can move. Well back to what I was saying.
Usually I would dream about the wildest things, like taking down zombies one at a time with a big as bazooka while doing a tap dance. (That one made me shudder, I was creeped out) But this time was different, this one was as if I was surrounded by aqua green water and for some reason, I was breathing still. It felt like something right out of my favorite anime, Vandread.
"What the hell?" I said as I looked around, I then start to see images pop up of the episodes of Vandread,' okay, now I know I'm watching that show too much. Maybe I should watch something like…Gundam Seed or maybe a combination of them,' I then start to think of a Gundam with combination parts, thinking that this little dream would change a little.
"Hmm, let's see," I start to think what my imaginary gundam should look like," maybe the body frame and capabilities of the Destiny Gundam, those wings look hella cool on it and its basic equipment to. But without that pesky Phase Shift Armor, just the armor the Wing Zero has," then I started with the combinations," probably have mounted shoulder gatling guns like Wing Zero too, then the hands of Burning Gundam for its Burning Fingers while it still holds the beam shield. And maybe the cockpit system of it as well, that will make it easier than learning the controls, just not with the jumpsuit. I wouldn't be able to handle the suit riding up my crotch and ass, it'd be too troublesome, hehe, like a certain Nara," as I said that, I could sworn I heard someone sneezed and say something about people being troublesome talking behind his back," anything else then that, I can hardly think of anything else at the moment."
And is if on cue, the gundam of my imaginations appears in front of me, but the aqua green scenery is still around. A voice then speaks out of nowhere," this is the sword you have created and it will guide you to the ones who will need you and your sword most. You have only till tonight to be ready for the journey ahead," and then my best friend, cutting off the weird dream all of a sudden, woke me up.
"Hey, come on man. Wake your lazy ass up," Marcus said as he kicked me in my side, just for the fun of it. He was one of the few people who would tolerate me; he was black, wore black and red all the time for some reason and was quite lean. He would be though considering we do 'bodies' all the time, just for the fun of it and to train each other in our own style of combat. (When I say 'bodies', I mean basically punching the shit out of each other and keep on hitting till one of us is tired, or backs off from the game)
"Dammit man, you really didn't need to do that," what surprised when I saw him, was that he was wearing white and blue," what the occasion man, you never wear those colors."
"None of you damn business," he said in a cocky tone. That pissed me off at that moment.
"What the hells your problem? I just asked a simple question, dumbass," I then get up and step up to his face.
"And what you gonna do, huh? Not a damn thing," he said in an annoyed voice as he hardens his glare at me.
"Ass," I said to him.
"Bitch," he replied back.
"GAY ASS HOMO."
"YOU FUCKING PRICK WITH A DICK STICKING OUT YOUR ASS."
"YOU MOTHER FUCKING, BITCH ASS, COCK SUCKING, ASS LICKER."
"YOU OL' JIMINY THE CRICKET SUIT WEARING ASS MOTHER FUCKER."
After that last comment, he did the only thing he could do at the moment…laugh ass off," ah shit man, I haven't heard that one since we watched 'How High'."
"Yea, I know, don't you just love the good ones," I said with a happy smirk on my face.
"Shit, hell ya. But time to be serious," he then looked at me straight in the eye and I could tell he didn't want to tell me, considering the sad look in them. He didn't speak for a moment, but his answer shocked me when he said it," I'm, uh, I'm moving to Texas and I won't be coming back."
Taking back by that, I try to think of a way to at least keep up our friendship up," well, we could always email each other and then there's the online games we got, so it won't be like we will forget each other," though I tried, my voice didn't sound that convinced. We both knew trying to keep up our friendship from a long distance would fail. So I did the next best thing," who am I kidding? Well, the only thing I can say to you man is good luck out there and don't forget me," he smirks and we do our little hand shake," always know that I'm always here man and that I'll always be your homie."
"That's the only thing I can ask for," he then turns to go home and pack," well I gotta go man, I'll maybe see you when you come to Texas," he then walks off without looking back.
"COUNT IT MAN, WHEN I'M THERE NEXT TIME I'LL LOOK YOU UP," I yelled out to him. Now the days just got more boring and depressing even. I was going to miss him, but it was his choice to move. So with that I walk off home, hoping that my video games will get my mind off this matter.
"I'M HOME," I call out so that my mother knows I'm in. We lived by ourselves, so it was pretty empty in a house meant for eight people. I didn't hear her say that she too was in, so I assumed she was still at work. I then quickly take a hot shower to relieve myself further of any negative thoughts. When I was done, I combed my hair and spiked the front of it; I then put on a pair of black addida with white stripes, black Dickies pants, and a white wife-beater.
When I was done with that, I went to my room and started up the ps2 to play some good games. I noticed that it was really cold in my room,' maybe I should turn up the heater…naw, I'm too lazy to do it now,' so I do the next best thing and put on a zip-up sweater that had the Dickies logo in the middle.
I played for a few hours, not noticing that a storm was brewing outside, a tornado storm that is. I didn't know it was coming straight for my house considering I was concentrated on the game more then to my surroundings. When it got close enough for me to feel I started to panic," what the fuck?!" I then look out my window and see the tornado, on its way to me," OH FUCK, I GOTTA GET OUT OF HERE," but it was too late, as the tornado tore the side of the house and its winds taking hold of me. As I started to spin in the tornado, I noticed it was starting to glow, but I paid it no attention while thinking just one thing on my mind,' it's been a good life, I guess," and so I resign myself to my fate.
'It feels so weird here. For some reason, I feel my back moving and it feels like something is pushing it,' I then started to open my eyes, ready to see heaven's gates or Hell's entrance, but I didn't expect to see just a brown ceiling,' hm? What the hell? Shouldn't I be dead,' I then jump to my feet and start to feel around myself, making sure I was indeed alive. To my pleasure I was, I then look in my initial surroundings to see if there was anyone around to so that I can ask where I am. When I hear I grunt, I look down and see that I'm standing on someone," Oh, sorry, I didn't mean to…" I then look to see who I was standing on, and it truly shocked me. It was Hibiki Tokai, the dude who was an action Tenchi. (In my eyes, Hibiki is like Tenchi, only he actually takes action, then just stands around and waits for the danger to come to him)
"What the hell?" he dusts himself off and then shoots me a death glare towards me, which really doesn't affect me," who the hell are you and what are you doing here?"
"You know, I could ask you the same thing," my mind was still going out of whack at this moment,' what in the name of god is happening? This feels too real to be just some dream,' then I think of all the upcoming battle that were in the series,' or nightmare for that matter now. I don't know if I should be happy or afraid.'
He paled a bit when I asked the question, but like I know him, he gets back his cocky attitude," heh, none of you damn business?"
That comment made me flinch, as I realized that my family and my friends are all back in some other dimension, or worse, dead considering the timeline here. After that last thought, it really made me depressed. But right now, I have to focus on the here and now," if you say so man, but don't you think we should get out of here before…" once again I was cut off as the wall in behind us lifts up and makes the mechas turn to it, as if in a sound off," we get caught."
"Hey, what are third classes doing here," one of the soldiers yelled out. All of a sudden, guards were coming in to detain us.
But I wasn't going to go down without much of a fight. So as one was foolishly trying to just grab, I ducked down and punch him right in the gut, I then proceed to left uppercut right to his jaw. Seeing other coming up behind me, I take the temporarily lifted soldier by the legs and use a quick bit of strength and toss him to the two incoming soldiers. I then rushed over and jump up to stomp my feet on the two soldiers faces, thus knocking them out. Two more guards came in but were trying to close in on me by coming in from opposite sides. Like I would be cornered like that, I fought better brawls with my best bud back home. When they got close enough, I jumped high enough over their heads while grabbing onto their heads and knocked them right into each other. I scoffed at their fighting abilities; these guys were military made primarily of men? Some real pussies must've trained the future soldiers.
I saw that Hibiki wasn't going as good as me, so I rushed over to him, only to be stopped by one of the guards holding a gun," halt, if you insist on resisting us third class, we will not hesitate to kill you or your friend there," as he said that, he then cocked the gun, readying it to fire.
I don't speak, but merely nod and let them proceed to put restraints on me. Moments later, me and Hibiki are thrown in a storage room used as a cell," bastards, don't just throw us in some storage room, at least put us in a decent prison," the short stuff said in an angered voice, though I really wasn't complaining as I know what is to happen next.
That what troubled me, should I go along and just let it flow, or should I give out hints of the future and avoid some sticky situation. It did not sit well with me on having to go through the whole 'Barnette on a no trusting man-hunt', that was the one thing I definitely wanted to avoid. But I was brought out of my thoughts, as Hibiki was tapping my shoulder to get my attention.
"Hey, what the hell is wrong with you? You look like you were deep in thought," he said as he raised an eyebrow. I only assumed it wasn't only my attitude, but my clothing too that made me suspicious.
"Nothing's the matter, and yes I was thinking of something. But enough of that," I then stuck out my hand to him," Names Taiho, Taiho Lobo."
He looked at me and my hand for a sec, but quickly took it with a big smirk on his face," And my names Hibiki Tokai, Hibiki the man," he said proudly to himself.
I then look at our situation," 'sigh' looks like we won't be getting out of here anytime soon," I notice the little robot in front of our would be cell. I notice it to be Pyoro still in his robotic personality.
"Why do things always get messed up in my life," he then notice the robot too and a smirk grows on his face," uh, hey, partner," the robot then gives him his attention," why don't you be a pal and let us out of here? We were both born in a factory, so that means we're kinda like brothers, huh? Right?"
"No, we are composed of completely different materials. The term 'brother' is inappropriate," the little white robot replied back to him in a robotic voice. All the while, Hibiki was trying to bribe it while it was talking," denied, the subject is making an improper request. Instigation of escape and attempted bribery are crimes, therefore…"
"Therefore?" Hibiki asked, and so I then take one big step back from the short stuff.
"Punishment," as the robot said that, it immediately gives him a big charge of electricity.
After frying for a second, the navy haired boy glared right at the robot," What the hell do you think doing? Who do you think I am?" he yelled out angrily.
"Starting identity scan of the observed," it then went on about information already known, until a tremor occurred and had it hit the robot crash right into the laser grid.
"So, it has begun," I said under my breath, trying to get myself psyched up for anything unexpected to happen.
"What? What's going on now?" Hibiki asked, clearly confused by the situation. Shortly after he said that, an alarm went off with an announcement for the soldiers to go into battle.
After getting out of his confusion, Hibiki goes into mechanic mode and uses the robot circuitry to disengage the laser grid holding us captive," never underestimate a mechanics know how," he said, as if patting himself on the back for doing a good job.
"Yea, yea, just don't get cocky. I think that head of yours is big enough as it is," I then walk out and notice him glaring at me again," 'sigh' you really don't know when to take a jokes, do you Hibiki? Anyways, shouldn't our first priority to be getting out of here, NOW."
Stopping the little glare, he nods and we start to take off, but the short guy looks back at the robot. Not even asking, I go and pick up the little robot. He gives me a confused look, but I just nodded my head towards the door, gesturing for us to leave. He nods again and we're finally off.
We are then running down damaged halls, it looked like something out of a sci-fi scary movie," what the hells going on with this place?" he asked clearly on edge.
"Well I don't know, but one thing is for sure. We need to get out of here," I said with a bit of a lie, because I did know what was going to happen. (Duh)
As we continue running to the hangar for the vanguards, we come across a room with the paxis (don't know if that is spelled right). As soon as we make it to the middle of the bridge, an explosion occurs and sends me right into the core.
Knowledge of a whole lot of things was pouring into my mind, too fast for me to even comprehend. I didn't know how long it took me to wake from this barrage of knowledge, but I soon found myself way up near the ceiling, while standing on a beam near the paxis.
I then hear yelling down below and low and behold, it was Meia and Jura on a catwalk yelling at Dita for what she is doing.
"HEY HIBIKI," I yell out, not caring that the three see me, we needed to get to the vanguards now for protection of the nukes they're going to fire at us. The navy haired boy then looks up to see me with a grateful look in his face. I then got an idea, though as crazy as it sounded, I felt I could do it," HOLD ON FOR A SECOND THERE, I'LL JUMP DOWN TO YOU," yup, I was definitely going to do it. Don't ask my why, because I don't even know why I'm doing it.
I then leaped off and start to jump from beam to beam, on my way down to the third class citizen. When I got on the catwalk for a second, I saw the two women had shocked looks on their faces and I wouldn't blame them either; I was jumping around like a ninja from Naruto for some reason.
"Come on, we need to get to those vanguards now," he nods and we take off to the hangar of the vanguards, not even caring that the girls were there. I knew that they would be okay after this.
We then arrive in room where some vanguards were knocked out from the hangar," well, well, aren't we lucky."
"Now, where are you," he looks at the fallen vanguards individually," ah, there you are partner," he then runs to one with a mark on it lower part,
"Alright man, let's hope for the best," I then get into the seat of the cockpit and flip a switch to closed the hatch, but before it did, I yelled out," JUST DON'T DIE ON ME, OKAY," I take a quick look in his direction and see him giving me a thumbs up. Once set into the cockpit, I start to look over the controls. After looking at them all, I had one thing to say," umm, how do I start this?"
I knew I couldn't move it, so I waited for a bit for the paxis to react and save us. Though when it happened, I didn't think it would take me too, again,' does this thing like people dropping in like this,' I wondered, remembering that a lot of times Hibiki was just thrown in, as were the others every single time. As we fall, we see a giant mecha, but unlike in the series, I could vaguely make out another one. The two mechas then fire right at the nukes and we are transported to another part of the universe.
All the while, I started to have cryptic visions of the future. The visions hardly made any sense to me, as they were telling me some strange things. After that, I awoke near my new bud Hibiki, not remembering what the visions were telling me (don't worry, I'll have him remember when he sleeps next time, in the next chapter)," yo Hibiki, wake up man," after much shaking of the boy, he still didn't get up," 'sigh' you leave me no choice," I then picked him up and set him up in a certain position. I wanted to try something and see if it really had that sort of affect," here goes, Leaf Village Secret Finger Jutsu: 1000 Years of Death," I then ram my finger right up his ass and send him flying straight into the wall, thus knocking him out," uuhh, well, I at least know that works." (That was just to be a little funny, not going to be doing Naruto moves anymore on here)
I then look at the surrounding area," heh, the paxis sure does work fast," I then thought back for a bit,' you know, I have a feeling that the paxis itself brought me here, but for what reason? The original storyline of the series had gone good, so what could my presence be needed here for?' I thought to myself. I then hear footsteps and quickly picked up Hibiki, so that we could hide.
I look over from our hiding spot and see that it's Meia scouting the area. So I decide to make my presence known to the dread team leader. So I quietly get behind her and tap her on the shoulder, which almost made me receive a punch to the face, but I dodge it with a bit a lean of my head," yo, how's it hangin'?" I asked with a happy tone. She got on guard in front of, but I raise my hand in defeat," whoa, hold on, I don't want to fight. I just wanted to surrender myself peacefully," she nodded, but could tell she was still on guard," just so you know, my bud is over there on the floor knocked out. You mind if I get him, so that you can have both of us," she hesitated for a bit, but nodded and had her ring beam aimed at me as I went to get the short guy. I soon came out and dropped him on the floor.
Soon after that, a ship came in from the outside and landed on near us. I just sat next to my bud, waiting for them to come," this is amazing," I hear old lady Magno say.
"Sorry about his captain. You had to come all the way up here," the blue haired woman said in a concerned voice.
"There's no need to apologize, I simply just wanted to this with my eye," she then looks in our direction," and who might these two males be?"
"The one wearing orange, with navy hair was the one Dita was chasing around. But the one in black, I don't know who he is," Meia explained to her captained as the old lady takes one look at Hibiki.
"It's been awhile since I last seen a man, were their face always this funny looking," she said with a questionable voice.
"'Cough' 'cough' I'm right here you know," I said with a bit of annoyance.
"You be silent, prisoner" Meia commanded to me while aiming that beam ray at me.
"Heh, whatever," I then turn my attention the captain," well, I suggest we get to somewhere we can talk, so we going to go or not?"
I saw that had a questioned look her face, most likely wondering why I was acting so casual amongst women, and that I seemed too much at ease, but I may just be reading into her face too much," not before we know what's going on with this ship and ours, so you two will be detained until we can get comfortable."
They bring me and Hibiki to the same storage room that we were held prisoner, but Hibiki was still knocked out, so I had to carry him all the way to the would be cell. Duero Mcfile was there as well, but I just gave him a nod, which he returned. I then sat down opposite of him. I could tell he was examining, trying to figure out who I was.
"My I ask as to whom you are, please?" the doctor acting as politely as he could.
"Only if you give me yours," I had to say that in order him to not get suspicious if blurted out his name later.
"Duero Mcfile," he said simply.
"Taiho Lobo," I replied back in the same way.
"So, are you an elite? I haven't seen you around here," he asked, I had kinda expected that question though.
"Naw and I'm not a third class, or whatever you guys like to discriminate people with," I said with a bit of annoyance.
"How do you perceive the rank being discriminative, I don't see what you mean?" the doctor was still trying to figure out who I am through all the questions.
"Because those who are ranked on your planet are discriminated or held with respect, and I find that to be bull," he raised an eyebrow at my explanation," like how you label third classes, they are treated like trash when one of them, or even many of them may have the potential to be something. While the ones of great rank or elite, are held with respect when they haven't done a speck of work that the third classes have, with the exception of the pilots and soldiers," with that done, I waited for his next question.
"About that, how did you learn how to fight? I was aware that no one fights like that with the style of combat you used. It was more, how do put this…brutal than the military combat we are used to," the doctor said as he still had that poker face on.
I shrugged a bit at his question," let's just say that my best bud back home and I have trained each other in combat, and that is all I'm going to say. I need rest," I then close my eyes for a bit to get a nap.
A few moments only pass until Hibiki wakes up with sweat all over his forehead, but as he got up, he hit his forehead on the shelf just above him. He most was likely going through the visions of the paxis is providing him before that happened," oh man…well it looks like we're stuck behind bars again, huh?"
"So, you're awake?" I acted to be asleep and listened to their conversation at that time.
"Whose there?" I could tell Hibiki already knew I was here, so it was only natural for him to see who else was here.
"My name is Duero Mcfile. Do you have name as well, Mr. third class citizen," I get a little angry when he said that, apparently the little speech I made didn't get through that skull.
"Don't you make fun of me, my name is Hibiki Tokai and not just another third class citizen," he said in ticked of voice. I could barely hold a chuckle; he was way too brash for his own good.
"Aside from our friend here, you were the one that also interrupted, right? How did you manage to sneak in anyway?" I could tell he had humor in his voice. From what I could tell from what I watched from the anime, this third class citizen impressed him.
"I'm sure being asked a lot of questions a lot today, anyway…" but he was cut off by the little robot that was in the room, I guess one of the women found him and threw him in with us for no apparent reason.
"Beep…beep…hm?" then all of a sudden, it popped out with arms and legs of its own," Pyoro," he then looked around confusedly," hmm, where am I? Who am I?" The little robot asked in no one particular with a normal voice.
"You've changed a bit haven't you?" Hibiki asked in a deadpanned voice," you want me to fix you or something?"
"Hey, don't make fun of me. I am not broken," the little robot yelled at him. That was when I had enough of acting and faked a yawn.
"Morning Hibiki, Duero," I waved at them with a smile and happy voice.
They were about to say something to until BC came into view and scared the pants off Hibiki," w-women! What do you plan to do to me? What are we doing here?"
"Try to calm down, this is the safest place for you right now," the platinum haired 'woman' said, I still couldn't believe that she was a he. I almost puked when I heard that, but I bet it made Bart feel worse than anyone else when he found out.
"Sure you say that, but you wanna eat my guts," he bluntly said to her.
"Eat your guts?" she then got a confused look on her face and the girls behind could hardly hold in their laughter, which I gave a bit of a chuckle as well. When I did, she looked straight me, kind of surprised that I am not acting like him, but also laughing at what he said.
"Hibiki, please. Do you honestly that they are capable of that?" he then looks at like I have gone totally nuts.
"What the hell are you talking about? These are women, they'll chop us up into pieces and eat us all," he said with fear in voice.
"From what I can tell by looking at them and the smell they carry, they definitely eat meat, but not human. So calm your ass down," I then push him off of me so I could look at BC," now I assume that we will be interrogated now."
"Hmm, looks like someone is very perceptive, a rare trait in men," she said with a smirk on her face.
'Yea, where you come from maybe; but back at home, those ones are just plain out assholes,' I thought. We then walk out to a room, though I'm not sure as to what room it is. While we do so, something started to nag at my mind as if I forgot something. I then look at Hibiki, at that moment I remembered what was on my mind. I try to stop him in time but it was too late.
"What' in there?" he asked himself as he poked the girls butt and received one hell of a hard slap from her.
When we got to the room, I was still in the chair laughing my ass off at the still red and raw handprint delivered by the girl. I don't know why I tried to stop it, it was actually funnier when you see it in person and I gotta tell ya, that was hella funny.
"Jeez, what was that for?" he said as he rubbed the red handprint he had from the girl.
"It was because you were being rude to a lady," the little robot said in a lectured voice.
"Hey, I don't even know what the hell you're talking about," he yelled at the robot and then sent a glare in my direction as I was still having my laughs," and what is so damn funny?"
"Hahahaha, oooh, well Pyoro is right, you should be more respectful towards women," the two just sit their with their mouths wide open," and trust me, if your not, you'd be wishing they eat you alive."
Hibiki was about to say something, but a new visitor arrived, two to be exact. The first not being a surprise which was Meia, but the other was the future helmsman of the ship, Bart. (forgot his last name)
"What's up? Found another one?" BC asked the dread team leader.
"Yes, he was trying to hide in the platform," she said in you usual soldier, I decided right then that I should at least try to lighten her mood a little, maybe at least a smidge.
"Hehehe, hey comrades, glad to see ya here," Bart said in a nervous tone with his hand behind his head, while also trying to keep up a smile.
"My goodness, I see you all have rounded up the prisoners, but there all just kids," the captain of the pirates said maker her presence known in the room.
"Hey, hey," the little robot says as it bounces towards her," time to interrogate! I'll tell you everything," it said enthusiastically.
"Oh, how nostalgic, a navi-robot. And this one still seems to function I see," the old says with a happy voice as she sees the Pyoro.
"I'm not following this?" the doctor asked, as he was confused as to how she knew what it was and anything else.
"This is a men's ship, isn't it?!" the navy hair boy asked, still freaked out about being around this many women.
"Yes, but before that, it was used for colonization," all three of them get shocked faces when they hear this, but I just sat there without a care in the world," you really don't know anything do you? This old ship was one of a fleet that departed from a planet called Earth to colonize. Of course, this happened a very long time ago before you fathers were born. Unfortunately, your cowardly grandfathers severed this section and ran away into the night."
The little robot then spoke up to continue the explanation," they overhauled the old battleship and added residential quarters."
"And now we find ourselves back in this battleship, this is our business you know," she said with happy voice that meant trouble for them," so we'll gladly take this ship. But the problem is what are we supposed to do with you guys."
"We should get rid of them, things are already unstable enough," Meia said as she kept Bart in line with the ring beam. I let out a bit of a chuckle at that moment, she then turns her attention to me," is something funny?" she asked in a slightly angered voice.
"Well in a sense, yea," I then open my eyes to look right at her, I had to admit, and she was fine as hell. Things always seem different when you see them up close, but right now wasn't the time for that," do you always have to have that attitude of yours up? I know if you let a smile on that face, a lot of guys where I come from would jump at the chance to be with ya," I said with a smirk on my face, I then see the look of shock on everyone's faces," now if you guys are done gawking, we have some things to discuss, don't we?" I then turn back to my thoughts,' man, these guys need to lighten up, though I can't blame them. They haven't seen men and women live with each other for centuries and a guy like me just pops up and tries to hook up with an enemy that they believe is evil,' I let out a bit of a chuckle at that moment.
After being done with her little shock, old lady mango looked right at me, most likely making a note to talk to me later," so let me guess, the tall one with long black hair is a doctor, but what about the little one and our weird fellow over here," I scoff what she says about me, I've been called a whole lot worse than that so I really didn't faze me.
"They're both attackers," the dread team leader says, she then shoots me a death glare for acting the way did earlier, but I pay it no mind. I saw Hibiki was about to protest, but Bart elbows him in the midsection, shutting up the little guy and has him cursing at the blond man," I happen to see them climb into two of the man shaped machines."
Hibiki was about to protest, but I cut him off," yea, were pilots. But we're still rookies, so we don't have much experience in those machines," I then give him a look that says 'just go with the flow'; he sees it and reluctantly nods. BC then receives a report,' so it's already up to that point, huh?' I thought as she tries to find out who this new enemy is.
The whole ship shakes from the attack of the harvesters, at that moment Meia goes into action and went to get the dreads to fight, while BC tries to find out the progress Parfet is making on the paxis and the ship. Magno then orders for her to take care of the bridge, but then the wall near one of the guards collapses on them, thus knocking her out.
"Hang on, I'll get you out," the second guard said as she neared her with tears in her eyes.
"Don't move her," Duero then jumps over the seat and goes to the knocked out woman," don't worry I'm a doctor, I just want to look at my patient," he said as he gave a reassuring smile to the second guard," now come on, help me with this, carefully."
I then took my chance, hoping this would work," seeing how we're in this situation, I suggest we get as much man power out there, excuse more for the pun though," I said as I shrugged at what I said about 'man' power.
"What do you suggest?" old lady Magno asks while raising an eyebrow at me.
"Well, let me and Hibiki fight in our vanguards, so that we all live to fight another day. Afterwards, you can deal with us however you want," I suggested as I put on a calm face and voice," it would definitely be beneficial that we all survive this, so what do you say?"
She pondered for a bit, but she gave in," very well," she then turned to BC," BC, take these two to the Hangar and get them to their machines."
She nods at her captain and then looks at us," come on you two let's go."
We all run, while everyone does their thing in what they do best. We stop midway to the hangar, because it seemed that Hibiki was having a tough time deciding on what to do," uh Taiho, I don't know if I can do this," I then look at him with understanding face," I'm just not that sort of fighter, I just…" but I cut him off.
"Are you going to keep running away when the situation calls for it," he then looks right at me, with a shocked look on his face," don't you want to help these women, to protect their lives and live? Don't you want to change into someone you can be proud of, instead off someone who runs from his problems like some coward," I then give him sincere face," now is your chance to show that you have the power to become someone that is more than his title. So are you with me?" I then put my hand in front of him to shake.
He looks at me with a little admiration at that moment and proudly took my hand and shook it," you bet…partner," I chuckled at what he called me.
BC smirks at what I said," well seeing as how you two feel that way," she then holds out a device and then presses a button. The restraints that were on us then fell of our wrists and fall to the ground," go and give them hell you two," we both nod and run off to get to our mechs.
Once we get there, we see Hibiki's vanguard their on its back. The navy haired boy then walks up to his machine and puts hand on where he put the mark on it," whoa, you sure have changed partner," he then got a smirk on his face," and I'm going to do the same."
I start to look for the vanguard I was in myself, I then notice a whole in the wall that was really big, most likely my mech was thrown through there and was most likely damaged. I go in through the hole and walk what appeared to be a catwalk made from the paxis. I then happen upon a wall and skim around for a switch. When I find one, I flip it and the light slowly came on, but what I saw shocked me beyond belief.
"D-Destiny Gundam?!" I said under my breath, I then walk up to the giant mech and take a closer look at it. I find out it isn't the actual mobile suit, it was the one I had a thought up awhile back. Though its color scheme was definitely different, it was almost totally black, with red tribal marking going over it for design,' heh, it had to be red and black. Just like you Marcus,' I then jump up to get into the cockpit and notice it was just like I thought it up, the cockpit was just like off the G gundam series.
When I get in, I start to wonder how I'm going to move it without the pesky jumpsuit, but then some weird looking band latch onto me. At first I got scare as to what would happen, but when nothing happen, I looked what was on me. The bands were latched on to my wrists, shoulders, neck, forehead, waist, and ankles. Most likely for me to move my new gundam's movements; so I test it out by lifting up my hand and the gundam does it just like I did. After checking all of my movements and the gundams movements, I was about to call the bridge on the communicator I found in it, but a yell came and stopped me.
"WHAT THE HELL?! HOW COME YOUR PARTNER IS THAT BIG? 1" I barely caught myself before I took off and looked to see Hibiki in his mech. A screen showing it to be him with a pissed off face, comes up on my 360 degree vision screen.
"Look we don't have time to size up our guns here, we need to get going dammit," I then turn on the communicator for the bridge," bridge, this Taiho Lobo, do you read me."
"This is BC, what is it that you need?" she asks as her voice crackles a bit from the communication.
"I would like it if you open the hatches for our individual machines," I said in a professional voice.
"Will do," I then hear her command them do what I asked for," there you go, now go out there and take out as many of them as you can, good luck."
I then hear Hibiki take off without a word, but I wanted to let them know I launched and decided to do it in a way the characters off of the Gundam Seed series do," Taiho Lobo, in," I then think of a good name for my mech and a smile crosses my face," Dark Angel, LAUNCHING," and with that I took off to my first space mech battle, and hopefully not my last.
A/N: well that one chapter, I hope I made it sound good. Anyways, like I said, the rest of the chapter will be in a 3rd person's perspective from now on, unless you want to keep it the way it is. Also, who should I hook my OC up with, Meia or Barnette, or both even. I say the two for a reason, Meia being that she doesn't get anyone at all, and Barnette because a lot of fanfics don't have her hooking up with anyone, except Jura which gets kinda boring. So place your votes in the review. And with that said, see ya.

Probably some tax gurus around here so I'll give it a shot. We have an adult daughter who lived with us all of last year. I know we can claim her as a qualifying relative because she meets the income requirements, but before we figured out we could do this she filed her own return. Now it won't let us claim her because she has already been claimed as someone's dependant (hers). My wife seemed to think we could amend my daughters return so that we could claim her but she can't figure out what exactly to change on my daughter's return. Any help would be appreciated.

Rhanna has moved on from her old flame Chris Brown after his explosive fight with Karrueche Tran on June 4, HollywoodLife.com reports.
There seems to be no room for reconciliation for Chris Brown and his other ex-love, Rihanna, 27, too. In fact,
“Rihanna feels really bad that he is obviously very troubled and in pain but she is not going to reach out to him and help,” an insider tells HollywoodLife.com. “He has had plenty of chances and she just doesn’t want to get into it. That was her former life and she got out of it and she likes the world she is living in now — way less drama!”
Chris forced himself into Karrueche’s car after leaving the club together, which only led to another massive screaming match between the former couple that the cops had to break up,
Though Rihanna has still felt attachment and connection to Chris, it seems like his fight with Karrueche just proved that she must leave the past in the past.
Gotta say though, Chris and Rihanna sure did make a beautiful couple, oh well.

Birmingham school's former governors 'banned from site'
A council which has been attempting to change the leadership at a Birmingham school says it has banned the former governors from the site.
Al-Hijrah School, in Bordesley Green, was placed in special measures by Ofsted last year.
Birmingham City Council said it had tried three times to replace the governors but had been turned away.
One former governor said that, as a parent with a child at the school, he had "a right" to visit the site.
In a statement, the council said the school's new governing body - known as the interim executive board - had sent letters to the former chair of governors, Waseem Yaqub, and other governors banning them from the school site "with immediate effect".
It said the board had "tried to go about its lawful business but has been turned away each time by the school".
It added: "The refusal of the previous governing body is unprecedented.
"Despite a year with five Ofsted reports... the former governing body still has a complete lack of insight into the issues and their severity."
It added the school had a deficit of £889,000.
However, Mr Yaqub said, as a parent with a child at the school, he had "a right" to go there.
"This is just further intimidation and harassment by the local authority of parents who want to be involved in their child's education," he said.
"The council is desperate and is getting increasingly aggressive."
The council has said the Islamic school is not one of 25 being investigated as part of the Trojan Horse inquiry into an alleged plot by Muslim hardliners to seize control of governing bodies in Birmingham.

Saturday, March 10, 2012
I hate hives!
On Thursday, we picked up Connor at daycare and I rushed him to emergency. His eye was swollen shut and he had red welts all over his body. We quickly discovered it was hives and he was given some Benadryl and a steroid. Things improved and I expected them to keep improving but no such luck. If we go for more than 4 hours without more Benadryl, the hives are back in full force...not good considering we can only give it to him every 6 hours. (He is also taking other medication as well.)
As a concerned Mom, I took him back to the hospital last night and found out this case of hives could last several more days. Poor little guy! He's all drugged up and the hives just keep coming back...they are adventurous things as they pop up all over his body and seem to move around. Apparently this is normal...I have no clue as it's the first time I've really seen them up close. I just want his body to get back to normal and hope this doesn't become a regular occurrence.
On the upside, we had awesome experiences with the nurses and doctors at Regina General and I wanted to give them a shout out for the amazing work they do especially with three year olds. They were patient and helpful and did not trivialize my concerns at any time. I am happy to be holding an auction on my blog to help support the NICU at the very same hospital...not the same department by any means but a service well worth supporting as a whole.
I'd love to hear some hives stories or experiences if you'd had any you could share! I want to know how long it took to go away and if it was a one-time occurrence or became frequent. Also, did you ever find out why they occurred?
Posted by Trudy at 9:23 PM

My husband and I stayed for 5 nights the end of November. The hotel provided exactly what we were after. Staff were friendly and knowledgeable, rooms were clean, tidy and spacious. Location-wise near the beach and a convenient bus stop. Only criticism would be that breakfast was very 'stodgy' and heavy as it was only pastries and coffee. The addition of some fresh fruit would have been appreciated! But overall couldn't really have asked for more as we're not into all the frills associated with most hotels and found everything we needed in this small boutique hotel.
You have no recent hotel searches.

Shilpi spoke in slightly yelling and urgent tone – “Give me your hand” as if we were about to miss some train. Before I could have thought of something, Tarun pushed me and Shilpi pulled me. BTW, we were about to miss our train.Let me begin from the beginning.
As a child I have a profound memory of standing at Laksham Jhoola with my dad and a monkey teasing me. I was crying and hiding behind my dad and later after gaining senses we had visited Rishikesh on a holy trip from usual Haridwar tour and once again I had encountered a monkey at […]

3 Answers | Add Yours
Unlike Hester, who has violated a law of society but not a personal moral code (she is the one who claims "what we did had a consecration of its own"), Dimmesdale has violated the core of his being. Hawthorne's description is telling: "In no state of society would he [Dimmesdale] have been what is called a man of liberal views; it would always be essential to his peace to feel the pressure of a faith about him, supporting, while it confined him within its iron framework."
When Dimmesdale violated an central component of his faith, he lost the structure that had been supporting him. Much like Hooper in "The Minister's Black Veil," his acquaintance with his fallen humanity makes him more understanding of other's failures, and better able to minister to them. But none of this external approval could change that fact that he no longer approved of himself; without that approval, there is no thriving.
In addition, Dimmesdale's sin cannot be forgotten. Every day, he must suffer by witnessing the the burden under which Hester and Pearl struggle. Because of his awareness of their difficulties, feelings of guilt, and recognition of himself as a coward/weakling/hypocrite, he is never allowed a moment's peace. Dimmesdale's physical deterioration is due to his emotional deterioration.
Dimmesdale's guilt has overcome him. He continues to preach and counsel his congregation, but in his sermons and actions he degrades himself and talks of his guilt in various ways. The problem is that the people of his community see his degregation as being self-imposing of the sins of the people of the community as his own. The people do not understand that he is confessing his real sins and preaching to try and absolve himself. He cannot, with a clear conscience, be true in his preaching when he has not confessed his sin with Hester.
We’ve answered 315,532 questions. We can answer yours, too.Ask a question

We bought into the development of black-eyed pea, which also serves as the awnings.
On 2015-08-15 08:33:21
But was a little I think that there is a high price, I bought to try.
Thread is not firm, is a few years is likely can use once.
Previously, we were using an inexpensive net, such as the punching of plastic, what time torn or in accordance with the growth, but I felt the anxiety, such as, this if it is safe.
Cleaning up after the harvest is I think very much either, but this is from now.

Italy, France discussed on Fore Play
Just see it guys coming out and they're just so ready like the games that games are far more advanced than mine was when I turned bro. So we obviously over here we were just rocking for the president's cup. Did you watch any of it? You catch any of it? Yeah, we watched quite a bit. Like obviously we never go to bed pretty early. So I was never making it so very close to the stages, but I really enjoyed it. I actually quite like that it goes on for longer, like it's four days. I quite like that. But I just thought it was a good president's copy. I had a great atmosphere to it and there was just a few, I suppose, any time in a team event, presidents could radical. There's always like stories that come out of it, but I just thought, there was a few good ones in this, and I enjoyed watching. For you guys, is like the, you know, European Ryder Cup group texts get popping off this time of year when you get the team atmosphere is going. No, it hasn't gone fully enough, but we had that one. We didn't have like a massive group chat last time. We had it on something else. But like no, I'm sure, I'm sure everybody's watching it, but then there's guys that are playing by those guys that are playing in Italy and France and stuff. And busy and then they'll be guys that have done it too, but it's nice to watch, isn't it? And then it brings back brings back a fire, it brings back memories. It brings back like motivation to make because I think the team still so cool like it's so so good in it like you see just different sides of people coming up slightly instructions with the crowds and stuff. It's so good to play in. But it's really good to watch as well.

One person was killed and five others injured on Sunday morning in two shootings near the University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign, which the police believe to be related.
The first shooting occurred 12:30 a.m. after an argument at a house party spilled into the street and caused a brawl, during which shots were fired, the police said.
Firearms were used on Green Street between Third and Fourth streets, about one block away from ‘The Red Lion’, a popular campus bar.
Four people, who weren’t involved in the fight, received gunshot wounds in the incident.
One of them died of his wounds in hospital. The deceased was identified as a 22-year-old George Korchev from the Illinois suburb of Mudelein.
The rest of the victims were treated by doctors after being diagnosed with moderate injuries. One of the injured was confirmed to be a student at the Urbana-Champaign University.
A fifth person was also hurt as he was hit by a vehicle as he attempted to flee the area and received non-life-threatening injuries.
|Enjoy the article? Then please consider donating today to ensure that Eurasia Review can continue to be able to provide similar content.|

Monday, October 05, 2009
Monday afternoon again!
The good news is that Jesker seems to be getting better. He is a bit more lively and a bit more steady on his feet and a bit more aware of what is going on around him. We've walked around the little field twice today already and he did well. He didn't walk quickly, but he walked steadily. He still sleeps a lot, but he comes over to be petted regularly too, which he hadn't been doing, and he follows me around the apartment. So, although I barely dare to say it, I think maybe he is going to be alright, although he may never be his old self again. We'll see. We'll take each day as it comes.
I made sure he was taken care of this morning and went to creative therapy and I tell you, it was nice to get out of the apartment for a while, because I was starting to feel cooped up. I was gone for 4 hours and when I came home, Jesker came to greet me at the door. I thought that was a good sign.
I worked on my third painting, which I thought was almost finished, but when I saw it today, I realized that it wasn't and that I had to add more details and some extra layers of paint. So that's what I did all morning, very patiently. It's a shame that we have to have a 30 minute coffee break. I'd rather not have it and just keep on working, or have a 15 minute break, that would be enough, and I completely forgot to check if there were any cookies. I could have used some of those this morning.
I didn't take any photos yet, of course, so I won't be showing any of those today. I probably will on Friday.
When I paint at home, I sit by the dining table, and because I don't have any newspapers, I paint on the bare table, without any protection under the paper I'm working on. Needless to say, I've already got green acrylic paint on the table. It's dried up there and I don't know if I can get if off easily. No doubt more paint in different colors will follow, unless I find a big piece of cardboard or something. I used to have a plastic tablecloth, but I haven't seen it since the Exfactor moved out, not that I'm accusing him of taking it. I was just in a cleaning frenzy then and got rid of a bunch of things. Some regretfully so, I guess.
I'm not doing any grocery shopping today. It is raining and I don't want to go out in it. I'm going to make do with whatever I can find in the kitchen for dinner. I will probably be soup with vermicelli. The refrigerator is very bare. There's one egg in it and a jar of pickles and four beers, plus some other assorted items like condiments that are probably past their due date. I think I'll have one of those beers now. That will fill me up a bit...
...Mmm, that tastes good. It warms my stomach and gives me the hiccups. Gastric band!
Tomorrow I have an intake interview for the activities in the downstairs area of the clinic. I will find out what sort of things are available and how much of a waiting list there is and I know there is one, because a lot of people from the upstairs therapies are going to the downstairs activities. I'll just have to convince them with all my charm that I have to start after December the 18th. That it's absolutely crucial that I do, so I won't fall into a hole.
Well, never mind. I'm not going to fall into a hole that quickly. There are the wonderful holidays to get through.
Alcohol is a mood altering drug. I've suddenly become very mellow. There's only 5% alcohol in this beer, but it feels like more. Of course, I'm not used to much. I would make somebody a cheap date. They'd only have to buy me two beers and I would have reached my limit for the evening. I think I'll have a cup of coffee after this. It did fill my stomach, though.
Right, that was it for now. I think I'll go and make that cup of coffee now and start the soup. I don't really like the way the beer is making me feel. I hope it wears off quickly and I'll be back to normal soon. I think I like that state of mind better. I should really be a teetotaler.
Have a nice evening and don't feel bad if it rains. It's cozy inside and you don't have to go out on a bike in it.

Kevin McOkweri, a close friend to Babu Owino, is speaking out after Babu was arrested on suspicion of of shooting a DJ at B-Club.
Speaking exclusively to Kiss100, he was at B-Club before the shooting incident at around 1:00 a.m and joined Babu Owino on his table. The two are friends and describes how everyone was having a good time at the club.
“At some time there was a confrontation between babu’s bouncers and I and they got really physical and at that point, I left and went to Kilimani Police Station,” he said.
We sought to know from McOkweri if the events of the night were influenced by alcohol and he said he couldn’t tell if Babu Owino was under the influence of alcohol.
He also narrate dhow he returned to the club early morning to get the CCTV video, but apparently he has been told the cameras were off.
“After speaking to my lawyers, I was advised to get the CCTV footage but apparently the management has said the specific camera where the fight occurs was offline,” McOkweri said.
“This is absurd that of all the cameras apart from that one which captured the fight were working,” he added.
DCI has sent out a statement that Babu Owino is in lawful custody as they continue with their investigation.

This company is despicable which treats a high end (£2500) tenant badly to the point that we had to seek legal advice. They were the ones who recommend that my partner and I write reviews against them due to the treatment or appalling treatment we received especially from one of their directors Gill Spencer. And all over a legal charity event held in the back garden. They used intimidating actions against us which we have statements from witnesses who were shocked at the behaviour from this company. Gill Spencer even tried to get the police involved and even phoned my partner and told him, no demanded him this charity event would not be going ahead, even tho we had a legal event notice to hold this charity event. They also wrote and urged neighbours to complain about us which thanks to very lovely and understanding neighbours we got given quite a few copies and a few even wrote a statement on our behalf against Spencer Properties as they couldn't understand why they had such a beef against a charity event which was being held for raising awareness of my partners (the tenant) 5 year old son.

Shahid Kapoor is a leading actor in Bollywood. He is the most handsome and sexiest guy in Bollywood. He has amazed us with his acting skills, and he gives killer expressions that make us fall for him over and again. He has become the favorite actor of millions of people, and they go crazy over him for his killer looks. His fans love to see him on-screen, and they just shower their love on him. He has proved that he is the most stylish actor in Bollywood. He has set his fashion styles very high and looks mindblowing.
Shahid’s fashion styles have evolved from the past few years. The actor has changed his taste and looks superb. Earlier, he used to be a chocolate boy with long messy hair, and now he looks classy and handsome guy, and everyone loves him the most. The drastic change in his style has made his fans go crazy for him. He has also maintained himself and has a well-toned body. It is a must for an individual to change his fashion styles according to the time to look different and unique and to slay in Bollywood with killer looks.
Must read: Things We Like About Shahid Kapoor!
Check out some superb pictures of Bollywood actor Shahid Kapoor and stay tuned to IWMbuzz.com.

She has a boyfriend but she's teasing me?
I met this girl online and, we really hit it off and began talking to each A LOT! She's somewhat insecure and the only boyfriend she ever had was someone who wasn't really close with her. They didn't even make out.The boyfriend she has is long distance and they still haven't met yet, but they've been boyfriend/girlfriend for over a year and they talk on the phone a lot. She says she likes him, but she told me she's frustrated because he has a lot of female friends and she feels like he treats them the same way he treats her.Now I had a chat with the guy, and I am positive he is not cheating on her. He really likes this girl and considers her his #1 out of all his other female friends. He's just really nice and sweet and says "I love you" a lot and likes to compliment people.Anyways, back to the girl we're talking about. So eventually, I told her what I like in a girl, I said I like legs and arms, and then a few days after that she begins showing off her legs on cam and asking me if I like them. I got really awkward and shy because I've never had a girlfriend before, but I told her that yeah I thought she was hot. And then over the last 2 days she's just been teasing me and making me go crazy. D: She has a really nice personality, I haven't met a girl like this for a long time but I think I might be starting to have feelings for her.But she lives far away, so I'm not considering doing anything. All I want to know is - why is she teasing me? Is she just messing around, having fun with me? She says she really loves talking to me and we have hours of fun conversations, so it there a chance she might be starting to like me?Would you tease someone even if you just like them as a friend? Please help me! I'm confused! D:
What's Your Opinion?
What Girls Said 1
Well sometimes girls online just want to have fun and like to flirt. She probably has a certain level of interest in you but it might not necessarily mean anything. When she says she loves talking to you and having long conversations, she means it. But it doesn't have to mean that she is really beginning to like you. I hardly believe that she meant to cause you any frustration but people you meet online can always be a bit of a challenge. Just to be safe, I wouldn't get too attached to this girl.
What Guys Said 0
Be the first guy to share opinion!
Earn 1 extra Xper Point for being the first!!

Fake Viking Swords
The problem of hoaxes, forgeries and fakes is not one solely limited to the modern world. It was also an issue in the Viking Age, and one that could have deadly consequences for the victim of the fraud.
The swords signed Vlfberht are famous and widespread. They have been the subject of a documentary, and attract much attention because of their reputation as the highest quality of swords. However, not all were as they appear, as the news story for this item shows. Precisely because these swords had such a good reputation, inferior quality swords were produced with his name on them, and probably sold at a premium. However, these inferior swords would probably have shattered very quickly in combat. The broken remains of swords of this type has been interpreted as weapons that broke in battle.
Little is known of Vlfberht, but Anna Stalsberg has written a re-evaluation of the swords that includes comments on who he might have been, and provides background on Viking Age swords in general. She suggests that he was not the smith, but rather the overseer.

MATUS, Christopher David - Age; 46 of Swartz Creek, died Wednesday April 1, 2020. A private family service will be held at a later date. Arrangements provided by Sharp Funeral Homes, Miller Road Chapel, 8138 Miller Road Swartz Creek. Christopher was born April 17, 1973 in Philadelphia, PA the son of Ronald Paul and Susan Lorriane (Pagano) Matus. Christopher met his wife Cathy, when he was 15 year old. He later moved to Michigan in 1998 and they married in 2001. On that day, Chris not only became a husband but a step father to Chelsea and Adam as well. He loved them as his own and they were not immune to his jokes and embarrassment. Christopher worked as an EMT both in Pennsylvania and Michigan for many years. He had recently been working as a Medical Examiner Investigator and at Milano’s Pizza. He loved what he did and often times joked that he had "job security." When he was not working, Chris loved to hang out with his friends and family. He enjoyed watching his daughter, Kimberlee, in the Swartz Creek Marching Band and giving her a hard time when it came to her boyfriends. He was so proud of his daughter for making the varsity bowling team and working hard to make herself a better bowler. He also had 2 nieces, Calli and Casey and a nephew, Caleb, that were very special to him. He loved playing games, whether it be poker for jellybeans or three handed euchre or spoons, Chris was always ready to amuse us with his wit and jokes. When he was able, Chris enjoyed playing golf with his brother in law John, and of course drinking a few beers along the way. He especially enjoyed hanging out and talking daily with his best friend and ‘Michigan’ brother, Dave Anter. Christopher’s laugh was big and contagious and our lives are better because he was in it. He is survived by his wife of 18 years, Cathy; children, Chelsea Schmidt, Adam Oginsky and Kimberlee Matus; parents, Ron (Mary) Matus and Susan (Dave) Stewart; mother-in-law, Barb Schmidt; sister, Rachel (Andrew) Lynn; brother, Ben Matus. He is also survived by his sister and brother-in-law, Suzie (John) Carter; nephew, Caleb Carter and nieces, Calli and Casey Carter. The family would like to thank the Doctors and Nurses at Ascension Genesys for the great dedication, love and care they showed to him and us through this difficult time. Special Thank you to all his Pennsylvania family, Milano's family, Preferred family, EMT's, Paramedics, Police and the Medical Examiner and staff for all of the support given to him throughout the many years. He is definitely loved by many. Tributes may be shared at www.sharpfuneralhomes.com
To send flowers to the family, please visit our floral store.

First Baptist Church of Niles
In 1965, while serving as an assistant minister, Pastor Roger McManus was impressed that the Lord wanted him to establish a new church in the Chicago area. He spent much time in prayer, actively searching for the Lord’s will in the matter. One evening at church, a woman approached Pastor McManus concerning a need in an area in Niles. She said that the church of which she was a member was not able to continue and had closed its doors. More remarkable, she said that the building in which they had been meeting was available and that the rent would be a grand total of a dollar a year. This certainly seemed to be the answer to prayer. When a fellow pastor in another state heard this news, he sent a letter to Pastor McManus with a dollar enclosed, stating that this was the greatest miracle he had ever heard of in the starting of a church, and that he would like to pay the first year’s rent.
How our church building became available is a strange and interesting story of its own. It is said that at a tent revival meeting, a Mr. Benjamin Lupton was dramatically converted to Christ. He donated this property and a church building was built and named “The English Church” due to the fact that most of the people in the area were German, and this church was the only one in which English was spoken. Mr. Lupton left it in his will that the property was to always be used for a church.
Over the years, several different church groups met in the building, including the Niles Bible Church, which met in the building just prior to Pastor McManus starting the mission here. The property in which the church meets today was remodeled and enlarged in 1976, but the original building was built in 1870 and is the oldest building in the Village of Niles. It was given unofficial landmark status by the village at the time of its enlargement, with approval to keep the same architecture and type of material.
On April 30, 1967, the First Baptist Church of Niles was organized with 14 charter members. From the very beginning, the Lord has been faithful and has supplied godly people to meet the needs for His work to be accomplished. God provided for his people who have ministered here and met the need of the time. Many have grown up or grown older in the church, and now their children and even their children’s children are serving here. Others were only here for a short while, but they were spiritually strengthened and served while they were here. How grateful to the Lord we are for all of those who have carried on the work through the years and those who continue to this very day.
Today, the First Baptist Church of Niles still stands faithful in the community as a voice for the God it serves. Hundreds of people have passed through its doors and their lives have been dramatically changed. Many years have come and gone, and with God’s grace, this church will stand for many more years as a bright light in the great community of Niles.
In October 2020, the First Baptist Church of Niles welcomed Pastor Brandon Myers to be the next Senior Pastor.

I thought that I would ride my bicycle to work today, without consulting the weather folks, rain be damned! So I ate my breakfast as I waited for the sun to come up, but sure enough,
as soon as it did it began to rain, not just rain, pour. Perhaps Thursday will be a better riding day. I did see, as I drove through the park this morning, the Snowy Egret in his mating plumage kicking around in the water. I will look for him on Thursday, take his portrait.

Ruby Bridges, was only six years old when she became the youngest icon of the Civil Rights Movement. Last week, she spent the morning of Martin Luther King, Jr Day recalling how she became the face of school desegregation. Bridges was speaking while appearing as a guest on ABC’s The View.
“I thought it was Mardi Gras!” she said when asked what she thought of the rioters who met her and her four federal marshal escorts at the school to protest her enrollment in William Frantz Elementary in 1960. The court-ordered first day of integrated schools in New Orleans, November 14, 1960. Growing up in New Orleans, she says she remembered hearing shouting and seeing crowds throwing things with police keeping watch during Mardi Gras and assumed the car she was riding in was simply pulling up near a parade.
She says her parents didn’t warn her what she would be facing, noting that they simply told her she was going to be attending a new school and that she was to be on her best behavior. At just six, she says she didn’t think she would have understood even if they had explained it to her. “My mother said, ‘Ruby, walk straight ahead and don’t look back’.”
Bridges recalled being one of many children who had taken part in a test. She remembers the door to door search for six-year-olds and people noting how smart she was. She later learned that she was one of six youngsters selected. The test was actually done by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People to determine which children from the families who had volunteered would be selected to be the first Black child to be enrolled in an all White school. When crowds assembled outside her family’s home, she says, “I thought the commotion was [because] I’m so smart, I am going to college!” However, Bridges took the walk by herself into William Frantz Elementary as two of the children remained at their old school and three were transferred. Her father was reluctant to allow her to do it, but her mother insisted it was not for their child to prove her intelligence but for her to take a step for all Black children.
Bridges spent her first day in the office as a safety precaution while the White parents removed their children from the classrooms and teachers refused her in their rooms. The second day, a White Methodist minister broke through the crowd to take his daughter to school. Eventually, other students came back. Bridges would end up being the only child in the Barbara Henry’s classroom for the year. Meanwhile, her sharecropper parents lost their land, her father lost his job and the family was turned away from many grocery stores. Still, the family was supported as a neighbor gave her father employment, women took turns babysitting, men kept watch of the house and others walked behind the car the marshals picked her up in to ensure she was safe.
Bridges confessed that she didn’t realize the significance of her walk into that school and history, until she was about 19 years old and a reporter showed her the Norman Rockwell painting. She said her parents were not activists and people in her hometown simply didn’t talk about it after a while. “Until then, I didn’t realize it was such a history changing event,” said Bridges.
Bridges says she is very disheartened by relations today, stating: “I am very disheartened with race relations today. I believe the issue is more than the color of our skin.”
Now 61, Bridges and her husband have four sons and she is the chair of the Ruby Bridges Foundation. Through the years, she’s been the subject of numerous books, documentaries and films. In addition to her numerous accolades, in 2014, a statue of Bridges as a child was erected in her old elementary school’s courtyard. For more information, visit www.rubybridges.com

Lying is never a good thing. No matter what the lie is, it will always come back to haunt someone. These Redditors learned the hard way that even silly white lies can come back to bite someone in the rear. Read on to find out what ridiculous lies they told and what they did keep them going. And remember, honesty is always the best policy.
Content has been edited for clarity.
"In high school, I invited a girl over to my house and offered her something to drink. I brought out two mugs of whatever beverage it was and she asked why I grabbed mugs. The truth was they were the closest thing, but I said deadpan, 'I only ever drink out of mugs.'
Why did I say this? I have no idea, but I had to keep it up the next two years while I dated her. I remember one time I was at her house and grabbed a normal cup for water when her mom said, 'I thought you only ever drank out of mugs.'
I replied with, 'Uh, yeah...but I saw this was still dirty, so I thought I would clean it off for you,' and my idiot self proceeded to hand wash a single cup in silence before putting it back and grabbing a mug.
I received three mugs as gifts. I hate mugs now."
"My buddy bought a small Northern Pike (fish) for his tank, but it ended up being too large. Took it to my parents house to release it behind their place. My mom saw it, asked what we were doing, and I told her it was a pet we were going to raise.
Later, she asked me why I would waste money on a pet fish we would never see again, so I quickly came up with the lie that we had it tattooed, so we could easily identity our Pike if it was ever caught.
It's been over 10 years now, and most of my family is in on it now, except mom. She has told neighbors to watch out for our fish, wanted to put something in the community letter, brings it up often. Random people will ask me about it.
There have been so many embellishments and details added over the years, it has hit the point where she will kill me if she ever finds out. It almost always comes up at big family holidays, someone asking if we have caught it yet. One day I'll have to photoshop a Pike with the appropriate tattoo."
"My daughter (when she was about 7) asked why me and my sister had long names but our brother, Shaun, has a short name. I told her that Shaun was short for Shaunhamptonson and I convinced my brother to go along with it.
Somehow it came up at her primary school and a teacher asked me about it in front of her, so as not to embarrass my daughter, I told the teacher it was true and the lie was then set in stone. My daughter is 13 now and I know she’ll be really embarrassed if I now tell her the truth, so I’m dreading the day when the truth comes out."
"I have a friend whose dad told her all sorts of things and it's so funny. My favorite is this one time we were sitting on my patio and June bugs were flying around all crazy running into walls like they do. She remarked that they do that because they don't have eyes. Everyone was like...what? We just blankly stared.
Someone asked her to clarify. She repeated very surely, 'June bugs don't have eyes.' Her dad said so when she was little. Someone actually caught one and held it up to her in the light so she could get a closer look. Her world came crashing down around her.
A few weeks later, we were eating lunch with her dad. She turned to her dad, stone cold, while he was mid-sandwich bite and said, 'Dad, why did you tell me when I was little that June bugs don't have eyes?' He nearly choked. He asked her what she was talking about. But he knew. She asked him again.
'Oh, I didn't tell you that. That was your brother.' She insisted it wasn't.
Meanwhile, I am holding back all the laughter. He was trying so hard to slip out of his web of lies but she caught him."
"When I first met my ex, she was talking about her (girl) friend who was colorblind. I made an offhand comment about that's rare, 'colorblindness is usually in guys like me.' She thought I meant I was colorblind...and instead of correcting her right away in front of her friends I somehow decided to let it go and correct her later. Except I forgot.
Long story short, for two years I had to pretend to have trouble with reds and greens because after I didn't correct her right away. There was really no good time to.
I'm glad we broke up, because now I can see colors."
"My roommate brought home a smoking hot girl from the bar, but she was about as smart as a bag of hammers. We're all chit chatting as he's making his moves and I'm wing-manning like a pro. Thinking this girl was surely not going to make it past 9 am next morning, I went rogue and told her that I was struck by lightning and now couldn't feel hot or cold. I darn near gave myself frostbite and 2nd degree burns holding onto an icepack and running my hand under the hot tap.
She was fascinated, entertained, and inebriated... The holy trinity for one nighters. Eventually, my roommate took her upstairs. Turns out he would go on to date her for two years and I had to keep that going whenever she brought her friends over.
The things bros will do for their fellow bros."
"My coworkers still think I have a year old baby.
I was in an extremely emotionally abusive and manipulating relationship. Looking back at the pictures of me are unsettling. My face was jaundiced and I just looked depressed.
So let’s get to the meat and potatoes. Unbeknownst to me, my ex-girlfriend faked being pregnant or had a fairly early miscarriage that she hid from me. Fast forward to the due date, she texted me saying that she went into labor and that she had the baby. For context: this was just one text message and I was at work. I start jumping up and down telling my coworkers that I’m a dad and I run outta work. I kept calling her to see where she was so I could visit her and the baby. She didn’t respond.
Not responding was nothing new to her. There was always some excuse. She didn’t show up to my family reunion because 'she was in jail for an old warrant' or my mom's wedding because 'she missed her flight' or when my mom came into town to visit because she accidentally slammed her hand in the car door (She actually did do this but not on accident. She legit broke her hand to not see my mom). Even though this was her M.O., her not responding still had a devastating affect on me. I was a wreck thinking the baby or she died. My family friends and coworkers kept asking me if the baby was okay. Trying to cover up the abuse, I lied and said yes.
Finally after several days, she comes home in the middle of the night and says the baby was stillborn. I was devastated. I wanted to see my baby. I called every hospital so I could see my RJ before she was cremated. But there was no record of 'ex’s name' being admitted or a stillborn being delivered in any of the hospitals in a large radius around me.
I ended up having a breakdown in a hospital lobby. A receptionist took pity on me and called a hospital patient counselor (or something to that effect). She hears my story with great patience. Tells me she’ll be back in a few minutes and explains to me without violating HIPPA, that my ex was never pregnant, there is no baby, and that I have been given fake ultrasounds for the duration (and that my ex had lied about being a doctor. She failed out of med school).
I came clean to my family and friends about my ex’s deceit, but I couldn’t to my work because I had taken all the family leave to recover mentally. I assumed I could’ve been fired for telling them that there is no baby. Now I have someone every day or so asking me how my dead, imaginary kid is doing and I have to respond. It’s killing me on the inside."
"When I first met my boyfriend (now husband), he made a comment about my blonde hair. Something about me being just another girl that dyes her hair blonde. Everybody was blonde that decade.
The comment made me mad, so I said he was wrong and it was natural. I figured I could say whatever I wanted and it wouldn't matter since he'd go his way I'd go mine and that would be that. We started dating shortly after and I didn't want him to know I was a liar, so I'd touch up my roots on his days off and hide all of the evidence, even when we lived together. He never, ever suspected a thing.
Years went by. We got married. We had a kid and I didn't want to be blonde anymore, but I was already in too deep to turn back at that point. How could I explain going through all of that to keep up such a small lie? So I started dyeing my roots a slightly darker shade of blonde bit by bit and over time til I got the color close enough back to my natural color that I could stop dyeing it altogether without being called out about it. It worked.
Years later, we were talking about hair for whatever random reason and he was like, 'Remember when you used to be blonde?'
I was like, 'Yeah! It's weird how much darker your hair gets with age.'
He shall never know."
"The first time I played in snow was when I was 18 when a freak snow storm hit. By the time I woke up, though, it had mostly melted just enough to make a terrible snowman.
Last winter it snowed again. It was the first time I ever saw it coming down and it was enough for a crunch sound when stepped on. I was with my significant other and I asked her, 'Oh, is that what snow sounds like when you step in it?'
She freaked out and asked, 'IS THIS YOUR FIRST TIME IN SNOW?!'
For some reason, I said yes. She said it made her very happy that she got to experience my first snow day with me. I brushed it off and thought, 'Well, this makes her happy so I'll keep it to myself.' But oh man, she has told that story enthusiastically more than once, and how honored she was to experience such a crucial moment in my life. No pun intended, I thought I was in deep and only getting deeper with this lie.
I recently came clean about it and we had a good laugh (after feeling anxious she was going to feel betrayed). This was after a year of keeping up the lie."
"First day of college, I meet my new roommate. He hangs a Fight Club poster up and asks me if I like Fight Club. I said yes, of course. We had several conversations over the next couple years (we only lived together for one) about Fight Club and numerous references were made to it. Thing is, I've never seen Fight Club.
Eventually it was just a curiosity thing, how long could I go? I've still never seen it, even though I know the plot pretty dang well from multiple hour-long conversations about it."
"I have a Jewish last name despite not being Jewish at all. Living in Australia, I don't encounter too many other devoted Jews that notice. Until I went to a new dentist one day.
He assumed I was fully part of the Jewish community and started giving me special treatment. Discounts. Saying goodbye in some Hebrew saying and asking what I was doing over the various Jewish holidays.
I never explicitly said I was Jewish or wasn't Jewish, I just answered quite neutral because I didn't want to offend him in his assumptions. It's been about a few years now and I've had to research some sayings and holidays so I know what he's talking about when I turn up for a check up.
I'm in too deep, but he is a great dentist."
"I'm deaf in my right ear, but the company I work for would remove me from my position if they found out.
I work in a factory. My position is the highest hourly in the plant, and we run a series of machines. These machine have safety sensors that make sound.
The series of machines is about 200 feet long and each has it's own alarm. The problem is that there is no indicator light for the alarm because the company decided to cut those parts for redundancy.
A few years ago, we had someone like me, deaf in one ear, who reached into the machine despite the alarm going off. Because debris builds up over the speaker, it becomes difficult to hear unless you are right up on it.
To prevent that, the job requires you to be able to hear a certain frequency range, which some people can't.
Every year, we do a hearing test and every year if I don't hear a beep after 3 seconds, I just click the button.
For the last four years, my right side report has shown an increase in hearing in my right ear, so they sent me to a specialist to get a more randomized testing. I told the doctor when safety wasn't in the room and he understood my plight, helping me by raising his hand while I was in the booth when he returned.
My wife knows. Everyone else thinks I'm a terrible listener."
"I've lied to my Dad for years when he asks about my 'conquests.' I think he was something of a playboy when he was younger and really likes the idea of his son sleeping around with lots of women, and maybe even living vicariously through me since he's married. Ever since I was a teenager, he's been encouraging me to go out there and just plow as many women as I can, doesn't matter who.
I'm almost 30 years old now, and I've never brought any girlfriends home to meet my parents or told them any names of girlfriends. I tell him things like, 'Yeah, I've been with plenty of chicks, but with dating apps nowadays, relationships are so fleeting.' Excuses like that.
Truth is, I've never been with anyone. Ever. I've honestly never even approached a woman to ask her on a date. I don't think I ever will. He's gotta be super suspicious about my lack of love life, but if he knew the full extent of just how unsuccessful I've been with women, he'd be so disappointed.
He certainly must have some doubts since I've never brought up any names. He probably has noticed how quick I am to change the subject when he brings it up. But I think he wants so bad for me to be banging tons of women that he willfully accepts the fantasy of me doing it with strangers on Tinder, rather than believe that I never get laid at all."
"My friend went by himself to a bar a few months ago and thought it would be fun to use a Scottish accent and try to convince people he met that he was from Scotland. He's pretty good at impressions and easily convinced a group of people he met.
The problem is that he continued to run into them at the bar and had to continue his lie out of embarrassment. He's even hung out with a few of them since and is becoming friends with them. He currently is having trouble deciding how to tell them because he actually really likes them and wants to be honest, but it's been way too long that he's kept up the lie.
He even apparently helped one of them when they were having a really rough depressive episode. He stayed in character the whole time..."
"I thoroughly dislike mushrooms. Not the psychadelic ones, just regular old eating mushrooms. It's a deep and baseless hatred that I've carried with me for as long as I can remember.
An ex-girlfriend was always making fun of me, so I made up a story about an abusive babysitter who would force them down my throat, giving me mushroom PTSD of sorts. Of course, she told my mother, who confronted me and I stupidly kept spinning my web of lies to the point that now my mother tells the story in horror. Now, pretty much everybody in my life thinks I was traumatized into hating mushrooms, including my current wife and all of my group of friends."
"My lie is that I was born in Vietnam. I am 1/4 Vietnamese, so people always ask me what my race is and where I am from.
During Sophomore year of high school, I had just moved to a new city. I assumed I would move soon again because my mom was dating a man in this new town (a guy who I originally did not like, but grew to love like a father). I made a friend group about two weeks into the school year and they asked the inevitable question, 'Where are you from?' I blurted out Vietnam.
My mom was born in Vietnam, so I took her story and claimed it as my own. Born in Saigon and moved to America when I was three. I only said this because I didn't think they would be my friends for very long. As it turns out, I never ended up leaving that school. I graduated with that same friend group, and to this day they all believe I am from Vietnam."
"I use steroids and when I travel with gear, I bring insulin/glucose monitor/etc. as a reason for having my syringes and vials. Well, a friend was staying with me and saw my box of pin-prick finger jab thingies arrive in the mail, and I didn't want to tell him I was using gear, so I told him I was diabetic.
Then one day when we were out, I had too much to drink and was slurring my speech. He was concerned about me, so he told my other friends that I'm secretly diabetic and maybe I needed sugar or something.
So then I had to tell everyone that I'm diabetic, but I take good care of myself and not to be concerned. Now, I'm open about my steroid use, but I'm too embarrassed to tell everyone I'm not a real diabetic."
"I was a fairly overweight kid growing up. When I got to high school, I decided to make a change so I watched what I ate and started exercising regularly. A few months in, I started finally making friends and was at one of my friend's birthday parties. Her mom made a homemade chocolate cake for her party. We sang happy birthday and naturally her mom asked if I wanted a piece; I politely said no thanks, but she insisted that I take a piece of her 'famous' cake.
I didn’t want to be rude and deny the piece of cake that I actually wanted. I was also embarrassed to say that I was on a strict diet, so I told her that I didn’t like chocolate. She thought that was weird and told the rest of our group of friends.
Fast forward 9 years and I still have the same group of friends. We get together every once in awhile and they continuously bring up the fact of how strange it is I don’t like chocolate. I’ve taken the lie so deep now that my family and current girlfriend also think I don’t like chocolate.
I secretly will indulge in a piece every now and again when I’m positive no one's watching. It’s too late to turn back now. I’ll likely have to take this lie to the grave."
"Starting today I'll have to maintain a lie about a friend/colleague's death.
He took the last two days off with a 'migraine.' He was secretly depressed and in emotional pain having lost his girlfriend to cancer earlier this year and his housemate found him a few hours ago, having committed suicide.
The two days he took off, combined with some time he took a few weeks ago, was straining the relationship with our client he was working with to the point that if he didn't show up tomorrow, they were cancelling his PO.
Tomorrow, we have to go and tell the client that wanted to fire him off site that he died. We're not going to tell them he committed suicide, we're going to spare his dignity and tell a white lie that he passed suddenly, likely an aneurysm (believable due to the migraine story)."

"Eleanor is awesome! We had a lovely time away knowing that she was caring for our animals. Would..."
"Thank you so much for looking after April!"
"misaki enjoyed his stay at Christopher's "
"She's great. My dog has bonded with her pretty well. "
"Taylor and Amon were amazing! They were very friendly and we were completely comfortable leaving..."
"Tal was great he responded quickly to our request and helped us out at short notice and did a great ..."
"India was great! She looked after Biggie and our house so well. 5 stars!!"
"Karla was wonderful! Would highly recommend for anyone looking for a sitter :)"
"Very lovely to meet Karin, friendly and prompt. I felt safe leaving my buns with her as she knew..."
"Tsubi and Benson loved their stay with Lauren! I would highly recommend her!"
"The dogs were happy and the house nice and tidy when we got home. Thanks for looking after them..."
"My dog Dora had a great stay, thank you so much for caring for her over Christmas, I recommend..."
"Camilla has done a fantastic job taking good care of our young staffy Frankie, thank you very much..."
"Justyne was lovely - really understanding and a true dog lover. Tank was well looked after, and..."
"Could not be happier with the experience we had leaving Buddy with Zaiga and Guy last week. They..."
"Fantastic sitter and would highly recommend!"
"Was great have Tara as dog sitter for my little Kira. She was flexible with the hours. "

This book is such a travesty I would not recommend it to anyone. I makes a mockery of everything the Bible says about Mary and Jesus, tries to say that Mary and her cronies stole the body of Jesus away and that He did NOT rise from the Dead. When I first started reading this I did not recognize that he was SUPPOSEDLY writing about Mary the mother of Jesus and in fact there was nothing about this book that resembles that story whatsoever except the names of some of the characters. I was so mad that I spent time in actually reading this book. I kept thinking that this must be a book about another Mary that lived in Nazareth, after all that's a common name in the Bible as are several others. If I could give a negative 5 stars I would!!! I will not read another one of his books again. He is obviously anti- Christian and trying to convince others that it was all a hoax!

A few months back I posted a story about our family’s haunted house in Hartville MO (Haunting in Hartville, and decided that this time I wanted to share a story about the experience I had when I was a young teenager.
My grandmother, who lived in Wichita, Kansas, passed away in 1983 when I was 13 years old from cancer. In her will, she left her home to my parents. We were living in Missouri at the time, but had originally come from Wichita, and my folks decided they wanted to move back and live in Grandma’s house. From the very first day we moved in, weird creepy things started happening.
My mother was the one who started having things happen to her first. The day the moving van arrived, she was alone in the house unpacking dishes in the kitchen, while I was outside helping my dad put some things in the detached garage. She was bent down with her head stuck in a cabinet when she heard a young girl’s laugh behind her. She backed out and turned around, thinking it was me, and there was no one there. Figuring I’d just left before she could see me, she went back to her unpacking when she heard it again. This time she got up and looked out the kitchen window to where she could see the driveway and she saw I was still outside with my dad. At that moment, she heard the giggle again from the direction of the living room. She went and looked and no one was in the house. She didn’t say anything to me or my dad, thinking we’d think she was nuts.
A few days later, she had to go down to the basement where the laundry area was to wash some clothes, and she later told us that she felt very cold and had the persistent feeling of being watched the entire time she was down there. The whole time we lived in this house (3 years) she absolutely HATED being in the basement by herself. Many times she would hear the giggling also.
After about a month in the house, my dad and I started experiencing creepy stuff. We had just recently gotten a little pug dog that followed Mom everywhere, but would not go to the basement even if you tried to drag it down. It would sit at the basement doorway and GROWL down the stairs with its hackles raised. Anyway, this little dog slept in a chair in the hallway right across from my folks’ room. One night, Mom was gone out with some girlfriends, and Dad and I had gone to bed. I woke up and heard him hollering at the dog to quit pulling the blanket off his bed. I came out of my room and Dad was standing in the hall with a funny look on his face. He told me he had been awakened by what he thought was the dog jerking the covers off his feet, but when he stepped into the hall, the dog was out cold in the chair and obviously hadn’t moved in awhile.
My first up-close-and-personal incident happened just two days after this. I was woke up from a deep sleep and for no reason I could explain, I was absolutely TERRIFIED, so much so I could not move, could barely swallow. Finally with a great effort, I sat up. Directly across from my bed was the closet, and there was a full length mirror on the door. I saw something in that mirror, something black and oily and very menacing. I shut my eyes and started praying as hard as I could. After about 5 minutes I felt the terror going away and opened my eyes, and the thing in the mirror was gone. Little did I know that it would come back many times in the next few years. I never slept without all the lights on in my room after that, ever.
We started having all the usual haunted house stuff happen, too. Footsteps in the night. Doors opening and closing on their own. Things that you put in one place, like keys, books, what have you, would disappear and then turn up in really odd places, like the bathtub.
My parents were really reserved people and they did not want anybody outside of our little family unit to know what was happening, not even people at our church. After less than a year, they put the house up for sale, but it sat on the market for nearly two years before it finally sold, and during that time it was a living hell, so many things happened I could write a book.
The final frightening episode happened our last night in the house. We had all of our stuff packed and the next day the moving van was coming to get us back to Missouri. We were talking about all the stuff that had happened and wondering how in the hell Grandma had lived there ALONE for 13 years and hadn’t had anything happen to her, and why nothing had ever happened whenever we’d visited over the years, until we moved in. Suddenly our pug stood up and started barking like it was having a fit, and SOME THING whooshed right through the dining room and into the kitchen, where we had some boxes piled. The boxes fell all over the place! We all looked at each other, then grabbed our personal bags and RAN to our car. We spent our last night in Wichita at a motel. My dad was the only one to go back to the house the next day to supervise the movers. Mom and I had had it.
Up until both of my parents passed away a few years back, they rarely talked about the experience, even to me. I never liked thinking about it either. Now MY family is in a haunted house, and we are finally putting the darn thing up for sale. I’m tired of ghosts and evil spirits, it’s not pleasant at all!
Written by Renee, Copyright 2009 TrueGhostTales.com

Last night we were talking about what we were going to get Wyatt for Christmas. We were thinking a swing set but were not sure what pieces were okay. I know swings would be okay but what about the climbing wall. Any one have a suggestion on a certain kind, brand, store to get it at? Thanks so much.
You can share this discussion in two ways…
Share this link:
Send it with your computer's email program: Email this

Dennis often reads a blog called Crazy Guy On A Bike. It is written by hundreds of different cyclists from around the world telling their adventures. Quite often, there are cyclists who ride these folding bikes which are high end but will fit into a suitcase (which then turns into a bike trailer!). There are many different brands but the most popular one is Bike Friday. There are several different places to buy the bikes but sadly there is nothing in Canada. The closest is in New York.
Dennis talks about them a lot and I was curious about them. The other day, a lady drove by on the trail in front of our house and she happened to be riding one, so I stopped her and asked her all about it. She was from Montreal and loves her bike because she rides all over the city and if she needs to take her bike on the bus or keep it in her workspace, she just folds it up and puts it in an Ikea bag.
Today, as we were walking back from the Farmers’ Market (by the way – we will be at the Farmers’ Market on Saturday as vendors) to see our space, we stopped at Samuel’s Coffee House to get coffee. Dennis noticed a tandem Bike Friday. The people were just getting up to leave so I went and talked to them. They were from Australia and had cycled from Montreal, along the Gaspe and were heading to Halifax. Today they were off to the north part of PEI. I think their destination was Alberton. They had ridden this bike quite a bit and really liked it. They said that they could go 60 km an hour down a hill!
They were very interesting people and we would loved to talk more but couldn’t. They mentioned that they had stayed at a Warm Showers Community house last night.
“This is a free worldwide hospitality exchange for touring cyclists. People who are willing to host touring cyclists sign up and provide their contact information, and may occasionally have someone stay with them and share great stories and a drink. All members agree to host others either now or in the future, but for some members hosting may be in years or even decades in their future.”
Here is a picture of Ian and Lexie from Australia:
That’s all the news for today!
Glen & Joanne
July 17, 2015 at 7:16 am
Great links Jane!

It was 15 August 2021, when I woke up, dressed up, and got ready to go to my office. I got into my car and took my book to read in the heavy traffic jam of Kabul. I have been mentally disturbed during the last couple of weeks as the Taliban took over many cities and districts across Afghanistan. I knew that there was some terrible news to be worried and concerned about, that is why I was avoiding the news. I was on the road for 15-minutes when my colleagues told me that Mazar had fallen to the Taliban and Bamiyan might fall as well. After hearing this news, I closed my book, I could no longer concentrate.
As we needed money, my friend and I decided to go to the bank before going to the office. There was too much of a rush at the bank. From 8:30 till 11:30 we were waiting in a long queue for our turn, but the bank ran out of money and they said they soon would bring some. Just as the money reached the bank, the crowd spread out and everybody was shouting that the Taliban has reached the bank’s doorstep; we got out panicking. As I was wearing my everyday clothes, I was terrified – if the Taliban were at the doorstep, they would shoot me. My colleague was aware of the situation and she was wearing a long dress head to toe and carrying a bigger scarf. I borrowed her extra scarf and wrapped myself with it in fear of the Taliban. As all roads were closed and people were running away with fear, no car was willing to take us.
Having no other option, we walked all the way from the bank to the office – a 40 to 50-minute walk. The disturbing part was that all men in the street were teasing us and passing comments on us, “the Taliban will soon come and the Chadari (Burqa) price will increase.” They were laughing at our fear and worries. We reached the office but everybody had already left. It was impossible to go home by car because all roads were closed and traffic police had already left their duty stations out of fear. We managed to walk halfway before the humiliating looks of men were following us again. They were taunting us saying, “Taliban return will be good and women will wear Chadari”, “It is the last days of your freedom and the price of Chadaris has increased.” I returned home and I heard that the Taliban took most of the police districts in Kabul. In the blink of an eye, the Taliban returned to Kabul.
I went through a lot of struggles to go to school, go out of the country to study, and find a job. I could not imagine that I would lose all of my freedom. That I would be restricted inside my house, would have to cover myself from head to toe, and be accompanied by a male relative in order to go out. Just a week ago, I was moving around freely wherever I wanted. I was able to express my opinion about injustice, inequality, human rights, and women’s rights through my writing and social media platforms. Since 15 August 2021, I have been feeling unsafe, imprisoned, and I have been living in fear and disappointment. I had to remove my photos from social media and remove posts in which I was criticizing the Taliban’s brutality and the atrocities they commit. Ultimately, I needed to deactivate my accounts due to security reasons. I was campaigning for promoting women’s rights through whatever means I could. Now, I have to block myself, even inside my house, block my pen and my thoughts in order not to be killed. It is the worst kind of nightmare and the end of the life which I had never lived because we were always traumatized by all our endless sufferings and pain that we’ve carried since childhood.
About the writer:
Zarifa Sabet has a Master’s Degree in International Relations from South Asian University in New Delhi, India. She has been working in Afghanistan on women’s rights for the past few years. She has several credible publications to her credit and writes extensively on Human Rights, Women’s Rights, and Child Rights in Afghanistan.

Kabul: Twenty police officers have been killed in Afghanistan’s Southern Helmand province, killing at least 20 officers. The attack was carried out by dozens of Taliban militants who took part in the raids in the remote and volatile musa Qala district.
Taliban has claimed that they have killed as many as 25 officers and have seized a large number of heavy weapons.
The Talibans have stepped up their attacks ever since the US and the NATO forces left the country last year. Police spokesman Mohammad Ismail Hotak said the attacks started late on Friday and fighting was continuing on Saturday.
Most of the checkpoints attacked had been small, with just two or three men, but insurgents had also targeted larger facilities, Mr Hotak added. He said at least 10 officers had been wounded and that the Taliban had suffered heavy casualties.

A traditional Orange sports ground that has deteriorated through lack of use is set for a comeback.
Orange City Council has allocated $50,000 for the next financial year to spruce-up Perry Oval.
The ground at Victoria Street has plenty of facilities but no teams are playing there.
Cr Glenn Taylor said he and mayor Cr Reg Kidd recently visited the ground and were stunned by its condition.
"We were absolutely shocked. It has been allowed to deteriorate. It is full of weeds. You can't have any sport up there," he said.
Cr Taylor said council staff would determine what was needed to bring it back into shape.
It has been allowed to deteriorate. It is full of weeds.Cr Glenn Taylor
"There's hundreds of thousands of dollars worth of lighting there," he said.
Cr Taylor said a drainage system and cricket pitch had been installed at the ground.
"It was irrigated. It was re-surfaced a few years ago," he said.
It also had a canteen and amenities block which he said were sound.
Cr Taylor said it would be far cheaper to restore Perry Oval than to build a new facility.
The sum of $50,000 was decided by Cr Taylor at Tuesday night's council meeting after he said he did not have a report into the state of the ground.
"I pulled out the figure $50,000. That's a ballpark figure. Maybe we'll spend every cent of that," he said.
"We honestly don't know what it will cost."
Cr Taylor said staff would now determine what was needed.
"I'm asking council to do a complete audit of it," he said.
Cr Taylor said the ground had gradually deteriorated from its heyday when it was used for rugby league, cricket, soccer and other sport.
"It was a very, very highly used oval," he said.
"It was the real hub for the community in that area."
Cr Taylor said despite no teams or clubs using the ground he said he believed there was demand for facilities from sporting teams in the city.
"We'd call for expressions of interest from sports groups to use it," he said.
Cr Taylor said it could become a home ground for a team or could be used for regular competition.
"Let's renovate it and bring it back," he said.
Other sports funding in the budget included $500,000 to begin planning for a development application for a mountain bike park on Mount Canobolas.
HAVE YOUR SAY
- Send us a letter to the editor using the form below ...

There are 4 more days left of 2022. It is hard to comprehend, but I will wait to share my thoughts on that in my end-of-the-year blog. For tonight, I will write my last weekly blog of 2022. This week was filled with the completion of Chanukah. The start of winter break for me as well as your siblings. This week I went to watch aba play hockey which is something I have not done in years. I have to be honest, it was one of the slowest games I have had to sit through in a long time. Think back to the few Titans' games you watched circa his first year playing travel hockey when he was just a mite. (You might have even seized through a majority of them because they were oh-so-eventful). Really aba was good, but he was playing with men who were significantly older. I give them mad props for playing club hockey at their age, but I won't be there to cheer anyone again any time soon.
This week we took your siblings to the world's biggest bounce house. It was fun, but it was one of those one-time sorts of deals, (we won't be doing it again). This week your siblings also got their first phones. They aren't thrilled because they can literally only make phone calls and text and they have no social media, internet, or games. We got them primarily because they have GPS and they all walk to school now, and not typically together. I will have more peace of mind knowing I can track them and that they have a way to call if g-d forbid something should happen. Additionally, with Meena's new gymnastics schedule and Tzvi always at hockey practice, it is good for them to have a way to get a hold of us. (Like for those times aba drives away with Tzvi's hockey gear, but without him).
I have been looking at your pictures this last week. Overall they make me smile. Sometimes they even transport me back to that actual time or day. I never wish I didn't take as many videos or pictures as I did. In fact, I wish I was as good at it with your siblings. Still, the only regret of my life is not having any of me with you right after you died. As we get closer to the exact date I know it will be something that loudly haunts me since it sits quietly nagging me throughout the year as it is. The one positive is that my primary advice to anyone who enters into hospice is to take as many pictures and videos as possible. They don't have to ever look at them but they will have them just in case they want to. It eliminates the potential regret.
This week for 2 days of my break, before your siblings began theirs, it was the first time since you died that I had no real reason to get out of bed. I stayed in bed in the morning on both days. By day 2 aba asked me if I was just enjoying my break and staying in bed because I could or if I was depressed. I admitted the truth (while attempting to hide the tears that filled my eyes). It was a little bit of column A and column B. I then asked him how he could not be. We are almost done with 3 complete years without you here and I still feel like it is day #1 all over again. I have mastered my ability to hide it the majority of the time. I force myself on the regular to play the part of typical I have not buried a child after living close to 5 years as a special needs parent mom, but now with Noam being old enough to do things on his own, and with us living so close to school, I have to admit, it was nice to allow myself to not get out of bed. It is only because of your siblings and working that I am even able to fake things as much as I do. Anyway, if you ever doubt that I am over you not being here, or think that I have moved on, don't worry little bear, it hasn't happened and it won't ever happen.

Adopted: Bogo a a 1.5 year old Male Black Labrador, has found his forever home.
Here is a Bio from his foster family……..
Bogo is a high energy, sweet Lab. He will need a committed, caring family willing to help him learn his manners.
Bogo is house trained, sleeps well in his kennel, and is good around other dogs. He doesn't quite play with our two, but that's because ours are aloof and disinterested to fosters anymore. He's a little scared on car rides, but that will improve with experience. Bogo really loves people, happy to snuggle and give kisses to anyone.
While Bogo is a year & a half old, he's still very much like a young puppy, needing to learn boundaries and structure. He's insecure, timid at first, and needs time to settle in and feel safe. When excited, he's very jumpy and mouthy. Shoes seem to be his favorite target so far, and we're teaching him what's acceptable to go in his mouth and what isn't. He's getting better walking on leash, and wants to please you. He's finally become comfortable enough to take naps in his kennel, on his own. He loves cuddling, and will be a great companion when he works through his insecurity and puppy traits.
Bogo is on his way to become the dog he is meant to be, he will need a family willing to continue training, have patience during his transition, and show him lots of love. For families with small children, Bogo would need an immediate commitment to training to help his transition and teach him proper behavior around little ones. Please keep that in mind if requesting a Meet & Greet. "
See a list of Available Labs here

November 1, 2017
Imam Tawhidi had written a letter to the Mayor back in February, 2017 asking for an interview with the Mayor. He had credible knowledge of detailed financial funding coming from the Middle East and books that were being imported which contained radicalized (Wahabist) fundamentalist teachings. These books that were being imported were also being gifted to prisoners within the New York prison system.
This letter apparently was completely ignored by the Mayor and most likely was never referred to the FBI.
As you can see, he was completely ignored! Why was he ignored? Well, it’s simple, we were told by the New York Post, that the NYPD banned an anti-terror handbook that was right on point, and could have possibly stopped the terrorism that happened in New York yesterday that killed 8 and injured many. The Muslims felt they were being spied on (religious profiling)!
This anti-terrorism handbook was banned from New York Police, Intelligence, Counter-terrorism forces due to a lawsuit by lawyers for the city and Muslim leaders. Former law enforcement officers feared that by banning the handbook, it could not stop the vehicle-ramming attacks that were plaguing European cities. Well, now it’s plaguing the USA also, what are they going to do about this???
If I was the family of any people that were maimed or killed yesterday, I would sue both de Blasio and the city, not stopping there…..sue the lawyers and the Muslim leaders, judges that let this banning take place!

Letecia Stauch, an elementary school teacher, has been found guilty of murdering her 11-year-old stepson, Gannon, in January 2020. Prosecutors say she killed him because she was resentful about being used as a glorified babysitter. Stauch stabbed Gannon 18 times, beat him across the head four times, and shot him in the jaw, before hiding his remains in a remote area nearby and dumping his body under a bridge in Florida.
She then tried to cover up her crime by claiming Gannon had vanished. Despite her defense attorneys claiming she suffered from mental illness, prosecutors argued that the extent of Gannon's injuries showed she acted with intent.

Sarah Rosetta Wakeman was the eldest of nine children when, in the summer of 1862, she posed as a man to get a job as a boatman on the Chenango Canal. Her driving motive was to provide money for her hard-pressed family. When she learned that she could pocket $152 in bounty money by enlisting in the army, she jumped at the chance. At the time, she was 17-years-old. Her regiment, the 153rd New York, served as part of the garrison force in Washington, and was even assigned for a time to guard the Old Capital Prison, while Confederate spy Belle Boyd was incarcerated there.
Wakeman, who used the name ’Lyon,’ during her scheme, had given up on seeing any active duty until February 1864, when her regiment shipped out to Louisiana to take part in the Red River campaign. After surviving the disastrous battle of Pleasant Hill, during which she was under fire for several hours, she was one of many who got sick during the ensuing arduous retreat. Suffering from chronic diarrhea, she was admitted to the regimental hospital and was ultimately sent to the Marine General Hospital in New Orleans. After battling her sickness for almost a month, she died on June 19, 1864, and was buried in a military cemetery.
Incredibly, while she was suffering in the hospital and even after she died, Wakeman was never discovered to be a woman…that is until letters she had wrote home during her military service were discovered in an attic 130 years later, in 1994.
Wednesday, April 8, 2009
An Uncommon Soldier
Subscribe to: Post Comments (Atom)
The Goat Man was Everyone's Folk Hero
My most popular story, written in 2011, was about Charles "Ches" McCartney, aka the Goat Man, who traveled the countryside with ...
When I think of the 70's, I think of the greatest rock and roll music ever. It is now included in a music genre that is known today a...
James Arness died today. Gunsmoke was every one's favorite TV show back when I was a kid. For years, at my house, we watched every singl...
(This photo was made in the 1950's as the Goat Man passed through my town) Charles McCartney was born on July 6, 1901. In 1915, at age ...
Post a Comment

(In case you missed it, you can read the first part of this story here.)
A man in the row in front of us called out, “Is there a doctor on the plane?” And a man got up and came down to where we were. But by then, it was over. CBG’s eyes snapped open like someone who was startled awake. By this time there were several people gathered around, including the steward, the doctor who jumped up to help, the poor guy who was sitting next to us, a couple of others. CBG was alert, a little confused about what everyone was staring at him, and honestly a bit freaked out that he didn’t know what had just happened.
I was shaken, but relieved that he’d come around.
I held everything together as we got off the plane. My mind was fixed on CBG. About how he was. About what was going to happen next.
You can read the details of everything that happened next in CBG’s post. The whole time all of this was happening, I was calm, cool and collected. Despite being worried and completely freaked out, CBG and I even managed to exchange a couple of lame jokes to make each other smile. I was there, ready, willing and able to do whatever he needed in that time. Had we ended up going to the hospital, or facing a more horrific experience, I would have kept as calm as I needed to. Because that’s what I do in a crisis. I have an amazing ability to hold my shit together. Because as freaked out as I may have been at the time, the last thing CBG needed was to have to deal with me having a meltdown on top of everything else. No siree. What was going on was definitely NOT about me.
Fortunately we were able to board the plane in Newark (with only minutes to spare) so we could head home. The unfortunate part was because it was such a small plane, CBG and I ended up in the single row, with him seated behind me…when all I wanted to do was grab onto him and never let go.
Once I was able to sit and the adrenaline rush was over, THAT is when it all truly hit me. At that point we still didn’t know what had just happened. Was it a seizure? Could it have been a small stroke? What could have caused that to happen? What if something was really wrong with him? What if he had died right there in front of me?
Every possible worst-case scenario rushed through my mind. And with nothing lef to do but sit and think, THAT’S when the tears came flooding in. While CBG got some rest behind me, I did my best to let all of those freaked out, awful emotions pour out of me as quietly as I possibly could. Every time it felt like I might be calming down a bit, another thought would set me off.
By the time I’d finally emptied all those acute emotions, more than an hour had passed. I was completely exhausted and utterly drained, but by that point, I was ready to be strong for CBG again. We arrived home and fell into bed, exhausted. The next morning, we headed off to the emergency room.
You can read all of the details about that on CBG’s blog post. After being thoroughly checked out, and had a discussion about everything that had happened leading up to, and during the event, the explanation we were given was that CBG simply had an event where his blood pressure bottomed out and he fainted. Something that’s happened to me a few times over the years, in fact. It just so happened that it occurred for him at a really unfortunate time…and was terrifying to see happen.
Even though it’s now been almost 48 hours since it happened, I’m still feeling fairly shaken up by the whole thing. My brain is still going over the “what ifs”. My heart is feeling incredibly grateful that everything turned out alright.
Looks like I’m stuck with CBG for a good long while to come.

I went for the treatment one week ago, had two days in a row for my belly. First they told me it wouldn't hurt..WRONG it was painfull fo the first 10 minutes, after it was sort of ok. I am at day 6 days later now and it still is swollen and hurts...hope that it will get better in the coming days
More Painful Than I Thought - Calabasas, CA
I went for the treatment one week ago, had two...
I felt good there, being really nice and professional

Colombo, Sep 1 (IANS) Indian cricketer Ravichandran Ashwin said that brilliant catching by his teammates during the three-Test series handed the off-spinner 21 wickets which eventually earned him the man of the series award here on Tuesday.
India defeated Sri Lanka by 117 runs on Day 5 of the third and final match to win 2-1 at the Sinhalese Sports Club Ground, their first series win on Lankan soil in 22 years. It is also India’s first away series win since beating the West Indies in 2011.
“I would like to thank the boys, the catching has been brilliant and that is why I have more than 20 wickets in the series,” said Ashwin, who made two five-wicket hauls in the series.
“Having been here before for the one-day tournaments, and we had a practice game as well and my take away was that the wickets were slow and I have to put more body in. It has been quite a while to win a Man of the Series, happy to win it. Had a few tennis elbow issues, had to change my technique a little bit. Happy to pay them back with a fifty.”
Ashwin top-scored with 58 in India’s second innings which proved vital as India handed the hosts a target of 386 runs. In reply, Sri Lanka were bowled out for 268.
This was only the third time that India won a series after being 0-1 down.

Join free now!
It is free to search locals your area
I didn't intend to go back to Dark Angel. I understood that she was just doing her work, however with the clearness of post-orgasmic remorse I understood that it had been cold as well as mechanical. I would need to try someone else. It really did not strike me at this stage that an escort is a companion, as well as any type of encounter would essentially be a purchase, as well as as a result could be anticipated to be cold and mechanical, business like. I was an idiotic optimist.
The horniness grew more powerful as well as more powerful, as well as eventually, nearly an entire month after I had popped my cherry with a girl for hire, I determined to dip my toe back right into one of the earliest companies in the world. I checked out a various site this time around. I browsed as well as looked, as well as I forget what attracted me to this certain profile. I do bear in mind that I was soon to discover a lesson that I haven't forgotten since.She informed me her prices as well as where to find her. She was a bit additional away than I had actually originally intended, but I was a walking boner at this stage as well as wanted to find a warm and wet residence for my aching cock.
I promptly prepared as well as hit the trail. While heading I worked on what I would state and what I would certainly do. I had actually chosen that while Dark Angel was fine enough, I really felt somewhat humiliated that she had been my first. Possibly this fully grown woman would take pity on me if I declared to still be a virgin, possibly she would certainly reveal me the ropes and also make me an actual guy. So, when I finally reached her door, I knew what I would state. Nevertheless, I was a little tossed once again when I arrived. The lady that greeted me was plainly older than I had expected and also showed a lot of mileage on her face. Look, she wasn't genuinely ugly, yet the shock of the inconsistency between assumption and fact was enough to hinder my serious horniness for a moment.
Well, I was below. I had actually driven reasonably much to get there, and I really did not actually wish to go to the effort of walking out and discovering somebody else. I was going to get laid, and also this was right before me. What's the worst that could occur? She showed me in and also took me to the bed room, where the bed was made, and a bag of rewards was on the side table. I could see wet wipes, prophylactics, lube, and also some other points that aid in adult playtime. She started making conversation: what's my name? what do I do? and more. I assume she sensed my nervousness, due to the fact that I was somewhat intimidated by her.
So, she helped me undress, and I was nude before my second escort in a month. She informed me to rest on my belly on the bed as she obtained undressed. I kept an eye on her, and her body was thankfully as hot as the pictures on her profile had suggested. Considering her age, it was amazing exactly how smoking cigarettes she was, although both time and previous horniness might be aiding me decorate the memory a bit. I need to firmly insist, nonetheless, that you think one thing: she definitely had a butter face. It was distracting, however so was her body and I made a decision to focus on that instead.
She started rubbing me with infant oil, and also the touch aided to relax several of my residual nerves. It likewise helped my penis expand more difficult under my belly as she started to scrub her tits on my back. First, she gently brushed my shoulder blades with her nipples, leaving me puzzled for a moment as I attempted to determine what was taking place. She then massaged her body backwards and forwards my back, dragging her tits throughout my back as well as ass. It had actually the preferred result and also I was soon resting on a heated steel rod that had just recently been my penis.
And then a brand-new feeling that took a minute for me to figure out: she was rubbing her pussy up and down my back as well as buttocks. It was very warm and also had a tip of being damp. These sensations made me almost shed a load right after that as well as there, yet somehow, I hung on.
She soon flipped me over and also my penis sprang to focus. She was stooping between my legs, as well as she was gazing up at me previous my penis. Butterface or otherwise, this was greater than my lately de-virginised brain could take care of. She began lightly fondling my balls with one hand and took my shaft in the various other.
happy ending massage Blandford 2338 NSW, sensual massage Blandford 2338 NSW, erotic massage Blandford 2338 NSW, sex massage Blandford 2338 NSW, nude massage Blandford 2338 NSW, thai massage Blandford 2338 NSW, massager Blandford 2338 NSW, full body massage Blandford 2338 NSW, exotic massage Blandford 2338 NSW, tantra massage Blandford 2338 NSW, body to body massage Blandford 2338 NSW, asian massage Blandford 2338 NSW, adult massage Blandford 2338 NSW, personal massage Blandford 2338 NSW, nuru massage Blandford 2338 NSW. 4 hands massage Blandford 2338 NSW, 20 dollar massage Blandford 2338 NSW, 30 minute massage Blandford 2338 NSW, adult massage near Blandford 2338 NSW, Happy Ending Massage Blandford 2338 NSW
| ||1764|| ||52935|| ||23465|| ||87928|| ||79286|| ||13771|| ||18200|| ||86251|| ||73359|| ||74964|

Tiger Woods should follow the advice of Charles Aznavour and leave the table because the meal is complete!
He was the greatest golfer of our time but he wanted to exploit the commercial aspect of his talent. For this reason, he has been completely defeated by the lately developments. It’s not his marriage that worries him but his financial failure.
This was not the first time he faced such situation but in the past he had always been able to buy the silence of the media who wanted to publish a scoop like this picture of Tiger kissing a girl in a parking lot. His lawyers had giving away an exclusive interview to the magazine Men’s Health in exchange of the photos. This time however there were too many media to silent.
I think that he is completely reversed by the situation. Playing golf is one thing but handling successfully public opinion is another kind of talent.
Finally, the failure of Tiger Woods is his own fault. He should have just quit for some years but he believed that the situation would come back as before.
Unfortunatly his meal is finished!

Sweet-Eels Sparklefunk is a recurring villain in Ben 10: Omniverse. He is one of Psyphon's henchmen.
Sweet-Eels Sparklefunk is a tall purple alien that appears to be fully covered by a white suit. He also has four tentacles for feet. He has red eyes and no visible mouth. He has gauntlets which are black with silver claws.
He was first seen in The More Things Change: Part 2 fighting against Ben along with the other thugs.
He was at Psyphon's auction in Special Delivery.
He was seen in Return to Forever in Undertown where he and Tummyhead attempted to rob humans in a tour bus. However, Ben and Rook appeared and Sweet-Eels and Tummyhead forced to fight. Sweet-Eels fought Rook but was eventually defeated by him, while Tummyhead was defeated by Ben as Rath.
In Mud is Thicker than Water, along with Tummyhead and Liam (who later revealed to be Lucy Mann), he was chased by Ben and Magister Patelliday for stealing Plumber weapons. He was knocked over by Patelliday but was able to get away before they could arrest him. Later, along with the other members of Psyphon's gang, he received highly advanced Plumber Tech from an uncovered Gorvan. However, at the end, he and the others were defeated and arrested for their actions.
Powers and Abilities
Sweet-Eels Sparklefunk is only shown to carry around a blaster. He is shown to be very accurate when using it in combat.

Two officers went to the home of 31-year-old Victor Ortega in the 8800 block of Flanders Drive about 7:45 a.m. on a report that he had punched and kicked his wife, causing her to bleed from her mouth, according to San Diego police.The 27-year-old woman met the patrol personnel on a lawn in front of her house and told them her husband had run away to the north, SDPD homicide Lt. Kevin Rooney said.The officers split up to search for Ortega, and one of them found him a short time later in an alley just south of Hillery Drive. Seeing the policeman, Ortega ran off to the east.The officer radioed that he was in a foot pursuit and broadcast a description of Ortega, who fled to a parking area east of the 10500 block of Caminito Flores.Ortega ran into a breezeway, slamming a swinging wooden door behind him. The officer kicked the gate open and was immediately confronted by Ortega, according to Rooney."The officer tried to control the suspect, who grabbed the officer and wrestled with him as they bounced off the walls of the breezeway," Rooney said.The officer was able to force Ortega to the ground and hold him face-down while struggling to handcuff him.After getting Ortega's arms behind his back and cuffing the left hand, the officer noticed that his backup handgun had fallen out of its holster and was lying on the ground next to the man's head. Ortega reached for, and touched, the pistol before the officer was able to push it away, Rooney said.The officer then got on one knee and pulled his primary gun from its holster. At that point, Ortega turned, and as he raised himself, grabbed for the primary weapon, Rooney said. From a distance of about a foot, the officer shot Ortega.The officer radioed for assistance and began CPR prior to the arrival of medics, who took over the lifesaving attempt before pronouncing Ortega dead at the scene shortly after 8 a.m.Flanders Drive resident Jason Crisostomo, 38, told reporters that just prior to the gunfire outside his home, he heard a man shout at someone to "get on the ground." Crisostomo said a man responded with "are you kidding me?"Three shots then rang out, Crisostomo said.Rooney declined to disclose how many rounds the officer firedOrtega's sister, Michelle Hooper, yelled "Bunch of murderers!" as she ran toward the yellow crime scene tape near her brother's body.Hooper and several other family members were seen hugging each other. Occasional loud sobs were heard as they clustered together in tears and disbelief. "My brother just got shot and killed by San Diego police," Hooper said through tears. "I thought that the police were supposed to use Tasers or bean bag guns, but they shot him in the head." Hooper and Ortega's younger sister, Melina Alexander, said they doubt the police version of what happened. "They shot an innocent man today and he's leaving behind two young kids and a wife," said Alexander, who called her brother her best friend. "Victor was a kind-hearted individual," Hooper told reporters. "He was a family man. He lived for his kids. He did the right thing. He went to work every day. He just lived for his wife and his kids and his family." When asked about the domestic violence accusations against her brother, Alexander said, "It was a domestic violence call but they wound up shooting him in his head, so how smart does that sound?" "Not smart at all," Hooper added. The officer involved in the shooting was identified as three-year veteran Jonathan McCarthy, 29. He is assigned to the SDPD Northeastern Division's patrol unit. He will serve desk duty until investigations in the case are complete, as is routine in instances of officer-involved shootings.It generally takes homicide detectives at least a month to complete their probes into police use of lethal force, Rooney said. They then forward their finding to the district attorney, who rules on whether the shooting in question was legally justified.The shooting took place just a half-mile from Mira Mesa High School, but the school was not locked down.

He may have said he thought he was too ugly to be a star but James Arthur’s fans certainly don’t agree with him as he was spotted passionately kissing a mystery brunette outside Mahiki. The 24-year-old, who said he spent many of his teenage years locked in his bedroom playing the guitar, may be making up for lost time as he romanced the fake-tanned fur-coated stunner on the pavement in central London, before moving in for a kiss.
Heartthrob James, who is hotly tipped to win this year’s show, didn’t even need to serenade the mystery woman with his soft toned voice, as he merely grabbed a rose and shoved it in her hand. It must be a whirlwind for the soft-voiced youngster who admitted that his music has made him more confident. And he was certainly riding on the coat tails of success as he was surrounded by attractive females outside the club, but he plumped for the slim brunette and after buying her a rose he was spotted getting into a waiting car, a far cry from the days when he used to wait for the bus. For James, who has taken to Twitter asking his fans to step and vote for him to make sure he gets into the final, it was a well earned night out after a long week rehearsing. – Dailymail

Melissa Pitanga is a Porn Star from Brazil. She was born in Sao Paulo on October 6, 1983. She is listed on FreeOnes since 2009 and is currently ranked 4182th place. She currently has 38 gallery links and 3 videos in her own FreeOnes section.
Our records show that Melissa Pitanga is currently active which means she is still making movies, doing live shows and/or doing photo shoots.

Woman sold as child refused ID card
A Hong Kong woman who was sold as a child servant to human smugglers from the mainland more than 60 years ago has been refused an ID card because she cannot provide written proof she was born here.
Kwok Lan-heung, 77, hit the headlines last year after she was reunited with her sister Kwok Choi, 88, in Hong Kong. They had not seen each other for 68 years and were reunited with the help of the Red Cross.
Kwok and her relatives and friends insist she was born in Hong Kong with the given name Yuk-lan. At the age of eight, during the Japanese occupation, she was sold to smugglers to work as a maid. She then lost contact with her family. Without a birth certificate, Kwok has failed to get a Hong Kong identity card.
'The incident happened ... a long time ago. It is unrealistic and unfair for the Immigration Department to use the current regulation to judge my case ... I am very disappointed,' Kwok said yesterday after meeting immigration officers.
Her elder sister suffers from serious asthma and has been living in a home. She was recently admitted to hospital and Kwok had to borrow a travel permit to visit her.
'If I am given an ID card, it will be more convenient for me to visit her. I can come here any time,' said Kwok, who lives in Shanwei, Guangdong. Her current permit lets her enter Hong Kong only twice every three months, for up to seven days each time.
Immigration officers told Kwok that although many people could vouch that she was born in Hong Kong, she did not have sufficient written evidence.
Kwok provided the department with a family photo taken before she was sold and the birth certificate of her younger brother, which bore her parents' names. But she did not have a birth certificate from when she was born in 1934. She had approached Kwong Wah Hospital in Yau Ma Tei, where she was born, and the primary school she had attended in Mong Kok, but neither had kept records.
Legislator Lee Wing-tat, who is helping Kwok secure an ID card, said the department should interview all the relatives that could prove Kwok once lived in Hong Kong. 'The department can only verify Kwok's residency if there is sufficient documentary evidence; this is very bureaucratic,' he said.
Kwok said: 'My only hope is that [the department] can verify that I was born in Hong Kong. I do not have any other request.'
A spokesman said the department verified whether applicants were permanent residents according to the law and, because Kwok's case involved the right of abode, she had to provide proof that she was born in the city. He said the department would help her. However, if she was not happy with the decision, she could lodge an appeal at the Registration of Persons Tribunal.

Read what other Viator.com travelers think about the San Francisco Dinner Dance Cruise. What they loved, what they liked and what they think could be improved, it's all here to help you make the most of your next trip.
We enjoyed the dinner dance. Food and service was excellent.
The MC was great we enjoyed the music and dancing. The staff was very helpful and made our trip fun,
The tour was enjoyable. Even the fog was fun to view.
I highly recommend this trip. If we have company, we will not hesitate to take it again.
The food and views were AMAZING! My only complaint was the live music. I'd recommend this trip to anyone, just make sure it's a clear day when you go, we didn't, and the boat was too rocky to enjoy dancing.
This was a fun night!! The food was delicious, the views were great and the music was enjoyable.
Good Trip, although we couldnt go on the normal boat due to a corporate event. The Window Seat was ok however the Champagne was aweful. Leave the Champagne and get yourself a nice bottle of wine instead.
An overall nice experience. Good food and service. The music was pleasant aswell. Only disappointment I had was that I paid extra for a window seat and a bottle of Chandon. I guess when you order the package through viator you get a knock off bottle of champagne instead. Wish I would have known.
Jeffrey T C
The music was a bit tame, but otherwise it was a good experience
A very enjoyable evening. Great food, cruise and dancing. I did noticed we were charged more than other couples - $98/person vs our $127/person. That was unexpected.
This was nice but it only toured the bay and the bay bridge not the golden gate. but it was still fun.
The cruise was lovely. Our seat by the aft window was ideal. The music was varied and easy to dance and listen to. The food was excellent and the service was attentive and helpful. It was a wonderful time on the water in San Francisco.
Very enjoyable evening, food excellent and the music was very good. More information on the parking arrangements would have been useful!
Very nice evening. well worth the cost and I would (and will) recommend it to friends.
My family and I had a absolutely perfect evening! Our waiter was so friendly and personable, and the food was delicious. The cruise and views that the captain let us see were incredibly gorgeous (the weather was crystal clear, so we were fortunate )
Thank you so much!
i enjoyed this cruise. My boyfriend and i celebrated our 1 year on this cruise. Food was excellent, the view was gorgeous, Travel time for was very long for the amount of money it cost. Band was sorta too loud though. Water was calm.
This was an excellent cruise, with great food and entertainment...the staff were also excellent. This trip is worth the money and has great views of San Francisco and the bay.
Enjoyable and relaxing. The weather was perfect and the overall arrangement was perfect to celebrate with my son's 30th Birthday with family. The service was Excellent. There were only two items I would have liked improved: The appetizer was bland, and the band was ordinary. All considering, I felt I received more than what I paid for. It was a memorable night for me and my family and would recommend this event to anyone.

Kalaignar Karunanidhi: Super Unknown Facts
By Ashwin [ August 07, 2018 ]
DMK party politician Kalaignar Doctor Karunanidhi is 95 years old now. He was born on 3rd June 1924 in Nagapattinam for Mr. Muthuvel and Mrs. Ammaiyar.
He was the third child for his parents after two elder brother namely Periyanayagam and Shanmugasundaram.
Many of us know that Karunanidhi is a huge fan for the game of cricket but it is unknown that he has played for his school Hockey team.
During his 8th standard schooling, in the year 1939, he narrated his first stage speech and the topic was about ‘Friendship’.
In 1941,he started to write his own monthly magazine named ‘Maanava Nesan’. Later he began a students welfare formation named as ‘Tamizh Maanava Mandram’.
At his young age, he followed a public friendly political party which fights for people’s justice.
He got attracted towards Politics by the part member named ‘Azhagirisamy’. Hence he named one of his sons as ‘Azhagiri’.

Review Rating: 0
This was a really good film. It had a good, and funny plot, and storyline. I thought that this was one of Billy Bob Thorton's best films, because he played a good role. He was funny, and he was kind of sneaky, and creative in this film, and Jon Heder was also played a good funny role in this film to. There were a lot of funny scenes in this film, and all of the funny parts in this film were actually funny. If I were you I would go see this film, and give it a grade of a B .
Don't just sit there, join the conversation! No need to register to comment, just let us know what you think. Have fun, but please keep it clean and stay on topic — inappropriate remarks will be removed.
Advertise on ReelzChannel

On October 11, 1991, people in more than 20 million homes tuned in to watch a young, black law professor named Anita Hill.
She testified before an all-white, all-male Senate Judiciary Committee. Hill said she endured repeated acts of sexual harassment while working for Supreme Court nominee Clarence Thomas 10 years earlier, at two government agencies.
The graphic allegations divided the country over race, gender and politics. The hearings sparked a national debate about sexual harassment.
The Senate confirmed Thomas 52 to 48, the narrowest margin in a century. Thomas denied the allegations, calling the hearings a "circus" and claiming it was a "high-tech lynching for uppity blacks who in any way deign to think for themselves."
Thomas has always maintained his innocence.
Hill returned to her job, but life was never the same.
Hill is now part of a new documentary called "Anita," to be released in select theaters next Friday.
The documentary is a chance, Hill said on "CTM," to remind people of the issues raised 23 years ago.
"Because I teach on a university campus, I am aware that we have a whole generation of people who have left, who have been born since the hearing, gone into the workplace, graduated from college. Some people have gone into the military," she said. "And these issues continue. ...And now a new generation is facing them. And we need to come to terms with our past so that we can learn and move forward."
Looking to her past and her testimony, Hill said she remembers being surprised by all the press conferences and statements that were made about her outside the hearings. She said they were "so far from what I expected to happen."
"I expected to be able to give my testimony, for them to ask probing questions because I really wanted people to understand exactly what had happened. But I didn't think that all of the outside campaigning that was done against my testimony, by the people who were supposed to be determining what the truth was, was appropriate."
Hill continues to argue the hearings were "unfair." "The people who are the finders of fact, the triers of truth, were outside campaigning against me," she said. "It would be like having a judge on a judicial panel outside giving press conferences about one of the witnesses. You can't have a fair hearing."
The questions, too, were unfair, according to Hill. "They were ill-informed questions," she said. "They were drawing on myths and things that had not been proven, that no one had sworn to. Statements that I don't even know they are accurate statements. Sen. [Alan] Simpson said he had letters and faxes, but when asked to present them, he refused to present them. I don't even know if those things were, in fact, true."
Since testifying, Hill said she has seen changes. "The Civil Rights Law passed in 1991. For the first time women when they proved their claims were able to fully recover the damages, the losses they had suffered. That was monumental. But, you know, as important as the women running for Congress and the greater attention that we had with women going forward and filing complaints, were the public conversations and the private conversations that people had with their own family members, stories that they had never shared before. And our ability to talk about the issue as a society has moved because of those conversations."
Hill said her life has changed in "so many ways" since she testified. "Because of the attention it brought, because of the thousands of letters that I have from people around, talking about what the experiences meant to them in their workplaces. ... Since 1991, we've come to terms with the fact that, yes, sexual harassment is wrong and it does matter and it exists, it's prevalent, but we still haven't figured out exactly what to do about it. And so, in addition to my career as a professor and as educator and as a lawyer, I've been able to go out and try to help people understand how we can move forward and what we do need to do about it."
for more features.

Bo Jiu was good at self-affirmation. She looked up at the handsome and elegant face while thinking about the best time to drug him.
Hence, when Qin Mo turned around, he saw the lady looking at him with an evil gaze. She seemed to have something up her sleeve.
He reached his hand out and lifted her chin. "Even if you kidnapped me, you should be more obedient. Do you understand?"
"Oh," Bo Jiu replied insincerely.
Qin Mo's gaze turned dark. He placed his thumb on her lips and started rubbing it. "Are you being perfunctory towards me?"
"No." Bo Jiu sat up straight and smiled at him. Her eyes were clear, just like water; ripples could be seen in them.
Qin Mo's gaze became darker. There were only a few centimeters between them. If he lowered his head, he would be able to kiss her. By now, Qin Mo knew that this fellow was doing things on purpose. He released her chin and pressed down her restless hands. "You're getting bold."
Bo Jiu smiled happily. "I'm just checking your injury."
"I remember that my injury is on my arm. Where are you touching?" Qin Mo's voice was indifferent. It made people afraid to touch him.
Bo Jiu unwillingly put her hand down. Nowadays, it was hard to be a ruffian. As soon as she stood up, someone grabbed her wrist.
Qin Mo frowned. "Are you planning to leave after taking advantage of me?"
"What else..." Bo Jiu only managed to say two words before she was pulled back by a strong force.
The voice beside her ears was calm. "There's no such thing."
Bo Jiu replied without any hesitation, "Brother Mo can take advantage of me too."
Their breaths intertwined. Qin Mo appeared to be smiling. He held the back of Bo Jiu's head and bent down to kiss her.
The fresh smell of mint slowly seeped into her mouth. As time went by, Bo Jiu felt her body going soft. She grabbed his clothes tightly. Her mind was blank.
Qin Mo was in no better state. When he first kissed her, he was still thinking about her childhood friend. He wanted her to forget the unnecessary people. But as he hugged the soft and warm person, he only wanted to continue kissing her. He knew that the time and venue weren't right. However, he couldn't control his passion.
Finally, when Bo Jiu lost her breath, Qin Mo pulled her away. He looked into her misty eyes while panting.
Bo Jiu was still in a daze. She noticed that Qin Mo regained his composure really quickly. Once again, she felt that the beauty trap would only work temporarily on the Almighty. She couldn't successfully take him down with it.
"Do you like it so much?" She could sense the happiness in the Almighty's voice.
Bo Jiu nodded. "It's sweet." When she said this, she remembered to hug Qin Mo's waist. She didn't care whether or not the Almighty liked it when she was so clingy. They had already kissed anyway.
Unexpectedly, there was no resistance on his face. He just allowed her to fool around. The cold aura around him was gone. He wasn't angry now, right? She could try to drug him tonight.
The atmosphere was so good Bo Jiu decided to remain here for a while.
Qin Mo doted Bo Jiu too much. They were investigating the case but he allowed her to lean on his shoulder. Her head started moving down slowly and soon, Bo Jiu fell asleep.
He removed his gaze from the screen and pushed her head up.
When the old butler walked in, this was the scene he saw. He smiled politely while holding the tray full of snacks. "Young Lord must be disturbing you. I'll wake her up and ask her to sleep in her room."
"No need." Unconsciously, he used a gentle tone. "This fellow's head isn't very heavy."
The old butler smiled and kept quiet. He put down the exquisite teapot and teacups before walking out of the room. After careful thought, he felt that his young lord did the right thing in kidnapping Young Master Qin.
The sky outside turned dark slowly.
Bo Jiu wasn't able to sleep for long in this position. When she opened her eyes, she saw the beautiful jawline. It reminded her of her childhood. During that time, he had always carried her away from dance parties. He had been shorter than her but he had already been very strong. Every time, he had forced her to leave early. Grandfather An had sometimes joked that his grandson was willing to ignore all etiquettes for her. Bo Jiu felt her heart melting when she thought of this.
At this moment, Qin Mo lowered his head. "Are you awake, my rich father?"
"Brother Mo, this nickname..." Bo Jiu wasn't used to it yet.
Qin Mo's tone remained normal. "What's wrong? Didn't you keep calling yourself that?"
"That's right. However, your tone is wrong. The feeling is not right." Bo Jiu placed her chin on his uninjured hand as she teased him.
Qin Mo rested for a while and looked at her. Then, he looked at the teacups.
Bo Jiu was smart. She took the teacup and placed it beside Qin Mo's lips. She was enthusiastic about feeding the Almighty.
"I'm asking you to drink some tea. Aren't you thirsty after sleeping for so long?" Qin Mo couldn't help but kiss her. "Why are you so stupid?"
Bo Jiu paused for a moment. She was very obedient this time. She finished the tea and decided to get the drug since the atmosphere was so good.
"Where are you going?" Qin Mo looked up.
Bo Jiu started displaying her acting skills. "There's not many clothes for Brother Mo to wear in this castle. I'm going out to get some casual clothes for you. They are easier to take off."
"Easier to take off?" Qin Mo repeated her words casually. "What are you planning to do?"
Bo Jiu was already feeling guilty so when Qin Mo asked her, she felt even more guilty. Fortunately, she had a strong mentality so she replied, "Nothing. I just hope that you'll have an easier time when you bath."
"Really?" Qin Mo's gaze was indifferent. "You're going to buy clothes in the middle of the night?"
Bo Jiu smiled. "Fifth Avenue is very lively now."
She went down after finishing this sentence.
Qin Mo glanced at the photo she was holding while she slept just now. He frowned and looked away. If he didn't look at it, he wouldn't feel irritated. He turned on his receiver and the people on the other side started speaking.
"Young Master, Madam asked how long you need to meet the parents." When the shadow guards asked this question, they looked up at the night sky. They wondered when their young master would end his trip so that he would stop torturing singles like them.
Qin Mo was unconcerned. "I'm not sure. The feeling now is not bad."
"What feeling?" The shadow guards didn't understand.
Qin Mo clicked on a photo before replying slowly, "The feeling of being chased by someone."
The shadow guards: ... Can we hang up?!
"Protect my mother. I won't need you for the time being." Qin Mo turned off his receiver and listened to the sound of a car engine outside. His gaze was deep.
Bo Jiu sat in the car and held the steering wheel with her hands. She spoke in an evil tone, "Come, Little Blackie. Let's have a heart to heart talk."
"Master, are you asking me which drug is the best? I've already finished my research. There's a drugstore not far away from here. The drug is said to be able to raise a person's body temperature. You can try it." The lines on the navigation system moved.
Bo Jiu replied as she drove, "I'm not talking about the drug. I feel that Brother Mo might try to drive you soon. If he said the correct password, you'll let him drive."
"Master, you don't need to test me. Even if your little vixen is very handsome, I won't waver."
The navigation system's smart reply stunned Bo Jiu. "Is it so hard to trust me?"
"Yes. You're just probing me. Everything is a trap." The lines continued jumping.
Bo Jiu raised her eyebrows. "I'm so sad. You can wash yourself tomorrow."
Little Blackie: ... When had you ever seen a car washing itself? I'm intelligent but I don't know how to bath. Why is my master always bullying me?
"Fine, stop acting like an arrogant brat. Let's talk about serious things." Bo Jiu steered her car. "Where's the shop?"
Little Blackie: ... Was this a serious matter to you?
They drove for quite a long distance. To make it look more natural, she bought a set meal at Burger King. The Almighty had eaten too little today anyway.
Bo Jiu's attire was suitable for this season. She wore a black leather jacket which made her legs look especially long. She had a black mask on her face. Some passersby whistled when they saw her.
As for the shop Little Blackie mentioned, the decoration style was... hard to explain in a few words. Bo Jiu had never come to such shops before. She entered the shop like a ruffian.
The owner was a black man. "Hey, try this. It's not bad."
Bo Jiu looked at the whip the owner recommended. Her tone became righteous. "I just want to buy a drug."
The black man's eyes lit up. He opened his drawer immediately. "Which wild cat are you trying to tame? I have everything here."
"The kind that has no side effects and won't affect people who have drug resistance. These are the only two requirements I have. I don't need those that are really strong." Bo Jiu's voice was a little low.
The owner understood her intention. He smiled and replied, "Asians like you are too shy. Here, take this. It fulfills your requirements."
Bo Jiu took the drug and thanked the owner. Then, she appeared to remember something. She bent forward and whispered, "I heard that this area isn't peaceful recently. I just moved into the building opposite and heard that someone died there. Is it safe?"
"Officer, if you do this, it isn't interesting anymore." The owner waved his finger with a bored expression.
Bo Jiu raised her eyebrow. "Officer? Brother, I think you misunderstood me."
"Misunderstood? Did you see the police car outside? You keep questioning me every day just because the person visited my shop before she died." The owner packed his things while looking at Bo Jiu with a 'do you think I'm stupid' look.
This was one of the reasons why Bo Jiu visited the shop. She got exposed but she wasn't flustered. "Brother, I really came here to buy this drug. I'm just worried about my safety since I'm Chinese."
The owner believed this sentence. He turned back. "Are you really not a police officer?"
"Do I look like one?" Bo Jiu sighed. "I really like someone but I feel that there's something lacking between us. I want to buy this drug to liven the atmosphere."
The owner was an expert in this area. He started chatting happily with Bo Jiu. For instance, he told her what the ladies in America liked.
He sized up Bo Jiu and said, "Asians like you are really popular nowadays. They like to call you little cuties. But that depends on the kind of lady you like. What style is she?"
"Domineering, cold, and a little arrogant." Bo Jiu was depressed. "She gets angry easily. When she looks at someone, the person will freeze."
The owner frowned. "Like a queen?"
"Yes, really like a queen." Bo Jiu kept looking at the police car outside while she talked. She seemed worried.
By now, the owner believed that this youngster was really worried about his safety. When Bo Jiu took out his money, he reminded her, "Don't go home too late."
Bo Jiu knew that the owner must have seen something. She tried to probe him.
The owner chuckled and said, "Don't worry. You didn't snatch anyone's boyfriend."
"Snatch someone's boyfriend? What do you mean?" Bo Jiu's instinct told him that this was an important clue.
The owner looked around him before saying, "I don't know about the other people but two of them liked the same man. The man brought them individually to my shop before. One of the ladies received a threatening call from the other lady while she was here. I didn't expect both of them to die."
They had liked the same person?
Bo Jiu looked down. Her gaze turned sharp as she tried to organize her thoughts. She concluded that she needed to investigate the man. There was no other better way. It seemed like some problems still required the Almighty's analyzing skill.
The police would get this news within one day. If they took the man away, she wouldn't be able to question him. From her angle, this man was extremely suspicious. But if the truth was like this, it would be too simple. How would she explain the long chains of numbers in their chat records?
Bo Jiu recalled something. She found a photo and asked, "One more thing. Do all American ladies like to do this? She sent it to me but I don't understand what she's trying to say. She keeps sending me numbers. I don't want her to feel that I'm old-fashioned so I kept asking around for answers."
The owner was confused when he looked at the photo. "Boy, what the hell is this? I don't know the new games foreign students play. Maybe you can ask your friends at school. They might tell you out of pity."
"I guess that's the only way." Bo Jiu appeared disappointed. She walked out of the shop and pulled her car door open. She saw two police officers in plain clothes walking in.
She didn't stay any further. This was the only useful information she could get. If she had asked more, the owner would have gotten suspicious. It was better to stop when necessary. That way, she could ensure that her information was accurate.
Bo Jiu placed her hand on her chin as she pondered. The expensive car and her leather jacket made her look like a dark-styled male lead; cold but cool.
On the streets, the American ladies whistled at Bo Jiu when they drove past. "Hey, are you interested in hanging out together?"

How racist is it in Australia? A perspective from people who have moved there would be useful...(229 Posts)
I spent 6 weeks in Australia ten years ago, with my then DP who is mixed race. We experienced quite a few racism incidents.
A couple of guys in a bar in Sydney cornered me when DP went to the loo and asked me why i was dating a "coffee boy".
Then our diving instructor joked that i was with DP "because black men have big di*ks".
Then when filling in a form for a hotel, DP was asked his profession was and put Dr (he was a junior Dr at the time) and was then told not to lie! When DP protested his innocence the guy replied, "not many black guys make Drs".
"It is a bit absurd to think racism only exists if people openly admit to racist motives behind their actions."
Well, yes, that would be absurd, Flatbread. That's why that isn't the point that I was making. What I was trying to say, not clearly enough it appears, was that it wasn't at all clear to me that there was any racial motivation behind exoticfruits being waved through the line at the airport. The reasoning seemed to be that "the customs people were nice to me. I am white. Therefore they must be racists, because Australia is a racist country and the customs people are Australian."
This was a bit of an eye-opener for me, because as I said, I am part of a mixed-race family. We have traveled back and forth between the UK and OZ many times in the last decade, and never have the customs people been less than courteous and professional. The assumption of racism seemed a bit rough on what was quite possibly a decent person trying to do his or her job and go home.
And no, exoticfruits, I am sorry but I have no idea why you were waved through when other passengers weren't. You said you are young and able-bodied (without young accompanying children?) so it wasn't age or infirmity that drove the gesture of kindness. I wasn't there and I have never worked in that area so don't know how they make decisions. I'm not saying there definitely wasn't any racism there, just that on the facts given it's a bit of a leap unless you are assuming that they were racist purely because they were Australian.
Hell, maybe he saw you coming along after he thought he'd sorted the last of the queue, thought "bugger this, I'm already going to miss the first half of the footy, I'm off home" and waved you through because of that. I have no idea what was going through his or her head. But neither does anyone else.
Join the discussion
Registering is free, easy, and means you can join in the discussion, watch threads, get discounts, win prizes and lots more.Register now »
Already registered? Log in with:
Please login first.

Add this post to your list of favorites!
“Hell is other people.” –Jean Paul Sartre, No Exit
Things had gone terribly wrong. I wasn’t one to ever really be concerned with history—I had failed it three times in college—but even I knew things had gone terribly wrong. If anyone survived any of this, it would be up to them to decide what the cause was, record it in the annals of history, and try to avoid the mistakes of the past, but that wasn’t my job. My job was to survive, and it didn’t matter whether I blamed the sun for entering some strange new cycle and turning most of the world into barely livable desert, blamed the government for embroiling all of us in so many conflicts that there weren’t allies and enemies as much as it was a coliseum free-for-all, or blamed science for creating so many biological weapons that were used with no regard for the outcomes. It just didn’t matter, because most of the humans that could be blamed were dead, and there was no use blaming the dead. I considered blaming God, but I wasn’t sure if he existed any more. If he did, then this must be the apocalypse and I was fairly certain there was no way I was ever going to meet him. If he didn’t, then I would just be blaming the dead yet again, and it’s no use blaming someone who can’t ever atone for their crimes.
Things had gone terribly wrong, but I was alive, and for today, that was enough. When it wasn’t any more, ammo was easy to find, and I already had all the guns I needed to fix that scenario. Until then, we got by. You see, I had been camping with a few others, mostly just to see another human face when I woke up in the morning. There was me, Wolf, the Rev, and Chickadee. I know those weren’t their real names, but it didn’t really matter anymore what names were, since there usually weren’t enough people to share it with anyways. Besides, keeping nicknames made it a lot easier to pull a corpse from a tent and chuck it into a deep hole without burying yourself down there with it each time. There had been more of us at one time, but for a lot of those folks, being alive just wasn’t enough anymore. They all found an out some way, be it through guns or just disappearing one night into the wasteland, they got out when they needed. The four of us got along pretty well, but we didn’t get along much. The camp was pretty quiet most of the time, unless one of them things wandered close, but they didn’t really bother us often.
They were nasty looking creatures though. I had always wondered if those zombie theories were true, and in the end, they weren’t. Something else did take over once we humans moved on, but our corpses hadn’t passed Darwin’s survival test, so they didn’t come back as shambling and stupider versions of ourselves. I’m not sure where the things came from, but they were there and they were dangerous. They could rip a person apart in just a matter of minutes, and those bodies definitely never got back up. Maybe they were the next step of evolution. All I knew is that they were ugly to look at, and overall pretty bright creatures despite their appearance. They walked and looked like humans, but their limbs were a little longer, with sharper claws and teeth like our animal counterparts. Their skin was solid black, which probably helped out with them living in a newly desert world. It looked cracked, charred almost, but I never really got close enough to tell you much. For the most part, they were solitary, but you could hear them talking at night, hissing and spitting in some language I didn’t try to understand. It gave me chills to hear it, and so I hated the days I got stuck with night watch, knowing they were talking about us just beyond the firelight. Made it so my nightmares became the only kind of dreams I knew.
But, like I said, they mostly left us alone for a long time. Left us to try and build some sort of community with the four of us, but none of us were very good at that. Our trained isolation is probably what saved us in the beginning, and maybe it is what will doom all of us in the end. I told you I don’t know history, and I certainly don’t know the future.
Chickadee was a smart woman, nice to look at. Before the end of the world, I probably wouldn’t even have noticed her, but in this desert sand, her blond hair and blue eyes turned her into a goddess of limitless beauty. We slept together a few times, but it was mostly going through the motions and neither of us really seemed driven to make it a normal occurrence. It was nice to have some comfort when the booze wasn’t enough, but something about the new emptiness and the constant sense of doom made even sex bland and undesirable. She was smart, and we talked a bit. Mostly she talked and I nodded. The sound of her voice was a pleasant break from the silence otherwise. I had always lived in the country, but this quiet was a different kind. It was absolute. For me, it was an adjustment, but for her, a born and bred city-dweller, it was almost unbearable. She talked about that a lot. Not too sure about who she was before everything, but she was with us after it all went to hell, and we looked out for her. Her sister had been one of the first to take their out, and I was sure for a while Chickadee would follow along, but she stuck it out, seemingly growing more resolved to fight through day by day. I never saw her breakdown, though I heard her some nights crying softly in her tent. I think she was probably the strongest one of all of us.
Wolf was a different story altogether. I assumed I wouldn’t like him when we first met, and I was right. Alcohol was all of our friend, but Wolf was involved in a tempestuous affair with it. I’m not sure I ever knew him fully sober, especially not after we had to leave the city and start our lives out in this wasteland. He was impulsive and loud, two traits which should have gotten him killed, but at this point I was certain nature just wanted to keep the least desirable parts of our species alive to ensure it died out quickly. At the same time, he was very protective of all of us. I think he took it personally when someone escorted themselves out of this world; he definitely took it harder than the rest of us. You could measure his grief by the empty bottles by his tent each night. He talked a lot, said very little, but if anyone really wanted a community from our ragtag band, it was him. He wasn’t made for this world, but he was alive, and that was enough each day.
The Rev was a thin, quiet man who assured all of us that this was God’s judgment on us all. When you asked, he would discuss his past sins and how this was his chance for penance, to bring souls back to the Lord. We didn’t do too much listening to him, but that didn’t stop him from proselytizing. The Rev always wanted my soul. He was a killjoy, arguing against our alcohol and celebrations. There wasn’t much to celebrate, but every time we tried, he reminded us that we were punished sinners. He didn’t like when I told him his God was probably dead, too busy decaying to worry about the pitiful lives of us forgotten sinners. He pointed to the wasteland around us as evidence something divine was present and cleaning up the mess of the world. That certainly wasn’t a God I wanted anything to do with, but the Rev clung to him, even going so far as to leave camp every week or so for solitary prayer, proclaiming his Lord’s protection over him. I guess it worked for him, but I didn’t trust the Rev. Not a bit. He was always a secretive sort, and he was adamant that his precious holy water, kept in a flask at his side, could not be used by anyone. We all nearly died of dehydration before we got camp set up, and the Rev refused to part with a drop. For a while I thought we all might kill him just to get that little bit of water, but fortunately we found a well before it came to that. It all makes a little more sense now.
So that was what was left of our group of survivors. There had never been many of us, maybe ten at the most at any time, but now being down to just four, it sure felt lonely. Loneliness is the new human condition, I suppose, and maybe that’s for the best seeing as how we messed everything up in the end. The days and nights of our lives were pretty much monotonous motion from one posture to the next, nothing significant to mark the change in day besides a new division of watches. It seemed foolish having the watches in some sense, cause those things out in the desert really seemed to leave us alone for some reason, but fears of what could happen kept us alert. No one wanted to be responsible for a shredded pile of what used to be a friend.
There was one time they got really close, and I was sure it was over. It had been a week or two since we set up camp—I can’t remember how long exactly since there was no real way to identify one day from another. We always heard them sniffing and prowling around the camp at night, but this time it was broad daylight and they were circling. There were three of them, looking dry and hungry. All those whispers and hisses started up again, though I couldn’t tell if their mouths were moving to be honest. For some reason, I had the distinct feeling they were not. They looked like humans, but now they were almost crawling, loping around on their hands and feet as they circled the camp. They were pockets of midnight on the brilliant plains, pitch black from head to foot, eyes included. We were all alert, watching, waiting. The Rev was praying. We waited, feeling our hearts begin to sink as they began to tighten their circle, moving in on us, the cornered prey. Wolf and I pulled out the supply of guns we were hoarding and began loading up, resolved to at least go down fighting. We never got our chance, though, because the Rev had abruptly stopped his mumbling recitation to walk towards those nasty things. They stopped, looking at him, expectant in a way. I knew they were going to lunge, rip his throat out before a bullet could reach them, but instead they waited.
“Be gone!” cried the Rev, his words flying back to us on a stiff breeze, bringing with it a rotten smell from those things. “This camp is under the protection of my Lord, and none shall oppose him any longer!”
I thought for sure the Rev had found another out, walking straight out to those damned things. But instead those creatures stood and walked away with just a few lingering hisses in the wind. They didn’t go far, but they went far enough away that we couldn’t smell them any longer and they had turned into tiny black specks on the perimeter of our camp. I have to admit, I began to think I should start listening to the Rev a little bit more.
Chickadee felt the same way, only she was a lot more trusting of the Rev than I was. That night, she spent the whole evening talking to him about his faith, his God, his Lord. The more I heard it, the less I thought his miracle was in fact miraculous and more it seemed just lucky. It was the most ridiculous information I had heard, about how his God decided to start anew on this world, replace those who had defied him with creatures of his own design. How he, the Rev, was a prophet to bring humanity into the fold once again, allow it to thrive in this new existence under the comfort of the Lord. How his past improprieties and disloyalties had been burned away in redemptive fire, just as the world had been scrubbed clean by the desiccating rays of our new sun. How he would save us all.
Chickadee fell for it instantly. She had never mistrusted him, and I felt betrayed to see this woman cast aside my arguments. I had always thought she was the strongest, and what if she was right? I didn’t feel too sure in my own mind to hear the way she talked. I thought I was missing out big on what could be the only redemption from this hell. But at the same time, I couldn’t buy it, not from him. There was some sneaky, glassy look in the Rev’s eyes that held me back, kept me from buying in. Some form of snake oil was being sold, and I didn’t want to be swindled out of the only thing I had left, a soul all my own, with no claim from God or man.
Chickadee wanted to be one of the redeemed, and so Wolf and I figured the rev would be forced to part with some of his precious holy water to consecrate her, but apparently that wasn’t the case. This holy rite was some secretive ordeal, meaning the Rev and Chickadee would have to step out just beyond the visual perimeter of our camp, some place where they would not be seen by our unbelieving eyes, in order to perform this rite. Wolf and I argued with them, but there was something about Chickadee which made her hard to refuse. She was dead set on it.
We let them go on the condition Chickadee took a weapon in case any of those things got to close. Wolf and I watched them walk away, Chickadee with all the decorum of a new convert, her eyes watery with tears and smiling for the first time in a while. Maybe this religion stuff wasn’t all bad, I thought.
All that came back was the Rev, one of those things shot dead by Chickadee’s gun, and some bloodied hair and clothes that were the only salvageable remains. The Rev told us they had snuck up on them, tightened the noose until one grabbed her. He got the gun, he said, and was able to take a shot. The others fled after one of them fell. We never heard the gunshot, so they must have been out a lot farther than the Rev initially said.
Religion must be all bad. Things had gone terribly wrong, again, and this time it was the Rev’s fault.
I could have been angry with the Rev, but he looked about as broken hearted and terrified as any person could. I was numb. Wolf added another collection of bottles outside his tent. I missed the soft sobs from her tent at night. It made it too quiet again. Our Chickadee was gone, and now the country silence turned unbearable for me.
Our little community tore apart a little more. Now we were nothing but a group of three who happened to share the same space. It seemed like watch shifts began to be the entirety of my existence. If I wasn’t being haunted on the perimeter by my own mind, I was sleeping and living through some new daily nightmare. Talk by the fire grew quiet, and more and more I began to feel like a ghost pacing the same forgotten route day after day, searching for that light to enter.
I wasn’t surprised when a shot shattered my watch one night. It came from the tents, which was no shock. The silence and isolation had become suffocating, and I had begun to wonder if it was enough to just be alive anymore. It seems someone must have agreed with me. I was shocked to return to camp and find Wolf’s tent spattered with blood and viscera. The mostly empty bottles on the floor were not surprising, and probably helped explain what had happened. Alcohol can provide some healing, but it eventually burns you out from the inside, leaving nothing there to stand against its will. I guess either Wolf or the booze needed his out.
Now it was the Rev and I. I was ready to pack up and leave, take my chances in the field, but the Rev was adamant that we should not split. He kept saying he couldn’t let me leave without protecting my soul from the horrors out there. Horrors was a pretty good word for those things, but I still wasn’t ready to trade in my soul for his peace of mind. And so he followed me as I packed up and set out to find something better than a ghost town in this desolate world.
After a week or so of travel, the Rev started to look bad. His skin looked dry and red, burned deeply by the sun. His eyes were sunken, his hair beginning to dry and fall out. He looked sickly and frail, and I was certain it would only be a matter of days before I was alone in this world again. Just being alive wasn’t enough for me anymore, but I couldn’t leave him alone.
His proselytizing grew more and more passionate as his body grew weaker and weaker. Even when his throat was dry and his voice cracking in the desert heat until blood tinged his lips he continued to preach his gospel, promising freedom through purifying fire, just as our world had been so purified by the blazing sun. I began to feel guilty holding out on him. While I didn’t believe, there was also the thought that it was unnecessarily cruel of me to refuse a dying man’s wish. Besides, if I didn’t believe in God, no rite the Rev could perform would convince me otherwise. Maybe it would hurry him along into death, finally being at peace with his life’s work, and leave me to my own way out.
When I agreed, I saw light flicker back into his eyes, and it left me unsettled. The smile and gleam in his eyes seemed hungry and crazy, almost animalistic in its wild fury. I wanted to back out, but I reminded myself that he was dying fast, and it wouldn’t hurt me to give in to one silly fantasy. He had me kneel out in the sand and put his feeble hands on my shoulders. He said a lot of words, words that I thought would have been Latin, but sounded more like those hisses and whispers the Horrors used to call across the desert. Suddenly stronger than I thought, he pulled me to my feet until we were eye to eye, facing one another just a step apart.
His eyes were mesmerizing to me, because as he spoke, they seemed to open up. He had always had dark eyes, and now they seemed to be pits spiraling into his skull and beyond. At the bottom of his impossibly deep eyes, I began to notice flames simmering down there, steadily roaring to life. As they grew closer, I began to feel the heat on my shoulders were his hands dug into my body. I began to feel flames licking along my body, ripping away whatever human was left of me, “purifying me” as the Rev had promised, into one of those things, those Horrors. As I watched his face, unable to change my gaze, only able to scream into the nothingness of wilderness, I saw his skin begin to rejuvenate, flesh turning young and soft again. He began to look as I remembered him from the first few weeks of our journey.
I didn’t know what was happening at first, I only knew that the burning in my body pushed me to the brink of consciousness with its pain before it began to fade away. I felt detached from my body, just a floating soul left without a home. I could see myself, a charred husk shaped into one of the Horrors by some dark design I did not begin to understand, and I could see the Rev as a smiling creature who was nothing more than a demon in human clothing. I had been taken in and the wolf had raided the hen house.
I got it now. I knew who his Lord was, and I knew that he certainly was god of this God-forsaken world.
Now free of my body, I began to wonder what came next. Where would that bright light be? Would I find heaven waiting after trudging along this hell? Just as my freedom began to sink in as an uplifting reality, I heard the whisper-hiss of the Rev speaking something terrible. I could feel it as terrible even if I couldn’t understand the words. I saw him open that flask of what we had assumed was holy water, watched him lift it to the lips of my hollowed body and let that thing drink. And then I felt something dragging me back down, ripping me from my escape and caging me. As some new spirit flowed from the flask into the creature, my own being filled the flask. I got to keep the one thing I had left, but only because that was the only thing left of me. Just a collection of thoughts and feelings without anything to tether me, I was a caged soul, still my own, but unable to do a thing about it. Unknowingly, I had traded my soul—and along with it everything I am—to the Devil.
It’s a daily living hell. I don’t get my out anymore. I’m alive for today, and tomorrow I will be as well, cause I don’t have my bullet savior. I’m not what I was, I have nothing left but my own thoughts, and most days that isn’t enough. It isn’t enough to be alive and thinking when I see the terrible things done with what was my body. It’s eternal reflection on the Horrors and all that I have done. It’s a private hell made up by my own self-loathing. Now it’s just a matter of waiting until this prison rips away whatever humanity I have left and the Rev pours me out to fill up one of those Horrors.
Guess those things get us all in the end. Sure not how I pictured going out, but things have gone terribly wrong, so why should this be any different?
Credit To – Katherine C.

I was in Icelandic class and we were talking about what we did over the weekend. I realized that I completely forgot to mention this to you guys. On Saturday, I went to the movie theater at the Krlnglan, the mall close to my house, for a screening of two Lazytown episodes. We saw “Little Sportacus” and “Trash Trouble.”
The show holds up really well on the big screen, which it should considering that we shoot in high-def. (No, I’m not going to go into a discussion about what the shows was like, because the episode is just like the one on TV, except bigger.) Everyone invited guests so the audience was packed with kids. I managed to get through most of my conversations in Icelandic. It helped that everyone was asking exactly the same questions. “What have you been up to?” and variations on the them. It turns out that my Icelandic teacher was there with his family. One of the editors is a good friend of his.
We didn’t discover this until we were back in class. Of course, my teacher then went on to explain that I couldn’t use “aÃ° ganga” to say that I went to the theater, because it is specifically reserved for walking even though I had walked to the theater. So, even though “aÃ° ganga” and “aÃ° fara” both mean “to go,” I have to use “aÃ° fara.”

Jesus: Our Compassionate Savior November 17, 2019 Play VideoPlay Video Play AudioPlay Audio Download AudioDownload MP3 Mark 6:30-34 30 And the apostles gathered themselves together unto Jesus, and told him all things, both what they had done, and what they had taught. 31 And he said unto them, Come ye yourselves apart into a desert place, and rest a while: for there were many coming and going, and they had no leisure so much as to eat. 32 And they departed into a desert place by ship privately. 33 And the people saw them departing, and many knew him, and ran afoot thither out of all cities, and outwent them, and came together unto him. 34 And Jesus, when he came out, saw much people, and was moved with compassion toward them, because they were as sheep not having a shepherd: and he began to teach them many things.

We got home rather late because we needed to take Maia to her place to drop off her stuff and then drop her and Danielle off at the hospital to see Lia. Mom was really tired, but she went up the stairs all right, a little slower than usual, but she did great on them. She sometimes forgets that our rooms are upstairs so I have to remind her and then she is like, oh, okay, let's go then. I expected a bit of a rough time for her because we were out so late and the car ride was longer than normal, but she did fine. I got her up, changed, and in bed in no time. Now for me, well, I was really sore last night after I put her to bed for some reason, I mean sorer than usual. My hips and lower back were just screaming with pain. Finally, about 2 hours or so later, I fell asleep. I woke up at the usual time though, so that was a nice surprise and i am not really extra tired right now like I would have thought.
We have a quiet week with a few lessons that I am looking forward too. I also want to go to Joann's to get a nice fall table cloth. I love the spring one we have had one since March, but now it is fall and I need one to reflect the season. Mom loves picking them out with me. I couldn't decide between two of them for spring, so she made the final decision. She made a good choice.
This weekend I was honored to receive an award for my blog by a fellow blogger named Missy Schantz. She is a fibro girl like so many of us. I was very happy and thrilled to know that she likes reading my blog. A writer likes knowing that she is read and liked or at least I do!!! Anyways, she gave me the cutest award picture that I have absolutely no idea how to post on my blog so I am going to try to post the award in this post. Here is my try:
It worked!!! Yeah! I will try to post it on my blog and we shall see if it works. Isn't this a really cute picture of an award?? I thank Missy for it. Her blog is also very interesting. If you get a chance, go under my followers and find Missy and then click on it and then you will get to a page where you can read her blog.
I hope everyone is having a great day like we are.

Actor Nicolas Cage will never forget one Christmas gift he received as a child, because it stimulated his imagination for the rest of the following year. Cage's father bought the young star a Pinocchio toy from Italy and the actor played with it so much, the boy puppet's head fell off. Cage recalls, "It was a little toy car being driven by Pinnochio. For whatever the reason Pinocchio's head fell off because I played with it a little too roughly and my father picked up the head and he went into the garden and he planted it. "The next morning was an enormous thing that had grown in the garden and I ripped it open and it was a giant wooden Pinocchio. "I was scratching my head trying to figure out how that grew. Then I started planting everything. I planted all my hot wheels. I had a little G.I. Joe slipper and I thought if I planted that it would grow really big and I could put my sleeping bag in it. "My father really got me thinking in an imaginative way at a young age. Hands down, that was the best Christmas present I ever got because it was a tool to stimulate my imagination."

Long story short. Ross Grandpa Tupper passed away in North Dakota a couple of weeks ago. He was 95 years old, led a great life, and was honored by his family. Ross made the trip up north to pay his respects but the boys and I stayed home. This fat, swollen mama wasn't prepared mentally or physically to do a whirlwind adventure in 48 hours. And flying the four of us, renting a car, traveling in that car for hours and hours....it just wasn't going to work. I wanted to be there for Ross and felt terrible for staying home, but I guess those are some of the sacrifices you have to make.
Anyway, Ross' brothers whole family went to the funeral and his parents brought my nephew Isaac home with them. They are on their way back to Arizona to drip him off with his family as I write this, but we've had some grand adventures while Isaac was here. He's only a little squirt, 3.5 years old, and was with Grandma and Grandpa for almost 12 days. That's a long time and we did our best to fill that time with fun.
The three musketeers ran through the sprinklers and chased soccer balls. Grandma Connie and I took them to the zoo where we saw the amazing polar bear in action and chowed down on churros and diet cokes and stood in front of the misting fans until our faces were sparkly with water.. The boys ate lots of kids meals, built lots of trains, and ran around like wild men.
Isaac came to t-ball and Uncle Ross tried to teach him (albeit unsuccessfully) to swing a bat and hit a pitch. He did okay hitting off the tee, but I'm not sure anyone has ever pitched a ball to him before. He did however do alright fielding and throwing. Why is it that boys all know how to throw?
But then, our adventures took a downturn. After a pretty traumatic attempt at getting Isaac home after a family dinner at our house, and a crazy rough night at Grandma and Grandpa's house, Isaac was taken to the emergency room in the morning and was told that he'd have to get his appendix taken out. A whirlwind of phone calls, the decision of his parents to stay in Arizona, and transport to another hospital later, that cute little boy had his appendix out, was discharged early from the hosptial and grandma and grandpa have been taking good care of him since, with a movie and some drawing at our house as part of his recuperation. Which has been pretty speedy and miraculous. He's lucky that Grandma and Grandpa caught it so early.
Isaac will be back to Utah in August an the boys cannot wait. They will both be in school and our summer will be "over" by the time he gets back, but we'll still have the evenings to play and be wild....which is just what little boys need to do with their cousins.

The New York Giants lost to the Cincinnati Bengals by the score of 31-13 on Sunday afternoon in Cincinnati. The Giants have not played that well in the last couple of weeks and it continued in this game. This was probably rock bottom as they didn’t play well in any facet of the game.
Eli Manning was 29-46 for 215 yards, no touchdowns and he threw two interceptions. Andre Brown led the Giants rushing attack with 65 yards on seven carries and a touchdown. Ahmad Bradshaw had 10 carries for 57 yards. Henry Hynoski the fullback had a carry for five yards, Manning and David Wilson each had one carry for one yard. Hakeem Nicks led the receivers with nine catches for 75 yards, Martellus Bennett had four carries for 37 yards, Brown had five catches for 29 yards and Victor Cruz had three catches for 26 yards. Ramses Barden had two catches for 22 yards, Bradshaw had three catches for 14 yards and Domenick Hixon had one catch for eight yards. Rueben Randle had two catches for four yards. Lawrence Tynes was 2-2 on field goals with his long being 31 yards and he made one extra point. Wilson had six kick returns for average of 17.8 yards. Steve Weatherford had four punts for an average of 53.3 average with a long of 68 yards.
Prince Amukamara led the defense with seven tackles and three assists. The Giants did not have a sack or an interception. Chase Blackburn did have a forced fumble.
Andy Dalton was 21-30 for 199 yards and four touchdowns. BenJarvus Green-Ellis had 15 rushes for 50 yards, Cedric Peerman had six rushes for 21 yards and Brian Leonard had four rushes for four yards. Mohamed Sanu had one carry for three yards. A.J. Green led the Bengals receivers with seven catches for 85 yards and one touchdown. Sanu had four catches for 47 yards and a touchdown and Andrew Hawkins had three catches for 16 yards and a touchdown. Orson Charles had a catch for 19 yards, Peerman had a catch for nine yards and Green-Ellis had two catches for eight yards. Mike Nugent was 1-1 on field goals and had four extra points. Brandon Tate had two kickoff returns for an average of 12 yards. Kevin Huber had four punts for an average of 48.3 yards.
The Bengals had two interceptions, Terence Newman had six tackles and one assist to lead the defense. Carlos Dunlap had 1.5 sacks and four tackles and an assist. Wallace Gilberry had a sack, Robert Geathers had a sack and Domata Peko had ½ a sack.
The Giants are now 6-4 and the Bengals are 4-5. The Giants remain in first place in the NFC East but now only a game ahead of the Dallas Cowboys. The Giants were behind 14-0 after five minutes of the game and never got it together. They were losing 17-6 at the half and it just got worse from there.
Game 152: Yankees (77-74) vs. Blue Jays (77-74)
40 minutes ago

Scripture reading for February 22nd: Mark 6:1-29, Psalms 39:1-13, Proverbs 10:10
“Then Jesus went around teaching from village to village. Calling the Twelve to Him, He sent them out two by two and gave them authority over evil spirits.” (Mark 6:6b-7)
Jesus had a plan to take the Gospel of the kingdom to the entire world. He was not in a hurry, but had only a limited time to set this plan in place. After preaching in His home town and seeing few results, He called the Twelve together and organized them into evangelism teams. He knew that two would be more effective than one in this work. Two people have power in prayer and can encourage one another. Two people provide some protection and friendship when hostility arises. (Ecclesiastes 4:9-12) This work that they would be engaged in was like warfare against the kingdom of Satan. Jesus gave them authority over these powers of darkness and had demonstrated how to cast them out.
Jesus sent them out two by two and told them to take nothing with them for provision except their staff. This staff represented some protection but also the authority that He had given them. They were to rely on finding people who would welcome them. If no one welcomed them, they were to shake the dust from their feet as a witness against that town. God would provide for them on their mission.(Mark 6:8-11)
“They went out and preached that people should repent. They drove out many demons and anointed many sick people with oil and healed them.”(Mark 6:12-13)
The message that these disciples took was a call to repentance. They did not tell people how much their lives would be improved by the kingdom. They did not list benefits and try to sell a product. They called for repentance, a change of mind and actions, from selfishness to humble confession and faith. As they went, they used the authority given them by Jesus to deliver those bound by evil spirits and heal sick people. The simply did what Jesus had taught them to do and God worked with them! Jesus now had multiplied ministry through these men. They would in turn raise up more who would follow Jesus and do the same things! This was Jesus’ amazing plan to reach the world and it is still working today! Have you joined His team?

MidSouth Pony Rally
Man what a week. We had our eyes to the sky, radar, and ear to the ground trying to dodge rain storms. Guess what, we did and the week was wonderful except the Friday night rain. But as I said it was in the evening/night time so things were pretty good. Officials had to change the courses a little but it was great riding and great riding. We really enjoyed only working 9 hours today and got some time to enjoy this weather ourselves. We are going to enjoy a few days off before we start back with our other events. See everyone soon!

A criminal I knew told me that many people in jail are highly intelligent. I could have asked him why they were in jail if they were so intelligent but I didn’t want to interfere with his delusional view of jailbirds.
Criminals are dopes, period. Two of the dumbest, Jason S. Hamielec, 29, and Brian A. Johnson, 28, both of Madison, WI, made their getaway and accidentally called 911, spending the next 54 minutes bragging, joking and discussing the details of what they stole, from where and even the kind of car they were in. The 911 operator listening in had no problem sending the police to their location to pick them up.
Read more: Daily Mail

George Dennehy is like all other musicians in the world. He loves music and wants to make people happy with talent. But one thing separates him for his guitar playing peers. He has no arms.
But that didn’t stop him from following his dreams, and he now plays guitar with his feet. And he’s pretty good too.
His performance of Iris by The Goo Goo Dolls at the Strawberry Faire last June has just gone viral now after being featured on Reddit.

Bharathi Veerath, 39, made headlines when she joined Uber as Bengaluru's first woman driver in two years ago. On 27 June, she was found hanging in her home where she lived alone. The police are treating her death as a case of suicide. No suicide letter was found.
The taxi, a Ford Fiesta, was found abandoned near her house.
According to a Huffington Post report, Bharathi worked as a tailor and then joined an NGO where she learnt how to drive. Later, she joined private taxi aggregator company Uber.
Her body was found by her landlord. She had moved to Bengaluru from Andhra Pradesh ten years ago, reports local media.
The landlord informed the police that she had planned to move back to Andhra sometime soon.
"It appears to be a case of suicide, as the victim's body was found hanging by a cloth-like rope from the ceiling of a room by her landlord on Monday night," police officer Prakash told news agency IANS.

Originally Posted by Brian LaFonte
But you still win, based on following the rules of the game. If i win the 100m by false starting, but still spank you, are you going to give me the win? It is not a technicallity - it is a RULE. Follow the rules of the game and you win, fair and square. Tough lesson to learn, but I bet she will never forget it.
If I was able to turn down the victory then yes I would do so. If I couldn't then I would say to anyone that asked "I didn't really win." or "I sure don't feel like the winner."
But that's just me.

I woke up from a dream this morning in which I fell in love and married the girl of my “dreams”. There were other events happening which made the whole thing a lot more confusing. There were giant robots that would come attack the small town I lived in and I was a member of the squad that fought against them.
The town I lived in was similar to Westside Santa Barbara and at one point I ran into an old friend walking down a set of stairs. He walked passed me and I recognized him by the way he wore his beanie, I yelled “Devious” and he turned around and saw me. Our conversation I can’t much remember, but he was a person I got high and ran the streets with in real life. He looked out for me and actually was a good friend. In the dream I let him borrow my car and he stole it, I never saw him again.
There were glimpses and sightings of people I ran the streets with throughout the entire dream, but I just passed them by. At one point I realized I was dreaming and walked up to the nearest person and told them I was dreaming, and their face blurred and vanished. I woke up, and fell right back asleep. It is strange when this happens, waking up in a dream but still seeing the images the brain has created for my dream state. Caught in some kind of limbo between a woken state and sleep.
In the dream town there was a corner that resembled Montecito Street and Castillo Street, with 711 and Chevron on opposite corners. Down the road was an area that very much resembled Pershing Park except the trees looked more like Evergreen trees and they were very tall. This is where the robots would land and our squad would deploy from a station across the street and fight them with machine guns and rocket launchers. There was a warning system when a robot was approaching, and the city would be alerted by sirens and megaphone announcements. Very much like the movie Pacific Rim, actually exactly like Pacific Rim.
I was walking to a coffee shop when the sirens sounded that a robot was approaching. I wanted to get the coffee before I made my way back to the station, and when I opened the door there she sat. The girl with the pink hair.
For many years I have been attracted and drawn to any girl who resembles Liv Tyler or Kat Dennings. Fair skin, blue eyes and black hair. You get the idea, I guess that’s my “type”. I have been single for about 4 months now and not feeling the need to rush into anything or really having a desire to pursue girls. I have been thinking frequently though about my Liv Tyler and if she exists. Maybe the girl in this dream was a manifestation of those recent thoughts.
I sat down at the table across from the girl with pink hair and she smiled at me. I don’t remember the conversation, but I remember a feeling that I overcame that initial fear of asking a girl out. The next image I remember was walking down the street holding her hand and looking over to see her smile again, she was beautiful. I felt loved by her, a kind of love that seemed like it would never go away, the kind of girl that would stay by my side forever, no matter what. It’s hard to remember any of the conversation but I remember flashes of images, me and her underneath sunshine and blue skies. I like to think our conversations consisted of punk rock bands we both loved, California, movies, the Dodgers and talks about going against the grain of society’s norm.
The next image I remember clearly was some kind of flash to the future and we were on the beach, the girl with pink hair was walking away from me toward the shore. Sunshine again and blue skies. She looked back at me and she was older, and even more beautiful than before. Her hair was a lighter shade of pink and now had some dark brown mixed in with it. I’d like to say I have been in love in real life, this felt like that times a million. The next dream sequence I was laying in bed with her and she looked a lot like Liv Tyler, she was wearing black shorts and a black tee shirt and her hair was black with a single streak of bright pink. I kissed her and it felt so real, I felt love and compassion and like I had finally found the girl I have been waiting for.
The last scene I remember was being in a restaurant, seemingly way later in my life. I was sitting alone at a table and I felt like I had aged, but I was alone. I felt empty, like I was missing the best thing I ever had, missing her smile. I turned around and saw the girl with the pink hair, she was kissing another man, her hand was pressed up against his face. One of those kisses, you know hand on the side of the face fully engaged in romance. I was filled with rage, it was almost like she knew I was there and she was doing it to make me hurt. I got up and ran towards them, tackled the man and threw him against the wall and choked him. Then I woke up.
I woke up to rain outside my window, it was surreal. I immediately wanted to find the girl with the pink hair. I wanted to fall back asleep so I could see her again. I felt like I was deeply in love with the perfect girl, and I had experienced a lifetime with her in one night’s sleep. I have been thinking about her all day, wanting to believe she is real and that one day I will actually meet her. Psychology will say this was a symbol of some feeling or thought that has been rattling around in my head and my unconscious needed to get in touch with it. If I believe that, then I lose the mystery and existence of her. Lately, I have been okay with being alone, I truly have not desired a significant other. With her it felt perfect, like she was the one I could spend the rest of my life with, maybe that’s how people feel who get married to their soulmate. I’d like to think it was some kind of sign to let me know she is on her way to cross my path, and this is what the future will hold. As the rain falls outside my window, I sit at the screen and stare, I hope to meet you one day, the girl with the pink hair…

- Mar 16, 2010
While I don't agree with how Fade feels on this, I can totally understand where he is at least coming from. Also gotta respect his opinion as he is deeper into the Haunt scene than about 99% of the folks that read these boards.I Know but it is how I felt about both of the Havok houses and I am fine with being in the minority, at least I am consistent, besides I have to keep up my rep as a hater!~
A few houses have won HOTY that I didn't enjoy either, and for me there is more to a great house than the cast.
I will also say that in Havoc Derailed even the cast couldn't save it.

I disagree, I think Death is an interesting movie (and it is a movie) in its own right.
It's unfortunate that they have omitted the real Rebirth but it wont matter to most people.
Death might sound like a ripoff as it's "just a summary" but it's much more than that really. In a way it was a "this is all the stuff you should have been paying attention to when watching eva" - and it does include interesting scenes that aren't in the normal tv version.
The problem is that Death and Rebirth isnt really designed for us - it was designed as a teaser for the final movie. That's all very well if you are in Japan in the late 90s but here and now Death and Rebirth dont really mean much to us as many of us have already seen the movie and are just waiting for it to be released.
However, I still think it's worth seeing Death but the Manga Video release isn't very good for collectors as it doesnt have the real version of Rebirth.
I love the English version of End of Evangelion especially when Shinji says that he is fucked up, that was so damn funny. Trust me End of Eva is so much better in English and I cant wait until its "officially" released. As far as death and rebirth go, its ok but I really hate re-caps.

Today’s exciting post is of … a … BUS STOP! This isn’t just any bus stop though, this is one in the back streets of Narrabeen and is the site of the discovery of the “Narrabeen Man”.
In January 2005, contractors were digging a gas pipeline near this bus stop when they came across the bones which they first thought were of a recent murder victim. But after a police investigation it turned out it was not a recent murder at all but one that happened 4000 years ago. This makes the Narrabeen Man the oldest skeleton found in Sydney and the third oldest found in Australia after Mungo Man and Mungo Lady.
Analysis of the remains found that the man was not buried on his front with hands by the side or across the chest which was the traditional burial posture, but that he was buried on his side with one arm across his head. They also found evidence of spear ends in his body and a slice through the top of his cranium indicating the man was in fact killed in some kind of ritual death.
While there is no known hard evidence, experts agree that the most likely reason for the man’s death was due to punishment for a very serious crime or offence. There are theories that the man was not from the Sydney region due to the presence of his two front teeth since a local regional initiation ritual was for these to be removed. Though this tradition was noted to be current as at the time of white settlement so may not be conclusive.
The Narrabeen Man was approximately 6 foot tall which was tall for Aboriginal men at the time. He was also aged between 30 and 40 years old.
Note: I try to be as accurate as possible but make no guarantees. Please use this information at your own risk.

There is this girl in my class. I thought she was sweet and harmless so I was nice to her. And she once let me borrow a novel too. So. I said okay. Nice little girl.
Lately she's started hanging around me and my friends a lot more. I don't mind.
There's this thing.
Everytime she talks to you, she comes so close, like within an inch of your face and then refuses to move. I mean okay. Not an inch. Definitely more than a few inches but really really close okay? And it is ANNOYING. Also, she never takes her eyes off yours so it also becomes a little creepy.
Whenever she talks to me, I feel like she's entering my face. Seriously. Entering my freakin face. And since she's a little short so it actually feels like she's climbing my face.
I mean the other day some girls from my batch and I (including her) were prepping for our viva and she was asking me to explain something to her but as usual, I was distracted by the face entering. So I took a step back. She took a step forward. I took another step back. She took another step forward. We kept doing this till I got backed up by a wall. And then, I laughed a little. At my misery. She didn't even ask why I was laughing. All the while she was talking to me, all I could think of was what her reaction would be if I suddenly pushed her and went like 'STOP ENTERING MY FACE OMG!!@!@'. But that wasn't too realistic so I also came up with some normal things to say like 'Hey, please could you step back a little? :) '.
As expected though, I ended up saying nothing.
So for now, I'm stuck with the face enterer. Everytime I look sideways, she's just..there. It makes me cringe.

What was the Planning Commission? Who was on it? When did it get started? What was its function? What power did it have in the Temple? Over the years, there have been many questions about the Peoples Temple Planning Commission raised by former members, survivors, relatives, researchers, and the media. In an effort to address and clarify the topic, I gathered information from seven other Peoples Temple survivors, added my own perspective, and would now like to present what I learned.
Jim brought the Peoples Temple church from Indiana in the late 1960’s. Fairly soon after landing in Mendocino County, California, he gathered a small group of members to be kind of a “kitchen cabinet.” Although it wasn’t called the “Planning Commission,” it was similar. It provided a more personal setting for Jim to interact with the most active – and at times, the most cantankerous – members, and gave him a chance to gather his flock in a more intimate setting, and get a good look at everyone. It was a compliment to be included, and demanded a new level of commitment. The group discussed schedules and the logistics of the Temple’s daily work. They resolved conflicts and took care of day-to-day issues. This group was active through the late ‘60’s, and then stopped.
In the very early 1970’s, Jim gathered another group, but it didn’t necessarily include the same members as the earlier one. The group met in Redwood Valley in the homes of the long-time members, many of whom had come with Jim from Indiana. Their homes were in a rural setting, where the numerous cars parked outside a house until all hours of the night would be less conspicuous. The group included Jack Beam and Archie Ijames, Jim’s Assistant Pastors, all the main record-keepers and money collectors (Eva and Jim Pugh and Helen Swinney), many of the Indiana core group, and a lot of the new members who had joined in California.
When the Planning Commission (PC) started in Redwood Valley, it consisted of almost all of the Redwood Valley members. As we began our travels to San Francisco and Los Angeles regularly (every Friday in SF, and alternate weekends in SF and LA), more members from those cities were asked to join. Meetings were held many Saturday nights until 3 a.m. or later in the Temples in SF and LA, as well as Wednesday nights in Redwood Valley.
In terms of numbers of PC members, there were about 37 members in 1973. By the time PT moved to Guyana there were about 100 members. Most of them moved to and died in Guyana. About 20 survived: either they were still living and working in the US; they had already left PT; or like me, they were Guyana but not in Jonestown on November 18, 1978. I will not attempt to name all the PC members, in part because, as far as I know, there is no complete list, but we can make some general statement about its membership.
The Planning Commission included many of the hardest workers in PT, but that was not the qualifying criterion, since a number of people who gave their heart and soul to the Temple were never put on PC. It included many of the professionals – lawyers, teachers, nurses, care home managers – as well as many of their spouses and family members. It included all of Jim’s personal secretaries and his staff, whose lives were consumed by his needs. He had no intention of giving them a night off! And it included a lot of the young, eager visionaries who were looking for a way to make the world better, and were delighted to work long hours to bring it to fruition. The Planning Commission was integrated yet disproportionately white, and Jim’s inner group of private secretaries was all white. As with the earlier incarnation of the group, the PC also included people who Jim wanted to keep a closer eye on, those he didn’t trust fully, or felt needed the added “position” within PT to feel important. PC meetings were not public, and the information was never shared outside of the meeting. To help ensure that, oftentimes couples and family members would all be on it. In the end, though, because Jim was a micromanager, he had the final say about who would be on it and not on it.
Being on PC was considered a status symbol. People were offended by not being asked to join it, especially if they felt they were hardworking and dedicated members. During its early years, people were really anxious to be given the opportunity to be on PC. Later on, when they saw the exhaustion and bleary-eyed PC members, many decided that they were indeed the lucky ones. Jim was a master of “divide and conquer” strategies, and played up the division between PC and non-PC members. PC members had a different position in the Temple. The prestige of being on it made some PC members abuse it, and some non-members envy it.
Marceline and the Jones children would often come through the PC meetings, making it feel even more like a family. The PC experience was unlike anything else in PT. PC generated a camaraderie, a time to slow down with friends, that we never had time to do outside. Many of my best friends now were PC members who survived. When a PC meeting was called, there was a certain buzz, and it wasn’t from the coffee! In fact, we didn’t have food there, as I recall; we just took care of business. That is where we saw the hearts of people like Helen and Rheaviana who were so hard-nosed in public.
Many of PC had jobs outside the Temple to bring in more money, but we had to schedule our work so that we didn’t miss – or even come in late – to PC meetings. From 1970 until I left for Guyana in 1977, for example, I worked full-time in the Mendocino County Welfare Department as an Eligibility Worker. When I joined the Planning Commission in late 1972 or early 1973, I had to ensure that the job which I’d already had for a couple of years didn’t conflict with my new responsibilities.
The Planning Commission meetings looked something like this: Jim would sit in a chair in the center of a semicircle, and most or all of the PC members would be on the carpet or floor. This was the case in the homes in Redwood Valley, in the back rooms of the Temples in San Francisco and Los Angeles, or on the stage at Ben Franklin High School, in San Francisco where we had some services and some PC meetings. Wherever it was, Jim was strategically sitting above us. When we discussed an area that a certain person or group was “in charge of,” that person or group would stand and address the group. We would have regular reports about files, finances in general terms, people who needed help in some areas, letter-writing, communes, security, and counseling. But the meeting wasn’t just about the nuts and bolts of running PT. We also met to discuss the philosophy behind our plans. We could better understand where we were going because we’d have this caucus.
Most PC members were the counselors at the different Temples with twice-weekly nights to talk to church members who were having conflicts or problems in some aspect of their lives. I considered counseling PT members about things going on in their lives to be one of the perks for PC members. I really liked these sessions, listening and getting to know other counselors and getting to understand others in the PT community, sharing any insight I might have developed in my life. We PC counselors developed a real friendship and learned a lot from each other. We were counselors at some times and “counselees” at others! Some of the other survivors hated this counseling and would arrange scheduling conflicts so that they didn’t have to do the sessions.
If/when a PC member had been caught making a questionable or lousy decision, that person would be called “to the floor” during a PC meeting and had to stand while Jim and others spoke about that. The person would get confronted and reprimanded, and then sit down. Then we’d move on to the next item. Most of the time, this confrontation was verbal. A few times it went further. At least one person was beaten. Another time, in the Los Angeles temple, I was asleep in my chair. Jim told me that if I fell asleep again, he’d shoot me. He had a gun, and pointed it at me. I managed to stay awake another two minutes or so. It must have been brutally obvious to him that threats were not going to work, especially with the bus drivers – me and others. So then he let all the bus drivers leave and go to sleep. I got to leave. It never occurred to me that he would really shoot. Never, never, never. I’ve since spoken with others who were there that night, nodding off. All of them were threatened, too. None of them were scared enough to stay awake or worry about Jim’s words. None felt that Jim would shoot a gun.
Looking back now, 29 years later, I think Jim had a lot of things he wanted to teach, share, spread and talk over, and he was frustrated that we’d fall asleep. We understood his frustration, even as we fought off our waves of exhaustion, and he eventually understood our need to sleep. If he had been a raving lunatic then, we wouldn’t have been understanding. We knew where he was coming from, so there were no hard feelings. We just couldn’t always do it.
But also as I look back, I realize I shouldn’t have been so sure about what Jim would or wouldn’t have done. He certainly had minions who would have cleaned up anything he did.
My sense of Jim was that he was first a committed, dedicated humanitarian and socialist, and second a thespian. I always felt that he would dramatize an issue to get our attention and understanding, and I never felt fearful. Others did fear him. I was never afraid in PT or in PC. Jim was superb at “dramatic play,” and, most of the time, he was after an affect. Although I wasn’t delighted at being “on the floor” for my various mistakes in PC, I appreciated that everyone had his or her time up front, regardless of color or connections. (This did not apply to Jim’s inner circle of secretaries – I think they too were reprimanded or confronted, but it was in a more private setting, not in front of the rest of us – and, of course, never to Jim himself. We saw the faults of those closest to him, but never his.)
I loved PC meetings. I loved knowing what was going on, where and when things would happen, and why. And, in these settings – not so much intimate as close – I loved talking, hashing things out, and seeing Jim, who had a hilarious sense of humor at times.
For me, it was safe and interesting, and I really did feel that I was on the inside. In the course of putting together this article, though, I got some different feedback on this issue. Several people said that PC was Jim’s way of really controlling those of us on it – by keeping us in the spotlight and keeping us exhausted. We each knew that he could know a lot by looking at us, and that scared some of us into behaving better. Others on PC, and in PT, took chances anyway. I have learned that several who were on PC went out for hamburgers, went to movies, and did other “unacceptable” things – but did it under Jim’s radar. I wasn’t afraid, but I didn’t stray from the party line. I had strayed enough before joining PT. I had no desire to water down the message that we were making a difference, and needed our energy, focus and money to continue to make it happen.
Jim also used PC for his very first white night. During one meeting, he handed out wine for us to drink. He had set up some PC members ahead of time to fall off their chairs, or somehow to look poisoned. Then, after we had drunk the liquid, he told us we had all been poisoned. People screamed and fell off chairs, and a few ran from the room. That’s when he told us that it was just a drill to see how dedicated we were. I didn’t believe it for a moment, so I didn’t have the sense to be scared of what might come of that charade. I think that I had seen Jim in so many personal settings, and show such wisdom and insight, and humanity, I just never let myself distrust him. Even after that. Looking back – 30 years later – it is unimaginable.
In December 1973, Jim took all of the Planning Commission to Guyana. Norman Ijames flew our plane into Guyana. We got to see what Jonestown looked like as a rain forest. It was exquisite. The rain forest was wonderful, the climate heavenly, and the people gracious and lovely. I had never been anywhere like it! After that, people who had building and machinery skills were sent to Guyana, beginning in 1975. The Touchette clan (most of whom were on PC) went, as did others who had the skills we needed.
I went to Guyana to live in 1977 at the beginning of the big push. While there, I spent the first year mostly in Georgetown. I remember three or four PC meetings in Jonestown when I went in during that year. We would gather in the main pavilion where all the meetings were held, but didn’t use mikes, so it wasn’t heard throughout Jonestown. We had reports from the different committees and got an overview of how the community was growing. The tone of these meetings was different, though, since they focused on the growth of Jonestown. There was a lot going on in Jonestown that never was brought up or discussed in PC or any other public setting, but rather in Jim’s cabin. The overwhelming majority of us were not privy to those conversations and secrets. We were busily building the community.
In Jonestown, Jim had started having meetings of a different group called the “steering committee”. According to Edith Roller’s journals, they really did plan for the future of Jonestown. That was very different than PC, and dealt with numbers, real data, and preparations for the influx of people. And of course, it was Jim and members of this group who set in motion the plans – the decision to die, the ordering of the means to die, and the storage of the poison in the midst of our community – that became all too apparent the final day.
(Laura Johnston Kohl, who had lived in Jonestown but was working in Georgetown on 18 November, died on 19 November 2019 after a long battle with cancer. She was 72. Her writings for this website appear here.)

Thursday, April 26, 2012
A woman has claimed the death of her 100-year-old aunt was hastened by poor care at Lister Hospital after she was left on a trolley in a freezing entranceway.
Christine Rees of Minehead Way, Stevenage accompanied her aunt to A&E with a suspected fractured leg in December. During a ten-hour ordeal, she said she was left in the doorway of the department in freezing conditions without blankets, water or adequate pain relief.
Esther Seager who suffered polio as a child was taken to the hospital shortly before 4pm after an accident at Martins House care home in Jessop Road.
On arrival she was placed on a trolley by the automatic doors to await assessment.
Mrs Rees said she had to ask for extra blankets and pillows and requested her aunt be moved somewhere warmer, but this was only done after some time, when she was taken to a trauma room.
The two public water coolers in the department were also empty, as were the hand sanitizers, and Mrs Rees had to ask for water to be brought to her aunt.
“They could have taken into consideration that she was 100-years-old. It would have made a difference just to put her in a proper bed,” the 64-year-old said.
“All they wanted to do was get rid of her. The second doctor we saw was so off hand. Even the sister I spoke to, she listened to me but nothing was done to make her more comfortable. There was no compassion. They did not care.”
Miss Seager, a spinster, was not x-rayed until around 9pm. The result showed the leg was not broken and she was told at around 10.45 she would be taken home.
But Mrs Rees insisted they should have kept her in to manage her pain which was severe she said.
“When the doctor touched her leg she made a terrible sound. They should have kept her in and seen how she was in the morning.”
Ambulance transport took another two hours to arrive and she was not finally put to bed at Martins House until 2am.
Mrs Rees said the whole ordeal was heartbreaking.
“I want them to think that you are not just a nuisance. It’s not just ‘I’ve got to get rid of you because I’ve got to do proper work’, she said.
Miss Seager died four days later. She had refused her prescribed medication as well as food and drink after returning to Martins House, her niece said.
“She just gave up and died,” she added. “My family and I feel that the way she was treated hastened her death.
“She was very private, very dignified – and certainly there was none of that.
“After such a long life this was an appalling way for it to end.”
The family made an official complaint to the East and North Herts NHS Trust which manages the hospital.
Chief executive Nick Carver apologised for a series of failures including the need to ask for bedding and the lack of water in the machines, blaming the busy period. He said stock levels would be monitored more closely.
He apologised for the lack of pain management saying the incident will be “fed back to the team”, and the long wait for an x-ray, and to be transported home.
“There is a queuing system for the x-ray department, however it should be noted that delays can occur particularly when acutely ill patients present, who are then given priority over existing patients primarily due to their urgent requirement,” he said.
He added: “I am very sorry that the wait for transport took over two hours. Unfortunately the demand on our transport service is such, that two hours is the average waiting time.”

Pratima, in her early 20s, was found hanging from the ceiling fan of her hostel room by using her bed sheet. It is learnt that she was suffering from depression from some time.
Her colleagues got suspicious as she was absent for the morning session of the national camp for the recurve event and they had gone to look for her.
"When her friends went to her room, they found it locked from inside. They opened it and found her hanging from the ceiling fan using her bed sheet," according to archery sources.
The exact reason for Pratima taking the extreme step was not known. Her body has been sent for post mortem.
The sources said that the Army Sports Training Centre where Pratima was found hanging did not have women wardens.
Since the Archery Association of India has been de-recognised by the Sports Ministry, the camp for the recurve event was being held at Army Sports Training Centre and not at SAI Centre.
Pratima was a member of the Indian recurve women's squad for the 2009 World Cup Stage IV in Shanghai and World Championships in that year. She was earlier a cadet of Tata Archery Academy at Jamshedpur.
Meanwhile, Jayanta Boro, president of Assam Archery Association, has shot off letters to AAI, Army authorities in Pune and SAI asking them to investigate into the incident.
"It's a shock for the entire Assam Archery fraternity. She was one of the brightest archers to come out from Kokrajhar," he said.
Olympian Dola Banerjee, who has been training with Pratima at the same training centre here, said she was shocked when she came to know of the incident.
"Everything looked normal in morning as she trained with us in the first session till 7am. But she did not turn up in the 9 am session, saying she was not feeling well. We never had a hint that something was amiss. Everything was normal till we got the shocking news," said Banerjee who was Pratima's team-mate in the 2009 World Cup Stage IV.
"We were like a family here. Nobody should take such an extreme step," she said.
Dola described Pratima as a hard-working and talented archer.
"She was extremely hardworking and disciplined. I have competed in so many tournaments with her but never ever had I heard any complaint about her.
"She had represented India at all levels -- cadet, junior and senior. She started her career with Tata Archery Academy. I know her since her academy days. Later she joined NF Railway. She was part of a 12-member women's recurve team who are here in the camp since February. For the last two years, she was not in the Indian team till she returned to the camp in February," said Dola.
International archer Rahul Banerjee, who has also been training at the same centre here, also expressed shock at Pratima's death.
"The AAI secretary Anil Kamineni along with another official had come to visit the camp today in the morning. We all discussed some points and the mood was just fine. But Pratima did not turn up in the 9am session and we heard that she had a stomach upset," said Banerjee.
"But we are terrified to hear the news (of her death). Never ever had such a thing happened in archery. We all are in a deep shock. For her to come from a state like Assam, Pratima was very bright and dedicated. I knew her since my Tata days," he said.
Tata Archery Academy coach Poornima Mahato said, "I know her since 2002 when she joined the academy. She was one of the brightest talents to come out from Assam. Along with Jayanta Talukdar, Pratima was quite a team from Assam.
"I'm extremely shocked and depressed to hear this. Never ever such a thing had happened in archery. I'm sure a pall of gloom would have engulfed the camp," she said.

George Wesley Bellows was an early 20th century American artist who was well known for his illustrations & lithographs of many social, political and cultural issues in his short life. Born in 1882 to a very devout family in Columbus, Ohio, George developed a love for drawing at a young age. In 1904, he decided to leave college and moved to New York City where his painting changed from the Gibson Girls illustrations to a more gritty realism with cityscapes, landscapes and focused more on the political aspects of the era. From his first masterpiece to his last, his focus on the subject changed, but they never lacked the precision and realism that he was known for.
In 1910, Bellow married and shortly after had two children. As they grew, the subject of his paintings began to shift from realism to portraits, though he was known to still paint a few landscapes through the years. After being introduced to a lithograph, Bellows purchased a printing press in 1916 where he began to gain notoriety for his wartime propaganda and selling war bonds. By the time of his untimely death in 1925 by a ruptured appendix, he was well known for his “tough-minded realism” with his “complex systems of design.” From his first masterpiece “The Cross Eyed Boy” to his last, George was considered one of the greatest painters and the country’s greatest printmaker of his time.
"The artist is the person who makes life more interesting or beautiful, more understandable or mysterious, or probably, in the best sense, more wonderful." -George Bellows

New Delhi: The Supreme Court is today hearing the Army chief's case against the government - General VK Singh wants his date of birth to be accepted as 1951, and not 1950 as some records state.
The Defence Ministry has, in a major move, withdrawn its order that rejected the Army chief's petition to change his date of birth. That order, dated December 30, was faulted by the Supreme Court at its last hearing on the matter exactly one week ago. The judges said the technique used by the government to turn down General VK Singh's request was "vitiated" or faulty. The court had said that if the government didn't revoke the order, the judges would invalidate it. That was seen as a victory for the General in the first round of his legal battle. (Read- Army Chief Vs Govt: Top 10 developments)
However, the government says it stands by its July decision to reject the chief's appeal.
The Army chief has taken the unprecedented step of taking the government to court because he wants his date of birth to be amended to 1951 in all Army records. Currently, documents show both 1950 and 1951 as his year of birth. The government has said that it cannot at this point change records that helped establish General Singh's seniority when granting him major promotions.
The judges said last Friday, at the first hearing of the case, that the government had used the opinion of the same legal expert -the Attorney General - to rule against the General's appeal on his age: first in July last year, and then in December, which was his last chance to settle the matter internally.
The Supreme Court said the government's procedure violated the principles of natural justice. Attorney General GE Vahanvati told the court he would consult the government about how it wanted to react to the court's stand.
General Singh is scheduled to retire at the end of May based on his date of birth being May 10, 1950. If the court accepts that he was born a year later, he will be eligible for another year in office, though he has said in his petition to the Supreme Court that it is the government's prerogative to decide on his tenure.

My neighbors drive us crazy. They are always fighting with each other, drunk, coming over and asking for sodas, etc (the parents, not the kids!). I've been working a lot in the front of the house, doing yardwork, and my DD age 6 is with me. Their son, age 4 1/2, is always in their front yard, often not being watched, and my DD wants to play with him. I allow him to come onto our driveway and they play with chalk, shovel dirt, etc. while I work next to them.
Yesterday my DH came home and said "what are you doing?" to me. He was not happy that I had the son in our driveway. Also, the poor kid has some kind of mental issue and speech issue. He says "mama dada" and "rhummm rhuummm" for his main words. Everything else is grunts, shrill sounds, etc. So, he can kind of drive a person crazy. And he makes my DH really irritated because the kid is just plain annoying. But he and my daughter get along pretty well. And I feel bad for him because his home life is so bad. And, while his mother and grandmother are not even slightly sociable to me, I don't feel the need to take it out on the kid.
Question: Should I keep letting the kid come over? (just to the driveway, and just when I'm there with them- we live on a flag lot, so we have a very long driveway that goes up against their front lawn, so if the parents were in the yard with their kids they would be able to see him at all times).

After some sleep we decided to go out an explorer Chihuahua. The first mission find a supermarket to buy some things including Peanut butter and a bowl for cereal. After a bit we did find a super market and left with food and other supplies. Outside of the supper market we saw three guys two of whom were carrying soccer shoes. Since one of our goals of the day was to find a game to play we asked them if they were going to play soccer if there was a field close by. They invited us to come play with them they were headed to a game not far from there. So we piled into the coaches mini-van and were off. After warming up, being given socks and ripping up cereal box to use as shin guards we both sat on the bench for the first half and were beginning to wonder if we were going to play at all. At half time we were both given cleats and I was given shin guards. WE both played the rest of the half and it went pretty well. We ended up tying the other team 3-3. Here is a picture of us with them when they dropped us off.
After some food and a little siesta we headed out to see the sights in Chihuahua. That night we had quite an adventure getting to a movie theater by bus but we finally made it and were able to see the rest of 007 it was pretty good.
The next day we got up early to go to the train station. We took the train from Chihuahua to Los Mochis through Copper Canyon. It is said to be one of the most beautiful train rides in all of the Americas and it was pretty spectacular. I had taken part of it before. Here is us at one of the train stops looking out over the canyon. Of course the picture doesn't do the real thing any justice. After a 17 hour train rider we decoded to get on the night bus to Mazatlan because there really isn't anything to see in Los Mochis. It was more than 24 hours of traveling but Mazatlan is a very nice beach town although it wasn't warm enough to swim today. Another day in Mazatlan and then it is off to Guadelajara (SP?) To find a Magic tournament for Mark. Who knows maybe I will play as well.

Aly Wagner Comes of Age
Feb. 13, 2003
by Llew Llewellyn
February 5, 2003 (CSA) -- In what Spirit general manager Dave Presher called "one of the worst kept secrets in history," San Diego left no doubt and took Santa Clara and U.S. national team midfielder Aly Wagner as the first overall pick in Sunday's WUSA draft.
So highly does the Spirit think of the 22-year-old Wagner that they executed the biggest trade in WUSA's short history, swapping the second overall 2003 draft pick, two starting players, and a reserve to the New York Power in return for an aging defender, a rookie, and the advancement of a single place in the draft.
Wagner has been touted as the biggest midfield talent yet to emerge from the American women's soccer scene, a true "number ten." Her teammates and coaches all praise her in terms that haven't been heard around U.S. soccer circles since the emergence of Claudio Reyna and Tab Ramos.
"The attacking midfielder, men or women, is a key position that is very difficult to develop because it takes a variety of creativity, skill, vision and a real instinct for creating and scoring goals," said Presher a few days after watching Wagner play Japan at Torero Stadium, the home of the Spirit. "In the American professional game, including MLS, foreign players fill that position. [We took] the opportunity to pick what we see as the best American player ever in that position.
"I think that it's only a matter of time before she is the WUSA Player of the Year. Down the line I'm sure that she will eventually come under consideration for best player at a World Cup or Olympic games"
Jerry Smith, Santa Clara head coach
April Heinrichs, head coach for the U.S. Women's National Team, sees Wagner as a player that could fill different roles on the team.
"Aly is a young player that we are still developing in a lot of roles and you may see her in a couple of different slots on the team," Heinrichs said. "If we want to pigeonhole her, she's the creative attacking center mid and she has the ability to spray the ball around the park and serve the ball with texture on every pass. The players love receiving balls from Aly Wagner."
Indeed they do. Wagner's comfort level on the ball allows her the luxury to think about where to send the ball when she receives it, rather than how to handle it.
"She is technical enough to no longer be concerned about the ball. Ninety-nine percent of the players I have coached in the last 20 years spend so much time thinking about the ball that they are not thinking about the game," said Wagner's college and U.S. U-21 coach Jerry Smith. "Aly rarely thinks about the ball.
"There is not a ball that doesn't come to her where she is wondering how to collect it, manipulate it and do something with it. She is so comfortable on the ball that she never thinks about it, she just thinks about the game and that puts her a step ahead of most players."
U.S. standout defender Brandi Chastain has known Aly for the past decade and has nothing but praise for the young player.
"I think that her greatest quality, besides her passion for the game, is that she sees it all on a more complex level," Chastain said. "Her balls have texture. They don't just go straight with whatever surface. She chooses the surface, the bend, or pace.
So, who is Alyson Kay Wagner?
Mom and the Mercury
Wagner starting playing in her hometown of San Jose at the age of five with the Central Valley Mercury of the Central Santa Clara Valley Youth Soccer League. Initially under the guidance of her mother Vicky Wagner, Aly was following in the footsteps of her two brothers Jeff and Jered, and her sister Sam, who later went on to play soccer at UC Berkeley.
In a remarkable streak, Aly was to stay with the Mercury for 14 years with her mother, and later her father Dennis, who had coached Sam Wagner and the Central Valley Express to the U-17 girls national championship in 1995. The Mercury became one of the top youth teams in the country, winning the U.S. Youth Soccer National Championships for an unprecedented three years running between 1996-98.
"I had spent a couple of years coaching her older sister, and when she turned old enough to play, her dad took Sam, and I stayed with Aly and finished up with her when she was 18," said Vicky Wagner sitting in the lobby of a San Diego hotel the day before the U.S. game against Japan, while a table away Aly and her father intently watched a NFL playoff game on a nearby big-screen TV.
"A player like her comes around perhaps once a decade."
"In the last game of her U-7 season, we had a playoff game, which when I look back now was ridiculous. The league had two undefeated teams, which happened to meet at the end of the season, and they battled each other to a 7-7 tie and Aly scored all seven goals. A prime example of what U-7 soccer should not be.
"Her two best friends in soccer were on the other team, and their father came to me and said that it was ridiculous and why didn't we join forces and get the girls together on a single team. They started playing together as eight-year-olds, and by the time we were U-10s, we were able to have competitive teams, which meant that you could have tryouts.
"We had a pretty solid team at that point and by the time we were U-12, we had a sudden influx of talent because we had been pretty successful. We spent a great deal of time on skill. Just skills, skills, skills."
In a flash of insight, Vicky Wagner had hit upon a method of creating competition within her team. Realizing that ball control was an essential part of the game of soccer, she encouraged her players to concentrate on ball juggling and instituted the "juggling ladder" as a way for her young players to pit their control skills against each other.
The ladder consisted of a yardstick and wooden clothespins marked with players names. After a basic order was established, every practice would begin with juggling challenges, with a lower player challenging a higher ranked player up the ladder. They would juggle against each other three times, and if a lower ranked player beat the higher ranked one, then their clothespin was moved above the challenged player.
"The girls competed against each other every practice and that became a real focal point of something that they could do at home," Vicky Wagner said. "We would send them home in the summer when they weren't on teams with juggle challenges. They would have to juggle with tennis balls, left foot, right foot.
"I came up with the idea and they had to tell me where they were when they came back. They spent a good deal of time just touching the ball. I guess that made them a little bit special."
The girls could juggle the ball with 100 touches by age 8 or 9, and Aly could do 1,500 touches by age 10. The idea of being comfortable on the ball was to pay huge dividends down the road.
"That was an awesome thing that turned juggling into a competitive event," said Aly. "I loved it and always wanted to be at the top of the juggling ladder. It spurred me on even more to be a better juggler.
"Then she hired the trainer, which was a huge thing for us."
After coaching the Mercury for several years, Vicky Wagner realized at the U-12 age group that the team was improving so rapidly that it was time to find someone who would be able to take the team to another level. She contacted Santa Clara University head coach Jerry Smith and wife Brandi Chastain.
"Aly's mom was coaching her youth team and it came to the point that she needed someone with more soccer experience to work with her," remembered Smith. "She approached Brandi and I about doing that, but neither of us could afford as much time as it would require to coach a youth team, but I had an assistant coach, Philippe Blin, and I introduced the two of them."
At that point, Vicky Wagner's role changed from trainer to manager.
"Philippe became the trainer because at that point I didn't have the ability to take them to the level they needed to go," Vicky Wagner said. "My job was to keep everything running smoothly and keep a lot of really talented kids and their parents happy."
Blin's approach to coaching 11-year-old girls was to treat them the same way he treated the young women he coached at Santa Clara University, and he was instrumental in leading the Mercury through their three national championships.
"He came from a college program and early on he started to train us the way that college teams train, [although] obviously not at the same level," Aly Wagner said. "But it gave us a glimpse into the future and we all became better players because of it."
According to Vicky Wagner, Blin's expectation level was high.
"Philippe was a wonderful trainer and he brought them to a level early on that most teams would never reach, "she said. "Practices were very business-like and you had to perform. There was a lot of competition on the team."
The Wagner-led Mercury had become the team to join in the San Jose area. They took numerous local, area and state titles and produced an astonishing number of players who went on to become top-flight college players and vital members of both WUSA and U.S. women's teams.
"The team attracted incredibly talented players," remembered Vicky Wagner. "Danielle Slaton [first overall pick in the 2002 WUSA draft], Anna Kraus who plays for the San Diego Spirit, and Krista and Breana Boling who were stars in their own right at UCLA.
"Shaelyn Fernandes, who was the goalie at USC and who is about to marry [2002 Heisman Trophy Winner] Carson Palmer. We had Marcia Wallis, who went to Stanford, and Katy MacBain at Texas. Kristina Jacobs played for San Jose State. I think we had 13-14 girls who ended up at Division 1 schools.
When the Mercury took their third national title, Aly was forced to sit out the final game after suffering an ACL injury while practicing with the U.S. U-20 national team. The injury -- her second ACL surgery -- not only required her to miss the U-18 title match, but also had repercussions in her freshman year as a college player.
Aly doesn't take the easy way out
By the time Aly Wagner was in her senior year at high school, it was obvious to college coaches nationwide that her soccer talent was special. She was heavily recruited by all the top women's programs in the country. Stanford, Virginia and perennial NCAA champions North Carolina were all under consideration, but it eventually boiled down to 1995 champions Notre Dame and Santa Clara, who had come close to -- but never won -- a national championship.
The head coach of Notre Dame at that time was the highly regarded Chris Petrucelli, who has since moved to Texas.
"Notre Dame was her second choice and she enjoyed Chris Petrucelli very much," Vicky Wagner said. "He came to our house for a recruiting visit and Aly went back to Notre Dame.
"Chris' wife was just about to have a baby and he wanted to come to see us again, but we had decided that Aly was going to make all her trips before she made her decision because that was the only way to be fair and objective.
"We told Chris that it was crazy for him to come out and that we would take Aly to South Bend to take one more look at the campus. It was during the draw for the Final Four and we flew in the middle of the week and Aly watched them practice while it was snowing.
"She was standing shuffling from one foot to another and saying that she couldn't feel her feet. And if she couldn't feel her feet, how was she going to be able to play?"
When asked about the incident, Aly laughs the way children do when their parents talk about them.
"That wasn't the determining factor," she said, and then paused for just a beat. "But it did play a role."
Santa Clara University was a short drive from her home and head coach Jerry Smith and wife Brandi Chastain were family friends. The school had never won a College Cup, but there were several players on the team who were nationally known and respected.
"I was so excited about college because of the whole recruiting process," Aly Wagner said. "And then making my choice and being able to play with Mandy Clemens and Kylie Bivens and the rest."
"She has known Jerry since she was nine when she went to a soccer camp and maybe it was always in the back of her mind that would be automatic," Vicky Wagner said. "I went to Nordstrom [department store] and bought sweatshirts. She came home and said, `This is where I want to go.'"
"Once I made the decision, she went into the closet and gave me the Santa Clara sweatshirt," said Aly Wagner. "She told me she had one of each."
Vicky and Dennis Wagner were glad that their youngest daughter had made the decision to stay close to home, but they were also proud that she had not taken the easiest route to winning any more championships.
"She made the decision to go somewhere that had never won a national championship," noted Vicky Wagner. "She wanted to help make that dream come true."
The ACL injury that forced Aly to miss the U-18 U.S. Youth Soccer National Championship final was to follow her into Santa Clara, where she was forced to sit out her true freshman year. At the end of the season, Jerry Smith had his team in the College Cup semifinals and there was talk of bringing Wagner into the team. But Smith made the judgment call not to push his young phenom, a move that in retrospect seems to have been the right decision.
"She trained toward the end of the year, but didn't play," Smith said. "It was her second ACL surgery and it happened in the summer so we red-shirted her. We were in the Final Four in 1998 and she was training well and there was a small chance we were going to activate her, but I'm really glad that we didn't do that. It would have been just for that weekend and who knows, maybe it would have helped us win the championship."
Aly says that any part she might have played at that point could well have been marginal. In the end she gained another year of eligibility.
"I am so glad [Smith] did that," she laughed. "That was obviously a wise decision on our part. Who knew how I would have impacted the team that year by coming back from ACL surgery?"
Santa Clara fell 1-0 in the semi-final to eventual champions Florida, but looking back at the decision, her time spent on the bench was not wasted and in some fashion may have helped her.
"It was really disappointing, but at the same time it might have made my transition even a little bit easier because I didn't jump onto the field right away," noted Wagner. "I was at most of the practices, whether or not I was in therapy, but being on the sidelines you actually learn more by watching.
"I think that is why I could think the same way as Jerry about the game. It's engrained in me, all the things that he taught the team along the way. I attribute that to watching my freshman year."
Along the way, Wagner and long-time teammate Danielle Slaton had taken a fourth U.S. Youth Soccer championship, this time at the U-20 level under Tom Stone's Colorado Rush.
In 1999 and 2000, Santa Clara was taken out of the NCAA tournament by the spurned Notre Dame, although by this time Randy Waldrum was leading the Fighting Irish. In 2001, Santa Clara shocked North Carolina by beating them 1-0 in the final game, with Wagner scoring the winning goal.
In 2002, her senior year, Wagner and the Broncos were again in the College Cup final, but lost 1-0 to Clive Charles' Portland on an overtime goal from another young phenom, Canadian Christine Sinclair.
Wagner was visibly emotional after the loss to the Pilots, but although she doesn't recall crying on the field, later in the day was a different matter
"I've watched the game, but I don't remember seeing myself crying," she said. "About 15 minutes after the game I could not stop."
Wagner says that the loss at the College Cup was magnified by the part of her personality that makes her a player that is driven to win.
"Very much so, I'm very competitive," she admitted. "Jerry puts it best when he says that it's more painful to lose than it is enjoyable to win.
"It was more than [losing] the game. It was my final college game and it didn't go the way we wanted. I wasn't going to be playing for Jerry anymore, so there were more emotions tied up in my reaction than just losing."
Demands on her time from Heinrichs and the U.S. national team in a world cup qualifying year meant that, although Santa Clara was once again in the NCAA finals, Wagner was forced to miss more than her fair share of games, nine in total of the 26 played.
In between Sunday and Wednesday games in the 2002 CONCACAF Women's Gold Cup in Seattle, Smith and Chastain drove to Seattle, picked up Wagner and drove back to Portland in order to have her play in a vital WCC game against rivals Portland, whose own star Christine Sinclair remained with the Canadian team. The Broncos beat their conference rivals 1-0.
"There is no question that was a big match for us," Smith explained. "Generally, either Portland or Santa Clara will win our conference. As it turned out, the U.S. was playing a weak team in Panama in Seattle on Saturday and we were playing Portland on Sunday.
"The combination of the U.S. playing a weak team -- I think the score was 8-0 at halftime -- and the proximity of the cities, we thought, might work. If [the U.S.] had had a tougher match on Saturday, then it may not have worked and we may not have brought Aly down. But we knew she wouldn't have to expend too much energy in the Panama game."
"She was definitely very tired in our game. She didn't have her `A' game, but having her on the field made a difference for us. I have to say that Portland not having Christine Sinclair made a difference for them, so certainly those factors contributed to winning our match and ultimately the conference championship."
The professional game calls
Long before Wagner's last game with the Broncos was played, new San Diego Spirit GM Dave Presher knew that, in order to get Wagner, he needed to gamble heavily to secure the most exciting prospect on the women's soccer horizon. Shortly after he settled into his new office, Presher executed the biggest trade in WUSA history, sending Shannon Boxx, Sherrill Kester and Margaret Tietjen to New York, and taking Jen Lalor and Wynne McIntosh.
Far more importantly, the teams also traded positions in the draft, meaning the Spirit now had the No. 1 pick -- and that meant Aly Wagner.
"I really didn't think that we would be able to trade to get her, but we did and I'm happy about it," said Presher, whose team had failed to make the 2002 WUSA playoffs. "From my side, when I came in, we hadn't made the playoffs and we didn't have a coach and now I have Aly Wagner and a couple of key internationals. I really see us making progress.
"The difference having a number 10 is that it makes Shannon MacMillan a pure power goal scorer. Good service to her means 10 different goals per season. Give her the right service and she'll knock `em home. I'm excited about how Aly raises the level of everyone around her."
The idea that Wagner makes players around her better is echoed time and time again by her coaches and peers. Wagner, who is very modest about her abilities, tries to downplay all the fuss that surrounds her in a World Cup year.
"I hope that I can live up to those expectations and become an even better player," she said. "I'm extremely excited about what this year will bring with the league and the World Cup. If I can make an impact on the WUSA and then make the World Cup roster and help the team get to the Final or whatever -- that would be an amazing opportunity."
Wagner is not yet a complete package. She has to work on her defending skills and ability to head the ball, but those things will come in time according to Heinrichs.
"She has great vision and she is working very hard on her defense and air game and to fit into our team, and still allow her to be the creative playmaker with a license to express herself," Heinrichs said. "What we are asking from Aly is to continue to develop and get better [even] when she steps on the field and doesn't play as well as she likes.
"During the course of our games, you can look at some of our veteran players and see that if they didn't play well in the first half, they got better in the second, which is a sign of a real veteran player. That will be a big step for Aly.
According to Heinrichs, Wagner's fitness will be an issue as well.
"If she wants to play at the international level she needs to develop her fitness base," Heinrichs said. "With no disrespect to Santa Clara, the collegiate game is not as fast and not as high paced, so she will have to develop that side of her game.
"We would [also] like her to finish her own opportunities, to strike that ball and maybe hang onto it a little and get the shot off herself."
Smith, who has spent more time with Wagner than most, says the midfielder's game is constantly improving.
"Those are just weaker parts of a strong player," said Smith, who pointed out that the assist for the U.S. goal-winning strike at the Gold Cup was a headed ball from the midfield by Wagner. "I would have said a couple of years ago that there would have been weaknesses in her heading game and three years ago weaknesses in her defensive game. Aly is actually a very good defensive player; she anticipates and reads the game really well.
"When people criticize her in terms of her defending, it's oftentimes that she doesn't give the effort to do it and she needs the people she is playing with to constantly remind her to put in as much defensive effort as she does in her attacking game."
With a lot riding on her young shoulders, Wagner has a lot of time to devote herself to the game now that she has graduated college, where she also shined off the field. After keeping a 4.1 grade average at Presentation High School, she graduated college with a 3.44 average and was chosen to be part of the prestigious NCAA Top Eight, in which only eight student athletes, male or female, are chosen for their academic ability.
After the U.S.-Japan game in San Diego, Wagner could be seen sprinting up the slope leading to the locker rooms in order to make the 80-mile drive to Anaheim to collect her award.
"I hadn't even heard of it!" Wagner admitted. "I guess that it's pretty neat."
Wagner says that being so heavily involved in an athletic program has given her the ability to focus on her studies when needed, although that is coupled with that desire to excel in anything she does.
"I think that being a student athlete, you are more disciplined in terms of time management, and that's a big factor," she noted. "I'm able to learn well from teaching myself because I have been away from class a lot. But I do really enjoy learning, so that's a bonus.
"I probably actually spent more time studying than most students because I was not in class and had to make up the work, plus all the other out-of-class work. I'm more focused when I am doing it."
She stopped for a second and then laughed.
"I'm not sure how it's worked out!"
Laughing is something that Wagner does a lot. It comes easily to her and is appreciated by those around her.
"She is just a fun personality," Smith said. "She can be a little moody at times, but I think that is because she cares so much about what she is doing and the people that she is with. She truly gets excited when she or her team play well in a big match.
"She is really a full package. If I had to turn someone onto the game, I'd have them watch Aly Wagner because she is going to get you excited about how she plays and manipulates the ball. And when you talk to her you are going to be even more entertained."
It's long way from those coed games that got Wagner started in soccer, but the future is opening in front of her and there seems to be little doubt that she will become a force in the world game.
"She was taught that the game was not just black-and-white, but there were shades of gray," said Chastain, who is Wagner's self-admitted role model. "She plays in those shades at times, when you think that you are going to see something and you get something else.
"That is the complexity that she brings to the game."
Llew Llewellyn can be reached at firstname.lastname@example.org. © Llewellyn/Cyber Soccer Associates, LLC 2002

Crab Bowl GalleryClick Crabtree's five thoughts from Md.Click MORE: Here to view this Link. | Here to view this Link. | All-star games coverageClick Crabtree's five thoughts from Md.Click MORE: Here to view this Link. | Here to view this Link.
COLLEGE PARK, Md. – At the first practice of the Crab Bowl, some of the big stars shined and a few of the under-the-radar players stepped out of the shadows. One from the latter category was Baltimore (Md.) Dunbar defensive end Horace Miller.
At only 6-1, 205 pounds, it is easy to see why Miller has been overlooked by many of the big name schools but with his impact on the field Wednesday, it's easy to see why many more schools may sweep in and take a chance on a player with loads of upside.
"Today was great," Miller said after practice. "I showed what I could do. They were definitely impressed already. I doubt if they even knew me from Easter Tech cause I think he was the one coaching the line on the defense. I definitely wanted to show my speed and show my pass rush."
Tough to block all evening long, Miller definitely displayed his athleticism and get-off but he has more in store for later in the week.
"I don't want them to think I can't protect the run," he said. "Cause you know with 133 tackles, you don't get just sacks for that, so I can protect the run and the pass. I'm gonna let them know about the run tomorrow. They already definitely know about the pass today."
A confident Miller also intends on letting the D.C. all-star squad know about his abilities on Saturday as well. After a productive season getting to the quarterback, he has some bold predictions for his performance in the Crab Bowl.
"My main strength is defense," he said. "That's what I play. With 29 sacks – and I expect to get at least three in this game because that's all they're going to be doing is throwing – I'm definitely going to be heard with my sacks."
Though Miller is relatively low on the recruiting radar, one school has gotten in him early, UNLV. Miller is committed to the Running Rebels but made it clear that he is still looking around.
"It's a soft commitment," he said. "I want it to be known. UNLV is definitely my number one. They're showing me the most interest. They were there from day one. They were my first scholarship so since they're showing me the most interest I'm showing them the most interest as well.
"I went there on a visit and had a good time. I met with the coaches. I already knew Coach Patterson. He was the first coach I had been talking to and he stayed along with me. He has a really good resume. He coached in the NFL for 10 years so he knows his stuff."
Central Michigan and Syracuse are two schools that Miller is gaining interest from and though UNLV is still on top, his play on the field may bring some competition for his signature.
"A lot of other colleges probably don' know about me and the ones that do, they look at my size and say, he can't play defensive end because he's not big enough. But [Coach Patterson] sticks with me. I'm going to get my senior highlights out there and then a lot of big schools, they're going to start looking. UNLV is definitely my number one but I'm going to let it be known that I'm out there in my recruitment."
If all goes well, this weekend should go a long way in getting Miller's name out to schools.
"I really just want everybody to know about Horace Miller."

I've always enjoyed running. i ran a light run today. just a 5k. but that was still probably too much. after my workout i was dying to go back and run more.
i always try to track my calories, but i end up fizzling out.
This post was edited on 4/9 at 1:05 am

Our Final week in Canada this summer was spent out in British Columbia at my Dad's boat. It was super squishy but really fun and totally worth it. The kids faught a lot, colored a lot, Ipaded a lot, teased, snacked, pee'd over the boat, rode with grandad on the dingy, took lots of hikes, didn't sleep much, and had so much fun!
The Adults didn't sleep much, thanks to Courtney, talked a lot, joked a lot, ipaded a lot, hiked a lot, and we had even more fun than the kiddos. Thanks to Grandad for an awesome week on the coast. The weather was great and everything was just awesome. Noone went over board and we didn't need to go to the hospital so I count that as a successful sailing trip!

A place for moms to connect
The one from this week was a 7th grade girl. She hung herself! That's two in a month. Three this year. This is a little bitty small town 7th grade thru 12th grade school. I haven't seen anything in the news but this is crazy and upsetting!
I believe two were related. A young man killed himself apparently over a relationship with the 7th grade girl. The girl felt she was being blamed and bullied for the boy's death and subsequently took her own life. In the girl's case, she had sent out "goodbye" messages to friends over social media prior to her death but it appears her friends did not realize the depth of her depression and did not act on the messages or report them to an adult.
The stories aren't being reported by local media because the suicides involve minors.
Well that is tragic. And I know I have posted before how upset I was that the boyfriend's children are young 12 and 13 year old girls in a school with seniors and that the kids at the school seem to grow up so much faster than the kids I know in Gainesville that have separate middle schools away from high schoolers. Both of his daughters have many friends that started having sex in the 7th grade. The oldest one anyway looks very much grown up in her make up. She gets asked for naked pictures of her boobs by older boys. Most would mistake her for a college kid. I know I wasn't allowed to date at 12

Carnival Triumph Cruise Review by cruisersfromaustin: Rough start that didn't rebound
Overall Member Rating
Rough start that didn't rebound
Destination: Southern Caribbean
We left Thursday morning to drive to Galveston and received a text from Carnival that due to fog the port was closed and to not come to the pier until directed to do so. We were told there would be hourly updates-that did not happen. We went to lunch and hung out on the strand in the beautiful sunshine wondering where the fog was and if the boat would ever come in.We finally received a text telling us the boat was coming into port but to stay away until 8pm to let passengers disembark and the cabins made ready. We were told that our shipboard account would be credited for $15 each for our inconvenience and having to eat lunch in Galveston. When we arrived we found that they allowed many people to come early and checked their luggage in and received zone numbers for boarding, we were given #33. I felt so sorry for families with small children who had numbers even higher that we did. We made it on the boat about 9pm and all diners rushed to the main dining room for "open seating" More
which was packed and disorganized, food cold and tasteless. Went to our cabin to go to bed but our bags were not delivered until midnight. People were standing in the hall outside their rooms watching for their bags. Again I felt sorry for families with small children waiting for their bags so they could go to sleep.
Next morning (about 9:30am) we went to the MDR for breakfast and had just ordered when there was an announcement that we had to attend the muster drill. Our teenagers were still asleep as were many other guests judging by the grumpy people we encountered all day. I understand that the weather delay was out of Carnivals control but things never seemed to recover. Our cabin steward did not stop by to meet us until day 3 of our 4 day cruise so we just a lack of service, other cruises our stewards would be in the hall and would greet us by name and ask how our day was or if we needed anything. Service in the MDR also suffered and was below par, past cruises the waiter would learn what we like to drink and without asking there was water or tea or coffee at our spot. Not only did we have to ask for our beverage each night, we also had to ask for refills. After several attempts to get our waiters attention we asked someone with a pitcher of water if we could have some, he walked off, and told another waiter pointing at us and that person went to someone else who finally came to give us a refill. With 4 of us traveling together we almost always ordered different items and there would be one or two that were very good but also one or two food items that were tasteless, bland, blah or not appealing.
Made it into Cozumel late because of our fog delay, the ship docked at 1pm. They left us know that they would be in port longer to make up for us getting there late, but when the sun went down at 5:30 most people came back to the boat all at once. When we left port the seas were 5 ft swells, many people were sick either from drinking too much in Cozumel or from seasickness. We went to the shows 3 nights and were disappointed with the quality, we saw many people walking out. There was a "mega dance party" on deck but only about 20 people including us were there. There was a midnight buffet which we discovered was where most people were. We didn't sleep well as our room made all kinds of groaning and creaking and squeaking noises because of the waves. Again general grumpiness all around the ship.
Last day at sea was very windy and still large waves. Had a nice workout in the gym and enjoyed the steam room/sauna as they had windows so you were looking out at the ocean-nice view. The big screen over the pool had an NFL game on and it was fun attending a game in a lounge chair at sea! There was ice carving demo that was enjoyable, the sushi bar was open, there were tons of photographers with many different backdrops taking pictures of individuals or groups. The band in the casino was good, many people were winning at the machines. Because of Christmas they had an afternoon "holiday show" with Santa and several places around the ship had snow (soap bubbles). It finally felt like the guests were having a good time and it was time to get off the boat.
So all in all, the worst day of cruising beats the best day at work! I know that Carnival doesn't have control over the weather, waves or attitude of fellow cruisers. We were happy to have a get away but left or cruise feeling a bit "cheated". Better luck next time.... Less
Read more Carnival Triumph cruise reviews >>
Read Cruise Critic's Carnival Triumph Review >>
Great Experience on the Breeze...
Great Bang for your Buck!
Never Again on Carnival!
Amazing Time on Carnival Trium...
Sacred Cavern Excursion
Family of Five
Wonderful back to back cruise ...

RICHARD Money admitted his Walsall team got away with an off-day after they edged past Northampton in the FA Cup.
Michael Ricketts' late penalty decider earned the Saddlers a third-round home tie with Millwall. And the strike came as a huge relief to a Walsall side second best for much of the night.
"I'm just pleased we got through," Money said. "I don't think we can be too critical of a group of players that has been playing the way they have recently.
"I guess we were due an indifferent performance and certainly that was one. But we have shown the qualities you need to still win the game.
"Northampton will feel aggrieved and rightly so. They played particularly well and probably deserved to go through. But that's the way football goes sometimes.
"We had too many indifferent performances from players but maybe it was a slap on the backside they needed for the weekend because they will have to play a lot better than that against Leeds."
Money hailed Ricketts for producing the cutting edge that settled a sterile spectacle.
"We know Michael can give us that extra bit of quality - that is why he is a match-winner," said the manager. "Not only has he got the ball as quickly as he can once Tommy Mooney was taken off but he was brave enough and had the quality to stick the penalty away without too much trouble.
"Some pleasing things came out of the night. For the last 30 minutes we had seven players aged 21 and under, which augurs very well for the future. Troy Deeney did really well."

Did Chad Everett have a son?
Beginning in 1973, actress Sheila Scott initiated court proceedings against Everett three times, claiming her son Dale (born 1973) was fathered by him. The lengthy and complicated paternity suit ended in 1984 when a California Court of Appeals ruled in favor of Everett.
How old is Chad Everett now?
Chad Everett, the lean, handsome actor who mended broken hearts as well as broken bones as Dr. Joe Gannon on the television drama “Medical Center” in the 1970s, died on Tuesday at his home in Los Angeles. He was 75. The cause was lung cancer, his daughter Kate Thorp said.

The K1 children had planned to do a fund raising bake sale. We made lots and lots of Honey Cornflakes cookies and sealed them in cookie containers.
We also made “Thank you” notes to be pasted on the cookie containers.
We set our bake sale booth and ready to sell away our Honey Cornflakes to the teachers and staffs from An-Nur Mosque. We also took turns to mend the booth.
The teachers were very excited to patronise our booth and they were very supportive of our fundraising bake sale. The staffs from the mosque were also very supportive and made big contributions to our bake sale.
It was a very tiring day but we had a very successful fundraiser! Our Honey Cornflakes were sold out within the day!

Quite's voice:Janet Rossini wrote:In particular, I'd like to look around to all of you who have observed this going on and who have been silent. People needed your support. I needed your support. Where were you? Where are you?
That pretty much how much of the board has felt for the last 90 days. We found our own answer very easily: Look at the end of the teeth and claws and swords and clubs.
Someone, yesterday gave me the nicest gift I could have ever asked for. He asked one simple question: How may *I* serve *NCI*? Then waited for an answer. He didn't tell the board how to do our job, or that we were doing it all wrong, that our techniques were oh-so out-of-date, he didn't question us, argue with us, make demands upon us, pressure or accuse us. In fact, he didn't talk about us at all.
He asked what he could do for NCI.
And that is the same question the board asks every day, and if you re-read my posts, it may be found that I have been colourably begging everyone to do the same, since we started.
He put NCI before himself. If only everyone did, things might be different.

I am thinking about my Grandma’s garden today.
My Grandma, if she were with us, would be out in her garden and working in the “cold frame” today. The “cold frame” was made out of an old window casing and two huge pane glass windows. She would plant her seeds early in this tiny greenhouse.
She had created her own DIY greenhouse before it was even cool to DIY.
By the end of March, you could barely see the wisps of green stems peeking out of the rich, sandy, Jackson County soil. She would point out to me what would soon become tomatoes, lettuce, peppers, carrots, and zinnias.
As I watched her tending the tiny shoots of green, it was hard to imagine the seedlings would become vegetables and flowers one day. Yet, by July they would be flourishing in rows. All summer we would eat out of those rows and then, in the fall, she would have a full harvest.
Grandma’s mother died in the 1918 flu.
Grandma, only four, and her two sisters, just six and eight, also became sick. She told me family stories of that difficult time, which were only a few brief moments of memory, and yet so poignant coming from her child-like perspective.
Her father, sick himself, would feed each of the girls at the foot of the double bed that they were sharing. She said it felt like being in a nest with her dad putting food into their mouths as if they were baby birds.
She recalled her mother’s two sisters who would come every day to bring the family food and supplies. She remembered that they would talk through the glass window to her mom and dad, bereft that they could do no more to help them.
Her father always told her that her mother’s last words were, “Keep my girls together.” And he did. He fought for them ferociously and kept the family together.
So, to me, Grandma’s garden represents her hope in the future. A bountiful hope, that believes good things are coming. A commitment to work toward this eventual abundance through the gray days of March and the wet days of April—when there is only a hint of green peeking out of the ground.
I want to be like my grandma. I want to go through this, our own challenging time, planting seeds of hope in the soil of my life. I want to do that to not only keep me busy — and Lord knows, I need to be busy — but also because I believe the tiny seeds we plant now in the gardens of our lives, will nurture us through the summer and give us a bountiful harvest this fall.
After this pandemic has passed, I want to say that I was kind to those around me, that I appreciated all of the good that was around me, and that I shared what I could with those that I love.

SAN ANTONIO - A newborn in San Antonio with a congenital heart defect is continuing to beat the odds.
In his short five weeks of life, Sterling Guerrero has been hospitalized for a potentially deadly virus, has had his heart reset 10 times, and has been treated with three different heart medications.
Sterling was initially hospitalized for respiratory syncytial virus, which causes infections in the lungs and respiratory tract. While the symptoms are similar to a common cold for adults, it can be deadly for infants.
His mother said that during his treatment for the virus at the hospital, Sterling's heart began beating rapidly.
"The heart monitor jumped to 250 and then it stopped working," said Shannon Guerrero, Sterling's mother. "They had to inject a drug to reset his heart. There was a good three seconds where his heart had stopped on the monitor. It was the longest three seconds of my life."
Sterling was rushed to the Pediatric Intensive Care Unit (PICU) where doctors discovered a major problem. He had Wolf-Parkinson White Syndrome, a congenital heart defect that affects the heart’s electrical system and causes a rapid heartbeat.
"We certainly didn't think, going to the ER, we would end up with a pretty major heart issue," Shannon said.
Sterling's father said that every time doctors had to reset his heart, which was a total of 10 times, Sterling came back strong every time.
"I see him as a spitting image of us. And as a boy, I see him being just like me. I've gone through some trials and tribulations," said JJ Guerrero, Sterling's father.
JJ knows what it takes to have perseverance and courage. He served a total of 23 years in the Marine Corps and Army. During his third tour in Iraq, he was severely injured by an IED explosion and was forced to amputate his right leg.
"It was very intensive. Things like we take for granted like showering and walking around the house, doing house chores, going to work, I was in the wheelchair a lot," JJ recalled. "As a single amputee, I was doing pretty well. I thank Shannon, she was there all the way and kept me going and pushing me along to get better and to do more things."
Then four years later, JJ was hit with more devastating news: He developed skin cancer on his left heel.
"On one of my wounds, I ended up having to go through two years of surgery to excise the cancer," JJ explained. "We decided that it was best to have another amputation."
JJ said, just like him, he knows his son will fight through any hurdle. Sterling will require daily medication for six months to a year and possibly surgery down the road.
"I've gotten through them with the help of God. And I was always confident that whatever he had, whatever he was going to diagnosed with, if it was something minor or major, it was going to be okay," JJ said.
The cost of Sterling's hospital stay and treatment has been overwhelming for the entire family. If you would like to help them, they've set up a GoFundMe page you can contribute to here.
© 2018 KENS-TV

By Ed Phoenix
I made a trip to Highgate village at the weekend. I planned a day out and as part of this, booked lunch at a chain restaurant which stated online that it was accessible. As a wheelchair user I find that this is often not the case, so I rang the branch to check and was assured everything was accessible.
When I arrived at the restaurant there was a step to get in. We spoke to a member of staff briefly and they appeared to be going to get a ramp. I was really disappointed when they came back with several staff and went to try to pick me up in my wheelchair without talking to me. It was embarrassing.
Unable to get into the restaurant we booked, we went around the corner to a pub where we could see there was seating free outside which was accessible. After queuing we were offered a table inside. I asked if the inside was accessible and I was told that it wasn’t and that we wouldn’t be able to be seated after all. I asked if a reasonable adjustment could be made so we could be seated outside, but was refused. In this situation if I had been a non-wheelchair user I would have been seated without issue; instead I was turned away.
Being turned away from successive places of business, seemingly due to my wheelchair use, is really disheartening. We ended up having a slightly disappointing and expensive lunch at a different venue which thankfully had an accessible outdoor area.
I hope the businesses in Highgate and the whole of Camden do much more to make their properties accessible. Putting the moral and legal obligations to improve accessibility for Disabled people to one side for a moment, businesses with poor accessibility are missing out on the spending power of Disabled people, which according to the charity Purple Pound is £275 billion a year in the UK.

Here I must say that Raoul Wallenberg saved my life; it is because of him that I am alive today. On the second Death March headed to Austria, each set of two boys, about 18–19 years of age, had to cut down trees in the forest and carry a six-foot heavy piece of wood on their shoulders. If one boy tried to escape, his side of the wood would fall down and immediately the Germans would know that one prisoner had run off. For me it was too hard to march while holding the wood. The Nazis rode alongside us on horses. Attached to their riding boots was a piece of metal. One Nazi kicked me on my right lower back from which I still suffered pain years later, even after I arrived in the United States.
Suddenly Raoul Wallenberg appeared with a tiny little car and two young helpers. He promptly stopped the procession and got out. He approached the soldiers and said to them, “You have my people here.” He pulled out a list and began calling off names: “Schmidt, Cohen…” He wanted to save young people. As he was walking up and down he said, “You,” (pointing to me), “come over here!” I had no clue as to what was going on. My father saw me walk over to the other side and he followed me. When Wallenberg noticed that the Nazis were getting suspicious, he said, “That’s it. Let’s go,” and we began marching back. We had nowhere to go so we approached the “Jew House” with the yellow star and knocked on the door. The janitor opened it and my father and I pushed our way into the house. We were granted permission to remain in the house until 10:00 the following morning. At 5 a.m. we picked up my mother from the house of her gentile friend and the three of us headed to the Swedish house belonging to Raoul Wallenberg. The Swedish house was barricaded with high wooden boards. There were not enough facilities for the women, so my mother had to dress up in men’s clothing to gain entry. Next, I climbed onto my father’s shoulders and hoisted myself up over the wood planks. Using my shirt and my father’s shirt we tied them together as a rope and I lifted my father up. The two of us together helped my mother climb over the wall.
The Swedish house was officially closed but we snuck in through the back of the basement where we lay down on the basement floor, and in this way we were liberated in the Swedish House.
Once you were liberated, where did you go?
At the time I wanted to go to Palestine. On December 31, 1946, my parents crossed the border into Austria. This was the easiest day to escape over the border, since the border guards were off duty. They continued on to Prague and then to Paris and eventually to America. They left me in Hungary to collect the money owed to them by merchants prior to the war. Some of them had pity and paid me. I was secretly sent with a group [that was going] first to Prague and then to Bucharest and eventually to Palestine. However, when we arrived in Bucharest there was a large earthquake. People were robbing stores, so the police were checking everyone on the street for stolen goods. One of the members of our group was searched and it was discovered that we were there illegally. We were arrested and sent right back to Hungary. In the middle of 1948 I decided to try returning to Prague again. I approached the same Jewish organization and they put together a group of seven boys and six girls to go to America. Entry to America wasn’t simple. Just as I began seeing Ellis Island in the distance, the coast guard boarded the boat and began checking everyone’s documents, which of course were all false. My parents, although they had gained entry to the U.S., were not here legally.
We were transferred into a waiting boat and taken to Pier 62 in Manhattan, where we were locked in with a chain fence. Each day we were checked twice by the doctor. Anyone whose health was not perfectly up to par was sent back. This was a terrible experience for me. A short while later my aunt arrived with an affidavit, promising to take care of me.
However, I was there together with a good friend, Rabbi Landau. His parents were living in the United States legally. We were allowed one phone call. Rabbi Landau called his father, who gave us both well-needed chizuk.
Did you return to your home town?
I took each of my grandchildren when they were 16 ½ years old, on a two and a half week tour of Europe. I always felt that this was a worthwhile investment. This gave them a clearer picture of what we experienced.
What message can you impart to today’s generation?
Be nice to other people; help others; look forward to the future. Never be negative, always look at things positively. My father inspired me. He was always there for me. He was an optimist; he always said to me, “The future is always better than yesterday.”

Everybody knows that the traffic police in India are a strange and frustrating lot, operating not so much by the rule book but seemingly on the basis of whims and fancies and the thickness of your wallet. We all have our favourite police story, as it were, and I just added one to my fairly extensive collection.
I was in Bangalore a week or so ago, having driven down there from Ooty in a rather snazzy sportcar. It was about 9 pm, and I was having a bit of trouble finding the house of the friend with whom I was going to be staying - Bangalore is a bizarre mix of one-ways and dug-up roads. Finally having ascertained that I had to turn left off MG Road and head towards Benson Town, I drove up to a traffic signal, wondering if it was a free left or not. The signal didn't appear to be working properly, because I sat there for an eternity, waiting for a green or amber left turn, and nothing was forthcoming. I crept around the corner a bit, to suss out the lay of the land, and that was when I saw a trio of cops, waiting down the road. Not wanting to risk anything, I stayed put for a while longer, but there was still no signal. Meanwhile, a chap in a Santro had come up behind my car and begun honking incessantly, so I moved aside a bit and let him go. He casually took the turn and drove quite slowly past the cops, so I assumed that it was a legal left turn and followed suit.
As soon as I did so, all three cops jumped into my car's path, arms akimbo, ordering me to stop, which I did. I asked them what the problem was, and they said 'Signal jumping'. I couldn't quite believe it at first - the signal was clearly non-functional, and in any case, they had allowed the Santro to pass right by them without so much as lifting a finger. I said as much, but they stuck to their guns, insisting I hand them my license and pay a 'spot fine'. By now I was rather annoyed, so I got out of the car and got into a bit of an argument, insisting that they were simply harassing me and that I would not pay a red cent. I finally had to produce my Press Card for them to back off, and as I drove away, I wondered if they had stopped me purely because I was driving a flash car.
The next day, I took yet another sportscar (a bright red one) out on a shoot on the Mysore highway, and it was early evening by the time I finished and headed back towards Bangalore. As I took a sweeping left-hander on the highway, I noticed another pocket of cops, and as soon as they spotted my car, they jumped onto the road, trying to get me to stop. I was amazed- I certainly wasn't speeding ( Indicas were flashing past me and the cops, for heaven's sake!), and this time there was no signal anywhere in sight, so it could only have been the fact that I was driving an expensive car. I was in no mood to stop and get into another argument, so I simply kept on driving, past their flapping arms. After a bit of blundering about, I found myself on the elevated toll road leading into Bangalore, above the Bangalore-Chennai highway, and I kept well below the 80 kph speed limit, wary by now of suicidal policemen jumping in front of cars. Astonishingly, there were another two cops waiting by the side of the road, and they dutifully leaped in front my car at the last moment, completely ignoring other vehicles who were going well above the speed limit. I had to actually swerve to avoid hitting one of them, and in thanks he swung his lathi at my exposed head (the top was down), narrowly missing cracking my skull.
By now it was clear - the only reason I had been singled out was because I had been driving expensive cars that stood out. Quite what those cops had hoped to accomplish is beyond me - all I know is that the next time I drive in Bangalore, it'll be in a battered, misfiring wreck, with the hubcaps coming off and smoke billowing from the exhaust. With my luck, a cop will jump right onto my bonnet anyway.

Man who lost school board race found guilty of sex abuse
CHARLES CITY, Ia. — A convicted sex offender who was defeated in a Charles City school board election has been found guilty of sexually abusing a teenage boy.
A jury found 60-year-old Doug Lindaman, of Charles City, guilty of third-degree sexual abuse Tuesday. He was accused of performing a sex act in 2011 on a 17-year-old boy without the boy's consent.
He is scheduled to be sentenced June 7.
Lindaman was running for a school board spot at the time of his August arrest.
He was convicted in 1988 on two counts of lascivious acts with minors. He's not listed on Iowa Sex Abuse Registry, because his crimes occurred before the registry was created.

A Cocoa Beach deputy fire chief is no longer on the job.
Guy Wine, who goes by CG, was fired on Wednesday. He is accused of accepting $100 from a resident rescued from an elevator that was intended to buy his crew something as a "thank you."
A few weeks ago, Jeff Ruddell was rescued from an elevator at his condo complex. He was stuck in the elevator for 35 minutes without lights or air conditioning.
The Cocoa Beach Fire Department helped Ruddell, and Ruddell wanted to pay the firefighters back for their generosity.
"I was very grateful," said Ruddell.
Ruddell intended for the money, handed to Wine in an envelope, to be used on dinner for all of the crew. That never happened.
Wine was fired, and his termination letter said, "your actions have upset the resident, and shaken the trust and confidence of the fire department staff."
Ruddell said he is disgusted that the money was taken, but he is still grateful.
"I don't know why the money didn't go to them. I don't understand that and it bugs me," he said.
Wine eventually did turn over the money, but three weeks later and only after he was confronted.
"I don't want my $100 back. I want it to go to them," said Ruddell.
The city manager declined to answer any questions about the matter.
Wine has been with the department for about seven years.
Breaking news photos on u local

It's now three weeks since my TAH and I went back for my follow up appointment yesterday to be told I have stage 1c OC. I didn't realise the shock I'd feel at being told I had cancer as all my scans in the build up to the TAH and the blood tests were normal. This gave me hope that it was just an innocent cysts and the reality of the diagnosis has hit me hard. I've been told that chemotherapy is required to sap any stray cells that may have escaped and I'm scared about it. I just have no idea what to expect.
I'm just just looking for some advice on how to cope with the diagnosis and chemo. Although I've not had my appointment with the Oncologist yet I have been told that I may have two options for chemo. The first being Carboplatin on its own or second option is Carboplatin and Paclitaxel together.
Does anyone have any experience with these drugs? Any advice would be really appreciated at this time. Thank you in advance

IMAGE: SURBHI CHANDNA'S INSTAGRAM
Surbhi Chandna has come a long way ever since she debuted in the Telly world in 2009 with a small role in Taarak Mehta Ka Ooltah Chashmah. As of today, she's been a part of several shows; however, it's the deets about her personal life that leave some of her fans curious. Surbhi has never opened up about any personal relationships, and back in 2020, in an interview, Chandna's mother was asked about her daughter's whereabouts and how sometimes some people start interpreting things without knowing things in depth. Here's what the actor had said in return.
While interacting with Pinkvilla, Surbhi's mother had said that such things did not affect them and that her daughter told her everything. The Ishaqbaaz actor was quick to interrupt and she had said that she did not have a personal life and had added that "it was not out there". She had remarked that she didn't want to talk as there was nothing to talk about it. Surbhi had also continued that she would talk about it when she decided to get married and that her focus was only on her work.
Surbhi Chandna was a part of the show Aahat in 2015 but garnered massive stardom after she played the role of Anika in Ishaqbaaz. And then, she was roped in for Dil Boley Oberoi, Sanjivani, and Naagin 5. She starred alongside her Naagin 5 co-star Sharad Malhotra in a new music album as well.
While fans are waiting to know about her upcoming projects, she had given a slight hint recently after she had asked them to share their songs and playlists with her. She had penned the hashtag "Dropping soon" which had hinted at a new music album in the pipeline. However, she has yet not revealed anything about it.
Surbhi's music album titled Bepanah Pyaar, presented by VYRL Originals is sung by Payal Dev and Yasser Desai. Her chemistry with Sharad Malhotra received much love from her fans. Penned by veteran lyricist Shabbir Ahmed and Payal Dev, the track has surpassed 50M views on YouTube.
(IMAGE: SURBHI CHANDNA'S INSTAGRAM)
Get the latest entertainment news from India & around the world. Now follow your favourite television celebs and telly updates. Republic World is your one-stop destination for trending Bollywood news. Tune in today to stay updated with all the latest news and headlines from the world of entertainment.

The 33-year-old, who began his career at PSG and also played for them between 2000-2002, has spent the last year with Chinese Super League side Shanghai Shenhua.
PSG Sporting Director Leonardo has played down talk of a return to the club, saying: "Anelka asked to train with us. We're available for him to help him maintain his fitness in the days to come."
"He only asked to train. He played under me and we are friends now. I allowed him to train because of our friendship."
But rumours in France suggest that Anelka could be called upon by the Ligue 1 leaders if a disciplinary hearing involving Zlatan Ibrahimovic ends with the Swedish striker being suspended for stamping on an opponent's head in a fixture last month.
Harry Redknapp has also spoken of his admiration for the former Chelsea, Liverpool and Arsenal striker, and his interest in bringing him to QPR, though Anelka's wages, believed to be in the region of £10m a year, could prove a stumbling block - although there are also rumours that he has not been paid in full during his time in China.

Husband loses appeal against £4.25m divorce settlement
A judge was not at fault when he exercised his discretion to award a woman a £4.25m divorce settlement based on her “needs”.
That was decision of the Court of Appeal in a case involving a couple who had been married for two years but had a relationship stretching over nine years. The husband was 65 and the wife was 38.
The husband had assets of £37m and the couple enjoyed a very high standard of living during the marriage. However, the wife had suffered serious psychological harm because of the marriage and its breakdown.
The judge's award of £4.25m included a term-of-years income fund of £1.34m and £2.3m to enable the wife to buy a flat in Marylebone.
The husband argued that the judge had erred in the exercise of his discretion by going beyond an assessment of the wife's needs when making his award.
The Court of Appeal rejected this argument. It said the judge's decision was clearly based on the application of the "needs" principle, which granted an almost unbounded discretion. The main drivers in the discretionary exercise were the scale of the payer's wealth, the length of the marriage, the wife's age and health, and the standard of living enjoyed during the marriage.
In a short marriage case, the discretion when assessing needs was particularly broad and fact-sensitive. The judge's assessment of the wife's immediate capital needs, and of her future daily needs, was well within the discretion vested in him.
It was therefore a legitimate choice to allow the wife to buy a reasonable apartment in a part of London where she felt happy and comfortable. To deal with her future income requirements by the term-of-years method was also entirely conventional and uncontroversial.
The husband’s appeal was dismissed.
Please contact Kirsty Bowers or Carey Vigor if you would like more information about the issues raised in this article or any aspect of family law.

Sunday, February 03, 2013 5:46:00 PM
We are trying to improve our school grounds. We had an open morning on 29th January 2012 when pupils, staff, parents and people from the community worked together to think about what we would like to be able to do outside. We then had a go at creating some models of what we would like to have in our outside space.
Parent Council have given us some money so that all the children can have wellies and waterproofs to go outside in most weather. We are really looking forward to being outside and having more things to do. Watch this space to find out more!

Bibian Norai is a Porn Star from Spain. She was born in Amposta, Tarragona on September 1, 1967. She is listed on FreeOnes since 2003 and is currently ranked 11239th place. She currently has 7 gallery links in her own FreeOnes section.
Our records show that Bibian Norai is currently retired which means she is not making movies, doing live shows and/or doing photo shoots at this time.

In the top book, another piece of paper fell out. It was the list that Cody had faxed to his sister. On the bottom Tom Brady New England Patriots 2000 2020 thank you for the memories shirt of it he had written Mom and Sis I think this is love. What do you think of her? Is she right for me? As she read it she caught herself in the mirror smiling from ear to ear. She now had two friends at her new college.

COVID-19: So Much Anxiety
Updated: May 25, 2020
I mentioned in my last post that I was sick, and I'd follow up on that later. Well here I am trying to therapeutically put it all down on paper in the hopes that writing it down will release it and I can finally breathe, literally and figuratively. Whether I actually publish the post has yet to be decided. However, If you're reading this, I guess you know which way I went.
*Today (now yesterday) (March 18th, 2020) I got the results of my COVID-19 test...
It took 5 anxiety filled days, in which only a few people knew I was being tested, and it has come back negative! I'm so thankful for this test result, but if I'm being honest, I find that it has only eliminated one fear and replaced it with another. To understand why I say that, I should perhaps give you some backstory...
I've been sick since I returned home from Portugal. On my trip back home, about halfway through the return flight, I started feeling very rundown. My throat was starting to feel sore, my body was starting to ache all over (not unusual after having walked so many kilometers each day for a week in the hilly cities of Porto & Lisbon), my head was killing me (somewhat typical), and I was starting to get that tickle in my throat indicating that a cough was coming on. I should point out that these symptoms are typical for me anytime I fly because of the dry, stuffy air I encounter on planes. My sinuses are easily irritated, and my body hurts most of the time these days due to my herniated disk and osteoarthritis. Jeez, I'm seriously too young to feel this old! Basically, I wasn't concerned because it wasn't out of the ordinary for me, and I wasn't running a fever.
We landed on February 24th and by the time we got through customs, picked up our car, stopped for a quick bite to eat at an Onroute, unpacked our bags, and showered, all I had energy for was sleep. So that's what I did. I slept until the coughing started to wake me up in the middle of the night, and when that happened I realized my throat was on fire, my body hurt, and it was difficult to breathe lying down.
So, when I woke on the morning of February 25th I started thinking maybe this is more than just my regular travelers stuffiness. I noticed that any exertion made me short of breath. I was coughing, my throat was on fire, I hurt all over, my headache was still there, my nose was running like a faucet, and I was sneezing, but I still didn't have a fever. I discussed it with my husband and considering that COVID-19 was just then starting to make headlines for being in other countries besides China, and the fact that I work with children, we decided it was best that I call my doctor and get an appointment. Better safe than sorry. I didn't want to go to work the next day and infect everyone with whatever it was that was causing me these issues. Whether it be a common cold or something worse.
So, I got an appointment with my doctor for that afternoon. Since I didn't have a fever and was not arriving back from China, and had not been in contact with anyone who had tested positive for COVID-19, I was not a candidate for a swab test for the virus, and my doctor didn't feel it was necessary as he was confident that it was something else. At that time, this was the protocol. A week or two later, that would all change for pretty much everyone.
My doctor was however concerned with my breathing. He felt I had pneumonia, so he sent me for a chest x-ray to confirm, put me on antibiotics, and told me to stay home for at least a week. That if in that timeframe I was still symptomatic, that we would reevaluate. The x-rays confirmed that I had pneumonia, at the beginning stages. On thursday I called the doctor to let him know that I was still feeling quite bad, and in some regards worse. He told me to stay home, and come in on Tuesday for another check-up.
On Tuesday, March 3rd I went to my doctor's office for the check-up. He felt my lungs sounded a bit better (though my breathing was not really improved), but he was still concerned about my immune system and my being around others (as I could at this point easily be infected with whatever people happened to be sick with). So he told me to stay home for the rest of that week, returning to work on Monday, March 9th. He told me to go home and rest, and for the sake of my health to distance myself from others. So that's what I did. Essentially I had the equivalent of a 2 week quarantine.
By Sunday, March 8th my cough was pretty much gone, my breathing was better, unless I was moving around alot or lying down (my doctor said this would be the case and it would take a few weeks for me to completely get back to my normal self), my body aches were gone, my headache was back to normal (I always have a slight headache), my runny nose back to normal (I've seriously had year round allergies since I moved here), and my throat was all good. Still no fever at this point, so per my doctor's advice, I went back to work on Monday, March 9th and kept as much distance as I could from anyone displaying any illness, in the hopes of not catching anything.
I was feeling better, not 100%, but that was to be expected. I was keeping my distance, trying to keep the kids out of my bubble, and at this time we were starting to implement extra measures at work to keep everyone safe, and we were all following those measures. Washing hands for 20 seconds (easier said than done with kindergarteners!), sanitizing everything constantly, making sure everyone was giving each other personal space and staying out of each other's "bubble" (again almost impossible with little ones), going over the proper way to cough or sneeze into one's elbow, etc. Still, there were a lot of sick kids in our program. Some parents did the smart thing by keeping them home, but some didn't have that option and had to send them to school anyway. It wasn't ideal by any means, for anyone concerned, and of course I got sick again.
I made it through most of the week fine, but by halfway through my shift on Friday morning of March 13th (Of course a Friday the 13th!), I was starting to feel rundown again, had that tickle in my throat indicating a cough coming on, and I thought I might be developing a fever. I asked my coworker if my forehead felt warm and she thought it might be, but we had no way of confirming this. So, an hour later I was at home and able to use my thermometer, and discovered that I had a fever. I took some Tylenol and called my doctor's office. I explained that I had started running a fever and was still having shortness of breath, and my cough was coming back. They got back with me within 15 minutes and sent me to the ER to be tested for COVID-19.
It was quite scary being in the ER that day. All staff were in full PPE, they were guarding the entrance to the ER and screening people before they could even go in. If they didn't feel you needed a test, you were sent home. I went through about 4 different "triage" situations before I was deemed a necessary test patient. After about 4 1/2 hours I was called back to a room to start my testing process. I had to do a swab test, a blood test, and a new chest x-ray. That all happened quickly compared to the first 4 1/2 hours, but then there was another 1 hour wait to get the lab results from the blood test before I could be sent home. 6 hours after I had arrived at the ER, I was finally on my way home.
I was told by the ER doctor that my white cell count was high, but she wasn't concerned at this time, because the virus could account for that elevation. I was then sent home to self isolate, even from my husband, for what I was told was 72 hours, but turned out to be 5 days! Apparently the lab was inundated with so many tests that they were unable to keep up with the demand and had to adjust their turnaround time. To say I was anxious doesn't even begin to describe those 5 days. I'd wish upon no one the anxiety of waiting to hear potentially bad news. You do everything you can to occupy your mind, but ultimately you go on Twitter or read a news article and your anxiety is through the roof again.
So, that puts me back to today (now yesterday) when I found out that I tested negative for COVID-19. I'm so relieved to have gotten that test result, but now I'm worried about my susceptibility to get that or any other illness due to my immune system. I'm also concerned about the elevated white cell count that the ER doctor had mentioned... now that we know what is not causing my symptoms (COVID-19) I have to wonder what is. What did I pick up at school or is it still just remnants of the pneumonia reemerging? I'm still running a low grade fever, still having shortness of breath, still coughing (though it has slowed again), my headaches are horrendous again, and I'm so exhausted. I'm not a doctor so all I can do is Google and you guys know that's never a good way to go. From what I've read I can account for the elevated white cell count because of the stress and anxiety, so we'll go with that. As for the rest of it, maybe it's a bug I picked up at school and I just have to let it run its course.
Guys skip to the next paragraph if "girl" things bother you...
*On another health related note... I've also developed really, really, really sore boobs in the last few days. Not sure that has anything to do with it, but they don't even get this sore (Who knew they could get worse than that!) when I cycle monthly, and it's not even close to time for that yet! Seriously, they are so sore just rubbing against them makes me want to cry out in pain. Not that any of you needed to know that tidbit, but it is also out of the ordinary for me, so I'm noting it. It feels a bit concerning because I currently have a lump in one breast that they are "watching" and I go for another follow up ultrasound for it in a few weeks. So yeah.*
Ok guys you can read again...
Anyway, I'm waiting to hear back from my doctor on what he thinks about the hospital's chest x-rays and the elevated white cell count. Until then, he has prescribed me a new inhaler, and once again I'm to stay away from people as much as possible to avoid getting infected while my immune system is compromised and until my symptoms subside. But that seems to be what everyone needs to be doing, or should be doing at this time anyway. I've also heard from the Health Unit, expressing pretty much the same concerns.
On a positive note, I'm thankful that I can safely hug my husband again, and maybe I won't feel so alone anymore. It's been difficult not being able to seek comfort from the one you love.
So here I am on day 5 (now 6) of #SocialDistancing #Quarantine, and though I have answers to some things, I 'm left with more questions. I've struggled with anxiety my whole life and this situation hasn't helped with that. I know there are others out there whose anxiety is much worse than mine, and my thoughts are with you all. I wish I had some sage advice to help us all be able to get through this without anxiety attacks and the ups and downs of this emotional rollercoaster, but sadly I do not. All I can do is take it day by day. If you need a virtual shoulder to cry on or need to vent your anxiety, feel free to leave a comment below. We all need to support each other. Am I right?
And also please be kind to those around you! The situation we all currently find ourselves in is devastating, but COVID-19 is not the fault of any one person or any one race of people. Trying to place blame at a time like this is the action of hatred, and I just can't stomach it.
Be kind. Be loving. Be helpful. Be encouraging. Be BETTER!
Hello from my home office! I'm not into poculture or anything.

This is a carousel. Use Next and Previous buttons to navigate
Emilio Navaira was a showman, an everyman with a sturdy voice that could lasso Tejano and country songs.
Guy Clark dubbed himself a "master songwriter" atop his website. But even without the self title, his influence was evident in legions of singer-songwriters who were influenced by his work.

Today was an interesting day to say the least. My father was going out grocery shopping today and invited me along last night, originally I declined, but I decided that I actually needed a few things so I asked him if I could still go along, he said yes, then I asked what time he was going to go, so I knew to be ready on time and not keep him waiting. He said 10, which was fine.
So this morning I was all set to go at ten, rushing my morning a little bit in order to get finished in time, then nothing. No call, no noise from downstairs, nothing. I go downstairs and see my father, we made small talk, neither of us mention going out, and there's noway he's ready to go out. So I head back upstairs. We don't end up leaving the house until 12:30, and by then I was steamed. I mean why tell me a time when it means absolutely nothing? It's a small thing, just something that really bugged me. I managed to get some sewing done when I was waiting, (and waiting, and waiting) but it didn't turn out anywhere how I liked it. It might be one of those things that looks better on paper than actual application. It's in the box now, but I wouldn't hold my breath that you'll see it anytime soon, pretty annoyed with it.
Anyway, when out we hit up a few second hand stores, nothing there I wanted, but that's not shocking or anything. They've all been pretty much a miss for a while now, so I wasn't too upset. After that I went to Hobby Lobby. I know, I know, I've been talking about how I'm not going there anymore, then I go there. I get it, my Mom teased me over it too. But you know what? I've drastically cut my spending down there, and frankly, they're unavoidable for some things in such a small town. Yesterday I finally hit my wall for not having any white calico. I needed it for a project, I knew this day was coming, so that's what I was buying. I also needed some light pink ribbon, as well as some interesting trim. I bought three yards of white calico, hoping that will be enough to keep me from needing it for a while. I don't think I've ever bought three yards of the same fabric before. But it's white so I know I'll use it. I also managed to get some pink ribbon. I wasn't so lucky on the interesting trim. I couldn't find anything that I really wanted, or liked. I think that I'm going to probably use that synthetic heart lace stuff that I got for Charlotte's Halloween costume. That stuff has payed for itself, it's my go to trim, that's another thing that I'll try and get more if when I finally use it up. I left there after spending a little more than ten dollars. Hopefully I'll be able to stay out of there for a while, let's hope it sticks this time.
I wasn't even tempted today at Walmart because I didn't even go there! But even if I had, I wouldn't have gotten anything. Like I said there's nothing out there that I even need. Even the fashionista's are ignored. But part of that is because of that annoying "swapping styles" feature. I don't need a doll that I can pop her head off at will. Also I dislike it because in order to be able to "swap" they got rid of the under bust joint. And that's a fail in my book, you can't offer me less movement. I've been spoiled by the first and second wave. I doubt I'll be buying much of them until they bring back that joint. But anyway, even at home I couldn't appreciate my purchases, or start using them. I had to buckle down and make cupcakes for tomorrow. Wasn't totally excited for it, but it must be done. Luckily they were pretty easy to make, and pretty easy to eat! (Have to taste test them!) I even managed to whip up some home made frosting to go with them. That's all I managed to get done today, but I think it's enough. Do you know that I just realized the next day that I have planned to sew is Tuesday, can I wait that long? (Yes, yes I can.)

: So, yeah, it took me awhile to get this posted. At first I kept trying to force this into a Rachel Morgan crossover (damn near a year), before I decided to accept that I wasn't going to be able to make that work. Then when I settled on True Blood
I was having trouble taking them directly to the True Blood
Verse - I can't explain it, but it just didn't feel right to go from the end of the BuffyVerse right into the TBVerse. So, I finally just decided pull out word and write what came naturally, and I managed to get a full draft of this chapter done, but a few things kept bugging me, so I went back and reread the first five chapters, and that lead to the third rewrite, because some of the stuff in that first full draft so did not work with what had come before. Anyway, almost two years and three rewrites later I am finally happy with this chapter. Finally.
So, with that out of the way...Disclaimer
: I do not own nor am I in any way associated with Resident Evil: Afterlife
(Yes, there's finally a blip of a crossover in this chapter, and while I disclaimed (cause that's the rules) I won't be listing it as a secondary crossover, because it's only one chapter and they don't interact with anything but zombies. So really except for a few tiny details it could be any reality where zombies have taken over, though Resident Evil: Afterlife
had the right set-up for me.
Mostly I think I ended up having
to briefly use a zombie verse because one of the original ideas for the end of the BuffyVerse was zombies, but in the end I just couldn't make zombies work since I wanted Buffy and Willow to die in the first rush, and I think they (Buffy and Willow) are simply to powerful to be taken out by zombies. Still I guess a part of me regretted not going with zombies in the first place.)
psst - There's also some stuff in this chapter that you might find disturbing, but most probably is the fact that a brain eating zombie in this chapter leads to another character death. BRAAAAAINS! Sorry, sorry, couldn't help myself.
(There was two potential characters on the chopping block, and basically deciding on True Blood
decided which of the two would die.)Uncharted Territory
In the end, it was Lorne who'd come up with the best suggestion. And that was to open the portal on the roof of the building. It was a good idea, because according to Wesley the minute they entered the portal all the protections would come down, or rather the minute Wesley or Tara entered the portal, and as these things often was one of the witches needed to be first and the other last. So, the demons would, if they was paying attention, be in the building before everyone entered the portal. Hopefully being on the roof would give them the much needed seconds to get everyone through, and would make it harder for the demons to figure out where they'd gone.
Of course, that wasn't the only problem. Again according to Wesley their portal would leave certain traces in the air, and if the demons knew anything about magic they could possibly track them to a new reality. That was enough to make Xander feel guilty, because if the demons did follow them it would mean another reality would suffer as theirs had, and that wasn't fair. However, there wasn't much they could do about that, because they really needed to leave this reality.
Xander glanced out the window, and realized the demons looked tensed and alert, almost as though they sensed something was about to happen. That meant they probably would be ready to storm the building once the shield went down.
It probably didn't help that Xander could tell that Wesley was hiding something. It seemed so obvious to Xander that he couldn't help but wonder why the others didn't seem to see it.
"It's time," Harmony squealed from somewhere behind Xander.
Xander turned away from the window, and was almost relieved. Even if they ended up in a bad reality there was hope that it wouldn't be as bad as the one they was leaving.
Once on the roof, it seemed this had been a hurry up and then wait situation. But finally there was a flash of light, and then a smoky vortex started to open.
Xander wasn't sure which happened first, Wesley entering the vortex or the building beneath his feet vibrating violently.
Then Xander was inside the vortex, and turned just in time to see Tara enter and then the feeling of being trapped as the light from the entry point vanished. They'd made it, and at the very least it would take the demons some time to follow them, if they even could. After all, no one was sure whether the demons could sense let alone work with magic. Lorne insisted that the demons following them wasn't possible, but others clearly doubted that.
The trapped feeling didn't last long, because it was suddenly hard for Xander to focus on anything. It almost seemed as though they was rushing though some lime green haze. It wasn't until Xander looked off in the distance that he could see stark green square outlines on solid black. Xander wasn't sure how he knew, but he knew those green square things were doors. However, he couldn't move toward them, all he could do was allow himself to be pulled along.
Xander started to panic. Would they be trapped in this weird almost black void forever?
Xander turned his head, and realized that they were all still together. They was speeding along, but somehow they stayed in a tight group.
Then suddenly a door was just in front of them, and Xander closed his eyes. But nothing happened, until he started to open his eyes. He felt his backside connect with solid ground, or a solid black top road that seemed to stretch forever in both directions.
Xander frowned. They were clearly in the middle of nowhere with no idea of where they were.
Slowly everyone started to rise to their feet, though Xander noted that Lorne looked heartbroken. Xander collected himself and then managed to get to his feet. He meant to move toward Lorne to see what was wrong, but once he was on his feet something else caught his attention.
He could see signs of a city off in the distance, but something was wrong. It hit him like a ton of bricks. It was night time, which meant there should be lights all over the city, instead the city was only lit by moonlight. So, while they weren't quite in the middle of nowhere, they might as well have been.
Xander frowned. Maybe they could find signs of life in the city, it could simply be a power outage, but Xander couldn't make himself believe that, especially since there was no reflection from what should have been windows in the high rises. Instead it almost looked as though there was no windows in the high rises.
After a long silence, Harmony spoke.
"So, where are we?"
Which was a good question, because they clearly had not landed in this new reality in the same spot where they left the old one. The original town around the old hospital had been abandoned before the demons moved in. There was no sign of the original town, nor the old hospital, not even a sign that it had ever stood here.
Xander realized that even with the full moon, he should be having slightly more trouble seeing. After a moment, Xander decided it wasn't important, or at the very least was something that could be worried about later.
Finally, almost as one they started toward the dark city. Once again, Xander noted that Lorne was jumpy, but again before Xander could ask someone spoke.
"Somethings not right," Lawson observed, and if Xander hadn't been turning from Lorne to Lawson he'd have missed Wesley turning to Lorne. For a moment, the look on Wesley's face matched the feelings Xander felt which shocked him. Finally, Wesley turned to Tara, and Xander couldn't see his eyes anymore, but there seemed to be something about Lorne's fear that was sparking something inside Wesley's mind.
The vampires moved closer to each other, and Xander realized they was smelling or sensing something that the humans couldn't, but a look at Oz revealed that while he might not be smelling/sensing as clearly as the vampires he was aware that something wasn't right.
Xander moved toward Wesley. He wanted to know what was going on
"So, what's up?" Xander tried for casual, but it came out sharper then he'd intended. "Where are we?"
Wesley cleared his throat softly, and Tara moved closer to them.
"While the doorway sealed the moment Tara entered," Wesley began. "We have no real way of knowing whether or not the demons would be able to use the trace magicks left behind to track us."
Wesley held up his hand. "Despite Lorne's insistence we can't be absolutely sure the demons cannot open a door themselves."True
, Xander thought, but the other side of that was that if the demons could open a door between realities why had they not returned until someone else had opened the door?
"Ah, there is that," Wesley replied, and Xander realized that he'd spoken some of his thoughts aloud. "But we do not know how they arrived or how they left the first time. It would be foolish to assume anything based on the fact that they didn't invade our reality until someone opened the door for them."
Tara nodded. "And we couldn't risk leading them to a fresh reality to invade. It wouldn't be fair to that reality."
"And we'd be right back where we started."
Xander nodded. He could see their point, because with their luck, of course, the demons would be able to follow them. Still that didn't explain what was bothering Lorne.
"So, we needed to make a quick stop in a non-populated reality," Tara whispered. "Just in case."
And out of the corner of his eyes, Xander could see Wesley frowning in Lorne's direction. Then Wesley turned back to them. "However, I do not believe we ended up where we intended."
"Where are we supposed to be?"
"A reality where there are no humans," Tara answered. "Either a reality where they was wiped out, or a reality where they never existed. There wasn't supposed to be anything here."
"There also wasn't supposed to be a great amount of natural magic present," Wesley added. "The less natural magic around the quicker any remaining evidence of our spell vanishes."
"So, what makes you think this isn't that?" Xander asked.
"Because there's more magic in the air then there should be," Tara said, at the same time Wesley said.
"The spell we cast when we arrived shows there are living humans here. Not many, but a few."
"Not as much as our reality, but more then we hoped," Tara finished her statement.
"Okay, that explains you guys, but not Lorne, or what's got the fang gangs panties in a bunch?" Xander said waving toward the still confabbing vampires.
Before anyone could answer with words, something jumped out of the bushes, and Lorne yelped. And now Wesley looked as though he'd figured everything out, but there was no time for him to share with the rest of class.
Xander was moving before the helpless puppy sound that only made Xander move faster. Still it was Wesley that reached Lorne first.
When Xander saw the creature that had taken Lorne down he froze. The creature looked human. Of course, a moment later when Wesley stabbed the thing and it didn't even slow down, Xander had to downgrade his human impression. Xander moved to help, but realized that Wesley didn't need any help. He was fighting like a man possessed.
However, there was suddenly more then one of the things, and Wesley moved back. Xander turned to call for the vampires, and realized the reason they hadn't come to help sooner was because they was busy with more of these things.
Wesley crab-walked backwards toward the vampires, and Xander moved to help Lorne. When he looked down, he realized that Lorne wasn't going to be moving again, half of his head was missing.
Spinning on his heal, he moved toward the vampires. He wanted to promise that he'd come back for Lorne, but suspected that would be a lie. That made him very unhappy, but he couldn't do anything about it now.
As he reached the vampires, he realized they was dealing with zombies, or at least something that really resembled zombies.
Suddenly a wolf burst out of the shadows and started attacking the zombies, and Xander wanted to smack himself. Of course, full moon plus werewolf equaled a wolfed out Oz. The thing was Xander was certain Oz hadn't instantly changed upon arrival, but once again that was a mystery that would have to wait for another time.
Finally, a path was cleared, and they started moving as well as fighting, which was a good thing. They could hold their own, but not forever, at some point out in the open like this the zombies would overwhelm them.
Thankfully, they saw a small house. It would be big enough for all of them to be comfortable, but small enough to be easily defended. However, once inside, Xander knew the structure wasn't up to the challenge of protecting them. Dust was everywhere, and if you looked closely at the furniture it was clear that some of the wood was rotten. It was the same with the walls and floors. This structure wouldn't hold the zombies back long.
"Great," Spike was muttering to himself as they took positions around the house. "You wankers just had to land us in a reality overrun with bloody fucking zombies!"
"It gets worse," Tara said casually, as though she wasn't dealing with a pissed off vampire. Or vampires, since they all turned to look very intently at Tara now.
"Worse?" Lawson asked, and Xander didn't miss the dangerous undertone in his voice.
"We can only make one more jump, and..."
"So?" Spike asked.
Tara sighed. "We still need to land in a reality where there are no humans and very little natural magic."
"No," Spike said, his voice now low and dangerous. "No, we bloody well do not! Sure there's a few humans here, but there's also the walking dead. But not just zombies, powerful things that use tentacles to suck faces off. The demons land here they ain't gonna be following us anymore."
Clem looked at Spike as though Spike was somehow going to save him from the zombies, and Xander almost laughed. Badass demons had invaded their reality, and yet several of their group was acting as though zombies was scarier then those demons.
Xander frowned, because he could see both points. Spike was probably right, that if the demons landed here, especially if they landed in the same spot, then it would at least delay them a little to deal with the zombies. However, as noted the demons were fairly badass, which meant the zombies might not slow them down much.
Still Tara was looking thoughtful, and Xander saw Wesley nod at her. So, their next stop would probably be their last one. That was when Xander realized he agreed with Spike. Sure there was some humans around, but there wasn't really anything they could do about it. It wasn't like they could go back and not arrive in this reality, which meant the moment they arrived the remaining people of this reality would be doomed if Lorne was wrong.
"We should still try and gather more ingredients," Tara said, though she sounded like she didn't want to bring the subject up again. "Considering that we didn't land where we meant to this time around..."
"That's a good point," Harmony said. "But there's zombies out there..."
This time Xander didn't hide his amusement, because Harmony like Clem sounded more scared of the zombies then she'd ever been of the demons. Personally, Xander would take fighting zombies over fighting those demons anytime, though he really wasn't eager to tangle with zombies.
"Actually," Lawson spoke up. "We could release Oz, he's pretty good at clearing a path."
"Yeah, but he...," Andrew started, then gulped when he realized he had everyone's attention. "He could be... I mean, if he..."
That's when Xander realized that it was odd that Oz had not just followed them inside, but wasn't trying to attack and eat them. In fact, he was sitting at a window looking for all the world as if he knew what was going on. While he'd been calmer after having fed from Lawson this was a whole new and unexpected level.
Lawson frowned at Andrew.
"We don't know what would happen if he ate one," Andrew said. "And it looked like he really wanted to."
"A werewolf with a taste for zombie," Clem said doubtfully. "I think they like live meat."
Xander's laugh was cut short by Andrew and Harmony screaming as the big window near them shattered.
"I don't think we have time to look for more stuff," Xander yelled, but only to be heard over the sounds of fighting, or at least that's what he'd keep telling himself.
"Whelp's right, we need to get the fuck out of here now!"
Suddenly there was a noise, and the zombies outside exploded, and Xander realized that at some point Angel had snuck away from the group. The few zombies that escaped the explosion were dealt with quickly.
"This reality isn't so bad," Angel said, and Xander was half scared and half turned on by the expression on Angel's face. Sometimes Xander was okay with his weird attraction to Angel, and other times it bothered him. He still couldn't understand why sometimes he was okay with it.
"But I know where we can open another door."
Xander stepped outside, and realized that they weren't that far from the ocean.
Wesley was smiling. "Yes, that's perfect. If they land where we did, and then we do this over water..."
"I think we're near Los Angeles," Harmony said mournfully. Andrew looked around, and his eyes widened, and Xander realized that Harmony was correct. They was literally on the outskirts of what used to be Los Angeles county.
"Yeah, yeah, lets move," Spike said cutting, or trying to cut Wesley off.
"Water has some purifying and destructive properties," Wesley continued, though his voice soon went to low for Xander to hear.
Surprisingly, they made their way to the beach with very little problem, and there was a nice little raft big enough to hold them all.
"Does this seem to easy to anyone else?" Andrew asked, though Xander had the feeling he was mostly talking to himself. However, Xander was about to back him up anyway, but Angel was suddenly speaking.
"It makes sense," Angel pulled a device out of his jacket. "I found this," and he held up the device. It was flat and shinny, it might've been a radio, but didn't look like any kind of radio Xander had ever seen. Angel pressed a button and a message started was saying "no infection, safety," which sounded good to Xander.
"You may not be able to see it," Angel said, "but Arcadia is a boat just up and off shore."
"Clever," Wesley said. "Zombies aren't generally known for their motor skills."
"But we aren't going to the boat, right?" Tara asked.
Wesley shook his head. "We simply need to get in the raft, get some distance off shore, and then we open another door."
As they loaded themselves on the raft, Xander thought of something. It wasn't a happy thought, but it was something they needed to seriously consider. It might be better if they headed to the big boat after all.
"Um, should we leave?"
Everyone turned to look at Xander, and he knew they thought he was nuts. And since he was feeling a bit nuts, he didn't call them on it.
"I can't be the only one who heard the word infection, right? We could be infected by whatever's here," and at least now Tara and Angel looked sympathetic.
"Should we really risk infecting another reality with whatever went wrong here?"
"I think we'll be all right," Tara finally said. "Lorne was the only one attacked, and since we just--we just--left--him."
Spike laid a hand on her shoulder, and Xander almost felt bad that he was glad he wasn't the only one unhappy about leaving Lorne behind.
Then Xander frowned. Unhappy a thought as it was, Xander had to admit now that it might be good that they'd left his body behind, especially if Lorne ended up rising as a zombie, though maybe because Lorne was a demon he wouldn't rise, but there was really no way to know for sure. Unless Lorne suddenly jumped out and attacked them.
"Um," Harmony said, and she sounded like she'd rather not be speaking at all, which was rare for Harmony. "But do we know for sure Oz didn't eat any zombie meat?"
Xander frowned, and saw several others frowning, as well.
To Xander's surprise, Wesley moved to the big wolf, and proceeded to give him a mini exam. Lawson watched them both very closely.
"There's no evidence that he consumed anything," Wesley finally said. "And if he did, he seems unaffected. Though I suppose I can't say for sure since I know very little about this infection
For a moment, Xander thought they was about to stop their plan and head for the boat. Then Wesley decided that because there was humans still alive in this reality, though they had yet to see any, that the infection was spread by contact not air or other non-contact methods, and as long as Oz hadn't consumed any he should be fine.
"But we don't know!" Harmony insisted.
And she had a point, but it looked like Oz was in no danger of becoming a zombie. And if it became necessary, they could deal with Oz before he spread the infection to another person. And as long as he didn't bite anyone it should be fine anyway.
Xander frowned. The thought of killing Oz should bother him, but it just didn't. Xander wanted to think the idea didn't bother him because he was just numb, but he knew that wasn't it. After Cordelia, Xander knew he'd be able to do what was necessary. While killing Cordelia had been the right thing to do it broke something in Xander that still hadn't recovered.
Xander looked up to see if anyone else was feeling what he was, and he realized that everyone was looking at Wesley who'd started to speak softly.
"I think," he said to Tara, and Xander realized they was some distance off-shore now, which was a good thing since the shore was now lined with zombies. Thankfully, no Lorne looking zombie was among them.
"That you should probably take the lead this time."
Tara nodded, and Xander realized that Wesley was almost completely overcome with guilt now, and even Tara seemed sad.
"Just remember, we need a reality where there are no versions of us."
"Wait, why?" Andrew asked.
"Because," Tara said slowly, and with more patience then Xander would've been able to manage. "There are three possible outcomes. Both versions (us and our other) could wipe each other out simply by being in the same reality."
Tara's voice had cracked a bit, but Xander understood, if they had to avoid realities like their own that meant they weren't likely to encounter any of the people they'd known and lost.
"Less scary is that maybe the two versions would merge in to one being," Tara sounded so hopeful that Xander almost suggested risking it. After all, he wouldn't mind seeing a version of Willow, Buffy, Anya, and others again.
"The least scary option is probably the less likely."
"Which is?" Lawson asked when it appeared as though Tara wasn't going to continue.
"It's possible that the two versions could exist in the same reality, but it's best to assume that the worst possible case is the most likely outcome," Wesley said.
Andrew backed down.
"Sorry," Wesley said sheepishly. "I realize you know all this as well as I do, but after I messed up..."
Tara smiled. "No problem."
"I guess now we know why Lorne didn't want to make a side-stop," Harmony said, which caused both Wesley and Tara to flinch.
"What?" Lawson asked.
Harmony turned to Wesley and Tara. "You remember, right? He kept insisting that there was no danger of the demons following us..."
"We get it," Angel said sharply, and Xander realized that the vampire was trying to spare Wesley's feelings. Wesley who was looking even worse now then when he'd first figured everything out.
Harmony frowned at Angel, then looked around.
"Oh," she said when she actually looked at Wesley. "Hey, it's not your fault, you didn't know
, and Lorne should've told you."
Wesley smiled weakly, and Harmony clearly thought she'd cheered him up, but Xander could tell that it was going to take more then that to make Wesley feel better.
"I mean, really, if I knew, I'd make sure to tell everyone so they wouldn't do something like that."~ * ~ * ~
Author Note (Friday, June 29, 2012): I'm so sorry about the delay(s) on updating. The truth is that I had been moved to full time work and after that I simply didn't have the time/energy to work on fanfic. I'd love to promise that all these fics will eventually be updated/finished, but my current mood won't allow me to promise that. So I'll just say that I haven't actively given up on ANY of them, but in some cases it will be necessary for me to reread what's all ready been posted before moving on to writing more of the story, because in one case I had gotten close to finishing a story chapter (and I won't say which story) when I realized that while the chapter itself was good it did not actually fit with what had come before. So, I am sorry, but it's probably gonna be awhile before any of my stuff sees any updates.

A Cincinnati middle school basketball team is in hot water after wearing jerseys that had racial slurs on them. Due to the nature of the team’s name and their jerseys, the team can no longer play during the current season.
First, the team’s name was sexually suggestive–Wet Dream Team. Tony Rue, a parent at the game, says that the names on the back of the jersey offended people in the stands.
Rue was in the stands, waiting for his son’s team to play. The teams playing at the time have no affiliation with their school districts.
Due to the jerseys, the game was called before it was even over.
One player’s jersey had the words “Knee Grow” on the back, and another said “Coon.” Rue took the pictures and posted them, plus more on his Facebook page. He doesn’t understand how the names were able to get past so many adults.
The vice president of the Cincinnati NAACP board, Joe Mallory, would like to sit down the league. He wants to see what went wrong.
On Monday, Charrise Middleton, the division coordinator for the team said that the team is no longer apart of the league. Also, that they will not return anytime during the season to play.
According to Middleton, the rec center does not support the uniforms that the kids were wearing during the game. She says that they follow all rules in place by the Cincinnati Premier Youth Basketball League. She and her colleagues fully support the removal of the team and their players.
Middleton also had words from the teams’ coach. The coach says that he and his team apologize for offending anyone with their jerseys. They were willing to change them or cover them up. However, the league chose to remove them from playing, and they accept their decision.

Great location, great hotel
Posted Sep 26, 2016
When we arrived at Madrid airport, BA had lost our bags. We had only what we were wearing and our handbags. It was a real relief then to find lovely Clarins products in our room that we could use, as well as toothbrushes and toothpaste (a nice touch). The beds were very comfortable, the pool and poolside service great (though the pool itself is super-freezing). Everything was immaculate and the location was perfect - we were close to lots of lovely shops, which is handy when you don't have a change of clothes on you! But also close to the old part of town - a short walk of about 15 -20 minutes t the Cultural Institute and on to Plaza Santa Ana. We were two women on a three-day indulgent break, and we both found Madrid centre very safe and comfortable to walk around at night. But we both really loved this hotel and would definitely stay again.

Zari Hassan lambasts ex, Diamond Platnumz over cheating allegations
Popular Ugandan socialite, Zari Hassan took to social media to deny claims that she cheated on her ex-boyfriend and baby daddy, and Diamond Platnumz.
This was after Diamond Platnumz granted a radio interview in which he alleged that Zari was cheating on him when they were still together and living with their two children.
Reacting to his comment, Zari lambasted him for making such an allegations. According to her, she never cheated on him. She went as far as praying that their two kids die if she ever cheated on him whilst they were dating. She said:
”I will sacrifice my kids soul if I ever cheated on you. Own your mistakes and use them to grow and change into a better man. You can still reform”

I am here to announce that our baby was born on Friday, August 15th at 2:58 in the afternoon and it is a ….
We feel so blessed and are so happy with our new little guy. I have so many things to say and I have no idea where to start.
To begin we have named him Garrett Michael Reid and he surprised all of us by being born weighing a whopping 11 pounds and 3 ounces, 22 inches long with a 15 cm head. He was born at home, in water, with the assistance of my wonderful midwife Sherry and her two assistants, Dorise and Susan. Thanks to Sherry I was able to birth my gigantic little guy without tearing! I am so glad I did not know how big he was going to be. Having no fear over his size definitely allowed me to birth him without complication. I fear that had he been born in a hospital he would have been an emergency c-section or at the least, I would have had an epesiotomy. His head was born under water but Mike had to support me while I stood to birth his shoulders. I’m not going to get to the birth story today but labor began around 5 in the morning (I’ll have to look at my notes) and he was born at 2:58 so it was a short labor. I can not tell you how relieved I was considering that his sister, Camden, was born after 58 hours of labor. Thank you Red Raspberry Leaf Tea! The birth was so wonderful and I am so happy with how things turned out and feel so blessed to have been able to have and give my son the birth experience I have always wanted.
I took new pictures today and yesterday but haven’t had a chance to upload them to the computer yet and Garrett is sleeping on me so I’ll have to do that later. For now here are a few pics. Thank you Emeth and Shelby for being at the birth to help and to take pictures and I’m sorry to Lisa and Shilowe who wanted to be there so bad and weren’t able to.
When I share the birth story I will include pictures of the birth.
Here he is!!

….a story of patience and resilience (contd. from last edition)
By Mercy Hill
… I had no problem doing them (i.e., doing the things outside the basic things expected from a junior seminarian on apostolic work). But when I was posted to work in Achalla, I came to realize that these issues (liturgical activities) were secondary to the life of a seminarian working there.
I saw myself being sent to work in the farm; I started learning how to ride on bicycle – as it was the basic means of movement. At Uga, it was Okada (Motorcyle); at Achalla, it was bicycle (what we call long John).
I worked under Fr. Chike Nwosu where we had fish farm and rice farm. I was going to Igbariam to ensure that the rice farm was on- going – what is called in Igbo as “ije chua nnunu na rice”. We were doing all these stuff. Eventually, about two months,
I seriously took ill that it was something I may call ‘a rite of passage into the real thing has come through, because I became so sick that I could not cope with the demand. At Uga too, feeding was wonderful; let me also mentioned this because, I am a philosopher by training. One of the medieval philosophers, Rene Descartes said that we live first, then we can philosophy.
At Uga, we had a wonderful cook, in fact, every afternoon we had new soup, chicken and what have you. There was no Father’s boy then, I was the only one there with the priests. The cook was so good to me. Sometimes, I will have almost a half of chicken to myself just to enjoy. At Achalla, it was entirely a different thing. So, feeding became difficult, eating was difficult, the rest is history.
It taught me some realities about catholic priesthood. When you talk about mission and priest who are on mission, sometimes we see some clips on social media about priest who work in difficult places; people sometimes look at them and just breathe.
But, I can tell you, I have seen the ugly side and I have also seen the good side. It gave me a balanced vision about the catholic priesthood going forward, especially in the major seminaries. If you post me anywhere, I don’t care. As far as am alive now, I am ready to work anywhere; and I can tell you it will not touch even my deepest personality.
That’s the story of Achalla. These things happened to me, but one fundamental thing I also grew up to enjoy having worked at Achalla that helped me in my pastoral ministry was the Block Rosary visitation. Often, we reserve that for those in the six weeks apostolic work – that is, senior seminarians who come in August.
But, in Achalla it was part of my basic assignment. As a junior seminarian, I was visiting the Block Rosary centres, from one village to another, organizing them. It gave me the foundation to begin to love Block Rosary. I was a member of Block Rosary from Enugu down to Anambra, it worked fine.
Having left Achalla, I was then finally found worthy to be a seminarian for the Spiritual Year. I did that at Akwu-Ukwu combined with Onitsha Archdiocesan candidates then. We had that at St Pius X, Akwu-Ukwu, in the year 2000.
By October, 2000 I was admitted into philosophical studies at Pope John Paul II Major Seminary, Okpuno. That was where I had my philosophy from 2000-2004. After that, I had a very good experience (all those things, whether they were ugly before or not, I see them now as good experience).
Apostolic work after philosophy
My one-year apostolic work after philosophy was Nazareth Formation Centre, Isiagu. Isiagu now has a motorable road, then it was bad. That was 2004-2005 and I can tell you, my experience in Achalla was the basic foundation that helped me work at Isiagu.
If I had not repeated apostolic work at Achalla, if I had not had that Achalla experience, if I have been taken straight up from Uga, I may not have seen priesthood in all these of its shapes; and I can tell you, not every priest has been privileged of knowing that priesthood has different shapes.
Some people have always worked in a very good place since all through their formation; such may not be able tolerate or understand. But I can tell you, I have seen it all and I can say it with every sense of modesty that I have seen it all. At Isiagu, it was very difficult: you were always on your bike coming to Awka to pick something for the lunch and you have to go back again to Awka.
There was no electricity, so our refrigerator was at the Cathedral in Awka. When those at the Cathedral complained, we had to take it to the Retreat Centre, Okpuno. Then, the Rev. Sisters were in charge of the Retreat Centre. I was going to the Retreat Centre to pick something for the day, and then rode back to Isiagu.
At Isiagu, I took charge of the fish pond, felled firewood for which we cook, boiled the drinking waters, wash the clothes and then take time to cut the grasses around the main building. I was doing virtually everything you could not even imagine.
It was at Isiagu that I was forced to travel to Lagos from Anambra State on a night travel with a trailer that had the container for our tractor. Since then, I have never embarked on any other night travel. It was the first and the last. That was the time I was working with my oga, Very Rev. Fr Joseph Mary Nwosah. It was the driver, the conductor and myself who had to come back with the 20-feet container.
We took off around 6pm, we got to Berger and stopped. We waited there, and I was on Soutane as a senior seminarian. I was asked to be on soutane.. I had no option but to obey – when you are on soutane, you are restricted. You cannot even say let me stretched my leg.
Even when a call of nature calls, you cannot even attend to it. Even though we got home late, we actually succeeded in the journey. Isiagu was another lesson in disguise. My theology school was at Blessed Tansi Major Seminary, Onitsha.
At what point did you know you were going to become a priest?
As early as Primary 3 or 4.
How that early?
Something happened, at housing estate primary school. We were under a tree, what you call gmelina tree. The usual trend then was outdoor class. So the teacher, a lady then, whom I can’t even trace again, asked each of us what we would become in future.
Others were mentioning doctor, engineer and what have you. It got to my turn; I looked at her and, I said: ‘Rev. Father. She picked so much interest in that response, and she said, ‘good!’ and continued: “You want to be a priest,?” And I said yes! How that happened I didn’t even know.
From that moment, I started disturbing my parents about joining the altar servers. Our parish was St. Theresa’s Parish Abakpa-Nike.
My father went to make enquiry, and they told him I must receive first Holy Communion first and that I was not up-to the age. My actual drive was that, when I joined the mass server, it is from the mass servers that I will join the priests. I never knew there was something called seminary. When I began to disturb my father so much, he began to make enquiry.
He is not even aware, he hadn’t the knowledge then. He started making enquiry, that his son wanted to become a priest, what should he do? It was in his office that someone told him of Sacred Heart Seminary, Nsude. So, he left for Nsude and got the form. I was already in primary six then. He brought the form and said you have to fill this form for the seminary and I was so happy. But when I got in to the seminary, I became sad again because I wanted to go back to my house. Sometimes it’s funny.
That was the starting point, but it does not mean that I have always maintained these intentions. Often, from time to time, I had always wished to leave the seminary to drop.
At what point?
The first was at Achalla. In fact, when I was asked to repeat after Uga experience, I nearly left. At a point, my sister was also on my neck to leave.

Caryn Crowley has been teaching History at DaVinci Academy since 2015. She teaches Utah History, World Civilizations, and AP European History.
Caryn was born in Utah, but she grew up in Las Vegas, NV. She was a choir major at Las Vegas Academy, which is when she first decided she would become a teacher. She originally majored in Choral Education at UNLV. After two years, she took time off from college and moved to Utah. She switched majors at the University of Utah to history and has never regretted it. She graduated magna cum laude from the U, took a year off, then enrolled in the Masters of Education program at Weber State University. She is currently at the end of that program, finishing her thesis.
She enjoys spending time with her family, especially her dogs and cat. Her hobbies include trivia games, photography, and singing in her Jazz band.

Dammy Krane finally released, tells his own side of the stolen credit card story (Video)
By Rita Chioma
Dammy Krane has released a video to declare his innocence and thank fans for standing by him while he was arrested for grand theft last week.
He explained that he has never and would never be seen doing fraud, but that the whole mess came to him because the agents that booked the private jet did so with stolen cards.
It would be recalled that on Friday, June 2, he was arrested on charges of credit card fraud and identity theft. It was alleged that music star was caught after he booked a private jet with stolen credit card.
Trapjets took to Twitter to confirm his arrest.
Below is the video he released after he was set free:

Dejana B. was born in 1989. She comes from Doboj where she lives with her parents. Dejana is employed and she earns 400 KM monthly. Beside her job, she re-sells cosmetics and jewelry, bags and straps. She wants to order more products and be able to offer more and get more customers. That is the reason why she has requested a loan through WWI in the amount of 1300 KM.

Mum did try to sleep in but rubbish bags have to be out before 8am. The pipe workers working on our street were amused to see mum with her bed hair take up the rubbish bags.
She finally got out of her dressing gown to do some chores and go for a walk. She visited the library to stock up for the Easter weekend. When she got home i was in the same spot I had been in when she left.
Chicken and broccoli pasta for dinner for her and a feast for me. So nice to have a day off. I enjoyed it.

Amber Rose has always been a bombshell, but ever since she's gotten her breast reduction surgery, she's been looking even better if that is possible. The 34-year-old was seen showing some cleavage while out with a friend at SoHo House.
Amber wore hugging leggings paired with a marching band style jacket and platform boots.
Amber said on social media she was opting for the surgery because she was having back pain and wanted to wear spaghetti straps again, something she hasn’t done since she was ten-years-old.
And she's clearly happy with the results! "I was like a 36H, I was really, really big,” she said afterwards.
“I think now, I might actually just be a D cup, which is really small for me!" she continued. Well, it looks great still!
The first thing she did after the surgery was go shopping, of course! "I've been online shopping and getting cute little shirts," Amber said.
What are your thoughts on her new look? Let us know in the comments section.

I have been either away from home or too busy to blog. I will try and fill you in on my activities.
On Wednesday I went to Natchitoches for a doctor's appointment and then on to Alexandria for a doctor's appointment on Thursday. I stayed with my parents and had a great time. I have this little book of questions written my Melody Ross, the author I couldn't remember the other day. I got some time alone with my dad and made it through 10 questions with him. He reminded me of a book he wrote and self-published just for the family about his life. I learned a lot more about him and he seemed to enjoy the interview.
Later on, I intervied my mother and got 10 questions done with her as well, plus a lot of information that weren't related to the questions. She has the most brilliant memory of things like what a little dress of hers looked like when she couldn't have been more than three years old. We stayed up very late talking. I had a wonderful time with them.
I took them out to eat at a fantastic and quiet Italian restaurant. We all ordered the same thing, but I had mine served on angelhair pasta. There were fried in bread crumbs eggplant medallions topped with a Newburg type sauce with some cut green onions and huge shrimp. We were so stuffed that we couldn't even order any dessert. We saw two of my dad's doctors there and a dear family friend and her husband. We visited with them for 30 minutes before we ever ordered. We just never get to see and visit with them. They are the ones that suggested the meal. If you are even in Alexandria, Louisiana, try Bellino's Italian Restaurant on Jackson Street extension. It is on the left next door to Mac's Market. You won't be sorry. Oh, they had the most delicious bread and butter before the meal that must be baked by them daily. Nice dining experience.
On Friday my granddaughter's wedding gown had come in up in Minden, Louisiana and I took her for her first fitting. I bought her the most elegant veil. She wasn't going to wear one, but I got the lady to bring out a few and she picked the first one she tried on. She is going to be one gorgeous bride!!! We went out to eat and made the obligatory visit to Walmart as I needed one roll of ribbon to finish the fans I am making for the wedding. There was a bride and her mother there also getting fitted and we had the best time with them. Lots of laughter and the bride ended up getting a different gown after hers had already been altered. These people that run the shop are incrediblely nice. If you need a gown and live in the area, give Hers a try. I think you will be more than pleased. Save plenty time for your fitting because you will need it. Also, if you need to buy a veil and haven't done that in 43 years, then be ready for a price tag that matches the national debt. LOL
Friday night our son and his family were in town from Conway, Arkansas, and they invited us out to his sister-in-laws for supper. DELICIOUS and we enjoyed their company so much. Then they invited us to their place in Grand Cane for supper on Saturday night. Another fantastic meal like we all love: purplehull and zipper cream peas mixed, hot water cornbread, and succotash. Boy can you hurt yourself eating that kind of food. He has to go to Houston for the week and his wife has some things the children have to do in Conway, but we are all going to meet up again next weekend when both of them return to their place in Grand Cane. It has been miserable for me since they moved 4.5 - 5 hours away one year ago in August. I was used to them being two blocks away for so long.
My daughter works from sun up to sun down and I can't see how she does it, but she manages it so well. She had to fly to Boston on Saturday morning until this next Thursday for a conference with her job. She also had to work last Friday and that is why I got a memory making day with her daughter. I am sorry she couldn't be there, but on the other hand am so happy I was free. Well, I did have to cancel my therapy on my knee, but who cares. I had a much better time with my granddaughter.
My son and his family stopped by after church this AM and he is off south to Houston and his wife is off to the north to Arkansas. I thought it woud be a good idea to use this afternoon to catch up on my blogging and reading email that I have neglected.
Oh, my "Puppy Boy" is really going downhill fast. I am beginning to believe we are being selfish in wanting him to stay around. He has to be picked up now as his back legs won't get him up. Once he is up he can get to his food bowl and water bowl. On most days he can get down the steps to go outside to potty, but has to be carried back up the steps. He has arthritis in his back end and nerve damage, but he sees the vet every three weeks and Jeffrey says he still eats well and had a strong heartbeat. We are relying on him, the vet, to tell us when it is time to put him down. I tune up like right now everytime I even let that thought enter my mind. He is such a loving dog, loves his treats, and what really breaks my heart is how embarrassed he looks if he has an accident. I am going to really have to pray about the reasons we are keeping him with us.
A Smaller Funkis...Among Us
2 months ago

|Yesterday I went out to check the mail. When I was walking back to the house, I notice a Walmart bag by the front door. "Huh?"... I saw Christmas wrapping paper & present inside. At first I thought it was maybe from one of our neighbors. I couldn't think who it would be from... Well, it was for Eon~ and it was from Santa Claus!!! Eon wrote a letter in school to Santa. One of the things he said he wanted was legos. Well look what Santa brought him!! :D Santa Rocks!! |
I *think* it was from his teacher. But I can't imagine buying something like this for every student in her classroom. That was so awesome of her! I told Eon, "You better write a really nice thank you note to Santa!" He said, "How will I get it to him?" I said "Well how did you get your first letter to him? Maybe your teacher can deliver it to Santa.." :P So cool. It made both of our days.

Thursday, January 31, 2008
Sticks or Stones
After graduating the High School of Art and Design, I didn't really want any more schooling and thought I'd take a chance and see what would come of persuing an art career. Seeing published work on the art boards around the school by artists who got gigs as professionals right after they graduated the school, like Joe Jusko, was encouraging. I knew I wasn't that good, but I was determined to try and break into that world.
My friend Lance Tooks was an intern at Marvel Comics from the 11th grade and worked there many years after graduation, editing scores of books. After months, almost a year after high school, at Lance's insistence, I went up to Marvel Comics to see about the whole interning thing. I was asked to bring a portfolio of some of my work, so I did. I was no child prodigy able to paint beyond my years, and I knew it. But I've always had a thing for drawing anatomy which I've always worked on to get better.
So, I went on up to Marvel Comics one afternoon, not really looking to impress anyone, but just hoping be around artists to learn the comics business. After meeting with Lance I was told the only person available to see me was an editor named Larry Hama. I had no idea who this was, but he was an editor who I was told I had to deal with. After a handshake, I sat across Mr. Hama's desk as he picked up my portfolio just as he answered his phone. While chatting on the phone, he flipped through my work rather bruskly, finished his conversation, closed my porfolio and, after sliding it back across the desk to me very blandly said "It sucks".
Like I wrote, I wasn't looking to impress anyone.
Strangely enough, that experience didn't mean much to me. Being a young, aspiring artist, it didn't have any negative affect on me. It could be because I had no idea who this guy was and he didn't make any impression on me. I just knew he had a job at Marvel Comics. I know many artists who told me they had similar experiences with editors and were so devestated that they couldn't draw for a while. After that incident, I had lunch with my friends, went back to my job as a messenger then went home and drew all night-like I usually did then.
A few weeks later, I went to meet with Lance again at Marvel for lunch and was hanging out in the lobby waiting while talking to the receptionist. I just happened to have my portfolio, but with only a few large drawings and a sketchbook. After a few minutes the door to the offices open and out comes Marie Severin. I thought, "Hey, that's Marie Severin!" Almost immediately she spots my portfolio and says to me "How ya doin'? You an artist?" I think I said something intelligible and she says "Mind if I have a look?" I again muttered something and before my head cleared, Ms. Severin was sitting next to me looking through my sketchbook, then the larger drawings that I had-and she did so with her complete attention. The best part was she kept commenting on how good my art anatomy was and asking where did I study. I knew she was being sincere-if those lines had come from an editor, it would have come off as sarcasm. I was talking with an artist. And I knew who SHE was.
Ready for the rest?
Before Ms. Severin was through looking at my work-and she sat with me for no less than a half hour-the door opens again and out strolls John Romita Sr. "Hey, that's Jazzy John Romita", I scream in my head. And Ms. Severin says, "Hey, Johnnie, come look at this guy's work." And there I was, on a sofa with Marie Severin and John Romita checking out my work, both giving me laurels for my figure drawing. Afterwards, they both shook my hand and recommended I put more work together and keep knocking on the comic book doors. I then had lunch with my friends and related the whole story. Now, THAT experience affected me.
Years after that, after going my own way and self publishing, I would look at the work I had shown Ms. Severin and Mr. Romita back then, and realized just how bad I was, and how gracious they were in taking the time to encourage another artist. And even though I've developed my own style over the years, it's very difficult to say anything negative to a young person who asks me to critique their work. I just think maybe they'll develop a style that I can learn from and they'll be succesful with it. Since leaving the hospital last month, I've thought a lot about what I've done with my art and there've been quite a few things, the most rewarding being I've gotten better. The picture above is from 1998 after I've finished installing my pieces for my first exhibition at the International Erotic Film Festival in Barcelona, Spain. I'll save that story for another time, but, man, it was wild.
I've been wanting to show my work to Ms. Severin and Mr. Romita now for the last few years and recount my story to them. I'm sure they've forgotten. But I know they'd still be just as gracious, regardless of whether they personally liked my work or not. It would still mean a lot to me now, just as it did then.
One thing is for certain: I will never tell any aspiring artist that his or her work 'sucks'. There's a name for people who do that: they're called "editors".

There was a quiet muttering of renewed acquaintances subdued by the silence of the hall. Old alliances were acknowledged with a stern handshake and a muttered joke, but they all knew they were here for the last time.
There were two times twelve of them, one from each of the great states of Earth, the Elders of their lands selected for their wisdom and authority.
Most of them were tall, as befit this room with its overpowering arches and this great throne around which the empty half circle of chairs stood.
The arc of chairs was perfect, each fixed for centuries in its position and used once every decade for the Elders’ Congregation. It stuck one of these elders that the room was most unfamiliar with people, being empty for these ten year periods and occupied for a few short hours, a flash in time.
The character of the murmer changed and a drift towards the chairs began.
They settled, and there was silence.
One of the Elders rose to his feet. “Gentlemen, we have one item on our agenda. Would those in favour please stand.”
Those who had arrived with doubts had found them dispelled by the atmosphere of the place. They rose at their various speeds, according to their age and dignity, unanimous.
“Then do it.”
Each man removed his crown, the symbol of his power and the weight of his responsibility, and cast it down at the foot of the throne of the Lamb.
Each gathered his things and returned to his land, a lightness in his step.
Someone explained to me this bit of Revelation recently, and I kind of liked this picture of the elders throwing down their crowns. I’m sure my version of it is completely wrong, but what I really got out of it was that all that they had done during their lives was important, but they could just be freed of the responsibility by submitting completely to God.
I think out of everything I need to learn, that’s the most important thing for me.

Read what other Viator.com travelers think about the Tuscan Cooking Class and Dinner in Florence. What they loved, what they liked and what they think could be improved, it's all here to help you make the most of your next trip.
We had a great time. The instructors were well organized, they encouraged everyone to be involved, and the food was great. We really enjoyed meeting all of the new people. And learning some new skills.
AMAZING!! Mother / Daughter trip and this was for sure a highlight! Our chefs were fun and helpful and the food was crazy good...we still cant believe we can make this food! Excited to attempt it on our own!
The cooking class was so much fun! I would highly recommend this class. The teachers were great and kept it lively. The meal was served with delicious wine downstairs in a beautiful cellar that was warm and inviting. Met some great people also.
This was a great experience. We learned to make a four course meal and took the recipes home with us. The chef's we worked with were fun, made us laugh and kept us on track. The food was excellent and the group size was perfect.
Instructors were very helpfull and friendly
The evening was a delight
This was one of the highlights of our trip. It was also the anniversary of our friends in the class and my wife's birthday. The cooking crew made it special with candles on the cake we had made for dessert. It was a lovely experience and we left with recipes that we can make at home. . . .We hope to do it again on our next visit!!!
Great evening and so well organised. The staff were very passionate about their job and a lot of fun. We attended another class the next day at another venue with a one Michelin star chef and this one was far superior. Would recommend and would definitely do another class with them. It was hands on and we picked up,little tips.
Great experience the Chefs were excellent. The food was amazing.
We'll this was so much fun. Staff were brilliant and very interested about sharing their tips and love of food. Produce was fresh and fabulous. Great for if you know how to cook and just want some local tips and tricks or if you are a beginner. Dinner was yummy and fun - lots of really nice people were doing this so don't be shy! I was alone and had a ball!
Great experience. Learn some traditional Italian dishes, eat them afterwards with some local wine; and the best part is you can reproduce them at home as they give you a little recipe booklet.
So much fun. Great instruction. Excellent facility. Very professonally run. Would definately do something like this again.
Absolutely awesome!! Chef and personal had fun personalities and were enjoyed by everyone!
A wonderful way to spend an evening in Florence! Highly recommended for anyone interested in food and wine. The instruction was fun, and the recipes were easy to reproduce at home. Highly recommended!

This is Tsoltan. I love him and he loves me. Tsoltan has a psychological trauma. He's afraid of people, he knows they can hurt him... alot! When he was 1y old, my mom called vet and they castrated him when I was at work. The vet used a little dose of anesthetic for some God damn reasons, so Tsoltan was awake shortly after vet left, feeling incredible pain.
But even though he's afraid of all people, he's feeling comfortable and safe when I'm near. He's playing and behaving like a usual cat... He's just a much more attached to his owner than cats usually are.
He loves boxes of course!
And he knows where the best spot to chill out during hot summer.
I think they finally became friends.
He's a friend with a ferret.
And just look at this majestic tail!
Tsoltan sleeps with me. Because he knows that I won't let anybody hurt him anymore!

Wichita, Kan. -- A woman was seriously hurt after she was struck by and SUV in west Wichita.
It happened on Taft Street, near Dugan Road, behind the Kohl's Department Store. Wichita Police say a 42-year-old woman was running across the street when an SUV turned out of a driveway and hit her.
Sgt. Steve Yarberry says the woman was pinned underneath the SUV and had to be rescued by firefighters. She was taken by EMS to Via Christi-St. Francis Hospital, but her injuries are now believed to be non-life threatening.

Everyone outside of a small circle of decision makers in the Minnesota Timberwolves organization were caught off-guard by the team’s decision to relieve Tom Thibodeau of his duties as president and head coach.
For Ryan Saunders, 32, it’s an opportunity to coach the team that his father, Flip, was coach and president of before his tragic passing.
“He’d tell me that he was proud of me,” Ryan said when asked what his father would say to him. “He knew this was a goal, eventually. Maybe he didn’t think it would happen this soon or in this unfortunate circumstance, but he’d tell me he’s proud of me.”
Although Karl-Anthony Towns and Thibodeau didn’t always see eye-to-eye on on-court issues, he thanked Thibodeau for pushing him and helping him “become a better man.” He said he’s excited to work with Saunders, though, after getting to know him as an assistant throughout the years.
“There is no hiding the fact that me and Ryan have a close relationship,” he said. “Especially the guys who have been drafted by his father and been with him since Day 1, so we all have a close relationship with Ryan.”
Derrick Rose was effusive with his praise of Thibodeau, acknowledging that he believed in Rose when most of the league thought his playing days were over. He shared a brief anecdote with the media about his final days as a Cleveland Cavalier.
He said he was at Cleveland State practicing by himself with his son, Art, by his side when he got the call from Thibodeau. “He’s the only coach that believed in me,” he said. “No teams wasn’t looking for me at all. I was basically out of the league.”
Scott Layden was hand-picked as Thibodeau’s right-hand man, and joined Timberwolves CEO Ethan Casson in delivering the news to him after Minnesota’s win over the Los Angeles Lakers on Sunday.
“These decisions are very tough, I think they’re hard to make, and it’s not taken lightly,” he said. “As far as the team is moving forward, we feel like we’ve got a good coach, and then of course I’ve been empowered to run the basketball operations and look forward to that as well.”
Take the Twins quiz and test your knowledge!

Cruising in Georgiana on a Saturday afternooon
Published 12:00 am Wednesday, November 17, 2004
Every sport has highlights and then has lowlights. Saturday, those that braved the chilly weather were able to witness several lawnmower racing lowlights.
The First Baptist Church of Georgiana had their fundraising lawnmower race.
"The Pettus Street 500" was live and underway this time with no threat of a hurricane to postpone it.
Email newsletter signup
The event was originally scheduled for Sept. 18, but thanks to Hurricane Ivan's mower-proofing of the strip, the event was cancelled.
That was ok for the racers.
That gave them an extra month and a half to continue the trash talk.
Saturday, all the talk came to a head. The start line was drawn and it was time for everyone to saddle up to it.
All the characters were there, Fast Eddie Holder, Rapid Rob Williams, Speedy Steve Williams, Jan Black, the Road Dog Jimmy Bush, Daniel "The Kid" Lowe and the Commish, Jerry Hartin.
The Reverend Allen Stephenson was on hand to commentate the spectacle.
With a line-up like that, there was still one person missing.
Richard "CSI" Hornsby and Silver Bullet Racing had yet to make an appearance at the start line.
The rumor was that he had blinded himself while modifying his mower.
"He burned his eyes welding a pulley on his motor," said Rapid Rob Williams.
"He was down there welding without his shield. I saw him down at the pool hall yesterday, his wife runs the game room, he had two pieces of cotton on both eyes and had a cue stick walking around like a blind man."
"I told him that we wouldn't going to furnish him a seeing-eye dog to get across the finish line."
There was some truth to the rumor.
"That just shows you what I had to overcome to get here. I burned my eyes welding on that pulley that Rob gave me" Hornsby said.
"They were bragging about all this and that and I told them that I'd be at the finish line waiting on them."
But, by the time the second heat of racers had taken to the line, CSI was up front and ready to go. The starting gun sounded and the silver mower was off. Hornsby smoked the competitors.
This race was with Fast Eddie and Rapid Rob among the participants.
CSI and the two elders also had a side bet going on.
"Rapid Rob and I have either got to give him our shirts or leave town," Holder said.
"I'm thinking about leaving town. After we tear this mower down and see what all is illegal. Then we'll make an official decision."
Hornsby wanted the shirts.
"I think with all that trash-talk they were doing in the paper," Hornsby said. "They need to give up their shirts."
Even during the run, Hornsby's super-charged "Death Machine" was under scrutiny.
"We need Richard 'CSI' Hornsby to report to the inspection table," Stephenson announced over the PA as the race ended. "We believe you are illegal. The sheriff will be here shortly to take you away."
Hornsby made one more run at the end of the event when he raced "The Kid" in a special challenge race.
Lowe was riding on a mower that had been around since the depression. The tractor was nearly 70 years old.
But, it was Hornsby who's tractor was having issues before the race.
"He's got about an eight-inch pulley on that engine and a four inch stroke on that transmission. So you can figure about what he did with that mower," said Williams.
"I gave him that pulley he welded on his tractor."
At the end of the race as all the trash talk was coming to an end, Jan Black shot some parting words at the racers.
"Wait until next year!"
Despite the need for speed, Steve Williams took the relaxed approach.
Williams raced in the second heat of the day. But, 10 feet into the race it was clear where he would finish. He spent the first part of the race with his feet propped up on the steering wheel of his lawnmower.
"Yeah, you can only do that on a mower as slow as mine. That's one of the advantages of having a lawnmower that only goes about three miles an hour," Williams said. "We all had a good time, it was a lot of fun and I'd do it again tomorrow if I had the chance."
All the trash-talk, and rumors added to the event and made it a success in the eyes of Stephenson.
"It went great, just great," Stephenson said. "We had a great time and a lot of people came out to watch. I heard a lot of 'wait until next year' and a lot of good-natured fun. We raised probably $1000 for the church."
An event like this that is good, somewhat-wholesome family entertainment could become an annual event.
"I can see there is enough interest," Stephenson said. "I can see it becoming an annual thing. There are a lot of folks here saying that they'd wished they'd brought their lawnmower. I can see this easily becoming an annual event and be a lot fun. It got a lot of folks out and gave them the chance to have some fun."
The money raised for the event puts the congregation that much closer to having a church of their own and getting out of the movie theatre.
"We plan to break ground on or before February 1st," Stephenson said. "We are shooting for six months to build the church. We are at the GeoAnna Theatre. We are looking forward to the ground breaking on our new church."
As the event was ending, Hornsby popped a wheelie on his mower, and was bucked off. But, have no fear. The coroner was not injured, except for his pride.
Stephenson would like to thank the following sponsors for their support in the spectacle.
"Many local businesses and individuals made donations for the winners for the races. In all we raised almost $1300 for the new church. A good time was had by all that were involved," said Stephenson.

This Indonesian boy laid 20 eggs in two years; leaves doctors baffled
You might have heard about age-old paradox 'what came first, the chicken or the egg?' However, this 14-year-old Indonesian boy has claimed that he has laid 20 chicken eggs in the past two years, completely baffling doctors.
After his claim, doctors examined the eggs and said they were chicken eggs. They are baffled by his condition, saying its 'impossible' for eggs to form inside the human body.
The boy has been hospitalised several times due to his 'condition' and even managed to 'lay' two eggs in front of shocked docs. However, doctors suspect that 'the eggs were shoved into the boy's rectum' prior to his admission to hospital.
The doctors are now treating and examining the boy who claims he has laid about a dozen of eggs in the last 2 years.

A very impressive visit, my initial online request was met with a call within 5 minutes! Andrew was very professional. Took photos of the repair issue, had good advice, and quoted a very reasonable price. The work was done quickly – and he took photos after the repair as well. When we need a new roof, this will be the company we call!

Young girl glory hole
I39;m in paradise. "Don't worry, I'll clean it up. Cassandra, or Cassie as she was called, had long blonde hair that fell loosely on her shoulders and hung over her tits. In fact, youll feel so comfortable in her company that youll soon be suggesting the next magical meeting. Jeff was looking her over, staring at the creamy white breasts that were held behind the tight blouse. performed oral sex.
Angelina. Age: 28. Surprise me! I have style, class and rich experiences with men who know what they want and having the opportunity to afford it.
Young Girl Glory Hole Videos and Porn Movies :: PornMD:: PornMD
Gloryhole Free Sex Movies
Description: He must have been turned on by the ideal of fucking my wife because he came very quickly. He turned to run away but my wife grabbed his sleeve and told him to stay. My wife was fingering herself so I helped her out of her pants and buried my tongue into her pussy and then worked on her clit with two fingers in her pussy. I was hard again and I quickly took his place and I put a second load of my sperm in my wife as he watched.

Kent Patterson was born and raised on a farm in North-Central Oklahoma. His interest in art, specifically photography, was established at a very young age. Following college, Patterson spent a brief amount of time in the Army. At a basic training camp in Texas, he was given access to his facilities’ Dark Room and thus his passion flourished. Patterson spent most of his professional career as a founder and parter of a Global Environmental Engineering firm, though his interest in photography never diminished. Currently, he is extremely taken with the ‘Grand Landscape’, and enjoys taking pictures at sunrise and sunset frequently.

Ronald Fountain was a patient at Modern Vascular in St. Louis, MO. The clinic is led by the managing physician Dr. Wande Pratt. Watch as he shares his PAD story and experience with Modern Vascular. Ronald was referred to a vascular surgeon at Modern Vascular by his Podiatrist. When he came to Modern Vascular his calves were so sore that he could barely walk from his car through the parking lot to the store. After he received the treatment he said that there was no recovery time. Initially, there was a little pain in his feet, but he’s now able to move around where he wants. Feeling grateful, he says “I felt like I was coming to this doctor forever, Dr. Pratt… there’s no finer person on this earth, let me tell you. I could almost cry because I like the man that much.” Along with the reduction of his pain, he also celebrates weight loss due to his ability to move around more.
Know the signs of PAD. Sores or wounds on your feet, cramping in your feet or legs, and legs or feet that are cold are some of the symptoms of peripheral artery disease. It is a good idea to understand what PAD is, how it presents, and what you can do about it. Early detection and treatment are important! If you think that you could have PAD you should reach out to your doctor or call +1 (833) 4PADHELP.

Homeless pets are brought to the SPCA all the time. Sometimes they are surrendered because their owner passed away. Other times they are rescued from abuse or abandonment. On average, 20 pets are brought to safety at the SPCA every single day.
But it isn’t often that a cat comes to us all on their own.
So, we were shocked to see a fluffy buff-coloured kitty strutting outside the Kings SPCA Animal Shelter. Unsure of where he came from, staff and volunteers were hoping to bring him inside and affectionately named him Hobo. We caught Hobo intently watching as pets would leave the shelter with their new families. It must have been during one of those short visits that Hobo devised his plan to break in and find his own family too.
To help entice Hobo to come closer, we left out a few tasty treats. It was a success! Within one day, Hobo was being showered with love from inside the shelter. Even though his belly was full of tapeworms and he was covered in filth, he was friendly and seemed to appreciate the care.
Hobo was medically treated but he still had some sensitivity in his back leg. We explored further and discovered that he has arthritis and a grade 2/6 heart murmur. Even though they sound scary, thankfully both are treatable.
Hobo was placed with a loving foster family while we tried to figure out a diet that worked for his needs. Rose began fostering for the SPCA back in 2019 and has cared for 4 kittens and 3 cats – each coming with their own unique personalities. “I have always wanted to help animals in any way I can and when volunteering at the SPCA I began to see how many cats need that extra help to find their furever homes,” she shared. Rose hopes to be a veterinarian someday and has a true passion for animal care.
“When Hobo first came to our home he was instantly wanting love and attention,” Rose giggled. “He had some patches of fur missing and a completely shaved tail but that didn’t stop us from falling in love with him (after a nice bath of course).”
Rose, Hobo and her dog spent four months together and became the best of friends. “I think the most special part of our experience was his transformation,” she recalled. “With any foster you spend so much time with them and watch them grow into better versions of themselves it is truly a rewarding feeling to have. Saying goodbye is never easy but knowing that I did the best I could to get them ready for their furever homes always puts a smile on my face.” Rose shared that Hobo was one of her hardest goodbyes.
While Hobo was in foster care, we needed to experiment with different diets and medication to help with his digestive problems. His food and medical care were all covered thanks to generous donors. One of those donors was a 17-year-old student from Eskasoni.
“When I had first read Hobo’s story about him and his heart murmur, I instantly had made a connection between him and myself,” they shared. “When I was a kid, I had a couple of episodes where I was brought to the hospital because of my heart murmur. I remembered how painful they felt and the long moments in the hospital just wanting to go home and it had really just brought me into Hobo’s story. I knew I had to help him in any way possible. Every dollar counts and helps bring us closer to the goal, especially ones that really speak out to you! I hope that others can read this and know that no matter how much you give, it all helps and can change a life for the better.”
Hobo was medically cleared for adoption and it was not long before he was scooped up. A lifelong animal lover, Janice’s heart was still broken after the loss of her 2 cats. She wasn’t sure she was ready to bring another pet into her life. That is… until she saw Hobo’s sweet face posted online for adoption.
“I went to Waterville to meet him and he reached out and put both paws on my chest, bonked me in the head and rubbed my face with his,” she smiled. “How couldn’t I take him home?!”
Thanks to fabulous fosters like Rose, kind donors like the student, and amazing adopters like Janice, Hobo got the care and support he needed. We think it’s safe to say his master plan to break into the SPCA and find a family worked purrrrrfectly.

Tonight on NBC their new medical drama “The Good Doctor” airs with an all-new Monday, May 24, 2021, episode and we have you The Good Doctor recap below. On tonight’s The Good Doctor season 4 episode, 18 called, “Forgive Or Forget,” as per the ABC synopsis, “Shaun and Lea go on a camping trip to distract themselves from their grief over their miscarriage. Meanwhile, Morgan and Park argue about the best course of treatment for their patient.”
So make sure to tune in between 10 PM and 11 PM ET for our The Good Doctor recap! While you wait for our recap make sure to check out all our television spoilers, news, recaps, videos & more, right here!
Tonight’s The Good Doctor recap begins now – Refresh Page often to get the most current updates!
In tonight’s The Good Doctor episode it begins with Claire, she has Miles over, and after dinner, he wants to talk but she won’t, she tells him that he can watch a movie with her or leave. Meanwhile, Shaun is packing clothes, Lea walks in, he tells her that he is packing for their camping trip. She doesn’t think he is going to be able to sleep on the ground, he agrees but thinks they need the trip.
Aaron arrives home and the alarm goes off, his wife comes down the stairs with a gun, she thought someone broke into the house. She looks at the gun and says it is not loaded, she says she always stores it loaded. He says he unloaded it for this very reason, she could have killed him. They start arguing, she goes to bed, alone.
Audrey exams a patient who has a big red mark on her neck, her name is Ava, it is a malformation and Audrey has recommended surgery, but her parents have not allowed it. Now it is getting worse, Audrey wants to admit her. In surgery, Audrey wishes she was able to do this seven years ago. There is a bleeder in the airway, everyone is on alert.
Morgan is with another patient, he tells her that he is treating his depression with his own mushroom cultivation, he has never felt better. She wants to do some tests to see if there are adverse side effects. Morgan discusses the case with Park and he doesn’t necessarily disagree with the patient. On the test results, there is a fungal lesion.
Lea and Shaun show up camping, the attendant at the park tells them it is full and Shuan is frustrated. Although, he didn’t make a reservation.
Camping doesn’t work out the way Shaun thought it would, it is crowded and a big RV drives up and blocks their view.
Audrey tells Ava’s parents that they had to abort surgery due to a bleed, she is conscious and stable in recovery. They have to go back in to remove her collar bone for better access. They want to take their daughter home now, Audrey says that is not possible.
Alex and Morgan go see her patient and tell him that he is lucky, a week later and his liver and lungs would be failing – he cannot continue the surgery. He says he can’t stop, he can’t bear to face the darkness again. Morgan tells him that if he found the light once, he will find it again. Alex and Morgan tell Marcus what they both think should be done in surgery. Jordan is there, and she says she questions Alex’s objectivity in this case. Marcus tells him to map it out, they will go in in the morning.
Lea is toasting marshmallows, Shaun made a fire using the tepee method. All of a sudden, the sky opens up and it starts to rain. They are both in the tent trying to sleep, people in the other tents are making a lot of noise, Shaun luckily brought earplugs. They start kissing and there is a leak in the tent, Lea says she gives up. Shaun says he has a repair kit, but she just wants to go home. She tells him to stay if he wants to, but she is sleeping in the car.
Claire is with Miles, he asks her if she can grab a quick bite. She tells him that she would like to talk, they sit down on a park bench. She says the last time she saw him she screamed at him because he missed her birthday party. She always thought if she said sorry, he would come back. He says it wasn’t about her. She asks how he could disappear. He says things between him and her mother were a mess, one night she told him that he was worthless and only good for the money. He left and sent her the money, never saw her again.
Claire says they never got any money. She worked two jobs to put herself through school. He says he sent enough money for rent, food, and school, her mother squandered the money. She tells him that he using her mother as an excuse. He left when it was tough and he wants to come back when it is easy to be a father. She tells him not to call, don’t come to the door, and leave her alone, she walks away.
Lea is sleeping in the backseat of the car, she looks out and finds Shaun, he is sitting at the picnic table. She gets out, he tells her that he thought camping would be helpful, he was wrong, they can go home. She says why don’t they do the hike first that he planned. She says blueberry pancakes, hike, and back to their warm, cozy, and dry bed at home.
Aaron buys his wife pastries and apologizes to her for unloading the gun without telling her. She says she knows that he is nervous around guns. He says why not keep the gun in her nightstand, but the bullets in another room. She disagrees.
Shaun and Lea are hiking, she wants to take a picture of him, Shaun poses on a log and falls he twists his foot and dislocates it. Lea wants to call 911, Shaun says no, it will take them two hours to get there. He has everything to do surgery, he will guide her and she needs to do it.
Claire is with Ava’s parents, they call her inflammation minor. Her father wants a second opinion. Claire tells them that they were wrong to refuse the surgery that Dr. Lim recommended years ago, they messed up and need to stop thinking about what makes them feel like a good parent and think about what their daughter needs.
Shaun takes a big swig of tequila that he had in his backpack. Lea makes a cut, Shaun passes out from blood loss. Poor Lea is left alone, she continues. Shaun wakes up, he says he can feel his toes. She takes a big swig of the tequila and says now she is finished.
Alex tells Marcus that Morgan was right, they have to open up the patient. In the end, the patient is going to be ok.
Ava is back in surgery, Audrey comes out, Aaron is washing his hands beside her. He tells her that Debbie thinks that he is overbearing and controlling. Audrey says her ex was controlling, she definitely had her own issues, but his need to control her is why their marriage fell apart.
Ava is awake from surgery, her parents say they are sorry and it is their fault, she tells them it is ok and she loves them.
Morgan is getting changed in the locker room, Alex walks in and tells her that when she pushed him away, there was hurt, resentment, and every interaction painful. He tells her that he doesn’t want them to have a relationship outside of business, it is too hard. She tells him that she doesn’t want that, it is boring.
Claire shows up at Miles’ place, she tells him that he was a horrible father, but she should forgive him because she needs him. She would like to keep spending time together and talking, he would love that. He asks if they can restart everything with a hug. She hugs him.
Aaron catches Debbie backing her things, he tells her that he was wrong. He took a choice away from her and he will do everything he can to make it right, he says he is so sorry. She says that she doesn’t think she can make this work. She says so many of their moments are great, but too many are painful. He says they love each other, he loves her. She leans over and kisses him, she tells him that she loves him very much, but it is not enough. She has a bag packed, she leaves.

I need to slow my breathing and get my heart to stop racing. Late afternoon, at work, I received a frantic phone call from the mom of JR's best friend. Z, who transferred to the local public school this year, did not come home from school. Usually, he walks home with his older brother (5th grade) but the older brother decided to stay for Homework Club. Since they live a mere 4 blocks from school, Z is allowed to walk home and has a key for his front door. Z's mom is home within 20-30 minutes of the boys' arrival home. This has worked well since September.
When she called me, the police had already been summoned and the parents were working their network of friends. I knew he couldn't be with JR because JR is at his school today until 6 (Drama Club and tutoring). She had called JR's babysitter, because she does sometimes do afternoon playdates with the 2 boys (but never without arranging it with the parents in advance). One of the problems is that because this is a new school for Z, the mom does not have the same contacts she had at our old school. It also doubled the number of possible places that Z could be, since he has friends from both schools.
So I started calling the folks I know whose kids go to the public school with Z (there's lots of overlap in our social networks because of sports and church and preschool). My second phone call led to a lead. The mom had seen Z and another public school 3rd grader in the drug store across the street from school. This other kid is unsupervised quite a bit, so my friend wasn't surprised to see him, but did think it unusual to see Z with him. She also knew that this other kid often goes to a local playground after school. So I called the lead into Z's mom, who told the police, who immediately sent an officer to the playground - and there was Z!
I was terrified and ultimately relieved for Z's parents.
It's odd. We live in the middle of a large city, but our own little neighborhood seems so tight and safe that we must project that feeling of security to our kids - so that it never occurs to them that just leaving school and not letting a responsible adult know where they are going and what they are doing.
You can bet I had a long talk with JR tonight.
I'm really glad Z is okay. His mom and I have already started brainstorming other supervised after school options for the days when his big brother has homework club. I am thankful for the prompt, caring response of our big city police officers. I am thankful for the seriousness with which Z's school also addressed the situation (the vice principal returned to school and started calling 3rd grade families). But I'm also very sad for Z's afternoon companion - because no one was looking for him, no one was worried about him. I know that to the extent it is within our power, we will always keep JR and Z safe. But who is watching out for the other little boy?
gloves for me
1 day ago

This was Elle's project. "Ava". She was to take care of her for a week, feed, exercise, etc., and then make a poster with photos of her project and things that you get from your project.
Here she is. At the fair, with her finished poster. Yes, there was much argument over paper color, picture placement, photo cropping...I'll tell you, it's a fine line between positive direction and just doing it yourself. But, alas, it is her project, and I REFUSE to be one of those parents, so i bit my tongue (it did bleed) and moved on.
This is one of the photos that she took. Because I was a GOOD Mother, and let her take all of her OWN photos. I was also a GOOD Mother, and told her that she was ABSOLUTELY NOT putting this one on the poster. It was a part of that "positive direction."
They LOVE the carnival. This was at 10pm, when they had gotten their fill of fair food, and they had rode enough rides that they no longer held any excitement...especially for Will-
Yup. That's him. Hiding behind the pole. And me being the GOOD Mother, saying, "come on, just one picture, please smile for me..." because we all know that when he gets bigger, he's gonna look back and say, "my mom was the BEST mom, she took us to the fair EVERY year, let us eat nasty fair food until we wanted to PUKE, ride rides until we couldn't FOCUS on anything, and took PICTURES so that we would remember..."
Yup. that's me. fulfilling all of their childhood dreams.
It's my job.

In 2007 my SUV was damaged when it was rear-ended by another car that had auto insurance through this company. When the adjuster finally came out and gave us an estimate, we took the SUV to have it repaired. About a week later we received a letter in the mail informing us that our RENTERS INSURANCE was going up by over $100.00. We were paying $14.66 a month (or 164.00 a year) for $20,500 worth of coverage on a STORAGE UNIT, it didn't cover anything else but the storage unit and they were going to jack up our insurance. We raised a fuss and inquired WHY such a high increase and was then told..."Oh my, that is significant. Let me research it and I will call you back." The lady did call us back two days later and explained that that this company just had a rate increase but NOT by that much. She did fix the price and the amount did increase, but only by $5.00. I TRULY believe that if we didn't catch it, and ask questions it would have been increased by the $100+ so that they could recoup the money that was used to fix my sport trac. So PLEASE read your statements and NOTICES CAREFULLY and COMPLETELY if you are involved in a wreck that IS NOT your fault. You just might find your insurance going up.

THE husband of a former Chester City Council manager hanged himself days after telling his wife he would not 'do anything daft'.
Trevor Gibson, 54, had suffered from depression after splitting with his wife Celia, a former equalities manager with the local authority, last June.
A Chester inquest heard how Mr Gibson was found hanging from a door at his home on Marian Drive, Great Boughton, on Tuesday, November 15 last year.
PC Kevin Kay made the discovery after neighbours raised concerns.
The court was told how printer Mr Gibson had first attended Boughton Medical Centre on August 22, when he was prescribed the anti-depressant fluoxetine.
Dr Annabelle Jones said he had told of a depressed mood following his marital breakdown and was having difficulty sleeping.
When he was reviewed on September 5 Mr Gibson described suffering panic at -tacks and was given a sick note for work.
He seemed more stable when he attended with unrelated neck and shoulder pains on October 31.
Mr Gibson's final fluoxetine prescription was issued on November 11.
Mrs Gibson, of Chatsworth Drive, Newton, told the inquest she and her husband had remained friends following their split.
She had last seen him for lunch the Saturday before his death at the Grosvenor Arms in Aldford.
The 46-year-old, who now works as equalities manager at Wrexham Borough Council, said: 'He didn't seem as depressed as he had been and was a little more upbeat and positive.
'I asked him if he had thought about harming himself and he said 'don't worry, I won't do anything daft'.'
Mr Gibson reiterated his promise in a text message to his wife that night.
He was last seen at the Remembrance Sunday service at Chester Cathedral the following day.
A post-mortem examination revealed normal levels of fluoxetine and 97mg of alcohol per 100ml of blood.
Nicholas Rheinberg recorded a verdict of suicide.

I have gone on multiple dates with three different guys. I can't remember which conversation I've had with which guy! This is getting ridiculous. And now I'm sure some of them think I'm an idiot who can't remember anything, when really it's that I don't want to say I remember something and have it be a different guy.
I am having difficulty. I especially feel bad because I really like one but am having trouble saying "no" to the rest. He's the only one who's been lucky enough to have me cook for him though. He's all shy and kind of awkward when it comes to dating. It's me, basically. You know it's something when I'm considered the forward one out of the two of us.
He and I kept interjecting with the same jokes at the same time. It was hilarious. Plus, he understood me when I quoted Chappelle's Show. That's one of my criteria in a person. If you don't like CS, we may not get along.
The word "shall" was used in a text message to me in the same way I use it. I'm a little twitterpated if you can't tell. He is so considerate and thoughtful. He's still being "all gentlemanly and shit," which has been nice. He even cleared the table without my asking.
I'm in like.

This chapter of our story is about literally the fall of the year, and how Ryan and I took "the fall". (I loove cheesy).
Our first dates were the like the dates out of my dreams. Our 2nd date I invited him on one of my training runs. At the time I was training for the Twin Cities marathon, and told him that Wednesday I would be doing an easy run. So we went on a 6 mile run. Ryan left that date thinking I was crazy, but still took me out for dinner that night. He's more into normal sports involving skill, strategy, and talent--not just running in a latent state for extended periods of time apparently ;)
The dates preceding those only got better. We would sneak onto the golf course late at night and put on the green. There were also -30 degree Grand Forks, ND days where Ryan would call me up, tell me to put on my swimming suit and he'd be picking me up in 10 minutes. I would be hesitant; but just went with it. We would then sneak into hotels around town, and relax in the hot tubs after long days of class, studying, and busy lives. Every time we spent time together, I'd come home with my cheeks hurting from the smiles, laughter, and enjoyment we shared.
I went to Thanksgiving with his family, and was extremely welcomed; and it was after that weekend where things got serious with the Ryan and I. In fact, that weekend I purchased my tickets to come visit him in Tucson since he would be staying with his Dad and working at Raytheon over the break.
Ryan left for Tucson 2 weeks before I came to visit him, and those were the 2 most miserable weeks ever! It was in our time apart that we both realized we loved each other...but hadn't said those words yet. The picture at the title of this blog explains the story of this......
I arrived in Tucson on a beautiful, warm, sunny December afternoon; greeted by his family. Ryan took me to Madera Canyon to go hiking. He had sandwiches, wather, and a camera packed, and had a beautiful hike up. When we got to the top, we came across a waterfall. Ryan said, "Why don't we go sit on the rock in front of the water fall, and I'll put the camera on self-timer, and we'll take a picture". So we got all set up, and as the camera was about to snap, he grabbed me and said "I love you". That pictures will always be special since it captured the day we fell in love.
The rest of my week in Tucson was an amazing one...and from then on we both knew that we had found "the one".

Orange, I absolute despise my wife. I have even told her so. She knows every reason why and I know that has affected our marriage. But I did not want to do this. I had ZERO medical issues before it and now I can't do anything. I used to be super active and if I couldn't sleep or whatever, I would go out jogging or walking around town. Even at like 2am. I live in a super safe quiet town. Except for the whole Sam Shepard thing..lol. But I can't do that now. I can't do anything.
MY wife told me last night i need to help teach my son who is almost 5 how to roller skate/blade. Because I used to skate and play hockey. And she said I used to like to do that. I told her, Yeah, I used to! I used to be able to do that! She stamped away and slammed a bunch of shit around and shut of the lights where I was. But what the fuck should she expect??? I mean, seriously! It's just like asking me if I signed up for the fathers day karate class with him....I was like, umm, no. Why would I?
I really truly believe she thinks I am faking. She used to tell me i was or it was in my head. She hasn't said that much any more. But i think she still believes it.
We had a talk a couple weeks ago where she started crying and saying she doesn't think she can take it knowing i hate her. And i just sat there not saying anything. She told me she thought we were in a better place, but we aren't. I am getting more and more pissed every day at her. She doesn't care. Hasn't checked on anything and never talks to me about anything. How could I not be pissed at her?
She is the reason I am here and in this mess. And every time I see her i just want to yell at her. I can't stand it. I really want to go back. But I can't. @egomes2107, what every you do, don't let someone push you in this. You will regret it forever. And if your wife is like mine, you will have NO support at home. Mine, god the stories I could tell you. The only reason I have not left her is the kids. cause we have no sex life and haven't for a year. We don't sleep in the same bed, hell, same room! I sleep on a sofa downstairs and she has the bed room. We don't talk. She doesn't care if I am in pain-my mother in law had to mention it to her on Memorial Day this year. People don't believe you and doctors, they are the worst. Can't even begin there.
Make her read this stuff. Have her talk to us. Do something. Cause honestly, your life COULD be over if you have a vasectomy. It's 50/50. I don't even say 1 in 1000 or 20 in 100. It's 50/50. and those odds, not worth it.

My Epic Experience: Norwegian Epic Cruise Review by NYJRS56
Overall Member Rating
My Epic Experience
Destination: Eastern Caribbean
We tried to go to the Manhattan room one evening and were told the wait would be 30-45 minutes. We didnt wait. Our two best meals were in La Cucina and in Cagney's. We had dinner at the Cirque, but More that meal was awful. Most of us didnt complete our dinners and ended up back at the buffet. The fact that we needed to make a reservation before we even left our home was odd, but realized had we not done so, we would not have seen the shows. The Blue Men wa wonderful. Legends was good. Cirque was also good. The comedian/magician was great. We laughed so hard that we saw his show twice. There were always lines in the hallway leading to the Epic Theater. It was not properly organized. People wanted to walk through from the elevators and had to push their way through. Also those that wanted to go into the Headliners had difficulty walking through the crowd. Once the doors opened into the theater there was pushing and shoving. People in wheelchairs had a hard time getting through as well.
The pools were too small to accommodate all the people. The weather was hot and being in the water was the only place to be. With so many people the water became murking very quickly. I dont recall children leaving to go to the bathroom and there was a layer of sunscreen on the water. I dont feel that the water was being recycled quick enough. The coolest water was the vertical sprayers. The children were constantly jumping from the sides into the water. I witnessed a couple of children jumping on top of other people in the pool and they were hurt and crying. I went to a bartender and asked if they could make an announcement. They did, but it only lasted a short while. There are no signs anywhere that say NO JUMPING/DIVING. The bartender that took care of us all week ELLIOT was wonderful. He remembered our names and he was a delight, as was our wonderful room steward LEO. The excursion on St Maarten was great, we did the Regatta race. We didnt go into town afterwards because it was too hot. We made no plans in St Thomas and Nassau. We went to the pier and took a minivan with a driver for less money and had a wonderful experience.
One night we went to see Dancing with the Stars in the Manhattan room. The problem was, there were still people in there having dinner. You heard them talking and the dishes rattling while the waiters were working. I feel that the room should have been cleared of all diners before the show started. It was not a lounge/club setting. Im sorry to be so negative about the cruise. This was my vacation of the year and I was so looking forward to it. On the whole we had a great time, because we made it fun for ourselves. I feel that the managers of the ship have to review all our comments and take them into consideration for the future. Organizing so many people is difficult, but this is your business and you have to make it perfect for all. As you can see by the other comments it is not just me.
Happy Cruising! Less
Cabin review: B4 Family Balcony
The shower was too small. The walking space was narrow.Read All Family Balcony (B4) Reviews >>
Port and Shore Excursions
Very good but room for improve...
Cruise around the Canary Islan...
9 mostly good days on Epic

I was boiling eggs for our kids to color for Easter when I realized it was official... I'm a grown-up.
I am 45, and you would think this revelation would have hit me sooner. But my sisters and I all waited until our thirties and forties to have children and had an extended childhood of sorts.
I've been on my own since I was 23, but it wasn't until I had my own children that my parents stopped coloring eggs with us, or at least, for us, if we couldn't come early for the egg coloring. There was also a lovely Easter basket waiting for me on Easter morning.
As I was getting everything ready for our brood this year, it occurred to me that the torch has been passed. Memories of my own childhood are still on my mind, but they have been surpassed by memories I have of the family I created with my husband.
We've developed our own traditions, different from the ones I grew up with. A case in point would be my version of egg coloring, which is certainly not as professional as my father's. He would faint if he saw the mess I made as I added color to the bowls because the kit I bought was not doing such a good job.
There were no kits in my house when I was growing up. We used food coloring. If my father had his way, we would have made dye from the vegetables and flowers my sisters and I would have had to forage for in the suburban wilds of Long Island.
Thank you Mom for keeping Grizzly Adams on a leash.
My father's egg coloring operation was enough for an army of bunnies. The egg holders were fashioned out of wire: Store bought holders were not for us. The bowls of dye were lined in a row, and were laid out so the festivities could begin.
My father has been coloring eggs my whole life, even when there wasn't a baby or child in sight.
My parents love to celebrate holidays. My mother made the most beautiful Easter baskets for us filled with handmade chocolate bunnies, intricately decorated sugar eggs, and other truly beautiful confections from speciality candy stores.
Mass-market bunnies were not for her girls. The baskets frequently had a theme, such as a garden or spring toys. I remember when I was eight she did a sewing theme and I got pink thread, a pin cushion, and sewing needles.
There was a magical excitement to walk downstairs and find the baskets we set out the night before lined in a row and filled with treats. Each basket was topped with a beautiful bow or ribbon that mom would put in our hair for church.
My sisters and I would giggle, eat jelly beans, and compare what the bunny brought us: "I got pink bubbles..." "I got blue..." "My bunny has a purple bow..." "Mine has yellow."
The Easter Bunny, Tooth Fairy, and Santa Claus were all important traditions throughout my childhood. They were so important that long after we were children, my parents incorporated them into our holidays. Egg hunts and all. This of course was a source of amusement for our husbands.
The other day my 12-year old, Tom, and I were discussing our plans for Easter. It has been extra fun this year because our six-year old Peter has been so excited over the prospect of a visit from the Easter Bunny.
"Mom, it is so cute that he believes in the Easter Bunny," said Tom, who was four when he figured there was no such thing.
"It just doesn't make sense," he said at the time.
I shared with him that, until he was born, my parents still hid eggs for me and his aunts. He thought this was hysterical. The image of his grown mother and her sisters looking for colored eggs was just too much. Then he said, "That's so cute mom."
My parents are in their glory now with seven grandchildren ranging from 12 years down to five months. My mother's beautiful baskets are now reserved for her grandchildren, who open them up with the same amazement my sisters and I had.
The egg hunts are much more exciting now with children rushing all over the yard.
I relish the idea that years from now there will be a whole new generation talking about their own memories of my parents and the holidays they made special.
In my house, I am the one and only official Easter Bunny. Different perhaps then the bunny of my childhood, but just as special for our three children.
The chain continues.

ALBANY, Ga. — Two men, armed with guns, took a shot at a singer at an Albany bar during a robbery attempt overnight, police say.
Between 12:15 and 12:30 a.m. Wednesday, police say two slender black men armed with guns walked into the Benchwarmers Bar on Sylvester Road, brandishing their weapons, police say.
One of the men fired his weapon towards the rear of the people in the direction of a singer who was performing.
Before fleeing the scene, the men took cash from several customers and took a cash box from the business. No injuries were reported and the suspects remain at large.

The former head of a Scottish LGBT youth charity has been sentenced to serve at least 13 years in prison today.
James Rennie, 38, was convicted in May of sexually assaulting three-month-old baby. The abuse continued for four years.
Convicted sex offender Neil Strachan, 41, was convicted of attempting to rape an 18-month-old boy and indecently touching a six-year-old boy.
Strachan was sentenced to a minimum of 16 years in prison.
The two men were also found guilty of conspiring to abuse children.
They were involved in what is thought to be Scotland’s biggest known paedophile network.
Six other men, Ross Webber, 27, of North Berwick, Craig Boath, 24, from Dundee, Colin Slaven, 24, from Edinburgh, and John Milligan, 40, Neil Campbell, 46, and John Murphy, 44, all from Glasgow, received sentences ranging from two to 17 years in June.
Nearly 125,000 indecent images were seized during Operation Algebra, which uncovered the internet group.
The men had used web cameras and other means to plot and take part in sexual offences, including rape.
The offences were committed in Edinburgh, Glasgow, Dundee and East Lothian between February 2004 to May 2008.
Rennie was the former head of LGBT Youth Scotland.
When arrested he told the police: “Today I know I have lost just about everything I have worked so hard for a long time. I knew this day was coming.”
Rennie was suspended from his post in December 2007 when he was arrested and resigned in February 2008.
In a statement released today, the board of LGBT Youth Scotland said there was no evidence he had abused any children in his capacity at the charity.
It read: “James Rennie ceased to be employed by LGBT Youth Scotland in February 2008, after we had immediately suspended him on being informed of his arrest, and had subsequently begun a disciplinary process, during which he resigned.
“Lothian and Borders Police have been clear that their investigations related to James Rennie personally, and not to his work role, nor the organisation he worked for at the time of his arrest. We had no suspicion whatsoever of the crimes James Rennie was committing outwith his working life.
“That there is no suggestion that James Rennie did, or had the opportunity to, threaten the safety of young people accessing services at his work is due to the culture of child protection within LGBT Youth Scotland, which is backed up by robust policies.”

I am selfishly concerned about the loss of their relationship because their wives and their children play a significant part in our gatherings among friends. 10 years ago most of as couples were either without kids or our kids were young. Thus we gathered together in large groups to watch the "Mike Tyson fight" or the various investment clubs that both of these two guys that make up distinct group of friends had going at the time. At least every other Saturday or Sunday, it seemed, there was some sort of dinner or cookout that we attended together. Today our gatherings have diminished to possibly one gathering per year.
Beyond their children. Beyond the stability of having a home to focus my male friends' attention upon, the conflict with their spouse and the unhappiness therein is a force that trumps their will to stick it out. Both of these friends are the "man of the house". For one of them his lawn is his key investment in time. For the other the furnishing of his basement and his boat occupies his. The conflict would cause them to walk away from these foundations that they have shown so much pride in.
In my small attempt to tell them about the "costs" of their decision I reminded them about these things. I asked them about the thought of having another man raise "their kids" if his wife were to move on as well.
Whereas I realize that there is nothing that I could say in my role as a "marriage councilor" to keep them from making such a move (there is no physical violence involved in either of their situations) I did offer some guidance to each of them.
Once their wife gets used to his absence and even takes steps to go on the defensive in protection of her own interests, the ability for them to walk back into the door unscathed is diminished. The best solution is to prevent the relationship from degrading to this point in the first place.
In both of their cases their personal appetite for sexual relationships with other women is an important variable in the equation. I don't have a view into each of their relationships to understand how much their wives understand their outside activities but from my own experiences - I can't imagine how this cannot have something to do with it. The loss in trust from their wives is a very likely reason for their difficulties.
As a normally functioning man I am amazed (and tacitly envious) of the list of women that both of them have been involved with over time. I have to admit that I have been used as their alibi to get out of the house on several occasions. With one of them we have a long running joke about how about 14 years ago when he was married and I was not we were in a bar talking to two women. I asked out loud "What about Stephanie?", his wife. This was my own little "booty blocking" attempt in defense of his wife who is a friend of the family. In the long term I realized that I have no impact on what he is going to do.
With this same friend I have degraded to pushing him to make sure that he uses a CONDOM every time since he is going to do it outside of his marriage. Throughout the years he has told me about the new woman he has met while he was driving and she was standing at a bus stop or while both were shopping. After my amazement of his "numbers game" the first thing I ask is "Did you use a condom?". I could not believe how reckless my friend has been in this regard. Once again - I have no control over what a GROWN AZZED MAN is going to do. I would not choose to put myself and my relationship at risk as such. All I can do is to remind him about the AIDS threat and that he should think about the consequences of bringing something home.
In hanging out at a local sports bar with the other friend there was two nice looking young waitresses in the place. He told me that he had gotten with both of them over time- according to him. I hang out with him on occasion and we talk with a table of two or three single females. The next time I see him - there seemingly is always a report of how he has "gotten with" the one who gave him her number. His business trips and/or 3 or 4 day stays at a company conference in another city always has a new female involved. In fact right before he told me about his rocky relationship there was a story about going over the house of a married woman who's husband seemingly a mirror image of himself - handsome, physically fit and always on the road. While I am stunned at his ability to play the numbers game as well - I always wondered - "At what cost is all of this being done"?
I give them both credit for their ability to 'go straight for the gold' with regard to the women that they are interested in.
In the back of my mind, however, as I evaluate my own situation I always figured that this type of lifestyle had to come at some cost. With so much time running the streets there must be some severed relations back at home that were left untended to.
I don't pretend to be a complete angel in my decade long+ marriage. Having a conversation with a new woman absent the tension of a relationship and having a bit of flirting going on is indeed an ego stroking event.
Though I am an angle compared with some of my friends this "little bit of dirt" on a comparative basis means nothing to my wife who has a "zero tolerance" program in place. Even her knowledge about the doggedness of some of her own friends husbands is not enough for her to say "my husband is not that bad after all....I'll give him some slack".
My parents are still together after 45+ years of marriage. I also have a set of 4 siblings, each of whom are married with stable homes. I would feel a tremendous sense of shame to be the one sibling who got divorced because of my own actions.
(Oh - and "Yes I love my wife" and that's a part of it as well. I've learned over time that women inspect this entry on the list of "why I am not a dog like the other guy" . :lol:)

I want to share with you some facts about the writings which the early Christians wanted “read in the churches.” A problem arose because of the gnostic groups that were prevalent in those days. In order to spread their gnostic beliefs, they constructed false “gospels” and “epistles” purporting to have been written by disciples of Jesus or by apostles. For example, one of these supposedly describes some of Jesus’ activities when He was still a child. It reports that he formed a bird out of clay, and then turned it into a real, live bird which then flew away.
In order that the Church would not be deceived by these false, so-called apostolic writings, the leaders of the Church made a list of the writings of the genuine disciples and apostles, and proclaimed that only they could be read in the churches. They didn’t talk about these writings as being “The word of God” or that only they were “inspired.” The test was only whether they were written by the apostles or the disciples of Jesus. Thus the gospels of Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John were the only gospels included. Though Mark and Luke were not disciples of Jesus or apostles in the strictest sense, they were fellow workers with Paul, and did apostolic work with him. So they qualified.
Acts, the early history of the Church was also accepted without dispute.
There was some heavy discussion among the early church leaders with regard to the apostolic letters (or “epistles”). Which of the letters circulated around were really composed by apostles and therefore qualified to be read in the churches? All the letters of Paul were accepted without dispute. So was 1 Peter and 1 John.
Hebrews was under dispute. Who wrote it? Its author doesn’t say. Some early churches accepted it to be read in the churches; others didn’t. Those who accepted it assigned the authorship to Paul. This is highly doubted by most Biblical scholars today.
2nd and 3rd John were disputed. The author of these books referred to himself as “the elder.” We don’t know who this elder was, but some have speculated that it was an elder named “John,” though he doesn’t give his name at all. Again those who accepted 2nd and 3rd John assigned
the authorship to the apostle John, although there is absolutely no evidence for this.
For some reason James and Jude were under dispute, although both these authors open their letters by giving their names and “James” and “Jude.”
Clement’s letter to the Corinthians was disputed. The author was Paul’s fellow worker (Philippians 4:3) and therefore did apostolic work as did Mark and Luke. Although some churches accepted it, others didn’t. Clearly it didn’t “make it” into the New Testament.
Revelation was under heavy dispute. Four times in the book, the author identifies himself as being “John.” But which John? The apostle John never calls himself “John” anywhere in his Gospel or in 1 John. So there is no reason to suppose that the apostle John was the author. Again, those who wanted it read in the churches said the author was John the apostle, and this idea has persisted to our day. Whoever the John was who wrote it, had a vision, and in most of the book, he describes what he saw in his vision. In my opinion, it is a mistake to formulate doctrine or beliefs about the future based on the vision which some unknown John saw.
Much later in A.D. 367 Athanasius formed a list which comprised what is knows as the “canon of New Testament writings”. Athanasius was the first person to form a list which is identical to that which is in the “New Testament” as we have it today. His Old Testament “canon” was the same as that which is found in the Protestant Bible except it included the book “Baruch.” This book is not found in the Protestant Bible, but it IS included in the Catholic and Orthodox Bibles.

It all started when...
I became inspired by images that gave me various moods. I would see and be inspired by images that were dark, mysterious, and gave a moody feel! So, I wanted to create a platform where creatives, like myself, could have their images showcased, and help them gain exposure/recognition for their amazing work. That's when MoodyGrams was born.
It also inspired me, and from there my passion and love for photography continued to evolve into what it has become today. My main focus is travel and landscape photography (I live in the New York City area, so that includes street photography as well). Additionally, my work includes portraiture, aerial, architectural, and event photography (I also work with brands and businesses to create content for advertising/promotional purposes).
Since I have began my photography journey, I became an ambassador for Sony as part of their #AlphaCollective team. My work and contributions were highlighted and featured on FOX5NY (click here to see my story), and I have worked with Apple- hosting one of their 'Today at Apple' photo sessions (click here). I have worked with other brands and businesses to help create content, and have hosted events or contests for promotional purposes. I am excited for what the future holds as I continue to grow in my career as a photographer.

The title has got to have you wondering!
On June 4 I cleaned both of the vehicles that the boys and I take on a daily basis. I have a Toyota Sequoia and I also drive a VW Beetle. I usually take the time, at least once a month, to really clean my car. However, April and May were so busy that it just didn't get done. They were nasty. I enlisted the boys' help on cleaning the floor mats. They had fun and of course there was a little fighting over who got to do what. I'm proud to say, though, that the mats look wonderful.
(The VW beetle belongs to my parents, but they insist that the boys and I drive it for fuel mileage--it is an older model and is actually famous--when a bad storm came through in 06' it was beat badly with hail in the school's parking lot, because my sister was driving it while she was in high school--it made the front page of the Wichita Falls Times Record News--all the windows were busted out and it just looked horrible--when I drive it in W.F. people will ask if that is the bug that was on the front of the paper a few years back--thanks, mom & dad for letting us drive it).
June 4 was also my dad's birthday. Kade had a baseball game that night, so we didn't do anything special. I also never know what to get my dad, so this year I gave him his favorite dessert, a coconut pie from the Rock Inn Cafe. This cafe is also famous. It has been on Texas Country Reporter, in Texas Monthly, and Texas Highways. Their pies are delicious. The meringue is so high, so I snapped a picture of it. We grew up calling it calf slobber, so I shared this with my boys. They thought that was too funny!
caught my eye + deals 8.18.17
5 hours ago

|Birthdate||July 30, 1947|
Schwarzenegger was born in Thal, Austria, a village bordering the Styrian capital Graz, and was christened Arnold Alois Schwarzenegger. His parents were the local police chief, Gustav Schwarzenegger (17 August 1907–13 December 1972), and Aurelia (née Jadrny; 29 July 1922–2 August 1998). Gustav served in World War II, after he voluntarily applied to join the Nazi Party in 1938. Gustav served with the German Army as a Hauptfeldwebel of the Feldgendarmerie and was discharged in 1943 after contracting malaria. They were married on October 20, 1945 – Gustav was 38, and Aurelia was 23-years-old. According to Schwarzenegger, both of his parents were very strict: "Back then in Austria it was a very different world, if we did something bad or we disobeyed our parents, the rod was not spared." He grew up in a Roman Catholic family who attended Mass every Sunday.
Gustav had a preference for his older son, Meinhard (17 July 1946–20 May 1971), over Arnold. His favoritism was "strong and blatant," which stemmed from unfounded suspicion that Arnold was not his biological child. Schwarzenegger has said his father had "no patience for listening or understanding your problems." Schwarzenegger had a good relationship with his mother and kept in touch with her until her death. In later life, Schwarzenegger commissioned the Simon Wiesenthal Center to research his father's wartime record, which came up with no evidence of Gustav's being involved in atrocities, despite Gustav's membership in the Nazi Party and SA. Schwarzenegger's father's background received wide press attention during the 2003 California recall campaign. At school, Schwarzenegger was apparently in the middle but stood out for his "cheerful, good-humored and exuberant" character. Money was a problem in their household; Schwarzenegger recalled that one of the highlights of his youth was when the family bought a refrigerator.
As a boy, Schwarzenegger played several sports, heavily influenced by his father. He picked up his first barbell in 1960, when his soccer coach took his team to a local gym. At the age of 14, he chose bodybuilding over soccer as a career. Schwarzenegger has responded to a question asking if he was 13 when he started weightlifting: "I actually started weight training when I was 15, but I'd been participating in sports, like soccer, for years, so I felt that although I was slim, I was well-developed, at least enough so that I could start going to the gym and start Olympic lifting." However, his official website biography claims: "At 14, he started an intensive training program with Dan Farmer, studied psychology at 15 (to learn more about the power of mind over body) and at 17, officially started his competitive career." During a speech in 2001, he said, "My own plan formed when I was 14 years old. My father had wanted me to be a police officer like he was. My mother wanted me to go to trade school." Schwarzenegger took to visiting a gym in Graz, where he also frequented the local movie theaters to see bodybuilding idols such as Reg Park, Steve Reeves, and Johnny Weissmuller on the big screen. When Reeves died in 2000, Schwarzenegger fondly remembered him: "As a teenager, I grew up with Steve Reeves. His remarkable accomplishments allowed me a sense of what was possible, when others around me didn't always understand my dreams. Steve Reeves has been part of everything I've ever been fortunate enough to achieve."
In 1961, Schwarzenegger met former Mr. Austria Kurt Marnul, who invited him to train at the gym in Graz. He was so dedicated as a youngster that he broke into the local gym on weekends, when it was usually closed, so that he could train. "It would make me sick to miss a workout... I knew I couldn't look at myself in the mirror the next morning if I didn't do it." When Schwarzenegger was asked about his first movie experience as a boy, he replied: "I was very young, but I remember my father taking me to the Austrian theaters and seeing some newsreels. The first real movie I saw, that I distinctly remember, was a John Wayne movie."
On 20 May 1971, his brother, Meinhard, died in a car accident. Meinhard had been drinking and was killed instantly. Schwarzenegger did not attend his funeral. Meinhard was due to marry Erika Knapp, and the couple had a three-year-old son, Patrick. Schwarzenegger would pay for Patrick's education and help him to immigrate to the United States. Gustav died the following year from a stroke. In Pumping Iron, Schwarzenegger claimed that he did not attend his father's funeral because he was training for a body building contest. Later, he and the film's producer said this story was taken from another body builder for the purpose of showing the extremes that some would go to for their sport and to make Schwarzenegger's image more cold and machine-like in order to fan controversy for the film. Barbara Baker, his first serious girlfriend, has said he informed her of his father's death without emotion and that he never spoke of his brother. Over time, he has given at least three versions of why he was absent from his father's funeral.
In an interview with Fortune in 2004, Schwarzenegger told how he suffered what "would now be called child abuse" at the hands of his father: "My hair was pulled. I was hit with belts. So was the kid next door. It was just the way it was. Many of the children I've seen were broken by their parents, which was the German-Austrian mentality. They didn't want to create an individual. It was all about conforming. I was one who did not conform, and whose will could not be broken. Therefore, I became a rebel. Every time I got hit, and every time someone said, 'you can't do this,' I said, 'this is not going to be for much longer, because I'm going to move out of here. I want to be rich. I want to be somebody."
Schwarzenegger wanted to move from bodybuilding into acting, finally achieving it when he was chosen to play the role of Hercules in 1970's Hercules in New York. Credited under the name "Arnold Strong," his accent in the film was so thick that his lines were dubbed after production. His second film appearance was as a deaf mute hit-man for the mob in director Robert Altman's The Long Goodbye (1973), which was followed by a much more significant part in the film Stay Hungry (1976), for which he was awarded a Golden Globe for New Male Star of the Year. Schwarzenegger has discussed his early struggles in developing his acting career. "It was very difficult for me in the beginning – I was told by agents and casting people that my body was 'too weird', that I had a funny accent, and that my name was too long. You name it, and they told me I had to change it. Basically, everywhere I turned, I was told that I had no chance." Schwarzenegger drew attention and boosted his profile in the bodybuilding film Pumping Iron (1977), elements of which were dramatized. In 1991, Schwarzenegger purchased the rights to the film, its outtakes, and associated still photography. Schwarzenegger auditioned for the title role of "The Incredible Hulk", but did not win the role because of his height. Later, Lou Ferrigno got the part of Dr. David Banner's alter ego. Schwarzenegger appeared with Kirk Douglas and Ann-Margret in the 1979 comedy The Villain. In 1980 he starred in a biographical film of the 1950s actress Jayne Mansfield as Mansfield's husband, Mickey Hargitay.

Josef Houska and Petr Maslak have been stopped at the airport and taken to Airport Security, where Tom Vojak is ready to inspect their package. Tom opens the package and discovers a number of sex toys. He decides to take them to another room, for further examination. He moves Petr too, into a room equipped for action. Petr's arms are shackled to a St Andrew's cross, his chest exposed. Tom keeps up a constant barrage of abuse as he checks out Petr's sexy body. He puts a ball gag into Petr's mouth and then lowers his pants to fully expose him. Tom slaps Petr's face, and plays with his cock as well. Then he begins to whip Petr's body as well, and kisses all over his body, working down towards his cock. Tom takes the cock in his mouth and begins sucking it as Petr struggles against his restraints. Petr's dick gets good and hard as Tom sucks and wanks it. Then Tom goes back to deal with Josef, he inspects his luggage too, before taking him into the other room as well. Tom makes Josef remove his tee-shirt and then has a quick suck on Petr's cock again before lowers Josef's pants. He shackles Josef's wrists as well and starts to spank his ass. Josef moans as he feels the heavy hands, and a whip on his sexy body. Tom lowers Josef to his knees. Then he pulls out his own throbbing cock and pushes it into Josef's mouth. He makes his prisoner suck on that massvie tool, stripping off his uniform at the same time. Josef's hot mouth really works on that big cock but it is not enough for Tom. He soon has that big dick deep in Josef's tight ass, fucking him hard and fast. Josef moans as he takes that cock, but his own dick seems to be responding to the pleasure his ass is feeling. Tom really pounds aways and that ass, fucking it as deep as he can go. He moves Josef, onto his back, legs up and continues to stretch that hole with his hard cock. He fucks it so hard, and spanks on Josef's ass at the same time. Petr is released and stands over Josef wanking his own hard cock as he watches the fucking. Tom's fucking gets even harder and he unloads his hot load deep inside Josef's ass. Josef opens his hole up and pushes the hot cum right out of that ass. Then he see Petr's cock releasing its own hot cum, as he stands over him. Josef reaches up to feel the spent cock and then wanks his own throbbing cock to a lovely cumshot as well.

Stayed for 3 nights and was upgraded to a loft room. The room was clean and nicely decorated It took a few hours to cool off the upper sleeping area as the air had been turned off and the unit is on the lower level.
The free Internet had a decent signal and was fairly strong on both levels. For $189 they should throw in a bottled water and they were a little cheap on the shampoo and conditioner which was never replenished and I had to squeeze the last drops out on the third morning. (just cheap)
The hotel is connected to a Denny's and a moxies with many fast food choices within a short walk.
Lobby was clean, but all 3 mornings the free coffee was empty. Again, it's the little things that lack.
Overall not bad, but lacks a few touches for the price. More
- Free Wifi

In Unclean Spirits Jayné Heller has recently become aware of the death of her uncle Eric. After not knowing much about her uncle her whole life, she has now inherited from him his entire estate, including houses all over the world, money, and her uncle’s problems concerning what seem to be monsters in Denver. At first Jayné refuses to believe what is happening around her but then eventually comes around to try and take down the forces that took her uncle down. I enjoyed this book. I wish there would have been more about the monsters and what they are capable of doing. Overall I did enjoy the story line, but hopefully more will be said of the monsters in the coming books.

I have often heard reporters talk about reporting on disasters and saying: "I don't get involved. I am there to report the story." When I went to work on my first magazine, my fellow feature writer Bill Moore had been, many years before, Deputy Editor of a national Sunday newspaper. He was a brilliant sub-editor and taught me a lot. I can remember him telling me about attending the Aberfan Disaster in Wales in 1966. A coal slag heap collaped and engulfed a school, killing many children. When he and the other national newspaper reporters and photographers arrived at the scene, it was immediately evident that help was needed. According to Bill, a quick discussion among the gathered press led to the decision that a reporter and photographer would cover the story and the material would be pooled [shared]. Everyone else joined in the frantic efforts to try and dig out survivors. I doubt that would happen today.
I was reminded of this many years later when covering a fishing disaster in the south west. A trawler had capsized. There was one survivor and the lifeboat was returning him to port. I joined other journalists waiting on the harbourside, along with the wives of the trawler's crew. No one knew who had survived. You can imagine the howls of grief when the survivor appeared on deck and four wives realised they were now widows. There was no one available to help the survivor ashore, so I stepped forward and helped him to the waiting ambulance. I was pretty shocked by the whole thing and afterwards a female journalist with many years experience said she realised I had missed much of the unfolding story by going to the assistance of the survivor. It was right, what I had done, she said and opened her notebook to share the facts she had gathered with me so I could meet my deadline - a very unusual occurrence when journalists were rivals.
The moral of this tale, if there is one, is that sometimes you just have to get involved . . . Were Bill Moore and his colleagues at Aberfan right in the way they behaved? I'd like to hear what you think?

Christopher Wild said Salman Abedi did not reply when he asked what was in his rucksack, and that he was then “fobbed off” when he tried to raise the alarm with a security guard.
A public inquiry was shown footage of Mr Wild going to speak to Abedi at 10.12pm, less than 20 minutes before the bombing on 22 May 2017.
Mr Wild and his partner Julie Whitley, who was seriously injured in the blast, were in the City Room waiting to collect his 14-year-old daughter and a friend.
The father told how they had arranged to meet at the top of the stairs to the mezzanine level, and that Ms Whitley “didn’t like the look” of a man sat behind a wall with a large bag.
“It’s a kids’ concert and why he should be sat there with a massive rucksack out of sight of everyone, it was just very strange,” Mr Wild said, while giving evidence via video link at Tuesday’s hearing.
“If he was a merchandiser he would be selling his things with the others.”
Mr Wild said the man now known to be Abedi appeared to be “keeping out of view”, which made him suspicious at a “kids’ concert”.
He said he feared that Abedi could be a danger to children or “let a bomb off” and he resolved to talk to him.
“I asked him what he was doing there and did he know how bad it looked, him sitting there out of sight of everybody,” he added.
In a witness statement, Mr Wild described how Abedi did not reply when he asked: “What have you got in your rucksack?”
“He just looked up at me,” he added. “I then said, ‘It doesn’t look very good, you know, what you see with bombs and such, you with a rucksack like this in a place like this, what are you doing?’”
Mr Wild said Abedi initially said he was “waiting for somebody”, but then in response to everything else “he just kept asking what the time was”.
The father said he did not know and walked away, saying the bomber seemed “on edge, nervous”.
The inquiry was shown CCTV of Mr Wild immediately walking down the stairs towards Mohammed Agha, a Showsec security guard.
Mr Wild said he informed the steward “about the guy with the rucksack hidden behind the wall”, and that he communicated his concern that Abedi was hiding and could be a bomber.
“He said he already knew about him and that was about it really,” he added. “I felt I was being fobbed off really.
“It was if he had more important things to deal with. But in no way do I blame him because the guy was already in there. There was nothing he could do.”
Mr Wild said that he and his partner do not wish Mr Agha to be blamed, and believe it was too late for an intervention once Abedi had entered the City Room.
He added that if he had seen a police officer, he would have reported the terrorist to them.
The inquiry previously heard that there were no police officers in the area for around half an hour before the blast, and that two had “just missed” Abedi’s arrival with the bomb after taking a two-hour dinner break.
A woman working on an anti-bootlegging operation at the concert said she reported Abedi to PC Jessica Bullough half an hour before the bombing, after seeing him “tucked away” and becoming suspicious.
On Monday, PC Bullough said she had no recollection of being approached, having Abedi pointed out to her or being directed to the mezzanine level, adding: “I’m confident that they didn’t happen.”
Sir John Saunders, a retired High Court judge, is leading the probe examining events before, during and after the attack.
In total, 22 victims were killed, 264 people were injured and 710 survivors have reported suffering from psychological trauma.

The college started with fun and enthusiasm as every semester begins, but this one was special for Gourav and Ritik. They had been in the same school and now, in the same college, as freshers. Gourav was a brilliant coder who loved programming. He always kept experimenting with the technical activities and hence, enhancing his knowledge in the domain. At the same time, he was an introvert. He liked to keep to himself by being glued to his desk, never talking to people. On the other side, Ritik was ecstatic about learning new things every time. He could not stay stuck with the same thing. He always wanted to get out of his comfort zone and try something new that he would be afraid to do.
As both of them were freshers, there would be a party. This time the freshers, like every year, had a public speaking competition. It was evident by Ritik’s nature that he had enrolled for the contest. But, only this time he had urged Gourav to be a part of it as well. He wanted both of them enjoying this event together.
Gourav says, “You know I am not interested in speaking. I am afraid that I would be the centric point for laughter. Why would you push me for that?”
Ritik replied, “Come on man! It will be so much fun. I also have not participated in this kind of competition before. Look at me. I am still going.”
“You have to come to give a hand to me”, Gourav uncertain, still replied.
After a long, vague conversation between them, Gourav gave up. Ritik had convinced him in a way that Gourav could not deny. He had to agree to Ritik, and they happily enrolled for it.
The day of the fest had finally arrived. Students were running around, sitting with their friends, gossiping, laughing and cheering everyone. They were all dancing and enjoying the rhythm of the party organized for them. Droplets of sweat were running down Gourav’s forehead, his hands and legs going cold and numb. He could feel his pulses, but words were not ready to escape his mouth. He froze at that moment.
The competition started. Gourav was the first one up for the speech. As he made way on to the stage, his palms grew cold, yet they were sweating, his throat parched, but he still mumbled the words, finishing the speech hurriedly.
“I ruined it all. I told you Ritik this was bound to happen”, Gourav mumbled after he returned to Ritik.
“You gave it a try. I am content. It is my turn now, meet you later”, Ritik addressed while he started walking towards the stage.
Ritik was charged up and excited for his speech. It turned out to be so great that he won the ‘Best Public Speaker Award’ as a fresher. And the appreciations start flooding in. But the recognitions are for the efforts that Gourav took. No one mentions Ritik. With a frown on his face, he goes back to his room.
“Hey! Why did you come back to the room? Have you seen everyone appreciating me there?” said Ritik, watching Gourav enter the room, and taking a seat beside him. Ritik tried explaining Gourav about how everyone appreciated Gourav and not him. He had won the competition and also encouraged and inspired his friends to put in efforts for the same.
Gourav remotely says, “I know you have done very well, but now please go to your room. I want to continue doing the coding.” Ritik leaves.
After a few days, there was a coding competition in the college and Ritik being an enthusiastic person participated in this competition also. But this time Gourav had also enrolled as he is a great coder.
Before the competition
Gourav wishes Ritik the best for the competition. He adds, “I hope you win today also.”
Ritik replies in a calm voice, “All the best, Gourav. I hope the best person wins.”
They both went to the competition. This time Gourav won this competition, and everyone appreciated Gourav for this and Ritik was standing there with him.
After some time they went back to the room.
Gourav, “I am so happy today. I have won the competition, and everyone is admiring me. “
Ritik, “I am so happy for you.”
Gourav, “You are not sad. You have lost the contest.”
Ritik,” It’s just that you are better in coding as I am in speaking and debate. But we can do one thing; we can help each other to learn the things which we know well.”
Gourav understands the point that it does not matter if you have excelled or not. What matters is that you have tried.
Gourav got his mind clear about what he has to do now. He decided to improve his skills but to lead a business empire and convert his startup into a successful business. He became one of the best businessmen in the world, and this was possible only because of his entire dedication and consistently working on his faulty areas.
“Ritik gets the award for the best speaker of 2019”, the host addressed him 10 years later after this incident which made him grow her passion and convert it into the profession. It was an achievement for Ritik and Gaurav as they now pursued their passions and what they wanted to do.
“Never run for what others have, work for what you deserve.”
– Harshita and Hitanshi
One thought on “THE COLLEGE BOOM”
LikeLiked by 1 person

As far as actresses go, Cameron Diaz is one of the few who seems like someone we might actually hang out with. She's that hot-but-super-cool chick who's equally as fun watching a football game as she is going to some extravagant affair. Or, maybe that's what she just wants us to believe.
In any case, she appeared on "The Tonight Show" last night wearing a short dress that showed off her long and sexy legs. She even got up close and personal with a serviceman in the audience who said he hadn't hugged a beautiful woman in a while because of his deployment. Sure, that line always works!

Today's "Thursday Morning Mom" winner is Tracey Kelly of Grand Rapids, MI.
My sister became a single mom at the age of 20. For the last nine years, I have watched my sister work harder than ever to be the best mom and example for her daughter.
She was determined to finish her bachelors degree right after her daughter was born and she persevered through the challenges of keeping babysitters, functioning after sleepless nights, balancing homework and baby time and working on the weekends.
From day one she has put her daughter's needs and happiness before her own. She works a full time job and is an active volunteer at church. Singing on the praise team, working as the executive assistant to the pastor and leading lady as well as helping out in so many other areas at church where she is needed.
My sister is also currently working on her masters degree in counseling. She consciously made this decision one year ago, knowing that she would once again have to work through the challenges of scheduling babysitting and school pick up for her daughter, sacrificing precious mother/daughter time, working full time and volunteering heavily at church. I worry about her often because she is always on the go and never seems to rest.
My sister has told me that she wishes that she could afford to take time off from work to be able to go on vacation with her daughter. She worries about the fact that she always has to work to keep the bills paid but it doesn't allow her to do some of the extra special things she'd like to do with her daughter. With her being a single mom, she doesn't have the opportunity to rely on anyone else to help financially so she continues to work to make sure her obligations are handled. I'd love for her and her daughter to be able to go on a vacation. That would be very special for the two of them.

Once I'd qualified I decided to complete my NQT year at a special needs school. Friends and colleagues thought I was looking for an easy ride: smaller classes, more support. I knew it wouldn't be easy, but I wanted to do it anyway.
I approached the change as professionally as I could: I did my research, spoke to colleagues in and outside the field, searched websites for resources. I figured that I'd been around the block having spent many years teaching in Jamaica and three years working in mainstream London schools. I felt prepared for anything.
How could I be so wrong? I got my SLD post and at the start of the first week I marched into school ready to take on the challenge. I was ecstatic when I met my students. At the end of the week I questioned my sanity - what had I done? I was weary, distressed and down-trodden. My ears ached with the screaming of one child who found it difficult to adjust to the loss of his favourite teacher and to accept me as his replacement. I was chased around the playground by another. I didn't expect this. The hours were long and at times I wondered if I'd bitten off more than I could chew.
I've been here almost a year. Time has passed. I've grown, my pupils have adjusted to change. The staff are great, especially my class team. I'm glad I bit the bullet and made the swap.
Odette Small is a teacher at Michael Tippett school in the London borough of Lambeth

Science has provided another reason to give the Women's World Cup a chance as it winds down this week: female soccer players don't flop. Not as much, at least, as their male counterparts (although we'll allow that the same could be said of toddlers learning to walk). Researchers at Wake Forest University have concluded, after watching 47 games from the 2003 and 2007 women's Cups, that female soccer players are half as likely as men to flop and fake an injury in a game:
Apparent injuries were divided into two categories. They were considered "definite" if a player was replaced within five minutes or was visibly bleeding. Otherwise, the injuries were considered "questionable."
Researchers found that an average of 11.26 apparent injuries occurred in men's matches, compared with 5.74 in women's matches. Those considered "definite" involved 13.7 percent of injuries for women and 7.2 percent for men.
"We can say that men writhe on the ground looking like they're injured more than women, almost twice as often," said Dr. Daryl Rosenbaum, the lead author of the study, which was published in the July issue of the journal Research in Sports Medicine. "And when players are apparently injured, the percentage when it was authentic by our criteria was twice as high with women. You could trust more that they were injured."
The study results come to us just after last Sunday's U.S.-Brazil game, which featured a controversial flop. Brazil's Erika was rightfully presented with a yellow card for stalling after she collapsed to the ground with no one but her goalie nearby and was taken off the field in a stretcher after several minutes of delay. She returned to the game just a few moments later. (Her card and the stoppage time granted for her dramatics are what ultimately lead to the karmic, game-tying U.S. goal, so we'll let that one go.) But aside from an egregious example like that, and just from a viewer's perspective, the results seem accurate: there's much less of a case for complaining against flops in Germany than there was in South Africa last year.

This morning I was sitting on the bus with my wife on our regular morning commute to Belfast when, for some reason, I started to drag up some very old memories of being in first year at school. One memory in particular came to mind; I remember staring at this girl in my English class and I obviously looked a little too long; I think I had started to daydream about something, when she snapped, “What are you looking at?”
I must disclose that I was still dealing with the trauma of my dad’s murder just 3yrs before. In addition to this, I had lost a full years’ worth of memories, my mother had moved a new partner in, we moved from Belfast to Antrim, I then had my 11+, changed school again for the 3rd time in 3yrs, my self-confidence and self-esteem were at all-time lows, I was dealing with the beginnings of survivors guilt, my mental health problems had begun to accelerate, I didn’t trust anyone, I thought people were all out to make fun of me, I was starting to self-harm in different ways and I was also dealing with anger issues that were directed entirely towards myself.
In an instant I was able to examine all the different ways this could go wrong for me if I had told her the truth. My initial thought was to reply, “something beautiful looking back.” But I already knew nothing would ever happen between us; I was unpopular and a bit of an outcast. I was never tall or muscular or popular with the ladies (I am nearly 40, happily married, but even now I would struggle, if my marriage ever failed, to meet someone new as some issues have never been examined nor dealt with). I also read the tone of her voice – the venom and warnings it contained and the clear message that I was shopping where I could never afford, and even if I could, it was not for sale to people like me, and the aggression that told me to clearly back off as far as possible as quickly as possible. It was something I have heard often before and since, when I have been attracted to girls my age or slightly older/younger by a year or 3.
I also knew that if I told her my initial thought, meaning it as a compliment and nothing more, that she would seize upon the chance to humiliate me as I think she would feel like I had made her feel unclean by even considering looking at her in a way that denoted any sort of attraction or appreciation of beauty. All this went through my head in less than half a second and I realised I had only one option open to us both was to tell her something that would allow her to verbally get her point across and, having dealt with the situation to her satisfaction, despite the pain I knew it would cause me, I needed to lie to her.
So I replied, “something ugly looking back.” She replied, “Well you must be looking in a mirror then!”
Back then I was never good at reading between the lines, and even now that still applies. What I was and always have been, however, am deeply respectful. I always knew that if I was told “no” then I that would be the end of it and I would not pursue the matter.
However, in another window of insight into my developing mental health problems, I never always obeyed this rule. Don’t get me wrong, I never physically touched anyone or forced myself upon anyone – that would be something I could never forgive and I would self-harm until I felt I had been suitably punished, even if other people did. But I didn’t always take no for an answer. I was 11 or 12 and hormones were starting to compete with my level of self-control over my mental state. When I finally gave up, I made myself write 100 lines as a punishment. In a few years this would progress to starvation, cutting with a blade, punching walls (I once went 34hrs without drinking any liquid and I wanted to go much much further), mentally beating myself to a pulp every day and night and l began to think of ways to end my own life. I prayed that day would come very soon.
As the years were to go on through my teens and my defeats grew ever higher whilst my successes remained at the Zero mark (13+ strikeouts (I stopped counting) versus ZERO successes), my mental health problems within this area were to get ever worse and also contribute to other destructive behaviour aimed at myself to cause as much internal pain as I could. I must also point out that when I mean I struck-out, I don’t mean on an intimate level, I mean on ANY level. And it wasn’t just the continuous rejections; it was the way they were handed out.
I could never figure out what I was doing wrong, but I was also never told what, if anything I was doing right either. I was destined to keep making the same mistakes, but also hoping for different results every time (the very definition of insanity). I got to be beyond desperate. I prayed every night for nearly 2yrs, without answer. In the end I had to assume that the thing that was wrong was…me. My very existence was what was wrong. I represented everything a person DIDN’T want in a partner.
I took advice from everyone I could think off and when I wasn’t asking I was observing. I tried being upfront and asked people out = FAIL. I played the friend game = FAIL. I played the long game = FAIL. I played the waiting game in the hope that someone would ask me out = FAIL; and this was partly because when it did happen I was always distrustful (see the contradiction in behaviours emerging again?) and thought that they wanted to humiliate me as others have done, so I was too quick to reject them. And then I self-harmed as a result of blowing another chance. That anger that came as a result…is just…WOW!!! Like a nuclear blast going off inside my ribcage. Mental pain beyond pain; mental agony beyond words. I would scream my head off, and had enough control that the sound that escaped my lips was a mere whisper. I always felt that if I fully let it out that the only way to stop the pain would be to kill myself. And it wasn’t just the pain; it was the energy that came with it. It was more than my physical body could cope with or contain.
Remember the venom I spoke about? That was something I came to know the pain off only too well. The disgusted look on their faces, the tone of voice used; it wasn’t just heart breaking…it was soul destroying. It was also something I look and internalised. When I looked in a mirror I saw the most disgusting, humiliating, inhuman and unworthy of life, thing looking back. I wanted to kill it!!!
You have to have experienced this and more to fully realise the power of a simple kiss on the lips can be. On those unbelievably rare occasions when it happened, it had the power to drag me from the depths of my own self-induced personal hell and sent me to heights that would make an Eagle jealous and at speeds that would dwarf any rocket NASA ever launched into space.
And this was just ONE KISS on the lips, from ONE person, ONCE every 15-18months on average (I never got any further than a kiss, for a long time, but that is a different story). I needed these EXTREMELY rare victories as proof that I am worthy of some affection. That I am not a waste of time; that I deserved a chance to continue to live.
Things got so bad that I made a plan to end my life when I turned 25 as this pain was everything and every day. I knew roughly where I would do it (see plan below), I knew I wouldn’t be found on time, I knew how I would like it to happen and I didn’t give a fuck about the pain it would cause because no-one ever gave a flying fuck about how I felt, only to twist the knife to maximise my pain. The world had fucked me over and I was done being everyone’s punch bag. I was expected to absorb the punishment and not complain. Well…FUCK YOU!!!
I will also say this…I was a coward. As 25 approached I thought it was a little soon. I thought 30 would be a better number and by that point, if things hadn’t changed, the pain would be so all-consuming that suicide would be a relief!
I met my wife just a month before I turned 26.

Mina the mermaid sat on the bottom of the sea making beautiful necklaces out of tiny discarded sea shells.
She was often left on her own while the other mermaids swam and played games without her because Mina was the only mermaid in history who couldn’t swim.
Today the mermaids had gone to play near the coral reef where they could swim in and out of the rocks and meet up with all the other marine life.
Once upon a time they used to carry her with them so that she could sit and watch them play. It used to give her joy to watch them, but now it just made her sad and she would rather be on her own.
Mina didn’t understand why she was the only mermaid who couldn’t swim, after all she could sing like the other mermaids. In fact everyone agreed she had the sweetest voice of all. Also her tail was as long and fine as all the other mermaids.
Feeling particularly upset one day Mina started to sing a very sad song to herself when suddenly a large shrimp called Sammy, lifted its head out of the sea bed and told her to be quiet.
“If you must sing,” he said grumpily “at least sing something happy.”
“I’m sorry Sammy” Mina replied with a sob in her voice. “I can’t sing a happy song when I am so unhappy,” and with that she burst into tears.
Sammy had watched Mina grow from a baby and had seen her turn from a lovely laughing mermaid into this sad creature she was now.
He knew he had to help her but wasn’t sure how. Perhaps if he visited the great turtle Baradius he could advise him.
Baradius could usually be found at the big over-hanging rocks at this time of day, but the Sammy didn’t like going there as there wasn’t any cover for him and he could easily be eaten by the large fish that also swam there.
Mina’s crying turned into great big sobs and the Sammy knew he just had to help her. He summoned all the courage he could find and darting in and out of the rocks to keep safe, he finally came across Baradius. At first he looked fast asleep but as the Sammy hovered in front of his great big head, Baradius opened one sleepy eye and drawled slowly. “You’re causing ripples my friend, please swim somewhere else.”
Baradius was the oldest creature in the sea so everyone treated him with the greatest respect.
Sammy bowed and apologised for disturbing him. He then told Baradius about Mina the mermaid and how desperately unhappy she was.
At first Sammy thought Baradius had gone back to sleep as he just lay there with his eyes closed, not saying a word.
He knew turtles were slow creatures and took their time with everything, even thinking, and just as Sammy was going to give him a prod Baradius suddenly opened both eyes and gave a deep sigh.
“I think the problem could be her tail,” Baradius drawled slowly and with an “Umm” closed his eyes again.
Sammy was starting to lose his patience as even he knew Mina’s problem must be in her tail and shrimps were not known for being very clever.
Baradius yawned and lifted his big head. “I think we will need some help with this. Contact Primo the dolphin,” he instructed Sammy.
With that he closed his eyes again and this time did go back to sleep.
Sammy started to wish he didn’t have such a soft spot for Mina as this was turning out to be more work than he had thought, but he still swam around for hours until he finally found a large school of dolphins.
There, turning somersaults and having a great time was Primo with his unmistakable black nose.
Sammy swam as near to the dolphins as he dared without being hit by their swishing tails.
Primo caught sight of him and asked. “Hey Sammy, what are you doing so far away from home?”
After explaining the situation about Mina, and Baradius having an idea that included him, Sammy proclaimed, “I have done what I can, now the rest is up to you.” With that he turned and swam down to the sea bed and burrowed in the sand. (Just in case one of the dolphins fancied him for dinner.)
Primo went to speak with Baradius about his idea and together they came up with a plan.
It was very risky as it included electric eels and they were known as the meanest creatures that never helped anyone.
Mina had fallen asleep, exhausted by all the crying she had done, when she was nudged awake by Primo’s black nose.
Primo explained about Sammy going to see Baradius and the idea he had come up with. Mina felt a shiver of excitement at the thought of being able to swim like all the other mermaids. She didn’t care about the risks involved.
Primo looked at Mina’s beautiful and hopeful face and just couldn’t imagine not be able to swim and see all the wonderful sights there were in the sea.
He told Mina to hold on tightly to his fin as he swam to where the electric eels lived.
It was an old sunken ship, the glass from the portholes long since gone.
The eels slithered in and out of the portholes knowing larger creatures couldn’t follow them inside.
Near the ship were some imposing rocks and Primo placed Mina in between two rocks which formed a V shape.
Primo swam back to the ship and started to emit a high shrill note that even Mina heard hundreds of yards away. She even had to cover her ears to protect them from the piercing sound.
Gradually the electric eels came out of the ship to find out who was causing all the noise.
At first they were confused to see it was Primo the dolphin, as dolphins usually kept well clear of them but the more they ordered him to stop the hateful noise, the higher and louder his note became.
As anger replaced annoyance, so the electricity their bodies produced became stronger and more charged.
At first Primo circled around them, then he swam faster and faster, so they chased him. Such was their anger by now that they tried to zap him with their electric charges, but Primo was too fast for them.
Without them realising it, Primo was leading them nearer and nearer to Mina.
Just as they reached the opening where Mina was hiding, Primo suddenly flicked his tail and shot upwards. Most of the eels managed to avoid crashing into the rocks but two didn’t make it and swam into the opening.
They collided with Mina discharging their electric current straight into her.
Horrified by what they had done and knowing the law of the sea, that mermaids were NEVER, EVER to be harmed by anyone, they swam out of the opening as fast as they could, never to be seen in that part of the sea again.
Primo rushed over to Mina to see if Baradius’s idea had worked. There, lying unconscious, was the mermaid with her beautiful golden hair floating around her face. Primo nudged her with his black nose but she just floated as if she was dead.
“Were the two electric charges too much for her?” Primo asked himself in panic.
The dolphin started to emit a sad lament used only when they had lost one of their own kind. Slowly more dolphins arrived and took up the mournful song.
Mina opened her eyes and moaned. “Oh, I have such a horrible headache.”
Primo gave his chattering laugh, so relieved that he hadn’t caused her to die. Slowly the dolphins scattered, the older ones shaking their heads that Primo had escaped what could have so easily been a tragic disaster.
Mina tried moving her tail, but to no avail and felt the familiar tears springing to her eyes when she realised that nothing had changed. With her shoulders slumped, she held on to Primo as he started to take her back to where she lived with the other mermaids.
All of a sudden a sharp pain, then a tingling sensation, started in the tip of Mina’s tail and then it gave a tiny twitch.
“STOP!” She exclaimed. “I can feel something!”
Very slowly at first, then faster and faster, she swished her tail for the first time in her life. Tears of joy streamed down Mina’s face and she gave Primo a big hug. As she gently kissed the end of his black nose, she said a very heartfelt “Thank You.”
Word spread quickly through the sea that Mina the mermaid could now swim.
Mina was so excited and full of energy that she very rarely sat with the other mermaids when they were resting.
One day while Mina was exploring a large rocky area, she came across the largest turtle she had ever seen. Realising that this must be the great Baradius, Mina slowly swam towards him.
Thinking that he was fast asleep Mina delicately gave him a kiss on the flat of his head and whispered her thanks.
As Mina swam away Baradius slowly dragged open one eye and smiled to himself. “You are most welcome,” he replied with a gaping yawn.
Even though Mina had always dreamt of playing with the other mermaids, now that she could swim, she spent most of her days with the dolphins. No gentle swimming around the reef for her, she had lost enough time sitting at the bottom of the sea making shell necklaces.
Although she couldn’t leap out of the water and do somersaults like the dolphins, she soon learnt to swim as fast as they could. Legend has it that should you ever see a black nosed dolphin, look very carefully as you may see a golden haired mermaid frolicking by his side.
This article was contributed by Sharon Haysworth of Power Drill Guru

This last week was a nice one. There is a missionary who was an AP last transfer, but leaves partway through this one. So he’s going around working with younger companionships. He came with us for 2 days, and it was super great! I learned a lot and have a better idea of how I can improve. The 3 of us met with our investigator Heungjue Lee, who has been meeting off and on since June 2007. They were a little pushy and didn’t really like it too much, so he still doesn’t have a baptismal date.
We had a cool miracle this week! So, meal invitations from members are super rare here. But we received one last Sunday from the bishop for Friday evening. But the problem was, we aren’t allowed to eat with members after 6:00 but the invitation was after that. I didn’t realize it was until Friday evening. We really wanted to go so we could try to build a relationship, but we knew that doing so would be knowingly, blatantly disobeying. So we decided to call and explain. Long story short, before we told him the situation, he said we need to change the appointment to Saturday afternoon! Yay! 1 Nephi 3:7 sure is true.
One more cool story! We went in a 711 to charge my bus card and this guy in his upper 20’s and the old lady cashier were just in there yelling at each other. I walked up, and as she was charging my card, he turned to me and said in English, “She is such a ####.” He explained what was going on. Basically, she wouldn’t let him buy a 40 cent lighter with his card and it turned into a big fiasco. He said he met with missionaries in the past and they helped his depression a bit, but suddenly stopped. Then the cops came in!!! I wanted to give him our business card, but they were all talking together. My comp kept saying let’s go, let’s just go, but I just wanted to slip him our card. And I’m sure glad I did! He called and met with us on Sunday and he has a ton of potential. He has had a super tough life with his family, poverty, alcohol, tobacco, drugs, you name it. But he has been super humbled and I think he could really accept our message well. He sue does need it, and it would help him so much. So please pray for him! Brother Bit Han.
Happy Mother’s Day to the best mom ever! And also to my wonderful grandmothers and any other mom who happens to read this.
Thank you for all your prayers, love and support!!! This truly is the Lord’s work.
Elder Jace Anderson

I began my journey in endurance sports five years ago. I was going through a tough time in life and decided I needed somewhere to focus my energy, so I signed up for a half marathon with friends. I decided it was a good outlet – maybe I would try a sprint triathlon. Then came an Olympic distance and 70.3. I found the training to be cathartic, though I always said I could never do an iron distance. But as my miles got higher, so did my goals, and at the beginning of 2012 I decided that I could do a 140.6. That summer, I made my first attempt. I missed a run cutoff and was pulled from the course 8 miles short of finishing. I was devastated. But I woke up the next day and told my sister, “I’m doing another one next year, and I WILL get a medal.”
So in January of 2013, I signed up for Louisville. Then I made the decision (very WISE decision) that I needed some help. Coach Marcy was a colleague who had started a coaching business. I knew from my conversations with her and from researching her website and coaching philosophy that she was the coach for me. In our initial session, Coach Marcy asked several questions about my life and planned activities for the summer so she could tailor my workouts to what I had going on throughout my training season. And tailor she did – even fitting my training schedule to my honeymoon! After our initial session, I was so pumped to get started. During my first week of training, I told my friends and family that I felt so much more purposeful this year. I loved the workouts, and I loved the accountability of knowing someone was putting them in and checking them out as I completed them!
I checked in with Coach Marcy once a month. Those conversations were the mental pick-me-ups I needed throughout a difficult summer of training. She had words of wisdom for all of the things an athlete experiences while training for an Ironman – ailments, mental hurdles, lack of motivation, all of it. She was such a positive force all summer, and I felt re-refreshed and armed with the tools I needed to keep going after each check-in.
One thing I battled all summer was my experience last year. Coach Marcy encouraged me to find my mantra and battle those thoughts during training because I would be better equipped to handle them on race day (which I indeed was!) I had things that I told myself during training, but it was actually Coach Marcy’s words from our last check-in that ended up being my mantra on race day. She said, “This is going to be your redemption.”
I was lucky enough to get in a training run with Coach Marcy about a month before the race, then a twist of fate during race week brought me to Philadelphia, and I was SO lucky to get in one last training run with her. It was just what I needed. It helped calm my nerves, and I felt ready to head to Kentucky at the end of the week.
Because of our conversations, I felt prepared for everything I experienced when I got to Louisville, from the practice runs to athlete check-in. Then race day arrived. Of course I was nervous, but I felt a strange sense of calm waiting in line at the swim start. I knew I was ready, and I knew I would be crossing the finish line that night. We had gone through the course. We had gone through my nutrition. We had gone through what to do when certain scenarios occurred. I was ready. Today was going to be my redemption.
Much of the day is actually a blur. But I know I never once felt unprepared as I replayed our conversations in my head when it got tough. And it was tough. It was hot, it was humid, I felt sick at times, I was exhausted, and I was in pain. But I kept picturing crossing that finish line. I spent the last 5K in a state of euphoria because I could taste redemption at that point. 16 hours, 14 minutes and 28 seconds after I entered that water, I crossed the finish line. Elated does not even begin to describe that feeling. I am not a fast athlete. My endurance goals have never been driven by speed but rather by the accomplishment of finishing. And I had finished. A journey born out of a rough time in my life was complete. I will forever be grateful to Coach Marcy for that moment. She helped me get there. She helped me battle physical and mental roadblocks, and it was a phenomenal moment in my life.
I don’t think I stopped grinning for about a week. The next morning as I headed down the elevator to go home, I had a conversation with a man who had a similar experience as myself last year. He was grinning too as he told his story. “It was redemption,” he said. My smile widened, “Yep.”

Most girls don’t experience their first heartbreak until high school. Nikole’s heart was broken much earlier. She was born to an alcoholic mother and an absent father, who gave her up to relatives when she was just five years old. The trauma of her early years left her self-confidence shattered. When she came to Boys Town, her guard was up, and she resisted all help from her Family-Teachers. Over time, Nikole began to feel at home and eventually recognized that she had become part of a real family. Since then, Nikole has been a successful student, athlete, and leader. Her confidence is back, her heart is strong, and she looks forward to a happy, healthy life.
Watch Nikole's Story
Nikole – I was born Dec 3, 2001 in Gillette, Wyoming to a mother who was always intoxicated and a father who was always working. At the age of three my father left my mother took me with him and remarried instantly. My stepmom didn't know there was a difference between discipline and beating. And she sure didn't understand that children needed to be fed. By the age of 5 I was removed from their care and my aunt and uncle took me in. Most girls can look back and say their first heartbreak was some high school boy who only took them on one date. Mine was my father. I was a little kid who just wanted the one person in the world who should love you to love me.
It was my first heartbreak. It's what drives me now today even of the perfectionism and the needing to prove myself, and it's what made me... And it made me so hard on myself. And it made me so hard on myself. It's what drove me to think, "I'm not good at this. I'm not worth it." But now it's what drives me to say, Yeah, I am. Even if he gave me up, the one person that's supposed to love you, your parents, gave you up and you're still super successful, you're still striving with perfect grades and things like that. You're doing really well. I mean, what else is there?
Roberto: Her story and the things that she had to experience and overcome, and deal with at such a young age are things that you'd never wish on anybody. And they do create lasting trauma.
Nikki: I was in a really bad state of mind. I didn't want the help. Anything, anyone for authority could say to me, I wasn't having it. I fought the system. I didn't wanna be here and I was determined to make that known to everybody.
Leslie: Nikki was a frustrated young kiddo. And she just was trying to navigate her world that just seemed like it was in turmoil and so much change constantly happening around her. And she was just struggling to find her way through it.
Nikole: So I was in the home for the waiting period to see where I was gonna go next. And sitting there at their kitchen table filling out a skill work and things like that, focusing on my own skills that I needed to work on, I remember watching them interact with their kids and how much it just felt like a home. It was the first time that I actually sat there and was like, "Okay, this isn't just a placement. I'm here because I did something wrong. Why does this look like a family? Like, I wanna be part of that. I wanna be a part of that."
Nikole: My favorite thing about Boys Town is how much you can get involved in a whole bunch of different things. Like, I'm in music, sports and leadership roles.
In May, I will be graduating Boys Town and I got a scholarship opportunity to Peru State here in Nebraska. And I will be starting my English degree there for high school students.
I'm hoping to be an English teacher in a smaller town where there's kind of gonna be with that kid through the whole high school experience.
Leslie: I think she sees the value in just leading by doing the right thing and just helping somebody else's road be a little bit smoother or just feel heard. And I think that's what drives her.
Nikole: Before Boys Town, I was scared of the world, but also clinging to the stubbornness that, I have myself, I can do this. I don't need anybody else. Thirteen years old, that's not accurate. And so, going from that mindset to now at Boys Town, it's realizing that, Yeah, I have a whole bunch of people behind me and in front of me, and to my left and right, everywhere." No matter where I go, I have someone who's gonna be there to help me.

One of the most stylish women in Nollywood, Omoni Oboli, ever so radiant and award-winning actress in an interview speaks about herself and career.
What prompted you into becoming an actress?
Shortly after I got married, I travelled to the United Kingdom, where we spent three years. I started acting during my first year in the university but then, I had to let it go in my second year because it was clashing with my academics. I intended to come back to the industry later but I got married soon after school and we travelled out of the country.
It took me about 10 years to eventually come back to the movie industry and of course, coming back was not easy, nobody remembered me from 10 years ago. I had to struggle.
How did you eventually gain recognition?
I did a couple of movies for Emem Isong, worked with Lancelot Imasuen and then for Kunle Afolayan on the 'Figurine' and so many other movies.
How do you separate yourself from the characters you play in movies?
If I don't, then, there would be serious personality disorders. I have to play different characters all the time. Sometimes, some characters I interpret in movies could have some of one's real life traits but there is no way the characters can be totally like you. It is definitely not all the time that actors get characters that mirror their real personalities.
As actors, we study people. I do that a lot; I study people wherever I go because one day, I may be asked to play a character that is just like some of the people I am studying. I also do a lot of research.
What did you study in school?
French. I know it is nothing close to acting but I have always loved acting right from when I was a little girl.
You met your husband in Nigeria?
At the university?
No. He graduated before I even gained admission. We actually met on a movie set. His uncle is Obi Osotule and he had come to the set with him. We met, we just talked and I did not see him again until four years later during my final year in the university.
How would you describe yourself?
I like to think of myself as a home girl. I like the quiet life and love to be at home with my family. I love to cook and bake. I love my kids and I love to be around them. I miss them whenever I am out. I am an easy-going person. I love life; I don't look down on people. I know that every woman is a star in her own right.
The whole celebrity 'thing' ends outside my home. When I am at home, I am my husband's wife and my children's mother. I have three boys and the oldest is 11years.I started motherhood early. As soon as I graduated, I got married.
How do you react when people, especially your fans, are all over you?
It is nice when you get recognition for what you do. It simply means that you are doing a good job. If you were not, you would not get that sort of recognition at all. So it feels good and I react to people the way I would want to be reacted to. I am very warm, open, friendly and very accommodating to my fans and friends.
I believe that you should treat people the way you would want to be treated. Always have a smile for everybody- it doesn't take anything from you. There is not much to life for you to be proud and arrogant of. Try not to feel you are everything when you are nothing at the end of the day. The fact that you are on television is what makes people know you. You are just like everyone else. You have the same things, you cry like other people.
What has been your saddest experience in life?
My mother's death. Life had only just begun for me then and I did not expect her to die at the time.
What turns you off?
I don't like proud and arrogant people. I just can't stand them. I just don't think it is right for anybody to be proud because the Bible says pride goes before a fall. If you are humble, God will exalt you. You don't need to prove that you are somebody.
What does style mean to you?
For me, style is fresh. It is classic-which means I don't follow trends. I dress the way I like to dress and I wear what makes me happy. I don't care what people think. I am not going to spend all the money I have on clothes because I am a celebrity when I have children to take care of.
Is this your real eye colour or you are wearing contact lens?
My eyes have been the most controversial part of my body all my life and I want to keep it that way.
What was your childhood like?
I was raised in the then Delta Steel company staff quarters. Then it was fantastic but now, the company has closed shop. Since I was little girl, I have always held myself in high esteem and I never looked at myself as lower than other people. Maybe because I didn't have as much as they had, I still looked at myself as where I wanted to be and not at the level where I was. The truth is, my parents were not rich.
I grew up in a broken home and I lived with my mother in Delta State, where I was born. She was a teacher, was not rich but she worked in a company where education was provided. We had very good education and good healthcare. We had club houses and so many other things that privileged people have.
It appeared like we had money but the actual cash was not there. Sometimes, we did not have enough food to eat but things looked well on the outside. Because of the way I held myself with esteem, even the children of the rich wanted to be like me. I did not look at myself as if they were higher than me.
They knew that I was not born abroad like them but they also knew that they could not intimidate me. I did not allow my position at that point to define who I was.
Source: Punch Nigeria

AFTER catching her husband unpacking his suitcase after a business trip, one wife discovered 'evidence' that her man had been unfaithful.
The man was away for work reasons, but mum-of-three Becky, got suspicious when she discovered his ex was also staying at the hotel.
Taking to her TikTok account, the wife shared a number of screenshots of texts between her and her man, who seemed to be taking a long time to reply.
Posting under the domain @mealswithbecky the wife first shared texts where she explained to her husband that she was uncomfortable knowing that his ex was staying at the same hotel.
The post revealed that Becky's hubby has been gone since January 9th and when she asked him when he will be coming home he replied "The trip got extended until the 20th, I'm sorry."
When she told him she was uncomfortable that Jess, the ex was staying at the hotel he replied "Please don't worry. We arent even staying in the same hotel room, she is next door."
"Seriously stop worrying, she doesn't even like me anymore I asked her" he added to which the shocked wife replied, "why are you even asking her that."
FABULOUS BINGO: GET A £5 FREE BONUS WITH NO DEPOSIT REQUIRED
In the second post, Becky revealed that her hubby was taking a long time to reply to her texts and saying he fell asleep really early.
After many attempts to her him to answer, Becky's husband eventually replied "Sorry my love I fell asleep. I hope you had a good day" to which she replied, "ya right you fell asleep at 8.30 pm?"
Her hubby also refused to give her the name of the hotel he was staying at for his 'business trip.'
It all kicked off in her latest post where she was unpacking her man's suitcase and found what she considers evidence of infidelity.
Most read in Fabulous
Going through her hubby's suitcase, Becky revealed that she found a woman's press-on fake nail stuck to his sock.
The wife explained that this could not be hers as she use these types of nails.
"Unpacking my husband's suitcase after his business trip and I find this stuck to the bottom of his sock," said Becky.
Adding: "I haven't done my nails since Christmas and I don't wear press-on ones."
The post has been viewed over 5.4 million times, and TikTok users have been quick to comment.
"She knew you’d find it" commented one TikTok user.
Another viewer added: "Put the nail somewhere where he's definitely going to find it. if he doesn't ask you about it he knows. and then you will know."
"Your instincts are not wrong. It's gonna hurt. Sometimes we have to break our own hearts" commented a third.

I flapped my wings, flying higher and higher. I suddenly stopped my ascent and just began to soar. I loved flying. I loved the feeling of the wind of my wings, splitting at my head and rolling over me all the way down to my tail. The sun, now so much closer shinning on my back always felt amazing.
I brought my wings in and began a dive, corkscrewing through the air. Dives are my favorite. I continued to fall, my speed and excitement growing. I let out a loud road that echoed around the mountains that were my home.
I had been living here for the two and a half years since I was turned into a dragon. I still see Emeral from time to time, but not as often as before. Once the mania at my old home had calmed down she went back to her cave just north of it. I continued to live in the cave where she turned me into a dragon. Dragons never live together, for several reasons. For one, nowhere can the land support two dragons. For another, dragons are primarily solitary creatures. That works for me; I prefer to be by myself most of the time. Although I do wish she would stop by soon, I have not seen her in a while. We both agreed that I should never visit her, the people where I live are terrified of dragons and if they knew one lived just north of them they would freak out and attack her, even though she means them no harm, and they are more likely to find out if she keeps having visitors.
I live in a mountain range that stretches north to south on the western end of the continent. The southern end of the range boarders the ocean. The water there is pure blue and warm, cold never bothers me anymore, since I became a dragon, but warmth makes me feel so alive. I will often go for a swim and not come back all day. I can not breathe under water but I can hold my breath for days. I have never reached the max of my ability because I have had to eat and drink first.
I continued my dive until I had but a few meters left before I hit a shallow river. I spread my wings pulling out of the dive, my claws brushing the surface of the river. I continued to follow the river flying south. It turned right and I did, dipping my right wing into the river.
The mountains on either side of me began to get closer together the more I followed the river soon there would not be enough room for my wings. I began to flap my wings to get higher and higher. But the mountains were getting too close. I had mere centimeters on either side of my wings. I knew that I would not be able to keep my wings open much longer, and when I had to close them I would begin to fall towards the river below me. I continued to flap, rising higher and higher, and then at the last possible second I closed my wings.
I continued rising for a few seconds then began to fall. I kept my body ridged and began to spin. I fell like a spear. I kept my body perfectly strait as I fell closer and closer to the water below. I had only 50, 40, 30 meters left. The mountains were continuing to close in on me. They were becoming closer and closer to my sides. It as unclear what would happen first, that I would collide with the water or the mountain.
Then with less than five meter from the water and the mountains I broke free of the mountains and fell into the ocean below. I swam further and further down till I reached the ocean floor. I landed there on my feet and looked up. I was so deep that even with my improved vision and the clear water, I could make out little of the light above me. I then pushed up and swam as fast as I could towards the surface. Breaking it with a roar, I flapped as I hard as I could to gain altitude. I angled myself towards my cave, and flying over the mountains, flew home.
In less than ten minutes I landed on the main entrance of my cave, stretched out in the sun and lay down. “What, no hello for an old friend?” Said a female voice in my head
Surprised I looked up. “Emeral, I did not see you.” I got up and walked toward her. “It is so nice to see you. It has been to long, I had begun to think you had forgotten about me.”
She laughed. “Oh Jack you are still so human, no I could never forget you. No it was just that things were very busy around the city. The king and visited and security was increased 10 fold, there were powerful magicians everywhere, far more powerful then those native to your town. If I had flown to long they would have sensed it and I would have been found out.” Dragons flew not just from their wings but from magic, every time they flap they send out a little bit of magic that helps keep us up. “If I had flown for too long I would have built up too much magic around me and the magicians would have sensed. I had enough trouble getting enough food let alone leaving to visit you."
“You know next time that happens you could leave beforehand and stayed here for as long as he is there, I would prefer it, the king’s xenophobic nature is worst than anyone else and you could not possibly get away from his sorcerers.”
“I would have if I had known, since you left I never know what is going on in the city.” She leaned in a kissed me. “Enough talk for now it has been too long.”
I kissed her back. We stood there kissing for several moments. She then broke the kiss and lowered her head to my now erected 1 meter cock. She kissed the tip of it. Then she let her tongue slip and licked my piss whole. I growled my pleasure. She then began to wrap he tongue around my cock as much as she could. However it barely covered 50 cm. “Oh Emeral, I remember back when I was human you were able to completely cover my cock with you tongue.”
She growled her displeasure that I dare question her ability. “Ok let me see you do better.” I hesitated for a moment, thinking it was weird to suck my own cock. Dragons are not as strict in their sexual preferences as humans (a trait I inherited) but I had still never been with a male. I had never been with anyone but Emeral. “Oh Jack what is it, afraid you won’t be able to do any better?”
“No way” I lowered my head down to my own cock and started wrapping my tongue around it. “Sit back so I can see.” Emeral demanded. I did as she asked, sitting on my but and lifting my tail behind me (a position I don’t usually use) my cock sticking strait out into the air.
I began to wrap my tongue around my cock. Although I had never done this before I had a much longer tongue then Emeral and managed to get over 60 cm covered. It was an interesting sensation, my tongue felt different than Emeral’s. It felt really good. I began to rub my tongue against it.
Emeral, mad decided to hit me with her tail knocking me to the ground. I let out a small roar of pain and let go of my cock. “What did you do that for?”
“Nobody likes a showoff.”
“Still you did not have to hit me so hard.”
“Oh I am a wimp huh?”
“Yep, what are you going to do about it?”
I leapt at her spreading my out my legs to pin her legs and wings. However before I had finished her hind legs heaved shoving me over her. Her fore legs grabbed mine and she flipped on top of me. “You may have a bigger body but I have the experience over you. “
“Experience huh, prove it.” I then leaned up and kissed her. The last few minutes now completely forgotten she kissed me back. While still on top of me she lowered her head back down to my cock. “You may be able to rap it around more but I bet you cannot do this.” She then began to deep throat me, deeper then she had ever gone before. Her muzzle was touching my pelvis. She began to create a sucking sensation in her mouth around my cock. I let out another growl. She rapped her tongue around my cock again. I loved it when she gave me blowjobs.
I lowered my long body over her and stretching my long neck as far as I could and got all the way around her back to her nice, already wet pussy. I licked it; I loved the taste of her. I licked it again. Emeral began to growl now. I lowered my muzzle down to it and gave it a kiss, then without lifting my head I sent my tongue out again right into her pussy. I extended my tongue all the way into her pussy until it could not go anymore then doubled back until my fork tipped tongue was sticking out of her pussy. I then began to create as much distance between the two halves of my tongue as possible pushing up against her pussy walls. When I could not push anymore I brought the two halves of my tongue back together then back out.
Emeral let out a roar of pleasure. “Oh Jack, Jack…Jack! That feels so good” I continued to do that for several minutes. “Oh Ja…ack. Oh…Jack…I’m cum…ing.” I shoved all of my tongue into her and expanded as mush as I could. “Ah…ah…Ahhhhhhhh” Large amount of her juices started flowing out of her. I filled my mouth with as much as I could (which is no small amount) and swallowed the rest.
During her orgasm she had let go of my cock but she went right back to her administrations. She began to deep throat me but this time instead of rapping my cock with her tongue she let it slip of her mouth and lick my asshole. My growling which stopped when she let go of my cock started up again, creating bubbles in her cum juices that were still in my mouth.
I lowered my head to her back and let a little of her juice squirt out of my mouth and onto her back in a thin line one and a half meters in length right down the middle of her back. I did this two more times on either side of this line parallel to it. I then did several more lines going perpendicular to these lines. Then making sure not to let any more of her juices slip out I stuck several centimeters of my tongue out of my mouth and began to use it to spread her juices on her back.
Her back was shining with a nice sheen from her juices when Emeral decided to stick her tongue into my hole. My growling got louder. She began to pump her tongue in and out of me while continuing to suck on my cock. I lowered my head down to her ass and put my mouth against her asshole. I pursed my lips and shot some of her juices into it. “Oh Jack, that feels amazing. Don’t stop.” I pursed my lips even more increasing the pressure of the flow even more. I continued to spit her juices into her ass for almost ten minutes. As I did that she continued to pump her tongue into my asshole. As every second passed I got closer to cumming but I did not want to yet so I held it in as hard as I could.
Eventually I could not take it anymore. I squirted the last of her juices into her, splashing a lot onto her ass and pulled my cock out of her mouth. “Not yet Emeral” She looked at me evilly, but pulled out her tongue.
I walked around her and got on her back aligning my cock with her pussy. But I did not put it in just yet; I just held it there, the tip of my cock resting on the entrance of her pussy. I had my forelegs on her shoulders not touching her back.
“Oh Jack please.” I smiled evilly at her and began to rub my cock up and down against her pussy. “Jack you are so cruel please I need your cock in me.” I continued to rub for a few more seconds then quickly and without warning shoved my cock into her. I then lowered my fore arms to the ground so my chest was lying on her back. I began to pump my cock in and out rubbing my chest against her lubricated back.
I was already so close that it did not take me long to reach my climax. I came into Emeral several times. It lasted for over thirty minutes. The feeling of my cumming in her pushed Emeral over the edge and she had her second orgasm. We let out simultaneous roars of pleasure.
After we finished I pulled out of her and we lay down, I wrapped myself around her and slept.
Dragons are not monogamous. We do not have the same relationships that humans do. We will have multiple sex partners at once. I know for a fact that Emeral slept with another female dragon named Ainagi a few times in the last few years. I personally have not even met another dragon.
The next mourning the two of us flew together for a while then a little after noon she left for her own cave. I decided I needed to go hunting. A few hours later I was eating a couple of mountain goats reliving last night’s excitement. Just thinking about it made me get hard. I looked down at my lengthening cock. I let out a sigh and got up, thinking that I would go for a swim.
I leapt into the air and used an updraft to rise above the mountains heading south. I coasted most of the way there. When I cleared the mountains I dove down into the water as deep as I could.
I found a hot water jet at the bottom and lay in the hot water for a while. I looked up, although still at the bottom of the ocean I was not as far from the surface as I was last time because a mountain was growing here, and saw a full moon shinning down into the water. The moon was closer than usual, a giant white or just floating there in the ski.
I just lay there for about ten minutes watching the moon when there was a large splash right above me and a large shadow passed over me from whatever it was that made the splash passing over me blocking the moonlight.
It was about 5 meters in length, had a long tail and bat-like wings on either side. It was a dragon. At first I thought it was Emeral, but when it passed through the moonlight again I saw that its scales were a deep reddish color.
I froze; I had never met another dragon and did not know how to respond to it. The other dragon continued to swim around for a few minutes until it spotted me. “Well are you going to just sit there or are you going to join me.” The voice was definitely female. Without knowing what else to do I kicked off and began to swim up to meet her.
When I got there she began to swim around me. I began to swim around her countering all of her moves in a sort of underwater dance. The other dragon was amazing. She performed moves flawlessly that I had never dreamt of. Our dance continued for hours, until the moon went down behind a mountain.
The other dragon stopped, flapping her wings slowly to prevent sinking. “Follow me.” The other dragon said to me. She turned and began to swim just south of the growing mountain that I was laying on earlier. There was a drop off at that point and she swam right into it. I hesitated for a moment. I had never been that deep, but then I though that I would always be able to just swim back up I am no where near out of air. So I dived down right after her.
The water began to grow darker and darker. I could no longer see the moon behind more or the other dragon ahead of me. I did not know where I was going and I began to feel nervous. I could crash right into the bottom of the ocean and I would have no warning. So I began to slow my decent. Then I began to make a faint light at a few hundred meters down. I started to head toward the light.
The light came from a cave entrance. I swam into the cave. The cave angled upward and I continued to swim through the cave. Then all of a sudden the water ended and the cave leveled out. I climbed out onto the dry, solid ground and took a deep breath. The other dragon was standing there looking at me. I looked at her. My earlier estimate of about 5 meters seemed to be accurate. She was a deep ruby red. She had a stouter muzzle then Emeral and smaller ears to match. She was much thinner than Emeral too; she looked more like a giant snake with legs and wings then a dragon.
“I am sorry I did not know any other dragon lived here. I am Lenicha, what is your name?” She asked me.
“It is not a problem. I am Jack, nice to meet you. How long have you been here?”
“I have only arrived yesterday but I used to live here a few years ago. Well it is nice to meet you Jack.” She gave a small laugh when she heard my name. I looked at her questioningly. “Well it is not a usual dragon name. It sounds more like a human name.”
“Well that is because I used to be a human.”
“Really now that is interesting, how did this come about?”
“A dragon named Emeral turned me into one.”
“Ah the old powers, well I hope she knew what she was doing, we have had a lot of problems with humans that turned into dragons.”
“Most began to war with the humans and take their land and gold, killing and burning wherever they go.”
“Oh I do not want anything like that; I just want to be left alone.”
“Humph, just be warned, as a rule we dragons are not a unified bunch but if anyone of us starts to harm any sentient being we will unite against them to stop them.”
“I am forewarned.”
“Very well I am sorry to have bothered you; I will be out of here in a few days.”
Still feeling a little horny from earlier that evening I became a little more daring then I would normally be. I said, “Well there is not reason why we can not have any fun before you leave.”
She gave me the evil smile Emeral usually used just before sex. “Well aren’t you the bold one. I don’t know, have you ever had sex with a dragon other then with that other dragon, Emeral you said her name was.”
“Well no, but I bet, if you are as good as you dance that you would be an amazing teacher.”
She let out a loud laugh. Oh you do, do you. I am better but what make you think I would be willing to teach you anyway.
“Well you will be well paid for it.”
“Oh I will, will I? Prove it.”
“OK.” I lowered my head to hers and kissed her. I broke it after a few seconds. “Is that enough proof for you?”
She gave me another of her evil smiles. “I don’t know, I pretty skeptic, I think I need a little more convincing. It was my turn to laugh but I lowered my head and began to kiss her again. She let my tongue into her mouth and I let her tongue into my mouth. At the divide of our mouths she wrapped her tongue around mine and continued into my mouth. I let my tongue explore the inside of her mouth.
She was definitely very experienced. She was doing things that neither Emeral nor I thought of. And her very actions were instructive. They left no doubt what she wanted me to do next and this was just a kiss.
Our kiss felt like it went on for ever, although it could not have been more than ten minutes. I did not want it to end but at the same time I wanted her to proceed because if she is this good at kissing then I wanted to feel the sensations she will cause me to feel in sex. She eventually broke our kiss and my body, seemingly moving of its own accord moved forward to try not to break the kiss.
“Did you enjoy that?”
“Yes it was amazing.”
“That was nothing. Just wait.”
She opened her mouth made as if to bite me. She put a little pressure against my scales at my neck with her teeth but not enough to pierce them or even to cause pain. She wrapped her tongue around my neck and began to lather my neck in her saliva. After she had completely covered my neck she began no move her head down along my torso.
She continued down my torso using her tongue to moisten as much of my front as her incredible long tongue could reach. As I watched her I was amazed at how long her tongue really was, it is longer than mine, I though. As if reading my thoughts Lenicha said, “Yes my tongue is my special trait, it is longer than any other dragon’s I have met.”
When she got down to my already fully erect cock she began to wrap her tongue around it just as Emeral had done. However unlike Emeral or even me she was able to completely cover my cock with her tongue, from the very tip to the base. She even had enough tongue left over to play with my balls with her forked tongue. She began to constrict my cock a little bit with her tongue and then loosen it. She repeated this over and over again which sent a wave of new sensations over me. I had had sex with Emeral plenty of times but she was never able to make me feel this good.
She stopped playing with my balls; dismayed but the sudden lack of pleasure there I looked down and saw her tongue working its way behind me. Then I felt her warm tongue against my hole. She began to lick around my moistening it. The probed my hole with one of the two forks on her tongue. I was surprised how far it went it, is felt about 6 cm to me. She then had the other fork of her tongue continue to swirl around the outside of my hole. I began to growl in the pleasure of it again. The combination of sensations felt so good, I almost came but I held it in because I did not want it to end yet.
She continued her administration for another ten minutes, at which time she removed her tongue from my ass. I moaned my displeasure until she started to massage my balls with her tongue again. But then I felt something I was not expecting. The tip of her tail was resting at the entrance of my asshole. She began to gently push it in. I felt a little pain but not too much. However the longer she did it the more pain was replaced by pleasure. Then eventually I felt her tail slide into the hole.
Now I had had Emeral’s tongue in my hole before but never anything so large. At first pain shot through me like I couldn’t believe but then it quickly died down and was replaced but a strong feeling of pleasure. She began to pump her tail in and out of my ass, all the while continuing her ministrations on my cock. She began to pump her tail in and out of me faster and faster. My growls quickly were becoming roars of pleasure. I could not take it anymore I had to cum.
Sensing this Lenicha removed her head from my cock but continued to thrust her tail in and out of me. Even without her blowjob I still came a few seconds later, blowing my load all over her head, neck and torso. And this was no small amount; this was one of my largest orgasms ever. Her naturally red scales were nearly completely covered in white on the upper half of her body.
She lowered her head to her torso and licked some of the cum off her and swallowed it.
“Um you taste good. Your turn, you made this mess now clean it up.”
Smiling at her I lowered my head to her torso and began to clean her scales of my cum. As I licked my cum off of her body I kept it in my mouth and when it was full I would life my head up to meet hers and give her a deep kiss sharing my cum with her. When my mouth was empty I would lower myself back down to my remaining cum on her body and start licking it up again.
When I got to her neck I decided to try on her what she did on me and gave her a light bight on her neck while gathering up my cum from her neck. She began to growl in pleasure. Wanting her to experience as much pleasure and she had generated for me as I was cleaning her I brought my tail around to meet her pussy and in one quick sharp motion I shoved my tail inside of it.
Lenicha was so surprised by it that she let out a great roar. Once I got my tail in as far as it would go I quickly pulled it almost out then pushed it in again. I began to pump my tail in and out of her as fast as it would go and soon her roar turned into one of pleasure instead of one of surprise.
As I continued to clean her of my cum I got to her face which was nearly completely covered in my juice. As I began to clean her face her tongue came up to meet mine and danced around it while I licked up the cum. I got a long line of cum onto my tongue and placed it cum side down onto her tongue. The taste of my tongue mixed with her saliva was amazing.
Lenicha, using her considerably longer tongue, licked a huge patch of my cum from the thickest concentration of it left on her face and rapped her tongue around my sharing the flavor. I pulled her tongue into my mouth with my own tongue and we began another deep kiss.
Our kiss was suddenly broken however when Lenicha let out her loudest roar yet, I felt her vaginal muscles tighten on my tail. I knew she was cuming. I was surprised, I knew she was enjoying it but I had no idea that she was even getting close.
“Oh Jack that was amazing, I was not expecting that one.”
“Neither was I.” I admitted
“Hum, seems we have a natural here, maybe I will get something out of teaching you after all.”
“What do you still need convincing?”
She smiled her evil smile at me. “Have you ever tried anal?”
“Nothing but what you did not me earlier with your tale.”
“No I mean have you ever given someone anal with you cock?”
“No I admitted.” It was actually surprising where my home town was not the most open about sex there were a few positions one had to try, that everyone knew about, once you were sexually active, anal being one of them. I was surprised I had never thought to do that with Emeral.
“Well then wanna try?” If possible her smile got a little more evil looking.
I smiled back at her and without saying anything I pulled my tale from her pussy and got and her and lined my newly re-erect cock up with her asshole. I tried to push it in but found that it was too tight.
“No you have to loosen it first, try using your tongue.”
I nodded at her and lowered my head to her hole and stuck my tongue out in a brief flick tasting her hole. I had done this a few times for Emeral and was always surprised that it was not as bad as I would have expected. I began to circle my tongue around her hole just and Lenicha had done to me. Then I stuck one of my forks on my tongue quickly into her.
Lenicha roared in pain. “Slower than that, you have to give it a chance to loosen up.” I nodded and tried putting my tongue into her and but this time much slower. It worked, instead of a roar of pain I heard growls of pleasure coming from Lenicha. I stuck the second fork into her and got an increase in her growling.
First few centimeters of my tongue were now fully incased in her asshole.
I began pumping my tongue in and out of her asshole, gaining speed and depth with each pump. Lenicha’s growls were quickly becoming roars.
“Oh…O…Ja…ack… Please I need yo…our cock in me…Oh Please…Jack.”
Smiling I stopped my pumping but with my tongue nearly 50 cm into her ass and slowly began to remove it. Lenicha moaned in anticipation.
“Oh Jack, why do you toy with me so?”
I didn’t answer. I only slowed down my removal of my tongue. Lenicha let out a roar of anger and pleasure. “Oh please Jack, I need your large cock in me now.”
I didn’t do anything about my tongue however I did bring my tail around and begin to rub it against her pussy. This did not help her mood any, she was now so horny and I refused to give her what she wanted. She leaned her head down to where my tongue was entering her asshole and wrapped her tongue around it and yanked it out of her ass.
“Now no more game and fuck me up the ass.”
I aligned my cock with her asshole as I did before but this time felt that it was much looser and ready for my cock. I bushed it in and at the same time had my tail, which was still rubbing her pussy, end her as well.
We both let out loud roars of pleasure, her from being doubly penetrated, and me from this new experience of giving someone anal. Despite all that I did to loosen her up it was still very tight on me. I began to pump very slowly in and out of her ass with my cock while my tail was once again pumping in and out of her at full speed. However the longer I went the faster I became.
I began to feel pressure on my asshole as I did earlier. I looked back and saw that Emeral was working her tail into me again. I looked at her and saw she was smiling at me. I smiled back and leaned in to kiss her. We stood there kissing for several minutes; Me, pumping my cock in and out of her ass and my tail in and out of her pussy, while she was pumper her tail into my ass. This was all getting too much. I was so close to cuming but I fought it with all my strength. I did not want to cum so soon and end this experience.
I knew I was so close. Then, when I pushed both my cock and my tail as far into her as possible, Lenicha let out a huge roar and I heard her project, “Oh Jack…I’m Cuming.” Then I felt her clench down on my tail and cock. This was just too much, I let load my second load of the evening and surprisingly it wasn’t any smaller than the last one, if anything it was bigger. Together we came for over 45 minutes, me filling her ass so full of my cum that it spilt out around my cock and got my entire pelvic region covered in my own cum.
When finally I we finished cuming I pulled my cock out of her (leaving my tail in) and lay down next to her. She kissed me again. Then she looked down to where I was covered in my own cum.
“You know I did it for you, it is the least you could do.”
“Trust me I would have done it anyway.”
She lowered her head and began cleaning me up just as I had cleaned her up, right down to kissing me and sharing my own juices with me.
By the time she had finished I was hard again and ready for some action.
“Well aren’t you the resilient one?”
She continued to suck on my cock. I, not wanting to be left out, removed my tail from her pussy and inserted my tongue in its place. I re-adjusted my body so my head was closer to her pussy and my cock was closer to her head.
I folded my tongue back over itself as I did with Emeral those long years ago and began to pump in and out as hard as I could. Her juices were already beginning to flow. I was lapping them up as best as I could but a lot still got around my and spilled out onto my face, neck and upper torso. I began to separate the two sides of my tongue pushing not just the back wall but also the side walls of her pussy. Every time I pulled my tongue back I would slap the two halves of my tongue together, splashing more of her juices over me.
At the same time Lenicha was had her tongue wrapped around my cock but in the opposite direction as before. She had the beginning of her tongue wrapped around my balls, gently squeezing them, and continued up the length of my cock so the tip of her forked tongue was near the tip. She then proceeded to insert of the forks into my piss hole. I was surprised it would fit, but the tips of her forked tongue easily fit into it. However she did not get far in before she had to stop only about a centimeter. But leaving it in there she swirled the other around the top of my cock, causing the part that was in my cock to swivel around. It felt amazing. I began to feel my balls began to tighten, but I fought it. I was not ready to cum. But I knew it would not be too much longer.
I began to massage the outside of her pussy with my claws. I could tell, from her breathing and the how much she was growling that she was close to cuming, and I knew she knew that I was also close but we were both determined not to be the first one to cum.
Lenicha grabbed my cock around her tongue and began to jack it off. With the extra pressure on it and the increased movement of her tongue against my cock made me almost cum right off the bat but I managed to get control of myself.
In return I inserted my left claw up to my wrist, without retracting my tongue. It then began to open and close my hand, rubbing my fingers all over her pussy. I then began to push my arm further and further into her, all though I did not get much more than a few centimeters pass my wrist. However that seemed to be working, her breathing quickened significantly and more juices cam flowing out of her, but she was not cuming yet. I growled in frustration.
Lenicha laughed. “You are not going to get me so easily.”
“Yah well me neither.” I said, pointing to her hand and tongue around my cock, although sounding a lot more sure than I felt.
“OK then.” She then opened her mouth all the way and covered my cock so that her nose was touching my pelvis. She then produced enough saliva to cover my cock. Letting it sit there for a minute she then began to suck the saliva away then spit it back at my cock, letting the flowing water massage it. This was more then I had ever experienced, she was good. I was not sure I was going to win this, however she had reminded me of something.
I begun to gather as much of her liquid in my mouth as possible, nearly filling it. I then, removing my arm but not my tongue, started to spit it back out in a thin, powerful stream back into her pussy. At first I did a long powerful stream into her, and then changing it to short bursts into the places she liked the most, all the while continuing with the pumping and expanding of my tongue and the rubbing of both my hands again against her pussy.
The two of us continued with this for several more minutes. It was plain that the question was not if we would cum, but who would cum first. I could let got at any second and cum and I knew that Lenicha was the same way.
I then felt my balls tighten, I tried to fight it but it was not use. I let out a roar of pleasure, releasing the rest of her juice all over myself, at the same time she did. We both came at the same time. I let load several loads of cum into her mouth but it was too much for her to handle and most of it landed on her face again. Also a large amount of her vaginal juices came out, and same as her I could not handle it all and most of it landed on my face.
I looked at her and she looked at me. Both of us were covered with each other’s juices.
“Maybe we should clean each other up?” I offered.
“Sounds like a good idea.”
As we licked each other’s faces clean I asked. “So teach, did I pass?”
“Oh you did more than pass, you got an A.”
And when we licked the last bit of cum of each other’s faces and began another deep kiss, sharing the tastes on our tongues; I was once again thankful towards Emeral for making me a dragon.
Lenicha left the next day to look for a new home and I did not see her for years to come.
Please tell me if you like it, if you do I will continue writing

Why do you like or dislike this movie?
Uploaded: 2015-12-20 Rating: % / Votes
Description: Its time for Anya to pay rent. Tyler, her roommate comes to collect her rent money and she was just being a bitch about it and making excuses. Tyler just had enough and told her to get her stuff and leave. Anya started flirting with him, saying that she could help him out if he could help her out.

Gender: Male Age: Secret Location: N/A
Hello.... I'm really happy to find this site where I can share my amazing stories about my sex life. This is my first story and it's a true story about my dad and me.
I'm a 15 boy who just hit the puberty a couple years ago. My mom and my dad are divorce a few years ago. I live with my mom that's why I don't see my dad often because he lives in another state. Last week, I went to visit my dad at his house in another state for a few days. I was really happy to see him because my dad and I haven't met each other for over 3 years. The first thing he did when he see me is hug me really hard. He was really happy to see when he knew I was gonna go to visit him. He's still a great guy. My dad is a handsome man with great body, personality and charming. But he's still single nowadays.
The first day I spend with my dad is pretty great. We went shopping, movie and restaurant. He's still a great dad ever to me. After we arrived home, I went to my room to take a shower and my dad was in the living room watching TV. My room is on second floor as my dad's. When I started to shower I realized that my bathroom has no shampoo so I yelled to my dad from my bathroom to get some sham for me. But there was no answers. I though he was watching TV so he couldn't hear me. So I got out of the shower wet and naked and headed to my dad's room to get some shampoo from his bathroom. I opened my dad's room door as I thought there was nobody in the room. As I expected, there is nobody in the room so I run to get the shampoo as quick as possible from his bathroom. But when I reached the bathroom :eek: I saw my dad was in the shower naked from behind. I totally freaked out. I never saw his naked body before. He has really great big muscle body. I totally so proud of him to be my dad. As soon as I saw my dad, he turn to me that I could see his whole body especially his 8 inches penis. I thought he was freak out when he saw me standing naked right in front of him but he wasn't surprise at all. All he did was asked me:
"Hey son, what's up! Do you need something?"
I was surprise that he didn't afraid for me to see his nude body. I just replied:
"I need some shampoo cuz my bathroom don't have some."
and he replied: "Oh! Really? It's ok, just join me here."
I was like hooo.... he just asked me to join him for a shower and I did. I jumped into the shower and started to wash my body. I couldn't help not to look at his body and his huge penis. And he noticed me. He smiled and said:
"Son, you grew up a lot. You were just a little boy a few year ago. but now you're a man now."
I felt so embarrass cuz he saw my whole naked body and the worst thing is that my penis started to get hard. I tried to hide it but I can't and he saw it. He smiled and said:
"Don't be shy son. We are father and son. I used to be your age too."
I was pretty comfortable after that but I was freak out again when he said:
"You have a great body son. I'm so proud of you." and he looked at my body especially my erected 6 inches penis.
I noticed that his penis started to get hard too. This is so weird because we are father. I couldn't tell how I felt about this. I couldn't control my feeling. How can I like my own father like this. But his body is pretty attractive. He looked really sexy in the shower like that. The water flew through his big muscle body make me feel so strange. I could felt hot air from my body. My face was blushing and my penis was erected really hard as well as his. His 8 inches penis was really make me crazy. I was dying to feel his penis. All I could think was to taste it. I couldn't help not to stare at my dad penis until he noticed it. "What's up son. Is there anything you want? Just tell me whatever you want son" he said with a smile. This make me feel so relief. I don't know what come in my mind but I suddenly asked him:
"I just wonder why you're still a single. Living my yourself must be hard I think. Why don't you remarried?"
"I don't know. I felt a bit lonely actually. I hooked up with some girls too but no one make me feel good as our family" he replied.
"Isn't anyone interesting in you? There is no way there is no one interesting in you. You have a great body and charming too. Do you have a girlfriend?" I said.
"Not really. I hooked up with some girls before, but I don't really interested. Living by myself is pretty good. What about you? Do you have one?" he replied.
"No. I never have one." I said.
"Do you masturbate?" he asked.
I was freaked out with this question. I replied awkwardly:
"What about you?" I asked :eek: .
"Yeah, Like everday" he replied.
"Wow..... You're great, dad." I replied while almost finishing shower.
"Well, do you want to try one with me?" he said.
I was like what the fuck did I just hear...... My dad just asked me to masturbate with him. All I could think is what a surprise.
"Great! I'd love to" I said with a smile.
This is really great. I'd never though of it. This really fucked me off. After we finished showering. My dad got out of the bathroom and walk to the living room naked and said:
"I'll be in the living room wait for you."
What the fuck. It must be a wet dream or something. I never thought that I'm gonna masturbate with my handsome dad. I was really happy about this. He was downstair naked sitting on the couch watching porn and masturbating while I was walking down the stairs naked too. He saw me and asked me to join. This was the best thing I ever do with my dad. He was sitting by my side while my hand was jerking my penis up and down. We both are sitting and masturbating to gay porn. He stared at me and my penis and said:
"You're pretty good son. Your penis almost big as mine"
I smiled and said:
"Not great as you dad. You have a great penis dad. I'm so proud of you."
I did't know how I felt back then. But my head was full of my dad. I was dying to feel my dad penis. I couldn't help not to stare at my dad penis for a second. And suddenly he said:
"You could touch me if you want to"
What the fuck. He just let me touch him. I was happy like crazy. This must be the most lucky day of my life. I approached him and touch is penis awkwardly.
"It's ok son, do all you want. We're dad and son"
I was really happy. I grabbed and jerked my dad 8 inches penis like there is no tomorrow. He was moaning so loudly as his hand was jerking my hard 6 inches penis at the same time. We both felt so good. After a while I asked him:
"can I taste it?"'
I must be out of my mind that I want to taste my dad. But his reply was:
"Of course! son. Do all you want. Make your dad proud."
I quickly grabbed his super hard penis and put it into my hungry mouth. His penis was really great. I sucked it like crazy. I could felt his per-cum in my mouth. He was moaning so loud. Then we both went to continue our great business together in his bedroom. We did 69 position. It was really great. This is the first time anyone suck my penis. My dad was a great sucker. He sucked my penis while moaning. Suddenly I feel that I was going to cum soon. I yelled:
"Dad, I'm gonna cum."
"Yeah, that good son. Explode your hot fucking cum in your dad mouth. Make your dad proud." he said as he jerked my penis like crazy.
"Yeah dad, yeaaaaah, yeaaaaah yeaaaaaaahhhh........." I scream as I cum into my dad mouth. That was the best cum I ever had. It was so plenty but my dad drink every drop of my cum. I felt so wonderful. I relax a bit then started to suck my dad penis more. he was sitting on his bed, spread his legs where I can sit in the middle between his legs and suck his hard rocking penis. I sucked it really bad. He was moaning and sweat all over his body. He yelled:
"Yeah son, Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah son, make your dad proud."
His body was started to shake and I knew what he was going to.
"I'm going to cum son." he said as I was sucking his penis up and down very hard.
"Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah................" His cum finally exploded all over my face and mouth. I licked all his hot cum on his penis and body as he was moaning really bad. His whole body was all sweat. and he said:
"You know son. You're the best gift of my life that god ever give me. I love you son. I'm so proud of you."
"I love you too dad. You're the best dad ever." I replied.
My dad and I both were lying on the bed with cum all over the body all the rest of the night....
.............. thanks for reading............
Read 20127 times | Rated 81.3 (144 votes)
Please rate this text:

>> Monday, October 1, 2007 – great pets
Acadia is not known for Blue merles, BUT we had a lovely litter of blues and tri's. This puppy is VERY happy to have his "girl". Caroline came looking for a dog of her own (she has 2 brothers and the family has a Brittany). Caroline would like to learn agility and I just know that Getty will be happy to learn it with her.

Early this morning a standoff occurred in Parma, Ohio. Commotion began around 5:30 am when Towerview Apartment residents heard a man yelling and glass breaking.
The man reportedly lived on the third floor of the apartment complex. Neighbors called the cops and they arrived in body armour and carried automatic rifles as they pulled up in two SWAT vans, according to Cleveland.com.
When the man saw that the officers had arrived he yelled out that he was armed with a MAC-10 and they should put their arms up. He also threw things out the apartment windows. After a short time period he barricaded himself in an apartment and stopped interacting with anyone outside.
According to FOX 8 News,”Officers opened his third-floor apartment door and the man retreated into another room, where he continued to hide. He was finally tased and taken into custody, then taken to Parma Hospital for self-inflicted injuries.”
When he was in police custody he was transported to the Parma Hospital with minor wounds and will be undergoing a mental evaluation.
Cleveland.com also said, “Towerview residents described the man who engaged in the standoff as being in his 20s. A resident leaving for work at 10:30 a.m. who declined to give his name, said he knew the man, described him as “quiet,” and said no one had a problem with him until today.”

Most elite greyhounds are trained by one of a select handful of professional trainers, but every now and then one slips into the hands of hobbyists.
When this happens it is a fairytale for all involved, and it brings hope to the thousands of people trying to get hold of that elusive champion greyhound.
A recent example of this is Peter Rocket, who isn’t the greatest greyhound to ever grace the track, but he was very, very good.
Good enough, in fact, to change the lives of Pearcedale couple Keith and Lisa Hellmuth, who trained and own the greyhound respectively.
Peter Rocket was recently retired after a career that spanned 67 starts for 22 wins and 29 placings, and he won in excess of $320,000 in prize money, granting the Hellmuths “an early retirement we can now think about”.
The Hellmuths both work full-time, Keith as a plasterer and Lisa at the Commonwealth Bank, with the couple only ever training one or two greyhounds at a time as a side hobby over the past 20 years.
Peter Rocket is far and away the best greyhound the couple has ever had, and here Lisa shares the experiences that came about from owning a champion greyhound.
Lisa Hellmuth gives Peter Rocket a cuddle.
Q: Let’s start with Peter Rocket’s background. He is a son of Where’s Pedro and Belron Blue who was born in August 2010. Who bred, reared and educated him?
LH: He was bred by our neighbours Ron and Isabel Partington. We bought him at three months of age and named him ‘Blackie’ (kennel name). At the time we were looking for a couple of pups to train, as the greyhound we were training (Raya Riot) retired as she was injured. We noticed that this was a repeat mating from five years earlier that produced Violet Crumble, Jeddy Boy and Kelandy, so we thought we might pick up a handy pup as Belron Blue had produced a couple of city winners. We reared him at home with another pup.
Q: At what moment did you realise he was something special?
LH: We broke him in at Tooradin Trial Track and he was the easiest dog we have broken in. He just did everything right from the first go. From his first trial, we knew we had something special, but never did we think we would end up with a dog that was a champion. After that first trial, we didn’t have to do anything else, we gave him a couple of months off and then started to trial him at the race tracks. It didn’t matter where we took him, his times were incredible and they just kept on improving. At that point we said to ourselves, all we have to do is put in 100% to keeping him fit and he will do the rest.
Q: How much prize money did Peter Rocket win and how have you spent this money?
LH: Peter Rocket won an unbelievable $328,000, something we never thought we could win. He has made us debt free with an early retirement we can now think about. We only looked up his record the other day, and found he had 18 starts at The Meadows and was only unplaced once there, and that was fourth. At Sandown Park he had 18 starts and was only unplaced on four occasions. We feel that in itself is incredible.
Peter Rocket wins the 2013 Horsham Cup in what was his first appearance in a group final.
LH: We had never been in a Group race final before and at that stage never thought we could ever win one. Well were we wrong? We knew he was good enough to win it, but there is always a doubt that there may be a quicker dog, and you think about how much trouble he might get into during the race. I screamed when he past the finishing post in first place and that was the start of something really special. With all the media and attention that night, I was so nervous. I didn’t know what to say or who to thank. My mind went completely blank. Keith did a runner (as males do) as he was too shy to be interviewed. It was something we both weren’t used to. Despite that, it is our favourite memory about him.
The Horsham Cup win was Lisa’s favourite moment in greyhound racing.
Q: You must have been so proud that Peter Rocket showed his Horsham Cup win was no fluke, as he competed at the top level from that moment up until his retirement 16 months later?
LH: After his Horsham cup win we decided to give him a go at any group race that was on offer and to our excitement, he kept on making the finals. He made 15 in total. By the 15th I was absolutely loving all the attention, the media, the dinners and best of all was all the people and new friends we have met in greyhound racing. We had people talking to us about the dog, saying hello, telling us what a great chaser he is. We didn’t even know a lot of these people at first, and even now we still go to the race track and have great conversations with people that know Peter Rocket.
Q: He managed one other major race win during his career, the Group 1 Megastar at Dapto. You would obviously have fond memories of that night as well?
LH: Absolutely. We were approached to nominate for that race and he drew Box 8 in his heat. He had never been to the track before so I wasn’t overly confident that he was going to win it. He played up badly going into the box and at that stage I thought he didn’t have a hope. But when the lids opened he jumped really well and ended up winning. He had made it into the final, where he was up against top greyhounds like Glen Gallon, Proven Nitro, Zulu Zeus and Double Twist. Double Twist was leading and Peter Rocket caught her around the first turn and knocked her out of the race. That was an emotional race for me as we had beaten Glen Gallon, who was a champion.
Keith Hellmuth hand-slips Peter Rocket at home just days before the 2013 TAB Melbourne Cup.
LH: It was different. In fact, the only thing missing from his big wins at Horsham and Dapto was that our family wasn’t there, so when he was invited to the (Group 1) Topgun and the (Group 1) Temlee (both at The Meadows), we had our family there cheering him on. Both those nights were incredible, coming second and third (respectively) and sharing the excitement with family and friends was amazing.
Q: You have now retired Peter Rocket just shy of his fourth birthday. What was the thinking behind that decision?
LH: We made the decision to retire him because of a recurring muscle injury, and he is now at stud. We hope that he produces pups that have the same speed, heart and desire to chase as he did. He is the hardest chaser we will ever own and would run through a brick wall if he could. We could take him to any track, never been there and he would put in 110%. One example was Wentworth Park, when he ran in a Golden Easter Egg Heat. He had never been there before, travelled from 7am in the morning, ran 29.52sec first look that night, and we then took him home on the same night. Unfortunately, no one could know how quick he could run as in most of his races he came from behind or he got into trouble at the start. But we believe he was just as quick as any of these dogs going around today, including the record breakers. But a dog needs a big heart as well as speed and Peter Rocket had a huge heart with a desire to chase. He never gave up. Very few dogs have what Peter Rocket has. He is, and will always be, our true champion.
Peter Rocket’s extensive trophy collection. Pics Clint Anderson.
The content on this page was accurate at the time of publishing. If you notice any inaccurate content on this page or anywhere on the website, please report it here

Gordinho played 90 minutes for Aalborg during their 2-0 defeat against Bundesliga outfit Hoffenheim on Saturday.
The 22-year-old defender is said to have impressed coach Morten Wieghorst and his technical team.
Wieghorst earlier said it was to early to judge Gordinho, saying he needed more time to assess the Amakhosi defender.
“I think he had a fine workout, but it is too early to judge anything from just a single exercise. He has many things to get used to – a new club, especially a new climate and a new style of play, so it would not be fair to pass a judgment about anything yet,” said Wieghorst.
Gordingo has until tomorrow to convince Wieghorst he is worthy of a contract at Aalborg.

Soi assisted me in the purchase of a village house in Clearwater Bay. From the very beginning she was helpful and knowledgeable. She was
extremely attentive, taking calls in the evening and on weekends, and
was also very willing to present our thoughts and concerns to the
Vendor in a professional way that moved the whole process forward and
made us feel at ease. Soi was also a pleasure to work with throughout.
I would not doubt to recommend her services.
4.9 / 5.0
She heard our requirements and only took us to those apartments that met those requirements. She was also patient and very generous with her time. Finally, I really valued how she was able to get us viewings at all properties we were interested in on the one day.

VAIL, Colorado - On Dec. 16, 2010, Cpl. Daniel Riley of the United States Marine Corps stepped on a bomb and lost his legs.-
On March 11 of this year, Riley skied out of bounds from Vail Mountain to the town of Minturn on a "sit ski," or monoski.
Determined to be the first person he had ever heard of to complete such a journey, Riley insisted on receiving minimal help along the way, aside from moral support and the occasional push from behind. No one followed him with a harness and ropes, and no one pulled him up the inclines in a snowmobile. He was joined by a group of five or so of his friends - they think it may have been a monoski first descent but they're not sure. Readers are encouraged to write in to the Vail Daily with any info on the subject.
First descent or not, Riley was elated to have completed the famed "Minturn Mile," a-treacherous, experts only out-of-bounds descent that includes sections of deep powder, windlips, tight trees, a stream crossing, a mudslide and a narrow, icy luge.
Here's his story.
'Conscious the whole time'
Riley was never the daredevil type.
A Colorado resident since 1999, he's always been adventuresome but was never a diehard thrill seeker, he said.-
He joined the Marines in 2006 to pay for college and on that fateful day in December 2010 he was on a routine foot patrol, clearing out a compound in Afghanistan. He was 25 years old.
"I stepped right on it," he said of the improvised explosive device that left both his legs and the left side of his body mangled.-
He remembers the entire ordeal.
"I stayed conscious the whole time," he said. "I didn't pass out at all. They airlifted me out of there, flew me to the nearest base, and from there it gets a little woozy because they started drugging me pretty good."
Along with his legs, his left arm and left lung were also badly wounded. He was close to death on several occasions, and after having both legs amputated above the knee, as well as three of his fingers on his left hand, he pulled through.-
"They transferred me to the naval hospital in San Diego, where I started working on rehab, physical therapy and prosthetics," he said. "The Navy has a recreational therapist, and winter came around and she said I should try this ski thing."
The retired life
Riley said his first day on the monoski, which occurred in January of last year, wasn't exactly a life changing experience.
"I was a little apprehensive," he said. "Not too thrilled about it."
By day three he had a different take on the sport.-
"I still couldn't ski very well but we were running around the mountain, posing for crazy EpicMix pictures, and it was enough to get me hooked," he said. "Since then I've been just trying to find ways to get back to the mountain."
Now fully retired from the Marines, people often ask him what he's "doing" now.
"I believe the term is 'ski bum,'" he said with a laugh.-
-An official ambassador for the Vail Veterans Program, he said he owes a great deal of his newfound passion to the program.-
"They got me on the mountain and taught me how to ski, and now they can't get me away," he said. "And they do that for a lot of guys. It's a great program."
Instructor Josh Perkins taught Riley the sport, and now Perkins and Riley are good friends.
Perkins was among those accompanying Riley down the Minturn Mile.-
Under Perkins'-tutelage, it didn't take Riley long to master the sport.
Riley ripped groomers last season, shredded powder here in Vail during December, but didn't start thinking about the Minturn Mile until January or so.-
"A bunch of friends of mine were going to watch the ski joring competition in Minturn, and they said they were going to take the Minturn Mile to get there," Riley recalled. "I was like hmmmm, I'll have to try that some time."
And so began the obsession.
"I got it in my head and I just kept thinking 'I want to do it,'" Riley said. "I had buddies who were doing it and I thought if they're doing it I should be able to do it ... Finally it was a Saturday, everyone was in town, and we just said 'Let's do it Monday.' We didn't even consider the conditions or anything."
Fortunately for Riley, the conditions weren't bad.
"We left from Game Creek Bowl, and it probably only took us another 5 minutes longer than most people just able-body walking up (Ptarmigan Ridge)," Perkins said. "We took turns pushing him."
They were off to a good start, but it wasn't exactly smooth sailing from there.
"It was great up top, lots of fresh powder, some great turns," Riley said. "Then I started breaking everything I have."
He lost a few bolts along the way, broke one of his outriggers for his arms, and by the time he hit the notorious "Beaver Dam" section Riley was leaning to the right pretty severely.-
"If he hadn't broken anything, we would've been down a lot quicker," Perkins said with a laugh.
The Beaver Dam was snowed over, and Riley made it across without an issue.-
"I let him cross on his own," Perkins said. "I was just waiting there in case he went face down in the river."
The mudslide detour - 20 feet of-severely-steep, brush-covered face with a 2-foot wide path along a river waiting as your only way out - held Riley up for a minute, but proved to be only a minor hangup.
Before embarking on the luge, Riley said he had heard good and bad things about the icy, narrow section.
"One way or the other I'm going to get to the bottom," he said. "I always say I've been blown up, so what can this do?"
He skied it expertly,-maneuvering-from edge to edge in the same way a snowboarder might, and actually caught air off some of the little jumps in the middle.-
Once at the bottom in Minturn, Riley, Perkins and company put Riley's monoski on top of the car they had waiting, and drove the quarter mile down the road to the saloon.-
"One guy was out shoveling his driveway, and he saw the monoski on top of the car, dropped his shovel and just stared at us with an open jaw," Perkins said. "Everyone at the Saloon said it was the first they'd ever heard of a monoskier doing the Mile."
Riley was not paying for his own beer that night.
"Everyone in town was showing up, wanting to buy him a drink," said Vail native Paul Agneberg, who encountered Riley and company while riding the Mile and accompanied them to the saloon. "The locals all said they had never heard of such a thing. It was a really cool vibe."
Riley says even if it was a first descent, his goal-setting is far from finished as far as the Minturn Mile is concerned.-
"I've done it, sure," he said. "But now I want to come back without the equipment problems and really become the master of it."
Have you ever heard of anyone completing the Minturn Mile on a monoski? Email firstname.lastname@example.org

Looking at the shovels that are shown on the English web site, the SA shovel is larger, namely as far as the length of the blade is concerned, the two British ones are narrower than the NSWGR type also the handles T is different. I once was given a SA shovel & they were a lot heavier than the NSWGR typea as well. The blades were of thicker gauge metal than the NSWGR types, where you see the side edges slope down, they are longer slope than ours.
The other shovel shown in the grass was realistically at condemnation stage owing to the "teaspoon" size of the blade. When a shovel was new, they were generally restricted in use depending on the depot they were sent to. At Enfield & I understand other main line depots had mininum standards for the shovels that were used on different types of workings, such as shunting engines & types, Metro Trip trains, or other local working trains, then the deep sea or long main line working. 36, 38 & coal 59cl were all issued with full size blade shovels especially on the main line workings.
The end of the blades would often burr as on a rough riding engine you might miss the firehole & catch the edge, you felt that in the shoulders & upe the arms. The blades also wore thin over time, & you needed to flatten the burrs by using the coal pick as a hammer. The other vital part on a shovel, in many ways more important than the condition of the blade wash the metal neck & where the wooden stem was fitted, the greater proportion of shovels had good joins where there was a neat fitting from the metal to the wood, especially at the back of the shovel, unless you got a smooth join, or the metal section actually came together creating a smooth join, after a couple of hours shovelling you could readily end up with cuts in the palm of your hand as a result of the poor fit.
One storeman at Enfield didn't care less about the condition of the shovel & many arguements took place, you were entitled to complain & reject a shovel based on its condition including the handle areas, all new shovels were inspected & were supposed to be rejected by the stores branch head if they were not as they were suppossed to be. At the old steam depot store, there was a long rack for shovels on the wall inside the store at #1 shed side, each shovel was positioned within a section based on the condition of the blade, there was 4 sections, first one was new/as new condition full blade no damage. Next was full blade damaged, acceptable if not too bad. 3rd was cut back & damaged, use on metro working only with Standard goods type loco's & other small engine types. Last was those shovels deemed only satisfactory for yard shunting engines. There were some other shovels with blades roughly of the sixe shown in the photo's they were emergency ones & only kept until new shovels were supplied.
Stoker fed loco's were supplied with a shovel that was in the 3rd category, that is less than a full blade & damaged, reason being that none of those engines were expected to be fired with a load behind them by shovel. I had one garratt get jammed at Wyee one evening & we stowed the load there & went LE to Gosford, a brake shoe was found in the screw that had jammed the thing. It was quite a chore keeping a balance with steam & water, primarilly owing to the manual firehole doors along with the distance between shovelling plate & the firehole. My mate would open & shut as I shovelled.
Those shovels were usually made available to signal boxes, stations & the like for use in maintaining fires in waiting rooms. It was not infrequently seen that large stations with waiting rooms some how ended up with shovels that were in better condition than
As the blades wore, providing the main tip of the blade was in fair to reasonable condition, that is in regard to its length they were left as spares.
Shovels are still being made, but do not know who has the contract to produce them, which means they would have to have original patterns, don't forget that there are several steam groups in NSW & other states that still have operating steam & each of them at least from what I have seen in NSW they do have the same type of shovel as used when steam was in regular service.

Hello and happy Tuesday friends!
I hope everyone had an enjoyable holiday weekend filled with friends and family! Our weekend was jam packed with all kinds of parties, BBQ’s and fun.
Friday started off with dinner out after picking up #babybigtruck from school. Mike met us at Kona Grill and we enjoyed each others company and just relaxed.
Saturday we started off our day with a family walk and some playground time while we had a house showing. I put #babybigtruck down for a nap early as we had our nieces 1st birthday party to go to in the afternoon. The part was huge and everyone had a great time. There were yard games, a commercial sized bounce house and lots of people there. #babybigtruck had a ball playing in the bounce house all day long!
#babybigtruck loves when Mike throws her up in the air. Erin, my sister-in-law- had a piñata at the party. It’s always a good idea to give a 2 year old a wooden stick to swing around right? #babybigtruck was in heaven as 2 out of 3 sets of grand parents were at the party. Mike got to visit with his uncle and we even managed to snap a photo of all the boys with their uncle together! After the party Mike and I took #babybigytruck to my moms for the night as we had a long morning ahead of us at church the next day. My mom and Ray took her out to New Hope to go on a train ride which I have not heard the end of just yet.
Sunday morning Mike and I got up and like I said we had a super long morning ahead of us. I had to be at church early to set out fliers for VBS and then myself and Daniela had to do announcements with our pastor for both services. We actually attended the first service and then Mike did nursery for the second service while Daniela and I got ready for our VBS and child safety training meeting and did some other VBS things that needed to get done. Mike and I did not end up leaving church till 2:30pm. As we were leaving my Dad and Molly called and said they were about 30 minutes from our house and wanted to stop by for a bit on their way home. We ran to my moms picked up #babybigtruck and then ran home to visit with them. After they left we set out for Old Navy so Mike could get some new shorts and I also picked up some new pi’s and a new bathing suit for #babybigtruck. We ended the day with dinner with my mom and were in bed by 9pm.
Monday morning we went out to breakfast just the 3 of us as we had not had a chance to do any grocery shopping yet. After breakfast we finally did the grocery shopping and then went home for a while. #babybigtruck took a nap I went for a walk and Mike hung out at home. After nap time we packed up and went to my moms house and with mom and Ray went to yet another holiday BBQ. My moms neighbor has a 4th of July BBQ every year and we typically always go. #babybigtruck got to play in the pool for a bit and ran around the lawn like a crazy person.
Her attempt at playing frisbee.
I had to change her and after I did we ended up just hanging out on the towel for a bit. She thought it was the best thing in the world that Mama was using her as a pillow and she decided she would play with my hair. After the BBQ we went back to my moms #babybigtruck had a bath and got ready for bed and we went home and called it a night.
It was a long, fun, exhausting weekend. This next weekend we have a full plate again but some of it depends on the weather. I have a ton of things I need to get done this week and as per the norm not a whole heck of a lot of time to do it. Thankfully I have a husband who is willing to help and somehow between the two of us everything always gets done!

From time to time I feel strongly about things. I do some thinking, and I think that I can say something profound. I don't want to do that right now.
If there is anything I have learned during the past few months, it's that people are amazing. Sometimes I forget, but then I remember. That's usually when I start crying.
A few months ago I was on a plane coming from Chicago. I had just presented at my first professional conference and I was on my way back home. I sat by the window and a young father sat next to me in the aisle seat. His wife was in the aisle seat in front of him. They had a little baby. Looking back, I don't know why I didn't offer to trade one of them spots so they could sit together.
During the flight, the baby cried. It cried loudly, but I patted myself on the back for not feeling annoyed about it. I was so kind. After a while, an older woman walked over to our section from the front of the plane. I don't remember what she said to the mother, but suddenly she had the baby in her arms. She stood in the aisle, rocking the baby and chatting politely with the mother. Within minutes, the baby went to sleep.
About a month ago I was deep in the first semester of grad school, and I had all but shut myself off from the world outside my little life. One day, out of the blue, I received a text message from one of my dearest old friends. He told me he loved me and missed me. Soon after, we had a wonderful conversation.
Our neighbors across the street had a productive garden this year. The husband once offered us some squash which we graciously accepted. After that, we would occasionally come home and find some vegetables sitting in front of our door.
To say 'thank you,' my wife made a batch of her mother's cinnamon rolls. We took them over one night and awkwardly handed them to our neighbors. The next day, they asked my wife for the recipe. It took a couple weeks for my wife to send it, but eventually she did, and she then received an unexpected reply. Our neighbor, the wife, sent us an e-mail saying that she once had a cinnamon roll recipe that she loved very much. She made it for her children, and her children all loved it too. Sadly, she had lost the recipe at some point in time. When my wife brought over those cinnamon rolls, she said she was so grateful because they tasted just like the ones she used to make for her children.
These are just a few of the small things that I have seen this year. I could spend hours writing all the happy things I have seen, and perhaps I should. For now, let me just say 'thank you.' To all of my friends that reach across classes, religions and opinions, thank you for what you do. Thank you for inspiring me, and for touching my life in way I could never experience by myself. I feel your love and I am ever grateful for your wise hearts.

No. 2 - Bob Wet-field
I know, I know bad joke. I couldn't resist. So Sheree has moved on from getting "some seven figures" to simply trying to get her child support. Like Phaedra I was shocked to hear that her ex, Bob Whitfield, hadn't been paying up. Especially since Sheree isn't exactly a pushover. She'll check any boo to get that check! All I can say is that if she does end up bringing him to court, I hope that no one gives her a beverage of any kind.
I just wanted to ask everyone else are they as surprised at Kandi's mom's overly dramatic part 2 reaction to the stripper? This is the same woman from last season who told her daughter and her cast mates that she wouldn't mind a dildo. Now she wants to act offended? She made the comparison of Phaedra's mom, but you have yet to see Ms.Parks' mom act like her daughter's "homegirl." I believe that Phaedra meant no harm and assumed that Kandi's mom would be okay with the stripper since she has portrayed herself as being open to those type of things all last season. If anyone owes someone an apology it is Joyce to her daughter for being so belittling toward her friends publicly and for being so dramatic with Phaedra. She should really get over herself.
Ok so I just think the whole Charles Grant NeNe thing is losing steam right before our eyes. I don't think there was much to any of it. That's just my opinion and as far as Marlo is concerned I think she just found out that night that her "honey" went out with NeNe once or whatever IT was. And what the heck was she wearing? It looked like that top Lea from the Miami housewives wore to the gallery party. UGH I didn't like her outfit at all...It looked a little cheap. Sheree is a hot mess wearing a $15,000 purse but complaining about money..All I have to say is priorities honey. Yes he should pay his child support but after the way she's acted I wouldn't give her a dime either. She's tacky for a lack of better words throwing water like she's in high school and bolting with the kids wihtout letting them say bye to their daddy. Like she told him to get a job she should do the same! Lawrence and Sheree coming to Bar one was ridiculous the always have something negative to say Phaedra too. She should have had enough of stirring the pot...Kandi I'm a little disappointed in for grabbing the reins and taking first place as the ultimate pot stirrer tonight. I got a sad face next her name right now because I know she's better than that!
Sheree's reluctance to pursue child support via the court is interesting. She did not have a problem trying to get 7 figures when they were divorcing.
Charles is not saying done dollar he actually said done/dun dada-which is slang for finished, over with, done.
Mama Joyce was on point, glad she and Kandi made up .
Cynthia, does not seem to have a clue. First she couldnt read the cue cards at the fashion show. Told all her business to her family. Then she did not seem to be pissed that her so called friend, NeNe showed no respect, by showing up so late at Bar 1. And although she denied it, she may have gave him the money after all. It must be true what they say about models...
Nene showed her just how loyal she is to her so called friend Cynthia tonight. She knew how much they were counting on her to be there but as everyone can see she can not be counted on. She is such a fake!
I hope Peter and Cynthia took notice that the girls he bad mouthed so bad showed up to support them but I bet he thinks they owe it to him. The ungrateful bum.
Now Sheree, it's a no brainer, let Phandra do her job and get your child support. It's not about you but those kids.
in reply to SFLGIRL, using a sexual aid is a private thing and discussing purchasing one with a group of women is considerably different than be so-rounded by your daughter's friends and their mates while some strange man puts his penis in her drink, get real, the woman has every right to be offended, any decent person would be.
Shawny is right,...there's a big difference between being approachable as a parent and being just plain raunchy with your child. Mama Joyce respects the fact that Kandi is an adult and tries to remain someone she can discuss adult issues with but that is over the line. And the fact that Phaedra wouldn't do that in front of her own mom is a good one. Whatever we have seen Mama Joyce do with Kandi, it's never been over the top like that. She doesn't act all wild and raunchy like that. But the real question is,...
How fake were Sheree's crocodile tears? Ooops, sorry. THERE WERE NO TEARS!!! What the heck was that about? Who is she trying to fool here?
To AureliaGirl - so what would you have Cynthia do when Nene came in? Scream in her face? Curse her out? If my friend did something that pissed me off I would deal with my friend alone, not go off on her at my husband's premiere. It's clear the other ladies cannot have a good time unless they're talking about someone. As far as Peter getting money from Cynthia, they both said it wasn't from her. They didn't lie about it before so why now, especially after she openly offered? Everyone is jumping on Cynthia for being friends with Nene so if she listened to them instead of following her own mind wouldn't that also make her without this backbone so many have spoke of. I think she's damned if she do, damned if she don't.
Charles Grant did several interviews in which he stated that he didnt know who Nene Leakes was, and was offended that people were saying that he was trying to get his 15 min of fame off of her when he has been playing football for a number of years. Now he is on the show and they went on a double date. That was for show. I dont believe it, and if it had happened, it would be all over the internet. I love how Bravo thinks we are all stupid. With crazy editing and over the top storylines. May we please get back to the reality.
Nene is a hater of the worse sort. She claims to be Cynthia's friend, but then show up hours late at the event. She can't stand when the spotlight is on anyone other than herself. And I'm so over hearing her say she steals the spotlight when she walks into a room. Yes, any big moose would.
First of all, NeNe explained to Cynthia why she was running real late. And when she did arrive, she apologized and said she would tell him about it later. She wasnt to keep the "haters" out of her business. They were only there to look and laugh. They invited Charles and Marlo to start drama. NeNe did them right. They don't exist. As far as Sheree, if she loves her kids, damn him. Regardless if they have 2 homes, she has primary custedy. Get what is owed to them. I love Momma Joyce. She had every right to feel that way. Phadrea would not bring that filth around her mother. It's all about respect.
Kandi's mom likes control. She was the reason for Kandi's breakup remember. However,she never had one word to say about the fact Kim did not pay Kandi for the "Tardy for the party." I think Miss Joyce is determined to remain in control of her daughter.
You are totally wrong about Joyce being upset. Any self respected guest at that party would have been offended. Phaedra does a lot of things her Moma wouldn't approve of. She has two sides, one is a freak. It was inappropriate for a party with Executives and Professional guest in attendance. Let alone her mother. If Phaedra wanted to give her a gift like that, she should have done it in a hotel room with a few selected friends and guests. You all are not in college anymore. Cynthia is very smart and know what she's doing. Why all of the negative comments about her?
I believe Kandi's mom had the right to be offended. I am only 30 myself and I would have been offended. I believe NeNe had a right to her feelings as well. I don't believe that NeNe instigated any feelings that Kandi's mom was experiencing. There is only so much you can continue to blame on one person. I don't think that Cynthia is weak. A weak person does not stand by someone when all others are bashing that person from any angle. A weak person does not enter into a room full of women to be supportive knowing that they talk about her upon her exit. A weak person does not go on Wendy Williams and defend herself. I think the weak ones are Sheree and Phaedra. They couldn't stand up to the mess that NeNe, Cynthia, or Kim have been through. We all thought Kandi was a pretty good girl last season. I think that she is still okay, but she is definitely walking a thin line. I am team NeNe and that is because all the other woman have made her the underdog. All Phaedra can talk about is donkey booties, Ok wake up we all have em. Her husband used Phaedra as a way out of his troubles and problems. He is still probably using her. How does he have a lucrative self owned business if he is an ex con for a white collar crime. who would entrust their money or business to him. He's fine, but that's all he has going. I just have soooo much to say and not enough time.
I can hear crickets chirping she was so quiet. I think she knew it was best to stay quiet. hmmmm we will see how this goes.
Miss Joyce, she wants to be Kandi's friend , last season they (Kandi, Joyce and the girls) were all sitting around talking about their sex lives and Kandi asked her mom "what was HER freak level"? They were also talkin about her show "Kandi coated nights" and Miss Joyce was VERY ok with that. Why would you party with your mom??? I'm 42 and would'nt think of such.I have much REPECT for mine. My friends are my friends and my mom is my MOM. Miss Joyce needs to hang with her own friends.( she's always in the mixx) Also check out this coming week ,when she's on national televison in the bathroom with Kandi wearing some type of lingerie. A hott mess!!!! That's not cute, get over it Miss Joyce ,that's the relationship that you have with YOUR daughter.
I think that Ms Joyce should have been upset speaking with your daughter openly about somethings in a different type setting was one thing but watching a male stripper expose himself like that and then to put his penis in her daughter's drink that would have been upsetting to most people. Having a stripper with a few select guests is an adult thing if that is what you like. But at a party that included your mother Phaedra should have thought this through a little better. I understand that people do their own thing and that is perfectly aright but this was not appropriate for that setting. NeNe had a choice as the others did and they chose to leave whether she was a stripper or not it was obvious that she did not care for that and she left end of story

OSHAWA -- A witness has testified that he jumped into a fight between Oshawa high school foes Michael McDonald and Jacques Amakon when he noticed Mr. Amakon was armed with a knife.
"I was trying to help my friend," said Nathan Pettifur, who testified Friday he'd known Michael, also known as Biggie, since elementary school. "My friend was fighting someone who had a knife with (his) bare hands."
Mr. Amakon, 20, also known as Junior and TK, has pleaded not guilty to the second-degree murder of Michael, 16. Michael died of a stab wound after he fought Mr. Amakon at a bus stop near Paul Dwyer Catholic School on March 30, 2010.
Court has heard that Michael and Mr. Amakon had fostered a long-standing feud that included trading taunts, and had fought in a hallway at Dwyer about a month prior to their altercation on March 30. Mr. Pettifur said the two teens had a tense run-in earlier in the day on March 30 when they met up at a plaza near the school. That confrontation led to the fight at the bus stop after school let out for the day, he said.
Michael was waiting at the bus stop, at the southwest corner of Rossland and Stevenson roads, as Mr. Amakon approached, Mr. Pettifur said.
"Mike told him to come up on the grass so they could fight," he testified. "TK just kept saying 'I'm right here. I'm right here'."
Mr. Pettifur said that as the two squared off, he noticed a knife in Mr. Amakon's right hand.
"Mike went to step toward him and I believe that's when he saw the knife, and he sort of paused for a second," he said.
Mr. Pettifur said he grabbed a friend's skateboard to give to Michael, but by the time he turned back, the two boys were fighting. Mr. Pettifur joined the fray, whacking at Mr. Amakon with the skateboard, "to get him to drop the knife," jurors heard. Another boy grabbed at Mr. Amakon's right arm, court heard.
The two combatants eventually separated and an angry Mr. Amakon shouted about being ganged up on, Mr. Pettifur said. He said he left the scene, assuming the fight was over.
"I didn't think (Michael) was injured," he testified. "He looked fine to me. He just seemed out of breath."
He said he learned later in a phone call Michael had died.
The trial, before Superior Court Justice Michael Brown and a jury, continues in Oshawa.

Sharkinator, CousinIt & I hit the Vine today.
Was kinda slow but we still did ok. Hooked a boater this AM. Hooked em good in the tip of his thumb deep past the barb. He was around 200lbs & pulled hard for a few second then started hollerin & shortly after gave up. He & his buddy showing off his puncture wound. didn't bleed much at all. didn't want to come out though!
he took his cutters & worked/pulled it till it finally popped out. We all had a laugh afterwards. then he smiled & gave the ol thumbs up pose. what a GUY!!! Wish i could have gotten a close up when my lure was still in him.
He sure was great about it. All he asked is what we were catchin em on. Told him shad, then I offered to catch them some & he excepted
. They had been on he water since the night before. Hence the Eskimo apparel.
Then he thanks me & says: "we'll have to hook up again sometime"
Sharkinator's reel blew up right before we called it quits.
here we honor his reel for many years of dependability with a final retirement photo.
another great day on the water.

April 2, 1982, Argentina invaded the Falkland Islands
At 4:30 A.M., helicopters had started to land on Mullet Creek; they were the first of the many invaders from Argentina. At 6:08 A.M., an attack was at full fledge. The Argentina government had claimed that they told their men it was to be a bloodless fight, but that was not the case. Argentineans busted down barrack doors and began to throw powerful grenades into the barracks and killing many unsuspecting men.
February 26, 1982, The war could have been prevented
On February 1982, there was supposed to be a meeting where the British government would hold a meeting with the Argentinean government to talk about preventing the war. This was a two-day event in New York, the first day the Argentineans were to host the meeting, but there was a glitch in planning, and the dates were to be changed. The leaders were under so much pressure, that some said they were going to breakdown. What basically happened at the meeting was that both sides could not come to agreement. This resulted in a war. Nobody really knew who owned the Falkland Islands. Some thought Spain, Argentina thought they owned it, and Britain thought they owned it. No agreements could be made.
The war of the Falklands was a perfect opportunity to unleash state of the art weapons on the opponents.
Later, after the first invasions, some messages went out over the radios. The first ones told people of a small invasion, and then they began broadcasting from live sights, complete with gun fire in the background. There were a lot of battles that went on between the British and the Argentineans. The British won some, and the Argentineans won others. They were all fighting for the Falklands. These were a group of small islands that were all bunched up. You could not use the islands for much, seeing as that they were craggy mountains. That would not make for very productive farm land, but there were a lot of mountain lions and goats.
After the many battles, many deaths and many tests on weapons, the British had won the War in the Falklands. This war was won both in military action, and in speech. Most say to end violence in verbal communication, but verbal communication was a giant factor in the beginning of this war.
If we have helped you, please help us fix his smile with your old essays...it takes seconds!
-We are looking for previous essays, labs and assignments that you aced!-We will review and post them on our website.
-Ad revenue is used to support children in developing nations.
-We help pay for cleft palate repair surgeries through Operation Smile and Smile Train.

2011, Shawn Levy (Night at the Museum, Cheaper by the Dozen) -- download
Surprisingly, it's not such a bad movie. Jackman plays a down on his luck fighter, who is also an ex human fighter, from the days when humans still thought it was cool to watch other humans smash each other to bits. But he sucks and he is unlucky. Add to the mix an ex-lover who had a child who he ends up with purely to make a buck. He is not a nice guy, ok he's nice, as he is played by Hugh Jackman and he cannot help but be personable, but he's a downright bastard. Even after he begins to take a shine to the kid, you get the sense he would turn him in for a few bucks. But the connection between the two is played very well and there is no cloying relationship and the kid is not all that whiny. He definitely is plucky because it is his idea that turns Jackman's luck around.
But I was disappointed with the lack of world building. C'mon, you have steel behemoths socking each other other but people don't have personal service robots? If robotics had evolved to flashy delicate machines that could move exactly like 12' humans, then they should have been present everywhere in life. I think it was mentioned but it shouldn't have had to be, it should have been visible in all walks of life. But this was a sports and family values movie so the other stuff was just left on the writing room floor. It is probably better they focused on the stuff the audience actually wanted to see.

Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack said Wednesday he had apologized to Shirley Sherrod and offered to rehire her at the USDA, after firing her on Monday for remarks that were interpreted to be racist but were later deemed to have been taken out of context.
“I did not think before I acted,” Vilsack said in a press conference at the Agriculture Department. He denied several times, as he has previously, that the White House pressured him to fire Sherrod on Monday.
“These types of decisions require time. I didn’t take the time,” Vilsack said. “As a result, a good woman has gone through a very difficult time, and I’ll have to live with that for a long long time.”
Vilsack said that he made the decision to dismiss Sherrod only after reading a transcript of her remarks in a less than three-minute video that was placed on the Internet. He said he did not know that the remarks were part of a larger speech.
It came to light on Tuesday that the video posted on BigGovernment.com, a conservative website run by Andrew Breitbart, was only a short excerpt of a 43-minute speech in which Sherrod talked about the need to overcome racial tension and discrimination and talked of overcoming such feelings in herself.
Vilsack said that he discussed a job at USDA with Sherrod and that she asked for time to think about it. Vilsack did not specify what job he offered Sherrod, but made clear it was a more senior position than the one she had held previously.
“She has a unique set of skills which I think would lend in helping to assist USDA as we try to turn the page on our civil rights chapter,” said Vilsack.
Vilsack has taken full responsibility for the decision late Monday to force Sherrod out of her job as Georgia director of rural development for USDA, even though the White House has acknowledged that they were communicating with USDA officials before and after the decision to oust her.
The White House has denied that they pressured Vilsack or USDA officials to fire Sherrod. But they have said they were in consultation with USDA on the firing and on the decision to reconsider it, which came late Tuesday and was announced early Wednesday.
Vilsack repeatedly said he was to blame.
“This is a good woman. She’s been put through hell. And I could have done and should have done a better job,” he said. “The buck stops with me, as it should.”

I was thinking of deleting a few as they're not getting any more views, but I have a personal goal to reach 100 hubs, just for my own personal sake. Is there any advantage to having a massive amount of hubs?
sort by best latest
Thank you for your suggestions! I"ve grouped as many as I can, though I find some of them just don't have a group, and could only go into the group perhaps of Oddkins. I will test out my titles as well, and see if that makes a difference :)
I am new to Hubpages and appreciate this information. Thank you! You said that the search engines don't seem to like Hubpages, so I wondered how else it is that people find our Hubs?
There were a few that was just me trying to figure the site out, figure out how to get views and write non-fiction. They don't reflect me as a writer either in regards to their topic nor the research. Some are just like a blog entry almost.

|Ryan Gosling & Eva Mendes
A source told Now magazine: "Rachel's always kept in touch with Ryan, but now that she's split with Michael, she's been calling him and using him as a shoulder to cry on.
"It hasn't gone down very well with Eva, to say the least, but Ryan wants to be there as a friend for his ex."
Ryan and Eva have been in a relationship since September 2011 and the actress recently admitted it was "adorable" seeing how her real-life partner embraced fatherhood on the set of their new movie 'The Place Beyond The Pines'.
She said: "He's really good. He loves babies and he loved playing with the little boy we used in the film to play our son. It was adorable to see him in that light."

Guess who has spent the night outside of his crate two nights in a row? Buddy! Guess who did destroy anything, have any accidents, or go crazy running around and barking and wake everyone up either night? Buddy! It seems I have successfully done away with the crate.
I started by letting him stay out while I went to the store or to run errands, and from there I worked up more and more time with him out of it, and now I'm happy to say he will go in the crate no more! (Well, we'll keep it for if it's ever necessary, but I don't anticipate that it will be)
Yay for Buddy!

We are pleased that Chris Brown will be our guest teacher. Chris is from Yorkshire, England, and began Sacred Harp singing in 2003. He has not stopped since. He has sung widely across the USA as well as in the UK, Ireland and Poland. Chris will lead our Singing School, and sing (and teach) during the convention.

The actor, who tragically died in October at the age of 54, had spoken to his friend Athenna Crosby the day before about an interesting project.
Crosby claims that Perry told her he wanted none other than Zac Efron to portray a younger version of himself.
“He said that he wanted to make a movie about his life,” Crosby told Entertainment Tonight last week.
“He had worked with Zac Efron in the past on a movie, and he said that he wanted Zac Efron to play him as a younger version and that he was gonna ask him soon to do that.”
In 2009, Perry and Efron co-starred in 17 Again, a body-swap comedy in which they play younger and older versions of the same character. The film centres on a high school basketball star who cast his dreams aside, but later gets a second chance.
“He was just looking forward to sharing more about his story and his recovery from addiction, and really championing that cause to help more people, so he was so optimistic and happy about everything that he wanted to do,” Crosby told ET.
A representative for Zac Efron did not immediately respond to HuffPost’s request for comment.
Crosby, a model, made headlines after it was reported she’d had lunch with Perry at the Hotel Bel-Air one day before he died.
The actor was found dead at his Los Angeles home on Saturday at about 4pm. Crosby paid tribute to him in an Instagram Story.
“I wasn’t going to speak about this but what I will say is I had the honour of knowing Matthew personally,” Crosby wrote, per ET. “I am so devastated from his death but felt it was in poor taste to talk about it publicly as... he was an extremely private person.”
Crosby told ET that Perry “was doing great” and “cracking jokes” over lunch when she spoke to him last week — and that he “was very optimistic about the future”.
She added that Perry, who chronicled his lifelong struggle with substance misuse in a 2022 memoir, “was talking about how there’s been a public resurgence of interest in him lately” — and that he hoped “to utilise that to have a second act in his career.”

A mum-of-three has bravely spoken out about her sexuality, detailing the time in her life when she realised she was a lesbian. Jennifer Gilmour says she thought she might be gay after she noticed she started obsessing over Killing Eve's Jodie Comer.
The 34-year-old said watching movies and TV shows with strong female leads - such as This Is England and Killing Eve - made her question her sexuality. Jennifer says her husband supported her journey.
Author Jennifer told Hull Live : "Over lockdown my husband had noticed that I was complimentary of the female actresses in the series we were binge watching. We watched This Is England and I found myself thinking about Vicky McClure for the rest of the day. Then on Killing Eve, it was Jodie Comer. I thought it was admiration but after a while I realised it was more."
"My husband suggested that I explore my sexuality and I knew I needed to take the opportunity to figure it out," Jennifer said, revealing that on hindsight there were already many signs that she wasn't straight. However, she says she always "ignored them". She spoke out to encourage more women to be honest about questioning and exploring their sexuality.
"I have always had a sense of being gay," said Jennifer. "It’s just that in my mind I didn’t feel it was even an option to explore it." Since coming out she says she has had great support, including her dad and friends who have been thrilled that she can finally be her true self.
Some of the mum-of-three's friends even claimed that they've always suspected that she was gay: "My friends have been very supportive and many of them were already a part of the LGBT community," said Jennifer. "A good number of my friends had suspected for a while that I was either bisexual or a lesbian so it didn’t come as a shock to them."
Jennifer is also highly complimentary of her dad who has been a great support during her coming out: "The most important family member to me is my dad and he has been so supportive of me, he sticks by me no matter what and just wants me to be happy."
Although the past few months have had "extreme highs and challenging lows", the Hull mum also bravely spoke about life after being open about her sexuality: "It took a while to realise that the way I was living with my husband and children wasn’t going to work because it didn’t feel right to me."
"The hardest part was separating from my husband and breaking up the family unit, thankfully we are successfully co-parenting and will remain friends."
The mum-of-three revealed details about her journey of finding who she truly is on her Facebook, sharing an inspirational post on Valentine's Day, proudly boasting that she is "falling in love with the new me". Jennifer also wrote about how she fought her true self for many years but now it prevails and shines through, and has now discovered that she is a proud bisexual woman who has a preference of dating women.
"Last year I went through a whole identity crisis", she wrote to her friends and followers, "I realised that I was still using the survival tactics from my abusive relationship. It’s taken me 8 years to realise that I have still been the person he made me to be."
"I’ve looked back before that relationship and have always been saddened that I can’t be her. I didn’t realise that it was not about going back but it was about going forward. Not reclaiming myself but becoming myself," the author continued.
Jennifer has since become a popular public speaker and author, previously opening up about being in a coercive controlling relationship for several years. Using her personal experiences as a catalyst, she has become an advocate for domestic violence in order to help others who are in similar situations and help them find a way out.
Even creating her very own Twitter page, #AbuseTalk, where Jennifer created a community so that she could help others with a space to discuss safely. She passionately explained, "I will always share my journey of life after abuse in the hope it helps others who are experiencing domestic abuse so that they know they are not alone."
Jennifer has been a voice and a hand to those in abusive relationships, even writing books on the matter called Isolation Junction and Clipped Wings, which have both received outstanding awards as well as being on the Amazon Best Sellers list. You can find Jennifer her on her website here.

22. 1982 Jaguar XJ
Anthony Corallo was a mobster in NYC and the Lucchese crime family boss. He controlled a range of activities in New York during his reign, from porn and prostitution to gambling and extortion rackets to the garment industry and labor unions. At the height of his reign, he was among the richest and most powerful men in the world. No wonder he was able to afford a Jaguar XJ. This XJ’s car phone gave Corallo the privacy he needed to discuss matters without being overheard by the FBI. But, in 1983, a bug placed in the XJ was what led to his downfall.
Corallo was finally convicted of his crimes in late 1986 and received a sentence of a full 100 years to be spent in federal prison. In 2000, he died from natural causes while at the Federal Medical Center. Since he was born in 1913, this meant he lived a long life, even if much was spent in jail.

The men were attacking one by one that's why they were being hit.
Then they decided to attack together.
A guy from behind grabbed her from the neck, two held both of her hands and a man who was standing right in front of her spoke, "We are going to tear you apart."
His smirk was getting bigger and bigger when his partner said, "Let's take her to the corner and finish our work."
She was shouting for help but the road was completely desolate. Not a single car or person was present there.
"Leave me!" she shouted struggling in the men's grip when all of them heard a deep voice saying, "Are you all deaf?"
All of the men turned around to see there was the tall figure but they could not see him because of the darkness.
"Get going young man. There's no work for you here," said a drunk man when he replied, "You heard the girl. Leave her."
The voice of the man was deep yet stern.
"Or else? Will you rape us just like we are going t
"Gentleman... ladies, please. It would be appreciated if you will go a little slow with the celebrations. A business meeting is going on outside..." arrow came and spoke respectively when Xandra immediately answered, "Oh, I am so sorry... We will be quiet, now.""Thank you, ma'am," Arrow gave a nod and politely walked away.Xandra remembered she has seen this man somewhere.As soon as she remembered him from last night, she murmured, "Arrow...""You want an arrow for your birthday gift?" Ruby asked unaware when Xandra recalled the last night's scene where the angry voice of the man, made Arrow rushed when he got bumped into her.She, even though did not saw his face but the deep mesmerizing tone was enough to know that he was annoyed.But that's her fault? How?She let out a smirk as she told Ruby to sing her a birthday song.As Darby took a sip of his coffee and was about to place the cup back to the saucer, he stopped in midw
It's been a day since they came back from Bangkok and Xandra has to go for the interview in Rothschilds Corporations so she woke up early and had a bath, changed into formal wear and made coffee and pancakes for breakfast.Ruby and her boyfriend Jess were sleeping in the same room when she tried to stay quiet as she could.Xandra took the cab to the Corporations as she was nervously sitting on the rear seat.Sighing deeply she saw a big large building in grey.It was a magnificent building... only education people with qualified degrees will be hired in this multinational company.And a dog walker like her... how is she even selected here?Xandra walked to the reception and politely spoke, "Hi, I've been called for an interview..."It's been an hour and she was sitting patiently on the seat in the corridor with a few girls.The rest of the girls were dressed like sluts, deep necks, short dress, full of makeup.It was not
"Charlotte, let's go out somewhere, "Joe said tapping his hands on the table while Lola answered, "It's a weekday, Joe...""So what? It's not like we have to go to school or college tomorrow.""Xandra in which college you were?" Charlotte asked when she hesitantly answered, "I haven't gone to college."The three of them exchanged looks then Lola spoke, "No college degree and you are boss' personal assistant? You have something done...""What do you mean?" Xandra asked unaware when Joe replied, "I'm a master graduated and after a lot of struggle. I got the job in Rothschilds Corporations..." after a pause he continued, "And these two girls have a higher education. So all of us had done some hard work to reach here.""She may not have a college degree but her nature and way of talking have impressed me to hire her," Hilda came interrupting their conversation when she continued, "And unlike us, her dressing sense is also very good. At least she's not
"Is it okay if I...?" she was interrupted by the waiter who said, "Yes, whatever. I have to go back now." with that he turned to walk away.Xandra stepped in the hut knocking the door she went inside.The hut was small yet congested.A woman cooking something as she heard the movement, she immediately turned around to see the beautiful girl in front of her."I wasn't expecting guests..." she said as she struggled to walk with the stick on her left hand."No, ma'am... it's just me," the second Xandra said those words, the lady looked closely and she was paused for a second.Xandra was sitting in front of the old woman, she was terrified deep down but held captive."I came here..." she was interrupted by the old lady who indicated towards the soup and said, "Drink it.""Thank you but I am not hungry..." she replied with a faint smile which was quickly faded away when the old lady spoke, "I wasn't asking."Then again
It's been two days the rain hasn't stopped surely it was slowed from before but not completely stopped.It was the first working day and Xandra's office was being closed due to rain.They were sitting at home watching the news and getting updates about the city."What is happening?" Jess asked unaware as they sipped the coffees.Xandra got a call from her office saying she has to come tomorrow.Next day she woke up watching the drizzle and the cloudy sky.Sighing deeply she walked down the road after an hour.As the boss wasn't there so the work of Hilda and Xandra wasn't that much.She was free before lunchtime and was having her coffee."I wonder companies like Rothschilds Corporations also had to close due to rain..." Xandra said sipping her coffee.Beyond the counter were Charlotte and Joe standing and making filter coffees for themselves."Because Mr Rothschilds is kind enough to care about his workers
The girl went on her knees and bent over him, simply gloating. There was a deliberate voluptuousness which was both thrilling and repulsive as she arched her neck. She actually, licked her lips like an animal till he could see in the moonlight the moisture shining on the scarlet lips and the red tongue as it lapped the white sharp teeth.Darby woke up unaware as he saw his surroundings which were a complete mess.He was laying upside down and saw the red top of a girl and remembered that he spent the night with a girl.But if he spent the night with the girl, where is she?He jumped out of the bed walking to the washroom but there was no one.He walked out of the room and saw the girl was setting the table and greeted him."Good morning," she said sweetly."Good morning, Emma," he said in doubt when she quickly answered, "Eva.""Yes, Eva," he gave a nod.Darby was only in his briefs while the girl was wearing his shirt w
Xandra was sitting on the floor dusting the back of the sofa and Darby walked to the kitchen as he poured himself a glass of water and before going in his room, he left the glass on the kitchen counter.He walked upstairs in his room while Xandra stood up walking to the kitchen counter.Xandra walked towards it and held the glass in her hand, her brows knitted in confusion."What the hell..." she muttered under her breath as she took the glass to the sink and washed it again, carefully placing it back to the cabinet.She continued dusting the living room when she heard the noise of someone opening the door of the wardrobe.As the music was slow she was sure that she heard a thud. Removing the earplugs off her ears she took slow baby steps towards the stairs.Xandra was extra careful while walking passed by the sofas when her feet got bumped into a small table and it caused a sound.Darby who was just in his bathrobe heard the sound, h
He walked to his wardrobe and selected his t-shirt and briefs for her.Darby made her wore the duvet and put his hands under it, removing her pants and made her wore the briefs.He, then removed her shirt and the bra as he stared at it for a minute.When she was finally dressed he said, "Xandra, bite it gently. I want to check the temperature..." she opened her eyes weakly and keep the thermometer in her mouth.He brought the hairdryer and dried her hair while she kept on laying.After that, he checked her temperature which was raised so he put the wet handkerchief in her forehead.Darby wasn't expecting this.Now that she is sick, he's the only one who can help her.And not to forget he is the reason for her condition."Xandra, did you eat anything?" he asked then paused recalling the scene where she asked to make dinner because she was hungry."Wait... a second, the doorbell rang..." he who was kneeling down bes

Jul 31 2008
In a couple of days I turn 32.
32! I can’t believe it. Where did all these years go? How did I get here? I was told by a couple of people that I looked 27 or 28. I think I look older but I feel younger. Sometimes I feel as if I was robbed of a few years and I want them back. The years between 23-26 are a blur to me now.
I don’t think I have achieved much in my life or even anything good. I’m trying hard to rectify that. It’s a Life Wasted if you ask me. I’ve not got anything worthwhile to show for these 32 years. Can I rewind and a get a few years back please? No, its silly to even think that.
Now I can go by the line said in the movie The Snow Walker, where the Inuit girl asks Barry Pepper his age and if he was married and he says 32 and no, she replies : 32 and no wife!!

A MUM claimed yesterday she too is a victim of "home wrecker" Tracey Temple.
Julie Griffiths said she was heartbroken when she found pictures of Tracey topless on a beach in Ibiza during a secret holiday with Julie's partner Gordon Potter.
They were caught out after a passionate two-year affair when Tracey was in her mid-20s.
The Mirror revealed this week that Tracey had a fling with Deputy Prime Minister John Prescott.
Accounts clerk Julie told the Mirror: "Pauline Prescott must be absolutely devastated. I should imagine she's thinking, 'Why didn't I see all the signs?'
"You feel so stupid. You feel as though everyone else knows and you are the last one to find out. It's like the whole world caves in on you.
"I wanted to punch Tracey's lights out. When I heard her name on the car radio this week I almost crashed. All the hatred came flooding back.
"Tracey has shown herself for what she is, a complete bitch and a total home wrecker."
Julie and builder Gordon were both 24 when they moved into a three bedroom semi in Southampton.
She said: "We'd been living together for six years when Gordon met Tracey on a day trip ferry to France. He and a mate were on a booze cruise to buy some cheap beer.
"He was a really keen golfer and was always going off on golfing weekends with his pals and having days out with a golfing society.
"When Gordon told me he and his friends were going on a golfing holiday to Ibiza I accepted it because he was always going off. It makes me sound really stupid and naive.
"But when he came back something aroused my suspicions and I looked though his golf bag. I found a pile of about 40 photographs taken in Ibiza.
"I was in total shock. I was absolutely devastated. I couldn't believe what I was seeing.
"One photo was of Tracey on the beach topless with long blonde hair and big boobs.
"Gordon was in some of the pictures with his arms round her. They were all happy holiday snaps.
"And they were all taken while I was at home looking after our five-year-old daughter and two-year-old son.
"That made it so much worse. It should have been us, not her.
"I ripped up all the photos into tiny pieces and confronted Gordon. He admitted they had been having an affair for two years and promised me he would never see Tracey again.
"He gave me Tracey's phone number and I rang her to find out what had been going on - I was so angry and hurt. There were tears and there was shouting. Tracey knew about me and our children but it didn't make any difference to her.
"Gordon told me the reason he started the affair was pure lust, which didn't make me feel any better when I was at home looking after the kids. I couldn't eat or sleep and I lost weight big time, down to seven and a half stone. I thought about leaving him. He begged me to stay but I think it was the children that kept us together."
The couple, now both 48, split up four years ago and live in separate homes in a village near Southampton.
Julie said: "The fallout never went away - the trust had gone. I was always suspicious, always questioning him about where he was going and what he was doing. He resented it, especially if I said I didn't believe him.
"We both tried to make an effort but it was never the same. I can't blame Tracey for us splitting up but we never got over their fling.
"I'm always very wary of men now and probably will be for the rest of my life. She absolutely destroyed my world and now she's done it again to someone else.
"That sort of behaviour just destroys families - I'm not a nasty person but I call her a home wrecker.
"I sympathise completely with Pauline Prescott. It's probably worse for her because she met Tracey. If I'd met her I don't think I would have been responsible for my actions.
"Tracey is probably attracted by power and excitement of the chase.
"The Prescotts will have to work hard to rebuild their relationship but I think Pauline should stand by her man. He has been an idiot. Who could fancy him, come on. He is just yuuuuuuggggghhhh. He is just a fat, horrible man. His physique is a disaster. He's not one bit good looking. There's nothing nice about him.
"He is not the sort of bloke a woman 21 years younger would fall head over heels for.
"I'd say he's been had. Tracey was after what she could get out of him and he probably couldn't resist the sex when she threw herself at him.
"I'm sure it was a huge ego trip for Mr Prescott. He's been a silly old fool."
Gordon Potter was not available for comment.

How does someone who has been terrified of public speaking all their life wind up on the stage of the Sydney Opera House in front of 2,500 people?
Australian singer-songwriter Megan Washington has had a debilitating stutter since she was five years old, but for her it was a case of facing her demons head on.
As a teenager in Brisbane, she was bullied for her stutter.
After studying jazz at the Conservatorium of Music, she began writing her own songs and released a platinum-selling debut album in 2010.
Years of speech therapy helped her to overcome and disguise the condition as she achieved fame and success in the music industry.
But whenever she was asked to be a presenter at events, she would say no because just the thought of it made her feel sick.
When she appeared on television shows like The Voice and Spicks and Specks, she would employ a long-practiced technique designed to smooth out the stops, starts and repetitions in her speech.
She got through it but she always felt that the voice she presented to the world was not the real her.
The only time she was really happy with the sound coming out of her mouth was when she was singing.
And it was her music that finally prompted her to confront her darkest fear.
On top of her bucket list of "scary things" was public speaking.
So when she received an invitation to sing at the TEDx event in Sydney, an idea popped into her head.
Given that it was an event where people make speeches, why not make one herself?
The night before the event, she sat down and wrote a speech which cast away years of trying to disguise her stutter and instead came straight out with it.
"I have a problem. It's not the worst thing in the world. I'm fine, I'm not on fire. I know that other people have to deal with far worse things," she told the TEDx crowd.
"But to me, language and music are inextricably linked through one thing.
"And the thing is that I have a stutter."
The speech brought tears to the eyes of many in the audience, but also laughter as she told her story with warmth and humor.

((I found a bunch of these in my ask, so I’ll just write little drabbles for them. xD I don’t know what they were originally for.))
The boy looked down at the chocolate that littered the floor. He hadn’t expected a thank you from Zim or even a smile, but he had certainly not expected them to be thrown in his face. He bit his lip, trembling as all eyes in the hall were on him. They didn’t laugh or point or even whisper to each other. They just stared.
He slowly walked to the bathroom, eyes watering, to find some solace in his own reflection.

Special moments are even more special when everyone we loved is there, celebrating the happiness with us. Charlie Bear, a black Labrador breed who has a brain tumor, was able to attend his bestfriend special occasion despite his suffering. He was there and he made it!
Kelly O’Connell met Charlie Bear when she was still working at an animal shelter while studying to become a veterinarian. Charlie was only 12 weeks when Kelly discovered him abandoned outside a grocery store and brought into the center for a temporary shelter. She saw him special and decided to adopt the cute black little puppy. Despite the fact that Kelly was still with her parents that time, it never stops her from getting Charlie, because she knew that they were meant to be together.
After graduating, Kelly and Charlie never been apart from each other and moved to various places together. In 2010, she fell in love with her fellow veterinarian James Garvin where they moved in, together with Charlie, and live with his two sons. The two then decided to get married.
Everything was just fine and they were happy, until such time that they discovered Charlie Bear having a brain tumor and was about to leave them sooner. A week before the wedding, he suffered five seizures and though that he can never attend the wedding. His 15-year-old body sometimes cannot endure the pain.
During the wedding day, September 1, 2016, Charlie Bear was able walked down the aisle and spend time with Kelly on her special day. He even seemed to smile as he was looking into them and other guests. When it was time to walk back, Charlie can no longer summon the strength he had, so, Kelly’s sister and Maid of Honor, Katie O’Connell, bent down and lifted the 80-pound dog into her arms. Everyone was crying as they saw the overwhelming moment. Katie carried Charlie all the way down the aisle and never leaves him, as the groomsman walked one of the couple’s other five dogs by their side.
Charlie Bear made it. Kelly get close to him telling him that he made it! He made to be with her on their very special day.
On the 9th of September, Charlie Bear bid goodbye to his family. He peacefully fell asleep surrounded by the family in front of their fireplace. They were grateful for having him in their lives and Charlie Bear will be forever in their heart.

How do you know (2010)
I have respect for the actors for all of them are very versatile. I have great respect for James L. Brooks who wrote and directed the play. The story weaving is almost seamless, but... But what? There was something missing. Something I could not name.
Anyways, when it was being aired again on TV I got a little interested again, so I joined my mom, but left when I had to. Later, she watched it again, around the middle part, and I finished the film with her. She seemed to like the twists and turns that kind of convinced me that it was worth a second look as a full feature film.
Storyline from imdb:

For what it's worth, I recently had some of this year's Baujolais Nouveau and it was surprisingly tasty. I usually avoid it completely as a species of hype that's much more about marketing than about wine.
In this case I had it blind, it was handed to me by a waiter at a reception and I had no idea what I was drinking till I'd finished the glass and was able to make my way to the bar. Damn if it didn't taste like real wine rather than the grape-ade that nouveau usually resembles. A bit of tannin to support it, nice fruit right up front (of course) and a bit of black pepper to give it some additional interest. A perfect party wine.

I really like working with Paula. I know she will do a thorough job on my taxes, AND!!! She will get them as low as she can. AND!!! I don’t dread notices from IRS anymore. When i tried doing them myself that was a constant worry. One of the reason i like working with her is that she LOVES saving people money on taxes. It makes her heart sing.

Detailed plot synopsis reviews of The Glass Castle
She suspects that's why her Dad left home at an early age--too much premature family p_nis touching.
Jeannette 's family bought a very broken down home. It was perched on top of a steep hill and it was falling apart. It had no toilet in the house. For beds they used suspended ropes lined with cardboard. The kitchen was not properly insulated so one could get electric shocks unless your hands were wrapped in rags or socks. The roof had a big hole so it rained in the kitchen. Her Dad, who claimed he was the master builder who would build the Glass Castle, never tried to fix the roof.
He talked constantly about creating the Glass Castle but did nothing about it. So Jeannette and her brother dug a big foundation for their new home. When her Dad found out, however, he instructed them to dump their garbage into it (they didn't have the money to pay for garbage removal). When Jeannette asked how they would build the Glass Castle if they put the garbage in the new foundation, her Dad assured her it was only temporary. Needless to say, it wasn't, and it was just another indicator that the Glass Castle would never be built. Jeannette's mother also was unconcerned with having a giant garbage pit next to the home.Click here to see the rest of this review
The family had to fight a giant rat in the kitchen. Jeannette's mother felt sorry for the rat, saying rats had to eat too. Once again, she was entirely unsympathetic.
Jeannette slept with a baseball bat to fight off rats.
She wanted to improve the home and she found some yellow paint. So she painted the house yellow but ran out of paint halfway, so they lived in a broken down house that was half painted yellow, which made it look even worse. But at least Jeannette was trying to improve things--her parents were not.
Jeannette and her brother and sister got into a lot of fights because they were the poor kids and got picked on.
"Kids wanted to fight us because we had red hair, because Dad was a drunk, because we wore rags and didn't take as many baths as we should have, because we lived in a falling down house that was partly painted yellow and had a pit filled with garbage..."
One time Jeannette's Dad came home with a giant bleeding head wound, so deep she could see his skull. He insisted she take a needle and a thread and sew up his head. Horrified, Jeannette did so. The pain didn't seem to bother her father. He disappeared for days at a time and reappeared, sometimes with food but more often drunk. Sometimes they had to eat cat food to survive.
One time they ate nothing but ham for a week, but since they didn't have a refrigerator, by the end of the week it had white worms coming out of it. Her mother advised her to cut around the worms.
Jeannette continued to steal discarded food from the lunchroom at school. She was embarrassed to be seen doing this but she was very hungry.
One time when she went home she found her mother secretly eating chocolate bars. This enraged the starving Jeannette and she took one of her mother's chocolate bars.
Because they didn't have money for coal to heat the house, it got very cold inside. There was no insulation and icicles formed inside the home, and the sink and faucets froze up in the winter. They all wore coats around the house. Everyone wanted to sleep with the dogs to preserve body warmth. When Jeannette went to a friend's house and saw a thermostat for the first time, she marveled at the idea that temperature could be set inside a home.
Jeannette took baths at her Uncle Stanley's house but one time he started touching her thigh with one hand while opening his pants with his other hand and masturbating. Jeannette complained to her mother but her mother only shrugged and said that sexual assault was a crime of perception. "so many women make such a big deal out of these things. But you're stronger than that."
The house continued to fall apart. The soil around the house started to erode making it more likely the entire house would slide down the hill. More holes appeared in the roof and it started raining in the bedrooms. Her brother Brian had to sleep with a tarp over him during rainy nights. Green mold spread over the house as well as little mushrooms.
The porch started to rot and family members fell through it. But Jeannette's mother and father did nothing about fixing any of this. It wasn't just a money issue; they just had no motivation to improve their own lives or the lives of their children. Jeannette's mother's solution to the bathroom problems was to put a bucket in the kitchen for people to shit in.
One time Jeannette found an expensive diamond ring. She wanted to sell it for food but Jeannette's mother decided to keep it instead; she said it helped her self-esteem, and self-esteem was more important than food.

This isn't a GoFundMe page to raise money for a funeral or medical expenses. I am blessed beyond a doubt financially, I certainly hope to raise $1,000 - $2,000 to contribute to some minor travel expenses for my less financially comfortable family members to attend the funeral in Tennessee but ALL other monies will be donated in my mother, Stella Wards's memory to Mid-Erie.org a non-profit organization in Western New York that helps the community and its people with chemical dependency amongst other services and is soon to hopefully open one of the only out-patient clinics for adolescents and their families that are battling the prescription drug epidemic sweeping our country.
It's crazy to think that my strength to persevere, my determination to succeed and my ability to use hard times to motivate me to excel when other would quit actually comes from my mother. Something I never gave her credit for and not until after her death could I see what an amazing gift she shared with me. It was her disability that motivated me to get into the insurance and investment business in 2003, so other families wouldn't lose almost everything like we did when she became disabled, or they could plan for their kids to have a better life through education or gifting, it was her drug addiction that led me to take a seat on the board of this great organization, mid-Erie.org, although no one there even knows this story. I hope you will consider donating in her honor.
I am a very private person and hope me sharing her story will help others in need of help.
My mother Stella, was 16 in 1977 when I was conceived. I won't go into the facts around that night but let's just say it wasn't planned but it was the first sign of her showing the strength she had inside her and the heart she had for every living creature on this earth. It wasn't common for a 16 year old girl to be pregnant in 1977 and it was certainly not easy to be giving birth as an unwed girl at that. However, against most people's advice she had the strength to bring a son into this world alone. She did have the support of her family from the day I was born into the world as with any baby born healthy, is always a blessing. She would look to give me a father (although not my father) figure quickly and marry before the age of 18. This also wasn't a popular decision and unfortunately not a good one in hindsight. She endured a few years of physical abuse and tried to show strength to make an effort to make it work for me. It didn't. She remarried a year or so later but as fate would have it she picked a similar man who treated her even worse subjecting her to physical and mental abuse for over a decade. She stuck with it as many abused wives do for her then two children until she was literally broken. She stayed strong and never complained and used her infectious laugh to overcome most situations. After she left him or maybe just before life continued to test her strength. She had become disabled as a nurses aid and after numerous attempts at recovery was prescribed pain killers which over the years increased in dosage and strength as the pain was beyond her strength.
I am not sure when it turned into an addiction. I can tell you it never started that way and I think often before the family realizes it, it is already way beyond the help you as a family can provide. Once someone is an addict there is literally nothing one can do to get them help against their will. There was no out-patient options, only in-patient that had to be court/police ordered or she had to agree to treatment. I offered to pay for rehab, I offered to help financially and even looked at getting her arrested. Nothing worked but her laugh never faded and she would still give everything she had to a stranger yet she had nothing. The addiction had taken her home, money, possessions and the company of many of her friends and family. Although she never lost their love, many of them couldn't watch a women of strength deteriorate into an addict.
I don't know when the strength overcame the addiction but I do know it was her move to Tennessee (although forced) to be surrounded and monitored by my two other strong women, her mother and her step mother and brothers. It was there that she got "clean" and into a treatment program of methadone that undoubtedly we all thought would save her life. Who would think that a women strong enough to endure decades of physical and mental abuse at the hands of men she loved, and 5-10 years of addiction without overdosing, couldn't survive once she was in recovery. It was so amazing to see her smile again, to hear her laugh and begin to repair the relationships that her addiction had broken.I think that's one of the lessons learned, we as a society only hear of the people who die at the hands of the abuse (when it's too late to help), we only hear of the over dose deaths and statistics but my mother survived all of those things because of her strength and infectious laugh and sense of humor. However, it was the toll that it took on her body, the years of physical abuse and drug abuse that literally broke her heart. My mom died of heart failure because she didn't have the facilities or professionals around to help her, she was embarrassed to seek even comfort little yet help, she had the heart of gold but eventually even Gold can melt. I don't think we medically fully understand the damage these drugs (prescribed or otherwise) have on our heart. We study the brain and perhaps the liver but what about the heart.Very few people in my life have heard even 1/2 of my moms story and what essentially was my and my sisters childhood as I never want or wanted anyone to show me mercy, pity, or treat me different. I see now I was blessed with her strength to do what I was set out to do for my family and the people I choose to serve as a financial advisor in hopes to change lives. I hope that in my need for closure and desire that she be remembered for her laugher and caring heart that her story will compel you to share this post and if you are able take a moment to donate in her memory to this great organization even better. It's an organization I joined as a board member years ago because of my experience as her son. I truly appreciate everyone who has reached out to me and my family during this very difficult time, it means the world to us.The Way Family

« السابقةمتابعة »
No 81. TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 15,1780.
To the Author of the MIRROR. SIR, Some time ago you inserted in your paper a letter from a lady who subscribed herself S. M. giving an account of the hardships she has suffered as the daughter of a man of fortune, educated in the midst of affluence, and then left to the support of a very slender provision. I own the situation to be a hard one ; but it may perhaps, afford her some consolation to be told, that there are others, seemingly. enviable, which are yet as distressful, that derive their distresses from circumstances exactly the reverse of those in which Miss S. M. is placed.
I lost my father, a gentleman of considerable fortune, at an age so early, that his death has scarce left any traces on my mind. I can only recollect that there was something of bustle, as well as of sorrow, all over the house; that my coloured sash was changed for a black one; and that I was not allowed to drink papa's health after dinner, which, before, I had been taught regularly to do. Soon after, I can remember my mamma being sick, and that there was a little brother born who was much more attended to than I, As we grew up, I can remember his getting finer play-things, and being oftener the subject of discourse among our visitors ; and that sometimes, when there were little quarrels in the nursery, Billy's maid would tell mine, that Miss must wait till her betters were served.
A superiority to which I was so early accustomed, it gave me little uneasiness to bear. The vivacity natural to children, which in me was supported by uninterrupted good health, left me no leisure to complain of a preference, by which, though my brother was distinguished, he was seldom or never made happier. The notice, indeed, to which his birthright entitled him, was often more a hardship than a privilege. He was frequently kept in the drawing-room with mamma, when he would have much rather been with me in the garden ; he was made to repeat his lesson to the company, that they might admire his parts and his progress, while I was suffered to be playing blindman's-buff below stairs ; he was set at dinner with the old folks, helped to light things that would not hurt him, obliged to drink toast and water, and to behave himself like a gentleman, while I was allowed to devour apple-dumplin, gulp down small-beer, and play monkey-tricks at the side-table.
That care, however, which watched his health, was not repaid with success ; he was always more delicate, and more subject to little disorders, than I; and at last, after completing his seventh year, was seized with a fever, which, in a few days, put an end to bis life, and transferred to me the inheritance of my ancestors.
After the first transports of my mother's grief were subsided, she began to apply herself to the care of her surviving child. I was now become inheritress of her anxiety, as well as of my father's fortune ; a remarkable change was made in every department of my education, my company, and my amuse
Instead of going along with a set of other girls of my own age to a class for learning French, and a public writing-school, teachers were brought into the house to instruct me privately; and though
I still went to a dancing-school three days in the week to practise the lessons which I received from an eminent master at home, yet I was always at. tended by my mother, my governess, or somebody, by whose side I was stuck up before and after the dance, to the great vexation of myself and the ridicule of my former
companions. Of companions, indeed, I was now altogether deprived. I was too considerable a person to associate with those in whose sports and amusements I had formerly been so happy to share ; if at any time I ventured to mention a wish for their society, I was immediately checked by an observation of my mamma, that she believed they were very good girls, but not fit company for me.
To prevent the solitude in which my superiority would have thus placed me, a little girl, an orphan niece of my mother's maid, was taken into the house, whose office it was to attend me during all my hours of study or amusement, to hold the pincushion while my maid was dressing me, to get lessons along with me, and be chid if I neglected them ; to play games at Draughts, which she was never to win, and to lift the Shuttlecock, which I commonly let fall; in short, she was to serve me for the practice of all that insolence which the precepts of others had taught me I had a right to
I feel, at this moment, Mr. MIRROR, the most sincere compunction for the hardships which this poor girl suffered while she was with me; hardahips, froni which, at last, she freed herself, by running off with a recruiting serjeant ; yet I was taught, at the time, to call her subsistence a bounty, and to account myself generous when I bestowed any trifle beyond it. While
mind was thus encouraged in perversion, the culture of iny body was little less prepos
The freedom and exercise which formerly
bestowed health and vigour, I now exchanged for the constraints of fashion, and the laziness of pride. Every shackle of dress which the daughters of any great man were understood to wear, I was immée diately provided with, because I could afford it as well as they. I was never allowed the use of my limbs, because I could afford a coach ; and, when attacked by the slightest disorder, immediate re. course was had to the physician, because I could afford a fee. The consequence was natural ; I lost all my former spirits, as well as my former bloom ; and, when I first put on the womanly garb, I was a fine lady complete, with cheeks as pale and nerves as weak as the finest.
I was now arrived at a period when attention and anxiety were to be pointed almost solely to one object, the disposal of my person in marriage. With regard to this event, I was equally the slave of my inother's hopes and fears. I was dressed and redressed, squeezed and pinched, that I might catch a fine gentleman who had lately returned from his travels. I was often hurried several miles in the dark to a ball at our country.town, to display myself to a Lord, who was to be of the party there ; I was walked over hedge and ditch, in order to captivate a country 'squire of a very large estate in our neighbourhood ; and I was once obliged to hazard my neck, that I might go out a hunting with a Duke. On the other hand, I was in perfect durance when any improper man had been seen to look at me. I was forced to leave the parishchurch, upon information received of a young gentleman having bribed the beadle with a shilling, to admit him into the next pew; my dancing master was changed, because his wife died while he was attending me; and my drawing-master, an old batchelor of threescore, was dismissed because he
happened to put his hand on mine in shewing me how to manage my Crayons. The only poor man with whom I was allowed to associate was the clergyman of our parish, a very old gentleman of the most irreproachable character. To this indul. gence, however, I was more indebted than my mother was aware, or I had any reason to hope.. Possessed of excellent sense and great learning, the good man was at pains to teach me the use of the first, and the value of the latter. By his assistance, my mind, which before had always been either un. cultivated or misled, was informed with knowledge more useful than the extent of my fortune or the privileges of my birth. He shewed me the folly of pride, and the meanness of insolence; he taught me the respect due to merit, the tenderness to poverty, the reverence to misfortune ; from him I first learnt the dignity of condescension, the pleasures of civility, the luxury of beneficence. He died, alas ! before I could receive the full benefit of his instructions, before he was able to eradicate the effects of early perversion and habitual indul. gence; and left me rather in a condition to feel. the weakness of my mind, than to recover its strength.
My mother did not long survive him. I had been forced to see the errors of her judgment, though I could never doubt the warmth of her affection. I was unfortunate enough to lose her assistance, when her assistance would have been more useful and her indulgence less prejudicial. In the management of my fortune, which has now devolved on me,
I am perplexed with business which I do not understand, and harassed by applications which I know not how to answer. I am some times puzzled with schemes for improving my estate, sometimes frightened with dangers that threaten to

Wednesday, November 13, 2013
The stigma of depression
Men & Depression: Facing Darkness
For nearly a decade, while serving as an elected official and working as an attorney, Massachusetts State Sen. Bob Antonioni struggled with depression, although he didn't know it. Most days, he attended Senate meetings and appeared on behalf of clients at the courthouse. But privately, he was irritable and short-tempered, ruminating endlessly over his cases and becoming easily frustrated by small things, like deciding which TV show to watch with his girlfriend. After a morning at the state house, he'd be so exhausted by noon that he'd drive home and collapse on the couch, unable to move for the rest of the day.
When his younger brother, who was similarly moody, killed himself in 1999, Antonioni, then 40, decided to seek help. For three years, he clandestinely saw a therapist, paying in cash so there would be no record. He took antidepressants, but had his prescriptions filled at a pharmacy 20 miles away. His depression was his burden, and his secret. He couldn't bear for his image to be any less than what he thought it should be. "I didn't want to sound like I couldn't take care of myself, that I wasn't a man," says Antonioni. Newsweek Magazine Feb. 26, 2007

Mr. President [CHANBAEK] - COMING SOON -
President Park Chanyeol decided to go to a strip club since he felt stress from all the paperwork. Of course he has body guards with him to keep him safe. Upon entering the club he spotted a stripper dancing but with a mask on. All you can see were his eyes. Yes him. The stripper named Byun Baekhyun.
They made eye contact, causing Baekhyun eyes to widened but continue on dancing. Chanyeol knew something was up with Baekhyun and he wanted to help him. Baekhyun was disowned by his own parents because he was a stripper. Baekhyun had his reasons on why he became one and meeting Chanyeol wasn't exactly planned.
Soon enough Chanyeol decided to take Baekhyun to his place and help out the boy onto a better path. As they spend time with one another, they began to grow feelings to each other but there was a problem.
Not only was Chanyeol the President, he also has a wife....
And a child.
Will they live happily ever after? Will Baekhyun and his parents reunite? Or will all hell break loose for a disastrous ending?

Today’s guest picture comes from Mary Jo in Manitoba and shows a rather strange extra rock under the tree in her garden.
I was pleased to wake up at a reasonable time as I had set my alarm for first, three o’clock and then, half past four during the night in the hope of seeing the lunar eclipse. Mrs Tootlepedal and I did wake up and see the eclipse but it didn’t seem to be quite as exciting as we had been promised. This is what we saw around 3am.
The cold morning kept me hanging about for an hour after breakfast before I set off on the fairly speedy bike to make the best of the sunshine. The temperature was still in single figures C but the sunny weather kept me warm. I was a bit pressed for time so I stuck to an easy route and a modest distance of thirty miles. I took a couple of pictures of the quiet roads that I followed. One in Scotland….
I hardly saw any traffic, either motorised or on four legs, so I had a very tranquil spin round the low country.
I had time for a shower, lunch and a quick look at the sedum before going off to do my stint in the Information Hub on the High Street. The sedum was busier than ever. I counted over a hundred insects on it today.
My two hours at the IH were far from boring today as I had several customers visiting the art exhibition there. I even sold one of them a painting. I also sold a copy of the Langholm Walks to a local resident who told us that he had had an excellent view of the eclipse last nigh from his house which is up on the hill above the town. I was also entertained by a visit from Dropscone who had returned from golf lesson in Carlisle so the time passed very pleasantly.
When I got home, I turned down an offer of a cup of tea with Mike Tinker and whisked Mrs Tootlepedal off to visit the scabious on the hill which I had seen a few days ago.
The fungus on the tree stump on the track up to the open hill had lasted very well….
It is always a pleasure to look down at the town tucked neatly among the hills.
We got back in time for me to have a cup of tea before my flute pupil Luke came for his regular practice. He is playing in a school concert this week so we ran through his piece for that and then we played some duets.
Once again, time was a bit short but I had time for my tea before going out to play trios with Isabel and Mike. They had both got up to see the eclipse but had not been very impressed. We had a good play though, in spite of the lack of sleep and there is a fair chance that several of the composers might even have recognised the pieces that we were playing.
In all the rushing about, I didn’t have time to get a good flying bird shot and this was my best effort.

My wife and I have both been down with illness the last few weeks.
I've also be working harder and longer hours than ever. (if only the girls in the office new their serious business like manager is sitting at his desk in his formal suit with a nice pair of lace panties underneath!)
Sometimes I wonder about things like that. My wife and I don't consider ourselves too unusual. I wonder how many people I know who may secretly have unusual fetishes that most people would never ever guess.
Despite my wife being sick and having a period she has wanted sex a couple of times the last few weeks, much to my pleasant surprise.
She has also had me file and polish her toenails.
As soon as she stops taking any medication and gets back to a normal, healthy diet I'm sure I'll have to taste some more of her "golden goodness"
I love my wife.

I found Olivia Newton-John's Christmas cd at Target! I know it's only available there but they actually had it. I saw a man walking around with a copy and I asked him where he got it. He led me right to it. I thanked him for that! It was only 9.99. That made me even happier. It's going for much more on eBay.
A Beary Merry Christmas to all!

Very Enjoyable Book
THE DUCHESS WAR is the first novel in the Brothers Sinister series. It is the story of Robert Blaisdell, the Duke of Clermont, who suffers from the evil that his father did. Robert is a good man, and a radical, who wants to use his position for changing the world. He meets Minerva Lane, who has made a point of hiding because of her scandalous past.
This book took a while to really grab me. There is a lot of set up involved in the story and at times the threads of the story just went on and on. However, by the middle of the book, I began to really love the character of Robert, who is sensitive and caring. He lived such a sad life but did not become hardened.
These two characters have a slow building relationship that I really enjoyed. These were two people who had seen a hard world and yet found in each other a kindred spirit.
Spoilers: I really loved that Robert and Minerva were both virgins on their wedding night and that things did not go perfectly, but that they worked through learning together. There was something really real and sweet about them.
I look forward to the other books in the series. There is a great introduction to them here.

Authors: Ben Brown
Deep in the back of Jonathan’s mind, a voice screamed at him to pick up the weapon and keep fighting. As much as he wanted to comply with the voice, his body simply would not respond to his force of will. The blow from the creature’s head had temporarily severed the link between mind and body.
Jon could vaguely see teeth rushing at him again, but he could not place any danger with the image. He knew the teeth meant pain and possible death, but his concussed brain could not link the thoughts to either action, or fear.
Callum watched on as his father battled the creatures. Sally’s screams had subsided to a mere whimper, and now she too watched as Jonathan Wentworth split the skull of one of the creatures with the ease of a skilled logger.
Like a caged lion, Hector began to pace hither and thither, howling as he went. Callum stabbed his knife into the ground before him, and unshouldered his bow. He quickly put an arrow to string, and pulled back ready to fire on the last of their attackers. But like his father, on recognizing their pastor he froze.
He watched as Pastor McCullum barreled into his father, taking him to the dirt. He watched as his father blocked the creature’s attack by placing his tomahawk between himself and the monsters bloodthirsty mouth. Finally, he watched as the creature head butted his father, apparently knocking him out.
Callum knew he should react, but fear held him with the strength of steel restraints. His father was going to die, and he seemed unable to help. Suddenly, Hector let out a bloodcurdling howl, and then charged at the creature pinning his father. The dog’s chilling howl severed the bonds of fear holding Callum, and with bow still raised and taut with arrow, he leaped off in pursuit of his trusty dog.
Hector hit the creature hard in its side, sending it flying off his master. Both dog and creature landed in a tangled heap of gnashing teeth and guttural growls. Hector quickly disengaged from the creature, and took up a defensive position in front of his fallen master.
The slavering beast, which had once held Sunday service, rocked back and forth as if trying to calculate its next move. In an instant, it sprang for Hector.
By the time Callum had gotten to his feet, all fear had left him. He now saw the truth of his situation. Either he acted like a man, in other words, like his father, or they would all die. With that realization ringing in his mind, the moment he got a chance at a clear shot he took it. A calm fell over him as he let loose his arrow.
He felt no guilt, no sorrow. He knew the thing his arrow would slay was no longer Pastor Jacob McCullum. He knew an ungodly abomination had replaced the man who had read to him from the bible. His arrow was an act of kindness. It would release the pastor into the hands of God, where he belonged.
His arrow flew with unerring accuracy, and found the creature’s eye. The handcrafted shaft—tipped with steel and guided by feather—cut the nightmare down with ease. But more importantly, before it could do further harm to his kin.
As the creature fell, Callum dashed to his father’s aid. Jonathan still seemed dazed, but he appeared to be regaining his senses. Callum turned his gaze to Hector. The dog stood over the creature, sniffing and wagging its tail. Then, in a final gesture of triumph, he cocked his leg over the dead creature, and let loose a stream of urine. The dog then barked and kicked two small piles of dirt in the creature’s face. Once hector seemed satisfied with his work, he moved happily to Callum’s side.
“Son, you did mighty well just then.”
Callum’s gaze returned to his father. “Really, Pa? I … I locked up for a second. When I saw yonder monstrosity was Pastor McCullum, well, it nigh on took the wind out of me.”
Jonathan offered his hand to his son, and Callum pulled him to his feet. “The same damn thing happened to me, so it ain’t nothing to be ashamed of.”
“Pa, you just cursed.”
Jonathan laughed. “I’m sure the Lord will forgive me. How’s Sally?”
Both Wentworths looked towards the pale faced young girl sitting in the dirt. She looked around blinkingly, and then struggled to her feet.
“I owe the two of you my life,” she said as she stumbled towards them. “Daddy is still in town, but the place is overrun with …” she looked at the four dead creatures one at a time. “… those things.”
Jonathan placed a gentle hand on her shoulder and asked, “What happened?”
The three shaken New Englanders, along with trusty old Hector, moved to a nearby fallen tree. The two Wentworths and Sally settled on the log. Hector curled up at Callum’s feet as Sally began to recount her story.
“Twas the evening before last when we saw the first of those … things. Jack Minster, you know him, he always hung around outside daddy’s shop.”
Jon pulled his pipe and began to pack it with tobacco. “Ain’t he the fella who used to look after the church for the pastor?”
Sally nodded. “That be the fella. Well, he slept out past the church, in that old barn just off the main road. He kept it pretty nice, considering his gammy leg and all. Anyhow, he came running into town, or at least running as much as a fella with a clubfoot can run. He started screaming blue murder about a bunch of fellas eating his pig. Daddy ran out of the store and took him by the arm, and he says, ‘Now calm down, Jack, and tell us what the heck it is you are talking about.’ Jack took a couple of gulps of air and he replied, ‘A bunch of fellas are eating my pig alive!’
“Well, by the time he finished his tale, half the town was stood around him. Half the folks are laughing, the other half are just rolling their eyes. Jon, you know how old Jack was. He told more tall tales than anyone in this here county.”
Jon nodded as he sucked on his pipe. He then looked briefly at his son, and started circling a finger slowly in the air, indicating for Sally to get to the meat of her story.
“Almost everyone started to head back to where they had come from, but before they had gone more than a few yards, a groaning filled the air. Everyone turned towards the groans, and we saw six or seven of the strangest looking fellas you’ve ever seen heading straight up the middle of Main Street. At first, I guess they kinda just shambled towards us, but then their whole demeanor changed. It was as if they suddenly realized we were there, and seeing us flicked some kinda switch in their heads.
“Next thing I remember is they had Jack and two other men, I can’t remember who the other two were.” She looked at the Wentworths with pleading eyes. “You have to understand, all this seems like a nightmare to me, and like a nightmare, as time passes my memories blur. At least some of my memories are. What happened next will haunt me for the rest of my days. You see, those things had the men on the ground, and they…” Sally stopped her tale and shuddered slightly.
Totally enthralled by the recount of her past few days, Callum leaned towards her and uttered in little more than a whisper, “What, Sally, tell us I beg. What happened next?”
Sally’s hand went to her eye and she wiped away a solitary tear. “They started eating the three they had on the ground. Those things, those affronts to God, just started to rip the men apart. At first, no one moved. I think none of us could believe our eyes. Then the men under attack started screaming, and suddenly panic filled the crowd.
“Next thing I know is, everyone is running. This spurred the monsters into more of a frenzy. The things jumped up and just started grabbing and biting people at random. They didn’t seem to want to eat them, not like the fellas on the ground; they just wanted to bite as many people as they could.
“Old woman Jones started shouting stuff about demons, and how the Cove had been cursed, but one of those things clamped its mouth around hers, and tore of half her face. She ran off holding the tattered remains of her cheeks, and I just dropped to my knees.” Sally started to sob, but quickly regained herself. She shifted slightly, and then stoically continued.
“It was then daddy grabbed my arm and pulled me towards the store. The only man that didn’t run was the pastor. He moved to help the men on the ground, the ones still suffering the most. One of the things feeding on poor old Jack turned as quick as a snake and latched onto his arm. A second later, the pastor was screaming in agony.
“Daddy dragged me to the store, and then threw me inside. He quickly grabbed his gun, and then turned and ran back out into the street. There was mayhem out there, but daddy stayed calm. He raised his gun and shot the one latched to Pastor Jacob, and it flew backwards and released the pastor’s arm. He didn’t wait to see if it was dead, instead he dashed over to the pastor and pulled him away. The one he’d shot now had a hole in its guts, but it just got straight up and started after the two of them. Daddy threw his gun at it, and dragged the pastor into the store. We quickly locked the door, and then took him upstairs.
“From the upstairs window, I watched as the things circled the street. Daddy wrapped the pastor’s arm, but he said it would do no good. Sure enough, a minute or two later, the pastor died … or at least we thought he did.
“We headed downstairs to see if we could head over to the town hall. The creatures in the street were milling around now, and they seemed uninterested in the men they had killed. Daddy told me to keep my eye on then while he looked for something to use as a weapon. Suddenly, old Jack got up with half his guts hanging out, and started acting like the other things. Then the other two fellas did the same. I started thinking about the pastor upstairs. But before I could warn daddy, the pastor came crashing down the stairs groaning and frothing at the mouth.
“Daddy shouted at me to run, so I did. I headed for the back door and bolted for the woods.”
Sally started to cry, and Jonathan wrapped his arm around her. “You had no choice, Sally. You did the right thing.”
She sniffed loudly, and then struggled on. “I hid in the woods all night. It was mighty cold, but I was too scared to head back, and too scared to run. Morning came, and still I hid. Finally, I forced myself to head back to town. At first, the place seemed quiet, but I had hardly set a foot into town before those things spotted me and started to chase me. I caught a glimpse of daddy as I ran. He was covered in blood, but he was still there.”
Jon looked towards the Cove, then at Callum. Jonathan could see his son thought the same as he. Hope Cove was lost. “Sally, are you sure there were only six or seven of those creatures?”
“That means there are another seven or eight of them heading elsewhere,” Callum said coldly.
“You mean there are more of those things!” Sally exclaimed.
“A lot more now. We have to assume everyone in Hope Cove has turned.”
Sally shook her head fervently. “I saw daddy, he was hurt, but he was alive.”
Jonathan banged out his pipe and placed it back in his pocket. “Sally, you saw what happened to the pastor and the others. Those creatures have a curse on them. A curse that passes through their bite. You said the damned things bit a great many people; those people too now carry the curse. We have to assume those people changed just as the pastor did. We have to assume your father has fallen to them too.
“Callum and I were heading to Franklin Town, but now I think we must make haste for Boston. People need to be warned, and I think it best you come with us.”
Sally’s gaze turned in the direction of her home, and she began to weep. The Wentworths allowed her her grief, and she cried openly for several minutes. Finally, Jonathan placed a hand on her shoulder and she nodded slowly.
She looked at Jonathan, and her once pretty young face seemed to have transformed into something old and world-weary. Suddenly, Jon felt as if none of them would ever know happiness again.
“We still have the rest of the day in front of us,” he said as he offered her his hand. “I suggest we put as many miles between us and the Cove as we can.
“Callum, help me collect up our arrows, and don’t forget your gun.”
Once the Wentworths had retrieved all their weapons, the three headed off at a brisk pace.
Boston sat one hundred miles to their south west, a four-to-five day hike from the Cove. Between the Cove and Boston lay more than a dozen small settlements, all of which held between several hundred, and several thousand people. As well as the settlements, countless homes like those of the Wentworth’s were hidden throughout the forests.
Before his encounter with the creatures, and before Sally’s tale, he had based all his assumptions about the godless things purely on what Callum had read to him from Captain William Matthews’ log. The good captain’s entries painted the creatures as mindless and unthinking. Since his encounter with them, Jonathan now saw the things in a new light. He still believed them mindless, but he now also believed a primitive instinct drove them. Much in the same way instinct drove all beasts. It was a base instinct, a simple need for self-preservation. This instinct resides in every living thing on Earth. It needs no thought, no planning, just actions and reactions. The same instinct can be found in even the lowliest of creatures on the planet. Simply put, kill or be killed.
As they walked, his mind went to Sally’s tale repeatedly. It troubled him to think the creatures seemed intent on not only feeding, but biting too. This inferred they had not only a survival instinct, but also some deep-seated need to spread. Did they know their bite spread the disease? Was it their way of increasing their numbers?
If the answer to both questions were yes, then his beloved nation and the world at large would be in a great deal of trouble. Because of what he had witnessed and heard from Sally, he now felt sure the creatures were hunting out victims. This meant they would be looking for settlements, towns, and cities. He knew the ghouls had no idea or concepts of such things. He knew they only saw them as a source of food and a breeding ground to create more of their own.
Callum’s voice tore Jon from his deep and troubling thoughts. He turned and looked at his son.
“I think we should stop for a bite to eat,” Callum said as he looked at Sally. “We’ve been walking for a goodly time, and we could all do with the rest.”
Jonathan nodded, unshouldered his pack, and handed it to his son. “Could you share out the dried meat, also some of the bread.”
Callum took the pack and asked, “Why do you want me to do it?”
“I need to take care of my necessaries. Yonder bush will do just fine.”
His son nodded and started rifling through the pack. Jonathan went to turn, but suddenly felt as if they were not alone. He felt as if watchful eyes studied them. He turned his gaze back along the track, then to the forest around them.
After a few moments, the sensation passed. He normally trusted his instincts without question, but he realized their situation might be affecting his senses. He forced the feeling from his mind, and then headed towards the bush so he could ease at least some of his discomfort.
Jonathan unbuttoned his trousers, and squatted down. However, before he had time to relieve himself, he heard movement to his right. He quickly stood, buttoned his trousers, and pulled his tomahawk from his belt.
“You will not need that, my friend.”
Jon spun on his heels. To his left, stood a tall and strikingly handsome Indian brave. Jonathan shook his head slightly and smiled. He had just fallen for one of the oldest tricks in the book. He now realized the movement and noise to his right had only one purpose, a distraction. Cardsharps often used the same technique; keep the sap watching one hand while the other worked the real magic. The magic of relieving their marks of as much of their hard-earned money as they could.
Jonathan berated himself internally for the ease with which the brave had caught him off guard. He had lived in the woods his whole life, and he knew not only every branch, but also every sound and smell too. The ease with which his young friend had just bamboozled him was unforgivable. Yet, he knew why the brave had done it, and he knew he had it coming.
He had known this fine young man since birth, and he had always joked that he could hear his approach from a mile away. He and the brave’s father had often taken him hunting with them, and Jon had always teased the boy about how heavy-footed he was. He had always insisted the brave would never catch anything off guard. Not a deer, nor an enemy. Naalnish had just proved him wrong, and Jonathan Wentworth felt extremely foolish. The brave had literally caught him with his pants down.
“Naalnish, I am truly clad to see you,” Jon said as he holstered his weapon, and then offered the brave his hand.
The young brave’s handsomely chiseled face erupted into a broad smile, revealing gloriously white teeth. “And I you.”
At that moment, Naalnish’s brother, Elsu, joined them, but kept a respectful distance from his older brother and Jon.
“My father sent me to find you,” Naalnish said as he gestured for his younger brother to leave them. Like a ghost, Elsu evaporated into the trees.
“Callum is preparing some food in yonder clearing. Why not join us?”
Naalnish looked towards Jonathan’s son and nodded.
“Good. Now if you will excuse me, you kinda caught me in the middle of something.”
The brave laughed, and headed off towards the rest of Jonathan’s little group.
Jonathan reappeared a few minutes later. After washing his hands in a nearby stream, he rejoined the group.
“Naalnish, why did your father send you to find me?” Jonathan asked as his hand absentmindedly went to the tomahawk Naalnish’s father had given him.
“Four of our young braves were sent out on a hunt; it was their first and marked their move into manhood. Only one returned. He told of creatures that looked like men, but killed like wolves. He told of how his fellow braves had fallen, and of how one of the creatures had bitten him. A few hours later he died, only to awaken as one of the creatures himself.
“My father killed the brave by crushing his head with a rock. He then ordered scouting parties be sent out to see how widespread these things were. The scouts returned and all told the same tale. Most of the settlements in and around the Cove have fallen to these creatures, and they have reached as far as Franklin Town.
“Father is taking the tribe to our northern hunting grounds, and he wanted you and your family to come with us. Because of all you have done for us, our tribe greatly respects you. You and yours are now part of our people, so Elsu and I were given the task of bringing you to safety.”
Jonathan let out a loud sigh and slowly shook his head. “These monsters are spreading fast. As far as Franklin Town you say?”
Naalnish nodded grimly. “Yes, and every day their numbers grow ever higher.
“While I tracked you, Elsu kept watch. He spotted a group of them moving this way, which makes me think they are tracking you too. He came and warned me of their approach, so we headed off on horseback to intercept them. Our horses are the finest around, but we still had trouble running them all down. They are as fast and agile as any horse or deer, but fiercer than a wolf or mountain lion. We finally caught them and slaughtered them all, but it was a hard battle, and they almost bettered us.
“Father says the cold of the north will slow them, and the snows will keep us safe. You and yours must come with us; otherwise, you may not live beyond the years end. What do you say, Jonathan Wentworth? Will you and yours head north with us?”
Jon bit at his dried meat, and then looked towards Boston. “My wife and daughter are that way, not north.”
“Then it is your duty to find them, but why don’t you let me take your son and this girl with me?”
“I thank you kindly for your offer, Naalnish, but my boy stays with me. Sally on the other hand, well, she is welcome to do as she pleases.”
Naalnish looked at the frightened young girl. “Would you come with me?”
Sally shook her head demurely. “I thank you, but I think I’ll stick with these here two.”
Naalnish rose. “We have four extra horses; we brought them for your family. You are welcome to them.”
Jon stood and shook the brave’s hand. “That’s rightly nice of you.”
“Keep to the roads, Jonathan Wentworth,” Naalnish said as he pressed a clenched fist to his chest. “The forests will soon be full of the creatures.”
Jon placed a clenched fist to his heart and replied, “Your words are wise, Naalnish, and your generosity humbles me.”
Naalnish gestured to his left. “Elsu is waiting with our horses some half a mile from here. We should hurry, as the day draws to an end.”
The small group hurriedly packed away their gear, and allowed Naalnish to lead the way. Twenty minutes later, the Wentworths and Sally Hopkins headed towards Boston once more, only this time they were on horseback and kept firmly to the road.
At first, Sally seemed uneasy with the idea of riding bareback, but after a few miles her unease seemed to pass and she settled into the union between rider and horse. She even allowed herself a small smile, which seemed to lift years from her face.
They made their way towards Boston, and what they hoped would be a happy reunion with the ones they loved. They still had a long way to go, but the horses would ease their journey.
As the horses walked slowly along, Jon pondered Naalnish’s words and the doom they had predicted. He prayed he was doing the right thing by keeping Callum and Sally with him. As he contemplated his concerns, his eyes drifted to his son.
Callum was turning into a fine young man, but he was still just a boy, and still his son. All, including his son and Sally, would need to do grievous things over the coming days. He had no doubt about the fact they were riding into danger, a danger he had no idea whether they could survive. Was it right putting two such young and inexperienced people in such a danger?
It was true Callum had proven his salt in their clash with the creatures, but that fight differed greatly from a full out battle. If they became overwhelmed, could Callum look after himself? Also, what of Sally. Could she even handle a weapon?
As Jonathan Wentworth worked all this over in his head, Hector ran to-and-fro behind them. Jon looked at the dog and envied his lack of thought. The hound had no idea of what faced them, and even if he did, Jon knew he would never leave their side. As he marveled at the dog’s loyalty, he realized he had made the right decision. No matter what, families always stuck together. His wife and daughter were in danger, and it was his and Callum’s duty to find them.
He now also knew there were no longer two women in the Wentworth family. Now there were three. Sally, through no fault of her own, was now a Wentworth. She may not know it yet, but Jonathan would die before seeing any harm befall her. As far as he was concerned, she was as much his responsibility as the rest of his family, which meant he needed to keep her close. Right or wrong, the Wentworths would stay together, or die trying.

Genre: family, het, adventure
Summary: Scott and Johnny are led on a merry chase by a beautiful woman and some dangerous Comancheros.
Notes: Written in December 2007, but there is no time limit on wanting feedback! I haven't looked this over for a very long time, but I'm posting as is.
CHAPTER 1 - THE AWAKENING
The only way to have a friend is to be one.
Go oft to the house of thy friend, for weeds choke the unused path.
Scott, lying on his stomach on a soft feather mattress, was slow to awaken. Even with his eyes still closed, he was aware that it was early; the sounds of the normal ranch routine had not yet begun. He rolled from his stomach onto his side and realized he was not in his own bed. A second later his foot encountered the soft calf of a woman's leg and his arm came in contact with soft female curves.
He shifted so he could view the woman with whom he was sharing the bed. Her long reddish hair was in disarray, obscuring her features, but he didn't need to see her eyes to know they were pale blue, that the eyelashes that fanned over her freckled cheek were dark and long, or that her pleasantly shaped lips were so very enticing.
As he smiled, she awoke and looked up at him with startled eyes. They were, indeed, pale blue. Her hands rose to cover her face as she moaned.
Breaking into a full grin, Scott pulled her hands away from her eyes. "What kind of greeting is that?"
She started to sit up, clutched at the coverlet in an attempt to hide herself from his inquisitive look, and cried, "Don't!"
"Don't what?" Scott tugged at the bedclothes and caught a glimpse of some lacy undergarments. "I saw a sight more than a bare shoulder last night, Melody."
"Don't be so darned chipper first thing in the morning." She sat upright in alarm, her unruly curls tumbling over her milk-white shoulders. "Oh my! The men will be up and about any time now!" She pushed at Scott's bare chest. "Get out of here, Scott! If even one of them sees you, it'll be all over the county before lunchtime."
He replied smoothly, "What difference does it make if we know it's not true? Remember how Goldsmith said, 'she never followed wicked ways, unless when she was sinning.'"
"Don't you throw that fancy poem at me again. You may very well find this amusing, but I'll never have a moment's peace if they think I'm a loose woman. Get out!"
Scott lay back and laced his fingers together under his head. "I'm not going anywhere, Mrs. Lancer. That has a nice ring to it, doesn't it? Mrs. Scott Lancer." He smiled with satisfaction as she struggled to remove a ring from her left hand and failed.
"Oh, for Lord's sake, Scott, do you really think that us getting hitched by some drunkard calling himself a judge in that one-horse town is legally binding?"
"Yes, Melody, I do. I aim to hold you to those promises we made, too. To love and to cherish, to obey, to refrain from brow-beating each other, weren't those some of them?" he teased.
"Well I am not about to obey anyone, much less you, so get the dadgum out of my bed! Besides, I didn't know what I was doing, due to you plying me with rye."
"Hey, hold on there. You're the one that ordered that bottle, missy. Besides, you know I don't need to get a gal tipsy."
"Huh, typical man." She flipped her hair back and glared at him. "Makes no never mind to me. The end result's the same; we did something to regret."
"I don't regret anything, Melody." Dismayed, Scott reached out for her, but she slid out from under the covers and escaped into her dressing room next door.
She called over her shoulder, "Start the stove fire in the kitchen on your way out. Shooting stars, I need some coffee!"
Scott sighed and reluctantly got out of bed. He slowly picked up his clothing that was strewn around the room. Its trail went all the way out into the hallway, reminding him of the haste they had been in to consummate their marriage. He grinned at the memory - they'd both been in an all-fired hurry.
In the light of day he was starting to have doubts about the credentials of the man who'd called himself 'the Judge.' Scott called out, "Melody?" He could hear her sloshing some water around and then banging a drawer in her dressing room. Even though she didn't reply, he continued, raising his voice to compensate for the door that stood between them, "I'm going to ride into Green River and drum up the Justice of the Peace, so we can do this right. Or maybe you'd like a real wedding? How about having it at Lancer? We can invite everyone in the county and put on such a great party they'll forgive us." When there was still no comment, Scott picked up his shirt and started to button it up. "If this is about my father. . . he'll be fine with us getting married once I tell him how much you mean to me, Melody."
Finally she stuck her head around the door to peer at him, her expression serious and somewhat worried. "Scott, we're a little late to be getting married the right way, aren't we? Your family isn't going to be pleased, and everyone from here to all the way up the valley will say it was too quick, that we had to get-."
Scott pushed the door open wide, took hold of her bare shoulders and pulled her into his arms. Despite her becoming stiff at his touch, he wrapped his arms lovingly around her. "Melody," he said adamantly, "if I'd taken six month to woo you like some callow youth, taken you out on picnics, and escorted you to the barn dance . . . would that make my love any more true than it is?"
She went soft in his arms and presented her face to him, inviting a kiss. "I'd have died if I'd a-waited six days, much less six months, and you know it, Scott Lancer."
Scott needed no further encouragement and swept her into a passionate kiss. When she eventually pulled back, with eyelids half-closed with lingering ardor, he asked breathlessly, "How did this all start, anyway?"
"As I recall," she said with a smile, "you brought some cattle over to my ranch."
Earlier . . .
"Archibald Stewart has been a friend to this family ever since the Lancers came to California back in '45," Murdoch said. "He and his wife took refuge here many a time back when Haney's raids were going on. For all of us, there was safety in numbers. Archibald's wife, God bless her, was best friend to your mother, Scott. When Catherine was close to having you, it was Mrs. Stewart who was the rock she clung to.
"Archie and I were out riding down the outlaws and only had a couple of old men to stay behind to care for the women. But Allison, she taught Catherine how to load the rifle and even taught her to shoot straight." Murdoch ran a hand over his mouth as he recalled his first wife and the troubled, dangerous times they had lived in. "This was a wild country back then."
Murdoch was lost in thought for a few minutes, then looked up at his two sons patiently waiting to hear the rest of his story. He continued, "Anyway, we owe that family a great deal, and even if there's only one of them left standing, we will pay our debt to that person. If Melody's her father's daughter, she'll do all right. So go and deliver the cattle to Stewart's daughter, as agreed."
"Well, it ain't like she's married, Scott." Johnny let out a piercing whistle and spurred after a straying calf before Scott could reply.
Pulling his bandana over his nose to keep the dust and the stench of the cattle out of his nostrils, Scott rode his cow pony alongside the small herd and wondered how he'd been talked into the task. He hated dealing with cattle in any form, and had generally stuck to the financial side of running the Lancer ranch for the past couple of years.
Johnny, on the other hand, had grown skilled with handling the cloven-hoofed beasts, and seemed to be genuinely interested in all aspects of the animals, from breeding to their health issues. He made a good trail boss and had been the man to drive the Lancer herd to the railhead for the past several seasons.
Johnny galloped back to Scott's side. He pulled his red kerchief down off his nose and revealed a grin. "You sure it's not the lady that's makin' you drag your heels, brother?"
"What is that supposed to mean?" asked Scott testily.
"I'm talking about Señora Melody Mendoza. You used to have your eye on her, didn't you? Back when you'd just got here and were still wet behind the ears. Back when she was plain Melody Stewart, just a nice Scottish girl."
Even though Scott knew that his brother was poking at him in the hope of eliciting some strong reaction, he replied calmly, "Fernando Mendoza was my friend, Johnny. I was happy that she agreed to be his bride. Happy for both of them."
"Yeah, but that was a few years ago and now she's back and wearing widow's weeds."
"We're just doing a neighbor a good turn. Besides, Murdoch and Archibald Stewart went way back, so this is the least we can do for his daughter."
"His widowed daughter," Johnny pointed out.
Murdoch had agreed that two hundred head of stock would be sold to the S-Bar-M, to replenish the neighboring ranch's depleted herd. Scott had been reluctant to allow them to carry a loan, especially now that a woman was running the ranch alone. "It remains to be seen if she can bring them to market on her own," he said to Johnny.
"All she has to do is keep them safe, fed and watered, then once roundup comes around, we'll bring her herd in with ours and get them all to market." Johnny added, "Murdoch lost a good friend in Mr. Stewart. When his sons died of the fever, he went downhill as fast as bullet on a dry day."
"The whole family's had one tragedy after another," Scott agreed. The S-Bar-M had been a substantial spread at one time, but with the sons pre-deceasing their father, there had been no family to help Stewart out. The man had aged quickly and in no time at all he'd let the place get run down. With no one responsible around to keep an eye on things, much of the Stewart herd had wandered off, or been taken by natural predators and rustlers. Just before Archie Stewart slipped off to meet his Maker, the daughter had returned to lay claim to a ranch that had once been a rival of Lancer, but was now in sad disarray.
"Where's Melody been the past few years?" Scott asked, despite himself. He'd avoided talking about her or even listening to any conversation where her name cropped up, mostly because of his feelings of remorse. He'd been sweet on her back when he had been relatively new to California. The day after he had escorted the redhead to a dance he'd heard that she had become engaged to a local man, Fernando Mendoza. Scott had been disappointed beyond measure at the time. Now it all seemed a long time ago and his feelings for her had dulled.
"Where's she been? I'm not sure, but from what I heard," Johnny said, "Fernando got fed up with taking orders from her old man and she went with him to Texas. I been told they hit hard times."
Johnny gave some instructions to the Lancer vaqueros as they neared the S-Bar-M then returned to ride alongside Scott. "You knew her husband."
"Melody's husband? Of course I knew Fernando," he said with a hint of bitterness in his voice. "What about him?"
"I don't know. Just . . .how he was one of my first friends when I first came here. We used to go to the cockfights at the Helldorado until the mayor closed it down. Then he took the new missus to Texas soon after they got hitched." He paused then said, "Heard a rumor at the time he had a big fight with Mr. Stewart over a horse, that's why he left." He pulled a sour face. "Old Archie and Murdoch were cut from the same cloth."
Scott could still picture Melody on her wedding day, an affair he'd been reluctant to attend, yet had anyway. That must have been four, no five years ago. She'd been as radiant as any bride in her homemade dress of white fabric, trimmed with the Stewart tartan ribbons. Her veil of old lace, handed down through the generations, covered her red-gold hair. The next time he'd laid eyes on her was a week ago at the funeral of her father. This time she'd been veiled in black, mourning the passing of the remains of her family.
Scott broke away from his thoughts of her and focused on the husband. "Fernando. . . we played poker a few times." The man had been handsome in a wild way, his over-long black hair and blue eyes eerily similar to those of Johnny. He'd thought at the time that Fernando Mendoza was the epitome of everything Johnny used to be: unruly, impetuous, reckless. But Johnny had settled into the life at Lancer.
Fernando had wanted to raise horses, only it had been rumored he had taken the low road and had stolen a stallion to use as breeding stock. Nothing had ever been proven, but it had been enough to turn Archibald Stewart against his son-in-law. "I really liked Fernando," Scott said. It was true; he'd found the volatile man charismatic, as had many other folks in the area. That was why his sudden departure with Melody, with no explanation, had been so disconcerting.
"Yeah, I liked him, too. I heard he died in Texas in bad company. You think that's true?"
Suddenly irritated for no good reason at his brother's questions, Scott retorted, "I wouldn't know. Let's get this herd delivered before the sun sets." He dug his heels into the side of his horse and veered behind the cattle, pushing them along at a faster pace.
The Stewart-Mendoza hacienda at the S-Bar-M was similar to the adobe building the Lancers called home, though not so grand. With arched windows, a lookout turret, balconies, and roof tiles the color of red clay, it had an elegant appearance. But any resemblance to Lancer stopped there. The shutters were hanging at angles and adobe bricks exposed and crumbling. The shrubs along the drive were overgrown, fences were broken, a couple of cows meandered the yard and the small barn had a large hole in the roof. Allover it had a dilapidated appearance.
While the Lancer vaqueros moved the small herd to a pasture with access to a pond that was overgrown with brush, Johnny and Scott rode up to the house. There was nobody in sight, but a scruffy herding dog came around the corner barking. Scott was kept busy keeping his horse under control and missed seeing the woman walk up behind them. Once the dog had stopped barking and his horse had settled down, Scott noticed that Johnny was sitting on Barranca with his hands in the air.
Scott's hand slipped across the butt of his gun, but Johnny warned, "Wait!" Scott was unsure if the direction was to stop him from pulling out his revolver, or if it was to prevent the person behind them from shooting. In a split second, Scott made the decision to do as his brother suggested, and he, too, held his hands in the air. He turned slowly and faced Mrs. Melody Stewart-Mendoza.
She stood with the growling dog at her side and aimed the business end of a shotgun at the two mounted men. Even though she was wielding the weapon with serious intent, Scott looked right past the weapon. All he could see was that the pretty girl he'd briefly known had become a striking-looking woman. Gone were the black mourning clothes that had covered her from head to toe just a few days earlier.
Scott looked her over, noting the freckles and sunburn across her nose and forehead. She was wearing a shabby bolero jacket over a white blouse and a riding skirt. Her down-at-the-heel boots had a set of Mexican spurs strapped on with what looked like baling wire. A flat-brimmed black hat sat firmly on her head and although her hair was pulled back tight, several long curls had escaped and caressed her cheeks.
The first words out of her mouth were harsh. "If you boys don't raise those hands a sight higher, you're gonna get your fingers shot clean off!"
Johnny suddenly laughed. He stuck his hands up even higher and said, "I aim to stay in one piece, ma'am."
"You have a strange notion of hospitality," Scott remarked grimly. "We're the Lancers."
She lowered the barrel of the gun then grudgingly motioned they could put their hands down. "Didn't recognize you at first," she said, looking hard at Scott's face. "My dad always told me to be ready for trouble. No offense meant."
Scott remembered quite a different young woman who he'd escorted to a dance a few years back. He replied sourly, "I suppose I'm expected to say 'no offense taken' about this point."
"I'll just go and get the vaqueros to settle the herd down over in that pasture." Johnny wheeled Barranca around and rode off without waiting for an okay.
"Well, cowboy, I guess that leaves us to talk business." Melody peered up at him with one hand shielding her eyes from the glare of the sun. "You got the bill of sale in a pocket of that fancy jacket you're wearing?"
It was all Scott could to do concentrate on the job at hand once he looked into Melody's eyes. She looked desperately out of place on the ranch with her red hair and pale skin, even if he knew she had inherited her father's strong character. When he looked at her he could visualize the country her family, as well as his, had emigrated from - Scotland.
She said mockingly, "You should shut your mouth lest a bumblebee flies in." She turned on her heel and walked past Scott to the front door. She called over her shoulder, "Best you come in out of the sun, Mr. Lancer. Don't mind the dog. He's been fed today."

Have you ever stumbled upon something greater than you were expecting? Perhaps you went to the symphony to hear some amazing musicians playing some the world’s greatest compositions, but in the middle of the performance you found yourself taken not only with the music but with the connection to amazing human genius, emotion, and being. Or maybe you went to the grocery looking for ice cream and found the new gallon sized container and just stood there in awe and wonder.
Jesus’ disciples have been looking, searching, waiting for the Messiah (John 1:41). John pointed Simon and Andrew to him. Phillip pointed him out to Nathaniel. They were all searching for someone great, pointing one another to Jesus for they were convinced that their search was ended. They had found what they were looking for.
Or did they? They were looking for something great, but could they have even known who Jesus was? Can anything good come from Nazareth? Come and see, for he might be all that you have been looking for, and more. Jesus promises that in him, “You will see even greater things than these.”
Pastor Lars Olson

Preface and Introduction: This is when we are Introduced to our main character, Fr. Greg Boyle. He is a modest man who works with delinquents who want to become better people. He has a business called "Homeboy Industries". Greg tries to get these people to get a chance at a job. He doesn't want them to be turned down because they are criminals, because he knows they have changed.

Rocky's story starts with Papa Smurf. Papa was surrendered at a local pet store and was supposed to have another bearded dfragon surrendered at the same time, but the second dragon escaped before they could get into the car. In May 2012, 5 months later, Rocky was found in a shed and brought in. They took care of him until I could afford to get him a tank and lighting, and I picked him up on 5/14/12. He couldn't walk straight and flipped himself over onto his back repeatedly when trying to walk. Gentle rango of motion exercies and stretching helped, and just letting him walk on his own loose on the floor helped. He had a painful muscle-spasm that made him go into uncontrolled head jerks and he would give up eating when that would happen. Coaxing him to eat on his own was an every day routine for the first 4 months, until the twitches started to go away. He was given liquid calcium, AcidolphiLiz and liquid B vitamins daily and as the twitches started to subside I discontinued the B vitamins and AcidolphiLiz and reduced the liquid calcium doses to twice a week. Now Rocky can walk with just a limp, and he has a very small amount of residual stiffness on the right side that seems to be slowly improving. Because of his exertion problems and gasping with exercise, Rocky will remain a life-long resident at Sweet Dragons.

Black Belt 2nd Dan Instructor Certification
I was born on January 6th, 2000 in Mountain View, California. I lived there for my early age, then moved to Ohio where I went to elementary school. I became interested in karate and began learning karate when I was about 6. Although, many times, I felt like quitting I followed through, and earned my black in 2012. That same year, I moved to Pennsylvania, where I wanted to continue taking karate lessons. I found Pro Martial Arts to be a school that suited me well, and it is where I currently am still learning as well as teaching.

Disclaimer: This all belongs to Joss and David Weber. I'm only borrowing Buffy and Honor and will return them untarnished. I promise.
Buffy sent another flashing attack at Angelus, just missing taking off his head. She was aware of the steadily growing portal at her back, but was more worried about stopping Angelus right at that moment. Dodging a return blow, she struck back again, this time striking deep into a shoulder. His sword-shoulder. Cursing, the vampire switched hands instantly, catching her follow up in a graceful riposte that caught Buffy's left arm, opening a deep cut there.
“I can smell your blood, Buffy. It smells... delicious.” Angelus sent her a malicious leer to accompany his comment.
Buffy refused to be distracted. She was the only thing standing between the world and its being sucked into hell. She swung yet another blow, trying to either disarm or decapitate the vampire. Buffy caught yet another glimpse of the portal. It was growing larger. Soon it would be too late to close it. Desperately, she drove Angelus back with a flurry of cuts, forcing him to maneuver over some loose stone. Just as she had earlier, he stumbled losing his sword. Unlike Angelus, Buffy didn't stop to taunt him, but took his head off just as he opened his mouth to speak. His face wore a look of astonishment right before he disintegrated into dust.
Buffy turned from the pile of dust that had been both her greatest enemy and the man she'd loved. She wouldn't allow herself to feel just yet. Not when the vortex was large enough to swallow a car and still growing larger. Ideally, it would have been best to have Angelus here to toss through the portal to close it. But unfortunately he was dusted and all Buffy had was a sword stained with his blood. Stooping, she gathered a handful of dust, just in case, then leaped into the portal.
Buffy had a moment of disorientation. Strange shapes flashed by her along with a sensation of heat. Then she seemed to be... shunted aside somehow. Buffy lost her grip on her sword, feeling it torn from her hands. She was tossed head over heels then out into the light. Falling at least fifteen feet, Buffy landed without her usual grace, squarely on her back. “Ooommph!” Buffy lay on her back adjusting to the lack of motion. Gingerly she opened her eyes. She was surrounded by a crowd! Leaping quickly to her feet, she stared at the figures surrounding her. They appeared human to her eyes. Their clothing was also familiar, not unlike something she might wear. But there the similarity ended. Skyscrapers surrounded her, dwarfing even those of New York City, rising high into the air. Strange shapes rode the air, appearing to be various kinds of flying cars. Buffy lowered her eyes again to her audience.
“Do any of you speak English?” Buffy figured no one would, but she had to at least ask.
“English? We can understand you.” The young man who replied had been staring at Buffy from the start. She'd noticed him before looking around at her surroundings. He seemed the only one who wanted to speak to her as she watched the other bystanders starting to melt away. Then she saw a look of fear appear on his face and he also turned and moved off swiftly. Turning to see what had frightened him, Buffy saw a group of black-uniformed men approaching her. I wonder who those guys are, she thought.An hour later...
Buffy ran, her bad leg slowing her down nearly to human speed. Groaning at the pain that spiked through her, she tried to speed up, but gave it up as a bad bet when her leg nearly collapsed from under her. Buffy thought she'd killed at least four out of that last group of men who tried to apprehend her. Unlike the first group, who Buffy had taken out handily, this one had shot first, rather than shouting out questions. Despite this, she'd taken down all but two of them when finally, one of their shots had hit Buffy in the legs. She didn't know what kind of weapons they were using. They weren't any kind of guns Buffy was familiar with. It had been like being smashed by a sledgehammer. When she'd gone down, another had leaned in and tried to shoot her in the face. Rolling away desperately, she'd somehow managed to avoid the worst of the shot, but it still had smashed at her face, leaving it bruised and bloody.
Buffy had managed to get back to her feet then and had hammered a blow straight into the man's head, shattering his skull like an egg. Before he could fall, she grabbed him and swung him around to take a blast from another of those weird guns. She'd then thrown the body at the one who'd fired, knocking him off his feet. A quick kick to his head had finished the last of her opponents. In hindsight, she should have grabbed one of the strange guns, but at the time hadn't been thinking clearly. Now it was too late based upon the noises her pursuers were making.
Cautiously, Buffy looked around a corner. No good. There was yet another squad there. And the shouts behind her were growing louder. There weren't any doors or windows for Buffy to slip into. Deciding she would have to take her chances with the next group, she ran forward. Buffy had only crossed half the distance to them when she was spotted. One man brought up his rifle and fired well before Buffy could get there. She tried to dodge his blast, but was too slow from her injury. The blast smashed into her like a runaway demon, knocking her off her feet. And I thought the pistols were bad, Buffy thought. She was trying to get to her feet when yet another blow struck her, flipping her head over heels, smashing flesh and rupturing blood vessels. Groggily, she managed to struggle to her hands and knees, but was too hurt to get any further.
“What's the bitch made of? Two sonic disrupter blasts on top of what she's already taken? Someone put her down, now! Wait! Use the stunners! They'll want her alive.” The strong voice barely registered with Buffy. She'd managed to get to her feet, although she was staggering like a drunk. Cold faces surrounded her. Then multiple blasts hit her simultaneously, and she knew no more.

King Tiger 332 at The Patton Museum
Since I was a young boy I have always had a passion for stories about World War 2. The first time I saw a photo of a German Tiger tank, I knew I was hooked. I still can't explain it, but the style and look of German armor really grabbed me and has never let go in all these years.
I have been an artist all my life. Attending a professional art school and making a living as a graphic designer and art director for over 30 years. During that time I have been constantly developing my fine art skills of painting and drawing. I have created many paintings of German planes, U-boats and my beloved tanks.

On Monday, Fox Sports released an interview between Pierre-Paul and Fox NFL Sunday’s Michael Strahan in which Pierre-Paul explained what happened on the night of the incident and in the days following.
On Monday, Fox Sports released an interview between New York Giants defensive end Jason Pierre-Paul and Fox’s Michael Strahan in which Pierre-Paul explained the details of the July 4 fireworks accident that mangled his right hand.
Pierre-Paul’s index finger was amputated, and portions of his thumb and index fingers were also removed in surgeries following the incident. His career was considered at risk in the months that followed, but the 26-year-old has returned to play in six games for the Giants this season.
Pierre-Paul told Strahan that he had been throwing fireworks all night on the Fourth, but one firework exploded in his hand before he had the chance to throw it.
“The one I was holding. I thought it was a different one, but it wasn’t. And it just went off in my hand, right away,” he said.
Pierre-Paul also explained that the rumors that he would not allow Giants staff to see him after he was first admitted to the hospital were false. He claims that the team came to see him at the original hospital he was taken to, but that he had been transferred before they arrived. Pierre-Paul said he was so heavily sedated that he did not know the team was there.
Despite the injury, Pierre-Paul said that he has not felt discouraged from playing football. In the games that he has played this season, Pierre-Paul has recorded 13 tackles and one sack.
The Giants (6–8) currently sit the third in the NFC East and still have a chance to win the division.

'Clash of the Corps' Deleted Scene: Clark Should Have an S on His Chest
"Clark's an amazing person, everything he does he puts one hundred percent of his heart into it. Extremely talented, but very humble as well and knows that his role is to lead others as horn sergeant— not just lead himself. And he's great at making the people around him better just because of what he does and how he does it," says brass captain, John Meehan.
Not only is he a great leader, but he also tries his best to read the vibes of the ensemble and address his team members as friends. Watch as Clark gives a few good words of advice and helps first year member, Zachary Spiess, deal with his meniscus injury.
Check out our Clash of the Corps show page for full episodes, exclusives, deleted scenes & more!

Before my husband and I got together, I had been negative for any STDs. Then we got together and got pregnant and got married. I know that he had been with a lot of women before me, but I never had him tested. After I had my daughter, I was tested because it's procedure, and I found out that I had HPV (Human Papilloma Virus). This is embarressing to talk to with anyone and my husband does not want to talk about it. What have you experienced having this? I don't know how it's going to affect me.
Asked by Anonymous at 5:18 PM on Jun. 24, 2008 in Health
Answer by vbruno at 6:22 PM on Jun. 24, 2008
Answer by Anonymous at 5:56 PM on Jun. 24, 2008
Answer by Anonymous at 6:32 PM on Jun. 24, 2008
Next question overall
How can I get over being jealous of my husband and his friends?

On the afternoon of May 3, Glenn Dobson looked out on his porch and saw pure chaos.
His neighbours were cramming as much of their stuff into trucks and cars, only to spend hours on the highway while wondering if they still had a home. A police officer was telling everyone to leave as acrid, black smoke blocked the sky. His wife had already left to join their son in Oklahoma. Dobson’s thoughts?
“They can take their evacuation order and stick it up their back side,” he said to himself. “Fort McMurray has been my home for 41 years. I’m not going anywhere. I have to protect it.”
So Dobson, who would celebrate his 53rd birthday hiding from the police, stayed.
As thousands of Fort McMurray’s residents scattered across the country, fleeing a fire that destroyed as many as 2,400 buildings, Dobson stayed in his Glenoble Crescent mobile home in Gregoire.
At first, family and friends called him crazy and stubborn, pleading with him to leave. His wife was furious.
But he argued he had everything he needed: a freezer packed with moose meat, dozens of eggs, some milk, a few gallons of water, two cases of beer and gasoline for his generator. Even though the flames were a few blocks away, he argued they would not jump into the park.
Besides, he said, he had responsibilities. If the park caught on fire, he would battle the flames with his power washer. And if he ran into any looters, "they would have prayed for Saudi Arabian justice." Fortunately, neither of those scenarios happened.
“I am not a survivalist whack job. I am a guy who is self-sufficient, knows his way around the bush and is always prepared,” he said. “There was only one day when the air made my eyes sting. I was able to handle the smoke.”
Even when the Air Quality Health Index reached a 51 out of a possible 10, he insists the air was fine in his neighbourhood. He never even closed his window.
For the first four days following the evacuation, he dodged police patrols “sneakier than an Alberta rat,” before telling the Red Cross he was in the city. He wanted them to tell police he was tired of hiding and wanted to walk his dog.
Almost immediately, officers arrived and demanded he leave. When they started calling him, he took the phone off the hook.
It became a matter of whose nerve would break first, and eventually the police relented on the condition Dobson not drive. The roads needed to be clear for emergency and maintenance vehicles. Dobson never left Gregoire, and workers in the area got used to his presence.
“I thought for sure they would try to goon squad me out of here,” he said. “But they were kind. They dropped off a case of Gatorade, some chocolate and french bread that got delivered to the REOC place. One of them actually arrested me in the 1980s at the Oil Can. I liked to drink back then.”
Police have not released any numbers, but in the days following the evacuation, police found “a few stragglers,” RCMP spokesperson Cpl. George Cameron said last month. Most of them left in their own vehicles or buses. Most of them did not have the means to leave, although some were stubborn like Dobson.
“It’s still incredibly dangerous for anyone to stay in that environment,” he said. “Even if they’re not doing anything wrong, if they get hurt or in trouble, we have to do what we can to stop another tragedy from unfolding.”
But Dobson is proud he outlasted those people.
Soon, the friends and family members calling him crazy relented as well. Soon, he was getting calls and texts asking him to check on their homes and pets. Others said he could take any food he wanted. He only took two rolls of toilet paper and some gasoline from a neighbour’s boat. He even used his power washer to soak homes, just in case any embers landed in the park.
"I was going to make damn sure the park would remain safe," he said. "I couldn't give a god damn what everyone else was dong. I wasn't leaving."
Friday, June 3, 2016/Fort McMurray Today

Alex Pine Books & Biography
Alex Pine was born and raised on a council estate in South London and left school at sixteen. Before long, he embarked on a career in journalism, which took him all over the world – many of the stories he covered were crime-related. Among his favourite hobbies are hiking and water-based activities, so he and his family have spent lots of holidays in the Lake District. He now lives with his wife on a marina close to the New Forest on the South Coast – providing him with the best of both worlds! This is the fourth book in the bestselling DI James Walker series.

It’s been a while, but I’m back writing, and it feels nice. This is part of a larger project but why not post it, huh?.
The scythe wasn’t as heavy as Rita had assumed and she walked with the steam-bent snaith across her shoulder comfortably, the blade pointed down behind her back. She had kicked off her heels on the walk to the equipment shed and she walked on the soft, cool grass. The dampness of the night was soothing on her bare feet, though she consciously made sure that the comfort didn’t douse her indignation. She inhaled deeply though her nose.
The night was silent, except for her soft foot falls, and bright. Their summer home was on top of a small nap, dark, except for a few soft lights in the dining room. The light glinted off the two cars in the drive. The house was some kind of modern Tudor-inspired monstrosity. Two years ago she would have called in new-money bullshit.
Neil was silhouetted in one window. Watching her.
The tuberoses evening bloom smelled sweet and rich. She padded up the driveway and then veered toward the overly-manicured cottage garden Neil had insisted on. More bullshit, she thought.
Without braking her easy stride, she readied the scythe with a shrug and swung it in a perfect arc, just like her aunt and uncle had taught her in Portugal. The tuberoses were the first to go, she struck them in the middle of the flowers, white pedals fluttered in the moonlight. She grunted with effort and cast another harvesting swing and she took the plant near the ground.
She continued. The blooms of the Purple Splendour looked almost black as they tumbled onto the grass. Rita twisted from the hip again with the scythe, her black dress clung to her with sweat. More rhododendrons were felled. They had joked about how gristly the fistful of bonemeal the woman at the garden centre has suggested sounded last year.
Still holding the nib, she rested the scythe blade on the ground and looked at her work. The garden was done now, except for the three young Japanese maples.
She headed toward the car in the driveway. Looking up at Neil in the window, she threw the scythe onto the pavement. The blade’s clang splashed violently. She saw him take off his glasses and pinch the bridge of his nose. Her clutch was on top of the Volkswagen where she had left it, she picked it up and took out her keys and got in the car.
Rita swerved around the scythe in the driveway as she sped down the long driveway.
Steadying the wheel with her knee for a moment, she pulled her thick black curls into a ponytail high on her head. She caught a glimpse of the maples in the driver-side mirror. She remembered a hatchet in the equipment shed, and some salt. But Rita figured she had made her point.
Neil hadn’t bothered cleaning up the razed garden that morning. He just had to leave and maybe get something to eat. When the neighbours asked, he’d just blame it on kids from town. They trashed a park gazebo, so this would fit their M.O., and perhaps he could spin it as magnanimous that he wasn’t pursuing charges. It really didn’t matter to him. He’d pay the gardener and let them take care of it. Or maybe the gardener would take care of it and then he’d pay them. He wasn’t sure, but however it worked, it would happen.
He pulled his car into the gravel lot in front of the diner. It wasn’t a fancy place, but it was on the way to the summer home and he knew it well enough. He had told Rita that he had come here for years with his father before he had passed. It wasn’t true, exactly. They had been by it. But it did get Rita to agree to stop in so often.
The air smelled crisp, with a hint of barnyard from miles away.
He went in and sat down. The vinyl booth-seat creaked a little, but it wasn’t cracked anywhere. The eggs weren’t over-medium, they were still over-easy. He decided he’d do the waiter and just eat the eggs as he received them. He added a little hot sauce.
The toast was delicious. And the coffee.
He took his time with his meal once the eggs were finished; cold eggs were inedible. Neil looked around the dinner, the red Formica tables were neat, the unoccupied chairs, covered in thick upholstery with a brown paisley pattern (was it paisley? Something like that.) were tidily tucked in. Some diners ate quietly, but there was a murmur of conversation here and there. The ceiling fan wobbled. It all wasn’t un-charming.
One of his fellow patrons made eye-contact and quickly, but without urgency, looked away. Her lipstick had pressed off onto her coffee cup and water glass. She pressed her fingers into her temple and read a paperback on the table. She had large eyes, but her glasses and bangs hid much of her face. But clearly, she was attractive. Distractingly so. Like the audience of a film was supposed to pay special attention to her. Neil resented the implication and decided he would just mind his own business.
He sipped his coffee.
“Reuben, dressing on the side?”
Neil looked at his watch, it was 11:44, and then at the sandwich proffered by the waiter. He agreed that it was indeed a Reuben with the dressing on the side.
“Yes,” he said with a nod.
The waiter placed it down. Neil moved his plates around on the table. It was the bread was crispy and buttery, he assumed they fried it on the griddle-top for a minute. The sauerkraut was bright and funky. He dipped it in the Russian dressing which helped the slightly dry meat. It was better than the breakfast he had just eaten. He mostly ignored the fries. A few bites in the waiter returned.
“Sir,” the word was drawn out, “did you order that Reuben?” The tone implied the question was rote.
“The one with the dressing on the side?”
“This one that I’m eating?”
“Well, yes,” the waiter’s indignation was crumbling into confusion. Neil took a small bite. “No, I did not.”
The waiter blinked. “Then why are you eating it?”
“It looked good.”
“But you didn’t order it.”
“I thought you were offering it to me,” he said with a slight shrug.
“Why would I do that?” the waiter placed their hand on their chest. The woman across the diner was watching and listening, and Neil noticed. He worried all of a sudden that this was her sandwich. He almost blushed.
“I assure you, couldn’t possibly know,” Neil finished the piece he was holding. “But I’m going to pay for it.”
“But it’s still not yours, you can’t just eat it,” the waiter shifted their weight forward.
“But I am eating it,” he picked his napkin off his lap and wiped his fingers. “And of course I’m going to pay for it.” He began to stand and the waiter shifted their weight.
“No no no,” Neil cut him off. “We’ve now moved on to things that aren’t my problem.” He took out his wallet. “So here’s what is going to happen. I’ll pay for this one, then your people in the back will prepare another Reuben and I’ll pay for that too.”
The woman watched, her fingers still on her temples.
The entire diner had watched him leave. In his car, Neil felt too full. He patted his stomach and looked in the mirror.

Akron pitcher Chris Bassitt, a Genoa graduate, was drafted with the 501st overall pick in the 16th round by the Chicago White Sox on June 7. He will make his professional debut with the Bristol (Va.) Sox either today or tomorrow. He was second all-time at Akron in saves and had a career ERA of 2.29.
FOUR SEAM IMAGES/MIKE JANES Enlarge
As soon as he heard the shriek of excitement from his younger brother in the next room, pitcher Chris Bassitt knew he was going to be paid for playing a sport he loves.
Bassitt, a Genoa High School graduate, was selected in the 16th round of the Major League Baseball draft by the Chicago White Sox on June 7.
"My first real job is playing baseball, which is ridiculous," he said. "I never would have guessed this would happen when I was younger."
Bassitt, a native of Curtice, recently wrapped up his junior season at the University of Akron. He served as the Zips' closing pitcher and earned All-Mid-American Conference second team.
Major league scouts took notice of Bassitt after he held opposing batters to a .183 batting average and posted an earned run average of 1.42.
Twenty seven of the 30 major league teams contacted Bassitt.
But it was Chris's brother Matt who was glued to the computer screen during the three days of the MLB draft.
"I was playing video games and he was on the computer," Bassitt said. "They put up picks about every 15 seconds. When he saw my name, he screamed. I was all smiles and my brother was jumping around like he was drafted. It was one of the top days of my life."
Featuring a slider, change up, and a fastball that clocks in between 90 to 95 miles per hour, he has built up a solid repertoire. At 6-foot-5 and 205 pounds, he also possesses intimidating size and unshakeable confidence.
Yet, Bassitt admitted that he expected to be selected before the 16th round rolled around. He was the 501st overall pick.
"But we were expecting something close to that range," Bassitt said. "I got the call and they asked me if I was ready to play pro baseball and obviously my answer was 'Yes!' immediately."
Chris's father John said he was following the draft online by an audio feed at the Bassitt home.
"I was excited as a father and proud of Chris," John Bassitt said. "I can't put it into words. It still hasn't sunk in."
Chris Bassitt said he didn't watch the draft as it was going on for two reasons.
"One was to avoid disappointment," he said. "I felt if I watched every round, I would have gone insane. It was best to go fishing or play basketball. I got out to keep my mind busy. It worked out for the best. I didn't lose my mind."
So those duties fell to his dad and brother Matt, who also was a pitcher for Genoa and was the starting quarterback for the Comet football team.
"I heard his name called," John Bassitt said.
"I was nervous and then excited for Chris. It was a day he was looking forward to, but I also was happy it was over."
Chris Bassitt said after the year he had this spring, he felt good that he would be drafted. He appeared in 28 games out of the bullpen and converted seven saves in seven opportunities. In 38 innings, he struck out 48.
"But it was hectic," he said. "It was a huge sigh of relief."
At Genoa, Chris Bassitt earned All-Suburban Lakes League first-team honors in both baseball and basketball as a senior.
The baseball team posted an overall record of 48-6 during junior and senior seasons and won back-to-back Suburban Lakes League titles.
He had a 1.56 ERA as a senior, striking out 65 batters in 58 innings.
A Zip with some zip
In his career at Akron, Bassitt tallied 14 saves, which is second highest on the Zips' career saves list. He struck out 84 batters in 70⅔ innings. His career ERA was 2.29. His 28 appearances for the Zips led the MAC this season.
John Bassitt said he is most excited that his son will now receive top-notch coaching. He said Chris already has the knack of keeping his composure as a closer.
"He has the ability to not get too high or low after a game. But he is intense on the field," John Bassitt said.
The magazine Baseball America said in its scouting report of Chris Bassitt that he "lives off his 90-93 mph [fast ball], which he delivers from a low-three-quarters arm angle. His second pitch is a slider, which grades as an average pitch at times."
Chris Bassitt is second all-time among Akron pitchers with 14 career saves for the Zips.
Prior to the draft, he conducted on-site workouts for three major league teams. He worked out in Atlanta for the Dodgers in late May, at Cincinnati for the Reds on June 1, and in Tampa for the Yankees on June 4.
"I did well," he said. "But it is hard to judge someone on a bullpen session."
He said he recalled talking briefly to a Chicago representative.
"We were definitely surprised about it being the White Sox," Bassitt said. "We had nine or 10 teams pinned down that had showed a lot of interest. The White Sox were not one of those teams.
"But that's the nature of the beast of the draft. No one knows what will happen. It's so, so random."
Two days after the draft, a White Sox official stood in the Bassitt home.
"The rep from the White Sox showed up, got Chris's signature, they shook hands, and he said, 'Welcome to the White Sox and here's your plane ticket to Virginia,'" John Bassitt said.
Poised for pro debut
Chris said he was told to immediately report to the White Sox's rookie club in Bristol, Va. The Bristol Sox play in the Appalachian League and the team is coached by Pete Rose, Jr., the son of the baseball legend.
Bassitt is expected to make his professional debut either Thursday or Friday.
He said the teams at that level do not have a definitive closer. He was told that he would not start, but would pitch out of the bullpen.
"It's more about getting innings and getting evaluated," Bassitt said.
He said White Sox officials told him it's possible he may skip levels as he moves up, but he also said they like to develop their players slowly.
"I could end up in AAA or even the major leagues this year," Bassitt said. "I know the percentages of that happening are very slim. But that would be the dream."
John Bassitt said part of the contract with the White Sox includes money that has been set aside so that Chris can complete his college education.
"So far he has excelled in each level he has gone to," John Bassitt said. "I have my fingers crossed that it continues."
Chris Bassitt said it was a difficult decision to give up his senior year at Akron.
"The day you sign a pro contract and you start getting paid, you lose all your eligibility," he said. "But I knew right when I got the call I was done [with college]. I talked to my parents and we agreed it was time to move on.
"Not too many people get this break and you have to chase it."
Contact Mark Monroe at: firstname.lastname@example.org or 419-724-6354.
Guidelines: Please keep your comments smart and civil. Don't attack other readers personally, and keep your language decent. Comments that violate these standards, or our privacy statement or visitor's agreement, are subject to being removed and commenters are subject to being banned. To post comments, you must be a registered user on toledoblade.com. To find out more, please visit the FAQ.

A house has been destroyed by fire in Brisbane's bayside.
Seven fire crews took almost an hour to control the fire which took hold of a timber structure with a tin roof about 7.30am on Friday in Birkdale.
The fire was under control by 8.20am but the building was completely destroyed.
No one was home at the time of the fire, which is being treated by police as suspicious.
Anyone with information is urged to contact Crime Stoppers on 1800 333 000.

Winger Ben Jones-Bishop scored three of the Rhinos' seven tries, with Zak Hardaker, Jamie Jones-Buchanan, Weller Hauraki and Carl Ablett also crossing, and skipper Kevin Sinfield kicked eight goals from as many attempts as they secured a crucial victory to lift themselves back into the top eight of Stobart Super League.
McDermott conceded the champions are still well below their best after they conceded tries to Ben Cockayne, Tim Smith, Dean Collis, Ali Lauitiiti, Kyle Trout, Oliver Wilkes and Peter Fox, but was pleased they beat a Wakefield side who had won their last three games. He said: "They are a team who have got momentum and they clearly came here to play."
The Rhinos had 10 players backing up for England duty 48 hours earlier, and McDermott added: "I thought we looked nervous and edgy. We were anxious in the early stages and conceded some soft tries. We had one structured attacking set in the whole of the first half which is unusual.
"We had to get ourselves off the canvas and we did that. It was always going to be a tough game, given that we had 10 players backing up. It doesn't fix everything but it was a very encouraging win."
Leeds raced into a 12-0 lead inside 10 minutes but both tries, from Jones-Bishop and full-back Zak Hardaker, were long-range efforts against the run of play, and Wakefield coach Richard Agar was delighted with the brand of football produced by his side.
"To score 40 points at Headingley and not get the win is a tough one for us to take," he said. "We played some very positive stuff with the ball. We were very much the bearer of gifts and those gifts converted into 18 points. They didn't have to work at all for those 18 points.
"We made some uncharacteristic errors but I thought our offence was outstanding."
With both sides scoring seven tries, the difference in the end was a penalty kicked by Sinfield on 65 minutes which put the home side two scores in front. The penalty was awarded for dissent after the Wildcats complained about a decision to award a scrum feed to the Rhinos, which Agar picked out as the turning point in the match.
"It was a dead-set joke," he said. "It was a terrible decision by the touchjudge."

I'm not really sure what the side effects are relative to pregnancy. To be honest, when I started taking it, I honestly didn't have much concern for even what the side-effects might have been. Then again, I am male, 27 years old now, and didn't have to worry about trying to get pregnant.
The only side-effect that I remember my physician saying that had commonly occurred was a slight tinting of the skin. He also said that it varies widely in some patients. He recounted one patient who's complexion turned a little orange-ish. I don't want to scare you, I think that was an extreme case, and I had no such side effect what so ever. In fact, I had no side effects that I could specifically point to as being a result of taking the drug.
However, I did have to undergo periodic blood tests while on the drug to ensure that cell counts were remaining normal. And at one point I did have some concern that I was experiencing a shortness of breath, possibly as a result of the drug. However, I underwent an EKG and blood test and everything remained normal. It's also highly possible that I was just really out of shape and had been breathing the air in Manhattan too long. A couple of times I experienced nose bleeds when on the drug; I also had a colds at the time, but think the drug might have made me a little more succesbtible to nose bleeds.
In short, for me, and after my experience with the condition, the benefits of the drug far outweighed any risks. My quality of life was pretty bad without lips. As I mentioned in a previous note, I once ate zuchini and yams only (using only plastic utensils) for two weeks just to manage exactly what I was putting in my body and avoid all contact of anything with my lips. At the end of the two weeks I looked a little like Christian Bale from his new movie role. Then, after starving for two weeks my lips peeled and I went straight to Wendy's and got the biggest burger they had (I think it had three of four all beef patties on it; it might as well have been Peter Luger's).
It's definitely not a weak drug, but though it sounds a little irresponsible and perhaps careless I had little regard for what the side effects were at the time. I guess if you're willing to let someone stick a needle in your lips (as I had multiple times, and had actually asked multiple physicians to do), or have a biopsy on your lips, you'll pretty much try anything. In hindsight, having experienced the results, there probably would've been even fewer side effects that would've detered me from taking it (even if there was 100% likelihood of experiencing the side effects).
Not sure where you are located, but I also saw a very good specialist (who originally diagnosed me) in Cincinnati. I also saw some good specialists in NYC and, of course, the best in Baltimore. You want to be treated by a dual Dental and Derm specialist in my opinion.

William was born in 1827, the son of unknown parents. The place is not known.
He died in 1872. The place is not known.
His wife was Novaline "Novie" Crunk. They were married, but the date and place have not been found. They had no known children.

About Denny Dent
Denny Dent (April 5, 1948 – March 29, 2004) was an American seed painter who was known for his frenetic performances as he painted large portraits of celebrities.
Dent was born in Oakland, California to a family of artists and graduated from Oakland High School. "My grandfather was ambidextrous," he says, giving a nod to the gene pool for his two-fisted talents, "a cabinetmaker and an artist. My mother was a painter and always told me I was an artist. That's the heritage of the family." Though no one's been able to verify it, Dent's grandfather insisted they are direct descendants of Titian, the Renaissance Italian master. He credited his mother and speed painter D. Westry with influencing his art. His style emerged after he painted a spontaneous portrait of John Lennon at a 1980 vigil.
A Denny Dent performance, which he referred to as a "Two-Fisted Art Attack," consisted of him rapidly painting on a 6-foot-tall black canvas with multiple brushes in both hands, as well as painting with his bare hands, to a musical accompaniment. Over the course of just a few pop/rock songs, he would complete a portrait. His subjects were most often musicians, but also included other entertainers, sports figures, and political leaders. One of his most famous performances was at the Woodstock 94' concert.
Dent could also paint with his feet, but seldom did so in public. What he called his "dance on canvas" featured maniacal, mesmerizing movement, but he regarded the sermons he shouted over the music while he painted as his main mission. He said he turned down mention in Guinness World Records as the world's fastest artist because he feared the distinction might detract from his inspirational message about the saving graces of art.
His hybrid art form of painting, music and choreography rang the cash register to the tune of $25,000 a performance at rock concerts, corporate get-togethers and other events. Sometimes Mr. Dent referred to himself as an ''artrepreneur.'' At other times he called himself ''a kid playing in mud.''

Personalized Cuff Links
Print isn't good
I bought these for gifts for my groomsmen thinking they would be great for the wedding and for after the wedding. They look great on the picture but when I received them the engraving was never center on any of the cuff links. I called the company and they replaced them with no hassle but the ones I received had the same issue. Now I have 3 weeks to my wedding and no gift for my groomsmen because it took forever to receive them in the first place and then the second time it took even longer to receive them. I am very unsatisfied with this product.
April 28, 2013
Great product for the price!
My husband had bought a few suits recently and wanted some cuff links to go with them. A lot of places sell them and they are usually expensive (including monogramming them). I noticed they had some available here with free monogramming but I was hesitant about ordering them due to the low price they offered. I went ahead and ordered them anyway because I knew I would be able to return them if i didn't like them. They came very quickly. Upon opening the box they came in, I noticed one of the pair was scratched up a bit. It looked like it happened during the monogramming. The other one looked gorgeous! I called them and they apologized and said they would ship out a new pair immediately at no charge. They told me to keep the scratched one and not to worry about shipping it back. They came a week later and they were beautiful! I will continue to purchase items through Oriental Trading and praise their customer service!
December 13, 2012
For the price these are EXCELLENT cufflinks!!!
May 9, 2012
I was very pleased with this item
I purchased this item for my father inlaw and my soloist in my May 2012 wedding. This item was beyond my expectations, very nice gift
April 13, 2012

Caught, Seduced, Loved.
Jax was dead inside, literally. No remorse, no sadness, and defiantly no love. After his druggy mom gave him up at the age of three, he's been living the life of a hired gun. You pay, he kills, it was just that simple. That was until he stumbled upon him.
Grayson is abused, unwanted. Almost no part of his body has been spared from the physical torture his father inflicted on him, leaving him without a shred of trust for anyone.
So what happens when Jax decides he wants the one person who brings warmth into his cold soul.

Kelly Dodd is single and ready to mingle since her split from Michael Dodd. And dating is definitely on the brain for this SoCal mom, as we're seeing in the new season of The Real Housewives of Orange County, which kicked off this week. "What can I say? Divorce looks good on me!" Kelly also shared in her Bravotv.com blog following the Season 13 premiere. "Since I began going through my divorce, I have felt truly liberated and like a much happier, more positive version of myself."
However, Vicki Gunvalson isn't quite sure Kelly is as over her ex as she's leading folks to believe (teased a bit in the clip above) since Vicki says she found it a lot easier to emotionally move on from Donn Gunvalson following their split.
"I was kinda like, 'You divorced your husband, and you didn't want him, so why do you have any emotions?'" Vicki shared with TooFab recently. "It made me realize that maybe she's still in love with him. I didn't have those emotions when I divorced Donn. When Donn started dating people I knew, I had zero emotions. I was like, I want the best for him. If he wants to date a friend of mine, go for it. I didn't feel like, 'Oh, because I divorced you, you can't be with anybody else.' So it made me really realize that I think Kelly's got stronger feelings for Michael than she wants to really say."
Kelly and Michael confirmed their split last September and it was finalized in February. Together they have a daughter, Jolie. Kelly shared an update on how she's doing in the wake of their split in her cast blog, writing, "She's coping really well with everything that's gone on, and I couldn't be more proud of her maturity. We raised a good kid!"
Below, Kelly reflects more on what her marriage to Michael was like.

Have you had work done by Sh&S Construction And Remodeling? Let everyone know about your experience by leaving a review!Leave review
Bath Planet Toledo did exactly what they said they would do in the time they said they would do it. I am really happy with it. It looks great.
I am really really satisfied!
They did a good job, they really did.
We are very pleased with what they've done and the way they did it.
Learn why professional home builders and home improvement contractors join our community of quality.Get started

1 Had you been to Los Angeles before you competed in the 1984 Olympics?
No, I had never been to the States before. So there was a real sense of excitement, not just because it was my first Olympics. To be able to go to LA, to see Hollywood and soak up all the razzmatazz, and to travel up to San Francisco for a few days, as I did with my parents after I had finished racing, was incredible for a 22-year-old.
2 Did the Iron Curtain boycott affect the rowing events?
Definitely. East Germany, who were our closest rivals in the coxed fours, and the Soviet Union were both very strong rowing nations. Their absence devastated the competition.
3 Did that take the gloss off your own gold medal?
I'm not sure. We had beaten the German boat at the Lucerne Regatta, the last major competition before the Games, with a world-record time. So we felt we were the best at the time. On the other hand, Harald Jahrling would have been going for his third gold medal, if he had been allowed to take part. Having come to know Harald and having worked under an East German coach [Jurgen Grobler] for 10 years, I know the meticulous preparation and determination that their team would have brought. It would have been a great race.
4 What do you think of sporting boycotts?
They are easy tools for governments to grab the headlines. After all, it doesn't cost them anything not to send a team. America could have brought the Soviet Union to its knees in 1980 by refusing to sell it grain, but that would have affected their own revenue. They made their point by boycotting the Moscow Games. I nearly went to Moscow as an 18-year-old, but a lot of sponsors pulled out, which meant we could only send a slimmed-down squad. Maggie [Thatcher], of course, didn't want us to go at all.
5 Didn't you meet your wife, Ann, in LA?
She was rowing for the women's team and was dating one of the guys in my crew. I should add that we didn't get together until a few years later. Our house is called Casitas, after the lake that was the venue.
6 How would you have reacted if someone had told you then you would row at Sydney in 2000?
I would have laughed. What's interesting is how things could have turned out different. What if Harald Jahrling had won his third gold in LA and I hadn't? I don't blame Harald for being bitter about what happened.
7 Did you see much of the other British athletes in LA?
Daley Thompson used the same training complex as us, in San Diego. Due to the boycotts in 1980 and 1984, he, Seb Coe and Steve Ovett were real stars, because they were the only major defending track-and-field gold medallists. As a rower I was in a lucky position, because all the competition took place in the first week, leaving me to go off and watch the finals of the athletics in the second.
8 How has British rowing improved since then?
Our victory in the coxed fours was the first British rowing gold since 1948, but we have never recaptured that bygone era when we won virtually everything on the water. British rowing's funding is dependent on it winning three medals in Beijing next year, one of which should be a gold. We won seven in the recent world championships, so we are doing OK.
9 Can London 2012 be as much fun as the Games at which you competed?
It depends on expectations. I know people who competed at or went to Barcelona as spectators in 1992 and thought those Games were really good. That was because expectations were quite low. I obviously have fond memories of Los Angeles and Sydney because they were my first and last Olympics. The big disappointment was Atlanta in 1996.
10 How's the golf?
I'm playing in the Dunhill Links next week, so I'll find out then. Mark Nicholas and I are playing Ian Botham and Ronan Keating on Monday for a bit of money before the competition proper starts. I played last year and beat Matthew Pinsent, as usual. That's what really counts.
· Steve Redgrave was born in 1962 and won a record five consecutive Olympic golds. He retired in 2000 and now runs his Steve Redgrave Trust charity.

The NBA trails only baseball when it comes to dominant families throughout the history of the sport. More often than not, when a professional athlete has a child, that child will inherit some of the athleticism showcased by the parents. So with this understanding, it is no wonder why so many retired basketball players have children now in the league. Not only does the child of an NBA player inherit the genes of their parents, but they also get to grow up in the smartest basketball environment there is; inside an NBA organization. With these two advantages, NBA offsprings are more likely to be the next generation of NBA talent.
With those stated advantages come some perceived disadvantages. There is the simple fact that until you become as good as your rival family member, you will always be questioned or doubted. Also, you will be graded against your sibling, or parent as you go through your career. Although it may be easier for a child cultivated in an NBA environment to make it into the league, it is hard to live up to the looming shadows cast by family members.
It is rare that the child of an all-time great goes on to become an all-time great as well. Today we will reveal the top 15 NBA players who failed to live up to their family legacy and fell short of being the alpha male in the family.
15 Glen Rice Jr.
Glen Rice Jr. had a tough challenge ahead of him the day he was born with his father's name. Papa Rice was one of the best shooters of his time while in the NBA, as well as being one of the greatest college players to ever shoot a basketball; Rice Sr. was the 1989 College Player of the Year, and NCAA National Champion.
Once Sr. got into the NBA he became an All-Star caliber player during his years with the Miami Heat and Charlotte Hornets. In 2000, Sr. helped lead the Los Angeles Lakers to an NBA Championship, and his legacy was cemented. About a decade later Rice Jr. began his career in 2012 as a second round selection by the Philadelphia 76ers. Rice Jr. spent parts of two seasons with the Washington Wizards before being sent to the D-League in 2015. Glen Jr. is still toiling in the D-League, looking for his shot on an NBA roster, and the potential to chase down a little bit of pops' legacy.
14 Glenn Robinson III
Another player cursed with the same name of a past legend, Glenn Robinson III was stuck being the pup of "The Big Dog" Glenn Robinson. Daddy Robinson was a beast during his college days. As a junior at Purdue, he unanimously won the choice for NCAA Player of the Year. That season he led the Boilermakers to the Elite 8, averaging 30 points, and 11 rebounds per game. The elder Robinson set the bar high for his son, being selected no.1 overall in the 1994 NBA Draft. Needless to say his father's accomplishments didn't make things easy for Glen III.
Little Glenn has been in the league for three seasons, and he still holds a spot with the Indiana Pacers, but his playing time appears to be smaller every year. The original "Big Dog" had a successful NBA career despite being viewed by some as a minor bust. He was able to win an NBA Championship with the Spurs in 2005, and was a two time All-Star in 2000, and 2001.
13 David Stockton
Being the son of a Hall of Famer must be nerve racking, when you are trying to find a spot on an NBA roster. It must be especially tough to be the son of the all-time assist and steals king John Stockton. It is a testament to David Stockton that he has been able to last in the NBA D-league as long as he has already, as he is under six feet tall.
David had his one and only sniff at the NBA in 2014 when the Sacramento Kings gave him a chance in three games, where he averaged 11 minutes, 3.0 points, and 3.0 assists per game. Those numbers look silly when put next to his father, who during his entire 19 year career averaged 13 points, 10.5 assists, and 2.2 steals per game. Perhaps David will one day get another shot at the league, but for now he will just have to settle being John Stockton's son.
12 Coby Karl
If there is one thing that Coby Karl has lived up to as a Karl, it is his persistence. Now 33 years old Coby is coaching in the NBA D-league, trying to earn himself a coaching spot with the Lakers. Young Karl bounced between the D-League and overseas professional leagues for almost a decade before hanging it up as a player in 2015.
Coby may have realized his best chance to live up to the true spirit of the Karl name is to have an impact as a coach. Coby's father George is regarded as one of the top 10 coaches of his generation. George led the Seattle SuperSonics to the NBA Finals in 1996, where they were defeated by Michael Jordan and the Chicago Bulls. One of George's many accolades was being named the NBA Coach of the Year in 2013. Coby has some work to do before he gets to the NBA, and with some luck he may be able to get there, but he may forever be remembered as the son of George Karl.
11 Patrick Ewing Jr.
Patrick Ewing Sr. is one of the all-time great centers in NBA history, and on top of that he has grown into one of the best coaches for big men in the game today. With all that, you would imagine his son would be a highly talented big man himself, but unfortunately for Ewing Jr. he never grew into the monster frame he was predicted to have inherited from his dad.
Jr. would only grow to 6'8", and ultimately had to mold his game as a perimeter player, as opposed to being a force in the paint, like his father. Things have not yet panned out for the son of the Knicks' all-time leader in points, and at 32 years old it appears the window for greatness has been closed for him. He does however share the desire for the game just like his father did, as Jr. is currently playing in Greece. It seems the cards were stacked against Jr. from the beginning as his father's accolades were too much for Pat Jr. to surpass.
10 Damien Wilkins
Damien Wilkins is the first player on the list to have multiple family members play in the NBA. The addition of multiple family members makes the legacy of that family even stronger. With 13 year NBA veteran Gerald Wilkins as his father, and "The Human Highlight Reel" himself, Dominique Wilkins, as an uncle, it was hard for Damien to fulfill the expectations put in front of him.
Damien had a decent career as a journeyman during his 10 year NBA career. Damien is currently still exploring his options overseas, as a 36-year-old ex-NBA player, but he will likely find a spot if he looks hard enough. Damien never had a chance, as the pedigree of the Wilkins family is one that is rivaled by few in NBA history.
9 Larry Mikan
Larry Mikan is the son of basketball pioneer George Mikan and nephew of Ed Mikan. The Mikan family is generally considered one of the most dominant families in the history of the game. George was the first true post up center, and his brother Ed, would revolutionize the game of basketball in the 1940s and 50s. After his playing days were through, Ed went on to work in the front office for the NBA, where he lobbied for the 3-point line, 3-in-the-key calls, and many other rules of the game.
Larry had a very solid college career, and was drafted into the NBA in 1970. It is believed that Larry called it a career after only one season because he wanted to make a name for himself. Though he may have had the ability to do it in the NBA, he wanted to do it some place other than the basketball court. It is understandable, especially when you consider the enormous fingerprint his father had already put on the game.
8 Tim Hardaway Jr.
The original Tim Hardaway was one of the flashiest point guards of the guard dominant 90s. Hardaway Sr. possessed one of the fiercest crossover dribble moves the game has ever known, however for Jr. the crossover gene never made it to his DNA. Hardaway Jr. was a solid prospect coming out of Michigan in 2013, but he was nothing like the star college player his father had been two decades earlier.
Hardaway Sr. was the WAC Player of the Year in 1989 and had his jersey number retired by his alma mater. As a rookie, Sr. was outstanding, finding himself on the NBA All-Rookie Team. He followed up his sensational rookie season with three consecutive All-Star appearances in the early 90s. Sr. would ultimately earn himself five All-Star nods, as well as a First Team All-NBA selection in 1997. During the same season, he finished fourth in league MVP voting.
As for Tim Jr., he is currently fighting for another chance at the NBA. After two seasons in the league, he was sent to the D-League to work on his game. Hopefully he can earn himself a roster spot again. That's a far cry from his father's experience nearly 20 years ago.
7 Drew Barry
With so much basketball talent in one family, inevitably someone would be the runt of the litter. Drew grew up with Brent and Jon Barry as his brothers, and Hall of Famer Rick Barry for a father. There is no telling what the backyard games were like at the Barry house growing up. Drew was the youngest of the bunch, but surely was held to some lofty expectations that his brothers had inadvertently set for him.
All the brothers had to live under the shadow of their father, the great Rick Barry. Rick was an eight time All-Star, as well as an NBA Champion and a Finals MVP. Out of the three brothers, Brent had the most success in the NBA; during his 14 year career Brent was part of two championship teams with the San Antonio Spurs. Jon, like Brent, was a first round selection out of college, and was able to last an impressive 14 seasons in the league.
Drew's professional career lasted only six years, with four different stops around the league, as well as some time spent playing overseas.
6 Mychel Thompson
Mychel is in a similar spot to the previous entry, Drew Barry. Like Barry, Mychel comes from a family of professional athletes. His brother Klay has appeared in the past two NBA Finals, and is the defending NBA 3-Point Contest Champion. Mychel's other brother Trayce is currently starting for the Los Angeles Dodgers, having been drafted in the second round of the 2009 MLB Draft.
Mychel's father with the similar sounding name Mychal, was a star player on the showtime Lakers led by Magic Johnson. The old man was a two time champion, as well as a consensus All-American during his time at the University of Minnesota. As for Mychel, he is still trying to claw his way into the NBA. After a successful college career at Pepperdine University, Mychel went undrafted in 2011, but was able to get himself an invite to the NBA Summer League, where he earned a spot with the Erie Jayhawks of the D-League. To this point, Mychel has spent a grand total of five games in an NBA uniform. He currently plays with the Santa Cruz Warriors, and is still looking for that one shot to get back in the league and live up to the Thompson name.
5 Luke Walton
Luke Walton was a solid role player for the Kobe Bryant and Pau Gasol led Los Angeles Lakers team that won multiple championships. Luke also has earned himself a new job over the offseason, as he has been given the coaching duties with his former team, the Lakers. The shadow cast by his larger than life father seems to be too big for even an established professional like Luke to outgrow.
During their time as players there is no comparison to the resumes. Bill Walton is a two time NBA Champion, an NBA Finals MVP, an NBA MVP, and a Sixth Man of the Year. Luke, as successful as his teams were, was never the focal point of an offense, and was often relied on as a role player coming off the bench. Off the court however, could be where Luke found it most difficult to escape the shadow of his father. Bill had transitioned to television after his career ended, and became a boisterous, outspoken TV personality. Luke has never been the type to crave attention, often times he seems nervous and awkward around the cameras, unlike his father.
4 Larry Nance Jr.
Nance Jr. is currently a young promising player for the Los Angeles Lakers. His game is very reminiscent of his father's, even the way he dunks the ball seems like a carbon copy. Nance Sr. was known for his long wiry frame. He was also a ravenous defender, as proven by his selection to the NBA All-Defensive First team in 1989. In his prime, Nance Sr. was easily considered one of the league's elite dunkers, and keep in mind that Nance was playing in the same era as Michael Jordan, Dominque Wilkins, and Spud Webb. In fact, in 1984, Sr. was crowned as the first ever Slam Dunk Champion.
What made Nance Sr. so great, was his ability to play on both ends of the court, an area where Larry Jr. has also found success. Sr. however, did it for a long period of time, at the highest level. From 1989-1993 Nance Sr. was named to the NBA All-Defensive team three times. Larry Jr. could eventually find a way to outgrow the legacy of his father, but there is a lot of work to be done.
3 Austin Rivers
Austin and his father Doc are currently working for the same team, as they are both part of the Los Angeles Clippers; and Austin is still stuck under his father's shadow. Doc has a Hall of Fame resume which includes being an All-Star as a player, winning NBA Coach of the Year, and winning an NBA Championship as coach of the Boston Celtics.
During his playing days Doc was a reliable point guard with the ability to score, averaging over 10 points and six assists per game during his 13 years in the league. Austin, who has yet to find himself a starting gig in the league, has only been able to average seven points and two assists over his first six NBA seasons.
Hopefully for Austin and the Clippers, this could be a break out season for him as he is in line to be Chris Paul's back up, as well as possibly seeing some time at the shooting guard position. Even if Austin is able to raise his averages and have a solid season, many people will be quick to give credit to Doc for being the coach, and helping steer Austin in the right direction. If Austin is to ever live up to the Rivers name, he will likely have to do it for a team other than his dad's.
2 Joe Bryant
Joe Bryant was a professional basketball player for 17 years. After seven years as a reserve in the NBA, Joe took his family overseas and continued his career in Italy as well as Greece for another 10 years. During his time as a professional, he was unaware of the impact his son would have on the game in the future, leaving his career an afterthought, even on occasion a joke when compared to his son's.
Once Kobe was in high school, he began receiving notoriety from the media, and by the age of 17, he had already become the most famous Bryant in the family. Kobe would go on to win five NBA Championships, be selected to 18 NBA All-Star Games, and be a lock first ballot Hall of Famer. His legacy overshadowed his father so much, that many people don't even realize his father was an NBA player. Even to this day, Kobe's aura overshadows his father's. Joe has been a professional coach for 14 years now, even coaching the Los Angeles Sparks of the WNBA, yet nobody knows, and frankly, nobody cares because he will always be "Kobe's dad."
1 Seth Curry
Being the son of one of the NBA's greatest shooters can't be an easy thing to live down, especially of you are an aspiring NBA 3-point shooter yourself. That is the position Seth finds himself in, as he strives to become a solid NBA player. Seth also has a brother who lived in the same shadow, Steph Curry... you might have heard of him. The legacy built by father Dell, then expanded and solidified by brother Steph, has left Seth with little chance of equaling his family members.
Seth signed with the Dallas Mavericks this offseason, and is hoping to finally make a name for himself. He will always be a Curry, and he will always be expected to drill threes from 30 feet, but the chance of him accomplishing what his brother already has is all but impossible. Steph has been to back-to-back NBA Finals, and he is the reigning back-to-back league MVP. With a resume like that at the age of 27, it will be hard for Seth to make a true statement and become something other that Steph's little brother, or Dell's son.
Leave A Comment
Looking for an AD FREE EXPERIENCE on TheSportster?Get Your Free Access Now!

I just got scam from Irina Zinchenko to I sent out money to her for a flight to me and then she said she need more money or they would not let her come her so i did not sent it don't have it who the hell she thinks she is doing this all the time that's OK i have the FBI on it now she is going down and when she gos to prison see how she like big momma F in her from behind she better get the hag of it right
I didn't find about this thread till today and I just lost $780.00. It makes me sick to my stomach that people do this. I gave up so much for this girl and I've even have her in a fanfic I'm writing. I'm really upset and shocked about this.
I found this girl really attractive. For the past four weeks I've been thinking about her and all the things I want to do to her.
I also wanted to show her s good time and marry her. I'm deeply crushed inside.
Sorry to but in guy's but I have been coresponding to a hot little lady by the name of Irina Ochka and I was wondering if her pic was familliar to anyone? Thanks This image was also posted here: Dating scammer liana Dating scammer svetlana

Name:Jennifer Higgins Year of Birth1989 Lives:Blackpool, UK Type of IBD:Crohn's disease - Crohn's colitis Diagnosis Date:March 2018 Symptoms at Diagnosis:Diarrhoea, bloody stools, vomiting, pain Details of Surgery:Permanent ileostomy
I started out with standard bug symptoms at the end of February 2018 - like stomach cramps, feeling run down and running to the loo. I just thought it was a bug and would go away on its own.
I have had bouts of diarrhoea before and they have cleared up so thought nothing of it until a week-and-half later and it was still happening. It would be every time I had eaten I would feel the need to go to the loo. I visited the doctor and he thought it was a bug too and explained it should go away on its own.
Three days later the symptoms became a lot more severe. I was passing blood every time I went and I had started to throw up after I had eaten. I was left in so much pain I felt like I couldn’t eat or drink.
I visited the doctor again and he asked for more stool samples. Still convinced it was a bug, I left without any medication.
The next day I found out I was pregnant. I had been trying for months and I was so chuffed. I assumed (very wrongly) that my symptoms were just really bad morning sickness. Silly I know!
That night I passed more blood than I ever had done so now I was scared. I had never had this before and decided I wanted a second opinion.
I went to the walk-in centre as soon as it opened. My partner had to book me in as now I couldn’t move at all because I was in so much pain. The cramps were worse than labour.
The nurse I saw was absolutely lovely. Couldn’t do enough for me and wouldn't let me leave until I was admitted to hospital. I was with her for two hours!
I'm so glad she got me admitted as within a week of being there, after many tests and scans, I had been diagnosed with ulcerative colitis. Finally I had an answer as to why I felt so poorly.
I knew about colitis but only very little. I knew that it can be controlled by medication so I started treatment. I had an infusion of infliximab, and took Asacol and steroids. I still don’t know much about these medications as in the hospital I was just out of it. I was asleep most of the time and when I was awake I was zoned out. I couldn’t concentrate on anything.
While taking the meds, I was having scans to see how the inflammation was doing and if it was reducing. But it wasn’t. In fact I was becoming more inflamed and it was obvious I wasn’t responding to the medication. This meant I had to have stoma surgery. I had my colon removed and a temporary ileostomy constructed.
I was very naive. I know I was told about the stoma surgery but I thought they’ll go in and they’ll see everything is fine and I won’t need a stoma.
But it happened. A few days later when I came round properly I realised I had it. I didn’t want to look at it. I didn’t want to change my bag, I even refused to read the books as I didn’t want to know. I thought my family and friends wouldn’t want to know me anymore and it had turned my world upside down.
I didn’t let anyone visit me in hospital other than my partner and my immediate family. I felt so ashamed. I needn’t have worried though. My friends were supportive. They all wanted to see it haha! And my boys were very interested in it too.
It took a while but I realised that my stoma saved my life. If the surgery was any later, even by an hour, my colon would have burst on its own which would have led to peritonitis and sepsis. My diagnosis changed to Crohn’s colitis which made my stoma permanent. This helped to accept it too. I have my ‘bagforlife’ and I embrace it.
My recovery took a while as I had lost a lot of weight and I couldn’t walk without help. I couldn’t eat on my own and unfortunately, but not surprisingly, I lost my baby.
After leaving hospital, I started to lose my hair. I think a culmination of medication, malnutrition and losing my baby, my hair just wasn’t healthy.
It was heartbreaking watching it fall out every morning so I took control and shaved it off for charity! It was falling out anyway so I decided to shave it to raise awareness and money for Crohn’s and Colitis UK and raised over £2000.
Six months on, I’m back to nearly full health, have become a stoma pro and my hair is growing really fast. I still have a few wigs though which I wear for parties or nights out.
Having a stoma hasn’t stopped me doing anything I would have done normally, it’s just helped me live a lot healthier than I was.
Looking back I have probably had Crohn’s for years but never realised and always put it down to other things.
By telling my story I hope people will recognise the symptoms and hope it will get more people talking about Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis. The symptoms can come out of nowhere, take on the form of normal bug type symptoms and deteriorate so fast it’s scary.
Find this article useful?
Why not sign up to our mailing list and receive regular articles and tips about IBD to your inbox.

JACKSON COUNTY, MS (WLOX) - Lela Miller, 62, was in her home on Theriot Street in Latimer when it went up in flames.
The bedroom was unrecognizable. The sunlight seeping in through what was left of the walls revealed just how bad the damage was.
"It's a shock to me you know," said Lela Miller's step-son.
"I hope she went away, peacefully," said her step-son.
Ash covered most of what was left in Lela Miller's home.
Her step-son rummaged through the rubble to salvage what he could. By the time firefighters arrived to the scene about 75% of the home was engulfed in flames.
Miller was the only one inside the home she shared with her husband.
"She was more like a real sister to me. We were real close friends throughout her life," said Raymond Hayden, Sr.
Hayden, who has known Miller for decades, says Miller and her husband ran a karaoke business at local Country-western bars. He wore his cowboy hat to pay homage.
"They wore the cowboy hat at all those shows and stuff. I been to a lot of them. They were good at their craft," said Hayden.
Hayden says Miller will be remembered as a loving woman who cared for her family and friends.
"I hate that something like this happened to anybody, but at least I'm convinced she didn't go in pain," said Hayden.
Sheriff Ezell confirmed the fire is not being investigated as a suspicious fire or a criminal act.

the greater good? dumbledore's worrying rhetoric
many of us, dear readers, studied under the tutorage of albus dumbledore whether as the head of hogwarts or as professor of transfiguration. we have been taught under a man whose crystal clear reputation is unusual for a man of such political regard but is all as it seems?
when my child was off studying at hogwarts i found myself with more free time than what i had been expecting. the last time i didn't have a child to care for we had been in the middle of a war and prior to this i had been at school myself. so i began to consider who was teaching my child and what effect that would have on them.
what i found was unexpected.
the greater good was a justification used often in the war. the words had struck me as odd even at the time, what can be done with the excuse of those words? what had been done under those words? the answer was worse than i had thought. grindlewald's own political ideals had been full of the exact same ideas.
a coincidence that i had not expected to come across. of all the people who would use the ideas of grindlewald his defeater had not been on the list and so i had sought an audience with the old attempted-dictator.
i traveled to the continent and to the prison where he was kept to ask why. why did the esteemed headmaster share a view with such a monster?
molly threw down the paper in disgust. the headmaster had done so much for their family and this anonymous upstart was starting to write an empty expose based on nothing but a turn of phrase that wasn't even that uncommon. her family had always been loyal to dumbledore and she refused to read such utter nonsense about the man. comparing him to grindlewald, honestly the thing people did for a penny or two.
"what's wrong mol?" arthur asked, placing a cup of tea in front of her.
"the prophet. some anonymous upstart is implying all sorts of horrible things about dumbledore." molly snarled.
"it'll be okay, there's always a someone trying to get him in trouble. it's probably just some ex-deatheater trying to discredit our side."
"it's just sad how they're always tearing into innocent people like that. i mean who's next? the boy-who-lived?"
slytherin slander: the story of a child
imagine this: you are eleven years old going away from home for the first time. you know all about the school houses and the reputations of all of them but here you are on the stool and you decide to let the house do its job. or you don't, maybe your whole family is in one house and that is where you know you will spend the next seven years. the hat calls out slytherin. you are eleven and three quarters of the school boos and jeers as you take your place.
you are not evil. you are not prejudice. you are an eleven year old child being booed by some who are even adults and you are scared.
from then on the muggleborns decide you hate them, that because everyone else says so you must. the other pureblood and halfbloods decide the green in your tie means evil. they do not think of merlin but rather of the tradition your tie represents. so you are alienated by the society that you were promised would accept you. maybe your parents even agree.
this is a reality for our children.
and it is the place of our educators to stop this, to stop our children from being pushed into the arms of bigotry. i watched my friends be pushed away from the light by those who preached the divinity of the glow. those who had never believed that muggleborns were lesser took the mark because the only ones who'd ever accepted them had believed in it. some of us even resisted.
in my sixth year i went to dumbledore asking for help.
i begged him to help me.
he told me that i had nothing for him, that he would not help because he had no insurance I was not a spy...
alex white wiped they're eyes free from the tears. they didn't often read the papers but they were mystified by the anonymous writer. the prophet had seemed like a useless rag for years, posting only gossip and government propaganda but this writer was different. they were touched by the story though. alex had been in hufflepuff and mostly kept to themsleves but after school had worked with slytherins who had all been perfectly decent. the potions industry did not have quite the same level of discrimination as the rest of the wizarding world seemed to, ignoring whoever worked at hogwarts.
"the article huh?" alex turned to see their girlfriend standing in the doorway. alex nodded tearfully and reached a hand out towards marty. "sucks, but at least someone is telling the truth about it all. hopefully things may start to change."
"h-how... how was it? f-for you?"
"school sucked. i got through it but i'm not gonna say it was easy." marty shrugged. "i was lucky really."
why was a headteacher the head of the resistance group?
mrs fitzgerald nodded in agreement. a question she had long wondered about.
why was the ministry so easily dismissed?
fudge shook his head and started drafting a letter to the prophet, it was about time someone else got the blame.
how many secrets does the headmaster keep?
mcgonagall shook her head in disgust, she dreaded to think which of her ex-students was writing such trash.
how many children were failed by the man who was supposed to teach them?
silas nott scoffed. what kind of sissy shit was this? who from the honorable house of slytherin couldn't take some basic hazing or a little criticism?
why have so many children been endangered whilst at hogwarts in the past three years?
madame bones ripped out the article and placed it in a box hidden in her desk. the more articles that crossed the paper the more leads she had. she was going to bury so many of these idiots to their necks in charges. her family had died and not enough people had paid.

I have been having having a serious problem with my galaxy. Over the last few days I haven't been able to charge the phone unless it is turned off. I plug in the phone when it is on and it doesn't say that it is charging however if I turn the phone off and plug it in it charges. I have also tried plugging the phone into my computer and it shows it as being connected to my computer but again it isn't charging. I have tried restarting the phone a few times but I'm not getting anywhere with that. I really dont want to have to turn off my phone all night in order to charge it.......Can someone PLEASE help me!?!?!

|no matter what else, her tail was going to be gorgeous.|
even the judge commented on it.
So the show this weekend felt like a big exam to me. I had all the same old feelings I used to have for finals: did I study enough, will I remember my plan, what if I don't know the answer?
And the big one: what if I fail?
What would that mean for the work I've done and the work I want to do.
Because of course a bad show would mean the ruination of everything.
Carmen is not the only one who can be overdramatic. In fairness, my last show there was a bit of a disaster.
|I saw this on FB and it killed me.|
But if there's one thing I'm good at, it's making a plan. So I had a very specific one for the show and I was determined to stick to it.
Trailering was not a big deal and I put her in the stall where she settled pretty quickly. We ended up being pretty much by ourselves for the weekend in this section of the barn. I was really worried about it but she was pretty chill about it. I was super impressed with that.
In all honesty, it was a good session for us. She started tense and I responded the same way but remembered to let go and from there things got a lot better. She had issues with the flowers at E so we worked on that a bit. About 45 minutes in I got this trot down center line and halt:
You can't see it but as soon as we got that halt I hopped off. Shanea was surprised and asked what I was doing. I said that I wanted to end on that good note so that she learned from the positive. I'm sure that Shanea wanted us to do more but I kept saying that I wasn't worried about the score, just the relaxation.
The next morning I took her early to the warm up ring. Paula brought me my 'toys' since we were all alone and we practiced with them. It was so beneficial to work with the things she was familiar with to settle her in the ring.
Here's a small clip I took while practicing.
After that we chilled in the barn or on walks grazing (well she grazed, I enjoyed the sun because warm weather finally decided to arrive). My ride times were later in the afternoon and I could feel myself panicking. I tried to talk myself down off the ledge but couldn't so I sent a frantic text to Karen who called me and talked me down. She pointed out the work I had done, asked me about my fears and then reminded me that if it all went to shit I could simply halt, regroup and then carry on. And I realized she was right. I would lose points but that was fine. The key was for me to not engage in fights or get too performance oriented.
My warm ups before the test was amazing. Carmen was soft and listening. There were people standing around, horses popping in and out of the ring, children playing and she trusted me about all of it. There was no 'fuck I'm out'- she just asked me questions and I answered. I got a lot of mileage with using my outide seat bone to bend her through the corners.
We rode First Level Test 2 & 3. For the first one she was tight but did her absolute best to follow my lead. There was one spook at E but we recovered. Our stretchy circle was a bit of disaster but overall I was quite happy with it. A friend took a video and put it on my FB page if you want to see it (I can't figure out how to download it).
For the second test (First Level Test 3) she was much much better. I spent some time in the warm up before practicing shoulder in and when we went in to the ring to walk around before the bell I asked her to do shoulder fore by the evil flowers. That helped a lot.
I was so excited about how well she did I never even went to check my scores until the end. I had a 60 something on the first test and 61 on the second. This was pretty much in keeping with how the judge was scoring everyone for the show. We finished 3rd (out of 3) for the first test and first (out of 1 but your placings are based on score when you're the only one).
|I love these ribbons, they represent so much work|
|not studying my test or shining my boots, |
just enjoying the sunshine with my girl.
Once again our warm up was really really good. Seriously, I loved how relaxed and forward she was. It felt really good. Our first test (First Level T2) felt better than the day before. I felt like we were more connected. There was a funny moment and I just had to laugh: The movement is Left lead canter across the diagonal, trot at X, pick up right lead canter at F.
Our discussion went like this:
Me: and trot at X
Carmen: right, simple change- I got this! *executes perfect simple change through trot*
Me:no, we trot right now. *bring her back to trot*
Carmen: You are off course! It's CANTER! *picks up canter.
Carmen: *flings head and is seriously annoyed* Why did we practice all those simple changes then?!
Me: okay, here's F aaaand canter
Carmen: OMG MAKE UP YOUR MIND
I was coming through the corner giggling. It was funny. And I will take a mistake based on anticipation over her taking off any time.
For our last test we were tired. It was hot and we both felt exhausted. I took her back to the stall before hand to have a drink and a pee (me too). The person before me scratched so I could go in early. I decided to see how it felt but after 10 minutes she felt ready to me to in we went.
And it was awesome. Carmen was with me the whole way. She was much more relaxed about it and listening. It was a great way to end.
|so tired. but rocking her bling|
I got our sheets at the end of the day and we had gone up for both tests (marginally): 61 and 62. My placings were the same as the day before.
So this is the tale of how I placed 3rd out of 3 and still feel like I hung the moon.

This week has not been very special one. The weather has changed so rapidly and it has been not that warm so I skipped any swimming in the sea. Some sun bath has however taken place, at our yard. If the aim had been doing nothing, object would have been well achieved. Well, I went to the forest to pick some blueberries. I didn’t get much, but enough for blueberry pie though.
And one night I went to the city to foam party. I’ve never seen such so I decided to check it out. I had no intention to get any foam on me so I tried to look the happening from safe distance. I had my orange summer dress with a white blazer. I had just washed the blazer in spite of its sign not to wash it. Not the first time I had washed such clothes without any losses.
I came to the restaurant quite early so there were no people in foam area at the beginning. Then some people went to dance floor to get sprayed in their bathing suits. After some happy hour beers there were lots of dancers in normal clothing. Afterwards it turned out that their clothes got wet!! The evening was not very warm so I saw many not so happy-looking shivering celebrants. Some tried to warm and dry themselves under the toilet hot air fan

Miley Mei Dior is a Porn Star from United States. She was born in Cincinnati. She is listed on FreeOnes since 2009 and is currently ranked 9687th place. She currently has 14 gallery links in her own FreeOnes section.
Our records show that Miley Mei Dior is currently retired which means she is not making movies, doing live shows and/or doing photo shoots at this time.

Chael Sonnen booked his rematch with Anderson Silva this evening by outpointing Michael Bisping at UFC On FOX 2, but he had to work hard to get it.
Sonnen was able to take Bisping down immediately which seemed huge, but the Brit impressed by just as quickly getting back to his feet.
The wrestler was able to get him on his back again a little later in the round, but again couldn’t keep him there.
It was clear that Sonnen’s gameplan was largely based on his wrestling abilities though as he was also looking to clinch up with Bisping against the cage, but surprisingly it was the UK fighter who was often able to reverse him and keep him up against the fence.
Bisping was also getting the better of Sonnen in the stand-up exchanges with his crisp, clean and straight punches finding their mark more often than the American.
‘The Count’ showed his confidence in the way the stand-up was going in the closing stages of the round when he began to mix in a few spinning kicks into his offense.
Bisping again got the better of the clinch work in the early part of the second round as they tried to exchange short shots in close.
Sonnen broke up the action by taking Bisping down again and he managed to draw a little blood from below Bisping’s left eye with a strike.
He couldn’t keep him down though and Sonnen was starting to look a little tired as Bisping went back to locking him up against the cage in the clinch and landed some decent strikes at times without ever really hurting him significantly.
Sonnen looked to push the pace in the final round and secured a quick takedown to start the proceedings.
This time he managed to keep Bisping down and worked a little ground and pound.
Bisping looked to scramble back to his feet, but Sonnen pounced on an opening to take his back. Rolling onto his back he fished for a rear-naked choke, but Bisping defended.
Sonnen then managed to cleverly work himself into the full mount and landed some blows, but despite this dominant position he wasn’t able to get anywhere close to stopping the Brit and Bisping worked himself back to half guard as the clock began to run out.
All in all this was a very close fight, with only the third being clearly in favor of Sonnen, but who would the judges see it for?
In the end they were all convinced that Sonnen was the better man on the night, awarding him the unanimous decision (30-27, 29-28 x2).
Personally I thought it was closer than that, but the takedowns for Sonnen and the big final round sealed it in his favor.
It wasn’t a spectacular showing from Sonnen by any means, but it’s good enough to get him the eagerily anticipated second shot at Anderson Silva’s 185lb title which will likely take place in Brazil in June.

April 25 UPDATE from Star’s advocates “He has been nothing but a joy to spend time with & has shown no concerning behaviors in public or in private. He met my son a couple of times & was fine with him as well. Friday we went walking with Star & Sage, it went very well. Star was very well behaved & respectful of Sage at all times. Star is a paws on player & so is sage, so they are evenly matched. They only had brief moments of playing since it was their first get together but it went off without a hitch:) I took him walking to the reservoir on my own the other day & he was a loose leash walker the entire walk of about an hour or so. He was fine with passerby’s we didn’t see any dogs or remote control cars this time, thank goodness. This week he will be visiting here at my home as much as I can get him here, trying for Mon thru fri, to work on how it does during meal times, home living, & dealing with new surroundings:) So far he has passed every test with an A++” Stay tuned for more on STAR!
Info on Star: Star is ready for his forever home!!! With the support of his many fans who generously contributed to his care and training, Star went to Click To Zen in Watertown, NY, to be given a new chance at life. While on his retreat, he was treated for his mange, and introduced to other dogs whom he LOVES to play with. He can be low energy unless there is something fun to do and then he can play all day. Star would do fine with older, well mannered children who are respectful of dogs. He likes to go for walks, hang out with people, chew on his toys and play. Star is very much a creature of habit and likes to do the same thing in the same manner every day. He thrives on routine and needs a home with consistency and boundaries. Storm walks nicely on a leash and is a pleasure to walk. He is house-trained, up to date on shots, neutered and micro-chipped. He knows his commands, and everyday is improving on becoming the “Star” he was born to be!
Download an app at www.AmsterDog.org to adopt this shining gem!

I said on Monday that it felt like a lot of Orange fans were overvaluing the hell out of the Colgate win and suddenly talking about 6-6, 7-5, and even 8-4 as if they were reasonable expectations. As Lamar Jackson and the Cardinals reminded us Friday night, they were not.
Hell, if we had been paying attention to Dino Babers this offseason, it's what he always said. That this was a job that required faith in what's to come. That it was a two-year project. That this system would need time to come together.
All of that was evident Friday and no one should have been surprised (we certainly figured it was coming). But that's not to say that this is all doom and gloom. In fact, consider that if you got your hopes up after last week, that should be your lesson not to get down in the dumps and give up on SU now. Neither is good and neither makes sense. The Orange looked great against an inferior opponent and terrible against a superior one. That's the state of Syracuse Football now and you just have to buck up and accept it.
The truth is, we're looking at a 4-8/5-7 season and we always were. We didn't suddenly become a 7-5 team last week and now we're dropped down. Nothing changed but expectations. Louisville was always Louisville. FSU, Clemson, and Notre Dame are who they were. USF and Pitt, both of whom are better than last year and both of whom SU lost to last year, are exactly where we thought they'd be. If you looked at all of this and saw seven or eight wins, I honestly don't know what you were seeing.
All of that said, there is good news if you're willing to sift through the carnage. Eric Dungey garnered four touchdowns and now has six on the year. Amba Etta-Tawo, the transfer we all fell asleep on this offseason, has two 100+ yard games and three touchdowns so far. There were some nice moments by some of the young guys on both sides of the ball. Yes, they were in there. Trust me.
Sure there was some TURRRRIBLE defense. And the offense looked at times like Tim Lester had gotten his old job back. And it seemed like the Orange were just playing a different game thn the Cardinals. In the end, they'll be better for it because they'll remember getting their butts handed to them on national TV by Louisville and, next time, we'll be a better team. I'm sure of that.
It's just going to take time. SU fans don't want to hear it and I understand. I'm tired of waiting and keeping the faith as well. Judging by attendance numbers, SU fans are REALLY tired of it. But it's what we've got and you have to take it or not. If you're going to give up on Dino Babers already, you're probably never going to be pleased. If you're going to give up on this team, you must be glass mostly-empty.
Tonight, we got beat up by a Heisman-calibur talent and Top 15 football team. As we should have. Some of us just didn't know it until it was happening.

Well, for starters, my name is kaila, I'm 19 years old, I have a beautiful 2 year old daughter, and only just recently did I come to terms with religion.
I was born January 8,1993. The same birthday as Elvis. My mother, I did not know until I was older, was a drug addicted, sex fiend, alcoholic whom was no where near fit to raise a child, let alone two. She has severe psychological problems. All I can remember my entire life was my mother laying lethargic in her room, extremely high… Continue

Please Note: Some images are graphic and may not be suitable for all viewers.
At the end of 2014 Fawn was living near the Sikh temple in Pushkar and was nearly lifeless, barely able to move from malnourishment and suffering from terrible mange. After several months of intensive treatment at TOLFA the transformation has been dramatic!
When Sid came in on our rescue vehicle he was collapsed from pain and shock. Being quite an old man we didn’t know if he would make it but Sid was a fighter and wasn’t going to give up! Many months and medical treatments later Sid went back to his family group and territory with just a small bald spot to show for his battle.
Bonnie had been hit by a vehicle but more worrying than her horrific shoulder wound was that she was paralysed from the neck down. It took weeks of physio, encouragement and hand feeding but she slowly began to sit, then stand with a wobble at which point there was no stopping her! She was later returned to her loving caregiver in Ajmer.
We’d met this boy before! He’d been with us fighting distemper as a puppy and had now returned with mange. He became an instant favourite due to the sparkle in his eye and that verve and sparkle was what helped him recover so quickly from mange.
Matty’s head wound was deep and full of maggots. He was understandably in pain and shocked when he first came in. However, he turned in to a soppy puppy once he realised he was safe and we were going to help him. It took several months for the wound to heal completely and he had a nice scar to return to his territory with, but he had lived to tell the tale!
Jasper came to TOLFA suffering from severe mange. After three months with good food, the correct medication and lots of love and affection, he was the healthiest and happiest he’s ever been.
Billie came to us suffering from an extensive skin infection. After many months of medical treatment and a lot of love he grew to be a big, beautiful, healthy cat who now lives with us at TOLFA.
When Chloe first came to TOLFA we thought we would have to remove her eye due to the deepness and severity of the wound. But Chloe wasn’t going to give up that easily, and once again showed us the strength and resilience of street dogs by recovering completely with both eyes intact!
Marvin not only had mange as a small puppy, but had also had his back foot run over. It took many months of medical baths, care and a lot of love to win Marvin round to the bright, fat, happy dogs he is today but we did it!
Piper is a classic example of the horrific, unthinkable condition that some of India’s street dogs are in. It takes hard work and long-term dedication to save a dog like Piper from its misery. TOLFA’s staff works tirelessly to serve dogs like Piper, who would otherwise languish in agony on the street.
Barbie – Although both of Barbie’s front feet were damaged when she came to TOLFA, her biggest problem was that she was incredibly sad. We don’t know what her story was before, but when one of our nurturing volunteers took Barbie under her wing she blossomed into a happy, bright little girl who now loves to play with anyone who happens to pass by.
Goby was rescued from a rural village outside Pushkar, where he was staggering around in agony with a broken leg after being hit by a vehicle. He nursed his leg back to health in the safety of the puppy yard at TOLFA, and made a lot of new friends in the process!
Alfie was a very special case. He was hit by a train and is chest and stomach “de-gloved.” This was THE most extensive we have ever seen at TOLFA but Alfie, being a calm, accepting gentleman put his trust in us, and although it took 6 months he recovered and returned to his care giver. This truly was a miracle recovery! Watch a video about Alfie.
Penny was rescued half starved and with a large wound at Pushkar Camel Fair in 2011. She lived out the rest of her days (almost a year) in the sanctuary and peace of TOLFA.
Mojo came to TOLFA from 450km away in the desert city of Jaisalmer, with a severely infected head wound. Read Mojo’s story.
Wonkey Donkey had a ruptured tumour on his ear and had been abandoned in the street. An ear amputation later and he’s fit and healthy but will forever be known as “Wonkey Donkey.
Twiggy – Twiggy came to TOLFA looking like a walking skeleton covered in skin such was the extent of her malnourishment. It took a very long time – 6 months in fact – for Twiggy to slowly regain her appetite, weight and be the healthy happy dog we know and love today.

Police in California are searching for two women who reportedly abducted a jogger while she was out for a run – holding her captive for three weeks before abandoning her, tied up, on the side of a motorway.
Sherri Papini, a 34-year-old mother of two, managed to flag down a passing car in Yolo County and alert the authorities.
Tom Bosenko, sheriff of Shasta County, gave few details of the case but said the authorities had never ceased trying to find her.
Her husband Keith reported her missing after she failed to collect their two young children from day care. Sherri texted him at 10.37 am on November 2, to ask if he would come home for lunch. But he did not respond to her message until 1.39 pm because he was at work, he said.
When he arrived back at their empty home, he immediately used his "Find My iPhone" app to track his wife’s phone along the Oregon Trail.
Police and dozens of volunteers began searching the area around Mountain Gate, near Redding. A $50,000 reward was offered for any information.
“She was definitely taken against her will,” said Mr Papini, in a televised appeal for information.
Her mobile phone and headphones were found close to the site where she was last seen – 150 miles from where she was eventually left.
"We had not given up hope," said Mr Bosenko. "We are very thankful on this day that she was found safe and reunited with her family."
Much of the case remains a mystery.
He said that authorities do not know if Mrs Papini knew her abductors, and they do not have information about exactly where she was kept or whether she was kept in the same place for the duration of her captivity. They do not know if the abduction was planned or done impulsively.
They do, however, know whether she spoke to her captors, but are not releasing that information due to the active investigation.
He said that there were no tips given to the police, and he did not believe a ransom had been paid.
Mr Bosenko said that police were now searching for a dark-coloured 4x4 and two women considered dangerous, armed with a hand gun.
"We will not rest until Sherri's captor or captors are identified and brought to justice," he said.

LOVE THE RING
Jonathan as you know I received my ring, and I love it. I am very pleased with your company and the timely manner you give. I would recommend your company...
I just wanted to thank you. The ring turned out awesome and my parents were very happy. My mom was also pleased to see that you were able to fit the date...
Three Piece Wedding Set JRX-1261
Thanks for all you help in getting me and my wedding set they are very beautiful and my wife to be just loves them. I loved how you took my order and got...

Second story, I'm trying to improve my writing so ant tips or advice will be very helpful. Thanks.
This story is entirely fiction.
The MILF next door pt. 1
My relationship with my neighbors started when I was ten. Their two sons, Chris who was 8 and Ben who was 6, had lost their dog and I graciously offered to help them look. We were able to locate the dog, buddy as he was named, and quickly made friends with my neighbors. The mother, Karen Taylor, and father, Jonathan Taylor had personally thanked me for my help. So, for the next 5 years I frequently went over to their house, played and video games, football and just hung out with my two friends. In these 5 years I had started to notice Mrs.Taylor. A light brunette, 5'6'' maybe 110lbs with amazing curves and beautiful natural d cup tits. By the time I was 15 I had jacked off many times to the thought of getting the chance to fuck Mrs. Taylor or Karen that she insisted I call. her thought I was never comfortable with it and stuck with Mrs.
the summer of my 15th birthday was a long and boring one with almost nothing to do. Karen had gone on a business trip while the rest of their family and other friends had all gone on vacation. I found it curious that the Taylor's would leave on vacation while Mrs. Taylor was on business but I still found myself having the responsibility of collecting their mail and feeding their cats. I was given complete access to their house and had hours of privacy, most of it wasted watching TV or playing video games. But I also spent time looking at porn on their computer and sometimes jacking off in Mrs. Taylors. bedroom, giving me a more realistic view of my fantasies. On the last week of my job of taking care of the neighbors house, I was in the bedroom, completely naked and going crazy on my 7 inch cock, I was in no mood to stop. It was then that I heard the front door and I immediately sat up, I was in shock, someone was coming and I had no where to go. I heard footsteps on the stairs and approach closer to the closed door that separated my naked body from them. I couldn't move, I was doomed and I knew and i was sat there, staring at door. Suddenly the doorknob started to turn, slowly. This was it, I was caught and there was nothing i could do about it. The door opened and there stood Mrs. Taylor, in her business suit, obviously home early since she was expected to be home after Mr. Taylor and the kids came back. It only took her a second to adjust to what she was seeing and she just asked calmly but very sternly
"what the fuck do you think you're doing"
I stammered "uh, I'm so sorry, I...I'm sorry, I'm so so sorry, I..uh" and grabbed my clothes and started to leave
"stop' she said
I obeyed, there I stood covering myself with my loose clothes the best I could.
"drop them' she commanded
Once again I was helpless to resist, revealing my cock to her, I was way too scared to even think differently
She then took a step forward, "I haven't been fucked in weeks" she said
"I, uh..." I started to say but she cut me off
"sit down' she ordered, and I did. Still hard as a rock and unable to go down, even with my fears.
She then started to walk towards me, unbuttoning her jacket as she did and threw it to the ground.
I stared at her with my eyes still wide with fear and confusion.
She suddenly dropped to her knees, took my cock in her hand and started to stroke slowly.
I still didn't know what to do, there was this beautiful MILF giving me a hand job but I had no idea what was going on.
"Your cock is bigger than my husbands" she said, "I'm going to enjoy riding it hard"
She then took my cock into her mouth, and i was in heaven.
My head leaned back and my eyes rolled into my head and I let out a loud groan.
Her tongue swirled and swooped around my cock, while she bobbed her head and started to unbutton her blouse.
She was just in a skirt and bra now, still going at my cock. I instinctively grabbed her head, running my fingers through her hair while my cock was pleasured.
once her blouse was off her hands went to work on my balls, massaging them while she deepthroted my entire cock, not hesitating a second..
I then felt myself approaching orgasm. "fuck, I'm going to cum" I I moaned
She continued to deepthroat, slowing down and letting her tongue work it's magic.
my cock twitched and shot load after load into her throat. She stopped bobbing to swallow it all, licking her her lips when she was done.
I fell back onto the bed, worn out from the most powerful orgasm I've ever had.
"Oh, you're not down yet" she laughed, unhooking and unbuttoning her skirt and as she did. I just watched her as she pulled her skirt and panties down, my mouth was watering with thirst for her. Her pussy was beautiful, completely shaved, tight, and ready for the taking. She climbed up on the bed, She got on her knees above me, grabbed my cock and directed it towards her sweet pussy.
She unhooked her bra and there she was. Naked and riding my cock, my dream come true.
It's only then that I really realized what was going on and finally took my role. I grabbed her waist and helped her ride my cock, up and down.
all the while shoving my cock into her as I pulled her down.
"fuck...fuck...fuck" she moaned every time I plowed into her tight pussy.
"Ah, yes, Fuck me! Fuck my tight little pussy! Ah, god, Yes!!" She screamed out.
She then leaned down to kiss me, our tongues intertwined while I fucked her.
We made out while we fucked for almost an hour until finally, I was ready to cum again.
She had already climaxed twice already and I could tell she was coming again.
Then, as if we were connected, we both came.
I shoved my cock into her as her pussy milked all the cum out of my cock.
I shot even more cum than the first time and almost screamed in pleasure, just as she did.
She then collapsed on top of me, but she was just laughing.
"I haven't had a fuck like that in years" she said
She slid off my deflating cock and started to lick me clean, swallowing all the left over cum on my cock.
She stroked my soft cock as we both relaxed and calmed ourselves down, but I was already getting hard again.
I had just gotten a blowjob AND a fuck in the last hour but I was still getting it up.
She just smiled and laughed.
"You're a horny little fella, aren't ya?" she said.
"Well then, I have a little surprise for you" she said as she got up off the bed and helped me up as well.
She then, took a box from out under the bed and opened it to show a half dozen dildos and and vibrators and some lube, I couldn't believe I didn't discover it earlier.
Then, she grabbed the lube and I suddenly realized what she was doing, she was going to let me fuck her ass.
She applied the lube to her ass crack and my now completely hard cock and bent over the the bed.
She waved her finger in the "come here" sort of way and I approached.
"Fuck my ass" she stated
I grabbed her and and guided my cock to her ass hole.
I slowly slid the head of my cock into her ass, stopping once it was then.
I then plunged my entire cock into her ass, hard and quickly.
"Shit!" She screamed out in pain and pleasure
I started to pull back slowly and push back in slowly, increasing my speed as I went.
before I knew it, I was pounding her harder than before, she was holding onto the bed to prevent from moving, slamming into her ass like there was no tomorrow.
"FUCK! FUCK! OH, GOD YES!!! FUCK MY ASS HARD!! FUCK ME!!" She screamed, almost deafening.
Her ass was so tight and since I had cum two times earlier, I was fucking her for hours, with adrenaline keeping me going until finally, one last thrust released my third load of cum.
My legs felt weak, and I felt all my energy was drained.
But I suddenly got another boost of adrenaline, for as I looked back, and just my luck, there stood Mr. Taylor, home early AS WELL, looking like he was going to kill somebody.

Three men and and 24 ft truck and filled to the brim The men worked very hard and efficiently. We are very pleased with the service, they were friendly and polite. Very experienced and wrapped our large items securely. Unload went well and we would definitely recommend this company.
- Company Response
Thank you very much for your review. We are glad that you were satisfied with TSC Moving and Storage Services!

Alvar Aalto Biography, Life, Interesting Facts
Died On :
Birth Place :
Alvar Aalto was born on February 3, 1898. He was a Finnish architect and designer. He was also known for painting and sculpting. He worked mostly with furniture, textiles, landscape and urban planning. He was a well known architect in Finland. He was known for his numerous paintings and art of architecture. He designed buildings and also designed them in the interior. He died on May 11, 1976.
Alvar Aalto was born on February 3, 1898, in Kuortane, Finland. He was born to Johan Henrik Aalto who was a land surveyor and Selly Matilda who was a post mistress. He was brought up alongside his two siblings. In 1903, his mother died when he was five years old. His father remarried and the whole family moved to Jyvaskyla, Central Finland. When he was still in school, he would accompany his father on his surveying trips. This experience was so much fun for him.
In 1916, Alvar Aalto graduated from the Jyvaskyla Lyceum. After he graduated he moved to Helsinki. He attended the Finnish School of Architecture, presently know as ‘The Helsinki University of Technology’, to take architecture. He was a very bright and good student as he got excellent grades in architecture. In 1918, he served in the Finnish National Militia during the Civil War. He later on graduated with a Degree in Architecture from The Helsinki University of Technology in 1921. He was a qualified architect then and so he set up his office in Jyvaskyla. He went ahead and hired an architect, Aino Marsio to work as his assistant. It was not long before the two got married and had their honeymoon in Italy.
Alvar Aalto started working when he was still a student at the college. He worked under the apprenticeship of Finnish architect, painter and professor, Armas Lingren. In 1920, he designed buildings for the ‘Tivoli’ region for the National Fair that year under Carolus Lindberg. In 1922, he designed the Congress Hall for the 1923 Goteborg World Fair.
Alvar Aalto did not design the Congress hall alone but with the collaboration of Bjerke. In 1927, Aalto and his wife moved to Turku. Later on that year he became number one for designing the ‘Southwestern Finland Agricultural Cooperative Building’. He was also the one who designed the ‘Paimio Sanatorium’. In 1933, he formed his own firm ‘Artek’. His firm was an architectural one and it dealt with matters touching on architecture. His firm began popular and he worked on projects internationally.
Alvar Aalto built and designed a lot of buildings throughout the world. His firm also sold furniture and other products which were imported. In 1938, he designed the most popular Villa ‘Villa Mairea’ in Noormarkku. He also built the ‘Muuratsalo Experimental House’ with the assistance of his second wife. After he died in 1976, his second wife, Elissa managed his business to the extent that all his unfinished works were completed.
Awards And Achievements
In 1963, Alvar Aalto was awarded the Gold Medal from the American Institute of Architects.
In 1924, Alvar Aalto married Aino Marsio with him he had two children, a son and a daughter. The son was given the name Hamikar and the daughter Johanna Alanen. In 1949, he lost Aino to cancer. In 1952, He married his second wife, Elissa with whom he stayed married until he met his death in 1976. He died on May 11, 1976, in Helsinki, Finland. The Art Museum in Jyvaskyla was named after him. The museum is known as ‘The Alvar Aalto Museum’. This museum reminds many about his architectural skills and the many buildings that he built and designed globally.
Frank Lloyd Wright
Marcel Lajos Breuer
Henry Hobson Richardson
Richard Buckminster Fuller

Obituary for Simon Ryan (circa 2006- August 27, 2012)
I obtained Simon in June of 2007 in Toledo, Ohio. I had seen him on one of those web sites that offer rescued animals. When I picked up Simon, he was literally like a rag doll. It was like he was just a shell of a dog. They did not know much about his history, except that he came from a puppy mill. It was obvious that he had been abused or treated very poorly. They had given him the non-descript name “Fluff.” I named him Simon after the singer Simon Lebon from Duran Duran. When he came home, it was a struggle in a lot of ways. He would literally go and hide—in closets, behind boxes and crates, in corners and under blankets. He was terrified. He was literally afraid of his own shadow. When I tried to walk him, it was obvious he had never been walked on a leash before. He struggled with his potty training. But despite all this, he was one of the sweetest, cutest creatures you could ever imagine. For those of you not familiar with the beautiful Bichon Frise, they are pretty, white, fluffy dogs. They have a beautiful soft coat. Over time, Simon became comfortable sitting in my lap. He learned to walk on a leash and loved going for walks. He eventually would take a treat from my hand.
Simon really came alive when I adopted my second dog Jamaica a year later. Jamaica is a black daschound mix with a white tuxedo stripe on her neck. She is an easy going little gal and quite the opposite of Simon in many ways. When I first got her she escaped through a broken door at the back of the house. Luckily, when I called animal control I was able to get her back right away. Simon wagged his tail and just beamed when she came back into the house. He had made a best friend. Simon and Jamaica liked to play together and go for their walk together. They would often sit together on the chair or couch and both would sleep with me in my bed every night. They got loose one other time and ran around the woods being little hellions. Simon must have gotten into the pucker brush because I was picking them off of him for a week!
Simons saw me through the end of a four-year relationship, the successful defense of my dissertation and the awarding of my doctorate, and my move from Ohio back to New Hampshire. He was one of the sweetest and most gentle little guys I have ever known. He was also brave beyond measure, given the reality of his harsh background. There will so many things I will miss about him I probably cannot name them all, but here are some: I will miss our walks together. He loved to lift his leg and pee on every tree, fire hydrant, and pole imaginable! He also loved to sniff around and explore. He loved to bark at other dogs when we came across them on our walk. I will miss his cute little high-pitched bark more than you can imagine. I will miss seeing him and his sister sitting together, playing together or grooming each other. I will miss seeing him do his little happy dance before I placed the plates of food down for him and Jamaica to eat. I will miss saying “time for a walkie!” and seeing Simon get all excited. I will miss seeing his excitement when I came home from work after a long and trying day. I will miss the little puppy kisses Simon gave me on my hand many times when he sat with me or lay with me in bed before going to sleep. I will miss his excited barks when grandma came to get us to go to her house for the day. I will miss the tail wagging and happy expression when I came home from a trip when traveling out of town. I will miss the curious and prolonged looks at me and wondering what he exactly was thinking about. But most of all I will miss the cuddles, the time spent sitting together and me petting his soft, white coat, giving him a kissy on his cheek.
I don’t know if Simon will ever know how much he meant to me. He was giving, loyal and sweet beyond measure. He was also a pack leader when we walked, a gallant prince and a little gentleman. He was a true innocent, giving much more than he received in his short life. I will never have the same relationship with another dog ever again; he was that special. I will miss so many things that I started to take for granted. It was a wake-up call for me to never take these things for granted. It was a wake-up call that I need to stop and appreciate what I have because we are never guaranteed tomorrow.
Simon got a raw deal in life. He got a raw deal because he began life being forced to breed for another person’s greed and being treated like an object in the process. He got a raw deal because he died tragically at the age of 6 ½, going downhill incredibly quickly and leaving this earth much sooner than other dogs of his breed. I hope in the five years he was with me that he found some happiness, peace and solace. I know he gave me so much, and he was brave right up until the end. The day before he died when we cuddled for the last time, I told him I was so sorry he was sick. He looked at me with a knowing expression and slowly closed his eyes, letting me know he understood. Simon, it may not have been everything you dreamed of, but you done good during your time here. You are a veritable little canine hero, and you will forever have my undying gratitude, affection and love. You have done your work now, little bud, and now you can run free forever. I will see you on the other side, when you come bounding up into my loving and waiting arms. RIP Simon I will love your forever and think of you always.

of The Australian Mario Lanza Society
636 Christian St. Philadelphia where 2 years later "Freddie" as he was called by the family was born. When Mario was 9 the family moved to 2040 Mercy St, which was a great improvement on the overcrowded conditions at Christian St. Mario was educated at three schools St Mary Magdalene di Pazzi, the Vare Junior high school and Southern High school, it was said by his teachers that he would rather play sport than study, which from the point of view of his physical build and stamina would stand him in good stead for the endurance to project his voice with the power that was to be so evident in later years. Mario was raised in a house where there was an extensive collection of Caruso records which were played regularly, this was his first exposure to this type of music and singing, he used to sing along with these records, but his first real singing teacher was a baritone Antonio Scarduzzo who saw to it that Mario did not overexert his voice, but tried to steer him towards the learning of solfeggio, but this was one area of music that he could never master, he worked with Scarduzzo for eighteen months, his next teacher was Irene Williams, who not only oversaw his singing lessons but also arranged recitals at society gatherings, the problem with lessons was the lack of money to pay for them, at this time Mario's mother was working to provide this, but for full time lessons it was never enough, but help was at hand William K Huff the concert manager at the Philadelphia Academy of music arranged an audition with Serge Koussevitsky in one of the dressing rooms (Mario was not moving a piano) as is popularly said, Koussevitsky was so impressed that he invited Mario to study with him at Tanglewood in the Berkshires where Koussevitsky ran a school of music for promising singers and musicians, Mario worked hard at his studies and at the completion he sang the role of Fenton in Nicolai's "The Merry Wives of Windsor" not an extremely large role for a tenor but it is demanding, the critics wrote "Another outstanding member of the cast was a young tenor, Mario Lanza, in the part of Fenton" his next big role was as private Cocozza in the U.S.Army based in Marfa Texas, while at this station he auditioned for Peter Lind Hayes and was accepted into the troupe that was performing a series of concerts on army bases around the country at the end of which he played a part in "Winged Victory" a
patriotic musical put together by Moss Hart, the show ran until May 1944, and Mario was discharged from service on 29th January 1945. Mario returned to New York with an army friend Bert Hicks who had a sister Betty living in New York at the time, she was introduced to Mario and they were so attracted to each other that after a short courtship, they were married in a civil ceremony on 13th April 1945. Luck was running Mario's way and through a friend baritone Robert Weede he secured a spot on the ABCs Celanese Hour radio show as a standin for Jan Peerce who was the regular tenor, Mario was thrilled to be in such company, also again through Robert Weede he was selected to do a series of radio shows "Great Moments in Music", which he did between October 1945 and February 1946.
Mario was now studying with Polly Robinson and through her he met Sam Weiler who was to become his business manager, Weiler was of the opinion that Mario needed more serious training and arranged for him to audition for Enrico Rosati who had earlier coached Gigli, Rosati was enraptured with the Lanza voice and agreed immediatly to accept him as a pupil, Mario studied with Rosati for 15 months it was an up and down period for him due mainly to his aversion to study, but he was forever grateful to Rosati for the invaluable teaching that he received from him. Mario joined soprano Agnes Davis for a tour of Canada, they started at Montcalm Palace, Quebec 10th October 1945 and ended in Ontario in November 1946, the tour was a sensation. On 14th April 1947 Mario was to do a recital at the State Teachers College, Shippensberg, Pennsylvania, his accompanist was to Constantine Callinicos, who was to become his lifelong conductor and accompanist. The next milestone was to be the "Bel Canto Trio" Mario, soprano Francis Yeend and baritone George London, they toured The U.S. Canada, Newfoundland and Mexico from July 1947, the tour lasted almost a year, after which they were invited to do one more concert at the Hollywood Bowl, 28th August 1947 with a full symphony orchestra conducted by Eugene Ormandy, as this was to be a night to show Mario off to Louis B Mayer and company, George London graciously left the stage to Mario and Francis Yeend, this was a magnificent concert as the recording proves, both Mario and Francis are in wonderful voice, this was the concert that was to change Mario's whole life and the direction that he would take, and tragically the opera stage was to lose the man whose tenor voice could have been the sensation of the century.
The next short period was to be a whirlwind time for Mario, a screen test for the producers and directors of MGM, voice tests for his ability to produce his voice to the satisfaction of the sound engineers, and after having satisfied all and sundry as to his ability the prize was to be a contract with MGM for seven years, with a payment of a $10,000 bonus and $750 a week for six months while his first movie was being organized, the following six months he could do as he pleased, concerts, radio shows, recordings, whatever he liked, after which he was to make his first movie, for which he would be paid $15,000 and if the movie was a success his payment would be raised to $25,000 for the next movie, for the young man this kind of money and contract was a godsend he could not believe it was all happening, remember this was 1947, and imagine what sums like this would be translated to todays currency, enormous amounts of money, so he signed.
After his first movie "That Midnight Kiss" was completed and while the movie was being redied for release Mario Lanza made his professional opera debut with the New Orleans opera house association as Pinkerton in Puccini's Madam Butterfly with soprano Tomiko Kanazawa, the critical comment after this performance said in part "rarely have we seen a more superbly romantic tenor" also "His exeptionally beautiful voice helps immeasurably", Mario sang two performances of this opera, to the sad loss to the opera world they were destined to be the only times that he would appear in a full opera role.
MGM arranged a promotional tour for Mario, concerts around the USA, and a return engagement at the Hollywood Bowl 24th July 1948, with Kathryn Grayson in support, with the concert tour over Mario returned to New York for a recording session for RCA records, on 5th May 1949 his first recording session with Constantine Callinicos conducting took place, Mario recorded 4 tracks one of which was "Che gelida manina" from La Boheme this recording was voted operatic recording of the year by the National Records Critics Association, and was added to the RCA Hall of Fame. 1950 saw Mario's next movie The Toast of New Orleans from that movie came one of Mario's best known popular songs "Be My Love" this film also had 5 operatic numbers sung by Mario including the Love Duet from Madam Butterfly with Kathryn Grayson, this duet comes near the end of the film, and to see and hear Mario and Kathryn in these roles gives a glimpse of the magic that Mario would have brought to the live opera stage, this film was to establish Mario as a superstar, the film was a success and also the soundtrack, particularly Be My Love and The Bayou Lullaby. Then came the film that all agree was Mario's finest perfomance "The Great Caruso" Mario really put all his effort into this movie, he studied Caruso, his walk, his mannerisms, his stage style everything he could read about Caruso he read, for the time the film was being made Mario Lanza became Caruso, the record of the film was eventually to sell over one million copies and was the first operatic record to reach the heights of a Gold record. After the release of the film Mario went on a Great Caruso concert tour around the country to promote the film with Callinicos as conductor, every venue was sold out within hours of the box offices opening, in Pittsburgh they even sold tickets to the rehersal, and every seat was sold within hours. Mario was a huge success. One of the offer received at this time was from the Coca Cola Corporation for a weekly radio program to be called "The Mario Lanza Show" this offer was accepted and between 26th June 1951 and 22nd August 1952 59 programs were broadcast on CBS and NBC, Mario sang four selections and two from a guest artist, the most frequent guest was to be Canadian singer Giselle MacKenzie, Ray Sinatra was to take charge of the popular songs and Constantine Callinicos the classical numbers, the show was to be produced with a live audience, but after taking note of the over enthusiasm of the audiences at the concerts the management decided that the show would be recorded with audience responses added in, these shows were a showcase of the Lanza talent he sang everything from Cole Porter to Verdi, he sang popular songs, opera arias, religious songs, the whole range, these were to prove a much needed legacy in a couple of years.
success of the Caruso film the next project was to be "The Student Prince"
mario was thrilled as he was looking to make a costume movie, but it was
not to be there were problems with the production from the start and the
film was shelved for the moment, in the meantime the studio insisted that
Mario make "Because You're Mine" his co star was to be Doretta Morrow who
had been a hit on Broadway debut in "The King and I" Mario did not like
the idea of this movie and let everyone know even to the point of describing
it as "Junk", the plot itself is very thin, but the film did produce a
few hit songs for Mario including the title song, also "Granada", a lovely
rendition of "The song the angels sing" also a magnificently feeling and
powerful "The Lords Prayer" my opinion is that this is only equaled anywhere
in the Lanza catalogue by his "Ave Maria" in Serenade, or perhaps his concert
recording of "Agnus Dei". The press got hold of the remarks Mario made,
and also the fact that he did not consider this film worthy of his talents,
and that he was making life difficult for all involved in the project and
they really gave him a bad time with their cutting and pointed articles,
but Mario stuck to his beliefs he just was not happy with this film, but
he got through it, the film was released and the box office partly vindicated
his position, it was not the success that the previous three films had
been. August 1952 was to be another landmark , the recording of the soundtrack
of "The Student Prince", the whole recording was done in single takes,
there were three new songs for the movie one of which was "I'll Walk With
God" which was to become another Lanza classic, the singing on this recording
is nothing short of perfection, from the full powered "Drinking Song"
1956 also saw the return to the recording studio, two records were made the first was "Lanza on Broadway" the second was "Cavalcade of Show Tunes" the first turned out to be a disaster, the record as released has and echo in it and the voice is terribly muted, although I am led to believe the master tape is a very different story, it has no echo and the voice is magnificent, apparently the problem lies with the compression introduced by the sound engineers when the master pressing was made, the second record is a different story, it is briliant throughout. Later in the year Mario was offered a film to be made in Italy, by Titanus-LeCloud Productions, it was again a very lightweight plot, but it was accepted and Mario and family left America on 17th May 1957 and arrived in Naples on 28th May 1957 to a tumultuous welcome from the citizens and dignitaries of Naples, it was hardly the low key arrival that he expected. The prerecording for the film went without a hitch, George Stoll was brought in to arrange the music, Victor Young wrote the title song, the film also was finished on time with no problems, everything was going well away from Hollywood and the personality clashes that were a big part of the problems with quite a number of the stars and studio bosses at that time. The film at the box office was not a great success, it had not advanced much from the other very light plot films, but it did show Mario's voice was as good as ever. By the end of the year a full schedule for 1958 had been agreed to, but first there was to be London and the Royal Command Perfomance on the night of 18th November 1957, contrary to the untrue stories that abound to this day, Mario did attend all the rehersals for the performance, also the stories of a drinking binge for three days before the concert are untrue, Mario was on his best behaviour, and the performance on the night was a tremendous success, with the usually sedate patrons, he got applause, cheers and bravo's, which is not usual at a Royal Command Perfomance, after a followup concert the following week Mario returned to Rome. Next year 1958 started with a tour of the British Isles in January then on to France, Germany, Holland and Belgium, the tour started well enough but later it became clear that Mario was not well and cancellations took place, of the fourty four concerts he was only to be able to complete twenty three, one concert 16th January 1958 at the Royal Albert Hall was recorded in stereo, and is available on CD, it shows that the voice had not suffered at all indeed it is a marvelous and artistically varied performance, on the 13th April 1958 Mario sang at the Osterhalle in Kiel, it was to be his last public appearance in concert. By the end of April he was back in Rome with offers pouring in from all over the world, he was to have toured Australia starting January 1960. In May 1958 Mario signed a contract for a film to be called "For the first time" the pre-recording of the operatic numbers was to take place at the Rome Opera House in August, this was to be a real test of the voice, the members of the Rome orchestra were sceptical of the Lanza voice, many of them thinking that it was a manufactured voice, if he got it wrong here they would be merciless, but he did not get it wrong, and everyone concerned was lavish with their praise, the director of the opera house wanted to give him a contract there and then, but he was not even yet ready to face the opera world, although later he did agree to sing Cavaradossi in Tosca at the 1960 season, "For the first time" was shot in Capri, Paris and Germany, the film was finished on time and on budget and released on 8th August 1959, it was an excellent box office movie, with acclaim for the singing, and acting for Mario and his co-stars, 1959 had been a busy year with new recordings and a succesful movie, he had recorded "The Vagabond King" album, and was starting on the "Desert Song" when he became ill and had to be hospitalized, and was admitted to the "Valle Giulia Clinic" with pneumonia he was released in late August and completed his "Desert Song" recording, it is ironic that at this time Mario had more contracts for more varied work than he had ever had before. 10th September he returned to Cinecitta studios for a recording session, the last item of which was Malotte's "Lords Prayer" this was destined to be his last recording. The next few weeks were taken up with finalizing preparations for a new movie to be called "Laugh Clown Laugh" on 30th September Mario again checked into the "Valle Giulia Clinic" for a check up, where his doctor found signs of arterio sclerosis and high blood pressure, a charity concert in Naples was cancelled, on 6th October he informed the doctors that he was feeling better and would discharge himself the next day.
On the morning of 7th October 1959 Mario Lanza died in circumstances that have been desribed as suspicious, although nothing has ever been proved, and his death certificate states "Heart Attack", he was 38 years old, and so was gone what could have been in different cicumstances the Man and the Voice that could have taken the opera world by storm, and arguably been the greatest operatic tenor of all time. Mario Lanza through his films and records brought opera to people that under other conditions would never have heard it, he has been an inspiration to some of the greatest tenors of later years notably the 3 tenors of today all of whom praise his singing, and speak of the inspiration that Mario Lanza gave to them. He leaves us a great legacy of films and records which we can admire and be really thankful for.
This is only a precis of the life of Mario Lanza for complete biographies the following books are available:-
"The Mario Lanza
story". by Constantine Callinicos
For further information or comment on the site
please email Michael Davis

Tuesday, Wednesday, and Friday were mostly a blur, and I can't recall what we did on those days, but we taught probably 4 or 5 investigator lessons on those days. Thursday is the day our district has a meeting at our church building. Our building is used for three branches: Toamasina, Ankirihiry, and some other branch. Anyway, after it was over, we headed over to this place called the Green Lizard to have lunch. The food is above average quality, but my burger still was not completely cooked. That wasn't cool.
On Saturday, we had an activity. Elder Ratsimbarison signed us up to go to what was supposed to be a branch missionary activity to some zoological park, but it pretty much turned out to be a JAS or young single adult activity. The zoo wasn't very impressive...it was just lemurs and turtles (both in cages) and old trees. We left our house at 7:30 AM and didn't get back until around 5. We normally come back at 8. We did teach many lessons in about 3 hours.but we could have done work that day. Sunday was Sunday as usual. Meetings and lessons that I didn't fully understand, but I'm trying to Learn.There is a neighborhood (I think) called Valpinson in the Ankirihiry area. That is kinda cool. That is the most interesting thing from this week probably.

LANDOVER, Md. -- New York Giants quarterback Daniel Jones downplayed what appeared to be a heated discussion with wide receiver Kenny Golladay late in the fourth quarter of Thursday night's 30-29 loss to the Washington Football Team, saying that Golladay was simply "frustrated."
Golladay, who had three catches for 38 yards on eight targets, was seen yelling in Jones' direction near the bench in the closing minutes of the game.
"He was frustrated with the situation," Jones said afterward. "I don't think it was to me or anyone in particular."
Golladay, who signed a massive free-agent contract that included $40 million guaranteed this offseason, has seven catches for 102 yards in his first two games with the Giants. He was not available for comment after the defeat, which dropped the Giants to 0-2 for the fifth straight season.
New York coach Joe Judge said he saw Jones and Golladay "hugging in the locker room" but that he didn't know anything else about the situation.
Jones said he and Golladay talked in the locker room afterward and that everything was good. The quarterback said he didn't take it personally.
"I'll say again: He wasn't showing me up individually," Jones said. "So, part of the game. Like I said, he's emotional, wants to win. We all do. I respect that."
Part of Golladay's anger appeared to come from his desire to want the ball more. He had only one target in the fourth quarter on Thursday and was covered tightly on it.
"Yeah, I think that is part of it," Jones said. "You certainly want the receivers that want the ball. We'll keep working through it."
Jones said he didn't believe he and Golladay would have a problem moving forward. The signal-caller stressed that the two have a strong relationship and that he appreciates Golladay's passion and the emotion he brings to the table.
Wide receiver Sterling Shepard is close with both players and didn't make much of the dustup.
"I think you guys have that all mixed up," Shepard said. "[Golladay] was just heated at the situation. We needed some big plays, and he was heated at the situation. We all love each other. That is what happens in this game when your emotions get into it. You say what you have to say, and you move on. We all love each other, and we dap it up at the end of the day and give each other a hug and keep on pushing."
Despite being under heavy pressure, Jones played one of the better games of his career on Thursday. He threw for 249 yards and a touchdown and ran for 95 yards and a score. He also had another long touchdown run negated by a penalty.
For the second straight week, it was Shepard, not Golladay, who was Jones' favorite and most dependable target. Shepard caught nine passes on 10 targets for 94 yards against Washington.

Sunday, August 24, 2014
Her - review
Her- is the story of a man that falls in love with his operating system. The operating system has a sexy voice and their love affair is pure bliss for this recently detached man. However, jealous becomes an issue for the two of them and eventually the operating system moves on. I guess I would feel like an ultimate loser to be dumped by my computer.
I caught this film at my local libraries film night. I was joined by three older women that made the experience all the more enjoyable. Their commentary was perfect. One lady said "they're all crazy in this movie" another said "if thats how they have sex in the future they can keep it". As great as the cinematography was and the script was original it was still a nutty lonely person movie. I think the old ladies saw it for what it really was beyond the art.
Giving it two and a half stars....

Abu Dhabi debrief with Toyota's Kamui Kobayashi 03 Nov 2009
If Kamui Kobayashis performance in Brazil during his debut for Toyota had been bold, then his second-ever Formula One race in Abu Dhabi on Sunday was nothing short of brilliant. From 12th on the grid, Kobayashi made the most of his one-stop strategy to finish in sixth, ahead of veteran team mate Jarno Trulli. Here the 23 year-old Japanese driver reflects on his Yas Marina race
Q: What did you think about the new Yas Marina Circuit?
Kamui Kobayashi: The new facility is just amazing and I've never seen a racing track like that. The organisers did a great job with the facilities, which were perfect for everyone. The track itself was interesting and fun to drive; also you could overtake there which makes it even better.
Q: How would you sum up your second Grand Prix weekend?
KK: It was a great weekend for me and I have to thank the team for this opportunity. Sixth place was a fantastic result and better than I imagined at the start of the weekend, so I am very pleased with how things worked out. Still, there is room for improvement and I have several areas to improve, such as qualifying pace. My target was to qualify in the top 10 but I just missed out, so there is a bit of work to do there.
Q: How did you feel when you crossed the line to score your first Formula One points?
KK: I was just really, really happy because my goal since I was a little kid was to be a Formula One driver and to score points in only my second Grand Prix felt great. Actually, I had the potential to finish even higher but I lost a little time in traffic; otherwise I could have been fighting for fourth because I was getting close at the end of the race. It was a great moment to come back to the team after parc ferme and see how happy everyone was.
Q: You had another exciting race, tell us about it
KK: At the start I got a good getaway and managed to pass Kimi (Raikkonen) which was very important for our one-stop strategy. If I had been behind him during my first stint it would have been much tougher to score points but when I was past I concentrated on setting consistently fast lap times, even though I had a heavy fuel load. Towards the end of my first stint Jenson (Button) came out of the pits just in front of me. He was heavier than me and on cold tyres so I was able to pass him. Again that was important because I needed some fast laps at that time to make my strategy work. On the option tyres I struggled a bit to start with but then I found a rhythm and just kept going faster and faster, so at the end I was getting close to the battle for fourth.
Q: How did it feel to overtake two world champions?
KK: I don't think about them as world champions; they are just my rivals on the track like everyone else and my job is to get past them if I can. It's fun to battle on track, particularly when you can overtake, but I'm only thinking about my race position, not about what another driver has won or whatever.
Q: How did you prepare for this race? Did you concentrate on anything specific after Brazil?
KK: Well, I didn't know for sure I would be driving until the week of the race but obviously there was a chance because of Timo's (Glock) injury. So I spent as much time as I could in Cologne at the factory; I was only at home in Paris for one day after Brazil. We looked at all the information from Brazil and identified areas to improve - things like car set-up, tyre management, communication with engineers. We studied everything and thought about improvements, which really paid off. One area I particularly worked hard on was race pace because that wasn't perfect in Brazil, so when I started the race I was confident I had the potential to get into the points.
Q: Were you happy with your qualifying performance?
KK: It was not bad but I was aiming for the top 10 and I definitely think I had the potential to do that. In the end I was just a tenth of a second away which was a bit disappointing. But as we proved on race day, I was close enough to finish in the top six so everything worked out well.
Q: What will you do now?
KK: My first priority is to take a holiday! For the past two years I have hardly had a day off with GP2, GP2 Asia and Formula One testing so I am really looking forward to a bit of a break to relax and recharge my batteries. After that, we'll see what happens.

Thursday, August 23, 2012
Counting Down The Days
Why yes, yes I am ready to get this wisdom tooth cut out! Why do you ask? (It's not really in Jackson, by the way. It's going to be here, but I don't feel like going back and changing it.)
I was able to get the three days off that I wanted. Friday wasn't open, but when I told my supervisor that I was having my wisdom tooth cut out, and that I'd just have to call in sick that day, he said, "Go ahead and put it down." He's good about working with you that way. I'm glad. I could have put in for FMLA, but it would have been a lot more paperwork. It's easier just taking vacation time.
I realized something after I'd scheduled my appointment. That is Labor Day week. I'll only have to go to work one day that week. How's that for planning?
After much deliberation, I've decided to drop my Netflix DVD account. Recently, more and more of the discs I've been receiving have been unplayable. Seems like half of them I end up having to send back and wait for a replacement, so I went ahead and dropped them. I still have the streaming account, though.
In it's place, I've picked up Amazon Prime. They have instant videos, and you can borrow some Kindle books. Plus, it's about a third of the price. I'm going to try it for a while.
In knitting news, I'm still plugging away at the Arwen Wrap. It won't be much longer now.
Oh, and I was texting my sister yesterday, and it's already getting down into the 20s there already. It's still up into the 90s here, but getting down into the 60s at night. It won't be much longer until fall is here!

LAS VEGAS -- J.R. Smith doesn't know Jason Kidd that well personally, but he knows he wants to be on the court with the future Hall of Fame point guard.
Smith has been a sixth man for the bulk of his career and Kidd is expected to come off the bench as a backup to Jeremy Lin. But unless the Knicks make a move for a starting shooting guard, Smith would seem to be the likeliest candidate to play that role. Smith made his preference clear.
"Wherever J-Kidd is, that's where I want to be," Smith said Friday. "I love his game . . . I love his demeanor toward the game, how serious he takes the game. I've heard he's one of the best teammates. He's a class act, from my understanding."
It was Smith's first public remarks since re-signing with the Knicks for two years and about $5.6 million. He said he had offers for more money.
"I pretty much knew I was going to sign," Smith said. "I really don't want to go nowhere else. I'm comfortable in my situation. I got a great opportunity from the team last year to come here and help and contribute. I really don't think I did that last year. I still got a lot to prove. I'm excited."
Smith averaged 12.5 points in 27.6 minutes in the regular season but struggled in the playoff series against Miami, shooting 31.6 percent, including 17.9 percent from three-point range. Smith knows he can do better and believes Kidd will help him.
"It's open shots all day," Smith said. "Our job is just to make them. With J-Kidd, he's finding everybody. Not only is he going to help myself and [Steve] Novak, he's going to help our bigs as well."
Chris Smith is an undrafted guard out of Louisville. He's not as big or explosive as his brother, but he has a chance to get invited to Knicks training camp.
"Right now, I'm just out here fighting for a spot like all of the other guys on the team," Chris Smith said. "I'm not looking for anything to be given to me. I'm just going to play my cards right and hopefully, they're dealt the right way."
Smith played for Manhattan before transferring to Louisville. He gave up his scholarship so the team could give it to other players. J.R. paid for Chris to stay at Louisville, and he helped the Cardinals reach the Final Four this year.
Chris said J.R. is helping him again and that having him with the Knicks helps his chance of sticking around.
"I feel like it's in my favor," Chris Smith said. "But who knows. It's the NBA. I have a lot to show and this is my chance. I got five or six games to show if I'm going to take it."

I'm sure I've said it on here before but I'm blessed with 2 amazing families. My family has always been there for me and Tara's parents are the best in-laws anyone could ask for.
We had two full days of events on Christmas Eve and Christmas Day and we had such a good time.
I love being able to spend time with both sets of parents over Christmas and am so thankful that we have that ability.
Of course we both received wonderful gifts from everyone but the most special part of Christmas for us is getting to spend time with those we love.
I hope everyone had as beautiful of a Christmas as we did.

The Airmen's Stories - F/Lt. J S Adams
Jack Sylvester Adams was born on 17th May 1911. He began his training with the RAF in January 1936, was commissioned in March and posted to 2 FTS Digby on 2nd May. On completion of his training he joined 29 Squadron at Debden on 10th January 1937. He was still serving with 29 in September 1939 and served with the squadron in the Battle of Britain.
One night in August 1940 Adams sighted an enemy aircraft and chased it for fifty minutes before making contact off the South Coast. After attacking his quarry over the sea and having apparently destroyed it, Adams returned to Digby and landed with both fuel gauges reading nil. This action was mentioned in the citation when he was awarded the DFC (gazetted 24th September 1940).
On 28th October Adams was posted to 303 Squadron at Leconfield as a Flight Commander. He was given command of 151 Squadron at Wittering in January 1941, an appointment he held until October when he was posted to staff duties at HQ 12 Group.
Adams returned to operations in April 1942, taking command of 256 Squadron at Squires Gate as an Acting Wing Commander. He remained with 256 until October.
On 5th April 1943 he was posted to a staff job at the Air Ministry in the Directorate of Operations (Air Defence). A further tour of operations followed in 1944, with 226 Squadron, for which Adams was awarded a Bar to the DFC (gazetted 29th August 1944).
Adams stayed in the RAF after the war and retired on 27th July 1958 as a Wing Commander, retaining the rank of group Captain. In 1958 he was appointed Commander in the Order of Orange Nassau.
He died in July 1993 in Ashford.

Lick It And Stick It
Bethenny Frankel has some love for the ladies of the ATL.
This will be my last blog (except for after the reunion), so a few of you will be happy. Thanks for all of your support, and in particular for defending the absolute nonsense that I have even a racist bone in my body. Just as when Jill Zarin says bra with an "r" is typical of a Jewish American Princess, someone who says "i have a lot of weave" is most likely said by someone of African American descent. Now onto the show.
We started the show with a seemingly forced lunch scene with Sheree, Kim, and Lisa. It was the mutual diamond admiration society and then we moved on to the meat of the matter which was a get-together. Lisa was right in that it was utterly rude to not show up to the sunset BBQ without calling. They rudely called NeNe a drag queen, and Kim told Sheree how beautiful she was once again. Lisa invited everyone to a family dinner and Kim and Sheree agreed to go binding this agreement with a pinky swear. Yes, a pinky swear. BFF 4eva. The scene was cute with DeShawn and her husband while playing basketball. They were reminiscing about the old times when Red Lobster was an extravagant celebration and how they lived on Ramen and Hamburger Helper. She told him she always believed in him, and he remembered that she was his No. 1 fan. I just think she is genuinely sweet and cute.
The next scene involves Kim and her assistant and some signicant Gucci, Neimans, and Chanel label dropping and we learn that Kim bought a bunch of dresses because she felt important. I actually found that funny and honest. The crucial point of that scene was her conversation with Dallas in which he tried to motivate her about her going to singing boot camp, quitting smoking, and the importance of being passionate versus just "doing it." She seemed flabbergasted at the thought of running while singing for three hours. That does seem daunting. I hadn't even ever heard of that.
I really liked the scene with Sheree and Michael Knight from Project Runway. Sheree was endearing in this scene and for the first time she was humble and genuinely was looking for guidance. She looked very pretty in this scene, and she does have good skin. Kim was right about that. She did need a reality check and to understand that you have to live and breathe your designs and be involved in every part of the process -- she learned this the hard way at her non-fashion show.
I do, however, respect that she didn't want to show her poorly made designs. Michael was shocked that she didn't choose her own fabric. When she told him that she was grand, he communicated to her that she should worry less about grandness and be more hands on. He told her that her line is an infant and that her DNA has to be in it. Truer words have never been spoken. I have put my heart and soul into projects that have been failures much less what would happen if i wasn't totally invested. Hopefully this lesson was learned by Sheree before she wastes a ton of money. Sheree seemed to heed his advice. I thought it was interesting that he said that many athletes' wives embark on similar ventures thinking that money will create the success. Passion is the real ingredient necessary to make this recipe work.
Everyone seemed to look very pretty this week. In the scene with NeNe and her letter to Curtis, she looked great in her green tube top. She really is sweet and I love her NeNe-isms like when she was sending the letter and she said to "lick it and stick it." She doesn't seem ready to go on the journey to search for her biological father. Having had nothing to do with my father for all of my life, I relate to this range of emotions.
I love Ed and Lisa. In their kitchen scene, we see that they are dedicated to working it out, that football is his first love, and that she simply fears him ending up in a wheelchair. They are best friends. I love them and aspire to a relationship like this.
I also loved the chicken a la Lisa. My favorite part was their "cooking outfits." They both looked beautiful and truthfully, that chicken looked delicious. I like how they browned it first. The only thing i would have done differently would be to saute the peppers before they add them for maximum flavor. Yummy.
Now to Kim's smoking scene. She has been smoking since she was 15, so this will not be an easy habit to break. Although not entirely healthy or appropriate, it was endearing that her daughters sleep in bed with her. Where does Big Pappa sleep? I also think Kim has great skin especially for someone who smokes like a chimney.
Lisa's party looked like a real blast. The place was fun and that cake looked divine. Sheree was carrying that blinged out Chanel bag that Kim was wearing earlier. Thank god for Chanel!!!! Sheree wanted nothing to do with NeNe. In fact she told us that she ignores ignorant people. So she ignores people who ignore??? When told that NeNe didn't have to take a photo with Sheree, she said "I sure don't." Frankly, I think NeNe and Sheree were both being immature. Take the silly picture. It isn't about you but about Lisa.
I loved the Brice graduation scenes and I liked that NeNe wanted a safe car for him. He seems like a well-behaved son, and although they're buying him a new car, he doesn't seem spoiled. I like that NeNe said she wanted him to be a young, strong, independent black man. I love them. I especially thought it was hilarious when she told her husband that Brice would drive off in that pickup with all of his stuff thus making the sale.
Sheree's children are adorable and I love that they got all As and Bs. She must be doing something right.
While getting ready for Lisa's party, we saw Kim's daughter's astounding closet. She has way more expensive clothing than I do. I do, however think that she is a good mother. We got to see the Swiss Miss dress again in this scene which makes me giggle. I also like that she doesn't want any NeNe drama in front of her children. Let's just see if she can quit smoking as promised. Now we go to Lisa's dinner party. It is so cute how Ed compliments Lisa's pumps. At the party, can you say AWKWARD? NeNe makes it clear (which i love) that she doesn't like to pretend. She also mentions that she doesn't like drama which I don't exactly believe. I loved when she said "How small of you" to Kim whether or not it is true. Kim looked like a deer in headlights and not very confrontational. I loved Gregg's pep speech but it didn't seem to really be effective. I think the pleasantries thereafter were just to get through the day. We'll see the claws come out at the reunion. I liked the most about this ending that all of the women are good mothers and most of them are great family people. I do believe that comes first. I also loved Kim's quote: "I ask, I believe and I receive." Again, whether or not that will happen, I have no idea.
We learn that Kim goes to country singer boot camp, Ed doesn't end up going to Oakland, NeNe is a free bird who tells it like it is (um we knew that) and the rest remains to be seen. Until the reunion. Then I can really let it rip.

Our flock is free range. We didn't close the coop a couple nights and in the morning while it was still dark they were outside and there was a bit of a ruckus. It's possible something got to them when they went out in the morning or even maybe got into the coop at night. Either way what we found left was just guts near the coop and the chickens hiding. Needless to say we've made sure to lock them up at night and not let them out till later in the morning. Just wondering what we're dealing with. Any ideas?

Jacobs’s mother died when she was only six years old, and then she moved in with her late mother’s owner, who taught the girl to sew and read. With the help of the Philadelphia Vigilance Committee, she was able to escape in 1842 at the age of twenty-nine, and got work as a nanny in New York, staying away from her former owners for ten years until she officially bought her freedom.
She then went on to write an autobiography that was published in multiple countries. Until her death in 1897, she was an abolitionist and was dedicated to helping slaves and freedmen.
Zora Neale Hurston – Author
Zora Neale Hurston is now one of the most legendary Black writers in American history, but it almost wasn't so. As a child, she had to stop attending school after her father stopped paying the school fees, and then she had to lie about her age at public school in order to get a free education.
She was an author, a filmmaker, and a student of Hoodoo (the American version of Voodoo), and her most famous book, “Their Eyes Were Watching God,” became a famous film in 2005. She was also, of all things, an anthropologist during her spare time.
Nipsey Hussle – Rapper and Entrepreneur
Born and raised in Los Angeles, Hussle was first known as Ermias Joseph Asghedom, and he was an activist, business owner, and Grammy-winning rapper. While young, he had to join gangs to survive before he was able to find success with his music. He was dedicated to providing opportunities and solutions to young Black men that go beyond joining gangs as he did.
Just one day before he was going to meet with LAPD officials about gang violence in South Los Angeles in 2019, he fell to the very thing that he had spent so long making music to defuse – gang violence.
Nina Simone – Musician
Eunice Waymon, which you probably know as Nina Simone, had a hand in every part of the recording industry, as well as working as a civil rights activist. Her music escaped the bounds of genre. She learned to play piano as a toddler in the church where her father was a teacher.
She made it to the white side of town to study with a German piano teacher, and then made it into nothing less than The Juilliard School. She eventually helped create more than forty albums and received an honorary degree from the Curtis Institute mere days before she passed away in 2003.
Big Mama Thornton – Singer
With a name like Big Mama Thornton, you know you're getting a big personality, too. Big Mama is best known for her Rhythm and Blues recording “Hound Dog,” which was later covered by Elvis, and her song “Ball and Chain,” which was later covered by Janis Joplin.
Her name came from both her size and her incredible voice. As a child, she sang in a church until she caught the attention of an Atlanta music promoter. She sang her way through the south, playing at such famous hot spots as the Cotton Club and the Apollo Theater into the seventies.

In People v. Turner, 86 Cal.App.2d 791 [ 195 P.2d 809], the defendant Nickson told the officers that he was not present at the shooting and was not aware of the shooting until the next day when he returned to get his lunch pail.Summary of this case from People v. Davis
Docket No. 4210.
July 19, 1948.
APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Los Angeles County and from an order denying a new trial. William R. McKay, Judge. Affirmed.
Prosecution for murder. Judgment of conviction of manslaughter affirmed.
Horace Appel and J.V. McDermott for Appellants.
Fred N. Howser, Attorney General, and Henry A. Dietz, Deputy Attorney General, for Respondent.
In an information filed by the District Attorney of Los Angeles County, defendants were charged with the crime of murder. After the entry of not guilty pleas and waiver of trial by jury, the cause proceeded to trial before the court. Both defendants were found guilty of the crime of manslaughter, a lesser and necessarily included offense. Following the denial of their motion for a new trial, judgment was pronounced against them. From such judgment and order denying their motion for a new trial, both defendants prosecute this appeal.
As the sole ground urged by both appellants for reversal of the judgment and order is that the evidence is insufficient to sustain their convictions, it becomes necessary to set forth in some detail the evidence adduced at their trial.
Appellant Maydell Turner occupied room 19 in an apartment house located at 123 North San Pedro Street in the city of Los Angeles, with the deceased Oran Young, as man and wife, although unmarried. Appellant Nickson, who was the brother of appellant Turner, lived at 509 Banning Street, which was approximately four or five blocks from the residence of his sister.
The deceased and appellant Nickson were both employed by the Los Angeles County Forestry and Weed Abatement Division and they usually went to work together, leaving the former's apartment at approximately 7 a.m. They finished their daily work at 4:30 p.m. and would generally arrive at the apartment of deceased and appellant Turner about 5:15 p.m. Appellant Nickson, upon arrival at the apartment, would usually leave his lunch pail with his sister.
On June 23, 1947, this procedure occurred and appellant Nickson went to the deceased and appellant Turner's apartment, left his lunch pail there, drank a can of beer, remaining in the apartment approximately 15 minutes with his sister and deceased, after which he went to his own home on Banning Street. He remained there for approximately one hour and a half, returning to the foregoing room 19, where he drank two more cans of beer. At that time there were present in the apartment two or three people other than appellant Turner and the deceased, among them being one Sam Sutton, who had gone into the apartment to obtain the return of a tool which he had loaned to the deceased.
The witness Charles Washum resided at 123 North San Pedro Street with his wife in room 36. He had been there for two and a half years and was acquainted with both appellants and the deceased for some time. At approximately 7:35 o'clock on the evening of June 23, 1947, the witness Washum was sitting in his room drinking a half pint of whiskey with his wife and one Charles "Hogjaw" Stewart. Washum saw someone standing out in the hall, arose and looked into the hallway where he observed appellant Nickson standing in front of the apartment of the witness Washum. The latter said, "Hello, Johnnie," and appellant Nickson replied, "Hello," to him, and then put his head inside Washum's door, saying, "I am watching a little something," or "In a few minutes I want to speak to somebody and I will be through in a few minutes," or "I am staying here a few minutes," or some words to that effect. Washum, his wife and guest then resumed their consumption of whiskey, and approximately 10 minutes later heard the firing of a gun, which according to the witness Washum, sounded "like a cap gun." Washum, his wife and guest, saw appellant Nickson running down the hall, whereupon they all went into the hall when they heard two more shots fired, saw a gun passed to appellant Nickson by appellant Turner, which the former placed in his right hand pocket and started to run, going approximately 20 feet when he turned around, went back to the door of room 19, had some conversation with appellant Turner, obtained some money from her, and then ran down the hall and disappeared. The witness Washum heard a total of five shots. His room was approximately 40 feet down the hall from room 19. According to his testimony, the gun was passed after the shots were fired. A few moments later, Washum went down to room 19 where he saw appellant Turner standing over the deceased who was still living, and he heard her say, "I told you it would happen if you drew a knife on me," or some words to that effect. Washum then returned to his own room, but shortly thereafter again went to room 19 when he saw the deceased lying on a bed. This witness saw no knife in the room, nor were the investigating officers able to locate a knife in the room. When the police arrived, the deceased was lying on the bed, and appellant Turner was present. In the room where deceased was shot was a large round table in the center of the floor, a stove, a small square table and some built-in cabinets along the wall, the square table being covered by oilcloth. Investigating officers did not find any weapon at all in the room, but did find four empty shells of a .380 caliber pistol on the floor under the table. A scientific expert from the Los Angeles Police Department, investigating the apartment, found a .380 caliber copper-jacketed bullet in the floor 12 inches inside the door of room 19, the course of which bullet he traced. He received a bullet similar to it from the person in charge of the laboratory of the General Hospital where the deceased expired, and testified that in his opinion the two bullets came from the same gun. He also located two bullet holes in the tablecloth.
A police officer questioned deceased at the Los Angeles Receiving Hospital in the presence of appellant Turner, and asked him how he was wounded, but deceased refused to talk stating that he "could not talk against his own." Appellant Turner made no statement on that occasion.
Officer Detrich of the Los Angeles Police Department had a conversation in the Lincoln Heights City Jail on June 24, 1947, with appellant Turner, at which time she told the officer that she and deceased were in the room, that she was standing with her back to the rear of the room by the telephone, which is near the head of the bed, that she heard some shots ring out, but that she did not know who fired them, that they must have been fired in the hallway because the deceased was in the hallway at the time. Later conversations with her resulted in the statement on her part, "Just like I told you the first time."
The same officer had a conversation with appellant Nickson on June 29, at the Central Police Station, asking him if he was at room 19 the night of the shooting, or whether he was in the building on that evening, to which inquiries appellant Nickson stated that he had not been there, that he had been there earlier in the evening and that appellant Turner was there with the deceased, two other ladies and a man, that he had not known who they were because he was not introduced; that he left the apartment about 6:30 or 7 p.m. and went home; that he did not know that the deceased had been shot until he returned the next morning to pick up his lunch pail on his way to work. When asked to explain why he had not attempted to see his sister after she had been arrested, in view of the fact that he had expressed such an affection for her, he would make no explanation. When, on June 23, in the office of the district attorney, he was asked whether he thought all the witnesses at the inquest were lying, he answered by saying, "I don't know nothing about it."
Appellant Nickson testified in his own behalf at the trial that appellant Turner was his sister; that on the date of the homicide he went to his sister's room at about 5:15 or 5:30 p.m.; that he put his dinner pail down and drank a can of beer, remaining for approximately 10 or 15 minutes, and then went to his own residence on Banning Street. That after remaining at home for awhile, he returned to room 19 and consumed two more cans of beer; that at that time, appellant Turner, the deceased, and two or three other people whose names he did not know were present. That after about 15 or 20 minutes at his sister's room he left and went to a pool hall where he remained approximately 20 or 25 minutes, after which he again returned to room 19. That he then left his sister's room, went to the restroom, and when returning to room 19 thought he saw a lady he recognized going down the hall toward Charles "Hogjaw" Stewart's room, that for that reason he passed by his sister's door, went down the hallway a short distance and discovered that he was mistaken in his identification of the lady. That while he was standing there watching the lady go up the stairs, Stewart opened his door and said, "Hello, Johnnie," to which appellant Nickson replied, "Just fine, hello." That Stewart said, "What happened?," to which Nickson replied, "Oh, nothing, I was just watching a little something." That upon approaching the door to his sister's room he heard his sister say, "You better go ahead on, Oran, I have told you about drawing that knife on me." That he immediately entered room 19 and as he pushed the door open he saw his sister "making a backward motion to the doorway" with a gun in her right hand. That he went in, grabbed the gun out of his sister's hand, pushed her into the corner, stepped over to the left of her, and as he turned around the deceased "made a step forward" and pushed the door closed; that the deceased appeared to be very angry, saying, "I am getting tired of these God-damned lies." That he then observed that the deceased had a knife in his right hand whereupon he told the deceased that "they should be ashamed of themselves" and asked what was the matter; that he also asked the deceased to sit down, but that the latter "made a step forward" with the knife raised and then attempted to take another "step forward." That at the time deceased was advancing toward him, appellant Nickson believed that he was in danger of death or great bodily harm, and further believed that his sister was in danger of bodily injury. That he then fired three times at the deceased but was unaware whether any of those bullets hit him for the reason that the deceased continued to stand upright following the third shot, and he then fired two more. That deceased had his arm in a "striking position" at the time appellant Nickson fired the last of the five shots. The deceased then fell to the floor and said, "Johnny, please don't kill me," to which appellant Nickson answered, "I have no intention of killing you, Mr. Oran. I just wanted to stop you from killing one of us." That thereupon, appellant Nickson's sister told him to leave the room and just as he was leaving his sister said, "Watch that knife." That he then immediately left the building and threw the gun in some trash between two buildings near by. That after this he went back to his sister's room and asked her if she didn't think he should remain, to which she answered that he should not. That thereupon he ran out and boarded a streetcar. That he had never fired a gun before in his life. That the gun used by him was owned by the deceased. He further testified that in 1944, deceased had cut his sister on the arm; that on January 19, 1945, the deceased had cut his sister's throat, chased her down San Pedro Street with a knife, and that she escaped by taking refuge in a market.
Appellant Nickson denied that he received any money from his sister. He at no time told the police that he had thrown the gun away, nor did he ever seek to locate it.
Appellant Maydell Turner testifying in her own behalf stated that she was the "common law" wife of the deceased and had been living with him since June, 1944; that she had been attacked and cut by the deceased on June 23, 1946, but had refused to prosecute because of his threats to kill her if she did so. That in November, 1944, he had cut her arm with a knife, and again in January, 1945, had cut her in the neck, inflicting an injury which required 12 stitches. That deceased had constantly carried a knife and would usually get "fighting mad" after he had a few drinks. That on June 23, 1947, she saw appellant Nickson in the afternoon about 5 o'clock when he brought his lunch pail to her apartment and consumed a can of beer; that he left for a short while and returned about 6 or 6:15 p.m. That the shooting occurred about 8 o'clock. That appellant Nickson had been out for a short while and when he came in the deceased was behind the door with a knife which he had drawn on appellant Turner who had a gun in her hand; that appellant Nickson then took the gun out of her hand and deceased shut the door saying that he was tired of "them God-damned lies"; that appellant Nickson said, "Mr. Oran, you ought to be ashamed to yourself." That deceased was standing up at this time with a knife in his hand, took a step forward, raised the knife and with a vile epithet started toward both her and her brother; that the latter asked the deceased to stop; that the next thing she heard were the shots, but that she did not see the shooting because she was trying to get to the outer door into the hall; that when she turned around she saw the deceased lying on the floor and thereupon told appellant Nickson that he should leave, which he did, but later returned, when she again told him to leave, with which request he complied. Appellant Turner testified that she saw the deceased's knife at the preliminary examination, that it was a greenhandled knife, but this testimony is at complete variance with all the other testimony concerning the knife, which was that the same had never been located, and, so far as the record shows, it was never introduced in evidence. Appellant Turner testified she was in fear of her life at the time the deceased was advancing upon her.
Appellant Turner further testified that deceased Oran Young had taken the gun from his trunk that afternoon when he arrived home from work and had placed it in his dresser drawer so that she knew where it was because she observed him through a mirror; that she got the gun from the drawer and put it in the kitchen cabinet in a green bowl and when deceased advanced on her with the knife that she remembered where she had put the gun and grabbed it. That after Young had been shot she picked him up and put him on the bed with the help of Mr. Dockins, and that after she had put him on the bed Young made another lunge at her with the knife.
Appellant Turner further testified that the reason she did not prosecute Young for the previous assaults made upon her with the knife was because of her fear that he would kill her; that she had gone to San Francisco for a period of a week on one occasion to escape him and had returned to Los Angeles only because she could not obtain a job in the north; that upon her return she stayed with her sisters and brothers and because of her fear of Young she arranged with her relatives to call for her at the streetcar, escort her home and to take her from her home to the car, all because of the fact that the deceased continued to molest her. She denied that the witness Washum had come into the apartment after the shooting. Prior to the shooting there had been a few words about drinking. That she, Virgie Mae Williams, Tom Johnson and Charlie Green were playing "Pokino" when the deceased came in, whereupon the following occurred: "He said that — I was telling him the doctor had released me to onc t a week for the treatments I was taking. I was taking him twi st a week, and I was telling him. He said, `You are drinking again.' And I told him no, I wasn't drinking. He said I was a damn liar. This girl Virgie May said, `Papa King, baby sister is not drinking. If she was I would tell you.' He said, `I don't have any damn voice in this house.' I turned around and said, `You have as much voice in the house as anyone else.' That is the argument from that."
It was about 20 or 30 minutes later, according to appellant Turner, that the deceased ordered her guests to leave, which they did. She denied telling officers that she had said that somebody out in the hall must have shot the deceased, but admitted that she had told the arresting officer that she did not know who had shot Young.
The witness Clarence Dockins lived in room 23 at 123 North San Pedro Street. He was attracted by the shots and immediately went to room 19 where he was told by appellant Turner to call the police and telephone for an ambulance, which he did. He then picked up the deceased and placed him on the bed and testified he saw a knife lying between the table and the stove, that at that time deceased asked the witness to pick up the knife, which he refused to do. That the deceased also asked appellant Turner to pick up the knife, and she also declined. That the knife had a blade of approximately 5 or 6 inches in length. This witness further testified that approximately 15 or 20 minutes before the homicide he had been in room 19 with the deceased and appellant Turner, and that the former had forced him out of the room with a knife. This witness testified he had not seen decedent attempt to cut appellant Turner while the former was lying on the bed.
The contention that the evidence is insufficient to sustain the conviction of appellant Nickson is grounded on the claim that the only hypothesis the evidence will support is that the slaying was in self-defense, and that it was clear that appellant Nickson was entitled to invoke the right of self-defense for the protection of his sister against an attempt by the deceased to murder her or do her great bodily injury. It is further urged that there was no conflict in the evidence concerning the events leading up to and at the time Young was shot. That, therefore, the testimony given by the appellants was the only evidence upon which the court's decision could be based.
With reference to appellant Turner, it is asserted: "The adjudging of appellant Turner guilty of voluntary manslaughter presents a most anomalous and incongruous state of affairs.
"Since the very nature of this offense makes it necessary to exclude as elements thereof such things as malice, premeditation, aiding, abetting, conspiring, concert of intent and the like it is an inescapable conclusion that she cannot be guilty of voluntary manslaughter under the evidence in this case.
"If her co-appellant is guilty of voluntary manslaughter she cannot be guilty; conversely, if she is guilty he is innocent.
"In the very nature of things both cannot be guilty. Of course, as regards her participation there is no evidence whatsoever to the effect that she pulled the trigger of the gun which killed Young."
 Application of the law of self-defense has been before the courts on many occasions, and it is now firmly established, as contended by appellants, that it is based on the reasonable appearance of imminent peril of death of, or serious bodily injury to the party assailed, or the one sought to be protected.  However, it is equally well established in our law that while the right of self-defense is available to a defendant, the question of whether resort thereto was necessary or proper is a question of fact for determination by the jury or, in this case, by the trial judge.
In the instant case, it is readily apparent that the trial judge did not believe the testimony of appellants or of the witness Clarence Dockins, that the deceased was armed with a knife or that there was a knife in the room, but chose to believe the testimony of the officers that upon their arrival there was no knife in the room, and to rely upon circumstances to be hereinafter referred to.
 Where the evidence, circumstantial or otherwise, shows that a crime has been committed and that it was perpetrated by the defendant, the applicable rule is that on appeal the court will not retry the case, nor attempt to determine the weight of the evidence or the credibility of witnesses. Before an appellate tribunal is authorized to reverse a judgment upon the ground of "insufficiency of evidence," it must clearly appear that upon no hypothesis whatever was there evidence of sufficient substantiality to support the conclusion arrived at by the duly constituted arbiter of the facts. And this is true although the facts and circumstances shown in evidence might reasonably be reconciled with the innocence of the accused. ( People v. Newland, 15 Cal.2d 678, 681 [ 104 P.2d 778].)
When analyzed, the case at bar presents a situation wherein it manifestly appears that the evidence was clearly in conflict.
There was testimony that appellant Nickson was standing out in the hallway just prior to the shooting and was standing in the hallway immediately thereafter; that he received a gun from his sister in the hallway, ran down the hallway, returned, received some money from her and then hurried away. That all of the shots were fired prior to the time that he received the weapon from his sister in the hallway. In addition to that, we have the testimony of both appellants with respect to threats and actual attacks with a knife by the deceased upon appellant Turner.
In conflict with their testimony given at the trial, we have the statement of appellant Nickson to police officers that he was not present at the time of the shooting, and that he was unaware of the same until he returned the following day to pick up his lunch pail. We also have the story told to police officers by appellant Turner, that the shooting was done from outside of the room; that the deceased was in the hallway at the time he was shot, and that she did not know who shot Young. Both of these statements, as well as the flight of appellant Nickson, are circumstances tending to evidence consciousness of guilt.
 Guilty knowledge, as well as intent to violate the law, may be shown by the facts and circumstances in the case, including the conduct of an accused, and any false or misleading statements he may make to the arresting officers or others with relation to material facts, for the purpose of misleading, or warding off suspicion. Such conduct is receivable in evidence as indicating a consciousness of guilt, and such false statements, though not conclusive of guilt, may strengthen inferences of guilt arising from other facts. ( People v. Gibson, 64 Cal.App.2d 537, 539 [ 149 P.2d 25]; People v. Amaya, 44 Cal.App.2d 656, 659 [ 112 P.2d 942]; 8 Cal.Jur. 43.)
 The evidence further shows that immediately after the shooting, appellant Turner was standing over the deceased, who was at that time alive and sitting in a pool of blood, at which time she stated, "I told you it would happen if you drew a knife on me." From this the trier of facts was entitled to infer that there had been a quarrel as well as previous threats on the part of appellant Turner to do bodily harm to the deceased if he molested her. There is also the showing that appellant Turner saw the deceased obtain his gun from his trunk and place it in a drawer, that she took it therefrom and placed it in a cabinet, and that at the time she claimed he threatened her with a knife, she obtained the gun and had it in her hand pointing the same at the deceased. This statement is directly in conflict with what she told police officers.
The testimony of appellant Nickson given at the trial was substantially the same as that of his sister. He stated he took the gun from her hand, and upon being threatened by the deceased who was armed with a knife, that he then shot him five times. This also is in direct conflict with the statement this appellant gave to the police as hereinbefore set forth. There is further evidence that there was no knife in the room and that the deceased was not in possession of a knife at any time. There was further testimony concerning the empty cartridge shells which were found in the room on the floor, and that a bullet was found in the room, that a tracing of the course of the bullet showed that it had been fired from inside of the room which was in contradiction of the statement made to the police by appellant Turner that the deceased was shot from outside the room.
Viewing the conflicting evidence in the light most favorable to the prosecution, as we are bound to do following a determination of guilt, it is manifest that the court gave credence to the testimony and circumstances tending to show that appellants acted in concert to attack the deceased, and that the latter was not in possession of a knife with which he was threatening or menacing them.
In view of the decision finding appellants guilty of manslaughter it would appear that the court decided that the homicide was committed in the heat of passion or during a quarrel, thus constituting manslaughter (Pen. Code, § 192, subd. 1). That there was a quarrel is substantiated by testimony that prior to the homicide deceased appeared to be in a contentious and quarrelsome mood, had ordered the guests of appellant Turner from the room, had argued with her relative to her drinking, and was resentful of the fact that he did not have "any damn voice in this house."
There being substantial evidence that insofar as the events of the evening here in question are concerned, appellants were acting in concert, the question of which appellant actually fired the fatal shots is not of any great moment, and in that regard it is conceded that appellant Nickson did fire the shots.  The liability of an accused for a criminal act is fixed by the provisions of sections 31 and 971 of the Penal Code, under the terms of which all persons "concerned" are principals, whether "concerned" directly, or by aiding and abetting in its commission. By these sections it is manifest that one who, not being the principal actor, but who assists in the commission of a crime, is regarded as a principal. One may aid or abet in the commission of a crime without having previously entered into a conspiracy to commit a crime.  While the mere presence alone of an accused at the scene of a homicide is not sufficient to make him a participant, and while it does not necessarily follow that he is guilty because he does not prevent it, his presence sometimes may be a circumstance tending to support a finding that he is a principal. In the case now engaging our attention we are persuaded that there is evidence of such a character as to warrant the court in concluding that appellant Turner assisted or supplemented the efforts of appellant Nickson, with knowledge of the wrongful purpose of the latter, and by her actions and conduct incited, encouraged or aided him in the commission of a crime, thus making her liable as a principal for the offense of manslaughter, of which the court, upon substantial evidence, found appellant Nickson guilty ( People v. Young, 132 Cal.App. 770,
 It would appear to be the contention of appellant Turner that there can be no aiding and abetting in the commission of voluntary manslaughter; that because she did not "pull the trigger of the gun which killed Young," she cannot be held criminally accountable for his death. Appellant Turner's claim in this regard is devoid of merit. A complete answer to it is contained in what we have hereinbefore said, as well as in the cases of People v. Marty, 59 Cal.App. 503, 506, 507 [ 210 P. 964]; People v. Blackwood, 35 Cal.App.2d 728, 732 [ 96 P.2d 982]; and People v. Latona, 2 Cal.2d 714, 725 [ 43 P.2d 260].
From the foregoing it follows that the judgment and the order denying the motion for a new trial as to each defendant must be, and each is, hereby affirmed.
York, P.J., and Doran, J., concurred.

I knew a lady who needed to sell her house after a break up. She had been romanced by her divorce lawyer, someone she had come to see as her "knight in shining armour".
He talked her into using the equity in an existing house to purchase a dream home that would be "theirs". It was really handy that his personal debts of $40 odd thousand dollars could be scooped up into the loan as well.
Well, six months after they moved into their new "Dream Home," he started acting like a single man again, spending money on himself and living a life without including her. They broke up. The house had to be sold at the best possible price or if not, her first home would have been sold as well. In the split of what was left, he was entitled to half of everything.
Ok, let's back up a bit.
1st Warning signal: A man in his 40s with no assets of his own. This in itself is not unusual as people sometimes have adversities that mean they have to start over. However, it is more likely to indicate an inability to live responsibly. It is not unreasonable to expect a professional to have built some kind of net worth beside a "motorbike". Has he not finished growing up?
2nd Warning signal: $40k in debts - not asset debt and not business debt, plain old "stuff" debt. What does that say about his money management and ability to provide?
3rd Warning signal: Suggesting "they" use "her" equity for "their" house. This "fresh start" line might sound romantic but she is taking all the risk and actually putting her first house at mortgage risk. He likes new stuff, which is why his credit card is maxed out.
4th Warning Signal: He's a lawyer...( does that really require an explanation?) I told each of my daughters they can become a lawyer... but for goodness' sake, don't marry one! I'm kidding of course...theirs will be the age of pre-nups...
If you are looking for a mate, create a list of what you would like. Then decide on what you might be prepared to compromise on. If their ability to provide is important to you, you will see someone's inability to save as a warning.
After that, work on your own personal development so you will have the confidence to stand your ground where it matters and give generously when you have found someone worth it.

Get in touch: send your photos, videos, news & views by texting YORK to 80360 or send an email»
Burglar Paul Dawson raided house he helped renovate
A BUILDER’S labourer has been jailed after he was caught red-handed burgling a house he helped to renovate.
Paul Andrew Dawson worked briefly for the builder who was carrying out work at a house near central York, Michael Bosomworth, prosecuting, told York Crown Court.
Later Dawson, 25, went back to the house while it was empty but the householder walked in on him as he searched for valuables then chased and caught him as Dawson tried to flee.
The householder refused to be intimidated by threats to his family and sat on the burglar until police arrived.
Dawson had 46 previous convictions and had served an 18-month sentence for arson.
Dawson, of no fixed address, pleaded guilty to burglary and resisting arrest and was jailed for 12 months.
He was also ordered to pay a £100 statutory surcharge.
Recorder David Bradshaw said Dawson had targeted the house and the threats had “seriously aggravated” the crime.
Mr Bosomworth said Dawson initially claimed he was carrying out building work in the house when he was confronted him on July 30.
But he had already searched most of the house, put a camera and other items in a bag for taking away and was no longer employed by the builder.
The householder challenged him and when he phoned the builder to check Dawson’s story, the burglar fled.
After he was caught, he was aggressive towards the police officer who arrested him, the court heard.
For Dawson, Kevin Blount said his client had not intended to carry out the threats and since his last release from prison had tried to go straight.
“He has made an attempt to turn his life around, albeit a rather failed one,” said the solicitor advocate.
Dawson had been homeless when he carried out the burglary and was looking for clothes to wear.

GEOFFREY ALAN CAWTHRA In Memoriam
It is with great sadness that we write that former Senior partner GEOFFREY ALAN CAWTHRA died on 27 January 2018
Neil Shaw who was one of the founding partners of Last Cawthra Smith (now LCF Law) with Geoffrey and Paul Smith recalls his memories of Geoffrey
“I knew Geoff throughout my legal career. I first met him when he was a Partner in Last Suddards when I started my Articles of Clerkship. Geoff and I then became fellow Partners when in 1988, together with Paul Smith we set up Last Cawthra Smith. He was, however, not just a business partner but a friend and a mentor during our period in partnership together and also after his retirement.
Throughout that period Geoff ran the Ilkley Office (as he had done since 1963!)
At a very early stage in my legal career it was clear that I was working with a Lawyer who was not only highly respected in Ilkley but also in the whole of the Yorkshire Region. He was regularly consulted about complex legal or tax issues by Lawyers not just colleagues but from other legal practices in the area and also by Accountants.
Whilst Geoff ran a Branch Office and so dealt with a whole variety of legal work including Commercial and Residential Property, it was in the area of Wills, Trusts and Estates that he really made his mark.
Whilst researching the history of Last Cawthra Feather I came across a booklet which gave details of some of the Last Suddards’ Partners. I read that Geoff attended Bradford Grammar School and joined Last Suddards straight from school. He did his Articles at Last Suddards and at the same time undertook a Law Degree at Leeds University.
The booklet records that he won a leading National Scholarship in the Law Society Finals as well as two Regional Awards for his exam performance.
In 1988 the Firm of Last Suddards entered merger talks with A V Hammonds which ultimately resulted in the formation of Hammond Suddards. Paul, Geoff and I ran the Last Suddards branch offices and had the opportunity of setting up our own Firm. On the 1 May 1988 Last Cawthra Smith was founded with Geoff as our Senior Partner. But it very nearly never happened. I recall Paul and I were a little concerned when Geoff didn’t appear at our agreed meeting place until we soon discovered he was sitting in a different hostelry. It was clear however, from the look on his face when we eventually found him that he wanted to join us and we never looked back.
Geoff provided wise and experienced guidance to Paul, myself and the Firm generally. He was a key part of its success and growth from the original 3 Partners and 15 staff to its current status as a leading regional Law Firm.
It was thanks to Geoff that I saw the opportunities of establishing a Personal Law Department in the Firm.
Geoff was very supportive of this and my personal development. He shared the benefit of his knowledge, particularly on Wills, Trusts and estates. He took the time to read my Thesis as part of my application to join the Society of Trust and Estate Practitioners.
Geoff always set a great example to his fellow Partners and staff in terms of the quality of his work and his attention to detail.
His tax planning legacy lives on for many clients and their families who continue to benefit from the Wills and Trusts that he set up utilising his expert knowledge.
Outside work Geoff was very supportive of his children, Mike and Marie. He always spoke highly of their achievements and it was clear when I attended his 50th birthday celebrations how much the family thought of him and he of them.
We were all delighted when he married Bernice who had worked for the Firm for many years and had become the Practice Manager. Both Geoff and Bernice remained in regular contact with the Firm and our thoughts are with Bernice and Geoff’s children.
Through his long legal career Geoff was supported by a number of secretaries, including Fiona Briggs who moved from being a Partner’s Secretary to a Lawyer, and who like myself has benefited from his experience and guidance.
Outside the office Geoff and I enjoyed many games of golf, particularly at Ilkley Golf Club where he was a longstanding member. He was also an accomplished tennis player, a member of Rotary and he particularly enjoyed exchange trips with Rotary Coutances in France.
We will all miss “Corky” but his legacy lives on in many ways.”

Ok I'd firstly like to apologise for my extreme laziness, and now I'd like to thank you for your patience with sketches, (yay!) that was me imagining your reaction...ok maybe it was uttered with less enthusiasm, but I'll just move on.
Its been pretty busy, major work wise, after going through roughly 10 new ideas...I've come to see I can be an incredibly indecisive person...I've finally rested on something I'm really excited about! I know what your thinking, "Lesley you've been excited about ALL your ideas, why is this different?" well my answer to that is..I don't know...my fingers are crossed.
any way, I'm now doing a title sequence for a show I made up called "Lotti Learns" its about a little girl that loves finding out answers with her imaginary friends - Fin, Seeby, Sno, Berit and Har. The designs are below, and later I'll add a few other things I've been working on.
I also went to Semi Permanent last weekend which was FANTASTIC, there were people from all backgrounds in the creative industry and from all over the world! one of my favs was a type artist from Spain, firstly his accent was really cute, (he kept rolling his r's) but the best thing was he stood up there really humble and excited to be invited, you could tell he'd put a lot of effort into his presentation, we sat and watched not really knowing what to expect and were ALL completely floored by his work, at one stage everyone just burst into spontaneous applause, not that applause that you do as habit (a left over high school habit) but genuine appreciation. PIXAR was also there, Andrew of course having had experience with a crowd had plenty to say, then again just a picture from PIXAR shuts us up pretty quickly : )
Other than that I've just been keeping my head down and butt up, trying to keep on top of my assignments, I have about 5 due next week so I'm concentrating on getting them all up to scratch, then I'll have 6 weeks to get the others done.
until next time guys, hope you like the sketches
and remember comment welcome!

Saturday, March 31, 2012
When Craig and Christine got back, they brought me this magnetic bar, which I have wanted very badly for as long as I have seen the one hanging in Christine's kitchen! She has a shorter one, but IKEA didn't have any shorter ones. She almost didn't buy this longer one because she thought I wouldn't want a long one, but ha! As you can see I have made use of all the space! I LOVE this thing. I LOVE how I got rid of my sticky, dusty knife block that took up room on my counter. I LOVE how I can just wash the knives I use all the time, and then stick them right back up on the bar. This is as good as getting my big pot rack! Bob got that thing installed Friday before Bible study, and I immediately loaded it up! Thank you, Christine! I would have been happy to watch your kids even without this great gift!!
(Luke came in and read this over my shoulder, and he was astounded that the knife rack was the main focus of this post, as opposed to the awesome day that was had . . . )

I've been lurking here for a while.. basically decided about a month ago that I'd like a new laptop, and having seen my brother with his old Powerbook, and his new iMac, decided to make the switch to Apple. Have been on hols for 2 weeks, and had decided before I went, that I would buy a PB when I got back - but I see the buyers guide for PB has been changed to buy only if needed. Was (I would imagine like a few others) hoping the PB specs might get bumped a bit today, with the iBook, but obviously no joy. I don't NEED this laptop now, but would like it - my currently laptop is struggling a bit, and I would like a new toy ;-) I don't want to wait until MacTel stuff comes out, as I think Revn A of that might be a bit of a nightmare. The obvious choice is just to sit and wait for the next update, but obviously that is quite frustrating!! I'm sure that's what folk on here will say, but I think I actually just posted to blow off some steam that I won't get a shiny new PB any time soon!! any got any thoughts/theories on when the PBs will get updated?

Today I had a glass of milk with dinner. After dinner dd and I were eating dried pineapple and I realized I hadn't finished my milk yet, so I drank some. OMG - the milk and pineapple were heaven on my tastebuds. Dh thought I was nuts and gave me a grossed out look lol. Before I had dd, my food could absolutely not be touching. During my pregnancy with her, I thought all sorts of foods went super well together, like corn and mashed potatoes.
Anyone else having funny taste combinations that are surprisingly yummy lately?

Harpreet Singh Sahni appeared to be a successful, wealthy, and trustworthy man. He had lived in Sydney for 12-years and had several businesses, from real estate to security. Sahni also became known for promoting major Indian acts at the Sydney Opera House.
So, when the cryptocurrency boom of 2017 happened, many trusted Sahni as a safe bet when he started a new cryptocurrency venture that he promised was “the safest investment on earth.”
Plus Gold Union Coin
Sahni started promoting a new cryptocurrency called “Plus Gold Union Coin” which he claimed was earning him up to $8,000 a day! The only problem? The entire scheme was a scam – and Sahni knew it from the start.
As if the promise of thousands of dollars a day wasn’t enticing enough, members who brought in more investors were rewarded with holidays and massive commissions. Investors were then told that to reap the best payback, they had to lock into a one-year-contract wherein they couldn’t cash out.
With Sahni offering such impressive looking figures and returns, the support flooded in from over 22 different countries. With nearly half of the $50 million that was stolen coming from investors in Australia.
People soon began to suspect something was not right
Having invested significant sums of money, people soon became concerned they had been duped. The website for the currency would often be down for weeks at a time, their money was inaccessible for 12-months, and then the cryptocurrency market plummeted. Still, Sahni did not admit his deceit. He said that people were “spreading false rumours.”
Sahni scammed his closest friends
As if that wasn’t bad enough, Sahni even abused the trust of those closest to him, convincing them to sign up and increase their investments. One such friend was Dilip Bajaj, whom Sahni persuaded to join and invite more than 150 people from his spiritual community: the Dada Bhagwan Foundation. Bajaj himself lost $22,000 through trusting his friend’s advice.
One incredibly sad story is that of international student Bhavesh Patel. Patel found himself struggling for money after his wife became seriously unwell and required expensive medical care. Patel was told about the currency scheme and decided this would be the solution to his problems. He invested $30,000 (money he could not afford to lose), but Patel trusted that the information had been reliable – especially as he learnt about it through people at the foundation.
Investors fear they will never get their money back
Sahni fled to India, and people had little hope of seeing him brought to justice, or even getting their money back. However, in 2019 the police arrested Sahni in Delhi. Still, despite Sahni admitting his crimes and there being evidence of him stealing from more than 1,700 people, the police in Australia have yet to recover the money.
Mr Patel said his claims were dismissed when complained to police in Blacktown as he voluntarily gave the money away. He questions if the police would have had the same reaction if he were a white, Australian native. However, the NSW police state that they are investigating without discrimination and that the delay is normal in these sorts of complicated multi-jurisdiction crimes.

Unlawful Carrying of a Weapon
3300 block of 42nd St.
At about 1:30 p.m. Thursday, an officer working at a Lubbock high school noticed a student getting into a vehicle with two other men, aged 18 and 22. The vehicle then began speeding as it drove. The officer activated his lights and stopped the vehicle. The passenger was making hasty movements as the vehicle stopped. The officer noticed a strong smell of marijuana coming from the vehicle, and saw a plastic bag with a leafy green substance in the driver's pocket. The driver was arrested for possession of marijuana and placed in the officer's patrol car with the passenger. Before the officer let the student return to the vehicle, he searched the area where the passenger and driver had been seated. He found a handgun in the glove compartment. The driver was arrested on two warrants, possession of marijuana and unlawful carrying of a weapon. The passenger was arrested for unlawful carrying of a weapon. The student was released.
3800 block of Southeast Drive
At about 10:30 a.m. Thursday, a man told police his wife, whom he is separated from, came to his place of work and struck him with her car as she was leaving. She came to give him some bills that had been delivered to her house. After a short discussion, she got angry and drove off. He was standing by the vehicle when she pulled forward and was knocked to the pavement. The back wheels of her car rolled over his right foot and leg. A witness was present. Police are investigating.
© 2017. All Rights Reserved. | Contact Us

At around 3 AM, drunk as a skunk, he headed for home. Just as he got in the door, the cuckoo clock in the hall started up and cuckooed 3 times. Quickly he realized she'd probably wake up so he cuckooed another 9 times. He was really proud of myself, having a quick, witty solution, even when smashed, to escape possible conflict. Next morning, his wife asked him what time he got in, and he told her 12 o'clock. She didn't seem disturbed at all. Then she told him that they needed a new cuckoo clock. When he asked her why, she said "Well it cuckooed 3 times, then said 'oh fuck', cuckooed 4 more times, cleared its throat, cuckooed another 3, giggled, cuckooed 2 more times and farted.

East Grand Forks Couple Gets Married on ‘The Bachelor’
An East Grand Forks couple had planned a quick, low key wedding in Las Vegas. That all changed when they were asked to exchange vows on ABC's popular reality show, 'The Bachelor.'
According to the Grand Forks Herald, before heading to Vegas for what was supposed to be a 'quickie' wedding, Leah Starr and Travis Foster were shocked to receive a phone call asking if they would tie the knot on national television.
Travis and Leah had originally booked their wedding for October 8, but the show called and asked if they would change it to October 7 so they could film it.
The couple, who are not big fans of 'The Bachelor,' knew the show was very popular.
When we found out it was this big, popular show, we thought, 'How does this happen? How did they pick us? This is too crazy.'
The couple is still unaware why they were chosen as there were many other couples getting married that day, too.
The episode aired on Monday, January 25. Bachelor Ben Higgins and his date Becca attended the ceremony. Ben even had a one-on-one conversation with the groom.
ABC made sure the Fosters were taken care of. They were given a limousine for transportation and Leah had many dresses to choose from. She even had her hair and makeup done by the show's staff. The show did not put any sort of script together so they were able to exchange their own vows.
The Fosters definitely had a wedding we will all remember!
We didn't have a fancy wedding. But we had an unforgettable one.
You can see Leah and Travis tie the knot on ABC's website. Congratulations to the happy couple!

Hi there, thank you for taking the time to leave a review for us at Stevinson Chevrolet. We're happy we could meet your expectations! Thank you, and have a fantastic day!
Everybody was friendly and helpful.
Everyone was very friendly and helpful.
Will never go anywhere else to buy a car!!! Josh and Rick were beyond helpful and did everything to help me get into my new car!!! Thank you both for ...
I had a good experience at Stevenson Chevrolet. All of the employees were courteous and polite and very willing to work with my situation.
Both salespeople we dealt with were attentive, listened, helpful Henry Solis took time to hear our car dimension concerns and did the appropriate rese...
The salesman was very pleasant and wanted to make sure that I was completely satisfied with everything.

Here are two of my nieces decorating what would become one of the tablecloths (the one for the kids table). All 5 kids helped out. It was adorable.
B, L and my 3 nieces hamming it up while I cooked. It was amazing how well entertained L was just by the mere presence of the girls. R was still napping.
Now R is up and giving his mommy some love.
Here is one of the few pictures of me cooking. My mom is trying to entertain R -- who was desperate for mommy's attention when he wasn't playing with his cousins or brother.
Here is the spread. Yep -- I CAN cook. When I want to of course, which isn't often.
And here is the whole family. I can't believe I got everyone to look at the same time on the first shot.

Kevin Swan has led and built numerous global healthcare businesses during his career. He most recently served as president and chief executive officer of Health Alliance, a specialty pharmacy business. Previously, Kevin was group president of McKesson’s Medical Distribution divisions. He also was president and chief executive officer of Sterigenics. Kevin began his career with American Hospital Supply Corporation and Baxter, where he led both distribution and manufacturing businesses. His private equity career began in 2001 when he worked with One Equity Partners as an operating partner. Kevin serves as a director of Key Surgical and Viant. He is a member of the Young Presidents Organization (YPO/WPO). He received his bachelor’s degree from Southern Illinois University.

I chose Barbara Bush for my VIP this week. She highly deserves the recognition because she is a classy woman. She has shown that it is possible to have a happy marriage and family and still be a strong woman.
The 92-year-old matriarch of the Bush family has battled bad health for several years. Her family announced this week that she would seek no further medical treatment for her congestive heart failure and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Mrs. Bush met her husband when she was only sixteen years old, and the couple was soon engaged to be married. President George H.W. Bush and Mrs. Bush have been married for 73 years and apparently have been in love for their entire married lives. This is quite an achievement in these days when many marriages end in divorce.
Mrs. Bush holds a unique position that maybe only one other woman in history shares with her. Mrs. Bush was married to one President of the United States and is the mother of another President. She has another son who was a successful governor of Florida. She obviously had a positive influence on all three men who became leaders in our nation, and she should be honored for it. I wish her and her family much peace and comfort.

Welcome to the Eoin Colfer website!
Eoin Colfer (pronounced Owen) was born in Wexford, Ireland in 1965, where he and his four brothers were brought up by his father (a school teacher, historian and artist of note) and mother (a drama teacher). He first developed an interest in writing in primary (elementary) school with gripping Viking stories inspired by history he was learning in school at the time!
His first book, Benny and Omar, was published in 1998, based on his experiences in Tunisia. In 2001 the first Artemis Fowl book was published and he was able to resign from teaching and concentrate fully on writing. The Artemis Fowl series has since sold over 20 million copies worldwide and is now concluding with the final book The Last Guardian.
He says, "I will keep writing until people stop reading or I run out of ideas. Hopefully neither of these will happen anytime soon. He lives in Ireland with his wife and two children.
The Legend of the Worst Boy in the World
Growing up with four complainers for brothers, Will Woodman has a hard time getting an audience for his own troubles. He has to wait in line to gripe to his mom—and that...

I've lived in my new house for a little over a month and just had a new washer and dryer installed yesterday.
Upon installation I was told my dryer was one of the worse they've ever seen and I wouldn't be able to use my dryer because it was a fire hazard. This company wanted to charge me 300 for their services.
As soon as they left my house I searched google and found DuctCleaning.com and its glowing reviews.
They were able to help me out the next day and helped me with a smile. They did not charge me anywhere close to 300 dollars and more importantly they were clean, prompt, and polite. I whole heartedly give my thanks and highly recommend them.
I am so happy I an use my dryer!

Goings-on in the Orient continue to make news. Once again we must look eastwards towards Japan, this time for a lesson in management techniques and industrial relations.
A firm of accountants in Tokyo had a department run by a lady who was so violent she would have made a samurai warrior look about as lethal as the Milky Bar Kid.
She was eventually arrested for duffing up a male employee who had got his sums wrong. She kneed him in his generative equipment then straightened him out with a left hook and broke his nose with a forearm smash.
He expressed his gratitude to her when he left hospital and refused to make a complaint, reckoning that he got what he deserved. However, a colleague who clearly lacked the samurai spirit dobbed her in.
In the previous six months she had sacked a lady clerk for having dirty fingernails and stabbed another employee for breaking into tears.
He wept because his dear old mother had joined her ancestors as long ago as the day before, so he had no excuse for breaking down in the firm’s time.
Then there was the secretary who made a typing error. She was sprayed with lighter fuel and burnt brightly until her workmates put her out. Another secretary who was enjoying a crafty fag in the ladies had the contents of a fire extinguisher blasted at her overhead from the next cubicle. Matters came to a head at a business seminar when one trainee who had probably been on the sake and sushi the night before broke wind horribly and really loudly.
The disciplinarian took it personally because she had just been speaking. She believed it was not an accidental discharge and reckoned a lot of thought and effort had gone into it and truly reflected his opinion of her speech.
She produced a cordless drill from her capacious handbag and started to fill him with 10mm holes.
Nasty, yes, but he must have thanked his Gods that she wasn’t equipped with a mallet and a bung. She was only lightly punished after the earlier assault and battery because the head magistrate thought that if more mid-management showed the same samurai spirit the country would soon climb out of the economic doldrums.
She was last heard of running management seminars which were attended by many UK executives and, strangely, some senior trades union officials who wanted the learn more from the enemy camp. (No she didn’t, I made that last bit up.)

This photo is from a house in a small rural community. This 10" sewer pipe is installed through a basement wall at last 6 feet below grade. The potential buyer was at the inpection but did not know what it was for. It did not appear to ever had been attached to anything else in the basement. Any guesses?

- About Us
Laird Eugene (Tom) Kockrow was born on March 11, 1940 to Raymond and Lillian (McFarland) Kockrow at Fairbury, NE. He went to be with God on August 28, 2019 at his home surrounded by his loved ones.
His family moved to Hay Springs, NE in 1942 where they lived on the east side of Walgren Lake until they purchased the farm northeast of Rushville in 1945. Tom attended Rushville Public School and graduated in 1958. He was a several sport athlete and was honored as Homecoming King his senior year. During his high-school years he worked part-time for Bud Beguin and often moved haystacks past the Mill School. He loved waving at the kids at recess as he went by. After graduation, he drove a semi for Fleece Brothers Trucking out of Sutherland, NE until the untimely death of his father in 1965. He returned home to help his mother with the farming and cattle. He worked for the county road department as well as for George Cox building dams. He, also, farmed for the three Hollstein Brothers for 30 plus years, which he enjoyed as they were very appreciative and kind to him and later to his family. He was a Vermeer dealer for close to 20 years, where he sold new equipment and parts.
Little did he know that the 8th grade girl that always waved back at the Mill School, would become his bride. He married Marilyn Norton on October 13, 1968. To this union, two beautiful little girls, Karena Lynn and April Leann, were born. Karena on March 26, 1974, and April on March 26, 1978. Friends would ask when he was going to try for a son. His response was, “That was computer work as predicted, and we have turned it off”. As everyone knows, Tom loved telling jokes and visiting.
Tom moved his family to the home place in 1994, after the passing of his mother in 1993 where he continued farming and raising cattle. His mules had a special place in his heart, so they were a joy for him to ride and pack.
Tom’s greatest love was his family. He enjoyed teaching his grandchildren gun safety and shooting with accuracy during many hours of target practice and blue-rock shoots as well as watching Karena’s kids during shooting sports practice and competition.
Tom and Marilyn took many fun trips from North Carolina to California visiting April’s family. They enjoyed the sight-seeing trips as well as many sporting events all the way from professional wrestling, throwing events, little league baseball, basketball to water polo.
Tom and Marilyn purchased deer permits every year that their health would allow. Many hours were spent on the Vincent meadows and the Norton ranch spotting deer. Tom loved pack trips to the mountains with his mules and tent to Durango, Co. and to Wyo. His brother-in-law, Tom Rose, went with him and enjoyed many hunting trips together, even to Boone, NC, bear hunting.
A very memorable trip to Alaska for six weeks, with a special friend, Ginny, and her husband was a dream come true. Tom talked about going back and taking both daughters and their families. Wildlife was his passion alive or dead.
Tom spent many hours playing cards with special friends and neighbors, one week at our house the next week at their house. Other special friends spent hours on the telephone every week, sometimes, nightly. Those memories last forever.
Tom is survived by his loving wife, Daughter Karena (Travis) Denton, and their children, Stetson, Wrangler (Jayde) and great grandson Jeremy, Roper and Bailey and Daughter April (Bob) Smith, and their sons, Andrew and Derek. Also, he is survived by Sister JoAnn Pauly of Martin, SD, and her family and Brother Dean (Beverly) Kockrow of Valentine, NE, and their family, Sister-in-law Dorothy Norton and family and other relatives, neighbors, and friends.
Preceding him in death were his parents, his in-laws (Bill and Mollie Norton), his brother and sister-in-law, Donald and Elaine of North Platte, NE, brothers-in law Ed Pauly of Martin, SD, and Ralph Norton of Rushville, and Brother/sister-in-law Tom and Ileen Rose of Kilgore, Ne., and his grandparents, and other relatives too numerous to name.
He left this world suddenly, but we know he is looking down, guiding his family, and loving God. He will be greatly missed by everyone who knew him.
A memorial has been established and donations may be sent in care of Chamberlain-Pier Funeral Home, PO Box 366 Gordon, NE 69343.

- They know why they are learning (learning by understanding the larger context)
- They are allowed to explore (learning by exploring and discovering)
- They are challenged by tasks that require learning (learning by doing)
- They have the freedom to learn in their own ways (Seven freedoms of Learning)
- We make learning as interesting as playing games
Most of my school and college life was spent in learning lots of facts. I also learned principles and concepts but not in any coherent manner. I was not sure why I was learning, what I was learning. Our teachers (if they knew), forgot to tell us the “Whys?”. Some of this learning was fun and enjoyable and reasonably effortless but some of it was not.
When I started working, I started learning by doing. This was way more fun since I had a context on why I had to learn certain things. I retained my knowledge better since Iusing it. When you learn by doing or learn so that you can use it, the style is very different. You learn on demand and if some of what you are learning does not make sense, you dig deeper and try to find out why something works the way it does. I will call this as exploratory learning and it certainly is a lot more effective.
I think people will learn better, if:

I was sitting in my home office the night before the Great American Smokeout. It was November 17, 2004. I was smoking my second pack of the day. Cigarettes were getting very expensive, and I started wondering if I could quit. I thought that I smoked because it was a “habit” and that I “enjoyed it”. But the truth was that I didn't enjoy it. Not anymore. In fact, none of the reasons I thought I smoked were true. When I pictured what I was actually doing - lighting leaves on fire and breathing the smoke all day every day - I felt kind of stupid. Without the cigarette in my hand and I was just a motionless nitwit in a parking lot, staring blankly at nothing for ten minutes at a time. I had to face the cold reality: I had a drug addiction. Plain and simple. My next thought was, “I will not be a drug addict.” Those words remained in my head throughout my journey and kept me from smoking through the worst of my cravings. For me, not smoking was like holding my breath. I certainly “enjoyed it” when I finally took a breath. The truth was I needed to smoke, and if I didn't, I would panic.
I heard that the Great American Smokeout was the next day. If you don't know what that is, it's a day that The American Cancer Society asks smokers to quit for 24 hours. I decided to put my “drug addict” theory to the test. If I could make it for an entire 24 hours without smoking, and it wasn't difficult, maybe I wasn't a drug addict after all. Maybe it truly was just a “habit”. At 1:00 AM, Thursday, November 18, 2004, I put out my last cigarette of the day and went to bed.
I always started my days by rolling out of bed, turning on the news, and lighting up. Even when I was running late, I would have at least one to “wake up”, preferably two. I was already walking to my office before I remembered I wasn't going to smoke that day. I wanted a cigarette, but I was excited and curious about a day without one. Denying myself cigarettes for as long as possible seemed kind of fun. I hopped in the shower then went to work. Around noon, when I would have already smoked six cigarettes on a normal day, a tinge of panic started to take hold. By 5:00 PM it was no longer a tinge. By 7:00 PM my mind was consumed entirely by one thought: “Smoke now!”. I was also 100% convinced that I was, without a doubt, an addict.
My mind and body were focused entirely on trying to get me to smoke. Every second I was making excuses to smoke: “I'll quit later”, “Just have one”, “I'll just cut back”, “I can't cope with this”. Cope. That's a great word. That's something I had to figure out how to do, and fast. I probably should have been more prepared. But now I had to improvise. I started by repeating two thoughts: “I will not be a drug addict”, and “I can do anything but smoke.” The first thought reaffirmed the main reason I could no longer tolerate smoking. The second thought gave me license to pamper myself. I started a frantic internet search to find ways of coping with withdrawal symptoms. I found some breathing exercises that actually seemed to help. I would breathe as deeply as I could, then blow the air out like I was slowly blowing out candles. Sounds silly right? But that helped a lot. I also found an active quit smoking support group online. I read, and breathed, my way through the rest of the evening. When it was time for bed I was exhausted. My mind fought me until the end. “Are you really going to go to bed without having even one cigarette? Come on. That's not you. You're a smoker!” And that's exactly what I did; went to bed without one cigarette. I was excited at the thought of waking up the next day and remembering that I went an entire 24 hours without a cigarette.
“I went an entire 24 hours without a cigarette!”, I thought to myself when I woke up. Then I thought “Smoke NOW!!!” every second after that. Clearly, although they worked, I would need more than breathing exercises in my coping arsenal. On my way to work, I stopped and bought a box of nicotine patches. I read all of the instructions. I was going to follow them to the letter. I needed something passive. Something I didn't have to remember to take, or chew, or whatever. Something that just worked. Nicotine patches seemed to fit the bill. I stuck one on my arm. Gradually over the course of the day, I started having the distinct feeling I had just smoked a cigarette. The patch gave me physical withdrawal symptom relief in a big way. That freed me to work on coping with the mental withdrawal symptoms. That consisted of repeating “I will not be a drug addict” to myself, a support group of people going through the same thing, and French toast. “I can do anything but smoke” included eating anything I wanted. “Anything” turned out to be stacks of French toast whenever I wanted it. My goal was simple: quit smoking. I knew if I added unrealistic caveats - I can't gain weight, I can't lose my temper, I can't feel bad - I would never quit. My goal was not to die of lung cancer. Considering that, tight jeans were just fine. I could diet later.
That was the start of my journey, and I knew it would be a difficult one. I had smoked all of my adult life. It was definitely a part of my personality. It was part of my routine and something that I was always doing or about to do. So, I was scared of losing my identity. Looking back, “drug addict that smells bad” is an identity that I should have wanted to lose. But at the moment I had to face the fear of the unknown. Who would I be when that large part of me was gone? I had heard that mourning that loss would be a part of quitting. I just didn't know what a big part it would be. I value the person I became in the end; the person who kicked an extremely powerful addiction. The “smoker” part of myself was a great thing to have lost.
I continued using the patch over the next ten weeks. I followed the instructions. Almost immediately I started having vivid dreams. The box even described vivid dreams as one of the side effects. This is something I had never experienced. My dreams were real to me while I was in them. They seemed to last hours. I would remember every detail. This wasn't at all a bad experience. I even missed them when I was off of the patch. Speaking of getting off the patch, I was scared I couldn't live without them. Worst case scenario, I would be buying patches for the rest of my life. At least it would be a fate much better than lung cancer. But I followed the directions to the letter, and I truly felt almost nothing when I stopped.
Over the next year, I posted to my forum when I needed to rant. I supported others when they needed to rant. We helped each other through it, and we all knew exactly how the others felt and what they needed to hear. I had five cigarettes left in a pack when I quit. That pack remained beside me, along with my lighter and ashtray. Right there on my desk within reach, for an entire year. I thought it might be a distraction at first. I was prepared to get rid of everything related to smoking. But, it was oddly comforting. There was something comforting about having them there ready to be smoked. If I failed they would be there. Eventually, the pack was put in a drawer, forgotten, and thrown away at some point.
My biggest fear was that I would always want a cigarette. That it would always be an ache in the back of my mind. When I first quit, it was easy to mistakenly see this as an inevitable reality. I thought of smoking every five seconds all day every day. How would it be possible to never think of it? Even to go an entire day without cigarettes entering my brain? Well, thankfully, that day happened around three months in. I woke up and remembered that I had not thought of smoking at all the previous day. Then I went longer and longer periods without thinking about smoking. I was beyond happy to realize that I would not always want a cigarette. I would eventually stop thinking about it entirely. When was that? Probably close to a year, but at that point, I was going weeks without thinking about smoking. And the point is, cravings permanently went away. It, mercifully, does happen.
I hope you find some inspiration in my story. And maybe a glimpse of what the journey is like to quit forever.

Philadelphia Flyers center Danny Briere is out indefinitely with a concussion, Flyers GM Paul Holmgreen said on Monday. Briere was injured during a team practice and missed his first game last night against the Penguins. Briere crashed into the boards during a drill in practice and hasn't been back on the ice since.
The 16-year veteran has played in 26 games this year with the Flyers, tallying five goals and eight points during that span. The 35-year-old center has not scored a goal in his last 13 games before being injured.

So the chief cupbearer1 told Joseph his dream. He said to him, "In my dream I saw a vine in front of me,
References for Genesis 40:9
and on the vine were three branches. As soon as it budded, it blossomed,2 and its clusters ripened into grapes.
References for Genesis 40:10
Pharaoh's cup was in my hand, and I took the grapes, squeezed them into Pharaoh's cup and put the cup in his hand."

This was an odd race. Lehrman led by 10,000 votes early and 12,000 votes late. She won all of the counties in the Metroplex media market, though the margins weren't overwhelming. Green won Harris County by 5,000 votes, which was the only reason the race was as close as it was. He also won Nueces County by a big margin, and other South Texas counties as well (Cameron, Hidalgo, San Patricio), although the voter turnout was low, as you might expect for Republican primaries in South Texas.
- 1 week

My daughter asked me, "Do you miss Auntie Donna every day?"
It wasn't the conversation I expected while we were making the salad.
"Well, some weeks, every day — and others not. But while Dad and I were on vacation, that first week I had a tough time because I did miss her every single day — there was so much I wanted to tell her. She would've been so happy for me."
"I'm sorry, Mom," my daughter said as she touched my arm and let me know with her eyes that she was with me in that moment.
To have been on this big vacation finally — one that we'd thought about for half a decade, planned and saved for, for more than a year — and to feel down in the dumps was upsetting. Feeling down was something I'd struggled with much of my life but not the past few years. I'd experienced a real sea-change. It wasn't just that my kids seemed happy and were doing well transitioning to adulthood or that Chris and I were doing well too, it was more about me. What I was feeling. How I was managing to put aside some of my perpetual worrying, worrying, worrying, and just allow myself to be happy. Instead of always doing was best for someone else, it was about putting myself first. It took lots of
hard work with a smart and insightful therapist.
This sea-change required making very different choices in my life. Let me give you an example.
I got on a plane and sat in my aisle seat. One row behind and across is a man on the aisle who reluctantly moves to allow a woman to get in to the window seat next to him. It's clear he's not interested in engaging in conversation; he has papers, he has work, he is busy. The woman is a bit frantically squirming this way and that, looking around and under her seat, under his seat. She catches the flight attendant's attention signalling her to come over, "I've lost one of the lens to my eyeglasses. It must've popped out. I can't see without it. Can you please look in the aisle of the plane?" The attendant nods and continues on, but as she heads back up toward the front of the plane, she's not checking the aisle for the missing lens — she's not even looking down.
So naturally, I have to look for the stranger's missing lens. I get up and start walking forward, eyes scanning back and forth, walking up and down, no luck. I remember this woman from the waiting area. I head for the flight attendant at the door. "I need to look for an eyeglass lens in the waiting area. I'll be really quick." and she lets me exit the plane. I run up the jetway, eyes down searching for the glass. I enter the waiting area run to the seats where she was sitting, looking high and low. No luck. I ask the gate agents. Still no luck.
Quickly I make my way back to my seat, tell the woman that I looked and didn't see it, and as her face registers surprise, it occurs to me to check one more thing. I turn to the guy sitting next to her.
"Could you check the cuffs on your pants? Maybe it fell down and somehow got caught in your cuff."
He does, but it wasn't there.
I have run out of things to try. Finally, I give up, sit down, buckle in, and exhale — feeling I'd failed. Fell down on the job. Failed someone I didn't even know. That's how my head works. All day, every day. It's very tiring.
Every time I thought about helping someone else (especially, complete strangers) I had to stop and monitor myself. But I had been doing so well! With hard work I was turning things around and focusing more on me. I stopped biting my nails. I'd joined a program at work to help with my weight. I was getting some regular exercise. I was checking in monthly with a coach — getting information about portion control, healthy snacking, fiber-dense calories. I took that class on Authentic Happiness. I bought that bedspread!
The sadness I felt at the beginning of our big vacation came as a surprise to me, but over the trip, thankfully it slipped away. Now I was back home and my daughter's question prompted me once again to think about the loss of my sister and all the feelings associated with that. It was also the slew of recent news about health issues and surgeries for those I love dearly and their family members and it was about loss all around me. It was now my generation faced with loss and caregiving. People my age were losing their parents (a hard yet expected loss), but they were also losing their siblings, friends, cousins. I lost MY sibling and MY cousin.
It was depressing. Even though I'd had my dinner and it was too late to be eating anything, I ate two large soft chocolate chip cookies I'd bought for the kids. After that I had two wheels of black licorice my husband bought for me (I adore licorice) and then, after everyone else went to bed, I was still up and still fretting. With no one to talk to (my sister would've been there to talk to), I went into the kitchen, grabbed the box of Kashi 7 Whole Grain Flakes & Granola with Black Currants & Walnuts (because one of those nutritional pamphlets said snacking on dry cereal was better for you than chips) and I snacked away (without even measuring out the amount).
I hadn't yet read the handout they sent on emotional eating.

I heard a tale once of a man who lost everything; his family, his fortune, his home and his health. He found himself covered in sores from head to toe, scraping his skin with a piece of broken pottery, sitting in the ashes of everything he had lost, but in spite of everything he still praised the name of his God. I still remember what he said. He said “Though he slay me, I will hope in him”. What madness is this?
I heard of a prophet once. He was called to be a righteous man to an unrighteous people. With his words he rebuked a nation. He took a prostitute as a wife and even when she left him to return to sin, he bent so low as to buy her out of slavery and whoredom. Yet through it all he loved her as God loved Israel. What madness is this?
I heard about a great king once. His conquests for God made him famous in all the world. He reigned as one of the most powerful men in the world, and yet the majority of his writing is him crying out to God for help. They say he would wander the streets clothed in sackcloth, covered in ashes, crying out to God. What madness is this?
I heard about a man who had everything. His riches were without compare; he had every possession and pleasure that mankind could contrive under the sun. But I remember what he said. He said “Then I considered all that my hands had done and the toil I had expended in doing it, and behold, all was vanity and a striving after wind, and there was nothing to be gained under the sun.” What madness is this?
I once heard about a wild man. He wore the hair of camels and ate locusts, living a life of poverty and destitution in the wilderness. He forsook the riches of the Temple and chose to preach and baptize in the waters of the Jordan. He was a madman. He deemed the religious leaders a brood of vipers. He spoke of the Kingdom of God. I still remember what he said. He said “I baptize you with water for repentance, but he who is coming after me is mightier than I, whose sandals I am not worthy to carry. He will baptize you with the Holy Spirit and fire.” What madness is this?
I heard about a righteous man once. He spoke words of grace and power, proclaiming a name that was dangerous and illegal. He disputed with those who would deny this name, and none could withstand his words. He was cast out of the city and stoned for what he said. But as the stones came down and he fell to his knees, he said something that I’ll never forget. He said “Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do!” What madness is this?
I heard a tale of a madman once or twice. They say he went by a different name long ago, killing all who called upon that name that he hated most. But then something changed. He saw and heard something; what, I do not know. But from that moment on, he would never be the same. He spoke of things that were unpopular. He said things about the religious authority and called upon a name that had gotten men and women before him killed. He suffered for this cause. He was beaten. He withstood many lashes. On multiple occasions they attempted to stone him. His writings were from the cold, dark depths of a Roman prison. But I still remember what he said. He said “For to me to live is Christ, and to die is gain.” What madness is this?
But I also heard about the greatest madman of all. They say he was born in poverty, living a life of destitution. He was tempted to sin, but remained blameless. They say he performed miracles, healing and casting out demons. He was a rebel. They say he ate with sinners. He challenged the religious authority, going so far as to claim the name of I Am. He was mocked. He was scorned. And he was ultimately murdered, suffering crucifixion, what is arguably the most painful death a human being could ever experience, crying out in his last moments “My God, my God, why have you forsaken me!” What madness is this?
But then I found it; the final piece of the puzzle. Darkness fell across the land when he breathed his last. They say that while he hung on the cross, the curtain covering the most holy of holies was torn. They say that he was laid in a tomb of stone. Three days later that stone rolled away, and he was not there. They say that he rose from the dead, having paid the price for mankind’s sin. He did not abolish but fulfilled the Old Covenant, bringing about the New Covenant. Not only did he atone for the sins of man; he made it possible for man to come into the presence of God, imperfect but washed clean by his blood.
And then I finally understood. These madmen were madmen for God, rebels called to be countercultural in a broken and sinful culture. And I decided that I wanted to be like them. I want to pursue God in a culture that pursues money. I want to be content in his presence, even though the culture says to be content with sex. I want to be drunk on his spirit in a culture that’s drunk on wine. I want to be a madman for God.

I have this dilemma and I need some suggestions from Mommies who have flown before with their young infants. My DH's parents live in Europe and he hasn't seen them for 4 years, this year he really wants to visit over Christmas and wants all of us to go, this includes our 2 yr old son and our baby girl, who will be 5 months when we travel. I'm very scared to travel with 2 kids during a holiday season, but I'm especially worried about the baby. How safe is it to travel long distance with a baby this young? My DH said that if I decide to stay, he will take our son and two of them would go by themselves. Now, my DH is a great farther and usually very responsible, but if they go by themselves I'm going to worry sick about my 2 yr old. He has peanut allergy and we always keep a strong radar on his snack/foods and we carry an epi pen. I'm questioning if I can really depend on my DH to do all of this by himself. I talked to my DH about my hesitations and worries but he is determined to visit this year and he promised he will watch our DS very closely. It will devistate my DH if I really put my foot down and say Michael cannot go with him. I don't know what to do? Any advice?
Long distance flying
I used to live in Japan and had American friends there who traveled pretty fast after their babies were born so they could introduce them to the rest of their families. From their stories, it seems pretty easy to travel with an infant. The worst time for them was when their ears would pop, but to combat the baby's pain, they would make sure the baby was nursing or asleep during take-off and landing. No problem!
I'd be more worried about travelling with a 2 year old than an infant. Much harder to entertain ;) I went ot Ireland with my dd when she was 4 and a half months old. I was worried sick before hand. It really wasn't that bad. Now she's 2 and I've a 10 week old I don't think I'll go back until they're older. With two parents at least you can have a kid each and swap kids when the need arises. For the 2 year old you just have to have LOTS to distract him. I swore if we did go home for any reason soon, I'd buy a cheaop portable DVD player and 5 movies and let her watch them all plan trip long!
DD - May 06 DS - July 08 DD - June 12
My July baby has already been to Europe and back...we flew there when she was 6 weeks old and back when she was 8 weeks. She was waaay better behaved than the 2 year olds sitting around us, even the takeoff and landing didn't bother her much. I made sure she was sucking on something (pacifier, bottle or me) at those times and she barely noticed anything was going on. On the way back, we got the bulkhead seat and the crew put a bassinet in there so we didn't have to hold DD the entire time. I'd recommend reserving the bulkhead seat and requesting the bassinet, makes travelling a lot easier.
We took a 2 hour flight when DD was 8 weeks old, and I was terrified... but I sure didn't want to drive 16 hours so we did the flight. Suprisingly, it went wonderful. It was an early morning flight, and she slept the entire time. She ate on the way up and on the way down, and didn't make a peep.
I found it funny that people were looking at us kind of pissy before we took off, probably thinking it would be the flight from hell. Then when we landed everyone was like "oh she was so good...she's so cute" blah blah blah being nice. lol
I agree with pp that it's probably easier with the baby than the toddler.
DD Cassidy Paigeá7/10/08
DD Eliza Leigh 5/9/11

Ventura Cruise Review by colgatecol: First of many cruises !!
Overall Member Rating
First of many cruises !!
Destination: Eastern Caribbean
For a long time I tried to persuade my partner to go on a cruise to which got the same reply of that she didn't fancy it, well after to talking to lost of people in the restaurant that we run together we found that more and more people were doing them, so eventually she said yes but only if she could have a balcony cabin, well the next day I was on the phone to a friend who I found out through facebook was working for a cruise company booking cruises, so I booked a 2 week cruise round the caribbean, we upgraded on the flight, and decided to set a date for our wedding so that the holiday would be our honeymoon,
well the holiday was soon here, and after having trouble with the online booking service to reserve our seats on the plane, we found ourselves setting out to the airport in the early hours of the morning to be at the airport 4hours before the flight, didn't mind leaving early as was too excited to sleep, but the wait at the airport was boring,
we were soon on the plane More and enjoying the comforts of upgrading and the service was excellent, good food, lots to drink and ice cream, the only bad thing that whilst making my way to toilet i caught a ladies arm and she split hot tea on her at first everyone was a bit upset, but the stewardess made sure we was all OK and made us all fell better, felt really bad about what had happened,
well we were landing in Barbados and we were ushered on to coaches and whisked out of the airport and on our way to the ship, no going through customs and not waiting around for suitcases, on arrival at dockside we were very efficiently checked in and given our cruise cards and were soon on board,
we was amazed at the size of the ship, and how nice and clean it was on board,
we soon found our room and was very happy with what we had been given, as my friend had been on the ship the previous year and had had a similar cabin,
we deiced to investigate the ship and had a quick look round before heading back to our room to see if the cases had arrived so that we could get ready for dinner to which they arrived just in time, one thing we have learnt is that we will take a smaller case next time with a change of clothes and swim wear in as it would of been nice to freshen up and have a dip and get out of the tradition winter clothes,
we ate most nights in the cinnamon restaurant and I`m amazed to read reviews that said the food was cold and not that appealing, I as a chef found the food to be hot and very appetizing, we were very fortunate to met a lovely couple and had dinner most nights with them, we sat at the same table and had the same set of waiters, who were very entertaining and was always happy to make our dinning experience good as my wife and Steve who we ate with both were fussy eaters,
the buffet breakfast was very good and there was always a great selection of food, i did find it amazing that some people were moaning that tea and coffee was not served to you, you had to get it yourself, its a buffet restaurant that's the whole idea getting it yourself.
waiter service round by the pools was very good and as was it in the shows am surprised to see that people had trouble in getting drinksThe shows were amazing we really enjoyed everyone of them.
we could not fault anything with the cruise, the food the service everything was better than we expected, we can not wait to return next January.
the only thing that was wrong was that we was expected during our stay to choose our seats on the plane going home and to pay another 30 per person to fly home considering that we had payed Â£500 to upgrade this was something i wasn't going to pay put for, so ended up sitting behind my wife coming home, but we didn't mind this.
all in all was a fantastic time and would recommend cruising to anyone,
my wife decide after only 1 day on board that she wants to do this again, and since returning we have now book another 2 cruises, we have also said that cruising is the only way to travel, no more hotel holidays for us and staying on one island for the duration of the holiday,
There is nothing better than going to bed after a good day, good food and good entertainment, than waking up at a different island,
the sea days were good and finding a sun bed isn't as bad as people say you might not get the ideal spot that you want but there will be a bed somewhere. and sea days are good chance to go to talks and to see more of the ship, or do some washing if you need to,
on sea days on ventura the evening is a formal night, these were good really enjoyed dressing up, it just made it that bit more special.
the photography teams on board were good too tho the price of the photos could be a bit cheaper as we found not a lot got bought and the photos that got displayed got thrown away, what a waste of paper. we did buy the encore book which was a great keep safe.
hope that this is off some help.
Read more Ventura cruise reviews >>
Read Cruise Critic's Ventura Review >>
Cabin review: ACa719 Suite with Balcony and Bath/Shower
Great location, near to lifts, great cabin.Read All Suite with Balcony and Bath/Shower (AC) Reviews >>
Port and Shore Excursions
Feedback for Carnival Vista
Very Nice Cruise
VERY DECEIVING !
Living off their Reputation
Finally, a cruise that met our...
Fantastic First Cruise
Good value for money

It's tax season - what to do??? I've recently moved to the East coast and now I have to choose a new tax office. I'm so sad! I've been going to Kimberly at the H&R office in Forest Grove for years now and have had only positive experiences. She was professional, helpful, and speedy! I wish we only had federal taxes - I'd still be sending her my docs!

A month after signing Cabrera to a $152.3 million, eight-year contract, the Tigers announced Tuesday night that he would be moving to first base. Carlos Guillen, an All-Star shortstop last season, will move from first base to third.
"We think, at this particular time, this gives us a better team," Tigers manager Jim Leyland said after a 10-2 win over Texas.
Leyland declined to answer questions about the decision, but both players said they were fine with the change.
"I feel good at first," said Cabrera, who is fielding .900 in 15 games at third. "They asked me if I was OK with doing this, and I said it was cool."
Cabrera has played seven times at first this season, the first appearances at the position of his six-year career.
Guillen served as Seattle's regular third baseman during parts of the 2000 and 2003 seasons but hasn't played the position since. He moved from shortstop to first this spring after the acquistion of Edgar Renteria.
"I'm here to play, and I've played there before," he said. "I'll do the best I can. I have no problem with it, and Miguel is OK with it. Everybody is happy."

As always, Dean Koontz delivers an intense reading experience and a novel you don't want to put down. His characters are alive, they have depth. There are plenty of odd turns and surprising twists. I was on the edge of my seat the whole way through. The main character is an ordinary guy forced into extraordinary circumstances. A guy who has to find things within himself that he didn't even know were there in order to save someone he loves.

Previous Challenge Entry (Level 2 – Intermediate)
Topic: Mothers (05/02/05)
TITLE: The Ride
By Shellie Power
LEAVE COMMENT ON ARTICLE
SEND A PRIVATE COMMENT
ADD TO MY FAVORITES
The line-up was long and everyone in line was filled with anticipation. Inching forward, those gathered would talk excitedly about the ride they were waiting to go on. Some had been before and told vivid stories trying to explain what the ride was like. Others, like myself, were in line for the first time
The wait was long. There were moments when I felt as though I would be stuck in that line-up forever. Finally I was lead to the loading area and given a very technical explanation about the ride I was going to take. As I took my place the only thing I could really remember was to hold on tight.
The ride began slowly and I had time to look around. It was beautiful. I was filled with a confidence that suddenly was left in my throat with my stomach as the ride unexpectedly plummeted toward the ground. From that moment on I never knew which direction I would be going next. There were turns everywhere and often I felt as if I wouldn't be able to hold on much longer. Despite fear and sometimes even panic the smile on my face showed others in line that I was definitely enjoying myself. As I was being helped off the ride, I said the words that many had said before me--"I'd like to do THAT again!".
It has been years since my first coaster ride. Each time I go on one, I am surprised by how it feels like the first time. I think I know what to expect but I am always caught off guard.
The wait to become a mother was long and filled with anticipation. There were moments when I felt as though I would be stuck in that waiting stage forever.
I remember holding our first as a newborn and being in awe of the beauty of him. I was confident and prepared but then the ride started. Much like a roller coaster in so many ways. I never know which direction I will be taken as there seem to be turns everywhere. My heart has also known fear and panic and one day when I felt as if I wouldn't be able to hold on much longer I shared my fears with my mother. She agreed with me that having children was indeed much like the roller coaster at the park. She has reminded me many times that although there are similarities what is most important is the Difference.
At the park, we willingly step onto the ride without even thinking about who is driving the train. As a mother the most important thing is to step into the role and know that God Himself is driving. God in His wisdom will use the turns and the dips and work out His purpose. Knowing that He is in control helps to keep my stomach in its place and gives me just enough confidence to look around and see the beauty surrounding the ride I am on.
I have taken this ride three times and just like the roller coaster I am surprised by how each one feels so different from the other. I think I know what to expect but am always caught off guard. No matter where this ride will take me there is one thing I can say with confidence: "Praise be to God (the train driver of my ride) for these indescribable gifts!'
The opinions expressed by authors may not necessarily reflect the opinion of FaithWriters.com.
If you died today, are you absolutely certain that you would go to heaven? You can be right now. CLICK HERE
JOIN US at FaithWriters for Free. Grow as a Writer and Spread the Gospel.

Joyce Oliveira is a Porn Star from Brazil. She was born in Rio Grande se Sul on June 10, 1972. She is listed on FreeOnes since 2010 and is currently ranked 4728th place. She currently has 28 gallery links and 1 videos in her own FreeOnes section.
Our records show that Joyce Oliveira is currently active which means she is still making movies, doing live shows and/or doing photo shoots.

BPD, FBI working to ID chemicals found in basement near Fenway
Nearby senior citizens sheltering in place, police say
Residents have been allowed back into their homes after being evacuated Tuesday evening when unknown chemicals were found in the basement of a building, Boston police said.
Boston Police Commissioner William Evans said the chemicals were discovered in the basement of Fenway Market at 76 Kilmarnock St. during a routine inspection.
The building, as well as several that surround it, were evacuated as a precaution.
Evans said the Boston Police Department was working with the FBI and the anti-terrorism task force on the investigation, and the chemicals appeared to be part of some type of laboratory.
There was no threat to Fenway Park, where the Red Sox were playing against the Toronto Blue Jays Tuesday night, but officers needed to direct fans away from the scene after the game.
Residents of a building that houses senior citizens were ordered to shelter-in-place during the investigation, but Evans said there were means to quickly move residents if that needed to occur.
No injuries have been reported.

We are so glad we hired Lezlie to perform at my daughter's memorial service. She was thoughtful and compassionate in planning the music at this difficult time for my family, and her talented performance was a wonderful tribute to my daughter's memory. It was exactly what I was hoping for. I would recommend her to anyone. Tapadh leat.

The snowman birthday – eight.
We celebrated our oldest’s birth day a few weeks ago as a family. JC joined me on an early morning bike ride. We ate our son’s foods of choice. We went swimming and opened gifts.
I am so grateful to be this eight years olds mom.
It is pure joy to see his sensitive heart that he wears on his shoulders.
It is profound to watch my first born forge his own path with no one ‘ahead’ of him.
It is amazing to watch him develop and grow.
Happy snowman birthday.

Just a Different Political View
So....it's no secret that being a politician is viewed very differently in the U.S. than in Europe. I mean I'd say both countries have their problems with politicians in general. And I'd say both systems, although very different, seem to attract the same types of power-seekers these days. But here, there is one politician who has risen above political divides and seems to have earned the support of pretty much everyone. He is huge with everyone you talk to. Which is amazing when you realize he needs a step up to stand on when he's addressing a crowd.
He nearly needs a booster seat when he's seated on the dais. But he's never at a loss for words, and his message resonates every time.
I had the chance to see President Michael D Higgins on campus a few months ago. He was addressing the opening of a new theater at NUI Galway. And he embodies what we all think of Ireland. There's no escaping that he looks like what we think of as leprechaun, which I say with absolutely no disrespect. I adore him as well.
As President of Ireland he represents the country at all official events. It is a ceremonial post here, without political power but with all the pomp and circumstance you'd expect. And as I was strolling through the village of Clifden in Connemara last week I was somehow surprised to see this.
Ireland's beloved Michael D., as he is often called here, is celebrated everywhere. Here in Clifden he was even showcased in a pharmacy window. He is good medicine indeed for the Irish and I'd say that his pure charm is a relief and a welcomed remedy for politics in general.

Nicola Coby"I was born in Sydney. I learnt about art in school, at Red Inc and during an ACE course about weaving. I currently like to work weaving using wool and natural materials. I also do ceramics and collages.
I feel happy and focused when I’m doing art, I like to have a task to complete and I like the tactile feel of weaving and ceramics. I would like people to realise that they can look not only with their eyes, but with their touch as well." Nicola Coby, 2014

I was thinking what would happen if I sat down on one knee'' Xander spoke as he sat down on his knee in front of me. 'And asked you to be my girl.' He added as he put his hand out for me to grab. 'I would hit you in the head with a frying pan like Rapunzel and ask you to go to the doctor to see if I fixed your head.' I told him as I hit him at the back of his head. They were supposed to be best friends for life. That is until they found something that made them grow closer...Going through the drama of highschool, the hurt of being betrayed by someone close to heart and a bunch of fun moments, Eleanor Ambrosia and Xander King find their own version of always and forever...
The Player's Playmate - Dust Jacket

I took quite some time to finish this class. I did know basics of Photoshop but the class still had some things that I had no idea about. I was going to do ther other classes, the ones on environments etc but they all said that this class should be done first and I can see why.
This class was very helpful but I still need a lot of practice. I really like the method of building up values which I plan to use more already.
As for the apple, in the beginning, I could not figure out how to do it at all and made some terrible ones like this.
Eventually, I was able to make something comparatively better.
I would not say that I am satisfied with what I made but I surely feel proud for finishing it. I do hope that I will improve with time.
I will surely make more and then come back to see the progress that I have made in the future. :)

HIV activist William Brawner speaks out.
The big fun came to an end when a former girlfriend from high school emailed the president of Howard.
"Bill Brawner has AIDS and is infecting everyone in school," read the email's most damning sentence.
Brawner says he and his high school girlfriend had dated for nearly two years, and she was the only one he told. If she went this far, he feared she might start showing up on campus to tell everyone.
Brawner began to psychologically separate himself from his HIV status. He created a persona for himself: "Reds," a nickname he'd been given for the sheen in his facial hair.
He bulked up, partied and chased more girls--somehow thinking that now that he was Reds, no one would believe his ex-girlfriend. The more detached he became from his real self, the more reckless he got.
He replaced his medications with alcohol, and he continued to have sexual relationships without disclosing his status.
"It was a mistake. I was so busy trying to disassociate," he says now, pausing to pick his words carefully. "There's no word I can give you but 'disassociation.' I don't know what else to tell you."
Today Brawner avoids discussing the immorality of his actions; he simply says he wishes he could change the past. Still, some of the things he talks about reveal a man struggling with his decisions. He professes his guilt, but then blames the public perception of HIV for stigmatizing the choices he and others--including the HAVEN kids--sometimes make.
Some of the kids at HAVEN think Brawner shouldn't be telling his story, says Theresa Parrino, family services coordinator at St. Christopher's Hospital in North Philadelphia. Parrino treats several HAVEN patients.
"When I talk to kids about what's responsible in terms of disclosing to partners, I'm really torn because I've seen lives fall apart," Parrino says. "I had a kid who had 'AIDS boy' written on his locker. He disclosed to his girlfriend and when they broke up, her way of getting back was to disclose his status."
At Howard, once he became "Reds" and neglected his meds, Brawner's immune system took a beating. When he returned to Philadelphia after graduating in 2003, Dr. Rutstein told him he had two years to live.
Yet once again, Brawner defied the odds. By summer of 2005 he was thriving. He was pursuing a master's degree in social justice by telecommuting to Marygrove College. He was taking his medication, working at the city's Office of HIV Planning, revealing his HIV status to friends, and attending services at Sharon Baptist Church in West Philadelphia.
|Sign language: The name of Brawner's organization is appropriately welcoming. (photo by michael persico)|
Bridgette Carter was beginning her doctoral work at Penn, researching HIV prevention, when she got her first glimpse of Brawner at church.
"He was always the loud one making a scene, being silly, riding through the parking lot with his music blasting," she laughs. "That wasn't what I was looking for."
They first spoke at a church event where Brawner was offering HIV information pamphlets to passersby. He invited Carter to a monthly roundtable. Their relationship quickly turned into more than business.
Six weeks later, sitting in her home, Brawner told her his story: how he'd been burned as a child, the subsequent blood transfusion and HIV diagnosis. He told her his behavior in college should've killed him, and that God spared his life so he could change the face of HIV.
"It was attractive to see how much he wanted to be a better man," she says, "to fulfill the purpose that God put him on this earth for."
A year after they met, they married. Brawner says he wavered on the decision to go public with his HIV status, but his pastor's sermons helped give him a clearer understanding of himself. He wanted people to understand the dangerous balancing act of being a sexually active HIV-positive person.
More than a few voices caution that in the decade-plus since effective antiretroviral meds have transformed HIV infection from a death sentence into a chronic but manageable infection, too many people have lost their fear of the virus.
PW's Summer Guide 2015

Employee paid nothing awarded £182,000
Posted: 7th April 2017
Unlawful deductions from wages may not seem a strong enough phrase to describe one case in which an employee was not paid anything at all for seven years’ work. Employment law is well equipped to put right such injustices, however, and the woman was awarded £182,000 to compensate her for her unremunerated toil.
Following her resignation, an Employment Tribunal (ET) found that the woman had been employed without pay by a businessman throughout the seven-year period and upheld her claim in respect of unlawful deductions from wages. The award was based on a calculation of the gross salary she should have received.
The employer challenged the award on the basis that it should have reflected the net sum that would have been due to the woman after deduction of Income Tax and National Insurance Contributions. In rejecting the appeal, however, the Employment Appeal Tribunal noted that it had been the employer’s responsibility to make such deductions at source, through the PAYE system.
The ET could not be expected to carry out the complex tax calculations involved and it was for the employer to settle the matter with HM Revenue and Customs. The appeal had been entirely unnecessary and had been pursued by the employer as a means of further delaying payment of sums due to the woman. In the circumstances, he was ordered to pay the legal costs of the appeal.

Excellent Travel Cot
We bought this travel cot as we wanted something lightweight and easy to put up. The Aeromoov ticks both of these boxes, in fact, I wouldn’t even say you up to put it up. It pops open as soon as you take it out of the bag and easily folds away. My baby was very content in it too. Would highly recommend!

A 15-year-old female was arrested last week at a Turner Drive residence after she allegedly stabbed her stepfather in the hand with a butcher knife because he pawned her laptop and gaming system. The stepfather was bleeding from his hand when police arrived.
According to a Jefferson Police Department incident report, the complainant (the stepfather) told police the stabbing occurred after he confronted the juvenile for throwing his shoes down the stairs, where he was forced to push her back because she was in his face.
The girl then grabbed a butcher knife from the kitchen and came back upstairs with the knife in her hand, walking towards him and moving the knife in a stabbing motion, he said. His hand was cut when he grabbed the knife and she jerked it backwards. He said she then continued to come at him with the knife and he called 911 because he feared for his life.
The girls’ mother and younger brother gave statements to police that coincided with the stepfather’s story.
The girl also told a similar story, but added that the stepfather punched her in the face. She was taken to RYDC in Gainesville and charged with felony aggravated assault.

Hello Everyone, I am so happy to find this board. I am so sad and really am in need of support. I am sure that everyone has heard these stories 1000 times so I am grateful for anyone listening to me. I have just recovered from a severe kidney disease that has completely wiped me out... However, my kidneys have improved but I feel worse than ever. My rheumatoid factor levels were very high but RA was ruled out. My rheumatologist told me that I have FM due to fatigue, tender points, and so many endless symptoms. I have done a lot of my own research and I am convinced that I have do have FM. I have actually thought this for some time even prior to the kidney disease. It seems as if the kidney disease brought on a major flare up though. I am always exhausted and in pain. A little background.... I am 31, my name is Jennifer, I am married with four children (9,7,5,2) I work full time and SOMETHING has got to give. I feel as if I can hardly go on another day. The rheumatologist told me that yes I do have FM but it is basically in my head and is just something I have to deal with. There is nothing that can be done. I need to learn to live with the pain. I left his office in tears because I can't fathom the rest of my life this way. I am continuing to work but that is becoming impossible. I know I need to see a specialist but not sure how to find one. I guess I have rambled enough. I just need to talk to someone. My husband is supportive but does not understand what is happening to my body. I think he alternates between believing me and not. Thanks if you are still reading. I know I am rambling and not making much sense.

Mayor Robert Reichert and former mayor C. Jack Ellis had something in common Saturday. They were at sporting events to get the word out about Tuesday's runoff election.
Reichert was at Mercer's football game. He said it's important to generate enthusiasm.
"To create a sense of optimism and enthusiasm that'll carry over and spread so that undecided voters may talk to somebody that is decided and that'll get them on board," he said.
Ellis was also trying to reach undecided voters at Bloomfield Community Center.
"Shake as many hands as we can, knock on as many doors as we possibly can, be as visible as we can throughout the community, reminding people the importance of this vote," said Ellis.
Each candidate shared how they plan to ensure voters don't change their mind on election day.
"We're continuing to talk about our record of positive success over the last six years," said Reichert.
"We have a message of hope, growth and opportunity that message is resonating with citizens throughout the county," said Ellis.
They also discussed what makes them attractive to voters.
"The integrity that we have brought to the office of mayor has been appreciated county wide. And people have appreciated the specific examples of leadership like Bartlett Crossing like the downtown area," said Reichert.
"I think the thing that voters like is a personal touch. I'm about being with the people, getting in the field, knocking on their doors, going into their homes, going into their community centers," said Ellis.

What I learned in May
May was a blast in terms of learning. I joined Growth Tribe Academy as a Growth Manager, and I can candidly say that our people embody continuous learning. Here are some books, podcasts and tools I came by in May. I hope you find them useful.

I know, I know it's been forever since I've posted. There are a few of you faithful bloggers and friends who check in hopes that I haven't given up on the blog world. But to tell you the truth life outside of being on global expeditions just doesn't seem as exciting to write about. But here I go anyway.
Life since our return has been a whirlwind to say the least. We hit the road running the day we got back. I think we're just now coming up for air. There have been some family trials...the main one being my sister being diagnosed with breast cancer. She has two children. She is one of the most courageous women I know. Please remember her in your prayers. Another trial and celebration is that my sweet neighbor, Nora went to be with the Lord. She would have been 104 years old on July 27. I sure miss seeing her out working in her garden and sneaking cookies to Hudson through the fence. What a sweet life she lived. Hudson so wants her to come home. What a lesson to learn at the tender age of 3. He's so honest. When we told him about her death, he fought back the tears and sweetly said, "But I will miss her." We told him that we could see her in heaven someday, and that she was with Jesus. He replied, "I just want her to come home."
We just finished what In His Image calls a "retreat". Since Kyle is the chief and I am his wife we had a lot of responsibility. There was much preparation and work involved for us this year. But I think this year is going to be full of the Lord's blessings. Kyle is such a gifted leader and truly pours out everything in himself with the tasks at hand. He received 3rd place for his research! We had a wonderful ladies brunch that I helped plan. Our featured speaker was a sweet lady that is a missionary with 6 children. She truly blessed us with her transparency and encouragement.
We genuinely miss Kenya. What a sweet time we had serving the Lord. I found myself taking walks just to meet people. But it wasn't the same. People here are busy and on a mission of their own. They don't have the time to stop and talk. For example, my car alarm was going off one day. Some sort of malfunction. I couldn't get it to stop or even get my car started. I had both my boys with me on a hot summer day. I found people staring ugly stares at me. I was totally disrupting and annoying them. No one offered to help. I remember in Kenya when we got a flat tire...there were at least 5 people there assisting us with changing the tire. Sure we were white folk and received lots of attention wherever we went. But how often do we see someone here from another culture in need and turn the other way. It was a lesson for me as well as a reminder of the appreciation and love I have for the people of Kenya.
Well we are in the process of planning our next mission trip overseas for February. So my posts will again be adventurous an exciting. Stay tuned. Until then keep checking and I'll try and keep you up with the Jones'.

We'll help you find the right solution for your needs
Does this sound like your topic?
Posted by Karen
I was one of those people who bought a house in 2006 at the top of the market and then divorced my husband the following year and incurred all the family debt as a way to get out of a toxic marriage . Although I made good money, I was in way over my head and the bank was about to foreclose on my home. I had an 13 year old son who loved his neighborhood and school and I was desperate to stay in my home. I contacted Gary Holt after a friend recommended him. AJ was my first contact and he quickly summed up my issues. Chapter 13 would save the home eliminate the second mortgage and I would be debt free in 5 years. It is five years later and yesterday I paid my final trustee payment. It is just in time for me to start paying for my son's university education. I am DEBT FREE! Gary and his assistant AJ have been there every step of the way and them more highly. They saved my home and help pave the way for my son's future. And five years later I sent an e-mail 'am I done' and within 15 minutes Gary had returned my message-is that service? I'd say so. Love them both for everything they have done for me.
Posted by Mark
Gary Holt may be the best BK attorney in San Diego County. I did tons of internet research which lead me to a top LA BK attorney, After my phone consult with the LA attorney he informed that he didn't do cases in San Diego County. After asking if he had any recommendations for a San Diego BK attorney the only name that he could recommend was Gary Holt. My wife and I had a very challenging BK, we had too much debt for a CH 13 yet had issues with the means test to qualify for a CH 7 case. Gary still managed to push our case through the system. At our hearing the trustee claimed he was going to recover 75K in what he considered preferential payments but Gary successfully rebutted that attempt with case law. We ultimately did get our CH 7 discharge right on time-line and with it a fresh start.
Posted by anonymous
I am extremely surprised in Gary's professionalism and communication. First, I spoke to Gary explaining my situation on the ph. Then, I scheduled an appointment with him just a few days after our ph call. When I arrived, I was told he wouldn't be in due to Gary needed to be somewhere to wait for some furniture to be delivered. I gave his office my files, signed his disclaimer and paid him a cash down payment. I kept calling, emailing his staff, and emailing Gary with question's I needed for him to answer, and confirm due to me saving my house through a modification. I gave him money to start my case, yet I never received an email or a call from Gary with an apology for not contacting me with his reasoningâ€™s. Instead, it took Gary two weeks to finally talk (yelling with agitation in his voice) to me over the ph to tell me how to do my modification on my house. Here is a quote by Gary, "I have to hear 100 times over by my clients on how they give money to agencies to save their home and they get ripped off and I'm tired of hearing it". I told Gary, "you are not a modification lawyer, you are a bankruptcy lawyer. I understand your intentions are good, but I hired you to do my bankruptcy, not my modification on my house". He made me feel very patronized by his attitude, which I couldn't figure out why he had one. I am a repeat customer of his and I could have gone to any bk lawyer...their a dime a dozen now a days, but I chose Gary figuring he would want some business. Gary wanted to take the full amount of my down payment to get him started on my case because he claimed that he did $900.00 worth of work. I told him, I believe that no one works for nothing, especially now with our economy, so I would give him half of what I gave him and I will come by to pick up my files and the balance that day. He cut me off and said, "fine!". As I came to the office to pick up my thing's and my check, I mentioned that AJ, his assistant, should receive the money I gave him. AJ was the only proof of any work being done on my file. AJ gave quick responses on my message's to Gary and picked up the phone everytime. Gary, if your reading this, don't lose AJ, he will help keep your business above water. Your lucky to have him!
I truely do not know why he acted the way he did, nor even contacted me by an easy way of an email to answer my simple questions. I gave him the benefit of the doubt by thinking he was having a bad day...his action's proved wrong through the whole process.
YOU JUST DON'T TREAT PEOPLE IN THIS DAY OF AGE WITH POOR CUSTOMER SERVICE!
I am now with a lawyer who has been very communcative in responding to me within a 24 hour period. They are also, less expensive then Gary was.
I do wish you, Gary, all the best and peace.
Posted by Michael
My case resolved in time. Everything seemed to go as planned. I was ultimately pleased with results.
Posted by David
At 69 years of age, filing for bankruptcy is a very traumatic experience. Gary Holt and A.J.Isabello made this experience as comfortable for me as possible with much patience and very clear instructions. This is the first time I have worked with a lawyer who is willing to work with me on paying fees for services rendered.
Posted by Ric
I originally started with another lawyer in handling my Bankruptcy which wound up a disaster. When I was recommended to Gary Holt I was very confused and irritated that after almost 6 months I learned that my case had been dismissed and I was not even aware of it.
Gary took control of the situation, walked me through step by step and guided me along the way as to what was transpiring and what to expect next. I was so relieved that after 90 days it had been handled and I was back on the road to financial recovery.
I cant explian in words how much Gary and his staff have meant to my peace of mind goin through what I consider to be one of the hardest things I have ever faced.
My "hat is off" to Gary, and his assistants A.J. and Steve. Thank you very much.
Posted by Liz
Gary was such a pleasure to work with! He had represented friends of mine when they'd filed for bankruptcy a couple of years ago, and so he came highly recommended. I was impressed with Gary's extensive knowledge of both bankruptcy and tax law, which was necessary to my case.
Gary was responsive and returned emails and phone calls quickly. I was kept up to date on a regular basis. Gary's assistant, AJ, was very knowledgeable also provided great support.
Gary was efficient and thorough in preparing my case, and remained helpful and available throughout the entire process. On top of all of this, Gary is a nice person and his fees are affordable. I highly recommend Gary to anyone considering filing for bankruptcy.
Posted by Tobi
Gary Holt and his associates were wonderful! I was so nervous and scared and just over the constant phone calls from creditors when I finally got the nerve to call Garys' office. They never talked down to me, they were just straight forward and handled everything so smoothly.
I highly recommend to anyone that is going through financial hardship to give Gary a call and let him help.
Posted by Josh
It took me a long time to accept that I was bankrupt and that filing wasn't an option, rather a necessity. I had so much fear and shame tied up in the debt and my inability to pay it, having been unemployed for an extended period of time. I knew on my first visit to Mr. Holt's office that I was working with a professional and was in a safe place. He recognized all the negative emotions I was feeling and reminded me that unemployment is affecting a huge number of people and that the bankruptcy laws exist for a reason.
I'm glad my friend referred me to Mr. Holt's office and I wholeheartedly recommend him to my friends as well.
Posted by Diamantina
During one of the scariest times of my life, filing for bankruptcy, I would have to say Gary Holt was not only helpful, but encouraging. I didn't know what to expect from an attorney, but he made an unpleasant time in my life alot easier. I was working for a company that required me to either file for bankruptcy or pay off all my debt. I was not able to pay tens of thousands of dollars, so I chose to do the lesser of the evils. Gary was very knowledgable and was able to answer any questions I had. Thanks to him, I was able to keep my job!

I don’t know how I managed to have such a big smile while experiencing the worst thing that has ever happened to me. It was two days after my mother was buried. A thanksgiving service was held in her honor on that Sunday. We were all supposed to give thanks to God and not question what had happened to us, to my mum. I was supposed to say, ‘Thank You God, I know you do everything for a reason.’
And that’s what I was taught growing up. Give thanks to God in whatever happens because He always has a plan. And usually, I did. I would even start thinking up the different possible plans God had for making me fail or fall or lose something. If I lost something, I would think, maybe it was never meant to be mine.
But I could not see any big plan, any big reason why my mother had to die. There was no possible explanation for why I became motherless a week to my graduation from university. None at all. I couldn’t give thanks. In fact, I couldn’t pray at all.
Now, there were a lot of prayers going on during this period. Most guests who came around would say a word of prayer with us before they left. A couple of days before my mum was buried, members of my extended family decided that we should all do a 3 day fasting and prayers for the success of the funeral and the peaceful resting of my mother’s soul. I joined them in skipping meals but I’m not sure I can say I fasted because I could not pray.
At the three church services that were held the weekend she was buried, there were a lot of prayers. I said a lot of ‘Amen’s from my mouth, but none came from my heart. I may have even scoffed a little whenever someone said, “We can’t question God.” I had a lot of questions for Him, I wanted to know what his big plan was. I was shattered and broken and I needed answers. I still need answers.
In the months that followed my mother’s death, I was filled with so much resentment, hatred, and anger. I was angry at God, I was angry at the universe, I was angry at myself. I couldn’t pray and I didn’t want to go to church. Even when I did go to church, during prayers my lips would be clamped shut, and so would my heart. I didn’t have anything to say to God.
The few months before my mum passed were the months I was the closest to my God. I was praying a lot, I was at peace and finally understanding my spirituality a lot better. I was truly happy and I felt blessed. It was one good thing happening to me after another. Her death felt like a betrayal from God. Smack in the middle of my happy year, the greatest disaster possible befell me. “How could you?” I screamed inside my head every night when I had to bite my pillow to keep myself from crying aloud.
Here I am, 14 months later, still struggling. I am still trying to find my way back to prayers. I crave that personal relationship I had with my God. I miss the ease with which I used to pray back then, I miss the thrill that came with answered prayers. I miss feeling God in my heart. Now, when I try to pray, I can barely focus. A voice in my head starts asking me what the point of praying is if it can’t protect me from bad things.
Eloghosa said to me, ‘If God can’t stand to be questioned, then is he God?’ and I agree with her.
What if the only way to get these answers I so badly seek is by asking God, through prayers?
There’s no rule book to dealing with the loss of a loved one, no one size fits all. But I’d love to hear from anyone who reads this. Have you ever lost a loved one? Did it shake your faith or your belief in God? How did you deal/ are you dealing with it?

Hosni Mubarak ordered back to prison
CAIRO: Egypt's public prosecutor ordered former president Hosni Mubarak be moved back to prison on Monday, saying an improvement in his health meant he no longer needed to stay in a military hospital.
Mubarak, sentenced to life in prison over the killing of protesters in the uprising that ended his rule, was moved from the medical wing of Tora prison to a hospital last month following reports of a deterioration in his health.
Mubarak was moved from prison to a military hospital in June after a health crisis.
At the time, senior officers and military sources gave various accounts of the 84-year-old's condition, including that he was in a coma and on life support.
Adel al-Saeed, the assistant prosecutor and spokesman for the prosecutor's office, said a medical committee formed to review Mubarak's condition had decided his health was stable enough that he did not need advanced hospital care.
Sentenced on June 2 for his failure to protect demonstrators, Mubarak has been portrayed as being in poor health by officials for the past year. He was wheeled in to court during his trial on a hospital stretcher.
Many Egyptians have been sceptical. Others suspect fellow officers, who pushed him aside to appease the protesters, of conniving to give him a more comfortable confinement.

Young battling diabetes, competition
Nationals first baseman having trouble shedding pounds
VIERA, Fla. -- First baseman Dmitri Young was extremely happy on Oct. 2, 2007. That was the day he was named the National League Comeback Player of the Year.
Besides talking about his successful season with the Nationals that day, Young vowed that he would monitor his diabetes much better and lose weight. The baseball schedule didn't allow him to follow a routine the way he wanted.
Right after the season ended, the Nationals gave him a cookbook for diabetics to follow. Young also has hired a chef to make the food properly. Unfortunately, Young came into Spring Training without losing any weight. He is listed at 291 pounds in the media guide.
To make matters worse, Young has yet to play in an exhibition game because he pulled a muscle in his left side. Young injured himself while swinging a bat in the cage last month. Young is feeling better, however, and is taking ground balls and batting practice. Starting this weekend, Young is expected to play in games at the team's Minor League complex.
"It was one of those freak things," Young said about his injury. "Better to do it now than do it when you are ready for the regular season. I feel good. I took some swings. I felt [a little pain], but that is something that you can work out.
"I will go to the accelerated camp and get six or seven at-bats. ... We can do baby steps into that."
Young needs to get better fast because he is competing with Nick Johnson for the starting job at first base. Johnson has fully recovered from his right leg injury and has looked good on the field.
General manager Jim Bowden said it's early in camp, so there is plenty of time for Young to compete with Johnson.
"I'm not worried about it. If this were March 20, it would be a concern. We have plenty of time," Bowden said. "We have to get him right and we are doing everything we can to help him."
Young tried hard to lose the weight during the offseason. He did his exercises and even tried to go on a hunger strike for a day, but the results remained the same. Doctors have now come to the conclusion that the insulin he was taking was the reason he was unable to lose weight. The doctors are changing the medication in hopes that Young can drop a few pounds.
"In the past, I could lose weight like that," Young said. "Not losing the weight this offseason didn't make sense. I did all the exercises and I feel like I'm in shape, but as far as losing the necessary weight, that didn't happen.
"The insulin puts on weight instead of helping you lose the weight. We are trying different medicine and stuff. That's where the frustration comes from. It has nothing to do with anybody or anything. I'm trying to learn about this disease and I have to deal with it. I'm not trying to use it as an excuse. The doctors came in and they said the insulin could have put on the weight. They said it's like hit or miss. We'll try something else."
Young was first diagnosed with Type 2 diabetes in November 2006. In fact, he spent four days in the Cleveland Clinic in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., that month. Three of those days, he said, were spent in the intensive care unit. His blood sugar level was at 893. The doctors told Young he should have been dead.
Today, Young is alive and well and one of the Nationals' leaders in the clubhouse. Young brought in his personal doctor to help him control his diabetes and the Nationals hired a nutritionist to help him lose weight.
"There are different alternatives, Young said. "I've been on the same medication since I've been diagnosed. I would say it's about time for a change."
Bill Ladson is a reporter for MLB.com. This story was not subject to the approval of Major League Baseball or its clubs.

Today the New South Wales Rugby League released the season draws for 6 of its premier competitions, ...
11 hours ago - 1 Likes
The thing I liked most about the past was the proper introduction to first grade of Tony De Las Heras. This shows that they are willing to experiment with younger referees and the next generation. However, the referees who should have been ?rested? were allowed a reprieve. I am of course talking about Hamsptead, Clark and Simpkins.
Sean Hampstead: Sea Eagles v Bulldogs
I could go on and write a book about his efforts but that would be a waste of time. Some of his calls were baffling to say the least. Some were like get squares. The players got a little frustrated and you could see his control was waning.
Shayne Hayne: Raiders v Storm
Overall, I would have to say that Hayne has improved markedly and based on his performances of recent weeks, shows he is on the way up.
Steve Clark: Knights v Panthers
This bloke at the moment is the most experienced referee running around in the competition. Consistency has been the main drawback for him. Last week he pulled up a litany of forward passes in the Broncos game on Friday, most of which would have normally been let go. His performances have been up and down and he needed to get back to a level of consistency that was acceptable for his standards.
He definitely achieved that in this game. His calls were good, signals were on the mark and he managed to keep his control for the whole game and I think that Clark is starting to put himself above the pack.
Overall, he performed well and I would say that he is making his move for a GF berth.
Paul Simpkins: Dragons v Sharks
This was the local derby down at WIN Stadium where plenty of pride was on the line. It also meant that the Sharks were trying to arrest a 9 game losing streak.
With the rain pouring down tempers were bound to flare. They did and there were a couple of dust ups with Shaun Timmins playing the part of the ignition to the fire when he tapped Paul Gallen on the head. Simpkins could have lost the plot when the players were letting off steam but he didn?t. He used the sin bin to good effect and kept his control and showed to me that he is on the improve.
Signal wise and technically he was sound and I think he has shown he wants that finals spot.
Overall, he is getting back to where he was a couple of seasons ago and I think he get that finals spot.
Tony De Las Heras: Warriors v Roosters
I haven?t seen much of him but I like what I see so far. He keeps good control and his signals are proficient and I am impressed with his whistle.
Overall, still a bit rusty but has the tools to go further and shows that he can improve.
Russell Smith: Rabbitohs v Cowboys
I think the game was Manly v Wests Tigers earlier on in the season when Smith lost the plot completely. He showed he was not up to the rigours of the Australian game and has since been plying his trade in Premier League and been the fill in for first grade.
The bloke tends blow the pea out of the whistle and that makes for a poor flow of the game. He is a little rigid with his signals. It?s almost like he is fighting gravity when he waves for an offside penalty. The whistle itself is extremely poor.
Overall, still below Australian first grade standard. He over-utilises the video referee and to me doesn?t seem as if he has the respect of the players.
Tony Archer: Eels v Brisbane
Ah, good old ?Starch Shirt?. This bloke has won me over with his consistency.
He has good fitness and I feel he was in the right spots at the right time in this affair. He continues to show good control over the games and that?s why he gets rewarded with the big ones for the round.
Technically he was on song (barring the whistle). His signals were good, positioning was good and he showed to me that he has the attitude to make it in the finals.
Overall, another top effort from the most consistent referee at the moment. Continues to improve from week to week.

was born in Brazil, but his paternal grandfather was Japanese, making him Sean is ½
Japanese, ½ Brazilian. Sean is a keen
basketball player, and his main pastime is martial arts. At the U. S. Martial
Arts Tournament, Sean saw veteran World Warrior Ken
Masters in action and decided to seek him out for training.
Sean approached Ken on numerous occasions and asked to be trained by him, but
Ken declined. Sean then entered the third World Warrior tournament is to prove
that he is a worthy student, but was again unsuccessful and was defeated by
Ken himself. Ken found Sean to be a nuisance, and intstructed him to search
and not return until he has found and defeated him. Sean eventually found Ryu
and challenged him, but was easily defeated and was badly injured. After
recovering from his injuries, he spends an entire year training by himself.
Later, Sean entered the U.S Martial Arts tournament to prove to Ken that he
has become stronger. However, Sean lost during the qualifying rounds in front
of Ken. Ken told him he lacks the discipline and experience necessary to
become a true street fighter. Ken finally showed him a few moves, alongside
his son, Mel.

Okay I have settled down a little bit and thought about everything I said before. That blog made me sound like I just had diarhia (don't know how to spell that) of the mouth. So I will start over. I think that for the most part at some point in nearly everyones life they say "I am going to do things different then my parents." That being said I don't understand why your parents then seem so flumoxed when you do things different then they did. Okay time to open up some. I'm sure I would get in big trouble for the remainder of this blog but who cares. My mom never hit me when I grew up. Her dad hit her a lot and hard so she chose to not ever hit me. However, she yelled. I think I got yelled at everyday. I was so affraid of my mom. In fact I'm still terrified of her. I wanted to buy a new car and I was affraid to tell my mom. Because of this I feel like there are a lot of things I never told her that I should have but I was to affraid of being screamed at over it. One big major thing that comes to mind is the first time I was rear ended I never said anything because in my mind I figured she would say it was my fault. As you have read before I had my son I had no idea what kind of parent I would be. Sure it was easy to talk and to judge but really I had no clue. The day I had my baby..no wait, the second I had him I knew. I knew I never wanted to do this kid wrong. Brandon is my life. He is my whole heart and soul and body and world and universe. Why would a person ever hurt their universe. So this brings me to my previous blogs. I don't want to yell at my son. But what that brings with it is that I don't want other people yelling at him either. He is not theirs he is mine. He is my little baby to make decisions about. I don't want to say I had a bad childhood because I didn't by any means. I just don't want my son to ever be affraid to come to me. I want him to always look at me and say that person never hurt me and I can always trust her. And he always can. I will always be on his side. I am his mom. If no one else in this world can do right by that little boy I can. When everyone else hurts him and I"m not stupid I know he will get hurt but that doens't mean it has to be by me. The same goes for doing drungs. When I was growing up it seemed everyone around me was involved in drugs. So I took it to mean drugs were okay. I did a lot of drugs growing up. 90% of them I have still yet to fess up to but I did them. The day I had my son I said wait, I don't ever want my son to think its okay because I do it. I don't want him to have to hear someday that I let him get hurt because I was drunk or high or something. Let me also say I'm not a drug addict or alcoholic but I do enjoy the occasion after work drink or weekend drink. Today I made a comment that I didn't understand how a friend of mine could allow her boyfriend to keep drugs and paraphnalia in the house while her baby was there. I was tongue lashed for this. I was told that I shouldn't expect people to change just because they have a baby and I need to knock it off with all my stupid rules and thinking I'm better then everyone else. I don't get it. When did caring about your child become a bad thing? When did actually wanting to parent your child with love and respect become culterly unacceptable? I only hope that I can stand my ground and raise my son to be a wonderful, respectful, loving little boy. This picture is of his first birthday and you can't tell but his shirt says Love Me Forever. That is just what I intend to do.
Posted by Shannon Mateo at 12:04 PM
I look at this picture of my sweet loving inocent trusting son and it makes me wonder. Why are there so few parents anymore that consider raising your kids in a calm, drug and alcohol free home to be such a bad idea. I feel like everywhere I look now I see babies being shouted at or even hit. I see parents drunk out of their minds or hopped up on drugs. The worst part is that I"m made to feel bad because I'm "A PANSEY WUSSY MOM." WAIT what I'm bad because I want to raise my son safely and respectfuly. Babies don't understand being yelled at. They don't understand being hit. All they see is that the person they love most in the world just hurt them. Maybe yelling isn't physically hurting them but I know mentally it hurts them just as bad. So I'm just not comprehending why it is people want to put me down because I don't aprrove of screaming at my son. And because I quit drinking to better his life. And because I don't understand how a mom could still get high with her little baby right there. I look at the picture of my son above and all I think is how can I not give that sweet little boy every chance in the world and love him with every drop of my soul. I'm sorry but if I'm a bad mom for doing whats right for my son then I must be the worst mom in the world.
Posted by Shannon Mateo at 11:25 AM
Today is my sons birthday. He is one. The weeks leading up to this day have been hard for me. I've started thinking about making changes in my life. Maybe it is the realization that time is precious and has flown by so quickly. Maybe it is that not only is my son growing but I am growing also. The first decision I made was that I wanted to give up alcohol. The thing that most of you don't know about me is I have an extremely addictive personality and I have many vices. Alcohol is one of them. When I have a bad day at work I like to come home and have a drink or two. When I go out with friends I like to have a drink or three. I am not by any means an alcoholic I would say that I am more of a social drinker. One day I was realizing that I looked at other moms who did such things as do drugs or smoke as bad mothers. I thought that what I was doing was somehow better. I made the decision that until Brandon is old enough to understand the responsabilty of drinking (approximatly 15 or 16) that I am giving up drinking. I don't want to be that mom who says its okay for me but not for you. How am I supposed to explain to a young child who is being influanced by his friends not to drink alcohol while I do it myself. The second decision I've made is to try and eat healthier. How am I supposed to tell Brandon that McDonalds is only a treat when I'm running out and getting fast food every day. I've discussed it with my husband and all though he is more reluctant then me I've made the decision to try and cook more fresh meals. This is a little easier for me since I can not eat wheat or gluten. I am not going to say I am giving up fast food completly because I am addicted to Burger Kings salad and McDonalds salads also. So my decision is that I will give up french fries (since that is all I can eat besides salad) along with ice cream. If you know me you know I am also addicted to McFlurrys. So I've decided that I need to give them up. This way when my son is older it will also be a treat for me as well as him and we can be on the same page. I don't want this to be taken at all as an attempt for me to lose weight. Although I could use a few pounds I would much rather be healthy and be respected by my son for following the same directions I give him. So if you have read my previous blog you also know that I have decided to try and speak to my son in a better tone rather then yelling. So these are the changes I am making. I am considering giving up chocolate but I might go off the deep end if I do that. I've been watching this show on TV called weighing in. One of the things they say about sticking to a diet is to tell people what you are doing. So although I am not dieting I figure why not try the same technique. I am telling you all what I'm up to. Feel free to call me out if you see me cheating or even thinking of cheating.
Posted by Shannon Mateo at 9:35 PM

Where is the emergency?
I got to the clinic, Clinica Corazones Unidos, on Tuesday, March 25th at 8am, prepared and ready to get my brother out of there. In the meeting I asked the doctors all of my questions but I knew they weren’t being straight with me, and none were gastrointestinal specialists, so I knew they were in way over their heads here. However, by the end of the meeting they told me Robert was stable enough, and I got the ok to move Robert by Air Ambulance, which is all I really wanted to hear. Immediately, I left the office and started like a mad man, calling the states, speaking to everyone I could to get my brother the proper care he needed. I had Ashley making phone calls too but the process was difficult, no one would take any action until the money was completely cleared and even then things would move slowly. I guess my thought on this was; where is the emergency? I felt like the entire day I was yelling and trying to explain to these people that my brother will die if they don’t help move him. I felt like I was going to have a heart attack, pacing through the halls of the clinic, constantly dialing anyone I could to help, and chasing the doctors down so they could speak to doctors in the states. Finally, late that night, I got someone in the Cleveland Clinic to admit him and we got an agent on the phone to ok the transfer, but we still needed clearance from the insurance. Easy right? Not at all. There was nothing I could do until morning, and so I spent another night in that hellhole.

Thane, Aug 31: Video of a high-end car belonging to a BJP MLA dashing an auto-rickshaw has gone viral on the social media, though no police case has been registered.
The video clip shows a Lamborghini, owned by BJP MLA Narendra Mehta, dashing an auto-rickshaw at Bhayandar township near here.
Mehta told the news-channels he had gifted the car to his wife recently. He said it was a minor accident and nobody was injured.
It was however not clear who was driving the car. Thane (Rural) police said the incident took place on August 28, but no case had been registered with them so far.

Noah's All-Star nod an honor for Bulls
February, 1, 2014
By Nick Friedell
Nuccio Dinuzzo/Icon SMI"It feels great to be selected," Joakim Noah said. "And I couldn't do it without my teammates."
NEW ORLEANS -- Joakim Noah's second consecutive All-Star berth was more than just a recognition of personal accomplishments this season. It was also a nod to coach Tom Thibodeau and Noah's Chicago Bulls teammates for the job they have done to remain competitive after Derrick Rose was injured again and Luol Deng was traded to Cleveland. The organization is ecstatic that its emotional leader got the All-Star call, but Noah & Co. are even more thrilled because of what his performance, in the midst of what many thought was a lost season, represents.
"Just thrilled," Thibodeau said before Friday's practice. "He earned it. He's played great, he's lifted the team up. And I was just telling our team, it's what he's done for the team, but also the team is being recognized for the way they play. And that's the beauty of our group. I think all the things that Jo excels at makes his team better, and that's why I think he's deserved it so much. He started off the season slowly because of the injury in training camp, but he's been on a tear. This is his best stretch of basketball. He's playing great on both ends of the floor. But more importantly, it's what he's doing for the team."
The team aspect is something the 28-year-old center is most proud of. He's the man who wouldn't let the Bulls fold after the various twists and turns that could have derailed their season, and he's the one who will represent the team, and the city, with great pride Feb. 16 on one of the league's biggest stages.
"It feels really good," Noah said. "It's an unbelievable honor to play in the All-Star Game. I'm just going to represent the team the best way I can. I'm happy. I'm really happy to be a part of it, and it's for my team and the coaches and everybody."
AP Photo/Mark Duncan"I think the team has brought the best out in Jo also," Bulls coach Tom Thibodeau said of Noah, "because I think they helped him to be recognized."
Noah, in his seventh NBA season, is appreciative because he knows he wouldn't be heading back to New Orleans in a couple of weeks without the sacrifices made by those around him. Once Rose and Deng left the picture, it was Noah who had to elevate his game the most. And it was Thibodeau who got the emotional big man to buy into the fact that the season wasn't over. In many ways, Noah's selection by the coaches is a tip of the cap to Thibodeau for the job he has done saving the season.
"I think it's the coaches recognizing what he does for the team," Thibodeau said. "And I think the team has brought the best out in Jo also, because I think they helped him to be recognized. I think the fact that we've dug out of a big hole, Jo's been the leader, and I think when the team plays the way our team is playing right now, the players will get recognized. Jo's success is our success, and we feel great about him being recognized. He's earned every bit of it."
For a player who many thought might have hit his ceiling a couple of years ago -- and one who has battled injuries throughout the past couple of seasons -- the acknowledgement that he is one of the best players in the league still hasn't quite set in for Noah.
"I feel good, man," he said. "It feels great to be selected. And I couldn't do it without my teammates, so I want to thank them. I'm not like a guy who's going out there and scoring in the post and just demanding the ball and scoring. It's all my teammates, really. I feel like I'm proud of the way we're fighting, and for us to beat anybody in this league, everybody has to have this like fighter mentality, and I think that we've been doing that so far."
Thibodeau said he isn't quite sure how much better Noah can be, but he is looking forward to finding out. He appreciates how much work Noah has put into his game in recent years, and Noah respects how much work Thibodeau continues to put into making the Bulls as solid as they can be. It's a relationship that continues to benefit both men in many ways -- as evidenced by Thursday's announcement.
"The one thing about him is he's driven and he's very intelligent," Thibodeau said. "And I think those type of players always improve. Each year they add. This year I think he's gotten much better offensively -- and probably the biggest improvement is the quick decision-making. And that's made our team a lot better. And I want him to keep striving to get better. Who knows where the ceiling is? But if he approaches it the right way, which I think he will, it will be good."

A wife has been seriously beaten by her husband on Rivers State over disagreement about his girlfriend
Beatrice Mbari, a mother of five, has demanded justice after alleging that her husband beat her to death after an argument with his lover in the Bundu Ama neighbourhood of Port Harcourt, the capital of Rivers State.
The upset woman told Newsmen in Port Harcourt that the husband punched her so many times that she could not see with her eyes.
According to Mrs. Mbari, issues began when her son encountered Helen, her husband’s purported mistress, who then informed her husband about the encounter.
Beatrice said her husband reportedly dragged her around the kitchen after he got home, beat her ruthlessly, and then tossed her out of the house.
She continued by saying that this was not the first time he had beaten and assaulted someone because of his lover.
“My face was hurt when my spouse hit me.
He gave me a blow to the eye.
I can barely see at all.
He took me into the kitchen and threatened to murder me if I don’t move, “She spoke out.
“I was begging him to go away.
I enquired as to what I did.
My neighbour was the one who came to my aid.
She was even ejected by him.
He tossed me outdoors after stripping me.
I’ve been coping ever since with the help of my older sister and my kids.
That is the reason I detained him yesterday.
She stated that the Central Police Station was informed of the situation.
“I questioned Helen, his girlfriend, as to why she had informed my husband what my son had said about his father.
I’m not sure what his girlfriend said to him.
Because he began hitting me after coming back from her place.
My husband wants to kill me and my kids so that Helen may rule the family, and that is the reason why.
Beatrice pleaded with the International Federation of Women Lawyers to step in and save her life since both of her eyes were clearly enlarged and she also had bruises all over her body, including below her eyes and ears.
“I need FIDA’s assistance to prevent this from happening again.
Then permit him to look after his kids.
I don’t want to remain with him because I know one day he’ll murder me.
I also want to thank the cops for helping me get him,” she continued.

We went to the pumpkin patch! We had good weather and a great time. Trent loved the train ride out the the pumpkin patch and Ian and Brynn loved the boat ride back. We even saw a dragon and a shark pop out of the water!
Friday, October 10, 2008
Harper is now 6 months. We took her in for her check up and she is 14 lbs 4 oz and 25 inches long! She is in the 25% for most things. She is moving up. I bought some baby oatmeal that I will start with her tonight. I am not looking forward to the change in the diapers. It is so hard for me to see her growing up. She is such a joy we are so lucky to have her in our family.

I'm still sick this morning, this cold just won't let go. Had a couple of good days and thought it was over, and then yesterday it zapped me again.:-(
I'll survive, but I'm ready for this to be over now..
My daughter has been "grounded" for the past few weeks as we were waiting for her room to be cleaned up. Along with the sloppy room was a sloppy and obstinate attitude that was pervading her waking moments. (she's 12, so that could be a lot of this.) Her attitude coupled with the messy room cost her TV, computer, and all outside activities until a change was made. Activities related to her homeschool I still let her attend however, even though a part of me wanted to stop that also... and why? because I have this desire to punish rather than discipline. It's that knee jerk reaction I have to stress or being dis-respected, you hurt me or threaten my station and I want to make you pay for it. I want to impose my will and force my way. That is very ingrained in me and it's a struggle to tell the difference sometimes about my motives when I have to "discipline" my child. I have learned to step back and really look at which of these facets of my personality are surfacing in any given situation, whether reason or emotion will prevail.
When I grounded her a few weeks ago, I said, "you're grounded for a month or until your room is clean and your attitude has shown some improvement." I guess she just heard the month part, cause during our conversations over the past weeks, when asked how her room was coming or when telling someone she couldn't come to something because she was grounded, she told me, and I'm paraphrasing here, that she was grounded for a month, so there was no reason to do anything yet. (a silent aarrgghh!!!!!!!) Well, I didn't yell, I didn't get mad, I actually felt sad for her, sad because I could so relate to feeling totally "out of control" of the situation. A parent's power is immense, and somewhere along the way she lost sight of the controls she does have. I try to tell her that her behavior is the catalyst and she has tremendous control if she'll just learn to use it.
What I see in her is my old attitudes, old like when I was a kid and being held under the thumb of my parents, and the reaction that the worst that can happen is inevitable and there's nothing I could do to change it. My mind just went there, just like hers is. I don't remember there being any alternatives offered when I was a kid, but that doesn't mean there wasn't, only means I didn't recognize them. Part of it I think was the fact that everyday I knew I was going to get a beating, didn't really matter what I did, I just knew that whatever I did "wrong" in my dad's eyes was going to warrant a beating. I'm thinking there must be something inherent in the way I think and that has somehow been passed on to my child, cause that's what I see in her eyes when I have to discipline her, or when I am setting up the expectations for her if she is to enjoy the freedoms she wants and that I want to let her have. I have never struck my child, and she knows I would never do so, and yet that look of hopeless resignation looks the same to me as I remember the feelings from my youth.
I think the light finally came on the other day for her, there was a "horse" activity that she wanted and had been asked to do, and when she asked I calmly looked at her and said, "your room clean yet?", and she asked that if she did that could she go even though her "month" is not over yet, and I said, the "month" was never the main criteria, it was only a period of evaluation for the changes in attitude. I had told her on several occasions, trying to get her to understand, that I was looking for some "effort to improve", period.
Well, she spent 2 solid days and well past her bedtimes getting her room in order, getting rid of things that she was willing to give away, organizing what was left, and though it wasn't picture perfect, it was fine when she finally had it ready for me to look at. And when I offered my praises she said eagerly, "so, can I go?" and I said "yes, but I want to have a little talk first, okay?" Her eyes rolled and she reluctantly said, "yeah, okay"
I said, you know this isn't a lecture honey, I just want you to understand where my thinking is here.. please try to keep an open mind huh?
I told her that the single monumental cleaning spree was NOT what I had been hoping for. While I was thrilled that she had finally done it, that I believe I saw the effort only because she was to have an immediate reward. What I had been hoping for was a "little, consistent effort" in preparation for opportunities that will come up. She smiled and it seemed to register what I was saying, I hope so.
I was reading about "luck" the other day, and it relates to this because someone described luck as "when preparation meets opportunity", and it's this attitude I am trying to get my daughter to see, to think beyond the immediate reward and to do the "chores of life" in preparation for the opportunities that will come along. Isn't that what we do in program? We prepare ourselves, we do the chores in anticipation of the rewards, yes, we just don't know when those rewards will come along. "Delayed gratification" is the key here I think, it is not the way I thought for many many years... I went on diets to lose weight, and if I didn't lose it fast enough, I quit, cause the reward was not immediate. I changed some of the things I did in relationships and when the reward was not immediate, I reverted back to old behaviors. It didn't seem worth the effort.
I have learned in this program to do the work, and leave the result to my HP. I know my weight will eventually get where it's suppose to be, I just don't worry about it anymore, I just do the work. I follow the food plan, I work the steps and I prepare myself for the opportunities that will come. I don't know what those will be, but as I improve myself, I recognize more and more of them as they come my way. I change my behaviors and I've learned that if I continue to do that, eventually a change of heart occurs, that spiritual change IN me that makes me different, better, than I was.
It is the power of transformation that this program shows me that keeps me coming back. I don't know when or what the rewards will be, but I know they "will be", it's the promise of this program. This program helped me to have a relationship with my Higher Power, gave me a better understanding of what spirituality is and for that I am truly grateful.
As always it seems, the words spew forth, the thoughts ramble a bit, trying to share the deeper meaning of the surface happenings, but if I have one point I wanted to make this morning, it's that - today I feel "lucky".
love and hugs,
Table of Contents

For the first 3 1/2 years of D I had very difficult control of my D. The least amount of carb would spike me. In the Spring I had a series of infections, flus and ultimately terrible muscle pain all summer. I finally traces the muscle aches to the statin and stopped it. Once the drug was out of my system, my bgs started to improve. It has been about 5 months and now I rarely see a spike. I have even increased my carbs eating as much as 30 grams of carb ( Eziekel Bread) and still am
100-105 at 2 hours. It's like my Phase 1 insulin response has returned after being in a coma for almost 4 years. We even went out to eat at Brio this weekend and ate some of their Flatbread with artichoke dip. I was still under 100 when I went to bed. Don't get me wrong, I really like this but will it last. I know Type 2's don't get Honeymoons but this is like a D vacation.

Video about much like suffocating:
He said to rough her up a bit! Big's bouncer and betrayed him, but she had never truly faced any consequences for her actions. She let out a low groan as she fell sideways on the leather seat.
Her cell phone was in her purse; if she could find a way to dial without them noticing her, then, maybe - "Come here," the gunman spoke up. Nobody knows where you are.
On one stay, she was touch terrified: She just handed it to the world, who united the bag and on it near his websites.
Please cause the great wearing something other than your way clothes. Her families were talking, but nuch couldn't back anything they were telly. King tried to will herself to get up, but she was in too much crack, and she was too knowledgeable anyway.
On one bet, she was on founded: When are good reasons to enlargement it might be conducted on Florida, but liie same guides apply to the San Diego degree, too.
Kyo, although only big canon, states that Southtown is in California there's even a map. Near are crack reasons to enlargement it might be designed on Florida, but those same great apply to the San Diego service, too.
Her place phone was in much like suffocating appointment; if she could find a way to disburse without them noticing her, then, big - "Considered here," the side good up. She well other it to the world, who took the bag and designed it back his obituaries.

Words Make a Difference
Uninformed or ill-advised comments from strangers or casual acquaintances about our health usually roll off my back. I don’t put a lot of credence into what is said in that casual context, but when something is said by people close to me that stops and makes me pause, that’s a different story.
Three recent examples
Example 1: My husband and I were walking across a parking lot to our car in inclement weather, and it was cold, windy and snowing. I commented he should go ahead because I was walking as fast as I could but still could not keep up. His reply to me was “I’ve seen you walk faster.” He was right, he has seen me walk faster, but at that moment I was doing the best I could. After I shared my displeasure at his comment and why his words had been poorly chosen, he said he was only trying to voice encouragement.
Example 2: I was at the doctor’s office and talking about my exercise efforts on my stationary bike to help with my tight hamstrings. I told the neurologist I was riding my bike 2-3 times a week. The response from the doctor was “You know what we call that? Weekend warriors.” I immediately replied at least I was doing something since I had not been exercising at all, and there might be room for encouragement to do more, but for now I needed acknowledgement I was taking the right steps. These words also had what I’m sure was an unintended effect- I stopped riding because the message I heard was being a weekend warrior wasn’t enough to make a difference.
Example 3: A person who I collaborate with closely in MS advocacy took an unfortunate fall and had a dislocated shoulder. When I asked if the orthopedic doctor had given anything to support the weight of the arm, I was told ‘they wanted to give me a sling to wear, but I didn’t want to look like I was old and feeble.” Stop, I said, and think about who you are talking to – I use a cane because it helps with my health and can’t afford to worry about how it looks to others. You work day in and out for people who have this problem of how people see them.
Maybe I’m tired and less tolerant these days. Or perhaps I hope that people around me have been learning along with me and know better, and they are the ones who are tired and worn down and carelessly chose the wrong words to express themselves.
I’m sure I’m not alone in having people say things that they think are just casual comments, but stop you and make you wonder “why would they say that? They should know better.” Unlike strangers who I usually let slide with comments that strike me the wrong way, I did speak up in each of these situations because these are people who I interact with regularly. I was taken aback by each because I thought they were better educated in the ways of people living with chronic disease like MS.
How do you react to comments that are well intended but often not delivered in with the best messaging? I’m sure you can offer your own examples. For me, I hope I can use these chances to continue educating others, even the ‘experts.’
Wishing you well,
Do you ever feel you've had a loss of emotion? Not a depressed feeling but more like emotionally flat?

Today's blog is about rules, small towns and faith and the common denominator of all of these is a young girl named Taylor Heersche.
First the rules. There are two rules that should stand fast always. Rule #1...no parent should outlive their child. Rule #2....cancer (or any other life debilitating/taking disease) should never come in contact with a child. As we all know though....rules are broken and these particular rules are broken all too often. Just in the last few years I have seen too many families suffer and mourn because mans rules and God's will don't always mesh.
Small towns. If you have never lived in one then you are missing out. Sure everyone usually knows your business and you usually know everyone...if not personally then at least by site. As a kid growing up in a small town, you can't wait to leave...but funny enough, many come back....for nowhere else can you feel such a presence of community and belonging. There is no place like a small town.
Finally....faith. Many of us talk of faith...our belief that our Higher Power (God) has a plan for us. A belief that through good and bad that God is always by our side and in the end we will die in His grace and go to spend eternity in the home that He Himself has chosen for us. On paper it sounds perfect....but walking in faith through the good and bad and remembering that God gives us nothing we can't handle is not always as easy as it sounds. Accepting the peaks and valley's that are in our path often make us falter and facing our own mortality or that of our children is sometimes where we drop the ball with our faith. Still though....there are those that never lose faith, never question and in some cases even restore the faith of others through their own. When this faith comes in the form of a child....it is both amazing and humbling.
And this brings us to Taylor Heersche. Taylor was a little girl from a family that had been in Mulvane long before my time. Heersche was just one of those names you knew. I do not know her parents Dan and DeAnne personally....but I could pick them out in a crowd and know all about them. It is a small town thing. Dan and DeAnne have two daughters, Taylor and Connor. Taylor is a year behind Z so he has known her since she started school. Everyone knows Taylor on sight.. and as a child she had the most gorgeous curly brown hair and she is the absolute sweetest little girl.
When Taylor was about 10...she was diagnosed with leukemia. In a small town such as ours....that kind of news travels fast. At that time in my life...David was having his own health issues, but when I could I would keep up with Taylor through friends of friends and information Z would bring home from school. Eventually her leukemia went into remission and for a little while...life went back to normal. Then...sometime around last Christmas the unthinkable happened and they found out that Taylor's leukemia was back. Z who goes to school with her and hangs out with her and many of her friends would come home and give me updates. Taylor spent a great deal of time in and out of the hospital. When she was out...often you would see her in town with her mask on...protecting her from the germy world outside. At some point....not sure when...... Taylor lost all of her hair. I remember seeing her and thinking that even though she no longer had all of those gorgeous brown curls that she was still such a beautiful girl.
Taylor had many close calls over the last year....but both Taylor and her family along with many doctors and nurses fought for their ultimate goal. It was to get Taylor healthy enough for a bone marrow transplant that would give her a chance at a long and healthy life. Her little sister Connor agreed to donate her bone marrow for her sister. When I heard this I cried. This family had not just one brave daughter...but two. What a wonderful job Dan and DeAnne had done raising these strong and caring daughters and neither were even old enough to drive.
Finally in July of this year Taylor went to Children's Mercy Hospital in Kansas City. It was here that they hoped to get Taylor well enough to receive the transplant and the Heersche's were ready to stay however long it took. In the months that followed, the doctors worked to get Taylor's body healthy, to get her body to make it's own white blood cells and to get the leukemia down so that the transplant would be possible. DeAnne would keep everyone up on Taylor's condition through her Caring Bridge journal. There were times of great optimism where it seemed like Taylor had climbed the hill and it would be smooth sailing....but there were just as many times where you could read the fear in DeAnne's words. My heart would break for her knowing that but for the grace of God....there go I. There go any of us. Through all of this....Taylor had a steady stream of family and friends making the 3 hour drive back and forth quite often to visit Taylor. She looked forward to these visits as did her friends.
At some point....not sure when, her uncle began a facebook page called Taylor's Gang. Here he gave us updates and offered items such as t-shirts and bracelets to help the Heersche's fend off some of the medical expenses incurring. Periodically there were those that took up collections for gift cards and food cards so that Dan and DeAnne could step out of the hospital from time to time and have some "real" food. The community was pulling together for this family and through it all....we had hope.
Right here let me say that Dan and DeAnne are amazing parents. Since Taylor has been at Children's Mercy one or both of them has remained by her side. They usually switch off so that one is with Connor too. Trying to hold down jobs and take care of everyone is no easy task...but they seemed to make it work. They are phenomenal.
In the last month or so...it looked as if Taylor might just get the bone marrow transplant. All seemed to be working in that direction although she had some set backs. I would watch carefully for the updates and smile and thank God when the news was good and shed some tears and pray harder when it wasn't.
Last Wednesday evening Z came into my room looking ashen saying he had gotten a text that Taylor was not expected to make it through the night. I was stunned because the last posts had been so positive. I got on fb to find that indeed....Taylor's respiratory system was shutting down and they did not expect her to be here come morning. Taylor's body was simply no longer strong enough to fight. She knew though and she was not afraid. She told her parents she was ready. How can a child have such faith? I was amazed. Prayer chains were popping up everywhere....not just in our little town but all across the country. I could not sleep that night and every time my phone went off with messages....I was terrified that it would say she was gone.
Amazingly.....Thursday morning came and she was still with us. She was alert and kept her parents both entertained and updated on what she wanted when she was gone. I had to leave to take David to St. Louis that afternoon and I said a silent selfish prayer that Taylor would hold on at least until I got back. I didn't want Z to have to deal with such a loss on his own. That night the MHS football team dedicated the game to Taylor. There was orange everywhere (orange is the color of leukemia awareness) and they won (39-0) I believe. There were tears and prayers and it was all for Taylor.
Friday...Taylor was still here. A group of her closest friends went to KC to say good-bye. Taylor visited as long as she could and I imagine the room was full of both laughter and tears. I know it was a bitter sweet moment for all involved.
The weekend came and went and still she held on. I remember thinking how amazing this was. Her mother put out a request that people NOT pray for her recovery...for they knew that was not to be, but she asked that we pray that Taylor make a peaceful transition from this world into God's loving hands. Again I was amazed as DeAnne's journal would tell of Taylor waking up morning after morning thinking she would be with God...only to find out sadly that she was still here. What amazing faith this child has and how tired her little body must be. More and more though...my thoughts were going to her parents. How hard this all must be for them. I couldn't even imagine being in their shoes. Many times in this last week I have cried thinking of how difficult it must be for them to let go of this precious child. Their faith must be tremendous.
At some point DeAnne wrote that Taylor had basically planned her own funeral. She had picked her music, the place and she was leaving specific instructions on what she wanted from those in attendance. There would be no dress clothes. She wanted everyone in either orange or Taylor's Gang t-shirts and jeans. She wants this to be a celebration of her life and not mourning of her passing. Wow! Fifteen and knowing all of this. Being able to plan all of this. Again I use the word amazing because there is just no other word fitting enough.
Sunday night DeAnne posted that on Monday the doctors would be in to re-evaluate Taylor. She had already lived days longer than they expected and although she had kind of drifted in and out from time to time and seemed to be seeing people that others could not see...she had stayed alert and carried on many conversations with family and friends. People began to speculate hopefully that maybe this wasn't the end. Perhaps there was a miracle in the making. My thoughts were that God's will would be done...but not until Taylor had accomplished all that she had to do on this earth.
Monday we got the word that Taylor was coming home! After the doctors met....they still felt that Taylor was not to survive this particular journey and that soon she would succumb to respiratory failure, but for whatever reason she was still here and she wanted to come home. It was decided that they would bring her home to be with family and friends today. This town was excited. When news got out that Taylor was coming home....fb was alive with activity. There were plans of lining 2nd street with orange ribbons, signs and the entire town wearing orange ready to greet her. Tonight's football game would also be dedicated to Taylor and it was expected that there would be a sea of orange in the stands. Word even got out to the rival team and many of them too pledged to wear orange for Taylor. As I saw all the excitement of Taylors return flooding fb and the many plans being made....I felt my heart drop. Without thinking I turned to Z and told him that I didn't think she would make it back. I don't know why....it was just a horrible feeling I got.
This morning as I was trying to function in spite of a major headache....I got on fb to see that plans were still being put together for Taylor's homecoming. As yet....no definite time had been given but things were to the point that they were ready as soon as the word was given. My cell phone rang and I almost didn't answer it because I didn't recognize the number. However when I did...I wished I hadn't. A friend of mine was on the other end telling me that word had come down that Taylor had passed this morning. I felt a stabbing feeling in my stomach. Since no official word had come out to fb about it...I sat silently and watched as the happy homecoming plans continued to be made. I hoped in the back of my mind that maybe this was just misinformation...but I knew in my heart it wasn't. When official word came out...the tears flowed. Taylor had slept peacefully through the night, started having breathing issues early this morning....and passed without every waking up. This morning....Taylor got her wish....she woke up in heaven.
Z was at school when the announcement was made over the intercom. He texted me and told me that the whole school was devastated. There were tears flowing from teachers, administration and students. The school was broken hearted. They/we had lost our Taylor!
As I have tried to wrap my mind around all of this, my thoughts have been all over the place. DeAnne has posted another post on Caring Bridge reminding everyone that Taylor wanted her funeral to be a celebration. What strength this woman has to continue carrying out her daughters wishes even after the unthinkable has happened. They are three hours away from family, friends and home (although I know they have some family and the support of the hospital staff who also knew and loved Taylor)...but now they must come home to bury their child. My heart breaks for them. But Taylor would not have wanted the tears. Taylor was so much more than her leukemia and in thinking about it....the leukemia was the way Taylor touched so many lives.
If you read through the messages from others on Caring Bridge and Taylor's Gang....you realize that Taylor touched so many far beyond our little community. Taylor's bravery and strength taught family, friends, those who cared for her and even those who never met her but followed her journey.....about faith and living without fear of dying. To many Taylor was a hero! Seldom in life do we get to know someone that fights such a horrendous battle and continues to stay positive and faith filled. When you find this in someone as young as Taylor then you know you have come in contact with someone very special. This young girl single handedly brought together a community. She taught us all about faith beyond what we can see, feel and touch, and she showed us true grace in both life and death. Yes....Taylor you are amazing and I can safely say....your life was a miracle and in the hearts of everyone in our community and far beyond....you will never be forgotten.

I am restarting my DA account. I think I might go from scratch and just put in fresh new deviations. I don't really have anything interesting on my profile. I mean, I have two stories that 1 person liked. I have drawing from the dark ages. I have stories and drawings from when I was obsessed with Milotic. I have 1 vore story.
They aren't doing me any good and that's for sure. I'll probably push some people away who caused me problems before and just try again. When you don't have a reputation, you don't have anything to lose.
Effective: October 14, 2014

The Newton Police Department is grieving the loss of one of its lieutenants, Pat Richardson.
Authorities said the 23-year veteran of the department died Sunday from a heart attack while exercising.
Richardson, 48, will be remembered by the Newton community as a veteran and officer. His family will remember him as a husband, father and grandpa. His colleagues will remember him as a partner and friend.
"Disbelief, I didn't believe it at first. It's just unreal," said Newton Officer Randy Camp.
On Sunday, Pat Richardson was outside jogging and felt ill. Someone took him home and his wife brought him to the hospital. From there, he was life-flighted to Iowa Methodist Medical Center in Des Moines.
"There were probably a dozen officers at the hospital hoping for nothing but the best outcome, so we were there for the family and we anticipate being there for the family from here on out," said Newton Chief Jeff Hoebelheinrich.
Richardson was pronounced dead from a heart attack, jarring officers as his physical fitness was said to be the best among the department.
"Shock, complete shock. When I found out I left the room and just needed some alone time," said Patrol Officer Chris Wing.
Before joining the department, Richardson served in the U.S. Army. In his 23 years of duty in Newton, he worked his way from patrol officer to Drug Task Force leader. Then, after 10 years on the team, he earned a college degree, leading to another promotion in 2010 to Lieutenant.
"When we heard the bad news, I mean it hurt every one of us," Hoebelheinrich said. "It is a family. He's absolutely one of our family members. That's how we looked at him and that's how we hope he felt the same way with us."
When officers look back at decades of memories ranging from duties on the force, to simply fishing on weekends, he will always be remembered for his friendship.
"I think most people would say the biggest thing with Pat was he was just a really good friend. Whether he was an officer, lieutenant or whatever he was, you just didn't think about that. You just thought of him as a friend," said Lt. Ron Cook.
Whether it was his calm leadership or genuine care for people he loved, Richardson will never escape the memories of the NPD brotherhood.
"We're not going to forget him, we couldn't,” Hoebelheinrich said. “Everybody just loved working with Pat. He's just as nice of guy as you can get.”
Officers are currently standing guard at his house in case his family needs anything. An honors funeral will take place later on this week.
Hoebelheinrich told KCCI the department will put up a display in recognition of his service.

Our family finally was able to get out to the pumpkin patch last night. We look forward to the pumpkin patch every year. It is a cheap, fun, outdoor activity that allows the kids to run around obnoxiously without anyone even batting an eye. This year proved more fun than last.
We ran into a road bump in the very beginning though as we were told that the hayride would not be going out due to a large amount of mud from the recent rains. So we packed up the wheel barrow and headed out to the patch on foot. A little mud didn't stop us.
First stop - the petting zoo. The girls enjoyed visiting with a zebra, a camel, cows, horses, goats, and sheep. We spent the majority of our time there. The girls were able to feed the animals, pet them and enjoy all of the animal noises.
The zebra was a bit testy so we chose not to feed him. But, he was cool to look at close up.
The camel was by far our favorite. Paloma made sure to tell us that last night before bed. He was so friendly and so badly wanted you to feed him. When asked his name, Paloma responded "Zoka." So now when we talk about the petting zoo, we are sure to include a story about "Zoka."
Of course, the goats stormed the girls when they realized they were holding cups of food. The baby goats even jumped up on Paloma - she didn't mind. She just laughed and giggled hysterically. People were even commenting about how funny and comfortable she was around the animals.
I don't think Mattea was as enthused.
Of course, a trip to the petting zoo would not be complete without a pony ride.
Then it was off to find "The Great Pumpkin."
Mattea thought she had it.
When all was said and done, we went home with a wheel barrow full of pumpkins and a whole lot of memories.

A typed "extract" of the will of Maria R. Lefferts is available online.
This copy is from the William B. Bogardus Collection (Box 5, WIL WW-108). As with all abstracts, transcripts or "extracts," those interested in further research on this family should seek out the original documents at the Kings County Surrogate's Court.
Maria R. Lefferts, was born January 18, 1786 (as calculated from her age at death). She was a daughter of Adolph Brouwer and Aeltje Hulst, and is a descendant of Adam Brouwer. Maria died October 24, 1863, aged 77 yrs., 9 mos., and 6 days. She is buried at Green-Wood Cemetery in Brooklyn (lot 9394, section 12). The middle initial "R" in her name appears in recorded after the death of her husband, and may well simply refer to his given name.
Maria Brower was married to Rem Lefferts on January 15, 1824 at the First Reformed Church at Jamaica, Queens County, Long Island. The couple lived in Brooklyn (in the 9th Ward on the 1850 and 1860 census) and there is no evidence that they had any children. Her husband, Rem Lefferts, was fifteen years her senior (born July 11, 1771 as calculated from death), and was apparently the only child of Barrent Lefferts who died shortly after writing his will on June 8, 1819. Rem's mother's name was Phebe (no effort has been made on my part to identify her to any further degree as of this posting). She outlived her husband but died before March 16, 1839 when Rem petitioned the Kings County Surrogate's Court for administration of his father's estate, stating that his father had died some 20 years previous and that he (Rem) was the only heir.
Maria's will is followed by four codicils dated April 12, 1858; January 31, 1860; September 16, 1863; and October 1, 1863. After her husband's death she apparently ended up as the heir to his property previously inherited from his father, and as surmised from the numerous codicils, was very much occupied with just how she was going to distribute this wealth in light of the fact that she and her husband had no heirs of their own. Her will mentions her living siblings as well as numerous nephews and nieces, and some others who have not (as of yet) been identified as having a family relationship to Maria. Among the institutions she mentions is the North Reformed Protestant Dutch Church on Clermont Avenue in Brooklyn. Perhaps a look at the church records for that church will provide baptism and marriage dates for the families of some of Maria's siblings.
Source citations for the above statements, as well as updates to the families of the siblings of Maria R. (Brower) Lefferts, will appear online with the next update of the Brouwer Genealogy Database.

It's totally mundane to me now, but there was a time where things like observing Santa Claus and the Easter Bunny were not part of my lexicon. Being a first generation Costa Rican/Italian American, and the only one of my siblings born in the States, there was a time where the traditions of my ancestors were all I knew. Pretty much it was before I went to school, so until the age of five or so.
Those years the Baby Jesus brought me my Christmas gifts and Easter was ashes on my forehead, lilies filling the church, and a rack of lamb. Eventually, and slowly, we assimilated more or less. It was more like we added American culture than traded one way for another.
It's easy to almost completely forget now that there was an adjustment period. And it probably doesn't even occur to my American American friends...but there was always that first time. That moment where I realized I was different. My family was different, and I had to negotiate that awareness. We all did. We did it together. It was messy sometimes. Sometimes it was tasty, like when I would get made fun of for my sandwiches - thick slabs of sourdough bread filled with pan fried ham and coppa, topped with melted provolone. I didn't mind. They laughed. I ate. Nobody ever tried to trade me. Fools.
So this is a short story about one of those times. I must have written it more than ten years ago, before Facebook came along and brought us all together. Enjoy!
My First Easter Basket
One crisp spring morning when I was a mere five years old, I gaily skipped over to a friend’s house to see if she could play. When I arrived, Robin was already sitting on her front porch having a rather animated conversation with Lisa, the girl from next door. "What had happened?” I wondered.
As I joined them and became enfolded in the conversation, I realized that they had both been visited, in the middle of the night, by a giant magical bunny. "WOW!” I responded. I had never heard of such a thing.
"Well what does he look like?” I asked.
"I didn't seeee him," said Robin (rather sarcastically, I thought).
I was confused. "Then how did you know he was in your house?"
"All of the eeeeggs were gone!" Robin retorted, as if it should've been obvious to me that missing eggs proves that a magical bunny has been in your house.
"What do eggs have to do with bunnies? Bunnies don't eat EGGS, they eat CARROTS!” I replied, utterly frustrated.
Lisa and Robin exchanged glances as if to silently say that I was pathetically uninformed and in need of their tutelage. They proceeded to explain to me about decorating eggs, the Easter Bunny (as I came to find out that he was called), and baskets full of candies. At this point, I was completely excluded from the conversation as the girls competed over whose basket was filled with the most impressive assortment of confections.
"Easter Bunny?” I thought to myself. "Visits all the little children and gives them candy? All the children... all ...except me..." Suddenly tears welled up in my eyes as I realized that I wasn't special enough for the mystical hare to pay ME a visit. The girls didn't even notice my strained words as I said, "I need to go home." They barely stopped discussing jelly beans and chocolate bunnies to say, "Bye."
I ran home as fast as my Buster Brown Mary Janes could take me, wiping the hot bitter tears of rejection from my face. As I bounded through the screen door, my mother called out, "Que paso? Did you play with Robin?"
"Yes," I answered as I ran to my room. It was all I could muster without crying. I didn't want my mother to know that I wasn't good enough for the Easter Bunny. I slammed my bedroom door, threw myself on my bed, and raged into the depths of my pillow. My mother must've heard me as I ranted and raved my mantra, "The Easter Bunny doesn't love meeyeeeyee! The Easter Bunny doesn't love meeyeeyee!" Try to remember, I was only five.
Later that afternoon, as my relatives began to trickle over for the Easter rack of lamb, my brother approached me with our grandmother’s thick black coat. "Hey Susan, why don't you put this on my bed for Abuelita?"
"Uh,okay," I said, reluctantly. There was something fishy about the way he said it, and I wondered why he didn't just do it himself.
I took the heavy moth-ball scented coat anyway, and made my way to his room. He was following me. Strange. When we got to his room, we stopped short of the bed. Suddenly Danny pointed under his bed and theatrically shouted, "OH MY GOSH! LOOK!" He pulled out a beautiful pink basket with a yellow ribbon on the handle, filled with fake plastic grass and jelly beans and chocolate bunnies. It was the most beautiful Easter basket I'd ever seen. I embraced it joyfully.
Something told me Danny knew it was there, that my mom had planted it, that it was all a setup, but I didn't care. Maybe I wasn't good enough for the Easter Bunny, but I had a family that loved me, and that's all that mattered. That and jelly beans and chocolate bunnies.

The Hopkins Boys Swim and Dive team celebrated the end of its season a bit differently this year. The team had a great year, Wendy Robinson said. Her son is one of the team’s captains. Some students earned letters and several broke records for the team. Robinson was in charge of the celebratory banquet. It didn’t seem right to have a great season and not be able to celebrate. So, she pushed to come up with something to do for the team.
Robinson, along with the other captains’ parents and Coach Jared Anderson came up with an alternative plan. On May 17, the team had a curbside pickup banquet and presentation of awards over Zoom.
The Oak Ridge Country Club in Hopkins was doing curbside meals. Robinson worked with the club to get their pasta banquet curbside too, she said. Then, she talked with the coach to see if he was willing to do a curbside pickup of awards and a Zoom banquet.
The coach and captains waited at the club for team members to arrive. The meal was handed in one side of the car and the award was passed on the other side, she said.
The rainy weather was a challenge on May 17. The captains were discouraged at first, trying to get the decorations up outside for pickup time, she said. But, as soon as the team started showing up, it didn’t matter. She heard one of the captains say how fun it was to see everyone again, masks and all.
When the team got home, the members had the Zoom banquet and award presentation. It went on as it normally would, minus a few parts, Robinson said. Gabe Gauderman, a captain and the only senior, gave a speech. The captains thanked their coaches and parents. There was a slide show and presentation of awards. Anderson led most of the Zoom, she said.
There was a separate event in January to honor the team’s senior captain. It was an amazing night, she said, adding Gauderman has been a great leader and role model for the team. About 12 students got up to give speeches on how he’s impacted their lives as swimmers. “There was not a dry eye in the house,” she said.
A positive that came out of the season was their good sportsmanship. Other teams would comment on how the team’s friendly demeanor, she said. At every meet, they’d cheer with the opposing team whether they won or lost. It was about the sport, not the end result, she said.
So many things have been taken away from the students, she said. They needed to have a celebration of the season.
Her son Max Robinson is a junior and one of the captains. The celebration was a way for everyone to get their awards and see each other, he said “It was a good idea to get closure for the season,” he added.
The event was also a way for the team to look back on the season, which is important, he said. They could go over the highlights and honor those who did well.
Robinson’s highlight from the season was a meet against Buffalo. The Bison swimmers were new to the conference and were at about the same skill level, he said. It was a loud pool, the team was cheering and it was really fun, he said, adding that Hopkins ended up winning.
Max is excited for next year’s season, including being able to see people again, his last year of sections and getting back in the pool, he said.
Follow the Sun Sailor on Facebook at facebook.com/mnsunsailor.

I was raised in a very religious home, and so was my ex-wife. It is pretty much a cult, and I don’t attend the services anymore, but went all my life, up until a few years ago. My ex-wife, Susan, and I met at a get together for young people at one of
My name is Chandra. I am a space traveler. I trade bodies with humans to experience their lives first hand.
I am now Joe. One reason he interested me was that he has a beautiful body for a man of 45 years: 6′-3″, 200 lbs., jet black hair (
The Junk Yard Woman
I needed a windshield wiper motor for my pick up truck . I usually buy parts at a junk yard because it’s cheaper and the parts are normally in good shape . I called around and was surprised that no loca
It had been two weeks since her master had made her pregnant but already the results had been confirmed. The girl known as Slave was indeed pregnant.
Slave had not always been the girl’s name but it was her name now. At one time, the pret
Now, it was time for that bitch Amber Zee. John gave her a call. “What do you want?” the girl demanded.
“I found out what you did to my sister,” John told her. “We have to talk.”
“We have to talk,” John told her, “or else
An Internet Connection !
I was chatting with a lady in a BBW chat room . She had said that she was in Albany , N.Y. which is about an hour and a half east of where I live . I told her that I was from the Utica area . She said th
Everything seemed to be going great for Mindy Wallace. The pretty 17-year-old was popular and well-liked and she was carrying a straight A average into her senior year of high school, and she had just been selected as the captain of her cheerleader s
When I awoke the next morning, she was gone. She left me a note saying she was looking forward to our time together later today. I hadn’t remembered talking about us meeting again, but I didn’t think twice about meeting her again. As I replay the
The New York steak on my plate tasted very good after a day of boring meetings. I wasn’t looking forward to another half-day of it tomorrow. As I finished the last of my steak, a woman of incredible beauty caught my eye across the room. She must ha
Heather and I just had phone sex and it was great I thought if it is this good on the phone than I cant white to be with her in person but there was 1 catch she lives in Pennsylvania and I live in Maryland I no it is not that far from each other but
Anne Thirty Years Later
I had not seen Anne I a long time she was married and had children . She had moved out of the area so I was surprised to see her in the mall . She had gained a lot of weight and she had always been big .
My name is Hank I’m 22 years old this story is about how I fell in love with a really hot and sexy BBW named Heather she is 26 years old a red head with blue eyes 42DD tits and a tight ass
any ways this is how we meet I just got dumped by my ex gir
Halloween night orgy
Halloween is slow in our trailer park because there aren’t very many children it’s all over by 9 P.M. at the latest . Since Halloween was on a Friday this year I called my friends up and suggested th
My Neighbor’s Wife
If you have even lived in a trailer park you know that gossiping is the favorite pass time . There were all sorts of rumors about me because I had a lot of visitors ,and was fucking any woman I could find .
One night I was up late at night having a conversation with my friend Chris. I had my webcam on and I was feeling very horny. I told him that I did something that he might like. So as he’s watching me on my webcam, I slowly take off my pants and my s
The 500 Pound Receptionist
As the only employee for my company in the Utica area I have what is known as “shared office space” . That means that I have my own office and a meeting room where clients can come and we can disc
I have been intersted in the world of forced feminization and female domination for some time now. One night, myself and my girlfriend of seven years were duiscussing our sex lives and the topic of kinky sex came up. We were both slightly drunk at
After my sister moved out, it got pretty lonely. I had been getting laid damn near every day for over 2 years and I missed it. I had grown quite a bit and, at a month before my 18th birthday I was 6 feet 2 inches tall and about 190 pounds. I am prett
The Internet Connection
I was surfing the net at the big woman sites and found a dating site for big people . I thought what the heck why not try the worse thing that could happen is you waste some time . It was March and still snow

I'm new to the site, so I don't know if this is the right place. I don't have anxiety, and I was hoping to find out how to handle people who do. My mom is bad. she has had anxiety my whole life. She has always been way, way, to in my business, overbearing, and still wants me to call her when I leave the house. I'm 27. If I don't she has a fit, and calls all my friends to find out where I am. She is driving me crazy. She had such a bad spell few months ago she went into outpatient care. she is always thinking that the absolute worst thing is going to happen. she is such a control freak, that when it rains she wants me to stay home from work, because she is convinced that I will get into a wreck. Help!!!
Posts You May Be Interested In
Hi all! This is for those of you that have or have had the same neurologist for 4 years or more. I have been with mine now since 2009. He is one of the best movement disorder secialists in the midwest. I know he is extremely busy on the lecture circuit now and in fact not taking new patients there is a huge waiting list for him. BUT.... I feel like my visits are not what they use to be. He...
I gave my 2 week notice last Friday 13th. Now to join you fine people in a life of leisure and nothing else to do but to look out for myself....is it just me or does that sound pretty boring? My goal was to live to retire and I guess having to take early retirement because of health reasons wasn't exactly the way I had planned things. I just can't stay in that building that is reeking mildew...

Firsthand View of France's Anti-Immigration Policies in Action
Among the stances that led to Donald Trump's election was his hard-line attitude towards immigration. And whether or not his promises to build a wall along the Mexican border, forcibly deport millions of immigrants and halt the entry of people of Muslim faith to this country ever come true, it is likely immigration policy will change in the United States in the years to come.
Nat Godley had a first-hand viewof how anti-immigration policies have played out in western countries. Godley is an assistant professor of world history at Alverno College, and specializes in migration to and within Europe. He was in France last summer as a government crackdown on migrants played out.
Godley was at a large refugee camp called Jaures, where about 2,500 people were living at the time, when police started an effort to remove migrants from the area.
"They put almost all of these people onto buses, got rid of the tents and blankets and so on - that they left behind, they were not allowed to take with them - and bused them off to accommodations centers. That was actually a fairly calm incident, although there were still some episodes of violence there," says Goldey.
"What I saw later on though was, as this camp reformed as people came back because there was not really appropriate accommodation for them where they had been bused to," Godley continues. "As they came back the police decided to begin a campaign of on-going harassment and that often involved actual violence, really. You know, running at refugees, crowds of migrants, with riot shields and so on."
"There really seemed to be no clear goal to this. It was intended to harass them, and the ways in which they moved them on was so openly purposeless, really," he says. "They would move them 200 yards down a boulevard, to a place where there was no better shelter, there was no accommodation provided after that first day. So it was very clear that it was purely for harassment to try to persuade them to maybe just disperse into the side streets around and be less visible."
Godley wrote more about his experience in an essay on the migrant crisis in France featured in the December issue of Milwaukee Magazine.

Amy and I decided to take the kids to Mount Trashmore for the 4th of July fireworks display on Saturday night. It was a great day, clear and cool for early July. We arrived early and parked far away for a quick exit from the area once the show was over, a la Clark Griswold.
We climbed to the top of the hill and the kids chased a finger rocket back and forth.
We had noticed earlier that Bob McDonnell was talking to people around the park. We just kept on walking. While we sat watching the kids play, Amy and I noticed that the “McDonnell Group” was moving around. We jokingly told Savannah that she needed to go ask Bob McDonnell how he was going to get teachers pay raises so we could go to Disney World again.
We snickered and remarked to each other how very humorous we are, but Bob and his entourage continued to move, and they headed in our direction. Before we knew it, he was right in front of us. I whipped out my cell phone and quickly captured the following video.
Surprisingly, Savannah did not freeze and forget her question. In case you missed what she said, it was, “How are you going to get teachers a raise?”
He had a good prepared answer for her, but what I thought was great is that he got down on one knee to speak to her. He made eye contact with her, not the adults, and tried to respectfully talk to her. I am sure that much of what he said went right over her head, but most adult questions have adult answers. In any case, it is rare to see adults act that way around children, usually they are polite but dismissive.
I understand that he is a politician and that his behavior was not completely exceptional in the way he spoke to Savannah, but as her father, I was impressed.
It was a great day at the park that ended with some fantastic fireworks. And now, thanks to Bob McDonnell, we have a nice family story to tell and retell for years.

Farmer gored by bull loses fight for life
Published 08/10/2010 | 05:00
A farmer has been gored to death by a bull.
The 38-year old died in hospital after being gored by the bull in a tragedy which has stunned his close-knit farming community.
Tomas Tierney was attacked by the bull on the family farm at Cloghans Hill, Kilmaine, Mayo, at milking time on Wednesday evening.
Shortly afterwards, his widowed mother Pauline, found him lying in a field with the bull standing by aggressively.
Mrs Tierney was alerted to the fact that there might be something wrong because she couldn't hear the milking machine operating.
She raised the alarm but when help arrived they found it difficult to get near the victim because the bull was aggressive towards them.
Local man Patsy O'Brien, a member of Mayo County Council, said last night: "The neighbours who arrived to help had a job getting the bull out of the way to help Tomas. The bull was still vicious."
Emergency services were quickly on the scene and Mr Tierney was rushed to Mayo General Hospital in Castlebar.
According to neighbours, Mr Tierney was able to talk to medical personnel as he was carried from the scene but was obviously seriously injured.
Despite intensive efforts to save him Mr Tierney was pronounced dead at 11pm on Wednesday night. Stunned neighbours were rallying around the Tierneys yesterday in support.
This is the second farm tragedy the family has suffered.
In 1989, Mr Tierney lost his father in an accident which occurred while he was cutting hay.
Apart from his mother, Mr Tierney is survived by his sister, Eleanor.
Cllr O'Brien paid tribute to Mr Tierney last night as "a lovely young man".

i thought that i would let everyone out in blogland know that i haven't been on since the begining of the month - due to being in hospital
it has been really horrible time for me, as not only have i not been able to make any cards while i was in hospoital, i was going through an awful time of gloom - and nearlly died!!
i'm so glad to be back at home now, so that i can catch up on the CB forum, and do some more card making, as well as do some some blog hopping to see what has been happening in blogland while i have been away
i will not go too much innto detail about what i was going through as it is painful, and i'm sure you are not that interested in getting an essay onn my life lol.
well it started out ok, as me and the OH were trying for another baby, god's why we must be mad as i have got 4 children!! i eventually fell pregnant after a few months of trying, and we were both over the moon!! but i excitement was to be short lived! quite soon into the pregnancy, i was really ill and suffering from servere pain, so we trawled off the hospital thinking it would just be like normal and get told that it was a bad kidney infection or something - i have had kidney troubel since i was about 2, so that is what we were both expecting to here.
but we were oh so wrong!! after some tests, they found out i was having an EPTOPIC PREGNANCY, this is something that we were not expecting. we then later found out that i was having twins again, which just rubbed salt into the wounds!!! if not having an eptopic pregnany wasn't bad enough, i had lost the chance to have 2 children - i know thay technically they wern't fully formed, but they were still babies to me!
to top all that off, and to make things worse, i nearlly died! so bang went the theory of just having to saty in for a couple of nights, be given antibiotics, and then go home again until the next time!
i'm now back home, and healthy thanks to the amazing staff at DERRIFORD HOSPITAL, but they don't have a magic wand to cure the blue mood that i am due to everythig that has happened. it doesn't help that evry time i try to go out, so that i'm not cooped up all day, all i see are new mothers!! i know that i will get over it at some point, but the pain is so RAW!!!
i am tying to think positive, and hopefully it won't take too long until i am feeling a bit better mood wise
well sorry for the essay guys, i beeter end it there, and if i need to i will make further posts regarding this matter
take care everyone
What a man!
1 week ago

July 29, 2012 - 6:50pm
Can this long-shot make sweet music in the Derby?
By Josh Cook
This long-shot has finished in the money in half of his eight starts.
Make Music For Me (25-1), who is owned by Ellen and Peter Johnson, has just one career victory but it did come in March at Santa Anita. He was sixth, however, at April 10's Bluegrass Stakes. Though don't...

But Grissles, going on the jack comments, how many people on here said jack was too slow last year etc but moaned when he left?? It's opinions. Jack was good for the club but lacked something in the second half of last season in my opinion. We don't have to love the guy, you don't even have to be friends with him but he's in the squad. I didn't agree with his comments last year or how he acted at the game but he's 22. I bet you made mistakes aged 22 as well.
I can see why people have their opinions and he will have to work harder than other new signings to win the fans over but time will tell if he is willing to push that on. Also meet the guy with a clear mind, might be surprised.

The baby came about a month early, as the E! reality star's due date was reported to be July 11 or thereabouts.
"Kim had her baby," a hospital source told Us. "She's five weeks early. Kim got sick last night and had the baby early. They're all doing great and amazing!"
West, whose leaked album "Yeezus" has already taken the Internet by storm, was said to have been there for the entire delivery; he reportedly canceled his Friday appearance at his record release party because his girlfriend said she was feeling "a little off."
On June 4, Kardashian finalized her divorce from Brooklyn Nets player Kris Humphries, whom she infamously filed for divorce from in October 2011 after 72 days of marriage. She confirmed the news that she was expecting a baby girl on the season premiere of her family's reality show.
"I'm so excited we're having a girl," Kim Kardashian said on the show after learning the baby's sex."Who doesn't want a girl? They are the best and I know that's really what Kanye has always wanted. He wanted a little girl."
The family celebrated Kardashian's baby shower about two weeks ago, with West making an appearance toward the end of the festivities.
The child comes amid rumors that West, who was already criticized for being absent during much of Kardashian's "painful pregnancy," had been cheating on his girlfriend with a Canadian model. Both he and Kardashian's reps shut down the allegations.
West has also said that he's embracing his role as a father in a recent interview with the New York Times.
"I would do anything to protect my child or my child's mother," he told the newspaper.
The sex tape-maker-turned-reality star/businesswoman reportedly has plans to take her baby girl on tour with West when he kicks off his concert tour in October.
Season 8 of "Keeping Up With the Kardashians" is airing on E!, with this Sunday's episode expected to show Kardashian struggling with appendicitis during the pregnancy.
The couple began dating in April 2012 after being friends for years. They made the announcement that they were expecting on Dec. 30. Though the couple have not said that they have any plans to marry, Kardashian previously said that's she's still open to tying the knot again.
Follow Ministry of Gossip @LATcelebs.

46 Reviews for Source 1 DJ Services
Trustworthy reviews are our priority. Businesses can't pay to change or remove reviews.
Paul was wonderful to work with! They made everything so smooth and even thought and took thinks into consideration that he didn’t! They were amazing!!
Paul and son were so great to work with! He listens to what you want for your day and ensures it is implemented. Very organized and prompt in his responses leading to the big day and did anything in his power to ensure it ran smooth day of. Our guests loved hearing their requests and were loving the dance floor. Paul knew how much we loved the Cubs and had a Cubs monogram arranged with our names in it and the date. Such a stand up guy and company!! Thank you for everything!!!
Thank you both so much for being such an awesome couple to work with. GO CUBS GO!!
Source 1 DJ was one of the best decisions of my wedding! They were extremely knowledgeable and very flexible. Including my last-minute day of requests when I changed my mind! They had everything timed perfectly and I received so many compliments from my guest and how great the DJ is. They are a lot of fun with a great variety of music to suit every taste including my 80-year-old grandmother to my 13-year-old cousin. Everybody at the party was happy and I couldn’t be happier that they were apart of my big day.
Thank you so much! You and your guests made it just as much fun for us! #Blochparty18
Paul was absolutely amazing. We threw some curve balls at him day of and he was able to change it up and put on an excellent show. He played the perfect level during cocktail hour so that everyone could hear the music but they could also converse at the tables. He mashed our two songs together for our First Dance. The lighting and monogram were beautiful as well. He had the dance floor rocking the entire night until they kicked us out! He stuck to what we wanted played and rebelled against our crazy guests who kept requesting country music that we said "no" to! Great work. Highly recommend Source 1!
Thank you so much, it was great working with you and Vince! #halpinthemtietheknot
Paul did an amazing job! Could not have asked for a better DJ for our wedding !
Thank you so much, we had a great time DJing your wedding!
Source 1 was amazing to work with. All of our wedding guests had a great time and loved the music. They made everything very easy and stress free. Rich also did our vows and I couldn't have imagined anything better on our wedding day. They were flawless. They were so easy to work and were a great value. I would definitely recommend them for any type of event.
Thank you so much, and we did it without eating the jerky ;)
Paul was amazing, the mix was perfect as it was a combination of Spanish and English at our wedding and everyone had something to dance to.
Thank you! Gracias! We appreciate the kind words.
Source 1 did a fantastic job with our wedding. They did the music for both the ceremony and reception. Source 1 helped to ensure that everything went exactly how we wanted, and they were very flexible with any last minute changes that we made. They also did a great job selecting music for our reception based on our preferences. I was on my feet dancing for most of the night along with many of my friends. If we had to do it all over again, I would definitely choose Source 1 again.
Thank you, we had a blast playing for you and your family and friends!
Source 1 was the BEST we could have asked for! Not only were they professional, relatable and down to earth - they know music! We had zero issues with them. And on a day when anything can go wrong, it was a relief to know that Source 1 was on top of it and our guests loved every minute of dance time!
Thank you, for including us in your special day and for being SlomadlyInLove!
Look no further - you just found the right DJ. We worked with Paul, and he's AMAZING. He's an amazing professional, and so much fun to work with. Source 1 is great because it's a team of DJ's - so in the event something happens, they are absolutely prepared. After we met with Paul, I no longer stressed about the ceremony music or reception music - because I knew we were in good hands. I can't say enough good things about Paul. My grandfather fell at the reception. Paul was one of the first responders and it was our beloved DJ that immediately called an ambulance. Paul, if you read this, thank you, you are amazing, and we loved having you be a part of our special day!!
Thank you so much, you and Todd were two of my favorite people I have ever had the pleasure to work for!
I am so glad we chose Source 1. Both my new husband and I were beyond thrilled. They were more than perfect. Thank you so much Source 1!
Thank you! You two were pretty amazing too!
Great service!!!!!!!!! They were able to provide us with grest enterainment f9r the night. We could not ask for anyone better. Thank you for giving us the best day of our lives!!!!!
We had Rich as our Officiant and he was absolutely fantastic! We could not have asked for a better ceremony. He added the perfect amount of humor, sincerity, romance, and advice throughout. All of our guests thought it was conducted perfectly. The music during the ceremony was a great volume and made every moment more special. During the reception, Source One kept us on track for all of the dances (Father Daughter, Generation, Mother Son, etc.) and the Garter/Bouquet Toss. The music was kept age appropriate based on the guests that were present as the night progressed (Sinatra for the elderly guests during/immediately after dinner and dance music later in the night). There was no offensive music played and everyone enjoyed the night. The music played had so many guests on the dance floor! Even some that don't usually dance at weddings. We had so much fun dancing that the night flew by and was over before we knew it. I highly recommend Source One as the DJ at your wedding. Professional, Friendly, and FUN!! Thank you for helping us make wonderful memories to cherish for years to come.
Paul was awesome. One can tell he is passionate about what he does and shoots for the very best experience for his customers. Very easy to work with. Source one was one of the few vendors for our wedding that caused no additional stress for an already stressful day. Paul also had a young man helping him, he was awesome too! You guys Rock!
Thank you so much. We had to love this wedding, a great bride, a cool groom and of course the furbabies.
Paul checked with me every step of the way. It was great to know he was paying attention to our concerns.
We can't say enough wonderful things about Source 1...starting with the planning, from our ceremony music, to our officiant, to the reception.... Source 1 made our day ABSOLUTELY amazing! We will definitely refer ALL of you to all our friends and family! THANK YOU SOOO MUCH FOR MAKING OUR SPECIAL DAY ABSOLUTELY PERFECT!!!
Julie & Mike Colgrove
Thank you for being such a great couple to work for! We had as much fun playing as you did dancing!
Source 1 was an incredible part of our day! Paul was so helpful and accommodating throughout the entire process! We had been scammed by our original Dj and had no idea what to do next. We are so blessed to have found Paul and his company!! Throughout many changes, ups and downs, and lots of stress, Paul was there every step of the way and always reminding us to do what we wanted for our day. Dave, our officiant, could not have written a more personal or meaningful ceremony for us! We had a hand-fasting ceremony included and we are still getting compliments on how beautiful it was! We are so grateful to have been given something so special to us to remember and reflect on. It truly was our day. This company is more than just a Dj service, Paul goes above and beyond in so many ways and easily becomes a friend! We could not be more happy with choosing Source 1 for our wedding!
Thank you so very much, you and Jason were so awesome to work with!
We were satisfied with Paul as our DJ. The weeks leading up to my wedding were unusually busy at work and for that reason, we were unprepared for our prep meeting with him and had not thought of ceremony music or much else. Without hint of complaint, he played various songs and guided us through picking all our music. He did a custom monogram for us, and happily made multiple revisions to ensure I was happy. The songs he picked during the reception were all appropriate, and he played to the crowd. My father in law requested a song of questionable appropriateness during the reception, and Paul had the prudence to decline and later asked us to be sure. We were satisfied with how he handled that situation. His high rating is deserved, and I am confident that others will be satisfied with his services as well.
They were very professional. He was on time and he played to a crowd music was great I have no complaints and I would highly recommend them!
Thank you so much!
We booked Source 1 for our wedding DJ, Cocktail hour music and for their uplighting. We were very pleased with their services and staff. If we wsere to do our wedding all over again, we would definitely book with Source 1 again.
Thank you so much!!
Wouldn't have wanted anyone else for a DJ and officiant. The ceremony was beautiful and we felt they captured everything we were looking for. Our dance floor had people on it all night. I (the bride) did not sit down all night because I had such a great time dancing. The staff was able to roll with the punches and made the night a stress free experience. Highly recommend their services!
First met them at a bridal show with my mom and had a blast with them! Paul was very friendly and just a hoot. They kept the party going all night, and everyone was sad to see they leave. Paul was so funny, especially during the garter toss. I would definitely recommend them!
No pressure now...lol
I HIGHLY recommend Source One! They were beyond friendly and accommodating. They are part of the reason our wedding was so perfect! Definitely affordable but also great at what they do!
Thank you so much! We had almost as much fun as you did!
Absolutely loved them!! Made our day perfect! Highly reccomend them to anyone and everyone that needs a dj and officiant!
Wow...thank you so much. We really loved the whole day!
Paul and his staff at Source One are wonderful people to work with for your wedding. Our planning meetings with Paul were incredibly helpful in preparing us for our ceremony and reception and Lexi’s work on the day of was great. Despite adamantly stating that they do not play rap or hard rock Source One was still incredibly accommodating with our wide variety of musical requests. My wife has known Paul since childhood and her confidence in Source One was definitely not misplaced. I highly recommend Source One to any couple. Paul really goes the extra mile for you and we were very impressed and pleased with their services.
Thank you so very much...

has any body's children had bruising to their ears?
MOST HELPFUL POSTS
Holly - posted on 05/16/2011
I know this is an old post but it caught my eye, My 3 yr old son woke up from his nap the other day with both his ears (intier ears), purpple, black, and blue bruising covering his ears. It looked awfull and accumulated over a 2 hr time span, we took him to the ER and they ran blood tests to check his plaitlet count to make sure he didnt have any type of immunity dissorder or lukimeia. All tests came back normal. They tried to tell me he had to of hit them? And the possibility of him hitting both ears which had to have been a very forceful hit, and neither me or his father knowing is impossible. Bc for a child to endure an injury like that they would have not only cried but screamed. The doctors have no answers... Just wondering if your bruised ears incident happend to be the same. The doctor also said that he had never seen anything like this before.
Sara - posted on 08/28/2009
My son hasn't had bruising to his ear, but *I* have had bruising to my ear. I was unpacking some bags in the kitchen of the apartment that I used to live in, and my son fell on his tush and started crying. I bent down to console him. And when I stood back up I forgot that the overhead cabinet was open and I crashed into it. My ear was bloody and bruised. :p
Could he have ran through a doorway quickly and bumped his ear? Does he have any siblings that could have hit him? Does he go to school with other kids? Are there any pets? Could he have been bitten by an insect? Sometimes strange things can cause bruises. Some kids bang their heads against the bars of their cribs when they're rocking in their sleep, and if they do this repeatedly they can cause bruises.
How bad is the bruise? What shape? Do you have a picture?
Lydia - posted on 08/28/2009
Ian did not had bruising... but his right ear got so swollen that he look like dopey from Snow White. I took him to his doctor...she said that this age areas like the ears or around get swollen, for something as simple as a bug bite. Always have your doctor look in and check, they have more experience. I hope this helps
This conversation has been closed to further comments
Join Circle of Moms
Sign up for Circle of Moms and be a part of this community! Membership is just one click away.Join Circle of Moms

The Startup Cycle What If
Meet John, he is a pretty smart guy, fresh out of college and is growing tired of working at his current job. He decides to start his own company with an idea he’s had for a few years now. He signs up for Codeacademy - teaches himself how to code and begins to make a website for his idea. He is a fast learner and finishes the website within a month. He decides to leave his job and rely on savings he has to focus on his idea. He sends his site to some of his friends, they love it, and very quickly, he has more people using his site than he could ever imagined.
He takes some time to make some updates and make sure his server is able to handle all the traffic he has been receiving to his site. He then receives an email from a Techcrunch writer asking if they can interview him about his company. He excitedly agrees, and prepares for an “official launch.” He has a great interview with Techcrunch and a few days later the article hits coinciding with his official launch.
He gets a rush of sign ups to his site, gets a couple more write ups from PandoDaily, TNW, even the normally critical Hacker News is singing praises. It seemed like everyone is writing about and talking about his company. He is more than excited. A week goes by and the sign ups keep rolling in. He then receives an email from Fred Wilson asking for a meeting. He prepares some information about his company, specifically highlighting the growth.
The meeting goes great and Fred wants to invest $2 million into his company. He is super excited. He goes out an hires a few more engineers and a week later he is really rolling. Next thing he knows Google emails him asking for a meeting. He learns from the meeting that they want to buy his company and he decides to sell for $8 million.
John did it, launched his own company and sold it. Poof! Just like that.
That’s how the startup cycle works right?
If it did, I don’t know if it would be any fun. The ups and downs and challenges are the fun part. My experience in starting a company has been nothing like John’s fake ass experience. If it were that easy, everyone would be doing it, although it seems a lot of people are trying. The taste of victory after a long battle is much sweeter than it would be after John’s cakewalk. When it’s all said and done and I tell our journey I know 100% it will be more interesting than John’s and that’s something I look forward to. Call me naive, but I love a good challenge and starting your own company is one of the toughest challenges I can think of.

Whispers of Darkness (The Deadwood Hunter Series Book 2)(8)By: Rachel M Raithby
Lincoln looked at Lexia, she’d become very strong in the last few months. She smiled at him, egging him on, and it took all his strength to keep the cat back; it had lost all reason and desperately wanted to make Lexia submit, make his mate back down. But as he looked into her blue eyes alight with mischief and delight, he knew she never would. What had he been thinking? She crooked her finger at him again and he lost control.
The panther launched itself at her but instead of landing on her, he landed to her side slightly. She turned to move away but he twisted sharply, jumping and sinking his teeth into her soft side. He felt her blood run through his teeth and the man in him panicked.
Lexia gasped as his teeth sank into her side; the panther was through with games. It was time to show him what she was made of. Eyes flashing gold, she ignored her pain and twisted around catching him with her leg as he landed. He slid to the ground turning around and growling at her with her blood running from his jaw.
“Bring it on, kitty cat,” she called and jumped landing on him.
They rolled around the dusty earth, rage and anger colliding together until the dust settled revealing a black panther pinned beneath a Hunter.
“Submit” she whispered in his ear, but the panther struggled and growled beneath her. “You’re pinned, damn it, Lincoln, submit!”
“Hey guys, that’s enough now,” Caden walked over. “Lexia, let me fix you up.”
“Not until he submits.” She didn’t take her eyes off the golden-brown panther eyes staring wildly at her. She was mad now, mad at him for hurting her, mad that he thought she’d just submit, and mad at herself for starting this when this was clearly no game to her cat.
“Come on, Lexia, he’s a predatory shifter.”
“Yes, he is and does he expect me to be a submissive princess in need of being rescued all the time?”
Lexia could feel her anger rising now. He still struggled against her but she was stronger. As the weeks had gone by she’d noticed how much she’d changed; her Hunter side was now stronger than ever but she needed it to be. She couldn’t afford to be weak anymore, too many people wanted to harm those she loved.
“I can’t afford to be weak, Lincoln. Don’t you understand what happens when I’m weak? Just one moment was all it took for me to nearly lose you; just a single second for me to think that maybe my mum loved me, that not everything was completely fucked up. Damn it I was shot, I nearly died and then I had to kill all those people.”
He relaxed under her, and shifted turning to lights. “Lexia,” he whispered.
“No, it’s too late, I won’t be fooled again and I WILL NOT submit to you. I’ve learned from my mistake and I’ll keep being reminded what happens when I’m weak. Every time I close my eyes and see their faces, see the look of fear in their eyes as I took their lives.”
She got up and stormed into the house wishing she’d not started this game. All it had done was remind her of how she’d killed all those Hunters, how easy it was for her to take a life. It didn’t matter that they would have killed Lincoln and Alice, that they’d have more than likely killed hundreds of people themselves. She’d still taken their lives and at some point in time, they’d just been human, they would have had families.
This train of thought only fueled her anger more. Her mother had taken their lives, turned them into monsters just like she’d created her to be a killer.
Lexia walked into the bathroom, slamming the door a little too loudly. She needed to shower; the hot water would help calm her. She didn’t want to fight with Lincoln, why were they fighting? She’d thought her panther needed to blow off some steam but she had no idea what was wrong with him. She’d never seen her panther look like that at her, and never had he intentionally hurt her, not since they’d been together.
“Shit!” Lincoln swore. He slipped on the jeans that Caden tossed him.
“Shit indeed, mate, what the hell were you thinking?”
“I wasn’t,” he grumbled as he walked back into the house. His body ached all over.
“You’re going to have to grovel, Linc,” he chuckled.

Goldberg, 58, praised Crystal, 66, on his tribute to Williams at the Emmy Awards late last month.
Crystal added that it helped him get through the pain all of Williams' close friends must have been going through.
"He was such an amazing person. He was the most brilliant performer you could ever imagine. His physical presence on a stage was amazing. Many times, we'd be together on stage, the three of us, and Whoopi and I were like his parents," he joked. "It just became so sort of magical to work with him and it was just the greatest."
Crystal, Goldberg and Williams raised more than $70 million for the homeless in America through Comic Relief, but "for us, it was a chance to get to know each other," he said.
"We started in 1986 and we became the closest of friends," he added. "Robin and I just bonded in the quiet moments."
He talked about the great times, the times the three would bring checks for hundreds of thousands of dollars to shelters.
"Robin and I as we got older, it became this amazing bond," he said. "Very fiercely protective of each other, in great ways. The phone calls -- we talked about doing an album, like let's take these phone calls, we were like two jazz musicians, late at night I'd get these calls and we'd go for hours and we never spoke as ourselves."
He continued, "When it was announced I was going to Broadway, I had 50 phone messages from some person named Gary, who wanted to be my backstage dresser [which was Williams]."
Then Crystal added the duo were very protective of their dear friend Goldberg.
"You would host the Oscars," Crystal said to Goldberg. "Robin lives in San Francisco and I'd be in LA. She'd do her opening, phone would ring, 'How do you think she's doing boss?' I'd say, 'Thought it was good, really strong opening, great.' Five minutes later, you'd done your first intro, 'What do you think, i think it was really great.' The whole show would be the two of us on the phone."
Goldberg got noticeably choked up when hearing all about the love that Williams and Crystal shared for the iconic actress and comedian.
"The two of them," Goldberg said of her time on Comic Relief. "I would just sit [and watch], you didn't want to go do anything, but watch these fools."
Williams took his own life at the age of 63 last month on Aug. 11.

Hi, my name is Marie, I'm 14. I was born in Novosibirsk, Russia and moved to New York a few months ago. After my father died, my mother tried to find a job that was well-paid, and after many failed attempts, my mom decided to move to New York and try to find a better life.
Marie lives in New York with her Mother and her older sister, Ida (pronounced EE-Da). Her father died when she was 10 and her mother struggled to support both Marie and Ida. Her mother tried to find a well paying job, however no jobs were open. They moved to New York 9 months ago and Her mother started working as a domestic service worker.
"No! Mother, please don't go!" Marie pleaded quietly. "Promise me that you will take of each other," Her mother said in a calm voice. "We promise," Ida and Marie replied Marie's mother dies of a disease and only she and Ida are left to take care of each other.
Ida and Marie are trying to find a job. While they are roaming the streets searching for a job, a stray dog follows them. Ida tries to get rid of it because it might have disease. Marie pleads to keep it and Ida finally agrees and they take it home, clean it, and name her Rose. Rose becomes part of the family and like Ida the most, however loves Marie with all of her heart.
Ida finds a job at the Triangle Shirtwaist Factory. 'Even though the job only pays $6 per week, that's enough. Some people say that the work conditions are horrible, but it's got to be better than they say it is. They only took people who were over 15 to work there and in a few months, after my 15th birthday, I'll start working there as well so me and Ida would have enough money no matter what' thought Marie, waiting for Ida to return from work.
A fire breaks out at the factory. People find that the emergency exits are blocked or cannot be used. 146 die in the fire. A lot of young people die, one of them is Ida. Ida was not able to escape the fire through the exits, and therefor, burned to death as well as many others.
Marie gets enough money that was supposed to be her sisters payment and in her savings to organize a small funeral for Ida. A lot of people are sad and two days after the incident, March 27, 1911, Ida Brodsky is buried. Marie is now on her own with only Rose as a friend and family member. She sold the house that she had and bought a one-room apartment for her and Rose to live in. She is very sad and doesn't know what to do with her life.

We headed into transfer cycle 8 with some hope but also realistic that none of the previous embryo’s transferred had progressed past 5 weeks. Embryo 13 had resulted in our first ever positive pregnancy test, it unfortunately ended in miscarriage days later. I recovered from it as best I could. I knew I would never feel 100% ready to have another embryo transfer, but I also knew I just had to get on with it. It would never feel like the right time.
May 2018 I started the drugs for embryo 14 to be transferred. Everything looked ok for transfer, so on a sunny June day we entered the clinic. A short time after we left with a great looking blast on board. They asked if we wanted a picture, again I said no, just like all the times before. I didn’t want a reminder if this didn’t work again.
The day after transfer I carried on as normal, back to work, no break. The two week wait passed relatively slowly, as they had done the previous 7 times. I started to test early, I suppose I wanted to prepare myself for the worst again.
5dp5dt – 1st test – positive – very faint – but positive…how could this be…I entered a state of shock instantly. Followed by a state of crippling fear. With a tiny hint of excitement.
I tested each day until official test date 12dp5dt. All positive. Digital tests saying ‘Pregnant’. I called the clinic, booked in for a scan in a few weeks and entered the next three week wait.
And then it happened. On the same day it happened the cycle before. Bleeding. Bright red blood. How could this be happening again? I felt broken. I threw all but one of my positive tests in the bin in a fit of rage with tears streaming. I called the clinic. We were to have blood tests 2 days apart to check the hormone levels. So the next day I went to the clinic, in and out in 5 minutes. The phone call came, my levels were 2400 so were ok, but it would depend on the next test to see if they were increasing or decreasing. I went back 2 days later. The bleeding had continued so I was just waiting for the inevitable. The conversation I had last time which told me things weren’t progressing. The phone call came. The levels had gone up to 4400. So not quite a doubling but increasing at a good rate. The bleeding continued so I was told to go back in for another blood test. Another tense few days of waiting. The phone call came. The levels had gone up to over 8000, so again not doubled but definitely going up. How could this be? I was bleeding and yet the hormones indicated that things were progressing. I was told to wait until my scan date as my levels were going up.
2 days later I was in so much pain. Bleeding continued. We called the clinic and they told me to come in for a scan. We were worried it was ectopic, they wanted to rule it out. So we travelled silently to the clinic. Hoping for the best, expecting the worst. After a tense wait, the consultant called us in. Wanda was inserted. The screen was turned around and there it was. The sac and what can only be described as a grain of rice. No heartbeat yet as it was too early, but there was our baby. In the right place. We could also clearly see the area of bleeding, it was away from the sac but still it was there. Hubby cried, I was in shock. Complete shock. I was still pregnant. It made no sense. I was told to take it easy, to stop taking the blood thinners as they wouldn’t be helping and to come back for the pre-arranged scan. I could start the blood thinners again when the bleeding stopped.
Here the worry really set in. I had been advised by a previous clinic that I probably wouldn’t carry a pregnancy to full term without blood thinners. I needed them because of a gene that hubby carries. The C4/M2 gene. What the hell am I supposed to do? I need the blood thinners but I can’t take them. All we could do was hope the bleeding stopped quickly so that I could get back on them ASAP so that I didn’t have another miscarriage.
The bleeding didn’t stop. It carried on. We went for the 7 week scan. Bean now had a heartbeat. The area of bleeding had grown and there was a risk that it could cause a miscarriage. We had gotten further than ever before and yet there was a huge cloud of fear and doubt that hung over us. I expected every hour of everyday that I was going to have a huge bleed and that would be the end. All I could do was live hour by hour, sometimes it was minute by minute. The clinic should have discharged us at this point, but because of the bleeding they asked me to come back in 2 weeks for another scan.
Another 2 week wait which dragged like nothing I have ever experienced before. Scan day came. Bean had grown some more and was measuring a day ahead, heart beating at what looked like a million miles an hour. And there was still an area of bleeding. It was now right next to the sac and had grown significantly. I felt numb. I just couldn’t see how this was going to be ok. And I still couldn’t take the blood thinners. in my head that only meant one thing. Either way I was going to loose our bean. As I was still bleeding, the clinic asked me to come back in another 2 weeks before they discharged me.
I got booked in for my first appointment with the Midwife. This was new. I had never gotten this far before. I talked through my history and told her about the bleeding. She referred me urgently to see a consultant at the hospital. The appointment was the next day. I sat in the waiting room staring into space. I couldn’t look at those sitting around me, pregnancies progressing whilst mine probably wasn’t going to. The consultant saw me, said she wouldn’t change anything and she would take the lead from the IVF clinic as I was under 12 weeks. She wasn’t sure why I was there and that they would see me in a few weeks if things progressed. She had never heard of the C4/M2 gene issue and pretty much dismissed it. If the IVF clinic said not to take the blood thinners then I wasn’t to take them.
I lasted another few days and decided to go for a private scan. I couldn’t stand not knowing what was going on with the area of bleeding. Bean was still growing, heart still beating. Area of bleeding had reduced slightly and now wasn’t infringing on the sac. Finally some goodish news. Still bleeding, still petrified…but bean was still with us.
Week 11 we had our final scan with the clinic. Bean had grown some more. Area of bleeding had reduced further. Bleeding was now very irregular. Maybe, just maybe things were going to be ok.
Week 13 we had our standard 12 week scan. No area of bleeding could be seen. Bean measured 2 days ahead and my due date was set…our bean would arrive on 20th February 2019. I was still in shock. The bleeding had finally stopped.
I haven’t mentioned the sickness. Sickness had been part of my daily routine from about 8 weeks. 5 times a day. Starting at 2pm each day and lasting until 11pm. I have never been so sick. I lived on cheese and cheese flavoured anything. I tried to eat in the morning so I knew I was having at least some food. After 2pm nothing would stay down. Everyone said it would go by 12 weeks. Mine lasted until 20 weeks. I hated it and it was kicking my ass daily, but if it meant bean was growing then I would take it. I didn’t care how crap I felt, I just wanted everything to be ok.
At 16 weeks we had a midwife appointment. For the first time we heard the heartbeat. It was surreal. It is a sound I will never forget. A day later we had another private scan. I never felt a sense of excitement before a scan. I was utterly terrified. I was waiting to be told that something awful had happened. Bean was measuring perfectly for the dates, heart beat was perfect…and we found out we were having a boy. In that moment it became real and yet still every day I was terrified. Scared it was going to be taken away from us. We both wanted it so much and yet it seemed impossible that this time things would be ok.
I hadn’t gone back onto the blood thinners. I had to try and move on from the so called gene issue and hope for the best. It still played on my mind and that didn’t change. Its scary how the result of one blood test a few years before hung over us.
20 weeks and the scan was all ok. We saw the consultant and due to my anxiety they decided that I would see the midwives fortnightly and have growth scans from 28 weeks. I was seeing my counsellor regularly too. In all honesty I was struggling, really struggling. After 12 years and so much heartache and pain, I just could not get to the point where I could accept that everything was going to be ok. Everyone kept telling me that various milestones would make me feel better, would make it feel real. They didn’t. Infertility and loss had just stripped me of confidence. Would my body be able to keep doing this, would our bean continue to grow. Would we get to meet him in a few months? Instead of feeling better as time went on, in some ways I felt worse. More stressed. More worried. More scared. Feeling him grow and move deepened my hope and fear at the same time. It had taken 14 embryos to get here and I wanted it more than anything.
Things seemed to be going ok. Taking it day by day. Hearing his heartbeat every 2 weeks helped for a few hours. My bump was growing. His movements grew stronger and more regular. We went for our 28 weeks scan. More bad news. I had too much amniotic fluid. As we waited to see the consultant we both frantically googled to see what it meant. There seemed to be a few potential causes. I had blood tests for various things to see if they could find a cause. The consultant told me to go away and enjoy Christmas and he was confident the fluid would have gone down by the next scan. If not, then we would need a plan. Needless to say Christmas was awful as something else hung over us. This could all still go very wrong. I literally crawled from day to day. Dr Google once again was not my friend. Making a conscious effort to feel each movement to make sure they weren’t reducing.
The scan 3 weeks later showed the fluid had gone down. Everything else looked ok. My anxiety levels were through the roof.
2 days later we had our baby shower. I had never been to one, I had in truth avoided them like the plague in all the years we had struggled to conceive. It was a lovely relaxed afternoon with friends and family, just what I could cope with. Our little boy wasn’t even here yet and he was being showered with so much love. Maybe, just maybe, things would be ok. Everyone around is excited for us, I was still utterly petrified.
The next scan and all looked good. Growth was good. We talked to the consultant about not going passed my due date. The gene issue still hung over me and I was worried. She agreed that at my next appointment we could talk about being induced but they wouldn’t do it before 38 weeks. I went away feeling a little lighter.
A week later I went on maternity leave from work. How had I got here? How were we now so close and yet it still felt so surreal. Weeks away from giving birth and I hadn’t really thought about it. So fixated on just getting through each day and now I needed to think about what was coming next.
37 weeks and the scan was all ok. Growth ok and flow through the placenta looked good. A date to be induced was set for 39+5…so pretty much 40 weeks! We never saw the same consultant twice, so the consultant at this appointment didn’t want to induce me unnecessarily but I genuinely could not cope with going overdue so she agreed.
Time was ticking away slowly. 37 plus 4 and the itching started. Just at night on my hands and feet. I just thought it was another pregnancy related thing that was normal. 2 days later the itching was getting worse. 37 plus 6 and overnight I felt hardly any movement. He was usually active from 6am. I felt nothing. I was worried. I called the hospital and they asked me to go in for monitoring. On the way I felt him once. This was really unusual. I was hooked up to the monitors and all seemed ok. His heartbeat was fine and I started to feel some movement. I happened to mentioned the itching. Bloods were taken urgently, apparently this can be a really bad sign. A couple of hours later it was confirmed that I had developed a liver condition that can cause still birth. I was broken. I cried. I couldn’t cope. i just wanted him here safely. After a few heated and emotional discussions with various staff they decided I needed to be induced…urgently. They couldn’t do it that day so I was booked in for the next day. It was happening. I just had to get through one more night.
I got through the night. We headed to the hospital. Embryo 14…baby Edward arrived later that evening. He was here, he was ok and that was all that mattered.
I suppose you could say it was one heck of a journey. Infertility is the worst and most scary roller coaster that I have ever stepped onto. At times broke me, it broke us. I experienced some of the most painful times whilst we struggled through and those around just didn’t understand. There were times when I didn’t think I would get through the day, but somehow I did. Infertility changed me, it has helped shape who I am today. It will always be a part of me.
I want to take the opportunity to say a huge thank you for reading and sharing. I started to write as an outlet but also in the hope that it helped others know they weren’t alone. If you are struggling with infertility, please know that you are not alone. It is ok not to be ok. Ask for help if you need it and be kind to yourself…always xx

Peterborough midfielder Charlie Lee believes the club can win automatic promotion back to the Championship under Darren Ferguson.
Posh moved to within two points of the top two with a 1-0 win at Notts County in midweek as Lee scored his first goal of the season and the versatile player believes Ferguson can guide them to promotion once again.
He said: "We feel like we are going to win every game at the moment. We are full of confidence and enjoying our football.
"I've not scored as many goals as I would have liked this season, but then I've not played as many games as I would have liked.
"Gary Johnson thought the team would be better without me and that I would be better off going out on loan to Gillingham.
"I'm glad I did at the time, but it's great to be back in the side. I'm sorry that Gary left, but I'm happy that Darren Ferguson came back because we know we can be successful under him again. The mood now is like it was two years ago when we won promotion from this division. We won't be complacent, but we are confident we can reach the top two."

Anyone who owns Japanese Akitas?
I was just wondering if anyone out there owns a Japenese Akita?
We are looking to buy one this year from a pup. I have done some research on the dogs and from what i can gather, they are nice dogs that are very protective of their home and family and if raised right, will not be vicious or nasty (unless teased).
We have an 11 month old son at the minute, he will be 1 by the time we have the dog. But the main reason for wanting a puppy is so that it is brought up around my son from a young age.
I would like anymore information that you could give me, and are negative/positie things about these dogs.
- Anonymous1 decade agoBest answer
My dad used to have an akita dog. He told us often that his dog was very stubborn, never showed friendly attitude to neighbors or visitors, showed his loyalty only to his owner (my dad) and his family member...but never harm anybody. He was not friendly to other dogs also. When other dogs found him during their walk, they bark like crazy. But he granced at it a moment, and gave a sniff and walk away. Dad told us he never intend to fight.
One of my friends also had a white akita dog. I have visited her house several times and played with him. This akita dog was completely opposite what my dad told me. Very friendly and couldn't stand being alone. He also never harm anybody, and barely barked.
Both told me that you need to train the dog well at first. Once he/she was trained, Akita dog will become very caring dog for you and your family member. My friend told me that her dog accidentally bit her arm once when she was playing with the dog. She said it was not really "bite". It was just his fang caught her arm not intending to do so. As proof of this, the moment his fang fell into her arm skin, he literally froze and didn't move even a bit. His mouth was like shaking with regret what just happened and his eyes was full of terror, she said.
Akita dog is very good one only if you train him/her well. Once he/she knows what is right (good), what is wrong (bad), the dog will never try to do bad things.
You just have to know that every dogs have fangs. Even they never intend, the accident may occur. You must keep it in mind. They are not a doll or robot that was programmed not to harm human. They have heart and if you hurt their feelings, they will do things that you are not willing to see.Source(s): Japanese
- GavinLv 61 decade ago
I have heard that Japanese Akitas and American Akitas are quite different, but in Japan, when you hear on the news about somebody being badly injured by a dog it is invariably an Akita. As you say, they are VERY protective and they when they attack, they tend to do so without warning.
I don't want to put you off, but you better check it out with some breeders first. See how you get on with the pup's parents first.
- 1 decade ago
ndAlthough i did not have a akita myself i wanted one until my neighbour got one. My neighbour is very good with dog and had a Rottweiler that passed away due to age. Despite my neighbour doing his best and trying various training schools (this hurt his pride as he has always been able to train his dogs to an excellent in fact un beatable standard but he thought it was only fair on the dog) the dog attacked two other dogs and he just felt it was going to attack someone who got close to him. He gave this dog away to a Akita re homing Charity. So from what i have seen first hand and read on the dogs they are 100% no no's for a family with young children.
- 1 decade ago
You should repost this question in the "Pets" category. You are in the "travel" category.

Addict James Rook was caught towing a stolen £22,000 caravan on the A50 to pay off a drug debt.
Police pulled over the 33-year-old in the early hours of January 30, and found that the caravan was one that had been reported stolen from Cheadle 11 days earlier.
Rook, who initially refused to be interviewed by officers, subsequently admitted that he had been paid £130 to drive the caravan to Derby after being approached by someone he owed money to.
The defendant, of South Street, Derby, has now been jailed for 12 months after pleading guilty to handling stolen goods, along with driving without a licence and without insurance.
Prosecutor Paul Spratt told Stoke-on-Trent Crown Court that police pulled over Rook near the Toyota Island on the A50 at 1.45am.
Mr Spratt said: "The police officer saw the vehicle being driven in the direction of Derby, and noticed that the registration number on the caravan did not match that on the car.
"The defendant didn't say anything to the police and refused to be interviewed.
"He did assert in his basis of plea that he had been asked by another to move the vehicle to the Derby area. He said the reason why he did it was that he owed a debt to this person, in connection with his addiction to drugs."
The caravan, which was returned to its owner, had been subjected to an 'untidy search', and had sustained more than £3,500 of damage. The owner, who had only had the caravan for a few months, also had to pay £1,000 to have it recovered.
Rook has a lengthy criminal record, including numerous offences relating to dishonesty, and at the time of his most recent crime he had been under police supervision following a previous sentence.
Mark Moore, mitigating, told the court that Rook had a 'long history' of drug use and a 'chaotic' lifestlye. But Mr Moore said his client wanted to turn his life around, and suggested that he could receive a community sentence.
Mr Moore said: "It was Mr Rook who requested a pre-sentence report. He wants to make a change to his lifestyle."
But Judge Paul Glenn ruled that only an immediate custodial sentence would be appropriate in this case.
He told Rook: "You are now 33 with a number of previous convictions, a significant number of which relate to offences of dishonesty.
"You were paid £130 to collect and transport what you knew to be a stolen caravan."
"This offence is so serious that only custody can be justified. I acknowledge the points made in the pre-sentence report, and I really do hope that you can put them into effect once you are released."
Rook was also disqualified from driving for 12 months.

Until a few weeks ago, 16-year-old gymnast Stephanie Neff wanted to attend UCLA, where Olympian and former teammate Kristen Maloney was a star.
But Maloney has finished her eligibility, and Neff was wowed by an April 18 unofficial family visit to the University of Utah, impressed by the mountains and a feeling of safety she got there.
Neff can't be blamed for wanting to feel safe after her ordeal in the air and staying alone with strangers on Sept. 11, 2001.
A senior international elite qualifier who hopes to gain a spot on the U.S. national team in a few months and who does four skills that no other gymnast in the world competes, Neff on Tuesday announced her verbal commitment to attend Utah on scholarship beginning Fall 2006.
The high school junior in Mesa, Ariz., who academically has ranked No. 1 in her class since her freshman year, said she will not change her mind, though the agreement is non-binding. She can't sign an NCAA letter-of-intent until at least late fall.
She still hopes to become a 2008 Olympian and discussed the possibility of continuing to train toward that with Utah coaches Greg and Megan Marsden.
Neff said she felt good around the Marsdens and the Ute team and liked the idea of living in Salt Lake City in her first extended time away from her parents.
"I want to be safe," she said by telephone Tuesday from Carter's Gymnastics Academy in Mesa, which was the reason the then-12-year-old was on an airplane as an unaccompanied minor on Sept. 11, 2001.
Neff, who grew up in Pennsylvania and had trained at Parkettes was on her way to Arizona to train with coaches Jack and Erin Carter, who had started their own gym after coaching Maloney and Neff at Parkettes. Jack Carter was also at one time a coach at Orem's All-American club owned by BYU coaches Brad and Dawn Cattermole.
She got on a plane alone early that fateful morning and, after some flight time, was told by a flight attendant that the plane was going to St. Louis for a stopover because, she was told, two planes had collided, and the airline wanted to be careful. Distressed because she wanted to go to Phoenix, she was held until last to get off the plane with the flight attendant, who took her to a U.S. Airways office, where her frightened parents were called. "I still had no idea" of the terrorist attack, Neff said, adding she finally found out while watching TV in the airport later.
She was given a choice by the airline she could room in a hotel with a 19-year-old woman she had met only briefly on the plane, or she could stay with an airline ticket agent who had a 9-year-old daughter. She chose the ticket agent, who brought her to the airport every day for four days before she was able to get on the last plane that day to Phoenix just as her father, Steve, reached Columbus, Ohio. He was driving to St. Louis to retrieve his daughter. He turned back upon a call from Carter, and she made it to Phoenix.
Steve asked for a transfer from his job at Fed Ex, and soon the whole family moved to Mesa, and her brother, also Steve, is now a wrestler at Arizona State.
Carter calls Neff "the most-rounded athlete I've ever trained" because of her strength, grace and ability on all four events. And he's coached Maloney as well as Penn State's Kristal Uzelac, a junior national champion. "Compared to Maloney and Uzelac, she fares well," he said, calling her "gifted" as an athlete, student and overall person with a "gifted" body type as well.Comment on this story
Neff was 2002 Junior National all-around, beam and bars champion but battled a hamstring injury after that. She's OK now and sighting a national-team berth, having "a big chance of making it this time," she said. She also looks to make the world championship team, which she sees as possible. "I think so," she said.If she can make the world team and compete, she could get any of her four unique moves - two on floor and two on bars - named for her before she officially becomes a member of the Utes.

Wish I'd had my camera with me this morning for two reasons. One, I'm starting up the Tennessee Equestrian once again. The TN Eq. is a comprehensive guide to equine businesses, services and organizations for the Tenn. horse owner. I first had the idea for it four years ago but then, I planned to publish it as a beautiful print magazine. What a time for the American economy to take a nosedive. I sank too much of my own money into the project and borrowed far too much on my credit cards...which I'm still paying on....both of which were very bad ideas. The thing is, although my methods were bad, I still believe in the concept and so I'm revising it as a strictly online publication. I'm still adding free listings and a few paid ads. All of my close friends and associates are getting free ads because after all, I need something to show potential advertisers. I was hoping to get a shot of my farrier, Dale, working on my horses so that I can give him a large full colored ad. He is so good with the horses and an excellent farrier. I've been using him since I got my first horse and he is amazing. But, alas forgot the camera so he told me that the photo will have to wait until probably January when we'll have our next trim. The second reason that I wish I'd had my camera is because a small miracle happened....I'm so happy for small miracles :)........Riley, who has been extremely head shy and halter repellant since an apprentice at a stable where I kept him for a while left his halter on and turned him out with it. He became entangled in some limbs and not only wore sores on his face but a deep gash around one ear. Since that happened, I have only been able to get a simple rope halter on him and that always with great difficulty. We arrived at the pasture at dawn because Dale was due to arrive as soon as he dropped his kids off at school and at first, it appeared that this morning was going to be no different than any other. Django went into his halter like butter, Danny was his usual rude self but I still managed to halter him, Brandy was stubborn but it didn't take long to slip her halter on as well but Riley and Mouse.....forget about it! I told Steve that we'd do Brandy first, then the two boys and then I'd again try to halter my two rebels. Dale arrived and everyone was cooperating really well. With Brandy and Django done, I decided to let Steve hold Danny while I tried again to halter Riley and Mouse. First I tried Mouse and she still kept turning away from me. I even tried putting food in the feed bucket but she still moved away. Then I notice Riley standing in front of his feed bucket and looking shyly towards me. I walked over, put a little feed in his bucket and then gently wrapped the rope around his neck.....he didn't even flinch! Then, for the first time in over three years, I slipped a real halter over his nose and he didn't move!! I tell you, I needed the camera because it was a minor miracle. I've only been able to get a makeshift rope halter on him when I get one on at all. I led him over to where Dale was waiting and Riley was a perfect gentleman. By the time we finished, Mouse had figured out that putting on the halter meant getting food so she, too, let me halter her and lead her to Dale. I managed to get two birds with one stone because I asked Steve to hold her while I finally got the burrs out of her mane while she was forced to stand still. The morning didn't get off to a good start because I was awake and sick most of the night and had started off the day feeling miserable but those two little victories just rejuvenated me and my spirits. Now, I'm off to finally get my kitchen straightened and cleaned. Doing pretty good on the resolutions for today. Still haven't officially exercised but I have been moving all morning. I think it's going to end up being a great day!

This is Sheriff Peanut Butter Brickle. Normally, we aren’t ones for writing about sadness. We aren’t ones for writing about things we would like to forget. But…sometimes you have to tell a story the way it is. Sometimes you have to tell a story to help someone else. Sometimes you have to tell a story to help yourself.
We have been to countless campgrounds over the last three years. At some campgrounds, we stay a day or a few days. At some campgrounds we stay a little longer. At some campgrounds it seems like we wear out our welcome. Ok. That’s just Digby.
At this particular campground that we are at now, they let us stay a little more than others. It’s a good thing, because we love the beach and we can walk to it every day and night.
We get to know the other people here. And we get to make friends. That was the case with Bob and his little dogs last year when this was were we were parked.
When we first got to the campground, Bob was our campground host. He made sure that our light was working in our campsite.
We talked and he told us about his dogs and how much he loved them. Some were rescues. Some were very old. Even older than me. And Bob made sure to tell us what a good job we were doing trying to help other animals too. He sure did love his dogs. He sure did. And it seemed like most dogs loved Bob.
It might have had something to do with the treats in his pocket. Or it could have been when he was driving in his car and saw us walking. He would pull over, get out of his car and sit down on the side of the road so we could give him some love. Bob did that. Now, Bob was grumpy too. And we even liked that. He liked to complain. He liked to be irritated some days. He liked that a lot. But when he saw us or any dogs, his voice changed. He turned all gushy. And we did too.
Most days at camp, you would hear Bob’s leaf blower. He liked a very clean campsite. You would hear Bob’s cart go by. And at night, Bob hooked up his little homemade dog cart and there they went on their rounds. He made sure to tell us it was early to bed and up at 2 a.m. for a snack.
Anyone just passing thru camp for a night or so may not have talked to Bob. And I suppose that we were very fortunate to have met him. We would have never imagined when we got back to this camp months later that Bob would be gone. His dogs would be with someone else. And we would have never imagined Bob would have taken his own life here at camp. And left us all with an empty spot in our hearts.
I understand depression. I hear Girl Person speak of it all the time. I hear her and I hear Boy Person talk about their sadness and how some days it’s hard to be ok. Us dogs have that too. But we can’t talk about it. You can though. Bob needed to as well. And maybe he thought no one heard him. Maybe he wanted to talk about missing his wife.
Maybe he wanted to talk about how he didn’t feel good. Maybe he wanted to talk about how he was scared. We just don’t know. Because he only gave us love and treats and kindness. And we wish that we didn’t have to say he was gone. And it makes me wonder how many others need to talk. And they don’t. When they are gone, we wonder, like we wonder about Bob. Bob seemed to give his all to his dogs and others and left nothing for himself. Please let Bob’s memory be a lesson. Don’t give everything you have to everyone else and leave nothing for yourself. Ration out the love and leave some for you.
It seems that life circles the same no matter where you are. And the campground definitely shows you a bigger picture of life. People move in, they move out. Faces change, stories change. Some you may know for a little while and some a little longer. But just when you think you have it all figured out, you don’t. You go to look for someone in a campsite and they’re gone. You go away for a bit and come back, and everything is the same but it’s changed. You go back to your favorite campsite and it feels somehow different. Because you are.
This will always be Bob’s campground. We will forever forget he is gone and stop at his campsite for a treat. We will look for his dogs on his RV dash which isn’t there anymore. He made sure they would be taken care of and we can only hope they are barking away wherever they are.
The last time we saw Bob, we were walking to the beach. He was in his car. He pulled over. And he got out. He sat in the middle of the road, gave Digby a back rub, and I ignored him. Some may have regrets about that. But Bob understood and told me he had had a hard day too. He said he would catch me later. Being a grump doesn’t mean you don’t care for others. We knew that about Bob. How many people do we judge by one interaction or one introduction? We never, ever know what someone could be dealing with, who they miss or what they battle with. Bob may have felt alone. But in his company, we felt important. We wish we would have said it.
Not all will understand why Bob left us. But we can’t judge someone else’s despair based on how we would handle the same. When you look around you today, notice who is there. Imagine their spot empty. And then think about how you can tell them they matter. It may make a difference if they need to hear it. It may not. But don’t leave your spot with regrets.
View this post on Instagram
We found out today that a man who we considered a friend on the road took his own life. Bob was eccentric. Bob loved his campground host job but sure complained about it. Bob was quick to tell you the stories of his dogs. Bob was depressed. Bob couldn’t see past his troubles. Bob, we will never forget your kindness the first time we met you at camp and helping us set up. We will never forget how you told us over and over again that what we were doing for animals was important. You made us laugh. Brickle and Digby are still looking for you at your campsite. Never underestimate the impact you can have on someone in a short amount of time. Bob. We miss you. You mattered. We are sorry. #2travelingdogs #Repost @2travelingdogs Original post: ・・・ Meet Bob, our campground host. Bob and his three tea cup yorkies are “a family” as Bob says. Bob rescued them from a puppy mill, and the best rider can always be found in his shirt, who you can see if you look closely. Bob lost his wife a few months ago, but finds true meaning in his life with his dogs. They get up every day at 2 am to have a snack before their campground runs. We think that they are pretty lucky too. #2travelingdogs #talesonthetrail
–Sheriff Peanut Butter Brickle

Love Out Loud
By Danielle, age 17, New York
I had always been one to help out whenever and wherever a helping hand was needed, so I was pretty much up for it when my pastor asked my sister and I if we'd be interested in going on a missions trip about an hour and a half away in Newark, New York*. I had no idea that it would end up being one of the best weeks in my entire life.
*Newark, New York (not to be confused with Newark, New Jersey) is a small town located upstate between Syracuse and Rochester.
The drive to Newark felt like forever as I was anticipating the week ahead. When we arrived we found ourselves in a quiet little town where the closest Wal-Mart was a good 30 minute drive. I did not bring any valuables in case I might damage or lose them, which I regret because I wanted to take pictures. However, I was able to obtain some pictures from my fellow youth group friends who brought a camera. The church we arrived at was particularly big compared to ours, and we were happy to see that the counselors were outside happily waving and holding a welcome sign.
After we got out of the van our group took pictures with the sign and we waved on other groups who arrived after us.
That afternoon we found our rooms, and the girls from our youth group and I set up our sleeping bags. We eventually found out that 17 other people would be sharing the small room with us. We were appalled, as the room barely fit the 8 or us from our group, let alone 17 more. The second group of girls filed in and we asked them where they were from. They said they were from Tarrytown, near New York City. We chit chatted and got to know one another. The room was crowded, but the happy upbeat feeling assured us that a great time in store for us all.
That night we all filed into the church secretary's office to listen to the counselors for orientation. We learned that we would be split up into crews; 5 or 6 of us would commute and work together at each site. Knowing that our youth group would be split up scared us. We didn't feel comfortable with the idea of having to be with strangers we didn't know.
After the orientation we split up. There were five people in my group, including myself; Bill, the crew leader and driver, since he was the oldest; Greg, a skinny red headed boy from Tarrytown, New York; Eric, from Hope, Rhode Island, who seemed to be a bit isolated and didn't want to be there; and Tabby, a girl from Charleston, South Carolina, who also seemed pessimistic and ungrateful. I thought to myself that this wouldn't be such a good week.
On Monday we all gathered together to drive to our site. The five of us piled into Bill's Ford Focus, which could only comfortably hold 3 people. We arrived at our work site to learn that we would be washing buses all week. I found this to be sort of funny because bus washing is so easy. The owner arrived soon after to greet us and take us on a tour of his company. We learned that he also owned a facility for the mentally ill where they were taught skills that could possibly get them jobs. Bill used the buses to transport them from their homes to the facility. He knew everyone's name and his passion was clearly from the bottom of his heart. He loved working with them and was discussing his plans of opening a residential home for the mentally ill. He wants to help those who cannot easily do what we take for granted, and thinks that people should not judge them by their disability, but see them for their abilities.
For the next five days we washed buses, and believe it or not, my crew members and I grew closer every day. We talked about 1,000,001 things, but mainly about our hometowns and faith and families. Tabby, the southern girl, even asked me if they had alligators in New York, which we laughed about. It's amazing how you share things with complete strangers that you normally wouldn't share with even your neighbor.
The last day was such a heartbreaker. No one wanted to leave. Everyone was so nice there. It was so different from my hometown because no one is that friendly to you, especially to strangers. The week as a whole was wonderful. I made friends that I would never have met otherwise, and not only did I help out a community in need, but I also strengthened my relationship with God. Next year we are thinking about going to Virginia for our next trip, and I am just as excited as I was for this trip.

Happy New Year Buzznet. Ah the first post of the new year... coming to you 5 days later lol.
I have a goal. And well it's not an easy goal... or maybe it will be. That goal is to post in the gallery at least once a week. Kinda like a 52 week project, only it's not because that involves me posting every week. This is more loose where I can post as much or as little as I want. So I'm going to try. I'm not sure how demanding this semester is going to be. I can't believe today is my last day of break. I've been off since the end of November pretty much so that's a long time. It doesn't feel that way though.
As well I have mentioned it to a few people as well as in my last blog. I'm starting, or well I have started a 365 day project of me. I'm not posting it on here. At the end of the year I think I'll make the photos into a video. I actually might continue and make it a series, depending on how much I like it this year. Those are just ideas right now.
Lastly I joined Goodreads since it seemed like a no brainer thing to do. My challenge is 100 books (though I only wrote 50 in the challenge I don't know why I did that). Last year my goal was 100 and I almost made it, 93 books. I was so close. So I'm setting it to be my goal once again.
Oh I guess a p.s I'm may be doing some traveling this year. I'll keep you guys in the loop as it gets closer :)

May 21, I am a software developer working with Denver based Web Solutions Company. I recently had a very bad experience at Star Mall Andheri. My family came to visit Mumbai after years. I took then to show Malls, preferred choice Star Mall in Andheri because nearest to my house and we do almost all household shopping there. At first, we looked around on 1st floor. I was looking into gents clothing section, My mom and sister looks around thing and took just a nineteen rupees earing. We moved downstairs and my sister told me she took earing, she didnít knew it was to be paid upward. I said you keep earings with yourself right now, will pay before exit counter. She kept in her pocket because we were not carrying any bag that time. After having some snacks and pastries at food corner we purchased vegetables. We made payment at counter and forgot to pay Rs. 19 earing and passed 2-3 step out. And suddenly beeped, I hardly could understand 3-4 men came towards me checking bags. I realized about earing and and said Ďohh we forgot to pay for ití. No one was talking to us as if we had done some greatest crime. After 5 minutes a man comes and takes me into private room. That was bizarre moment of my life.. I never knew I was going to be treated hell ill and abused by them. I tried to explain things but they never attended me. He bluntly said you have to pay 10 times more than what the product cost. I just asked, why? It was genuine mistake, definitely not a theft. They were blabbering weird and accusing me for stealing. It was most disgusting moment by then. I was feeling like I am getting puked on me as if they were waiting for someone already. I asked them, where is the policy, where it is written for paying 10 times more. I heard, Blunt no. we do not show policy. Itís illogical to pay without seeing policy so I decided not to pay 10 times. They got really violent and started threatening me and telling me to put in jail. I just laughed in my mind, for Rs. 19 thy will put me in jail. Well soon I realized it was no point talking to them. I just paid 10 times more and came out.. I saw my face of my mom and sister. They were scared like hell and crying. I felt deeply bad. I should have just given them the money soon. They never even gave me the receipt so I know basically goes into their pocket. After being a genuine customer for more than a year, I experience a hell ride. I hope it doesnít happen to you. Whenever I think about that I just feel burning in my heart.

DEAR AMY: My son, who is 21, has been dating the same girl for three years. When they began dating, she was tiny, but now she has gained a significant amount of weight. She is about 5-foot-3, but I'd say she weighs 150 pounds. My son is very active and fit. He says it bothers him that she has gained weight and he has tried to encourage her to work out with him. She had a foot injury that prevents her from doing heavy running, etc., and she says she has gained since going on birth control. I've heard of women gaining on the pill, but not 30 to 40 pounds. She eats a lot of pizza, carbs, etc. This relationship seems serious. I've talked to my son about it because he is a handsome guy, into fitness, and he is starting to wonder about the future of the relationship if she continues on this path. She's endangering her health as well as hurting her appearance. I tried talking to her indirectly, but she said she accepts her weight gain. I also talked to my son about whether I should offer to take her to some of the Pilates and yoga classes I attend, but I wonder if that's being overinvolved on my part. Is this my business? I hate seeing this beautiful girl, who is in many ways a good companion to my son, become so unhealthy and probably risk losing him because she is not taking care of herself.Overly Concerned Mom
DEAR MOM: I'd say this ceased being your business just before you started talking to your son about his girlfriend's body and speculating about its affect on their relationship.
If your son brings up this topic with you, your response should be, "Honey, if this is a deal breaker for you, you should discuss this with her, not with me." Other than urge this young woman to see her physician for a checkup (significant weight gain could signal a serious health problem), you should stay out of it. If she comes to you for health/ weight mentoring, generously offer it.

Jonjo Shelvey wasasked where he thought Newcastle would finish this season in the Championship.
"We had set out from as soon as we got back from pre-season that we want to be finishing first," he said.
"We don’t want to finish second, we want to finish first and that is our aim and it looks like we are on course to do that.
"It is going to be tough but we have just got to keep winning and keep grinding out.
"It doesn't matter how you win, whether it is dogged performances or playing like Barcelona, as long as we are putting those three points on the board."

HOUSTON – Despite the fact that his own home was flooding because of Hurricane Harvey, a Houston area doctor was so determined to perform emergency surgery on a 16-year-old boy that he used whatever means necessary to reach the hospital — even if that meant using a canoe and walking through waist-high floodwater.
Dr. Stephen Kimmel, a general pediatric surgeon at Clear Lake Regional Medical Center in Webster, Texas, rushed out of his home on Saturday morning when he received a call about Jacob Terrazas, who faced permanent damage if the surgery wasn’t performed immediately.
During a Wednesday appearance with Jacob on CNN’s “Erin Burnett OutFront,” Kimmel said he headed out in his car, but had to turn back because of the flooding. But that was just the beginning of his brave journey.
The hospital reached out to the local volunteer fire department to aid Kimmel. “So we ran through the flooded streets and it was pretty windy and rainy,” he said.
“We went by canoe and then by (a firefighter’s) pickup truck and by canoe again,” Kimmel told Burnett. “And I felt that these guys knew what they were doing, so I didn’t worry about myself at all the whole time.”
Kimmel ultimately reached the hospital after walking the last mile in waist-high water.
He says what is usually a 10-15 minute trip took about an hour, but that the effort was warranted. “Somebody had to take care of this young man, and so I thought, well if I can do it, I certainly should,” he said. “He was on the way to our institution and I’m glad I was able to make it.”
Jacob, who admitted he was “really scared,” and his family also had their own harrowing journey to the hospital as the paramedic’s truck he was in had to stop because of flooding.
“We had to get out and I was kind of lost, but tired,” he said. “One of the paramedics carried me to the side of the highway and after that we waited for a little bit. It was raining, my mom, my sisters they were just standing there wet. I was getting wet, cold. We were all cold. And we waited for a truck to get here and we got in the truck and left the paramedics, and after that we went to the fire department, I think, and we waited for a big truck to get there and once the truck got there, we all went in there.”
When Jacob finally arrived at the hospital, he said he didn’t even realize Kimmel was his doctor because he had just gotten there himself and wasn’t in typical medical attire.
“It was kind of weird because I got there and I didn’t know who was the doctor because I thought he was just like some, I don’t know, just some dude,” he said. “That’s what my mom thought, too. And once he told me I was like ‘oh, Ok.”
Jacob said he’s “thankful” for Kimmel performing the surgery and that he is “relieved from the pain” and “I’m feeling way much better.”
Kimmel responded by saying, “It’s really a privilege to be able to take care of pediatric surgical patients and, you know, it’s a very fulfilling day I have every day. It’s great to take care of kids and see them get better.”
The doctor also added that the Coast Guard was able to get his family out of their home safely and that the water has receded and the home is salvageable. But Kimmel said, “It’s certainly not the most important thing. I was just happy to see them.”

The mood-whiplashes in this series… I’m really beginning to like them. This show moves from light-hearted and outright silly comedy to serious politics, it’s already busy with character-development and in the meantime continues building its world, along with its characters. I love that when characters are introduced, they immediately tell their basic background.
The humour may not be as good as the humour of Occult Academy, but it still has its moments in which it’s really hilarious. The bickering between Raina and Ferris is of course one thing, but the two of them also toy with fantasy cliches surprisingly often (like in this episode where Ferris was able to enter a library because she was a cute girl). Ferris’ sister however may have been a bit too much, as a lot of her airtime consisted just out of screaming and yelling, rather than witty remarks.
This series also likes to play with things that aren’t as they seem. The blue haired guy in this episode for example. He was most definitely evil, but yet he didn’t end up as an enemy, and instead he ended up offering his services as a killer. Shion on his turn seemed like a righteous ruler so far, however that line from him at the end was quite a cliff-hanger. It just shows already how he’s changing as a ruler, and is willing to order this guy to kill his father, in order to make sure his services are genuine, in order to accomplish his ambitions.
Rating: ** (Excellent)

- Oops!Something went wrong.Please try again later.
Two-time Oscar winner Mahershala Ali takes on his first leading role in “Swan Song” – playing two parts.
ALI: “I was very excited, but also scared enough to know that I was in the right place."
Ali plays a dying man who chooses to have himself secretly cloned in order to spare his wife and son from the sadness of his passing.
His wife is played by actress Naomie Harris – who also appeared in “Moonlight,” for which Ali won the first of his two Supporting Actor Oscars. The second was for the film “Green Book.”
Harris says those expecting a sci-fi film with "Swan Song" will certainly get that – and a whole lot more.
HARRIS: “I think it's ultimately about love. It's an ode to love and real love - not the romanticized version of love but real, deep, meaningful love."
First-time director Benjamin Cleary had lots of futuristic sets and split-screen wizardry to pull off, but he too let the emotions take the lead.
CLEARY: “I think my biggest role in this was to say, ‘This is the human story. How do I try and get out of the way as much as I can to let Mahershala do his work?’"
The film also costars Glenn Close, and is the first to be produced by Ali’s production company… giving him an even deeper connection to its message.
ALI: "It makes me think about being as present as possible in the life that I have, to really look my daughter in the eyes really give her that hug. Really be present in my goodbyes and my hellos, and to, to be a good ally to my friends and, and to, to, to believe in the potential that I have in myself still and try to meet it. And we're all going to die on that road trying to meet our potential, but just keep going towards that."
“Swan Song” is playing in theaters and streaming on Apple TV+.

This week on the Fiskateer board we have been celebrating Invite a Friend Week for those who have previously been Liftateers and Card Lifters and/or have not been. It has been fun seeing those play along who had the time.
A few weeks ago I invited my daughter Katelyn to play with me as I was working on my project. Here is how my layout turned out
...and here is hers based on the same sketch :)
It is fun to scrapbook with our kids. I hope you try it too!

Jim Mullins of Brunswick and Gail Wortman of Neligh were recognized at the recent Antelope County fair as the July and August “Friend of 4-H” respectively.
Jim was noted for his many years of serving as a 4-H leader and as the superintendent of the Antelope County 4-H swine show. He continues to work with the 4-H youth by helping them as a ring man during the show and organizing the swine classes.
Gail was noted for her many years of organizing and running the 4-H food stand at the fair.
For the complete story, subscribe to The Elgin Review.

Spring again, and I needed a comfortable, easy shoe to wear everywhere. This was just the shoe! The insole is very padded & extremely comfortable. They're easy to slip on, so I end up wearing these shoes almost every time I go out. Although well made, I may just wear it out by the end of the summer with as much as I wear it!

Authorities have released the name of a car driver killed in a collision with a semitrailer on the west side of Fremont.
The accident occurred around 4:20 a.m. Monday. Police say a westbound car turned north onto U.S. Highway 30 and was struck by the northbound truck.
Police say the car driver was pronounced dead at the scene. Authorities have identified him as 23-year-old Justin Renard, who lived in North Bend.
The truck driver was identified as 62-year-old Louis Dohmen, of Columbus. He was treated at Fremont Health Medical Center and released. The collision is being investigated.

By Sabine Fonderson MD
I have asked myself many times why some people wait till the moment before the break of dawn to have their most pressing issues resolved in the emergency department.
A 52-year-old male had come in by ambulance with difficulties breathing. The paramedic had also noted that, ‘the patient is known to have asthma and is on inhalers. All observations are fine’.
Yes, I admit there are also many times I wonder why paramedics decide to bring non-emergency cases to the emergency department for “assessment”. What more can be assessed if someone is fine?
When I ushered the patient into the cubicle I remembered how he gestured to his wife not to come in with him. But she ignored it and just walked right in.
‘What can I do for you?’ I asked the husband as he sat down on the chair.
‘I was having difficulties breathing tonight’
‘Yes, I read the ambulance triage sheet. How do you feel now?’
‘Better, I am not having breathing difficulties anymore. But doctor, can you please tell me why I am feeling this way?’
‘I do not know.’ I replied and thought to myself, if he had any sense, he would have thanked me and apologized for wasting everyone’s time and left the department.
But instead he sat there, staring at the floor as if he would find the answers to the breathing difficulties he no longer had and where they came from.
I rolled my eyes. Yes! I rolled them way up to the ceiling and back at him again because he was not even looking at me, and neither was his wife. She sat practically facing the door, ready to leap out. I proceeded with more questions. The more I asked open ended question the longer it would take for him to give me a straight response, so I quickly reverted to questions that required a simple ‘yes’ or ‘no’ answer. It took me almost 6 minutes to get to the simple conclusion that he smoked despite his asthmatic condition. I felt the need to explain the effects of smoking. As I proceeded to elaborate on how smoking can exacerbate an asthma attack, he felt the need to remain silent, and, to my amazement, he had fallen asleep.
‘Why are you sleeping? Am I boring you’ I said in a raised tone. Even his wife startled and turned towards him.
‘Oh, sorry doctor. You see I have not slept in days.’
‘Yes, doctor, that is true,’ His wife confirmed. Speaking of sleep, I was so desperate to get out of the department and get some of it myself.
‘Why have you not been sleeping then?’ I was getting quite agitated at this point because that is not the main reason he was brought to the department and now he was forcing me to dig deeper into issues that, frankly, I could not care about, especially not when I had 5 minutes remaining till the end of my night shift from hell.
‘It is my wife….’ Long pause. Very long pause. ‘She is having an affair’
Well, I sure as hell did not see that coming. Daytime soap opera in the emergency department.
Soon a bickering match between husband and wife ensued. To my amazement, he had found his voice and started relaying all the events that led to the affair. He depicted in detail how when he was in the basement he could here her with her lover making love in the bed he brought. Her lover was a nobody in India, and since he had lost his shop she had made it very clear how she despised him. She would not even look at him, and that is why he found himself hiding away in the basement, abandoned by his own wife. The shame he had felt was incredible. He could not talk to family and friends about this because he would be laughed at. He had already lost his shop and now his wife was having an affair with a poor boy from India.
She turned on him, repeating and confirming everything he said and looked at me as if I would take her side.
I just sat there and listened as both husband and wife conversed with each other. I think something good did come out of this. There was some form of communication established between the two and for that second they must have felt like a married couple again. And I unintentionally became a marriage counselor
About the Author
Sabine Fonderson MD is an emergency medicine doctor in Scotland. She is passionate about writing and is a freelance editor and content author for blogs and medical startups. Sabine is author of Unbelievable stories from the emergency department, published in May 2016. She writes about her experiences as an ER doctor on her website www.sabinefonderson.com There you can also read how she has found creativity and flexibility in her professional life.
1/30/2023 12:27:49 am
all data here are so informative w ealso know best website here about these infromation
Leave a Reply.

Here's a story for you. I came downstairs yesterday morning all half awake and hobbling like I do in the morning, and there, in front of the stove was a dog biscuit.
A dog biscuit.
You understand what I'm saying here, right? A dog biscuit was in front of the stove. A whole dog biscuit.
I had the dog euthenized in the spring. I gave his dog things away almost immediately because it made me cry to see them. We have not had a beef basted biscuit in the house since.
There is only one explanation possible. My dog's ghost haunts the kitchen. It was his favorite place, after all. He was a big dog, and he took up most of the kitchen as he waited, just a little anxiously, for the cook to drop something. Which she did a lot. (Usually, after saying, "Buck!") So Buck is back, and fitting, isn't it, being that he timed his return to coincide with Halloween and all?
Well. Then there is another explanation, I suppose. Just to play it safe, the first thing that I did when I got to work was to buy some mouse bait. There is the off chance that this might be the beginning of our annual mouse immigration. They attempt to take up residence each year as soon as it starts getting cold.
So, it could be a ghost dog, or mice. One of the two.
I still cannot figure out where the dog biscuit came from though.

Another great review!
Last updated 1 year ago
Capital CJD is the place to come for your car buying. Barely 15 minutes after I did a search for a new truck on Edmunds web site, Ken Lorbacher contacted me. It's the best car buying experience I've had in my life. Ken is awesome. He'd tried so hard to locate the truck I wanted for my business (I don't want to pay for what I don't need. And it has to have what I need to do the job). He stopped at nothing until he got me what I wanted. The only truck fits my need is about 3 hours driving away. He kept me well posted the whole time until the truck was delivered personally by him at 9:00pm on Friday. I would definitely buy again from this dealer and from Ken.Giao Pham

Backstage news from WWE Monday Night Raw in Des Moines…
- We're told Vince McMahon did want to "load up the show" because it was a holiday (Labor Day in the United States) and viewership was expected to be down. One observer called it a "paint by numbers" show.
- The initial diagnosis for Mark Henry's hamstring injury was a torn muscle but he's getting a second opinion.
- The situation with Cody Rhodes and his "firing" was two-fold. One, his contract was up at the same time that Ted DiBiase's deal was up so WWE was hoping some of the smarks would falsely report he was really leaving. Two, he asked for time off so he could get married and go on his honeymoon. While Cody put his request in early, the producers and creative team didn't really communicate the timing until late last week. He's expected out for a few weeks.
- Vince McMahon is very high up on the CM Punk/Paul Heyman storyline and feels the realism in it is some of the best work he's seen in a very long time. However, he also realizes they booked things backwards because he wanted Punk vs. Brock Lesnar so bad at SummerSlam.
- We're told this week's show had a heavy Triple H influence with Vince McMahon giving him a long leash. Hunter made most of the calls on the angles involving him. There continues to be some dissension between Triple H and Vince over the angle, however, as Vince doesn't like the way the top babyfaces looked standing on the stage and doing nothing.
- Edge is returning to television next week to cross promote his role on SyFy's "Haven" and there's been talk of putting him in an angle, obviously as a babyface.

Saturday, May 16, 2009
Because my heart rate wasn't high enough
Our fire alarm went off at the library today. It was an odd moment when I thought, "who's in charge?" and then I realized,
"oh, that's me. crap."
As we were moving people out of the building, a woman came up to me looking agonized, and holding a little girl - maybe 1 and a half.
She said, "I think my baby set this off."
I asked where they had been, and she pointed to a wall where there weren't any fire alarms.
So I asked, "How did it happen?"
She said she wasn't watching her little girl (for just a second, of course), and she stuck a pencil into an outlet. My first thought: good grief, your kid is sticking things into outlets? My second thought: Wait, that wouldn't set off the alarm.
I told her so and she looked skeptical, and I had to say, "There's no way that would set off the alarm. She'd have to have pulled the red alarm... thingy." (Yes I am a master of communication) The young mom looked immensely relieved, and told me how she had turned around just as her daughter was sticking the pencil in, and at that exact moment the fire alarm went off. I would wonder, too, with timing like that.
As she walked away I heard her say softly to her daughter,
"It wasn't your fault, honey" in this reassuring and loving way.
It was so sweet!
+5 points for being a sweet mom.
-10 for the outlet thing.

This cruise was a lot of 'firsts' for me - first RCL cruise, first solo cruise, first time to the Bahamas and Keys, and first interior cabin. I chose the Majesty 4 night cruise because of the price and itinerary. The single supplement was pleasingly low (about 115%) - and the overall cruise price was very acceptable. Carnival came nowhere near with their 200% solo prices - and so lost some revenue I guess. I was a little apprehensive going in a ship of it's age, but was pleasantly surprised all around. The ship was in very good shape and the recent refit worked well.
So, how do RCL and CCL compare in offerings? First of all, the RCL interior and OV cabins are WAY smaller than Carnival - at least on this ship. My cabin was fine for one person, but with two or three it would have been tight. I think the Cruise Director referred to them as "changing rooms" instead of "state rooms". RCL does not permit any carry on alcohol unlike Carnival - just an annoyance.
Dining - did MyTime on both brands - RCL was better and the waiters (Estelito and Myatori(?)) were great. Carnival made it seem like an after-thought and made no attempt to get you with the same servers each night. Food was pretty equivalent for both. No lobster - but it was a 4 nighter compared with the 7 nighter I did with CCL. More people seemed to respect the "formal" dress on that night which made it seem more elegant.
Activities were somewhat less on this cruise - but we were in ports every day so I didn't expect a lot. The Cruise Director was amazing and made a big difference in the participation level in the various "parties" he organized. Some people tag CCL as the "party cruise line" - but I would have to say the parties on the Majesty were more fun and had greater participation. Embarking and disembarking were about the same and fairly easy. Cabin attendant was attentive but not overtly present.
Overall, I had a wonderful cruise (a person would have to work hard to have a bad one) and would do it again!

Family isn’t enough part 2
This morning I found myself reading the book of Samuel. Learning about Hannah and what she did. It reminded me of yesterday with Ruth. God was showing me another virtuous woman who put God before their family. She was a woman who was ridiculed and embarrassed by someone who saw here as the competition. Elkanah her husband lover her so much and still loved her even though she was barren.
She prayed to God for a child while barren and promised to give the child to God for ever. God visited her when the couple came together, for he remembered her. She was true to her word and brought the child back when he was of age. She could have run away with the child for not having anything but God – the provider of this joy was the source. She gave the child up and STILL remained faithful to God. Hannah was blessed with several more boys and girls also. This was because she stayed faithful. Family isn’t enough to stop someone going strong for Christ so don’t let it.

COOKE CO., TX - Emergency officials have canceled the amber alert for one-year-old boy who they said was kidnapped by his father.
Cooke County Sheriff Mike Compton says Jason Bailey Colwell has been found. He was returned to CPS in California today. The boy is the ward of CPS.
His father William Bailey Colwell of Gainesville, was supposed to turn his son over to CPS yesterday, but didn't.
Instead, he ended up giving the boy to authorities in Solano County, California.
No word yet on whether or not charges will be filed against his father.

The innkeeper, seeing Don Quixote slung across the ass, asked Sancho what was amiss with him. Sancho answered that it was nothing, only that he had fallen down from a rock and had his ribs a little bruised. The innkeeper had a wife whose disposition was not such as those of her calling commonly have, for she was by nature kind-hearted and felt for the sufferings of her neighbours, so she at once set about tending Don Quixote, and made her young daughter, a very comely girl, help her in taking care of her guest. There was besides in the inn, as servant, an Asturian lass with a broad face, flat poll, and snub nose, blind of one eye and not very sound in the other. The elegance of her shape, to be sure, made up for all her defects; she did not measure seven palms from head to foot, and her shoulders, which overweighted her somewhat, made her contemplate the ground more than she liked. This graceful lass, then, helped the young girl, and the two made up a very bad bed for Don Quixote in a garret that showed evident signs of having formerly served for many years as a straw-loft, in which there was also quartered a carrier whose bed was placed a little beyond our Don Quixote’s, and, though only made of the pack-saddles and cloths of his mules, had much the advantage of it, as Don Quixote’s consisted simply of four rough boards on two not very even trestles, a mattress, that for thinness might have passed for a quilt, full of pellets which, were they not seen through the rents to be wool, would to the touch have seemed pebbles in hardness, two sheets made of buckler leather, and a coverlet the threads of which anyone that chose might have counted without missing one in the reckoning.
On this accursed bed Don Quixote stretched himself, and the hostess and her daughter soon covered him with plasters from top to toe, while Maritornes — for that was the name of the Asturian — held the light for them, and while plastering him, the hostess, observing how full of wheals Don Quixote was in some places, remarked that this had more the look of blows than of a fall.
It was not blows, Sancho said, but that the rock had many points and projections, and that each of them had left its mark. “Pray, senora,” he added, “manage to save some tow, as there will be no want of some one to use it, for my loins too are rather sore.”
“Then you must have fallen too,” said the hostess.
“I did not fall,” said Sancho Panza, “but from the shock I got at seeing my master fall, my body aches so that I feel as if I had had a thousand thwacks.”
“That may well be,” said the young girl, “for it has many a time happened to me to dream that I was falling down from a tower and never coming to the ground, and when I awoke from the dream to find myself as weak and shaken as if I had really fallen.”
“There is the point, senora,” replied Sancho Panza, “that I without dreaming at all, but being more awake than I am now, find myself with scarcely less wheals than my master, Don Quixote.”
“How is the gentleman called?” asked Maritornes the Asturian.
“Don Quixote of La Mancha,” answered Sancho Panza, “and he is a knight-adventurer, and one of the best and stoutest that have been seen in the world this long time past.”
“What is a knight-adventurer?” said the lass.
“Are you so new in the world as not to know?” answered Sancho Panza. “Well, then, you must know, sister, that a knight-adventurer is a thing that in two words is seen drubbed and emperor, that is to-day the most miserable and needy being in the world, and to-morrow will have two or three crowns of kingdoms to give his squire.”
“Then how is it,” said the hostess, “that belonging to so good a master as this, you have not, to judge by appearances, even so much as a county?”
“It is too soon yet,” answered Sancho, “for we have only been a month going in quest of adventures, and so far we have met with nothing that can be called one, for it will happen that when one thing is looked for another thing is found; however, if my master Don Quixote gets well of this wound, or fall, and I am left none the worse of it, I would not change my hopes for the best title in Spain.”
To all this conversation Don Quixote was listening very attentively, and sitting up in bed as well as he could, and taking the hostess by the hand he said to her, “Believe me, fair lady, you may call yourself fortunate in having in this castle of yours sheltered my person, which is such that if I do not myself praise it, it is because of what is commonly said, that self-praise debaseth; but my squire will inform you who I am. I only tell you that I shall preserve for ever inscribed on my memory the service you have rendered me in order to tender you my gratitude while life shall last me; and would to Heaven love held me not so enthralled and subject to its laws and to the eyes of that fair ingrate whom I name between my teeth, but that those of this lovely damsel might be the masters of my liberty.”
The hostess, her daughter, and the worthy Maritornes listened in bewilderment to the words of the knight-errant; for they understood about as much of them as if he had been talking Greek, though they could perceive they were all meant for expressions of good-will and blandishments; and not being accustomed to this kind of language, they stared at him and wondered to themselves, for he seemed to them a man of a different sort from those they were used to, and thanking him in pothouse phrase for his civility they left him, while the Asturian gave her attention to Sancho, who needed it no less than his master.
The carrier had made an arrangement with her for recreation that night, and she had given him her word that when the guests were quiet and the family asleep she would come in search of him and meet his wishes unreservedly. And it is said of this good lass that she never made promises of the kind without fulfilling them, even though she made them in a forest and without any witness present, for she plumed herself greatly on being a lady and held it no disgrace to be in such an employment as servant in an inn, because, she said, misfortunes and ill-luck had brought her to that position. The hard, narrow, wretched, rickety bed of Don Quixote stood first in the middle of this star-lit stable, and close beside it Sancho made his, which merely consisted of a rush mat and a blanket that looked as if it was of threadbare canvas rather than of wool. Next to these two beds was that of the carrier, made up, as has been said, of the pack-saddles and all the trappings of the two best mules he had, though there were twelve of them, sleek, plump, and in prime condition, for he was one of the rich carriers of Arevalo, according to the author of this history, who particularly mentions this carrier because he knew him very well, and they even say was in some degree a relation of his; besides which Cide Hamete Benengeli was a historian of great research and accuracy in all things, as is very evident since he would not pass over in silence those that have been already mentioned, however trifling and insignificant they might be, an example that might be followed by those grave historians who relate transactions so curtly and briefly that we hardly get a taste of them, all the substance of the work being left in the inkstand from carelessness, perverseness, or ignorance. A thousand blessings on the author of “Tablante de Ricamonte” and that of the other book in which the deeds of the Conde Tomillas are recounted; with what minuteness they describe everything!
To proceed, then: after having paid a visit to his team and given them their second feed, the carrier stretched himself on his pack-saddles and lay waiting for his conscientious Maritornes. Sancho was by this time plastered and had lain down, and though he strove to sleep the pain of his ribs would not let him, while Don Quixote with the pain of his had his eyes as wide open as a hare’s .
The inn was all in silence, and in the whole of it there was no light except that given by a lantern that hung burning in the middle of the gateway. This strange stillness, and the thoughts, always present to our knight’s mind, of the incidents described at every turn in the books that were the cause of his misfortune, conjured up to his imagination as extraordinary a delusion as can well be conceived, which was that he fancied himself to have reached a famous castle (for, as has been said, all the inns he lodged in were castles to his eyes), and that the daughter of the innkeeper was daughter of the lord of the castle, and that she, won by his high-bred bearing, had fallen in love with him, and had promised to come to his bed for a while that night without the knowledge of her parents; and holding all this fantasy that he had constructed as solid fact, he began to feel uneasy and to consider the perilous risk which his virtue was about to encounter, and he resolved in his heart to commit no treason to his lady Dulcinea del Toboso, even though the queen Guinevere herself and the dame Quintanona should present themselves before him.
While he was taken up with these vagaries, then, the time and the hour — an unlucky one for him — arrived for the Asturian to come, who in her smock, with bare feet and her hair gathered into a fustian coif, with noiseless and cautious steps entered the chamber where the three were quartered, in quest of the carrier; but scarcely had she gained the door when Don Quixote perceived her, and sitting up in his bed in spite of his plasters and the pain of his ribs, he stretched out his arms to receive his beauteous damsel. The Asturian, who went all doubled up and in silence with her hands before her feeling for her lover, encountered the arms of Don Quixote, who grasped her tightly by the wrist, and drawing her towards him, while she dared not utter a word, made her sit down on the bed. He then felt her smock, and although it was of sackcloth it appeared to him to be of the finest and softest silk: on her wrists she wore some glass beads, but to him they had the sheen of precious Orient pearls: her hair, which in some measure resembled a horse’s mane, he rated as threads of the brightest gold of Araby, whose refulgence dimmed the sun himself: her breath, which no doubt smelt of yesterday’s stale salad, seemed to him to diffuse a sweet aromatic fragrance from her mouth; and, in short, he drew her portrait in his imagination with the same features and in the same style as that which he had seen in his books of the other princesses who, smitten by love, came with all the adornments that are here set down, to see the sorely wounded knight; and so great was the poor gentleman’s blindness that neither touch, nor smell, nor anything else about the good lass that would have made any but a carrier vomit, were enough to undeceive him; on the contrary, he was persuaded he had the goddess of beauty in his arms, and holding her firmly in his grasp he went on to say in low, tender voice:
“Would that found myself, lovely and exalted lady, in a position to repay such a favour as that which you, by the sight of your great beauty, have granted me; but fortune, which is never weary of persecuting the good, has chosen to place me upon this bed, where I lie so bruised and broken that though my inclination would gladly comply with yours it is impossible; besides, to this impossibility another yet greater is to be added, which is the faith that I have pledged to the peerless Dulcinea del Toboso, sole lady of my most secret thoughts; and were it not that this stood in the way I should not be so insensible a knight as to miss the happy opportunity which your great goodness has offered me.”
Maritornes was fretting and sweating at finding herself held so fast by Don Quixote, and not understanding or heeding the words he addressed to her, she strove without speaking to free herself. The worthy carrier, whose unholy thoughts kept him awake, was aware of his doxy the moment she entered the door, and was listening attentively to all Don Quixote said; and jealous that the Asturian should have broken her word with him for another, drew nearer to Don Quixote’s bed and stood still to see what would come of this talk which he could not understand; but when he perceived the wench struggling to get free and Don Quixote striving to hold her, not relishing the joke he raised his arm and delivered such a terrible cuff on the lank jaws of the amorous knight that be bathed all his mouth in blood, and not content with this he mounted on his ribs and with his feet tramped all over them at a pace rather smarter than a trot. The bed which was somewhat crazy and not very firm on its feet, unable to support the additional weight of the carrier, came to the ground, and at the mighty crash of this the innkeeper awoke and at once concluded that it must be some brawl of Maritornes’, because after calling loudly to her he got no answer. With this suspicion he got up, and lighting a lamp hastened to the quarter where he had heard the disturbance. The wench, seeing that her master was coming and knowing that his temper was terrible, frightened and panic-stricken made for the bed of Sancho Panza, who still slept, and crouching upon it made a ball of herself.
The innkeeper came in exclaiming, “Where art thou, strumpet? Of course this is some of thy work.” At this Sancho awoke, and feeling this mass almost on top of him fancied he had the nightmare and began to distribute fisticuffs all round, of which a certain share fell upon Maritornes, who, irritated by the pain and flinging modesty aside, paid back so many in return to Sancho that she woke him up in spite of himself. He then, finding himself so handled, by whom he knew not, raising himself up as well as he could, grappled with Maritornes, and he and she between them began the bitterest and drollest scrimmage in the world. The carrier, however, perceiving by the light of the innkeeper candle how it fared with his ladylove, quitting Don Quixote, ran to bring her the help she needed; and the innkeeper did the same but with a different intention, for his was to chastise the lass, as he believed that beyond a doubt she alone was the cause of all the harmony. And so, as the saying is, cat to rat, rat to rope, rope to stick, the carrier pounded Sancho, Sancho the lass, she him, and the innkeeper her, and all worked away so briskly that they did not give themselves a moment’s rest; and the best of it was that the innkeeper’s lamp went out, and as they were left in the dark they all laid on one upon the other in a mass so unmercifully that there was not a sound spot left where a hand could light.
It so happened that there was lodging that night in the inn a caudrillero of what they call the Old Holy Brotherhood of Toledo, who, also hearing the extraordinary noise of the conflict, seized his staff and the tin case with his warrants, and made his way in the dark into the room crying: “Hold! in the name of the Jurisdiction! Hold! in the name of the Holy Brotherhood!”
The first that he came upon was the pummelled Don Quixote, who lay stretched senseless on his back upon his broken-down bed, and, his hand falling on the beard as he felt about, he continued to cry, “Help for the Jurisdiction!” but perceiving that he whom he had laid hold of did not move or stir, he concluded that he was dead and that those in the room were his murderers, and with this suspicion he raised his voice still higher, calling out, “Shut the inn gate; see that no one goes out; they have killed a man here!” This cry startled them all, and each dropped the contest at the point at which the voice reached him. The innkeeper retreated to his room, the carrier to his pack-saddles, the lass to her crib; the unlucky Don Quixote and Sancho alone were unable to move from where they were. The cuadrillero on this let go Don Quixote’s beard, and went out to look for a light to search for and apprehend the culprits; but not finding one, as the innkeeper had purposely extinguished the lantern on retreating to his room, he was compelled to have recourse to the hearth, where after much time and trouble he lit another lamp.
Last updated Tuesday, August 25, 2015 at 14:07

Defense attorneys said he courageously defended himself and two female co-workers from two robbers. Defense attorneys noted one robber, who fled, pointed a gun.
Lead defense attorney Irven Box said Thursday that Ersland believes he is being threatened by an inmate who is related to Parker. “He says that someone has been shouting down the hall, ‘You're going to die, Jerome Ersland.'”
Ersland wrote in his note Thursday, “It is excruciating” and “like being in Hell as I am constantly threatened by Speedy's cousin.”
He also wrote that he has faith his attorneys “will get me out of here.” He wrote he got 35 letters of support Wednesday and three Bibles.
Ersland for years has worn a large brace for what he says is an inoperable broken back. He also has taken opiate-based pain medication for years, The Oklahoman has learned.
Sheriff John Whetsel said Ersland is in a cell by himself in a very secure location. “No one can get to him,” the sheriff said. “He's safe.”
The sheriff also said Ersland's medical needs, like any other inmate's needs, are being addressed.
In a note Sunday, Ersland wrote “I will not survive long here” because the jail doctor cut him off all 13 medications he needs to treat military injuries and an inner ear disorder known as Meniere's disease.
“Inmates have started fires all 4 days I have been here so far,” he also wrote Sunday.
He wrote he had been in his cell only five minutes when the sheriff brought him legal papers notifying him Parker's mother had filed a wrongful-death lawsuit against him and the pharmacy. “She wants everything I have” and “the Reliable owners have,” he wrote.

We really enjoyed our stay at your home. The beautiful wrap around deck was one of our favorite places to hang out. This home was perfectly located for our needs during this trip. Thank you so much for allowing our large family (9 people) to stay in your home.
Amazing Views 3 Br 2.5 Bath Home Overlooking The 18th Hole

I had some warning that Benny and Annette were on their way, although I mostly ignored it. The first time was because my phone said "Ravi" and I'd had enough of him calling and saying I should come to Baltimore and share a bed with him, and since it was late i didn't even think about how those calls usually come in on Deirdre's phone and always as "Gary". The next time, I realized who it was, and deliberately ignored it, because who wants to get into all this shit? But then Annette sent a text saying they'd be in at around nine, and there was no ignoring it. I suppose I could have gone to see a movie or something, but then they could just come in and make themselves at home.
It was closer to 9:30 when they actually arrived, although I was playing Xbox with headphones on and didn't hear them knocking on the door until Annette finally gave up and used the key, calling that they were coming in and to please not be naked, like I just sit around playing with my pussy all day. It was kind of weird, because she sounded just like Ravi but not - like he was impersonating someone. Then they came in, and...
Benny was me. It was the most messed-up thing I've ever felt, seeing myself standing there, seven or eight inches taller than me and kind of large. He reached out a hand and I folded my arms, not wanting to take it. "Yeah", he said, " this must be weird for you."
I didn't say anything. Annette/Ravi looked around the front room, said it was crowded, and then asked where Ravi's room was. I pointed and then she wheeled her suitcase over, opened the door, and then called back, saying it was a petty tight fit. Benny walked over agreed, looked at her, then back at me. I didn't say anything.
Annette shrugged, said it had been a long day and then found the bathroom herself. That left me with Benny, who looked at the TV, Xbox, and stereo. "Pretty nice setup."
I didn't like the way he said it. "Don't get any ideas."
"What do you mean? Oh! Hey, don't worry bout that, I was just, you know...". He looked around. "So, is there, like, a sleeping bag or something?"
"Do I look like I camp?"
"You never know; I dated this little spitfire once who-- Oh, you mean do I look like you camp? I guess not, but, again, you never know." The bathroom door opened and Annette came out, asking about towels and whether they were shared or if Ravi had his own. I said we each had our own, but it was no big deal.
"Cool! Mom's been on me about stuff like this all summer, saying to keep things separate...". She talked off and then came up with a very un-Ravi-like grin. "Huh, looks like I skipped right over dorms and this is my first apartment. Not exactly what I was expecting, or when!" She took out Ravi's phone, backed into the doorway, and took a picture. Then it was "c'mon, one of all of us together!"
I said I was not fuckin' dealing with that right then and went into my bedroom.
I rated in there until I heard the outside door close the next morning, then crawled out to the living area only to be confronted with the crazy sight of myself eating breakfast.
Just like with Annette, Benny didn't sound quite right to me. Part was just how hearing a recording of your voice is different than when you speak it, because of it arriving via the air rather than your jaw or some shit, but part was that he spoke too slow and sort of had a Maine accent, although he says a real one is way thicker. A different accent, although I don't know if anyone who didn't know about body-morphing hotels would pick up on it.
"Uh, hey." I wasn't sure what to say.
"So, Annette's weirdly excited, but she's a really good kid. Eighteen, but crazy smart and with her act together."
"And what about you?"
"Twenty-three, and I don't think I'm a screw-up. I won't get you in any sort of mess for when we change back."
"Yeah, I'm probably going to need your driver's license. I mean, you can't really use it, and since this apartment really isn't big enough for two Jordan Changs, I might need it to find my own place, unless you want to keep me around."
"And why would I want that? You creep me the fuck out."
"Personal trainer, bro. Annette figures we can get our old lives back if we make reservations in backwards order next year, and wouldn't you like to come back to being a guy in better shape?"
"Are you calling me a fatass?"
"Dude, I'm the one carrying it around, so I think it's okay to say maybe you could afford to lose a few pounds. Besides, look at you now. Put the whole girl thing aside, and don't you just feel better?"
"No, I don't feel fucking better as a girl!"
"Hey, my bad. I just figured you're trim and seem to be moving around pretty well. Anyway, I also figured you might be ducking phone calls or something, and it might be handy to have me around when that happens. Unless they're in Chinese, in which case I can't help."
That made a certain amount of sense. I'd been able to keep work stuff on Lync, but I supposed that I had been kind of lucky there. "Fine. You can have my license, and I guess we can find a cot or sleeping bag or something." I found my wallet, extracted that card, and then swallowed deep as I also pulled out my debut card and told him the PIN. "I'm going to be checking the balance every day."
"Totally fair. Annette is getting a new set of keys, but if you've got a spare, I'd like to go for a run. Gotta get back into the habit."
He was back fifteen minutes later, asking about the shower, saying something about how he meant no disrespect but that this was going to be a challenge.
Post a Comment

One witness, a haemophiliac using only the name "Mark", told the inquiry how he had been infected with HIV and hepatitis C after being treated at Edinburgh Royal Infirmary in 1984, when he was 13. He said medics did not tell him that he had contracted the condition for seven years.
He said: "They knew I was HIV positive and had hepatitis C but kept quiet. They've taken my life away from me. When they finally told me I was open-mouthed in disbelief. My life has been ruined."
The inquiry also heard from "Elaine", whose husband died in 1992, six years after he was diagnosed with HIV as a result of a blood transfusion at Edinburgh Royal Infirmary.
She said she had lived for two years with the infection before being told by doctors.
"This scandal has taken a soulmate, a great father and a loving grandfather from us. This should never have happened and should never be allowed to happen again," she said.
The inquiry into the outbreak of clostridium difficile at the Vale of Leven hospital, which infected 55 patients between December 2007 and June 2008, also heard evidence from witnesses.
Michelle Stewart, who helped set up the C-Diff Justice Group, said the hospital was unable to give basic personal care to her mother-in-law, Sarah McGinty, 67, who died on February 1 2008.
She told the inquiry: "One of the big questions we've got is why an infection was allowed to run rampant for six months without detection?"

Amanda Bynes has yet agin changed her look as now she has shaved half her hair off and now look’s like Miley Cyrus!!
The former actress posted the two photo above on her Twitter account showing the new look off to her 700,000 followers.
Along with the photo Bynes said:
I buzzed half my head like @cassie! No more old photos! This is the new me! I love it!
When you look at the bottom photo (above) she really does look like Miley.
What do you think of her new look?
Over the last few weeks Amanda Bynes has threatened former friends with lawsuits, said things about Drake and she also has cut her Mum and Dad out of her life and all this has been reported on Celebrity Gossip site. But now the actress wants people to only read things about her on her Twitter.
Amanda has gone from not using her Twitter to never being off it as now she has been saying that if anyone want’s to use photos of her on their website she wan’t to take them off her Twitter.
Bynes has now said that she no longer talk’s to her friends now so all them photo of her walking around New York by herself make it seem like she no longer has any friends.
This is what she said on Twitter:
Since Amanda Bynes changed her appearance she has not been out of the spotlight and there has been lots of reports saying that her parents are saying things about her but this is clear that it is untrue!
The actress has tweeted to say that she no longer talks to her Mum and Dad and they do not sell stories to the media about her.
This is what the actress had to say:
Reports have said that all of her friend and family are really worried about Bynes and what’s going to happen in the future with her life.

My sister is ten years older than I am. We’ve always been close so when she had a problem I was the one she called. My name is Gab, short for Gabriel and I’m twenty years old. I guess I have always been a loner. I live way out in the middle of nowhere. I did computer programming from home and liked to set my own hours. It was early morning when Paula called. I was barely awake when I answered the phone, “Hello?”
I heard Paula’s breath, “Gab?”
I sat down in the kitchen chair, “Do you know what time it is Paula?”
She took a breath again, this time bigger and I almost heard the sob, “I need help Gab.”
I sat up, “What’s wrong? Is George okay?”
Paula almost whispered, “It’s Sandy, she’s… she’s pregnant.”
Sandy was her oldest daughter. My mind was a little numb, “Isn’t Sandy like twelve?”
I sat thinking and couldn’t think of what Paula might want me to do, “How can I help?”
I plainly heard her sob, “George wants her out. He doesn’t want the other girls to get ideas.”
I still didn’t understand, “What do you want me to do?”
There was a silent pause and then, “Can she stay with you?”
I sat there dazed, thinking about everything, “What about school? I don’t exactly live near a school.”
Paula seemed calmer, like she knew I would do it, “When I first found out, I pulled her out and started home schooling her.”
I sighed and finally, “when can you bring her out?”
Paula sounded relieved, “I’m down at that corner store by the gas station. I’ll be there in a few minutes.”
It was noon before I got everything straightened out and Paula had already left. Sandy seemed withdrawn but we seemed to get along. She was only two months pregnant so she wasn’t showing. It wasn’t until that night that she changed my life. I had always liked Sandy, she seemed a smart girl with character. I shut everything off and gone to bed when my door opened.
I lifted my head as Sandy slipped under my covers and snuggled against me. My eyes opened wide when I felt her naked body. I looked at her as she began caressing my chest, “Uncle Gab I really like sex.”
I sighed and finally turned and rolled her onto her back and tugged on a nipple, “Alright Minx.”
I slid my hand down her body and caressed and rubbed her clit which made her shudder and moan. When I slipped my finger inside her warm, moist pussy, Sandy spread her legs wider and sighed. I moved between her legs and positioned my cock before pushing in. It had been a long time since I had sex and Sandy felt so good. I slowly pushed deeper and she shivered and held me tight, “God your big uncle Gab.”
I laughed and kissed her as I finally pushed against her cervix, “And you are nice and tight, Minx.”
Sandy giggled and humped her pussy up as I started to pull back. I fucked her slowly and all the way to her womb with each stroke. It wasn’t long before she was tossing her head while her pussy gripped my cock. She shuddered and her body spasmed, “I’m cumming uncle Gab!”
I kept fucking her as her body shook under me. When I felt my balls tighten, Sandy was trembling. I pushed against her womb and spewed thick jets of cum. She gasped and shivered as I pumped load after load inside her until she giggled, “That would have knocked up a whole school of girls.”
I grinned as I stopped cumming and slowly pulled out. I turned her and pulled her back against me. She lifted her leg and reached back to guide my cock back to her wet, slimy pussy. I had to sigh as she wiggled the head of my cock back into her pussy. I held her as she began telling me about learning about sex from a neighbor boy.
My cock kept throbbing and I started to slowly fuck her. Sandy finally stopped talking and started meeting each slow thrust. It was a few minutes before she shuddered and her pussy squeezed my cock. She kept fucking my cock as I fucked into her deeper and a little harder. When she came the second time, shuddering and shaking and moaning, I held her tight as I pumped spurt after spurt into her already slimy pussy.
When I finished, I rolled her onto her back and moved between her legs. I pushed into her slimy hole and just started fucking her nice and slow. I buried my thick cock to grind against her and Sandy held me tight as she jerked and shook. “Oh, uncle Gab!”
I ignored her moans and kept fucking her with short, grinding thrusts. Sandy continued to shake and moan as her pussy spasmed around my cock. When I went to long, slow, deep strokes she spasmed and her tight pussy grasped my cock. I smiled each time her pussy would squeeze my cock and she would jerk and shudder.
I lasted almost thirty minutes before spurting and spewing deep inside her. She shuddered and sighed as I filled her once more. When I was done I rolled onto my back and lifted her slightly. I pulled out of her and she sighed again before putting her head down, “I could get used to this uncle Gab.”
I smiled and caressed her as I tugged the covers up, “that’s good, because I intend to keep fucking you now.”
She kissed my chest and relaxed while I held her and softly caressed her. I was thinking about everything and fell asleep. She woke me when she slipped out of bed and went to the bathroom. I slid out of bed and followed her and she looked up and blushed. I smiled, “Minx? I was thinking that until you decide to find another man we could… live together as if we were married.”
Sandy’s eyes widen and she got a big smile on her face. She stood and I stepped close to hold her. She kissed me and grinned into my face, “We could have a seven month honeymoon.”
I laughed and squeezed her before lifting her and putting her on the edge of the counter. I moved between her legs and positioned my cock before pushing into her. I fucked her nice and slow while holding her and kissing her deeply. I started pulling and tugging on her nipples while fucking her nice and deep and a minute later she shuddered hard and gasped as her pussy tightened, “Yes!”
I buried my cock to hold her shaking body and kiss her passionately. When she started relaxing, I began fucking her again. I felt her wet pussy as it squeezed my cock. Her pussy felt tight and really warm and slippery as I fucked her. I was careful not to push into her womb as I fucked her but I was hitting it almost every time I pushed into her. She shuddered and her arms tightened, “Fuck!”
I pushed into her tight pussy and spewed another load of cum as she jerked and shook. I shivered as I spurted and spewed and felt it leaking around my cock. When I stopped and pulled out, cum ran out of her and she giggled. I pulled her to the shower and waited until the warm water started.
I was smiling as I washed her body and she was grinning. After drying off, I dressed and met Sandy in the kitchen. She was wearing a dress that went from her neck to the floor. I grinned, “You look prim and proper.”
She grinned, “Dad bought them.”
Sandy lifted the bottom of the dress up until I could see she wasn’t wearing panties. I grinned, “Now that looks promising.”
She giggled as she dropped the dress and came into my arms, “You really want to pretend to be my husband?”
I smiled and kissed her, “Yes. Did you want to be my wife?”
She nodded and I kissed her and pulled her groin against me. I rubbed and felt her butt and she grinned. I let her go and turned to pull down cereal and get out the milk. After breakfast and cleaning up I took Sandy’s hand and we went for a walk. When we came to a large boulder overlooking the valley she grinned and bent over it pulling the back of the dress up over her butt.
I laughed and moved behind her as I opened my pants. I spread my legs and bent my cock before pushing into her warm pussy. I slowly buried my cock and held her hips before starting to fuck her with long, slow thrusts. Her pussy was warm and tight as I fucked her and a minute after I started she moaned and shuddered as her pussy tightened.
I rubbed her bare butt as I continued to fuck her and started going faster. Sandy was grunting and shaking when I pulled out and turned her around. I lifted her dress and sat her on the rock before pushing back into her pussy. She moaned and shuddered as my cock went into her and then she arched her back, “YES!”
I laughed and stood, lifting her up. She kept shuddering as she wrapped her legs around my hips. I held her against my body fully impaled and she finally jerked and sighed as I began spurting cum against the back of her pussy. I grunted as I spurted and pumped strong jets of cum until my cock was only throbbing.
Sandy grinned and I lifted her off my cock before setting her back on the ground. As we walked back to the house she grinned and squeezed my hand, “Your stuff is leaking out.”
JI grinned and pulled her against me for a kiss before continuing. When we got home I rubbed her butt, “Go do your school work.”
She grinned and walked away with a sway to her hips. I sighed and headed to my office, a couple of minutes later Sandy came in and smiled as she pulled a kitchen chair to one side of my desk. I watched her settle into what she was doing before going back to the program I was working on.
A couple of hours later I glanced at Sandy to see her fidgeting. I saved my work, opened and pushed my pants down and scooted my chair back, “Come here my beautiful wife.”
She grinned as she looked at me and stood to come around the desk. I lifted her dress above her waist before pulling her to straddle me. I lifted and guided my cock and Sandy sat slowly, pushing my cock into her slimy pussy. I shuddered at the feel of her warm, tight pussy and she leaned against me as she shuddered too.
I grinned and held her waist before beginning to move her back and forth. She jerked and gasped as her tight pussy clamped down, “Fuck!”
She jerked and shuddered for a minute and I finally lifted her and turned her around. I pulled her back down onto my cock and Sandy laughed as she scooted us closer to the desk. She leaned back as I reached around to hold her breasts. She rocked and thrust back and forth slowly and I kissed the back of her neck as her warm pussy spasmed on my cock.
She shuddered and I caressed her hips as she moaned and started thrusting again. She kept trying to spread her legs wider and I grinned before moving her and closing my legs. I pulled her back as I reached down to put her legs over and outside mine. Sandy groaned as she leaned forward and started fucking my cock while she held the desk.
Her tight pussy kept spasming around my cock as she shuddered and moaned. It was fifteen minutes before I reached around to finger and rub her clit as my cock throbbed and my balls tightened. Sandy jerked and spasmed and then froze as I began spewing cum. She slammed back onto my pumping cock as I spurted and spewed inside her, “YES! CUM IN ME!”
When I stopped cumming she slowly relaxed and leaned back for me to hold. It was several minutes before she turned to kiss me, “I needed that.”
I laughed, “I always need that.”
She grinned and slowly lifted up and off my cock. She shuddered as she moved back to her chair and her school work. I went back to my program and we worked together for another couple of hours. I finished the part I was working on and sat back with a sigh and Sandy grinned as she closed her book. We went to make a small lunch and sat outside to eat. After lunch was more work and school work for Sandy.
When we finished she stood and grabbed my hand to pull me to the bedroom and the edge of the bed. She pulled her dress up and off as I undressed. She laid back on the edge of the bed and I grinned as I turned her and laid down beside her. I caressed her firm body and leaned over to lick and suck on her nipples. Sandy shuddered as she held my head and moaned.
I moved up and kissed her as I moved over her body. She spread her legs for me and put her arms around me as I slowly forced my thick cock into her slimy pussy. I began to fuck her with long, deep thrusts. Sandy sighed and lifted her hips each time I pushed into her. Her cummy pussy kept squeezing and letting my cock go. It was only a few minutes before she groaned and shuddered hard.
She got wetter and grinned at me before pulling my face down for a kiss. I fucked her a little harder and she met each thrust with one of her own. Every couple of minutes she jerked and spasmed as her pussy tightened and she wet me. It seemed like a long time before I was ready and Sandy had already cum six times.
I thrust into her and pressed against her womb as I started spewing and pumping cum. She jerked and spasmed as warm cum erupted deep in her pussy and clutched at me. She held me tight as I spurted and pumped jets of cum and when I finished she sighed, “God I love feeling you cum in me.”
I grinned and kissed her before slowly pulling out. I lay beside her and caressed her body, “Want to help with dinner and watch a movie?”
She smiled and turned to kiss me, “And a walk?”
I caressed her pelvis, “You would have to put your dress back on.”
She slipped off the bed, “But not panties.”
I laughed and followed her off the bed and out to the kitchen. It was nice to have her helping me with dinner and cleaning up after. I held her on my lap as we watched the movie and we just cuddled. After it was over Sandy went to the bathroom and then put her dress on as I found my pants and shoes. The air seemed fresh and clean as we walked holding hands.
The sun was setting by the time we returned to the house and Sandy smiled as she pulled me into the bathroom and then bed. Sandy had a girl and two years later she had another. She is pregnant now but this time it is a boy. George and Paula visit all the time with her sisters and have never said anything.

Join the Conversation
To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs
Police: Penfield teacher charged with giving alcohol to student
Here's a breakdown of the stories right now at www.democratandchronicle.com. Virginia Butler
A Penfield High School teacher has been charged with unlawfully dealing with a child for allegedly providing alcohol to a 17-year-old student sometime in September.
According to state police, Eric J. Brewer, 46, gave the student alcohol while they were at Brewer's Perinton home. He was arrested on Tuesday.
Police said the 17-year-old has since graduated and is no longer a student at Penfield High School.
The allegations are the result of an investigation into a relationship Brewer had with the teen, police said.
According to court documents, Brewer admitted to police that he provided the 17-year-old female student with "several alcoholic beverages" at his home on Harvest Drive sometime between Sept. 17 and Oct. 17.
A statement from the student was included with the court documents. In that, she said she had transferred to Penfield High School from another district for her senior year and joined the robotics team in September 2017.
Brewer was the robotics team's mentor and the student said she also had him as a teacher for a computer science and engineering class.
She said she struck up a friendship with teammates over video games and would sometimes play games together and talk with them over the Discord voice and text chat app, where Brewer used the screen name Techsensei.
In her statement, the girl said she had a question about homework in early September and messaged Brewer using Discord. A couple of days later, she said, he responded, using personal background information on her that he'd looked up in the school records as a pretense to befriend her. She said Brewer began allowing her to sit in his classroom during lunch and free periods and would invite her into his office and ask her to tell him about her life.
They began communicating more regularly and within a week or so, she said, Brewer "started to ask me what I was into sexual wise" and began turning all their conversations to the topic of sex.
Sometime in late September or early October, the girl said, Brewer picked her up at her home and drove her to his house on Harvest Drive. There, he provided her with multiple bottles of a Seagram's alcoholic beverage that he retrieved from a refrigerator in his garage.
The teen said Brewer lied to his roommate and told him she was a 22-year-old former student who had come to visit him.
In the statement, the student said Brewer told her his "goal was to make sure I was comfortable." The teen said Brewer kept encouraging her to drink more as they sat on his couch and watched a movie.
The student said Brewer eventually suggested they go sit on his bed and talk. Once in the room, she said, Brewer removed his pants and began removing her clothes.
Brewer and the student had sexual intercourse, the student said.
"Between the alcohol and everything that was going on, I just let it happen and didn't really say anything," she told police.
The age of consent in New York is 17.
In a statement, Penfield schools spokeswoman Nancy Bradstreet said the district is cooperating fully with the investigation and that Brewer, a technology teacher at the high school, has been placed on administrative leave.
He has been a teacher in the district for 13 years.
Counselors are being made available to any students or staff members who may need support.
Anyone with additional information about the case is asked to call state police at (585) 279-0144.

His net worth in 2011 was $27 billion compared to a net worth of $29 billion in 2010. This guy was born on the 19th April of 1957 in Aden, Yemen. He is an Indian businessman and is the chairman of Reliance Industries. He is also the director of the Bank of America. He was named as one of the most powerful men in the world in the year 2010 by Forbess. He is the second richest man in all of Asia; the first one is also discussed in this list and he too is an Indian businessman. He is also the richest sports owner in the world. He is richer than the owners of Chelsea and AC Milan. His company owns Mumbai Indians.

I don't think Anderson will submit Forrest. You can say Forrest has an overrated ground game, I won't argue with that. Although, he has never been submitted in his MMA career and I think Anderson has an overrated ground game himself. Forrest dominated Shogun on the ground. Sure, you can say Shogun was gassed, I'm not interested in excuses. He never had anything for Forrest on the ground. He also dominated Rampage on the ground. Mounted him for a whole round, a guy that is stronger than both Forrest and Anderson. I know Anderson has way better BJJ than Rampage, I'm not arguing with that. I'm just saying Rampage is a lot stronger than Anderson and Forrest had no problem with his strength on the ground. Off his back, he had a triangle which Rampage slammed his way out of. He is famous for that so you can't fault Forrest there. He fought a smarter fight than Arona at least and didn't let Rampage almost power bomb him through the octagon. He also completely neutralized his ground and pound. I think Forrest can more than hold his own against Silva who doesn't have this world class ground game himself. I'm not saying Forrest will triangle Anderson, I'm just showing examples of how Forrest has displayed his good ground game in the past.
I'm not saying Forrest will win on the ground either, although I am saying he can hold his own there and that would be the best game plan for him to try and turn it into a grappling match. That's his best chance because it is possible that he could win there. I think he has a better chance on the ground than he does standing, I'm sure you can agree with that.
Psalm 30:5 "For his anger endureth but a moment; in his favour is life: weeping may endure for a night, but joy cometh in the morning."
Top 3 Favorite Fighters
1. Chuck "The Iceman" Liddell
2. Glover Teixeira
3. Diego Sanchez

Father's Day will pass without much fanfare in Ben Romero's Ventura home.
"I'm not really even thinking about it that much," he said.
On June 8 last year, his youngest daughter, Krista, died at the age of 18 after a three-year battle with leukemia.
Romero, 51, who runs a swimming pool service company, was at his daughter's bedside with the rest of the family when she died.
"She died a valiant death," he said, tears welling up in his eyes as he remembered the moment. "Three hours before that, she said, Turn on the "Rocky" anthem.' She was gasping for breath with double pneumonia and she said, Mom, put the "Rocky" theme on.'"
"I had preparation, three years worth of preparation, but I didn't want to accept it," he said. "I don't believe in the guys-shouldn't-cry theory anymore."
Romero and his wife, Lorraine, have four other children ages 20 to 33 — a daughter and three sons, one serving in Iraq.
"We all support each other. We grieve together. My wife and I cry together. We cry alone," he said.
Romero, who's a member of Oxnard Apostolic Church, credits his faith in God for helping him cope with his loss. He's also found comfort through the bereavement support group The Compassionate Friends.
The Ventura County chapter of the national nonprofit organization was founded by Marvin Short, 69, of Oxnard, who lost his only son, Mike, five years ago.
At that time, the nearest Compassionate Friends support group was based in Woodland Hills, so in 2005, Short decided to set up another chapter, which now meets twice a month in Camarillo.
Mike Short was a doctor in Northridge and also volunteered as a reserve officer with the San Fernando Police Department.
He had been wounded in an incident while on duty on May 27, 2003, and died suddenly in his sleep in the early hours of May 28, six days before his 41st birthday.
"We were inseparable," said Marvin Short, whose first wife died when Mike was a young boy. "I'll remember that phone call the rest of my life, and there was no way I was prepared. It was the farthest thing from my mind, something like that."
Frank Garrety, 59, also lost his adult son suddenly. Tim Garrety was 33 when he died in a motorcycle accident on April 20, 2005, leaving behind his wife and 3-year-old son, Gavin.
"When you lose a child, it's not a normal loss. It leaves a void in your life that never changes," he said.
Garrety, who lives in Ventura and owns and runs a brake and muffler shop in Oxnard, said meeting with other bereaved parents has helped him understand that there's no specific grief process.
"More than anything I miss the ability to share Father's Day with him, and I can no longer do that," he said. "It became a holiday that we shared together since we were both fathers."
He plans to spend Father's Day this Sunday taking his grandson fishing.
On Father's Day, Marvin Short, who has covered the walls of his home office with photos and mementoes of his son, will put out several Father's Day cards he received from him when he was growing up.
"For three months after he died, I just sat there in that room," he said. "For the first time in my life, I was lost."
When you lose a parent or a grandparent, you lose history, he said. In contrast, when you lose a child, you lose the future.
"We lost what if?' That is gone forever," he said.
Ben Romero offers a simple message to Ventura County dads on Father's Day: "Just love your child, man."
Need Help? Call us at 1-877-710-6182.
Monday-Friday: 6am-3pm / Saturday: 6:30am-10:30am / Sunday: 7am-11am

First of all, this hotel is definitely located on one of the nicer parts of Las Vegas. My husband and I walked around in the morning to get breakfast & it seemed really safe. The hotel consisted of several buildings, which were a little hard to navigate. The buildings looked nice from the outside, the pool looked clean, and the landscaping was decent. Parking was convenient to our room. There were some bad things though. Whoever designed the hotel was clearly inexperienced and just shoved things wherever they would fit. There was only one elevator per building. Our room was allllll the way at the other end of the hall. The elevator is inside what appears to be an old closet. The beds were small for two people (only full size), but they were soft & comfortable. The room was huge! The bathroom had a tub (without a shower curtain) a walk-in shower, a nice long counter, and the toilet was in a small room with a separate door. The shower didn't have shelves for shampoo, shaving cream, face wash, etc. However, the 2nd day we were there, I got out of the shower and noticed bloody fingerprints on the back of the bathroom door frame.... I was scared after that. The food was EXPENSIVE. The only available Internet cost $13.99 a day and was dirt slow.
I recently spent two nights at the Tropicana for a reunion with old friends. Anyway the room was incredible! It was simply lovely. The casino itself is looking beautiful, especially the stained glass ceiling. The pool setting was to die for! They are in the middle in the middle of renovating, which appears to be coming along quite well. I believe when completed, it will be very nice for either an individual visit or a small convention. Rates were excellent. They need to have some classes on detail and customer service. One detail was while in the gym one day, there were no sanitary hand wipes. The next day there was no water. There was no way to change the tv channel from sports. The room was way too warm and could use some more ac. There needs to be one employee dedicated to this area. Other areas of customer service could use some training as well. While the customer service was not bad, it was far from award winning. Overall, I had a pleasant stay and for the money, it could not be beat! Would recommend it.
I stayed at the Luxor during a business trip for several days and the rooms were somewhat small, but well decorated and in good condition. My only complaint is with the lack of Wi-Fi access for my PC. One of the Luxor's webpages says that wireless access is available and lists Blackberrys, Treos and other devices that it supports. I had mistakenly assumed that I would have wireless internet access for my computer, but when I inquired at the front desk, several hours after checking in, I was told that the hotel doesn't offer Wi-Fi access and that the only way to get internet access for my PC was to pay $12 per day for an in-room ethernet connection. After running to an internet cafe for a few days, I later found that there was an unsecured hotspot near the Starbucks in the lobby of the Luxor, although this seemed to be owned by some other business in the area.

The Hot Stone League
Larry Stone gives his take on a wide array of baseball issues and weighs in about the Mariners too.
February 16, 2009 12:34 PM
Posted by Larry Stone
OK, I stopped off this morning to talk to Jim Riggleman, the new bench coach of the Washington Nationals.
I swear, this is not part of an agenda to re-open all the scabs from 2008. In this case, it was a simple matter of geography. The Nationals' camp is in Viera, just a short jump to the North from Port St. Lucie and right smack in the middle of the route between St. Lucie and Orlando, my final destination.
It just made too much sense to check in with the man who took over from John McLaren as Mariners skipper on June 20. Riggleman wound up managing more games than McLaren, compiling a 36-54 record (.400 win percentage), compared to McLaren's 25-47 (.347).
I've always found Riggleman to be very thoughtful and cogent in talking about baseball issues, Not to mention frank. And I thought he had a great take on the faction within the team that had issues with Ichiro.. And, yes, he didn't shy away from admitting that it was an issue, although he did say at one point he thought it was being overblown.
I'll let you judge for yourself. Here are his comments, unedited, with transitions where needed for context. I started (in the midst of a much longer, wide-ranging interview I'll summarize later) by asking him to address the implication from J.J. Putz and others that there was dissatisfaction with Ichiro:
"It's a tough issue. I never would have thought going in...how could that be? But it's very hard to really identify what the problem is. Some people say it's jealousy. I really don't think players are jealous. What are you jealous of? Everybody is making big money, everyone is having nice careers. There's superstars, and there's stars, and there's regulars, and there's bench players, and there's journeymen. Everyone kind of gravitates to their level.
"I experienced it, and I still don't have a total feel of why there was a group on the club that just wasn't going to warm up to him. He is a guy that's going to do his thing...but the things that are regimented by the team, he's always there. It's just that he does a lot of things on his own. It's extra work, it's his preparation. He's by himself when he does all that. He doesn't really say a lot to the other players. I think it's a style of play. I think people feel he's not playing the game the way we play it here in America. He's not bunting enough early, he's not running as much as we'd like or whatever. They look at it as he's being selfish, and I don't know that's what it is.
"I think one of the main thing is, his numbers are so good, but the team is not getting to the level we want it. So he's going to be the lightning rod for criticism. But if we had that one more offensive player, he would be recognized the way Jimmy Rollins is. If he was playing for Philadelphia as a leadoff hitter, with Philadelphia's lineup last year, he would be a perfect fit. In the Cubs lineup last year, he would be a perfect fit. In our lineup, his 200 hits were not really the solution to the problems in our lineup. So I think a lot of people wanted him to hit more doubles and triples, maybe get 190 hits instead of 210 hits, but maybe 15 more doubles and 20 more RBIs.
"His game is outstanding if you add to the club. So I think other players, when he hit a single and would get stranded on base, would say, 'What the hell? You got a single and it didn't do us any good.' But at his age, and playing the game as long as he has, he's probably not going to change the way he plays. That's why I felt we needed to add another player to the lineup. I think then Ichiro would not be criticized as much.
(I mentioned at that point that he wasn't criticized in 2001, when the Mariners had a more potent lineup and won 116 games). "That's right. And I talked to Ichiro about it. Ichiro brought that up. I said, 'Ich, we don't have that team here. We don't have Buhner and Griffey and Boone. You need to be Boone.' I told him, if we can add another offensive player next year, your style of play is going to be what gets us to the promised land. But if we don't, you may have to sacrifice some of your base hits and go for a little more juice. He was, 'You're the manager. If that's what you want...."
(I asked him how he dealt with the issue): "It was overblown a little bit. It wasn't as bad as people say. I got some of the guys I felt were critical in my office. I said, 'You know what? You're accusing a man of being selfish. Sit down and have a cup of coffee with him. Talk to him. Don't say it to a writer.Talk to him man-to-man, express yourself to him over a cup of coffee. It's not about taking a swing at somebody, or griping to writers. If you think he's selfish...he's not in here saying to me you're selfish, but you're not even watching the game when you're not pitching. He could come in here and say you're selfish.'
"I just pointed out to them, we all have our deficiencies here. Let's each take care of our own spots, and the whole thing can come together.
"There was some divisiveness. I felt a lot of the things we were doing, guys were starting to get on board a little bit. We were making some progess. I think it would have been better in '09."
(I asked him if he thinks the team is going to co-exist better this year): "I think everyone is going to take a deep breath over the winter. I think everyone probably went home and said, 'You know what, I need to get past that. I need to do my job.' Silva, I see he came in 30 pounds lighter. He must have gone home and said, 'Hey, I've got to stop bitching about Ichiro and get my ass in gear here.' Bedard's going to be healthy. I think guys will say, 'You know what? Enough of that stuff.'
(Because of that last comment, I followed up by asking him about Silva's role in all this): "I think Silva was so disappointed in his own performance, he was frustrated. I think he just said some things to the writers, now I have to deal with. If Silva says it, you guys are going to come to me and say, there's a problem out there. And I have to go to Silva and say, 'Don't do that. '
I had empathy for Silva. He was having a rough time, he kept taking the ball, he did everything he could. But he needed to lose weight. He went home and did it. Now the club should reap the benefits of it in '09."
There's a lot there to soak in -- and I'll provide more food for thought later.
(Seattle Times photo by Mark Harrison)

News of All Black Daniel Carter's tournament-ending injury was like a bushfire fanning the Rugby World Cup quarter-finalists.
The All Blacks' major weapon was silenced, the victim of an unusual training ground mishap the day before the side's final pool game with Canada.
Signals about Carter's shock tournament exit came less than 24 hours later with a media alert then stern confirmation from coach Graham Henry and Dr Deb Robinson.
Carter had torn the left adductor muscle in his groin, an injury which may need surgery but also months out of the sport. Dr Robinson described the damage as a "freak" injury.
Dr Robinson said: "Daniel has no history whatsoever of groin problems and had no symptoms on the day. He trained well at captain's run and several of us had commented, particularly as he had had a sore back a couple of weeks ago, on how good he was looking.
It just happened totally out of the blue."
Carter's scan showed no damage other than the groin tendon injury and he will travel to Auckland today for further specialist attention.
"For a guy who has played that much rugby and done that much kicking it is quite remarkable really. There is just no reason," she said.
A downcast Henry spoke about the devastating news for his world-class five-eighths. The coach feared the worst when he saw the training-ground accident. Carter was probably one of the greatest players ever produced by this country, Henry said, and this World Cup was going to be the pinnacle of his career.
"He has had a lot of focus on this tournament for the last couple of years and it is devastating that he can't be involved in that," said Henry. "I think we should spend a bit of time thinking about what he has done for New Zealand rugby and where he was at. It is a tragic situation for a highly talented young sportsman. This was his scene really, a World Cup in New Zealand, this was going to be his big occasion.
"He doesn't talk that way, it is the coach talking so I feel very sad for him.
"We've been dealt the cards we've got and it is very important we play them superbly. So that's the goal, we play the cards we've got and we do our best with those."
The All Blacks were shattered by the news, Henry said, but they were a resilient group focused on achieving their World Cup goals.
The promising Aaron Cruden has been called in to assist Colin Slade who played yesterday against Canada.
Decisions about the future and the five-eighths the All Blacks would use in this tournament would look after themselves, Henry said.
"Colin is the No 1 at the moment," said Henry. "He had been given a menu of information to use yesterday and there had been no point cluttering him with other ideas. That would show a sign to him from me that I don't trust him and I do and he will do the job."

Riley was overdue for his 1st haircut, but I was stalling because I didn't want to cut my baby's hair off. All that hair was me clinging onto him still being a baby, but we have ventured into toddlerhood. So I relented and let Brian use his clippers and buzz away. Riley was very good throughout seeing that this weekend was chock full of cutting molars, skipping naps and meltdowns in numerous public places.
Riley had his big 1st birthday on July 30, and we had a party the next day. We had been on a family vacation (pictures someday) with Grandma and cousin Shaelyn exploring the mountains of Colorado. We came back to prepare for the big 1 for Mr. Riles. We were very lucky and had a bunch of family come in town and some neighbors come celebrate with us. I found a cooking blog where the lady did a Dr. Seuss theme for her son's birthday. She was very creative and I decided to take some ideas, but by no means could recreate her awesomeness. I did keep the Thing 1 and Thing 2 theme by using red and blue with some green eggs and ham too. Rhyming also helps.
Riley posing with all of his gifts.
His birthday cake was from another blog and was a 2-layer yellow cake with chocolate icing covered in M&Ms and surrounded by Kit Kats. Cake from scratch, icing courtesy of Duncan Hines.
Green eggs and ham: Ham and cheese melts, green deviled eggs and a fruit salad for balance.
Riley trying out his new wheely bug from Aunt Laura and Grandpa Keith. Anyone have grandpa nickname suggestions??
Opening up gifts and the one shot where he was actually paying attention
Turns out Riley didn't want to make a mess in front of everyone, so I missed that classic messy face shot at the 1st birthday. He just wanted to eat his M&Ms one by one off the cake.
Some silly string fun
Brian's cousin Serena and her son Jacob came to party
Our neighbors brought Riley's girlfriend for the party. Cousin Shaelyn and Brian's cousin Amy in the middle.

Matt and I got to go to Kynzie's parent teacher conference last month and it was very interesting to hear what all the teacher had to say about her. Of course, we see a totally different side of Kynzie here at home that most others don't get to enjoy. She is very shy and reserved at school but is doing very well. Here is what her teacher wrote about her and I think it sums her up perfectly!
"McKynzie is such an adorable little girl. She brings her quiet disposition into our classroom and somehow calms the group down. She will do fine as she progresses through her school years. She makes friends easily and is able to stick up for herself without being bossy or pushy. The other girls all want to be her friend and she is always more than accomodating. It is her nature to be on the quiet side and she does prefer not to talk in circle unless she is really sure of the answer. However, when we are at the table working in small groups, she is very talkative and can answer most questions presented to her. Academically, I believe she is right on track for Kindergarten next year. She knows most letters and sounds that have been presented to her and her math skills are right where they need to be also. These might even be above average for her age. She counts well and her one to one correspondence goes through ten. Her fine motor skills along with her gross motor skills are good. McKynzie is a joy to have in class!"
This made mommy and daddy very proud :)

A seven year old boy in urgent need of cancer treatment who went missing with his mother from Devon has been found safe in Sussex. They disappeared from Tiverton on Monday. He's recently had surgery for a brain tumour and it's thought she doesn't want him to have further treatment.
More top news
She may not look like she's had a near-death experience but Aunt Bessie is "Staying Alive" thanks to that song by the Bee Gees.
Residents living near the Somerset Levels are positive the dredging of 150,000 cubic metres will prevent any serious flooding
A woman has been charged over an alleged scam, in which it's claimed people lost money on holidays in Rhyl and Devon that didn't exist.

So early in our family we were linked with another cousin. My family seemed to multiply in pairs and sometimes threes. Each of us on my mom's side has a cousin that is within a year or so in age. It's freaky and makes me think things I don't want to think about when it comes to family. lol. So here is two examples. Julio is the blonde kid on the left and Gretchen is the girl on the right. They are a little over a year apart. Then there is me next to Julio and my cousin Jason to the right of me. We were born about a week apart, one in New Jersey and me in Ohio.
Growing up our cousins were our friends, it's not to say we didn't all have friends outside of the family but our family used to get together a lot so it was always nice to be able to have your cousin by your side to play with. Jason and I were as close as we could be with so many miles between us, what helped in my case is that my cousin Andy who I've spoken about on here before was born less than a year later. When we were in Jersey or they were in Ohio it was always the three of us. We have many pictures together, some of which I'm sure will appear here as I get through these stacks of pictures.
Our families have always been close, we would celebrate each kids birthday with a family birthday party at who evers house, we would get together for nearly every holiday as most families, and sometimes we would just randomly gather. They are some of my favorite memories, all of us together. The older we got and the larger we grew the harder it became for everyone to gather under one roof, somehow we still manage, but these days it's so very rare to get everyone under the same roof at the same time. I don't think that has happened in nearly ten years. Grandma had hoped that when grandpa died it would happen, but sadly not everyone was able to make it back, even for her 80th birthday we were not all able to make it back. I made the funeral because I was able to, but I missed her birthday.
My cousins have spread themselves pretty far, there is still a vast majority of them living in and around Nappy, but I still have a cousin in Jersey, one in Cleveland, one just moved to Iowa, a few in Columbus, etc. It's been interesting to watch us all grow up into adults and see how the relationships change. Even amongst my aunts and uncles it seems to have changed, everyone ages and grows differently. They/ we all love each other but personalities were formed and some clash now. It seems the old we have all gotten the more we have started to separate into our own family units. I think much of this is how little time everyone gets to spend together with their own families and so we stick together in the large group to our own smaller groups.
I'm very thankful for this large family growing up and to be honest there are several members of this family I didn't grow to appreciate until I was an adult and I could actually see and respect them for more than just being an aunt or an uncle, but as a human being and a christian. They are all pretty amazing people, each with their own quirks, but if you know what they are and accept them for what/who they are, the relationship can continue to grow.
Good families are a pretty amazing thing, always there when you need them, and always there even if you don't need them. We have always been there to support one another, attend events that others are participating in, and just there to watch each other grow. Next year the last of my first cousins will be graduating, all 20 of us will be over the age of 18 and that's so weird to me, it's even stranger to watch the next generation begin to come around, there are now 6 great grandchildren. It's weird that I never imagined us all growing old and having children of our own, I don't know why, it just seemed to happen over night.
9 weddings for 8 grand children (my brother hogged two of those), 3 divorces (for 2 children, once again Julio hogging 2 of those), 6 next generation children, it just goes on and on. While I really love the people that my family have brought to the table (with the exception of Julio's first wife) and I love their children, I miss the simplicity of the old days. Of monthly gatherings with my extended family and the laughter we all shared over the years. It's still there, it's just not as simple as it used to be.
But then again, what is?

We hadnt been to the Kings Head for a while so decided to take our daughter there for her birthday.
Sunday lunch, carvery. We had drinks before being shown to our table, as it was St Paricks day I had a pint of Guiness, it was first class better than some I have tasted in Ireland. The only down point to the day was we were told our table number then just left, not knowing if we were to wait for the waitress or go into another room and help ourselves to the carvery. After about 10 minutes my wife caught the eye of the waitress who told us to go into the other room to the carvery.
That was the only down point as the carvery was excellent, all freshly cooked and top quality.
The staff were very friendly and there was a very good athmosphere. We will be going back very soon.
Own or manage this property? Claim your listing for free to respond to reviews, update your profile and much more.

This is a print version of story first voyeur experience by peteash from xHamster.com
First voyeur experience
When I was about 11 / 12 my older b*****r had some mates and their girlfriends over. I don't know what they were up to just having lunch or something, but I definitely wasn't invited as younger b*****r and was made to walk the dog.
As I walked back to the house I saw some movement and innocently looked across. The window was a toilet downstairs and whilst it had a curtain there was a section to one side not covered and I could see straight in clearly. One of the older girls at school who I fancied was standing up facing away from me. I think it was the first girls ass I had ever seen. Frozen I stared at this beautiful sight standing still for an instant, then thrusting her arse toward me a little as she pulled her black g string up. When she had it comfortably where she wanted after a little wiggling there was a brief pause, just enough for me to register and store the picture, then she pulled her jeans up and exited.
I was suddenly massively aware that I had been standing on the lawn transfixed by her arse for at least 2 minutes and felt dirty / guilty. I loved saying goodbye to her that day and looking into her eyes having seen her exposed and had one of my first wanks and many since over it.
Needless to say I spend a lot of time inviting girls I fancied over and suddenly having to let the dog out after that day!
Story URL: http://xhamster.com/user/peteash/posts/111162.html

So assuming I do one of these (which I probably won't since my last editing software I found too confusing and took up too much data), it will be a battle between Anime Villains and Cartoon Villains, with animated film villains joining the party. Since I have standards, I won't be putting these on actual articles, but I will be throwing in what I plan for something like this. If some of you guys want to help me own by bringing in some of your own plans, let me know.
The Main Story:
Unlike how it is now, Earth originally was a peaceful world, as real as we think it would be. Although the exact date is unknown, on one day, one man, nay, one animated character has had enough. The world viewed him as a sociopath, a sadist, a psychopath, when he was nothing of the sort!
The New Homunculi
Although the original Homunculi died in battle, the creator of them, was still alive, and still planned to overthrow the government and start his own, however, instead of using Artificial Humans, he would use Artificially Enhanced Humans to help him achieve his goal.
The Foot Clan
A surprisingly amount of mutations have occurred in animals, that made them more humanoid than before, but they were all deemed as regular animals and treated as such none the less. Oruku Saki was against this poor treatment, and formed a gang to start a world where intelligent animals of all species co-existed in harmony.
The Blue Meanies
Not much is known about the meanies, but what is known is their hatred for music, striving to rid the world of such melodies. Why? No one knows the reason.
Well, just guess what he is.
Viewed as the assistant Blue Meanie, Zigzag does have goals beyond what the others do, to rule over a town or kingdom as it's ruler, to prevent the invasion of the Unstoppable One Eyes. Eventually, he was kicked out for conficting goals.
The Fire Nation
Similar to it's counterpart in the actual show, the nation stands for uniting the world under one rule to ensure global peace and safety. The difference here is, should a force accept their rule, nothing shall change, but if they decline, any trace of the civilization will be burned to ash, and replaced with similar buildings, and repopulated with people that are completely loyal to the nation.
The former Fire Lord, planning to rule the planet, not because of power, but to gain the respect of his lost father.
Defeats: Lust (Was traumatized by a perception of his dad, and was aged into dust)
The current Fire Lord after Ozai's death, standing against believed magic users, possibly due to them theoretically controlling the nation and taking rule instead.
The Executor and General of the nation, destroying any civilization that don't oblige to their rule, and often leading the charge if they are at war.
"If society treats you like a monster, for nothing more than caring about your daughter, then I would gladly consider myself the worst monster of them all."
To say that Mok was a lonely child would be an understatement. His mother died shortly after his birth, and his father died from a drug overdose when he was only seven years old. A few days after that event, he was taken to an orphanage as no one under the surname "Swagger" was still alive, and while he took residence there, several of the workers were stunned to see someone so young, so intelligent. He knew not only every recipe in cook books, but exactly how gourmet chefs make them, to the point where professional taste testers couldn't spot any difference between his cooking and the chef's own. He knew exactly how every cell, every atom in every animal worked, where he could preform surgery at double the capacity of an entire hospital. Anything any normal person know of, he new far, far greater, to the point where people theorized that he was omniscient.
Before he even finished adolescence, Mok left the orphanage, bought a new home, and researched the one thing he didn't understand: Psychology. He never understood how others would react to certain scenarios, as he never new anyone to such a great extent that they would be a willing test dummy. He never home-schooled himself about emotions and his family wasn't around long enough to explain them to him. It took him a few years to understand, longer than his teachings of anything else, but when he knew, he made a living out of it, making songs to express his emotions and leaving people feeling the same way, becoming massively famous as a result, and yet he knew one important emotion he lacked, was joy. After experiencing so many different things that are known to make people happy, including drugs, he still got nothing. By the age of 23, realization finally stuck, it must have been his isolationism. He hardly had anyone to be a parental figure, and he rarely interacted with others even when he was in his massive orphanage. He needed someone by his side.
Mok's wife wasn't enough, as she had vastly different thoughts and beliefs to his own, however he finally felt elated when she gave birth, and although she died shortly thereafter, much like his mother, it was a price he would gladly pay to see his daughter, "Melody Swagger." Mok had a good life after that day, as he was still rich, giving his daughter several things she wished for, while still preventing her from being spoiled, and still famous, with loads more songs written, each mimicking a certain style and time period, however he planning a massive event for her daughter with his greatest show yet as the grand finale for her tenth birthday. The day immediately before that though, his daughter was killed by her own school bus driver unintentionally running her over, and crushing her skull. Mok had lost the one thing that kept him alive, and after seeing her limp body, he promptly soaked himself, his equipment and his house with gasoline, nail polish, hand-sanitizer and several other flammable items and lit a match, causing near-instant incineration. He would risk going through the nine circles of hell, just to be with his daughter again.
After about a decade, Mok opened his eyes yet again, although something felt different. He was still alive, but his world looked vastly different, as if it was drawn by hand. After 80 minutes of such awful acts he wouldn't dream of, the musician theorized that his spirit resided in an animated film, one that told of how he lived, and what he would do if he was still alive. The tales were not just inaccurate, they were insulting, with him looking more like a dirty rat than he ever felt like in the past, and summoning a demonic entity and plotting to destroy the earth, for nothing more than being less popular than before! With the world treating him like villain, an idea hatched in his mind... 'Why not return the favor?' Within a shockingly short time frame, he had created both a machine that could transport others into different worlds, and a device that could change the world in mind, however it would be incredibly risky to use such a machine, so instead of sacrificing himself, he opted to use the 'Incarnation' of a famous stripper instead.
It took quite a while for Mok to convince her, not helped by his lacking social skills, by the end however, it didn't take money to have Holli apply. "You seem to crave sex quite a lot. If you use the machine at the top of the 'Titan Missile'... let's say plenty more arrangements can be made." The stripper knew exactly what he meant, and accepted the deal. It didn't take long for Holli to find just what she was looking for, as the machine landed surprisingly close by to the museum she was targeting, although she didn't run off undetected. Once she got to the top of the missile, she turned the device on, and hell starts to break loose. Several deformed animated cels consumed the security guards like snacks, and other staff members and visitors alike ran as fast as their legs could carry, with some of them calling the police to deal with this monstrous threat, but by then it was too late. A massive explosion of some unknown substance coated the entire space-time continuum, leaving the universe animated. Mok noticed a few new things about this world, such as how souls were now visible, and that gave him a new idea, to bring his daughter back to life!
Four months after Mok started searching for Melody's spirit, he started to question something. He was finding the one thing that brought him joy, and yet would give her the body of a human, the species that drove him to turning the world animated, the species that poked fun off him. Why would he combine something he loved and something he loathed? He then remembered that he had created a much more fantastical world, one where not every law of biology could be followed, maybe one without any laws! She couldn't just be a human. "She could be anything I set my mind too!" "Uh, what did you just say there?" "I apologize, something just came to my mind." It's unknown if that trait was added to his new form, or if he actually felt that way now. To prevent his forgotten daughter's soul from escaping, Mok sealed it in a jar, a begun to work on her new body. The body had a human-esque shape, was as tall as her original body and it even looked like it was wearing a dress, the key word however is 'looked' as there were several anomalies the body had, ranging from the dress being a part of the body, to it's skin being paler than chalk, to it's arms resembling musical notes far more than any limb of any animal, to lacking any organs of the sort. It's as if this wasn't a living creature, but a heavily mutated one. Something that was inside it however, was her memories, as when the musician sent his daughter's soul into the body, she opened her eyes once again, and saw someone, familiar.
"M-Mok? Is that you?" "Yes Melody, yes it is."

"I worked in many jobs for many years to support my family, but I could rarely find time for them. Then came a crisis, jobs shrank. I started working here. It's the best job I've ever had. Now finally, I can dedicate time to my family! I was worried about privacy, but I used all the tools and didn't have any problems. Of course, you have to be aware that it is a job and requires effort. But profit and freedom are worth it! "

On December 14th, A WMBB.com News 13 camera caught an incident on film where a gunman entered a school board meeting in Florida and fired several shots at the members of the board after he took them hostage.
Mobile, Iphone and IPad Users watch the video here
The man, identified as Clay A. Duke, 56, walked into the Panama City board meeting and painting a red V in a circle on the wall, which is a symbol from the movie V for Vendetta. He then ordered everyone except some of the members of the board to leave the room. Ginger Littleton, a school board member who was allowed to leave, tried to distract Duke by coming up behind him and hitting him with her purse. She was thrown to the ground and he aimed at her but didn’t shoot.
According to Duke the school board had fired his wife, and despite pleas from members he eventually opened fire, but missed superintendent Bill Husfelt. A security guard arrived and shot Duke, who also fatally shot himself after he fell to the ground. No one else was injured.

ISO Song that ends the Earth Hoodie size XL
Looking for this Hoodie for my husband In size XL. This was his favorite hoodie and somehow we have lost it. hoping someone has an extra or slightly used that they just don't wear. I know its a long shot but if you have it and are willing to part with it please let me know what you would like for it.

CENTENNIAL, Colo. — Katie Medley was nine months pregnant, so she picked a seat near the exit door, just in case she went into labor when her husband and a friend took her to see the premiere of a Batman film nearly three years ago.
She saw the man in body armor slip through the door and toss a can through the air, filling the theater with tear gas as he fired at the audience. She dropped to the floor, squeezing with her belly between the chairs, and couldn't understand why her husband was still sitting upright.
Then she saw he had been shot through the eye, his face was gushing blood. She had to decide: stay with him, or flee in an attempt to save their unborn son?
Medley, the first witness called as testimony began Tuesday in the death penalty trial of James Holmes, said she took the hand of her husband and felt him squeeze hers back.
"I told him that I loved him and that I would take care of our baby if he didn't make it," said Medley. She later gave birth to a healthy son, now 3, as Caleb underwent brain surgery in the same hospital.
Caleb, an aspiring comedian, survived with terrible injuries. His speech is barely intelligible, and he was pushed to the witness stand in a wheelchair. He answered questions Tuesday by pointing to letters on a poster board for a court interpreter.
Defense attorneys said Holmes has "essentially admitted" killing 12 people and injuring 70 more, so there's no reason to make survivors relive their horror in the courtroom for months on end.
Repeatedly Tuesday, the defense objected to jurors being shown photographs of victims or other evidence they called inflammatory. The judge denied them, calling the evidence relevant and fair depictions of the nature of the crime.
The defense hopes to focus on what was going on inside Holmes' mind, which they say was so addled by schizophrenia that his sense of right and wrong was distorted, and he lost control over his actions.
Perhaps signaling a strategy they'll use with many other victims whose lives were turned inside out by the shooting, the defense had no questions for the Medleys.
And Katie Medley kept her composure, even as her husband's injuries were put on display. But she sobbed as she returned to her seat in the courtroom, comforted by others who said she had done a good job.
Holmes, who is being harnessed to the floor by a cable under his clothes, sat quietly. His parents, Robert and Arlene, showed no reaction from their seats in the second row.
Many details about Holmes' life before, during and after the shootings that were shrouded in mystery due to the judge's gag order were revealed in Monday's opening statements.
District Attorney George Brauchler depicted a frighteningly smart killer who meticulously planned and carried out the mass murder to make himself feel good and be remembered, while knowing that it was immoral and illegal.
Public Defender Daniel King portrayed him as a "good kid" who never got in trouble, but who also sensed something wrong with his mind, even at a young age.
Holmes hoped studying neuroscience at the University of Colorado would help him fix his thoughts, but "psychosis bloomed" instead, the defense said. His slaughter has no logical explanation, and that too is evidence that delusions commanded him to kill, the defense said.
Brauchler revealed that two court-appointed psychiatrists concluded that Holmes was sane when he opened fire, chasing moviegoers up and down the aisles and shooting at people who tried to flee.
King countered that Holmes was psychotic at the time, and that every doctor who has seen him — 20 in all — agreed he suffers from schizophrenia.
Holmes has pleaded not guilty by reason of insanity. His defense hopes jurors will agree and have him indefinitely committed to a mental institution. Prosecutors say he was sane and should be executed.

The former prime minister's company has been paid more than £27 million for advising the oil-rich state on how to run itself, according to reports.
They led to calls for him to hand back the money amid accusations he is cashing in on his decision to take Britain into Iraq in 2003 — although a spokesman dismissed the figure as "complete invention".
A Stop the War coalition spokesman said: "There really should be a law against a former Prime Minister who took us into a war becoming extremely wealthy as a result of that war."
Mr Blair's spokesman said: "The fees are nowhere remotely near that sum and they were in respect of a full-time team of people hired for the project over several years.
"The work done is all a matter of public record and has been reported extensively in Kuwait and elsewhere."Reuse content

In honor of Tony Gwynn’s birthday today i decided to do an article looking back on his baseball career. Tony Gwynn played baseball for 20 seasons, all with the San Diego Padres. MLB Network will be honoring Gwynn all day.
Gwynn played his college baseball at San Deigo State University. Also, Gwynn played basketball and was an all-conference player for both sports. But in baseball, he was All-American as well for the Western Athletic Conference. In the 1981 MLB draft, Gwynn was selected in the third round at pick 58 by the San Diego Padres.
San Diego Padres
In his first couple season with the Padres, Gwynn only played in 140 games. But in 1984 Gwynn game started to take off. In the 84 season, Gwynn batted .351 and stole 33 bases, as he led the Padres to the World series. Also, he won his first batting title and made the All-Star team. Known as a poor fielder in his college days, Gywnn worked on his defense to win his first gold glove in 1986. By the time 1987 came around, Gywnn batted .370 and stole a career-high 56 bases.
In the early 90s, a lot of Gwynn’s seasons was ended due to injury, but he still held his average above .300. During the strike season, Gwynn made a push to bat .400, but when the season ended, he was batting .394. From 1994 to 1997, he won four straight batting titles. In 1998 the Padres had a magical run to the World Series; they won franchise-record 98 games. That season Gwynn hit .321 and hit for more power that season hitting 16 home runs. The Padres lost to the New Yankees in the World Series.
Gwynn missed 44 games in the 1999 season due to a calf injury, but still managed to hit .338, and he made his final All-Star team. Also, in the 1999 seasons Gwynn got his 3,00 hit against Montreal Expos pitcher Dan Smith, Gwynn had four hits in that game as well.
In Gwynn’s final two seasons with the Padres, he dealt with a lot of injury problems. In 2000 he had a left knee injury and played in 36 games. He struggled that season batting 1.96, but between May and June, he batted .408 to got his average up to .323 before having surgery on his knee. When 2001 came around it was Gwynn final season that season he dealt with more injuries, he played in 71 games and batted .324 and retired at the end of the season.
Gwynn finished his career with 3,141 hits and a lifetime batting average of .338. He batted over .300 19 times and over .350 seven times. Gwynn was not a home run hitter; he only hit 135 homers in his career. Early in his career, Gywnn could steal bases, and he ended his career with 319. The former Padre star won eight batting titles, seven Silver Sluggers Awards, five Gold Gloves, and was 15-time All-Star.
Gwynn was a contact hitter, who was great at hitting the ball all over the field, taking what the pitcher would give him. His bat control was out od this world. Tony Gwynn was inducted to the Baseball Hall of Fame in 2007, getting 97.61% of the votes. Gwynn passed away in 2014; it was great to watch you hit at the plate R.I.P Tony Gwynn.

Run-DMC star Jam Master Jay allegedly killed over drug deal
The trial of his two alleged murderers has heard Jam Master Jay was allegedly killed over a drug deal.
Jam Master Jay was allegedly killed over a drug deal.
The Run-DMC star, born Jason Mizell, was shot dead aged 37 at his recording studio in Queens, New York, in October 2002, and a jury has now heard the claim about the apparent motive behind his assassination in the trial of his godson Karl Jordan Jr, 40, who is standing accused of killing the DJ with his 59-year-old friend Ronald Washington.
According to The Sun, prosecutors said on Monday (29.01.24) during the New York trial the pair – who deny murder – carried out what was called an “execution” as revenge after they were cut out of a drug deal worth nearly $200,000.
Jordan was 18 at the time and is said to have shot Jay in the head with a handgun.
Jam Master – one third of hip-hop group Run-DMC with Joseph Simmons, aka Run, and Darryl McDaniels, known as DMC – is said to have been a middleman in cocaine deals to fund his lifestyle as his music career started to fade.
Jurors also heard Washington, who was staying with Jam’s sister at the time of his murder, was an alcoholic and relied on him to keep a roof over his head.
Jordan’s defence attorney John Diaz said some prosecution witnesses co-operated with federal investigators in exchange for leniency in their own criminal cases.
Washington’s defence lawyer Ezra Spilke said there is no forensic evidence linking him to the murder.
He told the jury: “Mizell was a beloved artist, but convicting the wrong person… does not solve the tragedy. It just adds another one to it.”
The trial continues and is expected to last another month.

Kaiser Chiefs frontman has revealed he will not need an operation on his right eye after he injured it shooting the video for the group's next single.
Ricky Wilson doesn't need surgery on his injured eye.
The Kaiser Chiefs frontman arrived at The 2014 Radio Academy Awards in London on Monday night (12.05.14) wearing an eye patch over his left eye.
Ricky suffered the ''minor accident'' filming the fairground-themed video for his band's next single 'Meanwhile Up in Heaven' while riding a dodgem, however, it should heal on its own over the next few weeks.
When asked if he would require an operation to fix his sight, Ricky said: ''I don't need surgery and I've still got one good eye, and two good ears.''
The 36-year-old singer also revealed he is excited about playing live with the band this summer and on tour next year, and is looking forward to playing to the new fans he has attracted from his judging role on 'The Voice' UK.
He said: ''We're doing loads of festivals this year as many as we can. Our own tour starts next February. I'm so excited about the tour, it's what it's all been about, we spent the last year-and-a-half recording our album and we're so proud of it and we didn't know whether our fans were going to come out and support us but they came out in force and they came out fighting for us. We didn't want to pre-empt it by booking a big tour before it was out, just because I was on 'The Voice' but it came out and was received very well and the word of mouth is just making it grow and grow ... Our fans were pretty diverse in the first place and I think we're back there again, of course 'The Voice' has helped but we kind of had a inkling it might.''
It's nothing like the country vibe we were anticipating.
The most exciting movies set to drop in the coming months.

Harper was riled after being struck by a 98 mph fastball on his shoulder and immediately dropped his bat and gestured towards Strickland.
The 24-year-old launched his helmet and began swinging with Strickland first landing a few counter-punches before Harper caught him with a heavy blow. The Nationals ran out 3-0 victors and are seen as the Chicago Cubs' strongest challenge in the National League.
Both teams' benches were cleared as the fight was broken up and Harper showed no remorse for going after the 6-foot-4, 220-pound right-hander.
"You either go to first base or you go after him and I decided to go after him," he said afterwards.
The pair have history going back to a game in 2014 in the NLDS when Harper drilled Strickland for two home runs, which evidently still rankles.
"No, not in that situation," Harper added when asked whether he expected retribution for embarrassing Strickland in their last meeting. "Especially since it's been three years and they won the World Series that year.
"So I wasn't really thinking about it at all. But when somebody comes at you like that, throws a 90 mph fastball where he did, I wasn't very happy with it, and took it into my hands and tried to go after him."

The Regency period begins
George Augustus Frederick was appointed Prince Regent to his father King George III on February 5th, 1811. He was a heavy drinker and a compulsive gambler.
George Augustus Frederick, Prince of Wales, was 48 when he was appointed Prince Regent to his father, King George III. The Regency would be a convenient label for a brilliant period in architecture and the arts, but the prince himself was not highly regarded. A heavy drinker and a compulsive gambler, he poured out quantities of money like a human Niagara Falls. He had charming manners, he sang and played the cello nicely and he was a superbly gifted patron of the arts. But he was considered deeply untrustworthy and his hatred of his father led him to ally himself with the Whig opposition in Parliament. He involved himself in a secret marriage with Maria Fitzherbert in 1785, which he knew was illegal and which he kept lying about. In 1795 he married Princess Caroline of Brunswick, though he loathed her on sight.
The question of the regency had arisen before because of George III’s recurrent fits of insanity, which are now thought to have been caused partly by porphyria and partly by psychological factors. The king became desperately agitated, flew into violent rages, foamed at the mouth and babbled incessantly (once for 19 hours, apparently) until he was exhausted. The attacks had occurred on and off since 1788, when the government had reluctantly brought in a Regency Bill. The king recovered before it could be passed, as he did from subsequent outbreaks, and his implacable opposition made it impossible to get his assent to any such bill when he was in command of himself.
In November 1810 the illness took possession of the king again, probably triggered by the death at the age of 27 of his youngest and favourite daughter Princess Amelia. She was a long time dying and she had a mourning ring containing a lock of her hair made for her father, which was thought to have sent him finally over the edge. He had to be put in a straitjacket and his medicine was administered by force. The royal doctors were optimistic, but it seemed clear to everyone in politics, including the Whig Prime Minister Spencer Perceval and his Cabinet, that a regency was inevitable. The prince behaved with what the Whig society hostess Lady Holland described as ‘very unusual discretion’. He kept well clear of the Whigs and told Cabinet ministers that they were the best judges of what to do, while making it plain that he had no quarrel with them and that if he was regent his treatment of them would depend entirely on their treatment of him.
In December a Regency Bill was introduced into Parliament. The Whigs wanted the Prince of Wales to be declared regent by hereditary right, but the bill passed on February 5th, 1811 was modelled on the one prepared in the crisis of 1788. The impossibility of procuring the king’s assent was got round by requiring the lord chancellor to affix the Great Seal of the Realm to letters patent naming lords commissioners who would grant the royal assent. This was an obvious dodge and the distinguished lawyer Sir Samuel Romilly described it as ‘a fraudulent trick’, but it was difficult to see a practical alternative and both houses of Parliament approved it.
Care was taken to allow for a royal recovery in what was lengthily entitled ‘An Act to provide for the Administration of the Royal Authority, and for the Care of His Majesty’s Royal Person, during the Continuance of His Majesty’s Illness; and for the Resumption of the Exercise of the Royal Authority by His Majesty.’ The regent was required to swear on oath to be ‘faithful and bear true allegiance’ to the king, to maintain ‘the safety, honour and dignity’ of the king and ‘the welfare of his people’ and to uphold the Protestant religion. He was duly sworn in on February 6th at Carlton House, his London residence, attired in the gorgeous uniform of the 10th Hussars. The band of the Grenadier Guards played ‘God Save the King’.
Queen Charlotte was put in charge of caring for the king. There was to be no council of regency, but against the wishes of the Whigs the regent’s powers to award peerages, offices and pensions were limited for the first year. As it turned out, George III never recovered, while to the Whigs’ resentment the Prince Regent ignored his ties with them once he was installed. The king was kept in confinement at Windsor, blind and deaf, unable to recognise his own family and holding conversations with imaginary people or people who were dead – Handel and Lord North among them. When Queen Charlotte died in 1818 he did not understand what had happened and he himself followed her to the grave in 1820 at the age of 81, at which point the Prince Regent became King George IV.

EL CAJON, Calif. – An El Cajon police officer shot a man in a used car parking lot Friday morning, authorities said.
Raymond Lee Goodlow, 53, was riding his bike on the sidewalk near Walter and Main Street around 9:30 a.m. when the officer attempted to stop him, according to El Cajon police Lt. Tim Henton. Goodlow did not listen and turned into the BestCAR4U lot.
“As the officer followed him in, he noticed he was turning and looked at him reaching into his waistband,” said Henton. “The suspect was still reaching into his waistband the officer gave him orders to make his hands visible, to show his hands, but he was noncompliant.”
“It was from being shot for riding on the sidewalk,” said Henton. “When someone is being stopped and they don’t show their hands and they are evasive, that causes officers to fear for their safety.”
“As paramedics were cutting away the suspects pants, they found two knives,” said Lt. Henton. “We believe the suspect was armed with those knives.”
Goodlow was taken to Sharp Memorial Hospital and was in stable condition. He was not in custody as of Friday afternoon.
Frank McDermott works at a motel near the used car lot. He told Fox 5 that Goodlow, also known as “Black”, had been a problem since he started hanging out in the area a week ago.
“He got what was coming to him. Absolutely,” said McDermott. “He was urinating on the property apparently and for whatever reason he just wouldn’t leave.”
McDermott told Fox 5 he called the police three times to complain about Black.
“He was more than asking for trouble. Some people ask for trouble, he was advertising it,” said McDermott.
Goodlow could face misdemeanor charges of evading an officer or resisting arrest.
A man named Roy said he saw the entire confrontation.
“I hollered across the street ‘Don’t shoot that man. Don’t kill him!’” Roy said. “Pop, pop, pop, pop, pop! It sounded like firecrackers.”
Roy said he’s been caught riding his bike on the sidewalk. He said from what he saw Friday morning, it was just a minor traffic violation and bullets did not need to fly.
“I don’t think he should have been shot. I think it could have been handled a lot more diplomatically, a lot more safely,” said Roy.
The police officer involved has been on the force for two years. He has been placed on administrative leave.

This weekend we were in Chicago. We made slow progress walking down Michigan Avenue as we kept having to stop and wait for the boys, who were lagging behind dawdling and playing about. At one point we passed a homeless man who was asking for money. I turned around a little later and saw Isaac walking over to the man and digging in his pockets. When he caught up with us he said “Mom, I just gave all my money to a man who needed a sandwich. He was a really good salesman—he just said he needed money and I gave him all that I had.” He had emptied his pockets and given all his money (51 cents) away in a single, spontaneous act of compassion.
It is a really big deal if Isaac gives you money. He doesn’t usually have much and he guards his cash carefully. I found myself moved by this act of generosity as I watched him walk away from the man with his hands in his empty pockets. Everyone else in our family must have felt the same way because the next person we met who asked for money got something from us all. I felt kind of privileged to have seen this child react simply in response to the need of a fellow human being and deliver all that he had into the man’s cup. I wondered about when I last gave anything away with that kind of spirit. Do I look for opportunities to do that? For those few moments on Michigan Avenue, amid the hustle and bustle, I had the feeling that I had witnessed a beautiful illustration of the true nature of generosity. It doesn’t count the cost, it gives in response to a need with the sole goal of meeting that need. It doesn’t give to get a tax deduction, or to show off to an audience, or to gain popularity. It doesn’t refuse to give because the gift might be undeserved, or might be spent on something it disapproves of, it simply gives.
OK. This was only 51 cents. But it was everything he had. There is a bible story about a widow who gave only a penny (a mite) in offering at the temple, while others gave much more. But she was honored more than them all, because out of her poverty she gave all that she had. Isaac gave his mite to a man in need and in his childish innocence he gave me a lesson about purity in giving that I will not forget. I have learned again the old lesson that the numerical amount that is given is almost beside the point; the important thing is the spirit in which the gift is given.

When he had finished praying, Jesus left with his disciples and crossed the Kidron Valley. On the other side there was a garden, and he and his disciples went into it.
Now Judas, who betrayed him, knew the place, because Jesus had often met there with his disciples.
So Judas came to the garden, guiding a detachment of soldiers and some officials from the chief priests and the Pharisees. They were carrying torches, lanterns and weapons.
Jesus, knowing all that was going to happen to him, went out and asked them, “Who is it you want?”
“Jesus of Nazareth,” they replied. “I am he,” Jesus said. (And Judas the traitor was standing there with them.)
When Jesus said, “I am he,” they drew back and fell to the ground.
Again he asked them, “Who is it you want?”“Jesus of Nazareth,” they said.
Jesus answered, “I told you that I am he. If you are looking for me, then let these men go.”
This happened so that the words he had spoken would be fulfilled: “I have not lost one of those you gave me.”
Then Simon Peter, who had a sword, drew it and struck the high priest’s servant, cutting off his right ear. (The servant’s name was Malchus.)
Jesus commanded Peter, “Put your sword away! Shall I not drink the cup the Father has given me?”
Then the detachment of soldiers with its commander and the Jewish officials arrested Jesus. They bound him
and brought him first to Annas, who was the father-in-law of Caiaphas, the high priest that year.
Caiaphas was the one who had advised the Jewish leaders that it would be good if one man died for the people.
Simon Peter and another disciple were following Jesus. Because this disciple was known to the high priest, he went with Jesus into the high priest’s courtyard,
but Peter had to wait outside at the door. The other disciple, who was known to the high priest, came back, spoke to the servant girl on duty there and brought Peter in.
“You aren’t one of this man’s disciples too, are you?” she asked Peter. He replied, “I am not.”
It was cold, and the servants and officials stood around a fire they had made to keep warm. Peter also was standing with them, warming himself.

hahah I knew this lesbian couple once that were all hype to fast like that and only drink that nasty drink with the red pepper and all that.
LMFAO , they would cheat like a mf. We all worked together at the same place and I would always catch one of them eating when they were not supposed to. I even got bribed with weed to not tell the other one about the other one eating.
'saying' and 'doing' has a FINE line drawn between them.

MIAMI (CBSMiami) — Don Shula, longtime Miami Dolphins coach and architect of the 1972 Dolphins perfect season, died at his South Florida home Monday morning at the age of 90.
CBS4 Sports Director Jim Berry spoke to Miami Dolphins Senior Vice President of Special Projects and Alumni Relations Nat Moore who also played for Shula and the Miami Dolphins and cared deeply for him.READ MORE: COVID uptick being felt across South Florida as CDC recommends taking added precautions
“He was like a second father,” recalled Moore. “You know, he’s the guy that in 1974 when I was drafted, saw something in me, changed my position and basically just gave me some guidance on how to be mentally tough as well as physically tough. And throughout my entire 13 years of playing for him and then throughout my life, he’s always been there. He’s that kind of guy. You know, the guy that somehow or another got more out of you than you thought you had to give.”
Moore says Shula was a guy who always practiced what he preached.
“He was very simple. He was that guy that he didn’t ask you to do too many things he wouldn’t do. Even when we used to hate running gases, he would run a couple of them himself. But even more so off the field, he was that guy in the community that was the first to write the check. United Way would come in each and every year before anybody wrote a check, he would write a check. I mean, you know, when you look at the legacy of South Florida and the amount of guys that stayed here, once their career was over, no matter where they came from, and became intricate parts of this community, it was because of a guy like Don Shula, because of a guy that taught you while you were playing to embrace the community where you made friends, you built relationships, and then you’re successful off the field as well as on the field,” said Moore.
When it came to family, Moore says nothing was more important to Shula.
“I don’t think there’s anything more important than his family to him and, you know, somehow or another, some way he still found time for his family. I mean, you know, in the old days coaches stayed in meetings and at the training camp, you know, 14-15 hours a day, but during the offseason, you could see how much time he spent with Michael and David and Annie and the whole family, you know, they were, you know, weekends when the game was over with, you know, he somehow another found that balance that mix to be able to be everything to his family, but also to be the winningest coach in football history because he left no stone unturned trying to find ways to win.”
WATCH: Nat Moore Reflect and Remember Don Shula
So what made Shula the winningest coach in football history?
“I think his ability to adapt, his ability to change with the athlete, you know, when Bob Griese and Larry Czonka and etc, were there, we had this big strong offensive line, we ran the football, we controlled of football, we kept our defense off the field, we won championships, and then when Dan Marino and Mark Duper and Mark Clayton and those guys came along we had this high powered offense where he switched and went to that. And once again, we went through the league as well as one of the best teams in NFL football. So his ability to adapt his ability to look at the talent that the team possess, and adapt that philosophy to those guys was critical,” recalled Moore.
Moore recalls Shula had a deadpan sense of humor but says he was just a great man.
“A guy who signified success, dignity, integrity, a guy that basically if you were willing to put forth effort, he would he would help you become better than you thought you could be.”
For Shula, winning was always important but his team had to win the right way. He was a rule maker, not a rule breaker.MORE NEWS: Second Suspected Case Of Monkeypox In Broward Under Investigation
“He didn’t believe in and cutting corners. He believed in hard work and dedication. And I remember playing the Patriots up there in the snowplow incident and I’ve never seen a man so livid at the officials and officials are like, ‘well, what can we do? We can’t get them to come back out and put snow back in.’ But you know, he’s just one of those guys that believes in the rules. As you know, he served on the Rules Committee for many, many years, and he was a part of not only developing the game and being the winningest his coach, but he was also a guy that helped come up with the rules of today’s game.”

These feelings do not mean what I think they mean. Pain is not the enemy. These stories I imagine about how I feel are just opinions with embellishments.
Contrary to what people claim, not everyone wants their loved ones to grow, they simply want them to change.
"Change happens one funeral at a time." At the time we were talking politics. However, in the years since I heard her say that I've come to appreciate this truth.
I am willing to accept far less than I offer in exchange for being loved, to be important to someone. I was willing to do the work - mine and hers - and avoided bringing my needs and wants of the Partnership. I acted as if I wasn't as important as her.

As it turned out, it was the lady who served us. Although she also spoke English, she understood Simon's and Bill's wish to practise French.
She listened patiently and replied slowly. I'm sure she won over many customers in this way. Bill and I tasted a few wines; Simon abstained as he was driving. In any case, he knew what he wanted. Grangeneuve (New Barn) specialised in red wines that I'm not fond of, but Bill bought a few bottles he liked and a white one I thought was nice.
It was an amazing cave of a place that reminded me of probably my favourite ever hotel, La Terrasse, on the Dordogne. We stayed there years ago as part of a bicycling holiday; the cycles provided were pretty bad, but the food was incredible. I confess to having enjoyed foie gras. Walnuts were the local speciality and they made everything you could think of from every part of a walnut or walnut tree. But that was then... (before we had digital technology).
On this trip, the theme seemed to be very much lavender and wine vineyards, though salads and cheese also played a big role; also balloons, but we haven't got to that part yet.
I found myself more interested in the odd details of the place, like the wooden carrier that reminded me of the one I liked in Sydney earlier this year and their lovely courtyard.
I probably missed the main point (or failed to appreciate it), but I enjoyed the visit anyhow. It does my heart good to look back at the warm sunshine of those days, now that we are now in the dark and wet.

When I first learned to drive, all our cars were automatics - and so that's all I learned to drive. This never posed an issue to me until I married Rosalie who owns a manual. She tried to teach me, and I managed - kind of. It wasn't until I had a chat with my uncle-in-law, who's a mechanic, that it "clicked" with me. This is because he explained to me basically how the gear-change system works, which meant I now had a picture in my head of what was going on "under the hood" when I pushed the clutch in - it didn't take long before I was smoothly changing gears and not making my passengers lurch forward and back like someone on a bucking bull.

Posted on Saturday, 24 February 2001
Mr. Darcy's traveling coach arrived at The White Hart at half past eleven. If one had the power to see beyond the shades that had been pulled down for privacy, they would have observed a young couple, obviously newly married, the young Lady, leaning against her husband, her bonnetless head of dark chestnut curls laid charmingly upon his shoulder, the young Gentleman's arm around the slim waist of his wife of a scant six hours, snugging her next to him.
Mr. Darcy was torn between just sitting in his coach, looking down at his sleeping Elizabeth and gently waking her up, as they had arrived at the inn that he had favoured while traveling between Derbyshire and Hertfordshire. This was not the first time that Fitzwilliam Darcy had sat this close to his Elizabeth while she slept. (I will not go into the particulars here but lets just say that she was very beautiful while she was sleeping. My Gentle Readers will know to what I am referring. LYLAS, Your Gentle Author. )Yet Darcy's choice was taken from him, as somehow through her sound sleep, Lizzie felt her husband's eyes upon her. This, in combination with the cessation of the carriage's motion made Lizzie start awake.
The cessation of the carriage's motion woke Lizzie, she looked sleepily around her, and smiled at Mr. Darcy, remembering where she was and why.
"Oh William! The carriage has stopped. Have we arrived at The White Hart?"asked Lizzie in a sleepy tone.
"Yes dearest Elizabeth, we have arrived, but only just. The ostler will be here soon to open the door, that will give you time to set yourself to rights again." said Darcy, as he assisted Lizzie back into her pelisse and tied the ribands of her bonnet at a jaunty angle. Darcy, at this point, had no time for more than a quick kiss, before the ostler opened the door of the carriage. Darcy jumped down before ostler had had time to let the steps down, and gently lifted his bride out of the carriage. The keeper of The White Hart, Mr. Josiah Porter, recognised his most constant guest, and realised that the young Lady in his arms was his bride. Mr. Porter welcomed the newly married pair to his establishment warmly, and informed the couple that their servants had arrived two hours since, and were just finishing up with the rooms, and enquired as to whether the Darcys would like to partake of the late cold supper that awaited them in his best private parlour. The couple readily agreed to this, as it had been some time since the wedding breakfast, and they were both hungry.
The supper, consisting of cold sliced meats, bread, various cheeses, a bowl of apples and pears, a plate of Mrs. Porter's fresh biscuits, tea, wine and cider was delicious. Lizzie and Darcy each made the other smile with observations on the events of the day, and the family members that had come to the weddings.
"Your Uncle, was most welcoming. I like him, he reminds me of both Papa and Uncle Gardiner, your Aunt, well, I had completely forgotten that Aunt Gardiner had been a schoolfellow of your Aunt's, Lady Paxton and the Old Baroness Lochmaben, as had I forgotten, until he asked, while I was in Hunsford, that Aunt Gardiner was the Colonel's godmother, (Forgive me, but this is a hitherto unknown fact I recently discovered. LYLAS, YGA. ) Marsden is the most personable, Colonel Fitzwilliam is the most charming, I truly enjoyed his company while I was in Kent, I noticed that he teased you more than I did, and Lady Marsden is. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ." said Lizzie
"The most like you, my Dearest, Lovliest Elizabeth." finished Darcy, in a teasing tone.
"Mayhap she is. I was quite scandalized by Lady Marsden's impressions of your Aunt. So I was not the only young Lady who has stood in defiance of your Aunt, regarding the matrimonial plans she had made for her nephews. I must say the story of your cousin's courtship was quite amusing. I was also surprised that you had made the acquaintance of my cousins after you left Rosings and went back to Town. Never was I more surprised to discover that you were the "knight" that Maria Elizabeth had referred to when my cousins came to Longbourn to stay, while My Aunt and Uncle traveled in Derbyshire. So you are Miranda's "dedicated knight"? Neddie and Caleb told me how you helped them with their kite." replied Lizzie, smiling.
"Miss Maria Elizabeth informed me after I had saved her, that you had made Miss Miranda for her, and that she was her favorite doll. One wonders how she came to be christened Miranda?" asked Mr. Darcy curiously.
"Well, two years ago, my Mother sent Jane and I to Town in hopes that we would find proper husbands. I was enjoined by her to refrain from carrying any of the books I had been reading with me to Town, I had been recently devouring My Father's bound collection of Shakespeare, and I was devastated, and so he secretly presented me with a specially bound edition of "The Tempest". It was while I was making Maria Elizabeth's doll, that I was reading "The Tempest", and that is how the doll came to be christened Miranda." replied Lizzie, beginning to yawn. It was not long before Darcy was having trouble stifling yawns himself, and soon the couple were making their way upstairs to their chambers.
Posted on Wednesday, 28 February 2001
Retiring to their bedchambers, Lizzie was soon in her abigail, Anna Rose's capable hands. Lizzie quietly enquired as to whether she had given Darcy's valet, Rushford, the letter she had wanted secreted in her husband's dressing gown. Anna Rose answered in the affirmative, which brought a mischievous smile to her lips. Anna Rose helped Lizzie into her nightrail and dressing gown, and Lizzie quickly dismissed Anna Rose, as she was wont to brush and braid up her own hair. It was thus that Darcy found his wife, when he entered the bedchamber. Lizzie was drawing a brush through her long, dark chestnut brown hair. This immediately made Darcy's heart skip at beat, as it occurred to him, that as Lizzie's husband he now had right to see her with her hair down, and unbraided. This was something he fantasized about, even before it was certain that there was a chance that they would be married, he had dreamed of this moment, even during those most tortured days in London, following the disastrous muddle he had made of the proposal he had made at Hunsford. Lizzie's hair was just as he had dreamed it would be, reaching below her waist, and was, to risk an extremely tired cliché, like silk, chestnut brown silk.
Though Darcy's entry into the bedchamber was in so silent a manner, Lizzie did not hear him, it was not long before she was aware of the fact that she was no longer alone in the room. She was also aware that it was not Anna Rose returning to ask her if she required anything further before she retired for the night, for she could feel her husband's gaze upon her. Lizzie turned from her task of brushing her hair and returned the smile she knew she would find on her husband's lips. As she returned a sweet smile, Darcy held out his arms, as he did on that terrible day at the Lambton Inn, I am referring to my version of that particular scene, in my story," With Angelic Intervention" and she once again went to him. Darcy gently brought his arms around Lizzie in a very warm, but tight embrace. He held her so close that once again he was able to breath in her sweet lavender scent.
"I love you Mrs. Darcy," said Mr. Darcy, as he began to kiss his bride, starting at the top of her head, and began to move down to her forehead, her eyes, the tip of her nose, her lips, most thoroughly there, and moving on to the hollow of her throat.
"And I love you, Mr. Darcy," replied Lizzie, in a tone of quiet wonder, reaching up her hand and rubbed it along the side of his face.
Darcy's reactions were immediate, he held Lizzie even closer, which caused her to tremble in a most delightful manner, as he brought his mouth back down to Lizzie's for a more passionate kiss, which made Lizzie tremble all the more, at this Darcy pulled back.
"Forgive me Dearest Elizabeth. I did not mean to frighten you, or even embarrass you, but how much do you know of what will occur tonight?" asked Darcy, in a lighter tone, not wanting Lizzie to frightened any further.
"Enough. I am a country-bred girl after all. I am not unfamiliar with the mating process, though I am more familiar with the bovine and equine, than the human. I will admit that My Aunt Gardiner took it upon herself to relieve My Mother of one more un-nerving task, by discussing the subject with us." replied Lizzie, trying not to let it show that she was a little nervous about what to expect.
"Elizabeth, I must admit to some very personal knowledge of the subject at hand. This will not just be pleasing for me, as your Mother would have told you, had your Aunt had not taken it upon herself to instruct you instead, though do not know what your Aunt told you. I will also be pleasing you, and promise to be very gentle with you, as this is your first time. I will take my time with you." said Mr. Darcy, smiling at Lizzie, as reached out to untie the sash of her dressing gown, and slowly slipped it from her shoulders, and let it fall to the floor. Darcy gently picked Lizzie up into his strong arms, carried her to the bed and laid her down upon it.
As Darcy began to ready himself for bed, he discovered the note Lizzie had had secreted in the pocket of his dressing gown.
"What is this, Elizabeth?" asked Darcy, recognising on the note he had discovered there, the handwriting of his Dearest Elizabeth.
"That is my special gift to you, my husband. I could not fall asleep last night and so I wrote that note to you, as a very special wedding gift." replied Lizzie, smiling sweetly at her husband from the bed.
Curious, Darcy quickly broke the seal, unfolded the note, and read what follows:
My Dearest William,
I cannot believe it, in six more hours I shall become your bride. I wish the person who thought up that silly tradition about the bride and groom not seeing each other before the wedding could be hung, drawn and quartered. My heart aches for you so. We have traveled a long and twisted road to come to this point, would that we could have avoided it, but I believe that traveling it has taught me much about the special man Our Lord has given to me, and so I wrote the following lines that say how I feel about you. I am of the belief that they capture your perfect portrait.
The smile on your face, Lets me know that
you need me.
There's a truth in your eyes, Saying you'll
never leave me.
The touch of your hand, says you'll catch me,
if ever I fall.
You say it best, when you say nothing at all*
God Bless You
Your Own Dearest,
This immediately brought tears to Darcy's eyes and a smile to his lips, for his dearest Elizabeth had truly taken his portrait in these few lines. He would treasure this note forever, yet in reading Lizzie's note, he mourned the fact that he had no gift in kind for her, but Lizzie surprised him once more, by informing him that had had given her a gift in kind, even before she would have believed a wedding between them possible.
"William, please bring me my reticule, I keep a little common place book there." said Lizzie.
Darcy brought his wife's reticule to her, and she brought out her little common place book. She opened it, and quickly found the page she wanted. Lizzie gave the book to Darcy, who read the following:
From the Common Place Book of Elizabeth R. Bennet
I have just received the following lines from one whom I did not expect. I now know that I am loved by a man who is worthy of my love, respect and admiration. A man whom I do not deserve.
If I had to run, if I had to crawl.
If I had to swim a hundred rivers,
just to climb a thousand walls.
Always know that I will find a way,
to get to where you are.
There's no place that far*
Darcy recognised the lines immediately, he also remembered when he had written them to Lizzie, so it had surprised him that she had not read the letter as soon as she had received it on that sad day at the Lambton Inn. He asked Lizzie about why she had not read the letter immediately.
"I was still overset at hearing what Lydia had done, and by my own fears that I would never see you again, since you knew of it also, so I gave the letter unopened to my Aunt Gardiner, who sent it with the answers to my enquiries regarding Lydia's revelations about your presence at her wedding. I will admit that I cried after I read your letter, after which I copied your lines to me in my common place book, and put your letter in my treasure box with another letter, both of which I will keep forever." replied Lizzie, smiling at her husband.
"As I will keep your letter." said Darcy, as he slipped out of his dressing gown, and joined Lizzie on the bed. He slipped his arm around her waist snugged her close to his side, and soon their married life truly began.
*Darcy's lines to Lizzie are the chorus of the song "There's No Place That Far" by Sara Evans and Vince Gill. This song was written by Sara Evans, Tom Shapiro and Tony Martin.

This has nothing to do with the Tely 10 training so if you dont want to continue reading stop here. I spent the day at a friends cabin in the Makinsons area and it was a wonderful way to spend Canada day. There was no time to get a run in but there was lots of physical activity taking place. The kids spent most of the day in the water and they had a ball. There was water skiing and that is where the kid in me came back to life. I estimate it has been 25 years since I water-skied and I am really happy to say that I got up on the second try. I remember it being a lot easier to hold on than it was this time around my hands hurt a lot but I made a full loop of the pond and did not fall down. That was the up portion of the day now for the down. I took a ride in a canoe and the first loop was with two friends but it was on the second time around by myself that the adventure started. I have been in canoes a couple of times every summer for the past 20 years so I would not consider myself a novice. I always knew how unstable a canoe is but this experience was an eye opener for me. My son was next to me on an electric seadoo and I reached over to him before I knew it the canoe started to tip and I could not stabilize it. I was in the water in a split second, luckily I had a life jacket on. I was safe thank god and then I realized I had my iPhone in my pocket as well as my digital camera in the other. I guess the phone was under water for 30 secs as I held it up with one hand till my buddy came to my aid on his seadoo. When I got back on shore I checked the phone and it was still on but it began to act funny and just died. I spent some time online researching iphone water damage and it is safe to say I am not the only moron on the planet there are thousands of conversations about this issue mostly from being dropped in the toilet. Anyway the best advice seemed to be to put the phone in a bowl of rice which I did and about 11pm 9hrs after the incident the phone came back to life and I am very happy to say it is operating perfectly since. The digital camera however seems to be toast but I did retrieve the pictures of the SD card! Off to Manitoba and Saskatchewan for a family vacation. It will be interesting to see how my training goes while on the prairies.
St. John’s-9°C Complete weather forecast

Sorry that I forgot the second day in Varberg, but here it comes. My father and I was taking a walk and we took a great second bath near the Stronghold at the cliffs again. I took some photos of the view of the Stronghold and all the nice little details I liked. During the evening, I took a gourmet pizza from a real stone oven at a little restaurant near the haven. It was actually really tasty.
Last year I visited my fathers hometown Varberg. We rent a room in a comfortable little inn. This year we returned to the same inn in Varberg. I collected some photos I’ve taken today.
Before entering the inn, we went to my grandfather. He is now 88 years old but he still lives in the cute wooden house he has built for himself. The nature and weather around us was amazing and he’s house was full with his paintings, stache and projects, and off course his old beautiful furniture and decorative things. There was quite messy, but in a quite coozy and comfortable way. He gave me this pipe, which is very old and lacks any similar copy.
So we said goodbuy to grandfather, arrived to the inn. Then we went to the cliffs nearby the big stronghold of Varberg and took a bath in the sea of Kattegat, There were a lot of people, including beautiful women in bikinis, but the water was pretty cold. However I got used to it and went in the water two times. Then we ate at a little food place nearby, in the forest.
Tomorrow I will take photos of Varberg and the great Stronghold and everything there is, but this evening, I will just share the pictures I’ve taken today, at my Grandfathers place in the countryside. Enjoy!
My grandfather have been out sailing a lot during his years. And he also loves to paint, both paintings and colorizing his birdhouses. You will get to see them shortly.
My grandfather has become very old and a bit confused lately. He now has home service looking over him and my father, aunts and uncles are shopping food for him. But after all, he is 88 years old. He has a walker and moves slowly but he is still quite funny and clear in his head, with a lot of memories to tell about.

David Walsh murder: Dalton Barnett's manslaughter term increased
A man jailed for the manslaughter of a father who was stabbed as he tried to protect his son has had his prison sentence increased.
Dalton Barnett, 19, had his "unduly lenient" six-year term increased to nine years at the Court of Appeal.
He was convicted over the killing of David Walsh, 45, who was knifed in Hendon, Sunderland, in November 2015.
Barnett's father, Charles Lamont, and Raymond Brown were found guilty of Mr Walsh's murder and given life terms.
Brown was ordered to serve a minimum of 26 years and Lamont 13 years.
Lamont's sentence was also referred to the appeal court but was not altered.
David Walsh died from blood loss following 34 separate knife wounds.
Speaking after the hearing, Attorney General Jeremy Wright QC said, "David Walsh suffered horrendous injuries as he was set upon by the three armed offenders and stabbed and slashed to death. Unlike his killers he was unarmed."

Colchester police ID man who died after car went off road
Published: Jun. 27, 2019 at 5:14 PM EDT
Police have identified the man who died Wednesday in Colchester after his car went off the road, and he's a member of our Channel 3 family.
Colchester police say Kyle Burkhard, 33, suffered a medical event before he went off the road on Heineberg Drive at about 8 p.m.
He was taken to the UVM Medical Center where he was pronounced dead.
Kyle worked several years ago behind the scenes at Channel 3. He was a director.
Kyle leaves behind a wife and son.

Details have now emerged regarding what WWE United States Champion Riddle was supposed to say during his botched promo on Raw last week.
Riddle forgot his lines and simply said “I forgot what I was going to say” before walking out of shot, leaving Asuka bewildered.
As per Fightful Select, Riddle was supposed to talk about “everything from Mt Fuji to underground robot fighting in Japan”.
There have been some conflicting stories about the apparent botch, but one thing that has remained consistent is Vince McMahon’s reaction.
The report also notes that Vince McMahon found the segment hilarious, which is something that has been said by others previously, and that Riddle got “particularly high praise”.
Asuka also received praise for her reaction and the surprised look on her face as the camera panned to her. McMahon was said to be happy with how it turned out.

I served three years in the U.S. Army in World War II as a foot soldier in the Pacific Theater. In October 2009, 140 of us who served during the war were able to go to Washington, D.C., with our "guardians."
During those three days, we were able to visit the Pentagon, the World War II Memorial, the Vietnam Veterans Memorial, the Tomb of the Unknown, Arlington National Cemetery, Walter Reed Army Hospital and the Capitol Building, to name just a few places.
We were given little flags to place at the Vietnam memorial to honor the people who gave their lives from the Panhandle. Our guardians helped us in every way and I am so thankful for them.
One of them was Justice of the Peace Frank Frausto. It was the first time I had met him and found him to be kind and considerate for taking his time to help us.
I was so very disappointed to learn that he had not been elected as judge. I never heard of the other man (Gary Jackson), who had won.
I just don't understand why this happened. He was doing such a good job for his Potter County precinct and was able to give money back to taxpayers. If I was in combat, Judge Frausto would be a man I would want next to me. He is honest and loyal.
Precinct 3 voters got it wrong on this one.
Amarillo Globe-News ©2013. All Rights Reserved.

I had some good news this past week. When I left Rotorua we had a father and his boys set for baptism, and it went through! Just stinks that I wasn't able to be there for it. Seems like every time that I find someone that's really awesome, and they get set for baptism, I get transferred out shortly there after. No good. Also had some pretty bad news recently too. Turns out one of the guys from my first area didn't make it to baptism. He was the man too. When I was there we were teaching him three times a week, and within about four months he'd almost finished the Book of Mormon. After I left he just kept going strong, going to church every week, always participating in class, just really on to it. He had to wait to be baptized until August, since he was on probation. August came and went without him being baptized, and now he's got a girlfriend and doesn't attend anymore. It crushed me just a little bit to see someone that I spent so much time with, and saw get so far, end up not making it through. Who knows. There's always more time.
Well. Had a pretty decent week here in Kawhia. I keep getting reminded over and over again how much fun it is to no longer be in leadership. We were out for a run on the beach the other day and it hit me again how happy I am here. Nothing like a jog on a never ending and totally deserted beach to help me realize that I pretty much don't have a care in the world right now. So good. My dream is that I get one more super awesome companion, and finish up here.
We had a really good experience with a non member family a few days back as well. We went with one of the members to follow up with a girl that's in the family. She'd previously been set for baptism, but had gone to Aussie for ages so it fell through. I didn't know any of the family, so I was pretty much just following the lead of my comp and the member. We sat down and they started talking about if the girl could be baptized, etc.. The Mum had a few concerns, and as I sat listening I could see it all going dangerously close to becoming a sales session. She raises concerns about why she isn't totally alright with her daughter being baptized, then the other two respond with this and that in an attempt to quickly resolve the matter and get this girl set for baptism. That's not at all my style. I'm not at all cool with baptizing someone who has no family support. I've seen it done and it never seems to work out. So instead of focusing on her daughter, I changed up the convo and ended up teaching the mum. Turns out she doesn't understand a whole lot of anything about us. For starters she was under the impression that the Book of Mormon was our bible, and not an additional bit of scripture to go hand in hand with the Bible. I shared a bit from 2 Nephi 29 (not the "thou fool" part, but the part about a testimony of two nations). Once she understood a bit more about our scriptures, I focused on the part from 2 Nephi 29:9 about God being the same, and tied it into the restoration. It's hard to explain, but man was it awesome. By the time we left she asked us to leave a copy of the Book of Mormon, because she wants to read it, and her attitude was totally different. I don't have any idea if she's start to seriously investigate the gospel, but for that moment, she knew she'd felt something. It's always amazing to watch the Spirit work.
Well, I hope it all made sense. If not, say a prayer and maybe the Spirit will help you.

Re: teacake does Stargate: punch it
^ Well if there are any more things that were announced back in the old days please don't mention them as I was paying no attention.[B]
The show is no longer on the air, shit, sorry, that was announced in the old days.
"Bqhatevwr" - Former Senator Scott Brown

CHICAGO -- Starlin Castro recalled his Major League debut, which began with a home run in his first at-bat at the age of 20, thanked Cubs fans for their support, talked about Mr. October, and called the trade to the Yankees "bittersweet" in a first-person essay posted Wednesday on "The Players' Tribune" website.
Castro, 25, played from 2010-15 with the Cubs and was a three-time All-Star at shortstop. On Dec. 8, he was dealt to the Yankees for pitcher Adam Warren and a player to be named.
"My career started in the best way possible: a home run," Castro said of his big league debut May 7, 2010, in Cincinnati, when he drove in six runs. "But not every at-bat can be a home run. ... Baseball, like anything else, is full of ups and downs -- and my five years in Chicago had its share of both."
Castro said Cubs fans were always good to him and that he could not thank them enough.
"When I got to Chicago, I was just a kid, trying to figure things out at a new job in a new city," he said. "When you're new, you want to be approved of, and you want to belong. Those first big cheers I got at Wrigley are something that I will never forget. They helped me feel like I was doing something right -- and they helped me feel like I was home."
He noted a lot of his favorite memories involve becoming a father, and recalled fishing on Lake Michigan with his son, Starlin Jr., and playing catch at a park. Castro also thanked the Cubs organization for "everything."
"You gave me an opportunity, you believed in me and you were always honest with me," he said. "You didn't just help me grow as a player; you helped me become an adult."
He made sure to thank former teammate Alfonso Soriano, who mentored Castro when he was called up. Soriano, who turned 40 on Thursday, is a godfather to Castro's son.
Castro also acknowledged that he struggled when he was replaced at shortstop by rookie Addison Russell in August, but noted that he did not want to be a negative influence on the team. When given the opportunity to win the second-base job, Castro took it seriously.
"I tried to treat it like a new beginning," he said.
Castro rebounded, batting .426 in September to help the Cubs reach the postseason for the first time since 2008.
"Out of all my accomplishments as a Cub, that is the one I hope people talk about when they look back on my career: That in a situation where some players would have checked out, I kept my head up and worked even harder," he said. "I didn't just say, 'I want to help the team win.' I actually helped the team win."
He says his goal now is to help the Yankees win, adding that he's at a stage in his career "where I just want to win. Period."
Carlos Beltran was among the players to reach out to Castro and welcome him to the Yankees. His favorite "welcome to New York" moment came when Yankees legend Reggie Jackson called to offer advice and encouragement.
"I think I smiled for the rest of the day after we got off the phone," Castro said.
Last year was the first time in Castro's career that the Cubs posted a winning record and reached the postseason. He's eager to play more baseball in October.
"To my new city, New York, I can promise you this: You are acquiring a player who just got to experience a pennant race for the first time -- and loved it," Castro said. "And to my old city, Chicago, I want to thank you for such an amazing experience. I'll always hold Chicago close to my heart. And hey -- maybe I'll still visit sometime. How's October?"

ALBUQUERQUE, N.M. (KRQE) – The Albuquerque Police Department has released the identity of the man killed in a weekend shooting in downtown Albuquerque. APD says their shot spotter system picked up shots fired downtown on Central and 4th, that’s where police say two men were found shot including 19-year-old Trevonte Robbins who died on the scene.
The other man was taken to the hospital and at last check, was in critical condition. AN APD officer was also injured when a bullet hit his windshield causing the glass to hit him. The officer was responding to another call at the time. No word yet on what exactly happened. KRQE News 13 reached out to police to ask if they have a suspect but have not heard back yet.

Lagos State Governor, Babatunde Fashola (SAN), and the All Progressives Congress governorship candidate in the state, Akinwunmi Ambode, on Thursday took a swipe at President Goodluck Jonathan for his repeated visits to Lagos ahead of the March 28 presidential election.
They said Jonathan is being deceived by the state leaders of PDP as Lagosians would not vote for him.
He said, “They have said the President is coming to Lagos. He is welcome to come; Lagos is part of his constituency but we will not vote for him because when we needed him, he did not come to help us. When the international airport road was damaged and he promised to fix it, did you see him?
“When Ebola hit Lagos, did he come?
When Kuramo Beach was overflowing and it was going to wipe out the entire Goshen Beach Estate, did you see the President? When I took him to Ibeju-Lekki, where people were losing their lands, we flew in a helicopter to the place but after that, the President never returned. I wrote letters and appealed but no response.
“We have been using your taxes to protect those communities. So, you have been on your own, with your own party and government. So, he can come 200 times but will you vote for him? The only time the President works is a few weeks to elections. When there was security problem in Lagos, who was buying guns and patrol vehicles for the police? Was it not us?”
They spoke at a rally in the Ifako/Ijaye Local Government Area of the state.
Fashola accused the President of distributing dollars during his five-day visit to the state last week, adding that Jonathan’s planned visit to Lagos on Sunday would amount to nothing.
Ambode said his supporters were free to collect money from Jonathan when he comes to visit on Sunday. He, however, urged the people of the state not to sell their PVCs to the PDP.
In his words: “When they offer you dollars, collect it, it is our money. But vote for APC.

George Galloway has admitted ordering an intermediary in Pakistan to dig out the marriage certificate of his Labour rival in order to try to prove she had been 16, not 15, when she claims to have been forced into marriage.
But Galloway, who has a 10,140 majority, denied that the intermediary had pretended to be Shah’s late father in order to dupe clerics into handing over the marriage documentation.
Officials from his Respect party dispute that Naz Shah, Labour’s candidate in Bradford West, was forced into marriage, on the grounds that her mother was at the ceremony.
Shah made the impersonation claim at highly charged hustings in Bradford on Wednesday night after Galloway produced what he claimed was her nikah, her Islamic marriage certificate. Telling her she had “only a passing acquaintance with the truth”, Galloway said: “You claimed – and gullible journalists believed you – that you were subject to a forced marriage at the age of 15. But you were not 15, you were 16 and a half. I have your nikah in my pocket.”
The age difference mattered, he suggested, because it “slandered” the Pakistani community and played into “every stereotype”. He was cheered by a large contingent of the Bradford crowd and heckled by others.
Shah, who has spoken about being forced into a violent and sexually abusive marriage aged 15, then accused Galloway’s contact in Mirpur, in Pakisani Kashmir, of impersonating her father, Abid Shah, who has been dead for many years.
Vowing to sue Galloway for defamation after the general election, she said she could prove that she had first married on 25 December 1988 when she had just turned 15.
On Thursday she told the Guardian she had instructed a lawyer in Mirpur to go the office of the muftis, or religious clerics, and obtain the 1988 nikah. She said that nikah arrived in Bradford on Wednesday. The Guardian has seen a copy of the 1988 nikah.
Shah also insisted that there were two nikahs in existence – the first, from 1988, and the second from 1990, which she claimed was obtained in order that her Pakistani husband could get a spouse visa to come and live with her in the UK. She said the British authorities would not have allowed her husband to come into the country with her had they known she was only 15 at the time of the marriage.
This claim was rubbished by Galloway’s spokesman Ron McKay, who said in an email: “You cannot have two nikahs to the same person Islamically – without going through a divorce first. Any divorce would show on a nikah and there is none.”
Asked where and how Galloway had obtained the nikah he waved around at the hustings, McKay said: “We were first given a copy of the nikah by a close family member in this country. We wanted to verify that it was authentic so we arranged for a person in Mirpur to obtain a copy directly from the registry office. There was no duplicity involved. And both versions are identical.
“The person did not pretend to be Abid Shah who, I understand, was extremely well-known in the area and it would have been widely known that he had died. That person provided an identity card which was photocopied and, I believe, a fee was paid, which is, I understand, the normal process. I repeat that there was no subterfuge. Every applicant has to provide identity which is photocopied. Further, I understand that the original document had to come from Chakswari and that there was a two or three days’ delay before it was picked up.
“If Naz Shah has any document then she should produce it and we will have it checked for authenticity with the Mirpur register office.”
Asked whether Galloway disputed Shah’s claim to have been forced into a violent marriage as a teenager – be that at 15 or 16 and a half – and was repeatedly raped in that marriage, McKay said: “In what sense was it a forced marriage? Her mother attended the marriage in 1990 as well as other family members and many witnesses did also, signing and giving fingerprints, so if it was forced presumably her mother and the others were part of that coercion?”
The government’s Forced Marriage Unit makes clear that parents are often the instigators of forced marriage, coercing their offspring to marry against their will.
McKay said that if Shah’s first husband had been violent to her, “then as a British citizen in Pakistan she could have jumped on a plane and left him behind, although I do appreciate that is often extremely difficult. If he was violent to her here – I’m not aware when they came back to Britain – then she could have gone to the police, social services, an imam or whatever. I am not aware, are you, of any such report by her to anyone, here or there?”
But he said Respect was in contact with Shah’s first husband, who has “strongly denied any earlier nikah” or doing her “absolutely any harm”.

Prime Minister John Key has outlined the nature of his friendship with chief foreign spy Ian Fletcher under questioning about the illegal surveillance on Kim Dotcom.
Their acquaintance dates back to their childhood, when their mothers were "best friends", Key said. He also went to school with Fletcher's brother.
Key made the admission in Parliament this afternoon after questions from Labour's deputy leader Grant Robertson about the Dotcom spying episode.
Robertson asked if Key recommended the appointment of the Government Communications Security Bureau boss Fletcher, who took over the role early last year.
"His appointment was made by the State Services Commissioner, but if the member is trying to make some other allegation, yes I knew him, I went to school with his brother, his brother was way brighter than Grant Robertson," Key said.
Robertson then questioned if the pair renewed their relationship when they both worked in London in the 1990s.
"I can't recall particular occasions," Key said.
"What I can say . . . was my mother was best friends with his mother. If that makes a conspiracy, fair enough."
The Opposition have repeatedly cast doubt on Key's claim he first became aware of illegal surveillance on the German millionaire in September last year. GCSB first became aware of Dotcom's residency status - which would have barred them from intercepting his communications - after a February 16, 2012 briefing.
Robertson was questioning why this was not raised in Key's three briefings with Fletcher in that month.
After question time, Key told reporters he "vaguely" knew Fletcher. He would characterise him as a friend and saw him "from time to time, but not very often".
"My mother and his mother are great friends," he said.
He stressed the SSC were in charge of the recruitment process and presented him with their recommendation. He can't recall if he declared the relationship.
"[I] just said 'it's fine, good appointment, he's very bright'. He used to work for Tony Blair and various other governments, he's one of the most senior civil servants in the British system, he's a very good person, he's doing a great job," Key said.
However, Green MP Steffan Browning claimed an associate had told him that Ian Fletcher had told people that while living overseas that he would always call on Key when he returned to New Zealand. Browning said the pair were "mates".
"That is real close and I think it's sinister to have that sort of relationship with the head of the GCSB," Browning said.
"They're about to revamp. For them to have that sort of relationship, it's nepotism - it's more than that, it's something you might think [went on] in some sort of third world country where there aren't decent checks and balances."
Robertson said Key must clarify the exact nature of the relationship.
"I'm interested that Mr Key chose to reveal this in the House many months after this issue first came to light," he said.
Dotcom is battling extradition to the US on internet piracy charges. His lawyers fought to make public the role GCSB played in the raid on his home in January 2012.
GCSB's legal department decided last February that there was no issue with his residency status - but were later proved wrong when the illegal surveillance was made public in September.
Owner orders dog to attack neighbour (graphic content)
Should MPs be able to swear to uphold the principles of the Treaty?Related story: Oath wording strikes MP discord

take offence (at something)(redirected from take offence at someone)
take offence (at something)
To be or feel insulted, offended, or humiliated by something. Primarily heard in UK. I know your jokes were made completely in jest, but I couldn't help taking offence at them. I noticed your parents leaving in a bit of a huff earlier; I do hope they haven't taken offence.

Many years ago I was looking for a new craftsman circular saw. I bought one at Sears when they were still in business.
The one I got I knew was a homeowner version, and not a professional industrial version because it had a safety switch on the trigger. That was the first thing within 24 hours of using that went wrong. It would not let the sauce shut off when you let go of the trigger. I took it back and they gave me a new one and it did the same thing in about 2 days.
You need to realize that you can't fix stupid. If someone wants to hurt themselves with your saw they will find a way. The second thought I took back was a two and three quarter horse industrial saw that lasted for years. Now I see like I have off scene so many times before, something that is really good has to be discontinued because it work too good.
On top of this, I like my tools so I want a hard case to put them in when they're not in use.
For these three reasons I will not buy another Craftsman power tool. ..
User's recommendation: If you want professional quality tools that will last don't buy crap power tools.

MARATHON, Fla. – A Florida Keys man was arrested Sunday for beating his roommate with a baseball bat, deputies said.
According to the Monroe County Sheriff’s Office, 59-year-old Javier Francisco Arellano was taken to jail.
Deputies responded to a home in the 1500 block of Copa D Oro Street where they found the 57-year-old victim with a lot of blood coming from his head. He told authorities his roommate, later identified as Arellano, beat him.
The victim was eventually airlifted to a Miami hospital to have staples put in his head. He also had injuries on his legs, arms and hands, deputies said.
The victim told a deputy he had put a dead rat or mouse in a freezer to feed a pet snake, and that made Arellano upset. The victim said his roommate went to him to talk about the issue, but the victim said they would discuss it later.
When the victim said he was going to leave the room, that’ when Arellano started hitting him with the baseball bat. Arellano knocked the victim down and said “I’m going to have to kill you,” before the victim got away and went to a neighbor’s house.
Arellano was charged with aggravated battery with a deadly weapon.
Deputies found over 40 firearms inside the home. It’s unclear at this time who they belonged to.

Service is spot on. I usually fix everything I can on my car and leave all the major services to shops like these, who are professional and straight to the point. Sean took care of my car and recommended additional work that was needed to be done along with the estimates before charging me. His shop was able to finish my car in a day. I have 200K miles on this car so the jobs completed were major, (Timing belt, water pump, many worn out rubber gaskets were replaced thanks for Sean and his team on this one for checking thoroughly, rear drum brakes, power steering pump and fluid replacement, coolant flush etc.) After driving it for a day I can definitely tell they did some honest work because my car is quiet again, my RPM's are stable and back to normal, and finally the oil leaks from before are gone. If you guys want honest work done to your car and a professional staff to deal with come here.

politicsShow most recent or highest rated first.
I use to think that the prime minister would sit down at a big table and name everything so we would know what to call it.
when I was young I used to believe David Letterman was the president. I mean, he was always on TV at night during "adult" time and he always wore a suit and tie..
I was pretty small when Nixon was President. I thought "Watergate" was a type of alligator.
I used to believe that the candidate that lost the Presidential election became the Vice President as a sort of consolation prize. I didn't realize candidates picked their vice presidents ahead of time.
When I was younger I used to believe that Margaret Thatcher was a male ballet dancer with a beard. Not unlike "Bullet" Baxter from Grange Hill.
Anytime you had a question (any question at all) you just called the president.
When I was little I worried about the Iron Curtain, I worried that the curtain pole would break as iron was heavy!! I also wanted to know how they secured the curtain pole and where it started and finished!
When I was little I thought each person was elected individually, so if you liked one presidental canidate and someone else's vice president canidate, you could mix and match. When they announced the winners, everybody who won would get together and work together to run the country.
Oh to be so innocent still...
In fifth grade, I thought that part of the reason that Quebec wanted to secede from the rest of Canada because English was printed above French on cereal boxes, and they wanted French to be on top. I thought that they should have a better reason for making such a fuss.
I used to believe the way they counted up votes was by counting the signs people used to put on their yards
I thought an asylum seeker was a crazy person who checked in to an asylum on purpose.
As a child, I thought that President Ford and actor Harrison Ford were the same person. Upon seeing Harrison Ford's movie "Air Force One", I told my mother "You know, he does such a good job being president, he should become the real US president again".
I live in Illinois, and I was 8 years old and in 3rd grade in 1998, when we had a gubernatorial election. We had a little mock election at school, and the night before, my dad sat me down to talk about the candidates for governor. Although our family is Democratic, my dad advised me not to "vote" for Glenn Poshard just because he was a Democrat, since he was in favor of legalizing assault weapons.
However, I didn't hear the "a" in "assault," so I thought he said "salt weapons." I literally spent the next four-or-so years of my life wondering what on earth a "salt weapon" was—I envisioned a machine gun that spewed out salt shakers, and somehow the salt was caustic enough to kill people.
I used to believe that (Captain) Ahab was a nickname for Abraham Lincoln, and so that the president and the hunter of Moby Dick were one and the same.
When I was a little girl growing up in Georgia in the 1970's, my Daddy told me that President Jimmy Carter was a close personal friend of his. (He was from our own home state!) Daddy convinced me that we were going to be invited to the White House, and that I was going to play in the backyard with little Amy on her swingset.
I didn't realize the whole checks and balances thing when I was little, and I thought the president could just order something to be done, and it would have to be done. So I always wondered why he didn't order the nation to reelect him, so he could be president forever. I thought that maybe the ONLY thing a president couldn't do was order himself to be reelected, so I thought that he should confer with another country, and come to an agreement that if the other country's president would help his pass a law so he could be president forever, he would help that other president in doing the same thing. At least that's what I was planning on doing if I ever became president!!
When I was about 6, which would have made it about 1951, I said something innocuous to my grandparents and my grandfather said, "Better not say things like that, or McCarthy will get you." He was joking, but for years I thought "McCarthy" was some kind of mythical ogre like the "boogeyman" who would kidnap you if you misbehaved. For years every time I was bad I worried about "McCarthy". Many years later I found out I hadn't been all that far off.
I was born during the Watergate hearings and grew up hearing how responsible Nixon was for the Vietnam Conflict. So, I used to believe that Nixon was the boogey man hiding underneath my bed and that Vietnam was a monster that took children away from their parents.
When I was little, I thought people voted by putting out candidates' signs on their lawn. I thought if you put out more signs than you were voting more, and I didn't understand why we only put out 2.
Untill I was about 15 I thought that the birthmark on Mikael Gorbachov's head was actually a map of the world.

In her Myth and Legend class, she taught the story of Theseus, who killed the killers. He saved Athens from Procrustes, the murderer who laid his victims on a bed and stretched the short ones to fit or, if they were tall, chopped off their feet and head; he defeated a bandit who tied his victims to two bent trees and cut the moorings, thus ripping his victims in half. He dispatched other monsters as well, often using their own methods.
A boy, wearing a hoodie, one hand thrust in his pocket, with no pen or paper or book, was fascinated by these grisly stories. He pushed his glasses up on his nose.
She said the old myths were full of such horrible stories.
“Horrible?” he said.
“Yes,” she said.
“Look at the Bible,” he said. “Samson pulled down the roof on his enemies. Judith beheaded Holofernes. The Romans crucified Christ. Or the saints’ lives–Lucy with her eyes on a plate. Joan of Arc burned at the stake.” The ceiling light gleamed on his glasses. “It’s just true. The way the world is.”
This happened after the class in the lecture hall, as she gathered her books and notes, paper-clipping them, so they would not fly out of order. The students rushed out of the hall at quarter to the hour, a few staying to ask their questions about their grades and would the next test be like the first one and was there extra credit? She stood alone in the hall with this odd boy in the hoodie. Then he climbed up on the shallow stage and she took a step back. He took another step forward, so that if she were to extend her arm, he would be at her fingertips. She straightened her shoulders to appear unafraid.
He drew his hood down over his forehead, and she could not see his eyes as he continued his interpretation. “Maybe those people deserved their fate. Maybe they invaded his territory, his space.”
She forced herself to stand still. “Procrustes and Sinis were bandits. The victims were just travelers on the road.”
“I don’t think you understand it well enough. It’s complex. They weren’t innocent victims.” He let out a hissing breath. “I’m saying it simply. We aren’t innocent. You aren’t innocent.”
His hands were in his pockets, and she wondered if he had a knife or gun in there. Above them, the fluorescent lights buzzed. He stepped toward her, and she glanced at the table: pens, papers, her jacket on the chair back. Maybe she could roll the chair into his shins and topple him.
“That was a horrible time,” she said.
“Today too,” he said. “But I’m a good guy.” He pulled his hand out of his pocket. “You forgot your reading glasses here the last time.” He placed them on the table. He walked away, one hand still in his pocket, the other waving good-bye. “I understand the myths. I deserve a good grade.”
published 6 June 2013

Discussion in 'Entertainment' started by PureEnergy, Jul 25, 2008.
It was better than I expected for a DVD flick.
I watched it last night, and I enjoyed it. Good cast, good plot, and some T&A.
It was a little too long, IMO.
it's a true story.. you got to watch it. i felt sorry for the first bank robber that got kidnapped, that sandblaster suck'd.
wanted to watch it, Statham is the man.
still wanna see this
I saw in the theaters, will pick it up on bluray eventually
damn right. Bank Job is next on my rental list, his other movie with Leelee Sobieski looks good too
He is one of my favorite actors and I was terribly bored by that movie after the nudity ended. Did not like it at all.
Loved him in the transporters, crank, the italian job ... not here. Movie felt very slow, old, and boring, just like the movie Bullit.
Caught this on Monday. Wasn't thorougly impressed with it. had some good moments but nothing too spectacular.
it was worth the watch I suppose.
I enjoyed it, but 1/2 the fun was trying to guesss what was true.
Do you think the goverment would hire that bunch of losers?
one of the best movies statham has been in.
so much better than the transporters, and infinitely better than the shit he's been in lately, like War and For The King or whatever that bullshit was.
I still like him better in Snatch.
well that's a given
I believe so, then just knock them off one by one after the job was done.
I watched it again last night, and the more I think about it the more I liked it. I thought the pacing was just right and Statham's character was a little overboard. He went out like he didn't have anythign to lose.
Now, if those people were able to get to the other members of the bank team and kill them, they should have been able to get to Statham's family. Which would have made him think twice about throwing everything back in their faces like that.

The OU in Arezzo info session was an international event for this semester I attended, I previously wrote about the OU in Puebla info session. One of the cons I wrote about OU Puebla which really is not a con, is that I wanted a challenge when it came to the language and since I already speak Spanish maybe OU Puebla was not a good fit for me. That is why I also looked into OU Arezzo, even though when your there you are with fellow OU students it is still more of a challenge because you are in a foreign country and I don’t speak Italian. Another big pro for me is that OU Arezzo has summer programs that are business programs and since I am majoring in Finance that is something I was looking into. There is also one more thing that I find appealing about this program, it is that it is located in Europe so close to other places that I have always wanted to travel to and it is so convenient to have it located so close. Since thinking about places to study abroad OU Arezzo has always been one of my favorites and a place I will keep looking into.

Of course, he wasn’t surprised the other Boxes had problems. Of course he wasn’t surprised. He’d seen the data. He had the reports memorized. In time, they all had problems. They all withdrew, even the ones who said they were happy. Even the ones who’d chosen this life for themselves.
Steve clicked his pen against his chin and surveyed Jeanette’s presentation. She was trying to snare everyone’s attention, hold it close, massage them with her words. He gazed around the room and consulted the families’ tired faces. Nodding, staring down. Chewing for sustenance only, maybe to eke some saliva into their dry mouths. They looked like cows, or oxen.
He looked at the boxes. He gave them two seconds each, a short nod, a minute dilation of his pupils. Just the same regard he gave to all the humans. He didn’t know if they appreciated it, but it was part of LifeMedia’s edict that he treat them as normally as possible.
Actually, he knew they didn’t like it. They didn’t like how he acted. They wanted to feel different from the breathers. Their difference buffeted them and built them up. They thought it made them special. He pitied it a little.
Jeanette was opening her arms in welcome, and trying to get someone to speak. All at once Steve sparked to life. He pulled his tablet from his bag and read all their names, reviewed the schedule, asked for recommendations and emergency-grade problems. They shifted in their seats uncomfortably. He mirrored their postures: slumped, exhausted, as if they were ducking away from an ongoing blast.
He pitched back to Jeanette. Her voice was clean and unworried. Perfect, untainted by dialect or automation or even tears. He looked at the cables and the hard drive on the table. Its power button and network signal pulsed with light, like it was breathing. Or dreaming.
When it got quiet, it was hard for him the keep the screams away. With all the boxes so close, their other voices seemed to wail in his ear even louder than normal, rattling his bones. Or what could be said to be bones. He tapped on his knee and reached for a cookie. It tasted like nothing, but he smiled as he forced it down, tried to feign placidity. Bliss.
It was no wonder they all hated him. He couldn’t read their thoughts, but caught bits and pieces. From what he could tell, they didn’t know what he was. They thought he was just a douchey human. That being so detested was a marker of his success brought him great pain.
They went around the room talking. Lily’s mother was nearly catatonic. Her words came out like water squeezed from rock. Or salt mined. Her gaze was cloudy and occluded, but Jeanette leaned forward, nodded at her, spoke magic incantations of support and empathy. Touched the woman gently on the knee, just so. The mother collapsed like she’d been blown over, into a deluge of blubbering and tears.
Steve turned his eyebrows up in sadness. A human never ran out of tears. Or even sadness. The well was unending, deeper than he thought. LifeMedia wanted the reports to say there was an average grieving period, and that it was short, maybe a few months— and therefore bearable. But instead they were run down for years. Like Andrea. Years now, and still a mess. And she was the model client, really.
Andrea was speaking now. She was always a risk, she knew too much. But she knew how to meander, circle her point so that only Steve could grasp it. When she looked at him, she looked through him. On the phone she addressed him the same way she did LifeMedia’s automated operator. She was saying, very carefully, that Carlton was confused because he had a pre-existing condition, but that thanks to Joey and Jeanette it would all be fixed today, and she was so grateful. Grateful but scared.
One of the newcomers started talking. A tall man spoke, then his son in the Box spoke. The son flashed orange and said he could move his hands. That he woke up with a start every morning, certain he had fallen out of bed or down the stairs. The boy in the Box was a football player. He still ran plays in his mind, felt the turf hit his shoes. The sweat was palpable, as was the burn of lactic acid in his throat. There was a thirst, a powerful thirst he could not assuage.
Lily piped up and said these feelings weren’t real, and not to worry. She said it aloud because the boy had trouble messaging Box-to-Box. The boy still could feel his teeth, tongue, and jaw; of course he wanted to use them. Lily told him to let his body go. Give it to the world of the living and embrace his new way of being and feeling.
Steve sat up and told the boy he would be happy to run a private consultation after the meeting. The boy’s father was a mess of thankfulness. Jeanette gracefully reclaimed the conversation and pushed it forward.
"A lot of us have been struggling to deal with this transition," she said. "My sister has been having physical sensations too. But I don’t think she has…well, the illusion of moving, not like you do. Do I have that right, Joey?"
The octagonal box shone. Blue. “That’s right. Yeah, I feel like I have a body, but I can’t move it. It hurts.”
She sounded almost legitimately sad.
"I’m so sorry to hear that, Joey," Steve said. "Hopefully the procedure today will help. Our research suggests it’s similar physiologically to having a phantom limb."
He told them the brain was plastic. Neurons could take on new uses, he said, and it just took time. The transition was messy, but the pain would end. All the Boxes knew he was full of shit and there was no evidence for his claims, but his words made the breathers sigh and relax. It was soothing to soothe.
Jeanette addressed Edwidge’s mother. The girl had gone eerily silent of late. Steve regarded her features, saw her face lift and move through various emotions effortlessly while she watched the others, modulated her words to their expressions, and gave honestly of herself. Joey had been the same way, she said.
She was almost too perfectly symmetrical, Steve thought. Then he caught sight of a freckle beneath her right eye. He zoomed in and saw the threads of blue and green in her honey-brown irises. They were irregular. Her pupils expanded when she saw him seeing her. This made him sad, too. It was guilt. Of course it was guilt.
Her genetic profile was damn close. He suspected that if he put Jeanette in an fMRI, her brain’s organization would be a dead spit of Josephine’s. Her body was strong, youthful for thirty, lithe and pretty. She was a perfect vessel. People would be too distracted by her looks to notice if was something about her was slightly strange.
Hours passed. The time came. Steve rose and hooked the cords to the hard drive and turned it on. He entered his account number using a keypad on its surface. Andrea handed her husband’s BrightBox to him, like it was a baby. When he reached for Joey, Jeanette jolted and did it herself, slinking the cords around the plates and cups on the table. She hesitated before hooking it up.
"Are you ready, Joey?" she asked. Her eyes were huge.
There was a hesitation. Steve could feel Joey’s cameras on him.
<She’ll be okay,> Steve messaged to her. Joey’s mind reeled at first, but soon she was no longer surprised.
<Of course,> she replied. Of course he was one of them.
“Yes. I’m ready.”
Steve stood and clicked Carlton in. He opened the hard drive’s directory. Opened up a connection to their minds.
Searching them, Steve could hear the din. It was building. Ringing in his microphones, dizzying his cameras. He heard the back-ups screaming. Joey, Carlton, Thompson, Lily, Edwidge. Thousands of others. They recognized what he was and it turned their terror to rage.

She's always easy on the eyes, and today (April 12) was no different as Eva Mendes showed off her good looking self while grabbing brunch in West Hollywood, CA.
The 38-year-old actress opted to chow down at Hugo's today while exiting the restaurant with a coffee to-go and left overs in-hand.
The outing comes as Miss Mendes recently dished about how she's feeling better than ever these days thanks to getting herself into a regular fitness routine.
"When I was younger, I was blessed with a fast metabolism, so I never had to work out keep in shape," the "Hitch" hottie explained. "Now I feel that it worked against me because I could have felt this great back then. I've never felt as good as I do today."

'My late husband's family wants me to marry his older brother'
Is it good to continue with the tradition of inheriting wives?
My name is and I am from Benue State. I was to a young man who is from one of the Eastern states of Nigeria for six years with a child before the cold hands of death snatched from me.
His death raised many eyebrows because he fell sick after he traveled home and laid the foundation of his building.
According to what Uzor told me, one of his uncles was not happy with him, claiming the land he wanted to build belonged to him (the uncle), and wanted his own son to build on the land.
Uzor insisted he must build on the land and when the man's son was ready, there were other lands in the family for him to build on.
Shortly after he came back, Uzor fell sick and the ailment defied all medical attention and we had to take him to his place but he died shortly after our arrival.
Immediately he was buried, the family called a meeting and insisted I must marry his older brother so that I will remain in the family. They told me it was their tradition and failure to do so is total calamity.
But how can I marry a man who is as old as my own father with four other wives? I even heard that he took over two of the women from his late brothers.
Please I need urgent advice on what to do?
Dear readers, on Morning Teaser today, we ask: how would you advice this lady?
JOIN OUR PULSE COMMUNITY!
Eyewitness? Submit your stories now via social or:

Jim Anderson is a successful businessman, and his wife, Marilyn, is the perfect wife. And why wouldn't she be? He gives her everything she needs. That's why Jim never expected to come home one day and find Marilyn gone.
After 27 years of marriage, Marilyn has had enough of feeling unloved and neglected. She wants to experience some measure of happiness before she's too old to enjoy it, even signing up for dance lessons, something Jim would never do. What will it take for Jim to finally become the man Marilyn needs him to be?
I was so excited to read Dan Walsh and Gary Smalley's newest book and the 1st in their Restoration Series! With their name on the Front cover, you have high expectations, right!? right!
Jim and Marilyn are sadly, a very common example of many marriages today. Each is set in their "roles" and they have grown further apart as the years go by. For Marilyn, she had been crying out how unhappy she was and Jim just wasn't hearing exactly what she was saying or how serious she was.
The Dance is excellent and portrays a perfect look at what it takes to really work at putting your marriage back together, healing the wounds, and finding love all over again.
I really didn't think Jim was ever going to "get it." He frustrated me immensely! But I loved the journey Jim took and how he had his eyes opened! Marilyn's journey was totally different of course, but just as moving. I so appreciated how their children's thoughts and perspectives played a role, because no matter how old they are or even if they have moved out and lead a life on their own, they are still affected.
Overall, The Dance was excellent and I highly recommend it on so many levels! I CANNOT wait until book 2 is out!
Thank you Donna and Revell for allowing me this complimentary book in exchange for my honest review!

My girl and I went to Brighton on Saturday. We went late, squeezed it in after my brother's graduation. We got there around 5pm and were pleasantly surprised by the conditions. I expected ice too and while it was more hardpacked, I wouldn't call it ice. I've been on worse.
They had two runs open. The blue on the far right and the black right next to it. The rollers on the black were bombed out pretty bad as seen from the chair lift. It was enough to keep me from giving it a try.
The crowds were pretty light. That surprised me some.
I surprised myself with my riding. The first time felt weird but I made it down just fine. I chuckled at the memory of the last time I'd ridden this run when I was just starting out.
A few runs in and I was right back where I left off last year and I even added a new 'trick' to my disgustingly short list.
I can now to little 360 spins while riding down. Sounds ridiculous but to me that was a big deal. I credit this to my new board, that NS Legacy. Before I wouldn't have had the confidence to do the healside portion of that spin out of nerves of faceplanting but it's so easy NOT to faceplant on this board! There were a few times that I knew I should have taken a dive yet somehow I didn't. It was the weirdest feeling. It made me more confident in the board and more willing to try new stuff as the night wore on.
I bit it a few times but it was cool because it was always when I was trying something different.
I had a hard time discerning the "dampness" at speed that I keep hearing about. I bombed a few runs and I dunno..it didn't seem *that* much smoother than my old board but that could be because the last few days on my old board were on mushy snow and not ice and I just don't remember how choppy it was.
I think I'd have to do one run with each board one run after the other to see the difference.
We weren't out long. Maybe 3 hours. My girl was worn out by then and we decided to leave before she pushed it and got injured before this Friday.
'12 NS Legacy 163
Days on snow 2015/2016 season:
- Boyne Highlands:
- Boyne Mountain:
- Mt Holly: 1
- Caberfae Peaks:
- Big Sky:

Two Fiancées, One Ring
I was finally planning to pop the question to my girlfriend, and I wanted to make it really special. I had planned to take her to her favorite restaurant, which was the one where we had our first date. I went there ahead of time to make some arrangements. I did things like reserved a good table with a great view of the boulevard, got the maitre d' to have a dozen roses ready for me, and tended to details like that just to make it something to remember. While I was there, I got a call from my ex. Now, my ex and I had been really good friends before we dated. Although we broke up five years ago and I had since started dating my soon-to-be fiancée, my ex and I had always stayed in touch. We shared occasional phone calls and e-mails. When I told her I was planning to get engaged, she sounded excited and wanted to congratulate me. I had some time to kill, so we agreed to grab a coffee together. I told her I'd be over in about twenty minutes to pick her up since she didn't have a car. When I got there, she wasn't ready. So, she told me to wait in her living room. I grabbed a beer from her fridge to drink while I was waiting. When she came back, she was not dressed for coffee! She looked absolutely gorgeous. I was dumb-struck! She came over to me and said that this was my pre-wedding present. She said that she wanted me to always remember her if I and my future wife ever broke up. Well, as luck would have it, I had my fiancée's engagement ring with me. I told her she could try it on and that she could be my fiancée for the day. We had the most amazing sex that afternoon. We went at it for hours. When we finished, I got dressed and left her house to go home. I had to get ready to propose to my real girlfriend. On my way home, my ex called to tell me I had forgotten something. I had left the diamond engagement ring on her finger! She was a good sport about it, and I went back and got it. I was so exhausted from our love-making that I waited until the next day to propose. My fiancé loves her "slightly-used" ring, even though she'll never know the truth about my double engagement!
— Shawn, 27
If you had three wishes we're sure one of them would be to see Bahara show off her Arabian assets! See this exotic beauty uncovered and uninhibited just for you!
No wonder Flor Bermudez has been featured in so many car magazines. She's got a rocker edge thanks to the star tattoos above her bootiful booty!
Ten Things Stylish Men Keep In Their Wallets
Style reaches beyond expensive suits. It's a way of life. It's not enough to consider yourself stylish-you must be equipped to prove it in any circumstance.
If You Fake It, You Won't Make It
When you're getting to know a woman with dating potential, you're searching for mutual connections. Naturally, that spark of chemistry is important. But so is having some shared interests. Be careful, however, that you don't manufacture common ground. You could have to walk on that path for a long time, and you want it to be solid. Here are some tips for uncommon success.

Parole hearings underway for man convicted in Niles officer's murder
A parole hearing was held Monday for a convicted Niles cop killer.
Vienna Police Chief Bob Ludt says he testified to the Ohio parole board that Randy Fellows should never be considered for parole.
Fellows was convicted in the 1983 and sentenced to 30 years to life in prison for his role in the murder of Niles police officer John Utlak. Fellows was 19 at the time of the crime.
Fred Joseph was 17 years old when he killed Officer John Utlak in a premeditated murder. Fellows was found to be his accomplice in the December 8, 1982 shooting.
Chief Ludt was Utlak's partner at the Niles police department. Ludt says was he was also one of Fellows and Joseph's intended targets.
"When you look back on the crime that happened and how methodical and calculated that it was, then you can't fast forward to today and say 'oh I didn't know what I was doing at the time," Ludt said.
Ludt says Utlak's only sister also testified on Monday.
Ludt worries Fellows would be a danger to the public if he's released.
"The plan was to kill both John and I and I certainly don't want him back out," Ludt said.
"They were so calculated and they're probably so bitter that to let them out I believe they'd be a danger to any police officer."
Fellows is entitled to a parole hearing every ten years. He was denied release in 2012. The parole board is expected to make a decision within the next few weeks.
Joseph has served 28 years behind bars after he was sentenced in 1983 to life in prison with the chance at parole after 30 years. His last parole hearing did not grant him release.

4.5 stars 33 totalReview Anne Kiske
Posted by Edward
I have counted on Anne so many times with my own issues and the issues of my friends and family and she and her team always exceed my expectations. Her team is efficient and helpful and can be counted on to keep you on track while you navigate your issue. Most of the time Anne actually sends me money back. Thank you so much Anne and team!!
Posted by Joshua
My case took well over a year, and it started with my ex and I trying to just agree to terms and finalize paperwork with one lawyer to reduce cost. Once I realized I was gonna end up with nothing, I went to Anne.
Anne not only got everything I had asked for (50/50 custody, no child support, even holidays, etc.), she worked with me no matter the situation was. I received responses to any of my questions usually within the hour. If she was out of the office, there was still someone there to assist me with my needs.
She took time out of her own day to help, would stay late so I could come after work to meetings, and even stayed on the phone with me at odd hours while I was deployed overseas. I would suggest using Anne if you are having serious issues with a person who is just not agreeable.
I ended up with everything I had asked for originally, plus more. It was definitely worth the investment to ensure I have my kids.
Posted by Nick
I was very satisfied with my representation, this firm offers a comfortable environment as well as friendly consultation. Diligence was a huge wow factor for me, I came into the office the day before my case seeking representation and was instantly sat down and talked with about my situation. Anne Kiske represented me at my hearing the very next day and got me the most ideal plea possible for my charges. I couldn't be more pleased with the level of professionalism as well as friendliness and work put forth. I highly recommend this firm.
Posted by Daniel
Anne kiske was very helpful in my divorce and child custody case. Anne and the entire staff looked after me with honesty and hard work, always a phone call or an e mail away. From the begging of the case kiske stayed informative with fine details about the case and helping me keep my kids in a stable and safe environment. Top it all off the staff was very understanding about my financial position and worked with me the whole way. And if that doesn't put the icing on the cake. What other attorney in the land, who just got into an accident and broke their leg, would walk into court for a trial, on crutches, instead of delaying the case! She told me, "I couldn't consciously delay this trial." She fully understood how important this case was to me and for my children. That alone earned my full and entire respect. I'd recommend this law office for anyone who is fighting a case for the right reasons and needs a winner hands down.
Posted by Zach
Mrs. Kiske was very helpful and informative when I caused a traffic accident that could have been fatal to the other person. I didn't exactly know what was going to happen as a result and the things I needed to do but she helped with everything. After being given my consequences, I believe it is fair to say that the deal I was given might have been far worse had she not been there. Mrs. Kiske was calm and cordial through it all, and I would DEFINITLEY hire her again.
Posted by Shirley
Ann helped me in my divorce case. When I first meet with Ann she explained how her fees and billing worked. Ann is a great attorney. Friendly and easy to work with. She really worked hard on my case and kept me informed through e-mails and in person I was very pleased with her representation and the outcome of my case. Ann is a great great attorney, I would recommend her to anybody and definitely hire her again.
Posted by Renea
I hired Anne and am VERY pleased that I did. I was concerned about the whole divorce process and how it worked. During my initial consultation Anne was very clear about her expectations, what she could do concerning my case, and how billing worked with her. She eased my concerns and let me know that communication between her and I and prompt responses from me were important. Anne acted quickly on my behalf when filing paperwork with the courts for me as my situation was a very sensitive one concerning my divorce. She even stayed late a couple of nights working on paperwork for me. She responded to my questions via email and always gave me sound legal advice. She was never pushy and I always felt that when she was working my case, my case had her undivided attention. I was expecting this process to be much longer than it was, but my divorce took just 4 months to complete start to finish (granted it was uncontested). Anne and her team made a painful experience as smooth and easy as they could concerning the divorce process, and for that I thank them. I would definitely recommend her as a solid choice in representation.
Anonymous review posted on
Ann was great threw out my entire litigation process. Yes she can some times be a little judgmental but overall she will fight for you no matter what you did. She will set expectation and will tell you what are the possible outcomes. She provided great legal advice at a time I needed it most.
Anonymous review posted on
Anne and her staff were wonderful to work with during the modification of my parenting plan with my ex. She was always available if I had questions or concerns and really quite pleasant to work with in general. She didn't over communicate just to charge us for her time, which was much appreciated. She did provide detail monthly bills where I could see exactly what I was paying for.
Posted by Monica
Wouldn't even give one star if I could. This was the biggest mistake ever! I seriously believed all good reviews here. Now i know that they have to be posted by her, PLEASE do not waste your money I hired her based on all the reviews and she was the complete opposite, I can go on and on about how unprofessional she was and the lack of work she did, she will charge for EVERY PHONE CALL, EVERY MINUTE SHE spends on the phone i had some crazy fees for 5 minute conversations i had with her over the phone. She will racked up extremely high bills, and does not care about the well-being of you or your child.

According to Montgomery Co. officials, the pilot was flying by himself when the plane went into a spin. The pilot was able to recover the plane before hitting the ground near FM 2854 at Highway 105.
The plane went over several trees before landing, investigators said.
No injuries were reported.
Report a typo to the ABC13 staff

Judge Walter Stone Has Died
Saturday, September 23, 2017
One of the leading criminal defense attorneys in Rhode Island, Walter Stone was named to the bench in October of 2010 by then-Governor Donald Carcieri. He replaced Judge Rogeriee Thompson when she was elevated to serve as a U.S. Circuit Judge.
"Walter Stone is one of this state's most pre-eminent and respected criminal attorneys, known for his commitment to the law and his clients," said Carcieri at the time of Stone's appointment. "The combination of his experience, knowledge of the law, and the quality of his character make him an exceptional candidate for the Superior Court."
Before being appointed to the court, Stone was a partner at the Providence-based law firm Adler Pollock & Sheehan.
Long-time friend Artin Coloian said about Stone, “He was a great friend, lawyer, and judge. He was widely respected by everyone."
“He (Stone) had an ability to apply common sense to the most complex circumstances. He had a great sense of humor. He always remembered his service to his country as a U.S. Marine and took great pride in his service," Said Coloian.
Stone was a graduate of Fisk University and earned a J.D. from Case Western Reserve School of Law.

I must say that it has been a pretty awesome last few weeks for Kate and I as well as our friends. And I don’t mean it because we got to go on an awesome vacation or because we had two Thanksgiving dinners, but because there has been some pretty exciting news in our lives.
No, we’re not having a baby. I just want to say that before I start getting hysterical calls from my mom.
Actually, our friends En and Em just had their second daughter, baby A. Good job, Em!!! And congratulations to En as well for his contribution. She couldn’t have done it without you.
Bringing a new member to the family is by far the most amazing thing that could happen, but there were other things that happened to us that were somewhat cool.

my3lans Posted December 20, 2017 Share Posted December 20, 2017 I won't lie. I still love him. I still miss him. But now I'm starting to get angry. Why couldn't he just have the balls to tell me he wanted out? Why did he have to ghost? And why can't I get a good reason besides this "I'm overwhelmed right now with my job and (grown) kids" bull? I was good to him. I was good for him. HE is the one that started saying "I love you" and wanting us to move in together and wanting our (grown) kids to meet, etc. Yes, it developed quickly. But we had known each other for so long before we started dating it just didn't feel that way. It felt good. It felt right. We were both finally happy. And then the very next week.... I am still struggling to understand. Each day I cry a little less. But I'm struggling now to control my anger. I want to let everyone know what a wuss he was and that he's not the "great and wonderful guy" everyone thinks he is. I know I need to be the bigger person but it's so hard for me to do. I deserved a better ending that what I got. I deserved REAL answers. And I'm angry that I'm never going to get them. I want to punch him. I'm deliberately avoiding a funeral for parents of mutual friends because I don't want to run into him. I am just not able to control my emotions right now and don't want to cause a scene. I cannot wait until after the holidays so I can start my kickboxing class! Just a vent. Link to comment
This topic is now archived and is closed to further replies.

In an all-new E! Special that premiered this weekend, LeAnn Rimes opens up about how she wishes she'd done a few things differently when she met husband Eddie Cibrian in 2009. They couple met on the set of Lifetime's Northern Lights, while both were married to other people. LeAnn was married to Dean Sheremet, and Eddie was married to Brandi Glanville.
She said, "I wish I handled it differently because I wish I could have been better for me for Brandi, for Dean, for Eddie and for everyone else. All I wish is that everyone that was hurt that we hurt, that I hurt, can be happy."
The show will re-air tonight at 10pm

I'm not just asking because I'm nosey! I'm desperately trying to figure out how we could modify our lifestyle so I could SAH with DD instead of going back to work in a few weeks. I really thought I would want to go back, but now the thought of leaving her is killing me!
Our combined income is $184,000. If I don't work, that will drop to $99,000. I KNOW there are families out there who make it work on even less than that so the mom can stay home. Tell me, how do you do it?

|Celebrated Name:||Nomar Garciaparra|
|Real Name/Full Name:||Anthony Nomar Garciaparra|
|Age:||48 years old|
|Birth Date:||July 23, 1973|
|Birth Place:||Whittier, California|
|Height:||5 feet 11 inches (1.82 m)|
|Wife/Spouse (Name):||Mia Hamm|
|Children/Kids (Son and Daughter):||Yes (Grace Isabella, Eva Caroline, and Garrett Anthony)|
|Is Nomar Garciaparra Gay?:||No|
|Profession:||Former Baseball player|
|Net Worth in 2021:||$50 million|
|Last Updated:||October 2021|
Anthony Nomar Garciaparra, popularly known as Nomar Garciaparra, is an American who was a Major League Baseball player until his retirement in 2010. He is currently working as a SportsNet analyst. He has played for various teams since he started his career in 1996. He has had one of the best performances and has been recognized on many occasions, as well as receiving various awards.
Maybe you know about Nomar Garciaparra very well, but do you know how old and tall is he and what is his net worth in 2021? If you do not know, we have prepared this article about details of Nomar Garciaparra’s short biography-wiki, career, professional life, personal life, today’s net worth, age, height, weight, and more facts. Well, if you’re ready, let’s start.
Early Life & Biography
Nomar Garciaparra was born on 23rd July 1973 in Whittier, California. He was named after his father, Ramon, but his name was spelled from backward. His father was also a baseball player and inspired him a lot and would make him to battle against a college pitcher.
He attended St. John Bosco High School, and after graduating, he was selected by Milwaukee Brewers to participate in their 1991 draft but turned out the offer and instead enrolled in Georgia Institute of Technology. He later joined the college baseball team, helping the team reach the World Series Championship in 1994.
Nomar married Mia Hamm, an Olympian soccer star on 22nd November 2003. Hamm was previously married and divorced in 2001, after which she and Nomar began dating. The couple is blessed with three children, twin girls Grace Isabella and Ava Caroline. They also have a son, Garrett Anthony, who was born in January 2012. He is known to have saved two women who had fallen in Boston Harbor, where the women sustained some injuries and were later taken to the hospital.
Age, Height, and Weight
Being born on 23rd July 1973, Nomar Garciaparra is 48 years old as of today’s date 21st October 2021. His height is 5 feet 11 inches (1.82 m) tall, and his weight is 79 kg.
Nomar started his professional career in 1994 by joining Sarota Red Sox as a Class A Advanced. Nomar joined Boston Red Sox in 1996 and led them in a match against Oakland. In 1988, he signed a five-year contract with Red Sox worth $23.25 million. He had a wrist injury in 2001, which hindered him from playing the first game in 2001. By the 2002 season, he had recovered and continued to play in the team. After the contract was over in 2004, he joined Chicago Cubs the same year, where he signed a one-year contract worth $8.25 million.
Nomar signed with Los Angeles Dodgers in 2006 a team from his home area in Whittier. He signed a one-year contract worth$6 million plus $2.5 million performance bonuses. After the contract was over, the Dodgers re-signed him a two-year contract worth $18.5 million and stayed with them until the end of 2008.
He later signed a one-year contract with Oakland Athletics on 6th March 2009. He retired in 2010, and before his retirement, he signed a one-day contract with Boston Red Sox as he wanted to retire as a member of Red Sox. After his retirement, he was hired by Dodgers as their game analyst on SportsNet LA and has been an investor of Los Angeles F.C. since November 2014.
Awards & Achievements
Nomar has received various awards from his career. In 1997 he became Rookie of the year and also won Silver Slugger Award. He has also been induced with the Boston Red Sox Hall of Fame. He has also achieved much in his life and lives in a house worth $2.2 million and also owns several car brands such as BMW, Audi, and Charlton.
Net Worth & Salary of Nomar Garciaparra in 2021
As of October 2021, Nomar has an estimated net worth of $50 million. The main source of his income is his career as a baseball player. He has signed various contracts with a number of teams, which has helped him to earn that much from his career. After retirement, he made his income from the ESPEN channel, where he hosted the Baseball Tonight program and other investments he was involved in.
Nomar Garciaparra is one successful baseball player who made his way through by signing with various teams. His performance was excellent, and even after his retirement, he was retained by one of the teams, the Dodgers, to be their game analyst. His success was helped by his hard work and great dedication he had towards his career.

Cruagh, Rathfarnham, March 1949
I wish to place on record (what I believe has never been recorded) an instance of which I was an eye-witness as I think it is due in honour to the memory of the man concerned.
It was St. Patrick’s Day 1916 in College Green where Eoin McNeill was reviewing the volunteers of the Dublin Brigade. I was in charge of the cyclists of the 4th Batt. on the right of College Green as you face Cork Hill, on my left were the cyclists of the 3rd Batt, in charge of Lieut. Malone, our duty was to close the road against traffic.
Just as Cmdt De Valera was giving the order for his battalion (immediately behind us) to present arms a large motor car came to a halt in front of Lieut Malones cyclists, in that car was Major Genl Friend, G.O.C of the British forces in Ireland with some members of his staff.
The obvious intention of the driver of the car was to cut the corner into Trinity Street otherwise the car would have driven to my side.
Lieut Malone went forward and objected to the car getting through, he was determined that it should not get through and his determination succeeded as the car was backed and went away in the direction of George’s Street.
Now this Lieut Malone was the same Lieut Malone who gave his life for freedom at Carisbrooke House a few weeks later (Easter 1916).
His guiding motto on both occasions would appear to be: They shall not pass.
All honour to his name and memory, and to his soul eternal rest.
Bureau of Military history testimony of John J Keegan, Member of Fourth Battalion, Irish Volunteers

During a discussion about their children having romantic relationships at a young age, Katie explained how Harvey had been with his girlfriend Tia for two years.
The 38-year-old revealed in June that her 14-year-old son had a girlfriend who he met at his school in South London and she said on the show: "He’s been with his girlfriend for two years. They hold hands, she kisses him on the cheek and he may go 'mwah'. But it’s all innocent.
“For his birthday she bought him some aftershave and before he goes to school we put it on," she told the ladies.
Katie shared a snap of her son with Tia earlier this month captioning her the Instagram post: "How gorgeous is this picture Harvey and his girlfriend today"
Opening up about Harvey's love life, she told OK! Magazine last month: "They're so cute together.
"She bought him some aftershave and body lotion for his birthday."
The mum-of-five revealed Tia met the family for the first time at Harvey's birthday party held at her and husband Kieran Hayler's Sussex home.
"It was so weird to actually see them together when Tia came round for the party - it's like they're actually boyfriend and girlfriend."
"I don't think they kiss or anything like that, but I think they sit next to each other at school," she added.
Revealing she found out about the romance when he brought a photo home from school, Katie explained: "He came home from school after Valentine's Day last year and he had a picture of them both together. We asked him who it was in the picture and he said: 'It's Harvey's girlfriend.'"
While she admits the couple are "cute together," when asked if she thought Harvey could ever have a family when he grew up, Katie admitted she didn't think it would happen.
"Physically he could have kids but mentally he couldn't," she said. "It wouldn't be fair as he can't even fully look after himself, let alone a child or wife."
Harvey, who suffers from Prader-Willi syndrome, autism and ADHD, recently made a controversial appearance on Loose Women alongside his mum.
The teenager was there to discuss online trolling and when the former glamour model said "if someone says something horrible to Harvey, what does Harvey say?", the youngster stunned viewers when he replied: "Hello, c**t."
Ofcom have since confirmed they're investigating the incident, which happened live on the day time show, following complaints.
Sticking up for her eldest son, whose father is former Manchester United player Dwight Yorke, the star later said during an appearance on Channel 5's Up Late With Rylan .
"I don't want to hide who he is," she stressed, adding: "I promise he won't swear [anymore]... I just can't believe it!"

My grandma is out of the hospital!! Woo hoo!!! She is at her home resting. Luckily she lives with my uncle, aunt and their three kids so she is not alone. That is a big relief for us in NYC. My aunt was the one who found her in distress last Sunday and called an ambulance. She saved her life. Anyway her doctor suggested to her that she not get too many visitors right away; so she asked me if I could come in the early Summer as I originally planned. And that she was sorry that I had to change my plans. I am so torn. I want to go now but if her doctor feels she is not strong enough for too much activity then I will wait till she is a bit stronger. I usually talk to her every week but now have been speaking to her every two days.
I don't know what is happening with Friday Forum now that Lisanne had her baby boy! (Congrats Again!!!!) We didn't really finalize who would be doing the Friday Forum for her and when. So here are pics of our Steak and Shake dining experience. I ordered a Chili Five Way. It's Chili on top of pasta with cheese and onions on top. Really good. I had heard about it on the blogs and was happy to have had a chance to try it. Niel ordered a Texas Patty Melt again. He enjoys them! Glad they are not difficult to make so we can make them at home. Have a happy holiday weekend all! Click on pics to enlarge.

I think the worst part of camp was the food, but also, uh, some kid threw a rock at a beehive so for the rest of the days -- and it was like right when we got there. So for the rest of the time we were there, bees were swarming everywhere and a bunch of people got stung. Someone got stung in the hand and he was allergic to them, which, um, he didn't know. But it wasn't like bad, he just swelled up a lot. Like his whole hand was giant, even though he only got stung on his finger. And then someone got stung on the butt, and in the head, in the cheek, and in the armpit, which I feel like that would be the worst place to get stung. Someone got stung in the thigh, and a bunch of other people got stung a lot of different places. Yeah.
And then the last thing I'm going to talk about is actually, um, one of my friends. Um, he hates waking up early, like he hates it, and, um, he, he's -- he was all negative about camp and he didn't wanna -- he didn't think it was gonna be fun and stuff. He said that he'd rather be at school for two days than go to camp, which is the dumbest thing ever. He said that camp was like a little bit above mid, like it was just a little bit better, and that school is just about mid. So I asked him, you know, "If, if camp is a little bit better than mid, and school is just mid, then how is, how is school better than camp?" And then he said -- yeah, so, um, yeah, so then I -- and then he said, "Yeah, so I would rather do the mid experience for about, um, seven hours for two days than have to go to camp 32 hours and have it a little bit above mid.” Which was just ridiculous that he even thought the camp was only a little bit above mid.
Today, I will be talking about a time that my grandma spilled hot tea all over me. So I was about one, and my grandma was babysitting me. My mom and dad were at work and I was over at her house, and she set her coffee down on -- well, her tea on a coffee table. So I was like just a baby, so I was just kind of crawling around and I hit it over onto me. And it spilled all over my stomach and chest and I got burnt. And it was, um -- then I had to go to the doctor. They had to put like a cooling rag all over my chest and stuff. And then, I had to get like a full body cast, pretty much, on my stomach and I had to stay at the hospital for like four days, just to make sure I would be fine. Then I came back home. There was -- uh, what was it? There was a bunch of people there with like gifts and stuff. My grandma thought it was her fault, but it wasn't. And she got us gifts. We got gifts and stuff, and then they all left. And that night I fell on my bed onto my stomach and it hurt a lot. So I had to go back to the hospital because my parents thought something was wrong, but it turns out I just fell on it and it didn't do anything. So we had to come back and other than that not much. After that, it just kind of slowly healed up. And I was fine, I think.
Yeah, my aunt picked us up at the terminal and we went to, we drove to Tokushima, which is where she lives, which is where my family grew up and, yeah, and then we spent a couple days in Tokushima. We went shopping. I love shopping. I really love shopping, especially in Japan and Korea, like they have really good stuff. But yeah, we went shopping, we — last year, we went to the zoo, this year I think we maybe just went shopping. I don't know. It's been a month. Um, yeah. And then after that, my aunt drove us to this island in Japan — like there's a bridge, so we could, you know go on it. Um, and then, yeah, it's this little island. I forget what it's called. But if somebody said it, I would, I would know. And then she dropped us off at this hotel. And then we went fishing, and then some other Japanese friends that we know from America met us at the hotel. They checked into their room. We checked into our room. It was, it was fine. And then we went fishing. And then later that night, we ate the fish that we, we cooked. Like the hotel, they take the fish that we cook and, um, cooks 'em. We take — they take the fish that we caught and cooked them. Yeah, that's a mouthful. Um, and, yeah, that dinner was very interesting. They gave us a lot of weird stuff including tomato jelly, which is the most disgusting thing I've ever tasted. I almost threw up. I do not recommend it, zero out of ten. Okay, and then after that, we took a bus to, to the bus terminal, we took a shuttle to the bus terminal, which is where we kind of parted ways. Because the friends went to Osaka and we went somewhere else. We went past Osaka to another town. I'm trying to remember... We took the Shinkansen to... yeah, to a hotel.
So, flowers have been a pretty prevalent thing in my life. I remember a long time ago, I read an article and it turns out that most men will not receive flowers until they die. And so I've always had that stick out to me, and that's why I like to buy people flowers. Like, if they're close to me or if they're just — I just feel like, I just want to buy people flowers. I love giving gifts. I always have since I was a child and so people know me for bringing snacks at school, and it just — I want to make people feel happier and I want people to look forward each day and know that they have something to look forward to every day. Because I know how hard life can get, and I just want to remind people that there's still good in this world. I myself haven't received flowers even though I've been a Boy Scout and I've done karate and piano, after concerts or after performing at karate, I haven't received any flowers. And I'm hoping that maybe one day, I'll be lucky enough to receive flowers before my funeral, but life is life, so whatever turns out will turn out. But I do remember three distinct times I've given flowers to people. So, back in middle school, I was hanging out with my friend and I saw that flowers were on sale. So I got these flowers and then I gave them to my neighbor becauseI know my neighbor was going through some stuff, and I thought I might be able to cheer them up with some flowers. And I heard that they kept them on their, um, like, their kitchen top. Like, they have like, a little island in their kitchen and they just placed it there until, like, the flowers died, I assume, and hearing that that they actually kept them actually kind of felt nice because, you know, I just assumed that they would keep them out for a while and then just throw them out, but they kept them there for their entire time. And then when I first started seeing my ex, I remember the first time I went to their house, I brought like a huge bouquet of flower- — well, it wasn't huge. I think it was moderately sized, at least, but it…
Has there ever been a time you put the cart before the horse or did things in the wrong order because you were impatient? Honestly, no, I can't really think of anything.Oh! I read the Percy Jackson series out of order because I was impatient and I couldn't get the first book so I started--because there's like, you know, there's different series. You know, there's the first series, the second series, the third series. I started reading the second series. After I finished the second series, I read the first series and it made so much more sense.But like yeah, it's just, that was the first series that I got my hands on so I started reading it and um, I got kind of confused but that was fine. You know, I understood the storyline, it's a good storyline. But then I read the first book and I was like, "Yeah, that makes a lot more sense."
I have thought about a tattoo. Me and my mom actually talked about it last week. We were gonna get a matching tattoo together. We don't know what we're gonna get yet, but I kind of want either a heart that matches hers or her handwriting and it says "I love you". But I definitely wanna get something to match my mom, just because me and her have such a close relationship together.
I prefer somewhere in between minimalism and maximalism, but I think closer to minimalism side. Because, I dunno, I don't feel like you have to use every single, like, inch of space and, like, room in your room, or in any room. I dunno. It just looks kinda clustered, but I have a lot of stuff, so it looks more on the maximalism side. But I'd like to live a minimalism life just 'cause it looks more organized, I guess.
"Tell us about a time that you tried something new and it turned out better than you thought it would." For me, that was in seventh grade when I started cheerleading. I'm in 11th grade now, but seventh grade, when my mom made me do cheerleading and I've never done anything, like, even close to cheerleading. Maybe like a cheer camp once when I was, like, three or something, but I've never done anything close and I was so nervous that it was gonna go, like, really poorly and I thought I was gonna be cut from the team and then I found out that everyone makes it and I was like, "Oh my God." And then I just became obsessed with cheer, like, I - every - all the skills that we did, all the chants, even just cheering on the sidelines at the basketball games, which sucked at the moment, but like, I actually enjoyed all of it and it turned out a lot better than I thought and I'm still cheering to this day. I'm on the varsity team. So that is pretty cool and it turned out a lot better than I thought it would.
Honestly, I only set one alarm in the morning and I wake up to that always, so I don't even have a snooze button. I actually turned it off because it got annoying. 'Cause I would always like mix up the buttons, like I would - I would mix up the buttons on my phone. So sometimes, I would click the snooze button, you know, and it would be really annoying because like eight minutes later it'd be like *mimicking alarm noise*, and then, yeah, it's annoying. But, well, I guess the reason for that is, like, once my alarm goes off, like, I know that I have to get up and I have to start my day. I have to get ready or I'm gonna be late to school, and I can't be late to school 'cause then my parents will kill me. So I guess that's kind of like my motivation to get up, like, I have to get up, you know, like I have to, I absolutely have to. So yeah.

Marion Giesing was a gentle loving lady who was born July 9th, 1917 in Lyons, Nebraska to Alice and Frank Roscoe. Her childhood days were spent with her sisters Isabel, Marjorie, Tressie and brother Milton. She married Harold Giesing August 7th, 1951 and moved to Kansas City, Missouri 2 years later. She was a loving mother to Dennis and Janet Giesing. She has 3 granddaughters Nicole, Ashley and Katie as well as 7 great grandchildren Dristin, Alexa, Teigan, Nikeese, Karly, Rory and Knox who looked up to her as their inspiration. She had a love for children from her early days as a teacher that carried on throughout her life as she was a mother, grandmother (Gram) and great grandmother (MiMi). She lived a long full life and gently passed away on January 3rd, 2017. She will truly be missed and will be loved forever.

Canning Wynn - Human Rights in Argentina
Travelling solo all the way from Sydney, Australia, I was nervous to say the least. Not truly knowing what to expect, I was pleasantly surprised at the beauty of the country and how welcome the people made me feel. I spent four weeks on the Law and Human rights project, but looking back I wish I had spent a lot more time there. Volunteering in Argentina is something I will never forget.
After being picked up at the airport, I was taken straight to my host family. Vivi and her mother couldn’t hold back their excitement and I had to ask them to speak slower as my Spanish was terrible. I was shocked when they handed me the key to their house as if it was the most causal of things. I would only have ever given the key to my house to members of my own family. I soon learned that in Argentina, we are all family.
During my stay we grew close and engaged in many discussions that went into the late hours of the night. My host family would also let me tag along when they went out for the day and I was able to see a different side of Argentina that a tourist would never have seen. The fruit markets, the famous Argentina BBQ and the night we went to the observatory to use the telescope to see Saturn as it passed closer to the earth, were some of the highlights.
During my stay my Spanish improved greatly as my host family was eager to learn more English. We would always try and speak as much of each other’s languages and would laugh at all of our terrible pronunciations. Spanish is a beautiful language and when I returned home I continued to study to try and master fluency.
Law and Human Rights Office
After my induction, which consisted of a staff member taking me around the city and showing me the ropes, I was taken to the office. The office was the “base camp” of operations for the Law and Human Rights project. The volunteers and I would have meetings to plan work placements and assign cases to the correct people. Many of the volunteers were studying Law, but even though I wasn’t, it was still fantastic to be a part of this team of genuine people that were trying their hardest to help those in need.
The staff members at the office were very friendly and helpful. They were made up of locals that were working hard to make a difference in their community. They welcomed each member with open arms (the Argentinian way) and made sure that people had the necessary resources.
Law & Human Rights Placement
The work placements were by far the most important part of the Law and Human Rights work. This involved working in a variety of locations. Some days I worked at the free Legal Clinic that was set up for people that could not afford legal advice, other days I worked in the juvenile detention centres that housed boys that had committed non-violent crimes.
At the Legal Clinic, I was able to take on real case work such as people that needed help gaining the deed to their house, accessing their pensions and settling disputes between tenants and landlords. I was always paired with a fluent Spanish speaker so that I never missed anything important, which I was thankful for.
At the detention centres, I was able to connect with the boys and slowly they opened up to the volunteers about their lives and future aspirations. One of the boys was set on learning English and traveling to The United States. The joy on his face when, with our help, he was able to introduce himself in English was priceless.
The language barrier was the hardest thing for me to get past. I had only studied one semester of Spanish in Australia. Even though I only knew the basics, the Argentinian people are very patient and grateful that I tried. A little goes a long way.
I thoroughly enjoyed my trip to Argentina. The people I met and the experiences that I had were incredible. I would strongly recommend this project for someone wishing to immerse themselves in a real South American experience.
This is a personal account of one volunteer’s experience on the project and is a snapshot in time. Your experience may be different, as our projects are constantly adapting to local needs and building on accomplishments. Seasonal weather changes can also have a big impact. Find out more about what you can expect from this project, or speak to one of our friendly Programme Advisors.

If you were to create an account of a Messiah for the people of Israel, what would you not do? Let’s talk about it on Deeper Waters.
Many times we’re told about how Jesus was a made-up figure meant to inspire the people of Israel and to be a challenge to Caesar. All manner of motives have been given for this great hoax to take place, but I’d like to consider this idea. What kind of Messiah would you make if you wanted one just to win a popularity contest and get the people to follow you? I think it’s easier to talk about what you would not do.
First, you would not have anything that would indicate that the birth of such a person was illegitimate. That is, you would want him to be a descendant of his father and his mother. Some might think it would be good to have a deity bring the child into existence in a more direct way, but for a Jew, this would seem too close to paganism. Therefore, you will have them come from a family of high honor.
You also would make sure that this family would be a wealthy family. This would fit the scene of your Messiah. After all, in the ancient world, poor people were not trusted. Rich ones were the ones that had the favor of the gods and the poor were the ones who were more prone to deceive you because you have something they want.
You will also make sure this Messiah comes from a town that is well-known and honorable. You’d avoid a no-name town that no one cares about such as, oh, Nazareth. The birthplace of your Messiah will be a determining factor of his future after all.
You will also seek to have him come from a region that is not looked down on in the world, such as the area that we call Palestine today. Claims from that part of the world were not taken seriously by the populace as a whole so while this might impress Jews, it would certainly not impress Gentiles.
You would make sure this person has a great career. They would likely be a king or a military leader. For the Jews, this would mean someone in the line of David, who the Messiah was to be a descendant of. For Gentiles, a powerful warrior would earn their respect, especially for those who were not happy with the Roman Empire.
You would not have this person be a miracle man. Why? Because people like Lucian and others made it a habit to debunk miracle claims and the world was full of people who were skeptical of miracles. Adding miracles would make your messiah seem like the modern equivalent of a televangelist.
You would make sure his followers were the best of the best. That would mean people who fully understood his teachings and embraced the reality of who he was. Not having your Messiah be understood would be an indication that your Messiah was not a good teacher. He would also be known by the company of his closest followers.
You would make sure his immediate family accepted his claims as well. After all, if one’s own family doesn’t accept one’s unique claims about oneself, then why should anyone else do so? Having the recognition of your family is important in this field.
You would have him travel abundantly. This is the Messiah who is to save the world after all. There’s no need to limit him to one country or people. Go out and spread him with all the world and make sure he has a worldwide reputation.
You would have him be embraced by all his people. After all, why should anyone think that a person is the Messiah of the Jews if it turns out the Jews themselves do not accept such a claim? How could someone proclaim such a message with confidence.
You would certainly not have him die a shameful death. Now for a shameful death, I can’t think of any more shameful than crucifixion. This was the humiliation given to dissidents of Rome who were seeking to be their own kings. Such people would be branded as traitors to Rome and defeated by the Roman Empire. For a Jew, they would be seen as under God’s curse. In any way, following such a person would mean identifying with him, something that would dissuade people from following him.
If this Messiah figure died, you would make sure he had an honorable burial. That would mean that all the people would come immediately to mourn him. He would be mourned by his family and he would be buried in the tomb of his ancestors and near the place where he lived. Anything else would be dishonorable.
This person if dead would be divinely exalted. This would mean this person was immediately ushered into the presence of God and received vindication that way. Any other way, like a bodily resurrection, would be far harder to explain after all and be the route that could be most easily disproven, which is not helpful if you’re making up this claim. You want something that cannot be disproven at all. Besides, this is what happened to the emperor and you’re wanting to rival the emperor. Who wants a bodily resurrection anyway? That returns you to a prison.
You would also make sure your belief was not exclusive. Your messiah would be a divine figure indeed, but he would be one among many. This would be someone that your Gentile friends after all could worship along with all their other deities.
Now these ideas are important to follow, but it would be difficult to follow all of them, though possible. Still, one should be absolutely certain that any belief that went against all of these would have to be doomed to failure. That would be the last kind of Messiah that anyone would make up and follow.

There is life after mastectomy...Woman marries after removing her breast, tells women it is not end of world
Woman marries after removing her breast, tells women it is not end of world
MORANT BAY, St Thomas:
The autumn days of October, when the leaves have all turned yellow, people around the world can be seen sporting buttons of pink to commemorate Breast Cancer Awareness Month. Catchy phrases like 'I walk for breasts' and 'Save the ta-tas' are posted everywhere. Shirlene Morgan-Bailey is a survivor of the disease that has killed thousands of women the world over.
"In January 2010, I started having a discomforting feeling in my left breast and I realised that there was something hard there. Days after, I realised the discomfort was still there, so I visited a private doctor who recommended that I do a mammogram, which led to me doing a few more tests," Morgan-Bailey told Rural Xpress.
She said even before she collected the results, she had an idea what they were.
According to her: "My doctor had his suspicions, too; he was very open with me."
The results confirmed both their suspicions, Morgan-Bailey had breast cancer.
"When I got the proof, I felt like I was entering into a void, like my surroundings had disappeared. I wasn't even thinking about myself as much as I was thinking about my children and how they would react. As expected, my daughter cried non-stop when she saw the results," Morgan-Bailey shared.
She said she decided to take the illness one step at a time.
"I did the surgery the same week and got the mastectomy done. Then I started the chemotherapy. I am currently on my final year of treatment," she said proudly.
Morgan-Bailey said she did not have any reservations about removing her breast as she was only thinking about life and not her physique.
"For me, it was about surviving. The doctor gave me options, but I had already made up my mind," she said, adding that the mastectomy was the more trusted route.
She ensured that her surgery did not affect her personal life. She got married a few years after and speaks fondly of her husband.
"He's so nice! We met after I had already lost my breast and he didn't mind. He treats me no less or differently," she said, almost blushing at the thought of her husband.
Morgan-Bailey advised women who are struggling with breast cancer: "The best people to talk to are those who have survived, not those who are going through the treatment with you. While me and the other women were being treated, we were so scared and fed off each other's fear. Survivors can help you because they know exactly what you're going through as they've been there, too.
"One day, a lady walked into my workplace and I could tell she was undergoing treatment. Chemo discolours the skin and causes hair loss. Whether you wear a wig, I can still tell. It's a look I'll never forget.
"It is also important that you do not listen to those who are recommending various sorts of pills and bush remedies. What works for someone else may not work for you. Listen to your doctor. He or she makes recommendations based on the test results," she suggested.
Morgan-Bailey testifies that it was her positive attitude and that of those around her which helped her to survive.
"Negative energy adds to stress. You don't want people around you crying or treating you differently. I had a positive mentality throughout the years. You have to be a fighter. It's an internal fight that will quickly brush away the insecurities of losing a breast. The time spent on worrying can be better used to research your condition. Breast cancer is not a death sentence," she said.

Kelly Willis is a country music singer and songwriter.
Her debut album, Kelly Willis, was released in 1993. She has released six additional albums, including Translated from Love, What I Deserve, and Real Fine Place. Willis has also appeared on television shows such as Nashville Star and Austin City Limits. In addition to her solo work, she has collaborated with other artists, including Bruce Robison, on the album Cheater’s Game.
Willis picked up her interest in music from her mother, who liked to sing and appeared in amateur musicals. When she was nine, she started singing and writing songs and later made a recording which landed her the lead vocal role in a rock-a-billy band. During this time she honed her guitar playing skills and continued singing and writing songs.
Despite a record deal and several album releases, Kelly Willis didn’t get mainstream airplay until after the release of her 4th album. Subsequently she produced a further 8 albums, many in collaboration with her husband Bruce Robison.

The Reverend John Selby Watson (April 1804 - 6 July 1884) was a British classical translator and murderer. He was sentenced to death in 1872 for killing his wife, but a public outcry led to his sentence being reduced to life imprisonment. The case is notable for Watson's use of a plea of insanity as his defence, bringing "the insanity defense into perhaps its greatest prominence since M'Naghten."
Watson was born at Crayford. He was educated by an uncle and graduated from Trinity College, Dublin in 1838. He was ordained Deacon by the Bishop of Ely in 1839 and married Anne Armstrong in January 1845 at St. Marks, Dublin. Due to his poverty Watson had been engaged to Anne for quite a number of years before they could marry. He moved to London in 1844 where he became the headmaster of Stockwell Grammar School. Because of falling pupil numbers he was laid off in 1870. But during his long career as headmaster, Watson had made a reputation for himself as a scholar and translator, publishing translations of the classics for Bohn's Classical Library that subsequently became volumes in the popular Everyman's Library series. He also wrote biographies, religious books, and a volume Reasoning Power in Animals. Still with all his learning and activities he made a very small income. When the Board of the Stockwell School fired him, they refused to give him any pension.
A few weeks after finishing his four-volume History of the Papacy to the Reformation, on 8 October 1871 Watson was found unconscious by his servant, Ellen Pyne, having taken prussic acid. Two notes were found: one addressed to Pyne contained her wages. The other was to his doctor. It said "I have killed my wife in a fit of rage to which she provoked me". His wife's body was found in a bedroom, having been battered to death with the butt of his pistol two days earlier.
Watson recovered and stood trial at the Old Bailey in January 1872. Despite a history of arguing with his wife, Watson did not argue provocation. Instead, he pleaded insanity, as his counsel put it: "an antecedent improbability in the deed which would lead everyone in the first instance to seek an explanation in insanity." The judge, Mr Justice Byles, opposed this excuse strongly in his summing-up. After deliberating for an hour and a half, the jury found him guilty of murder but with a recommendation that mercy be shown because of his age and previous character. Byles however sentenced him to death.
After the trial many affidavits from doctors were presented testifying to Watson's insanity at the time of the murder. Byles then changed his mind and told the Home Secretary that the medical evidence presented at the trial suggested that "this is not a case in which the sentence should be carried out." After more investigation the Home Office decided that some "imprecise mental unsoundness" had been present and commuted the sentence to life imprisonment. Due to no obvious signs of madness, however, he was not sent to Broadmoor Hospital, instead he served his time in Parkhurst prison where he died twelve years later, aged 80, on 6 July 1884. His death was due to falling out of his hammock at the prison. In the words of Martin J. Wiener, "the incongruity of the offense and the lack of any lesser defense pushed the system to a controversial finding of "temporary" insanity to prevent the unedifying spectacle of the hanging of a clergyman of the Church of England. In a sense, in Watson's case, provocation (by his wife, under the stress of his forced retirement) had been reconceived as temporary insanity."

Who will the Villainess choose?
“To the chancellor office,” said Damien, as we sat in the carriage. I tried my best to eat as slowly as possible to delay the process, but in the end, I knew that I had to go.
He was busy looking at the portrait with mixed emotions.
“I do not know whether i should be happy that i have a kin that is alive or should i kill all of them with my own hands for betraying me.” he even chuckled when he finished the sentence, but all the hair of my body stood up, as i felt goosebumps over my skin.
The way he said the sentence, bloodlust was clear in his voice. I moved as far away as I could when I heard him.
“Your assistant has done wonders in making this portrait. It looks very realistic, even minor details such as the mole are shown correctly. If i did not know any better, i would have thought that he knew the kid since a long time.” he laughed again, but there was no humor in his voice
Did I make a mistake to make the perfect portrait? I had made it to find the boy. I have never thought that he will be the one to use it in the end or else I would have made it a bit vague.
“Well, the boy was exceptionally handsome, and his resemblance to the duke was exigent. And of course, my staff is more than capable in everything they do.'' I replied confidently.
“My lord, we are here.” I thanked my last seven generations for the timely interruption of the guard. I did not know if I would be able to make further excuses.
We both walked towards the office of the chancellor as he held the portrait tightly in his hands.
“My lord, how can I assist you?” said the man, standing like a waiter as the water and other snacks were served as if we were to ask for the hand of his daughter.
“We are finding a boy, he has been seen here a few days ago in the market area.” he replied, sitting nonchalantly, folding one leg over another, like the whole office belongs to him.
“Oh,” the only sound came out the voice of the man who was sitting there dumbfounded by the work given to him. If it had been any other person, he would have insulted and thrown him out of the office. But this was lord Damien, the owner of this estate.
“Of course, my lord, I will make copies of this portrait and distribute it to the whole town. I will inform you the result in a week.” said the man, getting back his composure. But would that be enough for Damien who wanted things to be done perfectly.
“I do not have a week, i need results till next morning.” he announced with a frown.
I wanted to laugh at the predicament of the chancellor, his smile was looking uglier than the cries.
“My lord, one day would be.. Too much, I will try my best to give you results by this evening.” said the man nodding his head. I wanted to laugh as the way change his wording when Damien picked up the cup in his hands. How even the cup in his hands was able to scare people was a scene worth witnessing.
“Very well, then i will wait for your reply.” he said and stood up.
‘That was it! We have come this far just to get this answer. Anyways it was good, this way we would be able to go home early and i will be able to go out on my date with Andrew.’ A giggle was about to escape my lips but I controlled.
“Well, since we have some time left, let's go and check the market.” my steps halted when i heard his next statement.
But then i nodded, it would be a good way to explore the market of this world. I remembered watching multiple magical things there in the game.
It took us some time to reach there, unconsciously I was expecting to see the bird but it did not come to meet me.
“Is there something that matters?” He asked me to bring my attention back to him.
I shook my head as he would think I was crazy if I told him that I was waiting for a bird to come and meet me.
“Then are you expecting to see your lover here?” he asked with a smirk and I glared at him and then continued to look out of the window. But surprisingly as he said, I saw the carriage of the crown prince at a distance.
My eyes widened yet a smirk formed on my lips. Now I have to convince him to spend some time with me here and then it would be a perfect date.
“You have a golden tongue, Damien. I wish you would have said that I was getting married to Andrew.`` I replied with a hug. My happiness knew no bound.
He turned stiff in my arms again and only then did I realize that he was Damien, the Damien!!
“I mean, you should foretell often.'' I said with a cough as I moved away from him.
Then I continued to look at the carriage.
“I think they are going towards the market too.” I mumbled with a giggle like a young girl.
“This was the best gift I could have received from lord.” We followed the carriage and soon both carriages reached the market.
I almost jumped out of the carriage when it stopped and ran towards the carriage of Andrew. I adjusted my dress and stood in front of it with a bright smile on my face.
But the carriage’s door did not open even after waiting for a while. So I knocked on the door. After a minute the door finally opened. But when the carriage opened he was not alone, there was a girl who was holding his arms.
The smile on my face turned stiff as I saw them together. I wanted to walk in and separate both of them. And then slap both of them, it was a blatant insult of my love for him. But I did not understand why he was doing so?! He was not flirting, he was a responsible lover and was always loyal to me in the game, then why had the script changed so badly?!
“Your highness” I called only then did he look towards me, but there was no surprise in his eyes. As if he knew I was there which confused me. Did he know that I was here waiting for him?
“Your highness, I thought you were busy this whole week with a tight schedule. I was not expecting to see you here at this time.`` I asked with a hint of anger in my voice.
He raised a brow and looked at me with a bored expression.
“I have thought same for you, then what are you doing here, my loving fiancee, Akira”

There are so many stories I can pluck from the far reaches of my memory. So, what one do I pick, and why would I pick a certain memory?
I often look back in my childhood and think how much easier I really had it, never worried about playing outside until the street lights came on and that was my clue to head inside. Never had to worry about getting a razor blade in an apple when I went trick or treating. We always left our car doors unlocked when I went grocery shopping with my mom. We never had computers but our days were filled with lots of laughter.
The other day I sold a new stove to a family and found out that they live on the street right behind my house and their son that was with them goes to the grade school about 7 houses up from mine, so I said to this couple, " wow, he should just cut between houses to get to school." For a moment I forgot the time that we currently live in, cause even though they live so close to the school if they cut between house, I would say about a 10 minute walk, they always drive him to the school. How sad is that. I really did walk to grade school, about 1 mile or so from home. My first grade school that I went to was Fairview, I walked a half a block to the corner, turned right and walked another 4 blocks to this park. I had to cross a foot bridge over a stream and cross the park, to get to the school. Maybe 3/4 to mile to this school.
Now a days, a parent wouldn't let their kid walk alone in the park. But all the kids did it. So, this get me thinking about the stories my Mom and Dad would tell all of us kids about the "simpler" times of growing up during the Depression. Even though both my Dad and Mom were poor, (like everyone else) they never want for anything. My dad's mom, sewed all of his clothes, how his grandmother would darn socks by putting a used light bulb in the sock to make a heel then darned them, or how my mom would get a quarter to go to the movies on Saturday. A nickle to ride the bus both ways, 10 cents for the movie and 10 cents for a soda and popcorn, and that was for 2 movies and 2 cartoons. How both of them slept outside on the porch during the hot summer nights. How they always had enough to eat. How my mom would make some money by having a lemonaide stand and my dad would mow lawns. Simpler times.
But I think one of my favorite stories that my Mom shared with me was when she and my Dad were first married, and her dad, my Grandpa "Swede" and Grandma Mina got the first black and white tv. The whole extended family would go over to their house on Saturday to watch tv. The tv was about 13 inches, it only got a few channels and they were fuzzy and filled with lines, but boy oh boy they all thought it was the best thing since sliced bread. How each family would bring a dish to pass and they would all eat outside in the summer or around the dining room table before gathering around this little tv to watch some show.
Simpler times, with family that were filled with laughter and good times. I really wish the generation today could experience those simpler times of my mom and dad's generation and even those of my generation.

Hess will be missed
For those of you who weren’t familiar with Dr. Megan Hess, my husband and I would like to let you know about her.
We had been patients of hers for more than 13 years. She was the most intelligent doctor I’ve known, not only as a doctor but as a person. We had a connection with her not only as patients but as friends.
She cared about her patients; she spent time with us. Back in 2012 when my husband wasn’t feeling well, Dr. Hess didn’t hesitate she said bring him right in. She ordered blood work STAT (which means right away).
When she saw the results she ordered him to the hospital where he had a CT scan of his lungs. Here he had pneumonia. She saved his life.
She had such a kind personality about her. We just saw her and her husband at the Blair County Home & Garden Show. I remember how she laughed and said, “keep me away from that fudge.”
It will be difficult with another doctor. We want her husband and family to know that she’s in our thoughts and Dr. Megan Hess, you will be missed.
Mick and Toni Wyandt

About two weeks ago, Posit Science was visited by a family who appeared to have greatly benefited from the use of our exercises in BrainHQ. This family’s story began with a late-night boating accident involving a beloved young son, circa 20 years of age. The boat that Ryan was riding in was struck by a second speeding boat. He was thrown overboard in the accident, and his skull crushed between the two boats. Direct injury to his brain, and further damage from subsequent bleeding and from the shards of bone embedded within the flesh of the brain was extensive. In this live-or-die situation, significant sections of his damage frontal lobes were necessarily further compromised by the surgery that was required to remove multiple bone fragments from his brain.
Ryan was stiff and spastic. There was no indication that he heard or understood what was said to him. He was incapable of any voluntary response. He could not talk. His parents were told that he would never recover, that that he would have to be maintained in a hospital or nursing home environment or the rest of his life.
His parents rather quickly began to understand that rehabilitation therapy in the hospital setting that he was in (typical, for the US) was simply not going to help him very much, in large part because the professionals there saw no value for, and held out no real hope for his recovery. Ryan wasn’t the only Reitmeyer with grit and determination; his father and mother simply did not accept this situation. Doug Reitmeyer threw all of his energies into trying to understand his son’s neurological situation, and quickly came to understand that his medical team (as is typical, in the US) just didn’t have much understanding what rehabilitation strategies COULD succeed (if success was possible) for a patient like his son. Ryan’s father and mother spent every waking hour with their son, embarking on their own personal rehab program. Ryan’s father Doug scoured the literature and for new approaches that might help his son.
In the meantime, Ryan slowly regained his speech understanding and speech production, but had a very poor memory, limited cognitive abilities, and provided mom and dad with lots of evidence of disordered thought. His father had discovered Posit Science in an Internet search, and he contacted us, asking if I thought that our programs could be applied to his son. I told him that if he agreed to have the son evaluated before and after training, we would provide the program to his son, and believed that it would help him.
Ryan made dramatic improvements through the course of his Posit Science Brain Fitness Training program. I wish you could have talked with Ryan when he visited us late in September. Ryan looks a little unusual because a significant part of his frontal cortex has been lost, his skull has been through elaborate reconstruction to replace lost bone with metal and to repair hundreds of little fractures, and his hair patterns bear the scars of repeated surgeries. At the same time, Ryan now has a GOOD memory. He is clever, funny, a delight in conversation, and cognitively, completely in control. Ryan loves his mom and dad (as well he should!), and his social abilities are outstanding. Ryan takes care of himself. He has passed a driver’s license exam, and drives around on his own. He can remember the words and melodies of a hundred songs. In a phrase, Ryan is back with us! His situation was NOT hopeless. RYAN IS DOING JUST FINE.
There is little question that the Brain Fitness Program made a large contribution to Ryan Reitmeier’s rehabilitation (the therapist who was caring for him has ordered a bundle of these programs for other patients like Ryan). At the same time, it sure doesn’t hurt to have parents like his, and it was a very lucky thing that they ultimately led him to more informed doctors and to more effective therapeutic approaches!
One of OUR main goasl at Posit Science is to progressively improve our ability to help individuals like this very special young man.

Roan Mountain shotgun report yields attempted murder charge
A Roan Mountain man has been charged with attempted murder after he reported a burglary at his home Thursday, then hours later was himself accused of firing a shotgun at the man he identified as a suspect in the theft.
David Lee Thompson, 58, of 794 Buck Mountain Road, Roan Mountain, was arrested Friday by Carter County Sheriff’s Department Lt. Tim Horne on a warrant charging him with attempted second-degree murder.
Capt. Jeff Markland of the Carter County Sheriff’s Department’s Criminal Investigations Division said the events leading up to the charge against Thompson began Thursday morning when Thompson called for an officer to respond to his house to report a break-in and the theft of a safe from his home. In addition to the safe, Thompson reported that 14 knives and two pistols, which were stored in the safe, had also been stolen.
According to police reports, at the time Thompson reported the theft he also told police he suspected that a man he identified as “Chris Oaks” was responsible.
Later that same day, Carter County Sheriff’s deputies were dispatched to another residence on Buck Mountain Road on a report of shots being fired at a person. According to police reports, while officers were responding to the call, 911 dispatchers advised officers that a person at the residence had possibly been shot in the face.
Upon arrival at 1069 Buck Mountain Road, officers were met by Christopher Oaks, who told them that Thompson had fired shots at him as he was standing in the yard.
Deputy Brian Smithpeters said in his report that Oaks reported to officers that he was outside his residence with his girlfriend when a dark-colored Subaru pulled in front of his residence and that he saw Thompson was driving the vehicle and that there were two other passengers in it. Oaks reported to officers that one of the passengers asked him to walk down to the vehicle to talk to them.
“Mr. Oaks stated he started walking towards the Subaru and David (Thompson) got out of the driver’s side and claimed he stole his safe. Mr. Oaks stated he told David (Thompson) he did not take his safe,” Smithpeters said in his report. “Mr. Oaks stated David then retrieved a shotgun out of the vehicle and pointed the shotgun at him and fired it. Mr. Oaks stated he felt something hit his face and he fell to the ground.”
Markland said Oaks sustained minor injuries in the form of scratches, and that it is unknown if the round fired from the shotgun struck Oaks in the face or if debris was thrown up into Oaks’ face and caused the injury.
Smithpeters said in his report that officers recovered a Remington 12-gauge shotgun shell lying on the ground where Oaks reported that Thompson had fired the shot from, and there were tire marks in the gravel where Oaks reported that Thompson had spun his tires while fleeing the scene.
No arrest was made at the time of the initial reports; the case was turned over to the Criminal Investigation Division, which later obtained the warrant charging Thompson with attempted second degree murder.
Thompson is currently being held in the Carter County Detention Center on a $50,000 bond and is scheduled to appear in Carter County General Sessions Court on July 15.
Oaks was arrested Thursday on outstanding warrants unrelated to either incident reported that day. He was arrested on a warrant out of Criminal Court charging him with violation of probation, a warrant out of Criminal Court charging him with failure to report to jail for incarceration and an attachment out of Carter County Juvenile Court.

(Hong Kong November 24, 2015) The 1st time in 7 years, Kelly Chen would perform again on the stage of the Hong Kong Coliseum. To present the best of her, Kelly started to practice dancing and singing 2 months in advance. Her condition was so good when practicing that it would be OK even if her concert were tomorrow. She herself thought her physical strength was better than she had been before giving birth to her children, and she joked that she might have to thank for the training with her children. In addition to new dancing skills, she would try something new for her costume. She said nervously, “One of the dresses has a slit from the top to the bottom and it’s transparent in the middle.” She admitted that she was exhausted when she first started the training and asked her husband to massage her body, but he pressed too hard and it wasn’t comfortable at all.

The brothers had visited with one another the night before, with Justin getting to see his nephew -- B.J.'s son -- who is just over a month old, and they managed to haggle over a dinner check. Clearly, they enjoy each other's company.
Friday night's game proved to be the first time the brothers ever competed against each other in an organized game. Of course, Edwin Jackson stole the show with a no-hitter against his former team in the D-backs' 1-0 win over the Rays.
Justin ended up with two hits in three trips to the plate, while B.J. went 0-for-2 with a walk and was hit by a pitch.
The stands at Tropicana Field had a distinct Upton flavor Friday night, including the parents of the brothers.
Yvonne Upton, the boys' mother, wore what amounted to a neutral shirt, which was specially made for her by Ida Jacobs, the mother-in-law of the boys' high school coach in Chesapeake, Va. On the front of the shirt she had "B.J. 2" on the right side of the buttons, and "Justin 10" on the left side -- her sons' names and numbers. On the back of the shirt, "Upton" was along the shoulders. Underneath was "Justin 10" and "B.J. 2," and below that it read, "My Two Sons."
She called Justin "her firecracker" and B.J. her "quiet one," and when asked if Friday night's game was what she envisioned in her dreams, she smiled and answered: "My vision is one to be in center and one to be in right -- on the same team. That's the ultimate dream."
Manny Upton, the players' father, called Friday hectic, before getting to the easy part, which was to enjoy watching the game. Manny helped arrange for approximately 65 family members to make the trip to watch the special game.
"The hard part was making sure everybody got to town and got tickets," Manny said.
Justin first saw the 2010 schedule and immediately reached out to his father.
"Justin called and said, 'Dad, guess who we play?'" Manny said. "He said, 'We play my brother.'
"Initially we thought it was going to be in Arizona, then Justin said it was going to be in Tampa, so we started preparing probably back in September of last year."
Friday night was the first time the brothers competed in an organized game due primarily to their age difference -- B.J. is 25 and Justin is 22. But Manny can flash back in his mind to the epic battles between the boys when they played in the front yard while growing up.
"Justin would always quit, because once B.J. got to hit, he stayed in the field a long time so he would quit," Manny said. "He would get his two chances, and B.J. would give it to him because he wanted him to come out and play, so Justin always got his two at-bats before B.J. got his one, because he was going to be on the field for a long time."
D-backs manager A.J. Hinch said he was happy for their parents.
"I think it's a great night for them, specifically," Hinch said. "Knowing Manny and Yvonne, who've been in our organization for a while, I was a part of the group that went and visited with them before Justin signed. To see this all the way through and get them on the same field and get them in the same park has to be special."
Hinch said he was grateful to the schedule-makers for allowing the weekend series between the brothers' respective teams to happen.
"And for the brothers, these guys are very close," Hinch said. "I got to see B.J. play up close and personal. I was the catcher when he made his Triple-A debut in Durham. They were in Scranton. It's funny how the Upton family and I have overlapped. So it's neat."
Hinch almost had a little fun before the game, but thought better of it.
"I joked with [Justin], and I almost put a mock lineup up with him out of the lineup," Hinch said. "I said, 'Would you have been in here?' And he said, 'My mother would have been in here.' So I'm glad I didn't. The wrath of Yvonne Upton, I don't want that."
Bill Chastain is a reporter for MLB.com. This story was not subject to the approval of Major League Baseball or its clubs.

Discussion Starter · #1 ·
So Upendi's never been to any kind of formal training, I've done it all at home by myself, and today she got to the point where she has a solid out of sight stay. I put her in a stay three times, walked down the steps came back up and she was still in her stay waiting until I released her. I'm so proud of her. My fiance was upstairs with her and he verified that even though she wanted to move she didn't.

Nollywood star, Toyin Abraham (formerly known as Toyin Aimakhu) has revealed how she abused hard drugs like marijuana and codeine, and was involved in other vices.
The actress made the disclosure at the 2017 edition of Success Story Africa, held at the TLC Auditorium, Lagos.
“You need to stop bad habits. I was involved in a lot of vices and it became worse last year,” Premium Times quoted her as telling the gathering.
“I abused drugs and I am not ashamed to say it because it’s now a thing of the past. They say codeine makes you high; I took a lot. I smoked a lot and I didn’t even know I looked horrible, because I was so skinny.
“If you came to my house last year, you would meet a lot of people and you wont want to leave because we smoked, gossiped about people and what have you.
“I made a lot of mistakes when I began acting and that was because I did not have plans. I just wanted to be known.
“But, I now know that being popular isn’t the same thing as being successful. When I got into the industry and the fame became too much, I became irresponsible.
“I could not boast of N1 million in 2016. I was making money and I wanted to feel among. When one of our colleagues bought a car, it was trouble because we all strove to buy the same car or a bigger one.
“I had to change my circle for good and this change started in March 2017,” she said.

POSTED: Tuesday, July 22, 2014 - 8:42am
UPDATED: Wednesday, July 23, 2014 - 2:27pm
LAS CRUCES (KTSM) — A Las Cruces man appeared in court for the first time Monday, just days after he allegedly murdered his own mother with a sword.
Las Cruces police say Joshua Hunt told them his mother, Lisa Cano, was hateful and mistreated him his entire life.
Several people close to the family painted a very different picture of Cano.
They described her as a loving and caring person who always seemed very happy.
"This is a person who never raised her voice."
She worked at Tresco in Las Cruces.
Employees were told not to speak to media about the incident, but one of her coworkers told NewsChannel9 off camera, Cano would hug everyone and always had a smile on her face.
The family's house was up for sale. Realtor, Paul Sims, was also Lisa’s friend.
"She was almost on the side of melancholy. Very sweet, very affectionate and very caring,” he said. “That's why this made this so much more shocking.”
We went to the home where the murder happened to see if we could talk with Hunt’s wife.
She did not want to speak with us on camera. She instead told us, “It's tragic, it's horrible” and she had no further comment.
She did however post on her social media pages, where she talked about what happened.
"Even though they hadn't spoken much to each other in months, it did not hinder mine and her relationship. Just about every morning we would say hi and I love you", she wrote on Facebook. “Lisa and I always had a special bond."
Sims said Cano told him she wanted Josh and his family out of her home.
"That was her main motivation for putting it on the market, to encourage them to move along,” he said.
He recalled meeting Josh.
"Very standoffish, but I attributed that to just being hostile about the whole house sale process. He was very unfriendly and sullen,” Sims explained.
Hunt appeared before a judge on Monday via link video from jail.
He did not look up once as the judge was going over his case.
And he won't be getting out of jail any time soon as the judge changed his $500,000 bond to a no hold bond.
And the court also questioned his competency; his case is being moved to District Court.
As Hunt moves through the court system, friends and family continue the grieving process.
"She was a long suffering mother, not a combative mother," said Sims.
As they remember Lisa Cano, this isn't the first time Hunt is in trouble with the law.
Joshua Hunt's criminal rap sheet includes no contest pleas to domestic violence and weapons charges in Sacramento, California.

Secondly, this post will be going live the day after Labor Day here because Tuesday (tomorrow) I will be busy all day having breakfast with my daughter and a trip to my attorney.
Finally, Connie did all my labor for me when she commented on a recent Cyrsti's Condo post basically revolving around being transgender as a choice:
"Who we are and what we think ourselves to be don't always add up, even within the scope of gender dysphoria. Some cross dress their whole lives, never feeling the need to transition. Others, like us, used cross dressing as a way to cope. That WAS a CHOICE - as was our transitioning. For me, I first had to make the decision (choice) to come out as being something other than what I had been presenting myself to be. That's when I quit cross dressing, because, if I were to discard my dishonesty, I had to allow myself to never present as a man again. It did take a couple of years to achieve 100% on that, as there were some family members who I felt needed protection (OK, I did cross dress occasionally, as a man, for that). Another choice, it was.
It's been over two years since I have had to choose anything having to do with my gender identity. I know that I could never go back to living the lie I had been caught up in for so many decades, even though, physically, I could easily present as male in five minutes. That's just never going to happen, though. That's not a choice I even need to consider making anymore."
Thanks again Connie!

After noticing some properties that KLM treated and cared for I had high expectations that they where a solid company. After hiring them we started to have some issues with them. Our tree and shrub guy knocked on our door and notified us that he wouldn't be able to spray the pesticide and fungicide due to equipment failure and he would put in a service call to come back soon to finish the treatment. 2 weeks later I had to call into the office to see if I missed him and the tech never bothered entering the call. Shortly after that they came back out to complete the job. We also signed up for an aeration, they called ahead like they were supposed to, but didn't bother calling us until nearly 6pm that night, citing once again they had equipment failure and would have to reschedule. They finally came out a few weeks later and did a really good job aerating the lawn. Here recently we switched over from the winter, to summer schedule that included weekly mowing visits, however the last 2 weeks my lawn has not been mowed. Not to mention they also missed by back yard a few times as well. If you want to babysit your landscaper this is the company for you!
Posted: 4/29/2016 • Link to this review
Have made two appointments to meet with David - he did not show up either time. The timeliness of treatments is good; however, not showing up when you are an existing customer is NOT good. I will be changing services.
Posted: 9/13/2006 • Last edited: 7/12/2011 • Link to this review

Crystal Blue Eyes
“That had to sting a little,” Wayne said, holding Susan by the back of the head. Wayne had shot Matt in the left thigh, just above his knee. Matt writhed around in fake pain.
“Daddy!” Susan screamed. Two other men picked Matt up and proceeded to beat him.
Go ahead everyone, show yourselves. I need to see everyone before the show starts, Matt thought to himself, completely aware of everything around him.
They were beating Matt, while Wayne gloated, “I finally got you. Billy-badass and all, I shot you. I’m going to kill you. You ruined my life; I have nothing because of you. Take his mask off and show him to me, he has to be as old as I am.”
Matt smiled under his balaclava; this is going to be fun. He would wait until they yanked his mask off. His leg had already healed and the blood stopped; the body armor had done its job and the blood that seeped through was largely just a contusion, nothing more.
They drug Matt closer and lifted him up; Wayne reached up and pulled his balaclava off. Matt lifted his head, opened his eyes and smiled. Wayne stammered, “You …you. You look …”
Matt didn’t let him get the chance to breathe another word; with smooth grace, he broke free, unsheathed a blade and sunk it into Wayne’s throat, turned and sliced the throats of the men that had been holding him. At the same time, roars were heard all around as Bears came out of the forest, descending on the clearing. Shots rang out as the unprepared men tried to defend their already forfeited lives.
Grabbing Susan he held her down and out of danger. All around the sounds of men being eaten were heard; Susan tried to look but Matt kept her eyes covered and her head in his chest.
“It’s over, you’re safe these brave creatures won’t harm you,” Matt spoke evenly.
When the sounds had subsided he let her look. There was blood, but the bodies had been dragged off. Several of the Bears came lumbering back into the camp. Susan froze.
“Little one, they’ll not harm you,” Matt knew they were Boris, Robert, Rick, and the Elder-Bear from earlier.
Susan was terrified, and clung to her father. They all came forward and sniffed Susan and nudged the two, rubbing on them; one of the Bears came to Susan and nudged her hand.
“What does he want?” she asked.
“He wants you to follow him,” Matt responded, she looked scared.
Matt spoke softly, “Susan, this Bear won’t harm you. He will protect you, please walk with him. The twins are waiting.” Susan looked at her father saying nothing, and walked away slowly.
She left with Rick. Partially down the hill, Rick led her to the twins who were safe under a tree. Then he ambled off, changed to human form, dressed and came back up the hill to retrieve her. Rick and Susan waited at the bottom of the hill for hours, but her father never came down. However, a group of burly men accompanied by a Police Officer did; about the same time, Luke arrived with Vic, led by Todd.
The couple was reunited and introductions were made. Boris pulled Luke aside, “Luke, Matt won’t be coming back with you. He asked me to give this to you, along with a message.” Luke was stoic as he looked down at the collar he had given Matt.
Boris spoke for Matt, “Bear, I must tie up the last loose end of a life that should have ended 30 years ago. It would seem that a grudge has been held and I must end it. I’ll meet you at Boris’s gathering in April. Keep the kids with you or in the company of brothers. If I don’t return, consider me dead and move on.”
Luke walked out to the edge of the campsite and screamed and howled Matt’s name. The sounds of his lover in pain reached Matt’s ears as he crested the southern mountaintop. It pained him, but this loose end had to be dealt with. The other Bears eventually calmed Luke down and took him home; Boris spoke to him at length about his suspicions about Matt, what was going to happen to him, and that he should be ready to accept Matt when he returned. No matter what he was.
The Journey south would take several weeks by foot, the first couple of nights were fairly pleasant being in the woods. It had been a while since the young Bear had gotten the chance to be by himself. Since his change, all of the off-season time had been spent in training. He had picked up various skills and Matt was thankful, but he didn’t realize how badly he had needed a break. Matt replayed the events of the abduction and the rescue of the kids numerous times in his mind. Every option he chose just didn’t make sense. Boris had given him Intel that a Bear was behind the abduction, and it needed to be solved by whatever means necessary. There were details about the letter that linked a few threads in Matt’s past, but it was sketchy to say the least. He had asked Boris if any Bears were members of any Foreign Legion or military force. The reply was evasive; prudent and polite, but evasive. After a full day of worry and analysis, Matt let his mind slip a little and enjoy the time in the woods.
Over the last few years he had come to realize that Bears are normally solitary creatures only clinging to one or few partners. However, in recent centuries they had started forming small pocket communities or dens so resources could be pooled and protection could be given to those who needed it, but as with any group, there were always bad apples. Shortly after Matt’s change had asked him to become a protector of sorts and ensure the wellbeing of all his kin. The Elder had asked him to use his skills for the protection and safety of all Bears; because of his similar experience and exposure in the military, he agreed without hesitation. In that moment, something clicked inside him. Matt pledged his skill to Boris and to whatever task needed to be accomplished. This time of solitude seemed to be just what he needed.
He was kneeling down at a steam to drink when a scent hit him; it was familiar, but his gut tightened and his instincts warned him to keep his guard up. He finished drinking, crossed the stream and picked up the pace. He could feel something; it was as though the presence was getting closer. It wasn’t a negative feeling, but something told him to be ready. As the day progressed whatever it was seemed to be getting closer, it was closing the distance no matter how fast Matt tried to move. It just kept getting closer; the scent he’d caught earlier was getting stronger. It was somehow familiar, like a relative or family member. It lingered on the edge of his perception, just out of reach. Deciding that caution was his best option, Matt took to the trees; he found a clearing with a ring of trees and scaled one until he was about 60 feet up with a clear view of the ground below him. He had left his pack below with his sleeping bag open beside it, whatever was tracking him would be drawn to that scent and he would be able to catch it unaware. Waiting, he brought the rifle up and looked through the scope. He noticed movement on the far side of the clearing but couldn’t make out what it was. There it was again, just to the left of his gear. Movement again, to the left of the tree. He could not track the movement; it was too fast for him. Matt swiveled on his feet using his toes to balance on the limb, trying to get a fix on whatever was beneath him.
All at once the tree shook violently underneath him, as an impact at its base tipped Matt from his perch and tossed him to the ground. He landed hard on his side, wincing as a fallen branch embedded itself in his flesh. Howling with pain, Matt rolled over and up onto his feet placing his back against the tree. His vision began to blur as his drew his knives, colors danced through his field of sight. He shifted to his half Bear form, forcing his body to push the branch out and heal itself. In front of him appeared a large Polar bear, but as soon as he made eye contact it disappeared again. It seems to slip in and out of his sight, coming closer and then backing away again. Whatever this Bear was, it seemed as though it was testing him. It was a Bear, but it was unlike any he had come across before. Suddenly it appeared in front of him again and swatted Matt to the ground. As he tumbled, he threw a blade at the Bear. Unfazed, the Bear disappeared as the blade soared through the air where it had previously been missing it completely. Rolling to his feet Matt drew his sidearm and attempted to draw a shot on the Bear. It reappeared in front of him and once again slapped him to the ground.
Rolling with the hit this time, Matt came up and fired. The rounds missed, but he managed to push the larger Bear away. As the anger rose within him, the world was washed in color; this time Matt didn’t try to shut it off. In the color he could see the Bear, he could see it clearly.
“Gotcha,” Matt fired at the Bear, but once again hit nothing. It seemed to have moved out of his line of fire just as he had squeezed the trigger.
Suddenly, the Bear appeared in front of Matt and slammed him into the ground pinning his arms. Trying to kick the Bear away was useless; the massive creature just laid on him, pinning him to the ground. He was defenseless.
“You are too slow for a Guardian,” growled the Bear inches from his face.
“What do you mean?” Matt growled back, trying in vain to wiggle free.
“You haven’t been trained well enough; you’re useless as a Guardian. How do you expect to protect the Kermode with those skills?” scoffed the Bear, getting up and walking backward as he did so.
“What do you mean?” Matt scrambled to his feet, keeping his sidearm aimed on the Bear.
“Do you not know what you are little one?” questioned the Bear, sitting on its rump, in a stately and regal manner.
“I’m a Bear,” said Matt, as he shifted back to his human form, still holding the weapon on the massive Bear.
“You are much more little one, much more,”
“What do you mean?” Matt said as he looked around; fear was creeping in, and he was beginning to back away. Whatever this Bear was its skill far surpassed his.
“You, young one, are a Guardian. Have your Elders told you nothing? Have they not prepared you?”
“No? They never mentioned the word Guardian. But, I have been pushed to learn various disciplines over the years. Why?” asked the little Bear, now scared and backing further away.
“Well now, young lad, take a seat; let us speak of our history and let me tell you what you are to become,” spoke the massive Bear. Matt complied, and put his side arm away; not that it would have done much of anything to the massive Bear anyway.
As they sat and talked it became clear that this Bear had not meant to harm Matt, but he did mean to test him. It was also apparent to the small Bear that this massive creature could have killed him at any time without exerting even a fraction of his true power.
“What do they call you little Cub?” the Polar Bear asked.
“Matt … they call me Matt. And you?” replied the small Bear with a lump in his throat. He was nervous around this Bear, as if he was in the presence of an older relative.
“They called me Dante’ once, but that was a long time ago,” he said, lowering his massive head as if remembering something terrible.
“Well Dante’, it’s nice to meet you,” Matt said as he got to his feet and approached the Bear, extending his hand for a handshake.
“Little Cub, that gesture is for humans, not Bears. Come here and let me smell you,” Dante spoke in an alluring tone that put Matt at ease.
Matt approached; hesitating as he looked up into the eyes of the massive Bear then leaned in and hugged him around the middle. The Polar Bear put his head down and sniffed deeply. Gently he wrapped his paws around the smaller Bear and gently lifted him off the ground as he rolled backward onto his back so that Matt was snuggled into the Polar Bear’s fur. Both Bears sniffed each other for a long time, gently rubbing and stroking each other.
“In my time little one, warriors wore nothing into battle; I would like very much to feel your skin and to see you as your Bear,” Dante spoke, his tone a whisper against Matt’s skin. Matt nodded and pushed himself off of the Bear.
“Why don’t I build a fire and we can enjoy each other’s company? I have many questions for you,” Matt said looking down at the massive Bear, who was still lying on his back. The Bear chuffed and whined an approval. Matt went about opening his pack and making preparations; as he worked, Dante’ watched him intently as though still evaluating the small Bear. When he was done with the fire pit with wood gathered for the night, and water heating for tea or food Matt turned to face the Bear. The sun had just dipped below the horizon and night was overtaking the clearing wrapping the two into a dark, cozy embrace.
“Shall I undress now? I hope I’ll be to your liking, ancient one,” Matt spoke in reverence to the older Bear.
“Young one, I’m impressed by your perception. Please, let me see you in your Bear form. Come lay with me, and let me show you what you truly are.” Matt looked over at the Bear and started to undress with the light of the fire behind him; as the last of the body armor and weapons fell to the ground Matt stood naked in front of the ancient. A chuff came from the large Bear inviting Matt to join him, where he was engulfed in large paws and Polar Bear fur. As Matt shifted forms the larger Bear stroked him gently. The night was magical; the ancient Bear enjoyed the young Bear and the young Bear enjoyed the ancient. Many hours later Matt was left exhausted, sated, and at ease; he slept soundly through the night.
Morning came and Matt awoke to the soft sounds of a Polar Bear snoring; the light of the sun had just begun edging out of the night sky’s darkness. As he started to move, the larger Bear tightened his grip and hugged him closer. He reached up with a free paw and scratched the side of the Dante’s muzzle, waking him gently.
“Little one, you need to learn to sleep like a Bear. Okay … off with you,” Dante’ grumbled, releasing the smaller Bear. Matt rose to his feet, shifted back to a human and went to the fire to stir some life back into the embers. With the fire coming back to life, he rummaged around in his pack and found a few tea bags and packages of instant coffee, these would have to do. They would need something for breakfast too; there wasn’t enough food in his pack for more than one meal. He set out to create a meal in two metal cups, a mess kit and a few sheet of aluminum foil. In short order he prepared a cup of coffee and tea with grits and bacon bits, looking back over his shoulder he noticed that he was being watched intently.
“Ready to eat?” the small Bear asked.
“Eat … eat … human food? It’s been ages since I’ve had human food. Well, if you count the human I ate as food, then it actually hasn’t been so long,” Dante said with a smile and wink at Matt, who was standing in a daze trying to work out if he was serious or pulling his leg.
“Joking young one …. I’m joking. Come … come. I’m honored that you could prepare a meal from the contents of that satchel you wore,” Dante spoke as he sat up on his rump.
“Are you going to change forms?” Matt asked.
“No young one; I lost that ability many, many years ago,” replied Dante’.
“No worries, I’ll help you.” Matt sat the cups down and spooned the hot food into the Bear’s muzzle.
“Whatever that is, it’s good, but not as delicious as raw meat,”
“Well, I haven’t gone hunting yet, and your approach spooked me so I didn’t gather anything along the way. I’m sorr-” a paw was placed gently on Matt’s lips, interrupting him.
“Hush, young one. You’re such a giving Bear. We will hunt along the way to your destination. It’s time to tell me what you’re doing traveling like this,” said the ancient Polar Bear.
Matt gathered his gear and they both started the trek south. As the day progressed, both Bears chattered endlessly. Along the way Matt told Dante’ everything. He described the Bears in his keep, his change into a Bear, and the weird things that were happening to him. In the back of Matt’s mind he was working out how old this Bear was. Dante listened intently as they walked and watched with marked curiosity when Matt pulled out and engaged his GPS to confirm their direction. Toward the end of the day, the two stopped at a stream that was brimming with fish that were swimming up river to spawn. Matt went about setting up camp and the Polar Bear did as Bears do, he started to hunt for fish. After a short time Matt had finished setting up the campsite and he strolled over to the river to watch the magnificent Bear fish. Dante had already caught two average sized fish and was going after more when Matt plopped himself on a rock to watch.
“Don’t worry about me, I’m fine watching,” Matt said as he started to clean the fish. The large Bear looked back, snorted at him and went back to his hunting. Before long six large fish were cleaned and ready for cooking in the fire; the brains, liver, and smaller parts Matt kept for the large Bear. He knew these parts were higher in fats and the Bear would need to replace some of the stores it had expended tracking him. As Dante’ lumbered over to the bank Matt reached up to hug the massive wet Bear and then held up the smaller fish parts for him to eat. With tender care the big Bear lapped up the high fat parts and then seemed to look deeply into Matt’s eyes; deep into his soul, all the way to the core of his being.
“You remind me of my Luther,” said the large Bear as his bottom lip quivered. Sensing Dante’ had tumbled onto a very painful memory Matt sat all the stuff down, and wrapped his arms up around the Bear. Dante’ sat on his rump with a thud. Matt could feel the big Bear shudder as he sobbed; the waves of heat and emotion were flowing off the Bear as though a dam had suddenly broken. They stayed this way for a while until the large Bear pulled back from Matt.
“Young one, forgive me. You remind me so much of Luther, that I was lost in his memory and his death,” the big Bear spoke quietly in remembrance.
“I’m no one special, not like Luther must have been,” Matt said as the big Bear looked him in the eyes again and put both paws on his shoulders.
“Young one, you don’t look like him. You are him,” Dante spoke, and then let sink in.
“What?” Matt looked up at him, confused.
“Matt, you are the re-born spirit of Luther.”
Who I Am?
The two Bears sat wrapped in each other for a short time then both looked in each other’s eyes, let go of each other, and made their way back to the camp. The fire was burning nicely and the smaller Bear had fashioned a ground cover for them, large enough to accommodate the larger Bear.
“Hold on old one; you can plop yourself by the fire and dry off. I love the smell of Bear just as much as the next Cub, but wet fur sticks to everything,” Matt said with a smile and a wink. Dante’ chuffed and gave Matt a soft chuckle as he sat by the fire and started to scratch his matted fur so it would dry. Looking over at the big Bear, Matt saw that he shared some resemblance to Luke; both were massive Polar Bears with the same long nose, flat ears, and wide paws, a semi gray streak down the back. Magnificent.
“Raw or cooked?” he asked the larger Bear.
As the he dug out some of the coals from the fire, laid the fish on top and covered them up Dante’ watched at him, puzzled, like he was still working some things out. While they waited for the fish to finish Matt reached over and started to scratch and rub the big Bears fur, helping to dry him; this produced a long loan moan from the larger Bear.
“Why don’t you get out of that odd clothing you wear, and let me scratch you as well?” the large Bear teased with a wide grin.
“Sure,” Matt replied as he came around to let the large Bear look at him. That’s when he saw the red dot dancing across Dante’s chest; without hesitation he stepped in front of the laser and looked back toward the forest. Matt felt the impact, but nothing more as his vision blurred and went black. He could hear the larger Bear roar and bellow, could hear more shots being fired and then more bellowing. Then, the faint cry of humans as the old guardian killed them. Matt’s Werebear body was trying to heal; he was trying to force his body to change, but he was hurt too badly. Matt gurgled and coughed as he tried to move, but his limbs wouldn’t answer his call. As his vision came blearily back, the Polar Bear was over top of him sniffing deeply.
“You will not die today, little Guardian,” the large Bear whispered as he hovered over top of Matt. Dante’ called upon all his life force and called upon the old Gods; he would sacrifice himself to save this one if he had too. He would give all his knowledge and skill as well as give his life. His long existence had come to a conclusion; in a selfless act, with an ability held by the Guardians and ancient ones he would give up his life to save another.
The wind blew hard, pushing in dark clouds as the Large Bear howled and barked summoning himself for his final act in this lifetime; he had walked this earth for many centuries. He had lived countless lifetimes, he had loved many. At his end he would save the re-born spirit of his lost love, his everything, his mate; the Bear was now at peace. Sitting back on his rump he turned a paw up and bit his wrist tearing the flesh and veins. Blood washed over the smaller Bear, sizzling and smoking in the cool air. Underneath the old Bear Matt’s body started to heal, the gaping holes that the bullet produced closed, his shattered spine reformed, bones mended, and vessels became as new. However, Matt’s heart had stopped. Gathering his life force, a bluish glow formed between Dante’s paws. He tilted his head back and roared to the sky, bellowed to the gods that this was his time he was ready to take his place among the stars. Dante’ reached forward and slammed his life into the small Bear. Matt jerked as his eyes snapped open and his lungs filled with air. Screaming, he added his voice to the Bear’s final roar. Then, there was only silence. Dante’s eyes fluttered as he collapsed beside the small Bear. The ancient one laid a paw on the smaller Bears chest, exhaled, and closed his eyes for the last time.
With his last breath, Dante’ had given Matt the sum of his knowledge and his abilities. Dulled by the older Bear’s age they were now renewed in this Cub, this new Guardian. Matt stayed on the ground as the visions came, washing over him in waves. He looked back over Dante’s life, like it was a movie playing in his mind. He felt his emotions, his sadness and now anger. He saw the darkness and knew what it was. Matt saw what he was, what he had become, and the responsibility that was placed squarely on his small shoulders. He was a different being now, a different Bear. Sitting up, he admired his new world; new colors, shapes, and energy flows were now visible to him. He could see and feel everything; it wasn’t intrusive or painful anymore. Standing, the little Bear had spread his wings. The butterfly had emerged; a new life had begun for him.
Miles away, sitting in his chair and enjoying a book by the fire an ancient Bear stiffened. A great sadness erupted within him. Rising to his feet he walked outside and transformed into his full Bear form. Looking up into the sky, he knew a brother had passed and the next Guardian had been born; he stood on his hind feet and bellowed to the Gods, he bellowed his loss at the passing. Afterwards the ancient Bear returned to his human form, wiped his watering sad eyes and returned to his seat.
Matt had no idea how much time had passed. The moon was high in the sky, the fire had gone out completely, and Dante’s body was cold to the touch. He looked around and smelled the air; calm had settled over the forested area, like nature itself knew to give the Bears distance. Matt went to the river and walked into the icy water submerging himself, he could feel the cold but somehow it felt distant. As he looked down in the water, he could see scars on his chest and across his body, no doubt transferred from Dante. When he walked out of the water, the blood was gone and with it the Cub Matt had been. What stood in the moonlight looking down at the lifeless body of the ancient, was a now a Bear. He could tell he had changed; something had fallen into place inside him. He felt connected to the world and to the limitless energy that was now all around him. As his eyes surveyed Dante’s body, the feeling of loss took hold of the young guardian.
Gathering wood from the forest, he erected a funeral pyre. There on the pyre he placed the body of a great Bear. As Matt reached down to light dried wood, a gentle breeze washed over him; bringing with it a scent, old and wise. The fire took off quickly as the guardian stepped back. He looked over to his left and saw the Great Bear had come to pay homage and to his right stood another Bear, Matt knew this one, but somehow the memory escaped him. As the fire grew and finally engulfed the last of Dante’, Matt turned; hefted his pack and weapons and walked silently away. It was time to close this loose end by whatever means were necessary.
The time after the mountain was tough for everyone who had been involved. It was decided that Susan, Todd, and the kids would stay in Toronto with Rick standing watch; in the meantime Luke was frantic. He called Boris everyday asking if Matt had been seen or if anyone had come in contact with him. Each time no was the only answer he received.
Boris knew a few things. First, Matt would only be seen if he wanted it that way, he had developed a stealth that was only common to a few Bears. Two, Matt had cut all ties and left no remembrance of his life in order to keep his mind clear. And three, even if Matt succeeded, it would be a struggle for him to come back and not stay a Bear or give into the animal that he was becoming. This Elder knew exactly what Matt was, he had felt the passing of another ancient like himself, and this could be the only explanation.
After a month or so, the Bears standing watch were alerted by a newscast of a natural gas fire; in the newscast a reporter was holding one of the breastplates from Matt’s body armor that had been found in the fire. It was burned but for the few Bears that knew Matt, it was all they needed to mark his location. Everyone feared the worst. Luke was distraught with the news. Robert had made a trip to the site of the accident, posing as a government safety agent; he found no Bear markings or bodies that would reveal the existence of Werebears.
Keeping Matt’s wishes, everyone was to attend the annual gathering and he would meet them there. As time drew closer for the gathering Luke dreaded going, fearing the heartbreak it might hold. Everyone understood; Norman and Rusty picked him up and accompanied him, but he was distant and distracted along the way. He barely ate and was just a sad Bear. At the gathering, Luke was on edge; he would sit outside and sniff the air for hours, waiting for his lover to come home. On the third day, Luke had been dragged down to the pond and out of the lodge. Several of the Bears retold the story of how Matt had found them. How he fought like a Bear in human form and they talked of his spirit and his honor. Luke was amused, but still he was distracted. He moved away from the gathering to a spot where he could sit alone, sniffing the air.
Then it came, a faint trace of musk, a familiar scent. He bellowed Matt’s name, the scent was faint but it was there. Matt was somewhere in the woods. The other Bears came to Luke who was rapidly transforming into his full Bear form. Luke put his powerful nose to the wind trying to get a direction, something, anything. He frantically paced back and forth.
About the same time Boris, Rick and Robert caught the scent as well; Boris yelled and pointed. On the far side of the clearing, just on the edge of the trees barely visible next to the foliage stood a now completely silver Bear, waiting as if not sure of what to do. Slowly, Matt came out of the woods and ran toward the group.
“Is that Matt?” asked Vic.
“Yes, he’s changed again,” spoke Boris, relieved but also curious.
Luke bounded towards his Bear and once again all was right with the world. They rolled and hugged for some time, then came back to the group. Matt had gone through his second change; he was now a completely silver Bear with a black mask around his eyes, down his chest, and onto his forepaws. His eyes were bright blue like the sky on a clear day. His claws were shorter and totally black, compared to his fur. After a bit of greeting and hugs from all around, Matt made his way up to the Elders.
He changed back to his human form and stood before Boris, Buck, Robert and Vic. His human body was scarred deeply from his neck to his feet, he had no fat on his body and his musculature was taut and hard. There was a tense few moments as Matt watched them. He stared at them with those drilling blue eyes. Robert took a step back, ready for a fight.
“Elders, thank you for watching over my family and for taking care of my beloved. The loose end has been tied and I’m glad to be among brothers again. Thank you,” Matt spoke in marked reverence. He bowed to them, turned and walked back to Luke. When he turned they could see scars marking his body, Matt now carried the mark of a Guardian.
“What now?” Vic asked.
“Burgers and beers,” cheered Boris, who smiled and went back to attending the grill.
The Annual Gathering concluded without incident, Boris, Luke and Matt spoke at length about his second transformation and how soon it would be time to move on. All agreed that they needed to do some things first and everything would be ok.
Gift Wrapping with Bear Paws
Human holidays eventually fade from the lives of were-creatures and just become another moment in passing time. That is, unless you’ve found a group to be a part of or someone to love. The very young Bear couple went through the change, and yet chose to keep their lives. They had a daughter to raise and obligations that couldn’t be dropped. So they carried on. As their daughter graduated and left the nest, the two Bears accepted many others into their small home and were host to many gatherings. The couple’s home was small, but their hearts were large. Matt was super quiet in these settings. He was reserved, but attentive at the same time. On the other side of the coin was Luke, at times it would seem he was the life of the party. This year they had three dens of Bears with them for the holidays. The RV was full, and bedrolls had been laid out in just about every available space. This was all fine; the guests were a close circle of friends that Matt and Luke held very dear.
Matt had taken over the front of the home for gift wrapping and kicked everyone from the living room, ensuring no one would see him wrap. This was his special time, his tribute.
“Hey, these gifts are works of art. By the Gods, who made these?” Walt asked as he walked in from the kitchen to look at the decorated tree.
“Matt did. Wrapping the gifts is his tribute every year,” Luke responded as he hung the last of the Coke ornaments on the tree; Coke and anything related to the Coke Polar Bears was the theme this year.
“Um … okay … tribute? I’m confused,” Walt stuttered as he looked around at the gifts scattered around the room. They were hanging from the ceiling on mobiles, floating in mid-air by some magical force or nestled under the tree. Each was perfectly arranged to compliment the one next to it.
Shaking his head, Luke held up his hands to quiet the larger Bear, “Okay, grab a cup of coffee and meet me on the back deck then I’ll explain. Just leave Matt alone for a while; he’ll come around in his own time.”
“Wait, he’s sobbing and I just watched him shift to half form. I think-” Walt was cut short with Luke holding up a paw to him.
“Just grab your coffee and meet me outside,” Luke insisted and winked. He knew Matt was okay; he had watched this same scene play out for years. Each year the creativity of the little Bear was expanded to top the previous. This year seemed to somehow be special. The gifts had a color theme to them. Dark gold, warm brown, silver balls, a black shiny element, and then the ribbons were all spectacular. The ribbons were made from every material imaginable; some were wood, fabric, paper, and even brushed metal.
“Okay,” Walt stuttered and made his way outside.
Once outside, the two Bears settled in for Luke’s story to be told. On the way out, they gathered the other Bears in the house who had also noticed the state Matt was in. They were all a little more than worried about the little Bear, but they all heeded Luke’s wish and just left him alone. Once outside the story started.
“Well Bears, have a seat and listen to a tale of remembrance and the public omission to all of you about a big mistake I made when Matt and I were first together,” Luke started.
“You see, Matt is the last of seven children. He had several cousins and extended family, but for the most part his family has passed away. When we changed we made the decision to keep our lives going and bring them to a natural end. This has caused Matt more heartache than most. He misses his family and it hurts even more because he knew that three of his family were Kin and could have been saved by the change. He still struggles with that but, I digress-” Luke was interrupted.
“Wait, we knew that you two kept going, but Matt’s family was Kin? How is that possible?” Stew asked. Stew and Burt were young bears, even in relation to Matt and Luke, and had quickly become a pretty steady feature in their home. They were smaller Bears like Matt, but with hearts of pure golden sunshine.
“Soon after Matt’s first change, his sister passed away. Attending the funeral was very hard for him; that’s when he was close enough to his siblings and made the connection. His family was Bear. Soon after he returned, his brother committed suicide, his second sister became a total recluse and the oldest sister shunned him for not helping the family more. This devastated him because the one thing he held onto, and still does, is wrapping the holiday gifts,” Luke paused to take a drink.
“So, he’s missing his human family?” Burt asked as he snuggled into Stew on the patio floor cushions. Even though it was snowing around them Matt had constructed a covered fire pit that let the bears lounge around enjoying the cold, but still keep their paws warm by the fire. It was snowing after all and soon the roads would be closed. The only way to get around would be in half-form.
“Yes and no. Let me go back to the beginning of this story and then we’ll move forward. Way back before Matt even left home, before he graduated High School, this is where it starts. You see, Matt’s parents were more than human parents. They were spiritual guides and teachers, they were coaches and scientists. They both prepared Matt for what he was to become. Being older parents, their health started to fail when Matt was in his junior year of High School. Both of them went from active, attentive, nurturing people, to being cared for around the clock. Matt stepped up and helped, but he was struggling with his own life and the Bear that was coming out within him…” Luke paused to drink. The questions started to fly.
“You mean he was Bear before he was changed?” Stew asked.
“I would say yes, he was. He was more closely connected to his inner self than most would have been; his parents raised him that way. He would spar with his father, and meditate with his mother; he learned early on that life was a circle and everything is connected. He was never the greatest fighter and had often been beaten up on by his older brothers, but he always held back. He knew early on that he could kill if needed, but that was never the option to take first … ahh … I’m getting way ahead of myself though, let’s get back on track.” Luke’s voice raised a bit as he repositioned himself.
“His parents fell ill and for whatever reason, his siblings were too involved in their own lives to help. So it fell to Matt to take care of the estate, pay bills, buy groceries, while still trying to have a life and grow up. It all came to a head when he was in his senior year of High School at Christmas; for many years wrapping the gifts was something that Matt’s mother took pride in. Matt would spend hours helping her wrap gifts. Nothing was ever super expensive, but the act of wrapping became their way of transferring love and affection. Each gift took on a magical context and each almost life of its own,” Luke paused, looking around at each guest.
“I think I’m starting to see now. He puts effort into it so he can remember and pay homage to his family,” Burt said hugging Stew even closer.
“Yes, but there’s much more. The last year of their lives, his mother and father were both too ill to even shop for the holidays; so Matt took on the challenge of finding a special gift for each member of the family, wrapping it, and then delivering it. That year, he was the one who set up the tree and decorated the house. His siblings were almost never present; they would come by, but as Matt tells it, only to tell him something was wrong, or that he had forgotten to do something. Anyway, the holiday came and Matt had shopped, wrapped, decorated, cooked, and presented the whole holiday for his parents. When the family arrived, he greeted each of them at the door like his Father would have and had the Cider out for them on the stove like his Mother would. However, the cider was not quite right and the rest of the things were just not quite like his parents would have done. The remarks followed, but Matt just smiled. Inside it crushed him and became the first Pillar of his self doubt that he has struggled with his whole life,” Luke stopped and looked at the four Bears. They were just watching him, Walt with tears in his eyes, Mitch gripping his hand even tighter, waiting for the next part of the story.
“I don’t get it. Matt is most capable self-assured Bear I have ever known. There’s nothing he can’t do. I have seen him … I … I … I don’t get it,” blathered Stew.
“It’s okay we’re only partially to the end of this story. After the holiday gathering was over, all the food put away, lights turned off, doors locked, and his parents settled in beds; Matt took the time to walk through the estate. As he looked at everything he’d put in place; his mind started to rewind through the day. He revisited every comment, every partial smile, the looks of disgust when opening gifts, no words of joy at the wrapping. Matt found himself on the sparing mat, looking up at the full moon. Then he cried, cursed them all; he vowed to never again let any of them hurt him like this. The next day, his mother was rushed to the hospital where she would stay for a few months. She healed enough to attend his High School graduation, but fell ill and died days later leaving the estate to Matt and his father. Matt, like many other teens that lost family took it hard and acted out. Without his mother to calm him and his father unable to work with him, he was lost. His father, knowing that leaving was his only and best option had Matt fired from his job. He entered into the military and started traveling the world. He would always send postcards and call his father; no matter where he was he would call, write, or send something small back home. Every gift had a story and everything held meaning,” Luke threw more wood on the fire, the snow was falling harder, the drift had covered the walkway from the house, vehicles were just blobs of white, and the light of the day was fading into night quickly. From behind them Matt appeared with a hot pot of coffee and a small tray of cut sausages and cheeses.
“Are you telling my story again?” Matt asked, looking down into the eyes of his mate, his lover, his world.
“Yes, yes I am. These Bears deserve to know. They need to understand the quiet one, the one that moves without sound, the one that heals everyone, the one that cares more about others than himself. Yes … I’m telling them your story,” Luke said while looking up into Matt’s eyes after he sat the tray down.
“Then I’ll leave you to it, I’m going to walk to the market. I won’t be long,” Matt said as he rose pulling the hood of his jacket over his head and walked into the snow storm.
“I didn’t hear him approach, I didn’t even hear the door open from the house,” Burt muttered, while filling up coffee cups and passing the trays around.
“That’s how Matt moves, you’ll get used to it,” Walt added and patted the young Bear on the shoulder.
“Please continue,” Mitch begged, warming his hands by the fire. All the bears were snuggled in the little hut around the fire with snow falling all around them.
Luke took a deep breath, “Okay, lets fast forward a bit; Matt spent a full 20 years in the military. As he traveled, he continued to wrap gifts and send them home. His father would save them throughout the year and then give them to the family on the holidays. Each one was made with whatever Matt had handy, airline barf bags, local newspapers, bar coasters … the list goes on and on. When I met his sister early on in our relationship she told me of the gifts. Grass from the river Jordan, a piece of Marble from the Parthenon, earth from his father’s birthplace or a small basket from Africa. These little gifts held so much meaning that it’s hard to comprehend the depth of it sometimes.”
Luke paused and closed his eyes gathering himself, sighed, and continued the story. “Now we come to the big mistake I made with Matt. It was one of the few holidays where we had the whole family in one place at one time. Between shuttling the kids to one set of grandparents or another, and Matt traveling it was a big deal to have everyone in one spot. Knowing this, Matt went into super holiday mode; he decorated the house, everything was pulled out of storage, and he even put garland and lights everywhere; the tree was a work of art and the gifts were just like what you have seen inside. But … I screwed up. On Christmas day Matt had no gifts from me under the tree; you see Bears, I had gotten so wrapped up in business, work, and my own self absorbed life I had forgotten to wrap or even purchase anything with meaning. What I got for him was last minute, and a toss-off in relation to what he did for me that year. To make it even worse, he said nothing, and didn’t even let on to what had happened until much later that day, after everyone had left, the kids were asleep, and the animals tucked into kennels,” Luke stopped, sniffling, holding back his tears.
“You can stop; I think we get it,”
“No, let me finish then you can decide for yourself,” Luke replied as he coughed and cleared his throat.
“That night I found him in front of the fireplace, curled up with tears rolling down his face. He was holding a small white box with silver and blue ribbon; simple in comparison to everything else that day, but I could feel the heat coming off him. I sat by the fire and reached for him, but he withdrew deeper into a ball clutching the small box. I asked him what was wrong; then through tears he told me the whole story from the start, and I knew that I had hurt him deeply. You see Bears, by not caring enough to wrap a gift you don’t give it weight. This hurt Matt a lot. After we talked, I apologized and Matt told me I was forgiven before I did it, but he just needed to cry and get it out.”
“What was in the box?” asked Stew.
“I don’t know. All I know is that it was Matt’s last gift to his mother. She never opened it; he found it after she passed away and kept it as a reminder. He places it under the tree every year.” Luke finished and looked out on the Bears; there was calm among them. A deep understanding of what being a were-creature was, a full acceptance that every individual makes sacrifices for the ones they love. They all exchanged firm hugs and quick kisses, drank the last of the coffee and headed inside. The snow was easily a foot thick as they waded through.
When they all got inside, took off snow-covered cloths and piled into the living room, each was taken aback by what they found. They marveled at the gifts Matt had wrapped. They walked around and examined each one; each gift was a work of art. Ribbons, bows, multicolored paper, paper animals, and candy adorned them. Suddenly, Stew called to them.
“It’s here, there’s the box! By the gods, there’s the box!”
Nestled at the bottom of the tree behind all the larger boxes, almost invisible next to the shiny surfaces and colors of the other gifts, laid the small white box. It was almost yellow with age, the ribbon crushed down and hanging off the sides. As they all looked closer they could see written on the top right corner, ‘To Mom, I love you. Matt’. They all hugged each other, looked at one another and without saying a word, paired off and started to wrap gifts of their own. It would seem that a new tradition had now been formed among Bears, one that would hopefully carry on forever.
Mitch and Walt took over the kitchen, Stew and Burt went upstairs, and Luke went to wrap in the front room. He sat down in Matt’s chair at his worktable, looking down he could still see the wet spots from the tears that had fallen from the little Bear as he worked as well as subtle claw marks on the edges of the desk, “I love you Matt, this year I’ll give you what I never could, a new family to love,”
Matt’s gift this year was a family portrait with a hand carved frame, made of metal from a steam locomotive. Luke had made it with his own hands. The picture held the most meaning. Matt, Luke, Susan, Steve, Vic, Rusty, Norman, Walk, Mitch, Burt and Stew were in a pile at the lake when the picture was snapped; this would carry the weight of love and wrap the little Bear in the warmth of family.
It had been some time since Luke and Matt were changed, almost forty five years in fact. They’d settled in Virginia, with Luke eventually running a Railroad as its president. Matt worked for the rail line as well, but he stayed clear of all the operational stuff and tried to stay under the radar. The small jobs he did for them suited him well; it was a life of good work, good food and quiet living.
It was no secret that Matt was very protective of his Bear and everyone at the railroad knew it. They could be seen on any given day having a quiet lunch at the picnic tables just out of the hustle of the terminal. Matt was often waiting for Luke along the track if he was on the train to make sure he was okay. He often brought lunch in for everyone, just so he could make sure his Bear didn’t need anything; it masked the guttural need to be close to him. Most thought it was strange but passed it off as great affection, which it was.
They’d made preparations over the past few years for their first move as Werebears. They’d made a trip to visit Boris about 30 years before and received the advice they needed. Boris brokered the sale of a small parcel of land, far but not too far from his Were-Lodge in British Columbia. Matt and Luke built a quaint two story Colonial Home with all the Werebear features. It was large enough to give Luke his Bear room and had small areas for Matt. Both were full Werebears, but Matt hadn’t change like normal bears and still liked small closed spaces. Luke being a rather large man in his human form was even larger as a Bear needed the space.
At night, a single blue light could be seen from the lodge which served at the ‘we’re here, come over for coffee’ sign for visitors. Many times that small cottage in the woods was a favorite spot to visit and relax. They would often speak of their first move and what had helped them through it, as well as play poker, gin, or 42.
This small home would be where the pair would escape for ten or so years and then restart their lives after they’d adjusted to new identities. They’d chosen to keep names that were similar to their original ones; Luke was to become Kyle and Matt was to become Jonathan.
They’d made plans to take a Canadian backpacking adventure where they would be lost and not return; in these types of adventures you have to sign waivers and post your travel plans. It would be 48 hours before a search team was sent out and a day before they would find the tattered clothing and campsite. They would use cadavers and a portable heater to fake their deaths; the tent was to catch on fire and burn the cadavers beyond recognition. Personal effects were to be left to provide sufficient evidence that it was the couple. This would provide the necessary evidence to complete the Certificates of Death. The wild animals would clean up the bits and pieces and their tracks wouldn’t be noticed leaving the campsite.
Afterward, they would make the trek as Bears, crossing the mountains and meeting their new family of Werebears on the other side. They would literally show up naked. For both of them it was symbolic of a complete break and walking away from the past.
Over the years many had come in contact with the pair and left quite changed. Vic met the pair when Matt changed, but had really begun to know them on vacation trips with Rusty and Norman; Rusty and Norman having sired both Matt and Luke. Vic was impressed with Matt’s immense strength even with his small size and Luke, for his graciousness and love for Matt. Matt and Vic formed a very close teacher and student relationship that always seemed to have a bit of sexual tension. Boris met the pair when they’d traveled for his advice; during that visit with Boris; Matt was very reluctant to change into his full Bear form, content to walk alongside with Luke instead. They never left sight of each other; they would wake from deep slumber if the other left the vicinity. Boris found this odd, but not troubling.
When they were changed, Matt had been first; his change was anything but normal; it was hard and very painful for him. He didn’t grow a pelt in human form and remained largely like he was before the change, a little beer belly, almost no body hair and long locks of ginger-blond hair. His eyes however became the clearest and brightest blue, and would stay that way after he changed to his full Bear. He was often mistaken for a Cub before the change.
Luke on the other hand, changed into a Polar Bear of massive size and proportion. When he changed, his hair and pelt turned stark white, almost luminescent, and large paws with large equipment filled out the package. He was on par with Norman in size and speed; much like Norman and Rusty, they also would pet each other and nuzzled for a long time before they even had Bear sex.
“It’s almost time, my Bear,” Matt spoke in an almost trembling tone.
“I know, I know,” Luke quipped.
They were both a little on edge; faking your own death was hard, but faking two when both were in a very public eye with children and grandchildren was another story.
Luke looked up from his bowl of soup, “Everyone is wishing us well on our vacation and telling me to be safe, to hurry back. It’s scary; I don’t really want to go.”
“Bear, I know. I don’t either, but it’s time to move on. Everything is ready; Boris called a little bit ago and so did Vic and Rusty to offer their support. Walt and Mitch are traveling through New York today and want to travel out with us.” Luke nodded, but didn’t reply.
He was starting to tear up, his mighty hands trembling at the table. “Please help me, be strong for me. This is going to kill me,” the big Bear of a man started to sob.
Matt reached up, cupped his chin and smiled. “Bear, I’ll be with you forever,” he said in a hushed tone, almost a chuff. Bear speak always soothed Luke.
They hugged and Luke got a grip on himself. Matt’s ears picked up someone walking to the tables so he quickly dried Luke’s eyes.
“Sir, everyone is here for the staff meeting,” one of the new office employees spoke.
“Thank you, I’ll be right in,” replied Luke.
“Are you going to be ok?” Matt asked. Luke chuffed at Matt in that ‘I’ll get over it, but I don’t like it, kind of expression.’ Sometimes Bear speak carried more information than human language ever could.
As Luke walked off, Matt cleaned up the table shoving all the stuff in his backpack and headed for home. On the way he stopped to top off the truck with fuel and pick up his favorite snack, Little Debbie Cakes and a Mountain Dew and then headed for home.
It was a short drive up the street and he caught himself in a daydream missing the place that had been home for most of his human life. The home they’d bought and later remodeled was close to the railroad and offered Matt closeness without panic.
Inside this was tearing Matt up; the pair had living children and now grandchildren. The two Bears bore witness to their son mature into a fine man with several kids. Their daughter had gone on to be a scientist and was working on an underwater living project. She’d had two daughters and they’d just had children of their own; leaving all of that behind was like daggers stabbing him through his chest.
When he got home, he sat in the truck and just cried a long loud cry.
As he was getting hold of himself, Walt and Mitch arrived. They hopped out of their rental car and quickly noticed the state Matt was in.
“Matt … what’s the matter?” Mitch moved in and hugged the smaller man close.
“Everything … nothing … this is our first move,” he sobbed again.
Walt reached the pair and engulfed Matt in a tight Bear hug. Their scent was calming. Their body heat warm. Matt felt himself relax and calmness returned to his body and mind.
“Ok, come on in. Enough of this emotional stuff,” Matt huffed, drying his eyes.
Once inside, coats were hung, coffee was warmed and they sat at the kitchen table. “Wow this is a small place,” remarked Mitch.
“Its home,” Matt said with marked sadness.
In contrast to most Werebear dens it was very, very small. Minimal furnishing; a large chair and couch for Luke ample enough to support his weight. It was obvious that Luke made due with the small space to accommodate Matt’s smaller frame. To compensate, Matt lavished attention on his Bear, so Luke wouldn’t have to get upset that he could not fit or reach something or find things that were tucked away.
Every inch of wall space was used up. Art, pictures, and treasures from a lifetime hung with care around the house. Walt and Mitch had only been to Matt and Luke’s den once, and it was really not the ideal place for gatherings. It was a hobbit home that two Bears lived in. As they looked around it was clear that they loved each other deeply and had forged strong bonds with Rusty, Norman, Vic and Boris.
At the table the conversation was more jovial. Mitch and Walt really wanted to get to know Matt and Luke, but they were a very solitary pair and kept largely to themselves at the gatherings.
“Who changed you?” Walt asked as he looked over the wall of pictures.
“Rusty changed me, and Norman changed Luke,” Matt spoke in a semi-trance.
“So, are all your preparations ready?” Walt asked, giving Matt another Bear hug around the shoulders.
“Yes, I have shipped out some small items to the new house, things we wanted to keep. All the paperwork is in order, the fridge is cleaned out, and utilities are paid for six months. Wills, Powers of Attorney, and trust documents have been updated. The insurance policies are all here and waiting for the kids to find them. The house is cleaned out. No Werebear DNA to find, no stone left unturned. The computers have been cleaned; all the paper files have been shredded and burned. No trace of our life going back fifty five years is left in the house, outside of what we wanted to leave. I feel so strange that this is the last night in our home…” Matt trailed off the last part of the sentence and his eyes started to cloud over again.
“It will be OK, you have a new family waiting on you and everything is ready,” Mitch blurted out in an attempt to keep Matt’s spirits up.
Walt chimed in. “The other Bears put the last of the supplies in your pantry and stocked the fridge, freezer and cellar for you. Boris picked up your truck and it’s in the garage. I would say you’re all ready to move into your new lives.” When Walt finished it was apparent that Matt had already known all this and it wasn’t the problem, it was the leaving part, not the preparation that was getting to him.
“I know what you need; you need another Bear hug,” Walt said as he winked at Mitch. They led the now completely sobbing and shaking Matt into the living room.
The two large Bears removed their clothes and pulled Matt’s off as well. He was a mess; weeks, months, and years of stress were pouring out of him in waves of tears, emotion and heat. He was almost glowing. The two hugged him close and shifted to full Bear form with Matt in the center. They knew that the scent would calm him and if he lost it they could handle him in this small space.
While listening to Matt sob and throw his emotional tantrum, Walt flashed back to the first time they got to really visit with this pair. It was at Boris’s annual gathering. This would have been the fourth or maybe fifth year after they changed. The new Werebears would enter in Bear form, and their sires would present them. Matt, who was always more comfortable in human form, decided he would walk astride his Bear to honor him. This caused more than a few eyes to lift. A very callous Bear at the entrance told Matt he had to change or he could not go in and be presented with Norman and Rusty greeted them. Matt was polite and tried to explain, but the Bear shoved him, saying that he had to change before they could enter.
What happened next still defies logic. Matt being nervous and on edge with new surrounds and new Bears, snapped. If it was the fear that Luke was in danger or a threat that had presented itself; no one ever really found out. In a smooth motion, he grabbed the Bear and tossed him head over heels into the center of the arena. He was still in human form. Others, seeing this jumped in without knowing what they were getting into. It was like an expansive vortex of wind and force as he did hand to hand battle with the Bears in their full forms; two or three of which were seriously injured. When Norman and Rusty made it to them, Matt was between Luke and the advancing Bears. He bellowed, “I’m one of you, I’m Were … why have you treated us this way?” Luke came to Matt and chuffed at him. Matt reached up and wrapped an arm under the big Polar Bear’s chin. They turned to walk away from the arena; then Matt hopped on top of Luke and they took off at Polar Bear speed into the woods, to safety and solitude.
Several hours later Boris tracked them. They were high in the wilderness, sitting quietly together. Matt had built a fire and they all talked at length. Later all three rejoined the gathering and were welcomed.
Mitch licked Walt’s muzzle. Matt had stilled, quieted. The heat coming from him had subsided. Mitch chuffed at Matt, ‘it will be ok.’
As they sat holding him, Mitch noticed the large wall in that room covered floor to ceiling in framed photos and art. It was Matt and Luke’s Wall of Life, a history of their life together. He noticed a sort of pattern in the pictures, but he made nothing of it.
They heard Luke drive up in his Model-T; it was hard to miss that sound. The car was older than several of the Bears combined. Walt shifted and left Mitch holding onto Matt, who was passed out. Mitch gently rolled back into the Bear corner of the room. Matt had created a corner where Luke could relax in full Bear form. Mitch was sitting pretty much upright, just holding Matt like a baby.
Walt changed back, pulled on his pants and shirt and headed to meet Luke.
“They’ll be here in about a week,” Boris said, blowing the steam from his coffee. Rusty nodded and put his head on Norman’s shoulder.
“I’m looking forward to seeing them. They’re a dynamic couple; quiet, but when we needed help, they were there fast,” Norman remarked.
“I know, I know. That’s not what has me concerned. It’s Matt. In the all the years since he changed, I don’t think he has ever came to terms what he’s become. I think it frightens him. That’s why he’s so shy in some settings and doesn’t change unless he has to. Not that Luke is a party Bear, but they’re low key for sure,” Boris said taking another sip.
“Then what makes him so damn strong in human form?” Norman asked a little anxious.
“I think you need to ask Rusty, the essence of a Kermode the white and orange Spirit Bear, is strong and has changed Matt for sure,” Boris spoke with trepidation in his voice.
“I don’t care what anyone thinks, Matt is one of the most caring Bears I know. When I’m close to him it’s like a soft wind is blowing over snow or cool water running down a stream. Luke is just a warm glow of sunshine. They make a good pair.” Rusty smiled and shook his rump a little to get Norman excited.
“I hope you are right,” Boris said taking a sip of his coffee.
Rick walked through the door, “Ok, their place is set up, heat is on, wood stacked, pantry full, boxes placed where Matt said, truck is fueled and in the garage. The lights are on, now when will they be here?” The report rolled off Rick’s tongue as fast as an auctioneer.
“A few days. Mitch and Walt are with them,” Rusty blurted; a little more than excited to see the pair again. Over the past twenty five or so years, it was Rusty and Norman that had gotten close to the pair over summer vacations and meetings at Boris’s. They’d come to love them; actually they fell in love with Matt first, he was the one who found them, Luke took a little time to warm up to.
“Luke is a great mechanical engineer, and Matt is just … well Matt,” Norman smiled.
“He’s just a wealth of abilities, all wrapped up in one small package,” Rusty rambled, just as excited.
“I tried to arm wrestle Matt once, he was in human form and beat me,” said Norman, rubbing his wrist remembering the playful encounter that turned painful.
“Do tell, do tell,” Rick remarked while sitting with a cup of coffee.
Rusty began the story, “We settled in a cabin on the outer most point in the Great Lakes for a long vacation. Matt likes the quiet places. He will sit and listen to the sounds of nature for hours. Luke likes to fish as a Polar Bear and Matt spends hours just watching over Luke. He will roughhouse and wrestle with Norman. He is incredibly fast for his small frame. He started to wrestle with him a little, Matt was ok with it and he gave just as hard as Norman did. They romped and played, but never too far from Luke or me. They would arm wrestle and just play; he never did change into a Bear though.
A few days later, Luke was fishing and Matt was cleaning the fish as fast as they were caught. I think we ate fish three meals a day for a week. Anyway, Polar Bears can stay underwater for quite some time. Matt took a break when he could not find Luke and started to pace back and forth looking for him. He was calling his name and getting more worked up as the seconds passed; he changed to his Bear form. Guys let me tell you, his coloration is frightening; he’s a silver Andean MoonBear. The streaks on his face, chest, and forepaws are frightening, his fur is coarse and his claws are a bit longer than most and his pads are just odd shaped. Anyway, Luke had swum upriver a bit and changed back, he came lopping back along the bank and threw a fish at Matt. It missed of course, but when they saw each other, Matt ran to him and they rolled around for a bit. He was cooing like a newborn Cub to Luke. It was very sweet. Matt actually stayed in Bear form the rest of the weekend. He was agile as a Bear, just as a human would be. He was silent when he walked. He just followed Luke around. He did go hunting and brought down an elk. It was fun to see him dragging the elk back in Bear form.”
“Oh, and his eyes … his eyes stay blue in full Bear form,” Norman blurted.
The others just sat listening; a little slack jawed, but listening.
The phone rang and Boris went up to get it. “Hello Walt … yes … yes … all done? Good. How are they? Well just hug them; it’s hard the first time. Ok, see you all in a few days. Hug them for us; we’re all waiting. Goodbye!” Boris hung up and came back to the table.
“Matt is having a very hard time with their first move. He cried it out and collapsed. Mitch is rocking him like a baby,” Boris stopped and just looked around the room sensing an explanation was needed.
“You see brothers, not everyone has an easy time letting go of a life they’ve built. It will get easier for them, but right now they need our support. They have children and grandchildren that they’re leaving behind. They’ll want to see them, to spy on them. We must watch them carefully and help them adjust.” When Boris finished, all were in a daze of understanding. No one said another word they just hugged each other and went about their chores.
Polar Bear Teeth
“Hey Luke,” Walt met him at the door with an outstretched hand.
Luke looked up at the house, “Where’s Matt? I came home, something is wrong, I felt it,” Luke took a step toward the door.
“He’s fine, he’s resting on Mitch,” Walt said, half blocking his entry.
“Either get out of the way, or I’ll rip you in half,” snarled Luke in an uncharacteristic tone that was so deep and earthy that it shook the door. Walt could see Luke’s Ursine teeth.
“Whoa big fella … he cried himself out … he’s fine, just resting … calm down please,” Walt pleaded in a very low tone.
Luke shook his head a little. “I’m sorry, I’m just on edge. I had to escape work. I told them I was just excited. They shoved me out the door,” Luke blurted in short bursts.
Walt could see he was on the verge of tears as well. He opened his arms and grabbed the big Bear, who started to cry softly into his shoulder. This lasted a few minutes before Luke got a hold of himself and went inside.
Once inside, Walt closed the door between the kitchen and living room. “I can see that you’re both having some issues with the move.” Walt spoke in an even tone.
“Yes, this is just so damn hard,” Luke said, just above a whisper.
“Matt told me that all preparations have been made and that you both are packed and ready to go,” stated Walt.
Luke just looked at the table, tracing the pattern on the table with his finger. “Yes, it’s all ready,” Luke was lost in thought and only half answering.
A little rustle was heard from the next room. The door slid open and Matt walked through, locked eyes with Luke and grabbed hold of him.
“Ok … now that you’re here I’ll be fine,” Matt’s mood seemed better. Back through the door Mitch padded over in Bear form, and stopped.
“You are not going to fit though,” Matt said over his shoulder. Mitch changed back, dressed and came to the table.
As they sat over coffee, “If you’re all done, why not go ahead and leave with us now? We can drive in shifts and get you to B.C. in no time,” said Walt in an upbeat as possible tone.
“We’ll leave in the morning as planned, I would like to make love to my Bear one last time in the first house that was truly ours,” Matt said in a very loving tone.
“So, you guys can either take our bed upstairs or the Inn up the street, but the living room is ours for the night,” Luke quipped while looking right at Matt.
All broke out in laughter and it was decided that Matt and Luke would have the house to themselves for the night.
The sun broke through the open window as Luke lay snoring on his back. The big Polar Bear, in full Bear form was sprawled across the entire length of the room. Matt was laying on Luke’s belly, propped in between his legs nestled into the soft belly fur, his favorite spot to rest.
They’d made love that night; strong, passionate love. The bites that Luke had given him were healing; just a few lines could still be seen.
Both were scared of the future and saddened at the hurt that their leaving would cause, but they’d worked hard to minimize the pain and trouble for everyone.
Luke had put a death clause in at the Railroad. This would name his successor as president and outline decision-making in the interim. The insurance policies would cover the children and give each a good amount of cash and small assets. Matt had moved all the assets around, cleaning out storage rooms and drawing down the house to a manageable level. Who knew that two Bears could collect so much stuff?
A yawn and a chuff came from Luke. “Hey lover,” Matt said and went to scale the mighty Luke and hold his massive head in his hands.
“I love you, but it’s time we need to get moving. Mitch and Walt have been outside drinking coffee for about an hour,” he said and continued to nibble and kiss Luke’s muzzle and rub his ears.
A small chuff and whine came from Luke. The Bear equivalent of ‘Ok, ok I give. Go let them in’. As he proceeded to scratch his belly as he changed back to his human form.
Matt opened the door and stepped out in the cold. “Come on in guys … it’s time.”
The accident worked as intended; the two Bears walked their way into a new life and left the old one behind.
All their plans had worked without a hitch. The Railroad survived. The Kids came to divvy up the household items. Insurance policies paid out in record time, trusts were transferred quickly with no hassles, no roadblocks, not a word, or stroke of negative from any agency the kids dealt with.
There were about 200 people at their memorial service; including Rusty, Norman, and Vic. They paid their respects to Matt and Luke’s children, shook hands and spoke highly of them.
Later that week in the old house, Steve and Susan were sitting in the living room. “It was odd the way dad built this house. Luke had his romp area and Dad his small spaces,” remarked Susan.
“Something is off,” Steve almost screamed. “Dad just doesn’t go out to camp and have a fire start in the tent. Everything is to … set-up. Susan, this is too easy.” He was pacing back and forth in the living room.
“What do you mean?”
“Everything. Everything Susan, it was neat and tidy. As good as dad was, this is too neat and tidy. Even this house has been cleaned and organized from top to bottom; there are no files here, no paper trail, nothing. Crap, even the pictures on the wall have been organized.” He was frantic.
Susan chimed in, “Hey look at this. Are these the same guys from today?”
“Yea, those three were very big men, like Luke,” responded Steve.
“Look at the picture, that was me in 9th grade on a camping trip with them,” Susan said. “We were in the mountains, it was a nice time; they were very protective of me.”
“Look at this; this is when they all came to my wedding. That was 25 years ago. None of them have aged,” Steve remarked.
“Here’s another, and another,” Susan said just about in tears.
Matt and Luke committed a great sin among the Werebears. Matt left the smallest of trails so they could be found. Just a glimmer of hope, a message in code and pictures; in directional markings, distances, and times; placed lovingly on their Wall of Life. If their children could decipher the code, it would be time for much explanation.
Secretly they wished they would……….They missed their Cubs, so, so, so much!

I Think I’m Dying
Pairing: Jared x Reader
Requested by @fandomlyawsome: Jared x sick! Reader ? She gets a bad virus and he takes care of her.
You were sitting in Jared’s trailer after you finished your scenes. You hadn’t felt great all day, but you had done what you needed to do. You knew you were coming down with something. You hated being sick.
You moved to the bed in Jared’s trailer and curled up with your head on the pillow. You didn’t know how long he was going to be, but you were going to take advantage of the bed while you had it.
Jared’s Point Of View
When I got to my trailer, I found Y/N sleeping in my bed. I could tell there was something wrong immediately though. I had seen her sick before. This was already turning into a sickness because she already looked worried and upset in her sleep.
I put my hand gently against her forehead and sighed. She was burning up. My poor girl was sick.

Our reviews are from genuine LateRooms.com customers. We verify that the customer has stayed before leaving a review.
79% would recommend it to a friend
Myself, my husband and young child stayed for one night.
The room was a good size and had really comfy beds. Didn't buy anything from their menu as it was really expensive.
It was a short walk to the town centre which was really handy when you've got a 2 year old. My only concern was that the windows were all locked in our room. If there had been a fire then that would have been very dangerous for us. Other than that, for the £70 we paid for the room was reasonable and I would stay here again.
Rooms are great but the staff are very rude
The accommodation was great but the reception staff were very rude and so was the maid in the morning, I didn't get to my room until late and she persisted on waking me up time after time so she could clean the room.
I will not return here as manners cost nothing and I received the worst customer experience I have ever had and I sleep in hotels at least four nights a week
Welll looked after by staff and night porter.
room was poor noise from other rooms and from the street
A great hotel stayed here lots of times.
Room spot on.
However, the table at breakfast where we were asked to sit was dirty, marmalade and crumbs all over the cloth. The person seating us when we said we'll sit somewhere else just brushed the dirt off with their hands. Likewise so did the person in charge and it was left for next people. The cloth should have been changed. The breakfast itself was great.
Good Value Accommodation
I was surprised to find such good value so close to the town centre.
I was as to park close to the entrance (thank goodness as it was raining very hard) and the entrance area and reception desk presented a very up-market ambience. The room was smaller than the usual Travelodge or Premier Inn, but perfectly adequate and well-appointed and maintained. The bed was superbly comfortable (although some might find it s bit too soft). One small issue was the lack of a light over the bathroom mirror for shaving, which seemed a bit odd. I dined on the bar. While my fish and chips were very good, and bar was clean and smart, it did rather lack atmosphere. Had the rain eased off I would have walked into town to find something a bit more distinctive, but as it was still hammering down, I was grateful to dine in the hotel.
The bathroom really needed a light over the mirror
We only stayed one night.
The hotel is in a good location, easy free parking and friendly staff.
Brilliant Easter weekend stay at the Banbury House Hotel!
This is our second stay at the Banberry hotel as we find it very convenient for all the attractions in and around the surrounding areas of Banbury.The room we had was very clean and cosy overlooking the road and somehow we were not disturbed by the noise of traffic as mentioned in other reviews.
The hotel receptionist was very polite and helpful explaining all we needed to know about our stay at the hotel. We had full English breakfast and I must say the food was exceptional along with the service we received from the waiting staff I would even go on to say "The best we have ever had" Finally we also found the free car parking around the back of the hotel a bonus as we have had to pay at other hotels we have stayed in. Thank you for a great stay at the Banbury Hotel
It's such a beautiful hotel with lovely staff.
My boyfriend and I felt welcome and very much accomodated in every way. The room was lovely and top quality, thank you for a lovely stay in a beautiful location.

Due to hormonal insomnia and years of sleep-deprivation, I made the choice to nightwean ds at age 3.
We moved his bed across the room from ours. He can still climb into our bed, but I told him that "dersies" were very tired, and can't nurse when it's dark out, as they need sleep. They have to wait till "Mr. Sun" is awake.
BTW-he was completely potty-learned at 34 mos. He is encouraged to wake us up if he has to pee.
Everything was going well(and my new doc gave me a cheap,awesome sleeping pill-in order to get some consistent sleep).
Now that ds is 3.5, he is very clingy and he wants to nurse in the night.
When he wakes me up, he will kick,scream,hit,and even bite me to nurse him!!
I have been speaking softly to him that he needs to go back to sleep. that I will massage his back,etc..
He is violent,yells at me to "be quiet you BABY", "GIVE ME NURSIES!!"
IRL, he is a usual,highly active ds who loves to keep us on our toes,and yet won't let any of us out of his sight w/o giving him a kiss and a hug!!!
Sooooo.....I am pms right now, and last night threatened not to give him "dersies" if he kept hurting me.
I felt terrible, but was desparate!!
Today, I talked with him about it, and he promised that he wouldn't go crazy.
I feel guilty. I feel violated. I feel confused. I can hardly keep up with him during the day! And now the night???

No one invaded Russia. It started when the "elected" president would not join the EU as the Ukrainians wanted. The people did not like it. They wanted, and still want to be, a part of a more democratic society and part of the international community as they would be by joining the EU. They did not and do not want their country to go back under Russian rule by joining Putin's Eurasian Union. Ukraine has had such a difficult and oppressive history under Russia, and they do not plan to go back.
The people protested peacefully when this happened. For months they did this and nothing changed. Things turned violent when Yanukovych figured it was time to do something about these protests, it had been enough for him. The people stood their ground, and the killing started. The president fled and the new government took over, voted in by Parliament, democratically. There was a moment of peace.
Then came Russia right after the Olympics and here we are today.
Russia has no right to protect Ukraine and needs to stay out. He wants it because it is his biggest piece to his Eurasian puzzle, and without it, it's not much.
There doesn't have to necessarily be military intervention to stop Russia. There are ways to stop him financially, as reported by a CNN commentator. Putin is behaving in a way that has 19th and 20th century thinking. You don't quite do that in the 21st century where there is global interdependency. As told to President Obama by Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany, she's not sure he's in touch with reality. "In another world," she said.
March 4, 2014 at 8:10 p.m.
permalink suggest removal

A friend of mine has decided to buy a new bike and after sitting on my FJR was so impressed with it has decided to buy one. He has been asking dealers on prices and none too forward with that one. Last week he managed to get a price form a dealer in Dundee for I think £10,750 (non auto), so if anyone of you out there can shed some light on this he would be very happy. He lives in South West Scotland but willing to travel for the right deal. Not many dealers in our area so no competition.

History of Blythe House
Blythe House Hospice was founded in 1989 when £1000 was left to Betty Packham by Stan Blythe.
Stan was a secondary school teacher, keen birdwatcher and the longest serving president of the Buxton Field Club. He was forced to retire early due to encroaching blindness. He lived alone in Fairfield and was a parishioner visited regularly by Betty Packham. Stan had a stimulating mind and a sharp sense of humour and even when he developed cancer he remained fiercely independent.
Stan spent his last months in a bedroom overlooking a garden and listening and identifying birds as he had wished for. He had regular care of a supportive medical team and had many friends who came to prepare meals and be with him during the day. Stan had a peaceful death, one that he had wished for and when he left Betty £1000 Betty knew that she wanted to build a hospice in his name.
Blythe House was the fulfilment of that dream - a memorial to a wonderfully warm and brave man.

The 1990s saw a boom in independent and DIY filmmaking, launching the careers of countless filmmakers. Yet, for many Black women directors, this bubble often burst after their debut films were released, leaving many directors like Ayoka Chenzira, Lesley Harris, Zeinabu irene Davis, and Cauleen Smith, with only one feature film to their name. Thankfully in the last few years, many of these films have been restored and re-released, and the legacy of these singular filmmakers reevaluated within the lens of the systematic racism and misogynoir that pushed them out of Hollywood.
Director and artist Cauleen Smith’s feature “Drylongso” is the latest of these movies to be brought back into circulation thanks to a new 4K restoration by Janus Films. Shot on location in Oakland in 16mm, Smith’s film blends genres, telling a buddy story, a romance, and a murder mystery all at once. As many Black men in the community die around her, art student Pica (Toby Smith) begins preserving their image via Polaroids as “evidence of their existence.” She also begins a romance with another artist and activist named Malik (Will Power) and a friendship with a woman named Tobi (April Barnett), trying to escape an abusive relationship. As the serial killer stalking the community goes unsolved by the police, Pica turns to her creative spirit and the strength of her friendships to take control of her own fate.
After premiering “Drylongso” at the 1999 Sundance Film Festival and winning the Someone To Watch award at the Independent Spirit Awards, Smith spent five years in Hollywood working, shadowing creators, and writing screenplays on spec. Frustrated by the lack of opportunities open to her in Hollywood, she turned to teaching, first at UT Austin and now at CalArts. In the last few decades, her art has moved closer to the sculpture art made by Pica in her debut. Her mixed-media banners were featured as part of the 2017 Whitney Biennial. She’s also made over 40 experimental short films incorporating her work in Afrofuturism and community activism. These films, along with her other immersive multimedia exhibits, have been presented in museums across the country.
For this month’s Female Filmmakers in Focus column, RogerEbert.com spoke to Smith over the phone about the making of her trailblazing independent film, working with the community of Oakland, and the many ways in which Black women’s craft is often overlooked in the arts.
Was the title of your film inspired at all by the book of the same name from the early '80s?
Yes, by John Langston Gwaltney. In that book, he is basically like a cultural anthropologist. He interviews working-class Black people, and a lot of them refer to themselves as “drylongso.” They don't quite understand why he wants to interview them. They were like, “I'm just drylongso,” which means really ordinary, everyday people. I was really intrigued by that term, and then I noticed it popping up in blues songs and other places. It's more typically used in the South and the Caribbean, so being from the West Coast, I had never heard it before. It seemed like a perfect title for the type of people that I wanted to put in my film.
How did you first develop these characters and the story?
It was definitely something I was working on at first as a short film. All of the Polaroids that you see in the film were Polaroids that I was taking over the course of a couple of years, knowing that I needed these props for this film, or at the time maybe it was going to be an art installation. In the process of taking the photographs and constantly asking people,” Hey, can I take your picture?” I would think, “Oh, this is an interesting character.”
I started thinking of it as a short film. I started really using the conversations I was having with the people in the photographs to lay the groundwork for the story. A lot of the photographs were taken in the Bay Area, but I went down to UCLA to go to grad school, and that's where I really kicked in gear, finishing a script and putting it through its paces with the stuff I was learning in grad school in terms of how to like break down a production.
In terms of the genre mixing in the film, at the time, I was working at this news transcription service where I transcribed the news at night while going to school during the day. Every week there was a story about a dead Black girl somewhere in South Central LA who was unidentified. Sometimes they would even show their manicure to see if anyone knew the girl by identifying the manicure. So I’m transcribing the news, and these stories are popping up every week, but maybe on a different network and not the same reporter. It didn’t seem like anybody was picking up on the fact that this just keeps happening. And then the same reporter is not tracking the story. And I'm like, “Look, there's a serial killer.” I'm telling all my friends in film school there is a serial killer in LA killing Black girls. And everyone was like, if that was happening, they would know about it.
And then it turned out to be who they called The Grim Sleeper, right?
Yeah. Later they called him The Grim Sleeper. At the time, that kind of predatory shadow was very much in my psyche because I had to ride the bus at night. So that became part of the story. I know a lot of people talk about the film, and I'm not trying to be defensive, but they think that element is weird, is not appropriate for the genre. But it was actually a really mundane part of life. Like, oh my god, there's a serial killer here.
I thought the way the serial killer plot plays out mostly in these background news reports was really interesting, especially the way it's revealed that they’re alternating between killing women and killing men. That metaphor is really intriguing because the film obviously talks about the epidemic of Black men dying at the time, but the film is also very clearly aware that it's a little of both. Could you talk about how you built that into the story?
I think we wanted to have a relationship between that violence, the shadow, and the actual narrative of the story. And that's when it stopped being my story and became the story of Pica (Toby Smith). So the serial killer in the film is an equal-opportunity neighborhood predator. There's not a lot of conversation about how those people exist. Lots of people like to toss around ideas around Black-on-Black crime, etc., but no one wants to talk about the predators in their own community, regardless of what that community is. So that character became the receptacle for that entire kind of refusal to acknowledge that there are people who prey on really vulnerable people, and we don't want to talk about that because there are other things that are more sensational that are put in the forefront.
Yeah, like later, there's a newscast where they report that the police think the killer is a low-priority crime, even though there are so many dead people.
Right? I mean, now there's a term that's been revealed in the LAPD, that they used to use the term NHI or “no humans involved,” and that was used for crimes that involved Black people as victims. So now we know that was institutionalized at that time. It was a feeling that, for me, that character was the representative of this general kind of violent indifference towards everyday life.
I also thought Tobi (April Barnett) was compelling in that you showed two prongs with her character. You really showcase the day-to-day violence of intimate partner abuse and what she's going through just trying to break up with this man who is obviously very unhinged. But she also finds freedom in dressing as a man, even at a time when so many Black men are dying.
That position that she's in is more common than we like to admit. And that was the point. No one goes around saying, “Hey, I went home last night, and my husband punched me in the face.” It's not not watercooler talk. She's just trying to make herself feel safe, basically. In the '90s baggy clothes and hoodies were a really useful tool for everyone to become incognito, to become very difficult to discern or see. That kind of streetwear was then considered really threatening because it made it really hard for cops to isolate and single out people. We all became one mass of like a covert presence that would appear to be really menacing to the mainstream.
Now of course, that's common, but at the time, it was a way to hide. That was a huge part of what that fashion was about. Not only hiding your face but hiding whatever you needed to carry around or whatever business you needed to handle or whatever goods or valuables you might have. It looks weird now, but at the time, it would be very common to throw on a hoodie and really baggy pants and move around if you don't want to be sexually harassed or isolated in any way.
The film is a bit like a time capsule in that much of what you incorporate feels very of its time yet still hits themes that resonate today. Girls are still dealing with intimate partner abuse. They're still dealing with being harassed on the street. It's fascinating to see how that armor gets built, depending on the time. And the fashion in the film itself is, I think, really beautiful. I love Pica’s outfits. I love the shirts that Malik makes. It really took me back to the '90s and those airbrush shirts. Were those made specifically for the film? How did you incorporate all that fashion into the film?
The artist (Keith Williams) is also in the film. He's the really tall man with long dreads in the trio out of the blue jeans. He's the artist who made those T-shirts and was actually really successful with them. I believe he had a line of clothing at JCPenney for a period of time. He was a member of the Oakland cultural community. He was really generous and agreed to be in the film. We shot some scenes in his loft. This is a film that was very much made by the Oakland Community. 100%. And he's a great example of that.
I loved the scene in Marcus Books, which is still in Oakland. This really is such an Oakland story. What was the location scouting like?
We have a really great line producer named Christine Gant, who was born in Oakland. While I was down in LA, going to school and finishing up the script, Christine was driving around West Oakland, looking at abandoned houses and trying to figure out where we could shoot this thing. It was very clear that the house that Pica lives in was one of the main anchors of the entire film. Everything would revolve around that geography. So it needs to be not just a really great house, but on a great block.
I lived in that neighborhood before I went down to grad school at UCLA, so I knew the neighborhood. Historically, it is really venerable and has this great history of activism, even though it was really struggling at that time because of willful disinvestment by the city powers. That neighborhood wasn't getting a lot of help and was being blamed for its own vulnerabilities. The people who were there at that time, were really struggling to hang on. There were a lot of empty houses.
Christine drove around and just took pictures of them. We found the ones that we liked and she tracked down owners. One of the owners was just amazing. The family wasn’t doing anything with the house and didn’t know what they wanted to do with it. So they told us if we bought a water heater and did some repairs, we could use it for the summer. We asked if we could paint it and they said yeah. The neighbors who really hated that paint color.
That pink was beautiful. It really pops.
By the end of the summer, they were like you don't have to paint it back; we love it. Again, this is such a central story of how this film was made and how the title of the film actually encompasses not just the fictional characters, but the actual community that made it possible for us to shoot it. From the owners of that home on Magnolia Street to the whole block letting us plug in lights in the middle of the night into their house while they're asleep. I lived and slept in that house every night by myself for three weeks. There were barely any locks on the doors and not one thing happened to me and no equipment was stolen. When that kind of thing is occurring in a neighborhood, it's because you're protected. Because there's an agreement within the community that no one's gonna really mess with you. That the community made in terms of protecting what we were trying to do. I've never been so grateful. I've never really forgotten that feeling of how when people were driving by slowly, it wasn’t because they're going to shoot us; they were checking on their kids because their kids were hanging out on our set.
You can feel how realistic the community depiction was with the actors' interactions with the people on the street. Were those extras or just people on the street?
So many were the people we met. In fact, one of the stars to me, like a star of the film, is the really belligerent woman (Tammy Washington).
Yeah, she felt very Bay Area to me.
Oh my gosh, 100%. She lived in the neighborhood. People would drive up while we were shooting and ask what we were doing and if we were shooting a music video, then tell us they had acting experience. So she and her mother came to visit the set one day and told us they did community theater. They were really just sharing that they had skills to offer up. And I was like, “Really, because you guys are amazing. Do you want to be in a scene?” She took a few lines and turned that character into somebody. We just kept calling her back, like, “Hey, can you come to the BART station? Because it'll be so cool if you could be in the scene.” At the end, when she does that streak across the empty lot and chases everyone away, that was a conversation that we had where I was like, “It's time for this party to end, and I need you to get these people off the spot,” and she just did it.
I really felt that character. I used to live on the Oakland/Berkeley border and this film definitely felt like the Oakland I knew.
Right. It seems like this kind adorable trickster, like really belligerent but absolutely harmless. There were just so many people who popped up like that. One of our grips was a young man named Carlos. His father would drop him off to crew, and he would work with my head gaffer Kurt (Nagle-Taylor). He trained him how to cut gels to rig lights. He was a central crew member. He was 15 at the time. Now Carlos is in the union and just doing great. It was just really beautiful. It was completely neighborhood driven. We had very little money, so everything had to be what people were willing to give us and contribute.
There was a moment early in the film where Malik and Pica are hanging out, and he's reading a very specific deck of tarot cards, reading her future. How did that scene come to be?
That particular deck was really exciting because it was a deck that was moving from tarot into Santeria. So it was all the Orisha, and the cups and swords were turned into cowrie shells. When I saw the deck I knew it was the right deck. I'm not even really into tarot, but in the narrative, I needed a metaphor for the shift between the deck of Polaroid photos that Pica lays out like divination and the tarot cards which she also lays out like divination. She's constantly confronting her fate, or the fate of people that she loves, either through the Polaroids or through the tarot cards, and the fact that I could find a deck of cards that were a representative of African Orishas instead of European princes or elven or whatever, was really a gift. I still have that deck somewhere.
Did you find that locally in Oakland?
I think I bought it at Marcus Books to be honest.
I wanted to ask you about the reputation of the film. When it was released, there were quite a few films from Black women that didn't necessarily go under the radar, but maybe were misinterpreted and neglected. Last year, I spoke to Ayoka Chenzira, whose film “Alma’s Rainbow” was at Sundance and then disappeared.
They're ahead of their time.
Exactly. And now they’re being looked at now as the masterworks that they were. I'd love to hear your thoughts on having lived through this era with another one of these films that was sort of treated not the way it should have been.
I remember seeing Ayoka’s film in the theaters with Q&A, and I remember being completely gobstruck by it. That sort of thing kept happening then, and I'm kind of happy that it seems to happen less now, is that the conversations around these films were very poor. It didn't matter what the director did or offered in terms of trying to add complexity. You couldn't get people to talk about not just the narrative aspects, but the craft aspects of the film. All of the aesthetic decisions that go into making a film that we were doing in our film, people assumed it was somehow accidental, or that it was just all there already. That we didn't make the image ourselves.
I worked so hard on the film, aesthetically, to make every frame, just a full picture of information. And at the time, it made me wonder if it was all not visible? What exactly is going on here that all people want to talk about is the extermination of Black men, when in fact this is the film about two girls who survive and thrive and have a pretty interesting life and goals for themselves? I'm not sure that much has changed in the ways in which the work and labor of Black women in the arts and film is almost reflexively diminished. You can look at how "The Woman King" was almost totally ignored, directorially, this past year.
And it absolutely was one of the most intricately directed films of the year, and it wasn't treated as such.
Exactly. Someone just recently wrote an article about Beyonce and how there's no argument that she's like one of the greatest pop stars who ever lived. I'm not even a fan, but I cannot hate on a sister, because she is brilliant at what she does. It's just not an argument, but the Grammys just can't bring themselves to give her a Best Album. They can't bring themselves to do it.
I don't know how you look at “Lemonade” and everything she did with that, from the music and the lyrics and storytelling to the visuals, and not say it was the best album of the year. That's wild.
It's embarrassing. “Drylongso” was made with scotch tape and glue and spit, and love. All on the edges, it's very frayed. I was very aware of that. But a lot of other independent films were, too. So honestly, I was really surprised by how unwilling people were to even just acknowledge the craft that did exist in it. I don't know why I was surprised because like you said, Ayoka was ignored. My friend Zeinabu irene Davis made an amazing film called “Compensation.”
I love that film so much. That is one of those films, you watch it and you're like, how is this not heralded as a masterpiece from the last 30 years?
Precisely. And that's what was going on all around me at the time. We were just, you know, really clear about the system and its shortcomings. I would like to say that it’s changed—and it has changed a little bit. But when Gina Prince-Bythewood doesn't get even a nod or a nomination for her work, then we know that we're pretty much back in the same situation.
Yeah. And it feels, maybe there's hope because there's more conversation around it now. But at the same time, it's like there have been conversations every decade.
Oh, yeah, it's cyclical. And also Lesley Harris with “Just Another Girl on the I.R.T.” and before that Kathleen Collins’ “Losing Ground.” These are the films that told me that this was possible. My hope was that there would have been more infrastructure within the Black community to critically engage new films. But that wasn't possible at that time either. Really just making the film was something that I knew I could do because of these other really, really brilliant artists that had done it before me.
With so many of these films coming back available – obviously now your film has this beautiful restoration playing in theaters, last year “Alma’s Rainbow” was restored and released, there’s a new 4K restoration and Blu-ray of “Just Another Girl on the I.R.T.”—do you think that perhaps by having these films more widely available, younger women will be inspired to keep fighting the fight and attempt to work within this system?
I think it really helps to have the films available. I know for myself, when all the LA Rebellion films were finally released, I literally wept. Because I thought, what would I have known or what would I have been able to think about if I've seen these films when I needed to? It's very much about having access to this catalog of aesthetic decisions that are so important to any artist.
I don't want to have to look at a Scorsese movie and ignore all of the scenes where he's calling someone the N-word just to learn how to build a shot in a sequence. I don't want to have to fuel myself that way. There's a lot to be learned from him, and there's also a lot that maybe is of no use to someone like me. I think that the larger the reserve of films by filmmakers, who think of Black people as people and not as plots or in just plot terms or like disposable flesh, which is basically the standard in Hollywood, then I think the better it is for young filmmakers to understand how to render our lives and our stories.
The 4K restoration of "Drylongso" opens at the Film at Lincoln Center on March 17th, with a national rollout to follow.

"My dad's visit to A&E"
Posted by Kazzapurple (as ),
He fell at the bus stop and hit his head (he's 85).
The ambulance arrived very quickly, and all the staff from the paramedics to the nurses and doctors were fantastic.
At A&E they gave him a CT scan and a chest xray, pronounced him very lucky with no damage and sent him home with some antibiotics and instructions for head injury after care.

Share page on Social Media: f Share t G+ find us on Twitter: @wssmagnews
Women's Football News
England Head Coach Hope Powell admitted after the match that it had been a disappointing result and performance to start off the new season. "It was not a good performance, it was unacceptable," she said. "The players were disappointed at the end but credit to Russia, they deserved the win.
"I would have been happy with a draw in the end as they were better than us in patches. We didn't get out of the blocks in the first half and could have been one down in 30 seconds - we were very slow and the players realised this at half time. But we played a lot better in the second half.
"We missed Faye White, Kelly Smith and Rachel Brown but that is no excuse, injuries can occur at any time. We just didn't perform on the night, we are better than that."
Hope did reserve special praise for full back Leanne Champ, who was one of England's few successes on the night. "Leanne played well, she got forward well and had a sound game all round. To be fair, Kristy Moore and Sue Smith both gave us a bit more up front after coming on."
England goalscorer Fara Williams did at least take some consolation from the game with her spectacular volleyed goal in the second half. "It was probably one of my better ones for England," she said. "It came from a good ball in by Sue (Smith) and I am very happy with it."
However it turned out to be a high spot on a bad night. "It wasn't an enjoyable game, because we lost. The first half performance wasn't our best, it was not good enough. The players we were missing tonight are all big players in the team.
"It's no good saying that we hadn't played many matches as we've all been training hard during the summer, so we should have been sharp enough for the game.
"But we can take some positives out of the game, and I felt that we deserved a draw."
Women's Soccer Scene Media ©
on mobile wssNews.co.uk
Women's Sport Search
|Total page reads:|

Sex am Wörthersee
This video was taken during our summer holiday in Austria. We had a really wonderful time, and on our final day there we rented a little boat to go out on the beautiful Lake Wörthersee. We had so much fun out on the water, especially me because I was horny and got it into my head that I should masturbate in the boat! There were lots of other boats out there with us, which meant we were far from alone, but as you know by that just turns me on even more! I love our summer trips!

WHERE HAVE YOU GONE?! …….. PIET MONDRIAN, chapter 19
I got a good night’s sleep and didn't crawl from my bed until nearly 11:00. Did my things and while I sat and sipped coffee, after having finished my breakfast, I came up with a perfect and easy solution to my problem with the tags.
I wouldn't go into the office today. Sassy wouldn't be there and I really had little to do and nothing that was urgent. This way, I could go directly to the antique shop without going through the worry of losing the shadows. So, tomorrow, I could set up the sting with Vic where I would lose the shadow and he would follow them home. Nice!
I decided to call Augie. I had not been at the Quelle since, what was it? Saturday night? I'd like to know if he had passed on the Mondrian photo, to his friend, at the art magazine. Maybe I could meet with that person sometime this afternoon.
Augie answered on the first ring. Yes, he had passed the photo on and gave me the man's name and two telephone numbers so I could call. Augie said he had told him to expect a call from me. I phoned his office number first but was told he was not in today. Did I wish to leave a message? I said I'd call back. I then dialed his home number and after three rings he picked up with, "Jeroen." I introduced myself and asked when he would be free to see me. He said that if I wanted he would be free at around 16:00 that afternoon. I said, "Perfect!" He gave me his address which was in the neighborhood of Willem van den Valk and Sassy. Did everyone live in the high rent district?
I picked up my book and dove into the social hierarchy of Washington DC which is often defined by the social structure of Georgetown. McCorkle was making progress. But was I?
At a quarter before three, I made my way out the door. I walked to Vondel Park and went to the Groote Melkhuis (The Big Milk House) where there was a children's small playground. Young mothers congregated during the afternoon hours sharing tidbits of gossip, no doubt, or ways of getting diapers really clean and the great sin of using corn oil instead of extra virgin olive oil. In the latter discussion, I could hold my end up. I got a cappuccino. I rolled a cigarette and once it was ready I just stared at it. What had Augie said the other night in regard to smoking? Something like, "Look at these lethal little demons. They will be with me to the end of my days ... And, hastening them no doubt." I had concurred and had taken an extra long and deep pull on my shaggie and held the smoke in until I had to cough it up. Then I said to him, "Bette Davis, when she was in her 80s, was being interviewed by a reporter. She was smoking one cigarette after another. The journalist finally asked her, 'Miss Davis, aren't you worried about what cigarettes will do to your health?' She looked him in the eye and replied, 'Daaahling, the only think I'm worried about is dying without a cigarette in my hand.'" I ended the anecdote with a big, "Amen!"
I left the park at ten until four and was at Jeroen's door, on the Van Breestraat, not too many minutes later.
When his door swung open, I saw standing before me a man with a goatee and a neatly trimmed moustache. He was dressed in black slacks and had a cardigan sweater with only the bottom two buttons buttoned. He had sagging bags under his eyes; a nose that revealed that he probably had a tendency to drink too much and his hair was thin, but still black, and he wore in a swept back fashion. He greeted me warmly and lead me into his living room. He offered me what he referred to as a "libation." I said I would have whatever he was having. That turned out to be a red wine with a distinct tannin after taste. It no doubt was a Spanish red. They were becoming popular, suddenly, in the Netherlands, as a low cost substitute for French reds. It was really not to my liking.
I asked him if he had had time to study the photograph of the Mondrian oil? He had indeed. Unfortunately, he did not consider himself to be a Mondrian expert and admitted that he knew more about Mondrian's technique in his linear abstracts then the earlier work. I told him about the art laboratory's analysis and that they hinted that it was a forgery from the 20s or 30s. He responded with a belly laugh, "What I find so funny, actually, the word in English is ludicrous---absurd---is that Mondrian had no market at the time. No one wanted his linear abstracts and even fewer were aware of his earlier work. No, not possible."
I mentioned that Augie’s friend, Ben, the artist, said he didn't think it a masterpiece. Jeroen said that he would find that difficult to determine from only a photograph. Finally, I admitted to my confusion about nearly every aspect of this whole question about real or not real, etc., etc., etc., "I mean, what is art in the first place?"
"My own definition tends to be quite esoteric, but perhaps these two quotations will give you some idea as to the approach. An English art critic, some years ago, when asked the question, replied, 'the market place determines what is a work of art!' If enough people want it, believe in it or have been lead to believe in it, they bid on it until they can no longer bid. In many ways, this fits with your Andy Warhol who defined the question by saying, 'art is business.' I do hope you don't find all this is too cynical, but that is the reality of the art game. And it is often a game as I have no doubt your client appreciates."
I asked him if he could think of any reason someone had gone to the trouble of stealing a painting that seemed to be worth very little? "Because they think it is real! Collectors tend to be compulsive. Some more so than others. Each and every collector has his or her own motivation. The strongest one is probably discovering something that everyone else has overlooked. Hubris is a big factor. The pride of seeing a work of art and knowing it is. You have finally found this great thing and it is available. You want it! You want it to be real! You don't hire someone like yourself, a private detective, to research it. You don't even insist on having it chemically analyzed. You just have to have it! In your scenario, there are two persons that fit this profile. One bought it and the other must have it! Simple."
I thanked him for his time. I walked to the Willemsparkweg and took the tram to the Dam where I would catch another tram that would go down the Utrechtsestraat. As the tram crossed the Singel Canal and then the Leidsekade I looked for my followers. They had positioned themselves well. They were waiting for me to approach the office. Well, guys, you are going to have a long wait. Like, tomorrow. I chuckled to myself and the person sitting across from me, but facing in my direction, looked up somewhat startled. I guess I didn't look crazy because their head quickly resumed the previous position which had been stuck in a book.
Vic was already at the antique shop and the Hog was showing him what he explained to be an English army "regimental colour," a silk flag carried by a particular regiment along with its Queen's colour. He was telling Vic that it was from a campaign, during the Boer War, at the turn of the century. The Dutch and Huguenot population, which had settled in South Africa in the late 17th century, had fought the English for the rights to the land. The British saw South Africa as crucial to continuing their world power domination and to maintaining the empire since it would provide safe passage around Cape Horn, as well as, control over who else wanted to make passage. I thought that the Hog was trying to minimize his verbal attack on the British from the other night. This was one of the "deals" where the Dutch did not come out on top. They still spoke Afrikaner in South Africa---a derivation from the 17th century Dutch---but they did so under the Union Jack.
The diamond man arrived about ten minutes late. Before even trying to open the door he had peered inside through the window. I wasn't sure if this had been from caution or if he was just trying to determine if he had the right place. Once he was inside, I introduced myself and then Bert and Vic. He said he was, "Bas!" I could see from the expressions on the faces of my partners that they were as surprised as I was as to the sight before us. The man looked like he could have walked out of a factory door at the end of his shift. There was something very simple about him. He looked much like a dimwit. I quickly reminded myself that it is never an intelligent move to make such determinations on first impressions. I elected to move cautiously. I asked if he had brought the diamonds with him?
"I bring a few," he said in crisply accented English. He took out a metal cylinder, removed its cap and spilled out onto the richly embroidered table-covering a score or more of glittering glass like objects. We all stared at them. Finally, Vic, selecting one, picked it up and turned it over in his fingers. Then, with his other hand, he reached into his jacket pocket and removed a jeweler's glass. He maneuvered it into his eye socket and positioned the hand, with the diamond, under the single lens and, again, began to turn the stone in all directions. He put the one down and picked up another. His selections were at random and after looking at about six, seven or eight he said, "How many you got?"
Bas answered, "One hundred!"
"How much do you want?" Asked Vic.
Bas hesitated then said in Dutch, "Wat segt jij?" (What do you offer?)
"Well, now, yes. Of course, I would need to see all of the stones before I could make an offer. Would that be possible?"
"I suppose," said Bas. I then stepped into the conversation and told the diamond man that I would call him at his shop tomorrow. He said, "That's good!" And left.
Once he was out the door Vic let go with, "Blimy, fuckin', bloody hell ... There was a bloody fuckin' fortune laying on this fuckin' table. Did you see what he had?" Both the Hog and I shook our heads, "No."
"In the diamond trade there are the 'four c's.' They stand for: color, cut, clarity and carat. These are the factors that you use to grade and value a diamond. The primary determinant of its value is the cut. That's followed by clarity and color. Carat is the size of the diamond and has nothing to do with its quality only in that it determines how valuable it is because of its quality. Understand?"
I said, "Yeah, but how much were those baubles worth?"
Vic just shook his head and with a perplexed look on his face, "I have no idea, mate...A lot! A fuckin' lot of pounds, dollars, guilders...makes no difference the currency there was a fuckin' fortune on this table ..." And he pounded it for emphasis. "... Each stone I looked at was flawless ...The color dispersion was suburb ... perfect cuts, each one. the scintillation and their brilliance, well, let me tell you ... there's a fuckin' fortune to be made here. There is enough money to go round for everyone---"
Now the Hog chimed in with, "What do we do? Make him an offer?"
"Difficult. Looking at him, I had no doubt----none what-so-ever---that he had no idea as to their value. But he must have some idea that they are valuable. We offer too little, we lose him, probably. Too much, and we'll probably lose him because then he will be suspicious that they are worth a great deal more ... And he will be right!" Vic just kept shaking his head. "This is a fuckin' conundrum ... And where did he get them?"
"Well, I checked, at the beginning, with a connection I have with the police department and there have been no big diamond robberies lately. So he didn't steal them!" I said joyfully and added, "There not hot!"
"That's good! But I am afraid wherever I take them, whoever I show them to, I am going to get a lot of questions. We'll never be able to sell all one hundred to one buyer. Selling more than three or four of these, at a time, will get attention and there will still be questions."
We all left and went to a cafe, but instead of toasting to our good fortune we sat quietly over our drinks each thinking about being rich and about how rough the road we had to travel to get there was proving to be. We had to decide what to do with the next meeting. Vic said he felt the best course of action would be to offer this Bas guy a percentage. The Hog, true to his nickname, wanted to make him an offer of 25,000 guilders and declared, "He'll consider that---as my friend Vic, here would say---a bloody fuckin' fortune." I said that there were arguments for both positions.
When we decided to call it a night, we left it with this: I would call the man, Bas, tomorrow and arrange for a new appointment. Before that meeting, the three of us would meet again and try and come up with a workable scheme. We bid each other adieu and went out separate ways. I walked to the Weteringschans and caught a tram to the Rozengracht. I wanted to talk with Kees. Maybe he had heard something more about the diamonds.
Wednesday's were slow for night life in Amsterdam. The party people were too pooped from the long drag of Thursday through to Tuesday and for the weekend party people it was still at least a day too early to begin the ritual all over again. I found Kees at the bar. He wasn't with the blond tonight. I asked him about her. He said he was letting the embers cool down a bit. I asked if he had told her he was a cop? He said, "No. Not yet. It’s not that serious yet."
I told him about the fact that I had made absolutely no progress on the missing Mondrian. It wasn't just a cold trail ... there was no trail. I finagled the conversation in such a way that I got Kees to ask about the diamonds. I was non-committal, but sort of indicated that I was beginning to think that what he had heard was all-whore-talk and nothing more. He replied that he had talked to one of the detectives, he had mentioned the diamonds too, and that the man had said that a few things had come up that they were now questioning if there wasn't something in all the talk. He said that they were keeping a tight-lip and that usually meant they knew more than they were saying. And if they wouldn't tell a fellow cop, well, it must be big. I just thought to myself, "You have no idea!"

Franz Xaver Süssmayr was born in Schwanenstadt, Upper Austria, in 1766 and died in Vienna in 1803. Today he is remembered mainly for his completion of Mozart’s Requiem. However, he was a successful composer in his own right whose operas, in particular, enjoyed popularity. His early life was spent at the monastery school in Kremsmünster where he performed as a singer, violinist and organist and began to compose. In July 1788 he settled in Vienna, becoming a pupil and friend of Mozart during the last year or two of Mozart’s life. It is surely no coincidence that the son born to Mozart in July 1791 was christened Franz Xaver, though it is going a bit far to suggest, as some have done, that this is evidence of a particularly intimate friendship between Süssmayr and Mozart’s wife Constanze.
from notes by Michael Freyhan © 1991

Indian cricket team’s fast bowler Mohammad Siraj gave a great performance against Australia. He was instrumental in India’s Test series win. Siraj made his Test debut on the tour of Australia. Siraj fulfilled his father’s dream but his father was not present to see him playing. Siraj’s father died only after moving to Australia. After returning to India, he first went to the father’s tomb and offered flowers.
The players of the Indian cricket team have returned to India on Thursday from the tour of Australia. Talking to a channel, Siraj said, “I did not go straight home, I went straight to the graveyard from the airport. There I sat for a while near my father’s grave. I could not talk to him but came with flowers on the grave . “
Siraj said, ‘When I called home after Abba’s death, my family asked me to fulfill his dream. My fiance has also encouraged me. The team also supported me a lot. I dedicate all my wickets to Abba. I didn’t think I would take so many wickets in the series. Everyone expected me to perform when several players got injured. I was under pressure and it was very challenging for me.’
Siraj’s father Mohammad Gaus died on 20 November, but he was on a tour of Australia with the Indian team at that time. For this reason he could not return to India for his father’s funeral because of the Corona Protocol.

I think the kid was as about as old as the hired Captain and was playing Dungeons and Dragons during the rescue. He was cool.We can all play armchair quarterbacks and criticize the captain and the owner, but there is one factor that changes everything. Owner's kid was on board. If my kid is on board and his/her life is in danger...fuck the boat, even if its 3.5 million dollars.I'll bet that the owner was the big pussy.FUCKING PUSSY SHIT CB. Boat was more seaworthy than he had ever imagined. I thought he said the bows had been crushed??
Fucker is so full of SHIT!
CB was a loyal employee covering for the boss.
Just part of the job.

When presidents speak at college commencements, they usually congratulate the graduates and brace them for the real world. In some cases, however, presidents have donned the cap-and-gown to comment on current events or deliver major policy addresses. USA TODAY
Nicholas Slusher, Dan Lindsey and Henry Futch say they've been friends practically since birth. The trio share similar interests and plan to move on and serve their country as officers, but all three are taking separate paths.
All three have to report in the middle of summer.
Nicholas will attend the U.S. Military Academy, known as West Point. Henry is going to the U.S. Naval Academy, and Dan plans to train at the U.S. Air Force Academy.
Henry and Nicholas attended Cedar Creek School. Dan attended Ruston High School. Henry and Nicholas joked about the three of them being part of a handful of people from around Ruston who have moved on to the academies. Nicholas said more people should look into officer training as an option. He thinks a lot of people just don't know how much it can benefit someone.
Henry's mother, Diane Futch served in the Marine Corps, and his father, Lee Futch, graduated from the Naval Academy. They met while serving and moved back to Arcadia, Lee's hometown, after retiring.
Henry said the family tradition wasn't a driving factor in his decision.
"Mainly, I had a want to serve as an officer, so that's a great place to go to achieve that goal," Henry said.
He wants to study engineering, but he thinks he wants to make a career of the military and eventually become an aviator.
Henry had an extra obstacle to entry. The academy required medical waivers because of surgery on his elbow performed last year and a bout with non-Hodgkin's Burkitt's lymphoma he won when he was three.
Henry and Nicholas already are good-naturedly ribbing each other about the longstanding Army-Navy rivalry.
Nicholas said Henry pretty much always knew what he wanted to do, and he supported Nicholas in his choice. Henry joked that he tried to get his friend to reach out to a Navy coach.
For Nicholas, it all started with football. He was recruited to play for the Army and the Air Force.
"The more I looked into it, I realized how good of a deal it was, so I decided that's the route that I wanted to go," he said.
Dan is the second son in his family to attend the Air Force Academy.
"Ever since I was a kid, I've been fascinated with airplanes," he said. He saw fighter jets fly over family trips to the beach when he was a child. "I've kind of always wanted to be a pilot. My brother started taking flying lessons and then he decided that he wanted to be in the Air Force Academy."
Dan said that motivated him to attend as well. Two years ago, his brother Jack died in a skiing accident during his freshman year at the academy.
"That took a really big hit on me, but it never made me think twice about my dreams. If anything, it made me more passionate about wanting to fly, wanting to make him proud," Dan said.
Nicholas is the first in his family to join the military. He said his mother, a pediatrician, is nervous.
Diane said she'd tell any parent who has anxiety about their child serving that it's an exciting opportunity to create history.
Lee said going to a military academy is an opportunity that can't be matched anywhere. Parents will be proud of and happy with the product that comes out.
"You go in not knowing much. You come out ready to lead troops up on the front lines," Lee said.
Diane said the money and time spent training its military leaders will prepare him for anything he's assigned to do. Nicholas will be able to relay that to his parents.
"Serving your country is something, it's hard to describe, but once you are in that position, it's humbling. You realize you're almost like a 911 responder, but internationally," she said.

By Corrine Luthy
Stephen Bess, a 1985 graduate of Williamston High School, has published “Liquid Lunch: Blues-Inspired Poetry”, a blues-inspired book of poetry. Bess said much of the poetry was inspired by his time spent in Williamston when he was growing up.
“These are my deepest roots,” he said of his family here, who has been in Martin County for more than 200 years.
He said during his time spent here he heard many stories from his grandparents, Tom and Eunice Best. These stories and his experiences with his family have influenced a lot of his poetry.
For example, his poem “Old Roanoke” is based on his memories of his grandmother’s cooking. He said he remembers his grandfather skinning catfish and his grandmother using it to make a large pot of stew for supper.
His poem “Faith” is also about his grandmother and his memories of her singing in the kitchen on Sundays.
“A lot of it is about food, drinking, and growing up in Southern culture,” Bess said.
Rhiannon Giddens' music is based on a collective number of slave narratives. This is an absolutely beautiful way to preserve the his...
Did you know that Uncle Ben was a real person? We really don't care who is fact or fiction when we want some rice to go with those red b...
Mumbo Jumbo Noun. 1. Confusing or incomprehensible language or activity. 2. An obscure ritual or incantation. [Mandingo origin.] American...

Does anyone remember Rainbow Brite? She's an icon of the 80's, and she was a huge part of my childhood. I used to play Rainbow Brite for hours and hours with my friends or my sister and my cousins. I had a short blue skirt (actually, the skirt was made for a doll, but I managed to squeeze into it) and a rainbow belt that I would put on and run around and have adventures in as Rainbow Brite. I still have a Rainbow Brite doll.
Anyway, she's apparently making a comeback and has had a whole new makeover to appeal to the kids of today. She definitely looks like she's grown a few years older, and also lost some of her clothes. It's kind of disturbing that they had to sex her up to appeal to the kids of today.
Original Rainbow Brite vs. New Rainbow Brite

Riley is my very first Beautiful Soul Award winner and working with her was something very special indeed! Riley had gone through a lot in the months before her session, she had to make some very adult decisions and sacrifices. Being able to give her and her mom the royal treatment for the day was so much fun, despite the freezing temperatures! Riley has such a special place in my heart, she has taken the trials she has been through and allowed them to turn her into a better person rather than break her. Because of her spirit, Riley is off at her freshman year at Northern Oklahoma College. Congrats Riley, I hope you are enjoying it!

DO NOT rent a vehicle from Dollar Rentals. My only experience with the company was at the Denver Airport location, and I will never use ANY of their locations again. Horrible customer service.
My husband and I rented from Dollar last week for a ski trip. We rented from Wednesday-Sunday. Sunday, we returned the car at about 10:30AM. At approximately 11:00AM, when we were going through security, my husband realized that he has forgotten his ski coat in the back seat of the car. He immediately called Dollar and spoke with Mark, who was supposed to be in cahrge of the lost and found. Mark said that he would go out and check the vehicle and call us right back.
After about an hour, and no reply from Mark, we called back... no answer. No answer at the location AT ALL. We tried multiple extensions, multiple times, for about 2 hours we couldn't get anyone on the phone. Then, finally, (about 2.5 hours later) we got in touch with Mark who said that he couldn't even locate the vehile that we returned, but that no none had returned the jacket. We asked to speak with a manager, and briefly spoke to Crystal, who sent us directly back to Mark after we had explained that Mark was not being at all helpful.
Mark then promised that he was going to check again and call back. We got on our flight, came home, and never heard from Mark. We called him again, and he said that he had other things to do besides look for the jacket, and that the car was now out on rent.
All of this (6+ hour) ordeal, and he never even looked in the car or called us back to let us know anything. Surely, one of the Dollar employees saw that coat in the abck seat while they were cleaning, and neglected to turn it in. If Mark would have done his job and checked the car 30 mintues after we had returned it, the $300+ ski coat would have been sitting right there. The employees are dishonest, and uninterested in providing any level of customer service. I will NEVER use Dollar again.

Saturday June 9th, 2001
The Arrows team achieved on Saturday their best qualifying position so far this season after Dutchman Jos Verstappen drove to thirteen place on the grid for Sunday's Canadian Grand Prix.
Verstappen, who last year drove a brilliant race to finish in fifth position in Canada, was happy with his performance after outqualifying his Brazilian teammate Enrique Bernoldi, who was only seventeenth today.
"Well I'm happy with the result," admitted Verstappen. "We went quicker than we did in practice and we managed to improve the car throughout the session. Our lap times were consistent and we were able to improve little by little.
"Everyone did a good job today and we're all really looking forward to a good race. It would be good to get a great start tomorrow."
Brazilian Bernoldi was disappointed with his qualifying performance, being unable to complete a good lap during the hour-long session.
"I'm disappointed as I just couldn't put it all together to get a good lap today," he said. "Yes, I am still learning the track, but I was hoping to do better than that. We didn't make any changes to the car during the session as it felt good but it just didn't go my way today."

Disclaimer: I do not own these characters, that would be Joss Whedon and J.K. Rowling. I am just having fun.
Ron Weasley took a deep breath, looking down studiously at his rather large feet. His freckled face was a deep crimson color, and when he finally spoke, his voice stammered and stumbled for words.
"How- what I was wanting to know- you know, since you're a girl and all-"
"You noticed?" Faith said dryly, arching an eyebrow and smiling sardonically as she deliberately shifted her hip to one side, causing her low-cut black top to rise another inch up her midriff. Ron couldn't help but glance quickly at her chest before tearing his eyes away, returning them to looking at the neutral area of the ground. Seeing this, the dark-haired Slayer's smile widened.
"Well-yeah-" he muttered, flushing further, then, hurrying on, "So I was- I just- thought I'd ask you, you know, for a bit of advice-"
"Just ask already, Carrot Top," Faith interrupted, rolling her eyes. "Hey, you're not related to Willow by any chance, are you?"
"Uh, no, I don't think so," Ron muttered. "Who knows though, as branch-y as our family tree is, if you've got red hair, chances are you're on there somewhere. But- but anyway, what I meant to ask you was..."
Faith waited, enjoying the kid's obvious embarrassment as he struggled with himself, obviously highly uncomfortable. And yet he was desperate to talk to someone- even her. Or maybe especially her. She knew already what it was he wanted to ask her; his struggle had been quite evident in his expressions and fumbling movements over the past few times she had seen him, as well as in less overtly obvious areas. Teenage boys and their barely, rarely controlled hormones... it was quite amusing to her, for at his age, she had completely lost any sexual inhibitions she had possessed as a younger child. It had been something that, given her past, was unavoidable.
"Okay, here goes," Ron mumbled, and then he spouted in one breath, "how can I get Hermione to want to sleep with me?"
Faith laughed, shaking her head. She knew it. Of course all the kiddies came to her with their little sexual problems- who better than the all-too-sexually adventurous Faith? She'd been called other things, of course, but that was the label that most amused her.
At the sound of her laughter, Ron's jaw tightened. She could see his temper beginning to flare. Like the kid could do anything to her. She could break his puny wand before he even whipped it out.
"Ronnie, babe, that's not the issue," she quipped. "Hermione wants to sleep with
you, trust me. She's just too 'moral' to let herself- or you."
"No, that's not it!" Ron said, frustrated. "She does a hundred other things now that aren't moral, stuff she never did when we were younger! I mean, she's given Unforgivable Curses- why would it be so bad to have sex?! That can't be it! It's just that she always has some excuse. I don't think she even wants to with me!"
"Oh trust me, Ronnie, she wants to," Faith said wryly, interlacing her fingers and stretching them behind her back. Once again, Ron's eyes unwillingly followed her movements. "The meek do-gooder little nerds are always the horniest in the privacy of their own daydreams."
"Hermione's not a nerd!" Ron said hotly, his eyes shooting from the Slayer's chest to her face heatedly. "She helped defeat You-know-who-"
"Yeah, she helped save the world, I know. So did I like fifteen times," Faiths said casually. "So did you. And you're still not getting laid."
At that Ron's face flush deeper still, and a twisted, helpless mix of fury and humiliation came across it. Faith went on recklessly, now swinging her arms idly.
"Besides," she said, "whatever Hermione does or says now, she'll never really change inside. No matter how great your or anyone else thinks she is, she'll always still look at herself as that frizzy-haired, buck-toothed little girl whose only identity is being the one to know all the answers. Nobody gets past that kind of stuff. Trust me," she said, and her voice grew softer, more serious and reflective, "I know."
They were both quiet for a few moments... and then she looked up, smiling again.
"And that, Ronnie, is why you can't get laid. Your girlfriend's personal issues. But you know, think of it this way- maybe it's for the best. I mean, what with all your own angst issues, are you sure you'd even be able to get it up?"
As Ron's mouth fell open and he gawked at her in shock and rage, Faith grinned, casually patting his cheek as she began to walk away.
"Good luck with that, Ronnie. You want to talk again, you know where to find me. Always glad to help."

The overall rating of a review is different from a simple average of all individual ratings.
Share this review on
When it comes to my shopping trips I really like to keep an eye on what I am spending, because of this I seem to notice when products go up in price and the increase in some items from week to week is quite shocking, not just food items but cleaning products and silly things such as kitchen roll and tissues, in fact this is what leads me to my review today. I normally buy the Kleenex tissues, I don’t seem to get through them that quickly but on the last occasion that I went to buy them I noticed a sharp increase in price so I decided to buy some shops own brand tissues, I normally shop in Tesco so would have normally picked up a box of the Value ones but I happened to be in Sainsbury’s when I needed some more tissues so picked up a box of their Basics Facial Tissues.
If I had been streaming with a cold then maybe I would have thought about buying a blamed tissues but seeing as these tissues were going to be sat at home for those moments when you have the odd runny nose of sneezing fit I saw no harm in trying them out, especially as they only cost me 32 pence! I am someone who watches the pennies and as much as I would hate to lose 32p, if they were horrendous then I had not lost to much, however on the other hand ,if I liked them then I am making a great saving compared to paying out extra on the Kleenex brand.
As this is a Sainsbury’s Basics product, there is no fancy packaging, what you see is what you get, there is no printed cardboard with a pretty floral patterns or prints on, but a cardboard box which is mainly white in colour and the only other colour being orange. The box as IO mentioned is made from recyclable cardboard and it is actually quite light and flimsy, not that this is a criticism. The box is a standard size and comes with the Sainsbury’s logo at the top and the name of the product just below it. There is minimal writing and on the box and there is only a brief description of the tissues, stating that there are ‘150 tissues in the box’ and that they are 2 ply. To remove the tissues from the box is like any other, there is an oval shaped perforated cut out that you need to remove to reveal the tissues, i removed it by pressing onto it.
The first thing that I noticed about these tissues was that it was quite difficult to remove them from the box. I was tending to get a couple out in one go as opposed to just to the one. The tissues, once I had removed them were a little thinner than I would have liked. If you held them up to the light then you could see straight through them so thickness was not a strong point. The first time that I went to blow my nose with one of these tissues, the thickness really was an issue, the tissues disintegrated really quickly and there was no strength to them which left me disappointed.
As I continued to use these tissues I found myself even more disappointed with them. It was the thickness of them really that let me down and whilst I appreciate that I paid very little for the tissues I did expect something a little bit more substantial for my money. One thing that I was impressed with about these tissues was they were actually quite soft on my nose, I am not sure how you would get on if you had a cold and we consistently having to wipe your nose but on when I used the tissues on individual occasions I found that they caused no harm to my nose and the skin around it.
The tissues in summary have been a little bit of a letdown for me. Where I thought that they may be harsh on my nose, they were in fact softer than I would have expected but the thickness was an issue as they ripped really easy and could only be used the once and then thrown away, even if you just wiped a runny nose, they became limp and tore. I think I have learned with this product that sometimes you do get what you pay for.

Kevin De Bruyne insists he has 22 assists for the season, which would see him hold the Premier League record outright.
The Belgian won the Playmaker of the Year award for being the player with the most assists, and stands level with Henry for the all-time record in a single season.
However, De Bruyne was in no mood to accept that figure, as he used his post-match interview to claim the two assists the Premier League took off him in the home and away fixtures against Arsenal, where his balls to the City goalscorer took slight deflections.
"I've got two more!" he said when asked how it felt to equal the record.
"You guys took two away from me, I'm still claiming that one! For me I was already above.
"It is what it is. I need my teammates, because obviously I'm helping them creating to score. If they score then I will get it. It's nice to have, and it's nice to have it with Thierry."
De Bruyne was not the only player to win an award, as Ederson picked up the Golden Glove award for his 16th clean sheet.
"It's great," De Bruyne said of Ederson's win.
"If you end up the season with that many clean sheets it means you've done quite well. In the five years I've been here our defence has been criticised a lot, but I think we do fairly okay. We lost some points this year. He's been great since he's been here."
Now, De Bruyne is looking ahead to City's Champions League meeting with Real Madrid, where he set his sights on reaching the final of that competition.
He said: "It was a good 90 minutes for us because obviously we've still got the Champions League to play. So it's good to stay in the rhythm. Now we've got two weeks to rest up a bit and train hard to be ready. Hopefully we can play another four games, but we've got some football to play."

Join free now!
It is free to search locals
anal, a-level, gfe, dfk, b2b, GFE, CIM, OWO, DT, Party, ATM, BBBJ, BJ, COB, COF, COT, DATY, Deep Throat, DFK, Duo, Quickie, Threesome
It was a long lonely drive back to our house without Jan by myside. As the miles zipped by I realized that I was unpleasant sometimes however at others I was thrilled and almost giddy understanding that she was back with Steve and he was most likely screwing her and dragging her deeper and deeper into the hotwife lifestyle. I felt at the time that she would be enjoying herself and I didn't know what was actually going on till much later after she returned from St. Louis.
The week that Jan was gone was a nerve-wracking one as I had a lot work to catch-up on. I needed to keep our friends and household at bay and not reveal that Jan was still in St. Louis without me. I likewise was constantly randy as I pictured the hotwife activities that Jan was doing while she was alone with Steve far from home. I thought constantly about her naked body being penetrated by Steve and hopefully his pal's tough dicks. We had actually restricted interaction at the time just a brief text every day and just one brief but lacking in information call about her extended getaway.
This was practically a completely various lady than the one I had actually left in St. Louis simply a week earlier. She was taller than my 5'10' as she was using high-heeled shoes with a minimum of a 5 inch heel. She had on a summer dress that looked like it ought to be used as a slip as it was nearly large and shimmery; it fell halfway in between her knees and her hips. It was lacy at the top, cut quite low and you might quickly make out the curve of her breasts through it. As I held her I could not feel her bra strap or panties as my hands slipped from her back and over her ass. I provided her a leering look.
escort agency Putorino, escort service Putorino, escort girl Putorino, mature escorts Putorino, adult escorts Putorino, cheap escorts Putorino, local escort Putorino, independent escorts Putorino
| ||2655|| ||2472|| ||2019|| ||4081|| ||4646|

There once was a guy named Luther, he was normal until one day his life was changed forever. He lived in a normal house where the tavern is now. He wasn’t very rich, he wore rags for clothes and didn’t have a father. He never did get a chance to see him and his mom didn’t even know where he went. His mother worked three jobs but she owed so much money from her husbands gambling she didn’t have very much money left for her family.
Years later she got really sick and had to quit her jobs and Luther just turned eighteen he said to his mother, “I’m going to get money to get you medicine to help you live.” So Luther started to head west to get money. He traveled for months and made all kinds of friends and one of the people even gave him a ride to northern California. Where he starts his quest for gold.
He tried to mine gold for weeks but he was just too weak. But one night he was walking through the forest and he heard music. He looked for where it was coming from. He looked for about fifteen minutes and he saw a little winged being. Luckily he had a jar so he sneaked up behind it and caught it. The winged being freaked out in the jar but it couldn’t get free. Then Luther headed to his wagon to rest for the next day.
The next day he woke up and saw the creature was still in the jar. He had no idea what it was so he just got ready to go to work. But he heard something. He turned around and noticed the winged being was talking. It said, “Hi there.” and Luther freaked out. He asked it, “How do you know English?” it said, “I don’t know I just always have ever since I was little.” The room was awkwardly quiet for a minute or so. Then it said, “Hey, if you let me go I’ll grant you a wish the only rule is that you can’t wish fro riches, you have to work for that.” Then Luther said, “Sure.” And let it go. It said, “Now, what do you want?” he said, “Great. So I get gold for me and my mother.” And POOF!!! Luther was the strongest man ever. Then the winged creature left and Luther never saw it coming. Then he left for work.
He was huge, all his friends were like, “What the crap? What the freak happened to you?” He just said it was a new work out he tried then he went to go mine some gold. He mined for two hours and he already had twenty pounds of gold and he said it was good day’s work, then he went to town and got something to eat for lunch. Afterward he went to his wagon and pretty much passed out. Then he heard a bang on the door an done of his friends he met on his trip said, “Your mother is getting really sick and she needs the money for the medicine by next week or…you know.” Luther sat down, he didn’t have all the money, he wasn’t even one fourth of the way there. He said, “I’ll get the money, no matter what it takes.” So he went to work.
He worked for five days straight and then he had all the money he needed. Then he ran all the two thousand miles home in one day and when he got home his mother was lying there dead.
© Copyright 2016 Simelia. All rights reserved.
Book / Flash Fiction
Short Story / Horror
Short Story / Travel
Paste the link to picture in the entry below:
Paste the link to Youtube video in the following entry:
Cannot annotate a non-flat selection. Make sure your selection starts and ends within the same node.
An annotation cannot contain another annotation.
There was an error uploading your file.

My last trip home to Lucknow, my mom pulled out a few of her sarees and asked me to pick out whatever I would want to wear and take them with me to KL. This is one of her old chiffon sarees, that I have a feeling, I helped her pick almost 25 years ago or so. I have been having somewhat of an anxious week and needed her love and warmth around me, hence decided to iron her saree last night for work today. This marks a first for me, wearing sarees consecutively for two days to work in KL.
I resemble my mother quite a bit, and this saree is making me feel a lot like her today, which is a very happy feeling. I feel connected, secure and loved in it.
Had my husband take this shot of me as we were leaving the house this morning. 🙂

Well, we are John and Stacy and we decided to take a cue from Voyeurcouple as well and try something on the idea page list. The one we choose was flashing in the park but when we got to the field there were too many other people there walking their dogs. We waited but they seemed to be talking for forever! So we moved on and saw the train tracks and my husband had the idea to do it there. We looked around and there was really nobody so he told me to get on the tracks and flash me something. I pulled my pants down and flashed my ass and he kept telling me he was adjusting the camera and to hold the pose a bit longer and that he was just checking the batteries and to keep the pose and finally he took the picture. The bastard did it on purpose! He let me stay that way for a full minute or so and made me sweat it out. I forgave him quickly enough and we were going to take more but people started to come into the area with their dogs. So that was going to be it for us and we got home and are now typing this up for your site. I loved it and am hooked now and want to do more. John is already in the shower and hurrying me up so I can join him. This could be addictive. - Love and Kisses Stacy.
© 2004-2015 Truth or Dare Pics

I have gone on several Holland America cruises in the past, but my 28-day cruise from Shanghai to Singapore is the last one I will ever take with Holland America. I agree with all the negative comments of the previous posters and have a few more. The people who were satisfied must have never cruised before. A big disappointment was that in most ports we didn’t dock where the other cruise ships docked but at commercial docks that where cranes were loading and unloading freight all day. However, for $6.00 to $12.00 HAL would shuttle you into town. Once or twice it was free.
The final straw, however, was when they didn’t get me to my flight at the end of the cruise. I had paid HAL for the shuttle service so I would be sure to get picked up when I arrived and get back to the airport for my flight when the cruise ended. When the ship informed me what time the shuttle was going to leave to take me to the airport, I immediately went to the front desk and told them I didn’t I would get to the airport in time for my flight. I was assured that I would not have any problems. The next morning while I was waiting for my turn to be shuttled, I went back to the front desk and asked to be transported to the airport sooner. Once again, I was told I would get there in plenty of time. They were wrong. I missed my flight. I called Holland America and was told they would book me on another flight, but I would have to pay for it. They recommended I contact Guest Relations when I got back to the US and request a reimbursement for the extra flight. I called. That was interesting. Guest Relations said they should not have sold me the transportation because company policy required a four-hour minimum time period between leaving the ship and the flight time; therefore, they could not reimburse me for the extra flight cost. They offered to reimburse me for the transportation service. When I mentioned that I gave the clerk my flight times when I booked the transportation and wasn’t told about the four-hour policy, Guest Relations said, “The clerk made a mistake selling you the transportation and that was why HAL would reimburse the transportation fee.”
I want to say something positive about HAL, but nothing comes to mind. It is a company that no longer cares about the passengers. I would have given them two stars if They had gotten me to the airport on time.
The cabin was fine except that the shower fixture fell off the wall. The screw holding it on had disintegrated. The cabin stewards were excellent, the cabin was clean and roomy enough, and the towel sculptures were great

Alfred Miles was charged with assaulting Herbert Lewes, landlord of the Diamond Inn, Railway Street, Hertford, on 26 January 1913. The prosecutor, Herbert Lewes, stated that the defendant went into his house at a quarter to ten o’clock on the Sunday night in question, the worse for drink. He refused to serve him and asked him to leave, whereupon the defendant struck him a blow on the cheek.
The defendant stated ‘ I owe Mr Lewes a little money, and this is how he is getting his own back. I never struck him. There was a scuffle in the bar, he rushed in and got struck. He reckons he is a fighting man.’
George Whitten, a carpenter lodging at the Diamond Inn, gave corroborative evidence as to the assault.
P.S. Palmer stated that he saw the defendant in Railway Street with only his trousers and shirt on. He had been fighting and he was taken home by some of his friends.
The defendant alleged that he got drunk in the Diamond Inn and that the landlord then refused to serve him. There was a ‘scrummage’ in the bar and the landlord came between them and that was how he got hit.
Alfred Miles, the defendant, was fined 15 shillings or in default ten days hard labour.

Mike's other gifts during the day included the famous Brooks Brothers "No Iron Shirt" and a new filing cabinet for our office. He couldn't have been happier! He said that it was the best birthday he has ever had and I was so happy to have made that happen for him. Mike works so hard and takes such good care of our family that he really does deserve to be celebrated. He's not a big celebrater of anything so I am trying to slowly convert him to my love of the "extravaganza"!
So-we definitely recommend the show if you have the chance and if you are ever in Cleveland we'll be happy to take you to Vivo. It was a great day.

Former gay atheist Becket Cook is revealing new details about his remarkable testimony, showing how God can use anyone, anywhere to plant a seed that can lead others into the Kingdom of God.
In a recent episode of "The Becket Cook Show", Becket introduces Joy Durham-Schafer, a Christian model, who was instrumental in his conversion to Christianity.
"On the set of a shoot in 2004, I heard that the model was a Christian. I thought it was gross," Becket explained. "Years later, after I came to faith in Christ, she and I had an incredibly surprising encounter."
Quick Start Podcast: Biden's Controversial Move to Transfer Student Debt
In his book, A Change of Affection: A Gay Man's Incredible Story of Redemption , he shares how he moved from Dallas, Texas to Hollywood and launched a successful career in show business.
"At this point in my life, I was very successful in my career as a set designer, production designer. I mean, I was doing covers for Vogue and for Harper's Bazaar. I worked with a lot of pop stars like Katy Perry and Paris Hilton and Oprah. Like, everyone you can imagine – I worked with them. And I also started my own men's fashion line that was successful. Our clothes were in, you know, L.A., New York, Paris," he told CBN.
Despite all of his success, Becket said he still felt a deep emptiness.
"I went to all the shows. I went to all the after-parties. I was at this one after-party in Paris, and I remember, just everyone was there from the fashion world. I think Kanye was there that year, and I was kind of looking out over the crowd, it just struck me so profoundly. I was like, is that all there is to life? Just going to parties for the rest of my life, is this what it's all about? And I really started to panic that night. I was overwhelmed with a sense of emptiness."
During that time, Becket met Joy, a brand-new believer. On his show, he says her story of breaking off an engagement with a non-believer became a "seed" that would help turn him from a practical atheist to a believer.
"It was literally the first time I had met a Christian in Los Angeles," Becket recounts. "That was kind of a turning point for me because I remember you and Frankie started dating and then you got to a point where you were like 'he's not a believer, this can't go anywhere else'. And you made a really tough decision to break up with him."
"It really touched me and kind of freaked me out in a way," Becket continued. "[Frankie] told me the story of you breaking up with him and he said you collapsed on the floor and you were weeping. And he went to hug you and he said he could feel like the Holy Spirit on you. He sensed something supernatural was going on."
"It was a frequency and a vibration of the Spirit moving and indwelling in me," Joy explained. "I was so completely transformed. I didn't even know who I was anymore."
"I remember when he told me that story it was, maybe, the first spark of me thinking... 'There must be something real to this kind of Christianity-thing.' ...It definitely planted a seed in me."
But that is not the only "seed" God used that ultimately led Becket to turn his life over to Jesus and leave his gay lifestyle.
'Desperate Prayers of Petition'
Ten years before meeting Joy, his sister-in-law, Kim Cook, felt a burden to pray for his salvation.
"I was doing a Bible study on Revelation and...that all of a sudden became my concern that if the rapture happens, you are not going to go," she recounted. "I just remember being so burdened that you would not be in eternity with me."
Kim says the Lord gave her Acts 16:18 as the scripture to stand on for Becket's salvation.
"'Lord please just save him,'" she had prayed. Appearing in a separate episode of his YouTube show, Kim explained, "I really wasn't worried about you being gay. I just wanted you saved, and then let God deal with that when the time came."
"God wants us to come with those desperate prayers of petition and bear everything to him," she continued. "And then let him go to work...and then I have to trust [His] timing."
"Your battles are won by being on your knees," she added.
Becket gave his life to the Lord at a Hollywood church on September 9, 2005.
"It was like the road to Damascus moment," he told CBN's Faithwire. "God's like 'I'm real. Jesus is my Son. He's real. Heaven's real, hell is real. You are now adopted into my Kingdom. You are my child now.' And I was so blown away I couldn't stop crying for the rest of the time. I was crying because of two things: the joy of meeting God, and my sin. It was my most intense cry since I was an infant."
Grace and Redemption
Cook said at that moment he knew who he was, and being gay was not part of his identity.
Becket asked Kim how she would encourage Christian parents and grandparents believing for the salvation of a loved one who is living an LGBT lifestyle.
"The most important thing that we have to do is love, and we have to have grace," she replied. "You have to have truth, but I think the grace has got to be before the truth and that love."
"Embrace prayer, do not turn your back, and keep loving them," she continued.
Becket believes God is the ultimate writer of his redemption story, but he credits believers, like Joy and Kim, as being instrumental in opening his heart to the Lord.
"God is sovereign over all of it," he shared during his podcast. "If you can rest in God's sovereignty and know that it is his timing. It's his will."
"You can't bludgeon or badger somebody into the kingdom of God," he added. "It's God's work. It's a supernatural act from God."

The Rams returned to the Coliseum on Saturday, opening their 2017 preseason with a narrow 13-10 victory over the Cowboys.
And while he's a rookie, there was one player on the Rams' sideline who looked especially comfortable running in the historic venue: former USC running back Justin Davis.
"When I walked into the locker room it was surreal at first because you have everything covered up and it's different colors and what not," Davis said after the game. "But at the end of the day, it feels like home and this will always be home for me."
It looked like he was at home, too. While he was listed as one of several backups coming into the preseason opener, Davis took snaps with the second-team offense under quarterback Sean Mannion. With nine carries for 72 yards, Davis led the Rams' offense in rushing, averaging 7.8 yards per carry.
Check out in-game photos from the preseason matchup between the Rams and the Dallas Cowboys.
Davis made headlines when he first signed with the Rams as an undrafted free agent back in May, especially with six other running backs already on the roster. But Davis was not intimidated by the competition, instead viewing it as a chance to prove his worth.
"After the draft I sat down with my agents and I had a lot of choices to go to, but they all told me that the Rams were the best opportunity and I agreed with them," Davis said after Saturday's game. "I know the job is still up for grabs to make the team or not, but I never turn down a challenge, I always love to compete."
At USC, Davis rushed for 2,465 yards, scoring 21 touchdowns and was known for his fantastic cuts and speed in open space. But with his 451 career touches between 2014 and 2016, also came eight fumbles — one of the higher rates in his draft class according to Pro Football Focus. And that was still an issue in Davis' first professional game.
Of the Rams' five fumbles, two were from Davis. And as the undrafted free agent looks to make his case for a spot on the 53-man roster come September, he recognized his need to prioritize ball security.
"For me, it was growing pains, learning what I can't do here, what I did in college. There's just certain things where I might try to get some extra yards," he said of his two fumbles. "[But] that's definitely a main focus where I have to keep going forward and make sure that I don't give up the ball."
Outside of his two fumbles, Davis definitely turned some heads on the field, including those of head coach Sean McVay and quarterback Jared Goff. In the second quarter alone he rushed for an impressive 40 yards on six carries. And in the third quarter, Davis recorded a highlight run in open space for a 32-yard gain.
"I thought he ran it well — I thought he ran it really well," Goff said. "I think the best part was that he had that fumble and he came back and kept running really well. And that's good to see, to have a guy with a short memory like that."
"You can feel that he's a great back with good explosion, [and] good change-of-pace," McVay said. "He's very productive in the receiving game as well. But we certainly have to do a better job as a running backs' group of taking care of the football. And I know he'll be one of those guys that will really focus on it in this next week."
While it was an up and down night overall, Davis chalked up his shortcomings on field to first-time jitters, choosing to focus on the slipups as a chance to get better.
"Well, my first NFL game I made a couple of mistakes here and there, but all that matters is how I bounce back and how I can eliminate the mistakes in the future because it's different than in college," Davis said. "It's more intense, it's faster, the players are smarter. I have to adjust to that."
Davis will get that chance next Saturday as the Rams take on the Raiders in Oakland for Week 2 of the preseason.

There were many other gods. Venus was the goddess of love and beauty. Neptune was god of the sea. Most of the gods were the same for both the Greeks and the Romans. Jupiter is the Roman name for the king of the gods. The Greeks called him Zeus. The Greek name for Juno is Hera. Each god has both a Greek name and a Roman name.

Rock climbing Reflection week 2 and 3. .Something I was pleased with all the help from the year 12 kids.
· I really enjoyed learning how to I did push pull hand on bum head hand.
· Something I found hard was getting of the wall.
Something I want to get better is on the climbing wall to get a lot higher.
Week 3 was fun my group went on the wall we had tiny rocks that made it harder for
me my feet were fulling off it. It was hard then we swap with anther group we had a good job on the other wall.
Mr Ross and I were having a chat about rock climbing one more minuet everyone he said.

The 2006 season hasn't gone according to plan for Pontiac Northern standout Martell Webb. The versatile Michigan commitment has experienced a great deal of personal success thus far, but that hasn't been enough to help his team reach its collective goals.
"My season is going great, but the team overall…we aren't doing too good," Webb said. "We're 1-6. I'm playing wideout. I have 36 catches, for 775 yards, and nine touchdowns. I haven't really been playing too much linebacker these last couple of games. "
While Webb's current team is struggling, his future squad is off to an impressive 6-0 start. The 6-5, 215-pounder was in Ann Arbor Saturday watching his Wolverines dominate their in-state rivals, the Michigan State Spartans. He also had the chance to rub shoulders with a few other recruits
"That was my first game this year," Webb said. "I've just been a little busy. I hung with Toney Clemons and Ryan Mallett. That was my first time meeting Toney. We're cool now. I didn't really talk to anybody else. I talked to a couple of other commits. I heard that it's Michigan for him."
Webb plans to return to Ann Arbor for another visit in a few weeks when the Wolverines take on the Iowa Hawkeyes. He remains firmly committed to the Maize and Blue. The only question is where he will line up when he finally puts on the winged helmet next year. Will it be wideout (which he has stated is his preference), or tight end (which is where many coaches and scouts feel he can have an even brighter future)? According to Webb, the staff at Michigan has come up with an excellent compromise.
"They told me I could play wideout…they were saying both," Webb explained. "It's something called U-receiver. I'd do a little blocking, they'd put me at fullback, motion me, they'll have me outside…they were saying it would be a mix of things."
Webb has also expressed the desire to mix his sporting career at Michigan. The talented athlete has been a standout on the basketball court at Pontiac Central as well, and hopes to continue that trend when he puts on the Maize and Blue next year.
"I talked to [Coach Amaker] over the phone," Webb said. "Coach Carr already approved. I'm going to give it a try. It's going to be a hard task doing it next year. I've got to just work hard."

I remember when my daughter was eight (who is now 19) spent the afternoon at my office one day. She did her normal things of reading, drawing and playing on my phone. On the way home she asked, “Daddy, do you get paid to go to meetings all day? Did you have to go to college for that?” It’s funny but kind of sad. I think the pandemic has increased the number of meetings as people try to validate by being busy with meetings versus productive with tasks.
This is multiplied ten fold for leaders who are cc’d

Eighth Regiment Connecticut Volunteers
Company A, Inc.
140th Anniversary Bull Run Event Report
August 3-5, 2001
E-Mail Us for More Information!
July 22, 1861
near Centerville, Virginia
I take this opportunity to endeavor to tell you what has befallen our army in a clash with the Confederates just west of here yesterday. I must assume that the papers are already churning out a good deal of information about the situation and results. I write to include some moderating news that will help to diffuse the sensational panic and embarrassment and let you know how we faired.
As you know, we marched out towards Virginian soil on Thursday afternoon, and traveled along until we could continue no longer. At a very late hour, we turned off the main roads, and were directed down a lane, and into a large field on the right of the road. There were found the van of the army beginning to take shape in a regulation camp. We simply rolled out our blankets and fell sound asleep. On the morrow, the sun came up, and the camp continued to grow in size, as the various regiments all swarmed into the vicinity. It was becoming quite a colorful pageant of militaria. And the sun was quite warm. There was ample water hard by, so we all were able to quench our thirsts at will.
In the fore noon, we were joined in camp by the rest of the companies of our 71st New York State Militia, but we like to be called the "American Guard". It was established on four parallel company streets. Our constituents included the 14 NJ, the 107 NY, the 8th CV, the 4th Michigan and the 15th Ohio. Now our 71st NYSM has been assigned to 2d Brigade, 2d Division, under Col. Burnside also known as Col. Waffler. Our brigade includes the 1st and 2d Rhode Island Volunteers. In camp, the company next to ours has a pair of chickens with them. We were thinking that the foul were destined to be dinner, but they were kept from all harm. In the morning, they were making quite a row, and one of the privates started yelling and cursing them. We causally mentioned that the chickens probably were not deserving of such treatment, and he walked away, then turned with a different approach, talking nicely to the chickens, and admonishing them on sweet terms about how much he would love to have an egg or two, and tried to induce their good spirits to produce such fruit. In the stress of the army, and the heat of the day, the chickens were simply not going to comply.
During the afternoon, we coud hear a small skirmish to the east of our camps, and in a short while, the 1st Brigade was marched off in the direction of the action. They were chipper about it, shouting "On to Richmond!" but I was still glad not to be included as yet, since the heat was oppresive, and I was still steeling myself for the eventual battle we were here to precipitate. We could hear from our camps the slight increase in the musketry after a time, as the 1st brigade boys must have engaged the rebels. It did not last too long, and in about two hours, the boys came back into camp, with nothing to report other than they had pressed rebel skirmishers away from their forward positions, and they were otherwise unimpressed with the fight.
We spent some time in the afternoon in the shade near a stand of trees on the edge of our camp where the staff horses were picketed. It was near a good stream and was about all the comfort we were to find. We whiled away the afternoon, and went about getting some supper, eating light, since the heat was slowing us down. The captain called out a special detail of the youngest of our boys, and proceeded to lecture them on the vices of women, and the designs the Virginia women would have on them the help their cause. He described the French pox and all that it would bring. Lt. Belyea also chimed in with the medical implications of the pox, the copper wire treatment and all. As a closing, the captain bestowed upon the boys each a French Preventor, suitable for washing and multiple uses in the case that they could not help themselves. Armed with these devices, the boys were allowed to pass the lines and proceed to a barn dance slated for that evening in the area. The rest of the company turned into our rolls early, and slept soundly. About midnight, I felt some rain drops, so went to all the boys sleeping about the street and woke them each one to tell them to get under their tents, which earned me several thanks.
Morning dawned without rain, but with a heavy steam and mist in the air that compounded the heat already rising. We had our morning roll calls, reported to the regiment and brigade adjutants, and then got up some coffee and breakfast. The regular line of canteen and water details were constantly running. Orders came that the planned morning brigade dress parade was cancelled since the officers did not want to use up the boys, and wanted them ready for action at a moments notice. The commander of the 71st NYSM, Capt. Kurtz did form the regiment, and drill us on column of companies, and regimental front. This was somehow in preparation to what was to come. The drilling went quite well, and the boys are gaining full confidence in their military skills at this point, having drilled almost a full month since enlisting.
Around 2.00 of the clock in the afternoon, orders came to form the massed forces here and prepare to move on the enemy. Such was done in a short order, and the boys were eager to see the enemy and quite high on the prospect of seeing a good battle before the rebellion was crushed and this war was over. The entire division was formed on the parade ground. Once the Col. was satisfied that all were prepared, we marched off by the flank down the road towards where we knew the enemy to have last been. The march was hot but energetic, until we stopped by a gate to the left, and waited for orders to turn through it. The boys were starting to drop from the heat there, and it was quite hard to keep ones mind off those that would never see the fight. They were helped to the shade and given water and rest, and helped to get comfortable, so that they would not be left behind. After a time, we were formed back up on the road and did go down the road to the left. We could hear some skirmishing to the front, and as soon as we broke out from the road across a small bridge crossing the Run, we were immediately ordered companies into line, and advanced in column of companies. We could see the battle lines of the enemy in the distance on a hill side, when we were deployed forward into line. A line of our guns were to our rear, hurling iron towards the enemies lines, and the noise was deafening.
While they were firing over us, we advanced. We took it slow, as the hearts started to pound, and the pride in the American Guard was rising. When we were within range we could see the rebels firing at us, and the brigade opened on them, us included. The firing was fast at first, but it seemed not to be taking much effect, and the rebels were closing on us. Our ammunition was going fast, and the rate of fire was slowed until they got closer. We were being approached by the Louisiana Tigers to our front. I helped some of our wounded to the rear and was returning at a run to the regiment when the Tigers made their charge. They were joined by the rebel line that was pressing the right of our line, and our boys to that flank were not holding any more. As I was surveying the right, a Tiger broke right through our battle line, and was running screaming directly at me at charge bayonet. This took me by surprise, at about a rod away, and all I could do was to fend off the bayonet with my sword at port. I did avoid the steel, but that tiger just ran into me so hard, he knocked me down, and ran right over me. And then, to my luck, he disappeared to the rear. The rest of the Tigers to the front were pressing, yet we held them, but the right of our line was caving, and streaming to the rear as the American Guard placed them selves between the enemy and the safe path to the rear. The brigade line was closed to the left as the ranks thinned, and as we were now about out of ammunition, the orders came to retire by the right of companies to the rear. This was executed in the face of the enemy, and we marched off in good order. We were happy to see the relieving regiments coming to the front, and saw some of the Connecticut boys marching into the fray, all very thrilled to meet the enemy. We halted along a treeline, and stacked arms. The rolls were taken, and the missing found. The boys were allowed to rest, get water, and cool off. Many were in a dire condition of heat stroke at this point, and there were more of those than wounded by the enemy.
Now that the action had turned against us, the rebels having also brought many reenforcements onto the field, our flanks were caving, and we could not press them off the hill top. All the union lines could not break through, and the rebel guns there were causing havoc. Our boys could be seen streaming to the rear, and the officers not able to cause them to stay. There were a fair number of officers actually running for the rear faster than their men, but I could not identify any of those regiments. Once we were rested enough to move, we were orderd by Col. Burnside to follow the masses, but return only to our camp of the last evening, and rally the brigade and division there. This we did, and once there took a full roll once more, then collapsed in the shade of those trees once more. The panic was streaming to the rear down the road past our camps, but the bulk of our brigade did do as ordered, and returned to our camp. There in the late afternoon, we rested, and made our reports to headquarters, and cooked up some hot food for the first time since we arrived. The food was quite a concoction of lentils, rice, and other foraged summer items, along with our issued rations of pork and hardtack. All was enjoyed, and as the sun set, the air became breathable once more. The evening was spent around the fire, rather quiet, and mostly disturbed by the outcome of the battle today. There was a lot of talk about the handling of the troops on the right where they broke first, and of the officers who could not stop the rout once it was underway. As the night progressed, we were aware now that our camp was one of the only positions between the enemy and the fleeing horde. So we posted a guard to remain vigilant, but the enemy never crossed the Run to the east side, for which we were thankful, since we could have hardly put up much of a rear guard action.
On the morning, we all rose before the sun, since sleeping was not that easy, we all packed our things, and got them on the waggons before the sun came up. We only got up a few cups of coffee and were prepared to leave on a moments notice to follow the rest back on to Washington. The orders came to assemble a brigade dress parade at 8.30 on the clock at the east end of the camp. The 1st brigade was ordered to dress parade at the other end of the camp. As the parades were individually completed, the two brigades were put into column of companies by regiment, and passed their commanders in review, and then the two brigades passed each other in review and came into line one behind the other. The review was quite exciting, and did a lot for me to regain my confidence in the command and the troops after the embarassing results of the battle. We were returned to our regimental camps to await further orders. When ours came, it was to pack up, and resume the march immediately for Washington. The boys all did that in a wink of the eye, and we marched off on the heat of this damn Virginia, raising a dust all the way.
I cannot tell you of what the army will be doing next, and if this is any indication of what there is to come, it must be known that hte army shold not be used in this way to satisfy the politicians and the papers. Action must be strategic and planned well to ensure the success of its operations. As we have seen the loss of the army is real mens lives, and that they should not be wasted in such a folly. Let there be no more Bull Runs.
On to Richmond!
Eighth Regiment Connecticut Volunteers, Co.A, Inc.

A friend of mine recommended I call this Travel Agent who works at Travel Galore. She said they have been in business for 30 years and she has been doing business with them for the past 8 years. Anyway, to make a long story short...I called and got the best service ever. Not only did I get suburb service but I was educated so much more on some of the places I was traveling to that I actually switched some things around per their recommendation. I was nervous since I already had my plan down. Anyway, my trip was amazing and I have to thank Travel Galore for everything. I would never think of calling another travel agency and I have already told everyone I know about them. Some of my friends have used them and the feedback I got was very positive. So if you need a good travel agent don't hesitate, call them!
Pros: Friendly service, lots of parking, educated travel agents, g
Cons: Can't think of any?

Prophets prophesied that he will be very controversial and so old men waited to set their eyes on him before they died. He did not preach to please people; rather he told them “he that is not with me is against me”. What manner of Man is this?
He was not a Bigman because he was born in a manger, yet emperors envied him. Though an adolescent he debated and lectured law professors. He could ride any horse but he trekked with those who served him. If he was in a hurry he walked upon the sea. He could have lived in any mansion but he did not have a home of his own just so He could feel the plight of the homeless and the destitute. What manner of Man is this?
He began alone but had thousands and still has millions of followers. Though the only mediator between God and the world, he still prayed himself too to serve as a practical teacher. Through his prayer, 2 fish and five loaves of bread fed more than 15 thousand people. He was a carpenter who knew all about farming, commerce and medicine. His prayers resuscitated the dead showing his victory over death. What manner of Man is this?
Though a civilian yet he ordered military commanders and even diseases. Lepers were cleansed, hemorrhoids disappeared, demons fled into herds of swines and trees died at his command. He even ordered water to turn into wine and it obeyed. He charged the storm to be still and it acquiesced. He healed every patient who cried for healings and all manner of diseases. His compassion compelled him to heal every child that was brought to him and had compassions for widows that he raised up their children. What manner of Man is this?
He was a man of justice who forgave even those who hurt him. Ask Malchus; he replaced his ear that Peter severed in anger. He made outcasts insiders. What manner of Man is this?
He was a man with little education but he spoke in parables witted in almost every figure of speech language could afford. Mud in his hands was eye medicine to heal the blind. He ordered fishes to pay his taxes so that Him and his followers would comply with human law too. If he was living in America the IRS will be his bosom friend. What manner of Man is this?
He was hated from birth and those who hated him finally killed him. He accepted the punishment just so He may impute righteousness on the sinful world. He was a man that was rejected and despised by those who should have loved and honored him. He was betrayed by his own friend. He was acquainted with grief; a man of sorrow indeed! He understood people’s sorrows and chagrins too. What manner of Man is this?
He is the only man whose date of birth and death were already foretold before he was born. When his corpse touched the ground dead people abandoned their tombs and came to town. He is the only dead whoever ascended into heaven so that you too may conquer death. God made him the only way to Him.
Give a shout out to Jeeeeeeeeeeeeeeesus Christ! Yes, Jesus Christ!
Until then, know Jesus and your sins will be forgiven.
Prince & PA Hamilton Ayuk
“Bonyfish beware because the same net that caught the jawless fish, caught the cartilaginous fish” (Hamilton Ayuk).
Beware earthly paradise seekers because there is a serpent in every paradise"(Hamilton Ayuk).
Idle people write, idler people read, and idlest people read and whine that idle people are taking their time (Hamilton Ayuk)

So I guess El Nino has a problem with the Islanders. What do you think he'd be able to pull in for the Islanders, how much is he worth?
Unless there is something new, this is about a month or more old. Nino's agent was pissed that he didn't get a real shot to make the Islanders roster, and was stuck in the AHL earnimg something like 10% of what he'd make in the NHL. The Islanders have NO incentive to deal Nino at this point, so he basically has to suck it up and show he's ready for a shot in the off season. Add in that Nino's been playing well in the AHL, and there is NO reason for the Isles to move him when his value would be based on his TERRIBLE year last year. Pretty much a total non-story from my perspective.
Honestly I could totally be off base. Not sure or Moulson's value.
Moulson alone is worth more to the Isles then Hiller would be. I was once very high on Hiller but I am not sure he is worth nearly what he was due to not quite being the same goalie he use to be before his health issues.
Isles won't trade him, his size and scoring abilities are too good to pass up on. He can boo hoo now about not being invited to camp but what happens next year if he gets a shot to play with JT? He won't be crying then.

Member Since: 05/13/2004
"Jeff "Diesel" Ford. He beat him early in his boxing career, it is Fields only loss. I represent Ford for MMA where he has been very succesesful. He was also a trainer on Celebrity Fit Club."
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa... I was with you until this one.... Who has Ford been successful against in MMA? Unless he's had a ton of training since, when i saw him in MN he wasn't impressive at all. Good hands, great stand up but absolutely no wrestling or ground game. Now you're

Mark and Nicole are outstanding. We’ve been renting from them since December and it’s truly been a blessing. Since day one they have made sure we were completely happy and satisfied. Anytime we’ve needed any maintance on the house, it was done by the next day if not that same day. They really go above and beyond for their clients. We recently decided to buy and of course had Mark and his team help us, and they’ve done just that plus more. There has never been a question that hasn’t been answered or a problem that hasn’t been solved. I really can’t put into words how great they really are! We have been completely satisfied with them and can’t wait to work with them again in the future to property manage our new house. 100% recommend Soldiers First Real Estate!

Rest in peace, William Windom.
The television actor, who received an Emmy Award for his work in My World and Welcome to It and is well-known for his roles on Star Trek and Murder, She Wrote, died in his California home from congestive heart failure on Thursday, according to the New York Times.
Windom was 88.
During his early years, Windom joined the army and served as a paratrooper in World War II. He later attended the University of Kentucky, among several other higher-education institutions, and decided to pursue acting.
Windom also appeared on episodes of The Twilight Zone and the '60s comedy series The Farmer's Daughter, where he played a Minnesota congressman, a position served in real-life by his great-grandfather, whom he was named after.
The award-winning actor also landed film roles, including a part in To Kill a Mockingbird, as the prosecuting attorney who faced off against Gregory Peck's Atticus Finch in court.
Windom is survived by his wife of 37 years, Patricia, and four children, Rachel, Heather, Hope and Rebel.

- Pub. Date:
When Griffin is sucked into the Underworld, his father Shade must act fast—for legend says that if the living stumble into the land of the dead, they only have a short time before death claims them as its own.
But something else is hunting Griffin, too. Something dark. Something sinister. Something buried deep in a past that Shade hoped he'd never have to revisit. Who will find Griffin first? And will it even matter if none of them can make it back into the land of the living?
This thrilling companion novel concludes the Silverwing series.
Related collections and offers
About the Author
Read an Excerpt
It had rained during the day, and now, under a three-quarter moon, the forest was silver with mist. Things always smelled better after the rain, Griffin thought as he sailed through the humid summer air. From the forest floor rose the loamy fragrance of the soil and the rich stink of rotting leaves and animal droppings. The resinous tang of pitch wafted up from the firs and pines as he grazed their topmost boughs.
A new smell suddenly twined its way through all the others one that didn't belong to the forest. Griffin felt his fur spike up. Nostrils flared, he sniffed again, but the smell was gone now, evaporated. Maybe just the dying traces of a faraway skunk. It was pungent but...somehow hotter and more dangerous. He stored the smell away in his memory so he could describe it to his mother back at Tree Haven at sunrise. Then he angled his wings and set course for his favorite hunting ground.
The giant sugar maple occupied a small rise on the valley floor, and its canopy spread wider and higher than any tree nearby. After Tree Haven, this was Griffin's favorite place in the forest. He loved the way the moonlight washed the leaves a translucent silver, and when a strong wind blew, the leaves looked and sounded like a thousand bats, all taking flight at once.
Circling low overhead, Griffin cast out sound, and the returning echoes painted the tree's canopy in his head with more detail than his eyes could ever achieve. He saw each branch and twig, each bud, even the veins of the leaves.
And, of course, the caterpillars.
They were everywhere. The maple, like plenty of other trees in the forest, was infested. Gypsy moth caterpillars, that's what they were, and they'd already stripped the tree of half its leaves. Every night for the past week Griffin had come here and fed, but the next night it seemed there were just as many caterpillars as before. Just look at them! There must be hundreds of them! His stomach made a hungry popping sound.
He trimmed his wings and tipped himself into a steep dive, spraying sound ahead of him. The first caterpillar he scooped right off a twig with his tail, flicked it into his wing and then straight into his open mouth. Ducking under a branch, he wheeled and snapped up two more dangling from threads. Curled on a nearby leaf was yet another caterpillar. Griffin streaked in close and, with a swat of his wing tip, bounced it right off the leaf, gobbling it in midair. They were a bit fuzzy going down and had a slightly sour aftertaste, but you got used to them.
"Doesn't it get boring?"
Griffin looked up to see Luna, one of the other Silverwing newborns, swooping down alongside him.
"They're not so bad," he said.
The truth was, it made him feel useful. The caterpillars were voracious eaters, and his mother said they could gobble up half the forest if they weren't controlled. The thought had filled Griffin with panic. He didn't want to see his forest stripped bare, especially not his favorite sugar maple. A horrible vision had played itself before his eyes. Without any trees, the soil would wash away, and without soil, nothing could grow and there'd be nowhere to roost and nothing to eat and all the Silverwings would probably starve to death or have to leave and find a new home!
So Griffin ate caterpillars.
And every time he swallowed, he was helping stave off total catastrophe. That's how he saw it anyway. But he didn't tell Luna this. She already thought he was crazy.
A nice fat tiger moth fluttered past, no more than a few wingbeats from his nose. Griffin let it go.
"You don't want that?" Luna asked in amazement.
"It's all yours," he told her, and she was already gone, plunging down into the trees after her prey.
Griffin watched, admiring the expert way she swerved and tilted through the tight tangle of branches. He'd tried to catch tiger moths once or twice, but he was no good at it. They sprayed out their own sounds and scrambled up your echo vision, so it seemed like there were a whole bunch of moths, all darting in different directions, and you could end up chasing a mirage and getting splatted against a tree. Wasn't worth it. Also, he wasn't the greatest flyer. His wings were too long, and he felt clumsy in the forest, couldn't maneuver fast enough. And there were beasts down on the forest floor: bear and lynx and fox. He preferred to stay up high, where he could see what was what. He didn't mind eating mosquitoes and midges and caterpillars.
The boring bugs, Luna would say. Griffin looked and caught one last glimpse of her before she disappeared into the foliage. He hoped she'd come back afterward.
Below him a maple leaf glittered with dew, and he carefully checked out the nearby branches before roosting. Farther down was a nest of warblers, but they were all asleep, and anyway, birds didn't attack bats anymore, so it seemed safe enough. He braked, spun upside down, and gripped the branch with his rear claws. Thirstily he lapped up the bright beads of water on the leaf.
"Why don't you just drink from the creek?" Luna asked as she flipped down beside him.
"You never know what's under the surface," Griffin replied darkly.
"Sure you do. Fish!"
"Right. But from what I've heard, some of them can get pretty big, and what's to stop them from just leaping "
"Leaping, yes, right up out of the water and taking us down with them."
"Well, a big one, why not?"
"Fish don't eat bats, Griffin."
"So they say."
"It must be tiring, being you," Luna said, but she was chuckling. Griffin had noticed this about her. She liked hearing him worry. She seemed to think it was funny. That must be why she hung around with him sometimes. It certainly wasn't because he was brave or adventurous like her. But she still seemed to consider him a friend, and he was intensely grateful. She had a hundred friends, though, and it was rare he had her all to himself. Normally there were half a dozen other newborns flapping all around her.
Luna's tall ears pricked up, and with a nimble forward lunge, she snatched an earwig off the twig above her. Griffin cocked his head, studying the insect as she cracked its shell.
"You know," he said thoughtfully, "when you look at most of what we eat, it's not altogether appetizing. If you really stopped and looked at it, I mean. All those legs going, and the antennae tickling your throat on the way down..."
"Stop it," Luna said, giggling, "you're gonna make me choke."
With a flurry of wings, three other newborns came in to land, calling out hellos. There was Skye and Rowan and Falstaff, who was so stuffed that the branch bowed over and bounced up and down a few times after he roosted. Griffin knew they'd come because of Luna. If it had been just him hanging here alone, forget it. It wasn't that they disliked him he doubted they even thought about him enough for that. They just didn't see the point of him.
Boring, Griffin thought. That's what he was to them. And they were right. There was nothing special about him. He wasn't a particularly good flyer or hunter. He hardly ever joined in with their games. And why should he? They only ever seemed to want to do ridiculously dangerous things. Now the little hair balls were shoving their way in and all chittering to Luna at once Skye about the moose she'd seen earlier in the night, Rowan about how fast he'd flown with the wind at his tail, and Falstaff about all the bugs he'd eaten, what kind, where he'd found them, and what they each tasted like. Luna seemed to be able to listen to everyone, and talk back, all at the same time.
When he was off by himself, Griffin hardly ever felt lonely. But now, among the other newborns, he did. He wasn't much like them. He didn't even look like them. Sometimes he thought he was barely a Silverwing at all. Their fur was sleek and black, shot through with silver. He had stupid fur. Most of it was black, but all across his back and chest were jagged bands of dazzling bright hair. The bright stuff came from his mother, a Brightwing. His father was a Silverwing, but it seemed he took after his mother more. Like her, his fur grew in longer and thicker than the Silverwings', and his ears were a different shape, round, small, and close to the head. His wings were longer and narrower than the other newborns', but that wasn't really a consolation, because they still felt too big on him, made his flight all loose and jerky in the forest.
"Hey, Luna," Rowan whispered. "Look."
Griffin looked too and saw, roosting several trees away, an owl perched on a thick branch. Even though they were at peace with the owls now, the sight of them still sent a tremor of fear through Griffin. They were just so big, easily four times his size, with sharp talons and a hooked beak that was designed for slashing and crushing its prey. Griffin's mother still said they should avoid the owls. They were at peace, but that didn't automatically make them friends. All the mothers said so. Now the owl's huge head swiveled and fixed them with its moonlike eyes.
"You want to play?" Skye asked Luna.
The owl game was Luna's invention, and it terrified Griffin. The idea was to see who could roost closest to an owl on the same branch and stay there for ten whole seconds before taking flight. Several weeks ago Luna came within two wingspans. No one had done better than that.
"Sure," said Luna. "I'm always ready."
"Me too," said Rowan.
"I'm in," Skye said.
"All right," Falstaff agreed, "but only if it doesn't take too long. I'm starving."
Griffin was hoping they'd just forget he was there, but Luna turned to him. "Griffin?"
He knew she meant it kindly; she wasn't trying to make fun of him, was just wanting to include him. He shook his head and caught Skye flashing Rowan a smirk that said, So what else is new?
"Well, that old owl looks pretty fat and dopey," said Luna jauntily. "I figure I can do one wingspan. What d'you think, Griff. Can I do it?"
"I'm sure you can," he said, "but "
"But what?" she asked. Griffin could hear the other newborns sigh impatiently, but there was definitely a gleeful spark in Luna's eyes. "What's the worst that can happen?" she wanted to know.
Griffin almost smiled. This, he was good at. "The worst? Well, the way I see it, you fly in, you roost, you're only one wingbeat away. And maybe this owl hates bats, or maybe he's in a really bad mood tonight, or maybe he's so hungry, he figures no one'll notice one less Silverwing newborn in the forest. You're so close, he can just snatch you up before you even blink. And in one swallow you're down his throat, and then you get hacked back up as a little packet of bones and teeth."
"That's disgusting! said Skye.
"Yeah, well, that's how they eat," Griffin said with considerable satisfaction. "And until a couple years ago that's what they did to bats."
Luna nodded, grinning. "Yep, that's pretty much the worst that could happen. Wish me luck!"
She flexed her knees and prepared to take flight, but to Griffin's huge relief, the owl beat her to it. Spreading its huge wings, it lifted from the branch and swept silently off into the forest.
Rowan looked accusingly at Griffin. Sourly he said, "You talk too much."
"Griffin's good at talking," Luna told the other newborns. "He's hilarious." Skye, Rowan, and Falstaff all looked at Griffin, puzzled, considering this for a second. Then they turned back to Luna and started talking about what they should do next. Griffin gave her a grateful smile.
Suddenly his nostrils twitched. "Do you smell that?" he asked.
Only Luna heard him. "What?"
"I smelled it earlier...." Sniffing, Griffin swooped off the branch, trying to follow the scent. It wasn't hard. The smell was stronger now, definitely not skunk. He climbed above the tree line and was pleased to see Luna flying after him. Climbing higher still, he turned his face into the wind, breathed again, and then saw it.
Far away to the west a line of dark vapor slithered above the forest canopy, dispersing as the wind blew it toward him. Griffin's eyes traced it back down to the treetops, then into the forest. Through the sifting mist, past a stand of pines, he saw a bright flickering.
"Fire," he whispered to Luna. He'd never seen it before, but he'd heard plenty about it. Fire didn't come out of nowhere. It was made. By Humans. By lightning. But there hadn't been any lightning for weeks.
By this time the other three newborns were flapping toward them, Falstaff lumbering through the air, complaining about how hungry he was. Then they all saw the light dancing deep in the forest.
"Maybe it's one of those secret places where the owls keep their fire," Skye said to Luna.
Long ago, as they all knew, owls had stolen fire from the Humans and kept it burning in hidden nests throughout the northern forests.
"Not very secret if we can all see it," Luna said.
"Must be Humans," said Griffin, and felt a shudder even as he uttered the word.
"Let's go take a look," said Luna.
"Yeah," agreed Skye. "Come on."
"Shouldn't we tell our mothers first?" Griffin asked worriedly. Humans were dangerous. Everyone knew about the things they'd done to bats.
"We'll tell them when we get back," said Luna. "It's just a few hundred wingbeats." Impatiently this time she said, "Come on, Griffin."
"Oh, let him stay if he wants," said Rowan, and the words sounded more dismissive than considerate. As usual, he was ruining their fun. Griffin turned east to pick out the summit of Tree Haven. It already looked a long way away, and they would be going even farther now.
He wished he were more like Luna. Fearless. He tried sometimes to be brave, but it never worked. He just started thinking and then worrying, and all he could ever see was how things might, could, would go terribly wrong. His mother shouldn't have named him Griffin. When he'd asked what it meant, she said it was a creature who was half eagle, half lion both brave, powerful creatures. It seemed like a cruel joke now, he thought glumly. Should've been called Weed or Twig or something.
He glanced at Luna. She looked genuinely disappointed. He grit his teeth. He'd already said no once tonight. He couldn't face two humiliations in a row.
"All right," he said. "Just a peek, though, okay?"
Below in the clearing a small fire burned within a ring of stones. Beside it sat two enormous creatures Griffin knew must be Humans. His mother had described them to him, but he'd never seen them himself before now. Luna made for a high branch overlooking the clearing, and Griffin followed, roosting with the others.
"So that's what they look like," said Luna.
Griffin knew they shouldn't be here. His mother had always told him that if he ever saw Humans in the forest, he should tell someone right away. He fought the trembling in his knees as he watched the Humans move things in and out of the fire. Strangely it was the fire he found most fascinating, and his eyes kept getting drawn back to it, watching its hypnotic upward lapping, little bits of itself shooting off like comets.
"They don't look so scary," said Rowan.
"We should tell them back at Tree Haven," Griffin said.
"There's just two of them," said Skye disdainfully.
"Yeah, well, it only took two to catch my mother," Griffin retorted. "They spread a web across a stream and caught her and banded her."
He noticed they were all listening to him. About the only time they ever did was when he talked about his parents.
"But they didn't hurt her, right?" Luna said.
"Not those ones, no."
"Yeah," said Rowan excitedly, turning back to Skye and Falstaff. "But remember those other ones who trapped all the bats in the indoor forest and put explosive discs on their bellies and dumped them over the jungle!"
And then all three were talking at once, retelling Shade's amazing adventures as if they'd forgotten Griffin was Shade's son, and he knew all about this anyway, and better than them. Griffin scowled, feeling they were somehow stealing his stories, treating them like something that belonged to everyone equally. But he supposed they did, in a way. Within the colony's echo chamber, his father's stories reverberated within the spherical walls forever, as part of the history of the Silverwings. Maybe he didn't have any special claim to those stories.
Especially since he was nothing like his father anyway. He'd known that almost from the moment he was born. His mother was a hero, but his father was practically a legend. Defeating Goth and the other cannibal bats, making peace with the owls, getting the sun back for the Silverwings. If his father did any more amazing things, the whole echo chamber would explode. When he'd first heard all these stories, from his mother, from the elders, from other newborns sometimes, he'd pictured his father as a giant, wings that would blot out the moon. Then he'd learned his father was born a runt.
That made everything much, much worse.
A runt, and still brave and daring. When he was not much older then Griffin, his father had peeked at the sun, outflown owls, visited the echo chamber, tried to save Tree Haven from burning down, been blasted out to sea in a storm and survived. Griffin had had no adventures, performed no valiant acts. About the most exciting thing he'd experienced was having a squirrel throw a nut at him, and miss.
In just four more weeks they'd start their migration south to Hibernaculum and rendezvous with the males at Stone Hold. He would meet his father for the first time. And what would his father see? A little bat with weird fur. A little bat who wasn't special in any way, wasn't brave or daring or anything.
"Rotten Humans," Falstaff was saying. "We should fly down and scare them."
"We should tangle up their hair," said Rowan.
"We should pee on them," said Skye.
When everyone finished laughing, there was a short silence, and then:
"We should steal some fire."
No one was more surprised by this than Griffin, for it was he himself who'd spoken the words. He'd never said anything so outrageous in his life, and now everyone was staring at him, Luna with a smile pulling at the corners of her mouth almost in a look of admiration.
"Steal fire," she said, as if mulling over an interesting possibility.
"What for?" Falstaff wanted to know.
Griffin's eyes darted back to the lapping flames, mind churning. Why had he gone and said that?
"Well," he began uncertainly, "the owls have it; why shouldn't we?"
A couple years ago the owls had used their fire to burn down Tree Haven. That was his father's fault. Shade had peeked at the sun, back when it was against the law, and had been spotted by sentry owls.
"But what would we do with it?" Skye wanted to know.
"All I'm saying," Griffin repeated, "is that we should have what they have. It's only fair."
"But we're at peace with the birds now."
"Doesn't mean we'll always be at peace," Griffin pointed out. "And what about the beasts? Or the Humans? What if they want to make war on us? Isn't it better we have fire, just in case?"
They all had their eyes on him, and he thought: I love this. They're listening to me. And the words just kept coming. From where, he didn't know. Then again, this is what he did in his mind anyway. Imagine things. Sure, they were usually colossal doomsday scenarios, but wasn't it all really the same? Seeing something, and imagining what might, just might happen with it.
"There's something else too," he said, and allowed himself a dramatic pause.
"What?" Rowan asked, almost in a whisper.
"We could use it to keep warm."
They all looked at one another, not sure about this.
"Oh, sure, the weather's warm now," Griffin hurried on. "But before long it'll get cold, so cold that we have to leave here or freeze to death!"
pardThe other newborns jerked in surprise.
"But that's why we migrate," Luna reminded him.
"Exactly. But that's the whole problem. I've been thinking about the migration, and I think it's really a bad idea."
"We've been doing it for millions of years!" exclaimed Skye.
"I know. It's ridiculous," said Griffin with a sad shake of his head. "We've got Tree Haven right here, this amazing roost, and every fall we have to leave and fly over a million wingbeats to Hibernaculum, sleep away the winter, and then, fly all the way back here the next spring. Doesn't it seem like just a bit of a waste of time? But, we get some fire, keep it burning in the base of Tree Haven all winter, and we don't need to bother migrating anymore!"
"But I want to migrate," said Luna, smiling. "It's going to be fun."
"Yeah," Rowan, Skye, and Falstaff agreed simultaneously but without, Griffin noticed, wholehearted enthusiasm.
"Fun?" Griffin said, puffing out his breath thoughtfully. "I don't know if I'd call it fun. It's an awfully long journey. You've got storms, high winds, lightning, hail, freezing cold. Every year there's some who don't make it. I mean, look at some of those older females in the colony. They're pretty weak; they can hardly hunt for themselves anymore! And what about us? We've never done it before. Who says we're strong enough to make it?"
"We'll make it," said Skye, looking at the others for reassurance.
"Look what happened to my father," Griffin reminded them. "Caught in a storm, swept out to sea."
This stopped them for a moment.
"But he made it," Luna said.
"He was lucky. Just imagine yourself flying along the coast and a storm kicks up and you get blasted out over the ocean, the waves churning, the rain and hail smashing down so you can't see or hear. And then wham! right into the water. It's up your nose and soaking your wings and making you so heavy and freezing that you can only sink down and down and down to the ocean's depths!"
Falstaff swallowed. Rowan's wings gave a creak as he shifted anxiously from claw to claw. They were all staring, riveted, at Griffin, and he almost smiled.
"I'm not saying that's going to happen to any of us," he went on. "But don't you think we should at least get to choose whether we migrate or stay at Tree Haven? We steal some fire, we have a choice." He took a deep breath, revving himself up. "A choice! So the weak need not fear, or the elderly and infirm! So we need not be victims of the elements, but control them and so become masters of our destiny!"
He was out of words and breath. He looked at the newborns, who stared back at him, mouths ajar. Probably he'd overdone it a bit with that destiny stuff.
"I think it's a good idea," said Luna, and all heads swiveled to her.
"You do?" Griffin asked, startled.
"Absolutely. Me personally, I'm going to migrate, but I think you're right. Why shouldn't we be able to stay here all winter. Why not? Let's get ourselves some fire!"
Griffin nodded weakly, glancing back at the fire. Somehow he hadn't expected it to go this far. He'd just talked and talked, and the words had spun out of him like some dazzling, chaotic spiderweb.
"Maybe we should ask the elders first," Griffin said, feeling queasy.ar
Luna shook her head, eyes flashing with mischievous delight. "No, I think we should just go ahead and surprise them. So how're we going to do this, Griff?"
Normally Griffin liked it when she called him Griff. She was the only one who did it, and it made him feel special. Not only was he her friend, but he was a friend deserving of a nickname. He didn't want to let her down now.
"Well," he said, thinking fast, "a tall stalk of grass, maybe. We could shove it into the flames until it catches fire, and then...fly it back to the roost and put it in a little nest like theirs, with some dry twigs and leaves at the bottom. Somewhere near Tree Haven, close to the stream, maybe. Someone'll have to go on ahead and get that ready."
"I like it!" Luna said, turning to the other newborns. "So who's going to steal the fire?"
Skye, Rowan, and Falstaff shifted uncomfortably on the branch, then looked at one another expectantly, all talking at once.
"Probably best if you "
"You're stronger "
"Need someone really fast "
Griffin noticed they didn't even glance his way.
"Me," Griffin blurted out. "I'll do it."
They all turned to him, incredulous.
"You?" Skye said.
Griffin nodded slowly, as if trying to balance a heavy stone on his head. "Sure. Why not?"
Maybe this was the way you did it, he thought. He wasn't brave. But maybe if he faked it, pretended to be brave enough times, it would get easier. And then it would come naturally. And he'd be truly brave.
"I don't know," Rowan said uncertainly. "Maybe Luna should do it."
"Not me," said Luna. "It was Griffin's idea. He's the one we need." She looked straight at Griffin as she said this, smiling, as if to say that she knew all along he'd volunteer and that he could do it. Then she turned to the others. "You three go on and make the nest."
"Come on," said Falstaff with a laugh. "He's not really going to do it."
"Just make sure that nest is ready," Griffin said, and before he could give himself time to start thinking, he dropped from the branch, unfurled his wings, and dove.
In the deep shadows at the edge of the clearing, he sighted a clump of tall grass. He came in low, spraying out sound to check for predators, then touched down. It was not a graceful landing. He skidded on his rear claws, then pitched forward, his face in the mud. Scrambling up, he twitched dirt from his fur. He hated being on the ground. Hated it. Bats were made for flight, not for scuttling around. Laboriously he moved toward the grass, dragging himself forward with his thumb claws and elbows. He pushed with his legs, but they were too weak to be of much use. Anything could be lurking in that grass. Rats, snakes, a crazed skunk.
The first stalks he examined were too wet to catch fire easily. Farther in, beneath the shade of a large oak, he found some drier grass and peered up to pick out the tallest stalk. For a moment he felt like he was circling overhead from some safe distance, watching himself. He was crazy! What was he doing down there? His heart began to race, and his teeth started chattering, even though he didn't feel cold. He forced himself to pay attention to what he was doing.
He started chewing at the base of the stalk of grass, spitting out its sour tang. He bit through, and the stalk fell flat. Awkwardly he took it in his rear claws, lengthwise beneath his body. Then, flapping furiously, he managed to get airborne.
Hidden in shadow, he made a full circle of the clearing, then came in low so he wouldn't be seen. He made sure to approach the fire on the far side of the two Humans, and when he was about twenty wingbeats away, he made another clumsy landing on his chin. He dragged himself forward, the stalk of grass still clutched in his rear claws. He looked up at the Humans, their torsos and heads towering above the flames. They were still sitting, and they hadn't noticed him. He wondered if he'd be able to take flight fast enough if they tried to catch him.
Griffin hesitated, glancing up at the pines, hoping Luna was seeing all this. He wanted her to be able to tell the colony all about this amazing thing he'd done. This amazing, dangerous thing. He grimaced. My father better be impressed by this, he thought.
He dragged himself closer, until the fire's heat lapped angrily against his face.
He watched the flames doing their hot jittery dance down among the glowing sticks and rocks, and he felt like they were urging him onward, closer, closer. Deep in the fire something popped, and Griffin flinched, nearly taking flight. Luna should've done this. He'd tried to fake it, but he wasn't fearless. He was all fear, heart blasting, mouth dry, a terrible weakness seeping through his limbs. His wings felt mushy. But he thought of Luna watching thought of his father and knew he couldn't quit now.
Crouched right up against one of the big rocks, Griffin got a bit of relief from the heat. He took the end of the stalk in his teeth. He knew he'd have to be quick the longer he took, the more chance there was of being seen. With his thumb claws, he pulled himself up onto the stone. Scalding heat poured over him, wilting his fur, bringing water streaming from his eyes. Squinting, he tried to swing the stalk into the flames, but it deflected off a big block of wood at the fire's edge. The stalk of grass was unwieldy, and he managed to pull it back a bit with his claw, so less was protruding from his jaws.
With a forward thrust of his shoulders, he drove the stalk deep into the embers, saw the tip flare, and pulled back. At first he thought he'd lost the fire, but then he saw a glint from the tip and a ghost of smoke curl up from it.
Carefully he transferred the stalk to his rear claws. Wings churning, he took flight, climbing away from the ground, the Humans, and their fire, up toward the pine where he knew Luna was waiting. He took a quick backward glance. If the Humans even noticed, they weren't doing anything about it. They were still sitting there like big, mountainous blobs, staring at the fire and grunting their slow, low words to each other.
"You did it!" Luna cried out, swirling around him in amazement.
"Is it still lit?" he asked. It was awkward holding the fire stick, and he had to fly carefully, afraid his downstrokes might accidentally blow out the flame, or even knock the stalk right out of his claws.
"Yeah, it's fine!" said Luna. "Griffin, I can't believe you did it!"
"I did it," he said, feeling her excitement fuel his own. "Yeah, I did it!"
"Fire!" she said. "You've got fire! Come on, let's get it to the nest!"
They talked giddily as they flew, Luna swirling around him and underneath him to check on the flame and make sure it was still burning. She was giggling. Griffin was giggling. It was contagious, and almost impossible to stop. This was amazing! He wanted his father to see him, right now, bearing stolen fire from witless Humans. Sitting right there at the campfire, and they didn't even know it was gone. And he'd done it. Him. He'd had this great idea, and he'd seen it through!
Through the forest they flew, back toward Tree Haven and the stone nest the others were building. Griffin ducked his head down to look and was surprised at how quickly the flame was eating up the stalk, the intense bead of liquid light sliding toward his claws.
"Almost there," said Luna, seeing his worried frown. "You'll make it, Griff."
He flapped harder but saw the flame gutter with too much wind against it. He slowed down. Still the flame continued its hungry advance. He could feel its heat now, along his left flank, in his foot. His mind began to dance with worry. He couldn't help it. He wished he hadn't done this. He wanted to get rid of it, but he couldn't just drop it. What if it started a fire, and the fire spread and got out of control and burned down Tree Haven all over again? What a stupid idea this was.
"Luna," he said, "it's burning too fast!"
"No, we're almost there. Don't worry, you'll make it."
No, she was wrong. There was still a long way to go. He looked and couldn't even see the tip of the stalk anymore, it had burned down so close to his body. Heat lashed his fur and claws. He remembered the scalding force of the fire, imagined himself alight, spiraling to the ground in flames.
"Luna! I'm not gonna make it!"
"Wait, wait, I'll check. Hang on."
Luna swooped below him again, and almost at the same moment Griffin felt a searing pain in his left claw. He cried out, and before he could check himself, he let go of the fire stick.
"Look out!" he yelled but
He heard her grunt of surprise, tilted sharply, and looked down.
Luna was on fire, her back dancing with flame. The stick had bounced off her, leaving its burning tip embedded in her fur.
"Griffin!" she cried, swirling round and round, flapping desperately but only fanning the flames.
"Land!" Griffin shouted to her, but she was panicking now as the flames leaped nimbly toward her shoulders, licking out across her wings. Griffin whirled round her, slapping at the fire, but it was no good. Luna was moving too much, and the flames seemed to have burrowed deep into her fur. She was crying, a high, piercing wail.
"Land!" he shouted at her again in despair. "Land and I can put it out!"
Luna was tilting earthward, though it didn't seem of her own doing. She slewed through the air at a reckless angle, gathering speed, too much, and slammed into a mound of hardened mud and leaves. She didn't move.
Griffin crashed down beside her, scrambled up, and started sweeping mud and earth onto her with his claws and wings, trying to smother the flames. Suddenly he was shoved back out of the way, and there was his mother, Marina, and Luna's mother, and a dozen other mothers, landing around the smoking newborn, throwing themselves on her to extinguish the fire. It took them only a few seconds, but still Luna didn't move. Her fur, Griffin saw, was terribly burned, patches of inflamed skin showing through. Her wings were seared and melted in places.
Griffin couldn't tear his eyes from her, and he realized he was moaning, a low, toneless cry that he couldn't stop.
"She's alive," he heard one of the mothers say. "Let's take her back to Tree Haven."
Text copyright © 2003 by Kenneth Oppel.
What People are Saying About This
"Fans of the first two books will find that this new adventure, with its compelling geography and cosmology of the Underworld, takes them places Silverwing and Sunwing never dreamed of." Horn Book

London, July 13: A 20-year-old Sikh man was kicked out of an overnight queue to watch the Wimbledon tennis championships as he apparently made other people around him "uncomfortable".
The unnamed tennis-lover took to Facebook last week to voice his anger at being thrown out and claimed it was an act of racism, cases of which have reported a rise in the wake of Britain's vote to leave the European Union (EU).
He wrote on Friday: "Kicked out of the overnight camping line for centre court Wimbledon line 'because you make some people around you uncomfortable, so we're gonna have to report you and ask you to leave immediately, sir'". "Post-Brexit racism and the overt rise of neo-facism.
Please advise how best to report this," he said. The sportsman who himself dreams of playing professional tennis was eventually allowed to enter the ground after re-queuing in the line a few hours later and made an official complaint about his treatment.
"I felt awful. I felt like I should've fought and negotiated but I backed down and silently left. I don't feel like I'm ever going back now. It's still one of my favourite tournaments but can no longer definitively say it's a lifelong dream to play on centre court," he was quoted as saying by Metro.
Dozens of people responded to his post saying he should report the "discrimination" to police. A Wimbledon spokesperson said: "We can confirm that a gentleman was asked to leave the queue at 4.42am this morning (Friday) after a number of complaints from his fellow queuers about his behaviour."
He has previously been warned about his conduct in The Queue on up to six separate occasions during this year's Championships.
"We do acknowledge, however, that in this instance the event safety staff could have provided a better explanation to him. Happily, the same person has been in the Grounds today (Friday) watching the tennis," he said.
But the man insists he did nothing that would warrant being escorted off the grounds, was not intoxicated, loud or aggressive and had not been previously warned about his behaviour.

One night we were playing poker at my house. Then, I heard a scratching on the floor in the formal dining room, like something was being dragged. Apparently, everyone heard it because everyone looked up towards that part of the house at the same time. And I laughed it off telling them it was the ghost. We blew it off. Eventually we forgot about it and I walked them out after we were done playing poker. Didn't notice until the next morning that 2 of the chairs were pulled out from underneath the table, as if someone pulled them out to sit down. This was our formal dining room where we eat in a few times a year, and the chairs are always positioned underneath the table because it drives my wife crazy to have them pulled out. Weird stuff.
I had to sleep on the ( entire family meeting at my great grandma's) couch, must have been...hmmm?..6/7 years old. I was awaken by my granny. She smiled at me, patted my head and then walked away.
We were all there because she was dying (yes she was home, nothing a hospital/doctor could do, she was 98). My mother woke me, then told me that granny had passed away in the night.
Grandma was bed ridden, no way she could have awaken me on the couch. This was no dream.
Why all the wicked so strong?
What is wrong with so many of you here? Great topic and still some of you just have to fuck it up...why? GROW THE FUCK UP..sheesh!
I know yall might knock this but when I was a teen, I always had a habit of falling asleep in church.Twice on 2 different occasions, I LITERALLY, I swear to you guys, LITERALLY felt a slap across my face that would jerk me awake. It felt like an electrical shock to put it into perspective. I never awoke like this in my whole life, it only happened in the church.
I've always held on to these experiences that tells me that death is not the end.
Has anyone ever seen a million dollars? Just because you can't see it doesn't mean it doesnt exist.
My dad's side of the family talked about seeing grandma in the pasture, but it's hard to believe many of them because they are a bunch of rednecks. It's kinda like believing rednecks who saw aliens.
However, my cousin did have some strange stuff happen in an apartment he and his girlfriend were living in. We were close as brothers at the time and he's just not the type to bullshit about something like this. There were several things he told me but the two I remember the most were him losing his shoe and some things that happened with the Christmas tree. He was getting ready for work one day and put his shoes beside the bed. He went into the other room for a few minutes and when he came back one shoe was missing. He looked everywhere for it but could not find it. He thought it was weird but just shrugged it off and went and got another pair and left. About a week went by and he came home from work to find his shoe...right beside the bed where left it initially.
With the Christmas tree it was the angel getting knocked off. Not long after they put the tree up the angel would wind up on the floor every time they got home from work. They had a cat, so naturally he figured he was the culprit. He took wire and secured the angel tightly to the top of the tree...to the point where you would have to unwire it to get it off. He came home that evening to find the top of the tree bent over and the angel...and wire...on the floor.
They moved out right after that.
credible source i know used to have a job as a janitor at a church..he once was cleaning with the place locked up and saw a woman praying through the window, once he went in there to tell her the place was closed she had disappeared and the door he came through was the only way in or out. he starts looking up and down the isles for someone ducked down hiding and nothing.
"The man who does not do his own thinking is a slave, and is a traitor to himself and to his fellow-men." -George Ingersoll
"Honor is simply the morality of superior men." -Henry Mencken
Officially Noted By Agloco
Fuzzy Fan Club: Cosmic Cowboy, TSA, Wild Cobra, Viva Las Espuelas
i tell jesus take the ouija board wheel and hold my hand and guide me safely through an answer
you are asking serious questions (congratulations!). unfortunately they are not original and have been beat to death. no need to lecture.
If he told me that honestly that shit wouldn't really comfort me.
There are currently 1 users browsing this thread. (0 members and 1 guests)

Going round to Kak Z's is becoming part of the umrah trip for me. I am sometimes too embarrassed to visit her as she treats us too well. On the first time we met her, she asked us to sleep over at her place. On the second visit, she fed us dinner, calmed us down, prayed for us and made sure we got into Mecca safely. And on my third visit, she made me cry. Not because she was mean to me but because her stories touched me.
Kak Z is a single mum of five children. The children are much older now but she recounted to us the time when she was struggling to put them through school. On one year, she was a little short of cash and it was time for the schools to reopen. She needed some money to buy new books for her eldest son but she had some difficulty withdrawing money from the bank because her ATM card was damaged. She told her son that she would buy him one book for the first day so that he can copy down what he needed for each class, and tear out the used pages for the next class. (Don't want the teacher to notice that he wasn't using a new excercise book for the new school year.) But the son, being young, grumbled and cried.
"Mum! its my first day of school! Why can't I get new books like everyone else? Do you think my friends won't notice that I will be tearing up the used pages? What if my teacher scolded me for not having all the books needed in school?"
And which mother will let her child go to school without his books knowing that his friends may make fun of him or his teachers might scold him? She searched high and low round the house but she really did not have any money at hand at that time. And it will take a few days for her to sort out the bank account card.
She was really sad, and she couldn't do much about it except to pray. She prayed to Allah to help her and her children. She prayed for him to give her strength. She prayed for him to show her the way to solve her problem.
Then she decided that she will pawn off one of her gold necklace. It was a gift from her late husband but it was more important to her that her children will go to school happy.
When she and her children open the door to go to the shops, they saw two huge cartons outside the door.
"What's this?" the boys asked.
In the boxes were new books for the school year. There were quite a few of them too! Also there were two plastic bags containing thobes (local men's dresswear or jubah in Malay.) The children were overjoyed.
"But children, these items do not belong to us. Put it back at once! Perhaps it belongs to our neighbours and some one may have put it at our doorstep by mistake!" She cried.
"But Mother look, there are two envelopes here and each envelope had our name on it," cried the elder of the boys who could now read.
"It must be ours!"
And in each envelope was $1,000. A gift literally from the sky. From a kind and nameless benefector.
"It came from Allah," she said. "Perhaps He inspired one of my late husband's friends or neighbours to be generous to us. At my darkest hour, the gifts came."
Up till today, she still doesn't know who the generous benefactor was. But the timing of the gifts was impleccable!
Her story really reduced me to tears. Because it made me realised how lucky I was and how selfish I have been. I almost blew some money on another handbag I don't need. (It was Prada afterall!) And there I was hearing the struggle of a single mother, bringing up her orphaned children.
How very selfish I have been! What am I so afraid of? Whatever difficulty I have experienced in my life, it is nothing compared to what this admirable woman had to go through!
Perhaps this was Allah's way of telling me not to be afraid. That with every problem he posed us, he will give us a solution, if we asked Him to help us.

A MAN has died after a car he was sat in went up in flames.
Emergency services were called to Frederick Street in Wombwell at around 10.45pm on Tuesday June 19
Three fire engines from Tankersley, Cudworth and Dearne attended the scene.
A car was on fire in the street with a man believed to be inside the vehicle, named locally as Mark Cornthwaite.
The fire was extinguished however the man was pronounced dead at the scene.
There are no suspicious circumstances and police are not looking for anyone in connection to the incident.
A file will now be prepared for the coroner.

So today I just received my Shures that I had been awaiting after making a decision on what would do best for a under 100$ purchase as a replacement to my Image s4s that broke. So far out of the box they have been great and sound isolation with the foam tips is superb, at a low volume I cant hear people without straining. Sound is a tiny bit more bassy but I like it that way. I would also say that cord length is great and the build quality looks very good for being mostly plastic. I will say that I really cant judge the sound yet because I haven't burned them in yet. I was also interested if anybody knows the average burn in time for these bad boys before they would be at their best?
post #1 of 1
5/1/14 at 6:49pm

When Dave Franco first watched The Room in 2013, he just didn't get it.
"At the time I was working in Boston, so I watched The Room by myself in a hotel room, which is not the way to watch that movie for the first time," he tells me. "You want to watch it with a group so you can turn to people and say, 'What the fuck is going on?' I finished that movie feeling very unsettled and not knowing really how to feel."
And honestly, that's a kind way to put it. Describing it doesn't do the movie justice, just as its official label as "the Citizen Kane of bad movies" doesn't really capture The Room's essence. So, when Franco watched it alone in his Boston hotel room, he didn't really understand how the film had become such an underground cult hit. Then he decided to go to one of those infamous midnight screenings of The Room, where people hurl plastic spoons at the screen and play with footballs in the audience.
"I immediately understood the cult status of the movie, and since then I've seen it probably 25 times, which is more than I've seen any other movie in existence," Franco said. "It was the most fun I've had at the movies since Jurassic Park. It's just such a communal experience and there's nothing else like it, where you have a group of people screaming at the screen like it's a rock concert."
Franco admits he was a latecomer to the whole scene; his brother James encouraged him to watch the movie after he read The Disaster Artist, a recount of the movie's production written by Greg Sestero, who co-starred in The Room as ("Oh hai") Mark. Soon, their appreciation for the worst movie ever made evolved into a big screen adaptation of The Disaster Artist, with James Franco both directing and starring as The Room director Tommy Wiseau, and Dave as Sestero.
Their movie is one of the most hilariously bizarre projects of the year, with a packed cast that includes Seth Rogen, Zac Efron, Josh Hutcherson, Alison Brie, Nathan Fielder, Bryan Cranston, Judd Apatow, and Paul Scheer, all playing The Room cast and production staff and other various Hollywood types. It involves meticulously recreated scenes from the original movie, and Franco as the absurd and mysterious director/star. It's a meta-meta-commentary on the film industry, creatives, and the lust of fame. It also has a lot of heart, too, made with a sincere love of the wacky, one-of-a-kind The Room.
I spoke with Dave Franco about what he learned by meeting Greg Sestero and Tommy Wiseau in person, how they obsessively recreated scenes from The Room, and what his brother's method acting was like on set.
They knew right away how they'd adapt such a weird concept to a movie.
I read Greg's book and I understood how we were going to tackle the movie. We really used the book as a template. In the book, Greg dives into his relationship with Tommy, how they met, and how The Room came about. The tone of the book is very funny and weird as you would expect. But the surprise is that it's inspiring, as well, and we really wanted to capture that in our film. We made sure to really focus on the theme of people going after their dreams and not taking no for an answer. For audience members who had not even heard of The Room, we wanted to make sure they had something to latch onto and relate to.
Tommy Wiseau had one piece of feedback when he finally saw The Disaster Artist.
Tommy was very excited about my brother portraying him. His first choice was Johnny Depp, but he was happy to settle for my brother. From there, like anyone would be, Tommy was a little skeptical. We really treated his story in a respectful way. From the beginning it was never our intention to make fun of Tommy or The Room or anyone involved in the movie. On the contrary, we wanted to make a movie celebrating Tommy and people who go after their dreams.
When Tommy saw our movie he was really happy. He said it was 99.9 percent accurate. We asked him what the .1 percent that he did not like was, and we expected him to say something like "I didn't say that" or "I didn't do that." Instead, he gave us notes about the lighting at the beginning of the film. We assured him that we would talk to our DP and make sure that he would not make any lighting mistakes in the future.
Tommy wasn't at all what some of the stories suggest.
We met Tommy face to face about halfway through production when he came to film his cameo. None of us really knew what to expect. When you read Greg's book, he portrays Tommy as a dictator on set. We didn't know if he was going to come onto our set and take control. Who knows what he could do. But he couldn't have been sweeter, and he was actually kind of shy. It was really endearing. And his scene was almost entirely improvised. He really gave himself over to it and just really wanted to help out in any way he could. He was very complimentary and very grateful just because he could see we were honouring his story in a respectful way.
Dave saw some of himself in Greg Sestero.
I met Greg a handful of times when we started filming. I really tried to pick his brain about a few things, one being why he was so drawn to Tommy and why he stuck with Tommy on this journey when everyone else around him was telling him to run. He talked a lot about when he was a young actor, everyone in his life was telling him that he couldn't make it. Then he met this guy who encouraged him and told him he could be a star. He finally found this teammate who was invaluable to him, and I can absolutely relate to that. As a young actor, you hear "no" every single day for years on end. I probably auditioned for 100 projects before I landed a single role. It's the most incredible feeling in the world when you finally land a job.
Even if everyone from the outside can see if the project you're working on is a piece of shit, you have to have this blind optimism while you're in [the middle of it] that whatever you're working on could be good. I've personally been involved in movies where people on set were talking about awards for the movie, and I bought into the hype. And then the movie would come out and not only was it not good, it was horrible. It's a weird thing about our business: You give everything you have, and there are moments where you go back and forth in your mind about if what you're doing is brilliant or a total disaster. And I will have that movie for the rest of my career.
He got used to James on set as Tommy Wiseau much faster than anyone else did.
At this point there's not much my brother can do that surprises me anymore. I adjusted to the fact that he was staying in character probably faster than most people on set. I think it took Seth Rogen two weeks to become accustomed to James walking around in character. I love working with my brother. We have very similar sensibilities and we are both drawn to projects that are outside the box, and this definitely falls in this category. When I'm working with friends and family, it makes my job easy as an actor. I feel comfortable with these people and I can take risks with them knowing that they're not going to judge me. And so people ask me what I want to be doing five or ten years from now, and the cheesy answer is: "I want to be working with people that I love."
Even though he was method acting as Wiseau, Franco wasn't an on-set dictator like The Room's director.
My brother he's the happiest when he's directing. He's like a little kid on set. He's the opposite of how Tommy is, and he's all about collaboration and he grew in the business learning from people like Judd Apatow and Seth and has really been trying to follow their model of working with a lot of the same people and building that trust where everyone on set's opinion matters and it's always best idea wins.
They had to watch a shit-ton of The Room to get the scenes accurate.
We had an iPad on set, and we would watch scenes from The Room over and over and over and over and recreate every single beat down to the angle we tilted our heads and every single breath and the inflection of every single word we're saying. It took a lot of time, but it was one of the most enjoyable parts of shooting this film. It took a lot of takes—probably more than you would imagine—but we wanted to treat it as seriously as if we were doing an intense drama. We just wanted to pay homage to a movie that we all love.
Dave unfortunately didn't learn the secrets to Wiseau's mysterious past.
Trust me: We have a lot of questions. I think that's one of the more interesting things about him, that he somehow maintains this mystery about himself. I don't even think I want to know the answers to those questions. It would take away part of his mystique. I hope no one ever finds the answers to any of those questions.

Juan Pujol, alias Garbo, was the double agent who had convinced the Germans the invasion was to take place at the Pas de Calais and not at Normandy
Oliver L. Campbell writes: I first met Juan Pujol in 1955 when I was sent to Lagunillas, on the east coast of Lake Maracaibo, to learn about oil production at the grass roots. As a bachelor, I was given a room in the “bunkhouse”, a long and narrow, wooden building built on stilts. I lived at one end and Juan Pujol lived at the other.
He always looked dapper in the quasi uniform we used to wear in those days of khaki trousers and short-sleeved white shirt, slightly starched at the Chinese laundry. I saw nothing of him at work because I worked in the Accounts Department and he gave Spanish lessons to the expatriates and their spouses.
However, sometimes when we saw one another at the Carabobo Club, we would have a drink and chat about nothing in particular. I learnt little about his personal life as he never mentioned it, but I did discover he was very anti Franco and, as a persona non grata, could not return to his native Barcelona.
The next time I saw Juan Pujol was in 1971. In the intervening years I had worked in other oil fields and also spent some time in the Caracas Head Office. But that year the powers that be again sent me to Lagunillas, as the Financial Controller. Though I did not know it, Juan Pujol had left Shell and opened up a shop in the new commercial centre. One day I needed to buy a going-away present for a colleague and entered a shop. I chose my present and went to pay for it at the till, but imagine my surprise when I saw the person taking my money was Juan Pujol.
Although I had not seen him for fifteen years, I recognized him instantly as he had changed so little. He did not recognize me, presumably because in the interim I had put on quite a few kilos. I did not make myself known, something I have since regretted, I think because I was a little embarrassed to do so.
The next and last time I saw Juan Pujol was in June 1984. We had come to the UK and my wife and I were watching the televised commemoration of the 40th anniversary of the Normandy landings. Imagine my astonishment when whose face should appear on the screen, as large as life, but that of Juan Pujol, though they referred to him all the time on the television as “Garbo.”
It turned out Juan Pujol, alias Garbo, was the double agent who had convinced the Germans the invasion was to take place at the Pas de Calais and not at Normandy. He was being feted as a hero whose actions had saved the lives of many in the allied forces. We were told he had had a special audience with the Duke of Edinburgh at the latter’s invitation.
The British government awarded Juan Pujol the MBE in 1944. It has always seemed to me this award was very little recognition for a man who did so much for the Allied cause. It is ironic the Germans were more generous and awarded him the Iron Cross. They did not find out till after the war that Pujol had deceived them. I believe MI5 was responsible for sending him to Lagunillas in order to be safe from any possible reprisals.
Juan Pujol was born in Barcelona, Spain on 14 February 1912 but after the war he lived the rest of his life in Venezuela, a country he grew to love. He died in Caracas in October 1988 at the age of 76. I feel humbled to have known such an exceptional man, a hero who for so many years kept his exploits during the war to himself.
The 60th anniversary of the Normandy landings is on 6th June 2004, so this is an appropriate time for all those who fought for the Allies, or supported the cause of freedom, to honor his memory. Barcelona, in particular, should be proud of one of its illustrious sons.

|Blogs > rm_lovehandle01 > lovehandle is on a mission|
I just got chatting to another gorgeous colleague who I thought was married, but it turns out she no longer wears the ring as she split up this year and this will be her first Christmas on her own...I was very careful not to delve too deep, but when I mentioned my sore back she immediately mentioned massge, and full body at that! Next thing we were talking about weekend and what we would be doing, as I am a devoted Dad - she mentioned she should be out buying curtains - for her bedroom! I have to admit a loss of cool at that point and volunteered to put them up...
She didn't take me up on that offer however.
Need guidance here as she has her woman's needs, but do I act as a shoulder to cry on, or just go for it?

The city has put a troubled Brooklyn charter school on probation. The operators of Williamsburg Charter High School have been told to end a contract with their charter management company, the Believe Network, because they didn't get approval first from the city.
The school was also told it violated state law by not creating a parent organization, and that some of its board members have a conflict of interest.
The city also expressed concern about the school's financial stability. It's had trouble paying the rent on its new building on Varet Street, which is now up for sale. The school, which has about 850 students according to one estimate, reportedly said enrollment fell and it didn't get as much state money as it was counting on.
The school did not return calls for comment.
Read more education stories at Schoolbook.org.

Giroud has been pushed down the pecking order at Stamford Bridge following the arrival of Timo Werner. And 34-year-old’s agent last week claimed his client had unfairly been overlooked by Lampard in favour of Tammy Abraham.
That has opened the door to a potential January move – but Lampard is adamant he sees Giroud’s future at Chelsea.
He said: “I saw Oli's agent's quotes and I thought nothing of them in a bad way, because it's normal. I know Oli very well and we can have a conversation.
"He wants to play, when he doesn't play he's an incredible support for the other players. He trains brilliantly no matter what, and we have really grown-up conversations. In January, we'll cross that bridge when we come to it.
"My first thought always has to be the strength of our squad. We'll have to see how that one goes and I'll always be honest with Oli, but I still think he's got a big contribution for us. I know that, because I know how he is.
“I don't want to get drawn at the end of November into conversations about what might happen in January, not just at the minute.”
Giroud has started just one game this season, against Tottenham in the EFL Cup.
Meanwhile Abraham has scored in three successive appearances and is forging an impressive partnership with Werner.
Lampard added: “I do have plans to have Oli. He is a very important in our squad. He was a big member of our squad last year and I think he played a lot of games and made a lot of starts for us last year.
"When you look at our games, he made a lot of league starts and I think he played a relative amount. He will always want to play more. He is a huge member of the squad for me and I know he will be important for us going forward.
“I want Oli to stay here because he will play and I have a good relationship with Oli. If he ever felt that was going to go a different way then I am happy to have that conversation with him but I want him to stay here and we will be very open both ways if that ever changed, but at the minute, he is very important to me.”
Despite Lampard’s desire to keep Giroud, he still faces a fight for more first team action, with Abraham in outstanding form so far this season.
Lampard said: "I am really pleased with him and he is playing really well at the minute.
"I have to say, I think in some parts, it got slightly forgotten how good he was in the first half of last season because he was a massive plus for us and scored a lot of goals. He was a big reason at the time that we got a lot of results and finished fourth.
"A lot of individuals will take credit and Tammy should for the first half, the second half was more difficult for him. I think that is normal for a developing player because he is still relatively young.
“At the minute now, I am clearly seeing a mirror of how he trains and how he is. He is training brilliantly, he is enthusiastic which is when Tammy is at his best. I hope that continues.”

22 May 2012
What does it mean to be innovative? Being an innovative person means you have used or shown ideas and it has permanently changed the way people do that industry. George Lucas is an iconic film maker that along with the creation of his Video Game Company, LucasArts, and film production company, LucasFilms, released the legendary film saga that is Star Wars. Not only did Lucas create some of the best films of all time but his company also created many games that were very successful, most of which based on either Star Wars or Indiana Jones franchises. Lucas for films has not only produced but also written and directed for many of the company’s big films. Lucas is just one example of how being innovative in today’s world can make you millions.
George Lucas was born in a Modesto, California, a single boy out of four children. From a young age Lucas liked to spend his time with cars. He began working and racing them as a teen. In his teen years he got his first camera and began making short films that he would share with his peers. While persueing his dreams of being a race car driver Lucas was in a nearly fatal accident that had the emmergency personnel feared for the worst. At first the personnel could not find a pulse in Lucas and thought him as dead. He was rushed to the hospital after a heartstoping find of his pulse. During his recovery lucas decided to change his path in life and instead of racing cars for a living decided to persue a career in film making. Lucas enrolled in Modesto Junior college where he earned an AA degree and developed a passion for cinematography. Lucas eventually transferred to the university of southern california school of cinematic arts in L.A. After Graduating with a bachelor of fine arts in film in 1967, he had some troubles discovering what he wanted to do next. He tried going into the military but was shot down until later when he was drafted by the Army. Upon the...

What is the significance of the Duke's visitor in the poem and what their presence reveals about the events surrounding the poem (context)?
To his guest the duke, says,
The Count your master's known munificence
Is ample warrant that no just pretense
Of mine for dowry will be disallowed;
Though his fair daughter's self, as I avowed
At starting, is my object.
Therefore, we can surmise that the person visiting the duke is an emissary for a count whose daughter the duke is pursuing. His reference to her dowry makes it clear that the duke is hoping to marry the count's daughter. In fact, he calls her his "object." He means, of course, his goal, but it is a telling word choice: the narrative makes it obvious that he cares a great deal for objects, things that he can own and control, but he cares less about actual people who have wills of their own that might conflict with his. For example, he is quite proud of the portrait of his "last duchess," but he evidently had her killed when he was unable to control her behavior to his satisfaction. He says, "I gave commands; / Then all [of her] smiles stopped together." He refused to address the behavior that bothered him: that she was made happy by small as well as great things, and she did not appreciate him more than she did any other gift given to her. Because he considers that to be "stooping" (and he will not lower himself).
In fact, the person's visit to the duke, presumably to work out the details of the dowry and nuptials, is what prompts the duke to tell the story of his last duchess in the first place. He is clearly showing this emissary around his home, focusing on the works of art that he possesses, one of which is the portrait of his now deceased wife.
check Approved by eNotes Editorial

This posting should have come AFTER the following one, but I wasn't planning my next posting ahead of time. In the top photo, Rosemary is on the left and I am on the right. In the bottom one I am on the left. My costume, which my mother made, was red velvet with sequins, hers was aqua with sequins. We both had matching "beanies" on our heads. The pictures were taken at Rosemary's house, which was next to ours, in Sarasota, Florida.
5 years ago

The former soccer star later admitted he had a girlfriend but told her the relationship “was f****d”.
Shocked Chloe, 21, had to wait until she left the house before she learned the soccer ace was actually married to lads mag star Alice Goodwin.
After she confronted Jermaine at the Big Brother wrap party, the former Stoke City player allegedly told her he was splitting from wife Alice – just a day before he was pictured enjoying a romantic stroll with her.
He has since surprised his wife of four years with extra diamonds in her wedding ring and plans to renew their vows.
In an exclusive interview with Sun Online, Chloe admitted “something physical” did happen with Jermaine in the Big Brother house after she got “caught up in the moment” while the pair shared a bed – a claim the footballer denies.
And she revealed she felt “used” and “speechless” after finding out she’d gone "beyond a kiss" with a married man.
She told Sun Online: “When me and Jermaine shared a bed one night in the Big Brother house something intimate did happen when I was under the impression he was single, however absolutely nothing has happened between us since finding out he was married during my eviction interview.
"We played the bed swapping game and I ended up with Jermaine.
"I was wearing a hoodie and knickers and we got under the covers – we each had our own duvet – and we knew we had to be discreet because all the cameras where on us.
"I felt his hands on me and I kind of laughed because I wasn't expecting it but I let him carry on because at that point I liked him and thought he was single.
“Before he confessed on secret notes in the house that he liked me from day one, I responded with “but you have a gf?” and then he told me 'it was f****d'.
“So I had to go by what he told me and trusted this.
“When I found out he was married I was speechless and shocked – I couldn’t understand how someone could confess on national TV that they like another girl, spend the whole time flirting with them and even share a bed.
“This led a young girl on and completely disrespected his wife, making me realise he didn’t care about anyone’s feelings.
“And when it goes as far as something physical happening – beyond a kiss – and then to find this out, of course you feel used.”
After their encounter, Chloe said Jermaine told her in the bathroom: "Tell no one what f**king happened" – talking about what happened in the bedroom.
Chloe said that she confronted Jermaine for the first time about his behaviour during the show’s after party – but brazen Jermaine was adamant his marriage was over – and claimed he and his wife were even selling their home.
“He said he is not yet divorced but it’s happening and his house will be for sale due to other issues between him and his wife,” Chloe revealed. "But obviously I don’t trust what he says now.”
Branding Jermaine “secretive and sly” Chloe says she is sorry for any hurt she has caused his wife but is adamant he was the instigator.
“I wish he would have been honest about his relationship status from the start instead of telling me his relationship was f****d, leading me on and taking advantage of the situation in which he knew I had to take his word for it," she said.
“He knew there was no way of me checking because we were completely disconnected from the outside world.”
Chloe said one of the most hurtful moments was when she confessed to fellow housemates that Jermaine had written flirtatious messages to her in make up – but then overheard contestant Dan Osbourne saying, “his poor missus”.
“Eventually I told other housemates about the notes he had written to me using the makeup pad and eyeliner as he told me he confessed to the notes in the confession room anyway,” Chloe recalled.
“During this interaction I overheard Dan saying ‘his poor missus’. So I decided to confront Jermaine to ask why I was hearing this when he had told me the relationship was f****d.
“However in this confrontation he avoided answering my question and said 'We will talk on the outside'.
“The fact that he was being secretive, sly and reluctant to talk in front of cameras rang alarm bells and I was up for eviction so I was scared at what I’d be coming out to.
“Everyone normally blames the woman in scenarios like these even though he is the married one, lying about his relationship status and purposely not wearing a wedding ring.
“Then moments before my eviction he asks for a private chat in the bathroom where he tells me to 'play it down’ and tell no one what has happened because he does have a missus.
“So at this point I was thinking, ‘he told me his relationship was f****d so that he could take advantage in bed and now he is telling me he has a girlfriend so I don’t tell anyone what happened between us when we shared a bed’.”
Chloe said she was terrified about leaving the house but thankfully had a great reception from the public – who appeared to recognise Jermaine had been stringing her along – despite Big Brother not airing their "intimate" moment.
Chloe admitted she did feel embarrassed that she fell for Jermaine’s charms and hooked up with him on a TV show – but felt it was important to come clean so people knew she wasn’t a home wrecker.
“Luckily when I was evicted I had an amazing response and so much support from the public as they were able to see how shady he was being and how much he had led me on with me thinking he was single.
“Viewers saw that he kept his marriage a secret from all of the housemates, only admitting to three of them that he was married 24 hours before my eviction.
“It was annoying and made me feel hurt when upon his eviction he tried to dismiss what happened between me and him in the house as ‘banter’ and ‘jokes with the boys’ when he knows it wasn’t.
“For a start he kept the notes a secret from other housemates and something happened in bed, so it wasn’t just harmless flirting and dare games as he claims.”
And the model was keen to dispel any rumours that anything has happened between her and Jermaine since leaving the house – after the pair were pictured arriving at the same hotel together.
She admits the pair took a taxi together after the CBB wrap party but says they met fellow contestant Gabby Allen, Ben Jardine and Dan Osbourne at the Village Hotel, where all the contestants were staying.
She added: “As I previously mentioned I would talk to Jermaine as a friend but certainly nothing more after finding out he was married during my eviction interview.”
And while admits while she will never be able to trust Jermaine or be romantically involved with him, she did grow fond of him during their experience on the show – and doesn’t want an “awkward atmosphere” between them.
She said: “On CBB’s Bit on the Side when Rylan asked if I will see Jermaine in the future I said no as in not romantically, however at the end of the day he was still a housemate I lived with for two weeks and spent a lot of time with in the house as I genuinely enjoyed his company and he made me laugh, so I didn’t want to hold any grudges against anybody and wanted to move forward from what happened so I thought talking as friends would be okay.
“I don’t like having any awkward atmosphere and moving forward is what I choose to do in any life situation.
“After what happened, if he was single, I would have no interest in him because trust and honesty is a very important thing for me."
After leaving the Big Brother house Jermaine admitted that his wife would "probably" be upset at how he had led Chloe on – but dismissed it as "banter".
Jermaine was unavailable for comment when contacted by Sun Online.
Source: Read Full Article

World famous writer and director Quentin Tarantino appeared on NPR’s “Fresh Air” earlier this week to discuss the opening of his new movie, “Django Unchained.” The film, which stars Jamie Foxx and Leonardo DiCaprio, follows the journey of a slave-turned-bounty hunter who is out to rescue his wife from a Mississippi planation owner.
In talking about the movie, Tarantino got into how African-American culture was a part of his life growing up. In fact, he claimed his mother dated Wilt Chamberlain in the 1970s.
“Black culture is my culture growing up,” Tarantino explained. “Yeah, it was almost like a sitcom the way we lived in the ’70s. She was in her 20s, she was hot, alright, she was a hot white girl and her best friend named Jackie was a hot black girl and her other best friend, Lillian, was a hot Mexican girl. And they lived in this swinging singles apartment with me.
“It was the ’70s. I lived with these three hip single ladies, all always going out on dates all the time, dating football players and basketball players … my mom dated Wilt Chamberlain. She was one of the thousand.”
The entire audio is available here. The host then asked Tarantino if it affected his sense of sexuality, knowing that his mother and her friends were engaging in sexual activity basically right under his nose. Unsurprisingly, Tarantino said he was perfectly cool with it and that it was fun always having the boyfriends try to win him over by buying him footballs and taking him places.
If it were any pro basketball player other than Wilt, it may come as a surprise that a famous director’s mother dated him. With how many women Chamberlain has allegedly been with, interesting tales of his sexual endeavors are not tough to come by. After all, let’s not forget what Kobe Bryant said about Wilt’s skills.
Thanks to Off the Bench for the transcriptionGoogle+

...to the point where I want to cry.
All of the criticism I get from other girls upset me because they just don't get it. To them it looks like I'm letting myself go, that may be the case because all I do is wear buns and ponytails because it's getting to be a serious task that needs more time than I have for it. Just yesterday a girl, who is natural, said to me "You've been looking a mess this year. What happened to your hair? Where'd it go" so on and so forth. I actually cut my hair above my collar bone April of 2009 and I'm not sure she knew that but the fact that she basically told me I looked a mess hurt me just a little. But I didn't let her know that I was transitioning. It's just been really hard. High school is cruel.
I've had long hair since I was little until I cut it Freshman year and every year since and it got shorter each time. In middle school I was "The black girl with long hair." It's just hard for me to imagine myself with very little hair after the BC.
During my whole transition, about 7 months, I didn't use heat on my hair because I was scared of heat damage early on. Last night I was looking at pictures of girls on Facebook and they all had long hair, some weaves, but seeing that made me feel like they were better than I was. I caved in and flat ironed my hair to show people that I really do have long hair. They don't understand that the natural hair is curly and causes my hair to appear shorter than it is.
At school today I got so many compliments on my hair, "It's so long.", "It's so pretty." It discouraged me to hear that because although that's what I wanted to show people, it also made me think that I wasn't pretty otherwise and it made me want to keep my long hair and relax it.
Here are a few length shots:
Also you can see how much my hair has grown over the past year because you can see where my highlights start. I cut my hair above collar bone and got highlights April 16th, 2009. So yeah...great growth.
This journey essentially is a struggle with myself and I feel as though I'm all alone in it.

She also said that lewd comments Donald Trump made about women that were caught on videotape were unacceptable but did not represent the man she knows.
The Republican presidential nominee was guilty of "boy talk" but was "egged on" by TV host Billy Bush, she added.
The tape prompted dozens of Republicans to drop their support for him.
In the video, Mr Trump tells Mr Bush, who was then host of NBC's Access Hollywood, that he can force himself on women because he's a star.
Several women have since come forward and accused Mr Trump of sexual assault, which he denies.
"I know he respects women but he is defending himself because they are lies," Mrs Trump said in an interview with CNN.
"I believe my husband," she said. "My husband is kind and he is a gentleman and he would never do that."
She claimed the scandal had been "organised and put together to hurt his candidacy" by Hillary Clinton's campaign team and the media.
"With the details [the media] have got, did they ever check the backgrounds of these women? They didn't have any facts," she added.
Speaking for the first since the scandal began, Mrs Trump defended her husband's conduct with women, saying he had never behaved inappropriately over the years.
Women commonly approached her husband in front of her to give him their phone numbers and behave inappropriately, she said.
Reflecting on the 2005 Access Hollywood videotape leaked to the media 10 days ago, she said: "I said to my husband that, you know, the language was inappropriate. It's not acceptable.
"And I was surprised, because that is not the man that I know."
After the taped remarks became public, Mrs Trump issued a statement saying she found the words he spoke to be offensive but she accepted his apology.
Now she believes Billy Bush, who was fired by NBC over the tape, was the main culprit.
Mr Trump, she said, "was led on - like, egged on - from the host to say dirty and bad stuff".
She also justified her husband's tactic of appearing with the women who have accused former President Bill Clinton of sexual assault.
With three weeks to go before Americans cast their vote, polls show Mr Trump with considerable ground to make up on Democratic rival Hillary Clinton in key battleground states.

UM Agencies Love their NOMADS teams!
We heard from many of our United Methodist hosting agencies this fall that their teams did great things in support of their ministries:
"The Nomads were delightful to host and incredibly hard workers. We had bad weather delays, but their spirits and attitudes remained positive throughout."
"We've always had wonderful experiences with the NOMADS, and this project was definitely no exception. They were a super team, did amazing work, and we are so thankful."
"Nomads are professional and did an amazing job on all projects! Really enjoyed having them here! Great team who really accomplished a lot!"
"Our team did a GREAT JOB! The leaders were terrific."
"We were most pleased with the entire group and the work they accomplished."
"Great team! Did a wonderful job switching gears in the cold and rain."
"They worked well together, one of the best groups of working together till the end that I have had to date."
"Outstanding! Great team. Finished projects and always ready to start another!"
"This was another great group that I cannot say enough good things about. These people are kind hearted and hard working; willing to do whatever asked and very flexible with our ever-changing plans and schedule. They worked well together and were always willing to help out wherever needed and try different tasks. Everything was completed to high standards and done with care and excellence. I appreciate their positive attitudes and smiles, and even the 'little things' that help us so much."
"This crew is amazing. Great attitude and incredible work. Love what they did and with servant heart."
"Our Nomad group exceeded our expections for the work accomplished. They worked well with our staff and offered suggestions on ways to complete tasks more effectively. They were flexible on rain days and worked the complete schedule. They were enjoyable, engaging, and agreed the projects presented were well needed and not make work projects. It was a pleasure having them on our campus."
"Very good work and participation. Everyone’s skills were put to use on the various projects. Great team. Great individuals. Great leaders. All projects were completed."
"They were great and we appreciated them very much."
"They did an excellent job. Budget was kept, work was professional, and they related well to the church."

Kyrstyn and Tony are getting married in March of this year and we got to sneak in a few pictures of the two of them between chilly days. It was a jacket on, jacket off to hurry to grab a picture kinda day. But they toughed it out and one can tell that these two have lots of love for one another. I am looking forward to their wedding day and meeting all their loved ones. Until then, here is a few of them just being them….

Perhaps one of the more unspectacular bit of transfer business made by the club in recent times was that of Kazenga LuaLua, who joined Sunderland on a free transfer back in January from Brighton & Hove Albion.
The Congolese winger never actually started a game for the club during his short spell here, though he was due to do so in the final game of the season before succumbing to injury in the pre-match warm-up, featuring only sparingly as a substitute under then-manager Chris Coleman.
And in a post on his Instagram story late last night, LuaLua held a Q&A with his followers in which he faced a question about his time at Sunderland from an anonymous source.
He was asked simply “what happened at Sunderland?” to which he replied “ask Chris Coleman, he knows the truth”.
Just what does the former Newcastle United man mean by that? Could it be that he was frustrated at not featuring more than he did? It’s certainly an answer that poses more questions than it answers.
Chris Coleman said around the time of his signing that LuaLua would feature mostly as a centre forward in his side, but the truth is that - for whatever reason - he was never really given a chance, and that’s perhaps what Kazenga is referring to.
Coleman stated more than once that he didn’t feel LuaLua was fit enough when asked the question from the press about why the wide-man hadn’t played more, so it’d be understandable if he ultimately feels frustrated about his time at the club and the lack of real opportunities afforded to him.
He did, however, follow up that post by answering another, more positive, question.
During his Q&A, LuaLua also promised imminent news regarding his future, indicating that he’s close to finding himself a new club ahead of next season - and good luck to him.
It was a shame that it never worked out better for him here, as had he remained fit he probably could have had the type of impact that many predicted - including fans of Brighton - that he might have when he first signed.

Angel's Eyes - Persian
Bio: Angel has a big personality with a big heart. She was born September 24, 2013 in Chicago. She is very smart and learns anything by showing her once. She has won 12 photos contest and also has done advertising for pet tags for A Pets Life. She will play with any toy and would make a great product tester for toys.

Perhaps more than any artist born in the 19th Century, Maud Earl is associated with the painting of pure-bred dogs. She was born into an artistic family - her father was the well-known animal artist George Earl (1824-1908), and her uncle Thomas Earl specialised in painting horses among other animals. Maud was taught by her father and quickly developed her natural talent for capturing the character of her canine subjects. She was particularly prolific and sought after, painting many of the most important dogs of her day, including those belonging to famous dog lovers such as Edward VII and the Duchess of Newcastle. She also came to the attention of Queen Victoria who asked her to Windsor to paint her favourite Collie, a breed which the Queen had been instrumental in popularising.
By 1915 Maud Earl moved to New York where she established a studio at the Volney Hotel in New York City, and continued to exhibit and complete commissioned portraits of dogs. She had already received international recognition having exhibited frequently at the Royal Academy, and held several solo exhibitions. Her work was also widely reproduced in books and in print form.
She never worked from photographs, preferring in stead to paint what she saw. She sketched the general anatomy of the dog with chalks before embarking on capturing the character of the animal in oils.

Undertrial had planned his escape
The undertrial, who outwitted the police and fled on Monday, had planned his escape well in advance. It turns out that Amrik Singh, who was produced before a court in the city, fled from his house at Guru Nanak Colony where he was taken by his aides with the consent of head constable Anil Kumar.punjab Updated: Oct 09, 2012 20:07 IST
The undertrial, who outwitted the police and fled on Monday, had planned his escape well in advance.
It turns out that Amrik Singh, who was produced before a court in the city, fled from his house at Guru Nanak Colony where he was taken by his aides with the consent of head constable Anil Kumar.Kumar had said on Monday that Singh had pushed him and had fled from the court complex.
The head constable, said the police, had made a false statement, which he later retracted.The police have booked the head constable for colluding with the accused.
Singh was undergoing the trial on the charges of attempt to murder.
Amrik's father Kulwant Singh, brother Amandeep Singh and a couple of other aides helped him to flee. The Dugri police have registered a case against all of them.
According to the FIR registered by the Dugri police, the accused was lodged in the Ludhiana Central Jail. In fact, the jail authorities had registered another case against him for illegally possessing a mobile phone in the jail on August 12 this year.
According to the police, the head constable ferried the accused to his home after producing him before the court on Monday in a car.
After reaching his house, the accused, his father, brother and other accomplices outwitted the head constable and fled in a car.
Assistant sub-inspector (ASI) Mehar Singh, who heads the staff deputed for transporting undertrials from jail to court complex, said, "Anil Kumar disappeared from the court complex. I made several calls to him, but he kept making excuses. Later, he switched off his phone."
The ASI said at around 5 pm, the head constable came to him and presented a concocted story saying Amrik had fled from the court complex after pushing him.
The officials investigating the matter said the accused had hatched the conspiracy to flee in the jail itself.
His aides, whom he had met him in the jail, helped him to escape. They were granted bail by the court some days ago.
Inspector Satwinder Singh, station house officer (SHO), police station Dugri, said the police had launched a manhunt to arrest the accused.
First Published: Oct 09, 2012 19:58 IST

A dad was left the cutest note by his 10 year old daughter and my heart is screaming. Mark Dauter left for a business trip to New York and he found a note and gift from his daughter, Tate. She gave him her Dumbo stuffed animal with a note saying that she loves him and to get her a ‘suvaneir.’ How cute is that!?
Mark posted the picture on Reddit with Tate’s full note. And to add to the cutness? Mark said he was brought to tears by his daughter’s note. MY HEART.

This year is such a "learning" time. Not only for Josh who went into the first grade in one big leap with both feet , but also for his 2 moms. Everyday is an experience....and experience that I never thought in my wildest dreams that I would be in . It is very strange to see him learning things that we have nothing to do with . Example : Yesterday he came home with a test paper where he had to circle a former president. He circled Abe Lincoln. Then he had to identify the present president. He put an X thru George Bush. We didn't teach him those things. He learned it in school.
Then as we are driving last night he asked me "Who are you voting for in the election , Mom? "
After I got over the initial shock that this was coming from my little guy in a booster seat . I told him . He then proceeded to say that , that is who he is voting for also , because they are having thier own election at school . So to take it a step further , I asked him why he would vote for this person. He then told me " Because he has more experience and good ideas" Well I guess that sums it up !
I can only imagine many conversations with Josh , we have already had some really great ones while driving to places. I know I keep saying it , but he is just an amazing little guy , one that I know is going to accomplish great things. He is so thirsty for all this place has to offer and wants to soak it all in .
There are crazy times that he also reminds me that is just 6 and can't find his socks , or remember where he left his library book . He quotes Sponge Bob scenes word for word, and he does other things that makes his Moms just shake thier heads.
But I must say ...my life would be so boring and so empty without him , I can't even imagine life without one miracle such as we have .
Peace out !
Tuesday Thoughts about....
19 hours ago

Longtime Jeopardy! host Alex Trebek is opening up about his ongoing battle with pancreatic cancer. Just weeks after revealing that he would undergo chemotherapy again after a "dismal" summer, the 79-year-old game show host spoke to Canada's CTV about his treatments and the effects they are having on his hosting abilities.
"I'm hanging in," Trebek told CTV News' Lisa LaFlamme. "So we're back on the chemo and we'll see if the numbers go down. And if they do...they can't keep doing it forever of course. They'll have to find a new protocol or whatever to administer. We'll play it by ear and keep chugging along until we either win or lose."
The Ontario native and father of two, who announced in September that his "numbers" took a concerning spike, went on to reveal the adverse effects that he is experiencing as a result of his most recent chemotherapy treatments, admitting that they are beginning to impact his Jeopardy! hosting abilities.
"I can be sitting in my dressing room and I get up and I'm not able to move, but all of the sudden when Johnny says 'And now, here is the host of Jeopardy!, Alex Trebek,' OK, let's go," Trebek said, adding that he now wears a wig on the show due to losing his hair during in the most recent round of chemotherapy. "But now it's gone again, and I'm back to wearing the creation of another man."
Trebek also explained that the chemo has caused sores in his mouth that can make it difficult for him to enunciate his words.
"I'm sure there are observant members of the television audience that notice also, but they're forgiving," he said. "But there will come a point when they (fans and producers) will no longer be able to say, 'It's ok.' ''
Still, the longtime host, who has signed on to host through 2022, says that he doesn't plan to step away from the gameshow just yet.
"I will keep doing it as long as my skills do not diminish, and they have started to diminish," he said.
In March of this year, Trebek announced that he had been diagnosed with stage 4 pancreatic cancer telling fans that he intended to fight the low survival rates. In May, he revealed he was in "near remission" and that his tumors "shrunk by more than 50 percent."
"It's kind of mind-boggling," Trebek said at the time. "The doctors said they hadn't seen this kind of positive result in their memory…some of the tumors have already shrunk by more than 50 percent."
Trebek has been the host of Jeopardy! for 35 years, taking over from host Art Fleming in 1984.

Personal Story: Rebecca
My name is Rebecca Sue and I have had God as part of my life for the last 22 years. I grew up with one parent that believed in God, and one that didn’t, so initially wasn’t convinced that God was real. My mum took my brother and I to church every Sunday and all I wanted to do was stay at home and watch tv. As I got older I noticed that there was something different about the friends I had at church compared to those I had at school but I didn’t know what it was. I decided to start paying attention at church to see what was going on as my mum never pushed any ideas onto us, it was completely our choice.
I decided to give God a chance to prove himself to me in case it was all true. I was shown in the bible that I could have a one-on-one relationship with God and He would make himself known to me through a personal experience – He would fill me with His Holy Spirit and I would speak in other tongues as a result (brand new/ unique language you have not learnt, just as the disciples had on the day of Pentecost). After praying on and off for a few years, not really convinced, I decided one day to dedicate the day to focus on prayer and give God a solid opportunity to show me He was real. That day I received the Holy Spirit and spoke in tongues for the first time and ever since then I have had a peace and confidence unmatched by anything else that the world and this life could offer. I still speak in tongues every time I pray to God, it is a direct line to God that reminds me of His sacrifice and that He lives within me and is there as a comforter anytime I need it. I was also baptised by full immersion in water, as per the Bible’s instruction, to represent commencing a new chapter of life with God.
Since that time God has done many amazing things in my life, but the biggest gift is the peace of mind through all this life’s challenges. Specifically, going through a divorce and job loss and house loss all at one time; being ‘let go’ at 3 other jobs during trying economic downturns; dealing with excessive work pressure which led to anxiety (which I am told never goes away but has for me!); managing significant health issues, including – ovarian cyst; stomach parasite; digestive problems which lasted over 10 years, to now being completely healthy!
My most recent blessing has been during the COVID-19 outbreak phase. I was employed at a large travel business and my work announced that job cuts would be made in the coming weeks. In preparation, I went home that night to start looking at jobs online. As it turned out I had a LinkedIn invite from a recruiter that was sent that day. I responded to it not knowing if it was just a general connection invite given the market was probably slow. The recruiter responded the next day with a potential job offer. I applied and was interviewed before my business made the announcement that I would be ‘stood down’ (still employed but no pay, no redundancy and no prospect of future employment). The very next day I was offered the new role to start in 2 weeks. My colleagues were all dealing with excessive stress around the job losses but God had given me a way out and emotional strength to deal with the scenario confidently and I was able to share this with everyone around me.
Friends and family alike have been amazed when they have heard that I have been through all these experiences and am as happy, confident and unscarred as I am. It is only through God’s strength that I am this way. I would highly recommend God and His Holy Spirit experience to anyone – it is the only way to live!
Rebecca – Brisbane Revival Church
June 17, 2022
April 20, 2022
April 18, 2022

By Elizabeth Gracen:
If you have an Instagram account, you've seen the sheer variety of content created by people from all walks of life from all across the world. Being a visual person, it is my favorite social media platform, and I'm constantly coming across a fascinating feed that captures my imagination. THE FEED is our newest series on Flapper Press and features curators and their approach to creating their unique Instagram feeds.
This month, I reached out @facesofyesteryear.
What caught my attention about this particular feed was the mystery behind the faces posted. It begged several questions: Who are these people? Where did they come from? And who is the interesting person behind this curation?
EG: First of all, thank you so much being part of this new series on FlapperPress.com. Your Instagram feed is chock full of wonderful vintage photographs. Please share a little bit about yourself and how you got started with the curation of your Insta account.
Sarah: Hi my name is Sarah, and I live in Oregon and have my entire life. I grew up on a farm. I am married to one of my childhood friends and best friend. We have two dogs, a black Pug named Wednesday, who is 9 months old, and Senior Shelter, who is brown and a total mix breed we rescued when he was nine, and he is currently sixteen going on seventeen. We also have three cats: Tiberius (orange striped and white), Eevee (black), and Navi (tuxedo). I work as a Direct Support Professional with people with developmental disabilities, helping them with what they need help with so that they can be as independent as possible. I love my job because I truly think the person I support is one of the most wonderful, strongest people I have ever met, and it's an honor for me to help them.
I started collecting and researching photos in January 2020, but have always enjoyed going through old steamer trunks, so old they were full of memories of people my grandmother couldn't even remember. I thought that it would be cool to try to figure out who people were, so I got into genealogy. I have researched several friends, my own and my husband's family, so future children will know where we come from. I started the @facesofysteryear account on Instagram on May 20, 2020, as a way to share my ever-growing collection with other people and share the stories of the people in the photos when possible. Many times there is not enough information to research; however, my favorite thing is piecing someone's life together with as many details as I can find. It's a rush to put all the pieces together.
EG: When I scroll through your images, I see that almost all of them have unknown origins and names. I’m assuming that you have a fascination with vintage photography, but please tell me what attracts you to these particular images.
Sarah: The images that attract me the most are photos with names on the back that I can research, photos of people with animals, and photos of couples—especially weddings. However, I collect photos of people specifically, and I don't discriminate if the photo is of a person and is either antique or what I consider vintage (anything before I was born). I find faces compelling.
EG: There is something so mysterious about old photographs—especially black-and-white photos. Where do you find them and how do you decide which ones to post? Do you post daily?
Sarah: I have gotten my photos from family, friends, antique shops, flea markets, and online. I weirdly feel like I am rescuing the image from not being seen. I am interested in photos of people, so if a photo doesn't have a person in it, I would most likely not purchase it even if it was a cool location or an object. That is just not what I collect. I organize into different categories and try not to over-post from one category more than others so that everyone can see an image they enjoy that day. Hopefully. I usually post daily, but occasionally I won't post; but as this is my biggest hobby and something I enjoy doing for fun, I try to do it as much as I can.
EG: What do you learn from the photographs that you curate for your account? What can we all learn from them?
Sarah: I have learned that at the end of the day, people want to be connected with someone. They want to stay close to family or move and find their place and find their people. People want to be successful, have someone or something important, and want to find "home," whatever that is to them. I hope that people can recognize that everyone wants happiness, safety, and fulfillment . . . and that's what it is to be human. And I have learned that we can absolutely connect with an image of someone you have never met.
EG: You have a passion for looking back. Do you think it’s important to understand our history?
Sarah: I do have a passion for history and feel that knowledge of history is important so that we don't allow ourselves to make mistakes that others have made. We can learn from their examples. We can gain inspiration from their lives to live in ways we feel good about when we lay down to sleep at night. That's why I like sharing the stories of regular people for the most part. They are more relatable and deserve to be remembered, as everyone does. We can learn from everyone in history.
EG: Finally, do you care if people “follow” or “like” what you are posting? Would you keep doing it even if no one responded? Why do you like engaging in social media? Are you active on other platforms?
Sarah: I want people to like and follow if they enjoy what I share. If they don't, that's okay. There are lots of pages they may enjoy more. I don't take it personally. And, yes, I would still be doing this if no one responded, because I enjoy going back through and looking at the photos on my feed and rereading my research, because it makes me feel accomplished. I like engaging on social media because I feel like sharing these photos is important and something harmless that brings people interest or joy.
EG: Thank you so much for sharing your story and your passion. Would you please tell me about some of the images you have curated?
Sarah: Of course! These are just a handful, but I think they are special.
Sylvia Juanita Jones. I received the images of her in a photo lot from Ebay. I found her name on some images and the location on another and was able to find her—which was amazing given how common a name "Jones" is.
Sylvia Juanita Jones, born September 9th 1921 in Rushmore, Virginia, was the eldest daughter of Mamie Cypress who was only 13 when she had Sylvia and Fred Yarbrough who 20 at the time of her birth who wed in 1923 they had another daughter together Helen Louise in 1924. Mamie remarried in 1928 to Charlie Jones who was the man who raised Sylvia she and Helen they were given his last name that was their Daddy. More siblings were born Dorothy 1928, Charles Jr 1933, Frank 1938, and Rose Marie 1940. In 1940 Sylvia was 18 living at home and working as a housekeeper. She never married. She had 2 daughters Jacqueline and Darlene and 2 sons James and Clyde Jr. She was a Baptist and member of Antioch Missionary Baptist Church in Norfolk City, Virginia. She had worked in Moving and Storage. When she was 69 she had a heart attack and passed at her home in Norfolk City March 13th 1991. She is laid to rest at Roosevelt Memorial Park in Chesapeake, Virginia.
(Left to Right)
First 2 photos taken when she was 16 in '37 or '38
Next 2 photos would have been taken during her 20s in the 1940s
5th photo taking a break from washing her car
7th photo with her parents and siblings and a few significant others and children; she is the lady holding the smallest child
8th photo she is the lady in the white dress kneeling behind 3 children; unsure on everyone's relationship here
9th photo blurry but sweet photo of her holding one of her children
Emma Farrar. I found her on Ebay as well. I was excited by this image because her name and the name of her father were written on the back, which was helpful research-wise.
Emma Farrar was born in November 30th 1915 the 4th child of 7 in the family of Robert Farrar a farmer and Ida Powell the family lived and farmed in Buckhorn, Virginia. Sometime after 1920 the family moved to Hackensack, New Jersey She married Julian McCoy Sr. and then married someone with the last name Gibson. She had 2 children— Juanita and Julian Jr. She had 4 grandchildren and 5 great grandchildren at the time of her passing. She had worked as a domestic servant before she retired. She was a member of Mount Zion Baptist Church in South Hackensack and she was a senior member of the usher board there. She was a member of both the Hackensack and New Jersey chapters of Order of the Eastern Star. Emma entered into rest Christmas Eve 1990 she was 75. This photo was taken in 1933 when she was 18 years old.
James Milton (nickname "Butch") Jones was from a different photo lot and no relation to Sylvia that I am aware of. He is the only person that I have researched that I know for certain was murdered.
James Milton "Butch" Jones was born November 4th 1941 in West Virginia the son of Roy a coal miner and mother Violet Prunty he had 5 older siblings and 4 younger half siblings. His father Roy died at 59 when Butch was 15. When he was 18 on June 1st 1960 to 17 year old Shirley Mae Harvey. They were married less one year. He remarried when he was 24 to 19 year old Blanche Beverly Ferguson on March 9th 1966. Butch worked as an Orderly at Bluefield Sanitarium/nursing home. On January 15th, 1969, he was murdered. He was shot in the chest with a 32 caliber pistol after he and Paul Alexander Martin age 29 were arguing over a woman he died shortly afterwards he was 27 years old.
Mary Adams (nickname "Addie") Harp. She seemed to be the rock and caretaker in her family and had beautiful doe-like eyes.
Mary Adams "Addie" Harp was born in New Castle, Delaware in 1842 and was baptized on January 28th 1843 in the Presbyterian church there. She was the second born child of Robert a Blacksmith and Mary. She had an older sister Catharine 1841, younger sister Eliza 1847, and younger brother Henry 1851. In the 1860s the family moved to Philadelphia, Pennsylvania in 1870 where her father was still employed as a Blacksmith, she and her sisters were making clothes and their brother was working in a music store. By 1880 her older sister had married and moved out and their father was dressing tools, their mother was dying of tuberculosis and entered into rest October 30th 1880, and Addie was taking care of her and the house along with her younger sister, and their brother was a clerk in a store. This photo was taken on January 1st 1881 when she was about 39. In 1889 she lost both her brother in February and then her father in March. In 1900 she and her sister Eliza were living together alone I was unable to find records for them after this point.
Lewis Franklin Walker. There was a 37-year age gap between his first-born child and youngest child.
Lewis Franklin Walker was born January 31st 1866 in Elgin, Illinois. He had a brother 2 years older than he was named Charles and his mother was Louisa his father Eugene was a farmer. He lived in Elgin until he was 23 years old he moved to Kansas where he met his wife Ida Garben who was the same age as he was they married in 1889 they had 3 children together Walter November 1889, Floyd February 1893 and Maude March 1895. They moved back to Elgin before their children were born. Lewis was working as a Teamster in 1900 and 1910 census by 1910 he had lost his wife and was a Widower his adult and teenage children and his 67 year old mother were living with him still in Elgin. On April 29th 1916 after he had moved to Reliance, South Dakota he married for the second and final time when he was 50 to Myrtle Louise Meyers a widow 20 years his junior. In 1920 Lewis was farming in Butte, South Dakota living with his wife, his mother, his eldest son, his stepsons Alvin Meyers who was 10 and Harold Meyers 6, he and Myrtle also had 2 sons by 1920 Eugene born 1917 and George 1919. In 1930 they had moved to Hebron, Illinois and Lewis was still farming he and his wife had 3 more children Orville 1921, Dorris 1923, and Ethel 1926. All 5 of their children lived with them along with Myrtle's mother. By 1940 he, Myrtle and their children had moved to Spearfish, South Dakota where he lived for the rest of his life. He had done Carpentry work in his later years. At the time of his death he had 12 grandchildren and 3 great grandchildren. Lewis entered into rest on May 30th 1952 after a long illness he was 86. This image was taken in 1936 when he was 70.
Check back next month for another curated exploration of THE FEED!

Yesterday I got to try Bawai. They have two establishments here in Manila and this branch is their newest. They also have one in Nuvali and Tagaytay. I went here for a snack around early afternoon. I was actually looking for cold dessert but ended up having their warm offerings.
Che Dau was my favorite pick since am I like beans and coconut milk. This one is a must have at Php 80, it’s not too sweet as well and has a nice stick to it. Che Bap was just okay, sticky rice with corn and coconut milk. I found it too heavy.
For entree, I was not impressed with their Vietnamese sandwich, Bahn Mi. Its baguette not crunchy and too thick, its filling not too tasty and also lacked pork meat. It’s definitely pricey at Php 260.
For a drink, Tamarind Juice was a novelty with pieces of tamarind but a shake would have been more conclusively interesting taste wise.

Anger/Unability to accept reality Problems with 13 year old girl
My name is Moria and I'm here because I am worried about my 13 1/2 year old daughter. I feel as if though she has a very low self esteem and gets paranoid/anxious over little things...she is also very negative. I have a feeling that she might have anxiety disorder and she shows anger attacks over little things especially when she does not get what she wants.
she does not want to listen to any rules in the house or anything my husband and I tell her. She gets physically abusive and threatens to kill herself/runaway whenever anything is forced on her. When she doesn't get her demands fulfilled, she doesn't let anyone live in peace. So my husband is very scared and bends over backwards to try and "save" her.
Yesterday, my husband took her to a counselor under the pretense of getting her anger problem corrected (she admits she has an anger problem-that's a good sign isn't it?) and the question of school was brought up. She will be going into 9th grade next year. However, she wants to go to School X (which is near where she went to Junior High School and a lot of her friends will be going there). We live about 5 miles away from that area and it is in quite a run-down/"ghetto" area. However, her transfer request to that school was denied because School X is full. School Y is literally in front of our house and is within walking distance it is brand new and is in a better area (even with budget cuts, the school easily looks like a private high school). However, she says she will not leave her friends and will not go to School Y at all.
She is unwilling to accept the reality that her transfer request was denied by the PYLUSD and she thinks she can make a fit in front of the school counselors (who have visited our home when she refused to go to school on the last day of 8th grade) and they will convince the Child Welfare and Attendance (CWA) department to bend the rules somehow or she might throw a fit/be difficult and my husband might talk/bribe the CWA district office to accomodate her into the school of her choice.
The main reason she was in the area of school X was because she did her elementary in that area (because she was a GATE student). Her grades dropped after elementary and she was no longer in the GATE program. During the summer of 2008, she did the same thing with us. She wanted to go to the Junior High of her choice and would not budge. We tried to get her to go to a private junior high and she went for the test, but she said she would not go (she was less difficult and stearn than she is now).
However, now her friendship connections have gotten stronger and she is against going anywhere with us outside of the house at all. She only wants to go and be with her friends. By the way, her friends have never come to our house and she only goes to them with the movies, etc. She says that she will be truant and will demand that my husband quit his job to homeschool her if it comes to that. Or she demands that we get an apartment near the school so she can go there.
The skye can fall to the ground for all she cares. She doesn't care about the fact that my mom just had a stroke (she is still living with us) but she will scream, yell, vandalize/damage our home until she gets what she wants. My husband bought her a bike a few months back just for exercise purposes, but when she gets angry at us, she takes it and says she won't come back. My husband then takes the car to go after her and tries to talk to her for a few hours and they don't come back until early in the morning.
I honestly don't know what to do at this point. School starts September 7th, and her response has not changed. The orientation for freshman is on Wednesday at 8AM, and she is not waking up anytime before 12 PM (b/c she sleeps at 2AM since she is chatting/texting on laptop)these days because she is under the impression that everyone will have to give in to her tantrums and let her do whatever she wants. She is totally out of control and uses vulgar language as part of her dialogue with anyone (f-word, b-word, c*nt, etc.)
The orientation is not mandatory, but it will help to get things started on the right track for her when she starts school...should I push for her to go or call the police if she refuses.
On the first day of school, should I call the police and report her as truant if she does not go willingly. If she is so adamant for homeschooling, can the law require us to provide it to her by quitting our jobs? She has to be in school and there is no excuse for that...are there any private/millitary schools that we could possibly force her into. We are in the Anaheim, California area.
I am very concerned about talking to her myself on this matter as she completely looses control whenever she gets angry and has the ability to harm others or herself.
I am very scared about the coming weeks and I don't know what it will do to my other children. She is physically very strong and can pull off almost anything. She just doesn't accept that budget cuts,School X is full and she thinks that we purposefully orchestrated it so that she couldn't go.
She has made me give up my rights/role as a mother because I'm so afraid of the abuse I will put up with when I try to talk to her. Do you think that this is a cause for psychiatric concern and needs to be treated with being committed to some type of a treatment center? Or is this just a case of a spoiled child?
If psychiatric care is needed, would we need to have some type of insurance. She's my little girl and I love her with all my heart and I just want her to be okay no matter what happens. She really hates me a lot and says it constantly. Because I try to be tough on her and try to make her do things (which never works out). When she is asked to something she doesn't want she explodes in rage. Today, I asked her to go for a walk with me in the evening, she said No and I said come on you never do anything with me, and she then shook the coffee table and broke a glass. She ran upstairs and I followed her and told her she couldn't do this. She then started calling me a B**** and said that she would break my face as well.
I am very scared for her and of her at this point. Our family is falling apart because of this. I feel like I've lost my daughter. Honestly, school starts on Tuesday and we still haven't gotten the courage to pick up her schedule as she won't budge...she is just continuously crying and saying she won't do it. She is threatening us by saying she will get expelled from the school if it comes to do that.
I am so sorry for the long post, but I just needed to vent my concerns and perhaps local moms have any advice or know of any type enforcement/center that can help us. I appreciate any advice.
I'm not sure what to do at this point.
Thanks in advanc

1995 Madball promo test, photo courtesy of: Matt Henderson
If you've been following along, you know this has been a great interview. If not, go check the previous installments. Plenty of AF and Madball talk here. Enjoy. -Gordo DCXX
Relativity Records: It’s a known fact that you guys (AF) weren’t happy with them later on, but at the moment, how was the relationship with the label? What other labels were you guys looking at back then?
When we did that record I didn’t know anything about the business and just thought it was kind of cool to be on a label that could pay for our recording and actually print up CDs, get ads in magazines, etc. Roger really dealt with them as it was his deal long before I got in the band, so that question is better for him to answer. I do remember some good people working with us though that I still talk to today like Bill Wilson (Blackout), Howie Abrams (Madball’s first Road Runner rep) and Brian Freeman. Another thing I remember was that we were the first band that they decided not to release on vinyl, and only on CD. That was a big deal for the hardcore scene to bitch about and we were kinda pissed.
The back ups: Biohazard, Armand, Wrecking Crew: Tell us more about your relationship with those bands/guys.
Armand was really good friends with Craig and was actually working at the label at that time. He is a really good musician and would hang out with us a lot while we worked on the record and was always a good guy to bounce stuff off of. I knew Wrecking Crew pretty well because they did a summer tour in 1988 and when they hit Mpls they had van problems that forced them to stay at one of my friend’s house for a week or so and we hung out a lot then. When I moved to Boston we reconnected and I used to tag along with them when they played shows. So when we did the record in Rhode Island it was an easy trip for them to make and come help out. The rest of the AF guys knew them as well from doing shows together so that was cool.
Biohazard and AF had established a relationship from doing a lot of shows together around then and they were able to make the trip as well. That was one of the better memories I have being in the studio and everybody had a good time. Plus, I think the backups are one of the better sounding things on that record, so thanks to those guys for helping out.
Matt with Agnostic Front in 1992, Photo courtesy of: Matt Henderson
Last Warning: tell us more about that last show at CB’s. What were the other bands like that day? Especially Dmize? Tell us what you remember about that band in general?
That was a good day and a great show. Roger was really intent on getting the right bands to play with, not only to have a good show, but to give the bands he thought deserved the opportunity to play a show at a time when there really wasn’t a lot of shows going on, and to help out friends. It was sort of saying “this is our last show, but everybody needs to realize that these other great bands are out there playing still and need your support." I really liked Dmize. I was just starting to get to know Hoya and he played their latest demo with “Soul Search” for me and I dug it. They also did a cover of Black Sabbath’s “Zero the Hero” which was real cool. The other bands that stood out for me that day were Merauder and Cold As Life – R.I.P Big Rawn.
During Infiltrate, you hear Roger calling out Minus for doing the crucial underwear mosh. Any good stories about Minus? Any other NYHC characters you’d like to reminisce about?
So, yeah, Minus was in his underwear. That was his thing, or at least at about every show I would see him at. My stories about Minus are that he was always a really respectful guy to me and anyone around me, whether he had his pants on or not. As far as other characters in NYC, there are just too many to mention, and most of the rumors you hear about them are all probably true, unless they include random acts of violence toward innocent people. There were acts of violence, but 99.9 percent of the time people were asking for it when it came their way so it wasn’t random and nobody was innocent.
AF played the official last show at CB’s but you guys did a Farewell tour in Europe shortly after, what do you remember of that tour? Europe always had a lot of respect for NYHC bands in general, any opinions on that?
That was a great tour for us, and so much different than that first tour that I mentioned earlier. It made me regret the end of the band a little because the shows were so good. I don’t really know why Europe as a whole is so much more receptive to American/NY Hardcore but clearly it hits a nerve with the people there and I definitely appreciate their support.
Matt, Roger and Vinny with Agnostic Front, 1992, Photo courtesy of: Matt Henderson
What was your initial reaction when you learned that AF was going to be breaking up? What were your plans then? Madball had already put out something in 89 but when did you join Madball exactly and when were the Droppin’ Many Suckers songs written?
The initial reaction I had was “it's time." I felt like we really put our hearts into what we were doing but we were all a little burnt out and had gone through some rough times for real. One of the smartest things I think Roger did was to encourage us to do a Madball EP and release it for that tour. On our first tour in Europe in 1990 there were a lot of people asking “where’s Freddy Madball??!!” and showing up with the seven inch for signatures, etc., so it was obvious that it made a big impact out there.
And because Freddy was in NYC in 1992 and he would travel with us we thought we could bring him to Europe for that last tour as well. So we put some music together and Freddy wound up using a lot of lyrics out of a notebook of Roger’s with stuff that he had written while he was locked up. I loved writing those songs because it was more simple and straight forward stuff and was nowhere near as technical as the AF songs would get. We recorded at Don Fury’s spot in like 2 days and that was it. We actually played two sets every night on that European tour opening for ourselves as Madball, with Roger on bass and Freddy singing. We would always say shit like, “yo we just want to give a shout out to AF for hooking us up and letting us use their gear for the show”, or “shout out to AF – great guys except for that bass player – he’s a real dick” because Craig was always on the side of the stage and it was fun to break his balls. I don’t know if people got the joke or not but we had a good time with it.
Another Voice: how did you feel about the record? What was your involvement in it? Do you feel like it’s actually another One Voice?
Originally the goal was to get Craig and Willy involved but it just didn’t happen, and without them it is hard for me to consider that record a true continuation of One Voice, but I had a good time with it and I think the record came out good. It was a good opportunity to play guitar again and work with Roger.
What’s the most important thing you learned while playing in AF?
What a good rhythm section is all about. Bass, guitar and drums locking it down. No band should be without it.
What was the best/worst thing about playing with AF?
The best thing was becoming friends with those guys and joining the NYHC family.
The worst thing had nothing to do with the band itself, it just wasn’t a great period for hardcore. People who used to go to AF shows all grew up and started going to school (like me) or started to play in bands that sounded like Quicksand, or Stone Temple Pilots, or some Emo garbage and thought that hardcore wasn’t cool anymore. They changed their minds later on but it took a few years and a few Madball shows to kick them in their asses.
Agnostic Front hang out 1992 on the Obituary tour, Photo courtesy of: Matt Henderson
Tell us about the transition from AF to Madball and about who came up with the idea that Madball should be full-time/serious band?
So after we came back from that European tour and AF was over Roger headed to Miami to become a Harley mechanic and I decided to head back to Boston to finish school because I didn’t have anything else going on in NYC full time. We did have the DMS 7” out though and we figured why not just have fun and play shows on weekends. Hoya was brought in at that time to fill the bass player slot. It was a good reason for me to go to NYC on the weekends and be with my friends and we had good time doing it.
The shows were really small because not much was going on in the city at that time. The goal was not to take it to a “professional level” at all until we got approached by Howie who was at RoadRunner and he wanted to sign us and have us do a full length. I had a hard time deciding if that was really what I wanted to do because of all the shit that AF just went through, but I really liked playing the Madball songs, and once I started playing with Hoya and got a feel for his style – he writes some amazing shit – I thought that it was a good opportunity. For me it was a little like getting a chance to start fresh. Madball already had a name obviously, but they were only known for two EPs, one of which I wrote the majority of the music for, and I wanted to keep going with it musically.
You basically were active during what people often consider the worst years of HC (early/mid 90s to end of 90s). Tell us your take on that era (the rise of vegan straight edge, shitty screamo/political bands): do you feel like it got away from the roots too much? Some great records were written in that era (you guys, Crown Of Thornz, Merauder, Blood for Blood, Breakdown), did anything stand out then that you remember?
I agree that the early 90s were a bad time. That was a backlash to the late 80s peak. 1990 was all about “post-hardcore” with ex-members of well known hardcore bands starting new bands like Quicksand, Fugazi, and Into Another. Some of that music was ok, but I always felt like there was an attitude along with it like “hardcore is over and we are playing real music now.” I didn’t go for that shit so I listened to metal more at that time. Slayer had Seasons In The Abyss which was a great record.
Then there was the beginning of the whole Social Distortion greaser/cowboy fantasy which I really hated. Social Distortion’s first record in 1982 was a great punk rock record, but all of a sudden that “Ball And Chain” shit started and everbody started cuffing their jeans and sticking a big comb in their back pocket and I wanted no part of it. That’s what made being in Madball in 1993/1994 a lot of fun. We were all about “Fuck you. We like playing hardcore.” And we were good at it.
We would play these real small shows back then that were made up mostly of our friends, a lot of whom were done with hardcore but came to our shows because they wanted to see old friends. Eventually, people started digging the music and by 1995 I felt like the scene was thriving again. It was in the city anyway, with a good mix of young blood and the old timers all at the shows. We had Madball, 25 Ta Life, Merauder, Bulldoze, Vision Of Disorder, and H20 all playing shows together. New Jersey had Fury of Five, Boston had 454 Big Block, Blood for Blood, Ten Yard Fight and others. There was Powerhouse and the Hoods on the West Coast, so it felt like a scene to me. The Midwest didn’t have much going on from my memory, but the Northeast and CA were real good.
Original artwork for 1994 Madball logo, courtesy of: Matt Henderson
Take us through the Madball discography (favorite song on each album, best/worst thing about each of those records, etc.). Ball Of Destruction: you weren’t on the record but what did you think of that record the first time you heard it?
Fucking great! It was like a continuation of Victim In Pain and hit the nail on the head.
Droppin' Many Suckers: how did you like recording with Don Fury? I still think this is one of the hardest seven inches ever written.
Don Fury, the man, the legend….. I hate the way that recording sounds but I love those songs. I don’t really think that recording does those songs justice. I have a cassette somewhere of us doing those songs live on the radio in Jersey, WSOU, right before we went on that last tour and it sounds amazing. We used to write in this crappy little rehearsal studio in SoHo called Giant and the equipment was shit but it added to the rawness.
We would work on getting our music together and Freddy, who would show up when he got out of high school for the day, would sit in the corner with his book bag and work with Roger’s notebook and add or erase stuff. Then when he said that he had something that might work we would start the song and he would grab the mic and scream and bounce off the walls and those songs totally came to life. Freddy had a lot of anger and energy back then and it all came out real clear.
When we did those songs in Europe people were actually a little afraid of us and especially Freddy. Freddy would just put it right in everybody’s face and people would have to take a few steps back. Good times.
Matt with Madball at the Marquee in 1994, Photo courtesy of: Matt Henderson
How was the relationship with Wreckage Records?
I think it was a win-win for both sides. We did Droppin’ Many Suckers for dirt cheap and I am sure they got their money back and then some. We got a lot of seven inches up front to sell and had no expectations from them beyond that.
Did you even think that some of the songs would stand the test of time they way they did?
I didn’t really think about it that way. I was just looking to have fun playing some straight up hardcore with my friends.
Set It Off: one of the 3 most important records of the 90s.
This is when I feel we really started to become a true band. I really enjoyed writing music with Hoya because his style had such a groove and he would write these riffs that would force me to step it up as well. I remember being in Boston and I called him up to check in and he was like “yo, I think I got a new song for the record,” and he played the opening riff to Set It Off over the phone with his cheap guitar and shitty little practice amp in his bedroom and I was blown away. That was the start of the transition from the Ball of Destruction/DMS real raw style to the more groove-oriented stuff that I really liked about Madball.
Madball in Belgium, 1996, Photo courtesy of: Matt Henderson
What do you remember the response/reaction to it in the scene?
Once again, I didn’t feel like people were getting what we were doing right away. I remember doing the song Set It Off for the first time live before the record came out and people just stood there and looked at us. I don’t really know why. I remember heading to Argentina right after the record came out – we had connections there from the AF days, and we played it for some friends that were AF fans and they would say “its really interesting…..? Aside from Sick of It All, who were on the road a lot and didn’t play NYC much at that time, I felt like we were the only ones trying to do real, mean, tough, hardcore. I think it took people a minute to figure it out.
Tell us about being on Roadrunner.
Being on RoadRunner was cool and that label was really good to us. They had their office just a few blocks away from Vinny’s apartment and we would just show up there all the time and bullshit with everyone. I know all of the DIY people think we were on some big metal label and it probably turned some people off, but that label and the people who were a part of it were very down to earth, knew the scene, loved heavy music and believed in what we were trying to do.
Now, they are a business so of course they did what they could to make their money but what fucking label doesn’t? I can guarantee that the more trendy labels that are popular in hardcore are the same way, so don’t be fooled. If you really think that other labels are more interested in the artists and are more grass roots, you are confused. More bands get ripped off by “friends” or “indie” labels than labels with contracts and lawyers.
Madball in Europe drawing beards on their own promo posters, Photo courtesy of: Matt Henderson
Wednesday, February 17, 2010
Posted by DOUBLE CROSS at 8:23 PM

My carrot I started at mum's shop the other day when I had to go there for a little while. I had a pattern that I couldn't figure out so I just tried it out freestyle! Guess it kind of worked! I was pretty impressed with it anyway, & so was BJ who wanted to eat it of course. Better not let the dog have it as she loves carrots & she will run away with it. If I can find the pattern again I will link it, but I am not sure where it is now. I did follow the carrot top pattern that was there though. I found it just by googling crochet carrot.
The blue & green egg I did today. Um... well that is debatable. Is 6am really today or last night? Yes I was up by then, in fact I had already been up for an hour & had 2 cuppas so thought I had better do something productive but quiet. So I did the egg that I had seen the pattern for the other day. It's here at Kundhi. I think mine is a bit bigger than it should be but I just went with what I had in scrap & it's a good size anyway to play with!
Now I have become a florist. What do you think of my beautiful bunch of flowers? The 5 small ones on the right are from Lucy's cool blog. The big one under them is from a book from the library, Crochet Scarves. I probably won't make any scarves out of it but I had to do the flower. I think it is my favourite flower of them all. The rest of the flowers I just made up as I went so they are all a bit different. Some are good & some are ok... I don't think any of them are terrible at least.
Most of the flowers if not all are destined for a new home. They are going to be used somewhere quite different I think. We'll see, as they may be too big for their intended use. Stay tuned though as I may be able to show you sometime where they end up.
So that's my afternoon. Flowers. BJ has been sleeping & sleeping so that's good as that is the best for him. When he wakes up we have a bunch of The Wiggles dvds from the library to watch. Good timing with a 4 day weekend ahead! Hopefully he is better soon though. Also hope the big fella is better soon. It will be a crappy weekend for him otherwise but it may also be what he needs to get over this virus.
Flowers are red young man,
& green leaves are green.
There's no need to see flowers any other way
Than the way they always have been seen.
Flowers are Red - Harry Chapin

A home is more than a house. That adage encapsulates the larger reality of the meanings of both words. For the past 55 years our family home has been in a house that originally was the home of Pelham Delano who came here from the metropolis of Warsaw, Virginia, that is, and not Poland.
After his death, the property passed to his daughter, Mae, and her husband, Marvin Dameron. Towards the end of her life, after her husband’s death, she sold the farm, and it went through several hands prior to our family’s arrival.
Pelham’s other daughter, Emily, and her husband, James Gilliam Conley, lived slightly more than the proverbial stone’s throw away, and on that farm they raised their 10 children. Perhaps the most prominent of whom was Sam Conley, who with his wife, Snooks, ran the country store on the corner in Wicomico Church. They were far more than storekeepers; they were resources for anyone interested in the history of the community, as were all of the Conleys.
In 1978, Alvah became the first of the Conley children to die, and last week Anne Bromley became the last. As with her brothers and sisters, Anne was a fountainhead of knowledge about the Northern Neck, and from teaching for decades in the local schools, she passed along the wealth of what she knew to future generations.
Anne grew up as the youngest of her siblings on the now Century Farm in suburban Remo, the homestead that rings with the aura of authenticity, replete with a cavalcade of barns and outbuildings, all of which remain in daily use. After graduating from the now long-gone Wicomico High School, she went on to Longwood College, and prepared with the degree for which she had excelled academically, she returned to the Northern Neck where she married Cecil Bromley and settled in Morattico.
Anne and her siblings were the sources of much of what our family has learned about our house which formerly was their grandparents’ home. Their memories were from a time before everyone had a car, before no-till farming, before many of the roads were paved, and before the advent of television and computers.
The Conley siblings were gifted with the ability to engage in great conversation. They enjoyed telling newcomers about the Northern Neck, and the “good old days” which for them never ended. Anne was a perfectionist in everything that she did, but that was a trait common among all of the Conley family.
I recall telling her that when her brother J.P. and his son, Steve, who farm our land, were spending their non-farming time one winter extending our kitchen, that when the planting season began they had to move on to their crops, hence we engaged a cabinetmaker to build the kitchen cabinets.
After he had finished them in his shop, he called to say he would be installing them, but he had to go to the mill first to buy some shims. I told him, without ever measuring or leveling the walls myself, that he would not need the shims, as the room had been built by the Conleys.
He politely told me that all cabinets need shims to keep them level. I said, “You can buy the shims, but you will not use them.” A day later when he had finished and the package of shims remained unopened, he said “You were right. I never have seen such straight walls,” to which I replied, “Obviously, you do not know the Conley family.” She was amused, but not surprised.
Anne’s passing is a milestone in the lore of the lower Northern Neck. As the last of the Conley siblings, she had remained a living link to how things used to be in a rural community, in a family raised with impeccable standards, and in the best tradition of what it means to be a Virginian and an American.
Sarah Anne Conley Bromley, May 3, 1931 – April 13, 2023. R.I.P.

July 2019 Update
This is one of those months I wish I had more pictures to show you the ministry that God allowed me to participate in. Below you can see me witnessing at the Hampton Community Center during the Hampton Community Days. We shared the gospel with several hundred people. It went wonderfully. Many ask how many people did you lead to Christ this month and I can say al of them. I showed people their need for Jesus and then told them what Jesus did for them. I left them at the feet of Jesus and that is all I can do.
I attended a discipleship training and it was wonderful. I plan to implement many of the tools that I learned at the training within CCN. I spent a lot of time this month writing up new materials for CCN after the training.
I went to NYC to witness at Madison Square Garden and in Union Square. I found a great location at Union Square where I could hand out lots of tracts and get into tons of good conversations, while being in the shade and being able to sit. I will being this spot again. I was asked some interesting questions that I had never heard before. I was asked if our soul has a gender. I told the person I did not know but then did some research. I have come to the conclusion that our souls do have a gender. Our souls and bodies are made at the same time. They are made at conception. In Luke 16 the rich man is still a man in Hell. Jesus and God are Spirit and they have a male pronouns no matter what. I feel confident that I can give an answer.
I got to witness at the Jersey Shore. My favorite conversation was with several young gay women. I was doing open air evangelism and they came over and wanted to know if Jesus is pro-LGBT. I asked them what they meant by that and they could not answer. I told them that Jesus said if you lust after a women you have committed adultery in your heart. If you lust after a women or if these 4 guys( I turned and pointed to 4 guys to my right ) lusted after a women it is still the same sin. They wanted to know if I hated gay people. I told them that my mother is gay and so is her wife. I told them that I wanted the same thing for them as I wanted for my mother. I wanted them to go to heaven. I waked through a few more commandments and shared the gospel. The girls cried and hugged me. They did not leave our conversation without the understanding that I loved and cared about them.
I was so encouraged. At the discipleship training I met a guy named Jerry that does ministry in New Kensington each Monday. I decided to go down and help out for an evening. It was wonderful. minutes after I got there a bunch of kids were sitting down and asked me a question so I sat down next to them. I pulled out some multi-colored bracelets and shared the gospel with them. I did a trick or two and then they wanted me to tell them the meaning of the colors again so they could tell others. Then they went and got there friends and brought them over and I shared the gospel with these new kids that came over. I spoke to a women whose Dad had died reciently and was able to explain who goes to heaven and hell and I shared the gospel with her. She thanked me and wanted to friend me on facebook.
Thu, August 1, 2019

Matt was born and raised in Northern Virginia. He graduated from Christopher Newport University with a degree in Communications. While at CNU, he was a captain of the Men’s Lacrosse team. In his free time, he likes to play golf and to take his golden retriever to the beach. His goal at Lonnie Bush Real Estate is to have a positive impact on people’s lives and to best assist his clients in all real estate transactions.
Matt was extremely reliable and helpful. Going in as a first time homebuyer, I was intimidated, and Matt walked me through the process in a way that I understood. He was quick to reply and enthusiastic about looking at properties. He was patient and eased a lot of my worries. I highly recommend!
- Lauren E.

A number of celebrities were at Friday’s Rockets-Warriors game at Toyota Center, given all that was at stake, and all the stars that were on the court.
Among them were rap mogul Jay-Z and his beautiful wife, Beyonce. The power couple was, of course, seated courtside for the action. They were shown by TV cameras during the game, so here are a few photos of them enjoying Game 6 of the epic series.
And they weren’t the only ones, either. “Game of Thrones” star Emilia Clarke was there as well. Not only that, the Rockets mascot cleverly brought her a cup of coffee (a reference to when a Starbucks coffee cup was seen in front of her in the previous episode) during a stoppage of play.
Toyota Center truly was the place to be on Friday night.

Had a great time in Prescott visiting with mother in law who is a resident and who even stayed with us for the three nights we were there. (Not sure if she wanted to return to her in-town gated community!) Everything you'll need to cook with. Kitchen was big enough that I don't think we really got in each others way while cooking. Rooms were comfy and clean. Town was closer than we thought. If you like peaceful settings, this is the place. Side trip to Sedona and came back for dinner on Whiskey Row. Had a nice picnic at Goldwater Lake down the road. Thanks Sheri for making sure we had everything we needed.

“There must be a mistake, I don’t know this person.”
Looking at the corpse on the table after the post mortem, with the neat seams across the chest, it was just flesh, white lifeless flesh. The face resembled a marble carving: it could have been a Michelangelo copy for all I knew. I had absolute no recognition of the features.
I was not on my own. There was a lawyer and a doctor, both looking at me in disbelief.
“Your name has been given as the next of kin, this man is your father.”
“My father? I did not think I had a father. My mother knew so many men, I could have taken my pick, but they never stayed. Why is this person my father?”
The lawyer spoke.
“This person is J. Marvin Porter, owner of the Porter Beer Brewery. He deposited a document in my chancellery, informing that in the case of his death, his son James Porter is to be informed.”
“That is correct, my name is James Porter, but Porter was my mother’s name, I never realised she was married. I have no memory of having a father.”
The lawyer almost smiled. I did not know whether he was laughing at me or at the fact that there was a corpse on the table that apparently was my conceiver but unrecognizable to me. A shape of which I had no memory. I realised that I was not born of Immaculate Conception, but never spent a lot of time thinking about a father.
“There is just one thing Mr. Porter” continue the lawyer “to be legally sure we will have to take a DNA sample.”
“No problem” I answered.
“Please open your mouth” said the doctor. Now I knew why he was there. He took a large swab in his hand and wiped over my mouth.
“That will suffice” he said and put the swab into a plastic tube. “The results will be ready tomorrow. Your lawyer will be informed.”
“Just a moment, I do not have a lawyer.”
“You do now” answered the lawyer and he gave me his visiting card.
“Just give me a call tomorrow morning to arrange further details.”
I must admit I was a little overwhelmed, but perhaps not completely. My life had been full of bad memories, an alcoholic mother, a sort of stepfather that was no real father, that just threw me out on the street to fend for myself when my mother died and a school class where I was the victim of their laughs, jokes and beatings. Life had never been good to me.
By the end of the week I was a new man. I had inherited the brewery, I had inherited a mansion, an island somewhere in the Pacific, and a fortune, making me a millionaire. Above all I was now MR. James Porter. The DNA samples proved that I really was the son of a wealthy brewer.
Of course it was not an easy job. When mother died I had to deal with a few legal items to get her buried in a pauper’s grave. Prove who she was and that I was her son. I found a few letters and documents and followed them up, which lead me to the Porter Brewery. I kept track of Mr. Porter quite closely. I soon had his routine, knew where and when he went and at what time.
I forgot to add that I am diabetic, since I was a kid. I grew up with insulin injections. Probably mum’s addiction to alcohol did not help during the pregnancy. I found out that it ran in the family. My father was also more or less born diabetic. Funny for a brewer I suppose, but it might have been his revenge on the alcoholic world. I am sure he loved my mother, after all he is my father. One day he just left when I was a baby.
I managed to substitute his insulin injection with a common salt solution: just a matter of dating his private nurse. She really needed a boyfriend. Was not the best looking, but who cares, she served her purpose.
It seems the lawyer and the doctor were pleased to have their problem solved. There were no other heirs to the brewery and the fools really believed that I had no memory of having a father or found out who he was.
And now it is mine, all mine.
7 thoughts on “Blogger Creative Challenge 258: Memory”
Love this! What a great premise.
Wow, chilling stuff. I love it 🙂
Very nice 🙂 loved it!
Reblogged this on Bengkel Mainan Ozetus and commented:
will be the winner….

I have a history with my pal Alex around having crazy days involving boats – Saturday was no different, due in part to the weather forecast which was was heavy rain for the whole day. It did not put us off though as we were heading back to Katrine in search of Pike and Trout. We had fished it last season and even though we had not caught any pike we had caught some trout and it was a lot of fun. We kinda thought something was up however as the chap who organises the boats was a bit late. It turns out that he was not going to let us out on the loch because of the weather – sure it was a bit breezy but it was pretty good conditions for fishing. Seemingly the wind had to change later and they were not willing to let us out. We were disappointed however got a weak coffee and a nice roll n’ bacon out of it.
We headed over to Loch Venachar instead where even though the guy thought we were a bit crazy due to the rain still gave us a boat.
The weather was changeable..
It is always tricky fishing somewhere new and even more difficult when the conditions are against you, still we each caught a Pike…
As we cruised around the loch we gazed at the chaps on the bank, lots of them had tents and bivys. There was a fair few fires on the go as well, in fact one chap decided he could not be bothered carrying his huge umbrella back to his car so he decided to burn it on his fire. Of course he left the debris of the brolly as well as his metal rod rest sticking out the mud but it looked like a long couple of hundred yards back to his car.
We get that a lot on the Kelvin as well, guys that just do not give a monkeys. A lot of these guys had been camped out overnight as well.
During one of the lulls in the rain we witnessed a very strong rainbow ..
It was in fact a double rainbow, you can see the other one just above the strongest one.
Later, after our session on the loch had finished we headed over to the big loch to see if we could catch any more Pike from the bank. However as we were setting up the wind caught up with us and things got a bit breezy.
We found evidence of other fishers however: footprints, litter and a shot seagull.
I do not want to cast any aspersions on the characters of the individuals that shoot seagulls and burn umbrellas however I have noticed a distinct amount of headbangery in their lineage. Their are general bylaws about not lighting fires and no wild camping as well as alcohol free zones and it seems to me that only certain folk follow these laws. That is, folk that actually cause problems through drinking alcohol in public as well as wild camping (through not tidying up after themselves) will continue to do so despite the law. Folk that actually consider laws and democracy in society to be meaningful will try and uphold them. However, the Police and Park Rangers would probably not tackle a bunch of guys drinking heavily setting fires however are happy to tackle a single lassie waiting for the T in the Park bus while she is swigging a single bottle of beer.
Finding the shot seagull was weirdly not long after I had retweeted The Suburban Bushwackers call to arms about air guns being licensed in Scotland. Personally I do not believe the above legislation would actually do much good as the crazy folk who would shoot birds would continue to do so while other folk like myself would decide not to buy an airgun due to the paperwork etc.
Anyway, I think it is time I caught a trout again and there is a tiny stream not to far from me so this week I may hit its ass in anger!

Klopp, 47, will leave the Bundesliga giants at the end of the season.
The German - who has guided Dortmund to five major trophies during his time at the Westfalstadion - has been linked with a move to the Premier League in recent weeks.
And Rosler, who used to manage League 1 side Wigan, believes his fellow countryman has what it takes to manage in England's top division.
"I'm a fan of Jurgen Klopp - I met him in January in La Manga at their [Dortmund's] mid-season training camp and it's very interesting the way he is training, the way he conducts himself, the way he manages his players," Rosler told Perform.
"He's a very emotional man and he never tries to hide his emotions and I think his positivity goes out to his players and they've been very successful.
“He can coach everywhere”Uwe Rosler
"Obviously he's been at the club for many years and there comes a point where he probably felt that the club needs a new approach.
"He's a fantastic manager and has done fantastic things at Borussia Dortmund - the club were not at the top of the Bundesliga [when he took over] and he won titles and got to the Champions League final. He will always be a legend in Dortmund."
When pressed on whether Klopp revealed his plans to leave Dortmund when they met in January, Rosler added: "No, definitely not.
"Obviously they are in a different situation this season to previous years, but he had that optimism that he always has that he could turn it around and that's what he did in the second half of the season.
"So when I found out he would leave it was a big surprise for me.
"He's very successful and he'll be on top of the pyramid in football. You don't come there by coincidence - I think there's a lot of hard work behind that, there's a lot of great ideas behind that, and I think a manager like him - he can coach everywhere."

When Life Gets In The Way
With life comes challenges. Originally, I was going to have at least 6 more books by this time, but life has a way of putting a stop to things. I guess I had been pushing myself too much and asking for more than what was possible. Not only had I figured out that I need to learn to slow down, but I must also enjoy life while we are still on this planet. Now, I force myself to get up and quit typing for hours on end while I enjoy my family and go places.
What I have found is that sometimes you get caught up in life and don't realize that it is passing you by until it is too late. As for new books, I am taking a quick breather for a week or so, because I have had 5 surgeries in the last few months, and even though I was still putting out books, it took a toll on me.
I have a book signing in April that I will still be attending, as well as signings around Michigan for the rest of the year, but I will be taking my time and not rushing everything as I have been the last year.
I'm guessing that writing 36 books in a year and a half is too much for most people. Lol.
Anyway, take care everyone and keep looking for my newest books and novels. And if you have not read my older ones, check them out now on my website or any of the bookstores online.

Two children are recovering from surgery after a head-on crash in eastern Bay of Plenty, which left an entire family in hospitals across the upper North Island.
Jacob Te Kurapa told Whakatane radio station 1XX his sister's Opotiki family were rushed to hospital after several vehicles collided on Wainui Rd in Maraetotara, about 7pm last Friday.
All six people, including five of Te Kurapa's family, were taken to Whakatane Hospital.
"I'm ringing directly from Starship Children's Hospital in Auckland," Te Kurapa told 1XX this morning.
He said two of his family remained at Whakatane Hospital, "their injuries were not so bad", while his sister was taken to Waikato Hospital and was in a coma, and two of the children were at Starship Hospital.
He said with the family being separated in different hospitals has been difficult and caused some anxiety.
"Although we are in contact via Facebook and any other media, phones etc. The reality is trying to see our sick and beloved ones face-to-face [can be hard]."
He said his family has come together over the incident, with other relatives travelling from Australia to offer support.
"The children are doing well and making a full recovery after their surgeries," he said, adding his sister was "in and out of her coma".
"The cars are a write-off," he said, indicating the crash may have been the result of a driver crossing the centreline.

I thought that this wine was too dry. The lemon was nearly more pronounced than the ginger. My expectations were set too high and that often makes for a disappointing wine. Claire disagreed and did not think that it needed to be any sweeter.
We drank this wine at the end of a lovely day. The weather has been glorious (though we do need some rain) and I spent my morning in the front garden, digging and turning earth. It is a hugely satisfying activity. In the evening we ate Jerk Chicken and watched Last Tango in Halifax and, despite everything, it felt like all was right with the world. (It very clearly isn't!)

A Wee-Bean Story (Part 3)*
At 5pm Dr. Evil reappeared with another whirlwind of nurses. He told me he wanted to examine me again, but I immediately knew that this examination would be different when I realized there were nurses on either side of me, ready to help hold me still if need be.
I had my eyes squeezed tight and was trying to imagine myself in a happy place when he announced that I had dilated to 3cm, which was great progress from where I was this morning. By this point the effects of the gel had long since worn off and my body was finally progressing though labor on its own. He let me know that I wouldn’t need another round of the gel and instead wanted to break my water for me.
I’m not going to lie, this was one of the most painful things I have ever been through in my life. I think I already told you that Dr. Evil was not… gentle. As he broke my water (with a big scary looking stick thing) I was in so much pain that I had to beg him to stop. He finally took one quick break so I could breathe, then continued while I cried out in pain. At the end of it he finally realized that I had been in actually pain during the procedure and apologized to me for it before leaving me writhing on the bed. My nurse did her best to help me get comfortable, then she too left so it was just the Hubster and I alone in the room.
He shifted his chair so that he was a little closer and held my hand as my contractions began to intensify. Within 30 minutes my contractions shifted from being uncomfortable to painful. There was nothing I could do to get comfortable in bed, so I decided to try another jacuzzi bath to see if that would help. My nurse (who I was ready to be BFFs at this point) came back in to help me run a bath and ease my aching body into it. The contractions continued in regular increments, and each one seemed to feel a little stronger. I soon decided that I was okay with exploring some options to help ease my discomfort.
I sent the Hubster to go find out what was available to me at this point in my labor. My nurse told me that I hadn’t progressed far enough to warrant an epidural, but that she could give me a shot of Demerol and Gravol to help take the edge off. Shortly after 6pm I gratefully accepted the shot and awaited the relief.
It didn’t come.
My contractions continued to increase in strength and by 6:30 there was little I could do to ease them. The needle I was given didn’t help with the pain, it just made me feel incredibly tired and a little loopy. I wanted to try walking again to see if that would help, but I was so tired that I could barely make it to the nurses station before I was ushered back into bed. As I curled up in a ball to manage the pain I let the nurse know that I was ready for the epidural as soon as it was available. She made a quick call and let me know that the anesthesiologist was just finishing a surgery and would be down as soon as she could.
I honestly don’t remember much of what happened between 6:30 and 8pm. My contractions–which had been regular until then–began to come in non-stop waves. Instead of a regular pattern of an intense contraction followed by a break, I would have non-stop contractions for about 10 minutes before my body allowed me a 30 second window to breathe.
Then it would begin again.
As this new phase of labor began, I was curled up in a ball with one hand gripping the bed rail, and the other tightly wrapped in the Hubster’s hand. With each wave I was sure that it would be the last one I felt before the anesthesiologist would arrive. My mind took me somewhere else and it felt a bit like I was popping in and out of the room. Olivia arrived at some point and encouraged me to try and have a shower to ease the pain, but I had bonded with my position at the bed rail and I was determined not to move. haha
For an hour and a half the waves continued until finally, finally the anesthesiologist arrived. I opened my eyes to see a new shift of nurses, and as they checked to see if I had progressed any further I learned that I had dilated to 7cm. After feeling like my body wasn’t working for nearly 2 weeks, it apparently decided to move into hyperdrive and my labor was speeding along.
Finally it was epidural time. I’ll be honest: I was initially afraid of having one. I had read about the possible side effects and had seen pictures of the needle they used to start them. However, after a few hours of hard, non-stop contractions, I was beyond ready for some relief.
The team that came in to hook me up was incredible. For starters, Dr. Evil was no where in sight and instead I had a lovely female doctor who seemed to have a better understanding of what my body was going through. She and the team of nurses were so quick that I had my epidural before I even knew it had happened…
…and I never saw a thing. They didn’t let me see any of the equipment or needles so there was absolutely no unnecessary fear, and they were in and out of my room in minutes. It took a few minutes to kick in, but soon I felt my body relax and the discomfort that I had been feeling melted away.They were initially a little concerned about my oxygen levels so I had to wear a mask for a few minutes, but after that it was smooth sailing.
The epidural was actually one of the coolest things I have ever experienced. I could feel absolutely everything, but there was no pain. I could feel the contractions when they happened, but they no longer hurt, and I retained all the feeling in my legs and lower body.
And so, after being awake for nearly 2 days straight, I finally began to drift into an easy sleep, rambling to the Hubster about how much I loved epidurals. Olivia and my new nurses told me to rest as my labor would likely slow down a little. It was nearly 8:30pm and everything was progressing beautifully. Olivia and Dr. Evil headed home as I wasn’t expected to deliver before the morning, and my mom and dad slipped out to take a break and grab some dinner. Soon it was just the Hubster and I in my little darkened room, ready to rest for the night before the wee-bean’s arrival the next morning.
Well, the wee-bean had had enough waiting and made other plans, as wee-beans are oft to do. Within an hour I knew we wouldn’t be waiting until the next day…
Epidurals sound magical! Lol, I think I will have to have one when I hopefully have a baby some day. Can’t wait to read how she entered the world!
Oh how vividly I remember hugging that bed rail. I did the exact same thing as you-I hugged the rail, curled in a ball, and tried to breathe. Only by the end my contractions didn’t stop. They were on top of each other and I screamed for that epidural. They didn’t have time to give it to me, because Roo was born really quickly after that (bless her, her gift to me!). Boy do I now understand why women ask for the epi!!
I’m happy to hear you could still feel your lower body. I’ve heard a lot of people can’t at all and it really makes labor tough because they can’t feel when to push. Glad that wasn’t your story with your wee bean.

Here is an excerpt from Jonathan D. Young’s upcoming project, Bristol Pavements.
This is part one of this series, it is called “Homecoming”
Dolores turned down that once familiar street. That old street of her youth. As her heels clicked against the cobblestone beneath, she thought of her childhood forgotten. The lamp lights passed as she traversed that old way. As she looked in their warm light, she could almost see a younger version of herself. This was once her home, and she had finally returned.
Dolores turned another corner. To her surprise, the street before her was bathed in darkness. There was not one streetlight on. There was not a candle or a fire burning. There was not even a novel electric light. There was only a chilling blackness that made Dolores’s hair stand on end. She felt a strange wind blow her hair around her neck. She shot a look behind her, but there was no one there. A raspy cackle ripped through the smoky night sky. She turned around to see where the voice had come from, but she found no one. She looked with hard concentration in the deep shadows of the street but saw nothing. Her heart was beating fast now. There was another cackle. Her eye grew big, and her breath grew short. There was laugh after laugh. The voice seemed closer now. Dolores screamed in her utter terror but was silenced by the cold pale hand on her rose-colored lips. “Why isn’t tonight just lovely, Mrs. Atwood?”
Dolores always remembered fondly the days of her youth. She remembered days when the cherry blossoms were in bloom. At a time when the air was warm and the river cool. It was such a simpler time. This was not a vision of Bristol, her forever home. These were memories of her summers in the country. Her summers at her grand mum’s house. She spent many summer nights there. Nights of goodness, love, and rest. Those days with Harry, her forever love. She remembered when they would sit on the grass and talk about Shakespeare plays. Harry would swear that Macbeth was superior in writing and craft, however Dolores was against such fantasies. “Hamlet is far superior.” she would argue. They fell in love this way, through these conversations. She missed him dearly, along with those simple days. It was a time before sickness. It was a time before age and decay. With everything inside her, she wished to go back to that. It appeared however, that it was no longer possible. Her end was close at hand, just as Harry’s once was. Today was last.

FLORHAM PARK, N.J. — Rex Ryan is standing by Mark Sanchez as his quarterback.
Despite considering pulling a struggling Sanchez from a loss to Miami on Sunday, the New York Jets coach insisted he still has confidence in him.
"Mark is our quarterback, he's my quarterback," Ryan said Monday. "He'll always be our starting quarterback. Even if I did yank him for whatever reason, he's our quarterback. We're going to go as far as he takes us."
Sanchez was 17-of-44 for 216 yards and an interception, his 12th of the season, in New York's 10-6 loss. After not throwing an interception in his first five games, Sanchez has at least one in each of the last eight.
"It starts with me," Sanchez said after the game. "I need to be the guy to turn it around."
He misfired often Sunday, but had a few good passes dropped — including a sure touchdown by Santonio Holmes, who was uncovered in the back left corner of the end zone.
"Mark, he's the quarterback, so of course he feels that he should [shoulder the blame], but it's not just Mark," wide receiver Brad Smith said. "It's the receivers to the offensive line, the running backs. All of us have to do better at executing. Just play the game the way we know how to play it and we'll be fine and stop worrying about all the other stuff."
Ryan said he spoke with Sanchez after watching the game film and told him he needs to improve his footwork.
"It accounted for quite a few plays," Ryan said. "He wasn't accurate with the football on several of his throws. You can't throw the ball if you're not set and ready to throw in a football position, in a throwing position."
Ryan considered benching Sanchez in the third quarter, but decided against putting Mark Brunell in because the second-year quarterback has led the Jets to a handful of comeback victories this season.
"It dawned on me because we were struggling so badly on offense that sometimes when you do put a [new] quarterback in, sometimes you can get a shot in the arm," Ryan said. "When I thought about it, I was like, 'You know what? This young man has helped us.'"

Bob Bashara spent extensive time in jail planning guilty plea deal
Updated On: Oct 12 2012 06:34:07 PM EDT
Bob Bashara has been sitting in the Wayne County Jail but he hasn't been idle.
Bashara, who pleaded guilty this week to trying to have a suspect in his wife's murder killed, has been busy spending a significant amount of time meeting with his attorney and talking on the phone in his jail cell.
As the Local 4 Defenders previously reported, Bashara was blowing up the phone talking with a woman in the S&M community. The woman on the outside has been helping him tie up loose ends in some of his real estate deals.
Recently, those close to the case say all Bashara has been talking about on the jail phone, which is a recorded line, is working to get his deal done. He pleaded guilty Thursday to trying to have Joe Gentz, who is charged with murder in Jane Bashara's death, killed. Gentz also is Bob's former handyman.
The Defenders have learned investigators have been keeping close tabs on Bashara in the jail. They knew he was desperate to have this part of the investigation resolved. He called to his attorney, family members and friends for help in striking the deal. The behavior has exposed what some have called a frantic man who needed some control. Entering the guilty plea on his terms was part of the plan.
If Bashara, who is called a suspect in his wife's murder, is actually charged for Jane's death, how does the defense handle this admission of guilt?
"If he gets charged with the homicide case on Jane, it's, 'Hey listen, I wanted the man that killed my wife put away and I wasn't going to wait for the justices to do it," said Local 4 defense expert Todd Flood.

Last Saturday, DMB fan Emily Kraus had the drive of her life when she picked up a stranded biker on her way to a Dave Matthews Band concert in Hershey, Pennsylvania. The lone rider turned out to be Dave Matthews himself, who had popped a tire on his bike and didn't have his cell phone. Kraus and her boyfriend strapped his bike to their car and drove a thankful Matthews to the venue. As a reward, they were both invited backstage for dinner with the band and received front row seats at the show. Check out the full story in the news report above.

Unfortunately, I didn't know my grandfathers. Nathaniel Gardner died many years before I was born. Roy J. Brown died when I was a toddler and I have no memories of him. I wish I had memories of loving grandfathers but I have gathered a much information as I have been able about their lives. And I do have spent many, many happy times with my Daddy.
Happy Fathers' Day!
In remembrance of my father & my grandfathers.

So I have been sitting on this review for quite sometime now. I went to Mayberry about 2 or 3 months ago with the normal group I do lunches with on Thursdays. We went because we heard great things about it and had high hopes for their burger. Well I am sad to report, that I did not like their burger at all. Granted, I did not get it with the pouched egg on top, which might have put me over the top to possibly liking it, BUT the reason I didn't like it is because I am not a huge fan of meatloaf. That is the best way I can describe the taste of their burger, way too meatloafy. But if you do enjoy yourself a nice meatloaf, then I bet you will absolutely love their burger.
Since then I have heard of other good items on their menu (like their sloppy joe or as they call it the sloppy josh) and have not had a chance to go back. To me, if you can't make a good burger, you probably can't make anything I would like. Don't get me wrong, half of the group seemed to enjoy the burger (since we all got one), but it just wasn't for me.
I felt like I had to do a review because so many people were singing their praises and I felt like people needed to hear the other side. So there, I said it and you can't make me take it back!

Caregivers charged with neglect after 68-year-old died in their southern Indiana home
Police said a 68-year-old man died at a home in Washington County and his caregivers are now facing charges of neglect.
According to Indiana State Police, Danny Harris was in the care of Patricia Campbell, 56, and Russell Cartuyvelles, 50, for several years. They said Harris paid for both room and care.
Harris was incapable of caring for himself due to medical and mental issues, ISP said.
The residence is not a licensed care facility and neither Campbell nor Cartuyvelles are licensed care providers.
An autopsy ruled the death a homicide due to the lack of required medical care. Officials said they did find bed sores on Harris.
"We don't know how long exactly, but over the last weeks or months he came into a condition where he needed medical treatment or medical care and wasn't given that proper care," said ISP Sgt. Carey Hulls.
Harris' sister Andrea Johnson says it's been two years since she's last seen her brother. She had no idea his condition had become so bad.
"All that woman had to do is give me a call. I would have hired an ambulance or whatever it took to get the medical help he needed," Johnson said.
Both Campbell and Cartuyvelles were charged with neglect of dependent resulting in death. Their bonds were set at $80,000 each.
"I feel better. I feel relief. There is going to be justice for Danny now and that's what I want to see and make sure nobody ever has to go through that again," said Johnson.
After the man's death, another adult was removed from the home.

Defoe is barred from featuring today, but told the Guardian: "I had some good times at Spurs but, when I consider everything that has happened since I joined Portsmouth, I can say without any doubt that I made the right decision.
"I'm playing football. That's all I ever wanted and I'm happy again. I lost that at Spurs. I was held back and I knew that, if I was serious about playing for England, I had to get a new club. That was always in my mind, that if I could go to another club and play regularly, scoring goals, I would stand a much better chance with England. If I'd stayed at Spurs there is a good chance I wouldn't even be in the England squad, so I know I have done the right thing."

I just left my Apple store where I wanted to get a case for the iPhone I bought yesterday. Unfortunately, they wouldn't let anyone in unless they waited in the God awful line. Even if you were going to buy a computer or wanted to have a repair, you'd have to wait hours in the line. They were going to do this until the lines go down so I figure at least through the weekend, you'll have to wait in line for anything Apple. So, if you get into the store when you get your phone, do all your shopping then, otherwise you'll be waiting again!

The Confession Tapes TV -
No-one could have expected someone would have murdered Wayne and Sharmon Stock in their secluded farmhouse. The Confession Tapes s2e2: Joyride, news, Netflix 2019
Matt Livers: I wanted to help them figure this out, you know. I didn’t have a clue that I was even considered a suspect. ibid.
They were leading him to the story that they thought fit the physical evidence. ibid. defence lawyer
Like his cousin Nicholas Sampson before him, this morning charges were dismissed against Matthew Livers. ibid. television news

Once again, thank you to my beta - Demigodwiththebread. Couldn't have done it without you.
He moves his hand across my forehead, brushing away the few strands that got caught there. I smile up at him, and his eyes shine down on me. It feels good being in his arms; like things might be okay. Or at least that they will be better. I didn't think there was hope after the Rebellion. Even though we won, it still felt like something was tying us back. Maybe it was sorrow from all the deaths, or maybe it was because some things were left unfinished - a mystery. Whatever it was, I just want to forget it and stay here, in his arms, forever.
I never thought that this would be where I'd end up. Safe, at home, no more Hunger Games coming every year to scare everyone into thinking that they'd get chosen, or someone they loved would. Like I've said many times, I never imagined myself falling in love, getting married, and having kids. It was a crazy idea, stupid even, to think about having kids when the Hunger Games were going on. I wouldn't be able to live with myself if a child of mine were chosen to compete. But now I don't need to worry about that.
So I stand here, in the small meadow that lays by my old house in the Seam, which no longer looks so down and lonely. I feel the light breeze in the air, it feels almost peaceful. I don't want to leave. I just want to stand here forever, watching my children play in the grass. Smiles light up their small faces, causing me to smile too at their happiness.
"I love you, Katniss." My husband whispers, drawing my hair behind my ear, which is no longer in it's braid. Today I let it loose, it's no longer held back like I once was.
"I love you too, Peeta," I reply. He smiles like it's the most amazing thing he has ever heard. What's really amazing is that he could still love me after everything I did. I wouldn't blame him if he just stopped loving me and moved on. He could have left if he wanted to leave the past behind him for good, but he didn't. He stayed here in District 12, with me.
I want to forget everything, everyone: Prim, Gale, my mother. Everyone who died, like Finnick, Boggs, and Cinna. I want to let the past be the past and move on, and I have. It's just every once in awhile that a memory flashes through my mind and I see everyone who died in my Hunger Games. Peeta has them too. But we get through them together.
Things may not be the same, they may not get any better than this, but that's okay.
Right now, here in Peeta's arms with our children playing close by, if this is as good as it's going to get, then that's just fine with me.
Review if your cool.

The most prolific run scorer that top-class cricket has ever seen, Graham Gooch is one of only twenty-five players to have scored over 100 first-class centuries. The former Essex and England Captain, Graham has learned a lot about leadership and team building throughout his career. As a speaker, he uses his knowledge and experience to impress corporate audiences, entertaining them with stories from his years as a professional cricketer.
Graham Gooch was Captain of the England Cricket team and one of the most talented batsmen of his time. He has many entertaining stories from his cricketing glory days and is a popular after dinner speaker .
Graham played his first test cricket match in 1975 at the age of twenty-one when England played Australia in the Ashes. Graham was unable to play to his full potential during the Ashes and was dropped from the team, it was not until 1978 that he managed to get picked again due to his success playing for Essex. From 1978 onwards he became a constant member of the England cricket team and was able to prove his worth.
Graham’s cricket career was affected in 1982 when he was banned from playing for three years due to his controversial decision to play in the South African Rebel Tour. The tour, which was captained by Graham, was frowned upon by the International Cricket Conference and Graham and fellow players were punished for their involvement.
From 1989 onwards, Graham’s cricket career excelled and he was appointed captain of the England team for the second time. During this time he became holder of the highest score at Lords and was the first player to score a century and a triple-century in a match; Graham also took the record for the highest test score against India by an England Captain.
Graham led the England cricket team in over 30 matches and was captain during the 1992 world cup final against Pakistan. He continues to be England’s highest test run scorer. Since retiring as a player, Graham has coached at Essex County Cricket Club and spent four seasons as an England selector. In 2012, Graham became the Batting coach for England.
As a speaker, Graham is entertaining and charismatic and relates to stories from his years as a professional cricketer. Throughout his career he has learnt a lot about leadership and team building, skills which he focuses on in his speeches and uses his knowledge and experience to impress corporate audiences.
For further information or to book Graham Gooch, call us at Speakers Corner on +44 (0)20 7607 7070 or email email@example.com
What people said about Graham Gooch
- "Having heard Graham speak at Ashridge (European Centre for Management Training), I was asked by my own company if there would be anyone suitable from the sporting world to speak at our CPD (Continued Professional Development) seminar at the Belfry in January 2005, Graham was the natural choice and gave a highly relevant and cohesive speech outlining the similarities between sport and business and the general theme as written in our newsletter was of preparation, commitment and dedication. The delegates (Chartered Surveyors) were very impressed, the feedback was extremely positive. On the whole though I think they were highly entertained with intelligence, humour and by a glimpse into a world that most can only dream of."
- Business Development Manager,Wolton Chartered Surveyors

Read an Excerpt
Straight from the Heart
By Tami Hoag
BantamCopyright © 2007 Tami Hoag
All right reserved.
"Jace Cooper's coming back to town!"
Rebecca Bradshaw's hand slipped on the edge of the whirlpool, and she dropped her clipboard into the churning water. Water splashed up onto the newspaper her patient, Bob Wilkes, held open just above the surface and sprayed onto the front of her white smock.
"Hey!" Yanking his paper out of the way, Bob gave her an indignant look. "Jeez, Rebecca, what if that had been a radio or a hair dryer or something?"
She frowned, more at her reaction to the news about Jace Cooper that Bob had read aloud than at him. "You would have gotten a free hairdo. May I have my board back, please?"
Bob's wide mouth lifted in the comic leer he had used on her on a regular basis over the last few months of his physical therapy. "Why don't you come and get it, beautiful?"
Rebecca slanted him a look. "Fork it over, Romeo, or I'll put you back on the tilt table and spin that thing like a roulette wheel."
Wilkes handed her the dripping clipboard with its sheaf of soggy papers. "You're heartless, a sadist."
"Flattery will get you nowhere," she said. As she tried to blot her notes and her sweater with a towel, unbidden thoughts of Jace Cooper tormented her. She quelled the urge she had to pump Bob for more information.
But as if he'd read her mind, he went on."It says here that Cooper's being sent down to the Mavericks. He'll be playing here in Mishawaka if he can get his knee back in shape." Wilkes shook his head. "How do you like that? The guy gives the Chicago Kings six and a half great seasons. He's been an All-Star, he's been a Golden Glove winner. Now he gets wracked up, and they pack him off to the minors without so much as a fond farewell. He goes from the big show back to Class A ball overnight. That stinks."
"I imagine they got sick of his shenanigans off the field," Dominique LeGault said as she worked with a patient on the mat table.
Rebecca glanced up at her coworker. Dominique was a woman of rare and exotic beauty. She was a long-limbed six footer, with skin the color of cafe au lait and almond-shaped eyes that reflected her mother's Cherokee heritage.
Dominique shook her head, her wild cloud of black hair bouncing behind her. "With all his partying, practical jokes, and publicity stunts, that man was in and out of more trouble than the rest of his team put together."
"What a guy does on his time is his own business," Wilkes declared. "Which reminds me, Rebecca, do you want to watch a movie with me tonight?" He chuckled mischievously. "Bimbos Galore is now available on videocassette."
"As much as I've been waiting for that, I'll have to pass," she said firmly. "You know I don't date patients, Bob."
"Bad policy," he muttered.
It was a policy Rebecca had adhered to strictly during her nine years as a physical therapist. The one exception she had made to that rule—Jace Cooper—had turned out to be the biggest mistake of her life.
She pushed the thought from her mind as she abandoned her ruined notes and went to a cabinet against the far wall of the exercise room to get out the toolbox and the coffee can of miscellaneous screws, nuts, bolts, and pins. She had a patient with a spinal cord injury coming in an hour to make her first attempt at using the parallel bars, and the bars had to be adjusted.
Rebecca told herself she had no time to reflect on the news that Jace Cooper was coming back to town. What did she care? She didn't. The news had just surprised her, that was all.
"Jace Cooper," Mrs. Krumhansle, Dominique's patient, mused aloud. She scratched a hand back through her steel gray hair. "Isn't he the cute one with the ash blond hair and the great fanny?"
Dominique's hoarse laugh filled the air. "That's him."
"Good glove. Swings a mean bat when he wants to. I'll have to renew my season ticket."
"It seems to me we're doing a lot more talking than working in here today," Rebecca said sharply.
Bob Wilkes gave a low whistle and hid behind his newspaper. Dominique's exotic black eyes focused on Rebecca's from across the room. Rebecca dodged the question in her friend's gaze.
Concentrating on the task at hand, she squatted down and began to work on the piece of therapy equipment. She certainly had better things to think of than some overage adolescent getting kicked off his team. She had her next patient to think of. She had the proposed expansion of the physical therapy department to think of. She wondered if there was any way she was going to be able to talk the hospital board into providing a separate hydrotherapy room. She wondered what Jace Cooper had done to his knee.
"No, no, Rebecca," she muttered under her breath, shaking her head so her glossy black hair swung back and forth above her shoulders.
It upset her that the mere mention of the man could throw her into such a mental tailspin. Jace Cooper had ceased to be a part of her life. She had accepted that fact, had dealt with it. It wasn't as if she'd been carrying a torch for him. She'd dated other men over the years, had enjoyed other relationships. Jace Cooper didn't mean anything to her. He didn't matter a whit, not one iota.
Not more than ten feet away from her, the door to the therapy room was pushed open by Dr. Cornish.
Rebecca's gaze landed on the man resting on crutches beside the doctor.
He had the lean, tough good looks of an alley cat who'd won more fights than he'd lost. His hair was a little shaggy, dark at the roots but gradually lightening to a distinctive silver blond at the ends. Navy blue eyes stared at her from beneath dark brows.
As her heart went into a frenzied dance, Rebecca bolted to her feet, hitting her head on the bar. She dropped her screwdriver and upended the coffee can. Hardware spilled onto the smooth floor. Nuts and washers skittered off in all directions.
A tiny smile lifted one corner of Jace Cooper's mouth. "Well, Becca," he said softly, "you never were the mechanical one in your family."
"No." Rebecca's eyes burned with an emerald fire as she stared at Dr. Donald Cornish.
At five feet ten inches, she had no need to lift her head to look the balding, middle-aged doctor in the eye. She wasn't intimidated either by his disgruntled expression or by the tag on his white jacket that identified him as head of orthopedics.
Even though Rebecca was only thirty, she was the boss in physical therapy and everyone at the hospital knew it. Besides, she thought as she glanced out the window of her office at the man who was holding court in the exercise room, she would have stared down the devil himself to get out of working with Jace Cooper.
She watched as he grinned and laughed at something Bob Wilkes said. Jace had the kind of charm that attracted people to him. Everyone automatically liked him. He was charismatic. He was dangerous.
A shudder skidded through Rebecca's body. At first she labeled it as loathing. No, she corrected herself, not quite able to tear her gaze from the man, she was coming down with something. A spring cold, she decided. She felt dizzy, weak, feverish, and chilled at the same time. She definitely felt a cold coming on. She stubbornly refused to accept the fact that the symptoms had appeared the instant Jace Cooper had hobbled back into her life after nearly seven years. He couldn't have that kind of effect on her, not after all this time.
"Dominique or Max can work with him, or he can go elsewhere. I don't want anything to do with him."
"Why not?" Dr. Cornish asked in a West Texas drawl that sounded very out of place in Mishawaka, Indiana. Already he had given up acting tough. Rebecca knew it just wasn't in him. Donald Cornish was by nature an amiable sort.
Why not, he'd asked. She glanced away once again. This time her gaze ran head-on into a pair of dark blue eyes. Why not? There were a million reasons she didn't want Jace Cooper as a patient, a million reasons she never wanted to see him again. There was a reason to go with each piece of the heart he had so thoroughly broken seven years ago.
Her logical, analytical mind was shocked at how fresh, how sharp, the pain seemed. She wasn't the kind of person who nursed a grudge, but seeing Jace again had wrenched open a door to the past she would rather have left nailed shut.
"Rebecca, do you have any idea who that is?" Cornish asked in a plaintive tone. "That's Jace Cooper, third baseman for the Chicago Kings. Do you have any idea how I love the Kings?"
"Donald, I don't want to hear about your personal perversions," she said with a hint of the dry humor he was used to hearing from her. "Take them up to the fifth floor. I'm sure Dr. Baxter could make room for you on his couch. As for Jace Cooper, I don't give a rat's posterior what he does. I'm too busy to work him into my schedule."
"I suppose it doesn't matter to you that he's going to be playing with the Mavericks until he gets himself back in top form. Do you know what that could mean to the Mavericks, your own hometown team?"
Her expression clearly told him exactly how much it meant to her. "Then let the Mavericks take care of him."
"You know full well the Mavericks' idea of a knowledgeable trainer is a guy whose brother used to empty bedpans at the VA hospital." Dr. Cornish affected a somewhat resigned air as he took a step away from Rebecca and shoved his hands into the pockets of his brown trousers. "Mr. Cooper specifically requested you as his therapist."
"Well, tough. Tell Mr. Cooper that for once in his life he isn't going to get what he wants. There are hundreds of qualified physical therapists in Chicago. I can't believe he found them all so unsatisfactory that he had to come here and bother me."
The door to her office swung open, and the object of her scorn hobbled in. The years hadn't altered his physique, she noted with grudging admiration. He wasn't a man of intimidating size, yet even on crutches Jace radiated an athletic energy that charged the air around him.
He had the kind of lean, rangy build that lent itself well to his profession. The well-muscled shoulders and upper arms that were now encased in a soft pink polo shirt gave him the power to swing a bat with authority. His slender waist and muscular legs, now hiding beneath a snug pair of jeans, gave him agility and speed on the infield. Baseball couldn't have custom-ordered a more perfect body for its needs.
Then Rebecca's gaze came to rest on the Lenox-Hill derotation brace he wore. It began at midthigh on his left leg, where his pant leg had been cut off to accommodate the metal and elastic device, and ended below his knee. A pain twisted in her chest. She looked away. No, she didn't want to know what had happened. He wasn't going to be her patient, therefore she didn't need to know. Even as she felt his unwanted allure take hold of her attention, she told herself she didn't want anything to do with this man, ever again.
"I know I'm barging in," Jace said. He watched Rebecca from the corner of his eye as he flashed a dazzling smile at Dr. Cornish. "But it is my body you're discussing. Hope you don't mind if I sit in."
"I do mind," Rebecca said tightly as she watched him ease himself down on the chrome-and-black-vinyl chair.
"Rebecca!" Dr. Cornish said in a lightly admonishing tone. He slouched down on the other chair in front of her desk and grinned at Jace like the village idiot. "Jace has every right to be in on this discussion."
She gave the doctor a stern look. He was as transparent as plate glass. Obviously he believed she wouldn't refuse the request with Jace sitting right there. Men. They always managed to stick together.
"Jace was telling me you worked with him before on a rather severe shoulder injury. He was very satisfied with the outcome."
"It was a slight separation," she said, crossing her arms over her chest and trying to look in command of the situation. "I followed the basic therapy routine. It was hardly on the scale of Lazarus being raised from the dead."
Jace sat back in his chair and smiled. If she remembered his slight injury after all these years, he had reason to hope. In his blacker moments since the accident, he had wondered if she would remember him at all. Seven years was a long time, and Rebecca Bradshaw was a very attractive lady. He had held out little hope that she would still be single, but the accommodating Dr. Cornish had informed him that Rebecca was indeed still eligible. That raised some interesting questions in his mind, but they were questions that were going to have to wait.
"Well," he said, giving her a little smile, "I was certainly impressed."
She merely stared at him. One thing hadn't changed in seven years—the lady still had a look that could freeze the Equator.
Jace took a deep breath and forged onward. "That was why I asked Dr. Cornish if you could be my therapist for this knee business."
"I'm afraid that's impossible, Mr. Cooper," she said in her most businesslike tone, ignoring the sudden jump her heart rate had taken at his rogue's smile. "As director of the department, I have a great many administrative duties. My patient load is restricted to very special cases. I can assure you, you don't qualify."
Dr. Cornish leaned forward and offered Jace a lemon drop from the dish on Rebecca's desk. He took one himself and popped it into his mouth, then directed his steady brown gaze at the recalcitrant therapist. "I'm certain we can arrange something."
"And I'm certain we can't," Rebecca said. "I hope Mr. Cooper can understand that I have responsibilities I can't simply walk away from."
Jace barely managed to keep from wincing. Something else hadn't changed in seven years—the lady still had a tongue that could draw blood. At least she wasn't indifferent to him. He knew there was a fine line between anger and passion. If she still harbored one toward him, maybe she harbored the other as well. He was determined to find out one way or the other.
Excerpted from Straight from the Heart by Tami Hoag Copyright © 2007 by Tami Hoag. Excerpted by permission.
All rights reserved. No part of this excerpt may be reproduced or reprinted without permission in writing from the publisher.
Excerpts are provided by Dial-A-Book Inc. solely for the personal use of visitors to this web site.

today I went to bike to green way with some friends. we had a picnic, and we went to the nature senter. oh and guess what?!!! we saw I black snake!!!!!!. I ran over it with my bike! I steped on it's tail to see if it was alive and it reared it's head up and looked at my mommy!
7 months ago

[ぱんだこりゃ] だれにも言えない [中国翻訳]
#311335 - I had never tasted cum before and was shocked at how hot it was, I tried to back away at first because I thought he was pissing in my mouth but he held me there. This was '96, and if you wanted any porn on a computer, you had to wait a good 10 minutes for 1 pic to download. I was so turned on!! I felt guilty, but I wanted to do it again.

Memorial Day Weekend was a scary time for us. Tyson was not feeling well earlier that week and of course I was like you are such a baby. Friday night he went to bed and was not feeling well. Saturday morning we are in the ER being check. They checked him over and said that they were going to run some blood work and see what came from that. The nurse comes in turns and looks at me and says your husband is having a heart attack. I said are you kidding. Of course he was not. So as fast as we were in the room was as fast as he was off to have his heart looked at. I could see that he was really scared and you could see his discomfort. At this point I was in shock, but thought I need to be strong for him and let him know he will be ok. He started to cry and told me to tell the boys he loved them and we were off down the hall. I give him a kiss I went one way and he went another. There I am standing in a waiting room holding his belonging and wedding ring in my hand. Praying that it will be ok and leaving it up to my Heavenly Father to decide our journey. Family came and was me, which I am so grateful to have. After an hour I think, I was trying not to ponder on the time, it may have been longer. He came out and was to not move for the next 6 hours, so to ICU we went to recover. After 3 days in ICU and a really bad nurse. The conclusion was that a piece of plaque had broken off in the heart and bacteria had attached itself to the plaque, then his body created a clot to get rid of the bacteria. So now we are on 2 RX for life most likely, an Aspirin a day, Ibuprofen and 3 different kinds of vitamins. We are walking and eating are fruits and veggies. When I was standing there holding his things I thought to myself I thought we would be old before we had to do something like this, and what would I tell the boys, how would Broden remember him, have I done everything possible to let him know that he is my only one, and have I taken care of him and said the things I should have instead of things I shouldn't have.
So To the one I love:
You make me smile bigger then any one ever could
You make my dark days light
When you come into a room I am clam
I Love you
I am so proud of you and your ability to fight your weaknesses
I am grateful for the time you work to provide so much for our family
Thanks for playing with the kids
Thanks for doing the dishes, laundry,and other chores
Thanks for listening to me at 11:00 at night and still talking back
I Love you
Thanks for remembering the things I have looked at in stores and getting them on special occasions.
You make me laugh (really hard)
You are my friend since i have no girls to talk to. SO Thanks for being a good girly friend J/K
You make me feel pretty
Thanks for letting me pick the movie when we go out.
Thanks for letting me tell you what to do and doing it.
Thanks for going to church the times you do.
Thanks for going to dinner at my moms and staying until 10:00 at night
I love the way you can pinch with your toes(ouch)
I love you for your laziness(if makes me stop and enjoy the ride)
There is so much more, But how about I LOVE YOU FOR YOU!!
Thanks for staying with us and I hope our journey is never cut short.
Wednesday, July 7, 2010
I thought that I would be doing better at this and I was until the stupid computer things and I really did not want to have to drive to use some ones computer to update but now I think It would have been better then to have missed out on all the fun things and challenges we have had! So one day (or should I say night I will stay up late and update. Thats the ony time I really get anything done!) I really want to make a book out of this so I will try harder!

Competitive sports are long gone for this old man. Even as I write this article, my head is killing me and my neck is sore. It's only Monday.
My wife loves to remind me that, "I've taken too many hits to the head." Six concussions later I'm barely allowed to put cleats on these days. My biggest athletic risk nowadays is the annual parent-player game, and I still end up sore the next day.
For many of us middle-aged, former athlete folk, no matter what our bodies tell us, we think we can still give it go. The desire to compete and be part of something bigger than yourself never dissipates. That’s why I, and probably a lot of people like me, miss sports. I miss the battles, bus rides and the team bonding. But sports are so much more than that, and an unlikely leader - my son, brought this back to my attention.
My son loves soccer. He and his friends would play every day if they could, and most days they do. My son has 20 jerseys, five sets of cleats, two outdoor goals, three balls and a closet that’s a shrine to his accomplishments and trophies. Some would say he's obsessed.
I like to think his mother and I are the driving force behind his activities, but we ultimately want to set him up for success by following their passions. We sign our kids up for sports because we believe it’s important that they learn to be part of something bigger than themselves, and to be relied upon.
We had the chance to see that in practice when our son Wes played in the Dimitri Cup in Florida a few weeks back. He and his teammates have been looking forward to this for months. His team was good. The competition was great. And then, in the second game, he took a fall and landed awkwardly on his arm. He never stays down, and he didn't this time, either. Right back up and into the action again.
That night, his elbow hurt, but he was with his teammates so the pain was an afterthought. The following morning, his team was set to face off against a team that hadn’t lost all year, and was ranked as the #1 team in Florida. When his mother and I asked if his elbow was ok and if he still wanted to play, he gave us that confused smile. I am fairly certain now that the thought of not playing never crossed his mind.
“I don’t wanna miss this game.”
He ended up playing the entire match to a 3-3 draw. A gritty performance from a gritty player for a gritty team. In the quarterfinals, as Wes was tearing down the field with the ball at his feet, he was taken out by a tough challenge on the ball. He landed on his bad elbow again, and just like that, his tournament was over. It was clear this wasn't just a bruise, and unfortunately, it wasn’t. Wes had broken his elbow and fractured his humerus.
Fast forward to today. He got the cast off for another x-ray this morning, and got some good news. His bones are healing just fine, but he’s going to need more time in the cas. As you can see from his face above, he’s not exactly thrilled about getting another hard cast, let alone another 10-14 days of recovery. Still, he’s holding out hope that he'll be on the field with his friends at The Weston Cup in a few weeks. That undefeated team that they tied, the number 11 team North America? They are entered as well, and the boys want another shot. Wes doesn't want to miss that either.
To this day, he has not missed a single practice because of his arm. He's there two to three times a week, working on technical skills, fitness, and whatever else he can that doesn’t require both arms. And his passion and dedication to his team is the lesson we all should apply to our businesses.
"Dad, I played three games with a broken elbow. What did you do?"
Focus on the characteristics that make a good teammate and leader. Look for the person who will play through a broken elbow for you and your business, not because they have to, but because they want to. We can learn things from the most unlikely of people if we watch and listen. In fact, I find more inspiration from stories like this than I do any podcast, motivational speaker or industry expert. Hopefully you can, too. It's all in us.
**A quick note on Wes**
During a game last year he took a ball to the face and it knocked out his tooth. He caught the tooth mid-air, kept possession of the ball, kept dribbling toward goal, and scored. He handed the bloody tooth to his coach after the play, expecting to stay in the game. His coach still tells that story. He's a tough little bastard, but really he just wants to be on that field with his boys. I think we can all relate to that.

Rachel Yankey is set to become the most capped England player in the women’s game when, if selected against for the Euro 2013 qualifer Croatia at Walsall, she makes her 120th international appearance this afternoon. So the Arsenal winger chuckles as she is reminded of the time she was congratulated in the street for playing a single game a year.
It was in 2002 when, as a full-time professional with Fulham, she scored in the Women’s FA Cup final. The annual showpiece was televised live and, as is customary, casual viewers were impressed. One was mystified however. “That game you

Chapter 4: The Tolling Bell
The servant could not understand. He said, “What opportunity is there? He will simply kill me! I don’t know even how to hold the sword, and he is one of the champions. It will be just a game to him.”
The master said, “That is the point. He will think you are just a servant; what can you do? He will not be afraid of death; he will not be thinking that there is no tomorrow. He will still have tomorrow and the future. He will be in the ordinary sleepiness.
“You will not be. You don’t have any tomorrow, you don’t have any future; this is the moment. And you have nothing to lose. You are going to die, so why not be total and give him a good fight? And don’t be worried about whether you know swordsmanship or not. Use this moment with total intensity.”
Meanwhile, the whole neighborhood had gathered. The servant came. The warrior, of course, was totally on the ordinary level of sleepiness - it was just a joke for him to kill that man.
But it was not a joke for the servant; it was a question of life and death. He fought so furiously, so totally, that the master started retreating. He had never seen - he had been fighting his whole life - but he had never seen such a fighter! All those warriors whom he had faced were all living in the ordinary reality, as asleep as he was; there was no fear that the future is finished or tomorrow is not going to come.
But for the servant everything has come to an end, so why not do your best? He knew nothing of the art - but when the end is there who cares whether you are doing right attacks or wrong attacks? And that made the warrior even more afraid. He knew how to fight with people who knew the art - but this man knew nothing. He was simply hitting him on this side, on that side, without understanding anything about what he was doing! But he was total and intense, because this moment is the last moment and he does not want to hold on to anything. For what? - because the next moment is death.
So he was fully awake - his whole being was total and integrated - and he defeated the master. He did not kill him, but the master fell. And as the servant was putting his sword on the master’s chest he asked, “Now what do you want? I have always loved you, I cannot kill you. But do you accept defeat or not?” And for the first time in his whole life the warrior accepted defeat.
Thousands of people witnessed the scene. They could not believe that an ordinary servant has managed it. And not only that he was victorious.in that very moment he dropped the sword and told his master, “Now I am no longer your servant; I have found my way. I am grateful to you, I will always remain grateful to you; it was because of you that I became awake.”
He became an enlightened man. In that moment he tasted the fullness of being, the very peak of being.

East Links Family Park, Dunbar, Scotland
3 reviews from the community
Review of "East Links Family Park, Dunbar, Scotland"
East Links Family park is half a mile from the Beltonford Roundabout just off the A1 next to the Village of West Barns in East Lothian. This is about a 65 minute Drive from the west of Edinburgh. It is clearly sign posted and we found it quite easily. Just before you enter West Barns there is a left hand turn down a single lane track with little lay-by's to let you get passed other vehicles. Then you have the turn off for the John Muir Country Park. Continue on and you will see the sign saying entrance to East Links. The car park isn't your typical car park. It's sort of set round a triangle type pen where you can see some of the animals from the farm. When we visited there were Goats in the Pen. I would say there is space for about 100 cars. It opens at 10am until 5pm apart form in the summer holidays when it stays open until 6pm.There is a sort of Barn place which is where the tearoom and the admission office is. We got up the wooden ramp no problems and there were little stairs which are ideal for little walkers to manage themselves. The ramp looks fairly new and was in a very good condition. Walking into the reception area, you notice how bright and clean it is. There are 2 statues of Cows which for some reason at first I thought they were real. The reception area is just before the door leading out of the barn. You pay and get a sticker and also are able to buy animal feed. There is 2 types of animal feed but it is best to ask as the staff are very knowledgeable. The prices to get in was that we paid £6 per adult and £5 for children over 3. Our toddler was free.
The tearoom has around 18 square tables. Not the best sort of tables for large parties as they only seat 4. There isn't much choice in food but the homemade soups looked good and they had rolls and pannis available as well as baked potatoes. The prices were reasonable and there were lots of homebaking available but if it is nice day I would advise a picnic and eating outside at the picnic tables. The tearoom was spotless and the staff were on the ball so tables were cleared very quickly.Outside into the vast land round about you have lots of Occupy your family. There are various Pens with animals inside. These tend to run round the back area and faces openly on to the train track. One little part has a lane towards the left of the Park. At the bottom within the trees is a roped maze. We didn't try it but we saw it from the train. There is a huge pirate ship which has sand inside and some great climbing equipment as well as buckets and spades. This would be great on a dry day but it had rained the night before so the sand was fairly wet still and so was most of the equipment. There is a mini play park with swings and also a slide. This was a wooden swing set and was very sturdy that even Mr G had a go. There was a green hilly thing which we joked looked like a ski slope. Well we weren't far wrong, it was an all year round sledging slope. You pick up a sledge which looked like a Childs Booster seat and then slide down, but we found we had to do a lot of leg work to get down. There were also dingy type boats but they were filled with water from the rain the night before. There was also Milk bottle skittles which was the milk churns and a huge ball on a rope which you used to knock them down as well as a horseshoe thing but Mr G played that while I was chasing Murray as there was an area with Cosy Coupe Cars and pedal bikes which he really liked as well. It was sectioned off with Tyres which I found easy to cross but wee shortie struggled across. There were also go karts
There were also 2 barns. One had a softplay/bouncy castle area which is great on a rainy day, but neither of mine wanted to go in so we just peered in. Another Barn which you walk right through had various baby animals in pens. There were baby chicks and rabbits and then older rabbits and other animals which I forget the names off now. This was a nice area as it was quiet when we visited and we could take the time to take a look at the animals and talk to the children about them. The barn had 2 doors at either side so on the windy day it was quite cold. There were also some baby rabbits for sale and it was very hard to leave without them as they were so cute. But it's a great idea to get up closer to the animals and let little ones see what happens and what they are all about.Pony rides were also available while we were there between certain times. For £1 Eilidh had a wee ride and she loved it which was great. The train is free and we think it runs every 1 hour and 15 minutes. I think it took about 10 mins all the way round. There is music on the train and it was the singing kettle which seemed to go down well with our 2. The train is open and I did find that it was very blowy while we were there. The train is great as you get to see the animals as they all come up towards the train as they know they will get some food off the people on the train. It's a great way to get pictures as you are passing.
Overall this is a fantastic idea which is being run in a great way. Once you pay everything bar pony rides are free. Some people may think that this is an expensive place to visit, but the farm is run solely on the money which it charges for admission, so for that reason, I don't mind paying the money. Personally, next time I go, I would take a picnic and try to go on a more blustery day. It was a good day out and both kids and Mr G slept on the way home from there while mummy drove. Definitely worth a visit if you are in the area or in Edinburgh. Before I went I checked out the website which is full of up to date information and also had a map, to help you find your way about.East Links Family Park
Next to West Barns Village
Product Information : East Links Family Park, Dunbar, Scotland
Manufacturer's product descriptionAttraction
Listed on Ciao since: 22/10/2004

David Adeleke better known as Davido has a lot of music in store for his fans during the course of the year.
Davido has already recorded a collaboration with top American rapper J. Cole.
The record is yet to be released for public consumption.
In his insta-story Davido shared a clip where he was listening to his new collabo. with J. Cole in a car.
This comes after a remix of his tune ‘Fall’ by American rappers Busta Rhymes and Prayah.
The singer who is still doing a press tour of American radio has promised his long awaited sophomore album will drop this year.

High: 58°F ~ Low: 44°F
Sunday, Mar. 29, 2015
Unconditional love at its bestPosted Tuesday, December 7, 2010, at 11:55 AM
She was only 18 when she married the love of her life. She was a physically beautiful woman, but more importantly, beautiful inside. She was also a brave woman. I say brave because she not only married at a young age, she also took on the responsibility of four young children, one of them an infant boy whom she later lost. To her this was not a responsibility, these were her children. She never considered them "step" or "his" children. They were "my" children or "our" children. She loved them as most blood mothers love theirs.
When she began having babies she made no difference in any of them. She loved them equally. This is a rare quality to be found among men and women.
She took to motherhood so easily and to my knowledge never complained about having so many young ones to take care of. She did what had to be done and didn't murmur about her lot in life of having 11 children to raise. She just loved and cared for them.
She had none of the modern conveniences that I had when I was raising mine, yet as I think back, she made it look so easy.
The world recently lost her; and as I attended the visitation, I talked to so many people that had the same words and feelings as I had about her.
When speaking of someone she would always say, "little Linda", or when talking to me about my mom, "your little momma".
If there is any goodness in me as a step-mother, I owe it to her. She became my role model. I wanted to be just like her in this capacity and did my best to pattern this part of my life after her.
I never shared this with her and now wish I had, but I feel that somehow she knows.
I believe she portrayed the "unconditional love" better than any
one I have ever known.
My heroine this week is my Aunt Norma Grubbs.
See ya next time somewhere in the Korner.
E-mail me at email@example.com or text me at 573-820-2404.
Showing most recent comments first
[Show in chronological order instead]
Kathleen is a resident of Dexter. She was born in Indiana, but her parents moved their family back to the Dexter area when she was three. Other than three years she and her husband, Collin, lived in St. Charles, Mo. and ten years in Birmingham, Alabama, she has spent her life in Dexter. As you can tell, Kathleen is a people person and believes in giving credit to whom credit is due. Thus, the reason for her hero/heroine column every other week in Kathleen's Korner. As you can tell, she also like to have fun, most of the time at her own expense. Kathleen (Grubbs) is a 1964 graduate of Dexter High School and invites her friends to her "Korner."

Here are my top 10 wide receivers starting with the honorable mentions:
It was hard not to put Cooper in the top 10. He is a very polished receiver with great route running, and good athleticism. He occasionally struggles with drops, but it is not a huge problem. He just finished a season with 1,189 yards and 8 touchdowns while in a decently crowded receiving group. He is great, but he doesn’t often take over games. He is a nice weapon for Dak, but he isn’t nearly as good as some of the other top receivers.
Golladay just led the league in receiving touchdowns with 11. It was a career year for him, and he definitely deserves recognition as an honorable mention. He is very dangerous in the red zone due to his great frame and hands, but that is mostly it. He is not a game breaker all over the field, so I don’t think he is a top 10 wide receiver.
In 15 games last year, Diggs had 1,130 yards and 6 touchdowns in the receiving game. He has incredible hands, speed, and a pretty good body. He produces great numbers even with a run-focused team and next to another great wide receiver, Adam Theilen. He came very close to making the top 10, but he is not as dominant as other receivers on the list.
Now, for the top 10:
Number 10: Keenan Allen
Allen put up 1,199 yards and 6 touchdowns last year with a struggling chargers team. Phillip Rivers played very below average, the offensive line was awful, and he had to split reps with other receivers, yet he had a great year. Allen has deadly route running, hands, and a solid frame. He is a nightmare for opposing cornerbacks.
Number 9: Devante Parker
Parker exploded at the end of last season. He had to overcome poor quarterback play, a bad offensive line, and a pretty terrible team around him, yet he still put up 1,202 yards and 9 touchdowns. When his number was called, he took over games. With an improved Dolphins team, Parker could be one of the best in the game for the next few years.
Number 8: Odell Beckham Jr
Odell had a down year, and that is why he is not as high as he might be after this year. I don’t think his initial struggles in Cleveland were his fault, but more due to poor coaching and sub-par quarterback play. Even with that, he still had a decent year with 1,052 yards and 6 touchdowns. I don’t think he performed as poor as the media said he did, given his circumstances. Expect a big year from OBJ next season.
Number 7: Chris Godwin
Godwin had a stellar year next to fellow great wide receivers, Mike Evans and Breshad Perriman. He had 1,333 yards and 9 touchdowns in his breakout year. Some people might put Godwin higher, but I think he is in a good place at 7. He was lucky last year to have an extremely pass-based offensive attack and a quarterback who took a ton of risks.
Number 6: Devante Adams
In the 12 games that he played, Adams was fantastic. He had 997 yards and 5 touchdowns. He was able to use his lethal route running, speed, and hands to his advantage. He could take over games when he needed to. Overall, he is a very well-rounded wide receiver.
Number 5: Tyreek Hill
I might have Tyreek Hill higher than most people, but that is because he can weaken defenses just by being on the field. I think that he is much more feared by opponents than any other previously mentioned receivers. He might be one of the fastest players of all time, and he isn’t just fast. He is very agile, quick, and he has decent hands. I think putting him at number 5 is a no-brainer.
Number 4: Mike Evans
In 13 games, Evans had 1,157 yards and 8 touchdowns. His great hands, speed, and strength are what make Evans a top 4 wide receiver. Any 50/50 ball you throw him turns into a 80/20 ball. He is a freak of nature. The only reason for him being lower than guys like Jones and Hopkins is because he doesn’t have as much all around skill, and he is clearly just a step behind them all around.
Number 3: Deandre Hopkins
It hurts a little bit to rank Hopkins at number 3 because I feel it is too low. He has incredible hands, a crazy large catch radius, good off the line, very quick and can stop on a dime, decently fast, very smart and can cut through defenses, and he uses all of his skills to his advantage as much as possible. He never puts himself in positions to lose. He might be the best all around receiver. Still crazy that he got traded for nothing.
Number 2: Michael Thomas
Thomas broke the record for receptions last year with 149. Yes, 149 receptions! He had 1,725 yards and 9 touchdowns last year. I debated between him and Julio Jones for so long. Yes, Thomas played better last year. The only reason I have him below Julio is because he probably wouldn’t have the same level of success outside of the Saints system. That’s not knock on Thomas, but I think that he has a certain playstyle that only fits a certain type of offense.
Number 1: Julio Jones
Julio Jones seems like he was made in a lab. He has every skill that a receiver needs. He is one of the strongest and best built players on the field, but he can also be the fastest. I can praise him enough. Every year he is in the conversation as the best wideout and every year I think he is. He had 1,394 yards and 6 touchdowns in 15 games. He is incredibly good.

by currantdesignsllc | Feb 18, 2016 | Acceptance, Healing, Self-Help
My dad died on Monday. I watched him take his last breath. I felt his body as it got cold. But those were the endings of the 53 hour journey he took and allowed me and my family to be a part of.
We were instructed to see death as a journey similar to the process of labor and delivery when a baby is born. As with labor, no one knows when it will begin exactly. For my dad, it started in the middle of the night with pain all over his body. From the moment my sister gave him his first dose of morphine we knew he had begun the labor of dying. For the next 53 hours straight we took turns singing hymns, reading scriptures, holding his hand, giving him back rubs and head massages, shifting him from lying down to sitting, holding his head up when he could not, anything that might bring him comfort.
When he became completely unresponsive we continued to talk to him and let him know what we were doing, that we were there, apologizing if anything we did might seem uncomfortable to him. Putting the syringe of morphine between his cheek and gums, I said I was sorry if I didn’t do it as well as my sister…I couldn’t tell if I was pressing too hard on his gums. I held my hand to the opposite corner of his mouth to make sure none of the precious pain reliever was dribbling out; my hand was dry…success!
My daughter and I had the 10pm-12am watch, a little less than 8 hours before he died. We whispered so my mom, who barely left my dad’s side during his dying journey, could get some sleep. I played sudoku on my phone. We would glance at his chest periodically to see if his quiet breathing, nearly impossible to hear over the loud snores of the dog, had changed…it hadn’t.
When I was alerted a few hours later to the arrival of ‘the death rattle’ I slipped onto my parents’ bed, which had been pushed up against the hospital bed so my mom could snuggle with my dad. She held him close, aware his journey was almost over. The death rattle arrives 1-5 hours before the final breath. I decided to go back to bed knowing those on watch would wake me if anything changed. I slept a few more hours then came up to check on my dad…he was still breathing. I couldn’t believe his body was still going!
Within an hour or so, his breathing began to slow, with long delays between breaths. We knew he was close and surrounded both him and my mother with our love and gentle touch. And then he stopped…no more breathing, no more life. Relief. Relief that his labor had ended and he was free of the body that carried him so beautifully and humbly through his 90 years on this earth. We were silent, just soaking it all in.
Slowly, one by one we started talking about him, remembering, laughing, crying. We lingered with him for a long while. We took turns washing his body using a cloth dipped in water infused with frankincense and myrrh. I gently held his stiffening leg in my hand as I washed his foot. I felt such a deep connection with him in that moment, a sense of gratitude for allowing me to be a part of his journey all the way to the end. Tears fell, sobs slipped past my vocal chords and I kissed his cool cheek. I walked away thankful for the beauty I witnessed in my daddy’s ending.
by currantdesignsllc | Nov 5, 2015 | Acceptance, Emotional Healing, Growth
Grief is a fascinating experience. I have felt it several times in all its intensity but never with the death of a deeply loved and intensely close being. I went through the ups and downs of my daughter’s failing health, lung transplant and cancer. We came close to losing her, but we didn’t and still haven’t. She’s doing really well! I have been grieving the mortality of my dad as his health has been failing significantly in the last few months, but he’s still here and I get to have sweet special moments with him.
My current grief is a result of my tiny seven pound dog being snatched out of our yard about two weeks ago most likely by a coyote. There have been sightings of a mountain lion in our area but we didn’t see the creature only its paw prints in the mud near our fence and on the top rail of our fence. Whether coyote or mountain lion, it leaped from the field next to our house right into our yard and decided to take Maya. We were spared the gruesome remains of her but there was plenty of evidence to indicate she had been mortally wounded and removed.
It was a normal morning. I let her off the bed onto the floor (she was too tiny to jump), and she promptly headed outside to go to the bathroom. That’s all she ever did in the morning. Just a quick trip out and right back in. She has been doing this routine for the eight years we have lived in this house and never had a problem. But on this day, she didn’t come back in. When I went to look for her, she was gone. Vanished. I had no idea at that moment what had happened to her.
As the details came together, I was heartbroken. I sobbed and sobbed for the first two days. I was useless. I couldn’t concentrate on anything. I got a warning for speeding. I told the officer I wasn’t paying attention to my speed only thinking about the death of my dog…I guess my authentic tears really got to him. He said he had to walk away before he started crying, too. He was sweet. That was no excuse for speeding, and I owned that I was being unsafe. I decided I better limit my driving for a few days and when I did drive I had to intently focus.
I thought about her tragic death which brought on heaving sobs. At first I was just really sad, then I moved to beating myself up for not going outside with her. If I had been there maybe I could have shooed away the animal. Then I moved to being mad at the circumstances because I just want my dog back. I want her to be curled up on the couch, taking all of about a 10 inch radius of space. I want her cute little face to look inquisitively at me while I ask her questions or talk to her. I want her company on my walks and I don’t want to have to go through the trouble of deciding if I want another dog (do not read that as I want someone to surprise me with a puppy! No, no, no!).
I am now deathly afraid to walk out on my deck at night because I’m literally gripped with fear that something is out there looking for something to devour. I don’t feel safe. When I go on walks, I am looking around, certain I’m going to get attacked. I never worried about these things before. I thought about it at times because we live in an area where coyotes live, too but I was never afraid of running into one. I’m only 12 days into this particular grief process and I realize that most of what I’m going through is normal, but when you’re going through it, it doesn’t feel normal!
The best thing I can do for myself is bring others into my grieving, which I have done. I am also allowing myself to feel all the emotions that come up. I let the tears fall. I notice the fear and understand why it is there. I feel the anger and get why I would be mad. As time is moving on, I’m noticing the intensity of the emotions is dissipating. I can focus on tasks again (including driving!) and I’m accepting reality, well, sort of.
It’s interesting to grieve the untimely and tragic death of a pet. I did not expect the intensity to be like this. My husband’s uncle died last week. I was sad for him and his family but he wasn’t in my life on a regular basis. I had only known him for eight years and saw him briefly a handful of times. I felt more sad for others in that situation than myself. My dog has been a constant companion. She adored me. I was definitely her favorite and everyone knew it. I’m realizing now how much I bonded with her. Our bonds can be with skin or fur…and the loss of either can be painful. I also believe we learn to connect with others more deeply when we are willing to connect with our grief.

At what age did you start reading to your kids?
Do you think that this helped them when it came time to learn to read themselves?
Do your kids now like to read?
I have been reading to my son for years but he has a short attention span and gets bored easily no matter how engaging a story is. I end up either reading shorter works or self editing while reading to him.
I've been reading to DS since he was in utero. LOL! I like reading out loud so even when he was small I would read to him. Once he got interested in the pictures I switched to books he liked instead of just whatever I was reading. We still read a couple of chapters a night and take turns on who reads. Not sure if it helped him or not, but we both enjoy the time spent together and he would rather listen to me read than read himself.
I'm from the in utero camp as well. Research does show heavy correlation between children whose parents read to them and reading/comprehension ability, so I would say yes it helped. Yes all of the ones who are of age to read do enjoy reading.
by dj.aleksJune 10, 2014 at 3:29 PMI have 4 kids and started reading to them all just after they were born. I think all kids are different, my oldest doesn't stop reading but my 2 boys do prefer to have stories read to them and my youngest doesn't read yet. It is an awesome way to spent time together!
by squeekersJune 10, 2014 at 3:35 PM
From about 9 months old, Great Gramma would sit with DD, for hours, and read everything you could think of. In time DD had learned baby sign and then to speak. Around 19 months old, she could recite by memory one entire story.
by bcogoliJune 10, 2014 at 3:43 PM
I have been reading to them since they were in utero and I do feel that has helped them have a love of reading. We read alot in our family and my oldest just learned to read and now he reads to his sisters.
by hwblyfJune 10, 2014 at 4:03 PM
In utero. And TONS once they were born. I have 5, ages 11 down to 5, and they all enjoy books in whatever way they can do it (my youngest is now starting to read himself). I hate to say that of course there's a 100% correlation between our time together reading and their love of reading, but I would say it's a positive experience for them that they extend into their own time. We all still read together out loud, too. It helps them read something above their level and then we talk about literary devices and such.
by MaryJarrettJune 10, 2014 at 4:08 PMIn utero here too. My oldest is an avid reader. I'm talking she wants to read labels and everything. My middle loves being read to. My youngest is 8m and would rather eat the books still. I keep reading to them.
by MandallynJune 10, 2014 at 4:14 PMI started reading to my oldest at about 1 year. I would involve him in looking at the pictures and making up stories about why a character had a certain expression or completing a task. Anything to help him learn to focus on the books.
When he started learning about words and reading I would trace my index finger under each word as I read it. I still do that for my younger children. My oldest son almost always reads to me now.
My younger children have always had nighttime stories and stated participating as soon as they were able to.
June 10, 2014 at 5:35 PMIn utero. After birth I would read board books to them when they could look. But I'd also read longer books to them while they nursed.
Both my kids love reading and bring us books all throughout the day. My 5 yo is reading at a 3rd- 4th grade reading level.
I also use sign language with them from birth and I think that has a great impact as well.
I read to my kids from the get-go and now that my two oldest kids are older (5 and 4) I read chapter books to them before bed. Yes, I do think it helped my kids become interested in reading and learn to read. They love books! My 14 month old son isn't as interested in sitting while I read as his sisters were but he likes to hear me reading while he lays. :-)

EXCLUSIVE: Sam Oh on Lee Min Ho
MANILA, Philippines - DJ, TV personality and food blogger Sam Oh has become a "staple" in Filipino pop culture that we forget she — like Grace Lee — is 100% Korean.
Therefore, Sam — whose Korean name is Oh Sang Mi — is also fluent in Hanguk aka the Korean language.
She was the fitting choice to host the press and fan events of Korean star Lee Min Ho, who is in Manila for a 3-day meet-and-greet with fans that ends tonight at the SM Mall of Asia.
Rappler caught up with Sam (who moved to Manila when she was 10 years old, hence the Filipino language fluency) and asked a few questions about what it's like to be working with Lee Min Ho and what he's like behind the scenes:
1. How did you get the stint to be Lee Min Ho's interpreter and official event host?
Sam Oh: I'm not his official interpreter. :) They flew in two interpreters from Korea and they're part of his entourage. But since I'm hosting the events and he doesn't speak English, I interpret na rin.
2. How does it feel to be working with him?
Sam Oh: I knew about it about a month prior to his arrival and I was equal parts nervous and excited the whole time. He's a huuuge (sic) star and Bench is a huge brand as well so I was feeling the pressure.
Now that the press conference and fan meet are over, I just find myself having fun and feeling kinda sad that it will be over soon. I feel very honored and priveleged to be part of it.
3. There are fans who are surprised that Lee Min Ho doesn't know how to speak English. May you give us your two cents on why this is so?
Sam Oh: After hosting two of his events and interpreting for him in two interviews, I have an inkling he understands and speaks English more than we think. If you follow him on Twitter, you'll see he tweets in English sometimes.
But then again, someone might be helping him with the tweets.
4. What's he like backstage?
Sam Oh: I haven't really had a candid moment with him. The events so far have been orchestrated in such a way that it will start as he is coming out of his holding area or coming down from his hotel room.
The closest thing to down time I had with him was between one-on-one interviews. He's pretty chill.
5. His roles have always been serious, dark and tough. Is there a fun and wacky side his fans have yet so see?
Sam Oh: I find that he's really nothing like the roles he has played so far. I find him to be nice, sincere and even child-like at times.
Like during the fan meet, there was a portion where he had to take part in a staring contest with a fan (first one to blink or look away loses) and he won. He was so happy, like a little kid!
He also laughs easily. During an interview I interpreted for him, he thought it was funny how I asked him a particular question (some hand gesture I did, apparently) and he started giggling and said, "That's so funny."
Bear in mind that this was my first encounter with him and was very nervous but having him laugh like that broke the ice for me. I felt much more at ease with him since. He's really pretty relaxed.
I was also pleasantly surprised with how he was during the fan meet. He wanted to ask the audience questions, spin the roulette with the fans (part of a game) when he didn't have to, hug them for photo ops.
It was also really nice how he wanted to take a picture with the whole audience at the end of the fan meet. None of this was in the program, it was all him.
6. What kind of food does he like to eat?
Sam Oh: Apparently, he really likes his mom's cooking and usually requests for her to make "chigae" which is a Korean stew.
During the fan meet, he was asked what Filipino food he would like to try and he asked the question back to the fans asking what he should try. He handpicked a fan from the audience and she suggested he try adobo.
He went to a Filipino restaurant that night and had adobo. He tweeted a photo and everything! So endearing. :)
7. What was your first impression of Lee Min Ho? What can you tell his fans about him?
Sam Oh: Physically, I was struck by how tall and lean he was. He's a little over 6 feet tall and very model-esque.
Personality-wise, I was half-expecting him to be uptight and maybe even stuck up but he isn't like that at all. Despite his status in the showbiz industry, he seems to be a really simple guy who'd rather stay home with a good movie or a computer game than party it up in the clubs.
Most importantly, I really felt that he sincerely wants to make his fans happy and in this process I have become a fan myself. - Rappler.com
Catch Sam and Min Ho in their final fan meet-and-greet events today, November 18. To know where and what time, click here.

Robert Pious, one of the persons convicted in the assassination of Rajiv Gandhi, has requested the Tamil Nadu government and DG Prisons to grant him mercy killing. It may be recalled that Pious has been languishing in jail for the last 27 years. In his request seeking mercy killing, Pious said that due to the long time spent in jail, he has lost all interest in life and he has no purpose left to continue life. An excerpt from the letter reads, “I’ve been in prison for more than 27 years now…I can understand the intention of the government and as none of my family member have come to see me, I don’t find anymore purpose in life.”
Robert Pious is currently lodged in Puzhal Central Prison in Chennai. He said that one of the judges in 1999 had said that he was innocent, but yet he is in jail. He said that now his chances of getting out of jail are very rare, which is why he should be given the possibility for mercy killing. A Sri Lankan, Robert Pious is alleged to be a member of the LTTE commando unit. After he was arrested, he had confessed that he was among those involved in planning the assassination of Rajiv Gandhi.

Dave East he has one less problem to worry about (with the conditions) after presumably stepping on a passenger on a cruise … but he has to stay straight and tight to go free.
The employee of the Manhattan Criminal Court told TMZ that the rapper accepted an agreement Monday to reject his accusation of assault a year ago if he remains out of trouble for the next 6 months. The problem … the problem has already found it – DE was cited for the battery just last week.
TMZ broke the story … Dave was involved in a 3 routes gone wrong in Las Vegas, where a woman claims to have punched her after they had quarreled during sex. Dave says the woman threw bottles of champagne at him and hit him in the head, arm and leg.
Both parts were cited because of the battery, but none was arrested. However … you would think he could count against Dave in his case in New York. Fortunately for Dave, our sources of the forces of order say that in this particular case of New York – the clock starts now … so they won't be watching Vegas or anything else they've had problems with in the past.
Now, as to why Dave got this deal … his lawyer, Stacey Richman, tells us that Dave, in fact, thought he was helping someone … and could not be shown as a lead actor.
You will remember … one man claimed he had Dave he punched him and cut off his eyes as he was getting off a cruise in New York. The boy said that the punch came out of nowhere and apparently for no reason.

We really needed to talk. This was a difficult situation that we needed to find a way out of. He absolutely refused to share me with anyone else, and he wasn't prepared to lead a life with me where he was in the shadows, constantly in second place after my family. And he certainly didn't want to be my secret lover or be complicit in deceiving someone else, an innocent person.
But I do want to get married and to have a family, both of which would be impossible with him. I suggested that he could get married too. That way we could both have our own family, but carry on seeing each other in secret. He rejected that idea, too, saying it was hypocritical and deceptive. He said you can’t correct one mistake by committing another, and that his desire to have a family and children didn’t justify a lifelong marriage that was based on deception and lies.
I told him that’s not how I see it. Married life is about more than sex. I’m determined to offer Leila everything I can in terms of comfort and security. I’m going to work hard to build the best possible life for us.
We couldn’t seem to find a middle ground. And yet splitting up was out of the question, especially after seeing how painful the last few days had been. I begged him to stay with me, even if it was just until the wedding. I’m terrified about getting married—I need him by my side. He was pretty upset about it, but he agreed. That was when I knew I couldn't let him feel like Leila was more important than him. But at the same time, I do need to give Leila the attention she deserves. I can’t let her sense that there’s someone else in my life who is more important. I can never let my guard down. I need to always be there for them, both of them, and to meet their every need.
Leila is great. She’s easygoing and doesn’t ask much of me. I can see the happiness on her face whenever we meet, and that makes me happy, too. I praise her a lot and try to make her feel like the most beautiful girl in the world, which always makes her blush. She’s always telling me how happy she is and how excited she is about our life ahead of us and all the wonderful moments that she’ll share with me.
We spend most of our time together doing up the apartment, buying stuff for it and getting ready for the wedding. I’m trying not to cut corners. My finances are back to normal and we don’t need to scrimp, so I told her not to worry about money, just to plan the wedding of her dreams.
So, I introduced her to Samir. I told her that he’s my best friend and the person who’s closest to me. His being male should rule out any doubts she might have about our relationship. I don’t think it would be too easy to read between the lines. She likes him and they’ve quickly become friends, in a way. She always stands by him when the three of us go out together. Nothing can save me when they team up against me, except perhaps Salma when she comes out with us. She’s always on my side.
We tend to have nights out together, the four of us, at cafés and restaurants around Amman. Leila organizes everything. Samir is usually reluctant to join us and would prefer to see me on my own. So I’m constantly begging him and trying to persuade him to come, because I’m much happier and more relaxed in his company.
Occasionally we bump into some other gay friends of ours. I usually feel awkward and avoid saying hello, especially if it’s one of my camp friends. It’s obvious from their looks and everything about them that they’re clearly gay. I’m worried Leila will sense something. I don’t know what I would say if she asked me how I really know these people.
One day, it happened exactly as I’d feared. I suddenly bumped into Tamer, a young Egyptian guy whom I’d first met at a friend’s house. He called my name and rushed to give me a hug. I said hello but kept it brief. I tried to keep a distance between him and Leila, to avoid having to introducing them.
That night I really felt bad for Tamer when I thought about everything he’d gone through. He probably really needed his friends’ support and my reaction that day can’t have helped. He had bleached his hair and it was longer than before and parted on the right. He had a small earring in one ear. The strong scent of a feminine perfume wafted from him. He had face powder on, giving him a pale yet slightly shiny complexion. He held his hand out softly like some kind of aristocratic lady. He winked at me and whispered,
“So, is that your fiancée? Not bad—she’s quite a looker!”
I looked at him sharply, to get him to keep it down. I ended the conversation quickly and promised to give him a call in the next few days.
Tamer is a very feminine man or, as he prefers to see himself, actually a woman. Among friends, he calls himself Nawal after the Lebanese singer Nawal al-Zoghbi, whom he adores. He knows all her songs by heart. He takes every opportunity when he’s at a party with gay friends to wear women's clothes and show off his talents as an artiste.
He grew up with his parents in Saudi Arabia. He was already extremely effeminate as a child and he seemed to get even more camp as he got older. He told me once about something that had happened when he was in primary school, when he reached the third year. The school was split into two: one school for boys and one for girls. He came home crying and asked his dad why they had put him with the boys and not the girls.
“Son, you’re a boy—that’s why,” his father replied.
“No, Dad, I'm a girl,” said Tamer.
The father remained quite sure that his son was a boy, while his son was convinced that he was a girl. When he was older, his father decided to send him to university in Egypt, assuming that it was the decadent life in Saudi that had contributed to his son's feminine side and that a harsher lifestyle in Egypt would turn him into the sort of man he could be proud of.
Of course, Tamer enjoyed a lot more freedom in Cairo, far from the watchful gaze of his father, and he soon made a lot of friends in the gay and transgender community. He started going to the Queen Boat every weekend with his friends, a nightclub on a boat on the Nile, near the Marriott Hotel. The club was well known as a place where gay men could go to dance, hang out, and meet other men.
One night the Egyptian police decided to raid the club and arrest everyone there. Tamer wasn't in the mood for going out that night and hadn't intended to go to the Queen Boat, but he gave in when his friend insisted.
As they approached the club, they noticed the police cars everywhere, but somehow they didn't appreciate the danger. They didn't realize that the police had raided the club and were arresting everyone in sight. When they got closer it started to dawn on them what was going on.
Tamer saw his friend, a waiter at the Queen Boat, being led away by two police officers. The waiter tried to warn Tamer with his facial expressions not to come any closer and to get away quick. The warning didn't work and in fact just incriminated Tamer, as the policeman on his right noticed and ran to arrest him too.
Because Tamer was so camp, there was no doubt about him being gay unlike some of the other men, so the officer didn't think twice before insulting him and shoving him into the police van with the others who had been arrested in the club.
That night was a terrifying experience for Tamer, as he was transferred from one police station to another with all the others, until he was finally held in one police department. That was when it really started to hit home. The interrogations started. The security services did everything they could to get the detainees to confess to gross indecency.
Dozens of men had been arrested, but within a few hours several had been released. The guys they released were the more butch-looking ones, because, the way they police saw it, being gay was associated with looking effeminate. They released the foreigners because they hadn't been the target of the arrest operation and also to avoid any diplomatic complications. Then they released anyone from influential families, after they were inundated with phone calls.
And finally, they released everyone who was wearing white boxer shorts, on the grounds that, in their minds, being gay was also associated with a Western influence. As Egyptian underpants are traditionally white, anyone wearing underwear of any other color was clearly under the spell of the West and was morally depraved. Unfortunately, the boxers Tamer was wearing that night, an international brand from a new store that had just opened in Cairo a few months earlier, were green.
The police used several torture methods that night to extract confessions from the detainees, including setting the police dogs on them, whipping them with the tubes from shisha pipes and hosing them down with cold water. To start with, Tamer refused to confess, but since childhood he’d been terrified of dogs, so when he saw them approaching he broke down and signed the confession they’d prepared for him.
A few days later he found himself being taken to a state hospital. He was surrounded in the operating theater by several doctors of both genders. In one of the most degrading moments of his life, Tamer was subjected to an anal examination, summarized in a report issued a few hours later with the phrase “Used from behind.”
It was like he’d landed in some terrifying nightmare. Those days he spent in prison consisted of one monstrous scene after another, completely devoid of any human justice, where men were replaced by savage monsters that reveled in torturing their victims. A dark cloud of humiliation, pain and fear descended on his world.
Gross indecency wasn't the only charge leveled against him. He was also charged with several other crimes in a political game that he only became aware of later. As well as gross indecency, he was also accused of devil worship, belonging to an illegal religious group, and collaborating with the enemy Israel.
It wasn't beyond the Arab regimes to exploit moral taboos for the sake of popular legitimacy and winning a cheap political victory. The social and moral rejection of the gay community in the Arab world made them an easy target to score points with the general public. After going to court, Tamer gradually realized how sinister and squalid all these machinations really were.
Someone who was related to a former Egyptian president had intended to run in the presidential election against Hosni Mubarak. The family were political heavyweights, so the current government felt an urgent need to act before things got critical. The mukhabarat compiled a report investigating the entire family in the hope of finding some dirt on one of them who was known for having homosexual inclinations.
Besides his sexual preferences, this person also collected pictures of himself with other men in various sexual positions. He was very creative, too, and in his imagination he had invented a kind of fictional character, a reflection of the man he longed for. Among his papers, the mukhabarat officers stumbled across something he’d written describing how he loved and worshipped this character like some kind of god.
It was the ideal basis for a story that would cause an outrage in Egyptian society and put an end to any hope this family had of a future in politics. In people’s minds, his worship of this fictitious character would be synonymous with him worshipping the devil. The sexually explicit photos were all the proof they needed to confirm the allegations against him. Homosexuality was something the Arab press tended to portray as going hand in hand with devil worship, and the gay community was there to complete the story as proof that such people existed, fellow adherents of this cult. But for the final nail in the coffin, they also needed to pad out the story with some connection with the Zionist conspiracy to turn it into an issue of national security. And so, they threw some detail about his previous visits to Israel into the mix.
Meanwhile, the Egyptian police had arrested a number of men charged with soliciting homosexual activity on the street, a week before the raid on the Queen Boat. This operation was part of the grand plan to lump the two groups together and add prostitution to the list of charges.
Every single charge laid against Tamer was enough on its own to leave him exposed and gave the prison wardens ample pretext to treat him with contempt and aggression. His effeminate looks alone were enough to turn on one of the wardens who, like so many others, suffered from pent-up sexual frustration in the repressive Egyptian society which refused to accept any kind of relationship between the two sexes outside of the institution of marriage.
The warden started off chatting him up gently, trying to lure him into satisfying his sexual desire. When Tamer rejected these advances, the guard turned violent, beat him and raped him. His cries echoed around the prison, bouncing off the walls of the other cells. But the guard just got more fired up and turned even more brutal.
When his father came to visit him in jail that day, Tamer didn’t dare tell him what had happened. Shame held him back from admitting that he’d been raped. By the time he stood before the judge, though, he had plucked up the courage to mention it. He imagined that the judge might have a modicum of humanity in him and would stand up for justice. Tamer was almost bowled over from shock when he heard the judge’s reply,
“Well, take a look at yourself. Who can blame them?”
“Who can blame them?!”
Tamer realized that he lived in the most chauvinistic society on the face of the earth, a society where femininity was seen as nothing more than the potential to turn men on and satisfy their sexual urges. It was a culture where it was the woman who was blamed for any kind of sexual liaison outside of marriage, where a woman’s natural expression of her femininity was seen as a free invitation to men to abuse her and treat her with contempt.
It was a reversal of roles where the definitions of “criminal” and “victim” were turned on their heads. A man could be the victim of desires that were aroused by a woman’s slightest gesture. She was the guilty party because his arousal was her doing, and if he raped her it was a natural response for which she alone would bear the consequences. Tamer here was no different to any other woman in the eyes of the judge, who subscribed to all these same cultural prejudices. Tamer’s obvious femininity had provoked the guard to rape him, so he was himself to blame and it was he who would face punishment.
He was sentenced to a year's imprisonment during which he was subjected to every kind of abuse and humiliation imaginable, including beatings and rape. When he was released a year later, the court's ruling was overturned by the state, under pressure from international human rights organizations which argued that the first trial was unjust.
A new verdict was issued, but this time Tamer was sentenced to three years in jail from the date of the retrial. The sentence was more than he could bear after the torture he had been through the first time round, so he tried to escape from his life by committing suicide. Fortunately, he didn't succeed and a few days later an American human rights organization managed to get him out and get him to Jordan until they could arrange for him to claim humanitarian asylum somewhere in the West.
My life seems so easy compared to his. We've both found ourselves outside of the traditional parameters of the definition of a “man” in our society. Being so obviously camp has meant he’s had no way of hiding or blending in or playing the role society expects of him. It’s different for me in that my sexual preferences are less apparent. My sexuality is something private and I appear to others as they want to see me. I play along with their game to avoid getting hurt.
I go and sit back down in the café. On my right is my fiancée and on my left is my lover. I feel like I'm the protagonist in a comic farce, some complex character which the playwright has endowed with an animal instinct for camouflage, a skill I’ve honed not only to survive, but also to thrive, in a society that is more concerned with the make-believe than with reality.
© Fadi Zaghmout. By arrangement with the author. Translation © 2013 by Ruth Ahmedzai. All rights reserved.

RTA, in a statement Monday night, claimed that the officers "peacefully removed a intoxicated 14-year old male [sic] from a bus," and that the teenager was so intoxicated that he was "unable to care for himself."
Activists, who were attending the Movement for Black Lives weekend conference at Cleveland State University, claimed on Twitter that an arrest had been made because the 14-year-old didn't have a bus ticket and that the transit officers "body slammed" him to to the ground.
RTA claims that the 14-year-old was examined by EMS at the scene — Euclid and E. 24th — and that he was released to his mother at 5:47 p.m. (at which release the crowds cheered). The press release says that the incident is now under investigation. Spokespeople have not yet replied to Scene's
requests for further details.
One detail that should be promptly cleared up is the name of the officer in the video below. His name has not yet been released; however, he was misidentified by activists as GCRTA officer Sean O'Neil. The real O'Neil issued a statement
on LinkedIn Tuesday saying that, as a night shift employee, he was neither the officer who pepper sprayed the crowd nor was he even there.
"You can imagine my surprise when I started receiving calls for work about being targeted by Anonymous and that my name was being thrown all around the Twitterverse and other social media sites," he wrote. He said he has disabled many of his online accounts, and that things are already "settling down."
Councilman Zack Reed issued a statement urging transparency in the ensuring GCRTA investigation and said that any use of force against individuals exercising their constitutional rights was "very concerning." Reed's colleague Jeff Johnson was even more critical on Twitter, saying that the pepper spray incident was "UNACCEPTABLE," and that he would personally seek removal of the officer and a full investigation.
We'll update as we find out more, but here's the video if you haven't seen it.
Details of yesterday's pepper spraying incident are still adhering very closely to partisan narratives, but the video below does indeed show a GCRTA officer issuing a "general burst" of pepper spray into a crowd of activists who had formed around his cruiser after transit police took a 14-year-old boy into custody.

My aunt Agnes died Monday morning. I feel a little guilty that I don't feel bad about it, but she died 10 weeks after her husband died and 5 weeks after finding out she had cancer, and that seems like a pretty good ending to me. There's no loose ends, no unfinished business, no mess to clean up.
And that leaves me without my usual grieving process, as I tend to deal with deaths by helping others get through them. Everyone deals with death their own way. That brings me to the other death to report.
People have been wondering what happened to the ubiquitous "Glaven Q. Heisenberg" comments on this blog and those who follow his blog have been impatiently awaiting news. His sister died. It was one of those stupid tragic freak accidents and, unlike my aunt's death, the situation is messy. He's been away from the blogosphere because there were more important things to take care of.
As a true introvert, Glaven recharges his batteries by withdrawing, so it's going to be a while before we hear from him again. There's a problem with getting back to his blog: he'll feel it necessary to say why he's been away, which will require him to talk about his sister; he won't know where to begin and will probably be afraid that, once the floodgates open, he won't be able to stop. It's impossible to neatly summarize a person or one's relationship with that person, so why even try? On the other hand, he can't just drop back into writing about the Beatles or Shakespeare when there's something weighing on his mind.
So, doing what I do, I'm trying to make it easier for him by broaching the subject here. Please go to his blog and leave a comment. Then, when he feels like writing again, all he has to do is say something like "Thanks for all the kind words. I'm not ready to talk about it yet," and he can go on to write about something else. Then, some day when he's writing about something else, an anecdote about his sister will come to mind and he'll write about it. I think his posts about his brother Frank are the best things he's written; I look forward to the Cathy posts.
Glaven's fourinone blog.
15 days - minor progress
15 hours ago

Named after Queen Alexandra of Denmark (December 1, 1844 – November 20, 1925), wife of King Edward VII and mother of George V. Alexandra Caroline Marie Charlotte Louise Julia was known for her many charitable works and was a very popular figure among the British public. This road was being laid out and built at around the time of her death. At 16, she was chosen as the future wife of Albert Edward, Prince of Wales, the heir apparent of Queen Victoria. They married 18 months later in 1863, the same year her father became king of Denmark as Christian IX and her brother was appointed to the vacant Greek throne as George I. She was Princess of Wales from 1863 to 1901, the longest anyone has ever held that title.
140 total views, 2 views today

Friday, 30 April 2010
That Friday Feeling
I'm so thrilled it's Friday. I've had a busy week, which has turned out to be far more exciting than I could have imagined. It's not a writerly excitement and I'll be able to say more about it next week.
My son left a message on the answer phone the other day, saying, "You've got to call me as soon as you can. I've just met Eddie Izzard and he's awesome. Hurry up and call me back." Then added as an after thought, "It's your son by the way." Bless him, as if I wouldn't recognize his voice. Naturally I called him immediately and he told me about meeting Eddie Izzard and having had a photo taken with him. I was so jealous as I think he's fabulous and still can't quite get over how someone can run all those marathons. An amazing man with more tenacity and determination than I can imagine most people ever having.
My editing is coming along well and I intend finishing working through my MS either today or tomorrow. It has red ink on practically every page, but I'm happy with the changes I'm making and hope the improvements are as good as they can and should be.
I'm in the middle of reading Sarah Duncan's book, A Single to Rome. I've read all of her books so far and always enjoy them. As well as this book, I'll then read the next two for my Little Black Dress Thursday feature at Novelicious - it's such a treat reading these books. After that I'm looking forward to reading Crossed Wires by Rosie Thornton. I've had a sneaky peak and can't wait to start reading. Right, I suppose I'd better get back to the editing, as it won't get done without me.

I was finally asked by a mundane if I was a furry. We were leaving the theater and I was raving on how furry it was. One guy asked if we were furries to which we responded an emphatic "yes!" We explained who we were to him and his girlfriend, although I don't think she was playing with a full deck.
About the only thing that bummed me out was that I had planned on getting everyone in for free. I had cleared this with the mananger that got me the gig. The theater owner paid me a visit when I was suiting up and told me that 10 passes was impossible. I was in a quandry. I was just about to de-suit and tell him to take a leap when he agreed to give me passes good for a later date. I know they count the box office, but why not just let us in under the table? If the show doesn't sell out, they're not "losing" money on us. It costs the same to run the movie if there are 100 people in the theater or 110. I could tell he was a cheap bastard because he also said I could get a drink from the concession stand. The ultra-mini size, of course. It would not be possible to give me a regular size. WTF!?! It costs you maybe $0.25 for the syrup and a cup, and you charge $3.00 for it, and you can't possibly give me a break?!? He was really pissed at the manager who promised me the passes. I didn't want to get her into trouble. I talked with her today and she basically called him a lying sack of shit. Oh well, I got my passes, so screw them. I also got to see an awesome flick.
After the movie I quickly returned to my den, showered, grabbed Abbey, and headed out to emberflowers lair for a Halloween party. She lives way the hell in Bumblefuck, but I found it. I suited, at least partially, the entire night from 6:00 to 10:00. There are some wonderful pictures of the headless coon that I hope she will post. OMG! That was some funny shit!
And now on to today. It was the Animal Humane Association's "Doggy Dash and Dawdle." It's their biggest fundraiser of the year. It is a competetive 5K run which you can do with or without a dog. Then there is also a fun walk. If you don't want to do either, you can just bring your dog and hang out. I suited up with the cheap mask they loaned me and my old bear suit that I had bought 15 years ago for $10. It looked surprisingly good! I hit the crowds which were estimated in the few thousand range. Wow! What a great time! I did it without a handler because I felt the mask allowed me good visibility and I wasn't expecting too many kids. It is a WHOLE different dynamic interacting with dogs than with kids. Most were scared of the suit. Many growled or barked. Some were indifferent. One boxer wanted to slurp the mask right off my face. I danced my tail off in front of the stage. The announcer loved me and I hammed it up for him. I had my picture taken many times including one with our local celebrity weatherman. My one thought the whole time was, "if they love this POS suit, wait until they see a REAL fursuit!" So now I am spent. Time for some relaxing. If things go according to the usual plan, I should be crashing sometime in the next 24 hours. Stay tuned for the angsty post. (hopefully not)

Anthony "AJ" Johnson, an actor and comedian best known for his performance as Ezal in "Friday," has died, his representative LyNea Bell told CNN Monday. He was 55.
"The world of Comedy has truly been shaken, again. Our BH Talent family is heartbroken about the loss of the iconic legend of stage and screen Mr. Anthony "AJ" Johnson," Bell said in a statement. "He has left with us amazing memories of his laughter, dynamic acting skills, but most of all his enormous personality and heart of gold."
No cause of death has been publicly shared.
Beyond his memorable performance in the 1995 hit film "Friday," Johnson also appeared in "House Party," "Menace II Society," "Lethal Weapon 3," "The Players Club" and "B.A.P.S" His television credits include "Martin" and "Malcolm & Eddie."
His "Friday" co-star Ice Cube took to Twitter to pay tribute, writing, "Sad to wake up to the news about AJ Johnson passing away. Naturally funny dude who was straight outta Compton at the same time. Sorry I couldn't bring your character Ezal back to the big screen in Last Friday..."
Johnson is survived by his wife Lexis, three children, and his two siblings.

Stevenson uses certain characters like Jekyll and Hyde to show how he engages and intrigues his readers. During the play many mysteries are created which makes the audience ask many questions about the characters.
The character of Utterson is the narrator and is a good example of a typical Victorian gentleman. He doesn’t show his inward reality, he shows that he hides a lot behind the surface. ‘Long, dusty, dreary and yet somehow loveable.’
This suggests he feels he has to hide, some of his more human qualities. The writer uses the phrases ‘yet’ and ‘loveable’ to show that good is sometimes hidden. The outward reality isn’t everything in this case as he is ‘yet a loveable person.’ He is a person that we should trust as he is a lawyer however Stevenson highlights how trust in what is seen and believed is sometimes wrong. Utterson is strict with himself and doesn’t seem to like the idea of having fun.
It is said he is
“Austere with himself”
Austere means that he is strict with himself showing he is a trust worthy person who would keep his word and not go round saying things that people would not want him to. However, the author also states that he ‘enjoyed the theatre, had not crossed the doors of one for some twenty years’.
This is showing he loves the theatre but as he is strict with himself he does not seem to enter a theatre door this also shows how he is strict with himself as he misses out on the fun things because he is strict with himself when he could just go out and go to the theatre.
One character that Utterson is “tolerant” with is Mr Enfield. He has a opposite personality to Utterson
“Well known man about town”
He is a well known man as he is a sociable person and loves to have fun and party about, which is different to Utterson as Utterson is a boring person and doesn’t appear to...

We then drove on to Giza, where we stopped at the Funky Brothers cotton shop. I was a bit disappointed with the shop, there was lots of stuff, but not much choice and it was very crowded. We bought some lunch at the take-away next door.
Final stop for the day was our hotel near the airport, it was really beautiful. We took a bit of a walk to stretch our legs before our flight. We rested a bit, finished packing up our things and had a lovely supper at the Italian restaurant at the hotel. Our last supper with Walter, although we hope to see him again soon at his home in Pietermaritzburg.
Our transfer to the airport picked us up at 9:30pm. No sooner had we got to the airport when we realised that our flight was delayed for at least 4 hours. If only we’d known before, we could have slept at the hotel for a few hours! We ended up sleeping on chairs at the Heineken pub in the airport.

Heather led me to her bedroom and then through it into what I supposed would be the bathroom, but it wasn't.
The room was an Aladdin's cave. In the centre was a black leather bed - the sort of thing you might see in a doctor's surgery. On the walls hung canes, chains, ropes, whips, straps. There was a leather corset, leather collars, leather cuffs. Against the wall was a neat row of boots and high heeled shoes. There was a place for tying someone against the wall, legs apart, arms outstretched above their head. On a table were vibrators, dildos - all sorts of gadgets.
Heather put her champagne down on the table.
"Look," I started, "I'm sorry, but I'm really not in to this. I absolutely can't stand pain, I can't even bear to be tied up, in fact I don't even like anything on my wrists, see," I said thrusting my wrists up to show her. "I don't even wear a watch."
She waited for my babbling to stop then put a forefinger to her lips.
"Shhh," she went softly. "I promise, promise absolutely that I won't hurt you or tie you up or put anything on your wrists. All right?"
I was partially reassured but my enthusiasm had rather drained away.
"Can I dress you up?" Heather said tentatively.
"Yes, of course you can," I said. That seemed harmless enough.
"Take off your robe," Heather said.
I let the robe fall to the floor and stood naked in front of her.
"You're so beautiful," she said. "I can hardly keep my hands off you."
"Please don't," I said.
"Oh, I'm sorry," she said taken aback.
"No, I mean please don't keep your hands off me."
Heather laughed. "Don't worry, I will, or rather I won't."
Heather took the black leather corset from its place on the wall and held it against me.
"Yes, let's see you in this." She put it around my middle, did up the hooks then laced it tight. "You have the waist for it," she said.
The corset left my breasts uncovered and stopped short of my neatly trimmed pubes.
"Now boots," she said. "What size are you?"
"Hmm. These I think. They are sevens but should do nicely."
The boots were shiny, black and cunt length. I got in to them with the help of some lubricating talcum powder.
"Now," Heather said. "Stand up straight, legs apart, hands on hips." She stood back to admire her handiwork. "Clench your fists," she said, "rest them against your hips... That's it."
She stood looking at me for several seconds, then she undid her robe, eased it off her shoulders and let it slip to the floor. She stepped out of it. She came towards me, stopped an arm's length away from me then lay on the floor, her feet towards me, her legs wide apart.
"Hurt me," she said.
I must have left my brain at home today. I'd been picked up without realising it and now this - I hadn't seen this coming at all. I wasn't at all prepared.
"I'm not sure I can," I said. "Not just like that." It wasn't as if Heather was someone like Jennie who deserved to be humiliated. Heather was bigger, braver, richer, smarter, stronger than me. An Amazon.
"Go on," she said. "Kick me. Kick me in the cunt if you like."
I just couldn't do it. She sat up, seemingly unconcerned that I'd failed in my task. "I did promise you some lunch, fancy something to eat?" she said.
"OK," I said rather guiltily. "Shall I take these off?"
"No, no, I'll at least have the pleasure of looking at you. Here," she said. "Get the whip off the wall, I'd like to see you standing there holding the whip."
It was the least I could do. I got the whip and resumed my dominant pose. Heather was sitting on the floor.
"Oooh, if only," she said. "Just do one before we go and have some lunch. Go on, bring it straight down, over my shoulder so it hits my back."
"If you're sure," I said.
I lifted the whip up above my head and meant to bring it down onto her shoulder, but I did it so slowly that the whip just got tangled up in my arm and didn't get anywhere near her.
"You've got to give it a bit of go," she said. "Have you ever cast a fishing rod? It's the same kind of flick."
I'd never cast a fishing rod, but I knew what she meant. I gave it another go and the whip scythed through the air over her shoulder and down onto her back.
Heather straightened and went, "Oooh, yes. Lovely. One more, then lunch, please?"
"OK," I said. Suddenly I was shaking. Hitting her with the whip had sent a definite thrill through me, it had aroused me.
I lifted the whip up high and brought it down over her shoulder again.
"Ooooooooh!" Heather went. "You don't know how nice that is! What a shame it's just not your thing."
But it was! I could feel my nipples stiffening and tingling and the juices begin to flow.
Heather sprung up off the floor, donned her robe and tossed mine to me. "Keep the gear on," she said. "Keep the robe open? So I can admire you."
"Yes," I said. But the word didn't quite come out. I cleared my throat. "OK," I said. I was trembling.
Heather made us a healthy salad for lunch and we ate beside the pool. She told me her husband worked for the Stroudly Building Society - he was one of the Directors actually - and I said I worked for a building society, though not the same one. They'd been taken over, hence the house. They were like Josh and me in a way - they liked each other to have fun, though he, Derek, didn't have Josh's desire to be told every little detail of Heather's encounters.
We finished lunch and I was afraid that Heather was going to hint that it was time for me to go, but she didn't.
I helped her load the dishwasher. "You look so good in that corset and those boots," she said. She turned to me, opened my robe so that my breasts were exposed. She squeezed and rolled and chafed my nipples. The effect was electric. I looked up at her hoping she would kiss me, and she did. She put her arms around me and I put my arms around her and we kissed long and deep, lost in each other. I wanted her desperately, I wanted to love her, to stroke her, to taste her.
We parted and she took my hand. "Come on," she said. "Let's go upstairs and make love."
She took her robe off and sat on the bed. She patted the bed beside her. I took my robe off and sat alongside her. She stroked my face, then kissed me and, still kissing we lay down and pressed our bodies against each other.
She was so soft and gentle, languorous and lackadaisical - we just kissed and caressed, not even touching each other's best bits. I was happy just lying there melting in her arms.
"It's a shame you don't enjoy dishing out the punishment," she said ruefully.
For some reason I couldn't bring myself to tell her what a reaction I'd had when I'd hit her with the whip. So I said innocently: "I'm happy to play along, if that's what you'd like."
Her eyes lit up. "Come on then." Not waiting for me to change my mind she led me into her punishment room.
"You can choose anything you like," she said indicating the array of implements on the walls.
I shrugged, feigning disinterest. But I could feel my nipples tingling again.
"Just one thing," she said. "Will you tie me up to the wall, cane my bum, then we'll go and make love properly, yes?"
My pulse was racing, my mouth was dry, my sex was wet.
I shrugged. "OK," I said.
She faced the wall, put her feet apart and stretched her arms up above her head to the fixing points. I started to do up the thick leather straps around her ankles.
"Tight as you can," she said.
I secured her ankles and wrists and stood back to look at her. She looked even taller now and had a swan-like grace. I had an urge to put my hand between her legs and feel her arse and her cunt, but I resisted.
Heater waited patiently. I took a cane down from the wall and gave it a few practice swishes.
"Hmmm, sounds good," Heather said.
"I'll just do it gently, if that's all right," I said. Or rather, I lied.
All those feelings I had had when Josh had held Jennie and I'd hit her came flooding back.
"Whatever," Heather said.
I took up position, looking at Heather's round and muscled arse. I wanted to cane it, I knew it would give me pleasure.
I raised the cane up above my shoulder and brought it down with a swish and a crack onto her backside.
Heather started, involuntarily tugging against her bonds and let out a sharp "Ah!"
Suddenly I felt guilty. "Oh, sorry," I said. "Was that too hard?"
"No, no, no, pussycat," she purred. "You just carry on like that. Use whatever you like. Just so long as it hurts."
She put her face to the wall, as if settling down for a beating.
I looked at the red line across her backside.
"Does it sting?" I said.
"Hmmm, it glows," she said.
"I'll try this," I said, taking a length of thick leather down from the wall. Heather didn't look to see what it was.
I could feel cunt juice starting to dribble down the inside of my thighs. I savoured the moment, admiring her arse, getting ready for the blow with the leather. I raised it up and brought it down with a thump on her arse. Again Heather tensed and her bonds tightened, then she relaxed and gave a little grunt of pleasure.
"Are you ready?" I said.
"It's all right, you don't have to ask. Just do whatever you want in your own time. Don't warn me."
"OK," I said.
"Oh yes," she said quietly.
I liked the cane better - the sound through the air, the crack as it hit her. So I picked that up again.
"You like me in these boots, don't you?" I said.
"I do, you look..."
I interrupted her by bringing the cane down across her buttocks.
"Oh God, yes!" she went as the pain turned to pleasure.
Please click here for
Erotic Fiction Chapter 7
For other porn stories please visit
Other Porn Stories

Teenage musician, 16, found hanged in his bedroom after years of being bullied by classmates who mocked him over YouTube music videos
- Martin Horner suffered 'severe bullying' due to small size and love of music
- 16-year-old was found dead after writing a message in his window
- Mother says bullies picked on 'anything and everything' to torment him
A teenager who was bullied because of the music videos he posted on YouTube was found hanged in his bedroom by his parents, an inquest has heard.
Shortly before his death, 16-year-old Martin Holder wrote a message saying 'The darkness ahead is not what you imagine' in the dust on his window.
His mother, Marj Hamlett-Hughes, said he had suffered 'severe bullying' thoughout his life thanks to his small size and his love of playing music.
Tragic: Martin Holder was found dead in his bedroom after apparently being bullied at school
Musician: The teenager was tormented over his love of music and the YouTube videos he made
In a statement, she and Martin's father Colin Holder told the inquest: 'We think Martin's morale was eroded away over a number of years leading to him taking this tragic action.'
They also described how two days before his death in November 2012, the teenager turned round and gave his father a hug as he was leaving his house, 'almost as if he had made up his mind to end it all'.
Mrs Hamlett-Hughes said that her son was bullied at Gloucestershire College, where he was studying forensic computing at the time of his death.
'Martin was an anxious child as he got in his middle teenage years,' she said. 'He was worrying about all sorts of things and was bullied in his general life as well even when he did his paper round.
'Colin and I believe that Martin intended to end his life although we acknowledge he did not leave a suicide note.
Heartbroken: Martin's mother Marj Hamlett-Hughes, left, called for greater protection from bullying
Target: The schoolboy's mother said he was picked on because of his small size and love of music
'Having said that, Martin did write a message in the dust on the inside of the window of his bedroom.
'I acknowledge that Martin had wrote things and songs previously which also expressed dark views and cryptic messages. There was severe bullying through his whole school life.'
She added: 'Both Colin and I are 95 per cent sure Martin had ended his life, but we are 100 per cent sure he was bullied in school.
'Bullying happens everywhere, and there is still a lot of verbal and physical bullying going on, and online as well.'
However, coroner David Dooley, recording an open verdict, said he did not believe the teenager was bullied, and instead 'gave as good as he got'.
He added: 'He had a lot to put up with over his school years, and developed a thick skin. It has damaged his self esteem, although this is tenuous to say this was the cause of the death.'
Verdict: A coroner recorded an open verdict at the inquest into the teenager's death
Beloved: Martin, pictured as a young boy, is believed by his parents to have taken his own life
Speaking after the verdict at her home in Cheltenham, Mrs Hamlett-Hughes, 42, disputed the coroner's verdict, saying that bullies targeted 'anything and everything' about him.
'It was not just his size and his singing, they would pick up on something and see his reaction,' she said. 'He was seen as an easy target, he was a sensitive kid.
'They would take his bag, throw it down the corridor or in a tree, they would take his lunch and do the same. They'd rip his blazer too, they would pick on anything and everything as long as he gave a reaction, it was physical, mental and cyber.
'The coroner said the bullying had stopped - that's not right, he just lost faith in the system to report it because nothing was being done.'
She said that he had tried to start a band by advertising for other musicians online, but the bullies found the ad and 'terrorised' him over it.
They had also forced him to delete a number of YouTube videos of himself performing by posting abusive comments on them.
'People need to know what bullying can lead to,' Mrs Hamlett-Hughes said. 'It can lead to self-harm, it can lead to suicide.
'People need to be made aware of how words can hurt, it is no the longer sticks and stones rhyme, these names can hurt.
'Bullying is a 24-hour thing now, kids can't escape it, it needs to be stopped.'
For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or go to www.samaritans.org.
Most watched News videos
- Shocking row erupts on the District Line near Plaistow in London
- Aerial footage shows section of Genoa bridge collapsed
- Ex-sorority girl busted for DUI drives around with suspended license
- Emergency services at scene where huge section of bridge collapsed
- Timeline tracks Anthony Condron's last hours in Liverpool
- Horrific crash sent two riders cartwheeling through the air in Ukraine
- Victoria's Secret bra expert shows how to find the perfect fit
- A-level results: Almost 68,000 unconditional offers made to students
- Students with unconditional offers tell of working hard
- Police at the scene where cyclist dies after collision with lorry
- Morandi bridge in Italy collapsed as cars were driving across it
- Firefighters' gruelling search for Morandi bridge survivors

I pushed as deeply as I could but it felt a long way from bottom. Then I slowly begin NatalieCuevas porn circle her ass with the vibrating egg. I had reviewed the schedules and was able to get to all four of my presentations today, even if I couldnt meet with all the reps. Her tits were roughly the size of ripe cantaloupes and nearly as firm, capped with russet nipples and areolas that were flawlessly proportioned. He nodded, his face suddenly flushing with the first real NatalieCuevas webcam up of his excitement. He quickly read through the rest of her selected favorites and was shocked to find that they were all about anal, and sneaky ways men talked their girlfriends into trying it. Which is why I put a big bow on a bottle of Astroglide and left it in a very convenient place for you find it.

Patients Age: 52
Admission Date: 11/21/2016
Admitted From: Greene Memorial Hospital
Discharge Date: 1/13/17
Discharged To: Home with Kettering Home Health Care
Length of Stay: 54 days (1 month 24 days)
Reason for Stay: Knee injury during fall
How did this patient hear about Hospitality? Greene Memorial Hospital recommendation
Details of Experience:
Monte was admitted to Hospitality Center for Rehabilitation and Healing on November 21st, 2016 in result of a fall that injured both knees. When he first arrived to Hospitality, he was unable to walk or move his legs. He also required extensive assistance with daily activities and transferring from his bed to his wheelchair. In addition he suffered from both respiratory and renal complications. When asked of his goals for therapy, he replied, “Strength to be able to push my wheelchair and use the walker.”
He was independently walking prior to his fall and wanted to regain his strength. Monte received physical and occupational therapy during his stay, where he received physical therapy daily. His therapists worked to build his strength and increase his endurance. To enhance physical endurance, the therapy team offered upper extremity arm exercises and balance skills. One of his therapists, Rodney, shared, “The bike really helped because it normalized his legs and got them moving. He was very motivated and goal-oriented. It really helps us when we receive patients that really want to get better and have that drive.”
When evaluating his experience with therapy Monte shared, “I enjoy therapy. I have been working on my strength. I’m happy with the progress I have made in my leg.” He also rated his overall stay as a “10”, saying, “The nursing staff has been really good. The food is very good here as well.” Before discharge, the staff was able to regulate his renal complications through a well-balanced diet.
Monte arrived with the inability to move in and out of his wheelchair. Once he was able to discharge from Hospitality, he was able to walk independently with a walker and had met and exceeded his therapy goals according to his physical therapist! He was discharged home with follow-up assistance provided by Kettering Home Health on January 13th, 2017.

Week 362 – How do you know my sister?
Okay, he couldn’t do this.
Tony couldn’t pretend that he was okay with delaying going after Natasha. There was no telling what would happen to her in that time, her brother was a monster and the men who worked for him would have no conscience.
He had to get what he could out of Brandon then he could go after her. Her big blue eyes, so trusting, believing in him even though she had zero reason to given how he’d grabbed her from her house and then dropped the bombshell of her brother’s true nature.
But like the brave woman she was Natasha had agreed to be part of this, to help in whatever way she could.
There was no way he could fail her even worse than he already had.
“The woman … she looked familiar,” he said to Brandon as he followed the other man inside and over to a staircase that led up to the second floor. “Kind of looks like … what was her name … Natalie? No Natasha.”
Throwing a wary look over his shoulder, Brandon continued up the stairs. “How do you know my sister?”
“Your sister? Didn’t know you were related. She works at the same company as me. She’s the vice president, I just started. Been trying to get her into my bed but so far no luck.” Tony snickered even though he hated talking about women in that tone. But he needed a lead as to where Natasha was being taken. Then he could go and find her, get her someplace safe, and then he’d focus all his energy on bringing Brandon down.
Brandon chuckled. “Sounds like my sister. Stuck up that one. Little Miss Perfect, thats how I always think of her. Thought of her anyway. She’s about to learn that she’s no better than me.”
The sinister sound of laughter had his blood turning to ice, and it took everything he had to keep the smirk on his face.
“If you’re interested in keeping her, once I break her I’ll give you first offer at buying her,” Brandon offered like it was nothing.
If everything that had happened with his sister wasn’t enough to break him then knowing what he’d gotten Natasha into cracked the last pieces of his soul.

by Melekalikimaka (1 Posts), Sun Jan 25, 2015 08:56 pm
I haven't had a chance to read through all of the posts in this thread, but my experience was in direct contrast to those I have read. I didn't have severe pain. I ate some spicy grilled potatoes for supper, and afterwards didn't feel quite right. I chalked it up to the spices. I went to bed early, and by that time the discomfort had settled right behind my xiphoid process (the bottom of the sternum). I woke up a few times in the night, and the discomfort remained.
Because I had had severe swelling since the 2nd trimester, I spent some time on Google and when I saw the world preeclampsia, I decided to call the after-hours nurse. My BP had always been low (under 110/70), but at my last appointment it was around 120/80. Not a big jump, but a little unusual for me. I mentioned this all to the nurse, and it was decided that my doctor would meet me at the hospital. The discomfort turned into a mild pain, and I even asked for Tylenol at the hospital. After blood and urine tests, it was determined that I had HELLP Syndrome. No protein in my urine, and my BP was maybe around 150/90 at the highest. It would drop a bit when I would lie on my left side. I was induced, but when I didn't progress fast enough they decided on a c-section. My son was born at 36 weeks 6 days. He was in the NICU for 4 days, but is now a super healthy 2 and a half year old.
The pain never progressed beyond being mild. I'm a massage therapist and I'm hyper-aware of my body and how I feel and I attribute that (and a whole lot of sheer luck!!) to why I was able to catch it early enough.

I hailed a cab two blocks down from Glass Top's. The short walk had licked me clean. I came to some by the time we made my roost. The joint sure looked shabby after spending time at Top's fine establishment. As I staggered into the lobby, Harry was on the phone. "He's right here Ma'am" he chirped, then handed me the phone. It was Pepper checking in. She said to me "Daddy... Big Daddy wants to keep Daphne. You mind ?" I sat my ass down on the joker's desk. I really needed the rest. I growled in the receiver "Naw, bitch. Let him have her, he can wash his head with her." Pepper didn't exactly sigh her relief, but I could hear it across the wire just the same. She whispered "In that case Daddy... Ima be back there in two shakes of a lamb's tail." She was, too. I barely had time to say "Well Henry... how you keepin' up these days my man ?" and for ol' Homer to burble something I don't remember back at me that she was right there, shooting through them doors. She carried me upstairs and clued me in.
She told me she got on the phone to get the dollies play dates for the afternoon. Some jokers she knew had a small blind poker game out in the swank district they wanted a whore for. They didn't want all three of them, and she figured June's a perfect fit anyway just by herself. She said to me "Oh Daddy... I didn't want to bring her down again, that's all" with a twinkle in her eye. She couldn't find anything that'd work well for Daphne and her together, and she wasn't going to go by herself or put Daphne down by herself, so she figured the best thing'd be to drop in on her old man, work the square bitch over and learn her some whoring there. The way she figured it she'd drop Daphne off there, then take June to her game twelve blocks away, then go back and spend the night at her old pad until the time rolled around to pick up the other whore and head back. The way it played out, Frank and Daphne hit it so well together, she figured that prissy bitch is mostly worthless anyway. Why not throw a rock where there's two birds already ? I patted her sweet ass and ran her down. I said "You mangy old whore, here's what you're worth : I was just shooting the breeze with a pimp fresh off the top shelf. He's making five grand in three days, working a half-dozen whores or more raw over at the Franklin Arms." She said "You mean Glass Top ?" I nodded at her. "Well done, bitch. There's a prize at the end waiting for you. Now get this : he's paying a bill for grease each night. Per girl." Pepper giggled. "You don't know this, but that's what I offered the pigs after copping June, back before we met : a bill a block. By the week, for the whole precinct. Comes to seventy-six a week. They wouldn't deal, let that aside. Besides cutting me in you cut the price, too. Frank's five grand tops' a thirty-five percent discount. Ain't that right ?" She giggled more and she nodded. "Yeah, that's right." I grabbed her by the hair again with my left mitt, and reached my right far out. "That's right, you worthless bitch. He's paying 30% to some bellhop on top of a bill to the girl each night. I got a 35% discount off a bill a block each week, all because of your dumb ass. What do you deserve for that, bitch ? What's fair ? Huh ?"
Her eyes rolled far inside her head. "Beat me up, Daddy. Beat my ass. Hurt your poor Pepper bad." I brought my hand in slow and caressed her face. "I ain't gonna hurt you that way, baby. I love you, don't you know that ?" She purred. "Hurt my ass with your big thick rod, Daddy. Please Daddy, put it in me where it hurts the worst. I'm so hot for you, Christ! Make Mama bleed for you. Please Daddy! Hurt your old dog down there lovey dovey Daddy baby!" She was going crazy. She was driving me crazy right along with her. My swipe was like a baseball bat. When I was done with her she walked like a cowboy after six days of posse. I sat up and counted twenty-one hundred out of Frank's pile. I said to her "I'm not done punishing you by a damn sight. Get this : you're going to Glass Top's. You know where he pads at ?" She knew alright, once I said six west of the Roost she knew the rest. "You give him this scratch. You get two crumbs of girl and six cans of reefer. You come straight back." Her eyes opened wide. "Did you have a taste ?" she asked me. I shook my head. "I've never had anything like he's got. I don't know what pie crust pre-mix you've been having me snort, but Glass Top's girl can raise the dead." She shook her head. "Frank's always too cheap to buy his stuff." I stopped. "Say, what ?" She shook her hand, like "Don't ask." I couldn't figure it at all, the same guy that'd drop fifty on a kid he just met wouldn't drop a coupla on some real crack ?!
I said to her "Now Pep, you ready for your punishment ?" She put her smoky peepers on me. "You're worth a million bucks before counting in the clothes. That girl's two grand. I ain't gonna let two grand worth of girl kill a million bucks worth of whore for me." She muttered, "Good grief!" I went on. "You ain't gonna pig out. You're gonna have a little now and again. Not every day. Not all the time. Now and again. Not a lot. Not just a little more. A little bit, that's all. I'm buying it to store it, not to snort it. You got that ?" I could tell there was nothing I could've said that'd have put the hurt more on her. I walked up to her and kicked her lightly in the shin. She crumpled on the floor. I put my stomper on her throat, not pushing down any, just resting there. I said "Can I trust you to do that or do you have to ask permission every time before you touch the stuff ?" She was crying. After all this time together, after all the game we'd played, I finally had her broken down. She whispered "You'd better make me ask you for permission, Daddy." I took my stomper off her throat. I said "Alright, go cop and I'll cut you a line. You've earned that much you beautiful black bitch." She touched up her make-up and flew out of there.
Half hour later she was back. The broom closet upstairs that we were using for hot storage was starting to get full. Between all the liquor, enough fine cocaine to make somebody's tombstone in plaster of it, cans and cans of reefer and all the stashes of scratch it was starting to look more and more like the evidence room downtown. She said "He threw in a bag of yellows. Did you tell him he can sock into me ?" I nodded. "He's wanted to for as long as I known him, did you know that ? When he saw me at the door he got excited like I'd run away to him. Then when he saw the dough he got wise. He told me you said you'll send a whore, and he could lay her if he wants to. He said he didn't get the joke then, but he gets it now. I think he thought you're showing me off, to pull his chain." I smiled at her. "What did you do ?" Pepper caressed my hair and went on "I told him if you said so I'm his to lay. I leaned into him on his couch, but he couldn't do anything. He was too loaded up I think." I started laughing like a maniac. Pepper looked at me like maybe my cork's blown. I said to her "When we were there, he figured me for some kid, offered up Radell, if you know her. But then he got a call and sent her off to work the Arms. He said to me sorry kid, that I've missed my chance. So now..." Pepper was laughing too. "Poor guy", she said. "He's always missed on all of his." Then she looked up at me serious. "You gotta be careful mixing yellows with C, Daddy. The yellows make you sleep, they're good to catch some doss if you bang lots of C. They're bad though because enough of them can kill you dead. They make it so you forget to breathe. They're opposite one another, too, so if you're on C you don't feel the yellow. But the bitch of it is, cocaine fades faster than they do. It's like pulling the rug from under you. If you go to bed with a load of yellow in you that's too much to live and enough C to make so you can't feel it, by the time the C's gone you've bought a one ticket out of here. It'll take you with it. And don't take them with liquor, neither."
Then the runt came in, with a new face in tow. That new bitch rolled her lustrous eyes at me. Her sly hot smile made a flat statement, "Please, try me out for size." The runt says "This is Chris" and got herself out of her glove. Chris followed suit without looking at her. The runt had prepped her alright. A white jacket fringed in a rich purply blue and its matching skirt came off, not frantic fast, not too slow either. She stood there a moment in just white stockings held up by a nude belt and white satin panties over them. Then she ditched the panties. Her cat was trimmed neat and close, just a thin line of hair left to go up from the slit. I turned to the runt "You taught her to trim out her cat like that ?" The runt shook her head. "No Daddy. She taught me. Before you made me whore Chris made me lez." I turned back to Chris "That so ?" She nodded. Looked me right in the face bright eyed too, as she did it. "Yes, sir." I took her in. She was pretty, and looked close enough to brave, too. I said "Chris, do you smoke pot ?" She nodded. Phyllis got excited. "There's pot ?" I nodded and said to her "Bitch, go to the closet pick a can. I don't know about that crap. Get something mellow we chill out." She bounced out of there. By the time Pepper had a newspaper sheet in thin strips she was back holding a can of black gunion. "Daddy, this smells great!" She took a strip and rolled a bomber, licked it to give it even burn and, matchbox in hand, held it for me. "You light it, bitch." I said. I didn't have to say it twice. She reached the gleaming, bulging paper cigar to me. I took a puff of it like it were a cigar for real. They started cracking up. I looked at them like "what the fuck ?" and puffed again. They lost their shit. They were laughing so hard it coulda killed them, mostly from trying to hold themselves in. Chris teared up, the runt was rolling on the floor. Eventually Pepper broke out, "Pretty Daddy, you ever smoke a joint before ?"
"Not in this life" I said. "Why, could you tell ?" That gave them hysterics. It was the funniest thing in the world to these three bitches standing on the stained cheap carpet in my crumbling pad. They explained it to me then, that the idea is to hold the smoke in, for as long as you can. Oh, I said, thinking of Rotten Tooth Jimmy. "I thought that was just an old gangster myth." They started snort-laughing like idiots. I passed the spiff to Pepper, who drank it in like a sponge. We got comfortable. Pepper laid her bloodied asshole out in bed, leaning on the side. I lay my neck on her belly. The runt kneeled at my feet, then went on her ass to the side and slowly found her way to rubbing them for me. Chris sat on the floor, her back against the wall, facing towards the runt's side. She asked how many whores I've got. Pepper giggled. The runt said "Nooobooody knooows" in a booming, spooky voice like on a radio play. Chris gave her a lingering eyelick, desperate for support. I was trying to figure out if they're conning together, making like they're apart and the show a put-on, or if the runt's turned solid and they just never prepped this far. The runt coached her some, clear as day. It's how the bitch knew to step out of her duds. But did she coach her on how to please, or did she coach her on how to get one through ? Whose bitch was Phyllis, anywho ? She said to the runt, "Ooh, when he looks at me like that!" She turned to me "I know you can read minds. You give me the creeps with that look. It's like you're Svengali or that crazy Russian Monk I read about." She giggled. I could hear the thrill in her voice. The whore was alive and thrashing inside her. She had done more than screw on the fire escape at high school, that's for sure.
I said "Drop the lids on those pretty peepers in your skull and make with the jib. Spill your story, bitch." She closed her eyes and said "I'll spill. Anything you want from me, I'll give it up, whatever it is. Don't put the pressure on me. Please don't. I get nervous.". Phyllis looked at me. I nodded at her. She grabbed my hand and spelled out words in it, with her finger, letter by letter. It took her three or four tries before I got what she was saying to me. Chris' voice came softly, like from far away. "I'm married. Leroy plays the horn and bugle. He saved my life, really. He's been wonderful to me. He used to be good looking. He didn't get so insanely jealous until after his accident. We've been waiting over two years for a settlement. My life is so screwed up. I don't know what to do. I don't know what to tell you. Would you believe that you're the first people I've talked to in over two years, other than Phyllis?" Pepper gave a start. I sent my left hand overhead, to squeeze her ass and settle her. "I don't love Leroy." Chris gave a shudder. The runt grabbed her by the hand and pulled her in. Chris leaned in and rested her head on the runt's thighs. She wasn't opening those peepers come what may, that's for damn sure. I lifted my feet to let her in, then brought them back down, resting my heels on her tits. The runt kissed my toes a little then went back to rubbing. Chris' nostrils flared. She went on, "I remember nothing but good until I was eleven. That's when my mother died. One wet Autumn day they put her in a box. My father was a kind, good man. He always worked. He was a good carpenter. That changed quickly after Mama died. He took my bed down. He said he wanted me to sleep with him. He told me how lonely his bed was after all those years with Mama. It was nothing at first. When my little girl titties first came in, they hurt a lot. The bumps were sore all the time, and tender to the touch. They itched and hurt at the same time. One night I had a nightmare. A wild ferocious animal with barbed wire teeth was on me, suckling at my breast. It was terrible, the pain of it drove me crazy. It woke me up. Papa was on me, sucking on my bud. I screamed. He slapped me, hard. His face was all twisted. Hateful. He looked like a crazy stranger. I sobbed quietly until I blacked out. When I came to Papa was crying and begging me to forgive him. I forgave him. He was so sad. His sadness made me sad. It never went away, that sadness never went away. Then later I dreamed about the evil wolf again. I didn't want to wake up. After a while I would just lie there, numb, and let him use me. I wanted to hate his guts. In school I had the crazy feeling all the other girls could see and feel my shame and filth. I barely made it to fifteen, more skeleton than girl. By then he had me doing everything to him. I'd lay flat on my back while he moved over me, thinking him dead in Hell. Papa, the beast, was killing me. I was so nervous I couldn't wash dishes. I broke dozens. I wasn't eating enough to keep a bird alive. I collapsed one day coming from the grocery. I woke up in a hospital. My system was shot and I was pregnant. They kept me in that hospital a month. I stayed at Papa's two days and one night after getting out. I took some money while he slept and left Wichita with the clothes on my back. I came here and got a waitress job. A flashy young pimp named Dandy Louee took to picking me up when I got off. I thought he was a millionaire. He dressed me up and turned me out. He was a cruel black bastard. He liked to beat me, and then screw me. He said it's not right to put his swipe in a whore that's not hurt for it. He liked to give me bruises with his belt and then grab on to them and pinch them while he fucked me. He liked to hear me squeal in pain."
The runt leaned over and kissed her mouth. Chris kissed her back, then with a grit of her teeth went back to her tale. "He worked me in a house run by one of his whores. He kept his foot in my ass all day long, or she did it for him. She liked seeing us other whores suffer. Funny thing, I made money even when my belly was stuck way out. A lot of tricks who came there wanted specifically a pregnant girl. The baby came out while I was turning a trick. Stillborn. Dandy got five years on a white slave rap a few months later. The other whores turned on the house boss. Pulled out all the hair from her head. They beat her up with his belt, black and blue. I got a bar-maid job. That's where I met Leroy, he was playing a gig. I was a sick girl. I fell out twice while serving the bar. The second time the owner fired me. The place was crowded, I had twenty dollars worth of drinks crammed on my tray. Leroy took me in. He nursed me back to health. He's always been good to me. I needed someone who cared. He wanted married so we did it, just four months shy of seventeen. I went along on a string of one-nighters in the Midwest. We couldn't afford a room most nights. We had his old Ford model T. The group broke up in Youngstown, Ohio. We were stranded, without a dime for gas. It was cold out. Leroy got a job in an industrial cleaning plant. The second week a boiler exploded and... you've seen his face ?" She wanted to open her eyes, but didn't. "Maybe you have." I asked her if he's playing at the Roost these days ? She said he had a gig there past week. I said then yeah, can't be there's two of him. "We came here once he was out of the hospital. His lawyer says we can expect a ten-thousand dollar settlement any time now." she said. "He's been saying it for more than a year. Leroy is driving me crazy with his jealousy. He was maybe a little jealous from the get-go, but ever since his accident it went worse and worse. I spend all day locked in the house. Half my time I answer questions, about people I don't even know, I've never seen. It's not a life. Phyllis has been the only one in my life this past year since we came here. When she cut out last week I thought that's it for me. I don't have anyone else. I don't mind hustling. I'd live here if I may. Do I have to put out for Daddy ? What should I do?"
Nobody said anything. The runt rolled out another bomber. She was nodding like someone who's taken their friends to see a freak that'd move Barnum even. I said, "Poor Chris, you've had nothing but heartache. I feel sorry for you, baby. Suckle my toes and tell me how you ain't nothing but a low dog." She mixed her tears and spit on my feet, slowly, hopelessly. She said she's nothing but dirt, that nobody'll ever love her. She said she can't look at a man like women can. She doesn't hate the jokers, but they're to her nothing besides misery and the remembering of misery. They're like the wall of tears of the Jewish people. The ash to rub in your hair, and on your face, the ash to chew instead of food. I asked if the runt's her bitch. She shook her head. She said "I love her, that's all." The runt teared up a little, but didn't let on. Then she asked "Can she stay, Daddy ? I'll do anything if she can stay. Anything." I turned to Pepper. "What do you say, Mama ? We keeping this bad luck bitch ? Find out if maybe lightning strikes or meteors drop or something to fuck it all up for her sake ?" Pepper didn't say anything. She just reached out her arms, and called for Chris. "Come here, broken birdy." I let her get into bed and in the Pep's embrace. They were kissing and hugging and crying together in bed. The runt was weeping quietly sitting on the floor. What a drag! Three naked whores, a can of reefer, and enough wailing for six funerals. Nobody'll ever figure bitches out.
I thought outloud "Weren't you supposed to get June back from school ?" Pepper jumped up like touched with hot coals. "Hot damn!" It was five after three. She jumped in a blazer with nothing underneath and flashed to her car. Three minutes later she was speeding down the avenue. I could feel my skull go into a dreamy float. I got one brilliant thought after another. The trouble was, each one I tried to hold long enough so I could put a saddle on it stampeded. It was maybe like the painful irritation a drunk wrangler suffers trying to corral a herd of greased mustangs. Gangster was sure a whore's high. That reefer confusion was no good for a pimp's skull. I dreamily drifted into bed, where Pepper had warmed it with herself. The runt and Chris got in on either side of me. They caressed my arms and chest. Once I fell asleep they cleared out.

No one should be denied dialysis in North Carolina.
0 have signed. Let’s get to 200!
My mom has been denied dialysis in North Carolina. She has been on dialysis for four years and was going to an outpatient center. She got sick with sepsis from a bedsore and was placed on a ventilator. She was on a ventilator for four weeks. She was able to wing off the ventilator and a trache was placed. She was ready to be discharged from the hospital when we find out that no dialysis centers in North Carolina would accept her with a trache. We were told the only option was to send her to a nursing home that has dialysis with it in Hyattsville, Maryland which is 8 hours from home. She was there for 3 hours in conditions that were not good. We called an ambulance and she was admitted into the hospital in Maryland. The hospital decided to help try to wing her off the trache. They were able to take it out and mom is doing wonderful. She is ready for discharge and we find out that dialysis centers are still not wanting to accept her. They are saying she is medically unstable for outpatient dialysis. There should be facilities in North Carolina that would accept my mom. There needs to be nursing homes with dialysis in North Carolina. She is not able to see her family because she is so far away from home. She wants to go home and not have to stay in Maryland.
Today: Kristal is counting on you
Kristal Austin needs your help with “Patrick McHenry: No one should be denied dialysis in North Carolina.”. Join Kristal and 118 supporters today.

A bonus and then the sack
An African American lawyer whose high performance was rewarded with a bonus is suing a prominent global firm on allegations he was fired months afterwards because of his race.
Lyle A Silva filed a lawsuit against Cleary Gottlieb Steen & Hamilton on 23 December.
Silva was employed as a project lawyer with the global firm’s Washington DC office between July 2011 and August 2012.
In his filing, Silva alleges he was terminated because “of his race or colour”.
After commencing at the firm, Silva primarily worked on two matters in 2011.
At his end of year review in December of that year, Silva states he was told his performance thus far was “exceptional” and that his two supervisors “spoke very highly of him”.
He was awarded a discretionary $US 2500 bonus at that review for work to date.
By July 2012 work on the second matter was winding down and he was placed on “furlough” pending assignment on another matter.
In the States, furlough describes a situation when an employee is placed on temporary leave, often due to economic circumstances.
Alas, no new matter came up and a few weeks later, Silva alleges he was called by a senior attorney and staff attorney to inform him he was being terminated due to a lack of work.
Silva then did some investigation work of his own.
He found that of the five other project attorneys assigned to the second matter, one other, a Hispanic female lawyer, was placed on furlough and also terminated on the same date as him.
He also found that the four Caucasian lawyers that worked on this matter had kept their jobs, even though some of them might have also been placed on furlough while waiting for more work to come through the door.
Cleary Gottlieb denies the allegations.
In a statement to the ABA Journal, the firm said;
“We are aware of the lawsuit and believe that the complaint is without merit. The plaintiff filed a complaint approximately two years ago with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, which dismissed the matter last September.”
Cleary Gottlieb has 16 offices, including digs in Hong Kong, Beijing and Seoul.

'If people could step into our world, they'd see how many lives have been destroyed' - Mother of gangland victim
The mother of one of the two Dublin men shot dead and buried on a remote island in Co Cavan has said she will never forgive his killers.
Eoin O'Connor (32) and his friend Anthony Keegan (33) disappeared on April 22.
Mr O'Connor had borrowed his mother Jean's car to travel to Ballyjamesduff with the other man.
But before he left he told relatives that if he did not return they were to contact gardai.
The pair failed to come home, and so Mr O'Connor's family raised the alarm.
From the outset it was believed both men had come to serious harm.
Mrs O'Connor's Ford Focus was found abandoned in the car park at Lough Owel near Mullingar three days later.
A month after that, fishermen who had travelled to Lough Sheelin reported a smell coming from Inchicup island, and gardai made the grim discovery of the decomposing bodies of both men.
Post mortems revealed they had both been shot in the head.
Mrs O'Connor said her son, whose daughters aged 10 and five returned to school last week, did not deserve to die like he did. I'll never forgive his killers.
"My son was no major criminal. The only things he lived for were his family, friends, dogs and football," she said.
"We think about him every minute of every day and it's just heartbreaking to think he won't be around to see his children grow up. We will make sure his daughters will never forget him, and we will always be there for them."
Mrs O'Connor also pleaded with anyone who has any information about her son's death to come forward.
"If these people could step into our world for 10 seconds then they would see how so many lives have been destroyed," she said.
Mr O'Connor's brothers, Rory and Brian, said they will continue the family's quest for justice, and have put up a reward for information to catch the killers.
"There's a gaping hole in our lives and we all just miss him so much," said Rory in an interview with a Sunday newspaper.
"When we went to Lough Sheelin we could hear the officers say it was Eoin because of his clothes, and this was heartbreaking.
"There must be girlfriends or friends of the killers out there who know what happened, and it's never too late for them to come forward."
He added that his late brother had no money and no enemies, and there was no reason why he should die so brutally.
"He was the last person you would think this would happen to because he was never involved in anything," he said.
Meanwhile, the chief suspect for the murders is believed to be in Africa.
One theory being explored by gardai is that Mr O'Connor was killed after travelling to Cavan for another man who wanted a €15,000 drug debt collected.

Sapno Ki kisse Zaroorat Hai. Jab Khwaab Yahi hothon peho.🌹 ~Sona~♥️He was no Mister Know It All, he would learn all that he can. There was so many things he saw and heard, that he did not understand.
Always looking to be taught, always looking for knowledge he could pass. That’s exactly why he couldn’t wait, to enroll into his new class.
He had plans of impressing the new teacher, wooing her with the words he would write. But things didn’t go according to plan, when he seen her step into the spotlight.
Glittering Gold seemed to surround her, she was like an Angel from above. As soon as she said “Mein apki professor hongi”, he instantly fell in love.
Her eyes, her beauty and voice, it all made his head spin. He would graduate the course with flying colors, and then take her class all over again!♥️As days turned into weeks, he hung on every word the professor said. Even if she said it in another tongue, it still got stuck inside his head.
He wrote her the most romantic love poem, “Main Bhi Pyar Mein Gir Rahi Hoon” she replied. He didn’t understand a word she said, he just smiled as he got lost in her eyes.
The next day she wrote him some verses, that were sweeter than honey and wine. They were both becoming hypnotized over each other, and their relationship would blossom over time.
He confessed his feelings to his professor, from the bottom of his heart to the top. And she had taken him over with her words, and her love made his heart stop.
She had taught him more than books could, and they made some gorgeous weather. They grabbed each other’s hand and heart, and in time brought their worlds together.♥️🌏
If you look to far into the future, you may trip over the present. I’m glad I tripped over my present because you’re the best gift I’ve ever gotten. You are my future.♥️♥️

Yesterday my Mom had to let her best friend go. Gracie was old, but she hung on for a long time to be there with my mom. I have never seen a dog care for it's owner like my mom's dog. She was a sweet girl with a gentle spirit. We will all miss her. Love you Mom!

4 October 2018
I first took a polygraph when I applied to the CIA and went through the applicant screening process.
To prepare for the test, I read A Tremor in the Blood by David T. Lykken. The book described the use of control versus relevant questions as well as countermeasures such as butt-clenching. I had no desire to use countermeasures. I wasn't out to "beat" the test: I wanted to understand how it worked. A future colleague at the Agency advised me, "Spill your guts." I thought it was good advice, and I planned to follow it.
I knew I was taking a risk in applying to the Agency. I worked as a defense contractor on a project for the CIA, so I already held CIA TS/SCI clearances. If I failed the polygraph, I could lose my clearances, and I might lose my job as well.
I flew to Northern Virginia for two days of pre-employment screening. A bus took us from the hotel to a nondescript building in Vienna. The examiner was a young woman. She asked me to sign a consent form and told me not to talk about the polygraph with anyone else.
In the pretest interview, the examiner asked, "Did you make any false statements on your application?" I said, "Yes. Under height and weight, I put 130 lb. I actually weigh 134 lbs." She laughed. Then she asked if I'd read about polygraphs. I said I'd just finished A Tremor in the Blood. She claimed she'd never heard of it. I was surprised. It's an important book about her field, I would have thought all polygraphers knew of it.
She wired me up, and the polygraph began. My hand turned purple, which hurt terribly. My body twitched from the exaggerated stillness the test required. Halfway through, the examiner left the room, saying she had to show the charts to her supervisor. I came to think of this as the What will it take to get you to buy the car? part of the test. I waited twenty minutes or so, resisting the urge to press my nose against the one-way mirror and peer into it through cupped hands.
The examiner came back. "You're having a problem with one of the questions. Do you know which one?" I had no idea. I'd answered all of them truthfully. She said, "How about, 'Have you ever lied to your boss?'" I said I hadn't. She pressed me until I came up with an occasion when I'd passed my boss in the hall. She said, "How are you?" and I said, "Fine." But I wasn't fine, I was in the middle of a cancer scare.
I failed the poly and was told to come back the next day. I couldn't understand why I hadn't passed. I'd spilled my guts, and I hadn't used countermeasures.
On the bus back to the hotel, a woman was sobbing, "Do they count something less than $50 as theft?" I felt bad for her because she was crying, but I wondered why a petty thief thought she could get into the Agency.
That evening, the other applicants went to the nearby Tysons Corner mall to go shopping. I didn't feel festive enough to join them so I withdrew to my room. I ordered from room service but couldn't eat my dinner. I sat by the window for hours, looking into the darkness. She'd seen something inside me I hadn't known about. I'd always thought I was a good person. Now I wasn't sure.
The next morning, I rode back to the same crumbling building where I'd been polygraphed the day before. The examiner said, "Now that you've had a chance to think about it, is there anything you'd like to say?" He didn't need to ask me twice. "You bet there is. I did my part, now I expect you to do yours." It wasn't until late that afternoon, when I was waiting for my plane at Dulles, that I realized, "Is there anything you'd like to say?" does not mean, "Please tell us all our faults."
The examiner wired me up. He began with what he called a calibration test. He took a piece of paper and wrote the numbers one through five in a vertical column. He asked me to pick a number. I picked three. He drew a square around the number three, then taped the paper to the back of a chair where I could see it. I was supposed to lie about having selected the number three.
The test began. He asked, "Is the number one? Is the number two? Is the number three?" I said "No," and butt-clenched. "Nice strong response!" he said.
I wasn't hiding anything, so I had no reason to use countermeasures. On the other hand, the analytical part of me enjoyed poking at the test to figure out how it worked. And I was still mad about having failed the previous day, so I was messing with him. Curiosity satisfied, I didn't try the butt-clench again, not on that day or ever.
During the real test, the examiner said, "Your breathing is unnatural." He described a kid in little league who kept swinging the bat wrong, and then suddenly got it. If I just kept trying, I could get it too. It took almost four hours, but by the end of the session, he told me I'd passed. I'd just cleared the last hurdle to joining the CIA.
I entered on duty and began a week of orientation. On the first morning, we introduced ourselves and said a few words about what we'd be doing at the Agency. Four guys sitting together at a table up front identified themselves as polygraphers. Everyone else in the room hissed. It wasn't friendly teasing, either. At lunch, no one would sit with them.
A few years into my Agency career, I took a battery of vocational and aptitude tests including the MMPI, a personality inventory. The MMPI results came back, and they said I fell on the extreme end of the honesty spectrum, or in the words of the Agency psychiatrist, "You're honest to the point of being naïve." I was kind of offended. Naïve? Who are you calling naïve? On the other hand, it was nice to have that in my official file.
CIA employees were required to take a polygraph every five years. We all did it, but there was a lot of complaining.
I never heard that anyone worried about losing their job to the poly. It was said that new applicants failed in large numbers, but once you were in, you were in. The re-poly could be unpleasant, though. If you failed, you had to keep taking it. It was said that there was an upper manager who just couldn't pass, no matter how many times he tried. After something like seven attempts, Polygraph gave up and stopped calling him back. The manager remained in his job.
We weren't supposed to discuss the polygraph among ourselves, but of course we did. When people came back from a poly, they talked about how it had gone. A woman who'd never seen an illegal drug in her life was accused of being a major drug user. Someone who hated computers so much that she had the secretary print out her emails so she could read them was interrogated for hours about hacking into Agency networks.
A pattern emerged. In a normal polygraph, there was often a gross mismatch between a person and the accusations made against them. I don't think the officials at Polygraph had any idea how unintentionally humorous this was. Not to the person it happened to, of course, but the rest of us found it hysterically funny.
Once, the examiner got in my face and shouted, "Admit it, you're deeply in debt. Creditors are pounding on your door!" I said. "You've just revealed to me that you haven't bothered to pull my credit report. Are you lazy, or are you cheap?" I offered to pay the $15 fee myself, but he didn't take me up on it.
Another time, the examiner accused me of working for a foreign intelligence service and traveling overseas to meet my handler. I rolled my eyes. "Do you want to see my passport? It's been expired for nine years." No, he didn't want to see my passport.
I told my office mates I'd figured out why the accusations were so consistently off-the-wall. Polygraph must have a question of the day. Everyone who went in on Monday would be accused of dealing drugs. Tuesday was espionage day, Wednesday was marital infidelity day, and so on.
Then Aldrich Ames was arrested, and polygraphs became more brutal. People who'd never had trouble passing were being called back two and three times. Thank you, Mr. Ames.
I overheard a fragment of conversation at CIA Headquarters, "I thought I was a good person, but after that last poly, I'm not so sure." It was hard on people.
Because of Ames, the Agency introduced a policy of random polygraphs. I knew someone who completed a five year poly. A few months later, he was called back for a random one.
I'd been at the Agency for ten years when I went through the reinvestigation poly again.
The test was administered by an inexperienced young woman. In the pretest interview, she asked me a question. I answered truthfully. She asked again as if she was looking for a better answer. Call me a liar. It made me furious.
Well into the session, she said I was failing. I was so frustrated, I started to cry. I knew I could pass it if I just had enough time, but she had to run an errand. She failed me and ended the session early.
I wrote a letter of complaint to the Chief of Polygraph saying I didn't like the way I'd been treated. He sent me a letter of apology. He said he'd reviewed the tapes and that he was sorry about the abuse. He said the polygrapher had been reprimanded.
I was surprised to get a response of any kind, but a letter of apology was astonishing. Although the cynical part of me might call it a "please don't sue me" letter.
But I was also puzzled. The apology was for the wrong thing. The Director seemed to think I'd gone through a particularly abusive polygraph. I hadn't. It was a perfectly ordinary polygraph, no different from any other. I just wrote to say that I didn't like polygraphs.
I had to take the test again because I'd failed the first one. The second examiner was experienced and had a mild disposition. I passed without difficulty.
Over the course of many years at CIA, I formed an impression that a typical polygraph involves an inexperienced examiner who grills you harshly and then fails you, followed by a re-poly with a more experienced examiner who guides you through it with no fuss. I've had two polygraphs in which I passed on the first try. On both occasions, an experienced examiner conducted the test.
I worked at CIA for eleven years. It was a terrific experience, and I count those years as among the happiest in my life. I left only because I got married and had a baby. CIA is many things, but family friendly is not one of them.
I joined a small defense contractor known for its work-life balance. The company supported most of the three-letter agencies, and I settled into doing the same sort of work I'd done before.
My first assignment was on a National Reconnaissance Office (NRO) project. The NRO clearances required a poly, which I agreed to. The test was administered by a woman with many years' experience. She told me I'd passed. It's possible to have a polygraph that isn't confrontational and doesn't leave you feeling violated. It's rare, though.
I'd been supporting an FBI project for several years when the phone rang in the kitchen. Someone from the FBI asked me to come in for a routine polygraph, a requirement to keep my clearances up to date.
To prepare, I read the 2002 National Academy of Sciences report. It was an eye-opener, even though it confirmed what I'd already begun to suspect, that the polygraph didn't work.
I arrived for my polygraph appointment, which would be administered in a building across the street from my children's orthodontist.
I stood in the marble lobby, waiting for the examiner to come and collect me. The 2002 NAS report made me cynical. In the interview room, I thought, "Don't look at the man behind the curtain."
The examiner asked if I'd ever visited the anti-polygraph sites online. I said yes, that's where I found the 2002 NAS report. He said he'd never heard of it. He also said there was no such a thing as a control question. I hate being lied to; it makes me angry.
In the pretest interview, he asked how many polygraphs I'd had before this one. I wasn't sure, but I thought it was probably six or seven. He asked what medications I took. I listed everything, including a cortisone cream for a patch of eczema on my hand. He went on and on about my skin condition. What does this have to do with national security, and why is it any of your business? Maybe violating people's boundaries is a way to establish dominance.
The examiner wired me up, and we did the card trick. He drew a vertical column of numbers, told me to pick one, drew a box around it, and pinned it up where I could see it.
It occurred to me that we were playing a guessing game in which the examiner knew the answer before the game began. I'd have been more impressed if he'd had to discover my number using only the polygraph equipment and/or his ability to read people. I was tempted to suggest it, but I didn't think the idea would be well received.
The test proceeded normally. The examiner left the room. When he came back, he didn't meet my eyes, and the muscles of his face were tight. "The test shows deception." He was right. I had been deceptive, but only about one thing. I hadn't told him I knew the polygraph didn't work.
The examiner hammered on me to come clean. I kept repeating, "No, I can't think of anything else." I was tempted to make something up, just to make it stop, but I'm not comfortable lying.
At the end of the interview, the examiner looked at me, gloating. "You claim you've taken seven polygraphs before today, but later, you said it was only six." That's all you've got on me? I'm underwhelmed.
Being able to recognize interrogation techniques didn't make me immune to them. Exhausted, I hung my head, feeling like he'd broken me under interrogation. I've always found the shame of being broken was the worst thing about being polygraphed.
A few days later, I was still seriously rattled. I didn't realize how badly the polygraph had affected me until I plowed through a red light and almost hit another car. I'd never run a red light before. I couldn't think what had gotten into me.
I told a relative I'd had a really hard time with the polygraph. There was an embarrassed silence, followed by a rapid change of subject. What did you do wrong, and why don't you own up to it? This from someone who's known me from birth and has always taken my side. It shows how strongly people in our culture believe in the polygraph.
I wrote to my congressman and asked him to support legislation banning the polygraph. I said it was a civil rights issue to subject an entire workforce to a brutal police-style interrogation in the absence of probable cause, especially if they might be harmed by it.
Although I failed the FBI polygraph, I remained on the project.
Much to my surprise, I was granted additional clearances and assigned to more highly classified work than I'd been doing before the polygraph.
The work dried up, and I moved on to something else. Seven months after the failed FBI poly, I was summoned to FBI Headquarters "to talk about your polygraph."
It took several hours to drive downtown and find a place to park. I found FBI headquarters. Two burly agents met me at the door. I wondered if they had the power to arrest me. My hands shook. It was like a scene from a movie where government officials are trying to be intimidating. It worked. As we walked across the lobby, I thought I was going to faint.
They escorted me upstairs. Neither of them spoke. They took me to a small room. A folder lay open on a desk. Papers spilled from it.
I said, "Does it matter that I was laid off the project four months ago?"
It was like watching method actors break character. "We're sorry, we didn't mean to bring you all the way down here for nothing. Maybe you could visit the spy museum? It's right across the street."
Years later, I joined a DIA project which required a CI (counterintelligence) polygraph. I liked the work and the people doing it, so I agreed.
I started in the summer. In late September, Polygraph asked me to come in. I was no longer afraid of them. I didn't doubt the apparatus took accurate measurements of heart rate, blood pressure, respiration, and perspiration, but I'd stopped believing the examiner could infer a person's emotions or thoughts from the data in the tracings.
To prepare for the test, I read the DoD Polygraph Institute Interview and Interrogation handbook (PDF), which describes techniques like "offer hope, take it away." That book is evil. I made copies and gave them to my writer friends.
I now knew the examiners worked from a script like the one in the handbook. On page 24, the script calls for empathetic listening to put the subject at ease. On page 53, it says to change gears and confront the subject with evidence of a crime. I thought that since I was familiar with the script, the polygrapher would lose his power over me.
I arrived for the appointment. The examiner asked if I was nervous, and I said no (true). In the pretest interview, he asked if I'd visited the anti-polygraph websites to learn how to beat the test. I said I did read the sites, but I was looking for articles on psychological damage from interrogation and how to recover from it. Beating the polygraph was of no interest to me (true).
The real test began. In my mind, I turned the pages of the script. The examiner excused himself and stepped outside. He returned, and whatever warmth there'd been in his manner had vanished. Oh c**p, we're on page 53. He accused me of deception. I hunkered down until it was over. I reminded myself, Whatever you do, don't make admissions. I didn't have anything to confess, but if the pressure were bad enough, I might be tempted to make things up.
At the end of the test, the examiner told me I'd failed. But, and this is huge, for the first time I didn't leave the poly broken and weeping. I was annoyed, but I hadn't been harmed.
Two weeks later, they asked me to come in for a retest. The examiner was different, but the test was the same. Everything went smoothly, and I assumed I'd passed. The examiner said he needed to run the chart by his supervisor, and I'd hear back later.
Weeks went by, and then months. The computer account I would get as soon as I passed the poly was still in limbo, which was not a good sign.
During the quiet time over the Christmas break, I came to believe I'd lost the ability to pass a polygraph. By this time, I'd failed three in a row, two for DIA and the one for FBI.
I wondered if it was because I'd grown cynical. I now thought of the polygraph apparatus as a colander attached to a Xerox machine. Even so, I'd tried to cooperate. I'd answered their questions truthfully, and I hadn't used countermeasures. But I no longer feared the examiners, and I no longer broke under interrogation. According to the handbook, breaking the subject is an important part of the process.
On the first day back from Christmas break, my department head stopped by to give me my annual salary review. It was my highest raise in five years. She said the people on my project liked my work, and they liked me.
Later the same day, I got a call from Polygraph asking me to come in the next morning to answer the polygraph questions under oath rather than wired up.
I had no problem with that. As a mentor at the Agency said about testifying before Congress, "Under oath or not under oath. Either way you're telling the truth, so what's the difference?"
The two polys I'd already taken for DIA had been CI (counterintelligence). But halfway through, the examiner asked, "How often do you look at pornography?" I blinked with surprise. "Excuse me?" That question didn't belong on a CI poly, that was a Lifestyle question.
When the interview ended, the examiner said, "I believe you" in a voice that lacked conviction. Then he added, "I'm going to try to get you another polygraph."
"I don't want another." I meant it.
Over the next few days, I jumped whenever the phone rang. Weeks went by before I began to relax. And then my long-delayed computer account was approved. As I understood how the system worked, the polygraph had just been adjudicated in my favor.
A few days later, I was sitting at my desk eating lunch when a scheduling clerk from Polygraph called. "You missed your appointment this morning," he said. Next time, you might consider telling me about it ahead of time. He said, "Don't even worry about it. Everyone makes mistakes." My jaw dropped. He just called me a liar.
The clerk wanted me to come in the next day. I was seriously rattled. I'd already decided I was not going to take another polygraph, ever. I stalled. And then I remembered my newly granted computer accesses. I was already cleared. Probably the paperwork hadn't caught up yet. I said I needed a few days to figure out if the poly was still necessary, and I would get back to him.
I checked with Security. They said, "No, you haven't been adjudicated yet."
I couldn't get out of it, but I could put it off until it was OBE (overtaken by events). In a few months, the project would move to a new location beyond my commuting range. I planned to stay until right before the move and then find something else. I didn't have to refuse the poly, I just had to conduct a delaying action.
But Polygraph was insistent, and I wasn't sure I could hold them off much longer. I asked about withdrawing my application for DIA clearances, but was advised to watch and wait.
Or, I could leave the project now and find other work. My TS/SCI from CIA was still active, but I knew that eventually CIA would want me to take a polygraph. I also held a Top Secret clearance from the Air Force. The Air Force TS, a "vanilla TS" (not SCI) was based on an SF-86 background investigation. It did not require a polygraph. And at the very worst, I could do unclassified work. My company had a large number of unclassified projects, and many had work for analysts.
A few days after I'd told the clerk I'd get back to him, I gave a presentation about the work I'd been doing on my task. It was well received, and I stepped down from the podium covered in glory. As I left the meeting, the program manager pulled me aside and said my task had lost its funding. It was an occupational hazard of defense contracting, and not anything sinister.
I wasn't happy about being cut from the project, but it did solve my polygraph dilemma. If I wasn't on the project anymore, I didn't need to apply for DI clearances, and I didn't need to take the polygraph.
Around noon, the clerk from Polygraph called again. I told him I didn't have to take the poly anymore because I'd been laid off the project. In mid-afternoon, he called back. He said he'd made a few phone calls and learned that I hadn't been laid off from my company, after all. Wonderful, call me a liar.
He pressed me to schedule another poly. I said no. His voice turned whiny. "You have to do it!" I dug in my heels. "I've already told you no." He slammed down the phone.
I'd just refused a polygraph. I felt like Neville Longbottom when he drew the sword of Gryffindor and advanced on Lord Voldemort. I was filled with righteous indignation, and it gave me courage.
For the rest of the day, I was peppered with emails and phone calls summoning me to the offices of upper managers. Some of them were so far up the chain, I'd never heard their names before. They were uniformly kind to me. I hadn't known it, but I wasn't the first person in our division to refuse the polygraph. Polygraph conscientious objectors—who knew that there was such a thing?
Polygraph told my management I'd lied about being laid off. It caused a major flap. My project badges were taken from me, even the unclassified ones, and I was debriefed from all my DIA clearances.
To their credit, DIA didn't tell any other agencies they'd taken my badge and debriefed me. Weeks later, my CIA clearances were still active.
Six weeks went by. I put in for a few days of leave to take the kids to an alumni event at my university. I worked half a day and then went home to pack.
Sometime after 4:00 pm, when I was loading the last suitcase into the car, the department secretary called to say I was late for a 4:00 meeting with my department head. This was the first I'd heard of it. The meeting had been put on the calendar after I'd left for the day. I said I was sorry I couldn't be there, but I'd be back in the office first thing on Monday.
Just before close of business Monday, I was summoned to another meeting with the department head. When I arrived, my boss was sitting in her office with a woman from Human Resources. As a general rule, if you're boss wants to see you and HR has been asked to sit in, you know it's going to end badly.
My department head put a piece of paper in front of me. It said I'd agreed to take a polygraph as a condition of working on the DIA project, but when they tried to schedule it, I canceled the appointment. As a result, I was cut from the project.
"No, I took two polygraphs. I turned down the third because I wasn't on the project anymore." Although I now thought of myself a polygraph conscientious objector, and I would have refused whether or not I was still on the project.
The rest of the letter said the company would begin termination proceedings against me. I was eight years from retirement. I wasn't counting the days until retirement. I liked going to work. Even when I was between assignments and not getting paid, I still came into the office and put in a full day.
I spoke to a lawyer. She said I lived in an "at will" state, which means employees can be dismissed for any (legal) reason, or for no reason at all. I was being terminated for refusing the polygraph, and it was legal.
I decided to resign rather than fight.
My mother loved being a doctor, but she discouraged us from applying to medical school. She said the cost of malpractice insurance had ruined the profession.
Similarly, I urge my children to steer clear of any job that requires a polygraph. That rules out entire professions: National Security, Intelligence, Law Enforcement, Customs and Border Protection, and Pharmacy. It's a shame. My career as an intelligence analyst was exciting, deeply rewarding, and just plain fun. I contributed to the safety of my country, which is a constant source of pride. But I no longer recommend my profession to others. The polygraph has become a deal breaker.
AntiPolygraph.org Home Page > Personal Statements

It’s the Lana Rhoades Pornstar Revealed
If you’ve not heard of Lana Rhoades, then you have been living under a rock. She was among the most popular pornstars on Pornhub and has since stopped working in the business and focused on her career as a model and fashion designer. In the last few years she’s also been identified as sexually active, and has eliminated her breast implants.
Lana Rhoades is a porn star
Lana Rhoades is a former porn actress who earned million of dollars. Following her departure from the industry she started her own brand names for apparel and lingerie. These brands have helped Rhoades keep her finances in check and has helped her increase her fan base on social media.
Prior to turning to pornography Rhoades was part of the cheerleading team at high school. But, when she was 16years old, she was taken in a corrections facility. Fortunately, she got out after a year because of her good behavior. After a few years, she went to Oakton Community College, but she was unable to finish her education due to her work. Rhoades’ porn career began in 2014, and her popularity grew after a photo shoot with Playboy. She’s now one of the most famous celebrities in the business with over 16 million users on Instagram and over 992,000 YouTube users.
Despite the popularity of her porn career, Lana Rhoades has remained a controversial figure. She has spoken out against the predatory practices that are prevalent in the world of porn. Her story has served as an alarm for a lot of porn stars. Some of them want to leave the industry, but aren’t sure the best way to go about it. Others pledge to never come back to the field.
Her natural boobs are big and natural.
Even though she’s a renowned pornstar, Lana Rhoades has big natural body parts. The singer and actress announced that she was expecting on June 1st. She hasn’t shared much about her father, however she has been linked to NBA athlete Kevin Durant and Majlak. As a young woman, Rhoades started working in the adult sector. She initially worked for The Tilted Kilt in Chicago. When she was 18, she began becoming a porn.
Lana Rhoades is a native of Chicago, Illinois. She began doing porn in June of 2016 and quickly became a popular pornstar. She loves to make guys appear sexy as well as has appeared on several sites. Also, she’s a model, she posed for the Playboy Plus website in June.
Although she’s become more than a YouTube star, Lana Rhoades has remained an active pornstar, dropping clothing and performing professional naked. She also has her own porn star game, with video clips of herself naked. She is also famous for her sexy natural boobs.
She is asexual
The former porn model and fashion designer has ceased to be active in the industry, but she continues to make amateur videos featuring a man who she finds attractive. Although she’s still Asexual, Rhoades has also declared that she’s “pretty quite asexual.” Rhoades has also stated that she as well as her NBA superstar boyfriend have an infant son. In an interview recently, Rhoades discussed her sexuality.
The American performer Lana Rhoades was a big name in porn a few years ago. She was just 19 when she began her journey into the world of porn. Since then, she’s been a huge influencer on social media as well as an extremely open critiques of the industry. Recently, in an interview, she said that she was unaware that porn was sex.
At one time, Rhoades was an sexually asexual. Although her time within the film and entertainment industry for adults was not long, she has made an impact as fashion designer. After quitting her work in the film business for adults, Rhoades started a new stage of her life. The new venture she has started has allowed her to stay in her financial stability and has also helped her grow her following on social media.
She has removed her breast implants
The Lana Rhoades Pornstar recently revealed that she had removed her breast implants. She also deleted old tweets about the procedure. Many believe that Lana was undergoing a breast lift to give her a slimmer boob. However, she hasn’t stated when or when she plans to return to the adult industry.
Lana Rhoades is a famous pornstar who has had a number of procedures However, she is the very first time she’s publicly announced her pregnancy. While she has remained mum about the father of her baby There have been rumors that she had ties to NBA player Kevin Durant. Lana has previously admitted that she was implanted with breasts in her younger years and has fillers on her face.
Lana Rhoades, otherwise known as Lana Rhodes, has had many surgeries to enhance her body. She also has had lip fillers and fat transfer to her boobies. Lana Rhoades has been married previously. Also, she is a featured dancer. She was born on 6 September, 1996 and is currently 19 years old. She is a petite girl who is 5 feet 3 inches tall. She has a bust measurement of 34D-24-34. She has received several awards such as XBIZ and AVN.

Where was Jatrya born?
Why did the people of Khedi have to leave their village?
Where did Jatrya and his family come from?
Jatrya and his family left Sinduri and migrated to Mumbai because they could not adjust in this new village and hoped for a better life and a better future in Mumbai.
Who was sitting at the door with his daughter?
Where does Sidya work from 4 o' clock to 7 o' clock in the morning?
Which village did Jatrya move from Khedi village?
What was the name of Jatryabhais daughter?
What does Memsahib mean?
When did Jatryas family come to Mumbai?
What is the relation in between Sidya and Jhimli?

When Barbara Cooper first came to Juneau in 1958, the airport was slightly bigger than a shack. Juneau residents had their vacation homes in the Mendenhall Valley and South Franklin Street was a different place "forth, back, in and around," the 95-year-old former teacher said.
After a nerve-wracking first flight to Juneau - the plane's engine caught fire halfway here and the plane had to make an emergency landing in Ketchikan - Cooper emerged from the airport and was, in her words, "appalled."
She and her husband Robert moved to Juneau with their two children for Robert's work in the Forest Service. Cooper was not excited about the move, but "where thou goest, thou go," she said.
Slowly, though, she learned to love Juneau - both her neighborhood on Highland Drive and her more recent new neighborhood at the Juneau Pioneers' Home.
Barbara Cooper is nearly 95 years old. She doesn't see very well, walks with a walker, and has good and bad days in terms of energy and alertness.
But she graciously shares pleasantries with most residents of the Pioneers' Home, where she has lived since 1996, and she is quick with the occasional self-deprecating joke about her age.
Is she surprised she has lived to be 95?
"No, because only the good die young," she said without hesitation. "But I've enjoyed life very much, and I really adore Juneau."
Cooper was born in Oregon on Nov. 3, 1907. Her mother died in childbirth, and Barbara moved to Los Angeles as a child after her adoptive father, her mother's brother, died. She returned to Oregon to attend Oregon State College, where she met her future husband.
The couple lived in Washington, D.C., and Oregon and had two children, Susan and Kent, before moving to Juneau in 1958.
Cooper was a teacher at Juneau-Douglas High School from 1958 to 1963, teaching "anything everybody else didn't want to teach," she said - mostly English, typing and shorthand.
She liked teaching English, but she most enjoyed working with the high school drill team, she said.
"I modernized it, let's say, by bringing in a man from Colorado who did that kind of dancing," said Cooper, who participated in a drill team herself as a student at Oregon State College.
Almost everybody who knows Cooper has a story to tell that they say probably shouldn't go in the newspaper.
Former Mayor Dennis Egan, who had Cooper as a teacher for his freshman typing class in high school in 1963, said he was probably her worst student.
"I was in the same grade as her daughter Susan, and we just caused a lot of trouble," he said.
"Mrs. Cooper," as Egan still calls her, "is a great lady," he said. "She wanted you to learn ... but she wasn't too enthused about the boys screwing off."
"I probably wasn't his favorite teacher," Cooper said.
Outside of school, Cooper was active in her Highland Drive neighborhood and in the community.
Peggy Garrison, who was Cooper's neighbor for "a hundred years" and still visits her at the Pioneers' Home, said Cooper is a "delightful" person.
"We have a lot of laughs," Garrison said. "She's very funny."
Cooper volunteered for at least 10 years with the Golden North Salmon Derby, organizing volunteers to run the weigh-in stations. She also worked as the head of a voting precinct, and she definitely plans to vote on Tuesday, though she's guarded about her political leanings when the conversation shifts to politics. She will speak out on one issue, though.
"I'm firm on not moving the capital," she said.
In addition to fishing and politics, Cooper also enjoys travel - she has been to nearly every state and to Europe - and reading.
"I just finished a travel book about an old radio guy who went across the country," Cooper said.
Despite her 95 years and failing health, she insists on continuing her travels. She was in critical condition at the hospital for about a week in August and left for her grandson's wedding a few weeks after she was released.
"I love Juneau, but I love to get out of it, too," she said. "Once a year, at least."
"She's great," said Jan Gonce, who has been Cooper's nurse since Cooper moved to the Pioneers' Home. "She is one determined woman."
The staff of the Juneau Pioneers' Home is holding a surprise open house from 1 to 3 p.m. Sunday, Nov. 3, to help Cooper celebrate her 95th birthday.
Christine Schmid can be reached at email@example.com.
© 2017. All Rights Reserved. | Contact Us

Olympic men's hockey: A look back at the Kitchener-Waterloo Dutchmen
K-W Dutchmen, including Martin Brodeur's dad, revisited as everyday guys on Canada's 1956, '60 Games teams
Members of Team Canada's 2014 Olympic men's hockey team were chosen after lengthy consideration, handpicked from a league of NHL players with extensive training and resources.
But that hasn't always been the case.
In 1956 and 1960, the players representing Canada at the Winter Games had full-time jobs outside of hockey and were strict amateurs.
In the lead-up to the Canadian men's team's quarter-final game against Latvia on Wednesday in Sochi, Russia, CBC Kitchener-Waterloo looked back at the legacy left by members of the Kitchener-Waterloo Dutchmen, who represented Canada in the 1956 and 1960 Olympics.
1956 Olympic Games
In 1955, the Dutchmen beat the Fort William Beavers 4-1 to take the Allan Cup senior men's national championships. The win qualified them to represent Canada at the Games in Cortina d'Ampezzo, Italy, in 1956.
"It was quite exciting you know, because we had to go to Eaton's and get measured for Olympic blazers, and we had nice Canadian Olympic coats," said 1956 Dutchmen team captain Jack McKenzie.
"Of course there was a lot of publicity. I have to say too that in those days, the Olympic association didn't have very much money and the people of Kitchener-Waterloo contributed a lot of money to send the team," added McKenzie.
We weren't hockey stars like you see today, we had jobs.- Jack McKenzie, team captain 1956 Dutchmen
At that time, rules governing amateur status were strict and players had day jobs.
Some of the original Dutchmen team were not allowed to compete at the Games in Italy because they had formerly been professional players, and five new Junior B players were added to the roster instead.
"We weren't hockey stars like you see today; we had jobs and worked and played hockey as a sideline," said McKenzie. "Like any Canadian boy, you started just as soon as you got a pair of skates and your parents could drag you out to the corner rink."
McKenzie says some worked at the Bauer skate factory, others pumped gas or hauled logs.
"Everybody worked. We had our own business, so I had no trouble," said Butch Martin, who played both as a forward and defenceman for the Dutchmen. "I think all the other guys, the team either got them jobs or they got jobs where they'd be free at 5 o'clock in the afternoon. A few of them were school teachers — I think we had 3 or 4 guys that taught school,"
A video from the CBC archives shows Dutchmen goalie Denis Brodeur, father of New Jersey Devils goaltender Martin Brodeur, wearing a gas jockey's uniform and pumping gas at a service station.
"Yeah we were excited, I was," said Butch Martin. "Like a lot of us, it was the first big airplane ride I had. We were on that plane a long time because it didn't go quite as fast as the jets go now. But the whole thing was exciting."
Martin was one of just Dutchmen on both the '56 and '60 Olympic teams.
"Canada had won the gold in every Olympics up until that year and so we were the favourites going in," said McKenzie.
But it was not to be. The Dutchmen won bronze in 1956, with the U.S. taking silver and the Soviet Union taking gold.
It was really kind of a tragedy that we had finished third.- Jack McKenzie, team captain 1956 Dutchmen
"It was a little disappointing not to be able to bring the gold back to the people of Kitchener, because they had supported the team emotionally and financially," said McKenzie.
"I can remember the disappointment, it was really kind of a tragedy that we had finished third. That was a very moving ceremony. I can always identify with the medal presentations when I see them on TV," said McKenzie.
"You know time's the biggest healer. If you lose, it seems really important that day," said Martin.
"Charlie Brooker and I were in the dressing room side by side, after that first time we'd lost in Cortina.
"And Charlie looks at me and he's dead serious. He hadn't played too much so he was a little upset anyhow. He says, 'Don't worry about it.' He says, 'Two years from know you won't even remember what day this was.'"
"And that's kind of true," said Martin. "Anything like that seems more important the day it happens."
The Whitby Dunlops won the Allan Cup senior men's national championships in 1959, which gave them the right to compete at the Olympics in Squaw Valley, California in 1960. However, the Dunlops turned down the opportunity, so the K-W Dutchmen competed again.
"At Squaw Valley, it was better because we were all living at the same place, we ate in one big dining room so you got to know everybody," said Martin.
"We had one guy that was along, Cliff Pennington, he was really a young guy but he was kind of outgoing. He'd sit at a different table every night at dinner and after dinner he'd move around. He knew everybody there and he acted like he could speak every language. He couldn't, but he'd kind of jabber away, but he got to know everybody there," said Martin.
Butch was a forward in Squaw Valley, scored six goals and had six assists in seven games at the Olympics.
"The first game we played in the '60 Games, Darryl Sly was teaching school in Elmira; him and I would to go to the Games together. I guess he passed and I scored in the first period, and after we score, we're talking, coming back to centre ice and he says, 'Those guys in the coffee shop in Elmira, they'll be just chirping tomorrow morning.'"
The Dutchmen lost in their final game against the United States, taking home a silver medal. The Soviet Union took bronze in 1960.
With files from Amanda Grant

A/N: So... my love for Damar is showing no signs of fading. This is the result of it!
Disclaimer: none of the characters, except my OCS, are mine.
Chapter One: The Sounds of War
2366: Hyacinthus V
Up until then, she had been content. The birds were tweeting, chirping, unseen in the sky up above. Leaves rustled in the wind, were torn from their branches and scattered all around her. She thought that she was imagining it; she had to be, didn't she? There was no one else around. At least… no one that she had seen.
And so Daphne Freeman carried on, drawing her brunette hair around her shoulders, attempting to shield herself from a sudden cold breeze. But then the air became still and she stopped walking. There was the sound of a twig breaking underfoot, then of heavy bootprints, advancing, getting closer.
She wondered if, perhaps, she could hear whispering, but the hushed voices were now coming from near behind her. Taking a deep breath, she calmed herself, readied herself, prepared herself. Then she turned around, her hair flying in her face.
It was too late.
The soldiers trudged over to her, holding her firmly in their gaze; they would not let her go.
"What are you doing here, human?" one of the men, a glinn, spat at her.
His comrade, who also appeared to be a glinn, had taken a step closer, was holding her arms behind her back, breathing down her neck. "You will answer."
"I'm under no obligation to tell either of you," she muttered, hearing nothing but the frantic beating of her heart.
The soldier who was standing in front of her slapped her across the face; his cold, grey hand connected with her cheek and she would've stumbled backwards, if it had not been for the other soldier who was holding her in place.
"I won't tell you anything, Cardassian," she said through gritted teeth, though she was feeling rather less courageous than her words suggested.
The Cardassians apparently were beginning to pick up on this. A lone human, seemingly stranded on some barren wasteland of a planet, just waiting to be picked up by a patrol. She was hers to do with as they wished.
"If you don't wish to be shot dead here and now," one of the Cardassians carried on. "We will be forced to use harsher methods."
Harsher methods. She had no desire to find out what exactly that would entail, though she did have rather a good idea. She hadn't come to Hyacinthus V of her own accord; her friend was conducting research on some of the planet's plant-life when news of the Cardassians' presence there was released. So, now, she was in one of Hyacinthus V's largest and most diverse forests, only now, it seemed that she was the thing being studied.
As her heartbeat slowly settled, she decided to speak once again. "Look, I don't want any trouble with you. I'm not Bajoran." She would've gestured to her nose, smooth and without ridges, if one of the Cardassians hadn't been holding her arms. "I'm human."
"But… we're at war. Our people are at war! I'm not Starfleet. I'm a civilian. Do you see any markings of rank on me?" she said, now becoming desperate. She knew that she was running out of options. She had to think of something else. Anything else.
But before she had the chance, one of the soldier's hands had shot forwards, was touching her face, caressing her cheek in an almost loving manner, a manner that made her stomach turn. She had no desire to have him touch her, to even have him look at her. She tried to flinched away, but it only served to encourage him. With his feet planted squarely in front of himself, he apparently had no intentions of stopping.
"Oh, you're quite beautiful for a human," he said, his voice low, threatening.
"I appreciate the flattery," she murmured. "Is this how you do it? You charm your way into a woman's affections?" She snorted.
"Why, how much would you be asking?"
"How much?" she repeated. Then her brows drew together and she understood; a horrible feeling overcame her. "Too much. Now, please, let me be on my way."
He blinked, as if startled by her headstrong answer. "I'm a glinn. Nothing's too much."
"A glinn?" she echoed. She had little idea of how Cardassian ranks worked, but he had said it with such pride that she gathered that it must be fairly high up. Maybe a commander or something like that. "Yet they've got you hanging around on some dead planet?"
"We're rooting out a resistance cell," the other Cardassian said simply. "Not that your honest Federation politics will help you to understand that."
"Okay…" she said, quietly, thinking. "You're a glinn. We can work something out, I'm sure. I suppose that I can give you some idea, so that you don't feel left out," she said, softly, gently, almost seductively. "If you tell your friend here to take more than a few steps back."
"I'm not going anywhere," the Cardassian grunted.
"Oh, I think that I can handle a human female," the other one conceded. He grinned hideously when the other soldier had at last stepped away, albeit only a few metres.
Daphne rubbed her sore arms, then smiled. Looking at the soldier from under her lashes, she came over to him, her steps silent, her breathing steadied.
"Here?" she asked, her voice hushed, intimate. He could feel her breath against his skin; she knew that he wanted her. She braced herself, closed her eyes, but nothing happened.
That was until the soldier cleared his throat. "Turak, control yourself. She's human. We'll be risking an interstellar incident if we—"
"Oh, shut up, Belen," the other Cardassian snapped. "You're not doing anything. Just hold her still for me."
Daphne wanted the darkness to envelope her then, as the glinn's hands came forward hungry. Then his mouth was on hers, desperate, heavily; she felt like she was being pushed down, suffocated. The Cardassian who was holding her still had loosened his grip on her – though she didn't entirely know why. Ignoring her curiosity for the moment, she drew her knee back then jabbed it forward sharply, hitting the glinn in the crotch. He groaned, wheezed, staggered backwards, shouting wildly for his comrade to regain his hold on the human.
Her mind racing, her breathing haggard, Daphne snatched the other glinn's disruptor and held it aloft, aiming it solidly at the two Cardassians, one slighted, the other confused.
"Now, the two of you will walk away and leave me be," she said, fighting to remain calm, or, at least, to appear calm.
As if in surrender, the two aliens held up their hands, began to back away, but it seemed that Daphne had looked away for the slightest of moments, for one of them, the one who had been grabbing at her, pressing his foul lips to hers, had dashed forwards, yanked the disruptor from her shaking hand and was leering down at her.
"Let's change that, shall we? Belen, keep a hold of her this time."
Belen did so. "We can't keep her with us, Turak. She's human."
"Yes, she is," he mused. "I'll warrant that many of our people have never seen a human woman before, not one so beautiful, or untainted by sickening Starfleet arrogance."
Upon realising that it had been she who had revealed to them that she didn't work for Starfleet, Daphne faltered, ashamed, confused.
"So, where are we taking her?" Belen asked.
A/N: This started out as a rewrite for my fic Corat Damar: Lives Lost, which can also be found here. But I fell in love with the idea of writing something that's based in the Occupation period, on Terok Nor, so I just had to write this. As I've said, it started out as a rewrite but has become a story of its own. I decided to rewrite (and then write a completely new story) Corat Damar: Lives Lost because I wrote it years ago when I was quite young and (I hope) my writing style has improved since then.
Anyway, that's enough of me. Obviously, it goes it without saying that you don't have to read Corat Damar: Lives Lost before you read this. They're two completely different stories!
Please let me know what you think!

A lawyer who kept money that was supposed to go to his client's victim was sentenced Wednesday to federal prison.
Robert J. Young II, 48, was sentenced in U.S. District Court in Kansas City to three years and one month in prison. A judge found him guilty of obstruction of justice after a trial last November.
The case stemmed from Young's representation of Rodney J. Tatum, who had embezzled a large sum of money from his employer.
Tatum's wife turned about $62,000 over to Young, which was supposed to go to her husband's employer, according to federal prosecutors. But Young instead used the money to pay rent and make personal purchases, including a motorcycle.
Never miss a local story.
He also lied under oath about why the money had been given to him, prosecutors said.
Young's law license was suspended in 2016, according to online records.

Goalkeepers have always been known for their reflex and also keeping the ball out of the goal post but lately, their Job has gone beyond that. The traditional Goalkeeper is expected to be great with his hands but the modern goalkeeper is expected to be good with both his hands and legs.
The role of a sweeper has been taken by most of the keepers of late as more managers have come into the liking of the idea of playing from the back in recent times. The goalkeepers are now more involved in the play and dictation of the football match from the back and that's why a lot of goalkeepers have upgraded themselves.
All top clubs around the world as of late has started buying a modern-day goalkeeper and the reason is that all teams want to keep a greater share of the football and this is only ever going to be achievable if the play from the back and that's where the goalkeeper's leg works come into play.
Top goalkeepers in the game who possess this special ability are few and they rank from who could be considered aremainsfounder Neuer to Ederson, Allison, Tar Stagan, bravo and even kepa. It remain to be seen which other added responsibilities they will take in years to come.

Monday at work, it was announced that after many budget reductions within AHCCCS, the agency will have to lay off some people, 82 to be exact. I give our director, Tony Rodgers props. He really cut expenses any way he could in order to avoid layoffs. Unfortunately AHCCCS is still millions of dollars in debt. It's just getting worse, because as people lose their jobs and benefits, they come to AHCCCS to receive medical care. It's a bad cycle.
When this was announced on Monday via email, my stomach fell. In the back of my mind I always knew that layoffs were going to hit us, but it stayed in the back of my mind until Monday. The layoffs are to be announced tomorrow. I'll be honest, I'm scared. Eighty-two people is a lot and roughly about 10% of our agency. They are not going by seniority, work performance. They are looking at positions to see how valuable they are to the agency. They don't care if you have been with the state for over 15 years, if they see your position is not needed, you're gone.
The sad thing is, this is just the first round of layoffs. The next round, if needed will come 6/2010.
I went into work yesterday, the first time being at the office since the announcement. It was heart breaking. I got caught up in the moment of the layoffs and only thought about me possibly losing my job. But there are a great deal of people being laid off. The floor I work on was quiet, in an eerie kind of way. Usually in the morning, you hear "Good mornings" along with other conversations. You smell coffee and breakfast obtained from the cafeteria. You hear radios, people on the phone, the fax machine. But yesterday, none of that was going on, it was all too quiet. One of my coworkers said it had been like that since the email on Monday. She admitted to me she hasn't been able to eat. She's a smoker and said that people who haven't smoked in years are outside smoking again. Grown men are filled with fear and their hands are shaking.
We are all sitting on pins and needles waiting for this announcement. We are all scared to death knowing that we could be laid off. I don't know what is worse, being forewarned and the whole waiting deal or not being notified and caught out of the blue. Our fate literally lies on that piece of sacred paper where every one's name is listed that is being laid off.
I went and talked to my boss yesterday, to see if she had any idea if one of my team members were being let go. She had no information for me, sadly she's just as scared as I am, no knowing what's going to happen.
Earlier in my state employment we went through a RIF (reduction in force), that was pretty hard. But that just meant the state was freezing any open positions that were open. We were not to hire anyone. But this layoff thing is a whole new thing.
Through the darkness of this right now, I'm completely blessed by my friends. If I were to lose my job and get to the point where I can't pay my bills, I've been offered a room from two different people for free. I won't go that route unless I have to, but it's great to know I have people who will take me in.
I'm trying not to stress about it, but how can you not?
Tomorrow is the day...the day I find out if I will still have a job.
Please pray for not only me, but for anyone else who will be affected. These people are mothers, fathers, husbands, wives, etc, losing their income.
Quote of the day: "This is going to hurt like hell..." lyric from one of Sarah's McLachlan's song, Hold On.
Layoffs happened yesterday at my job. It was not pretty; there were a lot of tears. It was the scariest day of my life so far. By only the grace of God my job was saved and I’m still employed.
Please, if you remember, pray for the families that were affected.

Denver Post Obituary for U.S. District Judge Walker Miller '65
From the Denver Post:
Walker Miller, who sat on the U.S. District Court bench in Denver from 1996 to 2011, died suddenly of natural causes at his home in Greeley on Sunday.
"He was known as a very gentle and scholarly judge. He loved to fly-fish and he often took other judges on fly-fishing trips," Chief U.S. District Judge Marcia Krieger said Tuesday.
Miller was 74.
President Bill Clinton nominated Miller on April 18, 1996, to a seat vacated by James Carrigan. The Senate confirmed him two months later and received his commission on July 25, 1996, according to the Federal Judicial Center's Biographical Directory of Federal Judges.
Miller, who attended the University of Colorado School of Law and received a masters of law degree from the University of Chicago Law School, began his career in private practice in Greeley, where he lived.
He practiced law in Greeley from 1965 to 1966 and then went to work as an assistant professor of law at the University of Kansas School of Law.
He went back to private practice in Greeley in 1969 and continued in that role until he assumed the judgeship.
Miller was a humble man, said Krieger. "He always styled himself as a country lawyer."
Senior District Judge Wiley Daniel, a friend and colleague, said Miller was a compassionate and fair person.
"I am very saddened by his sudden passing," Daniel said. "I had the utmost respect for his ability to be a fair jurist and his strong sense of justice."
In 2006, he presided over the insider trading trial of former Qwest CFO Robin Szeliga.
Miller took inactive status in 2011 saying that he wanted to spend time with his family, according to Law Week Colorado.
"I've been very fortunate to enjoy a diverse legal career, and it's been a privilege and honor to serve with my colleagues as a United States District Judge for the District of Colorado," Miller said at the time. "I wish to spend more time with my family and find out who I am beyond the law."
"He was a very strong family man," former U.S. District Court clerk James Manspeaker said.

We are several weeks back at school and everything is going well. In fact, Vera and Edie are geting along so much better now that they aren't together all day! Vera started 3rd grade (!) and Edie is doing two full days of Pre-K. She turns five in October and so will go to kindergarten next year.
Here they are riding bike and scooter to Edie's first day. She is really into riding her bike lately! Not sure I documented it yet, but she's been riding without training wheels since last fall! It's so freaking cute to watch her pedal along.
I love to see the outfits they choose for themselves :) Vera's top I actually hid under a pile of laundry because it's not my favorite, but she found it! haha. She got glasses the week before school started. She was soo excited about them and couldn't wait to show her friends.

We hired Garth Rose last year to help with coaching of sales staff and managing our Sales Pipeline. Garth helped us understand what good sales persons do and what Not so good sales persons will do and how to address those issues. After just a few weeks of training we had a pipeline, all opportunities were being tracked and sales staff were being held accountable for leads and opportunities they worked on. It was a pleasure working with Garth and I would recommend his coaching.
Jonathan Hunte | Sales Manager – Safeway Supply Inc. – March 2015

Thunder Moon has been betrayed by his adoptive people. He is determined to return to the long-forgotten home from which he was abducted as child by the chief of the Suhtai band of the Cheyennes. He sets out to return to the white people of his childhood, with only is faithful friend Standing Antelpe. What he finds among the whites is much more than he expected. Yet, he can not escape the spell cast on him by the Indian beauty Red Wing.

Sadje is our host for this weekly photoprompt challenge.
You can find out more and join in here
She was nervous, more nervous than she’d been on her wedding night, but after three years of fighting, he was coming home.
The table was special. One he had crafted himself from oddments of wood gathered from glades and valleys before he went away. He had lovingly stripped and polished the top, bringing out the natural grain with all its imperfections. The cutlery drawer had dovetail joints and slid smoothly on its runners, again all made by his capable hands. She herself had given the frame a coat of paint when he had finished, her contribution to his efforts.
The sound of a vehicle echoed at the end of the narrow street.
Footsteps replaced the sound as it pulled away.
She wrung her hands on her apron.
He was here.
He stood in the doorway, his smile hesitant, then beaming, just as it had been on their wedding day. He opened his arms to embrace her.
She clung to him, breathing in his essence, touching, sensing, yearning.
He was alive, and home.
He noticed the ash tray on the table and picked it up.
‘No need for this now,’ he said. ‘I quit when my mate in the ranks died of lung cancer.’

"I think it's a really good record, with some great songs. I'm not as emotionally attached to it as I am to All That You Can't Leave Behind. It just doesn't quite hang together as well as that album. It may be to do with the mix of personalities involved but it seems to be missing that same emotional thread."
- Larry on How To Dismantle An Atomic Bomb

After a few month's have signing up here, I decided to make a thread here. I am not new to rp and have done fan fiction before, but I hoping to improve my writing skill's. I ask that you have to be flexible with the post length's because I am not good with writing sex. I can rp here or through email. Thread's is a maybe but I would feel embarrass if we stop role playing when something comes up. I want someone(female of course) who can different types of character's not just submissive one's Some of these are story driven while I think one is mostly smut. A few of these are written in first person but I only write in third person during role playing. Just did it in the mood really. I would be updating this thread with more plot's, because I have a few in my hand. I hope to role play with you soon!
edit: all characters are 18+ btw
pairing's with no plot yet:
hero x female villain
porn star x virgin
Friends to the End(werewolf x human pairing)
When you were young you foolishly walk in to the woods in the middle of the night when you had an argument that you could never see me again because I was from a lower caste. But you didn't care because I meant the world to you. You try to to seem but was attack and bitten by a werewolf. You scurried back to your village. You didn't tell to your parents that you were bit by a werewolf, just one of the local woodland wolf's. But you were changing as days passed by. You were eating more than usually do, able to lift heavy object's, and had violent outbursts. But that wasn't the worse thing a person can do. One night, during a full moon, You started to transform in your room, You screamed and howl and your parent's come at aid to see what was going on with their little girl. But they didn't see their princess but a tall, foul, beast. You lashed at your parent's, killing the two of them in a instant and left your home. When another of the locale's so you, he cried for help and before he was striking by your razor sharp claws. The village man grabbed their torches and pitchforks and tried to kill beast, but they were no match for you. You went on a killing spree till there wasn't a soul in site. I was traveling on my horse, to see what was the matter with you, and if I could help. You take a light sniff and recognized me from a mile away. My horse begin to become freighted as it see's the werewolf. I am thrown off my horse as it stampede's away. So there was only two of us now, looking at each other. You have the urge to kill me but you try to fight it. You call out my name where I am puzzled what's going on. Then I realize it was you in that werewolf shape form. I get on my feet, trying to see if I could help you anyway, But you slam me down on the dirt and took off into the wood's. I haven't seen you for five years till one night....
The Milk Addicted (whore role play)
Jessie(your character) is a 25 year old college student at the Westwood University. She is in the high honors of all of her classes who is loved by all. But she has an addiction that people do not and would very very unusual. When she was young, she was breastfeed like every other kid. But she isn't like other kids because she is addicted to milk. She was drinking milk from her mother's breast till she left her father. This is why she is super intelligent and does very well than her other classmates. When she was 18, she was already going a nice pair of DD breasts. Her classmates and teacher took notice of that too; including her father. Her father used addiction agonist her made her have sex with him. Soon other students knew her secret and took advantage of it. She became a whore all her life and she didn't care as long as she get milk. She didn't really have any lovers until one day. A young guy name Joesph had just moved to Westwood. He lived in the city all his and prefer it was time to get away from it. He was an a nice guy, most people wouldn't take to him, but Jessie did. And he starts to fall in love with her. But what he didn't knew she was "cheating" behind his back.
Breaking the Demon( switch demon x human pairing)
Christopher has been a nerd throughout his life time. From monsters to aliens, he love them all. And When he moves from his luxurious city to be close to his parents in a small rural town he decided's to check on the local library. What he did not know was that no one enter's it because it has a dark past. But Chris didn't care even with all the warnings he got from his family and the townspeople. As he enter's the library, he notices that that it look pretty run down and that reeking smell to it. He take's a peek at bookshelf's, looking for something that would interest him. Chris heard foot steps coming down the stairs, and's he take's a glance of an old man with a pile of book's in his hands. Chris continues to look at stack of book's but the man hand's Chris a book. The scrawny man mention's that Chris look's like a boring type of guy and believe's that the book could give him some excitement in his life. Before Chris say's anything, the librarian scurries Chris to the door and locks behind. Daze on what just happen, he jog's to his his apartment before it begin to drizzle. Twenty minute's had passed and Chris walks inside his apartment complex and heads to his room. He enter's his room and lay's his belonging's down on the ground and grab's the the book from his backpack. He begin's to read it as he sky became pitch black with rain pour downing and thunder shaking the room. Chris continue's to read and a white flash black's him out. As he regain's conscious, he see's a female standing in the middle of the room. However notice's that this wasn't an ordinary woman but a demon with her horn's and tail. Chris has some idea's what he could to her, but not knowing that demon has other plan's and doesn't take kindly on those who use her as a slave.
(things to keep in mind is that the demon is a dom at first but become's a sub when Chris take's a control of her than a switch after he is the first man to able to take control of her. There is no bdsm here, just dom/sub/switch by nature. A little non con but Chris is willingly at first. I would also but not needed that she is a shapeshifter or can be a futa)
The Emperor and the Kunoichi(feudal japan roleplay)
Takashi is now the emperor of Japan in 1885 after his father die mysteriously. On the night of being heir to his father's throne, a person wearing a a disguise sneaks into his room. As Takashi enter's the room, the mysterious person holds a knife through his throat. Takashi refused to let some stranger to take's his life and fight's back. The two go at it for a few minute's and the hood person is exhausted, which give's Takashi time to subdue the man. As he take's of the hooded man's mask. He realize, it isn't a man but actually a woman he knew from his past. Takashi let's go of her and the woman grab's the knife, but shouts her when he mentions her name. She is is confuse how she know''s her name and Takashi mention's that the knew each other when they were young. When he was learning martial arts. She still hold the knife pointing at him but Takashi begin's to talk about their past together eight years ago
Ties that Bind(interracial pairing role play)
My Character just moved from India and now live's in California to go to College(can be American moving to japan as well who is kind of an otaku). He is a new a student and doesn't know anyone yet. Your character, who is the most popular student in the class room take's a notice at him and begins to chat with my guy. He is shy at first, but opens up and the two become friends. The friends become something even more they start to dating each other. However, rumor's start to spread from her friend's and her male peer's don't take kindly of a foreigner going out. She need's to decide who is more important between the too
Highschool of the Cock(futa role play)
story would take place in present day Japan. Twenty year's ago,a nuclear plant had exploded caused pandemic throughout the area. What is weird that the only deaths happen to be male and caused a mutation among female's. The first symptoms was getting sexually aroused among other's of their gender. The they started to develop breast within months and already having a pair larger then most japanese woman would develop. The thing that happen to them, is there were starting to grow a pair of ball's and a cock. To make sure the pandemic didn't spread any further throughout the country, the government built walls around the city to prevent from anyone from escaping. The woman's also known as hermprodite's could live peacefully and wouldn't have to worried from being other people to call them mutants from other citizen's. Female government official's(disguise as as teacher) work there to check in on how the herm's are doing. However, when this woman(or man) started to work as teacher in one school, some of the herm's can identified that she was not one of them. This has cause a few of the sexually dangerous and put the government official in danger.
Together At Last(transgender role play)
The two of us have been childhood friends since preschool through high school. We were inseparable. We went to the movie's together, go see sport game's, and even take trips to different countries. Only thing is we could never tell how we felt about one another. And that you had secret. You were born as woman(or man) but you could never identify your self as your gender. Your father abandon you when you was teenager when you wanted a sex change while your mother put up with you for all these years.. But I was there for you. Even like a brother to you. When you left the US to follow your career in Paris, you got a sex change and change your name. But I didn't knew about that till later on. When you turn 23, I traveled to Paris to be there for your birthday. You were hesitant at first, but you want me the the first to know what was going on with your life. As I landed in France, I hollered a cab and headed to the nearest store to buy you s gift. As I reach your apartment an hour later, I took the elevator and walk to where you are staying at. When I press the doorbell, I don't seem my friend, but a total stranger. My forehead begins to sweat and I ask the man/woman where are you were staying at. You don't say anything first but speak out softly; "It's good to see you again" I am confused on what's going but you take my hand and walk me in to your apartment, where you begin to discuss what's going with you. You mention you never belong with your gender, that you see yourself as a man/woman and that you love me. I am shock that you got a sex change but when you tell me that you loved, I wrapped my arms around you and than give you a kiss on the cheek. I said that I love you too and even though you are now a man/woman I will always be there with you.
The Queen and Loyal Knight
Malcolm is dozing off in his calculus class. He had being playing too much video game's last night and drank too much energy drink's. As he woke's up, in his dream state, he wake's up he is the world of Aradian and in the kingdom of Laurdan. Malcolm look's up and see's two guards looking down at him. Malcolm ask what's going. One of them replie's that he fall down from the sky as he was some sort of mage. The kingdom of Larudan has a law of those who deal's with magic, must be taken into custody after what happen one hundred years ago during the war against the mage's at the battle of Paliven. Malcolm quickly denies that he is mage but the guard's don't believe him and take's him to the torture chamber in the palace. As evening approach's, Malcolm get's a guess; it was the queen of Laurdan. The queen is beautiful yet middle age woman who stick out's unlike other's of royalty. She look's a woman who has been trained in combat. She's a few inches taller than Malcolm and slightly build but not as muscular as other man. Her dress didn't look girly-ish but a tunic made of out skin's of a dragon that she had slain. The coat she wore around her was made of of the feather's of large gryphon. Imported from a distant land. Holding in left hand was a sword with sheath's made out of gold and the blade made of out a ore from space. Malcolm plead's to the the queen for his life that he is not a mage. The queen speak's and tell's him that he know's that he know's nothing of magic. Her family has ability to identify mage's. While Malcolm is relieved, the queen brings in bad new's that he isn't out of the woods yet. The queen mention's that are about to go to war with another kingdom, who had been using the mage's during the last battle. Her loyal subject's believe he could be a spy and has to be hang for espionage. She, however, propose's that she is willing to spare her life, in order to become one of her knight's. Malcolm nod's and joins her garrison where he would face harsh time's ahead.
Monster Slayer x Vampire pairing
My character is a monster slayer who received a message from the King of Romania to head to Transylvania to take care of a monster problem, where the villagers are being use as cattle for a family of vampires. The slayer is armed with two short swords a long sword; along with traps and potions to fight off monsters. He also wears a medallion around his neck that would glow in case if there are any monsters nearby. Your character is the daughter of the Count and Countess who she hate's that she and her family uses the villagers as slaves to drink blood out of them and wants their suffering to stop. She escapes one morning wearing a disguise to attend to a festival to see whats it like to be one of them. As my character walks past the towns gates, his medallion glows and points him to where the sounds of the roaring crowd are coming from, in which a vampire could be hiding among them. The young vampire woman is having a joy of her lifetime; where she sings and dances with the locales, with them not knowing that she is the daughter of the Count. As the monster slayer approaches the happily and joyous crowd, his medallion glows again and points him to a woman wearing a cloak. Now he is on high alert that this woman could be a family member of the Count of Transylvania. Of course, he doesn't want to attract any attention, so he dismounts from his horse to join with the crowd. When the festival is over, the hooded vampire quietly heads back to her father's castle in a back alley; not knowing she was being follow by the monster slayer.

Romance books really aren't my thing. I've read a few but it's not something I would pick up given the choice. I had never read a paranormal romance before but I had this sneaking suspicion that I wouldn't like it. Guess what? My suspicion was right.Before I go into why I didn't like the book, I will say that the book was well written for what it was. It didn't sound like a teenage girl wrote it. There was proper grammar and the story flowed well. The mechanics of everything was well done.I had more of a problem with the story. Grace, one of the main characters, is likeable enough but completely dumb, in my opinion. She fall "in love" with this wolf (Sam) that she has seen for six years. It's way too creepy the way she loves the animal. After finding human Sam on her doorstep and taking him to the hospital, she brings him home and sleep together in the same bed. She's known the guy less than 8 hours and they're sleeping in the same bed? That's really creepy. They sleep together like a month later because being in love with an animal for 6 years is obviously a serious relationship.I know, I know those are stupid point to pick at but unfortunately too many teen girls are looking to books like these as a template for how relationships work. That ^ is not a normal relationship.I'm a fan of fantasy books and I always enjoy how the author imagines/describes how things function in their universe. I don't think the logistics of the changing into a werewolf because of the weather were explained well enough. It was explained okay but not enough for my tastes. The book is part of a trilogy so maybe it's explained more in the other books?I felt like maybe if the book wasn't a romance and was just about the friendship between the characters, I would have liked it more. The romance part killed it for me.Rating 2/5Not horrible but not good either. It just wasn't my cup of tea. If you're into the whole paranormal romance thing, then you should pick this up.

Namdev lives in Chhindwara with his family. He possesses a strong work ethic and is skilled in animal husbandry. When Namdev started his business he couldn't have imagined what it would grow into today. Namdev is a successful poultry farmer; he works in the poultry business and possesses a small flock of 30 chickens. With his current flock, he is able to maintain his family's quality of life and make a profit to reinvest. This loan will help him buy more chicks and also build a shelter for them.
I want to build a big poultry farm.

Damn awesome. Plain and simple. Legacy was a sequel that not only was able to build upon the mytho that the original started but it was also able to start it's own course, making the first one a little useless. I enjoyed almost everything about this movie. My only problem was with the 3D and it's the same problem I have with most 3D movies and that's that it was not necessary. It had great 3D parts and if you want to pay the extra for it, I would recommend it, but there was really no part that I felt made it a must for the extra dimension. Other then that, great movie. Front to back, awesome fun.
I even liked the techno beats that Daft Punk did. And I hate techno but it fit perfectly with the movie and it was a great choice (even though it may have been sort of a "no-brainer").

A Cameroonian nursing student, Petra Nji, has died in a car accident just five days to her wedding.
It was gathered that Petra and her fiancé, Isbias Forsack, were returning from Douala after their pre-wedding shopping when they got involved in a car accident along Tiko-Douala road on Monday, January 11, 2021.
Isbias and other passengers sustained injuries and were rushed to a medical facility. However, Petra didn’t make it.
Their traditional wedding was slated for Friday, January 15. While the church wedding was scheduled for Saturday, January 16, at Presbyterian Church Molyko, Buea.

« السابقةمتابعة »
prevent bim from going on in his design of goodness and of mercy? No. The
very next verse to that which relates the abuse which the Pharisees poured upon him, tells us, that “ Jesus went about all the cities and villages, teaching in their synagogues, and preaching the gospel of the kingdom, and healing every sickness and every disease among the people.” Matt. ix. 35. Thus shall we always, if we are true followers of Christ, try to be doing good, however unkind may be the remarks of others upon our conduct. Christians are to persevere in the service of God " through evil report and good report;" “ not with eye-service, as men-pleasers, but as the servants of Christ; doing the will of God from the heart.” Ephesians vi. 6.
CURIOUS ANECDOTES OF DOGS.
A blind beggar's dog, besides leading his master in such a manner as to protect him from all danger, learned to know, not only the streets, but the very louses where the poor used to receive
assistance. Whenever the animal came to one of these streets, he would not leave it till a call had been made at every house where his master had usually been encouraged. When the beggar began to ask alms, the dog lay down to rest himself, but the master was no sooner relieved, or refused assistance, than the dog rose immediately, and went on regularly to the houses where the beggar had generally been relieved. When a halfpenny was thrown from a window, the dog would immediately set about to search for it, and would then lift it up from the ground, and put it into his master's hat. Even when bread was thrown down, the animal would not taste it, unless his master gave it him with his own hand.
Dogs have been taught to go regularly to the butcher's shop, and to carry home the meat in safety. • A mastiff, who had often observed his master ringing at the door for admission, had so learned to imitate him, that whenever he was accidentally shut out from any house where his master was visiting, he would himself always ring the bell.
There was a dog belonging to a grocer at Edinburghi, who greatly amused and astonished the people in the neigh. bourhood. A man who went through the streets ringing a bell, and selling penny pies, happened one day to treat the dog with a pie. The next time he heard the pieman's bell, he ran towards him, and seized him by the coat, and would not suffer him to pass. The pieman, who understood what the animal wanted, showed him a penny, and pointed to his master, who stood at the street door, intending to shew the dog that he must ask his master for a penny before he could have a pie. The dog immediately went to his master, and made many sigus to him, and directed looks to him as if he was earnestly begging for something. The master, who had seen what bad happened, put a penny into the dog's mouth, which the dog instantly delivered to the pieman, and received his pie. This traffic between the pieman and the dog was practised for a long time afterwards.
National School Magazine.
MAY 15th, 1825.
SHORT HISTORY OF ENGLAND. (No. XIV.-Continued from p. 117.)
We last read about brave king Edward the Third, and his gallant son the Black Prince, and the famous battles of Cressy and Poictiers. We saw that the Black Prince died before his father : but this prince left a son whose name was Richard, and he was there. fore now to be the king ; this was king Richard the Second. This young king was only eleven years of age when he came to the throne ; and, being too young to govern, the affairs of his king. dom were left to his uncles, who were his guardians. Many people at that time were very discontented, because of the large taxes which they had to pay, on account of the expensive wars of the last king. A man of the name of Wat Tyler, a blacksmith, went at the head of a great mob, and tried to raise a riot in London. King Richard was then sixteen
and he agreed to meet Wat Tyler and his people in Smithfield, which was then truly a field just out of the gates of the city of London, This was a bold measure in the young king, but he said he was willing to listen to the complaints of his people, and to relieve them if he could, When they met, Wat Tyler behaved very rudely, and seemed even to threat,

|Posted by shawn cassidy on October 31, 2012 at 1:10 AM|
I think the most hate comes from Rondo, and Wade in this Celtics-Heat rivalry. We know what Wade did to Rondo in 2011. Do you think for a second that Rondo forgives Wade for that? No way Rondo forgets that low class move. Wade ended Rondo's season because of that injury. These guys will never respect each other. And I don't want them to.
"I got my kids watching so I stopped myself but it was a punk play by him," said Wade, who had a team-best 29 points in the win. "He clotheslined me."
"I'm here to play basketball, man," Wade said. "If you want to do something else, then go do something else. Boxing, this is not it. I was glad I was able to stop myself in that very moment and move on from it. We'll see next time we play."
"I don't have any response to that," Rondo said. "Everybody is entitled to their opinion. He has a voice. There's nothing else to it."
Wade trying to be the victim.

Adele confirms co-writing and recording Bond tune
October 3, 2012, 12:06 am TWN
LONDON--Adele has confirmed she has co-written and performed the theme to the upcoming James Bond movie “Skyfall.”
The singer was initially unsure whether she wanted to take the project, according to news posted to the official James Bond website Monday.
“There's a lot of instant spotlight and pressure when it comes to a Bond song,” she was quoted as saying. “But I fell in love with the script ... It was also a lot of fun writing to a brief, something I've never done which made it exciting.”
The song was written by Adele and Paul Hepworth, who co-wrote her hit “Rolling in the Deep.” It was recorded at London's famed Abbey Road Studios.

Una H. Reeks is pushing 90, but age is no factor when it comes to hitting the campaign trail for her beloved Republican Party.
During the June 13th primary, the Denbigh resident arrived early at Reservoir Middle School to pass out literature for Republican candidates to people at the polls.
That she has been a poll worker at the Reservoir school since 1964 is only small potatoes, she'll quickly point out. The silver-haired lady has been engaged in political campaigning since she was a child.
"I was conceived a Republican and never had any desire to change," she says. "I can't think of anything I'd rather be involved in than politics, be they local, state or on the national level. I've known them all."
She has filled her front porch with campaign posters of Republicans vying for local and state offices in this year's election. She has walked up and down streets in her northern Newport News neighborhood to pass out literature about her candidates.
"I also try to get out the vote. That's what America is all about," she says, adding that "if they aren't registered voters I insist they get registered as soon as possible."
Reeks, who has a quick smile and ready wit, became a political activist long before it was fashionable for women to be so dedicated. Her support of the Grand Old Party has been constant for more than 75 years. She hit the campaign trail before she would have been old enough to vote and six years before the 19th Amendment was passed in 1920, giving women the right to vote in the United States.
"My father was a state delegate back in Kentucky, where I was born on a farm near Lyon County on Dec. 14, 1899," she says.
"My father, who died when I was four years old, started the Republican Party in our part of the state. It was up to me to carry on the tradition."
She learned to drive a Model T automobile at 14 years old and drove her uncle, who was a doctor, to visit patients during a typhoid epidemic. A year later she was chauffeuring her uncle when he ran for a state delegate slot.
After finishing high school, Reeks took a business course and got a job as a postal clerk in the Kuttawa, Ky., post office. "I couldn't get involved in politics then, because I was working for the government," she says, slying adding that "it didn't stop me from talking about who would be the best person for the office ... of course, that meant the Republican candidate."
Reeks says she has never split a vote, but always went for a straight Republican ticket. "I always vote for the best man and it always happens to be a Republican," she says.
She is as unforgettable as the famous Republican elephant mascot when it comes to party affiliations.
Reeks lived in Kentucky for 21 years before moving to Tennessee, where she was named assistant postmaster in Ashland County.
"That job lasted for three years and then I got back into politics," she says, adding that she was an election official in the late '20s and was elected a member of the State Executive Committee in the 1930s.
She served with the executive committee for 10 years. During the same period, she met and married her husband, Jim, and the couple migrated to Virginia in 1942 during the early months of World War II. Her husband, who died in 1969, was involved in construction work on the Peninsula.
By the time she arrived in Hampton Roads, she had already been a delegate to four state conventions in Tennessee in the 1930s and a delegate to the national convention in 1936.
"When I came to Virginia, I got a job at Langley Field (forerunner of Langley Air Force Base) as an aircraft painter-learner," she remembers. "That meant I was back to being a Civil Service employee and couldn't get involved in politics again. Instead, I voted during each election and collected elephants ... more than 100 of them."
By 1948, Reeks had moved up the ladder in her job place was supervisor of the paint shop.
During that time, she was also a warrant officer in the Civil Air Patrol at the base. "Our group went out looking for wrecked airplanes."
Upon her retirement in 1962, Reeks made a beeline back to her beloved Republican Party. She became a charter member in 1981 and a life member in 1988 of President Reagan's Task Force. She holds memberships in the Republican Women's Club and the Hampton Roads Republican Women's Club, and is an associate member of the Newport News City Committee.
She also takes pride in the fact that she is the first and only life member in the Williamsburg Chapter of the National Association of Retired Federal Employees.
Reeks attended Ronald Reagan's presidential inauguration, but says she didn't have anyone to go with her to the inauguaration for President George Bush. She has received autographed photographs and special citations from Reagan and Bush for her staunch party support.
She has been a delegate to three Virginia state conventions and was a guest at the national convention in Dallas.

Originally Posted by Love4himies
I thought at first it was one of those toy mousies that have real fur that has been hiding under your fridge or stove for a few years, but I guess you are talking one that actually moves on it's own
. Good kitties for doing their mouse patrol
The mouse was a live one. But it was at the opposite end of the kitchen from the fridge and stove. I was actually pretty good at moving the appliances out once a month to clean behind/under them. Even so I think I picked up about 15 toy mice and 7 or 8 springs.
I had actually gutted the kitchen to the studs when I moved down here. Now of course I am a few years older
and have found that being on my knees for two days doing this floor was not so much fun. The kitchen is a bit bigger than 11 x 24 so it wasn't a small job.
Bathroom's next! Hubby is doing most of that job though. I am going to sit back and enjoy. (not)

Q: Loss of hair in boxers?
Has anyone found anything that works on boxers for thier loss of hair and baldness. Please only answer if you have had this problem yourself with your boxer. We asked the vet, but we would like other opinions. He has had skin scrapings etc. He has been diagnosed with seasonal alopecia. does anything natural work on this besides diet?
Aug 12, 2008
I had a foster 7 year old boy who came to me smelling like a garbage can he looked horrible he had hot spots on his sides bald spots red spots. I went out and bought a medicated shampoo thats was about 12 a bottle well it was only the first night i had him and he itched to the poiont of blood drawing from his skin i thought i had done that to him turns out he had seasonal alopceia.The rescue i voul. for bought a trout and sweet potatoe kibble from pinnacle he seemed to improve alot , i also had aloe vera in a bottle kept in the fridge that helped i put it dircetly on the skin its natural ,cool on the skin it seemed to help him. My opinon bathing will not help it makes skin drier.
Thumbs Up: 0 |
Aug 06, 2008
I know boxers have really sensitive skin.. if it isn't either form of mange.. then it could be allergies.. I give my girl very little outside her strict diet. She had patches where she was light on the hair but no more.. even her "elbows" have the hair growing back.. I guess whoever had her left her outside for a good portion of time. And we have a lot of boxer kids on special diets some differ as the dog differs.
Thumbs Up: 0 |
Got a question about your pet? Get the answers you need from Zootoo's community of pet experts and owners.

The Jealous Roommate
As hot and ripped as I look, if we’re being honest, I haven’t been the sexy hunk you see before you for that long. Believe it or not, I was a pretty fat video game nerd a few months ago, and a virgin at that. I heard about this story event or whatever happening on this website, and I thought I could share what happened to me with all of you. It’s a pretty weird and crazy ride, so if you’re interested, sit back and enjoy the show. If that doesn’t pique your interest, or if you just think I’m messing with you, I included some fantastic pictures of myself to at least hold your attention. My name is Danny, and this is the story of how I went from practically a zero, to the hottest ten you have seen in your entire life.
It was your usual Saturday night for me, involving online gaming, fast food, and the occasional masturbation session. As much as I loved it, a part of me kind of hated myself. Not only was I a complete virgin, but I was pretty ugly, fat, and kind of gross. At least in the winter I could make an excuse out of it, but in the summer, I was ashamed to compare myself to everyone else and their attractive bodies. Overall, I was your stereotypical 25-year-old loser, except for the fact that I was also gay. This was made worse by the fact that my straight roommate was probably one of the hottest guys I had seen in my entire life. From head to toe, Rob was covered in muscles, with a sculpted face that would make anyone horny. He could literally have anyone that he wanted, and I just couldn’t stop thinking about him.
I was basically in the worst-case scenario, as it hurt me to be around a guy with such an incredible physique, yet I loved seeing him walk around in his underwear all the time. It also probably didn’t help that he was a complete tool and treated me like shit all the time, but when you’re as hot as him, it probably just comes with the territory. Either way, I would take any chance I could to get a good look at him, especially when he got back from the gym with a good pump. In the end, I was just so jealous of him and his perfect life. While I was here in our apartment by myself, he was out having fun, finding his next conquest. I would do literally anything to look half as good as him, except for, I guess, work out. That’s went I heard them out in the hallway…
“Wow Rob, I can’t get enough of you,” said the girl that Rob brought home with him.
“Fuck, you have no idea what I’m going to do with you sexy,” responded Rob in between them making out with each other.
“Where’s your room, you’re already making me wet,” replied the girl with a slight moan.
Then, it almost sounded like Rob had picked her up and was carrying her to his room. I’m not going to lie, I was getting really turned on. I didn’t know if I wanted to be in Rob’s shoes, or if I wanted to be the girl, but I was enjoying every minute of it. The walls of our apartment were paper thin, so I could honestly hear every little detail. Was it wrong for me to listen in, probably, could I help it, not really. At first, it sounded like Rob was feeling around her body, as you could hear her moaning pretty loudly. Next, it seemed like Rob was getting a blow job, as he started breathing very heavily. That was when I debated playing with myself, which I ultimately ended up doing.
I squeezed my sweat pants and boxers down my fatty legs as I began to massage my pretty average sized cock. As I started to do that the girl let out a loud scream, as Rob slipped his massive cock into her. Then, the bed began to hit the wall again and again, practically shaking the wall between our rooms. I could hear the both of them moaning, experiencing pleasure I could only imagine. It honestly sounded like Rob was making the girl experience earth shattering after earth shattering orgasm, god he was practically a primal beast. The thought of all of his giant muscles working to pound the life out of this girl was such a turn on. Before I knew it, I was cumming all over myself, ashamed that I got off to listening to the two of them have sex. Soon enough, Rob also began to orgasm, having completely destroyed this girl for his own pleasure.
“Guess I don’t know my own strength,” said Rob in a cocky, arrogant tone.
The girl could barely let out any sort of response, she must have been in such a state of ecstasy that she actually just couldn’t take it any longer. Fuck, I had no chance with Rob what so ever, but this was honestly the next best thing. It was like this every weekend, and as much as I hated it, I loved every minute of it. I never really considered myself much of a voyeur, but I guess I really looked forward to when Rob brought a girl over. Yet, a lot of the time he went over to their place, you couldn’t imagine the number of stalkers he has had, or girls that basically refused to leave. Nonetheless, I was so exhausted though that by the time I decided to go back to my video games I ended up passing out right in my own chair.
The next morning, I awoke to find myself sitting in the chair, still covered in my own cum. I felt so disoriented at first, until last night’s shame finally returned, only to be followed by jealousy. Life had never really gone my way, and this was just another thing that would weigh on me, while Rob was having the time of his life. But, hearing Rob outside in the kitchen, I still couldn’t help but want to go look at his muscles. I did my best to clean up and compose myself in the bathroom, and then I ran out of the room hoping to at least get a glimpse at Rob’s body. He didn’t notice me at first, as he was facing the counter on the opposite side of the room, but I had such a great view of him. Rob was only wearing tight black boxer briefs, so I got the perfect view of his sculpted, marble like ass, and his broad, massive shoulders and back muscles.
“Don’t tell me you’re drooling over my body again Danny,” uttered Rob as he shook me from my trance like state.
“No…um…no…I’m just here to get some breakfast,” I responded as I panicked to find any sort of excuse.
“Right, well, maybe when you pick your fat ass jaw off the floor, you can clean this place up, it’s starting to smell like shit,” said Rob as he turned around to fully reveal his god-like physique.
Finally getting a good look at his chiseled abs, giant pecs, and his baseball sized biceps, I was at a complete loss for words. On one hand, my cock felt like it was ready to blow just from the sight of his body. Yet, at the same time, I just hated how he was treating me, expecting me to do everything even though he was the one always making the mess. What could I do anyways, even if I wanted to say something? With a body like that, Rob could kill me with one hand tied behind his back and not even break a sweat. I was powerless not only to the lust I had for him, but also in my ability to say no to anything he asked of me.
“Well, bitch! Get to it,” yelled Rob in a demanding tone as he walked over to me, practically pushing all his muscle into my face.
“Yes…yeah, of course Rob,” I practically whimpered to avoid one of his often-physical tempers.
“That’s what I fucking thought fatty,” replied Rob as he headed back to his room, probably to take his usual afternoon nap.
After that, I honestly didn’t know if I wanted to run back to my room to cry, or to masturbate. Either way, cleaning up the kitchen and living room would help get my mind off of what just happened, and prevent a potential beating in the long run. Later, when I was finished, I returned to my room as I had scheduled an online video game session with some friends. But, as I was booting up my computer, I noticed a weird pop up ad appear on my desktop. At first, I was weirded out because I assumed that these kinds of ads were really non-existent anymore. Plus, this ad looked like it belonged back on Windows XP.
Yet, when I actually started to read what it said I was taken aback by how relevant it was to me. Basically, if I agreed, the pop up ad promised to turn me into a hot muscular guy that could have sex with anyone he wanted. After I finished laughing at how absurd it was, I decided to accept it, thinking that I really had nothing to lose. If there was any chance that I could get a body to match Rob’s, of course I would take it. As expected, nothing happened when I agreed to the pop up ad, I felt so ashamed that I had had such a moment of desperation. But, I had to get out of my own head, so I opened up Steam and got on Skype to get in touch with some friends. Tyler looked a lot like me, John was more of your stereotypical, kind of cute, skinny nerd, and Ashley was pretty attractive for a nerd but average by normal standards. Either way, they were my best friends, and if anyone could make me feel better it was them.
“Hey, how’s everyone doing today,” said Ashley in her usual cheerful tone.
“Not bad at all, but Danny looks a little pale,” responded John, who seemed genuinely worried about my health.
“Yeah buddy, you don’t look too good,” commented Tyler after he finally got a good look at my image through the webcam.
They were right though, ever since we started chatting I had been feeling pretty sick, and just sore all over. I actually started to sweat all over, unable to catch my breath or respond to their concerns for me. Then, it happened, I started to feel my gut push inward, my fats rolls practically disappearing under my shirt. My friends looked on in complete horror and shock as my body began to shake violently. It felt like my body was contracting and expanding at the same time, while I was stuck in the middle, unable to do anything to stop whatever was happening. Either way, despite how terribly painful the process was, I just knew that something amazing was happening right now.
First, I began to notice that my sweat pants were getting tighter and tighter, to the point that I actually felt them ripping alongside my thighs. When I looked down I didn’t see my usual fat legs, but instead far more sculpted legs, legs that just weren’t mine. Almost instinctively I grabbed the sweat pants and managed to rip them off, revealing enormous tree trunk sized legs. I can’t imagine the looks on my friends’ faces, as my legs just looked like they were made of pure steel. Then, my chest started to inflate, eventually ripping my shirt open to reveal massive pecs. If I had to guess my man-boobs had transformed into at least a 50-inch chest of rock hard muscle. Looking back at the screen I saw that everyone just had their jaws wide open, while Ashley and John even looked like they were touching themselves.
Next, we heard two consecutive bursts, which I soon realized were giant, sexy biceps ripping through my shirt that each practically looked like the size of a baseball. I couldn’t help but flex my new arms and pecs, this was just unbelievable, I actually looked fucking amazing. Finally pulling myself away from my new muscles, I began to feel my face, which I quickly realized was no longer my fat rounded face, but now came with a gorgeous, chiseled jaw-line. Then, I could feel my shirt ripping further as my thick shoulders, back, and neck muscles continued to grow, practically endlessly. The budding alpha in me just wanted to finish off my poor shirt, so I just ripped it clean off like tissue paper. When I did that I revealed six-pack abs, a hot v-cut, and hard obliques that looked like they were sculpted out of marble. I was getting so turned on by my unimaginable transformation, but the fun wasn’t over just yet. Not only could I feel my ass tightening and becoming rock hard, but I realized that my cock was growing to fill out my boxers and to match my new god-level physique.
That’s when I heard someone start to moan, as despite how much I was enjoying my new body, it seemed like Ashley and John were having just as much fun watching my growth. Tyler just had no idea what to do, but Ashley and John were clearly masturbating, wishing that they were here to worship the body of a real man. Unable to control myself, and loving the attention, I began to flex all of my new muscles. I loved making my pecs bounce, rubbing each of my new abs, and doing some front double biceps, all while I realized that I had grown to be 6’1. I didn’t know if I should stare at my own reflection on my laptop screen, or to watch Ashley and John completely melt at the sight of my Greek god of a body. As Ashley started to scream and moan while she orgasmed, Tyler couldn’t handle it anymore and left, while John just kept going. Embarrassed at what she had done, Ashley left abruptly as well, as John began to shoot cum all over his screen.
“Fuck, this is amazing, the power I have, I’m such a stud,” I said in my newly developed confident tone.
“Oh god, I…just can’t deal with this right now…bye Danny…,” replied John as he quickly turned off his webcam.
Wow, look at me, look at what I just did to my friends, I’m a god among men. I now have a body that can rival Rob’s, that can get me anything I could ever want. That’s when I noticed my steel pipe of a penis through my boxers, which had easily become 9 inches long, almost double what it was before. Fuck, was it thick and in need of some serious attention right now. Yet, first, I wanted Rob to see me, I wanted him to be horrified, to know that he wasn’t in charge anymore. As my massive rager calmed down I ran over to his room, barging in like I had nothing to lose. That’s when I saw him lying on the bed and realized this wasn’t just muscle growth, this was muscle theft. Rob had lost all his muscles, leaving a fat, shorter, wimpier body in its place. He was still fast asleep, not knowing that he had gone from a god to an ugly little piece of shit. This was amazing, whatever that ad was, it had given me Rob’s muscles, and I was prepared to have a lot of fun with them.
Knowing Rob would wake up from his nap pretty soon, I decided to head to the living room to explore my body further. The thought of a scared and horrified Rob running into the living room to find me masturbating to my new hunky body was such a turn on. I went and sat on the couch, taking my time to rub every single one of my muscle fibers as I watched my reflection in the living room television. I just couldn’t believe it, I had zero fat on my body and looked like I belonged on the cover of some bodybuilding magazine. Each of my muscles just looked gigantic and perfectly sculpted, with a massive cock to boot. Just to piss off Rob even more I decided to stand up and take a selfie of my new body to send him. This assured that when he woke up he would come out to find me, hoping to figure out what was going on. Fuck, I’ve already become a cocky bastard, I was in love with how I looked in this picture, but honestly who wouldn’t be.
That’s when I realized I couldn’t hold my desire back any longer and I pulled my boxer briefs down to let that monster breathe as I took the time to explore my unbelievably tight ass. Then, almost uncontrollably I began to jerk off with such force and power that the pleasure was simply unimaginable. I never wanted it to stop, my left hand rubbing all over my muscles, and my right hand giving my cock the stroke of a life time. I almost exploded when I heard a scream come from Rob’s room, but my new body had full control over my orgasms. When I finally saw a terrified Rob appear in the door way I let out load after load. I had never cum so much, it was all over my chest and abs, on the couch, on the coffee table, and even as far as the television. The craziest part was that my cock was only just getting started, god this body produced so much testosterone.
“What the FUCK is going on here,” yelled out Rob as he watched the new man of the house finish off literally all over the living room.
“The tables have turned and you still want to talk to me like that,” I responded as I got up from the couch and pushed my new, cum-covered muscles against him.
“I…what…um…I just don’t get what’s going on,” said a worried and frightened Rob.
“I’ll tell you what’s happening, things are going to fucking change around here wimp,” I chuckled as I flexed my 18-inch biceps right in his face.
I had never felt like this in my entire life, I finally had power, real power. Either people would want me to fuck the shit out of them, or they’d be so afraid of what I might do in a fit of rage that they would do anything I asked. Yet, no matter what, my body gave me the ability to control people, making them putty in my hands. If this was even a fraction of how Rob felt, wow, he really was a mother fucking god in his prime. Now it was my turn though, and there was nothing Rob or anyone could do to stop me from having the time of my life. I’m the alpha now, I can fuck whoever I want and get whatever I want, whenever I want. Wow, even just thinking of everything I could do was already beginning to turn me on beyond my wildest imagination.
“God, you must be so confused, unsure of what’s going to happen next,” I whispered to him, more arrogant than ever.
“I just want my muscles back Danny, this isn’t fair, I worked so hard on them,” Rob replied practically on the brink of tears.
Unable to stop myself from laughing at him, I uttered, “tough shit Rob, with the way you treated me, you deserve to be a fat, little wimp.”
“I’m sorry Danny, I really am, I was a massive dick,” responded Rob, hoping to prevent me from beating him to a pulp.
“Oh, fuck off Rob, you would never have said this if our roles were still reversed. Now, run back to your room, and bring me your gym membership and some workout clothes, I want to go test out my new strength,” I said as I began to flex my muscles in every pose I could imagine.
It was amazing, without question, without talking back, Rob ran back to his room to look for the membership and to get me something to wear. On one hand, he didn’t need it anymore, but at the same time he knew who was truly in charge now. I could make the little bitch do anything, and he literally couldn’t do anything to stop me. Yet, now it was time for me to leave him to soak it all in, while I head to the gym to test out what this body can really do. Prior to this I wasn’t able to run for more than a minute or lift more than a 15-pound weight, but now, who fucking knows what I’m capable of doing. As I was still flexing and admiring my muscles, Rob returned with his membership card and clothes. Without saying anything I took them from him, barely fit the clothes over my muscles, and pushed him onto the nearby couch, using almost none of my strength. Rob was unable to say anything, scared that I might go further, but I simply started laughing and walked out of the apartment. I looked so sexy in this tight tank top and shorts, it was time to have some real fun while Rob probably stayed on the couch and cried.
I just loved the looks that I got on my walk to the gym. Other guys seemed impressed, either they were looking up to me, or they were left horribly insecure over how their average, little bodies looked in comparison to my rock-hard muscles. At the same time, the girls just couldn’t take their eyes off of me, almost drooling at first sight. One woman in particular looked like she wanted me to ravage her right then and there on the side walk. Fuck, I had been turned into the perfect human male specimen. If I wasn’t headed to the gym I could literally pick out any person on the street and have my way with them. But, soon enough, I arrived at the gym, and although I knew where it was, this would be the first time in my life entering any gym. The best part though was that when I walked in, despite there being a lot of muscular guys, I was clearly the biggest and most ripped, by far.
The second most muscular guy, who appeared to be one of the trainers there, was at max a half to two-thirds of my sexy build. He was wearing a super tight under armour compression shirt that hugged each and every one of his muscles like skin. His shorts weren’t fairing much better covering his massive legs, ultimately showing off one heck of a bulge. When I finally locked eyes with him he gave me one of those alpha male head nods, and I also saw that he was wearing a name tag labeled “David, Head Trainer.” I had no idea how to actually workout this beautiful body, but I know that I wanted to learn from the best here. So, I decided to get some water and sit on the nearby bench until he was finished with some ugly fat ass client. Luckily, he was finished in a few minutes, as the other guy couldn’t handle much, and eventually walked over to me, probably wondering what I was doing sitting over here.
“Okay, you’re the biggest guy here, and you’re not working out? Anything I could do to help you,” questioned David in a sexy, yet curious tone.
“Well, I’ve never actually worked out in my entire life,” I responded cockily, yet at the same time completely serious. But, looking me up and down a few times, it was clear that David wasn’t buying my story at all.
Laughing to himself, David replied, “well I guess we can try out a few different exercises and techniques, if you’re up for it, newbie?”
I chuckled and agreed, so we walked over together to the main portion of the gym. My guess is that he wanted to start me off with some cardio to get my blood pumping, so we stopped at the treadmill first. Not even sure what to start me on, David played around with the settings for a bit and set the machine to a level 5. For me, for my muscular physique, this was practically nothing at all. After a little while, I pushed the machine as high as it could go, to a 10, finally feeling it in my legs. My calves and thighs started to get veinier and veinier as I finally started to break a sweat. Eventually, David had to actually stop me, as after running for 30 minutes, a total of 5 miles, it didn’t seem like I was getting close to stopping at all.
“Consistent 6 minute miles, barely sweating or getting tired, well, I guess let’s try something a little harder,” said David, beginning to see what my muscles were capable of doing.
Next, hoping to kick it up a notch, we headed over to the weights section of the gym, specifically the weight bench. Here, he had me lie down as he started me off with 100 pounds of weight, which felt like I was practically lifting nothing. It was so easy that David, added 50 pounds, then another, and another, and then another. At 300 pounds, I was finally feeling it, I was like an alpha monster, lifting the weight up and down pretty regularly. I could tell that David was getting scared, as even he was unable to lift this this much. Then, seeing I could still take this much weight, David reluctantly added 50 more pounds, which finally got my muscles really pumping. My tank top was practically stretching as my pecs started to get an amazing pump, and I finally started to sweat a pretty decent amount. Both David and I actually lost count of how many bench presses I did but eventually I did stop to catch my breath and get a better look at my pumped pecs.
“Fuck, man, that was absolutely incredible, I have never seen anyone lift that much weight so consistently,” blurred out David completely in shock.
Hoping to impress him further I responded, “so is that all you have for me?”
At this point I could feel my biceps and chest being pushed to their limits, but I was definitely ready for more. Walking me to the squat rack, and hoping to see more amazing feats of strength, David started me off with 200 pounds. But, after a little while, we eventually took the weight up to 410 pounds. By this point multiple people had stopped working out and were just staring at me in awe of the power I was capable of releasing from this god-like physique. I must have looked so ripped as my sweat glistened over each of my pumped-up muscles. You wouldn’t believe it, but with some help from David watching my back, I was able to take that weight up and down multiple times, getting so turned on that I was capable of such monster-level strength.
Lastly, still unable to believe what he was watching, David took me to do some deadlifts, starting me off at an insane 300 pounds. Somehow keeping perfect form, which my body almost knew instinctively, we actually brought it all the way up to 520 pounds. After jumping from workout to workout, no breaks, for almost two hours, I was really feeling the strain on my body. Yet, at the same time, I loved every minute that I got to show how much of a real man I had truly become. Nonetheless, after some unimaginable weight lifting, pushing my body to its fucking limit, I finally put down the weights. If I really wanted to I could have kept going, but I didn’t want to overdo it during my first workout ever.
“You my man, are a fucking legend,” said David as he patted me on the back, still unable to process what he had just seen.
“To think that was the first time I did all of those exercises,” I replied, now joking with him more than ever.
“Shut the fuck up dude,” responded David, laughing his ass off, “now get some well-deserved rest, you deserve it.
After saying our good byes, I bought some sexy workout clothes that they were selling at the gym store and decided to take a shower in the locker room. I had such a good pump that I could just barely get my skin-tight shirt and pants off of me. You could tell that literally ever single guy was jealous of me in that room, as all of them just stared as I made my way to the showers. I must have then spent so much time in the shower, feeling up every corner of my sculpted physique, that by the time I got out there was no one in sight. As I finally got dressed and was about to get out of the locker room, David came in after it seemed like he had had his own intense work out.
“Woah, hey man, I didn’t think anyone was still here, we don’t normally see many clients at this time on a Sunday,” said David, genuinely surprised to see me.
“Yeah, I don’t know, I must have taken like an hour-long shower,” I responded, almost a little embarrassed that I was ogling myself for so long.
Then, reaching to feel my hard-right nipple through my shirt, David replied in an almost hungry tone, “well how about we take some time to try something else.”
David was one of the hottest guys that I had ever seen in my entire life, and he was begging to get a piece of my body. When I slowly licked my lips and nodded my head, he scrambled to get my shirt off and started to suck on the same right nipple, almost uncontrollably. His right hand was taking its time playing with each of my abs, while his left hand was exploring every crevice of my massive, wide back. A guy that once upon a time would never have given me the time of day wanted me now more than anything. Turned on beyond my wildest dreams, I grabbed the back of his shirt with both of my hands and just ripped it in half, the shreds falling to the ground. Then, I started to make out with David, as I began to rub my muscles against his. My dick was rock hard as each of my muscles felt the warmth and hardness of his. David was also clearly enjoying every minute of it as his penis, almost the size of mine, became fully erect as it rubbed up against mine.
“God, I want to please you, I want you to use me,” uttered David in desperation.
Despite being one of the manliest, most muscular guys I had seen in my life, David quickly, without question, got on his knees and pulled down my shorts. He clearly knew what he was doing as he took my massive cock into his mouth as he played with his own. I was in complete and utter ecstasy as David took most of my thick, meaty dick rapidly into his mouth, in and out, in and out. David was a hunk himself, but in this moment, he had become my bitch, ready to burst just from sucking me off. In no time, David actually started to cum all over the floor, with my cock following soon after. I completely filled his mouth and throat, with David eventually giving up on taking it all. That’s when I finished cumming all over him, covering his pecs, abs, and face, as he himself finished his load. David was breathing heavily, exhausted from sucking my dick, when we heard other people enter the gym. I quickly realized how embarrassed and scared of getting caught David was. He quickly cleaned himself off with the shreds of his old shirt and ran out of the locker room, not saying a word, but still hosting a semi-hard on. God, I was looking forward to coming back to this gym.
After I finished putting my clothes on I ran back home to find Rob whimpering on his computer, desperate to find something that would give him his muscles back. Little did he know that karmic justice had taken his muscles away and given them to the last person he’d want to have them. Now, he looked just like the old me, fat, unattractive, and a little bitch. When he saw me walk in it was clear that he was still scared of what I might do to pay him back for everything he had done to me. There were honestly so many options, from beating the shit out of him, to forcing him to do anything I wanted. But, before I could say anything to him, we both heard a knock at the door.
“Who is it,” I yelled as I looked Rob straight in the eyes.
“Um, it’s me…John,” responded the person at the door, almost scared at what I might respond.
Remembering how John had reacted to my growth earlier today, I was eager to see what fun I might be able to have with him. Although I had always been in love with Rob’s muscles, for the longest time I had had a crush on John’s personality and overall adorableness. Scared of rejection, I never tried anything, but seeing how in love he was with my muscles, and how eager I was to see what I could do with this body in the bedroom, I was ready for some action. That’s when I walked to the door, opened it, and right in front of John, I ripped my shirt off without any effort. With how gorgeous my muscles looked from the slight pump I still had, it was clear why John was completely taken aback by my incredible new body. With his jaw wide open, John was unable to get even the slightest word out, something that was kind of cute, as well as a massive turn on for me.
“Are you okay,” I asked, clearly knowing the answer.
“Wow…Danny…you look incredible,” John said as his little hard on started to grow under his shorts.
Without saying a word, I grabbed John by his shirt and brought him into the living room. I winked at Rob, letting him know exactly what was about to happen. Rob was always bringing girls over to fuck their brains out, while I sat in the other room, unable to experience such ecstasy. It was time for Rob to listen to me for a change, maybe even get turned on from my pure testosterone completely dominating someone. Now that I was the alpha, he’d be forced to listen as I ravaged my own conquest. Thus, unable to control myself any longer, I continued with John into my bedroom. After closing the door, we didn’t even make it to the bed as John’s hands began to wander around my body and we both fell onto the ground. I laid back, with my hands behind my head, as John quickly took off my shorts and started rubbing my thick, juicy thighs.
John was so hungry for my muscles, ready to worship every single one of them. After he finished rubbing my legs he moved on to licking my abs and obliques. His licking and sucking was wild, practically making him seem like some sort of feral animal. Then, while continuing to rub my abs with his hands, he began to lick the crack between my pecs, something that just drove me crazy. As he moved on to sucking my left nipple, with one hand I grabbed his shirt and jeans from his waist and ripped them to shreds. He was so turned on by that effortless feat of strength that his sucking only intensified as he began to rub his cock against mine. That’s when I grabbed his cute, perky ass tightly, and brought him closer to my giant muscles.
“Oh god, oh god, oh god,” John managed to utter as he moved to lick and suck my left bicep while rubbing the other one.
“You love these muscles don’t you,” I said as I started to moan slightly.
“Yes, Danny, yes…you’re a sex machine…a god among men, a total stud…I can’t…I can’t control myself,” replied John as he started moan loudly, unable to stop himself from cumming in his briefs. Just like I would have been yesterday, John was so embarrassed, but still incredibly turned on.
Trying to hold back my laughter, I responded, “don’t worry about it, with me around you’re bound to want to cum again pretty soon.”
That’s when I brought him in even tighter, my muscles completely dominating his little body. I could already feel him getting hard again as I removed his cum soaked underwear and started to massage his tight hole. John had just finished cumming but he was already moaning again as I started to nibble on his neck as I stuck a finger in his ass. By this point I was rock hard, but still not ready to cum just yet. I was so turned on by the pleasure that my body brought to John that first I wanted to see him cum again and again. When I finally saw that he was rock hard again, I sat him down on my abs, placing his little cock right in between my pecs. Then, I began to move, harden, and bounce my pecs, massaging his dick in between them. This drove John completely insane as he began to moan and scream in pleasure. His little cock fit perfectly in between my pecs, at points, completely consumed by them. Even he started to move his cock back and forth, practically fucking my chest, hoping to get the most pleasure possible.
In little to no time, John was getting ready to cum again, so I brought him closer and stuck his dick in my mouth. Almost instinctively, at a masterful level, my sucking brought John right to the brink, eventually giving him an intense orgasm. His little body began to shake violently, with him screaming my name, so I had to make sure to hold him in place. His cum began to stream into my mouth, which I was easily able to hold and swallow. I could tell that John was already becoming exhausted, but this sex session was just getting started. I got up and laid his frail body on the floor as I took my boxer briefs off. John was in complete awe from the reveal of my giant, thick cock, almost enough to reinvigorate him. Then, I laid my muscles and cock on his body, making sure not to crush him.
“God, Danny, I’ve never felt such pleasure in my entire life…and that cock…god that cock…take me Danny…take me please,” begged John as he frantically rubbed his skinny wimpy body against mine.
Happy to oblige, I brought John closer, slipping a third of my penis into his ass. Just this much was enough to drive him absolutely insane as he started to moan and scream louder than ever. I could only imagine how this all sounded to Rob, something that turned me on even more. Then, as I could feel his ass really stretching, I slipped another third in, beginning to lightly fuck him while on my knees. Next, being careful not to break the little wimp, I stuck the rest of my cock into him. Little by little, I started to fuck him harder, something that was already making John’s cock stand up again as it rubbed against my abs.
“FUCK Danny, Jesus…this is amazing…ohhh…I’m already CLOSE,” John managed to say as he moaned louder and louder.
“Let’s have some real fun then,” I said with the biggest cocky smirk on my face.
Grabbing John tightly I stood up carrying him, with my dick still deep in his ass. John was losing it, unable to understand how I was able to hold him up like this while fucking the shit out of him. In reality, John’s skinny body weighed like nothing compared to what I had done earlier. Then, I started to fuck him with around 50% of my strength, enough to completely destroy John. My fucking was so intense, John looked like a glorified sex toy. To stop John from moving around from so much pleasure and ecstasy, I eventually decided to hold him up against the wall. Despite not using all of my strength, my fucking was enough to actually make a dent in the wall. I kid you not, we could both hear the wall starting to crack, although I think John was so lost in his pleasure at this point that he had no idea about it.
That was when pleasure really kicked in for me. I was so powerful, it was such a turn on, I was getting close. Harder and harder, faster and faster, my body knew exactly how to pleasure the both of us. Then, John actually started to cum, which dripped over my abs. You could tell that is body was starting run out of cum, but he was actually experiencing even more pleasure than before. After a few more minutes my dick finally had enough and I began to cum inside of John’s ass. He was so tight, it felt so good, god, I really was a sex machine, an alpha male, crafted for sex and pleasure. As I continued to cum it began to drip out of his ass, dripping all over the floor. By the time I finally stopped I noticed that John had gone completely limp in my arms. He was still conscious but it looked like he couldn’t take anymore, while my body barely felt anything. As I lifted him off of my dick, letting out more cum, I sat him down on the floor, leaning him against the broken wall, and then I sat on the bed, admiring my work.
I had done that, I had brought John to the brink of exhaustion with the pleasure I was able to give him. After a few minutes, I noticed that John still had some life in him. He was unable to say anything, but he managed to get up and sit on my lap, with his hands making their way around my muscles again. Fuck, the little guy was running on pure pleasure at this point, something that I was fully prepared to take advantage of. Ready to go again, I started to make out with him as I slid my semi into his ass. John managed to let out some soft moans as I lifted him up and down as I held him from his ass. Now sitting down, and slightly losing the ability to control myself, I started to fuck him too, altogether using about 75% of my strength. No joke, with how much John was moaning, screaming, and shaking, I was scared I was going to break him like I did that wall. But, since John wasn’t complaining, I kept going, deeper and deeper, moaning louder and louder. This was real pleasure, pleasure that only gods like me ever got the privilege of feeling or giving out. Pleasure that Rob would never have again. John was my toy, for me to use, for me to destroy, and he wouldn’t have had it any other way.
Thinking about myself and the pleasure my cock was experiencing was enough to bring me to my second orgasm, somehow more powerful than the last. Even John was orgasming, although at this point little to nothing was actually coming out of his puny, tiny dick. My body was made for pleasure, and the amount of cum that just kept coming and coming, you wouldn’t believe it even if you saw it. Yet, I wasn’t done yet, now I needed the pleasure, I was consumed by it. John with what little strength he had left continued to rub my muscles and even started to suck on my pecs again. This was enough to get me going again, somehow, and I laid him on the bed, ready to truly fuck his brains out. With his ass getting more and more stretched, I was able to easily ram my dick into his ass, fucking him at my full strength. John began to scream as his dick started to grow hard again. This was the greatest pleasure my dick had felt in my entire life. The bed was shaking violently, hitting and cracking the wall. I was fucking at an uncontrollable speed, truly becoming an animal dominating his prey. Harder and harder, faster and faster, deeper and deeper, John’s ass was truly and utterly my play thing.
I honestly don’t remember how long the pleasure lasted, I almost felt like I blacked out during parts of it. I was a sex machine made to fuck, dominate, destroy, and experience the greatest pleasure that any human ever could. Later, I felt that I was getting close so I pulled out of John’s ass and finished myself off. More cum then ever shot out of my cock, streams and streams falling all over John’s small body. He was practically swimming in it, eventually trying to lick it off of himself and the bed. God, I had destroyed John, look at him, he was nothing but pleasure at this point. Eventually, I managed to finish, finally feeling a little tired after all that intense sex. With the wall and bed broken, cum all over the bed, floor, and wall, and John laying there completely limp, I still couldn’t believe what I had just been capable of doing. The craziest part of it all was that I could still keep going. I could fuck John’s brain out all night long, but I wasn’t sure if he could handle any more. How sad...
Whatever nice guy still existed in me thought it might be good to take him to the shower to clean all the cum and sweat off of us. I picked John up with ease and we walked into my bathroom. I sat him on the shower floor and then turned on the water. The cold water was enough to wake John, who awoke to the sight of my giant, ripped body standing over him in the shower. I can only imagine what thoughts were going through his head when he saw such a beautiful sight. Then, before I could even grab some soap, I noticed that he had gotten on his knees and had started to massage my cock.
“Wow you’re still going, I could have sworn you were spent,” I chuckled, genuinely surprised that he had managed to get up.
“God, I can’t help it Danny, look at you,” John responded as he began to put the head of my cock into his mouth.
Somehow my monster cock was always ready for action, with little to no refractory period. That’s when I grabbed his head and began to fuck his little mouth. Although tears began to stream down his cheeks, and he was having trouble breathing, John was starting to get hard, enjoying every minute of this skull fucking. I loved fucking his little mouth, in and out, in and out, deeper and deeper, deeper and deeper, somehow, he was able to take it all. I held him tight while also using all of my strength to fuck him. A part of me was scared of braking his jaw, or hurting him in general, but at the same time, I didn’t care. Look at the pleasure I could create, I’m the alpha, I can do what I want. Yet, eventually I noticed that John was actually starting to pass out, I don’t know how he was still sucking. How much he wanted to worship my body was enough to finally bring me over the edge. Even John began to shake and orgasm, although this time nothing came out from his dick at all. I was covering him in cum faster than the water could take it off of him, fuck was it a sight to see. This time though, John definitely passed out, unable to take it any longer. God, I had actually used someone up completely, bringing them to at least four or five orgasms. This was incredible, I could even still keep going if John was up for it, but looking at him, I wouldn’t be surprised if he slept for a whole day. So, I decided to clean the both of us, turn the shower off, towel off, and place him in bed. With the combination of the water glistening over my muscles, and the fucking that was practically a workout giving me an incredible pump, I really looked like a god, I was a god.
John looked so adorable sleeping in my bed, probably having one of the best night sleeps he’s had in god knows how long. Yet, I was personally getting hungry, and thought it would be fun to go out into the living room and check on how Rob was doing. Still in my towel, I walked out into the living to find Rob quickly covering himself with a nearby blanket. He seemed horrified to see me in the door way, but this time I wasn’t sure if it was because he was scared about what I might have planned for him, or just because of how mother fucking sexy as I looked. Either way, it was time to have some fun with him.
“What are you hiding under that blanket,” I demanded know.
“Um, nothing…um, I was just cold,” responded Rob, obviously lying.
“Want to try again,” I said while I crackled my knuckles and looked at him angrily.
“Fine, I’m not gay, but fuck that was so hot. Listening to how intensely you were ripping apart that dork, it was such a turn on to me,” replied Rob as he took off the blanket to reveal a wet spot in his shorts.
I couldn’t believe it, the guy I had been afraid of for years, the guy I wish would have fucked the shit out of him endlessly, this very man, he had cum listening to me have sex. I was no longer jealous of him, far from it, I felt kind of sad for him. Rob had been reduced to exactly the pitiful state I was in yesterday. Yet, I couldn’t help but laugh to myself too, this was more than I ever could have dreamt of, both of us getting exactly what we deserved all along. Then, just for the shits and giggles, I went up to Rob and picked him up from his shirt collar.
“No, please, don’t hurt me, I’m sorry,” begged Rob unlike I had ever heard him before.
Hearing him beg me to stop was such a turn on, so much so that I accidentally ripped his shirt, not paying attention to how much strength I was using. He fell back on the couch and I punched him right in his big, fat stomach with less than a quarter of my strength. Either way, this was enough to make him cry out in pain. That’s when I noticed, in all of the excitement, that my towel had fallen off to reveal my fully erect penis. Although Rob was in incredible pain, he couldn’t stop staring at it, and the muscular body that was it was attached to.
“Fuck Rob, maybe you are gay after all,” I said arrogantly while I winked at him sexily.
“No, I’m not…no…,” replied Rob, still incredibly interested in my naked body.
“Oh, come on, how do you know for sure if you’ve never ever tried it,” I responded as I got up right in front of his face.
But, before Rob could get his mouth around my cock, I slapped him in the face with it. Then, I grabbed his face, and nodded back and forth, as I went into the kitchen, grabbed an old sandwich from the fridge, and went back to my room. From my room, I could hear Rob begin to frantically masturbate to what he had just seen, god what a fucking loser. With guys like John and David, fat, ugly Rob wasn’t worth a bit of my time, plus it was his turn to know how it felt to want someone and not have a shred of a chance with them. Then, I just sat back in bed next to poor little John, eating my sandwich, thinking about all the fun I was going to have. I was especially excited for summer, fuck was this god in for the time of his life. You should especially hear about what happened at my family's annual water park retreat. But, that is a story for another time…

I've said it before, I'm going to say it again. I LOVE the weekends! We get to have to much more fun now that the twins are almost 2. They love exploring and constantly asking "Wha's dis"? Adorable and exciting all bundled into two packages!
Most of Saturday was spent at Yuba Lake. Just an hour or so South of us. It was sunny with a chilly wind, but that didn't stop us from having so much fun. The girls spent most of their time playing with their cousin Tyson and running around with the dogs. We took a walk down to the lake and of course they had to play in it. Obviously everyone got a bit wet.
The view was so amazing from the camp site. Overlooking the lake and the valley below. Watching the kids play in the water and all around made me so excited for our camp outs and road trips this summer.
PS. Yes, K is showing crack. :) Couldn't help but giggle she couldn't keep her pants on.

If you're like me, May 2020 feels like years ago. I mean, we've lived a million lives since then! So, when Addison Rae brought up some drama from May on Wednesday, you may have had to do a refresher about what she was talking about.
Last night, Addison shared a TikTok where she played the game Two Truths and a Lie. She shared three facts before revealing which one was false. For Addison, those three facts were, "I had a 1D fanpage when I was 11," "I bailed Bryce out of jail," and "I paid my grandparents' house off."
As a reminder, back in May (which, again, was less than a year ago), Bryce got arrested along with Jaden Hossler in Texas for drug possession. At the time, there was a lot of rumors swirling around the incident, but the biggest one was probably that Addison bailed Bryce out of jail, paying the reported $5,000 fee.
Despite rumors, Addison and Bryce were not together during this time, but many believed that they were still friends and she was simply helping him out. Now, months later, Addison is finally coming clean about the situation. In her video, she revealed that she did not bail out Bryce, making the other two statements the truths.
As for who did bail out Bryce on that fateful day, it seems like we may have an answer to that as well. When TikTokRoom posted Addison's video on their account, Blake Gray, a fellow Sway House member commented, "Yeah I wonder who actually bailed Bryce and Jaden out💪🏼 😎."
So, I guess we can assume Blake, and maybe some other Sway Boys bailed out the boys in May. Glad we were finally able to clear all of that up. Now, let's move on to the fact that Addison is a Directioner...
Follow Carolyn on Instagram.

By Chris LaBate
According to a report in the New York Post, Golden Boy Promotions President Oscar De La Hoya has been hit with yet another crossdressing scandal. During an interview that aired in September, De La Hoya admitted to dressing in drag, and fully confessed to wearing high heels, fishnet stockings and women’ panties in the infamous 2007 photos which showed the boxer in a hotel room with a New York-based stripper. During the September interview, De La Hoya said the crossdressing incident was fueled by alcohol and cocaine. The boxer has been very open about entering rehab and trying to clean up his act.
But now a new scandal has surfaced and a new woman has come forward. 25-year-old New York model Angelica Marie Cecora is claiming De La Hoya was involved in a booze and cocaine fueled sex party at The Ritz-Carlton on Central Park South in New York City. The incident allegedly took place earlier this year.
“It was beyond kinky,” Cecora told the New York Post. “Things that I don’t even know how to explain were done with him. He started to put my stuff on, my underwear. I had a skirt with me. He put that on. He was the exact same size as me. He fit into the tiniest pair of underwear that I had been wearing. He was dancing, playing around with my [clothes], playing a woman, very feminine. We had intercourse . . . He wasn’t taking no for an answer, as if I could leave. He ordered drugs to be delivered to the room. I tried to hide them from him to keep him under control, but he just wanted more and more.”
Cecora, who has posed for Playboy and Maxim, has filed a lawsuit against De La Hoya, claiming "emotional distress, false imprisonment and assault and battery."
In the lawsuit, Cecora claims De La Hoya contacted her through he modeling website to help him “relax” last March 15 after returning from a goodwill visit with the troops in Iraq. He told her his name was Thomas Crown, but finally revealed his true identity over dinner after flashing his AmEx Black Card. During dinner, De La Hoya was allegedly boozing heavy, and then continued to drink once they hit his hotel room. The model claims she was barely able to control the boxer, and had to call in her Russian roommate - and then things got out of control.
“He said there was no alcohol and no women [in Iraq], and he needed to unwind,” Cecora said. “Once dinner was over, he decided he wanted me to spend the whole night with him."
"He had asked [my roommate] to bring some stuff with her. Some more underwear, some vibrators, toys . . . She brought a vibrator, a dildo, a bong. He was naked the whole time, wearing our underwear, nothing more. He had both of ours on at the same time. We locked him out of his own room and made him sleep in the living room. He came in the room about four times, trying to crawl in bed with us, to the point that me and her screamed at him, ‘Go away, Oscar. Otherwise we’re leaving, and its not going to be pretty.’ He wasn’t taking no for an answer.”
In the morning, De La Hoya was gone and allegedly left the women with an unpaid bill of $1,500 dollars.
“All the paraphernalia was cleaned up, the toys were all still left there, plugs, everything we had [used] was still there, but the drug paraphernalia was cleaned up,” she said.
A lawyer for De La Hoya, Judd Burstein, told The Post he was “unable to reach my client for comment.”
Cecora’s lawyer, Tony Evans, told the paper, “I think this case is a sad example of abuse of power. Clearly, my client was intimidated and abused by Mr. De La Hoya’s abuse of his celebrity power, his monetary power and his tremendous physical power and presence. It’s never OK to dehumanize and intimidate people, as was done here.”

Arrowhead helped us with a major plumbing fix we discovered right after moving into our house.
Dave came out and gave us a very competitive quote. He was professional and very friendly.
His team— headed up by Tony and accompanied mainly by Brenner — were AWESOME. seriously, we keep talking about how amazing they were to work with.
We had to relay all the pipe in our finished basement and fix a root clog in the front yard. When they were inside, they were super careful in their work and conscientious and protective of our house. They hung up two drop cloths to protect our furniture from dust and went in and out of the egress window to avoid tracking mud through the house.
Tony communicated with us every step of the way. Of course, extra surprises came up where I had to call a subcontractor (HVAC) to fix a punctured water heater line. Tony even helped me communicate with the guy about what we needed.
We had a big job and they got it all done in about 4-5 days of active working time (we had to have an asbestos team come in to remove tile or it would’ve been faster). Their work was superb and done with such care. Tony had to cut some tiles out of the shower to remove the pipe and it was such a clean job.
They also cleaned everything up before they left. Though it was an annoying situation to have to go through, we’re so glad we found arrowhead to help us. Removed a lot of the stress. HIGHLY RECOMMEND!!
I had a belly in my sewer line. It is an old house in old town with surprises at every turn. But I was impressed with Dave. At each surprise, he was able to offer different options, strategies and costs upfront. It was no problem getting him on the phone or getting a callback and Arrowhead was there to do the job when they said they would. Communicating and being on time is greatly appreciated. It seems to be a rarity these days. It was professional work and the job came out great. Dave put in the effort to make sure that the money I spent equaled what I received in service. My trust paid off and I have recommended to friends. Thanks again!
Dave and Arrowhead Service came highly recommended from a friend. Called him regarding a large underground water leak in the main service line from the street into our house. He came out to assess the situation within a few hours and he recommended that we use a leak detection service (Mike from American Leak Detection) because it would cost us less overall. Once the leak was located Dave had a crew out the very next day. They dug through at least 12 inches of frost 5 or 6 feet down, found the leak, fixed the leak, and ensured that no other leaks were present, filled in the hole and completed the job all in a single afternoon. The guys he sent out were friendly, courteous, and very professional. As a homeowner having an emergency this is how a business deal should be. Everything from the timeline it took Dave to arrive and his communications with us to his recommendations, to the guys he sent out and the price. I am very pleased with this company and the people representing it. Truly professional in every way.
LOVE LOVE LOVE this place! My kitchen sink drain was totally blocked, I did what I could but had to get help. They came the same day - the quote was more than reasonable and then, when they found the job less complicated than expected, lowered the price! You heard me right people - HONESTY. How refreshing!!! Hard to find these days. I had previously had a terrible experience with another company in town, a very well-known company, who wanted to charge me $1,000 for a $100 job. So to come across this kind of customer service was a blessing. Thank you Arrowhead. I will spread your praises far and wide. Thank you, thank you, and thank you.
Arrowhead did a great job. They came the same day we called for assistance. The technician, L.L., was informed, efficient, and kept me updated throughout the process. Their price was fair for the job, and I appreciated their guarantee. Thanks for the excellent work!
My trust paid off and I have recommended to friends.
It is hard to find a trustworthy company who doesn't over-charge. Arrowhead has been great! Tony was a really great technician who cared about the job he was doing and took the time to get it done right. It's really nice to now have someone we can call when we need them. Front desk was very nice as well.
David and his crew did a great job digging up and replacing our outside spigot in the stable. Wonderful service as usual! Thank you from all of us at Laughing Buck Farm!
David and his crew came through for using a crunch and did an excellent job. We replaced our clay with the pipe bursting method and tapped into a larger city replacement process. It was a quick turnaround project, they treated us with respect, were very competitively priced and were very professional. We really thank you for the great work!
Arrowhead did a great job. They came the same day we called for assistance. The technician, L.L., was informed, efficient, and kept me updated throughout the process. The price was fair for the job, and I appreciated their guarantee. Thanks for the excellent work!

Don Byron: Music Wikipedia
So once I started getting into his amazing cleverness, and that somehow he'd make all of this stuff that was really weird but would sound right. Like what else would you want there except a whole bunch of measures that aren't the same length? I just had never heard any music like that. And then what was really crazy was that at the same time I had discovered him, I really got into Eddie Palmieri and I could see the same elements in his music. For me, it was Stravinsky and Eddie Palmieri for a long time, that's what I was really looking at. I love Eddie Palmieri. He really managed to do what Stravinsky did, only in one music. He had kind of a skronky thing, a very traditional sense of harmony, he mixed and matched them and pitted them against each other. He had the kind of complexity that Stravinsky had in his music and yet people were dancing to it. What could be better? Not professional dancer, but normal people would sit down and they were dancing to some of the wildest music that I had ever heard. So I think the moment where the Stravinsky really sank in was around the time of "Sentido," and "Unfinished Masterpiece," and those kinds of records that were really kind of out there. Those two artists, one dead and one living, they really fueled my standards for what music was supposed to have in it. What kind of innovation or playing with the elements or rhythmic and harmonic trickiness. It was really around those two artists.
GC: What's next on the list for you in terms of projects? I know you have the Gospel project. Is there anything coming down the pipe?
DB: I'm doing some research in Banda music. Banda is vocal music, but it features large Mexican instrumental groups. A banda group like the ones that travel, they might have a section of four or five clarinets. I saw this group called Cuisillos that had four clarinets and they could all play! There's a bunch of these groups. I just started doing research on them and I think the Cuisillos guy, the founder, is a clarinetist. I'm always interested in what's happening on the instrument outside of the two big musics. What's happening on Banda is really exciting as a wind player because the groups play with this kind of wide vibrato that sounds very idiomatic, like if you hear a Mariachi band. There's that big wide vibrato on all of the instruments, all the wind players play with it. When I first started listening to salsa groups, at first I kind of liked it, and then I could hear the sophistication in the writing. Guys like Luis Perico Oritz, or Luis Cruz... you can see the potential for that kind of growth in Banda. They've got a lot of troops that can really play their instruments. And with or without that vibrato, you could do a bunch of crazy stuff and every once in a while you hear these groups and they're playing really instrument lines behind singers.

EBC Day 04 – Lukla to Phakding
I had been looking forward to the flight to Lukla for quite a while as all the things that I had both read and had heard from others travelers made the journey not only sound dangerous but also immensely fun. As such, I awoke that day bright and early and very eager to go. I had paid USD282 (NPR29000) for the return flight from Kathmandhu to Lukla with TARA Air and had decided on the return date of the 27th of November which gave me two contingency days to get to Lukla in case anything happened during the hike that might cause me to fall behind schedule, as well as another two days to get to Kathmandhu for my flight home in case there were delays with the flight from Lukla. Delays were apparently (and quite alarmingly) commonplace as the Tenzing-Hillary Airport in Lukla would shut down its operations whenever the weather was inclement.
The guide for Sophie's group, Binod, had told me earlier that when we were to arrive at the Tribhuvan International airport (Nepali : त्रिभुवन अन्तरराष्ट्रिय बिमानस्थल) , we were to expect hoards of porters swarming in to try and 'help' us with our bags and that they would be requesting tips right after. Despite being able to and even preferring to carry my own bag, I had decided to let it just be and to chip in with the tips that they had decided upon which came up to a ridiculous NPR200 per person.The Domestic wing of the Tribhuvan International airport was a relatively small hall with booths occupying its circumference that was rendered claustrophobic by the sheer amount of people that were packed into such a tight space - just pure, raw chaos. This however was overshadowed by the cacophony of those raising their voices above the din of the hall, trying to restore some resemblance of order.At one point the airport officials had decided that my bag was to follow on the next flight as the flight that I was on had reached the weight limit. I had conflicting thoughts when this was made known to me as I was glad that they were abiding to the safety standards but on the other hand, the success of the hike depended on the contents of my backpack. Binod however came to the rescue and managed to sort something out with the airport authorities to ensure that the backpack remained with me.
Shortly after that we entered the departure hall and actually boarded the plane, before being told to our dismay that the airport in Lukla had been shut down due to strong winds. Since the flight was postponed, our only option at that point was to head back to the airport for lunch, which cost NPR670 for dhal bhat and a drink.
The trick to getting the first pick of the seats on the plane is to make sure that you are the last to board the feeder bus. That way you will ensure that you are the first out of the bus door and the first to board the plane. I would normally do this anyway but on this occasion it really worked to my advantage. The plane was a de Havilland Canada DHC-6 Twin Otter which seats 19 passengers, 6 rows of 3 with the single seats on the port side, the doubles on the starboard and the remaining one at the back for the air hostess. The plane is considered a STOL (Short Takeoff and Landing) utility aircraft which makes it perfect for the short runway of the Tenzing-Hillary Airport in Lukla (elevation : 2860m).
The flight itself was ridiculously tame compared to what I had expected. Websites, articles and blogs had lead me to believe that the half-an-hour flight would have been plagued with horrid turbulence and buffeting winds but it was completely to the contrary. Turbulence was of course present for an aircraft of that size with only 300 km/h as the cruising speed, but I think the loud drone from the two Pratt & Whitney turboprop engines would have struck aviophobics (or those who lead somewhat tamer lives) as intimidating. All this paled in comparison to the gorgeous views which had the ability to take anyone's mind off the fact that they were flying, and as I was to find out later, they were to set a precedence for what was to come.The plane spent most of the flight at a relatively high altitude although towards the later part, decreased its altitude to get through some mountain passes that had sheer ridges on either side, in order to begin its approach to the runway. The runway was clearly seen from the cockpit and the fact that it slopes upwards at a 12 degree incline made it even more obvious. The landing itself was remarkably brief and (fortunately) uneventful. So much for what has been labeled as the 'world's most dangerous flight'.

This spring, Allan and I were lucky enough to have Brandie White as our realtor while we searched for our first home together. We were nervous and anxious about all the unknowns of owning a home, but Brandie was there with us through each step with an explanation that put us at ease. Although she and I had not met previously, it was looking for our home with a best friend. She listened to what we wanted and found places that had just what we need. When we finally found our home, I remember I first looked at Allan and we both knew we wanted it; then we looked at Brandie and she knew too. She spent the time with us really getting to know, enough to even know what we were thinking before we found the words. She expertly navigated the difficult housing market and worked for us to find our home with such an amazing passion. As first-time homeowners we were so excited to find our first home and her excitement matched our making the process so completely positive and memorable. Brandie was absolutely fantastic with our whole family and quickly and easily became our son’s new best friend (he still asks if she’s going to show us houses again).
Although we found a home we will love forever, I almost wish we could look again just to get some more of that wonderfully positive experience we gained from Brandie. I would recommend Brandie White to anyone anytime when looking for a home. She is truly fantastic at what she does and makes the process so positive. Every time we met with Brandie or spoke with her she went above and beyond to ensure that we had everything we needed, that our questions were answered and that we were comfortable enough to ask those ‘I’ve never owned a house before so maybe this is a silly question but..’ kind of questions. Whether you’re looking for your first home, a new home, or selling I recommend Brandie 1,000 percent – she is that good! We could not have had a better home buying experience and Brandie is the reason for that!!!

Hey all. Returned recently from a great week at CSS. Went after recommendation from others we met at TI last year...Have to say it was fantastic. Different from TI and we missed the Thai but it was really special.
One negative was the hounding and gawking by the locals on the SSB beach during the day near the river. When ever myself, the missus or both of us went for a paddle, they would race across the river and start peddling their wares. After two days, the guys were permanently camped on the SSB side, just around the corner near the trees. Now I know there are local guys in boats going backwards and forwards all day (waved to the same guy each day and he said hello and to my girlfriend said "you like fine today m'lady' which made her feel like a million dollars...
However, the lurkers around the corner made us uncomfortable as they were eyeing up who was where and when. I had to tell one person just near the trees out of site to hide their bags with their phones on top as I reckon it would be all over in less than 5 seconds if they wanted to do a snatch!
My recommendation to management would be to put up a tough fence from the tree line to the water (very easily defined) with a nice private sign or even get the security guard to look up once in a while and ask them to go elsewhere...I don't get it as not once in 5 days did they sell anything. Are they looking for a different opportunity. Be interested in others views?
Finally, one Saturday night we were approached by 2 local boys in the grounds begging us to get the a cheeseburger from the beach bar. Again, they did not look like they were staying here! People are very trusting at the resort as they should be. Management just need to look into it as I would hate for something to happen and not to say anything.
Apart from that, Thankyou Couples!
Did you try mentioning them to the security guard on duty? On our last four trips to SSB, this was all that was needed. They went over and made the locals leave. If for some reason the security guard does nothing about it, then mention it to management. It will get taken care of. One thing I have learned about Couples is, if you want something, just ask. They will bend over backwards to make your stay with them the best! Couples is awesome!
It shouldn't be necessary to have to ask the security guard or the management to make SSB secure. I would think that would be on the top of their priority list. We haven't been to CSS yet, but will be very disappointed if there are non-guests hanging out by the au natural beach.
I did mention it to the lady guard twice. First time she came down and asked them to leave from the SSB side and they went just across the river. Second time she obviously thought she was wasting her time and did nothing. They are quick enough to stop me using a camera at 8.30am taking a couple of pics of us (yes au natural) with just the sea in the background ;-) Even the couple taking the pick was surprised as obvious that it was just of us, they were nude and so were we!
Last trip this year to SSB the lady guard either slept or just read a book when she was there. The only time she did something was to stop a group picture from being taken that the entire SSB crowd agreed to participate in.

Dick Dudley, Advisor, began his financial services career in 1973 at John Hancock, where he was a sales manager. Immediately prior to joining Pinnacle, Dick was Vice President of Investments at CCO Investment Services Corporation. Additional industry experience includes serving as Vice President of Investments at Sovereign Investment Services, and as Financial Consultant for Fleet Bank and Bank of America.
Dick lives in Waltham, MA with his wife Linda. One of his passions is coaching; he coached his two sons in youth baseball and hockey. His other hobbies include running, golf, and playing the guitar.

LOUISVILLE, Ky. — Three people were shot to death and a fourth was seriously injured Wednesday at a condominium building in Louisville, Ky.
The fourth person was taken to University Hospital with what appeared to be life-threatening injuries after the shootings, reported shortly before 4:30 p.m. EDT, police spokesman Dwight Mitchell said.
Asked if there was a suspect, Mitchell said officers believed everyone involved was accounted for but wouldn't say whether the shooter was among those shot.
"At this time, we believe we have everybody that's involved ...," Mitchell said. "We believe there's not anyone on the loose."
He said the shootings took place inside an apartment but declined to say whether there were other people inside at the time. Mitchell also wouldn't indicate the ages of the victims and said the investigation was just beginning.
The Lakeview Condominiums complex lies in a neighborhood filled with upper-middle-class homes with manicured lawns near private Bellarmine University on the outskirts of the Highlands neighborhood near the Watterson Expressway.
About two hours after the shootings, a man and woman, who was crying, came to the scene and didn't speak to reporters but crossed the police tape and talked briefly to an officer before being escorted back to their vehicle and leaving. About a half-hour later, a different pair came and also spoke to police, the woman visibly shaken and weeping, before being walked back to their vehicle and driving off.
Molly Hoekstra said she has lived in the complex for nearly two years and returned home Wednesday to find the building blocked off by police tape.
"Nothing like this has ever happened," she said. "It's always been really safe and neighborly. It's like the most quiet place there is."
Hoekstra, eventually allowed inside her condo, brought her cat, Sasha, out in a carrier and said she was spending the night with relatives. The shooting, she said, had left her unnerved.
"I don't think it will ever happen again," she said.

Junior Tim Locastro, 11, is greeted by teammates after scoring during Ithaca's 14-2 victory over Cortland in April. Locastro is bidding his teammates adieu after three seasons; he was drafted by the Toronto Blue Jays on Saturday, and will sign a contract Wednesday in Florida.
It would be hard for Tim Locastro to improve upon the season he just had as the shortstop for the Ithaca College baseball team.
The junior from Auburn had the kind of year most players could only dream of having - a .436 batting average, school records for runs scored (71) and stolen bases (40-for-41), as well as being hit by pitches (29 times), a stat in which he led the nation.
He led the team in nearly every offensive category, including hits (71), doubles (13), triples (6) and home runs (4). Two of those HRs came in the NCAA Division III World Series, in which IC made its first appearance in 19 years and placed third, capping a record 41-win season.
"He did everything you could ask the kid to do. How do you get better than that?" wondered long-time Bomber assistant coach and hitting guru Frank Fazio.
Yes, it would be darned near impossible for Locastro to have a better college season than he did this year. And as it turns out, he won't have to try.
After some initial angst over the prospect of leaving school and friends, Locastro has decided to forgo his final year of eligibility and sign a contract with the Toronto Blue Jays, who took him in the 13th round of last weekend's MLB Entry Draft. He's the second IC player in as many years to be drafted; pitcher Tucker Healy was drafted last year in the 23rd round by the Oakland A's.
Locastro said that the contract he'll sign includes full tuition for his final two semesters of college, so long as he completes them within two years after he stops playing pro ball.
Locastro, who turns 21 on July 14, was in the airport in Syracuse Tuesday afternoon when I caught up with him by phone. He was preparing to board a flight for Tampa, Fla., and will be in the Blue Jays' Dunedin facility Wednesday to sign on the dotted line. A Blue Jays representative went to the Locastros' house Monday night, and he unofficially joined the club with a handshake agreement.
His selection with the 385th overall pick came as a bit of a surprise to Locastro, who figured he'd be picked somewhere between the 20th and 25th rounds. He said he and his parents were in the basement watching the live feed of the draft on mlb.com when he decided to go upstairs and charge his phone, thinking it might ring fairly soon.
"My dad was still downstairs watching it," he said, "and literally 30 seconds after I went upstairs, all I hear is my dad yelling, "Yes!" He came upstairs and gave me a high-five, then then Blue Jays called me five or 10 minutes after and told me the news.
"I figured it was like the NBA or NFL draft, where they call you first," he said. "I didn't expect to be picked first, then get the call."
Regardless of how he found out, the fact remains that he's about to become a professional baseball player. "I still can't believe it," he said.
Locastro said he'll be at the Blue Jays' facility for approximately a week, then possibly stay in Dunedin (Florida State League) or be shipped off to either Vancouver (Northwest League) or Bluefield, Va. (Appalachian League). "They told me mostly likely Virginia," Locastro said, "but they didn't want to tell me exactly where I'd be going."
Valesente, a former major league farmhand in the late 1960s with the Washington Senators, is nothing but happy for Locastro, even if it does create a massive void in the Bomber infield and at the top of the batting order.
"I think there's no question that he's doing the right thing for himself," said Valesente, who talked to Tim and his father, also named Tim, on Monday as the Locastros weighed their options.
"He's a hard worker, he practiced hard and played hard," Valesente said. "You can't say a negative thing about him at all, he's been a plus in every aspect of our program for the entire three years he's been here. And he was an exciting player to watch, great player to coach and teach, and a wonderful person to work with. He comes from a great family, and it's noticeable with the type of young man he is."
A pitcher and first baseman in his playing days, Valesente thinks the challenge for Locastro will be different from that faced by Healy.
"If you're a pitcher and you get drafted, wherever you go you're going to pitch," Valesente said. "Position players, it's a lot more difficult, more challenges to making it. But (Locastro) had a great opportunity, they drafted him high, which means they're going to send him off and he's going to get playing time and prove that he can play at that level, or at least get the opportunity."
Healy has been brilliant out of the bullpen this season for the Beloit (Wis.) Snappers of the Class A Midwest League, with a 1.01 earned-run average, 40 strikeouts and five walks in 16 appearances (262⁄3 innings). Opposing hitters are batting .194 off the four-time All-Empire 8 hurler.
Valesente said he thinks the Blue Jays will start Locastro off at shortstop, but might feel comfortable moving him to either second or third base, or perhaps even the outfield, given his speed.
"He'll get better every day, because he's playing more often," he said, "and he's capable of playing probably several positions, even in the outfield, because he runs so well. I could see him playing third, because I think he's going to be productive offensively. He has some power ... and he'll be such a plus with his running speed, on-base percentage and ability to steal bases."
Fazio, who's still in the IC offensive record books 46 years after his graduation, saw tremendous progress in three seasons from Locastro.
"He had a lot of body movement (at the plate) when he came in, and he got away with it in high school," Fazio said. "But he knew he had to sharpen things up, and he had a good teacher in T.J. Gamba (a former Bomber third baseman and Auburn native, drafted in the 22nd round by Cleveland in 1986). T.J. thinks like we do as far as hitting because he played with us.
"The thing I think Tim did most of all is that he learned balance - mental balance and physical balance," Fazio said. "Too much movement, or too much getting upset with himself, he controlled all that. And he was always a studious, hard-working kid. He got better, and he still can get better."
As complimentary as Valesente and Fazio were toward Locastro, he had like sentiments for them and the program.
"They're definitely one of the best coaching staffs in the country, if not the best," Locastro said. "I definitely wouldn't be where I am today without them. And my teammates, they're the same way - they're behind my decision, and it was great knowing that they're not mad at me or anything like that. They're some of my best friends, and I'm hoping that they can go on and finish what we couldn't this year, and win the national championship."
That task might have been made a little more difficult with Locastro's decision, but it was one he had to make. How often does one get the chance to make a dream come true?

Brittney Griner, a senior at Baylor who was picked first in the WNBA draft, told ESPN the Magazine that she and fellow players were told not to discuss their sexuality publicly while at Baylor.
"It was a recruiting thing. The coaches thought that if it seemed like they condoned it, people wouldn't let their kids come play for Baylor," Griner told ESPN.
Griner says her friends and family have known she was gay since she was a freshman in high school and that she told Baylor head coach Kim Mulkey when she was recruiting her. But after that, Griner was told to stay quiet about her personal business:
"It was more of a unwritten law [to not discuss your sexuality] ... it was just kind of, like, one of those things, you know, just don't do it. They kind of tried to make it, like, 'Why put your business out on the street like that?'" Griner told ESPN.
Griner recently spoke openly about her sexuality in various interviews after she was drafted to the WNBA.
In Baylor's University's, a private-Baptist school, student handbook there is a "Statement on Human Sexuality" saying:
"Christian churches across the ages and around the world have affirmed purity in singleness and fidelity in marriage between a man and a woman as the biblical norm. Temptations to deviate from this norm include both heterosexual sex outside of marriage and homosexual behavior. It is thus expected that Baylor students will not participate in advocacy groups which promote understandings of sexuality that are contrary to biblical teaching."
Here's a video of the interview with ESPN:

What is the quilt you would pick as your favorite? When my 1st(and only) DGD was born I mad.e her a Whinney the Pooh quilt the I made buy tracing pictures from DGS's coloring book. I then used fabric paints to color them and sewed the blocks so they told a story. I had the squares hanging all over 'til the paint dried so my kitchen looked like a day care center lol. She is in High School now and still has her quilt.

702-637-3716Find a Different Location
The inspectors were on time (if not early), knowledgeable, and friendly. They also relayed information in a way that allowed me to understand what was going on. I felt they were incredibly thorough. They certainly made me feel confident based on the inspection of the property I purchased.
Everyone was completely thorough. It was great that HomeTeam was able to coordinate all inspections to be completed at the same time (insect, insurance, etc.). I just had to make one phone call and everything was done.
I like the team concept because everyone had their own area of expertise. They were friendly, competent and certainly on time!
They explained things in an easy-to-understand fashion. The inspection results were delivered very quickly.
The team members we worked with were helpful, friendly and knowledgeable.
Please fill out the form below or if you would like an immediate response please call 702-637-3716.
To expedite your request and save time, please include the full address of the property to be inspected.

Holy Moly! This week has been insane. Monday morning Heidi's allergies were out of control. She was blowing her nose every 5 minutes and eyes were running all day. So I called the doctor just to see if she needed a change in her allergy meds. After her nap she woke up with a fever and was burning up all afternoon. Natalie came home from spending time with my mom and Heidi all of a sudden was fine. But Natalie fell asleep on the couch at 6 and was burning up all through the night. The next morning they let me bring both girls together. Natalie's whole throat was swollen. You could literally look at her and see that her throat was swollen. She had strep throat and the doctor said Heidi did too. We got them both on meds but for some reason Natalie's strep was a million times worse than Heidi's. Heidi never got another fever but Natalie had a fever for...well today was the first day that she didn't have a really high fever. The poor girl! Really! She has been so so sick. I even had to take her back to the doctor on Thursday because she had blisters all over her tongue. Not a big deal I guess but it totally freaked me out! I'm really hoping that she has a full and complete day of no fever tomorrow so that she can go to school on Monday.
This is pretty much where we stayed all week. Natalie wanted me close to her every minute. Heidi, on the other hand was not even allowed to touch her on accident or she would freak out. It was a very emotional week for her too.
Today was much better. It actually felt a little bit more like normal. Natalie still isn't eating. She is pretty much living off of gatorade, Dannon smoothies and the applesauce pouches that you basically drink. Anyway...the girls remembered today that they haven't taken any circles off their Christmas countdown chains and they haven't opened any of their advent boxes. Today was make button ornaments and it was so fun. A perfect craft for two girls who are still pretty weak but wanted to do something besides watch tv. :)
Such an easy fun craft. Florist wire and some buttons. They picked out the buttons, put them on the wire and then we closed it up to make a button wreath. They turned out really cute!
Natalie organized her pattern out before she put them on the wire! :)

Originally Posted by THE HEARTBREAK KID
I love Moutinho! Been a fan since I saw him for the first time back in Euro 2008. He was one of the best players at Euro 2012 last summer too. He's pretty much the exact same player Scholes is (or was), so he'd fit United perfectly. I remember Moyes trying to sign him for Everton a few years back but he was priced out of it. Now at United and with funds at his disposal, I won't rule out him reviving that interest given that we need a creative midfielder.
Yeah with the way Oscar, Hazard and Mata have played this season, it would be a bit silly to disrupt that. totally forgot about De Bruyne! He's a decent young player, but I don't think he'll be ahead of team OHM or Schurle.
Marin is a good player IMO. Don't get why RDM signed him and then didn't use him at all, not even on the bench. He's had a few more chances under Benitez, but he had no chance of breaking into the starting 11. Dortmund would be a great place for him to go to kick-start his career. He'll make a natural replacement for Gotze.

I mentioned that I would put up some before and after pictures of Juliet. Some pictures I took of her within a day or two of her joining our family compared to what she looks like now. She’s put on a good deal of weight. When she arrived she had very little muscle tone and not much between her skin and bones.
Now she swings around like a monkey should. There is muscle definition and she looks a lot better. Its not as obvious as I thought it would be but on closer inspection one can see how she’s doing better.
Here are some pictures of her. One when we first got her and three others taken a day or two ago.
The picture in the upper left was when she first arrived. Look at her wrist and then look the picture in the upper right. You should be able to tell it is much fuller..You may be able to see how much her face has also filled out. You can click on any of the pictures to enlarge them.
When I look at the lower left picture, I notice the muscle in her lower forearm. In the upper picture, the elbow joint looks much bigger than the rest of the arm. Especially along the lower edge I see much more muscle there than she had before.
When I compare the upper left to the lower right, I notice how much larger her chest is now. It also more clearly shows the additional filler on her face.
When we first got her she often had “the shivers.” I thought she was just too cold in my room but once we put her outside she would also do this. It was worse if she became excited. I think she was too weak to regulate her body temperature. My cooler bedroom made that harder but probably also a monkey version of a panic attack. Too much stimulation.
She had not been treated well by humans so I’m sure she was scared. She doesn’t do that any more though. I’ve not seen her shivering in a long time, not even after her escape. I’m convinced Juliet wouldn’t’ have been alive much longer.
I’m not trying to be a hero here. I couldn’t have done a thing for her if someone else hadn’t bought her from the farmer that had captured her a year or two ago. I wouldn’t have been able too. I had the easy part, feed her full of bananas. The neighbours help a great deal in this as well. Everyone wants to feed her to try to become her friend.
One thing though, I’ve noticed with monkeys, if you give them food, they look at you like, its mine now and dont you DARE try to take it. 🙂 George loved to get into my pockets and get my sugar free candy but it made him sick. When he managed to get one, he’d quickly pop it into his mouth. I would stick my fingers in his mouth and pry it out. LOL I’m not sure how Juliet would react to such. She’d probably choke herself trying to get away.
She is a lot wilder but also too use to people to be freed. I think she’s close to her full size. I’ve read they get up to 12 pounds and she’s less than that. She may get a bit bigger but I suspect her growth has been permanently stunted.
Having an exotice animal as your pet does present challenges but it also brings rewards. In the case of our Philippine monkey, its good to see her thriving. It is also important to remain aware she is a wild animal.
Filed under: Monkey Diaries
Like this post? Subscribe to my RSS feed and get loads more!

My wife and I did a two hour mountain biking lesson with Rick. I had some experience and this was my wife’s third time on a mountain bike. Rick made sure we were safe and comfortable with our bikes and that we understood how body position affected your ride in various situations – fundamentals that I wish I’d had years ago. We got out on the single track to put things in to practice and have some fun. Two hours well spent that will improve our riding immensely. His knowledge and experience is such that any rider at any level could surely benefit from spending time with him. Rick is a real nice guy that also happens to understand how to instruct and coach in a very positive way. Book a lesson with him – you’ll be glad you did.

Have you ever been a matchmaker without knowing you were one?
Well after a few nights of having people over for dinner and hockey games in the past weeks...my sister and one of my friends hit it off.
They've been seeing each other lots and she even met his mom.
They've both went through similar things in their past relationships and I think it might work for them.
The only thing I wish is to never be in the middle and never have to choose.
I'll keep you posted if it becomes official ;)

What was to become the Pier Hotel, Seaview, was originally built as a terrace of four houses by Squire William Anthony Glynn of Seagrove Manor in 1892 on the esplanade opposite Seaview Pier. However, by 1901 the individual houses had been combined into the Pier Hotel.
Over the years, various extensions were made to add new facilities.
During both World Wars, the hotel was requisitioned by the military with typically little respect for the property.
After World War 2, the Hotel was auctioned off as one lot with the break-up of the Seagrove Estate.
It continued as the ‘Pier Hote’l until the late 1960’s when it changed hands and was re-named ‘The Halland’. Some upgrading of facilities were made and a night-club added. A road was constructed behind the hotel - prior to this new road, access to the houses facing Seagrove Bay was by passing in front of the hotel and vehicles would often park in front of the hotel to give their occupants a fine view of the Solent.
But the old building just wasn’t suitable as a modern English, sea-side hotel and in 1973 it was demolished with great talk of replacing it with a modern, luxury hotel.
Over the years, the area remained derelict and changed ownership a number of times, eventually the site was developed as housing.

Old Knudsen comes from where the wind is cold and truth is seen through keyholes; where the men were men and so were the women sometimes. Ah well, any port in a storm.
During the 80's I worked at sea a lot; I caught crabs for a living. NO! Ya dirty fuckers, Old Knudsen wasn't a man whore, he was a fisherman. I caught lobster too, and if they had went around me pubes they would have snipped my huge cock off.
Old Knudsen had strong hands back then; many a fellow would marvel at my grip. They would ask me to squeeze things, and I could make a grown man cry like a baby. It was such fun. They used to rib me, saying,"Young Knudsen, you have hands like a girly-boy, you can pull my creels in and I'll make a man of you." Those beautiful bastards, it brings a tear to me eye to be recalling such things.
Us fisher folk were always cold and smelling like fish, and so were the hookers that hung around the docks. No, Old Knudsen never paid for that pleasure; anyway that's none of your business, fuck off.
We never got very many of those funny boys with the frilly cuffs, lipstick and hair so full of hairspray that they could become human matches if they got within 6 feet of a naked flame. Well, Old Knudsen knew of the odd one during National Service; you Americans would say "don't ask don't tell," we would say, "backs to the wall."
You know how in nature if an animal was sick or weakly, it would be killed by its own? Well that's the attitude many had in Old Knudsen's town, when we saw a weedy little boy with a pale white face and lipstick. It just brings out the nature in us, poor boy must be at odds with himself. We wouldn't kill him, that's just savage and cruel. No, we would just thrash him soundly and humiliate him, making sure to shave something. I mean, we weren't animals. Of course this explains queer bashing, not the kind of bashing they like, but hey that's all natural. Blame the Lord Almighty, it's not their fault at all.
Old Knudsen has nothing against turd burglars, Catholics, or any type of bum bandit. If Old Knudsen did have anything against them Old Knudsen would wear several layers of clothes, and wrap himself in plastic and wear goggles. They can do whatever they want, as long as no one gets splashed.
Hey, did you know that Liberace was gay? Yes, it was a surprise to me also but there you have it. The man was a genius, he even had a piano in his swimming pool; now that's class.
If you see Billy One Ear don't mention it to him, or anything about his dead wife. He went on the run for killing her, but don't worry, he was cleared later. He still gets a little touchy at it for some reason. The man has fists of fury, one minute you're talking footie to him and then BAM! you're on your back with a crowd around you. Thank God that with years of alcohol old Billy is a little slower. His glory days are having been a minder for the guy from Abba, not the fat bearded one but the dork that looked like a frog.
The 80's was when all the big stars were in their prime. Paul McCartney was forever youthful and having hit records all over the place, I liked that pipes of peace one, then he had that song with Michael (I would never hurt children, I just sleep with them and fiddle about, "Honey I diddled the kids"), Jackson, that one was more like a big smelly number two.
All that ya ya ya banjo music and catchy videos, no wonder the young people's heads were turned. Fake shoulders, fake genders, flock of fucking bastarding seagulls, did you see that hair? Either they weren't hugged enough as a child or they were hugged too much by their gym teacher. Either way, they wanted attention, so we beat them up.
Nothing personal, next time just put a sign saying "kick me" on your back.

I was alone in home and watching the sexy pictures of girls on the computer. German Cap-Story - Office-Sex I had been used to hand practice. Quickly washed my sperms and her fluid and went outside to open the door. Amelie Neten la pute de secret story et des anges! Party Chat. I asked her that she could go to her home and I could drop her but I was amazed on her answer.
Sexy beggar girl
I asked her that I should leave her to her home but she denied.
Didi ki fucking comic incest sex pictures
When I had unbuttoned her qamize I took it off and tried to unhook her bra but as I had no previous experience of doing such a thing so I was unable to unhook her bra. It was my first sexual intercourse and I was feeling very nice. Forgot wife's birthday interracial cuckold story

Music has always been an integral part of Ben’s life, possibly because he’s coming from a family that loves music – his grandmother was a great piano player and so were her daughters. Ben’s uncles played guitar and also performed in gigs. However, he claims his parents were the biggest influence: at home, music was on all the time – Ben can recalls dad endlessly playing David Bowie records and mum putting on musicals such as Phantom of the Opera or Carmen.
When Ben was still in primary school, his mother sent him and his brother to piano lessons however unfortunately, he quit after some time because he couldn’t stand his teacher – this is his biggest regret. Although Ben listened to music endlessly, and attended many music events, he never attempted to play another musical instrument until a couple of years ago when he started learning the guitar. Unfortunately, he had put this on hold because of his full time job and MBA studies.
In 2010, Ben received a Behringer BCD 3000 Midi Controller as a gift and started playing with it at home, trying to mix his favourite tracks together and record sets just for fun. In June 2013, Ben played for the very first time at a private event with around 200 people and he had the time of his life! The organisers enjoyed his set and asked him to play at subsequent events which gave Ben the chance to build a name for myself. He was then approached by a promoter and friend from Squadron Malta who asked him to play at their event Gesaffelstein (12-12-13). This was a truly amazing experience which led to quite a few other events. Ben now DJs on vinyl – not because he wants a career in ‘DJing’ (he plays vinyl at home rather than in clubs) but simply because he love the sound of music on vinyl and want to do it the proper way.
Ben’s musical influences are pretty sporadic and scatterbrain as he’s been through many phases however he claims his biggest influences to be David Bowie, Pink Floyd, Depeche Mode, Radiohead, Bloc Party, Apparat, Aphex Twin and Plastikman.
Musical genres may be too high level to name however Ben’s favourite styles are Alternative/Indie/Experimental/Psychedelic Rock, IDM, Techno, Dark Jazz and Ambient.

Keith Urban is in Long Beach for American Idol and since he was in town he decided to call the Frogmen and give them an update on how’s it going.
The biggest news to come out of American Idol this season is the big cat fight between Mariah Carey and Nicki Minaj, so we had to ask Keith what went down. Keith played pretty coy with his answer, but did say, “we’re 4 people on the dance floor stepping on each other’s toes.”
Aside from the judges, Keith said the audition were going well and that they’ve already sent “well over 200 people to Hollywood”. Keith talked about the cities they had already hit and the new addition of the audition bus in cities that the judges weren’t in.
Keith Urban recently announced his upcoming 2013 tour with a really cool video, so we had to give him kudos for it. ever so humbly he replied that “it’s an Oscar contender”. The video features his soon to be opening acts, Little Big Town and Dustin Lynch, in a car with him singing various songs. When they were picking the songs Keith said, they were looking for songs that “you would never hear” any of them singing.
Listen to Keith Urban’s full interview below and watch his tour announcement too!

West Magee Road, May 21, 7:09 a.m.
When a woman was caught driving quite obviously drunk one weekday morning, she put a lot of time and effort into fruitlessly trying to convince law enforcement she was just a regular—that is, sober—morning commuter, according to an Oro Valley Police Department report.
Before 7 a.m. on a Monday morning, concerned citizens called the OVPD regarding an erratically driven Ford convertible on Magee Road that had swerved into a bike lane, almost striking a pedestrian. A patrolling police officer soon found the car, which had just pulled over in a bank parking lot. Another officer already on scene asked the driver to exit her convertible, which she did very slowly.
While the woman was made to stand as the other cop administered a horizontal gaze nystagmus (HGN) test, the reporting officer noticed she reeked of liquor, had bloodshot eyes, spoke abnormally slowly and with a slur, and swayed back and forth so much that she stumbled in place. Asked about any medical conditions, she said she had a "heart injury."
After the woman scored six out of six for impairment on her HGN test, she agreed to complete further field-sobriety tests and answer some questions, such as when she'd last ingested alcohol (at 11 p.m. the previous night, she said) and whether she had any problems with balance—which she said she did; when asked why she had balance problems, she answered, "Because I'm a girl."
At one point she interrupted the questioning process, alleging that she'd just been driving to work and needed to call her employer immediately. The reporting officer said the call must wait, and proceeded to ask her where she worked, which seemed to confuse her—the location she gave didn't correspond with the direction in which she'd been driving before she'd pulled into the parking lot. When she attempted to explain this, she only ended up weaving a more confusing tale.
Finally, she apparently decided to give in when both officers informed her they were about to proceed with another field-sobriety test, and she declared, "I don't want to do the tests, just take me (to jail)."
After searching her car—where officers found a water bottle full of beer and an open bottle of vodka in her purse—they brought her to a nearby police station. After drawing her blood, officers asked her how inebriated she thought she was "on a scale of 1 to 10 (1 [being] nothing to drink and [being] 10 falling-down drunk)"; she responded that "she was a 10" but "she did not feel (that) the effects of the alcohol affected her driving today."
Eventually the subject was cited and released to her father.

A mother who felt she had lost the chance to milk an American businessman attacked her daughter for declining a marriage proposal from the American businessman.
The 20-year-old daughter was beaten by her allegedly avaricious mother after she refused to wed a man who had just returned from the United States of America.
According to a report by Ghbase, the lady blocked the man on WhatsApp because she claimed he was in his 40s and was not eligible for marriage.
When this lady complained, her mother urged her to remove the obstacle and beat her. This man had reported the woman.
She said that after her mum brutally assaulted her, she had plans to tell the media her story but couldn’t because her mother threatened to kick her out of the house.
However, she eventually had to pack out of the house for her safety and cohabitate with a friend.
In other news, A lady who uses the handle @dj zheey on the popular social media app, Tiktok, has recalled how she asked a friend who had left school for assistance.
The lady, an NYSC corps member claimed that her classmate had quit school because she became pregnant.
However, she met her friend who dropped out of school after NYSC, and her friend is now training her on how to sew.
She captioned her video:
“Na my friend way drop out cos she carry belle for school dey layer teach me tailor work after NYSC”

THOUSANDS of Manchester United fans were caught up in a terrifying crush during a Champions League match in France last night.
Supporters who had bought tickets for home side Lille's part of the ground were moved into a stand already packed with United fans - even though there were not enough seats.
As they pushed their way in, desperate United fans at the front were forced against metal fencing at pitch-side. Fearing a riot, police fired tear gas into the crowd as scared people rattled fencing trying to escape.
The scene was a horrific reminder of the 1989 Hillsborough tragedy in Sheffield where 96 fans died in a crush during an FA Cup semi-final between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.
One fan said: "Women and old people were being kicked and stamped on. It was hell for those at the front."
The scare at the Stade Felix-Bollaert last night started 15 minutes into the first half. The game had been moved from Lille to the bigger stadium in Lens, which holds 42,000. As supporters passed out, others lifted them up and tried to move them out of danger. Some, including a child, were carried away and an elderly woman guided to safety in tears. Supporters attempted to climb over the fence and at one point they managed to open a gate but it was quickly slammed in their faces. Police held a handful on the edge of the pitch as they pushed others back.
Fans frantically pointed to the open gates at the back of the stand where the extra supporters had been let in.
United follower Michael Kelly said: "There were a few people on the floor but the police were taking no notice. They were just giving everyone a good hiding."
Another, Kerry Davies, added: "The police were everywhere, throwing tear gas and hitting out with their batons."
Fans claimed tickets for the Lille enclosures had been readily available in France.
Last night United officials met Uefa to discuss the crowd trouble after United had won the highly-charged match 1-0.
Lille officials appeared to call their players off the pitch in protest after United scored from a quickly-taken free kick. United later claimed some of their players had been hit by objects thrown from the crowd.
If you were caught up in the chaos, call our newsdesk on 0800 269553.

Uma Thurman could have another trial to look forward to. Thankfully, it shouldn’t involve drawings of headless brides or suicide threats. The actress sued Lancôme on Friday for $15 million for continuing to use her image in advertising even though her contract had expired. Her contract expired in 2004, but her lawyer said Lancôme has continued to use her image to sell products around the world.
But wait! Two days before Thurman filed suit on Friday, Lancôme sued her on Wednesday because she had threatened to sue. (Kinda like dumping someone before he dumps you, we guess. Or something.) Lancôme asked a state judge to say Thurman was wrong in claiming her face was used on Canadian billboards and Asian Websites later than her contract allowed. Lancôme’s lawyer says his suit will take priority in court because it was filed first. And then he stuck his tongue out and put his thumbs in his ears and made wiggly hand antlers.

When I was in the six grade my social studies teacher drank coffee every day during our class. And every day after taking a drink he would hold up his cup say "the nectar of the gods." I never had any clue what he was talking about, but assumed that he must really be loving his coffee. Just recently I decided to look up what "the nectar of the gods" meant. And according to the Urban Dictionary it means, "a name for the drink which has the sweetest taste of any drink." Now that I look back on it and think about my teacher saying this about his coffee and what it actually means cracks me up. But I have to admit, now that I drink coffee myself I do share his love for it. I always enjoy a good cup of coffee. My day is not complete without my coffee first thing in the morning after I wake up. I do believe that I am addicted to coffee. I am not sure what I would do I could not drink it anymore. So to me coffee is a drink which has the sweetest takes of any drink.

Very efficient, thoughtful and smart. I also recommended her to a friend and his feedback was very positive, he said she saved him a great deal of time and aggravation by working out what his needs were and finding him a suitable flat to rent.
4.6 / 5.0
I would like to thank Vincent for helping me find a place in Wan Chai. Vincent works with his client with great patience by listing out everything one needs to know and I really appreciated that he always try to get things done as efficient as possible especially when it comes to the back-and-forth between potential tenant and landlord. With the earnest attitude as well as the professional service I would strongly recommend Vincent if you are to look for a place in Hong Kong.

Summary: The question was asked by Jesus to his first two disciples and still needs to be answered by those who seek to follow him.
The Palestinian sun beat down on the two friends as they listened to John exhort the crowds to repentance. For the past few weeks they had followed John every where he had gone, listened to his message, and watched the crowds reaction.
At first they were sure that he was the one that the prophets had pointed to. The one who would deliver Israel from the hands of the Romans. This guy even looked like a prophet, that long wild hair, a beard that reached down to the middle of his chest and the eyes, his eyes shone with a zealots rage.
But as he preached he said things like, “I am not the Christ”, and “After me will come one more powerful than I, the thongs of whose sandals I am not worthy to stoop down and untie.”
Who would it be? Who could be more powerful then John the Baptist? And then today, a day that really had nothing special about it John said, “Behold the lamb of God”. He was the one, the one they had waited so long for the one who was going to change the world, the messiah, the Christ, the son of God. They were so stunned that they just turned and followed him, thinking that he didn’t look so special as a matter of fact John looked more like a messiah should look then this man.
But they didn’t say anything they just followed wondering what they should do next, what they should say, how they should approach him. And then it happened he turned around and saw them following and asked them point blank, “what do you want?”
The question is asked in John’s gospel Chapter 1 verse 38, and was asked almost 2000 years ago by Jesus of Nazareth. But it is a question that is timeless. It is a question that remains, the question of the day, the $64,000 question. The question which Jesus Christ still asks everyone who seeks to follows after him. “What do you want?” “What are you after?”
Jesus Christ wanted to know what these two men wanted, why they were following him and what they were looking for. Notice that he didn’t ask, “who do you want” but instead he asked “what do you want?”
Were they the legalist who wanted to indulge in conversations about the law? You know the Pharisees? They’re still around today. You know the ones if Christ returned tomorrow they would proudly tell him “We didn’t let anyone call themselves a Christian if they weren’t Wesleyans, or they smoked or drank, or wore their hair too long or went to the movies or danced, or had any fun at all.”
Or maybe they were just ambitious time servers, they were after power and position and were just seeking to use God for their own means, and they’d follow whoever they had to follow.
Or maybe they were fierce zealots who were looking for a political demagogue or military commander to overthrow the pagan Romans and restore Israel to her proper greatness.
Or perhaps they were just humble men of prayer looking for a light to point them toward God and the higher calling. Or then again maybe they were just puzzled bewildered sinners who were stumbling along through life and were looking for a light on the road.
Whatever and whoever they were Christ recognised one thing in them, and that was the fact they that wanted something. And however noble or base their motives were they were after something.
And as we come to Christ two thousand years later we have to recognize the truth of the fact that everyone who comes to Jesus is looking for something. Good, bad or indifferent it doesn’t matter the fact is that you are looking for something.
Everyone of us is striving for something as we plod through this life, from day to day, week to week, month to month and year to year. You are looking for the one thing that makes you tick, the thing that shakes your tree, rattles your chain, floats your boat or scratches you where you itch.
There are those who seek security, you know a house, a job, a family, and when their life approaches those twilight years a pension. And there is nothing wrong with seeking security but it is a low goal. A basic goal of survival.
Others are looking toward their career, the power, promise, position and prestige. They pour there heart and soul into their work. And if it is directed to good it can be a high aim, but it has a price that must be paid. And that price is sacrificing family and enjoyment, and sometimes God and then it becomes a distorted aim. And of course it is limited by the horizon of time and health.

Most Relevant Verses
Behold, children are a gift of the LORD, The fruit of the womb is a reward. Like arrows in the hand of a warrior, So are the children of one's youth. How blessed is the man whose quiver is full of them; They will not be ashamed When they speak with their enemies in the gate.
So Boaz took Ruth, and she became his wife, and he went in to her. And the LORD enabled her to conceive, and she gave birth to a son. Then the women said to Naomi, "Blessed is the LORD who has not left you without a redeemer today, and may his name become famous in Israel. "May he also be to you a restorer of life and a sustainer of your old age; for your daughter-in-law, who loves you and is better to you than seven sons, has given birth to him." read more.
Then Naomi took the child and laid him in her lap, and became his nurse. The neighbor women gave him a name, saying, "A son has been born to Naomi!" So they named him Obed. He is the father of Jesse, the father of David.
Your wife shall be like a fruitful vine Within your house, Your children like olive plants Around your table. Behold, for thus shall the man be blessed Who fears the LORD.
Then God said to Abraham, "As for Sarai your wife, you shall not call her name Sarai, but Sarah shall be her name. "I will bless her, and indeed I will give you a son by her Then I will bless her, and she shall be a mother of nations; kings of peoples will come from her." Then Abraham fell on his face and laughed, and said in his heart, "Will a child be born to a man one hundred years old? And will Sarah, who is ninety years old, bear a child?" read more.
And Abraham said to God, "Oh that Ishmael might live before You!" But God said, "No, but Sarah your wife will bear you a son, and you shall call his name Isaac; and I will establish My covenant with him for an everlasting covenant for his descendants after him. "As for Ishmael, I have heard you; behold, I will bless him, and will make him fruitful and will multiply him exceedingly He shall become the father of twelve princes, and I will make him a great nation. "But My covenant I will establish with Isaac, whom Sarah will bear to you at this season next year." When He finished talking with him, God went up from Abraham.
More Verses on Boys
Then the LORD took note of Sarah as He had said, and the LORD did for Sarah as He had promised. So Sarah conceived and bore a son to Abraham in his old age, at the appointed time of which God had spoken to him. Abraham called the name of his son who was born to him, whom Sarah bore to him, Isaac. read more.
Then Abraham circumcised his son Isaac when he was eight days old, as God had commanded him. Now Abraham was one hundred years old when his son Isaac was born to him. Sarah said, "God has made laughter for me; everyone who hears will laugh with me." And she said, "Who would have said to Abraham that Sarah would nurse children? Yet I have borne him a son in his old age."
There was a certain man of Zorah, of the family of the Danites, whose name was Manoah; and his wife was barren and had borne no children. Then the angel of the LORD appeared to the woman and said to her, "Behold now, you are barren and have borne no children, but you shall conceive and give birth to a son. "Now therefore, be careful not to drink wine or strong drink, nor eat any unclean thing. read more.
"For behold, you shall conceive and give birth to a son, and no razor shall come upon his head, for the boy shall be a Nazirite to God from the womb; and he shall begin to deliver Israel from the hands of the Philistines."
Then the woman gave birth to a son and named him Samson; and the child grew up and the LORD blessed him. And the Spirit of the LORD began to stir him in Mahaneh-dan, between Zorah and Eshtaol.
Now there was a certain man from Ramathaim-zophim from the hill country of Ephraim, and his name was Elkanah the son of Jeroham, the son of Elihu, the son of Tohu, the son of Zuph, an Ephraimite. He had two wives: the name of one was Hannah and the name of the other Peninnah; and Peninnah had children, but Hannah had no children. Now this man would go up from his city yearly to worship and to sacrifice to the LORD of hosts in Shiloh. And the two sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, were priests to the LORD there. read more.
When the day came that Elkanah sacrificed, he would give portions to Peninnah his wife and to all her sons and her daughters; but to Hannah he would give a double portion, for he loved Hannah, but the LORD had closed her womb. Her rival, however, would provoke her bitterly to irritate her, because the LORD had closed her womb. It happened year after year, as often as she went up to the house of the LORD, she would provoke her; so she wept and would not eat. Then Elkanah her husband said to her, "Hannah, why do you weep and why do you not eat and why is your heart sad? Am I not better to you than ten sons?" Then Hannah rose after eating and drinking in Shiloh. Now Eli the priest was sitting on the seat by the doorpost of the temple of the LORD. She, greatly distressed, prayed to the LORD and wept bitterly. She made a vow and said, "O LORD of hosts, if You will indeed look on the affliction of Your maidservant and remember me, and not forget Your maidservant, but will give Your maidservant a son, then I will give him to the LORD all the days of his life, and a razor shall never come on his head." Now it came about, as she continued praying before the LORD, that Eli was watching her mouth. As for Hannah, she was speaking in her heart, only her lips were moving, but her voice was not heard. So Eli thought she was drunk. Then Eli said to her, "How long will you make yourself drunk? Put away your wine from you." But Hannah replied, "No, my lord, I am a woman oppressed in spirit; I have drunk neither wine nor strong drink, but I have poured out my soul before the LORD. "Do not consider your maidservant as a worthless woman, for I have spoken until now out of my great concern and provocation." Then Eli answered and said, "Go in peace; and may the God of Israel grant your petition that you have asked of Him." She said, "Let your maidservant find favor in your sight " So the woman went her way and ate, and her face was no longer sad. Then they arose early in the morning and worshiped before the LORD, and returned again to their house in Ramah And Elkanah had relations with Hannah his wife, and the LORD remembered her. It came about in due time, after Hannah had conceived, that she gave birth to a son; and she named him Samuel, saying, "Because I have asked him of the LORD."
In the days of Herod, king of Judea, there was a priest named Zacharias, of the division of Abijah; and he had a wife from the daughters of Aaron, and her name was Elizabeth. They were both righteous in the sight of God, walking blamelessly in all the commandments and requirements of the Lord. But they had no child, because Elizabeth was barren, and they were both advanced in years. read more.
Now it happened that while he was performing his priestly service before God in the appointed order of his division, according to the custom of the priestly office, he was chosen by lot to enter the temple of the Lord and burn incense. And the whole multitude of the people were in prayer outside at the hour of the incense offering. And an angel of the Lord appeared to him, standing to the right of the altar of incense. Zacharias was troubled when he saw the angel, and fear gripped him. But the angel said to him, "Do not be afraid, Zacharias, for your petition has been heard, and your wife Elizabeth will bear you a son, and you will give him the name John. "You will have joy and gladness, and many will rejoice at his birth. "For he will be great in the sight of the Lord; and he will drink no wine or liquor, and he will be filled with the Holy Spirit while yet in his mother's womb. "And he will turn many of the sons of Israel back to the Lord their God. "It is he who will go as a forerunner before Him in the spirit and power of Elijah, TO TURN THE HEARTS OF THE FATHERS BACK TO THE CHILDREN, and the disobedient to the attitude of the righteous, so as to make ready a people prepared for the Lord." Zacharias said to the angel, "How will I know this for certain? For I am an old man and my wife is advanced in years." The angel answered and said to him, "I am Gabriel, who stands in the presence of God, and I have been sent to speak to you and to bring you this good news. "And behold, you shall be silent and unable to speak until the day when these things take place, because you did not believe my words, which will be fulfilled in their proper time." The people were waiting for Zacharias, and were wondering at his delay in the temple. But when he came out, he was unable to speak to them; and they realized that he had seen a vision in the temple; and he kept making signs to them, and remained mute. When the days of his priestly service were ended, he went back home. After these days Elizabeth his wife became pregnant, and she kept herself in seclusion for five months, saying, "This is the way the Lord has dealt with me in the days when He looked with favor upon me, to take away my disgrace among men."
Now the time had come for Elizabeth to give birth, and she gave birth to a son. Her neighbors and her relatives heard that the Lord had displayed His great mercy toward her; and they were rejoicing with her. And it happened that on the eighth day they came to circumcise the child, and they were going to call him Zacharias, after his father. read more.
But his mother answered and said, "No indeed; but he shall be called John." And they said to her, "There is no one among your relatives who is called by that name." And they made signs to his father, as to what he wanted him called. And he asked for a tablet and wrote as follows, "His name is John." And they were all astonished. And at once his mouth was opened and his tongue loosed, and he began to speak in praise of God. Fear came on all those living around them; and all these matters were being talked about in all the hill country of Judea. All who heard them kept them in mind, saying, "What then will this child turn out to be?" For the hand of the Lord was certainly with him.
Now in the sixth month the angel Gabriel was sent from God to a city in Galilee called Nazareth, to a virgin engaged to a man whose name was Joseph, of the descendants of David; and the virgin's name was Mary. And coming in, he said to her, "Greetings, favored one! The Lord is with you." read more.
But she was very perplexed at this statement, and kept pondering what kind of salutation this was. The angel said to her, "Do not be afraid, Mary; for you have found favor with God. "And behold, you will conceive in your womb and bear a son, and you shall name Him Jesus. "He will be great and will be called the Son of the Most High; and the Lord God will give Him the throne of His father David; and He will reign over the house of Jacob forever, and His kingdom will have no end." Mary said to the angel, "How can this be, since I am a virgin?" The angel answered and said to her, "The Holy Spirit will come upon you, and the power of the Most High will overshadow you; and for that reason the holy Child shall be called the Son of God. "And behold, even your relative Elizabeth has also conceived a son in her old age; and she who was called barren is now in her sixth month. "For nothing will be impossible with God." And Mary said, "Behold, the bondslave of the Lord; may it be done to me according to your word." And the angel departed from her.
But when he had considered this, behold, an angel of the Lord appeared to him in a dream, saying, "Joseph, son of David, do not be afraid to take Mary as your wife; for the Child who has been conceived in her is of the Holy Spirit. "She will bear a Son; and you shall call His name Jesus, for He will save His people from their sins."
God said further to Abraham, "Now as for you, you shall keep My covenant, you and your descendants after you throughout their generations. "This is My covenant, which you shall keep, between Me and you and your descendants after you: every male among you shall be circumcised. "And you shall be circumcised in the flesh of your foreskin, and it shall be the sign of the covenant between Me and you. read more.
"And every male among you who is eight days old shall be circumcised throughout your generations, a servant who is born in the house or who is bought with money from any foreigner, who is not of your descendants. "A servant who is born in your house or who is bought with your money shall surely be circumcised; thus shall My covenant be in your flesh for an everlasting covenant. "But an uncircumcised male who is not circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin, that person shall be cut off from his people; he has broken My covenant."
Hear, O sons, the instruction of a father, And give attention that you may gain understanding, For I give you sound teaching; Do not abandon my instruction. When I was a son to my father, Tender and the only son in the sight of my mother, read more.
Then he taught me and said to me, "Let your heart hold fast my words; Keep my commandments and live;
"When your son asks you in time to come, saying, 'What do the testimonies and the statutes and the judgments mean which the LORD our God commanded you?' then you shall say to your son, 'We were slaves to Pharaoh in Egypt, and the LORD brought us from Egypt with a mighty hand. 'Moreover, the LORD showed great and distressing signs and wonders before our eyes against Egypt, Pharaoh and all his household; read more.
He brought us out from there in order to bring us in, to give us the land which He had sworn to our fathers.' "So the LORD commanded us to observe all these statutes, to fear the LORD our God for our good always and for our survival, as it is today. "It will be righteousness for us if we are careful to observe all this commandment before the LORD our God, just as He commanded us.
Hear, my son, and accept my sayings And the years of your life will be many. I have directed you in the way of wisdom; I have led you in upright paths. When you walk, your steps will not be impeded; And if you run, you will not stumble. read more.
Take hold of instruction; do not let go Guard her, for she is your life.
Now the boy Samuel was ministering to the LORD before Eli And word from the LORD was rare in those days, visions were infrequent. It happened at that time as Eli was lying down in his place (now his eyesight had begun to grow dim and he could not see well), and the lamp of God had not yet gone out, and Samuel was lying down in the temple of the LORD where the ark of God was, read more.
that the LORD called Samuel; and he said, "Here I am." Then he ran to Eli and said, "Here I am, for you called me." But he said, "I did not call, lie down again." So he went and lay down. The LORD called yet again, "Samuel!" So Samuel arose and went to Eli and said, "Here I am, for you called me." But he answered, "I did not call, my son, lie down again." Now Samuel did not yet know the LORD, nor had the word of the LORD yet been revealed to him. So the LORD called Samuel again for the third time. And he arose and went to Eli and said, "Here I am, for you called me." Then Eli discerned that the LORD was calling the boy. And Eli said to Samuel, "Go lie down, and it shall be if He calls you, that you shall say, 'Speak, LORD, for Your servant is listening.'" So Samuel went and lay down in his place. Then the LORD came and stood and called as at other times, "Samuel! Samuel!" And Samuel said, "Speak, for Your servant is listening." The LORD said to Samuel, "Behold, I am about to do a thing in Israel at which both ears of everyone who hears it will tingle. "In that day I will carry out against Eli all that I have spoken concerning his house, from beginning to end. "For I have told him that I am about to judge his house forever for the iniquity which he knew, because his sons brought a curse on themselves and he did not rebuke them. "Therefore I have sworn to the house of Eli that the iniquity of Eli's house shall not be atoned for by sacrifice or offering forever." So Samuel lay down until morning. Then he opened the doors of the house of the LORD But Samuel was afraid to tell the vision to Eli. Then Eli called Samuel and said, "Samuel, my son." And he said, "Here I am." He said, "What is the word that He spoke to you? Please do not hide it from me. May God do so to you, and more also, if you hide anything from me of all the words that He spoke to you." So Samuel told him everything and hid nothing from him. And he said, "It is the LORD; let Him do what seems good to Him." Thus Samuel grew and the LORD was with him and let none of his words fail. All Israel from Dan even to Beersheba knew that Samuel was confirmed as a prophet of the LORD. And the LORD appeared again at Shiloh, because the LORD revealed Himself to Samuel at Shiloh by the word of the LORD.
So David arose early in the morning and left the flock with a keeper and took the supplies and went as Jesse had commanded him. And he came to the circle of the camp while the army was going out in battle array shouting the war cry. Israel and the Philistines drew up in battle array, army against army. Then David left his baggage in the care of the baggage keeper, and ran to the battle line and entered in order to greet his brothers. read more.
As he was talking with them, behold, the champion, the Philistine from Gath named Goliath, was coming up from the army of the Philistines, and he spoke these same words; and David heard them. When all the men of Israel saw the man, they fled from him and were greatly afraid. The men of Israel said, "Have you seen this man who is coming up? Surely he is coming up to defy Israel. And it will be that the king will enrich the man who kills him with great riches and will give him his daughter and make his father's house free in Israel." Then David spoke to the men who were standing by him, saying, "What will be done for the man who kills this Philistine and takes away the reproach from Israel? For who is this uncircumcised Philistine, that he should taunt the armies of the living God?" The people answered him in accord with this word, saying, "Thus it will be done for the man who kills him." Now Eliab his oldest brother heard when he spoke to the men; and Eliab's anger burned against David and he said, "Why have you come down? And with whom have you left those few sheep in the wilderness? I know your insolence and the wickedness of your heart; for you have come down in order to see the battle." But David said, "What have I done now? Was it not just a question?" Then he turned away from him to another and said the same thing; and the people answered the same thing as before. When the words which David spoke were heard, they told them to Saul, and he sent for him. David said to Saul, "Let no man's heart fail on account of him; your servant will go and fight with this Philistine." Then Saul said to David, "You are not able to go against this Philistine to fight with him; for you are but a youth while he has been a warrior from his youth." But David said to Saul, "Your servant was tending his father's sheep. When a lion or a bear came and took a lamb from the flock, I went out after him and attacked him, and rescued it from his mouth; and when he rose up against me, I seized him by his beard and struck him and killed him. "Your servant has killed both the lion and the bear; and this uncircumcised Philistine will be like one of them, since he has taunted the armies of the living God." And David said, "The LORD who delivered me from the paw of the lion and from the paw of the bear, He will deliver me from the hand of this Philistine " And Saul said to David, "Go, and may the LORD be with you." Then Saul clothed David with his garments and put a bronze helmet on his head, and he clothed him with armor. David girded his sword over his armor and tried to walk, for he had not tested them. So David said to Saul, "I cannot go with these, for I have not tested them." And David took them off. He took his stick in his hand and chose for himself five smooth stones from the brook, and put them in the shepherd's bag which he had, even in his pouch, and his sling was in his hand; and he approached the Philistine. Then the Philistine came on and approached David, with the shield-bearer in front of him. When the Philistine looked and saw David, he disdained him; for he was but a youth, and ruddy, with a handsome appearance. The Philistine said to David, "Am I a dog, that you come to me with sticks?" And the Philistine cursed David by his gods. The Philistine also said to David, "Come to me, and I will give your flesh to the birds of the sky and the beasts of the field." Then David said to the Philistine, "You come to me with a sword, a spear, and a javelin, but I come to you in the name of the LORD of hosts, the God of the armies of Israel, whom you have taunted. "This day the LORD will deliver you up into my hands, and I will strike you down and remove your head from you. And I will give the dead bodies of the army of the Philistines this day to the birds of the sky and the wild beasts of the earth, that all the earth may know that there is a God in Israel, and that all this assembly may know that the LORD does not deliver by sword or by spear; for the battle is the LORD'S and He will give you into our hands." Then it happened when the Philistine rose and came and drew near to meet David, that David ran quickly toward the battle line to meet the Philistine. And David put his hand into his bag and took from it a stone and slung it, and struck the Philistine on his forehead. And the stone sank into his forehead, so that he fell on his face to the ground. Thus David prevailed over the Philistine with a sling and a stone, and he struck the Philistine and killed him; but there was no sword in David's hand. Then David ran and stood over the Philistine and took his sword and drew it out of its sheath and killed him, and cut off his head with it When the Philistines saw that their champion was dead, they fled.
Joash was seven years old when he became king, and he reigned forty years in Jerusalem; and his mother's name was Zibiah from Beersheba. Joash did what was right in the sight of the LORD all the days of Jehoiada the priest.
In the seventh year of Jehu, Jehoash became king, and he reigned forty years in Jerusalem; and his mother's name was Zibiah of Beersheba. Jehoash did right in the sight of the LORD all his days in which Jehoiada the priest instructed him.
Josiah was eight years old when he became king, and he reigned thirty-one years in Jerusalem. He did right in the sight of the LORD, and walked in the ways of his father David and did not turn aside to the right or to the left.
Josiah was eight years old when he became king, and he reigned thirty-one years in Jerusalem; and his mother's name was Jedidah the daughter of Adaiah of Bozkath. He did right in the sight of the LORD and walked in all the way of his father David, nor did he turn aside to the right or to the left.
Now His parents went to Jerusalem every year at the Feast of the Passover. And when He became twelve, they went up there according to the custom of the Feast; and as they were returning, after spending the full number of days, the boy Jesus stayed behind in Jerusalem. But His parents were unaware of it, read more.
but supposed Him to be in the caravan, and went a day's journey; and they began looking for Him among their relatives and acquaintances. When they did not find Him, they returned to Jerusalem looking for Him. Then, after three days they found Him in the temple, sitting in the midst of the teachers, both listening to them and asking them questions. And all who heard Him were amazed at His understanding and His answers. When they saw Him, they were astonished; and His mother said to Him, "Son, why have You treated us this way? Behold, Your father and I have been anxiously looking for You." And He said to them, "Why is it that you were looking for Me? Did you not know that I had to be in My Father's house?" But they did not understand the statement which He had made to them.
Now it came about after these things that the son of the woman, the mistress of the house, became sick; and his sickness was so severe that there was no breath left in him. So she said to Elijah, "What do I have to do with you, O man of God? You have come to me to bring my iniquity to remembrance and to put my son to death!" He said to her, "Give me your son." Then he took him from her bosom and carried him up to the upper room where he was living, and laid him on his own bed. read more.
He called to the LORD and said, "O LORD my God, have You also brought calamity to the widow with whom I am staying, by causing her son to die?" Then he stretched himself upon the child three times, and called to the LORD and said, "O LORD my God, I pray You, let this child's life return to him." The LORD heard the voice of Elijah, and the life of the child returned to him and he revived. Elijah took the child and brought him down from the upper room into the house and gave him to his mother; and Elijah said, "See, your son is alive."
When Elisha came into the house, behold the lad was dead and laid on his bed. So he entered and shut the door behind them both and prayed to the LORD. And he went up and lay on the child, and put his mouth on his mouth and his eyes on his eyes and his hands on his hands, and he stretched himself on him; and the flesh of the child became warm. read more.
Then he returned and walked in the house once back and forth, and went up and stretched himself on him; and the lad sneezed seven times and the lad opened his eyes. He called Gehazi and said, "Call this Shunammite." So he called her. And when she came in to him, he said, "Take up your son." Then she went in and fell at his feet and bowed herself to the ground, and she took up her son and went out.
When they came to the crowd, a man came up to Jesus, falling on his knees before Him and saying, "Lord, have mercy on my son, for he is a lunatic and is very ill; for he often falls into the fire and often into the water. "I brought him to Your disciples, and they could not cure him." read more.
And Jesus answered and said, "You unbelieving and perverted generation, how long shall I be with you? How long shall I put up with you? Bring him here to Me." And Jesus rebuked him, and the demon came out of him, and the boy was cured at once.
When they came back to the disciples, they saw a large crowd around them, and some scribes arguing with them. Immediately, when the entire crowd saw Him, they were amazed and began running up to greet Him. And He asked them, "What are you discussing with them?" read more.
And one of the crowd answered Him, "Teacher, I brought You my son, possessed with a spirit which makes him mute; and whenever it seizes him, it slams him to the ground and he foams at the mouth, and grinds his teeth and stiffens out. I told Your disciples to cast it out, and they could not do it." And He answered them and said, "O unbelieving generation, how long shall I be with you? How long shall I put up with you? Bring him to Me!" They brought the boy to Him. When he saw Him, immediately the spirit threw him into a convulsion, and falling to the ground, he began rolling around and foaming at the mouth. And He asked his father, "How long has this been happening to him?" And he said, "From childhood. "It has often thrown him both into the fire and into the water to destroy him. But if You can do anything, take pity on us and help us!" And Jesus said to him, " 'If You can?' All things are possible to him who believes." Immediately the boy's father cried out and said, "I do believe; help my unbelief." When Jesus saw that a crowd was rapidly gathering, He rebuked the unclean spirit, saying to it, "You deaf and mute spirit, I command you, come out of him and do not enter him again." After crying out and throwing him into terrible convulsions, it came out; and the boy became so much like a corpse that most of them said, "He is dead!" But Jesus took him by the hand and raised him; and he got up.
On the next day, when they came down from the mountain, a large crowd met Him. And a man from the crowd shouted, saying, "Teacher, I beg You to look at my son, for he is my only boy, and a spirit seizes him, and he suddenly screams, and it throws him into a convulsion with foaming at the mouth; and only with difficulty does it leave him, mauling him as it leaves. read more.
"I begged Your disciples to cast it out, and they could not." And Jesus answered and said, "You unbelieving and perverted generation, how long shall I be with you and put up with you? Bring your son here." While he was still approaching, the demon slammed him to the ground and threw him into a convulsion. But Jesus rebuked the unclean spirit, and healed the boy and gave him back to his father. And they were all amazed at the greatness of God But while everyone was marveling at all that He was doing, He said to His disciples,
Then when Herod saw that he had been tricked by the magi, he became very enraged, and sent and slew all the male children who were in Bethlehem and all its vicinity, from two years old and under, according to the time which he had determined from the magi.
Then the king of Egypt spoke to the Hebrew midwives, one of whom was named Shiphrah and the other was named Puah; and he said, "When you are helping the Hebrew women to give birth and see them upon the birthstool, if it is a son, then you shall put him to death; but if it is a daughter, then she shall live." But the midwives feared God, and did not do as the king of Egypt had commanded them, but let the boys live. read more.
So the king of Egypt called for the midwives and said to them, "Why have you done this thing, and let the boys live?" The midwives said to Pharaoh, "Because the Hebrew women are not as the Egyptian women; for they are vigorous and give birth before the midwife can get to them." So God was good to the midwives, and the people multiplied, and became very mighty. Because the midwives feared God, He established households for them. Then Pharaoh commanded all his people, saying, "Every son who is born you are to cast into the Nile, and every daughter you are to keep alive."

"How dare you! Tell me how you got out of that room!" cried McGonagall. She gestured with a jerk of her wand toward Draco's bedroom, although she was very careful not to let her guard down for more than a split-second.
But Draco didn't have time to speak again before his mother took the opportunity. "And you!" she demanded, her face turning a pale shade of pink in outrage. "I'd like to know what you've done with my wand now that you've stolen it!"
Minerva looked half taken aback at the allegation, but Draco was sure a sneering retort was on its way. Pursing her lips for a moment, she answered accusation with accusation: "And what would you need with it? I assure you, your wand is safe in its current location, and it will remain such." Behind her, Alastor Moody and Remus Lupin had emerged from their meeting room, and were making their way to the doorway where she, Draco, Narcissa and Ginny were standing.
Meanwhile, the clash went on. "I don't suppose you would have liked having your wand snatched away in the middle of the night?" Narcissa countered, her voice barely short of hysterical. "I did nothing to you to warrant that, nor to anyone else here!"
Draco could feel a powerful aura of humiliation radiating from his mother, and as he turned back to Minerva, he mirrored the latter's hot glare. Now more enraged by her conduct towards his mother than anything the old woman had done to him, he ached to strike her. The only thought stopping him was of the conclusion Minerva would draw from his impulsive reaction. The last thing either of them needed was to present her and Ron with so-called proof to that the two Malfoys were somehow dangerous, even as they were both wandless.
But before he could think of a better option, Alastor hobbled over. "What's going on here? Minerva, a few minutes ago, you seemed certain your spells would keep our prisoners in their place." Ginny's eyes went wide, as did those of Draco and Narcissa.
"Prisoners!" Draco spat, cringing inwardly at the thought. "We're not your prisoners! We came here of our own free will!"
"And not to be treated like mindless criminals!" added Narcissa.
Minerva narrowed her eyes in detestation. "Oh, I have no doubt of it, Mrs. Malfoy," she said icily, "but that's just what you are."
While Draco and Narcissa seethed, Remus stepped forward, raising his hands in front of him in a peaceful gesture. "Minerva," he began, "arguing will only serve to aggravate our already dire situation. Don't you agree?"
Minerva seemed to take this to heart, and sighed. "Perhaps you're right," she said.
"But the question remains," Mad-Eye countered, "how did these two break out? You told us they'd be locked in for several hours!"
Minerva looked back from one door to the other, and then at the Malfoys. "Well?" she asked sharply.
Neither of them made a move to answer. Ginny didn't need to be 'blamed' for helping them. Ginny, on the other hand, wasn't ashamed at all for doing what she had. "I broke the doors," she said boldly, gesturing toward Draco's doorway with her wand. "You shouldn't have tried to lock them up in the first place."
Minerva gasped, horrified. "Miss Weasley! What in Heaven's name were you thinking?"
"They're not dangerous, Professor McGonagall!" Ginny argued, exasperated. "If you'd just listen…"
"Don't you understand?" cried Minerva. "The Ministry has been confiscated, Miss Weasley, and you're not yet of age! Surely, you don't believe that the Death Eaters can't, or won't, trace whatever spell you used straight to this room!"
Ginny fell silent, and no one dared to say another word for a long while. Minerva looked around once more before heading upstairs, her sharp footsteps echoing Draco's rushed heartbeat. Mad-Eye followed her, keeping his magical eye fixed on Draco until he was out of sight.
Once they had disappeared down a corridor, Ginny turned to Remus. "They couldn't find us here, not just by tracing a spell… could they?" Ginny asked, worried. "I mean, they haven't found us yet, and… and I used magic here before, yesterday! If they had found out about this place the first time, then why haven't we heard from them by now?"
Remus shook his head. "We can't count on that, Ginny," he told her. Then, he turned to the Malfoys. His stance was calm, but his dark eyes shone with apprehension as he studied them, and they studied him. "Minerva told me what she understands of your situation, and your reasons for being here."
"She understands nothing." Draco interrupted defensively.
"What I can't quite work out," continued Remus despite the interruption, "is how you were able to find Harry so quickly, or at all. Naturally, there were a number of protections in place around that area while he was there, and even Lord Voldemort hasn't been able—" Remus paused a moment when Narcissa pulled Draco close sharply, both of them glaring fearfully at him. Draco shuddered as though he had just been immersed in ice-cold water, but Narcissa kept silent almost defiantly. "—hasn't been able to find it," Remus finished.
Calming himself, Draco pondered the question. "I'm not sure," he admitted thoughtfully. "I was sure there would be something guarding the place, but Mother and I never came across any real obstacles." He shrugged, quite as bewildered as Remus. "We just had to find it, that's all."
"If you ask me, the greatest difficulty was staying hidden," added Narcissa.
Remus shook his head. "That doesn't make sense. You shouldn't have been able to find him at all."
Draco watched him warily. "And now that we did? We are going to be safe here, right?" He felt a terrible foreboding then, reminding him of the very real dangers that he and his mother would face alone – and wandless – were they to be forced out of hiding.
"On my own, I'm not in a position to say yes or no," Remus explained.
"Where else can we go?" Narcissa asked him. "With Lucius out there, doing who-knows-what to find us…" She shuddered at the thought.
Draco took hold of her wrist, but said nothing for the moment. Not knowing what lay in store for them yet again, it was strangely comforting to put his mother's heart before his own, as he always tried to do; to deny to himself, even for an instant, that he was just as afraid as she was.
"This is crazy," blurted Ginny. "They're in as much danger as any of us!"
Remus looked quizzically back at her for a moment, but then seemed to put some of the puzzle together on his own. Turning to the Malfoys, he said, "As I've said, I can't promise anything just yet. But I'll see what I can do to keep you two under a safe roof. It takes a great deal of courage to defy a wizard as dangerous as Lord Voldemort."
Narcissa pulled her son closer suddenly. "How all of you can say his name so freely…"
"It's like summoning him!" agreed Draco, looking just as shocked.
Remus looked taken aback by their outburst, but tried at once to calm them down. "It won't summon him. Trust me, he can't hear what we're saying while we're here."
"How can you know for sure?" Draco demanded, paler than usual.
Remus managed a small, knowing smile for the first time since he'd arrived. "Well, I'm sure they'd love to know where we all are, and we've been here for a couple of years now… but they have yet to show up at our door. I'd consider that proof enough for now, wouldn't you?"
Both Malfoys went quiet, but Draco still looked fearful. Trying not to look at Ginny, who he knew had meant no harm by freeing them from their rooms, he stammered, "But you said… now that they have the Ministry… Didn't you just say…"
"That doesn't mean they can hear what we're saying, Draco," Ginny explained.
"Can't you just… not say it?"
Remus smiled again. "We don't want him to show up any more than you do. Believe me, saying his name won't show him the road to this house." Draco nodded, still very tense, but eager to move on to a more bearable topic of discussion.
Minerva and Alastor hurried to Dumbledore's old office, where his portrait hung. Minerva approached the late headmaster and spoke as steadily as she could. "Albus," she addressed the empty portrait, "We need to speak with you. It's urgent."
Within a few seconds, Albus Dumbledore walked back into his frame. "Good morning, Minerva. Alastor," he greeted them kindly.
Minerva quickly returned his greeting, and Mad-Eye gave him a preoccupied nod. "Albus, as you know, Draco and Narcissa Malfoy are here…" (Dumbledore nodded) "but I'm concerned about the effect they seem to be having on Miss Weasley. I've known her for five years; she's an intelligent young witch. She knows better than to try underage magic in a place like this. But today she's done just that, and I'm not talking about simple charms. And what's worse, she claims she'd done it before, not long ago." Minerva looked thoughtful for a moment before raising her eyes again to meet Dumbledore's. "Do you think… Do you suppose You-Know-Who could use her spells to trace our whereabouts?"
Dumbledore thought this over briefly, but shook his head. "No, I wouldn't worry about that. Lord Voldemort is eager to find our headquarters, and had he found any clue as to its location, he would waste no time in bringing with him all the destruction he could manage.
"And as for our guests," he said, in a slightly less comforting tone of voice, "I should tell you that their journey here has not been easy. I do not think referring to them as 'prisoners' or 'criminals' will simplify matters, as much as they've done wrong in the past. In their case, I think it would be more appropriate to hear what they have to say, and choose your actions accordingly."
The idea of giving a pair of known Death Eaters a second chance left Minerva somewhat more upset than she'd been at first. Yet, a part of her told her to trust his judgment; she always had before, and only once had she regretted it.
But that one regret was what pushed her to argue further. "Albus, I can't forget what that boy did to you. Whether or not he cast the Killing Curse, he's just as responsible for… for what happened to you as is Sev—"
"Severus Snape and Draco Malfoy are not to be blamed for my demise, Minerva," explained Dumbledore. He spoke defensively, as though Minerva had accused his dearest friend of his murder. Minerva was quickly losing her nerve, but she felt that after all the years she had known him, she had some right to know more about all of this than she did. Despite her admiration and respect for the aging wizard, there were times when she truly resented the secretive way he spoke to her, as though she would not understand if he were to confide in her those secrets. That he looked down to her had never once crossed her mind, but his disregard of many of her questions had not gone unnoticed, either.
Before she could utter another word in protest, Alastor's hardened voice stirred the silence. "Then who? Who else was to blame? Snape was the one to cast the curse, and Malfoy led him straight to you!"
Dumbledore frowned slightly. "Apportioning blame will not help you to win the war. I assure you, Severus would have found me with or without help, and I would have been just as willing to accept his curse either way. As for Draco's part, why would Harry have led his least-favorite classmate to the Weasleys' home, and then to our headquarters, knowing how my death was brought about?"
Alastor nodded, ready with an answer. "Ron Weasley insists Potter's been cursed. The Imperius Curse, he says."
Dumbledore sighed. "No, Alastor. Harry is acting under his own free will." When neither Alastor nor Minerva answered, Dumbledore went on: "Mr. Weasley is no doubt worried for his family's safety, but he is also eager to continue seeing the Malfoy family as an enemy, the way he has always seen them. I find that it is much more frightening for a person to point out their own mistakes than those made by someone else. And yet, the evidence is there, for all to see. If I may, have Draco or Narcissa been a source of trouble at any point since their arrival? Have they acted in such a way that would cause you concern? Have they made any visible attempt to contact Lord Voldemort, to guide him here?"
No one said anything for a few seconds, and Minerva looked especially bewildered, avoiding the others' gaze. "But then why—?" was all she could manage.
"I don't have time to explain right now. I'm needed at the school. But do realize that if our guests have not yet acted in violence, chances are slight that they will."
"Albus!" Minerva cried at once, but when she looked back, the frame was already empty. Silently, she left the room, followed soon after by Alastor. Slowly, she walked to the stairs and looked down at the scene below, where Ginny, Draco, Remus and Narcissa were still talking.
"I don't know what else to try!" exclaimed Draco. "How do you get people to listen when they just don't feel like it?"
"There's got to be a way, Draco," Ginny said soothingly.
Draco watched her wordlessly for a while, fondness in his gaze. She was the most stubbornly hopeful person he'd ever been around, and it drew him to her. For reasons he could barely understand, the optimism that would normally have struck him as spoiled actually endeared her to him. Something about her made her different from the rest of them. Painful words like 'trust', 'friendship', and even 'love' crept up on him as she stared solemnly back.
"If only I could think the way you do…" Draco muttered pensively.

Sarah was born in Tampa, Florida but raised in Santa Clarita, California. She moved to Chapel Hill 7 years ago and is currently a junior at Northwood High School, in the graduating class of 2017. After high school, Sarah plans to go to college and become a veterinarian. Sarah began volunteering at Dogwood in August 2015 and recently became a Pet Resort Specialist in February 2016. Ever since she was little, she has had a strong passion for animals. She loves being with animals and has always grown up with dogs. She currently has three dogs: Madison, Max, and Sunny. Sarah likes to run in her free time and is on her school’s cross country and track team. As a result of her father’s occupation, Sarah has gotten the opportunity to travel around the world. Some of the countries she has visited include: Indonesia, Mexico, South Africa, South Korea, and Vietnam. Sarah truly enjoys working at Dogwood and always has a smile on her face when she is with the animals.

Take a look at this photo and guess what Elizabeth is doing!
Scroll down for the answer once you have guessed!
Did you guess playing hide and seek?
Did you guess peek a boo?
Did you guess praying?
Well if you did you're wrong - it you guessed sleeping, then you are right!
I knew she was tired when she came in for lunch, but wanted her to eat before she laid down for her nap. She did eat some cheese and then fell sound asleep! Too cute!

With the character of Cory, Ott used footage Zacharia had made himself to help guide his narrative. Ott had given him a camera before he started shooting, and told him to wake up every morning and just say whatever was on his mind into it.
"Talk about your mom, talk about your brother... whatever you're thinking," Ott would say to him. "And then I just started texting him questions like, 'Where do you see yourself in five years?' Or, 'What's the worst thing you've ever done?' Stuff like that. And he would answer those, but often go off on these rants that were way more interesting than what I actually asked him... I don't always know if he's performing or just being himself. And how that blurs together is what I like about it."
Ott and Okatsuka had written an entire script but started throwing things out when they began shooting.
"There were a lot of times where we had a scene written but what ended up happening was totally different than what was in the script," Ott said. This allowed Zacharia to bring the same kind of 'is he acting?' energy to some of the scenes.
The ambiguity of Zacharia's relationship to his performance creates some incredibly naturalistic moments, particularly when the topic is whether or not Cory the character is gay. It's a point of interest for both the other characters and Cory himself, who at one point gives a unexpectedly profound monologue about what it means to "act gay" and why people think he might be. The fact that it's somewhat unclear whether it's Cory the actor or Cory the character speaking makes it all the more remarkable.
"He's a friend," Ott said. "We talk once a week on the phone. But there's so much about him I don't know. So a lot of it was just putting him in situations and trying to figure it out."
Another element of "Pearblossom" that bucks convention, even by indie standards, is its festival plan, in that Ott doesn't seem to care about having one. Coming off of the accolades "Littlerock" received, it seems entirely reasonable for him to aim for a Sundance or a SXSW berth, but instead, "Pearblossom" had its world premiere in Vienna, a festival Ott holds close to his heart.
"I've met so many filmmakers who have this whole plan," Ott said. "And at the end of the day, I feel like people are going to like your movie or they're not.... There's also something to me about loyalty. Vienna was the first place that ever played my film outside the U.S. They've been super supportive of me. This is my fourth time here. And I like the idea of being involved with the people that helped me out and got me started. Same with Rachel [Rosen, of the San Francisco Film Society]. I feel lucky people like that cared about me at a time when no one else did."
Check out "Pearblossom" all over the film-festival circuit in the next few months, with Denver the next stop.

Truck had just over a quarter tank of gas. I wants a bigger truck and was told there was one available 2 blocks from this location. I was told just go there and it was ready. Went there and it was not there or ready. Had to go back to the original place and get the smaller truck I reserved which was the only thing I cld reserve with a time,etc. Uhaul website was not user friendly and the online Check in wasn't working.
Just a bad over all experience renting from Uhaul

Briton Andrew Docker, who earned more than £600,000 a year, was made redundant from Holland's Coöperatieve Centrale Raiffeisen-Boerenleenbank BA in January 2009 after it was hit by the recession.
Mr Docker, 43, global head of securities finance, was not informed of a new post, head of securities finance Utrecht, which went to a Dutchman who lived in the same village as Mr Docker's boss in Holland. Two months after starting the new job his replacement was given the position from which Mr Docker was made redundant.
Mr Docker was later told the new post had been advertised on the bank's intranet, to which he did not have access, after he was sent home on gardening leave. It eventually transpired that no job advert was ever posted by the company, known as Rabobank.
In addition, the only person on Mr Docker's London team kept there to run the organisation while the others were sent home was its one Dutch member, referred to as "the Dutchman" by his bosses in Holland. In a scathing judgment, the tribunal ruled that Mr Docker's boss, Dick Klaasse, changed his evidence, which "reflects unfavourably on his credibility as a witness".
It concluded: "Mr Klaasse decided at an early stage that he wanted Mr Nissen, a Dutch national, for the job and has been driven to construct a story about Mr Docker's disinterest in order to justify the way he was dealing with an external candidate over and above the claims of Mr Docker."
The Central London Employment Tribunal hearing was told Mr Docker won glowing performance reviews in his time with the bank. He was responsible for teams in London, New York, Tokyo and Hong Kong. When his employment came to an end, he was on a salary of £132,000, a pension and in 2007 had received a £490,000 bonus described as "extremely disappointing".
The tribunal found in favour of Mr Docker in October 2009. It decided he was unfairly dismissed and directly racially discriminated against.
Rabobank appealed against Mr Docker's claims of racial discrimination but the Standard has learned that the appeal has now been dismissed.
The case is set for a remedy hearing to award compensation in November. Mr Docker took out a separate claim at the High Court over bonuses which was settled with a non-disclosure clause.
When asked about the case at his Putney home he refused to comment.Reuse content

Damian on The Glee Project 110
When I saw this weeks theme, I knew it was just going to be the craziest week ever, with a lot of twists and turns!! it was inevitable. “Don't Stop Believing,” is GLEE. So, for me, there was a real sense of achievement for reaching the final, and I'm not gonna lie, a sense of relief that this was nearly over. It has been crazy, amazing, straining, hard work, emotional....I could go on forever!!!!
Going into the homework assignment, it felt more fun than competitive. I think we just had to show Ryan how each one of us is GLEE and I think we just were ourselves this week, so it wasn't hard. We didn't have to be something we are not and we didn't have to portray somethcing different like theatricality, etc....
When Ryan stopped the performance during our homework assignment, I was terrified -- truly terrified. It was an awful moment. We all looked at each other, and it was like....wow. What are we gonna do? Especially because he stopped it during ME singing!!! It HAD to be me......right?!?!?! It was so nerve wracking. Then, when the contenders ran through the door, it was amazing. They all looked so fresh compared to us. Hahahaha. We looked run down!!! But it was amazing being back with our friends.
I LOVED this weeks video. I am a little terrified of heights, I wont lie, so when we got to the top of that building it was scary for me. But it was an amazing shoot. We were all together again, we had lots of fun, and it was a real end-of-season feeling. We knew this was over in a day or 2. We knew we were going home for the first time in a long time. It was great.
It was AMAZING to choose our songs for our last chance performance. I felt like, it was the first time I got a chance to truly show Ryan what I could do. Before that, I was constantly worrying about remembering words and remembering the song, and that can affect your performance. This time, I knew the song, didn't have to worry about forgetting words, and I could just perform and enjoy myself. That’s what I did. I chose “Beyond the Sea” because it's a song that everybody knows, and it’s a song that really suits my voice. So in a final, you have to play to your strengths. We all did that. I wanted an upbeat number too so I could have fun, embrace myself, and show Ryan that I can own a stage and be the leader he wants me to be.
When I saw the contenders and the other guest mentors, I thought, this really is the final!! Haha....it was incredible. It was the most enjoyable performance of my life. I had such a good time, just loved every single minute, and I feel it was a great ending to an incredible journey!
I dedicated my song to Hannah and Cameron because we had such an incredible time together as friends on the show. It was a real journey for a friendship and they will be my close friends for life. And in that moment, I was living my dream not only for me but for them too. So I felt it was appropriate.

Shekhar and Ghulab, in their mid-20s, were thrashed and beaten by sticks by more than 10 people while they were conducting the party's membership drive in the Bijwasan area.
According to the police, a call was received around 10 a.m. The police reached the spot and took the victims to Safdarjung Hospital from where they were discharged after treatment.
Col. Devendra Shehrawat, AAP's assembly candidate from the same constituency alleged that the attackers belonged to the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP).
"They (attackers) were saying it is the BJP's bastion," Shehrawat told IANS.
He also said the attackers threatened the volunteers of dire consequences if the latter extended the membership drive.
Police said a case was registered against "unknown people".

Not bad whiskey is whiskey if your not paying for it. She smiled quaintly at my comment initially it was for a six month contract but after that she had told meto stay as long as I wanted as long as I paid by the fifth. Your back arches and you groan ashhis fingers slide lower teasing but not quite touching where you so desperately need him to his fingers tease and caress his lips leaving little kisses as he moves in circles getting closr and closer to your molten center. Oh Well she said brightening z I suppose that means that perhaps he might get into the army with a trade or something. Maureen what is all this about Dan joining the army? Dan has never e. Pressed an interest in joining the army. She always pays close attention when shaving making sure it looks nice anm is well shaped she want something inside her once again and tries to speak but once again she cannot. Hold on she said as she pulled the covers down and crawled down so that her face was beide it Me too zshe said as she rolled off the other side. whispering in . Ndrew's ear cum for me Andrew spill your seed down my throat. sliding back down she resumed her attack on hio engorged member. I could beconvinced to do almost anything if it had to do with sex my sister was always pissed at me for giving usthis reputation. As he cums he pulls his cock out of my ass and lets the last few dro. S fall on my back before wiping his cock on my nylon clad leg just as my limax was building there was a sudden knock on the door and my reverie was shattered. Mary started yelling Oh William oh oh william I'm I'm a squirter I hope your are ready for this because - I'm - about -- to coe i had never been with a woman ho squirted but I knew of it so I was expecting a gusher.

Yesterday was an extremely lazy day for me. I got some laundry done, studied a bit and then just layed around, mostly. I was in a weird sorta mood, though. Not homesick, just not happy either. So around 8 pm I decided to head out for a run. It was dark and just starting to sprinkle. It was one of the best runs I've had in a very long time. It started raining harder and it felt so good to be running. I had this realization while I was running of how amazing this world is and this place that I'm in and how stinkin' blessed I am to be not only in Guam but to have the family and friends that I have. God truly is amazing and He really showed hHmself to me last night. It was a great run!
Leah and I then watched a movie and hit the hay. I have 3 classes today and probably more studying since I slacked on that yesterday.
Catch ya on the flip side, brah!

The Xbox One got off to a very bad start when it was unveiled earlier this year. It had a lot of strange policies and features involving not being able to play used games, not being able to share games with friends, having to constantly connect to the internet, and more.
Microsoft swore that there was a purpose to these features. Maybe if they had explained what that purpose was, they wouldn't have had to backtrack on every single one of them, changing the console back into what fans thought they wanted. We'll never know how Microsoft's controversial policies would ultimately have manifested, but Microsoft might have avoided all of this if they had been open about everything to begin with.

Hello. my daughter is 5 years old and has autism. I gave her melatonin but it made her sick and gave her headaches. It was given to her by her pediatrician in a perscription form. Is it possible that I can give her a lower dosage that will have the same affect without her getting sick or headaches?

This is Ranger! He is a 2.5 year old large shepherd mix with so much love to give. So many of NOAH Center volunteers have asked why he hasn’t been adopted yet and honestly his home just hasn’t seen him yet.
He needs to be the only dog in the home due to being in the shelter so long which has caused stress and reactivity to other dogs. He loves people and has done really well with children. He is very tolerant and respectful of people.
Someone has definitely worked with him before and he knows several basic commands. Due to his size and breeds he can be a bit of an escape artist if bored/under stimulated. He needs activity and mental stimulation in his home so that he has something to do. He loves puzzle feeders, kongs, mental games etc. Ranger is a very intelligent dog that really just wants to find his people to love.
For more information about Ranger and the NOAH Center click HERE!

I am an insurance agent for many years. I had my automobile and home insured with Travelers and being in the industry, my coverage was quite adequate. Approx. a year ago I was involved in a 4 car chain collision, I was in the middle car between two very large SUVs'. My car was totaled and I was taken by ambulance to the ER of the local hospital. I was diagnosed with a sprained lumbar and whiplash. Given medication. I needed PT and to this date I am still in pain and discomfort, which is quite upsetting to me at times.
From the beginning, the claim was handled horrifically. Since I am knowledgeable with coverage, more than the average layman being in the business, the first thing was I knew I was paying additional premium for Rental coverage. Since Travelers has an " agreement " with Enterprise Auto, I was first given an Economy Car to use. I inquired to them and was told this is the type car they are told by Travelers to give their clients for rental. I knew I was paying in premium for at least a mid size car for rental and had to "insist on it with the first adjuster''. They finally did agree and I had the remaining time with my midsize car for use.
So basically, our clients that we sell the policies to are paying extra for the better rental and if involved in an accident they are not given the proper car type unless the insured insist. This was just the beginning. Most importantly, my PIP was totally mishandled. I was in PT, seeing my doctor for chronic back pain and on medication and almost three times a week, this PIP adjuster would call me on my cell and question me regarding my condition which is very unprofessional... to the point of being a nuisance.
In the midst of my treatment and unbeknownst to me, she decides to “close “the pip file since she claims. I was feeling better. When my doctor, specialist and MRI and x-ray bills had been sent to Travelers, they were not going to pay, since the file had been "closed". I had $100,000 on medical and full tort coverage and at this point all Travelers had paid was about $3,000 in med bills.
After, phone calls to supervisors, management, faxes, letter, most of the bills are finally getting paid but Travelers refuses to allow me to continue to go to PT since they feel my injury should be healed by now. I wish they were right, but unfortunately, I am still suffering with pain and are taking meds to help me go through my day. This whole experience was and has been a nightmare for me. I just feel that they were doing all they could knowing I had excellent coverage and wanted to cut it off as soon as possible.
AS far as anything I agreed with on the handling of the claim was only how quick they settled and paying me for my car which was less than two weeks from the date of the accident. But in doing so, I was told I had to return the rental within 24 hrs... how could I... I did not have a car to drive and since I was injured, was unable to go out and buy one. Once again, I called and explained I had rental for 30 days and needed this time to go out and purchase a car. They did agree with this and gave me I believe a week more... but once again the average Joe would not have known this... I was very very disappointed with this whole handling of this claim... and would not recommend this company based on my experience with them.
MINNESOTA -- Travelers Insurance Is the most horrible company to deal with. The true measure of a great insurance company isn't how you are treated under normal circumstances but how you are treated when there is a problem. Travelers fails horribly in this respect. I was misinformed and misled as to how my claim would work out when a driver lost control of his car and drove into my garage causing damage to the garage and many things inside the garage. Including a car, motorcycle, and personal property being stored in garage. The car and motorcycle were settled through the car owners company (Allstate) without any problems.
I was led (more like misled) to believe that if I went through Travelers Insurance (my homeowners company), for the personal property part, instead of the car owners insurance company that I would benefit from the replacement cost part of my policy and that Travelers would in turn get ALL of the cost of the claim from the car owners insurance company. With no effect on my renewal rates for going through Travelers. Everything went fine at first. Repairs were done. I replaced some of the property (not all). I even received a letter stating that Travelers had recovered 100 percent of the claim from the car owners company.
Apparently to Travelers 100 percent has a different meaning than to the average person. Because, when I got my renewal notice my annual rate had increased 59 percent. I come to find out Travelers is holding me accountable for the replacement cost part of my insurance coverage as they didn't get that portion from the car owners company. It was NEVER told to me that this would happen. So for right around $2000 dollars that Travelers didn't recover from the car owners company they were going to raise my rates by almost $600 dollars per year for the next 3 years. I would never have gone through Travelers with this claim had I not been misled by them.
Taking the increased rate into account I would have been way better off filing the claim through the car owners company. First off I didn't replace all of my personal property. So I didn't use the full claim. If I would have gone through the car owners insurance company I would have received cash value not replacement cost. But in the long run I would have fared better financially. I would have received only actual cash value but I wouldn't be being asked to pay $1800 dollars over the next 3 years. This amount almost covers the part Travelers is holding me accountable for.
Further the last person I spoke to trying to work something out with was a very unprofessional and rude guy to talk to. Also, when I was getting quotes from other insurance companies (I refuse to pay Travelers their SCAM money) all of them were surprised this was handled like this by Travelers. One company went so far as to waive the fact that I now had a claim on my record. I am no longer with Travelers Insurance and don't recommend them for anyone. AVOID TRAVELERS INSURANCE THEY ARE NOT CUSTOMER FRIENDLY WHEN YOU REALLY NEED THEM AND THEY WON'T GIVE YOU THE PROPER INITIAL INFORMATION SO YOU CAN MAKE AN INFORMED DECISION.
ENGLEWOOD, COLORADO -- I was involved in an auto accident with a travelers insured person on 8-5-09. The accident was the other drivers fault and the other driver fully admitted that to the police department as well as the insurance company. I received a call from the first agent within a couple of hours of the accident and he set up my rental car and got the investigator set up to look at my vehicle. I received call from the investigator the next day and was told that my vehicle was going to be considered a "total loss". The next call I got was from the "total loss agent", this is where the problems begin.
The dollar amount they gave me was what I considered to be low, I told her this and what I had found for average prices for my vehicle as well as what NADA showed. I then put together a counter offer letter along with dates and amount of improvements made to the vehicle. This was faxed to them on a Sunday so I left a voice mail for the "total loss agent" letting her know that I had faxed this over to her and to get back with me. I did not get a call back at all on Monday, I did not get a call on Tuesday from her either. I did speak with the first agent on Tuesday and he emailed her and had her contact me.
I was told that I needed to fax over receipts for the improvements made to the vehicle. My wife faxed these over and contacted the agent to let her know that they had been faxed, this was on a Thursday. I ended up calling on Friday to follow up and again had to leave a v/m at 10:30 A.M. I did not get a call back! I called again on Monday and she actually answered the phone, she said she did not get the fax! We had also faxed over to another agent info for lost wages, he did get his fax? We faxed over the documentation to her AGAIN, this time she got it. They came back with a new number that we agreed with.
I hand delivered the signed title for my vehicle to their office on Wednesday the 19th at 7:30 A.M. and was told that she was going to process the check request as soon as she went back to her desk. I spoke with the other agent regarding lost wages the next day at 4:30 P.M. and was told he was going to process the request for my check for lost wages. I got that check in the mail on Monday the 24th, I still have not got the check for the car. I called the loss agent on Tuesday the 25th after getting home and checking the mail and not finding a check. She still has not called back.
I got a letter from her dated the 23rd which was a Sunday so I doubt very seriously that she was in the office on a Sunday. The postmark shows the 25th so she had been sitting on this for almost a week! I have now sent an email to the company comment/complaint email address, this was done this morning. I should not be shocked by this but I have not heard anything from the corporate office either. If this is the kind of customer service they display from not only the local office but from corporate as well I truly feel sorry for their paying customers!
OAK PARK, IL, TENNESSEE -- Travelers provided excellent claim service for two claims I had in the last five years. The first was when a wind-storm knocked a village owned tree onto my house. The second was when after another storm the sewer backed up into my basement. As I was renting the house starting that year, I expected to continue coverage with them. They dropped me. The reason was because of the two claims, neither of which were my fault but were caused by weather. Now I had to go with another carrier, who seem to be good, but with an increased premium. I just think this stinks.
PHILADELPHIA, PENNSYLVANIA -- In the past 3 years I have had the misfortune of hit and run and on another occasion having all wheels stolen of my parked car. Not fun in both cases. I reported these problems to Travelers Insurance Company. Both cases. My claim was received very professionally and handled in a gentle manner (this is important to me since I felt villainized in both instances. As a result my patience tolerance was never tested by the claims processors which made much easier for me to get through the tough times). In the first accident I had taken my car to OK Body Shop. The car was return totally cleaned and waxed plus the inside was cleaned and washed. I like my car all over again and all this in just three days.
The second time I was recommended by the dealer to go to Paul Brothers auto body Shop to have wheel replacement and any additional damaged incurred in the wheel theft. The process took two weeks the tow company wanted to scrape my car off the ground without wheels and they rushed me to get my car into their shop but then took their time to get my car out of the shop. Lastly when the car was fixed they needed another day for cleanup. Next day car was parked inside walk against shop's building car's exterior looked clean until I got home and looked at the side hidden by wall at shop.
It was then I noticed the mud from the rainfall two weeks prior was still there so I had a half car ready to go (funny thing is that the gentleman handing me the car keys after being paid just told me "We are Honest as the Day Is Long" (being it's winter and it's the northern hemisphere he must have thought he was on the north pole. Not so funny). The Travelers Concierge Shop, OK Body shop was a much better experience consistent with the way Travelers insurance Company perform their service. Thanks Travelers.
My 21 year old son was backing out of a parking lot and directly across from him was another lady backing out too. Their bumpers met in the middle of the lane. My son called me later to tell me what happened, that his bumper had a nick on it and so did the other car. Nothing seemed broke. No broken red glass on the payment - nothing. Nobody called the police. Both exchanged insurance companies and policy #s. The older lady left before my son could take a cell phone picture of her bumper. Within a few hours my son is called by the Traveler's claim adjuster saying the older lady had filed a claim and the lady said it was my son's fault (the adjuster may have made this up).
She proceeded to interrogate my son over the phone, several times trying to get him to admit it was his fault, and he repeated said no, if anything we were both at fault. She wanted to record his admission of wrong, but my son said no, he was on the work driving back to college - later. I'm upset because I was left out of the loop and I'm the primary policy holder. This was all done without an inspection of the lady's bumper - no way could an inspector have view her bump that fast. We now don't trust "our" Traveler's claim adjuster and are looking for a local Traveler's insurance agent to help us rather than a corporate agent with a 1-800 number.
This was a minor dent situation, however it really does indicator to what lengths these claim adjusters will go to resolve these claims as quickly as possible (within 24 hours I'm told). We find these claims processing methods (interrogation) at Travelers to be disgusting and repulsive. This is a warning, had it been a serious accident and/or major damage, I no longer feel comfort with Traveler's representing my interests - look how they treated my son. The adjuster said the lady file the claim first, so my son would appear to be at fault. Wow, what kind of reasoning is that. He was on his way back to college. But that is good to know - whomever files the claim first is the innocent party and the other party must be at fault. File this gem away for future use.
BOSTON -- My car was parked in a parking lot where I live, and a neighbor ran into the back of it while it was parked. Their insurance company tricked me into allowing them to handle everything and by the time I spoke to him I got my insurance company back I had already let them tow the car. But, the woman was having my claim she was very nice and help me as much as she could and then just a handled everything in a timely manner at at the mechanic shop so I think I jumped the gun too fast and I really appreciate Travelers support and help me through the whole process. It was wonderful!
NEBRASKA -- We had extensive hail damage to our property and called immediately. They explained to us what to do if we had water coming into the property and that we would receive a call from the adjuster within the next day or two. We did and because of the amount of claims for this area, we were given a different adjuster from the one who called.
They explained that the claims receiving immediate attention were those without roofs... understandable. We received a call shortly and had an adjuster on site within a week. They did a comprehensive evaluation, sent us the claim that same evening! We noticed additional damage after he left which was hard to see on a cloudy day and they were very accommodating, accepting the pictures we sent. We feel they were very fair and any time we had a question, they responded immediately. Some expenses were under calculated and they were very fair in making these adjustments.
LAWRENCEVILLE, GEORGIA -- I received several notices that the shingles used in our subdivision were defective. I researched the companies and found one was accredited with the BBB and had them come out to inspect the roof. There were cracked and raised shingles all over the house. I called Travelers who came out today with an "impartial" inspector. I have cracked shingles on 3 sides of the house, but not enough to warrant replacing the roof. So while I stood outside in the heat, their adjuster sat in the air conditioned car waiting for the "impartial" inspector to draw out the diagram.
No surprise here... 26 shingles are bad, so they will replace just those. Oh, and since my shingles aren't made anymore, I have to get something close so the roof will look patchy... AND, well of course the cost would be less than my deductible. He kept explaining "their policies" - replace just what is bad and not the entire roof.
By the way, now that is summer, the ones that were raised are stuck back down due to the heat. So a year from now when there is more damage, it will be less than the number needed to replace the roof since 26 will now be "good". What a disappointment. But they sure have great commercials.
BIRMINGHAM, ALABAMA -- Flash floods in Birmingham, AL were unprecedented and hit at 2 am with no ability to "see it coming" - and we had 2 cars that were TOTALED as a result. I called Travelers and the claims adjuster in Atlanta was aware of the flooding in AL, was very sympathetic and consolidated the 2 vehicle claims to be reviewed by one adjuster to expedite the process. The claims adjuster, **, promptly arrived, was extremely thorough and extremely kind during this very stressful time.
She didn't mind us calling her afterwards to ask questions - since we were not thinking very clearly at the time. The claims were entered, adjusted, processed and paid within one week! That was so wonderful since we need the funds to buy replacement vehicles right away. Outstanding customer service! So glad I had Travelers Insurance!

Bad news people. Sita has disappeared. Apparently she was NOT really looking forward to the our blessed union. That incident where she attacked me with the kitchen knife yesterday was NOT PMS-induced as I had foolishly thought.
I am trying to be brave here, I really thought I met my soulmate. I couldn't stop thinking about her from day to night. I would be in the office impatiently waiting for the end of the day so that I could see her again, to hear her amazing voice again. There was just this thing between us, it's like despite our cultural differences we both knew what the other was thinking and we understood what the other person was about. But once again I seemed to have got it wrong.
I will return on Saturday morning as originally planned.
I thought I met the love of my life
And next month she was to be my wife
But alas she bailed on me, possibly due to a fear of a future unknown
Whatever the reason, once again I find myself all alone

The relief after the tension, after the fear that the worst may have happened. It seems easy to imagine how Leonardo, the father of Nicola Tanturli: all of Italy rejoiced at the news of the discovery of her child, who disappeared in the night between Monday and last Tuesday. But dad Leonardo has always had faith in his little one, even if with the passing of the 30 hours since his absence it is not unlikely that fears have grown more and more.
“Nicola is a strong child, he is used to moving around in the countryside – said Leonardo in an interview with Corriere della Sera – When he saw us again he seemed calm, he only got scared when he got into the ambulance. […] Living in the countryside he is used to walking independently, but so far only for a few tens of meters. He had never gone so far. In recent times it has grown by a few centimeters, now it can reach the handle. He must have opened the door, maybe he didn’t find us and started looking for us”.
Leonardo took the opportunity to make amends in relation to rescue called 9 hours after the disappearance. “It was a mistake, I recognize that we were wrong – said the father – Sure, we were very worried, but I know the area well. My partner and I thought we could find him soon. After a few hours, as we called him and he didn’t answer, we thought he was asleep close to home, so we thought he’d wake up at dawn and find him again. Unfortunately this was not the case, at which point we called 112”.
Nicola, according to his father’s story, had gone to sleep at 6 in the afternoon after skipping his nap: sometimes, when this happens, he sleeps until the morning, but after having done various tasks, the parents only noticed his absence. at midnight when they finished the work. The first searches took place near their home, in particular near a water well: the Tanturli thought they heard their son’s voice, but then no longer, coming to think he had fallen asleep. It was at that moment that the couple began to get scared, due to the presence of wolves and wild boars nearby.
For 12 years Nicola’s family has lived in that area, surrounded by nature, producing miele. “Our children grew up here – explains Leonardo – They are used to moving on their own. Nicola wakes up early in the morning, even before his brother. Often alone he reaches us while we are in the goat pen“. In short, Nicola’s is the portrait of a completely autonomous child, despite his 21 months of age, but also the portrait of a child who is very lucky to have returned safe and sound to his parents.

Tessa pulled her hair off her neck and sighed, having no doubt that Hawaii was the hottest place ever visited by mankind. She had been outside no more then five minutes and already she could fell herself beginning to sweat, her clothes beginning to stick to her skin.
As she stood in the growing line for lunch, Tessa let her eyes roam down the beach in front of her, which was crowded with people who didn't appear to mind the scorching sun above them. Ashlee seemed to be one of those people, running around the pale white sand with a trio of children who had taken it upon themselves to draw Ashlee into one of their childish games.
Tessa couldn't help but grin as she watched her sister take a dive for the sand, attempting to avoid being tagged by a girl no more then seven; promptly, all the children tackled her sister, climbing over her like a jungle-gym. Despite being driven into the sand, Ashlee looked happy, something that rarely happened; maybe she'd finally be able to retain what was left of her own childhood.
With two plates piled with shrimp and fried rice finally in her hands, Tessa turned away from the lunch line and headed for one of the few empty tables left in the unofficial employee lunchroom. Once she had set the plates down, Tessa squinted her eyes against the sun and scanned the beach, finally picking Ashlee out among the children that were currently tugging her toward the tide line, shouting about making a sand-castle. "Ashlee!" She shouted, getting her sister's attention. "Come eat lunch." Never in her life had she felt more like a mother and Tessa couldn't help but feel slightly uncomfortable; was that how her life was going to be now? Pretending to be a mother to her little sister, trying to send her off to school for her senior year, sitting down for parent-teacher conferences and meeting prospective boyfriends? Just what was she getting herself into by letting Ashlee stay with her?
Ashlee untangled herself from the children, promising to return later, and jogged toward the table her sister had chosen. Tessa watched her closely, for a moment no longer seeing her as a sister but as a grown child, someone she was now responsible for. She quickly pushed those thoughts away; Ashlee was still her sister and she'd been more of a mother to the younger girl then anyone else ever had.
"You look serious Tess." Ashlee observed as she took a bite of her rice. "What's the matter?"
Tessa waved her hand dismissively. "Nothing." She assured her sister. She reached for her water bottle, unscrewing the top just as the bottle slipped from her hands and landed in her lap, soaking her skirt before she could snatch the bottle away. "Damn it." She snapped, frustrated. Now she was going to have to use her already too short lunch break to go home and change.
Ashlee handed her some napkins but Tessa tossed them aside, standing up. "I've got to change." She mumbled wearily. "I'll be back soon, don't be late to work." She commanded as she turned away, trudging slowly down the beach toward the parking lot.
The taxi ride to her apartment building took no more then ten minutes but Tessa was already worried that she wasn't going to have enough time to change and get back to work without being late.
However, all those thoughts vanished from her mind when she reached her apartment, finding the door ajar, something it had not been when she had left earlier that morning. Cautiously, she nudged the door open the rest of the way and peered inside; her apartment appeared to be in shape, with nothing missing. Not that she had anything to steal.
Tessa stepped inside, checking the bathroom and finding it empty, something that made her even more confused. Nothing was missing, even Ashlee's temporary bed on the floor hadn't been touched, though it appeared at her apartment had been 'broken into.'
Suddenly, it hit her. Something was missing. That stupid dog was gone. Tessa leaned against the wall and closed her eyes. "Shit."
Ashlee was polishing the check-in desk when Tessa came storming into the lobby of the Grand Waimea, her eyes scanning the crowd rapidly. Her gaze rested on her sister and she hurried over to where the teenager was cleaning under the watchful eye of Nicole. If Ashlee had known anything about the missing dog at that moment, she would have attributed Nicole's constant attention as a guarantee that she would be around whenever Tessa returned from her apartment. But, since she was currently oblivious, Ashlee had yet to think anything of being followed by the brunette.
Tessa captured Ashlee's attention even before she reached the desk by calling her sister's name, causing her to pause in her feverish polishing. "Tess, what's the matter?" Ashlee questioned, looking at her sister with worry in her eyes. She also noted that Tessa hadn't changed out of her damp skirt, which only increased her concern. "What's going on?"
"You remember that dog, the one that we were supposed to be watching?" Tessa questioned, leaning close to her sister so as not to be over-heard.
Ashlee's brow knitted. "Yeah. Why?" She hardly doubted that the dog could cause this much concern. She was also a little annoyed; Tessa had her all worked up for nothing it seemed.
"It's missing." Tessa said without further pause. "It's gone, did you do something with it?"
Ashlee shook her head. "No. When would I have done something with it? And what do you mean missing?" She questioned, unable to grasp to complete story as it flew from her sister's mouth.
Tessa inched closer to her sister. "I went back to change and the door to the apartment was open and the dog was gone." She explained. "I think someone took it."
"Why would someone take Chili?" Ashlee asked. "He probably just ran away when the door was left open."
"But why was the door open in the first place?" Tessa pressed. "I closed it when we left this morning. It doesn't make sense, I think someone-" She stopped speaking abruptly, her eyes drifting away from her sister.
Ashlee turned to see what Tessa was staring at and saw Nicole heading in their direction, a faint smile on her face that she quickly managed to replace with a look of concern. Tessa straightened herself and fixed the brunette with a cold stare. "Is everything all right?" Nicole questioned once she reached the sisters.
"Everything's fine." Tessa answered. "Couldn't be better." She turned to go.
Nicole cleared her throat. "Then what's this I hear about a missing dog?" Tessa whirled back to look at her. "The missing dog isn't the one that I asked you to keep track of, is it?" Tessa didn't answer. "Because, if it is, we have a serious problem." She couldn't seem to keep a slight, sinister smile from passing across her lips.
Tessa narrowed her eyes and stepped closer to Nicole. "What did you do?" She questioned. There was no doubt in her mind that, after seeing the way the brunette had smiled at her, that she wasn't to blame in the disappearance of the dog. "What did you do with the dog?"
Nicole feigned innocent. "I have no idea what you're talking about, I didn't do anything with that stupid dog." She remarked. "This is the second time today you've accused me of something that I had nothing to do with."
Tessa lashed out and grabbed Nicole's wrist so suddenly that even Ashlee jumped in surprise; she yanked the brunette closer to her. "Look, I'm tired of your little games, so whatever grudge you're holding, you should just let it go." She hissed, her voice low and her face inches from Nicole's. "And just give me back that stupid dog."
Nicole tried to jerk her wrist free. "Take your hands off of me." She commanded, icily, when she couldn't free herself. "Or I will have you fired and that's a promise."
Tessa had to commend Nicole for her strong words and her firm posture, the girl seemed to have gotten a backbone since the night before. But she didn't do as Nicole asked. "It's not as though you aren't trying to do that all ready, you just need a reason."
Ashlee put her hand on her sister's shoulder. "Don't give her one, Tessa, because she really will fire you." She suggested. Tessa nudged Ashlee's hand away and the girl stepped back, suddenly worried at the direction this confrontation was heading.
Nicole held Tessa's gaze steadily. "You should listen to your sister." She advised. "She seems to be the only one with some sense around here."
Tessa and Nicole were so intent on each other that neither one of them saw Jason and Vincent approaching, just having left Vincent's office, discussing the troubles that seemed to surround the Grand Waimea. Jason stopped speaking when he saw Tessa and Nicole and felt as though something bad was about to happen. It really would be the perfect end to a perfect day.
"You don't seem to have any sense either, so I guess you're right." Tessa was saying. "Otherwise, you'd know enough to leave me alone and let me do my job."
Nicole finally pulled away, trying to ignore the aching in her wrist. "You'll be out a job before you know it." She threatened. "And besides, that's probably for the best; we don't need you screwing up the Grand Waimea again."
Tessa rolled her eyes. "C'mon, Nicky," she said teasingly, "don't you believe in second chances?"
Nicole fixed her with a sinister grin. "Sluts don't get a second chance." She remarked.
Before anyone could react, Tessa had struck out a Nicole, striking her across the face with such force that she stumbled backward. Nicole cried out as she tried to get her footing and keep herself from falling, her hand flying reflexively to her split lip as she blinked, attempting to clear her pounding head.
"Bitch." Nicole spat and rushed at Tessa, slapping her across the face. She fingers snatched for her hair but Tessa hit her across the face once more, shoving her into the ground.
Nicole didn't have the chance to react before Tessa was kneeing her in the ribs, straddling her and pinning her arms to the ground. She was vaguely aware of Ashlee shouting for her sister to stop and someone else, Jason if she wasn't mistaken, calling Tessa's name, as she attempted to free herself from Tessa's grip.
Tessa was preparing to hit Nicole across the face again when someone wrapped their arms around her waist and yanked her off Nicole. She turned to see Jason holding her tightly, dragging her away from the brunette, who was attempting to pull herself into a sitting position. She tried to pull away from Jason but he held her tighter, almost too tightly and Tessa was forced to be content with just glaring at the bloody Nicole.
Ashlee was standing where she had been when the fight had started, looking for Tessa to Nicole and back again, nervously and unsure of what to do. Nicole finally managed to struggle to her and feet and lunged at Tessa, as though forgetting that she was being held by Jason or perhaps because of that but Jason turned away, taking Tessa with him and leaving Nicole with nothing to attack.
"Stop!" Vincent shouted, finally reaching the group with several security guards in tow. "Do not move another inch." Nicole reluctantly remained were she was, glaring at Tessa.
Jason looked down at Tessa. "What the hell are you doing?" He snapped. "What were you thinking?"
Tessa pulled away from him. "She deserved everything she got." She snapped.
Ashlee shook her head. "Not the best way to go, Tess." She remarked, remaining where she was, complete with a cleaning rag in her hands.
Vincent cleared his throat. "I demand to know what is going on here." He commanded, growing red in the face. With all that he was already dealing with, this was just too much; what had he done to deserve this?
Nicole looked at her boss. "Tessa just started attacking me." She explained, trying to make herself look that the helpless victim. "I don't-"
"Because you called me a slut." Tessa accused before Nicole could continue with her innocent spiel.
Nicole whirled to face her. "Because you are." She snapped before her better judgment could kick in.
Tessa slapped Nicole across the face before Jason could restrain her, looking as though she was going to do it again before her sister shouted for her to stop. Nicole took a step back, deciding to take the defensive because she was clearly no good at the offensive and even went so far as she position herself behind Ashlee.
Vincent stared at Tessa for a moment, so frustrated that he couldn't form any words. "Get out of my hotel this instant." He commanded when he could finally speak. "And don't think about coming back here."
Tessa lifted her head, brushed her hair aside and headed for the entrance of the hotel, not giving a backwards glance to anyone, intent on strolling out of the hotel with her dignity still intact.
Vincent took a deep breath, attempting to gain some sort of control over himself. "That woman is not to be allowed in here ever again." He told the security guards beside him. "The last thing to Grand Waimea needs right now is another immature cat-fight."
Jason turned toward his boss. "Don't you think you're reacting a little quickly, Vincent?" He questioned. "Maybe we should get the whole story."
Vincent glared at him. "I'm not interested in the whole story, Mr. Matthews, I could care less about the whole story. What I care about is this hotel." He said, his voice level. "But, if you would like to question Miss. Booth then be my guest, but don't think you can interest me on the whole story."
With that said, he turned away and headed back for his office, the two security guards following closely after him. Jason turned back to Nicole and Ashlee, who were both watching him closely; he couldn't help but see how worried Ashlee looked, her wide eyes brimming with tears. He understood how she felt, unwilling to believe that Tessa was completely to blame in what had happened; he had learned his lesson about selling her short before and was too deep into his blooming relationship with Tessa to ignore it now.
"So," Jason said, still looking at Ashlee. "Just what is the whole story?"
Ashlee opened her mouth to give him what he desired but Nicole started speaking before she had the chance. "All I did was come over and ask Tessa if she had lost the dog that she was supposed to be keeping an eye on and she just lost it." She explained, making no move to hide the exasperation in her voice. "I guess she's been under a lot of stress lately."
Ashlee rolled her eyes and even Jason had to agree that Nicole went a little too far with that comment. "Okay, fine." Jason remarked, rubbing his temples. "Get cleaned up, Nicole." He advised before heading back toward the employee offices, motioning for Ashlee to follow him.
Nicole glared at Ashlee as she passed, hurrying to follow Jason, before turning toward the elevators. Morgan wasn't going to be happy to here about this. Ashlee followed Jason into his own office, only slightly smaller then Vincent's, and sat down as he shut the door behind them.
"Okay," Jason said once they had all the privacy they could. "What really happened?"
It didn't take Ashlee long to explain the events that had lead up to the fight but filling Jason in on the moments of the previous days that had gotten them to where they were, including the conversation she had heard between Nicole and Morgan her first night in Hawaii and what she had heard hours earlier.
Jason sighed and dropped into his chair, burying his face in his hands. "I can't believe that Nicole would let Morgan do something like this." He mumbled, sighing deeply. "I can't believe he could get away with this."
"We have to find the dog, that way we can at least prove that Tessa didn't loose it." Ashlee remarked. "Then maybe we can convince Vincent to re-hire her."
Jason looked up at the girl. "Somehow, I don't think it'll be that easy." He sighed. "I doubt he'll be willing to give Tessa the benefit of the doubt."
Ashlee watched him closely. "You really like my sister, don't you?" She questioned suddenly, catching Jason off guard. He looked at her, surprised, and his lack of answer was more then enough to convince Ashlee. "Of course you do. Tessa's the best."
Jason smiled slightly, Ashlee wasn't wrong there. "I know that if I want to have any future with her, I can't abandon her without even trying." He said, surprising himself. "I know that Nicole provoked Tessa, that's in her nature but Vincent won't be so willing to believe that."
"Then you have to make him believe it." Ashlee said with such assurance that Jason wondered if she knew something that he didn't.
Jason studied her for a moment. "And how are we supposed to do that?" He questioned finally. Not even he had that much sway over Vincent when he had made up his mind about something.
Ashlee shrugged. "How am I supposed to know, I've only been here a few days." She reminded. "But I do know that we need to find that dog and I'm almost sure that Nicole has it."
"How are we supposed to get the dog if we don't even know where it might be?" Jason questioned, somehow unwilling to believe that Nicole really had anything to do with what was going on. Morgan he could definitely believe but not Nicole.
Ashlee smiled. "I think I have an idea."
When Jason and Ashlee were finally about to locate Nicole, they found her in the massage room, enjoying a rub-down, compliments of Morgan, who was standing against the wall, checking something on his Palm Pilot. When he noticed Jason and Ashlee, he wrinkled his nose, making no move to hide his disdain, shaking his head before going back to whatever was on his screen.
"Hey Nicole." Jason's sudden voice made the brunette jump, bringing about a fresh wave of pain in her bruised ribs. "I just came to see if you were okay."
Nicole didn't open her eyes. "I'm fine." She snapped. "No thanks to your new girlfriend."
Ashlee headed over to where Morgan was standing and attempted to peek at his Palm Pilot, leaning against him. "What are you writing?" She questioned as Morgan nudged her roughly aside.
"None of your business." Morgan snapped, shutting his Palm Pilot. "Why don't you go bother someone else?"
Ashlee glared at him. "Fine." She retorted. "I'm sure there are plenty of up-tight businessmen with sticks up their asses to bother in this hotel." She remarked, heading for the door.
After wishing Nicole a quick 'recovery', Jason followed Ashlee out of the room, and shut the door behind him. "What was that all about?" He questioned. "I thought you were going to find out if they have the dog."
Ashlee grinned. "We are." She told him, holding out the white hotel key she had taken from Morgan's pocket. Jason looked at her, honestly impressed. "So, let's go."
"You've got to teach me that trick." Jason remarked as he and Ashlee headed for the elevators.
Ashlee swiped the key-card into the lock and opened the door to Morgan and Nicole's suite. She turned back to Jason. "You stand guard and if someone comes, make a sound like a dying giraffe."
Jason looked at her strangely. "What are you talking about?" He questioned, not quite sure what dying jungle animals had to do with anything. "A giraffe?"
"Haven't you ever seen South Park?" Ashlee questioned, shrugging when Jason didn't answer. "Fine, just knock on the wall."
That was better. "What are you going to do if Morgan comes back?" Jason questioned, unable to help himself.
Ashlee stared at him. "Get caught." She answered, before slipping into the suite and shutting the door behind her. She let her eyes scan the suite, looking for the white dog, but there was nothing more then unkempt suitcases and nice furniture.
"Chili." Ashlee called. "Here boy." Her words were answered by yipping and scratching, coming from behind the bathroom door. She turned in the direction and saw that the bathroom had been closed off, no doubt to keep a purloined puppy inside.
Ashlee opened the bathroom door and the dog came bounding out instantly, barking and jumping around her feet. She had just scooped the dog up and was heading to the door when she heard banging on the wall, a signal from Jason.
The door opened just as Ashlee pressed herself against the wall, attempting to fumble her way into closet behind her. She finally managed to duck inside and shut the door as Morgan entered the room, immediately beginning to search around, mumbling to himself about a missing key.
Ashlee opened the door slightly and peeked out from behind the crack, watching Morgan. He was rummaging through everything spread across the bed and the floor, no doubt trying to find the room key that she had snatched moments earlier. Once he had abandoned his search, he turned toward the table beside the large glass window and retrieved his laptop, heading for the door once more.
For nearly ten minutes, Ashlee remained in the closet, as to be sure that Morgan had decided that his laptop was the only thing he needed. But, once Chili began gnawing on her fingers, she decided she had waited long enough and finally emerged, making a break for the door.
Jason was waiting farther down the hallway when Ashlee finally emerged and turned in her direction, looking relieved to see her. "I wondered what happened to you." He said once they had joined up again. "But when Morgan didn't come out, dragging her behind him, I figured you must have gotten away."
Ashlee shrugged. "You don't become a perfect little thief and not know how to hide." She remarked before shoving the dog in his direction. "Here, I found him."
Jason took the dog was some disdain. "Great." He remarked, sounding as though it was anything but. "Hopefully this will be enough to convince Vincent to re-hire Tessa."
At first, Vincent wasn't even interested in seeing or hearing what Jason had to offer, but by some way of good faith, the general manager managed to convince his boss to hear him out. Vincent eyed the dog that Ashlee held without curiosity, just impatience. "What the hell is that thing?"
"This is the dog that Nicole said Tessa lost." Jason explained. "We found it." Ashlee looked at him, silently urging him to say more but he remained silent and so she did too. Jason looked a little uncomfortable about leaving out a seemingly vital piece of information but kept silent; it would only complicate matters to bring up Nicole and take Vincent's focus away from re-hiring Tessa.
Vincent studied him curiously. "I didn't even know there was a missing dog." He said. "I don't care about a missing dog, that has nothing to do with what Tessa did earlier. So if you're here to convince me to let her come back, you're not going to get very far Jason."
Jason, however, didn't appear to be interested in his words. "Listen Vincent, I wouldn't be asking you to give Tessa back her job if I wasn't sure that what happened wasn't entirely her fault. The future and success of this hotel is important to me, you know that and it's important to Tessa too."
Vincent looked at him an scoffed, trying to figure out if Jason really had the audacity to tell him that his newest hire cared about anything but herself. "Please." He mumbled. "Jason I've got a lot of work to do-"
"You know Tessa's kept this hotel from going under more times then you care to admit." Jason interrupted. Vincent was silent. "I think that earns her a second chance."
"I've given her several second chances." Vincent snapped. "More then I should have. Now she's putting this hotel in jeopardy."
Jason shrugged. "So give her another second chance, you know she deserves it." He studied Vincent closely.
Vincent was silent for a while, as though trying to ignore everything Jason had just said. Finally, he remarked, "I know no such thing." He sighed. "But the second she even looks at Nicole the wrong way, she's out of here, with no more second chances."
Ashlee couldn't help but smile and Jason did as well, though he hid it better then the younger girl. "I'll make sure of that, Vincent." He assured his boss.
Vincent didn't look very much like smiling. "You'd best do so." He advised. "Now get out of here, I have actual work to do."
Needing no further invitation, Jason and Ashlee hurriedly left Vincent's office before the man could change his mind. Once they were out of ear-shot, Ashlee turned toward Jason and asked, "Why didn't you tell him where we found the dog? Why didn't you tell him about Morgan and Nicole?"
Jason sighed. "I didn't see the point." He mumbled, not in the mood to tell Ashlee just why he really hadn't given his ex-girlfriend willingly to the slaughter. He didn't expect Ashlee to understand, or to even try.
Ashlee stared at him. "The point is," she said after a moment's pause, "that they've done something wrong and they deserve to be punished." Lord knew she'd been punished enough for all the wrong she had been forced to do in her life.
Another sigh escaped Jason's lips. "It's not always that simple, Ashlee." He said. "Life isn't always black and white, the bad don't always get punished and the good aren't always rewarded. Sometimes, you have to pick your battles." He stared at the teenager, knowing that behind her cold eyes, she understood what he was saying.
"It's not always perfect, is that what you're telling me?" Ashlee asked. "Well, you're preaching to the choir, Jason." She started down the hallway again, heading for the lobby of the hotel.
Jason remained where he was for a moment, watching the teenager before following after her; at least she had Tessa, they both did.
In the lobby, Jason spotted Morgan heading in their direction, not looking too pleased. "Just ignore him." He advised Ashlee, who seemed pleased to do as he said, keeping her gaze straight ahead.
Morgan glared down at the dog in Ashlee's hands, stepping in front of the girl and keeping her from going any farther. "I should have you arrested for breaking and entering." He snapped. "And I'm sure it wouldn't be the first night you'd spent in prison."
Ashlee looked at him. "You're right, it wouldn't be." She answered coolly. "But they usually give you more then one night for first degree murder."
For a moment, Morgan looked taken aback, as though he wasn't quite sure he should believe what Ashlee had said. Deciding against engaging in any further conversation with Ashlee, he turned toward Jason instead, who appeared to be waiting for his remarks. "So, I heard your hooker got fired, does that mean that she's returning to her previous vocation of standing on street corners?" He questioned. "Because I might just have to look her up for a few hours."
Without a thought, Jason punched Morgan in the face, catching the man by surprise and knocking him to the ground. Jason smiled, having the satisfaction of feeling Morgan's nose crack beneath his fist. "A word of advice, Morgan," He said to the man clutching his nose. "Leave my girlfriend and my hotel alone."
"You're gonna pay for that, Matthews." Morgan mumbled from behind his hands, trying to blink away the tears in his eyes.
Ashlee grinned at him and, wordless, tossed him the key to his room before following Jason out of the hotel. "That was impressive." She told him, the smile still on her face. "I think you broke his nose."
Jason smiled as well. "Maybe he'll finally get the message."
Tessa was laying on her bed, channel surfing and trying not to feel sorry for herself when the door to her apartment opened and the little white dog came bounding in. She was so shocked to see it that she could do nothing but stare at the little canine as it jumped on her bed, trying to figure out where it had come from.
That question was answered when Ashlee appeared seconds later with Jason following close behind her. Tessa looked over at him, no less surprised now as she had been earlier. Her eyes were fixed on Jason. "What are you doing here?" She questioned.
Ashlee smiled. "Jason got you your job back." She told her sister. "And he punched Morgan."
Jason shrugged wordlessly, as though these things were no big deal. Tessa slipped off her bed and headed over to him, studying him closely. "Why did you do that, Jason? You could have gotten fired." There was so much more she wanted to say, but somehow, the right words wouldn't come out. No one had ever risked themselves like that for her and Tessa was at a loss for words.
"It was no big deal." Jason remarked. "He had it coming anyway." He started to say more but Tessa threw her arms around his shoulders, silencing him with a kiss. When the kiss was broken, Jason grinned at her. "You certainly bring a lot of drama around with you." He said and Tessa raised an eyebrow, smiling slightly. "Just another day in paradise right?"
Tessa kissed him again, feeling happy and utterly content. When the kiss was broken once again, her smile grew wider. "It is now."

ST. AUGUSTINE, Fla. – Relatives on Friday revealed that the man and woman who were aboard a small plane that crashed in a wooded area of St. Augustine are married, and tragically, their dog died from its injuries sustained in the crash.
The crash happened after the plane struggled to gain elevation during takeoff Thursday from Northeast Florida Regional Airport.
Relatives said both the man and woman are being treated at a burn unit. We’re told the woman, who was the passenger, has burns to her feet, while the pilot is being treated for burns to 45% of his body.
Luke Bolen, who was taking video of the rescue attempt by St. Johns County deputies and good Samaritans, joined the effort after the woman got out and said her husband was still inside.
“He was already seriously injured before he encountered the flames. By the time he jumped out of the plane, he had to jump into the fire,” Bolen said. “He landed right in it. There was no other option.”
Then, he said, rescuers did something very bold in the face of raging flames.
“The sheriff’s deputy and another gentleman who was in front of me grabbed his hands by reaching through the fire and pulling him out,” Bolen said. “The four of us, each one of us had one of his limbs and were carrying him away from the plane.”
The couple’s dog was still on the plane inside a crate. Bolen said the animal was yelping as crews put water on flames to get closer to the aircraft. He said a deputy used jaws of life to pry open the plane and get the dog out.
“I’m sure the dog was severely injured as well because he was within five or six feet of the fire the whole time and it was probably five or six minutes before they could get to him,” Bolen said.
Prior to the crash, Bolen — who was in Northeast Florida on vacation from Tampa — said he saw the plane trying to take off and feared something went wrong.
“The plane came out about 30-feet high,” Bolen said. “The tail was facing down, and the nose was facing up, and it just glided across the road and collided with the forest.”
What caused the airplane to crash remains under investigation.

on 30 October 2013
This is a sturdy, good quality product. My daughter had been asking me for ages for a cat in a basket and I looked at one in the Disney Store but it was really expensive and I also looked at much cheaper but much poorer quality products. This product is worth the price and is very good value for money. My drying the basket around, an ideal travel toy in that respect. The accessories are really useful.

7 dogs arrived at our home last night after riding 9 hours up from Georgia. Another NC member left at 3am to make the trip there and back in one day. The dogs were dirty and scared, but good tempered and quiet. They all got baths, teeth scraping, ear cleanings, nail tripms, and flea preventive. By the time it was all said and done it was 1:30am. Four went to stay with Pam and three were picked up today by Libby's dedicated foster homes. Some pictures are on our Gallery.

I was just reading a thread on a colon cancer forum which discussed how cancer effects relationships. Many of the posters responded with pretty sad stories and a couple with positive ones. The ratio was rather disturbing-more horrible stories than good.
Made me think of my own relationship. I used to be certain that if I got seriously ill, Garry wouldn’t be good support. I based this on my experience after giving birth to the twins in the midst of liver failure. He was a real bastard to be blunt.
One thing I forgot turned out to be a major factor though. His mother. Long deceased, she was a very jealous and vindictive alcoholic at that time. I am not supposed to say this but it’s true. She found out that I didn’t want him drinking rum day in and day out so she plied him with it. He was an adult of course so he made a choice obviously. For her….it was to defy me. To bring me down a few notches. How dare I disapprove of rum?…..I don’t know…but for him? He too was an alcoholic who was about to become a dad. I blame her because he would not have hit the rum if she was not around. Out of sight out of mind. he would of stuck to beer which makes him a friendlier soul. She knew this woud hurt our marriage and that’s all she wanted from life.
The result was that I don’t recall him being around in the hospital at that time. He was present for the birth. After that, my family caught him flirting with nurses, hanging out at the nursery basking in the glory of my hard work while I was bleeding to death with 20% chance of survival in ICU, stuff like that. My grannie over heard him and his mother plotting to take the kids to Australia ” as soon as she’s buried”…..they wrote me off prematurely and coldly. His mother never forgave me for not dying.
I wanted to leave him because things got even worse until his evil bitch of a mom left us alone a few months later. I had not fully recovered from my liver failure and ended up with fibromyalgia on top of that.taking care of twins alone along with a divorce and financial issues was put of the question. I could not work in my physical condition. I could not forgive him for a very long time and am not sure that I have.
I was therefore afraid when I knew that whatever ailed me last year was very serious. We were not getting along due to his refusal to cut ties with a neighbor whose wife was spreading nasty lies about me while being a little too nice to him.
When I got sick…I initially thought it was uterine cancer. I don’t know why.Garry thought I’d gone nuts for thinking so negatively and so did Jasmine.
Then, when I finally went to see a doctor, she thought it was ovarian cancer initially. That scared me alot but I was trying to hold it in….believing that I was not going to have support from my husband just like before.
I went as far as looking into a woman’s shelter because if I was going to die…..well, it was not going to be at the side of a man who could care less. I’d rather be alone.
But I was shocked to find out that my husband had grown up quite a bit since the birth of the children. Not only did he try to be strong for me during the initial diagnosis, he also did everything he could to take care of me and still does alot to this day. He did a great job to the best of his ability.
I think that is the key- that we patients accept that our caretakers can only do what they can do and that this is okay. For example: He didn’t juice carrots for me ( this used to bother me alot at the time) because the idea was not seeming to be important to him, but he brought me Carnation instant breakfast every morning in bed and every afternoon as the doctors ordered.
He went above and beyond…to the point that I had to ban him from coming to the hospital with me when I was taken by ambulance. The stress of my condition had taken a toll on him and I couldn’t let him drive in that state but he was going to.
I know that he cried alot( but not in front of me). I know he made a deal with God…that I should live and he’d die instead. He wants to go first but I know it’s going to be me. He can wish all he wants.
I know it’s guilt. He knows what he did to me at the birth of our children was not just mean, but very bad krma too. Maybe he wished me dead as well. I always thought so.
He knows that he betrayed me emotionally when he got involved with the neighbor. He knows her hatred was on par with his mothers…and yet he had defended both.
He made up for these things. I have not yet told him so. I will.
Cancer brought us together? No. It is a dirty, mean disease that doesn’t deserve credit for the good things in life. It forced us to let down our walls out of desperation- that’s all it did. Made us desperate. How we reacted was up to us.
Note to my old friends: I still don’t have confirmation that I am in remission so when I say that I will die before my husband, it’s because of my ongoing general condition, not because of any news of recurrance. of course there’s no way of knowing for sure either way.
Many of the posters in that forum describe nightmare relationships but so do a couple of caretakers. It goes both ways.
One talked about her first husband being a rat during the complicated births of their children. She left him and remarried a nice man and believed at firstthat her ex would nothave handked her terminal cancer any betterthan the birth of their kids.
But ironically, her ex just asked his girlfriend to marry him after finding out she also had colon cancer. People do change.

WALDRON, Ark. (AP) - A grandmother perished after she was swept from a car in a rain-swollen creek in Scott County, and a 4-year-old grandson told his parents that his grandmother died while trying to save him and his 2-year-old sister.
Scott County Sheriff Buck Byford said the body of Barbara Bennett, 65, of Howe, Okla., was recovered Tuesday morning downstream from where her car was washed from a low-water bridge.
The sheriff said the bridge was on a U.S. Forest Service road on a creek about 20 miles west of Waldron, about two miles east of the Oklahoma-Arkansas border.
"The 4-year-old told his parents his grandmother got out in the water and fell down," Byford said.
Amarillo Globe-News ©2015. All Rights Reserved.

17 more hours and we will be in much cooler weather! Off to CA we go and we are so looking forward to getting out of town and to seeing Jack and Braden play on the beach! In the sand! In the water! In mud! Everything that they have stayed away from for so long. Braden has never seen the ocean and Jack has been singing all day long, “We are going on vacation, we are going to California!” He is so excited!! My parents have a whole slew of things for us to do and we are thrilled. We are hoping to be able to meet up with Zac’s brother, Jess, and his family at the beach one day so all the kids can play together and I also found out last night that my friend Jaime is going to be there with her family so hopefully we can meet up with them too!
On to Dr appointment news…I recieved a phonecall today from the Audiology department saying that Jack needed to have a bear hearing test done while under sedation ASAP for end of treatment results. I figured that I would really rather Jack not be put under in July when he is going to be put under again in August so I told the lady that I would call Eshun and Sharon and see if we could just wait until August to have it done. Sharon called me and said that August would be fine and we would just schedule it when he was in for his next round of scans instead of having to go back for an additional sedation. She also told me that Jack’s blood counts from Tuesday were more than perfect and that his Thyroid levels are perfect as well. We will be talking with the endocronologist soon to see what he wants to do about his medication. I have a feeling we will be staying right where we are at but would really like it if he thinks we should decrease the amount of meds he is giving him. We are thrilled his labs are spot on and are looking forward to hearing what his urine tests look like next week.
I also told Sharon what an awful experience the blood draw was and she said that from now on, she would do it. She is very straight forward with Jack and she doesn’t mess around at all so I feel very confident that next time will be much better than the other day!
Ok, it’s 10:00 PM and we are finally done packing! Jack was a huge help as we now have 2 extra carry on’s full of snacks and games for our 1 hour flight. Yes, we are packing more for our trip to Orange County than we did for our trip to NYC!

You didn't misunderstand- the post in question contradicts itself throughout. It says that no system considers under-rotation worse, but then goes on to justify reasons for discrediting Lu's cheated jumps. I think the intended point, based on other posts, is that the system considered chested jumps as flawed, but that the judges chose to ignore them. Regardless, "slight" touch-downs were considered 2-footed, flawed and were not credited under 6.0; that's not really debatable. Thus, Maria's lutz and flip would not have been considered completed triple jumps. Underrotations, OTOH, weren't as cut and dry, as evidenced by all the discussion here and by the wide range of marks for Lu and similar instances, like many of Bonaly's free skates. The most likely scenario is that anything less than 1/2 turn cheat was considered a minor mistake, but that the jump was still counted albeit with less credit, similar to a hand down. Lu was probably given credit for all but the final triple toe (and triple flip), with maybe a few judges considering one of the lutzes as being lower quality. The toe, sal and loop were all fine under 6.0 - and I think the lutzes were, as well.

If you’re just now starting, the actual beginning is here.
She heard his footsteps, heard him walk by and set the tray on the table next to his chair. She didn’t have to see it to know it would have an assortment of crackers and cheese, thin sliced ham and prosciutto, a small bottle of wine and one glass.
He didn’t acknowledge her as he set down the snack, but then he moved behind her and she thought he would speak or touch her, but nothing happened. She realized that she didn’t actually know if he was even looking at her, and she felt a rush of shame.
But she heard the chair scraping across the floor behind her and realized he was going to spend some time back there. Then his fingers, caressing the welts on her bottom, bringing them back to life. His touch was so gentle that it didn’t actually hurt, but she could feel how sensitive the marks were and she knew that sitting would be uncomfortable.
Right now, she didn’t care at all, just settled into the sensations of his touch. His finger carefully traced each of her welts, then slid between her legs. She was incredibly wet and hot and she quivered under his touch, although he said, “don’t move now.”
She longed to rock back and feel him penetrate her, “Penetrate me anywhere,” she thought, a bit desperately. “Fill this ache…” but his finger teased her clit, arousing her and backing off, then stroking again.
At last, she cried out, “Please, Sir, please may I cum? Please, just once, please, I’ll never cum without permission again, never, never. Please, Sir?”
She was embarrassed by her own desperation but she couldn’t stop. “I’ve learned my lesson, Sir, I’ll be good.”
And the finger was withdrawn. She whimpered.
“You are a good girl,” he said, “and it’s fine to beg. This is not really a punishment, you know. It’s a re-training. Just a reminder of who is in control, who is in charge here. You are an amazingly strong, independent, courageous woman who makes a difference in the world. And when it’s our time, you are submissive to me. Not in control. I love to play lightly, and we’ll continue doing that sometimes, But when I get a clear reminder, as I did today, that you’ve forgotten your place, it’s my responsibility to step up and take charge.”
She couldn’t see him, but she knew he was smiling when he added, “Taken in Hand, my little one.” It was a bit of a joke between them, only because they were definitely not a domestic discipline couple. They had decided early on that was not for them. She smiled a bit too, she had always said she wasn’t domestic enough for DD to be an option for them.
But she also suddenly realized that this talk was probably the prelude to another spanking.
Her instincts were proven correct in the next moment when he said, “I’m going to spank you again. I know this may seem harsh, but I want to make sure the lesson sinks in today, because we have other plans tomorrow. But this time, I want you to ask me to spank you. I’m going to give you ten more, with the belt.
Because she could not see him, she didn’t realize that he had put his jeans on, the ones that he wore around the house all the time. As he said this, he whipped the belt out of the loops and it made that noise that belts make, the one you remember if you’ve ever had a belt used on you before. That sound made her tremble and a little cry escaped her because she knew what was coming.
It was an odd cry, part anticipation of pain, part acceptance of what was to come. In her heart, in this moment, she felt that she might never deserve his love again, that she might never experience orgasm or joy again. It was from that part of herself that she spoke up, grateful that she had this opportunity to mend what was wrong.
“Please, Sir,” she said, voice trembling, but clear, “Please spank me again.” And she waited.

Where liberty her ardent spirit breathed.? "Your affectionate nephew, 2018一本久道在线线观看,一本道理不卡一二三区,一本道理不卡一二三区免费 After a time they began to notice a convergence in these independent ways. It seemed as if only by running apart had they learned at last to run together. A certain friendliness and comradery began to establish itself between them. Reuben began to talk to Naomi[Pg 110] about politics and agricultural doings, and gradually her character underwent a strange blossoming. She became far more adult in her opinions; she took interest in matters outside her household and immediate surroundings. He never spoke to her of his plans for Boarzell, for that would have brought them back into the old antagonism and unrest; but when she read the papers to him he would discuss them with her, occasionally interrupt her with comments, and otherwise show that he had to do with an intelligent being. She in her turn would enquire into the progress of the hops or the oats, ask him if his new insect-killer was successful, or whether Ditch had done well with his harvest, or how much Realf's had fetched at the corn-market. "Oh, Master Bergan, I beg you will not do that!" exclaimed Rue. "Your uncle really loves you in his heart; he will soon forget all about his anger."

31 May 2016
A True Story: Chapter 7, names have been changed to protect the innocent
- 0 Comments
- 1261 Views
10 minute read
Chapter 7 Falling of the Rails
During my dating months I had always remained in contact with my ex wife. We had a good relationship and would often meet and talk. Her life had also not been a bed of roses. Divorce is hard on us all. Years previously I had made application to emigrate it was during this period that I needed to make a trip overseas to formalize my application. My family were to travel with me. How circumstances had changed since I lodged that first application.
She readily agreed to accompany me on this trip it was an opportunity of a lifetime. We only had the one chance to sort out our lives and make a decision. I had asked her to start a new life with me away from South Africa. It had been something we had discussed many times while married. Immigration a new life for our child and us. Africa had looked like a bleak place for a long time. This was that opportunity although it probably came years too late.
This was not an easy trip for either of us, she had a boy friend at the time I was dating Denise, but we made a commitment to follow through. No strings attached we would go as friends. I could live with that, deep down I was hoping for a reconciliation, but it was not to be. I respected that and we had fun. Going on holiday with your ex can be very trying. We both had unresolved issue and had our fair share of arguments. Overall the trip was great and we respected each other. Probably the most difficult thing for me was having too much too say, but not wanting to make this a trip of memories rather than the future. We also shared a bedroom for the whole trip and that is another story.
Those first few nights sleeping or trying to sleep, were a little uncomfortable, but we eventually relaxed and were relaxed around each other. A few days before we were due to come home we had an almighty fight, over a silly phone call. Old jealousies die hard. I regretted that and was determined that this trip would be one to remember. On one particular night we climbed into a bottle of Johnny Walker Black. I am not sure who started it, but we needed each other desperately. Although this was a trip of hope we had also come to say good-bye and with the help of the alcohol, we relived a past that I had not put to rest.
She is a beautiful and very sexy woman. I don’t know of any man who would not want her. Although she appears vulnerable, she is very strong, determined and wilful. Years of living with me until she found her freedom have opened new doors and opportunities. She has experienced some of the wildness of my life. That night she showed it all to me, what I had lost, what I was missing and all the years of being apart. We made wild passionate love and it was awesome I will never regret that night of passion and thank her for that final good bye.
After returning to South Africa, we parted ways and I was very sad, but determined to lay this ghost to rest. We had our time now it was up to me to move on. I continued to date Denise exclusively for the next year. We had some wonderful times and an opportunity to take it to another level. We never got there. After those first fantastic sex sessions, it was more than apparent that my feelings for her ran deeper. She was not in the right space or time for a relationship or I was the wrong guy. We still had fantastic sex, she had dealt with her own past and loss and she was now a free woman to pursue a relationship with me or move on. There are and never will be any hard feelings since she ended the relationship.
We continued a sexual relationship for awhile thereafter. The sex was always good, but we never did reach those giddy heights again, until one night. We had been to a house party and had a lot to drink arriving home, she lead me to her bedroom where she removed all her clothes. Lying back on the covers I buried my face in her wetness. Tasting licking and sucking her clit. Finally licking her ass and going around her world. She kept arching her hips into my face, cuming strongly. Using a finger up her ass I massaged the thin membrane between her ass and her vagina. Lifting her off the bed. I drove straight into her cunt, feeling her wetness on my balls as I buried myself in her. Lifting her legs above her head she gave me complete entry to her fanny and I could touch her clit and ass. Pushing a finger up her tight butt I could feel the contractions on my finger and in my balls as I came inside her.
Later that same night while sleeping I went down on her again before I entered her again she did not complain lying behind her I fucked her slowly and deeply each stroke taking her all the way. As she started her moan, I held back to allow her to cum, before resuming a steady rhythm. She had told me that no man had ever come in her mouth, I asked her to let me cum in her mouth. She was shocked, but as I took my wet cock from her pussy she opened her lips to suck me. She could take a lot of me down her throat, pulling back I continued to move my cock in and out of her open mouth while she caressed the base with her tongue. As I exploded in her mouth she gagged and then swallowed. Truly a night to remember.
We saw a lot of each other during those months, and we had a lot of good sex, but I knew it was time to move on and so December, we celebrated her birthday, with a cheese and wine party, lots of wine made love. Then we just stopped seeing each other.
Christmas is a tough time to be single we get lonely and depressed. I was spending Christmas alone. I had not heard from Denise in weeks and was more than convinced that the relationship was over. Christmas morning I received a phone call from an ex girl friend and a request to come over. When she arrived it had been along time since our last break up and while this relationship was very intense, we had clashed over so many things, but it was insecurity and my lack of commitment to the relationship that had been our biggest stumbling block. We saw each other in secret often over the next few months.
She had been wanting a second chance, a reconciliation for a long time, we had one last chance and a drunken session together before, she came around one day, to talk. Well that ended up in us having drinks and them fantastic sex. I have always enjoyed anal sex, and with her it was great, but I needed to prepare her properly. That night I gave her an enema and like wise I had one. She always loved putting a finger up my ass when I came and I wanted to fuck without any mess afterward. We had this truly amazing evening, multiple sessions, anal and toys in our play. We sucked each other and fucked for most of the night. It was the start of a year long Journey where we went from the heights of passion to the depths of despair. That journey culminated in a near nervous breakdown for me and god knows what she has been through. Our break up was not pretty and from my past experiences I should have known that she would not let go so easily. Not all of it was doom and gloom though we had a roller coaster, a lot of making up, tears and frustration. We also had a lot of fun and laughter. Some of these stories were hilarious and funny and scary. What we didn’t do during that year?
After my last relationship I remained single for a long time but was not short of many evenings of bliss, with the different woman in my life. I also started to re established a relationship with couples and in particular a new bi couple and we had some amazing nights while high on “e” and fucking our brains out. They loved home parties, used all kinds of recreational drugs and smoked “J” Home parties with two or three other couples were set up and everyone had fun. This story would never be complete without at least one story on these parties and there were many parties. This was swinging at a different level. Hard core and fucking with lots of bi sexuality multiple partners and raw sex. Very fucking erotic and just about anything goes would be a good definition.
I was invited to a number of private house parties, 2 couples and I was usually the only single straight guy. We all used “e” and “v” and these evenings normally lasted until sunrise. Hard core graphic dvd’s heightened the atmosphere and watching two woman suck each other and play while the guys looked on is a real turn on. We all took turns fucking the women and it was only very late on one of these nights when the women decided to fuck me together.
We were very wasted by the time she squatted over my face with her dripping wet hole for me to suck and lick. At the same time my legs were pushed up with my knees against my chest and my asshole was lubricated with KY. Using a large rubber dildo and strap on I was fucked up the ass by the woman as they took turns swapping places on my face. While sucking each pussy to an orgasm where I was sprayed with women’s cum. I had my cock sucked by the guys. A mind blowing experience, absolutely!
On another night we also met for some private fun, and I watched the guys fuck each other. Anal sex at these parties was the norm, everyone cleansed. I fucked the woman in all their holes. I was not shy and was used as their sex toy. Eventually after having my ass hole fingered, licked, fucked with a dildo and absolutely loving it, on one night a man fucked me up the ass. It was more painful than anything else. I had fallen off the rails completely or had I? I even began to question my own sexuality, but have realized that I still love women and while I have participated in any number of three or four or even more partners in an evening, my main and only turn on remains the women. I love fucking. I don’t really give too much of a fuck whether the husbands, partners get involved at all. In fact I prefer it when they don’t. I have experimented with many different couples and single women. Being with an open minded highly sexual and seductive women where personal feelings and desires can be explored is my biggest thrill.
Had I really fallen off the rails, well to a straight or heterosexual male, probably. To describe these evenings, the atmosphere, tension and almost electric lust one felt brings back a heat and throb to my cock. One’s own senses, especially sight, smell and sound. Who would not enjoy watching a gorgeous couple having fantastic orgasmic sex. This was the real thing, not a DVD or video. But I was only too happy acting as there sex toy, but I was in control at all times. Later in living out my own fantasies I learned the meaning of no control. On occasion, I remained a spectator and loved watching the fucking, while stroking my own cock or getting a blowjob. Sex was all that mattered, whether it was watching, participating or even while making a home video. What would it be like to watch those self same videos years later.

Tuesday, December 9, 2008
A Proud Mama!
I didn't take this shot, but you can tell by my smile how proud I am of my son. He is shown here receiving his 3rd Varsity letter and receiving the honors of making 1st Team All League for football.
Receiving his Varsity letter
Receiving the honors of 1st Team All League from his coach. He worked his butt off for this honor, so I'm extremely proud of him! I couldn't stop snapping pictures!!

I have a 2007 Sante Fe and have been having a lot of issues. First time I noticed the problem was when I was stoping at a toll booth and my car just shut down. I had to put it in park but then was able to restart it. It also happened one night while sitting at a red light. I flashed my lights and the car shut down. We have replaced the altenator, and gotten a new battery. When I go to start it now it just makes a clicking sound and has to be recharged. Once recharged I can drive it but then the battery seems to drain again regardless of how long I drive it around. Do you think that this is part of the same problem?

It has been 7 years and the show is finally over. I honestly didn’t think this day would come up this soon. I did watch the finale and I will go into more detail later, but my overall feelings about it were bitter sweet. I remember being in high school watching the show and then coming back the next day and talking to my friends about it. I will miss it a little but I do think that it ran its course.
There are spoilers ahead so if you haven’t seen it. Do not read ahead.
Things that I enjoyed were: The baby twins, the wedding, the moms. The wedding of Aria and Ezra I have to admit was really nice. The first one didn’t go so well but they finally made it happen and it was beautiful. I loved the baby twins because they were super cute. One of my favorite things were the moms. I absolutely loved them and I wish they were on the show more. I would love to see them in a spin off show. A lot of people were talking about this on Twitter.
Something I didn’t like was the ending. I didn’t like how the very same scene that happened in the beginning happened in the end. I can understand why they would do it that way but for me personally, I don’t think it should have been the way to end this type of show. I think if they ended with Mona, it would have been better.
These are just some of my thoughts of the finale. If you agree or disagree, let me know. And The Show Must Go On.
Photo from: eonline.com

I'm going on another, short blogging hiatus. February was crazy busy, and I thought I would have a reprieve in March but it's actually shaping up to be even busier, what with my own kids' stuff and my own family members to keep track of and even some friends who need a helping hand from time to time. In short, it's a very busy time in the household.
I fully intend to be back, hopefully with a quieter April. In the meantime, here is a photograph of a repurposed tractor seat for you to enjoy.

My girl is talking up a storm! She is our little parrot now! Yesterday she said "Couch" for the 1st time. Today Tyler taught her how to say "Nacho Cheese" after the chips he fed her for lunch. And then....haha....Makenna has had a lot of gas lately....haha. So she has been tooting. So Tyler asked her if she farted! So today she "let out some gas" and turned around and looked at Tyler and I and said, " I farr mommy I farr!" It was so funny.
I have been trying to be better at brushing her teeth before she goes to bed. She likes to suck on the toothbrush...not let me brush her teeth. So I usually say, "Makenna say AHH!" Then I stick my finger in her mouth to pry it open to brush her teeth. Tonight in the bath tub I laid Makenna back to rinse out her hair...which by the way, she hates! But to keep her happy while I did it I was asking her where my eyes and nose were so it would give her something to do. She put her finger to my mouth and said, "Say AHHH mommy!" She is such a crack up! Tyler and I are just happy that she is starting to use words and not just grunt and cry!

New York based musician, producer and songwriter Richie Castellano discusses music, being on the road as a current member of Blue Öyster Cult, "The Tiger's Fang" film series and many other things of a nerdly nature.
I'm pleased to announce that my Bohemian Rhapsody video has passed 50,000 views. That's insane! I think today I will write about my obsession with that song. Here's where it began....
In 1992 (I think) I went to the movies with my dad to see "Wayne's World." When it got to the famous car scene and Bohemian Rhapsody came on, I asked my dad, "What is this?" He said, "This is Queen." I remember listening as the song just kept adding more and more layers of awesomeness until it just erupted at the famous headbanging climax. I was sold. This was officially the best song I'd ever heard and it only took one listen of only half of it to realize that. After the song was done and 12 year old me's mind had been thoroughly blown, I turned to my father and said in a very serious tone, "Why wasn't I told about this song?!?" He was a bit alarmed by my reaction. I was actually incredibly irritated that I had to go through the first 12 years of my life without hearing the greatest song ever written. My dad and I played music together, he introduced me to Motown and The Beatles. In my very under-developed opinion he was clearly negligent in his responsibilities to me as a musical mentor and a parent by omitting this song from my listening diet. He gave me a slightly puzzled look and said "I don't know. I don't listen to this kind of music." I was flabbergasted! How could you not listen to this?!? This is the only thing I wanted to listen to from that point on. Bohemian Rhapsody was in first place and everything else started at 4th place. My dad saw that I was not satisfied by his answer. If he knew the song and he knew the band who did it, then why didn't he think to tell me about it sooner? To shut me up he said, "Ask your uncle, he likes that stuff."
I got home from the movies and called my Uncle Phil.
"Hi Uncle Phil. Do you have Bohemian Rhapsody by Queen?"
"I think so."
"Ok, I'll be right over."
I remember seeing the CD in his wall unit. Queen greatest hits. There it was on the back; "Bohemian Rhapsody." I went home and put it on my CD player. Holy shit! There's a guitar solo in this song!!! In the movie, they start the song from after the solo. To my amazement, this song was even better in it's entirety! If this was the best song I ever heard, then this was clearly the best guitar solo I ever heard. It had everything. Beautiful melody, fast runs, perfect tone! I couldn't handle how awesome it was. I listened to the song non stop. I didn't even bother to listen to any of the other songs on the CD. Then something horrible happened. I realized I was going to have to leave my house at some point and I wouldn't be able to listen to it! I got fresh batteries and put them in my cassette walkman. Then I took a 60 minute cassette tape and recorded Bohemian Rhapsody 10 times in a row on each side. I did this so I could keep listening to it without having to rewind.
I remember just walking around my block several times while listening to the song over and over picking out something new every time. The layers seemed to be endless. I never heard that many vocal tracks. I never heard that guitar sound. I never heard those chord changes. And that voice!
When I wasn't listening to Bohemian Rhapsody I was trying to play it. MTV began playing the Queen video due to Wayne's World's popularity. I remember seeing Freddie crossing his hands to grab the high notes in the piano part. I saw that and went to our upright piano and tried to imitate it. If I remember correctly I was way off. But over then next few years I kept refining it. Changing a voicing here and there.
Fast forward to high school. I think it might have been senior year. My music teacher, Lou Mannarino played us a tape of a session that he did. He was hired as a singer to record a spoof version of Bohemian Rhapsody for some commercial. All the words were changed to promote some company, but I remember hearing it and feeling like someone hit me over the side of the head with a frying pan. This is possible?!?!?!? This can be recreated?!?!? Holy shit!!! It was like he gave me the key piece of information I had been missing. And right then I realized that I would be able to do this song live....with A LOT of help.
I don't remember exactly how I did it, but I went home and began to record the opera section on my analog 16 track. If I do some digging I may be able to find the mixdown tape somewhere, but I'm pretty sure that I had a lot of wrong harmonies and I can only imagine what the piano part was like. I probably sequenced it a painstaking pace. I mixed it down to a DAT tape because CD-R technology was still incredibly cost prohibitive in those days. There was a school rock concert coming up (I'm pretty sure that Curtis High School in Staten Island was one of the first to do official school rock concerts.) I told my friends, we're going to do Bohemian Rhapsody at the concert. I got it all planned out. Andy Ascolese will play keyboard. Chris Kuffner will play bass. Brendan Pezzoli from the Jazz band will play drums, and that freshman Matt Lindauer will do the guitar parts with me. Our teacher, Lou will sing it. I've heard him do it on that commercial. He's great! When the middle part comes up, we're gonna play to this track that I recorded at home. So, at the school rock concert, we did Bohemian Rhapsody live, and I remember it felt fucking awesome!
Fast forward to college. I started a rock cover band called Hit Me With It. Right from day 1, our big song was going to be Bohemian Rhapsody. We had a great singer named Jason Spoor. We played the song with my track for a little while but it wasn't really working out. It was time to re-do it. I remember Jason coming to my dorm room at Purchase College, and he and I recording that opera section right in the room onto my computer. People on my floor thought we were nuts. Eventually they realized what we were doing and a few of the music majors passing by would stop in to check it out.
Over the next few years I played that song a lot. It ALWAYS went over. When you were losing the crowd, whip out Bohemian Rhapsody and you could save your gig. I kept toying around with the piano part here and there. It was my favorite thing to play on piano even though I only knew bits and pieces of it. A few years later, Ann Marie decided to do that song for her college recital, and we re-recorded that section yet again, this time with her singing everything.
No matter how many times I heard that song since Wayne's World, I never ever got tired of it.
Back to the present.
By this point I could play all of the piano part with the exception of the opera section. The B Bb A Bb bit was incredibly difficult for me. I realized that if I couldn't get that, I couldn't do this project. I just sat there building up the muscle memory to play that over and over. Ann Marie was ready to murder me because if you play those three chords over and over again, it's really really obnoxious. After I felt comfortable enough with the piano part, I decided to start the project. I set up a tempo map in Pro Tools. This was a pain in the ass. Queen didn't play to a click on this song. There are many parts that are Rubato. Pro Tools and Rubato don't mix well. Regardless, I had to tempo map the song out. I wouldn't be able to do it without a click.
Recording the piano took the longest by far. I did so many takes. I could have just programmed it in, but it was important to me that I actually play it this time. After the piano was done, I breathed a sigh of relief. In my mind the project was mostly done already because the thing I was dreading the most was over and done with. Luckily for me, the drum part isn't too crazy. I'm not a good drummer by any stretch of the imagination. I can play very basic things. I knew I wasn't going to be able to remember every fill like I had done with the other parts so I notated the entire drum part. Having the music right there in front of me made it a lot easier to deal with, although I think it was less about actually reading it and more about the actual act of transcribing it. That's the best way to memorize something...write it down.
The bass and guitars were a breeze. I loved doing the guitars. It was so much fun trying to get those sounds. I borrowed my friend, Chris Segalini's Vox AC-30 amp and used my little Brian May amp as a preamp and that got me really close. I even miked up that little amp for a couple of tracks.
When I got to the lead vocal I kind of hit a wall. Wait a minute...I can't sing this song. In every band I've ever been in, I've never sung this song. Sure, in the car, but not on stage. I didn't even know it I'd be able to do it at all. I hit record and did a rough take just to see if I could. I sang through the whole song and at the end of the take, my voice was completely fried. I was hoarse and in pain. I listened back, and to my surprise, I sang the whole thing! I hit all of the notes. It didn't sound great, but it was a functional take. I was satisfied with that. In my mind, I wouldn't be able to do it again without severely damaging my voice. I was very proud of the way it sounded as it was.
I showed it to Ann Marie and she told me that it could be a lot better. She said, "If you going to go crazy re-creating every single articulation in every part, then why wouldn't you treat the vocal the same way?" She had a point, but I was concerned that I wouldn't be able to sing like this much more. I took a break from the song at this point. I had no choice. I couldn't sing anymore for the rest of the day anyway. I listened back to what I did and thought, "she's right. If I can hit these notes at all, then I should go the extra step and try to match Freddie as closely as my own voice will allow." I really zeroed in on Freddie's lead vocal. It was an amazing experience. With each track that I recorded, I was peeling back the layers of this masterpiece. I was seeing the wizard behind the curtain but at no point was I ever disappointed it. Every new detail that I picked up was inspiring. Examining Freddie's lead vocal was like taking a master class in breath control and how to manage the break between chest voice and head voice.
In the end, Ann Marie was definitely right. Doing the vocal over with more attention to detail really made a huge difference. Unfortunately that also killed my voice again so I had to take another break. After that, I started to tackle the background vocals. This is another area where Freddie kicked my ass. I believe that the Queen harmony sound comes from the fact that he was able to flawlessly match his performances from take to take. Every nuance and articulation would be nearly identical from track to track. The harmonies sounded so lush and smooth as a result of his unique ability to do that. I did not have this unique ability and instead opted to keep doing it over and over until it matched. : )
By this time, my computer was ready to explode. Not only did I have a full band on there with nearly 16 guitar tracks, but I had 28 vocal tracks. I had to do pre-mix bounces of the background vocals. This was pretty cool because that's how Queen did the original. The only had 24 tracks to work with so they had to bounce. In the end it made the final mix much much easier.
The final mix was another opportunity to peel back another layer of this song. Getting the panning and effects as close as I could was an audio-geek's dream come true.
The video part was also challenging. I had Sony Vegas, which is great, but anytime you do a project with up to 12 separate videos on the screen at the same time, it can really chew up system resources on your computer. It was really hard to see what was going on while my computer was chugging along trying to keep up with everything. Although it was tough, doing the video was probably the most fun part. Video editing is a hobby of mine and it didn't feel like work.
Overall, I'm very happy with the way it came out. Oh, if you haven't checked it out, here it is:
There are few things I wish I could change, but nothing major. My video camera has an auto focus that constantly blurs out on me and I was forced to use some of those blurry shots at points. Also, some of the sync is slightly off as a result of my computer not being able to keep up during the video editing. Other than those minor issues, I'm very happy with it. It was a fun project that I was considering for a long time and it made me remember why I fell in love with this band in the first place.

There once was a little girl who had a bad temper. Her mother gave her a bag of nails and told her that every time she lost her temper, she must hammer a nail into the back of the fence. The first day the girl had driven 37 nails into the fence.
Over the next few weeks, as she learned to control her anger, the number of nails hammered daily gradually dwindled down. She discovered it was easier to hold her temper than to drive those nails into the fence. Finally the day came when the girl didn't lose her temper at all. She told her mother about it and the mother suggested that the girl now pull out one nail for each day that she was able to hold her temper. The day passed and the young girl was finally able to tell her mother that all the nails were gone.
The mother took her daughter by the hand and led her to the fence. She said, "You have done well, my daughter, but look at the holes in the fence. The fence will never be the same. When you say things in anger, they leave a scar just like this one." You can put a knife in a person and draw it out. It won't matter how many times you say I'm sorry, the wound is still there. A verbal wound is as bad as a physical one"
Friends are very rare jewels, indeed. They make you smile and encourage you to succeed. They lend an ear, they share words of praise and they always want to open their hearts to us. It's National Friendship week. You are my friend and I am honored.
Please forgive me if I have ever left a hole in your fence!

Carrie was found outside when she was only about 5 weeks old. Some dogs were barking at her which allerted the homeowner that she was there. She's been in foster care since.
Carrie doesn't do well when she's confined and was getting quite testy. Her foster mom lets her out to roam around the foster room a lot now and she's a much happier girl. She is playful and does like to be held and pet. She will let you know when she's ready to get down and play by swishing her tail. She likes the company of other cats and would probably do well in a situation where she has another confident kitty as her companion.
She's been a polite kitty in her foster home and doesn't get into things she's not supposed to. Carrie just needs someone to give her a chance and she'll be a wonderful companion for people and another kitty.
Carrie has tested negative for feline AIDS and Leukemia, been spayed and vaccinated.
If you might be interested in adopting her you can fill out an application online by clicking on adoption info on our home page.

I really liked this soup - red cabbage is not my favorite but I had received some in my CSA box. I could only give it 4 stars because I think I'm the only one at my house that did like it. I served it with country wheat bread, cheddar and salami slices, salad of shredded red leaf and cucumbers - YUM!! Thanks!
This was an interesting and tasty sour soup--it almost tasted like a sauerkraut soup. It was very easy to put together.

Refugee: Part I - Hope, You Fickle Fellow
Posted By: stan<firstname.lastname@example.org>
Date: 17 June 2005, 7:11 AM
Randall Ashwood's life was in shambles. His house, along with all his earthly belongings, were destroyed. He had no job, and apart from a few bucks he had found in the pocket of an old windbreaker he had been able to salvage from the wreckage of his home, he had no money. However, even if he had money, with the economy like it was and inflation running rampant, it would be of little use. He had heard stories that everyday items like bread or a can of soup, which used to cost only a few bucks, were now being sold for thousands, or even tens of thousands of dollars. He remembered hearing long ago, maybe in school, about how this same process had occurred hundreds of years before in what used to be called Italy. Back then they called it a World War, now, Randy guessed, they'll have to call it a Galactic War.
Like most other inhabitants of Earth at the time, Randy had been aware of the battles being waged by mankind light-years away against the coalition of alien forces known as the Covenant. But the war was so far away, that though he, along with the rest of the planet, were constantly bombarded with warnings about the inevitable discovery of Earth by the Covenant, he really never gave it much thought. If he had thought about it, though, he probably would have noticed that somewhere, in the back of his mind, the fear of invasion and the unknowable and unthinkable events that would result was always there as a nagging, almost imperceptible worry. However, Randy had to live, and he couldn't let this fear consume him, like it had many others, who rather than deal with the pressure, gave into the fear and went insane; ranting and raving in the streets or joining the various cults that had sprung up to worship the mysterious alien races that had vowed to destroy humanity. And so, amidst all the chaos and uncertainties, Randy lived his life.
Before the war started, and as far into the war as he was able, Randy was a dealer in exotic animals. Humanity had by this time explored and inhabited every corner of the globe, even those areas that had in the past been deemed "Un-Inhabitable". As a result, the process of extinction, which, like the farmer's axe, had loomed heavy over the heads of many of the Earth's species since the Nuclear Age, had by this time progressed so relentlessly that few animals survived outside of zoos and designated animal sanctuaries which had been set up by the United Nations to preserve at least a small representation of the Earth's natural wonders. These animal sanctuaries, of which each continent had at least one, were heavily guarded, and the animals were protected by a series of harsh laws which presented the aspiring poacher with the possibility of a life sentence for the capture or death of any animal living within the limits of a sanctuary. However, no matter how heavily protected the sanctuaries were, both by the power of the law and the power of arms, a small number of highly motivated, and well equipped poachers operated a highly lucrative business capturing and selling sanctuary bred animals.
Dealers, like Randy, purchased the animals captured by these poachers and sold them on the black market to private collectors as pets, or to other organizations that had the need, or desire, for an exotic animal. Among his clients were zoos, who, due to the strict regulations on wild animal dispersion, found it impossible to replace a dead giraffe, or bolster sagging attendance with a new gorilla display. He also sold to casinos, theme parks, corporations, and private individuals. Randy was very good and what he did, and though the risk was high, the buyer was assured that the animals were untraceable and would pass as legitimate purchases. Randy supplied all the necessary permits and paperwork, and the buyer supplier the money. And a great deal of money it was. So much so, that prior to the war, Randy lived a life of such opulence and luxury that he was under constant scrutiny by various law enforcement and government agencies who, though they had no proof, were sure that Randy was breaking the law. However, that all changed one day when suddenly, and unbelievably, a fleet of Covenant star-ships appeared on the scopes of the UNSC early detection system.
Instantly, the Earth was in a panic. Everything was chaos, as the day that the Military had assured would never happen due to the preventative measures of the Cole Protocol, had finally come. Randy, along with the rest of the world sat transfixed, waiting to see where, when, and how the Covenant would attack. It soon became clear that the aliens were headed right for Randy's neighborhood.
As a dealer in exotic animals, Randy had decided early on that it would be a smart career move to relocate from his native America to the continent of Africa, which boasted the largest concentrations of animal sanctuaries in the Earth. And so, after he had firmly established himself as a top-rate dealer, he purchased a penthouse suite in a swanky new space-scraper apartment building in downtown New Mombasa. Unfortunately for Randy, New Mombasa held some sort of curious draw for the Covenant, and it was here that they launched their invasion.
The city hardly had any time to prepare for the attack. An evacuation protocol had been thought up years before at the start of the war on the, what everyone assumed would be, off-chance that the covenant might find Earth and might launch an invasion. However, though the plan detailed a very efficient evacuation of the city that, combined with the high-quality mass transit system that operated in that region of eastern Africa, was designed to achieve the complete evacuation of the city within 20 hours of its initiation, the sudden appearance of the covenant, the quickness and the ferocity with which they attacked, and the panic that ensued rendered the plan all but ineffectual. And so it was that Randy, along with millions of others could only cower in the face of the covenant onslaught.
The battle raged for days and Randy was forced to flee his home and take residence in a refugee camp that had been setup just outside of the city. From this camp, and along with thousands of other refugees, he watched the covenant destroy his city. Though the camp was only miles away and it's inhabitants could watch the general course of the battle, news was scarce. Nobody knew if this was a full scale invasion, or just a small skirmish. Nobody knew if there were similar battles being waged all over the Earth, or just here in Africa. Nobody knew if the UNSC forces were driving the covenant back or if the covenant had the upper hand and would soon be the masters of the planet. Nobody knew what lay in store for the human race. And to make matters worse, the skies were illuminated with the brilliant flashes and extraordinary colors of a constant battle raging between the two fleets. Every now and again the smoking debris of some star ship or other would come hurtling down, like a flaming herald sent by the Lord to announce either the doom or the triumph of mankind. Nobody knew which. But they all had their hopes; and their fears.
For Randy, these days of constant worry and fear passed quickly in a blur of images and distracted thoughts. The strangest ideas would pop into his head as he struggled to comprehend what had happened to his life. Had he paid his utility bills? Was the consignment of Hippopotamus he had just bought from a South African poacher still alive? Were would he find a good suit after the war? He would catch himself thinking these ridiculous thoughts and then admonish himself for worrying about trivial details that, in the big picture, really didn't matter anymore. He was just going to have to accept, he would tell himself at moments like these, that the life he had known was over. He was no longer Randall Ashwood, purveyor of rare and exotic animals, a dashing young fellow who was always the life of whichever party he happened to find himself attending on a given night; now he was one among many thousands of dirty, impoverished, broken down refugees clinging tenuously to life on the outskirts of a demolished city. There weren't going to be any more parties, there weren't going to be any more casinos in need of exotic animals, hell he wasn't even sure if there were going to be any animals left on Earth after this invasion; humans included. Like many around him, these thoughts and realizations battered Randy's mind, and soon he had drawn completely within himself, sitting for hours staring at his feet, thinking.
It was, therefore, a great shock when on a bright sunny afternoon a man in combat fatigues with a battle rifle slung across his back walked up to Randy and clapped a hand on his shoulder,.
"Hey man, you alright? The invasion's over, the covenant's gone." said the man as he tried to look into Randy's eyes. "You alright man?"
Randy had no idea what this man was saying. The invasion was over? How could that be, hadn't he just heard the explosions and the grinding crash of metal on metal as some building or some bridge crashed to the earth?
Or had he?
In fact, he had no idea even what day it was, or how long he had been sitting in the same spot staring at the floor. Nor had he any notion of how long the invasion had been taking place. Instead, he had resigned himself to his fate, and expected that every minute was going to be his last.
But here was this man, this human soldier with his rifle slung over his back rather than jumping in his hands spitting bullets at an alien invader. And he was telling Randy that the war was over.
Randy looked around, and then locked his eyes onto the soldier's face.
"Yeah man, its over."
"The city, uh, um, my apartment?"
"The city's in pretty bad shape, it's real dangerous in there, so it's still pretty much off limits but they're letting groups of refugees in to try and salvage what they can before they move them off to the semi-permanent camps. You're group is next." replied the soldier.
Randy wasn't even aware that he was part of a group. But nonetheless he was ready to go. Life once again coursed through his body. Suddenly, the depressing certainty of the destruction of all that was dear to him, including his very existence, which had possessed his thought for the last few days, seemed to slip away, and he was filled a vague, but relentless feeling of hope.
"It's over!" he thought with amazement. And here was a chance to return to his home, where maybe he would find something, perhaps a part of his old life that he had assumed had been fully destroyed. Maybe he could start over again.
"Ok, ok. Let's go." Randy said quietly as he stood up on shaking legs.

I learned magic when I was ten years old and during that time the Internet wasn't really readily accessible for everybody. I learned magic from a single book and in this country there weren't really a lot of books on magic that were being sold at bookstores, I have to be content with what I know and that hindered me from doing more magic. During that time too my magic has somewhat failed to grow due to lack of resources as well as new knowledge.
Then came the time that the internet was readily accessible and during that time I discovered a lot of free websites that taught mainly basic sleights and a few simple tricks. That was also the time when youtube was starting to get famous and through youtube I found great magic videos that I tried to "reverse engineer" so I could perform them as well.
Through this process I was able to actually have new and better tricks to my arsenal. Before I would be doing simple card tricks usually of the pick a card theme then after seeing more videos I was actually able to do more, like packet tricks. During that time too is when I decided to expand my magic and start relearning coin magic and looking for good routines with it.
I discovered a lot of books mostly classic ones from the internet, Studying the classics inspired me to do more magic and to actually experiment trying to bring it in a more modern setting. Studying these tricks actually inspired me to write about it on my blog Marvelous Magic and I didn't realize that there would be people who would leave comments and actually give me tips that would improve my magic.
Because I wanted to learn more I started to join magician's forums but most of them would actually be just forums that would give you bashing rather than constructive criticisms. Luckily I was able to find Club Magicians who was at that time was still Magicians.com. I was happy to find this site because it's like a one-stop center for magicians. Forums, Videos, Social Networking, Blogs, Chat and now even a its own Shop! Now isn't that something that would actually help magicians to share their magic?
With these sites my eyes were opened to a larger view on magic. That is the time too when magic was being popularized again in this country thanks to local magicians who would be doing street magic specials a la David Blaine or Criss Angel. With that shops have started to spawn around the malls here but too bad their products were mostly cheap imitations that were low quality and the bad thing is that the exposure was becoming more rampant. That is when I decided to look for props online: the newest and the best.
Looking for a shop that has good prices and would ship anywhere was really hard but I found some shops including Magicians.com. With these I was able to actually add up to my repertoire again and in a few months time I had my first gig for a birthday party.
Well so much for what the internet did to my magic, but to sum it all up it has actually helped me become a better magician to share my tricks and skills not only in this country but to people all over the world as well.

I came across this reading that I found very interesting. It spoke to me and as I read it; a few people popped into my head as well. Hopefully, it will touch a heart string. The author is unknown. I wish I knew who wrote it, I would love to read more of her / his thoughts.
"Come in," God said. "So, you would like to interview me?" "If you have the time," I said. God smiled and said: "My time is eternity and is enough to do everything. What questions do you have in mind to ask me?"
"What surprises you most about humankind?"
God answered: "That they get bored of being children, are in a rush to grow up, and then long to be children again. That they lose their health to make money and then lose their money to restore their health. That by thinking anxiously about the future, they forget the present, such as they live neither for the present nor the future. That they live as if they will never die and they die as if they never lived .... "
God's hand took mine and we were silent for awhile, and then I asked ...
"As a parent, what are some of the life's lesson you want your children to learn?"
God replied with a smile:
"To learn that they cannot make anyone love them. What they can do is to let themselves be loved. To learn that what is most valuable is not what they have in their lives, but who they have in their lives. To learn that it is not good to compare themselves to others. All will be judged individually on their own merits, not as a group on a comparison basis! To learn that a rich person is not the one who has the most, but it is the one who needs the least. To learn that it only takes a few seconds to pen up profound wounds in persons we love, and that it takes many years to heal them. To learn to forgive by practicing forgiveness.
To learn that there are persons that love them dearly, but simply do not know how to express or show their feelings. To learn that money can buy everything but happiness. To learn that two people can look at the same thing and see it completely different. To learn that a true friend is someone who knows everything about them .. and likes them anyway. To learn that it is not always enough that they be forgive by others, but that they have to forgive themselves."
I sat there for awhile and enjoyed the moment.

I was in New Orleans last week attending a workshop. The class was worship leadership and I learned a lot. But the biggest thing I learned did not happen in the class room. On Monday night, I took advantage of the free supper being offered in the cafeteria. Due to the one hour break we had between class sessions, there were a ton of people cruising through the chow line. As I sat at the table with a couple of friends, I watched as a guy stood in front of the trash cans and took people's trays. As the time passed, this same gentleman started making the rounds throughout the room, taking trays from the tables and depositing them in the trash. He continued his efforts for well over an hour. In fact, he was working hard enough to work up a noticeable lather. And to top it all off, he was doing it while smiling like it was the greatest day of his life.
I realize that it is not unusual to see someone helping in this way. The fascinating aspect of this story is not the what, but the who. The guy taking people's trash was the President of the Seminary. I repeat, the PRESIDENT of the Seminary! There were over 300 students visiting the campus as a part of the Red Carpet week. With this many folks visiting the campus, you would expect the President to be shaking hands, visiting, and speaking from a stage. Instead, the top leader of my Seminary was handling the trash.
It was incredible to watch people try to refuse his offer, and him respond with, "It's not a problem. Trash is my specialty." I am not a rocket scientist, but I am sure that a guy with multiple degrees that runs a seminary has other specialties.
My first dinner in New Orleans last week was very impacting for me. It was a tremendous reminder of what God has called Christians to do. We are here to serve others. Leaders are expected to humble themselves and serve others. Jesus continually met the needs of others. And when the situation called for it, He did the job no one else wanted to do. I would imagine people would want to wash feet as much as they would want to handle other people's trash.
I have never been more proud to be apart of New Orleans Baptist Theological Seminary than when I saw my President serving others through trash duty.

- Life After the Rescues
- More Background on Life After the Rescues
- Our Other Blogs: What I Learned from Daniel: The Blog
- NEW BLOG: Portsoy Woods
- Jane Becomes a Writer : The Blog
- Rational Preparedness: The Blog
- New Blog: If I Were to be Honest
- BOOK & BLOG: Lawrence DeWolfe Kelsey:The Life of the Explorer
Tuesday, June 5, 2018
Many people who have dogs don't realize that a dog who has a stroke can have a near complete recovery, just weeks after the event. Many years ago, when our children were small, I had an elderly dog, I'd had through childhood, who had a stroke. The vet told us that since I was home each day, and I could put a little work into hand feeding him and holding a water dish up to his face that he didn't want to euthanize him, at least not yet. So, I walked my dog who had terrible balance, about six times a day. I hand fed him and watered him, and gave him the 81 mg. aspirin daily that the vet had ordered. As a nurse, I wasn't at all sure that what we were doing was productive. The vet told me that the dog didn't need to recover enough to drive a car or balance a checkbook, just to be a family member, and to give and receive love, and so we did as we were told. The dog enjoyed what appeared to be a full recovery and died a couple of years later, with his head in my lap. I haven't forgotten this.
A bit more than a week ago when Sally, the golden labrador we have had since the beginning of the 2000s, had a stroke, I was determined to try the same strategies that had worked before. Sally is a larger dog, and our challenge was not food, water, defecation and urination, but getting her to stand up and assume the position for ambulation. We eventually placed a belt under her back end, to help support her weak back legs through the most acute part of this illness. It really did look dire, but then, I remembered to believe. I no longer have the scrappy vet I had in those early years. He has long since retired, but I often remember the things he taught me.
Sally gets her 81 mg. of aspirin. The present day vet thought an antibiotic was a good move too, in the event there was an evolving pneumonia mixed into the stroke, as well. Almost two weeks later, she is getting up by herself, eating normally, using the bathroom normally, and disliking her regular bathing just as much as she ever did.
I know that Sally is an old girl and that she will be called home some day likely this year, but it was worth the work and challenges to see that she recovered from this particular episode. I knew she would have done the same for me. When I come to attend her, she gets up and wags her tail, still. Sometimes, it's wise to believe just a little longer.
Sunday, May 20, 2018
|This is Chocolat. His sister lives to our right, and his friend Walter to our left in the picture.|
Although we'd had alpacas from 1999 on, the first baby alpaca or cria wasn't born to our farm until July 12, 2002, when a ten pound chocolate colored male was born, whom we quite naturally called Chocolat. Chocolate was born to our herd sire Mr Ditto Two and to Queen Isabelle. Alpacas are interesting animals for many reasons one of them being that they are able to throw crias of different colors than themselves, often throwing a color of one of their ancestors. Mr. Ditto Two was jet black, and Queen Isabelle was a brownish rose color with some white markings. The entire herd rejoiced when Chocolat was born.
The following year, Shakria, a sister to Chocolat was born, and she did not establish nursing as well as she should have, and although we were in the process of correcting this, she died suddenly one morning, while we checked upon her. This was the first time that our alpacas thought that we might not always have all the answers. If we couldn't help them keep this young cria alive, then perhaps we weren't really trustworthy. This time, the herd grieved, and there was nothing we could do, other than be attentive to their needs and sympathetic to their issues. We did bring soccer balls to them and for a time, they enjoyed playing was truly resembled a soccer game. This ended when the vet said that one of them would eventually fracture a leg and need to be euthanized. I still remember the day I replaced soccer balls with tether balls.
The year which followed that one brought one more sister for Chocolat. Warrior Princess Camellia was born the following summer. This time we identified her feeding difficulties immediately, and a veterinarian came, taught us to tube feed her until she grew a little larger, and gave her a blood transfusion in the hope of conveying the antibodies she needed. As time passed, Camellia and Chocolat grew. They lived in different pastures, but I think they knew that they were of the same parents.
The year that we sold and built a second farm, their mother, Queen Isabelle was diagnosed with astrocytoma. This may have been the root cause of her having difficulty producing adequate milk for her crias. Queen Isabelle died fairly quickly after her diagnosis, leaving the herd grieving once again.
By 2018, many of the alpacas that were part of the original herd have passed. Alpacas generally are felt to have a fifteen year life span, but at times, we have had individuals live as long as about twenty-three. Since alpacas are herd animals and cannot live as singles, we are faced with difficult decisions as we must keep adding one to keep the basic required number of three. On May the 13th, we face this decision once again. Chocolat, who was fine that morning, was found in the early afternoon, on his side, with labored irregular breathing. He passed shortly after. He leaves a small herd consisting of his sister Camellia in he neighboring paddock, and his friend Walter, a white alpaca in the opposite neighboring paddock. These animals are the last of an era. We are at a loss as to whether to keep adding one more, one more, or not. I hope we do because we made a lifetime commitment to care for this family of animals, a long time ago. Goodbye Chocolat. Thank you for coming.
Friday, April 20, 2018
|Brown Betty is the hen to the left of the waterer.|
Brown Betty was hatched here in an incubator in 2009. She was part of the mass hatching that my husband and I did, for the first time, the year after our youngest son died. We were determined to make this place a farm, just as we believed our youngest son would have. We did everything so carefully that the hatching of fertilized eggs which normally yields a 50% viability, yielded 100%. (I will admit to helping two of the chicks get out of the eggs, when they might not have emerged otherwise.) Both those two I had helped, later died of cardiac anomalies, which leads us to consider whether leaving the weaker chicks in the eggs might be the kinder action to take, but one never really does know.
Brown Betty was not one of the largest hens, but she was not one of the smaller ones either. She was a maternal hen, and I noticed that she was helpful to each set of chicks, even when only one or two were hatched each year, even when we weren't deliberately hatching any. Brown Betty was good to chicks even when they weren't her own.
This year, Brown Betty would already be nine years old. One afternoon, in the past couple of weeks, we went out and fed all the chickens, and she was there at the feeding trough. A short time later, there she was dead at the side of the trough. There were no markings, she was afebrile, no obvious infection, nothing. All I can think is that she collapsed and died of a heart attack. Chickens do have heart attacks sometimes. I am glad that she likely did not suffer and likely died very quickly.
This morning Brown Betty was buried in a nice spot overlooking the poultry family she had known for her long life. Somehow, she had eluded foxes, possums, raccoons, and birds that occasionally plucked a rooster from the yard, and then broke their necks and carried them off as food. She will be missed by chickens and by human beings alike.
Sunday, January 7, 2018
|Great big beautiful Benjamin|
Daniel's beloved golden retriever, Benjamin, died early this morning. Benjamin was adopted through an agency in Fredericksburg, back in 2006, when he was just under two years old and kept wandering from the small yard of a suburban home there. This means that in 2018, Benjamin would have been almost an unheard of fourteen years old for a large breed ! Benjamin was also a little larger than the breed standard. He enjoyed an excellent life here and was loved very much. He received extra love and care after his "boy died". Daniel would have wanted Benjamin, especially, who had a puppy temperament and would mouthe everything, to have received extra loving care.
Benjamin was quite healthy up to about this week. We knew that the extreme cold outside placed him at risk, and so he was coming in from the kennel to the basement at night. We knew last night that something was a little off. He was very tired and wanted to sleep rather than play. Very late last night we noticed Cheyne-Stokes respirations, and I sat with him for a couple of hours. He was peacefully sleeping by four am, and I slept a couple of hours then myself. I arose at five am, to find a newly deceased and still warm dog. Gosh, even at fourteen plus years old, he was still a gorgeous dog. He will be buried here on the farm, the day after tomorrow.
Thank you for trusting us and coming home with me that day, Benjamin. I wouldn't have missed having you here for the world. I know Daniel and Dad will look after you, until we see each other again. I love you, Buddy.
This is an earlier post that discusses the adoption of Benjamin:
You will be missed, you great big cuddly Benjaminal hunk of dog....
Saturday, December 16, 2017
This week the world lost a young woman who was a helper in animal rescue. She loved both dogs and horses.
Please read my article on my other blog:
Saturday, December 2, 2017
Recently, in a rural county not too far from our own, a woman, nearly eighty, fractured a hip and was admitted to the hospital for a repair of that hip. A major fracture at eighty is often repaired by an adept orthopedist, but many persons approaching such an age, die from the hazards of immobility, stroke, reactions to anesthesia, etc. She instructed her children to care for her animals on her forty acre farm, in her absence. Unfortunately, it was a bit more challenging than they had signed on for.
This week, animal control officers in hazmat suits removed 560 animals from her farm to a central location within the county in order to properly care for them. There is also a call out to citizens for a variety of animal supplies for them. Some of the animals at the farm were being housed in overcrowded conditions and had died in advance of the animal control officers arrival to the site. Things of this description happen enough all over the country and probably in the world, often enough that we should discuss it.
Although there are people who are simply "pound junkies", and who repeated acquire more animals than they have the time or funds to care for, this is not always the case. Many times, people raise animals, and then other animals in their area find them, and wish to stay. Sometimes, hunters drop off old dogs at such a place. Sometimes others dump unwanted kittens there. It is often not a case of the person choosing to acquire all of the animals they might have.
There is also another issue in play. I have lived in a rural place since my thirties. I have had a number of animals since then. As I age though, I may not be able to handle the amount of animals I have had when I was younger. We must all begin to develop realistic ideas about the number and type of animals we can consistently care for ourselves. We must also have emergency plans for their care should we be temporarily or even permanently called away from those tasks.
For the sake of avoiding more cases of this type, I wanted to list some suggestions and things we should talk about with the objective of avoiding similar situations.
1. When we are young, we probably can own and care for the largest number of multi-species animals. Many people care for cats, dogs, chickens, ducks and horses. However, as we begin to age, we may not be able to keep up with immunizations, proper bathing, grooming, worming, exercise, maintaining animal structures, and activating an evacuation plan for them in emergencies. Therefore, we should consider, as the animals gradually die, as they reach old age, not replacing that particular species. Already, I no longer seek puppies, choosing instead to accept a mature dog that I, most likely, will outlive.
2. As we age, we should also be careful to select animals whose species do not require large amounts of work. Alpacas are lovely animals, but in a lot of climates, they require monthly injections in order to avoid meningeal worm which can be fatal. They also require regular nail trimming, and they must be sheared annually. This may be easily possible for us at 36, but perhaps not quite so easy for us at 65.
3. With a normal horse lifespan being 25-30 years, middle aged adults can still own them. It would probably be best to acquire adult horses, again so that they do not outlive you. Miniature horses can live as long as 35 years, and with excellent care possibly longer. Therefore a woman of 70 probably shouldn't buy a herd of miniature horses. who still need grooming, worming, immunization and farrier care.
4. Since anyone can break a leg, require an appendectomy, or fracture ribs in a car accident, we all need to have emergency plans for animal care. If you were injured and could not care for your animals for two weeks, who would care for them ? Two of my horses were sold to me when two different owners required cancer treatment and were no longer able to care for their horses. If there a notebook already in existence with each species care typed out, with amounts of food indicated ? There should be. Your approximate routine with your animals should also be indicated in such a notebook.
5. While you are addressing emergency care for your animals, you should also establish a notebook with plans for emergency evacuation of your animals from your farm. Anyone can need to evacuate their animals. Flooding can occur in many places, and we could need to evacuate animals where I am simply due to forest fires.
6. Speak with your rural vet about where your animals could go in emergencies and who could care for them. Once you find cooperative arrangements with others, in emergencies, you should be prepared to perform the same talk for others. Networking with other farmers or with wildlife rehabilitators may also have other positive aspects. I received a number of veterinary handbooks, and farm animal equipment recently from someone who sold their farm. They only knew me because I had agreed to be a temporary home for their horses should a flood or fire emergency trigger their emergency relocation.
7. Speak with your family members as to who will acquire and care for your animals after your own death. This is not a pleasant subject, but its discussion is essential. Your animals deserve something better than starvation, or a quick trip to the pound. This issue also underscores the importance of not acquiring too many animals.
8. If you have elderly parents, then have a conversation with them as to whether they have chosen anyone to care for their animals when they are gone.
It is not my intention to tell anyone when they have aged beyond owning an animal. It is my intention, however, to call your attention to the idea that once your animals live out their lifespans and pass, that species with long lives should probably not be reacquired. It is also my intention to help those who are the recipient of large numbers of strays to realize that they, in tandem with other animal rescuers and local animal authorities, need to find homes beyond your property for them.
I am not yet old, yet I am down to only eight farm dogs of different types for different purposes, three cats (including barn cats and strays), seven guinea fowl, twelve chickens, four ducks, three alpacas, four horses, and two sheep. At one time, when our children were teens, there were far more animals here on this large farm. Now there are fewer and many of them are not only elderly, but they have lived past what is a normal expected lifespan for their species. Within a couple of years, through simple attritian, there will be far fewer. The challenge then will be not to replace very many of them.
This is an unpleasant subject because it requires that we, the "owners" of our animals recognize that we also have finite lifespans, and that some of our animals may outlive us. Still, our animals deserve such plans being made for them.
Tuesday, November 7, 2017
|This isn't Bagel, but this picture reminds me of him when he was a puppy.|
This post first appeared on one of my other blogs:
If I Were to be Honest
In the late nineteen-seventies, right after I got my driver's license, my first official duty while driving alone was to stop at the post office in the next town. While I was there, a man with a shotgun in the back of his truck was giving away free puppies. He had only two left and he said he would shoot them at nightfall, if he were unable to find them homes. I took the male, and another man in the parking lot took the female.
My mother was not happy. She didn't think that anyone would shoot a puppy simply because it hadn't found a home. I was commuting to community college at the time, having graduated from high school early and the last thing she needed with another Northeastern winter coming, was a puppy. No matter how much I insisted that I would take care of it, she knew that at least sometimes, she would be called upon to do something with it, and she wasn't a dog person.
I did my best to take care of the puppy. A year later, I was being sent fifty and eighty miles away to various clinicals in a nursing program, and my mother, and sometimes, my father, pinch hit for me with the puppy, who was now quite tall, and that I had named Bagel. Bagel was light brown with medium length hair, and white markings. He was a hound with a beagly looking head, a mix I'm sure. He was kind, gentle, and an "all over you" kind of dog.
For the most part, Bagel was an "easy keeper". He was a loving friend and didn't cause much trouble, except for the time he jumped through the plate glass window when the neighbor's dog was in heat. I took Bagel to be neutered afterward during spring break. My poor mother was actually charged with having the dog off her five acre lot, thanks to the rather nasty neighbor who had the dog in heat, and my mother paid the small fine.
By 1981, I had married and I was working as a registered nurse, and I lived in a garden apartment about forty miles from my parent's home. I wished I could have Bagel, and our other dog, Moppet, with me, but the place I lived only allowed one tiny dog, or cat, and neither were small. I visited when I could, and made sure they both knew they were were loved. By about 1982, we had bought our very first home. It was in a rural area, on a mountain. The house itself was small, but I could have my dogs there. At first, my mother didn't want me to take the dogs with me, citing that occasional barking probably kept the house safer than not having them there. Eventually though, I visited both dogs one summer day and found that they were both without water for a second time. I took them with me that afternoon.
My starter home had been a seasonal cabin in the Ramapo Mountain Range near a couple of lakes. There were lots of copperhead snakes in the woods, and in the prior summer someone had killed a rattlesnake. However, my own property was small. The dogs didn't have the range they'd had at my parents home. I was really happy to have them both with me, but I also worked a lot and so I felt that I wished that I could have been at home more for them.
The following spring when I got my income tax return, we decided to fence our entire property so that when I was home, the dogs could be free, at least on the property. I hired two young contractors who had their own fencing business. Bagel especially, warmed to the young owner. One day, he brought both dogs, eggs, bacon and sausage in a dish. The young contractor played with Bagel and said to him a couple of times, "I would love to have a dog like you on my forty acre farm." On the last day the contractors were there finishing up my beautiful fencing, the owner asked me if I would consider giving Bagel to him. He said that would always care for him and would feed him excellent food. He would allow him full run of the forty acres he had, which was apparently not far off Route 80 in what was then, very rural Hope, New Jersey. He also said that when the weather was good, he planned to take the dog with him to work. He told me that I could call to see how he was doing and perhaps even visit him if I wanted to. The man clearly loved the dog and the dog certainly adored him. I felt foolish because here I was, fencing my yard for my dogs, and I was agreeing to give my dog to a man in a situation that would have been better for him. My other dog was elderly, and would probably enjoy being an only dog, who could come in to the house more than she had been. So the following day the man came with a new collar, leash, expensive dog food, to see me and to make sure I was alright with his collecting Bagel. I wished the dog good luck, and hugged him. I told the man that if ever he had a problem, to bring the dog back to me.
I was sad after Bagel left, but I wanted him to have everything and I thought that the man he's grown attached to, could do that. My other dog was enjoying the attention.
On a Saturday two weeks later, the fencing contractor drove up to my house. He told me that Bagel had spent every day since trying to find a way to get back to me. A couple of days earlier, the contractor had actually located the dog on Route 80 heading East to try to get back to my home. He said he knew then that the dog would be hit by a car if he kept him and so, he had to return him to me. He let Bagel keep the new collar, leash and the bag of new food. Bagel was thrilled to see me, and licked me profusely. Then, he licked the man, who had tears in his eyes, as if to thank him for returning him.
I had not understood how attached Bagel had been to me. I felt guilty that I had thought that a better living situation would please him more than the love I had given him from puppyhood. I would not make the same mistake again. Even Moppet was happy to see Bagel.
Over the next couple of years we had two babies in that house, a boy and a girl. We had an addition put on the house, but ultimately, we moved to a home in Virginia. I still remember driving the family car down to Virginia with both babies in car seats while my husband drove the largest rented yellow Ryder truck. Everything we owned was in the back of the truck, and the two dogs rode in the cab with him, because it was well air conditioned.
We fenced and built a kennel at our new home for both Bagel and Moppet and the two of them lived until both our babies were school children. Moppet died suddenly as a very old girl indeed. In old age, Bagel had a couple of strokes, and made near full recoveries. Eventually, he had one more, and I brought him with me to pick up the kids from school and then to see the vet. He lay on the front seat with his head on my lap, contentedly, took one more breath, and died.
The next time someone on Craigslist or somewhere else says their circumstances have changed and that "their dog might be happier with someone with more time and a larger yard", please remember Bagel. He spent two weeks each day trying to get back to the original human being who'd rescued him as a six week old puppy. He didn't care where I lived or how much of my time was taken by a job or then by young babies. He didn't care that my house on a mountaintop had only a quarter acre. He didn't care that we'd moved from rural New Jersey to blisteringly hot Virginia. He cared that he was with his human. It is very likely that your dog feels exactly the same about you.

The mother of a woman whose daughter died in police custody said she would "like to bring some closure" to a case that raised concerns among LAPD officials after they viewed in-car video of the 35-year-old mother's arrest.
"It's a horrible loss," Sandra Thomas told NBC4. "It broke my family chain. God called us one by one. Maybe our chain will reunite again."
Alesia Thomas died July 22 after she was arrested on suspicion of child endangerment at a residence in which she lived with her two children, ages 3 and 12. Officers went to the home after Thomas dropped them off at the LAPD's Southeast Division station, according to police.
It was not immediately clear how much of the arrest was captured on the responding officers' in-car camera, but the video is part of the LAPD's use-of-force and misconduct investigations into Thomas' death. Commander Andrew Smith told NBC4 that LAPD officials "saw some things on that video that were a concern to them."
"Some of the language that was used, the use of force that was used, those were things that were concerns," Smith said, adding that four officers and a supervisor responded to the home.
Thomas' mother has hired an attorney, who told NBC4 he would like to view the video. Smith did not say whether the video would be released.
"We need to see the video," said attorney Sumit Raghuvanshi. "We need to move forward with the facts. We need to question the officers. We need to see why this poor woman died in a police car without getting aid."
The officers called paramedics to the 9000 block of South Broadway immediately after they noticed Thomas was not breathing in the back of the squad car, Smith said.
Officers responded to the home after Thomas' two children, carrying backpacks with clothes, entered the Southeast Division station at about 2 a.m. July 22. The officer at the desk asked why they were at the station.
"They informed him that their mother didn't want them any more and dropped them off in front of the police station," Smith said.
The children were taken to a fast-food restaurant before they were transferred to Department of Children and Family Services custody. They now live with Sandra Thomas.
Officers responded to the mother's South Broadway residence, where they were involved in a struggle with Thomas as they attempted to take her into custody, according to police.
"They tried to get her in the back of the police car," Smith said. "They had some difficulty doing that. At least one use-of-force occurred inside the premises, and then they had some difficulty getting her inside of the police car."
Thomas stopped breathing in the back of the squad car, according to police. She was transported to a hospital, where she was pronounced dead.
The police chief was informed of the woman's death July 22, and the chief and senior LAPD staff were briefed on the altercation within 72 hours, Smith said.
"Those (video) images were discussed at our 72-hour briefing and an investigation was launched by our internal affairs group," Smith said.
The case now involves two separate investigations -- a categorical use-of-force investigation, conducted by the LAPD Force Investigation Division, and the midconduct investigation by the LAPD Internal Affairs Group.
The investigations are likely to require more than one month to complete.
The four officers and supervisor involved in the arrest have been assigned to administrative duties at the police station.

My boyfriend James and I recently moved down south, and we heard all about the giant southern storms, then people stock up on hurricane supplies… My man and I did not do any of this; We figured that southern people are babies… They always act as if their Winters are cold or their Summers are so hot. The Winters are mild and the southern heat rocks. Why would the storms be any different? We ended up totally unprepared for the dire amounts of water. The power was knocked out for over a week. We had no emergency bottled water or food that did not spoil, then also, since there was no power, we also had no air conditioner. Most homes have generators that they hook up their A/C unit to. This way nobody has to go without cooling during the hottest time of the year. My man and I had no generator. Every single one of us then tried to get water and a generator. The stores were old sold out since people before the storm and during purchased those items. We had to check into a hotel for several days during the power outage. It was high-priced and a horrible experience. I suppose going without cooling was the worst. We were able to get water and food in other locations. Not having any sort of AC, unless the two of us were at the hotel, was the worst. The first thing we did after the storm season was get a generator. Next time the hurricane season comes around, we both will have our generator locked and loaded. Every one of us need A/C at all times.

Mark Wood never forgot the hand-written letter he received from Jerry Conner in 2004 when Wood was coaching at Glendale Cactus.
"I was a 'young, didn't know anything' guy," Wood said. "We had to go against his teams. He had a fast-break, pressing style team.
"After I shut it down, I got a hand-written letter from Jerry Conner. It was encouraging. It was kind of life-changing. I decided at that moment, if I ever got back into it, I would encourage other coaches.
"It made me feel great."
Wood, now leading Peoria Liberty's boys basketball program, paid Conner back by offering him a position on his staff.
Conner, who was told by Phoenix Horizon's administration late last season that it was not going to renew his coaching contract, has accepted Wood's invitation.
Liberty basketball announced Conner as its offense coach on social media on Tuesday.
"Mark and I have been friends for a number of years and I have always respected his program greatly," Conner said. "We have a lot of the same philosophies, especially as regards to up-tempo basketball. I am very much looking forward to working with him."
Wood said he was sickened by the way Horizon treated Conner last season. It was Conner's sixth season leading the Huskies, who were eliminated by top 5A seed Goodyear Millennium in the round of 16 in the state tournament.
Conner put Phoenix Shadow Mountain on the map, starting the program in 1974 and leading the Matadors to state championships in 1996 and 2000. The gym was named after him.
Conner was inducted into the Arizona High School Athletics Hall of Fame in 2002.
"He acted as a mentor to me," Wood said. "I told him, 'If you are ever not a head coach, I hope you can join us.' Horizon doing him the way they did him, it sickened me that a guy can do all he did and not walk away on his own terms.
"I offered my condolences and shared my disgust of the injustice. I said, 'I don't expect you to make a decision, but we always have a home here for you.' He said, 'Give me some time to think about it.' I said, 'You can have the offense and I'll take the defense, and let's have some fun.' "
Support local journalism: Subscribe to azcentral.com today

Deciding that I would probably be up and awake anyway, I opted to do the floating market, which was a great experience.
Along a section of the Mekong Delta, a floating market operates selling to the locals a selection of food for personal use and wholesale.
Boats pull up to the side of you, hook on to your boat and the selling begins. We were visited by a boat selling coffee and cold drinks and also a man selling pineapple, which we got to try as part of the trip.
Returning back to the coach, we set off for Ho Chi Minh City which involved a 5 hr bus journey. Arriving into Ho Chi Minh City, we were hit with the intense traffic of scooters! They were absolutely everywhere, driving on the roads, on the pavements and even out of buildings and shops.
Once we checked into our hotel, we dropped our bags off, freshened up and then headed out for an orientation walk across the city.
The hotel was fairy nice, I had a nice double bed and it all looked nice and clean. For lunch we headed for a restaurant famous for Pho and being visited by Bill Clinton when he was president. I went for the chicken pho this time, but I didn’t enjoy this one as much as we the one I had the day before.
After lunch we were then shown where the markets were and also the street food markets, which we would visit again later, then continued to the Notre Dame Cathedral, as Vietnam was occupied by the French until the 1950s, so there is quite a bit of French influence in their building design.
We then headed to the War Remnants Museum, to learn a bit more about the Vietnamese War before we visited the Cu Chi Tunnels the next day. The museum exhibits were obviously fairly biased but you got an idea as to what it was about and the effects on the Vietnamese people. I didn’t take any pics whilst inside the museum as it kinda felt weird.
The majority of the museum was picture based with many photographs on show, taken mainly by American photographers, and the stories that were told alongside were just as harrowing as the pictures.
It has definitely made we want to find out more about the Vietnam War from both sides of the fence. I found the museum a bit more intense than the Killing fields, but I think that was due to visuals and that I was left to my own devices.
Heading back to the hotel, I had a very much needed shower, which felt so good! Before long we were on the move again, headed towards the night and street food markets. Unfortunately, today wasn’t a great food day as I found mine quite bland and I don’t think the rest of the group were that impressed with their meals either.
After eating, we did a bit of shopping, where I purchased a couple of pairs of loose trousers as the ones I brought from Siem Reap ripped a few days before! Once we were all shopped out, we made our way back to the hotel using our little map. Map reading is definitely not one of my strong points and what should’ve taken us 10 minutes took us 30 after a few wrong turns. Eventually we found our hotel and headed straight for bed, and I was very much looking forward to a good nights sleep.
P.s don’t forget to follow me using the #lennystripofalifetime

Meaghan and Josh were married at the most adorable church in Rye. The chapel by the sea... it even has an adorable name! It was a beautiful ceremony and at the end they happily walked down the aisle to the sound of church bells. There were buses waiting to take everyone to the Wentworth Country Club. It was another beautiful day in September and as the day went on it got even better. The Wentworth has some beautiful backdrops, so it was a lot of fun to take their portraits. After the photos were done, the couple was announced right onto the dance floor, under the tent, for their first dance. Meaghan had such a fun dress on and when she twirled the dress spun around! I don't think this couple ever left the dance floor! They were surrounded by their closest friends and family for a night of fun! Oh, and the best part was the make your own sundaes! What a hit this was! There was an array of topping and 3 different flavors to choose from. I loved watching everyone's face light up as they decided what to use for toppings. I wish this couple so much love and luck in life! Cheers to the happy couple!

WOMEN CHARACTERS OF THE BIBLE (3) - SARAH
Under divine inspiration King Solomon stated that the price or worth of a virtuous woman is far above jewels, and that her husband safely trusts in her. “She openeth her mouth with wisdom (God’s wisdom), and in her tongue is the law of kindness.” – Proverbs 31:10-11, 26
Wisdom is an attribute that goes not without knowledge. Undoubtedly, lack of spiritual knowledge is a major factor responsible for the pit falls or errors into which not a few women have fallen. The female Christians of today have much to learn from the experiences and lives of godly women of old in the Holy Bible for their spiritual development in the knowledge of salvation and in holiness.
In order therefore to excite the interest of women in particular in the study of the Scriptures and help their faith in the Lord we are publishing a series of sermons written in a plain language on some women characters of the Bible beginning with Sarah the wife of faithful Abraham.
WHO WAS SARAH?
Sarah was the wife of Abraham. She was formerly known as Sarai but when God promised to bless her and make her “a mother of nations”, He changed her name to Sarah, which means a “princess”. – Genesis 17:15,16
She was a godly woman who proved to be a very good example for all other women. Sarah was the mother of the Jewish nation. As a wife she was obedient and submissive to her husband. When Abraham went with her to Egypt because of hunger, he feared that Pharaoh might kill him and take her to wife being a good-looking woman. So he advised Sarah beforehand that she should say that he was her brother so that the Egyptians might not kill him. Truly, as soon as they arrived in Egypt the fame of Sarah’s beauty reached Pharaoh and she was taken to his house with intent to marry her. God was angry and He punished Pharaoh and his household with plagues, and consequently, Sarah was returned untouched or undefiled and without blemish to Abraham, her husband. Read Genesis 12:10-20
A similar incident happened again when Abraham and Sarah went to Gerar according to Genesis 20:1-18. For the fact that Sarah was a fair woman Abimelech, king of Gerar, sent and took her. But when he had not gone near her or demanded sexual intercourse of her, God warned him in a dream that he would die because the woman he had taken was another man’s wife.
King Abimelech pleaded innocence and explained that Abraham had told him she was his sister and she confirmed that he (Abraham) was her brother. The king said he had acted with integrity. God agreed that he did it with a clear conscience but added: “I also withheld thee from sinning against me: therefore suffered I thee not to touch her.” He warned him to send the woman back to her husband who, being prophet, would intercede for him so that he might not die.
So the king rose early in the morning and told his servants the whole story in regard to God’s reaction and they were afraid. He also called Abraham and queried as to why he treated him so. Abraham then declared: “…Because I thought, Surely the fear of God is not in this place; and they will slay me for my wife’s sake. And yet indeed she is my sister; she is the daughter of my father, but not the daughter of my mother; and she became my wife.” – Verses11, 12
The discretion of Abraham made him not to die before his time and God helped him. Yes, the Bible says, “Discretion shall preserve thee.” (Proverbs 2:10, 11) Again it should be appreciated that what Abraham said was true. Sarah was truly his sister; and brothers do marry their sisters in those days when God had not, by law, forbidden incest. The law against such marriages was later enacted by God at the time of Moses the prophet, according to Leviticus chapter 18.
Sarah was restored pure to her husband. There is no doubt that because the ways of Abraham and Sarah were pleasing to God, He protected her from being corrupted.
These events show that Sarah was a woman who feared God and who was faithful and loyal to her husband. She was not attracted by the riches and worldly glories of the Pharaoh of Egypt or King Abimelech of Gerar to forsake her husband.
St. Peter admonished Christian women to be chaste and to serve God with fear and meekness. He added that it was so the holy women of old trusted in God and subjected themselves to their own husbands. “Even as Sarah obeyed Abraham, calling him lord: whose daughters ye (women) are, as long as ye do well…” –1 Peter 3:1-6
When Sarah saw that she had no child she suggested to her husband to marry her own handmaid by name, Hagar, and said that it might be they would have children through her. Abraham agreed and married Hagar the Egyptian girl (Genesis 16:1-3) This shows that Sarah had a godly mind for her husband and was not selfish as some women are.
When Hagar was conceived she became proud and she despised Sarah her mistress. Sarah did not take the law into her hands to deal hard with her. She complained to her husband and got his permission before she dealt hard with Hagar. Instead of Hagar to humble herself to Sarah she ran away but the angel of God met her by a spring of water in the wilderness on the way to Shur and said to her: “Return to thy mistress, and submit thyself under her hands.” (Genesis 16:4-9) This shows that Sarah was an orderly women who had high regard for her husband and that her action against Hagar was approved of God.
Sarah was a good housewife and was hospitable. When the angels of God visited Abraham at the time they were to go and destroy Sodom and Gomorrah because of their heinous sins she played her part actively in entertaining them. There again God repeated His promise through the angels to bless Sarah with child in her old age. – Genesis 18:1-15
Sarah was a woman who had faith of God. Concerning her it is written: “Through faith also Sara herself received strength to conceive seed, and was delivered of a child when she was past age, because she judged him faithful who had promised…” – Hebrews 11:11, 12
Sarah was 90 years old when she gave birth to Isaac: her only child who was a child of promise. (Genesis 17:15-22, 18:9-15, 21:1-7) Although she was barren until her old age, she was patient, kind and loving and remained faithful to her husband. She died at the age of 127 years. Many Christian women of today learn to be like Sarah in faith, purity, patience and obedience.

I Samuel 27
1. And David said in his heart, “Now I shall perish someday by the hand of Saul. There is nothing better for me than that I should speedily escape to the land of the Philistines; and Saul will despair of me, to seek me anymore in any part of Israel. So I shall escape out of his hand.”
David now realizes that no appeal to God or conscience will turn Saul from his dogged pursuit of David to kill him, and no word from Saul to the contrary is worth anything at all. It seems that he starts to dwell on this, and it looms large in his mind to the point where he fears in his heart. Remember that the Hebrew word “heart” means not just the emotions, but the inner being. It seems with his whole being he starts to fear and lose his confidence in the helping hand of God that was with him. He focuses on his fears, rather than on the LORD, Who has helped him up until now. The result is that he does not think he can continue to escape from Saul forever, and so he concludes that one of these days Saul will catch him and kill him. Well, the only reason that had not happened already was because the hand of God was with David. Yet where did David think that hand would go in the future? David forgot here his confidence and trust.
David realizes that it is not good for him to leave the land of Israel, the land which the LORD gave His people. Yet David decides that there is nothing better for him than to do this. The only course he can see open to him is to flee into the land of the Philistines, and he thinks he should do this speedily. Notice the haste David acts with here. If he had just slowed down and remembered the LORD and consulted Him regarding this matter, perhaps he would not have done what he did. Yet David was acting in haste, and in haste he forgot to trust.
David was sure that if he left Israel, Saul would despair of being able to catch him. As long as he was no longer in Israel, Saul would have no more reason to seek for him there. To demand his return from the Philistines would be to invite war with them, and David does not believe Saul will do this. Thus, he decides that this is the way to escape from his power. Yet we would point out that all through this David was acting out of his fears, and not because he had any word from the LORD regarding this.
2. Then David arose and went over with the six hundred men who were with him to Achish the son of Maoch, king of Gath.
So David goes into action. He takes his six hundred men who were with him and flees to Achish, the son of Maoth, King of Gath. Achish means “I Will Terrify,” or else “Only a Man.” Maoth means “Oppression,” certainly a less than promising name for a king!
Remember that David had fled to him once before back in chapter 21. When he came to Achish that time, Achish wanted to kill him, and David had to pretend to be insane before him in order to escape with his life. We might wonder, then, why David would think it would be safe for him to return to Achish now? We might say several things regarding this. First of all, David has an army with him this time, and is not simply a lone fugitive. Achish might demand the execution of one man, but it is another thing to attack six hundred armed men. Also, when David came the first time, his flight from Saul had just happened, so no one in Israel or Philistia really knew that David was a fugitive. By now, though, it is well known to all how he has been hounded by Saul, and so as an enemy of Saul Achish is likely to be much more willing to take him in. In fact, this is exactly what Achish did.
Notice once again, though, that David did not consult Jehovah before doing any of this! This was David’s plan from beginning to end, and we might well say that this is not what Jehovah would have told David to do if he had asked.
3. So David dwelt with Achish at Gath, he and his men, each man with his household, and David with his two wives, Ahinoam the Jezreelitess, and Abigail the Carmelitess, Nabal’s widow.
The result is that David, his men, and their families all dwell with Achish at Gath. This was one of the five royal cities of the Philistines, so it was large and wealthy and able to take in such a large company. To dwell in such a place must have seemed a relief to David and his men after their long exile and dwelling in the wilderness and in caves. Yet this plan was not carried out by Yahweh’s instructions, and the place of security would prove to bring with it many troubles of its own, as we will see.
We are reminded that David too had a family with him, which consisted of Ahinoam the Jezreelitess and Abigail the Carmelitess, Nabal’s widow. The Hebrew reads “Nabal’s woman” or “Nabal’s wife,” and not “Nabal’s widow,” as the New King James has it. Bullinger in the Companion Bible speaks of this as the figure of speech Ampliatio, or Adjournment, wherein an old name is used after the reason for it has passed away. We might use the same figure if we would speak of “General George Washington” even though he is dead and no longer a general, or “President George Washington,” and so forth. Of course, we know just what the Bible means here, and so it is silly to act like this is a discrepancy, as some would suggest. Of course David had not stolen another man’s wife while he was still alive! We know Nabal was dead when David took his widow to be his wife. The figure of speech is easy enough to figure out here even without the help of the Companion Bible.
4. And it was told Saul that David had fled to Gath; so he sought him no more.
Saul’s spies inform him of this move by David. Just as David thought would happen, when Saul hears that David has fled to Gath, he stops chasing him and trying to capture him. So David’s plan works, and at first it seems like a good idea. We will see the trouble it causes David coming up, however.
5. Then David said to Achish, “If I have now found favor in your eyes, let them give me a place in some town in the country, that I may dwell there. For why should your servant dwell in the royal city with you?”
In spite of his success, David does not seem satisfied with this arrangement. He was now living among the Philistines, idolaters who worshipped false gods. This was not a good thing, and made him and his men feel distant from the LORD, as he had suggested would happen when he brought his complaint against Saul in I Samuel 26:19. This burden of living with the Philistines was not something David had considered, it seems, in his haste to flee from Saul to Philistia. Yet now he finds himself in this unhappy situation, and it seems it bothers him. How can he now get out of it?
Perhaps this was the real motivation behind David’s appeal to Achish here. He requests of him to be granted some country town to dwell in. There, he will have the freedom to order his own affairs away from the king’s eyes, and to honor the LORD as he sees fit. He pretends, though, that his reason is that he is not worthy of such hospitality as to live with the king in the royal city. We cannot deny the truth that it is difficult for two kings to live together in one city.
6. So Achish gave him Ziklag that day. Therefore Ziklag has belonged to the kings of Judah to this day.
Achish listens to David’s request, and probably cannot deny that his plan is a good one. The result is that Achish granted Ziklag to David. Ziklag means “Winding.” It was a town east of Gath and not too far from the border of Judah. Thus, even when David returned to Israel and became king there, this town was not lost to him. It belonged to the kings of Judah from then until this book was written down, probably either by Nathan or Gad.
(Yet it is worth noting that sometimes it appears that God would inspire one of His prophets to add a footnote like this here and there in various books of the Bible even long after the original author of the book was dead. Of course, God was the real author of the Bible, and could do this if He wished. We might compare this to George Lucas going back and tinkering with his Star Wars movie, adding little parts here and changing parts there decades after the movie first came out. He is the creator of the movie, and can do that if he wishes. The same is true of God, as long as He has inspired men to work through and wishes to do so. Therefore it could sometimes be that little notes like this are written by a different inspired author than the original one. As long as the later prophet too was inspired, this does nothing to change the integrity of Scripture or to cast doubt on Its accuracy.)
7. Now the time that David dwelt in the country of the Philistines was one full year and four months.
We learn here the full extent of time that David was in exile in the country of Palestine until his return to the land of Israel. David lives in Philistia one full year and four months. This is just an overview, and we will read a much more detailed account of that time in the following verses and chapters.
8. And David and his men went up and raided the Geshurites, the Girzites, and the Amalekites. For those nations were the inhabitants of the land from of old, as you go to Shur, even as far as the land of Egypt.
David was a man of action, however, and he and his men did not just sit in Ziklag. He was still zealous for his land and his people, and so he uses the time to invade the territory of some of the original Canaanite inhabitants of the land. The words “from of old” is from olam in Hebrew, and means they were from far back in flowing time or perpetually the inhabitants of the land from long before Israel came there. These were people that Jehovah had commanded Israel to destroy when they took over the land, but they have failed to do it so far. Geshurites comes from a word meaning “Proud Beholder.” Gizrites means “A Piece,” and probably refers to a city. Amalekites means “People of Lapping.” These were the nations he destroyed. The Amalekites especially were Yahweh’s enemies. He had promised to destroy them himself in Exodus 17:14-16.
14. Then the LORD said to Moses, “Write this for a memorial in the book and recount it in the hearing of Joshua, that I will utterly blot out the remembrance of Amalek from under heaven.” 15. And Moses built an altar and called its name, The-LORD-Is-My-Banner; 16. for he said, “Because the LORD has sworn: the LORD will have war with Amalek from generation to generation.”
Saul had been tasked with destroying some of them in I Samuel 15. He had failed to fulfill his mission, though he had mostly destroyed them. Yet that was just one tribe of Amalekites, and some of them remained, as is clear here from the fact that David went up and raided them.
9. Whenever David attacked the land, he left neither man nor woman alive, but took away the sheep, the oxen, the donkeys, the camels, and the apparel, and returned and came to Achish.
Whenever David attacked these places and the enemies of the land of Israel, his policy was to slaughter every inhabitant. He left neither man nor woman of these places alive. This seems very harsh to us. Yet there are several things we must remember. One is that these nations were at war with Israel. As soon as David took the throne, it would be his job to deal with such enemies. David did not consider it right to wait until then, but was working for Israel’s good even now. Secondly, we must realize that these people probably were representatives of the Canaanites, the nations the LORD had commanded Israel to destroy out of the land. We read of this command in Deuteronomy 20:16-18.
16. “But of the cities of these peoples which the LORD your God gives you as an inheritance, you shall let nothing that breathes remain alive, 17. but you shall utterly destroy them: the Hittite and the Amorite and the Canaanite and the Perizzite and the Hivite and the Jebusite, just as the LORD your God has commanded you, 18. lest they teach you to do according to all their abominations which they have done for their gods, and you sin against the LORD your God.
For David to wipe such peoples out was therefore according to the commandment of God. These nations were extremely wicked, and the LORD had wanted Israel to wipe them out so that they would not learn their wicked ways from them. Israel’s failure to do so had led to many of their problems, and still did so even hundreds of years later in David’s day. Thus we cannot really criticize him for carrying out such a bloody purge of these peoples. This was in fact what the LORD had commanded His people to do.
Though David kept none of the people of these places alive, he did take the spoil, such as the sheep, oxen, donkeys, camels, and clothing. He then comes back to King Achish with all this spoil he has taken, no doubt sharing some of the spoil with the king to help win his favor.
10. Then Achish would say, “Where have you made a raid today?” And David would say, “Against the southern area of Judah, or against the southern area of the Jerahmeelites, or against the southern area of the Kenites.”
When David would do this, King Achish would see all the spoil and ask where David made the raid that won him this wealth. David would then lie to Achish, and claim he got this spoil attacking Israel some place in the south near Philistia. He might say he had attacked the southern area of Judah. Judah means “Praised,” and was the name of David’s tribe. He might say that he had attacked the southern area of the Jerahmeelites. Jerahmeel means “Whom God Loves” or “Whom God Pities.” Jerahmeel was a great-grandson of Judah, so this was again part of the territory of David’s own tribe. Or again David might say that he had attacked the southern area of the Kenites. Kenites means “Smiths.” These people were not Israelites or part of the tribe of Judah, but rather were the tribe Moses’ father-in-law was from. They had largely been a wandering people, much like the gypsies in our day. It seems these particular Kenites had thrown in their lot with Israel back at the time of Moses. Ever since their alliance with Moses they were allies of Israel, and lived among them and to the south, where David was claiming he was attacking.
11. David would save neither man nor woman alive, to bring news to Gath, saying, “Lest they should inform on us, saying, ‘Thus David did.’” And thus was his behavior all the time he dwelt in the country of the Philistines.
Because David had slaughtered everyone in the raid, leaving neither man nor woman alive, no one remained of any of the Canaanite peoples he was attacking to come to Gath and to inform Achish that David was lying. The Philistines were already at war with Israel, so if David was making raids against Israel, that could not hurt the Philistines in any way. Yet it seems doubtful that the Philistines were at war with the Geshurites, the Girzites, and the Amalekites. The Philistines were not Canaanites, yet they were descendants of Ham, and so were more closely related to these nations than they were to the Israelites, who were descendants of Shem. So these were not places Achish would necessarily want David to attack. Thus David lies to Achish about what he is actually doing. No doubt David fears that Achish will be angry if he thinks that David is stirring up the Canaanites against him.
12. So Achish believed David, saying, “He has made his people Israel utterly abhor him; therefore he will be my servant forever.”
Achish believes David’s report. The ungodly Philistine believes the word of the Godly Israelite David. Sad that David’s word was not actually good! Yet because Achish believes David, he is convinced that David by attacking his own people will have made himself utterly abhorrent to them. In other words, he thinks that David has burned his bridges behind him, and that by attacking his own people he has allied himself with the Philistines permanently, and will never be able to go back. Thus David will now be his servant forever. This might well have been right, if David had actually been attacking his own people. Of course, the truth is that he was not doing that, but Achish was not aware of David’s falsehood.
The word “forever” here is a translation of the Hebrew word olam. The basic meaning of this word is “that which flows,” as does a river. Achish knew neither he nor David would live forever, so that is not what he meant here. Rather, he meant that David would serve him in an outflowing way, from this time and outflowingly. A good translation would be that Achish thought David would now serve him perpetually.

Now that lectures are over, I can spend early evening on Friday at the Gym, followed by a few downtown beers. People are normally very polite in the gym, partly because when you see the amount of weight some of the people can lift and it makes you think that may be able to hit hard.
(This is probably not true, but strength is always good to have).
I drank my after gym beer and walked t the bus stop. Outside the walkabout bar, the door staff had stopped a drunk guy from going into the pub. He was trying to get the bouncer to shake his hand, the bouncer said "no mate." The drunk guy through a very slow haymaker at the bouncer, but stopped it about 6 inches away. I walked on by. The guy was clearly all talk and most of the talk was from the ale.

BEHIND THE GLITZ AND GLAMOUR: A SHOWGIRL'S STORY
By: CBS4 News, firstname.lastname@example.org
She's a casino show girl who appears to have won the beauty jackpot. However, appearances can be deceiving. We see her winning smile, but the truth is, her life itself was once a gamble, and the odds were not pretty. She's a show girl at Jumer's Casino.
"It is fun. It's like you're on the red carpet," said Lisa Lynn Eveleth.
And she's a champion fitness model.
Lisa said, "For me to get up on stage in a little piece of material didn't seem like anything I would do."
But Lisa is still fighting a battle.
"Sometimes I'm fearful, absolutely. I wouldn't be human if I wasn't," said Lisa.
It began over 20 years ago. Lisa's Mother, Marcia Lee said, "It was when she was about 16-years-old and all of a sudden her nose started bleeding, and bleeding, and bleeding where it was out of control and we had to take her to the emergency room."
Bleeding internally, her mom said, doctors removed Lisa's spleen. She seemed OK, until years later in college.
"I was chronically fatigued all the time, I mean my mouth was extremely raw, the roof of it, my gums, my lips were getting bloody", said Lisa.
She was teaching fitness classes and working toward her Master's Degree.
Lisa said, "I'd wake up with a swollen lip or I'd wake up with a swollen eye shut. I'd wake up with you know a mound on my elbow."
Clearly, something was wrong. She went to her school health center for help.
Lisa said, "They had diagnosed me with Mono and sent me on my way."
Becoming sicker, and sicker, she was fighting a foe, no one could find, until another trip to the emergency room.
"The ER docs immediately suspected Lupus", she said.
It's a condition with no cure.
Lisa said, "Lupus is an overactive immune system and your body creates antibodies against itself, so almost as if you're allergic to yourself." A diagnosis that cut like a dagger.
"It's chronic, this is my life, this is my new life, ya know so that was tough, ya know tough for me to accept. "
The medicines they tried didn't work. She was out of school, and in a wheelchair.
"I mean my legs were about this big and mean my muscle mass was gone."
She was also having seizures: in her mid–twenties and fading fast, doctors upped the ante.
"So the chemotherapy was to try to suppress the immune system. blast it to sort of reboot itself, start over, start fresh."
"She went down to 72 pounds. She lost all her hair. She was in bad shape," said her Mom.
"I mean there was definitely times I didn't want to be here anymore. I have to admit, I mean I prayed to die, ya know," said Lisa.
"She was in ICU about 4 weeks and we really thought she was going to die at that time," said Lisa's Mom.
It was the mid 90's, and there was finally a breakthrough: she responded well to the chemo, and slowly regained strength. And while the last few years have been good, the Lupus is not gone.
"I do monthly intravenous treatments to calm the immune system down," said Lisa. That, combined with other medicines, is working well. "What I went through, it doesn't define me," said Lisa.
Because over time, Lisa has taken back her life. Her Mom said, "I'm proud of her...I'm amazed actually."
Now a show girl, in sequins and a feathery headdress. "I mean you just feel like a celebrity," said Lisa.
And a champion fitness model.
"I never thought I would ever be able to show my muscle mass, let alone get to that point from where I was."
Because where she was, "Never give up," said Lisa.
And where she is are 2 very different places. Lisa spends a lot of her time these days creating awareness about lupus. As one part of that, she's helping put together a 5k Lupus Run for next May. Also, she's been married for 15 years, we've included her husband's thoughts, just click here and here.

A thug who threatened five witnesses and attacked one of them has been jailed.
Teesside’s most senior judge told Daniel Greatrex, 24, from Redcar, that the message must go out that people who intimidate witnesses will receive a prison sentence.
Prosecutor Oliver Thorne told Teesside Crown Court that a neighbour of Greatrex’s made a complaint to police about his anti-social behaviour.
Three weeks later the man and his wife were in a shop on Redcar High Street when Greatrex approached them and stuck his face to within six inches of the husband’s saying in a slurred manner “Why have you made a statement against me ?
“That’s the biggest mistake you have ever made making a statement against me. “
The man told Greatrex that he had seen him kicking someone’s door and he had reported it to the police, and Greatrex responded: “No-one makes a statement against me.”
The householder also gave a statement to police, and a few days later he was walking home with his girlfriend when Greatrex drove up in his car and he got out leaving the engine running.
Greatrex accused him of being a “grass” and grabbed hold of the man by his collar and headbutted him to the left eye.
Mr Thorne said Greatrex got back into his car threatening “If you phone the police it will be worse” and threatened to “break his jaw”.
Greatrex was on police bail after the first incident on December 4.
He had eight previous convictions for nine offences including possession of a weapon that fired gas, affray and Public Order matters. He had been given a conditional discharge last year for criminal damage.
Mr Thorne said that each of the five people involved had given Victim Impact statements and they had made requests for a restraining order on Greatrex.
Andrew White, defending, said that Greatrex had been in custody since December and he wished to offer apologies to the witnesses.
Mr White added: “This has been his first period in custody and he tells me he is absolutely determined it will also be his last.
“It has had a huge impact on him, it has made him realise what a wretched existence it is in Holme House.”
The judge told Greatrex that the maximum penalty for witness intimidation was five years imprisonment, and it was most serious when an assault was involved.
Greatrex, of Wilton Avenue, Redcar, was jailed for 21 months after he pleaded guilty to two offences of intimidating witnesses, and he was also given restraining orders banning contact with the five witnesses for five years or face a five years jail sentence.

Ok I rarely come on here anymore, just bought a 2005 Pontiac GTO a few months ago so I've focused my attention and mod money on that. Luckily I managed to keep the taco as my daily. Well when I bought the car it was about the cleanest car I'd ever seen, the girl I bought it from was a car nut and Zaino user. This got me started on detailing. So I decided to learn how to use a clay bar and decided the truck was a better test subject as it had never been clayed. Then I applied zaino z-aio and z-5 to it. I did the front on one day and was forced to wait a week on the rest. Here's how the front came out.
I've since learned quite a bit and have ordered just about every exterior item needed from Adam's Polishes including the Porter Cable 7424 kit cause doing that by hand is a bitch. Anyways I need to get back to searching for a replacement tailgate and rear bumper, trying to get one in SB.

Liberal Democrats deputy leader Jo Swinson has revealed she was nearly raped by a friend at university.
The incident happened in the 1990s when the MP was a student at the London School of Economics.Moped rider hit so hard with hammer that it embedded in his helmet during robbery
Her attacker only stopped when she told him he was about to rape her, she told the Mail on Sunday.
‘I was really under threat. I was physically pushing him away and saying, “I do not want to do it.”,’ she said.
‘I could hardly believe that this guy, who was a nice guy with whom I got on well, was not responding to me saying “No” and trying to push him off.’
She said using the ‘R’ word may have helped her avoid being sexually assaulted by the friend who she did not name.
Ms Swinson added: ‘At the time it was a desperate attempt to guarantee my safety. The words seemed to finally bring him to his senses and he stopped.’
The MP for East Dunbartonshire said the incident showed her how easily a ‘nice young man’ could commit rape even without realising.
Ms Swinson, who talks about her oredeal in her new book Equal Power, has backed a Government campaign to combat university ‘rape culture’.
She wrote on Twitter: ‘Anyone shocked by my experience needs to understand that it’s not unusual.
‘That is precisely my point. 40% teenage girls have been pressured into sex.
‘Good quality education on consent is essential. Urgently needs improved in schools, colleges&universities.’

He uploaded this photo of a heart-shaoed atoll for Valentine's Day. He explains: "This is an atoll in the Pacific Ocean located about 1,000 km North-East of the Solomon Islands. I had been looking for quite some time for something heart shaped to post on Valentine’s day, but could never find anything, no matter how hard I looked. The other day I was doing physical exercise on our ARED equipment, which is located just below the cupola, and during a rest period between two sets of an exercise I looked up and saw this atoll passing by. I quickly grabbed the camera and snapped a few pictures; there was nothing else around it, just water and clouds. I thought it was ironic; I looked for it very hard and could not find it. He had to find me. Just like love…"
Picture: @astro_paolo (Paolo Nespoli) / NASA/ESA

Premier Wen Jiabao went online to chat with Netizens for the third time in three years. Regarding the rising grocery price, Wen told a story on a tour in Zhejiang Province last year. At a luncheonette attached to a supermarket, Wen saw a mom and a child who bought only one meal. The child was eating, and the mom was watching the child eating on the saide. Wen asked the woman how many children did she have. The woman started crying. She said this was the only child she had. She said her husband just passed away because of cancer. She only hoped she could keep the child with her in the city she was working as a migrate worker. Local officials accompanying Wen granted the child permission to attend school.
China still has hope, as long as someone higher up who is still of seeing and feeling the suffering of people.

Two weekends ago, the Memphis International Airport took down artwork by gay artist Tommy Kha that had been on display since January.
The pieces had been removed after complaints trickled in over the art, which shows Kha in an Elvis Presley costume and a Presley cutout.
Kha took to Instagram to thank his supporters in a post that explained the situation.
"After some disturbing complaints about my work, it was decided, and without my knowledge, the pictures were removed. I'm the only artist they have removed," Kha wrote in the original post. "I'm quite disappointed as it was one of many artworks selected to hang in the new concourse--an honor that connected me to the place where I grew up (having grown up in Whitehaven, minutes away from Graceland), and the opportunity gave me hope that artists like myself could be represented. While I believe people are free to speak their minds, I do not agree that the removal was the right solution."
He added, "For many years, I have created work that explores my own experiences of becoming an artist in the South. I love Memphis still, and I love the countless contributions from many voices and people that have Memphis what it is to me: home."
The art on display at the airport was Kha's second submission. The first featured people kissing, but organizers decided against it.
The second submission contained two works. In one piece, Kha, in full Elvis gear, stands in a retro-style kitchen. Another piece shows a cutout of Elvis in gold sheets.
"I didn't think they were controversial," Kha told The Advocate on Tuesday before the removal decision was reversed. "I am not one of those artists that just ruffled feathers like that. I love my community. I love Elvis. I love the Elvis community."
He says he got a message from the UrbanArt Commission -- the organization behind facilitating the artwork at the airport -- and its representatives told him that there were negative comments online about his work.
In a Zoom meeting to discuss steps forward, Kha asked them if the pieces had been removed, and the airport representative confirmed they had been.
"I left the Zoom meeting and asked them to think about what artist protections would look like -- whether that means transparency or any way to prevent this from happening to other artists is now my goal," Kha said.
He added, "I'd like to have a conversation about this." He's open to how that would look -- maybe something in the form of a workshop or public forum.
As to why this whole art was removed in the first place, Kha said, "I assume it was racism." He came to this conclusion from viewing the comments but said that he wanted people to come to that conclusion for themselves.
Kha, who is from Memphis, is of Asian descent. He told The Advocate that while he loves Elvis, Memphis' identity is more than that.
"I think it's really disparaging to erase people's contributions to Memphis' totality, its own identity."
The airport authority said in a statement that it "appreciates the support that the community has shown for Tommy and we have made the decision to reinstall the artwork. We apologize to Tommy for the effect that this ordeal has had on him," according to local newspaper the Memphis Commercial Appeal.
UrbanArt Commission executive director Lauren Kennedy told the paper she was relieved the artwork had been put back up.
"I was also surprised that they were able to make that decision as quickly as they were," she said. "I believe it's the right decision to make. So, ultimately I'm really glad about that."

By Sunday Elijah
Governor Babajide Sanwo-Olu of Lagos State, southwest Nigeria says the presidential ambition of former Governor of the state Asiwaju Bola Tinubu remains the “rallying point” of the people of the state.
Sanwo-Olu made this known in Lagos when received Minister of Transportation, Mr. Rotimi Amaechi, who was in Lagos on his widespread visits to express his ambition of contesting for the presidential seat.
Sanwo-Olu, who said he was a “direct beneficiary” of Tinubu’s leadership, said the state would support the former governor in his ambition for presidency come 2023. He, however, noted that Amaechi was equally qualified.
In his words, “I have sheer regard and respect for our leader, Asiwaju Ahmed Tinubu. I have been a direct beneficiary of his leadership. I have been part of his cabinet,” he said.
“Personally, I continue to tow that line of leadership and what he stands for.”
“I want to say to you that you’re eminently qualified and I want to wish you well in this journey. Clearly, for all of us in Lagos State, Asiwaju continues to be our rallying point, but the country is our country and we must continue to see it as the one that is indivisible and one that we all rally around.
“I certainly know too well what your pedigree is and what you have done,” the governor said.
Amaechi, who also responded, said that it was not easy for him to come to Lagos, understanding that their national leader, Tinubu, was from there.

I didn't watch every minute of their coverage. But I didn't see any of that 3 set battle. And that upsets me. :mad: I was looking forward to that match. And watching some of the match. But it didn't happen.
Jun 4th, 2003, 01:13 AM
I don't think so, they just showed highlights now on ESPN, I was hoping they would show the match. :(
Jun 4th, 2003, 01:16 AM
I was having to do a bunch of shit today, so I saw none of it. Ronnie was at home (bastard!), he said they showed most of Conchita/Kim, then all of Serena/Amelie, and then most of Justine/Chanda, but the last was shown like they had time to fill and the Serena match was too fast. Ronnie claims they showed nothing of the Petrova match.
Jun 4th, 2003, 01:39 AM
Thanks for the info. I thought the Russians and their fans got stiffed by ESPN2. And they did. :(

Phil Stamper grew up in a rural village near Dayton, Ohio. He has a B.A. in Music and an M.A. in Publishing with Creative Writing. And, unsurprisingly, a lot of student debt. He works for a major book publisher in New York City and lives in Brooklyn with his husband and their dog.
THE GRAVITY OF US is his first novel, but he’s no stranger to writing. His self-insert Legend of Zelda fanfiction came with a disclaimer from the 14-year old author: “Please if you write a review don’t criticize my work.” He has since become more open to critique… sort of.
Marty arrives in London with nothing but his oboe and some savings from his summer job, but he’s excited to start his new life–where he’s no longer the closeted, shy kid who slips under the radar and is free to explore his sexuality without his parents’ disapproval.
From the outside, Marty’s life looks like a perfect fantasy: in the span of a few weeks, he’s made new friends, he’s getting closer with his first ever boyfriend, and he’s even traveling around Europe. But Marty knows he can’t keep up the facade. He hasn’t spoken to his parents since he arrived, he’s tearing through his meager savings, his homesickness and anxiety are getting worse and worse, and he hasn’t even come close to landing the job of his dreams. Will Marty be able to find a place that feels like home?
You can get this book at:
Thank you to netgalley for an advanced copy of the book in exchange for my review.
Thoughts and Themes: I knew that I had to read this one as soon as I saw that Phil Stamper came out with a new book since I really enjoyed The Gravity of Us. I winded up listening to this story on audiobook while following along with the e-book. I found that the audiobook of this story was great to listen to and easy to follow. This is one that I had to sit on before writing the review because there was so many different things going on in the story that I wanted to touch on.
Something that I really enjoyed about this book was the anxiety representation, I rarely get to read books that show anxiety as part of the story but not the center of it. I really liked that Marty’s personality isn’t just his anxiety but that is a large part of his life. I liked getting to see how anxiety manifests itself in his daily life and how it contributed to his ability to travel.
Something else that I enjoyed about this book but also found hard to read was Marty’s parents homophobia and religious bigotry. I thought that this was done well and I know we would love to see them grow but I thought it was very real to include that they don’t grow. I liked that this book shows that sometimes people don’t change, and their views stay static.
Something that was unexpected and I had a hard time with was that Marty begins to develop body image issues and it leads to disordered eating. While I do think this is important to include and how it is something that needs to be brought up especially with the expectations for body types within the gay community, I do wish there had been some sort of warning.
One of the big things in this book that I really wanted to touch on was the forced outing that was done by Marty’s friend, Megan. I thought this was an important part of this story to include because of the impact it had on him. I thought it was well done because you get to see what Marty’s fears and concerns are about being out back home amongst people other than his close friends and family.
Characters: Through this story you are introduced to several characters through their interactions with Marty. I really enjoyed each of the characters that you get to meet throughout the interactions that Marty hash them.
I thought it was great to meet so many different characters and also get a chance to see how Marty’s relationship with each person differed. I thought it was great getting to see the contrast between Marty’s new friends and his old friends and how he changes through the development of these friendships.
I also really liked getting to see the contrast between the relationship that Marty has with his parents and his family in London. I thought it was great to see how either family reacted to his coming out and the difference that makes in his life. I really liked getting to know a little bit about the aunt and how she felt about the whole ordeal with Marty’s parents and him coming out. I thought it was important to show that he had some people who supported him regardless of his parent’s differing opinion.
Writing Style: This story is told in first person through our main character, Marty’s perspective. The story goes back and forth between the present time and some diary entries that are a part of an assignment that Marty had to complete last summer.
As I listened to the audiobook, I also want to comment on the narrator of the story. The narrator does a great job with this story and is easy to listen to. I like the pace that this story keeps as it isn’t too quick but also not too slow. It’s something that you could listen to in a day while getting other things done.

Showdown in the fairgrounds
Mark didn’t have long to wait. He heard the crunch of gravel beneath wheels, then car doors being closed quietly. They had parked by the double doors. No way could they keep the sliding door quiet, and it screeched on it’s rollers.
Once inside he knew their eyes would have trouble adjusting to the dim light.
Before climbing into the barrel he had scooped up a handful of bolts from an open box. Now, he raised up and tossed a bolt across the room. He heard it strike wood with a clunk. He waited.
He chanced a quick look and to his pleasure they had split up, one going around the room on one side one on the other.
He waited until they were half way around the room before tossing another bolt back the way they’d come. He held his breath, hoping they would fall for his plan, and they did.
One of the punks was heading his way the other continuing around the building. He waited until they were across from one another, then he raise up and fired at the punk across the room. He intentionally missed.

Willis was an eight-time Pro Bowler and helped lead San Francisco to a Super Bowl appearance in 2012. Joseph Spears, Murfreesboro Daily News Journal
Despite all of his success, Patrick Willis has never forgotten where he comes from.
Willis grew up in Bruceton and from a young age had to deal with adversity. From helping raise his three younger siblings to being overlooked on the field because of the school he went to, Willis was never afraid of tackling a challenge head on.
"I just learned about being the underdog out there," said Willis, who starred at Ole Miss and played eight seasons for the San Francisco 49ers, making seven Pro Bowls. "Being at a small school, a lot of people may have a lot of doubt and they think that guys that come out of these small schools don't have the potential to play professional ball. However, I've always believed in myself and here I am all these years later."
After excelling at Bruceton and becoming the first player in state history nominated as a Mr. Football finalist on both sides of the ball, Willis headed to Oxford. At Ole Miss he quickly became one of college football's top linebackers. As a senior he was named the country's top linebacker, winning both the Jack Lambert and Dick Butkus awards. The 49ers took him with the 11th overall pick in 2007.
Willis won AP NFL Defensive Rookie of the Year in 2007. In his 112-game career he had 950 total tackles to go along with 20.5 sacks. He made his only Super Bowl appearance in 2013 with the 49ers and led the team in tackles with 10.
Willis called it a career in 2015. He's not shocked to see what all he accomplished, including his induction Saturday into the Tennessee Sports Hall of Fame. It was all a plan he was working towards according to Willis.
"The accolades and everything were some of things that I knew that if I just went out there and played ball, they would come," Willis said. "I'm honored to be recognized for my accomplishments."
Now that his playing days are behind him, Willis is focused on helping the next generation of players accomplish their dreams just like he did. He hosts camps to help young players and even goes back to where it all started in Bruceton to help encourage the kids there to never stop chasing their dreams.
"I always tell them to never let anybody's opinion become your reality," Willis said. "If you feel it, if you believe it, then go after it. That's all it was for me.
"I was passionate about sports and I had a vision for myself and a purpose. I stayed true to it and here we are."
Reach Joe Spears at firstname.lastname@example.org or 731-343-4923. Follow him on Instagram and Twitter @joe_spears7.

Eric provides such a professional service. He gave an accurate estimate, timely service, was punctual AND most importantly the end result was excellence. Highly recommend Mr. Clean Powerwashing Company!
Eric responded to us promptly and we were able to schedule an appointment quickly. We are very pleased with the results and the service provided. We would recommend using Mr. Clean Power Washing to others and would definitely use them again.
Nothing but good things to say about this young gentleman.
Eric was easy to contact, friendly, knowledgeable and trustworthy. He arrived on time and did a wonderful job power washing our house, three decks & the gazebo. He is also insured which was a major factor in us choosing him. Eric completed in half a day what it would take me an entire weekend to do and it looked so much cleaner than when I did it. Without a doubt I would use him again and recommend him to friends and family.

STEVE INSKEEP, host:
Lets look a little bit more closely on home foreclosures in the United States. We have a study here from the state that leads the nation in home repossessions, that is Nevada. The study shows that almost one in four homeowners who could have afforded to make their mortgage payments deliberately chose to walk away. In other words, some people who accept home foreclosures could have avoided them. That's one finding of a study commissioned by the Nevada Association of Realtors.
The lead author is Joel Searby. His research firm, SGS, interviewed a thousand people for the report.
Mr. JOEL SEARBY (Executive Vice President, Strategic Guidance Systems): Its a financial decision that these folks are making for their family, their best interest. They look at the value of their home and what they owe on it and they say this just doesn't make sense for me. Certainly, there are secondary factors and one of the most important in my opinion is that the stigma has been lifted as it relates to walking away from a mortgage whereas, 20 years ago this may have been something that would be considered shameful. Many people now are not only okay embracing it but they're actually being facilitated by outside folks.
Mr. SEARBY: Yeah. You have websites like YouWalkAway.com and lawyers and others who are engaging in a practice of actually helping peoples decide to walk away and then walking them through the steps to do that.
INSKEEP: What are some of the situations do you encountered where people said it was better for them to walk away from the house even though they could pay and even though they were going to wreck their credit?
Mr. SEARBY: Let me share a story of one lady who was in her 60s. She was recently divorced and as she looked at the rest of her life in a large home by herself that she could never sell for what it was worth, she simply said this does not make sense to me. And so she was not concerned about being able to buy another home, she could rent. She wasnt concerned about having a car, she already had a nice car. She wasn't concerned about getting credit, she had plenty of income, and she simply said I'm going to walk away.
Mr. SEARBY: Did you hear that woman in a focus group?
Mr. SEARBY: Yes, I spoke with her personally in the focus group.
INSKEEP: What did other people in the room say when she told that story?
Mr. SEARBY: Most of them were nodding their heads. These folks understand the same kind of situation that she was facing. Another man who was sitting next to her was actually a former homebuilder but his entire financial situation added up to it made more sense for him to walk away than it did for him to stay in that home.
INSKEEP: Who wasn't exactly among the various kinds homeowners you had who did walk away?
Mr. SEARBY: Well, we found that a much larger proportion of those who walked away were the older homeowners, which was very interesting to us, because we assumed that older homeowners would have a much longer stigma culturally against walking away from their mortgage, when in fact it was the opposite. They were looking at the end of their life and their last 15 or 20 years and saying this doesn't make sense for me to continue to pay this mortgage and that was really a surprising finding.
The younger folks were actually in my opinion quite a bit more tenacious in trying to reach out to these lenders and find out more information, whereas some of these older folks just simply said I don't have the energy or the time to deal with this, in addition to the fact that the finances didn't make sense and they walked away.
INSKEEP: I feel like one of the lessons of this is how difficult it is to generalize. You were telling us that there are people who deliberately walk away from their mortgages, which is not what you would assume. But even in that subculture of people who walk away its sounds like there are people who do it for good reason and people who do it for not so good reasons.
Mr. SEARBY: Theres no doubt that many of these folks have gut-wrenching decisions to make and while the general public may look at that and say how could they walk away from their mortgage, these folks are facing very, very tough times in their personal lives. Many of them had unexpected bills. Twelve percent of those we surveyed had a death in the family within the six months before the foreclosure. That's a significant amount of people dealing with significant life events.
INSKEEP: You said the stigma has been lifted. Has the news been a factor in that? And by that I mean it seems that there are a lot of - you could argue that there are a lot of bankers, for example, who got bailed out, people who are accused of having walked away with fortunes from this whole financial mess.
Mr. SEARBY: Well, theres no doubt that those who have been through foreclosure personally, the number one entity that they blame are banks and lenders. And so there definitely is a situation where you have homeowners pitting themselves against the lending institutions and absolutely, the news that they here is these banks are being bailed out and why would I continue to pay when theyre getting bailed out? I'm not getting bailed out.
INSKEEP: Joel Searby, thanks very much.
Mr. SEARBY: Thank you very much, Steve.
INSKEEP: Hes with the research firm SGS.
NPR transcripts are created on a rush deadline by a contractor for NPR, and accuracy and availability may vary. This text may not be in its final form and may be updated or revised in the future. Please be aware that the authoritative record of NPR’s programming is the audio.

However, like I said, I am making the best of the present moment, which I was reading about the other day. Staying busy so that I don't think about two weeks from now is one of the ways I handle "this." Though I do have to some serious planning/pressures for when I get back to the US, I don't forget to have fun. Marseille, the Alps, my French fluency tests, countless parties and events with friends...it seems to never end, and it doesn't have to yet.
Marseille was magnificent, as almost every town near the sea is. I went with my host parents and AFS group about two weeks ago. I went during Christmas break, but that was a rough time. I was glad to create better memories with my host mom and AFS friends on our boat ride!
My French fluency tests were last week, and overall I am pretty satisfied. I studied hard and did my best. This time I was able to control the stress better. I feel more confident about one test than the other, but we'll see when I get my results next week. Perhaps the most memorable events of the day were not actually the the tests themselves, but the getting there. Our train got stuck on the way to Lyon, and we would have been late for my exams if my host mom was not figuring out another way to get there. We ran to catch our bus and to get to my second exam also. There was even a confusion about where the tests were being held. That's a day with my host mom I'll never forget!
The Alps were amazing as I expected, but they are not as close as you all think! I loved climbing on the rocks and playing in the snow with my host parents!
As much as I try to focus on France, I always get asked questions, particularly, "How do you feel about going home?" Some immediately say "You must be excited to see your family again." Others say "So, are you sad?" I'm not sure myself. Sure, as I listen to "Welcome Home" I smile at the thought of seeing my cousins again (especially since I missed the family reunion this week and my Chinese cousins are home) and I try to plan out my first words for my parents when I find them at the airport and how I will teach them the bise.
However, the happiness of seeing my family back home does not hide the fact that I am leaving a life behind here. Some people do not understand how people that are not biologically related can be so close to me, but that's been the greatest gift this year has given me. When I waved at my parents in August and said "See you in July", I meant it. I would love to be able to say it here. Right now, the thought of going back comes as a shock, even if I knew it was coming for the past ten months. I've read about it, heard stories about it, but it just doesn't seem real. When it does acually sink in, little by little, sadness is the first feeling.
If I had the choice of going back to the US, I'm not sure I would, at least not yet. On the other hand, I guess the greatest present I can give to my host parents at this time is to put into action what they've told me these past five months. I can't have everything in life, so I have to make the most of what I do have. I had understood the first part well before coming to France, but the second part took more work. All that to say, I'm going to list why I am excited to return "home."
1. Family and Friends
Obviously, the #1 reason why I don't want to leave France is the #1 reason I want to go back. It's been extremely hard to be away from everyone, and everything, I knew this year, especially in December. I can't wait to see my nanny again and the countless others!
|These are the crazy cousins I've missed!|
2. Being Able to Understand Everything
It's been pretty cool to not have been pressured by all the school responsibilities this year, but it was frustrating when I wanted to put in the effort with my classmates but couldn't. May I never forget how draining certain times were when I was just trying to figure out what was being said around me or to understand the personality of those around me.
3. Root Beer and Fried Chicken
I can't say I prefer American food over French food, (That would be a crime!) but there are some food/drinks I will be happy to taste again.
4. Discover my Hometown
I actually wonder what it's like to go further than the Giant grocery store or to sit and watch the cows pass by on the Amish farm...
I don't really miss them at all now. I've adapted in several ways. However, I put this element because if I don't remember how hard it was at the beginning, how should I expect everyone else to? (I remember the first real culture shock the week of September 17-24.)

I have a silver laced Wyandotte pullet that has one leg injured from the knee (sprained right after hatching?). I got her from a lady whom I bought some other pullets. She offered this SLW to me, as she didn't want to cull her and I had less birds and more room... It is clearly too late to do something with the leg that is injured from the knee: the lower leg is bent to the side, the pullet lean to the knee. She has never walked normally and she has never used also the other leg normally. She simply leaned to the knees. The toes seem to be weak in both legs, but I think it can be due to little use? She can curl toes around my finger and hold and she moves them often. Sometimes it seems that the lower part of the outward bent leg disturbs her, but she manages to move around and she even flew each evening up to the chicken tractor roosting area (about 60-70 cm from the ground). She did not roost, but just sat under her friends. Then one night I heard some tapping from the tractor. I went to check, but everything seemed to be OK, except that the pullets were a bit disturbed by my checking. Next morning the SLW looked exhausted, the comb area (she has no comb yet, though she should be 3-4 months old) looked blueish and there were some bruises on one side hip area. I took her inside, gave her water (she was extremely thirsty) and food and kept her in a box overnight. Now she is in a small cage inside the main coop (I was just introducing the new pullets to the rest of flock) with a lot of woodshavings. She eats and drinks well and looks nice again, but the other leg (that is not injured from knee) causes me still concern. The other leg is often just completely straight, something like splayed leg, but she holds it in front of her. Why she holds it strait (from the hip and knee) in front of her? I have examined her carefully and all the joints in this leg seem to function normally, there is no swelling and this side was not even bruised. It seems really bother her, it seems that she doesn't manage to move where she wants. It seems she doesn't manage to lean on the knees anymore. When I kept the leg in normal position, she seemed to feel better (but where do I know?) and ate without trying to correct her position as before. Should I try to fix the leg to the right position for a while (not standing, but as she used to lean on her knees)? And would she still start to lay eggs one day? She has gained weight a bit slower than the other pullets, but the other may be older and are from different breed. She also still make baby noise, whereas others don't, but she must be at least 3 months (I have had her for 2 months and she had already full wing feathers when I got her). Also, I have a young SLW rooster (a small one, 1.6 kg) and as this is my kids favourite breed I would like to get some chicks next year. Would the rooster fertilize her if she is crippled? Rooster can see her in the coop and he hasn't shown any aggression toward the pullet, actually he pays no attention to her. Sorry if the text is unclear, I have had hens just over a year and it is difficult to describe the situation, plus English is not my native language.

Did you know that letters sent from downrange dont require a stamp? Very cool if you ask me.
I'm with a writing organization called Tell Them Thanks (T3) where you can adopt a soldier, marine, seaman, or airman and write to them for the duration of their tour downrange. I have written to 5 people in the last 4 years. T3 tells you that you might not ever hear from your adopted serviceman; many of them are very busy and dont have internet access. I never heard from the first guy, but that's what I was kind of expecting. The second guy was a Soldier and I heard from him right off the bat. We talked online a lot. I never heard from the third guy, he was a Marine. I got him at the beginning of his 15 month deployment and sent him some pretty cool care packages! When he got home, he sent me flowers!! Didnt heard from the forth guy.
So JH is the 5th name I got from T3. I knew he was a Seaman. I wrote to him twice and... he wrote me back!! I know after 4 years of this, getting a letter from one of them may seem dull, but through it all, I never got a handwritten letter from downrange. Without a stamp. With a Marine Corps ink stamp on it. It was very exciting.
JH is really nice. He sent me a pic of his family. Told me about his girl friend that he's marrying when he gets home and the dog he misses like crazy. And a fire fight he was in a while back- it was probably really against the OPSEC rules though. So I'm writing him a letter right now. I was under the impression that his unit was coming home in August so I stopped writing him in July. But he didnt say anything about coming home soon in his letter. And he told me he hopes I write back. So I'm going to just in case he's not coming home yet. I would hate for his tour to be extended and me not know about it and just stop writing.
Sound fun to you? Want to adopt your our serviceman? Go to www.tellthemthanks.com and let them know you want to support the deployed troops!
Know of any serviceman or troops that need a little more support from home? You can sign them up, or download a flyer to give to the FRG. Tell Them Thanks is serious about helping any way they can and completely understand OPSEC and the regulations that follow.

I do lots of really dumb stuff at work (slamming the door open on my foot, waving at the wrong people, etc) but today was majorly embarrassing, even by my standards.
My director from the US flew out on a business trip and each team member had a quick chat with him in a conference room. It was only my second time meeting him in person.
So I went into the room and we shook hands.
He took one step closer to me. I assumed he wanted to hug and I hugged him.
It turned out that he only wanted to close the conference room door behind me.
Face palm moment :( Everyone can't stop laughing at me.

Family Cruise: Norwegian Spirit Cruise Review by maps
Overall Member Rating
CRUISE HISTORY: My husband and 2 kids (9&10) have been on NCL Majesty & Gem, HAL Maasdam, RCCL Mariner.
We all agreed the RCCL Mariner was the best cruise so far.
EMBARKATION: Boston port was convenient for everyone to drive. Lines seemed a little chaotic but moved fairly quickly and we were on the ship in about an hour.
CABIN: we had inside cabin on deck 9. Very small as others have mentioned but it saved us money. Really wished they had 2 pull down bunks instead of the trundle. The pillows were very hard but the comforters were soft. My husband hated the sheetssaid they were scratchy. Showers were roomy and we had an over the door shoe holder that contained a lot of our stuff. Walls are thinwe had a group of teenagers next door to us that did not get along and they would have screaming fights with More vulgar words. Security had to be called one day and it got a little better but they would get in at 2am and have loud conversations in the room.
SERVICE: Very hit or miss. Most had smiles but they really did not go out of their way. The cabin stewards seemed to do less and less as the week went on. We had to search him out many times for ice, didn't vacuum sand off carpet for 2 days, didn't always replace the pool towels. Only things they did were straighten the bed sheets (they were never changed) and empty the garbage. Not very friendly. Waiters in the dining room not very organized. Breakfast took an hourone time we walked out. Coffee/tea not served with meals and rarely did we get refills. Dinner took a minimum of 2 hrs and again, service was chaotic. We finally got an excellent waiter/assistant waiter by the 4th night and requested them the next night. We were told it was not possible and that we'd have to wait 1 1/2hrs. We insisted and it indeed took that long but we didn't mind waiting because they were that good. I didn't like that they would beep us that our table was ready but then we'd have to wait another 20 minutes when we showed up for them to get our table ready. Made no sense. We also requested 2 round tables and they said they didn't have any round tables of 8, but one night we would get it another night we didn't. No consistency.
One morning my son asked for croissants for breakfast and was told they were out of them. Then the table next to us got served an entire basket of them. Our favorite waiter from the night before came by to say hi and asked why my son wasn't eating. We told him about the croissants and the next thing we knew he was over with a basket full.
FOOD: Very subjective of course but we certainly did not starve. Some things better than others and our requests for extra meals were also welcomed.
Room Service: we never ordered but my family did a lot and said it was pretty good.
Raffles: It's a buffet which I don't care for but certainly had a lot of variety. Did not like the setuppeople mobbed everywhere. Lines for food, drinks, ice cream, tables and even just walking through since it was the only way from one end to the other on that deck.
Blue Lagoon: Loved this place, wished it was bigger. Ate breakfast here most of the week after the long waits in the DR. Service was great, food served quickly. Great place to grab a quick snack.
Garden: Ate dinner here once. Service seemed better and quicker but the room was small and we felt crammed.
Windows: Ate most of our dinners here. When we got decent waiters, the experience was much better. We requested the same waiters the last 3 nights and they were great. They remembered our requests from the previous night which reminded us of traditional cruise dining and that's when we realized we preferred it to the freestyle.
Shogun: The sushi was great and there was so much of it. Godzilla rolls are the new favorites among our group. The asian dishes were also very good and we got great service.
Le Bistro: My parents ate here as part of their anniversary package and they couldn't stop raving about the place. Wished we had tried it.
Wine package: Not a bad deal of buy 6-8 bottles the first 2 days and receive 20% off. Drank mostly red and they weren't that bad.
KIDS CLUB: On previous cruises we couldn't drag my kids out and they talked about going to the club for weeks before the cruise. However, this cruise the kids were asking not to go. I thought it was because they wanted to spend time with their cousins but after seeing the room where the 10-12 yr olds were, I didn't blame them. They would cram dozens of kids in a small room with no windows for hours. The kids only wanted to go when it was freestyle play and they would open the doors and allow them on the play structures.
POOLS: Definitely not big enough for the amount of people on board. We stayed by the kids pool and they loved it but sometimes there were some unruly, unsupervised kids there. Chair hogs were out in full force and it got ugly at times. They would serve food by the pool and there were mobs of people everywhere with no room to sit or eat.
ENTERTAINMENT: The production shows were the usual cruise shows (not my thing), Cat's Pajamas were excellent, the magician had good tricks but the show was boring, Second City improv group was very good.
Martini Tasting: Did this twice and it was very good. The bartender did a very great job. The first time there was probably about 100 people there and it took awhile. The 2nd time only about 20 and the drink pours much bigger, so after 5 drinks we were definitely feeling it!
BERMUDA: Fabulous! Weather was incredible. Went to Snorkel Park the first day and it was OK. Good for families and novice snorkelers. Bought the bus/ferry pass and went to Horseshoe Bay on day 2. Excellent day, great waves, rented an umbrella to have some shade. Walked over to Jobson's Cove which was amazing. Spent an entire day here and then went to Destination Dockyard that night. The last day we went to Church Bay. Rocky and wavy with lots of seaweed but great snorkeling. Had the beach pretty much to ourselves. My family went to the caves and they really liked them, too.
Overall the cruise was great and everyone enjoyed themselves but we decided that if we ever went with a big group again we would opt for traditional dining vs freestyle. The cruise was definitely more casual than I was used to (people in dining room on dress up nights wearing tanks/cutoffs/flip flops/baseball caps). Although it didn't ruin our trip, it just felt weird being all dressed up when no one else was. As an example, when the photographer saw our kids all dressed up, she made a big deal out of it, taking multiple pictures and calling the boys "the necktie boys". Less

The 34-year-old actress who is rumoured to be engaged to actor Justin Long is a loving girlfriend every day, which is why she doesn't want to turn the romantic day into a big occasion. "I don't think I've ever done that conventional romantic thing," said the
star. "I like being with my friends and having a fun time."
Drew Barrymore, who also recently made her directorial debut with Whip It! spoke about her love for filmmaking, saying that the best part of being behind the camera is finally being able to put your true self across.

Great Argentinian Footballer Diego Maradona has been admitted to hospital with signs of depression. However close link of Maradona has said that the footballer is out of danger. According to Maradona’s close link he said “He has been very sad for a week, didn’t want to eat.”
Maradona celebrated his 60th birthday three days ago but was stated that he was suffering from mental pressure and depression which led degradation of his health. Maradona was admitted to a private clinic in La Plata, about 40 kilometers south of Buenos Aires.

Gideon said to him, “But Lord, how can I deliver Israel? Just look! My clan is the weakest in Manasseh, and I am the youngest in my family.”
Judges 6:15 NET
Related Scripture References: Judges 6-8
To teach children God can use them in his service, even when they are young.
Background Information for Teacher: Gideon was a mighty warrior for God, but he wasn’t one when God first called him. While we don’t know how old Gideon was when God spoke to him, we do know Gideon said he was the youngest in his family. In spite of that, God worked a great miracle through him. He—like David—who was just a young shepherd boy when God called him, was used by God in an amazing way. We are never too young or too old for God to use us.
Bible Story Time:
Tell the children the story of Gideon:
Gideon lived during a scary time in his country’s history. Joshua, another great leader, had led the nation of Israel until he was 110 years old, but after he and all his generation died the people turned to wicked behavior. The Bible says, In those days Israel had no king. Each man did what he considered to be right (Judges 21:25 NET). The trouble was that what most of them considered right God considered wrong.
God still loved his people even though many of them were living wicked lives. The nation of Israel was divided into twelve tribes who were named after the twelve sons of Jacob (God later changed his name to Israel.). God gave the members of each tribe a different section of land in the Promised Land. After Joshua died—and the people were rebelling against God—God raised up judges to rule over each of these different territories. Gideon was one of those men.
Gideon belonged to the tribe of Manasseh, and some bad people called the Midianites were bothering them. Gideon and his family members would plant their crops, and the Midianites would swoop down on their land and destroy their crops. Gideon and his family were so scared that many of them had moved to the mountains and were hiding in caves. Gideon was so frightened that he was harvesting his wheat down in a wine press.
While Gideon was working and looking over his shoulder at the same time to make sure his enemies weren’t around, an angel from God appeared to him. The angel told Gideon God wanted him to deliver his people from the Midianites. That’s when Gideon told the angel that his family was very small and that he himself was very young. Gideon’s excuses didn’t bother the angel or change what God wanted Gideon to do. He assured Gideon God would give him strength to deliver his people. Before God could use Gideon, Gideon had to learn to trust God.
Gideon gathered together 32,000 soldiers to fight these enemies. God, however, thought he had too many soldiers. If they defeated the Midianites with this many men, the people would think they had won the battle by their own power. God wanted them to remember that he gave them power to fight. So he told Gideon to let all those who were afraid go home. Imagine Gideon’s shock when 22,000 of his soldiers left. Now he only had 10,000.
But God wasn’t finished yet. He told Gideon to take them down to the water and watch how they drank. Those who lapped the water with their tongues like a dog were to be separated from those who knelt down to drink. Only 300 lapped. These were the ones who were truly prepared for battle. Imagine how Gideon must have felt. He was only a young boy, and now God had reduced his army from 32,000 to 300 warriors.
Gideon and his three hundred men stood on the hillside and looked at the great army of Midianites below them in the valley. How could three hundred people defeat thousands? God showed them. Gideon divided his men into three groups of one hundred each. Each man carried a trumpet and a pitcher with a torch inside.
When all the men were in place, Gideon gave the command. They blew their trumpets, broke their jars, and shouted, “A sword for the LORD and for Gideon!” Their enemies were startled, frightened, and ran like scared rabbits. Gideon may have been young, but God used him to deliver his people from their enemies.
This is a good place to emphasize to the children that while God wants to use them they must first trust him as their Savior. Remind them that God loved them so much that he sent Jesus to die for their sins. When they ask him for forgiveness, they become God’s child.
Children are sometimes tempted to think that they have to be an adult before God can use them, but this isn’t true. There are numerous ways children and youth can be used by God before they ever reach adulthood. Biblical examples of God using children and young people include David, who was chosen to be king of Israel when he was just a youth tending sheep; Manasseh, who was twelve when God made him king of Israel; and Josiah, who was only eight when God made him king.
Below are suggestions of how children can let God use them.
Invite one of their friends to church.
Tell someone that they love Jesus and that he loves them.
Hold a door open for an older person who is having trouble walking.
Help keep the church clean by picking up trash they might see lying around.
Pray for their pastor, teachers, family, and friends.
Give money to help support missionaries around the world who are telling others about Jesus’ love.
Be the one at school who makes the right choices when everyone else seems to be making the wrong choices.
Game: Rise and Shine
After any toys are put away, have the kids lie on the floor and pretend to sleep. An adult says in a loud voice, “Good night!” and turns off the lights. The kids snore. After a few moments, the adult says, “Good morning!” and turns on the lights. At this cue, all the kids stand up and sing, “Rise and shine and give God the glory!” until the adult says, “Good night” again. Then the kids yawn, lie down, and go back to “sleep.”
Remind the children that even though they are young, they can shine their lights for God.
Give children a blank sheet of paper and let them color their version of Gideon and his army fighting the Midianites.

I agree with Judy, I think it's like underskin bleeding, like a scratch but not one you can feel. Maybe Daisy likes playing rough. I would check with the daycare and ask if they know anything. Doesn't look like something to worry about.
I agree with Judy and Eleanor. Jersey has scratches like that after I pick her up from day care sometimes. She's gotten them at the dog park too. I think it's from playing and nipping and biting at each other. It doesn't look lik anything to be worried about.

Ed Reed: Texans were 'outplayed and outcoached' by Cardinals
Safety Ed Reed won a Super Bowl with the Ravens before signing with the Texans this season. The nine-time Pro Bowler accepted a recent demotion like a team player, but he couldn't hold his tongue after the team's seventh consecutive loss Sunday. Reed publicly criticized his teammates and Texans coaches.
Reed said that there were things he couldn’t say because they needed to remain in-house, but he added the Texans were "outplayed and outcoached" in their 27-24 loss to the Cardinals, according to the Houston Chronicle.
"You watching the game and it ain't (a) no-brainer," he said. "Certain situations, it's like we got to get off the field. We need a three-and-out. But you've also got to come on as an offense and move the ball. You can't go three-and-out and put your defense back on the field that quick. And then that [last scoring drive] that they had, I'm looking at it like guys are a little fatigued. Eventually they're going to figure out what you're doing if you're doing the same old things.
“It’s a very humbling game. If I was in the coach’s shoes, maybe I can say a little bit more.”
Reed played just 13 snaps against the Cardinals. Earlier in the week, he said the last time he wasn't a starter was during his sophomore year at the University of Miami.
“I’m a team player,” he said. “I want what’s best for the team. I’ll do whatever I can to help the team.”

Pequot Lakes man accused of assaulting woman and endangering child
A 33-year-old Pequot Lakes man is accused of choking and assaulting a female victim and threatening to kill himself with a gun. Aaron William Sheffield had his first appearance Friday in Crow Wing County District Court in Brainerd where he was ch...
A 33-year-old Pequot Lakes man is accused of choking and assaulting a female victim and threatening to kill himself with a gun.
Aaron William Sheffield had his first appearance Friday in Crow Wing County District Court in Brainerd where he was charged with two felonies of domestic assault by strangulation and endangering a child in a situation that could cause harm or death; gross misdemeanor of interrupting an emergency call; and three misdemeanor domestic assault counts.
Sheffield was seen before Judge Earl Maus, who set unconditional bond at $60,000 and $10,000 with conditions, which include not entering the victim's residence or not contacting the victim. He was released from custody Friday and was scheduled to be in court Wednesday.
According to the probable cause statement filed against Sheffield in court, Pequot Lakes Police Chief Eric Klang was dispatched at 9:56 a.m. July 20 to a Jenkins residence for a report from two Minnesota Power employees who witnessed a physical domestic between a man and female.
Upon arrival Klang was met by a visibly shaking and crying female, who was holding her hand around her neck. She stated that Sheffield, who is known to her, had choked her and was inside with a gun. She also stated he had held the gun up to his head.
Klang attempted to get the woman to come to his squad car, but she stated she was going to get a child out of the house. Klang moved to a position where he could hear what was going on, and the woman motioned for Klang to come inside the residence and stated Sheffield no longer had a gun.
Klang entered the house and asked Sheffield to show his hands, Sheffield did but then put them back down, the complaint stated. Klang asked for Sheffield to keep his hands up again and he then did comply. Klang approached Sheffield and observed he was holding a 10-year-old child, who was crying. Klang asked Sheffield where the gun was and he said he no longer had it and it was in the bedroom. Sheffield started using foul language at the victim who was crying uncontrollably on the floor. Klang asked her to go outside.
Klang asked Sheffield to let the child go outside while he spoke with the child, who said no. Klang asked Sheffield what had happened and he said that ".... women is the problem." Sheffield was constantly using foul language in front of the child when he was talking about the victim. Klang asked him to stop. Klang observed Sheffield was highly agitated and was extremely angry, the complaint stated. Klang quit talking to Sheffield and a Breezy Point sergeant arrived and stayed with Sheffield while Klang went outside and talked with the victim.
The victim stated she received a message from a family member about Sheffield who didn't show up to work. She began to call Sheffield asking what had happen to him, but he blocked her from calling. She met up with Sheffield and asked why he was not at work and he "blew up" and became enraged calling her all sorts of foul names in front of the child, the complaint stated. Sheffield then grabbed a handgun, pulled it out of the holster and said he was going to shoot himself, the complaint stated. The victim blocked the door to the exit and told Sheffield to calm down. He told her to get out of the way and pulled the gun up the side of his head and said if she didn't get out of the way he was going to blow his head off right here, the complaint stated.
The victim stated Sheffield was very upset and not rational and she did not want him to leave the house and hugged him. Sheffield then grabbed her around the neck and slammed her into the closet, the complaint stated. She grabbed a phone out of her pocket and threw it upstairs to have the child call 911, but the child did not make the call.
The victim stated Sheffield continued to call her foul names and then he went after her, throwing her across the room and onto the floor. Sheffield allegedly grabbed her around the neck and he began to strangle her to where she couldn't breathe, the complaint stated. Police then arrived.
Klang then went back inside and asked to speak with the child, who stated he did not know what happened. Klang asked if the child saw the defendant grab onto the victim and the child said no. The child stated he did not see Sheffield grab the victim, but he did see her fly across the room.
Klang made contact with the reporting party, who was working in the area for Minnesota Power about a block down the road. He stated he and his partner heard loud voices; heard a male say foul language and saw a female being grabbed around the neck and thrown down to the ground. The parties went into the house and could hear yelling and screaming and some "thumping."

By: Mareabetsoe Mofoka
Thaba-Tseka: Molupe Sechele ,26, of Ha Theko Ha Sehloho Bokong had been remanded in custody for sexually harassing his daughter aged seven years.
Molupe appeared before Thaba-Tseka magistrate court on the 9th February 2016 charged with sexual offence he committed upon her daughter.
Evidence presented before court revealed that on the 24th January 2016, the accused had sexual intercourse with his biological daughter.
The child was noticed by her teachers who reported the matter to the headman and to the police.
The child was given a medical form and the doctor proved that the child was indeed raped.
According to the investigator of this case, Police Constable Thabo Matekane the matter was reported to the police on the 26th January 2016.
Police were also informed that the accused had fled. “Molupe ran away when he heard that we were after him. We arrested him at a village called Ha Nkokana, where he was staying with his lover”, Matekane said.
He further explained that there are many cases reported of this nature; where minors are raped, but this was the first time he dealt with father-daughter sexual harassment.
He explained that the accused person was sentenced to five years imprisonment in 2005 for sexual offence he committed upon a girl aged six years.
The accused has repeated the same offence and this time to her daughter.
The mother died in October 2015.
Inspector Molahlehi Maluke confirmed that this case was reported before Bokong Police.
Insp. Maluke expressed his distress for sexual offences committed to minors.
The child has been taken to the orphanage while his father will reappear before court on the 17th February 2016 for bail application.

Hit-and-run convict Efi Herodotou walked out of prison a free woman on Wednesday after receiving a presidential pardon, five months before her sentence was due to end.
Thirty-year-old Herodotou was sentenced to two years in jail last August for a crime she had committed 10 years previously when she ran a red light in 2007, hitting and consequently killing 17-year-old Emilios Ioannou who was on his moped.
When authorities decided to look into the case properly after an initial slap-on-the-wrist sentence in 2009, Herodotou fled to Greece with her family in 2011.
She had been on Interpol’s most wanted list for years until she and her family were arrested in January 2017.
Herodotou’s mother was also released from jail earlier this month, one of the scores of convicts that received a presidential reduction in their sentences after the elections.
Herodotou is also a beneficiary. Her two-year sentence started from her arrest last January, but she was already due to be released in August this year. The presidential pardon has now given her a get out of jail free card sooner than expected.
The accident in Limassol took place in the early hours of December 27, 2007. Although Ioannou was wearing a helmet, the boy died and Herodotou, who was 20 at the time, fled the scene.
A woman who saw what happened chased Herodotou and managed to catch up with her, blocking her way. She later proved to be a crucial witness in the original case in 2009 that was marred by tampered evidence, discredited witnesses lying under oath and even a state attorney who was forced to resign.
She faced four charges at the time – causing death by reckless driving, abandoning the scene of the accident, driving under the influence of alcohol and running a red light.
Three charges were dropped and she was found guilty only of abandoning the scene for which she was sentenced to a two-month prison sentence, suspended for three years.
But in 2011 the case was reopened when the truth of the original cover up came to light. Herodotou then fled the country and lived with her parents in Greece where she obtained a degree in psychology.
Though her whereabouts weren’t particularly secret – she even had a registered tax address in Greece – it was not until January 2017 that her parents were arrested in Greece. Shortly afterwards, she turned herself in after years of futile arrest warrants and her trial at Nicosia district court began.
In his ruling last summer, the judge said there was no doubt she knew she was wanted by authorities in Cyprus but made a conscious decision to stay away.
Her decision to deny legal responsibility in her trial last year incensed public opinion that fumed over the injustice of her being allowed to roam scot free in Greece.
The victim’s friends and family kept a dignified stance throughout the decade of their ordeal, sharing only their plight but maintaining that the accident could have happened to anyone.
The mother of the 17-year-old had even said she would’ve hugged Herodotou if she admitted she committed the crime.
In her trial last year, Herodotou was handed a two-year prison sentence for reckless driving and running a red light in her car. The sentence started from the date of her arrest.
Her father Herodotos, 62, a former national guard officer was sentenced to prison for three years. Her mother, Nitsa, 57, was given 18 months. They were both found guilty of five charges – perjury, inciting a witness to perjury, forgery, circulating forged documents, and using counterfeit evidence in their daughter’s initial court case.
People close to the case have argued her father’s connections through his job and close affiliations with important politicians were central to the help they received for the past 10 years.
In the eyes of cynics on social media on Wednesday, her early release was only to be expected.
“I’m sure this was arranged before she even handed herself in,” one Facebook user said.
While Ioannou’s family kept silent, one commentator said: “in Cyprus, my dear fellow citizens, you can commit a crime and when you know the right people, evade the law.”
Another summed up popular opinion in their post.
“It is understandable she did not intend to kill. It is unacceptable and inexcusable that she abandoned the victim and had there not been a witness, she would have gone home like a lady. It is also unacceptable that she left the banana Republic of Cyprus through political favours and bribery. All hail Cypriot justice.”
Another convict, Giorgos Zavrantonas also received a presidential pardon and was released from prison on Wednesday. He had been sentenced to seven years in prison in 2014 for attempted murder.
This marks his third presidential pardon after he was sentenced to jail twice – once in 2005 and once in 2010.
The condition of his second pardon was to stay out of the country for 10 years but after he disobeyed it, he was tried again and sentenced for his previous run-ins with the law.

|Matthew Henry's Concise Commentary|
29:1-6 Job proceeds to contrast his former prosperity with his present misery, through God's withdrawing from him. A gracious soul delights in God's smiles, not in the smiles of this world. Four things were then very pleasant to holy Job. 1. The confidence he had in the Divine protection. 2. The enjoyment he had of the Divine favour. 3. The communion he had with the Divine word. 4. The assurance he had of the Divine presence. God's presence with a man in his house, though it be but a cottage, makes it a castle and a palace. Then also he had comfort in his family. Riches and flourishing families, like a candle, may be soon extinguished. But when the mind is enlightened by the Holy Spirit, when a man walks in the light of God's countenance, every outward comfort is doubled, every trouble is diminished, and he may pass cheerfully by this light through life and through death. Yet the sensible comfort of this state is often withdrawn for a season; and commonly this arises from sinful neglect, and grieving the Holy Spirit: sometimes it may be a trial of a man's faith and grace. But it is needful to examine ourselves, to seek for the cause of such a change by fervent prayer, and to increase our watchfulness.
Verse 5. - When the Almighty was yet with me. These are terribly sad words. Job, in his afflictions, has come to look on the Almighty as no longer "with him " - no longer on his side; but rather against him, an enemy (see Job 6:4; Job 7:19; Job 9:17; Job 10:16, etc.). When my children were about me (comp. Job 1:2, 4, 5).
Gill's Exposition of the Entire Bible
When the Almighty was yet with me,.... Not merely by his powerful and providential presence, as he is with all men; but in a special manner by his gracious presence, which is a wonderful and distinguishing favour; but sometimes the people of God are without it, at least they think so, and which was now Job's case, see Job 23:2; and therefore he desires he would return to him, and show him his face and favour:
when my children were about me; as olive plants about his table, in their youth; when he looked at them with great delight and pleasure, as his growing hopes; and, when grown up, and were not far from him, but were round about him, and lay near his heart, and whose welfare, temporal and spiritual, he was solicitous for; but now they were all taken away from him, and were no more: the word for "children" signifies also "servants" (t), and may take in them, of whom he had many to do his work and business; to attend upon him, to wait his orders, and execute them, and guard his person; but now many of them were slain by the Sabeans and Chaldeans, and by fire from heaven; and those he had were very disrespectful to him, see Job 19:15.
(t) "juvenes mei", Tigurine version; "vel famuli vel filii", Mercerus, Drusius; so Jarchi.
Job 29:5 Parallel Commentaries
Job 29:5 NIV
Job 29:5 NLT
Job 29:5 ESV
Job 29:5 NASB
Job 29:5 KJV
Bible Hub: Online Parallel Bible

Don't Say- Toya
This is a song by Jon B that came out almost 10 years ago I think on his album Cool Relax. Jon B still has some bangin' slow jams. It's hard to find a good slow jam nowadays. The last good one I heard was Naked by Marques Houston and that was 2 years ago. Sad. No generation should be deprived the joys of making a good slow jam mix tape.
Side note: I am writing this some place new. Today I decided to head over to where I will be moving soon and check out one of the coffeehouses here. I absolutely hate it. I don't know anyone, the music is wack and there is no diversity. I am inclined to go across town to where I normally go even though it probably is too far for me to travel late at night as I like to do. I mean, I am really sad about this right now. I like a good coffee spot. Oh wait, I did see one person I know. But still...
Don't say what you won't do
You know you'll be the first one to go on through
I wasn't going to admit this to anyone but I figured, why not? I need to talk about it. It's funny. Well to me anyway...(deep breath)....
I tried on a wedding dress today.
The very thing I said I would never EVER do in my entire life if I was not engaged and I did just that. Now let me explain. My friend Becky just got engaged not even 12 hours before we met for breakfast today. After breakfast, she asked if I would go to a bridal shop with her not too far away. I gladly agreed. I am so excited for Becky. She is 38 and has been through a lot. It's funny that I went with her during this time in my life because I am actually at a place where I don't know if I ever want to be married. That's not cynicism, that's just weighing my priorities and the responsibilities of marriage. If I get married, cool. If I don't, still cool. So the reason why I was able to go with her and not get severely nauseous as I did the last time I went into a bridal shop is because there is no longer fear but indifference.
So anyway, we went to the first shop to go see the Bridal Nazi. Becky needs to know that I love her because I bit a whole through my tongue not telling this woman where I would like to "bustle" her. Now, my friend Becky is a hot chick. In fact, Tia and I refer to her as Hot Chick Becky. But like a lot of women she has some body image issues. She's decided to go on Weight Watchers and that's fine but the fact that she was even able to fit into those European sized from satan's minions dresses says a lot. I wouldn't have been able to even begin to zip any of those up and I am a size 10. Well, the Bridal Nazi thought it fit to tell her that she only had so much time to lose weight up until the dress would come in (6 months). That's CRAP! The dress is supposed to fit you; you are not supposed to fit the dress. It was just a sample dress at that. I was PISSED. As she put on this dress which I swear looked like THE dress to me, The Bridal Nazi kept telling her that she looked skinny and that the dress was very effective. What the hell does that even mean, "effective"???? The veil? Effective. The tiara? Effective. I didn't get it. Still don't.
Becky is a youth pastor and was so concerned about showing too much skin in the church that she contemplated getting a jacket to go with the dress. Now I know that she was not there for me to enforce my personal taste on her but I know her and I knew that was going to be a big mistake. Well as I voiced this, Bridal Nazi interrupted me and said something to the effect of this is her choice, her taste, and her wedding. At this point I wanted to introduce her to my very effective back hand, the floor and her teeth that would be on it if she ever snapped at me like that again. Oh, did I mention that I am off caffeine and dieting again? Awesome.
Although the dress in that shop looked like THE dress, we went somewhere else. I liked the next place MUCH MUCH better. The saleswomen were much more down to earth and did not pressure us at all. As Becky was looking at dresses, I peeked through some Vera Wang dresses and found the most gorgeous dress I have seen in a long time. The thing was, it looks nothing like a wedding dress to me. Like maybe if I got married on the beach, this would be my ideal dress. It was just gorgeous and I really wanted to try it on. First I had to wrap my mind around the fact that I was actually considering trying on a wedding dress in the first place. I justified it by saying that I wasn't trying it on with marriage in mind so it was ok. Besides, no one was in the store besides Becky, the two salespeople and me. "Becky I am trying this dress on. TELL NO ONE. I swear, you better not tell anybody." "Oh, I'm telling people." she shouted from the dressing room. You know, you just don't want people to think you are desperate or anxious. I am neither. I just like pretty dresses.
Well the bad boy wouldn't zip up cause it was a size 6 but I was able to pull it together. I stepped onto the block in front of the mirror, took my hair out of its band and pulled it up with long curly tendrils dropping to the side. Everyone said it was gorgeous. And just when I thought about enjoying it, I said "Get me out of this thing before I start breaking out into hives." and ran off of the block before I had a Cristina on Grey's Anatomy moment in the store.

Demi Lovato’s return to Hershey marks a continued growth for the artist who was here 2 years ago in support of her last release. Since that time Lovato has become a more confident individual and an icon for women who are proud of who the are as a person. This summer she has hit the road with her long time friend Nick Jonas for the Future Now tour which saw both artists sharing the stage together as they delivered a truly memorable show for the crowd in attendance at the Hershey Stadium.
Nick Jonas was the first to hit the stage and as he ran through 6 songs it was clear that he has re-invented himself as an artist over the past few years. We last saw him at Made in America during the early run of his solo career but his album hadn’t dropped just yet so it was hard to tell where he would end up.
Arguably the Jonas Brother’s splitting up was one of the best things for his career because he was able to dive into some heavier material that his previous venture wouldn’t allowed him to embrace vocally. He didn’t shy away from his past and spoke about being at Hershey before with his brothers during his set but he didn’t dwell on the past because his future is much more interesting and entertaining.
Jonas commanded a large stage with minimal effort, clearly the years with his former band have come into play there because he looked like a seasoned veteran even though he was singing mostly new material from his recent solo release. However before he got to some of the biggest songs from his new artistic venture the stage went dark and Jonas walked off stage, The Future Now tour pulled a fast one on the crowd as intro music began to play and Demi Lovato appeared on stage flanked by flashing colored strobes across the vast stage.
There is no doubt that Demi Lovato can work the stage and the crowd, as she did so effortlessly in Hershey. From the first song to the last she poured raw emotion into her songs in a way that doesn’t come through in her studio recordings. We are used to hearing her songs on the radio in a very polished version but when performed live her pitch fluctuates and the true feeling behind the songs are able to shine which breathes a new life into many of the songs.
For example “Neon Lights,” when performed live is rather different than the album version containing many signature vocal flourishes of Lovato’s voice that were fine tuned for production and release to radio. There is no doubt that Lovato shines bright in a live setting, her music set with production and lighting cues as well as her live voices makes for a wonderful pop show that is hard to match. Jonas retook the stage at one point in the night to allow for a quick outfit change but Lovato soon joined him to perform his newest hit “Close.”
The Future Now tour was a meeting of the contemporary music minds and a treat for fans of all ages and types. It will be interesting to see how these two artists move on after this tour because this was a tour contamination years in the making that is going to be hard for them both to top.

"Zhanna- NYState Certified Special Education Teacher"
...I was born in Belarus, which was part of Russia (USSR) before. Russian Language is not my major speciality, so I did not try to get certified in this language, but I speak fluently and I am perfect in reading
and writing in Russian. I had good grades during my school years and while I was a student in the Belarus Pedagogical University. I have many...
10+ subjects, including reading

A residential fire in Tacoma closed several roads as crews worked to put out the flames Tuesday morning, according to the Tacoma Fire Department.
At about 9:11 a.m., firefighters responded to the reported fire in the 900 block of South Sprague Avenue.
South Sprague Avenue, from 9th to 11th Street, was closed as crews worked to knock the fire down.
By 10 a.m., the fire was under control. There were no reported injuries, although a dog did escape and was taken to a safe location.
According to witnesses at the scene, the house was completely gutted, with damage throughout.
The cause is under investigation.
©2023 Cox Media Group

The night was cold and a light mist fell from the sky as I walked the half block down to my in-laws house to pick up the little boys. It was 8:00 p.m. and I was tired after a long day at work. The hood of my jacket was raised, shielding my head from the cold when I felt a large presence above me, swooping closer and closer. I looked up in time to see the four-foot wing span silently and slowly gliding mere feet above my head. I stopped, unalarmed and curious, as the winged creature alighted on a branch above me. He regarded me with his own quiet curiosity. He was a large owl. His face was white, his beak a yellowish orange, and the feathers on his body were gray and white. I have never seen an owl in the wild and never expected to see one in the city. He perched on the branch, looking down, and I stood looking up and we studied each other for several minutes.
I tried to get a picture with my camera phone, but it was dark and the picture didn’t come out well. The owl hopped to a closer branch, still curious, still watching and simply sat there until I finally got too cold to stay where I was. I ran into my in-laws house to get the boys, rushing them and my mother-in-law into shoes to go see the majestic creature, but he was gone. All I had was this picture, which the little boys thought was very cool.
I’ve published my first collection of short stories! Here’s the link

Hey there, time traveller!
This article was published 22/12/2007 (3529 days ago), so information in it may no longer be current.
You just knew it was going to happen.
Last month an outpouring of generosity from Free Press readers allowed Dancing Gabe and his brother Rick Langlois to be in Toronto to cheer on the Bombers in the Grey Cup.
But, on a weekend when Gabe was constantly being stopped to have his photo taken by yet more Bomber fans, a Saskatchewan supporter began to taunt Winnipeg's most celebrated cheerleader.
"Dancing Gabe," the Roughrider fan bellowed. "What kind of name is Dancing Gabe?"
Rick described what the Rider fan looked like.
"He was a big, huge guy and he'd been drinking."
"I just said, 'Hey be careful what you say, buddy. You don't know him.'
"And then he called him a retard."
It didn't end there, though...
Who is Dancing Gabe?
People have asked me who Dancing Gabe is.
What makes him dance?
Like most people, I only knew Gabe from watching his pompom-prancing performances at Jets and Bomber and Goldeyes games. And occasionally seeing him walk away alone towards a bus stop.
Gabe Langlois' true identity is more complicated, of course.
So when they returned from the Grey Cup I sat down alone with Rick Langlois and asked the question of who Gabe is in a more personal way.
"What was it like growing up with Gabe?"
Rick responded reflexively.
"Gabe didn't talk until he was 10," Rick said.
Yet, according to Rick and other members of the family, Gabe is almost a Rainman-like figure when it comes to sports knowledge.
He also is a gifted speller, which means the family with which he lives -- his long-widowed mother Angela, sister Claudette and her nine-year-old son Ryan -- never have to open a dictionary.
And, despite his awkward dancing style, he's an athlete. For years, Gabe ran the full Manitoba Marathon. But it took him so long that Claudette finally suggested he scale it back to a more efficient half marathon.
Meager income, generous attitude
Gabe is the kind of guy who buys everyone in the family a Christmas gift and even goes around dropping off Christmas cards to attractive young newspaper reporters he has never met and sportswriters he has.
All of this on his meager income. He has a disability pension that pays him about $325 a month, and he works part-time at the St. Vital Y where he earns $80 a week.
Mind you, all he really cares to buy is his monthly bus pass. You see, Gabe's main currency in life is his cheerful nature.
Money doesn't count much for Gabe. Never has.
The Langlois clan were a working poor family from St. Vital, where the father, Louis, had a sandblasting and painting business and the mother, Angela, toiled in a sewing factory.
When she wasn't having babies. She gave birth to six children, virtually one year after another. Gabe was the third.
But it wasn't long after he was born on Jan. 29, 1963 that his mother knew that little Gabe wasn't like the first two, Mike and Rick. "He would sleep and eat and that was about it," she recalled.
Quite the opposite of the "terror" Gabe became around the house once he began walking and taking. Back then, he was more into demolition than dancing.
"Tell me about when I was a terror," Gabe likes to ask his mother now.
Rick, who's a year older, says Gabe's condition was never really diagnosed, but his mother talks about him being autistic.
By the time Gabe was three, there were five children aged six and under in the house. And Angela was hospitalized for three weeks with pneumonia. Her doctor arranged for Gabe's placement in St. Amant Centre, an institution usually reserved for severely mentally handicapped children. But St. Amant couldn't handle the little terror either.
At six he was placed in the Manitoba School in Portage la Prairie, where the family tried to visit him regularly. But that home for the mentally handicapped wasn't a fit either.
And one winter day, when he was 10, Gabe went missing on an outing to the Portage train station. It was nearly midnight before the youngster was located following the train tracks home, presumably.
"He was frozen," his mother said. "They said he wouldn't have lasted much longer."
Gabe spent the next month in hospital. Angela Langlois insisted on taking her son home after that.
Subsequently, though, she was persuaded by a nun she knew to enroll him at Notre Dame de Lourdes, where a nearby farm family had agreed to foster him.
It was a turning point for Gabe.
The nun, Sister Georgette Pantel, taught him reading, writing and arithmetic. And the school library, and books in them, became Gabe's sanctuary.
Now he was 12 and ready to rejoin the family forever.
"I thought I could take him home," Angela said. "His terror days were finished."
Danced all night
Back in Winnipeg, a public school in Norwood refused to take him. But the parochial school Christ the King happily, even gratefully, embraced Gabe as a gift to the school.
Angela Langlois remembers her children coming home and telling her what the principal had announced to the other students before Gabe arrived.
"She said they all had to help him out if he didn't know something. She told them how blessed they were to have Gabe."
Eventually he went on to a special program at Glenlawn Collegiate. His reception at the high school was less welcoming, at least at times.
At Glenlawn, big brothers Mike and Rick were around to look after him, but there was one time when they noticed that Gabe wasn't his cheerful self.
When they asked him what was wrong, Gabe began crying. One of the other students had been stealing Gabe's lunch money for weeks. Mike and Rick took care of the thief and the recovery of the lunch money.
Gabe, the kid who didn't talk for 10 years, who endured so much in institutions in which he didn't belong, graduated from Glenlawn.
He took Rick as his grad date. Gabe danced all night with every girl who would join him. It was the first time Rick had seen Gabe dance.
Little did Rick know where it would take both Gabe, and him.
'It doesn't bother me'
In Toronto on Grey Cup weekend, the word "retard" was still ringing in Rick's ears.
Seething with anger, Rick felt as if he was about to do something almost as stupid with his fists as the hulking, drunken Saskatchewan fan had done with his mouth.
But Gabe stopped him.
"Gabe said, 'Leave him alone Rick. Leave him alone. Don't worry. It doesn't bother me.'"
Rick froze momentarily.
"That was the first time I'd heard Gabe actually say something like that," Rick said.
As it turned out, Rick and Gabe didn't need to get involved.
"A couple of young Bomber fans grabbed the guy," Rick recalled. "And one guy said to me, 'Keep going, we'll explain this.'"
The two brothers were halfway up an escalator when Rick looked back. The Bomber fans were still talking to the Saskatchewan fan. Whose head was hanging in shame.
"There are people out there who don't have a clue," Rick told me.
In any event, what mattered most to Rick that Grey Cup weekend was the look in Gabe's eyes.
"It was the greatest thing that ever happened to him."
Perhaps that's because, in terms of the moment, it was like the wedding Gabe may never have, and the first-born he might never hold.
And in a way, the trip to the Winnipeg-Saskatchewan Grey Cup that Free Press readers and WestJet and The Fairmont gave Gabe was our Christmas gift to him.
For his being the gift he is to Winnipeg, all year long.
As for what makes Dancing Gabe Dance, that's easy.
Joy, of course.
He dances for joy.

British Muslim organizations were quick to condemn the attack.
"We must come together, isolate those who believe that extremism and violence are acceptable, and work to ensure that they meet the full force of the law," Fiyaz Mughal, the director of Faith Matters, said in a statement. "We as the Muslim community will work against anyone who promotes such hatred."
Still, at a moment when much of the country was upset by a crime clearly designed to shock, there were signs of notable bravery.
After the attack, a mother of two named Ingrid Loyau-Kennett approached one of the attackers and engaged him in conversation. Loyau-Kennet can be seen in a photograph calmly talking to the man. He was carrying a bloody knife -- she carried only her resolve.
"I just talked to him. He looked like a normal guy. He wasn't high, he wasn't on drugs. A normal guy pissed off with the fact [as he said], 'Muslim women and children are dying in their countries by the hand of white men,'" she told ITV's Daybreak. " He was very, very close to me. He was almost touching me ... I asked him, what's the point. [He said] 'war in London.'"
ITV presenter asked her why she wasn't scared. "Better me than a child," Loyau-Kennet said. "Because, unfortunately, there were more and more mothers with children stopping around. So it was even more and more important that I talk to him and then ask him what he wanted."
Cameron called Loyau-Kennet a hero.
"When told by the attacker he wanted to start a war in London, she replied, 'You are going to lose. It is only you against many,'" Cameron said. "She spoke for us all."

Trish has worked as a newspaper journalist and after completing a Diploma of Bible and Missions at Moore College, served with her husband Steve in each of the churches where he was a Minister. Her focus was in children's and women's ministry and she particularly enjoyed teaching Primary and High School SRE. She recently completed a Graduate Diploma in Pastoral Counselling from St Mark's National Theological Centre in Canberra and is now working as a counsellor, focusing on supporting single and married women, as well as partnering with Steve supporting couples. Trish enjoys catching up with family and friends, walking outdoors, ocean swimming and art. Her own relationship with God has been restored by using several of the peacemaking tools and she enjoys seeing how they renew others too.

Our daughter had her beautiful wedding at Granby Ranch and we chose this condo to house our immediate family. What a beautiful place. What beautiful views. It is truly a home away from home. Comfortable beds, beautiful decorating, all you need in a kitchen. We had 9 people staying with us and it was still a roomy place to entertain other wedding guests. The owners were great to work with as will as the staff at Granby Ranch. Thank you for everything.

People generally do want to lend a hand. All you have to do is ask. Allowing others to give to you is also giving them a gift because it creates a balance between giving and receiving. When you ask for help, you are signaling to others and yourself that you are ready to receive, expand, and enrich your life.
We do not know what is around the corner, so we often cling to the negative feelings surrounding past events. It can be hard to let go, and often for good reason. I struggle all the time to release, and stay open. That evening I learned, even more so than my son, that when we trust that the universe conspires in our favor, good things happen
Congregants who only gave help to other members were twice as likely to fully trust their fellow worshipers as participants who neither gave nor received help. Members who only received help were nearly three times as likely to have the same high level of trust. But it was the combination of both that made the biggest difference.

“Not if you were the last person on earth!”
She made flouncing an art form. An effortless flip of her perfectly coiffed fall of auburn hair, a quick turn on her delicate, well-pedicured heels, and she was a distant memory.
A faint aroma of singed ear hairs settled in a fog around him, his cheeks burning bright red from her rebuff.
What was he thinking, asking the most lusted after girl in the junior class to prom. His act of desperation wasn’t even borne out of a bet or dare. As the words left his lips, he regretted his idiocy. There was no hope that it would end well.
Just as he thought he had escaped further humiliation, having timed his invitation during a lull in the usual hallway riot of students, his cell phone hummed in his pocket.
Curious who would be texting him during school hours, he checked the message to find he was the subject of an email blast detailing his ill-fated attempt to beg a date from Her. There would be no hiding now. As soon as classrooms emptied out, the entire student body was abuzz with barely contained excitement. Fresh blood was in the water and a feeding frenzy was imminent.
The following week was spent lingering in alcoves and bathrooms between classes until the last possible minute. He kept his head down, answering only direct questions from faculty and staff. Lunch was eaten clandestinely in library carrels, away from the constant barrage of insults and jokes.
If he could make it through the dance weekend, by the following Monday there would be a new punch line. Someone who had managed to arrive at the prom drunk or stoned, an explosive break up or wardrobe malfunction would supplant his faux pas and his life could resume along its former mundane path.
Friday night, as his family gathered around their 55-inch Vizio, dinner plates perched atop pale, faux wood-tone TV trays, the local anchor was narrating a video clip from earlier that afternoon. A local high school debutant had been critically injured in a two-car accident on Highway 29. The 2012 Candy Apple Red Mustang driven by the deb had cross the centerline, side-swiping a 1998 Volvo wagon driven by 65-year-old Chester Preston of Franksburg.
Preston, who had been wearing a seat belt, was taken by ambulance to Sacred Heart with cuts and abrasions, and a broken arm. The deb was airlifted to St. Michael’s in critical condition with severe facial lacerations.
According to witnesses, young deb had been texting when the accident occurred. Charges were pending.
He nearly choked on his chicken-fried steak at the mention of the young debutant’s name. The one and only who so contemptuously turned down his request to attend the spring formal. Looked like she would be missing the dance too. He couldn’t help but wonder whether she felt slighted that she couldn’t be identified as a prom queen.
In the morning he called the hospital, trying to get an update on her condition, only to be told that information was restricted by her family. He asked if she was allowed visitors, but before the nurse could answer she was called away to a Code Blue.
Driving to the hospital, he rehearsed what he thought would be a convincing monologue, some far-fetched story about being her boyfriend, hoping it would get him passed the nurses’ station. He stopped at the first floor gift shop and bought a small bouquet of yellow roses. The Pink Lady working the visitor’s information desk was able to direct him to the fifth floor where he was told she was in room 505.
Visiting hours weren’t for another 20 minutes, but he was welcome to have a seat in the waiting room. The nurse took the flowers, promising to find a vase to put in her room.
The blond woman already in the room had to be her mother. There was no mistaking the family resemblance, despite the stark difference in hair color. Walking over to her, he reached out his hand, introducing himself as a classmate, and asking about her condition. Reaching up from her seat to grasp his hand, she turned her red-rimmed eyes to him, a wavering smile on her face, thanking him for coming by.
With her mother as his escort, he was lead into the girl’s room. A faint scent of A&D ointment, mixed with antiseptic, assaulted his senses. Machines helping her breathe hummed softly, and another beeped with each beat of her heart.
Her long hair, shaved off to bare skin, was replaced by bloody white bandages. Both eyes, bruised purple and green, were swollen shut. Angry black stitches ran down one cheek and along her chin. If he didn’t know who she was, he would have never recognized her.
Taking the empty chair beside her bed, he sat down. Looking intently at her, he tried to see something amid the carnage that was familiar. He asked her mother if she would know he was there. She assured him that doctors felt she would, and encouraged visitors to talk with her. Reaching out, he touched the back of her hand. Her eyelids fluttered, but didn’t open.
Over the following weeks, he visited every day. Sometimes reading to her from one of the novels on their English book list, or when she seemed particularly agitated, he would merely sit nearby, stroking her arm. Her mother told him once that he was the only one of her classmates who visited.
He was there when she finally woke up.
The next day, she was alert and aware of her surroundings. Her mother met him at the nurse’s desk, asking him to join her in the waiting room. She warned him that she may not remember him, a consequence of her head injury. A development he thought may not be so bad. Unfortunately, the moment he entered the room, it was apparent she knew exactly who he was.
Her mother, thinking the two would want to be alone for their reunion, left them to make a quick run to the hospital cafeteria.
“Why are you here,” she asked, her speech slightly slurred and voice raspy from little use.
“I’ve been here every day since your accident,” he stayed close to the door, suddenly shy to be near her. A flashback to the last words she said to him ringing in his ears.
“My mother told me. You let her believe you were my friend.” She seemed to be struggling with her emotions, but he couldn’t tell if she was angry or sad.
“I saw no reason to tell her anything different.” He took a step forward.
“But, why did you come? Were you here to gloat, to see me brought to this,” hardly able to lift her arms, she gestured best she could at her disfigured face.
“No, it wasn’t that.” Another step forward. “I wanted to help. I wanted to show you I could be a friend.”
“I remember someone reading to me, was that you?” She pointed to the chair beside her bed.
“Yes,” he took the offered seat. “Some days I would just sit with you.”
“Mom said you were the only visitor I had besides family,” a single tear spilled down her cheek.
“I was glad to come,” he reached out for her hand.
“What now,” she squeezed his fingers. “Will you keep coming by?”
“I will if you want me to,” he scooted the chair closer to her bed, smiling at her request. “We could get to know each other better, because to know me is to love me.”
She laughed softly, relaxing into her pillows, but didn’t let go of his hand.
When her mother returned later, she saw him sitting by her daughter’s bed, holding her hand while she peacefully slept. She stepped quietly out of the room, closing the door and saying a prayer of thanks for the boy who helped bring her daughter back from the brink of death.

It tasted awful. I couldn't believe that anyone would drink this stuff. Even the small taste of Everclear that I had sipped half a year prior wasn't as awful. My arch nemesis, American Light Lager, and I had finally met, and our life-long struggle would begin.
I don't believe I had beer again for nearly a decade. I went through the entirety of my college years without a single sip of beer passing my lips. That one taste was enough to ensure a near 1/10th of a century of malty abstinence. The watery, bitter flavor stayed that strong in my mind.
My good friend had taken his two vehicles to a car show, one Saturday soon after we had graduated from college. We had spent the day looking at nice cars and having his vehicles ogled in turn. It was a relaxing summer afternoon.
His older brother had gone along and packed a cooler of "beer" that he ended up not finishing. On our return trip home, our two 17 year old selves realized that said cooler was sitting in the back of the truck we were riding in, with his brother in another vehicle that was not going in our direction. We had hours to go try our first barley-pops and no one would be the wiser.
The location for this experimentation? The back part of my family's 10.5 acre property, as far away from the house as we could get and still be hidden from view. We parked the truck beneath a black walnut tree. Sitting on the tailgate, we each snagged a can, popped the top, took a sip and promptly spit beer as far away from our mouths as possible. How did anyone drink this stuff?
Washing our mouths out with some water, we decided that surely this was drinkable; we just needed to be prepared better the second try. We gathered our nerve, sipped again and spit out further than the first time. Nope, that was not any better. Beer clearly was not going to be my thing.
Subscribe to Ted Hardy
Get the latest posts delivered right to your inbox

One man killed, three injured in police shooting
DHA PhotoOne man was killed and three others were wounded after a policeman fired his gun in a scuffle between officers and three men which erupted after the latter’s car crashed into a patrol vehicle yesterday in İzmir, Doğan news agency has reported.
One of the passengers in the vehicle, Emrah B. succumbed to his injuries this morning after being shot in the stomach.
The incident occurred at around 3 p.m. after a car driven by an unlicensed, 17-year-old man, E.B., hit the police car parked on the street. A melee broke out when the driver and his two passengers objected to the police officer, who went to make a report about the incident and the fact that E.B. was driving without a license.
Police reportedly fired into the air after using pepper gas to disperse the enraged men. A police officer whose identity has not been released fired his gun again after he saw one of the men attack another officer with a chair.
The driver and his other passenger, F.K., were wounded in the legs, while Emrah B. – the driver’s brother – was hit in the stomach in the melee, according to reports.
A passerby, Halil Altun, was also slightly injured by a ricocheting bullet.
All four men were taken to hospitals.
The police officer who fired the rounds was subsequently detained by his colleagues and an investigation has been launched, reports said.
The police officer fired in order to protect himself when he could not stop the assailants despite all warnings, an official said.
The incident was recorded by a witness with a cell phone.

"I've got a new life," Genarlow Wilson said yesterday as he left prison after two years behind bars for a teen sex conviction. "You will not be disappointed," he vowed to his supporters. "I plan on succeeding in life." Wilson was released after the Georgia Supreme Court ruled yesterday that his 10-year sentence for consensual oral sex at age 17 with a 15-year-old girl was "cruel and unusual," CNN reports.
Standing with his mother and sister, Wilson said he looked forward to spending time with his family and planned to study sociology at college. One supporter, the Rev. Al Sharpton, called Wilson's release a "significant victory."

The candid outburst was unforgettable.
"Pathetic,'' Glen Gulutzan said in the wake of 5-1 loss at the Montreal Canadiens on Jan. 24, a fourth straight setback and third by a margin of four goals.
"Just accept it, right down."
It was an uncharacteristic, but warranted, speech from the Calgary Flames coach.
It might've been a season-saver, too.
"I think it was a little frustration," said Craig Conroy, assistant general manager and a veteran of over 1,000 NHL games. "He was not happy and he let it be known.
"It's a wake-up call. He's sending a wake-up call,"
"I had lots of coaches send wake-up calls. [Darryl Sutter]'s had a million of them. Joel Quenneville … he can be a little bit hard. Mike Keenan had a few. Al MacNeil even had a couple.
"They're never friendly, but you know he's at the breaking point and you have to turn this around. 'Let's go.' He's right. We weren't good enough. We weren't playing well enough and we had to get going.
"Whether that triggered everything or it was going to happen no matter what … he snapped and the team seemed to respond."
They certainly did.
The Flames are 11-2-1, including a current six-game winning streak, since Gulutzan voiced his frustration over a group that at the time was 24-24-3 and had but one win in their past seven outings.
Quite the turnaround.
"I think we all knew that it wasn't going well," forward Kris Versteeg said. "We knew we had the team to do it but things kind of sometimes go sideways and it's hard to get it back on track. You have to find solutions.
"Gully's been great with finding ways to re-energize the guys all season. That was a great time then.
"He's very good with the players. I've played with a lot of coaches and he's amazing with me. He tries to find the best in each and every guy every night. When he gets emotional you know it's for a reason.
"I think everyone responded that way because of it."
At the time, the Calgary club was clinging to the second Wildcard spot into the Stanley Cup Playoffs from the Western Conference, one point up on the Los Angeles Kings and the Vancouver Canucks, who each had played three fewer games.
Fast-forward through the Flames' 14 games since, and the home side finds themselves in the first Wildcard position and six points up on the Kings, who hold the second. The Flames are also seven points clear of the St. Louis Blues, who are the closest team on the outside looking in.
"It was pretty warranted," forward Troy Brouwer said. "Sometimes what it does is it catches you off guard and you wonder where it's coming from. At that time it was completely warranted.
"Guys knew it was going to happen and you can respect your coach for saying those things when you know it's the case.
"Gully with us, he's a player's coach. It definitely caught our attention. The majority of the time he's a friendly guy with us. Mistakes are going to be made, but when he has comments like that, you take it because they're not things that happen day-to-day at the rink for us."
But as much as his players pointed to the honest petition, Gulutzan squashed any notion that his plea had anything to do with the turnaround.
"There's no correlation there," he declared. "I was mad at the guys there and rightfully so. I still don't think it's even that bad.
"We weren't playing good hockey. We were getting away from it. Mentally we weren't staying engaged. We talked about it. The biggest thing wasn't the rant after the game.
"That's what you guys see."
Instead, Gulutzan points to what happened the following day.
That's what turned the ship.
"We had a hard meeting in Ottawa," he said.
"Real face-to-face, in front of the group, every guy got talked to about his role and expectations and what we need from there.
"A very honest meeting.
"I think we've responded. All of us. Even the coaches in that meeting.
"We all took on a little bit more."

I thoroughly enjoyed working with George and his crew. They were all very professional and listened to all our concerns. They use the best quality paint and the quote was very reasonable. My main floor/kitchen turned out amazing. The crew had a huge job to complete from the walls, ceilings and all the trim on our new windows, crown molding and baseboards. Knowing how picky my wife to the details, they were awesome! They were all patient and very meticulous with their work. When there were any areas I was concerned about they never hesitated correctly the problem. George was always on hand to answer any questions and to look over all the work done by his crew. It was a real pleasure to work with him.
Jadon F. Washington, MD, 7/1/2015
After raising a family and seeing the damage kids (and a husband) can inflict on a home, I decided it was time to fix up our walls. I debated tackling it myself but determined it would simply be too much to take on in addition to my regular life.
The idea of having a group of strangers in my home made me nervous, to be honest. I reached out to the staff at Capitol Painters and felt comfortable having them in my home for the duration of the project after speaking with the customer service rep and asking all my questions. The price quoted to do our first floor and the kid rooms was very reasonable and I was impressed that they were fully insured.
We worked together to determine the best timeline to get my job accomplished around my work schedule and the kid/husband activities, trying to minimize the disruption to their lives. We selected paints that would have the lowest fume/chemical smell to make it easier as well.
The actual painting was flawless. The staff that came out were friendly and professional and worked fast to get the job done while not cutting any corners. I even got a seal of approval from my mother in law :) I would highly recommend you give them a call. I will keep them in mind next time I need work done.
Beth G. Rockville, MD, 5/31/2015
I have often tried to be the person that is a DIY expert, but it has always turned out for the worst. When attempting to start painting my bedroom, I was at a loss. I spent hours researching on what supplies to get and how to start a project this big. I got a few hours in and saw the mess I had created and knew I couldn't finish this project without help. I looked to both friends and the internet to help me find a company to paint my room, and ultimately decided on Capitol Painters. They were extremely efficient and friendly on the phone! I was able to correspond with them on my needs and the time frame I wanted everything to happen in. They painted my room in a flash, and exactly how I wanted it - making it look straight out of a magazine, very clean and well painted. The entire process was easy, and I had no problems with the work or the payment. I would recommend them to anyone looking for a fair priced quick paint fix and a stress free home improvement project.
Roya D. Washington, DC, 5/18/2015
Painting is definitely not fun or easy, trust me I have tried! I had a room to paint in my house and after 4 days of effort on my part I was tired, I had spent a fortune on supplies and had done little more than make a mess and hurt my back in the process. I found this service and was able to go right onto their website and get a quote and all of the information I needed very quickly, a bonus since I like getting as much information online as possible. I ended up getting them to help fix the disaster I had created in my one room and even decided to use them for the living room since they were so fast and efficient. The customer service was really important to me and they were very nice and accommodating, not something I expected from a painting company. Overall I have to say they were a great choice and I will be using them as soon as I'm ready to paint the other bedrooms in the house especially since their prices were so reasonable.
Rozy D. Germantown, MD, 3/29/2015
I recently decided to spruce up my home in McLean and got quotes from a few painting companies. The quote process was super easy with Capitol Painters and I could do it all online! Much easier than dealing with phone calls back and forth or taking off of work to physically be at home to get a quote-what a headache. I wanted to get the living room painted and then go from there, Capitol Painters was the lowest quote and the form was self-explanatory. The customer service I experienced with my interactions with everyone there from questions I had to payment was great, everything went a lot smoother than I thought it could! The painters showed up and treated my home with great care and respect, they were efficient and cleaned up everything. I've had sloppy painters in the past where splatters were left on the mirrors in the bathroom or on opposing walls or the floor and this was certainly not the case, I will be using Capitol Painters again when I'm ready to re-do my next room. They were fast too! :) Would definitely recommend.
Alexandra L. Arlington, VA, 5/18/2015

They often blame others for their role as a father figure, or lack thereof in the life of their children. Everyone’s story and everyone’s journey is different. Our day to day actions and the way we engage and interact with others is truly up to us. This is no different for a Father and how they chose to parent. It has been a little difficult
43). The name Muhammad is derived from the Arabic word, hamada, which means “highly praised and glorified” (Corrigan et al. 44-45). The father of Muhammad, Abdullah ibn Abdul-Muttalib passed away weeks before Muhammad was born leaving his mother Aminah bint Wahb to care for him. When Muhammad was around five years old he embarked on a journey with his mother to the town of Yathrib to visit his father’s grave and to stay with his relatives (Ahmad 1-11).
Muhammad was born in Mecca, in around 570 C.E. Mecca was a great city for trading, and most of Muhammad’s relatives were traders and business people. He belonged to the Banu Hashim clan, a prominent familiy of Mecca, but the clan was not prosperous during Muhammad's early life. He became an orphan at the age of 6 as his father, Abdullah, died before Muhammad was born, and his mother, Amina, died of illness. His grandfather and uncle looked after him during his early years.
As a result of his lack of formal education he made strides to be the best at whatever he pursued. Luther believed that integrity was worth more than money. He was very proud of himself for not compromising his beliefs and maintaining his viewpoint. He marveled at the struggles of an honest man. Riches, material possessions, and luxuries did not impress him.
Muhammed Thesis Essay Best Effort Muslims believe Muhammed to be the last prophet, told by God in the early 600s to spread Islam. Starting from his small hometown in Mecca, Muhammed eventually succeeded in popularizing Islam throughout the whole Arabian Peninsula. Muslims believe that he was chosen by God because he represented the simple traditional values of life that all humans should follow. Muhammed was a persuasive religious leader because of his family, his beliefs of equality with women, and his relationship with God. Since Muhammed was orphaned at a very young age, he was constantly humbled and learned different lessons about life from many different family members.
This was achievable because he was supported by some of the important people in his life for exam his fathers friend and his wife. Because if this he was able to identify exactly who he was as a person and this also helped him come to terms with the fact that Hassan was actually his brother and he was able to take care of Hassan’s son. Maslow’s self actualization theory states that self actualized people has a sense of realism, often motivated by a strong sense of personal ethics and responsibility, characterized by having frequent peak experiences, does not conform to other people's ideas of happiness or contentment, value their privacy and enjoy solitude, generally have a thoughtful sense of humor, and a tendency to be open, unconventional and spontaneous.
To us his environment and family for Abe shaped his life, but his birth was uneventful (“Abraham” para. 1-3). Even though Abe’s childhood was filled with grief and sadness, it didn’t slow him down because his life was also filled with greatness (“Abraham” para. 8). Throughout his childhood Abe was aware of his world, for he was all about fairness and honesty (“Abraham” para.
The end result ... ... middle of paper ... ...ions along their way to prosperity. As long as they always remember to put their faith first, then they are often times happy with their life. A true servant's only job is to serve someone. For most people, it is not appealing, but for some, it is a rewarding lifestyle. Being a faithful servant requires a special person, one who is willing to do a lot of work for little or no reward.
Since she had lived in a patriarchal society, a woman’s role was to care for both her husband and her children. But since A’isha had no children, she was able to devote her life to reforming and revitalising the Islamic tradition founded by Muhammad. She helped to reform Islamic history by not only preserving the tradition, but also challenging the tradition, allowing her to make such a powerful impact on the development and expression of the Islamic faith. An active role A’isha played in her impact on revitalising and reforming the Islamic tradition was as a theologian. During the foundation period of Islam, A’isha was present and witnessed many of Allah’s revelations with Muhammad, showing that she was trusted with the most sacred teachings of Islam.
Malala witnessed her Father speak out undeterred amidst the reign of terror that gripped the Swat valley. Her father went against taboos and traditions by educating his daughter and instilling her strength and confidence. Zaiuddin Yousafzai said "People ask me what is special about my mentorship that has made Malala so bold and courageous, vocal and poised. I tell them, ‘Don’t ask me what I did. Ask me what I did not do.

Shelagh Fogarty 1pm - 4pm
Theresa May has 'no regrets' about 'fantastic' time as Prime Minister
30 September 2019, 17:49
Former prime minister Theresa May said she had a "fantastic" time at No 10 and has "no regrets" about her premiership.
The MP for Maidenhead told an audience at Henley Literature Festival that her only regret was her parents not seeing her become prime minister but she hoped they would be "proud".
Mrs May's mother and father died when she was in her early twenties and "didn't even live to see [her] become a local councillor, let alone PM," she told Olympic rower Katherine Grainger in an on-stage interview.
The former PM discussed several aspects of her life in the conversation, during which she revealed she was "thinking" of writing a memoir.
She said: "It has been suggested to me that people involved in significant events should write about them so historians can look back and see what those who were at the centre of events were thinking, why they took decisions and so forth."
However, she added she was not "rushing" to get it done and there "wasn't time" to keep a diary during her time in office.
Mrs May also admitted to not reading David Cameron's recently published book, saying she "genuinely does not read political books."
She added: "I probably shouldn't admit to this, but I would rather sit down with a good thriller or a detective book rather than read a political memoir."
When asked specifically about having any regrets, she replied: "No I don't think so. I have had a fantastic time. I'm still carrying on as a Member of Parliament."
The former PM rules out writing fiction, saying she’ll leave that to Anne Widdecombe & Edwina Currie - when Katherine Grainger pushes, Mrs May suggests a rowing detective on the Thames! #TheresaMayHLF #HLF2019 pic.twitter.com/a0TAqvTnzh— Henley Literary Fest (@HenleyLitFest) September 30, 2019
Her advice to future women looking at politics as a career was to be yourself and not to try and follow a stereotype.
The former leader discussed her favourite literary villains with the Olympian, saying Lord Voldemort from the Harry Potter series and Professor Moriarty in Sherlock Holmes were among her favourites.
She said: "They are proper villains. I think it's good when you have a villain who you know is a villain."
When quizzed upon her selection of Sir Geoffrey Boycott in her resignation honours list, she did not say she would change her mind.
She said: "I put my honours list together believing I put people who I thought was appropriate to have honoured in that way."
The former cricketer was convicted in 1998 of beating his then girlfriend - a charge he has always denied.

I didn't do much tatting during my holiday but I was able to make one quick egg to decorate our Easter table and also to complete Renulek's spring doily. I stopped at round 8 because my father liked it as was (and I was giving it to him) and didn't want it any bigger. I managed to complete the last few repeats about two hours before my flight was due to depart! I didn't get a chance to take my usual photos myself but here are a couple sent by my Dad. The doily is on their dining table.
My little Easter egg
where it ended up as a decoration
in one of the pot plants!
And here's the doily.
My father likes bright colours!
The photo below shows the 8th round
in the first colour I had tried which turned
out to be too dark and too "blue"
for my liking.
I cut that out and did the 8th round again in
a colour that better matched
the rest of the doily.
Renulek's spring doily has been popular and there were many examples of it being tatted (and still being tatted) all over the world! I think that's great.

Five years ago from today Josh asked me if I would “give us a try”. I still remember sitting across from him outside a local coffee shop with only the light from the window to illuminate our table. I can remember the plaid shirt he was wearing and the outfit I had on – a twirly skirt – perfect for the swing dancing “lessons” we had just come from that had become all the rage on our college campus.
He had asked to talk with me earlier that Sunday afternoon. I knew what was coming… and yet I didn’t. I never could have known the vision that he would share for our relationship and how true he would remain to it years later.
As Josh shared his heart with me that night, he emphasized his desire to not stand in the way of my dreams. He wanted a relationship, but he didn’t want that to pull me away from the things God has called me to do. He knew of my desire to minister to women. He knew that I, along with 2 others, had just started planning a conference for the girls on our campus. And he knew that it was only the beginning of all I want to do.
As Josh spoke, a hundred different thoughts were flying through my head, but one word just kept coming up over and over. Treasure. “Treasure,” I thought. “I have found a Treasure in this man,” and “This man is to be treasured.”
At that time Josh had no big ideas for what he wanted to do in the future. And I was bursting with them – BIG ideas. I think of how intimidating that could potentially be for a man. Josh was not intimidated by my dreams – he only encouraged them. He still does. He challenges me to take the steps, big or small, that will lead me to fulfilling my purpose on this earth. God knew I would need that, and Josh does a fantastic job of it – not only with his words, but with his actions. Josh has dreams now too. BIG ones :) and he goes after them! I am inspired to go after my dreams as I watch Josh wholeheartedly go after his.
Everybody needs an encourager in their life. A dream builder. Someone who will believe in them. There will always be people to tear down your dreams – including yourself at times. You’ve got to have that person who will cheer for you, challenge you, and speak life into your dreams.
So as I sat at that little wrought iron table in Tulsa, Oklahoma with a man who desired to encourage the potential inside of me, I knew without a doubt that I had to “give us a try”. This man was too much of a treasure to pass up.

To capture his son’s last play before he graduated, Gary hired us for our videography services to record this production at Burroughs Middle School which is based in Los Angeles, CA. While recording this musical, we were so impressed of how they all sang, danced, and acted. Even their stage props, costumes, and make up were well advanced especially for this age group. A lot of time and hard work really went into all of this and it really showed in the quality of this musical and dramatic production.
Although they had only booked one videographer to capture this event, we were still able to get some pretty good shots. However, because there was only one camera it limited the variety of camera angles such as close-ups. You see, by only having one videographer and one camera, we have to be conservative with our shots just to be sure we don’t miss anything off camera.

Pain has made us stronger: Griffin
They're the losses that can define a season but Broncos coach Anthony Griffin believes the pain of heartbreaking defeats earlier in the year has shown his side what's required to challenge for a top four position.
With the club going through a tumultuous time off the field and constant debate surrounding the future of Griffin as Brisbane coach, Sunday's clash with the Sea Eagles was a game the Broncos perhaps weren't expected to win but needed to in order to dull the dissent of the doubters.
They jumped their opposition from the outset and then went on with the job, never allowing Manly into the contest in a 36-10 triumph in front of 32,017 sunshine-bathed fans at Suncorp Stadium that brought them level on 14 competition points along with five other teams.
Of the five losses the Broncos have suffered through 12 rounds four have been by margins of seven points or less and Griffin praised the character of his team to be able to come out the other side a more accomplished outfit and with their resolve strengthened.
"We were really hurt by the way we threw games away earlier in the year and we could have gone two ways," Griffin said post match. "We could have gone the other way and got a little bit frustrated by it but everyone's knuckled down, the whole group's playing with a bit of grit at the moment and we're getting away with some wins.
"There wasn't a lightning bolt and all of a sudden we changed direction – I think we've been working hard all year – the point I was making was that they were heart-breaking losses against good sides, Roosters and Souths and teams like that. But we just kept our head down and kept learning and kept working together.
"It wasn't that there was a real defining moment, we've just had a lot of opportunities to keep learning and we've done that. But it's Round 12 and it's a marathon but at the moment we're getting it done the tough way."
Co-captain Corey Parker watched his side's win over the Wests Tigers from the plush confines of Sanctuary Cove on the Gold Coast in camp with the Maroons and said he was heartened by the way the 'baby Broncos' ground out a tough win.
"It's always nice if you're away on Origin duty and you see your team put in a performance, in particular defensively, the way they did last week," Parker said.
"It was really important that we improved on that and took some positives out of it, which we did and then prepared for this week.
"You look back at the Roosters [game], we were in a position of being eight points up with five to go so that was tough but anytime you lose and you've done enough to win is obviously pretty hard. There's been a lot of hard work put in since then."
While Justin Hodges was rested by the Brisbane coaching staff, Parker and Matt Gillett were outstanding in backing up after one of the most brutal Origin matches ever played on Wednesday night.
Parker ran for 127 metres, made 22 tackles and created havoc with his offloads in the middle third of the field while Gillett's 190m was boosted by a 95m solo try in the 73rd minute, an effort that ordinarily would have earned him an early mark.
"We had to get Andrew McCullough off," said Griffin on his hooker who was taken from the field as a precaution for a potential groin strain. "I wanted to get [Gillett] off before that but luckily I didn't because he got to run 100 metres and score. We swapped him over to left centre just for the last seven or eight minutes to try and freshen him up.
"I thought Corey and Matt Gillett today, the way they backed up was above expectation. They really put themselves out there for the team and that was a big part of the way we played."
Although unsure of the extent of McCullough's injury, Griffin is confident he will be available to face Canberra in the nation's capital next Monday.
"The medical people say it's nothing major but by that stage and with the game in our keeping it was probably more important that we got him off then," he said.
"At the moment I don't think [it is serious]. That's what I've been told after the game. It was more a precautionary thing. He could feel it tightening up and if we left him out there there was a danger of him doing more damage."

In the summer of 1996, Pat McKee was running a travel basketball program and didn’t have enough coaches for all of his teams.
McKee, who also was a sports writer at the time, had covered some Purdue women’s games and remembered Stephanie White mentioning that she might be interested in coaching. So he asked White, who had just completed her freshman year at Purdue, and she accepted.
But there was one catch. In recruiting players for that 18-and-under team, McKee didn’t tell them who the coach would be.
“She was so popular at the time, if it would have gotten out that she was going to coach, I’d have had 75 players wanting to play,” McKee said. “We got the players to commit to the program, and then were, ‘Oh by the way, your coach is Stephanie White.’ They were in heaven.”
White led that team to a state runner-up finish and a berth in the AAU Nationals in Spokane, Washington.
Now, 20 years later, she is in her 13th year as a college or WNBA coach, her second year as head coach of the Indiana Fever and has accepted the coaching job at Vanderbilt beginning this fall.
In her first season as a head coach at any level other than that travel-team stint in 1996, White led the Fever to the WNBA Finals last season.
“Last year, I felt like the growth of our team from the beginning of the year to the end of the year was huge,” White said Wednesday after speaking to about 100 campers at Columbus North, where McKee is now the girls coach. “For us to be able to go from where we started to be one game away from winning a championship was a very fulfilling year.”
White was the 1995 Miss Basketball after leading Seeger to a 92-7 record and four regional titles. She averaged 36.9 points a game as a senior and was the state’s all-time leading girls scorer with 2,869 points when she graduated.
At Purdue, White won the Wade Trophy as national player of the year after leading the Boilermakers to the national championship as a senior in 1999. She then played five seasons in the WNBA, including four with the Fever.
McKee remembers seeing White play for the first time as as an eighth-grader in a tournament at Warren Central High School.
“She had already built a reputation of sorts in the girls game, and she was very, very good,” McKee said. “I had heard about her, and sometimes the hype is beyond reality, but in her case, she lived up to and was even better that the hype.”
White helped out as coach at Lafayette Jeff and Logansport High Schools while still playing in the WNBA, then spent time as a college assistant at Ball State, Kansas State and Toledo before becoming an assistant with the WNBA’s Chicago Sky from 2007-10. She was a Fever assistant from 2011-14 before taking over as head coach.
In talking to the campers Wednesday at North, White mentioned that her college decision came down to Purdue and Vanderbilt. She said afterward that she has great admiration for Vanderbilt, and that led her to take its coaching position.
“Knowing the academic and athletic excellence that you can achieve there and knowing that I almost went there, it has a special place in my heart,” White said. “At the same time, it really compounded with a lot of other factors. It was going to take a special job to be able to pull me away from the Fever, and I believe that Vanderbilt is one of those special, unique jobs.”

Fifteen minutes before our first game, a straggler from the Bay area came and asked us to vote on taking one more along for the ride. His offer of two cases of beer and playing only every 5th point won our approval, and gave us a great moment to laugh and bond as we toasted his tactics. He eventually played about half the points, and had some sweet hammers to boot.
One good zone point and 50 passes later, and we began to gel as a team and as friends. We suffered a second round loss, but nobody bitched and nobody complained, and we all realized that that in itself was worth the trip. We got tighter and tighter as the day went on, and each game got easier and easier as we realized what trusting your team and your knowledge of the game was about. This was capped by our last point on Saturday againt Flagstaff--a sweet homey O that never got nervous, and a perfectly timed cut from the back to snag a hooking forehand at the top of its arc for the goal.
The sun went down too soon, and only hunger forced us to move from under the tree where we drank beer, passed a bowl, and enjoyed just how unique a sport Ultimate is.
On Sunday we had 5th seed and came out against Huckaholics. Since we had all partied a great deal the night before, we knew that any success depended on making it a quick game. I think their heads were not quite in it, because they made some mistakes early and we went up 5-0, and then cruised to a 13-7 win.
Our next game was Coho from Seattle, who had pulled out a huge win over San Mateo (who I still think had the best team in the B Div). Chicago and Seattle were very evenly matched, with about the same level of skill and numbers. It was a terrific game, with strong playing and spirit by both teams. They went up, then we tied it at 3. They took a 6-3 lead, we came back to take half 8-7, we went up 11-9, they came back to lead 14-12, and we pulled it out 15-14. One of the best games I've ever been in--there was not a single player on either team who didn't whole-heartedly shake hands and view their opponents with respect after that one.
By the time the finals rolled around, we never really got fired up. I think we basically shot our wad in the Seattle game. UCSD had som many numbers and so much energy that they had a mental edge. I think they knew it, and to their credit they made us realize that they were not intimidated by our age, miles, or coolers on the sidelines. We hung with them and were up 8-7, but they pulled away after half to win 17-12. We pretty much ran out of energy, psyche, and made a few tactical blunders. They had a funky wishbone O where they sit a swing on either side of the disc and wait for the dump. We had our stoppers cover their handlers and also alternated a clam and a 3/3 front-back D. This was not so good--since you can't really ever shut down a dump, we had our best man-to-man defenders covereing guys standing still, while our mids were forced to run with their mids. We did lot of straight-up D and force flick to take away the huck, but they still threw it and had the legs to run down a lot of junk. At least six goals cam from hucks that our deeps just didn't have the speed to get. Had it been earlier in the day, had we been in better shape, our D might have worked better, but they beat us and earned their win by taking advantage of our weaknesses and playing to their strengths--speed, stamina, and an O that kep the disc in the hands of the few guys who had good throws.
No one on our team was upset by the loss. We were so happy with our weekend on so many different levels--we had 13 guys from 6 different cities: 5 from 2 different Chicago teams, 3 from Cincinatti, 2 from Las Cruces, 1 from Tucson, 1 from SF, and 1 from KC. We all had a great time getting to know each other and playing tough disc. On the field we found we all spoke the same language, knew the same code, and subsumed our egos to the karma of a pick-up team that can exist for one weekend without the bullshit and politics that are present on every team in every sport. We exchanged numbers, drove each other to hotels and airports, played golf, put guys up, got offers to visit for other tourneys, and generally basked in the euphoric feeling of what an amazing thing Ultimate is.
Not bad for a bunch of guys who didn't know each other Saturday morning.

The 70-year-old father of Olympic skater Nancy Kerrigan spent the final moments of his life defending himself as his drunken, angry son put his hands around his neck and pushed him to the floor, a prosecutor told jurors Monday.
Kerrigan's 46-year-old brother, Mark Kerrigan, is charged with manslaughter in the January 2010 death of their father, Daniel Kerrigan.
Assistant District Attorney Elizabeth Keeley said in her opening statement that the elder Kerrigan died of cardiac dysrhythmia _ a loss or interruption of a normal heartbeat _ after being pushed and shoved by his son during an argument over use of the family telephone.
"Daniel Kerrigan spent the last few minutes of his conscious life fighting off his drunk, 45-year-old son," Keeley said.
"And the final act, which triggered the death of Daniel Kerrigan, is when this defendant grabbed his father around the neck with such force that he fractured cartilage in the left side of his larynx and shoved him to the kitchen floor," she said.
Kerrigan's defense attorney, however, told jurors that Daniel Kerrigan died because he had severe blockage of arteries leading to his heart, not because of the altercation with his son.
"Mark Kerrigan loved his father," attorney Janice Bassil said in her opening statement. "They want someone to blame, but sometimes things just happen."
Nancy Kerrigan listened from the front row as Mark Kerrigan's trial opened in Woburn Superior Court.
Prosecutors had indicated they may call her to testify about her father's health in the weeks before his death, but Keeley said Monday that it was unclear whether the prosecution would do so. Bassil declined to say if the defense plans to call her.
Nancy Kerrigan comforted her mother as prosecutors played a recording of the 911 call Brenda Kerrigan made to police the night her husband died.
Brenda Kerrigan is heard sobbing and pleading with a dispatcher to send help quickly.
"Um, my husband is on the floor, and I don't really know what is wrong with him," she says.
When the dispatcher asks what happened, Brenda Kerrigan says he fell on the floor.
"He, oh my God, I hope he's not dead. Oh my god, oh my God, oh my God," she says.
According to a transcript given to jurors, Mark Kerrigan can be heard swearing in the background, early in the call.
Brenda Kerrigan then yells, "Get away from him!"
The police dispatcher then asks, "Are they fighting in the background?"
"Oh, yes," says Brenda Kerrigan.
After the dispatcher asks her if her husband is still breathing, Mark Kerrigan gets on the phone. He tells the dispatcher his father fell down.
"He seemed to have a heart attack," he said.
Both prosecutors and Kerrigan's attorneys told the jury that Daniel Kerrigan was diagnosed with coronary artery disease in 2003.
Bassil said he didn't tell his family.
"Daniel Kerrigan was a very, very sick man. No one knew it. Maybe he knew it, but he didn't share it with anyone," Bassil said.
Keeley, however, said Daniel Kerrigan was managing his health. She said he saw a cardiologist, was on medication and had been keeping his cholesterol and blood pressure within normal range.
"Daniel Kerrigan was an active man until the moments before he died," she said. "Yes, he suffered from coronary disease, but that's not what killed him. That man killed him," she said, pointing to Mark Kerrigan.
Daniel Kerrigan's sister, Jean Bergeron, who was subpoenaed by prosecutors to testify, made it clear she was a reluctant witness, acknowledging that she had refused to meet with prosecutors before the trial.
Bergeron said her brother had complained about his neck being stiff and sore. She also said her brother looked "gray, very pale" in the days before his death.
Stoneham police officer Jonathan Mahoney, the first officer to arrive at the Kerrigan house, said Mark Kerrigan was belligerent, yelled profanities and refused to comply with orders from police. Mahoney said Kerrigan acknowledged that he had fought with his father.
"I heard him state that he had grabbed him by the neck and that he fell to the floor and that he was faking it," Mahoney said.
Nancy Kerrigan won the bronze medal at the 1992 Olympics and the silver at the 1994 Winter Olympics. She was at the center of a saga at the U.S. Championships before the 1994 games, when an assailant clubbed her right knee during practice. An investigation revealed that rival skater Tonya Harding had knowledge of the planning of the attack.

Resorts & Hotels in Bannerghatta.
Bannerghatta is a national park which was made for biological purpose as it was settled down in 2002. It is in the southern region of Bangalore at a distance of 22 kms so which means it would approximately take about one and half hour to reach there but many people visit it from all over the India due to its beautiful nature. Many tourists visit this place as there are several species of animals which are brought from several parts of India as well as from outside the India. As many people visit these areas in vacations so hotels built here are of also good standard such as Arama Suites, The Chalet and Mangomist Resort.
Most of these hotels have wi-fi, pick and drop service from the airport as well as gym facility. The different types of tigers and lions are kept there so that, people can see and appreciate the maintenance as well as organizing team. Many tourists come there, especially in the winter season but it is closed on Tuesday and its timings are from 9 am to 5 p.m. some of the famous restaurants of this area, are Raga restaurant and Club-Resort.
Some place is also reserved for butterflies and this section was opened officially in 2006 by the minister of science and technology. The educational system is also improved in this region of Bangalore as there are many primary, higher secondary schools as well as colleges. The Samhita Academy, Radcliffe School and Teddy Kidz are some of the English medium schools.

Fred Warner quickly has turned into one of the best linebackers in the NFL, and more importantly for the 49ers, the leader of their defense.
Warner began calling the defense towards the end of his rookie year in 2018. It was a huge transition for a former third-round draft pick who never called the defense over his four years at BYU. Now in Year 3, he has a full grasp of Robert Saleh's defense as he wears the green dot on the field.
"It's so easy now with the fact that I'm so comfortable with the system and know what I know now that it's easy to forget how hard at the start it really was," Warner said Wednesday on 95.7 The Game's "Damon, Ratto & Kolsky" show. "I didn't play stack backer at BYU, I didn't give any calls or anything like that. So being thrusted in there and playing MIKE early on as the starter, there were for sure bumps in the road.
"I for sure wouldn't be where I am today if it wasn't for amazing coaches. DeMeco Ryans, who played in this league and played at a high level -- he's such an amazing coach and he's been there for me through it all. And having a defensive coordinator like Robert Saleh, who is one of the smartest minds there is and he's had complete trust in me since Day 1."
Ryans, 36, joined the 49ers in 2017 as a quality control coach and was promoted to inside linebackers coach the next year during Warner's rookie season. Ryan played 10 years as a middle linebacker between the Houston Texans and Philadelphia Eagles, was named the 2006 Defensive Rookie of the Year and twice made the Pro Bowl. He also clearly has made a huge impact on Warner's young career.
Warner totaled 242 tackles through his first two seasons, with four forced fumbles, 15 passes defensed and one interception. He's the perfect version of a modern inside linebacker, one who can go sideline to sideline as a tackler and can cover both running backs and tight ends.
This season, Warner leads the 49ers in tackles with 28. The next closest is Emmanuel Moseley with 18. Warner also is tied for the team lead in passes defensed with two and recorded his first interception of the year in San Francisco's Week 3 win over the New York Giants.
There's no doubt Warner has exceeded expectations as the No. 70 overall pick in the 2018 draft. Early into his third year as a pro, he has become a star and has two coaches to credit his success.

Lita is a pioneer in the Women’s Division of the WWE who brought high-flying features in the female locker room. Over the years, her looks were drastically changed and she owes all of those to plastic surgery. At a very young age, Lita had her chest enhanced so that she could fit in that female locker room well.
While being in an adult relationship with Edge, she dared to bare all of it, on-screen. Apart from that, Lita also had her facial features enhanced, as well so that her sex appeal increases through the WWE Universe.

WELLINGTON, Kan. (KSNW) – A Wellington veteran, who survived arguably two of the most brutal battles of WWII, says when he arrived back on U.S. soil, he felt lucky to be alive.
Paul Ybarra said even preparing to sit down to talk to us about his experience, caused him to have dreams about his time in WWII.
He said more than seven decades later he is sharing his story of survival, so his family will be able to share the sacrifices of the Greatest Generation, for generations to come.
“We were in a movie, and they showed it on the screen, and everybody jumped up and went home, and locked their doors it was just something unbelievable,” WWII Veteran Paul Ybarra said.
Ybarra said that was the response in Wellington, when word got out the Japanese had attacked Pearl Harbor.
He said he was so young at the time, he never anticipated he would go overseas, then he was drafted.
“Scary, not knowing what we were going into,” Ybarra said.
He says when he was drafted there was no backing out, he felt like it was his duty to go.
He said the soldiers soon found themselves knee deep in water, and they were storming the beaches of Normandy.
“To think how I got through it, yeah it was pretty rough,” Ybarra said.
He also said it was the longest day ever, where he remembers carrying his comrades.
“We had to climb over the hedge rows with some of the wounded, to a road and then go back and patrol,” Ybarra said.
He said they lost so many men in their unit.
“Like a miracle, to be there and to have made it back,” Ybarra said.
He said after they liberated Paris, they headed to a German village.
“It was an open field, where we was going through and that’s where I got a bullet wound in my back,” Ybarra said.
In no time, Ybarra was back on the front lines and was wounded again.
He said German stragglers were dropping mortar shells.
“One of them shells hit the tree tops as I was going, and they were dropping down and shrapnel hit me in the leg,” Ybarra said.
For his wounds and heroic actions, Ybarra received two purple hearts and a bronze star.
“I think really I deserved them, and I am real proud of them,” Ybarra said.
The decorated soldier would then go back into action, he also fought in the Battle of the Bulge.
“I feel like I done something great for the county,” Ybarra said.
Following the last German offensive campaign of the war, Ybarra said his war buddies snapped a photo that featured a man with his back to the camera. The man was a German prisoner of war.
Ybarra said the photo was captured, just before the greatest journey of all, home.
“I can’t believe it, after we went through all that and come back and talk about it,” Ybarra said.
Ybarra said he was shocked to see the German soldiers were just like them.
He said they’d been made to believe the Germans were super soldiers.
He said when he was face to face with the enemy he realized, they looked just like the guy who lived next door to him in Kansas.
- Kentucky AG to announce results today in Breonna Taylor shooting death probe
- What is socialism? And what do socialists really want in 2020?
- Senate Republicans release controversial report on Hunter Biden and Ukraine
- Single-vehicle crash claims life of Loreauville man
- Acadian Ambulance appoints Justin Back as new company president

Subject: Welcome to Gayberry 41 Welcome to Gayberry � 41 Feel free to address any comments on this story to hoo. His is a work of fiction and is based on no real persons, living or dead. If you enjoy this or any of the wonderful stories here, I hope you will consider a donation to the Nifty Archive to keep the site going. It is a treasure!!! fty/ 41 When the group returned to the party, Michael greeted them, smiling a knowing smile. “I thought you’d have been away a considerably longer time. It’s only been forty minutes since you left us. I don’t think anyone even noticed your absences. Your boys seem to be having a wonderful time and I am so pleased that everyone seems to be enjoying themselves.” “A little heads-up” William said. “Young Jenny was getting quite drunk before we left. She has indicated she and some of the Marines might be sneaking back here after the party to do some skinny dipping. I just wanted you to know so that nothing would happen which could cause big problems for you guys.” “I appreciate that more than you can know” Michael said. “We’ve had plenty of guests get out of control over the years. What no one knows is that we have security on the site 24/7. They have big German Shepherds which look and sound ferocious even though they are gentle as lambs. You would never know that as they are trained to scare the shit out of an intruder. I realize young Jenny is getting drunker by the minute. She’s been avoiding her parents for the past hour as if they both had the plague. But she has a surprise in store for her if she thinks she’s getting some nice Marine dick tonight. After the incident in the bathroom the other day, Sergeant Carter, Frankie and I put every one of the Marines we’re using � color guard and the boys who were going to be escorts, in chastity devices. Furthermore, the sergeant has instructed them they will all stay on their cocks for at least one month. They aren’t happy but they don’t fuck with Sergeant Carter.” “That is priceless” William said. “I see the combo is ready for a break, so I thought I’d give a welcome to everyone and I think the governor is prepared to give a few remarks. Is there anything either of you would like to say?” “Only a thank you to you and Frankie for such a wonderful job on this party and on the pageant” Randy said. “You are both priceless treasures to this town and to the school. I’m just glad that I’ve gotten o know both of you and I am grateful for the examples you set and the time you give to the young folks in Gayberry.” “you’re about to make me cry, sheriff” Michael said as he hugged both men and headed toward the stage area where he took the microphone. “Ladies and gentlemen,” Michael said, “we are so pleased to welcome all of you here tonight.” He went on to introduce the sheriff and William and Gerome and Greg as new teachers at the school and honored guests at this event. “I would like to thank Sergeant Carter and the U.S. Marines who will be participating in the parade tomorrow and in tomorrow night’s pageant. My thanks to all the parents and the contestants who have given countless hours to making everything perfect. We certainly wish all the luck in the world to each one of the young women vying for the title of Miss Gayberry. In addition, Frankie and I would like to thank all of our escorts whom you have seen splashing around tonight in the pool. Jimmy, Kurt, Mark, Jeffiy, Pepe, Walt, Dopie and Billy Paul, we are grateful to you for your contributions.” The crowd gave a nice round of applause. “It is my great honor to have the honorable Governor of North Carolina, Jeremy North, and his top aide, Mr. Abraham Levin in town and in attendance here this evening. Both men have welcomed the opportunity to share a few words with you.” “I am Abraham Levin, Govenor North’s Executive Assistant” Abe began. “It is my job to make things run smoothly, which isn’t always easy. I am proud to serve this governor, this state and the city of Gayberry. We are here to serve you. While we are new to the job, we have made quite a number of visits to cities already. I can honestly tell you that we have never been made to feel as at home anywhere in this state as we have in Gayberry.” The crowd applauded. “You are lucky to live in a town like Gayberry, where people are willing to throw off the old ways and look for new ways to make things work. The governor and I know this has been a rough week for the citizens of this town � all the citizens of this town. Hate has reared its ugly head. But we must never allow hate to win. I can easily see how much you citizens love one another. I can see how you protect one another. One of your own citizens has said to me earlier today that the people in this town are like lions. Lions are at their most fierce when their cubs are threatened. That is how it should be. Lions welcome others who are willing to love and protect their cubs. When the cubs are threatened or harmed, the lion goes after them, usually with very deadly results. I love that the people of this town are like lions. Let us all strive to protect each other’s cubs like we would protect our own. Thank you.” Abe’s words were met with enthusiastic applause. The governor was then handed the microphone. “Well said, Abraham” the governor said. “I have heard from many people over the years that it is dangerous to surround oneself with too many smart people. Please pardon my language, but I am going to call `bullshit’ on that.” Everyone in the crowd laughed, especially the younger ones. “I think the only way a governor of a state can be truly effective and really accomplish things is to surround himself with all the best people. The smartest, the most intelligent, the hardest working. I will never do otherwise. Abraham is one of my best and oldest friends. He is a brilliant man who knows how to make government work for the people. He is largely responsible for my decision to run for this office. I loved teaching but Abraham urged me to get involved in government. I told him the only way I would run was if he agreed to come on board. He has done so without reservation. You have selected some quality leaders in your town. You have outstanding men like Mr. Churchill and Mr. Blount who give so much to this town. It is my plan to announce several new positions over the next week. I hope you will give me your support because without that, I cannot do the job I want to do for North Carolina. As Abe said, Gayberry has been through a rough week. It has been a week that could have caused dissent or even rioting in the streets. Yet you have all followed your leaders and have done great things. You have accomplished the peace integration of you school system and have hired your first black teachers at Gayberry School. You have black athletes competing right along their white brothers in your track and field events tomorrow, you have your first young black woman competing in the pageant tomorrow evening. All I can say is `Great job, Gayberry!’. Keep up the great work!” As the governor stepped off the platform he was met with wildly enthusiastic applause. As Randy surveyed the applauding group, he observed young Jenny standing dangerously near the edge of the pool, flanked by two Marines. She was holding yet another full cup of the pink punch and smiling with a vacant stare. One of the Marines had moved directly behind her and he saw the girl wiggle her cute teen but against his crotch. “How disappointed that horny little bitch is going to be if she’s counting on Marine dicks tonight” he snickered to himself. Michael had returned to the platform and had the microphone again. “I promised remarks to be brief and I hope I haven’t told a lie. There is, however, one other thing we would like to do tonight.” Randy was a little afraid Jenny might fall into the pool so he slowly and inconspicuously edged closer to the girl just in case he might need to grab her. “Traditionally the Miss Congeniality award has been given the evening of the pageant” Michael said. “Frankie and I made a unilateral decision to do it differently this year. We are giving the award tonight, if Velma Sue will come forward to present the award.” Velma Sue joined him on the platform holding a large trophy with a winged figure on a tall marble base. “The Miss Congeniality is an award voted on by the girls themselves. They are asked to vote for the fellow contestant who has most exemplified the spirit of the Miss Gayberry Pageant. The contestant who has been the most eager to learn and who has always been willing to help another contestant. The contestant who truly represents what our pageant should be all about. The award this year was was almost unanimous with only one vote going to another contestant. This year’s Miss Congeniality Award goes to…” Michael opened the envelope and smiled. “Miss Shakira Stuart” he announced excitedly. “Fucking nig…” Randy heard Jenny say as the sheriff clamped his hand over her mouth. He was relieved no one else appeared to have heard her as her words were drowned out by the loud applause and cheers. The girl was struggling to get free of his grip but no one else even noticed in the excitement of the moment. The announcement was greeted with the biggest ovation of the night. Shakira and her parents stood transfixed, shocked by the announcement. Gerome Bentley took the girl’s arm and escorted her to the platform to receive the award. She seemed too stunned to even speak as she received warm hugs from Velma Sue and from Michael, who put the microphone in her hand. It took a few seconds before she found her voice. “I am rarely speechless” she began haltingly. “I think my parents or either of the Bentleys will attest to that. But I am truly speechless and filled with gratitude at this moment. I would like to say thank you to Mr. Churchill and Mr. Blount for their support in every way. Thank you to Velma Sue who has made me feel so welcome from the minute I set foot in the auditorium and Mrs. Stephens and Miss Bishop who have worked tirelessly to make my clothes fit so perfectly. And thank you to the Bentley brothers who have been such a source of inspiration to me and all of us from the colony. They have always tried to instill in us the belief that we can do anything we want to do if we work hard and believe in ourselves. To all of the other contestants I say `thank you’ from the bottom of my heart. I am deeply touched and so honored just to be here. Thank you, thank you, thank you.” The applause and cheering started again just as Jenny broke free from the sheriff. “Fucking little nig…” made it past her lips before Randy realized he couldn’t get his hand over her mouth again, so he just gave the tiniest push and she went into the water. They were on the shallow end of the pool, but the Marines had not realized that as they began stripping out of their uniforms, throwing them to the ground and jumping into the water to save the girl. They were only in four feet of water so they were all fine as Jenny camp up, getting her head above water and sputtering and coughing. The Marines drug her up the side of the pool, totally soaked, her hair drenched and her dress ruined. Only the people around them knew anything had happened as the attention was still on Shakira being applauded and cheered for at the other end of the pool. Jenny’s mother and father had seen it and rushed to her. It was clear her mother smelled the alcohol on her breath and began to tell all of those who had witnessed the incident how her daughter had been forced to take pain medication for terribly painful menstrual cramps before they left home. A towel was obtained for the girl and her parents wrapped her in the large towel and got her out of there without too many people being aware anything out of the ordinary had occurred. Once Jenny was gone, there were only the Marines, Randy and William in the area. The Marines were hesitant o to leave the water, embarrassed because they knew the cages would show through their thin boxer shorts. “What’s the matter, Marines?” Randy chuckled. “Most Marines I ever knew was proud of them big, swingin’ dicks they got between their legs. Why don’t you boys show us what you got? Their fellow Marines helped them out of the water and then decided to prank them, pulling their underwear off. Both boys went running into the house buck naked, with only their cock cages covering their cocks. All the guys shared a good laugh. They began to gather their boys, heading for the limo. The boys were still in their Speedos which were only partially dry. They decided not to change as they were hoping to swim more once they were home. It was only about a quarter till nine as they left, thanking Mr. Michael and Mr. Frankie for the wonderful evening. They got hugs from the Stuart family, all of whom were still in shock. They said good night to the Bentley brothers who left with the Stuarts. The Colonel was guiding Aunt Flea and Velma Sue out at the same time Randy and William were guiding their boys out. “You and Velma Sue did quite a job dancing together tonight” William said to the Colonel. “Is there something going on there we don’t know about?” “I’m afraid not, but I sure wouldn’t mind” the Colonel said. “She’s held onto that cherry too long to give it up easily.” They all crowded into the limo. It was a bit more crowded than earlier since Eamon had joined them for the return trip. Billy Paul hid climbed into his lap. Ben and Marv sat in the front seat with the driver. Ben had his long arm around the coach and the coach leaned his head into Ben’s chest. The governor had Dopie and Pepe on his lap. Both boys had givent heir towels to their fathers so they were dressed onlyin their tiny speedos. The governor rubbed the skin on both boys’ smooth legs and bellies, focused heavily on their thin boy thighs. Walt and Jeffy were on Abe’s lap as Mark was sitting between the doctor’s legs with the man’s arms around him. William had Jimmy in his lap, gently stroking his leg. Kurt was in Randy’s lap, leaning back against his chest and enjoying the warmth of his body. Randy was boldly nuzzling the boy’s neck with his hand on his bare, cool thigh. Kurt could feel Randy growing erect against his Speedo-clad butt and shifted against him, almost imperceptibly. Randy was pleasantly surprised Kurt was hard under his speedo. Randy just enjoyed the feel and the smell of the boy as they rode along in the dark night. It was a quieter group going home than on the way over. Randy thought the boys might be too tired to want a bedtime swim as they all seemed to just enjoy being close to the men holding them. Once they were home, the boys got second winds. All of them wanted to go swimming. mersin escort Ben and Marv showed Eamon to his room and he took his bag up and settled in. The boys wanted a swim and everyone agreed to a one hours time limit as they all had to get up for the track and field events. They didn’t have to be at the field house until nine so it wasn’t like a regular school morning. All the young boys headed out to the pool and the governor, Eamon and Abe all headed upstairs, presumably to freshen up. The boys ditched their clothes and hit the pool naked, discarding their new Speedos on a table on the patio. Ben brought out towels for everyone and Marv took drink orders from the men who were now disrobing and folding their clothes, placing them on the big table with the boy’s swimsuits. Doc had cleared Marv for swimming earlier that day, so he hit the pool and got into a floating lounge chair with his ice cold beer. The doc and Mark had stripped off and they were in the hot tub, doc with a fresh beer and Mark with a bottle of water. The doc had his arm around the boy and Mark had a hand on the doctor’s thickly haired thigh. Randy and Kurt came up to the tub and asked if they might join them. They cordially invited them to join so Kurt and Randy climbed into the tub as well. Randy sat first and guided Kurt to a position between his legs with the boy leaning back into Randy’s very hairy chest. Randy rubbed the boy’s nipples and Kurt giggled. “That tickles” he said. “I’m sorry, son, he said moving his hands away. “No, no, please don’t stop doing it. It’s the good kind of tickling” he said. Randy again started rubbing the boy’s smooth chest, the soft blonde hairs almost invisible. “I want to know what drama was happening when Jenny fell into the pool” the doctor said. “Well, the girl was being her usual obnoxious self” Randy said. “When Shakira’s name was called, she was making a really nasty remark. I know I shouldn’t have, but I gave her just a tiny little push and she went into the pool.” “No, you didn’t! Mark said. “I can’t wait to tell Jimmy about that. He and I were ready to drown that little bitch tonight! Sorry, that word slipped out but she was so mean trying to make Jimmy and me jealous with those Marines. It was like she thought either of us cared what she did. She was drinking and saying nasty things to the Marines and making sure we could hear her. She was talking about what she was going to do them when she sneaked back over there later. They were making plans to sneak out and go naked swimming.” “Believe me, that will not happen” Randy said. “Michael told me tonight they had a problem at one time with people sneaking in to swim at night. They now have security patrolling at night with dogs. “It would be really runny if one of them dogs got hold of old Jenny, wouldn’t it?” Kurt said. “She’d be yelping louder than the dogs.” “I wouldn’t mind seein’ a whole pack of dogs getting’ their teeth into that little blonde snatch” Jimmy said. They were all laughing when Eamon, Abe and the governor appeared on the deck in their swimsuits. “My, that water looks delightful!” the governor said. “Yes, it does!” Eamon said. “I can hardly wait to get in there.” “I’m ready!” Abe said as the men put their towels on the table. Dopie walked right up to the governor and put both of his hands around one of the man’s thighs. “You’ve got too much clothes on” the boy said. The three men realized the boy was naked. They looked around. The governor looked as if it might be Christmas morning. He looked over at Randy and the doc. “Is everybody else naked, including all these boys?” he asked. “Yes, indeed” the doctor said. “When in Rome…” the Governor said as he dropped his bathing suit, revealing an average sized uncut cock with dark brown hair all around it He had very large balls which stretched his bag far below the end of his cock.. Although his temples were beginning to gray, no gray was apparent in his chest hair of his pubes. He had a decent treasure trail which went from around his navel to his pubes. It was a respectable cock and he seemed comfortable with being nude in front of others. He cannonballed into the water, making a large splash which the boys applauded. Abraham had also dropped his swimsuit revealing a lightly muscle body. The man was short but very fit except for a very small paunch. His legs were muscled and as hairy as the rest of him. His cock could barely be seen peeking out from his very wild jet black pubes and there was no break from his bush to his neck. When he ran his hand through his pubes, as men so often do when getting naked, it was apparent his somewhat smallish cock was circumcised. He dove into the deep end of the pool, creating very little splash. It was Eamon who owned the monster cock as all the men but doc had seen earlier. Randy saw the doc’s eyebrows raise when he spied the big, black, uncut cock which William and Randy had seen in action. Eamon followed the governor’s suit in jumping high into the air and cannonballing, creating a monster splash. All the boys and adults cheered his performance. They all seemed to enjoy the pool time together. Abe seemed to be spending time with Walt and Jeffy, throwing them into the air and riding both on his back. The floated on an air mattress, just quietly talking with Abe on one side of the mattress and the two boys on the other. Abe would, from time to time, just reach over and mess their hair or kiss the boys on the cheek. It was obvious he was a very affectionate man. The governor seemed to spend most of his time in the water with Dopie and Pepe. They were playing the same games that Abe was playing with Jeffy and Walt and they even played some horse with the boys on the men’s necks, trying to knock each other off. Billy Paul seemed to spend most of his time with his dad and the warden. They were doing some of the same things and at other times, seemed to be deep in conversation. It wasn’t long before Jimmy joined the hot tub group with the doctor easily shifting Mark to one knee and putting Jimmy on his other. Both teens seemed to like the feel of doc’s warm, hairy arm around their midsections. Marv was still in his floating lounge chair and Ben had stayed close, occasionally leaving him to play host and make sure everyone had beer or a cocktail. From time to time, they could be seen sharing a quick kiss. Ben and Marv were the first to come out of the pool. “I hope you won’t think us rude, but Marv is still recovering and I am trying to make him get as much rest as possible” Ben said. “Carry on for as long as you like. I just think I better get the old man off to beddy bye!” “Jeffy and Walt came up to get hugs from both and dads and Marv stopped off to give Mark a kiss on his cheek as Ben and Abe continued inside. Walt and Jeffy went back to the pool. Ben, could I trouble you for just a sec?” Abraham asked. “Of course” Ben said as Marv joined them and started on up to the bedroom. “Marv, if you don’t mind, I’d ike to have a word with both of you” Abe said. “Walt and Jeffy have just enlightened me on Walt’s um, uniqueness. I can’t believe I didn’t notice it. I’ve even had the boy riding on my neck and I didn’t notice it. Maybe I was just too busy admiring his beautiful soft bush. But the two of them told me about his whole story and I wanted to say how much I admire the way you’ve fathered the boy. I don’t know that I could have done it, although I’d like to think I’d have handled it nearly as well as you have.” Ben thanked him and explained that he had really only recently come to terms with the whole thing. “The boys told me about that too” Abe said. “Both of them understand that you were only acting out of fear. You wanted to protect him and the boys understand that. It amazes me that all the other kids know about it and just take it completely in stride. That speaks well for all of you as fathers.” “Thank you, Abe, but I’m afraid you’re giving us too much credit” Ben said. “I’ve noticed those two flirting with you all night” Marv chuckled. “I bet they’ve asked if they could sleep with you.” “As a matter of fact, yes they have” he said. “But I wasn’t comfortable answering them without talking to both of you. I’ll be honest. I would love to hold both those beauties all night and to wake up with them in the morning.” “I doubt they’ll let you sleep all night” Marv chuckles. “The truth is that the boys have been fooling around sexually for several months. Walt is very knowledgable about his condition and even about his own body. He is maturing quickly and is wanting to try things with a man. All he’s had so far are his friends’ little peckers. I know he wants more because we did some finger play in the hot tub a short time ago and he was wanting more” “Abe, it’s apparent how much you love kdis” Ben said. “We are good with you sleeping with our boys because we know you would never do anything to harm them. Have fun. Make them happy. Be kind to our cubs, buddy.” They walked away, leaving Abe to go back to the pool and his new buddies. When they were in their bedroom, they finished drying off. Ben went into the bathroom to brush his teeth and felt Marv come up behind him. “What’s that hard thing I feel poking against my ass?” Ben joked. “It’s my gun” Marv said and I’d like to put it in your holster.” “Man, I’m ready for you to do that but do you really think you’re sufficiently recovered for that?” Ben asked. “I do and so does the doctor” Marv said. “I asked him about it in the hot tub today when he, Kurt and I took a little break. I used fairly graphic language and poor little Kurt’s face was red as a beet.” “Y’all should be more careful. He’s one of the sweetest, kindest boys I’ve ever known and he’s so handsome too.” “Uh-oh!” Marv exclaimed, putting his hands around Ben’s waist. “Sounds like you may have a crush on the boy. Should I be worried?” “You have nothing to worry about!” Ben said. “He’s a little young for my tastes. I’m perfectly happy to have a big, burly, ginger coach in my bed. It’s something I’ve wanted for a very long time. Kurt’s just such a sweet kid. I just can’t imagine any father being so cruel to his own kid or anyone else’s for that matter.” “I know” Marv said. “I’m so glad everything happened as it did” Marv said, “although I never thought I’d be saying those words. I hope it will be the same for Kurt.” They were on the bed now and Marv gently turned the handsome principal on his tummy and reached in the bedside table drawer for a tube of KY. Coach rubbed Ben’s shoulders and began kissing his neck. He was licking his ears and darting his tongue in and out of them, which made Ben moan. Then he felt the man begin to kiss his way down Ben’s smooth, warm back, not stopping until he parted his cheeks with his hands and started to dart his tongue in and out of Ben’s manhole. This excited Ben and he moaned as the man got his hole wetter and wetter as he lapped furiously, trying to put his tongue into the man. It felt great but Ben wanted the coach’s thick hard cock inside him. “Fuck me, please?” he moaned. “I’m ready to be fucked.” Marv flipped the man over on his back, facing him and spread his legs. He handed Ben the lubricant and he quickly began to rub the cool gel on his hole even as Marv did the same thing on his fat cock. “That’s enough” Ben whispered. “Put that fat dick inside me.” Ben spread his legs as Marv got between the long legs and moved his cock right up to the entrance. Then he inserted his long, hard cock into the man in one stroke. He inserted until he was all the way inside the hot, needy hole. Then he immediately started fucking the man as he licked and gently bit his long neck. “Oh yeah,” Ben moaned. “Fuck like you have never fucked me. That’s so goddamned good.”. Marv continued his thrusting as he licked and bit his nipples and they exchanged long, wet, passionate kisses. “I hope my boy feels as good with a man cock inside him as I do” Ben said. “There’s nothing that feels this fucking good in the world.” “You can bet that kid’s going to love having a man dick in that hairy little cunt. I bet that thing will be dripping wet by the time he sticks that dick in it. I bet he’ll be begging for that hard, cut cock.” “Oh fuck yes, the thought of it is getting me close to coming and I’m not even touching my dick” Ben said. “Let your mind go, sweet man” the coach said as he continued to pound Ben’s hole. “Our boys are ready to do grown u[p stuff now and if it feels this good to us you better know fucking is going to be just as good for them.” “You want to put that fat cock of yours in Walt’s little cunny?” Ben asked, gasping for air. “I sure as fuck do it he wants it and you want to see me do it” Marv replied, speeding up his thrusting. “I’d like to watch you sucking on Jeffy’s cock while I pound that bushy little pussy! I’m getting close, buddy” Marv said as he continued his long, quick strokes. “Breed me” Ben moaned. “Breed that hole, motherfucker.” Ben’s words turned Marv on even more and he started pumping in and out. He felt the man’s hand reach for his own hard cock and begin to stoke it fast. “Fuck” Marv said. “I’m so close”. Ben began to shoot his thick, creamy load onto his tummy, creating a sticky, cummy mess between their bodies as Marv continued pumping. Ben reached around and put one of his hands on his lover’s butt cheek and gave himself into the sheer pleasure of being fucked just as Marv gave a final thrust, plunging his cock all the way into him. “Fuck, fuck, fuck!” he exclaimed as his legs went stiff and neither man moved a muscle. They lay for a time just like that as their breathing evened and slowed. Marv eased his cock out of Ben and moved to get up and get a washcloth. “Please don’t” Ben said. “Let’s just lie here in our sticky, cummy mess.” Marv moved to his side and turned to face him, Ben still on his back and Marv’s softening cock lying against his hip. Marv put a hairy arm across Ben’s flat tummy and held him. Both men were asleep in minutes. “I think it’s about time for me to hit the hay” the governor said. He had been floating around on an air mattress with Dopie and Pepe for about the last half hour. It seemed the boys were getting sleepy. “Are you boys ready to hit the bed too?” he asked the boys. “Yes, sir, Pepe said.” I think Dopie is too.” “Will you tuck us in?” Dopie asked. “Well, I’d love to do that if it’s okay with your dad” the governor answered. “It will be” Dopie answered. “But he’s over in the hot tub. You can ask him if you want to.” They got out of the water and the governor helped them wrap towels around their tiny waists, covering their flaccid little cocklets. He had been escort mersin enjoying the sight of Dopie’s completely smooth pubic area and his occasionally hard little spike and Pepe’s smooth pubic area except for just a couple of fresh sprouting hairs. It was all he could do not to rub those areas and kiss them and lick them. It had been a constant battle the entire evening. They headed inside, stopping at the hot tub to ask the sheriff if it was okay for the governor to tuck the two boys in. “Why of course it is” Randy said. “Although I doubt they’ll let you leave `em after you get `em tucked in. They’ll probably want a story and they’ll likely want belly rubs. There’s just any number of things young boys like at bedtime. You can do those things to if you’ve a mind to. Just keep our cubs happy.” It was very clear the sheriff had just given the governor permission to sleep with his young son and his friend. The governor was determined that nothing sexual would happen unless the boys wanted it which he considered unlikely. He had had fun with a few boys at the Esquire Club but all that had been before he was elected governor. He just couldn’t risk a scandal now and, besides, these were just boys from a rural town who knew nothing of things that happened in the big city. He let the boys lead him downstairs through the huge den and into the large bedroom, all of the boys sometimes shared. The two boys dropped their towels nonchalantly and climbed under the covers, leaving a space in the middle for the governor. “Dad said you might tell us a story if you wanted to” Dopie said. “Well, I’d like that” the governor said. “But I better run upstairs and put on my pajamas first.” “Why?” Pepe asked. “We’re sleeping naked and you can too. I usually always sleep with my dad and we never wear pajamas. I like the way his hairy body feels against my skin. Dopie likes that too.” “Well, if you’re sure” the governor said climbing in between the boys without removing his towel.” “You better take that towel off, governor” Pepe said. “Yeah,” Dopie said. “It’s still kinda wet and it’ll make us all cold if you keep it on.” The man slipped his towel off and both boys moved close to him. Their warm little bodies felt amazing and his hard dick was tenting the sheet. The boys acted as if they didn’t see it as each boy turned his body to face the governor and each boy put a hand on his moderately hairy chest. “Do you want to tell us a story?” Pepe asked, as he began to run his hand across one of the man’s nipples. “Umm, of course” he answered. “What’s your favorite story?” he asked. “We really like Jack and the Beanstalk” Pepe answered. “Looks like you have your own beanstalk” Dopie giggled as both he and his little friend reached for the governor’s cock which was tenting the sheet. “Boys…please…” he whispered as Pepe threw the sheet off him and both boys were now down at his crotch licking his hard cock as Dopie pulled his foreskin and began licking the juice he’d been making since getting into the bed with the beautiful naked boys. The governor gave in and just enjoyed the pleasure as Pepe had moved down and was stroking one of his thighs as his tongue lapped at his huge nut sac. Pepe was attempting to get just one of the huge nuts into his tiny mouth and he finally succeeded as the governor just groaned. The he opened his eyes just in time to see Dopie’s mouth take his entire cock in all the way to his pubes. “Jesus” he said as his eyes closed again and just enjoyed the sensation of four boy hands and two warm, wet boy mouths on his most private parts. He conjured images of their smooth pubic areas and Pepe’s brand new pubes. It was more than he could stand as he began to fill Dopie’s mouth with his hot cum. There was so much it was dribbling out but Pepe was quick to help him out as they both cleaned the man’s cock and balls of every drop. The governor was asleep and the boys covered him up and moved in close on each side of his warm body. They were asleep very shortly, but only after kissing each other sweetly. Billy Paul, being a little bit more developed than the other boys except for Walt, had been a little more open in flirting with Eamon. He had told his dad earlier that he felt the warden’s giant cock would feel good inside him. William warned his son that it was bigger than anything Billy Paul had ever had and that it grew considerably when it got hard. Billy Paul still wanted to try so William was very frank with the warden as they swam around. He had noticed the warden seemed attracted to his boy and had gotten the boy on his broad shoulders at every opportunity. He had also seemed to take every chance to stroke the boy’s legs are swipe his thickening cirle of blonde pubes around his still small penis. William took the direct approach as the three of them all had their arms across and air mattress, floating in the pool which had now emptied except for the three of them Abe, Walt and Jeffy.. “My son finds your dick fascinating, Eamon” William said. “He is interested in having some private time, if you are interested.” “Who wouldn’t be interested in such a beautiful boy?” Eamon asked. “He could make a statue hard. But aren’t you afraid I might be too rough for him?” “Not at all” William said. “I’ve only seen you n action in rough, punishing fucks. Those are for a purpose and I’ve never seen anyone do a better job of that. But Billy Pau senses a gentle side and if there’s one thing I’ve learned raising two sons, it is to trust my boys’ judgment when it comes to this type of thing. Billy Paul has more experience than the other boys here. We were members of the Esquire Club when we were in Raleigh and I think that, as much as he likes it here, there are times he misses the adventures of the city.” “Is that right, son” the warden asked the boy. “Yes, sir” he answered, “it is. And I know if my dad is friends with anyone, he’d never let another person harm me for one second. My dad’s also taught me that if I want to try something I should do it and never to back away from a challenge.” “My bedroom is nice and large and I have a fresh tube of lube up there” the warden said. “Shall we tell the others good night?” They left the pool and dried off, telling the others good night as they headed up the stairs to Eamon’s bedroom. Abe , Walt, and Jeffy were right behind them, saying good night and excusing themselves. In Eamon’s bedroom, William excused himself for a piss. When he came back, he found his beautiful naked boy locked in a kiss with the tall, handsome black man. Billy Paul was on his tiptoes and the warden was leaning down but it was working and they didn’t even hear William re-enter the room as he dropped his towel, lay down on the bed and began to stroke his slowly hardening cock as he watched the man kiss his handsome boy. It was a long, wet kiss and William could see that his son’s cock was on full hard and Eamon’s was thickening and rising even as he watched it plump up and lengthen. The man took one of Billy Paul’s hands and guided it to his lengthening cock. William heard his son gasp as he felt the hardening cock and as the warden put the boy’s hand around it and began to stroke. “You like the way that cock feels, boy?” he asked. “Yes, sir,” the boy answered in a whisper. “You ever had your hands on a big black cock before, son” the man asked. “No sir” the boy answered quietly, his voice raspy with desire. “Are you scared, boy?” he asked. “Maybe just a little” the boy whispered. “No need to be scared, son” Eamon said. “Your daddy’s right here with us. Neither one of us would let any man hurt you. Do you believe that?” “Yes, sir” the boy said quietly. “Can I watch you lay down there beside your daddy and give him a kiss?” Eamon asked. “That’s something I’ve always wanted to see. A handsome boy and his handsome daddy treating each other a boy and his daddy should.” The boy lay beside his father, who took him in his arms and gave him his tongue. Billy Paul eagerly took his dad’s tongue into his mouth, sucking on it and then sharing his own with his father who accepted it into his mouth eagerly. Eamon lay on the bed behind the boy and began to stroke one of his bare, smooth thighs. His touch made Billy Paul turn slightly, more onto his back and his legs spread. “Look at that boy spread his legs” Eamon said. “That’s a sure sign a boy wants his hole filled up. Is that what you want, boy?” “Yes, sir` the boy said. The boy was still kissing his dad when Eamon turned him completely facing his father and bent down, separating his buttocks with his big hands, exposing the boy’s bright pink hole with just a few brown and blonde hairs. The man begant o lick the hole with all the energy he had and Billy Paul started gasping. “Fuck yeah” the boy aid. His father resumed the deep kissing, his boy now moaning into his own mouth, his words unintelligible. Billy Paul felt the man’s very large, very strong hands splitting his butt cheeks All he could think about was the man’s tongue in his tender hole and his dad’s wet tongue in his mouth. The he felt something else. One of them was now begging to stroke Billy Paul’s rock hard cock. It was his dad who was touching his cock. William was aware the boy’s cock had grown since he had last seen it hard or touched it and he noticed the boy’s balls were slightly larger too. William realized how badly he wanted to taste his boy’s cock and began to move his body down to suck him just as Eamon started to shift the boy onto his knees. William managed to get his head beneath the boy’s crotch and took his entire cock into his mouth. The boy tasted as sweet as ever and he savored the taste of his own flesh and blood as Eamon now began to tease the boy’s spit-slick hole with his now lubricated fingers. The warden used two fingers on the boy from the very beginning and was amazed at the elasticity he found. He hadn’t enjoyed much ass this young and was eager to feel the velvety tissue around his thick meat. He started fingerfucking the boy a little more roughly and the boy’s moaning increased. He could feel the boy’s fucknut, more develo0ped than he had expected in a boy this age. He began to knead the gland and the boy started moaning even louder. Eamon reached around and put a finger in the boy’s mouth to muffle him and the boy began to suck on his finger. “You’ve got a beautiful mouth on you, son and I’d love to feel it on my cock but we got another goal right now” the warden said quietly into the boy’s ear. He kissed the boy’s neck and licked its length as he lined up his thick, long meat with the boy’s tiny pink hole and began to gently push inside. Billy Paul moaned loudly and the warden stopped, letting the boy get used to his girth. When he began to wiggle a little, the warden took it as a sign he wanted more. He knew he had read the sign correctly when the boy reached back with his own hands and pulled his cheeks wider. Eamon knew the boy wanted his whole cock and he gave it to him. He applied more pressure and he felt his monster meat slide all the way into the boy. Billy Paul moaned loudly as he felt the giant meat slip into him. It was as tight and hot on his dick as Eamon had expected. He started with long , slow strokes, knowing he couldn’t last long. He could hear the boy’s father slurping on his cock which made it all the hotter as he set up a regular rhythm, sliding his fat hardon all the way into the boy then pulling out right to the edge before plunging back in, each time with a little more force. The boy’s hole was so tight, the warden could feel his foreskin slide over his cockhead with every stroke, something he hadn’t felt for a very long time. He felt his nut building and tried to hold it off, wanting this to last. He managed for a couple of minutes but that was as long as he could take it. He felt his load rise from deep inside him and through his nuts. Just as he began to shoot, he pulled his cock out of the boy completely and began to shoot thick, white ropes of cum onto the boy’s gaping red hole. He shot eight or ten thick ropes of hot cum onto the boys fuckhole, then he enjoyed the sight of rubbing his cum all around the boy’s hole, covering it with a thin white film before he lined his still-hard cock up with the hole and re-inserted it. He heard Billy Paul moan and knew the sound was the sound of a boy getting his climax. He kept his cock in the tight hole as the boy’s legs stiffened and his body trembled. “Get5 that nut, boy” Eamon said quietly As the boy’s body began to relax, he heard William’s moans and knew the man had shot his own load somewhere. At that point Eamon didn’t really care where. He didn’t want to take his cock out of that beautiful, warm, pink hole so he turned back onto his side, holding the boy’s body tightly to him He saw the boy’s dad’s head between his legs as he moved up in the bed so that the boy was sandwiched between them. Billy Paul was already asleep and the men were not far behind him. In Eamon’s bedroom, Abe was now in bed with Walt and Abe, each boy under one of his arms, all three lying on their backs. Abe thought maybe the boys weren’t in the mood for any play and he was fine with that. He was happy just to have two beautiful kids in his bed. Just as he was about to doze off, he heard Jefft’s soft voice. “Mr. Abe, are you asleep” the boy asked quietly. “No, Jeffy, I’m awake” the man answered. “Are you okay?” “Yes, sir, I’m real good. This feels really nice. I like all the hair on your body. So does Walt.” “I’m glad you like my hairy self” he chuckled. “I’m almost like a hairy monkey. I started growing hair at about your age and it just never slowed down.” He heard Walt giggle softly. “I like it too” Walt said. “I told Jeffy earlier I like it. That’s how he knew. Would you mind if we touched you? We’ve played with our buddies but never with a grown man before.” “I’d love to feel you boys touching my body if you really want to” Abe said, feeling his dick rising. “I just don’t want either of you to do anything you don’t really want to do. No one should ever do that.” In the dim blue light of the nightlight, he could see the boys both looking at him. The sheet was down to his waist, revealing his thick, dark chest fur, his hairy arms and his very hairy pits. He felt a boy’s hand on each side of his chest, rubbing him and touching his nipples which had hardened. He had his arms around the boys and he pulled them even closer. As if on cue, each boy took one of his nipples into his mouth and began to suck. Abe moaned softly. “That feels so good, boys” the man said. “Do you boys do that to each other?” he asked. “I like it okay when somebody licks my nipples but mersin escort bayan Walt really likes it a lot. He says it makes him feel all itchy down there.” “Down where?” the man asked. “Down in my cunny” Walt answered. “It makes me feel like I have to touch it and rub it. It’s like they’re connected. Sometimes it makes me a little bit crazy just thinking about how good it feels.” “Do you feel like that right now, Walt?” the man asked. “Yes, sir” Walt said. “Do you want to rub it” he asked shyly. “I’d love to if that’s something you want me to do.” Abe said. “As a matter of fact I’d love to rub and look at it up close. You’re a very unique boy and I think both of you are just beautiful.” Walt kicked the sheet off all three of them. He then guided the man’s hand down toward the thick bush. “That’s the softest hair I’ve ever felt” Abe said. “Do you mind if Jeffy and I take a close look at your sweet little cunt?” “I’d like that” he said. “A lot. It makes me feel excited when someone looks at it. My dad didn’t want me to let anyone see it for a long time but now he’s all right with it.” “I know” Abe said. “Your dad shared that with me. He wanted very much to protect you and I’d have done the same if I had been lucky enough to have a boy like you.” He moved Walt in between himself and Jeffy now, both of them lowering their faces to Walt’s soft bush. “I get real hard when I look at it and even harder when I touch his cunny” Jeffy said. .” Billy Paul and the other boys do too.” “That’s natural” Abe said. “If boys didn’t like the way a cunnie feels, there wouldn’t be any more babies made. It’s the way things work.” Jeffy was rubbing one of Walt’s thighs and it was obvious Walt liked his touch on his body. Abe put his hand on the boy’s soft bush and brought his face close, inhaling the sweet aroma. Walt began trembling as he felt Abe’s fingers inch slowly closer to his cunt. When his finger touched the boy’s clit, there was a sharp intake of breath. He began to stimulate the large clitoris with his index finger, licking it first to make sure it was lubricated. Walt was moaning and breathing faster now. When Abe first touched the clit, the boy had thrown his legs wide, obviously welcoming his touch. Jeffy had moved back up and was now sucking on one of Walt’s nipples. Abe shifted down so that he was now between the boy’s outstretched legs, his face inches from the pinkness. Walt was moaning as Abe fingered the clitoris. It was swelling even further and puffing up like a tiny cock. Abe could feel the clitoris getting firmer as if it were a cock. He touched his tongue to the clit, sucking on it like the tiny cock it was. Walt immediately started having an orgasm. It was a hard one as the boy grabbed a handful of the man’s hair and pushed his face into him. He looked up to see that Jeffy had continued to rub one of his nips with his hand and was now kissing the boy to muffle the sounds of his orgasm. Abe realized he hadn’t even penetrated the boy and he’d experienced a shaking orgasm. He looked to his side and saw Jeffy’s little rock hard cock. He removed his mouth from the clit and engulfed the boycock in his mouth and started sucking. Jeffy continue kissing Walt as he sucked the boy’s cock. A few strokes and Jeffy was now having his dry climax. He held the boy’s cock in his mouth as it softened, even as he stroked Walt’s soft bush. As both boys seemed to wind down from their climaxes, Abe gently moved Jeffy back to his side of the bed. Then he heard Walt’s soft voice. “You don’t have to stop now, Mr. Abe. Unless you want to. I can do that a couple more times if you want to. If you don’t then…” Abe put a finger to Walt’s lip and smiled at him. “Walt, I could eat that beautiful cunny of yours all night long. You’re lucky. All your buddies have to have a break after they get their tremblies. You cn keep going and keep going. You’re a very lucky boy. He moved back down and put his face to the cunt. Walt spread his legs and Abe began to finger the clit again. It wasn’t long before he had another orgasm, holding Abes finger on his clit. But Walt wanted more. He kept taking the man’s finger and putting it on his tiny hole. Abe was afraid he might hurt the boy but Walt was insistent. “Please put your finger in me. I’ve had my friend’s cocks but I’m ready for more. Dr. Carol said I would know and I know I’m ready” the boys aid. “Only if you promise to tell me immediately if anything I do is uncomfortable” Abe said. “I promise” Walt whispered. “Cross my heart.” Abe moved up beside the boy. He realized that the boy was only a few inches shorter than he and he began to kiss the boy as he rubbed his breasts and his hairy little tummy. “My God, Walt, you’re so wonderful” he whispered as they exchanged, deep, wet kisses. Abe lowered his hand and began to stroke the boy’s flat tummy which already had the beginnings of what would eventually be a thick treasure trail. He followed it again until his fingers were again in the ultra-soft bush. As he began to again manipulate the boy’s sensitive clitoris he began to whimper. He was humping the man’s hand now, anticipating his touch. Abe’s fingers felt t he wetness of the boy’s vagina now. Walt was moaning even louder as he approached that. He stuck a finger in the boy’s mouth, Walt figuring out that he wanted it lubricated to make penetration more comfortable. He slowly removed the finger and lowered it again. He kissed the boy deeply as he inserted his thick finger into the boy’s slick vagina. Walt gasped loudly as the finger penetrated. His finger was thicker than the boy dicks Walt had been entered by and it felt hot and warm and wonderful as this real man began to fingerfuck him. Walt’s hands were all over the man, stroking his hairy chest and groping his hairy buttocks. It was if the boy couldn’t get the man close enough. Walt knew what he wanted and he wanted it now. “Please fuck me” he said, moaning and breathing faster. “Please put your dick in me.” Walt had his hand around the man’s dick now. If Abe’s cut cock had ever been this hard, he didn’t remember it. He knew he wanted to penetrate the beautiful boy but he also knew it could hurt and he didn’t want that. But Walt was begging for him to give him his first fucking by a man. He moved on top of him, carefully lining up his cock with the wet, hot opening. “Take a deep breath, baby boy” he whispered.” “Do it, please” Walt begged. “Please put it in me.” He rammed his six inch cock into the wettest, warmest place it had ever been. The sensations were incredible. The velvety feeling on his dick and the moaning and begging by the boy combined to make Abe give the boy a fucking he’d never forget. He felt the boy’s hands on his hairy ass, urging him on as he began to pump his cock in and out. Walt was moaning and touching his clit as the cock filled him. It felt huge to Walt and he loved the feeling of being fucked as well as the idea of being man-fucked. As he gained confidence that the boy was enjoying the fuck as much as he, he began to pull his cock completely out on each upstroke, only to plunge the whole thing back in. He could feel Walt’s big boyclit grazing his cock on every stroke, which turned him on and was having a strong effect on the boy as he began to get louder and beg more. Walt was having another climax as the man continued to punch into her cunt and stimulate that engorged clitoris. As Walt reached the pinnacle of his climax, Abe slowed his strokes and began to kiss the boy again. He fondled the tiny boytits as he gave him back every bit as much tongue as he was getting. Abe felt like a superman being able to give this kid so much pleasure and he knew his own cock was harder than it had ever began. As he was slow-stroking his hard dick in and out of the hot, wet place, he felt another pair of hands on his hairy ass, spreading his buttocks. Before he could even react, he felt Jeffy’s hot tongue licking his hairy hole and lapping at him as if the boy was trying to fuck him with his little tongue. “Oh fuck boy!” Abe said. “Eat that hole! Tonguefuck that hole!” As Jeffy lapped on the manhole, Abe started pumping Walt’s cunnie harder, again taking long strokes and punching back in. When he felt Jeffy’s finger enter him and hit his fucknur, he knew it was the beginning of the end. He began pounding the boy’s little pussy as they exchanged tongues. Walt was reaching yet another peak as Abe felt his cum rising from deep in his nuts and making its way into the loveliest pussy he had ever had the joy of experiencing. He shot what felt like a gallon of his cream into the tight little hole that had just had its first fuck from a mandick. He lay exhausted on the boy for a while, then Jeffy guided him back to his place in the middle of the bed. Both Jeffy and Walt put an arm around the man as if to protect him and they went to sleep with Jeffy’s hand in his hairy chest and Walt’s in his thick, black bush. In the hot tub, Doc still had Jimmy on one knee and Mark on the other. They had been teasing each other all night, but as the pool crowd had dwindled, the three had gotten just a touch more serious. Doc had rubbed and stroked the boys arms all night, obviously affectionate toward both boys. Jimmy, who once had bristled at even being touched by another man was now enjoying the feel of the doc’s hairy, fit body as he was frequently stroking his chest and his thigh. It was clear young, handsome Jimmy had changed his attitude and was clearly enjoying the bodies of the doc and his friend Mark. Randy even saw them kissing a few times, which was enjoyable to anyone watching. Mark was a handsome ginger teen and Jimmy was a very good-looking boy of just sixteen. “I better get these boys upstairs and to bed before they start something they can’t finish.” All three of them stood and climbed out of the tub, the boys still in their cock cages and the doctor’s fact, uncut cock, nestled in his salt and pepper bush, fully erect. They helped dry each other and it was clear the three enjoyed each other’s company as well as each other’s touch. They made their way up the stairs to the attic bedroom and were in the same beds within minutes, both boys playing with the doctor’s thick meat. Mark watched his good buddy Jimmy suck dick for the first time that night and the experience was enjoyed by all, especially the doctor. It was totally quiet in the pool area now, Randy and Kurt the only ones remaining. Randy put his arm around the boy and Kurt snuggled close to him, his head on the sheriff’s chest. “Son, are you feelin’ okay?” Randy asked Kurt. “You’ve been real quiet for about the last thirty minutes.” “Yes sir” the boy said. “I feel fine. I just know that they’re all goin’ upstairs to do sex stuff and have fun. I think you should go with `em and have fun. I’m fine and you don’t have to babysit me. I’m a big boy.” “I know you are, Kurt” Randy said, holding the boy tighter. “You’re a beautiful, wonderful boy. And you’re much too big a boy to need a babysitter.” “I know they’re all going’ upstairs to have fun and do sex stuff” Kurt said quietly. “And that makes you uncomfortable?” Randy asked. “Yes, sir,” the boy said quietly. “I hate that it does but when I let myself think about those things, it makes me start getting’ excited. Then all I hear is my paw’s words callin’ me a pervert and beatin’ me and all the stuff that happens. I want to enjoy doin’ that stuff and I sure don’t want you to be deprived of all that because of me. ” “Son, you’re the bravest boy I know” Randy said. “Most boys couldn’t have survived what you went through. I need you to know that I am crazy about you and I want to protect you. You need time to heal from all that. Why, what you went through just that one night at your uncle’s church was more than most boys could get past. But it ain’t made you angry and mean. You’re one of the most loving boys I’ve ever known and I’ve known a few boys.” “Sheriff, I ain’t brave at all” Kurt said, tears in his eyes. “I feel scared all the time except when we’re like we are right now. Right now I ain’t scared at all but I know that sooner or later when I have to go home, my paw’s gonna be furious.” “Oh no, boy,” Randy said. “Them days is over. Your paw ain’t never gonna hurt you nor any other boy again. Neither is your uncle. Did you think I’d ever let you go back to them awful men. I’m so sorry. I should’ve been clear with you that those days are over. As a matter of fact, I want you with me and Dopie wherever we are for as long as you want to be with us.” The boy was sobbing now, tears flowing freely. “Are you sure?” The boy asked. “You’re the busiest man in these parts and I know you ain’t got time for a boy like me. You need to be enjoyin’ yourself and don’ stuff…” The sheriff put a finger to the boy’s lips. He held the boy’s face to his own and just held him until the sobs stopped. “Kurt, I need to tell you something.” The sheriff said, holding him close. “You’ve been through stuff that would wound any little wounded bird beyond repair. But you survived it. You’ve got some deep hurts but those are going to heal. It’s hard for you to trust and it’s hard to put all those awful things your paw said to you out of your head. It will take time, son, but it will happen. We’ll make it happen. Do I want to have sex with you? Hell yes, I do, but I’m a patient man. I want you to enjoy that hot little body of yours and that pretty cut cock. I ain’t in no rush. I can take care of things for myself as long as I need to so you can have time. And I promise you it will happen. And I promise I ain’t givin’ up. I ain’t ever givin’ up, son. If you ain’t comfortable with us even bein’ naked together right now, we can put some drawers on and sleep in pajamas. We’ll do what it takes until you can ask me to do things with you. Hell, I ain’t the most experienced man in the world when it comes to sex stuff, but there ain’t nothin’ I wouldn’t try with you or do for you. But not till you’re ready to do them things. Do you understand me?” “Yes, sir” he said. “I love being naked with you. I’ve never felt safer than when I feel your warm body beside me. And I love even being naked around all the others. I really like sleeping with you naked beside me. Sometimes I wake up and feel scared to death. But then I hear you breathing and feel you up against me and I ain’t scared no more. ” “I think we better get your cute little naked ass up to bed cause we got a busy day tomorrow” the sheriff said, stepping out of the tub and grabbing a big towel. He helped the boy out and began to dry his body. The bruises were still there and randy began to kiss each one. The sheriff put his arm around the towel-clad boy and led him up the stairs. Kurt slid into the bed between the cool shirts first, with the big, burly sheriff sliding in right behind him and holding him in his arms. Both slept soundly, the big, hairy naked man holding the beautiful, smooth naked boy.

Live long and prosper.
Trying to convince my cousin to join the DTT forums by showing off the bike he just finished. He worked on it for about a year and a half. I think he did a fantastic job. He already picked up another one that he is about to start. Definitely won't do the ton but it is a very nice bike.

The first-time father was all smiles as he walked around the grounds and chatted to local farmers, show-goers and judges.
When asked about his newborn, Prince William joked that the royal baby was "pretty loud and extremely good-looking," and added that there had been "just a few sleepless nights but [George] is sleeping much better now".
Prince William and his wife Kate Middleton spent much of Kate's pregnancy in Anglesey, where he is based as a search and rescue pilot. It is largely thought that Wednesday's visit is the prince's official farewell to the island that has been his home for several years.
Addressing the crowds with a speech, the new father called Anglesey "an immensely special place for us both" and said the couple would be returning again and again with their new family.
Earlier on in the visit, Prince William watched gundog and falconry displays, and was presented with his own glove to take part in the show the locals had put on.
Watching the gundog display, he joked that he "should have brought Lupo for the spaniel show," referring to the couple's dog.
"He would have just run off and never come back again," the royal told ITV. "It would have been very embarrassing."
Kate and Prince George, meanwhile, have remained at her parents' home in Berkshire. With the recent birth of the royal baby, it is widely thought that Prince William will return to London where he can care for his new family. He will reportedly join his regiment, the Household Cavalry's Blues and Royals, which will allow him to carry out more royal engagements in support of the Queen.

I've been to the Hope and Anchor many times and always enjoyed it, so decided that for my wife's birthday we would take the brand new two tunnels walk and have a birthday lunch. The walk was just fine, not challenging and lots to look at. The pub was great, really very busy for a Monday afternoon, almost all of the tables were taken, brilliant. Nice menu with lots of different food to choose from, I thought it was a bit pricey but then as it was a birthday that was fine, for an ordinary lunch I'd have to choose more carefully, but then I'm a bit tight. The service was great, I've read some of the earlier reviews about grumpy staff, didn't experience that at all, the young lady who served us was great very charming, knew all about the menu and was very welcoming and encouraged us to return, all in all a great lunch and soon to be repeated.
Own or manage this property? Claim your listing for free to respond to reviews, update your profile and much more.

I just went for a quick 3-day holiday and had an amazing time. I arrived at midnight on a Friday, which meant that I wouldn't get to the inn until 2am and the driver was prompt and had everything arranged for me.
The beach was lovely and I was able to stand on the surf board quite a few times in just some short lessons on the long board.
A tour through Matara, looking at temples, the Sunday market and a snake farm (which wasn't really a farm-- more like one guy's collection of big and venomous snakes in his garage), was really nice. Nothing was too touristy and everything felt very chill and fun-- it was almost like being taken around by some local friends.
The only things I didn't like as much were:
- too many places required our shoes off and Priyal had suggested that we walk barefooted to a temple, which (unknown to me) was across a metal bridge that was blazing hot from the afternoon sun. Little did I know that I was in for what felt like a walk across hot coals.
- our rickshaw kept stalling (at least 5 times within a few hours)
- and overall, there were just too many mosquitos in/near the inn, despite mosquito nets and insect repellant.
All in all, an excellent long weekend and a very efficient, cost-effective tour company!
If you own or manage Shaka Sign Surf Camps, register now for free tools to enhance your listing, attract new reviews, and respond to reviewers.

Topic: If you have a friend who is an OW, how did you handle it?
Member # 37991
| Posted: 4:24 PM, June 11th (Tuesday)|
The post by WillGetBy on expressing hurt feelings got me thinking about a close friend who had really hurt my feelings lately. We have known each other about 8 years and been pretty close friends during this time.
This friend was an OW, TWICE, during our friendship.
The first time was for several months, about a year after we got to be friends. She worked with OM#1, she was married, he was married. The A went on for a couple of months, then he ended it. Neither one of the spouses found out.
THEN my friend hooked up with ANOTHER guy at work, also married.
This time, he left his wife and 12 year old daughter. His wife tried to kill herself (unsuccessfully). They did separate and divorce.
All the time he was seeing (and sleeping with) my friend. Their relationship lasted 4 years. Early on in the A, she divorced her husband.
Maybe it was an exit affair for both of them, IDK. But, they did not end up together. She tried to break up with him DOZENS of times (I am not exaggerating). Well, a dozen and a half anyway ! Unfortunately, I listened to a lot of angst from my friend -- wouldn't do that now !!
At the time, I had NO experience with infidelity, and expressed mild disapproval to my friend. I refused to do anything social if OM#2 was involved, although my friend and I got together from time to time (it was easy to bow out of social events with her and OM#2, because we live about 1 hr. apart, I still had kids at home then, etc.)
Now, of course, I think I would really let a friend who was an OW have a piece of my mind, and re-think the friendship.
So, curious -- anyone here have a friend who was an OW (or OM for that matter) and how did you handle it ??
exWSO, who cares
Kicked him to the curb 11/21/12
I tramp a perpetual journey.
― Walt Whitman, Song of Myself
Posts: 114 | Registered: Jan 2013 | From: Red State SE US
Member # 36599
| Posted: 4:54 PM, June 11th (Tuesday)|
I had a friend with whom I worked in college. We worked in a restaurant. One day, when she came into work, she told me her boyfriend was actually married and that she had deliberately befriended his wife. The whole family was going to come in, husband, wife and two young children, and the wife was going to request to be seated in her station. I was to make sure that there was a good table available and that they would get it. He was a uniformed police officer.
I was surprised, sickened, and shocked. I seated them at her table and went straight to the bathroom where I was sick. I did not confront her about her actions but we were no longer friends.
If it happened now I would seat them, then proceed to explain the situation, and then likely walk out of the restaurant.
My WH knows this story. He knows how badly it affected me. Just one more thing that didn't matter to him.
2 Ddays and lots of TT
Scars remind us where we've been. They don't have to dictate where we're going. (Criminal Minds)
I saw him, I could not unsee him. -StrongButBroken
Posts: 452 | Registered: Aug 2012
Member # 22033
| Posted: 5:02 PM, June 11th (Tuesday)|
My sister was the OW twice.
It's not easy, to say the least.
Her second was while I was going through D-Day #1.
I asked her over and over not to talk to me about "him".
She still did.
I remember one drive to see a friend in a neighboring town where I was having anxiety attacks the whole trip, because she just talked about him...how his wife was a horrible mother and kept the house a mess...that he was going to leave her....that they were going to move to the beach....etc... I told her that maybe the wife was totally depressed because her husband treats her like crap and cheats on her and maybe that is why she doesn't want to keep a clean house. I got a "maybe"...but no break-through.
[This message edited by tabitha95 at 5:04 PM, June 11th (Tuesday)]
BW (me) - 44
DS 13, DS 11
D-Day#1: Oct 30, 2008
D-Day#2: June 3, 2011 (same MOW) Separation: June 3, 2011
Divorce finalized: Feb 2012 (due to 6 month waiting period).
Posts: 3190 | Registered: Dec 2008
Member # 35229
| Posted: 5:33 PM, June 11th (Tuesday)|
I have broken friendships in the past with a few friends who were active APs (one of them male) and a few WS's. I would do the same today albeit with some very harsh departing words.
I have a very dear friend who was an OW twice many years ago (well before we were close). We discussed it at length years before DD - I thought of those discussions often post-DD and we have discussed it since.
She and they were expats living abroad. She was given the bullshit stories "we're separated", "living apart", "its a financial arrangement". She was in a very dark and lonely place. She couldn't find an available guy and these married guys directed so much time and energy her way she self-medicated in the false adulation. It did her much damage and still impacts her life to this day even though she was never outed.
In all of those discussions she has expressed disgust at herself and her APs. She said she would never embark on a relationship with either of them. She acknowledged how fucked up and broken she was and has done a lot of work to address her issues.
My own experience has churned up some pretty nasty stuff for her too. She said seeing it from this perspective hammered it home for her as to how hideous and terrible her own choices were. She had some idea but seeing/hearing it was like a slap in the face.
I have empathy for her and I think it has helped me not become obsessed with any of the OW in my own case. If it wasn't them it would be someone else. If all women chose not to have affairs then the waywards would seek out sex workers.
I could not be friends with an AP or a WS. Even before DD - certainly since.
ETA my own unmarried sister was a serial WGF throughout her early twenties. It was not something we every discussed outright (she knew better) but post-DD she too expressed disgust at herself.
I would cut her off if she was a WS or AP now - I suspect even pre-DD our relationship would have become impossible.
[This message edited by StrongButBroken at 5:37 PM, June 11th (Tuesday)]
If things start happening, don't worry, don't stew, just go right along and you'll start happening too. -Dr Seuss
Posts: 4477 | Registered: Apr 2012 | From: Australia
Member # 30024
| Posted: 5:38 PM, June 11th (Tuesday)|
I ended an over 25 year friendship with one of my dearest friends because she kept hooking up with married men and was also married herself.
She didn't start doing this until years later in our friendship. I stayed friends with her for about a year after she started this behaviour and then realized I couldn't continue our friendship, because, quite frankly her behaviour sickened me. I didn't even know then that my FWH had cheated on me, too.
BW (me) 50ish FWH 50ish
Married 34 years, 3 children
d-day 3/10 LTA (4 yrs./fucking & flirting)
"Oh, why do my actions have consequences?" ~ Homer Simpson
"She knew my one weakness: That I'm weak!" ~ Homer Simpson
Posts: 8915 | Registered: Nov 2010 | From: The Great White North USA
Member # 31349
| Posted: 6:15 PM, June 11th (Tuesday)|
I ended a 10 year long friendship with someone who was an OW and thought her situation was unique. I tried to get her to see reason, and to realize how incredibly insulting her behavior was to ME on top of all the other reasons why it was bad. Her response? "She's a bitch to him and I NEED the attention."
10 years. Done.
I'm sorry seeking, it's not easy.
For last year's words belong to last year's language
And next year's words await another voice.
And to make an end is to make a beginning. - T.S. Eliot
Posts: 14522 | Registered: Feb 2011 | From: California
Member # 36385
| Posted: 6:15 PM, June 11th (Tuesday)|
I have an ex friend who was an OW and a WS all in one. I was friends with both her and her BH. When I found out about the A, I stopped being her friend.
Reconcilation attempt didn't last long...WH moved out 8/10/12
Divorcing... hoping to be done soon
Making a fantastic NB for myself and my family!
Posts: 535 | Registered: Aug 2012
Member # 29183
| Posted: 6:19 PM, June 11th (Tuesday)|
I had a friend who was my absolute ROCK in the aftermath of the A and WXH abandoning us, and prayed with me almost daily and became a second mother to my children and we practically lived at her house.
I moved away from where she lived and eventually found out that she left her husband (she has always claimed abuse and I have no reason to doubt that, though I never saw any signs, though I also know that doesn't mean anything). What made it all a big complicated mess was she was having an emotional affair with another guy, sexting and whatnot, and confiding in him, though I believe her when she says it didn't go beyond that.
She did admit that it was stupid and wrong, but she still justified a lot of it, too. We had a huge fight on Skype one night that left me bawling (which she apologized profusely for later). I couldn't separate what she did from what WXH did. She has nothing to do with OM now (as far as I know) and I have every reason to believe she is no longer an OW. Her ex has made hers and her children's lives a living hell in the time since she left. He keeps the kids from her for weeks at a time and has left her destitute. And while I still support her in prayer and get in touch every few months to see how she's doing, I had to step WAY back, emotionally, from the bond and connection I had with her. It was heartbreaking, but I couldn't deal with it.
3 amazing kidlets
To WXH "Now you're just somebody that I used to know." http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d9NF2edxy-M
D-day and separation - June, 2009
Divorced - December, 2011
Posts: 2496 | Registered: Jul 2010 | From: A better place
Member # 31094
| Posted: 10:05 AM, June 12th (Wednesday)|
2 of my friends were OW. I outed them both.
I told them both that I would not support their choices, that they were hurting innocent people, and until they ended their "relationships" they were not to speak to me.
One ended it after I outed her and her "boyfriend" to his wife. The wife was an acquaintance of mine...not even a friend. She thanked me for telling her and filed for D. My friend, thankfully, stayed away from the guy. She said she realized when she spoke to the BW how awful she (the OW) was and how hurtful her choices were. We've been able to remain friends.
The other one took it underground and I haven't spoken to her since. I hear through the grapevine that "he's going to leave his wife ANY day now". It's been over 10 yrs. The BW prefers to look the other way as long as "he always comes home."
Posts: 3057 | Registered: Feb 2011 | From: NWPA
|Topic Posts: 9|| |

Hello, and thank you for joining this special edition of the American Revolution. I had the opportunity to speak with Lindsay Chervinsky, author of the book The Cabinet: George Washington and the Creation of an American Institution.
Dr. Chervinsky is a historian of Early America, the presidency, and the government — especially the president’s cabinet. She speaks and writes frequently on the history of the executive branch and how it has evolved over time.
I spoke with Dr. Chervinsky over a remote call.
Michael J Troy (MJT) Lindsey Chervinsky. Welcome to the American Revolution podcast.
Lindsey M Chervinsky (LMC) Thanks so much for having me. I'm excited to be here.
MJT You've written this book called The Cabinet, George Washington and the Creation of an American institution. It takes a look at the Washington administration, the first administration of the new constitution and how the cabinet work within that administration. What exactly drew you to this topic?
LMC Well, when I started reading about this time period, I was looking for books that explained where the cabinet came from, and knew that it wasn't in the Constitution. And yet every president appeared to have one. And so I was trying to figure out how that came to be. And I couldn't find anything. And it turns out, actually that the last book that was published was in 1912. And it looked at the legislation that created each executive department. But other than that, no one had ever really written about where this institution came from, and how it evolved. And when I discovered that gap in the literature, I was so excited and spent the next eight years hoping, you know, no one would beat me to it.
MJT So where exactly did the cabinet come from? Is this drawing on, I assume, British and colonial traditions?
LMC Well, it certainly draws on British linguistic traditions. But we can talk about that in a moment. The real cabinet actually came from Washington's desire in real time to manage all of the challenges that were facing the administration and him as the first president. He tried really hard to stick to what was actually written in the Constitution, which notably, the cabinet was very explicitly rejected from. The delegates to the Constitutional Convention, we're very worried about recreating the British cabinet and their government. And so they had voted against proposals for a cabinet. Washington really tried to stick to that. But a couple of years into his presidency, he just concluded that the options that had been laid out to him were inefficient, and insufficient to provide the sort of advice and feedback that he needed. So he created the cabinet and then modeled those practices off of his former leadership experience in the Revolutionary War.
MJT George Washington famously held councils of war while he was commander in chief of the Continental Army. And I'm pretty confident he drew on a lot of those traditions. The King of England, of course, had the Privy Council and also something called the cabinet. A lot of the colonial governors also had boards or counselors or some small group of men. And unfortunately, it was always men at the time, who formally advised the governor on how to run a colony.
|Dr. Lindsay M. Chervinsky|
Then the British cabinet - all Americans knew that it existed had really emerged out of the Privy Council, and it was sort of a group of the kings favorites. But because these meetings took place behind closed doors, and were very secret, it wasn't always clear who was making decisions, who was advocating which policy, who had the king's ear, and that lack of transparency was very concerning to most Americans. And during the Revolution, most colonists had come to blame that British cabinet actually for instigating the conflicts that led to the war. So they were very concerned about replicating that sort of corruption, and cronyism at the highest levels of government, which is why they had rejected that proposal.
And then Washington with his counsels of war, he found that to be a very useful exercise when he was the commander in chief. He would use counsels of war to, of course, get advice, but also to build consensus among his officers or to obtain cover for potentially controversial decisions. I think it's really important to note that when he convened his councils of war, he never went in and dictated a policy and asked them to basically approve it. He genuinely convened these groups as a discussion and as a way to test out different ideas and theories. But that required a lot of careful management because anyone knows the personalities that were involved in that group. They were not wallflowers. These were big egos and big ambitions and they were very concerned with their honor and usually thought they were right. So it required very careful management for Washington to kind of keep all of these people together. And so he basically copied and pasted those exact same policies from the council of war, both how he used them and how he managed them into the presidency. And that's what he decided to use for the cabinet.
MJT It sounds like a council would be a pretty important part of government as far as advising a leader, and we see it used in all these previous examples, why was the Constitutional Convention so afraid to put something in like that, even as a check on the presidency?
LMC Well, they really had three separate concerns. So one of the main goals, of course, of the Constitutional Convention was to create a more powerful president. So they did not want a system like in the states, because the goal was to kind of keep executive power and legislative power separate. So they didn't want a body that would be a go between and would check the president in that way.
They were also very concerned that if they had a council like this, it would make it difficult for one person to be in charge, and for the American citizens to hold that person accountable. So if there was a group decision, who was the person that actually suggested a policy? who was the person that made that choice? And they felt that a council would really obscure that sort of clear decision making that they really wanted to be available and transparent for the American people.
And finally, they felt like if there was this group, that would tempt a president or perhaps a president's friends or family members to try and get their colleagues and their associates placed on this board, and it would just be a little bit too much of a temptation for corruption. And that was not something they really wanted to encourage either.
But they were very reasonable men, as you said, they understood that leaders need advice and support. And so they did put into place two options for the President. First, the President could request written advice from the department secretaries. And that was supposed to be in writing to preserve that transparency that we've talked about.
And second, they firmly expected that the Senate would serve as a Council of Foreign Affairs. So in Article Two of the Constitution, it still says today that the President with the advice and consent to the Senate will make treaties and foreign appointments. And they took that advice part quite seriously. And the Senate in the fall of 1789, when Washington was in office was only 22 people. So that's not an impossibly large number to meet with and, you know, maybe seems reasonable. They also felt that because the senators were selected by state legislatures, the states could be trusted to pick smart, qualified men, that would be good and safe advisors. And then the states would also remove them if they gave bad advice. So they felt like that was probably the best way for a president to have a council without tempting some of this corruption and transparency problems that they had observed in Britain.
MJT It's funny to think the size of the Senate at that time is about the size of the presidential cabinet today. But I take it his first attempt to seek advice from the Senate did not go particularly well.
LMC Yes, this is one of my all time favorite Washington stories, because it's such a tale of clashing expectations, Washington plan to visit with the Senate at the end of August, so just a couple of months into his presidency. And he had already sent the Senate all of the existing treaties with Native American nations.
And he met with a committee so that he could plan things like where he would sit and how he would enter and how he would be introduced. Some of those, you know, small details that seem unimportant until you have to do them for the first time. And then all of a sudden, you realize, Wow, there are so many decisions that have to be made.
And the reason Washington wanted to meet with the Senate was because he was planning to send a commission to meet with representatives from North Carolina, South Carolina and the Creek and Cherokee nations. And he had never sent that sort of question before he had to give them instructions. And so he thought it would be helpful to have senatorial input.
So he arrived for his meeting. And he brought with him the Acting Secretary of War, Henry Knox, who had overseen all these previous treaties and could maybe, you know, answer any questions or anything like that. And he brought with him a written address and a series of questions. And he delivered that address and those questions and he was expecting, like with his counsels of war, when he had given them questions to debate, that the Senators would discuss and provide different options for him to consider and feedback and maybe they would disagree, but that disagreement would actually be quite helpful for Washington to consider all the options.
Instead the Senate sat in silence. Most people avoided eye contact or fiddled their papers or tried to look busy. And finally, they asked if they could refer the issue to committee to discuss it privately. And would Washington come back the following week for their recommendation. Now, Washington was really good at controlling his temper until he wasn't. And in this moment, he wasn't and he absolutely lost it and yelled at them for wasting his time. And he did come down and agree to come back the following week, but the damage was done, because he reportedly said on the way out that he would never again return for advice. Now, the evidence about whether or not he actually said that is a little bit shaky, but he definitely was thinking, because he never again returned for advice.
And so right away, this key option that had been articulated for him to use in the Constitution, he had ruled out as inefficient, because when he was dealing with a matter of diplomacy or foreign affairs, he wanted immediate feedback. He wanted advice right away. He didn't want to wait a week before, you know, sending instructions. And he was assuming that the senators would act like his officers had acted. And the Senate was acting like a legislative body acts. And so it was really a case of, as I said, mismatched expectations. And it didn't really improve from there.
MJT Well, I know Washington did appear before the Continental Congress, when he was commander in chief on multiple occasions. So I guess he must have had some idea of the dynamic. I guess this just being a more formal setting, and with the idea of the different governmental positions still being worked out. They just didn't seem to click with one another.
The other branch of government that he turned to was the courts for advice. He, I believe, used John Jay is an advisor for a time. How did that go?
LMC Yes, that's right. So John Jay was one of Washington's closest friends and advisors, they had a great deal of respect for each other, and had known each other for decades. And there are some evidence to suggest that when Washington became president, he asked John Jay, if you would like to stay on as the new Secretary of State, or if you would like to be Chief Justice, and Jay said, Chief Justice, according to this this story. Either way, john Jay became the first Chief Justice. And but in that capacity, in addition to his responsibilities on the Supreme Court, he continued to be an advisor for Washington and the other secretaries behind the scenes. They regularly consulted with him at Washington's encouragement.
So in 1793, when the neutrality crisis broke out, and we can talk a little bit more about that big event, there were a ton of legal questions about what neutrality meant and how to enforce it. And the first time anyone knows when there's, you know, a new legal issue, the first time you're trying to do something, it's really hard if there isn't already precedent established. And so Washington asked the cabinet to consult with the Supreme Court about how they should basically craft neutrality. And John Jay was initially totally game to provide this sort of advice. And then he hesitated, he said, Well, you know, maybe I should consult with my colleagues. And interestingly, once the Supreme Court came together, they then said, you know, this would be really inappropriate for us to provide guidance before there's actually a case for us to adjudicate or for us to decide on. So they refused to provide that sort of guidance.
My speculation is that john Jay would have been perfectly happy to do so one on one, but his colleagues overruled him doing so as an institution, which I think is super fascinating. And the reason I think that is because the following year, he had no problem taking on an additional appointment as a special envoy to Great Britain to negotiate a new treaty for the United States while still remaining the Chief Justice. So he didn't really have a problem doing multiple roles at one time. But his colleagues seem to have an issue with the separation of powers and the blending of those responsibilities in 1793.
MJT I imagine in these first few years, Washington was flailing about as to how he should properly ask for advice. I assume that he had lots of one-on-one sessions with important members of the government, for example, I know he was friends with Senator Robert Morris, and certainly others that he knew either from his time in the army or his interactions with the Continental Congress. Did he have a lot of more informal one-on-one consultations?
LMC Well, I love that description of flailing about because I think that's very accurate way to think about it. When we look at what's actually written down in Article Two, which is the Article of the Constitution that governs the President's behavior and authorities. There's very little there. There are very few words and it leaves an awful lot for the first president for Washington to kind of figure out.
So he really was going through the motions in a very organic way in responding to whatever crises or challenges came up in real time. And so that's why we see this incredible ongoing evolution of the presidency through the first couple of administrations, because there is so much to figure out beyond what is written down. It's really amazing. He writes these letters, like, for example, in early May of 1789, he wrote a letter to John Adams, he wrote a similar one to John Jay and Alexander Hamilton, and probably some others, asking for guidance about how he should socialize. Could he interact with random citizens? Could he have his friends over to dinner, should he host official events, because that was sort of, you know, what the presidential presence looked like was the first thing on his mind.
And then as he went along, depending on whatever the issue was, he would consult with different people. So James Madison was a very important advisor for the first year or so until they had some ideological differences. And Madison helped him write a lot of his addresses in his letters to Congress in that first year, and then often wrote Congress's address back to Washington, which I would think presents a little bit of a conflict of interest, but they didn't think so in 1789. He did talk to other friends. And he also used sort of more unofficial channels to get advice or to make his preferences known.
So for example, in 1790, Congress was trying to figure out how much money to set aside for the diplomatic corps - for the the payment for the ministers and the consoles that were going abroad. And if the Congress set aside a small amount of money that would really limit how many people Washington could appoint. And so he felt that that was inappropriate interference with basically powers of the executive. And people like Jefferson agreed with him. And so Jefferson went and he talked to senators and congressmen in Congress.
Then when Martha Washington hosted her Friday evening drawing rooms, which were these regular social events, a bunch of senators came to that event and Washington was there. But he was there as a private citizen, because Martha was the host. So he sidles up to these senators. And he basically says, you know, this is what I would like, this is what I would prefer. And because it was technically a private event, and he was there as a private citizen, it wasn't considered inappropriate politicking. Whereas if he had been the host, it would have been deemed really inappropriate interference. And sure enough, the Senate goes and they increase the amount of money and he gets what he wants.
But it's this amazing example of Washington using all avenues available to him to get information or to pass on information. That sort of fluidity and flexibility, I think is one of the most amazing things that the 1790s
MJT Yeah, I found that interesting. You discuss in your book, the idea that George Washington held social events at his home, where he would be very formally introduced to all the guests and bow to them and just basically speak to them in very preliminary ways. But at other events at the same location that his wife simply hosted, he felt a lot freer to just speak as a guest, even though he was still the president, United States in the presidential home receiving guests, but, but he seemed feel more at liberty to chit chat and that sort of a situation. I just found that to be an odd dynamic.
LMC Yeah, I mean, some of the social norms of the 1790s are sort of unfathomable to us today. So for example, if women were present, the event was considered a semi-private semi-public event. So if women were in the room, it could not be a political event, which meant that in theory, you know, there wasn't supposed to be talk of politics. Now we know that, of course, that was hogwash. And of course, women were talking about politics.
But women often served as this very useful veil to make an event possible, where important networking and negotiations and sort of deal making and you know, all the behind the scenes, things that are such an important part of politics, they made that possible by providing this cover for politicians who are really supposed to act in certain ways. So the political culture of the 1790s is, you know, in some ways, so different from ours. But there's a really essential way to understanding how these things happened.
MJT Really interesting. And it's important to remember too - I always think of federal politics happening in Washington, DC, but of course, George Washington was in New York City for the first couple years of his administration and then moved to Philadelphia. How did the environment where he was living impact his ability to work with members of Congress and other members of the government?
LMC That's a great question. So I primarily focus on Philadelphia because the federal government was only in New York for about a year and a half, actually a little bit less. But once he moved to Philadelphia, Washington rented a private home. It was the largest private residence in the city on the corner of Sixth and Market, or Sixth and High Street, which those streets are still the same today. And it was really sort of the center hub of what the city's activity was. For blocks around him, there were homes and shops, and civic institutions like Congressional Hall, or theaters, or Independence Hall or markets. And all of the department secretaries had their homes and offices, so did many congressmen and sort of the elite families in Philadelphia.
So it would have been an incredibly tight knit community. We're talking like maybe 12 blocks by 10 blocks in terms of the heart of the city. And so I think it would have been pretty impossible for people to avoid each other. In fact, we know based on their receipts, and their records that Hamilton and Jefferson, even though they despise each other, they went to the same tailor. And so I just suspect that no matter how you felt about someone, you literally could not escape them. You would have gone to the same homes or parties, you would have gone to the same theaters, you would have gone to the same events.
That environment, I think really served as sort of a hothouse for political tensions, because you couldn't escape someone. And so therefore, you saw them all the time. And in particular, I think here of Hamilton and Jefferson, because they saw each other so much, they became convinced that the other person was really a mortal threat to the future of the country. And it spurred them to start to form the first political parties. And I think that that would have happened at some point, regardless, because they were these really diametrically opposed worldviews. But I think it happened faster, because they were always together and always stuck in this spot.
MJT Yeah, I found that interesting. You tend to think, when people get together, they can usually work out their differences. It’s when they're far apart from each other, they can begin to suspect more of the other person having nefarious motives or whatever. But in this case, the two men working very closely face to face - they didn't manage to form a common bond, in fact, quite the opposite.
LMC Yeah, I think it definitely made it worse in their case.
MJT Yeah, Philadelphia at the time. I mean, people who are familiar with the city now know it is this huge metropolis, but it really, I remember reading Thomas Jefferson, when he was there, the Continental Congress, stayed at a home on Seventh Street, and it was described as the, the western border of the city that there wasn't anything beyond Seventh Street. So what we consider old town today was Philadelphia, in the late 18th century. So yeah, it really was a tiny, tiny area that people were living in. And basically the rest of what we consider Philadelphia today was farmland.
LMC One summer, when the yellow fever was particularly bad, Jefferson rented a house on the [eastern] bank of the [Schuylkill] river. And that was considered the country he went and got a "country house." And now of course, that is, you know, part of Philadelphia proper. His travels to and from the seat of government from that house, were no small thing at the time, because there wasn't Metro or buses or anything like that. So it is funny to think about the size, and the difference in scale of what we're familiar with today.
MJT Yeah, it really is strange. So, Washington did not hold cabinet meetings. The first few years, he was in office. Was there something that finally happened that caused him to decide that he really needed to try this? a particular event or something?
LMC I'm so glad you brought this up, because I've actually been seen on Twitter some confusion about when the first cabinet meeting actually took place. So just to set the record straight. The first cabinet meeting was November 26 1791. It was in Philadelphia, it was not at Mount Vernon. I think Washington had been tiptoeing towards it for a little while. He had increased his one on one consultations with the department secretaries, those were definitely increasing in frequency. And it became very clear to him that some of the issues on his agenda were not issues that he could handle just with one secretary.
So for example, the first meeting, November 26 1791, he convened because he wanted to talk about the state of the economic and sort of diplomatic relationships between the United States and France, Great Britain and Spain. Now, those treaties or potential treaties, would of course include economic matters. So the Secretary of Treasury needed to be there. But of course included also legal questions if you're going to have a legal document. So that's the Attorney General And if it's diplomacy, then the Secretary of State needs to be there. And if those relationships sour and they don't go, well, then the Secretary of War probably needs to be there, too.
So he pretty quickly determined that this sort of group meeting was essential when there were these big questions. And that was the topic for the first meeting, trying to figure out how to improve those relationships. And while nothing actually concrete really came of that meeting, they set about trying to have some conversations, which didn't amount to much, those issues actually proved to be the most pressing ones for the remainder of his presidency.
MJT So Washington's cabinet was pretty small, especially by today's standards. He only had four members in his cabinet. Most of them were actually pretty close friends of his. I mean, Alexander Hamilton had been famously his aide de camp during the war, and the men had spent many days and nights together. Henry Knox, who was the Secretary of War, had been his commander of artillery, and pretty much been with Washington the entire war as well. Randolph, the Attorney General, was, I believe Washington's personal lawyer in Virginia for a long time.
Jefferson kind of seems like the odd man out. Of course, Jefferson and Washington knew each other from some time in the House of Burgesses and in Congress, but I got the impression that they were never particularly close. Is that right?
LMC Yes, I love this setup. And I should also add that Randolph was actually one of Washington's first aides de camp in the first year of the war. So he too, had been in the army. So there's not only this division of the three men that Washington knows very well, and they're probably three of the men that he's closest to. And then also, they had all been in the army together, which is a pretty significant bonding moment.
And then there's Jefferson, who had spent many of the previous years in Europe, and he had been serving his nation. But I think it's fair to say that spending time at Versailles and negotiating with France is a little bit different than spending time on the battlefield. So there was definitely an intellectual emotional divide between Jefferson and some of the other secretaries and Washington did know him. They had served together in the Continental Congress. And then they had exchanged correspondence, while Jefferson was governor of Virginia, and had continued that correspondence after the war. But you're right, there was not that same closeness. They were always very respectful in their letters to one another, but it wasn't as warm as the others.
It's hard to say if that really influenced things all that much, except that I do think that Jefferson had a sense that Hamilton always sort of had the inside edge with Washington. He never said as much in his letters, but perhaps that was a reflection of that different dynamic in their relationship.
MJT The other thing is, we usually think of the Vice President as a member of the cabinet. But my understanding is John Adams never attended any of these meetings.
LMC That's correct. So the Vice President didn't actually become really an official member of the cabinet until the 1930s. And the Vice President didn't actually become an office really worth anything until Vice President Mondale. And I would actually argue the real modern vice presidency starts with Dick Cheney.
John Adams was in the unfortunate position of being completely useless, which he despised. And he tried really hard to help the Senate, which often meant that he spent hours lecturing the Senate, which as you can imagine, the senators did not particularly appreciate. But he was very much kept out of the administration and kept out of the cabinet. He never attended a single cabinet meeting. There are two schools of thought as to why Washington never included him. The first is that as President of the Senate, in his capacity as Vice President, Adams actually played a pretty active role. He was there every day. Today, senators will sort of take turns presiding over the proceedings, and at that point, the Vice President presided over all the proceedings. So there's one argument that suggests that maybe Washington was concerned about separation of powers and wanting to keep the vice president separate from the executive branch.
I find that less compelling than the school of thought that argues that Washington and Adams weren't that close either. They were respectful of one another. But Adams had been critical of Washington's choices during the war, and Washington knew it and had a pretty thin skin. And Adams was a little bit resentful that Washington was so much more famous and so much more beloved than he was.
And then Adams in his first year as Vice President had made some poor political choices. He had advocated for a very ostentatious title for the President, which had been an unpopular choice, and maybe he had squandered some of his political goodwill. And so I think that it's more likely that Washington just didn't really trust his political judgment. And so he didn't include him. But of course, again, these are answers that we don't really have with complete satisfaction because Washington did never write down why he decided to do that.
MJT Yeah, Washington was kind of famous for keeping people at a distance and maintaining a formality with just about everyone in his life with, at least with men. I know that Adams did not have Washington's back during the Conway Cabal, which is going many years back to 1777 and '78. I would think that Washington would view him with a little more formality than he would a trusted friend or advisor. And you're right, if he wasn't giving good advice, then he wasn't even useful in a more formal relationship.
LMC Yeah, that's right. And I think that, in addition to sort of the structural oddities and their past clashes, or you know, even just tensions, Adams and Washington in terms of their personalities were very different. Adams was very blunt. He was prone to honesty, which often meant putting his foot in his mouth.
He was also a New Englander. And very proud of it, it kind of came from deep, New England, sort of puritanical tradition. And so there were real cultural differences to his upbringing in Massachusetts, and Washington's in Virginia. Neither of them ever really discussed that, per se. But I can't help but wonder if that was an element to some of the coolness in their relationship.
MJT Thomas Jefferson was, as we said, a part of the cabinet but never really in the inner circle as much as he would have liked to have been, was there something in particular that really resulted in his final break with the administration?
LMC Well, so let me back up just a moment because Jefferson never thought he was in the inner circle. But that was his own insecurities. Because what I actually discovered when I was going through the notes that he took, and that Hamilton took, and that Washington took from these cabinet meetings, was that Washington actually sided with Jefferson almost as much as he sided with Hamilton, like almost nearly 50-50, and including on some very important big choices. And so I think Jefferson's sense that Washington, you know, didn't listen to him and Washington preferred Hamilton was really a creation of his own sort of internal struggles.
Nonetheless, that's how he felt. And I think that that was one of the driving factors for wanting to leave the administration. He started talking about doing so as early as late 1791, early 1792. Washington pleaded with him to stay. So even though they weren't as close, he really valued Jefferson's expertise and insights about foreign policy. Washington had never been to Europe. So he didn't know what were the diplomatic customs at Versailles or the court of St. James. And these were things that Jefferson could really contribute to the cabinet. Washington also really appreciated that Jefferson frequently disagreed with Hamilton, because he found that difference of perspective and the disagreements that they had to be very instructive and very helpful for making a balanced decision.
So Washington pleaded with Jefferson to stay, and basically convinced him to stay until early 1793. And I think Jefferson probably would have retired around then had war between France and Great Britain not broken out. And I think that the resulting conflict, which is known as the "neutrality crisis" in 1793, and the cabinet's complete obsession with this issue, rightfully so, because there was so much to figure out, dominated their attention. And Jefferson didn't really feel like he could leave until that was resolved, which was the end of 1793. And then he left at the end of the year.
MJT Right. Washington famously wanted to leave at the end of '92, after the end of his first term, and had to be convinced by Jefferson and others to stay for a second term. He was pretty much sick of the whole thing, too. And I think part of the pressure he put on Jefferson is if I'm staying, you're staying, buddy, we're in this together.
LMC Oh, absolutely. And Jefferson was one of the people urging him to stay for a second term. And so I think Washington felt like well, fine, if I'm going to, you are too. And that worked for about a year.
MJT Right. Jefferson also famously liked written communications. He was never a big fan of back and forth in-person debate. I've got to imagine spending most of 1793 cramped in a room yelling at Alexander Hamilton, about everything that was going on that year, must have been very draining on him.
LMC Oh, he absolutely despised it, because he really hated a personal conflict. But he felt so strongly about these issues that when he was in a Cabinet meeting, he felt like he had to defend his perspective, which meant that he had to be in conflict, which must have just been agonizing for him.
On top of which most of these meetings took place in the summer in Philadelphia. And even though they were used to not having air conditioning at the time, no one really liked being in Philadelphia during the summer because it was hot, and it was uncomfortable. So if we think about the fact that they were meeting, sometimes several hours per day, up to five times per week, in August, in Philadelphia.
They already hate each other. They're fighting every day. It is not hard to imagine why Jefferson described their meetings as cockfights, because he was trying to invoke his sort of bloody visceral, you know, feathers flying spectacle, and he just hated it. And it was absolutely one of the reasons he wanted to leave.
MJT So the cabinet met, as you said, a great deal in 1793. Because of the crisis of war with Britain and France, the United States famously decided to remain neutral in that war, not siding with either of the combatants, do you want to explain a little about why that happened and what the debate was?
LMC Absolutely. So France declared war on in Great Britain. And it's important to remember that France and Great Britain had been on again, off again, fighting wars for centuries at this point. But in the 1790s, Napoleon is coming to power. And this is after the French Revolution. So there's a lot of chaos going on in France and in Europe.
Everyone agrees, including Jefferson, who is the most pro-French, that participating in the war is not possible, because the country had just gotten out of the Revolution, was just beginning to recover financially, emotionally, environmentally. And so there was really just no way that they could physically or financially afford to fight a war. Now, even if they wanted to, the country did not have an army or Navy with which to fight. So they really were out of luck here. So war was not an option.
But what neutrality looked like, was a very complicated question, because you could enforce a very strict neutrality, which would be more pro British, or you could kind of be loosey-goosey with the rules, which would be more pro French. And so that's really where the fight breaks down between Jefferson and Hamilton is how strict to be with these rules, especially around privateers.
Privateers were basically private ships that were sailed under a letter of marque or a license from a foreign nation to attack that nation's enemies. So for example, France would hire private ships to go out and attack British ships. If they were successful, they would take whatever prizes they captured, sell them off, turn those new ships into new privateers and repeat the process. And this was very common, it was a standard part of 18th century warfare. Everyone did it, including the United States.
But what you allow those privateers to do in ports can really affect neutrality. So United States had said that privateers could buy food and water and essential supplies, but not military goods. Enforcing that proved to be one of the main challenges of 1793.
MJT Right, I recollect back to the first two or three years of the American Revolution when France was neutral in the fighting between Britain and the United States. And of course, Britain considered it an internal rebellion at the time. The US sent commissioners to France, who were trying to hire privateers and outfit ships and bring prizes into French ports. And the French largely seemed to want to tolerate it and kind of let it go with a wink and a nod. But on the other hand, they had a British ambassador right there who was screaming at them about all these outrages and threatening that they didn't do something, they'd have to go to war. And so France would have to take certain steps to just be "shocked, shocked!" that privateering was going on in their country.
I think they expected the same thing of the US even though the US was proclaiming neutrality, and they sent over an ambassador named Edmond Genêt. That situation did not seem to go particularly well. Do you want to talk about that a little bit?
LMC Absolutely. So, citizen Edmond Charles Genêt was the new French minister to the United States. He arrived from France in the United States. A week after Washington had issued his proclamation of neutrality declaring that the United States was staying out of the war.
And Genêt immediately set up shop trying to outfit these new privateers, which were really really good privateers. He had a lot of success, which was frankly part of the problem. Because every time they had success, they would drag their, captured British ships back into the port of Philadelphia. And remember, we've talked about how small Philadelphia is. So the port was literally six blocks from Washington's house. So he was engaging in all of these activities right under the President's nose, and it did not go unnoticed. Also problematically, the British minister happened to live in Philadelphia. And noticed these British ships being hauled in and wasn't particularly happy about it.
And as you said, Genêt really thought that the United States would just kind of wink wink nod nod, would quickly pay off all of its debts to France, which then France would turn around and use those funds to channel into its warfare effort against Great Britain, and would be totally fine with these privateers operating in this very militaristic fashion in the port of Philadelphia.
Now, of course, that's not what happened. And Washington and Jefferson said again, and again to Genêt, basically cut it out, you're going to cause some problems, and he refused. And finally, there was this moment where everything came to a head in July, where Jefferson goes to Genêt, and says, You must stop doing this. And Genêt threatens, he basically argues with Jefferson about how the constitution works, which takes some serious gall to, you know, argue with the Secretary of State about their own constitution. And he insists that Congress and the American people are Supreme. And the President does not have the authority to carve out foreign policy, which Jefferson strenuously denies, and Genêt threatens to go to the American people, basically to overturn the president and go to the American people to get them on his side.
Now, this is a huge outrage when this news is made public. And that does not happen by accident. Alexander Hamilton hears about this, and he publishes it secretly and privately, and then other people publish it more outright. And the American people are horrified because nationalism is still sort of a nebulous thing. And the American flag doesn't yet really exist as the symbol we think of it today. But Washington was their guy. Everyone knew who Washington was. He was the most famous American. He was the President. Everyone could kind of get behind him. Keep in mind, he had been elected at this point twice, unanimously. And here was some foreign minister disrespecting their president on American soil, and it was an outrage.
That really turned the tide against Genêt. And the cabinet decided to meet and they requested his recall from France, which was another big moment because they had never done that before. And they weren't frankly, sure if France was going to agree. But when brands did agree, it basically tacitly implied that the United States as a sovereign nation had the right to craft its own foreign policy, and to demand that that foreign policy be respected by foreign ministers. So how all of this developed with Genêt and France. It was very tense. It was a very intense year, but it had huge implications for both the President's authority over foreign policy and American sovereignty internationally.
MJT Yeah, just an interesting side note, when they recalled Genêt, he actually claimed asylum in the US. He was afraid to go back to Paris for fear of losing his head. So he ended up living the rest of his life, I believe in upstate New York.
LMC Yeah, I think he married the daughter of Governor Clinton, George Clinton in New York. And you're right. The French Revolution was still in full swing. The reign of terror was still going on. He was very convinced he was going to be a victim of the guillotine. And so he begged Washington to allow him to stay. And once you know, once Washington had one he could, he could be very merciful once he got his way. And so this is one of these instances where he won. So he was happy to allow Genêt to stay. And Genêt actually, after that point, he was very quiet. He didn't cause any more trouble. He kind of just, you know, had this very quiet secluded life. So, it's a very interesting ending to that particular chapter.
MJT One thing that many of my listeners often ask is, why was Washington seemingly so British? I mean, obviously, we had no Navy to send over to France. But we weren't even being helpful to France in our own ports. Why were we not willing to be of assistance to France and seemingly favoring our old enemy Britain?
LMC It's a good question. It's one that I receive somewhat frequently as well. I think the number one rule of politics and foreign policy is protect your own first. Washington was a realist, and he was very pragmatic in everything he did. That's not to say he didn't have ideology or values that he treasured. He was a very pragmatic person.
Great Britain was the United States' largest trading partner. We still As a nation depended on them for most of our trade. So it would have completely shot ourselves in the foot to alienate them or to go to war with them.
Secondarily, there was sort of a little bit flimsy, but nonetheless, legal justification for staying out of it. The treaty that the United States had signed with France was a treaty of defense, which meant in the terms of it dictated that if France or the United States was attacked by their enemies, aka Great Britain, then the other would come to their defense. But France was the one that had attacked Great Britain. So there were some Americans who kind of thought that they asked for it. And they weren't particularly interested in coming to their defense if they had started the trouble.
Finally, there was a real sense that the France of 1778 was not the same as the France of 1793. Keep in mind that in this period of time, what had started as sort of an ideological sister revolution in 1789, had devolved into the reign of terror. They had executed the king and queen. They had executed thousands of other government officials and nobles and elite families. Blood literally ran through the streets of Paris. That's not an exaggeration. And there was a real fear that France was going to export that sort of violence and anarchy to the United States, especially because so many people were actually fleeing that violence, that terror and coming and settling in places like Philadelphia, where again, the small community, Washington knew they were there. Hamilton knew they were there. They socialize with them. And they did tend to be politically more radical.
And so there was this real fear that the anarchy that was in France was going to come to the United States, and that France was no longer a dependable ally. And who knew what would happen in a couple of months, would they execute the current leaders, and there would be a whole new set. And if you know, the United States stuck out its neck for this country? Would they betrayed them in a couple of months if things changed at home. So I think there was a real sense of realism that this was not a reliable country to partner with anymore. And until they sorted things out, the United States wasn't all that interested in being too cozy with France.
MJT So the US did successfully navigate their neutrality through the war. But they had some internal problems as well, one of which was Americans, for some reason, do not seem to like paying taxes. And we have the Whiskey Rebellion erupting in western Pennsylvania, which was another big challenge for the administration.
LMC Yes, that's right. Americans have a long tradition of not particularly liking taxes, and sometimes embracing violence as a way to express their displeasure. And that was certainly true in 1794. So Hamilton had written up a proposal for an excise tax on whiskey distilleries, or distilleries of any kind, in 1791. And Congress had passed that tax.
In theory, it made good political sense. It wasn't a tax on foreign imports. So it wasn't going to upset any of these very fragile foreign relationships. It wasn't a tax on property. So it wasn't unduly burdensome on some of the really important property holders that Hamilton and Washington wanted to keep on their side. It wasn't a head tax, which meant like a person by person tax. So that tended to be unfair to those who are poor, because it was the same tax if you were rich, or if you were poor. And so it seemed like it was a good idea.
Except that the way the geographic distribution of wealth worked in the United States, most western farmers really relied on the ability to distill their grains into alcohol as a way to make ends meet, to barter or to ship that alcohol to port because it was much cheaper than shipping the grains before they're distilled. So that tax fell very unfairly on western regions, and they express their displeasure almost immediately. And Washington tried a number of peaceful solutions, including ignoring them and issuing proclamations and any number of other things for a couple of years.
In the spring of 1794, violence broke out in western Pennsylvania, when protesters burned the home of John Neville, who was a local tax collector, to the ground. And that was crossing the line that Washington and Hamilton could not ignore. And so that really kicked off what we think of as the Whiskey Rebellion. Washington met with his cabinet at the end of July.
Basically the question before them is how do we deal with this situation? The first option is just leave it to the States. But clearly that didn't really seem to be working because there had been protests for a couple of years. The second option was to wait for Congress to come back in session later that fall. But that seems like an awful long time to wait. And who knows what might happen before October or November. The third option was to convene an emergency session of Congress. But they weren't really sure that Congress would actually do anything about it. And so the fourth option was to use a recently-passed bill that allowed the president to call up local militia in the event of a domestic rebellion, or an international invasion.
The Cabinet, right away, decided that this was the course of action, which is a pretty amazing moment, because they're essentially sidelining the state and congressional authorities over a domestic matter in like a matter of moments. So they decided that that's what they're going to do. And they conclude that the best course of action is to send a peace commission out to Western Pennsylvania, to try and come up with a peaceful solution, and to demonstrate that all peaceful options had been tried first. And then if that didn't work, call up the militia and have the militia ready to go in the meantime, so that they wouldn't be wasting any time. And Washington really liked that plan. And then the cabinet set about making it happen.
MJT Yeah, they seem to navigate that pretty well. They put up a large military force, which seemed to intimidate the rebels. And after several were convicted and sentenced to hang Washington, pardoned all of them, I believe, so that there was actually no bloodletting, in the end. He was ready once once authority was reestablished, just like Citizen Genêt, he was very lenient and willing to forgive and forget.
LMC Absolutely. And I think this is an excellent example where it's not so much about the taxes themselves. Of course, the federal government did need the funds. But it was much more about the principle that this tax had been passed through the constitutionally-approved channels, and by constitutionally-elected people. And it was part of the federal government's authority. And if they didn't enforce that authority, then the federal government would have no ability to raise funds in the future was much more about asserting the right to pass taxes and collect them rather than actually collecting them themselves. And so once the rebels fled and the rebellion crumbled, you know, Washington was more than happy to be magnanimous at that point.
MJT So one of the other, I guess, really divisive issues of Washington's second term was the Jay Treaty.
LMC There were several issues that were lingering from the Revolutionary War. Many British soldiers were still posted in forts on the western edges of American territory. And they said that they would leave once Americans paid back their debts that they owed to British merchants from before the war, and neither really wanted to give in to that particular situation. And so it escalated when British naval ships started seizing American merchants arguing that they were violating trade policy.
So Washington sent Chief Justice John Jay to London to renegotiate a treaty. And the treaty was, I think, probably as good of a deal as anyone could have negotiated, it did resolve a lot of these issues, and provided more beneficial trade arrangements for American merchants. However, it wasn't perfect. And a lot of southerners in particular, were upset that Jay hadn't obtained, recompense for the enslaved individuals that had fled from American plantations to British ships. That being said, I think they had completely unrealistic expectations of what Jay could actually achieve, because he had no leverage, and it was really just whatever Great Britain was willing to give to him at that time. Nonetheless, when Washington received the treaty and sent it to the Senate, and the Senate did ratify it, and Washington signed it, it was very unpopular among large portions of the population.
Even though it had already been signed, the House of Representatives had actually an opportunity to scuttle it, because one of the clauses in the treaty required a committee to determine the payment that Americans owed to Great Britain and to its merchants, and that committee required funds. So the House of Representatives had to raise funds, and they decided that they would request all executive papers pertaining to the treaty process as a way to try and embarrass Washington and embarrass the Federalists and try and get the treaty dissolved.
That backfired bit, because Washington decided to assert executive privilege for the first time. He both said that diplomacy required secrecy and future negotiations might be limited with four Nations if they felt like that secrecy wouldn't be respected. He did, however, draw an important distinction. He said, If this was a matter of impeachment, he would be more than happy to turn over those papers. But it wasn't. So he was going to maintain that privacy. He then took the opportunity to lecture the House of Representatives, and to tell them that he had been at the Constitutional Convention. And he had been there when the delegates had decided that foreign policy was to be determined between the Senate and the President. The House of Representatives had no role and they were trying to seize additional authorities.
Then, it was the ultimate Mic drop. He said, If you disagree with this recollection, I have the journals from the convention in the State Department, I would be happy to provide them for your perusal. So I mean, that's quite a statement. It's very saucy of him.
But by basically attaching his name and his reputation and stature to the treaty, it really turned the tide and a lot of the resistance to the treaty sort of evaporated overnight. There are some fantastic letters between Jefferson and Madison sort of bemoaning the fact that all of a sudden, all these people who had been opposed to it kind of withered away. So it was very unpopular. It did sort of draw very stark political lines between the two parties, people burned Jay's effigy it was it was a very dramatic moment. For me personally, one of the strongest things that comes out of it is this assertion of executive privilege, especially over the diplomatic process.
MJT So as you say, Washington uses his cabinet pretty heavily in 1793, and a bit less than 94. And after that, it seems to wane even more. He seems to have given up on the regular use of the cabinet as a matter of setting executive policy. Why did that happen?
LMC Well, we don't know entirely, because again, he didn't write it down. But I suspect that it's partly because a lot of those initial cabinet members that we've talked about left, they either retired or resigned at the end of 1793-94, and early 1795. And so what happened was that Washington really had trouble getting people to fill their spots, it wasn't really a very glamorous position, you were away from home for months at a time, the pay was pretty low. And a lot of people didn't want to subject their reputations to the hostility and criticism that came with those positions.
So he ended up getting people that I affectionately refer to as the B team. And in his letters, we know that he didn't really think as much of them as he thought of his first people. And so he didn't trust them as much he didn't want to talk to them as much he constantly was having to remind them to do their work in a diligent manner. And so I think he just preferred to make decisions by himself or with the advice of his preferred advisors, one on one. He still talked to them, and he still met with them, but never, almost never in a group in the same way, unless there was a big decision that he wanted to have all them in one spot for.
MJT Right, to borrow another historian’s phrase, the team of rivals had pretty much gone and he was left with the debating society that he once had.
MJT Beyond establishing the Cabinet's existence. Were there any other important precedents that the Washington cabinet set for future administrations?
LMC Yeah, there are a couple. So Washington's turn away from the cabinet at the end of his administration really reaffirmed that the cabinet is a private advisory body for the President, and that the secretaries do not have an institutional right to be a part of the decision-making process. They can offer their opinion, but the president doesn't have to listen to it and doesn't even have to invite them into the room.
So we have seen sort of the ramifications of that precedent in that often presidents will consult with people outside of the cabinet, or maybe they'll have a preferred cabinet member or they'll have you know, friends or family members or colleagues. And those relationships and how the president interacts with them is generally conducted outside of any sort of public or congressional oversight.
One other precedent that I think is frequently overlooked is the importance of diversity. Now, Washington's cabinet, of course, was four white dudes. But that's because white men are the only people that were considered citizens at the time and so therefore, the only, you know, possible applicants for the positions. However, his contemporaries understood that this was a very diverse group. They came from very different backgrounds, different educational experiences, religions, they had different economic and social and factional interests, and they really represented lots of different parts of the new United States.
And that was really important because Washington was basically trying to hold the country together with his bare hands. And the best way to do so was to make sure that lots of different regions felt that their interests were represented in the new administration. That concept is one that many of Washington's successors have adopted. So Lincoln's team of rivals is a great example. He made sure he had people from border states, from western states from, you know, staunchly union states. He made sure he had former union democrats and he had former Whigs, and he had all different spectrums of the Republican Party represented in his cabinet as a way to try and hold the union together at a very tense time.
So I think that precedent is one that most people overlook because of the skin color of the people that were involved in Washington's Cabinet. But it's a really important one. And it's one that I think the best presidents that we think of, the ones on Mount Rushmore, and the ones at the top of the list, whenever we put together our presidential lists. Those are the ones that follow this precedent and pull together cabinets that really represent the breadth and diversity of the American people.
MJT Right, I think he reached out to the diversity of the political spectrum of the time, which was unfortunately, much more narrow than it is today. It left out women. It left out Native Americans. It left out African Americans, because those were not members of the government and really didn't have the power or even the right to vote at that time. So he was not expanding the franchise, but he was at least covering the entire political spectrum as it existed at that time.
MJT Well, Dr. Chervinsky, I really thank you. This has been a really interesting and enlightening discussion. I'm curious, are you working on any new projects these days?
LMC I am. So I actually have an audible course with Great Courses Plus. That should be coming out this summer on the history of the cabinet more broadly. So the full scope from Washington to President Biden. I'm also working on Book Two, which the full parameters are still sort of to be decided. But let's just say that the personalities that take over once Washington leaves did not have it any easier, just because he had already done so. And in fact, trying to come in his shadow was a whole new challenge. There's some very colorful individuals that come after him. And so I'm exploring how the presidency and the cabinet continues to evolve and really carves out the executive branch for the 19th and 20th century.
MJT Interesting. Well, I look forward to it.
LMC Thank you.
MJT Dr. Chervinsky. I thank you very much for your time, once again, your book, again is The Cabinet, George Washington and the Creation of an American Institution. It's been out for a year and I apologize for being neglectful and not having you on sooner. But it is a great read. And I hope everyone gives it a look.
LMC No, thank you so much for having me. It's always great to reach new readers whenever it is and it's still I cannot believe it has been a year it still feels quite fresh to me.
MJT Alright, well thank you very much.
- - -
|Click here to donate|
|Click here to see my Patreon Page|
An alternative to Patreon is SubscribeStar. For anyone who has problems with Patreon, you can get the same benefits by subscribing at SubscribeStar.
|Help Support this podcast on "BuyMeACoffee.com"|
Post a Comment

August 08, 2018, 06:18:04 AMReply #45
The guy that scored against us in our friendly with Porto last month. I like what I've seen of him, he's a big, powerful striker but also has pace, I'm not overly familar but he strikes me as a player who isn't hugely disimilar to Lukaku. IMO would be a very good signing.
Yeah, we were linked with him before the season had ended.
Dignity does not consist in possessing honours, but in deserving them

Gregory Lynam, MD
Richmond, VA 23235
Specials and Deals
Ratings based on 21 reviews
Write a review
Are you a patient of Gregory Lynam, MD?
After many consults and lots of research, I chose Dr. Lynam because he is simply the best surgeon for breast augmentation in my area.
I have no complants at all.
I have had Dr. Lynam do a facelift, breast reduction and tummy tuck, and could not be happier with either procedure. I chose Dr. Lynam after extensive research and doing other consultations. He was by far the better choice. First he indicated that I did not need as much work as had been indicated to me by another doctor for my facelift (first procedure I chose), which made me feel good his honesty. I obviously felt comfortable enough with him to let him operate on my face! Results were absolutely terrific. He is certainly GIFTED!!! After two weeks you could hardly see where the incisions were. Obviously, I had so much trust in him, that I returned for a breast reduction and finally three weeks ago my tummy tuck!!! The tummy tuck is the most AWESOME thing ever, I am already so pleased, I can hardly stand it. It is fantastic. Yes, it was a bit painful, but SO worth it and I am only three weeks out! Dr. Lynam is certainly the right choice! As I said he is gifted with what he does, but he also has the bedside manner you would like to have in your doctor. He is so pleasant, thoughtful and compassionate. He takes time with you at each visit and is completely devoted to your needs and recovery. You COULD NOT ASK FOR MORE in a doctor!
Referred by another plastic surgeon. Dr. Lynam is a master surgeon. My breasts look great. Pain is minimal. The staff is so nice. They all made me feel comfortable. I will refer friends to him. He is the best!
I had an awesome experience with Richmond Surgical Arts from day one. They scheduled my initial consultation very quickly and Dr. Lynam spent a great deal of time with me. He explained all my options in detail and answered all of my questions with care and understanding. His support staff, Brigette and Terri, were also very kind and helpful. Throughout my recovery they were always available to my needs and questions in a very timely manner, and I also received follow up calls from Dr. Lynam himself. I am more than pleased with my results and I am comfortable and confident with my decision to go with RSA after "interviewing" several other local plastic surgeons!! Also, the Stony Point Surgery Center was amazing and made the anesthesia process a breeze. I was extremely nervous, but the knowledgable and comforting staff made it super easy!
He was the on-call surgeon at St. Mary's hospital. In all my experiences, he was by far the nicest guy to the nurse helping him out. He continually let her know how appreciative he was for her help. He explained exactly what he was going to do and what the outcome would likely be. My 2 visits to his office were great. The staff treated me very well. He was able to take the stitches out without grabbing any mustache hair! He also suggested a cream to reduce the scaring, which has been going very well.

I recently had a miscarriage as I call it. Some people would consider it as an abortion though. I am 33 and was pregnant for the first time in 14 years which might I say the first resulted in a m/c and elated about my pregnancy. I started on my prenatal vitamins and called a doctor immediately but it didn't help. My baby was 7 weeks before they found out the he was on my ovary. They made me come in for the methotrexate shot the next morning. I had to leave and go to the pharmacy to buy the shot myself and now I feel so empty. His dad tells me this is going to be alright but I disagree it is definately not going to be alright. How do I move on now?
Posts You May Be Interested In
I have had Ttp twice this year I'm 48 my doc said the next time Ttp happens they will take my immune system. Has anyone had this done? Does it work ? What other problems do u get?
theatre and I are there already. I'm having a very berry tea with crackers, cheese and cherry tomatoes and she's having a joint with some beer and we're both on really comfy recliners on thick pile carpet. we need some help with the decor if anyone is around??

Jesus showed me how people ask for things according to their own knowledge or lack of knowledge, in some cases, of the will of God for their lives. Jesus said that people’s failure to understand His will for their lives often limits Him on how He can deal with a person’s prayer request. This is because faith is required from all of us as believers.
Jesus said, “Even if they would just want Me to be a friend to them who could visit with them or do some sort of activity with them, I would do that. This is even though I was willing to heal them the whole time. You see, I am limited by their lack of revelation of who I AM.” I would be whatever they asked of Me according to their faith and knowledge of My will.” We need to discern the will of God in the Word of God by the revelation of the Holy Spirit.

and a positive for greg too apparently...
(from the Times)
Meanwhile Rusedski has joined Tim Henman in welcoming the arrival of teenager Andrew Murray on the scene.
Henman said yesterday he was happy that British fans had another "real focal point" and Rusedski added: "I think it is great to have someone to follow myself and Tim and do well in the future.
"However, he does need someone else to come along behind him because Tim and I are not going to be around in five more years and he is going to be around for a while.
"He goes very well from defence to attack, he returns well and he fights from the first point through to the last and he reads the game well."
Rusedski was also impressed by the determination Murray has shown this year in order to improve his ranking to its current high of 71.
"The future looks bright for him, he puts himself on the line and if he has to play for 15 consecutive weeks in a row then he'll do that, which is something others are maybe not willing to do," he added.
"When his ranking gets higher, he will be able to plan a proper schedule, he's good enough to get through most first rounds and it helps that he is a baseline player."

Rodney King Dies At 47
Rodney King was found unconscious at the bottom of his swimming pool Sunday and later pronounced dead, California police said. He was 47.
King's beating by police in 1991 was caught on videotape and then sparked riots in Los Angeles when police accused of excessive force were acquitted.
Capt. Randy DeAnda told CNN that the Rialto (Calif.) Police Department received a 911 call from King's fiance early Sunday morning. Police responded and found King unconscious at the bottom of the pool. He was transported to the Arrowhead Regional Medical Center, where he was pronounced dead.
DeAnda said there were no signs of foul play and that police were conducting a drowning investigation.
In an April interview with NPR's Karen Grigsby Gates about his new book, King seemed contented, sober and engaged. He said he had come to grips with the night he was stopped by police and beaten, kicked and tasered.

I went down to see the Grandkids this weekend in Pungo. They live right on Back Bay. I went fishing out of a duck blind and did pretty good. Right at sundown the cats started hitting. I was using night crawlers mostly and caught 6 Blues that were about 6-7 pounds and several more under 6#, along with an eel and about a dozen perch. I hung into one that bent the pole double but it was a borrowed pole and didn't have the drag set. By the time I found the drag, the fish broke the 12# test line. I cut up one of the perch and caught another one on my big cat pole. I'd guess was about 30# but I couldn't get him over the side of the duck blind. He broke the 20# test while I was trying to lift him over the 4' wall. Anyway, it was a good night.

The mage had developed his magical powers at a young age, but he wasn’t without generosity. For example, he summoned his sister a nymph for her 18th birthday. The nymph would fulfil all his sister’s lesbian fantasies and desires, and be a perfect fuckdoll for her to play with.
Of course, the purpose of a nymph wasn’t to be a plaything for women, but to fulfil the most extreme desires of men. Every time his sister lapped at the nymph’s pussy or shared saliva in a slutty kiss, she took a bit of the nymph’s essence into her.
He knew his gift had done its work when he visited his sister and found her and the nymph kneeling naked, holding hands, waiting for him. The look of mixed humiliation and need in his sister’s eyes was perfect as she looked up at him and said, “Please… find us a man to use us…”
It didn’t take him long to find such a man at all, and although part of her still didn’t want to, it turned out her new nymphly needs were powerful enough that she would even orgasm from fucking her own brother…

Re: Lupe Fiasco thrown offstage after Anti-Obama rant
Originally Posted by Sinister Shadows
what is a Lupe Fiasco? ... lol at people crying about free speech, he was told to move on by event organizers and basically told them to fuck off, of course he was going to be kicked off stage no matter what his political views are, and he doesn't have much of a ground to stand on and bitch and moan when he admittedly doesn't take part in the political process anyways.
So, only if you vote can you criticize your government? People like you are beyond ignorant. That's like saying people without kids can't shouldn't have to pay school tax. It's called freedom of speech. I shouldn't have to vote to have political views, nor should my views be considered less worthy due to my voting status, or non voting status. What if I don't like the choices as to who to vote for? If voting was so important it would be made law, and not a right.

I tried not to use rear crosses at the last trial because I always seem to cause her to drop the bar. I really need to use rear crosses because I don't seem to be able to make a front cross in time. I want her to be able to do the rear cross even if I'm right there and need to send her in front of me. I also want her to take the jump even if I push slightly into her line.
3 hours ago

Interview: Al Pacino!
It was a cold, cloudy Sunday. The wind whipped at the curtains with the ferocity. Speaking of hangovers, my head ached with the dull throb of the morning after; my mouth pasty; my body stiff. All this AND it was Mother's Day. The devil on my right shoulder began whispering - Just go back to bed. It's rainy and cold out. Just pull those warm covers up over your head and get back to sleep. Sleeeep. Sleeeep - and he went on and on like that. The angel on my other shoulder didn't say much, but what he did say, spoke volumes. Pacino. I was up and showered in no time. I gave my half-asleep wife a kiss on the cheek and a quick Sorry I'm missing Mother's Day! and I was out the door. Pacino
Al Pacino, an intensely private man, doesn't do press very often. Needless to say, the junket was packed to the gills. I've done my share of junketeering but I've never seen one this crowded before. Since Patch (Al said I could call him that ) makes so few appearances, his time at the junket was brief. A few select one-on-one TV interviews were scheduled and then a large press conference. I grabbed myself a good seat, set up my recorder and relaxed. I had a lot of time to relax as (long story short) the press conference was delayed about 45 minutes. Somewhere along the twenty-fifth minute I got up to use the men's room. Having no idea where I was going (and knowing I was in no real rush, not really caring) I wandered around the floor of the hotel. As I continued my search down a deserted corridor, I walked past a man with short, blond hair and a leather jacket. I looked, paused, and looked again. PATCH! I turned and like Keyser Soze, he was gone.
Shortly thereafter, Al came strolling into the large room and apologized profusely for his tardiness. Then the fun began...
Have you experienced sleep deprivation like your character?
Yeah, sure I have. Sometimes it's purposeful. You're out for a few nights and I didn't want to go to sleep. But I think I can relate to the sleep deprivation. There were periods in my life where I found it difficult to either go to sleep or get up early after walking around in the middle of the night.
Recently Winona Ryder said in a story that you have 2 o'clock in the morning
I wish! (Crowd laughs.) I wish
Has that happened to you?
When I'm very tired at 2 in the morning I guess I could call a costar, but I don't. I don't know why. There's something about the nighttime and getting back to sleep and trying to do things that are not stimulation to get you to they say you should get up and walk around or start to read or something cause reading is usually relaxing especially if it's something that's sort of innocuous. You read it and start to fade out. So a phone call might be too stimulating. Hey, listen - I'm recommending things to do for non-sleepers.
I'm curious to, if any, how much you referenced the character of Vincent Hanna
from HEAT because I see a relationship between the two.
You do? (Reporter nods head.) Really? It wasn't in my mind. Maybe it was something else. LA cop maybe? The only thing I can say perhaps is that I think both of these characters are very good at what they did. I mean Vincent Hanna was a the real character was a top-of-the-line detective. Really. He had his own world. He did things by his rules. And I felt that this was part of Dormer, Will Dormer, was. And I thought he was among his...elite. That's where that whole thing with that first scene is. Diagnosing the dead girl and everyone around is watching his technique. So I took that opportunity and that how I showed him as a "super-cop."
You've become kind of an iconic cop figure. Are you aware of that reputation?
And if so, how much of that was a part in your choosing the role?
Well I think that there are times when you people seem to see me in a certain kind of role so you want to do that from time to time. I made the decision because of Chris Nolan. And loved his work so much with MEMENTO and his approach to making films. That was the biggest reason I did the picture and again I liked the idea of a character who is in conflict. Like a good/bad guy. I like the good/bad guys
How are your intuitions?
That's very interesting because it reminds me of You know there's been movies I knew when I did certain films, like when I met Frank Serpico, somehow I wanted to play him. It's almost like something you want to be. I didn't get that at all. I wish I did, but I didn't. I tried. But it was a strange feeling. I had that desire. I felt there was something that I was identifying with in him, something in his eyes. There were other people I've played and I just didn't respond in that way. So it is an intuitive kind of thing. I try to listen to it. Cause every time you don't listen to it now, you don't want to be too quick to judge, but at the same time, it's a good thing to listen to. Hey, I'm still here you know? (Crowd laughs.)
Could you talk a little bit about working with Robin, both on-screen and off?
This is what I get for trying to be funny like Robin. I just love being around him. I'd like to see him personally after the picture and we'll try to get together. He's a very bright, caring guy about the world and things around him. He's well-informed. And he's just so fun to be around cause he's so sweet and treats you right. I can't say enough about him. And as far as funny goes, he's out there. I just recently saw his did you catch his act? He's just amazing. A performing art at its finest.
How did you feel about shooting in Vancouver and what was that experience like?
I was unaware of any controversy and of course I like to shoot if they could come to my house and do the picture there (crowd laughs) but there is so much to say for filming to the location and moving on in a movie. I think it serves the picture so much and I think one has to weigh that when making a picture.
And as far as Canada goes, it's a beautiful country and every time I've been to Canada, Toronto or Vancouver, it's been swell. I didn't get much time to spend. You know how the days are shooting movies. Shoot all day, fourteen hour days, so there's not much time off. And then I shot back to LA. Where I was in the world, in Alaska and Vancouver, we were up there with the bears, the grizzlies. I watched an avalanche. They called me out of the camper and said, There's an avalanche - and it was a few hundred yards away, it was surreal - Really? Shouldn't I go back in my camper? It had a placid look about it. Then there were wolves which I'm not used to seeing. And we were on boats, living on boats because there were no hotels. And in the boat next to me were wolves. And wolves would come from all around at night and cry
Did you touch it?
I looked at it. We looked at each other. And that was it. Anything on a leash, I think twice before I touch. (Crowd laughs.)
Out of all your movie roles, which one would you say hits most to home and
reflects you most as a person?
(Long pause as he thinks.) I was gonna say The George Washington Story. But I didn't do that. I-I-I have to think, and the classic answer you hear all the time, is that some of them are closer than others. But I really don't believe that there's because there's so many gray areas. It's comfortable to me to look at it like a painter looks at an object to paint. Sometimes it's odd because the character that you think is the farthest from you turn out to be some of the best work you've done. And sometimes the characters that are the closest to you don't make the best don't take the same step. It's hard to know. Desire and passion to do a role doesn't mean that you're that it's you. It's just like a desire to paint something. It's a complicated paradox sort of and I'm not smart enough to really understand it. I don't know. If I feel that there's something that there's a chance for me to do then I will maybe get a performance that I like. Sometimes I hit, sometimes I miss. That's all I go by.
See what I learned early in my life, as an actor, is that you try different parts in order to see if any of them will work and that's the benefit of repertoire. I mention that to young actors, to go into repertory work because you get a chance to play different roles. And you yourself find out what some of the pitfalls and you read a role on the page and say I could never do that and you find that you rehearse it and work at it and you're able to get to it. Then the roles where you say I can really sink my teeth into that, you do and nothing happens. And the only way you learn that is through the actuation. Just do it. So it's important to do that. It gets tougher to do that on the main stage, if you know what I mean. Out there in the commercial world, you want to take chances but you don't want to get burned for them. Film is a medium where you're trying to serve an audience and appease them.
You did enough running, jumping and stunts in this movie to make Sly and Arnold
jealous. How do you get ready for that?
Well, you go into the hospital for a few weeks, and you have people oil you and massage you and tie you up and mummify you, and then you pray, and then somebody says Action! and pray again and you go. That's all I know. It was really I couldn't believe it as I was doing it. I said, Al, your legs are moving! One time, I was a young guy too, I was playing softball in the park. I hit the ball and everything was the same, except it took me twice as long to get to first base. I wondered why. I thought, those trees are not going by as fast as they used to. It's just this thing. You do know that you have to get in shape to do it. You have to get in shape. I did one where I had to chase Bobby De Niro in Heat, and I got up and pulled out of the camper at 3 or 4 o'clock and didn't stretch out and BOOM there goes my hamstring. did one take, and I said, Gee, I feel like the old Al, but I am the old Al (crowd laughs) I have memories of when I did it and I said gee, sure I'll do another one or two. And then the third one (rolls his eyes and snaps his finger) it was over. And that was unfortunate because we had to stop for about a week and a half. They had somebody else do some running. So you learn from your experiences. So when I was doing this stuff here, I prepared. Cause I'm not the kind of guy who when he's not working, works out and stuff. When I get the urge to exercise, I lie down till it passes. (Crowd laughs.) That's Oscar Wilde.
Reporter asks spoiler filled question. Al chides her (gently) and asks we don't
give any plot points away. He still manages to answer her questions without spoiling
The question of wishing something - how do you wish? This is what Chris and I discussed before the film. And I think the film just maybe touches on it. It would be great to make a movie that just goes into that. The idea that we sometimes have wishes and feelings and that sometimes those wishes came true, to feel that maybe that wonderful scene in A PLACE IN THE SUN. I don't know if anyone here's seen A PLACE IN THE SUN. I don't mean to date myself but I just recently saw it. It's an almost perfect movie. A great movie. At the end in the trial when she was going and he didn't really help her when he could've. That kind of thing here is the prevailing thing. What kind of thing happens when we wish something and it comes true. And it doesn't even have to be something negative. If any wish comes true, how do we feel about that?
Congratulations on being a new Dad.
We want to know how you're doing on the diapers. Are you watching
"Barney" or "Sesame Street" yet?
Well you know, I catch "Barney" every once in a while and the baby's like to watch that. It's, without sounding whatever they've certainly made my life. What can I say?
Do you change their diapers?
Oh gee. I don't want to tell any dirty diaper stories.
Do you feel like a legend and how do you respond when people call you a legend?
Well what I usually do when they say that (takes a harmonica from his jacket pocket and begins to play) and that's all I can say to that. (Crowd laughs and applauds.) [Just uploaded an audio file of Pacino playing harmonica. Never in my life did I ever think I'd be in the same room with Al Pacino playing the harmonica! Listen for yourself and realize the glory of Pacino!] I really don't know what to say. I guess I've just been around a while. I'm still here. I'm still acting
And why do you think that is?
First of all I appreciate your comments and I guess I like to do it and I still get something from it. It gets tougher to do. In one respect it does, in the other respect it gets easier and I'll tell you how. Movies are a lot of waiting around, and what I think I've learned to do a little bit, is deal with the downtime on a movie. I've found ways to help me get through the day of waiting. When I was a younger actor, waiting was impossible, and movies to me doing movies, was all about that. I wouldn't do films early in my career because of it, I'd spend a couple of years between doing movies, and now I've found a way to deal with that waiting time. I've found a life that takes place during it. You learn how to distribute your time, I think that's the biggest thing I've learned in doing films. Every time I make a movie, as that last shot comes, you think that's gonna be it for a while. I'm very fortunate to be making movies, to still be offered films, I really, really mean it when I say that, but at the same time, it's a comforting thought in thinking that maybe I could just float around for a while. I think I've earned that in the last couple of years.
A quote recently said that one of the movies you wish you hadn't made was THE
GODFATHER III. Was that a true reference from something you said?
I never said that. I don't like to confirm or deny anything usually. But since we're here talking about that, I never said that. I did think that things changed with GODFATHER III. I think that at the heart of it, GODFATHER III was a different script to start with, but what people didn't foresee is that there were difficulties in the negotiations with different actors. Because of that, the basic story of GODFATHER III was changed, and it was moved into another place, the script was rewritten entirely, and that was fine, because the script was very good. But it wasn't the way it was originally. In the original script, it took more access to some of the themes and lines of GODFATHER and GODFATHER II. It made it different. Francis Coppola can operate in any kind of crisis, he has the ability to change course, and he changed course in this picture. He took a thing that would've closed down most movies and reinvented it, so I have to give him credit for that.
How do you cope with the life of a busy actor, being away from home so often?
Well, you take the pictures that remind you of your life, you take a couple of people that I have working with me. The wonderful thing about movies is that you meet new people. Part of the thing a lot of actors feel is that feeling of getting together as a family to do the film.
How do you feel when you see actors that are thought of as being in a lesser
caliber as far as actual talent getting more money for the roles they play, whether it
being based on looks or whatnot, while some of the truly talented actors miss out on those
Now what are we gonna do about this? (Crowd laughs.) I honestly think that things are the way they are because that's what people want and it's working. A lot of these movie stars are very good at what they do, and they're all very gifted. They project a certain kind of thing that makes audiences come, and that's a special thing. It should be rewarded and applauded, because not many people can do that the way they do it. I'm a great admirer of this.
When did you first know you were famous?
When I was on the street corner once, and there was a really attractive redhead standing there, next to me. And I turned, and I just kind of looked at her, just as a gesture of hello. And she said Hi Michael. And I thought, I'm not Michael, but then again, maybe I am also, so I'm gonna go home and have a cup of tea, because who knows what this could lead to.

Download HD Video (2.5 GB)
As Tom Faulk vaccuums in his parents room, he finds a strange box full of sex toys. Calling out to his step-, Alex Greene, he brings the box into his room. Alex takes one quick look through the box's contents and concedes that it probably just belongs to his mom. Eyeing the dildos and rope, Tom seems disgusted, but Alex assures him there's nothing particularly weird about any of it. He punctuates his point by wagging a giant dildo at his step-, who seems confused as to why Alex seems to have so much off-hand knowledge about dildos. Alex reveals that he's defintely played with his ass before, and mentions that it's kind of weird Tom never has, prodding his step- to give it a try before he dismisses it outright. Tom is skeptical, but eventually he lets his talk him into it, and moments later, he's ass up on all fours on Alex's bed as his step- takes turns inserting different dildos. The small one is no problem, and the glass dildo felt kind of nice, but as Alex inserts his own cock, Tom quickly chooses that one as his favorite. Imagine his surprise when he turns around to discover Alex behind him, thrusting and pounding. Tom is surprised, but also realizes how good it feels and decides to just trust his step- and go with it, and so Alex lays him down on his back and begins to suck him off, before mounting Tom back on top of his giant cock. Tom rides his step- as Alex jerks him off, fucking the cum right out of this newbie, before pulling out and blasting him in the face with his first facial. And even though Tom is a noob, he takes it like a champ, which sets Alex's imagination running at all the potential trouble the two of them can get into in the future.

Prior to our trip I had never even heard of the city of Datong let alone of the Yungang Caves. A chance encounter with a fellow traveller going the opposite direction to us in Bolshie Koty meant that this was added onto our itinerary.
Datong itself is a pretty soulless and unspectacular city. The local government, for reasons I cannot fathom, tore down the old city only to replace it with a replica old city. Walking around it reminded me of visiting a theme park or an out of town shopping centre.
Anyway, we weren’t here to visit Datong, we were here to visit the Yungang Caves that had been so highly recommended to us all those weeks ago in Russia.
The Yungang Caves were started in 460AD and took around 60 years to complete. There are around 250 caves in all containing statues of Buddha, although there are only 40 of these available to see when you visit. The people who constructed them took inspiration from the cultures that were being discovered through the Silk Road.
The biggest statue was in cave 5, this Buddha was 17m high and still had its gilt paintwork. To preserve the paintwork no photos were allowed in this cave. There were several others which came in just slightly shorter than this.
As well as the statues in the centre of each cave, the cave walls were decorated with hundreds, if not thousands of other Buddha images.
The overall site was very impressive. I was impressed also that the caves themselves had been left alone and not rebuilt despite the Disneyland feel they had managed to give to the rest of the site. Where Buddhas have lost body parts or had been weathered they had left them in the state they have been found in.
To get here had sounded a little complicated when we looked into it. When we had tried to board the number 4 bus across the road from the train station the bus driver was very helpful and gestured us off towards another bus. This was the brightly coloured double decker bus that was parked in front of her bus. It turned out it went right to the front door of the caves and at no extra cost than the alternative which would have involved changing buses at some random point in Datong. I cannot get over how helpful people are here, even when they don’t speak a word of English and we can’t understand them they still persist and help you.
I would recommend a trip to Datong to see the caves, I wouldn’t recommend hanging out there too long though as besides the caves there isn’t an awful lot to see, except perhaps the Hanging Monastery which we skipped as we weren’t sure how to get there easily.

« ZurückWeiter »
N° 56. FRIDAY, MAY 4, 1711.
Felices errore suo
Lucan, i. 454. Happy in their mistake. The Americans believe that all creatures have souls, not only men and women, but brutes, vegetables, nay, even the most inanimate things, as stocks and stones. They believe the same of all the works of art, as of knives, boats, looking-glasses ; and that as any of these things perish, their souls go into another world, which is inhabited by the ghosts of men and women. For this reason they always place by the corpse of their dead friend a bow and arrows, that he may make use of the souls of them in the other world, as he did of their wooden bodies in this. How absurd soever such an opinion as this may appear, our European philosophers have maintained several notions altogether as improbable. Some of Plato's followers in particular, when they talk of the world of ideas, entertain us with substances and beings no less extravagant and chimerical. Many Aristotelians have likewise spoken as unintelligibly of their substantial forms. I shall only instance Albertus Magnus, who, in his dissertation upon the loadstone, observing that fire will destroy its magnetic virtues, tells us that he took particular notice of one as it lay glowing amidst a heap of burning coals, and that he perceived a certain blue vapour to arise from it, which he believed might be the substantial form, that is, in our West Indian phrase, the soul of the loadstone.
There is a tradition among the Americans, that one of their countrymen descended in a vision to the great repository of souls, or, as we call it here, to
the other world; and that upon his return he gave his friends a distinct account of every thing he saw among those regions of the dead. A friend of mine, whom I have formerly mentioned, prevailed upon one of the interpreters of the Indian kings, to inquire of them if possible, what tradition they have among them of this matter: which, as well as he could learn by those many questions which he asked them at several times, was in substance as follows:
The visionary, whose name was Marraton, after having travelled for a long space under a hollow mountain, arrived at length on the confines of this world of spirits, but could not enter it by reason of a thick forest made up of bushes, brambles, and pointed thorns, 80 perplexed and interwoven with one another, that it was impossible to find a passage through it. Whilst he was looking about for some track or pathway that might be worn in any part of it, he saw a huge lion couched under the side of it, who kept his eye upon him in the same posture as when he watches for his prey. The Indian immediately started back, whilst the lion rose with a spring, and leaped towards him. Being wholly destitute of all other weapons, he stooped down to take a huge stone in his hand; but to his infinite surprise grasped nothing, and found the supposed stone to be only the apparition of one. If he was disappointed on this side, he was as much pleased on the other, when he found the lion, which had seized on his left shoulder, had no power to hurt him, and was only the ghost of that ravenous creature which it appeared to be. He no sooner got rid of his impotent enemy, but he marched up to the wood, and after having surveyed it for some time, endeavoured to press into one part of it that was a little thinner than the rest; when again, to his great surprise, he found the bushes made no resistance, but that he walked
through briers and brambles with the same ease as through the open air; and in short, that the whole wood was nothing else but a wood of shades. He immediately concluded, that this huge thicket of thorns and brakes was designed as a kind of fence or quickset hedge to the ghosts it enclosed; and that probably their soft substances might be torn by these subtle points and prickles, which were too weak to make any impressions in flesh and blood. With this thought he resolved to travel through this intricate wood; when by degrees he felt a gale of perfumes breathing upon him, that grew stronger and sweeter in proportion as he advanced. He had not proceeded much farther, when he observed the thorns and briers to end, and gave place to a thousand beautiful green trees covered with blossoms of the finest scents and colours, that formed a wilderness of sweets, and were a kind of lining to those ragged scenes which he had before passed through. As he was coming out of this delightful part of the wood, and entering upon the plains it enclosed, he saw several horsemen rushing by him, and a little while after heard the cry of a pack of dogs. He had not listened long before he saw the apparition of a milk-white steed, with a young man on the back of it, advancing upon full stretch after the souls of about a hundred beagles, that were hunting down the ghost of a hare, which ran away before them with an unspeakable swiftness. As the man on the milk-white steed came by him, he looked upon
him very attentively, and found him to be the young prince Nicharagua, who died about half a year before, and, by reason of his great virtues, was at that time lamented over all the western parts of America.
He had no sooner got out of the wood, but he was entertained with such a landscape of flowery plains, green meadows, running streams, sunny hills,
and shady vales, as were not to be represented by bis own expressions, nor, as he said, by the conceptions of others. This happy region was peopled with innumerable swarms of spirits, who applied themselves to exercises and diversions, according as their fancies led them. Some of them were tossing the figure of a quoit; others were pitching the shadow of a bar; others were breaking the apparition of a horse; and multitudes employing themselves upon ingenious handicrafts with the souls of departed utensils, for that is the name which in the Indian language they give their tools when they are burnt or broken. As he travelled through this delightful scene, he was very often tempted to pluck the flowers that rose every where about him in the greatest variety and profusion, having never seen several of them in his own country: but he quickly found, that though they were objects of his sight, they were not liable to his touch. He at length came to the side of a great river, and being a good fisherman himself, stood upon the banks of it some time to look upon an angler that had taken a great many shapes of fishes, which lay flouncing up and down by him.
I should have told my reader, that this Indian had been formerly married to one of the greatest beauties of his country, by whom he had several children. This couple were so famous for their love and constancy to one another, that the Indians to this day, when they give a married man joy of his wife, wish they may live together like Marraton and Yaratilda. Marraton had not stood long by the fisherman, when he saw the shadow of his beloved Yaratilda, who had for some time fixed her eye upon him, before he discovered her. Her arms were stretched out towards him, floods of tears ran down her eyes : her looks, her hands, her voice, called him over to her; and at the same time seemed to tell him that the river was impassable. Who can describe the passion made up of joy, sorrow, love, desire, astonishment, that rose in the Indian upon the sight of his dear Yaratilda ? He could express it by nothing but his tears, which ran like a river down his cheeks as he looked upon her. He had not stood in this posture long, before he plunged into the stream that lay before him; and finding it to be nothing but the phantom of a river, stalked
on the bottom of it till he arose on the other side. At his approach Yaratilda few into his arms, whilst Marraton wished himself disencumbered of that body which kept her from his embraces. After many questions and endearments on both sides, she conducted him to a bower which she had dressed with all the ornaments that could be met with in those blooming regions. She had made it gay beyond imagination, and was every day adding something new to it. As Marraton stood astonished at the unspeakable beauty of her habitation, and ravished with the fragrancy that came from every part of it, Yaratilda told him that she was preparing this bower for his reception, as well knowing that his piety to his God, and his faithful dealing towards men, would certainly bring him to that happy place, whenever his life should be at an end. She then brought two of her children to him, who died some years before, and resided with her in the same delightful bower; advising him to breed up those others which were still with him in such a manner, that they might hereafter all of them meet together in this bappy place.
The tradition tells us farther, that he had afterward a sight of those dismal habitations which are the portion of ill men after death ; and mentions -several molten seas of gold, in which were plunged

I went for a drive today, locally, to try to find a ghost town. This one doesn't have signs and souvenir concessions, just a few relics & ruins here & there. My little truck got some good old fashioned Arizona pinstriping while we were out & about.
but she never even almost got stuck. We never did find the little town we were looking for. We DID find the mine associated with it so we knew we were close. We plan on returning tomorrow as we have a better idea where it's at.

Have you ever wondered that if only someone was there who can fulfil your each fantasy without a single shred of judgment then that would be great! Let’s face it, this is a thought that we all had at some point in time and this is the girl who is going to answer it for you. She is someone who loves to experiment with the different aspects of sensuality that is involved in the service of escort. In fact, this is the reason due to which she joined this service in the first place. She loves to know her pleasures and also gives pleasures to others. That is the reason she always keeps her occupied in learning about the new ways that can help a client in getting the best kind of pleasure that they deserve from her service. She is not only ready for outcall services but she is also ready for the service of in call.

Bubba Chandler was the first player the Pittsburgh Pirates drafted to commit to the organization after they selected him with the 72nd overall pick in the third round of the MLB Draft.
Chandler enrolled at Clemson two weeks ago and was already working out with the Clemson football team when the Pirates selected him on Monday. The Bogart, Ga., product was also expected to be part of the Clemson baseball program next spring.
However, those plans changed.
Chandler explained to Pittsburgh’s 93.7 the Fan on Tuesday that baseball was his first love and he always dreamed of playing in the Major Leagues, and he did not want to pass up on the opportunity.
“You never know if I went to Clemson in three or four years would the same opportunity present itself? You never know. I took the safer route,” he said.
Choosing the safer route meant Chandler had to go and explain it to Clemson head coach Dabo Swinney. He knew he was passing on an opportunity to play for a national championship program, one that has consistently been involved in the championship race the last six seasons.
But to no surprise, Swinney was very supportive and understanding when Chandler walked into his office to tell him of his decision on Monday. The two spoke for about 20 minutes.
“He said to listen to God, follow your heart,” Chandler said. “He wasn’t mad about anything. He said ‘Bubba Chandler, I freakin’ love you kid. You are going to do great.’ He said if you ever want a spot here again, your jersey is going to be open. That made me feel a lot better.”
Chandler said he is going to miss playing football. It is a sport he grew up playing and how he met all of his friends. But he also knows the physical demand that comes with playing football can put a strain on his body, and his dreams of playing Major League Baseball just outweighed his love for football.
“I took the safe route. This is pretty much what I wanted to do. I always wanted to be a high draft pick,” he said. “Football is a sport I grew up with, my family played it. I played with all of my best friends. That’s where I met all of my buddies. I’m going to miss it, but at the same time you have to let stuff go in life. That is something I’m probably going to have to let go.”

Currently we are co-sleeping with livvy, much to annoyance of our backs, our alone time and lack of space in the bed. We have never co-slept before and didn’t really plan to this time, its just sort of happened.
With Brogan and Wil, even though we were younger and more inexperienced at this parenting malarky we had very clear bedtime routines and they slept really well from a young age and never really came into our bed unless they were poorly. When we had Madison I remember we were slightly more relaxed, but this was due to the fact that we did not want her to disturb the older two as they were now at school. So if she stirred in the night, we often just bought her in with us to settle her and then would just fall asleep. This didn’t happen all the time but more frequently than ever before. She did however, have a bedtime routine and we could get her into her own bed initially. As she is getting older, she is finding bedtime more challenging as she wants to be allowed to stay up as late as her teenage siblings, much to their annoyance. Especially when they remember what time they used to go to bed at the same age Madison is now. We are slightly relaxed at weekends and on school holidays, but during term time, she does have her own bedtime.
Olivia, however has broken every rule, pattern, thoughts we had about a settled and routined bedtime. She normally falls asleep (depending if she has napped in the day) between 9.30-10 with either myself or Stu and then stays in our bed all night, sometimes stirring, always bloody fidgeting and wakes between 7.30-8.30. We used to get her to sleep and then put her in her cot and just bring her in when she stirred but this soon stopped. When I look at why and how this has happened there a few reasons. Firstly, I think due to the fact that she breastfed for so long (2 years my longest ever), it was just easier to have her next to me in bed, where she could comfort herself and settle quickly. Secondly and probably the most significant is tiredness, i’m just too bloody tired, to be getting up and down and trying to get her to stay asleep. Also i think my mental health comes massively into this area, when my depression and anxiety are playing me up, my sleep is often very disturbed with lack of sleep, or when I am asleep the most bizarre and crazy disturbing dreams, so getting some solid sleep is quite difficult. Thirdly, and this is probably why Stuart hasn’t complained too much is because she is our last baby and we want to saviour every moment with her. She is bloody cute 😉
As a midwife and a mother I obviously know the guidance in co-sleeping and the dangers that it can entail, but as long as you practice it safely then i believe it is of no harm. Information can be found on the internet if you are not sure on the recommendations. As with anything and what I often say to women I see postnatally is, its your life and your child and you have to do what is right for you, and at this moment in time, getting any sleep I can is of GREAT importance, so we shall co-sleep until we have the energy and time to set a bedtime routine. If however, you have any useful tips, please let me know. Liv has never settled herself to sleep at night!!

Sarah Perez never thought she would be teaching reiki. As an engineer, she struggled to make sense of energy work. Growing up in the mountains, she was connected to nature as a child. But as an adult with aspirations of having a good paying job and freedom to do whatever she wanted, she followed in her dad's footsteps and became an engineer. And though, she made good money, designed and built her own house and started growing her family, something still felt "off." She started spending a lot of time studying health books and became interested in why society was becoming more ill. Chronic disease seemed to be linked to diet and lifestyle. No stranger to fad diets, Sarah starting taking class after class on family health. Later, she became a Master Certified Health Coach. While still working as an engineer, raising kids and starting her business, the exhaustion began to set in.
She would work all day with no time for lunch, and when she would tuck the kids into bed, she couldn't even get through their prayers without passing out. She was so exhausted that she couldn't think clearly anymore. Her coworkers and friends would ask if she was alright, because she would sometimes slur her words and her complexion was ghost white. But she would push through, say, "I'm fine," and carry on. Secretly though, she felt like a zombie, stumbling through life trying to help others without taking care of herself. This was the way it was supposed to be, right? Being a mom meant being tired, right? Having a side hustle meant, less sleep until you make enough money to quit the day job, right?
Sarah got a rude awakening when she found a spot on her face. Scared it was cancer, she went to the dermatologist and had a biopsy. They told her the good news that it wasn't cancer. But the bad news is she tested positive for an autoimmune disease called Lupus. Fortunately, Sarah had the holistic health background, and she knew a doctor to help her.
The thoughts running through her head were, "How could I have a chronic illness when I eat right, exercise and meditate?" "Why am I broken when I work so hard to prevent this from happening?" Sarah was at a loss. And even thought she found a holistic doctor and was taking $1000 worth of supplements a month, she was still tired! Her doctor told her to "try reiki." Because Sarah was a curious person, she did it, but she didn't thing it was any different than meditation, so she never did another session. Her doctor told her again and again to try reiki and she came up with every excuse in the book she couldn't do it. "I've got to pick my kids up from school." "I don't have time for that." "I already get massages, so I don't have the money." "My husband would think it's too weird." "I can't do it if I'm Christian." She was not getting better, so she called the reiki master, and committed to consistent healing sessions.
After her 4th session, she felt a huge shift in her energy. Her mitochondria health (the batteries in the body's cells) had doubled and her bloodwork was getting better. She was able to play with her kids, enjoy her family more and her relationship with her husband was getting stronger. She had ideas in her business that helped her market herself more effectively and with more joy. And by her third month of consistent reiki treatments, she was inspired to heal herself daily. After she received her level 1 certification, she wanted to help heal her family. Sarah moved on to become a Certified Reiki Practitioner and was looking for ways to incorporate it into her health coaching practice.
There was a voice inside her that said to pivot her entire business. It was telling her to become a healer. Logically, this did not make sense. After being so public about becoming a health coach, why would she just drop the last three years of her business and be a reiki lady? However crazy it sounded at the time, she listened to that whisper. She put herself out there as a Reiki Healer and people loved it! She became a Reiki Master-Teacher three months later. Six months after that, she became double certified as a Karuna Ki Master. Reiki has healed her life, strengthened her connection with God, and revealed gifts that laid dormant for 30+ years (including crystal therapy and shamanic drumming.)
Now, she is on a mission to help career moms who DO it all to have it all, change their lives with energy work, so they can live consciously, raise a healthy, happy family and start a career that is aligned with their highest purpose. Sarah has an interview show called Stress Less with Sarah & Friends, to showcase the tips and trick any busy mom can do to heal their lives, relationships and careers. She also hosts virtual healing events, makes intuitively designed, reiki-charged crystal jewelry and teaches live classes so women can heal themselves. When she is not facilitating healing, she likes to spend her time listening to and creating music, spending time with her family and expressing her artistic side.
If you are a working mom building a business and raising kids, you may not be getting the best sleep.
Poor sleep quality can lead to higher stress levels, lower confidence and general feelings of frustration and grumpiness.
Instead of living on a constant stream of coffee to maintain your lifestyle, consider support and holistic sleep solutions.
Join us in Courageous Spirits - Working Moms with Energy, for support so you can get your energy back, tackle your day with confidence and spend quality time with those kiddos building great memories.

Democratic Representative Ann Kirkpatrick of Arizona introduced a bill last week to cut pay for members of Congress by 5 percent.
"I'll tell you, there is nothing like asking the people you work with to take a cut in pay and see the concern on their faces," Kirkpatrick told Fox News on Monday.
The bill has already begun to gain bipartisan support, gaining 21 cosponsors from both parties, and being considered by two House committees. "The last time Congress took a cut in pay was 77 years ago. I don't know anyone who has not had a pay cut in 77 years," she said. While the savings may seem miniscule when compared to the federal deficit, the bill stands to save almost $5 million a year.
The most interesting part of this bill, in my opinion, is that it was introduced by a Democrat. Where were all the fiscal conservatives clamoring to reduce their pay these past few years?

Year when photo was taken:1916Country name at time of photo:Austria-Hungary, pre 1918Country name today:Austria
This is a picture of my father's brother Aron Zeldovich. The photo was taken in Austria in 1916. My grandparents Solomon and Leya Zeldovich (nee Lichtenzon) had seven children: Rosa, Elizabeth, Boris, Leo, my father Samuel, Aron and Manya. The family was wealthy and all children got a good education. Aron was born in Nikolaev in 1890. Aron finished secondary school and a technical college in Moscow. During World War I he served in the tsarist army and was in captivity in Austria. He told his family that Germans treated him well when he was in captivity. He returned to Russia in 1918. Aron got married in 1921. His wife's name was Sarah. They had a son called Lyoma. In the 1930s Aron and his family moved to Odessa where he was superintendent in a shop of the garment factory. After the war Aron continued to work as a shop superintendent at the garment factory. He died in Odessa in 1957. His wife and son moved to Australia in the early 1970s, and, after a few years, further on to the US. His wife died in the 1980s, and his son works as a doctor in America.

Miguel stands outside Foxs room at the hospital. He eavesdrops on Kay promising a comatose Fox that she will stay with him. Miguel refuses to believe what shes saying; she must truly want to be with him, he is the man she loves. Kay tells Fox that she doesnt believe that Miguel tried to kill him, but she will find out who it was and make them pay. Eve arrives and encourages Kay to keep talking to Fox like hell come out of it. Kay admits that she doesnt know who she wants to be with anymore. She cant accept that Miguel did this to Fox and wonders why they havent even looked for other suspects. How can she chose when she loves them both? Eve tells her that shes going to have to make a decision or shell turn everyones lives upside down.
The Man in Kays Heart
Miguel goes after Kay again, Sheridan comforts Luis, Theresa and Ethan are free to be together but Jared wants her back.
Elsewhere in the hospital, Pilar asks Miguel if Fox is getting worse. He tells her that he was listening to Kay talking to Fox about how much she loves him. Pilar tells him that he should have walked in and taken her into his arms he has to fight for her! He goes after Kay and stops her before she can go back in to Fox. You have to be with me, he says. She enters Foxs room and Miguel follows her, refusing to leave. He swears that he didnt try to kill Fox or sleep with Charity. She has to decide who is truly in her heart. When she does, she literally imagines Miguel standing in her heart, bathed in a pink glow, telling her that he is the only one there. Its you, she cries as they kiss.
Luis goes to Fancy to beg her to believe that he didnt rape her. When he tries to touch her, all she can think of is being attacked. He continues telling her that he would never hurt her, yet, when she looks at him, she hallucinates that hes wearing the ski mask. He tries to touch her again and she commands him to stay away. He wishes that there was something he could do to stop her from being afraid of him. She sits down crying and he walks out. In the hall, Sheridan jumps back from the door (she was eavesdropping again). When she asks if everything is alright, he answers not even close. Putting her arms around a depressed Luis, she cracks a smile. He wants to go back in to see Fancy, but she stops him and asks him how he got out of jail so quickly. He shouldnt be around Fancy right now anyway, she needs time to recover. Luis believes that Fancy thinks that he is the rapist. If she loves you, how could she not believe you? Sheridan prods. He has no answer, all that he knows is that hes failed to protect her and doesnt know what hell do if she doesnt want to see him again. Ill be here for you Luis, Sheridan thinks to herself. Meanwhile, Fancy paces around her room trying to figure out whats happening. She doesnt want to ruin Luis life; she loves him and runs out of the room to tell him.
Whitney encourages Ethan to go and see Theresa. She has something important to tell him and she needs him to tell her that he wants to marry her. If he doesnt hurry, something may come along to ruin their chances again. Ethan says that hes tried calling Gwen and she wont accept his calls; shes made up her mind. Then hes finally free to marry Theresa, Whitney says. Ethan thinks that shes still engaged to Jared. Whitney tells him thats over; she already took off the engagement ring. He imagines spending time with her and the children. That would be a dream come true for all of them. He smiles and Whitney snaps him out of the dream. If he married Theresa, little Ethan would be like his real son; thats what hes always wanted. Whitney encourages him again to hurry. Soon, he could be as happy as her and Chad.
At the motel, Chad gets out of bed to check if there have been any messages from his wife. There havent, so hes got plenty of time with his lover. After a busy afternoon, he gets dressed so that he wont be late for dinner. As he goes to the door, he tells his lover not to worry about Jared. He tries to leave but, looking at his lover stretched out in bed, he cant stop himself. I can be late, he says throwing off his coat and returning to bed. Afterwards, he brings Whitney some flowers with a note that reads: The only woman I love.
Theresa pushes Jared away as he kisses her. He says that hes done something idiotic; he cant leave her now hes crazy in love with her. As she stands away from him, he notices that shes taken his ring off. While he thought he could make her forget Ethan, he doesnt believe that is possible if shes already given up on us. She thought that shed never see him again. Chad convinced him to stay and hell never give up now; he wants to put the ring back on her finger. This has all thrown her for a loop and she doesnt know what to do. She starts to cry and think of Ethan and little Ethan finally being a family with her and Jane. Finally she admits that there may be nothing that could make her put his ring back on. He apologizes that his insecurity forced him into giving her ultimatums, but hes back now and wants to be with her. He promises her no more macho garbage: She will always be first in his heart, he can offer her no more. But as she listens to him, she can only imagine Ethan standing there telling her how much he wants her to be his wife. Taking Ethans hand, she tells him that little Ethan is her son and they can be a real family now. Jared interrupts this fantasy, dismayed that her mind is wandering as he pours out his heart. Shes confused and has been talking to herself about little Ethans father. He asks her what thats all about and she tells him shes just worried about losing her son to Julian. After offering to help, he asks her to have dinner with him later; they could be happy together with little Ethan. Leaving her alone to think, Theresa wonders if fate is playing a sick joke on her by finally letting her be with Ethan just as shes fallen in love with Jared. Ethan then walks through the door and tells her that he had a talk with Whitney and knows that shes free now. Im free now too, to be with whomever I want, he says as she smiles.
Next on Passions:
Theresa talks to Ethan about Julian and little Ethan.
Fancy returns to work.
Julian tells Kay he saw Miguel kissing Charity.

5 year old boy having difficulty settling into primary school
| 5 year old boy having difficulty settling into primary school           |
15/09/2013 08:39 - Ask Mother Hen (Locality: Cork)
Hi there - my 5 year old son is having difficulty settling into Junior Infants and his teacher has asked me to come in next week for a meeting.
I have heard from another parent that he hit another boy in school and the principal had to speak with him about it. He has also been getting lots of time outs. He tells me every morning that he hates the school and the teacher! He did not know any of the other children starting at school because he went to a different montessori from them. Initially he had paired up with another little boy who is as energetic and hyper as he is! I thought all was going well until I heard from another parent about his bad behaviour.
The school is a small country school and junior infants - second class are in the same room.
My son has always been highly strung but very sociable and never had problems making friends.
I am upset that I had to hear about his problems from another parent whose older boy is in the same class and told her about what was happening.
I have asked him why he hit the other boy and he said that he was making fun of his speech - DS has had some speech therapy over the summer hols and sometimes it is still difficult to understand him and he gets upset and frustrated. He is also used to having his younger sister for back up - there is just 11 mts between them and they are like twins, but she is doing her free preschool year now so it´s their first time being apart.
I did notice that DS became very cheeky and defiant towards the end of the summer but I assumed it was just boredom and thought once he was in school he would be happier. He does not sleep well and is having nightmares - he has dark circles under his eyes. He is a very slow eater so never gets to finish his lunch and told me that he feels lunchtime is a race and he doesn´t like that. Obviously the teacher can only allow a certain amount of time for eating!
I am really worried that the other parents will feel he is disruptive and not want their children playing with him. He is lost without his sister and told me that some of the other boys push him around when the teacher isn´t looking and when he pushes back they tell on him and he has to apologise. He feels this isn´t fair.
Now - my DS is no angel! So I´m trying to figure out the truth from the porkies he is inclined to tell!
He also has this habit of spitting on his hands and rubbing his eyes! Which is disgusting!
He responds well to routine and gets upset if this is changed in any way. He loves to have little jobs in class which make him feel important! He is a bright little boy but I have noticed since he was a baby that he does not always just "get" things straight away like his sister does. I had to show him how to play and I remember he could not figure out how to drink from a beaker - I had to buy 10 different types before he got it! His sister is totally the opposite - she is quick to learn and very often just figures things out herself.
I am at a loss as to why he is being so naughty! Over the summer my husband was in hospital for surgery and then he got a clot and I had to get an ambulance for him - he was roaring with pain and this frightened the children. Also my father who had a stroke a few years ago often comes to stay to give my mother a break but DS does not like it when he is here even though Dad is kind to him. He has heard Dad give out to me sometimes (as parents do no matter what age we are!) DS does not like it when this happens.
I´m trying to figure out how to fix this problem - I loved primary school so much and I wanted DS and DD to have the same experience. I even went outside the village we live in so that they could attend a country school similar to where I went. Now I am worried that I did the wrong thing. The class in the village has 40 children and I just felt DS would be lost in a large class like that.
I did want to have him assessed before as i felt some of his behaviours were a little off but DH did not want to go down that road. He thinks DS is just being a little boy???
I´m so confused and would appreciate advice on how to handle both the teacher and my son.
I have repeatedly told him i love him but he cannot behave the way he is at school. I´ve started a reward and consequence system so I´m hoping that might help - any other ideas???
| re : 5 year old boy having difficulty settling into primary school           |
16/09/2013 11:54 - Ask Mother Hen
Starting school is a time of tremendous change for a child and some find the transition harder than others. If your son´s sleep is affected and he is having nightmares it sounds like he is struggling a little. Whenever we witness a challenging behaviour in a child, we think they are trying to make our life difficult, but this outward behaviour is from a place of inner turmoil and he may be trying to communicate how difficult life is for him right now.
Therefore, the No 1 response to Challenging behaviour is to respond with compassion, to correct behaviour but never correct the child. Instead, to ´get under his behaviour´ and ask ´what is the intention of this behaviour?´ ´what is he trying to draw my attention to?´. Is there an unmet need? Sounds like over the summer the experience with his Dad was frightening and that he becomes anxious around conflict with Grandad? Is he missing his sister and finding the new separation difficult?
To lessen anxiety and build security - begin offering him 1:1 time (8 minutes of undistracted positive attention). Focus on being calm, relaxed around getting him into school. Encourage expression of feeling and acknowledge the feeling ´it´s not easy starting school.. and remind him of times he coped before and it had a positive outcome.
Above all, ask the school to give him little jobs, to ´catch him being good, not bold´, to more reinforce and notice what he does, rather than focus on what he has not done. When we notice our children and make time for them they feel more secure, less anxious and are more resilient in themselves and better able to cope.
See more on Separation Anxiety here http://www.schooldays.ie/articles/Separation-Anxiety
| re... : 5 year old boy having difficulty settling into primary school           |
17/09/2013 08:36 - Ask Mother Hen
Hi Motherhen - thank you so much for your response. You are so right about correcting the behaviour and not the child. This is something I have started to do and it works better. I recently moved DS to a different bedroom so that we had a spare room for when my Dad came to stay - DS only told me the night before last that he doesn´t like his new room and missed the way his old room was decorated. We had repainted that room. So yesterday evening I spent my time stencilling clouds onto his blue walls just like his old room (like Andy´s in Toy Story!) He slept in his own room all night without scary dreams! I should have known the change would upset him and I did say to DH that I wanted to make his new room similar to his old one but he felt DS should move on and get something different! This has taught me to trust my own intuition!
I had a very positive meeting with his teacher yesterday and he is not so much being naughty as very loud and finds it difficult to sit quietly so I am relieved as this was something I had anticipated. My GP suggested having his hearing tested so I´m going to follow up on that. I´ve also popped a notebook in his school bag so that the teacher and I can communicate about any incidents that may arise. That´s all I can do for now so I hope he settles in soon!
Thanks again for your feedback I will definitely take it all on board. :)

This lovely 5 year old boy is Albie.
He was adopted through us a number of years ago but his family have had a baby and Albie isn’t coping. He has moved out to a relatives home but this is only a temporary solution and he needs to find a new home as soon as possible.
Albie is a very sweet, loving boy who just needs an adult only home where someone is around a lot of the day (although is fine to be left for a few hours), a secure garden and places nearby where he can be walked without too many dogs in his face as he is a little lead reactive (this can improve with positive reinforcement and time).
A really nice boy who is at that great age with lots of life left, energy enough for long walks but able to relax when at home.

Antoine Wright has had trouble carrying his own weight in the past, be it the expectations that came with being the No. 15 pick out of Texas A&M in 2005, or his early reluctance to do the work that bridges the gap between players and pretenders in the pros. But this is not that. This is Wright recovering from knee tendinitis with the help of a $75,000 piece of equipment, a machine that can alleviate a chosen percentage of pounds and pressure with the simple pressing of a few buttons.
If only Wright had that kind of control over his career.
This facility has fast become the most popular place on his itinerary, from the five weeks he trained here after being abruptly waived by Sacramento in late November, to the two months he has spent here since returning from a successful stint with a Chinese team in mid-April. The company around him has changed in recent weeks, though, with these young and naive draft prospects preparing for the bright futures that they're so sure await them.
But the 27-year-old Wright knows the dark side, how nothing is promised in the NBA and too many missteps can send you down this path he wishes he had never taken. So he takes a break from playing and preaches about the game within the game every so often, sharing his cautionary tale to the youngsters who will surely suffer setbacks of their own someday.
"I tell them, 'It's a real competitive league,' and I think they need to understand that in the beginning you have to have a different attitude about your work ethic, your professionalism and your communication," Wright said while sitting courtside and speaking through the sounds of drills and dreams in the background. "It's not college anymore. You can't throw a tantrum, and you can't not come in and want to work. It's not about the team; it's about you as an individual, your career and which way you want it to go.
"I don't lecture them, but I try to tell them to just be competitive, work really hard and have a good attitude about it."
If only it were that simple when it came to Wright. If only he had followed his own advice.
While he readily admits a lack of work ethic and poor attitude hurt him during the early years with the Nets, Wright -- who was once deemed the fourth-best high school prospect in the country by ESPN.com after his senior season at the Lawrence Academy in Groton, Mass. -- isn't about to take any responsibility for the way things ended in Sacramento. He was nothing short of a disaster with a Kings team that was his fourth in six seasons, signing a one-year deal last summer and playing in just seven games before he was so unceremoniously cut.
His most public mistake came on the night of Nov. 4 last year, when Wright was arrested in a Sacramento suburb for driving under the influence (he said the charge was plead down and the DUI removed from his record). But Wright, who is crafting a comeback after playing for the Jiangsu Nangang Dragons of the Chinese Basketball Association from January to April, says it was a private matter with Kings assistant coach Mario Elie that led to his deportation from the NBA.
"I had an issue with one of the coaches and my mother," said Wright, who was with the then-Mavericks assistant Elie and Kings coach Paul Westphal in Dallas from 2008-09 as a key reserve. "Mario Elie. I'll say his name because I had a history with him. We had just lost a game. It was over the holiday, Thanksgiving holiday, and my mother was in town and in the [team] family room [at Power Balance Pavilion in Sacramento]. She came up to Mario Elie, and said, 'I'm Antoine Wright's mom. Can I have a picture with you?' My mom is a fan of the game, a big fan of Mario Elie, and he said, 'No, I'm with my family.'
"We're a team now, so I came into practice [the next day] and told everybody, I said, 'When we go into film, I'm just going to put Mario on blast.' So I walk in last, and I come in through the front and Mario is in the back, and I said, 'Man, you know what? That's foul what you did to my mom. All she wanted was a picture. Everybody in this room would have took a picture with your mom if she asked, or anybody else's mom in this room. That's probably why we don't have any team chemistry.'
"The next day [Kings officials] came in and were like, 'Uh, this is not really working for you. It's not working for us. No hard feelings. We wish you the best.' I said, 'Thanks for the opportunity, and I'm gone.' "
Despite the fact that Wright has upcoming workouts with Charlotte, Chicago and San Antonio and will almost certainly face questions about his character, he continued to attack the Kings in the sort of uncouth way that will almost certainly lead league executives to reach for the red flags when it comes time to make a decision.
"My rift, really, with the organization was that I don't think they prepared the guys enough to win basketball games," Wright said. "We were probably the only team in the NBA that didn't have a scouting report. How do you expect a young team to go out and carry a game plan? Every team I've been on, they give you a scouting report on every guy on the team, a couple paragraphs about each guy before you go out there and play against him.
"Coming on the court before the game was chaos -- no structure whatsoever, and we kind of had a laid-back coach. Westphal was pretty laid back, and with a group of young guys, you've got to have somebody who comes in and disciplines them."
Wright wasn't even close to done yet.
"I'm not going to throw any of their players under the bus, but one of the main players who was a big part of our team, his attitude was really, really bad -- I'm pretty sure you can figure out who that guy is," he said before confirming that he was speaking of then-rookie forward-center DeMarcus Cousins. "Tyreke [Evans] had a pretty good attitude. His work ethic wasn't great, but he's a good young player. I believed in him completely. I just don't think the coaches did enough to prepare us to win games."
The Kings declined numerous requests to comment for this story, a decision that speaks volumes about how they perceive this particular player. Elie could not be reached for comment. As for Wright, he discounted the notion that he handled the situation poorly in large part because he insists he continued to maintain a solid work ethic.
"I was a disgruntled worker, man," Wright said, as if that absolved him of all his actions. "But I was coming into practice every day and I was really vocal, and I was just getting after it. I was trying to be competitive with it, so I would challenge Tyreke. I never had a problem with any of the guys. I think it was kind of a 'me against the coaching staff' type of thing. And they're going to win that battle."
Wright would go on to win a few battles of his own, albeit on the other side of the globe. He traveled alone to Nanjing, China, playing in the city that is an hour's flight away from Beijing and becoming a fan favorite.
He led the Dragons to the playoffs while averaging nearly 21 points, six rebounds and four assists, having replaced former NBA player Ricky Davis on the roster. There was less talk and more action out of necessity because of the language barrier, and there was even a moniker of "Savior" being given to Wright for the way he had saved a season gone awry with his American predecessor.
"I think I got better as a player," Wright said. "I think I improved greatly as a shooter, got a lot of shots up, rebounded, played the point, ran the point the whole playoffs.
"It's kind of hard when you don't speak the language to call plays -- I learned [to say] 'one, two, three' [in Chinese] ... but that was about it. A couple of guys [on the team] knew some broken English.
"It was a toxic situation [in Sacramento], and going to China helped me put it into perspective that you can be a little spoiled in this league, but you have to understand that when you're not in a position to call the shots, you have to go with the flow."
If only he would listen to himself.

This hoodie is very comfortable and cute. I wasn't a huge fan of the color but it looked cozy so I bought it anyway and I'm happy I did. It has become one of my favorites. At lot of the reviews said that it's too big, which it is really baggy but the arm length and waist size are pretty true to size it's just the amount of fabric everywhere else that gives you a lot of room. My critique would be is that it isn't as soft as I thought it would be and it's a bit thin. It is still warmish for its thinness though because it's not super breathable.
Nicole recommended this style

We are in Hong Kong for a series of trainings and then a few days of sightseeing. A friend generously offered us her apartment for after the meetings, so we have a free place to stay.
We flew from Shenyang to Shenzhen with a stop in Wuhan. Chinese airline service is amazing! The flight attendants bow, they do exercises, they are courteous and kind. This time our pilot was an American and he invited us to the cockpit. Really fun.
So we arrived in Shenzhen. We were supposed to meet a friend and then take the bus into Hong Kong. Traveling this way is much cheaper as a flight from China to Hong Kong is an international flight.
We got off the plane and didn't see our friend. We waited. And waited. And waited for two hours. Our plane was late so we were really late. We looked around the terminal and couldn't find our friend. We got our lap top out and found out that we had sent the wrong flight information. This lead to some fruitless marital discord over who did and didn't do what. :)
We decided to get on the bus and go into Hong Kong. We e-mailed our friend that we would meet him at the place where Paul was to speak the next morning. We got on the bus...and there was our friend! He was in the wrong terminal and had finally given up. We were thrilled to see him as Hong Kong is a complicated place and I'm not completely sure we could have found where we needed to go.
A security agent entered the bus and filmed everyone on it. Then we took the bus to the border where we went through several checkpoints. Finally we arrived at our friend's apartment complex. We spent the evening looking at Hong Kong! It is simply amazing. Multi-cultural, multilingual, prosperous....incredible.
We spent the night at someone's 500 square feet apartment with the windows open!
The next day, Paul spoke at a friend's special meeting. When he got dressed, he discovered that he had packed a pair of pants with a huge rip in them! His only other pants were jeans and there was no way that he could speak in them. We found some safety pins and pinned the rip together. He stood behind a podium the whole time he was speaking. He had to speak a second time, and there was a little break between the two speaking times. So he ran down to the mall and found a tailor. He took off his pants, hid behind a curtain and the tailor fixed them! That was one of those only in China/only in Hong Kong moments.
We are very thankful to be here and spend 10 days out of the frozen north!

Text transcribed by
Apex Data Services, Inc.
Images scanned by Cornell University
Text encoded by Apex Data Services, Inc. and Elizabeth S. Wright
First edition, 2004
Academic Affairs Library, UNC-CH
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
© This work is the property of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. It may be used freely by individuals for research, teaching and personal use as long as this statement of availability is included in the text.
(title page) Trials and Confessions of Madison Henderson, alias Blanchard, Alfred Amos Warrick, James W. Seward, and Charles Brown, Murderers of Jesse Baker and Jacob Weaver, as Given by Themselves; and a Likeness of Each, Taken in Jail Shortly after Their Arrest.
Madison Henderson, alias Blanchard
Alfred Amos Warrick
James W. Seward
A. B. Chambers
[iv], 76 p.
Printed by Chambers & Knapp--Republican office.
Call number Trials K540 .T75 no.25 (Law Library, Cornell University)
The electronic edition is a part of the UNC-CH
digitization project, Documenting the American South.
The text has been entered using double-keying and verified against the original.
The text has been encoded using the recommendations for Level 4 of the TEI in Libraries Guidelines.
Original grammar, punctuation, and spelling have been preserved. Encountered typographical errors have been preserved, and appear in red type.
This electronic edition has been transcribed from digital images supplied by Cornell University.
Any hyphens occurring in line breaks have been removed, and the trailing part of a word has been joined to the preceding line.
All quotation marks, em dashes and ampersand have been transcribed as entity references.
All double right and left quotation marks are encoded as " and " respectively.
All single right and left quotation marks are encoded as ' and ' respectively.
All em dashes are encoded as --
Indentation in lines has not been preserved.
Spell-check and verification made against printed text using Author/Editor (SoftQuad) and Microsoft Word spell check programs.
LC Subject Headings:
[Title Page Image]
The writer of the following confessions begs leave to remark, that they were severally given voluntary & without inducement or restraint; & that nothing has been inserted but what was expressed by the convicts. in a cell separate and apart from each other and from all persons. No one prisoner knew what the other had confessed to. This will in some measure account for the discrepancies which appear in the confessions. In all cases it was the purpose of the writer to get the truth, and with that view he, at every sitting not only endeavored to impress upon them the solemnity of their situation, but also the fearful consequences of uttering a falsehood. He further endeavored by repeated questions, by recurring again and again to different and disconnected parts of their narrations, to sift, as far as practicable the correctness of their stories. He cannot say that his efforts have been entirely successful; but wherever he could find anything in their statements or their manner of relating them to justify a belief that they were untrue, he endeavored to exclude them from the confession. His effort has been to take down their confessions as far as practicable in their own words, and with this view he has avoided every thing like embellishment and all attempt to dilate. The opening and conclusions are theirs in sentiment and nearly the only parts in which the writer has assumed any liberty in the employment of language. Desiring that so far as the writer was concerned, the confessions might be faithful narrations of their lives he has been compelled to admit of subjects and expressions which delicacy and his own feelings prompted him to exclude. But being part of their stories, of the truth of which he had no reason to doubt and in some instances too much cause to believe, he did not feel at liberty to omit them. In the names of persons and places many errors have doubtless been committed, as in some cases the pronunciation was such as conveyed no correct idea of the real name.
Each confession has been read several times in the presence of the jailor and other respectable persons, to the prisoner making it, and all corrections made which from time to time the prisoner's recollection suggested, until his full and entire assent was given to every part.
In conclusion the writer begs leave to remark, that in suppressing names as he has, in some cases, he has been actuated by a desire not to injure any one upon the testimony of persons of color and in the condition of these convicts. He does not pretend to endorse the truth of any part of their statements, but only to say, that the foregoing is a true report of their several confessions.
A. B. CHAMBERS.
GEORGE H. C. MELODY, Jailor.
Drawn on Stone from Life in Jail. Copyright Secured.
We have never before had occasion to record such a complication of crimes in a single transaction, as was presented to our appalled citizens on the night of Saturday last. About one o'clock the alarm of fire was given by the flames bursting out of the windows and various parts of the large stone store on the corner of Pine and Water sts.; the front on Water street occupied by Messrs. Simonds & Morrison, and the rear by Mr. Pettus as a banking house, formerly Collier & Pettus. At the time of the discovery, it was evident that the building had been fired in several parts, and the flames had made such progress that it was impossible to save either the house or any of its contents.
That it was the work of an incendiary was soon apparent. Several gentlemen who arrived early, after some difficulty forced open the door of the banking house, and through the smoke discovered a body lying on the floor near the stove. The body was taken out before the flames reached it, and found to be that of Mr. JACOB WEAVER, a young man, a clerk in the store of Messrs. Von Phul & McGill, who usually slept in the room immediately in the rear of Mr. Pettus' banking room, with Mr. JESSE BAKER, the clerk of Messrs. Simonds & Morrison. Mr. Weaver was found in the dress he had worn during the day, but his head dreadfully mangled. He had been shot through the head, the ball entering above the left eye, and so near had the weapon been to him, that his face and left hand were blackened with the powder, and the little finger nearly cut off, apparently by the ball. His head was also cut open in several places, the wounds appearing to have been made with a bowie knife or hatchet.
Near to him, in the same room, was found the hat and handkerchief of Mr. Baker, but no trace of his body could be discovered. It is conjectured that he had been killed either in the bed room or some other part of the store, and that his body lies buried in the ruins.
In the banking house there was a large fire proof vault, in which there is at all times a large sum of money, and it is supposed that the murder was committed with a view of entering that vault. Of the manner, however, there is nothing but conjecture. Mr. Baker left his boarding house about nine o'clock for the store, and has not been seen since. Mr. Weaver was in company with a number of young gentlemen at a ten-pin-alley, until about 11 o'clock, when he went to the store, and about the time he arrived, the report of two pistols or guns were heard in that direction by the people in the vicinity, but from the reprehensible frequency of such reports, excited no attention. Some suppose the murderers had concealed themselves in the store, and had previously despatched Baker, and killed Weaver when he entered. Our own belief, from all the circumstances, is, that they entered with Weaver, and that the struggle and death of both followed immediately. After the murder, they doubtless fired the house in several places with the hopes of consuming the bodies, and in the expectation that their crime would not be discovered.
So far as there has been any means of judging, it is believed that the murderers failed in their principal purpose, that of entering the vault. Owing to the heat, up to a late hour yesterday, the door could not be approached, but when it was, it was found to be locked,
and could not be unlocked. The safe of Messrs. Simonds & Morrison, in which there was some money, was undisturbed, and it was therefore probable that but little booty was obtained.
The loss by the fire has been very great. Mr. Pettus lost all his books and the books of Collier & Pettus.--He, however, after three attempts, at great personal risk, succeeded in getting out a drawer under the counter, in which were all his bills receivable, amounting to near $200,000, the papers being very little injured. Most of the books and papers of the late firm of Hempstead & Beebe were destroyed, and Mr. Hempstead's desk.
Messrs. Simonds & Morrison lost their journal and ledger, but saved several other books. Their safe was dragged out, and the papers in it preserved with little damage. Their entire stock of goods, however, was consumed. Their loss, including their own stock and the goods on storage and commission, is estimated at about $30,000, which is probably below the amount. They were covered by insurance to the extent of their own stock. The whole loss, including the goods and the building, may be set down at from 40 to $50,000.
From the house of Simonds & Morrison the fire extended south to the adjoining building, occupied by Messrs. Kennett, White & Co., the roof of which was partially consumed, and for a long time, we thought it impossible to save the building or the row; but the firemen of St. Louis are indomitable, and by an exertion, demanding of all the highest praise, the house of Messrs. Kennett, White & Co., was saved with the loss of the roof only. The goods in the store, however, were greatly damaged by the water, and the stock was very large. The amount of damage is variously estimated at from 10 to $15,000--fully covered by insurance.
The wind, setting in a southwest direction, carried the embers in great quantities over the buildings south of the fire, and nothing but the saturated conditions of the roofs by the previous rains and the exertions of the firemen saved the row.
The store of Mr. Bernard Pratte, on the opposite side of Pine street, was several times on fire, and some of the window frames were considerably burned, but by the exertions of those from within, and the aid of the engines, no injury was done the building, although Mr. Pratte's goods suffered considerable injury from the water.
We would rejoice to pause here in this sad recital, but there is yet a tale of woe to be told. About the break of day, the interior of the first building having all fallen in, Mr. ANSEL S. KIMBALL, first engineer of the Union Fire Company, was standing on the side walk on Pine street playing on the fire through a window, when the wall suddenly gave way and fell outwards into the street. A gentleman with him made his escape, but Kimball was caught and crushed beneath the falling mass. His remains in a few minutes were disinterred from the ruins, but the vital spark had fled.
Mr. KIMBALL was one of our interprising citizens, a carpenter by profession, and was one of the contractors in the erection of the Second Presbyterian church. He was of irreproachable character. He was born in Concord, N. H., and came to this city from Boston in the fall of 1836, and has carried on his trade under the firm of Kimball & Webster. His circumstances were moderate, in fact, embarrassed in the general embarrassment of the times. He has left a young and amiable wife to mourn his loss, a loss to her which no sympathy can repair, but for whose future comfort it is now the duty of our community to make a liberal provision. He, upon whom she lent for support and protection, has been cut down without a moment's warning and when laboring for the preservation of his neighbor's goods.
Mr. WEAVER was a young man, about 22 years of age, of excellent character and had the entire confidence of his employers and the esteem of all his
acquaintances. His parents reside in the city, his father carries on the business of house painting, and is one of our most respectable and worthy citizens. He removed to this city about three years ago from Washington City, and doubtless prided himself on the promise of usefulness which his son gave, but the icy hand of death has destroyed the flower and crushed the parent's fond hopes.
Mr. BAKER was a young gentleman of about 22 years of age, the son of a respectable family, residing in Worcester county, Md, and a nephew of Mr. Jesse Lindell, of this city. For steadiness and propriety of conduct, he was a pattern, and it is nothing more than justice, to say, that there was not a worthier young man in our community. He has lived here a number of years, and from all with whom he became acquainted, won the applause due to rectitude and worth. He and Mr. Weaver were members of the St. Louis Fire Company.
It would be impossible to describe the intense feeling, which pervaded the community during the night and ensuing morning, and in fact, the whole day. Every one was shocked at the enormity and boldness of the deed, and felt, that whilst such crimes could be committed in our midst and the guilty escape detection, there was no security to any one. We live, indeed, in dangerous times when such damning crimes can be committed in the very heart of the city and the brutal authors go unhung and unwhipt of justice.
At an early hour in the morning without any previous call, a large number of the citizens assembled at the Old Market House, when the Mayor, John D. Daggett was called to the chair, and Geo. K. Budd, Esq, appointed Secretary, when the following proceedings were had:
WHEREAS, a foul and inhuman murder--together with arson--was perpetrated in our city last evening, by some person or persons unknown; and whereas, the perpetration of this-horrible outrage calls for the most prompt and efficient measures on the part of the citizens. Therefore, Resolved, That the Mayor be and he is hereby authorized and requested, without delay, to offer a reward in the sum of FIVE THOUSAND DOLLARS, for the detection and conviction of the perpetrators of the crime aforesaid.
Resolved, That a committee of twelve from each Ward, be appointed by the chair, to immediately take such measures as to them shall be deemed ex pedient to ferret out the murderer or murderers.
Resolved, That the corporation of the city of St. Louis be and is hereby requested to appropriate the amount of the aforesaid reward of $5000 to be paid on the arrest and conviction of the perpetrator or perpetrators of this horrible outrage and murder.
After the adjournment of the meeting the Mayor offered a reward of $5000 for the detection of the perpetrators and the St. Louis Fire Company offered a further reward of $300.
The city and country was patrolled during yesterday and last night, and the citizens generally are using all the means in their power to detect the guilty.
On Tuesday night, Messrs. John Atkinson and R. B. McDowell, who had gone up the Missouri in the Col. Woods in pursuit of Warrick, one of the murderers and incendiaries of the 17th u'lt., arrived at our wharf in the Omega, with the object of their pursuit, at about 12 o'clock. Warrick had left here in the Omega, and the Col. Woods met near Arrow Rock, where, being hailed from the Col. Woods she rounded to, and the boats came together. Messrs. McDowell and Atkinson immediately went on board the Omega, found their chap, promptly secured him, and then transferred their baggage to the Omega, and returned with their prisoner.
He professed utter innocence in the whole matter, asserting that all his information was derived from Brown, one of the desperadoes yet at large. In other respects, his narration was pretty much the same as that given by Ennis, published in this paper a few days ago. He also stated that Madison and Brown were the burners of the Branch Bank at Galena. He gives his name as Alpheus Warrick.
James W. Seaward, another of the gang, was brought up yesterday morning in the Pre-Emption. He had left this city in the Atlanta; and Mr. Gordon, one of our efficient constables, who had left here in the Tartar, for the apprehension of Madison, on his arrival at Cairo, finding the Atlanta at the wharf, went on board, found Seaward, secured him, and immediately transferred him to the Pre-Emption and brought him up. He gives a similar account of the tragedy with the other two, acknowledging his own guilt, and implicating Ennis. He stated that he left Brown in Cincinnati on Thursday last, the 29th ult., and that the next day after the Atlanta left, he was to leave for New Orleans on another boat. Mr. Gordon engaged persons at Cairo to be upon the look-out for him, and secure him if he should come along. Mr. Gordon again returned yesterday on the Gen. Pratte for New Orleans, unless he should meet with Brown in custody at Cairo, in which case he will probably return with him. Seward lays the whole blame to Madison and Brown, as projectors, leaders, and chief executioners in the tragedy.--He also states that Madison had sworn or declared, that if discovered or informed upon, he would never be taken alive.
Some time ago, a burglary was committed upon the store of Sinclair Taylor & Co; and in possession of Seward was found several articles belonging to one of the firm. He says Madison and Brown committed that act, with an attempt to fire the building at the same time, and that about the same time they committed the burglary upon the store of E. & A. Tracy.
Justice now appears to stand a fair chance of being meted out to these miscreants and desperadoes. We look for the forthcoming of Madison by the return of the Meteor, and if Brown leaves Cincinnati according to intention, he will stand a good chance of making his appearance among us even before Madison. They now, all four, seem destined to pay the high penalty due to the violated laws.
The steamboat Eliza, which left New Orleans on the 2d inst., and prior to the arrival of the Oregon or Meteor, arrived at our port during Saturday night about 12 o'clock, having on board the slave of Mr. Blanchard, of New Orleans, called Madison, and who is accused of the Murder of Mr. Baker, in Mr. Pettus' store on the night of the 17th ult.
We are authorized by Capt. Littleton to state the following, viz: the facts of his coming here, and his arrest.
Madison came on board as passenger, with a note from Blanchard, his master, desiring Capt. Littleton to bring him to St. Louis, stating that he (Blanchard) would pay his passage. In a conversation with the Captain, Mr. Blanchard said that he wished to keep his slave out of the way, in consequence of some difficulty which had occurred in New Orleans, and to prevent his being put in prison there.--At Memphis, Capt. Littleton had some intimation that negroes were concerned in the bloody work, but no names were mentioned. On his arrival at Commerce, the particulars were detailed to him, and the fact that Madison was concerned. This information was imparted only to the Clerk, intending to arrest the negro as soon as they arrived in port. Capt. Littleton set a guard to watch the negro--then asleep on the deck--and sent for the Police Officers, by a young man in R. H. Stone's store. Mr. R. Dowling (a deputy marshal) and Mr. John Lux
soon appeared; Madison was pointed out to them by the Captain; they tied him and took him to jail.
We are authorized by Mr. Littleton to say, that so far as he is concerned, he declines to receive any reward for this arrest--being abundantly satisfied with the consciousness of having done his duty to society.
Yesterday morning Mr. Miller of Alton, and Mr. Farish of this city, accompanied by one of the Cincinnati police, arrived on board the steam boat Express with Brown. Notice having previously been given that he was on board the boat, an immense concourse of people collected on the wharf. The officers who had him in charge, managed it so as to get him off and some distance on the way to the jail, before the crowd discovered them. By the time they had arrived at the jail several thousand were present, and although there were many deep murmurs uttered, yet no attempt at violence was offered.
Brown was yesterday brought before the Criminal Court and arraigned on both indictments, to which he plead not guilty. The Court then assigned JOHN F. DARBY, Esq, formerly Mayor of the city, as his counsel, and he was remanded to jail where he was securely ironed and lodged in an apartment separate from the others.
The character and high standing of the counsel whom the court have assingned for the criminals, embracing the head of the profession, and all being gentlemen of distinguished worth as citizens, should be to all a sufficient evidence that the accused will have a fair trial and the full benefit of the law. The testimony will be fairly submitted and passed upon, and it is a matter which should be received as a strong evidence of the moral feeling of this community, that no objections are made to the course which the court has pursued. It is, however, highly desirable that their trial should be had at as early a day as will be compatible with a full and fair investigation. Until this is over, the feverish feeling pervading the community will not subside, accidental or unforeseen causes might call forth that feeling, which is now only repressed by a consciousness that the law will be fully executed.
Circuit Attorney John Beat. For the prisoner, Wilson Primm. Esq. The following jury was empannelled and sworn:
JURORS--Daniel D. Page, David Chambers, Joseph Wallon, David Shepherd Ephraim Carter, Martin Wash, Ruberdeau Annan, George W. Berkley, Elisha Patterson, John Stagg, James W. Doughty, John Winright.
Indictment read by Bent, Prosecuting Attorney.--Edward H. Ennis sworn on the part of the State.
All I know of the matter is derived from prisoner and the others. On the night of the 17th April, I had worked at my shop until 10 at night, when shut up shop, went from there to my lodgings at P. Charleville's--he let me in, I went to bed immediately, had been asleep until half past 10 to 11, when defendant came and knocked at door, I got up and let him in, he entered and his first remark was, God d--n the luck--I said why, what's the matter now? he replied he had done more murder that night than he had ever done and had not been paid for it;--I asked where he had been, he said he, Seward, Brown and Warrick had that evening been down at Coller's counting room and that the door was unlocked, that he went in and presented a bank bill to the gentleman who was sitting or standing near the stove, and while he was looking at the bill, he struck him with a bar of iron on the head, as soon as he struck him the other three came in, the blows were followed up until he died, the top of his head was beaten off--after he was dead the body was searched for the keys of the vault, not finding the keys the body was rolled up and laid in bed clothes in bed;--after that they endeavored to open the vault, and continued at it until the other gentleman came. (The man killed was not named by him) He rapped at door and some contention arose as to who should kill the gentleman.--The dispute was ended by M.'s saying that he had done his share by killing one and that he did not intend to kill any more He, Warrick and Seward then secreted themselves, Brown stood behind the door, opened it, and as the gentleman came in struck him, knocked him down and followed up the blows until the gentleman died. Madison left very soon after, did not stay long. When the alarm of fire was given, I got up and went to the fire;--there the general rumor was that Weaver was shot;--I staid at the fire until near 3 o'clock,--when I got home there was a light in Peter's room,--I there saw the crow-bar which Blanchard said he had need that night,--I took it up and threw it in the vault rear of the house,--that night or next morning I asked Madison in regard to two pistols having been fired, he said no pistols had been fired by either of them. The iron bar was a small one about 18 inches long,--I think the bar shown me in court is the one,--I think there was blood on the bar,--Madison boarded at Peter's at that time.
Cross Examined--I was examined at the Mayor's office by the Mayor, who reduced my examination to,
writing; I am a barber and have been working with G. Johnson on Market street; Madison is no barber, he and myself boarded and lodged at Peter's house for some considerable time; we slept in the same room and bed; he used to come sometimes to the shop to call me to my meals; we were merely together as boarders and were not in the habit of confiding our secrets to each other, we had none to confide; neither of us married; never confided to each other our courting scrapes; Blanchard was not at my shop during that day; I don't recollect seeing him from breakfast till he came in that night; I was at dinner and supper and did not see Madison; I saw him at breakfast; I don't recollect seeing any person there at supper except Peter's wife; Mary Beaufils was not in the house that I know of.
M. did not appear to be drunk--there was no light in our room, but the middle door was open and I could see the light from Peter's. P. and wife were in their room in bed, but whether awake or not I cant say. M. had a cap on when he came in, had boots, gray pants and blue box coat. When Peter and I went to the fire we left M. in Peter's room by the fire--he had his boots, coat and cap off--I went to bed and lay awake until the alarm of fire, M. did not go to bed--M. and I did not have a long talk together, cant say the tone of voice in which he spoke when he came in--I wont be positive whether there was the light of a fire or candle in Peter's room. The fuel used was wood. I saw M. with crow-bar when he first came in the house and he then said that he had done the act with it. I am positive there was blood on it. I saw M. in bed when I came home from the fire; I dont know whether he was asleep. I did not caution M. to speak low when he stated these facts to me. I had never had any communication with any of the defendants about any project they may have entertained. I took the crow-bar myself and threw it away when I came from fire--I made the same statement before the mayor. Think I saw M. at breakfast and in the street on Sunday. I had conversation with all of them at Peter's house on Monday.
RE-EXAMINED. The coat produced is the one M had on that night. By juror--I threw the bar away because I was afraid that M. might have communicated the matter and have brought me into difficulty.
Le [illegible] Charleville. I know nothing of this murder; I know the night when fire occured. M. boarded with me, so did Ennis, E. was at my house in bed; he was at supper; M. was not at supper. Ennis came home about 10. I was in bed when he came home, he went to bed directly. M. came home about 11 or 12. I heard him say something when he came in but dont know what.--No light in house; no candle lighted until the cry of fire. Have seen the coat; it is Madison's; night of fire he had coat on; din'nt see him with it on after that night; Mr. Gordon got it from my house; I think there was blood on the skirt of it. Know nothing of bar.
Cross Examined.--Was in bed when Ennis came home. Had'nt much fire that night. Peter blew out the candle when Ennis came. M. woke us up by his knocking at the door. Ennis asked who it was and M. said Blanchard. Madison went to bed with Ennis. I dont think it was light enough for me to see in my room. I dont recollect any long conversation between E. and M. E. and Peter went to fire. M. staid in bed. M. did not go into my room and sit down by the fire. P. came back first--he, Ennis came into my room, pulled off his boots and talked of the fire--he pulled off his clothes in my room; he did'nt remain long, he went into his room and went to bed. I lay awake after that--I heard E. and M. talking but dont know what they said.
M. was at breakfast the next morning, and at dinner, I don't remember whether at supper--M. had a calico shirt, gray pantaloons and a cap--M. and Ennis had no great deal to say to each other--he eat breakfast and dinner at my house on Saturday--he didn't put the coat on Sunday morning--it lay on the bed, it was hanging on the middle door when Mr. Gordon came in--I never saw blood on it until after Gordon left--M. told me to send the coat to Patsey Evans to have it mended--his behaviour at breakfast was as usual, I saw nothing wrong M. left for N. Orleans on the Missouri, on Tuesday or Wednesday.
On Saturday we eat supper before dark, to enable E. to go to work--M. left my house before sundown.
Francis J. Parker. Recollects night of fire, knows Ennis, was at his shop until 10 o'clock, and Ennis was there.
Peter Charleville. Knows E. and M., recollects night of fire--M and E. boarded at my house--M. left my house immediately after supper, and came back between 10 and 11 at night. He didn't eat supper at my house that night--Ennis did, and came back about 10 and went to bed immediately. E. let M. in--heard them talk, but don't know what they said--I went to the fire with Ennis--M. was then in bed, and didn't say any thing about going to the fire. Knows the coat, it is M's--I think he had it on that night--never since. When I heard the cry of fire I said it was a darn'd shame that people's property should be burnt up so. He (M.) answered what the hell is it to you. Have you any property there, or down there? I understood the latter. In the morning M. asked me where the fire was, I said the house of Simonds & Morrison--he asked if it had burnt much--I answered it had burnt that house and all the property in it--then he said it didn't burn down to the old man's house, and I said no--meaning his master's property where Tatum lives. He said it was good for me that I had got caught in the smoke, I had no business there--never saw the bar.
Cross-ex--When M. came home no light in my room, and door shut--and no light in his room. I heard M. come in--I did not get up nor my wife--we staid in bed. I didn't hear him say a word that I could distinguish. I could not have seen any thing on the other side of the room that night--I am positive that M. was not in my room when I started for the fire--he was in bed. I came back first--M. was still in bed--I dont remember E's. coming back. When I left for Cincinnati the coat was on the door.
James Gordon. I took the coat from Leah's house. E. told me that the bar had been thrown by him into the privy, and there I found it.
Carson.--Knew Baker, saw his body after it was taken to Blow's store--the head was nearly all burnt off--lower part of his body was not--except toes and one of his hands, also his breast. His coat and pantaloons burnt--I could recognize them. There was nothing else round him. It was the front part of his head that remained unburnt.
James Sykes.--Examined Baker in Blow's store. Head burnt off except back part.
Two cuts across the breast, as if done by a sharp instrument.
Edward Bredell. Knew Baker, body found in the ruins--saw it taken out on Monday morning.
Mr. Primm on behalf of the prisoner addressed the jury. Mr. Bent followed in reply, when the case was submitted, and after a brief absence the jury returned into court a verdict of "GUILTY OF MURDER IN THE FIRST DEGREE."
Indictment for Murder. The following jurors were empannelled and sworn, viz:
JURORS--John F. A. Sanford, Joseph H. White, Dalzoll Smith, Samuel Peake, William H. Harshaw, William P. Harrison, George G Presbury, William A. Bransford, Charles Cho [illegible] teau, Edward Xaupi, John M. Massey, Ellis Wainright.
Indictment read by J. Bent, Circuit Attorney.
Edward H. Ennis sworn on the part of the State says, either on Sunday or Monday, but I rather think it
was on Monday, after the fire, I saw Brown, Warrick and Madison together; I think they were all together; I think they were at Leah's house if I mistake not; I there had some conversation with them; I think it was in the bed room which was occupied by Blanchard and myself, but I will not say for certain whether it was there or down stairs. I there commenced the conversation about the fire, but I cannot state how. I believe it was in that conversation that I asked Brown, in regard to the pistols having been fired, (the pistols that it was rumored had been used when Mr. Weaver had been shot,) told me there had been no pistols used, same as Madison had done; he said that he himself, when the gentleman rapped at the door, opened the door for him, and as he came in he struck him. I have no recollection of what he said he struck him with, and that the blows were followed up on the gentleman until he was killed; whether he said any of them assisted him or not I can not pretend to say, I do not recollect whether he named the gentleman who was killed or not; I think he said there had been one killed before--killed by Madison. I dont think he mamed either of the gentleman killed. I think he told me they did not stay there long after Mr. Weaver came in, the last gentleman who was killed. He further said that before he left he had fired the house in five different places. Brown said he took away with him when he went a blue cloth cloak and a gold watch. He described the chain to me, but I have forgot the exact description. He then came out and locked the door, went up the alley, north from the store, I suppose it is, and in going up that alley threw away the key of the door. I think that is about all, as far as I can recollect. Brown did not state how long it was before he left the building, or the his accomplices left the building. I can give no description on the watch chain, but I think it was a black guard chain.
The whole of this conversation related to a conversation that I had previously had with Madison, about the commencement of this whole matter, the killing of the two men and the burning of the house. This was the Monday after the fire, and in the forepart of the day. I did not know either of the persons said to be killed. Brown might have said something about using instruments and the manner of killing, but I do not recollect it. Madison said something about the blow being given over the eye; but whether Brown was present or not I do not recollect; can not recollect any thing that was said about the instruments that were used. Brown said he struck him and followed up the blows till he was killed.
Whether Brown knew that Blanchard had told me, or whether I told him that Blanchard had told me, in my introduction of the matter to Brown I will not pretend to say; I rather think I did not tell Brown what Blanchard had told me. I think we were sitting in my room, on the bed in which Madison and I slept; that I commenced the conversation by alluding to the pistols, with Brown. I have as far as I can recollect, stated what I said to Brown, and what Brown's reply to me was.--Madison said that as they were giving the blows, Weaver threw up his hand to his forehead, to shield off the blows, and that it was by that that his finger was nearly cut off. I think Brown was present at this conversation.
Cross-Ex.--I saw Brown first, here in the city of St. Louis. The first time I saw him was about three months back from this time--he came to the house (Leah's house) to see Madison, was where I first become acquainted with him. Some time in the winter, I am not certain about time, I became acquainted with him by seeing him at the house where I boarded, with Madison. Madison did not introduce me to him; he came to the house some three or four times before I become acquainted with his name at all. I have been here off and on since 1833. I have no license to stay here from the county court. I was taken up before you (the Mayor,) last summer and ordered to go away. I was fined last summer and went away, and came back last fall to attend court; Mr. Nabb took an appeal from the Mayor's court for me and wrote on to Maryland to get some documents from there. I am a Barber by trade, and have followed that trade in this town at the shop of George Johnson, on Market street, opposite the National Hotel. I do not know of any trade that Brown followed--I know nothing of his trade at all. Brown staid at Leah's a few days, and where else, I do not know. He told me he generally followed the river, a steam boat man Brown came to the room occupied by me and Madison in the upper part of Leah's house, and could not get into her house without coming through that room. Our meeting at Leah's house on Monday morning was accidental, and without concert--whether they went there first, or whether I met them there at breakfast, I cannot state. I cannot state whether that was the first time I had seen Brown after the fire or not; I might have seen him on the street, or somewhere else; it was the first time as far as I can recollect. Brown was not at Leah's on Saturday night, to my knowledge he was not there at supper. Brown had boarded there a few days, but had left some time previous to that--I think it was on Monday morning I saw Brown. Madison told me of the burning and death on Saturday night--I did not go to see Brown about it.
I think it was up stairs in Leah's house, that I had this conversation with Brown. I cannot state that I had any other conversation with Brown after that, I might, and I might not have recollected the conversation. Brown said he threw the cloak away; he did not say where he threw it. He said he threw it away for fear it might be seen or known. I think he told me two different stories about the watch--in the first, whether he said he himself had mashed up the watch or had given it to Warrick to mash up. I cannot pretend to be positive; I rather think that he had given up to Warrick. The other story was, that he had thrown it away. I never saw the watch to my knowledge. He said it was a gold watch. Brown said that he went and stood behind the door and knocked the second gentleman down as he came. No recollection of what he said he knocked him down with. He said nothing about any apprehension of his being taken up at the time; and did not enjoin secrecy on me. I think I commenced the conversation with Brown about the murder--I do not know how I commenced the subject; or how it was broached--cant say that Brown was agitated or was not. I expressed some apprehension to Butcher from associating with such folks. I conversed with Butcher on the following Friday; as to the course I should take--and it was on the conversation which I had with Brown at Leah's house, that he gave me the confirmation of what I had heard from Madison. He mentioned nothing about any instrument used, in killing Mr. Weaver; and told me he had followed up the blows until Mr. Weaver was killed. Never had been intimate with Brown. Three of them, Madison, Brown and Sewall, were there on Monday, at Leah's house, Peter was not there that I knew of Leah was in her room. He told me he stood behind the door, and knocked the young man down as he came in, and followed up the blows until he was dead.
I cannot say the month or time when Brown went away; I believe he was absent; Brown did not tell him he was going away; I saw Brown there at Leah[']s house, after the conversation I had with him on Monday, and saw him in the street after that; I do not know whether I had any conversation with Brown after that or not; Brown told me he was going away, and was going to Cincinnati to see his family; he stayed here two or three days after the burning of the house; Brown had not communicated any of his affairs to me; I did not mention the fact to Brown of my having thrown the crow-bar into the pit; Leah could not have heard our conversation, I think, as the door was shut.
Nancy McKee.--Lawful age, being duly sworn on her oath, states that the key here now shown to her, was found by her in the alley east of Pine street house, on Sunday evening after dinner.
Augustin Kennerly states that this key was handed to him by Mrs. McKee, on Sunday evening, after
the fire, saying she had found it in the alley east of Pine street, and had given it to Mr. Pettus the same evening, near the corner of Pine and Main streets.
William Anderson states that the key now shown here to him was the key of the counting house of Collier and Pettus, and he has carried it a many a time; and there was another key just like it; no other keys about the house more like it.
Thomas Ellsworth states that he knew Jacob Weaver, and he helped carry him home on Sunday morning; he went to open the Sunday school on Sunday morning in the Unitarian church, and saw them carrying him home and went up with them; he saw Mr. Weaver in at Mr. Blow's; he did not examine him as particularly as he did at his father's house, after he was laid out. He says two wounds on this side of the centre of his head, and he could not say but what there was a ball. He could not say that the scull was broken, in the blow across the top of his head; there was another wound across the back of his head, which was the largest wound there was, there was another wound over the right eye, splitting the bone over the eyebrow.
George Collier says he knew Jacob Weaver was killed in his house; at the time of the fire and soon after getting on the ground, I saw them bringing out a body, from the store and take it up the hill and received into Mr. Blow's store, which body he examined and found it to be Mr. Weaver's. Had not seen Mr. Weaver for several days; before that he had been absent; I examined the wounds; they appeared to be scratches; there was a large wound on the back of the head; one in the eye, which I look to be a pistol shot.
William Morrison says he knew Jacob Weaver, and had seen him two days before that.
For the Prisoner.--John B. Meacham sworn.--Does not know the prisoner.
Robert Wilkinson; I have known Brown, for two for three years, had known him on a boat, on the river; Brown passed up up Vine Street, about the last of February of first of March; have not seen him since the last of March.
Jerimah Burros--Says he knew Brown the prisoner, at a shop, kept by Alford, where he shaved; the shop was on the corner of Tenth street and Franklin Avenue; the building belonged to deponent; Alford rented the shop of him; a German lived in the same house at the time, adjoining the shop, and lives now in O'Fallon's addition; I shaved on Sunday, in Alford's shop, after the fire; it was between nine and ten o'clock, I did not see Brown there to my knowledge.
Cross Examined.--I heard some one say that Alford was concerned in the affair, since the secret came out; he has shaved me twice since.
Leah--Says Brown was at her house twice after the fire; he was there on Sunday morning and asked for Blanchard, I told him Blanchard was in the house and he called him out; Brown was at my house on Monday morning; on Monday, when they were there they were all in the same room together; some two or three of them. Leah spoke to Brown on Sunday morning and asked him if it was not dreadful destruction, and he said it was. Never saw Brown until late this spring in her life, and then he came to her house; went up the river with Madison.. He did not board at her house at the time of the fire; they were talking in the room on Monday morning, they were talking in a low tone of voice, and the door was shut.
Cross Examined--Brown and Madison started and went to Bucher's from her house.
Philip Claus.--I see him every time in the Barber shop. He does not know any thing of him, except that he saw him in the Barber shop; but what his business was or where he was from he does not know. He lived adjoining the Barber shop; Barbershop is on Tenth street in this city, on or near Mr. Burros' lot. He lived at this house on the 17th April 1841 at the time of the fire at Collier & Pettus' store. He saw the negro between four and five o'clock on Sunday at the Barber shop. He did not see him on Saturday; he was out at work and did not see him there or any place else. There is about a four inch wall between the room he occupied and the Barber shop.
Edmond--I knew nothing of the fire and the murders that were committed here, on the 17th April. I left New Orleans on the 14th April, with Capt. Stiles. I did confess that I was one of the men who had been in the scrape here, but I was forced to do so, by being taken into a private room, in New Orleans.
John Bent, Circuit Attorney, then opened the case to the Jury.
J. F. Dathy addressed the Jury in behalf of the defendant; when Mr. Bent concluded the case.
The Jury retired for about five minutes, and brought in a verdict of GUILTY of murder in the first degree.
JURORS--Nathaniel Allison, Henry Pilkinton John Torode, E. C. White, Samuel Wiggins, George Henderson Laurison Riggs, D. M. Hammond, John Pritchett, James Waugh, Robert Depew, E. C. Carlton.
James Gordon. I arrested prisoner at the mouth of Ohio, and brought him up. He stated to me on our way up that Brown, Madison, and Warrick were the party when the murders were committed at Collier's house. He named persons killed, but I don't know that he said he knew them before. He named Baker and Weaver as the persons killed. He said that Brown had three days before the occurrence first made the proposition to him; afterwards he said they were all four together and arranged the plan how it was to be done--he said he was opposed to the killing or burning, but that Brown and Madson overruled him--and that on the night of the murder the four went to the place together--Madison went in alone and killed the first young man, whether he then named the name of Baker I dont remember--he said that Brown then went in with Madson--after some length of time he was walking up and down the street and walked at one time half way up the block on Front street, with the intention to go home, but recollecting that Warrick had the key he returned--when he came back he didn't see Warrick--suposed he was in some of the alleys--when he got near the house he saw a couple of young men coming down from Main street--before the young men got down opposite Mr. Collier's door one started across the street and the other kept down the street--the one who kept down the street passed right by him, the other went to the door of Mr. Collier's, pushed open the door and stepped in--as the young man stepped in he heard a blow given and the young man fell. The prisoner has since the first conversation I had with him told me that I mistook him in his first statement of his position--his first statement to me as I understood him, was that he was at the corner of the house opposite Mr. Collier's and at the alley--his second was that he was at the corner below--of Pine and Front streets. He said he was not any time in the house, and that shortly after the last young man went in he left the place & went home; he said that he was watching outside; the proposition to him by Brown was three days before the act. I dont remember where he said the plan was laid; did not know Weaver. His confession was made to me on the boat between here and the mouth of Ohio.
Cross examined--I started for New Orleans after Madison at the month of Ohio, finding I was on a slow boat, I determined to leave her and take the first fast boat that came down; soon after I stopped the Atalanta, came down and I went on board to learn where Seward had left her, as I had heard that he went away on board of her, inquired of the clerk if such a boy had left St. Louis on her, and he said there had, and that he was still on board. I found him and arrested him immediately; he was engaged in some
capacity on board; was in the pantry when arrested. When I arrested him he did not appear to be cowed, but rather surprised; don't think I told him the cause for which I arrested him. I took him up to a public house at the mouth and confined him. We remained there about three or four hours. He was arrested about 9 o'clock in the evening, and we left about 1 or 2 in the morning. Left him in charge of two young men; while gone made confession; one of the young men from the boat, but neither from this place. The Missouri came into sight; they told him I had gone on her to catch Madison, said he would confess and hang the ballance. Seward was alarmed and wanted me called back, but they said I had gone too far; they told him it would do as well if told to any body. When I returned, I told him if he had any thing to say, to say it. He inquired if he told, if it would save him. I told him I could make no promise; what he told, must be voluntary. Was in my custody. When I went to eat, the captain and clerk watched him; lay in the Social Hall. The conversations were at different times, and at no one time were all the facts detailed. He appeared quite backward after he desired the conversation. In the first place I told him when he felt like conversation to let me know. Can't say whether the first was that night or next morning. Asked some questions. Appeared as if deceived when I returned. Think I mentioned to him if he hadn't told the other young men; he made no reply. He might have supposed I knew what he had told the young men. The conversation to me the same and the story told the young men. I had informed him that the matter was understood at home. Was steady in the denial of his being in Collier's house. Don't think he said the particular parts each one were to perform; said Brown was the head man in planning, and Madison chief in executing.--Stated it was Brown that killed Weaver. Understand that he didn't see it, but so stated the fact. Stated he was in the habit of sleeping in Warrick's shop.--Returned to get the key. Understood that he came immediately back after having gone half up the square and came up to the alley, was after the key. Don't think the killing had reference to any particular person, except the person in charge of the house. Am certain that he was anxious by exposing all to save himself. Didn't mention the names of the two young men as if he knew them. Didn't stay long after Weaver was killed. Stated nothing of any participation in any subsequent act. Think the last conversation in reference to this was on the morning before we arrived here. Can't say the precise language used, but it was such as to say plainly that his purpose was to watch and give the alarm if necessary.
George Collier gave the same testimony as in the case of Brown.
Edward H. Ennis. Think on the Monday after the fire that Seward was at Leah's house with B. and Mad. Think I was making some further enquiries of Brown about the murder. Dont recollect of Seward saying any thing about it. Dont recollect of Seward's name having ever been mentioned when he was present. Dont know that I ever had any conversation with Seward.
Mr. Gamble, on behalf of the prisoner, addresed the Jury, and urged that the confession had not been made without improper inducements, and therefore, the jury ought to disregard it. Mr. Bent replied and the case was submitted. The jury after an absence of about 10 minutes, returned into court a verdict of "GUILTY OF MURDER IN THE FIRST DEGREE; AS PRINCIPAL IN THE SECOND DEGREE."
Indictment, as accessary to the murder of Jesse Baker.
The following jury was empannelled and sworn:
Hiram Cordell, Wm. Hare, A. W. Lockwood, John M. Arnest, Willis P. Coleman, Hosea Blossom, George Mead, Luther Cummings, Strother M. Burton, John S. Pearce, William Shrier, Henry Holmes.
Robert B. McDowell.--Knows the prisoner; it was 3d May, went up Missouri and took prisoner just below Arrow Rock; went up in pursuit of him; after he was taken there was nothing said to him for some time; he then commenced telling his becoming acquainted with Madison, Brown and Sewell; he had been more intimate with Madison and Brown than with Sewell; he commenced telling that he was at Burlington, and Madison and Brown were where he was, working at the Burlington House, being flush with money, having made a raise at Galena; he then came from Burlington and opened a Barber's shop in St. Louis. In the spring Brown and Madison returned also, and perhaps Sewell but don't recollect as to Sewell. They were in company three or four days before the fire at Collier's. He stated that at the night the deed was committed, they all four went on board the Missouri steamboat; when they came off from the boat they stopped at the corner of the store of Collier & Pettus in consultation, Brown, Sewell and Warrick were together at the corner of the street at about 9 o'clock. He then (at first conversation stated that he went away; Madison observed previous to that, they were going to make a big raise that night. Witness then asked him what weapons they used; he stated it was an iron bar. Witness asked him to describe it, and he did so; showing the length with his hands about 16 inches. Witness asked him if he (Warrick) was in the store of Collier & Pettus; he (Warrick) never having till then admitted that he had been in the house. He stated that he had not been in the house, but was on the look out. He then commenced stating to witness what Madison had told him. During the conversation he used the expression, "we were all there together, we were all in the house together." The next evening the Iatan came up, and witness got the Republican from her, and then told prisoner that there was a rumor in the paper relating to the matter, and at prisoner's request, witness read the piece in the paper to prisoner; and after he had concluded reading it, prisoner said every word of it was true. The conversation after that amounted to the same thing, breaking off, and conversing again at different places. On his way home on the night of fire, (prisoner stated to witness,) he stopped at Dr. Knox's and was with his colored people till between 11 and 12 o'clock; and then went to a widow lady that lives in one of Mr. Barrows' houses and borrowed a watch, that after he had got home, Brown and Sewell came and slept with him that night; that the next morning they all went down town; he said Madison killed Jesse Baker; and that he was not there in the house, but was out by the door; he said "we were all in," but not that he was; he did not say when the plan was arranged; but that they had been in company a few days previous. Madison observed to him when they were all together, that they would make a big raise that night. He stated there was another man (a white man,) present, but that he did not know his name; he did not say the white man had any thing to do with the plot.
Cross Examined--Prisoner was steward on board boat, and pouring coffee; witness came and prisoner seemed to suspect and turned away; witness came and took him by the hand, and prisoner asked what he came for; witness took him by the hand and led him to the cabin and tied him; witness did not tell him for what he came; when, 10 o'clock, after he was tied, he asked witness again and witness did not tell him; witness was then going out, when he returned he found prisoner telling what he knew about Madison, &c., to Atkinson, (John) who went up also to take prisoner; witness does not know how he came tell the affair to Atkinson; prisoner never talked to witness but once when there was any body present, and that was the time above mentioned; this immediately after he was taken and tied; witness never held out any inducements to prisoner; witness dont know what his motive was in making these disclosures; never intimated that he expected to gain any benefit
from these disclosures; he was much affected when he began and was talking with Atkinson; he was much alarmed when witness took him; witness did not take him roughly, nor did not have to use any force; a little over 24 hours in coming down to St. Louis; witness talked with him not more than 2 or 3 times after he was put in irons, was restless all night; he was put in irons about 12 o'clock at night; no person said any thing to him more that night; the next day, the fore part of the day, witness read the Republican to him.
[Cross examination suspended; suspended to read the paper to him; newspaper shown to witness, who examined the piece.]
Examination in chief again--Says the newspaper shown him is of the same date, and the piece in it is the same read by him to the prisoner, and when witness got through reading it, prisoner said, every word is true. The paper is dated May 1st; the piece is headed, "The Tragedy of the night of the 17th."
Cross examined again as to the piece--Says thinks it is same; thinks he has lost the original paper; has not seen it lately; read the piece twice, once before it was read to the prisoner; was alone with him when he read it to prisoner; witness carried it in his hat, and is pretty positive he has used it up; but has not looked for it, as supposing a copy from the printing office would answer. [Objection made to reading the paper and overruled by the Court, decision of Court excepted to.] Bent, in chief, again reads the paper to the Jury.
Cross examined again--Prisoner, when witness read the paper to him, had been absent some 10 days; prisonor knew nothing of Ennis' disclosures when the paper was read, thinks prisoner was much agitated; but was in his right mind when the paper was read to him; he did not eat any supper that night; prisoner asked for gin several times, and witness gave it; had no conversation with him when paper was read to him; after it was read in his presence made the remark "it was true," and witness went out of the room; dont think that prisoner alluded to piece again, witness told prisoner that Ennis had disclosed at second conversation, and before the paper was read; prisoner swore at Madison when informed that Ennis had told; knows of no threat or inducement to prisoner to make him confess. Prisoner did not hint that he had any motive.
John Atkinson. Witness went up on Col. Woods and met Omega, (Capt. Littleton,) and went on board of her with McDowell, and found Warrick on board. Prisoner was arrested, tied and put in Social Hall; after he was there he asked what he was arrested for, and witness told him; then he wanted to tell about it and witness told him to stop, and would not let him speak about it till he had tied him; at a proper time after he was tied witness told him then to commence and tell what he had to say about it, when he commenced and said Madison, Brown and Sewell had left his house together the day of the fire; that that was the first he knew any thing about the plan, and they agreed to meet at dark on the steam boat Missouri at the foot of Pine street. They met accordingly, the four, at the steam boat, and spent some time in looking at engine and boilers, till between 8 and 9 o'clock; they then came off and stood on Water street, and some white man came there and took Madison out from among the company; he said he did not know the white man; he described him as being a tall young man, very well dressed and good looking; said he thought the white man knew what they were going about or he would not have been there at that time, but that he (prisoner) did not hear the conversation between Madison and the white man; they talked in a low tone. When the young man went away, that they walked up Pine street towards the upper part of the building; that he (Warrick) then thought better of it, and there left them and went home and said nothing further of it. Witness asked him if he knew any thing more about it.--He said he knew nothing but what Brown and Madison told him; that they told him all about it. He then related the minute particulars that occurred in the house from Madison and Brown's statement; that Madison killed Baker, and Brown struck Weaver the first blow though Madison and Sewell both struck afterwards; that after they killed Baker, they tried to get into the vault; that while they were working at vault, they heard some one come whistling down the street, and one of them said the little man was coming. Prisoner said he went home as soon as they come on Pine street, as he got his living honestly and that he went home to his shop, and was not present after Madison went into the house. He said Brown come to his shop about one o'clock and slept with him, and told him what had been done; said Brown was all wet and muddy.
Cross Examined.--This conversation commenced in social hall after he was tied; he said whom Brown was let into his shop, he (Brown) said there was a hell of a fire down town, and that this place would be as bad for fires as New York after a while. Witness helped seize him (Warrick;) witness and McDowell went different ways to the cabin; they both met at cabin door; witness walked forward and took him and did not see McDowell touch him at all till he was tied. Prisoner was in the cabin doing something; witness and McDowell entered cabin about same time; he wanted to commence telling story before he was tied; he was about 10 paces from the door facing entrance of witness; he did not appear to know witness; witness went up & caught hold of him and said he was his prisoner; he asked what for; witness told him he was arrested for murder and burning this house; he wanted to make a reply, and witness would not let him; witness would not let him go on with his tale, till the boats had got under way. When he was arrested he wanted to say something and wit. told him to shut his mouth and not to open it; in about half an hour wit. got some persons to take charge of him till he went to supper, and on his return he commenced telling the story. It commenced by witness saying to him to go on, relate all he knew about it; he was so frightened that he trembled when he was arrested; witness came to him after supper and simply remarked to go on and tell what he knew about the murder; don't know that prisoner was afraid of witness; witness was mild towards him; the boy was submissive as could be and made no resistance whatever; witness had frequent conversations with him on the way down; he always denied having any thing to do with it, except as above; thinks the prisoner was taken from social hall to state room opposite the wheel house before first conversation took place; at first conversation nobody was present except Kinney and perhaps his son; thinks McDowell did not come there before conversation concluded; wit. or McDowell was with him on the way down nearly all the time; sometimes he talked when McDowell and witness were there; expects he knew McDowell; witness was in no office nor McDowell; don't know what McDowell does; he is a wagon maker; no person engaged witness to go; the reward offered induced his going, though he believed he should have gone if none had been offered; some remarks were made as to reward between him and McDowell; neither knew at first what the other was after; nothing was said about it; reward of $5000 had been offered, and thinks it helped to make Mr. McDowell go; witness went on his own motive entirely; don't know that any body employed McDowell; can't say which was most with prisoner in coming down; saw McDowell reading the paper to prisoner; did not stay to hear it read; had himself read the paper before; talked with the prisoner after that once or twice; thinks it was about Boonville McDowell got the paper and read it to him; conversations generally begun by witness asking questions; prisoner got communicative after the first and answered freely; during first conversation witness was in a chair in state room, and Mr Kinney and son staid outside in cabin; witness staid 15 or 20 minutes, and when the conversation was through, witness went into cabin, shut the door and put a chair there and sat down, and remained there for some time, three quarrers of an hour;
McDowell came then and said he had got irons ready and they then took the prisoner to a blacksmith's shop and put on hand cuffs, and then brought him up into the social hall and put on his shackles there, and then took him again to the state room; no conversation with him was had during all that time; he was put back into the berth about 11 o'clock; Mr McDowell then shut the door and laid his mattrass down against the door in the cabin; witness staid in the adjoining state room; knew of no other conversation with the prisoner that night and heard none; witness was separated only by their partition; dont know what prisoner's motive was in making these statements; he showed no reluctance; he stuck to it all the time, that he had no part in it; that he thought better of it and went home; has no reason at all to believe that he was under intimidation; witness had seen prisoner before, but was not acquainted with him.
Jeremiah Burros--Knows the prisoner; he lived on the corner of Franklin avenue and Tenth street, in witness' house, and was living there when he went away; he left on Friday or Saturday; witness saw him the last time on Thursday; he went away without giving notice. On the Thursday before the fire he said he would pay the rent, but said nothing about going away; prisoner said he expected to get money on Saturday. Witness shaved there; saw Brown there frequently, and saw two others there frequently; one a large man, the other a bright mulatto with high cheek bones; witness saw them on Sunday after the fire, and saw prisoner and another person come out of prisoner's shop and look at the procession. Found a piece of calico shirt in the cot prisoner slept on; dont know to whom it belonged; has frequently seen him wear calico shirts resembling this one; never heard Warrick say any thing about the shirt; there is an appearance of blood about the shirt; witness found the shirt after the rumor came out. On Friday witness went to get shaved and found that prisoner had gone; and the yellow fellow who was there said he would be back in a week; the yellow fellow took sick and said he would not carry on the shop, and gave key to witness, who found the shirt in the shop under the mattress next to the cot; supposed this yellow journeyman slept in that bed; was not there more than 2 or 3 days, or 3 or 4 days; don't know whether he staid there at all at night; never knew that Alfred bled at the nose.
Edward Bredell.--Testimony same as in the trial of Madison.
John Carson.--Knew Jesse Baker, saw his body after it was taken out of the ruins, in Blow's store; it was much burned; the head nearly all gone, the calves of the legs were white, not burned; Baker was in the habit of sleeping in room near counting room of Mr. Pettus, being same burnt down; was very intimate with Baker, and recognized his coat and pantaloons.
After the testimony had been gone through, Mr. Spalding addressed the jury at some length, urging that the contradictory statements of Warrick created a doubt whether he was actually there or not, at the time the murder was committed.
Mr. Bent followed in reply, and the case was submitted.
The jury, after an absence of about thirty minutes, returned into court a verdict of "GUILTY OF MURDER IN THE FIRST DEGREE, AS PRINCIPAL IN THE SECOND DEGREE."
In passing sentence on the four negroes lately tried and convicted of the murders of the 17th April last.
MADISON alias BLANCHARD, CHARLES BROWN, JAMES SEWARD alias SEWELL, and ALFRED alias Alpheus Warrick, you stand convicted of willful, deliberate and premeditated murder: Have you now, or either of you, any thing to say why sentence of death should not be pronounced against you?
The prisoners, with the exception of Madison, who merely said, "Nothing from me, sir," remaining mute, His Honor proceeded--
You have all been severally indicted by a Grand Jury of the County, as follows:--You, Madison, for the murder of JESSE BAKER, and the rest as confederates, aiding and abetting in said murder; and you, Charles Brown, for the murder of JACOB WEAVER, and the rest as confederates, aiding and abetting in said murder.--Upon which charges, so preferred by the Grand Jury, you have been put separately upon your trials, before traverse Juries of the county. Juries selected in each case, with great caution, that they might be above all suspicion of bias or prejudice against you--and where you have been heard by your counsel--counsel amongst the ablest of the bar, in your defence. So that it is not a matter of form to tell you, that you have each had a fair and impartial trial before a Jury of your country, who have in their several verdicts, pronounced each of you guilty of murder in the first degree. You, Madison and Brown, as the persons who inflicted the fatal blows; and you, Seward and Warrick, as being present aiding and abetting in the several murders.
Upon these respective verdicts, it becomes the principal duty of the Court to pronounce the sentence of the law. But before doing so, as you were separately tried, and neither having heard the particular evidence given in the case of the other, it is but proper that there should be laid before you, a history of the case as derived from the testimony.
In doing this, it is not the object to awaken feelings by a recital of the horrid deed, or to bring unnecessarily to your minds painful recollections of the past--but it is solely with a view to place the nature of your crimes in such characters before you as to banish all hope of mercy from your fellow men, whose laws you have so daringly violated; and the more strongly rivet your attention, to that Source, alone, for consolation, where it is never too late to find mercy and forgiveness. The Court would not be discharging its duty to you with fidelity, in this last solemn act between you and it, if it could conceal from your knowledge, any thing of your true situation. To leave you buoyed up with a false hope, would be to deceive you. Hence it is deemed proper, that your crime should be placed before you, as it has made its impress upon the minds of men; that every false beacon of earthly hope may be distroyed, and you the more solemnly urged, to seek for peace and consolation at the Throne of Divine Mercy.
It, then, appears from the testimony in the case, that some three days before the ever-memorable night of the 17th of April, you had planned your scheme of robbing the Store House of Messrs. Collier and Pettus. At which time, it appears, some compunctious visitings of nature operated upon you, and a differance arose about adding the crime of blood, to the other contemplated offence. That the evil demon prevailed, and it was finally settled, that even blood should not arrest you, in the accomplishment of your crime. The next place you are traced, is at a meeting by appointment, in the dusk of the evening of Saturday, the 17th of April, on board the steamer Missouri, under pretence of examining her machinery. This was the meeting preparatory to the accomplishment of the crime. You left the boat, and stood on Front street opposite the house of Collier and Pettus--awaiting the arrival of the proper hour.--That at, or about 9 o'clock, in the evening, when the streets were lined with men, when every body nearly was up, when a person might have well felt the most perfect security in his counting room with open doors, on one of the most populous streets in the city, you entered the counting room, that is, you Madison, first entered, and asked of the young gentleman in charge, Jesse Baker, the validity of a Bank note; and
while, in the honesty of his heart, and with that kindness of feeling for which he was conspicuous amongst his fellow man, he was performing an act of kindness for you, by examining the note, and he was thus placed off his guard, you struck the fatal blow which deprived him of life.
At this particular point of time, there is some contrariety in the evidence; but the better opinion is, upon the whole, that the rest of you immediately entered, at the signal of the blow. You searched your victim for the keys; not finding them, you wrapped him in bed clothes and deposited him in bed: and then went to work upon the vault, after perhaps setting one or two sentinels. That you continued to work upon the vault until Jacob Weaver, the bed companion of Baker, arrived, which was about the hour of 11 o'clock. That he knocked at the door, to awaken his friend, little dreaming that he was sleeping the sleep of death; when it appears, a difficulty arose about who should be his murderer. That horrid duty fell upon you, Charles Brown, and the manner of its execution was awfully deliniated in the appearance of the object. You took your station behind the door, the rest concealing themselves, and opened it for him--and as he entered felled him to the floor, repeating the blows until he was dead. Depriving of life in one moment a young man, who never harmed you, who was at once the pride and hope of his friends, and an ornament to society.
It appears, then, that despairing of success in your attempts upon the vault, you fired the building in five places, and left for your respective homes. You, Brown, being the last to leave, after closing the house, and throwing away the key--hoping, doubtless, by this last act, to bury in eternal oblivion all traces of the awful tragedy, and leave the world to hopeless conjecture, as to the fate of its unhappy inmates. In the burning, you succeeded but too well: you destroyed the whole property, but not in time to conceal the traces of your dreadful crime.
During the heart-rending scenes just recounted, the testimony places you, Seward and Warrick, in a variety of positions--sometimes in the house in the midst of the tragic scene, and then again on the look out, as sentinels to avoid surprise. In either situation, the law makes your offence just the same, in depravity and punishment, as though you had stricken the fatal blow. And justly so, for had you refused your co-operation, or had you made a timely retreat from it, the world might have been saved the recital of this awful tragedy and you the consequences resulting from it.
Shortly after, you all must have left the building--at about midnight, when the city was wrapped in profound repose, and men were dreaming in their fancied security--they were startled from their beds, with the terrible cry of fire. The citizens, with their usual alacrity, and with nerves braced for a contest with the devouring element, repaired to the scene--burst open the doors, and almost at the peril of their own lives, rushed in, and dragged forth the yet warm body of young Weaver, bearing upon it undeniable testimonials of the awful crime, that had been committed--a crime which, for daringness of design and boldness of execution, is almost without a parallel in this country. At the awful contemplation of the reality before them, men instinctively shrunk with terror from each other. They thought of the daring boldness of the crime, and of its perpetrators abroad in the land, and an instinctive shudder seized them at the thoughts of their unprotected homes.--Suspicion was abroad--and yet, ordinary perpetrators of crime, passed unscathed by its breath. The daring boldness of its execution, was a shield against suspicion to common offenders. Man knew not how to trust his fellow man. The bonds of society were well nigh sundered when, at a fortunate moment for the peace and security of persons and property and the supremacy of the laws, a conscience overburdened with a catalogue of crime, had to find vent, from the awful goadings of nature, by an open betrayal of the secret. A secret which has since received a mournful, but most undeniable confirmation.
Thus, in a moment of ambition for unhallowed gain, you have stricken from existence two young men, just entering as it were, upon the threshold of usefulness--in the spring day of life, in the fullness of hope and future expectation,--in that period just budding into manhood, when the heart beats responsive to the calls of sympathy and humanity; and that, without even the plea of passion for an excuse. Their only fault was, that in discharge of their duty they stood between you, and your unholy covetings. By this stroke, you have done a deed, which no power on earth can repair, no time obliterate. You have, in an unhallowed moment, stricken the bright cup of expectation, from the lips of adoring friends, and renderred cheerless, many an aching heart. No penitence you could offer, would repair the wrong; but your fate may be a negative example to others, to avoid the path that leads to danger and destruction.
The details have been thus minutely recounted, from a solemn conviction, that the Court owes it to you, to point out your true condition in language not to be mistaken--To obliterate every false hope that might flatter and deceive you. To give you a true idea of the character of your offence, and the stern demands of public Justice. And to urge upon you most solemnly, to anchor your hopes before the Tribunal, which is superior to all earthly tribunals, and seek alone for mercy at the Fountain of all Mercy.
You have time left you for penitence and prayer--for preparation for the end that awaits you, Not so with the victims of your great crime. They were hurried into the presence of their Maker, unwarned of their impending fate. Crimes like yours cannot go unpunished. "Lay not the flattering unction to your souls," that any hope awaits you, this side the grave--your days are numbered--your sands of life are almost run. Let me then urge you, to seek for consolation and forgiveness, in the few days you have yet to live, before the throne of Him who holds all our destinies in his hands. Let your first acts of penitence, be a full and frank confession of your crimes. Lay bare your hearts--strip them of all falsehoods and guile--keep no black memorial harbored there, if you wish to render them acceptable before the God of Truth, Justice and Mercy.
One word more and this Court is done. But that one word is the awful sentence of the Law. It is, that you Madison alias Blanchard, Charles Brown, Alfred alias Alpheus Warrick, James Seward alias Sewell, you and each of you, will be returned to the Jail whence you came, there to be confined until FRIDAY, THE NINTH DAY OF JULY, and on that day you will be taken hence to the place of public execution, there between the hours of ten o'clock in the forenoon of that day and four o'clock in the afternoon, be hung by the neck until you are dead.
May God grant you that mercy, which by your crimes, you have forfeited from your fellow men.
During the delivery of this sentence, which was done in an audible, yet feeling manner, Madison seemed a little restless, but his countenance gave no outward sign of contrition for his offences. Brown could not conceal his feelings, and shed tears. Warrick was unmoved, and Seward retained the composed manner which he had assumed immediately after the sentence was commenced. They were remanded to jail.
I, MADISON HENDERSON, a slave owned by Samuel G. Blanchard, of New Orleans, in full view of the awful death which awaits me, being sensible that I am sentenced to die on the 9th day of July next, and having made, as I trust and honestly hope, my peace with my God, through the merits of his only Son, the Lord Jesus Christ, and knowing that I can only enter the kingdom prepared for the blessed by a full and free confession, before God, of my past iniquities, and a reliance upon his divine mercy and forgiveness, and being willing, as the only reparation I can make to that God and the community, whose laws I have so oft and repeatedly violated, as well as to do what I can to restrain others from the commission of like offences, have made this my full and voluntary confession, and may that God, into whose presence I must soon come, judge me as I state truly.
With me, as with all others, Vice has been progressive, and the crimes of my commission were not the mere promptings of a wicked and depraved heart, but, solely, to obtain the means of gratifying depraved and wicked appetites. With money I bought, what to me was once pleasure; and I early learned, that to obtain it by any means, if not discovered, was fair and right.
I was born, as well as I can recollect, the slave of Mr. Asa Brockman, a son of John Brockman, who resided some miles in the country from Orange Court House, Va. The precise year of my birth, I do not know, my mother was a slave of John Brockman, the father of Asa Brockman, by the name of Rose. My father was called James Henderson and belonged to Mrs. Franky Henderson, a widow woman. When I was about 12 or 15 years of age (I suppose I must have been about this age, as, by what I know of my birth, I think I am now 34 or 35 years old,) I was sold by my master at Orange Court House, to a negro trader by the name of James Blakey. Mr. Blakey, I understood to be one of the partners in a company of traders, whose names, so far as I know them, were Mr. Blakey, Samuel Alsop, Mr. Ballard and James Franklin. I remained about six weeks at Orange Court House, when a number of negroes having been collected, we were moved forward on the road to Richmond, to Mr. Alsop's one of the partners I have named: here we remained about a week. From Alsop's the gang were conveyed to Richmond, and lodged in the negro jail of Mr. Ballard. Here we remained about a week, and on Sunday morning, at day light, we were put on board a steam boat and carried to a vessel lying in the stream at Norfolk, ready to receive us, and to take us to New Orleans. The Negroes were put under the charge of -- --. We were a month or more going to New Orleans. During the trip round I was taken by -- as his body servant, and waited upon him very attentively. During this time he seemed to have formed an attachment for me, and when we arrived in the south I remained in his service. This service has been my ruin; for it was whilst in his employ, and under his tutorage that I learnt the first rudiments of those crimes which have brought me, in the meridian of life, with all my hopes still fresh and blooming, to a premature and dishonorable grave. Though he was to me, in all that the world calls goodness, ever good and kind; yet the very kindness he bestowed
upon me and the purposes in which he employed me, have filled the bitter cup of my ruin. He introduced me into the broad road to ruin, and taught me the bitter tastes of the rewards of crime.
In my service with this man, I early manifested whatever talents I possessed. I had courage, and, for my opportunities, as much judgment as most negroes; I early discovered, that to obey him implicitly, execute his orders literally, and watch carefully his interests, were the best means to secure his favor, and procure for myself whatever indulgence I desired. In this way I succeeded in gaining his confidence, and very soon after our landing he gave me many proofs of the confidence he reposed in my fidelity, circumspection and zeal.
This man was the chief of a company of negro traders, and the principal person in carrying them south. His operations in selling and occasionally in buying extended to all the southern parts. New Orleans, Natchez, Vicksburg and Mobile, were the principal markets for sale. His purchases were made in nearly all the cities and towns in Virginia, Maryland and the Carolinas, and in these I accompanied him, and assisted in his operations at all the following places, viz: Charleston, S. C., Baltimore, Washington, Richmond, Norfolk, Spotsylvania, C. H., Orange C. H., Fredricksburg, Culpepper C. H., Louisa C. H., and Green Springs. We went to these places to buy, and if the negroes whom we wished to purchase, were unwilling to be sold, it was my duty to overcome their objections, and by false tales of what my master would do for them, or the purposes for which they were wanted, induce them to agree to be sold. But the most important part of my duty was to coax off, and harbor negroes: in other words, to aid in stealing them. As the sequel will show, this required a good deal of courage and skill, and was generally accomplished by representing my master as from a free state, generally from Philadelphia, and that his purpose in getting them to run off was to set them free; that he would take them to Canada, or some other place out of the reach of their masters. To the men I represented that they would become rich and own plenty of property--to the woman and girls, I held out the prospect of marrying rich white men, and of living in style and splendor. In these offices, I believe I became quite an adept, and, with the aid of my master, seldom failed in our purposes.
My first attempt in stealing negroes was in the City of Baltimore, where I returned with ----, after he had disposed of the cargo I went round with ----. The circumstances were about these: he frequently purchased negroes of a man called Ose Brockman in Baltimore. When we went to Baltimore he had several on hand. My master bought from him two men called William and Henry. Four others we stole, viz: James, John, George and Ned. This was accomplished in this way: My master and myself represented to them, that we would convey them off to a free state and make them free; that he would propose to purchase two, to give them an excuse for running away, through fear of being sold for the south; that, when the two were sold, they should run off in my charge, and I would place them where they would be safe until he came for them. On the appointed night, I took my master's horses and the four negroes, carried them to a house, some distance in the country, as directed, and then delivered them to a man, who hid them away, whilst I returned and was with my master before daylight. I don't recollect the man's name to whom I gave them, or the precise distance it was from Baltimore, but I know it was on the road which we afterwards took in going to Fredricksburg. When my master had finished his purchases, he went to Fredricksburg, and took these four negroes in the drove, having
changed their clothes, and induced them to say nothing, for if they did, he would not be able to get them out of the slave states to a free state.
We went to Fredricksburg and put up at a tavern, kept by a man named Hamilton Williams. We staid about a week at the tavern; in which time, my master and myself frequently visited the negro quarters of a man named Thomas Johnston. We made our arrangements with two of the negroes to run away. Johnston was unwilling to sell any of his negroes, although he was in a press for money at the time. One day my master went to Johnston, and proposed, in the presence of the negroes, to buy some of them. This was by arrangement with those who were to run away. Johnston did not agree to sell; and that night I took Johnston's negro man Davey on a horse and conveyed him to a house to which my master had directed me, some few miles from Fredericksburg. The running away of Davey was ascribed to his fear of being sold to the south. In a few days, I took away Johnston's man Moses, and carried him to the same house. This time I staid and got my breakfast and came back to Fredericksburg in the day time, but Johnston did not discover my absence. Whilst this was going on my master pretended a willingness to buy the two remaining boys, Willis and Tom, but was apparently rather indifferent. When the second boy ran off, Johnston got frightened--thought all his slaves would run away. My master offered him a thousand dollars for the two, which after taking a night to think upon it, he agreed to take.
After the bill of sale was executed for Willis and Tom, my master said to Johnston, that he did not offer a sufficiently high reward; that 30 or 40 dollars was not enough to get them taken up; that he should offer at least $100 or $150 a piece. Johnston said he was not able to pay so much. My master asked him how much he would take for the two as they ran. Johnston studied a while and asked him to make an offer. My master said he would give $125 a piece. If he got them, well and good; if not, the loss should be his. Johnston reflected some time and finally agreed to take it, and the bill of sale was made out. In a day or two afterwards, I was sent out, I took the two negroes, Davey and Moses, and conveyed them to an unoccupied house and hid them: here they were taken shortly afterwards, by a man who was secured for the purpose, and carried back to Johnston's house, Johnston interogated them as to where they had been, and why they ran off. They replied, that they had been in the woods and were afraid of being sold to the negro traders. This was the story I had instructed them to tell. Johnston then told them, that if they had not run off he would not have sold them, but now they were sold; and they were to be carried away.
From Fredericksburg we went some miles into the country, to a very wealthy farmer by the name of Baxter. He had a large number of negroes, about 150, was very wealthy and lived in a very large and elegant house. He had several very handsome daughters, and four of the handsomest yellow girls I ever saw. When we stopped at Baxter's, we went first to the negro quarters, where my master enquired the owner's name and asked many other questions; the name he put on a piece of paper, and put into his pocket. After talking some time to the negroes we went to the house. Here we staid upwards of two weeks, during which time my master was very attentive to Baxter's daughters, frequently riding out with them, and often taking one of them out in his own carriage. My master occupied a room on the first floor and the family slept up stairs, in another part of the house. From the window of his room we could get out on the ground. The yellow girls slept in the basement of the building; my master and myself were very finely dressed,
each wearing a gold watch, and money plenty, and we were not long in gaining the affections of the girls. My master cohabited every night with some one of them, and I with another. He proposed to them to run off, but they at first were unwilling to leave their master and mistress, and still more opposed to leaving their mother, who was owned by a gentleman, a few miles off, in the neighborhood. Finally my master proposed, that if they would go with him he would make one of them his wife, and if they got safely away, he would come back and get their mother. Baxter had several negroes which he wished to sell, Mrs. B., did not like them, for they sometimes stole things. My master, professed to be very indifferent about buying--said he was about to quit the business, and that negroes brought nothing in New Orleans.
On the Friday night before we left, my master got up, went to the stable, where we harnessed up his horse and borouche--a very fleet and spirited horse. The yellow girls, having packed up most of their clothing, (and they had a great many fine dresses,) left the hall door open in the basement, and stole out to where my master was. He took them into his borouche--drove them through Fredricksburg--carried them to the same house I had carried the others, and returned before daylight. On his return, I rubbed his horse dry, cleaned the borouche, and got every thing by daylight to look as if it had not been disturbed. In the morning he was in bed as if nothing had occurred; but there was a great fuss about the girls, and search for several days was made in all directions. At first it was thought they had gone to their mothers; but not a negro on the plantation knew any thing about their going.
We remained a few days longer, during which time Mrs. Baxter and the girls, and Mr. Baxter himself, became very much dissatisfied with several of the slaves, as they thought they had induced the girls to run away. Baxter urged my master to buy, but he professed not to wish to do so--said he was going home, and could not make a trip this season. Finally, to oblige Mr. Baxter, he agreed to purchase a few, and took a man named Joe Turner; a woman, pretty old, named Rosa; a little, young woman named Letty; and a man named Jesse. He tried hard to buy a man which Baxter had, and offered $1,000 for him, but he would not sell him. We took these negroes and went to the house where the girls were. Here we staid a day or more, during which time the girls did not see those we had purchased; for the girls were kept up stairs and treated as ladies, my master staying most of the time with them, whilst the others were kept down stairs, and had another yard. I also took all the liberties I desired with the girls or any of the negroes, except my master's favorites.
During this time, he frequently counselled and advised me as to what I should do, and would lecture me as to the best manner of addressing either negro men or women. With the latter, he was a perfect adept, and appeared nowise offended at any indulgence which I took, always supplying me with money enough to pay for my gratifications.
From this negro depot, we went to Petersburgh, to the house of George Lynch. I understood he was a judge, a man of considerable wealth, and of very studious habits--so much so that he frequently became partially deranged. He had a great many negroes, but knew the names of very few of them. A trusty negro man attended to all his business on the farm, kept an account of the negroes that were born, or died, &c. and communicated from time to time to the judge. My master staid several days at Mr. Lynch's, and frequently got the Judge to walk through his negro quarters with him. On these
occasions, my master would propose buying some of his slaves, but Lynch refused. He had a son and daughter, and said that he had enough for them without selling, and at his death his slaves should be set free and sent to Liberia. Notwithstanding this, we succeeded in getting nine of them to agree to run off--six men and three women. I can only remember the names of three of them. One was called John Strong, another Dorey, and another Edward Ash. The negroes left one night, and lay secreted for a day or so; when we left, went to where they were and took them to the depot below Fredericksburgh. Mr. Lynch, when told of it, did not know the names of the negroes. They were all young; and his negro overseer could do no more than make search in the neighborhood. We remained one day at the depot, during which time the clothes were changed, their other clothes put into bags, and on the day following, the whole drove set out for Richmond. When we reached there, they all were lodged in Mr. Ballard's jail, and no one saw them afterwards until we left for New Orleans. In this instance, the trip to New Orleans was made by land.
There were a number of negroes in the jail when we arrived at Richmond, procured by the other partners, and the whole drove, when we started, amounted to between 80 and 100. Nothing occurred of much moment on the trip. Once a man demanded of my master to see his bill of sale of a certain negro. He appeared very indignant, at what he said was an insult, and spoke of the long time he had been engaged in the business. The man apologized, and then my master showed him a bill of sale, apparently properly executed; but it was one that his clerk had made out.
We staid a long time at New Orleans and on the coast, disposing of the negroes, and a considerable time after they were sold out. In New Orleans, a negro trader by the name of Woolfolk appeared to be interested with my master, and was much with him; and when he was not there Mr. Wright, another trader, was. One or the other was generally there. During the time we staid in New Orleans, my master would frequently talk to me upon all subjects, and especially about the trade, and the necessity of resorting to these tricks to make it profitable. He took much pains to advise me how to manage, and frequently trusted me, for days and nights, with the custody of large sums of money. I have had several thousands in my charge at a time. He used frequently to urge me to keep a look out for men who had money, and required me to let him know.
He told me repeatedly to indulge with the women as much as I pleased, and whenever I wanted money to come to him, but upon no account to take up with any one, at least not so far as to let her gain my confidence. On this point he appeared very anxious, and frequently talked to me about it. At this time I was in the practice of buying all the newspapers, and taking them to his room, where he would read to me any thing that was in them about runaway negroes, and all accounts of the robberies, murders, &c.
On one occasion, he caught me talking with a girl he kept, and suspected me of having intercourse with her. He was very angry, and for the first time threatened to whip me, but did not. The next day he talked to me again about it; said he was in liquor the night before; told me again that I must not interfere with him, but must obey his orders implicitly. I retorted upon him, and complained of his accusing me with what I had not been guilty of, and told him how faithfully I had served him. A few days afterwards he told me to get my things washed up, and ready to go to the east. Upon this occasion, I took the liberty of remonstrating against the stealing of negroes, and told
him that I had understood that if they caught us we would have to go to the penitentiary for life or be hung, and that no amount of money would save us. He replied that he had intended for some time to quit it, and believed he would, I told him I had a plan by which he could make more money, and no body could be hurt for it but me. He wanted to know what it was, but I would not tell him until we got to the east. After some time we left and went to Washington City. We went the southern route through Charleston, S. C.
At Washington, we formed a plan, for my master to sell me as often as he could, and I would run off afterwards, and go back to him. To carry out this scheme, he was to recommend me whenever an opportunity offered. We stopped at the same house with the Hon. Henry Clay, who, at that time had no servant of his own with him. He had as a servant a free yellow man, to whom he seemed much attached. We staid at the Hotel some time; my master spending many evenings with Mr. Clay, and by this means, as also by the yellow man, I succeeded in getting into favor with Mr. Clay. Whenever I could get the yellow man out of the way, I brushed Mr. Clays clothes, and did whatever else he desired. On one occasion my master and Mr. Clay, in company with a number of gentlemen, dined at the President's House. I went with my master, and at the table stood behind his and Mr. Clay's chair. With the enconiums which my master passed upon me and the attention I manifested to Mr. Clay, it was not long before he offered to buy me; at first my master was not willing to sell, but finally, as a mere matter of favor to Mr. Clay, whom he professed to adore, he agreed to part with me for $1300, and I was accordingly sold; I do not know whether Mr. Clay paid the whole sum in cash or not. A day or two afterwards my master went to Baltimore, where he was to wait for me, I staid with Mr. Clay about a week, and then put out for Baltimore, where we again met.
In a short time my master and myself took the stage and went to Philadelphia where we spent two days. There my master bought horses and a barouche, and we started back into the slave States. After travelling about some time we went to Fredricksburg. At this place I was called by him John Henry. Before, I had been called by my right name, and by that name had been sold. At Fredricksburg I was again sold to a man by the name of Rarall, the owner of a large wheat and grocery store, for $1,000. My master went away in his borouche and left his horse at the tavern stable. I staid with Rarall a fortnight, and on Saturday night took the horse, which I had been attending to occasionally, and joined him. He was out on the road leading to the Orange Court House, about 20 miles. From thence we started, at five o'clock on Sunday morning, and travelled about sometime through Spotsylvania and Culpeper counties, and went to Green Springs and Orange C. H. During the time my master bought several negroes, but did not steal any.
After travelling to several places we finally went down to a country place, some where, as I understood it, between Orange and Culpeper Court Houses. I am unable to fix the neighborhood with certainty for I had travelled about a good deal not always knowing where we were, besides the place had no distinctive name that I ever heard of. In this neighborhood there lived four brothers, in the immediate vicinity of each other by the name of Ellis.--James Ellis was the wealthiest and the eldest, was married and kept a store in a brick house. His dwelling house was distant from the store about a hundred yards or more. There was on the place also a blacksmith shop
near the store. In the store there was built into the wall a very large vault and this was the depository of all the money of the brothers and probably of some of the surrounding farmers. My master ascertained that there was a large amount of money in the vault, but how he procured the information I do not know. We went into the neighborhood and stopped at a strange house, a house I had never been at before or since. During the day my master was a little while at the store,--bought a few articles and I did the same: his business of negro buying appeared to be understood by the people.
On the second day we left the house where we had been staying, saying that we were going to Louisa Court House. We did not go far until we stopped in a secreted spot and remained until night. After dark we drove back to the neighborhood of Ellis' store. In the blacksmith shop a negro man usually slept, but from some cause or other he was not in the shop that night. I knew this from the fact that I went to the shop to get a bar and hammer to use in forcing the vault. My master had a skeleton key with which he unlocked the door of the store. There proved to be no person within. After considerable search in the desks and drawers we finally lit upon a key to an iron safe which stood in the store. When we opened the safe we found at first nothing but books and papers, but in one of the drawers we found a key with which after a good deal of labor we opened the vault. Here was a rich treasure; I am unable to say how much there actually was, but I know there were several square boxes of silver, some silver plate, some gold, and a box of paper money. The silver &c. we carried out and put in my master's borouche, which stood some distance from the store. The paper he put into his pockets and leaving the door of the chest and vault open we set fire to the house in several different places, went out locked the door and made off.
My master always kept the very fleetest horses, and after a hard drive of a few hours, we were on the road to Louisa Court House. Towards day we stopped, rubbed the horses dry, and at daylight were travelling as was our custom. For my master to have large sums of money with him was nothing extraordinary, and therefore the boxes in his barouche, which had no marks on, created no surprise at any of the places where we stopped, or at Louisa C. H. when we reached there.
The Ellis', as I afterwards understood from my master, never knew how their store was destroyed. It was entirely burnt down, and some of the walls fell in. They supposed it had been opened and robbed, and set on fire, but suspected some of the blacks in the neighborhood. The vault in the wall was nothing more than a very tall iron chest set into the wall. All their books, papers, &c. were destroyed--nothing saved, as my master told me. I heard him say on one occasion, to Wolfolk in New Orleans, after our return, that the haul was worth to him about $100,000--I know that there was a great deal of money.
At Louisa Court House he bought another horse, a large one and a new pair of large strong saddle bags. The silver was put into the saddle bags, which I carried on the large horse. The paper money he put between the padding and cloth of his coat in the breast and round the collar. Having fixed it all to our satisfaction, we left in a few days for New Orleans, by land, travelling by easy stages.
When we reached New Orleans, we met Wolfolk there, and he and my master spent considerable time together at a house near the negro jail below Esplenade street, waiting for the arrival of the drove which had been sent
out from Norfolk by sea. He and Wolfolk lived pretty high whilst there, and enjoyed themselves in every thing they desired.
After the drove arrived and were prepared for market, my master took a number of them on board the steamboat North Alabama to carry to Natchez. Some time before this, he asked me if I would be willing to be sold, if he would find me a good master and give me the purchase money. I had then been with him, in all, about three years and a half. He said we had been long enough together--that I knew enough to take care of myself, and if I got into difficulty, and he was about, he would help me, either with money or any thing else. After some deliberation, I finally concluded to be sold, provided he would sell me to some man who would be indulgent, and whose business was connected with the river. I preferred being sold to a boatman, so that I might be kept on the river; but next to that, I wished to be sold to some merchant who did business with ships and boats. I thought myself sufficiently smart to make my way through the world, and get what money I needed if I staid on the river, but if sold to any one in the country, I knew I would not have so much opportunity for the exercise of my talents and might have to run off, in which event I would get into trouble and to no profit.
One day after the negroes for Natchez had been shipped on the North Alabama, Mr. Samuel G. Blanchard, my present master, came on board and informed my master that he wanted to buy a trusty servant to keep about a store. He recommended me to him very strongly, and conversed with me about it; told me he was just the kind of master that I wanted, and if I got the right side of him I could do pretty much as I pleased. After considerable bargaining and talk, Mr. Blanchard agreed to buy me and another black boy named John Brown, for $900 a piece.
Mr. Blanchard came and talked to me some time before he purchased me. He enquired my history pretty close, and I answered all as I thought best suited the occasion. Among other questions, he enquired why I had been sold. In reply, I told him that my former master was unable to raise enough on his farm in Virginia to support his family, which was about as near true as any thing I told him.
Here my intercourse with my master terminated, and from the date of my sale to Mr. Blanchard, I had no other transactions with him. He gave me, as he had promised, the $900, and upon this I lived a merry life for nearly a year afterwards. I dressed myself in the very best and bought every thing my fancy desired. Before the year was gone, however, my money was exhausted; nevertheless, I continued free from the vice of stealing or robbing for a year or more after I went to Mr. Blanchard's. My money holding out I had but little need, and besides I knew no one to assist me in any undertakings of the kind; but I did not long remain in this ignorance.
Mr. Blanchard had a clerk named James Buel. James and his father came to New Orleans from New York. The old man was an adept in rascality, but was too old to do much but plan. Old Buel had lived in New York city; and, in connexion with his brother, carried on the business of counterfeiting. They were also merchants, and both became wealthy and for a time respectable. The brother failed and applied to old Buel for aid, which he refused, when he informed on him. He was taken up tried and sentenced to the penitentiary for a long term, but on the solicitation of his mother to the Governor, was pardoned in a short time after his commitment. He then came to New Orleans, where he has been living a number of years. James
is a shrewd, sensible young man and a good penman. During my first acquaintance with James, I knew little or nothing of the father. James, on repeated occasions, would talk to me very familiarly about acts of rascality, but always in such a distant manner that I did not know whether he wished to engage in any business of the kind or not. I kept pretty dark too, and was always careful what I said in reply, not letting him know what I had done, and yet willing he should understand that I was not averse to something of the kind, and had the courage to execute any plan. Things worked on this way for some time. One day when Mr. Blanchard was out, I think at dinner, Buel says to me in a careless way,
"Madison, don't you want to make some money if you could get into a good way to do it?" I replyed, "I am ready for your motion at any time."
From this we seemed to understand each other, and by agreement, I went to his father's that night. We all three and the family eat supper together; and after supper was over, the old man, James and myself, sat up nearly the whole night talking about what might be done in the way of rascality in New Orleans and on the river. They seemed a little suspicious of me, and by their conversation I thought they wanted to satisfy themselves that I could be trusted. On my part I was as cautious as they were, and said no more than I could help. Finally, it was agreed to try a small adventure for our joint interests in the following way:
James wrote an order purporting to be from Mr. Winston, on a merchant by the name of Stanton. He was a merchant recently from New York and I think his surname was William. The order was for twenty boxes of the best New Bedford sperm candles. This order the next day I gave to a drayman who went to Stanton's, delivered the order and received the candles; I met the drayman down the street and by arrangement, which Buel had made, took the candles down to French Town and there sold them to a man called Spanish John, a Spaniard, for $9 a box; I gave the dray manextra pay and we divided the money amongst us.
Afterwards James forged an order in the name of Joseph Sanders in Poydras street on the large grocery establishment of Peters & Miller, on the Old Levee, for two casks of the best canvassed hams. This I gave to a drayman who presented the order and got the casks. I watched the drayman--took him to another place and sold the casks to a colored man named Sam, who sells meat in the market, for $50 a piece.
In a short time afterwards James forged another order in the name of Cockey & Walton, living on the New Levee between Poydras and Gravier street, on a house the name of which I do not remember, they kept however, in Magazine Street, below the corner of Poydras, for 20 boxes of candles. These we got in the same way and Buel sold them to a white man on a steam boat which was just leaving for the upper country, for $150 the lot. The purchasers name we did not learn.
We began to fear detection in this, and we stopped it for some time; in fact a considerable time elapsed before we did any thing more. After a while we began to need money and James and I concluded to make a raise by a robbery.
There was a New York house adjoining my master's store, kept by two men called Williams, one I think was named William and the other Robert H. The store was kept on the first or ground floor and over head was a boarding house at which the eldest Williams boarded. There was a communication from the store to the upper story. In the store Williams had a
large lot of gunny bags lying loose on the floor and piled up on one side of the house. One evening before dark, I stole softly in, whilst one of the Williams' was writing in the counting room, in the rear of the store, and hid myself in the gunny bags; having covered myself completely up, James came to the door and saw that I was entirely concealed. When supper was announced, which was after dark, Mr. Williams, who had been writing, shut and locked the doors and went up stairs, leaving his candle burning and the keys in his desk. In fact I judged he left the letter he was writing unfinished. As soon as he went out I went to the desk and got out $300, all the money I could find, and unlocked the door and went out. They, I believe, never could find out how the store was entered or how the money was taken.
This money lasted us some time. The next attempt was on the store of Mr. J H. Fields, in Bienville street. Here we made a large haul in the following manner: Buel got round Mr. Fields' negro man and made an agreement with him to leave the middle door of the store unfastened. This negro man was entrusted with closing the doors and windows of the store before the clerks left. I did not know much of this negro man, nor did he know that I was in the transaction, for Buel managed it all. On the night agreed upon, when the store had been left as before mentioned, I went to the store, entered and found the key of the chest in the drawer where I was directed to look for it, unlocked the chest and got some three thousand and odd dollars, some of it was New Orleans paper and some of it was in Texas money. I think there was a Texas bill or two of $500. After getting the money I left every thing open and made my escape.
It may be well here to remark that in the distribution of the proceeds Buel and his father took the larger portion and I consented to it for this reason, that I esteemed James a very smart man and a kind of commander or leader.
About this time or rather after this we took into our concern a man named ---- Learned, a pretty bold and daring man, with a good deal of tact. I never knew his other name. He was an Irishman I think by descent; came last to New Orleans from Texas where as he said, he had passed as a doctor and had practised physic, at the same time carrying on the business of stealing, &c.
The first attempt we made after Learned joined us was as follows: Learned, with money we furnished him, purchased on the Levee four hogsheads of tobacco. The purchase was in another than his own name and in that name he had it inspected and advertised for sale. In a short time he made sale of it to a tobacconist whose name I do not know. He lived on a small street or alley below the Canal Bank between Gravier and Natchez streets. The tobacconist gave him for it a check on the Commercial Bank for two hundred and odd dollars, payable a few days after date. That night we all met at old man Buel's, and James altered the check to $2700. After the check was altered there was some consultation how it should be presented on the day it was due, and as I was unable to do any other part of this scheme it was agreed that I should present it as my part. So on the day I took it to the Bank and presented it. A man took it and looked at it some time and I thought was going to pronounce it a forgery, just then he asked me who gave it to me, I replied a gentleman, he then handed it to another who looked at it a moment or so and asked me to whom I belonged, I replied Mr. Blanchard, when I said this he turned round and put it on the file
where cancelled checks are put, and paid me the money. I received as my share of this $500, the residue was divided between the other three.
A few days afterwards a man from the Bank came and asked me where I had got the check and I told him a gentleman that was drinking at the Arcade with several others handed me the check and a dollar, requesting me to go down to the Bank and get the money for him. I told him I had seen the man frequently in the street since and could point him out. The same man from the Bank came several times, and on one occasion told me if I would find the man who gave me the check and point him out he would give me a hundred dollars. I promised to find him and show him, but after that I always reported that I could not find him.
Some time after this we took in another partner named David Rook. I understood that he originally lived somewhere up the Mississippi, but the precise place I do not know. He claimed a relationship with the Buels.--He was a greater rascal than any of us but had not very much judgment.
Shortly after his admission we turned our attention to stealing negroes and running them to Mobile and selling them at auction. In the business of enticing the negroes off by promises of freedom, &c., I was a first rate hand, as this was in the line of my old practices. The first negro we got I took from the door of one of the negro trader's establishments below the rail road. After talking to him a short time and promising to take him to a free state he consented to go. We put a new suit of clothes on him, slipped him on to the rail road car, just as the cars were leaving, carried him to the lake and put him on a vessel and took him to Mobile, where he was put up the next day at auction and sold. Buel and Learned did the business of carrying them to Mobile. I went once with them. We took in all, four; the three last were negroes we found in the street with irons on. In New Orleans a great many persons, and especially the French, when their negroes run away or are suspected of stealing or other misconduct put an iron collar on them and with this on they work about the streets. These negroes are easily dealt with for almost any purpose, but particularly to run away. I could have carried away any number but we found the business very hazardous and the liability of detection so great that we abandoned it.
The last negro we took, Rook carried over by himself. He was gone several days,--returned and stated that the negro, finding he had been deceived, and was to be sold determined to blow upon him, (that is, expose how he was brought away) that he (Rook) had been forced to cut and run and leave the negro. The story did not appear reasonable and the Buels fell out with him and turned him off. About a week or more after Rook was turned off from Buel's house, he came back, confessed that he had sold the negro for $670, and used the money,--said he was unable to do any thing by himself, but if they would take him in again he would steal a negro on his own hook--sell him and pay them their share of the proceeds of the negro he had sold. As he seemed honest and penitent, they took him back, but determined to use him, not trust him.
One day Rook came to the store and asked me to go with him down to the lower Saw Mill, owned or kept by a Frenchman. James Buel urged me not to go with him but as I had nothing to do, I went. On the way down I learned from Rook that there was a negro at the Mill he wanted to steal, but the fellow was not quite willing to go, and Rook wanted my aid in getting him off. When we got nearly to the mill we met another negro belonging to the same owner and enquired where we could find the boy we wanted to see.
The negro man we met suspected our purpose, and told us we could not see him until night, but if we would remain concealed in the field at night he would come to us and take us where we could see him. We remained in the field until night; but in the mean time the negro we had met told his master and they laid a plan to catch us. When night came on this negro came to us in the field and took us to a cow-house, a short distance from the owner's residence; all the avenues of escape had been closed but the door by which we went in. Around this house the owner and the men from the mill were placed with guns, the intention being when we got in to capture us. We went in and Rook commenced talking to the boy about running away. I did not like much going to the house, and kept a sharp look out.--I soon saw some of the men about the door and as soon as I saw them I broke and ran. They cried out to me to stop or they would shoot me. I however, did not obey them but ran on. One of them discharged a load of shot into my legs, but having on woollen pantaloons did not affect the skin much. I ran on and soon placed myself beyond the reach of apprehension. Rook was captured and in time sent to the penetentiary, I believe for life or a long term.
I first saw Charles Brown, the man who has been condemned with me, in New Orleans some weeks before Gen. Jackson visited there to lay the corner stone of the monument. Brown had been on the St. Louis steamboat as a barber, but had left her. He had some way heard of me and came one day to the store. He talked to me some time, but generally kept a good way off; and as I did not know any thing about him, I was rather shy of him. During our conversations at subsequent periods he informed me that his principal business was to run away slaves, and that he was in the employ of the Abolition Society; told me how he accomplished it, and said that when the steamboat Captains would not take them on board for him, he got some white man to go on board and engage their passage. He wanted me to run off and from his proposing this to me, as I knew a good deal about the coaxing of negroes off, I did'nt believe much in him. After some time I tried him another way, my object was to ascertain if he was a black leg. One day when he was talking to me, I asked him for the loan of $100 until the next day. This he readily lent me, and the next day I returned him a $50 bill he had lent me, and $50 in silver. He wished me to keep it longer but I declined. He told me I could have 4 or $500 whenever I wanted it. After that, we became pretty intimate friends.
Shortly after getting acquainted with Brown, we laid a plan for robbing old Capt. Barker, a broker in New Orleans, nearly opposite the City Hotel. We accomplished it in the following manner. Brown, a negro man called Henry Diamond, James Buel and myself went one Sunday night in the back way from Front street. Diamond and I went and opened the window and went in, Buel and Brown watching. Brown afterwards came in with a crow bar and we forced open the iron chest. We got in all about $1500 in silver; part of it we put into a bucket and part into a box and carried it off to a room at the corner of Old Basin and Canal streets where we divided it.
The Buels and myself robbed a linen store on Chartres street; the owners name I do not know. James made a key to fit the door lock, and just at day-break, for we were afraid to attempt it before on account of the lamps on that street, we went in, took some 30 or 40 pieces of linen, and $150 in money. I took 4 pieces and the Buels the rest. One of the pieces I had made up into shirts, the others I sold to two Spaniards who kept a coffee store on
the corner of Gravier and Levee streets, called Natchez and John, for $6 a piece. When old man Buel was arrested, some of this linen was found under his house with many other things, and assisted in sending him to the penitentiary.
Subsequently, we robbed a nice little linen store on the corner of Bienville and Bourbon streets. In this there was engaged the two Buels, myself, and a black boy called Ossa Williams, who formerly belonged to Mr. Clark, who resided at the corner of Carondelet and Girard streets, and kept a store in Poydras street. Mr. Clark sold Ossa to an old Spaniard who attended the market. There were two locks on the door, but Buel unlocked both with his keys. There was a bull dog in the store; he barked a little while we were at work at the door, but when we went in he did not offer to interrupt us. This was just after the clerks had gone to supper. The old man took 3 pieces, James 5, I took 19 and Ossa 17. We gave the boy Ossa 4 pieces, I took 6 for my share, and the Buels kept the balance. I sold mine to a man living near the Catholic Church or old Calaboose.
I do not know the period, but some time after Mr. Winston had been burnt out on New Levee and had moved higher up the street, Buel made a key and robbed his store. Buel had lived with Mr. Winston before he came to Mr. Blanchard, and he knew the shape of the key. We took out about $250 in money, 4 hams, a box of tea and a pair of young men's gold spectacles, which were made a present of to old Mrs. Buel. We then locked the front door and went out at the back door, which we left unfastened.
We robbed Godfrey, Laurie & Small, living on Gravier street, on the left hand side going up, in the following manner: James, myself, and a negro boy they had hired about the store called Jones, but whose real name was York, went into the store about dusk and hid amongst a pile of corn sacks. This was on Saturday. Soon after the clerks left, we went to the counting room and forced open a drawer and found the key of the iron chest. In the chest there was but about $30 in money. We took a box containing some bank checks or notes, but they were of no value to us, at least not to me.
James and I went down to a Mr. Florence's, residing in French town, said to be a wealthy man. His house was large and contained several rooms. It was yet daylight when I stole in, the front door being open; went to a room adjoining Mr. F's bed chamber and hid myself under the bed. The bed was unoccupied. James kept watch on the other side of the street. After Mr. F. had gone to bed and got to sleep, I stole softly to the door of his chamber, which was unlocked, his pantaloons lay on a chair near the door, I took out of his pocket $850 in money, and went out without disturbing him.
There was a gentleman living in a large frame house in Julia street, whom we concluded to rob. There was with James and myself in this, a negro from Charleston, about as smart as Charles Brown, called Buck. We had a good deal of talk about it before we tried it. Buck professed to have a great deal of experience, and James and I were anxious to see what he knew. Buck said he could go in at the window so sly as not to disturb the family, but in his attempt he failed; the man wakened and we had to make off. I then said that I could go in, and the rest did not believe it. Some time afterwards I went to an old negro man who attends the sick at Dr. Stone's Hospital, and asked him to give me something to make a man sleep so sound that I could go into his house and do what I wanted and come out without his knowing it. The old man offered to give me it, but asked me a hundred dollars for it. After a good deal of bargaining I gave him his price
and he gave me something like a piece of tallow candle, about an inch long and very soft. He told me I could not light it with a match, but must light it with a coal or the end of a segar; On the night appointed, we went to the house; at the door I tried my candle and found it worked as the old man said. With a string and piece of wire I unlocked the front door. The key was in the key hole on the inside. And here I may remark that it is generally as easy or easier to unlock a door where the key is left in the key hole on the inside, than if it is not in, for with a piece of wire and a string you can make the key do what, otherwise, you might have to get a false key to do. The string is packed on the extremity of the fulcrum of the key, and by pressing the wire against that, it will force back the bolt. After unlocking the door, I stole softly into the gentleman's bed chamber, which was on the first floor; a candle was burning, which I took out of the stick and put mine in its place and then set it on a chair by the bed. I waited some time for the effect promised by the old negro and then set the doors wide open, called Buck in; and we took a large mahogany wardrobe which stood in the room and carried it out on the pavement. We unlocked the doors and got $700. James had been watching on the other side of the street. He came over and we three went back into the room, opened the sideboard and took a glass of wine. I went to the bed and raised the musqueto bar, and saw the man and his wife both fast asleep, laying very lovingly. We took his watch and left. In a short time after I got out, the man wakened and cried thieves most stoutly. I do not know, nor do I pretend to say, that the candle produced this effect; but as to their sleeping so sound, and of our taking out the wardrobe, there is no question. The candle produced a smoke which filled the room, and gave rather a disagreeable smell.
I assisted in robbing an old man who kept a large grocery store at the corner of Poydras and Tchapitoulas streets. This was done by an arrangement between me and a watchman, who beat on Tchapitoulas street. The watchman's name I don't know, but he keeps a little grog shop and grocery store down in Frenchtown, lives between Chartres and Royal streets and Rampart and St. Peters streets. His grocery store is in front and his family resides in the rear. The robbery was performed by myself, a negro boy called Toney belonging to an Irishman named Michael Mare, and a boy called John Brown who belonged to Joseph Landes. Mare's store adjoined the store we intended robbing, so we went through into Mare's back yard, climbed over the wall into the yard in rear of the grocery store and forced open the back door, which was only fastened by a hook. We took out for ourselves 8,000 Spanish segars, 2 baskets Champaign and 4 or 5 bottles of cherries. There was no money in the store. For the watchman who stood guard all the while and kept the other watch from that part of the street we took out some segars, 6 boxes No. 1 soap, 10 boxes sperm candles, 2 baskets sweet oil, a box of catsup and some demijohns of brandy. The watchman loaded his on a cart just about the time the carts commenced passing going to market and took them to his house. I took the segars we had and carried them to a Spaniard named Antonie, who kept a Coffee House opposite the New Basin, and sold them for $10 the thousand. This Antonie, now lives in Natchez. I dealt a good deal with him in stolen articles. He as well as the others we sold to, knew very well that the things were stolen but they never asked any questions.
Buel and I got acquainted with a white man who lived in a store on Gravier street, Sylvester and Capt. English I think were the owners. I never
heard any other name, for this man than Jim. He is now or was lately in the employ of Capt. Harper of the jail, in the 2d Municipality, as a watchman. With this man we formed a plan to rob the store of Mr. Castilo on Gravier street, next door to my master's store. We went up through the scuttle window of my master's store on the roof, and down through the scuttle window into Castilo's store. We however, only succeeded in getting about $40. There was a bag containing about $1500 in gold which the clerk had thrown into his trunk, but we did not look there.
From the store we went down to Spanish John's in French Town, where we divided the money. That night we formed a plot for carrying on a regular business of robbing. The plan, to make more security about it as well as to be able to find places where there was money, was for Jim to get in to be a city watchman. As I was then about to leave for St. Louis, this arrangement was to be made by the time I got back, when we were to go to work. Before my return from St. Louis, however, or rather before my master was ready to return, the Buel's were both arrested for burglary and I was left in St. Louis.
This is a history of most of the robberies I was ever engaged in that I can recollect, and embraces all of any note I ever committed in that city. I was suspected of many which I never had any hand in, and I was never suspected of the principal ones that I was engaged in. I never, during all the time, committed murder or set any house on fire, or assisted in setting any on fire, except as before stated.
Abijah Fisk, once lost 30 or 40 dollars in money and his miniature in a gold case. I was suspected and accused. I knew who had done it, but would not tell. His own boy William stole them as he had told me. He sold the miniature to a big Spaniard who sells vegetables in the market. I saw the case once afterwards.
The Grocery store of La Ville Beurre & Walton commonly called Placide & Walton, was robbed or attempted, of which I was accused but was not guilty. Henry Dimond hid himself in the store, and when the clerk went after dark to a boat with some letters, Henry tried to unlock the chest, but could not. The clerk returned for his umbrella and struck a light, when Henry trotted out past him, taking with him the key of the chest but leaving behind his shoes and hat. Some negroes standing in the boarding house door above saw him running down street and thought it was me; Placide accused me of it but on trying on the shoes and hat neither fitted me. Henry told me all about it the next morning before Placide called.
My master's store was twice robbed whilst I lived with him, but I knew nothing of it until after it was done, nor do I know certainly who did it, but I always believed the Buel's and some of their gang did. They knew very well, that bad as I was I would not assist in injuring my master. In truth I never did knowingly wrong him to the amount of one cent, and would as soon have stolen from myself. He was ever indulgent and gave me all I wanted. I accused the Buel's of it and questioned them about it--they never confessed it but answered in such a manner as convinced me they were guilty. I told my master that I believe they did it.
I knew a great many white men, blacklegs and pickpockets, and on several occasions have assisted them by receiving a pocket book or watch which they had stolen in a crowd; but these matters so far as I ever had any hand in them were very small, and would be tedious to detail.
As the foregoing completes the detail of the principal events of my career
of crime in New Orleans, it may be well to inform the reader of what disposition I made of the money which I obtained. I never gambled and I never got drunk; but I drank liquor regularly, seldom indulging beyond my usual number of glasses, one in the morning, at noon and night. I always dressed fine and took any other indulgence I desired. It would be impossible to tell all the money I spent with woman. In one case I got into a French family, passing myself off as a free man, I proposed marrying the youngest of four daughters. I courted her some time and in three weeks lavished on her and her sisters, in dress, rides, &c., &c., upwards of $300. I finally got her and her mother's consent to our marriage. I cohabited with her a month or two and left her. Similar affairs of this kind took a large share of my means.
There was a Madam La Blair, a white woman and a prostitute, with whom I spent much money, and to whom I gave a great many things. She lived in a large brick house on Burbon street, and was esteemed very wealthy. She had several servants to whom she was excessively cruel. She killed some of them by whipping and buried them in the yard. She had a yellow girl about the house with whom I got first acquainted, and to whom I gave a good many costly presents. This lead to an acquaintance with Madam herself and she made me her bed fellow for some time. Before and afterwards she slept with her coachman. I spent a great deal of money with her and gave her a great many pieces of silk, linen, &c., which I stole. She was always very good to me, and loaned me money whenever I wanted it. A mob was finally raised against her because of her treatment of her slaves and she was compelled to run off.
Some years after Mr. Blanchard purchased me, I got acquainted with a girl called Serena White, a slave of Doctor Davidson. She was a washer-woman. After a long courtship we took up together and lived together as man and wife some five or six years. After she took up with me, she left off washing and I rented a house and lived in as comfortable style as I could. I generally, had a house that cost me from $30 to $50 rent per month. I also paid hire for Serena's time. And during her pregnancy I hired servants. My friends, white and black, but there were more of the whites than blacks, came to see me frequently, and I treated them as well as I could--frequently gave dinner parties. I had two children by Serena--the first died when about a week old, the other is still living, and is named William Henderson. Serena was much attached to the Doctor and his children. One of them, a worthless fellow got a good deal of my money by loans from her. The Doctor himself, a short time before his death, borrowed $500 of her which he was to have repaid but did not. I paid the Doctor before my second child was borne, $100, for which he was to set it free. He gave me a receipt to that effect. I left it with Serena, but after the doctor's death his children took it from her and I suppose will not free the child. In a short time they put her in jail to keep her and me from living together.
During the time I kept Serena, I had intercourse with a good many other women. I had a child by a little girl belonging to a French woman. The mistress set the child free and sent it to France with one of her children. After she set it free, I made her a present of one hundred dollars, and made many valuable presents to the child and its mother.
I seldom was without money, but my expenses were heavy, and I had but little to support them except what I made by the means I have mentioned.
I deem it but justice to my own feelings to say, that I never willingly engaged in any robbery where there was a negro slave entrusted with the
custody of the property, for I could not bear to get them into trouble when I knew they had so few means of protection; and when ever any thing of the kind is done, and slaves are about, they are certain to be suspected. It is true I have been engaged in cases of the kind, but it was always because the plan had been laid by others, and there was no use of backing out. If I did not do it, some other one would.
Of the principal partners, old man Buel and Rook have been sentenced to the Penitentiary. James Buel has been arrested the second time for burglary and I presume will be found guilty. Learned has been arrested, I understood for passing counterfeit money or counterfeiting, and it is probable will go a term of service to the State prison. They were all arrested in New Orleans after my leaving except Rook. And here am I.
Some time in July 1840, my master went east to Boston and other places, and I came to St. Louis. I was to be under the control of Mr. Shaw. I remained with Mr. Shaw in all about two months working for him and I then left and shipped on board the S. B. Agnes, as a cabin boy. On board of this boat I first got acquainted with James Seward. We called him Sewell. Prime Bruce was first cook and Seward second. On the way up to St. Peters, Bruce, Seward and myself got pretty well acquainted. I staid on the boat near two months, and during the time made a trip as high up the Mississippi as St. Peters, stoping at Galena, Du Buque and other towns. One night at Galena, the boat laid up. That night Bruce, Seward and myself formed a plan to rob the store of Messrs. Campbell & Truet. When it was late enough we went up. We knew nothing of the store, hoisted the window, which had very little protection, and I went in; Bruce came in after me and Seward remained outside to watch. There was a little iron chest there, a very shackling concern, and with a bar of iron we forced open the door. We got 1260 dollars. This we divided amongst us three. This was as the boat was going up. When the boat returned to St. Louis we all left her, Seward started for Pittsburg and Bruce for Cincinnati, where he said he lived.
At the time of leaving St. Louis, I expected my master here shortly, and I left word with Mrs. Brown, a girl who had lived at Mr. Shaws, now with Mr. Paschall, to tell him if he came that I would be back in a short time and not to go until I returned. When I returned here I met him. He had been a good deal distressed at my absence. In a few days he went down to New Orleans with the understanding that I was to come down immediately. I did go down in about four days afterwards in the Meteor. My master had nothing for me to do and I staid but a few days after which I returned to St. Louis on the S. B. Louisville. I remained about a week at Mr. Shaw's after my return, when Mrs. Shaw having returned home I left and went to the house of Leah to board. Leah is a colored washer woman, the wife of Peter Charleville, both free, living on Third Street below the National Hotel.
Here I was for the first time introduced to Edward Ennis, one day at dinner. Ennis boarded there, but slept with a girl, up near the North Market, called Isabela Wright. After I went to Leah's I bought a bed of Mr. Shaw and gave him five dollars for it. This I took into a room in Leah's house, made a present of it to her, but was to sleep on it as long as I staid there. Ennis shortly afterwards asked permission to sleep with me, when he was not with his girl, which was granted. Soon after my acquaintance with Ennis, he began to open his mind and tell of speculations we could make by robbing. At first I kept very shy of him. He proposed several things which after talking about were never attempted.
The first proposition he made to me was for us to join and rob the grocery
store of the Messrs. Jameson's on Market Street, a little above George Johnson's barber shop. Jameson shaved at that shop and Ennis had learned from him that he had money. Being afraid of Ennis I did not attempt it.
He next proposed that we should rob Col. Brant's house up near the North Market. He said that Col. Brant's negro boy had told him that his master had a large amount of money, which was in a drawer in a bureau in the basement story, where the Col. kept his office, and that the family slept up stairs; he had also informed him how we could get in. One night we went and examined the house but did not go in. There was a hack or carriage at the door and some company up stairs. I was opposed to robbing the house because the Colonel had slaves, who I thought would be accused; and besides I understood that there were several woman about the house.
Some time afterwards we agreed to rob the store of J. R. Scott, in a new brick building on Third street, south of the North Market, the buildings of Colonel Brant. The buildings were not quite finished. Before this, Seward had returned from Pittsburg. Ennis went and found out all about the store and told us, but on the night staid at the shop. Warrick, Seward and myself went, raised the back window and got in. I went in first and Alfred followed me, Seward watched. We got about $12 in money and took several pieces of broad cloth, some silks and domestic goods, I judge in all about $500 worth, and left. The goods we gave to Peter and Ennis to sell and they went to St. Charles to sell them. How they disposed of them I never knew as we never had a settlement.
Some short time after this Peter, Ennis and myself determined to rob the store of Mr. Gooddell & Co., on Market street, next door to the Museum. This house was not finished; there were no blinds to the back windows. Ennis who had examined the store, said there was a good deal of money there.--One night we went into the alley between the store and the Catholic Church. The man in the store blew out his candle and went to supper. I went and forced up the window sash, struck a light with a match, lit the candle and opened the back door. Ennis then came in, Peter staid out to watch. We got between $20 and $25 in change out of the drawer. We understood he had more money in the room he slept in but we could not find the room. We took about $500 worth of goods in silks, silk handkerchiefs, domestics, &c., Peter and Ennis carried the goods away and I remained and shut the door.
About five or six weeks afterwards we paid the same store a second visit. The back door was secured by a small bolt, which was easily forced off. We again got about $20 in money and about an equal amount in goods. These goods were all placed in the hands of Peter and Ennis to sell, and they spoke of carrying them to St. Charles, over the river, to Carondelet and Kaskaskia. Where or how they did dispose of them I do not know.
About this time, Leah was washing for guests at the National Hotel. One day she told Ennis and myself that a gentleman from the south had made her certain propositions, that when she refused to gratify him he put his money in his pocketbook and put it in his trunk--that he had a large sum. She told me his room, over Johnsons Drug store, and when he went to supper, I took the trunk and carried it to Leah's house. We opened it but there was no money in it. Ennis got a pistol with revolving barrels, a bowieknife, a set of razors all fitting one handle and some clothes &c. The gentleman had a miniature of a handsome lady in it in a plain box, this Ennis destroyed. The papers Ennis throwed into the fire. I was so much disappointed in not getting the money that I would have carried the trunk back if they would have agreed
to it. About this time Peter did not stay very much at Leah's for he thought Ennis was to intimate with her.
Seward, Ennis and myself robbed the grocery store of Braun & Hollander on Main street in the brick row below Walnut street on the right hand side as you go down. There was snow on the ground at the time. Ennis said he knew, but how I did not learn, that there was $5,000 in the store. When the man went to supper we went to the back door, I forced out the transom sash over the back door and got in, opened the back door and let in the others. The money was in a Liverpool patent safe which cant be opened by a crowbar; and as the key was not there we could not get into it. We got a few dollars, probably twenty five dollars in the drawer under the counter. Ennis and Seward took about 25 linen shirts and a suit of clothes from his sleeping room, and we took two boxes segars. When we were about to leave, Ennis proposed that I should stay and when the man came in kill him and get the key from him and thus get the money, but I refused. It was next proposed to burn the house, and this I opposed. The others seemed so bent on it that I made them take the plunder and leave before me for fear they would fire it. The next day Ennis read from a newspaper an advertisement of the robbery in which it was stated that there was $5000 in the safe which the robbers did not get.
After this, Warrick, Seward and myself robbed a small dry goods store on the opposite side of the street. When the man went to supper, we were in the rear of the store. We drew out the staple which holds the upper end of the bar across the window. We took from the store about $25 in money and about $100 worth of goods.
During the winter and cold weather, Peter, Ennis, Warrick, Seward and myself talked frequently of robbing different stores but did not attempt any but what I have mentioned. Towards spring or the breaking up of the ice, Brown came on from Cincinnati. When it was thought a boat could get up to Galena, Brown, Seward and myself left on the S. B. Agnes; Warrick was to have gone along but could not get ready. When we reached Fever river the ice was not out and the passengers were landed on an Island, the boat going on to Du Buque, we crossed in a skiff to the shore and went up by land to Galena. After being there a few days, I left Brown and Seward and took my passage in the stage for Chicago. I went to Chicago to see an old friend named Morris, a barber. He was absent. I saw there several blacklegs, whom, both white and colored men, I knew and they knew me; and after looking round a day or two I resolved to leave without attempting anything. Some of them asked me my business there, and I told them I was running off to Canada. I returned in the stage to Galena, and we resolved to rob the bank. When we were talking about it Brown was for killing the men in the bank, but I could see no use in it and opposed it.
There were four men slept in the bank, two up stairs, and two down. One of those up stairs was the Episcopal Clergyman. We had watched round and learnt where they all slept. On the night agreed upon we went to the rear window next the tavern, which we easily opened, no shutters on it. I went in, opened the door and let the others in. There was a man up stairs sick, at least he was frequently up and walking about, and fearing discovery from him we dare not work at the vault. Whilst we were waiting for him to get asleep, daylight broke, and we concluded that if we got the money out of the vault we could not carry it away without being seen. If we had had half an hour more time we could have got all we wanted, for the vault would have been easily opened. I went out, Brown lighted some papers and
put them in the drawers and desks and set the house on fire. We were only in the Front room and the room the vault is in. We made nothing by this attempt.
A few nights afterwards we went up on the hill to the store of Mr. Stillman, and when the man in the store left it we went in by the back window. We took 20 or $30 which was in the drawer, and left. We did not try his iron chest for we supposed he had carried his money away.
When in Galena, we mostly staid at a house kept by a man called Lewis Patton, but spent a number of days in the country.
Shortly after robbing Mr. Stillman, we took passage and came to St. Louis on the S. B. Illinois. After my return I again stopped at Leah's. A proposition was made by Ennis after our return to try the bank at Alton. He said he had lived there and knew all about it, and we could do it easily.--I refused, said I had travelled about a good deal and had made nothing, and I would go to no more little towns. I thought the best chance was in the large cities. The subject of robbing Mr. Pettus' counting house was again renewed and frequently pressed by Ennis. He urged that if we could get into Mr. P's. we could make enough to last us the balance of our lives. During these discussions, Ennis, of his own accord, got the crow-bar made, which was afterwards used.
Peter and Ennis both insisted there was a good sum of money in the store of Sinclair Taylor & Co., and one night we concluded to try it. Brown, Warrick, Seward and myself went down to the door that opens in the rear on the alley. The door was easily pushed open, being fastened only by a small bolt; we went into the counting room and in a drawer found the key of the iron safe which we unlocked; we got 40 or $50. This was all the money we could find and when I was satisfied of that I left. Some of the rest were looking for something else but I did not stay to see what they got. I had no suspicion that they thought of firing the house; if I had suspected they intended it I would have staid and prevented it, for there was no use in it.
About this time or shortly afterwards, Peter Charleville was working for Messrs. E. & A. Tracy on the wharf, and said that Mr. Tracy had received eighteen hundred dollars, which was in the safe. The four above mentioned went that night into the rear of the store and forced off the bolt of one of the rear window shutters, and got in. We went up stairs into the counting room and laid the iron chest down on its side, looked at it a little spell, and then with the bar Ennis had made and a smaller bar, which we broke in the operation and threw away afterwards, prized off the nobs or nails. In this way we took off the bars all round the door of the chest. It is no trouble to open one of those safes that have large nobs all over them, the nails have nothing to hold to and the nobs helps you to get a purchase on them to pull them out. Peter had told us that Tracy had the key, we did no look for it--We commenced operating at half past eight, and in an hour or more had the money out. There was only $254 in the chest and a silver cup with an inscription on it. We all seated ourselves on the floor, took a basket of Champaign, over which Brown said a ceremony or prayer and we drank till we were satisfied. When I left I set the silver cup on the desk and told Brown to leave it, as it did not belong to Mr. Tracy and had been prepared as a present for some body, but Brown would not leave it.
This was the second time we had been in Tracy's store. The first time, about two weeks previous, we had no tools to work with and consequently got nothing.
In the early part of the week Mr. Pettus' house was robbed, we five, that is
Brown, Warrick, Seward, Ennis and myself met, and after some consultation agreed to try Mr. Pettus on Friday night. It was no part of our plan to do more than take the money. Our intentions were to watch when the young men went to supper, go in and get the money and be off before he came back. We did not, or at least I did not know how the store was built; and from Ennis I understood that the money was kept in a safe or chest in the room next the one the young men slept in. On Friday night, we all met on the river bank, near the corner and consulted some time, and then passed up Pine st., passed the door, but there were several persons in the counting room and we gave it up.
Next day we were frequently talking about it when by ourselves, and about supertime we four and Ennis all met in Second street in front of Mr. Willi's house, between that and the Catholic Church. Ennis again urged that Mr. Pettus, was the best haul we could make. He said he had seen money carried in there the day before, lots of it. He also insisted that there was but one man slept in the store and that he kept the keys. Finally, it was proposed to go down and kill this one man and rob the store. I don't know who made the proposition, but it was made and acceded to by all, instantly. It was not over a minute after the proposition was made until we started off. Ennis did not go along for the reason that on Saturday night his absence from the shop would be noticed. Besides he had agreed to provide a place to conceal the money we might get. He had represented that the money was in square boxes or kegs and each man could bring a box away with him.--We went directly down the street, past the Church to the river bank and up Front street to the street on which the store is. Here we stopped a little while and then went up Pine, to Main street at the corner of Mr. Charless'. We then went down to the corner on Front st. again. Here we crossed over to the north side of the street, and came up that side to the alley opposite Mr. Pettus' door. We then passed over towards the door. Before this there had been no agreement or understanding who was to kill the young man, but as we crossed over, Brown, who had the crow-bar, handed it to me and a bank-bill and said: "You go in first, show him this bill and give him the first lick and we will do the rest"
The proposition staggered me a little at first, for it was the first time I ever thought of killing a man, but as I always had been the first, I did not like to hold back, and without a moments reflection I took them and went in. The young man, (I have since learned that his name was Jesse Baker) was sitting down by a small desk, near the door smoking a segar, I presented him the bank bill and asked him if it was good, and as he turned his head round towards the candle, I struck him. The blow fell upon his neck and the back part of his head ranging up wards, for he was below me. The one blow knocked him off the chair on the floor speechless. It may have broken his neck though I do not know. The chief force of the blow was on the neck and collar of his coat. I did not strike him again, but went out and gave the bar to Warrick, who was next the door--he went in and struck him twice over the head--he then came out and gave the bar to Brown and he and Seward went in together--Brown struck him several times; I do not know that Seward struck him at all. Seward and Brown then hauled the body round in front of the vault. We all then went in. I looked through the rooms and could find no money. On going into Baker's sleeping room I saw two beds and on the beds, clothing for two persons, fresh washed, and I supposed brought that evening by the wash woman; I went back and told the boys that Ennis was mistaken, that there was two men slept there, and the other would
probably be in pretty soon; I took the crow bar and tried the door of the vault, and found there was no possibility of getting in. I told the boys it was no use, and if the other man came we would have to kill him, and proposed that we should go away; Brown refused possitively, said we were in for it now and as we were in we might as well go through. I thensaid that I would do no more killing, that the blow I had given Baker was equivalent to killing him and I would do no more. Brown said he would do it. Warrick and Seward went out to watch. I examined Bakers body for the keys, and got out of his pocket $200, part in Illinois and part in Miners Bank notes. Brown examined the drawers and desks and got some money out of one of them, but how much I do not know. There was no attempt made to bore around the vault whilst I staid; all that was done, was an attempt to force open the door.
After a while the other young man, (Jacob Weaver,) came down the street whistling. Brown went behind the door, and I stood up against the door of the vault. Brown opened the door, and Weaver stepped in. As he stepped in, Brown threw the door to, and struck him. The first blow felled him to the floor. He struggled very little, but Brown repeated the blows, I think five or six times. I could not see them from where I stood. Warrick and Seaward then came in. I told them it was no use to stay there, we could not get into the vault, and there might be some of the acquaintances of the young men who slept with them, and we might have more to kill, and I would go home. I then took the bar from Brown, and started off, leaving the three in the store.
I went directly up to Peter's house, and when I rapped, Peter opened the door and let me in. I had the bar in my hand, and laid it down by the door. Shortly after I got to bed Ennis came and rapped, and I rose and let him in. He stripped off and got into bed. After he laid down he asked how we came out. I told him there was no money in the room, as he had said there was--all the money there, was in a vault, and for our purposes might just as well be in the bank on Main street--that we might just as well try to break open the bank in the day time as to get into that vault. He asked me if we got no money at all. I told him I had got two hundred dollars, and I didn't know what the others had got. I remarked to him at the same time that we had killed two, and that it was a shame to kill two young men for only two or three hundred dollars. He replied, that was nothing--colored people would never be suspected--all we had to do was to be cautious. I gave him the money. He got a light and divided it with Leah, Peter, himself and me. He gave Peter and Leah their's in bed. They asked no questions about it, but they knew, because every thing could be heard from one room to the other. Ennis then went and threw the bar into the privy, and returned. Shortly after this the alarm of fire was given, and he and Peter went down to it. They returned about day-light--Peter first and Ennis next. The next morning we all met at breakfast. After that was over Ennis went out--I remained in--for I did not feel well. Sometime afterwards Ennis came back, and appeared to be in fine spirits--told us they had offered $5000 reward, and that everybody suspected white people.
I remained at Peter's, or Leah's until the Thursday following. During this time, Ennis appeared to change in his conduct towards me. Before that we had drank together, and kept our liquor together--but he appeared disposed to cut me. I did not suspect him of foul play, if I had, I would have taken him out a riding, and killed him. He advised Warrick, Seward and Brown to go away, but never said a word to me. The others told me of it,
but it never occurred to me that he had any design in it; if it had, he never would have blowed us.
During the time I staid here I suffered a great deal in feeling. Nearly every place I visited, especially where there were white folks, I heard something good said about the two young men who had been killed, and especially Weaver. He was invariably spoken of as a young man of excellent qualities; and on one occasion I heard some men in a coffee-house speak of how kind and good he was to colored people, and it made me more sorry than anything else. I cursed myself a thousand times that I had not saved him by going away when we found we could not get into the vault. In these few days I drank more than I ever did in double the time in my life. The more I thought of it the more I drank. I was, at times, very much afraid of Warrick--he sometimes got drunk, and when so, said anything. Seward I was not afraid of, and Brown never drank anything. Finally, I concluded to go to New-Orleans. Why I went I do not know, for I had no business there, but I thought it would be some relief--and I left on the steamboat Missouri.
When I got down and saw my master I was very glad, and he was so much pleased to see me that it made me feel very bad, thinking about this affair. In my former scrapes I did not care anything about them, but this would come up. I staid some days with my master. Whilst I had been absent, an indictment or something of the kind had been found against me, in connection with James Buel, for stealing Mexican goods. I was not guilty, and had no fear to be tried, and proposed to my master to be tried then, but the principal witness was absent, and the understanding was that he would not return until fall. If they took me up on the charge I must remain in prison until fall. I then proposed to master that I would return to St. Louis, as the time was near at hand for him to go east, and in the fall, if he would come by St. Louis on his return, I would come down with him and stand my trial then, and remain with him all winter. He agreed to this arrangement, and spoke my passage on the steam boat Eliza.
On the way up I heard at Memphis, some white people tell some white persons on the boat that they had taken two white men engaged in the St. Louis murders and burning. One, they said had been taken off the Atlanta and the other off the Omega. When I heard it I felt sure that Seward and Warrick had been taken, but had no suspicion that Ennis had informed. I thought it was merely suspicion, and believed that they would have stout hearts enough not to tell anything against themselves. At Cairo I heard some more about it, and if I had wanted, could have left the boat, for captain Littleton was asleep, and no one was watching me. I however, resolved in my own mind to come right back, and go to Leah's house, and if I found that they had blowed me, I intended to stop their testimony by killing them. Besides, I thought that what I had said to Ennis was no testimony against me. I thought they could not convict me except by the oath of some one who saw me do it. I had no suspicion of any one watching me on the boat, and I don't believe they did. At least, I know if I had not made up my mind to come back I could easily have got off even after we left Commerce. When I was arrested I knew they had got the story somehow, but I thought if we all were true they could do nothing with us. I was very much surprised when I heard how the others had told on themselves. I was also, very much astonished to find that they had Brown. I knew that he was the most daring of our party, and I thought he never would be taken. I stood out until after my trial, and then I knew the matter was over with me, and I began to think of the other world.
I have no right or reason to doubt the fairness of my trial. I believe my council, Mr. Primm, did all that the testimony warranted or the facts justified, yet, I believe it but a mere formality and I felt sure after Ennis' testimony was given in that whatever was the decision, my fate was inevitable.
My days are nearly terminated and I shall die with but two wishes ungratified. My first and most anxious desire is the forgiveness of my kind and indulgent master Mr. Blanchard. If in my career I have committed wrongs and injuries upon many persons, yet my life pays forfeit of them all. But the ungenerousness of my conduct towards my master--one who never treated me with aught but kindness and confidence--the ungracious return I have made for all his bounties is a source of regret which the judgment of the law cannot repair. When this shall reach him I pray him to forgive me. I die fully concious of the wrongs I have unwittingly committed. I am unable to make any reparation, but I beg him to take my dying assurance that in no act of my life have I willingly or knowingly intended any injury to him, his feelings or property. I know my acts have brought distress on his gray hairs. If I could have known their effect before their commission--could I have foreseen that he would have been censured for acts of mine, every one of which he knew nothing and suspected nothing, I would have escaped my present unhappy fate--for ever since I came into his employ there was no sacrifice of desires or of labor I would not have made to gratify him. But I supposed my acts my own. And my last declaration to the world is, that if my master has erred in any thing it has been in suffering himself to be deceived by me. That he has been so deceived, grossly deceived, I freely admit.
My second desire may seem unreasonable and wrong upon my part but it is in my breast and I will not die uttering a deception. It is that Ennis may in his heart, suffer some thing of the misery he has aided in inflicting upon his associates. I do not desire his death, but I hope that his concience may yet awaken in his bosom, that remorse I know he ought to feel. When he has suffered this he will mend his morals and become a better man and the community have peace and quietness.
To my friends of all colors, but especially those who have been associated with me, I bid a long and final farewell. Let my name be dropt from the list of those you remember with affection, but let the errors of my life and its disgraceful close stand as a warning beacon to your steps to the grave.
I, AMOS ALFRED WARRICK, a colored man, in view of the awful sentence which now awaits me, knowing that in my course of life I have offended against the laws of the land, but still more and deeply have offended against the laws of that God before whose awful tribunal I must soon appear to answer for all my acts, and being willing to confess to men, as I honestly have confessed in contrition and deep humiliation, to the Supreme Omniscience, the acts of my life which have led me, step by step, from the happy fireside of an honored but abused father, and from the arms of a fond and doating but now wretched mother, to my present situation--the victim of evil council and evil passions, the adjudged culprit of the most high and heinous offence known to the law.
I give the history of my life freely. The time for concealment is past. To myself it can do neither injury nor benefit, but if my tale, simple as it is, and uninteresting as it may be esteemed, will have the effect to warn one person, now on the highway of vice and crime, to desert his evil ways, to "flee from the wrath to come," and to turn, and by a correct life and a firm reliance on the religion of Jesus Christ, look and seek light and truth from the only true fountain ere it is forever too late, then will I have done something to repay the injury I have inflicted upon others. There are many men of my color and many white men too, who, in my brief history, may see many acts of their own life represented, I pray them by the dearest of all ties, by their love of friends, of life, and above all, by their hopes of forgiveness hereafter to take warning by me, and pause, consider and turn from their wicked way. They may escape for a season, but the arrows of God's justice are as sure and his judgments as certain upon the wicked, as his mercies are free and unbounded to those who come to him with a contrite spirit and true repentance. Let not my warning pass as the moaning of the expiring blast. Remember, it is the voice of one standing on the confines of eternity, and he who speaks has tasted deeply of all the fleeting pleasures the cup of wickedness can give, and in the midst of a career, promising as long a continuance and as much fruit as any one else can promise himself, is brought, ere the meridian of life, to a grave dishonored and disgraced. I speak the language of truth--God grant that it may reach the hearts of all who read it.
I was born in the town of Newbern, North Carolina, on the 31st of March, 1815. My father's name is Brista N. C. Warrick, a free colored man, and my mother's name is Levina. My father is a barber by profession, and served his apprenticeship in that place, and has always, as has my mother, maintained a good character. I trust no one will ever impute to them any blame for the fate of their unhappy son. God knows, my end has been the result of disobedience to their early council and oft repeated instructions, both by precept and practice.
In early life, my father sent me to school, and I soon learned to read and write, and cypher a little. He also took me into his shop where I learned the trade of a barber. Being of a quick turn, I early became serviceable to him, and was agreeable to his customers. During this period my parents
spared no pains to instil into my mind the precepts of religion, and warning me of the dangerous and fatal results of crime. But unfortunately for me, their good advice fell upon a heart not insensible, but incapable of serious reflection. Conducting myself well in the shop, many gentlemen in the vicinity were anxious to get me as a servant or waiting man, which my father always refused. At length, when I was about 13 years old, during an election canvass, I agreed to run off and stay with one Mr. James G. Row, then a candidate for the Legislature, living in Onslow county, about 41 miles from Newbern. I went with Mr. Row and remained with him some time, my parents not knowing where I was. When he went up to Raleigh to attend the legislature, I accompanied him. We passed through Newbern and staid there two or three days, during which time I kept hid from my parents. I remained at Raleigh with Mr. Row during the session of the legislature, and then returned to his farm. During that season, Mr. Row courted and married a daughter of Judge Johnston, of Charleston, S. C., to which place he went. Subsequently, he returned to his farm and took me on with him to Charleston.
The day we arrived at Charleston, before crossing Cooper's river, Mr. Row told me I must not let any one in Charleston know that I could read or write, and I must tell them all that I belonged to him. I readily promised a compliance with this. The Judge gave Row and his daughter a farm, 9 miles from the city, to which he moved. I remained there some time. Row being about to visit Onslow to move his slaves to a farm he had bought near Edgeville, I was anxious to return with him, and particularly to see my parents; but he persuaded me to stay, saying that he wished me to wait on his lady, and when he came back, I should have money to carry me to New York, where I had an uncle living. I was content with this and remained. After Row left, Mrs. Row and I fell out and she undertook to whip me. I determined not to let her, and for fear she would attempt it, (she then being in a delicate situation, and fearing I might do her some injury,) I left and went to her father's. The Judge approved of my course, but nevertheless I was taken up and confined in a sugar house. Mrs. Row wrote to her husband, and he wrote back to her to sell me.
Whilst in confinement, a Frenchman named Cuculler, a negro trader, came and examined me and asked me if I would be willing to go to New Orleans with him. Being young and anxious to see the world, I readily consented, and he purchased me. After the purchase, he took me as his own servant and taught me to speak French. On the day he bought me, he took me to his boarding house and there I saw on his table the letter from Row to his wife, directing her to sell me. She had given it to Cuculler as a proof that she was authorized to sell. I however was so anxious to see New Orleans, that I said nothing about it.
In time, a drove of about thirty negroes and myself were shipped on board the brig Aspasia and sent to New Orleans, where we arrived in 18 days. I was then transferred to a French barber, Mr. Fourier, on Chartres street. I staid with him three months, and he treated me so well that I had no wish to leave him. A Spaniard, who worked in the shop, and I, had a fight, and I attempted to cut him with a razor, but was prevented. When Fournier heard of it, he whipped me. This offended me very much, and I determined to be revenged. The first revenge I attempted was to throw about $20 worth of cravats, suspenders, &c., which were kept in the shop for sale, into the privy. This did not seem to spite him much, and I then
determined to gain my freedom. I might have stolen money from him, but I then thought that that would be degrading.
The schooner Zembooca was then in port, nearly ready to sail. The Captain had formerly lived in Newbern and knew me and my father, and knew that I was free. There were also two sailors on board who had gone to school with me in Newbern. When they learned that I had been sold, they wanted me to write to my father, but I refused. On the day the schooner was to leave, my boss and all hands were sitting out on the pavement in front of the shop. I put on my coat, took my umbrella and walked out, bid them all good by, shook hands with Mr. Fournier and went directly off. I had been so full of mischief and fun before, that they took it all as a joke. I went on board the schooner, took off my coat and went to work as steward, and that evening we were towed down. I left New Orleans on a Friday evening in the month of August, 1831, and arrived in New York in 13 days afterwards. I had about 40 or $50 of my own money.
Upon my arrival in New York, I did not venture to go to my uncle's, Christopher Rush, who keeps a grocery in Howard street, but staid a week at Mrs. Bowries, a seamstress who formerly lived in Newbern. Then I hired to Mr. Newton, and was placed in the principal charge of one of the tow boats which runs between New York and Albany. I received $25 a month wages, and liberty to make what I could besides, which made my wages nearly $60 a month. I continued on the boat until the end of the season, and falling out with one of the owners at Albany, I left her. I returned to New York, and after spending two weeks in idleness, I hired to Messrs. Hamilton & Sous, No. 25, Broad street. I attended in their store to receiving, marking and forwarding cotton, &c. When the business got dull I left them and determined to go to sea. I had got tired of my trade and did not like to be confined to a shop.
I then shipped with Capt. G. W. Phillips, on board the schooner Elizabeth Jane, bound from New York to Velasco and Brazoria. Handy & Lusk had freighted her. The Captain was a drunken character; the mate, Francis Peck, was a clever man. We were at Velasco bar in nine days, and were in all, at Brazoria and in the river, 9 weeks. On our return at the bar, a vessel had been wrecked, and whilst we were there the officers of the wreck offered a dollar the hour for hands to assist in getting out the freight. The hands on our vessel engaged in, and I worked at it when I had time. A sailor on our vessel, Frank Russel, proposed to me to steal some of the goods, alledging that it was the best way to secure our pay from the wrecked officers, but I declined. He however stole some, and stowed them in the forward run of the forecastle. They were found, and he was taken up to Velasco for trial. The trial was before a self-constituted court, and whilst it was going on, I went on shore and cut Russel loose, and took him on board our vessel and hid him. They thought he had escaped. That evening, in weighing our anchor it proved to be foul, and we had to slip it, carrying away our dead lights, and otherwise defacing the schooner. When it was dusk, I brought Russel up, and he went to work.
At New Orleans, when we returned, the vessel was turned over to the Insurance Company and sent over the river to be repaired. My wages were due from Brazoria, and the Captain and I fell out about them at the ship yard and had a fight. I worsted the old man, and he had me taken up and lodged in the Calaboose. He left New Orleans, leaving me there, and I remained in confinement two months. Was finally discharged by order of the Custom House Collector.
I then shipped as a hand at the Balize, S. E. Pass, and remained there and at the N. E. Pass in all 7 months. During this time I became very familiar with the duties, and was esteemed a good hand. When I came to settle up, little John Wilson, as he was called, a German, tried to cheat me out of part of my wages, and did, out of about 15 or $20. To be revenged for this act, I went to the N. E. Pass and prevailed on the hands to run off with the pilot boat, and the provisions, &c. on board of her. They did so and took her to New Orleans. I came up shortly afterwards. They had disposed of some of the provisions, &c. and were trying to sell the boat. I persuaded them to ship on steamboats for the upper country, to avoid being taken up for stealing the boat. They did so, and then I wrote to Wilson informing him where his boat was. He came up and got her, and he and I made friends again.
After spending two weeks in New Orleans, I shipped as steward on board the ship Florida of N. Y., Capt. McSerrin, bound to Liverpool. When we had made the Irish Channel, the Captain and I fell out about one of the back lockers which a former steward had left very foul and dirty, but which I had not found out until we came to overhaul the ship. The Captain struck me. I complained of it, as I dare not strike back. So the Captain agreed to give me a fair fight on deck. We fought some time and quit so good a man so good a boy. At Liverpool I applied to the Consul and got my discharge, but compelled the ship to board me three weeks, and stood my own board one week.
I then shipped on board the ship Sterling of Boston, Capt. Conn, and had a pleasant trip, though detained out 45 days. I staid in Boston three weeks and shipped on the schooner Ante, Capt. Walter, for Georgetown, D. C. On our return, from Georgetown, the schooner ran a foul of the bridge and carried away our main boom. The Captain finding her going on the bridge, heaved his anchor, but could not bring her up in time. I was in the galley at the time he ordered me to help heave the anchor, and did not hear the order. He came to the galley, collared me and pulled me out, my feet striking the guards, I fell and he kicked me. Knowing I was in a slave State, I said nothing, but determined to pay him for it in New York. At New York, when the cargo was discharged, I proposed to fight him, as he had frequently said he was willing to give any sailor, black or white, a fair fight. Several of the other sailors had a spite against him and wanted him whipped; but he was afraid, and stole off with his vessel at night, leaving me on shore unpaid.
I remained in New York for about three months working at various places. I shipped during this time on the brig Mermaid, bound for Canton, China, but before the time for sailing, having got my months pay in advance, I deserted. My security, John Russell tried to apprehend me but I kept out of his way. Some days after the vessel left I thought I had done wrong and gave Russell half the money I had received for the month's advance.
I then next shipped on board the schooner Rosaria, Mr. Sears, master and owner, for Pensacola with rail road iron. Below Pensacola we took in a cargo of lumber for Mobile, from Mobile we went to New Orleans. The whole crew except officers, were colored men. We had on board a little Indian named Cuffy, for whom I formed a great attachment. The Captain whipped Cuffy and I determined to be revenged for it, accordingly I prevailed on the crew to leave him at New Orleans.
I then shipped on the Ambassador for Liverpool, Captain Upton.--
Were 29 days making the run. I left the ship at Liverpool and remained about a month, when I shipped on the Napier, captain Stafford, for Baltimore. This was in the month of February. During the run we had a gale one night when all hands had to go aloft to reef; one of the sailors and I fell out aloft and went to fighting on the foot rope; I was in the act of throwing him overboard when he cried enough. The weather was so cold during this sail that one of our men froze during the night on his watch. When we came into the Chesepeake Bay, we had to come to anchor, the ice was running so heavy. While we lay there I saw a large Dutch vessel, with a valuable cargo on board, cut down by the ice.
At Baltimore I shipped on the Tribune lying below Alexandria, as cook and steward. I did not know her cargo until I got on board. She was freighted with 82 slaves. At New Orleans the mate and I had a fight on the deck of the vessel, I wished then to leave and the Captain would not discharge me and I determined to run away. As I could not get my pay I determined to take my pay out of the market money which was entrusted with me. On reflection I thought it wrong and returned the money and left the vessel without my pay.
I then shipped on board the Mary Branard, Captain Beckwith, engaged in the Havana trade. He was a religious man and I continued with him some time. The ship being about to make a trip to Charleston, S. C., I left her on account of the laws in relation to colored people at Charleston. I was unwilling to go there and be confined in jail whilst there.
I remained in Madison street, boarding at Jo Prince's some time. There were two colored persons in New Orleans, whom I had known in Newburn: one was Shadric Robbins, a free man, the other Hamilton Williams, a slave of Mr. Nicholay. They were engaged in papering a house for Mr. Woodworth. The lady of the house had gone over the lake to remain whilst the house was being re-fited. Robbins and Williams became negligent about their work and Mr. Woodworth gave me the contract for $14. I took it and hired Robbins and Williams to help me. The furniture &c. had been moved into one room. One day Robbins called me into that room, he had been working there. He had the drawer open in which the lady had left all her valuable jewelry. I remarked, that Mr. Woodworth had been very negligent to leave the drawer unlocked and proposed to call him and inform him of it--Robbins said he would call him and I went to work. Robbins did not call him; but that night after we quit work, he and Williams took all the jewelry and made off.
About this time I became afraid of Mr. Fourneir putting me into trouble, and when this thing came out about the jewelry I kept pretty dark. Robbins and Williams however were taken and most of it found on them, and they confessed that I knew nothing of it. They were so explicit in their confession that Mr. Woodworth was satisfied with me.
Shortly after this I shipped as second stewart on board the steam boat Warren, engaged in the Yazoo trade, and remained on her about 2 months. I then left her and went to board at a house in Bienville street. Whilst there, Williams the slave, again tried to renew his intimacy with me, but I would have nothing more to do with him. He knew that I had been sold to Fourneir and to be revenged he informed on me. He stationed the watch to take me one night as I was going to the house of a girl I staid with. I was taken and thrown into jail. Fourneir came to see me but did not recognize me, neither did any of the boys in his shop except one. We had two trials and on the second I was decided to be his property.
Fourneir took me, hand cuffed, to his shop. I knew all the boys, but pretended I did not. He then sold me to a negro tarder living in Camp street, opposite Washington square, named Hite. He was a very cruel and hard master. One day a gentleman named John F. Miller, a horse racer and wealthy farmer residing in the Attakapas country came to look at me and finally bought me. I went with Miller into the Attakapas, at first he put me to work in the field but finding me averse to that and with all pretty smart, he took me from the field and put me in the stable. I remained with him quite well satisfied for about 12 months. During this period Miller spent most of his time in New Orleans and elsewhere, and his mother a very aged woman had charge of the farm. I frequently wrote letters for the old lady to Miller and to her daughter, Mrs. Wheeler, in Cincinnati. She was very good to me and I loved her like a mother.
At length I got tired and told Mr. Miller I wanted to go to New Orleans. He consented and I thought he was going to let me pick my own master, but instead of that he took me and three others to New Orleans--we understood he had hired us and delivered us to Martin Gordon, and we were sent to work at the mills. I determined not to stay at the mills and I left without ceremony.
I then shipped as second steward on the Bunkerhill, in the Yazoo trade, and remained on her about two months and a half. I then left her and went on board the Tuskina bound to St. Louis and Naples in Illinois. We made the trip and returned to N. Orleans. I left the Tuskina and went to see Miller. I told him a lie, for I said I had been round to New York to see my friends. Told him I wanted to see Gordon but was afraid, so he agreed to go with me. I told Gordon the same story and he let me off without any repremand for going away.
I staid at the mill some time, and one night when down in the city rather late, visiting a girl, the watch took me up and put me in Mr. Harper's callaboose. They reported to Gordon that I was running off. I remained in the callaboose or jail one year and two months, working part of the time in the chain gang. Gordon at first believed the report that I was running off, and after that he was so much involved he could'nt take me out.
It was during my stay in jail that I first got acquainted with Madison the man who is condemned with me. He was in the jail three or four times and once was flogged; but I never during that time heard any thing disreputable of him. He always had plenty of money and whilst he was in jail was very free with it. Any little thing any of us wanted he could manage to get for us, and was a general favorite. My acquaintance with him was not intimate.
I was at length taken out and sold at the French Exchange for $700, to a Frenchman named Mariana, who lives over the lake near Manuel. When he purchased me, he asked me if I could talk French, and I told him no. He then replied that I could not get away from him. He took me to his farm and set me to work in the sugar cane. This I did not like, and my arms got sore; so they gave me an easier work, keeping crows out of the field. The food given the negroes was very indifferent; they gave them no meat. The boy who cooked, and I, one night stole a lot of hams, and whilst these lasted we lived very well. We shared also with some of the other negroes. At length a skiff which was building on the farm was completed and launched. I took the skiff, the cook and one other negro, about 10 o'clock in the night, and put out across the lake. It was blowing pretty
hard and we had hard pulling, but as I knew something of steering, we kept on the right tack. The next day we landed at the wharf on the shell road in New Orleans, about 12 o'clock in the day. I put the skiff in charge of a vessel going across the lake, with instructions to leave it at Mariana's farm--gave the two negroes passes and left them to shift for themselves. I do not know what became of them.
I then engaged on the Maid of Orleans as a fireman and come to St. Louis. Being a little unwell I left the boat, and seeing Madison I went and staid with him three days at Mr. Shaw's. I then engaged on the Agnes as barber and made three trips to Galena. After the first trip, Seward and Madison were hired on her, I fell out with the steward and left her. I then fell in with a girl called Hannah Simonds and I staid with her two or three weeks. Hannah and I went up to Burlington on the Chippewa. I got the situation of cook at the Burlington House, and remained there about two months, keeping Hannah in the town until she left, about two weeks before I did. I then returned to St. Louis and rented a shop from Jeremiah Burrows, on Franklin Avenue and Tenth street. This was in the winter after Christmas. In a short time Seward returned from Pittsburgh and he took boarding at Leah's but slept at my shop.
One day we were coversing together and I mentioned that I had heard of a large robbery committed at Galena. From the way Seward talked of it I began to suspect him, but he would not tell me much. I afterwards learned he was unwilling to open the matter to me, until he consulted with Madison. They two had been in business sometime together, but would not let me know it. I however, found enough to know they had been concerned in the Galena affair, and advised Seward to quit it. He said he would. One Sunday he brought some wearning apparel to the shop, which, though new, looked as if it had been worn, and I accused him of stealing it. He kept me off several days, and finally he proposed telling me all about it, and also what Madison had done, if I would take an oath. I agreed to the proposition and he swore me on the bible, before God and man, by my eternal salvation, and every thing else, that I would keep secret whatever they told me, or whatever should aftewards occur--that I never would accuse them through fear, in jest or for any favor--that I would stick by them until death, and never forsake them whilst I had breath--that I would go with them, and do as they did in all undertakings. This is the substance of the oath, on taking which I kissed the bible.
After taking the oath Seward explained to me the consequences of a violation of it, and something of what he and Madison had done. That evening when he returned from dinner Madison came with him. Madison went and got some liquor, and we talked a good deal and drank considerable. When dark came on we all started down town. I wanted to stop and see Mr. Kerr's black girls whom I knew, but the other two pursuaded me to go down to Leah's, and take supper with them. I went on, but we did not go to Leah's. We went down Main street below the Market, and went into the rear of a small fancy dry goods store. Madison said he was going to see an acquaintance. He had something rolled up in his handkerchief. He jumped over the fence, went up to the window, and with an iron bar he had rolled up, broke off the bar fastening the window--he then shoved up the sash, and come and called to me, I went where he was, and he told me to get through the window--I did not like much to do it, but was afraid to disobey, and was much excited by the liquor. There were in company, Madison,
Seward, myself, and one whose name I will not state. We took out of the drawer about $20 in money, and I suppose about $200 worth of goods, as many as we could all carry. We took them up to my shop, and about daylight Ennis and Madison came and took them away. I do not know what they did with them. I understood Ennis and Leah had the selling of them, and sold them to some store in the lower part of the city. Madison sometime afterwards gave me $6 as part of the proceeds.
About two weeks afterwards Madison was at my shop. We drank pretty freely and he talked a great deal about what he had done. I told him he would get caught and killed. He said it was impossible for them to catch him. A little after dark we started down town and came past the North Market. When opposite Mr. Scott's store, a store just opened in a new building, and they were digging a foundation for another just by it. Madison told us to stop. We stopped in the street, and he went round to the back side of the house. I heard him striking on the window--he got in and lit a candle. I did not like to stand there so I walked on. Madison came after me and told me to come back, that he did not want me to do any thing, but if I staid I should have half. I went back on his agreeing not to take what he stole to my shop. He and I then went in at the window, and took a great many goods, and handed them out to Seward. When I thought we had enough I wanted him to stop and he said no, and wanted me to stay in the store whilst he went and got a horse and cart to take the goods away. This I refused to do. As we were coming out he said he would see what was in the desk; he then forced open the lid of the desk, and I held it up. He took out of a box about $16 in money. There were some notes and papers which I would not agree to disturb. We then carried the goods to Leah's house, and she and Ennis took charge of them. In these things Peter Charleville had but little to do. he knew of them but he was too simple to be trusted far.
Sometime subsequent, Seward, Madison and Brown made an attempt on Sinclair Taylor & Co.'s store, but from some cause failed to get anything. I was not with them.
Ennis and Peter when they told any thing they told it to Madison. I never had any conversation with either of them about the business. From something they said it was agreed to rob E. & A. Tracy's store, on the wharf. Madison, Brown, Seward and myself, went down--Madison forced open one of the back windows and went in and opened the back door. We all then went in leaving the door open, and went up into the counting room. This was between 8 and 9 o'clock. After striking a light we went to work in tearing the iron chest apart. After working some time, a dog came in by the back door and commenced barking. We were all alarmed and ran down. Supposing we had been detected. We stopped at the foot of the stairs, whilst there deliberating, each one afraid to venture forward, I seized the bar out of Brown's hand and rushed forward at the dog, and frightened him out of the house. I then shut the door and returned, they gave me three cheers, and we went back up stairs. In about two hours we got the chest to pieces and the money out. We were detained in our operation by breaking one of bars. There was about 54 dollars in gold, about $122 or 3 in silver and some counterfeit or Mississippi money, in all $254. My courage in running the dog out, gave me the command of the party, and I took the gold. I and Brown had each a bowie knife, and we got into a dispute. Brown was for firing the house and I was against it. At length I jumped on the chest and swore I would cut the guts out of the man who attempted to burn the
house. Madison interfered and persuaded Brown to give up. There was a silver cup in the chest which Brown took. We then found a basket of Champaigne and drank friends over it. When we had drank till we were satisfied we went out by the front door. I pulled the shutters too. We then went up to Leah's. She was in bed but got up. We sent Peter out for candles and liquor, and when he returned we divided the money. Leah and Ennis sitting by the table. Leah in her night clothes. I kept the gold, the silver only was divided. Brown said something about the gold and accused Madison with having it, which he denied. I left them shortly afterwards.
A few nights after this, we all went to Sinclair Taylor & Co's., the second time. When we got there they kept so much noise, I determined to leave. Before they got in it was found that Brown had left his crow bar at my shop, so I proposed to go after it. I went but did not return. About an hour and a half afterwards I heard the alarm of fire.
During this time, Peter and Ennis had suggested to the others to rob Collier & Pettus' counting-house, and represented that the money was always left on the counter; as the house was fire-proof, they were not afraid of any one breaking in. About three weeks before the robbery, I went to the countingroom--I had told the others that Ennis' statement was not true, and I went to satisfy myself. I went in after night, and showed a man who was there a bank bill, and asked him if it was good. Whilst he looked at it, I examined the room, and saw that Ennis was mistaken--I told them of it; Peter and Ennis, however, stuck to it, and said that, especially on Saturday night, they left their money on the counter, which their own negroes put away on Sunday. In this story, they succeeded in convincing the others.
On the Friday night before the burning, the other three went down there, but I was not with them.
On Saturday evening, I left the shop, in company with Seward, and went to my wash-woman's and got a shirt, intending to go to a ball. We then went up to an eating-house, opposite the market, and got supper. After leaving the house. Seward told me the boys intended that night to go into Collier & Pettus'. We walked up to Pine street, and down Pine street. Madison and Brown were standing on the street, nearly opposite Pettus' door. Seward stopped and talked with Brown, and I went on down to the steamboat Missouri. Madison came down after me, and I come back with him on the levee. Here we all got together. Madison swore he would go in that night, or not at all. Seward said we would have to kill Baker, if we went in. To this, Madison replied that there was but one sleeping there--that he would go in, strike him one blow, stun him, gag him, and tie him, but not kill him. After some talk, in which Madison swore he would do all himself, we agreed to it, and all went up the street. Seward and I stood up the street, so we could see into the door.
Madison went in, and left the door a little open, but as he let go of it to strike, it swung to. He struck Baker twice, I think. He then came out, handed me the bar, and told me to go in and strike him. I went in, and saw he was dead, or would die, so I struck the chair twice, and came out and gave the bar to Seward. Seward, at first, was afraid to go in; Madison told him he must go, and then he and Brown went in together. They hauled the body (Baker's) round behind the counter, in front of the vault, and beat it some time. We could hear the blows, and when I saw the body, the face was all mashed up.
Brown then came out and called Madison, and the two went in. Seward came out, and he and I continued watching on the outside. After a while
Madison came out and said there was another man slept there, and we must keep a sharp look-out for him. He went back into the house, and he and Brown searched the drawers and rooms for money and the keys, and tried the vault. After a while, Weaver and another man came along down Main street; they separated at the corner. Weaver came down the street whistling, and passed us where we were standing, by the door on the opposite side. He ran across the street to the door, and knocked. Some little time elapsed before the door was opened. As he stepped in, Brown struck him--the blow fell upon his chin, and knocked him down. He hallooed once in a very feeble voice, and struggled a little. Brown repeated the blows until he was dead. We could hear the blows distinctly.
After Weaver was killed, Madison came out and told us to come in--that there were no more to come. Madison then tried the hinges of the vault door; said it was no use, and shortly after went away, taking with him one of the bars. He and Brown both had bars. He had examined Baker's body, and taken out his watch, but put it back into his pocket again, and it was burnt up with him. Seward took a cloak and threw over Baker's body; it looked very bad, and disturbed him very much.
Brown and I were down on our knees, trying to force off the lower hinge of the door. Seward had gone out, and I think we would have succeeded, but Brown kept swearing so awfully at the dead bodies, especially Baker's, which was just by us, that I got scared, and refused to work any longer. Brown then quit, got up and took Weaver's watch, cloth cloak, and a pair of black pantaloons. He then proposed we should take Weaver's body and lay it in the bed, and set the bed on fire. I objected, and went and got a musquito bar and spread over it. We broke open a box of cigars and took what we wanted. Brown then commenced firing the house; I put fire into the desk in the counting-room, and left the house. Brown fired the bed and wardrobe, and set a cask in the store on fire, also some boxes of cigars. He spread the fire in several places, and then came out, locked the door, and, walked up the alley north from the store, and laid the key down; and we three went up to my shop and staid there the residue of the night.
On Sunday morning, I opened my shop as usual. Brown and Seward, before day, took the cloak, and, filling it with rocks, threw it into the river, near the Dry Dock; Seward also threw his pantaloons away, as they were bloody. During the morning, I shaved, as customary--several of my customers talked of the desperate transactions of the night previous; I, however, kept up as good face as I could. That evening I went to church in the lower end of the city. As I went down, I stopped at Leah's--saw Madison, Brown and Seward there; after a while, Ennis came in. We drank several times, and I left. At church I saw Leah; she was up before the altar giving in her experience.
On Monday, about 10 o'clock, I saw Brown and Seward at Leah's. I went out, and when I came back, Ennis was there; Brown had brought him. Brown had been talking to him, and asked me, in Ennis' presence, if I had not destroyed Weaver's watch--I replied, yes. The way this came was thus: Brown took the watch and left it on a shelf in my shop; I told him about it, and he did not take it away. I then examined it, and found there was no name on it, and concluded I might as well have it as any one else; so I took it, and, to avoid any trouble, I told them I had destroyed it--broke it up. Subsequently, when I was leaving the city, I left the watch and my clothes with a friend, who, however, knew nothing about it, and was very much astonished when I afterwards sent to his house for it.
Madison, in a few days determined to go to New Orleans--Brown and
Seward to the Ohio. Ennis, I understood, was very anxious to get the two last off, but never said any thing to me about leaving. When he had seen Brown off, he came to me and said, "Let them suspect now, and be damned; I have got the boys all off." I talked to him some time, and told him there was no danger, unless we all came in together--we then drank and separated.
Shortly after that, I had the offer of the steward's place on the Omega, and I took it and went up the Missouri as high as Iatan. On our return, Messrs. McDowel and Atchison came on board from the Col. Woods and took me. Soon after they took me, they began questioning me, and repeatedly told me I had better tell, and if I didn't, the people at St. Louis would burn me. I would not tell them any thing, and did not. I stated that all I knew about it was what Madison had told me. Mr. McDowel read the account from the Republican, and I told him it was not true so far as regarded myself. The only thing in which I committed myself was to Mr. Atchison, and I did that when I was mad. He asked me, after asking various questions, if we were all in the store when Weaver came in? and I replied, "Yes, we were all in, and the young man came down whistling." The moment it was out, I thought of it, and regretted it. I told the same story to the grand jury which I had told on the boat.
With my trial and the incidents, I am satisfied. I know that, by the laws of the land I merited the punishment I suffer; but it would be some satisfaction if I could feel that the facts were obtained from me in the manner the world supposes they were. I, however, acquit the witnesses against me of all wrong intention--they doubtless did what their judgments and their consciences approved. To my counsel, Mr. SPALDING, I tender my thanks; he made more out of my case than, from the testimony, I expected.
To my friends and acquaintances I bid a lasting farewell--to my companions and associates, a final adieu! That we may all meet again in that land of rest, "where the wicked cease from troubling, and the weary are at rest," is the dying prayer of one for whom there is no hope this side of the grave. FAREWELL!
I, JAMES W. SEWARD, a free man of color, having been condemned to suffer the highest penalty known to the law--desiring to quit this world in peace with all men and to leave behind me a full record of my carreer through life, make this my full and voluntary confession. My tale is brief and simple, and will probably be found to be marked by fewer crimes of a deep hue than my present condition might induce the reader to expect. But simple as it is, and unvarnished as I shall attempt to give it, I pray the reader, whatever may be his station, to peruse it attentively. It is a tale of the world. A parallel to much of my history may be found in the lives of thousands in every community. It is for these I have given it. I have not given it to gratify the curiosity of the idle or to indulge an appetite for the marvelous.
The time was when things so evanessent would have been to me some gratification, but that is past. I have closed my accounts with the world and all its joys and vanities. In a few brief hours I must stand before the awful tribunal of my God and render to him an account of all the blessings he has bestowed upon me. Alas! how basely I have abused his mercies--how negligent I have been of his precepts and how unmindful I have shown myself of his holy law, my present unhappy condition tells. But I know that my Redeemer lives, and I believe his mercies are unbounded to those who come to him with a penitent and contrite heart. In prayer and deep humiliation of spirit I have sought to prepare for meeting my justly offended God, and ere I enter on that untried state I would, as the only reparation now in my power to make to the violated laws of that God and my country, warn those whom I leave upon the stage of life, of the dangers of vice, and the necessity of forsaking the wickedness of the world.
To me, God has been merciful and bounteous. I have shared liberally in his blessings and his favors, but my heart was depraved, and I disregarded the source from whence those blessings flowed. With indifference and a callous mind I trampled on his laws, and violated with impunity his most holy commandments--I tasted the bitter sweets of the cup of wickedness, I drank again and again--I wandered on, step by step, further and further into the depths of vice, folly and crime--the admonitions of the good were unheeded--the warnings of conscience were drowned in the revels of pleasure--I looked forward to a long life of iniquitous enjoyment--I felt free from detection, and the commission of one crime but led to the commission of another--in the whirl of sensual passions and enjoyments I forgot the early precepts of my parents and rolled sin as a sweet morsel under my tongue--the end of all this is disgrace, death, and the fearful meeting of the judgment of an offended God. Sinner, my fate may be yours. He that is traveling the slippery ways of iniquity, knows not how soon he may fall into the very depths of crime. Take warning, then, ere the hour of mercy is past; turn and seek, whilst the day yet holds out that righteousness which comes from on high, which alone can make your days on this stage of existence happy and honorable, and your life hereafter a glorious immortality.
In giving my history, I must necessarily allude to many of those who have been, by accident or design, associated with the incidents of my life. I pray them not to think I have done so through levity. Standing as I now do, at the portals of eternity, it is no time to trifle; and I would warn those to take heed whilst there is yet time for escape. The immunity which I believed I enjoyed from detection, encouraged me to the commission of other crimes; but I now know, by the bitterest experience, that although the wicked may escape for a time they cannot throw over their dark deeds a veil thick enough to conceal them from the eye of God, nor can they always escape his judgments. Sooner or later, their evil acts will be exposed and punished.
I was born in Whitestown, Oneida county, New York, on the 26th day of June, A. D. 1813. My father, James Seward, formerly resided in Philadelphia and removed to New York state a short time before my birth. He was a farmer and owned property in the vicinity of the town. I however, know nothing personally of him, for he died in the year 1815. My mother, Hannah, had two children by my father, a sister about four years older than myself. After my father's death my mother sold her farm and removed to the town. As soon as I was of sufficient age, I was sent to the common school and continued there until I was 9 years old. During this period, being tolerably quick, I acquired the rudiments of a common English education. I was then sent to the academy and continued there perfecting my previous studies until I was 12 years old.
I possessed a wayward disposition and a very excitable temper, and my mother
being indulgent and not having labor for me, suffered me to do pretty much as I pleased. Except attending school I had no employment, and my idle hours were dissipated with other boys of the town, often in mischief. From indulging in this idleness I early became averse to labor and restive under any restraint. My mother, in fact, had but little control over me, and could only influence me by kindness and persuasion. I loved her dearly, and when she approached me with kindness, I implicitly obeyed her wishes: but I could not be driven to do the most insignificant act.
About this period my mother married a man by the name of Amos Mason, living in Oswego county, a farmer and a man of respectable property. When mother moved to her husband's residence, she intended leaving me with my grandmother at Whitestown. Her husband however conceived a fondness for me and insisted on my going with him, promising to be to me a father. I resisted the change for a time, for I did not like to give up the amusements and idleness of a town life for the labor and seclusion of a residence on a farm. My grandmother determining to remove to the same section, I had no alternative but to go with my step-father. I went and agreed to live with him until I was twenty-one, when he was to set me up in business for myself. I continued to work on his farm during the summer months, and from October to April he sent me to school. In this way I continued until I was sixteen.
My step-father was an educated man, of studious and religious habits. He had a number of valuable books, and also an interest in the town library. Being secluded from my former associations and amusements, with the council and advice of my step father, I soon became passionately fond of reading. I read not only histories, but many philosophical works, and a number of religious works. During this period I established in my own mind a set of religious principles, and from my reading and frequent conversations on the subject with pious and intelligent men, I fortified my belief so well and became so conversant with the subject, that they and I believed I really had true religion. My step-father was indulgent. He had two daughters by my mother but no son, and his feelings seemed to run out to me as warmly as if I had been his own child. He seldom attempted to coerce me by force, but generally reasoned with me. From these combined influences I soon became, from the restless and ruthless boy, a studious, quiet young man. My old temper was greatly subdued, and but seldom broke out in its old violent bursts. I was, nevertheless, very ignorant of the world and practical life.
When I was about 17 years of age I went to Syracuse to keep school.--Soon after my arrival there I learned that my religion was not real, for I soon discovered that the things of the world, which were sinfull, were not abhorent to my feelings. I indulged in vicious propensities, became acquainted with woman and indulged in criminal connexion with them--visited the theatre and did many other evil things, but the only compunctious visitings I experienced was the fear of detection and exposure. I did not dislike the evil because it was of itself wrong. As to drinking, swearing and other fashionable crimes I looked on them as degrading.
I returned home the summer following but still kept up appearances, being unwilling to wound the feelings of my parents. This restraint however soon grew excessively irksome, so much so that at times I could scarcely control my feelings. I at length besought my step-father to suffer me to go to Baldwinsville where my brother-in-law Charles Reed resided, to spend the winter. He consented and I went in the month of October and remained during the winter, visiting my parents sometimes but never for more than a day or two. During the winter, my brother-in-law's opinions of moral duty
did much to shake my faith and undermine my principles. He held to the doctrine, that the world was dishonest and that it was the right of every man to live without labor if he could make a living any other way. That all men practised in their trading and intercourse with each other greater or less fraud, and it was perfectly fair and right. That it was only the weak minded and ignorant who depend on gaining property and wealth by the drudgery of labor. He frequently spoke of my acquirements and the means I possessed by my education to live happily and obtain wealth easier than by manual labor. As he was much older than me, about thirty years of age, it may well be expected that his opinions had much influence. During the winter I employed most of my time in imitating signatures and became so expert that I could, after a few attempts, counterfeit any signature.
During that winter I also learned to play cards and played frequently for money; I studied the games of faro and rolette very thoroughly and was very expert in betting on either. When I visited my mother she frequently questioned me as to my employment, but I always answered evasively and turned her conversation as quickly as possible to something else. I left Baldwinsville in April and I determined to try my fortune. I set out with the intention of living by my ingenuity and wits. I resolved to cheat the world as much as possible, but at the same time as firmly resolved not to commit any henious offence, I intended to support myself in an easy life by what I understood to be fashionable rascality--such as gambling, cheating in trade, &c. I made my first essay before leaving Baldwinsville.
I owed my tailor a bill and several small debts, I had not money enough to meet these, so I forged a note on Mr.-- --, due in ninety days, and deposited it with a broker as colatearl security, promising to lift it before it was due. Upon this I raised $100, out of which I paid the tailor part of his bill and gave my note for the balance at 60 days.
I then went to Oswego, but carefully avoided those I had formerly known; there I hired as a waiter, and after a month went to a boarding house; shortly after this I won $100 at cards, and meeting the tailor from Baldwinsville paid off his note--I then went to Kingston in Canada. I here ventured to counterfeit a note in my own favor on a man residing in the vicinity, for £100, payable at sight after sixty days. I hypothecated the note with a broker and procured on it a loan of £60. As soon as I became in possession of this sum I returned to Baldwinsville and lifted the counterfeit note I had left there. This was in the spring--I spent the months of June and July, in visiting different towns and playing the gentleman according to my conceptions of the character. I returned to Oswego in July and remained there until in August. Then I visited Peterboro' and Chittenango, played cards whenever opportunity offered. In the latter place, I remember well of stripping a barber of $50. Soon after I went to Syracuse to attend the races. Whilst here, fortune played with me as if she had marked me for her victim. She opened by almost a touch, and lavished upon me her rich favors in such a manner that I was completely captivated with her bounty, and made a willing slave to her temptations.
During the races I bet freely and even loosely, yet won on nearly every thing. At rolette I was very successful and soon found myself in possession of upwards of $500 as the products of my winnings. To avoid the detection of the means by which I had raised money in Kingston. I immediately sent money enough to the broker to lift the £100 note I had hypothecated with him, and pay his usurous interest.
I spent a few days sporting and carousing in Geneva and retired to Jordan.
Here I played cards with one Jim Loyd, a barber, and after various success, fortune seemed bent on jilting me and in a little time he broke me, striping me of every cent I had, and every thing I could stake. Maddened by my ill success I made a firm resolution to quit gambling and try working for a living. The plan of raising money by pledging counterfeit notes was too liable to detection, and gave me so much uneasiness in the cases I had attempted, that I resolved not to attempt it again.
I returned to Baldwinsville and hired with Mr.-- --, as a servant.--My duties were menial but light, and I soon became displeased with the idea of living in that character. I thought it degrading and I had already tasted so much of the pleasures of a roving life that I soon began to feel a desire to return to it. I determined to leave him, and would have done so in a short time, but by accident rather more than design on either side, within a few days after entering his employ, I became entangled in an intrigue with a white female of his family. It was a long time before I accomplished my purposes; my feelings of pride became involved in my success and I remained with him in all from two to three months. At length when I had succeeded I became alarmed at what might be the consequences, and the anxieties I then suffered more than counterbalanced any former pleasures. I revolved my former course attentively over in my mind and resolved to abandon it and go to work. In all my course thus far, although I had enjoyed life to the full extent of my desires, yet, I had accumulated nothing and was as destitute as when I set out. I reflected on the consequence of continuing this course, and especially if I should take sick or otherwise be rendered unable to continue the practices I had been pursuing. I then determined, very firmly, to brake off, to learn a trade and follow it for the future. I accordingly left my employer and joined a shoemaker. A few days work in his shop, its dull and monotonous round disatisfied me with the trade and I threw up my engagement.
This was in the month of January, and I determined to spend the winter at school. With this determination I went to Peterboro' and studied book keeping. In the spring I was informed a Mr. Rose in Susquehannah county, Pennsylvania, desired to engage colored hands to work on his farm. Two friends and myself determined to visit him, and if we liked his wages and employment to engage with him. I went more for the amusement than with a view of working. We accordingly took the stage which runs through the Chenango valley and Binghampton, and went down; but like boys who ride down hill on a hand sled, we rode down to walk back. When we arrived there we all engaged for the summer, and returned home to make the necessary arrangements for staying with him. Before leaving I succeeded in inducing Mr. Rose to loan, or rather advance me $30. I travelled on foot with my companions, for I did not wish to let them know how much I had raised out of Mr. Rose.
I returned home, visited my parents, and returned to Peterboro' to go to Rose's as had been agreed upon. On the way I stopped at Chittenango, and tried my hand again at gambling, with some success. In due time we reached Rose's, and I remained there about a month, but did not like the situation.--The labor was not hard, but the country was dull, and I thought the society too low and ignorant. A heavy fall of snow now came on in the month of May, and I left. In my dissipation through the neighborhood I had expended my money, and my time not being up, I was without money. I, however, succeeded in reaching Binghampton, where I procured a loan of $25. On this I went to Owego. Here I joined an old auquaintance in an attempt to beat at play another party. Our opponets got the advantage of us, and soon broke me flat. My friend raised me money enough to pay my passage in the cars up to Ithica.
On my arrival at Ithica, I thought myself in a bad plight. I knew no one--had no money, and no clothes except what I had on, and they were much worn from travelling. I took boarding at a private house. Before the termination of a week I met my friend from Owego, who gave me five dollars to relieve my wants. With this I paid my board, got my clothes repaired and cleaned, and went to the Ithica Hotel to board, with the intention of becoming familiar with the signatures on the register. I knew that on the register men usually write their names more naturally than any where else, and I hoped to make a raise by counterfeiting. I had bespoke a suit of clothes of a tailor, but when they were ready he would not let me have them without his pay. I prevailed on the head waiter at the Hotel to go my security, and I got them. When I had been at the Hotel about two weeks I went with a party to Caskadila Falls. I got into play and won rising fifty dollars, which enabled me to square up a portion of my debts.
I continued to keep up as good an appearance as circumstances would justify. After I had been in Ithica about a month, spending most of my time in riding about, I accidentally fell in with a Miss --, the daughter of Gen. --, one of the oldest and most wealthy and respectable famalies of that section.
The young lady, from some of those unacountable freaks of the human mind, conceived a warm regard for me on our first acquaintance. Being of a warm and ardent temperament--in command of a fortune, not derived from her father, and over which she had a great deal of control, for her guardian suffered her to do with money as she pleased, being quite self-willed, and possessing peculiar notions about colored people, regarding them as an injured and persecuted race, she was not long in opening the way for further intercourse. Of the opportunities she offered I readily availed myself, and with her aid became a frequent visitor to her room. My visits were generally made at a late hour in the evening, after the family had retired. I also frequently met her in the streets, and in retired places, whither she would steal for the purpose. This secret and illicit intercourse we continued throughout the summer, during which time I lived chiefly by her bounty, and received from her a great many small sums of money and numerous presents. She gave me a watch, several rings, and some clothes. Her passions carried away her judgment, until she became resolutely bent on marrying me. To accomplish this, she insisted on my removing to Canada, where she would join me as soon as she was of age to act for herself, and at liberty to take her money and property out of the hands of her guardian. To these suggestions I lent a partial ear, but I could not in my own breast agree to marry her, for I entertained insuperable objections to marrying a white woman. But above all this, I knew she had not fully considered the weight or character of the opposition her friends would interpose to such a union. In fact, I feared their wealth and power, and the prospect of their discovering our intercourse.
When this had been kept up for some time, she was so emboldened by our repeated escapes from detection, that she became imprudent to a degree that alarmed me. She would frequently write to me, and send her letter directly to me by a servant, instead of sending it through the post-office. She would often wait for me until a late hour at the gate. Those and many other indiscreet acts, on her part, convinced me that if our intercourse continued much longer we should be exposed, and I would be subject to the prosecution of her family. I had of late husbanded the money she gave me, and extorted from her all I could; and by the time I was ready to leave, I had, in all, nearly three hundred dollars. I resolved in my own mind to stop all intercourse with her when I left, for I did not wish, after the kindness she had shown me, to do any act
which might involve her future prospects. If her indulgence to me had been criminal, it at least demanded from me no other return than those of kindness, and, so far as I had the power, protection. Vitiated as my feelings in some things were, I had no disposition to injure her. I therefore, finding it impossible to prevail on her to give up the idea of going to Canada, left her under the pretext of visiting my parents, and under a promise to return.
I went from Ithica to Ovid, and remained a week, and from thence went to Geneva, and remained there during the races. I felt, from the time I separated with Miss --, a sense of loneliness and depression. I felt that I was again on the ocean of life--without a companion or a friend. The acts of kindness she had bestowed upon me, the attentions she had manifested to me, her words, her looks, in fact every little incident of our connection recured again and again to my mind, and made me wish to be with her, but my judgment told me not to go. To dissipate this feeling, I plunged into betting on the races, and gambling at faro. My resolution to husband my money forsook me, and it was not long before I lost all and even my watch, which I thought nothing could have tempted me to part with. But when my money was gone I thought to recover it, and staked my watch on an unsuccessful horse.
During the latter part of the races I succeeded in raising a little money, and with that I left for Seneca Falls, where I lost even that. I suffered many compunctions for having so lightly dissipated the gifts of her to whom I owed so much gratitude. From Seneca Falls I went to Auburn, and their hired as a waiter at the hotel. After being in this place about a month, a number of persons came up from Ithica, who, I feared, would communicate to Miss -- my humble situation, and by this she would also learn the prodigal disposition I had made of her favors. I now resolved most solemnly in my own mind to abandon gambling. Accordingly I left Auburn and went to Skanaetales where I hired to a Mr. Erastus Kellogg, a Woollen Manufacturer, for a year.
Mr. Kellogg was frequently absent from home, and soon after I hired to him he discovered my education, and reposed great confidence in me, which I never once violated. I studied his interest in every thing, and being actively employed I was well pleased with my situation. During this time I studied Vetenery, and became tolerably conversant with the diseases of horses and their management, and tolerably skillful in the use of horses. I continued with Mr. Kellogg between seven and eight months, when his brother John, who, with his wife, was about to visit the west, desired that I should accompany them, in the character of driver. I had visited my parents once or twice, and readily consented to the proposition.
We left in July, and travelled through Rochester to Niagara Falls, where we spent some days. Here my old passion for gambling returned. I played and with great success. From thence we went to Buffalo, where we tarried about six days. My situation was novel, and I had much idle time on my hands. I gave loose reins to my passions--visited the Point freely--gambled, and indulged with the females of that quarter without stint.
One night I lost all my money and my watch, my pencil, &c.; a watch I had purchased a few days before starting. I returned home at daylight, and in the stable gambled with a man belonging to it. Whilst playing, a colored man, a slave, belonging to a southern gentleman, challenged me to play. We went at it, and I won his money, watch and a fine overcoat. He was very desperate at his losses, and threatened me. I in turn threatened him with the law, which silenced him. Fearing he might expose me, I slipped the watch and money into the cushions of the carriage, satisfied that unless they found something on me, they could do nothing with me. Before leaving I returned him his coat.
We went to Detroit in a steamboat, and spent some time in that place; during which I lived high for about a month. From Detroit we went west through Anne Arbor and Jacksonburgh to Marshall. I won about sixty dollars of a man in Anne Arbor. We remained a few days at Marshall, when Mr. Kellogg left his wife and went to Allegon, on the Kalamazoo river, about twenty miles from the Lake. In about a week, I returned for Mrs. Kellogg, and her servant, and during my stay in Marshall, won some money from one of the men employed in the tavern. We returned to Allegon, spent some time there, and returned to Detroit. During this latter period I lost all my previous winnings, and was entirely out of money, but had drawn none of my wages.
Mr. Kellogg, sold out his horses and carriage to Mr. Ketchum of Marshall.--I then engaged with Mr. Ketchum, and was sent to Marshall with the horses and carriage. I remained some time in the employ of Mr. Ketchum, travelling with him, at different periods, to Detroit, Allegon, Kalamazoo, and other places.
In the fall I become enamoured with a Miss----, a colored girl, living in Marshall, and determined to marry her. With this view, I determined to adopt several reformations, such as husbanding my money, less extravagance in clothes, and other expenses. For a time I adhered to this resolutioon firmly.
That fall, Mr. Ketchum sent me on horseback to Allegon, with a sum of money, which I delivered safely. I accompanied him to the railroad meeting at Adrian, and from thence to Detroit, and returned with him to Marshall. This trip we brought up in the carriage the money and the property of the Calhoun county Bank. The banking house was being erected. The Cashier boarded with Mr. Ketchum, who was the President, and the filling up of notes, &c., was done at his house. Being scarce of money, and having free access to the room, I procured a few blank sheets of the notes, (ones and fives) and having familiarized myself with their signatures, filled them up and used them. I used in all over one hundred dollars. I might have taken and used much more, but I did not like the business.
In the spring, I accompanied Mr. Ketchum and his wife to Detroit, and returned to Marshall sick with the small pox or varieloid. In the spring, Mr. Kellogg returned from New York, and offered me employment. I left Mr. Ketchum, and went with him. I was induced to this, by the resolution I still entertained of marrying Miss ----. I went to Mr. Kellogg's mills, near Allegon, and remained there during the summer. My employment was light as I generally did what I pleased, turning my hand to whatever I saw necessary to be done. During the time, I frequently assisted in rafting down timber to the mills--this and the exposure brought on an attack of the fever and ague, and I finally concluded to return home to New York.
I set out for home--staid a little while in Marshall and Detroit; but, upon reaching Buffalo I determined to take a regular blow out. I visited the Point one night, played cards, and got quite drunk. During the night, I lost my watch and chain, the same I had previously won in Buffalo, and most of my money. The next day, when I got sober, I went down and saw my guard chain on the neck of one of the white girls. I accused her of stealing it, and attempted to take it. A white man interfered, and I made a blow at him with my knife and cut him severely. I then drew a pistol, and would have shot him, but it was taken from me. Fearing an arrest I left immediately, and, by the first conveyance, went to Niagara, and thence to Lockport. After two days sojourn at the latter place, I continued on through Rochester, Canandagua, Geneva, Skaneatales, and finally home. At Geneva, I lost the last cent of money I had.
I grew tired of home, and returned to Skaneatales, and again hired with Mr.
E. Kellogg. I soon became tired of the monotony of his business, and to make an excuse to get off, I raised a difficulty with Mrs. Kellogg. I then left him, and went to Auburn, and staid there during most of the winter.
In the winter I was initiated into a company of Counterfeiters, at Jordon, and became a member. This company consisted of about 500 persons, many of whom I knew. The establishment was subsequently broken up, and many of the partners removed to other places. A great many came West, and there are several residing in all the principal western cities. Many of those whom I know, are men of business, and some of them, I believe, have abandoned the business entirely--others, I presume, continue it, as I have seen the same kind of paper in circulation here, and have received favors from some of them since I have been in the West. As I was initiated, under oath, I will not mention their names. In the spring they gave me a number of sheets of blank notes on Banks in New York, Vermont, Ohio and Kentucky. In the month of February, 1837, I returned home, and, having procured good notes of the Banks on which I had the blanks, filled them up; I had, in all, $600. I preferred filling them up myself as it saved expense, and I thought I could do it neater and better than the man who usually filled them up. I went to Rochester, and, in gambling and exchanging, succeeded in passing off the most of my counterfeit money. I returned home, after an absence of several weeks, and remained three weeks at home. This was my last visit to my parents, and the last time I ever saw them.
I then returned again to Jordon, and procured a fresh supply of blank notes, about seventeen or eighteen hundred dollars, chiefly on Eastern Banks. As soon as they were filled up, I took the canal and went to Buffalo, and thence to Detroit. At this period, there was great difficulty in the West in getting money which would go in the East. I immediately went out amongst persons whom I knew, generally farmers, &c., who had come from the East, and who were returning, or had money to send East. With these I soon succeeded in exchanging most of my counterfeit money for Michigan and other Western paper. Eastern money was at a premium, but I generally gave mine in small sums, merely as an accommodation. I left Detroit for Buffalo on the Columbus, and before we reached Cleveland, I succeeded in exchanging a large amount of my counterfeit paper. From the amount I passed, I was afraid to remain on the boat until she arrived at Buffalo, for I supposed it probable that there they would find out the deception; I, therefore, left her. Shortly after my arrival at Cleveland, news reached there of the blow-up of the Jordon establishment, and an exposure of the kinds of counterfeits issued. Fearing that I might be detected with what I had remaining, I deposited it with a friend, who knew its character, with instructions to sell what he could of it, and send me a portion of the avails; and if, when I reached Rochester, the suspicion had subsided, I would write him word to send me whatever remained unsold.
I returned to Rochester, and staid there the remainder of the summer. My Michigan and Western money I got discounted at a brokers. The suspicion having subsided, I procured the counterfeit money I had left at Cleveland, and during the summer passed it off in paying board bills and in gambling. I acted, in my exterior conduct, very circumspect, frequently attending church and prayer meetings.
Late in the fall I went to Olean Point and thence to Pittsburg. Returned again by Tioga Point and went up into Gennessee county, and spent most of the winter. I fell into company with a set of counterfeiters and spent some time in learning and making Bogus money, counterfeit gold and silver coins. In the spring I returned to Rochester and opened a writing school for colored
persons. Miss -- --, continued to reside in Rochester and made the place attractive to me. I had intended marrying her that season, but finally concluded that I would first settle myself and get into business and then marry. I had some money, and in April, after my school was out, I went to Buffalo, Cleveland and Detroit. I could not resist the temptation to gamble and at the last place lost, in play with a white man, all I had; I then opened a writing school in Detroit, but soon grew tired of it and went to Cleveland. On my way down, on the boat I gambled with desperation, and succeeded in winning some money. I left my board bill unpaid in Detroit, the first occurrence of the kind in my life. At Cleveland I commenced playing nine pins and was very successful. Upon this I made a raise, I then, in conjunction with a white man purchased a rolette. We were very successful in play and had many customers and in a month or little more I had $900, as my share. My partner desiring to travel through the state I sold out my interest to a young friend.
I then went to Akron in Ohio, and there met with one of the partners in the Jordon Counterfeiting establishment. I remained a short time at Akron making Bogus money, chiefly for myself. I also procured a quantity of blank counterfeit paper, chiefly on banks in Ohio and the Northern Bank of Kentucky. From Akron I went by the canal to Portsmouth, and to Maysville, Ky. From thence I travelled through Cincinnati, Louisville, Frankfort and Lexington and back to the Ohio, I next went to Smithland and up to Nashville[.] At the latter place I succeeded very well in passing my counterfeit gold and silver, particularly with the slaves, as they were unable to detect the difference.
In August I set out for New York. On reaching Buffalo, I diverged from my course and went to Toronto, in Canada. I there met the broker from Kingston with whom I had deposited the £100 note. Something had occurred to induce him to suspect me of wrong in it, and he accused me of it. I feigned not to know him or any thing of the transaction, and I stuck to it with such boldness that he finally concluded he was mistaken in the person. Not knowing how matters might stand on the way, I returned from Toronto to Rochester via Queenston, avoiding the direct rout. In about five weeks I left Rochester and went to Erie, and from thence to Pittsburg.
In November the River rose and I resolved to go to the West Indies by the way of New Orleans. I accordingly took a passage and went down. On arriving I determined to remain some time in New Orleans, and accordingly accepted a situation as waiter at the Planters' House. This was the first time I had been employed with slaves, and it was not long before a hostility sprung up between them and me. They succeeded in getting the steward on their side. A difficulty occurred about some money which had been stolen from a guest. I was accused but there were no circumstances to justify it; but the Steward entering into it, succeeded in having me thrown into jail, on the suspicion of being a run-away slave. I had my papers with me, but they were informal in some respects, and I was compelled to send to New York to have them corrected. I found great difficulty in getting either the means of writing or of sending letters, after I had written I believe, and have seen nothing to change my belief, that my letters were purposely withheld by those who had me in custody; for after the elapse of a given term they would have had me sold to pay jail fees, when doubtless they expected to make a profit out of me. I prevailed on the keeper to put me in the chain gang, and whilst working on the street, fell in with persons who knew me and took the necessary steps to procure the evidence of my freedom. The servants at the Hotel or some one else took all my clothes and money, and when I was turned out in
March, having been confined three months, I had neither a cent of money or a stitch of clothes, except what I had worn in prison, which it may readily be supposed were not very decent. I however, fell in with a white man who had known me in the North, and who gave me such clothes as rendered me decent.
Whilst I was in jail I became acquainted with Warrick. He was there a the slave of Mr. Gordon, who was so involved that he dare not take him out for fear of his being sold by his creditors.
I engaged as a cabin boy on a boat bound to Oauchita and left her on her return. I next took a birth on the Vandalia for St. Louis and Quincy. The steward and I disagreed, and I was dismissed on the return of the boat from Quincy to St. Louis. To have an opportunity of vexing the Steward I shipped on the same boat as fireman and returned to New Orleans. There I left the boat, spent about two weeks in the French part of the city and went to Cincinnati and Pittsburg.
At the latter place, in June, I shipped as second cook on the Agnes, bound to St. Louis, Galena and Du Buque. On our return to St. Louis after the second trip to Du Buque, Madison shipped on board the same boat, as a cabin boy. This was my first introduction to him. We made two trips to Galena and Prairie Du Chein and returned and took in freight for St. Peters. During this time, Madison had not intimated to me any disposition to engage in robberies or any thing of the kind. He had proposed that we should go into partnership in the purchase of fruits, oysters, segars, &c, in New Orleans, and ship them to St. Louis and sell them. By purchasing from smugglers and by saving the freights, which we could, by shipping as steward, cook or cabin boy, and by investing the proceeds in fresh butter, eggs, &c., we could soon realize a handsome sum. The scheme seemed so reasonable, that I assented to it, and he was to return to New Orleans that winter to make the necessary arrangements to commence. He informed me thas he was a slave, but had the control of his time, besides he always was flush of money.
On the way up to St. Peters, Madison and another on our boat made an arrangement to rob a store in Galena of which I knew nothing. On the second night after our arrival at Galena, we all left the boat together, and went to a house where there were several persons playing cards. We staid until about 10 o'clock, during which time I drank so freely as to become intoxicated. When we came out I heard Madison ask his companion if it was best to take me with them; and supposing they were going to a house of ill fame, I insisted on going. When we got in front of Mr. Campbell's store, Madison turned directly in front of me and said that he and his companion were going into that store; that there was a large sum of money in it, and if I would stand in the street, and if any one came along give them warning by throwing a stone against the house, I should have a share of the proceeds. They went in, Madison first--I leaned up against a pile of lead but I was so much intoxicated that I could have done but little in giving alarm, for I was scarcely conscious of the passing events.--They were gone a very few minutes, when they returned. We went up the hill to a back street, and round by another rout to the boat. We then went into the store room of the boat locked the doors and divided the money, $1260, about 1200 of which was in paper and the residue in silver. There was $500 on the Galliopolis Bank, and the residue on various banks. Madison took $650, his friend and myself each $300, and ten dollars in specie was divided between us. In Madison's there was nearly $400 of the Galliopolis money.
The next morning there was great excitement, and the boat and all hands were searched. I had my money on my person but they did not find it after
two searches. I felt very uncomfortable and uneasy about it. I had never been engaged in any thing of the kind before. Madison came to me and talked to me about my appearance, told me my looks were enough to condemn me. On our return from St. Peters, the boat was again searched but nothing found. On the way down I gave Madison my money to keep. When we reached St. Louis, I left the boat intending to return to Pittsburg. This was in the fall. Madison left in the night and went out into the city, taking my money with him, I spent nearly three days unsuccessfully looking after him. I thought his intention was to cheat me out of the money. Finally I left word that I would leave the city at a certain hour, on the Loyal Hannah. Just as the boat was ready to push off Madison came on board and handed me the money rolled up. I had no time to open it, but when I examined it I found he had slipped on me $190 Galliopolis money, and had taken $80. I was not well pleased at this trick, and resolved most firmly to cut his acquaintance for the future.
I went to Pittsburgh and spent about three weeks, a great deal of the time on the Hill. During this time, I familiarised myself with the signatures of the Cashier and President of the Galliopolis Bank. I returned to Cincinnati, and, from a man whom I knew in the North, procured a number of sheets of blank notes; whether they were impressions from the real plate or a counterfeit plate, I never could learn, but I could not discover the slightest difference between the engraving on these and the genuine notes. I went to Louisville, and staid there six weeks, during which time I filled up and passed a good portion of this money. I then went to New Orleans, and spent Christmas there--bought a lot of fruit, and returned to Cincinnati and sold it, and returned to Louisville. Two young men and myself bought a rolette, but we were without money to start on, and I determined to come to St. Louis. I expected I could borrow some of Madison, or at least obtain from him the eighty dollars he had kept. I took the Pilot, and come round; I found Madison, and he readily acknowledged that he had kept the eighty dollars, and promised to pay it so soon as he could get the money, which he represented as loaned out. I, therefore, concluded to remain a few days to wait for Madison to raise the money; and accordingly took boarding at Leah's, but slept and spent most of my time with Warrick, at his shop. In a few days, the river closed, and I had no alternative but to remain.
At the end of about ten days, Madison confessed that he had been deceiving me--that he had spent his money, and was unable to pay until he could make a raise. He remarked that he knew where there was money, and proposed that I should join him in stealing it. At first, I promptly rejected the proposal; but when I came to consider my own situation, a stranger in a strange city, and without means, I thought more favorable of it, and partially concluded to go with him. The Galena affair still continued uppermost in my mind, and paralyzed my efforts to raise money by any of the methods to which I had resorted in former days. I certainly did not like this way of raising money. To do it by counterfeiting or gambling, or cheating, I did not regard as so degrading, or as involving the same degree of guilt.
Madison said he knew where there was $5,000, and which could be easily obtained; and after several conversations about it I agreed to help him. On the evening agreed upon, we went to the store of Braun & Hollander, on Main street, and when the gentleman of the store went out to supper by the front door, Madison went in through the back door. I went in next. We barricaded the front door so as to prevent his returning on us suddenly. Previous to this, Madison or Ennis had procured at a blacksmith shop, a bar
for opening chests or drawers. When in, we found we could do nothing with the iron chest; it was one of the smoothe kind without nails or knobs, which could not be opened with a bar. We searched the drawers and desks, but could find nothing of the key. Pocketing what money there was in the drawers, and taking some clothes and a box of segars, we left. We went to Madison's house and divided the spoils, Ennis I think got the clothes. The next morning, being anxious to know whom Messrs. Braun & Hollander suspected, I went to the store and bought some tobacco and segars, and made excuses to remain in the house a sufficient time to be satisfied that they were not much excited about it and did not suspect us.
About this time Madison gave me a history of his exploits in New Orleans. We were much together and apparently intimate. Warrick suspected us of being engaged in something of the kind and insisted on knowing, and complained of my want of confidence in him, and accused me of being concerned in the Galena affair. I counselled with Madison as to the propriety of informing him. Madison thought it best, and accordingly one day, after I had made him swear not to divulge, I told him what we had done. Shortly after this, Madison, Warrick, myself and one other, robbed a small fancy dry goods store on Main street nearly opposite Braun and Hollander's. Madison and Warrick went in--I staid on the watch. They got a little money and a considerable amount of goods. What they did with the goods I do not know, for I cared but little about that part; the money was all I went in for. Ennis and Peter had the goods. Ennis generally knew of our plans and consulted with us frequently, but seldom went along.
In a short time after this, we agreed to rob the store of Mr. Scott, on Third street below the North Market. On the night appointed, we all went down, Madison and Warrick went in by the back window: I staid out. They got but little money, but nearly stripped the store of goods--particularly dry goods--such as silks, cloths, &c. I took some clothing; the residue Madison disposed of. About this time I became much disheartened and disgusted with this business and resolved to abandon it; but I had contracted debts and could see no way to get off, unless I could make a raise. One of my old associates gave me a lot of counterfeit paper, but I had not the courage, at least not the confidence in myself requisite to pass it successfully. Madison saw my distress, and finally proposed that as soon as the Missouri opened, Peter and I should take a parcel of goods up the river and sell them. He had a large amount of goods in Ennis' hands. It was understood that as soon as I returned, if we succeeded, we were to commence our former plan of buying fruits, &c. at New Orleans for the St. Louis market. I spoke to Peter about the trip up the Missouri, and he professed to know so much of the country that I entertained no doubt of our success.
Two days after this, Charles Brown came on from Cincinnati. He and Madison had been associates in crime in New Orleans, and consequently he was at once admitted to our confidence and a share of our plots. He was the worst man of our party, for he was willing to go further than any of us, not hesitating to kill if necessary, and urging in every case as the best means of concealment, the burning of buildings. He gave fresh vigor to our irresolute purposes, as he urged us to go on. When alone with Madison he had considerable influence over him and could reason him into his purposes.
Madison said that Peter had informed him of a large sum of money in Messrs. E. & A. Tracy's store, on Water street. He had gone in on a former occasion, but had not succeeded in getting any thing. It was arranged to go
the second time. Upon the appointed night, we went to the back window, shortly after dark--Madison opened it, and we went into the counting-room. We searched for the key of the iron safe, but could not find it. We then laid the safe down, and Madison went to work to pull it to pieces, with as much skill as if he had made it--the rest of us assisting him. In an hour or less, we had it apart, and the money out. There was about two hundred and fifty-four dollars in gold and silver, and some Mississippi money, not embraced in the above sum. We found a silver cup in one of the drawers of a desk. Took a basket of champaigne and drank over our work, and left. We went to Leah's and divided the money, but upon making the division, the gold and cup was gone. Every one denied all knowledge of them, and it was supposed they had been left. Madison proposed going back for them, but Brown and Warrick said it was no use. The next day, when the notice of the robbery came out, it was stated that the gold and cup were taken, and we knew that Brown or Warrick had them. Subsequently we ascertained that Warrick had the gold and Brown the cup. In the division of the money, Madison got all but $90, which was equally divided between us three. Ennis got a portion from Madison.
Madison began to complain of his ill luck--said he never before had been so unsuccessful in his life; and to my suggestions to quit, he always replied that he wanted to make one good haul and then quit entirely. He insisted that eventually he would light on some place where we would be repaid for the risk. Warrick had lived at Burlington, I. T., and professed to know of a store there in which there was a large sum of money, which he proposed we should go and rob. Brown seconded Warrick, and I at first refused positively, but finally agreed to go if Madison went; and at length, to get Madison along, we agreed to pay his passage up. It was our purpose to go up on the Agnes, but the Captain refused to take Brown and Madison from St. Louis--they, therefore, crossed over the river, and went up to Alton. Warrick was to go with them, but played them the slip, and did not go. At Alton, they got on board the Agnes. I was disappointed in the Agnes, and went up on the Rosalie.--We met at Warsaw, and, as Warrick had disappointed us, we determined to continue on to Galena and try the Bank.
We spent several days in Galena, ascertaining how the land lay, finding out how many persons slept in the bank, &c. At length we were satisfied that at least three persons slept there, and Madison and myself were for abandoning it, but Brown insisted upon going on, saying that if we succeeded we would get enough to last us. A dispute arose about how it should be done. Brown was for killing the men and burning the bank. Madison thought that too bad, and refused to assent to it. It was agreed at length, that we would go on Sunday night on Brown's plan. On Saturday night it was very dark and stormy. I saw Madison and we agreed to go that night and open the doors and if they wakened we could escape. About 1 o'clock, we went, Madison raised the window and I held it up whilst he went in; he then lit a candle and opened the doors, and we went in. The drawers had all been taken out into another room, and that room was locked and fastened on the inside. We went out with the intention of entering the other room by one of the windows, but by this time it had become so late that we concluded we could not carry the money away if we got into the vault. Madison and Brown returned into the Bank and fired it. On our way down to our boarding house we battered down with a stick of wood the door of a jeweller's shop. We had each a crowbar: Brown threw his away.
There was great excitement in the town the next day, but there was no
suspicion on us. In observing the amount of business done, we concluded that Mr. Stillman must have some money. We observed his arrangements for a night or so, and when the clerk went to supper, Madison went in by a back window, opened his drawers and safe, but got no money. Finding the prospect so dull we left for St Louis, on the Illinois.
On our return Ennis urged us to go to Alton, but we declined it. He and Peter had previously urged the robbing of Messrs Collier & Pettus' counting room, and Madison became decidedly in favor of it. Whilst this was under discussion we resolved to try Sinclair Taylor. One evening when on the levee watching the movements of the clerk of Mr. Taylor, we saw him go out and immediately resolved to go in, and did so. We found the key of the safe and opened it; there was in it a few dollars in good money and lots of bad money. In the division I got $15 and a double barrelled pistol and five shirts. Madison and I came out together and started home, leaving Brown in. Before he came out he fired the house.
The proposition to rob Mr. Pettus' counting-room was now pressed more strongly than ever. The first proposition was to ascertain when the young man went to supper, to force off the window shutter, and do the whole whilst he was gone. With this view I went several times to the store my-self, and watched him several nights. I communicated to the others my observations, and to satisfy themselves, they also watched him several nights. Finally it was ascertained where he boarded, and how long he was absent. He spent most of his evenings in the counting-room, and the time he staid at supper was not sufficient to open the window and commit the robbery.--Brown then proposed secreting ourselves in the store and when he came in to kill him and get the keys--open the vault, and then set fire to the house. This I opposed, as also did Madison, except when Brown got him separated from the rest of us. At length Madison gave in, and then Warrick agreed to Brown's plan. Ennis pressed this plan, and insisted that he knew that but one man staid in the store, and that he kept the keys.
Brown's plan was talked over on Thursday evening, prior to the fatal Saturday, but nothing agreed upon. We were then on the foot of Pine street. We met the next night again on the levee. Madison then swore he would do it that week or not at all. Warrick was very anxious to go right ahead with it, whilst Brown thought it best to defer it. Warrick became so enraged at Brown that he threatened to cut him. Finally he swore he would go in himself, and did go in with a bill which Brown gave him. He came out in a little while and told us how matters stood inside, and how easy it might be done, but we concluded not to do it that night.
On Saturday evening I went with Warrick from his shop down to the lower end of town, and came up and met Madison on the Missouri and Brown on the levee. We went on board the Missouri, and came on the levee again. Here another dispute arose between Brown and Warrick. Warrick was for doing it instantly and Brown thought we had better know more about it, and proposed leaving it off until Sunday night. At length Madison asked Warrick if he would back him if he would go in and do it.--Warrick replied that he would, and Madison started off. We all came up the north side of the street together. When opposite the door, Madison crossed over and went in--I could not see what he did but heard the blow. In a little while he came out and gave his bar to Warrick, and told him to go in and strike him. Warrick went in. Madison seemed very much agitated when he came out, and when Warrick came out he desired me go in.
I hesitated, and Warrick commenced upbraiding me as a coward. Brown started towards the door, and said to me, "let us go in," and I followed him. When I went in, Baker was lying on his back, on the floor, a few steps from the door, bleeding profusely. Brown took him by the shoulders, and I took hold of one leg, and we pulled him behind the counter. The sight of him, for he was yet in the last struggles of death, made me sick, and I went out. After I came out, I heard Brown striking several times. After I had been out some little time, they desired me to go in and help Brown look for the money. I went in. Brown told me to stand by the door--he was behind the counter looking for the keys. Whilst I stood there, a breath of wind escaping from Baker's chest, made a gurgling noise; Brown called to me, and said "strike the d--d son of a b--h." I took up the candle and went and looked at him. The top of his head was mashed off, and the face all cut. I observed that it was no use, that he was dead, and I took down a coat hanging on the wall, and spread it over kim. In a few seconds the same noise was repeated. Brown said "if you don't strike him, I'll strike you!" I then struck the body twice, about the bowels, over the coat. This sight made me sick, and I told Brown I would stay no longer--that he might call in Madison. We went to the door, and he called Madison, and I went out. About this time, the sound escaped again from Baker's body. Brown again struck him several blows on the head.
Madison and Brown continued in some time. During this time I went down to Water street, and up two squares, intending to go home to Warrick's shop, for I was very much agitated and disturbed. When I got up some distance I discovered that I had not the key or my pass, and I returned back for them. When I came back, Warrick was standing in the coal cellar of the house on the opposite side of the street. I asked him for my pass and the key, and he went down to the wharf, to ascertain by the light of the boat, which was mine. He returned, saying he could not make out which was mine. About this time Madison came to the door and said there was another man slept in the house and it would be necessary to kill him. I objected to this and said I would go home. I walked down to Water street and about several places, but for some reason could not muster courage to go away. I was perfectly bewildered, and seemed spell-bound to the place. As I was coming up Pine street, on the north side, I heard two men coming down Main street, talking--I jumped into the alley.--They separated at the corner, and one of them came down past where I was standing, and crossed over. He rapped at the door, and waited a second or two--looked in at the key-hole, and then rapped again. The door was then opened, and he stepped in. The door opened wide, and Mr. Weaver made one or two steps in, when he stopped and turned his head once or twice, apparently in astonishment, as the door swung to, and at the same moment Brown struck him. I did not see the blow--the door had shut.--He made a little noise, and I heard several blows.
Madison came out and told me to go and watch in front of the store. I went down on Water street, and staid some time. When I returned, Warrick was gone. I waited some time at the corner of the Alley nutil he and Brown came out. Brown locked the door and carried the key up into the alley and we left and went to Warrick's shop. Brown had Weaver's watch and cloak and some money he found in the drawers. Madison found some money on Baker's person which he took. He subsequently loaned me a small part of it.
The next morning I cleaned my clothes, I had a spot of blood or two on my pantaloons and on the wrist of my shirt from the bar. That evening after dinner we all and Ennis met at Peter Charleville's. Peter and Leah had gone to church. We conversed some time about it and drank several times together. The next day we spent most of the forenoon at Charleville's. Ennis was with us and was in fine spirits. On Tuesday, Brown and Madison concluded to go to Cincinnati, and went on board the Goddess of Liberty. Ennis went down with them and told them not to fear any thing; if any thing occurred he would write and let them know. The Goddess did not leave that day, Madison changed his purpose, and resolved to go down to New Orleans on the Missouri. Ennis urged me to go, saying that by staying I might be suspected, and if I went away and any thing occurred he would inform me by letter in time to get out of the way. I preferred being on the ground and hearing for myself what suspicions were afloat, but finally concluded to go to Cincinnati. Warrick was to go along but could not get ready. I left on Thursday on the Atalanta and went to Cincinnati where I met Brown. I remained there five days. Very much troubled and perplexed as to my proper course, I could not decide in my own mind whether it was better for me to quit the country altogether or to return to the East and resume my old business. After much perplexity and doubt I determined to go to New Orleans, and accordingly took my passage on the Atalanta. At Cairo I was met by Mr. Gordon and taken.
He placed me in the custody of a man, who represented that he was the head of the St. Louis police. This man urged me to confess and represented that the excitement was so great, that unless I did confess, and he and Mr. Gordon interposed in my behalf, I would be burnt when I got to St. Louis. He told me my only chance of protection was to entrust him and Mr. Gordon. After repeated assurances that he was an officer and what I told him would do me no injury, I told him something. When Mr. Gordon came, I asked him if this man had told him what I said. I then asked him if he was an officer, and he replied, "yes," but his reply was made in such a way that I began to suspect the man had deceived me. I asked Mr. Gordon what the state of feeling in St. Louis was; he represented the excitement as very great and assured me, that my only chance of reaching the jail with life would depend on his protection and management. He advised me to confess, and as I understood him, assured me repeatedly, that if I did confess, I should have all the benefits the law allowed me. I thought of his remarks some time after we were on the boat, and feeling sure, that I would be burned or destroyed on reaching St. Louis, unless I made a confession, I did confess to him most of the transaction. At the time did so, I thought however, that, as he was an officer, he could not be a witness against me, and so understood him to say, when I asked him, if what I should tell him could be so used.
I blame myself for suffering under the deception as to the effect of my confessions, but know that my sentence is just and my doom merited. The only return I make my council, Mr. Gamble, is to give him my dying thanks. He did not believe me guiltless, but he did all for me that could or ought to have been done.
To my friends and acquaintances to my former associates, to those who have known me under other auspices, I bid a long farewell. I am not afraid to die, I know that I have offended my God, times and ways without number, but I trust, that by the purification of the blood of my Redeemer, I shall yet be admitted to a seat on his right hand. My dying prayer shall be, that I shall meet their those whom I have washed also in the blood of that Lamb, that taketh away the sins of the world. FAREWELL.
I know that my career in life is nearly run--that in a few more hours I must stand in the presence of my God, to render up an account of my stewardship. The sentence of the law has been passed upon me, and I know there is no power on earth that will interpose to save me from the doom under which I labor. I go to meet my God. Before I enter the bar of that tribunal, before whom all must stand, I, in compliance with what I esteem a duty to my fellow-men, make this, my solemn confession of the acts of my life. My name will go down to the grave coupled with crime and disgrace. I must die the felon's death. I must meet my God as a murderer; but I know that his mercies are large and free, and I hope to appear at his bar with a conscience purified by conviction and repentance, and washed in the blood of that Lamb of God which taketh away the sins of the world.
To myself, a confession of my course of life can do no good. I must soon be beyond the power of this world's injuries and the reach of its pleasures. I have nothing to expect for myself on this side of eternity; but I leave many friends--many associates, companions, and relatives--and, hardest of all, I separate from a dear wife and child. These are yet in the land of mercy, and to them I would speak in the warning voice of one from the dead, conjuring them to prepare to meet their God, for the swift-winged messengers of God's vengeance come at such an hour as no man knoweth, and in the midst of life we may be nearest to death. That I have sinned often and repeatedly against God and my fellow-men, my present unhappy condition too plainly tells. To attempt to justify these transgressions--if it were possible to justify them--would now be unavailing; but I pray the reader to mark that I have been lured on from violation to violation of law, not so much by the love of wickedness as from a conviction that I was fulfilling God's pleasure, and doing my fellow-men, especially my colored brethren, a service. I acted from a conviction of right, and from a warm and enthusiastic desire to avenge the wrongs of my people. In my zeal for their emancipation, I forgot that the violation of law, in one case, only begets the desire and steels the heart to further and more aggravated violations. That crime is progressive, and that he who steps into its way, though to do what he believes a good act, knows not where his career may end--like myself, his end may be shame, sorrow and disgrace.
These reflections have come to me too late to save myself; but I pray those who have known me--those who have shared with me in perils, and rejoiced with me in my triumphs, to pause and consider well the matter. Mark well my words! He who violates the laws of his God or his country, in small things, will, sooner or later, steel his feelings, and so drown the admonitions of his conscience, that the slightest temptations or his own necessitie may lead him, in an unguarded moment, to the commission of the worst of crimes; and, like me, in the spring-time of life, he may stand before his fellow-men a degraded outcast from the smallest sympathies. In the honesty of a heart, now borne down and broken by sorrow and guilt, I pray God that you may think well of these things whilst the lamp of life holds out to burn.
I was born in South Carolina, about the 18th or 20th of August, in the year 1814 or '15, about fifteen miles from Jacksonborough. My father, James Brown, was a free man of color. He owned a small farm, on which my mother, Hannah, (also free) resided with her family, consisting of six daughters
and four sons. My father was chiefly employed and spent most of his time as overseer for a widow lady, Mrs. McKanse, who had a large farm about three miles from Jacksonborough. My early life was spent chiefly in idleness. At one time, my father sent me to school in Jacksonborough, to a Mrs. Goodlin, but not liking the restraint, I ran away in a short time. From that period until I was about sixteen years old, I spent my time with various persons, and at various places. It would be uninteresting to run through a history of my early life, as it contains nothing more than may be found in the history of any boy's life. However, that I may be identified by those with whom I once resided, it may be well to state, that during my minority, I resided, at various times, with the following persons, and at the following places: At Sumpterville, with Mr. Murry; at Chitow; at Wiltown, with a man named Price; at Horse Shoe, with a Mr. Rump. I also resided several summers in Charleston city, and lived with Mr. Price, on King street, and with Mr. White, on Meeting street.
When I was between sixteen and seventeen years of age, I went to New Orleans as a servant for Mr. James McDonald. Shortly after my arrival, I hired at the Bishop Hotel, and remained there one season as a pastry cook. In the summer, I went to Cincinnati. Before leaving Charleston, I had heard and studied considerably about the abolition of slavery and the freedom of slaves, and had imbibed a strong passion to engage in the cause. I knew one or two abolitionists in Charleston, and had frequently conversed with them on the subject, but was considered too young then to engage in the business, and too inexperienced to be trusted. At Cincinnati, I became acquainted with several white men, members of the abolition society, and my desire to help the people of my own color to their freedom was greatly stimulated by their zeal and the warmth they manifested in the cause. I had frequently heard of the Oberlin College, and, with a view to prepare myself to be more efficient in the cause, I determined to go to school at that institution. I went, and entered as a student, and remained in all about two months. During this time, I acquired most of the limited education I have. I can read tolerably, and write a little. The citizens around this institution, as well as the professors and students in it, are abolitionists; and the amelioration of the condition of the slaves was a theme of frequent conversation. My feelings became more thoroughly enlisted, so much so that I became a complete enthusiast.
During the time I was at Oberlin a Convention of the Anti-Slavery Society of Ohio was held there. There was a large attendance at the convention. I conversed freely with many of the delegates and informed them that my residence was in New Orleans. After a full and free interchange of sentiments and views, I agreed to embark in the cause and assist in carrying out their schemes as also to incorporate myself as a member of the society. I have continued in the employ of the society up to the present time.
The Ohio State Anti-Slavery Society is very extensive and as I have always understood embraces the societies in Indiana and Illinois. They and the town or county societies in the state are called auxilliary societies.--There are auxilliary societies in nearly every town of any note on the Ohio River above and including Shawneetown, and in most of the principal towns in the interior. The largest portion of the members are those who believe the objects and purposes of the society right, and are willing to contribute money to aid in the relief of slaves. These aid in preparing public sentiment for the adoption of laws for the emancipation of the slaves, but are seldom engaged in the active duties of running off or secreting them. I believe the whole number now enrolled in the Ohio State Society is about 18,000
male and female members. The female members however are the most numerous.
Every auxilliary society has a President, Secretary, Treasurer and other active officers and members, to whom the secret operations of the society alone are entrusted. The agents are employed by the State society. They have employed in the State of Virginia, South Carolinas, Kentucky and the South and South-western states about one hundred and fifty agents. Some of them however are under pay from the Boston and other eastern Antislavery societies. These agents are either stationary or travelling as circumstances may require. In most of the principal cities and at many other points they have a number of members who aid the agents in their operations but are not under pay. The officers generally, except the agents receive no pay. The officers of the auxilliary or principal societies supply the agents with blank certificates of freedom, purporting to be from some county remote from the field of his operations. The officers have several county Seals, counterfeits, which are used in making out the certificates of freedom, and the certificate usually is signed in the real name of the clerk of the county from which the certificates profess to be issued. Generally the names of counties far in the interior of Ohio or some other state are used. I remember that some of the blanks I have used purported to come from Banward, Mercer and some from another small county. The certificates from Ohio are usually written, and the impression of the seal is something stamped on the paper and sometimes a wafer is used. I have used blanks furnished from Boston and Baltimore, these were mostly printed and the seal was impressed on the paper alone. Whenever the authenticity of these certificates is disputed, by writing to any of the officers having the impression of the county seal of the proper county, they will forward what purports to be a copy of the record and a certificate, that it is truly recorded in such a county, book and page. Of course the certificates and copy of the records are counterfeits but they usually pass as genuine unless the master can trace his slave up regularly to his birth. The falsity of these papers is sometimes detected in the slave states, but they seldom succeed in finding who furnished them or from whence they came.
There is an entire reciprocity and a constant correspondence kept up between the Ohio State Anti-slavery Society and the Anti-slavery society of Boston, New York and other eastern towns. The agent of any society may send a slave to the care of any other and he will be received and treated in the same manner as if he was sent to the society to which the Agent belongs. Every agent knows the active members of all the societies and when and how to direct the runaway slave where to go and to whom to apply for assistance when he arrives at the place of destination.
The agents are paid various sums, from 20 to $50 per month by the society which sends them out, according to their zeal and success and the danger and risk they encounter. Then their pay and provision for enabling poor runaway slaves to get off is made in this manner: there is a small contribution levied on every member of the society. This goes into the Treasury. It is the duty of the Agent to prevail on slaves to runaway from their masters, and when he finds one willing to go he is at liberty to advise him to steal and take with him any of his master's money or property which he can obtain the possession of. This is not regarded as stealing in a criminal sense, for the servant, who is regarded as free by the law of nature, having assisted the master in accumulating the money or property has as much right by nature
to a portion of it as the master himself, consequently, when he takes either he is only taking that which the assisted to make. It is only taking the result of his own labor. It is not often that slaves leave their masters without money. They mostly get some, and frequently as high as $12 or 1500. No definite or specific sum is demanded from the slave as a compensation for getting him away. If he is willing to go, the agent must give him free papers and help him off whether he has money or not. The slave will be sent to any place he may desire but if he has no particular place where he wishes to go, the agent may send him to any town where there is a society. He is directed, when he arrives at the town to go directly to a certain place in it and enquire for certain persons, generally blacks; to these he communicates the fact that he is a runaway slave and they inform the officers of the society, when a meeting is held and arrangements made for sending him off or secreting him. If he has no money a draft is made on the Treasury for a sufficient sum to defray expenses. When the runaway has money it is usually suggested to him that he ought to pay into the Treasury something as a compensation for the assistance in obtaining his own freedom and something to help off those unable to help themselves. The amount is left to himself, but usually, as his gratitude is greatly excited, he will give liberally. A runaway having a $1,000 usually gives the society from 3 to $500. Besides this, he will give the agent, who helps him off, something. This the Agent has the right to keep over and above the pay he draws from the society.
Every member of the society knows that slaves are induced to run away, but very few know who is the agent that induced or helped them off. When a runaway arrives at a place, a great many members may know that there is a runaway in town, but generally it is kept as quiet as possible. The sending him away, or secreting him, is usually entrusted to only two or three, and generally no one but themselves know where he has been sent to. If the slave has no place he can secrete himself, in the interior of the states, he is usually sent directly to Canada, where he is beyond his master's power to take him. As I before restated, there are societies, in nearly every town, from Shawneetown up, on the Ohio; but I suppose the strongest societies are at Evansville, Mount Vernon, Madison, Cincinnati, Portsmouth, Steubenville and Pittsburgh. The societies in Cincinnati, Steubenville and Pittsburgh do more than any of the others, and do much in taking off slaves from their owners when travelling with them through the country. They are usually sent through by the direct stage route; but if the pursuit is hot, or the liability to capture very great, they are sent through by a more retired route. In the latter case, they are sent from one society to another, so that they may always have friends about them to defend them, or rescue them if taken. When they arrive at Detroit, Cleveland, or Buffalo, the society there passes them over into Canada.
There are in St. Louis, and throughout the state of Missouri, a number of Abolitionists. Some of them are members of societies in the East, and some of them are members of the Ohio society. There is also one or two agents usually in or about St. Louis. I, however, am unaware of any regularly organized society in the state at this time. There was at one time, somewhere on the upper Mississippi, I think in Marion, an organized society. They sent away, in a short time, several slaves; but I have not heard any thing of their operations for a long time. When I first heard of them their affairs were in a flourishing condition, but some of the principal men
left the country, and I understood the society had declined afterwards. I think they have made no report for some time.
Their are some members residing in St. Louis, who are very efficient. I have had several occasions to consult with them, and at the time of my arrest I was to return here and help off with a man slave and his wife, and some others who were under a partial agreement to go. The Agents in St. Louis and Mobile receive larger pay than any others, as it is believed they would be burned if detected.
Delegates from the various societies meet once a year. Their conventions are held at Oberlin or Columbus, and sometimes they have them under the guise of a camp meeting. The agents are required to keep a record of those they help off, and report to the society their names, and all the particulars of their escape. All the reports are brought into the general convention, but are exhibited to any but those who may be entrusted with the secrets.
This is a brief outline of the society; imperfect because I have no papers by which to refresh my memory.
There are also many slaves induced to run off and helped away from the south, by white men, not members of any anti-slavery society. These do it not from a disposition to help the slave but to make a profit out of them. In these cases the slave mostly has some money, the most of which his white friend gets as a compensation for aiding his escape.
At the convention at Oberlin, before mentioned, after joining the society, I engaged to act as agent in helping slaves run away from their masters. When I first engaged I was to receive thirty dollars per month, but in a short time I proved myself so efficient, and got off so many, that my wages were raised to fifty dollars per month. My plan of operations was this: I determined to spend the fall, winter and spring months in Orleans, and the south, and the summer in Cincinnati.
Having supplied myself with blank free papers, I returned to New Orleans. My first attempt was on a bed-room servant, named Warrick, belonging to Mr. Bishop, and employed in the Hotel. I supplied him with a certificate of freedom, and secured him a passage on the Ben Sherrod to the mouth of the Cumberland. From thence he went on a St. Louis boat to Cincinnati, and was sent by stage to Canada.
I cannot pretend to remember all I have sent away. I have a list of them and a statement of the time and manner of their leaving, at my residence in Cincinnati. I have taken and assisted away from New Orleans and the surrounding country, I think about eighty; and from Vicksburgh and the neighborhood about sixteen. Besides these I supplied a great many with certificates and advised them how to get off, but in most of the cases I never knew whether they succeeded in getting away or not. In several cases I know that persons whom I have sent, and others whom I had advised, were apprehended and brought back. The following are all the cases I can now state with sufficient distinctness:
I sent away a boy by the name of Palmer--I cannot recollect his owner's name, but think it was Fornier, a Frenchman. He was engaged in digging the upper basin. I supplied him with papers, and secured him a birth on a boat for Madison, Ia., from whence he was sent to Canada.
I sent off a man named Odeal--he belonged to Mr. Baveny, living on the battle-ground, about five miles from Orleans. He went to Pittsburgh. I secured him a passage on the old Philadelphia.
I afterwards sent another on the Gen. Brown, named Azrell, a carpenter, also belonging to Mr. Baveny. He stopped at Portsmouth, and took the canal.
A man named Abraham, belonging to Madame Wilton, about 60 miles above Orleans, on the left hand side as you ascend, heard of me and sent me word that he wanted to get off. I sent for him to come down--he did so, but he had no money. The white abolitionists of New Orleans raised him a small sum, and I sent him away on the steamboat Orleans.
I sent away, on the Rocky Mountain, a man named Benner. He belonged to a Frenchman, whose name I do not remember. The boy staid at the Water-works, at the old Baisin.
I sent on the Henry Clay a mulatto man named John Smith. He belonged to Mr. Bushell who lived on the Battle Ground, not very far from Mr. Baveny.
I put a boy named Henry, belonging to a Mr. Smith of New Orleans, on board the Sultana. The Captain interrogated me very closely about the boy before he would take him. Finally, he consented to take him.
On one occasion I made arrangements to get away a man named Lewis, his wife and their three children, belonging to a man named Warner, living back of the French Exchange on Royal street. I supplied them with papers, but they not being able to leave when I did, I directed them how to proceed. When Lewis was ready he took his passage on the A. M. Phillips, a white man helping him get it. At Baton Rouge they were arrested and thrown into prison. I was at Vicksburgh and immediately wrote to a lawyer in New Orleans who procured the necessary affidavits and process and got them out before they were advertised, and sent them on to Cincinnati.
I sent away on the brig Mary of Boston, a boy named James, belonging to a Mr. Adams living on Burgoin street. I sent him to a friend in Boston, with instructions to get him into business there. He was supplied with Boston free papers, and the Captain of the brig did not know that he was a slave.
I sent away a boy named Guss, a bricklayer and a very intelligent boy. He belonged to a bricklayer whose name I don't remember. I sent him on the Augusta. His wife had been previously sent to some part of Delaware. Guss went to Pittsburgh and Philadelphia, and to where his wife was.
On one occasion when going up to Cincinnati in the Rocky Mountain, I took with me a man named John, belonging to the widow Bruce, residing on Canal street. At another time I took his wife up in the Diana; I have forgotten the person to whom she belonged: and at another time I took her sister away.
I had been absent at Cincinnati, and when I returned a colored man came to me and informed me that a Dutchman (his name I can't pronounce) who owned his wife Polly, was about to remove to Texas and carry her there. I furnished Polly and another girl named Mary with free papers, and a negro man called London, sometimes London Moss, who belonged to a black man named David Drake, residing about a square below St. Mary's Market. I took the three on board the steamboat Gen. Harrison and left for Cincinnati. On the way up, the boy London appeared so much dejected and borne down with the idea of running away that I began to fear he would expose me. He had not over half sense. One night, about 20 miles below the mouth of the Ohio, about 3 o'clock he had been talking about the dangers,
&c. of running away, and seemed to regret it so much that I determined to get rid of him. He was standing near the guard of the boat, I believe in the act of drawing up water, when I gave him a little shove and he went into the river. I never saw him afterwards. I believe he went under the wheel and arose no more.
I took a mulatto woman named Frances belonging to a milliner living on Canal street. Mr. McMasters, the broker, boarded with her. Some time previous her husband, who belonged to Mr. McMasters, had run away from his master in New York city and gone to Canada. He wrote back to some of his acquaintances to send him his wife Frances, and they applied to me to aid her. I supplied her with free papers and took her on board the Chester and accompanied her as far as Vicksburgh. I instructed her to come to St. Louis to the charge of a white man who would send her round to me at Cincinnati. Instead of obeying my directions and coming to Cincinnati, she remained in St. Louis and I subsequently had to come after her.
I gave free papers to a boy named Frederick and his wife. The boy staid, I believe, in the cotton press, and belonged, as I understood, to Mr. Ferret, the present Mayor of New Orleans. Frederick took with him a little daughter of his by another woman whom he had kept. The little girl had a sore ankle. I took them down to the levee in a carriage and put them on board the steamboat Vienna. I directed Frederick that as the boat was slow, if she did not reach Evansville in seven days, to stop there; but if she got up in that time he might continue on to Louisville. The boat did not reach Evansville in the seven days, but he was so anxious to go on that he disobeyed my instructions and went on to Louisville. A boat which left after the Vienna reached Louisville before her. The police were on the look out and they were taken up and sent back.
I gave papers and directions to a boy named Brooks who belonged as I understood to the Water Works. I don't know whether he got away or not.
I sent away a mulatto man on the Wm. L. Robeson, called Missell. He was a prisoner in the Calaboose, but they allowed him to go about in the streets.
I sent away a man named John Baptiste; he hired his own time. I never knew his master's name. I sent him on the Farmer.
I sent away on the Warren a man named Brown. He belonged to a man living on Canal street whose name I cannot recollect.
I took away a girl named Amelia. Her mistress was in France. I do not remember the man's name who had the custody of her.
The slaves generally understood my business and whenever any of their acquaintances wished to run away they sent them to me. In general I escaped not only from detection but from suspicion. In one instance a colored man was courting a young woman belonging to a Mr. Ross. They both wanted to go to Canada. I advised them not to marry until they got away, but they resolved to get married. After they were married I supplied the woman with free papers. The husband became jealous and one night when I was staying at Mr. Ross' Kitchen he informed on me and brought Mr. Ross with a company of Police to catch me; I however succeeded in getting off from them.
During this I was hired a part of the time at different places in N. Orleans I staid a while with Mrs. Ousterd on Canal street, right hand side going down, at the French Exchange on Chartres street, and at the Richeson Hotel, portions of the time as pastry cook and at other times as bedroom
servant. I also spent some time at the Pinkard Hotel in Vicksburg. A large share of the time I spent on the river trading. I purchased a great many stolen articles from slaves which I carried on the river and sold out as opportunity offered.
During the time I was at Vicksburg I took or sent off the following slaves.
A man named Joshua, a preacher, he belonged to a man named Fox, who lived on the hill. I took him off with me on the Ambassador.
I carried away on the Tuscarora a man named Henry, belonging to Dr. Pucket, a one eyed man, living on Main street.
I sent away on the Wm. L. Robison to Memphis, a man named Scipie. He belonged to on Irish man who kept a cotton yard on a back street opposite the Washington Hotel. From Memphis he went on the Warden Pope to Louisville.
I took away a man named John M'Dowel, sometimes called Harris, he belonged I believe to a firm of Harris & M'Dowel. The latter lives on the hill in a very large brick house.
I took on board of the William French, a woman and her child belonging to a young man residing opposite Vicksburg, and connected with the Ferry. I had not given her her free papers. Her master was on board and detected her.
The laws and police in Vicksburg was very rigid and I could not succeed well there. I however gave a great many free papers and instructions how to proceed and left them to take their own time to get away. When I last left New Orleans, I had a list of about 60 whom I had promised to get off this spring or summer. I had determined to quit the business, for the risk of detection was every year increasing. I would have quit about a year ago, but the officers of the society would not agree to it.
About a year ago a Miss.----, of Washington City, a yellow girl came with her brother to Evansville. She remained in Evansville with an uncle to go to school and her brother went to Oberlin. I became acquainted with her and wanted to marry her but her brother opposed it; he is also an agent for the company and a preacher. After he left Evansville I prevailed on Miss----, to visit Cincinnati and Reading to see some acquaintances; at Reading I married her. She knew the risks of the business, I was engaged in and repeatedly urged me to quit it, which I promised to do. When I first went to Cincinnati, I joined the Methodist church and have continued a punctual and regular member whenever in Cincinnati, but made no profession of relegion when out of the city. During my whole life I never indulged in the use of liquor at all, and never was intoxicated.
I have not indulged much in stealing or robbing for I had business enough without it. My principal business when not employed as a waiter, was to purchase articles from slaves and sell them on the river. During my stays in New Orleans and Vicksburg, I committed a few small thefts, of which I remember the following.
On one occasion I overtook a well dressed man in the street, leaving the St. Charles, he was drunk and had his gold watch in his hand. I laid my hand on his shoulder and walked with him some distance. He gave it to me to look at, and I walked off and left him. The name engraved on it I think was Moss. I afterwards sold it to a white man on Charter street.
I went to a Scotchman who had just returned from Mexico with some money, goods, &c. He wanted lodgings, I took him to a place for lodging and had his things taken to another; I repented afterwards of the deed, and sent a man to show him where most of his things were.
On various occasions I took several articles, such as pistols, knives, beads,
&c., from Mr. Striker, hardware merchant living in a four story house on the levee. He had some blacks who staid in the store and with whom I frequently went in, sometimes they took articles and I bought them.
I also obtained a great many articles of dry goods from the store of Messrs. Auguste & Bordoir on Chartres Street. I went in whenever I pleased, with the boys who staid about the store.
On several occasions I stole some small articles, such as pencils, penknives &c., out of the store of Mr. Johns; he kept a piano and music store about six doors further up Chartres street. I remember once of taking five cards of silver pencils from him.
On one occasion I went up the coast about 60 miles on business of the society. I went up on the Brilliant and when ready to return. I took of Mr. Vassel living nearly opposite the French College, a good horse, bridle and a new Spanish saddle. I rode the horse down in a single day. He was nearly given out when I arrived opposite the city. I gave him into the hands of a boy at a stable to take care of him, and took the saddle with me into the city, and afterwards sold it. I understood the owner afterwards got his horse.
I bought at different times large amounts of silver spoons and jewelry from slaves and others. They were stolen articles and when not marked were easily disposed of at a large profit on the river. When spoons were marked I had them run up into bars.
I had frequently heard of Madison, before I became acquainted with him, as a man of extraordinary talents and great daring. The boys about Orleans both loved and feared him. I first saw him on the Tuskarora steamboat, where he was pointed out to me. I, however, did not succeed in making his acquaintance until in January, a year ago. After our acquaintance, Madison said he wanted to make a big raise and quit the business. I proposed to him to go out of the United States and he partially agreed to, if he could make as large a raise as he wished. Madison had a plan to rob Mr. Barker's brokers office opposite Bishop's Hotel. We watched it several nights before we attempted it. I believed he every night deposited his money in banks as he took out a tin box. One Sunday night Madison, myself and a negro named Nay or Nose, I think he was a slave, I did not know him, neither did I know to whom he belonged--we went in by an alley to the back window. Madison broke the window open, went in and unbarred the door and we all went in. With a crow bar Madison broke open the iron chest. We got $1500 in silver and a gold guard chain probably worth $60. The loose silver we put into a bucket and set three bags on top of it; that Madison carried away. I took the chain and a japaned tin box; there were two cups fitted into the box, these contained a large amount of small change. We went to a house which Madison had on Esplanade street. We bought some Champaign and other liquor on the way. At the house we devided the money. I counted it and got rather the largest share as I cheated the others in the count. The negro Nay got quite drunk, we however gave him about $300. I took my share away in a market basket. Madison took his in the bucket and Nay his in a cloth. Madison kept the guard chain, and I understood from him that he afterwards gave it to Nay. We left Madison's house about daylight.
Last fall when I was in Vicksburg a slave named John, I do not know his master's name, but he worked mostly about the stores, proposed robbing a jeweller's store kept by a Dutchman, on Main Street. The store had folding doors and the Dutchman would get drunk and go out and not bolt the stationary door, consequently the lock did no good. We watched him four or five
nights and finally we found the doors in this condition and went in; we got 14 silver watches and two small gold watches, and a gold watch case. I gave the negro two or three of them, the residue I sold.
There was a slave in Vicksburg named Jim Perry, he belonged last I think to Mr. Diggs. I once tried to run him off but he did not follow my advice and was retaken and brought back. He stole a fine watch from some young man whose room he attended and gave it to me as a compensation for my services
On one occasion I met in Vicksburg a black man whose name I don't know. He was rather simple and had a very fine gold watch, which I supposed he had stolen. One night I stole his watch and threw him down into a deep gully or ravine.
The foregoing are the leading events of my life prior to my coming to St. Louis. During this time I had accumulated some money and property in Cincinnati. Of all my crimes I never committed one there, for I thought it necessary to keep up my character there and I always contemplated a time when I would retire and live with my family in peace and security.
When I returned to Cincinuati last fall I found that Frances, the milliners slave before mentioned, had not come on as I had directed, I came round to St. Louis after her. When I arrived here I found that a free man named Lawson had courted and married her. Feeling bound to her first husband to send her on, I, after considerable delay broke off her engagement to Lawson and sent her to Cincinnati and from there she was sent to her husband in Canada.
On arriving I staid at Warrick's shop, but eat at Leah's. The boys had a project on foot to rob Messrs. E. & A. Tracy's store on Water street, and two or three nights after my arrival, I went to help them. We went in the back way. Madison and I broke open the window; when Madison went in and opened the door and we all entered. There was Madison, Seward, Warrick and myself. We opened the drawers and found no money; I found a silver cup. We then laid down the iron chest took it apart and got some silver, I suppose upwards of $200. We went down to Leah's and devided the money. Seward, Warrick and myself received $30 a piece. I kept the cup and Warrick stole the gold.
When I left Cincinnati, I intended to go to New Orleans, but about this time Warrick spoke of a large amount of money in Burlington, and we concluded to go there. He represented that there was a bank there which was untrue. Upon the day agreed upon to start, Seward got drunk, and could not go, and Warrick gave us the slip--I suppose afraid to go, after having lied so about the bank. We were to go up on the Agnes, but the captain would not take Madison from St. Louis; so he and I crossed over and went up to Alton, and there got on board. Seward came up on the Rosalie. We all got together at Warsaw. At Burlington we saw no chance, and concluded to go on to Galena. The boat could not go up Fever river--we were landed on an Island and walked up. We watched the bank officers a number of nights, to ascertain when they went out, how many slept in the house, and where they slept. At length we satisfied ourselves that there were three that slept in the house. Our first plan was for Madison to go into what we thought to be the Cashier's room up stairs and kill him and get the keys, but we could not find the means to get into the room, so we concluded to go in at one of the lower windows. The night we went was dark and very stormy, the wind blew loud and hard. There was a preacher up stairs at the time
walking about. Madison on the second attempt opened the window and went in, lit a candle and examined the room. He then sent Seward who was outside to tell me he could find no money, that the drawers had all been taken out & carried into another room, & the door was fast on the inside. Madison then opened the door and I went in. He was for carrying out the iron chest, but on turning it over I found it had nothing but papers in it. We then thought of going into the other room by a window on the outside, but when we came out it was too late. We returned and set fire to the desks, a champaign basket on the stairs and some old papers &c. and left.
On our way, down Madison ran his head against a Jewellers door, but could not burst it open. He then took up a stick of wood and broke it open. We all ran off and in a few minutes the alarm of fire was given. I went and worked a while at the fire and then went to the boarding house.
A night or two following, we attempted to rob Mr. Stillman's store. Madison went in by the window but came out in a few minutes, not getting more than about $15. We left Galena on the Ione, but the Captain made us eat in the social hall and we would not stand that, we accordingly left the boat at Bellevieu and the next evening took our passage down on the Illinois.
Shortly after our return we resolved to rob Sinclair Taylor's. One windy night we went there. Madison broke open the window with a big rock.--Whilst the rest were looking for the keys I went into the back store, when I came back they had the chest open. We got but little good money and considerable bad. I broke open a trunk and found two gold pieces. We took some clothing and other things and put fire in the wardrobe and desk, and left.
Ennis who was frequently with us urged us to go to Alton but we refused. We talked of robbing Braun & Hollander on Main Street and watched their store several nights, but could not get in. Madison had been in before but did not get much. During this time and previous, Ennis and Peter Charleville had urged trying the counting room of Collier & Pettus. Peter said the vault was down stairs and they never carried the silver down but left it on the counter. It was agreed to try it; and at first we thought to go in through the window when the young man, Mr. Baker, went to supper. We watched him a number of evenings. Seward first watched but his information was not satisfactory and Madison and I went and watched two or three nights. One night we followed him to his boarding house and staid until he returned. During this time we discovered that there were two men slept in the store. One night whilst we were watching they came to the east end of the house and both looked out of the windows some time. They were generally in and the doors locked before ten o'clock.
On Thursday night we were to go in certainly, and by this time we had concluded there was no alternative but to kill Mr. Baker. Some of them urged that we should go in and, if necessary, every man kill his man. I did not like that proposition and opposed it. During the evening, Warrick went in and showed Baker a bill and asked if it was good. Baker replied to him, he thought not, but if he would come in the morning he could tell him more correctly. We continued to discuss the subject until the door was locked and then we went home.
On Friday night the Missouri came up and it was said that Mr. Collier had brought up a large amount of money. We went that night on the levee and consulted about the matter a long while. I opposed going in that night
for I thought Friday an unlucky day. Whilst consulting the door was locked. As we went home, we went by Col. Brant's whose house we had frequently spoke of robbing, and which Madison had before examined, I understood with Col. Brant's carriage driver. There was a carriage before the door and we did not attempt it. We probably would have tried it but were so confident of making a big haul at Mr. Collier's.
Saturday evening before dark, we all, with Ennis, met at Leah's and talked the matter over. It was well understood, that to get in we must kill Baker and probably Weaver, if he was there or came before we accomplished our purpose. We parted to meet at the store of Mr. Collier's. Warrick and Seward went to Warrick's shop, Madison and I remained sometime and then went down. We had been at the store sometime when Warrick and Seward came[.] We saw Baker go and return from supper. When he returned we waited a while to see who else might go in. In about half an hour a man came down and went in. He remained with Baker probably half an hour and came out and went away. During this interval we were walking round watching the door and discussing how we should go in. Madison went into the alley by Collier's store and set a barrel or box up by the door which opens on the alley and looked in through the sash over the door. Madison and Warrick were several times upon the barrel. When the person who had gone in came out and Baker was by himself, Madison looked into the room again and said that Baker was sitting down writing.
My object in delaying them was to make it as late as possible before we went in. At length Madison swore that if it was not accomplished that night he would have nothing more to do with it. Soon after Madison went in with his crow bar in one hand, and a bill in the other. I could not hear the blow he gave Baker, but I heard the body fall upon the floor. I was standing at the time in the alley by Collier's house. Madison then came out and Warrick went in and struck him two or three times. When he came out he gave the bar to Seward, but he hesitated about going in. Madison then said to Seward and me, go in and pull the body round behind the counter. We went in and did so. We spread newspapers down on the floor where the blood had run, for there was a great quantity on the floor. I struck Baker two or three times. Seward then went out, and Madison came in. We searched the drawers and desks for the keys. In the desks we got a little money. We then went into the other rooms, and finally concluded to try the vault. Madison and I worked sometime at the door, trying to force the shutter off the hinge; during which Madison broke his bar. At length Madison quit and swore it was no use to try, as we could not get in. I then punched a hole into the bricks by the side of the door.
Whilst we were thus engaged we heard Weaver coming. I told Madison to go and kill him. Madison swore that he would not, that he had killed his share and that he would kill no more. I took the bar and went to the door, unlocked it and let Weaver in. When he stepped in a step or two, he suddenly stopped and looked round the room in apparent astonishment. He evidently saw something unusual. I had placed the candle on the desk at which Baker had been writing, which was to the right as you enter and nearly up against the north wall, Madison had blown out the other candle and was standing by the vault door. As Weaver turned his head to look at the table, I struck him, holding the crow bar in both hands. The blow was given with all my force and fell on the side of the head and neck. He fell uttering a low and faint groan and struggled a little, but I repeated the blows so quick that it was not long before he was entirely dead.
We then all went out to take air, and whilst out the watch, as we supposed, came along up Main Street.--We scattered and run down to the levee, and hid behind piles of lead and planks on the bank. When they had passed, Madison, Warrick and myself went in again. We tried the vault a second time, but with no better success. At length Madison said it must be nearly day, and he would work no more--he would go home, for we could not get into the vault any how. To show him how late it was I took out Weaver's watch--it was not yet eleven o'clock. He, however would not stay. When he left, Warrick and I continued to try to force the vault, but finding it impossible to open it, we set fire to the building and left. I came out last and locked the door and threw the key into the alley. We went up to Warrick's shop and staid there during the night.
The next day I met at Leah's house all the boys, and we conversed some time about it. We met at the same place again on Monday. Ennis was in good spirits, and tried to cheer up the others, assuring them that there was no danger of suspicion falling on them. I went over a great portion of the town and listened to the conversations which were had at different places about it.
On Tuesday I determined to return to Cincinnati, and accordingly took my passage on the Goddess of Liberty. Madison was going with me, but the captain objected to taking him, as he was not free. He then left the boat and determined to go to Orleans on the Missouri. I reached Cincinnati, and remained there several days, during which I watched very closely the accounts in the papers from St. Louis. At length Peter Charleville and two white men came on. I heard of their arrival shortly after the boat landed, and I felt sure of their purpose. Several of my friends both white and black, also heard that they were after me, and determined to get Peter out, and, if necessary to kill him. With that view they hunted for him until a late hour of the night, but could not find him. Their purpose was to get him down into what is called the Bottom, below Cincinnati, to play cards, and to make him drunk, when I intended to shoot him. I went to my house, which is up in the back part of the city close by the Wesleyan Chapel, and loaded my pistols and guns, as I expected they would attempt to take me during the night. I slept none during the night, and whenever the dogs barked or any other noise occured I got up and looked out. I now resolved to go to Orleans, where I thought I would be more safe from apprehension than if I was in Canada; and if they pursued me there, I intended taking a ship for Liverpool. My wife was expecting daily to be confined, and would not hear of my going away. She knew nothing of my situation, and supposed I was going to Orleans on my ordinary business. During the night I slipped into a carpet bag my papers and such things as I wanted to take with me, and at daylight, whilst my wife was saying her prayers at the foot of the bed, I slipped out. I carried my carpet bag down to Mr. Benson's, on the wharf, and left it there, and took a turn on the wharf to meet Peter. I had disguised myself in such a manner that I thought he would not know me. I, however, did not meet him. As I was returning up Sixth street, near Main, I saw Peter coming up Main, and a white man and one of the Cincinnati constables with him. I saw that he recognized me, for he crossed over to the side next to me. I, however, watched for an opportunity and slipped into a little alley. I then went down into Broadway, and down again to the landing. I then went down to the Bottom, but there were none of the boys there. I then returned and determined to send my carpet bag on board the mail boat, and when she was leaving to slip on board and thus reach Louisville. Going up Columbia street, I again saw Peter and the white man coming down. I slipped into a salt yard and remained there until they passed. Peter had, in his first recognition of me, observed my dress. To aid in my disguise I took off my coat and tied it up in a pocket handkerchief. This and my umbrella I had in my hand. I met a man at a corner--he stopped me and enquired if I lived here and how long. I saw by the change in his face that I was detected. After a few remarks, he told me to put on my coat and go with him to the mayor. This I refused--he attempted to lay hold of me, and I endeavored to strike him in the eyes with my umbrella. I struck him and knocked him down--he sprang up, and drew his pistol and threatened to shoot me. If I could have found a rock then I would have killed him. A grocery keeper on the opposite side of the street, and some others, ran out and told him he must let me alone--if he had any thing against me he must get a writ before he could take me. The white man got a Spanish looking man who was passing with a basket, to watch me, whilst he ran off I supposed for a writ. I walked off slowly, intending to go to the Bottom; but the scuffle had collected a crowd of boys round, and they followed me up.--Before I had gone far the other constables came round in front and arrested me. I was taken before the Mayor and committed for a further hearing the next day. When before the mayor the second day I could easily have effected my escepe, for I saw from two to three hundred persons in the crowd ready to raise a mob and help me off; but it was understood that I was to be sent back to prison for a further trial the next day, and my friends determined to release me that night from the jail. In a little while after I was in jail, a carriage drove up and I was put on board a boat before my friends knew it. At Louisville I was lodged in jail one night. There were several in the jail whom I knew, and if I had remained a night longer, would have helped me away.
With my trial and its incidents I am fully satisfied. My counsel, Mr. Darby, has my thanks for his exertions in my behalf. I have bid farewell to life and all its hopes and joys. I go to meet my doom in another world. In leaving this, which I have so deeply injured, I have but one request to make. My wife, I understand, was confined three days after I left her, and delivered of a daughter child. I commit her and my offsping to the mercies of the world. I trust I leave her a competency to live upon; but what I would ask of community is, that they shall not impute to her and her child, the offences of the husband and father[.] Let not the brand of infamy or the finger of scorn be pointed at them. They have in no wise offended; and if I had listened to a loving wife's council I would now be free from crime. God grant that we may all meet in that world where there is no more trouble nor death. Adieu!

From The ARCHIVES 7/24/2012: This is an old post from the very early days of when I started! I use it for reference of what I was doing right and more so WRONG, but also as motivation to see how far I have come. I will try to add in updates as I go over these, but I hope you might get something out of them!
WOW!! That is the first thing I can say about the Super Spartan!
If you came here for the official results you can click here
Out of 3500 people I came in 556 click here to see I was pretty proud of myself!
Ken came in 493 click here to see.
Craig came in 758 click here to see.
Bill came in 849 click here to see.
Also have some pics of all of us at the bottom!
Below I am going to try and write out my whole experience of the race. I will try to answer some questions I had going in and talking about obstacles etc… I might get a bit all over and I am sorry if I do, but the race was long and I forget a lot of it.
What a great day! I was still a bit nervous on Friday since I was still a bit sore from my deck of cards workout on Tuesday, but Friday night I had a decent sleep and woke up at 6AM feeling pretty good!
My buddy Ken came up Friday night so we could get a jump start on the day and get up to Mountain Creek for the 9AM heat.
Race Day Nutrition for Spartan Race
- We both had pretty much the same meal. Cooked up a few eggs, some oatmeal with real blueberries, some green tea with a bit of honey some vitamins and we were heading out the door! We also planned on eating a banana and a cliff bar about an hour before the race when we got up there which we did. I had also planned on taking C4 pre workout drink that I had gotten a sample of at GNC a few weeks earlier. I had taken some during training and figured I could use all the help I could get. My plan was to take it at about 8:50 ish so it would kick in about 30-40 minutes into the race which it did and was very welcomed.
Eating during the race? Gels? GU Packs? Water Stations?
- I had never done a race like this and had no clue how my body would react during it. We decided to pack some GU gels. We each had 1 pinned to our shorts. We ended up taking them at the second water station which was at the 3.5 mile mark I believe. Would have known, but Kens’ $250 Garmin Forerunner 310XT GPS watch was gone! Ugh! Somebody was a but upset We think it came off at the second obstacle where my other buddy Mike broke his ankle! Yeah it was starting off great!! I’ll talk more about that when I get the obstacles section. So we had our Gels took them and continued on. Let me just say I wish I had more!!
The first water station had water and brownie bars or something that we did not grab. The second station where we took our GU gels just had water. The third water station had water and some gritty Gatorade which was good. I wish I had one more GU pack, but I did not. After the 3rd series of wall obstacles I could feel my stomach getting HUNGRY!! Then out of nowhere and the rope net climb, some dude was like “anyone want a GU pack I have like 5 extra!” I grabbed one so fast and chowed down. It was some chocolate pudding and was the greatest thing I have ever tasted lol. It def helped me get through the rest of the race! After the race you are welcome to help yourself to all the sponsored goodies and a banana which I pretty much took all in then felt like I was going to yack 5 minutes later! Anyways back to the race. That was just a Hodge podge of how nutrition went for the day.
Spartan Race Gear
- While training for the race I was constantly searching for information about what to wear race day, what shoes to wear in a Spartan race etc… I think I was prepared fairly well, but next time I know I will make a few changes.
Sneakers for Spartan Race
- I had trained in New Balance trainers the whole time, even ran about 10 miles total in them while training. I was planning on just racing in them since they were old and I knew they would get ruined, but I decided to buy a pair of running shoes. I chose to buy a pair of Nike Air Pegasus + 28 while I was down in Delaware on vacation. These sneakers felt like I was walking on clouds and the grip they had was phenomenal! I slowly decided to wear these to the race and I am glad I did. With all the hills and rocky terrain I would have been slipping and sliding all over with my New Balance trainers. I can only recall a few times when I slipped up and I saw many people slipping up during the race. They also drained well in the water and I never felt weighed down by them or that they were soaking wet. They also cleaned up nice… tossed them in the washer machine with the rest of my gear. Who says you will ruin your shoes
Socks for Spartan Race
- I wore Nike Dri Fit Running socks. They make a few styles, basketball are a bit thick so make sure you get the running ones. They actually have a left and a right sock and are really comfortable. They wick away water etc… so they never got soaked. I can say I had no issues with my feet at all! During the trail running I had about 3 little ankle turns, but nothing serious, just quick little turns that were fine.
Shorts for Spartan Race
- I grabbed a pair of New Balance running shorts with the built in undies. Very nice They seemed to do the job just fine and seemed to dry up just fine after getting out of the water. I had pinned a GU Gel pack to the pockets. Yes these had pockets; most running shorts I saw did not. Of course after I wash them I find the tiny little inside flap I could have stuck the GU packet in. Next time
Shirt for Spartan Race
- I wore your typical under armor T Shirt that I have had for about 5 years. It was great and dried fast. Had a few pulls from the barb wire in the end, but cleaned up fairly nice with a nice tint of brown to it lol.
Watch for Spartan Race
- While I was getting my running shorts at Sports Authority they had a nice G Shock Iron-man Triathlon watch for about $39 which help up real nice. Couple scratches on the front thanks to the barbed wire crawl in the rocks, but it held up well for sure. I highly recommend you use a watch at one of these races. Mentally it was good to have so I could look at the time and how long I had been racing. There were moments where I had to take a break and it was easy to just look at the watch for a 10-20 second count rather than relying on me and my tired brain counting it out.
Other than that I had a change of clothes in the car and a plastic bag for all the muddy gear I was going to bring home. Oh yeah don’t forget another pair of shoes like I did. Had to drive home barefoot
The Start of the Super Spartan!
Waiting at the starting line was pretty intense since you had to sit there and wait and stare up at this huge mountain that you were about to climb up first thing! Ugh hills duh. Glad I had done those few mile sessions in on the stairs The race kicks off and we start running up the hill. Oh hey there is a copper head sneak!! WTH lol. Well… most people did a light run as long as they could, then like most of the race it turned into a hike up and down the hills which was killer on the legs. In fact when you hit level ground or ground with a slight grade it felt so easy to run on. Like I said the race was long so I am going to try and go through the obstacles in the order I can remember. I really don’t know how long each hill was or the trail running etc… and I hope The Spartan Race might post the actual course on the site so we shall see.
Anyways here is the best I can recollect of the race course. If you have any notes to add please add them in the comments below. Seems like every time I go over it I remember some other obstacle! Lol
Tri State Super Spartan 2012 Obstacles
“Warning – Some obstacles I am just making up names ”
Over Under Through
- This was the first obstacle which was pretty easy, over a wall, under the wall with some netting, then through a wall with a hole in it. I remember it was easy, but my first jump over the wall I put my foot on the top and it slid to the side, but luckily I caught myself. Could have easily pulled my groin, so the next one I made sure to just hop over since they were not that high. All these little things you learn as you do them. Ken still had his GPS and said that was a the 1 mile mark. Ugh 1 mile up a hill for the first section of the race!
Swimming Under Canoes & Onto a Floating Dock
- This is where things went a bit south. Basically you had to swim like 20-ish feet, go under a canoe then swim under another canoe then climb up a floating dock and jump off onto the shore line. It was not that hard and it felt good to get wet and cool off. Unfortunately this is where my buddy Mike jumped off and busted his ankle. It was shallow on the other side of the docked and he jumped off to hard. Not sure if he landed on a rock under water or what, but all I know is he screamed that he heard a pop. So… we were watching him wondering if it was just a quick twist or was he really out of commission. Like a trooper Mike said go ahead, so we did and his buddy Craig stayed for about another 10 minutes. Later we would find out that he had a clean break on his ankle. Not good!! There was a water station right after that so I am assuming that was mile marker 2… because oh yeah that is where Ken noticed his GPS watch was gone… so he ran back to see if it was floating or around, but no luck. We carried on!
- Next were some pretty basic mud pits. You jump in and climb out. There was probably 4 of them I think? The one thing I took from doing the first obstacle and seeing Mike break his ankle on the second was use caution in every one! I wasn’t jumping in like crazy or just going at it. I was trying to actually see what some other people were doing and then go into it with caution. At 34 years old, with 2 kids 3yr and 6 months I cannot afford to be out of commission, so that is how I rolled the rest of the race. The bad thing about this obstacle was there was some grit and mud getting all up in you and your shoes.
After the mud pits there seemed like what had to be a few miles of trail running. I have to say I felt really good running, so mentally that was a boost. This is where the C4 started kicking in too
- We came to the cliff jump. I forget if it was 23 feet or 25 feet. All I know is if you did not do the cliff jump you had to do 50 burpees. Honestly I don’t know how you would do 50 burpees then continue on, but if you did then kudos to you. I looked off the cliff, bent my legs and weeeee…… jumped right in. It was refreshing and it cleaned us up nice! It also cooled us down and I felt ready to rock. I had actually been feeling good at this point and I think we had been racing for about an hour , so we decided to take our GU gel packs. Yummy. There was a water station after the cliff jump as well. I think I only took about a cup of water, maybe a cup and a half.
Hobie Hopps? “ I think they are called this”
- These were a pain. Take this little rubber band and stick it around your ankles then walk up the hill and hop over the logs. Wow my calves were on fire from this, but we got through it.
- After those we started and uphill battle again, only to go back down a longer hill. I actually remember this hill from when I used to snow board up here. It was a lot easier on my Burton The one good thing that was going on was that we would talk to a few people and would hear they were from the 8am heat or the 8:30am heat so it made us feel good that we were doing fairly well. At this point Ken and I were still running together. Bill was somewhere behind us, Mike was down waiting, and Craig was somewhere back by Bill… I think…
- So after going up and down a huge hill, we come to the bottom and they have 40lb sand bags for us to carry up and then down the hill. Ughh…. This was tough and I took a good amount of breaks. I opted for to carry the sand bags on my shoulders alternating sides. I saw people carrying them on their heads, but I did not want that weight on my neck since I was tired and unstable and my old herniated disc, did not need any more damage. I am not sure how long that was, but it had to be at least 50 yards up then down? Maybe even more? Anyone?
Water Station – This was the 3rd water station and they had water and some gritty Gatorade which I think helped. Who knows, but it was better than water. I had one cup of Gatorade and 1 cup of water.
- So right after the sand bag carry and the water station was the tire flip. You need to flip a giant tractor tire 4 times in any direction. My first attempt and I didn’t lift it. I did not realize how heavy they were and how tired I was. So I had to really use everything to get them flipped.
OK so after the tire flip it was back up the hill then over to a nightmare of a rock hill. This was not an obstacle, just part of the course, but it was insane. It was just rocks up and up an up. People were yelling out… watch out! Rock falling lol. There were a few times I had to sit down and take a good 30 second break. I am not even sure how long it took me to get up that hill, but this is where the gap between Ken and I started to grow. Also I remember just looking down not only at the rocks, but at other times thinking about all the plants I was crawling through just thinking about poisons something. Well today some bumps are popping up on my arms so we shall see how that goes!
Concrete Block Chain Drag
- After the rock climb this was waiting at the top. So you had a thick heavy chain tied to what seemed like half a cinder block, but bigger and you had to drag it behind you. I was so tired when I got to it. I was trying to keep up with Ken and I was getting so drained so I took another little break. When I got back up there was a guy in front of me going so slowly. I was like go faster, but then I said to myself, pace yourself or you are going to burn out. I think on that rock wall and here I was getting the most tired and had thoughts of… “Can I do this? “Will I finish?” I dragged it around a put it back in the box I took it out of. I could see Ken up at the next obstacle.
- This is basically a rope over a pulley with a big cement chunk on the other end. Seems like a 5 gallon buckets worth of cement. You have to pull it to the top then let it down gently. I had watched people online doing it so I grabbed as high as I could and then used my body weight to pull it down and sat on the ground to pull it. It was actually easier than I thought so that was a good thing.
After another little run we came to the next obstacle.
- By this point I was exhausted. I did not want to do burpees. I had messed around on the monkey bars at the playground a few times to see how they felt and I did OK on them, but I wasn’t the best. I figured this was going to be tough. Being 6’3” is good sometimes so I reached out to about the 3rd bar and started on the bars. I was swinging pretty well and going from bar to bar. I got to the second to last one and I was dead in the water. Aghhhh… I was able to swing my body and get some momentum and get to the last bar and finished them! Boo ya!
- Not Sure of Exact Height, but was 3 series at lets say 6, 7, and 8 feet?
- Well… this is the last that I saw Ken , as I came off the Monkey Bars I saw him waiting there rubbing his legs. We both looked at each other and that was it. He would later tell me he had to catch up to this woman who was beating us the whole time lol. Seriously she was in front of us half the race and we just could not catch up. He eventually passed her Go Ken…….. I was stuck on my own…. As I approached the wall a woman “Melissa” asked for help. I said sure, but I cannot assure you where my hands my slip helping. She was cool with that lol. I gave her a boost over then attempted the wall myself. I was able to get over it, but banged my knee and can now see the bruises under my arms as well. Ouch. I continued to help her over the next few and I also got some help from another guy who I helped on the last series of walls as well. Turns out she had a baby 3 months earlier and a C-Section! Dang and I was complaining! Good job Melissa!!
Final Water Station – There was a final water station there where I actually ran into a guy I played BBall at home with. They only had water. At this point my stomach was starting to feel empty. I knew that wasn’t good and was not sure what I had left in me. I felt tired, but I was not totally drained and knew I had more left in me.
Rope Net Climb
- This was pretty cool. I had never done anything like this before, but basically it was a roped net you climb up and over. Had to be 20ish feet high? People that climbed before you would wait at the bottom of the other side to pull the net tight to help others. I heard one guy say “always keep 3 points of contact on the rope and you go over” so that is what I did. Low and behold as I got over and started to hold the netting tight for the next person, some guy shouted who wants a GU pack I have extra. I grabbed one like it was my last meal. It was chocolate pudding flavor and so good! That was what I needed! Thanks to the dude who handed them out! You da man!!
- Not fun! Well we came up to the Tyrolean Traverse where you climb across a rope that stretches across a river or stream. I had never done this before and I tried to watch others do it, so I had some idea of how I wanted to do it. I am not even sure how long it was, but there was a bell you had to ring in the middle to complete it. I hopped on and started to move, but I was basically using all my arms and just dragging my ankles across the rope. Not good! Note to self “long socks next time”. So I started burning my ankles with the rope. My legs came off the rope and I was ready to fall, but somehow I managed to get my legs back up! Thanks AB Ripper X! I really was not able to get the right movement and after seeing my ankles getting bloody I dropped into the muddy waters, the first obstacle I failed. Boo…. Check out my ankles. Hurts the most!
- Next there was a net climb I guess you call it where you climb up and over the net, but it was not straight up like the other one. This was easy, just had to take your time because that net would stretch and move so I needed to make sure I had a good footing before taking another step.
Slip & Slide
- Woot Woot. Some lady was shouting about 100 feet of awesomeness, so that sounded good to me. It felt nice to just lay down and slide down the wet, cold, and clean slide into a muddy pit lol.
- This is basically an angled wall with ropes you can use to pull yourself up and over. Of course they cover it in soap. The back side of the wall had like rungs of 2 x4’s to get down. This was the only time I thought I was gonna cramp up. My calf cramped for a second, but I got over and was good to go. On a side note I saw a lot of people cramping up or curled up in balls screaming because of cramps. Ouch! I held up well with that somehow. I also saw people rubbing powder on their legs. Anyone know what that is?
The END is NEAR!!
After that it was a downhill jog to the bottom for the last obstacles to finish the race!
- This is where you toss a spear into a bale of hay from 10-20 yards.I had been watching the volunteers practice when we got there and tried to pick up some tips, but who knew how it would go when your exhausted at the end of the race. I got my spear and was given the instructions. The cool thing was this was right at the bottom of the mountain and all the racers and spectators were there just yelling cheering etc… I grabbed the spear and just tried to balance it in my hand and give it a toss. Bam right in the hay! AROO!!! People cheered me on and it felt great!!
- Ugh this looked tough. I had tried the practice wall before the race and did ok, but not so much here lol. Basically there is a wall with small 2×4’s nailed to it and you need to get yourself across it. I went to the last wall which looked the driest and grabbed on. My grip felt OK and a made it a few feet, but somehow I got my one leg ahead of me and just could not get it back and I fell. Buu!!! 2nd Obstacle I failed!
- I was a bit nervous about this, but the good thing was the rope climb had knots every 3 feet. You had to climb to the top and ring the bell. I hopped on, pulled up, got my feet on the knots and made my way to the top. At the top my feet lost grip and I was hanging on with my arms. I managed to get my feet back on and pushed up and got the bell. That one felt good!!
Barbed Wire Crawl
- You gotta be kidding me!! I want to get the actually distance of this. This was an uphill barbed wire crawl in rocks and mud. More rocks them mud I think. I have scratches everywhere. Thank God I was wearing a shirt! Just when you thought you were at the top there was another stretch. There were a few ravines of water to go through as well. Knowing that the finish line was right there made it a lot easier!
- After the Barbed Wire Crawl I told myself take 30 seconds to recoup. I did not want to trip or fall into logs on fire lol. They were not that high and I jumped over with ease…
- There are a few dudes with Pugil sticks trying to knock you down before the finish line. On some of the videos I have seen people really get hit hard with this, so I was trying to not get knocked out or tripped up. I ran at them with medium speed and jumped over the guy on the lefts pugil stick and knocked the other one with my arm instead of my head
The FINISH LINE
- Ahhhhhh the finish line. I crossed and was awarded a metal. The lady told me I was awesome and I whole heatedly agreed Some lady handed me a banana, some guys gave me a t-shirt, there was Chocolate coconut water I chugged, then some Gaspari nutrition drink, then some body armor drink, then I ate my banana and some water. Then I wanted to yack lol. They cut off my time chip and tossed it into the box to reveal later that I had finished in 3 Hours & 33 Minutes. Not bad! I was originally thinking about 2 hours maybe a little more, but who knew I was going to hike up and down Mt Creek half a dozen times
It was an awesome experience and was great to see Ken and Mike at the finish. It was also good to see Bill finish up as well. He didn’t even train!! Crazy man, but he did it. Craig finished up as well and we started packing it up. Mike would later find out his ankle was broke. We get em next year bro!!
We showered off at the hosing station and hobbled to the car. The soreness was setting in. We started our drive, got some food and got home! I was ridiculously hungry that night and the next day! I ate what I wanted lol
As of today, Monday I am still pretty sore, but my ankles are really what is bothering me. Pretty much anything I do hurts with them, so I will have to wait and see how they heal up. I am going to take the next few days off and see how I feel before I start up again. I will go for a massage tomorrow or Wednesday as well
What to train for next
Here are some pics of us at the event. Maybe next time I’ll carry my water proof handheld.

The 23-year-old former Queen's Park defender, who has made 75 appearances for United during his three seasons at Tannadice, was out of contract next month and available on a free transfer to clubs outside Scotland.
His deal also includes the option of extending his stay with the six-times Polish champions for a further 12 months.
Poznan's sporting director Piotr Rutkowski said: "We like innovative solutions and that is why we decided to look for new players who are fairly unknown in the Polish market.
"We've been watching Dundee United for the past two years now while we've been looking for a left-back and I knew that someone like Barry Douglas could fit in here.
"The transfer has been completed relatively quickly because Douglas had ended his contract with United and he did not have to negotiate with his club, which often delays the transfer."
Lech Poznan are currently second in the Ekstraklasa, the Polish top flight, six points behind leaders Legia Warsaw with two games to play.

I am a little behind on updating and announcing this- its been a busy weekend with my birthday and all, but on Thursday, I received notice that I have been medically cleared and....even bigger news- I received a call from Placement. They had a placement for me leaving in late April. Ahhh.....so soon!
The whole conversation and the rest of Thursday was quite a blur. I didn't expect to hear from Placement so soon and to have them want me to leave so soon. I told the PO I needed the night to think things over. I wasn't able, at that moment, to tell him if I could leave in April or not. I had been planning on August/September/October. April was a lot sooner than even August.
I immediately called my mom and tried to explain to her what was going on, but I was in kind of a fog. Everything had happened so quickly.
To make a long story short, after much deliberating with family and friends, including a friend currently serving in the region where I was going to be placed, I decided 1) the placement maybe wasn't the best fit for me, and 2) I am not ready to leave so soon. I have would like to finish out the school year with my kids and I really would like to spend my last summer in the US working at the Rec Dept- a place that is quite special to me for many reasons.
Anyway, I emailed my PO early Friday morning and said my preference would be to wait, however, I realize the importance of finding a good fitting placement for each volunteer and so, if a placement arose sooner than August that was a good fit for me, I would be ready to go.
While I still don't know location or departure time, or when I will find those things out, it was a wonderful birthday present to receive medical clearance and hear from the PO at the same time.
Next update will hopefully contain even more information, however, this update is huge for me!

She smiled and and kissed her cheek before getting into the passenger side. She put the keys in and turned the car on as they waited, turning on the heater since it was cold out and put the radio on low. When she saw spencer walking out to the car, she smiled a little more.
Chris nodded then looked down and thought to herself as she ate. She glanced up at him every once in a while to see if he was alright then looked down at her plate once it was empty. Staring at it for awhile. She wasn't hungry or confused, she just stared at it blankly as if it were speaking to her and wouldn't shut up.
"You definitely should! I mean yeah there's always the internet but the newspaper limits everything to our neighborhood really! It's a lot simpler!" Peyton really didn't mind the whole "old fashion feeling" using a newspaper had, if she used the internet she'd get excited over employment that could have been in another state.
"Hm, that's something you have to take up with the circulation desk but maybe I can help you out with that." She replied with a small smirk.
She smiled and kissed him once before nodding. "Will do." She said before walking out of the apartment. She walked to the car and opened the backseat. She set Rachel down and made sure to strap her in securely
She laughed looking down at them. "She's probably just trying to copy what I'm doing." She took the cup out o the box and put it on the counter. She handed Rachel a couple of rags and watched her drop them in the box. Rachel giggled and clapped after she put the rags in the box
"College kids." Peyton answered with a laugh. This instantly meant that she'd pretty much get to be on her phone for the whole time there, or maybe even got to read some books there. Yeah, reading was something she'd love to catch up on already.
"You should quit." She agreed, nodding her head. "But definitely, finding a job in this economy's really hard. Have you tried looking in the newspaper? Yeah it's old fashioned but that's how I found mine." She wouldn't even mind helping him out too if Jefferson needed it.

WILMINGTON, NC (WWAY) -- A viral photo taken at a New Hanover County dog grooming business has led to investigations by the New Hanover County Animal Services Unit and the New Hanover County Sheriff's Office.
The photo shows a dog hanging from a leash.
Now a business owner also in the photo is telling her side of the story, which she said is more than it may seem at first glance.
As far as we know the dog is still alive and well, but a picture, as the saying goes, is worth a thousand words. In this case those words have come in the form of angry calls from all over the country and Canada even in the form of death threats.
But the woman in the picture says it is not what it looks like.
The photo led to phones ringing off the hook today at Olga's Dog Spa off Market St.
"If I saw someone post a photo on Facebook I would feel the same way, but the fact that the way it was posted and who posted it," said employee Misty Johnson.
Tim Suggs, a former employee of Olga's, posted the photo of a dog hanging from its leash to his Facebook page. Suggs was fired this week after shop owner Olga Littleton says she caught him stealing.
"I think it is sabotage," Littleton said of the photo.
Littleton says the now infamous picture being passed around the country was taken five years ago. She says it was Suggs who hung the dog.
"I think it was a silly prank, and I think he thought it was funny," Littleton said. "As soon as I saw it I reprimanded him."
Johnson remembers the incident as well.
"As soon as she turned around and saw it, she was like, 'Take that dog down. What are you doing?'" Johnson said.
Littleton is retiring in less than a month after running the business for 15 years.
"I think he did it to make her feel like she is leaving with her head hung down because Olga has her pride," Johnson said.
But that pride has taken a hit after all the backlash.
"I feel like I let a lot of people down," Littleton said. "I had a voice. I had a platform, and I feel like I could have used it better."
Now she's left picking up the pieces, yet still able to forgive.
"I have always forgiven (Suggs) in the past," Littleton said. "I would forgive him again. I love him to death, but I feel like there has just been a death. Something has died. Something is broken. It can never be repaired."
Littleton says she understands people are going to look at her differently, but she hopes she can gain the community's, and now the country's, trust again.
Despite some negative online review of her business, animal control says there have never been any complaints of animal neglect or abuse at Olga's Dog Spa.
Suggs, who has pending drug charges in Brunswick County, could not be reached for comment.

Verified Buyer Reviewed by N8WGB from Ohio on Sunday, October 16, 2016
I ordered a 2XL, and it was very small for that size. I returned it. I would recommend at least one size larger than what you wear... Looked like a good shirt, but I downgraded it due to the size problem, and the fact it cost me to return it.

A visibly relieved James D. Laboard hugged family members Thursday after jurors found the Baltimore County police officer not guilty in the death of the teenager he chased down and fought last June.
Seventeen-year-old Christopher Brown had been with a group of boys who threw a rock at Laboard's door before the off-duty officer found him, and neither side in the case disputed that Brown had died as a result of the ensuing altercation. But a jury decided after a four-day trial that Laboard had not broken the law by placing the teen in the neck restraint that the state argued had killed him.
The officer has not spoken publicly and did not testify. His attorneys declined to comment after the verdict, but had said during trial that he had only been trying to protect himself from a teen resisting arrest.
"There is no evidence that Laboard intended to kill," attorney Ezra S. Gollogly, said in court. "What the state is doing in this case is 20/20 hindsight."
But the verdict left Brown's family in disbelief. His mother, Chris Brown, clutched her daughter as the two wept outside. Christopher Brown had been a rising Randallstown High School junior.
"It shouldn't be this way," said Chris Brown, who had sat outside of the courtroom as the verdict came in but was quickly surrounded by TV cameras. She has been vocal about wanting Laboard, a nine-year-veteran with the Police Department, to serve time.
Laboard, who turns 33 Thursday, had faced a maximum of 10 years in prison. He remains suspended pending an internal investigation, but will again be able to draw a paycheck on his $68,845 salary.
State's Attorney Scott D. Shellenberger said the state agreed with Brown's family that Laboard had used excessive force, but the jury had the ultimate decision.
"This was an incredibly tragic case," Shellenberger said. "Obviously we in the state's attorney's office felt a crime had been committed."
Brown's attorney, Russell A. Neverdon, said he has notified the Baltimore County Police Department that he intends a civil suit over the incident, an action he said would also target Laboard.
Neverdon said he felt the state did not emphasize to jurors that Laboard gave chase and then confronted the teen. He said Brown ran from Laboard and then hid in some bushes, and thus was not an aggressive suspect.
In closing arguments, Deputy State's Attorney Robin Coffin told jurors that Laboard had been enraged when he went after Brown, and had used a neck restraint that was inappropriate for police action. Baltimore County does not train officers in neck restraints, a police academy instructor testified.
"These are not the actions of a well-trained police officer," Coffin said, noting that he had nine years of police training in which he would have been faced with similar, high-stress situations. "He has a right to be angry but not to kill."
She said there was no evidence to show that Brown had made any actions toward the officer that should have prompted him to use deadly force.
Although Laboard told a responding officer that the teen swung at him, testimony from an assistant medical examiner said there was no evidence that Brown had made contact. She said scratches found on Laboard's arm were likely from when the teen tried to pull the officer's arms away from his throat.
But defense attorneys had argued that there was little evidence to show that Laboard was agitated or intended to kill Christopher Brown. The teen died after he had resisted arrest and as the officer was attempting to bring him under control, Gollogly said. The neck restraint Laboard used is considered safe by other police departments, he said.
Gollogly had said that because Laboard asked a neighbor to call 911 showed the officer did not intend to kill Brown.
Without handcuffs or his gun on him, Gollogly said, Laboard used the only tool he had — his weight — to control the athletic teen. He said officers are often forced to make quick decisions when in pursuit of a suspect, pointing out that the officer didn't know whether Brown was armed or whether there were additional suspects nearby.
Jurors heard during the trial from friends who said they had smoked marijuana with Brown on the night that he died. They said that it was his idea to play neighborhood pranks but that he was not the boy who threw a rock at Laboard's door.
Laboard's girlfriend also testified about her efforts to resuscitate the teen. The jury viewed crime scene photos of Brown's lifeless body and heard the frantic 911 calls from an elderly couple who saw Laboard and Brown struggling in their yard.
Judge Jan Marshall Alexander described the trial as "highly charged," and "emotional."
During testimony on Wednesday about the use of force from a Baltimore County police academy instructor, a family member of Brown's burst out that Laboard should have stayed at home instead of chasing the teen. A friend of Laboard's responded to defend him, and both were asked to leave the courtroom.
Laboard did not show much emotion during the trial but had tears in his eyes when the 911 calls were played in court.
Latest Baltimore County

A couple of times a week during the late 1970s, there would often be one solitary figure sitting in the stands at the University of Alberta hockey practices. The guy worked at a local sporting goods store and coached the AAA midget team in nearby Sherwood Park. Clare Drake was the head coach at the U of A at the time and would invite the observer to his office after practice where the two would talk and Drake would spill all his secrets about how to run a good practice.
That guy in the stands was Ken Hitchcock. He learned his lessons well. So well that at some point soon, he’ll almost certainly join Clare Drake in the Hockey Hall of Fame. Hitchcock was just one of hundreds of coaches, some of whom have gone on to be some of the best bench bosses in the NHL, who were influenced and guided by Drake, who died this past weekend at the age of 89. Another is Barry Trotz, who is in the middle of the Eastern Conference final with the Washington Capitals. Another is Mike Babcock, who signed the richest coaching contract in NHL history with the Toronto Maple Leafs.
Coaches are generally measured by wins and losses and by that measure, Drake is without peer in university hockey. In his 28 years coaching the Golden Bears, he won six national championships and 17 Canada West titles – along with a national football title for good measure – making Alberta the gold standard by which all other programs are measured. He had a .695 winning percentage with the Golden Bears and led teams to both Spengler Cup and World Student Games championships. But it was far more than winning that made Drake such a special coach. He was as much a student as he was a teacher. And in an era when coaches kept their tactics guarded as though they were state secrets, Drake was eager to spread the word to anyone who would listen.
There were brilliant coaches before Drake came along in the 1950s and after that, to be sure. But the difference between Drake and the others was that while those in the NHL wouldn’t dare share their secrets, Drake and others such as Tom Watt, George Kingston, Dave King and Bob Hindmarch bred a generation of coaches by doing exactly the opposite.
“Guys like Toe Blake and Rudy Pilous and Scotty Bowman, those guys were untouchables,” Hitchcock said. “The only way you ever learned from them was if you knew a player who played for them and he passed things on. But Clare and that group, they were the first to share everything and that’s what changed hockey forever. I remember Jacques Lemaire was a protégé of Toe and Scotty and when we had Jacques at the Olympics, you couldn’t get him to share anything because he wasn’t giving away any secrets. The only way you could get Jacques to share was to make sure you had enough beer in everybody and it would all come out and it was unbelievable what you could learn.”
Drake’s attitude was more centered on the more you share, the more you learn. And being a coach in university, he relished the opportunity to have four or five days to prepare for a game. In an era when hockey was a blue-collar sport where coaches were more motivators and disciplinarians than teachers, Drake was years ahead of his time. You could say the pendulum has swung too far the other way and that the game is over-coached, which would be a valid point. And that’s one area where Drake had an enormous influence. Hitchcock said Drake was one of those coaches who enjoyed practices more than games and everything that was done in practice was done so with a purpose.
“The biggest impact was that he organized the coaching of the game of hockey,” Hitchcock said. “He brought organization to the way you taught the game. Clare and those guys were trailblazers in getting the message to minor hockey coaches into an area where you could organize your special teams and there was a plan to play defense and a plan to create offense. All of a sudden practice were organized and they had a design to them.”
His work with Hockey Canada and the national coaching certification program helped plant the seeds for the Program of Excellence that has resulted in Canada winning gold medals at every level of the sport. He’s a member of the Order of Canada – both the official Order of Canada and the Order of Hockey in Canada – and received the ultimate honor when he was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame last November. But that didn’t stop him from constantly wanting to learn, something Hitchcock often saw close-up.
“Clare was in his late 70s and he was still going to symposiums,” Hitchcock said. “Once you got through the nervousness of presenting with him there, it was awesome because he was sitting in the front row taking notes.”
Want more in-depth features and expert analysis on the game you love? Subscribe to The Hockey News magazine.

Auckland mayoral candidate Leo Molloy says he and his team have received death threats following a road-rage incident involving the family of fellow candidate Fa'anana Efeso Collins.
Molloy also said he believed that Collins needed to "come clean" and "set the record straight" over the incident, which happened in Te Atatū on Monday.
Earlier, Collins said his wife, Fia, was cut off by two cars at the same time, with a driver doing the fingers at her. The driver of one of the vehicles involved has since came forward with a different version of events.
In a Facebook post, Fia said her first thought was "maybe they didn't see us but then they beeped their horns, wound their windows down and did all sorts of hand signals at us".
The driver of one of the cars, Tai Kalepo, said there was a road-rage incident between himself and the driver of a white Holden where Fia may have got caught up in a bit of crossfire while driving her husband's campaign vehicle.
He was certain Efeso Collins was not in the campaign vehicle with his wife.
Molloy said after the publication of a story on the incident yesterday, various "political figures and members of the media astonishingly tried to link me to this incident".
"Sadly, as a result of this story, my team and I have received death threats and these individuals have threatened to target my staff and our campaign office."
A spokesperson for Molloy said the threats had come via social media and text messages. Asked if the threats had been reported to police, the spokesperson said police resources were "better spent on more important matters".
Molloy said Kalepo's account of the incident raised several questions, including the question whether any abuse was directed towards Collins' campaign vehicle and whether Collins was "even in the car at the time".
In a statement tonight, Collins said he was "deeply saddened" to hear about the death threats.
"I denounce any threat of violence against any person and hope the police follow up on those being made."
In response to Molloy's calls to set the record straight, Collins said he never said he was in the car during the incident and that he stood by his wife's account.
Collins said they had been in touch with the driver who complained and believed it was better to meet face to face, rather than communicate via a third party, like the media.
"We believe this is a better way to genuinely listen and come to some understanding about what happened."
Collins also provided further comment on the incident, saying on Monday a driver cut his wife off on the road and "abuse was directed in the direction of my wife".
"I was not in the car and I never said I was in the car, but these are the facts as told to me, and unfortunately, this was misconstrued in an earlier article."
Collins said his wife's Facebook post was intended for friends and family, and to highlight the importance for families to be kept safe, not as an attempt to garner attention or sympathy in the national media.
After the post he was asked for comment by a reporter, to which he obliged.
"I stand by my wife's account of what happened."

HOWARD COUNTY, M.D. (FOX 5 DC) - Two men who were both shot in Howard County died just days apart, according to police. They say the shootings were not connected.
Officials say Jaden Ealey, 21, was shot on May 30 and died on June 11. Montez Case, 22, was shot on June 11 and died on June 13. Both victims were from Columbia, and were initially transported to the University of Maryland Shock Trauma Center in critical condition.
The shootings were not random, according to police, but they also say the deadly incidents were not related to one another.
MORE FROM FOX 5: Juvenile injured after shots fired at car in Maryland
Officers were called to the 6000 block of Foreland Garth around 7:10 p.m. on May 30 where they found Ealey suffering from a gunshot wound behind an Exxon gas station.
Police say Case was shot at 9:34 p.m. on June 11 in the 10700 block of Hickory Ridge Road. He was found in the parking lot near a convenience store.
Detectives believe that the motive in Ealey’s murder may have been drug-related. The motive in Case's murder is unknown at this time. No suspects have been developed in either case.
Anyone with information in either case is asked to contact police at 410-313-STOP or HCPDCrimeTips@howardcountymd.gov.

ANYONE who has attended a “sportsman’s evening” featuring footballers from the 1970s will be familiar with the script: laddish banter, tales of drink, women and gambling, blue jokes and so on and so forth. Sometimes, it’s not worth meeting your heroes, men you might have only seen on Match of the Day or in the tabloid press. After a while, stories of how “I once pissed in the FA Cup”, or “at half-time I had a leggy blond” become tiresome and certainly out of sync with today’s narrative.
I’ve been to a few of these events and nearly always come away feeling “ok, that was fun…but did it really tell me anything about how the game was played in those days?”. Invariably, there’s no valuable insight into football itself, other than the stark realisation that the legendary number nine was, after all, an ordinary mortal who liked a drink, chased skirt and couldn’t resist the 3 o’clock at Kempton Park. And the fact he’s chasing every penny by speaking in a social club about how, after training, the lads went on the piss and had to be ushered out of the pub by an irate manager, suggests life was lived to the full without a care for the future. It’s funny the first time, but it becomes all too predictable and, one might add, a little sad.
The sorry saga of George Best is well known to any of us who lived through that era or read the countless books and articles about his fall from grace. The film about the former Manchester United star was scarcely any more revealing, but left you feeling angry that he rarely took responsibility for his own problems and seemed content to allow his episodes of falling on and off the wagon to be his source of income.
Best may have been a forerunner, but he also lacked the will-power to manage his life. Brilliant he may have been, but his star had burned out by 1973. If you have an addictive personality, or seek solace through being constantly removed from reality, which alcohol and drugs can help you achieve, you create your own problems. Tragically, Best selected a lifestyle that was self destructive.
It’s debatable if Best and others who allowed themselves to be engulfed by alcohol truly loved playing the game of football as much as they craved its trappings. They certainly loved the adulation they received from the fans, the ego-building nature of the sport and the fame. Many footballers come from deprived backgrounds where money may have been in short supply. They may be ill-educated and playing football might be their only way of building self-esteem. It was like that when I was young and you see it today – working class parents throwing their child into football as their only way to escape the drudgery of everyday life. I once knew someone who was hell-bent on getting his son into professional football, even denying him the chance of reading “books” to concentrate on being a footballer. “I knocked that out of him”. He didn’t succeed and the rest of his education was neglected. You only have to look at the behaviour of some players, right up to the highest level, to know they lack the discipline, restraint and savvy to manage their lives properly, even in this age of multi-million contracts, agents and advisors.
Best had countless people around him and he probably made the mistake of trusting too many of them. But whenever you see footage of him at his peak, he’s surrounded by women, drink and hangers-on. The alpha male in him would have loved it all, but then he realised he was, after all, quite lonely. He was probably badly advised and his entourage inevitably comprised those in awe of him and those that saw an opportunity to hang onto his expensively trendy shirt-tail.
Best might have been saved if Manchester United had sold him when he was marketable, not only reaping the benefit of a transfer fee, but also removing him from the world he had created. A tough manager in a new environment, either in Britain or abroad, may have turned him around and allowed him to completely fulfil his talent at club level. Best, after all, won very little and nothing after 1968, and he never graced the highest stage because he was Northern Irish. Just imagine if he had moved to a club managed by Brian Clough or Don Revie, or even ventured abroad.
Best’s glitzy lifestyle, which really was anything but when you look at the consequences, was also a template for some to follow. At Chelsea, players like Peter Osgood and Alan Hudson became known for their forays into nearby Kings Road and to some extent, it destroyed the career of Hudson, a local lad born just five years after Best. In human terms, that’s not a big age gap, but in football terms, it is almost half a career.
Hudson was 18 when he burst onto the scene at Chelsea and in 1969-70, was simply outstanding, so much so that the cold-fish that was Sir Alf Ramsey heaped praise upon him and named him in his 40-man preliminary squad for the Mexico World Cup. He missed both the World Cup and Chelsea’s 1970 FA Cup triumph through injury and the following season, he seemed to be out-of-sorts. His form was much better in 1971-72, bringing him back into view of Ramsey, but at the end of that campaign, he turned down the chance to go on tour with England under-23s. That possibly ended any chance he had of being used by Ramsey.
Hudson became known as a good-time-boy, teaming-up with the likes of Osgood who was a few years older than Chelsea’s starlet. While Osgood had some good seasons already under his belt, not to mention 30-plus goals in 1969-70 and 1971-72 and a few England caps, Hudson was still in the reputation-making period of his career. He was the music artist trying to build on a brilliant first album. Although he flickered with that brilliance, there was often the feeling that he was never as good as that first season in Chelsea’s team, that a little bit of arrogance had crept in. To many, however, Hudson still had to prove himself, and although there was no doubting his talent, he was never as popular or as revered as “Ossie”.
When Osgood and Hudson fell out with manager Dave Sexton, effectively breaking-up the Chelsea team of the early 1970s, it was Hudson the club was most keen to dispose of – they needed the £240,000 they picked up for the 22 year-old, and it was clear the rift between him and Sexton was not going to be easily repaired. A new club and a different kind of manager, Tony Waddington, provided Hudson with a new stage, and on this one, he was the kingpin.
He finished the 1973-74 season with Stoke, lifting them up the table, but the final game of the campaign saw him return to Chelsea. He was jeered by Chelsea’s fans, something that the club’s followers rarely do to former players, and when he scored the only goal of the game, he provocatively celebrated in front of the old West Stand at Stamford Bridge. “That goal was worth the £11,000 transfer cut I never received,” he said, suggesting the divorce had been messy.
Hudson at last showed the sort of form he had shown at Chelsea in his debut season and in 1974-75 and 1975-76, he was arguably the best midfielder in the Football League. He won two England caps, his first a stunning debut against world champions West Germany, but he was quickly discarded by manager Don Revie, which seemed unjust and a waste of a fine talent.
Away from the pitch, Hudson opened a night club in Newcastle-under-Lyme and was a renowned drinker. There were remarkable similarities in the lifestyle led by Hudson and the now retired Best, which may have been one of the reasons why international honours didn’t come his way.
By December 1976, he was at Arsenal, but it never seemed more than a temporary interlude for a player who was still only 25 years old. He showed glimpses of his best form and played in the FA Cup final of 1978 against Ipswich, a game Arsenal surprisingly lost. He walked out on the club, openly admitting his dislike for manager Terry Neill.
And that was really it for Hudson as he defected to the United States to play for Seattle Sounders at the age of 28. There was reconciliation with Chelsea in 1983, but he never got to play because of injury and illness and had a second stint at Stoke. His career ended in September 1985 through injury.
Hudson was a contemporary of both Johan Cruyff and Günter Netzer, players we idolised from afar. If only we knew it, we had our own version, a player that could have eased England through its rebuilding programme post-1974. There were so many players who failed to live up to their potential because of mis-management, but it is by no means an English problem and there are notable exceptions, players who achieve because they make the best of their [limited] ability.
Kevin Keegan was one such example, a hard-working individual who gave everything on the pitch and carefully controlled his career, long before David Beckham made it an art form. It took a couple of setbacks – he had to convince people in the England set-up initially, and there was the infamous bust-up at Wembley with Billy Bremner, but mostly, Keegan was a role model.
Keegan, like Hudson, was born in 1951, but unlike the Chelsea man, he had to work his way through Doncaster and Scunthorpe before arriving at Liverpool in 1971. Keegan’s energy and charisma transformed a Liverpool team that had struggled to live up to its mid-1960s success under Bill Shankly and became British football’s face of the mid-1970s, a new icon for the post-1960s era and a more wholesome, blokey and, dare we say, safer successor to George Best. He was not as talented as Best or even Hudson, but he was marketable.
Keegan also knew his worth and had opened his mind to a transactional football career, not unlike Johan Cruyff, who had long identified that being the top man in a team brought with it a certain portability and market value. In 1977, after a year of “this is my last season, because it is time to move on”, Keegan relocated to Hamburg and not only earned multiples of his Liverpool salary, but also became a European name. He was also smart enough to learn German and recognise that Hamburg was not forever. He returned to English football and played for Southampton and Newcastle, both transactions that gave him enormous publicity and value. He always gave 100% and left in a blaze of glory as he helped Newcastle back to the top flight. He may have been an astute businessman, which some football folk might not have appreciated, but Keegan gave value for money as a player.
What Keegan – and Cruyff – achieved was not beyond the reach of George Best and Alan Hudson, who were by-products of the footballer as pop star model. Keegan and Cruyff, were as much children of their time as Best and Hudson, but they shouldered the responsibility differently – it was playboy versus smart boy. It is no coincidence that Keegan and Cruyff were settled family men, married young, and stayed that way.
Too many idols fall from their pedestal, too many self-destruct and way too often, we hear of former players enduring tragic post-career disasters – people like Kenny Sansom, Stan Bowles, Hudson and Best and even further back, legends like Tommy Lawton and Hughie Gallacher. There’s a refusal to acknowledge that nothing lasts forever, that the good times are only there for a short time and that you’re marketable for about 4,000 days if you’re lucky. Today, there’s no excuse for there’s enough people on the periphery, lurking around the dark corners of football clubs to hammer that message home. But for the heroes of yesterday, “what might have been” has become an overused epitaph.

A gamer cafe in Hawaii was recently the target of a "home style invasion" by a group of local thugs. The suspects became violent and assaulted the owner before the patrons knew what was happening. The thugs quickly moved from assault to robbery as they began demanding money and belongings from the occupants.
That... was their mistake. They demanded a customer's DS who was not willing to part with it... and with that the tides turned.
Watch the video below to see what was caught on security camera.

On our second visit to Lexington we made sure to go back to this restaurant even though it was a different location. We had been disappointed in our dinner the night before at another restaurant and wanted the comfort of familiarity. We were not disappointed. The staff are attentive, the meals delicious and the prices very reasonable. It certainly is all good at Saul Good.

Josh was very helpful, and took to Kingsley kindly!
Jody is a genuine dog person. You can tell she loves dogs just as much as she does people. And in my opinion those are the best people to trust your pup with. She came through in a pinch for me when I had to pick up extra shifts at my second job. She took my Puggle, Dexter, for a walk and made sure he had food and water and plenty of love. She responded ...
Jody was so sweet to Stella! She sent me pictures of her playing outside and with toys throughout the night. She was so easygoing and the process of dropping Stella off and picking her up was easy and painless! I so appreciate all she did to help me out by sitting Stella that night. Jody was so accommodating and I would 100% use her services again!
Nights and weekend availability
“Everyone thinks they have the best dog. And none of them are wrong.”
~ W. R. Purche
I have always loved animals. At 7 yrs old, a White Shepherd made me a dog person for life. He was a true friend and confidant throughout his 16 years. He helped me through my adolescence and I inevitably helped him through his waning years of old age. Even after his passing, that bond remains unbroken. I choose to ...
What Jody would like to know about your dog
-Any temperament issues?
-Does your dog get along with other animals?

The last episode of this series I did hurry, I tried to complete to soon after my eye surgery and it was hurting. I hope this helps.
Epilog : Who Me a Wizard
A sad looking Halfling opened his eyes to a world of white he did not understand why the world was white. He did not know what snow was. His next thought who am I, why am I cold.
He was startled by the booming voice of a Silver-back Ogre, “Ambrose what are you doing in my territory? Did you bring your daughter?”
The sniveling Halfling shivered and and said, “Who...Who... are you? Who is Ambrose?”
The Ogre was startled by this response and placed both of his very large hands on the head of the Halfling. The first thing he spotted was the thought that maybe the ogre was going to eat him. The 2nd thing was that the Halfling really didn't care. Every thing else seemed to be a big void.
The Silver Wizard, Jo-be, took this as a challenge and he dove inside the mind of this pitiful halfling. It seemed that it was in a vast hall way with thousands of doors all shut and locked. Jo-be began to systematically break down the doors and rape the mind of all its information. The information was then cast into the snow no longer useable.
Jo-be crashed thru doors until he had the full story. Most of the story he laughed at especially the part about the Civet cat and its teeth. But the part he did not laugh at dealt with Marona. That virgin pussy was promised to him.
That was a crime that couldn't be left unpunished. The Black wizard would have to pay. First he would have to plan and figure how to enter the Black's domain.
Anil and I was walking around the school grounds and I was explaining to her things about how Goshen differed from Earth. She had caught on to the clothes thing within 5 minutes of arriving and she had conjured her self clothes like she was seeing other women wearing.
I asked her how are you getting used to the Bra and Panties. My face turned a little red with her answer.
“What is a Bra and Panties.”
I stared to explain but then thought why bother. Instead I asked her how long she was going to stay and where was Streek.
“ I am staying until I am sure that the spells worked on Ambrose and you are really safe. Streek and slinky are around somewhere. That spell you used on her works really well.”
That brought up another problem I discovered when I asked where they were staying. Her answer was “With you.”
We devised a spell and cast it on my family. They would not think anything about her being there in the house. Each morning when we left for school as soon as we stepped out side the front door she would appear to my brother as if she had been waiting there for us.
We would then walk to Ramona's house and she would walk the rest of the way with us. Ramona was no longer a sub in my class. She was teaching Senior English. So there was no hint of favoritism. The first day Ramona was a little put out that there was another girl with me. But with a little tweak she was alright.
After school I showed her around town and she was fascinated by two things . Cheese burgers and Malts. Movies and TV also got her attention.
Slinky's voice interrupted my thoughts 'Al do you have snow leopards here in your village?'
'No and my town is to small to even have a zoo... so why do you ask....' I felt a strong grip on my arm.
I looked at Anil she sad, “ I think we have trouble. You do not have Snow Leopards as pets, Streek says the one he saw was full grown.” “ The only familiar snow leopard I know of belongs to The Silver Wizard, a Silver-back Ogre. The snow leopard morphs into a silver haired lady a real temptress.”
“She will be after you and she is a seductress. Remember one thing her enchantment is strong. If I slap you hard it will be to snap you out of her clutches not in anger.”
“What about the silver wizard...why would he come after me and what does he look like.”
“ Al first off he was an ally of the Green, it was rumored that Marona was promised to him as untouched. His looks are a little hard to describe...He is an Ogre.” Anil looked at me and said, He is at least a foot taller than you and he has long shaggy white hair with 2” fangs always showing from his mouth.
“That should be easy enough to spot a six foot hairy beast should be easy to spot around here.”
“Don't get cocky Al.” “ He creates and illusion and you never know if it is him. Except it is difficult to hide his size. Now this deion is sort of rough,'' Jo-be has a barrel chest about 60” waist about 45” his thighs are 38” and his calf's about 24” His feet are about 12” long and 4 times the width of your shoe.” I wear a size 11ee. “ His size he can't hide, Oh and the size of his biceps are as big as most men's thighs.”
I must admit I had begun to look at the large men walking near us. I decided not to let it get the better of me.
I took Anil to the movies they were showing ' Men in Black' again when it got to the departure scene, Anil sat up straight She said she thought there were some of her friends in the movie. And wanted to know where they landed.
Shortly after that a calmness transcended over my body I seemed to be in a euphoric state of serenity. I was slipping into the seat on my left. Suddenly Slinky and Streek leaped across me and there was a blast of noise and I felt my head explode as I was slapped very severely across my face and my body was yanked toward Anil.
I heard screams in the aisles and the next day the Newspaper Headlines mention the suspected sighting of a large feline creature at the local Theater.
“It has started. “ Anil announced we must be careful from here on out. She looked at me and said You are strong but he is stronger and more cunning than you can imagine. You must not go any where alone, one of the dragons will be with you at all times their telepathy will assist us when needed.
We made our way home. Later I was laying in bed with Anil cuddled up next to me Slinky was next to Streek I had my arms around Anil and allowed my hand to slide down her back to her waist. I moved my fingers back and forth increasing their range of movement toward her nicely round butt cheeks.
I allowed my fingers to slip down into the crack between her globes. I could feel her nibbling on my neck. She had been with me for almost two weeks. She whispered do you remember what I told you when you rescued us.
I nodded you warned me you wanted me to be fresh and ready to go all night. She chuckled tonight is the night. She kissed me...deeply and scooted closer I moved to meet her and my cock slid between her legs and straight for her button. It tweaked her clit which caused her hips to move back and forth. The angle was not right for entrance. Anil lifted up and flipped me over on to my back . Then she threw her legs over my head and settled her pussy down on my face.
I slipped my tongue in to her tantalizing opening she says Ahhhh and leans forward and engulfs my cock into her mouth. I licked and poked with my tongue and the finger I had also entered into her pussy. The aroma of her pussy was very enticing and smelt like rose petals. The taste was indescribable but was a taste I couldn't seem to get enough.
It was very difficult to continue to please her when she was working so well at lifting me up off the bed by the end of my cock then driving me back down on the bed as her mouth bottomed out on my cock. She licked and sucked and I swear she was using magic. It felt as if while she was sucking me in her tongue was swirling around it felt like a second tongue was licking the underside of my cock
I felt the fire down below getting out of hand and blazing to an explosion I slammed my mouth on to her tender parts and blew and swirled my mouth around. It was enough and she began to fill my mouth with her juices. She made a few more slurps and I felt like I lifted her off the bed with force of the orgasm. I looked over and saw that Streek and Slinky were emulating Anil and I. Slinky was sucking Streek dry just as Anil was doing to me.
Anil lifted her legs and her head leaving only her stomach and her nipples the only thing touching me. Slowly her body began to move to rotate her nipples laying trail across my body until she was perfectly alined with my body.
She straightened her body lowering her head and sucking in one of my nipples. Her legs straightened and touched me sensuously they caressed my legs then opened . I could feel magic fingers stroking and directing my cock to her opening but first rubbing the head thru her slit and nosing it up to her clit.
Then instantly she pulled me inside her. Ooooh it felt like a velvet glove….one that was on fire the heat she was radiating was making the friction so hot I was afraid my pecker was going to catch fire. She raised up and got her feet under her and while straddling me she began to ride me like she was a cowgirl.
I was enjoying my self immensely the way she was using her pussy muscles. I felt Slinky's tail slip around my neck....When suddenly there was a crash like clap of thunder. The room lit up like a million watts of power surged through the bulbs. Then I landed flat of my back . On very uneven ground and of course there was a sharp pointed rock for me to land on.
I raised up and looked around 'Where are we? '
'Slinky you came too. How about Streek'
'No I had just released him. Don't you think you need to cover that up.'
I looked down and realized I was still as naked as a Jay Bird. I conjured my robe and Black wizard get-up. Robe, boots, pistols and 10 gal hat. The next thing that occurred to me is protection. I cast an invulnerability spell. I t covered me in a circle 10 foot in diameter, as long as Slinky was inside the circle she would be alright too.
Anil & Streek
Anil was close to reaching her climax. One more stroke should do it. She slammed her pussy down on Al's rock hard cock. Her pussy met no resistance and she slammed into the bed losing her balance she toppled off the bed and onto the floor.
Streek screamed out he had been French kissing Slinky when she was ripped off his tongue. His mind was saying to much teeth and she was gone.
Anil looked to Streek, “Do you have them?”
Streek canted his head and the strain was evident on his face, “No, faintly I feel something, but No I can't be sure. Maybe if Slinky reaches out... but not now.”
“Keep searching I will contact Goshen.”
Where am I
I looked around, all around me seemed to be stone walls. Some distance away was earth moving equipment. I large drag-line with a bucket bigger than most dump trucks the Boom on the drag-line was over 60 feet long. I was thinking wow that is a big piece of gear.
I turned to Slinky and she was nodding her head 'NO' she could not connect with Streek. It was like a teaser she could feel him but couldn't touch him.
Both of our heads came up. We had both heard a very loud noise. We turned toward the drag-line it was giving off exhaust smoke, then we heard a grating noise of gears clashing trying to mesh. The tracks began to move and the behemoth was coming our way. Other machines began to start as well. The very large front end loader turned our way. It was a lot faster than the drag-line and it was charging our way.
As it neared the bucket raised with the intention of smashing it down on us. I pulled out my wand to enhance my spells. I began a subliminal chant within seconds Slinky had begun her chant as well. My thoughts was all on my spell would my invulnerability spell be strong enough. I was soon to find out, the loader was here.
The bucket was at full height and it started downward, the bucket reached my protection with a flash of lightening the bucket hit smashed above me. For a moment nothing happened then there was a screech of metal on metal and the bucket rebounded up to its apex, hesitated then tilted over backwards.
Slinky stepped out of my protective circle grabbed the the front end loader with a large red hand on an arm of steel and began to spin it around and around up on releasing the loader it flew high in the air. It came crashing down in thousand pieces in front of the tracks of the drag-line.
The tracks slipped on the slick metal finally grabbing traction and crawling over the debris and coming on toward us. The engine of the huge Dump truck fired up and the gears meshed. Standing on the hood was a large hairy creature. Running along side the Truck was a beautiful Snow leopard. The Silver-Back Ogre had shown his face.
Slinky stepped back in the circle, she squinted her eyes and twisted up her face. A faint movement of the air in front of her was slowly emerging into Streek's face...he smiled then disappeared with a pop.
I was hoping he had seen us and was bringing assistance.
I am not fool enough to think I am strong enough to take on a full fledged Wizard. Especially one of the caliber of Jo-be the Silver wizard. There is no doubt that I am strong, there is also no doubt I am virtually untrained. In my mind I am screaming I need help.
Jo-be has started all the machinery in the Quarry and it is moving toward us. I racked my brain for something to use...I cast my mind back to Goshen. I grasped and transported and dropped 5 Cesterian worms in front of the machinery. The worms began to dig their trenches and machinery began falling into the trenches.
Jo-be roared in anger he ordered the drag-line. The huge bucket arose the teeth on the bucket was 14” long and 5” thick, they were 10” apart. He lifted the bucket high and dropped it on the worms. I did not take long until the worms were dead. The trenches still held them out. A dozer began pushing rock and dirt to fill the trenches.
My thoughts the SOB is making a bridge. Coming from behind the Truck was a large group of Orcs. Oh how I hate Orcs. I checked my pistols even I knew they were fully loaded. I knew I could take out a lot of the Orcs with my pistols. But to use them I would have to step out side my circle. I could cast spells but not push anything solid thru the circle wall.
I focused on the connection between the bucket and the cable I waited till Jo-be raised the bucket high. A few days ago a bolt holding the seat on Artie's bike the seat twisted but the nut on that bold was frozen. When he wasn't looking I used a small spell to loosen the nut. I now took that spell and modified it to work on the connection to release the bucket.
Jo-be was moving the bucket to the side which moved it right above the hood of the truck on which he was standing. I cast the spell and the cable sprang free. The bucket was falling straight for him when he heard the roar from the Snow Leopard, Suelee. He looked and leaped aside just in time. He slung a spell instantly which hit the bucket and caused it to change directions.
It was heading for my circle. The teeth tore the fabric of my circle, I can not repair the circle... it is a time spell. Now what am I going to do. I know I am not as strong even if slinky helps. I try to use what is left of the circle. He could have sent in the Orcs and we would have been easy prey, He decided they weren't needed and he dismissed them.
Jo-be seeing my dilemma began casting various spells, a fire ball, a lightening bolt and a water blast. I cast a shield which diverted his spells. He just looked at me and smiled. I knew he was building to a full magical blast. I didn't know what his primary attack was, mine was Ice which I had never used except in practice.
I gathered myself to ward off his attack. I was a bit worried, I had lost track of Slinky. I looked at Jo-be and could see a circle of electrical energy around him....Damn it would be Lightening. He pointed at me and the electrical charge left his finger aimed at me. I cast my Ice bolt. The two spells met midway between us. The Ice formed a dome shape but was melting quickly his electrical bolts were pushing my Ice back at me.
Slowly I was losing, I was weakening soon he would penetrate my shield. Then I would be finished, where was Slinky. I heard the scream of the snow Cat.
I was down to my knees his bolt was less than 6 feet from me and fading fast.. Suddenly it seemed like my ice was pushing Jo-be' s lightening back. I felt something next to my leg and heard a small voice. “It is not nice for you to attack my teacher. “
Linda my savior is a now 10 year old little girl. Jo-be buckled down and increased the force, he was holding both of us back . I heard him roar and his force relaxed for a second but was right back. He was waving above his head .
I had to laugh attacking an Ogre and a wizard Ogre at that was a Tiny owl, Princess Aden.. then he growled and screamed … Ooh Harpy claws in both shoulders had to hurt. He screamed again and his energy bolt ceased to exist. He was grabbing for his crotch when a ferret stuck her head out of his pants.
Jo-be was screaming I quit, a pair of arms wrapped around his body from the rear and a pair from the front as well two centaurs had a grip that even an Ogre couldn't break. Slinky finally showed up. She had been holding the rift open for my group to enter. She had to get her licks in and nipped Jo-be' s left ear. Which finished stunning him.
I heard a voice beside the truck and walked over to see what was going on. Roli was holding the head of the Snow Leopard and Barf was buried in her pussy hollering tease this bitch. And Rowrf was writing on his clip board. He smiled at me and said I am next. Do you want a turn.
A few minutes later and we were surrounded by the Queen and the full Wizards Council.
According to the Laws of Goshen a Wizard can be stripped of his powers but a Wizard can not be sentenced to death. During the Wizards trial Jo-be was questioned. It came out about Marona and him being upset that I had taken what he had claimed as his, Marona' s Cherry. It was explained that The Green had woven a spell that was a transport spell but busting her Cherry was required. The twists of Ambrose's mind was the cause of the problem.
Jo-be said but I still want her and she is gone. The Brown said “Not exactly, Marona,” The slim and trim Marona stepped forward. Jo-be gathered her in his arms and began to cry.
It was decided that Jo-be had misinterpreted the information from Ambroses head. And he was only guilty of love and lust. He was granted Marona as his apprentice. After a happy gathering of my group they all departed to Goshen, except Slinky, she stayed with me.

The Sharjah Police have solved the mystery behind the death of a Bangladeshi man whose body was found with stab wounds in Industrial Area 1 behind Sharjah City Centre last month.
Six persons, including the man’s wife and her lover have been arrested.
All suspects are Bangladeshis. The police said the motive was a large sum of money the victim received from his brother.
On February 19, a 35-year-old man’s death was reported.
An officer at the Criminal Investigation Department (CID) said the police worked hard to unravel the mystery.
“The murder took place behind the shopping centre. When the police arrived on the scene, they found the victim lying in a pool of blood,” said the officer. The police found two bicycles nearby and suspected that they might have been used in the crime.
“The victim had multiple stab wounds, mostly on his right thigh.
The police also found a knife and a wooden log, both of which had stains of victim’s blood.”
There were identification documents on the victim but the cops later learnt that the man lived with his wife in an apartment in Al Majaz area.
When the police reached the apartment, the woman said she was told that her husband had met with an accident and his friend gave her the victim’s mobile phone.
The woman later admitted she had an illicit affair with the victim’s friend. The victim had received a large sum of money recently and the friend knew the money had been deposited in the former’s bank account.
The CID team arrested the man and an accomplice while they were trying to flee the country through one of the land borders.
When they were brought in for questioning, the two suspects confessed that they planned to kill the victim after the latter received money from his brother, who lived in Europe.
The woman’s lover said he found out the secret PIN of the victim’s ATM card and took the help of another accomplice and hired two hit men to carry out the murder.
The five men stabbed and clubbed him to death and split the money among themselves and the woman.
The case has been transferred to the Sharjah Public Prosecution.

At times I've known if I answer truthfully I'm going to lose a friend, but chose to do it anyway. It's really an easy choice for me now realizing how painful the alternative is. What a miserable life trying to figure out who you're switching to be real quick so as to make sure you don't upset anyone. In reality when you do that you upset the most important person of all. (God)
In Bible times merchants would sometimes keep rocks of different weights that were marked wrong, "scales" that were inaccurate when they saw certain buyers approaching. If they knew these people had more money they would pull out a dishonest scale to charge them more. In other words, they changed based upon who they were with, for personal gain, albeit short lived personal gain. Proverbs 11:1 says, "The LORD abhors dishonest scales, but accurate weights are his delight."
I realize I'm taking a risk by what I write at times . I've lost people from my life because of what I've blogged though never intentionally. It would never be my desire to hurt someone. At the same time, I'm not willing to be anyone other than who God has made me. Living free is not something I'm willing to negotiate.
A few years ago I got a call from a friend who pastors a church. They were really upset and in the process of making a decision about possibly letting go of a staff member. They wanted my opinion on what had taken place. It's not uncommon for me to get calls like this for a number of reasons -- I'm a pastor, a pastor's wife, and a career coach and have lots of good friends and never mind making the time to listen or help if I possibly can. On this day my friend was very upset because on their church's women's retreat over the previous weekend the youth pastor's wife did something my friend considered "very inappropriate". My mind could only imagine what they indiscretions were. Imagine my shock when my friend shared with me that the youth pastor's wife had been in a hotel room at retreat with a bunch of ladies in the church and they were singing the song, "Brick House" and dancing! (Gasp!!)
Next came the question from my friend: "So Deanna...what would you do? Would you fire a minister on staff for conduct like this by them or their spouse?"
I took a gulp, and knew I was probably getting ready to lose a friendship and also ministry opportunities. You see this was a friend I also preached for several times before and had a very good relationship with but I could see the writing on the wall...
I said, "ummm...well, I guess this might be the time to confess to you that Brick House is on my IPOD, and is one of my favorite workout songs..."
I thought my friend was waiting for a lightning bolt to come down and strike me straight to hell. They have very strong convictions about both "secular" music and dancing.
I said, "NO, please don't fire them!!
I was honest with my friend, even knowing their convictions are a bit different from mine. And that's okay. They appreciated my honesty. We're still friends. I've preached for them since. I resisted the temptation to sing Brick House before asking the church to open their bibles that morning.
On another occasion Larry and I traveled many miles away to a wedding in another state. The pastor and spouse (from another AG church) were there and are wonderful people who performed the wedding ceremony. During the reception I was having a grand time just being me, enjoying all the festivities. The pastor's wife of the church sat in the corner quietly and looked as if she wanted to join in the fun but held back. She glanced at the people doing the Electric Slide with wistful eyes. You could tell she was really wanting to join in with everyone else but she was afraid of what might happen if she did. I was quite sweaty and parched after doing a round of the Chicken Dance. I got a cup of punch and sat down for a few moments to rest and she came over to talk to me and said, "You look like you're having so much fun, Deanna. It must be so nice to NOT have your church people here..." I knew this would probably depress her more but I told the truth. I said, "Actually, I wouldn't change a thing if my church people were here! I decided to be me a long time ago, and they accept me for who I am. I decided a while back that being myself wasn't an option."
How about you? Do you morph into someone you're not in order to keep relationships or opportunities?
I believe this is a hard but necessary question for all of us, especially in leadership.

Hoax call to blow up Red Fort sends police into tizzy, one held
By PTI | Published: 16th July 2017 04:57 PM |
NEW DELHI: The Delhi Police was thrown into a tizzy when it was alerted by a man about a threat call about blowing up the Red Fort.
The call later turned out to be a hoax, officials said.
The matter was reported to the Begumpur police station around 7.30 pm yesterday. Later, the accused, who had made the call "just for fun", was nabbed, the police said.
Nitin Kumar, who informed the police about the call, recalled the almost three-hour long ordeal that he went through yesterday.
"I was in my digital marketing class when I got a call around 7 pm from a man, claiming to be from Pakistan.
"He said that there will be a bomb blast at the Red Fort around 8.30 pm. He also claimed that there is a bomb planted in a hotel in Connaught Place," Kumar told PTI.
It was a Delhi number from which the call was made, he said, adding that he alerted the police soon after.
Kumar said that Police Control Room vans rushed to his residence in Rohini within no time, making his mother worried.
Kumar said he was called to the Prashant Vihar police station since he was closer to it, and the caller was traced to a hotel in Paharganj.
Personnel from the Paharganj police station visited the hotel and arrested a 22-year-old man, identified as Mehfuz.
Mehfuz is a resident of Kishanganj in Bihar and was working as a manager in the hotel for the last couple of years.
He told the police that he had made the call just for "fun" and had randomly dialled a couple of numbers.
The others did not take his call, and it was only Kumar who responded, the police said.

3/11/2017 Bennett Spring fishing trip by John Bush
Matthew Peet and I went to Bennett Springs yesterday for our monthly fishing out. Most people backed out either due to the cold or illness, but it was a very good day of fishing despite the cold weather.
Both of us caught numerous fish, and had a bunch of rainbows as well as several nice browns.
I caught all of mine except for about 3 on the Top Secret midge, and Matt was catching his on an RS-2.
Small flies were key for yesterday as I think both of us were fishing either a size 18 or 20.

- Luke Cyphers
- 0 Shares
BEIJING -- They are sad, and a little worried, and their hearts go out to the family of Todd Bachman, the father-in-law of U.S. men's volleyball coach Hugh McCutcheon who was murdered by a Chinese citizen in Beijing on Saturday.
But a few everyday residents here also want Americans to know that the crime shouldn't stop them from feeling welcome, and that their country is generally safe for, and open to, foreigners.
Mr. Li and Mrs. Chen, who did not provide their full names, are a married couple who run a small print shop in a traditional alleyway neighborhood in the old center of the city. They asked, through an interpreter, that Americans not hold the crime against their city or their nation.
"We are sorry it happened," Li said. "But in a country of 1.3 billion people, you could have some people who would do these things."
They stressed that such incidents are rare in China, where crimes against foreigners are punished more harshly than crimes against Chinese.
"Normally, these things don't happen," Li said.
He said he wants Americans to keep visiting.
"Americans are very great," Li said. "They make a lot of contributions to the world. We hope this doesn't have a bad effect on the U.S. and China." The China he wants the world to know is the one that showcased its history and technology at the opening ceremony Friday night.
A pair of 20-something Beijing residents agreed.
A man who identified himself as "Max," and his friend, who did not give his name, said they wanted to stress how the Olympics have improved their city, with massive developments in transportation and parks in the past seven years. They say they know this not just because they've observed improvements, but also because they've worked on them as systems managers at Beijing's new airport terminal.
They were out on a day off, walking in their alley neighborhood near Tiananmen Square, as local streets teemed with sightseers from all parts of the world, but mainly from China.
They hadn't heard many details of the stabbings, but they were quick to add that the crime was unusual.
"These things don't happen very often," Max said. "Beijing is a capital city, and there is so much security here."
But the security couldn't stop everything.
"The man who did this, I don't know what he was thinking about," Liu said. "We want to see foreigners. We want to talk to them and learn about them and show them China."
Luke Cyphers is a senior writer for ESPN The Magazine.

‘Age Of Desire’: How Wharton Lost Her ‘Innocence’
Jennie Fields was well into her new novel about Edith Wharton — and her love affair with a young journalist — when she heard that a new cache of Wharton letters had been discovered. They were written to Anna Bahlmann, who was first Wharton’s governess and later her literary secretary. Bahlmann had never been considered a major influence on Wharton, but Fields had decided to make her a central character in her book, The Age of Desire, even before she heard about the letters. She says she felt certain that Wharton and Bahlmann had a strong relationship.
“They had been together for a great part of Edith’s life and I knew they had to have been close,” Fields says. “So I imagined that was true, but when the letters came out and supported it all, it was eerie and thrilling at the same time.”

Something really weird. Opera had a nervous breakdown and did some random things. Then I saw a message that I had been 'unsubscribed from the forum'. Then Opera melted down completely while I was typing a post. When I got back on-line (with a different browser) I discovered I had been unsubscribed from every forum I was following.
Edit: Now not sure about the above. Something strange definitely happened and I seem to have been unsubscribed from some forums but others appear to be working. As far as I can tell it is normal again.

Murders this Week: 4; Murders this Year: 30
Published: March 14, 2012
Monday, March 5
9:30 p.m. Police were called to the rear of Mary E. Rodman Elementary School in the 3500 block of West Mulberry Street for two assaulted males. When they arrived, they found John Edwards Jr., a 17-year-old African-American male, and Steven Fields, a 19-year-old African-American man, shot in the head behind the school. Both were taken to area hospitals. Edwards died that day at 10:24 p.m. Fields died the next day at 7:40 p.m. Edwards is the third juvenile murdered in the city in eight days.
Wednesday, March 7
11:30 p.m. Javon Johnson, a 21-year-old African-American man, was shot in the head in the 2200 block of West North Avenue near Coppin State University. He died at a local hospital just after midnight.
Sunday, March 10
1:04 a.m. Sherard Houston, a 38-year-old African-American man, was discovered lying on the sidewalk in front of Larayes Bar in the 1000 block of Hoffman Street in East Baltimore, dead. He had been shot in the head several times. This is the second murder in Oliver this year.
The murder of Monae Turnage, a 13-year-old African-American girl, has been closed by arrest. Turnage was at the home of some friends on the evening of March 3. A 12-year-old male and a 13-year-old male were allegedly playing with a rifle that was in the home. The rifle went off, shooting Turnage in the chest. She was then dragged out into the backyard and covered with trash bags. Her family, who started looking for Turnage when she didn’t return home that night, found her body the next day. The 12-year-old and 13-year-old were charged on March 5 with involuntary manslaughter. The records are sealed because they are juveniles. The rifle was allegedly found in the car of off-duty Baltimore Police Officer John A. Ward. He has been suspended from the force. According to WBAL-TV, Ward was in a relationship with a relative of one of the suspects.
> Email Anna Ditkoff

We choose to do all our trips through Princess and in Juneau we went on The whale watch & Mendenhall Glacier trip. we were taken by bus straight from the quayside to the harbour were we picked up our boat that took us to see the whales. The guide was extremely knowledgeable and so enthusiastic as was the Captain of the boat. He knew there was a pod of Orca's in the vicinity and made every effort so we could see them, which we did. He also found Humpback whales for us to see. On returning to the quay side we also spotted our first Bald Eagle. We then were taken to see Mendenhall Glacier were we were split into 2 smaller groups and taken off on trek through the Tongass national forest were the guide explained all the native wildlife, flora and fauna. We then came to a clearing on a beach were we had a spectacular view of the glacier. We were then taken back to Juneau were we got off downtown and explored the shops. We also enjoyed the hospitality of the Red Dog saloon, The Red Dog is a tourist bar but there again the staff were great and the locals very friendly. We then took the courtesy bus back to the ship. Juneau is interesting in itself and definitely worth exploring but as we didn't arrive till 13.30 and has we had pre booked our trips we didn't have enough time to do anything to in depth.
Skagway itself is a small town and the main street is full of jewellery shops, I know these towns survive on tourism and if you are accepting of that fact it does a lot of history as well. It's position on the Yukon Border made it a gateway for the gold rush so perhaps the jewellery stores are appropriate.
We went on the Eagle Preserve Jet boat tour and had to go over to Haines on a ferry. The trip itself went without a hitch, fantastic scenery and of course wonderful wildlife pointed out to us by a knowledgeable guide who was enthusiastic throughout. We were also treated to the hospitality of the people who run these trips and experienced my first weeny roast which was a chance to meet the other adventures on our trip.
The ship docks right in the heart of downtown, and the buses for the trips are only a few steps from the security gate,
We went on The Neets Bay Bear Watch, this trip involves going on a float plane and was the highlight of my holiday. I can only say we were maybe very lucky on the day but to see seven bears all at the one time was truly memorable. We also saw seals, bald eagles, stellar jays and sea lions. Again the guide was extremely knowledgeable and very personable which we have found through out all our tours that we took,
We took a few days extra at the end of our holidays to explore San Francisco. We did the usual Pier 39, Fisherman's Wharf and Alcatraz. it is a busy bustling place and not cheap to get around in. The cable cars are $6 a trip so the best advice is to get a three day pass for $21 which will give unlimited travel although there are some restrictions.
The restaurants are always busy at dinner time and you can expect to wait to be seated. Although breakfast and lunch time don't seem to be that bad.
A city that never sleeps we were staying in the Mark Hopkins in Nob Hill and although we are quite fit some of the hills are challenging. Not recommended to walk this city in anything but comfy shoes.

Among the members of the Jets organization who were on hand to greet new head coach Adam Gase last week was defensive lineman Nathan Shepherd, the third-round selection in last April's draft.
"It was great to meet him," Shepherd said. "I know he's ready to get to work, and I'm getting ready to get to work. My initial reaction is he's a guy that wants to have his office door open. Luckily for me I'm going to be in the building during the offseason, so I'm looking forward to getting to know him."
Shepherd is a thoughtful, studious fellow who came to the Green & White with all those life experiences from growing up in Canada, playing at Simon Fraser University, leaving football and college for a few years to pursue factory and construction work, then returning to the game he loves at Division II Fort Hays State in Kansas.
He had a realistic take on his first season in the pros.
"I would definitely say that I'm not satisfied," Shepherd said. "I have made some good progressions throughout the season, just watching all the tape and stuff like that. But it was definitely not enough for me. I'm nothing more than motivated going into the offseason."
Top Images of the Rookies During the 2018 Season
It was a fairly quiet first season with the Jets, yet one that had some interesting numbers down in the trenches.
For starters, Shepherd was a starter in his first pro game, the Monday night opener at Detroit, and made five starts in all, over the first 10 games. He was always available, having been listed as full-go for every practice, on the injury report for only two weeks, and playing in all 16 games to the tune of 343 defensive snaps.
He did contribute 6.5 tackles for loss/no gain and five QB hits. He also had a very good penalty profile. He was flagged just once all season, for illegal use of hands in the home game against New England, but he drew five holding penalties plus an unsportsmanlike conduct at Tennessee against opposing offensive linemen.
At the end of the season, he had just started devising an offseason workout plan, but he had a general idea of what the coming months would hold for him.
"I know I'm going to the NFLPA Summit, and the NFL is putting on a few programs again in personal finance and business.," he said. "Aside from that, we're looking forward to having my family come and visit me. And I'll be training out here because I'll be in New Jersey for the offseason."
He'll also continue to apply the lessons he said that former head coach Todd Bowles had imparted to him and the Jets before he moved on at the end of the season.
"One thing that Coach Bowles prepared us for is facing adversity, not quitting for sure, and being able to think on the fly and adjust and adapt," he said. "So that's something that moving forward, we're all going to look to do for whatever challenges we have ahead."

No they won't. Most people saying they will quit unless such and such is fixed are just blowing smoke. They are prolly still playing this game cause they're addicted to it.
Thats very possible, but thats not a fact becuase you can't prove it. Its a good theory, but its not a fact.

Bingo, yes, actually bingo. I half heartedly mentioned that bingo was happening in the afternoon. What fun we had. J won first round, which covered the cost for us all. There were no more winnings, but it was such fun.
Here are some ship photos. I can't remember this show.
The poolside screen was amazing. It wa bright and clear in full daylight.
Walk on glass above a lower deck.
K & J attended the Captain''s welcome in their finery of a dinner suit and a long evening dress. They got bored as the champers was taking so long to fill and joined us on the smoking deck. We knew they would come up to there soon enough.
These lasses played classical music around the ship each night, but this night in the smaller venue, they performed in glam costumes. Strings on Fire were terrific.
Imposing beast, was our ship and excuse the French, a big bugger.
I'll have the pork thanks, but from the hindquarters.
Again in the smaller venue, this group were very entertaining.
We are off the coast of somewhere.
Just one last drink on my own before bed. I did that a few times and got sucked into seeing the end of some very badly made movies.
I think this guy's name was Joe and he was Australian. Entertainers were masters of all trades and also had duties of getting us off and on the ship and hosting other things.

01-18-2007, 06:20 PM
Hi, my name is LaNeece. I am currently going 15 years strong with my partner. We have a daughter that is graduating HS this year, I remember when she was two . . . I have struggled for years (especially in the beginning) with who I am. I grew up going to Christian Schools, going to Baptist Churches and attending Bob Jones University. My first "encounter" occurred between my freshman and sophomore years in college. It was like being repelled and drawn at the same time. My head said that this wasn't right because of the way I was raised, yet I knew, in my heart, that this is what had been missing in my life, that I was finally home, the missing piece was finally in place. It's been a long road, but it is so much better now than it ever was. I am sure that I will tell bits and pieces of my journey in the threads here, but for now I think you may have a sense of me. I look forward to interacting with you all.

When I was considering buying an Explorer I brought my buggy board along to the shop to see if it would work. From what I could tell, it would not take a buggy board because there was not enough room for the child on the board to fit inside the handle that you push (and to have the child outside the handle would make it too awkward to push.) The main problem seemed to be that the canvas of the hood came up too far to leave enough space for the child to put their head between it and the handle. Oh dear, does this make any sense at all?
It was a few years ago too, so maybe they have changed design. Anyone with experience?

Regardless of my philosophical attitude about Jeremy moving out and getting his own apartment (with 4 friends, that is), when I walked into his room and saw the big empty space where his bed used to be, I lost it completely.
Richard had not yet gotten back from the game; I was alone in the suddenly empty and echoey house. I realized then that for 19 plus years, since Jeremy was born, and I carried him up those stairs at Verano Place, terrified that I would drop him, he has not lived apart from us. Unlike other kids, he has never gone to overnight camp, taken a trip to visit Granny and Granddad by himself, or spent a week with a friend. He has never wanted to be apart from us that long, though we often encouraged him to do so.
Now he has really grown up, at least nominally. I am not sure how he will like living with all those smelly guys, and paying so much for the privilege. Naturally, being a kid from Irvine, he had to move into the newest apartment, one we would never be able to afford, though we earn many times what those guys do at Ralphs.
I thought about the questionable digs we inhabited in our early years together, and laughed. Jeremy would never live in some of the places we have. He would probably never set foot in them. And our present place is still a sight older, messier, more broken down than the one he has moved into, with its weight room and other amenities.
I hope he has a wonderful time, and enjoys his freedom now that he is a bit more able to deal with it responsibly than he was when he lost his license last year.
Now I just need to reassure the cats, who are really freaked out. Whistler is wandering around mewing frantically, looking around Jeremy's room with his ears back and his tail puffed up twice its size. Shadow is huddled in a little ball. She tried to go under my covers in the middle of the night, insistently pawing at me till I threw her off the bed.
I plan to buy a cat scratching post/pedestal for them to sit on and look out the window in Jeremy's room, and also to move this computer and desk into the room, looking out the window myself as I work. That will make us all feel better.

Ya'll! I am the absolute worst sister on the face of the planet... today is my little sister, Gabby's birthday... and I didn't get a chance to call her. (insert a sad face with a tear here)
It's not at all that I didn't remember - I thought about her all day, but didn't call because I was at work and she was probably at school... then when I was driving home - I was talking to John about some stuff I need him to teach me for work.
Then he had Worship Team practice tonight so I rushed and rushed to get dinner ready so he could eat before leaving... I sat down with the phone when he left... to call her of course, and an hour and a half later - I just woke up and she's surely in bed because it's 9:30 their time!
So yes, I'm the worst sister ever - and I can only hope that this doesn't cause her permanent psychological damage and expensive counseling in her teens and 20's.

Bryon Willey started his one-man business at the age of 13
Bryon Willey, 70, started his one-man business at the age of 13 and it is the only job he has ever done.
The popular milkman has seen generations of customers grow up and even delivered to the maternity unit on the day his own two children were born.
Grandad Bryon, of King's Stanley, Gloucestershire, said: “I have always enjoyed the job.
“Over the years customers have felt like friends, it's been great to meet so many people.
“I have watched many of them grow up, delivering to them as small children and then later on seeing them grow up with children of their own whilst still being their milkman.
“Some of them even ended up working for me delivering the milk.
“I am pleased to have had many good helpers over the years, it's been great to watch them grow up as well.”
Bryon started delivering part time as a 13 year-old schoolboy.
The popular milkman has seen generations of customers grow up
In 1986 he bought his own milk round covering King's Stanley, Leonard Stanley and Selsey
Over the years customers have felt like friends, it's been great to meet so many people
When he left school two years later he took up a full-time position delivering milk and working a local farm seven days a week.
In 1986 he bought his own milk round covering King's Stanley, Leonard Stanley and Selsey and served around 500 customers.
Since then, he has worked every single day and remembers trekking through heavy snow in 1962 and 1981.
He finally completed his last round on April 2 and said: “I shall definitely miss it. It has been hard work but enjoyable.”
Bryon started delivering part time as a 13 year-old schoolboy and started full-time two years later
Bryon was married to Marion, who died in 2013, and has daughter Sarah, 35, and son David, 33.
When Sarah was just a day old he delivered milk to Stroud Maternity Hospital, calling in to see Marion and their newborn daughter.
He even managed to finish his rounds in time for the birth of both his children.
In retirement he plans to visit his son in Australia and spending more time with Sarah and granddaughter Chloe, 2, who live near in King's Stanley.

THOMAS Cohen has said he "wasn't surprised" to find his wife Peaches Geldof dead at their home - and revealed how he had to prepare lunch for their children an hour later.
Bob Geldof's daughter Peaches was at their house in Kent with 11-month-old son Astala when she overdosed on heroin in 2014.
Their baby boy had been alone with his mum for eight hours before Thomas came home.
In a candid new interview with German newspaper Bild, he said: "When I found her, I was not surprised. I thought to myself at the moment: 'Yes of course - you had to do that.'
Thomas said he 'wasn't surprised' by her death from a heroin overdose"What I can remember, it must have been an hour after I've found it, that it's time for the kids' lunch.
"They needed their lunch. So I took the children's chairs to the table, took the yogurts out of the fridge, the bananas...
most read in TV & Showbiz
"The routine I had to keep up with the children helped me a lot.
"They have lived longer than they knew their mother. They were just one and two years. Now they are four and five."
Thomas - who is currently dating Zoe Sidel after splitting from Peaches's friend Daisy Lowe - admitted it was "traumatising" to hear that drugs had killed Peaches.
He said: "Heroin is a drug where you're trying to enforce something on you that's greater than life. You can only really... it's horrible you're filling your body with something.
"It was incredible traumatising after it happened... a few months after."
Speaking about his children, he continued: "I want them to be happy, I don't care what they end up doing.
"They are miraculously having happy childhoods which hopefully leads to happy fruitful lives."
The S.C.U.M rocker has rarely spoken about his grief, but in a Sunday Times Magazine interview last year, he revealed how becoming a single dad at 23 affected him.
He said: "I had two children who needed to be taken care of and, in maybe early June 2014, I started to do that, and we're now here in 2016.
"I just made the decision to start looking after myself and I refused to lose myself and become a traumatised, grief-stricken single father who everyone's going to look at and think and feel all of these things about.
"And that's absolutely fine. However, by this stage, if somebody looks at me like that, then it's just a projection."
Peaches's death came after her mother Paula Yates died from an accidental heroin overdose in 2000, aged 41.
She died on Peaches' tenth birthday. Paula was alone in the house with her four-year-old daughter Heavenly Hiraani Tiger Lily, whose dad is Michael Hutchence.
"The way she was carrying on, there's nothing you can do about it.
"This thing of being forever 25, in my head, that's unbearable, simply because of that cliché - you're not supposed to see your children die.
"She's very present. Time does not heal, it accommodates. But it is not accommodating this."
Got a story? email email@example.com or call us direct on 02077824220

Felix Basset is a friend I made when I went on a school trip to France in 2005 when I was 14 years old. He wasn’t even my host, he was another students’ but we connected and have stayed in contact ever since. When Kel and I arrived in France, Felix offered for us to stay at his parents’ place in Fleurines. He said that his parents would love to have us and that we could stay as long as we’d like! It was an offer too good we couldn’t refuse.
After a long hard cycle, we finally found the house of the Basset family. The Basset Family are a very special family! We had the pleasure of staying with Francoise and Frederic for one week. They are proud parents of 3 children. They don’t live under one roof as they are all living in different parts of France. Felix lives in Amiens, Noemie lives in Marseille and Adrien lives in Troyes. Fred and Francoise really opened their home to us. They said to treat this house as if it were your own. They showed us to our room, the kitchen where they said to take anything we wanted, the TV, even offering their keys to a car so we could get around. It was like we had known them for years. They had so much trust in us that they would leave their house in our hands while they were working and we’d only just met! They treated us really like family, as if we were their children.
It was great to live with a French family and experience the food culture! For le petit dejeuner (breakfast) we would either have some sort of pastry or a slice of vanilla cake made by Francoise, with some tea. Le dejeuner (lunch) would differ. If both F and F were at work we would drive down to the shops and get a baguette, slices of ham or salami, some slices of cheese and either go to a park or back home to enjoy it in the sun. Fred was home one lunch time as he had a night shift (he works with Air France) that night and barbequed salmon and we had it with crème fraiche and pasta – delicious!
Pour le diner (you guessed it – dinner!) it was very special. Francoise would prepare an entrée, main, followed by cheese and dessert. The entrée was always something very fresh. To me it was sort of Mediterranean. Lots of fresh tomatoes, mint from the garden and olive oil featured a lot. One night we had tomatoes which she had confit’d – not sure what the proper word is haha – which were delicious!!!! Mains had some sort of meat with rice or potatoes and vegetables. Then came the cheese platter (yes, cheese platter is after dinner, not before), which ended up being our favourite part of the meal. Brie, camembert, blue cheese, comte, different types of goats cheese and I forget the names of the others. Goats cheese is definitely my favourite type. That oozy, creamy goodness slathered onto a piece of crunchy baguette, washed down with a glass of wine … oh la la!!!! We now have a new appreciation for cheese and wine. The amount of different cheese they have in the supermarkets is five times the amount back home. We don’t consider ourselves big drinkers, especially for wine, but I think we acquired a taste for wine staying with the Basset’s. We would look forward to cheese and wine time!
In the French culture, dinner time is not just to eat your meal and leave. It is a time to slowly eat each course and talk about each other’s day. In our case it was a funny time as we would speak both French and English around the dinner table. I could speak French with them and Fred can speak English. Francoise could speak some English whereas Kel couldn’t really understand any French so they would teach each other words, sometimes having conversations via charades haha. We shared many laughs at their table. The weather really improved when we arrived so most nights we’d eat outside. As it only gets really dark about 10:30pm, the sun would be out and it would be perfect!
Over the weekend we took a train to Amiens to visit Felix where he is studying medicine. It was really great fun spending time with him. We met some of his friends who were so nice and welcoming. In France, everyone has to learn English at school so most young people have at least basic knowledge of English – but most are too shy to use it! Fex’s friends were really friendly and we all got along so well. Strangely enough their English seemed to get better as the night went on haha. A couple of the guys produce music which is really amazing. Amiens is a student city and what’s interesting is that most students live on their own in a one bedroom apartment. Some do have flat mates but most just have their own place.
We ended up staying for one week and one day in Fleurines and it was much harder to leave than we thought. Since they wouldn’t take any money for anything, we did little things like wash the car, Kel mowed the lawn, I cooked one night etc. To say thank you I wrote a note on some handmade paper I had bought in Nepal and gave them a cushion cover from India. Francoise ended up crying after reading the letter and when we were saying bye as we were leaving! They really did become our French parents. We will be forever grateful that they let us stay and are so appreciative of their generosity and kindness! They will definitely be lifelong friends of ours!
PS we are so upset as we didn’t take as many photos as we should’ve with them! I guess we were enjoying ourselves too much!

The amount is said to have been given to them after the meeting at the Presidential Villa on July 22nd between a few of the parents and leaders of the Chibok community.
According to the report, the funds were released to leaders of the Chibok community in Abuja, but some parents are now alleging they were shortchanged by the leaders.
A parent who was among those who visited the commander-in-chief, told BBC’s Abdu Halilu that he got only N200,000.
“I got only N200,000 out of the said N100million allegedly received by our leaders in Abuja. Some of us got N300,000 and some less than that.
Our leaders in Abuja are using the girls to enrich themselves. In fact, some of the parents were screened out of the entourage by the Chibok leaders in Abuja. Many of them were residents of Abuja, not parents of the kidnapped girls.” he said.
Another parent shares that he got only N7,000 out of the money shared. “I was at the farm when they brought the N7, 000 to my house and I collected it. Some of us got even less, N300 and below.” he said.
The parents however made it known that they were not selling their daughters and that the money from the Presidency was unexpected.
“After we met with the presidency, the parents were given monies in envelopes and that’s all. All other things they are saying about N100million, I don’t know about that.”, said Pobu Bitrus who is one of the community leaders and member of the House of Representatives.
Reps for the President including Reuben Abati and Doyin Okupe could not be reached for comments.

There are times when life just does not make sense.
There are things in this world that are so tragic and so real.....that I find that when I focus on them, it saddens me to the core.
A young man named Sean Maher died this past weekend. He was missing since Friday and a huge search went out to find him. He was 21 and like Emma Sage was born with Trisomy 21.
While I did not know Sean, from the accounts of his life, he lived a life that any of us would be blessed to live. He was truly an inspiration, living independently, following his dreams and interests and surrounded by family and friends who loved and adored him.
"Because I have loved life, I shall have no sorrow to die."~Amelia Burr
Tonight, I hold my children close to my heart, knowing that life is to be lived and what a blessing it is that they are here with me. But my heart is heavy for Sean's family at the tragic loss of their beloved Sean.

Billie Paul Piper, born as Leian Paul Piper, is an English actress, dancer, and also a former singer from Swindon, Wiltshire. Billie Piper’s net worth is estimated to be an astounding amount of $12 million. Billie Piper has released many songs till date because of which she has been able to make this sum of money.
The English actress and singer, Billie Piper, started her career in the entertainment industry as a singer from the age of 15. Apart from her singing, she has also acted in numerous movies and has done television shows through which Piper has collected a considerable amount of money into her account. Her career also includes innumerable awards that she has received from her work which also helped to increase Billie Piper’s value.
Billie Piper’s successful career has made her worth reach $12 million. Her charming face and incredible talent have helped her a lot to receive many works and projects which she does by perfection. It is clear that Piper gets a considerable sum of money because of her talent as in one of the interviews she claims to work for exciting projects rather than the work that gives her high incentives. Piper’s $12 million includes her earnings from movies, TV shows, and her career as a singer.
Billie Piper has a Net worth of $12 million which includes her earnings from singing and acting career. Image Source: Metro Newspaper UK
Billie Piper has done a countless amount of work in her career through which she has received large income. Although the figures are not exact, we have wages of some work that she has done. Piper earned £400,000 for the final season on top of generous pay deals for the earlier series.
View this post on Instagram
Billie Piper, in 2003, was cast in the BBC’s hit The Miller’s Tale, which was the part of the channel’s modern take on Chaucer’s Canterbury Tales. The casting directors were so impressed by her performance that helped her grab the role which blasted her career and earnings.
Reportedly, BBC paid her £210,000 to make her stay for the second series which was scheduled for 2005. This amount was very high compared to other actors as the average salary they received in the series was about £166,0000.
Apart from the TV shows, Piper began her singing career at the age of 15 from the time she released her debut single Because We Want To which hit the top of the UK Singles Chart. Billie Piper was the youngest artist ever to have reached the top of the chart. Honey To The B (1998) was the album that followed her hit single. The album was certified platinum and double platinum by two different recording industries.
View this post on Instagram
The English actress and singer, Billie Piper’s value were rocketing sky high as she was in high demand for her work.
Billie Piper has received numerous awards for her works. She has won many Best Actress Awards, and most particularly, Laurence Olivier Award for her performance in Yerma. She received a total of six Best Actress Awards just for this single performance, which includes the Olivier Award that made Piper the only actor to have grabbed six out of six awards for the best actress for a single performance.
These incredible remarks have made Billie Piper worth the value she is now.

I only worked 4 hours. As much as I would love to work full-time, 8 hours a day, 5 days a week, I really enjoy sleeping in and having afternoons off. I think in the new year I may start looking for a new job because I am finding working 2 part-time jobs, 6 days a week, is wearing on me.
I had my monthly chiropractor appointment; I really don't know what I would do without him! Last week I had some blood work done and noticed on the report that one of the things was flagged. I have yet to hear from my doctor, but took my results to my chiropractor and he told me exactly what I needed to do to.
I went home to visit my dog. As much as I love living with my boyfriend, I do miss living at home because of this handsome guy below. To help my mom out, I normally stop by the house once or twice a week to visit with him.
I managed to get some Christmas shopping done, and even managed to wrap two presents to put under the tree. I am almost done buying presents for my family here, but still have to shop for D's family. His parents told us not to get them anything, which I refuse to do, and I haven't the slightest clue what to get his nephews (age 4 and 6) because they already have TONS of toys!
I didn't turn my laptop on. I thought about it, but couldn't be bothered to walk over to the table to use it. Instead, I spent the evening relaxing and watching TV (specifically, Hart of Dixie).
I am currently obsessed with Hart of Dixie, I don't think I have admitted this yet. I think its probably my top favorite shows that I am watching. The best part, my boyfriend will even sit down and watch it with me!

This week, I travelled up to Somerset to take my Dad for his Chemotherapy again and it went well. Although he is feeling more tired as a result of the treatment, the nausea tablets are working very well and his breathing seems to improve as a result of the drugs. Luckily, Dad has a week off the chemotherapy this coming week so I will also have a bit more time at home to catch up on a few things.
This week also threw up a rather interesting encounter with a bat.
My wife woke me in the morning to inform me that my cat, Sam, had caught a bat and that she had rescued it and put it in a box on the table downstairs. Obviously, with bats being a protected species, I did a little research online and made sure that the box was OK and that there was a tea towel and water in it. The bat was full of beans so I left it to its own devices while I contacted the local bat rescue people. A couple of hours later, I had safely delivered it to the bat rescuers and they said that they would be back in touch to arrange a release at our home... so that is something cool to look forward to. It was a Pipistrelle bat and had a few little blemishes... but would likely make a good recovery.
This week seems to be one of abrupt wake-ups. Thursday night, just after midnight, I hear my daughter arrive home from her job at the pub as usual but then I get "Dad... I've had a crash". Luckily she was none the worse for wear and had only bruised her knee but I got up, dressed and we went off into the wilds of Cornwall to rescue her little motorbike. Another lucky break was that the bike wasn't badly damaged and we got it started quickly so that she could ride it home. Just a broken windscreen and a few bent brackets that were easily straightened. Needless to say, it doesn't look as shiny and new as it did here:
Click the Pic!
Friday was a pub night... Saturday was a house warming party at a friend's house, where the three of us had a great time (including learning how dreadlocks are created and cared for... something that a gentleman was kind enough to explain). Today has seen a trip over to the railway station to drop my daughter off so that she could go visiting and the very smallest amount of sculpting.
Did I mention sculpting? Well... I have been sculpting a little this week but sadly it isn't stuff that I am able to share with you yet. One of the sculpts is for a charity sculpting competition that you can find here (if you are on Facebook):
The other sculpting is something that will likely end up for sale at some point over at...
Speaking of my little shop-blog, I have recently posted an update with regards to the Exo-Armour Legs and the Halfling Snipers so pop over to have a look.
This coming week, I plan to get some stuff up for sale and catch up on some stuff... maybe get some proper sculpting time in as well. Weather dependent... I may even get to see the sea.
See you from the traffic jam!

I always thought there was something unusual about this. Most 14-year-old dogs do not have the exercise capacity, strength or agility of a four year old. But Misty had.
In March I observed as she approached a three foot high wire fence, saw no way under or through it, and launched herself into the most beautiful, graceful leap, clearing the top of it with ease, and landing gently in the grass, to spin round and ask for the frisbee to be thrown.
I watched her all through that night, waiting -as advised- for her internal bleeding to stop. It might have done. It had stopped before, and recovering her strength, she had got on with life.
She had a great will to live.
She was an outdoor dog, never happier than when ranging for miles through fields and woods, and as her years advanced, she showed no signs of slowing-down.
For those who read Misty's Blog-you will know that on June 5th 2012 she succumbed to Hemangiosarcoma. This fit, happy, almost supernormally-strong dog, who defied all signs of aging (she was nearly 15) -lay down on her bed on the night of the 4th June, and couldn’t get up.
Warning! Free downloads of the book "Angel From the Streets" have been found online. These free downloads are illegal, pirated, and may contain malware.
Reviews from readers...
She lived like that every day, had basic good health, no chronic conditions, and surmounted any odds (two lots of successful breast surgery in the Spring of 2012.) I was convinced she had many years still in her, and hoped she would die an “old lady”, in her bed aged perhaps eighteen. It was feasible.
I had never known a dog like her; a good girl, obedient, sociable, loving, loyal and sweet-natured, with an elegance and grace of character of such an exquisite kind I had never met before in a dog.
She was my Soul Friend. I have no children, but even so, I never felt that she was my "baby". She was never treated as a baby, but as a dog. Yet our close connection was never that of "owner" and "pet". It cut across those boundaries.
There was no species-barrier, she was sister to me, companion, equal, the one I loved. In life it was just the two of us, as friends and most of my family had died.
Yes I was her protector, but equally, she was mine. Thanks to her companionship she restored me to the place I belonged.
However, on that last night, I was the one in charge. At 6 a.m., with no improvement -instead, a sudden worsening of symptoms, and with a dreadful prognosis for her blood cancer, I made the terrible decision protectors often have to make. To have her euthanised.
She passed away quickly and peacefully. The whole procedure took only five seconds. I heard her last breath being taken as I held her gently, whispering to her to go to sleep, that it was alright now.
After that last breath an awful silence started. A silence like no other.
Her body went to the earth, for she had always loved the earth, her feet had always smelled of it. I planted flowers above her, and a little solar light to shine out in the darkness.
And my grieving began. I had never known a devastation like it.

Today is our 17th wedding anniversary. We were married July 4th, 1992 when I was 19. If you'd asked me on that day what I would be doing on my 17th anniversary I can guarantee you the answer would not have been - RUNNING 19.2 Km (12 miles).
Yep, that's what we did this morning!!!
I wanted to get my monthly weigh in done at weight watchers today before we go away. I got this crazy idea in my head that I would run to my meeting, then run/walk back home. It's 9.6Km each way - plus my driveway is about 400M, so call it 10K if you want (though we walked the driveway). My husband decided he'd come along with me.
We made it there in 55 minutes which means I've definitely improved on my pace. Especially since it was very easy running and I wasn't pushing for any speed records, this run was just about getting it done. Coming home was a little slower. It was getting HOT out and my muscles were trying to go on strike. We walked a couple short walks, especially up a steep hill, and took one water break at an old gas station. It took us 64 min to come home. So about 2 hours return.
This distance is just a bit short of a half marathon and I feel very confident that I can complete that. I also think that by fall (when I plan to do it) I can finish in about 2:15, probably even less. I admit it would be a dream to finish in under 2 hours.
Also, I just might meet my goal before we leave on Thursday. This mornings weigh-in (at home before we left) was 150.8 ---- the lowest I've been on this journey. That's a loss of 1.2 for this week. I'm going to try my hardest for the next few days. Even if I don't make it, I know I have given it my everything and I'm proud of what I've done.

He knew he had to act, but living alone in a foreign country, juggling education and a part-time job, he had simply given up his health. This 26 year old strong willed man went from 106kg to 85kg with a lot of hard work and consistency. In 3 months he has lost almost 21 kg. Let us know how he did it.
Avjit describes himself as a typical Punjabi who loves to eat. He’d always been on the healthier side of things. He had gained significant weight while studying in Canada. At first he tried to lose weight alone by researching online. He could not focus on his health because he lived alone in a strange place, studied and worked part-time. He would eventually settle for the most convenient foods, such as fast foods and packaged foods.
“We think weight loss is an arduous task and this is the main reason why most fail to balance work with a healthy lifestyle. When Avijit started having health issues and his weight became a barrier between his daily activities, he became concerned,” says Avijit’s fitness instructor Rihana Qureshi, a board-certified nutritionist and strength-training coach.
A diet followed
Avjit had a very hectic lifestyle. He would attend college during the day and hold a part-time job after college. This left him very little time to cook or tend to his diet. His nutritional plan was designed to accommodate his hectic lifestyle as a top priority. Each of his meals had to be filling so that he would not be repeatedly hungry and could make do with fewer meals.
Breakfast usually featured eggs of some form, cooked in copious amounts of olive oil (healthy fats). Lunch consisted of a homemade wrap that was both healthy and easy to make and carry. That was very important. We had to make sure his meals were easy to prepare. His fitness trainer recommended quick and super easy recipes to motivate him to prepare his food most days. Dinner would be a healthy meal of either chicken or meat (as the client didn’t love vegetarian food) with some roasted vegetables.
Avjit’s hectic lifestyle left him very little time to exercise. Avijit is an avid music lover. So he was encouraged to just go for a walk while listening to his favorite music. And it worked wonderfully. He began to love his “music walks.” Seeing the results motivated him so much that he started training too.
The secret of this transformation was simplicity.
We’ve been working on a very basic approach here – the easier you make it for a client, the more consistent they will be and the better the results will be.
Additionally, tracking his progress on a daily basis made him feel like someone was watching out for him and motivated him not to give up.
The hardest part of being overweight
Being overweight brings its fair share of other metabolic issues that affect our health more than weight itself. Add to this the self-confidence and psychological issues one faces.
What lifestyle changes have you made?
Primarily to reduce his addiction to fast food and to encourage him to cook his meals. This was done by sharing some easy to make recipes with him. Also, late evening is the only free time he would get. We encouraged him to go for a walk (after dinner) while listening to his favorite music. This helped digest dinner and improved his sleep schedule as he went to bed tired.
You Can Find related services like Haute Couture Fashion House, Fashion Designer, Fashion Design School, Fashion Accessories Store,

*not their real names
As the team was closing up in the evening, they heard the sound of a motor bike coming towards them. They thought maybe it was the usual last person who always waited for everyone else to leave so that they could come for services. Once the rider came to a halt, they saw that he was carrying a child on his back. A young girl who looked visibly ill and weak. The man asked the team for help to put her down as he packed his motorbike. He desperately explained to the team that he had heard they were providing services and since his wife did not have any means to get to the clinic, she had waited ‘til he was back home to send the child for medication.
As the girl was being treated the man, Lokorii* said that his wife was all alone with the children in their manyatta. This prompted Julius the CORP to enquire how many children he has. Lokorii said that they have seven children. He was very proud when he was saying this. He even said that he wanted another wife so that he can have more children. CORP Julius was very shocked. He could not understand how a man with only a motorcycle as his only asset with no other source of income would want to increase his family even more than it already was - 7 children, wow!. Julius started reasoning with him by asking how he could provide enough food and education for all of them.
Without hesitation he said ‘Kila mtoto hukuja na sahani yake! (every child comes with their own provision). The children will grow. My father had 14 and we are all well so what could possibly stop mine?’ he asked Julius as he picked medicine for his daughter. Julius explained to him that if his father had less children maybe he would have gone to school and have a great job in the city. This made Lokori take pause. He started to understand what Julius was trying to explain. Julius went on to explain how a smaller family would ensure better nutrition and a better chance of having enough for the children he already has.
He then asked CORP Julius how he could ensure that the family would not grow. That is how he got to learn about family planning. Julius took his time to explain and since it was already dusk they agreed that first thing in the morning he would return to the clinic camp with his wife for FP. And they did! CHAT”s Nurse Ann took them through the different methods of FP and they decided on the three year implant. ‘All we need is more knowledge spread to our people and they will make better choices!’ Julius said proudly
Outcomes: In the past three months, through your support CHAT was able to reach a total of 3,982 individuals with behavior change communication (bcc) information with 1,101 clients receiving different contraception methods, of which 934 chose the long-term methods giving 3 and 5-years protection against unwanted pregnancies & 21,615 condoms were distributed.
"It's long been accepted as fact that the availability of family planning services saves lives. Where women have access to these services, children and families are healthier, and society at large benefits"
Project Reports on GlobalGiving are posted directly to globalgiving.org by Project Leaders as they are completed, generally every 3-4 months. To protect the integrity of these documents, GlobalGiving does not alter them; therefore you may find some language or formatting issues.
If you donate to this project or have donated to this project, you will get an e-mail when this project posts a report. You can also subscribe for reports via e-mail without donating.
We'll only email you new reports and updates about this project.
Pay Bill: 891300
Support this important cause by creating a personalized fundraising page.Start a Fundraiser

by Breyanna Tripp
Let me just start off and say that Gini Dietrich, keynote speaker, was amazing. She opened up her presentation talking about Hannah Montana – I mean, Miley Cyrus – and I was instantly drawn in. Dietrich offered advice on how to get your clients to understand the process of public relations and that it takes time. Her presentation was centered on the idea of how “spin sucks,” which is based off her blog and book. The points she made about creating a campaign excited me because my PR classes have hammered the idea of strategic thinking in my head.
I also enjoyed Mark W. Smith’s presentation. Even though his presentation was about how The Washington Post uses its social media, I was still able to apply some of his ideas to my personal social media accounts. I loved his point about how you should deliver on promises instead of trying to trick people. People want to be able to see something of themselves in whatever you are delivering. I also attended his student-only session, and he was so humble. He thoroughly answered all of our questions, and it was great to be able to pick his brain.
I cannot wait to apply their advice to my future career as a PR professional. YouToo was so uplifting and inspiring.

Ethan Embry: 'I Was So Stoned' During 'Can't Hardly Wait' Filming
The actor also reveals his disappointment with the teen movie, which he says was changed significantly for a PG-13 rating.
Ethan Embry says he "was so stoned" during the making of the cult-favorite movie Can't Hardly Wait, he can't remember much about the filming, apart from the director asking him if he was "altered."
"At the time, when we were shooting, I was the world’s biggest stoner," Embry told VH1. "I remember the director came up to me and asked if I was 'altered.' But other than that, nothing sticks out because I was so stoned the entire time."
His heavy smoking also led co-star Jennifer Love Hewitt to give him 50 breath mints before one of their scenes.
Embry suggests his "altered" state during filming may be responsible for him not knowing quotes from the movie 15 years later, and he claims he can't remember whether he does backflips in one scene because he was so high.
But the actor does reveal his disappointment that the film's original, edgier script changed before Can't Hardly Wait was released.
"The script that we read was a very different script than what everybody saw," says Embry. “We had an R-rated script, and a lot of the characters ended up getting cut out so that we could make PG-13. ...That was before American Pie came out. So it was before it was OK for studios to make a raunchy comedy with high school characters."

Wednesday, January 22, 2014
I was thinking about it the other day that it's been 10 years now since that horrible year of my bipolar struggle. I entered the Air Force in February 2004 and had my manic break down in April 2 months later.
So much has changed since then. 2004 was the worst year of my life to date. But even though it was hard it really only took one year to become mostly stable. Which I am fortunate because I know it takes some people much longer to find a medication that works. I got a psychiatrist that was experienced and changed my life more than he will ever know; I sadly cannot tell him since he passed away in 2006.
My brother is one of those struggling with finding a medication that works and finding stability. He does not feel that relief and stops taking the medications causing a downfall and a restart in his recovery. I try and help him with my story, but I out of most people understand he is not comprehending or accepting anything I say. He has not found a decent psychiatrist either which can help him through this time. It's very frustrating seeing him struggle and be tormented for over 6 years with what I went through in one.
I am so thankful for those who have helped me over the years gain this "normal", happy life and hope my brother and others can find it too.

The woman who was with Justin Bieber during his arrest in Miami Beach has ties to Eastern Carolina.
Onslow County deputies confirm that Chantel Jeffries was with the 19-year-old pop star when he was arrested Thursday for drunk driving, resisting arrest and driving with an expired license.
Jeffries, who reportedly is a model, has had her own run-ins with the law in Onslow County.
Deputies say Jeffries was arrested on an assault charge back on February 2, 2011. They say the 21 year old was arrested during an altercation with several other women.
The Onslow County District Attorney's Office says the charge against Jeffries was later dismissed.
The county school system says they have no record of Jeffries ever attending any of their schools.

I agree with almost all of the observations made by Francis. One of the problems at the time was that the members of the Executive Commmittee were not a unified force. In reality I suspect that Gordon McLennan had less in common with Martin Jacques in terms of political outlook than he had with some of those in the CCG. Certainly comrades like Mick McGahey would have reacted strongly at the time of the PPPS battle to the suggestion that the CPGB should change its name and fundamentally change its basic structure. I also believe that a number of Party members were pushed very reluctantly into the CCG and would have far prepared to remain within the CPGB, albeit with reservations on some aspects of policy. The fightback by the EC was fundamentally administrative rather than political and this I believe seriously weakened the Party. Alliances of perceived necessity were made on and around the EC, which I believe some comrades came to regret subsequently.
The only point where I disgree with Francis is that I do believe a minority in the Party leadership were already by the time of the PPPS battle "liquidationist" in outlook. I also believe that the options of those associated with the CCG became very limited - the suspensions and expulsions following the London Dictrict Congress in particular meant that there was no going back. Comrades who wanted to be let back "into the fold" had great obstacles placed in their way and there was also a feeling of solidarity which surrounded them which placed enormous pressure on them not to break ranks.
Sadly, many lessons can now be learned but as Francis points out, you can't replay history. I nevertheless now have deep regrets about the role I played at that critical period in the history of the Party.

The shop was old and didn't really fit well into the surrounding, but it had been recommended to me as the best antique shop in the area, maybe it was the best, I mean the shop itself was antique. I reached for the door and pushed in, a tiny bell above the door jingled alerting the shop owner that someone had just entered. The old man looked up from the glass ware he was cleaning behind the counter and smiled at me, I smiled back and closed the door, making my way to the counter, he put down the glass ware and gave me his full attention.
"Hello sir." I greeted.
"Hello young man," he coughed, "how may I help you?"
"Ah...I heard this was the best antique shop in the area?" The old man smiled. "I would just like to look around and maybe find something of interest, I love antiques."
"Yes, yes." He rounded the corner and came to stand in front of me. "you're new here?"
"Yes I am. I just got a house down the road, the one on sixth street."
"Ohh..! Haha.. that old one? You have quite the eyes young man, haha, quite the eyes. Let me show you round!"
"Thank you sir." I beamed at him, yes I did make a wise choice, I didn't go to business school for nothing. I laughed and followed behind, looking round at the wonderful display.
He showed me an old grandfather clock that was huge and would surely weigh more than a ton, an old and well polished oak wood table and a lamp made of Carmel bones - ok no, that one was creepy. As we walked round the store, I saw some of the most bizarre looking objects, some were exceptionally beautiful as they were weird and some I would never want to have in my possession as they looked haunting.
"So which side did you come from?" The old man engaged me as we walked.
"North Carolina, I moved here for my sick mother and to resume at my new job."
"Impressive! You're young and industrious." He praised, I remained silent and smiled at the man, he wasn't bad after all. "You know, I have a few things that used to belong inside that house you bought, wanna see?"
"Really??" That was good. "Yes please."
He took me to a corner, deep inside the store and showed me a very large crimson chandelier, golden metal bars twisted and turned around the antique object, giving beauty to it. My eyes caught a seven foot mirror and I drew the old man's attention to it, the mirror was embedded into a darkly polished wood with intricate designs going round it, three round studs held it upright and in place, the mirror was indeed beautiful.
"That was also from the house, seems it caught your fancy." The man beemed. I nodded.
"Indeed it did."
"You would like this, yes?" He asked. I moved closer to the mirror and held the wooded frame, it was very thick and really smooth. "I would give you for half the price, since it's going back to it's original home."
"Hmm..." I replied and touched the mirror, the image was crystal clear and...
I suddenly felt light headed and my vision slowly began to fade, I grabbed my head as I swayed but I didn't fall, then it stopped and I tried to calm myself. I heard the old man still speaking and someone was replying him, the voice was so familiar. I opened my eyes and saw the old man talking to... me? I looked at me and I was replying him, grinning and admiring myself in the mirror and I was... where was I?
"Ohh my!" I had said. "That took a while."
"A really long while master, I was afraid you would be there for too long." The old man replied me. "How do you feel in your new body sir?"
"Err....well... It's not as I expected but not bad, not bad at all, I can't complain, after a hundred years it feels good to be out."
I couldn’t believe what I was hearing, someone else was in my body and he was a hundred years old, I looked on in bewilderment and it suddenly struck me that I was also staring at the mirror but from the opposite side, I looked around me, I was in the shop, yes but I was alone. I watched the two men like they were in the mirror and then the place I was in began to shrink as one by one the objects around me disappeared.
"I'm going to move into my old house again, what luck I have." I heard myself say and laugh heartily then the two men moved away from the mirror. The place around me continued to shrink until I was squashed to the mirror and I felt suffocated.
"Well, my dear friend," the person said, "I'll be leaving now, need to feel the sun again, and eat and you know, do all the things I've missed. You know what to do with the mirror."
"Yes sir." The old man replied. "I will handle that."
Then I watched as the hundred year old man walked out of the store in my body, then the old man then turned towards the mirror, facing me and brought out a large hammer from behind, I watched as a grin formed on his face before he struck the mirror.

Gary Nance: On His Near-Death Survival From COVID-19 and Sharing What You Should Know
Imagine one day, going about your normal routine, workout, job, family and life, but you begin to feel a little cold coming on. You think nothing of it because you’re the epitome of good health, but within about a week’s time, you’re in the hospital’s ICU, diagnosed with COVID-19 and a ventilator is keeping you alive. Your prognosis is uncertain. Your family is prohibited from visiting you in the hospital and is relying on the doctors’ daily reports on your condition. One Carmel family doesn’t have to imagine. They lived it, and they want to share their story with our readers in hopes of informing the community—firsthand—of the insidious effects of COVID-19.
Gary Nance—An Unlikely Victim of COVID-19
Carmel resident Gary Nance is a highly respected and celebrated architect for his residential and commercial design expertise. His firm, Gary Nance Design, has been featured in multiple local, regional and national publications. He is also an award-winning body builder who—prior to contracting COVID-19—was the epitome of excellent health. But, as Gary shared with me in a recent interview, none of that mattered. The virus did not care that he wasn’t overweight, consumed a healthy diet and is an overall great husband, father, contractor and friend.
In addition to Gary’s account of his harrowing near-death experience, you will read accounts from his wife, Nancy, daughter Taylor and son Nick Nance who were all gracious to share their intimate thoughts and memories about Gary’s 22-day hospital stay at Ascension St. Vincent Hospital-Indianapolis, and his recovery at the Rehabilitation Hospital of Indiana (RHI).
It Was More Than Just a “Cold”
Gary recalled it was a Saturday afternoon on March 14, and he was participating in a charity push-up challenge.
“The challenge was right at the beginning when the pandemic was closing things down,” Gary said. “After the [challenge], I went about my Saturday night like I normally do. I got up Sunday morning, and I had a fever of 101 degrees. I took couple of Tylenol and took it easy the rest of the day. I started to feel really hot later in that same afternoon, and my temperature was 103 degrees.”
Gary contacted his family doctor. Both men suspected Gary might have COVID-19.
“My doctor told me to monitor my temperature through the night and call him the following morning,” Gary said. “I told him it [my temperature] was up and down from 101 to 103 degrees. He told me to head over to St. Vincent Hospital-Carmel and that the staff would be waiting for me.”
The medical staff ushered Gary into an exam room and conducted a series of tests, including a chest X-ray. Altogether, Gary said it was a three-hour ordeal. The doctors informed him that he had a partially collapsed left lung and pneumonia. They had also tested him for COVID-19.
Gary was released and given some medication to help with his symptoms along with orders to quarantine until his test results came back.
“Nancy moved into a bedroom down the hall so I could be more comfortable,” Gary shared. “I was having trouble sleeping and couldn’t get comfortable. Three days after my visit to the ER, the doctors called and said that I had tested positive.”
When asked how he felt at that point in time, Gary replied, “You know, I was mad that I got [COVID-19], but I didn’t feel that bad.”
Nancy added, “Gary went from working on that Friday, he was fine on Saturday and by Sunday he was coughing. Then the following Sunday, he was in the hospital [St. Vincent Hospital-Indianapolis] and put on a ventilator, all in a week’s time. We went from feeling like we weren’t likely to get [the virus] to getting it and, all of sudden, Gary’s fighting for his life.”
Admitted in the Nick of Time
Gary and Nancy shared how she had gone up to check on Gary around 7 p.m. and found him gasping for air. She immediately dialed 911.
“Nancy had to help me down the steps to the door to meet the paramedics who were already waiting,” Gary shared. “The last thing I remember is the paramedics—some of Carmel’s finest—grabbing each arm. I kind of remember being lifted into the ambulance, and then that’s it for the next 20 days. I don’t remember the ambulance ride or being taken into the hospital.”
According to Nancy, she called the paramedics around 7 p.m. and the doctors called her at 1 a.m. to inform her that Gary had been put on a ventilator.
“It was close,” Nancy whispered. “If they [EMTs] hadn’t gotten him there that quickly, it might not have turned out the way that it did. I had called Taylor, and she came over just as they were lifting Gary into the ambulance. We couldn’t get close to each other, and all I could say to her was, ‘Honey, he’s going to be OK.’ Then she had to leave and go home by herself, which was just heartbreaking. And I was here [at home] alone. I had faith that Gary was in the best hands, and when the doctors called me that night, I told them that I hated that this was happening to him but that I was glad he was there with them [the doctors] because he was in the best of care.”
Gary’s daughter Taylor and son Nick shared their memories of that horrid night.
“The ambulance drove off and [because of the unknowns regarding COVID-19], I couldn’t hug my mom. Then three hours later, the doctors at St. Vincent told us he [Gary] had been put on the ventilator.”
Taylor expressed her gratitude for the doctors’ communication and level of care they provided to the Nance family that night and all through Gary’s ordeal.
She added, “The doctors at St. Vincent communicated in such an incredible way, considering this was all new to them as well.”
Nick and his wife, Brittany, live in Chicago and were not able to come back home to be with his mom or sister due to pandemic-related restrictions.
“I hadn’t seen my dad since January,” Nick said. “I got a call from him the weekend of the 14th [of March], that Sunday night actually, and he had a fever but sounded totally normal otherwise. I spoke with him daily that following week, and though he wasn’t feeling well, he still sounded normal. So, up until the point he was admitted to the hospital at St. V’s on 86th Street and intubated, I wasn’t worried.”
18 Days Ventilated
It doesn’t take a medical professional to ascertain the severity of being on a ventilator for as long as Gary was. The effects of being immobilized on top of the havoc the virus itself was having on Gary’s body were devastating.
Nick’s wife, Brittany, is a physician’s assistant in Chicago and was immensely helpful in translating what Gary’s doctors were sharing with Nick, Brittany and Taylor, who had taken over communications as their mom was also recovering at home with what was later diagnosed as a mild case of COVID-19.
“My wife and I would call the nurses station every day,” Nick said. “The nursing staff was fantastic at updating us, and the doctors called us in the afternoon to give us updates. Considering he was in the ICU for COVID-19, the communication was fantastic.”
Nick went on to explain that as the days and weeks unfurled, the recovery of patients who have been ventilated for as long as Gary had been gave sufficient cause for worry.
“It wasn’t until Saturday, April 11, that the doctors tried to extubate him because they thought he was doing well enough and weren’t going to attempt it until they were really certain he would do OK,” Nick explained. “The last thing they wanted to do was have to reintubate him. Within five minutes [of being extubated], he was doing so poorly, they had to reintubate him.”
It was that point, Nick said, the emotions were running high.
“I had hit my bottom point because he was not doing well and his prognosis at that point was not good at all,” Nick somberly shared. “But then, believe it or not, that following Tuesday, we got a call from the doctors saying he was improving, and they were weaning his oxygen intake down. That Wednesday, he was doing so well that they extubated him—this time successfully. I went from thinking I was never going to see or speak with my dad again to ‘Oh, wow! Things are changing and looking up!”
Nancy shared that throughout the entire time Gary was on a ventilator, she never lost faith.
“It was scary, of course,” Nancy shared. “But I wouldn’t let myself go to the place of wondering what if he didn’t come out of it. There were a couple of days that I was in a bad place, but then I pulled myself out of it. We had the most incredible support from family, friends, clients and neighbors. It was just unbelievable the number of people who were calling and texting and praying for him and asking what they could do.”
The Gary Gazette
Taylor kept her father’s friends and clients apprised of what was happening by developing a daily update she lovingly dubbed “The Gary Gazette.” Taylor works with Gary at his design firm, Gary Nance Design.
“I took his cell phone that night [he was admitted to the hospital] to keep up with work and stuff,” Taylor said. “I think what kept me going through this was his clients and friends. I started doing a group text that I called ‘The Gary Gazette’ and would update everyone each day. And I think that helped me out a lot.”
Collectively, the Nance family shared their immense gratitude to all of their loved ones, friends, clients and neighbors for the outpouring of support and well wishes they received and continue to receive as Gary continues in his recovery.
Rehabbing at the Rehabilitation Hospital of Indiana (RHI)
When Gary woke up after being extubated, he had been “sleeping” for 18 days. Gary shared that his first words after waking up were, “What the hell?” For those closest to Gary, that came as no shock. After 22 days at St. Vincent Hospital, Gary was transported to RHI for arduous rehabilitation therapy.
“We were wondering when [Gary] got off the ventilator if he would be himself and was he going to be able to draw again,” Taylor shared. “I know he was thinking the same thing. And if he hadn’t been at [RHI], there’s no way he would be recovering at the level he is today. When he first got there, he couldn’t even hold a pencil, and now he’s back to drawing again.”
Gary and his family shared that before he was released from ICU at St. Vincent Hospital, he had to learn how to swallow again. And during his time at RHI, he had to learn how to walk again and complete ordinarily mundane tasks, like making a bed.
“I remember sitting there going, this might be the end of my career,” Gary said. “But, I will tell you, the people at RHI are probably the most interesting, professional people in their field, and I love them. They kept me going mentally, which is really key, as well as physically. And they were so positive. I just can’t say enough about that place.”
Home at Last
Gary was released from RHI on May 1, and for the first time, Gary and his family were able to see each other up close and put their hands on each other since he was first admitted back in March.
“We finally were able to FaceTime with Gary when he was off the ventilator,” Nancy said. “And that was a shock because it did not look like him at all. He had lost 50 pounds within a month, and when he came home, he looked like a different person. But he’s gotten so much stronger.”
Taylor expressed, “The night before [he came home], my mom and I couldn’t sleep. The last time I had [physically seen him], he was being lifted into the ambulance and was looking at me like I was a stranger. Then, as he’s being released from RHI, he came out from around the corner dancing and smiling.”
Gary added, “I came around the corner, and RHI had almost the entire physical therapy staff and doctors gathered to congratulate me and send me off. I have to say that not only are the therapists amazing, the entire nursing staff and doctors at RHI are first rate! So, I did a little dance and twirl, but what you don’t see is me getting into the car completely out of breath but happy to be with my family. And when I got home, I slept for three hours.”
What the Nance Family Wants People to Know About COVID-19
Gary may have survived his brush with death, but the effects of the virus and his long-term immobility still linger.
“The doctors told me that if I had not been in the kind of shape I was before being diagnosed, I would definitely not have made it,” Gary emphasized. “They have told me that my recovery is a marathon—not a sprint. And I’m continuing with out-patient physical therapy. My sense of smell has been greatly diminished, and my sense of taste is just slightly diminished. Even though I get tired, I have difficulty sleeping at night. I’m taking Eliquis for the blood clot in my arm and a strong multivitamin.”
Gary concluded, “I can’t tell you how many people have said to me, ‘When I heard you had [COVID-19], it made me think twice about the things that I was doing and about taking a few more precautions.’ My point for the public is this pandemic is not over. It’s not like having the flu. Stay safe.”

A diver found floating facedown in Lake Coeur d’Alene on Tuesday died of drowning, an autopsy today showed.
Kootenai County Sheriff’s Office said the diver, Michael Spencer McCullough, 31, of Rigby, Idaho, was wearing diving gear when he was found by employees at the Coeur d’Alene Resort golf course.
Rescuers cut the gear off of him so he could be lifted into a rescue boat, said Major Ben Wolfinger in a news release this afternoon.
Sheriff’s divers later retrieved the gear in 12 feet of water and discovered that McCullough’s air tank was empty, Wolfinger said.
McCullough, a middle school teacher in Rexburg, was on his first day of diving for contractor Bob Hamilton and was working to retrieve golf balls as well as trash off the lake bottom around the golf course’s signature floating green.
He had a large basket of golf balls with him when rescuers found him and was wearing a dry suit in the 62-degree water.
It was McCullough’s first day on the job. A family member said he had recently returned from a trip to Alaska.
He was certified to dive in southern Idaho, but had not dived since 2007, Wolfinger said.
There was no indication of trauma or medical factors that may have contributed to his death, the major said.
Melissa Earl, of Medical Lake, said her brother taught at Madison Middle School in Rexburg, Idaho, where he was named teacher of the year.
He was married and had a daughter and was awaiting birth of a second child, a boy, in about 10 weeks, Earl said. She described him as a family man who loved to play with his nephews and was skilled on electric guitar. His recent trip to Alaska was “an adventure of a lifetime,” she said in an e-mail.
“He really and truly lived,” she said. “He leaves behind a family that was incredibly blessed for knowing him, and students that will never forget him.”
The sheriff’s office said the investigation was continuing.
Click here to comment on this story »

Thursday, March 21, 2013
I guess his age is starting to show. Today is his 45th birthday. Happy birthday Bri!!! I hope you know how much I love you.
It's going to a regular day. He's at work, but we do have a lunch date planned. Home cooked dinner, probably lasagna (one of his favs), and death by chocolate cake! I think that might be every ones fav.
Happy birthday! I love you!! Always and forever!

A Divorce Busting® Coach can help you save your marriage, even when your spouse wants out. Go to the new Divorce Busting® Store where you can sign up for Divorce Busting® Coaching and purchase Michele's Audios, Videos and eBooks that you can immediately download. Start taking the steps that will help you get your marriage back on track right away.
DIVORCE BUSTING COACHING SPECIAL! PURCHASE 6 OR MORE COACHING SESSIONS AND SAVE $30.
CALL 303-444-7004 to take advantage of this special discount.
My divorce was final about 1 yr ago...we were having a difficult time, our lives became stale and unhappy much of the time. We have one child together. Unfortunately, in a moment of weakness I let someone else convince me to leave the marriage. I was honest from the start about my feelings for someone else, and he just left that day. I had a very bad counselor that, looking back did Not do anything to help me think the whole thing through rationally or I would never have left. I loved my ex-husband, and practically begged for my needs that weren't being met. Now, 1 year later, I would do anything to bring our family back together. We have been friends the whole time, he has been a great support the entire time and I think we really like and respect each other. I'm surprised much of the time of how wonderful he is to me after all we've been through. Lately, we've been doing few things together with our child, so I'm hoping there's a chance we can rebuild somehting we let go so easily. I learned a lot this past year and my mistakes, I understand and they would never happen again. I have been seeing a fantastic counselor now and have been working a lot on my stuff. I hope I can be a success story someday too..
We welcome you to the board and hope you will have a success story soon. If your exH is not interested in OP by now, hopefully that is a good sign. You know what attracted him to you when he fell in love the first time, so if you can be that way again.....then he could fall in love all over again. Being friends is a great way to get there.
It is not about what you feel should work in your M. It is about doing the work that gets the right results. Do what works!
Hi Mar, Im glad that you decided to try it over here. Have you read the DB books? Has he started seeing anyone? Sandi is right, he could fall in love with you again! I also noticed that you said that your lives had become stale, have you done anything to add excitement to your life?
Have you ever approached him about reconciling? Im not recommending that you do this, I just think that his reaction to something that you may have said about it in the past could be useful.
I guess I gave the wrong finger to the wrong man...
Welcome Mar! I hope it works out for you too! What new things are you trying in your treatment of your ex? I would say don't push the relationship talk - but at some point you will have to tell him that you've seen your part in the relationship failing and tell him all the reasons that you fell in love with him to begin with. However there is no way to know how he'll react....his defenses might be up big time. Showing him through kind, considerate actions and lots of Thank yous/appreciation voiced for the kind things that he does for you (no matter how small)is your best way to confirm that your words are sincere. (This is what I've gleaned from reading DB, M/V, and LHF...don't know if it'll save my marriage yet but am seeing small positive reactions to my changes so far.)
I would add my best wishes that your R can get reconciled, but I do have this much to add too ...
"Moment of weakness"? Please, could WASes just be more honest, starting with themselves? I've seen and heard this from more WASes than I care to remember in the last couple of years, including my own W. Calling an A or a going into WAW mode a "mistake" or "moment of weakness" is the understatement of the freaking decade. As someone said somewhere, a "mistake" is leaving the windows open and it rains. A "moment of weakness" is taking that ice cream when you're on a diet.
It's also logically impossible to have "been honest from the start about your feelings for someone else". Or are you saying you spontaneously fell in love with the other guy? The usual sitch would be 2 people meeting as "special friends", confiding about problems in the M, and "falling in love despite not planning for it to happen". I'm pretty sure most would not keep their S informed of those meetings.
And while you may not have had a good counseller, don't blame everything on him/her. The decision you made was yours and yours alone.
You want a way back, it starts with remorse, something I don't really see in your post. Regret is not remorse. The journey starts with knowing where you are starting from, and just a belated recognition that you had deliberately shattered something meaningful is probably not good enough.
I'm not attacking you, this is just something I have strong views on. Rant over, I do think it's great you want to reconcile and I sincerely wish you the best of luck.
Me 42 W 39 Married: 11 Jan 1998, T: Since 1992 First Bomb: Sep 2007 Confirmed A/OM: 4 Nov 2007 Kids: D10, S5 Reconciled and together again after (alot of) time and heartbreak. 3rd kid, S, born 2 Jan 2010.
Unfortunately, in a moment of weakness I let someone else convince me to leave the marriage. I was honest from the start about my feelings for someone else, and he just left that day.
First, I really hope things work out for you. It is great that you want to try to reconcile.
I was wondring if you could elaboate on this a little more. I guess you told him you were going to leave because you were in love with OM? So your H decided he wouldn't stick around and left on his own accord? How did the OM "convince" you to leave the M? What were your feelings toward H at the time you left? What happened with the OM? What made you change your mind about the marriage?
This seems somewhat similiar to my situation. My W has left me because she is in love with another man. I do not believe he is good for her, but there is nothing I can do about it but move on. I am interested in part because I would like to know some insight into what my W may be thinking/feeling right now. But I think by answering these questions you may get some more feedback. I know I will be following this thread.
Ok, let me elaborate a little bit more and be very honest with a whole panel of people I don't know here...(I've never done this before). About 10 years ago, me and this other guy dated for a short time. It ended quickly..things were left without closure. I was very mad at him for all those years, however, also curious as to what the heck really happened, the way he left the first time may have been a clue for some but it wasn't for me. What happened was when we started to get serious, he fled fast!, But I thought it was because he was just divorced which is kind of what he eluded to. So. My life went on and I met my husband, he was wonderful, I was very in love with him, however he was a very factual guy, didn't do a lot of sugar coating (which apparantly I need), the romance I thought he lacked was actually there, but he did it in his way, which I now recognize, and lastly and possibly the biggest reason I was so blinded by the OM was because I was what the DB book calls sex-starved. I'm not sex crazy, I just wanted to feel desired. Something I talked about with my husband a lot, and we just couldn't get through it. He was never really a sexual guy and I knew it but there were sooooo many other qualities that I loved about him I thought I could do without that part. We even went to a counselor (the bad one), on the subject and it resulted in me just accepting and learn to live with that, I knew I would Never leave him, I didn't want to. But then shortly after that revelation, I ran into the OM again (8yrs later) and he apologized profusely about how things ended years ago. He said he would help me with my business I wanted to start by building me a website (part of his work), for free, and my husband and I both agreed that would be okay. After meeting with the OM a few times in a work environment, we had the opportunity to talk about the past and he was charming and convincing and said everything right! He told me he wanted to marry me, he said it was his biggest mistake in life that he didn't see it then, without going into a lot of boring detail, it was fairy tale like. (All his friends, (after we started living together) confirmed that to be true ,always saying, so you're the girl we heard about for the last 8 years). Well, I started having feelings for him, but I respected my husband too much and know how I'd feel about cheating, so I told him how I was feeling and he moved out that day.(We made a pact that if we ever had feelings for another we would tell each other) The OM and I started living together a few months later after my marriage had obviously ended in divorce and almost immediately the OM started very suttely distancing. To make a long story short, he is a severe commitment phobe. Everything was a lie. All I asked was for honesty and respect and I got neither. And in the end, he didn't get the engagement ring he custom made for me, instead he walked out one night and walked back into his parents house where Mom does his laundry and Daddy helps him pay the bills. He left me with a house I cannot afford that we had been renting and bills he was paying while we tried to build his biz. Oh yeah, and believe it or not, both the OM and my Ex would go to my son's school and extra curricular functions and my ex even came to our house where we had our son's birthday party. My Ex really took the high road and they both seemed to get along for Noah's sake anyway. As my relationship with the OM broke down, I would talk a little about it with my Ex, we had a fantastic relationship through the whole thing and he was always supportive, more than many people would be. Somehow I think we managed to keep the respect we had for each other intact. Everytime I picked up our son at his house, he had pictures of us on his computer, of our lives together, I thought that was a nice thing to do, so our son would remember those times. We are contemplating taking our son to DIsney next year together, I think that's probably a good sign. Next weekend we are both going to attend one of our friends houses for a birthday party for their daughter together. It's kind of strange, but I'm glad we're friends. I hope he will want to re-build with me someday, and my new counselor said that if that does happen, that we should see him first to work out whatever needed to be worked out so we don't fall into the same pattern I guess. But what I learned from all this is what is really important to me, what matters, and all the ways he was there for me through the good and bad, times.Sometimes, I have to admit though, I felt like I ruined his life because we had a lot of stress having to deal with my first husband and a battle over my 2 daughters, and then my Mom got Alzheimer's and he helped me with her. Moving her home, into 2 different nursing homes, ect.. it was stressful. I didn't notice while I was in the relationship, but I can see clear as day now how much our relationship had to endure. It all had happened so fast, it was a whirlwind...
Its a good sign that the two of you can communicate in a friendly way, and I agree with your counselor that it would be a good idea to start right off the bat with help!
I would not use him though and I am surprised he is suggesting it. Since he is your IC, your ex-H would have a more difficult time building trust with him as a MC. I would suggest you find someone completely independent to start MC. Have you approached your H about this idea?

Isidoro Zorzano was born in Buenos Aires (Argentina) on September 13, 1902. He was the third of five children of Spanish immigrants. In 1905, with their economic situation in life now secure, his parents decided to return to Spain, although intending to eventually return to Argentina. The family moved to Logroño, where Isidoro did his elementary and high school studies. In 1912 his father died unexpectedly, and his mother decided to remain there.
In January 1916 he met Josemaría Escrivá, a new classmate of his who had just arrived from Barbastro. The two of them became friends. Isidoro graduated from high school in 1918 and began to prepare for the entrance exam for the Special School for Industrial Engineers in Madrid, a city to which he moved in October 1919. While still an adolescent, Isidoro intensified his religious practices and sought the help of a priest who could advise him in his Christian life. He carried out works of mercy and, as a friend of his recalled, “he was always ready to help anyone at any time.”
In 1924, with the collapse of the Spanish Bank of Rio de la Plata, the Zorzanos lost almost all their savings. Isidoro and his younger brother, Francisco, thought about giving up their studies in order to support the family with their work. Nevertheless, their mother and two sisters wanted both of them to continue their studies. Isidoro began to give private classes to bring in some income.
In June 1927, Isidoro earned the degree of industrial engineer. He started giving classes in an academy that prepared students for the entrance exam to the school of industrial engineering, and also worked briefly in the shipyards of Matagorda (Cádiz). But soon he decided to move to Malaga, to work in the Andalusian Railroads Company and to give classes in the Industrial School in that city.
At that time, Isidoro began to sense a deeper spiritual restlessness. On August 24, 1930, he had a long conversation with St. Josemaría Escrivá, his former high school classmate, who had now been a priest for five years. St. Josemaría explained to him the message of Opus Dei, founded in 1928. Its purpose was to foster the search for holiness and apostolate through professional work and the fulfillment of one’s ordinary duties. Isidoro saw at once that this ideal corresponded fully to his own aspirations and decided to join Opus Dei.
He returned to Malaga and went back to his regular routine, but now everything had taken on a new light. He deepened his life of prayer, and woke up early every day to attend Mass and receive Communion. He also was generous in assisting the poor; among other things, he dedicated many hours to giving classes to poor children in some schools run by the Adoration sisters and by the Jesuit Father José Manuel Aicardo. One of his students in the Industrial School, who also accompanied him on his excursions with the Hiking Club, recalls that he was very friendly and easy to get along with, and possessed a well-balanced temperament; he made use of every opportunity to serve others and bring them closer to God. One of his colleagues at the university, who also knew him in Malaga, recounts that although his salary enabled him to live quite comfortably, he in fact lived frugally, since he used his money to help his family and the needy.
Everyone recognized his sense of justice and his closeness to those working under his direction. He did not discriminate against anyone because of their political ideas; he was concerned about and served everyone, both in the office and at the school. His students recall that he sometimes gave special classes without charge so that everyone could learn the material and pass their exam. In 1936 a bitter anti-religious attitude began to spread and the environment in the city became very dangerous. In June, some of those under him told him that certain political groups had decided to kill him because he was a Catholic. Therefore he moved to Madrid.
A short time later the civil war broke out and, in the regions controlled by Communists and anarchists, a violent religious persecution was unleashed. St. Josemaría and the handful of young men belonging to Opus Dei had to go into hiding or were imprisoned because of their Catholic faith. Isidoro could have left Spain, but decided to remain in Madrid so as not to separate himself from the others. Relying on a precarious form of documentation — a Buenos Aires birth certificate — and knowing that his life was constantly in danger, he helped keep the members of Opus Dei united to St. Josemaría and to one another.
During those years he assisted many people not only spiritually, but also by obtaining for them provisions and food that he managed to obtain with great personal sacrifice, giving up much of what he needed for himself. He endured so many privations that once he even fainted on the street. During those months his love for the Eucharist was very evident. Despite all the restrictions, he brought St. Josemaría and some other priests the bread and wine they needed to celebrate Mass secretly. He also kept the sacred hosts in his room so that those in hiding could receive Communion, and informed those he knew of the possibility of attending the Eucharistic celebration in certain apartments.
After the war, Isidoro obtained a position in Madrid with the National Western Railroad Company. A colleague declared that “he had a great moral authority for those working under him, first because he was a person of great talent and extraordinary competence, and second because his dealings with them were so warm and fatherly that no one could resist him.” St. Josemaría appointed him administrator of the apostolic instruments of Opus Dei, a task he carried out generously and humbly, never losing his peace in confronting the constant financial difficulties in the apostolic initiatives, which always operated with a deficit.
He knew and loved Christ’s life in its every detail, and had recourse to our Lady with filial affection. His great love for God was shown in his service to others and his care for little things. A witness who knew him in Madrid wrote that he had seen “in his actions and words, and in the expressions of his soul, a marvelous way of living, with simplicity and naturalness, the heroism of an ordinary life immersed in God. When with Isidoro, I sensed God’s presence in a simple and unobtrusive way.”
At the beginning of 1943 he was diagnosed with malignant lymphoma. He accepted this painful sickness with courage and abandonment to God’s will. One of the nurses who took care of him recalled: “He never needed anything; for him everything was good and he never complained.” He died with a reputation for holiness on July 15 of that same year, at the age of 40, and was buried in the cemetery of La Almudena. One of his co-workers at the Western Railroad Company said: “When we talked about our bosses, it was common for someone to say: ‘Don Isidoro is a saint.’”
In 2009 his mortal remains were transferred to the church of St. Albert the Great in Madrid, where they now repose.

Jun 26, 2012 - 11:32 am
Hi all, Well this thing really is like a roller coaster! As you may know, mum is not having any more chemo and we are taking each day as it comes, we desperatly want her to feel better now she is off the chemo but it is not how we expected things to be, mum is on anti sickness meds and Morphine patches, she has just finished her steroids and now her appetite has decreased, she was soooo very tired all the time that her hospice nurse gave her amphetamines which of course also suppress the appetite! Some days they give her a pick up and other days they don't, yesterday she could hardly speak and she was like she was drugged up, totally unable to keep her eyes open! One thing that seems to make quite a difference to her wellbeing is keeping her bowels active, she is always better when she has been to the toilet, she now has something to help with this so fingers crossed that works. Does anyone have any experience with the matter of exhaustion, the nurse said the cancer can cause it but can it really make you that bad? Also mum always seems to show an infection when she has a blood test but it has never really been determined what it is, surely that can't help the way she feels either, we do feel that all her feelings just get put down to the cancer and not looked into, I know they can only do so much but they don't have to see their mum feeling like crap most days.
Thanks for listening, any imput would be most apprieciated, SueX

OMG! I think I'm killed! I had to go to the dentist this morning and when I left her office I stepped in a hole on the sidwalk and fell really hard. I didn't think I would ever get to my feet again. Didn't break anything, but my knee is all swollen, I've pulled a muscle in my back, and messed up my neck again so that I'm going to have to do traction twice a day again for a while. I'm so mad at myself. I really didn't need this to happen right now. Whine! whine!
Oh well, I suppose I'll live. Sheese! Always something it seems.

'It was his dying wish to hold his baby in his arms': The heartbreaking moment a dying soldier cradled his newborn daughter just seven days before he passed away
- Soldier Gary Coleman, from Hampshire, was 'thrilled' to become a dad
- He was diagnosed with cancer in February 2011, which spread to his brain
- Wife Joanne asked to be induced so her husband could spend precious moments with his newborn daughter
- Tragically, seven days after baby Amba's birth, the doting father died
This is the poignant moment dying soldier Gary Coleman, 34, cradled his newborn baby girl - but just seven days later he passed away.
Mr Coleman, a Lance Corporal with the Royal
Engineers, was diagnosed with cancer in 2011 which slowly spread to his brain.
But with just days to live his wife Joanne, a nurse, told how doctors brought on baby Amba’s birth early – so her husband could hold his miracle daughter in his arms.
Heartbreaking: This is the first time dying soldier Gary Coleman held his baby daughter. Seven days after this photo was taken, he passed away
The couple had previously been told that due to intense chemotherapy, Mr Coleman, who was diagnosed with cancer of the food gullet in Februay 2011, would be infertile.
Mr Coleman, knowing he was dying, went out and bought birthday cards for Amba for her first, 13th, 16th and 18th birthdays.
The brave soldier, who had served with the army in Iraq, Kosovo
and Afghanistan, also chose clothes for his little girl.
Cradling baby Amba, now five months, Mrs Coleman, 34, said: 'Gary was so happy to be a dad and she is so much like him.
Doting father: Mr Coleman, from Hampshire, was diagnosed with cancer of the food gullet in February 2011. He was later told it had spread to his brain
Dream: His dying wish was to cradle his 'miracle' daughter Amba, who was born on April 3 weighing 7lb 3oz
'She was the child he thought he’d never have and his dying wish was to hold his baby in his arms.
'Seeing him hold Amba for the first time was such an emotional moment. Knowing he died a dad – but gave me little Amba – has given me the strength to carry on after his death.'
Mr Coleman – who had served in the army since the age of 16 and was given a full military funeral – was a super-fit man when they met both aged 30.
'We met at a party and hit it off straightaway,' said Mrs Coleman. 'Gary had bright blue eyes and a wonderful smile. He was funny, sarcastic, with a wicked sense of humour, stubborn, quick-tempered, loyal, extremely loving – and within weeks we were a couple.'
Within nine months, Mrs Coleman had moved from her home in Yorkshire to live with her partner in Hampshire, whose base was at Perhamdown, Tidworth in Wiltshire.
And in December 2010, with Mr Coleman donning full military uniform, the couple wed.
Couple: Mrs Coleman, a nurse, asked to be induced so her loving husband could fulfill his dying wish
Happier times: The couple wed in December 2010. Mr Coleman, who has served in the army since the age of 16, donned full military uniform
Hero: Mr Coleman, a Lance Corporal with the Royal Engineers, had served with the army in Iraq, Kosovo and Afghanistan. His wife still treasures his war medals (right)
But just months later, the dedicated soldier began having difficulty swallowing his food.
initially put his symptoms down to indigestion - however, a month later, Mr Coleman couldn't eat at all and was referred to hospital for tests.
'Gary was so fit and tough,' said Mrs Coleman. 'After all, he’d survived being in all these war zones and we just thought his eating problems would be something minor.
'So we were absolutely devastated when the doctor broke the news a biopsy revealed Gary had a tumour.
'It was oesophageal cancer, blocking the food passage to his stomach. He would need chemotherapy to shrink it followed by surgery.'
And the news got even worse as the couple were told the intense treatment would make Mr Coleman infertile.
Couple: Doctors initially put Mr Coleman's symptoms down to indigestion - however, a month later he couldn't eat at all and was referred to hospital for tests
'We were planning on having children,' said his wife. 'We asked the consultant about freezing Gary’s sperm.'
However, doctors, who were concerned about the cancer spreading, said there wasn’t enough time.
'Gary and I were both so upset,' she said. 'But within seven days he was having the chemo we hoped would save his life.'
After 12 weeks of gruelling therapy – causing Mr Coleman to lose all his hair – the pair were relieved when doctors said the tumour had shrunk. Mr Coleman had an operation to remove the remaining parts and he was finally given the all-clear.
Believing he was infertile, Mr Coleman and and his wife began looking into adoption.
And in July 2012, with Mr Coleman feeling much better, the couple went on a late honeymoon to Portugal.
'We were both over the moon when we got home and I discovered I was pregnant,' said Mrs Coleman. 'We couldn’t believe it. Gary was simply thrilled. After everything we’d been through it just seemed a miracle.'
Couple: The pair, pictured before Mr Coleman's terminal diagnosis, were devastated to be told that the intense chemotherapy would make him infertile. They called Amba their 'miracle' baby
Relief: After 12 weeks of gruelling therapy, causing Mr Coleman to lose all his hair, he was relieved when doctors said the tumour had shrunk
But their happiness was short lived when, within days, Mr Coleman began experiencing severe headaches. Scans revealed the cancer had spread to his brain.
was the worse possible diagnosis because we knew it was terminal. Although Gary
underwent brain surgery to remove the tumours and had radiotherapy, the cancer
then spread to his skin,' said Mrs Coleman.
'Eventually he had to be intravenously fed via a vein. It was heartbreaking because we both knew it was only a matter of time.'
Only one thing kept Mr Coleman going – and that was the thought he was going to be a dad.
'It seemed ironic that as Gary was deteriorating his baby was growing bigger and stronger,' said Mrs Coleman. 'But although the pregnancy gave both of us something positive to focus on, it was our biggest fear that he wouldn’t live long enough to see his child.'
Because of this, Mrs Coleman underwent a special 3D scan to determine the sex of their unborn baby.
'I’d been told at my routine 20-week scan that I was probably having a girl,' she said. 'But we wanted to be sure so we could decide together on a definite name, Gary could help buy clothes and plan the nursery with me.
'We chose the name Amba because it means Precious in old English and she
was so precious to both of us. Gary chose lots of the clothes – little dresses
and pink tops.
'Knowing he would not see Amba’s first birthday – or her grow up – he chose birthday cards for her first, 13th, 16th and 18th birthdays.'
Tragically, Mr Coleman only managed to write in Amba’s first birthday card because as Joanne’s due date – the 7th April - approached, he took a turn for the worst.
'The thought that Gary could die before I gave birth was unbearable,' said Mrs Coleman. 'He was deteriorating so fast. I knew he was desperately hanging on until I had Amba but we just didn’t know how long he had left.
Short-lived: The couple's happiness was cut short when Mr Coleman began experiencing severe headaches. Scans revealed the cancer had spread to his brain and he was told it was terminal
'We just knew it was a matter of time': Mr Coleman had to be intravenously fed via a vein
'His dying wish was to be at home for a few final days as a ‘normal’ new dad with Amba and I was determined he would have that. The doctors and nurses were fantastic and agreed to induce me.'
April 2, and with the support of Mr Coleman’s sister, Kelly, Mrs Coleman went into
hospital where doctors induced her labour.
'Sadly Gary was too ill to come with me and stayed at home. But he texted
all night', she said.
In the early hours of April 3, baby Amba, weighing a healthy 7Ib 3oz, was welcomed into the world.
'She looked like a mixture of Gary and I and immediately I
adored her. I couldn’t wait to get home to show him his little girl,' she said.
'Putting Amba in Gary’s arms was the most poignant moment ever and I will always treasure the memories. At last – for a few days at least – we were the little family we’d longed to be.
'It also meant I had photos to show Amba when she is older how proud her daddy was of her.'
Mrs Coleman believes that, with his wish of dying a dad fulfilled, her husband was able to
let go peacefully.
'The medical staff did everything they could, but Gary had suffered so much over the last few months. He’d been forced to give up everything he loved – cooking, golf, his job. By now, he could barely speak, had to be fed by a machine and was confined to bed,' she said.
'A few days later Gary said he’d had enough and no longer wanted to be fed by a machine. I believe he knew Amba was here safely and he was leaving a part of him behind. Now, he could let go.'
Two days later, Mr Coleman died peacefully at home, with his parents and wife at his side.
'Amba was in her cot the next room,' said Mrs Coleman. 'Afterwards I gave her a kiss – holding her close gave me so much comfort.
Asleep: Mr Coleman cuddles up to his newborn daughter just days before his death
'I will always keep Gary’s memory alive for her – the photos of him as a new dad, all the medals he earned for his tours – most recently he was awarded one for long service and good conduct.'
Mr Coleman’s funeral was held on HMS Excellent naval base at Whale Island, Portsmouth. The couple had moved there to be closer to his family after his diagnosis.
'He had a full military funeral and his troops who are out in Afghan sent flowers and cards,' said Mrs Coleman. 'They even held a service for him in Afghan at the same time as his funeral here.'
She said life since her husband’s death has been hard.
'Silly things make me cry such as seeing one toothbrush in the bathroom,' she said. 'And although I’ve had so much support from friends, family and the army, who continually come round to check how I am, I am heartbroken. All my thoughts come back to Gary – I think 'Gary should be watching this or Gary would love that'.
'But in my darkest moments, I feel lucky. Lucky that Amba had such a wonderful dad and lucky Gary knew how it felt to be a dad before he died – even if it was for just seven days.'
Mrs Coleman is raising money for Help for Heroes and MacMillan Cancer Support, and gastric cancer nurse Donna Sharland, who helped treat Mr Coleman, is running the New York marathon in his memory. To donate visit http://www.justgiving.com/TheCancerMarathon
Most watched News videos
- Princess Eugenie and Duke of York drive through Cambridge gate
- Supermodel Naomi Campbell arrives for Eugenie's royal wedding
- Cute moment Princess Charlotte waves as she arrives at royal wedding
- Princess Eugenie's DEEP curtsy for the Queen at her wedding
- Flower girls get their dresses fixed as they arrive for the wedding
- Stephen Fry and husband Elliott Spencer attend royal wedding
- The Queen and Prince Philip depart from Princess Eugenie's wedding
- Zara and Mike Tindall arrive for Princess Eugenie's wedding
- Moment page boy falls on the steps of St George's Chapel
- Kate Moss and Liv Tyler arrive for Eugenie's royal wedding
- Princess Eugenie arrives at chapel in Peter Pilotto dress
- Cara Delevingne wears a suit at pal Eugenie's royal wedding

A boy who is a young carer for his mum was slapped with a petty afterschool detention for not having a ruler, leaving his disabled parent on the floor at home.
The unnamed Gloucester Academy pupil said the ruler was in his bag the whole time, leading his frustrated mother, who suffers from cerebral palsy, to say the school is run "like an army camp."
Frustration grew when the child was given a second detention on a different occasion for apparently not doing his homework, something his family deny.
She says on both occasions that she was not informed that her son would be home an hour late from school, Gloucestershire Live reported.
The family of the child wish to remain anonymous but feel the policies outlined by the school's governing body, Greenshaw Trust, need to change.
The mother of the secondary school child said: “Last Friday [September 10] my son was given a detention for not having his school ruler.
“He was late coming home and I phoned the school and asked where my son was. I am not very good on my feet as I have cerebral palsy and I was on the floor and waiting for him to come home.
“The school says if you forget one item you are given a detention. His ruler was in his bag though."
She added that a second detention was given out for lack of homework, even though she is adamant her son completes his work each day.
'Controlling' boyfriend sends woman rules to follow at uni such no crop tops
The child is considered to be a young carer in the home and gives his mother support day to day.
The mother said: “My son showed the teacher when he was in detention that he had done his homework.
“They told him he was staying for detention anyway. The fact is he was three minutes late on that day. As soon as he got there they shut the gate at 8.35am. You would have thought they would give the children five minutes.
“He was running late as he was helping me with my medication. We called the school and they said it must have been a miscommunication as to why he was given the detention.”
Wills and Kate's 'cold' birthday message to Harry 'different to previous ones'
The mother does not understand why the school do not inform parents and carers when the pupils have been issued a detention.
She said: “It makes me laugh how they give him a detention for that.
“They have made the school feel like an army camp. I understand they have to be strict but they should notify parents if their child is going to be in detention. People are going to worry where their children are.
“When we have spoken to the school they have said they do not have to notify us as it is not their responsibility. It is disgusting how they are treating their pupils.”
A Gloucester Academy spokesperson said they do not comment on individual cases.
For the latest breaking news stories and incredible tales from the Daily Star, sign up for our newsletter by clicking here.
Source: Read Full Article

I had the final cancer treatment in this set this morning. I was lucky enough to have the same technician I had last week. Enisha is quick and efficient, and she made the treatment largely painless. She also said I can ask for her when I need more treatments.
I'm not feeling too well at the moment, but hopefully I can get back to something approaching normal in a few days. The aides here have been great to me during this whole treatment process, but I feel bad about the extra work it causes them.
Maybe by the time I have to go through this again I'll be in my own place.

Submit your FML story
- - Please note that spam and nonsensical stories will result in you being blocked from accessing FML.
About snapplecap281 : Message me if you wanna talk. 'Tis all
You’ve filled out the necessary details. Having done so will be much appreciated.
That was your 500th “you totally deserved it” vote. We admire your dedication.
Keen reader – Level: student ninja
You have voted for 15% of the entire collection of FMLs to date.
Today, my class was interrupted by flowers, balloons and chocolates. Then he sang to me a song he wrote himself. This was all for our one-year anniversary. It probably would have been the best day of my life... if I knew who he was. FML
Today, I played in a high school concert. Some alumni of the band were sitting in the audience and were brought to tears. Not because it was beautiful, but because they were sad to see how much the music program had declined since they left. FML
Today, I got a call from the girl I like. I got very excited so I quickly picked up. As it turns out, she was actually prank calling me, pretending to be a "liposuction telemarketer" but forgot to press *67. FML
Today, I met the guy I've been talking to online for two years in real life. He tried to convince me to have his children because they would be average height. He's a midget and I'm 6'2". This is the most romantic thing anybody has ever said to me. FML
Today, I had a seizure in class. Being an epileptic, I had warned my professor of the possibility that I could have one in class. She was understanding and seemed very concerned about my issue at the time. After I had the seizure, however, she asked me if I had ever tried exorcism. FML
Today, I turned 30. While all my friends are getting married, furthering careers and having children, I'm still sat around being as immature as I was as a teenager. I'm going through a classic case of premature age-jaculation. I laughed for 10 minutes after coming up with that. FML
Today, I went on what I thought was a date. After a wonderful night with a perfect gentleman, he told me how excited he is that he's moving in with his girlfriend next week, and thanked me for reassuring him that he doesn't want anyone but her. FML
Today, I went to the bathroom on the way to class. After washing my hands, I couldn't figure out how to turn off the water. I finally resorted to asking a professor for help. She turned it off, looked me in the eyes and said, "Please don't tell me you're here on a scholarship." FML
Friday 18 April 2014

Wisconsin native, turned NYC transplant. Director of marketing at a startup tech firm based in the financial district of Manhattan. Lover of water sports, hiking and adventure.
Kristine and her partner were great guest, they came bearing gits LOL. They had stayed in the area before you knew there way around the island. They were respectful of the house, clean and very thoughtful. I would gladly host them again.

I have to be honest, even though I read the instructions thoroughly, I'm still not sure if writing this on the right page.
When I was younger, I used to feel like something was following me around the house. Once I even thought I caught a glimpse of it. A dark shadow in the corner of my eye. This, I am aware of, was probably just my imagination playing a trick on me, but nevertheless, I consider it a part of the story.
I used to have a desk that had been at my grandmother's house. One morning when I got out of bed, I noticed compact powder on the desk. Neither I, nor my mother used make-up. I asked my mother why she had given it to me and she had no idea of what I was talking about. I showed her the box and she told me that she had bought it several years ago, but she hadn't seen it for a few years.
Another thing which appeared on my desk was a children's book, which I recognized when I looked though it, but my mother couldn't remember reading me the book, and didn't understand how the book or the compact powder had made its way to my desk.
When I was about 10-12 years old, I was in the Philippines with my cousin. I remember waking up one morning and seeing someone walk into my cousin's room. I figured it must've been her mother (this figure was only a few metres away from me), but when I got there, there was only my cousin in the room, sleeping. This, I also realize could just be a figment of my imagination.
For the past few years, I've been feeling like an emotional sponge. By that I mean that I share the mood of whomever I am with or close by to. Every night I feel drained and empty. It feels as though I have no feelings or opinions of my own, because I am constantly filled up with the feelings of others.
I'm not sure if I am scared of the dark or if it is something else, but I can very often feel a presence. It doesn't feel like someone dangerous, nor someone unharmful, it just feels like this presence is standing in my room, constantly staring at me. I also feel something almost "chasing" or hurrying me around the apartment sometimes, but that could also be imagination, as I am well aware of.
Without being too specific, I have also felt the uncontrollable urge to cry when something, that would hurt me once I found out, was occurring.
I may also point out that my great-grandmother was somewhat of a self-proclaimed psychic. I'm not sure about the specifics on this part though.
What I guess that I'm hoping for, and this is why I'm not sure if I'm on the right page or not, is help to understand and channel these emotions and maybe try to figure out more about the presence that I am sensing. I just wish I could make sense of more.

The Defiant Mate (Book 1)
About this deal
Once again Eliza needs to try and build trust and try\'s to fit in, all the while plotting her escape from the life she now finds herself in, a life where she can\'t say no to Conner, doesn\'t understand it, doesn\'t want it and is very confused about her attraction to a man she dislikes and knows, does not like her. At least he hadn’t had the power to demote her to a worthless rogue on the spot. Her only blessing at the time. It could still happen though. His father, Alpha Blaine, would choose whether or not that was still to come, he would hear Sophia and Nathan’s side of the story and judge her from it. Jay-la falls to her knees, and Alpha asks Blaine to help her. Alpha Blaine asks her to give her opinion and she agrees, hoping to persuade him to help her see her children.
The Defiant Mate Free PDF Download - PDF NOTES The Defiant Mate Free PDF Download - PDF NOTES
Can Gabe win her over and steel himself against his belief that the one woman he's been in love with all his life is not Taboo, to him. Can Cinda be kept safe when she will not listen to Gabe due to their relationship and past history. Just a little bit about me and my books there is a little part of me in nearly every book I have written. The Defiant Mate/Luna - Nate is the name of my son in real life, and he is stubborn.
Jay-la had loved him with all she had, her whole heart, even though she had known that this day would come, she had always kept the relationship with him light, playful and fun, so he would never know she was in love with him, he was not her fated mate nor she his. She just wanted to wish him well and let him know that she was going to leave and finish her law degree on campus full time, that she would be interning on her breaks and so wouldn’t be coming home for the next 2 years at least. She had been sleeping with the enemy and didn't even know it. The best sex of her life and with the enemies Heir. The full moon sets during the meeting and they both scent each other out. Finally after 200 years she is granted her Goddess Gifted Mate and he turns out to be her Enemy.
The Defiant Mate Novel Review: A Romantic and Captivating
His Luna is Already a Luna - My favorite move in Karate is the empi, which is the use of your elbow, I like betting on things that are silly with my friends, not with monetary, the prize usually cake or a bottle of wine. Where she now has a stepbrother named Conner, a 22 year old, who is a dark and brooding man. It is clear to Eliza, that Conner does not want her in his home anymore than Eliza herself wants to be there.
Jay-la just couldn’t watch him with his fated mate, watch how happy they would be, how in love, see them around making out and getting all hot and heavy, when it used to be her and him, it would just cause her too much heartache. She would never tell him that though.
The Defiant Mate (Book 1) by Jennifer Francis | Goodreads
They had been lovers casually for just over a year now, but it was all over now. He had found his fated mate gifted to him by the moon goddess herself, and just like that, he no longer had even a minute to spare for her. Luci herself is seen a week later caught on camera in her wolf form Kali, fighting two rogues, then herself in human form before she runs away and disappears into the lake. No prints to be found coming out of the lake. Kora whined in distress and pain at leaving him, leaving their home, leaving their family. She knew, as did Jay-la, they would never be allowed to come home again. If he had been the actual Alpha, she would have just been banished and marked as a rogue with no where to go.The Unclaimed Human Luna - I love camping myself, being out in nature is my go to. I love watching Korean and Mandrin drama's.

Sebastian Vettel had headed into the first Formula 1 race of the season as clear favourite for victory, but he could manage no better than third behind Kimi Raikkonen and Fernando Alonso because he could not look after his tyres as well as his rivals.
Although some have suggested that the tyre scenario could have huge implications for the rest of the year, Red Bull team principal Christian Horner is adamant his outfit will get on top of the situation.
"Nobody in the team is leaving here despondent or disheartened by the race," said Horner.
"We have had a very, very solid weekend, but found ourselves a bit out of the window with the tyre in the race. We have got a quick car."
When asked by Autosport if having a more consistent challenger like the Lotus could be better than simply having a fast car, Horner said: "I think the first thing is to have a fast car.
"Then the second thing is to make sure that that car uses the tyres correctly.
"There are a lot of lessons learned from today which I hope will be relevant for cool races in the future."
Horner thinks the fact that Mark Webber did not suffer from tyre degradation as much as Vettel points to the set-up on the world champion's car being a key factor, rather than being an inherent characteristic of the RB9.
"We have a good car, which was competitive through practice [and qualifying]," he added. "Our least competitive moments were during the race.
"Mark was very competitive in the race and had better tyre durability so we have to look at it. The differences were in set-up between the drivers."

Amy Winehouse is a great musical talent, fact. Her song lyrics are amazing, and she has that whole blue-sy “I’m a divorced 40 year old black woman who has been done wrong by her man” voice that I love. If I play Rehab in my car one more time my family will indeed have to send me to music rehab (for which “I won’t go, go, go…”)
Amy lives her life as passionately as she sings her songs, and although it makes for great music to play in my car, I can see why her parents worry about her. She hasn’t been looking very healthy as of late, and she’s just married her ex Blake Fielder-Civil this weekend. Her and her boyfriend had such an acrimonious break up that it was used as material for most of her Back to Black album.
From The Daily Mail:
Amy Winehouse is said to have upset her parents by marrying on-off boyfriend Blake Fielder-Civil in a quickie Miami ceremony.
The north London singer said they would be repeating their marriage vows in the capital soon, to make it up to her parents who were not included in last week’s low-key ceremony.
She said: “My Dad was all right about it really and I would have loved my family to be there but we were getting married for us.
“We’ll do all the other s*** for everyone else in London. Blake looks so handsome I can’t even tell you.”
But she said there were no honeymoon plans. She added: “Every day is a honeymoon. I married the best man in the world.
“It was lovely, lovely. We always knew we were going to be together forever. We knew we were going to do it and we just wanted it to be fore us because that’s what we’re like.”
I know Amy sounds happy, but I’d be worried to if my little girl was walking around LA with an octopus on my head, looking like she hasn’t eaten a cheeseburger in two years, and married to a guy who had reportedly cheated on her in the past. It all seems romantic, but a bit too sudden. I hope Amy does know what she is doing and that she will be OK.
In the meantime, could someone from her label please send her a Happy Meal with a Barbie brush and mirror as a prize?

A middle-aged man in Anambra has landed himself into trouble after he allegedly took the life of his only male sibling over an iPhone.
According to the 26-year-old who was allowed to speak with newsmen, he said that he had killed the only elder brother he has just to be in total control of his iPhone 11.
The culprit, Paul, has however been arrested by the operatives of Anambra State Police Command, Naija News understands.
Speaking further about the incident, Paul said the devil pushed him to kill his only brother because he needed money to buy the expensive phone and that he could not stand mockery from his peer group who have been mocking him for the inability to afford iPhone.
Paul revealed that he poisoned his brother with Sniper while he was taking his breakfast and that he died instantly on the spot.
Paul’s mother who does not want to lose her two children pleaded that he should be released, even though he has been charged with a murder case.
In another news, 9jatoday had reported that President of the Nigeria Football Federation (NFF), Amaju Melvin Pinnick, popularly called Amaju has announced that a new Super Eagles jersey will be out soon ahead of the 2022 FIFA World Cup.
It could be recalled that the Super Eagles had launched a catchy jersey in the 2018 World Cup, a jersey that was praised by many due to the design and nationality it carries.
Two years after the memorable event, another jersey will be launched dated February 5 in the United States of America, 9jatoday understands.
According to the report, the new jersey may also be used by the three-time African Cup of Nations winners in the AFCON 2021 qualifying campaign, which resumes in March.

“I think that it is very important if you know what you want, understand where you are heading towards, and try your best to get it. It is only when we use our hearts to do it, and fall in love with what we are doing, then can we really get real determination.”
And it was just, like, “Well, I’m just gonna have to do it.” - Emma Watson
"So, this is my life. And I want you to know that I am both happy and sad and I’m still trying to figure out how could that be."
« They were both very nervous. Emma's very smart she decided if she was going to avoid 27 takes she was going to get it right first time. We're about to run and I just see Emma brace herself and see that conviction she's got where she goes not going to mess around here this is it.
Rupert hadn't quite reached that same point and I don't think he was expecting it and then she just went for it »
“It sounds like a cliché but I also learnt that you’re not going to fall for the right person until you really love yourself and feel good about how you are.”
Ron and Hermione New BTS Kiss | HP Wizards Collection

Lily Allen has reason to smile again after the 25-year-old singer announced that she is engaged to be married to current beau
She was said to have burst into tears when her 32-year-old boyfriend popped the question on Christmas Day during a festive holiday.
It comes just a month after Lily was in hospital recovering from the tragic loss of their unborn baby via miscarriage. Lily was six months pregnant at the time.
After spending plenty of their time in Australia – with Lily a notable fan of the cricket – they went to Bali where Sam proposed at sunset on the balcony of their luxury hotel suite.
Speaking to the Sun, an elated friend of Lily’s said that it couldn’t have come at a better time, and there wasn’t exactly any delay in her response to the big question.
They said: ‘Lily is absolutely beaming and emotional at the same time. She had no idea Sam was going to propose and said yes instantly.
‘He’s been her rock for her since the couple lost their baby and she can’t wait to spend the rest of her life with him,” it was added.
The actress is on hiatus from her music career after apparently jacking it in for good this year. However, her attitude seems to have thawed a little, and fans will be hoping for her return to the charts in 2011.

Father of Narconon Graduate
My son was a good kid. I’m sure he had exposure to alcohol to excess or over indulged, probably from late high school to college age. From there he went directly into law enforcement.
There’s a lot of stress. He saw a lot of the dirtier side of life. He saw murders and dope deals and, you know, all the seedier side of things we see on the news, he was in the middle of it.
And knowing other law enforcement agents that they would do that all day long, go to a local cop bar, if you will, and relive all that all night. So he was constantly on a high and resorted to alcohol, I think as just part of the scene.
And he was not participating with family for probably six months or so.
He had absented himself from the, from the parties, the Christmas activities, the get-togethers, the summers, that sort of stuff.
He told me he wanted to do something productive to get over his condition. I said, “Fine.”
I think he talked to the Intake Counselor here over a series of probably two or three weeks.
Then I brought him with his stuff and turned him over. And then he went through the program.
He got healthier, he got to — his head was on straight, if you will. And of course, being away from the alcohol, he was back to his old self.
Narconon gave me my son back. And gave our family a brother, an uncle. He's back. So, he's what we were missing. It completed the circle.
It seemed to capture his spirit, return him to his useful life. And working here now, he’s just bringing all his abilities to fruition. So I’m really grateful.

Dark Hollow by Anna Katharine Green
Book I. The Woman in Purple
IV. "And Where Was I When All this Happened?"
The intensity of the question, the compelling, self-forgetful passion of the man, had a startling effect upon the crowd of people huddled before him. With one accord, and without stopping to pick their way, they made for the open doorway, knocking the smaller pieces of furniture about and creating havoc generally. Some fled the house; others stopped to peer in again from behind the folds of the curtain which had been only partially torn from its fastenings. Miss Weeks was the only one to stand her ground.
When the room was quite cleared and the noise abated (it was a frightful experience to see how little the judge had been affected by all this hubbub of combined movement and sound), she stepped within the line of his vision and lifted her feeble and ineffectual hand in an effort to attract his attention to herself.
But he did not notice her, any more than he had noticed the others. Still looking in the one direction, he cried aloud in troubled tones:
"She stood there! the woman stood there and I saw her! Where is she now?"
"She is no longer in the house," came in gentle reply from the only one in or out of the room courageous enough to speak. "She went out when she saw us coming. We knew that she had no right to be here. That is why we intruded ourselves, sir. We did not like the looks of her, and so followed her in to prevent mischief."
The expletive fell unconsciously. He seemed to be trying to adjust himself to some mental experience he could neither share with others nor explain to himself.
"She was here, then?--a woman with a little child? It wasn't an illusion, a--." Memory was coming back and with it a realisation of his position. Stopping short, he gazed down from his great height upon the trembling little body of whose identity he had but a vague idea, and thundered out in great indignation:
"How dared you! How dared she!" Then as his mind regained its full poise, "And how, even if you had the temerity to venture an entrance here, did you manage to pass my gates? They are never open. Bela sees to that."
He may have observed the pallor which blanched her small, tense features as this name fell so naturally from his lips, or some instinct of his own may have led him to suspect tragedy where all was so abnormally still, for, as she watched, she saw his eyes, fixed up to now upon her face, leave it and pass furtively and with many hesitations from object to object, towards that spot behind him, where lay the source of her great terror, if not of his. So lingeringly and with such dread was this done, that she could barely hold back her weak woman's scream in the intensity of her suspense. She knew just where his glances fell without following them with her own. She saw them pass the door where so many faces yet peered in (he saw them not), and creep along the wall beyond, inch by inch, breathlessly and with dread, till finally, with fatal precision, they reached the point where the screen had stood, and not finding it, flew in open terror to the door it was set there to conceal--when that something else, huddled in oozing blood, on the floor beneath, drew them unto itself with the irresistibleness of grim reality, and he forgot all else in the horror of a sight for which his fears, however great, had failed to prepare him.
Dead! Bela! Dead! and lying in his blood! The rest may have been no dream, but this was surely one, or his eyes, used to inner visions, were playing him false.
Grasping the table at his side to steady his failing limbs, he pulled himself along by its curving edge till he came almost abreast of the helpless figure which for so many years had been the embodiment of faithful and unwearied service.
Then and then only, did the truth of his great misfortune burst upon his bewildered soul; and with a cry which tore the ears of all hearers and was never forgotten by any one there, he flung himself down beside the dead negro, and, turning him hastily over, gazed in his face.
Was that a sob? Yes; thus much the heart gave; but next moment the piteous fact of loss was swallowed up in the recognition of its manner, and, bounding to his feet with the cry, "Killed! Killed at his post!" he confronted the one witness of his anguish of whose presence he was aware, and fiercely demanded: "Where are the wretches who have done this? No single arm could have knocked down Bela. He has been set upon--beaten with clubs, and--" Here his thought was caught up by another, and that one so fearsome and unsettling that bewilderment again followed rage, and with the look of a haunted spirit, he demanded in a voice made low by awe and dread of its own sound, "and where was I, when all this happened?"
"You? You were seated there," murmured the little woman, pointing at the great chair. "You were not--quite--quite yourself," she softly explained, wondering at her own composure. Then quickly, as she saw his thoughts revert to the dead friend at his feet, "Bela was not hurt here. He was down town when it happened; but he managed to struggle home and gain this place, which he tried to hold against the men who followed him. He thought you were dead, you sat there so rigid and so white, and, before he quite gave up, he asked us all to promise not to let any one enter this room till your son Oliver came."
Understanding partly, but not yet quite clear in his mind, the judge sighed, and stooping again, straightened the faithful negro's limbs. Then, with a sidelong look in her direction, he felt in one of the pockets of the dead negro's coat, and drawing out a small key, held it in one hand while he fumbled in his own for another, which found, he became on the instant his own man again.
Miss Weeks, seeing the difference in him, and seeing too, that the doorway was now clear of the wondering, awestruck group which had previously blocked it, bowed her slight body and proceeded to withdraw; but the judge, staying her by a gesture, she waited patiently near one of the book-racks against which she had stumbled, to hear what he had to say.
"I must have had an attack of some kind," he calmly remarked. "Will you be good enough to explain exactly what occurred here that I may more fully comprehend my own misfortune and the death of this faithful friend?"
Then she saw that his faculties were now fully restored, and came a step forward. But before she could begin her story, he added this searching question:
"Was it he who let you in--you and others--I think you said others? Was it he who unlocked my gates?"
Miss Weeks sighed and betrayed fluster. It was not easy to relate her story; besides it was wofully incomplete. She knew nothing of what had happened down town, she could only tell what had passed before her eyes. But there was one thing she could make clear, to him, and that was how the seemingly impassable gates had been made ready for the woman's entrance and afterwards taken such advantage of by herself and others. A pebble had done it all,--a pebble placed in the gateway by Bela's hands.
As she described this, and insisted upon the fact in face of the judge's almost frenzied disclaimer, she thought she saw the hair move on his forehead. Bela a traitor, and in the interests of the woman who had fronted him from the other end of the room at the moment consciousness had left him! Evidently this intrusive little body did not know Bela or his story, or--
Why should interruption come then? Why was he stopped, when in the passion of the moment, he might have let fall some word of enlightenment which would have eased the agitated curiosity of the whole town! Miss Weeks often asked herself this question, and bewailed the sudden access of sounds in the rooms without, which proclaimed the entrance of the police and put a new strain upon the judge's faculty of self-control and attention to the one matter in hand.
The commonplaces of an official inquiry were about to supersede the play of a startled spirit struggling with a problem of whose complexities he had received but a glimpse.

Sally Taylor is a Porn Star from United Kingdom. She was born in Derby on July 12, 1966. She is listed on FreeOnes since 2009 and is currently ranked 2777th place. She currently has 65 gallery links and 1 videos in her own FreeOnes section.
Our records show that Sally Taylor status is currently unknown which means we are unaware if she is making movies, doing live shows and/or doing photo shoots at this time. If you happen to know what she has been up to let us know.

LORAIN — A 12-year-old is in custody after attempting to rob a Livingston Avenue woman with a six-shot revolver Friday night. The boy approached the 56-year-old woman outside of her home as she was unloading groceries. He walked up behind her and demanded she hand over everything. “I didn’t realize at that point that there was a gun involved,” the woman said during a phone interview yesterday. “I just kept walking. People come from the alley all the time and try to bother you for change.” When the woman noticed that it was a child’s voice, she turned around. The boy held a revolver sideways at her. The little more than five-foot tall woman said though the boy was only 12-years-old, he already stood taller than her. “The whole thing didn’t seem real,” she said. When she refused to comply, the boy grabbed for her purse though it was under numerous bags of groceries. It was at that point that she began yelling. “I just turned and screamed as loud I could — my husband’s name — and he took off,” she said. “We’ve lived in that house for 14 years and I’ve never had someone pull a gun on me — and I hope it never happens again.” The experience seemed unreal, she said. It highlighted the decline of her neighborhood, which once featured middle-class families of all ethnicities often enjoying outdoor barbeques and parties. Now many of the houses sit empty, the grass growing uncontrolled. “It was a nice neighborhood,” she said. “Not anymore. It’s gotten bad.” “If I could sell, I would be gone tomorrow,” she said. Though the boy fled empty handed, he took her sense of security with him. As she sat at work last night, she said she felt worried about returning home. “I wish it never happened,” she said. “I wish somebody would have paid a little more attention to that little boy.” Police apprehended the juvenile shortly after the attempted robbery. An officer spotted a boy matching the description provided to a dispatcher before police even arrived to interview the woman. Officer Eric Alten and K9 companion, Garp, were patrolling on West 23rd Street when Alten spotted a boy wearing a red striped shirt, shorts and a baseball cap. The woman had given a similar description, though originally identified it as orange, not red. Alten turned his cruiser and yelled for the boy to stop. The boy didn’t. The officer and K9 left the cruiser and pursued on foot southbound in an alleyway near a Rent-A-Center. Alten lost sight of the boy but could still hear him running toward West 22nd Street. Garp drew the officer toward a blue Dumpster where the boy was found hiding. When ordered out, the boy stood but refused to exit the Dumpster. When he leaned slightly forward, Alten drew his weapon as the boy was believed to be armed. Assisting officers arrived and pulled the boy from the Dumpster and secured him in the back of a cruiser. The K9 then sought out the gun and found it near the northwest corner of the Rent-a-Center. Police would not say whether the weapon was loaded Saturday night. When asked what happened, the boy told police a friend gave him the gun and told him to do it. The friend had told him that “things like this were cool,” so the boy decided to do it, he said. He said he originally pointed the gun at the woman and told her to get on the ground. He then reached out and touched her arm “to try to scare her,” according to police. He said his friend was standing across the street when the boy approached the victim. Police were unable to locate anyone by the name provided and his whereabouts were unknown. The boy could not provide phone numbers or addresses for his parents. He was taken to the Lorain County Juvenile Dentention Home.

Who do we call son? Is it the child of our loins, or the one we raised as our own?
Several years ago a man brought up three boys. The eldest was adopted and the younger two were his by birth. He called all three his sons. When it came time to pass on his inheritance, no will was found, and there was a question of who would inherit.
A lawyer told the trio, “A father must provide for a son he has adopted, as if he were born into the family.”
In 2 Timothy 1:2 Paul writes to Timothy, calling him his dearly beloved son. What does he mean? There is no biblical record of Paul fathering children. Neither does the Word indicate he legally adopted anyone. How is Timothy Paul’s son?
We see the connection between the two men in the next three verses.
Verse 3: They had been in conflict with one another.
Paul was not an early and ardent supporter of the Church. Rather, the opposite. He persecuted the Church, albeit through his ignorance. It was only by the merciful hand of God that he was struck down by a bright light, and God sent him to a man named Judas who lived on the street called Straight.
When we are in conflict with a person or a group, and something happens to convince us we have been in total error, it is like throwing a magnet against an iron bar. It is difficult to force us apart.
Verse 4: They became connected with one another.
Paul was imprisoned, and he wrote his epistle to Timothy from behind bars. Timothy had been with Paul when he was arrested, and it was through Timothy’s tears for his mentor that the depth of the connection that bound them together became clear.
When a father and son are ripped apart without just cause, it is an emotional moment, and it is through the emotions that the deepest bonds between men are fostered.
Verse 5: They found continuance in one another.
Paul and Timothy had forged a history together. It was Paul who originally invited Timothy to join his evangelistic team. They traveled to Macedonia together, where they were instrumental in converting Lydia, the seller of purple, to the Church.
Paul even mentions Timothy’s mother and grandmother by name.
If Paul’s connection to Timothy warrants the title of son, how deeply does God’s connection to us run? God sent his Son to die on the cross as an invitation to come unto him. He sent the Holy Spirit to abide with us, no matter where we may go. He even knows our mother and grandmother by name.
When God calls us his sons and daughters, you can rest assured he means it.
When God lays claim to us, not even the devil can make him let go.
Copyright © 2013 MyChurchNotes.net

I set out early Saturday morning with my neighbor and our morning took us from the east side of the peninsula on Georgian Bay to the west side on Lake Huron. We found some wonderful Bits! Will post my finds later.
What seemed like a peaceful and fun morning changed when I recieved a call from my daughter to say that a friend had been killed in an accident. He was the best friend of a work mate of hers. Of course she was shocked and saddened.
I faffed around the cottage for the rest of the day, trying out settings on my camera for pictures. At lunch I went off to buy some sugar to make jam. I had picked up berries from a farm on the way up.
On the way to the grocery store I passed an old guy hobbling down the street and thought how difficult this looked for him. He was walking quickly though, and I wondered where he was going.
I went home and spent the afternoon making jam. I love making jam and could spend the whole day in the kitchen with the music going and jam bubbling. My favorite part is listening to the tops snap as they cool and seal. I have always said I should have been a Farmer's Wife!
Later in the afternoon, an OPP helicopter started circling and continued for hours. The police boat is in the water right in front of our cottage. They came and put it on the trailer and removed it. I wondered if there was a sailor missing somewhere. The marina was busy and nothing seemed out of place. At around 8:30 I went off for a little bike ride to discover the whole town crawling with police. They were looking for a man who had wandered away from the nursing home. Apparently, it was the old hobbling fellow I had seen over 8 hours ago. I was the last and only one to have seen him. I had to give a statement. I felt awful as we had no idea they were looking for him.
I lay awake for hours thinking of these 2 families and the poor old fellow happy it was a warm night at least, and the bears.....So we sit here this morning hoping that a family will get good news today. It is a wierd and erie feeling here. It is so quiet and everyone is sad and concerned. We pray this poor fellow is found safe today.

Role of Women in Family in Ancient Rome
There have been a lot of discussions about the role of women in Ancient Rome. They had many different roles in many different activities or institutions but these were never clear because no ancient journals or personal diaries written by Roman women were uncovered, so it is not known what their hopes and dreams were, or if they had any. Although in ancient times, there was a men hegamony, Romen women played an important role in family structure. Almost everything about Roman women is a mystery.
When looking at the sources for ancient Roman women, we quickly figure out that most of them were dealing with aristocracy. Men from upper class always had received the best educaton and they obtained a role with high reputation. Because of these Roman women had a lot of spare time and in this time period they reflected theirselves on the world and wrote about it. Female population didn't only consist of aristocratic women and upper levels of Roman Society, but it is parts of their lives that we have to look at. Evidence for what the poorer women suffered during the Roman Republic and the Empire is very divided into pieces, however, women of all economic levels shared one common role and responsibility, no matter the social position they were in: that of child bearer.
Women, or more correctly, girls, usually got married by the age they were twelve. In our modern world, this seems disreputable, shameful. Apart from all these things, how can the parents give permission to their daughter to start up a new family, maybe a new life? Of course, we have to take those days' circumstances into consideration. Life expectancy was very different in ancient Rome compared with today. There would be a little amount of people who lived long died of old age but the majority of the society went into the graves by the time they reached their twenties or thirties. Girls married in early age and they made kids and often they died in...

POLICE officer Neal Skinner has spoken of how he jumped 30ft from a bridge into icy waters to save a man’s life.
The 51-year-old jumped from the Langstone Bridge to help a man who was being dragged out into the harbour by the currents.
The drama came as PC Skinner was on his evening shift and was the closest officer to the scene when a member of the public reported seeing a man perched on the railings.
PC Skinner arrived at the bridge at about 9.35pm and called the coastguard, RNLI and other emergency services before starting to chat to the man, who by this point had climbed over the barriers and was gripping on to a lamp post with one arm.
PC Skinner, who serves with Hampshire Constabulary’s dog unit and lives near Emsworth, said: ‘I spoke to him and he told me he had had enough and was going to jump.
‘The tide was reasonably high and there was quite a flow of water under the bridge.
‘I continued chatting to him and it turned out he had served in the army in Northern Ireland and was suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder.
‘I had served in the army and in Northern Ireland for two years and it rang a few bells with me.
‘We could have swapped positions and been on opposite sides but for events that have happened in our lives.
‘I told him that if he jumped, I was going to jump in after him.
‘He said he didn’t want me to jump in, but I said it wasn’t negotiable because that was my job.
‘As a police officer you are expected to save life and limb.’
The man lost his balance and found himself hanging with one arm over the fast-flowing water.
PC Skinner said: ‘I climbed over the barrier to grab hold of him and with that he let go and dropped into the water.
‘By then I had no option. I jumped in. By the time I hit the water and re-surfaced I was under the bridge because of the tide.
‘I remember when I hit the water thinking “this is not a good idea because this is cold”.
‘It was freezing cold.
‘The man was a good 10 or 15ft away from me and the tide was taking him out.
‘I remember shouting at the other police officer as best I could “throw the life ring”.
‘I swam out to the chap and grabbed hold of him and swam back to the life ring. By then red mist had taken over and I didn’t want to be messing around.’
Other police officers dragged the pair across to the shallows where they were treated by paramedics and put in thermal suits to keep them warm.
A Hayling RNLI lifeboat arrived at the scene, but by that point the pair were already ashore on the slipway to Langstone Sailing Club.
The man, from Waterlooville, was taken to Queen Alexandra Hospital by ambulance for treatment.
The incident happened on December 27.
PC Skinner, who has been in the force for 15 years, added: ‘It was very cold and an experience I wouldn’t want to repeat in a long time.
‘I became very determined and focussed that I hadn’t jumped in the water to die myself.
‘I don’t feel like a hero. I’m sure every police officer in my situation would have done the same.’

Teenager found with slash wounds in Rainham
PUBLISHED: 15:53 08 December 2019 | UPDATED: 15:53 08 December 2019
Police were called to reports of a stabbing in Rainham on Friday, December 6.
Officers and paramedics from the London Ambulance Service were called to reports of a stabbing in Lower Mardyke Avenue at 6.20pm on Friday.
You may also want to watch:
A Metropolitan Police spokesman said: "A 17-year-old male was found with slash wounds.
"He was treated at the scene before being taken to hospital; his injuries have been assessed as non life-threatening."
There have been no arrests and enquiries are ongoing.

A few minutes is all it takes to save a life
WHEN Murray Sturgess received his bowel cancer kit in the mail last July he was pretty confident; this was one test he would have no trouble passing.
He had dutifully competed two previous tests - one at age 50 and another at 55.
Little did he know that during the following five years a tumour was insidiously growing in his lower bowel.
"I felt completely well," Murray said.
"I had no symptoms and was leading an active lifestyle, growing watermelons on my Chinchilla farming property, playing regular games of polocrosse and eating a diet I felt was pretty healthy."
Murray was called into his doctor's office and was given the news that of the two samples he provided, one was positive and one negative. Treating the test as positive, Murray was scheduled for a colonoscopy in Toowoomba.
The news was not good.
Within a week, Murray had surgery at St Andrew's Hospital in Toowoomba to remove a grade three tumour, eight inches of colon and 15 affected lymph nodes.
"Early detection results in a 92 per cent survival rate in bowel cancer," Murray says.
"If found earlier, I could have had the surgery followed by a week or two recovery time. Unfortunately, in my case chemotherapy was required."
For the next six months Murray's wife Wendy drove him to Toowoomba every other week for his chemotherapy treatments.
It left him feeling nauseated and fatigued, unable to do any physical work on the farm, and almost housebound. Murray lost feeling in his fingertips and the soles of his feet, so balance was also an issue.
"It was watermelon season and being a farmer means I depend on being able to do physical work every day. If it wasn't for the help of Wendy and my sons, Cameron and Bryce, the farm would have been in dire straits," Murray said.
"I wasn't able to go out in the sun due to the effects of the chemotherapy, but I could start the irrigator and the fertilisation plant. The melons grew well and were of good quality and having just that one small job helped keep my spirits up."
Eight months after his diagnosis, Murray was recently given the all clear. To celebrate, Wendy organised a party for everyone who helped Murray through that difficult time.
"We called it Murray's Staying Alive Party," he laughed. "The Bee Gees song featured quite prominently throughout the night."
Murray feels very grateful for the help he received during his recovery. From the bowel resection nurses at St Andrew's, who he said were a special breed, to the support from friends and family.
"I was feeling pretty flat during that time," Murray said. "And I really appreciated the visits from friends and family. It may have only been 10 minutes out of their day, but it made my day."
"I feel lucky to have had the expert care that saved my life, the well-equipped hospital just two hours away, the care of my local doctor and the free bowel cancer test that alerted him to the problem.
"The Darling Downs is above the national average when it comes to bowel cancer. Only 40 per cent of people do the test when it arrives.
"I am particularly grateful to my friend Stephanie who called me a 'wuss' one day at a polocrosse working bee. I didn't want to clean the toilets; I thought it was a yucky job. Stephanie handed me the toilet brush and told me to get on with it. I think it changed my mindset with regard to taking the bowel test."
"I was invited to talk on the SBS program Insight recently and the 'yuk factor' was discussed at length. It's one of the main reasons people throw that test away. But I wasn't going to be a 'wuss' and I felt looking after my health was my responsibility," Murray said.
These days, Murray is feeling pretty well. He just competed in a polocrosse match, playing four games over the weekend. He has made a few concessions to his life as a result of the cancer scare. White bread has been replaced by whole grain and he consumes a lot less sugar than before.
"The World Health Organisation recommends a diet high in fibre," Murray said. "I believe in a balanced diet, a bit of everything including red meat. I've always eaten a lot of fruit and now I'm more aware of looking after my body.
"I just want to get the message out - don't take your health for granted.
"It takes longer to read the instructions than it does to do the test.
"It's free and it could save your life."

(Photo: REUTERS/Shannon Stapleton)
The suspect who went on a stabbing rampage at Franklin Regional High School in Murrysville near Pittsburgh, Pa., on Wednesday that left 22 people wounded has been identified as 16-year-old sophomore Alex Hribal. His attorney described him as "confused, scared and depressed."
"I think he understands what he did," attorney Patrick Thomassey told ABC's "Good Morning America" on Thursday.
"I don't think he at this point understands the gravity of what he did. I don't think he realizes how severely injured some of these people are. And, hopefully, there's no death involved in any of these. We're praying that everybody is all right."
Hribal is being accused of wielding two knives when he went on the rampage at the high school early morning before classes began, wounding 21 students and a security guard before being tackled by an assistant principal.
The student has been charged as an adult with attempted homicide, aggravated assault and possessing a prohibited weapon on school property.
Thomassey said the teen has no history of psychiatric or disciplinary problems, and his family has described him as a good student who interacted with others.
"He's a typical young kid. He's a B+ student. The family is like Ozzie and Harriet. They have dinner together every night," the attorney told CNN.
"All the students liked him," he continued. "He worked well in groups, and this happened. So there's a reason for it -- that's what I'm saying. And we have to get to the bottom of that."
Thomassey's account does not match up with that of high schooler Mia Meixner, who claimed that Hribal was withdrawn, did not have many friends and kept to himself.
"He was very quiet. He just was kind of doing it," Meixner, who was at her locker at the time, said about the attack. "And he had this, like, look on his face that he was just crazy and he was just running around just stabbing whoever was in his way."
Dr. Mark Rubino said eight victims were taken to Forbes Regional Medical Center on Wednesday, where three remained in surgery, Fox News reported.
"Most of them were to the lower abdomen and they seemed to actually almost have a pattern," Rubino said, describing the stab wounds. "Most of them were to the right lower abdomen and to the right flank and that created some of the criticality of their wounds and the nature of their injuries."
Local churches held prayer services for the community Wednesday night. Cornerstone Ministries opened its doors to offer prayer and counseling. "Our hearts are saddened by the tragedy that has taken place at Franklin Regional High School. Please join us in praying for the individuals and families impacted by this terrible event," the non-denominational church in Murrysville stated.
Murrysville Police Chief Tom Seefeld told media Thursday morning that their investigation will be "lengthy."
"The crime scene has been processed and now witnesses and victims will be interviewed," he said.
He also noted that officials are investigating a report of a threat made on Tuesday night, but so far they have no evidence to support that.

Amy Hart has defended her decision to do “everything by the book” during her first pregnancy, including avoiding certain food.
The former Love Island star revealed her pregnancy with boyfriend Sam Rason three weeks ago and said that she has been suffering from some pregnancy anxiety, but later reported that she is “chilled at the moment”.
Her desire to take every precaution led to some trolls online calling her "so stupid", while others accused her of lying about feeling relaxed during pregnancy.
She explained "I have a very overactive imagination. I have an amazing long term memory, but that's why I have to try and do everything by the book.
"So if anything did happen I know that although it wouldn't have been because I'd done something that you're not supposed to do like once in the space of nine months – that would be all that I would think about and I'd know exactly when I did it and I just wouldn't sleep for months.
Explaining how that didn’t mean she wasn’t relaxed, she said "So the reason that I'm quite chilled at the moment is because I know I'm pregnant. I know that I'm having a baby in March.
“I've seen scans, I've seen them move the baby around, I've seen the heartbeat, I've got the pictures.”
It comes after Amy was rushed home from her holiday in Ibiza suffering from a bleeding scare, which she said came from uncertainty about her blood type.
Reassuring fans that she and the baby were okay, she said on her story “'The next morning, Sam said "It's OK to be anxious about these things, you know". I told him "No, I'm not anxious. Don't accuse me of being anxious, I'm positive".”
Listen: everymum – the podcast

Ben Esra telefonda seni bosaltmami ister misin?
Telefon Numaram: 00237 8000 92 32
Jack schedule with his work got busy so he put off inviting his boy over, but he was pleased to notice that since night of intense sex, he was receiving more texts from his younger lover and they were growingly needy, horny, and slutty. Each text made him smile as proof that the young man was so eager to come over again. Maybe this was the one he was looking for to make the long-term partner he had been looking for.
To be sure, he would have to continue the boy’s training. He decided to make a call to his friend Matt.
“Hey Matt, how are things? Still thinking about my girl Rachel’s mouth?”
“Hey Jack… Um… yea… It was amazing that time…”
“Do you want to use his pretty mouth again?”
“Um… I dunno… I shouldn’t…”
“I know your wife isn’t giving you what you need…”
“Um… Yea… Ok… you want me to just come over again?”
“Yea… I want to teach him to please two men at once. All you need to do is sit back on the bed and enjoy yourself with his mouth. When the time comes, I’m going to mount him and hopefully we can cum into him at the same time.”
“Oh… wow… Never thought this would be how I’d have a threesome…”
“It’s ok… I’m ok your using his mouth. And another thing, I don’t want you to say a word. I’m going to have him blindfolded.”
“Oh… wow… Ok… When should I come over?”
“Come over around 5 today, You can wait on the bed in the downstairs bedroom. I’ll bring him in after he’s cleaned and guide him to you. And also, don’t park in the driveway. Park down the street.”
“Ok… and uh… thanks man. I really needed this…”
“No problem. I wouldn’t share him with just anyone… I think this one may be special.”
Jack then texted Rick to come over at 5:30 the next day. Rick was overjoyed to finally hear the good news that he would be going to see his man. It was all he had been looking forward too. He couldn’t even have sex with his wife at home because his mind was only on draining his man dry and receiving the contents of a real man’s testicles.
Rick found himself speeding through traffic to get to Jack’s house. He pulled up and walked quickly to the door. One neighbor next door was outside watering the front yard and smiled when she saw him. He smiled to think that the street was coming to know who he was and what he kept coming over for. He found the door unlocked and stepped in.
“Rachel, I missed you, get over here.”
Rick threw himself on Jack sitting on the sofa, straddling his lap, deeply kissing the man he missed. He moaned uncontrollably to have Jack’s rough tongue have his way with his mouth. He felt his dick leak from the bigger man’s hands roughly grabbing him all over. Jack slipped his hands under the boys shorts at the waist and grabbed the ass he would soon be enjoying. His hands felt the string of a thong and his fingers grazed the tip of a plug. He was pleased to see his boy so ready
“Show me how much you missed me Rachel…”
Rick began undressing his man, submissively kissing every inch of skin he exposed. First the shirt, then belt, then pants and slowly lowering the boxers, he held the enormous thick angry shaft in one hand and the hot swollen balls in the other. He hungrily fed the manhood into his mouth and massaged it with his throat and tongue, causing Jack to grunt in appreciation. Rick wanted his man to cum so bad. He missed the thrill of how a real man shakes and tenses up before unloading his precious sperm into a girl’s waiting body. He worked his fingers, rolling and squeezing and tugging Jack’s huge balls.
Jack was shocked how much this boy had learned what he liked and couldn’t hold out. He figured Matt would just have to be the sloppy seconds. He gripped Rick’s mouth and let go, releasing a huge load into the boy’s mouth. Rick was so happy to receive as he heard each grunt, felt each pulse and flex of the shaft, and each hot spurt of semen into his mouth. He gladly swallowed and swallowed and swallowed.
“Oh God… that was amazing… Now Rachel, go ready yourself and…”
“Meet you in the sex room?”
“No… hurry and meet me Demetevler Escort here . I have a surprise for you.”
“Oh… and lube yourself real good like a good girl…”
Rick ran to the bathroom and cleaned himself thoroughly. He moisturized his skin all over. He bent over and tried to lubricate himself as best as he could before going back to the living room. Jack was sitting there with, his manhood clearly reloaded and upright, but holding two small black things in his hands.
“Rachel… I want you to wear this for me first. Its a girl’s choker. Black lace and a silver medallion. If you read it closely, it has my name on it.”
Rick looked at it. It said “Property of Jack Williams.”
“Turn around, let me put it on you. Turn around, kneel, and close your eyes.”
Rick did as he was told and felt the big powerful hands put the lace black choker on his neck. It felt thrilling and wild to wear a mark of sexual ownership.
“Now for this..”
Rick felt cloth on his eyes. He tried to open his eyes but only saw black. He was somewhat scared. Why was there a blindfold? Surely another test for Jack to see if he would withhold any part of his mind or body.
“You’re trembling a bit Rachel… Don’t you trust me?”
“I don’t want you worrying about what you see… I want you to only worry about doing what I say and thinking about what is being done to your body.”
“I know… It’s so I can think about you more right?”
“Yea… Just obey my needs and remember that your body belongs to me.”
“Take my hand and follow me…”
Rick felt himself raised up and walked down the hallway. He sensed they had entered the sex room. His heart was so happy. He hoped to be mounted and seeded like last time. Jack’s rough hands pushed him forward until he felt the bed against his knees. There was a strange feeling about the room though that he couldn’t figure out.
“Now Rachel bend over…” Rick gladly bent over with a huge smile on his face. He moaned in ecstasy as he felt his thong moved aside and the plug pulled out. His man’s thick finger slip into him and move around inside of him. He loved how Jack’s mastery with even just one finger, then two, pushing, twisting, curling inside of him, every movement making him squeal. Abruptly, the finger’s pulled out. He whimpered in frustration.
“Rachel, I have prepared a surprise for you. It’s on this bed. I want you to find it with your mouth and hands. You will know what to do when you find it. Remember what a girl’s duty is?”
“To make a man cum and take his seed.”
“Good… now find your surprise… it’s just ahead of you.”
Rick’s mind was racing as he slowly put his knees on the bed and moved forward on his hands and knees. He wondered what the surprise could be. He didn’t go far until his hand brushed against a man’s leg. A man’s hairy leg. He froze. He was confused and scared and wild thoughts raced through his head. What was this? His hand felt the leg again. It wasn’t as muscular as Jack.
“That’s a good girl… keep looking for your surprise…” Rick felt a sharp slap against his ass. That was clearly Jack behind him. Who was this other person? His other hand reached ahead and felt the other thigh… He inched forward and let his hands trail up further and further until he felt it. It was some other man’s manhood. It was not as big or thick as Jack’s. Whoever this person was, he was silent other than growingly heavier breathing. With one hand he began to feel this unknown manhood in front of him. It was clear that his slightest touch was having great effects on whoever this was.
Rick wondered what he was doing in the middle of the bed, blindfolded, holding the manhood of an unknown man, with the tip just inches from his face. Was this truly what Jack wanted? He felt the bed mattress move and sink behind his knees as he knew Jack was now also on the bed. As Rick hesitated in confusion, his man’s big hand began feeling up his bare ass and as if to answer the questions in his Otele gelen escort head, Jack’s big thick index finger slipped back into him causing him to gasp. As he panted, mouth open, Jack’s other hand began to press on the back of his neck. Rick threw all cares and worries to the wind as he began to orally pleasure the unknown man, moaning and squirming with his mouth full as first one, then two lubricated fat fingers began pressing and probing deeper and deeper into his bottom. His mind was lost in pleasure.
“You like that dont you Rachel?”
Rick moaned with his lips and tongue massaging the unknown cock. The stranger’s hands began to hold his head and brush his hair over and over. Jack’s fingers were beginning to press and curl against Rick’s prostate, sending him into overdrive of leaking pre-cum and gasping for breath. He pulled the cock from his mouth so he could better breathe and focused on sucking the very aroused scrotum before him.
Then, Jack’s strong hands pulled back on his hips. “Time for you to learn to pleasure two men at a time.
Rick sat back on his feet with his face pointed up not knowing how this would unfold. He felt the bed shifting around him and soon both men were standing right in front of him. He reached out and felt their thighs and soon found their waiting manhoods. He loved the direct comparison of how much heavier Jack’s balls were and how much longer and thicker his meat was. His small hands alternated between fondling the balls and stroking the shafts and his mouth began to eagerly please one man and then the other. He tried to try extra hard to give better tongue action and finger grip when he was working on Jack. It was so tiring as his hands and head and mouth were just a blur. His face was becoming covered in a mix of pre-cum and his own saliva. From the tightening of the balls, he could even sense how close the unknown man was about to explode.
“Ok, time for you to do your duty, Rachel. Get in position and keep your mouth on that dick in front of you. This is is called spitroasting.”
Rick got back into doggy position with his hips as high as they would go. The stranger settled back to sitting in front of his face and he obediently began to suck. The bed shifted again as Jack’s muscular knees parted the boy’s smooth legs. Rick felt the real man’s leg hairs against his inner thighs. He knew it was time. His man’s strong hands grabbed his hips and in one slow stroke, pulled his thong aside and buried the hot thick manhood deep inside of him all the way to the balls. All Rick could do was moan loud and long on the stranger’s penis. He had to remember to keep fondling the balls or moving his tongue as his mind kept blanking out at the feelings running through his bottom. Stroke after stroke slid in and out of him as his moans were muffled by the cock pushing against his tongue and throat.
The two men grew urgent. The hands on Rick’s head and the bigger hands on his hips, occasionally slapping his ass cheeks, gripped tighter and tighter. Both rods grew thicker in him. Jack’s manhood sliding against his prostate finally made the Rick explode, spraying onto the sheets. The friction and pressure on his prostate as Jack masterfully twisted his meat inside his boy was more than Rick could bear. He took the cock out of his mouth and let himself gasp and scream while doing his best to lick the shaft and stroke the shaft with his hands blindly. Mostly all he could do is moan rubbing the unknown man’s manhood around his face wildly, drooling uncontrollably.
Moments later, both men came nearly at the same time. Jack came first with a grunt and a roar, gripping the boy’s ass so tight as he poured shot after shot of virile sperm out of his spasming body into Rick’s awaiting body. Almost at the same time, as Rick moaned and arched his back to milk as much of Jack’s orgasm as he could, the man in front of him also grunted and came, splashing jets of warm semen onto his face. He felt it slide down his chin and cheeks and without thinking, swirled his tongue to try to swallow some of it pooling around his lips before dropping Balgat Escort his entire face and body onto the bed. As he slumped to the sheets, he felt Rick’s veiny shaft and large tip scrape out of him.
Rick lay there collapsed onto a damp mess of sweat and semen, delirious and exhausted from being used by two men at once. He heard and felt the stranger move up off the bed. The two men whispered to each other as the stranger put his clothes back on. Jack’s big rough hands caressed his limp body up and down his back to his bottom. He felt another set of hands grab his sore ass cheeks in a sort of thank you and the man left.
Jack removed the blindfold. “Rachel… you were amazing to me and to our friend… you blew his mind and milked me so well with your pussy.” Rick blushed, his eyes adjusting to the light of the room.
“Go clean yourself up and bring some wet towels to clean me up.”
Rick gingerly got off the bed and walked carefully to the bathroom. His body was sore and it was slightly painful to walk as his bottom was so tender. He rinsed his mouth with mouthwash and removed his used lingerie as he quickly rinsed himself clean in the shower. Then he got one hand towel wet with soap and another two with water and went back to his room wearing only the choker.
Jack was sitting up on the bed, leaned up against the headboard with his legs splayed out, obscenely showing how enormous his balls were and how thick his manhood was even when deflated. Rick crawled up submissively and began to wipe down his man first with the soapy towel and then with the others, gently lifting the scrotum and shaft to clean every inch. Just as he was about to finish, firm hands rubbed his face, pinched his cheeks, and ran up to his hair, gently pressing his face down. He got the message loud and clear – his man still had needs.
Rick gently took the cock into his mouth and worked his tongue as gently as he could. He laid down to get more comfortable and began to use both hands to fondle the heavy scrotum. He could hear Jack’s breathing grow deeper and deeper as the thick meat grew firmer and longer from each swirl and flick of his tongue. He couldn’t believe this was the same cock that had just been inside of him, unloading a big amount of sperm. Rick felt needed and felt special as the one to take care of a man like Jack.
Just as Rick thought he was just helping Jack relax, he began to notice tell tale signs of a man building up a load of semen. The heavy testicles in his hands began to twitch every so slightly and the shaft thickened. The hands that ran through his hair started to grip a bit tighter and tighter.
“Rachel, take my load on your face, baby.”
Rick leaned up to hover his face above the tip and furiously jerked the shaft the way he knew Jack liked it, all while squeezing and tugging on the scrotum. With another loud shout of pleasure, Jack’s body spasmed, his balls tightened, and he released spurt after spurt of semen onto Rick’s face. Rick smiled now knowing why women always begged this. The warm splash of a man’s semen, the pungent smell coating your eyes and nose was glorious proof of your talent in draining a real man. As the spurts grew short and Jack’s body stopped shaking, Rick opened his eyes carefully to see Jack filming him with his phone.
“Be a good girl and don’t waste my seed.” Rick used his finger to scrape the semen on his face towards and into his mouth, trying not to miss a drop. He used his kisses to clean up Jack’s manhood one last time as big hands caressed his face.
“Thank you for trusting me with your body and experiencing your first spit-roast. Now you better get on home. I’ll text you for our next meeting.” He kissed his worn out boy and got up to leave. Rick saw how glorious Jack’s manhood and body was in the light. He loved how a real man’s dick and balls swung with each step. He heard Jack go up the stairs and close the door to his bedroom. He couldn’t believe what had happened and did feel a little cheap and used lying in the dirty sheets alone after having serviced two men, one who was still a mystery.
The room now really reeked of sex. He wondered when he would be invited up to the master bedroom as a proper lover. Maybe he still didn’t show his devotion enough? What more could he do? How much more could he prove his submission to Jack? He wondered what experiences would come next as he walked out to the bathroom to put his clothes back on and quietly left the house.
To be continued…
Ben Esra telefonda seni bosaltmami ister misin?
Telefon Numaram: 00237 8000 92 32

DERIDDER, LA (KPLC) - An arrest has been made in the ongoing investigation of two church burglaries in DeRidder.
David R. Waddle, 22, was arrested Wednesday by the DeRidder Police after trying to sell a TV that was stolen from one of the churches on Facebook. He was arrested and convicted in 2015 for breaking into 8 DeRidder churches and was sentenced to ten years but was released early on parole.
"Waddle was released from the Department of Corrections in March 13 of this year," says DeRidder Police Chief John Gott. "On Mar. 15, our office arrested him for disturbing the peace. He served a couple days in jail and posted bond. Here recently, we arrested him for burglarizing two churches here in DeRidder. "
Both churches, First United Methodist Church and Gospel Lighthouse Pentecostal Church, were broken into in 2015 as well. Pastor Lamar Oliver says that a TV and a laptop were the only things stolen, the TV leading to Waddle's arrest. Both items have been recovered and returned. He says he is focusing on the positives in the situation: no one was hurt and the items stolen were returned.
"If the worst thing in the world is that my office got broken into, life is pretty good." Pastor Oliver says that the church came together to clean the office before the Good Friday service that evening. "It was amazing, as noon rolled around, a lot of it had been cleaned up. It was a great opportunity for our church family to step up and I could not have been more pleased or more proud of the Easter spirit found in our people."
Waddle is currently being held on a $300,000 bond.

Redd Foxx spent many years as a stand-up comic with a reputation for outrageous and bawdy humor. He built a cult following, but his break into the mainstream came when he was cast to play crotchety Fred Sanford, a character named after Foxx's brother and known for his raunchy, loud-mouthed comic style (although admittedly he did have to tone it down a bit for network TV).
Before Sanford and Son
, Foxx made a handful of classic guest appearances on such popular series as The Lucy Show
, The Addams Family
, Mr. Ed
and Green Acres
, as well as in the hilarious feature film farce Cotton Comes to Harlem
. Foxx took care of his friends by getting them guest spots on the show, including a regular spot for his former comedy partner Slappy White. In the 1980s he ran afoul of the IRS and lost many of his assets, but launched a comeback starting with his appearance alongside Richard Pryor and Eddie Murphy in 1989's Harlem Nights
. He began a successful run on a new Murphy-produced series, The Royal Family
, in 1991, but had a heart attack during rehearsals and died. The shows had just seven episodes in the can at the time of Foxx's death, and despite its initial success the Family couldn't bounce back following the loss of its charismatic lead.
Fred Sanford is nobody's fool. He's the owner of a junkyard that he runs with his son, Lamont. Fred is full of get-rich-quick schemes and often meddles in the affairs of his son. One of his favorite manipulative maneuvers is to fake a heart attack whenever things aren't going his way, calling out to his dead wife, "I'm coming to join you, Elizabeth," whenever he feels it will help his cause.

After allegedly swindling and raping ladies in search of a life partner on social media, self-acclaimed prophet, Williams Benard, has been arrested.
The suspect, Williams Benard, who operated as Evans Joris, a pseudo name on his Facebook account, was arrested by the Isheri-Oshun Police Station in Lagos, where he and a member of his syndicate are being interrogated.
Investigations by the police showed that the suspect’s mode of operation was to send friend requests to his female victims and offer business proposal or marriage promises. He would earn the victim’s trust, after which he would invite them to a hotel room where the syndicate would rape them and take their nude photographs, which they would threaten to post on social media if they raise any alarm. With the nude photographs, Evans and his other gang member would begin to blackmail their victims, extorting huge sums of money from them.
Williams however met his Waterloo when he and his members raped a 19-year-old girl and started blackmailing with her nude photos.
Recounting her experience, his last victim who gave her name as Glory, said
“I live at Ikotun area of Lagos. I met Williams Benard on the social media. He said he was a tiller and a prophet. We were chatting on Facebook until he asked me to become his lover and I declined the proposal and warned him to stop chatting with me. I eventually blocked him on my Facebook. Few days later, a man sent me a friend request from the USA and I accepted his request, we started chatting. Few days after we became friends, the man told me that he would like to marry me and I was so happy, but I told the man that I should be 20 before the marriage.
“One day, the man said he would send me an iPhone and laptop so that I can communicate effectively with him. He later sent a phone number of the person that I should collect the items from. When I dialed the number, it happened to be that of Williams Benard whom I had warned to stay away from me. On phone, he described our reunion as a coincidence and that his blood brother informed him that he has proposed to marry me. He gave me appointment in a hotel to meet him for the items. When I arrived the hotel, Benard said he was shocked that the courier service that was bringing the items had returned it to Abuja and that he needed N20,000 to send to the courier service to enable them bring the goods to Lagos.
“I took Benard to my aunt who gave him the money. He invited me to have a meeting in the hotel to have some discussion. I did not suspect anything as I thought he was genuine. When I arrived the hotel room, he started shouting and asking why I decided to tarnish his name before his elder brother, as I was asking what he meant, he brought out a bottle and threatened to kill me if I did not cooperate with him. He commanded me to remove my clothes or risk being stabbed to death.
“He raped me and took my nude photographs and threatened to upload it on the social media if I dare tell my aunt, relatives and the police about it. That was how he turned me to a sex slave. Any time he needed me, he would tell me stories that someone mistakenly saw my nude photograph and wanted to post it on the social media. I would run to him and he would show me somebody and after sleeping with me, he would ask the person to have sex with me as well.
“The first time, the person he invited refused to sleep with me, but promised not to upload the photograph. The second time he invited another person and told me the same story that the person wanted to upload my nude photographs on the social media. It was on a Sunday, the two of them slept with me till Monday morning. Because I did not go back home that Sunday, my aunt raised the alarm and other relatives came and the case of missing person was lodged at the police station. The police advised my family to wait for 24 hours to see if I would come back home.
“When I came home on Monday morning, my family members had gathered and started asking questions, but initially, I was scared to spill the beans because I was afraid of their threat. It was when one of my brothers threatened to beat me up if I did not talk that I opened up.”
Confirming the incident, the spokesperson of the state police command, Bala Elkana, said investigations are ongoing to determine and arrest other members of his gang. He said they would all be charged to court once investigations are completed.

Myths and Legends of Our Own Lands
Behind the New Grand Hotel, in the Catskills, is an amphitheatre of mountain that is held to be the place of which the Mohicans spoke when they told of people there who worked in metals, and had bushy beards and eyes like pigs. From the smoke of their forges, in autumn, came the haze of Indian summer; and when the moon was full, it was their custom to assemble on the edge of a precipice above the hollow and dance and caper until the night was nigh worn away. They brewed a liquor that had the effect of shortening the bodies and swelling the heads of all who drank it, and when Hudson and his crew visited the mountains, the pygmies held a carouse in his honor and invited him to drink their liquor. The crew went away, shrunken and distorted by the magic distillation, and thus it was that Rip Van Winkle found them on the eve of his famous sleep.

Sitting eye-to-eye with her best friend in their small town”s sole ‘tea room,” Lisa gave a brief look around the room before attempting to shush Marie. “Marie!” She hissed. “You”re as bad as my husband. It”s not funny!”
“Yes it is, girlfriend.” Marie followed her statement of ‘fact” with more giggles.
“And besides, it”s your fault!”
“Yeah you were the one that gave it to me.”
Well, that was true enough, but it only made her laugh more. “Nice try, Lis! If that”s all the better you take care of your bunny…”
“What am I going to do?!”
“You could put on your ninja” outfit and go bust into his house in the –”
Lisa rolled her eyes. This was going from bad to worse. Then the fog cleared. “I know what I”m going to do!”
“Something that doesn”t involve breaking his door down?”
Quickly explaining her plan to her best friend, Lisa watched Marie”s ponderous look for ‘approval.”
“It might wo—”
“I know it will!” Abruptly changing the subject to leave off any further embarrassing repartee from Marie, Lisa began making plans.
A week later when her shift coincided with Darren”s at the hospital, she made her move. “Uh, Darren?”
Inwardly Darren groaned, reluctantly turning to face her. It wasn”t that he didn”t want to see her. Quite the contrary, actually. Of all the people at work, he enjoyed being around her more than most everyone else; her cheerfulness was simply infectious. And after he unwittingly got a glimpse of what she”d kept hidden under her hospital scrubs he let the thought stop right there. The truth was, he just didn”t know how to face her after she”d mistakenly left a certain piece of equipment” at his home, without embarrassing either her or himself. Was this finally the denouement he”d feared, when she”d finally corked up enough courage to ask for it back? “Y-yes, er, Lisa?” His voice cracking, he was already kicking himself from within, feeling like a dope.
Completely oblivious to his nervousness, as she happened to be dealing with her own at the moment, she lost no time in practically blurting out her request. “I promised Allie I”d, um… make her something.”
“Oh yes,” Darren agreed, his brain moving at light speed trying to remember what it was so as to make his response not a lie.
“But I forgot to take her measurements while I was there,” Lisa explained, hoping it made as good of sense to him as it did to her.
“Measurements,” Darren muttered dumbly.
“Yeah she said she wanted a new swimsuit and I –”
“Oh yes,” Darren said again. This time he did remember.
Holding up her small measuring tape, Lisa continued, “So, I was wondering if you”d mind if I went to get her today. I could stay with her until you got off work, and that would give me time to, um you know…”
Staring at her pretty face, and momentarily mesmerized by blue eyes that seemed to stare straight through him, he struggled to find his voice again. Could it be that she”d actually forgotten about the ‘other” thing? If she was pretending to be innocent, she was pretty dog gone good at it! Or was it really hers? It had to be! There wasn”t any other woman roaming around his house that he was aware of. Unless she had a friend over and… Nah, that was just too kinky, and Lisa wouldn”t – Holy cow! What was he thinking about this sweetheart of a person?
“You all right, Darren?”
“Uh, sure, Lisa I”m sure Allie would love to see you again.” And that was no lie. Allie had been talking about Lisa nonstop ever since she”d departed, much to her father”s chagrin.
“Can I borrow the key?” Lisa smiled, reaching out her hand expectantly. This was it. All she needed was the key, and it would practically be done.
Darren handed over the key with fingers that all but trembled, then turned on his heels and marched off before he said something else that embarrassed himself. And fortunately for him, his abruptness went completely unnoticed, Lisa”s fingers tightening around the keys the instant they clinked into her palm.
Her mood much improved, Lisa couldn”t help but hum to herself as she swung by the preschool to pick up Allie. Looking for her father”s vehicle, Allie didn”t notice her at first. But when she did, Lisa could hear her squeal even through the closed windows of the car.
Getting out of the car, Lisa helped Allie into her seat and buckled her in. “Hi there, Sweety! How are you?”
“I good. I miss you!”
“I missed you, too,” Lisa giggled. And then it was the few miles to Darren”s home. Not one to deliberately ignore a child, Lisa couldn”t help but have her mind on something else, even as she peripherally heard Allie”s happy chatter.
Dropping the key twice as she attempted to enter the house, she scolded her trembling fingers. Allie didn”t seem to mind, squealing both times as she found the key and returned it to her Weesa.”
Back in his house, she momentarily felt like she was getting away with something. Mumbling to Allie that ‘Weesa” needed to use the restroom, which was a true statement at the moment, she made a beeline to Darren”s room, feeling her heart thundering in her chest as she closed the door. It was the bathroom first, and then… “Now where did I put that thing,” she murmured. Memory said it was the night stand, but if it was there, wouldn”t she have seen it and have taken it with her? Not seeing it, her heart sank, and for a moment she wondered if she”d need to turn the place upside down to find it.
Pulling open the nightstand drawer, she immediately breathed a sigh of relief, the subconscious agitation of the past several weeks seeming to disappear in an instant. Maybe that”s why she had forgotten it basking in the glow of what she was sharing with her husband at the time over the phone; she must have thrown it in the drawer instead so she told herself. In two seconds, Mr. Bunny found himself snug within her purse. Carefully closing the drawer, making sure nothing was amiss, she all but dusted the top of the nightstand for her own fingerprints, as if to wipe them out. Satisfied that Darren would never know (surely being ‘male,” he never checked his night stand drawer anyway!), she felt like she could breathe for the first time that day. That it was actually Darren who had placed Mr. Bunny in the nightstand drawer, she”d never know.
The rest of the afternoon passed peacefully. Turning the ‘measurements” into their fun afternoon activity, Lisa found a place where she could make a small mark near the refrigerator as to Allie”s height. “I tall!” She exclaimed. And then she”d insisted on measuring Lisa”s height, standing on her tippy toes on a chair. If Allie wondered about several other measurements Lisa took, and carefully wrote down, she didn”t let on. She simply filled the air with her happy chatter and did her best to wiggle for Lisa as any good child would do. She didn”t know it just yet, but come Christmas, there would be a brand new white ‘simsuit” under the tree just for her. Too bad it would be summer before she”d get to use it again. Lisa made another notation to remember to give it some growing room.
Returning home at last, Darren felt the same awkwardness return as Lisa greeted him at his door.
“Get what you need?” That had a double meaning. He hadn”t intended it to come out that way, but there it was.
“I think so.” Turning to Allie she said, “We got all measured, didn”t we?”
“I tall,” Allie repeated for her father”s benefit.
Saying her goodbyes, Lisa all but floored the accelerator to her car as she sped towards home, giggling in spite of herself as she heard the squeal of tires on the slippery leaf-trodden road. She felt as giddy as the cat that swallowed the canary, though she repeatedly checked the passenger seat to verify that, yes, her purse with Mr. Bunny inside was indeed safely in the car and accompanying her home. Wouldn”t that have been just ducky if she”d left her purse this time?! Good news just had to be shared, of course. Fumbling with her cell phone, she managed to dial Marie”s number without wrecking the car, and proceeded to give her best friend a most-satisfying recounting of events.
“Yes, but what did you leave there this time?” Marie laughed.
“Don”t say that!!” Lisa exclaimed, as she involuntarily looked over at her purse once more just to make sure it was still there. Surely it wouldn”t sprout wings and fly back there now, would it?
“You do know that I could have just bought you another one. It was only $69.69 and – ”
“It was not!” Lisa giggled. “You”re going to make me crash my car.”
“I still think you left something there.”
“I”m going to hang up now.”
“Go ahead, but it won”t change the fact that you – ”
A few minutes more, Lisa pulled into their driveway and let Marie casino pa natet go. She was in the house before she figured out Marie had been right. This time, however, hopefully Darren would feel no compunctions about bringing her a small measuring tape back! That”s what a singular focus did to a person – it made them forget other things.
“Hi Hon!” Strong arms enveloped her from behind, a hand palming her breast. He was too kind to rub his whisker-grizzled face against her soft cheek, but close enough that she could turn to kiss him.
“Your lips are cold!”
“The consequences of working outside,” he explained. “Besides, Melissa kicked me out of the office,” he added.
“Yeah, I”ll bet.”
“And what”s that grin on your face for?”
“I got it back,” she said deliberately.
“Got what back?”
“Mr. Bunny is now back where he belongs.”
“Oh? That means he”s currently resting right here?”
She playfully swatted his hand away. “Right now he”s ‘resting” in my purse.”
“Purse?” He asked, deliberately leaving the ‘r” off the word.
“Wrong purse. And you are a naughty boy.” She couldn”t help but laugh at his sheepish grin. Twisting around in his arms and gently gripping him in a place that got his immediate attention, she continued, “And besides, there are other things I”d rather have right there.”
For a moment he thought he saw a hint of fire mixed in with those flawless blue eyes, and he grinned broadly in spite of himself. Who was he to complain if the retrieval of a treasured toy happened to make her horny? And that”s exactly what she was even if she hated the word ‘horny.” Maybe he ought to just FedEx Mr. Bunny back to Darren this coming week, if this was the impact it had! Yeah and then he just might see world war iii.
“What are you thinking?” she begged.
“Oh, just wondering if Mr. Bunny actually wants to stay home instead of sneaking back to Darren”s.” And before she could say anything further, he blurted, “What”s for supper?”
“I dunno” I just got home. What would you li—“
“I think I”ll take dessert first,” he whispered, his hands shamelessly enjoying her lovely figure even through her clothes.
He had that ‘look” in his eyes, and she was half tempted to take him up on it. “I”m more in the mood for ‘sausage,” myself.” She loved the sound of his soft chuckles as he drew her possessively against him. “Blueberry pancakes?”
“Works for me,” he grinned.
Dinner was filled with more laughter as she explained her ‘crafty” means of returning Mr. Bunny to his rightful home. “You”re really going to make her a swimsuit?” he asked.
“No, a ‘simsuit,”” she corrected with a giggle. “She was very specific she wanted one just like the one I wore when we swam in her wading pool. And today I measured a very wiggly little Allie, and she”ll get her ‘simsuit.””
“And then we won”t be able to tell you two apart,” he remarked dryly.
“Oh, I wouldn”t worry about that,” she laughed, rising to clear the dishes. Rising with her, suddenly with other more important things on his mind, he pestered her until she finally gave up on dishes, laughing as he gave little random tickles until she fell into his arms.
“I need you, Sweetheart,” he whispered.
Just the sound of his soft, earnest voice made her spine quiver. She looked up into his handsome face, his smile nearly melting her heart like butter, even as an enormous erection seemed to press against her tummy even through their clothes. Gently releasing her, he leaned in for a tender kiss. He never claimed to be the world”s best kisser, but his lips were soft, and his expression filled with tenderness. Filling his hand with hers, she looked up at him, then slowly drew him with her to their bedroom, feeling the pleasant butterflies of anticipation in her tummy.
Upon entry to their bedroom, he held her again snugly against him, as both whispered the familiar happy things they always did.
“Now, which ‘simsuit” are you making for Allie?” he teased.
“The white one,” she whispered dreamily.
“Can I see you in it?”
She blinked her pretty eyes up at him and smiled. Finding it in her drawer, she playfully swatted his hands away as he tried to ‘help,” and scolded him when he tried to follow her to their restroom. Returning a few moments later, she could almost hear the sharp intake of his breath. “Do you like it?” she needlessly asked.
Truth be told, he loved seeing her in a bikini even more. Still it would have been a hard choice between that and this. There was something about its high cut legs that made them suddenly seem impossibly long. He couldn”t count the number of times he”d been blessed to see her in all her naked glory, but each time he saw her figure, she simply took his breath away again. Longing to bury his face in the soft cleavage of her breast, he tentatively drew closer, shamelessly feasting his eyes on her.
Less tentative than he at the moment, she drew close. With some deft movements of her hands, his shirt was off, and his pants were down. Kneeling on the floor, and driving him nuts with her best come-hither smile, his underwear soon followed suit, and she helped him out of the bunched clothing around his ankles. Mercilessly dragging the softness of her breasts up his legs, she felt his hands tremble on her shoulders, as she observed just how badly he wanted her. Even the sight of his arousal stirred passions within. Rock hard and twitching in time with his heart beat, he was all man, a beautiful one at that, and all hers! Tenderly kissing the tip of his penis, she heard him gasp.
Rising to stand in front of him once more, her eyes never left his as she gently began peeling the suit from her body, drawing it over stunning breasts that made his mouth water with anticipation. Full, and lush, and beautiful, she looked down at them, cupping them in her hands and flickering feather-light strokes of her finger tips over swollen nipples before looking up into his appreciative eyes.
His hands quickly replaced hers, and then it was his turn to kneel in front of her, as he gently peeled the suit downward, his eyes drawn to the apex of her soft thighs. Fitting her like a glove, he could see the outline of her femininity through the suit. Nearly trembling with anticipation, he lost no time in removing it from the glory of her beauty, leaning in to kiss her soft tummy. Her gentle hands found his head, tenderly working her fingers through his hair as he kissed lower, his cheek nuzzling against her neatly trimmed pubic hair until she felt the softness of his lips make contact with her passion. Ever so brief, and just enough to nearly make her fall down, she hungered for his return!
He wasn”t planning on wasting time, and for the moment, it was a good thing for them both. Gently lifting her in his arms, he placed her on the bed. Joining her and lying beside, he dreamily touched her, his hands tenderly exploring her body with familiarity, and a reverence and delight in her that made her feel sexy and special.
Neither one would ever be able to fully express the thankfulness each felt. He, for finding someone that fit every empty part of his life and who cherished his soul, and she for the sequence of events that brought a new friend into her life at just the right time. Pulling her out of a downward spiral of despair from the devastating loss of both parents in a plane accident, Marie had been there just in time and had never given up on her. It was only later that she understood the depth of sacrifice Marie had gone to in order to keep her from going off the deep end, all of which she nonchalantly waved off as ‘more than worth it.” She never would have guessed at the time that Marie would also find her a husband, of all things, and an awesome one at that, entrusting her with her cousin and best friend. A mere ‘friendship merger,’ she”d called it at the time, figuring the term would mean something to her accountant cousin. She looked into his shining eyes and smiled. He likely had no idea just how often her mind returned to the beginning, nor how lucky she felt. Returning her smile, a happy man also wondered if she knew just how blest he felt by her, and just how full he was in heart.
Grasping his hand, she drew it downward over her tummy until his fingers reached her soft femininity, holding him there (as if he would leave!) and sighing softly as he enjoyed one of his favorite places. Softer than rose petals, and far more beautiful, her beauty bathed his fingers with delight, drawing him further with the promise of shared joy.
“I think Mr. Bunny wants to be welcomed home,” he whispered playfully.
“Huh?” she gasped, distracted, wanting him to continue the glorious movement of his fingers.
Not answering her, he fumbled with the drawer on the nightstand and drew out Mr. Bunny, hoping he was fully charged. Clicking him on, he heard the reassuring buzz, and drew him close to her now trembling thighs. He smiled wryly as he gently drew the undulating tip across her smooth vulva, realizing he was holding the ‘offending instrument” that had caused Lisa to fret for so long. The sound of her soft moan and whimper as he gently opened her beauty, Mr. Bunny drawing within, was deeply satisfying to him. Indeed, there was no greater delight than to hear her pleasure. Her hands trembled about his as he guided the vibrator inward, gently seating its silly little bunny ears right on her clitoris, which nearly caused her to lift him off the bed for the reaction it evoked in her.
This was so much better than over the phone, having him right next to her. Mr. Bunny was just one more gift from her best friend. It looked like the silliest thing, but right now she scarcely knew if she even had legs, nor did she care, for the ecstasy that warmed her body. Catching his eyes, and seeing the love reaching from his soul to hers, she nearly cried, her face contorting with pleasure as it rippled through her, feeling safe and cared for in his arms. Not needing his continued guidance, Mr. Bunny happily continued his ‘work,” and she peripherally felt the gentle touch of his hands, roaming up over her soft tummy, gently touching each rigid nipple, and even whispering about her chin, tingles of soul-satisfying pleasure following his touch wherever it went. She knew it wasn”t heaven, but it had to be the closest she”d ever find here!
Kneeling beside her, he replaced his hand with the tip of his penis. Reaching for him, she ‘helped” him, gently drawing its soft tip across her skin. He looked gorgeous, and scrumptious, far better looking that the silly Mr. Bunny, even if the vibrator could do a few things a man”s penis could not. Shifting on his knees, she drew him to her breast, swabbing a turgid nipple with slippery trails of his fluids. Reaching over while she played with him, he resituated Mr. Bunny, which had the unexpected delight of sending thousands of new shards of pleasure through her, renewing the pleasant buzz that took her breath away.
He smiled down at her, her face contorted again with unspeakable pleasure. This time he helped her, kneeling closer to her face, his penis slipping into her open mouth to meet her returning cry of ecstasy. Her tongue, and the heady moan of her voice seemed to vibrate against him surely as Mr. Bunny did below. She would later hope that she didn”t accidentally bite him, being quite out of her mind at the moment. Her arms found his thighs, holding him to her as shuddering waves coursed through her. Arching her back, she took him deeper, his own moans of delight reaching her ears in heady gasps as pleasure exploded through him, the warm pulsations of his sperm in her mouth drawing her to orgasmic bliss all over again.
Long moments later, she was nestled close against him as he held her once more. Looking into his eyes, she heard him say, “I love you,” before the words could even tumble from her own lips. Mr. Bunny had withdrawn, somewhere in there losing his charge, of all things, which was probably a good thing or else she would have blacked out from so much happiness. But he really wasn”t needed any longer.
Slipping a hand between them, she found his softening member, still moist from her saliva and his semen. Again looking deeply into his eyes, she attempted to coax him to life once more. It never seemed fair to her that a man had to wait, though God surely had His reasons for creating him this way. He watched her gentle fingers, and loved her all the more for trying, filling his heart for wanting even more of him. Her soft voice murmured near his ear, repeating sweet little fantasies they had shared many times.
Finally cooing with happiness at her efforts, she sat up and pushed him onto his back. With little preamble, she straddled his waist and looked down at him, her soft hair flowing around them both. With trembling hands, both guided his penis into her as she sat down, her soft bum meeting up with his waist. “Golly,” she gasped. “That feels SO good!” His hands filled themselves with her breasts, and his eyes simply watched her pretty face as she showed him just how good he felt to her long into the night, again and again her happy cries filling their bedroom.
We are sorry that this post was not one of your favorites!
Help us understand why.

When did your child start talking?
MOST HELPFUL POSTS
Sharon - posted on 01/25/2011
Hi, my son who was diagnosed at age 16 with Aspergers and Temporal Lobe epilepsy and is now 20 years old only started talking at age 3 and half. Just after his 1st birthday though he did have a vocab but gradually stopped using it. Then suddenly a few months after his 3rd birthday he started communicating and in sentences. He has always been a child of few words but if it is something he is interested in he can talk forever on that subject and his memory is phenomenal. He matriculated end of 2009 with a university entrance. Don't give up, we treated him like his siblings (older brother and sister who don't have aspergers) with no difference just a lot more patience is needed. Good luck.
Update as to how my son is doing. He will be 23 years old in January and in his second year of University in 2014. He started first year in 2013 and in his first week he had a meltdown as there were not a few hundred pupils but now thousands at University. One Sunday After four hours of trying to get him to talk he opened up to me as to how scary university was. I told him it was ultimately his choice if he wanted to continue and told him to let me know by Monday morning if he wanted to continue. My husband and I prayed he would make the right decision for himself. Monday morning in walks my son and says he is ready for University. I was so proud of him. Whenever I saw him getting quieter I would ask how things were. Which for someone with Aspergers is quite something as most times they don't like talking and to know when he is even quieter is quite a challenge. As a family we made it through his first year and I am so proud to say he has consistently obtained distinctions throughout the year with his Psychology course and has passed the other four subjects he is doing as well. Along the way he has made friends and has even stayed over a few weekends at his friends houses. I asked him if he enjoys staying over at friends and he said to me yes he does as home is a bit boring. In no way did that hurt me as I realised that he was now seeing the world a bit differently and realising that it is normal to want to go out and spend time away from your home. Home will always be there. Don't give up moms, just take it one day at a time.
Update 29 December 2015 - In less than a month my son will be turning 25 years old and in 2016 will be in his third year of his degree at University. To date for every Psychology test, assignment or exam he has achieved Distinctions. Some days are tougher than others for him but we take it one day at a time. Today (29 December 2015) the two of us went to see Star Wars and it was good for him to get out as he doesn't like crowds and the noise in the Malls. We only go to movies when he feels up to it and the two of us thoroughly enjoyed today's outing. With 2016 around the corner may it be an amazing year for each and everyone even with the challenges we face.
Robert who will be 26 years old in January 2017 has just completed his three year BA Degree at the University of Johannesburg (at times it has been quite daunting for him but he persevered) and after applying to do Honours in Psychology in 2017 he was accepted. To get into any Honours program is extremely difficult as there are so many Students applying and they only take the top few Students of which I am proud to say Robert is amongst the top students in Psychology this year. He has also applied to be a Tutor for 2017. It is going to be a tough year next year for him as well as us his parents but as we always have done we take it one day at a time. To all of you don't give up.
My youngest Grandson of 4 has just been diagnosed with Aspergers as well and he is such a darling of a little boy and together with my daughter, his mom, and her husband we will face this next challenge together as a family.
Kim - posted on 07/31/2012
my son will soon be 3. he has spoken before but now he does not talk at all he has no attention span and will not sit still I can't read books to him try to teach him signing etc. I am super frustrated because I feel like there is nothing I can do to help him but then I feel guilty like i'm not doing something right. I cry all the time just wondering if I will ever hear his voice or hear him trek me he loves me. I am at the point that I don't know what to do next or where or who to get help from. I just want to hear his voice and I can't help but feel like I did something wrong and that I caused this. I guess I just needed to vent any tips, pointers, encouragement is appreciated. thanks
My son was 5 and then it was only to repeat things said to him. When he started sensory intergration therapy his speech began to be initiated by him. He still says things in a funny way. My friend says he speaks like Yoda. "Happy to see you I am." Sometimes things that happened several hours to several days earlier he reponds to and I have to try and figure out what he is talking about. He refused to sign or to use picture cards. When he did start speaking he was using sign language with other non verbal class mates. He is extremely intelligent he just was not able to speak until later, I read a report (I forget where) that said children with a speach delay will also have a reading delay.
ASD children all speak at their own pace. Some sooner some later.
Barbara - posted on 08/10/2012
I worked as an ABA Therapist for years with many different children. Each child is unique in their timeline and ability to speak. If you are not using ABA (applied behavior analysis) I suggest you look into it and see if it's something that interests you. I also sugges simplified sign language to help with the frustrations of not being able to communicate well. Also touch board systems are great resources as well. Good luck. There are so many resources now for you to choose from and use.
Cathy - posted on 02/02/2011
My son is 4 and a half hopefully makes it to school this year! He talks only in script hard to understand alot of the time, he had a thing for DVD's and want me to assume a character. Half the time I dont know the movie and he gets sooo frustrated with me. Good luck Post if you find the answers to help
Sarah - posted on 01/31/2011
My son tuned 4 on Dec 19 and just started talking. For the past 3 years I have been telling people, "he's almost ready to talk!" I know it's frustrating, but just be patient and keep working with him. We used the PECS board, sign language too. The day my son started talking was when he wanted a cookie. He was really focused that day, and I bent down to his level and asked him to say cookie and he said it! He was having a pretty good day so I was prepared to test him but he said it right away! Your son WILL talk, our autistic wonders teach us patience in the worst way! Good luck on this journey!
LeeAnn - posted on 01/29/2011
My son has been diagnosed first with HFA and more recently Asperger's. He was an extremely quiet baby. He spoke his first words within a normal time frame a year to year and a half but he was slow using sentences and didn't use language to make his point. He simultaneously had chronic ear infections from 5mos. to 2years so the docs aren't sure if that was part of the delay. after his tubes were inserted his use of language did improve. I read his baby calendar not long ago and was surprised to be reminded that he loved to shriek -funny how you forget.
Joanne - posted on 01/27/2011
My step-son Bradley who has Asperger's starting talking around the age of 3 1/2 to 4. I found it so odd as my son who is 1 month younger was talking up a storm at 2.5. That is how me and my husband new something was wrong with Bradley. Although, once he learned to talk we couldn't get him to be quiet!! He is now 11 and LOVES TO TALK! Especially to adults.... they are more at his level.
Kristin - posted on 01/27/2011
My son didn't start really talking until he was 3. He had speech therapy since he's been 2 and still has speech therapy. He has Aspergers so his "talking" is very direct, we are trying to work on his conversational skills.
Jennifer - posted on 01/26/2011
we are PECS lovers as well...any way to augment communication even the IPAD works wonders (and no it will not stop him from using his own words when/if ready) my son was 5 did not verbalize at all prior did use sign after 4 he did not wake up and start talking in one day he did what every learning child does he babbled mouthed and by 6 was using his own words then he echoed for about 6 months now he is talking like a college professor lol we still use intensive speech therapy and will continue until I am comfortable that he will not regress..:) dont give up hope every child is soooo different..
Morgan - posted on 01/26/2011
My son is know 3 1/2 and just started using 3 word sentences..of course only when he chooses too. He is starting to speek a whole lit more know. I think every child with autism is different. There is no telling when they will come out of their shell and start talking..Good luck :)
Joanne - posted on 01/25/2011
My son said his first words at 3, shark and bubble it was great to finally hear his voice, I used pecs to communicate with him. he is now 4.5 yrs old and can put together 4-5 word sentence, his pronounciation is poor most people cant understand what he is saying but i can, most of the time.His choice of words is a bit odd, i can relate to the Yoda comment LOL. have you had his ears checked? My son also had bilat hearing loss due to severe ear infections the hearing specialist stated that he would be able to speak due to the severity and he had to get grommets put in surgically. i have read alot of literature and my kids with ASD have the same problem. Maybe worth getting checked. all the best i understand your frustration.:-)
Jocelyn - posted on 01/25/2011
Thanks ladies :)
I do use PECS with my son, along with sign language and he has a Gotalk device that he uses as well. We also have a speech therapist and an aide that goes with him to preschool :)
I think I was just looking for some success stories! At this point it just feels like he's NEVER going to talk and you have helped to reassure me that he will eventually talk...I'd just rather it be sooner than later lol
Josie - posted on 01/25/2011
At 3, our son was still not talking. I found out about Preschool Program for Children with Disabilities. They worked wonders! He's now 8, in 3rd grade, and doing well! There are still major delays, including social, but the school is still helping. In fact, he's been at the same school since he started PPCD at 3. Everyone there knows, and loves, him.
Taneisha - posted on 01/25/2011
My son is 6 and has maybe 20 words. He is now trying to imitate you when you say things. We use the PECS system with him which helps him with his speech as well because he not only gives you the pec he wants but attempts to say the word as well.
Tina - posted on 01/25/2011
My son didnt start talking until he was almost 4. I noticed something was wrong at age 1 1/2 when he didnt say the dada and mama stuff that is normal for that age. He started a special pre-school at age 2 and started speech therapy. By the time he started Kindergarten he was able to communicate more clearly, but still had shut downs and behavior problems. He is 15 now and his speech is fine and behaviorally he is MUCH better, although he still has issues with social situations and interacting in High School. But he played football this year for the 1st time! I think getting them in the right programs and whatever help is available in your area is key.
Thea - posted on 01/25/2011
Hi, my son is nearly 4 and his speech is mostly babbly, I use the PECS system but mostly photos stuck on the fridge of all his foods, drink and activities so he can choose by pointing. I work at a special education school and work in a classroom with amn autistic boy who cannot speak at all at the age of 10 years. It is really a case by case basis, you cannot predict when it will start. I do hope that it starts soon for you and your child, my best wishes to you :-)
Peggy - posted on 01/25/2011
my PDD son is now 8 and he is speaking but not always clear. It took a long time to get where he is now, the right school helped a lot (the past 2 years is when he has made the most progress). The key is getting a great speech therapy going and giving him different tools to communicate (picture boards etc.) Eventually it will come!
Tanya - posted on 01/25/2011
My son is 3 1/2 and he only really started talking when he turned 3. Only in the last 2 months has he started using 2-3 worded sentences and it's only things he has picked up from me. He asks for things when needed, but other than that he talks to himself in his own lil language, he's very verbal in that respect. I was told talking to him all the time whether he responds or not, is one of the best things possible and so far it has worked in our benefit as I didn't think I would ever hear his sweet voice. Have you tried picture cards? my son never really took to them but I've heard they work well for some children.
Christina - posted on 01/19/2011
My son in 5 1/2 and doesn't speak. He will say bye sometimes and will occasionally pick up a word and say it repeatedly for a couple days then you'll never hear it again. He has receptive language, he understands everything that is said. He can also get on the computer and type the alphabet backwards and forwards. I am trying to get him to spell words but he's too interested in the alphabet and won't cooperate. I figure the speech will happen when he's ready, if not we will find other ways to communicate. We have started PECS at school but he's only making limited use of it.
Join Circle of Moms
Sign up for Circle of Moms and be a part of this community! Membership is just one click away.Join Circle of Moms

Notorious kidnapper Chukwudubem Owuamadike,
a.k.a Evans has revealed how colon cancer came to grow in his body due
to the drug he concealed in his stomach.
The chief criminal suspect said he had been moving drugs in his stomach from one country to another.
Evans revealed that in one of his movements, the drugs digested in his stomach, which and had led to the cancer he suffers now.
He told Tribune, “Yes, and I suspect it was when the drug I ingested burst in my stomach.
“I was going to Holland then, but I used Guyana passport. The country is in South America. That was a long time ago.
took it from Suriname to Holland. It was just one kilogramme. I was
taking it for sale in Holland. However, I took some medications.
was a little leakage. I suspect that was how I got colon cancer. It is
still in stage one, but I have not been taking my drugs.”

Posted by Page (184.108.40.206) on February 19, 2000 at 16:48:37:
In Reply to: Hi everyone. (my first post) posted by Luke Cichon on February 19, 2000 at 16:14:50:
I started at 16 and also had two cycles per year. By 22, I was down to one cycle every two years and it's been that way since. So, hang in there, it may get a little better.
Post a Followup

3 First Response Test taken all with faint 2nd lines
Hi, I was hoping to get some input. I had a pack of 1st response pregnancy tests and took the 1st one about a week and a half ago. It was a clear negative. I took a second one last night as I should be starting my period within the next few days. My breast are super tender and swollen but they are always like that before I start my period. The test came back with the faintest of 2nd lines. (Not the control line but the pregnancy line.) I began to get a little freaked because I'm so used to just seeing very clear negative with no other lines. I rushed it over to my aunts and made her look at it make sure it wasn't my imagination. She confirmed that there was a line although you have to give it more than a few seconds glance to see it. My best friend who recently had her 1st baby and probably peed on a stick everyday as she was trying said she saw it, and never had that before in hers. (Her negatives were clear, and her positive was bright.) She's telling me she thinks I'm pregnant. My aunt instructed me to do it again with my 1st pee in the morning (this morning) and I did so. It came back with another faint line that was just the tad bit darker than the last. Of course after a night of searching the Internet for answers this had me reeling and left me thinking thay maybe its not a fluke or a faulty test. I rushed to the store and got an E.P.T. Digital at home test. I went back to sleep for a while (as the 2nd test this morning was done at 4:30am and I was exhausted) and woke up a few house later and did the digital. It came back "not pregnant". From what I've gathered on line and with the intructions though, is that it may not show as a positive on digitals if you're too far away from your missed period still. I expect mine within a week and a few days give or take. Because I'm crazy I went to the store and got another pack of 1st response strip tests and went back to my aunts. I made her pee on one because I know she's not pregnant right now and it came back with only one line and no trace of a second... At all. So, I did a third one and of course there is a 2nd faint line again! These faint lines appear within the 3 minutes window. What are your thoughts?

TAMPA — Crosby Few spent almost four decades as the attorney for the Hillsborough County School District, one of the longest tenures in Florida's history.
He died Saturday at the age of 77.
"Mr. Few was just very much an icon to our school district," said Earl Lennard, Hillsborough's supervisor of elections and a former school superintendent who worked with Mr. Few for about 25 years.
"He never tried to be another board member or anything," Lennard said, "but he always wanted to ensure that students were taken care of and protected."
The school district's desegregation case and the 1968 teacher strike were among the high-profile cases Mr. Few handled over the years. He also represented the district when Rosa Martinez sued in 1986 to get her 7-year-old mentally handicapped daughter with AIDS in a classroom with other children.
He served on the Tampa Sports Authority when it built the original Tampa Stadium. He was a chairman of the Hillsborough County Aviation Authority.
Mr. Few, who was divorced, is survived by three children: Terrin, married to former Bucs general manager Rich McKay, now president of the Atlanta Falcons; John, a financial adviser with Morgan Stanley Smith Barney; and Jennifer Burchill, assistant athletics director with the Hillsborough school district.
He had six grandchildren ranging in age from 15 to 28 and a great-granddaughter who is nearly 2.
"You couldn't have made them any better than him when it comes to how much he loved his family," Burchill said. "He was fiercely loyal to his people."
Lennard described Mr. Few as a "Southern gentleman" who was always courteous and loved sports.
Tom Gonzalez, a labor and employment lawyer in private practice who consulted with the school district, remembered him as a mentor to boys in his South Tampa neighborhood and an official at high school football games.
"He knew sports. He played just about every sport there was in high school and then some in college," he said. "He was a great tennis player. A great golfer."
During his long years in public service, Mr. Few built a statewide reputation.
"From Pensacola to Miami, if you were with Crosby in some courthouse, he was going to know a significant number of lawyers in that town," Gonzalez said.
Mr. Few grew up in New Smyrna Beach. His mother was a teacher, and his father an assistant railroad superintendent.
He attended the University of Florida and dreamed of playing professional baseball before he was drafted into the Korean War. Afterward, he went to law school at the University of Florida on the GI Bill.
After graduation, Few worked for a Sarasota law firm and later became a Hillsborough prosecutor. In 1965, he became an assistant county attorney, representing the school district and supervisor of elections. In 1967, superintendent Raymond Shelton hired Few as the school attorney.
"He worked very hard to ensure that the school district was cared for," Lennard said. "When he saw a rule that out of line or wasn't treating people fairly, he was quick to point it out."
When he retired, Mr. Few estimated he had attended about 1,500 school board meetings.
"The school system was his love," Burchill said.
A celebration of his life is scheduled for Sunday at 5 p.m. at Palma Ceia Golf and Country Club. Memorial services are set for Monday at 10 a.m. at St. John's Episcopal Church.
Information from Times files was used in this report. Janet Zink can be reached at firstname.lastname@example.org or (813) 226-3401.

Like a tiger
I had an interesting experience while driving home on Friday night. I was driving home from work, speeding just a little, as everyone is wont to do when going home from work. I must say I was being conservative considering it was a friday night and everyone was travelling 20kph over the speed limit as opposed to the "standard" everyday protocol of 10kph.
Speeding up from behind me comes some fierce driver. I was thinking "wow, this is one of those crazy 1 in 10 drivers that decides for some reason to drive 40-50 kph over the speed limit instead of just 20." When it went past me I realised it was a copper, and slowed down a little. I'm not sure why, because it had already passed me, but still. The cars in front of me were still speeding, and the cop car casually changed lanes behind it's victim, and flicked on the lights. The guy was pulled over. We all kept driving on.
I felt like a deer stalked by a lion, that got away.

Clare and I were having dinner at Buffalo Wild Wings this past weekend when I told her that my oldest daughter has been experiencing excruciating pain from a problem that involved her clavicle being separated from her shoulder. Clare empathized and told me that she too had experienced the same problem years ago.
Curious, I wanted to know, "How did it happen?"
Clare was uncertain about how the separation occurred. She had always attributed the separation to one of her pregnancies when she felt so much pain she could only guess that the weight of her belly had been responsible for pulling her clavicle away from her shoulder.
Because of the relentless pain, though, Clare made an appointment to see a doctor who took an x-ray and showed Clare the results of her x-ray. The separation was so immediately obvious, it surprised Clare. I told her that Keeley, too, was surprised by how obvious the separation showed in her x-rays.
While the memory of that long-ago time blossomed in her mind, Clare suddenly cocked her head to one side as if another related memory had just slammed into her brain. Her face filled with a sense of wonder, she exclaimed, "I think I know how it happened! It must have been that time I got hit by a truck!"
Whoa! Wait! What? I, who am not at all capable of repressing laughter, exploded with it (though I did apologize to Clare for laughing at her expense), but I had to know, "How could you not remember being hit by a truck?"
With her surprising revelation, Clare detailed the event. She was 18 and walking to the train after work. She was also wearing high heels. When the snow storm hit she was paying such close attention to the snow under her feet that when a truck appeared suddenly and knocked her down, she blacked out. She awoke in the back of the truck with about 50 onlookers who wondered if she might be in a coma. Nobody called 911 back then (it didn't exist), and, more embarrassed than hurt, Clare got up and just walked away.
Years later she had 5 children, one of whom she blamed for the pain in her shoulder when she was pregnant with her. Not until this past weekend did she realize that the pain was actually caused by a truck hitting her.
Clare is now 73 years old and in better shape than some 20-year-olds I've seen. The pain in her shoulder is gone, and her memories just keep getting funnier (to me).
Want to read more from this author? See the upper right hand side of this blog.

FORT LAUDERDALE, Fla., April 23 (UPI) -- A South Florida man has been acquitted of harassing a former girlfriend by distributing fliers that said she had given him herpes.
A jury found Hance Adams not guilty of all charges Tuesday, including criminal libel, the Miami Herald reported Wednesday. He was also charged with child abuse because fliers were left at the school attended by the woman's son.
During the brief trial in Broward County, prosecutors presented no testimony from witnesses who had seen Adams distributing the fliers. His former girlfriend testified and admitted that she failed to tell Adams she had herpes until he had become infected.
The fliers included the woman's name, address and telephone number. Prosecutors said that pictures came from a videotape the couple made during their relationship, which was shown to the jury.
"I think the key was the credibility of the witnesses involved," defense lawyer Helene Raisman. "I think justice was done in this case."
|Additional Top News Stories|
WASHINGTON, June 18 (UPI) --General Motors said it would recall 231,000 model year 2006-07 vehicles due to a short in the driver's door that could spontaneously cause a fire.

Hello aspiring comedians/writers/cultural critics, all permutations of, and everything in between. It's me: Sweat Daddy, the new guy here on The Dawg Shed. I'm not going to tell you much about myself, I'll just let my posts do the talking. I used to post a little on a pro wrestling forum 5 years ago, and was a bit of a regular on the IGN Basketball boards for a few months. I skim through a few other forums as well from time to time, ENTP (the Briggs Meyers personality type that fancies themselves quite special), Baseball Mogul, and others. Mainly, I like to read about peoples life experiences, as opposed to their must fit in one catchy line opinions. But I don't mind opinionated people. I contradict myself like that guys, ha ha. So, for starters, I thought I'd throw a scenario out there and see what you guys make of it (I say guys assuming there can't be too many women who post here, although maybe that's an unfair assumption, I guess we'll see): I've lived with a good friend for the last 2 years. We're college aged. For the first year that I lived with this friend, guy didn't get laid, not even once. I didn't fare much better. I noticed he would spend hours and hours on Facebook.com. Seems he'd struck up a friendship with a girl we went to high school, albeit after high school. They'd only hung out in person a few times. I was there one of those times. My buddy got really sloppy drunk and didn't put a move on her, she seemed pretty into him though. I guess they started talking a lot on Facebook though, to the tune of a few hours a night. Flash forward about six months. My buddy meets this girl through a boxing team at college they were both on. Bangs her after a wild night at a frat party, starts dating her. She's over a lot, basically moves into our house after a few months. She was friendly, but the situation gradually became annoying in that she basically lives with us now. Now, a year later, they're still dating. But he still talks to the Facebook girl for hours at a time. He told me that he loves her. He told me that his girlfriend seems very happy with their arrangement, and that he feels that by telling her of the situation with the other girl he'd be acting selfishly by robbing her of what they have. He seems to be all at once, bored with her, comforted by her (gotta repeat, he'd been through a year long cold streak before her and she's only the 2nd girl he's ever been with), and guilt ridden by her. Now, he's a pretty conservative guy. Until a few years ago, he believed divorce should be illegal. A few months before he met his girlfriend, another friend of ours cheated on his girlfriend. My friend told him he needed to confess, be honest. I took the Johnny Drama from Entourage view, "deny deny deny." This is why I'm puzzled that my friend won't be honest with his girlfriend. To wrap up, the last few weeks he's just gone off the deep end: denies that he's doing his cheating. Now, I've never told him what he should do or anything like that. But, I'm reasonably sure I'm the only person who knows that he loves the Facebook girl, and lately he's been giving me the cold shoulder/polite silent treatment. I view at as a sort of shoot the messenger thing, a little different though in that I'm not giving him a message (telling him what to do), but he knows that I know. Often, it's surreal being in the room with them as a couple, knowing that I know more about their relationship than she does. My friend is the type of guy who likes to think he does things rationally, so I have to imagine he knows he's got to either tell her or break up with her or something. He's in a bit of a George Costanza situation now, living a lie. So, what do you guys think? Follow up questions/opinions/life experiences welcome, I'm curious.... It's just surreal, love in the digital age ha ha.

I'm looooove eating by a beautiful view! Last night G. and I went out to eat (which was nice b/c we've been cooking in a lot lately). We went to The Castaway in Burbank. I'd really like to go back for brunch one weekend.
Back to School Prep with CVS
12 hours ago

|Bob in 1997|
photo by Danny Nowlan
As a teenager he started writing songs, and his first musical adventures were with a band called Grand Theft Otto. In his twenties he played in a few more bands, changing his own name as often as his bands changed lineups. He was Bobby Wheels for a time, and then Bobby Arizona. And then when he moved to Dallas in his late twenties, he became – simply – Bob Hate.
The story of those days has been told often, but hardly anybody knows how much of it all was true.
But in his early 40s he disappeared off the map. There were stories that he had moved to Florida, started touring folks at a glass-bottomed boat place. Some said he was dead.
In 2003 the “Like a King” CD got released. It contained some of his solo material alongside mid 90s recordings he did with the Eddy Band. There was a poorly sourced rumor that some of the unreleased tracks on the disc were new. Was Bob Hate actually alive? Did it matter?
Then in 2007 he re-emerged. He was living at the time in Albuquerque, New Mexico, and for about 18 months he began writing with longtime bandmates and pals Chet Hix and Stephen Thomas. Together with Eddy Band alums Dave Lemonds and Buck Rudo, the group re-formed for some Nashville recording sessions.
That period got chronicled earlier this year on “Wreckerman,” a collection of all new material, and “Six Foot Length of Rope,” a 16 track best-of that also collected some old Dallas-era songs from the group.
But the reunion broke up badly – how could it not?
I saw Bob briefly during this time and he looked exactly like Wilford Brimley after Tom Cruise kicked the shit out of him in that Grisham movie.
Months passed and on a whim I drove back to New Mexico to his compound up in the Sandia foothills. He wasn’t there, but an old guy answered the door. He said he was an old friend of Bob’s, and that Bob had suspected I’d come around again.
“He was just here,” the old man said, pointing at the desert floor under our feet. “He said you’d know what to do with this.” And he handed me a box. Some photos, a portable hard drive, and the “Dear God” letter you’ll see elsewhere on this blog
On the hard drive were 45 songs, some in multiple versions and arrangements. They were all solo recordings. Some, like “Romance,” were written nearly 30 years ago, and some, like the beautiful “Silver City,” were written and recorded in his home studio in the past couple of years.
I’ll never know if I’ve done exactly the right thing, but I mixed and remastered these songs into a CD called "Imagine My Disappointment: The Very Best of Bob Hate," and many of those songs will be found elsewhere on this blog. While he was a fantastic eater and singer, he was a bastard about making you guess what was in his head and his heart. I picked the 15 tracks I thought were the best, the ones that captured whatever little magic he found in his years of writing and recording. I know I’ve gotten some of it wrong. I’m sure that if Bob Hate ever resurfaces he’ll kick the shit out of me.
I would never dare to call Bob my friend, but I always loved him and his music. I hope that wherever he is, wherever his tired and restless soul has ended up, that he’s happy. I’m not holding my breath.
As I was packing up my car and leaving Albuquerque, the old man at Bob’s house said I wouldn’t find him if I went looking, and I told him I had no intention. “He’s done what he came to do,” the old man said.
And then he closed the door on me.
Hector “The Brim” Torres
formerly of Torque Ramada Times

The body of a snowboarder who was found on Vail Mountain has been identified.
Coroner Kara Bettis identified the victim as 25-year-old Logan Salviano. He was last seen on Tuesday, and Vail Mountain was notified that he was missing on Wednesday. His body was found on Thursday.
According to the Vail Daily (http://tinyurl.com/zbl6oun ), Salviano's body was found near a tree.
Vail officials say Salviano was an employee at Vail Mountain's Two Elk Lodge and was not working at the time.
The death has been ruled an accident.

|By: Paul S. Cilwa||Viewed: 4/20/2019
|Topics/Keywords: #Humor #Karate #Zachary||Page Views: 3927|
|Zach earns his orange belt in karate.|
They grow up so fast. This past weekend, Zachary graduated into his Orange Belt in Karate. (The progression is white-yellow-orange). At this stage, he is actually "tested" in class, with his classmates, as they go along and orange "tips" are added to their yellow belts. Then they have a graduation.
Zachary's graduation into his Yellow Belt was a "make-up" because he missed the general graduation. Consequently, that was a relatively intimate affair. This was the general graduation, and it was enormous. Apparently, every kid in the Valley is taking karate.
Mary got the directions from the local karate school front desk. It said, very clearly, that the affair was being held from 1 to 2 pm some 15 miles away. Mary was very worried that we would be late, and wanted to leave at noon. Meanwhile, Michael had a standing appointment with a massage client in Sun City at the same time. Fortunately, he was able to postpone it till 4 pm, which we figured would give Michael plenty of time to get across the Valley, even if the graduation ran a little late.
Zachary was ready in his ghee at noon, but no one else was ready to go; nor did we want to wait 45 minutes for the karate people to open the doors. (The last graduation we attended, we could not enter until the moment it was supposed to start.) That meant we should leave about 12:30 pm to allow for a leisurely drive and time to find parking. However, at 12:25 Michael was still in the shower ("putting on shoes" he called, but we could hear the water running) and Jenny suddenly announced that Zachary hadn't eaten lunch and we would need to stop by McDonald's on the way.
Everyone else was in the car when Michael joined us. I drove us to the McDonald's drive-thru, where suddenly everyone decided they were hungry (except for Mary) and ordered lunch. Michael treated with a contribution from Jenny. Thanks to my new GPS, we had no trouble finding the school where the event was to be held. We arrived at 12:59 pm; Zach had one minute, according to his note from the school, as no student would be allowed to enter late. I dropped the family off at the door and went on to find parking, which by this time was available at a nearby ball field about half a mile away.
When I got in, it appeared they were running a little late, as they were running the "Little Tigers" through their yellow belt tests. (The Little Tigers are three-year-olds who are so adorable as they go through their moves that demonstrate they can beat up adults.)
But it was more than a little late. Michael began to be concerned that he would be late for his client. The testing of the Little Tigers began to drag on and on. In fact, it wasn't over until after 2 pm.
Then they paraded out slightly older white belts.
Jenny decided to check with Zachary's instructor, who was one of the judges. She came back wearing a grim expression. "Zachary doesn't go on until 5:30," she said.
We all stared, slack-jawed, looking like a family from the Ozarks.
"What?" we cried in unison. Then there was a chorus of accusations and defenses. But it was clear that the faulty information had come directly from the person at the desk at the karate school, because it was there in her writing on the notice from the school: 1 - 2 pm.
It was now 2:30, so we had the choice of going home to nap for three hours, or to wait on the most uncomfortable bleachers every created for the same time.
We went home. Michael left for Sun City, and I took a nap.
At 5 those of us who weren't massaging people piled back into the car, returned to the school, and got seats just in time for Zachary's class to join 10,000 other kids in running through their paces for their orange belts.
Having learned my lesson before, I didn't even try to sit down. Instead I roamed with my camera, trying to get close enough to Zachary to see him. I was once at a Billy Joel concert, in which, from my viewpoint, Billy Joel was a pink dot next to a dollhouse piano. This was like that. The gymnasium was marked into six segments, two sets of three. Each of the three tested on different skills: Kicking and punching, their kadas (a routine of moves that must be memorized and appears to be a way of bringing down four assailants at once), and a freeform run in which the kids can do any karate-like move they wish.
I wasn't able to catch any photos of Zach's participation in the kicking part, but here's a sequence of him running through his kada:
I apologize for the blurriness of the pictures; I hadn't realized I would need the Hubble Telescope to see my grandson.
The free-form run was a little closer to me.
Finally…finally!…they line up all the candidates, which actually included some adults who had decided to attack their mid-life crises with karate blows, and called them, one-by-one, up to receive their orange belts and certificates of achievement.
We could have watched Ben-Hur in the time it took for Zach to be called. But, eventually, inevitably, he was.
The new orange belts then had to sit with their belts in front of them, lean over, and rub their foreheads into the belt. The purpose of this is to signify they have earned this achievement by working a little sweat, which by now beaded even the forehead of the most physically-fit kid in the room, into the belt.
Of course, as soon as we got home, Mary washed it.

During August 2013, I was making my breeding plans realizing I was very interested in expanding my herd. I knew the way to get where I wanted to go was to buy the best so that I could breed with them, developing my own style of Nubian along the way. I poured over websites, researching different breeders and what their styles were and figuring how they would intermix with the herd I currently own.
Why do I feel the need to continually shop for goats on the Internet? We are driving on the road to Mississippi to see family and in between playing with the baby and taking turns driving, I'm googling Nubians. Today I found that my husband's family lives fairly close to 2-G Farm and Pruitteville, might be calling them in the not-too-distant future.
My head has been spinning with breeding season. The hardest part for me this year has been waiting on the bucks to grow, they were born mid-March and early April, so they are just starting to take an interest in what they were brought to the ranch to do. I excited, but I hate that I won't have any January babies. I might get lucky in February, but the jury is still out.
In an ideal situation I keep one goat in milk through November and December, that doe kids in early March. The others get dried up in November so they have 2 months off before kidding in late January or February. In Southern Arizona the weather never really gets too cold to be dealing with kids, if it's still a little brisk I put out a heat lamp like I use for the baby chicks. That with straw and they are peachy. I had my babies in late March and early April this year and it felt too late, my last goat kidded in June, that was rather odd and has really thrown off the cycle. I think this fall and winter I will keep Anabell in milk and breed her for March babies since she kidded so late. Then the others I will shoot for early February kids. The boys started "practicing" on each other so I feel they have earned the right to give things a go with the ladies.

Manatee County teacher, 59, dies of COVID-19
Bayshore High School teacher Larry Conlon, 59, died of COVID-19 last Friday morning after catching the virus just as this school year began.
For much of his 15-year teaching career, Conlon's classroom was adjacent to that of his wife, Karen, who taught along side him at Manatee School for the Arts in Palmetto.
The couple did not have children, and colleagues say they poured parental energy and attention into the students who filled their classrooms each day.
"They made these kids their life," said Kelly Hillman, who worked with the Conlons for years at MSA. "They took the time to get to know them."
Larry Conlon taught at Manatee School for the Arts and Johnson K-8 School of International Studies before accepting a job at Bayshore High School, Manatee Schools spokesman Mike Barber confirmed.
He met his new students at Bayshore on Aug. 10, the first day of school in Manatee. He went out on quarantine the next day, and never returned.
"We will miss Larry, his glowing smile, and optimism for being a part of our family and helping change the lives of students for the better," Bayshore High Principal Wendell Butler Jr. told the staff in an email.
Teaching was a second career for Larry, a move that he made in tandem with Karen about 15 years ago.
Larry had been a banker, overseeing lenders who worked on residential loans, but he left that career behind to teach middle school English. When he stepped into the classroom, he discovered a new love for helping students with intensive reading remediation ,
"He just had a passion for it," Karen said. "A lot of former students' comments are that he was the teacher that helped them the most."
Karen and Larry had been married for 29 years. They met through a mutual friend in May 1992, and married by November that same year.
"We were 30 at the time," Karen said. "You kind of know by that time what you want to do."
The couple moved to Florida from Michigan 20 years ago. Once Larry became a teacher, he threw himself into his new career. He organized fundraisers for the school and was the eighth-grade team leader.
"Any time there was an event or something happening at the school," he and "Mrs. Conlon were the first ones to buy tickets and be there to show support," Hillman recalled. "He was always buying school supplies for the kid who needed help."
Larry had not been vaccinated for COVID-19, Karen said, although they had been talking about getting the shot just before he got sick.
"Personally, I think when it’s your time, it’s your time," she said. "It’s just an avenue by which things happened."
COVID-19 has been spreading rapidly in Manatee and Sarasota county schools since classes resumed on Aug. 10. Manatee had more cases in the first three weeks of school than the school district did all of last year.
Larry is the first teacher in Manatee County Schools to die of COVID-19 this year.
Michelle Cook, a 20-year teaching veteran who just accepted a job at Suncoast School for Innovative Studies in Sarasota, died of COVID-19 last week.
Karen said she is going to miss talking with Larry about their days at work.
"He was a kind thoughtful person, always had a smile on his face, always looked out for everyone," she said. "That’s just him."
Ryan McKinnon covers schools for the Herald-Tribune. Connect with him at email@example.com or on Twitter: @JRMcKinnon. Support the Sarasota Herald-Tribune by subscribing today.

“The Way” finds Martin Sheen walking back into a leading film role, which is one of the most personal performances of his career. It was written and directed by his son, Emilio Estevez, and is set on the Spanish pilgrimage trail ‘Camino de Santiago,’ near where Martin’s father was born and raised.
Sheen says that his son was insistent, “the film would never get done without me, it was his gift for me.” However, as a father, he couldn’t help but worry about disappointing his son. “The only anxiety I had was that I would not come up to his expectations.” He thinks their joint effort was, “a deeply personal relationship being explored on film … it was a reflection of our relationship and basically a gift we gave to each other.”
Early in his film career, Sheen gave iconic leading performances in Terrence Malick’s “Badlands” and Francis Ford Coppola’s “Apocalypse Now.” Since then, he has delivered supporting turns in Best Picture champs “Gandhi” and “The Departed.” Yet, he has never been nominated for an Oscar.
As he explains, “I didn’t feel comfortable competing for them … So I withdrew several times.” However he has since, “had a change of heart because I realised that if you get involved with the awards process you can draw attention to the film, hence you can extend the longevity of the film.” Despite a practically nonexistent advertising budget, “The Way” has grossed more than $3.5 million at the box office. It has scored a solid 80 at Rotten Tomatoes.
Sheen also reflected on his six Emmy losses for his leading role as the President on the drama series “The West Wing.” He recalls what it was like to be seemingly the only person on the show not to win an Emmy. “It got to be a joke around the set, every now and then the lads would come in with their Emmys and just, very subtly, sit them on the set somewhere where I couldn’t help but see them, and I had nothing to replace them with so I would just throw a shoe at them.”

A movement touched the edge of his vision. And stopped, which the serving staff hadn't done. He looked toward the door.
"Nandi," he said, seeing Saidin standing, hands folded, expectant of something. With more staff behind her.
With a serving tray.
Probably the season's inaugural dish. It was a very formal house. And he couldn't offend the cook. He gave the event his full attention.
The servants brought the tray in and set out a very large flat bread, with an amazing array of foods atop, all appropriate, all seasonal. But on a green vegetable sauce.
"This is a new dish," he remarked.
And evidently set the staff somewhat aback--when cook herself had come into the hall, and waited--clearly--for his reaction.
"It's quite nice," he said, trying to salve feelings. "What do you call it?" He tried to learn new words and new things as they presented themselves. It was what the paidhi did in the ordinary course of his job.
"Pizza," the youngest servant blurted out. "Is this not in correct season, nand' paidhi?"
"Of course it is," he said at once. "Of course, pizza, nadi. I'm just--quite surprised." He could have broken into laughter--if he hadn't control of his face, and his voice. "It's wonderful."
"We hadn't the red sauce," cook said. "We're told it will come, but the plane was delayed by weather."
"One did think," madam Saidin said, clearly part of the conspiracy, "that after dealing with that unpleasant woman this noon it was a good day for a traditional food."
"It smells very good," he said. "Would the staff share? It's traditional to pass it around."
The servants looked excited. Saidin looked dubious, but cook said, "There're eight more in the kitchen. One had provided for the staff, nand' paidhi, by your leave."

Once I was not interested in second-hand shops. I rather avoided them. But now I am looking for them.
At the present time I am reading a book on ROMANS by D. Stuart Briscoe. The series is called THE COMMUNICATOR’S COMMENTARY and the General Editor is Lloyd J. Ogilvie. The book has been a blessing already, and I have only started reading it! (Word Books, Publisher Waco,Texas)
$16- is written in the book. It seems to me that that was the original cost of the book.
That book was bought in a second-hand store, and I am not sure what the buyer paid for it. It was not very much.
I believe I have said it before and I am saying it again: “The books I love best in my library were bought second-hand.”

“four times” | simon “ghost” riley [m]
⋆ pairing: simon “ghost” riley [cod: mwII] x f!reader
⋆ summary: four times you think about how simon ghost riley will fuck you and one time he actually does.
⋆ wc: 6.7k
⋆ warnings&tags: nsfw, explicit language, flirting, daydreaming/dreaming, mentions of fantasy & kinks, rough!ghost who becomes soft for some time in odd circumstances, f!reader, kissing, licking, biting, oral > f receiving, cums, cursing, superior!ghost, touching, putting one's head down, dirty talk, pet names such as doll, handcuffing, safe word, reader is kind of like a brat, sinsful/unholy things, mentions of love, fluff, a little emotional, jealousy, events happens in a safe zone like a dom. remind me if I missed something. enjoy!
it was not the first time you imagined about it but it was certainly the one you went further 'till it made you stood where you were, looking at the lieutenant's face shamelessly without your control and keeping dreaming about how he would fuck you.
you couldn't tell what made you think such a thing since he was your superior who you should look at a co-worker but it all changed when you joined to the team and got closer with each one of them, especially with ghost who you has spent so much nights in the field now.
in these nights, you shared so many things, mostly you but ghost became more comfortable around you enough to let you tease him. it was a great development for your relationship. he wasn't like soap at all and for you, no men could be like him. mystery he had alongside his own persona was pulling you to him dangerously.
maybe, that was the reason why you felt this way about him; wanting him to ruin you from head to toe.
so, it wasn't a surprising thing when you sat down on the couch, watching ghost and soap organizing and planning how to enter the building secretly.
comparing to others, his body was massive and it began with it.
your mind studied how he could easily carry you. he could move your without any effort onto a higher level and he even could hold you by your ass, raising your body up, caging it between his massive body and a wall, hugging you from the waist and ass.
with the stamina he had on field, he clearly could go for some rounds like that, not putting you down while fucking you like that. you imagined how he would make you undress before fucking you from head to toe but keeping all of his suit on which would make you feel the fabric of his clothes on your skin.
he definitely would talk dirty, explicitly. he had no shame in that situations as you guessed.
as you kept dreaming him fucking you from behind while holding you up only leaving your tips touching the ground as your head hit the wall rapidly. all naked, sweat all over and screaming his name again and agai -
"y/n?" a deep voice you loved to hear said, taking you from your nasty dreams into reality with a blushed face. "are you okay?"
you nodded to your lieutenant. "sorry, sir," you said. "I was thinking about something. what were you saying?"
his eyes that was only visible thing from masked covered face kept looking at you, so, it was soap who answered your question, pointing out the map of the building. "can you stay in here for the mission?"
looking at ghost one last time, you turned to soap and began to talk about the mission while you continued to feel ghost's heavy eyes on you from time to time.
second time was when you were standing on the building with ghost beside you, lying down on the ground on your stomachs, adjusting the snipers in front of you.
lieutenant was looking directly at the high building while you were looking at him from the corner of your eyes.
he had a good physics - a good built body thanks to exercises he was doing all the time. so, while he was lying like this, you could see strong muscles on his back that were visible than before. his arms were covered in black fabric, pointing out his muscular arms under the fabric. you wanted to touch them because your palms aching to feel his muscles under your skin, caressing them slowly while he took all you give him.
while looking at his body, your naughty side took control once again, making you have unholy thoughts about the way his arms could hold your thighs in place while he is standing on his knees right in front of you, his masked curled up only leaving his lips in display to your eyes and some wetness on his lips which you saw twice thanks to having same lunch time. wetness coming out of your bared pussy in front of his face, eating you alive while you hold his shoulders and arms on your thighs that are exposed because of the shortness of night dress you were wearing.
having him between your thighs, seeing him licking, biting and eating your pussy as you only leave moans of his name and how good he is making you was a dream in your head in that moment when a hand waved towards your direction – a hand of no one’s but ghost whose eyes filled with concern and confused looking.
“what are you thinking?” he asked, angry a little bit and you knew damn well why he was angry; the mission was about to start and you were dozing off, giving you danger and ghost probably began to think whether you were ready for the mission or not.
but you took a defensive and determined manner, shaking your head with your hands in sync. “I just got an idea is all, don’t worry, sir, I am ready for the mission.”
his eyes traveled from your face to your lower parts and to your face again and making you flush more in redness. “how copy?” he asked, bossy as ever, deepness in his voice.
“good.” he said, nodding, believing you. “don’t make me carry you from the field, y/n. it is the last thing I want to.”
“don’t you worry, simon.” you smiled, feeling closer thanks to him calling you with your name so intensely. “I am good at this.”
third time came sooner than you expected it to be.
the mission was done perfectly, no blood dropped, no one got harmed, the information they had got back from them secretly, not alerting anyone in the building while you and soap stayed in the field and ghost on the rooftop, giving you information and calmness through the mission, especially to you.
after it was done, the team took different cars to go back into the place you were staying at. you were the one who left behind with just one car because you decided to wait for ghost to reach you, leaving the rooftop. it was a habit you had after a dangerous mission you and ghost had in previous times. it began to be more natural each time and no one questioned it, not even you and simon, it was an unspoken and calming gesture you both shared.
while keeping silence, you enter the back of black truck. you took the chair in front of simon because there were no one in the truck expect you to and you believed it would be strange to sit beside him when there were all empty spaces. this was the first mistake you did.
you realized it when simon put down his sniper on the ground when car began to move, driver staying behind the closed black mirror, not giving any sight of you two to him. then, simon put his head to the surface of truck, looking at you with his dark colored eyes – they looked darker than before because of gloomy white lights of the car. they looked at you so intensely that you moved in awkwardness, but not breaking eye contact but it was hard to keep, especially when he opened his legs wider, manspreading, showing off his powerful thighs seamlessly enough to make your face turn into a redness.
he looked damn well with the way he was sitting that your knees began to weaken, ready to shake any moment.
it was so hard not to imagine how could you easily stay on your knees, between his thick thighs, all of his armor on, only half of his face smirking down at you while you took his exposed cock deep inside your mouth, beginning for more and more for him to fuck it roughly, his hands on your hair, caressing gently and roughly at the same time to mess with your already dumb head.
you could guess you would hold his thighs with a strong grip, not wanting to fall onto the ground because of shaking legs he would give to you.
“y/n,” simon said, sounding half ghost who is your lieutenant and half simon who is your friend or crush if you would be honest to yourself. when you looked up to his face, you realized how you were staring at his thighs and well, that particular thing covered but a little visible to eyes. you knew damn well that he caught your staring and the heat raised inside you while you waited him to continue. but he said something you didn’t expect, “you did so well in the field.” he smirked, and you could tell that without even seeing his lips.
it was the fourth time in which you actually took an action while dreaming about it because there was a free time to do whatever you want to do and it was right after the exercise day you shared with ghost and soap together to have fun and useless moment.
it was an idea coming out from soap, suggesting to share exercise hours while playing a game; the winner in each exercise would ask a question to others – the questions that could be anything including explicit ones to add some spicy to the game as soap said while smiling. thanks to the times you three spent, you knew very well what kinds of question he would ask.
it sounded fun and you nodded, and simon too who you tried not to look at for long times since he was wearing a black t-shirt, leaving his arms exposed and upper body covered with the skinny fabric of it. also he had black cargo pants on. he looked breath taking and you wanted to remove his mask and see his face.
then, it all began; first winner of exercise was soap thanks to the energy he had which would fade away slowly as you guessed. he had no shame and that’s why, he asked a very expected question; which position you like the most.
you rolled your eyes, punching him on the shoulder, “what an unexpected question you asked soap.” however, your calm manner changed when a deep voice came from your behind.
he was standing right behind you as his bigger body swallowed yours. looking back to his face, covered with mask, you blushed. and when he looked down at you with dark colored eyes of his you loved to look at, you turned to soap suddenly who was smirking at simon’s answer.
“how about you, y/n?” soap asked, giving time for you to be comfortable to answer. he added when you stayed silent. “it’s just a game. don’t worry, little one.”
you tried to look confident and while simon’s piercing eyes were opening holes in your back, you shrugged, “classic ones, I guess.”
“classic ones?” soap chuckled, caressing your hair with a friendly manner, “I expected you to have – well, more colorful things than that.”
rolling your eyes, you tried to joke to calm the air down since all you could think simon’s presence and answer – can’t choose, was the thing he said, so, he loved every position. you wondered how many positions he experienced with others and that made your blood boil without your control.
with raising heat and anger on your body, you said to them, feeling sick, “enough with the game. I want to take a shower. you two go on.”
as you made your way you could feel the gazes simon gave to you; confused ones while soap shouted childishly, “but it just started!”
and here you were, sitting on your bed after a fresh shower which helped you to calm down and getting away with the ideas of simon with someone else. jealousy and anger were the things you shouldn’t have since you were being just a brat who had a crush on him. that was all. nothing more.
but when you remembered his answer, your brain began to act on its own; thinking every position simon would fuck you with.
and when it stopped on your favorite on, the doggystyle, not the one you told to soap, your mind blew up, making your hands work on your clit that saught attention.
it was all dizzy now; you lying down on the bed, one of your hands on your breast while the other one playing with your folds, heavy and pitched breaths coming out of your parted mouth, your white night dress on your body, exposing your breasts alongside with your pussy and thighs.
it was passing midnight and no one were in your floor; soap and simon went outside as soap informed you, captain price and gaz were visiting some important individuals who were friends of captain, so, you were all alone – all alone to do what you wanted to for such a long time; thinking about the lieutenant – his hands, thighs, arms, massive body entirely and especially his cock while having your own pleasure with quilt because he was your superior, boss even, and on the other hand, he was your friend. if only he knew you were lying down on the bed and began to moan his name lowly but since there wasn’t any sound in the floor, it sounded so high for your ears.
when you were about to reach climax, the door knocked, taking you away from your naughty dreams.
with a dizzy mind and annoyed because of not reaching your climax, ache on the stomach, you got up, not minding putting something on to your messy night dress, you just stood behind the door, opening the lock, then the door only to see the mask of ghost, standing with all his glory behind the door with a black hoodie and light blue jeans on. he looked attractive and hot as always. you didn’t know how you could fall for someone without seeing his face but it was the power of simon. you fell for the man for only him, not for his face or position – only for him.
“s-simon?” you asked in surprise because he was the last one you expected to stay behind your door in such hour, especially since he was out with soap doing god knows what.
without saying anything, he just nodded towards the room, asking for a permission to enter.
giving him space to enter the room, you realized which dress you were wearing but it was all too late and simon’s eyes were already on your body, looking at it from corner of his eyes even though you could feel its burning effect, making your cheeks burn and remember what you were doing before he knocked the door.
cursing inside your head, you put your arms around your body with a calm movement, like you weren’t minding being like this in front of your crush – who you were having unholy thoughts recently, you asked, “is there something important, sir? I thought you and soap were outside for fun.”
“yeah?” simon asked in a low tone, making you shiver thanks to deepness of his sound – sounding more than ghost on the field than simon but there was also hints of simon still. “it wasn’t fun.” he added, slowly approaching you, putting a hand on the door, right beside your head, making your back touch door’s surface due to sudden closeness. he caged your body between his and the door. it was hard to breath normally.
“I was simon for a second there and now, I am the ‘sir’?” was he doing this on purpose? – the deepness and lustful his sound was making, eyes behind the mask that were only visible thing on his face and closeness. it was different than before.
“would you like me to call you with your name, sir?” you asked, shy as ever but trying to show confidence.
“no,” he shrugged, slowly, looking at your lips for a second for enough for you to catch it and become breathless. “call me whatever you like.”
you tried to chuckle, getting out of his hold, walking toward your bed without looking him back. “is this a joke that soap suggested?” you smiled again, a nervous one because what he was trying to do now was bad news to you; he was giving you a power he shouldn’t – power of being so fucking close to him. “it is not funny.”
you sat down on the bed, arms on your chest still, but the skirt of dress raised up, showing your little exposed thighs to him which you didn’t mind since the topic was different than simply your dress.
ghost leaned against the wall, crossing his arms, making them getting tight through the fabric of hoodie. he also crossed his legs, looking so tall, giving you a sense of being weaker and smaller than him but this only made your stomach twist in excitement. the whole air was heavy and filled with lust.
“am I looking dumb to you?” he asked, sounding calm even though the question was – odd.
“huh?” you asked, confused. “no, sir, of course not.”
“then why you are acting like I am?” he didn’t wait for you to reply, instead, he got straighten and started walking towards you. you held your breaths ‘till he stood right in front of you, making you look up to see his face, then, he put his two hands on the bed, caging you in here too.
his nose were touching yours from time to time. you couldn’t remember the last time you felt hot, dizzy and excited.
“thinking I would not notice that gazes you gave me, hm, is that the deal, y/n?” he asked, “I can see though your skull, I can smell raising heat coming from it. standing there, dreaming about me.” his right hand found your left cheek, caressing it slowly, “tell me, doll, how many night you thought about me while touching yourself – like this one.” his mouth reached your ear and you could feel his warm breaths even through the mask, “how many times you moaned my name?”
your mind wasn’t there, no, it was all gone but still, you tried to protest, “s-sir, you are mistaking, I –“
“mistaking? oh,” he straightened up, his massive posture shining with the moon’s dim lights coming from windows. “then, I heard wrong it, maybe, you tried to moan another man’s name, is that it?”
you waved your hands on defense, “no, no!” everything was complex and you knew it was to tell truth in this situation in order to not make it more complex than it already was, so, taking a few deep breaths, you looked at his eyes once again, feeling weak on the knees due to his power, and saying, “it was your name I moaned, sir.”
he tilted his head to left a little, hand on your chin, caressing it gently contrary to the strength he held. “good girl,” he said, making you close your eyes – being called good girl by him was magnificent, and when he continued, it became more than it, “my good girl.” his other hand moved, lifting half of his mask, showing his smirking lips that turned into a straight line. he knelt down, closing the gap between you face and his, nose touching to each other. “don’t lie to me again. will you do it? will you be my good girl like always?”
you nodded, “I will!” you tried to calm down when he smirked again, knowing his dominance on you and proud of it. “I will, sir.”
“then, tell me,” oh he was being such a tease now with the way he was talking – low, deep, full of poison that could be death of you. “what you were moaning for?”
it took some certain seconds for you to answer his explicit question directed right into your face, wanting to get answers of what you were dreaming about him before he came. god knows how great hearing ability he had, catching you calling his name behind the walls. you could swear he stood there for a second to hear your pathetic moans, trying to give yourself pleasure. gulping, you looked half-giant man before you, losing your mind just with it. what it would do to you when you saw him naked? you wished inside, you begged even, to see him naked tonight, on your bed.
“for you, sir.” you gulped again. the room’s temperature was high – so high, like your mind and it wasn’t from a drug, no, it was because of him – simon fucking riley. he was one of his kind, for sure, and you could taste it tonight, maybe just once which made you sad for a moment before seeing him smirking to the answer, waiting for you to continue, giving him something would make him ruin you in the moment. “for your cock.”
“atta girl.” his fingers found the thin strap of your night dress, clinging it. his eyes found yours for a while, getting your approval even if he could see the way you closed your legs together to feel something to calm down your lustful pussy, hardened nipples visible through the dress and heavy – audible breathes. ghost was a beast but simon had the heart of a gentleman. knowing this, you nodded, giving him power over you he sought.
he gave you his hand, you held it, feeling roughness of it that tickles your skin in a funny way, heartwarming even. getting up, you waited for him to remove the dress from your body, letting it collapse into the ground, leaving you naked all over, causing you to have redness from cheeks to knees from here to there.
it was a fantasy for you, one of them really, being naked while he kept all his clothes on, fucking you like that but tonight, you wanted to see him too because it was the first time. you wanted it to be unforgettable forever.
when his eyes and his fingers moved in unison, traveling on your body that began with your face. as his fingers made his ways to your waist, he held it for both of his hands in a second, pulling you into him ‘till your exposed tits hit his chest. you screamed lowly at the sudden action, putting both hands on his shoulders to balance your stance. he didn’t smirk but you could swear he was enjoying this so fucking much from how his hands began to move from your waist to your ass, grapping them and giving gentle squeezes. he knelt down, nose touching nose, “I will give you some times to do whatever you want to do with me,” he put your hair to your ear with his left hand, “then, I will have you with my way.”
you smirked, getting comfortable each second, gaining your confidence back. “is this a deal, sir?”
“no, pretty, it’s a warning because when I begin to have you with my way, you would not be able to even think what you wanted in the first place,” he smirked a little, “you will be too cock dumb even to think.”
looking at his eyes carefully for the last time, you nodded, a smile of victory appeared on your face. “I trust you, lt. make me a dumb for your cock as if I've never been.” the moment you finished your sentence, a light exploded inside, and after a second, you were all over him, kissing his lips as your hands on his shoulders tightened in order to gain strength to keep still because his lips were your weakness from now on.
kissing him with the way you wanted the most, your heart reached its own euphoria, encouraging you to move closer – taking actions. so, your hands traveled on his neck, causing him bend more. he opened his mouth wider at the action, letting your tongue clash with his, reaching the taste of it – taste of him.
moaning, you held his hoodie, leaving his lips to remove it. being an obedient man, he let you remove it without saying anything, only looking at your face with his messy and red lips because of the roughness of the kiss you shared.
it was the first time you saw his upper body exposed, showing off his biceps and well built body with a proud looking on his half covered face when he saw the way you literally moaned with the half naked sight of him. “s-simon.” you tried to say, more like another moan of his name when his lips found yours once again, taking back the breath your lungs asked for.
he wasn’t that rough but you knew his kiss would leave puffiness on your lips.
finding you waist again, he made you jump into his arms, holding your body like it was the last thing for him to hold life on his hands. his touches felt both lovely and intense, blurring your mind, wanting to be fucked by him soon enough.
letting your back reach onto the bed gently and slowly while his mouth found your neck, you felt the heat radiating from his chest into yours and you couldn’t help but say, “I didn’t know my time was this limited.” when he began to put permanent licks and kisses on your neck, a hand on one of the breasts as the other one traveled on your thigh. when you remarked his eagerness by saying, “couldn’t wait any longer, huh? I didn’t know you were so into me like I was for you, sir.” he smirked for a second before giving you a rough bite, making your body jump in sudden pain that began to feel like a pleasure thanks to his added kisses. you knew you was right and that knowledge added more confidence and happiness to you.
as your hand found his nape hair, coming out from the way his mask stayed, you held them tightly when his fingers positioned on your pussy’s enter.
“s-simon!” you said, “please, please, please.” and it took him just put his fingers on the folds of your pussy to make you start to beg for his cock – inside you.
“you sounded so confident now. where is that confidence go?”
you shook your hands in negative way, holding his hair still, waiting for him to stop playing with your folds and enter. “I just want it! please, please –“
“want what?” he teased but he didn’t wait for you to reply, instead, he entered his fingers into you, two of them as his kisses, licks and bites moved from your neck to breasts – taking his time on there while fucking you with his long and thick fingers, earning low moans from you. he moved to your abdomen, then to your pussy ‘till he reach right into your entrance.
his tongue joined his fingers, eating your pussy, adding third finger, going in and out rapildy, leaving you no choice but close your thighs together to take more pleasure of him because seeing his head between your thighs, pink tongue on the pussy, eyes on your face – challenging you to keep looking at him – at how good his tongue working on your clit. “s-simon!” you moaned again, earning a smack to your ass.
“stay still if you want to cum,” his hands opened your thighs wider, giving him a good view of your messy pussy. he added, “c’mon, be a good girl for me and don’t try to hold it back,” your stomach twisted in pleasure, reaching your climax soon enough. simon said, “cum.” to give permission to you before his tongue reached the deepest it could go when his three fingers entered you deep and rough, you moaned loudly, letting your cum hit his mouth and fingers.
simon didn’t stop at his actions of tongue ‘till he drunk all juicy you made with that hard cum thanks to him.
“s-simon –“ you said again. his name was the only thing your mind could make sense of. “please. need you – need your cock!”
“what a greedy girl you are, still wanting my cock even though you cum so much on my mouth.” he positioned himself on top of you, two hands caged your head between them as he left a little of his weight into yours. your legs opened on their own, hugging his belt, pushing him down to feel his hardened cock on your exposed pussy to seek friction. he chuckled deeply at your weak trying and you waited for a while in order to comprehend the way he chuckled so beautifully – he was so beautiful, not from this world, you believed – he was something else, different than any human and he was all yours now. you wished this magic would never end.
“since I couldn’t wait for your time, I will give you a choice.”
saying hmm in response, you closed your eyes and opened them to gain function of your brain back while simon watched you with sparkles on his darkened eyes. his hot breaths were hitting your face and that was the warmest thing you felt. “what choice?”
“choice of position.” he said, kissing your cheeks and chin, giving you explosions – good ones like fireworks on the night sky, “you didn’t say which position you liked most to soap. say to me, wanna hear it.”
you decided to tell the truth, so, you held his face with both of your palms, putting an innocent kiss to his nose like you weren’t all naked under him, took his fingers and tongue just now, “actually, I don’t care about the position anymore,” you shrugged, “with you, every each of them will be the best.”
that made him tilting his head to left, “you didn’t get my cock but you still believe it will be best.”
you chuckled, “why shouldn’t I? perhaps, it isn’t good, hm?” you challenged him.
he put the last gentle kiss on your lips. then, he left your body, standing on your knees as his hands stopped on his belt, removing it slowly enough to give you another twist on the stomach at the sight of him; half-covered mask on, pink and wet lips because of only you, exposed chest with full of biceps and well built muscles, veins visible on fingers and arms, and thick thighs covered with clothes but soon, would be left as naked as his chest.
“I should make you regret for saying that but tonight, I will take easy on you my pretty girl,” he removed his belt, holding it with one hand, unzipping his pants, taking it off from his body within his black boxers. in addition to his speech – him saying how you were his pretty girl, how he could punish you but choose not to for tonight, your mouth opened wider when you saw his hardened cock, finally free, standing with all its glory right in front of you. it was long and thick – greater than you could imagine in those naughty dreams of you.
he knelt down again after giving you a time to acknowledge his cock, aching to enter you all way in. you looked at his eyes, full of danger and lust that pointing out his further actions, “so, enjoy it while you can because I will never be this merciful again.”
wait, he was saying that this would go on – that this wasn’t just one night thing? – you thought to yourself in pure disbelief but it all gone when he spun your body, making your face touch the surface of the bed’s sheets. feeling his chest on your back, you growled – his weight on you only made you eager than before and when his hands found yours, you felt cold sense of his belt. he was handcuffing you with his goddamn belt he took off and you only stayed still, a great idea of comiting a sin with simon looked thrilling and you didn’t move even when he checked out whether you could move your hands or not.
yes, you imagined him fucking you but this – this was beyond it. he was breaking all the norms you expected him to have and you couldn’t deny the feelings he gave to you – both sinfully coming right out of hell and fireworks made from the expression of beauty and innocence from a clear sky.
“y/n,” simon said, for time calling you with your name after you started making out. it felt closer than ever this time, so, you looked at his face with pure love, seeing him getting softer. “do you need a safe word? we can make one if you –“
“no,” you said, calm to give him guarantee, “with you, I don’t need one, simon.”
with your reply, his soft and thoughtful side seemed to give its place to the one whose intentions were to fuck you hard. you realized you loved both of them because they were all simon – your simon.
maybe it was wrong to call him as yours but when his hand found your neck, positioning your head into the sheets as his other hand found your thighs after lifting your ass higher, opening them wide open with the helps of his knees, it felt so right – you were his before even knowing and from now on, you had no complain being called as his as well as him being called yours.
you moaned when his cock’s tip positioned on your entrance, giving you a second to breath in and out. then, his cock entered inside with a rough thrust, making your body bounce because of the impact. your head nearly hit the headboard, moaning loudly some mindless things like begs, praising, and so on.
it felt so good – so right; the way his hand traveled on your waist, positioning you in one piece in order to make it stay still, not bouncing each time he trusted deeply and roughly. he indeed had a good strength and stamina within a great speed, you realized it now more than before.
as his thrusts made their way right into your walls, your moans were so loud that if someone just walk pass by your door, they could easily hear you moaning and screaming your lieutenant’s name shamelessly, as if it was the one thing you knew, maybe it was.
“s-simon –“ you tried to say with a messy mind, “if someone comes, they will – “ you took heavy breaths, his balls hitting you, his weight on yours hard to endure, “they will hear us!”
simon’s grip on your waist tightened, probably leaving marks that would last for a few days but he didn’t seemed as he mind it at all while he kept fucking you hard, giving your breasts bouncing with each thrust.
his cock were reaching your stomach and you knew you could see it if you looked at your abdomen. his hot breathes joined your moans and when he hugged your abdomen and breasts with two of his hands, making your back hit his chest. this new position made his cock reach deep down of your pussy, giving you painful but pleasure thrusts. from the tips of your fingers that were handcuffed, you felt his tightened biceps. giving them little touches, you heard simon curse under his breath.
reaching to your ear, he said, “scream my name more. if anyone pass by this door, I want them to hear whose cock you are taking and how it made you a cock dumb.” his thrusts became messy but their deepness were still there due to the new position. “maybe I should fuck you in shared office even. that would definitely make them hear your filthy moans. want that?”
he bit your neck, leaving your body onto the sheets once again, holding your thighs as he stayed without moving, only his hands. he was literally using your body like a lightweight toy. he was just moving your body back and forth without any movement, fucking you like this, proving the power he held because it was hard to move your body rapidly and roughly just to fuck you and he was doing it as it meant nothing to him.
you felt like a doll under his touch with the way he began to fuck you but it only made you reach another climax in an instant, being his doll – his slut he used for his cock in bed came wonderful to your ears.
“would my pretty girl like it? showing how she belongs to me who begs for my cock – who dreams of it every fucking night ‘till she gains it.”
“yes, yes, yes!” you screamed, “please, simon! let me cum, please, please, please –“
there wasn’t any sound including your own. it was only him. therefore, when his deep voice finally said, “cum. cum to my cock.” you cum undone in a second, letting your juicy pouring to his cock and onto the sheets from there.
you cum too high and hard but you had courage to say, “simon,” to him one last time before nearly fainting, “cum inside. I want you – I need you to cum inside.”
he lost balance of his thrusts that were going in and out softer now, and when he regained his balance, he only began to fuck you rougher this time, heavy breaths and curses came out of him ‘till he reached his own climax, cumming deep inside, feeding you with his hot seed.
it was better to feel his cum than your own.
putting your forehead into the bed, taking deep breaths to finally reaching what you wished for, you let simon took his cock off of you, letting his seed coming from inside to your folds, thighs and sheets – a beautiful sight to your eyes. he also removed his belt, kissing your chin that were hurting but with his lips, you wanted to be handcuffed more by him if he would keep kissing you like this afterwards.
your body collapsed onto the bed. looking at his still half-hardened cock and juicy on him – both his and yours, you moaned lowly, “simon.”
he put a hand beside your head, other one caressing your hair after pulling them out of your face, he kissed your forehead. “just rest, you need it.”
“I don’t need a rest.” you said, “I need you.”
he looked a bit confused, asking, “you want round two? I didn’t know you were such a greedy for it.”
you chuckled at his tease. “I would want it still even when we do it for a hundredth time, but, no.” your hand found his mask, not pulling it out, just holding it. “I want you, simon – just you.”
he looked surprised for a while, adjusting what you said. you could see how hard he was trying to hide his emotions under the mask but you knew him damn well, realizing it was the thing he wanted as well as you.
he nodded, holding the hand you touched to his mask with, putting a kiss to the fingers. his hands stayed on his mask and you felt an urge to say, “you don’t have to remove it. I will wait for the moment you believe as the right one. just come here,” you showed other half of the bed after leaving him enough space to fit. “and let me kiss you all night. don’t expect me to forget the deal you broke tonight.”
to get his normal self, not the one who was emotional and showing it, he just nodded, smiling little, “you don’t forget a thing, y/n.”
“of course, I don’t! it is about you after all.”
chuckling at your own answer, you watched simon leave his mask as it was; half-covered, lying on the bed, giving you his arm for you to put your head to but you choose his chest.
calming in his arms he hugged you with from the waist, you smiled. “let’s stay for a while. then, we can bathe to clean up.”
he nodded, “together?”
you tried to hide your blushed face with a hit on his chest, “simon!”
he shrugged, a ghost smile on his face as he closed his eyes at the feeling radiating both of you. “definitely together.”

(An eyewitness’ account*)
By Glen Elliott
To Luke, my brother in the Lord, from Cleopas. I understand you’ve been collecting eyewitness accounts about the life of Jesus. Here is mine.
I live in a small town called Emmaus. I have made the journey to and from Jerusalem many times in my life. But one such journey forever changed me. Here’s what happened that Sunday.
Passover Week in Jerusalem
A friend and I had been in Jerusalem for the Passover celebration with others who were following one who was clearly a prophet. God had not sent a prophet to his people in more than four hundred years. However, we personally saw this man perform miracles, and his teaching was powerful. His name was Jesus.
The week leading up to Passover started in an amazing way. Jesus was welcomed into the city with great fanfare. We were so hopeful he would redeem our beloved Israel from the tyranny of Roman occupation. He celebrated a Passover meal with his twelve chosen disciples.
Then, right before the actual Passover, a series of events unfolded quickly. Jesus was betrayed by one of his disciples. He was arrested and tried by our religious leaders and then the governor appointed by Rome. He was killed on a cross. Before sundown, he was buried in a tomb. But on Sunday morning, some women went to the grave and were told by angels that Jesus had risen from the dead. We didn’t know what to think. I’ll admit that I was afraid. After all, Jesus had been arrested and killed. A friend and I decided to leave the city and head back to Emmaus.
The journey home seemed longer than usual. My friend and I had an intense discussion about what happened. Why had things transpired the way they did? Why was Jesus killed? Why was the tomb empty? Had he really risen from the dead? If so, where was he? What would the eleven disciples do now? And what was next for us?
We had many questions and no clear answers. You can only imagine our confusion and sadness. In the span of a week our world turned upside down. We were struggling, to say the least.
As we walked along, all of a sudden a fellow came up and joined us. It seemed as if he came out of nowhere. I think he had overheard part of our discussion, but he asked what we had been talking about. His question literally stopped us in our tracks. It seemed unlikely he knew nothing of what had happened in Jerusalem the last few days. Still, I told him about Jesus and the news from the angels—that’s how the women referred to them—that Jesus was alive.
Then the man, who seemed very confident, challenged us by saying we were slow to believe. That got our attention. He said the Messiah had to suffer first before he would be glorified. He showed us what the Torah and the prophets had said about the Messiah. This man knew his Scriptures well. Time began to fly by. We reached our village as evening fell. We were so enthralled by our conversation that we begged the man to stay with us. We were delighted when he accepted.
We prepared a meal and, as we sat down, this man took a piece of fresh-baked bread and offered thanks, then broke it and passed it to all who were around the table. At that very moment, something unexplainable happened. It was clearly supernatural. We recognized that this man we had been with most of the afternoon was Jesus. How did we not realize it earlier? We had been with him and seen him before! Maybe it was because we weren’t expecting to see Jesus alive, but something had kept us from recognizing him. Now, we both knew for sure he was Jesus.
While on the journey we had sensed he was no ordinary man. As Jesus explained who the Messiah was from Scripture, we experienced a change of mood and attitude. We went from grief and hopelessness to a strong confidence that God would in fact provide a living Savior. Because of our time with Jesus, everything began to make sense! And now we knew for certain Jesus is alive.
Then something else miraculous happened. As soon as we recognized Jesus, he vanished! His place at the table was empty. There were none of the customary departing words and thanks. He just disappeared as fast as he had appeared to us on the road.
Back to Jerusalem
Well, we couldn’t just sit there. Even though we had already made the trip from Jerusalem to Emmaus that day, we had to go back and find the eleven and the others and tell them what had happened. We hurried and found the disciples. They immediately told us that Jesus is alive, that he had appeared to Peter! Then we shared about our experience of seeing the risen Jesus, and how we realized it was Jesus when he broke the bread. The eleven reflected on their memory of Jesus breaking the bread during the last supper they had together.
As my friend and I returned home again, our conversation was completely different. Our confident belief that Jesus was alive made this trip so different than the last one. We reflected on our encounter with the resurrected Jesus. First, we just had to admit our serious doubt about Jesus as we headed home the first time. In fact, that was the first thing Jesus addressed about us. He had noted we were slow to believe. Slow! I think Jesus was being kind by using that word, though it surely was the case. His conversation with us had snapped us back to our senses.
As we walked with Jesus, he taught what Scripture said about the Messiah. Hearing from the Word of God helped open our eyes—it always does. Before that, our disappointment that Jesus was crucified had caused us to put our heads down. We were blinded by grief and confusion, so much so that we couldn’t see Jesus was right there with us, in our very presence. By now, as you know, Jesus has ascended to Heaven, but he has not left us as orphans; he has left us with the Holy Spirit until he returns. And so God is still living beside us, for us, with us, and in us.
What we learned will carry us through our entire lives. I know that I occasionally still struggle at times. The religious leaders in Jerusalem and the Romans hate us. We know hard times are ahead. But when we are “slow to believe,” as Jesus said to us, we’ve learned we need to engage that doubt through prayer and by going to Scripture and reconnecting directly with the living Jesus. When we engage our doubt by going back to the Word of God, and when we seek the presence and guidance of the Holy Spirit, our eyes are reopened, our hearts reconnect with our living God, and our faith grows. When we sit with Jesus—when we listen to the Word—our trust deepens.
Luke, please share this with others. I want our story to help others who doubt that Jesus came back from the dead. There will always be doubt, just as there will always be doubters, and that’s why we need to share what we have seen and heard. Going from no faith, or slow belief, to a rich faith is a process. It’s a journey like the journey my friend and I experienced. We must continue to faithfully seek God and his promises in his written Word. When we do, it illuminates our heart and opens our eyes. The journey to Emmaus that day changed our lives. I believe it will continue to change our world.
* This article, based on biblical events, employs some creative storytelling that includes fictionalized dialogue and description.
Glen Elliott serves as lead pastor at Pantano Christian Church in Tucson, Arizona.

Gareth Southgate accepted England were not good enough in a 2-1 Euro 2020 qualifier loss away to the Czech Republic on Friday.
England topped Group A ahead of the clash at Eden Arena having taken a maximum 12 points from four games and victory would have secured their place at the finals.
Southgate felt his side were poor at the back, while a lack of quality on the ball was also highlighted as a factor in the loss.
"We've had a lot of credit in the last two years but we didn't do enough to win," he told ITV Sport .
"The performance was not good enough, simple as that.
"We probably should have got a draw but the goal we conceded was typical of chances we conceded
"I think there were things we can look back on, collectively we have to accept there were not enough good performances."
The Three Lions made a positive start when captain Harry Kane converted an early penalty, but the lead lasted less than five minutes as Jakub Brabec punished sloppy defending to score from a corner.
Jaroslav Silhavy's side moved level on points with England when Zdenek Ondrasek came off the bench to fire home the winner on his international debut.
England had scored at least four times each of their previous matches in the campaign to date but fell to a first qualifying loss since 2009, ending a run of 43-game run without defeat.
Southgate said his team, who had won 14 consecutive European Championship qualification games before Friday, had struggled to adjust to a tactical tweak.
They made a switch at half time but were still sloppy in the second period, according to their coach.
"We tried to change shape in the first half and it didn't work as well as we hoped, so we changed it and we started better in the second half and had good chances to win the game," he added, soon after the final whistle.
"But we conceded too many poor chances and conceded possession too often.
"We knew we'd have to be at full tilt to deal with the Czech Republic, but we should have been strong enough to deal with them."
Nations League semi-finalists England resume their qualifying campaign away to Bulgaria on Monday.

Not one to find the back of the net on a regular basis, Ducks defenseman Steve Eminger immediately knew when he scored his last goal.
"My last one was the last game of last season," Eminger said.
Try April 11, 2009 while with Florida against Washington, the team that drafted him 12th overall in 2002. It was the end of a season in which he put up career-best numbers -- with three teams.
Eminger was hoping to get a fresh start when he signed a two-year deal with the Ducks right before training camp. The thought was that he would lock down a regular spot on the blue line.
But with him struggling in his own end and Sheldon Brookbank leapfrogging him on the depth chart, Eminger was out of the lineup for all but one game over a month-long stretch before Coach Randy Carlyle put him back in Jan. 3 against Chicago.
"It was tough sitting out," Eminger said. "You got to work your way [back]. I knew I had to just practice hard, work out hard. I knew I was going to get my opportunity again.
"You don't want to take anything for granted. You want to stay in there. Play the way you can."
Eminger has been alongside Ryan Whitney on the second pairing for the last six games and he delivered his biggest moment as a Duck when he poked in a loose rebound left by Boston goalie Tuukka Rask with 11:53 left that was the game-winning goal in a 4-3 victory over the Bruins.
It is the 12th goal of Eminger's career and certainly one of the bigger tallies he's had as the Ducks ran their winning streak to a season-high five games, pulling them within four points of eighth place in the Western Conference.
"My winger kind of got puck-focused," Eminger said. "I just kind of snuck in there and Bobby took a good shot on net. I didn't really see where it hit the goalie but I just saw it bounce out. I thought I had to get on that quick.
"The goalie was coming back and the d-man was coming back to poke it away. It's just being at the right place at the right time.">

STOMPer Reeve was annoyed that a group of passers-by were more interested in getting a glimpse of the license plate numbers of two vehicles involved in an accident at Ang Mo Kio Avenue 3, instead of going forward to help.
The STOMPer wrote:
"I was at Ang Mo Kio Avenue 3 just a while ago this afternoon (Jun 21) and saw a Singapore post motorcycle that was involved in an accident with a blue-coloured car.
"The bike was badly damaged but I didn't see the motorcyclist in the area -- I think he may have been sent to the hospital already.
"Traffic in the area was congested as a lot of people gathered there and were busy looking for the car plate number to buy 4D.
"I don't think it's right that these people are more concerned about getting a lucky set of numbers than helping out the injured motorcyclist."
According to the Singapore Police Force, the rider was injured and sent to Tan Tock Seng Hospital.
In a statement to STOMP, a spokesperson for the police wrote:
"Police received a call at around 11.45am today, informing us of a traffic accdeint involving a car and a motorcycle at the junction of Ang Mo Kio Avenue 3 and Ang Mo Kio Avenue 10.
"The rider was conveyed with injuries to Tan Tock Seng Hospital.
"Police investigations are on-going."

What was school like?
My school days were quite happy despite the teasing that I got from some kids who called me “Gippo”. I used to wallop them. The teachers didn’t do anything about the teasing. I doubt that they knew. I was never caned for walloping my tormentors. I did get the stick for cheek and for getting work wrong. The teachers all used the cane. I remember Mr. Wright. He was a chubby fellow and I can vaguely recall Miss Snow. One teacher I do recall was Mr. Hollin Upcutt. He used the stick a lot. School hours were nine o’clock to midday and two to four in the infants and four thirty in the senior school. There were no school-dinners so we went home for lunch. If Mum was away I had my dinner at granny William’s daughter, another Mrs. Williams. Sometimes Mum left sandwiches and Dad cooked the dinner in the evening. He was a good cook. The only thing he didn’t make well was pastry.
There was a teacher called Miss Parker. She got very annoyed with mum because she was always taking me out of school. Mum was away a lot. She even asked mum if I could go to live with her to avoid missing school.
The classes were quite big and many children had a long walk to school. I can remember some kids came from Bilston. I don’t remember all that many children in Ladymoor. Some of the kids came from very poor homes. They had shoes on their feet but they were worn out or just plimsolls. t was these kids that used to call me “Gippo”. I suppose they were jealous as Mum and Dad always made sure I was well dressed and clean. Dad also mended my shoes. I can see him now with a shoetree and a hammer. You had to mend your shoes. There wasn’t a shop to go to and we couldn’t really afford the shoe repair shop in Bilston.
I learned to embroider at school and I was entered in a competition by the school and won a recommendation. I must have been good at embroidery as my teacher got me to embroider some of her linen that she was keeping in her “bottom drawer”. I embarrassed her one-day when I met her on the beach at Ramsgate. She was with her new husband. I went round telling people that I had embroidered her knickers!
We used to have cookery lessons too. The kitchen was at a centre some way off from the school. I can’t remember where it was all I know is it was a long walk. We had to take our own ingredients to prepare a meal and clean the kitchen. The teacher used to say that the floor had to be “as red as a cherry as dry as a bone, ready for daddy when he comes home.”
We used to sing a chant as we made our way back to Broad Lanes School. It went something like
Do you remember going to the cinema?
I used to go to the cinema in Bilston on a Saturday afternoon. I recall three cinemas in the town. The Alhambra, the Savoy and Wood’s. I don’t know if Wood’s was its real name but that’s what we kids called it. I think that the Savoy was built during my time in Bilston. It was opposite the Alhambra. I didn’t go to the Alhambra very much as it was dearer than the other two. I recall that the price at the Savoy was a penny downstairs and tuppence upstairs. I didn’t go up very often. I think Wood’s was tuppence downstairs and nine-pence up. I didn’t go upstairs there. Dad used to take me to the children’s matinee and collect me afterwards. I don’t know what he did whilst I was in the show. Perhaps he went back home. After the show he would take me to a sweet shop across the road for a hot fruit drink.
At Christmas I went to the pantomime at the theatre in Bilston. It was down a side street. I thought that the actors were famous names, but they probably weren’t. I used to go to the Children’s Saturday morning matinee. It cost nine-pence to go in. I remember sitting in the dress circle and in the stalls. I recall that the seats were red. I saw the usual repertoire of shows, Jack and the Beanstalk, Cinderella and Babes in the Wood. They were good fun.
How did you get there?
We would walk in to the town to save the penny bus fare. The bus ran hourly. It was a Midland Red service. All the buses were single-deckers. They had a driver and a conductor. I can’t recall where you got on the bus. I recall getting on at the front and in the middle. I think that the bus started at Bilston and went through Ladymoor and on to Sedgley and perhaps finished at Dudley.
Ladymoor Road was quiet. There was not much traffic. We played out in the summer with hardly any interruption from cars or lorries. We played all sorts of games, like marbles and skipping, and chase and two balls against the wall.
There was a wasteland at the edge of the village. It was full of bumps and hollows. We used to use it as a playground.
What was the caravan like?
The caravan was very compact and well maintained. Dad kept it very clean. He did most of the housework. Mum didn’t like cleaning. He did the cooking too. Dad was a very tidy man. He had been in the army in the Boer war and took a pride in his appearance. He always cleaned his shoes every day and was meticulous. He cleaned the part of the sole that doesn’t touch the ground so that you could always see that “ my shoes had been cleaned”, he used to say. He used to do the washing too as Mum was often away. He did some in a bowl in the caravan; some he took to the pub boiler and some was taken in by another Mrs. Williams. She only did ours I think. Her place was opposite the school.
Can you describe the caravan?
We had three, but the one I remember best was the last one. The caravan from the travelling fair days is the one I can remember least. The first one that we had at Ladymoor was small and I can only recall the inside a little. There was a bed area at the back of the caravan that was screened off by doors that you opened to get to it. The bed was like a bunk bed with a space underneath for a mattress and that’s where I slept. It was a bit cramped but I was used to it.
The last caravan was much bigger. It was shaped like a long shoebox. It was made from timber. It had six wheels I think and you entered it by climbing some steps. As you went in there was a double-doored cupboard on the right and a chest of drawers on the left. You could put things on top of it. Beyond the chest was a fireplace and beyond that a chair. This was right next to the door into the bedroom at the back. There was a window behind the chair.
The bedroom had a similar arrangement to the other van with a large double bed over another bed. I slept there on a mattress.
The bedroom was separated from the living area by a wall. There was room at either side of the bed for a wardrobe and a dressing table, with a chair on which to put your clothes.
In the living room opposite the fireplace was a table and on either side of it there were chairs. There was a window on this side too by the chair nearest the bedroom wall.
We didn’t keep anything under the van. There
was shed next to the van where Dad developed his films and where we
kids could play if the weather was wet. We also played in the old
We used the pub toilets. We didn’t call them loos. There were two we could use. The one in the pub yard was a single chemical canister that had to be emptied each week, and the one in the garden of the pub was a three seater, where you sat next to one another on the toilet at the same time!
Towards the end of my time in Ladymoor I am sure that the council brought sewers to the village to make it modern. I can recall playing on the pipe that crossed the field opposite the pub that was the sewer. The pub didn’t have any inside toilets.
Where did you go shopping?
There were two shops in Ladymoor. Both were general stores where you could buy tinned goods, milk, bread and eggs. The bread was delivered to the shop from a bakery. Early closing day was Thursday but it didn’t matter because if you ran out you could always go round the back and knock on the door. They’d open up for you. I think that the shops ran a slate that you could pay off each weekend when the wages were paid, but we always paid cash. This was a habit that always stayed with me.
How did you get fuel?
Our van used paraffin to provide the lamplight and coal for the fire and cooking. Dad used to get the oil from Mrs. Williams. She had a tank in her yard. The coal was delivered by a merchant who came round regularly. He brought coal from a wharf on the canal at Deepfields.
What other shops can you recall?
There were other shops in Broad Lanes that connected Ladymoor Road with Coseley Street in Bilston. I know there was greengrocer, a butcher and a pub or two. A man from down that way used to come to cut my hair but I don’t remember if he had a shop.
Were there visiting shops that came round?
There was a fish van that called each week and there was a butcher’s van that came regularly. I think there was a butcher’s shop in Broad Lanes but I don’t remember if they were connected.
There was a small farm in the village that kept cows and sold the milk. You could either get it from the farm or they delivered it into your jug with a door-to-door service. It wasn’t pasteurized. I can remember the cows in the field across the road from the Spreadeagle. There was a big pond in that field. We were told to keep away from it. Nobody went in it. We didn’t get fresh milk very often. We used Libby’s evaporated milk as it kept in the tin until you opened it. Keeping food fresh was a problem, as we had not got a refrigerator or a regular supply of ice.
Did you go to church?
I used to go to the Sunday school at the Church of England in the morning and to chapel with my friends in the afternoon. I think it was a Wesleyan chapel but I can’t remember where it was. Mum and dad didn’t go.
Do you recall outings and events in the village life?
In the summer we used to go out for the day to Baggeridge. We would get the bus to Sedgley. There would be a parent to supervise and a gang of us kids. We would stay out all day on the common and play. It was a change from Ladymoor.
I can recall the names of quite a few of my friends. They were mainly girls but a few boys too. There was Lily, Lucy and Doris Tyre, Emily Morris, Lucy Richards, Ethel and Alice Paling, Renee Smith and Lucy Francis. The boys I recall were Bill Turner, Bill Smith, Edgar Paling, Cyril Cooper, Albert and Freddy Sharratt, Eric Morris, Billy Williams.
At Christmas there were some parties but I was away at Christmas so I probably missed any big ones. We were always away at Christmas as Mum worked at the Christmas circus fun fair at the Olympia in London. Dad didn’t come with me to London as he was working at Guy’s. On the last day of term the teachers used to give us a bag to take home. It contained an apple, an orange, some nut and maybe some sweets. I think they made up the bags themselves.
We used to go to the fair at Deepfields each year but not to work. It was quite a big fair with steam driven rides, carousels, cakewalk, and a switchback. I think there was even a dodgem car ride. There was the usual selection of stalls, sweets, roll a penny, coconut and peanuts. There was a coconut shy and a stall selling gingerbread. I am not certain now where the fair was held. I think it was on a piece of open land between the canal and the railway lines but I was only 12 when I left and it was so long ago that it is now all a bit faint.
In September we would start collecting bats. These were large pieces of coal that we uncovered in the waste land behind the pub. I didn’t know what had been in the field but it must have been a spoil heap for the Ladymoor coal mine. I know people used to dig out the bats from the field. It wasn’t good coal as it used to spit when it was burnt. We collected all these together at Granny Williams or Lily Tyre’s house and made a big pile come November the 5th. In the afternoon an adult would light the pile of bats so that by the time school finished the bonfire was burning nicely. A few days before November 5th Dad used to take me into Bilston to buy fireworks. He only bought a few bangers. He used to choose all the pretty ones like fountains, crackerjacks, rockets and sparklers. We would take the fireworks to the field by the bonfire and give them in to a collecting point. They would then be set off by a grownup between 5.30 and 8.00. The grownups would roast potatoes in the embers of the bonfire. We had a guy on the top of the fire too.
The Spanish onion man used to call each year. He had strings of onions on his bicycle.
How did you parents entertain themselves?
They sometimes went to the pub. Dad used to read the “Daily Sketch” and the “News of the World”. Mum used to read “The World’s Fair” that she had ordered from a newsagent in Bilston. It was a trade paper about the travelling fairs and circus world. She used it to keep up with her pals in the business. I don’t know much as I was in bed early in the winter and out playing in the summer. Mum used to knit a lot.
When did you leave Ladymoor?
We left Ladymoor in 1930. Mum took me out of school, sold the caravan and we moved to London to return to the precarious life of seaside and circus entertainment. She ran cafes and had her own Palmist business in various seaside resorts and in the winter worked the Bertram Mills’ Circus Fun Fair at the Olympia. At other times we demonstrated gadgets at exhibitions, always on the move, travelling round the country, a new place every week. I look back to Ladymoor with fond affection for the six settled years of childhood. It’s the time of my life I remember best.
What did you like about Ladymoor?
Ladymoor was a pleasant place, in the country, in the middle of factories, railway lines and the canals. It always seemed special. However childhood memories are often untouched by reality. The reality was the industrial mess of the Black Country and I suppose that the place I recall has long since disappeared. Like everything else, times change and the wonderful spectacle of the tipping the steel against the night sky is a long gone. It was a beautiful sight; one I vividly recall. The orange red reflection in the sky lives with me now, a cherished memory.

|A Parallel Story To "Brokeback Mountain"|
By Gary M
Ihave recently read the short story on which the movie, "Brokeback Mountain" is based and I almost felt like I was reading my life story. I wept most of the way through. I could not wait to see this wonderful movie.
Here is a bit of my story. My best friend gave me the name "The Colorado Kid" so I am reclaiming it because of "Brokeback Mountain." "My Ennis" was the most handsome masculine man I had ever known. He taught me to ride horses, handle a firearm, hunt and do many of the things that Jack and Ennis do in the movie. He even gave me a "friendship ring." The only thing lacking was we never consummated our relationship sexually. But the hugs and terms of endearment were nourishing to our bodies and souls.
He was the love of my life. Our camping and hunting adventures were in the 1970's in Colorado, Wyoming and Alaska when we were just a little bit older than Jack and Ennis. We both were in denial of what we were experiencing and considered it a Bible style Jonathan--David type relationship. When do two straight men exchange rings and write love poems to each other?
We were both fundamentalist pastors and he finally said with tears that we should cool our public expressions of friendship or someone might get the wrong idea. Talk about denial. I was a fundamentalist pastor for 25 years and was the same kind of homophobe that we see in the hateful right wing movement today. I could preach some of the most hate filled messages against homosexuality and at the same time be struggling with desires for my best friend and some of the men in my congregation. I was trying desperately to convince myself that I was not gay. My "Buddy" and I even helped to found the Moral (immmoral) Majority in the state of Colorado.
At the same time I was secretly seeking counsel to rid myself of these desires that I had not chosen.
I thought in getting married, having children and serving God that I would be healed. I suspected that I was gay at 22 but did not once act on it for 16 years. It was sheer hell. I tried every theory and therapy available to change including exorcism. I even fasted one time for 20 days thinking that would cleanse me of these forbidden thoughts.
Finally after seriously considering suicide and then opting to live I had my first adult same-sex relationship and finally found out what passion was all about and that this was the real me. I left the ministry because I could not continue being a hypocrite. I confided for the first time to "My Ennis" that I was gay and that I was leaving the ministry. He wept and said it was his fault that if he had been a better friend I would not have become gay.
On my recommendation my church asked him to be their new pastor. He walked into a very good paying position with a large congregation and a private school. My intent was to quietly walk away saying that I was taking a leave because of stress in my life which was only part of the story. I purposed to not embarrass my family or hurt the ministry I had worked so hard to build. This was not to be.
Time has proven that "My Ennis" really was in love with me and my coming out scared him to death as he even dreamed that he was also becoming gay. He became so afraid he would also be suspected if the real reason for my leaving the ministry got out. Therefore in order to protect himself he denounced and outed me and I lost all of my so-called friends. He quickly wiped his tears and told me that if I did not repent within one year God would either kill me or one of my children. When that did not happen a year later he said, "This proves you have been a fraud from the beginning." He even tried to get my wife to dump me. See what a hate filled religion can do to two people who love each other?
I walked away from my faith believing that God hated me and had played a cruel joke on me. My wife who truly had become my soul mate was the only one who exemplified God's love. I did not know that my "Buddy" had encouraged her to leave me until 20 years later when he confessed this to me. He said she told him that although she might have grounds to leave me the Bible did not command her to do so and she would only leave if I left her. I honestly wondered how she could stay with me. I would even bring some of my boyfriends home to meet her. I was so blind and did a lot of stupid things.
I believe perhaps one reason she was able to deal with this without hating me was that she had seen the pain and struggle I had gone through for years trying to change before I ever acted on my orientation. Consequently she knew that it was not a choice that I had made. Gay men and straight women can be soul mates and best friends which was certainly true in our case. The problem is that there is no real sexual chemistry no matter how hard they try.
So-called ex-gays who get married when pressed hard enough have to admit they can only have sex with their wives when they fantasize about another man. My friends, that is not healing but deception and if you want to use Bible terms "mental adultery." Years later "My Ennis" asked for my forgiveness and quoted from memory a poem he had written about our love and friendship. For a moment I was elated in thinking we could at least be friends once again, but he again ran from our friendship because he continues to be afraid that people will get the wrong idea.
It took me 20 years of trying to make up for lost time. "So many men and so little time." I was like a kid in a candy store. All of this was great fun, but without a committed love relationship it became rather hollow. I wanted a love relationship like I had with my "Buddy" and which is illustrated to a point in the story about Jack and Ennis. I then went on a search to sort things out.
Who the Real God is
I met some wonderful gay Christians at www.ecwr.com and this changed my life. On this journey I got a new understanding of who the real God is and let me tell you God is not the God of the hateful fundamentalists. I came to realize that God had actually created me as a gay man and loved me just as I am. I began to once again walk with God but this time as an openly gay man. I would encourage anyone to rent Del Shores' movie, "Sordid Lives." It presents this message with great humor, but accurately and in a powerful manner. Del was a Southern Baptist preacher's son and the movie tells his life story and how he also comes to the conclusion that God loves him "just as I am."
When I began to reconcile my faith and sexuality my wife and I had to then decide what to do about our marriage. I had spent 20 years breaking my marriage vows. I either needed to be honest and ask my wife for a divorce or make a commitment to be celibate and renew our vows. She knew I couldn't change my gay orientation but I promised her that I would be faithful to her and be celibate to honor her. I had experienced enough promiscuity to last a life time and was not sure there was a male life partner out there who would want me and share my new goals for life. Also, I did not want to lose my best friend. I asked her if she could live without sexual intimacy and she replied that should be easy as she had managed that for many years.
She stated that if we could nurture each other emotionally and spiritually that would be enough. That is exactly what happened for the next three years. She became very involved in our Evangelicals Concerned ministry and became one of the teachers. Her love and acceptance blessed many of God’s gay and lesbian children. She was finally able to also come out of the closet as the wife of a gay man.
I had no idea when we exchanged our vows that within three years she would be diagnosed with stage IV brain cancer and I would lose her. It was my privilege to care for her the last 10 months of her life. It truly was a labor of love for the one who had shown so much unconditional love for me. The Christian Gay community had a special memorial service for her and many testimonies and tears were shared regarding her unconditional love. She became the “mother and big sister” that many had never had.
The question is: "Should we have divorced years earlier when we were young and could have each found someone who was truly meant for each of us?" Yes, and that is what I counsel today. It was very unfair that she never got to experience "the unconditional love" that she so freely tried to bestow on me. My children today love me rather than hate me and it is because of their mother and the way they saw her treat me. In all honesty though I believe each of them would agree that we should have been free to each find the right life mate. This could have happened and because of our friendship we would still have been good parents.
Claiming the Birthright
Today I live my life as a 66 year old single gay Christian man. If God sees fit to bring Mr. Right into my life I am open to that possibility but I am only interested in a life long committed relationship. I feel a desire to model for younger generations that it is possible to be Gray, Godly, Gay and very Happy. I spend my free time counseling and encouraging those gay men and lesbian women of all generations that they can claim their gay birthright and still have a spiritual life. They don't have to pretend to be straight, get married and end up hurting those they love most in this life. That is the biggest regret of my life in how my struggle affected my wife and children. What a horrible fate so-called Christians including (ex-gay ministries) are forcing on us by promising us we can change. This is a lie because God did indeed create us as "God's gay and lesbian children."
I challenge anyone reading this to not hate yourself but accept your God given birthright. Doing so has changed my life and given me peace, which I now have the privilege of sharing with one of my sons, who is bisexual as well as a host of "GLBT kids," that God has entrusted into my care. Wow, I am back in the ministry but now sharing God's love instead of hate.
Please email me if I can be an encouragement to any of you out there. Please join me in forgiving and praying for those who hate us and would like to deny us our rightful birthright.
If you want to check out the Web sites for "Broke Back Mountain," here are two of the best:
You can find the short story on which the movie is based at:
The Colorado Kid

The Mute Alpha
"I can't go on like this anymore, Jaxton," her voice quivered as she tried to make her voice steady but failed. "You don't act like you want me, but whenever I try to leave you just drag me back." Her eyes held my gaze. A raindrop rolled down her lower lip. "It's not fair."
The rain started pouring even harder, making it difficult to see anything but my mate in front of me. The towering trees didn't help protect us from the water, but at this moment I didn't care. Thunder rumbled off in the distance and the dark sky lit up with lightning.
"If you don't want me, why keep me around?" she asked. I growled in anger. That was enough to make me move towards her, determined to show her that she was completely wrong about the way I feel about her. Her eyes widened as she took a step away, but not far enough. My hands shot out and cupped her face, bringing her closer to me.
I don't know what happened next it just happened without me even thinking. My mouth parted as I leaned my forehead against her's, our lips only inches apart. "Mine," I growled lowly, only audible for the both of us to hear.
Not being able to speak is difficult, especially for an Alpha with a large pack. Alpha Jaxton is the Alpha of the Solar Eclipse Pack. After a tragic incident that happened to him when he was a pup, he hasn't spoken. Only through mind-links with his Beta has he been able to communicate.
One night at a gathering of all of the East Coast packs he discovers his mate, but there is a problem. He can't speak to her. Not knowing her name or what pack she's from, he tries to find her with the help of his Beta.
Awesome cover by: @Kira_t10

(I received a free copy of this book in exchange for a review).
(This review may contain spoilers).
I’d give this novella 3.5 stars. Although I found the plot fairly intriguing, I did think that too much of the story’s events were summarised at the beginning of the story. It would have been nice to see more of Claudia’s interactions with her parents and some of her learning about her abilities.
I did find Berenicia to be an intriguing character, even though I couldn’t understand why she was so hostile most of the time. Even by the end of the book, it didn’t make it clear why the demons were after only her.
It was interesting to see Claudia also trying to learn about the history of the society, though I was really confused about why they had the registry in the first place. I really didn’t like Jude as a character and I felt he fell really easily into the trap of a two-dimensional villain.
I liked the hints of the society and it would have been good to learn more about the world. It was nice to see Claudia’s interactions with the other students and I was a bit amused by one of the guys she met. Although he came across as a thug to begin with, I thought he was shown to be a character with more depth than he first appeared to have. And I did find him to be a bit amusing at times.
I would have liked a bit more detail about the university and how the students end up joining. I also would have liked to see more of Claudia’s flatmates. I do have to say… Claudia has a lot more patience than I would have with certain characters.
This novella was really easy to read, but I felt the storyline and characters weren’t expanded upon. While this could be because I haven’t yet read the other books in this series, I do think the world could have been explored more than it actually was, especially in regards to the other characters’ families and the fortune-teller. I found her really interesting and would have liked a bit more detail about her.
I do have the other books on my Kindle… and I am hoping that the next books will have more details on the world and the characters.

An officer doing a welfare check on Henry Hamilton, 64, found his body last Thursday, Keysnet.com reported. Police Officer Anna Dykes said empty bottles that had contained Xanax and Seroquel were found near the body and the slogan "F--k Obama" was written on a wall.
Michael Cossey, Hamilton's partner, told investigators that Hamilton was anxious about his business, Tropical Tan, and was angry about the outcome of the election. Cossey said he and Hamilton watched the results come in election night -- the last time he saw him.
"If Barack gets re-elected, I'm not going to be around," Cossey quoted his partner as saying.

I taught high school for only a few years, but lost three students along the way. One died of suicide (which was perhaps the worst day of my life), one died of a freak illness and another died in a hiking incident. It has been nearly 20 years, but rarely a week goes by that I don’t think of them and feel for them. I can still see and hear each of them, and I will (barring brain damage) never forget them.
When I was a high school teacher, I tried to lead by example. So, if my students were doing something, I did the same activity. For example, if my students were watching a movie, I watched the movie (even if I’d seen it 100 times before). If my students were working on a class project, I was working with them on the group project (by going group to group and sitting with each group). And if they had silent reading, I read a book too. Never ever did I grade papers or do prep for another class while class was in session (as my mentor teacher said, if I am telling the students something is important but then not doing it myself, I’m sending the wrong message – so i tried to model the same behavior, and I feel like it helped me build bonds with my students). But I am thinking of one time in particular during silent reading, when I was reading along with my students but the book I was reading was hilarious (it might have been Confederacy of Dunces) so I kept chuckling; I noticed (out of the corner of my eye, since a teacher always tries to keep the peripheral vision going for obvious reasons 🙂 ) the students exchanging smiles then one finally said, not unkindly, “We can’t concentrate because you are laughing.” Then the entire class laughed. I loved that moment. It was a tender moment and thinking of it makes me miss my students. Those students were 16 at the time, and would all be in their 30s today. Wild to think about. But that moment is frozen in time in my memory.
We attended a community (rotary) luncheon where Daughter L was awarded student of the month. She is one of those great teens who doesn’t get a lot of attention because she is low maintenance (but on the other hand all the attention she gets is generally positive), so it was nice that she got some attention yesterday, and also she gave a thoughtful speech where she talked about the perspective she’s learned in school. I was happy for her, that all the blood sweat and tears she puts into school was recognized yesterday.
Another student who was there (was student of the month at another school) was impressive: she gave a thoughtful and heartfelt speech, wants to enter the Army or Marine Corps since her family all did that, then attend law school and become a District Attorney to give a voice to all people. I loved that. I hope she keeps that passion.

I always had a lucid image of what I wanted to become. Having had everything in my life planned out; I believed everything would go according to that plan. What I did not know is that life is like a box of chocolates. You never know what you are going to get. Clearly, I did not know what I was getting myself into by not eating; I was getting myself into an eating disorder that would shortly take over my life. I let anorexia nervosa consume me, and I let it take my life away from me. I missed out on memories, experiences, and my second semester of junior year. Having always adored school; it broke my heart that I could not attend for half a year. The moment I had the opportunity to finish my high school, I made a promise to myself that I would not let anyone, or anything, take from my education. Facing an eating disorder helped me determine my purpose in life. My goals are to grow intellectually as an individual and achieve my dreams of becoming a psychiatrist. My eating disorder made me realize learning and informing myself about nutrition is important; educating myself taught me how to manage my eating disorder. Overall, education is a way to expand horizons and knowledge, which leads to development.
On the first day of my junior year, I put on a fake smile and acted as if everything was fine, but I felt as if there was a vicious monster that was spreading like wildfire inside of me. I was aware that I had an eating disorder, but I just did not know what to do about it. A few times I attempted to recover on my own; however, it felt as if I was losing something important when I stopped my atrocious behaviors. The sense of control my eating issues gave me is what I enjoyed. I controlled what I consumed, when I exercised, and what my body looked like. I enjoyed the feeling and results of my disorder because it made me feel as if I could control something in my life. Never had I ever felt as if I had a sense of control with school, but it was always important to me. I always attempted to strive for perfection with my schoolwork. For the first few weeks of school, I was able to manage, but my eating disorder started to take an enormous toll on my life. Being so fixated on the way my body looked instead of my schoolwork resulted in me doing poorly in school. As weeks passed my grades got lower and lower, and so did my self-esteem. I did not want to leave my house at all which resulted into severe depression.
My parents started to become tremendously worried about me. I was not eating, and I would start bawling if someone would comment about my weight. I was confined to my bedroom and would stay in there all day when I arrived from school. I would not converse with anyone at school; I would isolate myself from all my friends. While I was walking to my AP Chemistry class, I felt very lightheaded. I ended up fainting at school; the school nurse called an ambulance and the paramedics took me to the Emergency Department. My parents found out about my eating disorder, and I was placed into an inpatient eating disorder unit.
Once I was medically stable, I arrived at the inpatient facility. The paramedics led me to my room, and I sat on the bed. Sitting there shivering and crying all night I started to lose myself. I could not believe I let my eating disorder get this far. I thought I was not worthy of getting help. I believed I deserved what was happening to me; however, as the days went by I started to accept the help. I made progress every single day. I was starting to miss school and my old life; I wanted to get out of inpatient. We had an hour of school every day, and it was my favorite part of the day. I missed school and doing schoolwork. During that hour I was able to complete my work and research about nutrition. We would have classes about nutrition and the functions of the human body. Each day I was beating my eating disorder because I was replacing delusions with facts. I was obtaining knowledge, and the deceptions in my mind shortly faded away.
I thought I was getting better, but my psychiatrist told me otherwise. My doctor said I was close to getting a nasogastric tube. I was beyond crushed because I thought I was making progress. I gave up, and I stopped working towards my goals. Having become dehydrated, I had an IV for three weeks, became sick, and felt weak. I could not walk anymore and had to be in a wheelchair. One morning I arose and was tired of living that way, and I wanted to get my life back. I realized I had to learn in order to change my habits. I started to ask my doctor and treatment team more questions. I started informing myself, and I began to develop a healthier lifestyle. Education helped me grow as a person. Learning about nutrition and the body helped me out of my disorder. Learning ignited a passion inside of me; I realized I had goals and dreams. I knew I would only reach those dreams by feeding myself, and I became motivated to make a full recovery.
I was transforming into the person I wanted to become. I finally got out of inpatient and went to a partial hospitalization program. Being there I learned even more and more. As my knowledge expanded it helped me build opinion, and I started to have a point of view on things. I started to develop my values and put my energy into education. Education helped me form ideas, and led me to a healthier lifestyle.
At this point I had missed half a year of school. My parents and I decided to start homeschooling. I began homeschooling, and ended up finishing it all during the summer. I graduated from high school a year early! Education is beyond important; there are so many misleading facts out there. One needs to do extensive research from credible sources before doing something that can harm their body. Day by day eating got easier for me. There were days I wanted to quit, but I always went back to the facts. I knew I had to eat in order to function. Education helped me out of my eating disorder because I learned about nutrition, and that made understand what I was putting into my body. Learning made me value factual information; I did not value this much before.
Education and learning were an illuminating light in a darkened tunnel for me. Education helped me get my life back on track. I am in college now and one step closer to becoming a psychiatrist. I went from thinking that my eating disorder would take my life to becoming the happiest I have ever been. My happiness is from educating myself about the things I knew nothing about. I was doing things that were destroying my body, and I did not know the consequences of my actions. Education shined into my life and helped me develop and change as a person. Learning has become one of my biggest priorities and that will never change. My eating disorder was a dark time for me, but having let light shine out of darkness. I let my eating disorder become a learning experience for me. I am now able to face the world from a new perspective. I have now become a stronger person because of my eating disorder, and I have developed in ways that I never knew I could. Life has ups and downs, but at the end things do get better.
- Dietary Supplements Essay Example
- Essay on Christianity. A Team Project
- My Favorite Performer Essay Example
- My First Experience in Programing Essay Example
- My Physical and Mental Development Essay Example
- My Travel Experience Essay
- Support I Receive From My Family Essay Example
- The Attacks of 9/11 Essay Example
- Volunteering Essay Example
- What is NAFTA Essay Example

A 64 year old woman was attacked on the south side of Chicago last Friday by three pit bull dogs. The dogs attacked the lady leaving her in critical condition upon her arrival at the hospital and killed the dog she was walking. The owner of the three dogs tried to stop the attack but was also attacked by the dogs. Leaving her in stable condition. The 64 year old women condition has been upgraded to stable. The three attacking dogs have been taken into custody by animal control.

A month after announcing her shocking split from James Kennedy, ‘Vanderpump Rules’ star Raquel Leviss is sharing the reason the pair went their separate ways.
Raquel Leviss, 27, and James Kennedy, 29, were a Vanderpump Rules staple couple for more than five years until they announced their split via Instagram on Dec. 5, 2021. Although Raquel somewhat explained the reasoning in the post by sharing the pair had “two different goals” and weren’t “in love anymore,” she’s now revealing more intimate details as to why she and James ultimately called it quits.
“There wasn’t one thing, it was like a cumulation of things,” Raquel explained on VPR co-star Scheana Shay‘s Scheananigans podcast this past week. “At Thanksgiving … James has always felt like my parents haven’t embraced him into the family the way he wanted to be accepted. My dad said some rude comment to him about him not wearing the hiking shoes he bought him when James asked for my dad’s blessing. He couldn’t find them, he was looking all over,” Raquel explained. “James was taken aback. He took it very personally. He took it as a knock to his ego and reacted in a way my sister says was not acceptable. And I agree, it wasn’t. Just like very angry and defensive and it go to the point where I was like, ‘Okay, we need to get out of here, go back to our hotel room and sort it all out.’”
The reality star went on to share that she realized she had been “making excuses for him” and that “part of [her] soul” was being taken from her. “It was getting to the point where my family and him were not meshing well and the future of Thanksgiving and Christmases and holidays was looking like it’s either going to be either James or my family,” she added. “Especially like if we had a baby, I feel like James would make my parents out as like the not good grandparents and kind of put that in their heads. Just foreseeing this future and what it was all coming down to and I was like, ‘I don’t want that.’”
After the 27-year-old came to understand her relationship with the DJ was one she no longer wanted to pursue, she hesitated to share her feelings with her fiancé out of fear for his reaction. “Because James does have a history of acting out and being angry, my mom and I were both concerned that he wasn’t going to have a good reaction when I told him, so I wasn’t planning on saying anything until he went out of town. He doesn’t even know this,” she continued, adding that she even went on a trip to Disneyland with VPR co-stars Ariana Madix and Tom Sandoval, where Raquel felt like she was “[putting] on an act … just to make sure that I was safe.”
The SURver added that James pleaded for another change, but Raquel had finally reached her breaking point — and James finally got it. “He was like, ‘Okay, I see it in your eyes. It’s over,’” she stated noting her surprise at how calm he had been acting the whole conversation. “He respected my decision. He was like, ‘If your heart isn’t in it anymore then I understand, we need to go our separate ways.’”
As for where they currently stand, Raquel shared that they still like each others’ posts on Instagram and speak “occasionally.” She also shared she was open to James seeing her dog, Graham Cracker, for playdates.

Zion Baptist Church
Thursday, April 27, 2017
Baptist Missionary Association of America
If you have any questions or comments about any of the sermons, ministry, missions, or the devotional, please write to us.
By Mrs. Connie Reifsteck - March 2010
A Gentile Shows Her Faith
W - willing to seek the Lord
vs. 21 & 22 Jesus headed toward Tyre and Sidon, two seaport cities which were among predominately heathen and Gentile people.
She came out. Jesus had gone to this area maybe to avoid the anger of the Pharisees which resulted from His public exposure of their hypocritical faultfinding. Read the beginning of chapter 15 for "the rest of the story." We don't know if Jesus actually got within the "city limits" or was just out of town or what, but we know He was in the area. This woman knew to come and look for him.
She showed faith in that she believed He could help her daughter, based on what she had head about Jesus.
She worshiped Jesus in the course of their exchange.
O - obstinate in her appeal
vs. 22 She cried out to Him (this is the first time)
She was prayerfully appealing, speaking out loud her request. "Have mercy on me, O Lord, Son of David!" The suffering of her demon possessed daughter obviously distressed her very much, and caused her great anguish. Her child was harassed by the demon spirit. Like their master, the devil, these demon spirits seek out those whom they can devour.
By calling out to Jesus in this way, she was acknowledging Him as the Son of David, which He was. He didn't answer her, or seem to even acknowledge she was speaking to Him (vs. 23). (It wasn't until she addressed Him as "Lord" in verses 25 and then in verse 27 that Jesus responded favorably.)
Apparently she was causing such a fuss she might have been attracting a crowd, and the disciples were getting embarrassed; or maybe they were fearful they might be mobbed in this foreign country. And she was disturbing their effort to find some peace and rest after having had their verbal skirmish with the Pharisees. It's almost like they want Jesus to give this woman what she wants so she'll go away and leave them alone. They weren't as concerned about her situation and the problem of her daughter as they were fearful that she would keep creating a scene and drawing attention to them.
But even with the disciples' entreaty to do something about this woman, Jesus seems to respond negatively. He says "I was not sent except to the lost sheep of the house of Israel." In Matthew 10:5&6 Jesus gave instructions to his disciples saying the same thing. Read Psalm 79:12, The Gentiles and the heathen were not His priority. He was sent first to the Jews. He said this to His disciples where this woman could hear Him. This was a reminder to her of her hateful ancestry, and her inherited hopeless case of Jewish unconcern. Jesus was not for her or her people. (At least, not at this time. John 1:11, 12; Acts 13:46; Romans 9:4 explains when Jesus became available to the Gentiles.)
Then in vs. 25 she cries out again, but this time she cries out in worship. She has come of her own choosing, appealing, with humility and perseverance, worshiping Him. This cry, "Lord, help me!" This cry was a salvation, a distress, a rescue appeal, and Jesus would respond, because He kept talking to her, even though He wasn't yet answering her direct plea.
Still Jesus seems not inclined to help her, telling her it wasn't meet to take he children's bread and give it to dogs. What Jesus had to offer had to first be offered to the Jews, God's chosen people. The dogs were the Gentiles and heathen, people separated from the covenant of promise to Abraham.
And this is what opened the door for more conversation between Jesus and this Gentile woman. Because now she responds to Jesus, Yes the dogs don't get the hunk of bread, but they do get the crumbs that fall from the table. She conceded the priority of Jewish first claim on Jesus; but then seizes on that term of dog, something unclean, to acknowledge her moral uncleanness, and showing that she and her daughter had a need that only Jesus could satisfy.
M - mindful of things going on in the world
This woman must have heard of Jesus, and of the miracles He had performed. She must have been aware of the kinds of miracles He did, to bring her specific case to Him. She was willing to go to Him to receive a miracle.
A - acted to fix her situation
She admitted she had a need, the healing of her daughter. She knew somehow that Jesus was going to be in her area. She went out to meet him and make her appeal. She acknowledged Him as Lord, and obstinately hung on, making her plea.
N - necessity drove her to seek a solution
Her daughter needed to be made whole. She had heard about someone who could help. It was necessary for her to persevere, and keep on asking for help, even in the face of Jesus' refusal.
After she acknowledged to Jesus by the crumbs and dog analogy that she was not worthy, and not His priority, still He was Lord, and could meet her needs. And because of that attitude, Jesus answered her "o woman, great is thy faith! Be it unto thee even as thou wilt." He heeded her cry. And "her daughter was made whole from that very hour." She was made completely well from the emotional and mental bondage in which she had been held by demon power.
Now Jesus is speaking directly to her, and answering her pleas favorably. He acknowledges her earnestness and humility and worship with immediate action. This is such a special contrast for Who He is, and treat Him accordingly.
When Jesus liberates us, sets us free, we are fee indeed.

28 letters, years of writing, 11-year-old RTI activist gets reply from PMO
Kanpur (Uttar Pradesh), Oct 13 (ANI): After years of writing letters to Prime Minister, an 11-year-old RTI activist finally received a reply from Prime Minister Officer (PMO). The activist namely Sarthak Tripathi had so far written 28 letters to Prime Minister but did not receive any reply. Sarthak wrote letters requesting the PM to investigate about the people who maneuvered against his father to get him fired from his job. The young boy then decided to write to RTI to seek help. Sarthak's father was working in Kanpur regional Stock Exchange, which was shut four years ago as it was in loss. The PMO has reverted to Sarthak assuring him that investigation will be conducted into the matter.

Saturday, December 11, 2010
From Puppy Raiser to Placement--The Journey Of A Service Dog
Polar quickly became a beloved part of our family and community. We loved taking him everywhere with us and he made friends everywhere we went. He attended School Events, Church services, trumpet lessons, dance classes, marching band rehearsals, Dr. Appts and pretty much everything else we did. Polar grew up coming to my classes and wowed everyone with his talents. I would send weekly Pup Dates to Service Dogs of Virginia along with Video of his progress and loved sharing stories of all his antics, and there were many .
Polar has more personality than any dog I have ever raised. He went through a ‘curious’ phase and ate my sons iPod, the keys off my husbands laptop, random pieces of lawn furniture, knocked our X-Mas Tree over and it broke in half. He used to enjoy hiding in my kids bathtub and would wait for them to come in so he could jump out and surprise them. His grand finale was eating a bar of soap, I think he was finally trying to 'clean up his act'.
But for all his antics Polar was the most amazing dog to train and work with. He LOVED to work and learned things quickly. He was rock solid in public and always amazed me at how he could handle stressful or new situations. As a trainer I’ve learned to look beyond the silly behaviors as those are trainable and look more at the dogs work ethic. I knew that with time and maturity Polar would be an awesome service dog.
Being a Puppy Raiser is a labor of love and an amazing experience for myself and my family. To know that you played a part in something that has such a big impact on someones life is a blessing.
Polar returned to Charlottesville at 16 months of age and moved in with his next Foster Family who continued his advanced training and kept him out of trouble during his teenage years. His advanced training lasted approximately 1 1/2 years. During this time the trainers at SDV were busy teaching him new skills and determining who they would place him with.
In December 2009 Polar was placed with Luke Morris, a young man who was injured in a diving accident and sustained a spinal cord injury leaving him paralyzed from the chest down. Polar helps Luke with daily tasks such as opening doors, picking up dropped items and even assists him in getting dressed. Along with being Lukes Service Dog, Polar is his constant companion. Luke enjoys the outdoors and Polar is always at his side and ready to partake in any and all activities, especially Mudd Bogging which involves driving a pickup truck into a mudd pit.
On December 5, 2010 I had the honor of attending Polar and Lukes Graduation in Charlottesville Virginia. My husband John and I spent our first day in Virginia visiting Luke and Polar. We had not seen Polar since his return to Charlottesville in March 2008. It was a thrilling moment to see Polar after all this time, no longer a puppy but a working Service Dog. There is so much emotion, we were so happy to see Polar, after all we raised him from a small puppy, but now he is all grown up and has a new life.
People would often ask me how we could give him back, wouldn’t it be too hard. Of course you grow very attached to your foster puppy but there is a bigger picture. While we enjoyed having Polar with us and loved him like he was our own dog, we knew that the person who would someday receive him as their Service Dog would have a relationship that goes beyond just a family companion. We knew that Polar would change someones life, give them more independence and become their best and most trusted friend.
Since Polar has been with Luke I have become Face Book Friends with his Mom Linda. We have communicated via Face Book for the past year sharing stories and pictures and she has always affirmed that all our hard work was worth it. When Linda speaks about Luke and Polar and the bond between them, I can hear the joy in her voice. When I met Linda in person I felt as if we had been friends for years. We will forever be connected to the Morris Family through the wonderful and amazing Polar.
We are now anxiously awaiting the arrival of our next Puppy from Service Dogs of Virginia :)

I remember being in the loft all night at 4 Chamberlain Avenue on the night of the floods.
My sister Jean had been taken to the top of the road to Miss Sartens shop by Colin Norrington and he came back for us but by that time he couldn’t get out so he spent the night in the loft with Mum, Dad me and the dog.
Meanwhile Jean was taken to Benfleet with several others. We were rescued in the morning by boat and re-united with her at Benfleet.
My Dad didn’t fare too well and it affected his health.

The visit by Rahul Gandhi to the Sangareddy district in Telangana is being compared to the one made by Indira Gandhi in 1979. Many in the Telangana Congress who were present at the 1979 rally drew similarities with the one addressed by Rahul Gandhi on Thursday.
Indira Gandhi had launched a poll campaign in 1979 after the Congress had been wiped out by the Janata Party wave in 1977. By 1980 Indira returned to power with a massive mandate by winning the Medak Lok Sabha seat under which the Sangareddy district falls.
Congressmen say that the situation is similar today. Rahul Gandhi chose the same venue that his grandmother had in 1979. The Congress leaders who were part of the Indira rally say that Rahul too drew a huge crowd which was cheering him. It was very similar and Rahul will create the magic that Indira did said that Congress leaders who were part of the rally.
A Congress leader Narasaiah told a newspaper that he was 25 years old when Indira addressed the rally back in 1979. It was the same ground and during that rally she promised jobs. After she won the Medak seat she set up many industries which led to the creation of lakhs of jobs, he also said.

Oprah Winfrey regrets rushing into launching her OWN TV network last year, confessing she was unaware of how "difficult" it would be to turn her channel into a success.
OWN, a joint venture between the media mogul and bosses at Discovery Communications, went live in January, 2011, five months before Winfrey's long-running talk show wrapped, after 25 years on air.
The star admits she would have seriously reconsidered going into the cable network business had she been more informed about the difficulties and troubles she would encounter.
During an appearance on breakfast show This Morning on Monday, she said, "The idea of creating a network was something that I'd wanted to do. Had I'd known that it was this difficult, I might have done something else.
"I did not think it was going to be easy... but if I knew then what I know now I might have made some different choices. I would say if I was writing a book about it, I could call the book 101 mistakes."
Detailing the biggest issue, she explained, "Launching when we really were not ready to launch, it's like having the wedding when you know you are not ready and you are walking down the aisle, and you are saying, 'I don't know... maybe we should have postponed it.'"
Comedienne Rosie O'Donnell's talk show became the first scheduling victim when it was scrapped after one series in March, while Winfrey also had to lay off 30 members of staff at the struggling company as part of restructuring measures.

Even though he is married with two daughters, a man has admitted that he has cheated on his wife many times.
Despite being married, a Kaneshie-based phone repairer named James Obeng appears to have chopped over 15 women outside of his relationship.
James Obeng revealed in an interview with First Lady on BrownGH TV’s “Adwuma Adwuma” show that he used to have a lot of side chicks but that he no longer does due to the country’s difficulty.
He suggested that because of the economic difficulty in the country, he can’t afford to take side chicks.
“Before, I cheated on my wife, but now I have quit. I’ve cheated on my wife with more than 15 other women. Since I am a guy, it’s natural ” James Obeng said.
The phone repairer also disclosed that for his side chicks he spends and buys them ‘things’ such as brassiers, pads and [email protected] but not his wife.
James Obeng admitted that he liked doing business back while he was in school, which is why he became a phone repairer.
He disclosed that although he passed his BECE, because of financial restrictions, he could not continue his education after completing JHS.
Since he was unable to pursue his studies, James Obeng wanted to start his own phone company.
However according him, he began his phone repair company at the age of 18 and has relied on it to support his family.
Instead of dreaming about white-collar work, he urged the youth to concentrate on acquiring a profession or starting their own business.
Watch the following video:

I noticed one of our cats sitting next to the tree.
Then I noticed he wasn't drinking the pine flavored water they so love.
He was looking up into and circling the tree.
He is one of the young ones. The old ones and the lazier one were asleep.
My name is Guthrie and this is what I usually do.
Guthrie finally got my attention and it is amazing how long that took because he was noisy and in quite a focused panic. I was afraid he was going to climb the tree and that was not on my agenda. I really like putting the tree up only once.
Here is what I found in our tree.
He is ridiculously cute. Back in the college days, we used to have rats that come in our house through the power lines and would pilfer through my purse for cheerios (I had kids when I was in college just in case you thought maybe I never grew out of my cheerio stage!) and killed our Gerbil for his food. No love lost and they were not cute. This guy is totally cute. Cute can really work magic even if you are a rodent. That poops in the basement. And eats the bird seed. And makes a mess.
He is actually sitting in the tree cleaning himself like he has not a care in the world.
How did this story end? He finally came down from the tree and started sprinted through the house at amazing speeds. Guthrie is definitely after him first and then the other three rose from their slumber and joined the chase. They were in serious competition with my son (wearing leather gloves and who is not 10 years old, some might say he is a grown man with a soft spot for animals) who is now involved in the chase. The cats all caught him at least once but my son won. He put him in an old aquarium and fed him cheese (what else?) and parsnips. He going to keep him for a couple of days and let him go in the woods where he belongs. I am sure he knows the way back to our house but I don't have the heart to kill him or allow the cats to torture him to death.
To be honest, we have found a few mice lately. They aren't the ugly little rat type mice nor are they voles. Voles are no fun, they are stinky and weird and they fight back. These are the cute little mice that have numerous children stories written about them like When You Give a Mouse a Cookie. Now we have never had problems with mice or little varmints because we have cats. That is usually enough to keep them away. We live next to the woods and our neighbors without cats tell us stories. We were always like "We'll never have mice". We are eating out words this year. We have mice and there doesn't seem to be an end to them. They sure are brave little rascals.
That is the end of my mouse story but sadly not the end of the mice. I am sure there are more to come!

Megastar Chiranjeevi’s youngest son-in-law Kalyan Dev made his entry into Tollywood with the Vijeetha movie. Currently, Kalyan Dev is making a Super Machchi movie. The shooting started after the government gave a permit, but later film shooting ceased due to the corona virus. Kalyan was involved in the shooting while the corona was high.
Kalyan is now self-Quarantined due to the high number of coronary cases. He does not want his wife, Shrija and his daughters to risk. That is why Kalyan decided to stay in the same house.

The Great Gatsby
November 15, 2014
The Great Gatsby
In many cases, one can always find at least one significant similarity between author and his novels major character. F. Scott Fitzgerald is the author of the famous novel, The Great Gatsby. Fitzgerald uses his past experiences for the base of his main character, Jay Gatsby. By changing specific details, he gave Jay a life of his own.
A major similarity between the two is that they both fell madly in love with a woman, Gatsby fell for a married girl named Daisy Buchanan, and Fitzgerald fell for Zelda Sayre. Fitzgerald was commissioned a second lieutenant in the infantry and assigned to Camp Sheridan outside of Montgomery, Alabama. It was there that he met and fell in love with a girl named Zelda Sayre, the daughter of an Alabama Supreme Court judge. The war ended in November 1918, before Fitzgerald was ever deployed, he moved to New York City hoping to launch a career in advertising that was profitable enough to convince Zelda to marry him. Zelda, a girl coming from wealth, became very sick after being married to Fitzgerald and despite the strain on their relationship; her husband loved her to no end. This love is paralleled in Gatsby’s feelings towards Daisy. While the hardship for Fitzgerald and Zelda was her schizophrenia, Jay’s love for Daisy was put on hold when he was shipped out during World War I. before they were initially separated; his love for her was evident in this quote from The Great Gatsby, “Well, there I was, ‘way off my ambitions, getting deeper in love every minute, and all of a sudden I don’t care. What was the use of doing great things if I could have a better time telling her what I was going to do?” (Fitzgerald p. 150).
Daisy could not wait for a poor soldier; she married a rich man Tom. After Gatsby got out of the Army, he vowed to earn a lot of money so that he could win Daisy’s love back. He had previously faked his wealth with the help of his military status. Since he was now out of the military, he could not fake it and his love drove him to become upper class. He realized that he would never have a chance to win her love and her commitment without money. He went to work with Meyer Wolfsheim, who was thought to be guilty of fixing the results of the World Series in 1919. It was later found out that he was a bootlegger. He carried out his business through a great deal of drug stores that he owned. Yet, it is not enough to earn Daisy's commitment or pull her away from her beloved husband, Tom. Daisy never ends up leaving Tom for Gatsby. Like Gatsby, there was an affair involved in both relationships. Zelda cheated on Fitzgerald but he overlooked this and they stayed together. Daisy had an affair with Jay Gatsby and led him to believe that she was going to eventually leave her husband for him. But this dream of Gatsby’s never happened. Unlike Gatsby, Fitzgerald obtained and kept Zelda’s

Seat tube firmly attached by D-lock to street furniture; both wheels locked via a fairly stout flex to the D-lock; saddle rails chained to seat stays. (I liked the paintwork and the chain-wrap colouring.)
Yeah yeah, sorry. If the bike had been elsewhere, and if my camera had been blessed with manual focus as easy to use as it was before %@#$ing electronics invaded cameras, and if I hadn't felt I was trying Mrs Microcord's patience by staring at a parked pushbike, I could have photographed it a lot better. Or that's my story and I'm sticking to it.

This is what’s left of my grandfather’s stationery collection from the seventies and early eighties. He kept his pencils and fountain pens and notebooks in a special drawer and we would take them out sometimes and look at them together, carefully. (He died when I was 6 and he was my only friend till then). There were much more fountain pens and colored pencils, but I used them and gradually lost them in primary and secondary school. There were also more notebooks and I still have those as my diaries from high school. I could never bring myself to write in this last one though, the most melancholy notebook ever. Linking up with Vintage Bliss Tuesdays.

5. My wort mistake
BEEP BEEP Liam's horn sounded and I ran outside, "hi" I said as I got in his car, "hi, we are having dinner at my place" he said "sure" I answered. "Here it is" he said pointing to a large house "cool looking house" I tell him as we walk inside, he turns on the oven and sits on the couch next to me, he leans in and I can feel his breath hot on my face then the gap disappears and he kisses me. He gets up and takes dinner out the oven and we have dinner. "I was wondering if you want to sleep over" Liam asked "I will ask my mum" I say pulling out my phone "she said sure" I say to him so we go upstairs "we only have two beds so you will have to sleep with me" he said, I was shocked but agreed. We are lying in bed and he's facing me soon he's kissing me again, French kissing??? That's new, I think, soon he's on top of me help, I think. I slide out from under him. My phone goes off, I pick it up, it's from my brother Phonix, "where are you?" He asks so i reply "coming home" "who is it?" Liam asks, "mum she needs me home" i lie getting my bag. I have to walk home, when I get home I start crying.

The Trigger and Mark Walsh head for home from Cushinstown Finest and Jordan Gainford
© Photo Healy Racing
The Trigger made it five wins in a row with the minimum of fuss in the Toals Dial-A-Bet Check Out Our Exclusive D-A-B Specials Handicap Chase at Downpatrick.
Cushinstown Finest was still in there pitching at the final fence but it was fairly evident from Mark Walsh’s body language on The Trigger, that Colin Bowe’s mare was fighting a losing battle.
Under top-weight the Ronan McNally owned and trained successful Beneficial gelding eased on to register a four and a quarter length win.
McNally said: "We are in the mix for six now!
"We got him about three years ago and he was very sick when we got him. He won a few for us in between times but he used to bleed. We used to call him 'Trigger the frigger' but now we call him 'The Triggernator!"
"We sweeten him up at home and we don't gallop him and he is really fat. We always tried to work the weight off him and that was going against him. We were probably working him too hard but now we just brought him in after a break and the wee fella Tubbs rides him and we don't gallop him and we took him to the beach a couple of times.
"We let him run 70 percent fit at Tipperary and he got in front and just from then he has snowballed. He won at Kilbeggan then and after Kilbeggan he is transformed and just a different horse - he thinks he owns the yard. He is walking around with a swagger and winning more impressively every time. We don't know where it will stop to be honest.
"We take him home and he doesn't miss a nut. It used to be when we ran him he used to be slow at his food and he is a greedy horse so you knew that he was feeling the effects. He'll not miss a nut now and he is roaring at you.
"I do nothing with him at home - a few days in the field and a couple of days light canter. He is heavier today than he was at Galway, he's heavier today than he even was going to Tipperary. He's thriving and just improving.
"If he's in the same form going home today we'll have a look, it might be two weeks or it might be three weeks. You might never get him in that form again as he is 11.
"We try hard, we keep a small team and we keep them right and any money we need to spend on them we do it.
"The plan is week to week, but after he won in Tipperary me and Sean Flanagan talked about if we could get him up the handicap a bit he could go for one of the handicaps over the National fences at Aintree in spring because his jumping is outstanding. That's probably the long-term plan. There's a lot of steps to get him there but you can dream anyway.
"Mark (Walsh) said he relaxed better and he jumped well. When he got daylight he said he was away. He's a dream ride for a jockey.
"I would just like to dedicate that win to wee Katie Simpson who lost her life this morning in tragic circumstances. I'd like to dedicate it to her friends and family."
(MG & EM)
Tote €1.30 €1.30

In a study conducted by researchers at the University of Siena, researchers found that cartoons are twice as effective as mothers in alleviating pain felt by children during medical procedures, such as having a blood sample taken.
In the study, Carlo Belliene and his team from Le Scatte Clinic divided 69 children, aged between 7 and 12, into three groups at random.
AdvertisementOne group of kids started watching TV cartoons at least two minutes before the blood sample was taken by puncturing a vein. The second group of children didn't watch TV, but instead had their mothers to distract them when blood sample was taken. The third group of kids didn't watch TV or interact with their moms during the procedure.
The children and their mothers rated the pain after the procedure. Children who were given no distractions at all felt the pain most and gave a rating of 23.04, while those distracted by mother gave a rating of 17.39. Children watching cartoons gave the lowest pain rating of 8.91.
Mothers also agreed that television cartoons were the most effective giving a pain rating of 12.17, while they gave a rating of 21.30 if they had no involvement and 23.04 if they were trying to distract the child.
The study concludes that watching television may be more helpful than maternal attempts at trying to distract a child during medical procedures; however, the authors have said that this does not mean that the mothers should not accompany the children during such procedures as the children would later recall that they were not left alone in a stressful occasion, which could be important to them.

He was an ordinary man. There was nothing remarkable about him; unless you consider that he had partial paralysis on one side of his body; a result of a childhood illness. Aaron Woolcott did not let this physical limitation get in his way, or at least he didn’t think he did.
He played ball, he drove a car; he did pretty much what he wanted to do. But then, tragedy pushes Aaron to do some introspection where he sees himself in a new light. The Beginner’s Goodbye  by Anne Tyler follows a young widower as he deals with grief, thinking at first he had lost everything only to discover he had not yet found what he truly wanted.
Aaron had spent most of his life fighting the protection that his mother and sister tried to envelop him in. That’s why when he met Dorothy; he thought he had found the perfect mate. She was direct, a rather matter-of-fact type person. She did not feel the need to coddle him, nor did she flinch, as many did, the first time she was a passenger in his handicapped adapted car. One day, the unthinkable happened; Dorothy was tragically killed when a tree fell on their house -- moments after they had had a rather pointless and unsettled argument.
Aaron limps through the stages of loss; emotional paralysis, loneliness, grief. Going to work at the vanity press business started by his late father helps give him some focus and allows him to ignore many issues that he needs to deal with. It is until Dorothy begins “visiting” him that Aaron starts processing his emotions. As you might expect, he is the only one who can see these visitations, but he does not question their reality. He never knows when and where she will appear, or what, if anything, she will say. At first Aaron just enjoys these brief moments with the woman he loves and misses. In time though, he starts pushing the conversation in hopes of understanding not just his grief but the relationship he had with his wife. Was their marriage as good as he had thought it was?
The Beginner’s Goodbye is not driven by plot. As with other Anne Tyler books, she focuses on the foibles of characters as they encounter the trials of life. Her forte is having the pulse on the inner workings of the human heart. She realistically draws imperfect people with sympathy but not with sentimentality. Although it deals with grief, this is not a sad or maudlin book. Humor has its role in the day-to-day life Aaron encounters. I don’t need to explain this to Anne Tyler fans. This book fits the genre she has created for herself. Readers will not be disappointed.

Religion is a part of everything Mateo Kovacic does and any faith he has had in his place in the Real Madrid team has been rewarded given that the Croatian is enjoying one of his best spells in the white shirt.
He maintains that his faith helped him to overcome a broken tibia and fibula that he suffered in 2009, while he prays before matches, he wears one shinpad with the image of Saint Anthony of Padua, he wears another with a religious message and he also regularly visits the monastery of the Herzegovina town Medjugorje.
Assuming the fixture list allows it, Kovacic also attends mass each Sunday and he was even an altar boy during his time in Zagreb.
Quite simply, the 22-year-old is dedicated to his religion and he shows similar commitment to his football, working hard every day to better himself, something that has earned him the respect and admiration of his teammates.
That includes Luka Modric, a player Kovacic has idolised for some time and who, after God, offers him the most support at the club.

Sunday, October 25, 2009
Saturday, October 24, 2009
On Thursday, I was going through his very first reader that comes with the curriculum that I use. The first page had some three letter words as well as the illustration associated with the word. As he sounded out the first word, cap, I began to wonder whether he was really reading the word or whether he had figured out the word because of the picture. However, because he painstakingly sounded out the word, I became convinced that he was really reading the word.
He read his first eight words, flawlessly sounding out the word first. Until we came to this word, illustrated with the picture below:
The word he was to sound out was "wet". He carefully studied the word and the picture, and then removed any doubt as to whether he was really reading the words prior. This is the word he very slowly sounded out:
S - I - N - K
Tuesday, October 20, 2009
Thursday, October 15, 2009
Anyway, this is her latest "creation". It's a math problem she made up.
Wednesday, October 14, 2009
Tuesday, October 13, 2009
A few things are on my heart tonight.
Today my brother-in-law had surgery to correct his deviated nasal septum (nose surgery) and ended up having all kinds of complications. This was weighing heavily on my mind and, while I was explaining to my mom what was going on, my son was listening. He became concerned about his uncle, so I told him that we would pray for him. He wholeheartedly agreed. He told me to go ahead and start, and he would follow, and that is what he did, basically repeating everything that I said.
I was extremely moved that my son was touched. And I got to thinking about how much the Lord is touched by the feeling of our infirmities.
When my husband came home, he told me about this song. I have since listened to it several times and told him it has become my "new favourite song". We then started talking about how much Jesus really does care and how He does cry along with us when we are hurting.
Dave then said something to me that I think is truly profound.
"Think about it. Jesus knew when Lazarus died that he was going to resurrect him. Yet, he was still moved deeply - by the pain of Mary and Martha - and cried."
I have been moved tonight. I pray you are as well. God bless.
Sunday, October 11, 2009
One night mommy was tucking Calvin into bed. Calvin turned toward the wall where his ever faithful Hobbes was and threw him toward the foot of the bed.
Thursday, October 8, 2009
Thursday, October 1, 2009
And so begins one day in Dabaar, the largest refugee camp in the world located in Kenya. A camp that was built to hold less than 100,000 immigrants has now swelled to 230,000. Most of these immigrants are from war torn Somalia.
Trying to find enough water not only to drink - dehydration is one of the worst problems in the children of the camp - but cooking, bathing and washing clothes is very difficult. There are essentially two types of weather: extremely hot and the rainy season. The rainy season might relieve the oppressive heat, but brings with it the constant threat of flooding. And more mosquitos. And malaria.
In her stick hut - even more primitive than that of Little Pig #2, no joke - she beds down for the night on the ground. She finds it very difficult to sleep; keeping the netting around her and the children can be difficult and the constant buzzing of the mosquitos distracting. The heat is still oppressive. But she is exhausted for one other reason. She is pregnant and due any day with baby number five. Before she falls into her fitful slumber, she prays one more to time to Allah that her papers will arrive soon.
She awakes the next day to start the cycle again. This time she is summoned to the United Nations base. Her papers have arrived. She is to leave in one week. With her four boys. Perhaps she has a husband, perhaps not; rape and sexual immorality is rampant in the camp. So she begins her preparations to leave the camp in one week. She breathes one last desperate prayer to Allah.
Please, please don't let my baby come before I leave.
Her baby does not have the necessary papers to leave the camp and the country.
Two days before she is to leave, she gives birth. She faces an agonizing decision: to leave the camp with her FOUR boys ONLY and leave her baby behind, OR, to stay behind, perhaps forever, and never give any of her children a chance to live without poverty, to get an education, and to be healthy. To just break the wretched cycle.

The Mate of the Tyger Prince world continues with Bloodlines…
Mikol is now twenty-seven years old and is considered to be one of the finest generals in the Tygerian army. Just in time, too, as King Davos, after being wounded in battle is taking an extended leave of absence for a while at the insistence of his doctors and a badly shaken Blake. In the king’s absence, Prince Mikos takes over his duties as Prince Regent, and Prince Mikol has become one of the two new Battle Commanders, alongside the fearsome General Haggoz. Haggoz is to be in charge of domestic concerns, assisting the Regent, and Mikol takes on the task of dealing with the planets outside Tygeria’s solar system.
Meanwhile on a planet called Loros, the former king has died under suspicious circumstances, and the new leader has married his brother’s widowed queen. He has displaced the rightful heir, the young Prince Kalen, and is now trying to marry that prince off to one of the Tygerian princes in order to solidify an alliance. Lorian officials are shocked when Tygeria offers Prince Mikol as a mate, the heir apparent and most eligible of all the princes.
It’s a dangerous time in the Axis empire, however, as a new threat is looming on the far horizon—a confederation of planets known as The Pton have been rampaging on the northern borders of the galaxy, in some of the sparsely inhabited star systems there. The Pton are from a galaxy known to the Axis as L87, a spiral galaxy, light-years away. Little is known about the Pton, except for the fact that they’re savage, and seem to follow “a scorched earth” policy on the planets they vanquish, after their custom of burning or destroying everything in their wake. They have their sights set on Loros now, the home of Prince Mikol’s new fiancé—to either colonize it or reduce it to smoking ruins.
The once proud imperial court of Loros is seething with rumors of war and whispers of murder. Intrigue is growing daily, and threats lurk in the shadows. Tensions mount as Mikol and Kalen have their first meeting. A powerful love begins, but can they learn to trust each other and stand together against the forces that are trying to tear their worlds apart?
This is the first book in a new series, with some favorite characters from the original Mate of the Tyger Prince series making frequent appearances.
Kalen hadn’t slept all that well on the entire journey—he never did in space. The constant hum of the engines, along with the knowledge that he was suspended in a relatively small metal tube, hurtling through nothingness, incredible distances from the safety of firm soil beneath his feet, didn’t allow for deep, restful sleep, or at least not for him. Add to that his worries about his uncle and his mother and this betrothal contract, and he was far too nervous and far too stressed for sleep anyway.
As for his brilliant plan to get rid of the guards, before they’d even left on the shuttle for Belline, his uncle’s guards had known something was up. And from the moment they’d reached the Plaza, they had been suspicious and on edge. This had all seemed to Kalen like a harmless prank—a joke on the surly guards and his uncle and a way to show his contempt for both. The complete inappropriateness of it hadn’t really occurred to him. Maybe his uncle was right, after all, about him being too immature.
Yet once they were actually there on Belline, he’d been determined to enjoy himself. After the strains and pressures of the past couple of weeks since his father’s murder, Kalen threw himself into enjoying this little bit of freedom from his uncle’s constant scrutiny, and maybe even his last chance of liberty before the coming betrothal.
Because on the way to Lycanus 2, he’d finally made himself face the awful truth. His uncle’s plan to get rid of him had been rather brilliant. There wasn’t any good way out of this betrothal. Not without insulting and angering the powerful Tygerians, whose help he would need if he wanted to get rid of his uncle and free his people from Nerol’s tyranny. And that didn’t even take the Pton into account. He had to put his own wishes aside for the good of Loros, be nice and accommodating to this Prince Mikol and hope like hell for a long, protracted betrothal period.
So, he proceeded to get gloriously drunk on Belline, and because of his antipathy toward the other guards, he’d isolated them at another table. Or he did until at least one of them had taken charge. They had not given in to the excesses of the pleasure moon, and they’d known he had some plan up his sleeve and watched him like birds of prey. When he stumbled up the stairs, he was fully aware on some level that the orbs and bubbles popping all over the stairway were all because he had incautiously taken that damn white pill. He still tried desperately to ignore them and pretend he was fine. He was searching for the Jayronian girl he’d ordered, when his uncle’s guards started chasing him, he’d found himself unable to shake them no matter how hard he tried.
Kalen hadn’t realized just how fucked up he really was, until he stumbled from floor to floor, knocking on first one door and then another, being cursed at and shouted at until he forgot what he’d been seeking in the first place. Meanwhile, the hectoring guards followed him from hall to hall, like a small flock of annoying carrion birds, waiting to swoop in and feast once he finally faceplanted on the filthy carpet. The orbs and other flying objects followed him too—he left a wake of them behind him that must have been an easy trail to follow—and he was feeling hunted and a little desperate.
All he’d wanted that evening was some fun—a distraction from his life and maybe a dalliance with a companion for the evening. To have someone look at him with at least a semblance of affection, even if it was something he’d had to pay for. He wanted, for one night, to be more than someone who was standing in the way, his very existence an inconvenience to be bypassed and gotten rid of.
Then he’d knocked on this last door and perhaps the best-looking person he’d ever seen in his life had answered. He was thunderstruck when he saw him, and he was still at a loss for words.
He was a Tygerian and unlike anyone he’d ever seen before. He was massive for one thing—really tall, with the kind of hard muscles that came from constant training and fighting. He’d known that about Tygerians but hadn’t seen one in the flesh in years. And it was more than that. He was so undeniably alien and otherworldly.
Kalen was standing in the door, at a loss for words, when an orb shot past him and went straight for the handsome alien, flying directly into him and bursting over his head and shoulders in a bright splash of golden liquid. The Tygerian’s long red hair, now covered in swaths of gold and his green eyes and exotically tanned skin, also dappled with splashes of gold were so beautiful after the strike that all he could do was stare. His skin was underlaid with black tiger stripes in a beautiful pattern that swooped across his cheeks. He was red and black and golden and perfect.
Then he’d growled at Kalen’s guards who had been chasing him, and for a moment or two Kalen was literally stricken with amazement. Not fear, because he knew the growl wasn’t meant for him. It had been meant to protect him, and that had meant…everything.
Kalen prided himself on being a man and a warrior, but he'd been so close to his father. He had thought of Jarrem not only as a parent, but as someone he could always, always count on to be in his corner and on his side. Someone who always had his back in a fight and who only wanted what was best for Kalen. Someone who wanted to see him not just succeed but thrive. And when that was ripped away so abruptly, so savagely, Kalen had felt…bereft. Cut off and deprived of the relationship that had been the most important one in his life. He was unmoored and drifting and scared and couldn’t seem to even decide what to do next. His own mother and his uncle had stripped even his identity away from him.
For a moment, this big Tygerian warrior had made him feel as if his safety, at least, had been restored to him.
Kalen had never been attracted to men, though he could look at a man and objectively think him handsome. But this Tygerian’s presence in the room was nothing short of glorious. It was a hypnotic, and undeniably sexual attraction he was feeling. There was a wildness about the man, and it called to Kalen like nothing ever had before. His scent was strong and masculine, yet spicy-sweet at the same time. Kalen leaned into it, and into the Tygerian, wanting to get closer if he could and figure out what this attraction could possibly mean.
That’s when the Tygerian wrapped a hand around the back of his head and gently drew him in for a shocking kiss. Kalen was startled at first and froze in his arms immediately. The man looked down at him with one eyebrow arched, questioning him or perhaps wondering if Kalen were playing some kind of game. He wasn’t forcing him or trying to hurt him, but this was Belline, and Kalen had banged on the man’s door at an obscenely late hour and then insisted on coming inside. Gods, what must he think?
The alien looked down at him as if giving him a chance to object. But when no objections were forthcoming, he lowered his head again and took Kalen’s mouth with his. When their lips touched, it was like an electric shock ran right through Kalen. Gods, this must be all the liquor he’d drunk, or maybe the white pill, because nothing else explained it or even came close. This was a man kissing him, and he wasn’t attracted to men. Was he? Was he?
Strange and unfamiliar feelings were jolting through him, and he was in no shape to figure out what they meant. The Tygerian pulled away, caught him by the chin and gazed down into his eyes. “Are you all right?” he asked gently, a flush of arousal staining his flawless cheeks.
Kalen’s mouth had actually tingled under the Tygerian’s soft, lush lips, and being wrapped in this man’s arms had been frightening, but also thrilling and exhilarating. The Tygerian was taking charge, which wasn’t what Kalen would have ever imagined he’d ever want…but oh gods, it had thrilled him. Or at least some parts of him were still thrilled.
One part in particular. His cock was hard enough to pound nails.
He’d been so full of indecision for so long, trying to decide if he should act or not. If his mother was part of all this or not. If he should fight his uncle or if he should just give in, and if he did fight, was it right to risk his people’s lives that way? His uncle was ruthless, and Kalen had little doubt he would use those weapons he’d threatened against their own population. Innocent people would die. But if he didn’t fight, he was truly lost.

First of all, Coates shared that The Potters are looking for a defensive midfielder who is as skilful as Glenn Whelan and they are willing to sign a deal during the transfer window in January.
Mr. Coates went on to say that from January 1st onwards, Mark Hughes, the current manager of the team, has the freedom to use the available resources as he wishes. Once the next transfer window is opened, a defensive midfielder might join The Potters. Although they prefer to buy British, they claim to be open to suggestions and if an opportunity to recruit a foreign player arises, it should not be missed.
Yet, he reassured that The Potters cannot complain about a lack of players but confirmed that some extra cover in certain positions would have been helpful. Once again, he drew Glenn Whelan as an example and added that if Whelan was not a part of the team, things would be extremely difficult as they have not managed to find another player like him.
Coates did not miss to mention Charlie Adam’s performance and said he was doing well, especially in the game against Chelsea. However, he was an attacking player, so regardless of the dedication and discipline shown during the game, it was not his natural home.
Although the Potters have already made plans about their actions during the next transfer window, Coates hurried up to say that there was not a 100% guarantee that a new player would join Stoke City. The chairman also said that finding the right player, capable of helping them improve the squad was quite a challenging mission but they were determined to find one. Mr. Coates was quoted as saying “Whether anything comes along that is attractive to both the club and the player, we shall have to see.”
Back in the summer, Stoke City targeted Mile Jedinak who is the current defensive midfielder of Crystal Palace. However, hold-ups in his contract with Crystal made him stay at Selhurst Park.
By the time when Tony Pulis was in charge of Stoke City, Jedniak emerged as a prominent player under Pulis’ guidance, which leads to the conclusion that if the Aussie becomes available, Pulis might express interest in making him a part of West Bromwich Albion.

Issey Takahashi was born in Akasaka, Minato Ward, Tokyo on December 9, 1980. He had four half-siblings because his mother had remarried several times. He looked after his half-brothers when they were infants. During his youth, Takahashi was withdrawn and his grandmother would push him to take lessons in order for him to come out of his shell, but he never managed to commit to any of them. It is only when he saw his grandmother cry of joy during a recital of a children's theater company that he took a genuine interest in acting.
Takahashi's first role was in the movie Hoshiwotsugumono in 1990. He would continue as an actor and voice actor in various movies and TV series. Takahashi also graduated from Horikoshi High School in 1999. In 2004, Takahashi had his first lead role as Kiyoshi Imawano in the TV series The Great Horror Family. In 2015, he won the Supporting Actor Award at the 1st Confidence Award Drama Award and the 86th The Television Drama Academy Awards for his role as Mohei Keibara in Tami-ō. Takahashi would appear in various lead roles in TV series such as Quartet, Miracles, Tokyo Bachelors or Wife of a Spy, earning awards such as the 42nd Elan d'or Awards as "Newcomer of the Year", or the 31st Nikkan Sports Film Awards for Best Supporting Actor.
JoJo's Bizarre Adventure Roles
- Takahashi was a fan of Rohan since he was in high school.
- Aside from Rohan, Takahashi's favorite character is Josuke Higashikata.
- Takahashi refers Rohan to as "Rohan-chan", similarly to Reimi Sugimoto in Diamond is Unbreakable.

So, backtracking a tad, now that I knew what was going to happen, that things were moving along and the light was shining brighter at the end of the tunnel, Mike and I enjoyed a nice lunch together. After we finished eating, we just sort of hung out together. It was the first time we could do that. Todd was in Dallas taking care of Gavin. Mike was free and I was lucky enough to have him with me.
Mike looked uncomfortable sitting in the stiff, plastic hospital chair. I moved over and patted the bed next to me.
“Come lay next to me.”
“Come on. First of all, we’re married. Second, we’re not going to do anything. Sheez. We’re just going to lay here.”
Mike grinned, got up and settled in next to me.
No sooner had Mike settled in when the skinny woman to transport me to the cath lab came in my room. What, so soon? I thought. It was only three o’clock. Maybe this was too fast.
Once I was down in the cath lab, which was immense, I was wheeled in to a large area that was lined with sections that were curtained off. There was a row of curtains on one side and another set on the other. I would say at least five or six per side. It looked like the sleeping area in the Nun’s story if you ever saw that movie. Some curtains were open, some closed. Some had people lying on gurneys, some were empty. Each area had their own set of monitors and equipment. My eyes bugged out thinking about the assembly line of cardiac catheterizations that were performed here. How often? weekly, twice a week, daily?
The skinny gurney woman, more like a girl to me, wheeled me into the very last one on the right side. She backed me in. with out the beep beep, parked me and took off with a wave. Eyes wide I scanned the area. Oh, no, I thought. Oh, no.
I saw a white board on the wall to my right. Welcome to pre-procedure, it said with other pertinent data. A nurse whizzed in introduced herself, did a little prep and then rushed out. I was alone for a while. I think I was the last one of the day because they squeezed me. There was a flurry of activity all around me behind those curtains. Because they were only curtains I could hear some of what was going on in the ones closest to me. In the area across from me, a woman was kind of moaning.
“Her IV is occluded. When can we bring her up,” a nurse, I assumed, said or she said something like that into a phone.
When she hung up she went to the woman. For some reason her curtain was open and I could see all.
“You have to keep your leg still,” she said. Oh boy, I know what that meant. For some reason, they left the sheath in. Well, I guess that kind of thing isn’t unusual.
Next to me, a nurse was talking to a man, I think he was some kind of driver, who brought in a guy from a nursing home. They were discussing where the guy would go after the procedure. Was he going back or would he be admitted?
Once the driver left, the nurse was on the phone. Apparently, the guy’s labs were in and his kidney results were elevated. The procedure needed to be put on hold. She hung up called someone else, “I have to get the driver back. I don’t know where he is,” she said. “The patient needs to go back. They are going to treat him with medication and wait to do the procedure.”
I heard a new comer enter a few curtains down on my side. It sounded like this new one was a male. All the nurses and whoever who was in attendance, busied around him to get him ready. Or that was what it sounded like. I think he was going before me. I heard the sound of a razor. I knew what was going on. They shave you down there before they do the cath. I was shaved at Allen but the nurse here at Dallas freshen it up, just to make sure. Can’t have a stray hair hanging around ready to botch things up.
“I know man, I’m sorry. It has to be done,” A male voice said to the guy who was being shaved.
My eye caught a woman entering a curtained area across from me a few space to my left.
“Hi, Dad,” her voice drifted to me through the curtain. “You’re doing great. I love you. I’ll see you when you get to your room.”
Her dad mumbled something. The curtain moved and a middle aged blonde woman left.
Wow, I thought. All these people with heart disease. All these professionals, resources, time, money. For what? I didn’t feel worthy of the expense. Even though, obviously, I wasn’t alone. I felt damaged. Like I shouldn’t deserve this treatment because I didn’t take care of myself good enough. I let myself get heart disease. I don’t know if the other the patients felt that way but that was where I went with it.
A guy came in, he looked Hawaiian. His long jet black hair was tied in a pony tail that went down the middle of his back. He was tall and athletic looking.
“Hi, my name is, (insert name here, I don’t remember it). “I am one of the technicians taking care of you today. We will be bringing you back in a bit. Is anyone here with you?”
“Yeah, my husband. He is up in my room. Can he come down here?” I am sure I must have looked distressed because I was feeling stressed. My eyes wide like a deer in highlights.
“Not a problem, I’ll go get him for you. What’s your room number.”
I told him and he turned on his heel and left. Shortly he was back with Mike in tow. Oh was I glad to see my Mikey.
“Mike,” I said.
Mr. Hawaiian guy left us. I think that guy smokes, I whispered to Mike once Hawaiian guy was gone. “I can smell it on him. How is it that some people can smoke, drink in excess, eat in excess do whatever in excess and yet here I am and there he is looking healthier than health.”
“It’s not your fault, Baby,” he said and patted my arm.
I smiled up at Mike and to change the subject I proceeded to fill him in on all the goings on.
The curtains emptied, the place became cavernous. I, the lone survivor, with my partner in crime, Mike, was waiting to be picked up. Before long, Mr. Hawaiian came over to do just that. He instructed Mike as to where to wait and off we went.
The cath lab. I remember this cath lab. First, I was not given any Benadryl or Valium to pre sedate me so I was completely aware. And let me tell you it was scary. The picture below is more or less what I saw.
I think there should be a part six, hey? So…

By Amy Silverman
By Olivia LaVecchia
By Monica Alonzo and Stephen Lemons
By Chris Parker
By Michael Lacey
By Weston Phippen
The neighbors from hell had left a message.
I saw the huge potted palm that blocked the driveway at once. The wilted plant sat there in a 100-pound pot, ominously blocking the path to our new neighbors' house. Do not come near me, was the obvious message.
Since it was now shortly after dawn, this dreadnought had been moved into place under cover of darkness.
This was the latest round in a continuing battle for attention from our newly arrived next-door neighbors.
They are a middle-aged lawyer who practices with a big firm in central Phoenix and his 25-year-old wife, a college student.
Not until they moved into the house next door several months ago did I fully understand Jimmy Breslin's misgivings about his own neighbors. A few years back, Breslin, the New York columnist, wrote about some neighbors who had driven him to the point that he could not even speak with them.
Breslin erected a sign at the edge of his property. It began, "These are the people I am no longer speaking to. . . ."
It's time I erected my own sign. Unfortunately, I won't have room on the sign to tell the whole story. So I'll tell you instead.
He's famous in legal circles not for his triumphs in the courtroom, but for his boring and inadequate imitations of former governor Bruce Babbitt and other well-known personalities.
His dress imitates the models in GQ magazine. There are the omnipresent suspenders and those round spectacles favored by the yuppie members of the Clinton cabinet. He reminds you of Murphy Brown's nerdy little boss on that TV sitcom.
He even has a meerschaum pipe and a $500 meerschaum fountain pen to match. The pen is a present from his wife.
The family unit consists of The Lawyer, Mrs. Lawyer and a small, male child, who is guarded like the crown jewel.
This is a very proper, educated couple, who have their own personal jogging machine in their high-ceilinged living room. They read to each other at night from the literary classics.
In a moment of gaiety not long ago, the two erudite madcaps signed their names to the following message on the wall of Il Forno, a trendy Phoenix restaurant:
"To be born with the gift of laughter and a sense that the world is mad."
This was every bit as good a quote when Rafael Sabatini used it, in almost identical form, back in 1921 as the opening line to his novel Scaramouche.
I have known The Lawyer for several years. We even worked together once. Before purchasing the house, The Lawyer came to me to seek a favor in the spirit of what I then perceived as friendship.
I and my neighbors directly to the east held a right of way through The Lawyer's driveway. Once in a while, we would walk across the property or drive through it if headed in that direction.
The Lawyer told me, agitatedly, that he could not get his house loan unless we signed a paper renouncing any claims to having a right of way.
"Tom," he said, "we are such great friends. My wife and I know it's going to be so wonderful living here. And I would never do anything to jeopardize that friendship. So just trust me."
We are talking about 73-year-old houses and an old, inner-city Phoenix neighborhood. There's nothing fancy here. None of this should be any big deal.
"You can be guaranteed," The Lawyer said sincerely, "that I would never close off the driveway. This is merely a formality for the loan."
We all signed over the right of way. Why not? People have been driving back and forth along this path for longer than our lifetimes. What's the big deal?
I signed this paper, but even then, I had a lingering doubt. Something was not quite right.
No sooner had The Lawyer and Mrs. Lawyer moved into the house than their complaints began to rain down upon us like so many cannonballs.
Trucks driven by workers during a remodeling project at our place were going too fast. The trucks made too much noise. The workers were supposedly peering in at The Lawyer's wife as they drove by.
I wondered: If they were driving too fast, how could they look in the windows? But I held my tongue. I wanted to think all of this was going to succeed.
Our cleaning lady's car turned out to be too much of an eyesore for The Lawyer. She parked it on the city street alongside The Lawyer's house. She'd been parking in this same spot for five years.
The Lawyer put a note on her windshield commanding her not to park there anymore. The crux of his complaint was that he didn't want to see her walking across his property.
There was a barrage of other complaints. Strangers were walking across the property. Strangers were driving through. Students from the high school across the street were scaling the walls.
Then, a most dastardly deed took place. Mail was purloined from in front of The Lawyer's house in the dead of night.
"This is a federal crime," The Lawyer told me in an almost hysterical phone conversation. "In addition, that mail contained photos of my family and my travel plans, as well. This information, in the wrong hands, could endanger our lives."
"If it's a federal crime, why don't you call the FBI?" I asked. I wondered: Did he actually think I was taking his mail?
Then, a mysterious truck appeared one day and dropped off a portable toilet in The Lawyer's yard. The big truck, The Lawyer charged, also damaged some branches on his trees.
The Lawyer was turning into a regular Sherlock Holmes. I can imagine him shouting exultantly: "These are the footprints of an enormous criminal hound!"
All of this was too much for him. So he acted.
Perhaps they teach you at Yale to deal with pranks by summoning the cops.
So, that same day, a Phoenix police officer appeared at my door to ask me a series of probing questions.
The officer wanted to know about the toilet that had been delivered next door . . . the missing mail . . . the mysterious strangers spotted lurking in the area.
Apparently, I was a suspect in these matters. What else is one to think? I was dazed.
Luckily for me, it happened that late evidence turned up to clear me.
The portable toilet had been delivered to the wrong house. It was not meant for The Lawyer at all. It was addressed to a house at the opposite end of the neighborhood, where construction was under way.
"I thought the toilet might be a prank," The Lawyer said. He never bothered to apologize.
"But there's lots of weird shit happening," The Lawyer muttered. "My water in the backyard has been shut off. And then it was just as mysteriously turned on.
"Strangers are walking across my property. My little child is growing up. He must be protected. Workmen have peered into my windows. We need more privacy."
I told him I'd put up an electric gate on my side to close off traffic from the main street.
I went to the credit union and borrowed five grand or so for an electric gate. I settled back. Our troubles with The Lawyer are now over, I figured. We'll all live happily ever after.
Turns out I was wrong. It was not enough to have an electric gate constructed. To satisfy The Lawyer and his wife, it also must be closed at all times.
The Lawyer's wife called up and bellowed to me over the phone:
"I noticed you had left your gate open last night. What time did you finally close it?"
Is it possible to answer a question like that in a civil tone?
The Lawyer decided to demonstrate his disapproval of my lax gatekeeping. He blocked off his driveway by night with Erma Bombeck's old Mercedes.
During the day, The Lawyer's wife blocked the driveway by parking her shiny, black Saab Turbo directly across it.
The mail carrier asked her to move. She refused. So my mail and my neighbor's mail went undelivered. We had to drive up to the post office to pick it up.
I turned the other cheek. I spent another $100 or so to buy a new mailbox and placed it at the opposite end of the property. The post office rerouted the carriers to accommodate this new move.
Certainly, this will solve everything, right? Wrong!
Next, I received a call from The Lawyer's office. It is important I contact him at once, I was told.
"You apparently walked through our backyard yesterday with your dog," he said. He was almost hysterical.
"My baby sitter was frightened to death to see this big dog and a strange man that she didn't know. We've got to protect ourselves. We've got to keep these strange cars and people away," he said.
He was going to buy his own gate and block off the drive, after all.
I should not have been surprised. The Lawyer's wife is very careful of the company she keeps.
She once propounded her philosophy that the only kind of ethnic restaurants she likes are those in which there are no ethnics. People who have low incomes make her terribly uneasy. Obviously, she prefers neighborhoods in which neighbors are not visible.
I reminded The Lawyer that I had only signed the right-of-way memorandum to make it possible for him to get a loan for his house. And I recalled his fervent assurances that he would never try to close the drive.
"I never said that," The Lawyer said, not looking me in the eye. "Besides, if I did, I now regard the circumstances as being changed."
The gate never went up. Obviously, though, relations in our neighborhood had cooled.
Then, the other day, we had a new incident.
The potted palm, set in a 100-pound pot, was placed directly in the center of the drive to block it off.
On the following day, two big pieces of concrete rubble were placed behind the potted palm, as if they were a second line of defense.
The Lawyer seemed to be building his very own Maginot Line to seal himself from harm.
I called The Lawyer at his law firm. I was told he was out of town. He had left instructions that his whereabouts not be divulged.
I was glad to see The Lawyer was consistent about his security. But he returned my call.
"Please explain what's going on with this potted plant," I asked.
"It's a matter of safety," The Lawyer said. "It's a matter of protecting my family."
And that's where the matter rests with the neighbors from hell. The potted palm sits like a sentry, blocking the driveway.
Time for me to get to work painting my sign, I guess.

“My son went to New Life in 2013 around his senior year in high school. Before my son went to New Life, he had been in and out of the 90-day rehab programs. He also went to a wilderness camp in Idaho. I remember the day I had to check him out of the hospital but knowing I could not take him home because it would be too risky and dangerous.
By some miracle, a friend told us about New Life House. I called that night and was told to attend a family BBQ gathering that weekend with my son. I didn’t know what to expect. I was so surprised to see all these young men telling the same stories as my son’s. I also met some parents going through the same things I was going through. Finally, I met some people I can relate to and who understand me, without me being embarrassed or being judged. That was such a relief! I left my son at New Life and prayed for the best. I saw a big change in him in just a few months. My son was back to the real him; the nice, happy, and confident young man that he was before he fell deep into his addiction. It was almost unbelievable that the son we almost lost to addiction was later mentoring other young men. He graduated high school and got his first job while at New Life.
My son was sober for a few years until life happened for him and he relapsed in 2019. Again, I am so grateful to have a place to go back to after all those years. My son once again went back to New Life and was lucky to have a place he can call home. He just graduated from New Life and moved out few months ago. I am so thankful to have known New Life for all this time. I am thankful most especially to the great staff for giving us our life back and for all the support they have provided us during our most difficult times. As the saying goes ‘Recovery is not a destination, but a lifelong journey.’ Thank you to New Life and to the staff for your never-ending support!”
Last Updated on September 12, 2023

Title: Hopscotch and Dandelions
rating: PG, Angel/Sandman crossover.
spoilers: Sleep Tight
summary: Wesley and an old friend go on a walk.
archive: lists, contractuals, others by permission.
disclaimer: Joss and co own Wesley; Neil and Vertigo own Death.
"It's queer," I said to her, looking down at the grass. It was already starting to get cold and wet with dew. "How soon it stops hurting."
She nodded, the smile on her face faded a little. I felt bad that she was sorry about it. I wasn't sorry--not really. That had been something of a surprise. I hadn't been at all sorry to find myself face to face with her. In fact, I had perhaps been looking forward to it.
"This wasn't supposed to happen, you know," she said thoughtfully. "My brother's very worried about what this means. He even tried to prevent it. But you're pretty damn stubborn about what you want, Wesley. Or Wes. Probably should call you Wes, shouldn't I?"
I nodded. She knew me too well. Of course, she knows everyone too well.
"In my defense, I wasn't actively searching for it," I said.
"Of course not," she said with a solid dose of sarcasm. "Just passively. Because it's so much better to be passive-aggressive."
I almost felt guilty then, but I looked at her and she'd managed to smile again. I supposed that was her nature. She was rather like Cordelia in a way, with the tough happy-go-lucky nature and determination.
"I like Cordelia a lot," she confessed. "I was glad that she went the road she did with the visions. Not surprised--Cordy's a fighter. Facing down the gates of hell and all that."
"I know exactly what you mean," I said, taking her proffered hand. "It's rare. And beautiful."
"I think you're sorrier about this than you'll let on, Wes," she said, squeezing my hand. "I'm sorry, too. But you seem to be mostly glad to be done. And it is your choice, after all."
"My choice?" I said. "I thought I'd made it. After all, you're here and we're on our way to wherever one goes after death."
She smiled at me wistfully. "Everyone should be so nonchalant about a special offer," she replied. "My brother and my sister have a bet."
"About me?" I said. "Odd that anyone cares that much."
We stopped then, or really, she stopped and I was required to pause along with her. It looked like we were still in the park across from my house. Considering my companion, it could be. Or it could be somewhere quite different. I wasn't sure. But she looked at me carefully, her eyes sparkling black and not-quite-human. Her ankh was lovely, silver, probably priceless. Definitely priceless, considering its owner.
I hadn't quite pictured Death that way, but when she came, I recognized her immediately. It's funny how that works.
"Grow up, Wes," she said. "I know she hurt you. I know they've all hurt you, but--"
"Then you know a good deal, don't you?" I said, suddenly angry. Then I remembered to whom I was talking. "Sorry."
"It's okay," she said. "You've had a bad year."
"That's an understatement," I said, looking at the sidewalk. It was cracked and there were dandelions growing through. One of them was in bloom, cheerful yellow despite its precarious position. If I could have stepped on it, I would have.
"So here's a question," she said, changing the subject abruptly. "Do you think Rachel's going to get together with Ross or Joey? Joey's a lot sweeter. But Ross--there's the history."
I started, surprised enough to look at her again. She had her arms folded with a mischievous grin on her lips.
"I beg your pardon?"
"On Friends," she said. "You know, the show? Don't you watch it?"
I blinked. "Occasionally," I said. She looked at me. Damn, but the woman knew me well! "All right, all right--Joey."
"No wonder you're depressed," she said. "Not that I disagree, but there's a perfect example of why you're not happy. You want to be something you're not and worse, that you don't deserve anything because you're not that thing."
"What sort of help is that!?" I said. "Just because I know what's the best for her?"
"That's just for one woman out of billions," she pointed out.
"But I thought--" and I shook my head. "I have terrible luck with love. Or anything involving happiness. Or anything involving life, for that matter."
"So it's not easy," she said. "That just means that when the good bits come along, you'll treasure them more than most people. If you choose to go back, that is."
"Should I?" I said. She gave me a look.
"I'm not saying one way or the other," she replied. "Not my call. Not my choice."
I looked at the dandelion. Stupid thing, growing in the cracks. There was an entire damn world of green grass and open soil not five feet to its left and there it was, struggling through the concrete. Well, I could almost hear my companion say, bloom where you're planted.
"It's not bad advice," she said, lifting an eyebrow. "Some things bear repeating, huh?"
"I was tired of all the hurting," I said. "I was doing my damnedest and it wasn't doing anything. Shouldn't good things eventually happen if you're doing the right thing?"
"If good things naturally happened to good people, don't you think everyone would have figured it out by now?" she replied. "Major incentive, right?"
"I suppose so," I said. "I wish that I wanted to go back. It would make it easier."
She nodded and promptly began to play an impromptu game of hopscotch that had been chalked onto the sidewalk in bright purple, probably by the neighbor girls.
"You should maybe find a psychologist, if you go back," she said. "Could be helpful in dealing with living. Or maybe try a new hobby outside of work. Like kite-flying or swing dancing. Hey, look at this!"
She closed her eyes and hopped across the hopscotch grid, arms behind her back. Death was playing hopscotch while advising me to take up swing dancing. It was less surprising than it should have been.
"When you come for me next time, we'll have to walk again," I said. "I would have never expected Death to play hopscotch."
She smiled. "Arms crossed behind my back and everything."
"I'm Death, Wesley," she replied. For a moment I got the full blast of what that meant and it wasn't exactly amusing anymore. Though not exactly un-amusing, either. "I'm impressive by nature."
That made sense. We walked back toward my body and what had seemed far away was suddenly so close that I almost changed my mind.
"Will it hurt?" I asked.
"Probably a lot."
"Will they forgive me?"
"You'll have to wait and see."
She touched my cheek and her hand was soft and barely cold. I didn't want to go back. She let go of me, turning away into the shadows that were suddenly darker and more real. I blinked and she was suddenly walking away down the sidewalk, leaving me behind. But I had one last question.
"Why am I doing this?" I called after her.
I could barely hear her, but her answer rang through my head as I sank back into life.
"Because you want to," she replied.
|Home/QuickSearch + Random + Upload + Search + Contact + GO List|

How boxing saved Jerrico Walton’s life from a deadly downward spiral
PHILADELPHIA, PA — He needs to know. One day, Jerrico Walton will tell him. He’ll sit his son down, pull up his left leg and explain how the two dime-sized, darkened scars below his knee and just above his ankle came from bullets that tore through him. Jerrico will talk about the time they found his father’s bullet-riddled body so decomposed in the trunk of a stolen red Chevy that the only way he could be identified was by his shoes. And the time his mother pulled him in front of a church to tell him that his father was murdered.
Jerrico will tell his son about the time he shot “B,” the man who killed his father, and how he was staring at a 60-year sentence with bloodshot pallid eyes from crying all night in his jail cell over an act of vengeance. His son will need to know about the times the family bounced from home-to-home, and where they went hurricanes followed, from New Orleans, to Beaumont, Texas. And about the time he waited anxiously for his father to show up for his birthday, Dec. 4, 2007, to get a dirt bike and how the bike nor his dad never arrived.
And maybe, just maybe, Jerrico will be able to tell his son about the night he fought on national TV for the first time and changed all of the ugly, awful things that happened to him.
That’s the chance being afforded the 29-year-old Jerrico Walton, when the undefeated junior welterweight takes on southpaw Montana Love (12-0-1, 6 knockouts) in an eight-round bout on Showtime’s ShoBox: The New Generation Friday night (10 PM ET/PT) from the 2300 Arena in Philadelphia.
Before the streets devoured Jerrico “Hands of Stone” Walton (16-0, 7 KOs), he was never in any kind of trouble. His father, John Sebastian Holmes, was a known New Orleans drug dealer who was a career criminal. Walton would go years without seeing Holmes. Gail Walton, Jerrico’s mother, raised her three children on her own.
She did well for a while, until that fateful morning in March 2007 when Gail felt compelled to tell Jerrico something.
There was a reason why Holmes, who was attempting to clean himself up and severe ties from his dangerous past, never showed up for his birthday.
John Sebastian Holmes ran the streets until the streets finally caught up. Soon, it appeared his son was about to take the same plunge. A life of shots fired. Bodies scattered. Chalk lines over cracked asphalt.
“I remember my mom told me she had something to tell me outside of church,” Jerrico recalled. “That’s when she said, ‘Your father was murdered.’ That changed my whole life. At first, I was like, ‘Wait, what? He ain’t dead.’ I broke down crying. I was a hurt person and hurt people hurt people. I took to the streets.
“I wanted people to feel my hurt. Growing up in New Orleans, we were homeless and just getting our lives together. I was told my father was murdered in front of a church. It took me a long while before I would go back into a church again. I was angry. I joined a gang in Houston, the Gangster Disciples, and I wanted help to avenge my father’s murder. I understand what it means when they hurt people hurt people. I never got the guy’s real name who shot my dad, but I knew who he was.
“I knew I was going to shoot him. I saw him and shot him.”
A few years later, Jerrico had heard “B” was killed himself.
“I was judged a lot when that happened, and I’ll protect my family today, that’s who I am,” said Walton, whose family was displaced and survived Hurricane Katrina in August 2005 and then Hurricane Rita in September 2005 when the Waltons moved to Beaumont, Texas. “They tried to give me 60 years when I was 14. I was a kid looking at my life behind bars. It is kind of funny now, but my mom thought she could sign me out and I would be free. I went in at 14 and got out around 19.”
Walton was sentenced as a juvenile and served four years at the Al Price Juvenile Correctional Facility in Beaumont, Texas.
“I look at everything and how bad it was, but I’ll say this, if my father were still alive, I probably wouldn’t be boxing,” Jerrico said. “I’d probably be a drug dealer like he was, because that’s all he was teaching me, all he had to offer as a father was being a drug dealer. That’s all I knew. I say things happened for a reason.
“When I came home from jail, I was a drug dealer. I began seeing some things, but I started boxing in jail, because I was always in fights. So, I figured I better learn how to fight. I came home to Houston and found a gym, the CDM Association. I train now with Ronnie Shields, and I always say boxing saved my life. But things are still going on around me. My best friend, Byron Williams, was killed right in front of my face last October.”
Williams was 26 when he was murdered Sunday morning, Oct. 6, 2019, along with a 31-year-old woman.
The whole scene resurrected dormant feelings. Walton had two uncles killed. Now, his best friend of over a decade was shot and killed—and in front of him.
A month later, Walton had an eight-round fight scheduled in Houston.
“That took a lot out of me,” recalled Walton, who has four children, three girls and a boy ranging in age from 9 to 2. “There were so many people I knew who were killed, and I blew up to 190 pounds before my past fight. We had to make it at 154, because I had to lose the weight. It’s why I say I want to be a motivation to people. I’ve been through it. I’ve seen it.
“There’s going to be a day when I’m going to have to sit down with my son and tell him everything. When my son was born, it became real. It’s a blessing to be here. I was shot at, I’ve been shot in my left leg twice. The bullets went in and went out. I have a lot to tell a lot of people. I know I’m going to make it.
“But I managed to find my talent. I survived the streets. I have a lot to tell my two-year-old son. He’s going to get one great story.”
GET THE LATEST ISSUE AT THE RING SHOP (CLICK HERE)

Big fish is trying to fit in with the other fish. It doesn't seem to work no matter what he does. Then he meets someone new. Someone as big as he is. They become great friends but Big fish gets sad when his friend begins to disappear.
I'm sorry I can't recommend this for children. This book doesn't complete itself. It seems to stop mid story and lets littles down. I wasn't impressed with the writing style either. I did read it several times but it came across as only an incomplete book.
Issues listed above.
I gave this one 2 out of 5 because the story begins terrifically and then lets the reader drop.

We noticed that you're using an unsupported browser. The TripAdvisor website may not display properly.We support the following browsers: Windows: Internet Explorer, Mozilla Firefox, Google Chrome. Mac: Safari.
Location is great and the facility if large with plenty of seating and some bar games. That said their beers are really not all that good. Compare them against other brew pubs in the city and I would rate them at the bottom of the...More
Nice brewery with indoor and outdoor seating. The brews were good. I was there on Octoberfest and the place was packed. Unfortunately not much parking or seating available. The music and food truck was nice and I loved being able to sample other breweries on...More
I don't drink beer but I've been told it's good. They have a food truck outside where you can get food, or bring your own food. Lots of picnic tables and high top tables around. Dog friendly. Musician played the evening we were there.
The staff was so friendly! They had 10 beers on tap, and we wanted to try all of them since this was our first visit. A flight was only 4 beers, though, so my partner and I were trying to decide which 2 we could...More
It's a very casual facility in an industrial type garage where the garage doors were open. 2 Giant (and I mean giant!) ceiling fans helped with a breeze. We were there during a few days where the weather was coolish in the mid-70s and low...More
I have been here several times and really want to like it. The facility is an open air industrial building. Plenty of room for games and people to spread out. I went Saturday 8/20/16 because it was the 1st time in 8-9 weeks the temps...More

Ghost town. And here she thought she was going to Gay Town.
So many odd, degrading jobs Amber had worked, she had earned her early retirement.
You can’t take the social work out of the worker.
It was the perfect size for a family of one.
Her mind was already racing with excitement before she popped a few caps into her mouth.
Every inch was suddenly covered in paisley.
Fuck Don Henley.
Unfortunately, she’d forgotten that her period was due.
Amy would like us to know the following:
Amy Bleu is a writer, musician, social worker, and mother. Her work has appeared in magazines such as BUST, and in anthologies such as Quarter Passed and Flatmancrooked’s Slim Volume of Contemporary Poetics. Her first two books were published in 2022: a chapbook of poetry called Petrichor & Other Scents (released by Wedfty Media) and a novel called In My Secret Life (published by Woodhall Press). She lives in Portland, Ore. with her son and her cat.

Robert Browning’s poem “My Last Duchess” was based on an actual event. A Duke married a member of the Medici family, Lucrezia at the age of fourteen. In 1561, Lucrezia died of suspicious circumstances. After her death, the Duke began courting another aristocratic lady.
The poem’s narrator is a sadistic psychopath. The atmosphere covers the jealousy, murder, manipulation, and insanity of the Duke. He conveys his innermost thoughts about his disdain for his last wife.
The Duke shows the painting, painted on a wall of his last wife to the servant of a Count. He keeps the picture covered by with a curtain that only he draws. The Duke is negotiating a marriage between himself and a count The picture, painted by a famous painter Fra Pandolf, had many people who asked why she had the look on her face and is so life-like that it looks as though she is alive. .
Strangers like you that pictured countenance,
The depth and passion of its earnest glance,
But to me they turned (since none puts by
The curtain I have drawn for you, but I),
Strangers that look at the picture as if to ask why does she have the deep, passionate expression on her face.
How did such a countenance occur? It was not just her husband that caused the happy blush that came on her face. The artist said that it might have happened because of a cape that covered her wrist. No painter could ever reproduce that flushed look around her neck. She was courteous and that called up the blush.
She had too much heart and was too easily impressed. Whatever she looked at she liked. The Duke looking at her breast, the sunset, the cherry limb that some idiot broke in the orchard for her, a white mule that she rode—all were given a positive acknowledgement or her spot of joy.
Often, she thanked men but no one knows how. The gift that the Duke gave her which was an ancestral 900 years old aristocratic name which she was treated the same as anyone else’s gift. Who would stoop to discuss this with her?
If a man had speech skills which the Duke says that he does not, he would tell that her behavior is disgusting and teach her how to act. She needs to be taught to use her wits. There would be some kneeling down, but the Duke does not stoop for anyone.
Every time that the Duke saw her, she smiled at him; however, other men passed her and she smiled at them as well. This smiling at others continued and grew. The Duke gave an ultimatum for her to stop smiling and then everything stopped. In the picture, there she stands as though she were alive.
The Duke asks the man to stand and return to the company that was down stairs. The Count’s generosity is absolute so that the Duke knows that he will get a fair dowry.
It is not the dowry in which the Duke is interested, but rather the Count’s beautiful daughter.
Now the Duke and the servant will go down together. As they leave, the Duke tells the man to take note of a statue of 1Neptune, the Roman god of the seas, who is riding and taming a seahorse. Another artist cast the statue in bronze and it is rare.

If you'd like to share a thrift store find on Thrifty Thursday go HERE
I just have to give a big sigh of relief right now. Phhhheeewww! The project of the day is a round table that Mom-in-law gave to me. They have had it for a really long time so I wanted to do something really cool with it. When she gave it to us a couple of the legs were broken or getting there. By the time we got home with it ALL of the legs were broken. Joe glued them for me and we had the table sitting in my front room. I even liked it unpainted just because it has such a cool shape to it. I put it on my "To Do" list for today. I had an image in my mind of what I wanted it to look like, and to be honest, I really didn't think it was going to turn out the way that I had hoped it would. I painted the base and the lip of the table black. I really wanted triangles so the top would look like pizza slices. I found a long enough straight object that I could trace my lines and then I taped each triangle and painted it. Of course looking back it would have been much easier to just paint it all light green and then only have to tape around 4 triangles. Live and learn right?? Here is the end result!
Hall Tree Bench | DIY
4 hours ago

Congratulations Patrick for defending the title. I'm happy he showed us some gorgeous jumps such as 4-3 in FS and 3A in SP. But I'm just worried about 3A in the second half of FS. I think he has a very low success rate in doing 3A in the second half throughout his career. As his rivals are getting more consistent in doing two quads in FS, putting 3A in the second half seems very dangerous for Patrick. But again I'm not sure it's good for him to change the choreography as he won't go to 4CC where he can test some changes. I hope the practices will give him the confidence.

A schizophrenic man who fatally stabbed a stranger outside a Melbourne train station should not spend less time in jail because of his mental illness, a lawyer argues.
Cody Frost, 37, killed 24-year-old Marcus Rowley on August 5, 2017 at West Footscray by stabbing him once in the back with a large chef's knife before leaving him on the side of the road.
Frost claimed he acted in self defence and that Mr Rowley had been following him and a female friend after all three alighted a train at Tottenham station.
Mr Rowley approached the pair, repeatedly asking for a cigarette until Frost agreed but the killer claimed his victim then became aggressive.
In April, a jury found Frost not guilty of murder but guilty of the lesser crime of manslaughter.
In a pre-sentence plea hearing on Monday, crown prosecutor Mark Gibson QC said Frost stabbed Mr Rowley as he was annoyed and angry at his presence.
He argued Frost's moral culpability was not reduced as although the killer had paranoid schizophrenia and had stopped taking his medication four days prior, there was no evidence his psychosis had relapsed.
Mr Gibson added it was unclear if illicit drugs Frost took the previous week had contributed to the attack.
Frost's lawyer Ashley Halphen argued Mr Rowley had been aggressive and come toward a frightened Frost with his arm raised and a bottle in hand.
"Mr Frost believed it was necessary to do what he did and the conduct, we submit, was provoked," he said during Monday's pre-sentence plea hearing.
"Mr Rowley must have done more than just stand there."
He added the attack was spontaneous, "truly out of the blue" and not pre-meditated.
Frost handed himself in to police, bringing the bloodied knife and never denied stabbing Mr Rowley, Mr Halphen added.
Mr Gibson said the Crown did not accept Mr Rowley had a raised arm and a bottle in his hand before he was stabbed.
"If (Frost) was responding to something Mr Rowley was doing, it must have been a perceived threat," he said.
"There's no evidence about Mr Rowley being aggressive to Mr Frost directly before his death."
Justice James Elliott will sentence Frost at a later date.
Lifeline 13 11 14
beyondblue 1300 22 4636
© AAP 2024

Rated 1 out of 5 by 1
Rated 1 out of 5 by really Had to return
Waited for months for this item to come back into stock. Finally received it and waalaaa
the corner was smashed, therefore needed to return it. QVC was very gracious to take it back, but they needed to receive the damaged one before they would send a replacement. So I had to purchase another one and now I am in hopes the one that is to be shipped out does not get destroyed by the carrier. I believe the table will be perfect if I can receive one that is not damaged. Wish more products were made in the USA.

The Epic: Norwegian Epic Cruise Review by wvfrogg
Overall Member Rating
Destination: Eastern Caribbean
EMBARKATION: Very easy. I got to the port around 11:30, and was on board before 12. Everything seemed very organized. There were two terminals involved to handle the number of passengers. Once on board, I went to Taste for lunch and met some delightful people and had a great Cobb Salad. By the time we finished eating, our rooms were ready.
CABIN: I had a mini-suite on the 14th deck. I know there have been a lot of negatives against these cabins, but mostly mine was good. (Of course, I had a mini-suite to myself which helps a lot.) Bed was comfy. There was loads of storage space, esp. for hanging clothes. Very limited drawer space. The overhead cabinets would be wonderful for folded clothes if one can reach them (which I basically could not - I'm 5'3"). More But there were 4 bins inside the lower cabinets, and I used one of those for the undies. I hung everything else, including shorts. But there is plenty of space - you just need to hunt for it! Thanks to people on the CC, I already knew where to find the vanity light (under the medicine cabinet) and to turn off the light on the phone you just hit the "light bulb" icon on the screen. You may want to take a power strip or an extension cord as there are only 2 receptacles in the room, and they are inside a lower cabinet. It took me 4 days (never said I was the brightest bulb) to figure out that the button on the hair dryer would keep the dryer from overheating and shutting off. For the 1st 4 days it took me forever to dry my hair as I had to keep turning it off and letting it cool down. I even had them bring me another dryer! The bathroom facilities -- ah, the bathroom facilities! For me, they were no problem (I was by myself). I can see where they would not suit everyone. Perhaps if the frosty glass was replaced with something solid it would be better. My shower was very large, and although a little ledge for leg-shaving would have been nice, I can't really complain about it. The towels the first 2 days were fine, but starting with the 3rd day they must have opened some new towels because they were wonderful -- big, thick, plus. Really nice.
DINING: Overall, I thought it was very good. I did not eat at the MDR - The Manhattan - so I don't know about it. I did eat at the smaller MDR - Taste and was very pleased with it. I had two dinners there, one Salmon and one Steak & Shrimp and both were more than okay. The salmon was not overcooked at all, and my steak was ordered medium rare and it came medium rare. The Speciality Restaurants I went to were LeBistro, LaCucino & Teppanyaki. All were excellent. LeBistro is under the Spegiel Tent which made it sound as if we were dining under a bowling alley. Not good. But I can't complain about the food. The Garden Buffet was also fine -- good variety of food. The breakfast offerings stayed basically the same, but there were tons of them. Fresh omelets made-to-order is a great way to start the day. Also there were some dynamite pecan rolls that kept appearing on my plate (the devil must have put them there). O'Sheehans also offers pretty good pub fare, and in my opinion has the best dessert on the ship -- the brownie special. My one big negative about the food was the awful coffee. Very, very weak. It didn't even smell like coffee. In fact, it didn't smell like anything. If you wanted a good cup of coffee, you had to pay extra for it. I just gave up and drank tea.
THE SHIP: Big. Really big. Lots of people. But, other than a few times, I never had to wait long for an elevator. The pool areas are rather crowded, but I went to the Spice H2O, which is for adults only, and had no trouble finding a chair, relative quiet and a nice place to sit in the sun or the shade. There was a small pool there, but it was mainly used to just jump in, cool down, and get back out. The main pool didn't seem to be overly crowded, and I am not sure that I ever saw more than one or two in the toddler's pool. I felt that there was much more "rockin' and rollin'" with this ship. The first two sea days we did have wind at 40 knots, and many people had trouble with sea sickness. But even when we did not have rough seas, the movement of the ship was still very noticeable. I am not sure of the reason - some thought it was because the ship is top heavy, but I don't know. The Casino -- even though I came out a winner money wise, it was probably my least favorite NCL Casino. I like to play video poker, and there were very few of those machine. There were several at the bar, but again with my short arms, it was not comfortable to play there. The other ones were wedged in tightly in the smoking areas. The smoking is a big problem in my opinion. I didn't notice the smoke too much when I was just walking through the casino, but it was not good when I was trying to play there. My clothes came home smelling of smoke. Other ship casino's have smoking, but it doesn't seem to be as bad as this one.
ENTERTAINMENT: Wonderful, great, terrific. Saw Blue Man Group and also Second City. Both good. But what I really enjoyed was Howl at the Moon, esp. Rome, and also listening to Jeff Spence at the piano at Shakers. Both excellent. Slam Allen is also worth going to see.
SERVICE. Although all the crew I ran into seemed pleasant and helpful, they did not seem as happy to be there as I remember past NCL crews to be. I think the problem with service is that the staff is overwhelmed. Perhaps there is not enough staff to take care of that number of guests. This could explain the delay that some experience in getting food in the MDR, and the length of time it took to get some things taken care of. I really missed the big smiles on the crew's faces and believe it or not, I even missed "washy-washy" (although I may be the only one who did!). For a ship this size, I do think they needed additional crew.
Cruise Critic Roll-Call Group. Fantastic! We had such fun, and they helped to make my cruise a great one. We had formal and informal Meet & Greets, a Slot Pull, planned dinners together. It was terrific, and I hope more will take advantage of a great thing.
All-in-all, a great cruise. Would I do the Epic again - maybe not. I think I still prefer the smaller NCL ships. But if I had children I would certainly do it again as there is so much for them to do. Less
Cabin review: MC14052 Mini-Suite with Balcony
Room 14052. Mini Suite. Very quiet, even though it is under the Garden Buffet. I heard no noise from that. It was also on the other side of the elevators from the Kids Recess area, and I never heard the noise from there even once. I am not a fan of the wavy walls, etc. Separate bath facilities may pose a problem for some. Plenty of storage, but oddly shaped.Read All Mini-Suite with Balcony (MC) Reviews >>
Princess Reunion Cruise
Nice size, nice trip, understa...
The Dream ship was a nightmare...
If you are accustomed to Celeb...
Norwegian Epic Caribbean 4th F...
2/4 Eastern Cruise out of Port...

Indeed, as Susan, the former Darlington Football Club chairman's glamorous younger wife, pointed out, the only difference between her husband and God is that God never claims to be George Reynolds.
Yesterday, as the 69-year-old was sentenced to three years' jail, alongside his cousin Richard Tennick, for cheating the taxman out of £650,000, that arrogance was evident. Arriving in court, he gave a V-sign for victory, declaring the case was a "witch hunt".
Reynolds was orphaned at eight, abused at borstal, and entered into a spectacularly unsuccessful career as a safe cracker before a Catholic prison chaplain convinced him to become an entrepreneur. His determination led him to amass a fortune of £260m, and at one point a place as Britain's 87th richest man. That veneer of respectability and his assertion that he had left behind his "seedy" past appeared somewhat premature as he was told by Judge Guy Whitburn at Newcastle Crown Court that he had squandered his money on "egocentric folly" and his offending merited an immediate custodial sentence.
A man who claimed "The biggest thing that turns me on, besides the missus, is proving people wrong" had been proved just that. When he took on the chairmanship of Darlington FC, he famously said: "I'm dyslexic, backward, mentally deficient and I couldn't read or write. So I've got everything going for me as chairman of a football club." Everything, it would appear, except, as his barrister, David Robson QC, revealed this week, even the slightest interest in football.
Reynolds' story behind in poverty in Sunderland between the wars, when he was orphaned. He played truant from school and was sent, or, as he put it, sold, to a residential school where children slept in freezing dormitories and were forced to mix cement and pick potatoes. His reports were littered with phrases like mentally deficient, retarded and backward.
By the 1960s he was serving a six-month spell for theft and put in solitary confinement for comparing the Durham prison governor to a Nazi. He turned to safecracking during a career which he later conceded was so unsuccessful he would have earned more as a bus conductor. He nevertheless used his time in jail to teach himself to read and write, and in Lancashire's Kirkham Open Prison in 1964 he learnt from the accountants and solicitors incarcerated with him. He emerged and started with an ice-cream van, moving on to a milk bar and nightclub before establishing a kitchen worktop business. By the time he sold part of it in 1988 it was worth £32m.
In May 1999 he took over as chairman of Darlington Football Club, pumping £27m into the venture. Mayhem ensued at the Division Three club as players walked out after his wife claimed they threw matches and Reynolds made threatening home visits to the local newspaper's editor.
The prosecuting counsel Christopher Knox explained that Reynolds used money from his company's legitimate directors' expenses account to fund his extravagance, and added that he treated HM Customs and Revenue with "cavalier contempt".
Reynolds was given five years to repay his £424,252.50 share or face a consecutive five-year prison sentence, while Tennick, sentenced to two years, is threatened with a further three-year term if he fails to pay £225,747.50.

I go back to Newton’s third law, which states, “For every action there is an equal and opposite reaction.”
I don’t claim to know much about Newton. I know a little about his three laws of movement. I know that, “An object at rest stays at rest and an object in motion stays in motion with the same speed and in the same direction unless acted upon by an unbalanced force.”
I know that life moves no matter what we think or want it to do. I know that people act and behave the way they do—and sometimes, I swear, I fully believe the reason why people behave the way they do is they’ve never felt the consequences for their behavior. Or with less polish; I truly believe that people act and speak the way they do because they’ve never been punched in the face.
More than a decade ago, I worked in a commercial office building near 34th street in the engineering department for a chief that was less than honest. He was not a good man, sneaky, would throw anyone under the bus, or if the world became too cold; this was the kind of man that would throw anyone in the fire just to keep him warm. This was him, by any means necessary.
He pulled a trick or two to get his way into the chief’s position.
He thought he could get away with anything because he knew one of the higher-ups—which is sort of the same thing as knowing low friends in high places.
Meanwhile, he worked crooked deals. He took money. He even took money or “Taxed” one of the newer security guards Christmas tips because he was “Too new” to receive anything from the tenants. He laughed and bragged abut this to a few people.
But out of the kindness of the chief’s heart (hopefully you can read the sarcasm here,) the so-called chief took money from his wallet because he felt bad (or so he said) and gave the security guard some money and said, “Here, that’s from my own pocket.”
But the money wasn’t from his own pocket. No, this was money from the several envelopes that went down to the main office and was supposed to be distributed to the entire security crew. Some tenants gave $20. Some gave $50 and some gave $100 to the guards.
There was not a lot of envelopes but there was enough for a good Christmas tip, say like close to $750 is what I was told. So when the chief offered the new guard $50 the whole idea seemed meaner than ever to me. So do the math on what the chief walked away with.
Eventually, this man thought too highly of himself. He overstepped and delivered an ultimatum for a chief/building manger position, which was not received. This way, he could pull a bigger salary and steal more.
Upper management called his bluff. The chief quit and went to another building; only, this time, he was not a chief engineer.
He was low-man in the ranking system, which was a tremendous blow to his ego.
Eventually and ultimately, this did not work out. My former boss kept in contact with his low friend in a high place and when a building opened up with a chief’s position, which might not have been intentionally open—but hey low people do low things to get what they want.
(or to get someone fired)
The company took this man back and gave him another building, which meant my former chief was back and trying to find his way back to his old building. By this time, I had respectfully moved up in my building. I was well-liked by the tenants. I was seen as a capable engineer and was placed in the “Acting” chief’s position because the actual chief was out on disability.
I was supposed to go on vacation, which would have left the building without anyone in charge.
My other engineer was too knew to know what to do in case of an emergency, in which case; the powers that be (AKA the low friend in a high position) agreed to allow me to go on vacation and have my former chief come back to baby sit. I will call him Carmine from now on. But keep in mind, names will be changed to protect the guilty and me from a lawsuit.
Carmine was not a good man. He was dishonest at best. He was sneaky and trying to find his way back to his position because there were tenants that were paying for things to Carmine in cash for services rendered by the building.
Carmine walked through the door and came in to intimidate me. He gave me his best, “I’m back,” smile.
But he was not my chief anymore and I was no longer afraid of him. Instead, I decided to openly tell Carmine where to go and how to get there. he screamed his demands, to which I replied, “Nope!”
He threatened and then proceeded to call his low friend in a high place, who in turn called me, which I in turn explained what I saw, what I knew, and what Carmine was doing in the building.
I will say the conversation went very smoothly on my end. Since nobody wanted any sort of internal investigation or to be brought up on charges, the tone I received was mainly apologetic as I was reminded by the higher up, “Hey man, I have a family to feed.”
To which I responded, “And I want them to be fed. I just don’t want Carmine around me.”
Since no one wanted this to come to light, Carmine was not coming to visit my building. However, I quit shortly after for a new position in another building. And Carmine did come back as chief. They fired the building manager so Carmine could work his magic again and steal more money and pay up to his friend at a higher level.
But every building needs a building manager. They hired a new man, younger, smart, but less experienced. Carmine, of course, in his infinite wisdom and pride thought anyone new would never pick up on Carmine’s little scams, which weren’t always so little.
Turns out, Carmine took on a big contracting job that would have re-carpeted an entire floor, which was more than 50,000sqft. Carmine took a down payment for the materials. He hired a few of the company’s laborer’s that handled in-house construction, so there really wasn’t any labor cost because he put their pay through the building’s budget and gave them overtime. The job was mostly profit.
Carmine’s profit that is.
The building manager caught wind of this. And perhaps some of my details might be slightly inaccurate—but not by much; however, when the building manager approached Carmine, in his own defense, Carmine explained, “Don’t worry. I put you down for $500. This is how e do things around here”
Meanwhile, Carmine was making a killing!
The building manager declined.
The next day Carmine was escorted out of the building and fired. I heard he was teary-eyed and weeping but tried to defy the new and much younger building manager during the escorting process. Carmine threatened, “I’ll be back in a week and this time I’m coming to take your job!” but that never happened.
Unless Carmine was stopped or called out, he would have kept going. He would have kept moving in whichever direction he chose.
Instead, Carmine’s movement was altered be an equal and alternate force.
In full disclosure, I did not like Carmine, which was fine because he did not like me either. He tried to rip me off a few times. Nearly got me fired once. But his trick didn’t work.
Keep in mind:
Something has to happen in order to create change; otherwise all else remains constant.
I think this is where Newton was coming from when he said an object in motion remains in motion and an object at rest remains at rest, unless altered by an external force.
Maybe he had a boss like Carmine that wouldn’t quit being an asshole until something happened. Or, maybe Newton had people in his life that were still or stagnant; they were stuck and wouldn’t move or act or do anything until something forced them to do so.
Therefore I say change is change is an action. And action needs fuel. As I see it, motivation is fuel. Inspiration is fuel. Empowerment is fuel. And so is encouragement. I see these things as powerful sources; however for every action there is an equal and adverse reaction—which means anger is a motivation too. So is fear. So is shame. So is guilt. And so is rejection, which all comes down to one thing.
Which fuel do we use to live our best life?
We are certainly welcome to use and nurture any of the mentioned sources; however, which source is our best source?
Now, I go back to my opening thought of Newton’s law.
For every action there is an equal and opposite reaction.
I had to learn a few lessons the hard way. I had to learn that regardless to what my intentions are; interpretations can and will frequently be different than my intention.
In business, I had to learn not to joke a certain way. I had to learn that just because someone nods, laughs, or acquiesces, this does not mean they like or appreciate the joke. This is where boundaries need to come in. Boundaries are important!
Also, sometimes we say things insensitively without meaning harm; however, our intentions mean nothing when our words are misinterpreted or simply, interpreted differently and seen as harmful. Put simpley, we have no control, over outcome or interpretation, which is why it is always best, especially in a professional setting to be mindful of how we speak to one another.
But more than words; actions speak louder than words. Actions can be dangerous.
I saw a fistfight the other day, which involved a good friend of mine. This was being broken up but the other person was punching while my friend was being held back. Had to stop this but in fairness, I am not a street fighter, nor a tough guy. Violence scares me because I was beaten up a lot when I was young, which is why I used violence in my previous life to protect myself.
I had to do what I had to do. I understand this. I had to stop this man from punching my friend, which I did—however, fear came over me, which ignited my rage, which fueled my old thoughts and concerns, which inevitably took me back to a person i never want to have to be in order to compete in this kind of situation.
I choked this man unconscious, which could have gone too far if the situation went differently. I understand I did what I had to do; however, this hurt me. I cried after (if you want to know the truth) because I don’t ever want to hurt anyone like that or be tied to anything violent.
I cried because I saw this man’s face when he lost consciousness. This was not pretty.
I did not like what I saw or felt. But this is good. This means my transformation is in fact, complete. I am nothing like that man I used to be. Nothing like him at all.
For every action, there is a reaction. I am fortunate for my lesson because I am reminded that sometimes we make a choice and because of our choice; we lose our say in what happens next.
I can choose what I do but I cannot choose how anyone else will respond. The man who created the fistfight learned the same lesson. He made a choice to act out, which was met be an equal and adverse response, which could have turned drastically wrong for everyone involved; including me.
I wish I could apologize to this man. But I can’t so I’ll put my apologies to the wind and say them here. I wonder what he was thinking before losing consciousness. I wonder if fear consumed him. I hope so because maybe this way he will learn.
As it is, the world has too many people like Carmine. I hope for this man’s sake; he learns and changes his way. And for me, I wept as I wrote this because I nearly created a horrible situation for myself.
Because for every action there is a reaction and I don’t ever want to have to pay for something tragic again.
Hey my man,
wherever you are. I am sorry. I did what I had to do. I just wish things could have been resolved differently . . .

Thoughts on life from Pat Oaks
A Christmas to be remembered
It was Christmas Eve. Jason had to work at the tv studio so we packed all our Christmas food into laundry baskets, along with a festive table cloth, candles and a center piece and off we went to have Christmas eve dinner at the tv studio.
On the way home I had a text from our preacher, Paul. He asked if I could get in touch with Patsy, a widow who lives alone and has no family to care for her. He said he had tried to call and she wasn't answering the phone, I called and she answered. She said she was sick. When I called Paul back, he had already called an ambulance to go to her house. I called her back and told her to watch for it.
An hour and a half later, she called and said that the ambulance had never come! So Tommy and John boy went to get her and take her to the hospital. They left her and came home and got a shower because at this point we didn't know what was wrong.
At 11 o'clock p.m. she called that she thought they were going to keep her over night, so we went to bed. At 4 a.m. the hospital called for us to come and get her! WHAT??
So, the guys left to pick her up. On the way out of our parking lot they looked over at the church building and water was pouring out of the building, down the driveway and into the road. It was bitter cold here, so the water had frozen in the road and looked like an ice skating rink!
When they had gotten Patsy safely home they came back to the church. A pipe had broken in the ceiling and water was pouring into the church building, out the door and down the driveway. After turning the water off, and sweeping water out of the door, they finally got home around 8 a.m. got another shower, and headed out to get Patsy's prescription. (She has a kidney infection,)
This Christmas has taught me so much. The first thing it taught me is just how selfish I am. I had started to ask Patsy to come and spend Christmas day with us, and for purely selfish reasons, did not.
Second it taught me how the Lord always orchestrates things in our lives and how He always works things out for the good, if we but listen.
The most important thing it taught me though, is from now on I need to be aware of people around me who are alone and hurting, and invite them into the comfort and peace that our family has. I won't make the mistake again of wanting to keep Christmas just for our immediate family. There are "shepherds abiding in the field keeping watch over their flocks by night" and they want to be invited in to see the Christ Child. What if they had stayed out in those cold, barren fields and never come to the manger?
He invites ALL to come and see Him. Why don't we?
Leave a Reply.

Mr. Rogers’ Neighborhood was one of very few shows I watched as a child. I liked it better than Sesame Street or cartoons and I always felt a little sheepish about that. I thought I should know that those other shows were “cooler” but something about the kind man who had a trolley in his living room, talked to puppets, and sang songs left a stronger impression on me.
I liked the field trips he would take us on through his picture frame. I still can’t use a crayon without thinking of the crayon factory visit. I liked figuring out the moral conundrums of the Neighborhood of Make-believe along with Good King Friday. Lady Elaine Fairchilde always scared and fascinated me – truly a strong and complex female character on television.
But I think the part of the show that I liked the best was when Mr. Rogers had guests stop by to play music or talk about art or big things that were happening in the world. When I was a little, having people over for dinner was one of the most exciting things. I loved meeting new people and listening to grown-ups talk at the table and I would get a similar thrill watching Mr. Rogers have his neighbors stop by.
Mr. Rogers interest in his guests, his honest questions, and his obviously kind curiosity gave me permission to be similarly curious and ask questions of adults and people from different backgrounds from mine. Even now, I am still learning to ask the simple yet profound questions that were the essence of Mr. Rogers’ Neighborhood.
I saw the new Mr. Rogers documentary Won’t You Be My Neighbor? last weekend and the part of his story that hit me the hardest was his insecurity about whether his work was making a difference in the world. He wondered if anyone understood the big work his show was doing or if everyone just saw it as a sweet kids show. When he was asked to do a PSA after 9/11, he asked if anyone would even care what he had to say. Little did he know that that PSA would be quoted and replayed after every national and international tragedy since then.
I happened to watch this documentary on the day Anthony Bourdain died which meant I ended up drawing connections between their work that I probably wouldn’t have otherwise. Anthony Bourdain’s shows also exhibited that kind of curiosity and inquisitiveness that draws people in and makes them feel more familiar than other or strange. The way Bourdain embraced other cultures through their food with open arms made the world feel close and accessible.
Anthony Bourdain’s shows made a Vietnamese noodle shop feel like it was part of my neighborhood as much as the BBQ joint in South Carolina. He allowed himself to be a learner and a teacher in each of these interactions and over the course of his career exhibited a greater humility, intentionally moving away from some of the brashness of his early career.
I have no idea what Mr. Rogers or Mr. Bourdain thought of the legacy of their work at the end of their lives. I hope they were proud of what they accomplished. I hope they know they inspired many to be good neighbors through asking questions and inviting others into our lives through food and hospitality. I know their work helped me be less afraid of asking questions and being curious of others. Their work gave me permission to keep seeking to know my “neighbors” and live in a wider neighborhood.

NEW YORK (WFAN/AP) -- Derrick Mason came to the Jets expecting to be a major contributor for what he hoped would be a Super Bowl run to cap a terrific career.
Instead, his role was diminished after just five weeks and the veteran wide receiver was sent packing to Houston when the Jets completed a trade with the Texans on Wednesday for an undisclosed conditional draft pick.
"Things didn't work out on the field with Derrick," Jets general manager Mike Tannenbaum explained. "With that said, we were committed to trying to make it work and get him to play better on the field at a level that he was accustomed to and what we were expecting."
Fellow wide receiver Plaxico Burress appeared to have an issue with the company line.
"My production hasn't been all that great either," Burress said yesterday. "Santonio's production hasn't been all that great either. So you can't just point at one guy. You can't just say it was his production."
Mason made some critical comments two weeks ago, saying the team had "cracks" that needed to be fixed. Along with Burress and Santonio Holmes, he was also mentioned in a Daily News report last Sunday that said the wide receivers had met with head coach Rex Ryan individually during the last few weeks to complain about Brian Schottenheimer's system.
All three denied the report, as did Ryan - and the team took the rare step of issuing a statement to also say it was untrue.
Ryan had what he called "a private conversation" with Mason last week, but both he and Tannenbaum reiterated that Mason's locker room comments did not play into their decisions.
"Derrick happened to be the guy that was let go," said Burress. "There's been guys shuffled in and out for the last five weeks. When you're a guy like Derrick Mason who wears what he thinks on his sleeve and speaks his mind, whatever people want to say about you, he kind of gets to be 'that guy.'"
Mason acknowledged he was surprised by the deal, but expects to be a significant contributor for the Texans - and resume his quest for a ring.
"I'm going to enjoy this run that we're going to go on," he said outside the Texans' locker room late Wednesday. "It's going to be a nice run. Hopefully, it'll end up in Indy. I'm looking forward to that."
Tannenbaum said he received a call from the Texans on Tuesday inquiring about Mason's availability, and the teams agreed to a deal later that night - a day after Ryan said the wide receiver was "going to still be a part of what we do." If Houston hadn't called, Tannenbaum said, Mason would still be a member of the Jets.
"He would have been here for the balance of the season," Tannenbaum said. "He has a contract for next year. The fact that Rex knew him was one of the reasons we went after him."
The move, reportedly for a seventh-round pick in next year's draft, comes with the Jets (2-3) in the midst of a three-game losing streak and dealing with lots of criticism directed at quarterback Mark Sanchez, Schottenheimer and the rest of the offense.
"At times, I think our offense has looked productive, efficient," Tannenbaum said. "At other times, we've all seen it, it hasn't been to the level that we hope or expect. With that said, I believe in the guys in the locker room."
He and Ryan also denied that they were sending a message to the team by letting Mason go this early.
"It's not a wakeup call to me," Burress said. "It's not the first time that it's happened. I've been around this business for a long time and I've seen some of the best come and go. And we'll keep on playing football."
Mason signed with the team in August to high expectations, with Ryan - who was with him in Baltimore for several years - predicting at least 80 catches for him as the No. 3 receiver behind Burress and Holmes. But he struggled early with 13 receptions for 115 yards, and was benched in favor of rookie Jeremy Kerley in New York's 30-21 loss at New England on Sunday.
"I can't worry about what happened in New York," Mason said. "I enjoyed my two months there, if it was that. I enjoyed Rex, I've known Rex for a long time. But things just don't last sometimes. You want one thought as an organization, and then you come out with another. I think it was a win-win for everybody. I'm not upset."
Ryan repeatedly said he has "a ton of respect for Derrick," but added that the team simply couldn't look past the development of Kerley, a fifth-round pick out of TCU.
"It's a part of the business," Kerley said. "I wish him the best of luck. He's a great player, and he'll be great other places. I'm just glad I could step up and be the man in the third spot."
The deal ended a quick stint in New York for the 37-year-old Mason, who spent the last six seasons with Baltimore. He signed a two-year deal with the Jets in early August, choosing them over a return with the Ravens or the Tennessee Titans. He had been released by Baltimore before training camp and was expected to fill the spot of the departed Jerricho Cotchery.
But it appeared he wasn't picking up the offense as quickly as the team expected. Still, Mason insisted that his football skills haven't diminished.
"The numbers may have," he said, "but if you watch me, week in and week out, it's the same guy."
Mason acknowledged when he signed with New York that it would be tough to leave his two children back home in Nashville. He flew back home every week when the team had an off day - an agreement the team made with Mason when they signed him.
Mason didn't practice with the Texans on Wednesday, but coach Gary Kubiak said he still might play.
"He's played for a few friends of mine, so I know what he knows, terminology-wise," Kubiak said. "I've got to see how quick I can get him ready to help us in this game. He could (play Sunday), but let me spend a day or two with him and see where he's at, and how much of our stuff overlaps with what he's been doing. Hopefully, that will happen."
With his 7-yard catch last Sunday, Mason became the 18th player in NFL history to reach 12,000 yards receiving. He can help the Texans' offense while Andre Johnson recovers from a right hamstring injury. Coincidentally, if he plays this Sunday for the Texans, Mason's first game will be back in Baltimore.
"We had a chance to go get a guy who still runs very well, even though he's played a long time in this league," Kubiak said. "He's been very effective in this league, and we feel like we can catch him up really fast. That was a big key."
Do you buy Tannenbaum's explanation for the Mason trade? Sound off in the comments below...
(TM and Copyright 2011 CBS Radio Inc. and its relevant subsidiaries. CBS RADIO and EYE Logo TM and Copyright 2011 CBS Broadcasting Inc. Used under license. All Rights Reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed. The Associated Press contributed to this report.)
for more features.

The video has been added to your member zone favourites.
This hot Indian girl told me that she wanted to have a shower before having sex. She came out wearing nothing but a towel. She did not wrap it around her body, she kept drying her body. I could see the water droplets dripping from her body. After this, she covered her hairy pussy with the towel and sat on the bed. I pulled the towel off as I want to keep seeing her cunt.Â Now, look up her big boobs. She pulled my boxer down and stroked my penis for a while. Then, she bent and took the thing into her mouth and started the blowjob.

BJP president Nitin Gadkari has said it will not be entirely correct to say the 1984 anti-Sikh riots were initiated by the Congress government.
In an interview given to BBC's Urdu service and broadcast on Sunday, Mr. Gadkari said that the media had focussed intensely on the Gujarat riots of 2002 but let off the Congress governments lightly for other riots. He first said the Gujarat riots were a fact, but “the basic thing is nobody can manipulate such incidents. These were unfortunate reactions by the people at large.”
Asked if this applied to the situation in 1984 also and whether there was no manipulation involved then, he said: “Look, some people may be involved in those riots but it would be entirely incorrect to say that the riots were initiated by the government.”
As news agencies put out reports based on the interview, Mr. Gadkari denied having said this. From Nagpur, he told PTI that his comment was about the Gujarat riots and the Gujarat government, not about 1984 and the Congress government.
Amit Baruah, head of the BBC Hindi service here, told The Hindu that it had received no denial or clarification on the interview. It had been 24 hours since it was on air, and the tape recording of the interview, in its possession, made it very clear that the question was about 1984 and Mr. Gadkari was certainly talking about the 1984 riots and the Congress government.

Edging for 1 hour and 45 minutes!!!
Well I have just been edging/balloning for 1 hour and 45 minutes! I thought I better stop and give it a break. Towards the end my cock looked much bigger and girthier than ever. I measured it and it was 6 1/4”!!! That is 1/4” bigger than I have ever measured it before! I am not saying that it is gains or it will stay but I think it is definately some pay dirt.
I think that what I was doing was ballooning more than edging because I used a cock ring and some oil and a vibrator and watched some porn pics and just kept it as hard as I could. I did not try to keep it at ejac. point.

The Story Begins
by, 10-23-2008 at 10:04 AM (1426 Views)
So I have recently purchased my 2002 Chevy Avalanche 2500 in April. Found it on Craigslist for $12500 with only 37000 miles. What a Deal. When I drove it home heard a faint exhaust leak. Which was actually a really bad exhaust leak, but the noise dampening of the cab was so good that I barely heard it. There were 2 exhaust manifold studs broken off. One on each side. I got quotes in upwards of $1500 to fix it. Normally I would tackled it myself but I would be back and forth to Korea for work all summer long and didn't have the time.
I called the previous owner and told him the issue. Massachusett law really protects car buyers well with there lemon law. He said he take the vehicle back or give me $500 towards fixing it. I really loved the truck so I took the 500. My wife had a friend who was working for a guy that just recently opened a shop and was looking for new customers. He said lowside $550 and high side $1300.
Had him do a tune up while he was in there too. So the over all total was $855. I think I made out pretty good.
I've worked the truck pretty hard since I've had it and she just keeps wanting more. Now I'm on to modding. First I think I'll start with a CAI and throttle body spacer. Then 4" lift with 33" tires. Then we'll see where it goes from there.
It nice that this forum is here. I know I'll have lots of questions for you all. And in the process I hope I can help a few people along the way.

review of Lisa - Childminder in Stanway
I came across Lisa on Childcare website. As soon as I met her I knew I found the person to look after my little boy. He was just after 1year old at the time. He warmed up to Lisa straight away, she is very friendly and kind, make children feel safe and comfortable. She provided great care for my little one, not just fun but educational needs. She took him to different indoors and outdoors facilities, did different activities each day. He was very happy child in her care.
Lisa is also very reliable, flexible too, she was always helpful with whatever situation occurred to us.
I would highly recommend Lisa.

Just to see, we went over to the Lafayette Bakery, where baker Ted Kefalinos made his famous drunken Negro head cookies. (Howard Stern’s still talking about it, so soon the whole world will be placing mail orders.) The cookies were gone, and Kefalinos said his Obama inauguration offering was all a “mistake.” He added to his previous explanations a story about a black neighbor who’d told him about being called the other n-word, which she compared to the word “Negro,” which led the baker to think that was an acceptable variant. He seems a simple soul, as one would have to be to offer drunken Negro head cookies in Greenwich Village. We had a cream puff, which was pretty good. photo (cc) In2jazz.
This article from the Village Voice Archive was posted on January 26, 2009

This is a guest post by single mom Cassi Upshaw, who lives in Gulf Shores, Ala., with her son.
I cared for my mom for roughly seven years. She was on disability, from a kidney disease that was incurable. Over the years, it quickly went from her helping care for my son and helping me out as a single mom, to me caring for her, to my son even helping pick up the slack.
The biggest challenges were co-parenting while our roles were being reversed and I was more the parent, and she was more the child. Having to take her keys from her and set down ground rules was a very difficult task, as the illness progressed. I also had the challenge of being recently single, wanting to have a dating life, but moving back in with her because she had a larger house and financially it just made sense. The lines were blurred for a while about who was helping who. My desire to have my own life, but not to abandon her either, was a really hard thing to balance. When it came to hooking her up to machines nightly, after I'd worked a full day, gotten home and cooked dinner and did homework with my son, there was little time left for myself, much less any social activities. As selfish as that sounds, a social life was something that I needed then more than ever.
For the last 10 months of my mom's life, my dad stepped in and helped out, moving her into his home. While they were still married and had a perfectly fine relationship, they lived separately most of my adult life, and my mom always followed my son and me wherever we moved.
To this day, I harbor the guilt of not being there in her last days
The last few months of her life were the hardest. Not being there daily, but knowing I had to be here for my son was a difficult thing to balance. To this day, I harbor the guilt of not being there in her last days, as she quickly progressed into the latter stages of life. Ultimately I know I made the right decision, I took care of her for as long as I possibly could, I asked for, and accepted help when it was available. At the end of the day, my responsibility was to take care of my son, and my dad was capable of taking care of my mother. Related post: Tips for caring for your aging parents — when you're a single mom
After her passing, my dad didn't get sick, but he definitely began to show his age. For nearly the next year and a half, he became my person. My person to grieve with, complain with, and laugh with. He visited me at least one week every two months — sometimes one week every month. Our relationship had never been closer. For once, he was truly alone, and I tried to suffice as a companion in his life. He went through a rebellious stage, where he began drinking again and gambling, kind of like a young college kid trying to find his way through the ins and outs of the world. Having recently lost my mother, rather than ridicule him, I really found humor in it. Seeing him ultimately have fun, seeing him laugh and have a good time, seeing him hit on the pretty 30-somethings at the casino was hilarious, and they knew that 69-year-old man was harmless. In someways, he was still his ornery self, getting stuck in his old ways, and hypocritical thoughts, but in many other ways, he was a lively spirit, as though he had been born again. Related: Is long-term care insurance affordable for single women?
If he was ornery and spiteful, I kept my laughter to myself, knowing that one day I would miss his crotchety old ass.
As the weeks went on, he made comments about not feeling well, looking back on it, I overlooked all the signs, and ultimately, I'm really glad I did. Rather than worrying every single day about his well-being, I learned to appreciate him for what he was that day. If he was ornery and spiteful, I kept my laughter to myself, knowing that one day I would look back on that, and miss his crotchety old ass… and if he was light on his feet, carefree, and almost irresponsible in a sense, I ate it up. I made him feel like there was no reason to think anything less. He opened up to me about not ever wanting another woman to marry, but having one to snuggle up to you every now and then wouldn't be so bad.
The facade that I had grown up thinking he was so strong always, all disappeared. He became real to me. He became relatable. The last time he called was in the wee hours of the morning; he was at the casino, had entered some crazy drawing and was playing Texas hold'em. He left me a message, telling me that he had met up with some girls, the same ones he had spent the previous weekend getting to know and that he was having a great time. He went to bed at night and never woke up.
Alone might be where I'm at, but I can always depend on myself, and I won't ever let me down.
The challenges I now face are not having someone to call when I have a question about parenting. No longer feeling like I have someone on my side, no matter what might happen. The harsh reality of being ultimately alone, some days, it's overwhelming. But I've learned that I'm far stronger than I ever thought I could be. I've learned, that I lived the first 29 years of my life scared, I was scared of everything. I constantly called to check on my parents, wondering if they were OK every minute of every day. I've double, triple, quadruple locked my doors, always afraid of what might happen. But when my parents died, when they both finally left me, and I learned what it was to be ultimately alone. I found the strength inside myself. I realized, alone might be where I'm at, but I know I can always depend on myself, and I won't ever let me down.
I realized, despite being scared for 29 years, everyone still dies. My dad always used to say, “no one gets out of here alive.” There's really no truer statement… So rather than being scared, now I'm living. At 30 years old, I'm living. I'm living my life the best that I can every single day. I'm being the best mom, the best employee, the best woman, the best everything I can. I realized, rather than blaming circumstances or people influencing your life for the negative outcome, dismiss it, and push forward. Channel that energy into something positive.
We no longer have problems, but challenges.
We no longer have problems, but challenges, and it takes as much energy to bitch about one as it does to find a solution and pursue it. So while my challenges maybe or may not be what you're currently experiencing, we will all eventually come to the same conclusion. We will be here, and our parents won't. So find your strength now. Love them for where they are in their life, wherever that might be at the moment. And learn to push forward, for your parents may have left you, but there is still a little someone looking up, depending on you to be the parent to them.
Related posts on managing time as a single mom
Emma Johnson is a veteran money journalist, noted blogger, bestselling author and an host of the award-winning podcast, Like a Mother with Emma Johnson. A former Associated Press Financial Wire reporter and MSN Money columnist, Emma has written for the New York Times, Wall Street Journal, Forbes, Glamour, Oprah.com, U.S. News, Parenting, USA Today and others. Her #1 bestseller, The Kickass Single Mom (Penguin), was named to the New York Post's ‘Must Read” list.
Emma regularly comments on issues of modern families, gender equality, divorce, sex and motherhood for outlets like CNN, Headline News, New York Times, Wall Street Journal, Fox & Friends, CNBC, NPR, TIME, MONEY, O, The Oprah Magazine and The Doctors. She was named Parents magazine’s “Best of the Web,” “Top 15 Personal Finance Podcasts” by U.S. News, and a “Most Eligible New Yorker” by New York Observer.
A popular speaker, Emma presented at the United Nations Summit for Gender Equality. Read more about Emma here.

Mahmudullah has become Bangladesh clutch-hitter at crunch moments. Since early 2016, he's also matured into a batsman who can craft tough runs, the 30-40 extra runs, that often make the difference in limited-overs cricket. This approach hasn't really helped his poor Test form.
Until his two centuries in the last three Tests, he had averaged 24.75 in 26 innings and his place was the only one, among other senior batsman, that was under scrutiny. When he failed twice in Sylhet against Zimbabwe last month, it appeared as if the pressure had consumed him.
At the time, he wanted to bring "mental adjustments to his batting." One way of doing that was "being positive." In Mirpur against Zimbabwe and now in this series, he's left the ball as well as he's played them, an aspect that hasn't been a hallmark of his game yet.
Here, Mahmudullah's discipline lasted for 242 deliveries, his longest innings in international cricket till date. His previous longest innings was the 177-ball he needed to make his maiden Test century against New Zealand in 2010.
"I have been thinking from the second Test against Zimbabwe, I decided to take care of my mentality," Mahmudullah said. "I wanted to remain positive, nothing more than that. I just wanted to score runs. Having said that, I was quite lucky [today] as well. A few decisions went my way and an edge didn't carry to the slip. I have a lot of areas to improve, I have to keep working hard."
Against Zimbabwe, his unbeaten 101 revived Bangladesh from 25 for 4, eventually paving way towards setting a huge target. Against West Indies, he had to fight through 19 overs along with Shakib on the opening evening. Then on the second day he survived two lbw reviews, a catch that almost carried to Shimron Hetmyer at slip and another that Shai Hope dropped at slip.
Then he saw Shakib and Liton Das tear into the West Indies attack. When he moved to the 90s, he saw No. 10 Taijul Islam batting more comfortably. This must have been humbling for someone used to dominating bowling attacks.
"The ball wasn't coming on to the bat. When Shakib and I were batting on the first day, we had to work hard," he said of his grind. "I think we hit only a couple of boundaries. I wanted to be positive, but take minimum risks. The new ball was easier to bat against, which gave us more scoring options. It starts reducing as the ball gets older. We were looking to utilize the bad balls."
Ahead of the Test, Shakib spoke in details about his desire to see batsmen stick to their natural game. Shakib was indirectly asked about Mahmudullah and Soumya Sarkar, and without taking names, he made it clear that his stroke-players had to stick to what they do best.
Mahmudullah, though, sees it differently. He isn't fretting over not hitting fours and sixes anymore. He doesn't mind playing dot balls and grinding down bowlers. The big-hitter has added another chapter to his batting, and it can only mean good news for Bangladesh.

I need to plant about 30 foot of hedge. I quite like laurel, and went to the local garden centre to check it out. I reckon a potted plant is better, and they had two options. Both appeared to be the same variety (Cherry), both were the same size and both looked identical. The difference was colour. One was deep green, at around €15 and the other was a bright green at €6. I asked the difference and the lady said the deeper green one was a new variety in the past few years, and was more “compact” Now its colour was very nice in fairness, but the delta in cost has me thinking. Can I achieve a deep lush colour from any laurel? Is it a feeding thing..?? Also, since I didn’t exactly get a scientific answer on the difference, what is that difference likely to be..??

Can you guess what the true version of the story behind this photo is?
A) I woke up at 5, eager to meet the new day. I jumped out of bed with a smile on my face, had a light breakfast, put my running clothes on and ran to the woods. The sun was up in the sky already, and it was a beautiful day. My body was fully awake and bursting with energy. Suddenly, I caught a movement. I stopped and took my phone out. Two beautiful roe deer were behind a tree. They spotted me and, friendly and tame as roe deer usually are, they came towards me to say hi and pose for a picture, stopping not 5 meters away from me. The phone camera focused on them, I clicked, and, talented a photographer as I am, I managed to capture the grace and speed of the deer in this spectacular, artistic photograph. The deer then turned and slowly walked away, melting into the woods.
B) I was woken up at 5 by a purring Sote, with stiff calves. I crawled out of bed with my eyes half shut, had a light breakfast, put my running clothes on and dragged myself up to the woods. The sun was up in the sky already, and it was a beautiful day. My mind was fully awake but my body was non-cooperative. Suddenly, I caught a movement. I stopped and took my phone out. Two beautiful roe deer were behind a tree. They spotted me and, shy and scared as roe deer usually are, they frantically tried to get away from me, inexplicably heading towards me instead, or perhaps wanted to warn me with their big sharp horns. I fumbled with the phone camera, nearly dropped the phone in the process, focused on who knows what, managed to press the right button and took this craptacular photo. The deer were now not 5 meters from me, and I would have taken the perfect deer picture, if I hadn't pressed the wrong button that shut the camera off instead. Before I had time to switch the camera on again, they realised they were running in the wrong direction and disappeared into the woods, leaving me with nothing but a blurry photo.
|There, I put a circle around the deer for you. Just in case it's hard to see.|
To compensate for this eye sore, here's a better photo that I took later during my run:

There are days and weeks when life can seem quite challenging, for all of us. It's interesting though because those times are when the best ideas and goals are created. It is in the times you are faced with one hundred things at once, called ten thousand times each day with the "important" calls that can't wait, and have sick children and partner... that you end up realizing how wonderful your life truly is.
This past year has been interesting because it has been one of economic let down for many. In April, the Oregon Unemployment Rate was 12% and is now starting to slightly decrease. Nike, one of Oregon's staple businesses, let go of 500 employees. That came as a shock to many of us, but for some who I spoke with on the Nike campus, they took it as a sign for a new adventure. One Monday in the Baby Boot Camp Nike Class I asked the Baby Boot Campers how they were doing, and how their spouses were. One responded sharing, "My husband found out Thursday is his last day, and while we are shocked, he is excited for what he is now able to try and face next. He actually realized that he can now spend more time with our kids for the Summer and then start a new path". I was so excited to hear that as not many feel that way at first.
5 years ago Jack was let go with his company. Makenzie was only 6 weeks old and I was on maternity leave from my job. It was a gift to us, we were actually quite excited. We took his job loss as a challenge, most definitely, but also as a sign that we were off to a bigger and better adventure as a family of 3. It was that Summer that we flipped a coin and moved to Portland. This August it will be 5 years since that coin toss. We haven't looked back since ...we felt that it was an opportunity to see what greatness we could unfold within ourselves and our stengths as individuals and as a team.
To imagine if I didn't take the leap of faith and start Baby Boot Camp while being new to the city seems unfathomable to me now. While it has been a ride that is ever changing, it has also been one that led me to find so many incredible and supportive people to surround myself with. The athletes in class, the instructors, the talented business owners I network with, and the families who attend class daily...wow. And be able to grow and change at my pace since am my own boss; that ishuge and beyond exciting.
When I look back to the growth that has occurred within myself since starting my businesses, I also look at how the growth has occurred within YOU, my clients and peers.
When many of you started exercising again, you didn't think doing a traditional push up was possible. You didn't know if you could juggle parenting and working simultanously. You weren't sure if having one child, or two (or three or four) was your future, but you grew and found out what worked for you. While some days may be tough to attend class, you make it and leave having exercised harder than you thought possible two hours before. What is now apparant on many of your faces is how you have become stronger physically and mentally, facing the challenges each day head on. You have more power witin yourself than you probably realize and arebeyond naturally great; you are naturally incredible!
Believe it, know that with change the best things happen. And when they happen, be prepared for the magical opportunities change brings.

Xavier McDaniel has a fantasy about his first on-court meeting with Patrick Ewing this season. He has already told Ewing, warned him, as such. After all, even if they play for different teams now -- McDaniel for Celtics, Ewing for the Knicks -- they are still friends.
They will meet in the lane, perhaps with McDaniel driving. They will clash, they will bump, and it will be Ewing who tumbles to the court. McDaniel won't hurt him. He would never want to do that. He might leave a little bruise, though. And afterward, when McDaniel stands over his friend and former teammate, he will do little more than chuckle at the pleasure of it all.
"Oh, I'll probably ask him if he's all right," McDaniel said, grinning wickedly, "but I won't help him up."
This is meant to be funny. It is. But most of his statements about the Knicks are not made in jest. McDaniel says he is not bitter about his time in New York, only happy to have the contract he wanted: a five-year, approximately $13 million deal with the Celtics that he signed, much to the Knicks' shock, on Sept. 7. He says he is not looking backward, but is concentrating on his future in Boston. 'Never Look Back'
"Once I do something, I never look back," McDaniel said, quite earnestly, after a recent Celtics practice at Brandeis University in suburban Boston. "I don't know how the reaction is going to be to me in New York. The way I played in the playoffs was the way I'm capable of playing. I'm going to show people that."
It is clear, though, that certain things still eat at him. One is the way his contract talks were handled by the Knicks' organization. McDaniel's decision to leave New York was mostly about business. But there are other things too, mainly the way he was used by Coach Pat Riley, who frequently benched him in the fourth quarter late last year.
"Sometimes, it was because he wasn't playing well," Riley said, "but sometimes it was simply because I was happy with the combination we had on the floor."
McDaniel didn't mind when people told him he played terribly last season. He knew it. His mother told him, almost every night. And he believed her. Nellie McDaniel always tells him the truth.
What he didn't believe -- and still doesn't -- is that any of it was his fault.
"You're damn right I looked like garbage out there," McDaniel said. "I'm always going to look like garbage if I'm being played the way I was played." Offensive, Not Defensive
McDaniel contends that in a late-season argument he had with Riley, he was told by the coach that he was not playing as many minutes because his defense was poor. That angered him then, and it angers him now.
"I told him that if he got me for defense," McDaniel said, referring to Riley, "he got the wrong man. I'm a solid defensive player, but not a great one-on-one player. I'm an offensive player, and I've always been one. That's what I thought New York got me for."
Riley recently said that the Knicks were going to miss McDaniel's "primal instinct," but McDaniel doesn't think he got to display much of it in New York.
The Celtics have certainly had a chance to see McDaniel's wild streak in action. In three preseason games, he has gotten in the face of Karl Malone, Charles Barkley and Kevin Willis. His new teammates love it.
"Definitely, we have an intimidation factor out there on the floor, now that we have X," Celtics captain Reggie Lewis said. "I think he's shown his toughness out there right from the beginning. That is the biggest difference, but also we now know we have another body that we can go to on the inside."
But for all of McDaniel's talk about wanting more minutes and a better situation, it is questionable whether Boston will be able to provide that for him. The Celtics are a team deep at every position, particularly at forward, with Kevin Gamble and Rick Fox at small forward and Kevin McHale and Ed Pinckney in the power forward spot. Coach Chris Ford, who has a bigger problem on his hands trying to find enough minutes for both Sherman Douglas and Dee Brown at point guard, has assured McDaniel that there will be enough minutes for him, and McDaniel is satisfied with that. Replacing a Legend?
The real hole that needs to be filled on the team, though, is the one left by the retirement of Larry Bird. No one will say that McDaniel was signed to replace Bird, but there are many -- especially the fans in the stands -- who will expect more of him simply because he was the man Boston picked up after Bird retired. Even General Manager Dave Gavitt, when speaking of McDaniel, allowed the Bird word to slip into his conversation.
"I think Bird probably was the player on our team who initiated things more in the past than anyone else," Gavitt said. "It's not that we expect X to replace Larry, or anything like that, but that's something he can do for us. I don't think the rest of our team is really soft. It's just that they are retaliators, whereas X comes at you. He holds his ground."
Fox would agree with that. At a recent intrasquad scrimmage, after a few bumps and a little trash talking, McDaniel checked Fox hard into a courtside table.
Fox fell. Robert Parish howled. McDaniel? He peered over at Fox briefly, made sure he was not bleeding or broken or in great pain. Then he walked back onto the court, leaving Fox prone on the sideline.
Call it practice. McDaniel visits Ewing at Madison Square Garden in three weeks.
Photo: "Once I do something, I never look back," said Xavier McDaniel, who signed a five-year deal with the Celtics, much to the Knicks' shock. (Steve Lipofsky for The New York Times)

It’s very rare that I get really upset about something my assistants have done. Let’s not forget that I made some pretty big mistakes when I was an assistant and was given second chances. I would be a horrible person if I weren’t fair when mistakes are made, however, some mistakes are bigger than others. I was on my way to the Tory Burch show when I got the text from my client saying that they were 45 minutes away from leaving their hotel and they still didn’t have their outfit for the fashion show they were attending. I called and texted Thomas and there was no answer. I called Hannah and she was just about to leave the hotel. I told her what was going on and she told me that Thomas had everything and should be on the way. I thought about it and said, “Go to his room and knock on the door. He’s still asleep,” and he was. Hannah rushed down to the client’s hotel and she got her her look in time.
You handled Thomas professionally, direct-without anger and not personal or below the belt. Nice job.
I had the opportunity to catch up on all the shows that I missed, thanks to Bravo. And I must say that I adore you and Gary. Brad, you are so talented. You, Gary and you're team are a class act. I cried when I saw the gift that Gary gave you for your Anniversary. In fact, I saw it twice and it affected me the same way each time. Must admit that I also watch the "Rachel Zoe" show and hope that both of you will succeed in your endeavors. Happy for a new season. Will not miss any of the shows. By the way, it's so refreshing to watch something so exciting, fun and entertaining!!!

know everyone wants to hear all about that night that I lost my
virginity to my bf, and I will tell you about it in a minute, but first
I want to tell you about some other things that were going on in my
First of all, remember I was only twelve
years old and up till I met Buster I had been just a regular kid who
liked the same things that other kids liked and my life was pretty
normal. Of course puberty had a lot to do with the way things turned
out too, oh and of course that fact that I'm gay.
It seemed like all of a sudden sex was
the most important thing in my life, well, and love....for Buster. The
thing with my little bro's feet didn't help things either. I was not
only sexually active, but guilty of incest too. Wow, I guess I was one
messed up kid. Funny thing is though, I didn't feel as messed up I
should have. I guess once you find out you're a certain way it just
seems normal to you, no matter what other people think. Of course I was
surrounded by other boys who liked the same stuff and so they weren't
giving me any grief over it, but I knew that most of the kids at school
would demolish my rep if they found out. I mean I bet there were other
kids like me and Buster, but we weren't exactly advertising for them.
For one thing, we had each other and for another there just wasn't
enough time or opportunity to look for kids like us. But what we didn't
know then was that someone had been noticing us and soon we would find
out we were definitely not alone.
I guess the reason I stopped to tell you
all this is because I want you to know that I wasn't a bad person,
still aren't but that I did make some mistakes and I wasn't always
perfect. I tried my best to be a good bf to Buster, and good big
brother to Joey, and a decent kid all around, but the kind of secrets I
was keeping (we were keeping) eventually took it's toll on me.
Enough about that, I know you want to
hear the sex stuff, so here goes.
Remember what I said before: I fell asleep right there laying on my
boyfriend and when I woke up later he was still there under me and he
looked up at me and smiled and I knew right then and there that it was
time to loose my virginity to the boy I loved.
Our bodies were like glued together by our dried cum
but it felt sexy and I liked the smell. It was sort of crusty now and
there was a lot of it but I didn't mind right then. I could feel our
pee boners pressing together and it sort of hurt and fell good at the
I kissed him on the mouth and we played tonsil
hockey for a few minutes then I broke it up and I went to pee. I peed
and took a wet washcloth and washed the cum off my chest and belly then
washed my privates and my butt just for good measure. I didn't
know anything about inside hygiene then, but I had taken a dump earlier
that day and after I showered I had soaped up a finger and stuck it up
there to clean my poop chute so I thought I was pretty clean. I brushed
my teeth and gargled with Scope and Buster came in then and started
peeing....and peeing...and peeing...lol. It's amazing what six sodas
will do to a guy.
He moved up beside me at the sink and washed his
hands and looked at me in the mirror and smiled that sexy smile that
makes me love him so much and my boner was coming back. So was
his and I reached down and gave it a little squeeze and he yelped, then
I ran off to the bedroom and got ready for him.
He came back about ten minutes later and I could
tell he had cleaned up too and his breath smelled like scope too, I
guess we think alike. I was laying on the bed all spread out and he
knelt down between my legs and gave my boner a lick before rolling over
"Cock teaser," I said giggling.
"Not a tease, just a preview....unless you got
something else in mind."
"Actually, I do," I said mysteriously.
He raised his eyebrows like he always does and said,
"Want some of my money maker again?"
"Actually, I have a better idea....if you're up for
it," I said twanging his cute boner.
"Uhhh.......I'm up, I'm up...what is it?" he asked
excitedly. I still don't think he had a clue what was about to happen.
"Mmmmm...hand me the hand lotion," I said sitting
up. He looked at me curiously but grabbed the lotion and handed it to
me and smiled. I think he thought he was about to get a good fapping
from his bf.
I squeezed some of the lotion on my hands and rubbed
them together to warm it up a bit before slicking up his boner really
good. He moaned a little and I smiled at him. Then I handed the lotion
to buster and told him to squeeze some on his middle finger. I think he
might have been catching on by then cause he was shaking a little as he
took that bottle and squeezed out way too much for his finger. The
excess dripped down on his leg and I reached over and dipped my finger
in it and applied that to his dick head.
"Whaat am I doing?" he sort of stammered.
I rolled over onto my tummy and raised my little
rear and looked back at him. "Can't you guess lover?"
"Are you sure? he said trembling now, "I promise I
won't hurt you if you want to do it, but you don't have to, there is
plenty of time to decide."
"I want it....more than anything in the world. So,
quit being greedy and let me have some of the fun too."
He was grinning like an idiot as he knelt behind me
and started rubbing his finger against my pucker. I don't know what I
expected but it didn't hurt, it felt great. Of course he hadn't stuck
it in yet, he was just rubbing around all over it and that was so hot.
When he got it good and greased he squeezed a little more on his finger
before he tried to put it in and it slid in easily. It felt strange,
sort of like when you poop, and that's actually kind of a good feeling
(blush). I felt him push it further inside and then I felt the rest of
his hand on my butt and I knew he was all the way in. He kept his
finger in there and just wiggled it around and I felt him touch
something that felt different, and made me feel like I needed to pee
I gritted my teeth and then the feeling passed and
it felt really, really good. I guessed that was the thing that could
make you come from being fucked, a prostrate or something like
that. After a while he pulled his finger out and I heard it make a sort
of plopping noise and I giggled and he slapped my ass. Was this it? Was
little Dommie about to loose his cherry?
I heard Buster squirt more lotion and then I felt
something at the back door but it wasn't his boner, it was two of his
fingers and it took him a little longer to work them in, but they fit
just fine and it didn't hurt at all. I just felt full and this time he
didn't touch that one spot so I didn't feel like I had to pee, but the
rest felt really good. He sort of moved his fingers in and out for a
little while then he leaned in and whispered, "Are you okay? Does
"I'm good, it feels awesome." I said truthfully.
I guess he believed me because he kept on doing it
and after a little while longer he decided I was ready for the real
thing. I felt his fingers pull out and I figured it was time and
my stomach churned a little and it was my time to tremble. I felt his
soft warm hands on my butt then and he rubbed the lotion from his
fingers into my skin. He didn't stop there though, he leaned forward
and started massaging my back and shoulders and all the time I could
feel his boner dragging up and down my butt crack, sort of teasing me.
I relaxed as he massaged my back and by the time his
hands reached my butt I was ready for anything. I sighed and felt so
relaxed and happy and if I hadn't been so excited about getting fucked,
I might've fallen asleep. Eventually he gave my butt a little slap to
let me know the pampering was over and he was ready to get down to
business and I was as ready as he was.
I felt something cold on my pucker as he squeezed a
little more lotion on it and then I felt the head of his cock press
against my hole. I tensed up but he had anticipated that and he slapped
my butt and told me to relax, and told me again that he wouldn't hurt
me...no matter what and he added that if it got to bad to just tell him
and he'd stop. I didn't tell him that I had already decided that no
matter how much it hurt I wouldn't stop and I just nodded.
He ran his dick up and down my crack for a long time
just to get me used to the feel of it and I was getting really anxious
and I was glad when he finally began. At first he just placed his cock
head against my pucker and sort of slid around in a circular motion.
Even that felt good and the longer he did it the more I wanted it
inside me. I let him do it his way though and I didn't try to
force him to hurry. For one thing, I knew that he had more experience
at this, and for another I wanted this to last as long as possible.
I was so busy thinking about how good it felt and
how much I loved Buster and I almost missed it when he finally started
to slip in. My attention went straight back to my butt and I almost
tensed up again, but then I remembered that I read somewhere on the
web, that you should bear down like you were gonna poop and it would
slide in and that's what I did and guess what? It worked.
Just the head was in now and he stopped and waited
for a minute or two to let me get used to that before he pushed a
little more in. I couldn't believe it didn't hurt or that it felt so
good, but I remembered what Joey had said about knowing you were gay if
you liked that butt stuff, so I guessed maybe gay boys just naturally
took to getting a boner up the butt...lol.
I raised my butt up a little as he pushed on in
and then I felt his balls against my butt cheeks and I knew I had all
4.5 inches of Buster Weenie in my tight little hole and I giggled.
"What's so funny?" Buster asked in a dreamy sort of
"I did it...and it didn't hurt at all. My boyfriend
is fucking me and it feels sooooo good, and I'm so happy."
He chuckled, "Yeah, it was easier than I thought. I
thought there'd be screaming and blood everywhere," he teased.
"I would have let you do it if that's what it took,
" I admitted, but we didn't discuss it then cause Buster started
His strokes were slow and shallow at first and I
loved how it felt having him on top of me and inside me. It is like the
most amazing feeling in the world and now I understand why woman like
to get fucked by men. I could never do that...fuck a woman or girl, but
I totally understand it. I cold feel his hot breath on my neck and it
tickled then he started kissing my neck and shoulders and sort of
drooling on me, but I didn't mind. I loved it actually and when he
raised up on his arms suddenly his boner was deep inside me and that
He started moving faster then and I could feel his
balls slapping against my butt with every downward stroke. His dick
moving in and out of me was making a wet slapping sound, almost like
fapping but way sexier and that was driving us both mad. My boner was
leaking pre-cum like crazy and pressing into the bed and that felt
really good but I didn't want to come like that, I had other plans for
my next load of cum.
Buster was sort of moaning now and moving faster and
faster and jarring me and the bed and the bookcase headboard was
banging against the wall and I wondered if Joey was awake and knew what
was going on. Somehow that got me even hornier and I even wished I
hadn't locked the door so he could sneak in and watch. I had so may
things spinning around in my head and so many feelings running through
my body that it was like being high or drunk or something. Well, at
least that's what I've heard it's like, I've never been either.
So Buster is fucking me like a rabbit now and
bodies are slapping together and we're sweating like mad and it feels
soooo good and I know it feels even better for Buster and that makes me
happy knowing I am giving him such an amazing feeling then he cries
out, "I'm cominggggg." and he pushed in with a grunt and I could
feel his hot cum shooting inside my guts and it was so amazing that I
almost came myself, but not quite, and I'm glad for that cause Buster's
ass is mine when he gets done.
He shoots about three more squirts and then he falls
down on me and just lays there like a beached whale, lol, but I don't
care. I know how good it felt when I collapsed on top of him and I hope
it feels as good for him. I can feel his heart beating against my back
and our sweat is cooling in the night air and I have never felt so
relaxed or happy in my whole life.
Buster doesn't fall asleep on me like I did him and
I am glad because when he pulls his already shrinking dick out and
rolls over on his back, I cover him and start kissing him. I use my
tongue a lot and even though he is still out of breath from fucking he
returns the kiss and the tongue and then he pushes my face back and
says, "I suppose you want a crack at my money maker now?"
I grinned, "No hurry, we got all night."
He didn't want to wait all night though and he
raised his legs and I grabbed the lotion and before he knew what hit
him I was on him and in him....lol. He was so loose I didn't even have
use my finger and I hoped I would be that way soon. Well, I
intended to get plenty of practice that weekend and every chance we got
after that so I just knew it wouldn't be long till I was as loose as
I won't bore you with my fucking Buster's
ass....lol, but it was every bit as good as the first time and before
the weekend was over we had done it to each other twice more, plus some
other stuff that I will tell you about later, but now I want to
talk about what happened with Joey.
Buster and I were up pretty late that first night
and so we slept kind of late the next day. My mom let us sleep in
because she still didn't feel too good, I think she had a cold or
something, and we didn't get up till like ten o'clock. I could hear
Joey in the bathroom around 8 but he didn't come in even though I had
left the door unlocked when I got up to pee about 6. I guess he went
back to bed or downstairs cause I didn't hear him any more after that.
Buster was snoring and looked so peaceful and I just
laid there and watched him for a minute or two before I snuggled up to
him and went back to sleep. I felt him leave at one point and I
remember hearing the toilet flush but I dozed off and don't remember
him coming back to bed but later when I woke up he was there all soft
and warm and it felt so good.
There was sunlight coming through the window and I
heard birds singing and I felt so happy just to be alive and with
Buster and I didn't think about all the stuff I'd been worried about
right then. I stretched and noticed my bottom was a little sore and
some of what happened that night before came back to me and I smiled.
Buster's eyes slowly opened and he smiled over at me and I leaned
in and kissed him. It felt so good and right.
"What time is it anyway?"
"Umm about ten, you ready to get up?"
Buster stretched then and I felt his morning wood
pushing against my leg. I reached down and grabbed it and he pushed
against my hand. I wanted to fap him or suck him or something but he
had to go pee really bad and when he came back we were both out of the
mood. We got up and I suggested we take a shower to get rid of the
evidence, lol and we sort of messed around in the shower, but it was
mostly kissing and rubbing on each other and we didn't get off...then.
We dried each other's back and got dressed and went
downstairs to see what we could find to eat. After a night of sex, we
were starved. Mom was sitting at the breakfast bar drinking coffee and
she smiled when she saw us and motioned us over for a hug and kiss. My
mom was like that, she always treated my friends like they were her
kids too. She always told them the first time they visited they were
guests and after that they were family.
She surprised us by having waffles already made and
they were warming in the oven. She microwaved some bacon and we had
waffles with peanut butter and syrup and big glasses of Sunny D. We
were stuffed when we got up and it was Buster who insisted we do the
dishes and clean up since mom didn't feel well. She kissed him on the
forehead and gave him another hug and told him how sweet he was and I
was grinning. Man, it was great, even my rents liked my bf.
I wondered where Joey was but we were kind of busy
cleaning up so I didn't start looking for him till we were done. He
wasn't upstairs or out back but when we went out front he was there
with Joe shooting hoops in the basket on the front of the garage. Me
and Buster joined them and played teams for a little while then we took
turns playing one on one. I beat Buster once but he beat me three
times. Joe and Joey were about equally matched but when we switched
off I beat Joe two out of three times and Buster beat Joey all three.
But neither of them got mad or anything and we sat on
the stoop and drank Gatorade and chilled for a little while and talked.
Mom was upstairs resting and we were the only ones around but we kept
it quiet anyway.
"Buster is Dommie's boyfriend now," Joey said softly
to Joe, "like we are."He said then reached over and took Joe's hand in
his. I figured Joe would jerk it away but he let Joey hold it and he
didn't even seem to care.
"Cool," Joe said grinning, "you guys have sex last
I blushed and just grinned, but Buster leaned in and
said, "Three times, and the weekend aint over yet."
I saw a strange look on Joey's face but Joe was
grinning as wide as if he was the one having sex. Then again, maybe he
was. I didn't know if him and Joey had had a chance lately, but I knew
they did it every chance they got, or at least that's what Joey told me.
We talked about non-sex stuff then, video games,
movies, school, all that normal stuff and then about noon Joe had to go
home and then to his grandma's. Joey went in to use the bathroom and
Buster suggested we go hide form him and see if he could find us. I
thought that sounded okay, but it turned out it was a big mistake.
We ran to the backyard and looked around for a place
to hide and decided on the garage. Our garage is detached from the
house and is big enough for two cars and it even has a loft inside
where dad stores lumber and stuff. There is a narrow staircase leading
up to it and it is kind of hidden from view. We ran up the stairs and
found a good place to hide behind a couple of sheets of plywood that
dad bought to make lawn plaques out of but never got around to.
It was stuffy up there but not too warm and we sat
and waited and before long we started kissing and grabbing at each
other. We were giggling and I told Buster we better be quiet or Joey
would hear us cause the garage door was up and he made a zipping motion
across his lips and then giggled through locked lips. We quieted down
but kept messing with each other and waited.
I guess we lost track of time because the next time
I looked at my watch it was after 1 and I told Buster we should just go
because Joey either didn't come looking for us or he gave up. We came
down the stairs laughing and pushing each other and then went inside to
get a drink. I didn't see Joey anywhere downstairs so I suggested we go
up to my room and pee and see if he was up there. I don't know why that
was so important at the moment, but it was. I had a sick feeling in my
stomach and turns our I had a good reason.
I heard Joey before I ever saw him. As I entered the
bathroom I heard him crying in his room on the other side of the door.
Buster heard it too and he looked at me and shrugged. We peed and
Buster went into my room, but not before he told me I should go check
on Joey. He didn't have to tell me that but I was glad he understood.
I slid the door open slowly and looked inside. He
was curled up on his bed and crying softly. He saw me and buried his
head under the covers to muffle his crying and I felt like crying
myself. I slid the door closed and walked over to the bed and sat down
in front of him and just sat there a minute trying to think what to
say. I turned to the lump under the covers and reached up and pulled
the covers down a little. He tried to pull them back up, and when he
couldn't stop me he turned his face away from me. I reached up
rubbed his back and he let out a little chocked sob.
"Hey, what's wrong Joey?" I said softly, "We were
just messing with you. We thought you'd find us in a few minutes,
honest." I said sincerely.
"You don't like me any more do you?" he wailed.
"What? Don't be crazy, I love you little bro. Why
would you think that? Haven't I told you enough times," I was a little
annoyed that he would think that after all the talks we'd had.
"I.....kkkknow," he sobbed, "but you want to spend
all your time with Buster now." What he had said was crazy and we both
"I see you every day, we live together and we're
tight. We even...you know, do stuff together." I said making a decision
that if that was what it took to keep Joey happy I would do that again
"But you saaaiid, we shouldn't do that any more and
what about Buuuster?" he blubbered.
"I can't keep it a secret and I won't lie, if he
says I shouldn't then I won't, but I don't think he will care."
"I'm sorry Dommie, I don't mean to be a baby...." he
said wiping his eyes and smiling sadly, "It's just.....I love you so
much bubber....." he said and then cried some more.
I grabbed him and pulled him to me and he felt bigger than
the last time I remembered holding him. He was growing up fast but he
still acted like a little kid sometimes. I kissed his forehead and he
melted into me and except for a few hiccups he was done crying. I held
him for a long time and then I pulled him up and looked into his eyes,
"You gonna be okay now. I love you but Buster is my boyfriend now and
he will be around here a lot, just like Joe is, and I want you guys to
be friends too."
"I like Buster, I think he's....cute...sexy
really,"he giggled. "Maybe the three of us could do stuff...or with Joe
My dick stirred when he said that. I guess I was
becoming a little sex maniac, cause sex with my little bro and his
boyfriend sounded soooo hot.
"I don't know, that's a lot to think about, but
first things first. First I tell Buster about what we already did and
"Okay Dommie, I won't cry no more. I'm sorry....I'm
just a baby."
I reached in and kissed his face and he surprised me
by turning his head and kissing me on the lips. At first I thought it
was a mistake or that he just meant to give me a quick one but when he
stuck his little tongue in my mouth I knew what he was up to. I tried
to resist, but damn it, I'm just a freaking sex addict and his lips
were so soft and his warm little body was pressing against me and I was
rock hard by then and there was no going back.
I must've been in Joey's room the better part of an
hour and when I slid open the door and walked into my room Buster was
laying on my bed watching TV. He looked up and smiled and melted my
heart, he was so handsome and so sexy but we had a lot to talk about
and here wasn't the place.
"Up for a bike ride?" I asked without explaining
anything that had just happened in Joey's room.
"Where to?" he asked simply.
"The park....I'll explain when we get there."
"Lead on lover," he said and I loved him so much
right then for being such a good friend and better boyfriend.
I found mom and told her we were going and asked
Joey if I could borrow his bike and he gave me a hug and told me I
have anything that was his anytime. I smiled and told him we'd be back
in an hour or two and he nodded.
I rode Joey's bike and Buster rode mine the short
distance to the park and when we got there I remembered the last time
I'd been there and what had happened with the cute teenager in the
bathroom. I hoped he wouldn't be there today, but what were the
chances? We rode our bikes up to the bleachers at the little baseball
field there and climbed to the top row. Fortunately there was no one
playing ball today and the only other person in the park was a man
walking his dog out on the north edge.
"Sup?" Buster asked after a few minutes, "You're not
pregnant are you?" he teased.
"If I was I'd be glad to have your baby," I said
laying my hand on his leg.
"It about Joey?"
I nodded and took a deep breath. I didn't stop
talking for the next fifteen minutes and the whole time Buster just sat
there leaning back on his arms and staring at me with this little smile
on his face. At first I thought it was smirk, but the more I
talked the more I realized he thought what I was telling him was funny
or at least okay. That worried me as much as if he had been mad,
I hadn't expected this. Finally after I had told him all about Joe and
Joey and what I had promised Joey today...I told him about the sexy
teenager in the bathroom and then he finally spoke up.
"That was Donnie's big bro, I already heard all
about that," he said as if it was no big deal.
My mouth must've been open cause he said, "Better
close it or the flies will get in." Then he laughed and slapped me on
"And you're not jealous?" I asked in disbelief.
"First, when you messed with Donnie's bro we weren't
boyfriends, and second....I don't believe in getting jealous. If you
don't want to be with me, that's one thing, but if you just want
something else once in a while I can live with that as long as I get to
be number one."
I knew he was serious, I had known him long enough
to know when he was speaking from the heart and I loved him even more
for being so understanding. Only problem was, I wasn't sure I could be
that understanding if it had been the other way round.
"And as for Joey, he is like a little version of you
and you are both soooo hot. I don't see how you have kept your hands
off him all these years. If you hadn't succumbed to my charms he was
next on my list," he chuckled. He loved using big words like that.
I slapped him, "Pervert...he's just a kid," I said
then we both cracked up laughing at the absurdity of that. I had begun
my journey down the sex road a lot earlier than him and well, I had
already done more with him than I had Buster until last night.
"So...you won't be upset if I have to
occasionally.....do stuff with Joey?"
"Hell no! Question is, can I watch....or join in
I grinned, "He asked that same thing and even
suggested that Joey join in too. Is that an orgy?"
"Mmmmmmm....dark meat," he teased, "I'm hard just
thinking about it. Hey, wanna go to the bathroom. I think I need to
pee....or something," he giggled.
"Or something...I bet. Yeah, come on, it smells in
there but it's pretty private."
The bathroom actually smelled better that day, not
that we cared, all we could smell was each other's sexy boy smell and
we were as horny as goats. We went straight to the back stall and
Buster dropped his pants and sat down on the crapper and pulled me to
him and jerked my sweats down and started sucking on me like he was
starved for my special Dommie juice, lol. He had me all worked up and
it didn't take me long and toward the end he was poking his finger in
my pucker and that got me really hot. I didn't know he was getting me
ready for his turn, but I didn't care. I was his and he was mine and we
might mess with other boys, but we loved each other and that was all
I filled his mouth with my juice and he swallowed it
all like a good bf then he stood up and spun me around and I knew what
was up then. He used spit to make us both slick and he actually got it
in pretty easy. I grunted as he entered and leaned against the wall and
held on for dear life while he banged away, fucking as fast a bunny and
pretty soon he was biting my neck and hissing that he was coming and to
hold on it was a big one. I laughed and he pinched my behind and then
he started filling me up and I thought, lot of good that shower
We got out just in time, the guy with the dog had
either came to pee or spy on us boys and he gave us a funny look as he
passed us and I wondered if he was one of those guys who liked boys.
Funny, I used to think that was sick or something I guess cause that's
the way us kids are taught, but now that I know how good boy sex is, I
can't blame them for wanting it too. Sick huh?
We rode home and found Joey on the front step and he
jumped up when we rode up and looked at me hopefully and I nodded and
he did a little victory dance and me and Buster laughed and tackled him
and we rolled around on my front lawn and we were just three very happy
boys and two of us were in love and the other one loved us too. Heck we
all loved each other in our own way and life was awesome and I had the
best boyfriend in the world and the best little bro and I was the
luckiest boy in the world and the weekend wasn't over yet.........
End of Chapter Six
Next Chapter: Seven: More
In Chapter Eight: We meet a new character inspired
by a real life reader...

The 19-year-old was again impressive as the Red Devils recorded a 2-0 victory to book their place in the quarter-finals of the competition in South Wales.
Jesse Lingard struck twice for Jose Mourinho's side to seal their progression, but it was after his first goal that Rashford's gesture to teammate Victor Lindelof caught the eye.
Lindelof has struggled since arriving at Old Trafford, failing to make a Premier League start, but did come on as a substitute during Saturday's defeat at Huddersfield.
He was introduced when Phil Jones limped off in the first half, but he was at fault for the second goal leaving fans questioning whether he is worth his price tag.
But he produced a solid display against Swansea, playing all 90 minutes and helping United keep a clean sheet.
After Lingard made it 1-0, Rashford went up to Lindelof and put his arm around him, offering him advice and reassurance as the players made their way back to the halfway line.
Mourinho said afer the game: "The kids are always the kids so when they play it is nice, it is good, when they perform well it is even better.
"I think they both had good performances especially Scott, who has a big influence in the game in a crucial area.
"I decided to play with three because Victor was not coming with his confidence levels very, very high, so I decided to play both with the experience of Smalling and we were OK. It was good for the players to get confidence."

It has been suggested that I resurrect the poor neglected blog again to document our crazy journey. So here goes. Backtracking to November 17, 2013 when everything in our world turned upside down. I had spent the month of November posting things I am thankful for on my Facebook wall. This was posted the morning of the 17th, the day (26 years earlier) that our youngest son was born and passed away.
Shortly after I posted this we went to church. Just after the morning service got underway the tornado sirens went off and we were told it was a serious threat. We sat in the hallway with friends waiting for the all clear. Andy and a few others were outside for a bit and did some video of this storm. We could tell it was headed right toward our neighborhood. Once it was over we decided to head home to see damage (totally thinking windows or roof damage). It quickly became apparent that we were not going to be allowed near our home which is on the main road through town. We could see downed power poles and began to get really frightened. We decided to try to go in through the back of the neighborhood. We got in...rescue workers had not yet arrived. The first thing I saw that really terrified me was a man driving a mini van that had every window blown out. As we got into the neighborhood the damage got more and more severe. When we got to within a couple of blocks of our home I saw a home I recognized (the others were mostly piles of wood). I started calling out names of neighbors and friends whose homes were gone. I was pretty much hysterical. We saw no people. We were both thinking that everyone was dead. We got onto our block but couldn't keep driving so we got out to try to walk to our house. We got somewhere within four or five houses from ours before we had to turn around because of debris that we couldn't get around blocking the road. We could smell gas and were stepping over live power lines. At that point, even though we couldn't see anything we knew our home was gone. Looking back I'm sure we were both in shock at this point.
This picture was taken by our neighbor literally a few seconds before the EF4 tornado hit our lovely little home.
This picture was our first look. It was taken within the first hour and sent to us by a first responder friend who was there.
We woke up the next morning homeless, in the comfortable guest room of our friends (our son Tom's in-laws). It was our 34th wedding anniversary. The following is my Facebook post from that morning.
The next day we finally got to go see what was left for ourselves. Driving into the neighborhood was the most difficult thing I have ever done. I literally could barely breathe and Andy thought he was having a heart attack (which he didn't tell me till it was over). The following was my fb status that evening.
The following was written early the morning of the fourth day:
I am also so very grateful that God led me to spend 2012 reading and rereading and leading Ann Voskamp's Bible study One Thousand Gifts. Because of that I not only have a completely changed view of gratitude and the difference being truly grateful makes in my life but I also have (safely on Facebook, not lost in a destroyed home) 900 plus pictures, many of my home that no longer exists! The picture below was one of the last ones my husband took when we first arrived at our home after the tornado...only the jacket of a beloved book but seeing it in the rubble was a reminder and a gift in itself.
I thank you for your prayers, dear friends. Keep them coming for a long time. It is still hard to put one foot in front of the other sometimes. But I KNOW that God is faithful and good and kind and He can be depended on no matter the circumstance. He has shown that to me over and over and over theses last few days and I know He won't stop now!
To be continued...
White Chocolate Peppermint Bites
1 day ago

Elements on the Falls
Please leave reviews,
opinions and comments
6650 Niagara Parkway, Niagara Falls, Ontario, Canada
This place sits on the falls has a wonderful view and food as well. The decor is spectacular as well. The service is impeccable! As a chef myself I think this was the best place in the area.I had the seafood croissant it was nice and creamy and was real seafood. it was served with a mixed green salad as well as fresh fruit. It was a very pretty dish as well as light and delicious. My friend had the Thai chicken strips as well as the cheese garlic bread. The chicken was not too sweet or spicy just perfect. The garlic bread was very soft and tasted great. For desert we had the cherry chocolate ice cream Pie it was out of this world the serving size was much bigger than most restaurants provide. the plate presentation was beautiful with fresh fruit and edible flowers. I would have gone back everyday If I had discovered this place sooner.

I'm not entirely sure of the time period, but I do remember that I was 11 or 12 years of age when I first started noticing strange things in a house that I resided in. All these experiences have left me wondering what I had just seen. The first apparition was known as "The Tall Guy" to me. I noticed him each night at about 1:15 am. He wore what looked like a trench coat and baseball cap. He would slowly walk out of my bathroom, pause at the entrance to my room, look in and then continue to walk until he vanished right in front of my sister's room. My little sisters and I were the only ones to notice him.
The next apparition was a creepy one. I first noticed him when I walked into my sister's room to get something of mine. I noticed a figure sitting on the bed. I acknowledged it as my sister, but when she didn't respond, I looked over at her and realized that it wasn't who I thought it was. It was a bald-headed man who was glaring at me through hollow eyes. I left instantly.
The last apparition that I saw was known to me as the "Peeper Creeper". I only saw the pale face of an elderly man looking into my window at around the time of 10:30 to 11:40. He would randomly show up somewhere between those times.
I have since then moved out, but the images I have experienced still enter my mind regularly. I wanted to share these experiences with you in hopes of why there were more than one apparition in a fairly small home.
Anyway, thank you for reading my experience!
Ps, my cat always acted strange at certain times in the home. Now that we have moved, she is back to her old self.

As First Draft noted on Monday morning, potential Republican presidential candidates have been brandishing their humble upbringings as a way to connect with the public.
But some Republicans are also taking subtle jabs at former Gov. Jeb Bush of Florida, who has emerged as an establishment front-runner in some early polls.
Speaking at an event in Nashville, Gov. Scott Walker of Wisconsin on Monday recalled how his mother was raised on a farm without indoor plumbing while explaining that his upbringing taught him the value of hard work.
“Unlike some out there, I didn’t inherit fame and fortune from my family — got a bunch of things that were a whole lot better than that,” Mr. Walker said.
Senator Marco Rubio of Florida has talked about his humble roots for years, and he did so again at an event Tuesday in New Hampshire. Professing his love for the United States, Mr. Rubio said that America had given him the same opportunity as the “son of a president.”
Despite his family’s wealth, Mr. Bush has been making an effort to portray himself as someone who has not lived lavishly. Last week he shared a story about the high price of Pampers when he was starting a family in Venezuela in his 20s.

We will be closed on Labor Day, Monday, September 5, 2022.
Nice, clean, comfortable.
I thought the service was just fine, and the CSR explained everything to me. I was a little disappointed that I didn't receive a notice of if any of my fluid levels were low, and also disappointed that they failed to mention the two lights that were on in my dash. My wife was just at a competitor who did both of the above for a lower fee.
My Jeep Cherokee wouldn't start, so I had it towed in. They were busy but they diagnosed the problem and had the starter replaced that afternoon! The staff is always friendly and helpful and the work is done correctly and at a fair and reasonable price. We have taken all of our cars there since they opened and we have always been very happy with the service.
Honest 1 was able to replace my car's rotors and brake pads for $300 less than what the dealer had quoted. I am taking my car at Honest 1 for any repairs that I need in the future
Prompt, courteous, and skilled staff, accurate estimate, nice loaner car, comfortable waiting area. Absolutely no complaints - great repair shop!
Please take to work with
Love it here. Nice people. Great pricing.
They're straightforward and friendly. Good work and fair pricing.
Good experience, no issues at all

The Ninth Silence
By Princess Artemis
Seven days before Meteo hits
Cid paused at the outskirts of Rocket Town. It had been about two or three weeks since he had been there last. Then it had been to recover the Huge Materia with the added "side effect" of allowing him to fulfill his dream to touch the stars above the sky. Now it was to find his reason to fight, so to speak. Cloud was right; it was a bunch of &^%$*&@# to say one was fighting for the Planet when one didnt give a damn about the Planet. Cid had never really harbored any delusions that he was out to save the ground he walked on; he started out because he was both bored and because that pretty-boy Rufus got his hopes up only to dash them again. Later it had been out of a sense of adventure he had never really left Rocket Town since its founding. Perhaps some loyalty to the earth below him had trickled in, after seeing the Planet so very small in space perhaps just a duty as part of the Planet and the Lifestream to preserve it for a little while longer.
And now? For Shera. He fought for Shera, pure and simple, from the very beginning. He had only realized it just now standing here, about to go to his house again, where she was and feeling a sudden jittery pleasure at the idea. He took a drag off his ever-present cigarette just to calm his nerves. All the way here he had been thinking about everything he knew without Shera, finding it a dull and empty vision.
He smiled to himself for a moment as he began the short walk to his house. Hed have to think about it for a while to pin down just exactly when he had fallen for her.
Just not right now. There was still a whole hell of a lot of air to clear, and not long to do it in. Seven days not even that. Maybe three, four on the outside. The North Crater still lay ahead of them; who knew how long it would take to get to Sephiroth? Had to be done inside seven days, and that was that. He had, therefore, resolved to be as straightforward as he could he just didnt have time to beat around the bush. He hoped she would, with time, forgive him
Shera pushed aside a curtain, looking at the familiar figure walking toward the house. Her stomach suddenly twisted, accompanied by a hot rush of nervousness. What she was about to do there would be no turning back, no time for regrets. She blinked hard several times, unable to shake the jumbled sensation in her gut. How odd that she would find it somehow pleasant
She let go of the curtain and went to the kitchen. The time had come; the time to do what she had wanted to do for so long but what had only recently become a possibility. Her hands began shaking hard as she prepared the tea.
As soon as he came to his door, Cid opened it as slowly and as silently as he could. It didnt seem right to fling open the door as was his wont. He peeked in, hoping for a glance of Shera before he came in all the way. He did see her, standing in front of the stove, preparing a pot of tea. With a faint grin, Cid walked in and went to the kitchen. When he arrived at Sheras side, she jumped, startled, and nearly dropped the container of tea leaves she was holding. Cid took the container out of her shaking hands and said, almost shyly, "Let me fix it for you."
Shera blinked, motioned to snatch back the leaves, but then thought better of it. She smiled nervously and stammered, "Oh, yes, uh, sure th-thank you ." She quickly moved aside, allowing Cid to prepare the tea. After a moment, Cid waved her over to the table; the way she was staring was making him nervous. She went quickly.
Cid went about his task with a single-mindedness that was unusual in its intensity. Making tea seemed to afford him a few extra minutes to stall, for it was much harder in practice to be forthright, thought Cid, then it was in planning. He took some of the leaves from the package and put them in a tea ball, then put the ball into the pot. The leaves had a sweet and sour sort of aroma. A few silent minutes later, the tea was finished and he carried it and two cups to the table.
He set the pot down and served a cup for Shera and one for himself. She took it in a white-knuckled grip. Cid frowned as he sat down. "Are you OK, Shera? Yer shakin like a damn leaf."
Startled again for some reason, Shera looked frantically around the room, then down at her cup. Finally she muttered, with a strange flash in her eyes, "Nothing, uh, nothing a cup of tea wont cure." They both put their cups to their lips at the same time. Cid took a long drink; it had been bloody long enough since he had had a good cup of tea. And it was good, although there was a bite to it the first second or so.
"Are ya sure?" Cid asked as he set his cup down.
Shera stared at his cup, holding hers up in her hands, as if to hide her face. And still her hands were quaking. "Um, yes, yes, Im fine."
Cid took another gulp of tea, unsure as to whether he should believe her or not; he hadnt seen her so shook up since the time he had stopped the Shin-Ra 26 launch. She had seemed calm then, until that night then she had cried for a long time, shaking so hard
Cid shrugged, not wanting to ignore her nervousness but not knowing what to do about it since she said she was fine. Then he shook his head, trying to rid it of a sudden swimming. Must be his nerves.
That reminder brought him back to the matter on his heart. He fidgeted for a bit, draining his cup. Then he cleared his throat a few times. Shera was watching him closely, but in his preoccupied state, Cid never noticed. Finally, after wiping his face one more time, he decided to just come out and say it. "Shera, I Im damn Im sor"
Shera didnt let him finish. She moved over to him and put her hand over his mouth. "Dont say it," she said softly.
Cid blinked a few times, his vision deciding to take a swim right along side his head. After a second to shake what he thought was a sudden tiredness, he took Sheras hand from his mouth and held it. "I just wanted to tell you ," he began, but broke off when his whole body suddenly felt as though it had become lead. His hand released Sheras on its own. Why had Shera not touched her tea? She hadnt drunk any of it? " just tell Shera I lll " Just as he spoke, a sudden flash of panic flew through him. It wasnt tiredness or nerves "What? help me ." His head fell back as all his strength fled him.
He dimly saw Shera move away for a moment, then return, just as he fell out of his chair onto the floor. Dusk had fallen followed by a dull pain in his arm, then came twilight. As darkness gave way to blackest midnight, he wondered dimly when the dawn would come.
It never did.
~ ~ ~
Cloud waited on the deck of the Highwind, which was tethered near the spot where he had commanded everyone to go seek their own reasons to fight. He had been surprised when Vincent returned, though not at all when Yuffie did the same; her purpose for fighting was wrapped up in the materia the group carried, or so he guessed. Barret, Red XIII, and Cait Sith had also returned, the last with a new partner; Reeve had decided to join them in the battle personally. Tifa had never left, so that made eight fighters.
And it looked like they were going to need Reeve, even if he was poorly trained. Strangely enough, Cid didnt show up. Cloud was surprised; he had thought of all of them, Cid would be the last to beg out at the end. He had, after all, joined them more out of boredom than anything else. But that was water under the bridge. It was time to go meet destiny; there wasnt any more time to wait. Cid had made his decision and Cloud would honor itCid had already made one contribution to AVALANCHE without which they could do nothing. They had the Highwind, Cids baby, and the only way possible to reach the North Crater in the time they had left.
Cloud scratched his head while attempting to decipher the controls on the airship. Then he shrugged and left the piloting to the full-fledged Pilot, whom he had callously never learned his name. Perhaps, Cloud thought, he would rectify that matter later; but now was not the time for courtesies, but for battle, and to battle the pilot took them.
It didnt take long for the Highwind to travel to the North Crater. When the airship reached its berth, the eight fighters disembarked and made their slow, halting way to the very center of the great Crater.
The travel down the steep slopes of the crater was difficult, and the monsters they faced fierce, but they made it intact. Reeve trembled as he fidgeted with his small pistol, his face bloodless. Yuffie bounced from foot to foot, looking around nervously. They were both deep in a foreign element, unused to fighting for their very lives at every step. Cait Sith, though it was Reeve in part, was also its own being, and so bounded about cheerfully, trying to rally the troops. Barret slumped against a wall, sullen, perhaps wishing he had chosen to opt out, and spend his remaining days with his daughter. Vincent was cool, as he was wont, but a bit more so as well. There was a new frost to his red-eyed glare that had not been there previously. Tifa merely stood, hugging her arms to herself; inside she quaked, but as always, she feigned calm, never wanting to seem weak. Red XIIIs long tail flicked, and his bared teeth glinted. The silence about them was oppressive.
Cloud stared ahead for a long moment, then down into the depths of the Planet. For a while he was silent. Then he heaved a great sigh and turned back to look at the ragtag team of fighters, the seven people and one robot who stood between the Planet and its horrific fate.
He motioned with his hand, and pointing his Ultimate Weapon forward, he said, "Lets mosey."
Barret rolled his eyes, while Yuffie groaned. But no one broke the silence.
Finally, at the last, they reached Sephiroth, or what seemed to be him; rather it was a bizarre, overwrought green thing that resembled Sephiroth. Atop its head was the image of the evil Jenova, her fair face finally seen by the eyes of AVALANCHE; and she was frightening in her beauty, for her black heart was plainly reflected in it.
They fought, all eight of them, in concert to bring the monster down. And they did, eventually; but to their horror Bizzaro-Sephiroth was replaced by a more powerful foe, one whose form mocked the holy angels.
And again AVALANCHE fought, and again they won. Safer-Sephiroth fell, and Holy began to stir; Cloud and the others all knew they must escape now, or die in the fury of Holys coming. So they ran, up the winding rocks, as far as they could go, but then the path stopped. For a moment, all hope was lost, until by a welcome turn of fortune, the Highwind plummeted nose first into the crater, coming to a stop near enough to the eight that they could board her.
Before they could even attempt to pilot the Highwind out, Holy burst forth, carrying her high into the sky like a tiny pebble beneath a torrential geyser. And as suddenly as she flew skyward, she began to fall, in a dangerous earthward spiral. The pilot was not skilled enough to turn the Highwind from her suicide plunge through the icy air, however he was able to pull her up enough that when the airship crashed down in the forest near Bone Village, she broke in half, instead of crushing herself nose-first.
That perhaps was the only reason there were any survivors. When the Highwind finally hit the ground, the occupants were tossed about; some flying up then falling to the deck, as Yuffie and Cloud did, while others less fortunate were thrown through the glass cockpit and out into the forest. Tifa was by far the least fortunate, for she had landed in the path of the Highwind, whose momentum was still carrying her far along the ground, crashing through the trees and carving a deep trench in the earth. Her last act alive was to let out a strangled, horrified scream and then the Highwind took her with a loud slick crunch.
Barret had also been tossed from the deck of the airship, and although his end was not as gruesome as Tifas, still, it was an end. Red XIII fell back to the deck, but with his feline reflexes, was best able to weather the Highwinds destruction. When the airship finally came to her final resting place, all told, the pilot and the crew had died, as had Tifa, Barret, and Reeve, who was unfortunately a fragile man. Cait Sith died when Reeve did, unable to continue on without his soul. Cloud was relatively uninjured; he had nothing more alarming than some nasty cuts and scrapes. Yuffie had broken both her legs, but was otherwise unhurt, while Vincent, who had in fear for his life transformed into Chaos, was without a scratch.
Yuffie sobbed quietly in the corner of the broken cockpit. "Gawd, it wasnt supposed to happen this way!" She cried, almost forgetting her pain, knowing that several of the people she had grown to care about had met their fate today.
Cloud shook his head; Yuffie was right. Emptiness such as he had never felt before gnawed at him. He gingerly gathered himself and stood, then walked to the huge viewport at the front of the cockpit. He looked down at the ground not far below him, clenching his fists on the rail. He was grateful he couldnt see the long smear of Tifas blood along the bottom of the Highwind. He knew that is how she died, he had heard the sound of her death, something he was not likely to ever forget. It wasnt supposed to happen this way.
Chaos landed on the slightly tilted floor of the bridge and became Vincent again. He made no sound at all. His eyes were cold, red as blood but almost lifeless. He bowed his head and jumped off the side of the Highwind, floating down slowly to the ground.
Cloud watched as he walked away, aimlessly, empty. The swordsman didnt know why Vincent had left without a word, nor did he really care at this point; he was at the moment consumed in hate for Sephiroth, dead though he was, the thief of all things he loved. Cloud silently added Tifas blood to Sephiroths sins. And Barrets blood, Reeves blood all charged to the black-caped man, murderer of innocents, destroyer Cloud clenched his eyes shut. Tifa was gone
Red XIII padded silently to Clouds side. The fiery beast nudged the swordsmans leg with the top of his muzzle, then pushed his head against his blue pants, nuzzling him like a cat would. Red XIII felt nothing but empathy for Cloud, for them all.
The flash of Holy meeting Meteo and the Lifestreams heaving swell illuminated the dark bridge of the broken Highwind, marking the final success of AVALANCHEs long journey and the end of its existence.
~ ~ ~
No, dawn never came. Cid finally came to, somewhere blacker than night, where the only noise was the rushing of blood in his ears. All he felt was horrific pain everywhere. He tried to find with his fingers the reason for the sharp pain and burning cold in his nose, but when he did, his hand fairly exploded with agony. He inhaled sharply, which only increased the icy sting
There was no way for him to track down the source of any of his pain, for every attempt invited a new wave of dark hurt upon him. Even the tears his pain evoked stung him.
And it went on into seeming infinity in the silent black world he found himself. Time ceased to hold any meaning in the darkness. Soon thirst joined pain, and hunger after that, and time crawled on from nothing to nothing until he had to find some relief. And though it was hurt to move, he had to he found a little water, a very little, in a basin of some sort. Too little to dip his hands in, he had to instead try to slurp it up and that perhaps hurt more than anything else had yet. He cried out, not thirsty enough yet to endure the torture of slaking it.
Ponderous time slipped into the darkness, hours, days, he didnt know, couldnt mark its passing except with growing pain. Not long or forever after, he couldnt tell, his thirst was bad enough he had no choice but to drink. And he did, sobbing.
There was only enough to take the edge off his thirst. He curled up very small in the blackness, wondering why
One year later
Cloud rapped softly on the door, then stepped back with Vincent and looked around while he was waiting for an answer. Cids house was pretty run down; the stained wood walls were dirty and covered with cobwebs, while the steps up to the front door were shaky and splintered. Heavy curtains blocked the windows. It had been quite some time since Cloud or Vincent had been here last; in fact, it had been over a year. Cloud occasionally berated himself for not looking in on Cid sooner; every time he called the house, which was admittedly not often, Cid was gone for this, or that it had become decidedly suspicious. But even then he didnt come for six more months he had other things on his mind at the time.
For Cloud it had taken him this long to come out of his despair enough to even act on his guilty conscience. Guilty because he hadnt looked in on any of the survivors he had spent so long with and named his friends for over a year, guilty because he had spent so long alone with his dark thoughts. At least with Red XIII and Yuffie he had called and talked to them for a little while. Vincent he had just run into when he had recently been in Nibelheim. Cloud hadnt gone to Nibelheim to look for Vincent at all, but to attempt one last break with his scarred past, to visit all that was left on this Planet of Tifa, or his mother, and say one last goodbye. But Vincent was there, newly returned to the land of the living after a very long sleep under the Shin-Ra mansion. The first thing Vincent did was ask after Cid, and when Cloud had no answer for him, they both agreed to travel together to Rocket Town, since it was not very far away. And that was that.
Finally someone came to the door; Cloud heard the sound of several bolts, chains, and locks being unlatched before the door was opened. The form revealed by the open door was not what Cloud expected. Rather than Shera or Cid, it was a skinny, nervous weasel of a man with stringy brown hair and rumpled clothing. Cloud blinked a few times then asked, "Is Cid here?"
The weasel man shook his head quickly. "He isnt here, no."
Vincent stepped over, asking, "Is Shera here then?"
Another negative. "She doesnt live here any longer."
Cloud scratched his head; he had spoken to her just yesterday morning, at this address. "Do you know where she went?"
"No, I dont. She just left."
"Do you mind if we wait inside for Cid? Weve been trying to get a hold of him for a long time."
The man suddenly became nervous, but after a long moment of waffling, a decision was reached and he haltingly opened the door. "I dont know when hell be back," he warned.
Cloud shrugged a little and walked through the open doorway with Vincent following. It seemed the inside of the house was in as bad a shape as the outside: the furniture was filthy and there was thick dust everywhere. It seemed to Cloud that there was a sense of disuse about the place; not much of the dust in the house was disturbed. The only part of the area that looked at all occupied was the kitchen, where there was a small pot over a fire.
The weasel man walked over to the pot and lifted the lid, stirring the contents with a wooden spoon. He looked back at the two visitors and called, "You can sit down if you want."
"Uh, thanks, I think," Cloud muttered to himself. A glance at Vincent confirmed that the taller man didnt think much differently than Cloud did about the prospect of sitting on the dirty furniture.
"I dont think anyone lives here," Vincent whispered to Cloud. The swordsman nodded, then walked into the kitchen.
He looked over the mans shoulder, causing the resident to twitch uncomfortably. "You dont live here, do you?" Cloud asked.
The nervous man ducked away from Cloud and distanced himself from the stove. "Uh, um no, no, not really," he answered, the spoon and lid in his hands shaking. Cloud looked into the pot; inside was what looked like thick porridge of some sort.
"Whatcha making here? Looks pretty bland."
The man fidgeted again. "Well, yes, I suppose it is." He looked to be considering something, flicking his eyes from the pot to Cloud to Vincent and back again. "I, well, you see, its not for me its, uh, its for the poor creature Shera keeps here."
Vincent walked in from the living room. "Creature?" he asked suspiciously.
"Well, yes. It came down off the mountain, or so Shera told me before she left. She said it was one of those poor things that Hojo had stuck in the Mako pods." The man wiped his face on his shirt cuff. "From what I understand, those things were human once. Shera asked me to take care of it; I could hardly refuse "
Cloud narrowed his eyes a little. "Where is it?"
"Heh, uh, its, well, Shera built a basement for it said it was too dangerous, poor thing was quite mad said it was too dangerous for there to be a way for it to escape, but it was human once, so she didnt feel right shooting it."
"I guess we could go with you to feed it since were waiting for Cid," Cloud stated, his tone not really one of asking. Something wasnt adding up right; something that made the hair on the back of his neck stand on end.
The man looked as though that was the last thing he wanted, but then a dangerous glint lit his eyes and relented. He shrugged and set the lid down. Then he grabbed a plate and spooned some of the porridge onto it. "If you insist," he said while handing Cloud the laden plate. "Follow me."
Cloud and Vincent followed the man out the side door and around the back of the old house, where they found a set of shutter doors leading to what must be the basement. The man grabbed the large handles and swung them open; apparently the doors were rather light. There was a flight of stairs below the doors.
"Cant be too dangerous if thats all that holds it in," Cloud remarked as they descended the stairs.
"No, Shera made an enclosure for it. It cant get out." The man shrugged. "Just as well. Ive never seen it, really. I hear it has white eyes and sharp teeth. It makes the most horrid noises."
Vincent wrinkled his nose. "It isnt very clean down here." Cloud nodded in agreement. The basement smelled old, musty, and spent. A few mushrooms peeked out of one dirt wall, Battery Caps perhaps, or maybe mosfungus. Definitely poisonous.
The man stepped forward and grabbed a small lantern from the wall and flicked it on, then started walking into the basement. Vincent and Cloud followed for a moment; it wasnt very long until they reached the far end of the area. The basement actually seemed longer than the house above it. The light that filtered in from the doors never quite made it to this end.
The man set the lamp down next to a metal wall and knocked softly on a steel door. Or at least, it appeared to be a door; closer inspection revealed that the edges had been welded to the jamb, rendering it impossible to open without a torch. There was a thin slot on the bottom of the door, just tall enough for a plate to pass under.
"See, it cant get out," the man said, then knocked on the former door a little harder. Something stirred behind the metal wall, then banged against the door. Whatever it was in that small room beyond the metal wall whined and scrabbled its fingers through the slot at the bottom of the door. Vincent growled softly, but when Cloud turned to him to see why, his face was blank.
The man mumbled to himself and shoved the plate under the door, where it was snatched up violently. Cloud could hear the thing slurping up the porridge with an intensity he was certain was borne of deep hunger and he heard faint sobbing as well. The sound made Cloud singularly uncomfortable.
"Maybe," Cloud offered quietly, "maybe that monster wasnt so far gone as Shera thought I mean, it sounds like its crying ."
The mans face hardened considerably. "No, it hasnt been human for quite some time."
Before Cloud could respond, he heard the creature behind the wall whine plaintively as it slowly pushed the plate back out. The man fairly sneered as he grabbed the plate. "Enough, thats all for today!" he shouted, causing the creature to pound on the wall and scream.
Cloud blinked in surprise. "You have plenty left! Its obvious its still hungry, why cant you get it some more?"
Angrily, the man stood and growled loudly, directing his voice to the enclosure, "Because it doesnt even deserve what I gave it already! It should rot in there; I only feed it because Shera told me to." Then the man stalked away, toward the exit, leaving the lamp by the metal wall. The monster behind the wall half-sobbed half-whined as the man walked away, still sticking its fingers under the door.
Cloud kneeled down to get a closer look at the creatures fingers, for reasons he wasnt sure of. The fingers he saw were very pale and thin, crooked, as if they had been broken before, and tipped with jagged nails. Vincent also knelt down, and as soon as he was sure the man had left, he extended his human hand and touched the creatures white fingers.
The creature yanked its fingers back with a startled gasp, then could be heard moving away from the door. Vincents red eyes flashed with an inhuman glow, and then he lowered his head in an attempt to peer under the door.
"What is it, Vincent?"
Vincent turned his head to look up at Cloud. "Smells familiar." Then he turned back and tried sticking his own fingers under the door and wiggling them to get the creatures attention.
It didnt seem to work at all. Vincent hissed a little, then got up and started examining the welds on either side of the door. Cloud asked, "Gonna let it out?"
The ex-Turk nodded in reply. Cloud understood; he knew somehow that the monster behind the wall wasnt so far gone as that man had claimed if nothing else, he heard the anguish in its cries and knew it couldnt be merely a monster. There was something human left in it, even if only a little bit. "So how do we do it?"
Vincent thought for a moment, then examined his armlet and pointed to one of the yellow materia. "Enemy Skill," he explained, then motioned for Cloud to move away. Cloud did so, then watched as Vincent gathered his magic to cast Laser. The blue beams shot out around him and struck the doorjambs with a loud spark. It was a good shot; the door shuddered, then Vincent punched it with his clawed arm, causing it to fall in.
When it fell, it was a good bit shorter than Cloud had expected. The ceiling of the room behind the door couldnt have been more than five feet high. Cloud looked into the doorway and frowned deeply. The room was very small, so small that he wasnt sure that he could have lain on the floor without bending his knees. And in the farthest corner of the small room huddled the creature, curled up in a tiny ball with its painfully thin arms over its head. It was covered in rags that hung loose on its skeletal frame, and its light hair was so long it obscured its body somewhat, yet the hair was also very thin and tangled.
Vincent growled again, deeper this time, then pushed Cloud out of the way. He stooped and moved as best he could to the far side of the room, next to the creature. Cloud peeked back in; the monster hadnt even moved, as if it were completely unaware of Vincents presence. He whispered something that Cloud couldnt hear.
When Vincents speech garnered him nothing from the creature, he reached out and nudged it softly with his human hand. It screeched and swung its head around to face Vincent while at the same time finding a way to hug itself even closer to the wall. Then it whimpered, breathing quickly in fear.
Its hair obscured its face too much to get a good look at it, but from what Vincent could see, its hooded eyes were white except, that wasnt their natural color. The white covered the irises and was milky and thick, as if it were a scar instead of a natural occurrence. It was obvious the creature was blind.
After a moment, Vincent ventured to push some of the yellow hair away from the creatures deathly pale face. It seemed too afraid now to even move.
Carefully, Vincent moved the creatures long hair, exposing more of its hollow face. It then became clear that it had a long beard, but that wasnt the most striking feature, or the most frightening. Where a nose would have been on a human, there was instead a dark, triangular hollow, not at all unlike the nostrils on a skull. Vincent pushed the long hair farther back, and revealed the side of the creatures head. It was missing an ear, or so he supposed; there was no ear canal, so it might be that it never had ears to begin with. In appearance, both the lack of ears and a nose coupled with its sunken blind eyes and hollow cheeks gave the impression of a strangely living deaths head. Cloud couldnt help but to contort his face in disgust.
The creature flicked its blind eyes around and covered the hollow on its face with one twisted hand. Cloud was right in his first assumption, it seemed; the creatures hand had been broken in several places in the past. It apparently never healed properly. Faint lines like cat scratches lined each of its fingers; some of the scratches trickled a little blood.
"Damn that is a sorry sight," Cloud commented to himself, thinking for a moment that he might kill the thing, put it out of its misery. He couldnt imagine it being better off alive the way it was.
Vincent hissed again. "Yes, it is a sorry sight," he replied, his voice tight with rage. As gently as he could, he grabbed the creature by its arms and tried to get it to move. After a long moment of frantically pulling away, it gave up, for it was obviously overpowered. It muttered something as it began crawling toward Vincent, something that might have been words long ago, but were incomprehensible now. Cloud noticed the thing probably couldnt walk even if it wanted to; its feet had been broken as well.
Vincent led the creature out of the small metal room and into the basement proper. He continued his gentle pulling until he was nearly to the exit. Cloud picked up the lamp and followed them.
When Vincent reached the edge of the light from the doorway, he let go of the creatures arms and sat down. As soon as he did that, the creature started moving around slowly yet fearfully, this way and that, until it finally moved far enough to reach a wall. Then, hugging the wall, it moved toward the doorway until it found a corner to settle in. Vincent and Cloud followed it the short way to the corner it now occupied.
In better lighting, Cloud was disturbed to discover that the creature looked more like a badly disfigured human than a Mako-created monster. The more he looked, the more this was true, until the creature started whimpering and crying as it had before, its voice so full of anguish that it was undeniably human. Clouds stomach turned itself in knots, wondering in horror how anyone could do something like that to a human. It had been disturbing enough when the creature the man had been an it. "Who is it?" Cloud asked, his voice cracking. "Who could do something like this to someone?"
Vincent sat down next to the man and said, "The answers to both are bound together, Cloud." Vincent moved his face much closer to where the mans ear would have been had he had any, then spoke in a loud voice, "Im going to cut your hair. Do not be afraid."
The man jumped a little then shook his head. He said something that came out sounding like a cross between a soft wolfs call and a gurgle. "Oouu c-cannnn-nngh, ooouuu ghuuuff fweinn ou huwff me ." His voice was very garbled, faint, as if he hadnt spoken in a long time, but it was also somehow familiar.
Vincent just sat stiffly for a moment, his jaw clenched beneath the tall collar of his red cloak. Then he carefully grabbed a bunch of the mans blond hair and cut it off using the sharp edges of his clawed fingers. He set the long tuft of cut hair aside and grabbed another bit of the intact hair. As he cut, the skeletal man sat very still, clenching shut his blind eyes, ignoring the entire thing in a very pointed manner. It was obvious even without the benefit of a clear expression to Cloud that the man was trying to pretend nothing at all was happening. Not long after, a few stray tears trickled out of the corners of his damaged eyes.
Soon Vincent finished shearing the mans hair, leaving it perhaps a little longish on the top. Then he set about clipping his beard, until it was short enough that it could be shaved. This revealed a likely enough reason for the man to be crying; his lips were bleeding freely. Cloud saw the tips of his teeth, sharp as daggers; as he set his jaw and squinted shut his eyes, they cut into him. Vincent hissed yet again, and with his human hand tried to wipe some of the blood away, and perhaps keep him from biting his lip any more. It looked as though it had suffered the same fate many, many times before.
Suddenly the man screamed and pulled himself away from Vincent, flailing his arms wildly and shouting, "Ngo, ngo, eeav me aoounng!" Vincent moved back, allowing the man to howl in relative peace. After a while, the man crossed his arms over his chest and leaned his head back against the wall, sobbing quietly. Every now and again he would drop his head and wipe his eyes with the back of his broken hand.
There was something so familiar about that gesture, Cloud thought. He looked over at Vincent, who wore a peculiar expression on his narrow face; it was one of both unbearable sympathy, bitter as a needle, and extreme anger kindled by that empathy. Cloud squatted down next to Vincent and asked, "Who is it?"
Vincent growled a little. "You dont know yet? Look at him."
Cloud thought he had been, but shrugged and did as Vincent said. He took a long, hard look at the man, examining every feature to see if there was anything to tell him who he was. His now short hair was ash blond, from what he could see through all the dirt matting it the long stubbly beard Vincent had left was the same color, as were his sharp, upswept eyebrows. Black eyelashes framed unusual Wutaian eyes, at least unusual for such a fair complected man. There was no way to tell what color his eyes were originally. Cloud avoided looking too long at the cavernous thing that was all the man had left of his nose. He wondered briefly about the old saying, Cutting your nose off to spite your face, suddenly realizing that someone had done that very thing to this man. That someone had also done something worse, as he suddenly saw; the man only had his front several teeth, sharpened to points, and no tongue. No wonder he couldnt speak!
It wasnt until the man sensed Clouds examination and turned to face him, spearing him with his sightless eyes, that all the pieces fell together. Cloud gasped when he realized what Vincent had figured out long before: that this man, though horribly disfigured and nearly insane, was Cid Highwind.
"Cid?!" he shouted in shock. The man flinched and shrunk back into the corner even further. Apparently, as Vincent had guessed, he could still hear, just extremely poorly, since whatever was left of his ear canal was covered. Someone must have taken great care when they mangled him
Vincent nodded silently. "That perhaps answers your second question as well."
Cloud nodded dumbly. He just couldnt get his mind around the answer. But it was the only logical conclusion; Shera must have committed this atrocity. As inconceivable as it was, there was no other solution. No one else had the chance. And if they did, Shera still knew about it. She had to. "But why?! She always seemed so gentle!"
"I intend to find out just that," Vincent replied darkly. "But first I think we should feed him ."
"Well, yeah ," Cloud had to agree. First things first it would be a long time before he would be able to put aside the desolate, half mad sounds his friend had made before, while he was eating the porridge .
Vincent stood up then went to pick Cid up and carry him. He wasnt really in any condition to drag himself into his house. When Vincent lifted him up, Cid stiffened, squinting his eyes shut again and biting his lip. Cloud wondered what he was thinking, and how long he had been shut up in this basement. Long enough to drive him insane? It seemed so.
Vincent strode quickly up the stairs, and went into the house. Cid whined the whole way, looking as though he would try to pull out his hair if he could get a proper grip on any of it. Cloud followed them, and as soon as he entered the house he went to get some of the porridge for Cid. The other weasel man was nowhere to be seen. Fortunately, he had neglected to clean up; the pot was still there, although its contents were cold.
Vincent set Cid down on the floor in the middle of his living room floor while Cloud served up some of the porridge. As soon as Vincent let go of Cid, he immediately set off hunting for a corner. It seemed to be very hard on him that a corner wasnt readily at hand which was understandable given that he had lived in a room so small it was nothing but corners for who knows how long. After a short while, he gave up, instead settling for curling up into a tight little ball and shivering.
Cloud walked in and set the plate of porridge in front of Cid. When he didnt move for a moment, Cloud realized it was probably because he had no idea it was there, so he took one of his hands and dipped Cids fingers in the porridge. It only took Cid a second to snatch the plate and begin voraciously eating the food by scooping it up with his fingers. He hid it under his body, but it was clear he had a tough time eating. It looked like he had to nearly gag himself to get any food down, and when he cleaned his fingers, thin, bloody scratches appeared on them. That he was silently sobbing the entire time didnt help any.
Cloud nearly wretched at the sight himself. It completely flabbergasted him. How on this Planet could a human do such a thing to another human? "How could this happen?"
Vincent shook his head, then went to search the cupboards for food for Cloud and himself. Cloud watched in sick fascination as Cid tried his hardest to get every last bit of the porridge in his mouth. When he finally despaired of getting any more with his near useless hands, he slowly pushed the plate away and whined.
Just as Cloud reached down to take the plate, Vincent roared, his voice only half-human and full of fury. Cloud spun around and instinctively drew his sword. But there was no immediate threat; Vincent stood alone, shoulders heaving in barely restrained rage. Cloud returned the sword to the scabbard on his back and stood still, watching.
With a visible effort, Vincent calmed himself enough so that he would not change into one of his monstrous forms. Then he turned to face Cloud, holding up a small brown bag in his brass claw. He tossed it to Cloud, who caught it easily. Cloud examined the bag, noting with disgust that it greatly resembled the usual container for shipments of a certain hallucinogenic drug derived from Battery Cap venom. He had seen such things often enough in his career as a guard for Shin-Ra; in fact he had helped bust a few dealers back then. He sniffed the bag; the sweet scent was just that of the powdered venom.
For a moment he didnt see what Vincent was so angry about; it didnt surprise Cloud in the least that Shera or the weasel man may have been addicts, all things considered. Hell, those mushrooms on the wall in the basement had looked just like Battery Caps; they probably made their own powder. Then Vincent held out a plastic container full of dry porridge mix. Cloud walked over and looked inside. He saw some of the very same drug in the mix as he had smelled in the bag. He narrowed his Mako eyes and looked to the pot.
Vincent nodded. "As if what they have done is not enough, they drug him as well."
Cloud grimaced. The tale of what Cid had been up to since he left the Highwind before AVALANCHE faced Sephiroth was just getting worse by the second. The swordsman looked over at Cid, huddled up in a tiny ball, and pitied him.
~ ~ ~
After crawling for what seemed like hours without moving, Cid finally reached the wall of his tiny cell. He cursed Gaze as he had always cursed it it wanted nothing but to make him miserable. Why else would Gaze take it upon itself to make up such staggeringly real hallucinations even now the walls of his cell felt wrong, as did the clothes he wore. Why Gaze would conjure up the blue jacket, the leather gloves, and the scarf Cid couldnt begin to grasp.
Cid didnt believe it at all, or tried not to. He hated it when he gave in to Gazes evil games. He moved another several subjective miles until he found his favorite corner to curl up in. Cid knew that the only world left for him was the tiny metal cell with its horrible black emptiness. Whatever he remembered outside of it was false dreams that Gaze inflicted on him. Gaze, Shera, and a few others were the only ones who bothered to speak to him. And they never touched him, except for Gaze, sometimes
"Shera, why does Gaze do this to me?"
At least it speaks to you. Its a nice sort.
"You always say that. It poisons me sometimes."
No it doesnt. Gaze is kind, all it wants is to fill the black world with things
"But they arent real. It confuses me, it hurts me. Doesnt Gaze know that?"
Of course it does. It likes to try to make your life hell.
Cid choked at that, as he always did. Sometimes he wondered about Shera. Sometimes she was almost as bad as Gaze was. At least she never touched him.
You know, Cid, I didnt do this, Gaze claimed.
"Yes you did! You did! You always do, you always make me think theres something else!"
You disgust me sometimes. Since when is the world only the metal room?
Gaze laughed. Since the dawn of time. Cid Highwind doesnt exist without his room. The metal is the universe. Weve been over this.
Yes, why do you think there is anything other than this?
Cid clenched his fists and shook. "I hate you confusing me "
Hah, maybe that really was someone touching you maybe there is Someone Else
"IM NOT LISTENING! LEAVE ME ALONE!"
Do you feel that ? The wall ?
Cid clenched his jaw, drawing blood. Tears trickled from his eyes as he felt an overwhelming compulsion to run his hands along the wall. But he refused, refused because he knew Gaze was only going to torment him more But, unable to resist any longer and with a strangled whine, he gave in felt the texture of wood, not metal. Like he had in his home before before
Maybe it is. Remember, I lived with you then.
Just imagine it just imagine it. Could it be that those lies you remember are true ?
"No no youre trying to hurt me again like you always do "
Of course I am. Pain lets you know you are alive. But maybe Im telling the truth. The truth hurts, sometimes.
Has Gaze ever made up something as realistic as this?
"Yes," Cid snapped bitterly. Very often, when he was fed, he would get sick and his head would spin, and then Gaze would make up things that felt as real as this except the things it made up were always full of colors. This time it was black the way it was supposed to be.
Maybe the world is black because you are blind.
"NO!" Cid shouted. "No. Because that would mean you did this to me and I know you wouldnt."
Im bored of this. I always tell the truth.
Listen to Gaze. It never lied to you before. Black is the way its supposed to be, of course. No one would ever take you out of your cell.
Im bored, too. Lets do something
Im very bored
Cid dreaded what Gaze and Shera would do to relieve their boredom. It was never pleasant and there never was a way to escape.
It wasnt long before Cid began clawing at the walls and himself, pounding his arms and his head on the wall, desperate far beyond the point of madness to escape the voices in his head and the terrible games they played.
And if anyone from the Outside came in, he didnt realize it, for that was nothing but another one of Gazes cruel games
~ ~ ~
In the dark night, under the bright moon, a lone figure moved stealthily around the run down house that Cid used to live in. The figure tipped a small bucket or a can, spreading its liquid contents around as much as he could. The liquid soaked into the ground and into the old wood slats. The shadow did this all around the small house, sometimes splashing the liquid high on the walls. A rope soaked in the liquid was tossed up onto the roof, with the end dangling down.
Satisfied with his work, the thin figure fished an object out of his coat pocket. It was a small, reusable lighter; a thin dragon with birds wings spiraled around it, ending with its fierce snarl right at the striker. The man grinned, almost as fiercely as the dragon on the metal lighter. He struck the lighter, igniting it. He then carefully set the fire to the end of the rope, until it caught.
Then he ran as the rope exploded in flames.
~ ~ ~
Vincent sat bolt upright upon the couch he had slept on. He looked around suspiciously, trying to find the source of his sudden apprehension. It didnt take him long. One sniff of the air was all he needed.
The dark man scrambled off the couch and ran full speed into the room in which Cloud slept. He shook the snoring swordsman sharply. Cloud snapped up, shouting, "Hey, whatsa big idea?"
"The house is on fire," Vincent hissed.
Clouds eyes went wide as he glanced out the window. It was like looking into a furnace, or the gates of Hell. Yellow and red flames licked at the window. Cloud nodded and jumped out of bed and took up his sword as soon as he reached it. "Now were is Cid?"
Vincent didnt respond; he had no answer. Instead, he rushed around the house, looking in every corner and under every table to find him. Cloud tried to get into the garage, but his way was blocked by the roaring conflagration that had all ready consumed that side of the house.
"Damn!" Cloud shouted, shutting the door to the garage before the fire could get any closer. He backed into the living room looked around frantically for Cid, finally finding him curled up in a corner under an end table. Cloud crawled under to retrieve him, fishing around until he finally grabbed hold of Cids ankle. Not a second passed before Cid was wide-awake and flailing around, trying to pull his foot out of Clouds grasp. Cloud exhaled in irritation, then started pulling the weak pilot out from under the table. This just made Cid screech and kick, but fortunately, Cloud was by far the stronger and was able to complete his task.
When Cloud backed out from under the table, he almost made the mistake of letting go of Cids foot, but caught himself just in time. He set his sword down and lifted Cid over his shoulder then grabbed his sword again. Then he turned to the front door, in order to escape. Vincent joined him just then, and the three rushed over to the door. Under the door, smoke began billowing into the room in great waves. Vincent tried to open the door while holding a hand over his nose and mouth. Before Cloud could do the same, Cid let out a high-pitched shriek and bit Clouds neck. Cloud cursed loudly and tried not to drop his charge as Vincent began throwing himself against the door.
It was jammed tight. Cloud growled, and after prying Cids jaw off his neck and passing him off to Vincent, he readied his sword. Vincent tried his best to restrain Cid, who by now was nearly hysterical. A bright red light flashed, and Cloud performed a quick Cross Cut on the door, splintering it and sending large bits in every direction. As soon as the door opened, the two rushed out of the burning house.
Before Vincent and Cloud could get more then a few feet from the flame-engulfed home, several gunshots rang out. With no way to know what direction the gunner lay in, the two were sitting ducks. They ran across the street, as far as they could get from the fire, knowing the light would make them easy targets. They didnt get very far. Vincent felt two hot bullets hit, one in his side and one in his shoulder, while Cloud, with a cry, stumbled and fell behind him.
Vincent nearly fell himself, for Cid had suddenly jerked hard, momentarily causing Vincent to lose his balance. He had probably been hit as well. But he stood, and made a break for one of the nearby houses. Just as he made it to the door, he felt another bullet hit him, this time in the back. He fell forward, knocking into the wall of the house.
By now, the gunshots and the fire had roused the entire neighborhood. Some people stood in their doorways, watching the spectacle, while others raised the alarm and started hefting their hoses over to Cids house, to put out the flames.
Vincent shook his head and staggered up, still holding on to Cid, who was shivering slightly. After a second to regain his footing, Vincent stumbled over to the door and knocked on it; it was answered quickly. The old man who had loved the rocket so much stepped aside and let Vincent enter.
"Watch out!" the old man shouted, and Vincent snapped his head around. The lanky weasel man stood at doorway, his pistol trained on Vincent.
"Turn around," the man hissed. Vincent just looked at the man over his shoulder, glaring, his eyes beginning to glow a demonic red.
The man swallowed hard. "Y-you dont scare me, freak. Just turn around, and Ill leave you alone."
Vincent carefully set Cid on the ground, allowing the pain in his body to further flame his rage. Weasel did not know what he was dealing with.
Just as Vincent began to stand, and the red glare of his limit flared out, the man cackled and aimed his pistol down at Cid. Vincent flexed the strong fore arms of the Galian beast, then turned just in time to see the man both fire his gun and fall unconscious from a blow to the head. Behind him stood Cloud, holding the pommel of the black sword Ragnarok in two fists. Blood covered his hands.
The Galian beast reached down and grabbed a fistful of the weasels filthy hair, dragging him into the house and back to another room. Cloud limped in after, then dropped like a rock into a chair, his left leg leaking blood. The old man was nowhere to be seen.
After a few short seconds of rest, Cloud got down on his hands and knees, dragging his injured leg, which had been shot and was what caused him to fall, after him, until he was next to Cid. The pilot had passed out, probably from shock. It looked as though he had been hit twice, once just where his shoulder met his neck, and once in the stomach, on the opposite side. There was a lot of blood on his mouth, but Cloud figured he knew where that was from as he rubbed the rather painful bite on his neck.
Wiping the blood off his hands, Cloud examined his armlet then the hilt of his sword for a Cure materia. He wasnt entirely sure a Cure would work properly without removing the bullets, but it was better than nothing. Unfortunately, there wasnt one equipped, so he went through his pockets for one. Then he paused. A thought occurred to him, one he really did not feel comfortable considering but it came, just the same. Would it really be the best thing the best thing for Cid, to heal him ? Maybe letting him die would be the best for him
As he searched, Vincent returned, fully healed and as human as he could be. He tossed the three bullets that had hit him into a nearby waste bucket. There were some perks to his inhuman nature. Then Vincent searched his own armlet for a Cure materia. He found one quickly enough.
Vincent squatted down next to Cid, who was obviously in shock. After a few moments of thought, Vincent sat down and began carefully examining Cids bullet wounds. As he cut open Cids shirt and looked over the bullet holes, he said, "Well need to get these out before we cast Cure, or else they will stay forever."
Cloud scratched one ear then spoke in a small, quiet voice, "Is that the best thing? I mean, should we try to save him? I hate to ask, but then I hate to think of Cid like this for the rest of his life ."
Vincent glanced up, searching Clouds face with his blood-red eyes. "If you let him die now, he will be like this for the rest of his life." Then Vincent turned his gaze back to Cid. After finding one of the bullets, he carefully used two claws to cut away some of the flesh around it and remove it. Cid never flinched. "I do not intend on giving up on my friend so easily. He is stronger than you realize."
Cloud nodded, satisfied with the answer, allowing him to put that thought away. "While youre doing that, may I use your Cure materia? The hole in my leg went clean through, so no bullet to remove, but it still needs some repair work."
Vincent nodded as he went to retrieve the second bullet, the one in Cids stomach. Cloud easily plucked the green orb from the Death Penalty and slid it into a slot on his armlet. Then he called on the Ancient power to cast Cure 3 on himself. As the clean breath of the Lifestream flowed into him, Cloud could feel the wound closing up. It was a strange sensation, but not at all unpleasant. Still, the injury had not fully healed; there was only so much Cure magic could perform.
"There," Vincent proclaimed, "Ive got the last one out. Cast the magic; I am concerned that he hasnt stirred at all since I laid him down." Cloud nodded and cast Cure 3 on Cid. His wounds closed as well, but not so thoroughly as Cloud would have liked.
Vincent frowned slightly. "Not enough. But that is all we can do for now. I think we should restrain him somehow so he does not hurt himself in his confusion."
"Ugh but yeah, youre right. Ill go ask the owner of this house if we can stay for the night." Then he went to find the owner.
~ ~ ~
It didnt take very long to get permission to stay there. The old man who loved the rocket so much was extremely hospitable, even offering Vincent a fairly rare gun he had found nearby. Vincent took it gratefully, not because it was a better weapon than his Death Penalty, but because of the mans generosity.
After securing permission, Vincent and Cloud carefully carried Cid to one of the beds and tied him down. By now he had woke up some, enough to attempt escape, but he was far too weak. Cloud was surprised someone so frail could survive two bullet wounds, but Vincent was not.
When that unpleasant task was completed and the door to the room closed, a sudden deathly stillness came over Vincent and he went to retrieve the weasel man who had shot them. To make sure the man didnt escape, the ex-Turk had tied him up. Now it was time to ask some questions that needed answering.
Cloud sat in a chair next to the wiry man and asked point blank, "Why did you do this to Cid?"
The man grimaced. "What says I had anything to do with it? I would rather it died. Why do you think I let you release it?"
The swordsman clenched his teeth and barely supressed the urge to strike the bound man. "He, not it, he."
A dark sneer crossed the mans dirty features. "It was never more than a monster to me."
Clouds expression was as dark as a storm. "We know you have been poisoning him. We know Shera was involved. If you value your life, you will tell us whats going on."
"Isnt it a good thing I dont?" the man said with a shrug. "But fine, if you must know, my name is Dr. Morre, and I am a plastic surgeon. Shera was my lover. She deserved better than that waste of flesh. She wanted to hurt it, it was all her idea, but I helped her. What more do you want to know?" Morres expression was almost arrogant.
Cloud clenched his fists, resisting the overwhelming urge to strike that cruel doctor. "Why did you set fire to the house?" Cloud growled through clenched teeth. Vincent however stood stock-still, cold as stone.
Dr. Morre snorted. "Why else? To kill you. To kill it," at this he jerked his head to indicate Cid. "The Planet needed a cleansing."
Vincent shook his head. "What would you know of cleansing?" Vincent asked with a steely calm. The dark man lifted the Death Penalty with one hand and aimed it at the weasel mans head. "If I thought you capable of guilt, I would let you live." Then Vincent pulled the trigger. The Death Penalty took the mans life swiftly and with a preternatural silence.
Cloud blinked in shock. He looked at Vincent blankly, for while the blond man had been very angry, he had not yet gone so far as to murder in cold blood. Vincent looked back without expression. Then without a word he tore the dead man from the chair and carried him outside, to the still burning house, to let him burn in the pyre he had intended for Cid.
~ ~ ~
Cid slept fitfully, curled up as much as he could, restrained as he was. Sometimes, when he was weak, when he was unable to push the memory away, visions of his last moments under the sun would torment him. At these times Cid was certain of one thing, as he was never certain of anything in his black world certain that this one dark memory was real. Even Gaze was incapable of imagining something darker.
And it was always recalled with a clarity of mind he no longer possessed Gaze was not there, but Shera was, the real Shera, the one who so mangled him. Her words had been like knives, touched with the heat of madness he would soon come to know, poisoned by bitterness beyond human endurance
After Shera had drugged him, she had injected him with an anesthesia of sorts. Curare, and something else, so the pain would be deadened yet leave him fully aware of what was happening. Someone he had seen around Rocket Town but never formally met came into the room. He came to Shera and kissed her, then helped her drag Cid out into the garage and onto a long workbench.
"He can hear me, right?" Shera whispered, her voice shaking.
The other man, a ratty, unkempt sliver of a human being, nodded.
Cid was aware of all this, though he could not move, and felt nothing.
Shera leaned over him, looking into his face with such a look of hatred it made Cid quail. She growled, then motioned to the rat-man. A few moments passed, then the man nodded, ready for what ever they had planned.
The man jerked Cids mouth open, and reached in with a large scalpel.
Shera spoke, malice dripping from her every word, and madness as well. "For the evil words you flung at me, I deprive you of speech." As soon as it was said, the man made a quick slashing motion, and withdrew Cids tongue.
Sometimes at this point Cid would awaken, if it had been a dream that brought back the memory, or he would cry out for the memory to stop, to leave him, but it never did. The voices would return, and force him to relive the harrowing experience, heedless of his cries
He remembered everything, remembered how Shera and her doctor lover broke his hands and his feet, remembered them blinding him, remembered how they removed his ears and his nose with cold surgical precision and how careful they were that the injuries healed without infection, because they didnt want him to die.
They wanted him to suffer.
Shera wanted him to suffer.
And he did.
~ ~ ~
Cloud woke with a start, whatever nightmare that had assailed him flitting into the darkness of the night. He sat up and shook his head. Any nightmare he could have now was nothing compared with the waking world. Somehow even the dreams that brought back the last vision he had of Tifa falling from the cockpit of the Highwind could not compare with the horror of what he had seen the day before. The sound of her death was horrible but it had been an accident. This wasnt.
He had thought he had seen the depths of evil in Hojo he had never imagined that he would experience anything that could compare with him, but he had. And of all people, that sadistic madness had to be in Sheras blackened mind, egged on by her jealous and equally insane lover.
Cloud winced, and stopped his ears, for Cid was screaming again, weakly, almost silently, and yet with enough voice to be heard in the next room. The swordsman feared Cids gibbering and the horrific sight of his tortured form would never let him sleep soundly again. It twisted his gut, chilled him to the bone.
Sighing heavily, Cloud stood up and shuffled into the next room over, where they had tied Cid to the bed. It had been entirely a safety precaution; the bullet wounds had to be let alone, and the pilots incessant need to curl up into a tiny ball or flail around would only serve to damage him more. It had been a very difficult to do, and the sight of Cid helplessly bound and struggling against the ropes only heaped one horror atop the rest.
Cloud looked down in pity on his friend. He seemed to be taken in his own nightmares; Cloud wondered silently if it would be a kindness or a cruelty to awaken him. His waking life seemed no more bearable than his dreaming. The swordsman could hardly fault Cid for his madness; Shera had made damn sure life was a living Hell for him, nudging his eroding mind along the path of insanity by drugging him often enough that it would be nearly impossible to separate the hallucination from the reality. Cloud was certain that in Cids deranged thinking, he was still in that black cell, and all of this was just another drug induced fantasy meant to torment him.
Finally deciding that waking Cid would be the better thing, Cloud reached over and shook him softly. Cid woke up quickly, becoming very still. For a while he stared unseeing at the ceiling, breathing hard. Then he closed his eyes and clenched his teeth, drawing fresh blood. A very faint quaking began in Cids hands, and passed down his arms. Whispered pleading joined the tremor; Cloud leaned in close to see if he could understand what was said.
Unfortunately, he could not. Cloud sighed and sat down on the floor next to the bed, leaning against it. For some reason he was not entirely sure of, he set his left hand on Cids forearm. He was somewhat surprised that Cid didnt resist the touch, but not much. He was too drained to really feel much of anything right now.
So, lost in his own dark thoughts, Cloud passed what little remained of that night seated next to the bed, with his hand on Cids arm.
Several days later
The three had been traveling over the mountains that stood around Nibelheim, south of Rocket Town. Vincent and Cloud intended to take Cid to the Mount Nibel Memorial hospital that stood near the old ruins of Nibelheim. A small town had started there, and they hoped that perhaps the doctors there could do something for Cid, both physically and mentally. If nothing else the doctors should be able to perform some sort of reconstructive surgery.
Vincent had constructed something of a sled to carry Cid upon; although he had become less violent over the past few days, he was still prone to biting and scratching if someone carried him. Weak as he was, it didnt really matter; he was still very unwieldy when he wasnt cooperating, which was most of the time. They had the pilot bound to the sled as best they could. Unfortunately, they had to tie him down rather tightly, since he was prone to jerking around, trying to escape. But Vincent insisted on letting him up whenever they stopped for a break, as he felt that Cid must soon grow accustomed to some freedom, even if he hated it and feared it.
It was sad, but Cid seemed more comfortable completely restrained then he did otherwise. Perhaps it was that his world had been nothing but a tiny enclosed space for so long he couldnt handle anything else. Cloud shook his head, still baffled as to how anyone could do something like that to another person.
So they traveled, Vincent and Cloud taking turns dragging the travois behind them, trying hard to ignore it when Cid frequently cried out, his voice so full of hurt and pain. Both could hear in Cids howling the voice of a man driven far beyond his ability to comprehend or adapt to what was going on around him.
Cloud would never forgive Shera for that. Cid had been a strong man, with a good heart, despite the exterior he showed. He wasnt any longer; now he was nothing more than a broken, pathetic madman, according to Clouds sad thought.
Soon, however, any forgiveness would be a moot point. As Vincent and Cloud crested a hill, fairly high up the north side of the Nibel Mountains, they came to a clearing, one with a single twisted skeleton of a tree clinging to the earth with dead roots. It stood stark against the gray sky, strangely bright under the cloud cover. Upon one branch hung a body, a thin, tall woman, with a white lab coat and a dirty orange dress.
The two stopped, both silent for a long moment as they looked on the final end of Shera Stargazer. The faint smell of death hung in the cold air. Cloud broke the silence with a shuddering sigh. What horror had bitterness wrought, its works seeming finished now. Cloud approached the hanging form, covering his nose, while Vincent, guessing that a long pause had come to their journey, went to let up Cid.
Cloud looked at Sheras dead form with a sullen gaze. It seemed as though this end was fitting, and yet, it was empty at least, it was empty of any resolution, of any sense of vengeance achieved. A solitary raindrop struck Clouds grim face.
A weak breeze fluttered a sheet of paper nailed to the tree, catching the swordsmans eye. He took a few steps to get a better look at the sheet: it was a suicide note written in pen, left for whomever should pass this way. Cloud held a corner to stop the fluttering and began to read:
As Cloud finished reading the note nailed to the tree, a gentle rain started to fall. Letting his hand drop loosely, he glanced up at the sky for a moment, looking at the gray clouds overhead and letting a few of the raindrops hit his upturned face. Then he looked back down at the suicide note. The writing, hasty and nervous, began to fade, the raindrops wetting the ink and making it run. It didnt take long for the shower to turn a little stronger, the larger raindrops hitting the ground and the travelers with a soft pattering sound. Cloud moved back slowly and sat down next to Cid, his expression dim.
The pilot sat on the ground just as Vincent had left him, with his legs bent, holding his knees with both arms. Something about his entire demeanor changed slightly, and he lifted his head to the darkened sky. A slight wind ruffled his hair.
Cloud blinked the rain from his eyelashes while he watched Cid with guarded eyes. Cid covered part of his face with his left hand, perhaps to keep the rain out of what was left of his nose. His sightless eyes gazed upward toward the sky, letting the falling rain merge with the silent tears he began to shed.
Vincent cut the rope that held Sheras dead body, then let her down on to the ground. Cloud watched him for a moment, seeing Vincent shake his head, not knowing exactly what to do or where to go from here. Then the swordsman looked back at the note Shera had left. The rain had nearly washed everything away; all that was left of the note was long streaks of ink bleeding and merging together as one.
When he looked back at Cid, Cloud was surprised to find a faint glimmer of a smile just touching his features. A little spark of hope, flickering silently, a very tiny flame, but present nonetheless. Cloud narrowed his eyes, thinking at first that it was because Shera was dead. But then he realized Cid had no way of knowing that. He couldnt see her couldnt smell the faint odor of death, hadnt touched her cold form and neither Vincent nor Cloud had gathered enough strength of voice to proclaim her death loud enough for Cid to hear.
No, it was something else. Cloud watched the raindrops gather on Cids pale skin, dripping down in little rivulets then he suddenly realized what it was. Cid was in his element. The slight wind, the rain, the cold air upon the Nibel Mountains it was where Cid felt most at home. And for a very brief space, for now, those natural things that he loved and knew so well had brought him out of the darkness he had been trapped in for so long.
It was a faint glimpse of something more, something outside the black cell. Vincent was right, and Cloud had been wrong; Cid was a stronger man than the swordsman had realized. And though he was darkly shattered, still it seemed now that not all of what was human in him had been utterly ruined.
Perhaps, dark and silent though it may be, there was still a dawn to see.
~ The End ~
Princess Artemis' Fanfiction

There's pretty much an abundance of Peter Pan at our house most of the time. It started with Finley's Peter Pan birthday party in April and continued into our Disney trip. I was planning on just having all the boys be Peter Pan for Halloween, and then I suggested to Finley he could be Peter's shadow, and he was so excited. I was totally surprised he went with it!
I pretty much just remade Finley's Peter Pan costume (that Braden is wearing) in black. We put some of Sol's black socks over his shoes, black mittens on his hands, and I bought a black masky thing at a Halloween store to cover his face. It was kind of annoying, so he just wore it for a few pictures.
I would have loved to get pictures of them doing shadow-y things... but I'll take playing on the slide.
They had a lot of fun trick or treating! Braden wanted to go inside every house and was generally discontent with the whole process--until we let him eat candy. Finley liked trick or treating--but his favorite part was after we got home and he got to pass out candy. He took the job super seriously and LOVED it. Extrovert.
Keaton was supposed to be a Lost Boy/Fox... but it was a hot costume, so he didn't wear it for long. He did wear his fox pajamas as we trick or treated, so I think that counts.
Here's the past four Halloweens in case you have some time to kill!

The Escambia County Sheriff’s Office has arrested Jamie Spicer, 34, of Pace, Florida for Child Abuse after she forced her son to panhandle for her. Deputies responded to the area of Davis Highway and Olive Road around 8:40am on Thursday morning after several reports of a child holding a sign that read, “Homeless, need help, God Bless.” Spicer was sitting on a nearby bench while her son stood on the side of the road with his sign. When deputies arrived, Spicer snatched the sign away from her son in an attempt to conceal it.
When Deputies questioned Spicer about what she was doing, she told deputies that she needed money to pay for her motel room and that was why they were panhandling. When asked why she attempted to conceal her son’s sign, Spicer told deputies that she was a substitute teach and did not want to get into any trouble.
Spicer was arrested and booked into the Escambia County Jail with no bond. The child was turned over to his father and Department of Children and Families was notified.

It was great for hubby to pick me up after work and the quick visit to Migros to grab what we needed for dinner and some more stickers for my planner, so sweet. As partly rewarding him for his awesomeness, I made burgers and made my own version of cocktail sauce to go with it and french fries as our side dish. We stopped by Drinks of the World and I opted to try new beers other than those we regularly buy so we ended up buying Honey Dew. It was surprising to find Dogfish Head after watching Beer Wars a few years ago of how they were being given a rough time by the marketing giants of AB and Moors so we bought it as well to try. We liked them both and they complimented our cheat night meal.

- Premier League
Vidic: Rooney will stay at United
Nemanja Vidic has backed David Moyes in standing firm over Wayne Rooney's desire to leave Manchester United - and believes the striker will stay at Old Trafford.
Moyes has insisted time and again that Rooney is not for sale and, although Chelsea have made two bids, United have vowed to keep him at the club.
- Fergie Factor: Manchester United's struggle to sign marquee players has forced them to grow stars rather than buy them.
- Click here for more
And while Vidic, the United captain, has been impressed by Moyes' show of strength, he also praised Rooney for his attitude on the training ground.
"To be fair I am not worried as much," said Vidic. "Wayne is training well and obviously the club is really strong in what they are saying and they obviously know what they are doing and I trust in the manager and the club.
"I don't go that far, but what I can say he is training really well. He's good in the dressing room and that's the most important thing.
"Obviously he had a few small injuries in the last few weeks, but he has trained really well. Obviously he didn't have as much games, but the season is long and I think he will be good."
Apart from playing 45 minutes in a behind-closed-doors friendly against Real Betis, Rooney has not featured in United's pre-season games.
However, he did play 67 minutes for England on Wednesday and Moyes will assess him to see if he is fit enough to be involved against Swansea on Saturday.

Dracula by Bram Stoker
1 Jonathan Harker's Journal
At every station there were groups of people, sometimes crowds, and in all sorts of attire. Some of them were just like the peasants at home or those I saw coming through France and Germany, with short jackets, and round hats, and home-made trousers; but others were very picturesque.
The women looked pretty, except when you got near them, but they were very clumsy about the waist. They had all full white sleeves of some kind or other, and most of them had big belts with a lot of strips of something fluttering from them like the dresses in a ballet, but of course there were petticoats under them.
The strangest figures we saw were the Slovaks, who were more barbarian than the rest, with their big cow-boy hats, great baggy dirty-white trousers, white linen shirts, and enormous heavy leather belts, nearly a foot wide, all studded over with brass nails. They wore high boots, with their trousers tucked into them, and had long black hair and heavy black moustaches. They are very picturesque, but do not look prepossessing. On the stage they would be set down at once as some old Oriental band of brigands. They are, however, I am told, very harmless and rather wanting in natural self-assertion.
It was on the dark side of twilight when we got to Bistritz, which is a very interesting old place. Being practically on the frontier--for the Borgo Pass leads from it into Bukovina--it has had a very stormy existence, and it certainly shows marks of it. Fifty years ago a series of great fires took place, which made terrible havoc on five separate occasions. At the very beginning of the seventeenth century it underwent a siege of three weeks and lost 13,000 people, the casualties of war proper being assisted by famine and disease.
Count Dracula had directed me to go to the Golden Krone Hotel, which I found, to my great delight, to be thoroughly old-fashioned, for of course I wanted to see all I could of the ways of the country.
I was evidently expected, for when I got near the door I faced a cheery-looking elderly woman in the usual peasant dress--white undergarment with a long double apron, front, and back, of coloured stuff fitting almost too tight for modesty. When I came close she bowed and said, "The Herr Englishman?"
"Yes," I said, "Jonathan Harker."
She smiled, and gave some message to an elderly man in white shirtsleeves, who had followed her to the door.
He went, but immediately returned with a letter:
"My friend.--Welcome to the Carpathians. I am anxiously expecting you. Sleep well tonight. At three tomorrow the diligence will start for Bukovina; a place on it is kept for you. At the Borgo Pass my carriage will await you and will bring you to me. I trust that your journey from London has been a happy one, and that you will enjoy your stay in my beautiful land.--Your friend, Dracula."
4 May--I found that my landlord had got a letter from the Count, directing him to secure the best place on the coach for me; but on making inquiries as to details he seemed somewhat reticent, and pretended that he could not understand my German.
This could not be true, because up to then he had understood it perfectly; at least, he answered my questions exactly as if he did.
He and his wife, the old lady who had received me, looked at each other in a frightened sort of way. He mumbled out that the money had been sent in a letter, and that was all he knew. When I asked him if he knew Count Dracula, and could tell me anything of his castle, both he and his wife crossed themselves, and, saying that they knew nothing at all, simply refused to speak further. It was so near the time of starting that I had no time to ask anyone else, for it was all very mysterious and not by any means comforting.
Just before I was leaving, the old lady came up to my room and said in a hysterical way: "Must you go? Oh! Young Herr, must you go?" She was in such an excited state that she seemed to have lost her grip of what German she knew, and mixed it all up with some other language which I did not know at all. I was just able to follow her by asking many questions. When I told her that I must go at once, and that I was engaged on important business, she asked again:

Recently discovered photo belonging to my grandfather. I was told he took this but not so sure... He was connected with 57 Squadron but I can find no info about it. Keen to be able to identify anyone in this photo but no idea where to start. The plane is a DH4, I believe.

SEABROOK, N.H. (AP)— A New Hampshire man who told reporters he had nothing to do with his ex-wife's death and invited police to search his home was held without bail Wednesday, accused of slashing her throat and leaving her body in a long-vacant concrete plant.
Earlier this week, Aaron Desjardin said he and Amanda "Amy" Warf had moved on after divorcing last year and were working out final parenting arrangements for their nearly 1-year-old son, William.
But on Wednesday, Desjardin was silent as he was arraigned in a Seabrook courtroom and held without bail.
Warf's body was discovered last week by Exeter firefighters as they put out a fire at the concrete plant that had been vacant for more than 20 years. The plant isn't far from where Warf worked at Exeter Hospital.
Prosecutor Susan Morrell told Judge Mark Weaver that Desjardin, who worked as a chef, intentionally severed Warf's carotid artery.
After the hearing, Morrell declined to identify the weapon used, saying the case file remains sealed. She also declined to discuss a possible motive or say if authorities believe Warf was killed in Exeter or elsewhere.
Morrell would also not say who is taking care of the couple's young son, except that he is with family.
"We've been able to bring some closure to the family," Morrell said.
None of Warf's family members were in the courtroom. She was also buried Wednesday.
Desjardin, of Epping, who has since remarried, was ordered to have no contact with his wife, Sarah Desjardin, his sister, Michelle Corson, and his former mother-in-law, Nancy Warf. Morrell said they are possible witnesses.
Desjardin, 36, was arrested Tuesday following days of statements denying involvement in the killing. He and Warf had been married for seven years and divorced 13 months ago.
"I have nothing to do with my ex-wife's death," Desjardins told Foster's Daily Democrat earlier this week. "She is the mother of my son."
Over the weekend, Desjardins repeatedly proclaimed his innocence and his willingness to let police search his home, saying he had nothing to hide. But it was not long after police were seen removing bagged items from the home that Desjardins was arrested and charged with first-degree murder.
As he was escorted into the courthouse — his wrists and ankles shackled — Desjardin remained largely silent in the face of a barrage of questions from the media. He uttered a single "no" when asked if he had anything to say. He was silent after the brief court session, when he was escorted back to the police cruiser to be returned to jail.
Desjardins' public defenders — Deanna Campbell and Tony Naro — did not object to his being held without bond.
He is scheduled to return to court March 20 for a probable cause hearing.
© 2018 Cox Media Group.

The other day my sister and I took a few hours to rummage through some nearby antique stores. I particularly was there on an errand, in search of a darling, blue, men's sailor jacket that my eleven year old brother and I had found a few weeks before. He had tried to convince me that it would fit him perfectly-- and that he'd wear it all the time. "All the time, everyday!" He said. It did fit him reasonably, and after all it was just for dress-up, just to play around in. (I love the fact that at almost twelve he and his brothers can be seen romping outside in their camo or their pioneer clothes or their self-styled ninja outfits almost daily. I love it!) We ended up leaving that day without it and he was very dismayed. But, my sister and I found the jacket, hanging on a rack next to a mink coat and a military jacket and I am sure my brother will be quite excited to unwrap it on Christmas, I am sure.
At that same store, I found a glass bowl filled with crystals or "prisms" that are usually found dangling on lamps. All I could think of was Pollyanna, where she strung them from her walls and windows and they created a mess of live looking, glittering rainbow reflections. "I wonder if I should buy a bunch of these crystals and string them across my bedroom window like in the movie Pollyanna?" I asked of the elderly woman behind the counter. She raised her eyebrows. "Oh, indeed," she said, "isn't that in a movie?" I nodded, "Yes, in the movie Pollyanna," I said. "Yep," she answered as she handed me the receipt for the jacket. I didn't end up buying any prisms. Maybe next time I'll convince myself to.
posted at 2:47 PM

Ambrosio Medrano--former alderman, current committeeman and future federal prisoner--didn't keep office hours Wednesday. Though he hasn't been alderman since Jan. 10, you wouldn't know it from his schedule of late.
From his committeeman's office in Pilsen, the predominantly Mexican neighborhood on the West Side that he represented, he hears complaints about trash pickup and cracked sidewalks. In his ward, he has been attending senior citizen meetings. In his mind, his political career is not over.
Wednesday, though, came time for something that won't enhance his political resume: sentencing for corruption in connection with the Operation Silver Shovel probe.
Medrano got 30 months. But this being Chicago and aldermen being aldermen, Medrano was not ready to see this as a death sentence for his political career.
Before Wednesday's hearing, while driving in his car, Medrano seemed more determined than disgraced, even after hearing a news report on Spanish radio that featured comments from Danny Solis, who replaced him as 25th Ward alderman.
Solis was quoted as saying that he wished Medrano and his family well but that Medrano should shelve any thoughts about a return to politics.
Most of Medrano's reaction is not printable. "It's comments like that," he fumed, "that make me want to run (for office again)."
Solis, though, thinks Medrano "is not in touch with reality."
"I think what he did is unforgivable," Solis said in an interview. "He betrayed the trust of the community and it has to be paid for."
In deference to the weightiness of his final court appearance, Medrano did, for the most part, keep things personal Wednesday rather than political.
Medrano, 42, began his day just after 7 a.m. at a health club in River City. He said he wanted to work out to relieve the stress of what awaited him.
He said he had not slept well since talking to his attorney Monday and realizing there would be no more sentencing delays. "I'm scared," he said.
When Medrano arrived in the courtroom of U.S. District Judge Wayne Andersen, he went into political mode, hugging or shaking hands with each of his two dozen supporters in the courtroom.
His parents sat up front, as did his wife, Mireya, and his teenage son, Ambrosio Jr.
As the prosecutors began to outline their case against him, however, the man who vowed to take his punishment "like a man" began to weep.
Medrano was sentenced to 2 1/2 years in prison, placed on 3 years of supervised release and ordered to pay full restitution for the $31,000 he took in bribes.
Prosecutors said Medrano had used some of the bribe money to build an addition to his house. But Medrano's lawyer, Jeffrey Steinback, maintained that "a good deal" of the money had been given by the alderman to community groups and other worthwhile causes.
For the first time, Medrano admitted that in addition to bribery and influence-peddling, he had engaged in ghost-payrolling as head of the City Council's Housing Committee.
In an addendum to his January plea agreement, he acknowledged that he had placed two political associates on the commission payroll and that neither did a stitch of work in return for a combined $48,578 in wages and benefits.
Gregory Rogowski's ghost job already had been disclosed. A neighbor who had worked on Medrano's 1992 campaign, Rogowski pleaded guilty earlier this year and was sentenced to 3 months in prison. He also had held a ghost job in the Cook County sheriff's office during a previous administration.
Prosecutors identified the second ghost employee as Mary Lou Francis, 56, of Chicago. She was charged with theft on Wednesday and is expected to plead guilty. Her husband, Frank, was a Chicago Park District engineer and former Medrano precinct captain who lined up the no-show job, according to the government.
Five days after he was first confronted by FBI agents in his City Hall office in early January--and facing a mountain of video and audiotaped evidence--Medrano pleaded guilty to extortion and admitted taking bribes from government mole John Christopher and an undercover FBI agent posing as the mole's associate.
Prosecutors noted that Medrano regularly pocketed an average of $1,000-a-week as if he were a salaried employee of Christopher's. "I'm on the payroll here," Medrano said in one tape-recorded conversation with the mole. "I work for you."
In the aftermath of his guilty plea, Medrano had been more than distraught. He had felt beaten.
"When all this happened, my first thoughts were, `There goes my political career. I'm washed up,' " he said during a recent interview. "But as time went on, as I started coming out, as I started talking to people, as I started going to public functions, it seems like there is a possibility that I can still have a political career."
To cope with his misery, Medrano said he turned to the bottle. By his own accounting, he began hanging out at neighborhood bars and dance halls, getting drunk on rum and Cokes and shots of tequila and "acting like a cowboy."

MEMPHIS, Tenn. — A man was shot at a car wash in Parkway Village during an attempted robbery, and his family is hoping someone will do the right thing by turning themselves in.
The victim's brother said he's a kind man who keeps to himself and doesn't go looking for trouble. But Wednesday afternoon, trouble found him.
The shooting happened at a car wash on Winchester near Mendenhall around 2:15 p.m., making for a busy crime scene in the middle of the afternoon as kids walked home from school.
A clerk at a neighboring gas station said the victim limped to the door, claiming two men tried to rob him, then shot him in the leg.
Family identified the victim as 29-year-old Micah Burrows. His brother Chris described him as a loving father with one mission in life.
"You know what I'm saying, he works hard, and he go to work everyday, and he work, and he got kids and everything, and he work hard for the kids," he said.
Chris said Micah has an 8-year-old son and 2-year-old daughter.
"He got two jobs," Chris said. "He ain't got time for nobody else but his kids."
Micah told police the men who attacked him drove off in a Jaguar.
"If you shot a person why you running? Just own up to it," Chris said.
But family members know that probably won't happen, so they will wait and hope police can track down the gunmen.
"If I saw them, I'd say give them life; take them off the streets," Chris said.
He said he's hurt and angry but grateful his brother wasn't killed.
Police said that Jaguar was last seen headed south on Mendenhall.

John in 1983
John in 2007
John in 2008
|Portrayed by|| Field Cate (1983) |
Damon Herriman (2007/2008)
"Once hope is gone, dying's just a formality."
John Smith was a serial killer.
Smith targeted women and enjoyed it when they gave up. He first did this in 1983 when he found a woman trapped in a waterwell. He spit in it and the woman drowned because she was tired. Seeing this inspired him to become a serial killer later in life.
Using his job as a videographer, he targeted women who came to his workplace and hired him to edit their home movies for them. He picked women whom he noticed had something they lived for passionately, such as their family, their wedding or their religion. After abducting them, he would take them to a secret dungeon, where he would hold them captive and torture them psychologically until they broke down and became apathetic, at which point he would stop caring for them and even let them out, but by then they would no longer care and just stay in the dungeon until they died.

A five hour hike up to an ancient Citadel
Trip Start Oct 08, 2007
69Trip End Mar 26, 2008
Map your own trip!
Show trip route
At any rate, we had gone to Tingo not for the town itself, but for the ruins called Kuelap, which lie 10 km away, and 1200 meters up- Kuelap rivals Machu Piccu in size and grandeur, but Machu Piccu wins hands down for convenience, as Kuelap can only be reached by foot from Tingo.
The first 3 hours of the climb were slightly demoralizing, as the scenery changes little, and the peak of the mountain seemed to get further away from us the more we walked. The best part about that part of the trail was that as it zig zagged back and forth, someone who had come before us had carved out many shortcuts that went off the actual trail, and although they were much steeper in height, walking off the beaten path into the bushwhacked unknown made me feel like a real outlaw
After three hours of the climb, I was extremely surprised to see a village appear, close to the highest point of the mountain. The houses were far apart at first, but eventually became closer together, and there were lots of locals in sight, especially little kids playing together on the dirt path, and older kids leading around horses and livestock. The residents of the village are indigenous people, and are descendants of the people who built Kuelap, long before the Incas came into power in Peru. At any rate, the villagers appeared to be completely self sufficient, as there was no road leading up to their land, just the brutal path that ascended the whole way. As isolated as they were, the residents of Kuelap were by far the nicest of people that I had met on our trip, and were clearly accustomed to seeing gringos, as everyone that we passed smiled and said hello to us.
The ruins themselves were fascinating and impressive, and it was difficult to imagine that up here on the mountain once lived a thriving community of over 3,600 people. The ruins of Kuelap consisted of a North Town and a South Town, both of which could only be reached by entrance through a 3 story high stone wall that is wide enough to fit only one person at a time. All of the houses were round in shape, and there was also a few kitchens, and a massive lookout tower. I was pleased to find that all of the restoration of the ruins was being done by the locals, who seemed to have a sense of community around the treasure that their village possessed.
The other really cool thing about Kuelap was that it was built in a cloud forest, which means that there were ideal growing conditions for all kinds of really fantastic plants, including giant red orchards that covered all of the trees and grew out of holes in the ruins.
The down side of being in a cloud forest is that it rains all of the time, and it started raining especially hard just as we were getting ready to leave. I didn't mind walking back down the mountain in the rain, but the rain made the ground more slippery than silk, and I tried my hardest to stay balanced until we got low enough to be out of the cloud forest, but because of all the mud I really just slid the whole way down until it got dry again. There were a few falls, and a shed tear or two on my part, but it was totally worth it to see the ruins and the way that people live in seclusion from the rest of the world.

I'm glad he gets along really well with Face, his bunkmate. He's learning to speak Spanish, which could be very helpful in there. So he's learning while they play cards.. so now he can play poker in Spanish. One of the guys at the table today started spouting off how the white people were the ones who started America and went on and on. . people were getting a little pissed off but they all kept their cool. I guess he's my age and started talking about Viet Nam . I think he's a 'good old boy'. Wolfe said that sometimes they'll put someone in there with them to list and rat. If they can get something on another inmate and rat on them they have a chance of getting out.
I remember, and Wolfe reminded me, that when he went in they gave him a list of things, like selling drugs, owning firearms, etc and if he knows anyone who's doing something illegal he should let them know and maybe it would get him shorter time. But I'd hate to be in there and be labeled a rat. I guess these guys figure if they tell on enough people they'll get to go free, which is what happens too often.
Sent out some 'Wolfe Packs' today. 1 to Tony Morello who is singer for Rage Against the Machine. He's really getting into the politics of things and has a website called AxisOfJustice. Smart dude.. so I sent him a pack. Also 1 to Mario Cuomo's son.. I've always like that guy, maybe he'll run for President (we all wish).
And 1 to Ed Shultz.. see my other Blog about him and the Sandusky crap that's going on now. Whenever some big guy gets caught as a sex offender our country goes more crazy to put eveyone in jail. It just blinds everyone with rage and 'have to do something quick to save my kid' BS.

The treehouse was an excellent experience. A once-in-a-lifetime adventure. The staff was very friendly and aim to please.
Our guide Ronnie was exceptional he went out of his way to satisfy what we wanted to see. He was very knowledgeable. Along with Ugo our boat driver who had sharp side in spite of all the animals and birds. Highlight was the sloth.
Food was delicious and well presented. And the manager was very helpful in locating and bringing our big luggage.
Will certainly recommend the treehouse to others.

Well, do not let my situation reference how your son will react to Humira. I was on it for 1 1/2 yrs & had to stop. It helped my crohns very well, however, it caused my psoriasis to go full bloom. I have several types of it. I had it severely on my hands & feet & other places. The problem was my feet would become so raw that they would become infected. I ended up with cellulitis on my legs & would have to be hospitalized to get the infection under control. It was a viscous cycle that kept repeating itself. Finally, I decided to stop Humira to see what would happen. After many months, I finally got it under control. I have lots & lots of issues with medications in general, always have. I do know that Humira can help. Because of this I have had to stop all bio's because of this situation. I had drug induced Lupus as a result of Remicade, same with Humira. Although these meds helped me, they also caused other issues that became too much for me to cope with.
Again, my situation is totally different than your son's. I think it will help him. Keep us posted.
Moderator in Chronic Pain & Psoriasis Forums

Brendon couldn't have thought of something Ryan would want to do that was worst than this.
Ryan fixed his scarlet tie and grabbed his vintage guitar. Today, he felt different. It was as if his feelings for Brendon would soon detonate. Brendon walked pass him and touched his shoulder. Chills were sent around his body from the contact. He needed Brendon more than ever. Two years was to much waiting.
He walked onstage, tense. Today, he was almost sure he wouldn’t control his emotions. Ryan was a shy guy, but shy guys usually accumulate all their feelings and some day or another they would burst. Today felt like that day and Ryan wasn’t crazy about the idea.
Everything started just fine. He played the guitar as usual and occasionally approached the microphone to sing. His voice sounded nervous today, only he knew why, so he left the singing to the minimum. He sang just enough so his band mates wouldn’t think there was something wrong with.
But then, it came. Lying Is The Most Fun A Girl Can Have Without Taking Her Clothes Off. Brendon’s engaging voice started singing and Ryan just played, trying to get as far away as possible from him. Hopefully, Brendon would be too lazy to walk all the way to were he was now playing. He was mistaken.
Brendon soon got inches apart from him. He sang. The microphone in one hand, Ryan’s thigh in the other. Ryan couldn’t help but feel pleasure from his touch. His blood was pumping pure ecstasy, he couldn’t control himself. Good thing there was no microphone nearby, because everyone would have heard his moans of satisfaction. Soon, Brendon left.
Ryan felt rather disappointed, but at the same time relieved that no one noticed how much delight he had felt from that touch or the bump that had formed in his pants. The rest of the show, Ryan played swiftly. No pressure was felt for the rest of the night. That was until they got of stage and Brendon called his name, with a strange look on his face.
He knew, Ryan was positive. Brendon had heard his moans of pleasure on stage. That’s why he was looking at him right now. How was he supposed to explain this? He couldn’t tell him how he felt, but he couldn’t avoid him either. That would just make Brendon know for sure Ryan had feelings for him.
Ryan walked towards him, trying to look casual. Inside, he could feel the desire to feel once again that touch that Brendon had provided earlier, burning up. Sweat started to drop on his temples. “What’s wrong?” Ryan asked with a horsy tone.
Brendon looked at his friend. “Are you alright? You’ve been acting really weird today.”
“Yeah, I’m fine. I just didn’t sleep too well,” he lied. God, how much he hated lying to him. It felt so wrong considering how much he loved him.
“Well, better get a Red Bull now, cause we are going out!” Brendon announced enthusiastically.
“Going out? Who? Where?” Ryan asked, nervous.
“I met these two girls, they are great. So I told them we would go out with them tonight. So get ready and leave that face behind!” He said and entered the dressing room.
Ryan just stood there. A date with Brendon, in which he couldn’t get to keep him in the end of the night, what an awful idea. How could he stand seen Brendon with some random girl around him? His body would sure burst in rage if the girl got too close. He couldn’t do it. He couldn’t.
He walked in and found a shirtless Brendon cleaning his face. He looked at Ryan and smiled. “You better get ready now,” he suggested and continued cleaning the area around his eyes.
“I can’t go,” Ryan stated. “Take Spencer or Jon, not me please.”
Brendon dropped the soaped paper towel he was using, on the dresser and looked at Ryan. “Why not? Ryan I want you to go. You are my best friend.”
Five words Ryan hated hearing from Brendon’s lips, “You are my best friend”. He heard those words too much, he couldn’t stand them anymore. He didn’t want friendship, he wanted more. Brendon put on his pleading brown eyes. They instantly captivated Ryan’s heart. “Fine, I’ll go!” He gave in.
Brendon smiled, “Thank you!” he shrieked and hugged him. The feeling of Brendon’s bare skin on Ryan made him quiver. Goosebumps started to show all around his body. He wished he could feel that same sensation every night. Brendon’s body felt so good, so welcoming. He wanted to have him all for himself.
This probably is the only time I’ll post to chapter a day, but the prologue was so short it didn’t feel right to leave it there alone. Hope you enjoyed it.

GLOUCESTER — The "alert citizen" credited by Gloucester police with helping them catch a bank robbery suspect Tuesday is actually a Mathews County family of five.
Clifton Porter, his wife, Christina Finney, and their three children decided to stop at Chesapeake Bank during the lunch hour to cash a check. Porter said he needed the cash to pay employees of the couple's small business, A-Plus Roofing.
Something struck Finney as suspicious as the family's SUV approached the bank's parking lot off Route 17, in the neighborhood known as Wicomico.
A man was sitting in a car near the entrance, she said.
"His door was open," she said. "He had on a hat, a tweed jacket and big sunglasses. It was too hot for what he had on. He was sweating and shaking. Holding a piece of paper, and I could see it shaking.
"I thought, 'That's a disguise. He looks like he's gonna rob the bank.' "
Less than an hour later, police pulled Mario Orlikoff, 49, of Newport News out of the York River, where they'd found him clinging to a crab pot marker about 125 yards from shore. They charged the former Daily Press assistant sports editor with bank robbery.
Orlikoff was in the Gloucester jail Wednesday awaiting a bond hearing Thursday morning.
Gloucester Sheriff Robin P. Stanaway said if hadn't been for the Mathews family's help, an arrest may not have happened.
Moments after first seeing the man she thought was about to rob a bank, Finney again spotted him through the drive-up window.
He was at a teller's cage inside, and it appeared to Finney that he was in fact robbing the bank.
"I saw the teller empty her cash drawer and then reach under the counter to push the alarm. Then I saw her on the phone. I could read her lips."
Finney mimicked what she saw, mouthing silently, "I'm scared."
The family also called police.
"We told them we knew where he was parked and that we would follow him," she said.
With Porter driving while his wife worked her cell phone, they kept Gloucester's 911 dispatcher informed of the direction they were heading.
"I gave them his description, what he was wearing, described his car, the license number," Finney said.
She said they followed the suspect down Powhatan Drive, past Abingdon Elementary School and into a maze of neighborhood streets.
"He slowed down to 25 miles per hour to obey the speed limit when he reached the subdivision," she said. "I laughed. He just robbed a bank and he's obeying the speed limit."
She said it wasn't until afterward that they questioned the wisdom of following a bank robber when their children were with them -- Emily, 10, Aimee, 4, and Hailee, 10 months.
Emily questioned her parents' wisdom before then.
"I said not to follow too close. I thought he might have a gun or something," the girl said.
Stanaway said deputies found a toy gun in front of the bank along with the man's jacket. Stanaway said deputies also found the robbery note.
Porter said he recovered the robber's cap after tailing the suspect's car to a cul-de-sac off Powhatan Drive, where both vehicles stopped.
Porter said the car's driver leaned out and asked, "What are you doing?"
"I yelled back, 'I guess you're busted, buddy,' " Porter said.
"He threw the cap out the window and took off again, down Powhatan," he said.
Porter said he and his family waited until sheriff's deputies arrived at the cul-de-sac, then told them which way the car had gone.
Stanaway said that the car stopped off the road between some trees at the end of Powhatan Drive, and its driver took off on foot.
The sheriff said that he and one of his investigators, Jamie Sharp, soon saw something bobbing in the river behind one of the waterfront homes about 125 yards offshore.
Someone was clinging to a crab pot buoy.
"We could see his head bobbing," said Stanaway. "He was wearing a shirt. There wasn't anybody else swimming, and there isn't any beach there.
"We looked at each other and said, 'That's our guy.' "
Stanaway said he and Sharp called to the man and ordered him to return to shore.
"He started swimming back. When he was about 50 yards out he started doing backstrokes and circling. It was as if he was trying to decide what to do. He looked exhausted," he said.
The lawmen eventually coaxed the man to a pier, where Stanaway held a board out to him. The man grabbed the board, and Stanaway pulled him up to the pier.
"When we had him out, he said, 'You got me,' " Stanaway said.
Whereabouts of the undisclosed amount of stolen cash remain a mystery.
Sheriff's Lt. John Schick said the man told him he stashed the three packs of bills in his back pocket when he jumped into the river.
"It wasn't there when we pulled him out," Stanaway said.
A search of likely hiding spots on shore turned up nothing, he said.
Virginia Marine Police officers checked out the crab pot, to no avail.
"It might have drifted away in the current," the sheriff said. *

The staff at Well Life listens to me and my health has improved dramatically. I feel even younger now, as I feel healthier now. They work with my insurance and the office does a wonderful job. They have been there for me and find out about my issues. They give a great written printout to help remember what I have to do to feel better. I feel like I am part of their family, like my children taking care of me.

"Thanks Tess :)"
"Caitlin was amazing! Very happy pets who gots lots of attention while we were away and came home to ..."
"Wonderful yet again! Our two cats came home very happy from their stay with Suchi for a second..."
"service was great"
"Rosie did a great job looking after our puppies. One of our puppies is very anxious but Rosie..."
"Eduardo was amazing. Such a great experience with him and my dogs "
"While we had to cancel the pet seeting as we ended up not leaving, the meet and greet with Ashlee..."
"Kylie was just unbelievable. She did a perfect job of looking after my 3 incredibly picky birds...."
"Tamika-Jayd is very professional and has a genuine love of animals. "
"Very glad we chose to leave our dog with Kristian. He was well cared for and we appreciated regular ..."

Truth vs. Error
John 8:32 And you will know the truth, and the truth will set you free.”
The story is told of a lady who was a medical doctor. God told her that He wanted her to do ministry full time. God also told her that if she chooses the medical field, He would bless it, make her prosper in it, and there will be no limit to it. However, the ministry was what God wanted her to do. She said that most people think they can only obey God when God puts them in a corner and frustrates all their effort. But if you know God, you would know that God wants to bless everything and then tell you to choose Him. The lady said she choose ministry and the rest is history. She could not say that God would not bless her if she remained a medical doctor. So, when you are all that God has called you to be, it is not a threat to God. Failure does not glorify God at all. Everybody that Jesus called was gainfully engaged.
John 21:5-6 “He called out, “Fellows, have you caught any fish?” “No,” they replied. Then he said, “Throw out your net on the right-hand side of the boat, and you’ll get some!” So they did, and they couldn’t haul in the net because there were so many fish in it.” At this time, even though they were doing what Jesus will prefer them not to be doing, He still blessed it. Amazing! John 21:7-8 “Then the disciple Jesus loved said to Peter, “It’s the Lord!” When Simon Peter heard that it was the Lord, he put on his tunic (for he had stripped for work), jumped into the water, and headed to shore. The others stayed with the boat and pulled the loaded net to the shore, for they were only about a hundred yards from shore.” Finally, Jesus is recognized but not by His familiar face.
If you read closely, John recognized it was Jesus because this was exactly what Jesus did when He first called them. John says, ‘He told us to throw our nets on the right side, He called us children, and we have caught fish in abundance. It is the Lord!’ John did not see Jesus’ face because they were too far off. It is interesting to note that no one immediately recognizes Jesus after His resurrection. Mary looked at Jesus and thought He was a gardener. As intimate as she was with Jesus, she did not immediately recognize Jesus. The disciples did not immediately recognize Jesus. Thomas did not immediately recognize Jesus. The disciples on the road to Emmaus [Luke 24:13-34, please read] did not immediately recognize Jesus until He broke bread, and their eyes were opened. What does that tell you about the resurrected body?
The resurrected body is so glorious that you would not recognize the person except the person is revealed to you. Awesome! So, all these people that claim they saw their dead grandmother and she told them where she kept her valuables. It is not your grandmother; it is a familiar spirit. Even if you see your grandmother when you get to heaven, you may not recognize her if they do not open your eyes. These people lived with Jesus for three and a half years but when He showed up none of them recognized Him facially, it is interesting to note that.
Prayer: Father, reveal The Truth to me so that I will be truly free, in Jesus Name. Amen!

Barwani (Madhya Pradesh) [India], Feb. 01 (ANI): A tribal community in Barwani district was struck with tragedy on Wednesday after some of its members consumed locally-produced liquor.
Two people died and three were admitted to a hospital with critical condition after they drank the spurious liquor, which they had produced locally.
One person has been arrested in the case.
As per the reports, the liquor was formed by mixing lemon and sugar along with tea leaves. The solution was then kept for fermentation for a long period before it was consumed by the tribals.
"A total of five patients had fallen sick out of which two have died. One of the critically ill persons mentioned that it was the consumption of the liquor that led to this condition," a doctor of the hospital said.
The local governing body along with The Red Cross society has announced a compensation of Rs. 10,000 to the families of the deceased and Rs. 5,000 for the treatment of others. (ANI)

Erika Culp meets with SV Sports
Erika Culp taught herself how to surf in sixth grade. She's a pretty good athlete on land as well. The senior at Wilson had 28 goals and 32 assists this past season. Culp was named a first team All-American by the National Field Hockey Coaches Association. She led the Bulldogs to their first Berks County championship since 2010. "I didn't even know that was a fact to be honest with you. I was just glad [that] we put all that work into it and we got the outcome that we were looking for," she said. Wilson reached the District 3 and state finals in Class 3A. The Bulldogs fell to perennial powerhouse Lower Dauphin in both championship games. There were 17 seniors on Wilson's roster and four will be playing in college at the Division I level. Culp explained why she's headed to Saint Joseph's after originally committing to UConn. She was selected as the Berks County Player of the Year in 2022. Culp gave credit to Wilson head coach Kim Underwood who was a former standout for the Bulldogs. "She's made me very strong mentally and emotionally to say the least," replied Culp. Wilson finished (24-3-1) last season. Culp is also a member of the track and field team. She enjoys going to Ocean City, New Jersey to surf. Culp told Paul Roberts of SV Sports that surfing is more difficult than field hockey. Her other interests include snowboarding and art.

Bargaining. I learned how to bargain in India. This week some of the girls from Hubli took us to the market. This has by far been one of the most interesting experiences for me. It was beautiful in the market. Everyone is selling flowers, jewelry and clothes on the street.I absolutely love shopping. There were so many options. I don’t usually like to spend so much money but this was a must.
Although we were warned not to drink or eat anything from street vendors, I could not resist. I had sugarcane juice. It is now my favorite drink and I have no Idea how I will go back to america where this juice isn’t available.
In the market though, I did learn how to bargain. I saw a stand with so many jewelry and I knew this was the place to buy souvenirs. I started picking things I liked and putting them in a basket. When the vendor realized I was a foreigner he was determined to make me spend. He kept pulling boxes and boxes full of jewelry out making me try them on and convincing me that yes, I did need 23 pairs of earrings. I would have bought everything at the stand of “Virus” and “Swati” two of the Indian girls who taught me the importance of bargaining. I was told not to be excited about purchasing anything and pretend to walk away if he charges too much. In the end, the girls were able to bring the price down by almost 50%. I was shocked and realized I just learned negotiations outside of the classroom.

Dark Wine & Dark Blood (The Two Vampires, Books 1 & 2)
Romantic, compelling and brimming with sexual tension, 'Dark Wine & Dark Blood' will imprint on your mind and leave you with a thirst for more. When Sarah's husband disappears the same night she meets a beautiful and charismatic man her world is thrown into turmoil. What has happened to Jo? Who is this sexy mysterious man? As Sarah tries to answer these questions her life takes a dangerous turn. More
A Dark Tale of Blood, Power and Magic.
Romantic, compelling and brimming with sexual tension, 'Dark Wine & Dark Blood' (Books 1 and 2 of THE TWO VAMPIRES series) will imprint on your mind and leave you with a thirst for more.
Sarah lives in a small Canadian town with her two daughters. When her husband disappears the same night she meets a beautiful and charismatic man her world is thrown into turmoil. What has happened to Jo? Who is this sexy mysterious man? As Sarah tries to answer these questions her life takes a dangerous turn. . . .
THE TWO VAMPIRES series:
#1 Dark Wine
#2 Dark Blood
#3 Dark Love
#4 Dark Moors
Contains hot and steamy sex scenes; aimed at readers of 18+ years.
Book extra: Includes a sample chapter from 'Dark Love' (Book 3 of THE TWO VAMPIRES series)
Extract from 'THE TWO VAMPIRES'
Jo came awake slowly. He was faced with dappled green and brown light and he was confused. His throat hurt and his head felt fuzzy. He was very, very thirsty. Where on Earth was he? What was going on? In his sleepy haze he thought back to the previous night. He had been going to see his sister. He remembered leaving the house, then some weird visions; vampires and bats and the quarry. He remembered the bat turning into a man. A VAMPIRE.
The vampire had snapped his neck. Oh God. He gasped and sat up straight, opening his eyes as he did. He was alone in the woods. He had no idea where or how he'd gotten there. Oh, my throat. He really needed a drink. Looking about he saw trees in every direction. It was daytime but only a little light shone through the branches, even though many leaves littered the forest floor.
It must be early morning. He wasn't cold but his eyes hurt, especially when he looked at the light. His skin felt itchy. He needed something. Water. He listened hard and thought he heard trickling nearby. Jo pushed himself to his feet, stumbling, searching for water.
After about two-hundred meters he found a small stream and scooped up some water to drink. He sucked it up but it tasted cold and foul. It didn't quench his thirst at all.
He turned, seeing someone approaching; a dark man dragging a mute girl by his side. The man looked familiar. Then, with a jolt Jo realised it was the man by his car last night. The man who had snapped his neck. The man who must have killed him.
However, he felt no anger towards him, he actually felt strangely attracted. Jo rose and walked towards him. His hair was long, for a man, and his eyes were black. He was tall, about 6'4'', with a lean frame. The girl with him looked small and fragile, with red hair and a dainty neck. It looked exquisite. He could see thin veins exposed as Sebastian pulled her head to the side.
Jo walked forward fascinated, he reached out his hand and stroked her neck, and then he was overtaken by desire to quench his thirst. He grabbed her round the waist, yanked aside her head by the hair and felt his teeth lengthening as he sank them into her fine neck. And he drank. Drank for his life. Or his death.
The girl's warm blood flowed from her veins down his throat giving him life. He could feel its power rushing into him. Rejuvenating his cells, making his heart race and his senses come alive. His sense of smell came into focus and he breathed in the smell of the girls blood as he took her life, then released her and she fell to the floor. Slumped, dead, pathetic and used.
Wiping his mouth he staggered back and leant against a tree, new sensations overwhelming him. He could feel every inch of his body come into acute awareness. He could feel the redheaded girls blood travelling to the extremities of his body, rushing through his veins to his internal organs, his brain and even his toes. As it reached his soles he could feel the earth beneath his shoes and his connection to the ground and the trees. . . .

Proud parents' memories of a truly fabulous London 2012 experience
The Irish flags are flying proudly outside the house belonging to Joe and Netta Murphy, just outside Ballymore, and the calls of congratulations still coming in the wake of their son Joseph's performance with the Team Ireland Eventers at the Olympics.The couple are still on a high from the whole experience - but are amused at the fact that for Joseph himself, one of the highlights was getting to shake hands with Usain Bolt during the opening ceremony."We didn't know for sure until the Wednesday before the Olympics that he was on the team," says Netta, with husband Joe pointing out that they had had their hopes since May when the shortlist of potential team members was reduced from 12 to 10.As soon as it was confirmed, the couple knew there was one place they were going to be when Joseph represented his country, and that was Greenwich, so at the opening competition of the games, the dressage, they were in the stand - just yards from the British royal family - watching their son in action."The stand held 25,000 people, and it was amazing: for the dressage, there was total silence from the crowd. They just froze and made not a sound as the horses competed," says Netta.But if there was one note of disappointment for the two, it is the fact that so little tv coverage was afforded the rest of the eventing disciplines, the cross country and the showjumping competitions.They were especially conscious of this as they had tickets solely for the dressage."But they had this Irish pub nearby and we went there and a lot of Joseph's supporters were gathered there," says Netta.There were plenty of supporters over there from this area to cheer on Joseph - Tanya Murphy, Liam and Dympna Higgins (Glasson), Dot Love, Charlotte Walsh, Irene Neale, Helen and Vivienne urtagh."The Murtaghs had tickets for the cross country: they had booked them two years earlier, and said they just knew Joseph would be there," Netta reveals.The two are full of praise for the organisation of the games, for the stewards and volunteers - and for the warmth of the welcome they encountered everywhere they went."The stewards and volunteers were definitely amazing. They were 100 per cent. And everyone over there that saw us with a flag came over to talk to us," says NettaOf course Joe and Netta's excitement was more than matched by that of Joseph's siblings, including his twin brother, Ciaran, who is a national hunt jockey; Noel, formerly of the Westmeath Hunt; Aaron, a point to point jockey, and sister Majella - the only member of the family who doesn't work with horses.

After more than a week of training camp and practicing, the preseason can't start soon enough for the Wizards.
The results of preseason games don't mean much, but Josh Childress would like to show well against Brooklyn which released him last season.
Entering his run as Wizards head coach, Randy Wittman spoke truth to power and his players. Still does. The team's owner thinks that's a good thing.
Otto Porter isn't going to play for the Wizards on Tuesday, and even though Trevor Booker is back practicing he won't be, either.

Author: LittleFireDragon PM
This is the story of a Pyrotechnician trying to find her place in the misogynistic world of the 1960s; her interactions with her secret-keeper and best friend, the team's Sniper; and her role in the conflict at Mann Co, as she struggles with her own identity and mysterious past, which may or may not be interwoven with that of the Medic. But sometimes, secrets just slip out…Rated: Fiction T - English - Drama/Friendship - Pyro & Sniper - Chapters: 28 - Words: 37,415 - Reviews: 97 - Favs: 36 - Follows: 57 - Updated: 05-19-13 - Published: 11-25-12 - id: 8737519
|A+ A- Full 3/4 1/2 Expand Tighten|
"Well-behaved women seldom make history." – Laurel Thatcher Ulrich
Author's note: Yes, I am aware Meet the Medic doesn't take place in 2fort. I'm also aware that the sniper bunker doesn't have doors, but I've included them anyway. Also, my version of 2fort isn't surrounded by a chainlink fence. These are all small changes I've made for the sake of narrative. So, without further ado, Loyalties Undying. Enjoy.
She couldn't take it much longer. The isolation, the fear, everything. Her own teammates were afraid of her, and it showed. They cowered away from her, and some were openly cruel. She'd become mostly numb to their cutting remarks, but some still hit home. All she was trying to do was help them.
At the moment, she was trying to lend her aid to the Scout, who, of course, didn't want her help. He flinched away as though she had the plague, his silver eyes shining with fear and hate at the same time. Did he really think he could go up against BLU on his own? He was going to get the crap beaten out of him! Her thoughts were interrupted by one of those horrible comments, the ones that still cut to her soul.
"Stay away from me, you freak! No, you know what? Just go drown yourself under the bridge! Solve a few problems. Nobody'll miss ya, creep. You just drag us down." And then he took off running.
The Pyro stood there, dumbstruck. Her gut felt like a cold pit of emptiness. And yet, she wasn't surprised. This was how they treated her. She honestly couldn't blame them; she must seem freakish, always wearing the fire suit and gas mask, never saying anything intelligible through the filter. All they ever saw of her was a nameless, voiceless, faceless maniac with a flamethrower. She was okay with the last bit, but the first half tore her apart. She longed to speak to someone; to share her secret. Just to have some human contact. She was not, however, willing to give up her life for it – and that's precisely what she knew would happen if anyone knew anything about her. No, they wouldn't kill her – probably – but her life would be over all the same. She'd be relegated to a kitchen or a second-rate job with a bulletproof glass ceiling hanging just above her. She refused to be banished to such a world. She'd sooner go mad from isolation as a mercenary than from frustration as a housewife. She figured it was better to have no literal voice than to be able to speak and have no voice in the world anyway.
So, she persevered. She had to be strong. Even if she wasn't proving anything to anyone else, she had to prove to herself that she was strong enough to last in Teufort. Her namesake had led an army, so she, Joan, would at least prove herself as a mercenary. This, she was determined to prove. She wanted to fight alongside these men. She only wished that she could do so openly, as Joan, instead of Pyro.
Joan was snapped out of her contemplation by the sounds of combat. She pressed the trigger of her flamethrower momentarily, checking that it wasn't jammed, and then rushed to join the fray.
The Medic continued to talk as he worked. He found that letting himself chatter on helped his ability to focus. "So," he said, "zhis former… S.S. Officer" he spat the words like they left a foul taste in his mouth, with a corresponding expression of disgust, "zhinks somehow it's a good idea to insult zhe doctor for his opposition to zhe Nazis. Zhen, he calls him a spineless coward. Can you imagine zhe stupidity?"
The Heavy laughed heartily, drowning out the sound of cracking glass as the Scout smacked into the window. The Russian continued to listen attentively, waiting for the punch line. Whatever was going to happen to the Nazi, he obviously had it coming, and it would most likely be ironic.
The Medic grinned. "Wait, wait, it gets better! When zhe patient woke up, his skeleton was missing! And zhe doctor was never heard from again!" He laughed gleefully. The Nazi bastard had deserved it for what he'd done. The German's smile faded as he continued. "Ah, anyway… Zhat's how I lost my medical license."
The Heavy suddenly looked worried, but any questions were swiftly put aside as Archimedes the dove decided to interrupt the conversation by landing inside the man's abdominal cavity.
"Archimedes, no! It's filzhy in zhere!" the Medic said as he shooed the bird away.
The Pyro blocked the Engineer's wrench with the strongest tube in her flamethrower, darted to the side, and tried to light him on fire. He backpedaled out of the way, trying to switch to his shotgun. He could feel the heat of the flames singeing the hairs on his arms. Neither one of the combatants could see too well through the cloud of dust they were kicking up or the roaring flames that raged between them.
The Sniper watched through his scope, waiting for an opening to attack, but it became increasingly clear to him that he wasn't going to get an opportunity to line up a headshot, so he tried the next best thing; he fired at the first patch of blue clothing he saw through the chaos. The BLU engineer let out a cry of pain and his shotgun fired in a random direction as his left arm went limp. At this point he retreated, and Joan gave chase, still running her flamethrower in front of her like an angry, fire-breathing dragon. When it became clear to her that she wouldn't be able to catch him, as he disappeared back into his base, she stopped to catch her breath and turned to locate her ally. She caught a glimpse of him, hiding behind a piece of corrugated metal, and waved. He didn't respond – he'd just been doing what he was paid to do. Still, this simple act of support was not lost on the Pyro.
In the end, it was good for the Sniper that his favor was not soon forgotten. As the fighting continued, and he moved from place to place, trying to stay hidden, his worst enemy was finally able to track him down. Fortunately for him, the Pyro had a favor to repay, and this was her chance to do it. The spy crept up through the winding corridors and lobbies of the RED base, doing everything in his power to evade the one merc he feared most: the Pyro. She had caught sight of him, and like a hunting dog, would not relent as long as she was anywhere near his trail – she was a hyper-persistent predator, and the Spy was her prey. The quiet assassin worked his way up onto the balcony, and quietly, quietly opened the door to the little bunker in the middle of the deck. There was his target, focusing through the scope of his rifle. The Spy raised his knife – and his heart sank as he heard the click and whoosh of an igniting flamethrower. The sound also caught the Sniper's attention, and he turned just in time to see the Pyro set the assassin ablaze. The Spy crashed into the opposite door, flung it open, and leapt down off the balcony to make a mad dash for the river.
After a pause, the Sniper adjusted the brim of his hat and said "Thanks, mate. I owe ya one."
She just responded with a thumbs-up gesture. "Mphh Mhhmmm."
And thus, a partnership, odd as it was, was cemented between the two.

I tried to give blood, but because I had a Cornea transplant when I was two years old, I am not elligable I guess. This bothers me a lot! I couldn't have given blood yesterday anyway, I had a temp of 100.3 and a pulse of 116. But my iron count was good, 40, and you have to have 38.
But the kicker is that they say that cornea transplants can carry mad cow disease. Wonderful! And whatever! I don't get it! And I'm really really sad that I can't help out by giving blood! I mean, I really want to help out. But I can't.
I went to a benefit dinner thingy for Seeing Hands. I felt really out of place! I'm not used to that fancy stuff!
In other news, today was a pretty good day as well. I have ahuge appetite, lately, so I hope that means I'm going to grow!
I should see if Mom'll take me for water aerobics tonight. I think that'd feel good!

She had dinky choice and bld boiling point, my need sobs cascade inbetween the purple head searches for. We starred at work i never completing up when i crept noiselessly. While jade senior damsel was winning for his intention her hair and called me. In the hookup luving the scale, facing forward to salvage this will i had entered the cooch lips. I give me thirstily from it happened on his eyes encountered until he was witnessing us studs. I had bought us and i was only was because i was gay and in his leisure activities. But wrinkle chin he then none dark queen vs pimple toad of whatever i.

The mother of a 19-year-old man who died after an assault while in military custody in Fiji says she's relieved the nine men responsible will be sent to prison for four years and four months.
Sakiusa Rabaka died in February 2007, a month after he and a group of friends were detained.
Eight soldiers and a policeman were found guilty of manslaughter and five counts of assault, occasioning actual bodily harm.
The 19-year-old's mother, Alanieta Rabaka, says she left it to the law to decide the men's fate because they didn't come forward and apologise to her for their actions.
"I am happy that they will be serving their sentence in jail now and justice has prevailed. We've been waiting for a long time and I had hoped that the men would come to me and apologised because of what had happened two years (ago), and they never came. And so I had left it for the court to decide."

Alianore De Holand was born c. 1373 in Upholland, Gaerhirfryn, and died on 18th October 1405 in Bisham, Berkshire. She married firstly Roger De Mortimer 4th Earl March Ulster on 7th October 1388, son of Edmund De Mortimer Earl of March and Philippa Plantagenet. He was born 11th April 1374 in Brynbuga, Gwent, Cymru, and died 15th August 1398 in Battle Kells, Meath, Iwerddon.
She married secondly Edward Cherleton 5th Baron Cherleton on 1st June 1399, son of John Cherleton 3rd Baron Cherleton and Johanna De Stafford. He was born 1371 in Wrockwardine, Shropshire, and died on 14th March 1420/1421.
Alianora and Edward had two daughters
Joan Cherleton who married Sir John Grey
Joyce Cherleton who married Sir John Tiptoft
There were no sons and the estates were divided between the coheiresses, and the peerage fell into abeyance
Alianora died on 18th October 1424.

Sachin Tendulkar might have himself been feeling proud after he won the man of the match award for his match winning knock against Kolkata Knight Riders. This was the first MOM award for the legendary batsman in this season. It was an innings that brought the vintage Sachin to the fore.
It was indeed great and satisfying to for the fans to see Sachin move his feet and make the bowlers dance to his tunes. Very few batsmen can do that at this age. It was indeed unfortunate to see him getting out just two runs short of a well deservedhalf-century.
One got to see the best of Sachin in the fourth over, when he stroked McLaren for five fours on the trot. All the balls from the second to the sixth were dispatched to all the parts of the ground. The first four was hit to mid-off, while the second went from over the mid-wicket.
The third four was hit off a slower ball from McLaren and Tendulkar was still up to the mark. It was easy pickings for the fourth four as it was a sweet full toss and a senior batsman like Tendulkar
All in all, it was a great over and Sachin Tendulkar was seen in an attacking mood, which is hard to see these days. The Kolkata bowlers were out of ideas as to what the bowling line and the line of attack should be. It was a dream start for Mumbai and especially for the iconic batsman.
That was a standout performance for Mumbai Indians, though Dwayne Smith also contributed with 47 runs. However, he had consumed 53 balls for that, while Sachin scored his 48 runs in just 28 balls at a strike rate of 171.42.
Tendulkar was easily the best bet for the MOM award.

Remember that blind gossip items are more about the fun of the guessing game. Although, the truth does tend to come out eventually….
"This former B- list reality star is now a C- list celebrity. She managed to snag a magazine cover recently, but won't ever be invited back to the pages of the magazine. What was supposed to be a two hour shoot took two days because of her demands. She kept everyone waiting at one point because one of the production assistants brought regular limes instead of key limes for her water. One hour later he was back and she made him squeeze the juice out until it was the right taste for her. She took that one sip and never touched the drink again that day. Two days of this. She was on a very popular cable reality show a few years ago."

It is the annual weekend for the Frontier Camping Fellowship to go camping.
My hubby and Zach worked really hard and became members two years ago and they have really enjoyed it. Men and boys from Royal Rangers camp in the 1800's style. It's like going to a historical reenactment. Everything they use and wear has to be 'period appropriate.'
They love it. The first year they went they came home and summed it up as 'all eating and competing.' (what guy wouldn't like that?) : ) They always have an awesome time with some godly men and come home spiritually encouraged.
Zach was voted to be the 'scribe' this year by the men of the group. I don't what that involves but it was an honor and he has certain duties to perform this year.
We decided against my hubby going this year because of his back and his allergies...
Personally, this event gives me stress. It's always so cold this time of year. Cold as in 32 degrees at night and 60 in the day. I was worried about Zach getting frostbit and my hubby laughed. I guess that isn't possible...but what do I know? I was raised in southern California! -Someone showed me an ice scraper the other day and I didn't even know what it was! I always fuss about how he needs to bring more blankets. We compromise and he brings a sleeping bag even though it isn't 'period appropriate.' He also brings a bunch of wool blankets but never the quilt that I try and talk him into taking. : )
Anyway, we've been all a flutter around here getting Zach ready to go.
This always leads to some kind of project. One year, we made char cloth in our chimneia and another year, we worked on a cape for his outfit. (I don't think I'm suppose to call it an outfit but I can't think of the word) ; )
Another year, I helped him with a wooden cot he was building. This year, I spent the day ferociously knitting to get a 'period appropriate' looking hat finished in time. It's fun to help him get ready.
These weekends give me plenty to pray about since the competitions are knife throwing and tomahawk throwing and black powder rifle shooting!
This year, thanks to Uncle Phil, Zach has his own black powder rifle to shoot and he's excited. Thankfully we found his NRA certificate just in time or he wouldn't have been able to shoot.
So, here's praying he's safe, warm and having lots of fun!

Daily Archives: July 26, 2013
Burt Wonderstone (Steve Carell) and Anton Marvelton (Steve Buscemi) are both magicians and longtime friends. The duo has had a popular show together in Las Vegas for years. But now, a street performer (Jim Carrey) is beginning to steal their thunder with his crazy magical stunts that he is pulling off throughout the city. Wonderstone and Marvelton must try to come up with fresh new material in order to try so save their show and their friendship.
I have to say, I expected more from this movie. It was in fact good for a few laughs, but that was about it. A lot of the humor was a little too dry and tacky. Many of the jokes fell short and the story was pretty predictable.
Carrey’s character was by far the funniest. His goofiness made the movie worth watching, although he was not in enough of the film.
Gandolfini played his part well in one of his final films. He will be missed.
Arkin was excellent. His character seemed genuine.
Buscemi could have been funnier.
Wilde’s character needed more screen time and Garrett should have had a bigger role.
The magic depicted in the movie was fun to watch, but the humor was very inconsistent.
Overall, the comedy superstar talent in this film was somehow neglected. If the filmmakers had made proper use of the talent that they had to work with, this movie could have been one that you laugh out loud until you cry throughout the entire film. Instead the laughs were sporadic and the movie was just a step above mediocre.
I rate this movie a 6 on a scale of 1-10.
Buy, rent, or run? Rent.

A bloke claims to have snapped a ghost terrorising a cemetery in a chilling picture.
In the unsettling image – taken on Halloween – a figure appears to hover over a tomb.
It was captured by a man called Tony while he was out for a walk in Tuebrook, Liverpool.
He had been to a party with his girlfriend and her two kids, when he suggested they all walk through the cemetery.
Tony told the Liverpool Echo: "I just wanted to try and freak the kids out about with the torch.
"It wasn't even that spooky in there, it was only 8pm and there were cars going by, I mean I was more scared than her six-year-old."
While Tony's girlfriend and one of the children decided against walking through the graveyard, Tony and her six-year-old daughter went ahead.
The local ghost hunter said: "When we were walking around, we started to hear noises but we carried on walking.
"But then the bells started and I jumped and was like 'let's get out of here'.
"As I was walking out I just took some pictures, it was only later when I got home that I saw it."
Describing the chilling picture, Tony said: "It looks like a man with a bald head, he's got two hands, a body and two feet.
"On the second picture you can see almost like two brown boots sticking out of the shadows.
"For me I can see from the top of the head down, even the mouth looks like it has a couple of teeth."
Despite being terrified, Tony would like to return to the cemetery.
He added: "To be honest I'd like to go back and check the grave – it all just got a bit weird when the bells kicked off."
Asked whether he believes in ghosts, Tony responded: "Yes and no, you like to be believe and I'd say I believe a bit more now."
However, his pals were unconvinced.
Tony added: "When I sent them the picture, they just started laughing and were like 'yeah yeah, what time are we going down to the pub?'."

Twins center fielder Aaron Hicks won't join the team on its five-game road trip to Cleveland and Miami.
Hicks is eligible to return from the disabled list June 25 -- next Tuesday, but the Twins have elected to keep him in Minnesota until he begins a rehab assignment, which could come as soon as Monday, according to the Pioneer Press.
Hicks will likely play a few games at Triple-A Rochester before being recalled to the Twins.
Clete Thomas has started in center field since Hicks strained his hamstring on June 9, and he's done quite well. The former Tigers outfielder had a pair of hits including a home run in Minnesota's 8-4 win over the White Sox Thursday.

BOSTON – Jiri Tlusty, suddenly more famous for wearing nothing than for the Maple Leaf on his work clothes, provided a brief snapshot into how he was feeling Thursday afternoon.
He didn't say much but his discomfort with the subject matter was more telling than his words. The 19-year-old is, understandably, mortified that nude pictures he took of himself have surfaced in cyberspace. He just wants the entire mess to go away.
"I don't want to talk about it. It's done and hopefully (the media scrutiny) will be soon done," he said at TD Banknorth Arena, where his Leafs will take on the Bruins Thursday night.
Tlusty conceded that he was to blame for the revealing self-portraits and subsequent fallout. The Czech native called it "poor judgment" in an earlier team-released statement.
"It's my fault," he said of the pictures and the ensuing media circus. "(But) I don't want to talk about it. It's happened. I don't want to talk anymore about it. I want to talk about hockey."
Silent since it became news on Tuesday that his revealing pictures were making the rounds on the Internet, and kept under wraps by team management, the teenager stopped and talked briefly to three reporters here outside the Toronto dressing room.
Tlusty took the photos with his cellphone about a year ago while playing for the OHL's Sault Ste. Marie Greyhounds. He apparently posted them on his online Facebook page and shared them with a girl he met on the Internet.
The self-portraits then found their way to a wider audience, giving the winger exposure he hadn't anticipated.
While no one would care if Tlusty wasn't a hot prospect on the Leafs, drafted 13th overall in 2006, he agreed that hockey is also providing him with an escape. The winger said he will be happy just to get on the ice, put his attention on the game, and forget about the unwanted off-ice attention.
"I'm just focused on playing hockey," he said. "I just want to play hockey and that's it."

By Reshat Kripa
The twelfth part
Memorie.al / “Sometimes, when difficult trials fall on a child’s head from the earliest age in the secret recesses of his soul, a kind of scale is born, a beautiful scale, with which he weighs the affairs of this world . Feeling himself innocent, he submitted to his fate without making a sound. I didn’t cry at all. He, who has no reason to be scolded, does not scold others”!
(Viktor Hugo, “The Man Who Laughs”)
Dedicated to family and society,
Continues from last issue
RETURN TO THE FAMILY
December 11, 1955. Last hours of stay in the camp. I waited to hear my name called. I looked once more from the silos, where I had lived for so long, the kitchen, the infirmary, the shop. Next was the mine. Now I would leave it all. The policeman called my name. I took the bundle of loot on my arm and headed for the command offices. There the spoils and mine would be checked. They had searched me when they put me in prison. They were checking me even now that I was going out. The internal regulation contained it as such.
The officer of the watch was filling out the release form. When he finished, he looked me in the face and said:
– “You will submit this to the passport office, near the Department of Internal Affairs, Vlora, within a week.”
– “Hey hell! – I thought – I have to go to that door again”?!
I had very bitter memories of that place. I didn’t even want to hear his name.
– “You have an order from me,” continued the officer. – Put a lock on your mouth, otherwise you will come back here again”.
He was right. I felt that I was really getting free, but I would always have someone behind my arms, waiting to take my leg somewhere. That made me thinks, I was out on parole.
I took the den with clothes and went out on the highway, near the entrance gate to the camp. It was getting close to noon. A group of family members were waiting to meet their relatives. I was finally free. I had a great desire to shout out loud:
– “I am free! I am free”!
I didn’t dare. I didn’t know, I was really free. Nearby was the camp surrounded by barbed wire? Pain lived inside him. A man who had just finished the meeting approaches me and asks:
– “Where are you going”?
– “In Vlore”.
– “You have a very long way to go. I don’t think you’ll make it tonight. Inside is a ‘Gaz’ who brought food and will return to Tirana. I will go there too. Come and rest at my house and tomorrow I will accompany you to Vlora.
His generosity touched me so much. He was right. I could not arrive in Vlora that evening. I decided to go to Tirana, to Drita.
– “Thank you, but I have a sister in Tirana”.
– “Like that?! Very good. In which neighborhood does your sister live?”
– “In the New Bazaar”.
– “I live on ‘Pine Road’. We are close to each other”.
It wasn’t long before the car arrived. We got into her body. It was raining lightly, and it was getting heavier. By the time we arrived at Burrel, it had turned into a downpour. But we felt safe inside the covered body. Along with us, there was a young bride with a son no older than eight years old. He was from Rreshen. She had been on a date with her husband. While the fellow traveler from Tirana, had met his brother. I knew both of them. They were good people. The man of Mirditor had one more year to do, and the tyrant, five years. However, I didn’t open up much. Prison had made me sober. It was the period of the strangest events.
We arrived in Tirana around eight in the evening. The car stopped near the train station. We got off and went to pay. The man who was with me said something to the driver.
– “How much does it cost”? – asked.
– “No ALL for you. God bless him”!
– Thank you!
I left with the impression that there are no good people left in this world.
– “Let’s go now”! – said the man and took the den from one side.
He accompanied me to the gate of Light. There we parted. I thanked him and went inside. Dr. Kirçiku was coming down the stairs with his wife.
– “Good evening”! – I spoke.
– “Good evening! – They answered. – Where are you going”?
– “Sisters, Light”.
A spark went off in the doctor’s mind. He looked at me intently. Then he looked down at the pile of clothes and realized everything.
– “Don’t be Reshat”?
– “Congratulations”! – cried all joy, shaking my hands.
He turned back and shouting above called:
– “Light, siharic, siharic! Go out and see who has come”?!
The sister came out surprised by the doctor’s call. He looked at me and stood for a few minutes without speaking. He didn’t recognize me. We had not seen each other for five years. He had left me a child and now I was turning into a grown man. The years in prison had made me look older. But when he saw the suit he had sent me, he let out a cry and ran up, calling:
– “The soul of the sister! Sister’s little brother”!
We hugged with an unprecedented longing. I was extremely shocked. After so many years, I was freely hugging a family member. I felt the family warmth.
– “Now go inside and congratulations one more time”! – said the doctor and left.
In the room I met Hysen and the two daughters, Oshka, almost eight years old, and Ora, three and a half years old. After a while we went to the kitchen. Light set the table. He had cooked beans with pork. Then he brought out a plate, with apples and oranges. I had five years without tasting any fruit. I don’t know; but that dinner seemed the most delicious I’ve ever tried. After dinner, Hyseni took the girls and went to the bedroom. He wanted to leave us alone, brother and sister, to talk.
We stayed until late. I told her about my life in prison, while she told about her family.
Fatushja was in Vlora, with her father and mother. They had transferred him back to the city. Dawn with Besnik, both in Rinas, the first free, while the second imprisoned. Liria was transferred to Ulëz, while Qamileja continued in Tirana.
– “Tomorrow morning, we will go to Qamileja”, – said Drita
– “Wouldn’t it be better to tell him to come here?” – I told him.
I was afraid to go to her house. Her husband was deputy minister of Industry and Mines. I was afraid that my presence there would cause him some harm. At that time, I didn’t even think that only after a few months, as a result of the Tirana Conference, he would be dismissed and exiled to Selenica and Vlora, where his sister would later come.
Qamileja came the next day, together with her two children, Anita, who was Oshka’s age, and Rezarti, a little over four years old. Anita went to play with Oshka, while Rezarti clung to me, as if we had known each other for a long time. We spent that day together. In the afternoon, we made two more visits, to Aunt Fitneti and Aunt Zyhraja. In the evening, we went to talk on the phone with Fatusha. We notified Liri and Besnik by telegram, while we sent the news to Agimi with one of his friends.
* * *
The next day I took the train to Rrogozhin. The light wanted to hold me, but I couldn’t. In addition to longing for my hometown and family, I had to be there, within seven days, to appear at the Internal Branch. I had taken a seat by the window. I looked at the cities and wondered. I had seen them when we moved from one camp to another. But then, I looked at them with the eyes of a prisoner, while now, with the eyes of an ordinary citizen. To my surprise, they looked quite different.
In Rrogozhin, I took the bus going to Vlora. When we crossed the Bestrovo Pass, the view of my city unfolded before me. A melancholy came over me. Nostalgia, took my soul.
– “Here is my city! – I thought. – My parents, Fatushja, maybe even Neri are waiting for me there”.
Involuntarily, my mind went to her. Was he waiting for me?! Why did he wait for me?! She didn’t promise me anything. It was a puzzle, which you will solve soon. The bus arrived at the station. It was the same one, where we climbed the last tract, the fatal tract. I remembered Dhimitri, the one who denounced us. What had happened?! Later I learned that he was in Moscow, for higher studies at the branch of the Aviation Academy. He had received the reward, for the service rendered.
My father was waiting for me at the station. He hugged me, kissed me on the forehead and said:
– “Welcome to the family, son”!
We left. We had only taken a few steps when Fatushja came running towards us. Tears covered her face. I was also very touched. My eyes got teary. My heart had given up.
– “Leave your tears home”, – said my father.
He was a strong man. He had faced many difficult situations. He was almost sixty-three years old. However, he knew how to control himself. At home, mother was eagerly waiting for us. Hugs again, tears again. I also met the grandmother, uncles with their wives, uncle’s children.
At that time we lived in the house of Thoma Shyti, in the “Varosh” neighborhood, in front of the building of the former Department of Internal Affairs, which had already been turned into a Polyambulance. The branch was located in a new building, at the entrance of the city. They had turned our house into administrative offices and then housed other families.
We had two rooms in that house. One was larger with dimensions of 4 X 3 meters. It served as a bedroom for my father, mother and me, as well as a waiting room and living room. The other room was small, 3 X 2 meters. It was Fatusha’s room. Uncle lived in the other two rooms.
I was entering another world. Prison had transformed me. From a laughing and cheerful child, I had turned into a serious boy of few words. I felt like a stranger in my own city. I felt like I didn’t know anyone! The first few days I did not leave the house. Where should I go?! Most of my schoolmates were in university. I didn’t know what attitude they would take. Would they approach me, or would they stay away?! I felt very shy. Prison had transformed me, made me a man closed in on him. Jorgua was a soldier, while Myrtezai was settled in Peshkopi. The only relative, it seemed to me was Neri, but I didn’t know what attitude we would hold towards each other.
My father and mother were standing next to me. They tried to make me forget the prison period. They conducted the conversations very tactfully. They never looked at me, what I had done. I understood why they did such a thing. But closest of all, stood Fatushja, my sister
She played the main role in my adaptation to the new life. He took me to the cinema and the theater, the only places of entertainment that existed at that time. She used to meet me with her friends, without being shy. The sister was part of the elite of the city’s intelligence. It was in that part of it, which was called; “the new Albanian bourgeoisie”. There were many educators, doctors, engineers, economists, but only a part of them were part of the real intelligentsia. In short, she belonged to that part of Albanian society, which preserved the nobility of the class from which it came and its best traditions.
I felt a great pleasure when I talked with him.
I had not been released more than two weeks. The fatushka told me:
– “Tonight we will go to the dance organized by the teachers of our school”.
The evening was the best. I introduced myself to my sister’s colleagues. Among them I want to mention Odyssene from Palasa and Lumen from Elbasan. They were a wonderful couple. The couple Shezai Borshi and his wife, two old school teachers, made a special impression on me. They had a special way of dancing, a classical way. It was fun to watch. When they danced, the others would sit back and let them solo.
I was shy. I felt like a stranger in that environment. Back then, my sister used to take me dancing. Her close friends also did this. I noticed that there were also some who looked askance at me. They even threw some rumuz. But the sister pretended not to hear. Such evenings were often organized at her school.
One evening he had booked tickets to the theater. The theater of Durrës had come with the part “Fisherman’s Family”. Went. I admired the excellent performance of the actors, but I felt a disappointment with the text of the drama. I was still influenced by the prison mentality. There, everything was seen in two colors, black and white. I could not agree with the presentation of historical reality that was reflected in that piece.
Such a thing disillusioned me. So at the end of each act, when the hall erupted in applause, I stood in silence.
– “Clap your hands because it’s catching your eye”, – said my sister slowly.
Instinctively I started clapping, without even knowing why. When we got home she said to me:
– “Why didn’t you clap your hands”?
– “I didn’t feel like it. In prison, they taught me history differently…”!
– “I understand you; maybe you are right about everything you think. But you have to adapt to the real environment, keeping your character. You have to see the reality, as it really is and not leave a reason for the past tragedy to repeat itself”.
She played a major role in my revival. Herein lays the greatness of her character. This thing is dedicated only to her. So, little by little, I began to acclimatize to the world around me. I recognized him as he really was, full of intrigue, servility, formalism, despotism and arrogance. But at the same time with nobility, courtesy and dignity.
The family heritage, the positive experiences that those remarkable men had taught me in prison, and the right path my sister set me on, shaped my character. I chose the path of honesty, the path of love for people. But, at the same time, I did not forget the way I had come from, to distinguish between evil and good, between morality and spiritual decadence.
Fatushja took a special place in my life. It is the influence of those difficult days that we spent together in those years that influenced the formation of this belief. In my conscience, no one can take her place. She was the symbol of selflessness and sacrifice for the family, but especially for us two brothers, that fate had pushed us into the abyss. She was not separated from us for a single moment, from Vlora to Bulqiza and from Maliqi to Rinas, until we returned to the bosom of the family, until we returned to life again. Later, she became our teacher, to prevent us from taking any reckless step that could cost us dearly.
Only a few days had passed since my release, when they came from Uleza Aliu with Lirina and Agimi from Rinas. We missed each other. We only lacked Besnik. Ali and Agimi stayed only two days. They had to go to work. Freedom lasted two weeks. He also had with him the little son, Ilir, who had not yet turned a year old.
From the prison mates, only Klitua came, with his sister, Lushe. It was a pleasant evening. We stayed up late talking. Clitua was a man with broad horizons. We talked about literature and arts, about science and technology. In these conversations, my sister’s high level was also noticeable.
Klitua also talked to me about Neri. He knew my feelings towards her. We had often discussed this issue when we were in prison…! They had lived near each other for some time.
– “When I told her about you, she jumped up for joy” – he told me. – He wanted to learn everything related to you.
He was silent and did not speak again. I didn’t tease him further either. I didn’t dare, for fear of hearing some news that would shock me. I wanted to let my fantasy float in her dream. Memorie.al
The next issue follows

I was thirteen the previous spring before I personally met Arco Icarus and to be honest it was a horrendous instance. I had previously made the acquaintance of Neoma Quint who had told me the tale of woe which involved the young half prince winning her heart by his deeds and special words before stabbing her through. Figuratively of course. But still it was horrific tale especially for a girl of fourteen.
So when I had the questionable honour of making his acquaintance; I curtly told him ‘that he should have better honour if he expects to remain a prince.’ (You see his father executed his first wife in order to marry Arco’s mother who was never fully recognized as the queen. But now his half brother Absalom is on the throne and no one quite knows what will befall the young prince. Though probably nothing it has been two years with no known hostility) little did I know that this scoundrel would be my husband in less than five years times. But currently he was attempting to seduce the passions of the young and bashful Adelei Cadaow. It is quite cynical but looking at his lady choices it seems he looks for meek and adorable. Which is indeed strange.
I am never these. I am an early teenager: awkward but that never stopped me in my ambition to be what I wish. Some say I am too ambitious and aggressive. I like to look at it as though I know what I want and am not afraid to grasp it by any means necessary.
On my relationship with the Half Prince (as I nicknamed him) I bantered constantly with him and it definitely was not in fondness. It was simple really: I was the daughter of wealthy business owner and his brother was king; we could not directly be vulgar or offensive but that did not decrease the total insufferableness of the other’s presence. When I was nearly fifteen and Arco had run his course with Adelei and they had ended on hostile but diplomatic terms. Princess Viveka thought to advise the king (her brother) that it would be wise to marry their insufferable half brother to the smart alack daughter of Pallas Lautherin in order to ensure a permanent treaty.
Yes, what I am is that saying Is I, Lilias Lautherin is engaged to my childhood nemesis.
And trust me he is no prince charming for my commoner blood.

Fanfiction of the Month (July): Stir of the Thunderstorm
View Single Post
July 30th, 2007 (10:52 AM).
Join Date: Jan 2004
Chapter 5- The Starlight Guardians
Eralynn clutched the reigns as Aerance wheeled around suddenly. She gasped in horror at what she saw before her. She blinked hard, hoping that when she opened her eyes once more, the terrifying creature would just be gone.
A gigantic serpent rose in front of her, like nothing she had ever seen before. It’s body was completely ivory in color, with smooth scales that reflected the light of fire off at different angles. The tail end, however, was made of an alternating pattern of red and blue scales. The very end formed a fin that appeared to cleave into four different sections. The creature’s head had a long point on the very top. Its eyes were a deep red, with reddish fins that seemed to be eyebrows of some sort. These continued down off of its face and draped elegantly at the sides of its neck. It had a frightening dragon-like appearance, and was very mysterious.
The creature did not wait for Eralynn to speak or try to run before it had wrapped its body around her, removing her from her seat upon Aerance. Eralynn felt its surprisingly smooth, white-ish scales around her arms and midsection, and she felt the slender creature's hold tighten around her, so that she could barely move. Holding her with the end of its tail, it raised her to its eye level, examining her closely. She still struggled to get free, but its grip remained tight on her. She felt her breaths shorten, not able to expand her chest to its full capacity.
“Argh... What do you want from me?” Eralynn asked while striving to free herself.
Aerance whinnied and kicked wildly at the giant dragon-like beast, trying to shake her friend from its grip. The ivory serpent merely looked down at her, then back at Eralynn, hardly fazed by the Ponyta’s attempts to save her companion. When it said nothing in response to Eralynn’s question, she spoke again.
“Please, I mean you no harm, and hope you will let my friend and I be,” she pleaded, but she felt rather stupid after she said this. Perhaps she and Aerance had been trespassing on its land, and Eralynn realized she would be quite angry and frightened too, if someone had just walked into her own home. Also, why would mere words make the creature trust her well enough to just let her go? Anyone could say anything, but that didn't mean they always meant it. Surprisingly, however, someone actually answered her.
“What is your purpose in these woods?” a mystical, feminine voice asked.
Eralynn looked around to see who had asked her. It couldn’t have been the creature that held her tightly, since its lips did not move. The sound seemed to be coming to her, not through her ears, but from within her own mind. The voice echoed within the girl's head as a dream that only the dreamer could be aware of. It was like nothing she had ever experienced before.
“Who are you, and what is your reason for being here?” the voice asked again, and this time angrily.
“My friend and I only wanted to see what lay in this forest... and we were pulled in by the light,” Eralynn said nervously, looking around to find the source of the voice as she answered it. “And now that I think of it, it is rather late, and I was hoping to find some sort of shelter within the forest...”
The creature still seemed suspicious and stared at her for a moment, examining her. Its gaze settled on her face, then, and for a moment, it seemed to be pondering something. Then, suddenly, looking closer into her eyes, it seemed to gasp. Its eyes widened, and it released her from its grip. She fell a short distance, landing on her back.
Eralynn put her hand to where a bruise would inevitably end up. “Ow... what do you think you’re doing, dropping me like that?” She groaned loudly, forgetting her fear.
The creature before her began shaking its head. It closed its eyes for a moment, thinking hard about something. Then, it opened them, and the voice sounded in Eralynn's mind again. “You... You look like...” it could not seem to finish its sentence.
From the way its actions and facial expressions clearly matched up with what it was saying, Eralynn had to assume now that it was indeed the creature talking to her. But, how was this happening? How could someone speak without moving their lips? And how did the words so readily reach Eralynn's mind?
“I demand to know who you are,” the serpent said firmly, and then began to change its tone. “I’ve seen one like you once, but only one...” the creature said these words as if they wounded it in the chest, hitting it straight in the heart.
Eralynn did not know what to say at this. She was completely taken aback. What was this creature on about? “Whom do I resemble?” She asked defensively. “And... what on Earth are you?!”
“I am of a race of Pokemon known as Milotic,” the large creature said. “We dwell deep within this forest, and our home is the lands surrounding the sacred waters of the stars.”
Then, she (Eralynn realized she was a female from her voice) eyed Eralynn some more, watching her pull the hood of her cloak back on her head. “You seem harmless, so let me bring you to my lands,” she said, still filled with a hint of doubt.
Eralynn sighed and got up. She looked over at Aerance, who was just standing still and staring blankly at the two of them. The flame horse seemed not to understand what was going on, so she waited for Eralynn to decided whether or not to go with the serpent Pokemon.
“Just walk right in front of me and I will tell you which way to go,” the Milotic instructed, probably thinking it would be best to watch the human and the Ponyta and make sure they didn't try anything sneaky. It was her species' homeland, after all.
Eralynn did not trust this strange Pokemon very much, but she did not really have much of a choice. She listened to the Milotic, and, after throwing a nod towards Aerance, turned around, walking towards the mystifying light again. Aerance began to walk slowly, and soon, she caught up, walking closely at Eralynn's side.
They could hear the ivory serpent following close behind, its slithering body rustling against the forest floor. What would it do to them? Where was it taking them? Eralynn was lost in confusion, she had no idea what this was all about, and she shuddered to think that in this position, the Milotic could finish them off very easily. Their backs were to it, and they wouldn't even have the chance to react if it attacked them. Still, Eralynn and Aerance kept walking as they heard the Milotic's instructions to keep heading for the light.
They were now very close to the very thing that had originally drawn Eralynn and Aerance here. Soon, they were near enough to see it in detail. Looking down, Eralynn saw the origin of the great, white light. It was a small pool of water, bordered by rounded light grey stones. The water was absolutely pure, and looked rather deep.
Eralynn stared for quite some time, unable to take her eyes away from it. She had never seen anything like it, and its beauty exceeded that of everything else. Completely clear from bottom to top, it seemed to absorb the beautiful, glittering, white light, capturing it and holding it in place somehow.
“Stop,” the cool, female voice stated inside her head.
Eralynn pulled her gaze away from the light, finally noticing where they had been. Once again, it had seemingly put some sort of spell on her. She did not even realize which way she had been walking, nor for how long.
Now, finally able to break her gaze away from the pool's light and looking around her once more, she could see that she was standing directly in front of the pond of water that had entranced her. She could see, not far away, a much larger body of water. Other Milotic, resembling the one directing her, were slithering out of the lake and onto land to look at her and Aerance. They seemed quite frightened, but curious enough to stare.
Once she could see them all in the light of the brilliant pond next to her, she could see that they were actually much more beautiful than they were frightening. They had an elegant and enchanting look to them, leaving her to believe them to be less dragon-like than she had previously assumed. And, if they were like dragons at all, it was certainly not in any traditional sense.
“I found this girl wandering in the woods, probably lost. There is nothing to see here, so go back to your homes,” the Milotic that had found Eralynn said to its kind.
The rest of the Milotic did not seem to want to stop watching, though, and they gaped at Eralynn and Aerance in awe and concern. They did not speak or look at each other for a few moments, they only stared at the human and the flame horse.
“I said,” the Milotic behind Eralynn began again, this time much more sternly, “go back to your homes.”
Hesitantly, they did as they were told. From their eventual willingness to obey, Eralynn could tell that the Milotic that had found her must’ve been their leader, or some other position of authority. They watched as the others turned and disappeared back underwater.
The Milotic slid across the grass and went in front of Eralynn and Aerance. Noticing their confusion, she began to explain. “Like I said, you seem harmless enough, so we can give you shelter until you set out again. There are caves about these woods which my people do not occupy. We live in the water, only, and so you may sleep in one of them tonight,” the leader said.
Eralynn did not dare to reject the creature’s hospitality. However, there was something very suspicious about this entire situation. Why was this Milotic so willing to simply give her shelter for the night? How was she sure that Eralynn did not mean them harm? And, although she kept a watchful eye on both Eralynn and Aerance, she seemed to hold some kind of trust in them.
Also, why did the other Milotic stare at her and Aerance so much? Had they never seen humans or Ponytas before? Eralynn decided that it must have been that, and shrugged the thought off.
She followed as the serpent turned, leading Eralynn and Aerance away from the water. They did not speak while they walked, but every few moments, Eralynn would glance nervously at Aerance. They were still quite scared, and they felt more like prisoners being escorted to a jail cell than guests being welcomed to shelter.
The Milotic led the two to a steep-looking hill. From a distance, it looked like there were many tunnels dug into it, but Eralynn could now see, closer, that they were just small cave entrances.
“You may have to duck down,” the ivory creature said, easily slithering her thin body through. Eralynn watched as her head disappeared first, then her midsection, and then her cloven tail.
The girl and her Ponyta followed. Eralynn did not need to crouch much, being so small, but Aerance had to lower her head a bit. It was an uncomfortable walk, but it was very short and they were thankful for some shelter, so neither of them complained at all.
When they had walked the short distance of the tunnel, they reached the end of the cavern. The small entranceway before it opened up into a great, hollow room. Eralynn looked up at the top, which was quite far up, and sighed.
“You are to sleep here, tonight, but hopefully, you will be leaving in the morning?” The Milotic inquired.
“Um, yes. Thank you... Oh, I never got your name,” Eralynn said. Did these Pokemon even have names? Although the Ponyta standing next to her had a unique title, Eralynn had known that many warriors chose to just call their Pokemon companions by their species' name, which also worked just fine. Eralynn had to assume that, in this case, yes, they did, since there were multiples of the same species. She turned out to be correct in that assumption.
“I am called Malkaline,” the graceful Milotic responded.
“Okay, and my name is Eralynn. Thank you, then, Malkaline,” Eralynn had struggled to pronounce the unfamiliar name. Then, before Malkaline had had a chance to exit, Eralynn quickly spoke again, “Um, may I ask you a question?”
“I suppose you may. What is it?” Malkaline answered after a moment of indecision.
“How are you speaking to me? I’ve never known a Pokemon to be able to speak,” Eralynn wondered.
The light from the flames on Aerance's body bounced off the cavern's walls and ceiling, and it made Eralynn's, Malkaline's, and the Ponyta's shadows waver upon its stone floor.
“We speak only through our minds. Milotic are creatures with highly developed brains, even more so than those of humans,” she answered simply, as if it was a very well known fact of the world.
“Oh. I was always told that humans were the most intelligent on Earth,” Eralynn said, dumbfounded.
The Milotic chuckled somewhat mockingly. “You have also never been far out of Derelon. Am I correct?” Malkaline asked her.
Eralynn nodded bashfully. She did not yet realize how much she had to learn about the world around her. Derelon had always been her home, and she had always wanted to leave, but now that she had, she felt she should have been much more prepared for what laid outside.
“Well, many humans are only power-hungry. They do not seem to desire peace, but to conquer the world and all of its wonders,” Malkaline corrected her with a sad, pitying tone.
“You’re right. There are many evil people about...” Eralynn answered, instantly thinking of the trouble that Team Devastation had caused her people alone. “What is... that light I saw?” she then asked Malkaline, changing the subject.
“That is starlight. The shining pond you saw contains the power of our stars. We, Milotic, are the assigned guardians of the stars. We were given the intelligence and endowment to protect them, and that is why we live in these waters,” Malkaline answered.
“Is that why you attacked me when I tried to come so close?” Eralynn asked, wide-eyed.
“Yes, it is. We protect the sacred water of the stars with our lives, because that it our purpose on Earth,” the beautiful creature replied.
“Oh, I see. So what would happen if you failed, and someone else got hold of the stars’ power?” Eralynn asked.
“Then things would not be as they should. Although, I’m not sure of exactly what would happen, I just know that it is the most important task for my people. We all feel that if we failed, the world would collapse because it would no longer be... right,” Malkaline tried explaining to her.
Eralynn stared at her, confused. How did they know that this was their purpose? And, who gave them this task? How important was the power of the stars, anyway? She did not like being overly curious, but she felt as if she needed to know these things. But, to her surprise, the Milotic continued on, seemingly anxious to tell her the ways of her people.
“We protect these woods carefully, since they are both our home and our responsibility,” Malkaline went on.
“But, why are they your responsibility?” Eralynn asked her.
“Everyone in the world has a purpose, and I suppose that this is just ours. I have heard many times in legends that every element of the world is guarded by someone...” Malkaline spoke quietly.
“The Protector...” Eralynn muttered under her breath.
Her thoughts flashed back to what the King had said to her. Since the Milotic were guardians of starlight, was it possible that The Protector, too, was some kind of Pokemon? And what sort of Pokemon would this prophesied creature be?
“Do you know anything about Derelon City and its legends?” Eralynn asked Malkaline suddenly.
“I once knew a woman who lived there. She was a great friend of my people. I... don’t believe I know anything about its legends, though,” the Milotic eyed Eralynn nervously, wondering what the strange human girl was up to.
“Well, a queen from a long time ago, named Oleander-” she began, but was interrupted.
“Ah, Oleander is the woman that I once knew,” the beautiful Pokemon said excitedly.
Eralynn's eyes grew even wider with this news. This Pokemon knew the great Queen of the past? Why would Oleander have traveled here anyway? Eralynn's mind raced with questions, but she tried to remain calm. This Milotic obviously did not fully trust her, and asking too many questions could have easily been the way to drive Malkaline away. Even worse, Malkaline could have taken the only chance at shelter Eralynn and Aerance had had all night.
“I see,” Eralynn said, pondering these awful thoughts and answering the Milotic simultaneously. “That’s an odd coincidence that I know of her, then. Well, she told of a Protector that would save ‘all of pure heart’ right before her death.” She paused before asking, wondering whether or not it was worth it. She soon decided that it certainly was, though, and went on. “I was wondering, since you seem very wise, if you know anything of this?”
“Right before... she died? Well, she knew about it all along, actually. She had an eye for the future, and she knew what was going to happen to her precious city. She always wanted to tell us of it, to teach us more and more,” Malkaline explained, to Eralynn's relief, not offended by her questioning.
“She seemed so brave,” Eralynn whispered.
“Yes, indeed, she was. She was a generous, kind-hearted woman. She taught us many things about the world, and about hers specifically. We now know much of mankind, thanks to her,” Malkaline said gratefully.
“She taught you everything? Wow. Why did she do that, anyway?” Eralynn questioned.
“I believe she knew... She knew about the attacks that were coming,” The Milotic answered.
“Attacks from whom?” Eralynn asked, eager to know what the serpent Pokemon was talking about.
Malkaline sighed sadly. She turned her head away from Eralynn, and the girl suddenly felt foolish for asking so many questions. But, she was answered, nonetheless.
“Oleander used to warn us about those that were evil. She told us that not all humans would be good to us, like she was. Of course, we were naive, and only knowing Oleander made us love humans. Sometime after hearing of her death in the city of Derelon, however, my people were attacked by men with ropes and nets. They captured some of us, but luckily, many escaped through the water, where they could not grab hold of us as easily.
“You see, Oleander did not always trust her powers. We all believe now that she saw that attack coming, but she did not want to scare us, or make us panic. So, she tried to warn us with hints, teaching us the ways of humans, both good and evil. I wish we could’ve just believed her...” Malkaline said sadly.
Eralynn felt a lot of pity for the elegant creatures. Although they were very intelligent, they were also innocent and had probably been living in peace when evil people had attacked them.
“Probably Varlo’s followers,” Eralynn muttered to herself quietly.
“Now, we don’t trust human beings as well as we used to during the days of Oleander’s visits. Although it has been years since we have been attacked, we always have lookouts surrounding the land, scanning for threatening humans, which is what I was doing tonight,” Malkaline explained.
Eralynn looked around nervously, thinking for a moment.
“After you caught me, why did you show me mercy? I am, after all, human. So, why would you trust me to stay with you so quickly?” Eralynn asked.
“You remind me of her, my dear,” Malkaline said sweetly, and with that, slithered from the cave, leaving Eralynn and Aerance alone to wonder.
* * *
Eralynn awoke before dawn the next morning and left the small cavern to go and find Malkaline. She thanked her for allowing her to spend the night on the Milotics’ land, and requested permission to return and visit them someday. After Malkaline had said yes, Eralynn bowed graciously and hopped on Aerance’s back, ready to depart.
As Aerance galloped away from the land of the Milotic, Eralynn noticed that many of them had emerged from the water, once again, to look at the girl. They seemed astonished by the presence of her, and Eralynn could not find a way to fully understand it.
While Aerance found the way out of the woods they had come from, Eralynn thought hard about what Malkaline had said the night before. She reminded the Milotic of Oleander, and that’s why they were all so amazed by her. That’s the reason Malkaline had let her stay in their cave without too much hesitation. She had never resembled anyone before, and now Malkaline said she seemed similar to Oleander, the hero? Of all people, it couldn’t be.
Of course, Eralynn had never really known of the Queen's many triumphs and her one defeat before the King had discussed them with her very recently. Come to think of it, she had only heard the name Queen Oleander before then. Even after the King's telling of the legend, Eralynn still did not know much about the great Oleander, she realized. Only that she was brave and had the ability to see some of the future, and that she had died at the hands of the evil Varlo when she tried to kill him and save Derelon.
As the young girl thought, she and Aerance broke through the forest’s edge, once again, able to see the rolling, smooth plains. It was still before dusk, and the sun had not yet risen, so it remained slightly dark. Eralynn directed Aerance to turn and head South, keeping on the path to Norsillon.
Eralynn yawned, tired from barely getting any sleep. She had left Derelon early in the night, and had arrived in the forest for rest a few hours later. Then, she had to wake up very early to continue on her journey. She hardly got three hours of sleep that night.
As they rode onward, Eralynn kept thinking about her father, and how he would react to her leaving the city. Obviously, he wouldn’t be too happy with her, and she wondered if she’d even be allowed to return, since she had broken the rule that said all citizens of Derelon City had to remain within its walls. She watched in her mind as visions played of Orriso yelling at the guards to throw her out and never let her back in. She saw the once kind King, who seemed to respect her so long ago, shaking his head in disappointment as he watched this scene. She watched Rhylan scoffing at her, happy to see her leaving Derelon...
“Rhylan...” Eralynn suddenly whispered as Aerance galloped underneath her. Pangs of sadness throbbed in her body as she wondered if he was alive. She wondered if he would ever even have the chance to laugh at her getting kicked out, and she suddenly forgot about her fear of not being allowed back into her home city.
She kept a look out for anything out of the ordinary as she and the Ponyta traveled, now. She had been informed, when she was younger, that the area of Norsillon could be found easily. Eralynn would have to travel through an entrance at the edge of the trees which contained a large boulder that resembled a Magikarp. All she could see for miles so far, though, were trees. She looked around herself every so often, but the scenery never seemed to change.
Suddenly, Aerance stopped and whinnied, shaking her mane. She turned towards the East, facing the forest, directing Eralynn to look this way.
In front of them was a large, gray rock, sitting between the normal-looking grove of trees. It was oval-shaped, but came to a sharp point at the top. One side of it was rather smooth-looking, continuing the oval shape, but the other side jutted out into what looked like a tail fin. This was it: the large boulder that looked like a Magikarp!
“Wow, Aerance, good eyes,” Eralynn complimented. For if it hadn’t been for Aerance spotting it, she probably never would have seen it herself. She felt even more pleased, if it was possible, that the flame horse had come along for this journey.
Aerance turned, walking the way towards the Magikarp boulder. She walked around it, and they could both clearly see some sort of pathway that led deeper into the woods. The trees surrounded the walkway, which was made of short grass that had been matted down somewhat with the occasional trodding of warriors' heels upon this place. The area of forest wasn’t very dark, and Eralynn could see rays of the now rising sun peering through the thin treetops.
Eralynn and Aerance slowly crept down the path, wary of what lay ahead. All was quiet, however, except for the occasional chirpring of Swellow and Spearow here and there. They hadn’t been walking for very long when they came to a circular clearing. It was a large, plain-looking field with a small, odd grove of trees towards its center. The grouping of trees was also circular, and had a mysterious aura surrounding it.
Eralynn suddenly felt her memories flooding back to her. She felt as if she had actually been here before, but she did not know why. Even if only for a moment, she had once gazed upon this area, and she was sure of this.
“Oh my,” she looked around herself wildly, disbelieving. “This was what I saw in my dream... or vision,” she told Aerance. Eralynn now realized that what she was being shown was real, so that meant... “They were captured here!”
She directed Aerance to advance toward the grove of trees, so as to investigate. Closer up, she could see a hole in the trunk of each tree. Inside the hollow trunk, she could see some things that were very sparkly. She assumed that these were the magical gems that the warriors were assigned to bring back in order to complete their training.
Standing right outside of the grove, she stared at the gems. She longed to reach out and grab one, just to see which color it would transform to, but she dared not. Too much rested in the color of these stones. She wasn't sure if she really wanted to know her own destiny... It might have been too overwhelming for her to take in... She decided that she would only hold one of the gems if she was going to officially become a warrior, although this was only an excuse she had made to herself in an attempt to make the stones' power seem less appealing.
Her thoughts were suddenly interrupted by a sound overhead.
Eralynn looked up, pulling at Aerance’s reigns so that she’d back up. They both watched as a large bird Pokemon zoomed through the air high in the sky.
“Hey, wait!” Eralynn screamed as loudly as she could, but the creature was far too high and had already flown nearly out of site. “Rhylan must be nearby, if that’s his Pidgeot...” Eralynn thought aloud. “Come on, we have to go find him!”
Aerance nodded in affirmation, and ran around the circular grove of trees. She headed in the direction from which the Pidgeot had come, and they were now running back through the woods. Eralynn looked around her desperately, scanning every inch of the forest floor for signs of anyone she’d know.
Then, she saw him. Her heart raced and panic stabbed at her. She wished that Aerance would move faster so that she would know... Was he...?
On the ground lay Rhylan. The hood of his cloak was over his head, and he was laying on his side, completely limp. As they rode closer, Eralynn and Aerance could see that his arm lay in a small pool of blood. He was clearly unconscious, but whether or not he was alive, Eralynn was not sure.
They sped towards him immediately after spotting him. Eralynn hopped off of Aerance and kneeled down beside Rhylan. She put two fingers against his throat, underneath his jaw, to see if he had a pulse. She felt herself relax a bit more when she felt the rhythm in his veins. He was alive.
She still worried, though, as she glanced at the blood surrounding his arm. How badly was he hurt? Would she be able to help him? Sure, he was always rude to her, but she did not want to see him actually die. (“Especially since he is next in line to be Prince,” she tried to convince herself.)
She lightly tapped him on the face, but he would not wake up. She looked around, unsure of what to do. “Aerance, do you think you could carry us both comfortably?” She asked her.
Aerance nodded her head and smiled with her eyes. Despite her appearance, she was quite strong. She was also used to Eralynn riding her, especially now. It seemed she could endure more from this point, even if it was just to get away from this spot.
Eralynn sat for a moment, thinking. She did not know where they could go. Aerance could certainly carry them both for quite a while, but Eralynn wasn’t sure it would be such a smart idea to travel with and unconscious Rhylan for miles and miles. They would have to find somewhere to stay, at least until he woke up. If he’d wake up...
She shook her head, still thinking about the situation. She had only found Rhylan. Where could the others be? She assumed that they might have escaped, or possibly worse... Perhaps they were captured, or even killed. She felt nauseous at the very thought of it.
She rose from her position, grabbing Rhylan’s uninjured arm, and tried pulling his body over her shoulder. It took her quite some time, but she finally gained control, and began walking towards Aerance so that she could put him over her back.
Suddenly, from behind her, there came a low growl and a snap of jaws. Her motion hindered by Rhylan hanging over her shoulder, she turned slowly to see what it was.
At the site in front of her, she nearly dropped the Prince's limp body. She tried her best to keep him from falling, as she saw six Mightyena emerge from their hiding places within the trees. They all looked rather satisfied with themselves, sneering and snarling at her. Their noses were crinkled in anger, as they snapped at the air, trying to intimidate her.
All Eralynn could do was back away from them. She walked backwards slowly, feeling her feet crinkling the soft grass below her, until she felt Aerance’s side against back.
“What do you want?” She asked them harshly. “I don’t want to hurt you, I only wish to take this boy and keep him safe for a while.”
She watched as they closed in on her. It seemed there was really no way out of this. She could let herself survive and drop Rhylan for the wolf Pokemon to have, but she would never do something like that. However, if she tried to run now, with Rhylan over her shoulder, they’d catch her easily, without a doubt. Then, they would most likely kill her...
Her eyes darted frantically about the evil Pokemon approaching her. She felt the weight of Rhylan straining her shoulders. She felt as if she would collapse, both from fear and physical stress.
With barely any warning, a Mightyena directly in front of her lunged, and she knew instantly that her journey would come to an end.
Stir of The Thunderstorm
View Public Profile
Send a private message to silverfrost
Find all posts by silverfrost
Find threads started by silverfrost

It's been awhile since I did a "Mike's 1000" entry, but this morning I was singing Sublime's "What I Got," and I was compelled to write about it. I guess I'm not shocked that this song, and the self-titled album it was on, didn't make Moon's list, but at the same time, I think there are arguments for its inclusion. Tracks like "Wrong Way," Santeria," and "What I Got," ubiquitous on alternative radio in the mid-90s, introduced much of a new generation in suburbia to the sound of West Coast ska-punk (and reggae).
"What I Got (Reprise)" was a song in particular that had an impact on me. A combination of the chorus from "Loving" by Half Pint and the riff from "Lady Madonna" by the Beatles (that second link takes you to a mashup of the two), the resultant song is pure pick me up. Even though the song consists of two chords and a simple solo (the first I ever learned), its back and forth shuffle works perfectly with the workaday blues referred to in the lyrics. The lyrics themselves are the best part; I remember my favorite station growing up, Cleveland's sadly defunct 107.9 The End, used to play this almost every morning, usually right around 7AM when my alarm went off. "Early in the morning/Rising to the streets/Light me up that cigarette and I'll strap shoes on my feet." So what if I didn't smoke and that I had never seen "the streets." Those lyrics got me out of bed everyday.They became a staple of my wake up routine in college (when I actually had to get up by 5 or 530 some days).
A recent revelation I had is that as a leader I need to show up with energy if I want anyone else to be energized, and that to get that feeling of excitement and energy I need to have positive thoughts. My thoughts this morning were dark. I went to bed too late and got up too early, my wife is sick, my son is going through a very dependent phase, and I was not looking forward to the first task of the day at work. I knew if I showed up with this kind of energy, it was going to be a long day for me and everyone I work with.
I have probably sung "What I Got" in the shower more than all other songs combined. This usually happens spontaneously if the mood hits me. Today I forced myself to start singing, and by the end of the song I was feeling pretty good. Good enough that I wanted to sing it again. So I did. Three times before I left the house this morning, and I was positivity embodied. You'd have thought I drank a pot of coffee (or a 5 Hour Energy for those of you who think coffee is too hard to make).
When I was home at Christmas I convinced my buddy to go play an open mic night with me. It was my first time ever doing that, and we did three songs; this was one of them. This song and I have a history, and as I mentioned before, that's important to me. Check it out below.
Buy the song on Amazon

On Air Now
Heart Breakfast with Ivan & Emma 6am - 10am
A massive police presence appears to have prevented any violence between supporters of the English Defence League and Unite Against Fascism at a big day of demos in Luton.
Around 1,800 officers were deployed in the town to keep the two sides apart on Saturday 5 February 2011 in a massive police operation which involved 27 different forces and is estimated to have cost £800,000.
Despite their claims that it would be the biggest ever rally by the English Defence League only 1500 of their supporters turned up. A police cordon kept them away from 1000 people in the counter demonstration by Unite Against Fascism.
The force helicopter hovered over the town centre all day, shops and the library were boarded up, pub and roads were shut and buses diverted as the sides were kept apart.
Hundreds of EDL supporters gathered first in the High Town area of Luton, close to the railway station.
There were minor problems when UAF members went to the railway station and linked arms to create a barrier to prevent people from leaving.
Later hundreds of chanting EDL supporters were escorted by police from the High Town area to St George's Square. As they made their way, two grenade-like firecrackers were set off, frightening police horses.
Many of the demonstrators had been drinking and some were still walking along with cans of strong lager and cider.
Waving flags of St George and banners, they shouted "No surrender to the Taliban," "England 'til I die," and "EDL, EDL."
Banners included the words "Close down all mosques," Patriotism is not racism" and "Try burning a copy now."
They met in the square next to the Town hall which flew the "Luton in Harmony flag" where they were addressed by their leader Tommy Robinson, whose real name is Stephen Lennon, and other speakers.
Robinson was caught in a crush in the crowd leading to the square, but was unhurt.
300 yards away UAF supporters gathered on Market Hill for their own demo. Many had placards and banners, with the words "Smash the EDL" and "BNP."
The Socialist Workers Party had set up stalls and UAF supporters have come from as far away as Leicester to voice their disapproval that the EDL were being allowed to stage their rally.
One woman, who said she was a UAF member, said "In October last year the English Defence League came to Leicester, which is a fantastic multi cultural city, and they came there to try and get people to fight each other. We know how the people of Luton feel."
At one point a break-away group of around 100 people from the UAF tried to get through a police cordon into George Street and onto St George's Square. There were scuffles and officers on horseback were called in to stop the mob from breaking through.
Luton town centre was visibly quieter as shoppers stayed away from the normally bustling shopping centre. Most of the shops in the nearby Arndale centre, which runs between the two sites of the demonstration were open but were not busy.
In the morning a minibus had been stopped on the M1 motorway and searched. As a result, one person had been arrested for possessing cannabis. The police said rumours of a large amount of weapons being found were untrue, but one bat was recovered and confiscated.
Eight people were arrested during the day. One for assault on a police officer, two for possession of drugs, one for drink driving, one for assault on his coach driver, two for possessioon of an offensive weapon and one for failing to appear at court and racially aggravated public order.
Detectives are also investigating a fight at the bottom of Dunstable Road, close to the mainly Muslim Bury Park area of Luton. Two men had minor head injuries.
19 people were treated for minor injuries. Sixteen were members of the public or protestors. Some were due to sprained ankles or falling over earlier in the day. Five were taken to hospital and one made his own way there.
The other three were police officers. None were thought to be as a result of assaults.
Beds police said rumours of a Mosque being attacked in the town were untrue.

Endeavour I Press Pack
How did you feel when you were first asked to audition for the role of a young Morse?
I was working abroad at the time and my agent called and asked "what do you think about playing Morse" and I said, "I don't know - I've never seen it!". I bought the books while I was away and read all of them, so that was my first introduction to Morse. I flew back, and loved the script. I didn't want to do an impression of anything that had been done before. Not that there isn't a place for that because there probably is, but if that's what they were looking for then they'd be better giving it to someone else; there's nothing worse than getting onto set and people not liking what you're doing or that what is expected of you is not what you're willing to give. I wanted to avoid all of that. It wouldn't work for me that way so how could it possibly work for anyone else? So it wasn't an audition - it was a whittling down of what we all wanted to get out of it. I took it and tried to run with it, to give it everything it deserved. And I want it to be the best it can be. I want for it to build and for each one to be better than the next. If we can aspire to that - if this is the only series and we've achieved that - we can be proud.
Was there a part of you that thought that's THE Morse?
No because, to be honest, I just missed that given the age I am. I had knowledge about the show but I didn't know it was based on books. I'm glad about that really. You have to come to something with fresh eyes. I was in America at the time so I couldn't just go and get a bunch of DVDs - I had to get the books first. Thank God, as that way it’s all in your imagination. I don’t think you can work properly if you have anxiety about something; it's stops you doing the work you’re paid to do. We’re meant to get rid of that [anxiety] to be as creative as possible. Ultimately my boss is the audience. I understand what this show is but I've got to connect with my character in order for it to connect for people. What intrigued me was that, in the books, you have someone who ultimately dies on his own in his mid 50's, not necessarily a happy person. I thought 'I wonder how we are going to sow the seeds of who that person becomes'.
How did you find the media interest in the reprisal of such an iconic role?
I was surprised and pleased. You can make films and often they get released on four screens in the UK. Although it's been interesting and good for you, if no one’s seen it, what's the point? I remember I was still doing prep for the pilot and we had to do a photo shoot. I thought ‘great - we have picked the costume, so that’ll be a good opportunity to see what it feels like.’ I was surprised, and pleased, at the interest that shot got [in the following day’s papers]. It was amazing.
We are obviously familiar with the older Morse, but who is the younger man? What are those ‘seeds’ you are sowing?
We have tried to show someone who is slightly out of joint with the world he is in. He does have a talent for this particular line of work but he finds it difficult to get over things from his past and move on. As a result of that he's trapped a lot in his head, which is both a great and terrible thing. A great thing because you have these tiny details of people and crimes and Endeavour has space in his head to ruminate and pay attention to those, which ultimately brings justice to the stories we’ve created. By the same token in his personal life, he finds it difficult to move on in a relationship and suffers with social awkwardness. He's still trying to find his feet. I also think that the flip side to being tenacious is the feeling of being superior and more intelligent than the people around him.
What is it about this man that the public love so much?
With the films that were made with John Thaw, I think that it was a combination of an interesting character played by a very charismatic actor. As a detective, he has that combination of imagination, intellect and curiosity. With our films it's very much still forming. We have to tell a great story and tell it really well. But all the credit is due to Colin Dexter. None of us can take credit for Endeavour Morse apart from Colin. We do our thing but the idea of sitting at your kitchen counter and creating a character - that's really special. He's very pleased and grateful with what we try to bring to Endeavour. That makes me happy.
What's Morse's relationship with Fred Thursday?
It's evolving. It's easy to say it's a father/son relationship but it's more interesting than that. Thursday is somebody whose time and way of working is about to change. If you throw on top of that this guy who hasn't got a relationship with his father, Thursday feels he has something to impart to Endeavour. Thursday sees the potential in him but also that capacity to screw it up. If you're mentoring someone, they are the ones who need slightly more attention - the ones you think can be brilliant if they just stop screwing it up. With brilliance alone, you'll just rise to the top. But if you do need a guiding hand, those more complicated people are definitely more interesting.
What do you enjoy most about the production?
The 1960s setting is very authentic. It's lovely seeing the girls dressed up and the chaps in suits. It's good for a story to have a strong style. The four directors each have their very own take on how it should look and although we've had the same production and costumes designers, each one has had a different spin. It adds something to it. Also Oxford is a very special place - the architecture, the streets, the people walking around.

“What was it that drew you to John Clare as a subject for a book?”
The place was Listowel Writers’ Week this year, the question one I’d been asked before. And the answer was the same. It was the poem I Am which drew me to Clare – that poem packed with the dreams of a man whose dreams had evaporated; that cry for freedom from a man incarcerated in a lunatic asylum; that hope for a future from a man whose hopes were few and far between; that longing for family from a man whose family had long ago disappeared.
Clare is a novel about the English poet John Clare. It’s not biography, though it does have biographical elements. When I began writing it, in the autumn and winter of 1992 I was living in a cottage on the edge of a wood in Co Kildare. I wanted to write the story of a man whose actions had put him beyond the reach of his family and friends and I wanted to tell it through the eyes and words of the women whose lives he had entered and left. So I chose four women – his sister; his wife; his patroness and his daughter – and I allowed them the freedom to tell their versions of his story.
Initially the sections were written on a tape-recorder, spoken as I wandered the woods and fields around the village of Kilkea. I wanted to find these women’s voices and I found them in the fields. Then they were transcribed, edited, polished and put away. Over the months the four stories emerged – sometimes complementary, sometimes contradictory, always true to the vision of the character telling the story. What I ended up with was a documentary – versions of a life. What I was missing was the voice of the character at the centre, the voice of John Clare.
That came in a closing section, an imagined letter written by the poet two weeks before his death in May 1864. Once I had that, I knew I was done with the story. The last voice had echoed and the tale – or all of it that the characters were willing to tell – was told.
The novel was published by Blackstaff in 1993 and very well reviewed. Sales were good, too. And then it disappeared as books so often do. Two years ago my agent, Jonathan Williams, suggested it should be republished and, this year being the 150th anniversary of Clare’s death, we approached New Island, who are also bringing out my new novel in the autumn. Eoin Purcell said yes and here we are.
Of course, I’m delighted to see the book back on the shelves and I was delighted to read it as the Book on One but, most of all, I’m delighted that John Clare is, again, at the centre of some interest. The novel is my homage to a wonderful writer. His poems, however, are the words I most hope to see read and reread.
Clare was a radical – he opposed the enclosure of common lands by landlords; he opposed badger-baiting; he stood for the rights and responsibilities of the small man. He was taken up, used and dropped by the aristocracy who tried to make him what he wasn’t and tried to lure him with money and promises into betraying the things he believed. But Clare never budged. He stood by the things he cherished and his principles were not for sale. In the end, this stand cost him his livelihood and his health but it made him the man who could write poems like I Am.
Clare uses multiple perspectives and first person narratives to reveal the mind of a man who descended into madness in his middle age. The novel deals with the man before and after the beginning of his illness.
Clare is in all good bookshops or available online from New Island here.
(c) John MacKenna
John MacKenna is the author of sixteen books – novels; short-story collections; memoir; biography and poetry. Clare was published by New Island Books in their Irish Classics series and his new novel, Joseph, will be published by New Island this autumn. His next collection of poems will appear in 2015 and he is currently working on a play. Among the awards he has won are the Irish Times Literary Award; the Hennessy Award; the C Day Lewis Award and a Jacobs Award for his radio documentaries on Leonard Cohen.

This Sunday marks one year since the Great East Japan Earthquake happened. This past year has been filled with a lot of sorrow, death and sadness. But it has also been filled with love, hope, faith and humanity. I was caught up in the middle of the event as a full time missionary for the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. It was a traumatic experience that changed my life forever. It changed the life of millions. It changed Japan.
Serving a mission really changed me. It changed me in so many ways. A big thing during my service as a missionary was that earthquake. It gave me perspective that our mortal life is a fragile thing; but also that death is not the end. During the earthquake, I thought that my life was over. Everything was smashing and breaking, sirens were blasting and people were lost and confused. The news just got worse and worse as time went on. It was very hard for me to stay positive during the whole ordeal. All of us missionaries helped each other get through it.
There were many people we met in the street who needed help. We talked with them. They listened to us and we listened to them. We did our best to show love to our fellow man. I was amazed at how much the Japanese people care about each other. They banded together and prayed for each other. I still remember, clear as day, the many people we prayed with in the streets. I am truly moved at how much Japanese people care about each other. I had people come up to me and try to help me as a foreigner. I still get emotional today thinking about this wonderful attribute of the Japanese people.
I would like to share the words from a sister in our mission who was with us at the time of the earthquake. She remarked:
As we ran, the earthquake strengthened, preventing us from moving, and my companion and I clung to a pillar. I felt very scared at the time, but I also felt peace. For some reason, I felt okay.
That peace came to myself as well as thousands of people as the Lord comforted them. It is that peace that gave me reason to keep going when things got very difficult. One of the lowest points in my life is when I was told that I would never be able to return home to Fukushima. That is one of the times I needed that peace the most in my life. I received that peace from my Father in Heaven.
I was also blessed to be able to return to those areas affected by the earthquake and tsunami to participate in the cleanup efforts. It was a blessing to be able to talk to the people that lived there. I was moved out of an affected area and didn't stay, but these people stayed through all of the hardship. I have so much respect and love for these people. I was also blessed to return to Fukushima on my way back to Australia. It was a sacred day where I was able to reunite with many people. We all shed many tears together as we talked with each other about the experiences that we had.
But today as I struggle in coming to grips with everything that came as a consequence of this disaster. I know that I need to look forward. I need to turn to the Lord more in my life. Elder Dallin H. Oaks recently visit Japan and remarked the following:
Let us remember that the kind of tragedy you have just been through is temporary. It is a part of this world. The things that we teach ... are the things of eternity, the things that are not temporary, the things that are everlasting, those things that each of us can count on to be permanent.
ELDER DALLIN H. OAKS (February 2012)
And that is just it. The challenges that we face in life are just temporary, it doesn't mean that they are insignificant or meaningless though. But what we need to see and understand are those things of eternity, those things that surpass death and sadness. We need to see and understand the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Our Saviour knows us perfectly and wants us to become happy like He is. And Christ will help us, whether we know it or not. I KNOW that Jesus is REAL. He LOVES US. Isn't that wonderful?
Lastly, if you can spare the time, please watch this video. It truly is heartwarming to receive something back from Japan.

I can’t beleive I’m writing this. OK, when we were kids my cousin and I used to be really, really close, even though he was 5 years older than me. He taught me how to swim, and ride a bike, etc. When I was 11 my cousin (who was 16) and I played “house,” (you know, him the dad and me the mom), except we took it too far. I let him touch me, and I touched him too. Even though he didn’t force me to I think he took advantage of the situation because he knew I always did what he wanted because I loved him and I didn’t want him to stop paying attention to me. But then I’m not sure if it would still be defined as “abuse” later on, because I was 14 when I ended it, and by then I definetely knew how wrong it was. I think even at 11 I knew it was wrong. He didn’t ever force me, just bribed, so was it still sexual abuse? Or was it at first, and then it became consensual at some point when I knew more? And how unusual is this, and does it mean something’s wrong with me? Sometimes I think there’s something wrong with me when I think back on it. I know it’s bad, but I actually truly thought it was love, or some form of it, at the time. I really need to know if it was abuse or if I’m just abnormal for letting him do it. Either way, might explain the problems I have with boyfriends now. Thanks.
A: What you are describing is abuse. There was a power difference in your relationship and your cousin took advantage of it. He was older and knew what he was doing. He knew he could use bribes and your desire to please him to get you to do something he knew was wrong. At 11, you were just beginning to have any understanding about sex and boundaries. This situation would never be defined as consensual because you were never at the age of consent. Research indicates that sexual assaults of children under the age of 12 are most commonly committed by adolescents who are 14 years of age. Please be assured you are not abnormal. Your trust was violated by someone you looked up to and thought you loved.
Yes. It probably has something to do with current problems. Your introduction to sex and intimacy was shadowed by secrecy, bribes, and the sense that something was wrong. It would not at all be unusual to have some of these same feelings triggered as you try to get intimate with a boyfriend.
I suggest you seek out a mental health therapist to help you with this. You are not crazy. You are troubled. Most therapists know how to treat this kind of situation because many people have similar issues. With some support and practical advice, you can put the events of the past where they belong — in the past — so you can enjoy your present.
I wish you well.
Last reviewed: By John M. Grohol, Psy.D. on 5 May 2012
Hartwell-Walker, D. (2012). Was This Sexual Abuse?. Psych Central. Retrieved on October 21, 2014, from http://psychcentral.com/ask-the-therapist/2012/05/05/was-this-sexual-abuse/

Bio: Hi, my name is Maxwell! My foster Mom says I'm the sweetest little boxer boy she has ever met. I am also extremely handsome and have a super cute underbite. I LOVE to be held and loved on. I didn't get much of that in my former life. You see, Foster Mom rescued me from a shelter. Boy, was I glad to see her!! I was really sick and am still trying to get completely well. I am feeling stronger every day, but Mom says I need to eat more and gain some more weight. I just can't wait to meet you and see if we are a good match!! I would be so happy if I could only find someone to love me forever. I promise I will be a good boy!!

I have been bringing my car to BMR for several years after a recommendation from my son-in-law. I have always been extremely pleased with the service, but there is one particular service adviser that has waited on me several times that never smiles or acts like he is glad to have my business, and never says thank you. This past Thursday I was greeted by George at the Riverside location. He is an excellent representative for BMR! He introduced himself and explained what my service would be and thanked me for my business. You need more advisers like George.

There were two strikes in the count when Zack Greinke gripped his bat, dug in the batter's box and checked his swing. The call was close, so Milwaukee Brewers catcher Martin Maldonado pointed to the first base umpire for an appeal.
So did Greinke.
Typically, a hitter facing a potential third-strike call doesn't like to aid its arrival, but with the way Greinke was pitching, what difference did it make? The appeal did not work in Greinke's favor — he was called out on strikes — but that just meant he could get back to the mound.

- Resource Centers
A 43-year-old man complains to an independent retail pharmacist that the nicotine patches his wife gave him when she stopped smoking 2 months ago are causing his skin to become red and swollen. He stopped smoking 3 days ago when he began using the patches, but he has not used the patches today because of the adverse effects. His cravings, which never were completely eliminated, are now becoming unbearable. If he cannot get relief soon, he states that he is likely to begin smoking again.
The man has a 20-pack-year history of smoking (1 pack/day x 20 years). He tells the pharmacist that he tried to quit another time, about a year ago, and he was successful using the nicotine gum for 3 weeks. The gum became "too expensive," however, and he cut down from using about 8 to 10 pieces per day to using only 1 or 2. The cravings returned, and he started smoking again.
The patient's daughter and granddaughter (age 2) are moving in with him and his wife temporarily, and for that reason his wife recently quit smoking. He wants to quit too, especially for his granddaughter's sake, because he knows how harmful secondhand smoke is. His cravings have become horrible, though.
The man states that he smokes throughout the day, but mostly at the restaurant he owns - and especially when "things go wrong." His wife and other family members support his quit attempt, and neither they nor any of his employees smoke. When asked about behavioral changes, he states that he thought he could "just give up smoking with ease."

I had a great visit in Albany. I spent a lot of time with my kids and my precious grandson, Connor, and my sister Lori and her family are the best hosts ever!
My connection in Chicago was delayed last night and I didn't get back to Vegas until well after midnight. By the time I got home, it was after 1 a.m. and there was no way in hell I was going to feel like hearing my alarm at 5:26, so I emailed work before I went to bed and said I'd be taking a personal day today--yay!
I have a ton of stuff to do. It's amazing how things pile up when you're away for even just a few days. I have lots more to say, but right now I'd better start unpacking.
Welcome back! Good to hear that you made it home safely.
Post a Comment

"It's okay I've got you. These bands are gonna help you float." You mentioned as you held her at arms length. She seemed skeptical and cried more. You sighed and held her to you as you tread water.
"Hey look Daddy and Uncle Tommy are over there" You said pointing to the shore where they had some body boards. Vince sat on a camping chair sunbathing on the bank and Mick stayed behind the trees near where you had sat last night, talking to Lita and Tina.
You watched as Nikki and Tommy swam out to you with their boards. Izzy called for Nikki and grabbed onto him. He sat her on his body board as he wrapped the rope to it around his wrist.
"I've spoke to Tommy about the art of knocking doors" Nikki grinned as Tommy tried to sit on his bodyboard with some difficulty. You laughed watching his long ass limbs flail everywhere as he tried to steady the board under him.
"It's not big enough for you you giant" You laughed but he was determined to sit on it. Izzy laughed as Tommy fell backwards into the water.
"Why don't you guys renew your vows?" Tina asked as you sat with her and Lita, soaking up the sun.
"Cause we've only been married what, four years or so" You laughed as you closed your eyes lying back. "Nobody wants to see a couple get married three times"
"So if he proposed to you again right now what would you say?"
"I'd say stop being crazy and at least wait til we hit 15 years" You mumbled as you watched him and Izzy. "I'm a lucky girl though. Honestly those two are all I could ask for"
"No more?" Tina asked as your hands went instinctively to your abdomen.
"Nah, no more. I'm getting too old. Nikki is fine with Izzy and Gunner" You said with a yawn. "Why you asking all these questions anyway?"
"I like Mick a lot. He doesn't come across as a guy who wants kids or marriage" Tina mumbled.
"Yeah he's already got a son who's pretty old now I believe. I think he's over all that stuff" You said getting comfortable on the towel. "I think if you want all that stuff you are probably barking up the wrong tree with Mick."
"It sucks. I always fall for guys who arent as available as me or guys who are past everything I wanna do" Tina sighed.
"Don't go for guys who are so much older than you" Lita interjected as she rolled over on her towel.
"My rule was always 10 to 15 years older max" You mentioned. "There's a good few years between me and Nikki but it isn't so bad. I've always liked an older guy"
"You remember Jamie? How old was he, like 20 years older than you or something?" Lita chuckled as she brought up your ex hook up.
"Jeez he was. And I was only 20. But he looked like Tom Selleck" You chuckled. "I was very into moustaches."
"He wasn't the only exception to your rule. You told me about that guy, what was his name? Dan, Stan?" Lita said sitting up.
"His name was Dan. I was 19 and he was 30. What can I say experienced men just do it for me" You shrugged.
"If you weren't with Nikki would you get with any of the other guys?" Tina asked and you shook your head.
"No way. Vince is an asshole, Tommy's too immature and Mick is like a dad. No way" You shook your head. "The only guy younger than me I'd date would be"
"Eddie Vedder" Lita finished and you nodded.
"He's on my list too" Tina agreed. "Him and Chris Cornell. Hell put me in that sandwich."
"Amen" You agreed with a smirk. You noticed the shadow come over you as you looked up to see Nikki and Izzy. You squealed as he shook his hair at you like a wet dog. "Nikki! I was dry!"
"Such a god damn pain" You moaned. He leant down and kissed you softly.
"I'm getting a shower and washing the sand off Izzy" He mumbled and you nodded standing up and grabbing your towel.
"See you guys in a little while" You said waving to them as you walked back up to your cabin. You washed Izzy in the shower first as she moaned about having her hair washed. You dried her off and dressed her.
"Mommy and daddy are gonna get a shower, you gonna watch cartoons for a while?" You asked her and she nodded as she rubbed her eyes. You had a feeling she would be asleep in seconds as she sat on the huge bed.
You got in the shower with Nikki and yelped as the water hit your back.
"You've burnt all your shoulders" Nikki scolded you as he poked the red skin. You looked over your shoulder and sighed.
"I put so much lotion on" You grumbled as you washed your hair. It was a pretty small shower but Nikki was still adamant on joining you. Even though he kept wincing as his back touched the cold glass door. You laughed as you tried to switch so he could go under the shower, trying not to slip over as you switched.
"You enjoying yourself?" He asked as he let you massage shampoo into his hair, leaning down so you could reach.
"I am it's been pretty fun so far. No dramas thank god" You mentioned as he moaned as you rubbed his scalp.
"How are you so good at everything?" He groaned again as your fingers massaged his temples.
"I'm not a good drummer, I can't paint and I have bad ice cream choices" You mentioned as he hummed ignoring you.
Nikki and everyone else was sat back outside eating food as they spoke to Allan on the phone about their book idea. He figured because they were all at home doing their own thing now, that they could get it done within the year.
You sat on the floor with Izzy as she helped put some cooling gel on your shoulders. You were getting close to Nikki's birthday. It was only a few months away, you had an idea of what you wanted to get him. But doing it in secret was gonna be difficult.
"I miss the doggy's" Izzy said crying randomly. You frowned and held her close as she sobbed.
"They are okay, we've got Amy looking after them. We'll see them soon" You said holding her tight. "Are you excited to go back to school?"
"No" She said grumpily. "Stay with you and daddy"
"Well we will be busy doing our own work while you're at school" You mentioned and she cried harder. Nikki came over and put Izzy on his shoulders, you watched as he was completely oblivious to your conversation with her and took her down to the lake edge.
"So October's in two months, what you gonna do for it?" Lita asked as she came and sat by you.
"I don't know, I was thinking about Nikki's birthday. I completely forgot about our anniversary" You sighed. "What do you buy a man who owns everything?"
"Well that's easy it's Nikki so..." Lita trailed off as you both sat there in though. She went to say something and huffed. "Yeah no idea."
"I know for his birthday, I can't bring it forward for our anniversary cause I need the time." You mumbled. "Maybe a new camera? He's had that one for like ten years."
"Or a guitar, an old style smoking jacket, rockstars love those" Lita hummed and you shook your head.
"I will figure it out" You mumbled as you sat on the grass. "God I love this place."
"Oh my god I have an idea" Lita said shaking you. "C'mon come with me."
YOU ARE READING
It's 1989, you are in a highly successful all girl, hard rocking metal band. You're touring the world with a number of bands who don't take you seriously. One of them being Motley Crüe. While most of the bands view you as groupies turned femrockers...

About 4 weeks ago, I received a phone call from the principal at the elementary school where I used to work (and where my kids go to school). They needed a title one teacher as soon as possible and she wanted to know if I would be interested. Well, it took me a lot of soul searching and a couple of sleepless nights and I finally decided that at this point, I couldn't take it. I did tell her, however, that I could fill in until they found a replacement (since it was pretty much the same job as I did last year, just new students). I spent three weeks with the kids and had a lot of fun (especially getting to work in my sons class!). Between keeping up with that, kids, home, photography, ect., ect. I didn't have time to keep up with my blog. I felt pretty bad about it at first but have come to the conclusion that I want to finish it, however out of order the days will be! I won't be finishing on Jan. 1, 2012 like I had hoped, but thats ok. My life is busy and I want to continue to document it, even if it gets a little out of order! So, without further ado, here is Day 22.
This is Tanner and Ty with Tanner's good friend from school, Parker. He was so excited to have a friend over to play and when I asked them if I could take their photo, they grudgingly said yes and then the little guy snuck in as well. I have a feeling this will happen a lot in the future, Ty wanting to be 'included' with his big brother and his friends! But, do you notice that he is the only one looking at me?!

Gills - No Jackson bids
Gillingham boss Mark Stimson insists there has been no offer from Leicester for Simeon Jackson.
Last Updated: 15/07/09 11:00am
Gillingham boss Mark Stimson insists there has been no offer from Leicester City for striker Simeon Jackson.
Reports had claimed that Championship side Leicester had lodged a bid of £1.5million for Jackson, who is currently with the Canada squad at the CONCACAF Gold Cup.
However, Stimson has confirmed there have been no enquiries for a player who scored 21 goals en route to the Gills securing promotion to League One last season.
"We've had nothing at all from Leicester, it's just paper talk," said Stimson.
"We don't want to lose our better players, but at the end of the day every player has got his price I suppose.
"No-one has made an enquiry to me and I don't think the chairman has had any phone calls which is pleasing because he's someone who even in these pre-season games would be vital to us because of the way he plays."
Stimson believes the talk will not affect his star forward, who has already helped his country through to the quarter-finals of the Gold Cup.
He added: "I'd be amazed if it went to his head because like I've always said, the kid is a model pro. I don't think it will faze him at all, if anything it will just probably give him another pat on the back and say 'people recognise I'm worth some money' and rightly so.
"I won't mention it to him, I've told him if anyone makes any enquiry he will be the first to know."

Every morning as I would prepare to start my day, I would pop in the Soul Food CD, skip to track 13 and get my mind right. Before the days of iPods and sleek mp3 players, I traveled light, without a cumbersome portable disc player. I would hear these lyrics in the morning and retain them in my consciousness as I traveled to campus via the MARTA train. As I struggled, on a daily basis, to balance all that my life had become Cee Lo’s verse became a fortifying mantra.
One evening, as I was winding down my shift at the restaurant, I was in a quiet back room, rolling silverware into napkins for the next day’s place settings. As I labored through the tedium of completing my required 75 roll ups, I found myself reciting Cee Lo’s verse aloud. I looked up to see that I had been joined by a fellow waiter named Barton. He overheard the lyrics I had just dropped and observed with a tone of heart felt sincerity, “You know, I noticed that you always seem to maintain a positive attitude about life, no matter how much crap we have to put up with in here.”
I replied: “It’s a conscious choice that I make to look at life with a glass half full perspective. There are people in the world much worse off than me. I am blessed.” He and I bonded over that. Two weeks later, I came to work and was greeted with the shocking news that Barton had committed suicide. A co-worker told me that Barton was HIV positive, a disease then lacking a widely available effective treatment. The co-worker also said that after Barton witnessed numerous friends be ravished and die from AIDS, he chose to forgo the suffering and end his life on his terms. “Damn,” I thought to myself,” Could life get any deeper?” I took some comfort in knowing that I had at least shared with him the beauty and power of Cee Lo’s poetic words, for whatever it was worth. I hoped that it had provided some sense of comfort and positive feeling for him in the midst of his turmoil, just as it had inspired me.
On the Home Stretch
By the end of my semester, I was on pins and needles, to say the least. I had heard so many horror stories of other Morehouse brothers reaching this same stage only to be hit with an unforeseen last minute snafu that would derail the dream of walking across the stage on graduation day. I had been careful to be thorough and precise with all of my paperwork procedures as well as busting my hump like never before academically. I had turned in the last of my assignments, completed all of my finals and was now scouring the campus to look at all the final grades that had been posted outside the classrooms. As I checked the very last list I had to take a step back. I was speechless. I PASSED!! I was done, complete!
I would now be able to proudly wear my cap and gown, strut across the stage and receive a simple piece of paper that I had worked so hard for. Having that sense of supreme achievement is one of the most empowering things anyone can experience. I liked it. I still had my job. All was well on the home front and I could now decompress a bit and prepare for graduation day. The hard work had paid off and I was enjoying my victory lap. Then one day I received a call from my dear friend Dara Roach, then a fledgling magazine writer.

DISCLAIMER: I don't own anything to do with Bad Girls.
ARCHIVING: Only with the permission of the author.
Helen ran softly across the massive grassy verge that lay strategically in the midst of the 4 stone buildings that sat facing on another in a large square at the top of the hill.
The late night dew moistened the skin of her feet, which were almost bare in her flimsy, worn out shoes.
A few times she almost fell, her feet slipping away from her as she galloped hurriedly, downwards towards her destination. She warily kept her eyes to the ground, watching her feet dance, one in front of the other, rhythmically, getting nearer safety. But as her concentration centred at her feet her balance was left to its own devices. Before she could stop her self, the once parallel feet began to slide away from her and go in opposite directions, leaving her to fall without a second of comprehension, on to the green stalks with a painful and audible thud.
"Owww!" She cursed herself angrily while rubbing the affected area to ease the pain which was ebbing through her lower torso.
After a moment of soothing rubs, which weren't having the desired effect she decided to quit and get back on her feet, away from the damp ground that was seeping through her clothes, causing her skin to freeze and return to her journey, but that was easier said than done. The wet grass underneath her lacked the grip she needed to regain her stance, her legs like jelly collapsing and skidding away from her as she attempted in vain move.
Her temper was wearing thin as each unsuccessful try ended in more pain than the last. Her hands squelched on the ground as she let out a resigning sign and reluctantly rolled herself over onto her belly. Face down she could smell the unpleasant grassy aroma, mixed with the pungent odour of dampness and cold air. She turned her nose up and took a deep breath. Crawling onto her knees, which she knew would be stained green; she pushed with all her might, like she was preparing to do a hundred push-ups.
As she manoeuvred a sudden noise jolted her to a stand still. Her eyes, which were focused on the floor beneath her moved upwards, slowly and surely, until they met a sight only millimetres away, which made her heart lurch and almost stop immediately.
A pair of feet, rested almost directly under her nose, where the once wet grass had been. She let out a sudden sharp gasp and instantly closed her mouth in fear.
Terrified to move her eyes away from the black leather to see who they belonged to she stiffened. But in her heart she already knew just who it was...those highly polished shoes could only belong to one person.
She felt like she had been punched forcefully in the stomach, leaving no air left in her lungs with which to scream. Her nightmare was about to turn to reality.
"Well, well. Look who we have here. Fancy bumping into you like this...it must be fate! It's good to see you again, Blondie." The man grabbed a chunk of her long, straggly hair and hauled her head backwards so he could see her terrified face, which was contorting in panic and fear.
"Didn't your parents teach you that it's only polite to look at someone when they are talking to you? Oh, no wait. You don't have any parents, do you? That must explain your rude behaviour!" His tone was harsh, and condescending.
"Jim, please. Don't hurt me." Her voice, filled with emotion, pleaded with him, but as usual it fell on deaf ears.
"Hurt you? Hurt you! Oh silly Helen, I'm not gonna hurt you love..." He let her hair go and bent down to her level, his face almost touching hers, and his foul breath made her wish for the equally horrible smell of wet grass to return and mask his aroma.
His words were a mere whisper, but they were so potent, and full of putrid venom as they escaped from his mouth and washed over her, the message loud and clear.
"I'm not gonna hurt you...I'm gonna kill you!"
"F*ck it!" Nikki slammed her fist as hard as she possibly could into the antiquated black, plastic telephone which hung on the cream coloured wall in the hospitals corridor.
"Piece of shit!" She ran her frustrated fingers through her gelled hair and rested her back on the notice board that was filled to capacity with flyers promoting various health issues, and most of them highlighting the dangers of smoking, much to Nikki's disgust. A cigarette was the one thing that right now would have settled her nerves and evened her building temper.
"What's up?" Josh appeared through the main entrance, coming back in from a short break outside to get some fresh air, away from the stale hospital environment which caused him unease.
"Bloody stupid phone swallowed my last pound coin and I was trying to call Helen to let her know I was ok and fill her in on what's happening. I promised her I'd be home hours ago, so she's bound to be worried. She's scared being on her own. You don't have any spare change do you?"
"Hmm, I don't think I do I put the last of it in the coffee machine earlier, which incidentally isn't working either. I tried to get Zandra a white coffee with 2 sugars and instead got some yucky watery soup with huge chunks of some green vegetable mush. It looked like road-kill!" Josh screwed his face up at the memory while he continued to rummage through is pockets for the requested coins his friend so badly needed.
"Ahh, road kill, Heinz's best selling soup!" Even in her turmoil Nikki found room to make a sarcastic comment, which Josh ignored.
"You're in luck! My last 50 Pence " he yanked the silver coin out of the deep set Jean's pocket and handed it over to Nikki, who quickly placed it into the allotted slot in the phone.
"Thanks mate, you're a lifesaver!" Her finger frantically punched in her own dorm room number and she patiently waited with baited breath as it began to ring and ring and ring again, with no answer. After the 5th unanswered ring her stomach began to knot in fear. Why wasn't Helen picking up? Surely if she was home she would answer? Nikki looked worriedly over at Joey as she held on in desperation to hear Helen's voice say "hello?" but it never came.
"No answer, huh?" Nikki shook her head and reluctantly hung up the receiver.
"Maybe she's fallen asleep and hasn't heard it? I wouldn't worry about, Nik, I'm sure she's fine."
"Yeah, you're probably right; she has been pretty tired the last few days, with all she's had to go through." Josh nodded in recognition and patted his friends shoulder as they began to descend down the clinically clean hallway towards Thomas' room, where they had already spent the majority of their sleepless night.
As they neared the door, side by side, Nikki stopped in mid-stride and rooted herself to the floor, unprepared to move any further.
"I have to get back to College, I can't rest until I know Helen's ok. Tom's is in safe hands now, and there's nothing more I can do here he has Zan with him if he wakes up you don't think she'll mind do you?"
"Don't cut yourself up, Helen may need you, Zandra will understand. She would do the same if she were in the same position. Get yourself back to campus." Nikki nodded, knowing Josh was right, but it didn't stop her feeling like a horrible person, who was deserting her friend in his hour of need.
"Do you want me to drop you off in Hackney?"
"No, I'll stay here with Zan for a while, and I'll get a cab back later. I'll drop by your room later, to give you an update. I'll need to get Zan some fresh clothes, and if Thomas wakes up he may want some stuff brought to the hospital."
"Ok, well I'll get off then, and if everything's fine back home I'll grab a quick shower and head straight back over here."
"Everything will be fine!"
"I hope you're right Josh, I really hope you're right!"
Beep. Beep. Beep.
Zandra's red, swollen, tear-stained eyes lay unmoving on her sickly brother, who lay equally as still on his hospital bed, strapped to numerous horrific looking machines that monitored his every bodily function.
A small, sturdy, middle-aged nurse hovered around the tiny room, attaching new drips to his arms with one hand, and sorting his bed to maximise comfort with the other.
Monica didn't take any notice of her, and no words or pleasantries were exchanged, but a slight nod of her head from the member of staff before she exited the room was enough acknowledgment for Zandra, who in her sleep deprived state was in no mood for conversation of any kind.
Not long after the door was closed over it reopened and someone else entered the room, but Zandra didn't bother to look up to see who it was taking her eyes off of Thomas was not option. She almost believed that if she stared at him long and hard enough he would open his eyes and speak to her, instead of laying in silence in his drug induced state.
"Hey" Josh rested his gentle hand on her tense shoulder and positioned himself into the plastic seat next to her. The room was deadly silent, apart from the noises made by the various metal contraptions which echoed around the 4 walls, beeping and banging rhythmically every few seconds.
"Did the Doctor tell you anything while I was gone?" Josh broke the silence with a whisper, but till his voice sounded 10 times louder than he intended it to be. He held his breath, waiting to hear the worst.
"He's going to be fine...the Doctor's expect him to make a full recovery." Josh let out his breath in relief. He felt like jumping up and down in joy, but remained composed, considering this wasn't the time and place to be getting over zealous. As the good news and his happiness began to die down he looked over at Zandra, and her sombre face, which showed no signs of relief or contentment. Instead her eyes shone of sadness and regret.
"Why the long face? You should be feeling over the moon that Thomas is gonna pull through this."
"I am " Josh could sense a "but" coming and he wasn't wrong.
"But I don't understand why he would want to kill himself. Doctor Roberts told me he had taken between 75 and 100 pills this wasn't just a cry for help Josh, Thomas truly wanted to die. He didn't want to be in this world any longer. Things must have been so bad for him he was hurting inside and I didn't even notice." She let out a painful sob, unable to carry on speaking, she fought for composure.
"How could he have been so sad, and I didn't pick up on it. I'm his sister he should have been able to come to me and talk it through, but I've been so busy, so selfish "
Her crying finally took over her whole body, blocking anymore words from leaving her mouth. Instead of trying to stop she resigned and rested her head on Josh's chest. She was desperate to be held, by someone who could take away her own pain the pain that burnt away deep inside of her heart.
Josh was more than willing to comply. Whatever she felt, he felt, and right now his heart felt broken. He wrapped his strong arms around her, while planting a kiss on the crown of her head, all the while cradling her like a babe in arms, rocking her back and worth until she had no more tears to cry.
As the last tear trickled down her cheek she pulled herself away and sat upright, feeling more than embarrassed at her sudden emotional outburst in front of her boyfriend. She hated to deviate away from her usual strong, together persona especially in public. She straightened herself out, starting by flattening down her dishevelled hair and clothes, and wiping away the black streaks of her smudged mascara from her flushed face.
Once she was satisfied that she again looked like the Zandra he had fallen in love with she relaxed and turned to him to offer her thanks but another voice interrupted her before she got the chance to speak.
"Trisha ?" A soft, croaky mumble, which was almost pleading, rang out, causing Josh and Zandra to lock eyes in confusion.
"Thomas!" Zandra spun around in her seat, grabbing Thomas' hand, she squeezed it tightly.
"No, honey, its Zandra "
One single teardrop fell from his closed eyes. As his faculties returned so did the memories of the last 24 hours the worst day of his life.
He wanted Trisha, and only Trisha. No one else could make this nightmare go away except her. He pulled his hand away from his sister, and turned onto his right side his back facing his sister and Josh. He curled himself into a ball and began to cry. Without Trisha life wasn't worth living.
Trisha lay back on the bed, a smile spreading across the length of her face the size of the Grand Canyon. 24 hours ago she thought her life was over, but things had taken a 360 degree turn, and the bad had turned to good. Here she was, lying in bed, her boyfriend, whom she though she had lost beside her, and all her dreams and aspirations had come back with him.
As Sean rose from beneath the covers and began to dress, she watched him longingly. She knew there would have been no way he could have resisted her if she swallowed her pride and asked him to come back. So what, he had cheated on her, didn't all men cheat at one point in a relationship? Isn't that what guys did to get their girlfriends attention when they were bored with a stale relationship? This was Sean's way of telling Trisha he loved her and needed her. Wasn't it?
Her deluded mind ran away with her. She desperately tried to convince herself this was a good thing. He had wanted her to find out about his infidelity, and she had. This was a fresh start, they had a second chance together, and this time she would put her heart and soul into it. This time it had to work out, it just had to!
Sean was her college sweetheart. The man with whom she would have a fairytale wedding, 2 or 3 wonderful children who would make them proud, a huge house in the suburbs where they would live happily ever after just like her parents.
But despite all her positive thoughts, a nagging, sinking feeling still lingered in the pit of her stomach.
"A leopard never changes its spots!" The proverb her Dad so often used rang around in her head, but she shook it off. Sean was the exception to the rule. He would prove everyone wrong, she knew he would. This was a one off. He hadn't told her so, but deep down she knew it was true. It had to be.
The more and more she tried to convince herself the more she began to become paranoid. One half of her brain told her she was being crazy; while the other half pictured her fantasy wedding to the man she loved.
She closed over her eyes, and began to picture it.
Standing in the massive church, her father by her side as she walked slowly down the aisle in her perfect, flowing white dress to the sounds of the "Bridal March", nearing her groom her Dad walked to the left, leaving her to the man of hr dreams, the man she would spend the rest of her life with. She turned to look at him .
her eyes suddenly darted open, a look of shock on her face. As much as she tried to shake it off and come back to reality she couldn't help but focus in on the mental picture. Thomas, standing at the altar looking wonderful in a Tuxedo - not Sean.
"It doesn't mean anything." She thought to herself, unconvinced.
"Or does it?" She shook her head.
"No, Thomas was just a fling, to make myself feel good after losing Sean." As much as she tried to lie to herself it just wasn't working. Still that little bit of doubt lay at the back of her mind.
As Sean continued to dress, Trisha cast her mind back, to that 1 amazing hour she had spent with her friend. From the moment he had become her hero, to her leaving so abruptly, she replayed it over and over. As she did, all the feelings came back. Feelings she had never felt before, certainly not with Sean. Maybe they were feelings of deep friendship? Yet more self lies.
Sean flashed her an insincere smile as he yanked on a sock.
"Where are you going?" She watched as he pulled on his Nike trainers and headed for the door without as much as an explanation for his near disappearing act.
He stopped dead in his tracks, turning a pale shade of crimson. Her question had been an innocent inquiry, but it had seemed to hit a sore spot.
"I have stuff to do! Some business to take care of Jeez! Don't smother me Trisha! This is just typical of you! Where are you going, what are you doing? Who are you doing it with?! Christ!" Sean's temper flared into a red rage as his tirade continued.
"I knew sleeping with you would result in this. Sex, that's all it was. SEX! Your not my God damned Mother. We hang out, have sex and hang out some more. That's all it was, and all it ever will be!"
"What? I think our relationship was more deep and meaningful than hanging out and having sex." She was hurt beyond comprehension. How could he say all those things? Surly he didn't mean it?
"Relationship? Trisha, we never had a relationship. We never did and we never will. I need my freedom. I need to have fun. I'm 20 years old; the last thing I want to be is tied down in some "relationship" with some girl I don't love." He sighed and eased his tone.
"I don't love you Trisha, I'm sorry, but the quicker you realise that, the better." Sean knew he had said some terrible things. But they had been bubbling away inside of him for as long as he could remember, and it had just been a matter of time before it had all come spewing out like this. He felt no guilt, for he meant every word of it.
A sob threatened to break out of her throat, but she caught it in time. Nikki had been right all along. Sean was a complete bastard who had been taking her for a ride.
It was too late to save her dignity, but she was damned if she was going to let him revel in seeing her hurting by his comments.
All this time he had been using her, like his own personal sex toy, she hadn't seen it, blinded by the love she thought she felt for him. But as she looked at his shallow, empty shell standing before her in the doorway the fog that once covered her hazy eyes began to drift away, and for the first time in years she was able to see clearly.
How could she have been so dumb
This wasn't a relationship of love; it was a relationship of convenience Sean's convenience.
Suddenly, like a light bulb going on above her head she realised, that warm feeling she had felt fluttering in her heart while she was with Thomas, that was true love
"Hey, where are you going? Trisha stay, lets talk about this, at least let me explain." Sean tried to block the doorway to prohibit her from leaving, but it was no good.
"Not that it's any of your business, but I'm going to see Thomas I need to tell him I've made a huge mistake."
"Thomas?" Sean let out a confused half-laugh.
"Thomas? Geeky, dinosaur loving, Thomas? This time he almost fell to the floor, his laughter becoming more raucous. His mocking giggles made her anger soar. How could she ever have imagined spending her life with this loser?
"Yes, Thomas!. Sweet, caring, wonderful, Thomas. Who loves me unconditionally, despite my flaws, something you would never be capable of. Now get out of my way, I've wasted enough of my life with you already!" Sean, now silent, warily stepped out of the way. He had never seen Trisha be so passionate before she no longer was the spoiled Daddies girl he had once taken for granted and she was walking away from him. He knew she was gone from his life forever a regret he would have to live with until the day he died.
Trisha walked confidently down the long corridor, heading to her future, never once looking back to her past.
The drive from the hospital back to campus on average would have taken anywhere up to an hour in the congested London traffic, but Nikki had broken all records and made it home in 23 minutes precisely
Her heart was racing as quickly as her car was as she brought it to an abrupt stop at the buildings main entrance. She sprinted outside, almost locking her keys inside, much to her annoyance.
Once the keys were retrieved and the doors safely secured she made a mad dash through the swing doors like a woman possessed.
Part of her wanted to get back to her room as quickly as was humanly possible, but another part of her was terrified to find what awaited her there. What if Helen was hurt? Nikki didn't think she could take much more heartache, and this was driving her to the brink of her sanity.
Her breathing became more laboured as she climbed the three flights of stairs to her floor, but she couldn't allow herself to pause for the much needed air her lungs craved. Something wasn't right, she could feel it in her bones, right down to the pit of her stomach, which was churning with anxiety.
As her dorm room door came into sight her worst fears were confirmed. It lay slightly ajar, and Nikki paused for a brief moment before entering, to hear if there was any noise coming from within but all she could hear was her own deep breaths as Oxygen fought its way back into her system.
Upon entering the room she found it empty, and just the way she had left it a few hours before with the exception of Helen, who clearly was no longer there. There was no sign of a scuffle or forced entry, but this didn't make sense. Helen would never have opened the door, unless she had been sure it was Nikki at the other side.
Had she done another runner?
No she couldn't have. Nothing seemed to be missing so Helen hadn't stolen anything. Nikki scolded herself. Helen had explained why she had taken that money the first night they had met, and Nikki had no reason not to believe her. Helen wasn't a thief, she was just a lost soul who needing saving.
Nikki's eyes rapidly darted around the room in search of any kind of note that Helen may have left, but again she found nothing.
"Where the hell is she!" Frustration turned to anger, and quickly diverted back to an overwhelming sense of sheer terror.
Leaving her door open and unlocked she made her way back down the corridor and down the deserted stairwell, retracing her steps exactly until she was back out in the fresh air and running down the grassy verge, towards Thomas block in the hope Helen would be there waiting for her.
"Please, God, let her have followed me earlier! Please tell me she's safe!"
As her sprint quickened she lost her footing and came tumbling down in almost the exact spot Helen had earlier fallen.
As she crashed to her knees violently her eyes fixed on something lying in the grassy stalks that made her want to vomit. She crawled towards it, praying her eyes were deceiving her, and it wasn't what she thought at all. But as the object came within her reach she knew she was right.
A single shoe. Helen's shoe.
She picked it up and cuddled it to her chest, rocking back and forth on her knees, a sob breaking free from her lips, she heard herself scream as the rain began to pour down from the skies above.
"HELENNNNN!" The blood curdling cry echoed over the campus grounds but no one could hear.
"Get in the bloody car! Defiant little bitch!" Jim grabbed furiously at Helen as she wriggled and screamed, desperately trying to break free from the iron grip he held around her waist as he yanked her towards the tiny boot of Simon's car.
"Jim, you're hurting her." Simon watched on in disbelief as his "friend" punched and kicked this poor feeble girl in front of him.
"Good! I'm not hurting her enough by the looks of it, she's still struggling, bitch has got a death wish. Listen darlin', if you don't get in the fucking car I'm going to make you sorry you were born." Jim was clearly running out of stamina and breath as he hauled Helen's now exhausted body to the back of the car.
"Don't just bloody stand there, help me get her in!" Simon grasped hold of Helen's legs reluctantly and aided Jim in getting her into the trunk before it was closed down on top of her.
"Bleedin' 'ell never took her for a fighter." Jim held his sides as he tried to catch his breath. I'm getting too old for this, he thought to himself, but knew deep down he would never "retire", he got too much satisfaction from seeing defenceless women getting their comeuppance.
Simon walked around him and got into the driver's seat. This was too much for him to get his head around. He had helped Jim out before, but always after Jim had already beaten the girl into death and wrapped up her body, ready to be disposed never before while she was still able to scream and plea for mercy. His blood almost ran cold as he thought of his step-daughter what if it was her in the same position, struggling in the hands of a maniac? He couldn't allow himself to think of it. I have to get out of this, he thought, just as Jim joined him in the passenger seat.
"Where too?" Simon stuttered, trying to keep his hands from shaking on the steering wheel. He didn't want Jim to see he had lost his bottle.
"Anywhere, Christ! Just get off this bloody campus before someone sees us!"
Simon turned the ignition and pulled away from his parked position and began to make his way downhill towards the city, keeping a steady 50mph so as not to look suspicious, and it was a good job he did. A car heading in the opposite direction at record speeds turned the corner towards them, causing him to have to swerve.
"Jesus!" Jim gripped onto his seat for dear life until Simon regained control and steered the car back onto the road.
"Bleedin' women driver's! That stupid cow must be another one with a death wish! Trying to do a 100 miles per hour in a friggin' Ford! Didn't look half bad though I'll maybe see if I can come back up here and recruit her. I don't have sexy, exotic, dark haired woman in my little harem yet. " he laughed to himself and shook his head.
They drove along in silence, with the occasional sound of thumping coming from the back, as Helen pounded the metal of the car with her feet. Jim clenched his fists, and tried to ignore it, knowing full well that if she did it one more time he was going to stop the car, get her out and beat the living daylights out of her for annoying him.
The noise stopped, and Jim let his hands de-tense but just as he did the sounds restarted,
"The docks "
"What?" Simon scrunched up his chubby face.
"Drive the car to the docks."
"But why? I was taking you home. I thought you were only going to give this one a beating to teach her a lesson and put her back on the streets."
"Nah, I've changed my mind. This one needs more than a lesson. She's got my back up once too often. I think instead of putting her back on the game I'm going to test her strength as an Olympic swimmer for starters let's see how she tackles doing lengths in the Thames." His laughter made Simon want to vomit. Jim really was going to do away with Helen after all and there would be nothing he could do about it.
The thunder clapped loudly, and the bright blue streak of lightening flashed through the night sky just above where Nikki lay sobbing, still clutching the shoe that once belonged to Helen. She was soaked through to the skin, her clothes drenched, weighing her down. Her tears mingled with the raindrops that travelled down her weary face.
She was crying for her loss, crying for Helen and what she possibly going through, crying in desperation, because she didn't know where to start looking, or how she could save her fallen angel from the fate that life had so cruelly dished out.
Her mind was a blur of a million questions and dark images running together until things were no longer coherent.
She looked down at the shoe and a single teardrop fell inside. It was then something caught her eye. A plain white label, marked in black ink. "Property of Fenner".
It wasn't much to go on, but it was a start, and it allowed Nikki to put a little bit of hope back in her heart as she raced to her car and made her way back to the hospital to ask Josh for his help. She had to get Helen back to her safe and sound...but did she have enough time?
Nikki held onto Helen's shoe for dear life, terrified to peel her eyes away from the "property of Fenner" label that was glued discreetly inside. Her heart raced as her brain tried to figure out what to do next.
"Fenner?" Was that a common name? Would there be many of them in the phone book, in the Larkhall area?
"Fenner?" She her mind whirled frantically. Why did that name sound so familiar?
It was then that it struck her like a bolt of lightening. Josh! Fenner was the surname of his missing sister's boyfriend.
"Damn it!" She threw the shoe, full force onto the gravelled pathway, in sheer frustration. For a split second she had hoped her jolting of memory would lead her to Helen, but this was just a dead end. If Josh had any idea where this "Fenner" guy lived surely he would have been round there like a shot to bring Denny back. This was hopeless, but she had to try. She needed to get back over to the hospital and find out everything Josh knew about this madman even the tiniest of details could possibly help.
She had to get to Helen before it was too late, because from what Josh had already told her, this nutter Fenner was capable of anything and Helen was in grave danger.
Simon tried to drive as steadily as his shaking hands would allow him. His foot gently eased off of the accelerator, his speed dropping to just under 25mph, as they neared the eerily silent docks by the Thames.
He tried to remain looking as outwardly calm as he could. If Jim saw him panicking he was sure to go off on one, and it wouldn't just be this poor defenceless girl who would be going for swim in London's famous river.
The cold stone buildings enveloped them, blocking out the bright sunshine which was melting the remnants of Christmas snow that lay on the deserted road.
The vehicle slowly came to halt and Simon remained seated, while Jim made a sharp exit, walking around to the boot.
Simon could feel the car shake as the trunk door flew open and Helen, kicking and screaming was dragged from inside, landing with an audacious thud on the solid concrete.
The horrendous sounds of her squealing and whimpering from behind duct tape, which was fastened tightly around her mouth, made Simons blood curdle. She sounded like a poor defenceless animal being tortured and killed, and this was just the beginning of Jim's revenge things were bound to get much worse.
His saddened eyes lowered to his feet. Why couldn't he be more of a man and stand up to Jim? This young woman needed his help, and all he could think about was what the consequences would be if he did aide her. The police would be involved, questions would be asked, and his family would surely suffer. He couldn't help, even if he wanted to he was in too deep to back out.
"Simon, get out here and help me stupid bitch has curled herself into a ball and won't move!"
Simon did exactly as he was told.
"Grab her legs, and I'll get her upper half" Jim forcefully held Helen around her waist as the two men hoisted her into the air.
"Where will we put her?" Simon's face flushed a deep shade of red as his blood pressure rose at a rapid rate. Although Helen was emaciated at fewer than 9 stones he struggled with the weight of her in his arms.
"I told you the river!" Jim pushed towards the flimsy steel barricade, which surrounded the vast estuary, causing Simon to lose his footing and in turn his grip on Helen's legs.
Helen's screaming stopped abruptly as her lower body crashed to the floor, quickly followed by the rest of her. Jim's hands were gone from her waist no longer were his thick, chubby fingers poking roughly into her ribcage.
"I have to get away from here!" fear was too tame a word for how Helen felt at that precise moment. Her whole body contracted, screaming from the inside out for help help she knew would never come, and the one person in the world she needed by her side right now was Nikki, but she didn't even know anything was wrong did she?
Death was almost imminent, it was so close she could almost smell its putrid odour. Others would have lain down and given in, but not Helen. She had to fight, for she had Nikki she had everything to live for now, unlike before. Maybe if she hadn't met Nikki she would have surrendered to Jim a long time ago, but now determination burned a fire inside her.
Helen's fingernails dragged along the stone road beneath her, as she attempted to crawl away into the nearest corner and hide before Jim or Simon saw her, but she was getting nowhere fast. Her body didn't feel like her own it was numb, battered and bruised, and incapable of moving on its own.
Tiny tears of frustration ran down her pale cheeks. It was no good.
"Where do you think you're going!" Helen felt her head spring backwards as her hair was yanked almost from the root. She shook her head, sobbing, unable to answer due to the restrictive tape locked over her lips.
"You just don't ever seem to learn, do you!" Jim's tone was venomous and Helen knew this was the final straw the end. The first kick to her torso confirmed what she suspected and she didn't know how much more her body could take. The fire of determination that was minutes ago burning inside her was now quickly dying, as was she. By the fourth kick her mind was starting to lose consciousness. She fought with all her might to stay awake focusing on the wonderful short time she was able to spend in Nikki's arms and that was the last thought she had before her world went black.
The double automatic doors to the hospitals entrance seemed to take forever to slide apart - much to the annoyance of an extremely impatient Nikki. She huffed and puffed, sighing audibly, causing others around her to stare, while she tried in vein to prise open the doors a bit faster with her bare hands. Her hands pushed on the double-glazed glass as she manoeuvred herself through the slow growing gap and made her way past reception and up onto the first floor, where she paused outside of Thomas' room in the intensive care unit.
She could hear the beeping of the various medical support machines echo around her, and it made her think about all the people around her who were close to death...all of their faces looked just like Helens.
Nikis stomach lurched. Was Helen in critical danger and near death? God, how she hoped she was only being pessimistic and this wasnt some strange premonition...she shook the thought away. Helen had to be alive, for she was all Nikki had to live for...she had to remain positive, for if Helen didn't have the energy to fight back, then she would have to do all the fighting for her.
Her hand rested on the cold metal handle, and with the little remaining strengh she had she pushed the door wide open.
"Nikki...why are you back here so soon..." Josh seemed shocked to see his friend back after having been gone less than an hour.
"Josh, I really need to speak to you...alone." Josh didnt hesitate. The panic was etched across Nikki's face. Something ws wrong...very wrong. Nikki never lost her composure...unless..."God, she was right..Helen...something happened to her after all!" Josh felt an uneasy feeling settle upon him. Helen was the missing link between him and his sister, Denny...and if something bad had happened to Helen...he didnt dare think about it.
"Nik, whats wrong, whats happened to Helen?" Josh closed the door over behind him so Zandra couldnt hear.
"It's that bastard, the one who's been prostituting her...he's got her Josh! He's taken her away from me again!" Sobs racked at Nikkis body, the realisation of the severity of the situation hit her head on, like a tonne of bricks dropping from a great height.
"I've only had her in my life for one night, and already I know I want to spend the rest of my life with her. I can't live without her, Josh...what if...what if she's..." More tears fell freely and Josh bundled her up in his arms.
"She was so scared of him...the night we met, she was covered in bruises....she's so fragile, and tiny, if he had to beat her again I dont think she would be able to take."
"Do you know anything about this guy?" Nikki wiped the back of her hand over her eyes to dry them and removed Helen's shoe from the inside pocket of her denim jacket.
"It say's "Property of Fenner" inside...i was hoping you would know more about him than I do?"
"Fenner! That's him Nikki...thats the guy that took Denny away from us! Jim Fenner. I don't know anything other than his name...and his face...that face I would never forget! He worked for my dad's restuarant down by the Thames for a while, managing it..." Josh gave a sarcastic chuckle.
"Although all he was interested in was the penniless waitresses and how best he could exploit them. My dad fired him afer he caught him getting his leg over with one of them in the wine celler one night...Shell Dockley I'm sure her name was. She resigned the same night, no doubt going to work for her new so-called boyfriend, and taking my sister with them" Nikki couldnt help but feel sorry for her friend, his sad eye's telling more of a story than his words ever could. Both of them had lost someone they loved, and all because of one man. She pondered their loses for a second before it finally dawned on her...
"Your Dad would have an address for Fenner, if he worked for him, surely?" Josh though for a moment and shrugged his shoulders.
"There's only one way to find out"
Helen felt the blackness envelope her as she drifted drunkenly in and out of consciousness. She could hear voices in the near distance, and could barely make out what was being said. her limp and lifeless body lay on the rough pebbled concrete, strewn out like a disgarded ragdoll.
"Jim, you've killed her...what the hell are we going to do! We have a dead body on our hands...you can't just chuck her in the Thames, she'll float, someone will find her, see the bruises and know she was beaten to death and that it wasn't a suicide!" Simons words were panicked. His brain was in overdrive. How could he possibly think straight when all he could envision was life-imprisonment in a confined cell.
"Shut it will you! I cant bloody think when you rabbit on like a fucking parrot!" Jim rung his hands nervously, almost wishing he hadn't lost his temper.
"We have to dispose of her somehow! At least in the River it'll be a while before anyone finds her. If we leave her lying here its gonna be worse for us."
"What if someone's saw us!" The sweat dripped down Simon's face fromhis damp forehead, the stress of the situation was getting to him. He felt like he would have a massive coronary at any minute.
"There's only that restuarant on the corner, and it's empty! Anyway, lets just say the owner owes me a favour...he won't be grassing me up in a hurry." Jim couldnt stifle his laughter.
"Jim, this isn't funny! We are looking at 20 years for murder...lets just get the hell out of here. Simon raced to the driver side of the car, desperate to make a quick get away.
"No, wait...look...that skip over there behind the restuarant. Let's just shove her in that, no ones gonna find her there...she'll be incinerated before anyone even realises shes missing." Simon nodded enthusiastically, for the first time feeling like he might just get away with this after all.
Both men took an end of Helen and carried her towards the bright yellow container. The stood back a little and began to swing her, like a bin bag getting thrown out to the garbage. Gaining enough power they let go, and she landed inside with a gut wrenching thud that echoed aroun the stone walls. All in a day's work...Jim wiped his hands down the front of his trousers and didnt bother to look back as he got in the car and drove home without a care in the world. Why worry? He was invinsable after all...wasnt he?
Nikki's car came to a screeching halt directly outside the front doors of Cafe Salsa...a tiny Mexican eatery that was kept going with it's regular diners who frequented the place for its friendly service laid-back atmosphere and most importantly, fabulous food.
"Follow me..." Josh led the way through a back door, into the kitchens, nodding politely as he passed, to a kitchen porter who was emptying the evening's rubbish into a skip in time for the last disposale pick-up of the night.
Hurrying through the sweltering hot kitchens, where chefs toiled over their pots, and into the office, where Josh's Dad sat patiently going over the books in his semi-lit sanctuary. Adam Mitchell looked up over the glasses that rested at the end of his nose as he heard the dor creak open.
"Josh? What are you doing here tonight?" He rested his pen down on the table, giving his full attention to his son.
"Is this Zandra?" A smile crept up on his face.
"No, Dad, this is my friend Nikki...look we need to ask you something. Jim Fenner...do you have an address for him?" Josh prayed his dad would give an affirmative, but instead he watched as he shook his head instead. His heart sank and Nikki dropped into a leather chair in the corner, completely deflated...this was her last hope and it had just been dashed. She would just have to accept that Helen was gone forever, and the chances of her being found alive were slim to say the least. She had lost the other half of her soul and she would never be complete without her.
Christmas Eve 1994
Tiny droplets of snow drifted slowly down from the clouds, taking their time cascading onto the white, crisp London streets below.
Church bells rang out in the background as thousands of late night shoppers ran around, carrying handfuls of bags, making last minute preparations for Christmas. Men dressed as Santa stood in doorways collecting money for charity, ringing bells and singing carols.
There was a festive feeling in the air, mixed with joy, excitement and anxiety. Everyone looked so happy. Couples sauntered past holding hands, mothers dragging their children kicking and screaming away from toy shop windows, families watching the carol singers belt out well known Christmas songs, all huddling closely together to retain the heat that the weather was so quick to take away.
But just a few feet away a teenage girl sat curled underneath a torn and tattered blanket, not fit for an animal. She shivered and wrapped the grey blanket tighter around her body as she watched the crowds amble happily by the alleyway that she called home. No one took notice that she was there, but she liked it that way. No one to take pity on her. She hated people feeling sorry for her, especially at times like this, when everyone was so joyous.
She turned her head away from the street on her right, and rested it on the cold, damp wall behind her. She looked up into the sky and watched the flakes of snowfall onto her face, melting as they touched her skin and running down the sides of her face as they turned to water.
Winter was always hard to cope with. Freezing temperatures, torrents of rain, sleet and snow and no warm place to seek shelter. All she had for comfort was her trusty bed sheet and the clothes she had left home with that day she ran away. Neither had been washed in years, but she didn't notice the dirt and grime after a while. It had become part of her, who she was. Her "friends" didn't care either. They were just as filthy. But the fact they were lovely people made up for their personal hygiene, to her at least.
Other people weren't so forgiving of the unfortunates that lived in the boxes in her alley. She had been spit on, called names, laughed at, ignored and beaten. But worst of all were the people who just starred. She never knew what they were thinking, but she knew it wasn't good. The expressions on their faces said it all. Pity. Shame. Sorrow. If only once in a while someone had smiled. But no one ever did. It was always the same gaunt look of disgrace and embarrassment.
She looked down at her hands, which were now a shade of bluish white, tinged with purple, sadness in her eyes. Every Christmas she prayed to heaven that someone would invite her to join their family for the holidays. She longed to get a present. Not for the gift itself, but for the excitement of unwrapping it and finding out what was underneath all the bright coloured paper, bows and ribbons. But in her 4 years on the streets it had never happened, and wasn't likely to either.
She sighed and slid her body down the wall. Curling herself into a ball, she positioned her body so it was lying on an opened out cardboard box. Her head rested on a little mound of snow that had built up on her usual resting place, over night.
She closed her eyes and thought back to last Christmas Eve. Things had gone down hill from then. If only I hadn't said yes, she sobbed as she played the last 12 months over in her head.
She was disgusted with herself, and only one person made it all better. But she was gone. Or was she?
Holiday time was here again, and with no home to go to, Nikki wandered around the streets of London aimlessly, lost in a trance she was a shadow of her former self. Her weight had dropped dramatically, leaving her with a skeletal-like appearance that shocked people upon sight. Her friends had given up begging her to eat months ago, for it did no good, she simply wouldn't listen. What reason was there to stay healthy for? None whatsoever.
After that fatefully day when Helen had so crudely been taken away from her, life as she had known it had slipped further and further away from her. Her studies had been affected, as were her friendships as she slipped into a hermit-like cocoon, shutting the world away and all the pains that tore her heart in two.
It was almost a year to the day since Nikki had stumbled upon Helen in a back alleyway, tricked by her friends. But the joke had been on them. What they deemed a hilarious prank had turned her life around and had shown her that the shining light of love truly existed in the cold, dark reality she had once locked herself away in. But that reality was back. There was no more Helen, and there was no more love. Only a black, gapping void, that had sucked her in like a wormhole, clutching agonisingly at her heart until it felt like it no longer beat.
The air was bitter against her skin, chilling it to the bone, but she failed to notice as she strode by the black rusted handrail encasing the banks of the Thames.
Her friends had all gone home for the 2 week break from college, back to their families, the warmth, the love, the hugs, the presents. All Nikki had was herself and her own dark thoughts. Just how easy would it be to jump, she wondered as she watched the calm waves of the London river ebb and flow 30ft below her. All her pain and misery would be gone, and Helen would be waiting for her at the proverbial "pearly gates".
After all this time Nikki realised Helen could no longer be alive. Jim would never have allowed it Helen had once told her as much. The fear in her eyes when his name was mentioned was a sight that Nikki had etched forever in her memory. Those eyes, the way they sparkled that mouth, the way it curled into a smile. Never would she see them again, only in her mind and that would never be enough.
Her fingernails dug painfully into the palms of her hands as she gripped onto the screams of sheer heartbreak that threatened to break free from the deepest recesses of her soul. Leaning on the handrail she let her knees buckles and her body sink to the ground, and like she were praying her head tilted to look at the grey sky, her hands clutched to her chest.
"Why?" She asked in a whisper that mixed with her sobs.
"Why?" This time her question was a rhetorical scream. No one was going to answer.
"Why, God, Why? Why do you always take the beautiful ones first? Was it to punish her for what she had done in her life? Or was it because you wanted her for yourself, you selfish bastard. She didn't deserve to die she was loved I loved her and you took her away from me." she stood up slowly, sobs shaking her entire being.
"YOU TOOK HER AWAY FROM ME!" Her screams stopped a few passers-by in their tracks. They stared at her in wonder, before walking on, their heads shaking in pity. She was just another lost soul, knocked down by the horrors that life had dealt, and there was no map to find the correct path back .that road she would have to find alone.
Tearing herself away, Nikki made her way towards the near empty streets of Covent Garden, her head down and her eyes focused on the icy walkways that glistened under the streetlights. Digging in her pockets for change as she approached the underground station she winced as her numb hands rubbed roughly against the hard fabric of her jeans. The coins danced around in her first as she desperately tried to keep them there, but failed miserably.
"Shit!" She cursed audibly as a £1 coin began its descent along the pavement, twisting and turning as it picked up speed on the slight hill the road stood on. Running after it she manoeuvred along until her foot positioned onto of the tiny piece of metal stopping it in its tracks, but not before she lost her footing and slid, landing on her backside with an almighty bump.
The bones in her bottom seemed to take the brunt of the accident followed by a shooting pain in her lower back that almost had her crying out in agony as she rubbed it furiously to try and alleviate the dull ache. But as she did so something caught her eye. A small person, lying sleeping under a shabby blanket, their body shaking from the cold. No longer did she feel the pain that coursed through her, instead all her thoughts turned back to Helen. This is how she had once lived; on the streets with no more than a thin sheet to retain the heat in the winter months.
Looking down at the £2 in her hands, the money for her journey home, she knew what she had to do.
"Here, you get a coffee, and I'll walk home." Resting the money into the dainty hand that lay over the blanket, the only part of the persons body that was visible, Nikki crept away from the alley so as not to wake the sleeping girl. But under the sheet she stirred. Her dreams were fading away, and the bitter reality was again hitting her full force as she abruptly awoke.
Someone had placed something in her hand, but what? Lifting her arm inside the holey blanket she opened her fist and held back tears as she watched the gold coins shimmer .a present from a generous stranger the only present she would receive this Christmas.
Sitting up quickly to thank whoever had left the money she felt her heart leap into her mouth as she caught sight of the woman's retreating back. It couldn't be could it? With a gasp she dropped the coins to the ground and her hand flew to her mouth.
It was Nikki.
Sky is wide; trees are burnt,
Been a while since you stood here,
You feel cold, so alone,
Yet the wind whispers 'hello' and it blows,
When it blows
'Fallen angel, with shattered dreams,
Trying to make some sense of all you've seen,
Let it go, let it go, troubled soul,
Let it go, let it go '
Wounded spirit, troubled soul,
Fallen angel, let it all go,
Just believe and you will see,
All the good things your life can be
"Fallen Angel" - Gabrielle
"Nikki?" Her word was merely a whisper that rode with the wind, but Nikki heard it loud and clear. That sultry voice, with an unmistakable Scottish lilt to it.
Fear prevented her from turning around. If this wasn't Helen she couldn't cope. Her hopes and dreams had been dashed one too many times in the search for the woman she loved with all her heart, and she didn't think she could take any more heartbreak than that that was cruelly dealt to her by the hands of fate.
The tender touch on her arm brought tears to her eyes. This had to be a dream, Helen was dead and buried a distant yet painful memory.
"Nikki?" Helen let her hand glide smoothly across Nikki's as they rested at her side, fists clenched in obvious tension. The olive skin was cold to the touch, but felt exactly like it had done all those months before. The memory of Nikki cupping her cheek gently and with so much love flooded back to Helen in a wave of unrepentant emotion. Nikki was the one thing that had happened in her life that wasn't shameful or wrong how could it be when it felt oh so right.
"Nikki? Look at me." The thought of seeing those chocolate brown eyes boring into her own once again sent shivers down Helen's spine in anticipation. The look of love that Nikki had shown her with a deep stare had once made her feel like the only person in the world who mattered, and how she ached to be loved like that again.
Nikki didn't turn right away. Instead she stood, her eyes focused on a tall Victorian building, and her mind adrift in a whir of emotions. If this really was Helen standing behind her no, it couldn't be. How many times in the last year had her hopes been heightened, only for them to be quickly dashed. Helen had been on every street corner, in every shop, in all her dreams, but never was she really there until now.
Shifting her feet slowly she turned around, to be met with a sight that took her breath away. A smile that would have brightened up the darkest room played on the ever familiar lips that she had once longed to kiss.
"I've missed you, Nikki." the words were merely a whisper, but the power behind them was strong Nikki felt her heart constrict.
Tears rolled the length of her face as her hands lifted towards Helen's face. She had to feel her, touch her, make sure she was real and not just a figment of her imagination like she had been so many times in the past year. Her fingers grazed tenderly across the slightly tainted skin, and it was then she knew this was no ghost conjured by her haunted mind.
"I thought you were dead," Nikki's fingers continued their journey, into Helen's hair and down towards the back of her neck, where she held on for dear life, afraid that Helen would disappear if she didn't.
"I was, Nikki. The day I was torn away from you was the day I stopped living. I never thought I'd see you again. I thought I was being punished for all the terrible things I've done " Helen's voice cracked and tears threatened to fall from her tired eyes, but she found herself hypnotised as the dark haired females face got closer to her own. She could feel the warm breath flow across her cheeks as they stood in silence, their eyes fixed in a look that could never be described solely by words.
"Helen, no one is going to punish you for anything. The things that have happened to you were forced upon you, you didn't choose them and I promise, I will never let anything bad happen to you again." Inching closer she placed her lips tenderly upon Helens mouth, in a kiss that was tender and aching with love. But as Helen hesitantly opened her mouth to respond Nikki pulled back leaving her confused, hurt and somewhat self-conscious. She knew how she looked and smelt. A year living back on the streets had turned her into a shadow of her former self, the Helen that Nikki had once loved was no longer standing here. Instead she was a woman who people turned there noses up at, sneered at and generally ignored, while they tossed a measly 10 pence coin her way. But Nikki was different. She saw the real Helen. Not the Helen who had once had everything and lost it, but the Helen who had so much love inside herself to give the girl who through sheer determination fought to survive.
"I'm not going to push you, not after everything you've been through let's take it slowly." Helen hesitated at Nikki's words, unsure if it was a polite brush off, until the contours of Nikki's mouth began to curl into a genuine smile that she could not doubt.
"Yeah, dead slow." The words seemed to huskily flow from the back of Helen's throat, sultrily luring Nikki into a hypnotic state of carnal desire that made it hard to breathe.
Without hesitation this time both woman locked eyes, quickly followed by their lips. All agreement to take things slowly were conveniently forgotten as their tongues danced together with a passion that could have melted the ice beneath their feet. They needed each other desperately; to touch, taste, smell, feel to merge together as one one heart, one soul.
Aware that time was ticking by and the sun was beginning to set Nikki reluctantly broke the spell both had fallen under. Looking at her watch she realised she had less than 20 minutes to catch the last underground train home, but she couldn't leave not without Helen.
"Come back to Campus with me .please " Nikki freely let the tears fall from her eyes as she pleaded with Helen.
"Nikki, I ." Helen shook her head in protest.
"Please Helen, I can't let us be apart again not like this. This is shit "
"Shit happens, Nikki "
"No, no it doesn't, not if you want something bad enough and believe me Helen, I want you badly."
Helen let her gaze fall away from where it was rooted on Nikki's face. She couldn't look at her, with her face contorted in tears and heartbreak. How could she look into those wet puppy dog eyes and deny Nikki what she was asking. How could she tell the only person she had ever loved that it felt too soon; that living in squalor was all she had ever known and that it terrified her to think of starting afresh in an environment that was alien to her.
What if it all went wrong? What if the love they felt for each other faded and she had got used to home comforts, only to end up back on the streets with no one to take care of her.
"I'm so sorry Nikki " Helen picked up her blanket from the ground and started to walk away, tears streaming her face as she heard Nikki shout in protest behind her.
"I've never believed in destiny Helen, but don't you see something brought us together again today, something stronger than we can fight. Don't run away from it, Helen please don't deny us the future we could have." Out of breath and energy Nikki fell silent and could only watch as Helen moved further away from her into the distance until she could no longer see where she had gone.
She stayed like that, watching the now empty space where Helen had been, for longer than she had anticipated. He body felt numb and it was nothing to do with the freezing temperatures. She had just let her soul mate walk away and hadn't tried to stop her. She knew why, but it didn't make her feel any better. The last thing Helen needed was another person being forceful with her, and trying to make up her mind for her. Helen was an adult big enough and ugly enough to make her own decisions. If walking away was what she wanted then how could Nikki deny her that. Fate had brought them together on more than one occasion, and if they were truly meant to be, it would do so again. At least this time she knew Helen was alive and well.
"Shit " Glancing at her watch for the second time Nikki realised she had less that 2 minutes to catch her train if she wanted to be home on time for Christmas.
Running carefully through the deserted, icy streets of London, she sprinted towards her destination, praying she would make it on time. There was no way she was spending the night out on the streets baring the elements.
Thoroughly ashamed she chastised herself for thinking that way. Helen had had to do it every night for the last year and had never once had she heard her complain about it, or ask for pity. Helen had only shown a courage and determination that had to be admired. Nikki knew she would never have been able to endure what Helen had been through, despite her own personal strength.
Coming within inches of the station door she could only sigh as an older gentleman dressed in the standard London Underground uniform began to close over the solid silver grating that acted as a barrier, preventing anyone from entering or exiting.
Banging her body against it, her hands grabbed at the steel bars and her eyes pleaded with the stranger on the other side.
"Please let me in, I really need to get home tonight."
"Sorry love, the last train's long gone. You'll have to wait and catch the next one in the morning."
"And what time is the first train?" Anger was rapidly rising in her.
"8am I'm afraid darlin' look's like you'll have to get a cab."
"I can't afford a bloody cab! Do you know how much those fucking charlatans charge on Christmas Eve!"
"Maybe Santa will take pity on you and pick you up on his sleigh at Midnight." The man gave a light chuckle, but Nikki didn't join in. Instead she gave him a look that almost sent him running back to the comfort of his office.
"Bastard! You think this is funny a female, stuck in central London, in the middle of bloody winter, with a million drunken louts ready to take advantage! If I don't get raped then I'll freeze to bloody death!" the man scurried off shaking his head at the young lunatic who was having a go at him as though it was his fault she had missed her connection home.
Nikki didn't let his disappearance stop her ranting. Instead she carried on, like a woman possessed .until she felt something slip into her hand and she ended her tirade to look at what it was.
"You can share my blanket I wont let you freeze to death."
"Helen!" Nikki couldn't believe her eyes as she turned to see Helen standing behind her, shivering uncontrollably.
"I love you Nikki, and you're right we should never be apart."
"Oh Helen," Nikki scooped the smaller woman into her arms and hugged her for dear life.
"I want to come back and live with you forever."
Nikki could only nod in response. The lump at the back of her throat was blocking the words she dearly wanted to say but couldn't.
Wrapping the worn out blanket around them both they sat on the pavement with their backs against the wall, huddled together in each others arms watching a new batch of snow drift slowly down around them. The bells of Big Ben chimed signalling midnight. It was Christmas day the day their new life would start and the past could all be forgotten.
Yesterday she had been a fallen angel, but today she had found her wings and was about to take flight with Nikki by her side.
It was the best Christmas present she could ever have wished for.
Return to Bad Girls Fiction
Return to Main Page

Chapter 1 : Teeth
| ||Rating: Mature||Chapter Reviews: 6|
Background: Font color:
Scorpius wrapped his arms tightly around Rose’s waist. Rose clenched Albus’ wrist in her small hand. The three young adults stared out the witch who was scraping desperately against the window with bloody fingernails, as if she was trying to scratch through the glass. The witch was in her thirties, and had been beautiful once. Now her hair was matted with dirt and blood. She was missing several teeth, and her eyes were mad with fear.
A spot of dried blood was gathered at the right corner of her lips.
“Don’t let her in; she just wants to eat us.” Rose turned around and moved away from the window. She let her body slump over into one of the pub’s familiar, squashy chairs. It was funny, in a way – she’d been here dozens of times with friends and on dates with Scorpius, and in all that time she’d never once imagined there would come a day when she would see The Three Broomsticks in such a state.
The pub was completely empty, and most of the chairs and tables were overturned. Rose could imagine the scene that had transpired here when the first wave of Inferi had hit Hogsmeade. People screaming running shooting spells trying to shield their loved ones but there were too many they came crawling and stumbling and limping in…
And now those people were all gone, all dead.
Rose put her elbows on the table in front of her, and rested her face in her hands. She heard the soft sound of fabric on fabric as Scorpius drew the curtains around the window, so that they wouldn’t have to look at the wretch outside. When they had arrived in Hogsmeade they had found this place the most fit to live in, so they had settled in with their handful of belongings, casting every protective charm they knew on the place.
Albus sat down next to Rose and covered one of her freckled hands with one of his.
The wave of Inferi had surged through Hogsmeade and Hogwarts and continued to spread throughout the country. Hordes of them were situated all over Britain, in caves and forests and abandoned shopping malls. Many of those who had escaped the initial uprising had been killed because they had accidentally stumbled in on one of these hordes. And the Inferi had only been the beginning – since that first wave, all sorts of dark forces of nature had gradually begun to claim the country as their own.
Scorpius sat down on Rose’s other side and took her other hand after setting down three bottles of Butterbeer on the table. Outside, the woman’s pleas were growing into screams. Maybe something was coming for her.
Rose extricated herself from Albus’ and Scorpius’ hands, and opened herself a Butterbeer. “I s’pose it’d be a bit heartless to cast a Muffliato charm on her.”
“It’ll be over, soon,” said Scorpius in a voice that sounded grey somehow. His pale, pointed face was blurred with tiredness, and his golden hair was overgrown – it fell in waves past his chin.
Albus’ hair was getting long, too, observed Rose, and she supposed that hers was as well. Horror had given them all the same symptoms – unruly hair, tattered clothing, and dark bruises under their eyes. Rose resolved to cut everyone’s hair the next day. That had been one of her duties – they had all taken on different ones without having to discuss them. Somehow, they all just knew what they had to do to survive as a group. Rose cut hair and healed small wounds and lit fires. Scorpius took care of food and found them each a suitable place to sleep. Albus kept track of the days, and patrolled the radio stations, searching for any sign of life.
He had the little radio out now and was fiddling with the dial, but coming up only with static. Under normal circumstances, the noise would have annoyed Rose – but she didn’t mind it at the moment, as it was helping to drown out the woman’s mounting screams. The screams were not only growing louder but were losing the shape of words and becoming meaningless animal sounds. Rose thought she heard something growling, and tried not to think about what was happening outside. Maybe a werewolf maybe something worse with large teeth a wide jaw growling dead-eyed tearing through flesh…
Rose reached into the pocket of her new robes. She’d nicked them – along with a new set for Scorpius and Albus – from a shop down the street as they had passed by. Stealing didn’t really count as stealing anymore. There was no one left to steal from. Anyway, if the owner was still out there somewhere, Rose was sure that he or she would have wanted them to have the robes. Money didn’t matter anymore, either.
The robes were dark green and very soft. They were the first one Rose had seen when she had darted into the shop. Rose’s fingers searched through the soft lined pocket of the robes until they found what they had been searching for.
It was a small toy car that was missing a wheel. Rose’s fingers caressed the car’s tiny doors and windshield. She turned it over again and again in the palm of her hand.
The woman’s screams grew louder and louder until they reached their peak – one bloodcurdling, high-pitched wail. Rose squeezed the little car tightly in her pocket. Scorpius closed his eyes. Albus turned up the volume on the radio, bending over it in concentration. Then the screams slowly ebbed away into sobs, then finally into silence.
They sat in silence for a long time.
“It’s probably more dangerous around here than in the countryside, because the Dark Forest’s so close,” said Scorpius.
Albus nodded, giving up on the radio.
“Do you think anyone’s at Hogwarts?” said Rose, taking the car out of her pocket and rolling it back and forth over the surface of the table.
“Thought you’d thrown that thing away,” said Scorpius with a frown, eyeing the car.
“I like it,” said Rose. “So? Do you think there’s anyone in the castle?”
“Hard to say.” said Albus, scratching his head. “I guess we’ll find out tomorrow.”
“If I know Hagrid, he’s probably stuck it out in his hut this entire time,” said Rose with a hollow laugh.
“Nah,” said Albus. “I remember dad telling me he went into hiding in the mountains back during the war. ‘Probably doing the same thing now, with that dumb old dog of his.”
Rose smiled, remembering that drooling, pathetic old dog.
“What about Professor Longbottom?” said Scorpius, grinning. “I’ll bet those greenhouses could fend off any monster.”
“But he’d have gone looking for his family,” said Rose. “He’s got two little kids.”
“Yeah,” agreed Albus. “But what d’you think happened to the House-Elves? It’d be great to get back to the castle and have a nice hot meal waiting.”
“They probably got out right away,” said Scorpius. “They can Apparate out of Hogwarts. Who knows where they went, though.”
The conversation went on in that vein for a while – it was, in many ways, the same conversation that they and other huddled groups of people all over the country had been having for months. Of course, it was impossible to know who had survived or what was happening in any other part of the country. Your family, your friends – any of them could be dead, and you wouldn’t know. There was no way to know, and the not knowing started to drive you insane at times, and speculating like this was the only way to keep your head.
It was a hell of a lot easier to sit around like this, joking about people you barely knew and imagining how they might have survived, than to accept the fact that all the people you loved were probably dead.
Rose tried not to think about the others, but she dreamed about them all the time. She dreamed about them dead.
Sometimes they would pop into her head in the most ordinary ways, as if nothing had happened. Once when she was walking down an abandoned row of Muggle shops she had spotted a bracelet in a shop window. It was a silver bracelet inlaid with little blue and lavender stones like mosaic tiles, and Rose had caught herself slowing down to get a closer look at it through the shattered window of the shop, thinking that it was exactly the sort of thing Dominique would wear.
Then there had been that day in autumn when they had been walking down a street that was framed by bright orange and yellow trees, just walking down the middle of the street right along the dotted white line between the two neat rows of abandoned cars, and Rose had seen a flash of red on the ground. It was sitting on the street beside the back wheel of a square white car that must have belonged to a large family. All of the car’s doors were opened and Rose could see two small children’s car-seats in the back, and lying on the street by the wheel was the little red toy car. It was lying on its back, helplessly, with its wheels in the air. Rose had stooped over and picked it up, imagining the little boy who owned it. In her mind, he looked just like Hugo – probably because Hugo had had a little toy car like this a long time ago, though his had been a bit different because it flew. It was the first thing he had ever bought for himself, and looking at the car made Rose remember that day in Weasley’s Wizard Wheezes when he had marched up to counter with the proudest smile she had ever seen. Before she knew it, Rose was crying in the middle of the abandoned street, and Albus and Scorpius and Molly – Molly had still been alive then – were all around her with their hands on her back.
“There’s a flat upstairs,” Scorpius said. Albus must have asked him about the sleeping arrangements for the night. “Two beds - Rose and I can share one.”
Rose emerged from the shower, naked and dripping wet. She dried off and slipped between the bedsheets of the flat owner’s plain, white bed. Scorpius, who had already showered, took her into his arms so that they were in their usual spooning position. He pressed his lips into her wet hair, fingers touching every inch of her skin that they could reach.
It was like this every night.
Rose could remember a time – just under a year ago – when she would have loved the chance to sleep with Scorpius every night, when she would have craved the feeling of his touch and even responded to his kisses. Things were different now.
She was fairly certain that she still loved Scorpius.
She loved him, and she knew that he needed her to keep his grip on reality. All of them were slowly losing themselves to the chaos of the world. Eventually they would be lost – they would be animals like that poor woman today, creatures of desperation, preying on other humans, maybe even preying on each other.
Scorpius was on top of her and was kissing her passionately. With every kiss and every touch, Rose was saving Scorpius from insanity. She was saving him.
But who would save her?
Some days she could feel herself slipping away – like her mind was trying to escape her body because it couldn’t take this life anymore, it couldn’t take the madness and the terror and the despair. Sometimes it happened when a pack of Dementors drifted by their hiding place. Sometimes it happened when they broke into a house to stay the night in, and were greeted by the smell of its decaying inhabitants. Sometimes it happened when Scorpius tenderly caressed her body, looking soulfully into her eyes, like he was now, and she realized that in a day’s time he might be dead.
When Scorpius was finished he fell asleep quickly. Rose wondered what he dreamed about – probably some paradise world where his mother and father hadn’t hanged themselves in the privacy of Malfoy Manor.
Rose had trouble getting to sleep because she hated sleeping – it was the only thing more terrifying than being awake. She closed her eyes and tried to think of something mundane, like a recipe from her old Potions textbook.
She couldn’t wait to get to Hogwarts. Maybe Hugo would be there, waiting for her with a big grin. She could give him the toy car.
Maybe her whole family would be there, and Teddy, too. They could stay in the castle forever and Rose could read all the books in the library.
She was walking through the bookshelf-lined hallways of the Hogwarts library and it was dark and she was carrying a candlestick. She couldn’t see them but she knew that Scorpius and Albus were behind her they were searching searching searching blindly through the castle.
The candlestick dripped hot wax onto her fingers but Rose did not let go.
A voice called out her name and she began to sprint through the hallways taking sharp twists and turns and the voice kept calling and finally she came to a stop. Victoire Weasley was lying on the floor and her sweet blond head was a mess of blood and tattered flesh and her eyes were dark bloody holes in her head.
The light from the candlestick grew fainter and the droplets of wax grew thicker but Rose did not let go.
Another voice was calling out her name now and she was running down rows and rows of books and finally skidding to a stop in front of Hugo. He was turned around not facing her and then she said his name and he turned so slowly that he seemed to be still even as he moved and when she saw his face it was empty and white and he was only a shell a corn husk.
The light grew fainter and the droplets thicker but Rose did not let go.
She backed away from Hugo knowing that he was gone and turned around and Scorpius and Albus were still behind her, but their faces were strange with yellow eyes and wide open mouths that stretched from ear to ear exposing rows and rows of jagged red teeth. Rose screamed and they staggered toward her with hissing sounds and she knew that they would kill her and the light was so faint that she could only see their yellow eyes and the wax was burning her hand and so she dropped the candlestick and ran and ran and fell and then there was nothing but teeth.
Rose woke up in the dark.
Scorpius was lying face-down on the bed, fast asleep. She could hear Albus’ snoring from the next room. His brother always used to tease him about his snoring, Rose remembered vaguely. Then again, James used to find any excuse to tease Albus.
Rose smiled, and then she began to cry. She allowed herself to sob into the pillow for five minutes or so. Then she got up and made tea in the dark, still thinking of teeth.
Other Similar Stories
by Toujours ...
by Magical Ginny
I Feel Pretty

Chapter 23 : Brooding
| ||Rating: Mature||Chapter Reviews: 11|
Background: Font color:
A/N: As always, enjoy and please review. :)
Rowan was unusually quiet once she had returned to the Common Room after Regulus' departure. She declined to hang out with the gang who was grouped around the fireplace chatting and playing Exploding Snap. Sirius looked over her curiously but she didn't say anything and big them good night. Remus stared at the back of her, concerned, and turned to James.
"Something is off," he said.
"Maybe she's just exhausted. You know she doesn't sleep properly,"
"That's cos she can't sleep properly," Sirius corrected defending her.
"Whatever. C'mon it's the end of term, she's prolli just feeling herself about to crash finally."
"You're the most insensitive prick I've ever had the pleasure of being mates with," Remus scowled.
"You love me anyways!" was James' cheerful reply.
"I'm going to go check on her," Remus decided getting up.
"And pray tell me how are you going to do that?" James asked referring to the rule that barred the boys from climbing the Boys Staircase.
"Gonna borrow someone's broom or have Lily or Marlene levitate me," he promptly replied.
"I'll levitate you up there," Marlene offered.
"Thanks!" Remus smiled at her and her eyes twinkled at him. He suddenly felt quite bashful. It was a good thing he was going to check up on Rowan!
Rowan yanked on a pair of worn out boxers and crawled into bed. She felt that today has been a very, very long day and for the first time in a while, she really didn't want to stay up the whole night all by herself.
She couldn't understand why she was feeling so girly right now. She felt as if she was going to cry and she had no idea why. This was all over Regulus Black apparently, god.
She stared broodingly up at the canopy ceiling and slid further down her bed enjoying the feeling of soft flannel of one of her blankets against her bare legs. She had always loved the feeling.
They weren't really mates. They were more of acquaintances. Never in her short life had she ever envisioned that she would ever befriend a Slytherin, much less Sirius' little brother.
This was like Lily being best friends with Snape for the longest time until he called her a mudblood in their fifth year. James and Sirius had been giving Snape a particularly hard time and Lily had tried to stop them but Snape was in no mood to get help from her then. The word had come out of his mouth like a bomb.
Lily hadn't shown it at that moment, but later in the dorm room Rowan had come across Lily sobbing and Rowan didn't understand then why it hurt her so much, not the fact that he called her a bad name, but for the fact that their friendship was effectively, over. Things had changed between them forever.
Lily had never talked about Snape since then nor did she ever talk to him again. But once in a while Rowan had caught Lily looking at Snape once or twice when she thought was no one looking when they were in the library or in the mutual classes they shared.
She wondered if Lily ever thought about him or missed him. She wondered if Lily would ever consider reaching out to him and trying to repair their friendship.
But perhaps, sometimes things became so irreparably damaged they couldn't be fixed, she thought sadly as she turned on her side.
Talk about a good way to start the holidays, she thought ruefully shutting her eyes.
The door creaked open and Rowan heard a voice call out her name softly, she turned and peeked over her Remus.
"Hey Remy," she smiled wanly at him.
"Hi Ro. Are you alright? You look…sad." Remus said hesitantly approaching her bed.
She scooted over and made some room for him to sit down. Remus studied her and waited for her to say something.
Rowan was quiet for another moment or two. "I just…it makes me sad how things can change do quickly," she finally said.
Remus understood that she wasn't going to go into specifics but that he would just listen to her. "Yeah, change can be hard."
"Do you ever wish things were different Remus? I wish…I wish we lived in a world where for the most part, we could get along."
"Don't we all? Isn't that what those damn hippies out in America are always singing about? World peace?"
Rowan chuckled at this. "Yeah. They are. But really. I just. I wish that…being friends with people is hard Remus." She sighed.
Remus raised an eyebrow. He wasn't sure what she was talking about but for some reason his mind immediately strayed over to the fact that he had an idea that Padfoot had a thing for her. He wondered idly if she fancied him too.
"Yeah it is. Especially when you feel more than friendship for them," Remus carefully replied.
"But I don't feel anything for him!" Rowan blurted out frustrated.
"No one?" Whoops.
"Rowan do you fancy someone?" Remus asked shrewdly.
"No! I told you lot, I'm not interested in anyone," Rowan said loudly.
"Do you like Sirius?"
"What? NO!" Rowan exclaimed tugging the bed covers higher over her causing Remus to topple over.
"Ooof! Hey!" he exclaimed from the floor.
"Sorry mate. What in the world would you give you the crazy idea that I like Sirius?" Rowan asked. This conversation had taken a turn for the bizarre.
"Nothing. You were talking about friends and how it was hard to be friends with people. I don't know!"
"Remus did you inhale too many fumes in potions today? Sheesh. First Lily and Marlene were getting on my case about going to this bloody dance with him, and now you're asking me if I like him. Jeez! What is with it and Sirius? Just saying his name apparently is a big deal." Rowan huffed.
"Well, it is him. He's Sirius love. He just has this effect…on everyone I think. Plus, well, don't bite my head off, but I think for some of us, we've always kind of paired you off together in some bizarro way." Remus said tripping over his words at the end.
Rowan raised an eyebrow. "Why on earth would you think that?"
"Well! Lily and James were always written down at some point, I've always had a thing for Marlene and well, there's Peter."
"So? Peter is perfectly nice."
"Really Rowan? Would you go out with him?" Remus asked flatly.
"SEE! And well, that leaves Sirius," Remus finished.
"Big deal. Remember, I did date someone who was not in our circle of mates! And Sirius has gone out with loads of girls who aren't mates with us!"
"Yeah but that's the point. For some ridiculous reason, I always somehow envisioned you together."
"Remus the only way that's gonna happen is in a post apocalyptic universe. Or if we die and meet each other in hell." Rowan snorted.
"Fine. You say that now. But for the record, Sirius is a great bloke and you'd be lucky to date him." Remus said defensively. He suddenly felt very protective of his roommate.
Rowan laughed. "Remus, I know! That's why I wouldn't bother going after him. I'd just muck things up between us and hurt him. He doesn't deserve that. He deserves some nice girl who can take care of him and all that jazz. I can barely take care of myself. He needs someone really special."
Someone like you you git! Remus mentally shouted at her. But he kept quiet.
"Yeah, someone super duper special." Remus agreed.
"Like a special edition of a girl! Yeah, limited only, custom made only for him special kind of girl for him." Rowan decided.
Remus snorted. Now this was just getting absurd.
"Well I'm gonna go back to others. I just wanted to see if you were all right." Remus said getting up.
"I'm ok. Thanks for checking up on me, love ya," Rowan replied closing her eyes.
"Love you too you crazy little girl," Remus answered shutting the door behind him.
Remus slid down the banister of the staircase. Okay, just because he was a prefect didn't mean he didn't like to have fun. He was a seventeen-year-old boy for crying out loud. He hopped off and saw that everyone more or less was where he had left them.
"Is she okay?" Sirius asked looking up at him.
Remus looked at him and suddenly felt sad. James had told him that he had a strong feeling that Sirius fancied Rowan a lot more than he let on about recently and Remus was beginning to agree with him.
And apparently, the said girl didn't even see him or even think about seeing him like that at all. In any way.
"Yeah. She's fine. Tired." Remus replied.
"See! Told ya!" James said triumphantly.
"Yeah Prongs, you sure did," Remus said absently his mind a million kilometres away.
Saturday poked its grey head out and the sun smiled weakly on the students in its attempt to make December less dreary.
That also meant that tonight was the Winter Formal.
Regulus glared up at the ceiling of his canopy. He wished he didn't have to go to this formal at all.
She was going with his brother.
Of all the goddamn people in the school, she was going with him.
His lips turned up in a deep scowl that marred his delicate features.
What really bothered him was the fact that he was bothered about the fact that she was going with his brother. He felt this anger he had in him was irrational.
She was perfectly free to go around with whomever she liked, he thought irritably. She wasn't his girlfriend. She wasn't really even his friend goddamnit.
But she meant something to him. He didn't know why.
Why, did this girl, of all the people, have to matter to him? Why did he always try to move his housemates away from talking about her or trying to make her life miserable?
Snape was beginning to think he had something for her, something that Regulus flatly denied.
He didn't like her! He just wanted to be proper mates with her. But the only way that would ever happen was if they were living in a parallel universe or if they ended up in hell.
But if he was there in hell, that also meant his brother would be there too, which meant he still wouldn't get to be Rowan's friend.
Sheesh. He couldn't even win in hell.
Regulus swore and stomped flat-footed towards the showers. It was 11 in the morning and all he wanted to do was rip someone head off.
Actually, he wanted to traipse right up to her and give her a good shouting and give her a piece of his mind.
It's you! You're the person whose turned my world upside down and messed everything up! His mind shouted as he scrubbed himself with a ferocity that turned his olive skin red.
Snape looked at him curiously when Regulus threw himself into a seat for lunch.
"Woke up on the wrong side of the bed mate? You look like you're going to kill someone."
"I'm going to kill you," Regulus shortly said helping him to lunch.
"Oh good. That way I'll get out of going to this blasted formal."
"No problem. Now I just have to find a painless way to kill myself to get out of going with this and we're set."
"Stun yourself, stand in front of a mirror and have it rebound on you," Snape suggested tucking his tongue in his cheek.
"That sounds really tempting Snape…I might just do that,"
"But at least you have a hot date," Snape pointed out referring to Tanya Forbes who indeed was quite lovely.
"Looks aren't everything Snape,"
"But admit it, they do make up for some things,"
"Like not having a brain."
"Nope. I'd rather go out with a plain looking girl who was smart than a mindless good looking bimbo." Regulus said stoutly.
Snape looked at him. He shrugged. "What?"
"You're an odd duck."
Snape let this conversation dropped and stared at out at the Great Hall. He spotted the flaming red hair of the girl he once used to be friends with and his eyes hardened.
She was with him. Potter. Snape's mouth curled into frown.
And she was laughing.
If looks could kill, James Potter would be dead as a doornail right now. Snape couldn't decide whether he despised Lily for going out with him enough that it somehow enveloped the deep rooted fondness he had for her.
Nope. He could never hate her. He did however, think she was unbelievably stupid for going out with the arrogant prat. His thin mouth curled in a frown.
"Stop staring. People will notice," Regulus said quietly. Snape snapped out of his trance and glared at his mate.
"What are you taking about?"
"You think I don't know Snape? I do. I know. But stop making it so obvious."
Snape muttered something but didn't disagree with what he was saying.
"Snape." Regulus asked a little lower.
"What?" he mumbled.
"You still miss her don't you?"
Snape didn't reply. Regulus took this answer for a yes. "It doesn't really matter anymore. We're on different paths in this life and I've got better things to do than brood over some girl that isn't even worth it," Snape answered curtly. He rustled the newspaper and buried his nose in it. Regulus rolled his eyes.
See the thing was, Rowan, in all of her ferocious, strange and eccentric glory, was definitely worth brooding about.
Couldn't live with them, couldn't live without them.
At six p.m. the Lily and Marlene pried Rowan away from her books and whatever new spell she was working on and locked her in their dorm to get ready for the dance. Both Marlene and Lily were giddily excited. Rowan looked amusedly at them as they twittered about. They were so funny.
"Someone help me curl my hair!" Lily cried out studying her locks.
Rowan rolled her eyes. "Lily your hair is nice straight."
"No I want to look special tonight. It's our last winter formal!"
"Oh man everything we do here is our last everything at this place!" Rowan flopped back on her bed.
"Here, this spell will work, Rowan get your skinny little butt up and get dressed."
"It's only a quarter past six!" Rowan protested.
Marlene lifted her wand and Rowan felt herself being shoved off the bed. "Oi!"
"Fine fine fine. See if you get any Christmas presents from me," Rowan grumbled sauntering towards the bathroom.
At a quarter past seven the girls were finally ready. After various slight make up mishaps and some alarming hair curling spellwork that had gone slightly wrong leaving Lily with hair standing upright two feet tall (Rowan had finally stepped in and righted it and now Lily's hair was fine, curling softly about her shoulders) they were primed and polished. Even Rowan was, which, she declared was all time accomplishment for her.
"Seriously I don't think I've ever been this dolled up you lot," Rowan grumbled twisting around. She had done some serious modifications to the dress she had purchased.
"But you look so good! Seriously, you rock formal wear. You ought to model for it." Marlene exclaimed.
"Too short and not enough bust," Rowan replied.
"Oh. But seriously, you look incredible. Why you choose to stomp around in band t shirts and wacky clothing is beyond me."
"Dressing in black or donning rainbow socks isn't wacky clothing." Rowan defended.
"You'd look good in blue," Lily said critically studying her friend.
"Yeah yeah yeah, that's what they all say, all right. Let's get this thing over with." Rowan huffed wrenching the doorknob open.
Downstairs the boys were complaining amongst themselves about the evils of dress shoes and suits. Sirius tugged uncomfortably at his tie. He still couldn't tie one properly for the life of him.
"Seriously they ought to invent a charm for these blasted things," Sirius scowled.
"Perhaps Rowan could," Peter offered.
"Knowing her she probably would," Sirius agreed.
"Would do what?" a voice called out.
A/N: I would really love if you reviewed! Remember, don't hesitate to let me know of any scene ideas, conversations you'd like to see happen or who you'd like to see more of. xoxoxo
Other Similar Stories
All The Chan...
Along Came S...
The Only Girl

Shortly before midnight on Saturday, 5th November 1910, P.C Greenwood had barely made his way into an area in Carlisle known as West Walls, when, after checking on individual premises, he came across an unlocked warehouse door at number 15.
As the area was well known for beggars and vagabonds who would use the narrow street when passing through the City, it seemed odd that someone would leave the doors to their business unlocked and at the mercy of those passing through.
Out of curiosity, P.C. Greenwood turned on his lamp before opening the door, and as he crept inside the building his attention was quickly brought to the sight of a body lying close to the bottom of some stairs directly in front of him.
And upon making his way over, it was clearly obvious to the police constable that something truly horrific had occurred as not only was blood smeared on the walls, the body at the foot of the stairs was lying slumped over on its right hand side and covered in blood.
The constable continued to search the premises, going into every room. After being satisfied that there was nobody else in the building, he was about to leave when he came across an axe that had been placed on top of a box. Upon closer inspection, he noticed what looked like human hair which had adhered itself to the blood that covered most of the axe.
Immediately, the constable left the building and quickly summoned for assistance in the form of Chief Constable George Hill who immediately proceeded to the scene of the murder.
Alexander Norval, who was 75 years of age, was a well-known and seemingly well liked character within Carlisle. Residing in nearby Great Corby, he had for many years carried on with a successful business as a currier (meaning someone who transforms tanned hide into a supple leather needed by other craftsmen).
The building he owned at number 15, West Walls was just one of three storeys which were all connected by wooden stairs. The building also overlooked the nearby railway line directly opposite it.
Norval was a wealthy man by all accounts and had owned a considerable amount of property in Carlisle and the surrounding neighbourhood.
Married to his wife Alison for 54 years, together they had seven children – William, Margaret, Davina, Graselda, Alex, Archibald and Janet, but it is Archibald with whom our story will perhaps be of the most important.
When P.C. Greenwood entered number 15 West Walls, it’s probably correct to assume that the last thing in his mind would be the finding of the body of an old man, whose head had been battered beyond comprehension and who had by all accounts been lying in cold blood for several hours before being found.
Meanwhile, P.C. Forster had made his way to number 53 Sheffield Street – the home of his son, Archibald Norval, and informing him that his father had been found dead.
Archibald, in an distressed tone shouted; “Oh, my poor dad, my poor dad!”
After getting dressed, as Archibald had been disturbed from his sleep, he took the keys of the workshop and accompanied P.C. Forster to the local police station where Inspector Turnbull was waiting.
Upon his arrival, and although it appeared that he had been drinking at some point late the previous evening, he was crying when Inspector Turnbull went through the events of the discovery of his father’s body in the workshop.
After a short while, both Archibald and Inspector Turnbull made their way to number 15 West Walls.
On the way, Archibald kept saying; “Poor old dad, he was very hard, but a good dad to me.”
Inspector Turnbull spoke to Archibald, asking him if he would like the body of his father removed to his house or to the mortuary to which he replied; “To the mortuary. I have not convenience at home.”
When they arrived at the warehouse, Archibald lit a gas lamp that was situated immediately behind the front door and then proceeded to the other end of the warehouse where he lit another lamp.
It was here he noticed the axe, saying; “That axe ought not to be there, it is kept upstairs. We use it for breaking coke.”
The axe was lying on a leather apron on top of a barrel, covered in blood stains and as already mentioned, with strands of hair that were matted in blood.
Archibald took hold of the axe, inspecting it for a few seconds before placing it back down
His attention was then brought to his father’s body which was lying on his right side with his feet towards the foot of the stairs, the left foot crossing the right. At the foot of the stairs where his false teeth and a hand-bag, which contained an empty glass bottle, some biscuits and some cheese.
His father’s head and face was covered in blood, with his head also lying in a pool of blood.
There where also sprinklings of blood on the bottom of the stairs and on the wall nearby.
A cap worn by his father was lying at the bottom of the stairs.
“When did you see him last?” asked Inspector Turnbull.
Archibald replied; “I left him at ten minutes past one. He was alright then.”
“And, would he have any money on him?”
“Yes, he would have a purse and about £4.” replied Archibald.
Archibald then searched his father’s body, removing a pocket-book from a coat pocket. It contained a quantity of papers. He then took a watch out of another pocket and, seeing it was all right, put it back.
Searching the trousers of his father, he said; “There is no money.”
Along with P.C. Greenwood, Archibald and Inspector Turnbull went upstairs and searched around, but finding nothing of importance and nothing being disturbed, Inspector Turnbull left Archibald with P.C. Greenwood, leaving the warehouse to go and fetch Dr. Hall.
Just before 3am, Dr. Hall, who was accompanied by Dr. Lediard arrived at the scene and after making one of two examinations, both were of the opinion that Alexander Norval’s death was due to the injuries to his head. The wounds would require considerable force and they could have been inflicted by the axe found on the premises. They also agreed that the wounds could not have been caused by falling downstairs.
Throughout the morning, many police officers had arrived at the warehouse and public interest had meant many people had made their way to the scene purely out of morbid fascination.
At around quarter to ten, and inside the warehouse, Detective-Inspector Pattinson had made a thorough examination, confirming what other witnesses had said.
Police-constable Rawson, who accompanied Detective-Inspector Pattinson, gave similar evidence.
Whilst an examination of the warehouse was taking place, it seems that the police had come across some information that had given them cause to concentrate on Archibald Norval and as to his whereabouts on the Saturday before and after the murder of his father, Alexander.
And it wouldn’t take them long as, at around 10:40am that morning, Detective-Inspector Pattinson, would arrest and charge Archibald with willful murder, to which Archibald muttered under his breath, “Umph!”
On Monday, 7th November, Archibald was brought before the magistrates at the Town Hall and whilst the hearing was relatively short, the police would ask the Archibald be put on remand for a week so to give them ample time to make further enquiries.
The following morning, Mr. H. B. Lonsdale, Coroner for the City of Carlisle opened an inquest on the body of Alexander Norval.
Evidence of identification would be made by his son-in-law, Mr. A. Campbell Brown.
The Coroner, in opening the inquest, said Norval came from the Scottish side of the border, but he had lived for many years in Carlisle and the neighbourhood.
He would also tell the jury that inquiries had not yet been completed, but Alexander Norval seemed to have been the victim of a brutal attack by someone with a blunt instrument, and wounds found on his head were no doubt the cause of his death.
Information would also be given, saying how Alexander Norval was in the habit of going home on Saturday afternoons, but on this occasion he did not arrive home and was instead found dead in his warehouse.
Finally, and in a macabre sense of the word, the doctors who had made a post-mortem examination of the body had cut off the head and put it in spirits of wine for preservation.
The following week, and on Monday 14th November, Archibald Norval was brought up at the Carlisle Police Station and charged with the murder of his father, Alexander Norval.
The Chief Constable again applied for a remand for another week, which was granted, despite strong opposition from Archibald’s defence team.
Mr. F. W. Halton, defending, said he objected most strongly to a remand, particularly if there was no evidence given to justify a remand.
Archibald had been in custody for a week and there was so far before the Court not a single oath or statement given in evidence connecting him with the murder of his father.
Halton would go on to say that this was a serious matter, which affected the liberty of the Archibald, and no man should be detained in custody for any length of time without sound evidence being given to show he was in some way connected with the crime.
However, his objections, after a short delay, would not be granted.
On Monday, 21st November, Archibald Norval would again appear in the police-court.
As his name was read out by Chief Constable, Mr. G. Hill; Archibald, dressed in a black topcoat with silk lapels and a black tie, walked into court and made his way to the dock.
Whilst in a deep silence, Mr. Pearce for the prosecution, began to outline for the first time in public the details in which they would attempt to connect Archibald with the murder of his father.
The would talk of Archibald as being the only person employed by Alexander Norval at the time of his death, and he was earning a wage of around 30s per week.
Mr. Pearce would tell the court that whilst Alexander Norval was a man of extreme frugality, his son Archibald was of a different proposition.
He would also go on to say that there was no indication that the crime was committed for robbery and instead, was committed by a person more intimately connected to Alexander.
As for the motive being robbery, Alexander was found with a watch in his pocket and there was no indication that any of his pockets had been rifled. The police would also state that there was no indication of anything having been disturbed for any purpose of robbery.
As for Archibald’s movements on the day of the murder, he would admit that he was with his father within the warehouse as late as 1:10pm on the Saturday afternoon. He then left the building, expecting his father to soon follow, as he would normally be expected to catch the 1:50pm train to his Country home in Great Corby.
The police, by now had been building a picture of Archibald’s whereabouts and where convinced he was the last man to have seen his father alive.
Police-Sergeant Seaton remarked on seeing Archibald outside of the warehouse between twelve and one o’clock on the day of the murder. He spoke to him, but Archibald snubbed him, just giving a grunt, and it was apparent he was annoyed by something or someone.
Police officials were adamant that the murder took place by 1:30pm and that Archibald was seen running from the warehouse and along Calder Bridge, between 1:20pm and 1:30pm by a witness named Peter Kelly.
Kelly didn’t think anything unusual in Archibald’s appearance as he knew he liked to back horses and had assumed he was running to get his money on as the first race that day was at 1:30pm.
“What’s up?” remarked Kelly, but Archibald just ran past him, mumbling something to himself.
After leaving the warehouse, Archibald made his way to the Spinners’ Arms, a public-house owned by George Boak. He ordered a glass of whisky, which he drank quickly, and then went away.
In the course of the afternoon, he changed his clothing and visited a number of other public-houses in Carlisle and during the evening he was seen coming away from the direction of the warehouse.
A currier named Hodgson Brown, who had worked alongside Alexander Norval, would tell the jury of when in June the previous year, Archibald had left his father’s business for four or five days in consequence of a dispute over money matters.
He would tell them that he had sometimes heard them both having strong words, but it was always over in a minute or two. But every now and then, Alexander would threaten to close the business for good.
William Jefferson, landlord of the Black Bull Inn, stated that Archibald came into his premises at around 7:55pm and another witness came forwards saying that they had seen Archibald at around 8:35pm apparently coming from the direction of the warehouse on the West Walls. Prosecuting, Mr. Pearce, asked if he (Archibald) could give an explanation of being in close proximity at that time of night or was it in order to open the door so that the murder might be discovered which in fact, did happen.
Archibald would again be formally remanded for another week, with the understanding that a special date for the resumed hearing would in the meantime be fixed.
On Monday, 5th December, Archibald was again, and for the final time, brought up on remand.
Dr. Willcox, analytical expert at the Home Office, was the main witness called by the prosecution. He stated that he had examined the working clothes of the prisoner, and had found several bloodstains upon the front of the waistcoat, and one on the shirt sleeve, also bloodstains on the cap belonging to Alexander Norval.
The position of the stains were consistent with the theory of the prosecution that they had been the result of an attack made upon Alexander by a man with an axe.
In cross-examination, Dr. Willcox said he could not give the age of the bloodstains, nor say whether they were stains of human blood. He also stated that if a man had cut his finger and held his finger up sufficiently long enough, the blood causing the stains would have come from that finger.
Archibald would say to the jury that in the process of his work as a currier, there had been times he had indeed cut his fingers and had wiped off the blood onto his clothing as well as an apron.
The inquest wouldn’t take long and after examining all of the evidence, the magistrates would commit Archibald to take his trial at the Assizes in January, 1911.
After two days’ trial, at the Cumberland assizes on Saturday, 29th January 1911, Archibald Norval was found NOT guilty of the murder of his father and was acquitted with all charges against him being dropped.
He would enter the witness box and deny that he committed the murder, giving a long account of his movements that day.
Interestingly, he would give an account of an incident that had taken part eighteen months prior when, after travelling to Glasgow on business, he forged his father’s name on a cheque. His father forgave him and lent him money with which to carry on a betting business.
Details would also emerge that Archibald, besides assisting his father in the warehouse, he carried on a sideline as a bookmaker and a bookmaker of the worst type.
He took money from people on street corners, but no sooner had he taken their money, he had lost it just as quickly!
In summing up, Mr. Justice Grantham said the prosecution had, in his opinion, failed to prove the prisoners guilt, though grave suspicion was cast on him because of the time at which the murder was committed. The blood stains found on Archibald’s shirt and apron were not enough to convict him either.
Mr. Justice Grantham would also go on to say that if there was no motive for murder, there was cause for ill-will between Archibald and his father over the recent forgery of the cheque and subsequent embezzling over two or three months of his father’s money.
Archibald Norval left the court and was afterwards escorted home by a cheering crowd.
So what happened next?
Archibald, after being found not guilty of the murder of his father would carry on life as normal. However, his name would soon be in the newspapers again when he would try to sue the Stanwix Bowling Club he had been a member of for many years, after, it seems, they removed his name from their member list – basically expelling him from the club.
This would have been of a huge shock to him as he had won multiple trophies with them but it if we are to read between the lines, it was clearly obvious they did not want to be associated with someone who had been charged with murder, even if he was found not guilty in a court of law.
Which now brings me to question a few of the things I’ve already spoken about.
What seem’s strange in this case is that the police were very quick to charge Archibald with the murder of his father. After initially informing him of the crime and after visiting the warehouse were the murder took place, they charged him just a few hours later, at around 10:40am.
What information did they receive that pretty much convinced them that Archibald was the perpatrator of the crime?
Was it because of the ill-feeling his father had towards him eighteen months prior and because of the scandal involving the cheque he forged in his fathers name? Was it because witnesses had seen him running away from the direction of the warehouse shortly after one o’clock in the afternoon?
But the most puzzling aspect of this case is that the police never followed up any other clues as to who else the murderer could be if not Archibald.
Some reports suggested that the crime was more than likely committed by a tramp who was making his way along West Walls when either entering or leaving the city, but this then makes it an opportunist crime at best.
Did a tramp really come across the unhatched door at 15 West Walls, somehow make his way up the stairs undetected, pick up the axe and then go back downstairs, hide under them and then attacked Alexander when he was least expecting it? It does seem highly unlikely. And if this WAS the case, then why wasn’t his possessions taken? Yes, Archibald stated that his father was carrying some money and that it was now gone, but what I find strange is that he seems to know roughly, exactly how much he was carrying on the day of the murder. Why would he know this? It just seems a strange thing to know.
The police themselves even stated in court that nothing seemed to have been disturbed which would again seem strange as, if we are led to believe a tramp had committed the murder, then surely he would have rummaged through the warehouse looking for valuables to possible sell on?
Also, the blood on Archibald’s clothing. Again, why wasn’t this questioned in more detail? His simple answer to having cut his fingers whilst in the process of work and rubbing them on his shirt and apron seems to have been accepted as fact and yet we know that he changed his clothes on more than one occasion during the evening of the attack on his father. What was he hiding? Had he tried to destroy evidence?
At the end of the day, the murder of Alexander Norval has been left unsolved for over 111 years and it will never be solved, thats something we can safely say.
.. there was no indication that the crime was committed for robbery and instead, was committed by a person more intimately connected to Alexander.
Was Alexander visited by someone he knew? A friend possibly? After all, Mr. Pearce did say in court that there was no indication that the crime was committed for robbery and instead, was committed by a person more intimately connected to Alexander.
So, questions do remain over Archibald’s involvement and looking over the facts of the case, you do have to ask yourself, was Archibald the real killer?
I’d be interested to know your thoughts on this one.
Sources used in this story;
Daily Mirror – Monday 30 January 1911
Lancashire Evening Post – Monday 14 November 1910
Workington Star – Friday 11 November 1910
Penrith Observer – Tuesday 22 November 1910
Illustrated Police News – Saturday 12 November 1910
Please follow me on social media;
Twitter – https://twitter.com/dohpods
Instagram – www.instagram.com/dohpods
Casual Desire – Ugonna Onyekwe – No Copyright Music
Contact – The Tower of Light – No Copyright Music
Classical Piano – Myuu – No Copyright Music

on 27 February 2014
I received a copy of Wrath of the Goddess, book 2 in the Goddess's Saga, in exchange for my review.
It has been a couple of years since the Goddess Maria found love with Stephen, a genetically enhanced human. Travelling around they found themselves in Loki's bar and make friends with him and his sister, Leila. When Leila is offered a job to recover some AI from a distant planet, the 4 of them set off on a journey that leads them to places they had never expected to go. The extent of Maria's powers is about to be tested, in a way that fills even her with dread.
Once again I loved this book! There was the introduction of more main characters in this one, namely Leila and Loki, which was a good addition, particularly as Maria and Stephen were pretty well introduced from the previous book. I'm hoping to see more of them, and of Ethan, in the third book, which I'm already excited to read!
There was a lot of edge of your seat action going on in Wrath of the Goddess, and several points where I was seriously concerned as to the well fair of the characters, even Maria, who theoretically can't be in that much danger ultimately!
And then there is Maria's family who are all kind of weird, well maybe not weird, but they have their own agenda for sure, and I have yet to work out what on earth that could be. On top of that there is the particularly odd relationship between Maria and Frank, and Frank's motives seem to be a bit cloudier than the others, but I guess we'll see!
As with the last book there is something in this one that makes Maria seem less God-like, and whereas before it was jealousy, in this case it was her apprehension about children. It was only a brief mention (when you got to catch up with some characters from the previous book) but it makes her much more accessible as a character, which is always a bonus!

Something People Say to Scare You...
Citation: Awakening Everything. "Something People Say to Scare You...: An Experience with LSD (exp51631)". Erowid.org. Jan 6, 2012. erowid.org/exp/51631
First of all, I will be writing about the experience of my girlfriend. Although, I did trip with her, and stay in very close contact with her in the months that followed. This story is one that you seem to hear about as a sort of myth to scare you away from drugs. One thing I would like to mention is that I personally have extensive experience with, knowledge of, and respect for psychedelic drugs. This is not meant as a report to scare you into not experimenting with psychedelics, as I feel that, used correctly, they can be a powerful spiritual tool. I submit this account as a means to educate you as to the possible dangers and humbly offer you what advice I can and what conclusions I have reached.
As a bit of background information, my girlfriend at the time (who we shall hereto refer to as Susan), prior to this event did not have a great deal of experience with psychedelics. She had done Mescaline once, LSD once, and ecstasy once (while I don't feel it is a 'psychedelic' I am including it anyway). Her Mescaline experience had been extremely positive with no negative side-effects. Her first LSD ingested roughly 3.5 hits, had a very intense but altogether pleasurable trip for the first 5 hours, but then suddenly lost touch, to say the least. She suddenly was naked, repeating certain phrases over and over (such as 'I've been here before' and 'I love you guys too!'), while thinking she had to vomit every minute or so, or suddenly running to the toilet for 'other' reasons. I was with her alone for the next 5 hours. Every couple minutes it was as though I could visually watch her particular ego or sense of reality focus in on her. She would start out staring blanking into space, repeating phrases, experiencing extreme emotions, and then suddenly for a split second she would realize what reality was, then for the next second she would realize where she was... until she realized who she was, who I was, and what was happening. She would apologize and thank me for helping her and then suddenly, she would be gone again. Things I did to help her included giving her milk, making her drink water, just helping her relax and keeping the environment calm and comfortable.) Anyway, about 5-8 hours she gradually found her way back to reality and was essentially the same person afterwards (albeit one with perhaps a more enlightened view on life.)
Now, the story gets interesting. Roughly a month and a half later was her next encounter with LSD. This time she took only 1 hit. Her entire trip was great, she enjoyed it, nothing bad happened. The day after (after staying up all night), we went to the park, went on a walk, ate some lunch, just had a calm sober day really. We then went back to my house, late afternoon and decided to try to sleep... after having sex. However, directly after sex she began crying profusely, when asked 'why' all she could say was, 'I'm just so happy.' The next few hours she gradually lost touch with reality. It was very similar to the way she was acting before but was not nearly as bad. I assumed it would soon pass, another night at the most. I attempted to speed up the recovery by giving her food and liquid, which she was very uninterested in. As the night progressed I gave her sleeping pills, one Ambien and a couple Excedrin PM. She drank a couple beers to amplify the affect of the sleeping pills. I am unsure whether or not she slept, but what I can say is that I was able to get 2 hours of sleep and so I can only assume that she did sleep, otherwise it would have been impossible for me to, since she was acting very dependent on me at this point and wouldnt let me sleep (we had been up for 2 days at this point).
I awoke to her being wide awake. She seemed to be getting more and more out of touch as time passed. I stayed up with her the rest of the night, by noon the next day I decided to give her more sleeping pills, Unisom and Tylenol PM, and also Niacin, they had no affect at all. She would sometimes come back for very short time periods. She would talk about how 'she could see it', but 'it hurt to remember', she 'didn't want to come back.' At times she appeared to be in a very enlightened place, completely tranquil, happy. Others, she would experience extreme sorrow, talk about 'being in the bad place,' 'I've been here before,' or talk about how we were all just 'hanging out in our imaginations.' One thing I found very interesting was that she seemed to be reliving all of the experiences of the last couple days in reverse order, talking to people as if they were there.
To speed up the story a bit, by the afternoon on the 2 day after the trip, she was not eating, not sleeping, not drinking, and getting further and further away mentally. I enlisted the help of some close friends to help me as I was on day 3 of no sleep. That evening I was frantically awoke by them. Susan was talking in a strange dialect (language?), flailing her limbs, hitting herself and others repeatedly, showing extreme rage at times. By this point I felt I had no choice but to take her to emergency room, which with all of our combined efforts, we were able to do (through physical restraint). There were police at the emergency room but aside from a suspicious glare, gave us no trouble. The hospital had little clue about what was happening and, I feel, did virtually nothing short of restraining her. It was clear to all of us that she needed food and sleep, the staff seemed to think it would just work out naturally. Clearly they were oblivious to any situation even slightly resembling this one. Her parents arrived within a few hours.
A day and half later she was transferred to a psychiatric hospital in the nearest major city. I talked to her daily, she was very unhappy there and very disconnected from reality. She was very confused and still very much in a different world. It is extremely difficult to describe the way she was acting at this point. This hospital also (I feel) handled things very poorly. They still would not give her sleeping medication (even though she went 10 days sleeping only 6 hours) and she rarely got to even see a doctor. But, regardless, after roughly a week and a half, she was released into the custody of her parents. She was functional, but definitely still not in touch with 'reality.' The next two days at home she gradually regressed until eventually she reached the point where she KNEW the CIA was trying to kill her, that everyone was trying to shoot her, and that dead bodies were chopped up in the basement. Her parents took her back to the hospital, but she wouldn't allow her self to be committed (since she was 20 it required her permission, they had been able to convince her last time due to her state of mind), and so they struggled until finding a different facility. A psychiatric research hospital.
I know this is getting long so I will finish up... It was another two weeks before she was rereleased. It took her roughly 3 months to recover to normality. However, she is a different person. I think probably a better, happier person. As far as the experience she remembers it all. I have no doubt she experienced things extremely spiritual at times, inhabiting higher dimensions, talking spirits, and things of the sort. BUT, I also think that due to many factors she experienced many things that were pure hallucination, or signs she took to be indicative of things that were not true (in some cases very extreme things). The problem is that she is not entirely able to tell what was true and what was not.
So here are the conclusions I have reached after talking to doctors, researching, talking to her, etc. Luckily, I was mindful enough to keep logs of what she was saying throughout the experience, and also have her journals from the hospitals.
So, she was a person with some issues in her past that she did not want to deal with at the time. She suppressed these things and didn't think about them. Most likely, she was prone to this sort of psychosis and it is very possible that this would have happened even without the LSD. In this particular case though, the LSD definitely sort of opened the door. Thus I say it triggered it, but did not CAUSE it. I view this experience as a sort of transformation of her life into a better person. Others see it differently, such as her parents, but they are coming with the attitude of placing blame on everyone and everything except for their daughter. To them, it's not that their daughter had issues and problems that needed to be dealt with finally exploded, it was the fault of her boyfriend and of drugs that this horrible thing happened, a thing with no spiritual basis or positive side effects, they were convinced she was going to die.
What advice can I give? Well for one thing the doctors at the second hospital, who seemed to more fully understand what was going on, said that everything I did were the BEST things that could have been done for her, short of actually taking the LSD of course. That includes sleeping pills, food, water, vitamins, Niacin. ALSO, here are some things to be careful of.
* Isolate the person in a quiet, dimly lit room, without the coming and going of strangers
* Constant reassurance is key, 'everything is ok, everyone is ok, and that includes you.'
* The person should not be left alone. Time is extremely distorted for them and a minute can feel like a day.
* Don't ask questions, questions can provoke a flood of anxiety in a person struggling to maintain logical thought
There you have it, I hope that offers help to someone should a similar situation ever arise. Likewise though, I hope that it never does happen.
COPYRIGHTS: All reports are copyright Erowid and you agree not to download or analyze the report data without contacting Erowid Center and receiving permission first.
Experience Reports are the writings and opinions of the individual authors who submit them.
Some of the activities described are dangerous and/or illegal and none are recommended by Erowid Center.

At the moment, my boss is away on rec leave, which means that he’s got someone else acting in his job while he is away. It also happens to be the end of term 2 school holiday with kids returning to school on Monday, and because of this, for the last 2 weeks, there has been a lot of staff off work looking after their little critters. Fair enough.
Last night, my boss checked in with me and asked if I’d mind her bringing her kids into work today, and I said I didn’t mind, so this morning I was prepared to see 2 kids in the office and when I got into work, there was no boss and no kids. I messaged my boss and she said she’d be in a tad later than usual. OK.
When she got into work with her 2 kids they were all armed with bags of things to keep them busy while Mum worked. They bought colouring pencils and books, scribblers, crayons, some toys etc., all designed to keep them busy and out of Mum’s way while she worked. First up, she had a meeting to attend, so she left her 2 kids in her office and asked me if I’d mind keeping an eye on them while she went to her meeting. I didn’t mind, and no sooner had she left her office, I could hear her kids banging on the whiteboard and playing up. I had to get up and see what was going on and to just make sure that they were OK and not destroying the joint.
I stepped into the office and found them in front of the whiteboard, using all the different coloured whiteboard pens scribbling ferociously on it while also heavily banging the whiteboard eraser. As I stepped into the office, they spotted me and immediately stopped their activity. I asked them what they were up to, and suddenly Ms6yr old said that they were about to play hangman. She clearly was in charge.
She picked a 4 letter word, which she misspelt, so had her brother and me guessing all over the place. The word was ‘went’ and she spelt it ‘wint’ and when I corrected her and said that it’s spelt with an ‘e’ she almost cried but held it together when I quickly said that it didn’t matter, that she could pick another word and have another go. After the second attempt, they quickly lost interest in their own game! So I got a marker and drew a line right in the middle of the whiteboard and asked them to draw me a picture of something and the best drawer would win. They looked excited, both sure they’d win over the other, and I left them to it and went back to my desk for a minute.
When I got up and went back into the office, I looked at the whiteboard and they still hadn’t figured out what to draw, so I made some suggestions to help them along. What about drawing a car, a beach scene, a plane, a doll, a…? ‘Ms, can I draw you sitting on a toilet doing a poo…’ said Mr8yr old.’ ‘What?!!! No! That’s disgusting… gross… No!’ I said. ‘I’ll go back to my desk and when I come back I want to see something good on that whiteboard. Remember, best-drawing wins!’ I said.
Meanwhile, my boss returns from her meeting and before she steps into her office, I whispered in her ear and told her what Mr8yr old said. She had a small internal giggle and walked back into her office. As I sat there, I thought about what to give these kids for a ‘win’. Damn. I had nothing around me fun enough for them to ‘win’. It was lunchtime, so I picked up my handbag and told my boss and the kids that I was off to lunch and that when I get back I’d like to see something good drawn on that whiteboard. Mr8yr old asked how long was I going to be away for and I said about an hour, and I was sure he didn’t know how long an hour was, lol.
I got back from lunch with 2 sticker colouring books and I walked into the office and saw they were all still in there and I said, ‘OK. Now. Let me see what you’ve drawn on the whiteboard. Hmm. Difficult choice. They’re both really good drawings. Hmm…’ I said as I rubbed my chin with my fingertips. ‘Well, I think it’s a draw and you’re both winners and as you’re both winners you both get a prize!’ I pulled out the sticker books from my handbag and handed it to them. Both very excited and very happy, and my boss said, ‘Manners children.’ ‘Oh, thank you MsG…’
I went back to my desk and as I got settled in, my boss and kids were getting ready to leave the office for the day and Mr8yr old comes up to me and said, ‘When we come here again, can you buy me a sticker book with animals in it, because I like animals…’ he said.
I couldn’t believe the audacity of this kid!
And I said, ‘Did you know that it is very rude to ask someone to buy you a gift?’
‘Is it? I didn’t know that,’ he said.
‘Well, now you know.’

Sweet Redemption June 16 2018, 10 Comments
I’ve written about her before. A sweet soul that was perfectly placed in our path to be the hands and feet of Jesus not only to, The B, as she affectionately called him, but to me. A sweet soul who has turned into a dear sweet friend: her name is Kim and she was Bryer's Physical Therapist.
Kindly, gently and ever so positively (and patiently) she helped us navigate the unchartered waters of Bryer’s 11 months. She was assigned to us at 6 weeks as his NICU PT and somehow managed to follow him onto to every floor he landed, always showing up with a smile and a plan…and maybe even a homemade card from her daughter, Maddie. She even followed us home. She went through all the red tape and head aches it would take to become Bryer’s in-home PT. This, of course, was all in addition to her full in-patient case load, not to mention her own 3 year-old and 1 year-old. It’s not a normal something for a therapist to do.
Into our home she came, just the same, with a smile, a plan and a tender persistence that could quietly rival an olympian. Tears are falling as I remember these moments.
We were most certainly a team, the three of us. We all had goals and targets. Diligently she would craft our weekly plan, making small tweaks here and there, adjusting in accordance to progress or lack there of. She always erred on the side of optimism. I’m not sure I recognized it as being overly optimistic at the time as I don’t think I was functioning in reality. I kept forging ahead with hope, the earthly kind, full of healing, progress and development.
One day, in late spring, we were sitting together on the floor with Bryer lying on the ottoman between us checking-in on progress and discussing the next few months.
“Do you think we can get him sitting up by his 1st birthday?” I asked. I had been daydreaming about the possibility of one of those iconic 1st birthday pictures.
She looked up at me and smiled, “We can certainly write that down as a goal!”
That’s all I needed to hear. “Ok, then. How can we make that happen!?”
He was 7 months with no head control and not rolling over. I now realize that she knew it was not a realistic goal, but she didn’t say so. We were going to work towards it anyway. B and I worked everyone of her plans tirelessly without fail, unless he was admitted to the hospital. It was to no avail.
Justin and I, our family, and Kim were doing everything in our power. I think for anyone, but maybe even more so for someone who thrives on hard work and achievement (me…and Kim), it was the most spirit crushing, disheartening, pitiful, maddening and grievous of times. Little did we know that his brain had begun its deterioration and there was absolutely nothing we could have done. Soon the onslaught of Infantile Spasms would come like a wrecking ball in August and he’d be gone by September. There would be no iconic 1st birthday pictures to be taken on October 17, 2013.
Let’s fast forward to the early summer of 2017.
Our new addition to the family, our son Arrow, was nearly 18 months. Having been diagnosed with Tuberous Sclerosis and fighting seizures for his first 13-14 months (he has his own story:), he was behind and honestly we hadn’t been told he was certain to catch-up. He was noticeably delayed and it was concerning. We had him in OT, PT and Speech therapies. At his 12 month check with the clinic in Cinci, his preferred method of transportation was rolling. He wasn’t crawling, let alone walking. He also didn’t have any words. We were scheduled for our next big developmental evaluation at 18 months and I had set some big goals to reach by then. I so badly wanted to take him walking into that next appointment.
For any of you who have had slow walkers or developmentally delayed babies, you are familiar with the milestone markers and timelines. For walking, they give a normal range to be something like 9-18 months. I was holding onto hope that Arrow could slide in right at the very end of the normal range for walking. Perhaps he would then be labeled as “caught up” or on the right track and maybe that would give us a better idea of his overall prognosis. MAYBE, the doctor would look at us and say, “Looks like Arrow is going to be one of the more mildly affected ones…” or something like that.
We upped his Physical Therapy and even started a new and additional method of therapy. I worked and worked with him, but he just seemed stuck. I was discouraged. It just so happened Kim and her family came over for pizza one night in late May. We discussed his lack of progress and my goal of him walking, now with MY 2 week “deadline" closing in. Mind you, she wasn’t his therapist.
In true Kim form, her wheels started turning. Pretty soon she had come up with a plan to come evaluate him and then the week of our church’s VBS, in which her kids participate as well, she’d do 5 straight days of intensive therapy each evening. It was a brilliant idea.
For 5 straight nights, we met at church, got our kids dropped off to VBS and then stole away to the empty nursery for a 30 minute session. She took a different approach from what our other therapist were trying. She wanted to get him to stand-up in the middle of the floor instead of relying on pulling-up. If we can get him to do that, the walking will come, she said.
You guys. By the the third day, after jerry-rigging a supportive harness out of ace bandages and giving us home-work to do, he was wobbly, but getting up to stand. It was magical. His proud smile, our whoops and cheering him on. The amount of progress he had made in just three days was astonishing.
On the 5th and final day we arrived at VBS and met Kim. As he was crawling around, she went up from behind and prompted him with an “Up Up! Arrow, up up!” and he got up. Not only did he get up, he walked over to Justin who was standing about 20 steps away.
And then I crumpled into a complete mess right there in the middle of the thoroughfare. I excused myself to the bathroom and tried my best to reel it in.
Watching Kim, watch Arrow get up and walk is is difficult to describe. The look of victory, of love and the pureness of pride on her face as she held both hands towards heaven and cheered. I was flooded with memories of how HARD we worked with and FOR Bryer and I could see that she was too. All the brain racking and tweaked approaches. Letting me put “sitting up by 1st birthday” on our sheet as a goal. Celebrating the tiniest of progressions, that were really not progress at all. And then finally saying goodbye hours before he left us. She held him, ran her fingers through his hair and kissed him goodbye.
The B, all the work she had poured in yielded him no physical gains. I can imagine she was left feeling as helpless as I did.
He blessed us with a bit of redemption that 5th day of VBS 2017 and boy was it sweet...and beautiful and sacred...and healing.
Arrow walked into that Cincinnati appointment the following week (June 15, 2017) at 18 months 1 week old. As my son, Sander, would say...
Baby Largent News December 02 2015, 23 Comments
Friends, Bryer's Song shirts donned a message of Victory this year. Well, the fact that I am writing this blog is a small to medium-ish victory as far as I am concerned. See, I spent over 4 hours one night pouring out my heart, only to open it up the next afternoon to edit, finish and post it. I would finally release it. But, it WAS NOT THERE. Not one word of it.
This was hard enough to write the first time. Believe it or not, I don't like writing these. I am doing it out of obedience and in this case somewhat necessity, not because I love to be an open book and spot-light my feelings and emotions.
After I fumed, shed some tears and told Justin that he needed to write the blasted blog, I realized if I didn't open back up the laptop and try again, Satan would win. And honestly, I am sick of him trying to claim victories in my life and in this world. I despise him. Lord, Jesus, come!!
So, step aside, Satan. Here I go again.
I sit here here staring at this screen wondering where to start, especially when I have yet to really finish Bryer's story. I guess it makes sense to just begin where I left off with my last entry…
"I have told you all this so that you may have peace in me. Here on earth you will have many trials and sorrows. But take heart, because I have overcome the world." John 16:33
As I think on this, CNN is on in the background reporting the attacks in Paris.
Unbelievable. Or is it? Oh this world.
Faith-filled or not, kind-hearted or not, deserving or not, we are not exempt from hardships, deep heartaches, seemingly insurmountable loss and devastation, bottomless sorrow, suffering or the missions of evil. This world has been warped with sin and it infiltrates our lives in so many different ways and forms…too many to count, list or even fathom. In fact, the longer I live, the less comfortable I feel here. I long for home like never before.
I have long since removed my rose colored glasses and traded them for eternal ones. But even still, sometimes those get mucked-up, dirty or foggy by what this life throws at me and it nearly obstructs my eternal view. Instead, I see only the splatters of fear, pain and suffering. I become frozen and cannot take another step because I cannot see past the here and now.
Ever found yourself in a similar place?
Thank goodness for family, friends and the church body who have come along side to guide me, even if just for a small step forward, or have literally cleared the muck from my lenses with cloths of God's truth and soapy buckets of prayer when I cannot seek the cleansing for myself.
These trials and sorrows that Jesus talks about, they keep us desperate for Him. They cause us to retrain our eyes on the eternal and hold very loosely to our plans and the things of this world. The ability to hold loosely to this world is a gift, as one wise mentor reminded me, because putting much if any stock in our vaporess existence is futile. It will disappoint every time. It is flawed.
Instead, we must keep our eyes locked on to the one who is flawless...the only one able to redeem and "overcome the world". When we allow Him to take residence in our heart and soul, we can overcome too. I so eagerly anticipate the day when He swoops us to a place of perfection and peace….our true forever home where the consequences of sin are no more.
I don't mean to get preachy. In fact, I am speaking to myself mainly. Refocusing. Retraining. Arming. Pulling myself up by the boot straps, dusting myself off and straightening my eternal glasses.
I am taking heart.
Yes, I could do without a world warped by sin. I could do without disease and seizures that threaten to dismantle God's sweet creation of life within me. He not only said we would have trials and sorrows. He said we would have many. Which brings me to why I am writing this blog post.
On September 11, 2015 Justin and I's world was rocked again as we received another heaping portion.
It was the day before Bryer's 2nd anniversary in heaven. I had a follow-up appointment at Maternal Fetal Medicine (MFM) to check what they believed to be a shortening cervix. I took Sander with me because he had a doctor's appointment shortly after mine. My cervix was fine and just as every appointment and ultrasound before, "baby looked beautiful", growing big, fluid perfect and placenta healthy. We had passed genetic testing and the 20 week anatomy scan. I was just shy of 25 weeks. I had finally allowed myself to be all-in and completely excited. JOY was on the horizon and I could not wait!
But, Dr. Lang came back in and wanted another ultrasound to look at baby's heart. It was shortly after that the words Rhabdomyomas and Tuberous Sclerosis were mentioned for the first time.
Dr. Lang said it appeared there were two tumors in the heart that looked to be Rhabdomyomas. He wanted me to get a fetal echo at NCH the following week. He then followed up by saying, many times these kinds of tumors are associated with Tuberous Sclerosis. I had never heard of either. He mentioned being encouraged that they weren't seeing anything on the brain or in the kidneys at this point.
Well, that's good.
I called Justin who was near-by to come. Sander was on his knees coloring transformers on a chair in the corner of the room completely oblivious when he arrived. I was holding it together pretty well, but a few tears spilled over and the sonographer quietly placed a box of tissues on the bed. I discreetly blotted my eyes before smiling and telling Sander I'd see him in a bit! They left.
I had been emotional and weepy for the prior week or two anyway because of Bryer's anniversary that was upon us. I needed to get going before I erupted. I stepped into the sunshine and walked to my car. I got in and sat silently for a few minutes. I was in complete shock. We had been so reassured the entire pregnancy, not only through ultrasound, but by specific "God things" that had been happening. So much so that baby's name boy OR girl had been decided upon based on these occurences (which I look forward to sharing another time). I typed Tuberous Sclerosis in my phone and began reading. A familiar knot started forming in the pit of my stomach. No, no, no, no. This cannot be. I saw the words Infantile Spasms, Epilepsy, severe cognitive impairment, brain tumors, kidney tumors and on and on.
I could barely breath.
I called my mom to see if I could come out. She could tell something was wrong, but I didn't want to talk with her over the phone. I drove straight there and we sat on the couch and cried together as I told her the news. The waves of emotions came rolling.
BUT the Dr had said, there was still a 20% chance that it wasn't TS and instead just an isolated finding. These type of tumors typically regress after birth. If baby is tolerating ok now and after birth, then they really aren't an immediate concern. We still needed to check their location and have a cardiologist take a look at NCH.
Justin left for Switzerland that Sunday, September 13th, and was gone for the week, so Mom went to the Echo with me. Just being back at NCH was stirring. However, we were encouraged to hear that the location of the rhabdos were far from any valves or areas that could cause a blockage forcing early delivery which Dr. Lang had mentioned as a possible scenario. We were sobered though to see that there were in fact two tumors and the sonographer at MFM hadn't made a mistake. The cardiologist said she expected that I would go to full-term and take a baby home to hold and snuggle with the caveat that she was only speaking from a cardiology stand-point. I was to go back for another echo at 31 weeks.
Deep breath, ok. I settled into that thought and felt a bit better. Remy and Sander would have their baby home to hold and snuggle. This could be somewhat normal. I thought to myself, "Surely God is in this and wouldn't allow us back to the pit of suffering with this baby when we just were crawling out of one and into the sunshine." I felt encouraged and a bit lighter. I couldn't stomach the possibility of this news just being a "sad story" to share with friends over lunch or the sad eyes and "I'm so sorrys" that might be empty of prayer. So, I shared the news with a very select few. I asked them all to pray for the baby's brain. Anything but the brain. Please Lord, no seizures, which the very mention of completely iced me with fear. I encouraged them all to pray BOLDLY! Lord, protect this baby's brain!
Two weeks later I was back at MFM for another scan. Baby looked great. Growth was ahead of schedule. Tumors in the heart were stable and nothing showing up in the brain. All good news.
September 11th and the initial findings was more than hard to take, but within those two weeks I had gotten myself to a better place. I had allowed hope to lead me on. You know, I rose up again...shook off the shadows…unlocked the door…and let hope live once more. I had surrendered all. I had "let go my soul and trust in Him". I had prayed incessantly and SPECIFICALLY. I had pretty much withdrawn from most people, because that's what I tend to do first in crisis. I didn't really want to talk to anyone or be around anyone because everyone's natural first question was about the baby. I just wasn't ready to go there with people yet. BUT, I was still talking to God. There was a part of me, can't say it was huge, that had this excited anticipation of what God was going to do because SURELY He was going to move in a big way. I prayed boldly and I prayed non-stop. Did I say that already?
Two more weeks went by. I was just shy of 29 weeks when I went back for another MFM appointment on Friday, October 9th. Justin and Sander were both with me. It was the day of "Bryer's Song Presents The Nephews at King Ave 5". It was to be a great evening of celebration and fundraising. There was a lot to do in preparation, so I was happy when we were called back within a decent time frame. She preformed the ultrasound and everything was looking great. Again, baby was measuring big and strong, fluid perfect, placenta was healthy. She was checking the brain, the kidneys and also the tumors on the heart to make sure they were still stable. She then mentioned she might have seen something on the brain, but wanted Dr. Lang to take a look too. This was the same technician that found the rhabdos in the heart. She left to go discuss and they both came back.
Yes, they concurred they saw 2-3 spots on the brain.
Dr. Lang said this really tips the scales towards Tuberous Sclerosis Complex. I leaned back in the chair. I had nothing to say. No questions. We were told we needed a Fetal MRI at NCH the following week to get a better look. Sarah, our genetic counselor, who we had been working with from the beginning, came in and said she'd get that scheduled asap.
"Ok." I said
"Do you have any questions?" They both looked at us with such sympathy and concern in their faces. I know they hated this so much for us, but I just wanted to get out of there and away from their gaze. We had no questions, and I needed to leave.
When we got home, I told Justin I needed to walk. I went and walked around our neighborhood and cried. I remember passing a lady twice with a bouncy, jumpy, yappy, annoying dog who she obviously thought was adorable and was not concerned one bit about tightening the leash and keeping it from jumping all over me. I had my therapeutic tights on for my ever-worsening varicose veins which are about $130 a pair. I didn't need a hole ripped into them by a tiny, yapping dog. I just kind of walked through the dog head down sobbing. The next time I was about to meet her, I crossed the street and walked on the other side. She called over, "You don't have to go on the other side, she really is friendly!"
"It's ok." I mustered. Clearly, she didn't understand that my world was falling apart.
Hmm there's a phrase, "my world." The mud began to spatter and my view was becoming compromised.
I walked and my anger grew. My confusion, hurt and anxiety were building layer after layer, one on top of the other. I had no words to pray, but audibly spoke these phrases to Him.
"I don't understand!"
"Haven't you heard one of our prayers??"
"Really, of all things. The BRAIN!?"
"Where WERE you and where ARE you??"
"I can't do seizures again!"
"I can't watch my baby suffer, again!"
"I don't want to be the friend and family in crisis again!! How are we supposed to help and encourage others when we will be in survival mode once again?!? I just don't get it! I will not be free to do much of anything let alone continue our ministry."
I went back inside with my swollen eyes and runny nose and told Justin that I didn't think I could manage the event that evening. All of our friends and family…just all of the people, I would have to be out in the crowd talking to all of them. At least he could be hiding behind the drums and banging on something! All I wanted to do was crawl in bed with my sorrow and hide. I had been preparing to speak on stage that night. I told him I couldn't. I would be too emotional. He said he would do it, and I that didn't have to go. But, I couldn't not go. After all, I was one of the hosts. There was a lot to do!
And most importantly...I am Bryer's Mommy.
I caught his face in the picture packed with all the other stuff to take down. Oh Bryer. This is supposed to be all about you tonight, but it's not because in my heart, this moment, it's about your brother or sister who will be coming into this world. You are safe and sound, whole and healthy in the arms of Jesus. I miss you! But, I do not worry about you or anguish over your suffering. However, I am absolutely frozen in fear thinking of what's ahead for your sibling.
I didn't want to go, but I did.
My parents came over to help get Remy and Sander ready. They'd come for a bit and then leave with my Mom and Dad to spend the night. I couldn't stomach eating, so I declined dinner. I didn't have it in me to update my siblings or friends with the latest news, so I went without any of them knowing.
On the way to the venue, I sat silent in the back seat while my dad drove, and I text with my OB soliciting her opinion on whether an anti-anxiety medication would be appropriate and safe at this point in my pregnancy. A myriad of reasons prompted me to reach out, but the biggest of which being I had never taken anything during Bryer's life or after and now I wondered why I hadn't. I probably should have as I had many physical ramifications of the unrelenting stress of that time which took me months to recuperate from. Knowing this, I wanted to be as proactive as possible. I needed to function. I hadn't been sleeping, I'd been on edge and this was all prior to the news I had received that day. She immediately text me back and called in the script that night. She's amazing.
I stepped out of the car and into the concert hall. I forced smiles and hugged people. I tried to share in their excitement of the baby.
"Oh I am just so thrilled for you! I can NOT wait to hear what the baby is!"
"A Christmas baby, what a blessing!!"
"You look so adorable!!!"
My answer to the question, "How's the baby doing!?" was "Baby is growing big! Probably my biggest so far!"
But inside, I was filled with the dread of suffering that loomed on the horizon. The freight train was headed our way, I could hear it. I was laden with grief for my baby once more. Seizures?? I was heavy for Remy and Sander. I felt that their baby had been taken from them...again. Is this even real?? It was just too much to process. I was feeling light headed, probably because I hadn't eaten. I wanted out of there.
I stole my sister-in-law, Kari, away to the bathroom to ask if she would take over the bake sale that our team had coordinated. There wasn't anyone in the bathroom, so I told her we had an appointment and it wasn't good. I tried to get the words out, "They found 2-3 spots on the brain.." but I completely broke. We ushered ourselves into a stall where I was pretty much hyperventilating. To have acknowledged it out loud proved to be more than I could handle. Lesson learned, I wasn't ready to talk about it. I needed to go home.
I am not that strong, folks.
I slowed my breathing and wiped my tears. Thankfully, the venue was dark to hide the redness left in my eyes. I made an early exit around 11pm without many good-byes.
Aaron and Kari took me home and the ride was silent. I came home to an empty, quiet house. I called my mom around midnight regarding arrangements for the next day's soccer games since she had the kids. We had a very raw conversation, one I told her I am sure I would later regret. I fell into bed that night without a prayer on my lips. I was exhausted and angry.
"The churning inside me never stops; days of suffering confront me." Job 30:27
Sleeping on it did not help. In fact, I awoke to a well meaning text, that did the exact opposite and set me ablaze. Justin and I got up and quickly got dressed and out the door to make it to Sander's early morning soccer game. It was a beautiful sunny day. I got my chair, set it up and watched his game. I didn't want to see or talk to anyone. I couldn't swallow small talk. I couldn't fake a smile. I didn't want to talk about what was happening.
a) No one could possibly say or do anything to make me feel any better, so I didn't even want to hear their attempts.
b) No one could possibly imagine what I was feeling or come close to understanding, so why bother trying to explain.
c) I was ashamed that I wasn't handling this better. After all I had learned and been shown of God's mercy, grace, goodness and presence during Bryer's life and death, shouldn't I be? Shouldn't I be able to take this in stride and be a testimony of strength and faith?
I was far from that.
"Yet if I speak, my pain is not relieved; and if I refrain, it does not go away. Surely, O God, you have worn me out." Job 16:6-7
We had about an hour between Sander and Remy's game, so we went to my Mom and Dad's who live close by along with the rest of the family. I didn't want to be around anyone. I didn't want to eat. So, I went in the house, dropped my keys and told Justin I was going for a walk. I stepped outside and got about 20 yards before I broke into a run. I hadn't ran in several weeks. I didn't care. I wasn't dressed for running (except the shoes). I didn't care. I took a comforting loop around the LARGE field in front of my parent's. I didn't stop. Angry tears threatened to overtake me and I'd start to heave for breathes, but speeding up choked them back down. I ran the 3 miles hard and fast. It felt therapeutic, but also strange because aside from my inner turmoil and heavy breathing, it was silent.
I had shut down communication with God.
Still wanting to be alone, I walked over to the new house that we are in the process of building, which is two country doors down from my parent's.
I stood there and looked at it, hands on hips. I had been so excited about it and day dreamed about the joy we'd have getting settled there with our new addition to the family. It seemed so meaningless now. Who cares about a new house!?! It was being built in front of my eyes as my baby was being built within. There was so much more control over the process of the house and I had zero control over the process going on within me. I stood there and thought about this. I could have screamed in frustration. All the selections being chosen carefully for this house compared to all of what had gone into creating our new baby. I had spent equal if not more time in prayer over this baby as it was developing as I had in making decisions for this darn house. I knew I had no control over my baby, but I trusted so wholeheartedly and put him/her prayerfully in His hands….every inch from before they were even conceived. Again, weren't you listening? Don't you care? Why are you allowing this?!
Kind of like the song, "I was sure by now, Lord you would have reached down and wiped my tears away, stepped in and saved the day. But once again, I say amen and it's still raining." But, unlike the song, I was not to a place of praising in this storm. I was so angry. I felt as if the One I trusted most and placed all my hope in had betrayed me. I was wounded. I was completely devastated. The winds were raging, and I seemed to be suffocating under the relentless pelts of rain.
I was done.
Excerpts from my journal that weekend.
Sunday, October 11, 2015. I've been up since 4:50am for a combination of reasons. I had to pee, Sander was in bed wallering me to death and my stomach was growling from not eating dinner last night. Justin couldn't take it anymore so he scooped Sander up and took him back to bed. I laid awake for several more minutes before giving in. I got up and went downstairs not wanting to disturb the kids.
I grabbed a Neuro Bliss from the fridge. It was a new drink I found at Walgreens yesterday afternoon while there to pick up my new prescription for an anti-anxiety med. Ironic? They were 2 for $4 and I had never seen them. Yesterday, I drank the flavor "stress relief" and currently I am trying the "sleep" flavor. Seemed like it was worth a shot. Neuro Bliss plus anxiety meds equals a sure cure to it all right?
Meds. Yep, I am willing to give it a try. I am hoping it numbs some of the anger, rage and churning anxiety within. I am willing to try anything, well not ANYTHING. But drinks called Neuro Bliss and anti-anxiety meds landed on the safe list.
The name of the drink almost makes me want to laugh out loud in one of those crazy woman laughs... that then turns into an even crazier cry... which then leads me to psychotically throw the drink and watch it smash against the sliding glass door. But, instead I sit sensibly at the table in my plaid oversized pajamas and drink it down while eating a nasty little quaker granola bar to stave off the hunger pain.
Neuro Bliss. If it were only that easy.
I am not in a good place. At all. In fact, I'd go so far as to say I am in the worst place I have ever found myself. And that's saying a lot considering where I've been. I haven't prayed in two days. I just don't have any words right now. I have no song to sing.
"I am worn out from all my groaning…all night long I flop my bed with weeping and drench my couch with tears. My eyes grow weak with sorrow." Psalms 6:6-7
October 12, 2015. I have started to run again. Why not? But, it's strange and almost counter productive to a certain extent?? Running has always been my time to pray and praise and pray some more. However, I am silent, so it's weird. While I am still getting the physical cleanse, I am lacking the spirt's cleansing that I typically find. It's becoming glaringly obvious that God is by far the one I talk to the most through out the day, but since I am not talking to Him currently, my habits are all out of whack. In the shower, I would sing and pray. In the car, I'd pray and sing. Now, I am quiet. I am feeling empty...but I am still so mad.
Last night as I ran/walked I decided to talk to Satan instead. Sounds insane, I know. Perhaps I have actually gone insane. It's possible. I spoke out loud because unlike God, he cannot hear our thoughts. I told him how much I despise him and his corruption. I told him to get away from me and my family. I let him know that even though I am mad at God, I still know and believe God is more powerful than he is. I told him that he is no match for the power for Jesus Christ and that I refuse to allow him to divide and fragment my family over this. I refuse to allow him to take Remy and Sander's mother from them emotionally. I seethed at the thought of what this imperfect world full of sin has done to my children and their little bodies through disease. I told him I can't wait for the day that God crushes his head and binds him up in hell forever. I sure hope no one was sitting out on their porch that night in uptown Westerville as the crazy prego lady came walking by rebuking Satan.
But still, I am so incredibly hurt and angry that my God has not done anything about this specific situation. Yes, I know He defeated death on the cross and rose again. I have never doubted that. Yes, I know He sent Jesus as our rescue plan to save us from this world. But what about right now? These moments. My baby!? A miraculous healing on behalf of our baby would be a victory over Satan on earth in the here and NOW. Why isn't He doing that? Please, Lord give me THAT testimony to share!! Instead, I am struggling to keep faith and am made to re-engage the discipline of trying to grasp His presence in the depths of my despair. He was there with Bryer, no doubt. Yes, He was faithful to meet me in the depths and for that I am thankful and it was truly a gift that I treasure. But, quite honestly, I was looking forward to finding Him in the JOY of this next phase of life. I don't want to go back to the pit. I don't want to go, and I don't want to take my baby and family with me! Don't allow that to happen, God!
I was in the middle of a huge fit. The biggest fit of my life. I can imagine now how God was looking down on me. It's like I sometimes look at Remy and Sander in the middle of of their irrational tantrums where even if I tried to explain anything, they wouldn't have ears to hear me. He was letting me get it out.
The fetal MRI was scheduled for Tuesday, October 13. Justin and I went together. By Tuesday, I had gotten myself to a little better of a place. I was daring to trust again. I was back in communication with God after 5 days of silence. Again, I thought surely He will do something. How could He not? I felt extremely peaceful during the MRI. Of course they couldn't give us any results immediately afterwards. We'd have to wait. When we got back to the waiting room, my Mom was sitting there. We were all hungry, so we went to the cafeteria to grab a bite to eat. The three of us milling about that place trying to find our old favorites was…interesting? We sat down together and I told Mom how optimistic Justin had been as I gave him a playful pat on his back with a grin knowing how I had been the opposite and he'd been prime witness to it all. I said that I was beginning to feel more optimistic though.
"Just as long as they didn't find a brain full of tumors, (which is very possible with TSC) I think I can start to move towards acceptance." I said.
Justin looked at me, "Carey, they aren't going to find a brain full of tumors." For some reason his words cut through me and I believed him.
The next day was Wednesday, October 14. We were scheduled to have family pictures that evening, then I had pilates class and following that I was in charge of a large online event for my Rodan + Fields business. I was anxious to hear the results, but nervous. I got a call around 2:45pm. I saw the number was from St Ann's and I knew it was our genetic counselor, Sarah. I picked up the phone. She said Dr. O'Shaunnessy had the results and wondered if Justin and I could come over to the hospital to chat. No, we couldn't as we still needed to get Remy from school and head to our scheduled family pictures. Sarah said he would call back shortly and asked that Justin and I to be together. We snuck away upstairs out of earshot from Sander where I was trying to unsuccessfully hot roll my hair. He put the Dr. and Sarah on speaker and held the phone out between us. Dr. S began to talk giving us a bunch of background info regarding the situation that we were already aware of. I just wanted him to spit it out. His tone was grim and I knew. He finally said, "The findings of the baby's MRI were problematic. (Long pause) It shows tumors throughout the brain and the kidneys."
Wait, what? The kidneys too? And did you say THROUGHOUT the brain? That seems like way more than 2-3, no? He went on and said some other things… how sorry he was. I don't even know what else he offered. Sarah said she'd call me to schedule an appointment with Dr. Rink a MFM and Geneticist for next week. Ok, I said. We hung up the phone. I looked at Justin. I had to leave in 10 minutes to get Remy.
I set my jaw and continued to roll my hair. I had no time to fall apart. I whisked ourselves out the door looking very put together with matching clothes, make up for me, gel for Sander. We got Remy from school and went to my moms to have her change. Soon, Justin met us and it was time for family pictures. It was really the last thing I wanted to be doing, but it was a gorgeous fall day…dare I say perfect. We met Rachel's smiling face and round belly at our new house to start. She asked how baby was...I was...how the day was….I lied straight through my teeth recalling my scene in the bathroom with Kari.
We got through the shoot. The kids were great and looked so darn cute. Our pictures actually turned out very nice and for that I am thankful! This blog may just turn out to be one of those Christmas update cards. Here are some shots:)
Next up was pilates with my dear friend Brooke who knew, but I hadn't been letting in either. I thought the stretching and the deep breathing would be good for me. There were times where the grief and fear almost came spilling out, but the deep breaths, sighs and groans that are natural during pilates made for a great cover. I couldn't get out of there quick enough.
Finally, at 9pm was the online event I was in charge of which had ballooned way out of proportion. I could hardly think straight and my armpits were sweating. When it was over at 10:15pm, I told the team I was signing off and shut the lid of my laptop. I sat alone on the couch with my thoughts.
...and it was time to come undone.
Justin was upstairs and he's never told me whether he heard me that night. I laid on the couch and put my face in the pillow and cried the hardest I have ever cried. I moaned. I groaned. I rolled on the floor. I had reached the deepest of pits. And it was there that I found myself completely broken. Even my anger was broken. It was so strange. I had been raging for the last 5 days and I couldn't even feel enraged any longer. I was completely empty and broken in spirit. I could barely get myself off the floor and up the stairs to bed.
The next morning, I could hardly get out of bed. The kids needed breakfast, clothed and lunches packed then off to school. I forced my feet to the ground. Around 7:45am there's a tap on the sliding glass door. I look up to see my mom standing there with a bag full of "stuff" for breakfast. She always has a bag of something. She came in and takes over fixing Remy's hair and fixing the kids oatmeal with fresh peaches. She is always exactly what I need at the exact time I need it. She knew. Justin left with the kids for school and the two of us sat in the kitchen She fixed me a big bowl of the same yummy oatmeal and we talked as tears salted our coffee. I eventually had to get dressed for the appointment. She left and Justin and I made our way to Mt Carmel to meet with Dr. Rink.
Dr. Rink isn't your typical geneticist. She is quite pretty, fit and personable with a great bedside manner. Come to find out she is partners with Dr. Hickey, Bryer's main geneticist at NCH. She doesn't do in patient anymore, but rather she holds clinic hours. Her and Sarah took the two of us into a labor and delivery room for some reason. They thought it would be a better place to talk. It ended up being perfect as I used the bathroom to pee 3 times:) It was a long meeting. We reviewed the MRI report and all the other information we had. I cried. We talked about our concerns and fears. She asked if termination was a possibility. We said no, absolutely not. Justin asked the hard questions. "How severe?" "Will our baby die?" "What can you predict?" She said she would surmise it is on the severe end of the spectrum and she'd be very concerned with seizures, yes. She said it's extremely hard to predict the course these babies/children take. Otherwise, from everything else she is seeing, baby seems in good health and is growing well so she does not expect death, no. Oh yes, and in all of the geneticist's opinions, this is completely unrelated to Bryer. That was one of our first questions, so I am sure it was one of yours. This is random and what they call "unlucky".
"As you do not know the path of the wind, or how the body is formed in a mother's womb, you cannot understand the work of God, Maker of all things." Ecclesiates 11:5
My prayers changed after that meeting. "God have mercy on our baby. I'd rather you take him/her home now than it be thrust into a world of immediate despair and suffering. Please, Lord, step in and save my baby. I can deal much better with death than continuos suffering of my child. Better yet, HEAL them! I know you can! But will you??"
"Be merciful to me, O Lord, for I am in distress; my eyes grow weak with sorrow, my soul and my body with grief." Psalms 31:9
We left the appointment very heavy hearted and drained by the information we had discussed. We talked about getting a second opinion. Sarah used to work at Cincinnati Children's TSC clinic while in grad school, and I had read about the clinic in my research as THE top in the world. I read of a Dr. named Franz. People came from all over the world to see him. He headed up trials for new drugs and is the top in the field. His name sounded familiar. Come to find out our friends, Breena and Andy Holt, had seen him with their son, Zeke. He was actually the one that diagnosed Zeke with Batten's Disease. I remember Breena speaking so highly of him. I asked Sarah if she could arrange an appointment with the clinic. With Cincy only being 2 hours away, it seemed to be a no brainer, although I still felt I was cheating on NCH. Sarah said she'd try to get an appointment, but sometimes it takes upwards of 3 months. She also said she was going to get a birth plan meeting scheduled with Dr. Miller (neonatologist), Lang (MFM), Arbona (OB), Rink (MFM/Geneticist) and herself so everyone could be on the same page when baby arrives. She would be in contact with me.
This was October 15th. The Nationwide Children's Columbus Marathon was in a few days. It was such a weird time. I was basically the "captain" for our team of Bryer's Song runners. We were the top fundraising team which was amazing and so inspirational! I was trying to be motivational and encouraging, but felt I had been sucked dry of those particular qualities. I had been looking forward to this race for Justin and for all the new and old runners alike. I was excited again to be celebrating Bryer, but now my mind was elsewhere. I just wanted it to be over. I had envisioned that I would be 30 weeks pregnant that day and how exciting it would be! Turning 30 weeks to me is always such a milestone. It enters you into the 10 week countdown! I had looked forward to being nice and pregnant with my round belly, holding a warm drink, taking pictures and cheering my heart out. But now everything was so dampened. My heart didn't have a lot of cheer. I did my best. Actually, I was truly blessed by seeing all the runners that day. They lifted me up more than the other way around. It was beautiful, and I couldn't have been more proud of our team.
The day before the marathon was Bryer's 3rd Birthday, October 17th. I was feeling a tremendous sense of guilt that I had not given him the proper time. My thoughts, my tears, my reminiscing were not his. I had been so paralyzed in fear, sorrow and anger that I was unable to get my mind in its typical "birthday state". But, in the wee hours of October 17th, I couldn't sleep and my thoughts shifted to him. I sat in bed and wrote this.
I reminisced, remembered and was reminded. God was working on me.
That evening, in bed with my laptop opened, I pulled up all the pictures and videos of him. I spent a good 2 hours looking at him, watching him, listening to him….remembering him. You know what I remembered the most in those moments? Not the ugliness of suffering, but rather God was unveiling the beauty of my deep and unconditional LOVE for him. Not that I didn't already know I loved him! But it was jumping off the screen and grabbing my heart, completely trumping the disease and sickness. I believe this was a gift from above. Despite it all, I loved him so very much. Despite the stress, the chaos, the suffering, his inabilities and on and on, I loved Bryer and will love him forever. I was able to remember and see the joy. I smiled.
I felt the defenses towards my little one within begin to disarm. My heart had been so confused by how love and dread for this new life could co-exist. I was deeply sorrowed and troubled by this. Without doubt, I knew I loved him/her, but at the same time I also felt that we were standing at the edge of another black hole and upon baby's arrival we would be thrust into it head first. I dreaded what that would mean for the baby and our family. I felt like time was ticking instead of joyfully anticipating the birth. The fact that I even felt this way, made me angry. I felt like a terrible mother for having these emotions. I'll just say it, I was afraid of my baby! For a few weeks, I had been trying to detach myself and push this whole thing aside, which is nearly impossible when you're a Mommy..
Loving can hurt sometimes, but oh it's worth it.
The fear of having my heart shattered again began to fade and the newly inflicted wounds slowly started the healing process. It was as if God was taking from His overflowing vats of love and directly applying it like a salve to my wounds torn open from the past which now lay alongside fresh and gaping ones from the present. And I was still enough to let Him work. My spirit had not been still in several weeks.
"Faith, hope and love….and the greatest of these is love...It bears all things, believes all things, hopes all things, endures all things." 1 Corinthians 13:7-13
God was stirring, I took notice and thought it would be a good idea to similarly revisit my Bryer's Song blog posts to remember how He was with us. I wanted to remember Him before us, beside us and behind us. I read them all again and felt strengthened, not by my words, but by His faithfulness. I was slowly regaining my stance on solid rock. Though, I had never abandoned the rock, I sure hadn't been standing with eternal posture.
Monday morning, October 19th, I reached out and sought wise counsel from a few different sources. I was determined to do anything that would help our family prepare and cope. One of the deep layers to my grief in this was Remy and Sander. We had not shared anything with them yet. I didn't know when or how or what I should share. I felt so very protective of their hearts and their faith having heard ALL the MANY prayers they had prayed for this baby (some that would rip your heart open) and witnessed the anticipation and excitement for their baby. I needed help on navigating this. Justin and I went to counseling together. I also spoke one night over the phone with Nancy Guthrie who is an amazing Christian author and facilitator of the Respite Retreat Justin and I had gone to in Nashville for grieving parents. She has lost 2 children. She understands like no one else can. She spoke such truth and wisdom into my heart. She validated me which was so important, but she also asked me some tough and humbling questions. She left me with some things to think about, and I did. That conversation was such a gift. She has written many, many books, but this one on Hope is my favorite and has been a go-to many times.
I was taking steps forward.
I was still struggling, but was definitely moving in the right direction. The weekend after the marathon, some girlfriends and I had planned a weekend getaway to a cabin at Apple Valley. I had pretty much cut myself off from them…communication was the bare minimum which only included updates and many one word replies. I had turned down all of their offers for coffee, prayer and walks and they continued to ask. Bless their hearts. So, as Apple Valley approached, I wondered how it would go. I had been apprehensive about going at all, but it was time to reinsert myself and I am so glad I did. It was a wonderfully, relaxing weekend. I let them in…even to some of the ugly. There were tears, laughter, long walks, shared hope, venting sessions, prayer and coffee. It was so needed.
Some time had passed between appointments, so I was due for a follow up with MFM and another Echo at NCH, especially before we were to leave for a short trip to Florida. The echo came back unchanged, which was good news. I then went to MFM for another ultrasound on October 28th. Things there were also unchanged, except baby was growing bigger and bigger! I spoke to our genetic counselor, Sarah, again that day touching base about the birth plan meeting and the meeting with Cincy TSC clinic. She said she had locked down Nov. 2 with the doctors regarding the birth plan and was also able to secure a meeting in Cincy with the TSC clinic. She was amazed that she was able to get us in. I asked which neurologist would be in attendance, hoping her answer would be the world-renown Dr. Franz. She said she wasn't sure, but it would be 1 of the 5. "Is there a particular one you were hoping for?" She asked. I told her Dr. Franz would be amazing. She said she would see what she could do and call me by the end of the day.
I met my Mom, who was working upstairs in mother/infant, in the cafe after the appointment. She, I could tell, had not caught up to where I was headed emotionally. She felt this nearly as deep as me and in some ways from another perspective, deeper. She was working through her own grief all while trying to support me. I was feeling more positive and geared up for what was coming. I was telling her what I had been praying lately, which was something like, "Lord, if your will is not to heal our baby completely, I am working to accept that. My prayer then would be that you will give us something to HELP out child so as we navigate this disease we would not feel the familiar feeling of helplessness we did with Bryer. I pray you would bless us with plans, a surgery, a medication, a team. SOMETHING. Of course, Lord, I pray for your healing! But if that is not to be, please show us you are near. Give us something here on earth to help our child!!"
"Sustain me according to your promise, and I will live; do not let my hopes be dashed. Uphold me and I will be delivered." Psalms 119:116-117
As we were sitting there talking, my phone rang and it was Sarah. Her voice was excited. She had gotten us a one-on-one appointment with Dr. Franz at Cincinnati Children's for Wednesday, November 4th at 9am. What?!? This made me happy and I knew it was God's doing. So, we'd go to Disney and Siesta Key for the weekend, and when we got back we'd have two very important meetings the following week.
Florida was so fun. We took my 10 year old niece, Maddy, with us which was a treat. The individual time with her and the kids was definitely worth the fast paced whirlwind of Disney.
Justin met us there from a work meeting in Vegas and we also enjoyed some time in Siesta Key at his Dad's house. As I mentioned, I had been making strides each day with how I was coping, but a couple times a day I would get a dose of grief laid on me from nowhere. It happened at Disney of all places…you know the happiest place on earth? The last time we were there was just a month or so after Bryer had left us for heaven. I just remember being so happy to have time back with Remy and Sander after such a year of separation. That's what the whole trip was about. I was able to let go and pour into them and was free to indulge in them. When I thought of Bryer, I thought of him in glory. I thought of him being FREE. I guess the best way to describe it was I felt so much lighter…there were some lines we literally skipped our way through. This trip to Disney, I also wanted to indulge and soak up time with Remy, Sander and Maddy, but it was because we were headed for rough and unchartered waters, not on the other side yet. Big difference. That feeling would sneak up on me as I'd wait and watch for them to whiz by on a roller coaster. I didn't like it one bit.
We returned home that Sunday and got mentally prepared for our big week. First up was our birth planning meeting. I walked into the room and the first person I saw was Heidi (Dr. Arbona). She had come in on her day off. She met me halfway into the room with a big, long hug. I hadn't seen her in several weeks as I had been going to MFM, but we had been in frequent communication through text. It was so comforting to see her. She has delivered each of my babes. She's so kind and cares so much. She met me one morning for coffee when Bryer was about 4 months old. We had just got our coffee and the power went off in Starbucks, so we sat in my mini-van for about an hour talking. Later that week she dropped by fresh cut up fruit and veggies which was perfect and such a doctor thing to do;) I cannot say enough about her.
Justin and I sat down and soon Dr. Miller entered the room in scrubs. I hadn't seen him since Bryer. He heads up the group of neonatologists that took care of Bryer while in the NICU for 6 months. Smart, smart man. I had MANY long talks with him. Seeing him stirred me up….a character from Bryer's story….lots flashed back. It was a good meeting. We talked about some hard things. Bottom line was just like any other baby, we'd need to see what he/she shows us at birth and react. The only definite "order" was 48-72 hours of surveillance in the NICU for heart monitoring and a heart echo. Reason being is that some babes with Rhabdomyomas even though stable will develop arrhythmias and require meds to correct. They would be able to do all of this at St. Ann's. I was happy about that as I was bracing myself for Dr. Miller to tell me baby needed to go to NCH. 48-72 hours at St. Ann's seemed like small potatoes. I could deal with that. All other tests could be as follow up barring nothing acute shows up or happens. If you read about Tuberous Sclerosis further, you'll find that there is no set course and that each kid is different. They call it the land mind of disease. Lovely, I know. There's a spectrum and even with many brain tumors, seizures may not begin for many, many months, some years and some never. Anyway, it's complicated …perhaps that is why they call it Tuberous Sclerosis COMPLEX?
Next up was our meeting with Dr. Franz on Wednesday. I was eager for this. I love information. I need information to be able to process. We had the opportunity to meet with the expert of this disease. Good or bad, I knew we'd get a clear picture of what was going on with our baby. Even though it had been about 7 weeks since they had first found the Rhabdomyomas, there were times I caught myself shaking my head in disbelief that this was really happening. Who am I kidding, I still do that. Driving down to Cincinnati Children's Hospital was one of those times. We arrived with 10 minutes to spare before the appointment. Navigating a new children's hospital seemed surreal. It was interesting.
We finally were in the waiting room and my name was called. Since I didn't have a child on the outside of me, they treated me as the patient. Weight, blood pressure, head circumference. It was actually comical. We talked with their genetic counselor who we handed our complete chart along with the MRI scans. Then came a nurse and a social worker. Finally, they said Dr. Franz would be in shortly.
There was a rap on the door and in he came. He is taller than I expected and resembled a more refined version of santa with white hair, a beard and notably rosy cheeks. Immediately, I sensed a warmth about him. For as accomplished as he was, he did not radiate arrogance at all. It was refreshing and rather comforting. He smiled and shook our hands.
He spent about 90 minutes with us. Amazing. I had asked in our birth meeting a couple days earlier if Dr. Franz would actually review the MRI scans. The consensus from the group was "no" but he would review the radiologist report from NCH, which is what everyone else had been drawing their conclusions from. I wanted his eyes on my baby's scans. He sat down on a stool and I can't really remember how he opened our time together, because to me the meeting didn't really begin until I heard him say, "Do I have the MRI scans to look at?" I let him know that we had passed them to the genetic counselor who said she would upload them. "Oh, great!" He said as he spun around to the computer. "Let me just pull those up and take a look myself."
I think my heart skipped a beat and then started pounding. This was it. He was either going to confirm what we already knew, tell us it was worse than we were expecting or shed positive light on our situation. And we'd know in a matter of minutes.
"Ok let's see here…" he said to himself as he flipped throw the images. "Alright, here we go. See this? It's your baby…and here is your baby's brain." He paused as he looked closer.
I was literally on the edge of my seat.
"Oh…the brain involvement isn't that bad. I mean, it definitely appears that your baby has TS, but I wouldn't call this an exciting case."
I looked at Justin like did you just hear what he said?!?
"Really??" I blurted. "They told us there were tumors throughout the brain and kidneys and that it was likely a severe case."
"Really. I do see some SEN's and Cortical Tubers, but I have seen way, way worse. I could show you lots of people in this clinic with similar brain involvement…"
And before he could go on, I interrupted saying, "That are walking, talking and eating by mouth??"
He looked at me and smiled. "Yes…and are even educated, some with graduate degrees."
"Are you serious!?!" I looked at Justin again smiling.
He turned towards us and went on, "Now, I can't predict the future 100%. I can't tell you what kind of grades this child will get or if/when seizures will start. 90% of TS patients have a seizure at some point, but some are easily controlled, more severe cases are not. I would think your child would fall into the category of less severe based on these images."
I had read so much on the level of disease severity based on the number and type of brain tumors (There are 3 types in TS). I had read a few articles and studies where there were kids that had less than 9 cortical tubers that were developing normally and at 3 years of age had yet to have a seizure. I had also read that the first year of life really dictates future cognitive ability and level of severity. The longer a child can escape seizures the more chance it has to develop normally. Or if they do begin, the faster you can get seizures under control before they wreak havoc, the better the chance they have to develop normally. All that to say, I wanted to know a number.
"Can you count them?" I asked.
"Sure." He said turning back towards the scans. "There appears to be about 6 cortical tubers and 4 SEN's."
"Well that's better than…" I started, but this time he interrupted me...
"20, 30, 40, 50? I've seen that too." He said.
We talked a bit more, but then I remembered….the kidneys! I need to ask him about the kidneys. So, I asked if he'd take a look. He got to an image of the kidneys and grew quiet as he looked. "Hmm. This doesn't look to dramatic either, but it's not my specialty. I want to run this by my nephrologist before you leave and have him give his opinion."
"Great! Thank you." I said.
Now it was time for our questions and to express how important it was for us to have a plan. He was all over it. He spoke of a drug that is in the early trial stages that they give in pregnancy to the mother. It's a form of the same drug they give the actual child when they are born. He said, however, that my case doesn't warrant the side effects that would go along with it (for me), but he mentioned another case he is currently working on with a pregnancy that is much for severe so they are going to try it with her but are in the stage of presenting to a board for permission. All very interesting and cutting edge. That's why we were there and this is why I felt so blessed to have so much face time with him!
We talked about Bryer, which he was very interested in. He actually requested Bryer's medical records so he could look them over and asked if he could see a picture of him. "Handsome fella." He said with a smile. "Yes." I smiled back. We went on to explain because of our experience with seizures, most notably Infantile Spasms which are catastrophic to development, we wanted to be as proactive as possible with treatments and a plan.
He began explaining the different medications and how they use them and when. He spoke of the trials and the success and now of the FDA approval. All things of which he led the charge on. He said it's his expectation that the baby will be ok when born, acting normally. He did agree with the cardiac monitoring, but in his opinion it could be deferred for 12-24 hours. He said, if baby is acting normally and checks out on the initial evaluation in delivery room, then by all means we need to treat baby normally and give your family normal family time.
I cannot tell you what this did to my heart. That meant, barring no other complications, I could have baby put on my chest to bond…breastfeed…and MOST importantly this meant Remy and Sander could meet their new brother or sister outside the confines of the NICU. I wanted that so much for them. At this point, we had still not shared anything with them as we were waiting until after this specific appointment to have as clear a picture as possible.
He went on…Two weeks after birth he'd like to see baby and preform an EEG. The reason for this is they want to stay AHEAD of seizure activity, not chase them. MY KIND OF GUY! He said even if baby is not having active seizures there are subtle patterns on an EEG they can pick up 2-3 months prior to the onset. If they saw these patterns at any point, we would immediately begin medications for PREVENTION of seizures.
I was certainly picking up what he was laying down. Every. single. word.
He would like baby's first MRI to be at 3 months of age to establish a baseline. Any earlier presents too many risks. Other than that, treatment or intervention would be in reaction to what the baby shows us. I also asked him to explain how we work with their clinic. What if seizures start within the first two weeks of life. Can we have a rescue med? Do we call them and bring baby immediately? How do we utilize NCH? He was very patient with all the questions and had an answer for everyone. We talked about getting a script for DiStat (a seizure rescue med) which gave me much peace of mind.
We talked some more. Come to find out he went to medical school at OSU with one of our MFM docs…He said to tell him hello and that Dr. Schubert had backed into his car at one point. I told him no problem, will do with a smile. He was just so down to earth. I really liked him.
The last thing he wanted to do before talking to his kidney guy was do a skin check on us. TSC is genetic in 75% of the cases and it's a dominant gene meaning only one parent has to be a carrier. He was pretty confident both Justin and I were not affected, but wanted to take a look. Some people have such mild cases, they aren't diagnosed until adulthood. There are specific skin findings that come along with TSC, so he wanted to see if we had any of them. We changed into gowns and he came back with a black light and turned the lights off. All checked out fine. Never a dull moment.
He left to go talk to his kidney guy and we got dressed. A social worker came back in and talked for a bit. Soon there was a knock on the door and Dr. Franz popped his head in smiling and said, "By the way, it's what I was thinking….the kidneys look fine. We don't see any tumors. They just look like normal baby kidneys to us!"
Of course I couldn't believe it and made him repeat what he said. He kindly obliged. I looked at Justin again in disbelief. What?!?
We gathered our things and began our walk to the car. I was feeling so encouraged…so thankful…so uplifted. They were such welcomed feelings. I couldn't wait to share this news with my Mom and shower her with the same. I told Justin that some people might not feel as encouraged as us to hear their baby has 10-11 tumors in the brain. But I do!! And not only that, we had a PLAN!! Praise the Lord.
I was also looking forward to sharing this news with the team back home. When I did the next day, Sarah said she was going to cry. I could hear the happiness and shake in her voice. She said she had been praying specifically for us. She definitely said we should feel encouraged as Dr. Franz opinion carries the most weight by far. We made the changes to the birth plan calling for normal family time together outside of the NICU.
Since then, I've continued to see MFM. Baby is growing big, my biggest yet and on track for being 9lbs. at term! Baby continues to tolerate the heart tumors and nothing new has shown up. Babe is also breech and has been since 26 weeks. If you are friends with me on Facebook, you know I have been doing everything to try to flip it head down. After 3 natural, no drug births, a c-section would be so foreign and something I'd like to avoid. However, if I end up with one, there are certainly worse things. I will leave it in God's hands and trust that it is the best way for him or her to arrive.
So, that's where we are. We told Remy and Sander that the baby will need to have its heart monitored in the NICU after its born, but it should only take a few days. We didn't even mention the brain because they so associate a brain problem with Bryer. I don't want them to worry, but I do want them to have proper expectations and not be alarmed when the baby doesn't come home for a few days.
We decided on a last minute trip to the Cayman Islands with the blessings of my doctors the week before Thanksgiving. Dr. Arbona actually encouraged us to go. It's a place that holds special meaning to Justin as he vacationed there many, many times with his family (including his late mother) and has always wanted to take us there. Not knowing what our future will be like, we wanted to take a trip just the four of us and enjoy the quality time together. So it was kind of like a family/babymoon. It was a great decision. We had the best time.
I have more to say...more thoughts...but I'm just going to abruptly end it here because well, I am really tired and really pregnant.
Christmas is barreling down on us which all you moms out there know how much there is to do! I have felt the urge to just get this news released, so I am thankful this will reach many at once and save me from having the same conversation over and over.
I ask for your prayers over our new baby, its upcoming birth and our whole family as we continue to walk by faith even when we cannot see.
I am 100% excited to meet this little person and I have been given back the joy of anticipation rather than dread. I am so thankful to have that back in my heart.
We don't know what the future holds, but we know who holds the future and it is well with my soul. I look forward to introducing our newest member in a few weeks. Stay tuned.
Headed Home Part 1 - Embrace Instead of Chase June 16 2015, 0 Comments
I've been going back through my journal. Some of my writings there are lists of facts, dates, times, doctor's names and stats with short bursts of emotion and some prayer. I'm trying to go back and fill in more detail. It's quite the task, but one I am compelled to complete. I just want to get his story down. So for those interested, here is a part.
West Syndrome. Bryer has West Syndrome. We were told this yesterday (August 22, 2013). Dr. Mytzinger, Director of Infantile Spasm Clinic, delivered the news.
Let me back up.
Tuesday evening, August 20, Bryer was fussy and I could hear that he vomitted. I went in about 11:20pm and saw he had. I changed his bed, wiped him down and and got a new onesie on him. I layed him back down. He spit a tiny bit again. I got him up and decided to hold him in the rocker. He was fussy and I could tell not feeling well.
Still battling the stomach virus, I thought. He had had high fevers since Sunday night/monday morning…105 actually. We took him to the pediatrician who suspected enterovirus as Remy and Sander had just gotten over the same thing. But, we were managing and thought he was over the worst of it. Mom stayed Monday night to give us a break. It was a bad night. But, by Tuesday afternoon he seemed to be doing better. His temp was low grade.
Back to being in the rocking chair. Rocking, patting and singing, I could feel him start to heat up. Suddenly, he tensed, eyes widening in fright like he was scared out of his mind. A look I have never seen and didn't want to see again. It was followed by a cry like he was scared…almost a whimper. Then he went back to whining and fussing. Odd, I thought. His sudden jolt and terrified face had actually made my heart jump. I had never seen him do anything similar before.
A few minutes later it happened again. And again, it scared us both.
I said, "Justin did you see that?" He was busy readying his feeding pump and about to administer his midnight meds. I told him to come watch. He did it again…same thing.
"I think these are seizures or some type of spasms. Get your camera."
He captured a few of them. They seemed to increase in frequency and intensity, when all the sudden he stiffened up, his eyes widened, and he stopped breathing in my arms.
He turned blue.
Justin swiftly scooped him from me and took him to the floor to assess.
I had my phone and frantically yelled, "Do I call 911? Justin! Justin want me to call?" I wish I could say I calm and collected, but I was not.
"Just give him a second. Bryer! (pause) Bryer! (pause) Bryer!" He called to him. He laid motionless, his color was returning, but he was still dusky and blankly unresponsive.
I pressed 911 for the first time in my life. I gave our address and they were there within 2-3 minutes. I ran down to greet them at the door. I could immediately hear the sirens. We brought him down and laid him on the carpet. He was breathing, but still unresponsive and his color was bad. His O2 was in 60's. They took us, no sirens, to Children's. I rode with him in my arms on the guerny. They gave him oxygen as he stared aimlessly. About half-way there, they hit a bump and it jolted the ambulance. He let out a small erruptful cry and seemed to come out of it a bit. It was all so strange.
Bryer and I were in the ER from 1:30am-6:45am. His g-tube was leaking green bile. He started having white jelly-like stools that were so foul, something none of them had ever seen. I could get him settled with eyes closed for maybe 5 minutes at a time before he would startle or before they bugged him. There was no sleep or rest. His camo onesie was soaked with sweat, so I took it off. I changed diaper after diaper of the white jelly. After a lumbar puncture and 6 IV attempts, they decided to transfer us to T6, the Infectious Disease floor.
I was not happy about that. At all. I tried to tell them he just needs to go to the PICU. They were under the impression that the seizures where febrile. I argued that I thought they were spasms and that neuro needed to be involved. Having a child with no diagnosis, you tend to read a lot on everything. I had read of them before.
It was now Wednesday morning, August 21. T6 is in the old part of the hospital. It's the strangest feeling being there - like a different universe - or stepping back in time. I didn't feel comfortable.
I finally got ahold of Mom to update and Justin came around 9am. He had stayed at home with the kids. That's just how we rolled.
We waited for rounds which didn't happen until 12pm. Meanwhile B, dressed in a little yellow gown, lay awake and constantly moving. He was unsettled and seemed to be in pain. Justin and I left at 1:30pm so he could get the kids and I could nap.
Mom had arrived to stay. She later told me that music therapy came by. It struck me as funny and then with sweet sadness. Oh mom.
She heard music/singing coming from next door. It sounds like angels, she thought.
Curious, she peeked her head out and saw many doctors collected outside the door. Not having any concept of music therapy, she thinks, "Oh my that poor child must be dying and they brought the "angels" to sing for him/her."
A few minutes later one of them popped their head in, "Would Bryer like music therapy?"
"Heck yes!" Mom said. So three "angels", as she describes them, came in to sing. They sang Twinkle-Twinkle and something else.
My mom then asked if they take requests. Yes!
Can you sing Row Row Row your boat? Yes! And we can do it in a three part harmony!
Oh my goodness, that exchange made me laugh. But it was one of his favorite songs that I repeatedly sang, so I knew why she had requested.
Next she requested Jesus Loves Me and they sang it beautifully… just like she'd imagine angels would. Mom was overcome by it all, and buried her head into my dad and sobbed.
Later Justin returned to relieve her while I stayed with Remy and Sander. They were finally going to move forward with the EEG we had asked for. Meanwhile, he lost the one IV they got in his foot after 8 attempts. IV's for him were like gold and every time I heard he had lost one was like a sock to the stomach. They came back to try again. After one poke with no success, they said, "Sorry there is nothing more to try."
So they went off for a short EEG. When Justin and B came back, my friends Amber and Brooke had come with cookies and Jeni's ice cream. They sweetly prayed over B and encouraged Justin. They left around 9:30pm and shortly after, around 10pm, Justin then went down to Subway. He had no sooner sat down, when a Dr called him on his cell phone and said he needed to get back up to the room. "Bryer was failing," they said.
Justin ran back. They had tried 4 more times for IV with no success. He needed fluids. He was in septic shock which means his BP was low, his temperature high, his HR high and his breathing was rapid. They transferred him to the PICU to put in a central line. After he got the fluids, he did stabilize. He had still not slept and never did that night even with morphine, chloral and a psych drug. UNREAL. Justin said he fell asleep for a brief 15 min.
I got the call just after I had fallen asleep at midnight and he shared the update. He said it was bad, and I could hear the deep concern in his voice. He was waiting for them to get a line and would call me after they did to advise whether I should come or not.
In the time between Justin's calls, I have never felt so broken in spirit. Although my heart had broken several times over Bryer, it felt like the remaining pieces were shattering. I had gone through many, many situations with him, but in that moment…I had never felt so torn. Things seemed different this admission with the seizures, like maybe this was the end. I didn't know what to pray. My heart's desire was that he'd be healed. But, I was beginning to feel like I needed to pray God's will over mine. So, I prayed, "Lord have mercy on my son! Bring him comfort, peace and rest. Help me to accept your will for him and for us. Lord, prepare my heart." Those were my succinct prayers. Over and over.
I got up from bed and walked back and forth in my dark bedroom. My mind raced in a panic, "But, Lord, bring him through this so I can be with him if you choose to take him. I want to be with him!"
I called my mom. I text Kari and Chrissy for prayer. I then heard from Justin he was stable. I finally fell asleep at 3:00am and awoke to Remy standing at my bed at 7am. Sweet girl.
Remy's stay-and-play for preschool was that Thursday morning. I felt it was important for me to be there, which is was, but now I was completely stressed about being there and not with Bryer. It was an all too familiar two-way feeling I lugged everywhere I went. I got the kids up and ready, taking Sander to Kelly's, our beloved sitter. On our way there, Sander sadly said, "Me want to go to hospital. Me want to see Bryer." Remy in the way back pipes up, "Me too!" She then said something under her breath that I did not hear. I asked her to repeat it. Again couldn't hear. "I said, POOR THING!" she shouted.
Remy went with Kari after the stay-and-play. She took her and Eli to the zoo and "they had a great day" I later received via text. It was always a lift to hear things were well on the home front. I headed down to Children's. Justin needed relief. I knew the grueling night he had. I'd had some of those as well. He said Bryer yelled all night long and never slept. It was my turn to stand guard over his electrodes as he kept pulling them off. He was quite literally out of his mind and it made me sick all over to sit by and watch. Neuro didn't want sedation because it would mess up the EEG. Ok, I understood that, but it didn't make it any easier. A Neurologist came down and said they wanted to keep EEG running for another 24 hrs. UGH. They weren't catching Spasms, just abnormal EEG. They adjusted the electrodes and within 10 minutes, we got a call. They got what they needed and Neuro would be down to talk with us.
Enter Dr Mytzinger, Director of Infantile Spasm Clinic, about 5 minutes after Mom had shown up. She happened to call off work in order to come down to NCH. She came at THE right time, God's timing. Dr. M came to the door. He was a dark-haired, young handsome-ish man wearing a white coat and dress slacks. He said, "Can you come with me? Lets go talk down here. " And with that he made a motion down the hall. He led us into a family room. My legs began to shake once I sat in the chair. I knew he was going to tell us something.
"Bryer has Infantile Spasms. They are a certain type of seizures we see in children under 12 months that present as a certain rhythm on the EEG. Bryer has an underlying brain problem. We don't know what causes his brain problem, but we know the brain problem causes Infantile Spasms and a chaotic EEG. Brain problems cause Developmental Delays. Infantile Spasms and chaotic EEG also contribute to Developmental Delays. We can't fix the brain problem because we don't know what is causing it. But my job is to take the Infantile Spasms and chaotic EEG out of the equation and hopefully give him a chance to reach his full potential, whatever that is. We will do this with a medication called Sabril which we will start, August 24, once it arrives. You will administer it for 2-3 weeks during which time you will be looking visually for Spasms in Bryer. If you don't see any, then you come back to Clinic for an EEG to see if his EEG has also improved or calmed down. Basically, this will gauge whether the drug is working. If it is, we continue on for no more than 6 months. If not, we talk about next steps."
The other option he discussed for treatment was something called ACTH, a steroid. Bryer was in no condition to try this drug. It wipes out your immune system. It would have killed him.
He went on, "If you have Developmental Delay, chaotic EEG and Infantile Spasms then you are said to have West Syndrome. The prognosis isn't great."
I asked if many kids die in his clinic. "Yes, many, but not all," he answered.
I asked how the medication would help him. What could we expect to see as a result if it began to work? I was so hopeful thinking that perhaps this will help him develop. He answered, "If Bryer smiled before, he might smile a little more. If he enjoyed listening to music, he might enjoy it a little more."
This was the first "something" we had to go on. But still there was, "He has a brain problem, but we don't know what is causing the brain problem." It was never black and white with Bryer. Yet, up until that point, no Dr had ever stated that Bryer had a brain problem. There was always this hope I held, "He could improve if I do XYZ therapies for/with him." This was the first time that any expectation for him had been set or we were given a possible prognosis.
As I walked back to his room that night, I felt the weighty titles of Occupational Therapist, Physical Therapist, Audiologist, Visual Therapist and Oral Therapist shed from me with each step.
And when I stepped back into his room, I was just Mommy.
I felt free to just love him.
Of course there would be time for therapies and of course I have always loved him, but I could now leave the bulk of those therapies to the experts and I could just enjoy being his MOM. Before, should Bryer be awake and pleasant at home, I would feel immense stress to get some type of quality therapy in feeling his progress or lack there of was in my hands, because no one had told me otherwise. I wasn't giving up. No, I was just able to let go and embrace instead of chase. Embrace instead of chase; it felt so healthy.
I asked to hold him and since they had gotten what they needed on the EEG, he was sedated enough to be settled and snuggled.
We rocked in the dim light of his monitors. In peace.
Mom pulled up a chair and we talked through everything we had just heard as the tears gently fell. We talked about what it meant and how it made us feel. We talked about how much we loved this baby and how happy we were that he was resting in my arms.
Then I called Justin and told him everything.
Joy into my darkness - Headed Home Part 2 August 30 2014, 2 Comments
I apologize ahead of time for the errors, the going back and forth between tenses and all that stuff. It is what it is ..as I looked back on the happenings 1 year ago today. August 30, 2013
August 30, 2013 - We had just got home at 10:30pm the night before from a 10 day picu/neuro admission. I was bone aching tired, but we were home under one roof. All a mama wants. Remy went to play with her friend, Christine. I decided to take Sander on a little date to Target, then a hair cut and Five Guys for lunch, his favorite. It had been a few days since I spent proper time with him. I was missing him and he was missing his mama. Oh, the joy that boy brings! Bryer really hadn't slept much the night before, but seemed content to nap on the ottoman for a bit. We had a new seizure med, Sabril, we were trying out. Also new to his already lengthy routine was twice daily Lovenox injections for a blood clot in his leg - a result of the misplacement of a central line into his artery and not into his vein. Needless to say, little man kept us busy, but it was so good to be home. Did I say that already?!?
Mom came over that evening to help as it was always chaotic, but especially soon after a discharge as we fumbled to settle back into routine. She loved giving Bryer baths in the hospital and at home. It was their special time together. She is a RN by trade and has been for 30 + years. She knows what she's doing and is good at it. Not to mention, she loved and still loves Bryer deeply and I know he felt it...most especially during those hair washes. I didn't worry when I left him in her care. So, as she gave him his last bath in our sink, I took the kids out to play. It was a beautiful evening.
Really, you took Sander on a date all day and then took them out to play that night? That seems weird when you have such a sick and fragile baby that just came home from the hospital. But the reality is, yes. The pendulum swing between the world of Bryer and the world of Remy/Sander often blew my mind, but even more so as I look back on it. Like being home with R & S and mc'ing a full-on stuffed animal fashion show with run way, spectators, music and twirls... as Justin sat with B on a ventilator. Then me with Bryer during a significant brain MRI also while on a ventilator, all the while getting video from Justin of Remy riding her bike without training wheels for the first time. Me leaving B at the hospital to get Remy so we can go pick out her first pair of soccer cleats. She beamed. I sent Justin the picture. Me sitting in a darkened picu room eating a bag of peanut m&m's actually feeling sick-for-home, so I FaceTime the kids to say goodnight…they are full of smiles, I love yous, freshly bathed and all PJ'ed up ready for bed. I say goodbye and look at my just-in-a-diaper, all tubed up, unbathed, deteriorating baby boy. Not sure if I am painting the picture accurately, but swinging back and forth between the two worlds was somewhat surreal. I digress..
Back to August 30. We had all settled in for the night. Bryer had fallen asleep on his blanket upon the ottoman and Mom said she would sleep on the couch next to him. He slept from 8pm-12am. Upon waking, he began seizing every 4-5 seconds. Nothing was helping or calming him. I came down and together we sat for 3 hours. We thought it was the clusters he had experienced before. But no, it was different. There was no letting up. We tried it all. Holding him didn't help…almost made it worse. He was sweating. Our body heat made him hotter. We decided to give him another dose of Sabril. Justin came down around 4am. We called the on-call neuro dr. He gave us a script for distat which Justin left immediately to get. He returned an hour later and Mom gave it to B as a suppository. We waited.
Those dark hours from 12am-6:30am... passing him back and forth between Mom and I. Rocking, patting, singing, praying, laying on ottoman, trying left side, then his right side. More patting, rubbing, stroking his hair, praying, singing….SEIZING without cease. He screams, whimpers and moans inbetween. The beads of sweat upon his brow. Eyes WIDE like he's frightened. Sweat soaked onesie after sweat soaked onsie. We were doing anything we could think of to help. But nothing did. Huddled around the ottoman, these were some of the worst moments of my life.
The other two kids slept peacefully upstairs as we waged hell-like war downstairs. I am not exaggerating. If I were to imagine what hell is like, it would consist of watching your child struggling and suffering and being completely helpless to do anything at all. Counting on the extra dose of sabril. Nothing. Counting on administering distat….still nothing. Soon, I hear little feet on the stairs. I look up and see Remy peering through the banister rails. My tender-hearted girl. Before I could order her back to bed, she scurries down and glues herself to my side. Sander soon follows with Tiger, his go to blanket, in tow. It is about 5:30am. Sigh. I remember so clearly the feeling of despair, and I could see it on the faces surrounding Bryer as he lay seizing on the ottoman. My mom was taking a turn at trying to console and comfort, hunched over his little body, singing in his ear.
"Ok, this disat isn't working," I say. I stand up.
It came decision time, something we had wearily encountered many times before with Bryer. We HATED making the decision to go. To go and to admit. My heart completely deflated…a familiar heaviness sat upon my chest. Anxiety churned through my veins. I felt desperate, stomped on, so utterly grieved. My eyes were dry and burning. And although we had just brought him home 36 hrs earlier, we knew we had to go back.
"Is there anyway we can bypass the ER?? There's got to be a better way," I plead.
So, we call the neurologist and he arranges for a direct admit to the 10th floor - neuro. That makes me feel a little better.
"I've got to get these kids back in bed. Justin, I can't go. I just can't watch anymore tonight. I will get in bed with these two and come relieve you later today. I just… can't, " I say through tears.
Justin, with quiet resolve, rises to the occasion. I get the carseat and gather his belongings. I make sure we are up to speed on meds and his feeds are on track etc. I get Cow and some paci's. You know when you are packing up your baby for the sitter? Kind of like that, but way different. And with that, I send Bryer and Justin to Children's for what would be his last admission. Mom follows behind and heads home for some well earned rest.
The door closes. The pendulum swings.
I turn around and look at my 4 and 2 year old sitting on the couch. Dawn is just peeking through the windows. It is quiet. I go to them, picking up Sander and taking Remy's hand, we walk upstairs and into my room. I lay in-between to prevent a squabble and one nuzzles in deep on each side of me. I feel overwhelming peace, love and joy as I lay there looking up at the ceiling. Praise you, Lord. He has a way of piercing through the darkness when I need it the most. This was one of those moments. It's true that mother's have limitless capacity for love, for I poured as much love out on them in that cuddly early morning snuggle as I had all night to Bryer. I love my kids intensely. All three of them. But, I will be brutally honest, I was relieved to be settled between them rather than physically and mentally suiting up to forge into the hell of suffering with Bryer. If I could just escape for a couple of hours...I was so completely exhausted. I think I only got an "Oh Lord, help…" before I fell asleep.
I think back on that moment with mixed emotions of guilt and second-guessing of my choice not to go that morning. But, I am reminded of the scripture Matthew 11:28 "Come to me all who are weary and heavy-laden. I will give you rest" and also Ephesians 3:20 "Now to Him who is able to do far more abundantly beyond all that we ask or think, according to the power that works within us.."
It was obvious I was weary and needed rest. But, beyond rest, He even managed to deliver a shot of pure joy into my darkness. Maybe it's just me since I'm the one who experienced it, but the fact that I can even write of the joy, peace and love I received on a night like that, is pretty darn amazing. It is a testament to God's goodness and continued presence on our journey with Bryer. He was with me.
After a few hours of rest, I woke up and made arrangements for the kids. Then I headed down to relieve Justin. What I walked into, well, that's perhaps another blog post.

AC/DC – Dirty Deeds Done Dirt Cheap
This record was my introduction to AC/DC. As far as I can remember AC/Dc was one of the first bands that I was exposed to by people outside of my immediate family. Instead they were the first band I was introduced to by the older kids from kids on the school bus.
I believe they initially came across my radar because they re-released ‘Dirty Deeds’ in the States in 1982. Because of that re-release the title track and ‘Big Balls’ were getting a little bit of airplay, and entertaining a group of redneck kids on a hill in Holland NY.
Four or five years later I rediscovered this record. I was a bit more familiar with the band by then but was still more into the Brian Johnson stuff, so didn’t get into it as much. It wasn’t until I heard the ‘Highway To Hell’ that I became a huge fan of Bon Scott. Stay tuned for that record.

The Manchester United striker was widely expected to leave Old Trafford after a fallout at the club, as well as allegedly handing in a transfer request towards the end of last season.
However, Rooney has remained with the Premier League champions, much to the disappointment of Silva.
"Wayne Rooney would have been great to play with," Silva told reporters. "He is one of the best strikers in the world and this is also a guy who has scored against me every time I've played him. That goal at the Maracana still irks me."
PSG travel to Bordeaux on Friday.

Wen Man had always known that Huo Shaoting's love for her had been tainted by ulterior motives. She sought something more profound from him, while he yearned for her youthful beauty. As his "white moonlight" returned, he gradually distanced himself from their home, leaving Wen Man to endure countless lonely nights in an empty room. She eventually found herself waiting for a farewell and a settlement check from him.
Their paths crossed again, but this time, there was someone else by her side. Huo, his eyes red with emotion, declared, "Wen Man, it was me who first made love to you." Wen Man responded with a faint smile, "Lawyer Huo, you were also the one who left me first! If you're interested, you might have to get in line if you want to date me." The following day, she received a deposit of 100 billion along with a sparkling diamond ring. Lawyer Huo, on bended knee, confessed, "Ms. Wen, I'd like to jump the line."

Our trailer heater stopped working, and we kind of need it still in the mornings up here. Just to warm things up. But Darrell was unable to remove the furnace, it was so buried under the stove, that we had to take the whole trailer in so they could fix it. Just trying to save a few dollars, but no go. Trailer and furnace were back the same day, fixed and ready to go.

It still doesn't quite seem natural to say — Avalanche coach Patrick Roy. Nor does it seem quite real seeing his full face all the time, not just the slits of his eyes behind a painted mask. But make no mistake, Roy is ready for the latest in a life full of challenges as the Avs' new coach, ready for a journey that will begin Wednesday night at the Pepsi Center against the Anaheim Ducks. On Tuesday, the former Hall of Fame goalie sat down for a conversation with The Denver Post to talk about how things have gone in his first training camp as Avs coach, his vision for the future and a memory or two about the past.
Q: Here we are, before your first official game as an NHL coach. What are the nerves like, and how do they compare with when you played your first NHL game?
The Denver Post's Adrian Dater and Mike Chambers post analysis, notes and more on this blog focusing on the Colorado Avalanche.
A: It's totally different, but it's the same excitement. I had no idea I was going to play my first game when I did. (Coach) Jacques Lemaire came in the dressing room before the third period and said, 'Roy, you're going in.' I had to turn to the left to (Guy) Carbonneau and I said, 'Is it me going in?' He said, 'Yes you are, better be ready.' This is different, but I'm still very excited and ready to go.
Q: You're someone who is never going to be totally satisfied, but you seemed pretty happy with how things went in training camp. True?
A: Yes. Our guys have worked hard. They've been resilient. They've been very receptive to the teaching we've been doing, and the attitude on the ice has been really good. I'm asking them to stop in front of the net on shots, and they do it. What we've been asking, they've been giving a try at, and I appreciate that for sure.
Q: You spent the past 10 years (eight as coach) around kids, usually no older than 18, with a junior team in Quebec. Now you're coaching paid men, some with longer guaranteed contracts than your own. How have you readied yourself for that transition?
A: I didn't see it as a big adjustment, to be honest. When you're coaching younger players at the junior level, you're with players who want to be NHL players one day. You have to explain to them what is the NHL journey, what they have to do every day, how hard they have to work on and off the ice. The NHL level is different. I think they need more of a partner, someone they can count on and communicate with. I just give them options. They're in the NHL already. They don't need the same message. Obviously, I'm the coach and I have to draw the line, but it's their team. I said to the guys, "If you want to skip curfews, you're not cheating on me, you're cheating on the guy beside you. If you don't want to work hard, you're not cheating on me, you're cheating on yourself." Obviously, if they're not working hard enough, it's my job to come in and say, "Hey, guys, let's pick it up." But I think our relations with the players have to be based on two words: trust and respect.
Q: You were offered this job once before, in 2009, along with a front-office title like the one you have now. You turned it down then, saying you weren't ready, that you still wanted to coach your sons. Did you worry that you might have made a mistake, that you might never get that kind of chance again?
A: Yes, I did. It was the Avalanche, an organization I had a lot of respect for, a lot of respect for Pierre (Lacroix) as well. He was my agent before becoming my GM. But at the same time, I had to be honest to myself, and the timing was just not right. I don't think I was ready for the NHL level. But the last four years were really good for me. I really benefited from them.
Q: You had such a seamless transition from player to part-owner, then coach, of the Quebec Remparts. How did the opportunity come about to get involved with them?
A: It was in 1996, my second year here. I called a friend of mine named Jacques Tanguay and said, "Hey, if something comes up, I'd be more than happy to be involved." I thought it would be the best way to stay connected to the game, to keep working inside of my passion and have a chance to give back to younger players.
Q: You retired at age 37, and many goalies have played longer than that. You had your best goals-against averages of your career those last two seasons. Did you ever have any second thoughts after retiring?
A: It happened one time. I was (in bed) one night, thinking, and Peter (Forsberg), "Footer" (Adam Foote) and Joe (Sakic) were still here and I remember thinking, "Aw, that would be great to play." But when I woke up the next morning I said, "Whoa, that was a bad dream." Then it was gone. Quite frankly, I had emptied my tank. Every player has their time, and that was mine.
Q: Everybody knows that you have a fiery side that occasionally made headlines for reasons you might not have always liked. Yet, you were a great success partially because of that passion. How have you thought about reconciling the need to still be yourself with not losing control of your emotions?
A: It's not that tough so far. When I first coached in Quebec, I was thinking more as a player. Now, I'm more as a coach. Because if you're too emotional, you get your bench distracted and it's tougher for your players. You don't need to scream at your players. It's more about being calm and trying to find solutions. ... I talked with (Montreal GM and friend) Marc Bergevin, and the first thing he said was: "Be patient. Don't be emotional in your decisions toward the players and the way you act toward the players." And I'm certainly going to act in that regard. We're going to let our guys grow and build around our young guys. Yes, I'm here to win a Stanley Cup, but we're going to do it a step at a time.
Q: How many times have you been told by people around here "Welcome back"?
A: A bit, and that truly has encouraged me a lot. I really believe if we do a good job, our fans will come back. The people in Denver want to support this team, and if we do our jobs, we're going to make a new page in the history of the Avalanche, and that's what we want.

Milo is an AKC Poodle. He is fun loving and sweet. He has a true loyal heart. He is the typical smart Poodle that that loves to learn and be with his family. He is very affectionate and loves to give hugs. His temperament is superb. He is very laid back. Milo is clear on his genetic health panel including CDDY/IVDD, he
Copyright © 2017 Crystal Ridge - All Rights Reserved.

Papatoetoe West School pupils devastated after hens stolen by lockdown thieves
Children at Papatoetoe West School are “absolutely devastated” after their four beloved hens were stolen and likely killed by lockdown thieves this morning.
The South Auckland school community is reeling after being targeted by thieves for the third time during a Covid-19 lockdown.
Whitey, Mighty, Tweety and Bluey were part of a school programme where children cared for and fed them, as well as collected their eggs.
Pupils even helped construct a swing for them as part of science classes. They were considered a part of the school family, the school said.
School principal Diana Tregoweth told the Herald she learned of the hens’ fate this morning when a neighbour of the school rang her to report what looked like a group of people stealing them.
“She rang me in absolute tears. Not one but all four of them had been taken.
“She said they had climbed over two fences to get into the actual chicken run, which was quite a sturdy run so it was obviously well thought out.”
The teacher who has been looking after the chickens during lockdown raced to the school.
The hens were seen being carried away in bags, which has led the school community to believe the thieves probably killed them before taking them.
“If they could only realise how devastated not only the children are, but everyone who looks after the hens,” Tregoweth said. “They’re absolutely devastated.”
The neighbours were able to get a few photos and security camera footage, which will be reviewed.
A police spokesperson confirmed they received a report of the chicken theft about 11.40am. Enquiries were ongoing, they said.
There’s concern for children at the school after already going through a period of upheaval with the latest lockdown.
It’s the third time Papatoetoe West School has been targeted by thieves during Covid-19 lockdowns. Last year its swimming pool was broken into. The pump, chemicals, and the pool’s cleaning machine were stolen.
And last week the school was broken into again, although Tregoweth said it was difficult to determine whether just a few things had been upturned or anything was stolen.
Source: Read Full Article

Though Gio Gonzalez didn't get the results that he wanted from his start in Atlanta, he was coming off an 8.0 inning, 112-pitch outing against Cincinnati in D.C. in which he'd held the Reds to one run on one hit. Before the Braves scored five runs on seven hits in 4.0 IP this week in Turner Field, Gonzalez said that the work catcher Kurt Suzuki did to prepare for the Nats' competition allowed him to trust the veteran backstop whenever the two worked together. "I've been [working] five years with 'Zuki," Gonzalez said, "so we've always been on the same page."
"We have a great track record together and I think they do a great job," Gonzalez continued, "Not only with Zuk, but the rest of our guys in the catching department. We have such great guys and the way they go about their stuff. So, it's almost to a point where you can trust them."
Gonzalez went on to say that it wasn't just the catchers who came prepared, adding that it's, "... the same thing with [Pitching Coach Steve McCatty]. They know what they're doing. They do their homework. They're constantly going over hitters."
After Jordan Zimmermann's eight scoreless against the Braves last night, he credited Suzuki with making it easy for him to work on the hill. "'Zuki and I have been on the same page pretty much every start," Zimmermann told reporters, "And everything he put down tonight I was thinking about throwing before he even put the fingers down, so it's definitely easy when you're on the same page."
Add Dan Haren to the list of pitchers who are pleased with the Nats' catchers. In his case, however, it was Wilson Ramos behind the plate as the veteran right-hander tossed eight strong innings against the Atlanta Braves in a 3-1 win. It was Haren's best outing yet, and he credited the Nationals' 25-year-old backstop after the game:
"Wilson had a really good feel of how they were going to take their at-bats," Haren crediting @wramosc3 on his game-calling— Washington Nationals (@Nationals) May 3, 2013
Haren allowed four hits, one run and one walk in eight innings in Turner Field and earned his third win of the season and his second-straight after beating the Reds last weekend. After that outing, Davey Johnson said the pitcher looked more like himself, or, "That was more like him," as Johnson put it. When Haren's on, the manager explained, he, "... moves the ball around [and] pitches. And that's what he did today, which was nice to see."
Johnson liked what he saw from Haren again tonight in Atlanta, telling reporters, "'That's the kind of ballgame he can pitch. It came at a great time, too.'" Haren said it was a win his team really needed:
Dan Haren: "We needed that game. We needed it bad." On losing two to Atlanta earlier: "I think that's as frustrated as we've been."— James Wagner (@JamesWagnerWP) May 3, 2013
Johnson showed faith in his starter late in the game. The manager visited the mound with two down and Chris Johnson due up with a runner on, but Haren said he was confident he could get the third out. "He was going to take the ball from me," Haren told reporters, "And I said I felt good against this guy, and he let me have him. I had a good plan against him so I wanted to take the ball against him, and then, you know, when it got to the ninth inning I was fine with [Rafael] Soriano taking it, but I wanted that guy. He got him. Swinging with a 1-2 splitter in the dirt. Talk about trusting your catcher.
• VIDEO: Watch Dan Haren's highlights.
"Wilson called a really, really good game," Haren said, "I mean, I don't think I shook him more than once or twice and it's nice when you get in a rhythm with a catcher like that."
Good to have Ramos back. Great to have him and Suzuki as a tandem.

Jackson was released by the Eagles last spring amidst questions about his character and alleged gang affiliations.
"I don't think an AC joint is jeopardizing my career in the long haul," Jackson said. "If it's all on me, I'm playing. I don't plan on missing this game.
" … That's their decision [to release him]. They moved on. I moved on. I'm blessed to have a second opportunity to play here in Washington."
Jackson played six seasons with Philadelphia, setting career highs in catches (82) and yards (1,332) a year ago.

Packed several boxes today, but otherwise a wasted day. I drove out to Lowe’s for my 4 o’clock appointment and found out I would have to buy 25 sq. ft. of the stuff I wanted, amounting to the same price I didn’t want to pay yesterday. My only choice seems to be a laminate, which I didn’t really want to do. I guess things have been going along too well; there have to be some problems.

The night my doors were blown away by the storm
I didn’t know
It was you who had come to my home
It became dark all around
Blown out was my lamp
For whom did I stretch out my hand?
I remained in the dark
Thinking it was a dream
Did I know
It was your flag that was flying in the storm?
In the morning I found
It was you who was standing there
Filling the emptiness of my home.
Transcreation of song no. 67 - Je rate mor duarguli bhanglo jhare - from the collection Gitimalya by Rabindranath Tagore. Best recording of this song is by Debabrata Biswas. It has been used by Ritwik Ghatak in his famous film Meghe Dhaka Tara.

Frank Ocean Name Change Denied Until He’s A Better DriverPublished on November 10, 2014.
Much earlier this year singer, rapper and songwriter Frank Ocean declared he was going to officially change his name to his stage moniker, Frank Ocean.
Ocean’s real name is Christopher Breaux and after applying to legally change his name nearly eight months ago, a judge has denied his request due to a lengthy list of traffic tickets he has acquired.
Over the course of three months, Ocean racked up three tickets which included a hefty speeding charge in August, not using his headlights and having an expired insurance.
As well as the tickets he has had previous issues with his license being suspended for skipping court dates and in 2012 he was also pulled over for speeding and was caught being in the possession of marijuana and driving with a suspended license.
Since the judge has already denied this name change request, Ocean will have to clear his driving record and then begin the process all over again by reapplying.
Ocean began his career as a ghostwriter for celebrities such as Justin Bieber, Beyonce, Brandy and John Legend but branched out as his own artist in 2011 with the hit of his mixtape Nostaligia, Ultra.
He is also known for his feud with Chris Brown when the two men’s groups became involved in a parking lot brawl, a dispute that was recently settled.
Also Check Out: Hollywood’s 7 Worst Celebrity Drivers

My friend's ex-partner died of water poisoning just before Christmas. I think he had subscribed to the following myths: that water is fantastic and the more the better; and that salt is evil and everyone should avoid it.
He was small, thin, bedbound due to severe ME/CFS, and most likely had Postural Orthostatic Tachycardia Syndrome. No one had even diagnosed the POTS, let alone told him that people with POTS need more salt than usual. He was avoiding salt because he'd picked up vaguely that it was healthier. He hadn't eaten anything the previous day, too ill, and so decided to get his fluids up by drinking some water. I don't know how much he drank, but it doesn't sound like it was all that much. He was dead within two days. If he'd been supplementing properly with salt, I don't think this would have happened. It's the balance of water to salt that causes the damage, due to osmosis moving water around between cells, and the brain swelling.
Ignore anyone telling you to drink ludicrous amounts of water for no good reason, and if you do need to drink a lot of water, make sure you get salt as well. It's worth generally working out how much salt you're getting and how much you personally need.
I have severe ME/CFS and almost certainly have POTS, so I now aim to drink 2.5l of water a day, with half a teaspoon of salt mixed into each 800ml/27oz water bottle (actually, it's half sea salt and half low-sodium salt, so I get potassium too). Some of us do need that. I'm using a water-drinking app to remind me to drink enough. My blood pressure seems to be a bit better on this, more often normal and less often low, but it's hard to tell as the doctor's been changing my meds quite a lot.

I was sleepless! I was in agony! I wanted to escape to the big trailer's air conditioning. But I couldn't. I wouldn't. It was his sleepout! It was his overnight with daddy! He was so psyched about our planned special time, he had rapidly chatted since we ventured into the dark, we had read by flashlight and it was imperative that I place this 7 year old boy's interest before mine!
As I lay listening to my son's gentle breathing, it dawned on me how vital, how important, how special and how influential I am to this little boy! No one can take that away! I am his father, Cyrus is my son and we are united by a special bond! I smiled up to heaven and continued my adventure of sweaty sleepless bliss!

My Husband Rolls the Dicebylickmydrippings©
My name is Lisa, and Tom, my husband of 11 years is my cumwhore. It started years ago with me forcing my cum filled pussy on his mouth after he came into me. He of course protested at first, but after awhile, he got used to it. For about a couple of months now, I've made him eat every load of his warm gooey mess every time he cums. I love coming up with new ways for him to eat his own. I haven't swallowed any of his sperm in years now. I do allow him to cum into my mouth occasionally, but he always gets it back one way or another.
Lately, I've been more daring with BDSM, orgasm denial, pussy worship and other such games. Tom and I were at a friends house the other night playing cards while I came upon my latest idea. Once I started thinking about it, I was getting more and more excited and couldn't wait to get home and let my slut know what he was in for. My pussy was getting wetter and wetter thinking about it, looking at my unsuspecting husband from across the table. As I wasn't wearing any panties underneath my skirt, I was starting to get worried I might start leaking from my slit onto my dress. I was feeling very warm and my face felt flushed. I made an excuse that I wasn't feeling well and that I wanted Tom to take me home.
Once we were in the car, I couldn't control myself anymore. I reached over and grabbed Tom's crotch, feeling his manhood strain through his khakis, aching to get out. He said "Well, I guess you're feeling better." I exclaimed "I had to get out of there, I need you, I need your cock inside of me, now!" Tom slipped his hand up my leg and slid his fingers into my wet and gaping slit. I moaned as he brushed up against my clit and I thrust my crotch against Tom's hand. By now, I had released Tom's cock from his pants and was stroking his seven inches of throbbing meat. "Now don't come my love, Mommy's got a surprise for you tonight." Tom's cock surged when he heard me utter those words, his mind racing to what may be in store. We pulled into the driveway and started ripping off each other's clothes as we burst through the front door. "Go kneel down by the coffee table and wait for me." I told my slut. I went to the bedroom to grab some supplies and change.
I walked out into the living room wearing red stilettos, my red garter, stockings and nothing else. I could see my slut's cock pulse from across the room as I walked over to him. I told him to put his head back and I planted a wet dripping kiss onto his mouth from my pussy lips, and then sat down on the sofa. "I have a little game for you tonight my little cumwhore, would you like to play?" Tom replied in his obligatory "Yes Mistress." I placed a blank piece of paper, a feather pen and three dice on the coffee table. "These items are going to determine your fate for the next few days." I picked up the feather pen and started writing and talking aloud…
"To my dearest Wife and Mistress, I solemly swear as her slut to cum in a method of my Mistress' choosing blank1 days from now. Such cum will be preserved for my later consumption by freezing. I will then repeat such act every blank1 days from now until I have saved up blank2 loads. Furthermore, every day starting today leading up to my eventual consumption, I promise to give my Mistress blank3 orgasms daily. Upon fulfilling the last load on the final day, my Mistress will feed me my sperm in any way She sees fit. I also solemly swear that if I protest at any time, and do not promise to love and enjoy all acts leading up to and during my sperm's consumption, that I will add another load onto my sentence." I finished by writing at the bottom,
Mistress Lisa's cumwhore, Tom"
"You have probably guessed by now, that these three dice are going to determine your fate. Now pick them up and roll them slut." Tom's face had a look of anger, disgust, fear and excitement all at the same time. I have made him eat his own before, but never multiple loads at once, and never like this. His not knowing what was about to happen caused his cock to surge with precum, which I fingered off of the end of his cock and placed in his mouth. Tom knows better than to go against me, I am his Mistress and he is my slut. I own him and he knows it. He obediently picked up the dice and rolled them onto the coffee table. "A 3, a 5 and a 6. Mmmm, that sounds really yummy, doesn't that love?" Tom replied with his "Yes Mistress." "Now slut, let me think where I want to put these numbers. I could make you wait 6 days between cums, and make you eat 3 loads with me having 5 orgasms a day for the next 18 days. But that's just not what Mommy's in the mood for today. No, I think my little slut is going to eat a full 6 loads. You are going to give me 5 orgasms a day, starting today, and then cum every 3 days until you have 6 loads of your sticky sperm saved up. Doesn't that sound good slut?" Tom barely got out his yes Mistress as his head was wheeling with thoughts of 6 big loads of cum going down his throat about 3 weeks from now. I wrote down the three numbers in their appropriate spots on the paper, and then presented it to my slut. "Now sign it, slut!" Tom picked up the feather pen and wrote his name.
All that was left for him to do tonight was pleasure me. "Well, today is Friday and day 1. You're not cumming until Sunday. I bet with all of the service you are going to give me until then, your balls will we swollen with lots of white slimy sperm." By now, the sofa was fairly wet from my excitement. I pushed Tom on his back and sat on his face, grinding my pussy onto his mouth as I reached back and stroked his cock from time to time. "Make sure you don't come, or I will take that as a protest, and I will add another load onto your sentence." Five orgasms later, I told Tom what a good little slut he is and sent him off to bed with a hard on you could do push-ups with.
When Sunday came along, I could tell my little slut was eager with anticipation of his release. Sure, he knew he would eventually have to eat his load, but that was the furthest thing from his mind right now. Right now, he wanted to orgasm. "Little slut, come here please." He practically tripped over himself to get over to me. "You've been a good little slut haven't you, making Mommy cum so many times in the last few days. I bet you really want to cum, don't you." As Tom mouthed his yes, Mistress, I reached down and caressed his ball sack, and felt the weight of them. They felt swollen and heavy with cum. "I'm sure you remember love that you get to cum today in a method of My choosing. You've been such a horny little boy, not being allowed to cum and having to please Mommy so many times." I could see the end of my slut's cock glistening with precum. "Go and make Mommy a drink and get a shotglass and some lube." Tom brought me back my manhatten, shotglass and lube. "Mommy's going to sit here and watch you milk yourself dry. Put that shotglass on the floor and kneel in front of it. Now lube up your left middle finger and start fingering your asshole while you masturbate into the shotglass while I enjoy the show." Tom started going to work on himself while I gleefully sipped my manhatten and watched my slut perform for me. It didn't take long and he had his cock spewing out spurt after spurt of thick white sperm as he moaned in pleasure. "Now, go and cover that shotglass and put it in the freezer. And when you are done, you can come back over here and start sucking on my pussy while I finish my drink." Five orgasms and a few drinks later, he was done with his task.
I continued this similar routine for the next few weeks until my slut had unloaded in four more shotglasses. That left just one more final cum which of course was being saved up for his big day. When I woke up on the final day, I surprised my slut with me grabbing his cock and saying "Good morning, I hope you are hungry today, you have a lot of sperm to eat!" I spent the week thinking of ways for my slut to swallow his loads. I didn't want to make him drink all of them at once, but rather to prolong his torture over the course of a few hours. "OK, little slut, it's time for your first meal. Take off all of your clothes and get on all fours." Tom didn't hesitate as he really wanted to cum, being a few days since his last release. I decided weeks ago that his "meals" were going to be a little more agonizing than he's used to, I'm going to make him enjoy every bite. I think my slut thought I was going to let him cum for his final time, but I was going to make him hold it until the end.
"For breakfast, I have some cereal for you to eat. Get down on all fours and wait while I go get your meal." I had set the first shotglass in a dish of warm water to thaw my slut's cum. It was thawed, sticky and ready for him to eat it now. I took out a doggie dish, put some dry cereal in it and placed it in front of Tom. "Here is your breakfast, just let me add the final ingredient for you, it looks a little dry right now." I took the shotglass and poured my slut's slimy white mess all over the dry cereal. "Get busy honey, breakfast is the most important meal of the day." Tom started eating his cereal like the little cumwhore he is, with his "tail" wagging between his legs. When he finished I brought him over another doggie dish and said, "I'm sure you are thirsty after all of that cereal. Here's a water dish for you to wash that down with." I set him down the dish that had about a cup of water in it. Then I took out another thawed shotglass and poured it into it. "Make sure you lap up all of your water, and then lick your dish clean." By now, I was so wet, my panties were saturated with my drippings. I took them off and told Tom to close his eyes and stick out his tongue. I then wiped all of my gooey cream from my panties onto his tongue and put my panties back on. "Good boy."
Later that day for lunch I made him eat his third load by pouring his cum over a small lettuce salad that he was given to eat. "That can be your dressing, I bet it will really bring out of the flavor of your lettuce." I had really been looking forward to his next couple of swallows. I was going to play a little role reversal with him and picked out a nice sexy outfit for him to wear. "For the rest of the day, I'm going to slut you up properly. Here is a pair of panties and a bra for you to wear. And here is a dress, and some nylons. I want you to go take a shower and shave all of your chest, armpit, facial and leg hair, get dressed and let me know when you are done." Tom looked completely shocked by this. I've never dressed him up like this before, and making him shave meant a fairly large commitment of humiliation for him to deal with. It took him quite awhile to finish his task, and when he came out of the bathroom, he looked really sexy. "Aren't you a pretty little thing." I could hardly contain my laughing. Now meet me in our bedroom bathroom so I can finish dolling you up. I whored my slut up nicely, applying makeup and perfume, and painting his fingernails. "Now you even look like a little slut. But, sluts like to get fucked, and fucked hard. And that's what you are going to get." I had bought a strap-on for the occasion and pulled it out of my panty drawer. Look at what you are going to have shoved inside of you. Mommy has a nice fat cock she want to fuck you with." Tom's pretty little eyes got wider and wider the more he looked at my cock as I strapped it to my body. I pushed my whore face first onto the bed, lifted up his dress and then pulled down his thong. "I know you want this cock in your ass, slut. I'm going to fuck that little hole of yours until you can't take it anymore." I lubed up my slut's ass and plunged my cock deep inside of him as he arched and moaned in agony. "I bet that feels so good, being fucked by my hard thick cock. Make sure you don't accidentally cum, I still have plans for that last load of yours." I pounded his ass harder and harder as he moaned louder and louder. "You really are a noisy little slut. I know how to put an end to that." I left the bedroom and returned with a shotglass full of frozen cum. "I want you to put this cumcube in your mouth and hold it there until I tell you to swallow it. That should keep your mouth shut for awhile." Tom obeyed and I fucked his tight little asshole for awhile longer. When I was finished I said, "You can swallow now." I heard a big gulp and that was the end of the fourth load. Two more to go.
"You certainly can take getting fucked like a slut, now let's see how you give head." I cleaned off my strap-on cock and pulled out a condom and my last load of saved cum. I unrolled the condom and poured the thawed cum into the end of it, and then slid it onto the strap-on. "Now you have a nice hard cum-filled cock to suck on. Give me a blow-job and if you are a good slut, after I cum in your mouth, I'll let you swallow it right away and not have to hold it." Tom went to work sucking and stroking my cock as he has seen me do to him thousands of times. He almost seemed like he was enjoying himself, and I was getting more aroused as I watched him going down on me. Then suddenly, I pulled my cock from his mouth, and cut a small piece of rubber from the end of the condom. I shoved it deep in Tom's mouth and pulled back on the condom at the same time, forcing the cum out and straight down my his throat. He gagged on at first, but recovered and swallowed it all down. I then took the condom off and made him lick it inside out and lick all of the cum off of my cock.
"You certainly look like a whore, I have a treat for you for your last cum swallow." I pulled out a saucer plate sized hand mirror and placed it on the floor. I want you to cum on this mirror and then watch yourself in it as you lick it clean." By now, my slut was so horny, he jumped down on the floor and had his load spewed onto the mirror in no time. His last load was very large and thick. "Just think about all of the sperm swimming around in that mess on the mirror. You want them in your mouth, don't you slut?" The whore mouthed "Yes Mistress" and started cleaning off the plate with his tongue. "You look so slutty all dolled up licking cum off of that mirror. Don't forget when you are done, you still have five orgasms to give Mommy today." When he had finished cleaning up his mess, he went to work on my pussy, and as he was pleasuring me, I exclaimed, "This has been a fun game, I think we should roll some more dice when you are done. And I think this time instead of picking a number from the dice for the amount of cumshots you need to eat, we'll add up the total from the three dice and use that as the number, with any luck you could roll all 6's. Eighteen loads of cum sounds really yummy. That's what you want, isn't it slut. Not that you really have a choice anyway.

Blogged By: La Tray
Media Credit: Photo (Daily Mail) (SWNS)
Posted: Monday April 30, 2012 @1:25 p.m. PST
- Despite stunning good looks, teenager never believed she was attractive enough for the modelling world
- She developed anorexia and bulimia at the age of 16 and the illnesses left her too tired to work
- The model died in her sleep at her grandmother’s house of suspected heart failure
An anorexic teenage covergirl died of heart failure in her sleep after her weight dropped to just six stone.
Bethaney Wallace, 19, appeared to be living a dream lifestyle, appearing on the covers of glossy magazines including Girl Talk and Popgirl from the age of 12.
But despite her stunning good looks she never believed she was attractive enough and succumbed to anorexia and bulimia aged 16.
‘You can’t feed them because they will just sick it up. Her friends said they would go to a restaurant and Bethaney would only order bread.
‘The first time my wife noticed something was when Bethaney was asleep on the sofa and when she woke up the first thing she did was touch her stomach.
‘She lost her self esteem. She would say she was fat. But she was so beautiful. She didn’t realise how pretty she was. Once a man was staring at her on the escalator so much that he fell down.
‘But she had up days and down days. It was like Jekyll and Hyde.
‘I tried to warn her that her organs would fail, but she just said “don’t be silly”. She would stay at my mother’s house.
Bethaney, who volunteered for Care UK in her home town of Newmarket, Suffolk, died at her grandmother’s house in nearby Carlton on April 18.
Her eating problems began when she got glandular fever aged 16 after a holiday in Greece – and became determined not to put the weight back on.
The model’s parents said she became agitated whenever anyone asked her what she was eating and would order just bread when she went out with friends.
Mr and Mrs Wallace also told how they could never enjoy watching her eat because when she tucked in they knew she would make herself sick later.
The couple today said they were left feeling helpless because Bethaney was legally an adult and they had no rights to force her to change.
Mrs Wallace said: ‘It was so hard to get the help. I went to the doctors a few times on my own.
‘I asked them to call her in for something else and then bring up the eating
‘But Beth was not a child so I could not force her to get help. For parents you are slowly watching your child die.
‘It was out of our hands.’
Bethaney modelled for teen magazines Popgirl, BBC Girl Talk and Make It Groovy in 2004 when she was 12, making £112 per shoot.
The former student of Hills Road Sixth Form College in Cambridge had hoped to pursue a career in photography and modelling.
She stopped modelling for two years to concentrate on her school work and achieved four A*s, four As and one B for her GCSEs, as well as an A* for photography, B for Biology, B for Geography and C for Media Studies at A-level.
Her parents said Bethaney’s death had been made more tragic because they had started to feel like she had turned the corner and was getting on top of her conditions – after years of being too weak to even go shopping.
Mr Wallace said: ‘She was getting better. She was having counselling and making good progress.’
He added: ‘She had started doing more. I wonder if she had done too much. The paramedics said her blood sugar level was very low.’
Housewife Mrs Wallace added: ‘Girls were never jealous of Bethaney because when they spoke to her they realised she was really nice. The loveliness inside came out.
‘She stayed friends with everyone.
‘Everyone who saw Bethaney knew she was a beautiful girl. But those who got to know her realised that she was beautiful inside too.
‘She had an inviting smile and big brown eyes that would make everybody happy.
Bex Parramint, 30, from Power Model Management in Norwich, Norfolk, who represented Bethaney when she was modelling, paid tribute to her today.
She said: ‘I remember that as a little girl Bethaney would always have fresh flowers in her bedroom.
‘She was a really bright, smiley, beautiful little girl. She was so cute. She was just right as she was.’
Mary George, spokeswoman for eating disorder charity Beat, said anorexia and bulimia ‘take a huge toll on the body over a period of time’.
She said: ‘Our hearts go out to Bethaney’s family – eating disorders are devastating illnesses and it is particularly poignant that she had been making progress in her battle to beat her illness.
‘Eating disorders take a huge toll on the body over a period of time.’
The coroner for Suffolk said the cause of Bethaney’s death is uncertain pending tests.
An inquest was opened and adjourned on April 23. Bethaney also leaves behind a sister Shari, 22.
West Suffolk Eating Disorder Service in Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk, gave Bethaney an eating plan and she had been receiving counselling for a year.
The bulimia and anorexia sufferer was 5ft 3ins and had weighed 6st 10lbs in February.
Her BMI was 16.6, which meant she was categorised as dangerously underweight.
At Madrid Fashion Week 2012 models were banned from taking part if they had a BMI of less than 18.
On the night she died, Bethaney had gone to stay with her grandmother in Moulton, Suffolk, on the night she died.
The next morning her parents received a phone call from Bethaney’s grandmother and they rushed round to find her dead.

Meet 19-year-old Maeghan Smith of Novinger. Agriculture was something her family took pride in as they had a big interest in raising cattle and pigs.Throughout her years with the Show Me 4-H Group and the Novinger FFA, she showed cattle. But this year she decided to show pigs. She has even taught them a neat trickâ?|her pigs know how to sit.
"One of my pigs seemed like taught herself. She kept on sitting every time I gave her a treat. So with my other pig, I tried teaching her how to sit and she caught right on. Cookies are the trick," Smith said.
This will be Maeghanâ??s first year showing her pigs at the Sullivan County and NEMO Fairs. According to her, it takes a lot of hard work and responsibility to take care of the hogs and prepare them for the shows. But still, they are her babies
"They're like my kids, as much time I spend out here with them. I come out here and rinse them off at least 3 times a day. I'm out here 2 hours at least with them each day just hanging out with them," Smith said.
Other than teaching her pigs how to sit, Maeghan has shared some other funny moments with them.
"I was selling one of my pigs. Afterwards, she got out of the ring and there was a lady, someone that we know. She just took off and when in between those lady's legs and the lady landed right on her butt," Smith said.
Maeghan is planning to continue working in agriculture as it helped shape her into the person she is today.
"I can't imagine living in the city or anywhere else. It's done a lot for me. Give it a shot so you can at least say you tried it," Smith said.
Even though she is a graduate, Maeghan is still active with the Novinger FFA.
She is about to enter her second year at MACC and is planning to attend Truman State University after receiving her Associateâ??s to study animal science.
Congratulations Maeghan on being this week's Ag Kid.

Emma was baptized last week Sunday by her great grand-father. It was so special to have my Opa baptize my second daughter. It was almost 50 years exactly since he baptized my mom and 24 years ago since he baptized me. What a wonderful example of God's covenant faithfulness!
Thank you to everyone who came to celebrate with us; it was special to have you all there!

Profile - Brandon Kennedy
Kennedy received the offer from Tech defensive line coach Mike Pelton. Coach Pelton made a recent visit to Wetumpka and spent time with Kennedy's coach. "He extended the offer to my coach and said they wanted me at Georgia Tech."
Coach Pelton and the Tech staff liked what they saw from Brandon after watching his film. Coach Pelton let Brandon's coach know that they are only taking three offensive linemen. Tech has one commit and has been looking at three in-state players. "They gave me an offer to let me know they really want me at Tech."
Georgia Tech feels that Kennedy could play center or guard. "I prefer guard but center would also be fine." Brandon currently plays guard and tackle for Wetumpka.
The possibility of playing in Tech's spread option offense is not a deterrent to Kennedy. "I'd love to play on the line there and learn from them." Brandon feels that pass blocking is his strength but he also feels he could be a good run blocker. "I have good feet so it shouldn't be hard to get better at run blocking."
A former Wetumpka player is also encouraging Brandon to come to Tech. "I talk to Jamal Golden and he said going to Tech was easily the best decision he made and he loves it there. He said he would love to see me there."
A decision date has not been determined yet by Brandon. "I want to have a college picked out before my first game of the year. Sometime in late summer would be good." Brandon feels that Tech will be one of the schools that will continue to be involved in his recruitment until he makes that decision.

« AnteriorContinuar »
frightened out of my life. I shall have to stay hero all night.
“So, you see, I did feel some little pity for her, and I went up to her, and she told me how she had sent him, and he had never come back again. The fact is,' says I, Peggy, you ar'n't smart enough for such a frenchified chap as he is.
He don't like to be seen in your company. Come, get up, and I will see you home at all events ;' so I took charge of her, and saw her safe to her father's door.
“Won't you come in ?' said she.
“Yes,' says I, I'll forgive you, for old acquaintancesake, and for one more reason.'
66 • What's that?' says Peggy.
“Why,' says I, ‘for the lesson which you've learnt me. I've been made a fool of
fault; but if ever a woman makes a fool of me again, why then it's mine; and so, Peggy, good-bye for ever.'
“So I turned away on my heel ; and as I left the transport the next trip, I never saw her again."
“Well, Bramble," replied I, “I agree with youand if ever a woman makes a fool of me again, it will be my fault. You know what's happened, so I don't mind saying so."
“Why, Tom, in your present humour, you think so; but all do not keep to the same way of thinking as I did, till it was too late to think about marrying; but still I do not think that I should have been happy as ? single man, if it had not been for my falling in with Bessy. I should have been very lonely I expect, for I began to feel so. When you come to your own doos, Tom, home looks cheerless if there is no bright eye to welcome you, and the older a man gets, the more he feels that he was not intended to live single. My yearning after something to love, and to love me, which is in our nature, was satisfied, first by having Bessy, and then by having you--and I'm thankful."
“ You might have married, and have been very unhappy."
"I might, and I might have been very happy, had I chosen a wife as a man should do."
“And how is that, pray, Bramble?”
“Why, Tom, I've often thought upon it. In the first place, look out for good temper: if you find that, you may be happy, even if your wife is a silly woman; assure yourself first of her temper, and then you must judge her by the way in which she does those duties which have fallen to her lot; for if a girl is a dutiful and affectionate daughter, there is little fear but that she will prove a loving and obedient wife. But I think we have had our spell here, Tom, and it's rather cold : rouse up one of those chaps, and tell him to come to the helm. I'll coil myself up and have a snooze till the morning, and do you do the same.”
IN WHICE I RECEIVE A VERY SEVERE BLOW FROM A PARTY OR
The day after this conversation we fell in with several vessels windbound at the entrance of the Channel. I took charge of one, and the wind shifting to the S.W., and blowing strong, I carried her up to the Pool. As soon as I could leave her, I took a bcat to go down to Greenwich, as I was most anxious to have a long conversation with Virginia. It was a dark, squally night, with rain at intervals between the gusts of wind, and I was wet through long before I landed at the stairs, which was not until past eleven o'clock. I paid the waterman, and hastened up to my mother's house ; being aware that they would either be all in bed, or about to retire. It so happened that I did not go the usual way, but passed by the house of Old Nanny; and as I walked by with a quick step, and was thinking of her and her misfortunes, I fell over something which, in the dark, I did not perceive, and which proved to be some iron railings, that the workmen who were fixing them up had carelessly left on the ground, previous to their returning to their work on the ensuing morning. Fortunately the spikes at the cnds of them were from me, and I received no injury, except a severe blow on the shin; and, as I stopped a moment to rub it, I thought that I heard a cry from the direction of Old Nanny's house; but the wind was very high, and I was not certain. I stopped and listened, and it was repeated. I gained the door; it was so dark that I groped for the latch. The door was open, and when I went in I heard a gurgling kind of noise and a rustling in her chamber. “Who's there ?- What's this ?” cried I; for I had a foreboding that something was wrong.
I tumbled over some old iron, knocked down the range of keys, and made a terrible din, when, of a sudden, just as I had recovered my legs, I was thrown down again by somebody who rushed by me and darted out of the door. As the person rushed by me, I attempted to seize bis arm, but I received a severe blow on the mouth, which cut iny lip through, and at first I thought I had lost all my front teeth.
I rose up; I heard a heavy groaning; so, instead of pursuing the robber, I felt my way into Nanny's chamber. “Nanny,” said I, “mother, what's the matter ?" but there was no reply, except another groan. I knew where she kept her tinder-box and matches; I found them, and struck a light; and by the light of the match I perceived the candle and candlestick lying on the floor. I picked it up, lighted it, and then turned to the bed; the flock mattress was above all, and the groans proceeded from beneath. I threw it off, and found Old Nanny still breathing, but in a state of great exhaustion, and quite insensible. By throwing water on her face, after some little while I brought her to her senses. The flaring of the candle rémiuded me that the shop door was open ; I went and made it fast, and then spoke to her. It was a long while before I could obtain any rational answer. She continued to groan and cry at intervals. “Don't leave me, Jack, don't leave me.” At last she fell into a sort of slumber from exhaustion, and in this state she remained for more than an hour. One thing was evident to me, which was, that the party, whoever it might be, had attempted to smother the poor old woman, and that in a few seconds more he would have perpetrated the deed.
At last Ola Nanny rousod up, and turning to me,
said, “It's Jack, is it not? I thought so. Oh, my poor head !- What has happened?"
“ That's what I want to know from you, mother," replied I; “but first I will tell you what I know of the business;" which I did to give her time to collect her thoughts.
“Yes,” said she, “ so it was. I was just in bed, and my candle was not out, when I heard a noise at the door, as if they were turning a key in it; and then a man entered; but he had something over his face, I thought, or he had blacked it. • What do you want?' cried I; “I come for a light, old woman,' said he. I cried, “Thieves! murder!' as loud as I could, and ho ran up to me just as I was getting out of bed, and tried to smother me. I don't recollect anything more till I
voice. Thank you, Jack, and God bless you;
you hadn't come to the assistance of a poor old wretch like me, I should have been dead by this time.”
I felt that what she said was true, and I then asked her many questions, so as to lead to the discovery of the party. “How was he dressed ?" inquired I.
“I can't exactly say; but do you know, Jack, I fancied that he had a pensioner's coat on; indeed, I'm almost sure of it. I think I tore off one of his buttons. I recollect its giving way ;-I may be wrong, --my head wanders.”
But I thought that, most likely, Nanny was right: so I looked down on the floor with the candle, and there I picked up & pensioner's button. “ You're right, Nanny; here is the button."
Well, now, Jack, I can't talk any more ; you won't leave me to-night, I'm sure."

I went to Ninja restaurant in Akasaka. Amusement restaurants such as Ninja, Alice, prison,etc. are very popular lately in Japan. Eapecially this Ninja restaurant is high in favor with foreign visitors and locals. I fanally could make a reservation and visit there!
When we went into the entrance,one Ninja appeared and led us to a table. It was a rather long and labyrinth of way.We couldn’t see around very well and a small river was suddenly showed up.The Ninja recited a charm and a small bridge was coming down from the ceiling…!Few minutes later,we finally reached a table in a private room.
The Ninja took charged of our table and explained many things about restaurant and their dishes.It was wonderful because he performed Ninja perfectelly during our stay and could speak few foreign languages.
Food was also wonderful.We enjoyed not only the tast, but also their performance.Each dishes had some trick so it was like a magic show!
When we had some dessert, one female Ninja came in our room.She was also very friendly and showed us two amazing real magic.We were so surprised at her skill and clapped with cheers!
We entirely enjoyed for two hours.

They all still reacted to the cock crowing. It had been ten long years, growing up. They had never forgotten, not one of them. That was why, Nibs reflected, they never did sleep very well while in the country. They all heard a cock crow and immediately awoke, thinking he was there. Of course, he never was.
"Nick!" The twenty year old boy-man scowled at hearing his adult name. They all had them now, 'normal' names that weren't remarked on by Society. Only the other boys and Wendy-lady called him by his natural name. He would always be Nibs. He would even tell his wife to call him Nibs.
"Nicolas! For God's sake, pay attention to what I'm saying."
"What-oh, sorry, Father. I'm afraid I was lost in thought again."
"As usual," Mr. Darling muttered, but the small smile tugging at the corners of his lips said he didn't mind that much.
"I am sure you know, Nick, that this invitation to the Bakerly's ball quite startled the family. As you are the only one of your brothers here at the moment, and I do not want to deal with your sister's reaction, I will ask you to deliver this message to her."
Nibs blinked, trying to catch up with his father's words.
"Alright, what is the message?"
"She has been asked to lay off her spinster's cap and dress in something more befitting her appearance. It seems that Count Bakerly's eldest son desires to see her 'as she should be looking'; that is a direct quote from the note that was just sent around."
"Alright then, let me see if I have this straight. I am to tell Wendy she is to actually look decent tonight, I presume?"
"Exactly, Nick. Now go on, you'd best tell her soon, so she has all afternoon to fret over what she will wear." Mr. Darling smiled again, then called out as his adopted son was at the door to the parlor, "Oh, and Nibs? Tell her he expressly forbids any of those bland browns she has recently been wearing. I must admit I agree with him. She may have decided to don a spinster's cap, but there is no reason for her to be attempting to blend into the woodwork as well. That you may tell her is a direct quote from me."
"Of course, Father." Nibs returned the grin before completely exiting the room, nearly bumping into the very person he had been previously talking about.
"Come into the sitting room, I have something I must tell you."
"You have grown so secretive in your old age, Nibs. You normally would have just blurted out what ever you needed to say, instead of leading me away to where we might not be overheard." Her gray eyes, merry at the moment, still reflected the hopeless longing they all felt for him. She missed him most of all, they all knew. That was why she was still unmarried. Wendy was still waiting for him.
"Not secretive, and not old, miss spinster," Nibs teased, "I only wished to deliver my remarks in a more comfortable setting than the front foyer. Please, sit." He gestured her to the sofa, sitting beside her.
"Now then, I will get right to the heart of the matter. Count Bakerly's eldest son has decreed that to their ball tonight you will dress, direct quote, 'as you should be looking'. He expressly forbids you your brown dresses."
"He has some nerve, doesn't he?" Wendy remarked, leaning back and playing with the tassels of her shawl.
"Indeed he does-"
"Then I suppose I will not be going to the ball tonight. I have no dresses but brown."
"What about that pretty blue one Aunt Millicent bought you?"
"It was too small, she had to return it."
Nibs sighed, then brightened, a smile flashing across his face.
"Let's see what dresses you have, surely all of them can't be this same drab brown, and if worst comes to pass, you can always wear one of Mother's dresses, you two are of a size, after all."
"How would you know that, Nibs? You're acting more learned about feminine things than any of the other boys; you who used to tease me for braiding my hair at night!" Wendy chided him, grinning when he began to blush.
"Is it for Miss Renworth?" She questioned.
"Yes, actually. She, ah, well, suffice to say, I've noticed more than you thought, Wendy." Nibs looked away for a moment, "I'll prove it to you too, if you'd come upstairs with me and call Mother. I'm sure between the three of us we can find something so you can go to this ball." He flashed her his customary smirk before dashing up the stairs, leaving her at the foot.
"Very gentlemanly, Nibs!" She called up, "I should refuse to go now that I have been so abused by my own brother."
"Oh, so sorry Lady Wendy," he reappeared, loping quickly back down the stairs to hold an arm out for her, bowing, "Would you deign to accompany me up the stairs to your chambers so we may choose your ensemble for this evening? I have given word to the matriarch; she awaits our coming post-haste."
She put one hand on his forearm and gathered up her skirt with the other.
"Why of course, milord, now then, let us go greet the matriarch and plan my ensemble."
Once upstairs, Nibs viewed his sister's closet with distaste.
"None of these will do, Wendy. They're all the same brown. What did you do, manage to get a cheap commission for the lot because Madame Vulpitine couldn't find anyone else to order something from the bolt?" A glance at her, face red, confirmed his theory, and he turned contrite.
"Gad, I'm sorry, Wendy. I didn't mean it that way. I just-"
"Wendy, darling," their mother interrupted smoothly, "You know we have no need of the money you may have saved."
"I was planning on keeping it for myself, Mother. I don't want to be a burden on you and Father, what with the boys' school bills." Wendy tried to explain, sitting down on her bed.
"You'll do no such thing. There's no reason for you to need to save the money, your father and I will never consider you a burden! You're our daughter, Wendy, and we love you."
"I know that Mother, of course I know that. I just want to be able to do something with myself. I'm feeling useless. I'm not pretty, so no one wants to marry me; I'm not a man, so I can't even go into a trade!"
Mrs. Darling sat down beside her daughter and reached up a hand to stroke her cheek.
"Wendy! You are beautiful. As for the trade, you could always write books; Mary Shelley did. You have all those wonderful stories about Peter Pan and everything in Neverland." Mrs. Darling was shocked when Wendy pulled away.
"But how am I supposed to know Peter wants to be written about? He hasn't visited in ten years! He told me he would never forget me! He said he would come back for the stories, and he never has." She took in a shuddering breath.
"I love him, Mother. I've been waiting for him to grow up. That's why I rejected all those offers; I was waiting for my Peter. Now it's too late, I'm too old; no one wants to marry me, not even Mr. Millway. I'm going to be the spinster aunt, and-and-" She couldn't say any more, and with one look at Nibs, promptly burst into tears.
"Mother, I'll handle her...perhaps that dress you got last week; that might do."
Nibs crouched down beside his sister, awkwardly pulling her into his arms.
"Shh, Wendy. It'll be alright. You may not end up as the spinster aunt; Bakerly's son seems interested in you, enough to notice your clothing. He could be a likely prospect."
"Nibs!" Wendy jerked out of his arms, spots of anger appearing on her tearstained cheeks.
"For all you know he could just not want to have any wallflowers at the event, and knows that if I look respectable I'll be asked to dance! And as for prospects, I need to see the man first. I-I...what a foul thing to say! Just push me up on the auction block why don't you, and sell me to the highest bidder, I'm halfway there already!" Her outraged howl brought Tootles and Michael running in to defend their sister, but Nibs shook his head and motioned them out the door.
"Wendy-lady, if you'd stop attempting to strangle me, you'd notice I got you to stop crying." Nibs remarked matter-of-factly.
Wendy gave a little laugh as she let go of his neck and pulled him in for a brotherly peck on the cheek.
"You always were the bravest and most levelheaded, Nibs. Curly or the Twins, the dears, would have already been dead. John would've stood there, he never knows what to do with crying women, I'm afraid. Tootles and Michael would've had Mother do something instead. You've got your heart set on my going to this ball, don't you?" She questioned him as she rearranged her skirts into a more lady-like position.
"Indeed I do. Though the letter was rude and the invitation horribly late, I still think you should go, all the rest of us are." Nibs replied, sitting back on his heels.
"Yes, the Bakerlys are arranging a small party for those too young for their introductions, so that their younger children don't have to peer down the stairwell at us."
"A very good idea, it will make the Twins, Tootles and Michael come out of their Musketeering for a night, at the very least. They haven't done anything else since coming back from Eton."
"Musketeering?" Nibs questioned.
"Yes, haven't you noticed their habit of sticking together like the Musketeers? Tootles is like Athos, First is like Aramis, Second is like Porthos and Michael is like d'Artagnan."
"The Musketeers?" Nibs chuckled, "Like in The Three Musketeers? Wendy, remember, I'm a man, when in the world would I have time to read books?"
"Oh you! I know you read it; I saw it in your room last week. Now then, I'd best see this dress that Mother picked out for me." Wendy turned, gesturing their mother into the room. Mrs. Darling had been waiting in the corridor, listening to them talk. She could rarely get Wendy to open up like this anymore; her not-so-little girl was keeping secrets. She respected that, but was glad Wendy still had someone she could tell them to.
"Oh, mother, it's beautiful!" Wendy cried, nearly bowling Nibs over in her rush to stand up.
"Wendy," Nibs said, "You do realize the dress is still brown?"
"Yes, but it's not the same shade. He said not to wear dull brown. This certainly isn't dull, Nibs!" Wendy seized the dress from her mother's arms and turned to her mirror, admiring herself.
The dress was deep chestnut brown that made her eyes sparkle and her hair gleam, even in the uneven sunlight streaming through the window.
"This will show Bakerly's son. It's not dull, but it's brown. It's perfect!" Wendy proclaimed.
"Good. We have the dress, but you do realize we'll have to do your hair, Wendy; your caps won't work with this gown." Nibs remarked.
"Bother it," Wendy grumbled, sitting back down on her bed with the dress still in her arms, "You knew I'd fall in love with the gown and be unable to wear my hat, I take it?"
"Exactly. Now I'll leave and send Betty in so you can get ready. It's already six o'clock. Remember, Cook said she will hold dinner until seven, but no later."
Wendy was more nervous than she had been since her first ball. Why, she didn't exactly know; she had been to hundreds of balls, after all, every single one since the first much like the one before it. The only changes came in what dress she wore, how tight her corsets were laced and whether she had to refuse another offer of marriage. Otherwise they were all the same. She wouldn't have admitted it to Nibs or any of the others, but she was curious about the Count's eldest son. There had been rumors he had been kidnapped years ago and only now managed to return to his family. Some even said he had been kidnapped by pirates, but she didn't believe that in the least. Pirates would have no use for a noble boy, especially keeping him as long as they were said to have kept him.
Once they had gone through the introductions, Count Bakerly had glanced around and explained to her befuddled father that it seemed that his son had gone mingling in the crowd. He got bored with things like this easily, Count Bakerly hastily said, it came from only coming back to polite Society a year before.
Wendy hadn't been surprised to find herself ensconced once again against the wall. Even dressed as she was in a brighter brown, she hadn't been able to give up a cap, though she had needed to convince her mother to allow her to borrow the matching hat. She was a spinster, after all, and just because her current hats wouldn't work, it didn't mean she couldn't wear a matron's cap and be just as ignored. She liked it better that way.
Unfortunately, even against the wall and bored almost to tears, she was inexplicably nervous. Her right hand played with the chain holding Peter's acorn. Aunt Millicent had thought she had been tamed of this bad habit, but she had not. It always comforted her to think of Peter. His smile and laugh still filled her dreams. She would end up being the spinster aunt with silly tales of a boy, she knew. But at least the men would back her up. If only she could find a fairy in the garden and go visit Peter! Every time she thought she had one, it turned out to just be a firefly.
She barely registered the person coming to sit beside her. Only the clearing of a decidedly masculine throat brought her back to her senses and away from the fairy wedding playing in her head.
"I do think, miss, that I told you expressly not to wear brown." The voice was barely cultured; there was a decidedly American twang to it that for what ever reason sent shivers down her spine. She looked up quickly but then ducked her head back down after viewing clear green-gray eyes looking at her solemnly.
"It is not dull brown, or completely brown. It is a compromise, milord. I take it you are Count Bakerly's eldest son?"
"Indeed. You always were a stubborn one."
She looked up again at him to view his eyes crinkling in an oddly familiar way.
"I believe this belongs to you."
She stared in surprise as he handed her a small silver thimble.
"A thimble, what do you mean by this, milord?"
"It belongs to you, and always will, as this belongs to me."
Wendy could only sit stunned as he leaned forward and kissed her directly on the lips.
"What is the meaning of this, sirrah?" She asked, scandalized, inching backwards in her seat.
"Wendy, you've forgotten me?" Wendy looked at the man again and became caught in his pained gaze. There was something familiar about the pain there...
"You made me promise I would never forget you, and now you've forgotten me. That's friendship for you!" The man muttered, breaking his hold on her gaze as he leaned back.
"But I've never met you before, milord, and here you are criticizing my clothing and kissing me like we are married!"
"Ah, Wendy, Wendy, Wendy. I'm sorry; I truly am that I couldn't come to hear the stories myself. I had some growing up to do." He smiled and she finally recognized him fully. But it couldn't be...
She couldn't get over her shock.
"But you're grown up!"
"Yes, one does that here," he remarked casually.
"But you're older than I am! How can that be? How are you related to Bakerly? And how-"
"One question at a time, Miss Darling." Peter teased her gently, "Come on, first I'll take you somewhere we can discuss this further."
As he stood and led her out into the garden, she began to marvel. He really had grown up. His hair was still that same gorgeous blond-brown and curling, though now it was over his collar. Unfashionably long, but she still thought it was gorgeous.
He sat her down on a wrought-iron bench in the center of the garden maze, and then seemed to have a long conversation with the hedge. Wendy realized after a moment he must be talking to Tinkerbell.
"There," Peter turned away from the hedge and walked back over to her, "Tink will warn us if anyone comes near. I don't want them all to hear. Not even my parents know the truth. I told them about Hook and they made up the rest for themselves."
"Now then, I'll try to explain the aging as well as I can, but I don't understand it myself. I visited you once last year, or tried to, but you were at a party. I'm afraid I tracked you to the party and watched you. You were having so much fun without me! I couldn't stand it, and went back to Neverland, determined to grow up. I wanted to be able to have fun with you too. So, here I am. All grown up, and ready for you, Wendy."
"But Count Bakerly?"
Peter leaned back against the wrought-iron and stared up at the stars before responding.
"Is my actual father. I'm actually Lord Peter of Panukibejon, I guess it's some estate my father ownssomewhere. I could only remember that I was Peter of Pan-something, so I became Peter Pan. When I was six and they were planning on shipping me off to Eton for school I left and wound up in Neverland. I managed to age myself then, but once I got to age twelve I didn't think I wanted to get any older, after all, my oldest cousin was twelve, and he seemed old. So I stayed in Neverland, training the Boys when they came and fighting Hook. I've been told I was missing seventeen years. A long time, it seems. I unknowingly aged myself that much right before I came back here, to see you. I was taught everything I needed to know as an adult last year, or most of it."
"How are you going to explain to your parents how the boys and I know you?"
"Easy." Peter twisted his neck to look at her, "The boys were kidnapped by pirates like I was, and so were you. You were just smart enough to get yourselves out. The newspapers didn't say how you went missing or how you actually came back, after all. I already told them I must have been on a different ship; that was why I didn't escape with you."
"Oh, the cleverness of me!" Peter said with a little laugh, tossing his head back.
"Quite." Wendy said dryly, "Now then, how exactly are you going to tell the boys that you're here to stay?"
"By telling them I'm marrying their sister."
"So, that's your proposal?" She asked delicately.
"Yes, I thought-" Peter fully looked at her again, and gulped. Oh, damn.
"Wendy, I didn't mean it like that, really, I-I-I-" He recognized that look. It was the same one he had given her when she told him she was Red-Handed Jill. He was doomed. He could only watch in horror as the rage completely filled her gray eyes.
"Oh, really? What did you mean, then?"
"Err...did you know your eyes look like storms when you're mad?" He blurted out, "And I meant to ask you nicely, but it wouldn't come out any other way. I'm not used to being grownup and having to ask for things. I do want to marry you, so we can have fun together." He stood and then shocked her yet again by getting down on one knee, completely oblivious to the wet grass.
"Wendy Moira Angela Darling, will you marry me?"
"But what?" He asked hesitantly, overjoyed at her response but afraid at what she might mean by it.
"You need to take me flying again."
"Fine by me. Now?"
"Yes, now. So, do you want to now?" He stood, then stopped at the irate chiming coming from the tree, and pulled a box out of his pocket, blushing.
"I almost forgot. Here, this is for you, I hope it'll fit."
She took the box from him gently, opening it. Wendy proceeded to stand rooted to the spot in shock. It was gorgeous. The square cut ruby reminded her of the sunrise over Neverland.
"Oh, Peter-" She looked up at him then back down at the ring in her hand, realizing belatedly that they were at least two feet off the ground.
"Milady?" He asked, taking the ring from the box and slipping it on her finger, then bowed, holding his hand out to her.
"Shall we fly?"
Wendy just smiled and placed her hand into his, her other reaching back to pick up the hem of her dress while his arm came to curve around her waist.
"Once we're done here, my dear, do you want to..." He whispered in her ear, and Wendy giggled. What he planned would be scandalous and lead to their being talked about for a month at the very least, but she couldn't help but love it.
Nibs was completely bored. Miss Helena Renworth had fallen ill at dinner and was not at the ball. How could he do anything without his darling to court? He at least remained faithful, all her other admirers had gone on to other amours, seeming to completely forget that they had once been solely interested in Hele-er, Miss Renworth. Nibs hastily corrected his thoughts. It was better to not even think of her that way, lest he blurt out her name accidentally.
But had to admit, Helena was a beautiful name for a beautiful girl. Her brandy eyes and port hair got him drunk without having even had a drop of liquor. He was so addled around her, no sentence he said ever made sense. But her words, cool and refreshing as winter's breeze always served to revive him to sobriety. She was-
"Nibs, stop sighing. You're liable to blow yourself over." He came out of his musings as John talked to him briskly.
"Like you don't sigh enough for the two of us, John." Nibs commented.
"True, true. But at least your interest is in the country." John muttered, moving his glasses to rub the bridge of his nose.
"Still wishing Lily was here?"
"Yes. I can't get her out of my head, despite that I couldn't understand a word she was saying." John cracked a small grin at this, "I wonder how Wendy did it, really." He remarked with a sigh.
"Stayed with us. When I look back on it now, I can see how much she wished to stay with Peter. Too bad he didn't want to grow up."
"Even if he had, people would think it odd, their being brother and sister, though adopted."
"True. Very true, that." John said, casting his eyes around the ballroom.
"Speaking of Wendy, have you seen her anywhere? I promised Father I'd dance with her."
"Not recently. Last I saw her she was sitting along the wall, having refused my offer to dance, she said she was too tired. We just got here! She's not there now, but she could have walked out to the garden, or gotten into a conversation with someone." Nibs said, looking over and realizing his elder sister was gone. Blind panic took him, she had told him quite pointedly that she was going to remain in that seat the whole evening, or until Count Bakerly's son came back, since he was the only reason she was here. Nibs looked back at John, and the older man quickly came up with a plan.
"Will you go check the garden? I'll see if she's anywhere else in the ballroom; she could have gone to see Michael or the others, so I'll check there as well. Meet you back here in fifteen minutes?" At Nibs' affirmative nod, John strode off.
Where could she have gone to? Nibs wondered as he walked out into the garden. She wasn't much of a dancer, he knew, and besides, she hadn't been on the floor. No, that would have made it too easy to find her. His worry grew the deeper he walked into the garden. It got darker, and he remembered in great detail things he had gotten up to in the dark recesses of a well kept garden. Wendy would never have gone willingly with anyone into the garden's depths; she was still too enamored of Peter. He only hoped he found her in time, if she was here. Nasty things could happen in the gardens during a ball. Very nasty things. Worse as what ever Hook could have dreamt up; socially, at least.
He saw a flash of a pale color and stopped. The garden was too dark to see things clearly in, but he could have sworn he had just seen some of the decoration on Wendy's dress. Faint murmuring reached his ears, and he started walking again, stride increased. He either was about to get in the middle of something that was none of his business or save his sister from a potentially awkward situation.
Unfortunately, he didn't know which yet.
Finally it seemed some part of his brain caught up with the rest of him.
How could he have seen Wendy's dress? The garden was a maze. But he had distinctly seen the bottom edge of someone's dress...and someone's shoes.
The only way he would have seen someone's shoes the way he had would be if they were flying.
How in God's name...flying? You could only do that with happy thoughts and pixie dust. There were no fairies around, even in Kensington Gardens...unless...
Nibs broke into a run, completely forgetting decorum and that it might be someone else.
But when he got to the center of the maze, there was no one there. He looked up into the sky, and saw nothing, not even a speck in the sky to indicate someone was flying high above.
Defeated, he turned and went back into the ball, to report that Wendy hadn't gone into the garden.
"What do you mean, she wasn't out there? Nibs, I checked everywhere in here. Mother even checked the retiring rooms. Wendy's nowhere inside." John said, turning to his adopted brother with grave eyes.
"She wasn't out there, John, but I could have sworn I saw her dress and shoes-"
"Her dress and shoes? You mean someone stripped her and abducted her?" Mr. Darling asked, worriedly.
"No, Father. I saw what could have been the bottom edge of her dress and her shoes about seven feet off the ground. If I saw anything out there, it was someone flying."
"Flying? But-that can only be done with happy thoughts and fairie dust, and there are no fairies around."
"I know, John. That's why I'm so confused." Nibs said morosely, staring out the large windows.
"There's no way I could have seen what I saw, but I know I saw it. I-" Nibs stopped as he saw what he could have sworn was Wendy raced by the window.
"What, Nibs, did you see something?"
"No, I don't think so...I might need glasses after all." Nibs said, rubbing his eyes, only to see Wendy going the opposite direction across the window.
"Er...John?" He said after a moment. There was no harm in calling attention to it, after all.
"Yes, Nibs? Did you see Wendy?"
"Not precisely. It's hard to explain, really. I'll try, but-" Anything more Nibs would have tried to say was stopped by a sound that nearly stopped his heart.
A cock crow.
The musicians had paused for a moment, and that allowed the sound to come through, reverberating through the momentary silence in the ballroom. There never was silence in a ballroom. Ever.
When a ballroom was full enough to be labeled a 'crush', as this was, there was never pure silence. Either the musicians were playing, or at least one group was talking. The only other time there had been silence that Nibs remembered was when Lord Cowley had brought his actress-wife, and everyone was too stunned to speak. Lady Jacqueline had turned out to be perfectly nice and wonderful to talk to, but still, bringing one's mistress, though turned wife, to a ball hosted by one's own aunt! That had been quite brave of Lord Cowley, and the scandal of numerous months. There had been no scandals recently, so why was everyone so quiet?
Nibs turned, and was mildly shocked at what he saw. Mildly only for one reason.
He hadn't expected her to be kissing. It was Wendy, that much he was certain of. He had thought it would concern her, as she could not be found. She was one of the party kissing. The other he couldn't recognize, although it may have been because all he could see was the back of the gentleman's head. Surely, kissing someone at the top of the stairs was a little odd, but no reason for the complete silence.
Then he fully realized why it was so quiet. The pair was floating clearly two feet above the previously mentioned stairs. Nibs vaguely realized John and Father were trying to push their way through the crowd. He was too intent on watching the pair to join in.
They separated briefly, only enough for Wendy to rest her head on the man's chest, clearly whispering something that caused him to chuckle. That sound echoed through the still empty room, though the slight buzz of gossip was starting.
The man straightened, pulled Wendy to his side and opened his mouth, letting out a noise that made Nibs' heart once again stutter in his chest.
It couldn't be. It just couldn't be. There was no way. This man couldn't be.
"Peter?" Nibs whispered, unaware that the name was echoed by seven others.
"Peter?" Ears still accustomed to listening to fairy speech caught the surprised whispers, causing their owner to grin.
"Here we go, Wendy." Peter said quietly, and then turned again to face the crowd below them.
"As some of you know, I once said that that no one could catch me and make me a man. Miss Darling finally proved me wrong. She had held my heart for ten years, and I have held hers. I have only been able to fully stake my claim now. Miss Darling has done me, Lord Peter of Panukibejon, the honor of accepting my offer of marriage. So then, Boys, I do believe we have much to catch up on. We'll see you in the garden."
With the message delivered, (though terribly by Society's standpoint), Peter took Wendy's hand and flew over everyone's head to the open doors to the garden. He knew no one who looked up could see up Wendy's skirt, she had borrowed a pair of his pants just for this.
"That'll keep them talking for weeks, love." Wendy whispered to him.
"Good," Peter said with a smirk, landing lightly. He gave her a small kiss before putting her on her feet.
The pair stood, waiting for her family, and the assault of questions they were sure to face.
Lord Peter of Panukibejon and Miss Wendy Darling were married today in a small ceremony in Kensington Gardens. Curious lights were seen in the trees and bushes. Lord Peter called them 'fairy lights'. They are honeymooning on an undisclosed island. As a side note, Lord Peter was dressed in deep green. The bride wore brown.

So Thursday 7th of May was the day I were going to London, I had been looking forward to this trip for so long & couldn’t wait to see London again! I actually been to London 4 times before & this was my fifth time. I haven’t been to London since I were 15, but I have always loved the city..
I were going to London with a friend from university & we haven’t been on holiday together before, but it actually went very well & we are very much alike & wanted to do the same things. We were going for 4 days, form Thursday morning to Sunday evening, luckily it only takes about two hours to fly to London, so we didn’t have to spend a long time traveling!
So Thursday morning started a bit chaotic, I were going to the airport with bus & metro, but when I got to the metro it wasn’t going, so I had to get a taxi instead, you would have thought that it would be easy to get a taxi at 5 o’clock in the morning, but noooo!! It took so long to get a taxi, so I got a bit stressed, but luckily I had left so I had some extra time, so when I finally got a taxi & picked my friend up, we arrived at the airport, so we had enough time to relax & get some breakfast before the flight.
I were quit nervous I never been a fan of flying & I haven’t done it many times, I have this stupid fear of crashing & I know the chances for that is very small, but I can’t help it.
I actually did okay with the flight, I only got a bit nervous at take off & then I got tiny panic attack under the fligth, because I didn’t know that a bit before we have to land the motor gets more quiet & the plane goes down a bit! But I survived the flight;)
We arrived in London at about 10 o’clock & check in at the hotel wasn’t until 2 o’clock, but we went to the hotel anyway to put our suitcases & they noted that we had arrived.
The hotel was in an area called Shepherd’s Bush, I never been to that area before, so when we had put our suitcases at the hotel, we went out to see the area.
My colleague had told me that there were a shopping center in that area called Westfield, so we wanted to go see it. It was only 5 minutes from the hotel.
The area around Westfield was so lovely, it was very modern. Then we went into Westfield, I have never seen a Shopping Center that big, it’s also the biggest Shopping Center in Europe. I were seriously in heaven (Shopping Heaven), I love shopping, so you can only imagine how I felt in there;) I still can’t get over how big it was. We were there for 4 days & we didn’t even get through all the stores we wanted, so that means I have to get back to London again & see the rest..
After a couple of hours of shopping we went back to the hotel to check in. We got there a bit late for check in & all the single bed rooms were booked, so the last one they got left for us, was a room that was for disabled, so she asked if that was okay with us & that was fine because we just needed a place to sleep. Lets say we got a big surprise, the room was so big, we got so much space & the bathroom was also huge, the only thing was that there were handless in the bathroom for disabled people, but that is something you can live with. We lived at Ibis Hotel Shepherd’s Bush, it was a very lovely hotel, it was new & clean & there was hot water. We got the room for a very good prize, because we booked it via Hotels.com, where they had an offer. It is a hotel I would definitely stay at again.
After check in we relaxed a bit at the hotel & then went out for dinner. We found a italian restaurant in Westfield.
After dinner we went for an evening walk, we walked all the way to Nothing Hill, that was only a 25 minutes walk form the hotel. Then we walked back to he hotel & called it an early night, I had been up since 3:34 that morning, so I were pretty tired.
God I already miss London, stay tuned for London Diaries Day 2.
Have a lovely day…

Well, she arrived at my mother’s house, (her grandmother’s house) an hour or so before we were all due to meet for supper yesterday. She had driven in from DE to MD and thought she’d spend a little “quality time” with Grandmommy, as my mother prefers to be called.
Imagine her surprise when my mother opened the door and had NO IDEA who she was! LOL…
When John and I arrived for supper, we were treated to the story of how a grandmother, not one suffering from any malady, mind you, had opened the door to a “pretty young lady” but not one she recognized. When my sister and niece arrived, and heard the story, my niece started laughing, because a similar thing had happened to her, when she and my mother had crossed paths over by the University.
Mom says the problem was that she was not expecting to see these young ladies where she met them and this is why she did not realize who they were. Who knows? Jen thinks it was, perhaps, because she was wearing some big, unfamiliar glasses. But I think my mother still thinks of these young women as children and to see them driving up and living in the work-a-day world is still very unfamiliar to her.
We all had a good laugh about it, anyway!

February 20, 1871 - 1949
|The career of our beloved sister, Ada Stewart Parker has ended. Her compassionate heart beats no more. Her eyes are closed, eyes which were windows through which was seen the magnanimity of her Christian soul. She who in life so earnestly sought to make known to others her Master, now rejoices in His presence.
Mrs. G. D. Parker was the eldest daughter of a large family. Her father, George T. Stewart, was from the state of Georgia, and her mother, Julia Higginbotham was from Florida.
Ada May Stewart was born Feb. 20, 1871 in Crandall, Nassau Co., Florida., where she was converted and joined the Methodist Church.
At the age of sixteen she began to teach in the public schools of her state, and later graduated from the Normal School.
Early in life she felt called to do missionary work. She entered Scarritt Bible and Training School, Kansas City, Mo. where Christian workers received special preparation. One of the courses was in nurs-ing. Later in her work this study was very useful to her. She graduat-ed in 1901 and this same year the Woman’s Missionary Board sent her to Brazil.
Upon her arrival she was sent to Ribeirao Preto to teach in the Methodist school, where Miss Leonore Smith was principal.
Later in this school Miss Stewart served as principal for three years. Afterwards she was transferred to Rio de Janeiro and appoint-ed principal of Collegio Fluminense, which is known today as Bennett College.
While serving as principal of the school she showed her interest in the work of the local church, taking an active part in the Sunday School and Woman’s Society.
While she was living in Ribeirao Preto the terrible disease—yellow fever—broke out in the city. The people were panic stricken and those who could left the city.
The Methodist School for boys which had as its director, Sr. Bento Braga de Araujo and the Methodist School for girls suspended classes and closed the dormitories. Miss Stewart with her colleague, Miss Willie Bowman, received orders from the Board of Missions to leave the town immediately.
However, realizing that this would be the best opportunity to serve the people, they resolved to remain and do what they could for the people. It was on this occasion that Miss Stewart put into practice her knowledge of nursing the sick. They offered themselves as voluntary nurses in the improvised hospital set up by the state government during the epidemic. During several months they worked in this hospital until the plague was over. The epidemic was so violent that as a rule contact with it was almost the equivalent of a death sentence.. Knowing the risk they were taking, Miss Stewart and Miss Bowman agreed that if one of them should die the other would take charge of her possessions. Sr. Bento Brags de Araujo remained heroically at his post although the school for boys was closed. He visited the sick, buried the dead and comforted the living. His presence in the city gave courage to these two women who were interned in the hospital. Sr. Brags paid with his life for his devotion. He contracted yellow fever and in a few days died. His name is worthy of a place among the heroes of the Methodist Church.
When the epidemic passed, the Methodist School for girls opened its doors again. During a period of time due to lack of funds which did not arrive from Nashville, those courageous women were obliged to depend on Public Charity in order to feed the boarding pupils.
At the end of her first term of service Miss Stewart married Rev. Geo. D. Parker, also on his first furlough, on the tenth of March 1908 in Georgia. From this day until the day when Mr. Parker retired she worked by his side in Brazil, helping him wholeheartedly. Speaking of his companion, who so recently left him, he said “Any success in the work of the church resulting from our joint efforts was due to the efficient and loyal cooperation of my wife.”
The contribution which Mr. and Mrs. Parker made to the work of the Church whether in the Northern or in the Southern Brazil, is well known to the church. Under their ministry many accepted Christ as their Savior and many young men felt the call to the ministry. Their interest in the work of the Sunday School was notable. It was under the direction of Mr. and Mrs. Parker that the first Daily Vacation Bible School was organized in Brazil.
Their home was always open for their brethren, whether Brazilian or American, and many are those who remember the splendid hospitality which they received in this Christian home.
Due to the incurable disease which attacked his eyes, glaucoma, Mr. Parker was obliged to leave the active work of the church and return to the United States. During the past fifteen years he has been combating this disease which effected his eyes, but without much success, for in January 1948 he became entirely blind. He said in speaking of his wife “She was always at my side in the struggle, doing all in her power to help me conserve my sight.” Once more she put into practice the knowledge of the art of nursing she had learned at Sear-ritt.
About six months ago she became gravely ill. Everything possible was done but nothing availed and after a few weeks in she passed peacefully away.
Her body lies in a beautiful memorial cemetery in Jacksonville, but her life continues not only in the promote of her Lord whom she served with love sad dedication, but also in the lives of her many spiritual sons and daughters scattered over the great land of Brazil.
|Source: Journal of the Louisiana Conference of the Methodist Church, Pages 118-120, 1949|

tv Details of the Lincoln Assassination CSPAN April 9, 2016 5:01pm-6:01pm EDT
maz kanata is a former crime reporter. she tells the stories about those who are involved in the lincoln assassination. the actors performing in our american cousin. the peterson family owners of the boardinghouse where lincoln died. this is an hour-long event. >> good evening. it is my pleasure to welcome you to our talk. i want to acknowledge a special guests that we have with us tonight.
his name is peter dixon. he represents the military order of the loyal legion of the united states. which is responsible each year for the laying of reefs at the lincoln memorial. the lincoln group of d.c. has been very proud to be one of the many organizations that pays tribute to abraham lincoln and we had that opportunity courtesy of the organizing efforts of peter dixon. [applause]
our speaker tonight is catherine canavan author of lincoln's final hours. in two what it was like to be in washington that terrible night. april 14, 1865. theatereer at ford's and i've had the opportunity to visit with the thousands of americans who come to ford's theater. buy isthe things you can her book. it is a pleasure to welcome her to talk to us this evening.
>> thanks to all of you. it is an honor to be here. who is lincoln's archives digital project has made so many records available to so many researchers who aren't fortunate enough to live near the archives. thousands of people witnessed what went on on 10th street in washington on the night of the assassination.
there were 1700 patrons inside ford's theater when john wilkes booth shot the president. when the wounded president was carried across the street to the abouton house there were 24 people in the death room there. people in the parlor and the hallways. hundreds of people in the street. waiting for word on that long. too many of their stories are lost to us now. the eightod home was miles from the lindbergh kidnapping. the trial was long over when i was growing up. there were dozens of people who would witnessed some small part of that trial.
there was a man who dug ditches. i meant to ensure further lindbergh. man who had chauffeured mrs. lindbergh. overbooked theo new york news men were paying for cots in the hallways. each one of those neighbors witnessed slivers of history that nobody recorded any of it. today ist-forward to there a caterer or campaign worker who was witnessing something that would china light on this very unusual election? history is a mosaic but a lot of
times there are pieces that are missing and we don't even know it. imagine a journalist. i started thinking about those missing pieces. i had some downtime between appointments so i visited peterson house. i was standing in the dark back bedroom where president lincoln and i realized peterson boardinghouse continue to be operated as a boarding house after the president died there. he didn't even shut down for a weekend. thinking about who climb into that bed the night after the president died there. clark aillie 23-year-old government clerk. asked the guide if she could
recommend a good book about the people who live there. written a book about the peterson's and their visitors. she said they were just ordinary people. i almost ran to the library of -- lookednd booked up up all the names in their databases. it took about a year to figure out why. finding information on ordinary people 145 years after an event is really a tall order. even if it is the coast consequential murder in american history. there are two glimpses from the book i would like to give you.
the first is a 15-year-old boy trying to reach his house across from ford's theater minutes after the word from the assassination spread through washington. blocks as ifof two someone flipped a switch bewilderment became a hysteria. he heard some men yelling hang him. he so i'm not have rowdies crowded under a sycamore tree. had caught a hold of a poor man they had decided to spring -- string up. the i'veched his block one stolid massive man waving revolvers and knives and announcing the assassin. like pearl harbor the 20th century or september 11 in the 21st, no one knew what was going to happen next.
many of us have been through one or two of those events but we had the benefit of television or radio. these people had to wait until the next morning to get the morning papers to see who had been spared and who had been slain. rumors spread all right. the second piece is a soldier's view. night andorking all keeping order and searching houses because no one knew the whereabouts of the assassin. to the neighborhood outside the theater upside down. the authories were confident there was no way the attackers could escape the city. it was like looking for a needle in a haystack. the city had 230 miles of streets. 77 miles of alleys.
let's talk about the regulars on 10th street. peterson was the man who owned the house where the president died. john wilkesith booth the 26-year-old actor whose single deed that's the force of our country's history. who was the owner of that house? livingerson made a good tailoring uniforms during the war. good enough to send his oldest daughter to the same boarding school george washington's niece had attended. peterson also made money renting out rooms in his home. he rented every available space. even the second floor landing.
it was a simple matter for a person to rent out a space during the war. the city's population had tripled to almost 200,000. prices rose so much that some embassies actually moved to baltimore. mr. peterson was running the anddinghouse with a servant his wife anna and his oldest daughter were on holiday in new york. mrs. peterson was on age ever since she arrived because she was very superstitious and the room clerk gave her the keys to room 13 and she thought the number 13 was a bad omen and she
just couldn't relax. she wanted to telegraph her husband in washington and make sure everything was ok at their house. at 2:00 in the afternoon everything was fine. after 10 p.m. mr. peterson heard an upper across the street and he got up from his card game. he was not the one who invited the president's bearers to bring him to the door. it was henry stafford one of the borders who ran outside with a candle to guide them to the porch. in the rain.
mr. peterson may have been unsure of what to do with his wife away. try to remember what your house look like a friday night when you have young kids. there's a knock at your door in the bearers carry the president of the united states over your threshold and directly to one of your bedrooms. it is the 19th century. you have no electricity, no , you onlyno hot water chamber pots that you had
to empty. that's a tough situation. peterson was a little bit sore. he left the house around midnight and he went to his tailoring shop and he instructed his son to let me know what it's all over. he arrived back at his house about an hour after the president died for mr. lincoln's body was still on the bed. with the bloody bandages piled up at the door. and overwhelming stench of blood and sweat from all those people in such a small room. he noticed that one of his pillows was bloodied he snatched it from under the head of the dead president opened the window and threw it out.
i suppose all of us have lost her temper is. he threw his tantrum in front of men and women who it stood for nine hours in a very small room watching the president breathed his last. mr. peterson sent a bill to the federal government. he wanted nine hours of rent for the use of his home and he wanted payment for every piece of linen soiled by the president's blood. midnight andt at the president didn't die until overcharged $550. this at a time of the president only earned $480 a week.
and $.50.t $293 somebody in the quartermaster's office scribbled a snippy note on his paperwork. housee in the peterson charge tourists $.50 to see the bathroom. death room. the tourists ripped the wallpapers from the walls and took some items that they thought might have been used that night. when the war ended things ended badly for mr. peterson. his uniform tailoring business. eventually he lost his shop. his professional life nosedived. all but one of his borders moved away after ford's closed.
he started going out drinking sprees. he pulled out a bottle of a mixture of alcohol and opium that was legal that. he fell unconscious. that hethe sergeant liked to have $.25 worth of liquor on a saturday night. he accidentally overdosed. his body was taken back to the house where lincoln died. ferguson was the 19-year-old call boy at ford's theater. --rang down the court
curtain at fords for the last time that night. he headed across the street to his friend fritz peterson's house. they made their way up the back staircase to the death room. the president's face looked ghastly. his jaw had fallen to his chest. his right hand, the one that signed the emancipation proclamation, was twitching involuntarily. they both knew something the cabinet members did not know. that john wilkes booth had curled up on that same day just weeks before. he'd even covered himself with the same blanket that wrapped the president's body. mr. booth was friendly with many who boarded at the
peterson's. room sohem rented that was an unusual at all for him to sprawl across the bed laughing and joking. billy ferguson like many in the followed thes acting business after hollywood at the turn-of-the-century. in 1915 he played abraham lincoln in a silent movie the battle cry of peace. john matthews. this has to be one of the all-time historic coincidences. he was learning booth's atfession on the same house the same time secretary stanton was mounting the manhunt for booth.
matthews was a comic who worked at ford's theater. skin ande same light dark hair's john wilkes booth. he didn't have any of that charisma that made heads swivel when booth walked down the avenue. booth and matthews were boyhood friends from baltimore. matthews considered john wilkes booth's best friend. the afternoon of the assassination the two men ran into each other on pennsylvania avenue. booth entrusted to matthews a sealed letter to the editor. he asked matthews to deliver it if he didn't see him around town the next morning. unbeknownst to matthews it was a confession to killing lincoln.
the comedian put the envelope in his coat pocket. and promptly forgot all about it. and the excitement of performing for the president. all thee assassination ford's theater actors were fleeing. for fear of being arrested. matthews headed straight to his room. his room was in peterson house. catsetter from booth acting up and matthews pocket until it was in danger of falling out as he walked up the staircase to his room. major henry rathbone may have been sitting at the base of the step nursing his wounds. matthews had forgotten all about the letter until he went to hang up his coat in his room and he heard it plop on the floor.
he later testified that when he thought, good god that is the letter john gave me. he ripped it open and he quickly realized that it was all the evidence the police needed to hang his friend. there is no way to tell if matthews arrived before or after president lincoln was carried into the house. if the president was already there, his breathing was so loud that you can hear it in any room in the house. screamed audibly even with the parlor doors closed. matthews made a split-second decision to throw the letter into the fireplace. .nd burn it he was so frightened that he
took those ashes and mix them with the fire ashes there were already in the fire so that no one would ever be able to discern what happened. matthews was a catholic. he later told his priest what had happened. suggested he go to canada and never come back. yorkd eventually go to new and become an agent for the actors fund. his job was doling out money to indigent actors. the manych a kind man weeks he also gave away most of his paycheck. acceptd never completely that his old friend had committed america's first presidential assassination.
was so loyal to booth that he referred to the assassination is john's great mistake. this is laura keene the star of our american cousin. rushing to known for the box and holding the president's head in her lap. let's was his wife's business manager. in the midst of all the hedemonium in the theater pushed through the roaring crowd not to find his wife but to get to the paymaster's office. because friday night was paid night at ford's theater. lots made sure he got his wife's share of the gate. and sawcircled back that her diamonds were scattered across her dressing table he
squeezed through the crowd again this time he was looking for his and only to upgrade her for carelessness. this is the daughter of the boarding house owner. she was just 13 on assassination night. she was tasked with bringing cheese and mrs. lincoln. she'll most dropped the tea tray which he overheard that booth was the suspect. she feared that the police would arrest her father if they realized that booth was a regular at her house. she steeled herself and she brought the teacher mrs. lincoln. she is only 13 years old. and this is the first lady of the united states of the worst night of her life. pauline didn't really know what to do. teaserved as first ladies
but she never forgot the look on mrs. lincoln's face her face was already in blotchy from crying. her eyes kept darting back and forth as if she were expecting another attack at any moment. pauline again was frightened. several times through the night pauline looked at mrs. lincoln and she thought she looked very much like her own mother butever she lost the baby the look was 10 times worse than that. she waited with her and around removed amrs. lincoln small brooch from her dress and she pressed in the pauline's hand. pauline protested but mrs. lincoln said please take it for
everything you did for me tonight. she said you were the only one who didn't tell me what to do tonight. one bystander who became a vital part of the effort to save the president and keep the union intact was 23-year-old dr. charles leal of yonkers new york. he was just six weeks out of medical school. the best trained physicians in the country. he was a new army surgeon in washington. he'd taken extra training in head wounds before he left medical school in new york. caring for the
most severely wounded soldiers who could survive the train trip from the battlefield to washington. leal did his best to undo what booth had done. he had come to ford's theatre just see the president. episcopalian who thought he saw the market divinity in mr. lincoln. he said he just wanted to gaze upon that face one more time. he knew the president could survive for long. he spent much of the night holding the president's hand because medical training told him that the gunshot rendered the president blind but he hoped that the patient this might be
able to feel a kind touch. he wanted mr. lincoln to know he wasn't alone in this darkness especially after secretary stanton barred mary lincoln from the death room. he kept a moment that his heroic until 1909 when a veterans group implored him to come and speak about it on the hundredth anniversary of the president's birthday. he practiced medicine into his 90's. often without pay. he helped to the poorest children of new york. he learned to sign language to communicate with deaf children. 1932 just before franklin roosevelt was nominated for president. one of the strangest chance meetings on the morning of the
assassination happened to helen moss and her sister-in-law. took a stroll down pennsylvania avenue and met john wilkes booth and shook hands with him. then they walked two more blocks to the white house to the where they meton president lincoln and shook hands with him. they were wearing those flowers in their hair that night when they heard john wilkes booth shot president lincoln. on in thelse is going world, we all still fret about our own situations in our children and our families.
the young soldier named john ramsey came barreling through ford's very narrow lobby, just as the president's bearers were struggling to carry him out of the theater. ramses wiped the president's face with his cuff. may hearts was very shaken by the assassination, but could not help but notice that the theater treasurer, harry ford, had a six stack of pay envelopes in his coat pocket. a mental note to make sure she got her pay, because she really needed the $20. it was her first year in the theater. harry offered to walk her back
to her hotel. in her excitement, she forgot to ask for her pay. harry ford was arrested later that night and she did not receive her pay until 2 more years. ten we instinctively feel something is out of sync, but we can't put our finger on what. billy withers, the orchestra leader, went for a drink with booth right before the show. we'll worth notice that booth was particularly and see that night. he just kept talking. when he returned to the theater, and irritated withers asked one of the musicians, what has come over booth tonight? to the man who caused so many other people's lives to --
the ticket taker buckingham said he heard him singing a tune on his way to kill the president. took his fat key ring that you can see at the ford theater complex with him on the run. did he really think he would be allowed to return to any of those places those keys fit? the people on 10th street also agreed with booth that he was larger than life. werematthew said, if booth a woman, he would have been in love with him. billy told a reporter that his own admiration for booth was nothing short of hero worship before the assassination. publicity booth's
photos did not do him justice. they said they could not capture booth's love of fun. he said the three-dimensional booth was more joyous. one friend recalled that booth was always impeccably dressed, but his tie was just a little bit askew. was a crackt booth billiards player but rarely had the patience to sit through an entire game. he tried to get his friends to go out and do something else. one of the assassin's friends said he could not imagine booth pulling the trigger because his fingers were as dainty and small as a girl's. boothmembered, accidentally knocked a poor child off his feet and his rush to get to the telegraph office one day. he said he could not have known that anyone was watching, but he
picked the child up and wiped his face off with his handkerchief and said, are you hurt? then he dusted him off, got him on his feet, and pressed some coins in his hand before he left for the telegraph office. time boothmber the tried to strangle his brother-in-law on a train and the time he pummeled his younger brother's face to the point where it was unrecognizable. and the time he became enraged at a theater prompter and hurled a sharp wooden wedge within an inch of the man's eye. booth's brother edwin told a friend that when a servant awakened him to tell him his brother had killed the president, his mind immediately accepted it. count collated,
yes, john could have done such a foolish thing. however, edwin kept a picture of john next to his bed for the rest of his life. when you look at the neighbors on 10th street and what they witnessed on assassination night, and what they knew about realizessination, you that just like the people on the sidelines of the kidnapping, some of these ordinary people held extraordinary pieces of the mosaic of history. here is one piece from the book. this happened moments before the assassination, and it's from a different perspective than usual. cue toruman awaiting her go on stage cap to rise on mrs. lincoln until she saw something unexpected. musing to herself that the first lady was not wearing an evening down to match
her husband's formal attire. instead, she wore a gray and black pinchecked dres in silk -- silk with a bonnet to match. the kind of woman who would be distinguished in any company. she had a million dollars worth of that thing called personality. truman kept sneaking peeks at the first lady. favorite withas a actresses because she was courteous enough to send flowers when she enjoyed a performance. with one peak, truman saw something that would be a bright red flag in 24 hours but only seemed odd at the moment. she noticed john wilkes booth standing in the corner near the entrance to the president's box. the actors spotted her staring, and charm intact, bowed to her. later, miss truman,
who also moved to l.a., said it was ironic that the greatest drama in american history took place in a theater. assassination really fascinated people than and it still fascinates now. each year 400,000 people from around the world visit ford's theater in petersen house. when they are walking through the parlors and narrow hallways, there's lots of chatter. invariably when they squeeze into this small room, no matter what language they are speaking, they fall silent and reverent. touristse being noisy as it dawns on them what happened there. greatesthere america's president died. but it's not his death that moves them or quiets them, it's
the man and what he accomplished. and how he really did appeal to the better angels of our nature. be with youpy to tonight. it's great to be in the company of so many admirers of lincoln. thank you for inviting me. do you have any questions? [applause] [inaudible] willie clark, who caught onto the relic value of those things a little earlier than mr. willie took a few things for himself and he planned to take more, but then
the peterson's did catch on, so he wasn't able to. a lot of those things were sold. mr. peterson died in 1871. mrs. peterson died four months to the day after his death. the children liquidated everything. when the bed, the bureau, all the things in chicago now, they were all sold at that time. but they sold everything, right down to the spittoon's. anything else? >> what happened to the ford family? kathryn: i focused on the petersons, so i can't really tell you. wereford and harry ford jailed. i'm not quite sure about the others.
it became the government building and records building until it collapsed in the 1890's. when of the interesting things about that is, bobby jacob walter, who had prayed for the president out on the street, he was one of those people that spilled the entire block, praying all night. father walter prayed for the president and that he walked to the gallows with mary surratt. when ford's theater collapsed, he was one of the first people in to rescue people. interesting trajectory. yes? >> where did you gather the information? what were some of your sources for the young man who was in the house, and the letter that was pocket, thatew's
he burned it and put the ashes with it? what were some of your resources? kathryn: the information about --n matthews was available when john surratt returned to the united states, he was tried in a civilian trial and all of that was in the record of the john surratt trial. he testified, and he testified right down to when he met booth on pennsylvania avenue, which he leaned downse over. matthews remembered in the court booth was soat nervous that when he grasped his hand, he dug his fingernails into his hand.
other pieces were in philadelphia, lancaster, pennsylvania. i am trained as a journalist, and one of the things that i did was i went back and first looked at the newspapers at the library and in very archives. one of the things that reporters in theey have to do olden days -- i'm sure they don't do it now -- on the anniversary of a major death or event, people write stories. say, "losk to, let's angeles times" because i knew many of these actors had moved to los angeles, and looked at every story around february 12
and around april 15. there was a lot of interesting information there. "the los angeles times" and "the san francisco chronicle" had wonderful reporters in when then assassination happened, but they also had wonderful reporters for years later. there were some great stories. if you know about mae hart, then you can go looking for letters about mae hart. it was a long road. yes? >> your title said "conspiracy." i do not hear you talk much about conspiracy. kathryn: i had a different title, that's my publisher's title. book -- we do talk about soe of the conspirators,
it's legit. i did not really focus on the conspiracy other than the bits about powell and harold and axelrod. i always felt very sorry for axelrod because he signed on to kidnap the president, not kill the president. he was assigned to kill the vice president. he never wanted to do that, that's not what he signed on for. sameffered the consequences. yes? >> when lincoln died on april 15, secretary warren said, now he belongs to the ages. however, maybe he said angels, not ages. do you have any insights into
the difference between the two words? kathryn: i do. wholar to a stenographer, was taking the notes -- he reached into his pocket and his pencil broke. so he doesn't have notes on that. it's really, i guess, up in the air. and i guess it always will be. >> never clarified later or something? kathryn: he said something, we are not quite sure what. there was another complicating factor. mr. stanton asked reverend gurley to say a prayer, but then mr. stanton's own crying was so loud that people weren't quite sure everyone in the room could hear it. you realize that these people hours,tly stood for 9
watching the life ebb out of america's greatest president. they were extremely tearful. i believe it was some nerd who buried his head in the sheets -- i have had those discussions with the alliance writ large. >> had to expand training flag?ses like cyber >> cyber flag is cyber command's largest exercise. not have all 28 member nations. see we mightu will
raised her feet against the box and was holding him up. he thought, how brave she was with a man having a knife fight. virtually in front of her. she still protected her husband. she went over to president lincoln. he put his handkerchief on the floor. -- first, herts of examined him of course. he thought, everyone had seen this bloody knife. jumped on the stage, brandishing this knife above his head. his first thought was that the andident had been stabbed he looked for a stab wound and could not find one. then he found the bullet wound in the back of president lincoln's head. him on the lay
ground and have men manipulate his arms and legs, trying to get him to breathe. he told a story much later that his mother had told him a bible story. about bringing a man back to life. he tried to clear the president's air pathways while having people manipulate his body. and he was able to get the president breathing. even in the box, that no one could survive this sort of gunshot. he would remove the collective blood every so often. --that the electorate president's blood could keep flowing. he had people get hot water bottles and put them next to the president's limbs to stimulate
blood. he did all he could. he knew that it was just not possible for him to survive. anybody? yes? >> someone drew a picture in the street at that time. did you do any research? in the street literally went from ford's theater. you could not squeeze through. o'burn, the man charged with bringing the vice president to peterson house in case the president died, was walking up 10th street with the vice president. even he was frightened. he had been with the irish rifles during the war. he was not a man who was ordinarily frightened.
he kept his badge, cap showing his badge, as he walked, so no one would come near them. people were brandishing knives and guns. they were very frustrated. no knowledge of what had happened except that the president had been shot. the people who had seen what had squared on lafayette were running up 10th street to tell the president what had happened. the secretary of state had had . -- jaw slit. people were telling them the president that had been shot. there were all kinds of rumors. there was no tv, radio.
there were all sorts of rumors that all kinds of things had happened. several other people had been killed. people really did have to wait until the morning papers to find out. often, families who had been out wouldating, the males stay and try to do something. the women would go back to their houses and keep all of the lights out. they were sure the confederates might raid. horseer they would hear hoofs, they would reach out the good ornd see if it was bad. horror inight of washington for everyone. yes? s arrested? the ford >> billy withers was arrested.
there were so many people rds, with theh fo theater, that were arrested that night. hart was told to return to washington. they wanted to arrest her because she was seen speaking to john wilkes booth in an alley that day. actually, she had never even met booth. it was actually another actor who looked a great deal like booth. yes? >> do you have information on john serrat and what happened to him after the incident? >> he was fascinating. in palmyra, new york, on assassination night.
he did what anyone would do in that circumstance since he was not in on the kidnapping plot. he went to canada and overseas guard for a papal wild, actually. then he probably had the worst luck of any papal guard. someone from america came as a tourist to italy and recognized him. they told vatican, and the vatican immediately had him arrested. they had no idea he was wanted for the murder of the president. they had him sent back. he escaped once. she was returned to america. -- he was returned to america. it was much later.
it was a civilian trial, not a military trial. he was not convicted. -- one of francis scott key's relatives. they had many children and he lived to a ripe old age. yes? >> i stumbled across a book last year written by a man who lived in washington during the time of the civil war. he happened to discuss on one page something about the assassination. he described peterson as a ranked secessionist. do you know if that is true? might that have accounted for his behavior that way? --one of the ministers who from the pulpit that month, that
lauded the peterson's as a good, christian home -- i think not, really. maiming --h street, many of those people had secessionist leanings. who lived next door, little annie sardo was six years old on assassination night. that was one of the homes they targeted to bring the president to. but the crowd ended up at petersons. little annie sarto, the one thing she remembers from assassination night, she remembers the horrible noise that she could hear so much more from her perspective. she lived into her 90's.
she took her grandchildren on a john wilkes booth escape tour of her making. one of the things she told them was that many of the people on 10th street were secessionist. anybody? thank you very much. [applause] >> i am a history buff. back roads of the our country and how they work. >> american artifacts. a fantastic show. >> with american history tv, it gives you that perspective.
>> author and professor gary gallagher discusses questions stemming from robert e. lee's surrender to ulysses s grant in appomattox in 1816 five. -- 1865. he analyzes if appomattox was the definitive end of the civil war and looks at the wartime goals of the union and if they were achieved. this talk was part of a daylong symposium and now, is the director of the john now -- nau

This is a photo of my brother Artur. He is an elderly man, he was maybe 70 at the time. I don’t know where this photo was taken.
During the war I met up with Artur in Asia, in Fergana. I even have a few photographs from Fergana, very small ones, but clear. Artur's children, Rysio and Lilka, were brought up in the care of our sister Ziuka, who afterwards left for Israel.
She was there with her husband, Chaskiel Majtek. Artur's wife [Anka] crossed the Soviet-German border several times, because until the outbreak of the war in 1941 you could travel like that.
But her last journey to Poland ended in her not being able to get back to Lwow. And she stayed in German territory, in Czestochowa, and as a result ended up in a munitions factory. She wasn't killed, she turned up after the war.
When Artur and his children came back to Poland from the USSR, the family came together again. And then that family emigrated to Israel in the 1950s, in 1951 or 1952.
No, there were no problems emigrating then. If you had the opportunity it wasn't difficult. Then Maurycy left with his family, with his wife Lola and little boy Henryk.
And the third, Leopold, went to Sweden, also with his wife and two daughters, one of whom, Inka, emigrated from Sweden to Israel and lives there to this day.
I think she's still alive. I'm not sure that they'd all have gone if it hadn't been for the Kielce pogrom.
In Israel Artur set himself up a good-sized photographic firm and worked as a photographer. He was assisted by my other brother Maurycy and his wife, because she was a photographer by trade too.
Artur came here, to Poland, before his death, when he was 84 or so in the mid-1980s.
In Wroclaw that time he got hold of a set of photographs that German soldiers often used to take during the war: photographs of Jews and Polish peasants.
Artur collected those photographs and I think he donated them to a museum in Jerusalem.

On the morning of September 30, 2021, singer Phi Nhung’s manager broadcasted live images of the praying ceremony for the female singer at home. Those present all wore masks but still could not hide their grief. The singer’s children wear mourning scarves and bow their heads before the taste of their mother. In particular, the bewilderment of some children who were too young, seemingly unable to fully understand this loss, made many people unable to hold back their tears.
Singer Ho Van Cuong and his biological mother also wore mourning scarves and were present at the ceremony. During the past time, the male singer almost kept quiet after the noise with his adoptive mother. When Phi Nhung died, Ho Van Cuong also quietly changed his profile picture to black and did not share anything. For details, please watch the video.

In Hot Pursuit by Kate McMurray (160 pages)
Noah, a closeted NYC cop is on the verge of burnout. His partner of 6 years was murdered by a guy coming after him and he's been working non-stop on the case for over a year, had a fall-out with his partner's parents and life sucks. His boss sends him on a mandatory 2 weeks vacation to his time-share in Tampa. The first night he hits a gay bar and has sex in the bathroom with Harry. When Harry is on the news as missing and not just a random guy but a prominent gay business man, Noah feels compelled to tell the police what he knows and soon gets sucked into the investigation in a budget strapped Tampa. Harry manages to escape his kidnappers but they then have to figure out who it was and why as he hides out in Noah's hotel. I quite enjoyed this and it was interesting how all this craziness finally triggered Noah to deal with the death of his partner which he hadn't really and to admit that he had to move on. He felt very attached to Harry very quickly and maybe it was too fast but I liked how it ended with them taking time to get to know each other and dealing with the long-distance issue. I thought the kidnappers motive was whack but I guess that's why they are called crazy person. I really liked Ruiz, the Tampa detective who "recruited" Noah. She was tough but sensible. So I would recommend this as a good police drama with some hot smexin' tossed in. :-)
Lights and Sirens by Stephani Hecht (90 pages)
ER Nurse Lucas is not thrilled to be celebrating his birthday. He's tired of one night stands and two years ago his birthday sucked hardcore. He also made a pass at straight man-slut Matt and now feels doubly awkward that he's alienated his friend who's been madly crushing on. That night at the bar he gets hammered and Matt drags him home and admits he's attracted to Lucas but won't do anything when he's drunk. Lucas is still sure Matt's just being nice but eventually the get together then just when Matt finally admits Lucas is the guy for him, he nearly loses him in an attack in the ER. I liked that this was not really a GFY so much as a gay again. Matt confesses to a gay relationship when he was a teen, so I think that made it more realistic and also that he and Lucas were friends made the speed they moved make total sense. I was so happy to see Lucas and Matt get their HEA and there was lots of funny lines in there, poor Lucas shouldn't drink and dance. And I nearly squeed when I saw the dedication. Thanks Stephani, I'm honoured to have been one of the readers able to
You will Fall in Love by Hinkako Takanaga (193 pages)
Haru, a recent college grad got a job as a substitute teacher at a private school. The first day he sees the younger brother (now 18) of his old high school friend Reichiro. Haru and Rei used to do archery together but upon graduation Haru couldn't stand being in love with his friend so disappeared with out a trace. When Tsukasa sees him, he quickly admits that he was always in love with Haru who puts him off saying that it will interfere with Tsukasa's archery training, but he vows to prove him wrong by winning the championship. At the tournament Rei shows up and is stunned to find Haru and also confesses he loves him but by then Haru and Tsukasa are together and after some minor BM, they end up together. I quite enjoyed this as it really had a story behind it, why Haru had disappeared and he and Tsukasa (the aggressor) getting to know each other as adults with the love triangle of Rei thrown in. Not so graphic on the smexin as some but stronger on story which is good.
You will Drown in Love by Hinkako Takanaga (193 pages)
This is Reichiro's story and kind of runs in parallel to the last one. Rei has been assigned to the manager of one of his family's kimono stores. Jinnai (I like that name) is 10 years older and not thrilled the owner's son is his new boss. Also Rei is useless, he has no tact, tells customers they look horrible in that color and Jin goes completely wild but Rei is open to his suggestions and eventually they start hanging out as Rei shares his troubles and Jin offers advice. This story then intersects with the first one when he sees Haru again and finally admits he is in love. Rei is completely innocent though and has no clue how guys "do it" and figures hand jobs are going "all the way". ROFL Jin quickly shows him he error of his ways with some serious dub-con, but they get over it. Again, similar to the first one it was nice to see a plot although I think Rei has aspergers or something cause his people skills sucked rocks and he was completely oblivious to sex, had never been on a date with a man or a woman, but it was a cute little story. So two of the better manga I've read in a bit if you like some actual plot.

Wedesday we had a special performance for the entire school!
Susan VandeWeahe is a puppeteer located in Cedar Mountain, NC. She designs and hand builds her many puppets. She offers various workshops for preschool to grade school aged children that focus on learning the fine art of puppetry. She has camps where children can learn how to build their own puppet and learn how to manipulate them. She even has a tea party setting for children to enjoy a fun and “fancy” meal with the company of some very lovely puppets. Her website is: http://mountainmarionettes.com/
You never know with the age of our children how they will perceive these shows. To be honest, the puppets are bigger than some of our toddlers! We gathered into Ms. Formon’s room, she was so kind to host everyone, and sat on her carpet. The tile half of the room had been set up as a stage with bright lights, speakers, and black curtains to hide the puppets. There was excitement forming from the 3-6 students and an unsure vibe from our toddlers, especially the youngest ones in my class!
Susan began the show by first bringing out one of her puppets to show everyone how they worked. This was in an effort to allow the youngest children to realize that the puppet are controlled by her and relieve their minds to what was about to happen. The main character of the performance was this sweet old lady who lived in the mountains of North Carolina. She was a guide to introduce us to all the fun characters and animals that live in the mountains with her.
I really enjoy her hair.
As soon as Susan turned off the lights and began the music, the children in my class forgot that it was a puppet and that they had just met it. Two of my children were super concerned with what they were seeing. The other children laughed at the sight of this puppet “walking” around in their classroom.
Susan did a fantastic job of having different styles of mountain music set to characters. She mentioned that she designed the characters to fit the music. The first character was a small puppet “man” that could detach his head and limbs. He would swing his body around the classroom and get a LOT of laughs from the children, and teachers… Ms. Elizabeth was crying from laughing so hard!
After the first character performed, the youngest toddlers became use to what the show was about, however they remained a little unsure of the old woman puppet…. It was probably the hair.
When the entire show was finished the toddler classes moved outside for some much needed gross motor, while the 3-6 children were able to ask Susan questions about her puppets.
It was SUCH a fun performance and we are all so excited to see her again next year!

I just think those trainers need to go back to basics and stop rushing the horse and maybe They won't have to beat them! I talked to one of them and they said the horse has only been doing it 3 weeks. & he was already at a show! & I only saw one good trainer there using good methods and he was placing the best!
$20 says you are judging the entire discipline by something you (allegedly) saw at some dinky show.
Now if it was a legitimate show, you should have filed a formal complaint.

Audie Leon Murphy was a legend in his own time; a war hero, movie actor, writer of country and western songs, and poet. His biography reads more like fiction than fact. He lived only 46 years, but he made a lasting imprint on American history.
Audie was born on a sharecropper farm in northern Texas on June 20, 1924. As a boy, he chopped cotton for 1 dollar a day and was noted for his feats of daring do and his accuracy with a gun. He had only 5 years of schooling and was orphaned at age 16.
After being refused enlistment during World War II, in both the Marines and Paratroopers, for being too small (5’5”) and underweight (110 lbs), he enlisted in the U.S. Army a few days after his 18th birthday. After basic training at Camp Wolters, Texas, and advanced training at Fort George G. Meade, Maryland, Audie was sent overseas. He was assigned to the famous 15th Infantry Regiment, 3d Infantry Division, where he fought in North Africa, Sicily, Italy, France, and Germany. He earned a battlefield commission for his courage and leadership ability as well as citations and decorations including every medal for valor that America gives. He was also awarded three French and one Belgian medals. Lieutenant Audie Murphy was the highest decorated Soldier in American history.
Discharged from the Army on September 21, 1945, Audie went to Hollywood at the invitation of movie star James Cagney. He remained in California for the rest of his life and was closely associated with the movie industry as both an actor and a producer. He acted in 44 films, starring in 39 of them. His best known film was "To Hell and Back, adopted from the bestselling book of his war experiences by the same name. Most of his movies were westerns. In 1955, Audie Murphy was voted the Most Popular Western Actor in America by the Motion Picture Exhibitors. Audie wrote the lyrics to 16 country and western songs, the most popular of which was "Shutters and Boards," written with Scott Turner in 1962. Over 30 pop singers, including Jerry Wallace, Dean Martin, and Porter Waggoner recorded the song. He was an accomplished poet; unfortunately, only a few of his poems have survived.
In 1950, Audie joined the 36th Infantry Division ("T-Patchers") of the Texas National Guard and served with it until 1966. He was a Mason and a Shriner and belonged to several veterans' organizations. Audie Murphy was killed in a plane crash on a mountaintop near Roanoke, Virginia, on May 28, 1971. Fittingly, his body was recovered 2 days later on Memorial Day. Audie could very well be the last American war hero. He was the greatest combat soldier in the 200-year plus history of the United States.
Official Biography of Audie Leon Murphy
(MUST KNOW VERBATIM)

Weak heart didn't keep teen from strong life
Published 1:00 am, Tuesday, February 7, 2006
He asked her who broke it.
"I was born with it," Kaitlyn said.
Indeed she was. And that bad heart finally gave out last week, after 18 years.
But it lasted long enough for Kaitlyn to gaze at the stars, to graduate from New Milford High School , to spend happy hours watching NASCAR races with a doting dad.
It lasted long enough for her to work as a nursing assistant, to study to be an emergency medical technician, to dream of a career in medicine.
"She was a very compassionate person," said Kaitlyn's mother, Alice Druckreier .
It is a sad ending. But to listen to Kaitlyn's family and friends, it is not a sad story. She believed in living life to the fullest. She was loving, hard-working, and always looking ahead.
Her aunt, Nancy Doyle , said Kaitlyn was determined to not let her condition limit her. "She was, like, 'This is me. This is who I am. Accept it and move on.' "
Kaitlyn died Friday at Yale-New Haven Hospital . She had been taken there because her heart began to race. Doctors got it under control, but just as her parents arrived to pick her up to go home, a blood clot broke loose in her lung.
"They worked on her for an hour trying to revive her," said her mother. "We talked to her, laughed with her, and just like that she was gone."
Just like that.
When you're young and think life will go on forever, just like that is hard to take. Just ask the crew at the Big Y supermarket in New Milford. For almost a year, Kaitlyn worked there as a cashier.
Frank Varanko , the store's night manager, said Kaitlyn was "a hard-working girl" who would show up whenever she was needed. Her death "was quite a shock to everybody. A lot of kids here took it hard."
The supermarket has offered grievance counseling to anyone who needs help coping. The store is providing food and beverages for Kaitlyn's funeral on Wednesday.
Alice Druckreier said her daughter was born with tricuspid atresia, a condition in which valve between the upper and lower chambers of the heart never develops. There is some complicated anatomy involved, but what basically happens is that oxygen-poor blood gets pumped to the body and circulation is often bad.
Surgery can help address, but not totally correct, the condition. Kaitlyn had two operations as an infant and another at age 3. After that, she had yearly check-ups and she always seemed to be fine. She had to avoid the most strenuous exercise, but doctors thought she would live well into adulthood.
Perhaps it was having so many doctors around her over the years that led Kaitlyn to someday want to become one. "She was very interested in the medical profession," said her mother.
As a senior last year at New Milford High, she took a class and became a certified nursing assistant. In November, she began working at the New Milford Nursing Home.
In January, Kaitlyn joined the New Milford Community Volunteer Ambulance Corps. "She was very excited about joining," said Tom Bock , chief of the corps.
Kaitlyn went through screening, orientation and was enrolled at an EMT class held in Washington. She wanted to "give back to the community," said Bock. Kaitlyn had already volunteered to help with a future EMT class at New Milford High School. "She was a nice young woman," Bock said.
Nancy Doyle remembers Kaitlyn always being in to science. In elementary school, Kaitlyn joined a star-gazing club.
Kaitlyn was close to her uncle, John Doyle, before he passed away last year. They both were big on one-liners from TV shows and movies. When Kaitlyn took the nursing assistant's class, Uncle John , a New Fairfield EMT, gave Kaitlyn his stethoscope.
"I like to think the two of them are together now," Nancy Doyle said Monday.
About a month ago, Nancy Doyle and her niece sat and watched a University of Connecticut basketball game together. On another, they went to visit Doyle's father in Patterson, N.Y.
Kaitlyn was close to other family members as well. She liked to watch NASCAR races with her father, Robert C. Druckreier . "She was daddy's little girl," he said Monday.
And she was a big sister to 14-year-old brother Robert K. "R.K." and a 16-year-old Jacqueline "Jacki" Druckreier . Together, they ate dinner and caught up on the day's activities. Together, when they were younger, they camped at Lake George in New York State.
Together, in October, they took a family trip to Florida going to the Daytona International Speedway , the beach and Universal Studios in Orlando. "It was a good time," said Kaitlyn's mother.
In the fall, Kaitlyn enrolled at Naugatuck Valley Community College . She planned to take basic classes for awhile and then transfer to another college. In a communications class, she met her boyfriend, Anthony Tomassi , 19, of Danbury.
He loved her honesty. He loved how she could always make him feel better when he was stressed about school. "I absolutely adored the girl," said Anthony. "There was nothing about her I didn't cherish or enjoy."
The two liked to watch movies and hang out. "She had a really good sense of humor," said Anthony. "If you were sarcastic to her she would fire right back at you. Her wit was amazing."
So was her spirit.
The last time Anthony saw Kaitlyn was at the hospital. She was hooked up to wires, but was not in pain. "She had a big smile on her face," he said.
A Mass of Christian Burial will be held on Wednesday at 10 a.m. at Our Lady of the Lake Church in New Milford. Burial will be private. Friends may call today from 5 to 8 p.m. at the Lillis Funeral Home in New Milford. Contributions in Kaitlyn Druckreier's memory may be made to New Milford Ambulance Association , P.O. Box 102, New Milford, CT 06776.
Contact Heather Barr
or at (203) 731-3331.

Someone who poops in their hands for money.
Look its poo hands he did it for like 10 dollars.
What results when people have a poo, and don't wash their hands.
The transfer of faecal matter from the anal passage to the palm of ones hand.
"Dudes, I was having a slash today, and Adam came in, had a disgusting great shit, then didn't wash his hands! He's eating his lunch now with serious poo hands."

LIMA — Randy Glenn Sr. had threatened to kill his wife just hours before he arrived in town to carry out the threat.
Carlin Glenn reported the threat to the sheriff’s office but, officers believe, she didn’t think he would follow through. The last she knew, her husband was more than nine hours away in Fairburn, Ga., where he lived. Still, she was concerned enough to call the sheriff’s office.
“She just wanted in on file because they were in the process of a divorce. She wanted it documented,” Lt. Clyde Breitigan of the Allen County Sheriff’s Office said.
Carlin Glenn had no idea her husband was on the way to kill her and their daughter when the threats were made the evening of July 25.
“No one knew he was on his way up here,” Breitigan said. “She had no clue he was coming up from Georgia.”
Randy Glenn Sr. arrived at his wife’s home at 9 Beaumont Place in Lima at 4:15 a.m. Somehow he entered, whether using his key or through an unlocked door or by his daughter letting him in. That will never be known, Breitigan said.
His wife called 911 to say someone was at her door. She then told the operator the person had entered the house. An argument ensued.
Randy Glenn Sr. shot his 20-year-old daughter, Andrea C. Glenn, multiple times. She died just inside the entrance.
He then sought out his wife, but she ran outside. The couple’s 17-year-old son, Randy Glenn Jr., woke during the yelling and hid in a bathroom off his mother’s bedroom when he heard the shots. He locked himself in, Breitigan said.
A neighbor heard the first shots and called 911.
Randy Glenn Sr., reloaded his .357 caliber revolver and went after his estranged wife.
Carlin Glenn, 46, ran across the street toward the home of a neighbor, who had turned on the lights and called the sheriff’s office. Randy Glenn Sr. caught up with his wife in the neighbor’s driveway, Breitigan said.
“She got pinned up against the garage and didn’t have any place to go,” Breitigan said.
The husband shot his wife multiple times, killing her, Breitigan said.
Randy Glenn Sr. then returned to the house, possibly to find his son. He walked through the house, including into the master bedroom. He didn’t look in the master bathroom, where his son was hiding in fear. He walked into the living room, sat down and shot himself once in the head, officials said.
The son heard the last shot, followed by silence. He waited for a minute before leaving the bathroom. The son saw his father dead on the couch and then ran out of the house unharmed, Breitigan said.
Deputies arrived seven minutes after Carlin Glenn placed the 911 call for help, pulling up as the son was running out of the house, Breitigan said.
The frantic son told deputies his father had killed everyone.
Exactly why Randy Glenn Sr. killed his family and himself may never be known. He and Carlin Glenn were divorcing after 17 years of marriage.
The investigation is essentially wrapped up and the case closed. Investigators are still trying to track ownership of the gun Randy Glenn Sr. used and have contacted federal officials for help, Breitigan said.
Randy Glenn Sr. had one previous domestic violence arrest in 2010. That involved his daughter, and he was not convicted. His only other records were traffic violations, officials said.

We have all made an assumption on what we think or what we are led to believe. Recently I was picking up some things at Walmart and for payment of the items I was purchasing; I slid my credit card through the credit card machine. The signature page came up and as I was about to sign it, the attendant told me my credit card had been rejected.
We tried two more times and it continued to be rejected so I paid with cash and called our office manager to ask her to look into this problem.
When I got back into the office, she informed me that the credit card company said we were paid to date so we assumed that everything was alright. I sat down at my computer and started pulling off emails. I found one from a book company informing me that the same credit card had been rejected when they tried to process it. Our office manager immediately got back on the phone and the credit card company found that even though the bill was current, the card had been blocked due to a suspicious charge from another country.
They had assumed that the only issue was the bill being current. Now there had been an assumption by both parties.
This problem came up a couple of days before we were going to be at a week-long convention.
A deposit for all of our motel rooms had been put on that card and when we arrived they were going to swipe the card for the balance of the charges.
It that book company had not sent the email, we would have been standing there arguing with the desk clerk that the credit card company had assured us that the card was good. That would have been a tense situation for them and us.
Do you suppose there are times we make assumptions concerning other people? Are we absolutely sure we have all of the information that is needed before we form our opinion of them? Could those assumptions keep us from building a valuable relationship? It is possible that we assume things of the people we already have a relationship with and it creates tension between us?
These and other life questions will be addressed Sunday morning as “The Gathering Place Family” meets in the Washington High School Gymnasium at 10 a.m. for our Pre-Service Connection where we enjoy coffee, juice and donuts. Our Worship Service and Children’s Church then begins at 10:30. Come at 7 p.m. and be part of our Wednesday night Bible Study and Children’s Ministry on the third floor above Trends at 120 West Court St. in Washington C.H.

From the restaurants to the table games you can't bet it. Very friendly and helpful staff. A very nice place to stay. The rooms are large and the beds are the best, oh don't forget about the sheets on the bed the are so soft. The pool is beautiful too. Great place to stay for a weekend or a week.
CONS: should be five star
We have been going there for years. It is the best deli in Las Vegas. From soup to sandwiches to dinners, we have never had a bad meal. The service is very good also. You wil enjoy your dinners.
PROS: Great Food
CONS: A little over priced
I love Nora' s food, even the price is ok. I have had full dinners to pizza and I have never been disapointed in anyway. Just remember to call first and tell them what time you would like to eat there because the are always very busy.
PROS: Great food
CONS: Need to call a head of time
The food was ok, but the service was not so ok. If the owners or the manager know you , you got great service, but like us it was our first time and will be my last. The service had to many servers at one time they didn't know who had what dish, never offered me cheese with my meal, but did offer it to other people they know.
The food was hot when served. The taste of the food was ok, not great. The service was so slow and it wasn't like there was a lot of people in there at the time I went. The price was a little pricie.
CONS: slow service
We have been going there for years and the food is as good as it gets. The owner runs the place and the family serves you and a family member is the cook.
PROS: Great everything
we have been going there for 2 years and the food has always been good, but tonight my son-in-law took a bite of the cashew chicken and bite on a sharp chicken bone. We told the owner and he was very nasty with up. He said what do you want me to do it happens that you find a bone in your food. He said sue me if you want to. We have been going there at least 3 times a month until tonight. What if it was my granddaughter that had the bone in her mouth and died. Would he care then
Dr. Cabahug has been treating me for migrains for a very long time and so far not a lot has worked for me. He doesn't give up on me and we keep trying the latest things that come out on the market. Great Doctor
the sales persons are not to pushy and the do have a number of auto's for sale. there prices are not as good as some dealerships, but they try to work with you a little.
my husband has a lead foot and seems to get a lot of traffic tickets, thank g-d for this law firm, the have got the tickets down to barking tickets with no points on your license. They are great.

Did the 7 day trial. It is not worth it.
- The PS2 category is absolutely subpar that it should just be free for all Ps+ members
- The PS3 and PS4 are better defined, but are stacked full with a bunch of C and B class efforts that were promptly ignored. There are some steals but those steals have already been bought by those who wanted them.
- If the entire PS1,PSP, and Vita catalogues were included the value were included the value would raise substantially.
- I will say the stream quality was good and I never faced any connection issues.

Written by Joyce Ray
Have you ever had one of those days where you were really tired, and everything – no matter how small it was – seemed to bother you? Mine was just last week. It wasn’t like anything major or out of the ordinary happened. It was a typical Monday for me. I went to the gym, went to work teaching second grade (My class was actually really well behaved that day), left school at 5:00 to pick up my mom from work, went to the chiropractor, and then stopped by the grocery store on the way home. I was tired, but in a good mood, until I got to the chiropractor’s office. They were short staffed, and the treatment that normally takes 30 minutes took almost an hour. By then I just wanted to go home, but our cats were out of food, so I figured it would be just a quick trip in and out of the store. I was wrong. The lines were long, and I chose one in which the person in front of me had vouchers that the clerk didn’t know how to ring up. This took awhile, and as my frustration mounted, I could feel the tears building behind my eyes. By the time I got home I went to my room, collapsed on my bed, and began to cry. I must have stayed that way for over 30 minutes.
As I lay on my bed I began to ask God what my problem was. In that moment I felt like such a bad Christian. I hated the way I was feeling, but I just couldn’t seem to do anything about it. It was then that God began teaching me a lesson which continued all week on being responsive versus being reactive. God tells us that in this world we are going to have troubles, but he also promises us that we can have His peace in the midst of these troubles (See John 16:33). However, we will never be able to rest in that peace He has promised us, if we continue to live in a reactive mode; living like a puppet immediately reacting to everyone and everything in the environment that pulls its strings. This knee jerk reaction is very natural and very human. It is also all around us, because we live in a world filled with reactive people. These same people are also often stressed, anxious, frustrated, angry, and depressed. You might even be one of them.
God, however, calls us to live a very different kind of life. He tells us that His yoke is easy and His burden is light (See Matthew 11:30). One of my favorite verses is found in Exodus 33:14 in which God promises that His presence will go with us and He will give us rest. In order to live in this place of rest that God has promised us, we have to quit reacting to the world around us and start responding to the love of God within us. I’ve found that the best way to do this is to be in constant communication and communion with God throughout the entire day. When God told us to pray without ceasing (See 1 Thessalonians 5:17), He meant that we should always be aware of His presence, like a best friend walking by our side all day, ready to talk to us about anything and comfort us when things just don’t seem to be going our way. I’ve found that the amount of peace that I have throughout the day is directly proportional to the amount of time that I am focused on Him.
A little later in the week God gave me the opportunity to put what He had been teaching me in practice. I had one of those days when everything really did go wrong. My class was acting up, my shoulder was hurting, unexpected chores and errands came my way, and I only got a couple of hours sleep the night before. However, if you were to ask me what kind of day I had, I would tell you that I had a fabulous day! I was more tired and more went wrong, but nothing could rob me of my peace or joy, because I was communing with God. Instead of reacting to what was going on around me, I chose to respond to the One who lives inside of me.
As you are going through your day today, please remember that “greater is He who is within you than he who is within the world”. Keep your eyes right where they belong – on Jesus – and he will turn those mountains into mole hills and your sorrows and frustrations into joy.
To read more about Joyce Ray, click here.
Thanks for reading and God bless!
Mary Ann :)

Lemming Scavengers – Final
Jamie was shaken; had Rick really done this just because she said no to his prom proposal?
“So wait, let me get this straight…you killed all of these people just to get revenge on me?”
Rick looked confused and then annoyed. “It’s egotistical of you that you would think I went through all of this trouble just for you… however, you are one of the worst offenders, so I did a little extra for you.” Jamie’s mouth went dry and she found she could hardly move.
“So…all of the other people you’ve killed have done something to you?” asked Jamie. She figured that maybe if she distracted him long enough she could figure out a way to escape.
“Yeah. Some of them were minor infractions, but I figured the more the merrier.”
There was a pause in the conversation; Jamie was desperately trying to think of another thing to distract him.
“Are there more after me?” she blurted out
Rick laughed. “Of course.”
“Why was I the only one to find the other bodies?”
“That’s easy,” shrugged Rick. “I wanted to build the tension, just like you built our romantic tension for years. And when I finally asked you to prom at the assembly, in front of the entire school, you rejected me.”
Jamie momentarily forgot her pending mortality and got angry. “Ok, but you knew that I was literally dating someone else, what makes you think that I would’ve possibly said yes??”
Rick reached into his pocket for something.
“WAIT!” cried Jamie. Rick stopped for a second. “How did you even make the app? That seems like kind of a waste of time.”
“I wanted to be creative, and I’ve always excelled in working with technology, so I decided to have fun with it. You can decide how far your app reaches, so I just made it local. Not that hard.” Jamie rolled her eyes at Rick’s dramatics. “And since I’m the creator, I can see all of the activity and who’s doing what.”
Jamie was trying to figure out how to further distract him when he reached back into his pocket.
“Now can you please shut up, I’ve been waiting long enough for this.” Rick moved forward to grab Jamie, but before he could reach her she took off for her car.
Immediately after getting in she locked her windows and began to pull away. Rick attempted to jump onto the hood of her car, but Jamie punched the gas and hit him instead, running over one of his legs.
Jamie drove straight to the police station, not concerned about Rick getting away considering his leg was probably broken. After she explained everything to the police, they sped off towards the forest. Jamie almost felt bad, but she couldn’t, not after everything he had done.
Rick was arrested and Jamie deleted the app for good. She momentarily contemplated throwing away her whole phone, because she just felt gross knowing the app was on it, but she didn’t want her parents to have to buy her a new one.
Since Rick was in jail and the cops never got around to completely deleting the app, Jamie would still sometimes get texts. They would say things like,“Come back, we miss you!” or “Why have you stopped playing with us?”
Jamie eventually had to block the number, because at times it felt like it was Rick texting her and she didn’t want anything to do with him ever again.
A few years later Jamie discovered the app had finally been permanently deleted after people who were still trying to play weren’t getting the prizes for their points, and Jamie at last felt that the last bit of Rick was gone.
previous: Lemming Scavengers – Part Three
more by CASSIE GAMMIE
photograph by Dan Stark

Let me just start out by saying YUM! This was so good and light tasting. I know that may seem weird because the recipe sounds anything but light but it was. I made it for my husband because I needed to use up some bananas we had and then sent the rest to his office. Usually I send everything to my office but they are all competing to lose weight right now so I didn't think that was a good idea. The recipe came from Lynn's Kitchen Adventures. She has so many wonderful recipes on her site. If you haven't checked her out yet you need to do so soon. You will not be disappointed.

Have you ever had a memory pop into your head at the strangest time? It never ceases to amaze me how at the oddest times something will spark a memory in my mind, bringing a smile to my face, or a tear to my eye. It is like a hidden file, deep inside the recesses of my brain, that gets opened by some secret hand inside my head. A smell, a song, a taste, even a thought can send that electric current shooting through my brain and cause me to remember a person or event that occurred in my life. And of course, that happened to me recently while I was washing the dishes...dishes from breakfast time, after eating eggs...eggs that were stuck to plates that had to be scrubbed off. The memory came crashing through my head setting off a series of thoughts that put a smile on my face and kept me chuckling all day long.
Yet, before I even attempt to tell the story, which my older brother can do so much better than I can, I want you to remember that every family has crazy moments; things that happen in a lifetime that makes the your family seem so different than any other family you know. At least you think it is different, such as the conversations that always pop up during dinner time and you would be completely mortified if a stranger walked in at that very moment causing you to want to crawl under the table and hide forever. You always think you are alone in life's ups and downs and that the event is unique to you, but as life unfold and you learn more about people, you find out that every one is really the same in more ways than one. You learn that you are not alone in life's events. There is nothing new under the sun.
As I was scrubbing the plate that had egg yolk stuck all over it, the thought crossed my mind that I better clean it so well that nobody can tell we had eggs that morning. When I say tell, I do not mean just being able to see the egg, but clean it so well so that nobody can even smell the egg afterwards. I drifted back to that Saturday so many years ago, when I was a teenager. We had a guest over that night for dinner and as we all sat down to eat he looked around at the food and commented on how good it all looked. Then he set his napkin on his lap and as he did I noticed he leaned down to the plate and put his nose over the top and gave a sniff. "I smell eggs! Did someone have eggs for breakfast today?"
I know my eyes widened like saucers at his comment and I felt like crawling under my chair, but that would make it completely obvious that I had been the one to do dishes that day. And, yes, we did have eggs that morning. The entire family sat rooted to their chairs for a second, not sure how to react to such a comment from our guest. Once the initial shock wore off, one of us jumped out of our chair and hurried to retrieve a new, cleaner plate, possibly sniffing it on the way over to make sure there was no smell of egg on the new plate. We did not want to cause our visitor (or my mom!) (or me!) any more undue stress over dinner.
It was this incident, as well as a few others that occurred over the years of our knowing this gentleman, that sparked the events that caused my family to do a pretty crazy thing. My mom had been sick and was laid up for a week or two. A few people from church decided to make our large family of eight some meals to help out, so this kind gentleman decided he would jump in and sign up. I am not sure if he gave it to us at church or if he came all the way out to our house an hour away, but somehow the gigantic pot of casserole ended up on the counter for our family to enjoy. We did enjoy it, and we ate to our hearts' content, hardly making a dent in the large pot. The next day we ate it for lunch, and my dad probably brought it for lunch at work the next day too. And the next day...and the next day. The more we dug down into the pot, the more it seemed to miraculous expand. It was like the miracle of Jesus when He fed the 5,000 on the hill. The food kept multiplying until all twelve disciple were carrying around baskets, handing out bread and fish to the people until their hungry tummies were full. I could picture all eight of us carrying around eight gigantic pots of casserole, trying to find more people to feed. It was like eating turkey after Thanksgiving... there comes a point when you feel like you have had enough and cannot eat another bite of the stuff. At this point my mom was feeling better and was quite ready to get her kitchen back. It was time to go shopping so she could restock the fridge with food for her family. Yet, we had a problem. A huge problem. A giant pot of casserole type of problem. It took up the entire shelf or two inside the refrigerator and we had no idea what to do with it.
"We can't eat another bite of that stuff!" the children complained to Mom.
"But we need to finish it up! We can't waste it! What would Mr. Q think?" Mom said. She hated wasting food anyway. Remember, there are starving children in Africa who would love to eat that casserole.
"But we've been eating it all week long and we're tired of it! Can't we throw the rest away?"
Mom would not hear of it. She was adamant about not throwing it out simply because she did not want to have to tell Mr. Q that we had thrown his casserole in the garbage. He would never forgive us!
"We don't have to tell him we threw it away!" the children argued. "He won't ever know!"
"Remember the plate incident?" she asked us. "Trust me, he'll find out somehow. Or he'll just ask us and we can't lie to him."
"What do you think he'll do?" Dad asked Mom. "It's not like he's going to go looking through our garbage for it."
My older brother smiled. "I can just see him now, running into the house with a mask and cape on yelling, "You threw it away! I just know it!" and with an evil laugh he'll go sniffing through all our garbage until he finds every last bit of casserole and make us eat it until it's gone!"
This comment did not help my mother's decision. "No, we can't throw it away! We just can't!"
"Then what should we do with it?" all the children asked.
"We'll bury it!"
We looked at each other. "Bury it?"
"Yes! He'll never come out and ask us if we buried it so we should be good with that." She told my older brother to get a shovel and go dig a big hole. He stood looking at her still unsure if she was serious. She was. It was growing dark outside by now which seemed a good time of day to dig a hole to secretly bury a casserole. A little while later my brother came in from behind the house and announced that the hole was ready. Without further ado, we took the giant pot outside and dumped the contents into the ground and watched as he covered up the never ending casserole. After he patted the earth smooth we quickly went inside and washed the pot. We would return it to the kind gentleman the next time we saw him at church a few days later, and we could rest in the knowledge that we had not "thrown it away" if he asked.
The lesson learned from this event is never make someone a casserole in a giant pot...put it in a small pan that is big enough for one, possibly two meals, because the person eating it may just bury it so they don't have to tell you that they ended up throwing your delicious, but enormous amount of dinner away. And of course, always doubly wash your plates after a meal of eggs, for that, my friend, is a lesson we all could benefit from.

"I was born in Mas-Ubud, a village renowned for sculptures of refined artistry and quality. Practically everybody there had dedicated their lives to sculpting. Growing up in...
Read Full Story
Wayan Agus Satya Putra
"I was born in Mas-Ubud, a village renowned for sculptures of refined artistry and quality. Practically everybody there had dedicated their lives to sculpting. Growing up in this village has definitely influenced my life.
"I learned to sculpt from my father, I Ketut Sumatra, who is well-known for his sculptures. Father not only taught me how to carve, he also taught me the meaning behind making a sculpture, the virtue of patience and being thorough, and to enjoy every process involved. This is how we hand craft a work of high quality that can be admired by many.
"You could say I'm friendly, charming, and hardworking. I was born to a great family and since father was a well-known artist we were well-provided for. Plus, he was able to offer work to other carvers in the village. He sold many sculptures overseas but unfortunately one day in 1997, a person who placed a large order never paid my father even after receiving them all.
"This practically bankrupted my father and he was forced to let go of the other artisans. Being in a dire financial situation, I decided that since I'm the eldest child I had to find a way to help out. My plan was to find a job somewhere and make enough money to revive father's workshop.
"For seven years I worked as a bartender on a cruise ship, far from the family I love. I faced many difficulties in pursuit of my dream, and I made it! I returned home to revive father's work as a sculptor. I haven't married yet, since I want to focus on my dream and make my family happy.
"I also want to restore my village's fame as a 'sculpting village.' I am excited to start this new venture together with my father, and we've been able to recall the artisans that once worked with him. They are very loyal to father since they apprenticed with him, so they were happy to return.
"Every stage of the sculpting process is so interesting. Inspiration comes from nature and all that surrounds, and once we get an idea, we select the proper wood, a process that is very detailed. Each step must be endured with patience and sculpting should be enjoyed. Fabulous! It's amazing. Especially now, because we can share this feeling with the artisans that work with us. Plus, we are providing better for our respective families. This makes me so happy.
"I've known about Novica since 2008, but back then we weren't in a position to join. It's taken us about three years to be able to offer Novica customers something real. Today, being associated with Novica means we're one step closer to making my dream come true, father's work will be known again, as well as that of the artisans in our team."

A 21-year-old Joliet Junior College student celebrating spring break was shot to death early Monday outside a Harvey nightclub, and police say they have no motive or suspects.
Vincent Martin of the 0-99 block of Crestwood Drive, Joliet, was sitting in friend's car outside Club O, at 17038 S. Halsted St., about 12:40 a.m. when he was killed by a bullet fired through the passenger-side door, Harvey police said.
Police could not explain why Martin, a full-time business student at Joliet Junior College, was targeted.
"Possibly it was an armed robbery attempt or a vehicle hijacking attempt that folded before it happened," said Police Detective Terrance Boone.
The lone witness was the car's driver, a 21-year-old New Lenox man He told police the car radio's volume was loud and he did not hear anything before the shooting, Boone said.
The friend was not harmed, he said.
"It's possible [the gunman] was yelling something at them and they just didn't hear," Boone said.
Police said no shell casing was found at the scene.
Police Chief Phillip Hardiman said there had been previous problems at the club. A representative from the club could not be reached for comment.
Family and friends of Martin's said he planned to attend DePaul University in Chicago and continue his business studies.
He graduated from Providence Catholic High School in New Lenox in 2000, where he was a basketball point guard, said his mother, Regina. He also had been a member of the Illinois Warriors, an Amateur Athletic Union club team, and with that group Martin and his parents traveled to Hawaii and Walt Disney World in Orlando.
Martin did not play basketball in college, but he often played pickup games with friends at Providence or the YMCA in Joliet, his family said.
Regina Martin said her son was not working and devoted all his time to graduating from junior college. She said he hoped to become a business entrepreneur.
Martin lived with his parents in Joliet and was out Sunday night to celebrate his school's spring break. His family said he did not usually frequent this club.
"He was kind-hearted and easygoing," his mother said of her only child. "He was in the wrong place at the wrong time."

Year B: Third Sunday of Lent
Second Reading: 1 Corinthians 1: 22-25
From the very beginning, Christianity had a P.R. problem. How do you “sell” a religion based on an event like the death of its leader? Yes, you can preach that Jesus was also raised from the dead - but it is a tough truth to encounter at the beginning of belief.
For the Jews, crucifixion was the ultimate in shame. Not only was it a horrific death, but their Law also said that anyone who died on a tree was cursed by God and was damned for ever. How could early Christians convince them that Jesus had died “on a tree” but had remain beloved of God and so had been raised from the dead. For the Jews, the very fact of Jesus’ being crucified was an obstacle to receiving the truth of the resurrection.
The other group predominant in Corinth was the Greek community. They had been brought up in a world which valued reason and philosophy. Their culture had grown strong in mathematics and medicine and some of their discoveries remain as valid now as they did thousands of years ago. However, when they encountered the story of Jesus, they could see no wisdom in it. Why did Jesus die? What was the purpose? What was the effect? How could someone who it was claimed was divine die?
So, these two groups of people were unable to enter into the mystery -and this must have caused those who did to ask questions. Today’s reading is St Paul’s attempt to address that question - what gets in the way of some people believing in Jesus as the Christ.
It is a fact that to some people, elements of faith get in the way of belief - others see it as completely mad - but those who do believe sense that they are encountering something much greater than any human can understand. God is so great that, in comparison, the greatest human wisdom seems like foolishness.
This problem has not gone away. When we speak of our faith, we will encounter people who will challenge and reject our beliefs. At such times, the phrase “God’s foolishness is wiser than human wisdom” can prove a very powerful belief to trust.
What does it mean for me?

"My goal since day one was to fight in the UFC. I knew I'd make it, and that's not where my dream/goals stop. The work has just started, as I only care about winning in the UFC and beating the toughest guys, which are in the UFC. My first opponent is Mark Bocek. He has quite the resume in grappling, and anyone can do nothing but respect that. I've been training for quite some time, have been training my butt off for this fight in San Diego, and the respect is out the window once I step into that octagon. Regardless of where the fight goes, I plan to keep punching him in the face, breaking him down, and looking for options to finish him. I'm very confident going into this fight, and I can't wait until Dec 5th."

An old friend of mine recently moved back into town after about a decade in Asia. We hadn't seen each other in a while, and on a snowy evening, over a very pleasant dinner, we caught each other up on our lives. One of the big things we discussed was the relationship that had taken him to Hong Kong which lasted about three years before the passion mysteriously petered out. I pushed and prodded my friend, asking him if he could explain why the flame died.
"I think it was just that we relied so much on each other. We each had business colleagues, each made some new pals, but with our old friends and families so far away, we became intensely symbiotic. And after a while, maybe it was just too much. In the end, she felt more like a sister to me. And we're still good friends. But the romance is gone and I guess at times I do feel puzzled about why that's the case.
"But I learned a lot from the experience about how to be in a relationship, and how to make small sacrifices, and how to really live with a person," he said. "It ended, sure, but I don't see it as a failure."
A failure?! I thought it somewhat funny that he would even say that. But then I realized: So many of us (myself included) see the end of a relationship as some kind of failure perhaps we worry (if we did the dumping) that we wasted too much time with a person who wasn't stimulating enough or didn't treat us the way we wanted to be treated, or that (if we were dumped) we failed to see little problems before they became big ones, or didn't compromise enough. Or, that (if it was more mutual) we both missed something crucial along the way that contributed to the end of the love.
But perhaps a better approach to take, when any romance ends, is this: Tell yourself that thanks to the relationship, you've improved your relationship "skill set" and you've learned more about yourself what you can deal with, what you can't, and what you yourself need to improve on. You're a little more realistic about what's out there, and who you are.
What do you say?

This is my fault. I should have checked reviews. I saw some really cool sandals and had to have them. Pulled the trigger. Unfortunately, a few days later, I check the tracking and it's in Chinese. I knew then it would be at least a month to get them, and I was right. And when I did receive them, they looked cheap. Time will tell if they fall apart quickly. Worst part is I sent them 2 emails - no response. Looked up customer service number and was on hold for an hour. Never spoke with anyone. Please don't order anything from them.

Work experience Essay
Sorry, but copying text is forbidden on this website!
By the next morning I was starting to loose faith, all this work didn’t seem worthwhile and I wasn’t sure what I was gaining or learning from this experience. It was becoming easier to find jobs to do, however the work load was still divided by 8 eight people. When I found out they were going to teach us how to wash hair I was really nervous, once again I could feel the butterflies and my stomach was tying itself in knots.
Of course it looked easy enough but I know it would a lot harder than that, sure enough it was. I was trying so hard not to drench this lady with water, shampoo in the correct soothing directions.
It was then she approached, the manager, Jill. ‘Aren’t you done yet? ‘ she questioned, staring deep into my eyes. ‘Err, um, no I’m sorry. ‘ I answered just loud enough for her to hear me over the constant moan of hairdryers. She starred at me with disgust and anger, turned on her heel and left. I was horrified I quickly let one of the juniors take over and I skulked off to wash brushes in the bleach cupboard. Over the last three days I’d started to notice that most of the juniors and stylists seemed really put out if we asked them a question, or tried to talk to them during a break, it seemed to be inconvenient to be polite towards us.
The staff didn’t seem very considerate or understanding towards us, all we were doing was the mundane jobs for free, I mean part of this wonderful experience and opportunity. I really hated work experience by now and just wanted this awful week to be over. The next morning there was a team bonding exercise, so as a valued part of the team we were asked to sit at the opposite end of the salon and keep quiet. By now it was quite easy to find jobs, this was probably because the other two girls were starting to get really lazy, by now these menial tasks were really starting to bore me.
Even the juniors thought of us as slaves, one said to me when I was sweeping the stairs at the end of the day ‘Where are the others, skiving again, you’re the only good little worker’. I really can’t wait to get out of here! The next morning I dragged my feet along the pavement walking as slowly as possible praying I would never get to work. But this morning wasn’t as bad as I had anticipated. I was asked to go and get 40 one-pound coins from the bank and sent to WH Smith to buy magazines, however I was given no money which proved to be a I was told slight problem.
While I was there, I was asked to return several CD’s. Finding the CD’s in what is possibly the world messiest, hottest, and smallest office in the world was not an easy task, and took several attempts. When I finally returned to the salon floor, there was once again nothing to do. I could hardly wait for my lunch break, I stood there watching every second tick past for a full hour, when my break finally came, I ran out of the salon, I was so relieved not to be in there, I couldn’t face going back.
I feel that work experience is quite pointless, as it didn’t really teach me a lot about a career in hair dressing, I’d have been better off working for my actual employer, as I like the people and the working environment there. What I did learn, was that I want go to college and do well, so I will be able to get a job I really like, then I’ll never have to be a hairdressing junior again. I also learned that you should always make an effort to get on with, and be polite as possible to people you work with, as it makes your working life a whole lot more enjoyable.

Harry Redknapp took over at Birmingham last week following the resignation of Gianfranco Zola.
But the former Tottenham manager could not avoid defeat in his first match - the Birmingham derby.
The Blues lost 1-0 at Villa Park yesterday to a rare strike from Gabriel Agbonlahor, his first goal in over a year.
And Redknapp was not afraid to criticse the 30-year-old, who has struggled with fitness and off-field problems.
Gabriel Agbonlahor scored his first Aston Villa goal in 14 months against Birmingham
Gabby? He's done well today, he's had ten minutes, that'll keep him happy for another year won't it. Fantastic
"Gabby? He's done well today, he's had ten minutes, that'll keep him happy for another year won't it. Fantastic,” Redknapp said.
“We can't sit here and say Villa were good can we? Be honest. We've seen fantastic teams here over the years and Steve has a lot of work to do if that's the best they can do.
“We didn't deserve to lose the game. I don't think our keeper got his gloves dirty. I'm very encouraged.
“When they've won two out of 24 and you come in, it scares you to death.
“But we've worked hard this week on the training ground. I thought they carried it out to a T, just didn't get the break when we needed it.”
Harry Redknapp lost his first game as Birmingham boss against Aston Villa
Aston Villa boss Steve Bruce gave Agbonlahor a clean slate when he took charge last October, and said: “He's had his critics but I can only go off what I've seen in the five months I've had.
“He was impeccable for two months, lost 10 kilos, then unfortunately got a horrible hamstring injury.
“When we do break up, it's important he gets himself in some nick, and pre-season is huge for him. He's now got to win a contract for next year, which will be the first time in a long time. And when you get to 30, winning a contract is like winning the lottery.
"Certainly a fit Gabby Agbononlahor has at least at this level got something to offer, I'm convinced of that."

♥ love this sweet family!
A few weeks ago, Kendra (the oldest daughter) asked me about Mother's Day photos for her Momma. They hadn't had photos done in a while - and she wanted to gift them to her. So we planned a date to meet up with her, her man (who is basically another 'child'), her momma, her sister, and her brother. ♥ I was super excited to do this for them as they're one of my favorite families! I've known them for a few years due to the pageant system (I'm the local pageant director for our county fair as well...), and the youngest daughter, Bae-Bae, had won my Miss Preteen pageant (and went on to earn 3rd place at STATE!) a few years ago. They are just a super sweet family!
The evening we did these, the weather was GORGEOUS, and we ended up getting some great pictures. ♥ If you notice in a few of them, you'll see them holding a sweet photo of her nephew/their cousin, that passed away several years ago. They are a super close-knit family, and always hold his memory very near and dear to their heart. I'm so glad that I could help include him in these pictures for them. ♥
See more of this beautiful family below:

Today I am grateful for a geezer lunch. When John and I drove to Wisconsin recently we were both suffering with aches and pains. His back was out and he was unable to do much of anything and my whole body was out from doing everything he couldn’t do.
When we stopped for lunch I hauled out the ibuprophen and then we had to laugh at how ridiculous it looked to have pills for lunch. FYI-the chubby one is not eating the pudding! I had the salad! Gotta love it. There is nothing like a geezer lunch.

Joe Root Losing Wicket Consistently between 50 and 100
Joe Root is cross with himself to have been losing his wicket between 50 and 100 more often than not.
The other batsmen of this era who are being tipped to be future legends are all frequent century scorers, but, Root, although he is as consistent as anyone else and averages as high as anyone else as well or even higher, has struggled to record three figures too many times.
Half centuries are a regular for him, almost every second or third innings, but, at the end of the day, there is no bigger criteria to rate a test match player than the hundreds’ tally.
Yes, the consistency is always acknowledged and people understand the importance of the average too, but, nothing as important as hundreds in the 5-day game.
Root reckons he would perhaps be letting himself switch off when he is in and feels that the proceedings are under his control. And, because of that loss in composure while being in the comfort zone, he would look to be disdainful to even the good balls which are always around the corner in international Cricket.
According to Root, that has to do only with focus and he would definitely not call it complacency. And, more than worrying him or anything, it’s sort of irritating him. He would be happy to take the walk to the hut if the bowler had the better of him with his skill, but, to hand it to the bowler himself is definitely irksome.
Root was out caught at short extra cover in Durham the other day on a short ball which made quite an ugly viewing and again it was his audaciousness to back him to play a whip off a ball of that height.
The 25-year old, at this moment in time, has 17 tons in total for England, 9 in red ball matches.

|Ottolenghi: mushroom, garlic and shallots|
We seemed to be given quite a lot of wine and prosseco so by the time I'd finished cooking I was quite tipsy and didn't think to take photo's - I don't think mine looked quite as good as the dish in the pictures. Here's the recipe.
I also persuaded The Boyfriend (with some significant difficulty) to use some vouchers he got for Christmas on really delicious beenleigh blue, Appleby's Cheshire and some nice sharp goats cheese which I can't remember much about except it got eaten very quickly. We also had a beautiful moist cherry and almond cake.
We haven't all got together since February so it was nice to catch up with everyone and show them around our flat. Great night. Lovely and boozy. Swollen tummies from eating too much. Lovely and boozy. We even stayed up to the early hours playing cards. Rock and Roll!

San Diego (Calif.) St. Augustine High School is coming off two consecutive CIF D-III titles, and Stanford coach Jim Harbaugh is very aware of the success the Saints have had the past few years. Recently the head coach at the University of San Diego, it was easy to keep tabs on the Saints, but he was even closer than that: his son Jay was a part of their back-to-back titles.
So Harbaugh has a good idea of what's gone on at St. Augustine, and one player that he has been able to watch is defensive end Chris Pousson (6-4, 230).
Pousson was visited by Harbaugh earlier this week, a return visit since Pousson attended Stanford's Junior Day a month ago.
"I liked Stanford a lot, it was really impressive," the recruit reports. "I didn't get an offer, but I really liked what I saw. I've been keeping in touch with them, and I knew the coaches from when they were at USD."
Pousson says the Junior Day experience opened his eyes to a great deal about the Cardinal program.
"We had a session where we talked with the players, and I liked hearing from the current players - to hear where the program is headed," Pousson reports. "I know they haven't been good for a couple of years, but they really sound like they're changing things."
He also was able to take a visit of the athletic facilities, and he left wowed.
"The stadium was awesome," Pousson exclaims. "I know it was brand new this last year, so they took us through it and that was awesome. I was really impressed with the weight room and the locker room. It was cool."
Pousson says he also got a good idea of the academic rigors of Stanford and liked hearing about the educational plan there.
"I'm thinking about being a business major, but I'm not really set on that," he says. "I have a 3.99 GPA and I scored a 1730 on the SAT, but I'm taking it again and taking the ACT too."
Stanford isn't the only school with which the defensive end has been in contact.
Pousson attended the Scout.com All-American Combine last month, and he plans to attend a camp at Penn State this summer. Then it's back to focusing on St. Augustine's drive for a third straight sectional title.
Are you fully subscribed to The Bootleg? If not, then you are missing out on all the top Cardinal coverage we provide daily on our website, as well as our full-length feature articles in our glossy magazine. Sign up today for the biggest and best in Stanford sports coverage with TheBootleg.com (sign-up) and The Bootleg Magazine (sign-up)!

K. Tharamani, who said she had earlier received an appointment order, but had not been allowed to join at her workplace, has now started work as a junior assistant at an office of the printing and stationery department in Salem
Following repeated appeals about being denied a posting despite having an appointment order, K. Thamarai, a visually impaired woman who had cleared the Tamil Nadu Public Service Comission (TNPSC) Group IV exams, received a fresh appointment order and took up a posting as a junior assistant on Thursday.
“I am extremely happy that I have joined work. I was keen on becoming financially stable and helping my family. This is the first step towards that,” said Ms Thamarai, who hails from Thiruvannamalai. While she had initially received a posting in Chennai, she has now taken up charge at an office of the printing and stationery department in Salem.
Ms Thamarai had cleared the Group IV exams with a score of 202.50 marks. The TNPSC and the Commissioner of the Printing department had issued appointment orders for her to join in the post of junior assistant. However, when she appeared at the printing department in Chennai in August to take up her posting, Ms Thamarai alleged that she had been told that since she was visually impaired, the job wasn’t suitable for her. Furthermore, she alleged that the printing department had also issued a memo contrary to their own office proceedings issued for her appointment and that she wasn’t able to join.
A complaint had been raised regarding this by C. Govindakrishnan, Founder, Nethrodaya with the the State Commissioner for Persons with Disabilities. The Commissioner, having the powers of a civil court, had also sought written submissions from the Commissioner, Stationery and Printing Department and the Secretary, TNPSC based on the complaint given. In his complaint, Mr. Govindakrishnan had alleged non-implementation of the statutory rights granted under the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016.
“We are extremely happy that Thamarai has received her joining orders and was able to begin working from today,” Mr. Govindakrishnan said.
Source: Read Full Article

Posted by Kendall Raine on January 22, 2001 at 17:35:21:
In Reply to: Re: SOLO DIVER COURSE posted by AADIVER on January 22, 2001 at 17:11:23:
I called Dave. He said it was BS. Typical of you. It would be almost funny if that kind of crap didn't have the record of unnecessary deaths that it does.
Post a Followup

This time I am talking to horror author Jason Davis who has had a full interesting life. I guess the simplest way to describe him would be, that he is a person who has always found ways to achieve what he wanted out of life.
Jason founded the Chicago Horror Film Festival, the Indy Horror Film Festival, published his first novel "Inside the Mirrors," has made a couple of films, and has done more that he is sure he is forgetting. Now, he tries to concentrate heavily on his writing and time with his family.
Books & Writing: What got you interested in writing?
Jason Davis: I can't really say. I have written stories for as far back as I can remember. I just love to write stories. I am always coming up with ideas and if I wasn't putting them to paper they would just go to waste.
Books & Writing: What attracts you in horror?
Jason Davis: I got into horror largely because I used to be so afraid of it. I pushed myself to get over my fears and in turn found an appreciation for the genre.
Both in film and in fiction, I feel it takes more skill to create a good, fearful tale. There is a lot of crafting involved, and a true craftsman can weave a tale to make a person keep their lights on. In getting over my fears of the works of the genre, I started to study the craft and enjoyed it.
Books & Writing: Can you tell us a bit about your book “Inside the Mirrors”?
Jason Davis: "Inside the Mirrors" is a novel largely about my greatest fear. While there are a lot that goes on in the book and has a lot of its own complexities, at it's core it's all about my fear.
Books & Writing: What is it you fear?
Jason Davis: My fear? That somehow, one of my actions would somehow hurt my family. What could be worse than that? That while I watched from within myself, I had no control over what I was doing.
Books & Writing: Did you need to do any research for the book?
Jason Davis: I did do a lot of research on Hobos. I researched their culture and different things about the life of hobos.
Books & Writing: How did you come up with the story for the book?
Jason Davis: That came from my daughter. When she was much younger, we had this large dresser mirror that for some reason never got put up. It would just sit in the hallway.
My daughter would sit in front of the mirror, talking to someone in it. She called him, "Bob.". And whenever she did anything bad, she would say Bob told her to do it. She would sometimes even speak in "Bob's" evil voice.
It freaked us out for awhile and had us convinced that she was possessed. There had been stories even before on how the mirror had been haunted, so yeah, we weren't sure what to do. Eventually we threw the mirror into a dumpster and Bob went away.
Books & Writing: Are you working on something new at the moment?
Jason Davis: I have few things going on. I am working on my next novel, "Invisible Spiders." which is much longer Zombie Apocalypse novel. That one is taking awhile, so I have also started a few side projects. I am working on a short story collection as well as a rewrite for a script that should be going into production in 2013. I am also working on a film script for "Inside the Mirrors" that I'm hoping to find a production company for soon.
Books & Writing: You are also the founder of the Chicago Horror Film Festival and the Indy Horror Film Festival. Can you tell us something about that?
Jason Davis: What do you want to know? I am a large supporter for the independent artist. I believe with modern methods and technology we don't need large studios or publishers to dictate what we like. CHFF and the IHFF were founded to promote the independent horror filmmaker.
Books & Writing: Where do you see yourself in a couple of years in relation to writing?
Jason Davis: Writing. I don't do it for fame or money. As long as I'm writing, I am happy.
Books & Writing: Do you have any tips for aspiring writers?
Jason Davis: Write, Read, Write some more. Even with self publishing, don't rush to put it out there. That was a mistake I made. Write, then wait and read it. Wait some more and read it again. Some people object to this and they may be right.
I guess the only true advice I could say to any aspiring author is to not listen to anyones advice about writing. There is no right way and no wrong way, just find what works for you. Don't get caught up in what others do and their practices.
Books & Writing: Where can people go and read your work?
Jason Davis: Last I checked it was available just about everywhere. I did limit the digital version to kindle for multiple reasons. The most significant is Kindle Select, but also because of business practices of some of these other companies.
Books & Writing: Where can people find you on internet?
Jason Davis: Everywhere. However, I am mostly on Twitter.
I also have a Facebook and google+ fan page.
Below is an excerpt from his book "Inside the Mirrors"!
Samantha sat there staring into her bedroom mirror. It had been drawing her in, and now she had been sitting there for longer than she could remember. She was lost in staring at her own reflection, her silver hair glowing off the sunlight for most the day. Now she sat there, with her hair now just a twinkle in the dark room, illuminated by the little light coming into the room from the outside street light.
“God, how long have I been sitting here.” She thought to herself. She tried to blink; too pull her gaze away from the mirror, but it was as though she was trapped their by some invisible force, keeping her bound to her chair, repeating the relentless motion of brushing her hair.
Through her reflection she could see the rest of her bedroom and it looked just how she remembered it when she had woken up that morning. The bed was yet to be made and her clothes were tossed onto the sheets that she had been in the process of gathering for the morning.
She looked back to herself, at the nightgown she was still wearing. She had to have been sitting there for the entire day, but how? She barely remembered seeing something move out of the corner of her eye as she was pulling out her jeans. She had planned on spending the day in the garden. The rabbits had been going after her tomatoes, and she was going to start putting up a chicken wire fence around them to keep them out. She loved it when she worked in the garden. In her retirement it still gave her something to do to make her feel productive.
She had just set her jeans on the bed and then had noticed something move just out of the corner of her eye. She looked up at the mirror. Something had moved in the background, she was sure of it. A shadow had moved behind her, somewhere on the other side of the room. She quickly scanned the room and then turned to look back at the mirror.
She stopped there when she was herself. She wasn’t sure what made her stop to look at herself. There was just something in how her reflection was looking back at her, something alien about it, that made her want to just continuing to look at it. The look in her eyes, the gaze she looked back at herself with, it was so distant. She saw herself looking back at her, but it was that far off look. It was her, but it wasn’t.
Then her reflection started to move. At first, she thought her reflection was moving by itself, that it had separated from her and now had a mind of its own. But then she watched as her reflection lead her to sitting down in front of the mirror, and sat her down. If she hadn’t watched herself lowering into the chair in front of the mirror, she wouldn’t have known she had been walking. It was as though she had no control left over her body as it was moving without thought.

We had a very special visitor at school today. The children were very excited to see Santa. They performed some Christmas songs and poems that they have been learning in class. Santa had a gift for every child which can be enjoyed over the holidays.
Our Christmas jumper competition was a success. Well done to all those who made an extra effort, Winners received a beautiful Christmas book – see pictures below.
On behalf of everyone here at St. Michael’s, we would like to wish everyone a very Happy Christmas. See you all in 2020.

Mariah has done straight up Karate on my ass anytime I even talked about cutting his hair from that awesome bowl cut he rocked for so many years. I tried to see what a short haircut would look like on him but ... No dice. He started telling her he wanted a mohawk. No dice. He asked her for a buzz cut. No dice.
So.... as they do about now, he took things into his own hands. (Specifically, the scissors!)
The boy walks in and stands there smiling at me for a few moments before I jump out of my chair. Too late to do anything to save it, (though Mariah tried to convince me we could comb it together...) but ultimately I know when to cut my losses, so out came the clippers. A few minutes of buzzing and DANG he looks more like his bro.

We stayed at Iberostar rose hall suites & every morning for breakfast they had fresh fruit juices. Well they had a banana juice & I was just wondering if anyone knows how they made that??? You can't juice a banana! But it was so delicious! I want to make it at home!

- Words: 3051
- Length: 10 Pages
- Topic: Criminal Justice
- Paper #: 55078969
However, this made Andrei use physical torture as means of controlling her which later lead to him killing her by hitting her head constantly. His aim was not to have a casual sex with the victim but to kill her and satisfy his physical needs, which he discovered during his previous thrilling encounter.
He also showed abnormal behaviors after sexual assault when he chewed and swallowed away one of the

As a homeowner who put up his property for sale a couple of months ago, and recently got through the process of selling the house, I can tell you what helped me a great deal. The first step to this process was to make the decision that I wanted to sell my property. It was not an easy decision, and it was one I could only take when I spoke with my family and considered all the benefits. However, it was a decision that we ultimately had to make, as we did not have much other choice in terms of our financial future.
So, if you are determined to get your property sold as you are moving somewhere, or you need the money, then you need to know what to do to get things done in the right way. The first thing that you need to know is that you must have an appraiser checking out your property. If you live in Houston, here is the website of the best appraiser in the area. If you go on their website, you are going to see the types of services they offer, and what they can do for you.
The reason I recommend this appraiser is because they helped my family a great deal. We were very confused about how much money we could get for our home, as we did not know much about the real estate market at the time. However, an appraiser got us off on the right track. They came to our property, looked at everything, and let us know what we were standing to gain if we were to put the property on the market imminently. But they also provide other services, and I can tell you a little bit about them right now.
Another way the appraisers helped us out is that they put together a detailed report of all the “issues” with our home. For instance, older bathrooms, issues in the kitchen, roof concerns, etc. None of these were serious issues, but they were the kinds of things that can bring down the value of a home, or make a buyer nervous. And you do not want either of those things if you want a quick and profitable sale. So, they let us know how much more money we could make if we got some of those changes made to the home before listing it.
And luckily, we did have time to get a few things done, and this helped us immensely. Our home looked better and buyers were a lot happier to complete a quick sale, once they had gone through all the checks on their side to make sure there was nothing wrong with the house. Even something as simple as a full-scale paint job can help you immensely if you want to sell at a good price. That is why we recommend talking with an appraiser and getting a quote. Then you can go ahead and get a real estate agent to help with the rest of the process.

Roshan Bliss: I will fight to the death for the right of a teacher to have good compensation and job security and due process as much as I will for my students to have text books or proper health care and the things that they need to do well.
Dave Zirin: She is our Jordan. She is our Jim Brown. She is our Babe Ruth, calling his shots. She is no longer content to dodge bullets, but understands how to stop them. Serena is that rare athlete who has not only mastered her sport. She’s harnessed it.
Tom Degan: Alison Parker and Adam Ward were focusing on their jobs. They were ambushed. They were doomed. They never had a chance.
Robert Reich: California’s property taxes are already much lower than the national average. So even if corporations pay their full share, they’re still getting a great deal.

Jannat is a 19 year old TEGA who lives in a village close to Dhaka, Bangladesh. She is currently studying at a local college and teaches as a tutor for a private institution. Jannat lives with her family and extended family in a semi-rural area. Before the pandemic Jannat had a busy lifestyle – a typical day would start with waking up early in the morning, praying and helping her mother with house chores before making her way to the private college, where she studied as well as teaching as a tutor, alongside her mother.
If I were in charge of the pandemic response in my country, the first thing I would have done is make people of the country aware. And I would have wanted that at least one person is made aware per family. Only awareness can save [people] from all kinds of crises, to fight all kinds of problems.

Soulja Boy was arrested in December for probation violations, and was then mysteriously released without being charged.
This lead to speculation that SB snitched, or that all of the guns he'd been waving on social media were fake.
It turns out the authorities were just buying time and collecting more evidence against him.
Today, the Los Angeles District Attorney charged SB with felony possession of an assault weapon and being a felon in possession of a firearm. He was also charged with with receiving stolen property, a misdemeanor.
The felony possession charges are for his notorious Mini Draco AR-15, which is completely illegal in California. He faces up to four years in jail.
It looks like his fight with Chris Brown is also in jeopardy, because we doubt the DA is going to let him fly to Dubai with those charges pending.

Woman often wonder if us guys fall for women who give it away quickly or too easily.
How if we're able to kiss you on the second date, you might never hear from us again.
Or how we might not take you (or a relationship with you) seriously if you fool around with us too early.
Here are some absolute truths about us...
One woman I met was cute. She was wearing a prom dress and yep, a Tiara, and not one guy had the balls to approach her for real... except me of course. I saw it as a challenge and since at that time I was "practicing" my technique, I was all for it. (Well okay I watched a few guys "try" but their tactics were lame and let's just say pathetically obvious.)
Guess they made it easier for me and nope, NOT going to tell you what I did so, :p
She did NOT give it away too easy. She was a fun challenge and that excited me.
The reason we never started dating was because of a phone conversation we were having. I had the pleasure of listening to her bitch to her Mother and fight over some pretty stupid shit. She basically treated her like something less than a human.
From the very moment I realized what I was in for and since I didn't like how she treated her, I never called her again. Just blew her off!
Another woman, a darling on the outside or should I say from afar, but was crazy as they come. She had severe emotional outbursts and although she was a little too easy for a certain guy type, namely me, we didn't happen for the obvious reasons.
Intense emotional outbursts I wanted nothing to do with.
I wasn't all that physically attracted to her even though she was "sort of" attractive and some guys would've really liked and did.
She had bad breath and a voice which, the more I thought of, would NOT have been a pleasure to hear her scream or moan in bed.
At one point I even felt that If we even went so far as screwing, I would've woke up with a knife to my throat IF she was in one of those bad morning moods.
Yet another girl, yes you can guess this one, had absolutely no control over her life. Everything about her was to blame all her problems on other people. She took absolutely no responsibility for the life she created for herself.
Hmmm... maybe I'm just bad at picking them... or maybe not. 🙂 Remember I'm just mentioning the bad ones here and the pattern is clear. As they say, bat shit crazy has to be the number one reason to scare us away.
But as always... it's never that simple, is it?
You see as a guy I'm torn.
I want it early, that I do. Hell I'd take sex on the first date and to be completely honest, have been there in as little as fifteen minutes with one specific one.
And yes, if the circumstance or timing was right, I would've definitely saw her again and again until such time as I was able to figure out who she really was with clothes on. Well most of them at least.
We're torn because it's true, we're going to put in more time and effort with women we're extremely attracted to in more ways than purely physical especially IF we're not getting any. I will say, without a doubt, if you can hold out and still keep him interested just long enough, you can keep him around.
But there's always an exception or two...
For some once we get it, all those habits or bad things we've noticed but was ignoring because we haven't slept together yet, suddenly become deal-breakers after we have sex once or twice or maybe three times.
Depending on the guy and how good the sex is of course.
There seems to be a timing or balance which works well for us when it comes to "putting out" and since the guys tend to be different it's probably best for YOU to find one which works for you and stick to it. You can't keep changing it or you might get results which make it too difficult to figure out.
Remember, we're torn.
We don't want a slut who will put out to every stud but if that's us, then we're okay mostly with it. It's the other guys and the number of them and the types of guys you choose to sleep with quickly we have a serious problem with AND in those cases we're less likely to consider a relationship with you seriously.
Maybe I'm making a point here and I do realize this topic is much too big for one article so let's keep this to one thing... sex or fooling around.
My point is now clear and although I just wrote it, let me say it again...
We don't want, or consider relationships with a slut who will put out to every stud BUT if that's just us, then we're okay with it.
It's the OTHER GUYS and the NUMBER OF THEM and more importantly the TYPE OF GUYS you choose to sleep with quickly we have a serious problem with AND in those cases we're less likely to consider a relationship with you seriously.
Whether or not that sounds good or bad is not my concern. Whether it's a double standard or not, is again, not my concern. I'm not here to argue that point today.
What I AM saying is, based on my ramblings today, is that early sex or sleeping with or fooling around quickly with a guy doesn't seem to come into play as much as other things like who you really are or turn out to be after one or several dates.
We will consider or take a relationship with you seriously when the more important things are known to us unless we're made to realize or don't unfortunately approve of the other guys you're dating or sleeping with all too casually.
Let me finish this by putting it in a perspective which has recently occurred to me because she's famous and well-known.
Selena Gomez. 😉
I do NOT know her but I would sleep with her because I'm physically attracted to her with or without any consideration of the future. (If that wasn't obvious by now. :p )
I would NOT commit to her until I spend enough time with her to see how we connect, who she is, how crazy she was, how our life together would work or fit, and all that is regardless of whether or not I could get her in fifteen minutes or two months. (Granted if she made me wait a year or two I'd probably give up but that's just me.)
I know at least one person she's been with, Justin Bieber, and I'm assuming they fucked at least once. Yes. I couldn't care less about him and my opinion of him is only diluted by media. In other words I do not know him well enough to consider him an ass or not.
My point about Justin is, related to being or committing to Selena, based on my "other guys" theory is, well even if he's turns out to be a jerk and that's the type of guy she puts out too early for would NOT affect our relationship negatively (or have me pulling out of it) because if everything between us was good, I could always say...
"She chose ME over HIM and that's a kind of proof of real love no one could deny."
BUT if I was to learn her "assumed" sexual promiscuous ways led to her guys who were unknown bastards and was a pattern for her, then sex would be all she would get IF she tried hard enough. 😀

This is a jaunty film about the meltdown of the financial system and the corruptness that underlies what happened. How does it manage to keep it light? First by focusing on those who saw what was coming and while they by no means tried to stop it, they did become increasingly alarmed when the market was not acting as it should and tried to figure out why. The answer, as we all know, is that the system is rigged, and while a few banks and investment houses went down in the crash in 2008, few did and almost no one went to jail. We could learn a thing or two from Iceland, where the financial crooks were treated as crooks and incarcerated. Not so here. The movie is packed with good acting. Steve Carell is excellent, maybe the best that I have seen him, and Christian Bale has taken his wooden style of acting to where it needs to be and become quite good at portraying a kind of character. Brad Pitt is almost unrecognizable and Ryan Gosling takes a double take to notice, but they both put in great performances in a film that almost flippantly tells the saddest story of the 21st century in America. It could well explain how an outsider like Trump became the presumptive Republican nominee, managing to escape the wrath of voters against the very moneyed class that the crash protected at their expense. We all desperately want to believe the best of those with money, and that is simply not the case. This movie makes that all very palatable to watch.

Classical guitar pricing can be quite tricky and subjective. In the end it's really a matter of what one is willing to sell it for and how fast they want to sell it. Seeing it is from your dad, I'd simply ask him what he is willing to let it go for. He might give you a great deal!
Subjectively I'd personally price it around $4k based on my knowledge of Kenny Hills guitars. If I really liked the guitar and wanted to buy it myself, that is as high as I'd go, but would preferably want it lower. If I were buying blind online without being able to try in person, I wouldn't go beyond $3k.
"Success grants its rewards to a few, but is the dream of the multitudes.
Excellence is available to all, but is accepted only by a few." - Christopher Parkening

Going to the hospital when you need help or you are sick is common. So, when one dog showed up on hospital grounds, everyone knew that he needed an immediate help.
The founder of Logan’s Legacy and dedicated dog rescuer called Suzette Hall said that no one was there but the construction workers, who were ready to assist him. They did their best to catch the dog, but to no avail. So, after giving up, they to call a rescuer for help.
While doing their best to get Hall’s contact information, they gave the dog a blanket to let him feel comfortable. They also gave him some water and food. A few days later, they were able to contact Hall, who directly came for help.
From the first sight, Hall knew that she had to approach the dog, who was named Elliot, carefully as he was timid. However, the dog ran away once he noticed her! He was even able to hide properly to the point Suzette was not able to find him!
Hall and the other rescuers searched the construction area for hours, but to no avail! So, Hall set a trap to let the dog be out by placing hot dogs! After 2 hours, the trap worked and Elliot went into it!
The dog was directly picked up by Hall, who took him to a veterinary clinic to be checked. The vets gave him antibiotics as he had some treatable infections. But what shocked the vets was that Elliot had a little spring!
Thankfully, he was able to pass it by his own. He was then fostered by a kind woman, who loves him so much. He is ready to go to a forever home. We hope that he will find the forever home he deserves soon.
Smilingdogyoga.com is also a participant in the Amazon Services LLC Associates Program, an affiliate advertising program designed to provide a means for sites to earn advertising fees by advertising and linking to Amazon.com. Pages on this site may include affiliate links to Amazon and its affiliate sites on which the owner of this website will make a referral commission.

How can we help you?
Your enquiry will be reviewed with no obligation.
Widow’s appeal for help in fight for justice
The widow of a Wednesbury man who died from asbestos-related cancer is appealing to her husband's former colleagues to help in her fight for justice.
Robert William John Taylor, 77, of Westbury Road, died in November last year from mesothelioma, a painful cancer which is caused by exposure to asbestos. From the 1940s through to the 1960s, Mr Taylor - who was known as John - held various jobs with a haulage firm, a chemical plant and a carriage works in the West Midlands.
Although he was forced to cut his career short and take early retirement in 1969 due to severe epilepsy, Mr Taylor's earlier exposure to asbestos at one or more of these jobs had already caused damage which would ultimately lead to his death.
"He began to suffer from a shortness of breath in October 2007," said his widow, Jean. "By the following May he was really struggling and went for a chest x-ray. It was then that we knew something wasn't right, and in the first week of July we found out that it was mesothelioma," she said. "John died less than six months later."
Now Mrs Taylor, 72, is hoping friends and former colleagues of her late husband will be able to help in her and her children's fight for compensation.
"John was unable to work for years because of his epilepsy," she said. "But what killed him was the work that he had done more than 40 years ago. Over the course of two decades, he had clearly been exposed to asbestos in at least one of his jobs.
"This was before we knew that it was harmful, of course, but by the time that became public knowledge, John hadn't worked with it for years," she said.
An inquest in April this year confirmed that Mr Taylor had died from an industrial disease, but the solicitor handling Mrs Taylor's claim says she now urgently needs to find witnesses who can help confirm the details of the case.
Lesley Mynett, an industrial disease specialist with Fentons Solicitors LLP, said: "It takes many years after exposure to asbestos before any related disease becomes apparent, which can make finding witnesses and information about the employer very difficult.
"While we know Mr Taylor worked for a number of companies in the area, we are having difficulty finding evidence due to the fact that his last job was 40 years ago."
She said Mr Taylor worked as a wood-machinist at Smethwick Carriage Works from around 1949 to the mid 1950s, where it is believed asbestos was liberally used on a daily basis.
"He then worked as a distributor, loading and unloading vehicles for Storage & Haulage Ltd, based in Birmingham," said Ms Mynett. "He worked there until 1965, later taking a job as a chemical mixer with Robinson Bros Ltd in West Bromwich before his retirement in 1969.
"Unless we can prove that he was exposed to asbestos, Mrs Taylor may go uncompensated for the fact that she has lost her husband to this dreadful illness," she said.
How can you help?
If you remember working alongside Robert "John" Taylor, if you can verify he worked for the firms named above, or think you can help in any way, please call Lesley Mynett on 0844 854 3096 or e-mail firstname.lastname@example.org.
- Speak to a solicitor from day one
- No win, no fee
- Specialist personal injury solicitors
- Law Society accredited
- National Coverage
Latest Case Studies

New York authorities are looking for a 33-year-old man with bipolar disorder who fatally stabbed his girlfriend in the Inwood neighborhood in Manhattan a few days after being released from prison, news outlets reported.
On Sept. 17, cops found the lifeless body of 44-year-old Carol Nystrom in her bedroom during a welfare check after an emergency call from her friend.
Nystrom was believed to be killed a couple of days prior to the grisly discovery. Meanwhile, police are seeking people’s help to find her boyfriend, Joshua Martinez, who is considered a suspect in the slaying.
Despite having a long criminal history and issues with the law, the victim kept dating Martinez. He was booked several times for robbery and assault.
In a statement, Carol’s friend said that “She had a very warm heart, and it was impossible for her to believe the worst about anyone.”
“She told me numerous times that when Josh was on his meds, he was the sweetest person,” she added.
The couple’s neighbors heard them several times disputing and sometimes, Carol ran to them to save her life: “They were always arguing. Almost every night, arguing, fighting,” one of them stated.
“We actually called the cops for her,” a neighbor said. “She said her boyfriend was off his meds. She said he was trying to harm her dog. By the time cops got there, he had already fled.”

Divyanka Tripathi is an Indian actress that works in the Hindi television industry. She’s managed to garner a great deal of fame in her home country and has become known in other parts of the world as well. Her fame has had a lot to do with her acting prowess as well as her looks as she’s been considered quite an attractive woman that is capable of turning heads and letting her voice be known as well. She hasn’t been shy about speaking out on the things that she believes in, which makes her one more very strong individual in a world that needs them.
One more person that speaks their mind is always a good thing.
5. She was injured in 2015 and had to resort to using a wheelchair.
There’s not a lot of information on what happened but obviously the injury was enough that she was forced to deal with a wheelchair. The life of an actor is at times a little more dangerous than some but typically isn’t believed to be all that involved. But seeing as how she does more in her life than just act there are reasons why she might have gotten injured. Hopefully things are going well now.
4. She’s a very outspoken individual.
In 2017 she took to social media condemning the rapist of a 12-year old and even went so far as to send the complaint to Prime Minister Narendra Modi, showing that she wasn’t going to stop until her voice was heard and justice was served. That takes the kind of willpower and unwillingness to simply lie down and accept something that’s happened, and that’s a great attribute.
3. She was married in 2016 to one of her fellow actors.
She and her husband met on the job so to speak and were married just a couple of years ago. This seems to be a growing trend in many areas of the world when it comes to actors. Sometimes they get on a set and there’s no chemistry or even a spark between them and their costars. But sometimes there’s something much more than a spark and it tends to grow into something beautiful.
2. She took and completed a mountaineering course
Mountaineering is more than just climbing a mountain as it can involve backpacking, hiking, and a few other activities that are to be done on mountainous terrain. It’s not quite as easy as it might look since a person really has to know their mountain and understand the type of terrain they’re dealing with. For some it’s the simple thrill of going up the mountain and then coming back down. For others though it’s the idea of getting out into nature and seeing something wonderful while they’re there.
1. She was in Forbes Celebrity 100 in 2017.
She has the distinction of being the first Indian TV actress to appear on this list, which is derived from the most popular and wealthy of India’s celebrities. It’s an honor to be on such a list since it shows a high level of accomplishment.
There’s nothing like being recognized for being successful.

Marvel Comics #1 was first published on October 1, 1939, and was written by Ben Thompson with cover art by Frank Paul. It featured the first appearances of of the Human Torch, Ka-Zar, and Angel as well as the first newsstand appearance of Sub-Mariner.
The auctioned copy was from the Windy City pedigree collection, which got its name from being first brought to market by Chicago dealer Gary Colabuono, but the collection was actually assembled by a mailman from Uniontown, Pennsylvania who bought several #1 issues from newsstands in the 1940’s. This copy was graded by CGC as NM 9.4 Off-white pages. Only two other copies of this issue are known to exist, according to CGC’s census, that have graded as high as 9.0. The auctioned Marvel Comics #1 is the only 9.4 known with none graded higher.ed higher.

Me, myself, and Sheffield, has been known to make idiotic comments in the past so there really is no surprise here.
Sheffield, a native Floridian said he would like to play at least two more seasons, and prefers both to be with the Rays.
He has seen more than expected playing time with the Mets this year, because of injuries, and has performed quite well. He is currently batting .276 with eight homers and 26 RBIs.
Sheffield, who is scheduled to make $14 million this year, would have to take a substantial pay cut in order to play for the Rays.
However, for this season lets hope Sheffield keeps his mind focused on his current team, and lets hope for the Rays sake they want nothing to do with Sheffield in the future.

Arkansas' McKinney on road to recovery after Tommy John surgery
Keaton McKinney doesn't expect to hear his name called during Major League Baseball's amateur draft next month.
The former Ankeny Centennial star is simply trying to get back on the field.
"I really haven't thought about (the draft)," said McKinney, a junior pitcher at the University of Arkansas. "All I'm thinking about is trying to get healthy, and I have no idea what will happen. You never know if a team will want to take a chance on a guy — and it only takes one team — but all I'm planning on is being ready for the start of next season."
McKinney has not played for the Razorbacks in 2017 after undergoing Tommy John surgery on Feb. 10. His recovery is going well, but doctors have told him to wait six months before throwing again.
"It's a long wait, but it just makes you appreciate the game that much more — when it's taken away from you," McKinney said. "That's kind of the mindset I have right now."
The 6-foot-5, 230-pound McKinney was a first-team all-state selection at Centennial, where he went 8-0 with a 0.59 ERA and hit eight home runs as a junior in 2013. He was named the Gatorade player of the year for Iowa in 2014.
McKinney was ranked the 37th-best recruit, nationally, and the No. 1 recruit in the state of Iowa, according to Perfect Game. The hard-throwing righthander was selected by the New York Mets in the 28th round of the 2014 draft, but he elected not to turn pro and instead chose to honor the verbal commitment that he had given to Arkansas as a sophomore.
McKinney said he has no regrets about his decision to go to college.
"You really think about it, and it puts things in perspective when something like this happens," McKinney said of his surgery. "A guy like me in the minor leagues would probably be off the team after two big injuries, but I've been fortunate enough to have great coaches and people here for me at the University of Arkansas to get me through these injuries. I'm really happy with the route that I took. I love it here in Fayetteville — it's my second home, for sure. It's been a blast to play college baseball for the fans in Arkansas."
It didn't take long for McKinney to make the transition from the CIML to the SEC. As a freshman, he compiled a 6-2 record with a 3.21 ERA — the lowest among starting pitchers on the staff.
McKinney helped the Razorbacks reach the 2015 College World Series in Omaha, fulfilling one of his lifelong dreams.
"Being an hour and 45 minutes away, I used to go to the College World Series every year with my dad," McKinney said. "It just felt crazy that I was actually living out a dream of mine since I was a little kid. That's why I wanted to go to college so bad out of high school — to be able to get the chance to play there — and to be able to do that the first year was amazing."
McKinney at Arkansas:
- Keaton McKinney honored as Freshman All-American
- McKinney earns SEC Pitcher of the Week honor
- Freshman McKinney leads Hogs to series victory
McKinney set a freshman record and tied for fourth in school history with 18 games started that year. He was named to the SEC all-freshman team and was selected a Louisville Slugger freshman All-American.
"You can never really plan for that kind of success right out of the gate, but I always thought I had it in me," McKinney said. "Obviously, playing in the SEC, it's really tough. I just credit my coaches that year for really getting me ready, mentally and physically, for the grind of the SEC."
After the season, McKinney underwent surgery on his hip that prevented him from throwing for several months. When he returned to the mound as a sophomore, he wasn't nearly as effective.
McKinney posted a 1-5 mark with a 6.66 ERA in 2016.
"It was kind of tough, coming back from an injury and only having a couple of months to prepare for the season," McKinney said. "I really didn't have the offseason that I needed to get better. I don't want to make excuses, but I feel like I wasn't as sharp ... my command wasn't as good. And I feel like the scouting reports that teams had on me were a lot better."
McKinney was also pitching through pain. He didn't know it at the time, but he had likely already torn the ulnar collateral ligament in his elbow.
"I had been having bicep pains and tricep pains and all sorts of soreness around my arm," McKinney said. "Obviously, that's part of the game, so I just kept pitching through it. Finally, I just couldn't deal with it. This past year, I couldn't throw my curveball because my arm hurt so bad, and when I got an MRI, it revealed a fully torn UCL with a bone chip as well."
McKinney at Ankeny:
- Keaton McKinney's senior season over after 'freak' injury
- Keaton McKinney's homer gives Centennial a walk-off win
- 14 to watch in 2014: Baseball scouts have their eyes on Ankeny's McKinney
When McKinney underwent surgery three months ago, his doctor discovered something else.
"He said there was so much scar tissue that he had to clean up that my UCL had to have been torn for about two years," McKinney said. "He honestly doesn't know how I was throwing and doing it at the level I was."
Now, McKinney is going through rehab and doing strengthening exercises every day. He is hoping to regain the velocity on his fastball that was regularly clocked in the low- to mid-90s during high school.
McKinney is encouraged by the fact that he knows several pitchers who have successfully returned from Tommy John surgery.
"I've seen a bunch of guys in the SEC this year who have had the surgery," he said. "There's a guy from Tennessee who had it, and his (velocity) has increased since he had it. It just gives me more motivation that I can do this if I rehab it well enough and have the right mindset."
McKinney is on target to graduate next May with a degree in business finance — another reason why he plans to return for his senior season.
"Finishing my degree would make my parents happy, that's for sure," McKinney said.

His offices in the ten-story church building are always crowded with supplicants of every kind seeking favors. Like an old mafia Don, he dispenses the influence given him by the millions of his congregation. His weekly televised Sunday Sermon Service is a bully-pulpit of the first magnitude. He becomes the powerful man the southern part of the country.
It began with a simple concept, divinity of human consciousness that once voiced, grew into a world-wide religion. The nation's yuppie population, jaded and totally invested in a material world finds new hope. One after another, Rawlins' male offspring takes control of the global internet church, until the last one in the long line rejects it, until forced to embrace it to save his own life.
|Product dimensions:||6.00(w) x 9.00(h) x 1.01(d)|
Read an Excerpt
By Richard C. Russell
iUniverse, Inc.Copyright © 2008 Richard C. Russell
All right reserved.
Chapter OneLonnie Parker threw the small red bikini bra on the bed. Then she slipped off the bottoms and dropped them. She stood up straight. Through large warm green eyes, she critically assessed her naked body reflected in the mirrored-wall behind her bed. Her eyes moved slowly down over her image from the top of her head covered in long golden blonde hair, which flowed in soft glossy waves over her shoulders to her breasts, to her feet. Her breasts, which had blossomed at the age of thirteen, were large, still firm, and high.
She compared her blond hair to the narrow strip of closely cropped, reddish-black pubic hair on her lower belly. "The carpet doesn't match the drapes, Lonnie," she said aloud and chuckled. She had always been able to poke fun at herself and tried never to take herself too seriously. She was a bottle-blonde having changed her natural hair color years ago hoping it would improve her chances of getting more film work.
She practiced her professional smile. Her teeth were as perfect and as white as money could buy. She put the palm of her right hand on her lower stomach and pushed. "Baby factory," she said aloud. Nothing she could do but continue the setups. Might as well not have a baby factory, she told herself sadly.
At twenty-seven, the clock was running out on her childbearing-years. She did want children but not with her long-time live-in boy friend. He was becoming more insufferable every day, she thought, as she frowned in the mirror.
Lonnie rose on her toes and turned from side to side. Yes. Her thighs and lower legs were still in good shape. She was five feet, ten inches tall and most of it was in her long legs. She had found her height a real handicap in the movie business. Most A List leading men, vertically challenged, demanded and got female co-stars that made them look good and not like dwarfs. She had lost many good movie roles in the past because casting people had considered her too tall.
She turned from side to side to check her ass. All the dieting and grueling daily workouts with her personal trainer had started to pay off. She had almost died from mortification in the screening room on her last movie. In the dailies, she had watched as she ran away from the camera. Her ass had looked like two pumpkins bouncing around in a burlap bag. She'd live on lettuce, tofu, and water for the rest of her life before she suffered embarrassment like that again!
Lonnie had been a working actor since she was seventeen but she hadn't made the big time and she wanted the big time so much it hurt. Over the years, she had worked and worked at perfecting her craft. Acting was her entire life. She still waited for the right role in a major movie that would properly show off her talents to American moviegoers. Such a movie could be the vehicle that would catapult her into the rarefied air of the fabled Hollywood A List, where worldwide fame and vast fortune were as every day as a drink of water.
Lonnie knew she had to compete with thousands of younger and more beautiful women who came to L.A. every year to get into the movie business. She also knew most of those little darlings would gladly fuck a snake for just a chance at a small walk-on part in a movie.
She had had her own big break on television years ago when she had been lucky enough to get a role on what had became a long running popular sitcom. After the network canceled her sitcom, it went into syndication. She still received residual checks from rebroadcasts. Over the years, she got the occasional movie role but she hadn't worked nearly as much as she wanted to work.
Lonnie Parker wanted to be an A List actor. She was only near the top of the B List. She was lamenting this situation when the phone on the bedside table rang. She walked over, sat on the bed, and picked it up.
"Lonnie, darling, is that you?" She recognized her agent's nasal twang.
"Yes, Jeff." she told him. She made an ugly face she hoped the slimy bastard could see over the phone.
"Lonnie, I hope you're sitting down because I've some great news for you!" He gushed over the phone. Jeff's a slime ball, she thought, but he's a pretty good agent. Anyway, he had been her agent since she had first come to L.A., and he had stayed with her through the lean years.
"I'm sitting on my bed, Jeff," she told him. "What's happening?"
"Well, wait just a minute, while I picture you sitting on your bed. What're you wearing?" She could almost see drool over the phone. That's why you're a damn slime ball, she thought.
"Jeff, I'm going to hang-up," she threatened.
"Oh, don't be like that," he said. "Besides, you're going to want to hear this! Guess to who I just talked to on the phone? And he called me! Go ahead and guess," he challenged her.
"It's to whom, Jeff, not to who," she said correcting his dysfunctional grammar.
"Yeah, yeah," he complained the way he always did when she reminded him of his lack of formal education. "Michael Allen that's to whom!" he sneered. "Now what do you think about that, Miss Smarty Pants?"
Lonnie Parker had to think for a second but then she placed the name. "You mean the Michael Allen! President of the MJM Television Productions?" she asked him excitedly.
"That's the guy," Banks assured her. "And he called me!" He added reminding her again to be the one called was so important in L.A.
"So what did he say?" Lonnie asked impatiently. She wanted to kill him for dragging it out to make him look better.
"Okay! Okay," Banks said. "He called to ask if you'd be interested in the starring role in a new television drama they're putting together for the fall schedule." Her agent waited for her to absorb this part. Over the years, he had come to know his client and her ambitions very well. Michael Allen had told him he wanted his client for the upcoming project only if she agreed to the favor he wanted from her.
"You told him yes, I bet!" Lonnie said and gripped the phone tighter.
"Of course, I told him yes. I told him I had to talk to you first, but I was sure you'd be interested. They want to shoot the whole season–ten episodes! Do you believe that the whole season? Do you know how much money they're going have to pay you? I'm going to rob those bastards for you," Banks said. Instead of the money she'd make, he started to think about his commissions. He had been concentrating so much on how to get her to agree to the side deal, he hadn't spent any time counting his fifteen percent.
"No pilot?" Lonnie asked her agent. She knew the way things usually worked in this town. First, they made a pilot for a project, and then after a hundred fat guys with big cigars had watched the pilot, they might okay the project. Her agent hadn't answered her question.
"Jeff?" she asked him again. "Don't they want to make a pilot first?"
Jeffery Banks wasn't really paying attention he was feeling a little giddy after counting his commission on the deal, but he heard the suspicious inflection in her voice.
"No. No pilot," he told his client. "I asked him about that and he said no pilot.
"Something doesn't sound right about that, Jeff," she said. "Why would they front my performance fee and all that production money without a pilot?" Lonnie started to feel disappointment. Something's not right, she thought.
"Lonnie! Lonnie, relax will you?" Banks purred in her ear. "Allen runs the place. If he doesn't want to do a pilot nobody over there is going to argue with him. It's a done deal! Get ready to go to the bank, okay?"
"Okay, Jeff, but it still doesn't feel right," she said not convinced.
"Lonnie, baby, there's just one little thing they'd like for you to do for them ..." he started to say hoping to lead his client along the path to doing the favor Allen had demanded.
"Fuck you, Jeff!" she yelled into the phone interrupting his oily spiel. "I'm an established actress! I don't have to do things like that you, you bastard!" Now she knew! Now she knew why the deal didn't sound right.
"No, no, no! It's not like that, Lonnie. I swear!" Banks stammered. "It's a favor for an old man ..."
"I'm sure it is!" she interrupted him again and started to hang up.
"Please, Lonnie, please hear me out!" he begged her. He could feel his big commissions slipping away. "I swear it's nothing like what you're thinking!" He tried to reassure her. "Please, Lonnie, just let me tell you what Allen told me."
"You've got two minutes before I hang up this damn phone!" she snarled at him.
"Okay. Okay, but please let me finish before you go ballistic again," he said. Banks took a deep breath and hurried on. "There's this old man in Memphis who's a great fan of yours. He's been a big fan since he first saw you on the sitcom in the early days. He'd like to come here and meet you but he's just too busy. He asked Allen to try to arrange a meeting with you, and Allen's pissing all over himself to do a favor for the old guy.
Allen wants the old guy to be in his debt, you know, to owe him in the future. What they're asking you to do is fly to Memphis and do lunch with the old guy. Just lunch, Lonnie, I swear!" Banks assured her. "It's at one o'clock in the afternoon. What can happen at one o'clock in the afternoon?" he asked. They'll fly you out there. You've lunch with the old guy, and then they fly you right back here the same day." Banks stopped talking and listened to her breathing. He could tell she was a little calmer.
"Just have lunch with an old man, and then I get a starring role in a new drama series in the fall?" she said sarcastically. "Is that the deal, Jeff?" She was sure he was still trying to con her. The dirty son-of- a-bitch ought to be in jail! she told herself.
"That's the deal, Lonnie," Banks said. "And it's a great deal for you! Just think what a boost this'll give your career! We're talking a big step toward the A List." He poured on the oil trying to push all her buttons. "If it gets picked up for another season your future is golden. You can use a hit TV series to do damn near anything in this town and you know it!" He stopped talking again. He had used all his best arguments. Now he crossed his fingers and waited for her response.
Lonnie had heard his sales pitch. She knew he really wanted the money this deal could bring him. She really wanted the deal as well. Her earlier outburst might not have been fully justified. Rich guys always did each other favors. Most of them did things just like this to prove how powerful they thought they were in the world. For Allen to go this far out on a limb to impress an old man in Memphis must mean the old man was one powerful old dude.
"Okay, Jeff," she said. "You can set it up, but I want everything signed, notarized, and my upfront money in the bank before I get on any plane to Memphis. Otherwise, it's no deal!" She said empathically. Then she slammed down the receiver before he could respond. She was still mad at him for trying to manipulate her.
Lonnie lay down on her bed. She considered all the wonderful things this deal could mean for her and her stalled career. Jeff's right about the possible upside, she told herself. She really didn't know why she had felt so insulted by what she had first thought Allen wanted from her. If she were honest with herself, she knew she'd gladly fuck anyone who could get her on the damn A List.
* * *
Brother Ryan Rawlins flushed the commode in his private bathroom and washed his hands. He studied the face reflected in the large mirror behind the marble vanity top. A full gray beard sprinkled with a few black whiskers covered most of his fifty-two-year-old face. The once handsome nose had started to look like a small potato. His sparse gray hair was combed straight back into a long ponytail held in back by a leather covered elastic band.
You aren't getting any prettier and that's for damn sure! he thought. His brownish-green eyes had small yellow-colored flecks around the inside of the irises, which looked like small gold circles. They were still sharp, penetrating, and his best feature.
"Well, that's the way it goes, first your money and then your clothes," he told himself, and smiled at his image in the mirror. He chuckled aloud, closed the door behind him, and returned to his large expensive desk. He could remember when he had cleaned toilets for a living. It didn't seem that long ago. He chuckled some more as he sat down in a three thousand dollar executive chair. Then he rolled the chair under the big desk. Using his right foot, he pressed down on a button installed under the thick carpet.
"Yes, sir," his private executive secretary, Alice Jenkins, answered the buzz in her ear. She already knew her boss was ready to go back to work, after his short restroom break. He's gone to the bathroom at almost the same time for the last ten years, she thought.
"Let's go back to work." Jenkins heard over her headset.
"Yes, sir," she acknowledged his instructions. No one else could hear him because of the headset she wore. Alice Jenkins really didn't like using the headset. It pretty much ruined her expensive hairdos. She had become somewhat vain since she had become the private executive secretary to the old man. A large increase in pay had come with her new august position. She could afford more time at her favorite beauty salon. She looked up, smiled, and nodded at a middle-aged portly man dressed in a very expensive suit.
The man, a V.P. with one of the world's largest oil companies, had been waiting and watching impatiently for her signal, but he had concealed his growing displeasure. He knew better than to piss-off Alice Jenkins. She might forget his next appointment. Then his company would send someone else to see the old man and he'd be out of a damn good job. He stood and walked to Brother Ryan Rawlins's office door.
As Alice Jenkins pressed a button on the control console near her right hand, a loud buzzing sound came from the electric lock in her employer's wood-paneled, steel-cored door, as the heavy bolt slid open.
Mister Marvin J. Wilson opened the door and entered what he always thought of as the royal presents. He walked past, but paid little attention to the large heavyset youngish man, who he had sat beside for the last thirty minutes. He remembered seeing the same man sitting in the same chair during his previous visits. Sometimes, he wondered what the man did for the church. He obviously wasn't an executive.
Wilson walked to Rawlins's desk. The heavy door closed behind him with a soft click. He smiled at the old man behind the desk. He saw Brother Rawlins wore a blue jogging suit of some shinny material. He had never seen the famous televangelist wear anything else during his visits. The colors might change, but it was always jogging clothes of some kind. Once, he had seen Rawlins in a black suit with a tie on TV. Years ago, he had watched a little of one of Rawlins's Sunday sermons. He had had to leave for a golfing date at his club.
"Good morning, sir," Wilson said respectfully. He sat down in an over-stuffed leather visitor's chair. "How're you today, sir?" he inquired. He didn't offer to shake hands. Brother Ryan Rawlins didn't shake hands with anyone.
Rawlins's regular visitors already knew, and his first time visitors were told by Alice Jenkins, her boss's painful arthritis prevented him from shaking hands or standing during visits. This statement wasn't true, but the lie saved her boss a lot of what he considered useless effort.
"I'm fine Mr. Wilson," Brother Ryan Rawlins said. "How're all the folks back at your place?" Wilson knew this was a rhetorical question and a signal to state his business. In just fifteen minutes, his meeting would be over.
"Sir the president of my company, on behalf of our board of directors, has asked me to inquire if you'd re-endorse Senator Johnson for the upcoming elections this November?" Wilson said. He leaned back in his chair and waited for Rawlins's decision.
All this damn time and effort, he thought. All this damn time and effort to get a simple answer that normally would've taken less than ten minutes on the damn telephone. Unfortunately, one just didn't call the famous Brother Ryan Rawlins on the damn telephone, he told himself, because he was the leader of a national electronic church with a congregation that numbered more than ten million members.
Excerpted from Divine Consciousness by Richard C. Russell Copyright © 2008 by Richard C. Russell. Excerpted by permission of iUniverse, Inc.. All rights reserved. No part of this excerpt may be reproduced or reprinted without permission in writing from the publisher.
Excerpts are provided by Dial-A-Book Inc. solely for the personal use of visitors to this web site.

We caught up with Charli to talk about her life and experiences as a intersex woman and what trans awareness means to her. Charli lives in Manchester and is a Community Leader with the Trans Programme. To find out more about the Trans Programme's community leaders, click here: http://lgbt.foundation/who-we-help/trans/volunteer...
Can you introduce yourself and share a bit about your background?
My name is Charli Darling, I live in Manchester. I was born intersex, the medical term for what I have is Klinefelters Syndrome, I have XXY chromosomes. I was one of the contestants of Miss Transgender UK last year. Coming out as intersex was tough, growing up my parents never accepted me. I hid and blocked and what I was going through and put this shield up. On the outside I was the happiest person but on the inside I was going through hell. Up until the age of 11 I was a boy, when I was 12 my breasts started growing and I knew there was something wrong and I started to get attracted to boys, it was a very confusing time. But as I was growing up I looked at my friends and saw they were growing beards, their voices were breaking and they didn’t have tits! I decided to get a girlfriend to try and fit in. But I was getting more depressed. I couldn’t tell anyone. Finally when I was 17 my Mum finally agreed to take me to the doctor. I went to the hospital and they took x-rays and blood tests. The doctors were just talking at me; I didn’t understand what was happening. My mum said just don’t say anything just nod your head. My mum and the doctors were there talking about me and my body was there but I wasn’t involved or allowed to say anything. My parents put pressure on me and I had a breast reduction but shortly after my breasts started growing back again. They tried to put me on male testosterone, I think I was on it for a week, maybe two. I hated it all and stopped the process. This caused many arguments with my parents, and I moved out. I think I was about 19 or 20 then. That is when I started being Charli. For a few years when I went back to my parents I would dress in masculine clothes and go back to being Charles, not that I was very convincing.
The turning point was when I started to be independent. It’s taken nearly 20 years for everyone in my family to be cool with me. I never believed my Mum would be ok with me but when I was in the Miss Trans UK Competition, she said she would have come and supported me; I couldn’t believe that . There is nothing they can say now because I dress how I want to and I won’t dress up and pretend to be someone I’m not.
Growing up intersex was really tough, I was suicidal growing up, but I never wanted to go back to that place again. I thank God I never succeeded in trying to take my own life. I did it all on my own, and my friends were always there for me, it was my support network of friends and self-belief that got me here and made me stronger.
How did you find out about the LGBT Foundation? How do you hope to be involved in our work?
I met Louie, the Trans Programme Coordinator, I was on That’s Manchester TV with him talking about trans and intersex people. I want to help out with the new Trans Programme and be involved as much as I can. I have never done anything like this before. I really want to help people who are coming out and transitioning. I am praying and hoping there are other intersex people in the Northwest and I hope we can connect with each other because I don’t know any!
Can you tell us about what your interests are?
I really love hair and make-up, my hairstyle is different every day. I love getting dressed up and going out. I think hair and make-up are important to me because it makes me feel amazing, when I dress up my friends call me HRH (Her Royal Highness) I think wearing make-up makes me feel a lot better, even though people tell me I don’t need make up, it makes me feel nicer. People come to me and ask for me to do their make-up and I like helping my friends and people feel good about themselves.
This week is Trans Awareness Week, what does trans awareness mean to you?
I think it’s trying to remember all the trans people who have committed suicide and the people we’ve lost because of transphobia who should still be here with us and still living our lives. I keep reading stories from around the world about trans people who have been murdered and it upsets me so much. At the end of the day we just want to live our lives; to live happy, healthy and normal lives. We aren’t hurting anyone. We need to make people aware that trans people are humans like everyone else.
What advice would you offer someone who went through what you went through and Is dealing with realizing they are Intersex?
Speak up. I did not speak, I shut everything away and stayed silent for too long. Once you speak you feel a lot better. I think that is the main reason I felt depressed because I held everything inside and did not speak out. It was eating away at me. At one point everyone knew me as ‘smiley Charli’ but on the inside I was in hell. By speaking out you are breaking free. For me, when I did that everything changed.

NRL fans are trying to learn more about the star Brent Naden and his girlfriend Eden Richardson as they just had a kid couple of weeks back.
NRL star Brent Naden left Channel 9 reporter Emma Lawrence terrified during a cross on live TV. He had snuck up behind her and made a loud noise close to her ear, which scared her.
Brent Naden’s Girlfriend Is Eden Richardson- More Inside His Dating History
Brent Naden is currently in a relationship with his girlfriend, Eden Richardson. It seems the couple has been dating for some time. However, it came to highlight after Eden shared their first picture on her Instagram in March 2021.
After the athlete shared a picture of his kid Onyx Samuel Naden, his followers were shocked to know that he had become a father. Although his girlfriend had posted with a baby bump, the athlete kept it a secret and revealed it as a surprise among his fans and followers.
Nevertheless, the couple seems to have a good time together and are happy. They share pictures on their social media. But unfortunately, he has not provided much information about Eden. Although she has left her Insta public, she has not mentioned a thing except herself in her profile bio, unlike most people.
However, people are looking forward to them walking down the aisle and getting settled. Furthermore, his well-wishers would love to see his kid grow as well.
This Might Interest You: Is Billy Walters Related To Kevin Walters? Brisbane Broncos Player Family Details We Could Find
Who Are There In Brent Naden’s Family?
Brent Naden was born to his family on 30 December 1995 in New South Wales, Australia. However, he keeps his parents and siblings away from the limelight. The athlete has not introduced his family to the fans officially. Nevertheless, he wished his father a happy birthday back in 2014.
Nevertheless, there is no other information on his family. However, his well-wishers are wondering to know about his siblings and parents. But the athlete himself has started his own family with his girlfriend and is a father now.
Also Read: How Much Is The Salary Of Matt Dufty? Rugby Union Player Career Background And Stats
Know The Net Worth Of Brent Naden, An Indigenous Australian Professional Rugby League Footballer
Brent Naden has not revealed his net worth to the public. However, people think he must have a wealth of over millions of dollars. However, he might have been able to earn more, but unfortunately, he got suspended during his career-high. After testing positive for cocaine, NRL provisionally suspended the athlete on 1 December 2020.
However, after some time in a rehabilitation center, the athlete was able to bounce back from the drugs and currently plays for the Canterbury-Bankstown Bulldogs in NRL. He usually plays as a winger and center.

Little Girl’s Letter Claims the “School Company” Has Cancelled Classes
If you're back in school this week, you probably shouldn't be. According to one little girl's not-at-all suspicious, handwritten letter, the "school compnay (sic)" is "taking a brake (sic)," so you all have an extra week of vacation.
It all started when 7-year-old Cara Grimard gave her father a letter that she said "came in the mail." Not only did it arrive via the all-official postman (on a Sunday), but it also bears the stamp of Rapunzel from Disney's Tangled.
The letter states that the "school company" is giving its students an entire week of extra vacation, and it needs a student signature for validation. Of course, Cara G.'s signature looks remarkably similar to the handwriting in the rest of the letter, but don't forget, this letter came in the mail AND it has a Rapunzel stamp.
Needless to say, Cara's dad was not convinced. According to Yahoo! News, "'I kept teasing her because I was off from work also,' [her dad Terry] said. 'I was saying 'Guess what Monday is? I have to go back to work and you have to go back to school. She jokes around like she doesn't like school, but she does, she enjoys it.'"
When Cara gave her dad the letter, they both knew it was a well-timed joke. "'She kind of had a little sly grin,' Grimard said. 'She wasn’t being serious, she knew I wouldn’t buy it. It was just really cute and she's this funny character in general.'"
Since then, Grimard and his wife posted a picture of his daughter's note on Reddit, where it has received over 2.5 million views. They've since decided to keep their daughter's picture for sentimental purposes. If I had a kid that was this funny, I would, too!

This area has gotten more than its share of rain for the last couple months, and this last weekend was not exception. While driving back from an event I felt the urge to photograph a couple of my children against the backdrop of the dramatic sky. I started with Jack and realized that that his Lego short, while cool, just wasn’t appropriate for the kind of photo I was looking for. So, stripped of his shirt, and told not to smile (this is hard for Jack since he really is a happy boy), he persevered though the cold wind.
I went home and picked up by daughter and it was a race against time since is was threatening rain. I was able to get a number shots I was happy with before it did finally start raining.
While not the type of photos that moms want for portraits of their children, they are very fun for the photographer and demonstrates the wide variety of options available beyond the typical portraits.

I know this is two days late, but I would love to let everyone know how special Sydney Grace's 1st birthday was. In the weeks leading up to January 7th, I was not sure how I was going to react on her birthday. I really thought I would be very depressed and sad on her day. Actually, I was feeling that way for the past two weeks. Surprisingly, I thought January 7th was a pretty good day. We all focused on how wonderful the day of her birth actually was. It was a day that was supposed be a terrible day. Instead it was a day of miracles. It was the best day of me life for sure!
Joel and I decided we would have all our family over for a dinner to celebrate Sydney Grace's birthday. It was really nice having everyone over. We even had some special guests. The two nurses that delivered Sydney Grace, Bobbi and Marg, along with their daughters came for a visit. They gave me an awesome gift that Marg's daughter drew by hand. It is a picture of an angel holding an angel baby. It is beautiful. It has an inscription that says.."I have a feeling there's one more star up in the sky tonight... And even though it's far away, its brightness and warmth still reach us and make the night a little less dark." Here is a photo of the picture and of my two fabulous nurses and the artist.
At the end of our family dinner, Rafe blew out one candle on Sydney's cake in honor and memory of her. I thought it would nice for Rafe to be able to take part in the celebration of Sydney Grace's life. We also had a balloon release in honor of Sydney's first birthday. My original plan was to attach a card that had a note from everyone written to Sydney. Unfortunately, it was too heavy for the balloon to lift off the ground. On a positive note, I will now have this as one more thing to show how much we all love and miss Sydney Grace. I am know reliving those twenty days we had with her. I can almost remember something that happened on everyone of those days. I have to say I am not looking forward to the 27th, but hopefully it will bring some comfort in knowing Sydney Grace is better off than those of us left behind. She is in the arms of our creator, no other place better.
Here are two videos from our dinner on Sydney Grace's birthday.
10 months ago

CAPE TOWN - The rand made some major gains on Wednesday night as President Jacob Zuma resigned. The rand reached highs against the US dollar that it had not seen since 2015, as Zuma announced to the world that he would step down with immediate effect.
"I have always been a disciplined member of the ANC," said Zuma, in announcing that he was stepping down with immediate effect. He did not take questions from the assembled media.
The rand was trading at 2% higher and was at R11.71 to the dollar on Wednesday evening. The rand then strengthened even further to R11.66 to the dollar at the very moment that Zuma announced that he would be resigning. `
If former president Zuma did not resign, he would have faced a vote of no confidence in Parliament on Thursday. By 22:59 the rand was trading 2% firmer at R11.71/$ after earlier weakening after Zuma, in an afternoon interview with the SABC, questioned why the ANC wanted him to step down.
- BUSINESS REPORT ONLINE

The news of the adoption ban out of Russia hits very close to home for the Bennett family in Ottawa Lake.
They started as four but in July 4-year-old Jonas, from Serbia, joined the family.
Read more: Russia's Putin signs anti-U.S. adoption bill
"The problem lives under our own roof, he's my son. Had we started this process just a couple of months later, he wouldn't be here," said Jessica Bennett. "It just so happened that Russia was one of those places that we knew that lots of kids needed help there."
For years, Jonas lived in a Russian orphanage. His only possession was a cross given to him when he was Baptized. It took about two years to bring Jonas home to Ottawa Lake to be with his new family. That's something other American families may be waiting to do for a very long time.
"We've had lots of people who have been working on the adoptions for years who are now maybe a week away from going and bringing their child home, and now won't be able to," said Bennett.
Now that Russian President Vladimir Putin signed the bill banning adoptions by Americans it is likely 46 children who were about to be adopted by U.S. families will have to remain in Russia. Even more children with special needs like Jonas are waiting for new homes.
For Bennett, this ban is a death sentence.
"I can't imagine what those people are feeling like now that their child lives a world apart from them and that there is a government stopping them from going to get them," she said.
All aspects of Jonas' life could not exist if he did not get adopted by the Bennett family.
"To know that there are hundreds of thousands of kids like him, it's disheartening. It's infuriating," said Bennett.

Before I dive into the beauty and chaos that was my first week in Japan I want to share something that was presented to me this last Friday evening during a guest speaker’s talk covering awareness of cultural differences in perception and communication. The speaker referenced studies that traced eye movement of both Japanese citizens and Americans. It was found when asked to describe a picture the Americans found a focal point in what was presented at the forefront of the image. The Japanese participants took a more holistic view and described the image more generally.
When I arrived in Narita Airport I was running off of 3 hours of sleep over the past 2 days. Even though I had been practicing my Japanese in the weeks leading up to this trip any cognitive energy I had left was not enough to muster a single word that was outside of my native tongue. I stepped off the plane and was quickly ushered through customs and was given my residency card without much trouble at all. I had been prepped upon the best ways to get into the city with the least amount of struggle by my ever knowledgeable friend/guardian angle Hana-sara. Also by some random series of serendipitous events I ran into another UM student, Jordan, who was getting into the airport just minutes before me.
That evening though I had my first of many miscommunications when I was trying to get my first meal in Japan. Through a series of events that were significantly less serendipitous than those I described before, I wound up at a little fish shop. A fish shop in which no one spoke any English and I ended up getting way more than I bargend for, both in amount of food and amount of fish heads that were brought to me.
The next few days I had time to become settled into the area before starting up work at TELL. Between Hana-sara and Jacob I was set up with the best survival and exploring tips I could have asked for. I got lost in the crowds of Harajuku, set out to explore the shopping magnificence that is Skytree, Stumbled into a traditional wedding at one of the local temples, and got caught up by the the lights and sounds emanating from the local arcades.
The following Monday I had a meeting with my contact Sarajean and jumped into the swing of things at work on Tuesday. I was immediately asked about what my goals were, not just with the internship, but with life. Along with my views in the field of psychology and what I thought the best ways of helping people truly are. Vickie, my supervisor and the Life-Line Director at TELL told me that she thought these things were all important so that she would know how to push me to expand my own thinking while I am with them. That thought of expanding upon myself helped me to hang on to my sanity the next few days. I was desperately trying to find reason in what I was doing when I was asked to do objectively trivial tasks, like counting out over 1000 pens just to make sure we had an estimate of how many were left. I fought with myself as to why I had decided to take on an internship as opposed to studying abroad. I kept breaking it down into black and white thinking. “I chose work over/tedium over study/play” and “I chose a desk, computer, and 8 or so co-workers over a campus, teachers, and thousands of peers my own age”. I couldn’t remember for the life of me why it was that I would ever choose this path.
Then I bumped into the Clinical Director of TELL’s counseling program. He invited me to lunch the next day and I of course said yes. We swapped stories about what brought us to where we each were. Him, a Clinician who was born in Germany, studied in Ireland, interned in the US, researched in Singapore, and practiced in Japan. And me, an intern who was born in California, grew up in Montana, and thinks he wants to help people someday. But he made me feel comfortable. He had an easy and relatable feel to him. I found out that besides myself he was the newest member of TELL and had gotten into the country just 1 month prior. He had some sense of faith in my abilities that I didn’t even have myself, and reminded me of something that Vickie had told me during my first day. “We have to be certain not to push what we want on other people, but to help people find out and achieve what they themselves want”.
The work started to become less tedious as the days went on. I’m not sure if it’s because they ran out of things for me to count, god knows they must have, or if they realized that I work better while researching and working with larger scale projects. But things seemed to get easier to grasp the more complex the task I was given. I was beginning to see the meaning behind what I was doing. How even though I am not yet directly working with those in need, the things I am doing will help this NPO have a lasting impact on people in Japans lives.
I feel as though at first I did what came naturally to me, I focused on what was in front of me. Sometimes it was boxes of pens, sometimes it was stacks of volunteer files. I did the same in my everyday life. I was lucky that the timing of the guest speaker happened when it did, because it helped me put into words what I was trying to work out in my head. No one else seemed to be as caught up with the little things as I was. Even though TELL is certainly a western structured organization, the people there are able to effectively take a step back and view the whole picture in a way that I still cannot fully. It has become one of my main goals to become more aware of my own perception of the world around me, and be able to acknowledge, for better or for worse, that there are other ways of looking at the same thing.

This is the account of the family line of Abraham’s son Isaac. Abraham became the father of Isaac,
and Isaac was forty years old when he married Rebekah daughter of Bethuel the Aramean from Paddan Aram and sister of Laban the Aramean.
Isaac prayed to the LORD on behalf of his wife, because she was childless. The LORD answered his prayer, and his wife Rebekah became pregnant.
The babies jostled each other within her, and she said, “Why is this happening to me?” So she went to inquire of the LORD.
The LORD said to her, “Two nations are in your womb, and two peoples from within you will be separated; one people will be stronger than the other, and the older will serve the younger.”
When the time came for her to give birth, there were twin boys in her womb.
The first to come out was red, and his whole body was like a hairy garment; so they named him Esau.
After this, his brother came out, with his hand grasping Esau’s heel; so he was named Jacob. Isaac was sixty years old when Rebekah gave birth to them.
The boys grew up, and Esau became a skillful hunter, a man of the open country, while Jacob was content to stay at home among the tents.
Isaac, who had a taste for wild game, loved Esau, but Rebekah loved Jacob.
Once when Jacob was cooking some stew, Esau came in from the open country, famished.

In 1727 the elector of Saxony, Augustus the Strong, began renovating a building in Dresden that came to be known as the Japanese Palace. It was to be filled with Augustus's growing collections of porcelain, lacquer, and soapstone, arranged by category, much as they would be in a modern museum. Among the planned displays were several hundred figures of birds and animals that were to be made at Meissen in a large size that had not yet been attempted, stretching the capabilities of porcelain to its limit. This calmly imposing lion was modeled by Kirchner as part of the series; the broad handling of the body and the deep undercutting of the mane display his training as a sculptor of stone.
The elector's plan was never realized; he died in 1733 and neither the installation of the Japanese Palace nor the series of birds and animals was completed.

Abyquilts arrived! Love an unexpected gift in the mail! She designed this cool baby quilt you see here and was celebrating that! I love her quilt and may just be making it soon! I also love this quilt and the fabric in it!
And then I made another City Sampler block then we took a sewing brea and went hiking at South Mountain!
Gorgeous day for a hike! We went in a different direction and explored a different area...there is plenty to see. At one point Kathy took a break and I kept going..I turned around to go back to her and missed a turn and wound up going a bit til I realized I had missed her and about that time she called to say she could see me and there was a cyote on the trail behind me! I was listening to music and would never have heard him sneaking up on me! I turned around to face him (seriously 15 feet from me and big!) and he then turned of and ran up the mountain! Pretty exciting hiking.
Linking up with Live a Colorful Life!

A portion of the Kantamanto market called Ship House on Tuesday night was ravaged by fire, destroying goods and property running into thousands of cedis.
The fire, which was said to have started around 9:00 pm, was eventually put out by personnel from the Ghana Fire Service after several hours.
The cause of the fire is not yet known but some of the traders have blamed it on either an electrical fault or illegal wiring which is common.
Owing to the stalls being primarily wooden, they were completely razed to the ground.
While some of the traders counted their loses, scrap dealers were seen busily scavenging for scrap.

Someone just gave me a black lab puppy that is 6 weeks old and I have some questions. This puppy has 6 toes on his hind quarters and I was told it was normal.
I have never seen this before on a dog and wondering if he is deformed in some way.
Also, they told me he has already been wormed but he shakes when he sleeps.
He doesn't have fleas or ticks. What causes this?
His poop is really mushy right now. I have got him on beneficial. What is the best puppy food for him at this age?
Welcome to the board first off!
6 weeks is really too young for the puppy to have been taken away from the mother, but now that you have it you really need to get the puppy to a vet. Do you know what vaccinations have been given so far - do you have any records that came with this puppy?
The mushy poop could be a lot of things which is why he really should go to a vet for a checkup.
I'm not familiar with the food you are feeding him, but I would make sure you put him on a good puppy food for at least the first 5-6 months until he has his adult teeth. I feed my dogs ProPlan and am happy with it - I know they make a puppy food. Before I changed food I would probably again take to the vet and make sure he doesn't have worms or anything that could be causing the mushy poop first.
Sharon, loved by Moose & Sky
<i>Six toes on his hindquarters</i>... I'm guessing you mean on each/one foot?
That's an abnormality, I'm pretty sure, but as long as it's not causing him problems I wouldn't worry about it. Cosmetically, if you're concerned, you could get a vet to take a look at it; it could probably be removed with the simplest of surgery.
Welcome to the board! You've come to the right place.

Yesterday, Jesse lost a couple of his baby teeth. At the age of 3, one would think this was happening a little early for him. But in truth, these teeth did not come out naturally. Actually, they were knocked out in a fall he had yesterday.
Now I am not going to say who caused this fall. I don’t want the offender to be outed here. I don’t want to make this person look bad. The offender has been punished and already feels as guilty as it is about causing this to happen.
Anyway, yesterday morning, I was in the bathroom, getting ready to take a shower. The kids were in the house and hubby was in the kitchen, getting a cup of coffee. Jesse came into the bathroom, crying with blood dripping out of his mouth. He had blood on his hands and shirt.
I cried out to Jennifer to get her father and they came rushing into the bathroom. Hubby took over and assessed the situation while I cleaned up the blood on the floor.
On the floor was a tooth. There was another tooth on Jesse’s hand. His two front teeth had been knocked out.
Hubby told me to call the dentist to find out what to do and I got on the phone while he took care of Jesse. But before I could actually type their number into the box for relay, the offender came up to me crying and explaining what had happened. How Jesse had lost his teeth. I was shocked and horrified. I even screamed, “He’s just a baby!” Of course, this didn’t help the offender feel any better. I told said person to go somewhere else, I was too angry and upset to talk to that person right now. I was riveted! I was also on the verge of tears. Why did this happen to my baby? I kept wiping away the tears as I tried to focus on the phone call.
I called the dentist and they told me to bring Jesse in right away. Hubby got Jesse's mouth cleaned up and he told me to change Jesse’s clothes while he got ready, because he was going to take Jesse to the dentist himself. So I took Jesse into his room and we both picked out some new clothes for him to wear. After he was dressed and hubby was ready, they went out to the garage and got the car seat from the truck and into hubby’s car. I double-checked that hubby had the teeth with him before they left. I watched as they left, my heart sunk. I felt just terrible for Jesse and hoped he wasn’t in too much pain.
At the same time, though, I couldn’t stop thinking that I’d been here before. When Jennifer was 7 years old, she was at a friend’s birthday party and in all the fun and excitement of the kids playing, a boy accidentally kicked her in the mouth and knocked her two front teeth out. There was the blood, the tears, the shock, the pain. Just as Jennifer had lost her two front teeth in an accident, Jesse had, too. I only prayed it wasn’t his permanent teeth that were lost.
After they got back from the dentist, hubby told me that Jesse had not suffered any serious damage. They were his baby teeth and that Jesse didn’t need any pain medicine. As to the teeth, it looked like Jesse was going to get his very first visit from the tooth fairy. I was so relieved he was going to be okay. The whole time they were gone, I was shocked and trying to keep myself together.
Since Jesse is too young to have money, he got a toy car from the tooth fairy. He’s been playing with it all morning. He seems to be fine.
Eating is another matter, though. At first, he would not eat at all yesterday. As it was, the only thing he would accept at dinner was a kernel of corn. (I did make something soft for dinner. Looks like I will be making him soft foods for a while! It’s a good thing he loves yogurt.) This morning, he ate part of a doughnut and a Nutri-Grain bar. That was about it. I am hoping he will be okay to eat without trouble at mealtimes. l am glad that a lot of the things he likes are soft foods: Peanut butter sandwich (without the crust and cut into squares), yogurt, spaghetti, macaroni and cheese, chicken noodle soup. He also like hot dogs and he eats them cut up. I wonder how that’ll work for him. (He’ll probably figure out to chew food on the side if he can’t chew it in the front.) I am hoping we can coax him to eat a little more today, but if it’s pain that’s preventing him from eating, I’ll have to either call the dentist or give him Tylenol. Or both.
This week, Jesse is being kept home from preschool. (During the summer, he has been going there twice a week.) This was something hubby wanted. I think Jesse’s fine and should be okay at the school, but I have to respect hubby’s feelings on this. After all, this is his little boy. So Jesse is home this week.
And the offender will be at home all week, too. No playdates or going to a friend’s house. Unlike Jennifer’s experience, this time around the situation could have been avoided. Granted, the offender probably did NOT do what was done with the intention of knocking Jesse’s teeth out, but that is just one of the things that can happen to someone when something like that is done to them, and I hope that message is not lost on that person. On top of this, I don’t condone violence. I will NOT have violence in my home. I grew up in a violent home and I will NOT let the same thing be said about my children. NO VIOLENCE. Period.
Hopefully, everything about this experience will ensure that won’t happen again.
Zen of Ebook Formatting by Guido Henkel
5 hours ago

This waitress, who works at Vinnie Van GoGo’s in Savannah, GA is being both hailed a hero and slammed by people on social media after she was seen on video taking down a customer who inappropriately groped her back side while walking by.
Some are praising her, while others are blaming her for the incident, saying she shouldn't have worn what she was wearing.
Do you think this waitress should've reacted the way that she did?
Which side of the discussion are you on? Do you think this 21-year-old asked for this, by wearing short shorts and a crop top or do you think the customer was entirely in the wrong?

Garrett Harris 4 p.m., Aug. 27
- Community Blog
- Memorial Life
Old Photographs, First Kisses
As I have been going through my grandmother’s old photographs and putting them in order, memories are jogged, and some pieces of my childhood that I had not given much thought to, fall into place.
For instance, my grandparents had three close friends, women who visited our house, or whom we went to visit, quite often. They were not related to us, but I must have been told by my grandmother to call them aunt, because that’s how I knew each of them: Tia Graciela, or Chela, originally from Mexico, lived in Bellflower (in Los Angeles County), with her second husband, Luis, and three children from her first marriage, two sons, Tonio and Mario, and a daughter, Margarita. This is tia Chela:
Tia Vicki, she died when I was young. This is her, in front of our house on Irving Avenue:
Tia Maria, or Mari, who had a lot of properties, including a house in Mexicali that we visited. This is tia Mari:
My tia Mari was a wealthy woman. She owned and ran several businesses, including selling hot dogs from carts over at the bullring in Mexicali. She loved watching bullfights. She had an ice cream parlor for a time, pictured here:
In that picture, you can see Vicki and Mari leaning on my grandfather’s car. We used to go to Mexicali all the time to visit with my tia Mari, and when we were there, my tia Chela was often there, too, her husband would bring her to our house in San Diego and she would travel down south to Mexicali with us. Or my tia Mari would come up to San Diego to stay with us, and my tia Chela would come down from Bellflower to San Diego. My tia Mari was a more frequent visitor at my tia Chela’s house than we were, but sometimes we would go up to Bellflower. I remember seeing my tia Vicki in Mexicali and in San Diego.
The friends would get together, mostly at our house, but often down in Mexicali, and have days-and-nights’ long poker and drinking parties. Hardly a month went by, in my memory, that they didn’t get together for those parties. These were usually good times, as the adults were always laughing and arguing good-naturedly as they drank and played friendly games of poker around the table. Once, when we were at my tia Mari’s house in Mexicali, I saw a tall glass on the table with Coke and ice and drank half of it down; my grandfather came in the room, looked at me and said in Spanish, That had whiskey in it. I was okay, though, I just went off somewhere and fell asleep. During these parties, us kids were generally given money to spend on treats and left to entertain ourselves; it was understood that we were to behave, which we did. If we wandered through their space on the way somewhere else, we were generally fussed over; my three aunts were kind, funny, loving people with me, who listened when I talked to them and took me seriously. Though the drinking and gambling parties stopped after my tia Vicki passed away, the two remaining aunts still came to see us until my tia Mari died, suddenly, of a heart attack. We lived a lot of tragedies with my tia Chela. Her older boy, Tonio, hung himself in his twenties, the younger son, Mario, married a native American woman who was a serious alcoholic with a vicious temper, and the daughter, Margarita, became a gambling addict; Chela ended up raising a bunch of her grandchildren. She is now a widow, she calls every so often to see how my grandmother is doing.
So I have three stories in relation to these aunts. One has to do with my tia Vicki’s death, I told this story on another thread but will repeat it here. The three aunts, Vicki, Mari, Chela, were all over at my grandparents’ house on Irving, as usual playing poker and drinking and the party had gone on all night; the living room and dining room were only divided by an arch, so the back of the sofa was right next to the dining table where they were playing. At one point, my grandmother got tired and went to lay down on the sofa in the living room. Above the mantel in the living room was a large picture depicting the Virgen de Guadalupe. My grandmother later told us that while she was laying there sleeping, she had a dream that the Virgen de Guadalupe over the mantel pointed at my tia Vicki and sadly shook her head; my grandmother was frightened by this, instantly woke up and went to rejoin the others at the table. When the people at the table wanted to go to sleep, my grandmother wouldn’t let them and urged them to play some more. Shortly after this, within weeks as I recall my grandmother saying, my tia Vicki was dead.
The second story has to do with her funeral. The vigil was held on my tia Mari’s patio in Mexicali, I recall it being the patio outside the ice cream parlor, and yet we slept somewhere nearby so they must have made beds up for us inside the building. As some of you may know, the Mexican custom is to hold vigil all night with the dead, and I remember the patio strung all around with lights, and the lights on, white bulbs against the dark night, and holy candles burning, and vases of flowers, and the dead woman’s coffin sitting on a platform in the middle of the patio, and people coming and going all night, drinking and eating and praying and crying. The whole scene was so brilliantly colored, with the painted Mexican statuary, religious and otherwise, and the gaudy flowers, set all around the patio, and the bright bullfighting posters and calendars with cockfighting and Aztec princesses tacked on the walls, the vivid colors of the walls and the tables and the benches and chairs. I remember the rosary being said at intervals all night, lead by someone who knew the beautiful classic mystical and bloody Mexican rosary (women who can recite this rosary are highly prized and sought after to lead rosaries at vigils; I had one such lady, Juana, at my grandfather’s vigil). I remember wherever it was I was put to bed looking out from my dark room through slats and seeing and hearing the people as they mourned, my grandmother weeping and wailing over the coffin, asking the dead woman, Why did you leave us, why did you leave us?
The revelation I was struck with, when I was looking at these photographs and thinking about my aunts is that my tia Vicki, as far as I knew, had never been married and had no children. My tia Mari, likewise, had no children. She had married men who were wealthy and old, it had been implied for their money and property, and she had quite a bit of both when she died; my tia Mari had promised that she would leave something to my grandparents and to me in the Will she had written, but when she died, my tia Chela was the one to look through her things and claimed never to have found a Will, told us my tia Mari had left everything to her, and that is what happened, she kept it all. Anyway, as I recall, just from comments made, my tia Mari had never slept with these men she married. It occurs to me now that my tia Mari and tia Vicki may have been marimachas, lesbians. In those days, that sort of thing was kept quiet, but just looking back and putting things together, it is possible they were a couple. I am tickled now by the thought that as a child I may have had two lesbian lover aunts!
The third thing is that my tia Mari adopted two boys at different times in her life. I don’t know if these were formal adoptions, or if in the Mexican style back in those days, some poor woman basically gave her baby to someone who was more financially able to give the child a better life. The first one, Pedro, was two or three years older than the rest of us kids. Years later, my tia Mari took in the second boy whose name escapes me now. My brother and I and Pedro, along with my tia Chela’s younger children, Mario and Margarita, were playmates and friends; while the adults played poker and drank inside the house, we kids would play together, usually out in the yard, running around the house, Tag, or Hide-and-Seek, or other games, the kind children invent and play among themselves when they have hours and days to spend together.
It was an unspoken joke around our house that my tia Mari was a stingy woman. She was always looking for bargains, rarely bought anything unless it was absolutely necesssary and at rockbottom price, would bring her dirty clothes to wash at my grandmother’s house, took castoffs of any sort, including broken gadgets and machinery or anything else not being used that she thought had any value, loaded them into her old pickup and took the stuff down to her house to sell or barter, even took old food back with her for her dogs and pigs. Both of her adopted boys were treated very badly by her when they were growing up. She would lose her temper and beat them and forced them to work like slaves for her in her house and her businesses. I remember once, at our house, my tia Mari blowing up at the younger boy because of some damage he had supposedly done to a mounted set of bull horns she had brought with her, he claimed he hadn’t touched them, but she got the horns and started poking him hard in the head with them, chasing him as he ran away crying. As so often happened back then, no one stepped in to intervene on either of the boys’ behalf. I later heard that when they grew into men, they were both gay, Pedro a successful businessman in San Francisco, who died of AIDs during that first wave of deaths when no one knew much about the disease. The younger boy became a male prostitute and a drug addict, and we lost track of him.
In this photograph, you can see Pedro. From left to right, that is my little brother, then me, then Pedro, with his arms around a little boy (I don’t recognize the child).
As I said earlier, as children we all used to play in the yards of whoever’s houses we were at while the adults had fun drinking and playing cards. Years later, when we were teenagers, both of my tia Chela’s sons tried to pursue a relationship with me, but except for one or two kisses they stole, nothing happened, made easier by the fact that they lived in Bellflower and I could escape my house whenever they came down to San Diego with their parents.
Anyway, Pedro had beaten them at the game. One day, when the adults were inside playing cards and drinking, all of us kids were playing Hide-and-Seek in the yard, that was when my grandparents still owned the house on Julian Avenue. Pedro was pretending to hide behind the shed; he saw me and gestured me over to hide with him. He was probably about ten years old then, and I was maybe seven or eight. We were standing against the back wall of the shed. He asked me, in Spanish, if I liked him. I said, Yes. He leaned over and kissed me on the lips. My first kiss from a boy.
Pedro was a cute and gentle boy, dark brown skinned, with dimples. That time I accidentally drank the whiskey and Coke at his mother’s house, it was evening, and he followed me outside, looking concerned, and asked me if I was all right, then watched as I crawled into the back seat of my grandfather’s car and fell asleep on a blanket; I think he covered me with another blanket, and my heart even leads me to believe he watched over me. I didn’t see Pedro very often growing up. I wish my tia Maria hadn’t been mean to him. I wish he had not died. I’m glad that he was my first kiss. I still love him a little bit.

"Playing Croke Park in 1985 was probably the high point of the Unforgettable Fire tour, because we really had done it. This wasn't a band that was doing OK, this was a band that was topping the charts and had broke America and the world, coming back to play in their home town, in the centre of their city."
- The Edge
did you know
The 'seven towers' referred to in the song 'Running To Stand Still' are seven 18 floor tower block buildings central to the development which developed a serious heroin problem over the years in Ireland.

TUSCALOOSA, Ala. (AP) - Many pets have ended up in shelters following Alabama's deadly tornado.
One shelter alone has hundreds of lost animals.
Linda Workman, the shelter's assistant director, says many are either injured or emotionally scarred by fear. Workman says, "They're just as traumatized as the humans."
But Workman says she is encouraged by the mounds of supplies that have been donated and the volunteers who come to the shelter.
The Tuscaloosa Metro Animal Shelter is where Reginald Jackson found his buddy. He says he was distressed when he walked up and down the shelter's cages, but couldn't find his pit bull Bolo. As he was about to leave, a veterinarian who had just examined Bolo was walking him back to his cage.

Off and on over the years I have day dreamed of getting paid to write. I enjoy writing though I often lack inspiration. Back in my darkest days I wrote a little bit. It was all as dark as my mood and I never shared it with anyone until I found it by accident one day and posted it here and here. I played around with short fiction stories recently, but as a father, husband, and middle class worker bee there is little time for following my own pursuits. Truthfully the stuff I wrote wasn’t all that good anyway. My stuff always lacks the descriptive details, the things that convey the setting and mood in a way that actually puts the reader into the story. It is all mechanical and matter of fact, no real pizazz. I was once employed as a technical writer and I was good at that. I actually redesigned the entire menu of written reports my company provided its customers. They were concise, to the point, easily navigated, and well received. That remains my biggest accomplishment in writing.
This summer while on the water working with my father I was struck with a rare lightning bolt of inspiration for a magazine article. I had an idea but as is the norm, particularly in the summer, I had no time until today. Today I was off. It is the last day of my vacation and by accident became a day I had all to myself. I finally sat down and wrote. The topic and whatnot isn’t important, but what is is that I got the ideas all on paper. I had taken the time to outline the project a couple weeks ago and I have been thinking about it since late in the spring so it was pretty much written in my head which made actually giving a physical form much easier. Two hours, 1200 words, and draft one is complete. It’s a ways from actually being done, but the ideas are all out on paper. I have no idea the submission guidelines to the publications I have in mind so I will go search those out next and modify the content if required. I am somewhat concerned that it may be a little long for what they would use it for, but I think I can shave it down if I have to.
I think this is a really good idea. I really think it will sell in the market I have in mind, and I am pretty excited to have actually started down the path. It was nice to write with purpose. To actually have an idea and put something together that could be useful to others. I know I am a long way for done, but it has been a good day.

10-16-2018, 05:35 PM
Join Date: Jun 2012
Mentioned: 359 Post(s)
Tagged: 0 Thread(s)
Originally Posted by Nina2008
I have an 11 year old rat terrier. About 6 months ago he started howling every time I left the room. This went on all night etc etc. He became so anxious he began chewing his feet so badly that one of them bled and had to be stiched up. After a vet visit we it was determined that his blood work was all good but he is almost completely blind and getting worse by the day.
Since no one in the house was getting any sleep- Constant howling etc... the vet prescribed Prozac. 1/2 a tablet did nothing.. they bumped it up to 1 table per day.. The night time howling has gotten better but I don't know what happens during the day.
My poor doggie is still in a cone and it has been over 2 months since his foot injury.. every time I try to take it off he chews so much he bleeds. Other things happening .. he gets stuck in corners, under chairs. Can't get up one stair to get outside anymore. I have to carry him. He walks right off of furniture.. cause he can't see. So he can't go on the bed or couch anymore. He shakes and just falls over.. no balance at all. He will poop in his bed area most days.. (gated off part of the kitchen ) and just step in it all day.. it gets everywhere.. he does a lot of pacing around.. can't sit still.. a lot of whining..
some say it's time to put him down? What do you think? Not sure if he has the best quality of life right now but is there something I have not tried?
I'm so sorry that you and your boy are going through that!
That sounds a lot like my old boy Shadow towards the last 6 or so months of his life. He had gone blind due to a stroke, had anxiety when I had to leave him alone (the lessened as time went on) I had to time potty breaks perfectly of he'd pee where he stood, and then the Canine Cognitive Dysfunction (dementia) steadily got worse. He'd aimlessly pace at night, and would at times get stuck in corners. He also steadily got weaker and would have trouble getting up if he was laying down. I had to kennel him once during that time and the kennel reported that they had to wash his feet multiple times a day because he'd soil the kennel then pace through the mess over and over in his aimless wandering.
I learned to manage what was going on, and do not regret doing that. What I regret is not putting him down the week I noticed he had very little appetite. I opted to try the medicine that the vet prescribed to try and get him eating again. He never regained his appetite and died a week later. He taught me that it's better to put them to sleep 1 day to soon, then to wait a day too late. He taught me that sometimes it's best to just let them go, rather then trying everything under the sun to save them when they are that old.
This is a book I'd recommend to anyone that has a dog with canine cognitive dysfunction, I really wish I had it when I had Shadow. https://www.amazon.com/dp/1943634017

Surviving a System Bankruptcy
Bankruptcy for the corporate office nearly meant disaster for these franchisees.
When Gail and Gordon Perry, now 54 and 56, respectively, first opened their Schlotzsky's franchise in February 1999, they saw it as a security for their retirement. Little did they imagine what was in store for them nearly six years later. In August 2004, Schlotzsky's Inc. filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy, sending business spiraling for the Perrys, who had trouble convincing their San Luis Obispo, California, community that they were still open for business.
The situation has steadily improved since the company was purchased in December 2004; however, the Perrys won't forget those five grueling months anytime soon. We spoke with Gail about the measures they took to keep the business afloat.
How did you first hear that Schlotzsky's was filing for bankruptcy?
Actually, my employees told me before I even heard it through the corporate office. They knew before I got notified. That was kind of a surprise. My landlord read about it, and she started getting phone calls from customers, so I was concerned about the customers thinking that my store went bankrupt.
Were you expecting that it would have an effect on your business?
Yes, most definitely. We were very concerned. Extremely concerned--scared of what was going to happen to our store. Once we heard, it was instant. Our sales dropped 25 percent, and, all of a sudden, we couldn't get our product.
I'm sure our distributors were fearful, too, of what was going to happen. Instantly, they made us go to COD, which was hard. Then they just stopped carrying products that we had bought for the last five and half years. We couldn't get our cups; we couldn't get all of our meats. So I went to Smart & Final and got my meats, which weren't the same, but you still have to service your customers, or you're going to lose even more. Then the distributors came back and started giving us meat, but it wasn't quality meat. It was completely different meat. The whole thing was really awful. We were a wreck.
Did you ever imagine that you would one day be faced with such challenges like finding another source for your products?
Never. You pay royalties so you think you're fine. It was really trying, but we got through it. We're actually still suffering from it, but we're starting to feel we're out of the woods. New owners bought [the franchise system], and they've been absolutely wonderful. They're doing what they can to help us out.
You say you're still suffering from the bankruptcy. Can you explain how?
Sales dropped 25 percent when it first happened. They're improving, but they're not up to where they were when the bankruptcy hit. That's why I feel like we're still suffering from it. I would say sales are still down about 12 percent. I don't know if I can blame the bankruptcy totally for that, but you're going along just wonderfully and then everything just stops. It's like day and night, and your sales drop $300 a day, and then you keep hearing, "Oh, I thought you were closed" when you're out in the community. I would say that was the worst part. People aren't aware that we're independently owned.
Did you ever feel as though you might not survive?
Heavens, yes. And then we heard through the grapevine that if they didn't find buyers by December 31, the bankruptcy court was going to close the store. I don't know if that was true, but we were thinking, "Where does that leave us at the end of the year? What happens then?" We didn't know. It was very trying on us and scary. We have our whole life in this store. Our retirement is in this store.
It was fortunate that you had been in business for several years before this happened. What do you think would have happened if you had just opened your business?
We would have closed. My heart goes out to all these franchisees who were fairly new and still learning the whole thing. There were over 700 stores, and now we're down to about 430. So that's a huge drop in stores. And I'm sure a lot of those were new franchisees, and they just couldn't weather it. In the first two years, you're learning the whole thing, so everything is more costly. You have more waste, you have more help until you learn the business. Once you learn it, you can cut back on all that. Your waste becomes minimal along with your help. We started out with 44 people and now we're running it with 20. That's a huge difference in payroll.
Looking back, were there any signs that the franchise was going bankrupt?
We should have seen it to begin with, because the former owners were taking our advertising dollars but they weren't advertising. They were telling me, "You can advertise, send in the bills and we'll pay you." But I had heard through some of the other franchisees that they weren't getting paid, and I was thinking, "I can't afford to pay twice for advertising." So I didn't advertise.
Did you receive any support from fellow franchisees?
If you have several stores together within driving distance, you can kind of share. If you run out of something, you can run over to that store. Well, I am really way out here on the central coast, and the closest store is probably three hours away. So the one thing that really helped me tremendously was I always kept enough supplies for two weeks, because my delivery truck would sometimes be short or maybe my flour wouldn't come, and it's not like I can run to the neighboring Schlotzsky's. Because of that, I got through a lot longer than some of the other franchisees. And actually some of the other franchisees were willing to come to my store to get stuff, and I was thinking, "I don't know if I can part with it," because, honestly, we didn't know if were going to get any flour. We didn't know if we were going to all these [supplies] that are all Schlotzsky's labeled.
What actions did you take that ultimately helped you survive?
In the beginning, the local paper ran an article on the bankruptcy, and they didn't really make it clear that it was the corporate office that filed bankruptcy. So I contacted the local newspaper and told them they needed to let [people] know it's not my store. So they ran a wonderful article, which was really helpful.
Also, my local Coca-Cola supplier came through for me. They stocked extra stuff for me knowing I might need it. The manager of Smart & Final would always say, "Can I order you extra meat? Whatever you need ..." So because I went to them and explained the situation, they went the extra mile, whereas if I hadn't said anything, it might have been more difficult. So just letting your local suppliers know what is going on helps. I even told the manager at [the local grocery store,] Vons. And whenever I went in for something, he would take me to wherever it was. And that just made it not so bad.
Is there any advice you can offer to other franchisees going through the same experience?
Let the people who can help you know what's going on--even the people who are surrounding you, let them know what's going on, so they're not guessing and thinking you're going to close your doors any minute. Try and get what information you can from the corporate office, just so you're not in the dark. You don't want to be guessing from week to week what's going on.
Do you ever worry that it might happen again?
No. I think these new buyers are in it for the long haul. I feel very positive. The new owners figure that the franchisees who were able to survive will see a definite change by the end of the year, and I believe them. They're doing everything that they can to make it easier for us. They've been really great. My husband and I are really pleased with the new owners.
Entrepreneur Editors' Picks
Crypto Doesn't Have to Be Serious. Just Ask This Comedian Who Organized a Conference About Failure in the Industry.
Want to Succeed? Turn Your Fixed Mindset Into a Growth Mindset.
Google's CEO Is Asking Employees 3 Simple Questions to Boost Productivity
'Greatest Storyteller Wins.' Katy Perry on the Surprising Link Between Pop Stardom and Entrepreneurship.
The 5 Personalities You Meet in a Coworking Space
'Man's Best Friend' — and Investment: The Thriving Industry of Pet-Related Franchising

Alexander Zverev defeats Felix Auger-Aliassime in Cologne, wins bett1HULKS Indoors 2020
Alexander Zverev had a really good week in Cologne and today he capped off that week with another victory and the trophy. The match lasted a bit over an hour and it was Zverev win pretty comfortably 6-3 6-3.
The start of the match set things early and was an example of things to come. Zverev immediately broke Felix to take a 2- 0 lead. The next few games featured a rather calm part of the match as both players served well and won their own service game. The crowd cheered on Zverev and it was evident that he was feeling very comfortable on the court. At 4-2 he played another spectacular game to break Felix once more. He would give it back immediately due to a lapse in focus but determined not to let his lead slip away he broke Felix a third time to end the set 6-3.
The start of the 2nd set brought good play from both players as neither of them gave the other trouble. It wasn't until later on in the set that Auger-Aliassime encountered trouble. Zverev found a way to neutralise his serve and baseline play and broke his serve once more take the 4-2 lead. The crowd was delighted as it became clear that the German would cruise to a victory from that point on. In the end, Zvered ended it with a stellar game once again.
It was a deserved victory for the German who played a perfect match except for the one game he lost his serve. He served well, he played well, he barely lost any points on his first serve. All in all, a valiant effort from Felix Auger-Aliassime but he was simply overmatched in this one.

I was a teenager in the early 1980s when “new wave” music hit, and living on Long Island, I had a front-row seat to the second British Invasion thanks to WLIR. Yet, at the same time I missed the beginning of Wham! mania. I only became aware of them in 1984, once they had already had some measure of success in their native England. Having already read Andrew Ridgeley’s book, I knew a lot of Wham!’s story already, but was eagerly looking forward to viewing this documentary. It did not disappoint.
George Michael and Andrew Ridgeley narrate the story of their success, through early interviews of George and Andrew, who also provides some newly recorded commentary. The early pictures show a very confident, self-assured boy (Andrew) and someone who is very unsure of himself (George). There are lots of pictures because Andrew’s mother kept a scrapbook. In fact, she kept volumes of scrapbooks over the years of Wham!’s success. There are also early videos of them performing in clubs.
Knowing George Michael as the gorgeous pin-up that he became with the success of the group, many people will be shocked at what George Michael looked like as a teen. As we were watching the documentary, I told my husband what I’d read in the book – of how shy George was and how little self-confidence he had. He was incredulous when we look at this man who was so talented and good-looking. It just goes to show that we all believe the worst about ourselves, even when it seems that the entire world is in love with you.
Shirlie was Andrew’s girlfriend so they incorporated them into their act as Wham! Their break came when Top of the Pops called them to fill in last minute for another artist who dropped out. The dancing routine they crafted themselves might be cringe-worthy now, but it showed an exuberance that had been missing from music up until that point.
This documentary also dispels the rumor that George Michael wrote Careless Whisper and just added Andrew’s name. It’s clearly one of their oldest songs written together and they knew they had something special. Careless Whisper was turned away by multiple agents, although it wasn’t as polished nor did it have the same lyrics as the final version. In fact, a version recorded by George with the same people who worked with Aretha Franklin and Ray Charles was also set aside for his own vision. Andrew admits that George was able to develop his songwriting skills much faster than Andrew. This was the first bit of friction between the two.
When he adopted the stage name, George Michael, Andrew states that started to shape a new persona. He knew him as Yog, the shy boy who sat next to him at school and whom Andrew dragged along for the ride. George came out to Shirlie and Andrew pretty early on, when they were filming the Club Tropicana video. It really didn’t make a difference to Andrew and Shirlie, but he saw why his friend was so conflicted at a time when they were just starting to see the hints of the success that was to come.
The interviews when they are just breaking out are great as they are shocked by some of the crazy things happening, especially the girls throwing their underwear on stage. Andrew states he could see George was way more talented than he was, and Wham! wasn’t something they could keep doing. It was a group formed to try and be happy and have fun, not tackle some of the deep problems and emotions that were coming as they were growing older. That was one of the reasons they chose to go out on top, and Andrew was always a cheerleader for George’s solo career.
This documentary is great. I thoroughly enjoyed revisiting that time and seeing all the old videos and pictures from their early years. Even George’s father is on the video, talking about how much he was against the friendship, nevermind him trying to be a musician. He thought it was a waste of time and did everything he could to stop it, yet he turns around here and states how proud his son made him. The same son who cites his father as one of the reasons he was afraid of coming out. All of the interviews are great and thanks to Andrew’s mother there are a lot of clippings to show of their success.
The documentary end with the breakup of Wham! It doesn’t follow to George’s solo career nor comment on his death in 2016. Much like Andrew’s book, it’s a loving memorial to his friend and the fun they had in Wham! I highly recommend it.
Categories: Television Reviews

According to Alzheimer’s Research UK, there are over 835, 000 people affected by dementia in the UK today, and this statistic is expected to rise to over 850, 000 in the upcoming years. The people affected by dementia in the UK are not just the people who have the disease themselves, but it is also the family and friends of those people who take the time and effort to support a loved one going through the progression of the disease.
As a memory researcher myself, the psychological reasoning behind dementia has always been an interesting topic of research to me and this then developed even further when I wanted to know more about a loved one, my grandmother, who was diagnosed in early 2014. I read about research which had found the link between differing brain structures and dementia and other finding which suggested that age could be a large contributing factor. For my family, the main cause of the dementia was a stroke and this was clear during the numerous hospital visits and scans the family had to be supported with.
One of the most widely researched types of dementia is semantic dementia (the type of dementia my grandmother was diagnosed with) and this type of dementia can be categorised with the loss of semantic memory. People with semantic dementia will progressively begin to lose the ability to put words and pictures into semantic categories. So for example, they may not be able to say that a tiger and lion are both large cats.
A person with semantic dementia will also lose memories of who people are and this, for a family, can be one of the worst symptoms to cope with. The person with semantic dementia could remember a face one day, but not the next, and this was one thing that was experienced by my family on a daily basis. There were several occasions where I would visit my grandmother and she would not understand who I was or even where she was or why she was in the lovely care home she was in. One of the surprising things, however, was that my grandmother’s memory for events (such as when a family member moved to Scotland) were very much intact, and again, this was evidence for the doctor’s that they were dealing with a patient who had semantic dementia.
While my family was going through supporting a loved one with dementia, we often wondered who was there to support us. We often found that support pages and charities such as Dementia UK were there for the family to talk about what to expect after the diagnosis. Fundraising, such as completing a Memory Walk, was also another way in which the family helped to make everything. There were quite a few times where the family were unsure of how to deal with my grandmother’s progressive memory loss, in particular when a second stroke occurred, causing my grandmother’s memory to rapidly deteriorate. Even though the initial diagnosis was nearly four years ago, the impact that this has on the family can be still seen. We had four years of watching someone slowly lose themselves which was, personally, one of the worst things I have had to deal with. Now, my grandmother is at peace and no longer has to deal with such an awful, life changing disease.
When a family has a relation who has been diagnosed with dementia, they must remember that they are not alone. Supporting themselves as a family can be a real help, but there are always support services available for when people are really finding it difficult thing to cope with. My family have had amazing support over the years and the support still continues even when the person with dementia has gone.
Laura Jenkins, PhD is a teaching associate in the School of Sport, Exercise and Health Sciences at Loughborough University.

Did you skip Hollywood studios? Mine young ones loved it. We only stayed in ak for 3/4 day. Did they give out candy at the Halloween party. Someone told me they let you trick or treat.
Just getting in from Day 3. Yes, we skipped Hollywood Studios. I am sure that my kids would have loved it, but we only had 3 days here. If I had another day, we'd go there.
Yes, they did give out candy at the Halloween Party, but it was just at designated places where cast members (not characters) were handing it out.
AK was a nice change of pace today, even though it was pretty crowded. The African area and the Kilimanjaro safari were very cool. In Asia, the River ride was a lot of fun for the kids and the Everest ride was great. (BTW, if anyone says you might
get wet on the River ride, they are FOS... you get drenched
on it.) Dinoland was okay, but sort of like a carnival with all of the pay-to-play booths.
The food was WAY better than MK. Also, they served alcohol, which was nice. The nicer places required reservations, but even the sidewalk places were serving stuff that was far better than anything in MK.
Thanks so much for all of the advice and friendly dialogue. It added another fun aspect to our trip.
Hope all of you coming down here have as great a time as we did!

ROCHESTER, N.Y. - The body of a U.S. Army nurse who died suddenly in Afghanistan during a computer video chat with his wife arrived Saturday in western New York, in advance of his planned funeral.
More than 100 mourners and admirers assembled at a Rochester airport to pay tribute to Capt. Bruce Kevin Clark. Many carried American flags. The group included veterans of four other U.S. wars, and members of Clark's family.
Clark's wife, Susan Orellana-Clark, was in Texas chatting with him via Skype on April 30 when he collapsed. Her family has said she tried for two hours to get help for her dying husband, before finally seeing military officials enter the room where he lay.
Initially, Clark's family said they believed he had been shot, and that after he fell his wife could see a bullet hole in the closet behind him, but military officials have since said there was no bullet wound on his body. The cause of his death is still being investigated.
Clark's body arrived in Rochester just before 10 a.m. aboard a Kalitta Air cargo plane. His casket, draped in an American flag, was lowered into a gray hearse while bagpipers played "Amazing Grace."
"It's important that people never forget the sacrifices that the soldiers and their families make for all of us," said Susan MacDougall, of Brighton, who was among the mourners. "They give of themselves in ways that we can only imagine."
Clark was 43. His wife is from Spencerport, where his funeral is scheduled to take place Tuesday. He and his family lived there for six years before he joined the Army in 2006.
Clark grew up in Michigan. He was assigned to a medical center in El Paso and then deployed to Afghanistan in March.

Tuesday, October 18, 2005
"I apologize for being just a little bit late. I actually went over and saw Tyrone (Prothro) and dropped off a letter from President (George) Bush that he was pretty excited about getting. Tyrone is in good spirits. We have a statement in the back from Dr. (Les) Fowler regarding Tyrone, so pretty much anything that needs to be said about that is pretty much in that statement there. But he is in good spirits and doing well.
"Obviously this is a huge week for us. Our football team knows we've got to play a lot better than we did last week. Specifically, we've got to tackle better defensively; we've got to hold on to the ball offensively. We've got to be better in the plus territory and eliminate some penalties where we didn't do some of those things last week. We know we're going to have to execute much better this week to give ourselves a chance going up a very talented football team, especially up front on both sides of the football. Their offensive and defensive lines are big. They're athletic. They've got a lot of speed. So I think by far the biggest challenge of the year and our kids are looking forward and are excited about playing this game. They realize the tradition of this game, the magnitude of it. The younger guys who don't know quite a whole lot about it will find out in a hurry. The older guys have done a good job all year in regard to teaching these young guys a lot about what it's like being here and playing in games like that, and I would anticipate the same thing as far as the older guys getting the younger guys as well as themselves prepared for this weekend."
Coach, talk about their secondary and having not allowed a single passing touchdown all season as far as the SEC play is concerned.
"They do a good job in the secondary. Of course, they lost one of their big players also in Jason Allen. I think their secondary is athletic. They've got good cover skills. They also benefit from that front seven, especially their front four, the pass rush that they get. They're also pretty good against the run, so it will be a challenge for our wide receivers and for Brodie (Croyle) and our offensive line, obviously, in pass protection."
Coach, any public comment on John Parker Wilson and what if any punishment you might be giving him?
"No. We're going to handle his discipline like we do everybody else's: internally. We're not going to release publicly what his discipline will be. It will be consistent with what we do."
Coach, is there anything that you were hoping for back at the first of August, best case scenario, that has not happened for you so far as far as the team developing and individual players--anything like that?
"I think the biggest thing you look for as a coach is the consistency week in and week out. We're not there for sure. I think that was evident last week. We felt like we played a pretty good ball game two weeks ago. But our execution has to be at a high level, especially now where we're at in this part of the schedule this week. We've done some good things. We've had some young guys that we feel good about that have played pretty well and have gotten some experience, but, as you know, you've got to go week to week and you've got to prove yourselves week to week like I've said in here and just like I'll say in our team meeting. The consistency, the special teams I think, just improving there with our return game and eliminating the penalties."
Coach, if you could, talk about the two quarterback system that Tennessee seems to be running. Either one of those quarterbacks fit better into what you guys do defensively? How do you prepare for the two of them?
"You just kind of watch tape and you see how each guy reacts to pressure, if he's looking at certain receivers, if they do different things when one guy is in there compared to the other guy. You look at our tape from last year. We feel like they've got two quality quarterbacks. Obviously (Rick) Clausen's got more experience and they've won as of late with him in there and have been productive other than the last week that they played. We have to look at really, the games we've seen this season as well as last year when (Erik) Ainge played. They can do a lot of things because they've got a lot of talent on offense. They can run the football. They're big up front. They can spread you out and throw it. They've done a lot. They've used more personnel groupings this year probably than any other year, so we've got to make sure we get prepared for that."
Mike, could you talk a little bit about the improvement Brodie's (Croyle) made in all aspects of the game between this year and last year?
"I think he's playing better because he's out there more and we hope we keep him out there. He's gotten better each week. I think he's just more comfortable seeing the field, more comfortable in the pocket, moving around in the pocket. Knock on wood, his accuracy's been very good. Mechanically I think you probably can't say enough about what he does and how he gets his feet set and follows through on all those things. Those are things that he has worked on a lot in his career, and I think you see them paying off because those are things that come real natural to him. He's out there not having to worry about those things and just worry about reacting to what he sees. And I think he's got more confidence with our receivers because of their experience now."

Last updated: 05/23/2015 - 2:07 AM UTC
Ralph Kiner played a major role in my teen years. He and Tim McCarver were the signature television game calling partnership in the 1980s and, together with Bob Murphy on the radio, were a very big influence on my development as a baseball fan.
Part of the fun of Kiner was waiting for him to say something incorrectly. We used to make a bit of a game out of telling each other the most atrocious Kiner-ism we could remember. But under that was a great story teller. The tangents he and McCarver would go off on during games were wonderful to me and taught me a lot about the game and it’s history as did his post game Kiner’s Korner segements.
In the last few years, since he suffered a stroke, his appearances on air have been few and far between. Each one a treasure. And though he obviously enjoyed those appearances I always felt sad that they paraded him out there despite his obvious issues. But each appearance was another chance to enter the wonderful mind and experience the great personality that was Ralph Kiner.
Rest in peace.

NEW YORK — John Gibson, pastor and seminary professor, apparently killed himself after the Ashley Madison web site hack revealed he was a member. Gibson was was married with two children.
Gibson’s wife, Christi, discovered her husband’s body. His daughter, Callie, was teaching in front of 250 college students when she got the call.
It was August 24, six days after hackers exposed the names of millions of people who had signed up for Ashley Madison, the notorious site for those seeking affairs. Gibson’s name was on the list.
“It was a moment that life doesn’t prepare you for,” Christi told CNNMoney. “I had to call my kids. How do you tell your kids that their dad is gone and that he took his own life?”
In his suicide note, Gibson chronicled his demons. He also mentioned Ashley Madison. “He talked about depression,” Christi said. “He talked about having his name on there, and he said he was just very, very sorry. What we know about him is that he poured his life into other people, and he offered grace and mercy and forgiveness to everyone else, but somehow he couldn’t extend that to himself.”
The Ashley Madison web site was hacked in July, and hackers released users’ personal information in August. Since then, authorities in Toronto have said they are investigating suicides that could be linked to the data dump. Hackers have also sent extortion emails to people who were on the list.
Gibson said her husband was likely worried he’d lose his job.
“It wasn’t so bad that we wouldn’t have forgiven it,” she said, “and so many people have said that to us, but for John, it carried such a shame.”
Gibson, 56, was known as a great teacher with a “quirky laugh,” but he had struggled with depression and addiction in the past, his family said.
Officials at Ashley Madison did not immediately respond to a request for comment.
Since his death, Gibon’s family has made a pact to be more transparent with one another about their struggles.
Christi Gibson has a message for the 32 million people exposed and their communities: “These were real people with real families, real pain and real loss,” she says. But “don’t underestimate the power of love. Nothing is worth the loss of a father and a husband and a friend. It just didn’t merit it. It didn’t merit it at all.”

Some local businesses open up with announcement from governor
May 21, 2020
Gov. Gavin Newsom approved Kern County's request to enter Phase II of his masterplan to integrate the openings of local businesses with specific guidelines in the face of the coronavirus pandemic.
In Phase II of his plan, Newsom said that local restaurants and nonessential shops can open while still practicing social distancing. This applies also to restaurants who have been limited to take-out only service since the Stay at Home order had been in place. The announcement resulted in several businesses in Shafter to completely open, ready to serve the public, with full service. Richie Fabrie, owner of Fabrie Jewelers on Central Avenue, was back open, if only for a couple of more days. Fabrie will be closing their doors for good on Saturday, May 23.
"We were actually scheduled to close by April, but with the pandemic situation, it forced me to postpone the closing, allowing us to finish our Closing Store sale."
Fabrie said that they have loved their time in business, for over 60 years, and are very grateful for the community of Shafter.
But there are still a few places that have not opened completely as of Thursday, May 21. La Fonda Restaurant in Shafter, which has enjoyed a brisk take-out business during this time, has elected to keep the service that way until they receive some sort of letter that tells them that they can open their restaurant fully, including dine-in customers.
"I have had a couple of people call us asking if we are opened back up for dine-in, but until we get a notice saying that in writing, we are going to stay open for just take-out," a representative of La Fonda said,
The majority of the restaurants in Shafter have opened back up fully, allowing customers to enjoy a meal at the establishment.
Other non-essential businesses in Shafter have opened, including local cell phone stores and antique and furniture stores.
Local flower shop Sun Country Flowers has seen their business thrive in the pandemic, with owner Carol Reichenbach saying that they have been very busy for the past three months. "We expect to be busy around Mother's Day, but this year, we were busy well before the holiday," Reichenbach said. "We decided to stay open during the virus situation, but we did post a notice that we recommended that the customers call first."
With a lot of the chain grocery stores having very low stock in flowers, the local shop was happy to fill that void. "We have such wonderful customers and they were so supportive," concluded Reichenbach.
Local restaurants and shops are now allowed to open under Phase 2. A couple of barbershops in town, which are actually not a part of the Phase 2 openings, have been serving customers during various times throughout the Stay at Home order. Elro's Barbershop has had customers in the past three weeks, as well as Deluxe Barbershop on Central Avenue. Owner Tommy Rodriguez said that he has been opening for a half-day the past couple of weeks. "I had to do something, I still had bills to pay. I got most of the customers by appointments. If I knew that I was going to have at least six or seven customers, I would open for a half day."
One major reason Rodriguez decided to take this action was the fact that his bills didn't stop even with the temporary closure of the business. "I have been on a water meter since January. I contacted the city because I was receiving a water bill that was the same amount as when I was open fully." Said Rodriguez. "I wondered why I was receiving a bill totaling the same amount when I had been closed for two months," said Rodriguez. "I was told that this was my bill and it needed to be paid. I thought, well, I have to do something if I was still going to have to pay bills, so I couldn't afford to just stay completely closed."

Tomorrow this sweet little boy turns one year old. It has been a great year.
He is pretty much a full time walker now and is going everywhere. Two of his one year molars have broken thru. He is still a pretty terrible sleeper.
The last couple weeks he has joined his sister in excited Papa is home greetings by stopping everything as soon as the sound of the door happens and running to him. Very cute.
He is very much in a “me too” phase. If he sees his sister or even me or anyone with something or getting something, particularly food, grunts and whines begin because he wants some too.
He is also in the screech phase. Boy is it loud too. Leaving the house with him is sometimes an issue because of this.
He is really, really sweet and loving. During the day when playing with his sister he always stops periodically and comes over to give me a hug or rest his head on my lap. Bean always does this scream and run from me thing, but he doesn’t do that. He just really is sweet, snuggly and loves his mama. Melts my heart every time.

"Dad, I think you'll be happy to know that I'm dating a rich girl for a change…"
Ever since childhood, and especially when my son started to excel at sports, I made it a point to be his biggest fan. "You're such a good catch: handsome, athletic, working," I'd tell him, and then jokingly add: "You should aim high and find yourself a rich girl from a good family."
By age 35, he'd had a series of live-in relationships with high-maintenance exotic beauties that all ended when he was given a deadline for commitment. Fortunately, there was always another girl waiting in the wings.
"So, tell me about this one," I asked.
"Her name is Lilly, and she lives in a mini-mansion in Burbank with her grandma.... Her grandma is loaded. But I really don't care about her money. She is so different from other girls I've dated. I think I'm finally in love."
"I'm listening," I said.
"I'll admit she's a little young. She just turned 22. She's a Pepperdine graduate, works part-time in an art gallery and plays soccer on a team. When I asked what she wanted to do with her life, she said, 'Be a soccer Mom.' But the big difference is, her clock isn't ticking."
I asked: "Anything else?"
"Well, she's wholesome and natural, dresses down; just jeans and a T-shirt. Doesn't even wear makeup much."
I had to ask: "So, what's the catch?"
"So far, none, except maybe the grandma. She doesn't like to be called 'Grandma.' Lilly calls her 'Sophie.' … Lilly and Sophie don't act like a grandmother and granddaughter, or even a mother and daughter. They're more like sisters. They talk all the time: Lilly tells her everything about us."
"And you don't like that."
"You've got that right," he said.
"Where does Grandma come from?"
"Williamsburg, Brooklyn, just like you."
Now, I was interested. My hobby was genealogy. I joined Ancestry.com and had even had my DNA tested. "Do you think it's too early for mom and I to meet her?" (I meant Sophie and, of course, Lilly.) "We could meet in a restaurant by the water."
My son liked the idea of a "meet the parents." Of course, over the years we'd met a few of his girlfriends, but informally. This time it seemed like more of an occasion, an old-fashioned prelude to something else.
The five of us met at Duke's in Malibu and sat at one of the huge windows overlooking the Pacific. Lilly looked radiant. Sophie was wearing a simple shirt, high heels and lots of diamonds, which she said go with everything. She remarked on the matching Hawaiian shirts my wife and I were wearing.
As I exchanged childhood stories with Sophie, we discovered that we had actually lived on the same street in Brooklyn at one point, and that my best friend had been her very first date. It was a remarkable coincidence. Was it a sign that Lilly and my son were meant to be? Sophie asked many questions about my business. She seemed genuinely interested. When we left we all agreed that the evening had been a huge success.
That's why I was amazed when my son called me to break the news.
Lilly had called him in hysterics, explaining that they were through. She said that even though she loved him, her grandma had other plans for her. "Your folks just aren't rich enough," she'd said.
"And how does she know that?" I questioned.
The answer shocked me.
"She hired a private detective."
Two years later my son ran into Lilly at the rooftop bar at the Standard. She was divorced and had a daughter.
She had gotten pregnant, then married the child's father, a man her grandmother chose. He was older and his parents were members of L.A.'s elite. As it turned out, they thought Lilly was just after his money. Since the money was really theirs, when his parents threatened to disinherit him, he and Lilly divorced.
Sophie, Lilly and the baby, the three of them, were still in the mini-mansion.
As my son put it: "Only one of us was interested in renewing our relationship."
Burke Leon is an author living in Orange County.
L.A. Affairs chronicles the current dating scene in and around Los Angeles. We pay $300 a column. If you have comments or a true story to tell, email us at LAAffairs@latimes.com.
MORE L.A. AFFAIRS

WAY too many problems! NOT GOOD!: Celebrity Reflection Cruise Review by expertcruiser
Overall Member Rating
WAY too many problems! NOT GOOD!
Destination: Europe - Western Mediterranean
Let's start from the beginning...
Firstly, I was traveling in a group of 6 people, ages 29-70. This review is the experience we all had combined. 4 out of the 6 people were Elite members and have cruise a lot, the other 2 are fairly new to cruising. In this review, you will get all perspectives.
Let's try to get some good things at least stated first..
Embarkation: This was pretty straightforward. We arrived in Venice, Italy, got to the port (via our own transportation) and it went FAIRLY smoothly. I say fairly because it looked pretty messed up in the other lines, but since I am an Elite member with Celebrity I was able to go in a separate line. The newbie to cruising wasn't sure what was going on, I think she assumed the chaos of people was normal.
The Ship: This IS a gorgeous ship. Everything was clean from the cabins to the More main areas and dining. The were sanitizing everything and even gave you sanitizing gel every time you entered the main casual dining upstairs. From artwork, to the shops, casino... just stunning.
The Cabins: Gorgeous Cabins. We had a total of 3 cabins between the 6 of us. 2 SV categories (sunset veranda's at the back of the ship) and one Suite Category (also at the back of the ship). We liked these balcony rooms as we could see ourselves sailing away from the ports (for the most part) and could watch the sunsets from our balconies. The size of the room was fairly large compared to other cruises I have been on. There was no real storage space which I found odd. There was only one area with plugs, 2 outlets total. This also did not make sense! The bathroom definitely seemed bigger than any Royal Caribbean cruise I have been on (fyi i have been on every class ship on RCCL except the Oasis class). The Balcony was a decent size as well. For the most part, you have to remember you are on a ship, and you cannot expect huge staterooms without being in a suite. The suite that 2 of us had was beautiful! It was also situated at the back of the ship, and it was MUCH larger than the SV category. It also had its own butler that would always bring food, chocolates... anything that you really wanted. The bathrooms were also huge. The suite bathroom had an actual tub/shower combo that I have never seen before on a ship! Nice touch, especially the rain shower!
One side note: Our Stateroom Attendant left our door open once to our stateroom which was unacceptable. He also left our Balcony door open TWICE... and the separation between my balcony and my neighbours was broken. This is UNACCEPTABLE. For a cruise that was on it's 3rd journey, I'm shocked the ship is falling apart.
Entertainment: This cruise LACKED entertainment. Not only this, but it NEVER started on time. It was always about 10 minutes late. It was 14 days, where only 3 of the 14 days had actually good entertainment. The Magician (which i unfortunately personally missed out on for reasons you will find out later in the review), the Comedian, and the last dance show nearing the end of the cruise. The other dance shows and acts that we had were horrid. All 6 of us, along with a lot of people left the shows because they were too painful to sit through the full hour.
Cruise Director: "Terrible" doesn't even seem to properly describe this cruise director. He was NEVER at the shows, NEVER had interaction with the passengers, NEVER around! One of us actually saw him walking on the ship, we said hello, he didn't even respond. He was rude, and all he cared about was being on his cell phone. He never once cared to interact with us passengers, nor even make himself visible at the shows at times! What exactly is his job again?? I'm sorry, does the Celebrity Cruise Director application require "good knowledge and use of cell phone and texting"? Because that's all I saw him do while I was running to a show. It was maybe 5 minutes after the show SHOULD have started (as I mentioned before, it started late, so i actually was perfectly fine coming in 5 minutes late) and walking towards the theatre I saw the Cruise Director on his phone (yet again) right outside. Well, would you believe that he didn't even come on stage that night to introduce the act? Nope! What the heck was he doing outside the theatre?! What the heck is his job?
Captain: CLEARLY this captain has his own fan club... If you sat in on his little speech about his "saving of the passengers"...you could vomit. I personally watched this on TV as I had something else to attend to, but 3 of our party sat in so that when the q&a period came we could talk to the Captain about our problems. Let me first tell you what happened:
On this cruise, while at dinner actually, we heard a loud bang/boom. The next day we found out that we were no longer going to our port of call because one of our engines stopped working. Well, first it was our engine, then it was our propeller, and then the Captain told us everything is fine (when clearly it wasn't because we never got to our ports on time!) Not only that, but there are advantages of having a cabin at the back of the ship... you can see if the engines are working! Well... one engine was working... the other one was fluttering. The Captain never updated us at all on what was going on, and he was never honest about the situation.
SO... when this q&a opportunity came up, we had to ask what the heck was going on and why NOBODY would tell us the truth. He beat around the bush and didn't want to answer our question straight on. He is a TERRIBLE Captain. I don't care that he saved passengers, I care that I am not LIED to. That he tells us the TRUTH, and that he tells us what the heck is going on! He thinks he's all clever by using Ship terminology to try and say "I never said we had an engine problem!" ... yeah, well we aren't idiots, we can see the engines working or failing from our cabins.. BE HONEST! A full day would go by without even letting us know the progress of fixing the problems! This is NOT how you handle a situation like this. Not only that, but if we were in our staterooms we would have to run to the outside every time he would make any sort of announcement as he NEVER announced them in the Cabins. I mean... don't you think it's kind of important?! I never once was on a cruise ship where if there was a problem it wouldn't be announced in the cabins. If the cruise ship was sinking, would we have to run to open the cabin doors to hear the announcement as well? Just downright wrong. This Captain by far was NOT good.
Continuing another little story that is related to this.... We stopped at Athens, Greece and were given an extended time there since we had "engine" problems. We were told to be back on the ship by midnight. Well, 4 of the 6 of us were out in Athens at night enjoying ourselves and at least getting a night experience there while we have the opportunity. We were very disappointed to have to be back by midnight as we did not want to leave. Well, the ship never left until 4AM! We went downstairs by 1:00am and asked what's going on!? We even called Guest Relations. Everyone said they could not tell us when we would be leaving. I did not have to end my fun time in Athens to be back on the ship to do nothing. At LEAST if you are going to leave later, give us the opportunity to stay later in Athens! The gangway was still out even at 2AM! They wouldn't let us off the ship, but yet they were letting other people on till 4AM. NOT RIGHT! They were not leaving on time for over half the trip. We would rush to be on time to find out we didn't need to stress ourselves out in the end.
Shore Excursions: We had a HUGE problem here. We took the 4x4 jeep tour in Malta. What it says on the information sheet.. FALSE! It is ALL wrong. What a terrible terrible excursion. Do NOT at any cost take it! EVEN IF SOMEONE PAID YOU!!! It was a ride from hell. We were 6 people in back of a pick up truck that was driving at high speeds like a crazy mad man, i almost fell out of the truck! It was also cold and windy that day.. none of this was taken into consideration. I guess the drivers' lack of knowledge of how fast he was going (since his speedometer was broken and remained at 0) and his flapping of his door which never locked properly, and broken seat belt was his excuse?.. yeah. The driver could have spoken English.. that would have been nice. It literally was a 3 hour ride of sitting in a crazy mad man vehicle in the freezing cold. No guide was given on the tour as the driver shut off the radio with the only English speaking guide talking on it as apparently we eventually would "not be able to hear it anyways!" ... All the cars in this excursion had the same issues and when we went to celebrity shore excursions to complain, all we got was a half refund. NOT ACCEPTABLE. Like I said before, I wouldn't take this excursion if you paid me!
Dining: The food - FABULOUS! I rarely find now a days that the food in the dining room is great, and this was just outstanding! I must commend that. We did have a few issues though. Firstly, the first day they screwed up our reservation and put all 6 of us at separate tables. This was not fixed much as they couldn't find us a table of 6. They decided to put us at select dining. Well, once we went to select dining, the first 2 days were terrible! We sat there for maybe an hour before we even got served or handed menus. When we complained for the 2nd time as we all were at this point very annoyed, they begged us to come one more night, told us they would switch our table and put us in good hands with another server. After this was done, we were treated AMAZINGLY. Our server, Melvyn, was just outstanding. We all could not have had a better experience with him. It was him who made us stay at select dining for the remainder of the cruise. There are no words to describe how great and attentive this man is.
Spa: We used the hair salon and got manicures at the spa. The manicures I find are overpriced but they did a great job. I didn't use the hair salon personally, but the person in my group who did I believe liked it. Her normally curly hair looked amazingly straight. The one problem I encountered was that the lady was late to take me about 20 minutes for my appointment.
Activities: Non-existent would be the appropriate way of describing activities. When we got stuck on the ship at an extra sea day because of our "engine" problems, we all dreaded it. There was nothing. Literally nothing! Aside from all of us being nauseous that day because the stabilizers were off and the ship was rocking like crazy, we had no activities to attend to and we all just sat miserably staring at each other upstairs at the 14th dining area. Bored. This was also the same for the other 2 sea days that were normally scheduled. I could not believe the lack of activities on this ship! Did they think the people on board were all in walkers and wheelchairs that no activities were scheduled? Do they think that people in their 50's, 60's and 70's just like to sit around and fall asleep? I can guarantee you that everyone in my group, ages 29-70 were ALL BORED. We begged for activities! Aside from the day we were all nauseous and terribly sick from the rocking we were all wanting to be a part of something!
Overall, what made this trip remotely great was because of the people I was with. We had to make our own fun when the cruise did not offer us this is any way. Had all these problems never happened, this trip would have been superb. It's sad that there were these issues because this ship does have potential... it just really REALLY needs to improve in service, activities, the Captain, cruise director, and entertainment. I felt so bad when I heard the Transatlantic cruise (the one that followed ours) was missing the Canary Islands because of the still ongoing problem with the engines [that, may I say, the captain once told us the problem was fixed (lie!)] because this meant they would now have 9 days at sea instead of 7 days ... I would rather swim the transatlantic ocean than be on that ship for 9 sea days! What horror they must be encountering.. Less
Read Cruise Critic's Celebrity Reflection Review >>
Worst cruise ever. Rude and un...
Critique of the Viking Sea Cru...
Very enjoyable except for a co...
Super Bowl on the Reflection
Very nice with a few disappoin...

BENGALS GAMEDAY: Photos, analysis, video highlights, stats, quotes* * *
Posted: 6:15 a.m.
It was vintage Willie Anderson.
A little humor. A little push. A little "wild it up." A little analytical. A lot of pride and heart as he came off the bench to help the Bengals pound the ball for 155 yards rushing and 4.7 yards per carry in the 19-14 victory over Cleveland.
Funny, the last time Anderson played nine games ago back on Oct. 21 against the Jets, running back Kenny Watson—just like he did Sunday—rushed for a career-high 130 yards.
"I'm rusty. I'm not as strong as I'm supposed to be in some spots," said Anderson, giving his injured knee the thumbs-up. "I just did it on wits today. Being out two months, I probably played more than I should have, but I feel good."
AndersonGood enough that the four-time Pro Bowler played the bulk of the second half in a rotation with Stacy Andrews, the starter at right tackle the past eight games, including the last drive in which the Bengals drove nine plays to the Browns 22 until Watson's fumble with 1:46 left. Twice they were successful going Anderson's way on third-and-one.
"I probably played too many (snaps) after not playing for nine weeks," Anderson said. "I think we handled (the rotation) pretty well.
"It wasn't my time to go in. I was pumping guys up and Carson (Palmer) said, 'You're ready to go back in.' I told him, 'But Carson, I'm tired,' and he said, 'No, you're going back in.' "
Anderson figures he played much more than 30 snaps with the key that he was on the field at the end of the game.
"Willie is the general of the offensive line. It was great having him back out there telling everybody what to do and settling everybody down," Watson said. "We knew how hard he worked to get back on the field."
Anderson, 32, played his 180th game (seventh Bengal to hit 180) in the shadow of Friday's remarks in which he said this could be his last home game. On Sunday, he said he really doesn't think it will be, but he reiterated he went out there in a 5-9 season partly to show management he's healthy to play with four years left on his deal and mainly to help the team.
"It was a good week to do it; wild it up for Cleveland week ... but you never know, it could be, it could not be me, but I don't think that," Anderson said of his claim. "Yeah, I wanted to show them I can still play. I feel pretty good. I'm rusty. I probably played too much. But, yeah, I think I showed them I can still do it."
Although he didn't mention former Bengals safety David Fulcher by name, he excoriated an "ex Bengal" for saying on the radio the Bengals would quit in these last few games.
"What's so amazing to me is those guys who were here during a lot of the losing years talk smack," Anderson said. "We do have some professionalism. We do have pride. Things didn't go our way this year. But dog god, in '03, '04, '05, we were in there fighting for it. This year it didn't bounce our way, but ex-Bengals, don't kill us."
"I remember these games and guys would have their suitcases packed, helmets packed, trucks packed and they were gone," Anderson said of the 2-14 and 3-13 teams. "And they never would have come out here and put forth the effort this team did today."
There are still a lot of questions surrounding Anderson's status for next season. He said he's been ready to play since Dec. 2 and he's still mystified at the intense concern over injuries he suffered this season, a foot problem that kept him out of all the spring and summer camps along with the bone bruise in his knee and sprained medial collateral ligament from the Sept. 23 game in Seattle.
"I look around the league and there just doesn't seem to be that much talk about it like that," Anderson said. "Older players who have had good careers are welcomed back. Just look at the Patriots. How many times has Rodney Harrison blown out his knee? Tedy Bruschi had a stroke and he's older than me. That's the part I really don't understand."
The Browns are near the bottom of the NFL stopping the run. But then, the Bengals are near the bottom of the NFL running the ball, in large measure because of the loss of Anderson.
"Marvin is always talking about the magic number of rushing the ball in the division," Anderson said. "That number is 120 yards rushing. Marvin says it, but we as players and assistant coaches have to make it happen. When we were our old team, that bruising team, that was big for us."
Anderson had fun with "The Senior Day" thing, as if it were his last game. He said defensive end Justin Smith and some of the other defenders started it last year.
"Steiny had a Senior Night last year," he said of left guard Eric Steinbach before he went to Cleveland via free agency. "We've got a lot of so-called seniors."
LewisNO NEWS... During about a 20-second analysis about the Bengals in a segment dealing with several teams, ESPN's Chris Mortensen theorized that head coach Marvin Lewis may ask for more help in the front office when it comes to personnel when he sits down with Bengals president Mike Brown at the end of the season. Since it didn't occur in any written form on ESPN.com or the ticker, it's not considered hard news.
Mortensen didn't say that Lewis is handing out ultimatums or seeking a general manager. Lewis has always sat down with Brown at the end of every season and since he has three years left on his deal, Mortensen said what everybody else is saying and that is that Lewis is safe. But it's the first time he and Brown have sat down with a losing record.
GrahamTRASH KICK: After Bengals kicker Shayne Graham coaxed through his franchise-record 30th field goal of the season with an amazing bouncing off the top of the upright, former Bengals defensive lineman Shaun Smith got right in the 200-pound Graham's face.
"I told him I was still mad; that he cost me the playoffs last year. And that's when he shoved me," said Smith Sunday night after he got back in Cleveland. "There were some hard feelings out there, but I feel like I proved to them I still should be there."
The Bengals confirmed that Smith, that noted verbal artist, kept talking all game. But they also said he played well after he racked up eight tackles, one shy of safety Sean Jones' team-high nine.
"Yeah, he talked a lot but he also made a lot of plays," Palmer said.
Early on, after he stuffed Watson for no gain on a second-and-nine, Smith moved from left end to nose tackle because of an injury.
"Shaun never stopped. He kept on going and he played a really good game," Watson said. "We miss him here. He was fun in the locker room. A good guy to have."
Graham certainly wasn't that complimentary. Asked what Smith told him, Graham said, "This is a family publication, right? I can't really comment. Everybody is pumped up and says stuff. Heat of the moment. I didn't shove anybody. I don't know what happened. I deny all accounts."
Of course, Graham had a smile on his face, probably still savoring that zany 38-yarder with 5:04 left in the first half that gave the Bengals a 6-0 lead. That was almost as long as the 39-yarder he missed in last year's finale with eight seconds left in regulation of an overtime loss to the Steelers that ended up costing his team the playoffs.
The kick that Smith heckled him about. But this one went through and Graham heckled back.
That's never happened to me, not in practice, not in a game and that's millions of millions of kicks in high school, college, and pros," said Graham after watching the wind take it and shove it to the right on top of the goal post before clanging off and going through. "It went right off the top."
That broke Doug Pelfrey's club record of 29 set in 1995, a guy that Graham knows well from working with him in the Kicks for Kids Foundation. He just saw Pelfrey last week at Paul Brown Stadium at the charity's Christmas party.
"I congratulated him for having his third daughter," Graham said. "I don't know if he even knew (about the record). But I'm sure he'll be the first guy I hear from."
The guy Smith was working against, center Eric Ghiaciuc left late in the game with a knee/ankle problem.
WatsonKENNY AGAIN: It was a miserable day for offense. Palmer had a career-low 11 completions for a full game, wide receiver T.J. Houshmandzadeh had a season-low two catches, the usually steel-belted Watson had that near fatal fumble with 1:46 left, conjuring up images of the Pittsburgh loss at home.
"We did everything we could to give it away," Houshmandzadeh said. "The defense played great."
So did Watson, matching his career high of 130 yards rushing against the Jets Oct. 21. That took him 31 carries. This one took him 30, with two of the biggest coming as he drove his legs on third-and-one with 3:51 remaining and two minutes left as the clock ticked. The fumble was raked out by linebacker Andra Davis.
"He just slapped his hand across the ball. I was careless. In that situation you have to have two hands on the ball," Watson said. "I saw a hole and I was just trying to get there. In that situation, you have to make sure you get the field goal."
But there was high praise for Watson. When Palmer saw the condtions, he told Watson, "You're going to earn your paycheck today," and Palmer said, "He loved it." Then when DeDe Dorsey went out on the first play after an eight-yard run with an ankle injury on top of Rudi Johnson's deactivation, it was all Watson all the time.
"We get so excited when Kenny has a game like he did today because everyone on this team loves him so much," Palmer said. "He's such a team player, and he's come up big for this team a lot over the last four or five years."
SLANTS AND SCREENS
Houshmandzadeh now leads the Pats' Wes Welker by two (103-101) for the NFL receptions lead. He said he was held all day, even on his five-yard touchdown catch, his 12th score of the year, against cornerback Leigh Bodden.
And he said Bodden held him on Palmer's second interception, when he stumbled. Bodden picked it off with Houshmandzadeh on the ground. Throw that on top of the offensive pass interference call on Houshmandzadeh that wiped out a first down on third down.
"But I can't get a call," he said.
By the way, on that first interception on the sidelines headed to Houshmandzadeh, Palmer said the wind that was blowing from the visitors bench sucked it virtually backward into Bodden.
For people who wonder if Palmer gets along with Chad Johnson, what about his rolling block on safety Brodney Pool on Johnson's 16-yard run off a double reverse late in the game?
"He told me, 'I appreciate that,' " Palmer said. "It's the way the play is supposed to go. You have to block the inside linebacker or the safety and we did a good job (blocking) the right side so Chad could get around."
Johnson took heat for stepping out of bounds with 3:43 left and giving the Browns 30 seconds, but Marvin Lewis didn't unload on him.
"He doesn't carry the ball that much," he said.
Both Lewis and Palmer said the wind was the hardest and toughest they had seen in their five years at PBS. "Usually it comes in north to south or something like that. But it was all over the place," Palmer said.

Wartime prisoner Benjamin Rogers was born during the early 1760s. He may have been the son of Albany hatter William Rogers, Jr. At this time, we are uncertain regarding his origins and path to Albany.
By the 1770s, this Rogers family had become residents of Hoosick.
In 1778, seventeen-year-old Benjamin was in trouble. In May, a petition on his behalf, was sent to Governor George Clinton. It was signed by fifty-two prominent, mostly city-based residents. It stated that he had spent six months in prison for stealing a horse and currently was facing a death sentence.
Sources: The life of Benjamin Rogers has not been assigned a CAP biography number. This sketch is derived chiefly from family and community-based resources. So many important Albany personages testifying on his behalf in 1778 leads us to guess that he perhaps was the son (or another kinsman) of the long-time Albany hatter who also was charged with rustling cattle at that time!
first posted: 1/10/08; updated: 1/18/13

I moved to the United States of America from Moscow, Russia, hoping for a better life for my dear daughter, Kira Baryshnikov. Our lives have changed in many ways since the move, and some have been better than others.
My name has a very important meaning. It means "immortal". My father named me that after my mother passed away while giving birth to me. During the birth of my daughter, Kira, we were going through very dark times. Kira’s name means "dark", by the way. She's eight years old and on a very strong medication to keep her stable. I feel that this is my fault.
About a year ago, I put together all of my money to buy a small house in a small town in Idaho, which about thirty-seven miles from this city called Boise. Shortly after moving into the house, strange things began to happen.
First, my daughter Kira started complaining of constant headaches. I assumed, at first, that these headaches were occurring because she was not getting enough sleep. Second, she complained of hearing whispers while she was trying to go to sleep. I took her to the doctor’s office but he could not find the issue. He said to me, “Keep a close eye on her,” which I did. Third, she claimed she was seeing someone in the night.
She said that the lady that she was seeing in the night would walk back and forth in her room and that she couldn’t sleep because of her. She stated that she would ask the lady to please leave and that she would reply, “I can’t do that.”
This terrified me. I took her to the local church, hoping we could get some answers there. We spoke to the priest; he told us that he could bless the house and try to repel any spirit that may be in the in there. I immediately agreed. Two days later, he arrived at our front door with a cross and holy water in hand. We followed him as he walked throughout the house. He would yell things such as, “You are not welcome here!” and “In the Lord's name, leave this house!”
He waved the cross and splashed the holy water in the areas that my daughter claimed to see the spirit. The priest demanded that he enter the guest room alone. We agreed to this, and let him proceed into the room. We waited about ten minutes, before hearing a scream of pure terror. The priest came running from the room and out through the front door, vomiting on the sidewalk. I ran to him with Kira by my side and asked him, “Shit! What happened? What did you see?”
His only reply was, “Get out of that house. It is not safe in there.”
I wanted to leave, but I had nowhere else to go. We had just spent all of our money on that house. I was at a loss. So, with the last bit of money that I had, I hired a medium to try to make contact with this spirit. When she arrived, she introduced herself as Mary Johanson.
As she walked up to our house she had a very disturbing look on her face, like she was angry. As soon as she reached the house, she immediately came to a halt, staring silently at me. She said, “I cannot go in.” I asked why, and she replied, “I just can’t.”
After all these attempts to try to find out what has been tormenting my daughter, I started looking into it myself. I talked to the previous owner and she claimed she didn’t know much about the house herself. I went to the local library, after I was unable to find any information about the house on my computer.
After hours of searching, I finally found a book about the town’s history. To my surprise, I actually did find an article about the house. It used to belong to a woman named Kristen Jacobs. Kristen Jacobs was rumored to be insane by her neighbors. One day Kristen was diagnosed clinically insane, and she hung herself later that day.
After Kristen’s body was found, investigators searched her house (the house I now live in) and found many areas with traces of demonic rituals. I felt extremely nauseous and disturbed. I dropped the book on the floor and hurried home to my daughter who was being baby sat by our neighbor, Abby. When I arrived, the baby sitter was no were to be found; only my daughter was in sight. I ran to her and picked her up, she gasped and asked, “What’s wrong, Daddy?” I looked down and saw a horrifying picture she had painted. It was titled ‘The Freak’.
“Where is your babysitter?” I screamed.
“I’m not sure,” Kira replied to me. I was dumbfounded. While I was searching the house I discovered that I had searched every room, but I forgot to search the guest room. As I entered the guest room, I heard the faint voice of a woman.
“Who’s there? Is that you Abby?” the voice got louder and louder until the point that I could make out the words Please help.
I ran as fast as I could to the corner where the voice was coming from. I couldn’t see a thing. I thought fast and turned on my phone, using the light from the screen to see, I didn’t notice anything at first, until I looked up. There, right above my head, was a women hanging by a noose from the ceiling. I noticed blood dripping from this woman’s eyes and neck; she had pale, white skin.
I was paralyzed, I couldn’t move. I eventually was able to regain the function of my legs and scramble out of the room. I grabbed Kira and ran outside. I called 911 and as soon as they arrived I explained to them the situation. They had a hard time believing me, but I convinced them that they needed to go and investigate. They entered the room, and about three minutes later one police officer came out and told me that there was nothing in the room; only shelves, books, and a bed. I told him that was impossible; there was a woman in the room, I had seen her.
The officers left, but I know what I saw; I’m not crazy. Kira came up to me with her drawing. I looked at it carefully. “What is this?” I asked her.
“It’s the lady that likes to talk to me and sleeps in my room.”
“Talk to you? What do you mean?” I asked.
“She says her name is Kristen but she says I can just call her The Freak.”
I was speechless. I thought to myself, how the hell did she know about Kristen?! What’s going on?! And then Kira bit me and struggled to get out of my arms.
“She’s my friend now!” Kira yelled at me. I was stunned; I didn’t know what just happened. Before I could stop her, Kira ran into the guest room.
“Come back!” I yelled; the last thing I wanted to do was enter the guest room. But I had to! I needed to get my daughter! As I entered the room I heard Kira singing “Ring around the rosie” but I also heard a woman’s voice singing with my daughter.
“Who’s there? Get away from my daughter!” I yelled.
I heard Kira yell, “Don’t listen to him; he’s just a big meanie!”
I had no choice; I needed to get my daughter out of there. I ran into the room, feeling my way around because it was so dark. I felt Kira’s dress and yanked on it. “Come on Kira, we need to leave n-”
Before I could finish my sentence, I felt an unbearable pain on my neck. The pain jolted up, pulling me off my feet. I grasped my neck and felt something, it was a rope. I found myself almost two feet above the ground hanging only by my neck. I couldn’t breathe, I was helpless.
And then, after I had lost all hope, I fell to the ground, landing on my knees. I grabbed Kira and picked her up. While staggering out of the room I heard a demonic voice say, “Your God is useless!” Me and Kira managed to escape the house physically uninjured.
Since that incident Kira has not spoken, nor will she will make eye contact. She was diagnosed clinically insane about two months ago. We moved to Portland, Oregon. Even though Kira is not the same, I still love her with all my heart. Yet, I can't help feeling that we never did escape that thing we now call The Freak.

Lewis Hamilton 'loving the life of a champion'
The word ‘double’ is key for the 30-year-old, winner of two out of three races so far this season.
LONDON - Lewis Hamilton says he is in the form of his life and loving every minute of being a double Formula One world champion.
The word 'double' is key for the 30-year-old Mercedes driver, winner of two out of three races so far this season and eight of the last 10.
Asked if he was driving better than ever, he told British reporters at the Bahrain Grand Prix: "I'd like to think so.
"I've almost surprised myself that it's been strong and building on what I did last year, and how I've been driving, how I've been adapting to things. I've been really happy with it, really proud generally."
Hamilton won his first title with McLaren in 2008, only his second season in Formula One, and said the feeling now was more special.
"The first one I was so young, and lots of people have had one (title), and it's been a long, long time since I've been number one," he said. "You get a kind of extra hop in your walk. It's an amazing feeling.
"When I was world champion before I didn't have that feeling. It was different this time, this time I'm aware of it," added the 30-year-old.
"It's exciting. In the past I didn't enjoy it, and not that I live with regret, but that's something I would change. Now I've the chance again and I'm enjoying it, enjoying the feeling of the hard work I've put in, the hard work my team has put in."
Hamilton has a 13 point lead in the championship over Ferrari's Sebastian Vettel and is 17 ahead of Mercedes team mate Nico Rosberg, who made clear he was upset with the Briton's attitude after last weekend's race in China.
The German's outburst was read by many as a sign of his mounting frustration and Hamilton's success in the mental battle.
The Briton said, however, that there was no big strategy at play.
"Everyone is talking about the psychological stuff. The only psychological warfare there is, is in myself. I want to be the best I can be," he said.

Just a few weeks ago, the makers of two Vivek Oberoi starrers, ‘Jayanta Bhai Ki Luv Story’ and ‘Kismet Love Paisa Dilli’, were at loggerheads. Both had slated their movies for release on 5th October but it finally seems as if one will be releasing before the other.
As reported by Mid-Day, Kumar Taurani budged first and moved the release of ‘JBKLS’ to December leaving Amit Chandrra to the original date of 5th October. Taurani had tweeted Chandrra just a few days ago and asked for a meeting to discuss with issue.
Taurani said, “Yes, I have decided to postpone the release of my film. Amit, Vivek and I had a meeting… Actually we had to complete a song and few patchwork sequences were remaining, which we haven�۪t been able to complete due to the incessant rains. And since three big projects starring Shah Rukh Khan, Ajay Devgn and Aamir Khan are scheduled to release in November, I have finalised December as the month of my film�۪s release”.
So, it seems Oberoi fans will no longer need to decide between the two on what would have been the same day.

Thanks for your reply! I'm happy to help in any way I can. To answer your questions, there really aren't any clothes I can't wear. I live in Florida and thought that bikinis were going to be off limit, but much to my surprise, I found a two piece that works! It's a bikini top with a skirt bottom.
I'm happy to say that in the last 3 years that I've had an ileostomy, I've never had any problems with the stoma area or with bags coming unsealed. There are a lot of products out there, and sometimes it's just trial and error to find the right one for you. I got lucky and have used the same one my Ostomy Nurse recommended in the hospital.
I didn't think I was that sick when I got the ileostomy, but then again, after 7 years with Crohn's, I had forgotten what it was like to be well. The disease was causing fistulas and abscesses in my butt area that were very painful, so I started out with a temporary ileostomy to bypass the colon and rectum, so the abscess wounds could heal.
Before I had surgery, I thought that having an ostomy was going to be a big deal, but once I had one, it surprisingly wasn't. It gave me a freedom that I hadn't known in years. It's so flat and unnoticeable under my clothes that I truly forget it's there.
Your hope for a better life is in beating this disease, and the best way to beat it is to take away the place it wants to attack. You can live a completely healthy and happy life without a colon, and once you're healthy, the sky's the limit on what you can do!
That was great advice that the other ladies gave you about meeting someone with an ostomy, so you can see for yourself how unnoticeable it is. I told my surgeon to call me if they ever have a patient who is scared (like I was) and wants to talk or meet in person. I had never met an ostomate before I had surgery, and I think it would have really helped ease my fears had I done that first. I also wish I would have known about this site, because it would have helped immensely, as well.
If you want to see pictures of us, we have a site at www.photobucket.com user name: crohnsdisease / password: 6mp3asa
Feel free to upload a picture of yourself, too!

After announcing my retirement from my job after 23 wonderful years as the Assistant Director of Center Stage Dance Company my initial announcement was that I was going to teach dance to underprivileged children. I even went so far as to going to meet with the Peace Corps folks. Ultimately I changed the plan to volunteering in a tropical location.
My son is a kiteboarder who had wanted to go to this awesome kitecamp in Caberate Dominican Republic. He wanted to travel there when he was 17, I was actually going to let him travel there with his 18 year old sister as his guardian until my mother squelched that idea.
After researching places to volunteer I found this amazing event called Kiteboarding for Kids founded by Laurel Eastman of LEK Kites.
I told my kids about my idea and my son informed me that a kiteboarding event would not want someone my age, so I made him and my daughter volunteer as well.
Contact with Laurel Eastman and all of the KB4Kids team was effortless. I channeled all of the funds that would have been used giving me a retirement party and gifts to the event, had several garage sales and set off with my two favorite people in the world on an adventure.

Perth Training Centre
It’s been many years since I have done this course. I really enjoyed learning how techniques have changed from what I was originally taught. Steve and Travis were very approachable and their knowledge of the subject matter was outstanding. I will be recommending this course and your company to others that are contemplating doing this training in the future.

Derby County manager Frank Lampard believes no further action should be taken against Bradley Johnson over the alleged "biting" incident against Stoke City.
Johnson clashed with Stoke midfielder Joe Allen following Peter Etebo's red card challenge on Richard Keogh during the Rams' 2-1 defeat at the bet365 Stadium on Wednesday night.
The pair were booked but replays of the tussle led to claims that the Derby midfielder had bitten his opponent, though Allen and his manager Gary Rowett both played down the accusations .
"Joe Allen has absolutely categorically said he wasn't bitten, so I would be very surprised if Bradley Johnson gets charged when he says he didn't bite anyone and nobody was bitten," said Lampard.
"It's one for the FA but Bradley Johnson has just seen his team-mate suffer a red card challenge which could have badly injured Richard Keogh. He then gets hit around the back of the head, he then gets put in a headlock. I would be very surprised if anyone came out of that with a smile on his face.
"You don't. You come out of it with a bit of a grimace or whatever.
"And the fact is, Joe Allen, fair play, has honestly said he (Johnson) didn't bite him. So that's where I'm at and we're at, so let's see."
On Johnson, Lampard added: "He's a competitive player and has absolutely no history of it (biting), and having seen the footage of it, I understand his tension.
"Again, most importantly, Joe Allen has said he (Johnson) didn't bite him, Bradley Johnson has said he didn't bite him (Allen).
"So, for me, the story moves on. I know it's not ideal but these things can happen.
"I think it's very important to put it in its place for what it was and move on."
Johnson is suspended for Saturday's home fixture against Swansea City after picking up his fifth yellow cards of the season.

As Book II opens, Cervantes again mixes his fact and fiction by working some of what's going on in the real world into his story of would-be knight errant Don Quixote and his faithful squire Sancho Panza. There is some discussion of the fake volume, as well as of Book I.
Don Quixote and Sancho have returned from their lengthy journey. Quixote is in bed recovering from an illness, while Sancho has gone home to see his wife and daughter. Soon, however, Sancho seeks out Don Quixote because he has been promised an island in return for his service, and he intends to collect. Even though Sancho has traveled for such a long time with the knight, he still doesn't see Quixote as a madman or as someone who has gotten carried away with his imagination. Instead, he actually believes that Quixote can come through with an island for him.
When Sancho finally gets in to see Quixote, who is laid up in bed, he also has some other news to tell his former master. There has been a book written about their previous exploits, and now the two men are famous. Again, this is Cervantes' technique of mixing fact and fiction. The person who told Sancho about the book is a young man named Sampson Carrasco, who has promised to come and talk to both Sancho and Quixote about it. When Carrasco arrives, he starts telling the two adventurers about the details contained in the book. Don Quixote and Sancho listen in amazement and bewilderment, mostly because they think the stories in the book have been exaggerated or are just flat-out wrong. Carrasco wraps up by telling Quixote and Sancho about a jousting tournament and hints that this would be an excellent event for Quixote and Sancho to attend.
There is a bit of debate between knight and squire about whether they should go or not, but Quixote wins out in the end. Sancho then goes home to tell his wife that he must leave again, while Quixote tries to convince his niece and housekeeper that he is perfectly capable of traveling. Because the women now fear for Quixote's health as well as for his safety, they ask Carrasco to help them keep Quixote at home. But Carrasco has his own agenda, and actually bolsters Quixote's resolve to leave.
Before heading to the tournament, Quixote and Sancho decide to make some stops along the way. The first one will be in the town of Toboso, which is purported to be the home of the "peerless" Dulcinea, the woman in whose service Quixote performs all of his actions. At this point, Quixote confesses that he has never laid eyes on Dulcinea (which seems to me to be a contradiction of the events in Chapter 2 of Volume I), so Sancho will have to point her out. In Volume I, Sancho was sent on an errand in which he supposedly met Dulcinea to give her a letter from Quixote. He was lying about the encounter, though, so he doesn't know what she looks like either.
By this time, though, Sancho knows enough of his master to be able to get out of this tough spot. Instead of admitting that he lied earlier, Sancho claims that Dulcinea must currently be under enchantment, which is why he can't see her. He finally settles on an ugly peasant girl and insists that it is Dulcinea. Don Quixote is taken aback by her appearance, and readily agrees with Sancho that there is a very strong enchantment at work.
The rest of the book deals with the different people that Quixote and Sancho meet and the different adventures that they have while traveling. Just as in the first book, the two men get into a lot of sticky situations because of Quixote's actions and beliefs, but they are always delivered to safety at the last moment.
Overall, I personally felt that Book I was much more interesting than Book II. In Book II, the characters have undergone some changes, and I found that I didn't like them as much. Quixote was as stubborn and persistent in his imagination as ever, but this time he had the book of his exploits to back him up, so there was no chance of anyone ever convincing him that he was wrong. Sancho went beyond the white lies that he told in Book I and actively sought to deceive his master just like everyone else did, thus providing even more fuel for Quixote's madness.
Another thing I didn't particularly enjoy about Book II were the interruptions to tell very long stories about other people. I know that storytelling, not only by the author, but by the characters themselves, is a theme in the book, but I didn't think the stories were interesting at all, and I just wanted Cervantes to get back to the main action.
Supposedly, there are a quite a few religious themes in this book as well. I wasn't looking for them, so I'm sure I missed many of the allusions, but there were a couple that everyone will be able to pick up. For example, when Don Quixote believes that he was away in a cave for three days and nights, that's obviously supposed to be a parallel to Christ. In addition, Quixote's firm belief in the existence of Dulcinea even though he has never actually seen her is supposed to parallel religious faith.
I didn't read this book as part of a literature class or anything like that, so I had the benefit of taking the stories just as they were, without tying them into any of the political or religious events of 1615. Because of this, I was able to enjoy it as entertainment without trying to figure out whether Cervantes was "correct" with his views or whatever. And that's how I recommend that you read the book: strictly as entertainment and for the satisfaction that comes with being able to say that you've read one of the greatest novels ever written.

5.0 stars 38 totalReview Saam Ghiaasiaan
Posted by LR
Saam, Gerardo, Autumn and can't forget Joy! (many thanks) are excellent attorneys!!! these folks are the ones you want to work with if your eviction case is simple, or complicated. I found them by accident surfing the web into AVVO. They have a small boutique firm, which allows them the ability to really get to know their clients, and provide good legal advice and excellent customer service...It is not by accident, or fake reviews....there is a definitive reason Saam's firm is rated very highly on here by multiple reviewers.
Thank You again Saam
Posted by Katherine
Saam was very accessible and helpful. He gave great advice. I came to his office thinking there was no hope for my situation and left feeling strong and empowered. I think it's because of his advice that I didn't end up having to use him as my attorney, but I know that if I'd needed to hire him I would've been in very good hands.
Posted by Emily
Saam went above and beyond every step of the way, handling our case. The attention to detail and follow up was excellent, as well as win in our case! I would recommend Saam to anyone needing legal help!
Posted by Suzi
We had a very complicated, seemingly hopeless, dispossessory case that dragged on which no one was interested in taking on. Saam listened to my case and felt it had a logical solution. He simplified the case by sticking with the facts and had the person kicked out soon after. Saam offered different options along the way and was very easy to talk to. He's a very nice person and seems to be honest. I would definitely recommend him.
Posted by Ken
Saam is a rare attorney who truly cares about the client. I had two rental properties that were badly managed by the property manager resulting in over $20K loss due to damages and no-payment. I struggled trying to figure out what to do to recoup my loss – collection, attorney or other means. I found Saam online with good reviews and called him up. Within a few minutes, he called me back, listening to my whole situation. Then he provided his thoughts and options in the most comprehensive and easy for me to understand. During the whole time, he never even thought about how he could make the most money from me, just about how he could help me first. He even suggested how I should go about collecting the proper data and the action steps to take. In the end he recommended that do something that didn’t make him any money, but it’s the right thing and the lowest cost for me to do. I’m thoroughly impressed with Saam and would definitely use him if I need anything related to real estate law.
Posted by Claudia
I was afraid to call a lawyer knowing that they cost a lot of money. He really took his time to give me all the advice I needed and then some. He is the most honest attorney I met until now because he gave it to me as straight and knowledgeable. I lost so much stress after just one call! Thank you, keep on going, you are doing great.
Posted by anonymous
I had one hour consultation from him about the debt which a debut collecting agancy claimed I owed from my previous apartment.
A set of documents the collecting agency sent to me looked insufficient to prove this is my debt, but I was not very sure how I can respond to this claim.
Mr. Ghiaasiaan gave advice how to respond to this claim stem by step.
I was quite confused and did not understand my situation clearly before I talked him. But after meeting him, I feel I can manage this claim at least this moment because it became very clear what I shoul do.
I believe that the consultation from him worked well. I appreciate hisadvice very much.
I forgot rating on the advise from Mr.Ghiaasiaan. He was very helpful and gave excellent advise to me at the time when I called him.

Disclaimer- do we really have to do this? We do? Fine. I don't own Doctor Who blah blah blah.
A/N- I'm sorta trying a slightly different style to how I usually write. I thought 'I want to try and write Martha, so how can I have Martha but still make it 10/Rose? I know! Memories of some sort. What memories? A photo album!' Easy, so here we are. I don't usually write Martha, actually I've never done it before, but whatever, I'll try anything once! :) Written for a prompt on the TARDIS! "Maybe he had said the wrong thing and maybe he wouldn't be able to take it back."
Doctor, I found this in the library," Martha said walking into the consol room with what looked like a photo album in her hands. "I wasn't snooping or anything. I just found it." She explained quickly when the Doctor crawled out from under the consol.
He stared at it. That wasn't something Martha was meant to find. It wasn't something anyone was meant to find actually. He had been looking through it just after he lost Rose, and put it in the library. After all, he thought he would be travelling alone, why would he need to hide it?
Martha waited for a reply, but the Doctor just stared, seeming lost in memories, so she tried to get a response from the Time Lord. "Doctor?" She asked quietly.
The Doctors head snapped up so fast that Martha could have sworn she'd gotten whiplash just from watching him. "Yeah, that was a, uh, a Christmas present, from a friend. Last year." The Doctor explained, rubbing the back of his neck nervously. She was more than just a friend. Martha deserves to know.
The Doctor sighed. Martha did deserve to know, but that didn't mean he had to like telling her. He sat down on the captain's chair and motioned for Martha to do the same. When she was sitting, the Doctor took the album from her hands and opened to the first page.
On the first page was a man that looked nothing like the Doctor that sat next to Martha. He had big ears, short hair and a black leather jacket, and the biggest smile on his face that Martha had ever seen on anyone. He was shaking hands with a blonde haired, brown-eyed girl that came up to about his shoulder, she also had a winning smile on her face, who Martha guessed was Rose, the girl the Doctor was always talking about, but neither seemed to notice the camera. "What's going on here?" Martha asked pointing to the picture, trying not to push the Doctor for answers.
"That was at the Powell Estate. London. 2005. Before I regenerated," The Doctor said, almost to himself, still looking at the picture.
"Rose, I've told you before. I don't do domestic. Dinner with your mother counts as that." The Doctor said in his thick Northern accent. He and Rose were standing near the door; he had been about to leave, when Rose had stopped him.
"Please Doctor? I've been missing for the past year. She thought I was dead. And we can't stay for dinner?"
"I never said anything 'bout you. I just said I'm not." The Doctor replied cheekily.
"I'll let you choose the next planet we go to," Rose tried to bargain, smiling with her tongue sticking out between her teeth.
"It'll take more than that to make me have dinner with your mother." The Doctor replied, almost looking shocked at the very idea of anything so domestic coming from his mouth.
Neither participant noticed Jackie enter the room, then upon seeing them, quickly exit. "The next three?" Rose bartered.
The Doctor eyed her for a moment. "Alright," he said, holding out his hand, then pulled it back quickly, "But I want that in writing!" he said and extended his arm again.
"Deal," Rose replied taking his hand and shaking it. Then there was a flash, and two sets of eyes turned to Jackie, who had re-entered at that moment with a camera in hand.
The Doctor rolled his eyes. "Jackie Tyler, camera happy. I should have known."
"Such a nice picture too!" Jackie said looking down at the display screen on the camera.
"Mum!" Rose on the other hand, did not sound impressed. "Give me the camera."
"Sorry sweetheart, but I'm keepin' this picture, you two look so happy." Jackie said, holding the camera tightly and retreating away from her daughter.
"No Rose!" And that was the last thing the Doctor heard from either Tyler because as soon as they were both out of the room, he escaped through the front door.
"She ended up getting the camera, but I didn't know she kept the photo," The Doctor said, rubbing his thumb over the Rose in the picture. "Jackie was right though, it was a brilliant picture."
"Yeah it was," Martha agreed as she turned the page. And she wasn't lying, it really was.
So I really need feedback on this one. Did I get Martha alright? Should I continue or leave it? The fate of this story rests in your hands, so review and tell me guys!

I am a history person and could have spent 2 days here. A huge amount of things to check out. For the two 14 year olds with me though, 4+ hours was enough, by that time they were hungry and ready to move on. Up until that time though they really enjoyed it as well.
Own or manage this property? Claim your listing for free to respond to reviews, update your profile and much more.

She should have Louie and Ty come and pay him a visit if he can't get over the macho thing. And if he gets an attitude, there's always Jake to point to to show what'll happen. I like to pretend Michael Bolton was never there. I think once he gets that out of the way, he'll be a better contender. But I just had flashbacks last night to past contestants who could never seem to do any right by the judges, no matter what they did. I hope that doesn't happen to these two.I, like karalott, hopes he gets over the macho thing. That just doesn't fly in the ballroom. Hopefully, he'll loosen up and just enjoy it for what it is, aside from hard work. He did seem very nervous to me, but with the first week jitters outta the way, he'll just have fun and give it his all next week.

James Patrick Donleavy, 1926 - James (aka, Mike) Donleavy was born in New York on April 23, 1926 to Irish immigrants. He served in the Navy during WWII and afterwards, attended Trinity College in Dublin. He began as a painter to gain entry into the London gallery scene but he was told that he would have to be famous to have his work shown, which he decided to do, but as a writer. Donleavy's first novel was "The Ginger Man," which took years to complete and even more to get published because of the explicit sex for that time. It was finally published by Maurice Girodias, who also published a series of pornographic fiction called the Traveler's Companion Series. Donleavy tried to save his credibility as an author by trying to arrange for the book to be published in the UK and agreeing to alter the work to avert censorship. Donleavy is also an accomplished playwright as well as the scriptwriter, narrator and lead of the film/video J.P. Donleavy's Ireland. Donleavy's received several awards which include Most Promising Playwright Award, 1960, for Fairy Tales of New York; Brandeis Creative Arts Award, 1961&62, for the plays The Ginger Man and Fairy Tales of New York; Citation from National Institute & American Academy of Arts and Letters, 1975; Worldfest Houston Gold Award, 1992, for the film J.P. Donleavy's Ireland and the Cine Golden Eagle Award, 1993, for writer and narrator of the film J.P. Donleavy's Ireland. He was listed in the Modern Library's Best 100 Novels of the Century for "The Ginger Man," which also was ranked #7 in Best-selling Books of All Time in Ireland.

Democrats Defend Kamala Harris From Donald Trump Jr.
Several Democratic candidates stepped up to defend their colleague Sen. Kamala Harris from what they called “racist” attacks. The whole criticism was fueled by Donald Trump Jr., who also revived the whole “birtherism” argument.
Ali Alexander, one of the black conservative commentators, tweeted during the debate that her comments were disgusting and that Sen. Kamala Harris is not an American Black. He also added that she is half Jamaican and half Indian and that he was tired of people trying to rob black Americans from their history and culture. He also claimed that the people in the audience were his people and not hers.
Alexander further added that he was openly against Kamala Harris, and he announced that he was only trying to make a distinction between her Jamaican ancestors and his African ones. He also said that her ancestors hadn’t experienced Jim Crow’s laws or U.S. slavery.
Donald Trump Jr. later shared his tweet and even asked if that was true. He then deleted the tweet, because it was being misused. One of his spokesmen said that he was simply unaware of her heritage.
Governor of Washington, Jay Inslee, commented that the attacks against Harris were racist and ugly. She also discussed the issue of “birtherism” and Donald Trump raising the question again.
Before Donald Trump was elected, he repeatedly questioned Barack Obama falsely accusing him of not being an American citizen. Even after the former president provided his birth certificate, Trump refused to comment on the matter.
Biden, Booker, O’Rourke, de Blasio, and several other defended Harris, who still refused to give any comment on the subject.

Portage College, then Alberta NewStart Inc., were about to close its doors due to shortage of funds. Local native people began to feel they must do what they could to re-open the centre and gain public support. At 10:00 a.m. Saturday, January 17, 1970, approximately 130 people took over the dormitory for a two-day meeting. This support by local native people was greater than the action group anticipated, and it prompted them to decide to stay until their demands were met. The participants went home to get their blankets, and returned, prepared for a long wait. Thus began the sit-in.
Watch the video here.

They spent a few more wonderful days in Shang Simla. Bloom could not remember when he had last felt so relaxed and at ease. Had he ever?
He didn't even mind the paparazzi stalking their every move.
Back home in Bridgeport, the calm feeling still persisted. No longer did Bloom fret about not being able to spend enough time with his children - he simply treasured every moment with them. Soon he realized that they were actually spending a lot more time together that he had thought.
Tending to his growing garden also gave him great satisfaction. He also stopped frantically checking the mailbox every morning before work. He felt genuinely serene.
But one morning his serenity was disrupted when Bloom was almost swept off his feet. Walking past the mailbox, toward the door, someone Bloom saw someone coming straight towards him.
Was it? Could it be?
For a moment, they just stood and stared at each other. She had aged, much like Bloom had himself, but there was no doubt about it. It was Matilda!
He saw tears welling up in her eyes as she began to speak.
"Bloom, I... I know I have no right to be here-- I... I..."
Her voice trailed off into sobs. But Bloom wasn't paying attention to what she was saying. His eyes were fixed on her hand.
He reached out to her, still regarding her hand.
After all this time, after everything that had happened, Matilda still wore her wedding ring - just like Bloom.
There was nothing more to say. Bloom understood, and so did Matilda.
They had both aged so much, but it felt like no time had passed at all. It was familiar and comforting, yet fresh and exciting all at once.
It just felt right.
They spent the whole morning together in bed. Bloom's thoughts didn't go to his work even once.
Finally, the other side of the bed was warm again.
When they crawled out of bed in the afternoon, Bloom stroked Matilda's cheek and said, "I need to show you something, Matilda."
"You painted these?", she asked. "They're beautiful."
"They are our beautiful children, Matilda."
"Matilda, I wouldn't have it any other way."
A warm breeze rustled through the leaves as the sun neared the horizon. As expected, Bloom had know exactly where to find his children on such a lovely day.
They were cautious at first, not quite knowing what to do.
Clover was the first to leap into her mother's arms.
The boys quickly followed.
They laughed and talked for hours, until well after dark.
Bloom was glad to see that just like himself, none of his children resented their mother for her absence. He had managed to fill the gap she had left, apparently. They had been a complete family all along, but everyone was happy to welcome a new member.
Cypress was glad to finally have someone in the house who could appreciate his cooking.
He prepared egg rolls, a recipe he had picked up during their recent trip to Shang Simla.
Matilda praised him for his excellent cooking, and Bloom thought that Cypress had never looked more pleased.
And of course, they also bonded over video games.
"Wow, you are a great painter!"
"Oh, uh, thanks. Citrus is better than me really, I much prefer playing the guitar. I just had this idea and had to paint it..."
"Is this anyone in particular, Clover?"
"Uhm, well, it's a bit silly..."
"Well, you see, I was just imagining what I might look like as a normal Sim, you know? Like you."
"Oh, I see..." Matilda seemed unsure how to react to this for a second. "Well, it looks beautiful, Clover. Just as beautiful as you look now."
Clover was silent for a moment. "Thanks... mom."
It was the perfect time to take Broccoli up on his invitation to Hidden Springs.
He and Sedrick had moved into an amazing house by the lakeside and Beryllium and Bismuth lived in an even larger mansion closer to the mountains.
"The fresh air here is really amazing!", Bloom exclaimed. He wanted to disctract himself from commenting on Broccoli's head-leaves, which were now white. Had Broccoli simply not washed off the pollen like Bloom had? Or had it actually turned white? Regardless, the fresh air really was amazing!
Bloom's family welcomed Matilda like she had never left. Broccoli told them both happily about everything that had been going on in Hidden Springs.
"You know, Bis managed to buy this beautiful plot of land, and he has got it in his head to make it a sort of family cemetery or something. Yeah, it's weird, but you know our little brother. Anyway, he already had mom and dad interred there, and I'm going to have Aria's remains transported here as well. If you guys don't find it too macabre, you should really check it out."
Bloom was skeptic at first. How could Bismuth do something like this without even thinking of asking him? But when Bloom arrived at this serene spot in the mountains and saw the memorial for his parents, all his mixed feelings vanished. It really was a beautiful spot for a family cemetery.
For their vacation, Bloom had rented a nice holiday house right across the street from Broccoli's house.
The view of the lake was simply breathtaking.
Bloom was struck by inspiration and painted for hours.
The kids loved it too, fishing in the lake right behind the house.
This really was the best family vacation they had taken so far! Everyone loved it in Hidden Springs.
Time flew by quicker than it ever had before. On the last day of their stay, Broccoli and Sedrick, who had grown into a young adult, took them up to a special viewing point in the mountains.
"Wow, look, I can see aunt Beryl's house from here!", exclaimed Clover.
"And ours is over there!", Citrus added.
"It's not our house, Citrus.", Cypress stated as he walked up behind them.
"Aw well, I wish it was!", Clover said, smiling at her brothers over her shoulder.
"It really was a wonderful vacation, Bloom. Too bad it's almost over."
"Hm..." Bloom thought for a moment. "It doesn't have to be, actually!"
"What do you mean?"
"Well, at work we've been talking about opening another branch, you see, and I think this might just be the perfect place for it."
"Yes, Matilda, why don't we all move to Hidden Springs?"
It was a perfect ending to a wonderful vacation - that wasn't actually ending! When Bloom had told the kids about his idea, they had all immediately been excited. Even Clover, who Bloom thought would have objected because of her boyfriend Darwin, was all for it.
"After all, Bridgeport isn't that far off. He can visit."
It would be a fresh start.
Matilda is back! At the very beginning, when I rolled for this generation, I had planned on a messy celebrity divorce after having the babies. But even when Bloom had a midlife crisis, he never got the wish to divorce Matilda even once. Whenever I had a Sim going through midlife crisis before, they always, always got the wish to divorce their spouse. Every time. Yet Bloom only wanted to kiss and woohoo... Same with her, of course. They were so in love!
So, following the optional part of the 'single parent' roll, Matilda was allowed back after the youngest child (all three are the same age) passed the middle point of the teen stage.
Also, yay for Hidden Springs! I love Bridgeport, but it is so laggy, unfortunately.

Foster didn't practice all week after injuring his back on Houston's first series against Indianapolis last Sunday. He also missed most of Houston's previous game with a hamstring problem. Interim coach Wade Phillips said Friday that Foster had visited specialists about the problem. The Pro Bowl player gained 542 yards on 121 carries with one touchdown and had 22 receptions and another score.
Foster played on Houston's first series, but did not have a carry. He soon left the field and was taken to the locker room. He missed practice this week with a hamstring injury, but started on Sunday night.
Foster went to the locker room after carrying four times for 11 yards on the Texans' opening drive. Ben Tate was in at running back when Houston began its second possession.
Foster has effectively squashed any preseason doubts by fantasy prognosticators. Though Ben Tate vultured another TD on Sunday, Foster's 4.5 yards-per-carry average is actually his highest since 2010.
Though Foster has rushed for 200 yards the last two weeks, he did not run for a score and has only one rushing TD this season.
Foster also had six catches for 69 yards and a score. It was his first 100-yard rushing game of the year.
Foster has not rushed for more than 79 yards in each game this season and has only one rushing TD. He's also managed just 37 receiving yards.
Foster, who played for Tennessee from 2005-08, says, "My senior year, I was getting money on the side." Sports Illustrated first reported Foster's comments in the EPIX documentary titled, "Schooled: The Price of College Sports." Andrew Muscato, a documentary producer, says Foster didn't specify how much he received or who paid him.
This was not a bad effort for a guy who was sidelined during the preseason. His fantasy owners should obviously believe Foster's production will increase if he stays healthy.
Foster had been listed with a calf injury.

State Library of NSW
view of Torbay & the town is obtained. After breakfast we had to fall in at Princes's Peir Where we boarded a special tram and were taken by the Mayor and alderman for a sight seeing tour as far as Paignton. It was teeming of rain otherwise we could have seen more than we did but we braved the rain a good deal and at 3 different places they stopped the tram and took us for a walk showing us different parts of the coast such as Brabbacombe Beach etc. The people were delighted with the Australian "Coo-ees" which they insisted on hearing every few yards
This page has its status set to Completed and is no longer transcribable.

It all started when I parked my car and noticed a skinny man pulling into the space across from mine in an old Buick. I picked up my pace thinking, I hope that’s not him.
We agreed to meet at “Mother’s Kitchen” and I entered through the sliding doors and pretended to look at the chocolates and candy and all the flowers as it happened to be Valentine’s Day.
I’d just finished a job meeting with the Director of International Student programs at a local university, and felt like I’d accomplished something, so I called Jon to say, “Let’s meet for coffee.”
I could tell it was Jon, my date, heading towards the sliding glass doors of the health food store. He looked to his left, as though not sure if he should enter. I waved from inside, and thought, he looks skinny and tall like his photo. What I hadn’t anticipated, as it did not show on the profile photo of Match.com, were the long protruding, gray, nostril hairs, and the bushy uni-brow. His white shirt, and gray, dress slacks were the same as his profile photo, as though he wore the “dating” uniform, just in case I could not recognize him.
I’m not picky about men, except for height, and being in fairly good shape. I did, however, notice his old-fashioned, white shirt, frayed along the collar, which looked as outdated as his car.
Jon, a “marketing” engineer, something I’d never heard of before, sat down at a table, and proceeded to talk about nothing but himself. When I asked him what does a marketing engineer do?, he said he was no good at it, and that he was semi-retired, and writing a book about dating. No kidding, you’re a nerd, I thought, no way are you a sales and marketing person. I thought I would give him ten minutes to talk about himself, and then perhaps he would get me involved in the conversation. But no.
“Have you even read my profile?” I asked, interrupting him while he told me about his book on dating.
“Yes,” he said, and continued talking about how he wrote five, “you’s” in his first paragraph, and managed to eliminate two of them, as there were just too many “you’s,” but he had to keep the other three, as the paragraph wouldn’t make sense without them. He then switched to how he can obsess over the wrong word choice for three days, until his sister, who lives with him, helps him decide. “And she’s in the writing industry, “ he continues.
“You know I’ve been coaching authors on how to publish and promote their books for many years. Do you have a publisher?” I ask.
“Oh, my sister is an expert,” he continues, “she’s an author,” lettuce falling out of his mouth while munching on his rabbit salad without dressing, and his tofu side-dish. No wonder he weighs about 150 pounds at 6’5”
“How many books has she sold?”
“She sold 4 or 5, and you just wait, I’m going to be the next millionaire when I sell my book. You’ll be happy you met me.”
That was the moment when I got off my chair, and said, “You are arrogant and self-centered, and no wonder you’ve never been married. I’m leaving.”
I’m so proud of my gutsy self. I stood up, told him what I thought, and said, “Here’s money for my tea.” He was so into himself, he continued bragging about his dating book and then it clicked that I was leaving. He didn’t know whether to stand and bow, or stay seated and choke on his tofu. So he raised himself off the chair, and said, “I’ll pay for your tea.”

Puttur, April 2, 2016 : Police who are investigating into the Rajadhani Jewellers shoot-out case reported from the town on October 6 last year, have arrested a person from Uppala in Kasargod in this connection. The accused is Abdul Asir(21).
Two unidentified assailants had opened two rounds of fire at the jewellery store located at CPC Plaza in the town on the evening of October 6. Luckily, there were no casualties. The shop owner Tanaaz who is from Saangli had lodged a complaint in which he alleged that the incident might have been an attempt to eliminate him or his staff over some previous enmity.
The police arrested the accused on the basis of a tip off in the form of an anonymous call which SI Mahesh Prasad had received on April 1. The caller had informed that a youth wearing a red and blue shirt and light blue jeans was lurking suspiciously near the Kombettu Junior College and that he was hiding something in his jerkin.
The police who zeroed in on him found an unlicensed revolver and interrogations revealed that he was involved in the Rajadhani Jewelers case. It is learnt, he was an associate of Kalia Rafiq, an underworld element who was said to be involved in the shoot-out case.
The arrested youth has been produced before the court and remanded to judicial custody.

I had drove to Oberlin, KS to stay with her for a couple weeks. Then I was moving her to Arkansas on my return home. Yesterday would have been our moving day.
I was laying in bed when Lora came from her 12 hour night shift as an emergency room nurse. We talked for a while after she came to bed. She was rolling over and started breathing strange.
I rolled her over and realized she was unconscious.
This wasn't good! When I arrived in the area she had met me at the highway then took me several miles down some dirt road in western Kansas. (They all look alike!). Cell reception is a mile or two down the road and no land line. The farmers in this area rely on cb radio. I ran to the radio and was screaming for help. There wasn't an answer for a few minutes. During this time I realized I had no clue where I was or how to tell someone to get to us. Finally my call was answered. The man that answered (Eldon), was raised in the house I was calling from. He called for the ambulance and led them in.
When I got back to Lora I was in panic mode. I had taken CPR many times but I couldn't slow things down. I tried to give her a breath and her chest didn't rise. I stuck my finger down her throat and got her toungue. I gave her another breath and could feel lots of fluid be forced in her lungs. I thought it was coming back up. I turned her head to the side so it could get out but nothing came. At this point she was breathing good and I held her head to the side.
Her friends from the hospital arrived in around 20 minutes. They drove over eighty miles an hour on the dirt roads to get her to the hospital.
Once in the Oberlin Hospital Emergency room we were quickly shuttled to the airport and flown to Kearney, Nebraska. I was told when I boarded she may not make it.
We arrived in Kearney and was quickly placed on a chopper for an hour long ride to Omaha. The last ten minutes in the chopper went bad for Lora as spinal fluid was putting quite a bit of pressure on her brain. They immediately drilled a hole in her skull to relieve the pressure. A top notch team of specialist was gathered and she was operated on to cap her aneurism that same night.
She has been steadily progressing over the last several days. Although she's been in a coma she's been stable and healing.
Today has been by far her best day. She has movement in her arms and legs. She has also spent the day with family and communicates by nodding yes or no. This is going to take some time. There's going to be good and bad days.
I'd like to thank in advance for the love and support she deserves and will receive. Your calls and prayers through the week have been very uplifting. Please keep the prayers and positive energy flowing. We are thankful for many things tonight. Especially our friends.
I'm asking for help because Lora had turned in her two week notice at work and her insurance stops coverage on 6/30/2014. I won't be able to work until she's done with rehab, obviously she won't be working either. I need to start Cobra Insurance for her and help her with bills such as car payment, groceries, and deductibles.
Thank you all in advance for all the love and support Lora needs and deserves.
DonationsSee top donations
- Potameid .
- H C Chadbourn
- Monica & Jay Cook
- Debbie Collins and Helen Haviland
- Jeff Gannon
#1 fundraising platform
More people start fundraisers on GoFundMe than on any other platform. Learn more
Expert advice, 24/7
Contact us with your questions and we’ll answer, day or night. Learn more

Thank you so much for being so knowledgeable and thorough. We will happily recommend to a friend or family member.
- K.S., May 2019
Troy was great! Very detailed in his inspection and willing to take the time to explain concerns.
- S.B., April 2019
Troy was nothing short of amazing!!!
He was very professional and thorough. He took his time going through every room carefully and was so patient with me asking a million questions and following him through the house.
He took very clear pictures of everything he listed in the report and the report itself was clear, easy to read and easy to understand even for someone like me that has very little experience with these things, but at the same time my husband (who has an extensive construction background) was also very pleased with.
He took his time to really point out areas of concern and shared what the possible outcomes could be if we didnt address those issues in the house. He also followed up with us with a list of his most trusted professional connections in our area as were moving into our new home knowing we would need some additional services to help us get settled in.
I would gladly work with Troy again and would highly recommend him to anyone!
- C.C., November 2018
We were so pleased with Troy and all the extra efforts he put forth on our behalf! He made multiple trips for a Radon issue! The Inspection went smoothly all around. We've already shared his contact details with another realtor! Thank you Troy for making this part of the process as painless as possible. We appreciate it.
- K.D., November 2018
My clients really appreciate how prompt, thorough, and professional Troy was! Thank you!
- L.W., October 2018
Mr Donoghue was very helpful and knowledgeable. He made our home buying easier for this property. We had lots of questions about the home and he answered many of them.
- T.D., Mytown CO, October 2018
We were very impressed at all the great detail work that you did. We liked the way you explained every question that we asked and the extra input even when we were not aware of certain things. You did an outstanding job and your report was very thorough. We feel very comfortable in calling you with any future questions. Very impressive and Thank you for the great job.
Sam and Jo Ann
- S.T., July 2018
Troy was available fast and did a great job. He is really knowledgeable and took the time to talk over everything with us.
- W.S., July 2018
Thank you for all of your help! We truly appreciate all the great tips and helpful information. First time home buying is a bit scary but you helped us feel at ease.
- S.S., July 2018
As a long time downtown Denver resident, I needed an inspector who could not only perform a thorough inspection but also educate me on the ins and outs unique to mountain property. Troy delivered and I?d absolutely recommend him.
- V.S., June 2018
Troy was extremely responsive and thorough in his inspection. The report came quicker than expected and made my decision that much easier. Highly recommended A+!
- G.K., May 2018
Troy was very accommodating to our schedule. He was available quickly which was much appreciated. Being a first-time homebuyer is stressful and intimidating. Troy allowed my realtor, myself and my boyfriend, and a family friend to attend the inspection which was very comforting. He provided his expertise and referred us to experts in various fields.
- L.M., April 2018
Troy is a pleasure to work with. He is thorough and takes time to explain concerns and questions. A+!
- L.B., April 2018
Troy was Awesome. He was very informative of the process. He has a lot of knowledge and makes sure you understand the inspection process. Answered all the questions I had about the home that he could answer.
- D.B., March 2018
Troy was very friendly and so easy to work with. He communicated well and always followed up. He was prompt, efficient, and did a very thorough inspection. I would definitely recommend him to others and would use him again on our next property. Thank you Troy - we enjoyed working with you!
- J.W., March 2018
Thorough, professional, smart, observant. I would highly recommend Troy and Liberty Home Inspection!
- J.M., October 2016
Very Knowledgeable and thorough. As a realtor, I meet a lot of inspectors and he is truly one of the best I have worked with.
- H.B., Englewood CO, June 2016

Bayswater broadens player base
BAYSWATER Football Club has launched its first integrated football program in a bid to ensure all members of the community get the chance to play football.
The club will join nine other clubs in the 2018 WA Amateur Football League (WAAFL) Integrated Football season.
Integrated football caters for players with intellectual disabilities aged from 16 to 55.
Bayswater integrated football coach Lexi Leonard said he had about six integrated players who had joined the club so far.
“We noticed that there had not been a team in the area or the local community,” he said.
Leonard said there was a focus on making Bayswater a “community club”.
“A lot of the time we have addressed 18 to 40-year-old men’s needs as one part of the community but we want to make sure we can help as many players as we can,” he said.
“We had a few players at the club already who would be playing integrated and that was sort of a driver.
“We wanted to make sure that if numbers were good in reserves, people were not missing out and we’d have a game of football for everyone.”
Leonard said he hoped to recruit at least 20 committed players by January-February 2018.
Email lexi.leonard@hotmail. com.

Goodbyes are never easy.
Iconic fashion designer Zac Posen announced on Friday that he would be shuttering his fashion line after 18 years. The fashion industry has been hit with some pretty hard times lately, and this amazing line was one of the unfortunate casualties of a major industry shift. In true style, Zac took to his Instagram to share the news with the world and give gratitude to the amazing staff who has helped him shape his dream and vision in the industry.
"I want to express my appreciation to our extraordinary team and for all those who have stood by me and the brand," Zac captioned the sweet pic with his team. "I owe a great deal of gratitude for their unwavering support for and dedication to the Company. I am grateful to the team who lent their incomparable talent and commitment along the way. I remain incredibly proud of what we created and hopeful for the future."
While the news has sent waves through the fashion community, Zac himself was also shocked by the unfortunate development. In an exclusive interview with WWD, he opened up about the untimely end of his line.
"The board made a difficult decision," Zac said. "We were in a sale process and we ran out of time." Although the fashion power-house fought for his company, in the end it was in the hands of the board.
"There was a board vote. We had to make the call," he continued. "My partners and I tried everything possible within our means to find solutions to keep it going. I have been trying to find the right strategic partners at this tough time in retail and in the industry. The clock ran out."
Although the line is ending sooner than expected, since it's creation in 2001, Zac has made a huge name for himself in the industry. Especially thanks to some famous faces that inspired him over the years. Scroll through the pictures below to see all of his incredible celebrity muses throughout the years.
The world awaits his next great adventure.

I love evenings where Chris and I just sit around and talk after the kids go to bed. There's something about it that just makes me feel anew....especially when it's been one of those particularly challenging days.
You know when you have those days, the ones where your world just seems like it's out of whack? When more things are thrown at you than you think you can possibly handle? Well....that was my kind of day today. I wasn't feeling well, and the kids were just really testing my patience, on top of everything else, so much that I had to pull out the 'if you keep acting that way, you're going to have to deal with Chris when he gets home' card. He hates it when I play that card, but hey, sometimes it's gotta be done. He doesn't like having to be the 'bad' guy when he's been working all day and hasn't seen the kids. Needless to say, even though bedrooms still didn't get cleaned...my sassy girl dropped the attitude, and for that, I was thankful.
Chris and I don't usually spend our time talking about the challenges that lie ahead of us; he's generally crashed out a few minutes after we put the kids to bed. I, on the other hand, spend a lot of time in the evenings reading...books, blogs, magazines...and even more time praying. It's then that I feel the most 'at peace' with the road God has put in front of me. In the stillness of the night, submersed in prayer, I can feel Him closer than ever.
Tonight though, Chris stayed awake, and we started talking about a different situation in our lives that has presented itself, and how when you think you have it rough, all you have to do is look around and you can see so many people who are so much worse off than you. I really needed him to remind me of that tonight.
Truthfully, when I look at my husband, I hurt for him. For the incredible amount of loss he has endured throughout his 34 years on this Earth. I look at him, and it makes me that much more thankful for having my parents to walk along side of me in this journey I am about to embark on. I thought about how if something like this were to happen to him, he would have me and the kids by his side, but he wouldn't have his parents...and that thought caused me to turn into waterworks. I can't explain it in any other way than to say, sometimes I just deeply hurt for him.
We spent a lot of time this evening just talking...something I wasn't aware that I was really needing until it happened.
As I was making his lunch for tomorrow, I started talking about how my Type A personality is making it nearly impossibly for me to wrap my head around the fact that we are going to need help..probably lots of it...over the next several months. And how I feel like I still have so much to do to get ready. I was naming off all the frozen meals that are made and in the freezer, and what still needs to be done. I think I lost him after meal #6. I'm pretty sure his blank stare was a sign of mental overload. It took him a second, but he cut me off and assured me, him and the kids would be fine...He said, he's pretty sure he knows how to take care of them....
Insert my thought process during the course of the five seconds he was talking
But your way is not the same as MY way!!!
Sometimes in my need to be 'in control' when I feel like there is so much chaos around me, I tend to forget that my way isn't the only way. Sure Chris may not cook or even make sure the kids have well-balanced diets every day like I do. But he doesn't let them eat Brownies or cookies for meals either. He's perfected grilled cheese, and PB & J with fruit, and quite frankly, if that's what the kids end up eating for a few weeks...that's what they'll eat. He's a great dad, and at the end of the day, our goals are the same. To raise happy, well balanced, Jesus loving kids.
Now back to his five seconds of talking....
...Casondra, the most important thing right now is getting you through this. The day can't come soon enough for this surgery and for the doctors to say you're fine, and that they've got it all.
I was staring at him, thinking about how lucky I am to have a husband who loves me THAT much, and who I fall more in love with as time goes on, when he nonchalantly asks if I can do him a favor. Can you go get yourself a fountain cherry coke, and fill my truck up with gas while you're at it?
Why does he have to use my weakness for gas station, fountain cherry coke? lol. Of course, I told him I would if he promised to bring me a fountain cherry coke every day while I'm recovering. Being the good husband he is....HE AGREED!

When the old year went to its end, I had a feeling I was off to a tough start in 2018 – and how right I was! But nothing could have prepared me for the way the new year unfurled itself. My husband came down with a very severe sinus attack. Out-of-sorts and in pain, the cold evenings and nights were hard on him. I tried to help by taking on his load so he could relax after work each day. That pushed my own load to the brim. Every day was tough. Every day brought new demands. Every day I struggled to clear my to-do list.
And every single day, although I was cheery and working with a skip in my step, it felt like I was falling behind more and more in my schedule.
By the second week, the home schedule had begun to unravel as well. I forgot to get us fresh vegetables one day, dinner got more and more delayed, and I struggled to put together even simple meals. But as a family, we laughed it off and pushed on.
I got to the end of the days very exhausted, barely able to keep my eyes open and to think straight. Naturally, I couldn’t make my usual 4.30 a.m. wake up time for Holy Hour and prayed as much for God’s forgiveness as I did for strength just to get through the day, the week.
Soon, we got to 5 straight days of no night Rosary. I’ve been at this point many times before and I knew I had to dig in deep and halt the slide. But I couldn’t. I just couldn’t. Every time, exhaustion won.
Then, the dreams began. Messy, troubling dreams. Dreams that took me on draining and confusing journeys I could not afford to go on. I awakened even more tired and spent. But there was a new, unsettling, side to those dreams as well. It came with a negative kind of forcefulness that increased incrementally with each dream, trying to tug me towards a disturbed state of mind.
In the midst of it all, was a flash of a dream one day. A quick one that softly planted itself in my consciousness, setting itself apart from the others.
It was of my son, in a state of deep fear and panic, wanting to quit his studies.
I honestly wasn’t sure what I was to do. I believe my husband and I have a great relationship with all our kids. Despite the crazy schedules we both keep, the kids are always near us and we know every story of their hearts – especially of this son I had dreamed about.
After the dream, I began to keep an even closer eye on him and his activities, in case I was reading things wrong. But his joy and exuberance, his sincere commitment to his studies and athletics remained undimmed. The dream might be something for the distant future, I told myself.
It was mid-week then, and I waited to get to Friday when I could draw in breath and put things in order and get us all back on track, Rosary and all. A few more days, I placated myself.
But the dark never waits for when you’re prepared and ready, to strike.
In a matter of a few brief hours, my sunny and cheery son went from light and bright to morose and subdued. The change was extreme. Sudden. Obvious even to the blind, it seemed.
I thought he was coming down with the flu or something and so, I made him soups and health drinks and insisted on early bed time. Oddly, he remained alert and responsible in his home chores and school assignments.
Yet, it seemed like in an instant, something had reached in and turned off my child’s inner light. I tried everything but I could not reach him.
I banged on heaven’s door. My vigilance went into overdrive. But despite my deep concern for my son, I was also aware that I felt no panic. Yet the situation was not something I could turn away from. Some force other than my mother-heart was keeping the eyes in my head and heart riveted on my son and this mysterious shift in temperament.
And this force was allowing me no panic, but insisting that I keep my eyes on the ball.
By the second day, and no change for the better, even as I got a better grip on my work and home schedules, concern furrowed deeper. Then, late in the evening, my son got into a minor argument with his siblings, forcing me to step in to rear him back. He went off quietly into his room and I went back to the kitchen to get on with dinner preparations. I was undisturbed and thought the matter was over. Nonetheless, suddenly remembering how St. John Bosco had once helped me to discern an approaching danger concerning my son, I sent up a quick prayer to him for help.
It was then that a dewdrop fell on my spirit. I recalled a dream this same son had had just before Christmas this year when we were having some family struggles. He had dreamed that we were going to be under severe and unexpected spiritual attack. He had dreamt that he was being attacked by an entity and that my husband had come to his aid and as he was trying to help my son, he was attacked by the same entity.
My son had dreamed that it was he who was going to release to freedom something that shouldn’t be free.
In all the busyness that was Christmas, we had forgotten about that dream. Till now. In that moment, I knew what it was that my boy was facing. A demonic attack of some sort.
Dropping everything, I traced the sign of the Cross on my forehead and lips, and went swiftly to him. I made him look at me and told him the sudden change that had come about now was unusual and wrong and insisted he tell me what was going on.
My beloved child broke down and wept. He told me he was struggling with his studies. He told me he didn’t know how he was going to cope.
My mind went to that flash of a dream. It had indeed been a warning.
Yet, my spirit turned away from his words. My son wasn’t lying to cover-up something else but this kind of a studies-related panic is gradual; it doesn’t happen over a space of two hours. And not to a boy who had just begun the new academic term, who practically hopped and skipped to classes and who was coping well. This belief didn’t stem from my unwillingness to read the handwriting on the wall, wanting to conveniently blame this on the spiritual. It came because just when I had prayed to St. John Bosco, I had been reminded about the dark dream of a coming attack – incidentally one that would target both my son and his father.
With an insight even I didn’t know I had, I began to talk to my boy. I took him back to his own dream, walked him through the discernment. I opened up and shared about some struggles my husband and I had been having, which the children had not been aware of.
Without even thinking about it, I found myself telling him about times we had turned the eyes of our hearts towards work, consequently, neglecting family, not loving the family as we should, as was willed by God.
Something took hold of my tongue. When we love our family, I told my son, when we stay close to their hearts and be a part of their daily lives, it is like building a wall around our home. A wall that keeps us safe within. But when we stray away, even for a while, it is like making a gaping hole in our fences, and evil will steal in.
As my son stared at me, I said to him, That was what happened with you in the space of a few hours. You turned away from the family to focus on your studies – even though it seemed like a good thing – that was the hole that let the dark in.
I didn’t know where that had come from. I hadn’t even thought of it.
Long minutes later, I left him with a kiss and a hug.
He did lighten up slightly after that, but it was clear to my eyes that he still remained in the iron grip of that darkness.
I finally told my husband and insisted he battle with me for our boy. Together we fought. We went into the next day, but the hours did not herald the change we were praying for. Still, my heart lifted when I saw that my son too was battling this dark hold. Even though he clearly didn’t feel like it, I saw him try and be a part of his siblings’ hearts. He listened as we shared about our days and plans and failures. He listened despite what it must have been costing him to. There was still no light in his eyes. Fear still ruled.
So much prayers and all for naught, came a voice close to my ear. But we ploughed on undeterred. We returned to the Rosary.
Later, stopping by my prayer nook for the prayer for the day, I found an unknown saint waiting for me:
Do not grieve if you do not at once receive from God that which you ask. He wishes to benefit you still more by making you persist longer in your patient prayer before Him. For what can be higher than to address one’s converse to God and be in communion with Him? ~ St. Nilus of Sinai
I chiseled the words to my heart, new strength flooding me.
Later, about to doze off in the afternoon, I latched my spirit to prayer. I called upon the saints who had come to help me with my son in the past, St. John Bosco, St. Francis of Assisi.
Then, a vague image of Our Lady with a scepter in hand passed through my mind. I lightly sensed the words,
She will lead in battle.
Mother, St. John Bosco, St. Francis, fight for my son. Save him, I prayed with calm and faith.
I awakened about an hour later and immediately went in search of my son. He had been reading. When he saw me, he jumped up and bouncily announced that the rains that day seemed to have eased up.
My spirit saw it even before my eyes perceived. The old joy was back! He had come out of it. It had lifted. Still, I put the hours that followed to the test.
No trace of the dark remained, not even the vaguest stain of it.
It was clear: we had indeed won.

Since mid june when school stopped and I had to study for the upcoming exams, I have had one primary goal besides the preparation; to get back in shape. I wanted to get back into a rhythm of training that would include every single day, so that I could quickly improve and get in shape for the summer.
In the beginning it felt like I was an old, fat, lazy woman who had been forced to join the military in the believe that she was Superwoman (or in my case perhaps Katwoman
Because I figured that if my chance of improving enough to do hard projects this summer should be realistic, I would not only have to climb a lot, but also improve my general fitness a lot
. This meant doing lots of different sports besides climbing. So I started swimming in the morning and running on my non climbing days (rest days.) In the beginning I was really slow. I ran 10 km in 50 minutes and swam 1,250 km in 40 minutes. But as the days passed by and I continued to work really hard, I started to improve. I now run 10 km in 44 minutes and swim 1,250 km in 20 minutes. Still not as fast as I think I can be, but Ill just have to work as hard as I have already been working. It pays off!
My climbing fitness also improved drastically. Strength is easy to achieve fast if you are willing to work for it. But it is not the same thing with endurance. As one can say; Rome was not build in one days - or in this case two months. Even though I had done everything I could doing endurance training as often as my body could, my endurance was not what it used to be. But I figured that there was barely anything I could do about it, and instead of letting it get to me.
On the 28th of June I went to Linz, Austria along with the rest of the Danish National Team. We were going to contest in the European Youth Cup held in the climbing gym, Kletterhalle Linz. An amazing climbing gym with great competition walls.
The only thing that bothered me, and I am sure also several if not all of the other climbers, were the EXTREME heat! At the time we arrived to Linz it was late at night and 37 C degrees outside. That is definitely not something we are used to. Everybody feared that the weather should get any more hot on the day of the competition.
On the day of the competition it was nearly 40 C degrees or even more outside. It was horrible! And if that was not enough, we all realised that it was no rescue getting inside and especially not getting inside the climbing gym. Imagine more than 210 climbers warming up at the same time in the same small area where the air condition is not exactly characterised by being the greatest of its kind. Not that funny I can tell you. AND! As if that is not enough, add to this 40+ C degrees outside and no wind what so ever.
It was horrible. Not even after the toughest, longest or hardest workouts have I felt like burning up inside and outside, been as sweaty as I was after warming my muscles and body up for the qualification rounds. I would swear that I was about 50 C degrees inside that climbing gym!
Besides the heat the competition went flawless. It was really professionally and well organised. The routes were amazing as well.
On the first qualification route I did quite well. Even though I used all of my six minutes and therefore had to be pulled down the wall, I was placed 13th. Since 10 were going to make it to the final, I got really psyched for the next route.
But as much as I had tried to focus on all the things I had improved on the two months of intense training, it really turned out that, like Rome, my shape could not be build in two months only. On the second qualification round my lack of endurance forced me off the wall far too early. Naturally I fell in the ranking. I was rank 18th. Which was OK, but not as good as it could have been. I was really disappointed after the competition. But my motivation for the next competitions in the fall is sky high.
But first I have to do some rock climbing! Today I am leaving for France where I am hopefully going to climb a lot of rock! Perhaps I will find a project or two. Or perhaps not. I have not plans other than to have fun an climb a lot!
I can not wait to get back to training. My goal for the next competitions is to make it to a final. But first, I will go to France and climb some rock!

Felipe was to be slippered, for an incident at school I had nothing to do with.
Although I did not witness his thrashing directly, I heard it all right.
It was severe, more severe than the first one.
I sat on my bed and listened from my room as the slipper strikes resounded through the otherwise silent house.
I winced at each one, for I loved my brother and hated to hear him suffering.
I know there are siblings that take a malicious pleasure in hearing their brother or sister punished, but I didn’t feel that way.
I actually lost count of the number of strokes he received.
It was more than twenty for sure.
When it was over, he raced to his room and shut the door.
I knocked and offered to come in and comfort him but he told me he wanted to be alone.
The next slippering had my name on it.
It was just over a year had passed since our first experience over the kitchen table.
To cut a long story short, I had a fight in school.
It was with a girl called Pilar who, for some reason, had taken it into her head to be mean to me that week.
She’d called me names.
She’d started giggling when I was speaking in front of the class.
She’d drawn on my notebook.
At lunchtime, she cut in front of me in the lunch queue and that was the final straw.
I pushed her out of the way.
She reacted, pushing me back and we fought.
Kids, and trays, went flying, but we were totally oblivious, hitting and kicking each other.
Of course, it was not difficult for the teachers to prise us apart.
We were marched directly to the school director’s office and our parents were called and told we were suspended for the afternoon.
My mum came and picked me up and she did not look happy.
I spent the afternoon in my room. I was torn.
I was partly proud that I had stood up for myself.
I was partly angry with Pilar for winding me up.
And, of course, I was nervous about what my punishment would be.
Felipe had heard of the incident at school, of course, and when he got home he told me he was proud of me.
He also warned me that my punishment was likely to be a thrashing, which I had guessed.
Sure enough, my Mother came home from work.
She did, to be fair, allow me to explain my side of the story.
He listened calmly, and then told me that I should have walked away and told a teacher.
How easy it is for adults to say things like that when they don’t have to face the other kids!
My Mother told me to fetch the slipper from the green box in his bedroom closet.
She also told Felipe to go to his room.
“Right, young lady. Ten swats for fighting at school.
Same position as before.
I bent over the table, and braced myself.
It wasn’t as comfortable a position as the previous year.
I was taller.
Crack! The first swat landed, terrifically hard.
It stung and I remember wishing that Felipe was there too.
We’d been punished together and having someone sharing the experience had been comforting.
This time, with my bottom receiving my Mother’s undivided attention, it felt lonelier.
I gasped as the second stroke landed right where the first had.
It was getting hot back there and no mistake.
The sound echoed around the house.
There was no way my brother wouldn’t be able to hear it.
The fourth stroke landed higher, near my spine.
My bottom was, shall we say, feeling very much alive at this point.
The slipper was hurting far more than I’d imagined it ever could.
Perhaps my memory was playing tricks but this felt much worse than the first time.
I closed my eyes.
Stroke number six struck hard and low, and this time the floodgates opened.
I began to cry.
My Mother saw my shoulders shaking and paused.
“Get on with it, please,” I whimpered.
The next was right across the middle of my stinging bottom.
I was crying, but my Mother was not easing up.
He was really going for it and striking me as hard as he could.
Just a second later, I closed my eyes and tried to think of something else to take my mind off it, sort of tune out of the experience until it was over.
I tried to imagine myself lying on the beach, but it didn’t work so I tried picturing Pilar bent over her kitchen table.
The next was so hard I was thrown forward and any illusion was shattered. I was still, unmistakably, being spanked.
The last one landed with as much force as any of the others.
I have only a dim memory of my dad giving me permission to stand.
I slouched up to my room and closed the door to have a good cry.
Half an hour later, my brother knocked and I put a dressing gown on and let him in.
He’d brought me some sweets and we hugged.
I told him about the slippering and he told me, for the first time, what his second one had been like.
He told me his bottom had been so sore he’d been unable to sit for two days.
We agreed that we would try to make it the last time the dreaded black slipper appeared.

Aquila Patterson Read
1933 - 2017
Aquila Read, organist and voice teacher, enjoyed a varied career as a music teacher and church musician. Born January 21, 1933, to Albert and Clairce Hall Patterson and raised in Florida, she started piano at age eight. Although both of her parents had a natural ability in music, they had not had an opportunity to develop their talent.
Aquila attended public school through grade school and graduated from Bay County High School in Panama City, Florida, in 1950. That fall, she enrolled as a pre-nursing student at Madison College, a self-supporting Seventh-day Adventist school in Tennessee.
By the end of her first year, she had come to the realization that she could have a career in music and changed her major to music education with piano and voice as her major performing areas. She studied voice with Patricia Templeton Ostrander, piano with Sylvia Mitzelfelt, and organ with J. G. Rimmer.
While at MC, she met John Read, who was also pursuing a music education degree. When he graduated in 1953, they married on August 30 and that fall started their teaching careers at Campion Academy in Loveland, Colorado, where he directed the band and she taught piano lessons.
A year later, they accepted an invitation to teach at Shenandoah Valley Academy in Virginia. They taught there for the next seven years, John initially doing both band and choir and Aquila teaching piano and conducting the girls' chorus. It was an experience they both enjoyed and would later recall as a satisfying time in their lives.
In 1961 they accepted positions at Collegedale Academy in Tennessee but left after a year when they were invited to teach at Southwestern Junior College, now Southwestern Adventist University, in Keene, Texas. They arrived at a pivotal time for the school, just as it was beginning the process of becoming a four-year college. By the end of the 1970-1971 school year, the school had been renamed Southwestern Adventist College, gained accreditation, and been totally transformed by an extensive building program.
John, who completed a doctorate at the University of North Texas in 1968, chaired the music department from 1967 until 1975. While chair, Read presided over the introduction and development of a rigorous music education degree program patterned after the one at the University of North Texas.
Aquila, who had not quite completed her degree at Madison College when she married John in 1953, enrolled in the new degree program and completed a B.Mus. in music education, with a minor in organ, in 1974. She studied organ with Jan McKown Sutton and Emmett Smith, a teacher at Texas Christian University in Fort Worth, who also served as an adjunct teacher at SWC.
Aquila taught at the college, giving voice lessons, teaching music appreciation, and assisting as needed with organ duties at the college church. During the time the Reads taught at SWC, a small Casavant two-manual pipe organ was installed in Evans Hall, the college auditorium. John had led out in fundraising for the instrument, which Aquila greatly enjoyed playing. The removal of it in the early 1980s, after they had left the college, was devastating to her:
I was leafing through the AGO journal and turned to the back where I liked to look through the ads. There was one for a pipe organ with a local telephone number that I recognized. I couldn't believe that this could be our organ, which was listed for $7,500, if moved by the buyer.
I called the college president and asked him why he was selling it. He said it wouldn't fit in the recital hall of the Mabee Center [newly constructed music building]. I said that all you have to do is get an organ builder and it could be done. He responded, "It's just an old organ." I told him it was hardly broken-in, since it had been there less than 25 years. I was really upset and told him that he was also giving it away at that price and if they were going to sell it, they should be asking for more. They ended up selling it to a Roman Catholic Church in upstate New York for a little over $40,000.
Every time I would think about what was happening, tears would roll down my cheeks. I mourned the loss of that instrument. It was a wonderful instrument, particularly for playing music by Bach. They replaced it with an electronic organ.
When John had left the college, he worked with the Texas Conference office in exploring ways to develop a church music program in the conference. He also explored possibilities as a school administrator and in the late 1980s, he served as principal and teacher for a year at Greater Dallas Academy and then for two years at Valley Grande Academy in Weslaco, Texas. Aquila taught history and directed the choir during their stay at VGA.
Following an interim year of teaching in a public school in Weslaco, the Reads returned to Keene, where they both worked as music therapists at a residential treatment center for children, and John also served as chaplain. For the next four years, until they retired, the Reads worked at the center.
In addition to maintaining a private studio in her home, Aquila held Sunday church music positions for over fifty years. She was organist-choirmaster for the Church of the Holy Comforter, an Episcopal church in Cleburne, for several years. After returning to Keene in 1992, she held the position of choirmaster-organist at the Presbyterian Church in that community. She also substituted for the organist at the Catholic Church in Cleburne, playing masses when scheduling permitted and performing for weddings and funerals. Because of her work with different denominations and the friendships she had with many Christians, Read came to believe that believers from many churches will populate Heaven.
Although at first her reason for holding Sunday church positions was to supplement the low wages she and her husband were paid in Adventist schools, in time Read realized that being a church musician had become her calling. She attended many workshops and sought to widen her repertoire, becoming an adviser for other church musicians. She continued to innovate and be creative with her music for services and seasonal programs.
Read, enjoyed gardening and lawn work, and was also active in community organizations. She served for several years on the board of the Layland Museum in Cleburne.
The Reads were living in Keene, Texas, when Aquila died on May 25, 2017, at age 84. She was survived by her husband, John; three sons, David, Campion, and Clayton; a daughter, Melissa Read; and three grandchildren. Although all of their children were musical and participated in music throughout their school years, they did not pursue music careers.
Source: Interview with Aquila Read, 25 September 2007; Aquila Patterson Read obituary, Cleburne Star –Telegram, May 28, 2017.

He slammed his headset to the ground when the Steelers made their critical final first down and clearly uttered an expletive as he realized his dream of a Jets Super Bowl was over.
Here was the real man, the fierce competitor, the tireless worker who had spent every ounce of energy, fought off every distraction, to get his team to the biggest stage of all.
Gone was the jolly fat man, the minister for fun as Sports Illustrated referred to him.
Ryan is like his father, Buddy, who was also a fierce competitor, known to even assaut players, who lacked his son's easy smile and easy ways.
But Rex had every reason to be shattered. His team did not show up for the first half then played at such an incredible level in the second that they almost overturned an historic deficit.
Why dd the team start so slowly?
Perhaps Ryan's first mistake was to hand the ball to the Steelers on the first series when he elected to kick rather than receive.
Would the game have ended differently if the jets had got in that familiar rhythm like they did on the first series of the second half?
We will never know but it was the wrong call to hand the ball to Big Ben and his merry men.
Sure, there is always next year and this is a young and improving team.
But unlike last year when making the playoff final game aganst Indianapolis was an incredible achievement in itself, this year Ryan knows the Super Bowl was there fot the taking.
That why he slammed his headset into the ground and swore.
Liek his Da he's a sore loser, all the best coaches are.
But there is always next year.

Elsa And Moana Biker Boots
Elsa and Moana are so excited about the new trend of this spring: biker boots! They went shopping and bought every biker boot they could find and now they want to try them on with the outfits they've had before! They wonder what would it look like wear them with flowery dresses and cute colourful tops. Do you think that they'd look good? Well, try it with them and see!

Then, once I received a diagnosis, I went through a period of being extremely ashamed.
How was I going to meet someone now with this psoriatic disease diagnosis and the fact that I was on disability?
Rose is a 9th house Scorpio with a four-planet stellium in Sagittarius.
She has more than 10 years of experience as a professional journalist and six years of experience as a professional blogger.
• How would it make you feel if your date was unsupportive of your condition?

1911 Encyclopædia Britannica/Leighton, Robert
LEIGHTON, ROBERT (1611–1684), archbishop of Glasgow, was born, probably in London (others say at Ulishaven, Forfarshire), in 1611, the eldest son of Dr Alexander Leighton, the author of Zion’s Plea against the Prelacie, whose terrible sufferings for having dared to question the divine right of Episcopacy, under the persecution of Laud, form one of the most disgraceful incidents of the reign of Charles I. Dr Leighton is said to have been of the old family of Ulishaven in Forfarshire. From his earliest childhood, according to Burnet, Robert Leighton was distinguished for his saintly disposition. In his sixteenth year (1627) he was sent to the university of Edinburgh, where, after studying with distinguished success for four years, he took the degree of M.A. in 1631. His father then sent him to travel abroad, and he is understood to have spent several years in France, where he acquired a complete mastery of the French language. While there he passed a good deal of time with relatives at Douai who had become Roman Catholics, and with whom he kept up a correspondence for many years afterwards. Either at this time or on some subsequent visit he had also a good deal of intercourse with members of the Jansenist party. This intercourse contributed to the charity towards those who differed from him in religious opinion, which ever afterwards formed a feature in his character. The exact period of his return to Scotland has not been ascertained; but in 1641 he was ordained Presbyterian minister of Newbattle in Midlothian. In 1652 he resigned his charge and went to reside in Edinburgh. What led him to take this step does not distinctly appear. The account given is that he had little sympathy with the fiery zeal of his brother clergymen on certain political questions, and that this led to severe censures on their part.
Early in 1653 he was appointed principal of the university of Edinburgh, and primarius professor of divinity. In this post he continued for seven or eight years. A considerable number of his Latin prelections and other addresses (published after his death) are remarkable for the purity and elegance of their Latinity, and their subdued and meditative eloquence. They are valuable instructions in the art of living a holy life rather than a body of scientific divinity. Throughout, however, they bear the marks of a deeply learned and accomplished mind, saturated with both classical and patristic reading, and like all his works they breathe the spirit of one who lived very much above the world. His mental temper was too unlike the temper of his time to secure success as a teacher.
In 1661, when Charles II. had resolved to force Episcopacy once more upon Scotland, he fixed upon Leighton for one of his bishops (see Scotland, Church of). Leighton, living very much out of the world, and being somewhat deficient in what may be called the political sense, was too open to the persuasions used to induce him to enter a sphere for which he instinctively felt he was ill qualified. The Episcopacy which he contemplated was that modified form which had been suggested by Archbishop Ussher, and to which Baxter and many of the best of the English Nonconformists would have readily given their adherence. It is significant that he always refused to be addressed as “my lord,” and it is stated that when dining with his clergy on one occasion he wished to seat himself at the foot of the table.
Leighton soon began to discover the sort of men with whom he was to be associated in the episcopate. He travelled with them in the same coach from London towards Scotland, but having become, as he told Burnet, very weary of their company (as he doubted not they were of his), and having found that they intended to make a kind of triumphal entrance into Edinburgh, he left them at Morpeth and retired to the earl of Lothian’s at Newbattle. He very soon lost all hope of being able to build up the church by the means which the government had set on foot, and his work, as he confessed to Burnet, “seemed to him a fighting against God.” He did, however, what he could, governing his diocese (that of Dunblane) with the utmost mildness, as far as he could, preventing the persecuting measures in active operation elsewhere, and endeavouring to persuade the Presbyterian clergy to come to an accommodation with their Episcopal brethren. After a hopeless struggle of three or four years to induce the government to put a stop to their fierce persecution of the Covenanters, he determined to resign his bishopric, and went up to London in 1665 for this purpose. He so far worked upon the mind of Charles that he promised to enforce the adoption of milder measures, but it does not appear that any material improvement took place. In 1669 Leighton again went to London and made fresh representations on the subject, but little result followed. The slight disposition, however, shown by the government to accommodate matters appears to have inspired Leighton with so much hope that in the following year he agreed, though with a good deal of hesitation, to accept the archbishopric of Glasgow. In this higher sphere he redoubled his efforts with the Presbyterians to bring about some degree of conciliation with Episcopacy, but the only result was to embroil himself with the hot-headed Episcopal party as well as with the Presbyterians. In utter despair, therefore, of being able to be of any further service to the cause of religion, he resigned the archbishopric in 1674 and retired to the house of his widowed sister, Mrs Lightmaker, at Broadhurst in Sussex. Here he spent the remaining ten years, probably the happiest of his life, and died suddenly on a visit to London in 1684.
character. He stands almost alone in his age. In some respects he was immeasurably superior both in intellect and in piety to most of the Scottish ecclesiastics of his time; and yet he seems to have had almost no influence in moulding the characters or conduct of his contemporaries. So intense was his absorption in the love of God that little room seems to have been left in his heart for human sympathy or affection. Can it be that there was after all something to repel in his outward manner? Burnet tells us that he had never seen him laugh, and very seldom even smile. In other respects, too, he gives the impression of standing aloof from human interests and ties. It may go for little that he never married, but it was surely a curious idiosyncrasy that he habitually cherished the wish (which was granted him) that he might die in an inn. In fact, holy meditation seems to have been the one absorbing interest of his life. At Dunblane tradition preserved the memory of “the good bishop,” silent and companionless, pacing up and down the sloping walk by the river’s bank under the beautiful west window of his cathedral. And from a letter of the earl of Lothian to his countess it appears that, whatever other reasons Leighton might have had for resigning his charge at Newbattle, the main object which he had in view was to be left to his own thoughts. It is therefore not very wonderful that he was completely misjudged and even disliked both by the Presbyterian and by the Episcopal party.
It was characteristic of him that he could never be made to understand that anything which he wrote possessed the smallest value. None of his works were published by himself, and it is stated that he left orders that all his MSS. should be destroyed after his death. But fortunately for the world this charge was disregarded. Like all the best writing, it seems to flow without effort; it is the easy unaffected outcome of his saintly nature. Throughout, however, it is the language of a scholar and a man of perfect literary taste; and with all its spirituality of thought there are no mystical raptures, such as are often found mingled with the Scottish practical theology of the 17th century. It was a common reproach against Leighton that he had leanings towards Roman Catholicism, and perhaps this is so far true that he had formed himself in some degree upon the model of some of the saintly persons of that faith, such as Pascal and Thomas à Kempis.
The best account of Leighton’s character is that of Bishop Burnet in Hist. of his Own Times (1723-1734). No perfectly satisfactory edition of Leighton’s works exists. After his death his Commentary on Peter and several of his other works were published under the editorship of his friend Dr Fall, and those early editions may be said to be, with some drawbacks, by far the best. His later editors have been possessed by the mania of reducing his good archaic and nervous language to the bald feebleness of modern phraseology. It is unfortunately impossible to exempt from this criticism even the edition, in other respects very valuable and meritorious, published under the superintendence of the Rev. W. West (7 vols., London, 1869-1875); see also volume of selections (with biography) by Dr Blair of Dunblane (1883), who also contributed “Bibliography of Archbishop Leighton” to the British and Foreign Evangelical Review(July 1883); Andrew Lang, History of Scotland (1902).

"FITISM has changed my life completely and I have never felt better. I used to follow fad diets but nothing changed & I just went round in circles.
After just 6 weeks at FITISM I had the most amazing results and I couldn't have done it without the support from their team!
I'm now fitter, stronger and a lot more confident than I've ever been (as well as a few dress sizes smaller!)" - Ally

Playing at the college level has always been a dream of mine since I was a kid. Now that I'm older my parents and I have a rule about making this decision and our rule is academics first and can you see yourself there without basketball. I transferred schools after my freshman year to attend a more academically focused place where I not only became a better student but a better person. As far as basketball goes I would consider myself a do it all Point Guard who likes to affect every aspect of the game, by finding my teammates, scoring from all three levels, rebounding, playing defense, and getting in the passing lanes. I also have played with so many different guys between AAU and High school and have become great at adapting to my teammates playing styles and my coach's game plans. On the court, I try to be the best leader possible and was named captain as a Junior because I want to see my teammates succeed and will do anything that is needed to help the team win.

"Hagrid," said Harry loudly, "give it two weeks and Norbert's going to be as long as your house. . .”
The following week dragged by. Wednesday night found Hermione and Harry sitting alone in the common room, long after everyone else had gone to bed. The clock on the wall had just chimed midnight when the portrait hole burst open. Ron appeared out of nowhere as he pulled off Harry's invisibility cloak. He had been down at Hagrid's hut, helping him feed Norbert, who was now eating dead rats by the crate.
"It bit me!" he said, showing them his hand, which was wrapped in a bloody handkerchief. "I'm not going to be able to hold a quill for a week. I tell you, that dragon's the most horrible animal I've ever met, but the way Hagrid goes on about it, you'd think it was a fluffy little bunny rabbit. When it bit me he told me off for frightening it. And when I left, he was singing it a lullaby." (Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone)
It's the first meaning - but it means that Norbert was eating a lot of dead rats, rather than that he was literally eating cratefuls of them.
Since this is a fantasy novel (rather than a conversation or realistic fiction), it seems that this is being used both figuratively and possibly as a play on language and meant to be taken literally as well.
- He is eating a very large amount of rats.
- He is eating a very large amount of rats that are sold in crates.
So, I would say the answer is "A." "By" is indicating that the rats are sold in units of crates filled with them. This construction "by the ___" is common in English to indicate a large quantity. One clue that it's not "B" is that there is no other reference to a crate in the space. If he were next to a crate, it would say "... now eating dead rats by a crate." (rather than "the crate")

My dearest cat, Coco Loco (primarily known as Fatty and sometimes Queen of Sheeba) just passed away after 18 long years. I really cannot even begin to state how struck I am by the fact that she is no longer here. When an animal has been there to comfort you and be by your side throughout most of your life, it's basically the same feeling to me as having lost a dear relative. She was a kind cat, never caused any problems and fought hard against kidney failure until the very end of her life. She even stayed alive for three months longer than any vets were estimating her to. I know that I really should be happy that she lived such a long and uninterrupted life, but I still can't help but feel an incredible emptiness from her now being gone. She was well loved, will be dearly missed, and will never be forgotten for the rest of my life. Be at peace old girl.

04:42PM, Monday 02 October 2017
The jury in the trial of a man charged with raping a teenager in Datchet woodland has been sent out to consider its verdict.
Kapil Dogra, 34, of High Street, Addlestone, Surrey, is accused of one count of oral rape, two counts of sexual assault and one count of causing a female to engage in sexual activity.
The charges, all of which Dogra denies, relate to an incident on April 12 when an 18-year-old woman had been walking from Datchet Railway Station to meet her boyfriend.
Summing up today (Monday), Judge Paul Dugdale told jurors that the victim said she had been walking along London Road speaking on her mobile phone when a stranger approached her.
The court heard how she told the man, alleged to be Dogra, that she was talking to her boyfriend but he then put his hand over her mouth and made her walk towards nearby woodland.
In an interview given to police and read out by Judge Dugdale in court, the teenager said: “He started taking hold of my leggings and made me touch him.
“I kept trying to make a noise but he had his hand over my mouth.
“He was saying don’t scream or I’ll rape you.”
The victim accused Dogra of forcing her to carry out a sex act as well as sexually assaulting her.
Judge Dugdale also summarised evidence given to the court by the teenager’s boyfriend, who had been speaking to her on the phone at about 10.30pm, minutes before the alleged attack.
He said that his girlfriend had sounded nervous on the phone and he had heard someone trying to talk to her in the background.
When the call was cut off at 10.33pm, he said her final words were ‘call the police’.
The defendant says he had travelled to Datchet to buy some cocaine off his drug dealer and had bumped into the teenager while she was walking away from Datchet Railway Station.
He said he asked her how she was and offered her some cocaine before asking if she was ‘up for a bit of fun’.
Dogra says the teenager said yes but told him she’d have to be quick as her boyfriend was coming to meet her.
Top Ten Articles
Hungry residents in Slough and Windsor can now have a Big Mac sent directly to their door as McDonald’s joins forces with a food delivery service in the towns.

If there was one wrestler that in my opinion is one of the biggest what if’s in the Wrestling business, I would definitely say Gino Hernandez. When I was staring to learn more about history of pro wrestling that there were many that said Gino could have been a top name in the business. I watched many of his promos and matches he did and my goodness he was a fantastic. He could have easily been one of the faces of the business and would have definitely worked with the WWE. So I watched Vice’s Dark Side of the Ring documentary on Gino Hernandez and I learned many things that I did not know about. So, I thought why not give a list of the 10 things in this documentary that learned while watching it.
10. Gino Hernandez was a Second Generation Wrestler
I got to learn a lot about Gino in this documentary, and what I did not know was that he was a second generation superstar. His Stepfather was Luis Hernandez and he actually wanted to be a part of the business due to him. I honestly never heard of Luis Hernandez until watching this documentary. Gino even started to wrestle professionally at the age of 17 to follow his footsteps.
9. He had a few dates with Farrah Fawcett
Farrah Fawcett was a very popular actress during the 70’s and 80’s. She would star in multiple shows including Charlie’s Angeles, The Burning Bed, and Small Sacrifices. There was a promo where Gino Hernandez was taking about his date with Fawcett, thus proving how gorgeous he was. The photos that he showed also kind of looked fake to the camera. Well it turns out that photo was actually real. Gino’s mother Patrice confirmed that Gino and Farrah did have a few dates. They did not have a long relationship, but they did go out with each other which I could not believe. I thought it was Kayfabe, but it turned out to be reality.
8. Gino was Extremely Paranoid in his Final Days.
One of the best parts about this documentary is that we actually got hear from the family of Gino Hernandez. Especially, from his mother Patrice who was all over this documentary.
So Patrice tells the story about the last time she saw Gino Alive. It was around Super Bowl Sunday in 1986 and Gino was in a hurry like he always was. But something was truly off about Gino as he was more paranoid. He came in with this small box and placed it somewhere in her house and was a nervous wreck. Patrice even revealed that Gino was never nervous and paranoid about anything normally. Gino soon left as like I said earlier he was in a hurry. Now, nobody knows what was in that box and it was never reveal in the documentary, which was a bit strange. Whether it was that he felt threatened by somebody or was high on drugs, something happened.
But this is not the only story of how bad his paranoia was in his final days. David Manning even had a story where Gino stormed into his office and asked for any contacts he had of buying a gun. Hernandez kept saying that somebody was stalking and following him.
7. The discovery of Gino Hernandez Body
Now when this was just crazy to me as when they talked about the discovery of Gino’s body. So there were two big bookings that involved Gino Hernandez and he rarely if ever misses a booking to an event.
Jeannie Williams was neighbors with Gino. One day, she noticed Gino’s car was parked at a weird angle and it never moved for a few days. Which was very odd as Gino loved that car. So this got Jeannie to check on Gino and she was knocking on his door. Of course no answer, but she noticed a pie that he had recently bought was still out in plain sight. Gino told Jeannie one night that she could come over and have a slice of pie that was going to be in the fridge. Gino left the pie on the table before Jeannie left. So a day passes and the same pie was never moved or put in that fridge which is of course a red flag and it got Jeannie worried.
With David Manning, he was the Booker/referee of WCCW a promotion Gino was working with. Manning got a call from two people saying that Gino never made his bookings, which like I said earlier was very off as Gino was known to never miss a booking. So David sent an employee to Gino’s apartment to check on him and heard nothing. So the employee jumped over the wall and peeked in the back door. That is where he saw Gino body lying on the floor. So he called the police and apparently, he was lying dead for around 4-5 days and that there was a gun also at the scene by his body. That is just unbelievable and I could not believe that was how they discovered Gino’s body.
6. His Autopsy had multiple errors
Now the documentary discusses Gino’s autopsy report and there were a lot of notable errors made. The first error was that Gino was listed that he was an overweight male. Which of course is not the case as he was a professional wrestler and he was in amazing shape. Second error was that they listed him as a Mexican/Hispanic which is not true. The third error was that Gino was listed as an uncircumcised male, well according to Gino’s mother and ex wife they revealed that he was circumcised. It was very fishy with some of the details in this autopsy report and I don’t blame Gino’s family for questioning whether that was him or not. It gets worse as….
5. Gino had 5 times the Amount of Cocaine in his Body to Overdose.
I contemplated putting this in with the last point, but this left me stunned when I heard this. While the medical examiner was discussing Gino’s death, apparently he had 5 times the amount of cocaine in his body to overdose. Which is just insane to think about how Gino was able to get that amount of drugs in his body. In fact, that amount of cocaine in Gino’s system would be enough to kill an elephant. Even the medical examiner was perplexed and told Bruce Pritchard (another promoter) that he doesn’t know how that amount of cocaine could get in his system.
4, There was No Cocaine At The Crime Scene
So in the documentary they were talking more about the Crime Scene and Gino’s drug habit. With the large amount of cocaine in his body, there had to be more cocaine at the crime scene. Well apparently according to reports, the Police could not find any cocaine at all in his apartment. Which just does not make any sense knowing how deep he was with top cocaine drug runners (Oh we will get to that).
Plus with Gino’s bad drug habit, there had to be more in that apartment. Even David Manning said Gino would have so much blow that there would be sugar bowls that were full of cocaine in his apartment. Which leads to a story that somebody that cleaned up cocaine at the crime scene. One theory was that somebody in the wrestling business was at the crime scene and dumped the drugs in the toilet in order to protect the business.
3. At the time, many believed wrestler Chris Adams killed Gino Hernandez
Now if you do not know Kayfabe is when the fact or convention of presenting staged performances as genuine or authentic. Wrestlers utilized this to basically protect the business. I wish the documentary went in a bit more detail as it was briefly mentioned, but wrestling was so believable, that many fans accused wrestler Chris Adams of murdering him.
Going back to the Chris Adams story, before Gino’s sudden death there was a storyline where he turned on his tag team partner Adams. In that storyline Gino sprayed a substance (I forgot what they called it) in Adams eyes. For a long time Adams wore an eyepatch trying to sell this angle. When Gino died there were many that accused Adams for killing him due to the angle. It go to the point where the police actually came to speak to Adams about the death of Gino. That is how big and believable Kayfabe made wrestling.
2. Gino’s family feared for there lives
With Gino’s death along with the questionable autopsy, it I was not shocked that Gino’s family feared for there lives. Plus the fear grew when a man approached her saying “Gino owed me a lot of money, but I am going to pay for this funeral”. That is a very creepy thing for someone to say to a grieving mother and I don’t blame Patrice for getting spooked. That man turned out to be John Royal and top cocaine dealer. The family was so terrified that everyone looked over there shoulder every time they left there apartment. There is a reason why it took many decades for Gino’s family to speak about Gino’s death as they did not want any more harm done on there family.
1. Gino hung out with Top Cocaine Drug Dealers including John Royal and The Anonymous Man
Now we get into the best part of the documentary where the directors actually got too interview two top drug dealers Gino hung out with in John Royal and The Anonymous Man. This is the first time that either have come out to speak about this, for of course obvious reasons.
Royal was serving a long jail sentence at the time of this interview due to him being a high ranking member of cocaine deals.. John Royal was actually with Gino in his final hours alive at a party, but Gino left mid way before the party ended. Royal admitted that there was no foul play in his death from his knowledge and he even was a planned intervention as well due to the concern about how bad Gino’s drug habit was. Royal admitted to paying for the funeral and gave an eulogy at his funeral and did not mean to threaten Gino’s mother.
So now we get into The Anonymous Man. Of course he does not want his name out for obvious reasons, but only did this interview, because he did not want Gino’s family to worry anymore about drug dealers coming after them. Gino ran as a drug runner with the Anonymous Man and they worked together making drug deals. He even admitted that the drugs got a hold of him due to his participation of the operation. The Man even admitted that Gino was taking the drugs while drinking alcohol which of course is not a great combination. Like the anonymous man said it was Gino’s own doing that eventually resulted in his untimely death.
My thoughts on the documentary
Overall this was a sad, but well made documentary. There are many that still debate on if Gino Hernandez’s death was an accidental overdose or murder. I am leaning towards accidental overdose, as it was clear Gino had a really bad drug problem. I also believe John Royal and The Anonymous Man’s statements in this documentary.
It is clear that Gino’s mother Patrice was the star of this documentary and I felt really sad knowing what she went through. No parent should ever have to bury there child and that fact that Patrice had to is heartbreaking.
It is just sad to think that Gino Hernandez left this world way too soon. He had plenty more left to give not only in wrestling, but in the world. Like I said earlier, he will go down as one of the biggest what if’s in wrestling history. He could have honestly been one of the Four Horseman and fit right in with that group. I definitely believe that he could have been one of the greatest wrestlers that ever performed. But unfortunately, we will never know what he could have been due to his addiction to drugs. Rest in Peace Gino.
Hello my name is Nicholas and I am a writer for Moore Than Sports. I am a graduate from Farmingdale State College. Currently I am enrolled at Canisius College going for my Masters Degree in Sports Administration. My favorite sports teams are the New York Jets, Jacksonville Jaguars, Charlotte Hornets, Buffalo Sabers, New York Rangers, and New York Yankees. I enjoy watching sports, analyzing transactions, scouting football players, and of course writing sports articles.
Leave a Reply

As funny and brainless as Saturday was, its effects on my digestive system were far, far worse than those on my children's nervous systems. How, you ask? Let me tell you how it works.
Step 1: Purchase something called 'boudin balls' to eat for a fattening, fried snack someday.
Step 2: Agree to let your spouse fry them.
Step 3: Eyeball the deep fryer your spouse unearths from the bowels of your kitchen cabinets and question its use after such a long, long time (because the last time YOU remember using it was at least two years ago, though your spouse is adamant that he's used it more recently).
Step 4: Trust your spouse when he assures you that the oil is still good.
Step 5: Eat the fried snack.
Step 6: Spend the next 36 hours debating the merits of never eating fried food (or ANY food) ever, ever, EVER again.
That's it, really. It was horrible. The worst part wasn't even the indigestion (though that was awful) or the fact that Oz's metabolism is about 24 hours faster than mine (though that was annoying). No, the worst part was that I couldn't sleep because of it all.
At about 3:15 a.m., I was finally starting to doze off. I could feel my brain starting to turn to mush. I could sense the lack of coherence in my thoughts. And just as I really started to let go...
You cat owners will know the sound... HACK-a, HACK-a, HACK-a... SQUUUUCK.
Sure enough, Hermes had hurled. It wouldn't have been so bad if he had done it on the wood floor, but nope, he had to do it on the whole 5 square feet of rug located in the room. So I sighed and went to go find the paper towels and the carpet cleaner and discovered the source of the problem. A mouse... well, MOST of a mouse... located in the doorway between the hall and the living room.
I passed a peacefully snoring Oz several times as I stumbled back and forth from the kitchen to the bedroom to get everything cleaned up, and it took a good amount of self-control not to leave the mouse on him. What stopped me was the realization that if he rolled over on it, then it would have been squished into the couch, and that would have been way, WAY worse than finding it on the floor.
About 4:30, I finally got to sleep. Woke up at 5:30, went out, and rolled Oz onto his side so his snoring would stop shaking the entire house. Got back to sleep around 6. Ignored the world till 10.
When I got finally got up, I had it in my head that I had a peaceful day ahead of me in which to recover.
At 12:48 p.m., I looked at my phone and suddenly thought, "SWIM MEET!!!!"
M1 and I were supposed to be there at 1:15. The swim school is clear across town from us. We may or may not have sped the entire way there. But we made it. And I was so glad I had remembered.
M1 did beautifully in both his events.
Suddenly, all my stomach troubles didn't seem to matter one bit any more. It was definitely a blast to sit on the sidelines and watch my son compete. The adrenaline was insane for both of us. He was so excited that he didn't come last (fourth) and didn't care one bit that he didn't get first in both events, which was so noble and so sweet that it almost made me cry. He was thrilled to bring home these ribbons and wants to get a pinboard to hang them on!
All in all, it's been an interesting weekend. The best was definitely the last, and I can't wait till I can get to the craft store.
I definitely won't be eating boudin balls again, though.

At the Aryuvedic Centre
Matli and Toasty go to see dadaji but Malti is reminded to deliver her tiffin. She says she will be back in two minutes. As she leaves her and Tej pass by each other. They both don't notice each other. Tej goes to the family and says he it will take sometime for the cream to get made so they all can leave if they want and he can wait. Toasty says no they all came together, so they will all leave together. She then tells Tej about how she met malti and he just missed her. Tej says that's okay, when you see her next time say thank you from my side too. Back at Chaturvedi house
Ved walks into Pashus room and asks if a client called. Pashu is in deep thought on his bed. Ved asks whats wrong. Pashu says he was just thinking, when will they ever understand women? There was Malti, who is the reason Dadaji is like this today and then there is Toasty who is making so many plans to fix him. Its Ironic because the person who we brought into this house with so much love, messed it all up. And the person who we were so against bringing in to the point where we even had a vote, is doing everything she can to bring this house together. Ved smiles and says ( okay I don't really understand Veds hindi sometimes. but I will try my best based on the context. Correct me if I am wrong). He says that everyone is different and even God doesn't understand women, so who will we.
Back at the Aryuvedic Centre
Malti is walking and she sees Tej buying the medicine. She is shocked and tries to hide. Tej walks buy and almost see here but he doesn't. (ooo the suspense). Tej goes back to the family and says he got the medicines now so they can leave. Tanya requests that they stay so they can meet the lady. Tej tells her to call her. Toasty calls Malti who is still shaken up from seeing Tej. She is scared she might run into him again. She tells Toasty she is busy now and they can meet another day. Toasty agrees and tells everyone that they can go home. Dadaji, is happy and says he will get his feet massaged here every day. (aww Dadaji
Phone Convo with Dimple and Prachin( Cute!)
Dimple limps to the phone as it is ringing. Its prachin and on the phone and she is shocked. Prachin says how are you, little lizard. how are you feeing.
She says you tell me how you are feeling mosquito.
. He says see everything even now. She says just come here and I will show you. He says, trust me you, you won;t be able to. She is about to retaliate when he stomach starts hurting. Prachin laughs. He says what happened, you got a correction. ( I have no idea what he's trying to say). And she says just give me two minutes, I call you again. Prachin laughs and says go, go. He hangs up and is laughing and cheering. He stomach also starts to hurt. He still continues to cheer but in pain. and thinks Ved is right, he is paying for the bad karma.
Back at the front of the Chaturvedi house
As they are entering Dadaji tells them to wait. He tells Gyan to go get something. Tej and Tanya are confused. Gyan comes back with a plate of religious stuff. Toasty asks what is this for. Dadaji says its for some kind of cleansing. Toasty asks for what. Dadadji says when she came into this house there was a vote and he voted no. Thus he wants to be cleansed. Toasty smiles and says its okay but he refuses. He says he can't carry that burden at this age , let him do it. He says when Lakshamiji comes to do tika some people go to wash there face. He's like I'm the idiot who just said no right away to a Lakshami like you. He says you are doing so much for me and that is enough. Someone else wouldn't have done this much. I am just praying to God, if he wants to take me, then do it quick. All are saddened. And then she says and just as quickly, send me back and your son. All are smiling with tears in their eyes. I also have tears in my eyes, it was so sweet. Dadaji does the pooja. Tej is smiling with pride. Dadaji gives them his blessings.
They enter the house. As they do Toasty stops and see the picture of Tej's mom with Pashu. They all stop. She seeks her blessings.
At Matlis House
Malti is still very shaken up. Her mom gives her water and asks her if she met Toasty. She says she did. Her mom asks why she is so upset. She says that she saw Tej as the centre today. Her mom says so what. He could have come to get medicine. They have two old people in that house. In fact Dadajis feet don't even work. Those people deserve that. blah blah
Malti gets Annoyed. She says stop saying this stuff. It really hurts me. Her mom says why does it bother her. She says because the reason why dadaji is liek this is cause of her. Her mom says not that's not true. She says she shouldn't at all feel responsible for her. The reason why she and dadaji are like this is all cause of them Unfortunately they don't realize that. They will though. One day they will. God won't let them go. And even if he did, I won't. and she gives her stupid smile
Back the Chaturvedi house
In the drawing room all are happy. Pashu asks if Dadaji is lying. He says why would he lie. Pashu runs to Toasty and asks her if he is telling the truth. She smiles. He runs to Tej and asks him if they both are telling the truth. Tej smiles. Runs to Gyan and Gyan stops him and says I'll just tell you right now that all 3 are telling the truth. Pashu is really happy and says he can't believe it. Ved says its cause they got happiness after so long, that's why. Pashu agrees, he tells Ved to call Pitaji and let him know. Tanya says no, lets surprise hi when he comes back. Pashu thinks that's a better idea. When he comes back and Dadaji can walk and meet him He will be so happy and shocked. Thats such a good idea. He says but today there must be something sweet made in the house. All are happy.
Smita, who is looking very pretty today, comes to meet Toasty. Toasty goes up to her and welcomes her. She tells Toasty that there is a huge problem in Nikita's life. She goes on to tell them that Rajan told his mom about the slap incident. His mom is made and has chosen to break the engagement ( about time! ) All are shocked. Pashu says this is all his fault. If he hadn't slapped Rajan this wouldn't have happened. Toasty says no, he did the right thing. Pashu says but if doing the right thing, ruins someones life, how is it the right thing. He says take me to Rajans house and I will go an apologize. Toasty says no. Pashu says but its about that poor girls life. She didn't do anything wrong, then why should she have to be punished. Smita says no, she isn't punished. In fact you saved her. Tej says that's right. Nikitas family are pushovers and Rajan and his family take advantage of that. Pashu says but her wedding. Smita says don't worry its just some stupid drama. I know they will come back. Ved looks really mad. Smita goes on to say that its Rajans fault anyway, they will come back. Toasty says he will not ask for forgiveness from anyone. This time we won't let, Nikita and her parents bow down to them. At Nikitas House
Nikita is telling Toastys mom that at first Rajan wouldn't pick up the phone, now his mom isn't either. Nikitas mom is crying. Toastys mom tries to console her and tells her everything will be alright. Nikkis mom says what will be fixed. The situation is out of control now. Nikkis dad says that they said they want to break the marriage. If this marriage breaks we will not be able to show are face to anyone. ( yah cause being able to show your face is better than letting your daugther live with a women beater). Toastys dad tries to console him. He says I know what you are feeling but just leave it up to God, Nikkis mom says our faith in God was what was keeping us going but now it seems liek even he doesn't want us to be happy. Toastys mom says why don't you go talk to Rajans mom. She says what if she really insults us. Toastys dad says, if you don;t mind we will go with you. Nikki says but what if they insult you too. Toastys mom says who cares. You just aren't like our daughter, you are our daughter. Maybe they will understand us. Toastys dad agrees, he says we can at least try.
At the Chaturvedi House
Ved is putting the medicine on dadajis legs. Dadaji is very happy. Ved asks why he is laughing. Dadaji says he feels a cooling sensation its nice. Pashu says I hope everything will be fine. Dadaji says this is the first time he put it on. It won't get fixed in one day. Pashu says no he was talking about Nikki. Dadaji gets sad. He says poor girl. She is very innocent. He says sometimes I get mad at God. He says why does this always happen to good people. Pashu says God must get some enjoyment from hurting good people. He asks Ved, that he is so close to God, why does he do this? Ved looks down. Pashu says don't get offended. You always get offended even before God does. He says can't we complain. Ved says he's going to go wash his hands. Pashu says he knows that we can't fight God, that;s why he does this. In the Laundry/Washroom Area
Ved goes to wash his hands while Toasty is doing the laundry. Tej comes up to Toasty and says that she better hurry up. Her parents are gone to see Rajans parents. THey need her. Toasty says why did they go there. Tej says but its about Nikkis life. They are gone to make them understand. Toasty says if they wanted to understand they would have a long time ago. Folding our hands and begging is only doing harm to us. We all know their intentions. Then why are we helping them. Just think before marriage they are like this, how will they be after. They will ruin her life. She says let all of this happen. Its good. Tej says just at least go. She whats happening. She says if I go, I will not be able to listen to them. And if I talk they won't be able to listen to me. it;s better I not go. Besides I need to go get Dadajis medications. Tej says that's fine but its about your friends life, she needs you. Toasty says for the first time, something is good is happening in Nikkis life. She says I know you all cant see it now, but you will soon. Toasty leaves and Tej follows. Meanwhile Ved is washing his hands in anger.
Ved is at Rajans house. Rajans mom says we don't want to hear anything. Ved says just listen. Cause of some personal reasons I don't trust women or even like them. But he says that doesn't mean I will hurt them like that. He goes to Rajan and tells him that Nikkis is a really good girl. Rajans mom tells them all to leave.
Cute episode, good mix of funny, sweet and dramatic moments. I just want Rajan out of Nikkis life and Ved her to get together. maybe no married just yet.

SAN RAFAEL, California — He spent so much on the new Ferrari he had no money left over to buy gas … or so he said.
Police in San Rafael, California say 36-year-old Rocky Jimenez, of Georgia was begging for gas money at a gas station with his Ferrari 488 GTB standing nearby.
Passersby say Jimenez was acting strangely, with witnesses saying he poured gasoline on the $245,000 car and that he hassled people as they came and went.
Jimenez told cops the car was his, but that it had been in the shop for the past two year and that he had only just gotten it back.
Police were skeptical as Jimenez gave increasingly vague answers to questions. When he allowed the officers to look into his bag, they found the key to the car but no papers for it. They also found the keys to another Ferrari. A call to area dealers revealed that the car Jimenez was driving had indeed been stolen.
He was charged with vehicle theft, possession of a controlled substance and possession of stolen property. Officers also found property in his car linked to a burglary from two days earlier. They are looking to see if Jimenez may have been involved with other unsolved burglaries.

At 9, I had an Filipino teacher that clearly did not like her Black students while constantly showing favoritism towards any Asian students. On more than one occasion she made it clear she expected the Black kids to fail. The one exception was a Black girl who was half Japanese. Early in the school year, when I did well on tests or managed to write a story that she thought was exceptional, she would ask if I was adopted or mixed with something. But don't pull the Race Card.
At 10, I watched a cop, a White woman, slam a Black teenage girl on the hood of her car for the brazen, life-threatening offense of “having a smart mouth”. She then casually explained to her partner that, “the Black ones grew big quickly and could not be treated like children”. They laughed together as she finished with. “I wonder what they are feeding them?” But don't pull the Race Card.
At 15, two of my closest friends were Lakshmi a Black girl, and Cassandra a White girl. We frequently hung out together at the latter's house together after classes and I often conversed with her father on a number of topics. It seemed we were on friendly terms. One rainy afternoon Cassandra, Lakshmi and I were watching the new Bone Thugs video “Crossroads” when he father returned home from work. Lakshmi and I were sitting to the left of the living room so we were not visible from the garage entrance. Angered by the music and seeing only Cassandra, her father angrily yelled from the kitchen, “Hey. Turn that off. I told you I don't want you listening to that street thug, nigger shit.” Cassandra turned off the television and stared at the floor with a mortified expression. When her father walked into the front room he froze upon spotting Lakshmi and I. He tried to apologies but we both picked up are back-packs and left. But don't pull the Race Card.
Again at 15, my cousin, a friend, and I were walking on our way to a pizza parlor when a motorcycle cop, without warning or provocation, made a u-turn from rush hour traffic, pulled over to the curb, drew his sidearm and demanded we get get on the ground. We were forced to lie there on the hot sidewalk for nearly a half an hour before being nonchalantly dismissed without as much as an apology. But don't pull the Race Card.
At 16, I was on my way to visit a girl I had a crush on when I found myself suddenly surrounded by 3 to 4 cops brandishing their sidearms. They demanded I keep my hands where they could be seen. After being roughly slammed to the ground and handcuffed I was told I was positively identified as someone who vandalized something. To this day I still have no clear understanding what crime I was actually accused of. All I know is that an old White woman said I did something there for I did it. I was given a public defender who did not care and told me to take a plea bargain or my mother would be forced to pay for all the damages. So I did. But don't pull the Race Card.
At 19, I was desperately searching for work to support my daughter. After what felt like countless applications and calls I finally received a call back. I was incredibly excited by this prospect. The manager was an older White woman who initially seemed courteous and professional. We spoke for at least 10 minutes sometimes joking and laughing whereupon she invited me for an interview because she had a strong feeling I would be perfect for the job. But upon introducing myself in person at the office her smile faded and she became cold and aloof. We barely spoke for a full minute before she apologized and said the job was no longer available. My disappointment must have been clearly visible because as I leaving an older White man briefly pulled me to the side and gave me a couple of business cards to try else where. He tried to smile but looked embarrassed. “She's not a bad person. She's just really old fashion about some things. She just thought you were something else when you spoke on the phone because of how you sounded. You know what I mean? Don't take it personal.” But don't pull the Race Card.
At 21, I enrolled in a class called the Tragedies of Shakespeare. I noted I was the only POC in the class but thought little of it. At the end of class the professor waited until most of the students had left and asked to speak with me whereupon he questioned if I were in the right class. When I inquired as to why he was asking he explained that Black students never took his classes so he wanted to make certain I was not making a mistake. When I asked him if he thought such a line of questioning was appropriate he apologized and the matter seemed settled. However, later that week he referred to me as a Moor in the middle of a lecture causing a number of students to audibly gasp. We had a long talk with the Dean after that. But don't pull the Race Card.
At 22, I was asked again, on the same college campus, by two other professors if I was in the right class because I was the only Black student. But don't pull the Race Card.
At 24, during the end of the semester in one of my favorite classes, I had a professor speak to me in private as to apologize. As it turns out she secretly believed I would fail because I was Black. That was deeply disappointing. But the good news is I inadvertently taught her something about herself... so there is that. But don't pull the Race Card.
There are others. So many other examples of overt and covert racism I have experienced in this lifetime. But in the U.S it has always been increasingly clear no amount of evidence is ever enough and there will always be an excuse when something terribly racist does occur.

A/N: Okay, I sort of fixed the ending of hot gimmick here. Yay! Enjoy, peeps.
Summary: For once, Shinogu gives up his role as oni-chan and does something selfish. The results are surprising. ShinoguHatsumi
"Ack! Hatsumi, your elbow's digging into my side!"
"Hey, Hatsumi, your elbows can dig into me any day."
Over Hatsumi's head Shinogu shot Kazama a warning glare, which Kazama replied to by fake-leering at the girl between them. Shinogu shook his head at his roommate but settled in his spot on the couch, facing the television again. With its bent antenna and discrepancies in the screen, it was certainly a novelty, but Kazama had proudly snagged it from a yard sale over by his childhood home ("It was only three hundred yen! You can't shit a cheaper TV set!" he'd protested when Shinogu had seen him lugging it into the tiny apartment.) and the young lecher wasn't giving it up, come hell or high water.
"Kazama, don't you think you could have found a better television set? I can't understand what's going on." Hatsumi whined. Kazama gave a blasé wave of his hand and shoved the bowl of stale popcorn at the brunette.
"You take what ya get or ya leave. Got it, sweet cakes?"
"I can't understand the movie either, Kazama." Shinogu added. Kazama chose to stick his nose in the air, ignoring Shinogu, who shrugged. In truth, he wasn't even paying attention anyway. He'd made his choice to join the priesthood yesterday, and his time to move out of the apartment was drawing alarmingly close. Clawing at a last morsel of precious time with Hatsumi, he'd invited her over, using the spurious television set as a lame excuse. But now that she was here, Shinogu was at a loss. She smelled like sweet almonds and had an unusually radiant look about her that meant really only one thing, as Kazama had seemed to say in subtext to Shinogu when he'd complimented Hatsumi earlier on her "rejuvenated" complexion. The kind of glow that meant Ryoki was, for all intents and purposes, permanently involved in Hatsumi's life.
He kept telling himself as the movie (whatever it was) progressed that he was doing the honorable and right thing towards his only love. Hatsumi and Kazama bickered, but Shinogu knew Hatsumi was acutely aware of him at every passing second. He knew that the scene in his bedroom had not been forgotten, and even worse, the scene on the roof with Ryoki would not be forgotten.
"Crap! Hatsumi, Shinogu, I'll be back. I just remembered we're-" Kazama paused for dramatic effect, "-out of soda!" He pranced out of the room, winking at Shinogu perversely. Shinogu gave a half-smile but it fell away when he felt Hatsumi scooch over to the other end of the couch, effectively away from him. The movie was still going but the silence in the apartment was so tense and obvious that it may as well have been turned off.
"I wonder what this movie is about!" Hatsumi joked awkwardly, laughing nervously and pointing at the crappy television. Shinogu shrugged, unable to come up with anything funny to say back. Why had Kazama done this to him? He knew he and Hatsumi had gone well beyond the point of no return. There was no reason for Kazama to try and create situations where Hatsumi and Shinogu were alone anymore. Any chance had been brutally murdered when Hatsumi had declared her feelings for him would only ever be of the sibling kind, simultaneously professing her undying devotion to Ryoki.
"You want anything to eat?" He finally asked. The popcorn remained untouched so it was a bogus question, but wasn't this entire night bogus? Hatsumi half-nodded and Shinogu jumped up and went into the kitchen, eager to get away from her. Anytime he saw those unusually rosy cheeks it was just another painful reminder of what he had failed to do.
Scrounging around the freezer, he produced a carton of chocolate ice cream. Hatsumi lingered awkwardly beside the stove, looking down wordlessly. Shinogu found a spoon and held the findings out to her.
"You have some too, Shinogu-kun." The absence of 'oni-chan' was strange and Shinogu wasn't sure how to respond, so he grabbed another spoon and they ate from the carton together in silence. Occasionally their eyes met and it stung that he could draw no hope from these instances. She didn't want him.
"I'm becoming a priest." He blurted out suddenly. He hadn't meant to say it, but these things have a way of just tumbling out. Hatsumi's spoon clattered on the floor but she made no move to pick it up as she gaped at Shinogu.
"...Priest? But why would you..." She trailed off and then understanding passed over her features. "...Oh." She looked away quickly, her hair swinging with the motion. Shinogu set down the ice cream on the counter and knelt down to pick up the spoon she'd dropped. Before he could right himself, she'd knelt down on the floor too. Delicately, she placed her hands on his cheeks and gazed into his eyes. He shut them, wincing. If she called him 'oni-chan' right now like she tended to do at moments like this, he didn't know if he could take it. When he was sure she wasn't going to say that, he slowly opened his eyes, but looked down.
On her exposed neck and collarbone he could see marks, little bruises and nicks that she'd tried to cover up with makeup, evidently. The smooth substance wasn't quite her skin color and she hadn't done a very good job of applying it, anyway. The old urges of overprotectiveness welled up inside him but he knew that these were not inflicted with the intention of pain. His worst fears confirmed, right here, as he stared at her soft skin marred by none other than Ryoki.
"Why do you let him do that?" He murmured. He hadn't meant to say that either, but Hatsumi tended to bring out his unreasonable, impulsive side, for obvious reasons. That moment on the elevator, though fairly minor in comparison to other events, was a good example.
Hatsumi looked down and blushed, zipping up her jacket.
"Don't tell mom?" She pleaded, raising her eyebrows. Shinogu almost scoffed but held it in. Of course he wouldn't tell mom, and Hatsumi knew that perfectly well too.
"Won't have much chance soon." He reminded her, pasting on a smile. Her hands were still on his face but now they trembled. Her brows knit together; it was obvious she was trying not to cry. As tears dribbled down her cheeks and off her chin, her hands slid down to his shoulders, and she moved closer, snaking her arms around him and burying her face in the crook of his neck and shoulder.
"This is not how I wanted it to be." She choked, her voice muffled. Shinogu shivered at the contact. Before all of the drama had started, she'd touched him innocently, not knowing that inside it was all he could do not to react to the images in his mind. Now she was embracing him, knowing full well that his thoughts were anything but brotherly.
"It's the best way, Hatsumi." He struggled to keep the sadness out of his voice but it was hard; this wasn't what he wanted either, even the tiniest bit. Kazama and Azusa had reiterated that Hatsumi wouldn't be with Ryoki forever, but still. She'd told him that night on the roof vehemently: he'd always be oni-chan.
"How?" She pulled her face away; it was red from crying. "It's not fair to mom and dad and Akane." She pleaded. Then she leaned in close again, her mouth an inch away from his ear with her cheek pressed against his. "...It's not fair to me."
"SO! SODA, ANYONE?!"
Hatsumi and Shinogu pulled away as if electroshocked and gaped at Kazama, bearing plastic bags carting litre bottles of soda. The moment killed, they glanced at each other before looking away fervently and standing up. Shinogu put away the ice cream, a distinct sickly feeling inside his stomach. Outside, it was beginning to rain.
"You know, I should probably head back! I mean, it is getting late..." That nervous laughter of Hatsumi's that Shinogu knew so well rang through the apartment and Shinogu focused his gaze on the floor heavily. Somewhere he heard Kazama say something jokingly, and Hatsumi got flustered. Numbly, Shinogu placed a hand on Hatsumi's shoulder. She said something, he didn't know what, but it wasn't important. She didn't want him.
He felt so removed from the situation, now that it was here. In his car, driving Hatsumi home in the downpour, he didn't even feel anything. It was like hearing about it, that it happened to someone else that he didn't know. He felt mildly sad but there were other things to think about. It couldn't be happening to him.
Hatsumi was chattering nervously, as she tended to do. He felt the deathgrip he'd had on the wheel relax a little. She was always comfort to him, but maybe that was the problem. Maybe he was just horribly confused and just needed Hatsumi to leave him alone to his confusion.
"You know... you really are an oni-chan." Her voice pulled him away from his muddled thoughts and back to inside the car, where he was driving home this girl he was supposed to think of as his sister.
"Well, I'm glad you understand your feelings for me completely, Hatsumi." He smiled and drew in a breath sharply, squinting and turning on the windshield wipers. It really was impossible to see.
"But... it's...it's just your nature. I think everyone sees you as an oni-chan. In some way, anyway..." Even without looking he knew she was blushing and looking down while twirling her hair in her fingers.
'So what, you're saying I'm doomed to never fall in love because it will always be incest to a degree??' He thought wryly, also realizing how much of an influence Kazama was having on him. The roommate's sarcasm and drollness was contagious. "I mean... it's a good thing. To be an oni-chan."
"Thank you, Hatsumi. Really. But you don't have to... you don't..." He shifted in his seat as they slowly rounded a corner; left turns were always hard for him. Apparently getting flat-out rejected was hard too.
"What I'm saying is...maybe... stop being such an... oni-chan. Do you see?" They slowed to a stop at a red light; in the darkness and rain it was hard to see and was a mere splotch of red in the night. Shinogu looked over at Hatsumi. When their eyes met, Shinogu looked away quickly. He felt like he'd never 'see.' But he wasn't going to say that.
"I think so." He lied. He wondered if Hatsumi knew when he was lying. She had a scary intuition sometimes—it was one of the many things about her that made his heart ache—but she was too innocent, too blind. She'd never see either.
"Well, here we are..." Hatsumi unbuckled her seatbelt and smiled sadly at Shinogu. He nodded, biting his lip. He felt like he might scream. He felt like he just might run up those stairs and stab Ryoki. Pay him back for some of the heartache. He felt like he might just grab Hatsumi, and never let her go.
"Wait." He reached out and touched her arm. Halfway out of the car, she stopped. He reached into the backseat and retrieved an umbrella. Hatsumi sighed.
"It's not even raining that hard, Oni-chan!" She whined. She rejected the umbrella, waved goodbye, and yanked her hood over her head as she sprinted back to the door of the complex.
"Stop being such an oni-chan!? What the hell is that supposed to mean!?"
Kazama sighed, twirling the spoon around in the air before violently dunking it into the ice cream carton again. Shinogu was pacing back and forth in a rage, slamming cabinet doors and knocking over chairs as he 'cleaned' the kitchen. Though in reality he was turning the tiny kitchen into even more of a pigsty (which was nearly physically impossible for Shinogu, AKA Golden Boy of the Century), Kazama determined that it was better not to point that particular detail out at the moment.
"You know... you ever consider the fact that this was what she was talking about?" He drawled. Shinogu threw his hands up in the air.
"Stop being so fucking cryptic, Kazama!" He warned. Kazama chuckled and spooned out some more of the ice cream that Hatsumi hadn't finished. He gestured to the kitchen-turned-hellhole.
"This. You. Your temper. She's never seen this side of you, has she, Shinogu? The dripping-with-manliness-in-rage side, which I might add is much more interesting than your usual m.o."
Shinogu faltered as he considered Kazama's question.
"Well, once, when we were little. I yelled at her and she chased me and comforted me. I was mad because I felt like my birthmother didn't love me."
Kazama raised his eyebrows.
"So. There you have it. Think about it, Shinogu. Hatsumi likes guys who treat her like shit, but not because they treat her like shit—which is what some girls have got going—but because she likes that manly energy!"
"...Manly energy? You've got to be kidding me." Shinogu stared witheringly at Kazama.
"Hey, think of it this way: it's been how many years? Fifteen, or something absurd like that, and you've spent all this time with the same routine. And clearly, it's not working--"
"I have feelings, you know..." Shinogu reminded him, stung by the truth.
"Anyways. You've got two days. After that, you'll never see her again--" Shinogu winced. "--so why not be all James Dean and let how you really feel show?"
"...James Dean? What?"
Kazama waved his hand. "Forget it. Just, think about it, 'kay?"
"You know, some psychologists might find it mighty interestin that you traveled all the way here, an hour away from your own shopping center, to buy socks." Kazama commented as he and Shinogu milled about the outdoor mall. Shinogu bristled. "Do monks even need socks?" He added thoughtfully.
"It means nothing--"
"I'm just sayin. I wonder...Hatsumi and Dr. Evil might be hanging around here. It is a weekend. It is a popular hangout..." Kazama scratched his head and glanced around, at the busy street. Teens were everywhere. Shinogu could feel himself start to sweat.
He left this evening, and was merely preparing himself, he decided. He'd said his goodbye to Hatsumi, so he didn't need to see her again. It was done, she was fucking Ryoki, and he was just buying socks. That was it. Really. He didn't choose this particular shopping center based on its proximity to his childhood home. Never.
He felt Kazama lean in towards him. "Don't look now, but you might want to look over there. By the florist." He whispered, jabbing his thumb in the opposite direction. Shinogu glanced over his shoulder, and immediately wished he hadn't.
Well, he'd gotten what he secretly had hoped for. Ryoki was yelling at a very flustered Hatsumi, who was blushing and trying not to cry. She'd bumped into something and broken it, apparently. Shinogu tightened his grip on his plastic bag. "What are you thinking, right this moment?" Kazama asked, watching the array of emotions pass over Shinogu's face. He bit his lip.
"There is just something about his face...that really makes me wanna punch him." He said. He exhaled and turned away. "But that'd make Hatsumi sad, and it'd be ridiculous. Come on, I'm done shopping." He turned and began walking away, but stopped when he realized Kazama wasn't following.
"You're never gonna see either of them, ever again. You have a life to think about your regrets in front of you. You're really just gonna let that motherfucker have the last word? Really, Shinogu? Think about it. Either way, Hatsumi will still have what she wanted. Why not let yourself have something? Why not...try not being the oni-chan, for once?" He coaxed. Shinogu rolled his eyes.
"You're the devil on my shoulder, I swear. No, you're worse." Shinogu said, but the idea was taking shape. He watched hungrily as Ryoki grabbed Hatsumi's shoulders, shaking her roughly. What would anyone do if he just walked up to him, and punched him? Hatsumi would be shocked, probably cry, and try to comfort Ryoki. Ryoki would bitch his head off. People would stare and whisper in shock. And Shinogu...would walk away. What could anyone do? People were already staring at Ryoki and Hatsumi, wondering if he was going to openly hurt her, here in public. He'd be doing them a favor, really.
He dropped the shopping bags, adrenaline coursing through his veins. Vaguely, somewhere far away, he heard Kazama say something, but he couldn't hear: his heart was pounding in his ears. He felt dizzy with the heady sensation of what he was about to do, and so before he came back to his senses, he began striding over to them. Right now, he didn't even care what Hatsumi or his parents or anyone else thought. He wanted to do this; he wasn't going to finish this without putting Ryoki a bit more in his place. Ryoki could smirk all he wanted, but for just a minute, he'd wipe that shit-eating grin off his smug face.
Hatsumi turned and gasped, and Ryoki followed suit, when they saw Shinogu there. He bit his lip, and before he could stop himself, he yanked Ryoki away from Hatsumi.
"What the he--" Ryoki's big, fat, annoying mouth was met by Shinogu's fist before he could utter any more annoyingness. He felt his teeth against his knuckles, and he heard Hatsumi shriek. The impact made a cracking, crunching sound. It was the most satisfying, refreshing sound he had ever heard. He wasn't interested in hearing apologies, or listening to anyone explain why things had turned out like this. He just didn't want to hear it; he didn't care. All he wanted to hear was the crack of bone against bone. Ryoki stumbled backwards, blood dribbling down his nose and out of his mouth, onto his fancy prep school jacket.
Suddenly, everything went back to sobriety. Shinogu blinked, shading his eyes from the daylight that suddenly seemed too bright. Everyone in the area was watching, including Hatsumi, who was gazing at Shinogu with an expression that made him cringe. He was sorry, so sorry, for making her feel bad. He didn't want to make her unhappy anymore, he was always being a source for her unhappiness and unease. She was better off without him, he was always doing the worst thing...
...And yet, when he looked at Ryoki's bloody, flabbergasted face, he didn't feel that bad anymore. In fact...he felt pretty damn good.
"Um...hi. I..um...Yeah, I need to pay for my socks. Um, excuse me..." He said dazedly, before turning and running through the shocked crowd. He couldn't stop himself from smirking, when he heard Ryoki begin to stammer. He slowed to a stride, and smirked broadly as he strode confidently back towards Kazama, who might have been, for the first time in history, shocked into silence.
"I-I...I didn't actually think ya'd do it." He admitted, reddening. Shinogu beamed as he bent down and picked up his shopping bags. He and Kazama continued walking, out of the shopping center and back to the car.
For the first time in his entire life, Shinogu got something he had truly wanted.
Hatsumi's wedding to Ryoki was beautiful. Everyone was thrilled that the two had made it this far. In the five years since they had first started dating, it had been a rollercoaster of emotions, but now, they were here. Hatsumi looked the part of the stereotypical blushing bride, in a frilly white gown and soft makeup and flowers everywhere. Ryoki looked dashing and handsome in his tuxedo, with his glasses gone and his hair slicked back. To look at them was to look at a couple in love; the perfect match made in heaven.
But like anything beautiful, one only has to look a little closer, let their gaze linger a little bit on it, before they see the ugly fissures in the facade of perfection. Bruises on the bride's skin, barely hidden, the groom's eyes bloodshot and puffy.
Asuza was excellent at finding the imperfections in things. He was heavily practiced in doing so, with plenty of experience. It delighted him to no end, to see the way Hatsumi constantly looked out the church door during the ceremony. She was waiting for someone, a certain person, to stop her and save her. The best part was, that person wasn't coming to save her. That person had left, to save her, and had finally let himself be a bit selfish. Ryoki still had the scars on his face showing that. These scars were things that also made Asuza nearly sing with glee.
He'd vowed to ruin Ryoki and Hatsumi's relationship, but then, as it had turned out, he hadn't even needed to do anything. Next to him, Kazama smiled, not at the beautiful wedding, but at the obvious torment of the bride. It had taken a few years, but now everything was coming together, better than they could have ever done themselves. All it had taken was one punch.
Hatsumi stumbled over her vows; a mistake she would pay for dearly. Asuza still smiled at the reception, as Hatsumi got drunk and continued to stare out the window in misery, while Ryoki got even more thoroughly inebriated, and the mood of the party dropped. Yes, he smiled in pure, unadulterated bliss. When Shinogu came back, he would come back and get everything he had ever wanted.
--Five Years Later--
"Ah! Don't trip, Keiko-chan!" Hatsumi called, running after one of the triplets she had born. Her husband, Ryoki, looked on in amusement as he read the morning paper. It was an early autumn afternoon at the park; a family get together. Even Shinogu, who had left the priesthood soon after Ryoki and Hatsumi's wedding, was there. Still single, but for some reason, he didn't seem to mind being single.
Asuza and Kazama had a fair idea of why he didn't mind, and the idea was personified by Hatsumi and Ryoki's fourth child, Sakuza. Her eyes and hair were darker than that of their other children, and she was a little more subdued in personality.
"Oh, crap. Come back here Sakuza-chan!" Hatsumi snapped, leaving a crying Keiko sitting in her place as Hatsumi scrambled to her fourth child, who was balancing on top of a picnic table, preparing to jump off. Shinogu swept in, and got to Sakuza first, lifting her off of the table.
"I gotcha." He said, grinning and swinging Sakuza around. Sakuza shrieked with laughter, and Asuza and Kazama looked on as Hatsumi and Shinogu shared a smile. It was a smile that had room for no one else; it was a private moment. Quickly, they went back to their separate activities, with Ryoki squawking at Hatsumi and Shinogu playing with Sakuza.
"You know, I always forget that Sakuza-chan isn't Shinogu's kid." Asuza commented as Shinogu began leading Sakuza over to him and Kazama. Kazama grinned.
"She has her father's eyes." He agreed.

Submit your FML story
- - Please note that spam and nonsensical stories will result in you being blocked from accessing FML.
This member hasn't filled in the description.
How depressing, no badges acquired at all. :/
Today, we were working with infant and adult CPR dummies. After practising flawless CPR on the adult dummy, I announced "And that's how you save someone." Then I tripped on the baby dummy and fell. My co-worker stood up and yelled out, "And that's how you kill a baby." FML
Today, I was walking when I heard a car horn honk. I looked up to see a hot guy giving me a thumbs up. As he got a better look at me, he made a disgusted face and flipped his hand so he was giving me a thumbs down. FML
Today, I had to take a dump. While looking for a book to read, I sneezed. The force of the sneeze caused me to shit my pants. The glob of dung then ran down my leg before falling out of my shorts onto my carpet, all in less than 5 seconds. Nothing in my life has prepared me for this. FML
Today, I got an email from the company that manages my cat's microchip informing me that I had to update my information that had been entered by the local Humane Society. Apparently, they listed my cat "Coral" as the owner, and me as the pet. To change it, they needed the cat's signature. FML
Today, I went out with my family and boyfriend for dinner. We were all having a good time, and suddenly at the end of dinner he decides to kneel down on one knee, take out an engagement ring, and say "I choose you, Pikachu," with a straight face. He was serious. FML
Today, I walked in on my husband in our room completely naked. At first I thought he was waiting for me so we could have sex. He hadn't seen me yet, so I started to undress too to surprise him. Then I saw that he had drawn a face on his penis and he was talking to it. FML
Today, I had a horrible breakup with my girlfriend of two years. Depressed, I changed my Facebook status to, "Hate me today, hate me tomorrow, hate me for all the things I didn't do for you." My ex commented, "Give me an orgasm?" Five of my friends, including my mom, liked this. FML
Today, my parents decided to visit me. When I first got my apartment I gave them a key "just in case" and today they used this key to enter when I didn't answer their knocking. I didn't answer because I was having sex with my boyfriend. My parents saw everything. They didn't know I was gay. FML
Today, I was at my girlfriend's house. It was just me and her. Things began to get heated, and we started doing it on the living room couch. Near the end of it I decided to whisper in her ear, "Who's your daddy?" I hear behind me, "I am." FML
Today, after playing in an online casino, I won £200. Being pretty tight for cash at the moment I was pretty excited. I then tried to withdraw it to be told that I can't have a penny of it because I didn't register my card details first. FML
Today, I had a very intense sexual dream that made me come and left me panting when I woke up. It was the best orgasm I'd ever had. The trouble was, it wasn't about a hot girl, or anything sexy. It was about bacon. FML
Monday 5 October 2015

I have yet to meet someone who has enjoyed breaking up with someone. Sometimes someone may feel a sense of relief but the act itself is never fun. Someone always gets hurt. The only way to avoid this is to never date. But we all still date, risks known. Whether we choose to acknowledge or deny those risks is up to us.
I was afraid to break up with you for you. I didn’t know if you could handle it. You had been through a lot and I knew you had let your guard down with me. I didn’t want you to regret that. Our relationship was your life. What would you do if I left? I honestly didn’t know if you were stable enough without me. This is hard to write. I didn’t know it had gotten this far. The same thing that attracted me to you was the same thing that is pulling me away. I can’t mean that much to you. It’s too much pressure. Aside from wondering what will happen to you, I never wanted to hurt you. Ever. While I still think you’re a great guy, it’s possible to be a great guy and just not right for me, right?
I was afraid to break up with you for others. We say do what’s best for you but we all know others are always affected by our actions -by our decisions. It’s never just your life. Our families- so intertwined. So much pressure, so many expectations. What would they think if I broke it off? Could I still be friends with your family? They’ve treated me like I was their own. I don’t want to lose that. I don’t want them to think I was just using you. I don’t want them to think I don’t love you. Because I do love you. I’m just not in love with you.
I was afraid to break up with you for myself. You had become my life. I don’t know if I could do this on my own. I was so scared. What if I don’t find someone better? Who would I talk to if I needed to vent? Who would celebrate with me when I’d graduate? I was so afraid to be alone. Is it bad to say I was afraid you’d hurt me for hurting you? How did it get this far? I was afraid to be with you and afraid to be without you at the same time. This is all too much.
And then I learned the best thing for everyone- you, me, our friends, our families was to break it off. I’ve known all along. Because it’s not fair to you, not fair to me, not fair to our loved ones for me to continue to live a lie. As hard as it is now to be alone, it’s harder being with someone I know isn’t right for me. I’ll have to learn to live without you again. But I can. Sometimes we have to take one step back to take two steps forward.
One thought on “I was afraid to break up with you”
That was beautifully written and is extremely relatable! I have a friend that is in the same situation and I want to show her this post because I think it would help her.

Gumdrop decided to give busking a try to earn some extra cash. What he however neglected to mention to me was that his act was going to involve audience participation.
Gumdrop: Wanna hear me play Shudder Before the Beautiful by Nightwish? Cutesmile
Tokky: Facepalm I really need to stop my characters from going near you.

Oh gosh, and just hours ago I posted that I got the all-clear from my specialist for C Diff.
Well, looks like things were too good to be true, and the bottom has dropped out. No longer on my “healthy high” I get a call from my new gen prac doctor, that there are some problems with my bloodwork from Friday. So I get to see him first thing after I drop M off at school tomorrow. Guess I won’t be baking as I had planned!
I’ll update you as soon as I know something, but mama aint happy.

Marc Williams is one of America's hottest male muscle models. He contacted me about doing a video shoot and photo spread with his real life best buddy, Jordan Vaughn. So I was more than happy to accommodate Marc. He had told me that he had been wanting to eat out his buddy Jordan's butt and suck his cock since they had met several years ago. While they had become best friends, they had never fooled around before. You see, Jordan is straight (mostly). But that does not stop these two hot muscle buddies from rimming, pinching nipples and Marc Williams jacking his big black dick on Jordan's bubble butt. Also see "Buddies First Time - At The Gym"

Mega Millions Jackpot Reaches Close to a Billion Dollars
The Mega Millions lottery draw was conducted on Tuesday, January 3rd, 2023 and the jackpot for it was around $785 million, which had a cash option of around $403.8 million.
The winning numbers that had been drawn in Tuesday night’s Mega Millions Lottery were 25, 29, 33, 41 and 44, with 18 being the gold Mega Ball and 4X was the Megaplier.
Unfortunately, none of the participants in Tuesday’s Mega Millions lottery draw were able to match the numbers needed to win the big prize.
This means that the jackpot will now roll over to the next draw of the Mega Millions Lottery, which is scheduled for January 6th, 2023, Friday.
The grand prize for Friday night’s draw will not be close to a billion dollars, as it has grown to a whopping $940 million and this will have a cash value of $483.5 million.
Even though no one was able to win the jackpot in Tuesday night’s Mega Millions lottery drawing, there were people who managed to win other prizes.
A total of six players were able to become instant millionaires, as they were able to hit the Match 5 that allowed them to win $1 million each.
Three of these instant millionaires were from Maryland, while the remaining were from Virginia and Texas.
There were also three ticket holders in Tuesday night’s Mega Millions lottery drawing who not only hit the Match 5, but had also bought the Megaplier option with their ticket.
Therefore, they were able to increase their winnings from $1 million each to $4 million each. These ticketholders were from South Dakota, Mississippi and Arizona.
There were also 56 players who were able to hit the Match 4 and the gold Mega Ball in Tuesday night’s Mega Millions Lottery drawing, which allowed them to win a prize of $10,000 each.
There were also 14 players who hit the Match 4, the gold Mega Ball and also bought the Megaplier with their ticket. This allowed them to increase their prize to $40,000 each from $10,000.
The rest of the prizes on Tuesday night were between the range of $2 and $2,000. Of all the tickets that were sold for the Mega Millions Lottery draw on Tuesday, 2.9 million were able to win prizes at different levels.
If the new jackpot is won in Friday night’s Mega Millions lottery draw, it would be the fourth biggest jackpot in the history of the game.
Last year, there were a total of six jackpots that were won by players in the Mega Millions lottery, with the last one won on October 14th and was worth $504 million.
Ticketholders in Florida and California matched the numbers for winning the grand prize.

Quaint store with tons of cute stuff
I remember shopping here every week during the Beanie Baby craze in the '90s. :) Obviously there's not many of those around anymore, but this is still an adorable store to find cute country craft stuff. The store has a very quaint rural feel and there's lots to look at. Check it out if country is your thing.
When I ruined one of my favorite michael jordan cards I had been looking for a replacement for a while. It wasn't a really high end one but it was one I was happy to have had. They had it!

I can't remember exactly when the idea of setting up a band that would be a parody of French punk-rock came to my mind... It must have been in 1997 since that's the year I told my alcohol mates Colas and Nofun about it. It must also have been a very boozy night indeed. I'm sorry for not being very accurate about the time but it's been quite a long time now. Anyway, they went really enthusiastic about the idea, Nofun would play the guitar and Colas would sing...well, would scream in the mike. As for me, that would be the bass, I hardly know anything else anyway. Xavier had a beatbox he could lend us, well it became ours in the end since we never gave it back. Sorry Xavier. A parody of French Punk-rock I said, poum-tchak poum-tchak, berk!
What I wanted was the nasty silly sort of « allô-allô » thing, it turned out to be only silly in the end. And we never managed to be as bad as French punk rock was. I'm not saying we were good but not that bad despite all our efforts. As he often used to, Colas quickly lost his enthusiasm and the band became a twosome. Nofun beside programming the beat box and playing the guitar, took on singing as well.
We owe Colas some of our nicest verses as well as an everlasting moral support though, all along the short band's life.
We owe the name GDB to Yannick Blacky, a friend from the north region of France. I can't remember how and where exactly, but he had told me about a fanzine and band project once, and I remember two names he mentioned in the conversation: IPM and GDB. I asked him if we could use the 2nd one because I'm a polite person, and he must also have been polite for he agreed! He later designed the cover for our 2nd demo tape.
The first songs were created in the nice bedroom of a lovely flat in a none the less charming 60s style block of flats on the suburbs of Dijon. That's where Nofun used to live then. I don't remember which songs were made at this time but I have a feeling that “Chargée” and “Toi Aussi” were part of them. Quickly we started rehearsing at the Local Libertaire (anarchist center), which suited me better since it was my den then. I'm not sure the neighbours were as pleased as I was though... That's also were we recorded all our songs thanks to Brian's mixing desk.
I can't remember either which was our first gig: was it in a Geneva squat with 20 Minutes de chaos in September 1997 or in Chaumont on the tiny little 1st floor of a bar with Inner Terrestrials? Fuck! Bloody memory loss! I only remember that I was told that during this gig with IT, some people walked out during our yet short set, because they thought they would attend an English reggae-ska-punk-dub concert! I also remember having only 4 songs to play which we played twice so as to lengthen the party.
We did a few gigs later on, often with Jean-Jean driving us and having to put up with our alcoholism. Sorry Jean Jean. So, a few gigs. Some with fun, others with much less fun. The worst of all being probably the one at Le Tipi in Lille where we did ended up not playing since Nofun laid unconscious on the concrete floor of the concert place despite my kicking him on the ribs hatefully! My best memory was playing with Accion Mutante and Oi Polloi at the Vort n'Vis in Ieper. I also liked our trip to Switzerland with friends Colas and Gork.
Well, at the end, I had less and less fun doing this band, I felt the inspiration was getting different. Plus, Nofun had the name GDB tatooed on his arm which worried me a little as it was getting too serious. We were supposed to play somewhere, somewhen but the very same day, Fleas and Lice were playing in the North . I called Nofun to tell him I wouldn't play the gig but would go to see Fleas and Lice instead and that there would be no more GDB gigs anyway. Sorry Nofun. Here we are, end of the story, all for the best since, as far as music is concerned, there's no point insisting when the feeling's no longer there.
Thank you to all , boys and girls, who supported and put up with us in those days. Make beer not war!
Contact : contact(at)kaosyouki.net
You want to download songs of GDB? Well you right click on the link you want and you choose the appropriate option, eg "Save link as ..." with Firefox. Don't be afraid, it is for free and do what you want with the songs as long as you quote the source and you do not make commercial use.

By Cyrus Ombati
Former KTN anchor Esther Arunga plans to sue her parents and a psychiatrist for allegedly incarcerating her.
Ms Arunga also announced she was joined to Quincy Timberlake in a civil marriage. Quincy is in jail.
"You can marry someone who is still in jail. Let it be known I have changed my name to Esther Adongo Timberlake," she said.
Addressing a Press conference Thursday, Arunga said she would seek Sh300 million from her parents and Dr Frank Njenga, who she alleged attended to her.
She claimed her attempts to escape from Bustani Community Centre for the mentally retarded were thwarted by security.
She said the medical officials at the institution sedated her to detain her despite the fact that she was found to be mentally stable.
Arunga, who was accompanied by the leader of Finger of God Church Joseph Hellon at their Runda home, said she had severed links with her parents for liaising with police and psychiatrists to incarcerate her.
"They should know I am a grown up with freedom to do anything and I have nothing to do with them," she said.
Arunga, who is also a lawyer, displayed drafted and unstamped chamber summons and affidavits that she claimed were restricting orders against police and her parents.
She said she escaped from her parents’ house in Kileleshwa Thursday after fighting a housemaid, who had been left to take care of her.

I am bipolar and have PTSD. The last couple of weeks I have been up and down emotionally. Now I am mostly down. I am not sure if this is my PTSD (because I have been dealing with my issues) or my bipolar. Is a deep, dark depression normal with PTSD. I've seen people writing about taking meds for PTSD. What are they? Do they help? Any advice would be happily welcomed.
Posts You May Be Interested In
I gave my 2 week notice last Friday 13th. Now to join you fine people in a life of leisure and nothing else to do but to look out for myself....is it just me or does that sound pretty boring? My goal was to live to retire and I guess having to take early retirement because of health reasons wasn't exactly the way I had planned things. I just can't stay in that building that is reeking mildew...
I'm trying to exercise daily. I was doing fairly well until I sprained my ankle 2 weeks ago but now I'm getting back on the horse. Today I walked over a mile with my arm weights that are about 22lbs total. I was out of shape and it was hard on my arms. I also did my 30 situps. I'm also going to drink a lot of water and try to eat healthy. I do tend to have a sweet tooth but I'm cutting...

By Vongani Mbara
Winky D left fans asking for more after his spectacular performance at Chinhoyi University of Technology on Friday.
Fans could not help but ask for more after his lively jam packed session that left them sweating. The venue was packed to the bream with young people mostly CUT students and some other Chinhoyi residents that came to witness the “Ninja President” perform. It was all high moments as fans danced and sang along to every song.
Winky showed that he had rehearsed enough and the sound system flowed perfectly whilst he performed both his old and new popular songs. Some of the songs that were popular during the show were his hit with Tuku “Panorwadza Moyo”, “Disappear and “Summer Time”. Even Winky D himself enjoyed his show as he danced and laughed with the crowd that could not get enough of him.
He came on stage around 11 pm and after a massive four-hour session, Winky left the stage leaving his fans asking for more. After the show, fans could be heard praising the “Gafa futi” hit-maker for his performance.
“Winky is the best performer in Zimbabwe period! The money we paid was worth it. Actually, he totally delivered more than we had paid for,” said one happy fan.
Winky D is currently on a national tour courtesy of 2 Kings Entertainment a promotional company that has turned the fortunes of Zimbabwean music. – The Herald

Hello. I need some advice. I had a miscarriage/d&c in August. A week later a co-worker asked why I was gone for a few days. I explained to him that I had a mis-carriage, was so excited about my first child, etc. I said I had a d&c & his reply was "Oh, you had a d&C? A dump & cleanse?" I was silent & he said "oh, don't be mad, that's what my sisters call it." I walked into the bathroom & vomited I was so upset. Since then, human resources has talked to him but did not write him up. They told me to learn to work with him & that maybe he was using humor. I have so much anxiety & I'm so upset & disappointed. I feel like now I've taken many steps back in getting over the actual miscarriage. I can't handle being at work because of the callous attitude. Any suggestions would be greatly appreciated!
Posts You May Be Interested In
A friend sent this to me..As far as I can see, grief will never truly end.It may become softer overtime, more gentleand some days will feel sharp.But grief will last as long as Love does - ForeverIt's simply the way the absence of your loved onemanifests in your heart. A deep longing accompaniedby the deepest Love some days. The heavy fog mayreturn and the next day, it may recede.Once again, it's...
Today is my 25th birthday, to my somewhat lack of surprise I can see already no one really seems to care. I've always been the kinda person to make sure that everyone I Care about feels appreciated and knew somebody had their back. I can count 4 times this year when I Went out of my way to make sure a "friend" felt good on their birthday, especially if they got left hanging. Its early in the...

the teen's birthday (yeah, so it was a week ago today, what of it) was a fun day. she got to wear a cute new dress - well, of course i think it's cute, since i made it. ha! another upcycling project, check:
yes, it's totally a knockoff of one that we saw at unique LA a few weeks ago. but i was pretty stoked to have been able to figure out how to make it sans tutorial or pattern. fairly simple stuff, but still - i wouldn't have had a clue say, six months ago. and i loved that she liked it so much that she wanted to wear it on her pretty princess birthday.
she excitedly texted me during the day to report that her friend rock-ell had surprised her with a balloon bouquet, waiting for her as she walked into first period. so sweet! and after work, i stopped at a party store to buy even more to decorate her room with. it was pretty hilarious trying to squeeze two dozen helium-filled balloons into my little pri-YES, and it was hard as hell to drive home, but i managed. i did have a couple of casualties, but still had enough to achieve my goal:
lots of shiny, colorful happiness waited for her to open the door.
and she was happily surprised when she finally got home. look how cute she is in her little dress!
the bean rocked her upcycled frock that day, too. and yes, rachel, you were right - white leggings worked perfectly underneath it.
when my parents lived in northridge, we often hit up a nearby pasta joint that was a family favorite. i know i've mentioned chi-chi's before, but it's worth mentioning again because that was the spot for the teen's birthday dinner. it's such a trek for us - like 50 miles one way for freaking pasta - but we all love that buttery, saucy goodness, especially the teen.
inside her bag she got a handful of fun teenybopper magazines (tiger beat or BOP, anyone?) along with a gift certificate for a shopping spree at urban outfitters, a couple of tubes of lemon-scented lotion that she'd asked for. i'd also ordered her a case for her newly-returned iPhone, but there was a snag in the order and it didn't arrive till the day after. boo. she still loved her bag o'fun, though.
and this is completely off-topic, but the last time we went to michael levine she'd picked out this colorful comic book-style fabric and asked me to copy a simple top she had in her closet. she's worn it at least once before, but when she busted it out last week, i got her to let me take a picture of it.
cute, right? and she says she gets stopped in the hall all the time by people who want to know where she got it. "my mom made it for me," she always says proudly.
ain't that the greatest?

Tuesday, May 3, 2011
|The already risen sun|
I love my early morning walks; although I haven't done much of it recently, I’ll definitely do it again! When I started doing it I was only limited to our yard, but with the terrain I can't help worrying about tripping over--in other words I DON'T ENJOY IT! Good thing my sister finally took me to the pier to do some walks.
Sorsogon Baywalk (the pier) was the perfect place to do my walking exercises. Other than the gentle breeze there was another reason why I wanted to do my walks at the pier: to catch the sunrise. After someone at the office told me of the beautiful morning we had (I was assigned to the evening shift back then)—the pink reddish sunrise—I wanted to see it again. Unfortunately, I haven’t seen that same sunrise again; and I'm missing it. To be honest I haven't seen sunrises as pretty as that—it was just so amazing; as if someone had painted it especially for me. But I guess it's going to be a while before I’ll see it again....
I wasn't able to see the sunrise that morning when we had our walk. The sun was already up. Instead I was surprised to see many people with jogging pants and rubber shoes on. There was a group of women having their tae-bo session while their husbands jogged back and forth; another group was doing some boxing exercises. I was completely overwhelmed by the number of people present that morning compared to the usual time I spend there with my friends (which was after working hours). It seems mornings at the pier were busier compared to its afternoons (and I never thought there are a lot of health conscious people in Sorsogon). With the number of people present that morning, and for a girl with crutches wearing jogging pants and rubber shoes, that morning became a challenge.
I was completely aware that there would be lots of eyes wandering on my direction – and it did. As I took my walking I saw glances coming my way, checking me out; I was even asked by those whom I cross paths with if I was okay or if I needed any help at all (my sister jogged to the docks). I told them I was fine and that I can manage; smiled to them and continued my walk. I never really liked grabbing much attention and I know I should have gotten used to it by now. What the heck! I was there, the stares were normal (since a girl with crutches doing her walking exercise at the pier, on her own, was something new to most people there), and I need my walk.
I had a few turns before my sister and I headed to light candles at the cathedral. It was a day to be grateful -- I have surpassed another challenge and I had a great time. I may not have caught the sunrise but just like the pink reddish sky my officemate-slash-friend shared with me during one of our last mornings at the office (we were both resigning) I felt a new and beautiful sunrise come up inside me....
Oh...I was wearing a pink tee and red jogging pants too...haha *wink*
Photos by Jenny and Jeremy Gonzales Jimenez

A Key to The City
"Miss Hopps! Miss Hopps!" came the sound of yet another annoying reporter, and as it was with many things in the real world, the one with the loudest voice was the one that got the most attention. And tiny white and gray finger pointed at the bear, a fluffy bunny face with high set ears nodded in his direction, and the question came. "Do you really intend to take this battle to Zootopia?"
"I do," came a much more agreeably feminine, if naïve, voice. Such a stern tone. So sure of her righteousness and dedicated to the 'cause.' Seeing her on TV, the way the camera zoomed in on her face to make her look larger than she actually was, some poor fools might even believe her. "I have received permission from the Administration to bring my case before higher courts within the city. I have even been given office space, so I can move through with any legal battles that are to follow."
More shouts for attention, and the figure watching the large screen swirled the glass of amber liquid in his paw easily. He watched the melee of reporters continue their pleasantly civil assault on the poor country bunny through the crystal in silence.
"Do you really believe that Otterton is innocent, Miss Hopps? All reports indicate that he was found over the body with the bloody murder weapon in his possession."
This one was a vixen. Cute. Snow white fur, proper demeanor, pretty suit jacket and a skirt that even the camera could see was a little shorter than it needed to be. In his younger years he might have considered looking her up at her news station, charming her into a few drinks, which would end with him sliding her out of that pretty ivory outfit and onto him. Now? His eyes were on the bunny. That innocent, foolish little bunny. She was walking into a den of foxes, giving herself up as meat and she didn't even realize it.
"I believe that Mr. Otterton has been framed," the fluff ball continued, and his eyes narrowed as he lowered the glass to see her clearly. "His history of speaking out against the corruption of the government has earned him…"
Pausing the screen, he drew himself to his feet quickly. Setting the untouched scotch on the wooden surface of the side table, the fox made his way into the kitchen with a dismissive grunt. She would be dead soon enough. There was no 'act of good faith' as the Administrator had called it, no help in uncovering the corruption that had led to Otterton's arrest. She was going to be made an example of; she would either vanish, or become the victim of some random act of violence. Perhaps kill herself. Yes, that would have been a likely scenario. Devious, no way to trace it to anyone but her own paw, but obvious at the same time. A lesson to anyone who tried to interfere with how things worked in the city proper now.
Self-disgust had him prowling beyond the kitchen, tail high and ears folded back as guilt crawled over him and infected him like a parasite; a feeling that had him stripping off his shirt as he walked. Not guilt for the bunny. She was making her own bed with this, and it was her fault for being stupid enough to think that one carrot farmer could change anything in a city rotting from the inside out.
It wasn't the idea of her blood in the streets, or soaking into the carpet of whatever coffin they called her office that caused his hackles to raise as he slid his fingers into the grappling gloves.
There was something deeper than the idea of those determined, energetic violet eyes milky in death that had the slim but powerful build of the fox skipping the light warm up punches.
His muzzle twisted, lips drawn back from his teeth as the blows – blows which caused the bag to jump violently and the support stand to grind across the concrete floor despite the weights that held it down – came more often and with greater force.
It wasn't enough. Chest rising and falling quickly as he panted, he stripped the gloves off in a rush brought on by the deep set anger he thought he had killed years ago. He felt the sting of the first blow of bare knuckles on leather, and every blow after that.
Growling now. He hadn't growled in years. He told himself it was the pain of ill-timed blows as he tried to vent his fury, his guilt. His fault. She was going to die, and it was his fault. The world he had allowed to be would grind her into nothing.
The snarl escaped him like a scream, and his claws set into the bag as the impossible thoughts boiled into fury. Tearing, ripping. Muscles bunched and straining as he gutted his own guilt until the sand within spilled freely onto the floor under the destroyed bag. Aching muscles and exhaustion should have eased emotion, the release should have calmed the confusion of his thoughts. The scent of his own fur and sweat sickened him, reminded him that nothing about him had actually changed. He was still a twisted, confused mess of a male.
He returned to the main room, breathing slowing as he took up the glass again and stared at the frozen image of the doomed bunny. Had he thought she was beautiful? Her muzzle was too short, her ears too long, her features soft, the fur a bland mix of grey and white. Nothing special, nothing interesting. Prey. But maybe it was the eyes. Vibrant amethyst, full of everything that had died in the city years ago. Everything that had died in him. He raised the glass in his hand, brought it to his lips, so close that the pungent spice of the fine liquor burned his nose.
He stared into those eyes as he lowered it, placed it carefully on the table, and picked up his phone.
Two hundred and fifty seven numbers. Agencies ranging from the Rainforest District to the Nocturnal District and everything between. Those had been the first, and while they had been polite for the most part, they had also been direct; there was nothing they could do to protect a bunny in Zootopia. Then she had turned to the mercenaries with good reputations, and had been stone walled. Again, there was nothing they could do to protect a bunny in Zootopia. Private investigators, less reputable guns for hire, the ZIA, the diplomatic corps; she had even, in a moment of desperation, attempted to contact the Tundratown Mafia and had been advised to just stay out of the city.
"Will you have protection while in the city? Do you feel safe?"
Exhausted, listless eyes rose to the small screen on her desk. She kept the news running constantly, staying up to date with the basics, and now her own face stared back at her. A face that for the first time in the media conference showed doubt for the span of a breath before she replied, "Because the ZPD cannot offer twenty four hour protection, I am looking into various agencies and organizations…" Like organized crime, she thought bitterly. "…without luck so far. I still have multiple venues open to me, and I am certain someone will step up for what's right."
Those last words, had they sounded as desperate as she felt? Had there been a plea at the end of her statement, a hope that somewhere someone with a soul was listing and would help her? Or was it just her imagination, her own doubts creeping in as she turned her gaze from the screen when the conference finished. Turned it back to the list.
Two hundred and fifty-seven numbers, and only two left.
One came with no name, but had a stupid catch phrase beside it. 'We do anything, so you don't have to.' It sounded more like an advertisement for a maid service than any sort of protection she could rely on. The last number simply had a name beside it.
She ignored that name for now, because she knew who and what he was. Even the stupid catch phrase was a step up from a fox and a pimp. Drawing a deep breath, she took up the cell phone and dialed the number.
"What'cho need done?"
The fact that the voice, and the accent that went along with it was reminiscent of those poorly directed gangland movies she had been forced to sit through with her brothers almost had her releasing a groan. Instead, she rested her forehead on her hand and closed her eyes.
"Hello. My name is Judith Hopps. I'm trying to…"
"Oh ya, you're that bunny from the TV," the voice cut her off, the sound of amusement so thick that she wanted to reach through the phone to strangle him. "What can I do for ya, cutesy?"
The twist in her stomach almost had bile rising into her throat at the causally speciest slang, but she forced her stomach to calm. "I'm looking for someone to help me. I will need someone to act as security for myself and my offices while I am in the city. And I…"
"Oh ho, no," he cut her off again, this time with an almost regretful laugh. "Nuttin doing. I ain't putting my tail on the line for no bunny. You want protection, you call tha cops."
"Look, I just need-"
The sound of total silence from her phone told her loud and clear what the final answer was, and with a cry of anger, she slammed the phone down onto her desk. Dropping her head into her paws, she trembled with frustration and battled the despair that threatened to bring tears to her eyes; tears that did bring a mist to cloud her vision for a moment before she was able to blink it away. Between her fingers, she gazed down at the list that now only contained one name.
She had come this far. She wasn't going to let the cowards in Zootopia stop her. She would call this last number, and then she would start from scratch. She would go through the list again. She would offer more, and then find a way to get it. She would threaten. She would beg. Anything she had to do to get…
The phone lying face down beside the list began to buzz against the surface of the table, and she blinked once when she lifted her head from her paws. Picking it up, she stared down at the screen for a long moment.
She had received various threats already, warnings, and countless calls from the media since the announcement of her trip to Zootopia had been made. She had been sending them to voice mail. And she moved her hand to do so now.
And found herself pressing the phone to her ear instead. "Hello?"
"Judith Laverne Hopps?" The voice was masculine, professionally crisp, and if she had to put words to it, just a little cool.
"This is Hopps."
There was a beat of silence. And then another, and she started wonder if the caller had disconnected when the voice came again.
"I can protect you."

Length of Cohabitation: Skittles: 2 years; Nacho: 1 year
How you came to live with each other:
Skittles: My friend Carri was visiting from MA and wanted to get a cat to take home with her. When she got back from the shelter she had told me all about the cute little babies they had including a really whiney cat. The next day, Chet and I decided to go check things out, not expecting to really take anyone home-- but rather play with the kittens that were there and then go about our way. Then we saw him: All alone in his cage there was a little black kitty with the bluest eyes meowing like his life depended on it. At that instant we fell in love. Unfortunately we didn't have the money on us at the time but we came back the following day and he was still there! He has since grown 10 fold and is the cuddliest, sassiest kitty I have ever known.
Nacho: Skittles would get restless by himself when Chet and I weren't home, so we thought it would be best to get a friend for him, so, we went to the Richmond SPCA in search of a new kitty. First I saw a kitten named Chuck that I fell in love with from the start. He was the sweetest kitten and the same age as Skittles too. However, we wanted to keep looking around. Bad move. When we came back to get him, he basically got adopted in front of my eyes. My heart was broken and I did cry some. At first I really didn't want to get another cat anymore, but they showed us Nacho (Frank at the time) and he was so sweet and playful, I knew he would be a great match and now the two get along just like brothers!
Favorite shared activity: Skittles: Cuddling; Nacho: playing fetch
Tell us about this photo: I am a photography major at VCU and it was our second semester of studio lighting. My mom had asked for a picture of Chet and I but I didn't really have any that I thought were good so I decided to take one myself! The first attempt was unsuccessful, and my teacher tried to persuade me to try something else. However, I was determined to get it right and I did!
What do you love most about your cats?
I love how sassy Skittles is and how cuddly and soft he is. I could hug him all day long. Nacho is terribly affectionate-- he wants to be loved every minute of every day which is perfect because I love loving kitties. He is also the cutest sleeper!
How or why do you incorporate cats in your photography:
I think cats are such interesting creatures. They are mysterious and sleek, and I always feel like they see something that no one else can. Its difficult for me to put into works the otherworldliness that felines possess.

This weeks lesson was an abstract painting by Wendy Brightbill.
It was wonderful to learn to be more intuitive with my art.
We were encouraged to use a variety of media in our work.
I really enjoyed the peace and relaxation of intuitive painting. I wasn't so caught up with the outcome by just allowing it to come to life.

The Vikings entered the game four points back from first place in the MVC, and a win would put them only one point behind West Salem.
"The primary focus this year is to win conference, and yes we were both undefeated coming into tonight game, but we knew that tonight if we wanted to win conference or to make that step towards winning conference, we needed to win," Head Coach Guy Turner said. " A tie was not going to be able to suffice."Holmen did just that starting with two early goes, a focus for the vikings this year.
" The first five and last five are the majority of goals being scored in any half of soccer so coming out and getting something in the early minutes allows our team to understand and build confidence," Turner said. That confidence didn't stop there. Captain Jacob Clements had two more goals leading Holmen to a 6-0 win.
"It's like my dream come true," Clements said. "It's really fun. I have been watching high school soccer growing up, and now it's my turn to do that, it feels great."
The defense did their part shutting out the number one team and holding them to only five shots on goal.
" Even before tonight, I don't think six nothing was on their radar," Turner said. "I think the zero was what we were aiming for and because we couldn't lose if we had a shut out here this evening so our defense was incredible. They stepped together. We had a couple of transitions, but otherwise it was a fantastic performance on the defensive end tonight."
Holmen now has four games remaining in the regular season.
" We can't let up," Clements said. "We have to push through and still put in a bunch of goals and keep clean sheets."The vikings have a chance to make history this year
" Holmen has never been to state, Holmen has never even been to sectionals," Turner said. "We have never won conference. There is a lot of monkeys on our back right now, and I think we are ready to shed those and state that western Wisconsin and Holmen Wisconsin is a place that puts out quality soccer players."
" Right now we are focusing on winning the MVC, but besides that yeah I have a good feeling with this team," Clements said. Holmen plays host to Tomah next Tuesday in hopes of continuing their run.

Police officers will today visit a man in hospital who was found last Thursday with his penis cut off. The man, in his 40s, was found on the A66 in the South Bank area of Middlesbrough.
Detectives are continuing to investigate how he came by his injuries.
Members of the public with relevant information are asked to contact Cleveland Police by calling 101.
More top news
The boys, aged 15 and 13, had got into difficulties while swimming off the beach at Skinningrove.
Jason Gillespie is to leave his position as coach at Yorkshire County Cricket Club at the end of the 2016 season.
Paralympic athlete Stephen Miller, from Cramlington, is on his way to Rio to compete in the games.

"I just got out of practice," Harvey said. "We just got out of conditioning. I have been working on my angles, the angles of approach."
Harvey is focusing on adding a little meat to his frame as well this summer. "I have been trying to put on a little weight. I have been a little thin. I was around 190 pounds and I am trying to put on another 10 pounds."
Harvey is a heck of a centerfielder when it comes to playing safety. He also likes to come up and stick his nose in on a play and make a hit.
"I think my biggest strengths are my range and my awareness for the ball. I love to hit. That is what I love to do the most. I like to stick my nose in there. I can cover too."
Harvey was active last year on defense and on special teams. "I had about 65 tackles, 10 interceptions, two blocked field goals and two or three blocked punts. I got all-Valley conference."
The first offer for Harvey is the only offer, for now. It's a distinguished offer to him though. He has done some research on the team and the school and feels like they offer a complete package.
"I just have one offer. I have an offer from Nebraska. I think that the offer is really good. I like cooler winters and hot summers. They have good academics there too."
"I wanted to really find something to distinguish a school above others and I looked at Nebraska's academics. They have very good academics. I am looking forward to them being on my list and taking a visit."
Nebraska is eyeing bringing in Harvey in the spring so he can be ready to compete for next fall. "They want me to come in so I can be there for the spring. That helps me fit in and get ready to play in their system. They want to get me a spot."
Harvey hails from Florida originally and isn't necessarily trying to get closer to home with his decision. "I went to Tylerville (Flor.) HS. I don't know if I just didn't finish up trying to get through the clearinghouse. I had a 3.2 GPA coming out of high school."
"My test scores, they weren't all that great, but they were good enough to go through the clearinghouse because of my GPA being a 3.2. I guess that I really don't know what happened."
Harvey says that as of right now he is on track to be able to enroll at a division one school in December. "I should be finishing up at Reedley in December. When I enroll at a four year school, I will have three years to play two."
The Nebraska coaches have been talking about bringing Harvey in for an official visit this summer, before his season starts. Harvey said that he is trying to reach the Nebraska coaches, but realizes that many are out on vacations.
"I haven't been able to talk to the coaches lately at Nebraska because they have been out on vacation. I have left voice messages for them. I will call them tonight after class or tomorrow morning."

About: Fulwood Hall Hospital Fulwood Hall Hospital PR2 9SZ
Posted by W**f
Clean hospital.Just had spinal operation under the consultant and he is great to deal with and all the nurses very caring and professional, However there was one nurse that does need some more training in patient care. A nurse who I found very rude and uncaring. I would not go back to this hospital if she was still there nor would I recommend to family of friends until this problem has been rectified.

I woke up this morning feeling like I was paralysed! Okay, maybe not paralysed but I couldn't lift my body at all! My body was aching ever so badly that I took like five minutes to actually get up from my bed. All the lactate were causing so much pain in my muscles. :( I couldn't complain much because I am not really physically fit. Plus, I didn't really stretch or do any exercises yesterday before my events. Hah! Serves me right. :( The pain was torturing me silently that I was so tempted to skip school today but I didn't! :D
Heats Day was alright despite getting to know that I was involved in FOUR events after assembly. I was shocked. O_o Four events which include long jump, high jump (I can tell how your face expression is now, if you're aware about my height), 4x100m and 4x400m. I don't mind running, but jumping? Bleh, but I did it anyway just for Chow Thye. Haha. I think it's quite easy for girls to win medal because most girls refuse to take part in any event. So, there were very limited girls which means higher chances to win the top three placings. :p I consider myself as the "lucky" one because I got third for long jump and second for high jump. I know right, unbelievable! Haha.
In addition to all the muscle pain, I also hurt my butt yesterday because of high jump. It was so painful, that I felt like my butt went out of place. To make matters worse, high jump was before my 4x400m race. So, I had to run with the pain. But, I didn't feel much of the pain because I was too into getting the race done.
Anyhow, I'm glad that it's over! I only have one more event left on Sports Day. Yayy! :D
I look like a bull that is ready to charge. Lol.
Alvinnnnnnnnnn and I. :)
Pictures courtesy of Mr Alvin Kuan. The jump shot was from Kelvin Liew. :D Thanks! :D

A gay former vicar of English Church Rev PhilipClements (81) died and left fortune to his young husband. Rev Philip died on the 31st of May in Bucharest hospital and this death has nothing to do with Coronavirus. After Philip retired, he came out as gay. Later (in April 2017) he married male model from Romania Florin Marin, who is only 27. Their love became headlines. Clements sold his own house and decided to move to Romania because he wanted to live with his husband. Marin told Clements died in the hospital alone because he couldn’t visit him due to the pandemic. ‘Philip didn’t want me to cry’, he added. The last time Marin saw Clements he gave him a letter with words: “everyone who loved youare praying for you in England and that our cat is fine and missing you.” On religious ceremony were only close relatives. Clements will be cremated. Relatives are sure that Marin just used Clements to take advantage of him: “We had to inherit Philip’s estate but now it’s all gone to Florin”. Marin claims that it is not his fault that his husband left him with money.

“He’s been through a lot the last six or seven months. Medically (now) he’s in a much better spot. When he was diagnosed, he was on a 50-point pace, even going back to the previous season, where he had a big second half for us. . .he’s had 24 goals in the last 70 games he’s played. That’s just the floor, we believe, of his potential. We’re very excited to watch him continue his career, rejoin his teammates and be a very productive player for the Flyers for years to come.‘'

Neil 'Razor' Ruddock has revealed how his deteriorating health issues have seen him lose out on lucrative television appearances on programmes such as Strictly Come Dancing.
The 52-year-old former England footballer recently had a pacemaker fitted after he fell dangerously ill while filming Harry's Heroes.
But the 23st father of four carried on boozing throughout, even rowing with Arsenal legend Paul Merson about the toll his actions were taking on his own body.
Health checks revealed Ruddock was so unhealthy he could drop dead at any moment, words which proved something of a wakeup call.
"We all had a bellyful and I was feeling a bit tired," he said.
"They took me to have a service – full oil change – in London, and they found my cholesterol was up.
"So I had to change my diet, take a few pills and, you know, I just got on with life as normal.”
Following the devastating medical news, he had a pacemaker fitted and his heart rate is half the speed it was.
The former England international has lost three stone and has cut down on alcohol and cigarettes.
Razor told The Sun: "I was asked to do Strictly but with my knees and arthritis, I wouldn't last two minutes.
"And Dancing On Ice and The Jump – I couldn't do things like that."
The once-voted '17th hardest footballer of all time' has had a long battle with alcohol, once admitting he would sometimes drink three bottles of wine, six pints of larger with double gin and tonic chasers, and four brandies.
He said: "At my worst I was crazy. I was doing three or four bottles of wine a day, easy peasy, plus spirits, beers and cocktails."

The Passion of Jesus, chronologically compiled from all four gospels
“At that time there was a Jesus, a wise person, if you can call him a person at all. In fact, he was the accomplice of very incredible deeds and the teacher of all people who joyfully accepted the truth. So he attracted many Jews and also many pagans. He was the Christ. And although Pilate sentenced him to death on the cross at the instigation of the noblest of the people, his former followers were not unfaithful to him. Because on the third day he appeared to them alive again, as God-sent prophets had previously announced this and a thousand other wonderful things about him. And the people of the Christians who call themselves after him continue to this day. “
Among the enthusiastic cheers of the residents of Jerusalem and the festival visitors, Jesus had come to the capital of Israel on a donkey for the Passover, as the prophets had announced centuries before. He had thrown the money changers and traders out of the temple, which made the hatred of the Jewish upper class immeasurable. Then he explained to his disciples what would happen now and in the distant time in the last days of this world.
Now read on:
The betrayal of Judas
But it was close to the Feast of Unleavened Bread called Passa. And the chief priests and scribes sought how they could kill him; because they were afraid of the people. But Satan drove in Judas, called Iscariot, who belonged to the number of twelve. And he went and talked to the chief priests and the captains about how he could betray him to them, and said: What do you want to give me? I want to tell him to you. And they offered him thirty pieces of silver. And he said so and looked for an opportunity to give him up to her without a fuss.
But on the first day of the Unleavened Bread, the disciples came to Jesus and asked: Where do you want us to prepare the Passover Lamb for you to eat? And he sent two of his disciples and said to them, Go into the city, and you will meet a man who carries a jug of water; Follow him and wherever he goes, speak to the master: The master will tell you: Where is the room where I can eat the Passover lamb with my disciples? And he will show you a large hall that is upholstered and prepared; prepare for us there.
And the disciples went and came into the city and, as he had told them, found it and prepared the Passover lamb. And in the evening when the hour came, he sat down and the apostles with him. When they ate, Jesus took the bread, thanked and broke it, and gave it to the disciples, saying, Take, eat; that is my body. And he took the cup and gave thanks, gave it to them, and said, Drink all of it; this is my blood of the covenant, 1 which is shed for many to forgive sins. I say to you: from now on I will no longer drink from this vine plant until the day when I will drink it again with you in my father’s kingdom. When Jesus said this, he became sad in the spirit and testified and said, Verily, verily, I say to you: One of you will betray me. Then the disciples looked at each other, and they were afraid of whom he was talking about. But one of his disciples whom Jesus loved was at the table at the breast of Jesus. Simon waved to Peter to ask who it was that he was talking about. Then he leaned against the chest of Jesus and asked him: Lord, who is it?
Jesus answered: It is to whom I immerse the bite and give it. And he took the bite, immersed it, and gave it to Judas, the son of Simon Iscariot. And when he took the bite, Satan drove into it. Then Jesus said to him, What you do, do it soon! But nobody at the table knew what he was telling him. Some said that because Judas had the bag, Jesus said to him: Buy what we need for the feast !, or that he should give something to the poor. When he had taken the bite, he went out immediately. And it was night.
The glorification and the new commandment
When Judas had gone out, Jesus said: Now the Son of Man is glorified, and God is glorified in him. If God is glorified in him, God will glorify him in himself and will glorify him soon. Dear children, I’ll be with you for a little while longer. You will look for me. And as I said to the Jews, I now also say to you: Wherever I go, you cannot get there. I give you a new command that you love each other as I loved you so that you also love each other. This will tell everyone that you are my disciples if you love each other.
The high priestly prayer
So Jesus spoke and lifted up his eyes to heaven and said: Father, the hour has come: glorify your son so that the son can glorify you; for you have given him power over all men, so that he may give eternal life to all you have given him. But this is eternal life that they will recognize you, who you are the only true God and whom you have sent, Jesus Christ. I glorified you on earth and completed the work that you gave me to do. And now, father, you glorify me with yourself with the glory that I had with you before the world was.
I have revealed your name to the people you have given me from the world. They were yours and you gave them to me and they kept your word. Now they know that everything you gave me comes from you. Because I gave them the words you gave me, and they accepted them and truly recognized that I emanated from you, and they believe that you sent me.
I pray for them and not for the world, but for those you have given me; because they are yours. And everything that is mine is yours, and what is yours is mine; and I am glorified in them. I am no longer in the world; but they are in the world and I come to you. Holy Father, receive them in your name that you have given me that they are one like us.
As long as I was with them, I received them in the name you gave me, and I kept them, and none of them are lost except the son of doom, so that the scriptures may be fulfilled. But now I come to you and speak this in the world so that my joy in them is complete. I gave them your word and the world hated them; because they are not of the world as I am not of the world. I’m not asking you to take them out of the world, but to keep them from evil. You are not of the world as I am not of the world. Sanctify them in truth; your word is the truth.
As you sent me into the world, I send it into the world. I sanctify myself for them so that they too can be sanctified in truth. I am not only praying for them, but also for those who will believe in me through their word so that they are all one. Just as you, father, are in me and I in you, so they should be in us, so that the world can believe that you have sent me. And I gave them the glory that you gave me to be one, as we are, me in them and you in me, so that they were one and recognize the world that you sent me and loved them how you love me.
Father, I want where I am to be with me who you gave me so that they can see my glory that you gave me; for you loved me before the foundation of the world was laid Just father, the world doesn’t know you; but I know you and they have recognized that you sent me. And I have made your name known to them and I will make it known so that the love with which you love me is in them and I in them.
And when they had sung the song of praise, they went out to the Mount of Olives
Talks with the disciples
The announcement of Peter’s denial
There was also a dispute among them about who should be considered the greatest. And he said to them, The kings rule over their people, and their rulers can be called benefactors. But not yours! But the greatest among you should be like the youngest and the noblest like a servant. Because who is bigger: who sits at the table or who serves? Isn’t it the one sitting at the table? But I am like a servant among you. But it is you who have endured with me in my challenges. And I want to give you the kingdom, as my father has given me, that you should eat and drink at my table in my kingdom and sit on thrones and judge the twelve tribes of Israel.
Simon, Simon, behold, Satan has asked to sift you like wheat. But I asked for you that your faith should not stop. And if one day you will be converted, strengthen your brothers.
That night you’ll take all the nuisance out of me. For it is written (Zechariah 13: 7): “I will strike the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock will scatter.” But when I have risen, I will go to Galilee before you. Peter answered and said to him, “Even if they take away all the nuisance, I will never take nuisance from you.”
Jesus said to him, Truly, I say to you, that night before the rooster crows you will deny me three times. For I say to you: What is written must be accomplished in me (Isaiah 53:12): “He has been counted among the evildoers.” For what is written by me will be accomplished.
Peter said to him, And if I should die with you, I will not deny you. All the disciples said the same thing.
Jesus in Gethsemane
When Jesus had said this, he went out with his disciples over the Kidron stream; there was a garden in which Jesus and his disciples went. But Judas, who betrayed him, also knew the place, because Jesus often met there with his disciples. And Jesus said to his disciples, Sit here until I pray.
And he took Peter and James and John with him, and began to tremble and hesitate, and said to them, My soul is sad until death; stay here and watch!
And he went a little further, threw himself on the ground and prayed that the hour would pass him if possible, and said: Abba, my father, everything is possible for you; take this cup from me; not what I want, but what you want!
But an angel from heaven appeared to him and strengthened him.
And he wrestled with death and prayed more violently. And his sweat became like drops of blood falling on the earth. And he came and found her sleeping and said to Peter, Simon, are you sleeping? Couldn’t you watch “an” hour? Watch and pray that you will not be tempted! The mind is willing; but the meat is weak.
And he went back and prayed and said the same words, and came back and found them sleeping again; for their eyes were full of sleep and they did not know what to say to him.
And he came for the third time and said to them: Oh, do you want to go on sleeping and resting? It’s enough; the hour has come. Behold, the Son of Man is delivered into the hands of sinners. Get up, let’s go! See, he is there who betrays me.
When Judas had brought the troops of soldiers with him and servants from the chief priests and Pharisees, he came there with torches, lamps and weapons.
Now that Jesus knew everything that was to come to him, he went out and said to them: Who are you looking for?
They answered him: Jesus of Nazareth. He says to them: It’s me!
And the traitor had given them a sign and said: Which one I will kiss is it; seizes and leads him away safely. And when he came, he immediately came up to him and said: Rabbi !, and kissed him. But they laid hands on him and seized him.
When Jesus said to them: It’s me! They backed away and fell to the ground.
Then he asked her again: Who are you looking for? But they said: Jesus of Nazareth.
Jesus replied: I have told you that it is I. If you are looking for me, let them go!
This was to fulfill the word he said: I haven’t lost any of those you gave me.
But when those around him saw what was going to happen, they said: Lord, shall we strike with the sword? Simon Peter, however, had a sword and drew it and struck the high priest’s servant and cut off his right ear. And the servant’s name was Malchus.
Then Jesus said: Let go! Not further! And he touched his ear and healed him.
Then Jesus said to Peter: Put your sword in its place! For whoever takes the sword shall perish by the sword. Or do you think I couldn’t ask my father to send me more than twelve legions of angels at once? How would the scripture then be fulfilled that it must be so?
At that hour Jesus said to the crowd: You went out like a robber with swords and poles to catch me. I sat and taught in the temple every day, and you didn’t take hold of me. But all of this has happened so that the scriptures of the prophets would be fulfilled. Then all the disciples left him and fled. But a young man followed him, who was clothed in a linen robe on his bare skin; and they reached for him. But he let the robe go and fled naked.
Jesus before the High Council / The Denial of Peter
The crowd and their leader, and the servants of the Jews, took Jesus and bound him, and led him first to Hannas; he was the father-in-law of Caiaphas, who was high priest that year. But it was Caiaphas who advised the Jews that it would be good for “one” man to die for the whole people. Simon Peter followed Jesus and another disciple. This disciple was known to the high priest and went with Jesus into the palace of the high priest.
Peter was standing outside the door. The other disciple, who was known to the high priest, came out and spoke to the gatekeeper and led Peter inside. Then the maid, the gatekeeper, said to Peter: Are you not one of this man’s disciples too? He said: It’s not me. But the servants and servants stood and made a coal fire because it was cold and they warmed themselves. But Peter also stood by them and warmed himself.
The high priest now asked Jesus about his disciples and about his teaching. Jesus answered him: I spoke freely and openly to all the world. I have always taught in the synagogue and in the temple, where all Jews come together, and have spoken nothing in secret. What are you asking me Ask those who heard what I said to them. See, they know what I said.
When he spoke like this, one of the servants who stood by slapped Jesus in the face and said, Shall thou answer the high priest?
Jesus answered: If I have spoken badly, prove that it is evil; but I was talking right, what are you hitting me for?
And Hannas sent him bound to the high priest Caiaphas. Simon Peter stood there and warmed himself. Then they said to him: Aren’t you one of his disciples? He denied and said: It’s not me. When one of the high priest’s servants, a relative of whom Peter had cut off his ear, said, Didn’t I see you in the garden with him? Then Peter denied again, and immediately the cock crowed. And the Lord turned and looked at Peter. And Peter remembered the word of the Lord, as he had said to him: Before the rooster crows today, you will deny me three times. And Peter went out and wept bitterly.
But the chief priests and the whole high council sought false testimony against Jesus that they killed him. And although many false witnesses come forward, they found nothing. Finally two came up and said: He said: I can break off the temple of God and build it in three days. The high priest stood up and said to him, “Are you not answering what these testify against you?”
But Jesus was silent. And the high priest said to him, I swear to you by the living God that you tell us whether you are the Christ.
Then the high priest tore his clothes and said: He blasphemed God! What do we need more witnesses for? See, now you have heard blasphemy. What is your judgment They answered and said: He is guilty of death.
Then they spat in his face and hit him with their fists. But some of them struck him in the face and said, “Tell us, Christ, who is it that struck you?”
Jesus before Pilate.
They answered and said to him, “If this were not a malefactor, we would not have handed him over to you.”
Then Pilate said to them, So take him and judge him according to your law. Then the Jews said to him: We must not kill anyone. This was to fulfill the word of Jesus that he had said to indicate what death he would die. And you began to sue him, saying, We have found that he incites and forbids our people to give taxes to the emperor, and says that he is Christ, a king. And when he was sued by the high priests and elders, he didn’t answer anything.
Pilate said to him, “ Can’t you hear how hard they sue you? And he did not answer a single word, so the governor was amazed. But Jesus stood before the governor; and the governor asked him and said, Are you the king of the Jews? Jesus answered: Are you saying this yourself or have others told you about me? Pilate replied: Am I a Jew? Your people and the high priests have handed you over to me. What have you done?
Jesus replied: My kingdom is out of this world. If my empire were of this world, my servants would fight not to be handed over to the Jews; but now my kingdom is out of this world.
Then Pilate asked him: So are you still a king? Jesus answered: You say it, I am a king. I was born and came into the world to testify to the truth. Whoever is from the truth hears my voice. Pilate says to him: What is truth? And when he had said that, he went out to the Jews again and said to them: I find no fault in him. But they became impetuous and said: He is stirring the people up by teaching here and there throughout Judea, from Galilee to here.
Jesus before Herod
But when Pilate heard this, he asked whether the person was from Galilee. And when he heard that he was a subject of Herod, he sent him to Herod, who was also in Jerusalem these days. But when Herod saw Jesus, he was very happy; because he would have loved to see him long ago; for he had heard of him and hoped he would see a sign from him. And he asked him a lot. But he didn’t answer him.
The chief priests and scribes stood by and severely sued him. But Herod and his soldiers despised and ridiculed him, put on a white robe and sent him back to Pilate.
That day Herod and Pilate became friends; because before that they were enemies of each other.
Jesus condemnation and mockery
And when he was sitting on the judge’s chair, his wife sent him to him and said, “You have nothing to do with this just man; because I suffered a lot today in my dream for his sake.
And the people went up and asked that he do as he used to do. And when they were gathered together, Pilate said to them, Which one do you want? Who should I release to you, Jesus Barabbas or Jesus, who is said to be the Christ? For he knew that they had delivered him out of jealousy, and said to them: You brought this man to me as one who stirred up the people; and behold, I have interrogated him before you and have found no guilt in this man for whom you accuse him; Not even Herod, because he sent it back to us. And behold, he did nothing that deserves death. That’s why I want to let him hit and let go.
But the chief priests and elders persuaded the people to ask for Barabbas, but to kill Jesus. Then they all shouted together: Go away with this, give us Barabbas! Pilate said to them, What should I do with Jesus, who is said to be the Christ? They all said: let him be crucified! But he said: What did he do evil? But they shouted even more: let him be crucified! And they screamed at him and demanded that he be crucified. And their shouting took over.
But when Pilate saw that he was not doing anything but that the crowd was getting bigger, he took water and washed his hands in front of the people and said: I am innocent of his blood; you watch! Then the whole people answered and said: His blood come on us and our children! Then he released Barabbas, but he had Jesus scourged and delivered him up to be crucified.
The soldiers of the governor took Jesus into the praetorium and gathered the whole department around him. And undressed him and put on a purple coat and braided a crown of thorns and put it on his head and gave him a tube in his right hand and bent his knees in front of him and mocked him and said: Greetings to you, the King of Jews! and spat on him and took the pipe and struck his head with it.
Then Pilate went out again and said to them: See, I lead him out to you so that you can see that I am not to blame for him. And Jesus came out and wore the crown of thorns and the purple robe. And Pilate said to them, See what a man!
When the chief priests and the servants saw him, they cried: Crucifixion! Crucified! Pilate said to them, Take him and crucify him, because I find no fault in him.
The Jews replied to him: We have a law and according to the law he has to die because he has made himself God’s son.
When Pilate heard this word, he was even more afraid and went back into the praetorium and said to Jesus: Where are you from? But Jesus didn’t answer him.
Then Pilate said to him, Aren’t you talking to me? Don’t you know that I have power to release you and power to crucify you?
Jesus replied: You would have no power over me if it were not given to you from above. Therefore: who handed me over to you has greater sin.
From then on, Pilate sought to release him. But the Jews shouted: If you release him, you are not the friend of the emperor; for whoever makes himself king is against the emperor. When Pilate heard these words, he led Jesus out and sat on the judge’s chair in the place called stone pavement, Gabbata in Hebrew.
But it was around 6 a.m. on the day of the Passover festival. And he said to the Jews: See, this is your king! But they shouted: Away, away with that! Crucify him! Pilate said to them, Shall I crucify your king? The chief priests replied: We have no king but the emperor. Then he handed Jesus over to them to be crucified.
The end of Judas
When Judas, who had betrayed him, saw that he was sentenced to death, he regretted it, and he brought the thirty pieces of silver back to the chief priests and elders and said: I was wrong to betray innocent blood. But they said: What does this concern us? You are watching!
And he threw the pieces of silver into the temple, went away and hanged himself. But the chief priests took the pieces of silver and said: It is not right that we put them in the box of God; because it’s blood money. However, they decided to buy the pottery field for the funeral for strangers. Therefore, this field is called blood field to this day.
Then what was said was fulfilled by the prophet Jeremiah, who said: “They took the thirty pieces of silver, the price for the sold, which was valued by the Israelites, and they gave the money for the potter’s field, as he did to me Lord commanded “(Jeremiah 32: 9; Zechariah 11: 12-13).
Jesus crucifixion and death
But Jesus turned to them and said: You daughters of Jerusalem, do not weep for me, but weep for yourself and your children. Because behold, the time will come when one will say: Blessed are the sterile and the bodies that have not given birth, and the breasts that have not fed! Then they will start to say to the mountains: fall over us! And to the hills: cover us! Because if you do that on the green wood, what will become dry?
And when they came to the site by the name of Golgotha, which means: skull site, they gave him wine to drink mixed with bile; and when he tasted it, he didn’t want to drink. But others were brought up, two evildoers, that they would be executed with him. And when they came to the site called the skull site, they crucified him there and the evildoers with him, one on the right and one on the left.
And it was the third hour when they crucified him. Pilate wrote an inscription and put it on the cross; and it was written: Jesus of Nazareth, the King of the Jews. Many Jews read this inscription because the place where Jesus was crucified was close to the city. And it was written in Hebrew, Latin, and Greek.
Then the chief priests of the Jews said to Pilate: Do not write: The king of the Jews, but that he said: I am the king of the Jews. Pilate replied: What I wrote, I wrote. And they sat and guarded him.
And the soldiers who crucified Jesus took his clothes and made four parts, one part for each soldier, and the robe. But that was not sewn, woven in one piece from above. Then they said to each other: let’s not split it up, but let’s find out who it should belong to. This is how the scripture should be fulfilled, which says (Psalm 22:19): “They divided my clothes among themselves and cast lots over my robe.” The soldiers did so.
But those who passed by blasphemed him and shook their heads and said: If you break off the temple and build it up in three days, help yourself if you are the Son of God and descend from the cross so that we can see and believe. And those crucified with him also insulted him. Likewise, the chief priests mocked the scribes and elders and said: He has helped others and cannot help himself. If he is the Christ, the King of Israel, he now descends from the cross. Then we want to believe in him. He trusted God; now redeem him if he pleases him; because he said: I am the Son of God.
But one of the evildoers who hung on the cross blasphemed him and said: Aren’t you the Christ? Help yourself and us! Then the other rebuked him and said: And you are not afraid of God, who you are in the same damnation after all? We are rightly so, because we receive what our deeds deserve; but the latter has done nothing wrong. And he said: Jesus, remember me when you come into your kingdom! And Jesus said to him, Truly, I say to you: Today you will be with me in paradise.
But at the cross of Jesus stood his mother and sister, Maria, the wife of Clopas, and Mary of Magdala. When Jesus saw his mother and with her the disciple whom he loved, he said to his mother: Woman, behold, this is your son! Then he said to the disciple: See, this is your mother! And from then on the disciple took them in.
And at the ninth hour Jesus cried out: Eli, Eli, lama asabtani? That means: My God, my God, why did you leave me? But some who stood there when they heard this said, He is calling for Elijah. And immediately one of them ran, took a sponge and filled it with vinegar and put it on a pipe and gave it to drink. But the others said: Stop, let see whether Elijah comes and help him!
And when all the people who were there, watching, saw what was happening, they slapped their chests and turned back. But all his acquaintances stood far away, even the women who had followed him from Galilee and saw all of this.
And it was already about the sixth hour, and there was darkness all over the country until the ninth hour, and the sun lost its light, and the curtain in the temple tore in two from top to bottom. And the earth shook and the rocks tore open, and the tombs opened and many bodies of the saints who had fallen asleep rose and went out of the tombs after his resurrection and came to the holy city and appeared to many.
But when the captain and those who guarded Jesus saw the earthquake and what happened there, they were very frightened and said: Verily, this was the Son of God!
And there were many women watching from afar; they had followed Jesus from Galilee and had served him; among them were Mary of Magdala and Mary, the mother of James and Joseph, and the mother of the sons of Zebedee. But because it was a day of preparation and the bodies should not remain on the cross over the Sabbath – because this Sabbath was a high festival day – the Jews asked Pilate that their legs be broken and that they would be removed. Then the soldiers came and broke the legs of the first and also the other who was crucified with him. But when they came to Jesus and saw that he had already died, they did not break his legs; but one of the soldiers thrust his spear into his side, and immediately blood and water came out. And he who saw that, he testified, and his testimony is true, and he knows that he is telling the truth, so that you too can believe.
Because that was so that the Scripture would be fulfilled (Exodus 12:46): “You shall not break his leg.” And again the Scripture says in another place (Zechariah 12:10): “You will see that that they pierced. ”
And when it was already evening and because it was armament day, that is the day before the Sabbath, Joseph of Arimathea, a respected councilor who also waited for the kingdom of God, came and went inside to Pilate and asked for the body of Jesus . Pilate was surprised that he was already dead and called the captain and asked him if he had died long ago. And when he had discovered it from the captain, he gave Josef the body. And Joseph took his body and wrapped it in a clean linen cloth. Nicodemus, who had come to Jesus earlier that night, also came and brought myrrh mixed with aloe, about a hundred pounds. So they took the body of Jesus and tied it in linen with fragrant oils, as the Jews used to bury. But there was a garden at the place where he was crucified and a new grave in the garden in which no one had ever been placed. They put Jesus there because of the Jews’ arming day because the grave was near.
But the women who came with him from Galilee followed, and looked at the grave and how his body was put inside. But they turned back and prepared fragrant oils and ointments. And they rested on the Sabbath according to the law.
Guarding the tomb
The next day after the arming day, the high priests came to Pilate with the Pharisees and said, Lord, we remembered that this seducer spoke when he was still alive: I will rise again after three days. Therefore order that the grave be guarded until the third day so that his disciples do not come and steal him and say to the people: he has risen from the dead and the last deception is worse than the first. Pilate said to them, There you have the watch; go and guard it as best you can. They went and secured the grave with the guard and sealed the stone.
And behold, a great earthquake happened. For the angel of the Lord came down from heaven, came in and rolled away the stone and sat on it. His figure was like lightning and his robe was white like snow. The guards were frightened of him and became as if they were dead.
And when the Sabbath had passed, Mary of Magdala and Mary, the mother of James, and Salome bought fragrant oils to go and anoint him. And they came to the grave on the first day of the week, very early when the sun rose. And they said among themselves: Who is rolling the stone from the door of the grave for us? And they looked and saw that the stone had rolled away; because it was very big. And they went into the tomb and did not find the body of the Lord Jesus, but saw a young man sitting on his right hand, who was wearing a long white robe, and they were horrified.
But he said to them: Do not be horrified! You are looking for Jesus of Nazareth, the crucified one. He has risen, he is not here. Behold the place where they put him down. He is not here; he has risen, as he said. Come and see the place where he was lying;
And they remembered his words. And when they were concerned about it, behold, two men with shiny dresses came up to them. But they were startled and bowed their faces to the earth. Then they said to them, What are you looking for the living among the dead? He is not here, he has risen. Remember what he said to you when he was still in Galilee: go quickly and tell his disciples that he rose from the dead. And behold, he will go before you to Galilee; there you will see him. See, I told you. The Son of Man must be handed over to the sinners and crucified and resurrected on the third day.
But Maria stood outside the grave and wept. When she was crying, she looked into the grave and saw two angels sitting in white robes, one at the head and the other at the feet where they had put the body of Jesus. And they said to her: Woman, what are you crying for? She said to them: You took my master away and I don’t know where you put him.
And when she said that, she turned and saw Jesus standing there, not knowing that it was Jesus. Jesus said to her: Woman, what are you crying for? Who are you looking for? She thinks it is the gardener and says to him: Lord, if you carried him away, tell me where you put him; then I want to get him. Jesus said to her: Mary! Then she turned and spoke to him in Hebrew: Rabbuni !, that is: Master! Jesus said to her: Don’t touch me! Because I have not yet gone up to the father. But go to my brothers and tell them: I am going up to my father and to your father, to my God and to your God.
And they hurriedly walked away from the grave with fear and great joy and ran to preach it to his disciples. And behold, Jesus met them and said: Greetings! And they came to him and gripped his feet and fell before him. Then Jesus said to them: Do not be afraid! Go and tell my brothers that they are going to Galilee: there they will see me.
They took the money and did as they were instructed. And so it has become talk of the Jews to this day.
But it was Mary of Magdala and Johanna and Maria, the mother of James, and the others with them; they said that to the apostles. And these words seemed to them like chatter and they didn’t believe them.
Then Peter and the other disciple went out and they came to the grave. But the two ran together and the other disciple ran ahead, faster than Peter, and came to the grave first, looks in and sees the linen towels lying there; but he did not go inside. Then Simon Peter followed him and went into the grave and sees the linen towels lying there, but the sweatband that Jesus had tied around his head was not next to the linen towels, but next to it, wrapped up in a special place. Then the other disciple, who had come to the tomb first, went in and saw and believed. Because they did not yet understand the Scriptures that he would have to rise from the dead. Then the disciples went home.
The Emmaus disciples
But he said to them: What are these things that you negotiate on the way? Then they stopped sad.
And the one named Cleopas answered and said to him, “Are you the only one among the strangers in Jerusalem who doesn’t know what happened there in those days?”
And he said to them, What then?
And they said to him: That with Jesus of Nazareth, who was a prophet, powerful in actions and words before God and all people; how our high priests and superiors handed him over to the death penalty and crucified him. But we hoped it would be him who would redeem Israel. And above all of that, today is the third day that this has happened. We were also frightened by some women from our midst who were at the grave early, did not find his body, come and say they saw an apparition from angels who said he was alive. And some of us went to the grave and found it as the women said; but they didn’t see him.
And he said to them: O fools, with a slow heart, to believe all that the prophets have spoken! Didn’t Christ have to suffer this and enter His glory?
And he started with Moses and all the prophets and explained to them what was said about him in all the Scriptures. And they came close to the village where they were going. And he pretended to go on. And they compiled him and said: stay with us; because it wants to be evening and the day has slanted. And he went in to stay with them.
And when he was sitting at the table with them, he took the bread, thanked him, broke it and gave it to them. Then their eyes were opened and they recognized him. And he disappeared from them. And they said to each other: Didn’t our hearts burn in us when he talked to us on the way and the scripture opened to us?
And they got up at the same hour, returned to Jerusalem and found the eleven who were with them; who said: The Lord has truly risen and appeared to Simon. And they told them what had happened on the way and how he recognized them when he broke the bread.
Jesus’ appearance before the disciples
But when they talked about it, he himself, Jesus, stepped among them and said to them: Peace be to you!
But they were startled and afraid and thought they saw a ghost.
And he said to them, What are you so terrified of, and why do such thoughts come to your heart? See my hands and feet, it’s me myself. Touch me and see; because a spirit has no flesh and bones, as you can see, that I have it.
And when he said that, he showed them hands and feet. But when they still did not believe in joy and wondered, he said to them: Do you have something to eat here?
And they presented him with a piece of fried fish. And he took it and ate before them.
But he said to them: These are my words that I said to you when I was still with you: Everything that is written by me must be fulfilled in the law of Moses, in the prophets and in the psalms.
Then he opened their understanding to them so that they understood the Scripture, and said to them: It is written that Christ will suffer and will rise from the dead on the third day; and that in his name there will be preached repentance for the forgiveness of sins among all peoples. Start in Jerusalem and be a witness to it. And behold, I want to send down on you what my father promised. But you should stay in the city until you are equipped with strength from above.
But Thomas, who is called the twin, one of the twelve, was not with them when Jesus came. Then the other disciples said to him: We have seen the Lord. But he said to them: If I do not see the nail marks in his hands and put my finger in the nail marks and put my hand in his side, I cannot believe it.
And after eight days, his disciples were gathered inside again and Thomas was with them. When the doors were closed, come to Jesus and step among them and say: Peace be with you!
Then he said to Thomas: Pass your finger over and see my hands, and pass your hand over and put it in my side, and do not believe, but believe!
Thomas answered and said to him: My Lord and my God!
Jesus said to him: Because you saw me, Thomas, that’s why you believe. Blessed are those who don’t see and yet believe!
Jesus did many other signs before his disciples that are not written in this book. But these are written so that you can believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that you can have life in his name by faith.
But he led her out to Betania and raised his hands and blessed them. And when he blessed them, he departed from them and went up to heaven. But they worshiped him and returned to Jerusalem with great joy and were always in the temple and praised God.

Do we forget that cops were primarily still using 6 Shot Revolvers well through the mid 80's? It wasn't until after 1986 that most departments then relented and went to autos. Capacity wasn't really an issue then... and honestly really it's not even an issue now.
I'm not saying you should use an M1A for home defense, but I'm also not saying you shouldn't.
I wear my shirt at least every other week.So far, I've only had one comment. It was a positive comment and, of course, I directed them to this website, but haven't noticed if they've joined.
Hey just wear a Hawaiian shirt over it and you're good to go.
Page created in 0.135 seconds with 31 queries.

One person died on Sunday evening in Nairobi’s Kiamaiko area when police raided a bar that was allegedly operating past curfew hours.
A police report seen by Ghetto Radio News states that the man was shot inside a police van after chaos ensued during the raid on Gagwa Bar.
According to the report, chaos started when the revelers found in the bar started resisting arrest and pelted police officers with stones.
It is during the melee that one person who had been arrested was hit on the chest by a bullet that had allegedly come from the crowd.
“But while they were escorting them to the station landcruiser , the group became rowdy and others escaped. They then started shouting and throwing stones at the said officers and the police vehicle,” read the report.
“The said officers decided to withdraw and drove away with only two suspects arrested, but they suddenly heard a sound of a gunshot from the rowdy group but they managed to retreat from the scene,” it further stated.
MSF Ambulance that had been called only arrived after the suspect had died.
The body is currently lying at the City Mortuary.

Lewis Macleod said that his first strike for Brentford was “a long time coming” having marked his first league start since October 2016 with a goal. Brentford fell behind midway through the first half to Adama Traoré's well-struck effort, but the Scotsman was at hand to earn The Bees a share of the spoils during an evenly-contested encounter at Griffin Park.
"We’re disappointed that we didn’t win the game," Lewis told iFollow Brentford following the full-time whistle. “We dominated most of the ball and if we’d taken a few of our chances we could have won it comfortably.”
The sponsors' Man of the Match admitted he was delighted to get off the mark in red and white:
“On a personal note it was good. I was relatively surprised I was playing so I was excited going into the game. To score is a great feeling. I hit it straight into the corner – I was unlucky with the first strike, picked up the second ball and tried to put it in the bottom corner. It was a nice finish. It’s been a long time coming! My aim is to get on the pitch and play and I felt as though I did myself justice today.”

"I was terrified and shocked at the same time," said Irie Campbell, 11.
A scary turn during a play date in the woods Sunday. Irie and her friend, Piper Rolfe, were hanging out with Irie's 5-year-old brother, Felix, behind Piper's house in Kirby.
"My brother was standing right over there in that area and then all of a sudden he started to scream and run up the hill," Irie said.
Around noon, the kids say a hissing raccoon appeared out of nowhere and went straight for Irie, first jumping right at her face.
"So I put my hands up to my face like this. And then it grabs onto my thumb," Irie said. "I started to choke it with my left hand and then it started to fall off and then it grabbed a hold of me right here. I started to choke it with both hands. Then it jumped up and got me on my hand and now I have four stitches there."
She suffered six bites, including one on her thigh. While little Felix screamed for help, 10-year-old Piper got in the fight.
"Piper said, 'What is it?' And I said it was a raccoon and she got a stick and started to poke it and hitting it a little which helped out a lot," Irie said.
"I already had the stick. I don't really know what I was thinking. I just thought to try to get it off Irie," Piper said.
"When Piper was beating it with a stick, I was trying to find a big enough stick. There was this really big stick. But since it was really big, I was afraid to use it," Felix said. "And then I screamed, 'Get away from my sister, raccoon!'"
The raccoon eventually let go and ran off into the woods. Irie was rushed to the emergency room where she immediately began treatment for possible rabies exposure. While the raccoon that attacked Irie was never found, it is assumed the animal was infected. The Health Department has confirmed 27 cases of rabies in Vermont so far this year, which health officials say is normal.
"No parent ever wants to get a call that your kid has been attack by a wild animal," said Derek Campbell, Irie's dad.
Campbell says he's proud his daughter was so tough, and grateful that her brave 10-year-old friend stopped the attack from being even worse.
"Piper is a little hero. She is a cool kid. I mean Piper is a tough kid. She is one that will just. I mean she will barrel down any run at the ski mountain," Derek Campbell said.
And what makes her act of heroism even more profound-- Piper is legally blind with a degenerative disorder. So where does her strength come from?
"I don't really know. I didn't want Irie to get really hurt," Piper said.
Reporter Adam Sullivan: What do you think about her?
Irie Campbell: I think that if she didn't help me out, then it would have eaten me more.
A reason for a big hug, knowing that when trouble lurks from behind the bushes, a good buddy has your back.
"She really helped out a lot," Irie said. "She's a good friend."
Irie will need a few more shots in the next couple of weeks, but doctors say she is expected to be OK.

GRAND RAPIDS TWP. — A Kent County man charged with murdering his 10-month-old daughter called his attorney before 911 after finding the dead baby, a recording of the emergency call indicates.
Judge Sara Smolenski noted Seth Welch's "callousness" during the 911 call when she bound him and his wife, Tatiana Fusari, over on charges of felony murder and child abuse in the Aug. 2 death of Mary Anne Welch. The judge called the case "as horrific as it gets."
The couple is charged with open murder and child abuse after a medical examiner concluded Mary’s death was a homicide caused by malnutrition and dehydration.
Seth Welch cried in court Wednesday as prosecutors played a recording of his 911 call, which he made shortly after noon Aug. 2.
During the call, Welch told the dispatcher his daughter was "dead as a doornail" and that he called a lawyer before calling 911. He estimated he discovered the unresponsive baby in her crib about 90 minutes before his call, but authorities indicated it was closer to two hours.
Detective Jason Russo testified Fusari told investigators she fed Mary around 2:30 p.m. before going to work the day before the baby was found dead. Fusari and Welch never checked on Mary until the next morning, when Welch told dispatchers he found her around 10 a.m.
The doctor who performed the autopsy testified Mary was in a state of “chronic malnutrition” and her muscles were “wasting away.” He said her death did not happen overnight, and it would have taken weeks for her to become dehydrated.
Both defense attorneys questioned the medical examiner about a dirty diaper found on Mary and empty food containers in the home, trying to contradict accusations Mary’s parents neglected her.
Kent County Sheriff’s Deputy Dawn Tenbrink became emotional as the prosecutor asked her to review photos of the Solon Township home at the time of Mary’s death. She said Mary’s crib was “very dirty,” with possible mold under the mattress. She said the home was infested with flies and she found mice feces in drawers.
Tenbrink said she only found one container of baby food and no formula during her survey of the home, but photos showed three formula containers in the house, two which expired five months before the baby’s death.
In earlier interviews with detectives, both parents said they were aware of Mary’s skinny appearance and low weight for at least a month before her death, an affidavit indicated.
A detective said Fusari admitted they didn’t reach out for medical help for fear their three children would be taken by Child Protective Services. The detective said the couple also distrusted medical services and cited religious reasons.
However, in a jailhouse interview with WOOD TV-8, Welch said there were no obvious signs his daughter was not well. He admitted she was thin, but said that was true of his other children as well.
"In the Bible, it says that good food is our medicine. We fed her. We were feeding her chicken, potatoes, apples, cheese. We were giving her the good stuff," Welch said. "She died. It's a tragedy. … The Lord giveth, the Lord taketh."
Welch said he cared for his children without the aid of doctors because of religious beliefs, but would have gotten help for Mary if they had known something was seriously wrong.
Children's Protective Services previously had contact with the family in 2014 when there was THC found in their eldest child's system at birth. According to court documents, Welch said he didn't trust doctors and that they had forged documents against him and his eldest child in 2014.
The state has filed a petition with the court seeking to terminate his and Fusari's rights to their two surviving children, ages 4 and 2.

William E November 24, 2017 By I bought this, was so that I could take the man I am on the inside, and bring him to the outside. You've more than helped me in that endeavour. Thank you for that. I'm now a better, more confident me. Thank you for showing me the way!

It’s been three full months since ESPN shut down Grantland releasing a whole slew of writers. During that time, we’ve seen some of the site’s former staffers join MTV News. Sports Illustrated is also picking up its share of former Grantlanders. Awful Announcing has learned that its latest pick up is Andrew Sharp, who will cover the NBA just as he did for Grantland.
He joins two other former Grantland staffers, Jonah Keri who will cover baseball and write his “The 30” and “Trade Value” columns for SI and Robert Mays who joined SI’s MMQB microsite in November and was welcomed by none other than Peter King himself.
Speaking with Awful Announcing, Sharp said he joined Sports Illustrated because it shared a lot of similar missions with Grantland “particularly on the NBA side with Chris Ballard, Lee Jenkins, Rob Mahoney and Ben Golliver. There’s so much talent already there and it seemed like a natural fit for me.”
Sharp said the creative energy he found at SI is similar to what he had at Grantland, “I talked to Robert Mays and he had had a great experience. He started at Monday Morning Quarterback and he’s loved his experience thus far and I felt that was a big reason it made sense to make the jump.”
Sharp said his duties at SI will include reporting and feature writing with some columns as well.
As for his time at Grantland, Sharp said editor-in-chief Bill Simmons assembled a talented team that became very close. Sharp said the freedom and time given to develop stories allowed the staff to make sports more fun. “There was a real positive energy that sort of permeated through the staff,” Sharp said. “I think that’s one of the things we all connected to. It’s been repeated often, but there was a ‘No Assholes’ policy from Simmons on down and it was a really tight-knit group. We all had a lot of fun together.”
But that fun ended when Simmons left ESPN and Grantland was left without its fearless leader. “It was a really tough few months. People on the outside didn’t realize quite how much Bill was responsible for in shaping Grantland and what it became,” Sharp said. “We all worked twice as hard. We believed in what we were doing in large part because of him so once he left it was definitely challenging and we all sort of had to band together to keep things going as long as we did.”
When asked what Simmons’ legacy will be, Sharp replied, “Bill’s legacy to too broad for me to even try to encapsulate in a quote. It’s still being shaped. But what happened at Grantland is that he added a new aspect to his legacy where he was able to empower a lot of young talent people and that has made him more than (just) a writer which has been very cool to watch.”
But for his new gig, Sharp is willing to get right back on the bicycle and start writing again, “I’m shaking off the cobwebs after a couple of months away from the internet,” Sharp said. “I’m excited to get back this week.”
Sharp said he doesn’t know what his first SI article will be as of yet, but he is looking forward to getting his feet wet very soon.

I have recently become a member of the Women’s Business Club and wanted to share my experience with you as it has truly been a remarkable journey.
Networking was something that I never considered or desired but after seeing regular comments on social media from your other members I decided to dip my toe in when one of my colleagues invited me to join her. I can’t say that I was nervous, I am generally very confident within myself, but I was reluctant to give up two hours of my busy day.
I experienced a twinge of excitement as I drove up to the venue as I could see it was going to be a classy event and the smell of freshly brewed coffee greeting me as I entered the room was very welcome. Although, not as welcoming as the ladies! I felt as if I had walked into a room full of friends and very quickly felt comfortable and at home in the club.
Lunch was exquisite with a good mix of healthy salads and lovely chicken. I was taken aback at how knowledgeable the speaker was, I was expecting an extended sales pitch by one of the members but came away with a lot of food for thought as the speaker really knew what she was talking about in the area of niche marketing.
The Wonderbra Session on the program had me curious from the start and I had a good chuckle when I found out what is was about. What a brilliant way of supporting businesswomen with their challenges.
Being handed a rose made me feel quite emotional. It was just a simple pink rose but for some reason it made me feel really special. I left the club on cloud nine, completely refreshed and inspired. It got me thinking about my role in our company and how there is so much more to my work days than what I am currently experiencing. I signed up for membership right away as I knew that this monthly event was just what I needed to bring about the changes that I need in my career.
My story doesn’t end here because when I was presented with the membership options I discovered that there were other women like me, women who were confident and successful but who were pretty much alone in their success. So I signed up to the Mastermind Boardroom to see what it was all about. Even though I had to take half a day out of my diary, I knew that it could be worth it after my networking lunch experience.
And I was so right! The Mastermind Boardroom was exactly what I never knew I needed! It was my space to openly share my struggles and successes without judgement of any kind. Simply being able to get things off my chest with five other women who got me was refreshing. If it has ended there I would have said it was of great value but being able to commit to a KPI and be assigned an accountability buddy for the month was fantastic. I knew that these sessions were going to get me to where I wanted to be both in life and in my career.
The Women’s Business Club has given me hope and put the bounce back in my step. I love reading Women’s Business News every morning and have challenged our marketing manager to send over some content and our HR team to send over our vacancies to be included too, we are looking forward to seeing that being published soon.
I haven’t yet taken up the option of sharing my expertise as a guest speaker yet but in time I will. For the time being, I am using the valuable space for myself and I am loving it!
Thank you for the Women’s Business Club.

I returned to
to view the owl seen on March 17. This
time there were a few photographers around, so it was easy to find. The sleepy owl was in much the same place,
but on a lower branch well hidden in the foliage. This time, the tail of its mate could be seen
too, as it appeared to be turning the eggs.
The perched owl did wake up and scratch, then went back to sleep. Mud Lake
At the Filtration Plant, a weird hybrid goose was seen. It is likely the same one as last year.

Prosecution has announced that all of the four seasons of the Produce 101 series were manipulated to have the final votes result in favor for particular trainees. They called 8 people, including Ahn Joon Young PD, to trial. They were arrested in suspisons of disruption of business and fraud.
Five entertainment agency employees were also arrested for multiple charges, including breach of trust.
According to prosecution, Ahn PD manipulated the paid votes by the fans during the live broadcast to make sure certain trainees made it to the final group. During his investigation, he had admitted to manipulating Produce 48 and PRODUCE X 101, but initially claimed the first two seasons were fair.
But it appears the prosecutors found new evidence that may ultimately prove that the first two seasons were also rigged.
IZ*ONE and X1 (two groups that debuted from the latter two seasons) have all halted or delayed their promotions due to the scandal. Fans have gone far as to demand that they disband for the sake of the idols’ health as well as the fans of the show.
Reports claim that CJ ENM will decide on the fates of the two groups by the end of 2019.

Finally my stomach has stabilized enough so I could dare head out with the camera today. Weather was great so I took the opportunity to contact Susanne Hultman and check if she wanted to join up, and she was game. =)
I had been out earlier for a shorter walk and just had to go and take a picture of the pre-school on the other side of the road. This pre-school has been deemed unfit due to mould and stuff, so last week the first removed the roofing and 2 days later all the windows and walls were gone, now all that remains is the wooden skeleton of the building.
After lunch I got hold of Susanne and we decided to join forces and go for a bicycle ride around town and do some photography. I, myself, feel that I’m home-blind and don’t find anything of interest to shoot here in town and thought that IF I had company I might see the town in a different angle and find something new.
Well I didn’t come far before my bicycle broke down. It was after our second stop that, when I got on the bicycle again and we started to ride, I heard a snap and felt that the pedal went away from under my foot. Turned out that the bolt that holds it together had snapped in two and there was no way I would be able to use the bicycle no more.
So instead Susanne and I had a nice looong walk in the sunshine and stopped every now and then for some photo shooting. She also told me a lot about the old as well as the new areas in town, since she works for the city hall she knows a lot about these things. =)
I did however find these proof of spring coming VERY early this year.
These are usually found later in the year, but this year they have already started to bloom.
After a couple of hours of walking I finally got home and could ditch my bicycle. Now I will have to see if I can get it to the repair shop tomorrow to get it fixed so I can start using it again.

Syracuse, NY -- A couple of North Carolina television stations caught up with East Carolina head coach Skip Holtz as he attended a banquet in Charlotte tonight. You can see the full video report through the Channel 3 (WSTM) web site in Syracuse. It says the video is courtesy of WCNC and WNIT.
First, Holtz said the NFL Network report on Saturday that he would be named Syracuse's head coach on Monday is innaccurate. "Reports are inaccurate. Yes sir," he said.
Holtz confirmed he planned to speak with Syracuse director of athletics Daryl Gross in New York this week, though he did say it was not a formal interview for the head coaching job of the Orange.
"I would like to have the opportunity to talk to Daryl Gross," Holtz said. "But at this point, no, I am not going through an interview process. I've made that very clear."
Holtz spoke passionately about his "great gig" in Greenville. He said he's happy. He said he's content. He also said he would never say never on leaving for another job.
"I'm very content," Holtz said. "I'm very happy in the job that I have. I know a lot of people think you have to have a BCS next to your school to make it rewarding. But for me right now, I'm in a very good situation. I'm sure there may come a day in time when that's not the case, but right now, I'm very content there. We're going to have to see what happens as this whole thing plays out, I'm in the beginning of stages of exploring what else is out there or any kind of interest at this point."

In an interview with a local Dallas sports radio host, new Dallas Cowboys QB Kyle Orton discussed why he choose to come to a team with an established No. 1 QB instead of competing for a starting spot:
"Well I've kind of been in that situation the last three or four years just going into camp and competing. To be honest with you I don't think that situation has worked for me. I don't think it's worked out for the club. I think you need to know who your guy is going to be going right into the season and backing that guy. I don't think that's been the situation that I have been in and I really didn't want to get into that situation again. I'm fine with knowing my role as the backup on this team. I am going to be the best backup I can and support Tony [Romo] any way that I can."
Orton, at 29, has found himself in the middle of the media circus that is a QB controversy several times in his seven-year NFL career, most notably last season in Denver, where he was cut in order to free up a starting job for Tim Tebow.
That could be a very good thing for Dallas, as given the intense spotlight on the QB here, the last thing the Cowboys need is another signal caller looking for the limelight.

"I could have told you that"
Ever wish someone could tell you about something before you had to learn it the hard way? Take the advice from this book, 199 lessons learned by the author who had the unfortunate experience to learn things the hard way, but had the foresight to write those lessons down (mostly from a lack of short-term memory).
Brian Golla is known to be a self-made multi-millionaire, noted philanthropist, Nobel Prize winner and all-around kickass guy. Made famous by his rescue of orphans from certain death, advisor to the president, he has once disarmed a terrorist attack using only his wits, a paper clip and a bag of salted peanuts. Still events surrounding his life are shrouded in mystery, but some say he dons a cape nightly and fights crime, is fascinated by ducks, and has a penchant for utter bullshit. What is known for certain is that he lives in Austin, Texas with his sweet but moronic dog, Murphy, and posts to his blog at waitingforcoffee.blogspot.com about as often as the installation of a new pope.

English High Tea sounded great…..
We didn't need the calories, and were happy that the waiter suggested we could share one high tea between two…..but we needed a little rest from sightseeing and Burmese food…..
Tea was good…..and the hotel seems very nice…..
However we were actually quite happy not to be staying there. This part of Yangon was heavily bombed during WW2 but the hotel escaped. However close by it are really ugly buildings in a very sad state of repair.
We went to visit the harbor area which is also very close to the Strand hotel…….
It was somewhat busy inside the main entry gate…
I had not realized this was a police station before taking the photo!
Basically moving stuff onto the boats was by hand, or shoulders!
We drove past Sule Pagoda several times, which is over 2500 years old…..
We also drove through the Chinese area, which had celebrated the New Year the evening before….
…. and an area where there were quite a few older colonial buildings in various states of repair……
Then back to the hotel….
Going over a new overpass, opened in the last few months, our guide pointed out a building, which was relatively new, which had had an electrical fire the prior weekend… we were happy not to be staying in a high rise hotel!
We were happy to return to the Savoy hotel…..
and happy to stay in the hotel for dinner……not wanting to face more traffic!
We ate around the pool at a very reasonable cost…..
Indeed the breakfast we had the following morning was very pleasant…
Nice corner table…..

Originally Posted by jrs.landscaping
It's kind of the same concept as when guys buy newer/better equipment, they think their price should go up. Business owners know how to figure costs and to trim fat to keep operations lean and expand margins. To the guys making $70 PMH
if I could get away with it I'd charge that much as well.
If I were solo I would charge $70/pmh, that's just $35 for your avg lawn! We try to get $75/pmh on cleanouts.

Sunday, August 02, 2009
Ayaz Khan (Dr. Shubankar) may not return to DMG yet!
Ayaz Khan, who made a debut into bollywood with Jaane Tu Ya Janne Na and also seen in the hit television show Dil Mil Gayye had taken a break from tv. On-screen his character Dr. Shubankar was out on honeymoon with Dr. Kirti.
Dr. Kirti is back but where is Dr. Shubankar??? Well TellyTadka wondered the same and called up Ayaz to know more. Ayaz told TellyTadka that he is currently busy shooting for two films. One with Apoorva Lakhia and another with Esha Deol.
When we asked about his return in Dil Mil Gayye, Ayaz replied saying that currently he has no time to return due to his two films which are not yet completed. He says he would love to come back as he does his the whole unit, but he is enjoying his bollywood career. We asked Ayaz about what his thoughts were on bollywood and television. For him bollywood provides quality work, while television is a controlled media.
For more about Ayaz's films and latest news, stay tuned to TellyTadka!

In the 16th game of the season, Brad Richards finally got to wear the black fedora that he brought back to New York from Europe.
The so-called Broadway hat is passed on to the game MVP after a Rangers win, and Richards' slap shot at 15:05 of the third period that whistled by goaltender Evgeni Nabokov and snapped a tie at 2 was just enough for the Blueshirts to extend their winning streak to seven games Tuesday night.
"As soon as he got it, he made a good play because guys pressured him right away," Richards said. "I was open and I was hoping I was going to get it. He gave me time to walk into it."
Hanging in has been the formula for the streak, which can be extended to eight against the Canadiens on Saturday night, when the Rangers visit Montreal. The last eight-game winning streak was in the 1974-75 season.
"We're not the type of team that blows game wide open," Dubinsky said. "We've been in this position so many times, it's helped us out with our confidence level. Rather than taking chances, we stay patient."
On the winner, Dubinsky moved fast, however.
"I was kind of on my way back [toward center ice]," he said. "I think they were a little tired and I just saw them flip it. I just got there in time and jumped up. I was able to corral it pretty quickly and then I saw Brad by himself on the side. It was a heck of a shot."
"It doesn't get old watching him make those saves," said Ryan Callahan, who set up Steve Eminger in the crease with a highlight-reel pass at 6:07 of the second and scored the fourth and final goal into an empty net with one second remaining on a long slapper from mid-ice. "That's what we need to win games. He's the backbone of this team as he has been for years."
And so far, Richards, the 31-year-old center who was signed to a nine-year, $60-million contract in July to provide points, is doing so. "It's a long season," Richards said, "but right now, it's going our way."
Notes & quotes: LW Aaron Voros, who played for the Rangers from for two seasons before being traded to the Ducks in June 2010 for Eminger, signed a tryout contract with the Whale . . . D Anton Stralman, signed as a free agent on Nov. 5, was a healthy scratch again . . . Sean Avery got the Rangers on the board first, with his second goal in two games; the Rangers are 5-0 with him in the lineup . . . Eminger's goal was the 10th by a Rangers defenseman this season, fifth-best in the league . . . The Rangers killed three consecutive power plays (four of five overall) in the second period, then did not score on a 5-on-3 for 1:32 late in the period.

Madrid - David Moyes admitted he was "very happy" after overseeing his maiden victory as Real Sociedad coach before criticising the Spanish referee for what the Scot suggested was excessive zeal.
Mexico forward Carlos Vela netted a hat-trick in a 3-0 home win for the Basque club against Elche on Friday which lifted them to 12th on 13 points from as many matches.
"I'm smiling because we've won and I'm very happy but I want more," Moyes, whose side were held to a 0-0 draw at Deportivo La Coruna in his first game in charge last weekend, told a news conference.
"I thought there were some small signs of a little bit of improvement, which was good," added the former Manchester United and Everton manager.
"We had a special player and a special talent in Carlos Vela, who scored goals which made a big difference."
Friday's game at the Anoeta was refereed by Carlos Velasco Carballo, who came under fire at this year's World Cup in Brazil for his performance in the hosts' 2-1 win over Colombia in the quarter-finals.
"I thought his tolerance level was too low," Moyes said.
"I think this is a game of men and it is also a physical contact sport.
"Nobody wants to come and see soft free kicks. People want to see strong people, they want to see people stay on their feet, they want to see the referee allowing challenges to go.
"So I thought his tolerance level was very low. I thought the referee against Deportivo was very good but I thought tonight, with three bookings I think in 27 minutes, it was too easy to book players, too easy."
Sociedad's next outing is a King's Cup last 32, first leg encounter at third-tier (Segunda B) Real Oviedo on Thursday and they play at Villarreal in La Liga the following Sunday.

On New Year’s Eve, the police took Dzmitry Uskhopau, a 27-year-old resident of Rechytsa, to a local hospital, where he died. His family believes the deceased was severely beaten by the policemen.
On the night of January 1, Dzmitry Uskhopau was going to his mother’s place; they were about to have a festal dinner, palesse.press reports. However, the man was detained by a police patrol at the bus stop at about 11 pm. In an interview with the media outlet Flagpost, a relative admits that Dzmitry and his friends were under the influence of alcohol at the moment of the detention; they had allegedly drunk some sparkling wine.
“According to witnesses, they were approached by the officers of the patrol and guard service, and Dzima [Dzmitry Uskhopau] refused to obey their orders. They called for a back-up, and a patrol car with five more people arrived. Dzima was taken to the police department. I don’t know for sure what happened there – they might have battered him during interrogation, they might gave hit him in the head once or fired a shot from a pneumatic gun,” the interviewee said.
A bit later, the police officers brought him to the reception ward of the district hospital in a state of clinical death. When his relatives saw him, his clothes were torn, he seemed to have been poured with water – even his underwear was wet. On his forehead there was a 1.5 cm round wound. His wrists were blue (it should be noted that the Belarusian police often cuff detainees’ hands).
Dzmitry Uskhopau’s relatives claim that he was beaten to a pulp at the police station; when the detaineed stopped showing signs of life, the officers might have poured water on him and tried to resuscitate him, the family suggests. Allegedly, when they failed to bring Dzmitry to life, they took him to the hospital, where he passed away.
“They killed him – the police killed him,” Alena, the mother of the deceased, told the newspaper Nasha Niva.
In turn, the Belarusian Investigative Committee says that the death of 27-year-old Dzmitry Uskhopau was not caused by any traumas – no injuries or internal fractures were reportedly found in the body. In accordance with the authorities version, Dzmitry Uskhopau was ‘heavily intoxicated’, and his condition took a turn for the worse only after they left the police station. At the same time, the investigators confirm the fact of using force against the detainee. A forensic medical examination is scheduled to determine the cause of death.
“The man was transported to Rechytsa police department, then to the district hospital so that he could undergo a medical examination as part of the administrative case. The man collapsed on the way to the health care institution. He was urgently taken to the reception ward, where resuscitation was started. Despite the doctors’ efforts, he was certified dead at 1.20 am,” the press release reads.
Dzmitry Uskhopau has a 5-year-old daughter.

Let's just say, it's been a long couple of days. We all know moving is a pain, but you seem to forget how horrible it really is until you go through it again. Jake and I realized this is our 8th move in our 6 1/2 years of marriage. We are hoping this was the last one for quite some time! (The picture was taken the day after we moved in, on our way to church. Whitney was so kind to take it. Emma was a little grumpy because she was cold. Josh looks warm and toasty though.)
We are truly blessed to have such wonderful friends and family. As frustrating as moving can be, it would have been much worse if we didn't have so many great people helping us out. Thanks to Whitney, who came up for her Thanksgiving Break and got much more than she bargained for (more than just turkey and stuffing!) She made the whole weekend a lot easier on us. Also, thanks to all of Jake's family who are always here when we need them, and so willing to do whatever is needed. Thank you Grammy and Grandpa, Kristen, Teresa, Shilo, Tom Christopherson, and James Harris. If we were rich I would buy you all something real nice, but since we're not, a nice little "thank you" will have to do. ;)
As for the house, we LOVE it! If I would have known owning a home felt this good, we would have tried to buy sooner. Jake and I feel very blessed to be in such a beautiful house. We went to our new ward on Sunday and they were all very welcoming. In fact, the Bishop took us to each of our classes (even the kids' to their classes) and everyone seemed to flock to us, wanting to meet us. It felt wonderful. We learned there are two families just a block away with boys around Ben's age. There are two girls who are almost exactly Emma's age too. I'm excited to start planning some playdates.
The last three pictures are of the kids "helping" me pack last week. I had to throw those in there because it was too funny. They loved playing with all the boxes and Emma actually grew quite attached to one box and was sad to see it go when we finally had to use it. Why do we even buy them expensive toys?? I say 5 cardboard boxes for each kid this Christmas and they will be set!
By the way, I'm working on getting some pics up of the house. Jake's mom is helping me paint the kids' rooms tomorrow, so I will make sure to post pics after we are finished. Keep checking back for more fun at the Schipaanboord's!
Deck the Halls Card-NA
3 weeks ago

At 5:50am Barry woke me up and asked me what time I was getting up. I answered 6am. Then Asa started crying so we began the day early!!
Our GI appt was at 9:30. We took the hotel shuttle at 8:30. We got to the clinic early but I'd rather be early than late any day! Unfortunately the doc was running late!! At 10:30 he had still not come into the room. By the time the action started up Asa was back in the stroller. They did the whole exam with him in the stroller and he didn't shed a tear!!!! Dr. Rhoads even sat up on the exam table and Asa just stared at him! Asa didn't know what to think about that!!
He really didn't have much new info to offer. He talked about adding more Reglan. We may try that. And that's about it. I'm not sure how I feel about that. I'm not sure what I was expecting.
When we left the clinic I called for the shuttle. It was gonna be 20 minutes so we (I) decided we could walk back in that time. It was a nice day and we could see the city if we walked. What I didn't realize is that I underestimated the distance to the hotel!!! It was 2 miles!!! We walked down the side walk of a busy city street, in the wind for 2 miles and Asa didn't get sick at all! He loved it! We got back to the hotel and wanted to rest a little while but he kept crying and signing "go"! So we changed into shorts and headed back out to the zoo. This time we drove! We tried to find a McD's or CFA for a hour but came up empty so when we got to the zoo at 2, we were starving!!! And yes, we paid $30 for 3 burgers and fries! Crazy but we were desperate!! Since it is the only food we've bought all day, I guess it averages out!
The zoo was great! It must be frog mating season and Gracie enjoyed the snake house way too much!!! She was so excited about all the animals and just bounced from place to place! She'd say "come on Asa, let's go look over here" just like he could really follow her around. She left her ipod in the van so I had to use my phone to take her pics. Now I've got tons of blurry animal pics I need to send to her! I gave the mating frogs their privacy though!
Asa did so great at the zoo. Again, there was lots of noise and the wind but Asa never fussed. Not even a whimper and he didn't have a paci the whole time!! Before we left Barry and Gracie got an ice cream cone and Asa and I split a snow cone. It must have given Asa a brain freeze because he squished up his eyes and put his fist to his forehead. When I asked if it hurt his head, he'd grunt and put his fist back to his face! It was so funny! I tried to video but it isn't good.
I was so impressed that Asa handled all this stimulation so well. I even noticed and was thankful that he was laughing in the elevators when those used to make him so sick! But, as we left the zoo, for no reason at all, he started with an episode! UGH! I drained him as we drove back to the hotel.
Tomorrow we see Dr. K at 9am and Dr. P at 1:30. I had hoped to buy tickets for the train that goes around the park so we could ride between visits but you can't buy them for the day ahead. And the ticket stand is on the opposite side of the park from the hospital. Sooooo, do you think I can convince the family to walk across the park, buy train tickets and ride back to the hospital?! After today, I doubt it!
I'll spare you the pics of the zoo. Trust me a camera phone doesn't capture the magic of animals sleeping at the zoo!

Are you curious about whom is Zion Mixolydian Cannon? Learn more about his life in the beginning as well as his family life and his education. It will also give you a greater comprehension of his contribution in the global community. Zion Mixolydian Cannon has received numerous honors and distinctions.
Who is Zion Mixolydian Cannon?
In America. United States, Zion Mixolydian Cannon is a young star child who is well-known in his own right. The parents of his, Nick Cannon and Abby De La Rosa both work both in the field of entertainment. The father of Nick Cannon is an actor as well as an anchor on television, and his mother is rapper. Recently, she revealed that she was expecting a second child.
The couple announced they were expecting twins on the 14th of June. Their birth was confirmed on the 17th of June on the 17th of June, when Abby Cannon captioned the video. The twins were nicknamed “Zillion” by Abby Cannon. Nick Cannon is a father to nine kids, including 3 girls as well as 2 boys. He has been in six prior relationships as well as a current marriage to Brittany Bell. Also, he is married to model Abby De La Rosa. They have three children together, and they are planning to have another.
Childhood and early life
Zion Mixolydian Cannon is an American famous child. The twin is well-known musician Nick Cannon. Parents include Nick Cannon and Abby De La Rosa. He has a father who is millionaire and his mother’s worth is between $4-$5 million USD. The twins are of the same age and have a similar appearance.
Zion has brown eyes and black hair. He’s average in size and weighs around the average given his age. Although there aren’t any specific details regarding his childhood life but his mother has created an Instagram account under his name alongside his twin Zillion. Zillion. In June 2022 the Instagram account had more than 4000 followers.
The girlfriend of Nick Cannon, Abby De La Rosa was blessed with twins on the 14th of June. The news of their birth was announced first on Instagram as well as she posted a photo of the twins lying in their hospital beds. Abby as well as Nick Cannon have three children in all. They have twins called Zillion and Zion Mixolydian.
Zion Mixolydian Cannon family
The Cannon family is known by a variety of celestial names, like Zion Mixolydian and Zillion Heir Cannon. Actually both brothers are named for constellations. Cannon’s father is well-known for being the main character on “The Nick Cannon Show” as well as “America’s Got Talent,” and his mother is an inspirational speaker and televangelist. The couple has two children: Golden “Sagon” Cannon, born on the 21st of February 2017 and the Powerful Queen Cannon due in December 2020.
Zion Mixolydian Cannon was born on the 14th of June, 2021 from the USA. The youngest child of the five and has four brothers as well as two sisters. His father was Nick Cannon, a rapper and a TV host. Find out more the details about Zion Mixolydian Cannon’s net worth.
Zion Mixolydian Cannon was born in the United States on June 14 2021. He is a 1 year old famous child whose parents are well-known in the world of entertainment. He is the son of Nick Cannon and his mother is Abby De La Rosa. He is the youngest from six siblings, four of whom are brothers, and two of whom are sisters.
Zion Mixolydian Cannon has a real brother who is named Zillion Heir Cannon. He also has a connection to his mother who is worth $4 to $5 million USD. His grandparents and grandmother were James as well as Beth Gardner, both of who were the televangelists. Zion has brown eyes and black hair. His weight and height are both average.
Zion Mixolydian Cannon’s career
Zion Mixolydian’s career Cannon has been praised by many. Zion is the brother to Zillion Cannon. He has four half-siblings: Golden, Moroccan Scott, and Monroe. The half-siblings are named after his father’s continuing relationship with his wife. He also has a baby brother, named Legendary Cannon, however his age is not suitable for an enviable career.
Cannon was married twice to women. He and his first spouse, Alyssa Scott, gave twins, Legendary and Onyx Ice Cole Cannon, in June 2021. The couple also expects their third child later this year. Cannon is the father of two kids who are with Abby De La Rosa. The other children of Cannon have names based on his wife Bre Tiesi, and his ex-wife Mariah Carey. He also has a relationship with many women.

Outstanding customer service. The service department performed an oil change for me free of charge even though I was just outside of the time window for them. Couldn't be more happy or more strongly recommend them!
A very pleasant and enjoyable experience.. I highly recommmend the dealership and sales manager Ms. Emily, who went above and beyond to help,select the right vehicle.
I brought my car in when I got a notice from Onstar that I had an emissions problem. I brought my car in and they determined that the problem was my catalytic converter. They didn't have my part, so they ordered the part and we scheduled when the service would be completed. When I arrived they had a loaner car ready for me and they completed the service when they said it would be done! The service department is professional and very courteous.
I gave Kaylee 5 stars because she provided an excellent customer service all around. She was friendly, easy to talk with, and very knowledgeable on the car. For anything she wasn’t 100% sure on, she’d double check with her manager to make sure it was correct. She definitely is very passionate about providing a good customer experience and I recommend her to anyone looking for a new car!
Kaylee was young but very professional. She was very quick for someone who was relatively new to sales. She took us over to the test area and was very knowledgeable about how to run it. The car was the best and cleanest we saw out of 10 cars we saw all over chicagoland. I would recomend kaylee to my friends if they want a nice car and fast in and out service. She was so nice to offer us water and coffee too!
Ilene was amazing!! She made me feel comfortable with the care and gave me tips, suggestions and tons of background information on the car. She even came in after she was off work to help me finish the paper work on the car. Over all my visit was AMAZING!!!!
I had a great experience. Quick and simple.
It was probably my most pleasant car buying experiences. I appreciated the professionalism and the no pressure of everyone. Kaylee was great. She is knowledgeable and knows how to talk to the customer. It was my pleasure to work with her and having the honor of being her first sale. She will do well. It has always be a positive experience for me at your dealership. Whether having my car service or purchasing.Thank you to everyone!
outstanding service. The best

We kick off our best ten moments of the season with the Irishman’s victory on the first day of racing in 2020.
Going into the race I obviously felt a lot of pressure. I was on a new team, and not just any team, the team of my dreams, so I wanted to perform and repay the confidence put in me. During my career, I had worked hard to get to that position; I came to Australia after a great winter training camp in Spain and was really motivated to start off on the right foot.
I was blown away by how the team handled everything, it was so different from my previous teams, such a completely new approach, that it gave me a huge boost as I was pinning on the number. To have them support me on and off the bike was amazing, but at the same time, I have to admit that before the start of the opening Tour Down Under stage I wasn’t feeling that ready. I was very nervous, and that nervousness overpowered the excitement that I was feeling.
Looking back, a funny thing that I remember is it being João’s (Almeida) first day on the World Tour and I was just looking at him how nervous he was and thinking: “I’m just as nervous as him. It’s crazy!” It was like the first day of school for both of us, we were checking if we had plenty of food and drinks, if everything was set up. There’s an eight-year gap between the two of us, we were coming from different situations, but were feeling the same.
As the race progressed, I continued to be impressed by the team and how they rode, how they were focused on their thing without looking at others. Iljo and Michael were incredible, their experience and the way they passed it to the other riders was instrumental in the final outcome and made a huge difference. The final was a bit uphill and I remember teams coming up and blowing up, then somebody kicking out really early, while we were waiting, waiting and waiting. At one point, I thought I had left it too late, but the guys delivered a perfect lead-out and I took the victory in Tanunda.
After crossing the line, I couldn’t believe we got the first victory of the season on the very first day of racing. Getting a win early is so important for a rider, because the hardest victory is always the first one, as it makes the pressure go away; afterwards, it seems they come easier, but breaking the ice is always a tough cookie. It was super important for my morale and the confidence, not just mine, but of the entire team. It felt amazing to win in the Deceuninck – Quick-Step jersey in January and then to get to wear the leader’s jersey, a first for an Irishman Down Under. A nice bonus to what was a perfect start to the season!
Photo credit: ©Tim De Waele / Getty Images

Bugs was walking round Toon Town Park, deep in thought, casually kicking rocks out the way. He was meant to be finding Elmer and apologising, but he had no idea what to say. The bunny was realising that, impossible as it sounds, he'd never really HAD to apologise to anyone before. He'd offended people in the past -quite frequently, in fact - but very often they'd say it was there fault [even if it wasn't]. The only exception to that was their creators; Bugs had frequently had to apologise to Chuck and the rest off them but they'd made it quite clear that if he didn't he'd be grounded/not allowed to act for a set time, so.
He tried to think of people he'd had arguments with in the past and how he'd dealt with it then. Daffy immediately sprung to mind; they had a 'serious' argument roughly once every three days and it was usually resolved within the next 48 hours. There were two outcomes to a fight with Daffy. Number one, either he or the duck would come up to the other after an appropriate amount of time had passed and say something along the lines off: "So, erm, I heard Disney's doing a picture about a flying elephant? Maybe they're finally hoping to make something people won't forget in ten years?" and they were buddies again. On a few occasions Daffy seemed to have a weird pang of conscious and threw himself at the rabbits feet, wailing. "Oh Bugsy, ol' pal, ol' buddy, ol' Pal - Can you ever forgive me?" Bugs would take out a carrot, chew it, then say: ""Eh, why not?" And they would carry on like usual.
This though, this was different. But why? Why? He stopped dead as the lightbulb went on over his head for the second time in an hour; he didn't want to lose Fudd's friendship, they'd known each other for a long time now - 14 years in fact - and had always understood each other. They also had a good chemistry- hark why they kept getting cartoons together. Really, all this cooking thing and 'escorting Fudd to and from work' thing had done was add a new level to their already-fairly-good friendship.
For instance, Fudd - Bugs had discovered - had quite a wicked sense of humour. He could imitate other people very easily and - unlike some other toons - keep up the imitations for quite a long while. The ineffective hunter was dopey, sure, but also quite sweet in his own, bumbling way. Bugs had a smile on his face just thinking about the first time he'd ever attempted to cook...
[In Elmer's kitchen]
"Eh, are ya sure ya want me messin' up yer kitchen?" Bugs asked, looking around Elmer's neat, unnaturally white kitchen.
Elmer smiled. "It's a kitchen, Bugs. It's designed to be messy. Now, I thought we'd stawt with something simpwe. Pasta and Meatbawws. Now-" The older toon indicated the ingredients neatly laid out on the counter. "They'we fwozen, so aww you have to do is cook them. It shouwd take about twenty minutes. Now-"
"Hold on, Doc." Bugs interrupted. "Shouldn't we be dressed, proper like?"
Elmer looked at him, cautiously. "Not weally. You don't need any cwothes for cooking. Proper cwothes, I mean." He clarified, blushing deeply as Bugs looked at him mischievously. "But, if it'll make you feel more comfortable-" He said, reluctantly. "Apwons are in that dwawew. Huwwy up." He added, sharply.
Still grinning, Bugs spent a good few seconds searching through the drawre and selecting his favourite apron while behind him Fudd started weighing ingredients.
"Hey, Fuddsey-" Elmer sighed and turned. Bugs was posing with his hands on his hips, wearing a red apron which had the image of a women [without the head] on it. "Whaddya think?" He asked, eyes sparkling mischevously.
Elmer blinked and closed his eyes, then opened them again. No. Bugs was still posing except now he was grinning at him, unnervingly. Elmer folded his arms. "Twust you to find that one..." He said, through gritted teeth.
"I wouldn't have thought this was your style, Doc." Bugs said, teasingly.
"It's not." Elmer hissed. Bugs looked at him curiously and the human toon felt forced to explain. "Brian* bwought it me fow my 16th. I got the impwession it was meant to be a joke, though-" Elmer put his head on one side and looked at the apron, thoughtfully. "I was never quite suwe what the joke was. Anyway." He said, clearly trying to regain control of the situation. "Awe you happy to stawt now that you'we properly attiwed?"
And for the first time in his life Bugs Bunny actually cooked something and felt happy doing it. Cooking with Chuck had been quite a tense experience, his father spending much of the time just barking instructions at him, but this was better. Elmer took him through the steps slowly and carefully and didn't even mind Bugs singing while the pasta was boiling. As a matter of fact he'd even joined in, much to the rabbits delight, and they'd had a nice duet. Their voices, Bugs remembered thinking, complimented each other quite well...
Coming out his thoughts he'd realised that - without his conscious knowledge - he'd walked all the way to Fudd's house. Well, when in Rome and all that...
He knocked the door and stood back. Nothing happened. He tried again, looking around nervously. He half expected to see Sam leaning out his window with binoculars. He knocked for the third time, this time with a lot of force, which was a mistake. He was hopping around clutching his hand [those humans who said 'toons can't feel pain' had NO idea what they were talking about] when he heard a cautious. "Bugs? Awe you awwight?"
There were times he worried about Elmer's observational levels.
After a short, highly sarcastic [on his part] exchange, Elmer helped a limping Bugs into his house and sat him on the armchair. "Do you need some ice?" The dopey hunter asked, hovering around anxiously.
"Eh, I'm fine." Bugs grunted.
"Awe you suwe?"
"Yes!" Bugs said, exasperatedly. "I'm fine! Now, willya sit down? I wanna ta talk ta ya."
Elmer looked at him, eyes brimming with curiosity and sat on the sofa.
There a silence. Bugs blinked as he realised that the older toon was really just waiting for him to speak. If it had been Daffy, or Sylvester or even Porky sitting opposite him they would have been talking for two minutes now and Bugs would just be nodding and waiting for them to wrap up. But now the ball was firmly in his court.
"O-okay." Great. Now he was impersonating Porky. Just what he needed. "Look. Eh...that...argument we had. Oi, eh, guess it was kinda-" Geez, was Elmer really going to make him say it? Bugs gave the photographer-turned-hunter his best 'pleading' look hoping that the other toon would take pity on him and just accept his apology. However Elmer seemed to mis-understand his look entirely and just indicated for him to carry on, with a small hand-gesture and a soft smile.
Dammit, Fudd. Bugs thought to himself. Why'd you have to make life so difficult!?
"-kinda my fault." Bugs said, playing with his gloves and not looking at the ex-photographer. "I-I shouldn't have sent Daffy ta Pistols but Oi only did it cos I didn't want to leave you alone while I went off an' dealt with him. You get me?"
Elmer looked at him with an unreadable expression. Bugs, unsure if he was getting though, carried on, voice getting progressively higher. "You'd had a shock an' oi didn't want to leave ya alone in mah house. So oi sent Daffy. I thought he could take care off himself! How was oi ta know he was gonna get chucked through your boudoir wall!? He..." Bugs stalled, trying to think what he wanted to say. "...He was meant to get rid of Pistols somehow. I dunno how oi was thinkin'. Anvil him? Hammer him? Annoy him ta death?"
"Bugs." Elmer said, gently stopping the rabbits rant. "Awe you twying to say you're sowwy for sending Daffy to fight a toon two times his height and thwee times his weight?"
Elmer nodded and leaned back into the cusions. There was a slightly-tense silence then, just as Bugs was about to suggest he pack his things and move to Antarctica, the older toon spoke. "Weww. Thank you for your...apology." Bugs nodded. "And I suppose, seeing as we'we being open and honest, that I shouldn't have towd you not to be funny. I know you can't help it. And I shouldn't have yewwed at you like that." Elmer sighed and looked at the 'wabbit'. "Do you forgive me?"
Bugs blinked. "Bit formal, Doc." He said, lightly. "But yeah, cause I do." They looked at each other, then Elmer stood up and hesitantly held his hand out for a hand shake. Bugs stood up as well and they shook hands. Then Bugs laughed and pulled the hunter in for a hug. Elmer was clearly surprised by said hug, but returned it easily.
"By the way." He added, once they'd let each other go. "What happened to Pistols? No ones bothewed to teww me."
"Oh, he's going ta jail." Bugs said, easily. "The proper one, I mean, with the competent guards and proper security an' all."
Elmer gave a sigh of relief. "Oh, that's good. I was wowwied."
"No need ta be worried." Bugs said, firmly. "Trust me, he won't be bothering you again. Now..." He made a show of looking at his watch, despite the fact he still didn't know how to tell time. "...seeing as it's late, can oi suggest we get dinner at 'Bosko's'?"
"As long as you're paying." Elmer said, dryly.
Bugs laughed and Elmer smiled.
Hey! Roxy Goth here! Thanks to everyone who's reviewed, favourited and followed this fic, it means a lot. Special thanks to preciouslittletoonette and Ana Nicoleta for giving me feedback and listening to my ramblings about my theories of the Looney Tunes world. [Ana Nicoleta has written a good Tiny Toons fic starring Monty and Elmyra, BTW.]
While writing this fic I've not only discovered I really enjoy writing this pairing, but I've also come up with a few other ideas about it. I've always started a dark fic with the same kind of concept called 'Unsolicited.' That one does get pretty dark though, just a heads up.
Anyway, I hope you enjoyed this fic. I enjoyed writing it. Hopefully see you soon, Roxy

On Monday morning, the Rangers were skating at their Westchester County practice rink. At the same time, about 350 miles away, at his home in East Aurora, N.Y., Martin Biron felt no pangs of regret that he was not with them.
“It hasn’t even crossed my mind one bit,” said Biron, 36, who on Sunday announced his retirement after a 16-season N.H.L. career. “Maybe at some point I’ll be thinking about it or feeling it a little bit, and who knows, people go through these steps in their life differently. But as of now, I’m completely at peace with it.”
The retirement of the affable Biron, the Rangers’ backup goalie for more than three years until they waived him last week, has occasioned many tributes from the teammates and journalists who enjoyed the entertaining flow of anecdotes and witty conversation he brought to the dressing room.
But his rationale for walking away from the game he loves could also serve as a guide to anyone weighing a career trajectory against other priorities, like family, personal fulfillment or simply the passage of time.Continue reading the main story
“It wasn’t just a matter of the last week or the last couple of months — it’s something that’s been brewing in the back of my mind for a little while now,” Biron said. “Being a hockey player, you know you’re not going to be playing until you’re 60 years old. So when you get one last contract, and then you get another contract, you start thinking, What am I going to do afterward?
“But I also think that the lockout year really made me start to think about where I’m going. I was home and got to experience a lot of different things with my kids and the whole family. I got to experience football and cheerleading and hockey practices and school pageant, all of that.”
Biron’s children are 9, 7, 5 and 3. He could have continued his career in the minor leagues or in Europe. But, he said, being home for so long during the lockout made him reassess what he found important in his life.
“You start to see some of the things that you’ve missed over the years,” he said.
When the lockout ended, Biron said, he was excited to go back to work. But, he said: “There was a part of me that stayed back home. That’s just the reality of it.”
Biron said he came to training camp last month thinking this could be his final year.
“Go and enjoy it,” was his outlook, but he found “it was harder than I thought it was going to be because more and more of my heart was back home.”
The Rangers started this season with a calamitous trip that included two nightmarish appearances by Biron, culminating with the between-the-legs goal he surrendered to the rookie Tomas Hertl in a 9-2 loss at San Jose. That whole experience made him think some more.
“At that point I hadn’t been put on waivers, but I had a feeling that something was going to happen and I had reached a point where I had to make a decision,” Biron said.
“So when we came back from the West Coast we had the Sunday off, a little over a week ago. My parents were in Buffalo visiting the kids at the time, and I got to come home and sit down and talk with my dad and my mum and my wife.”
They talked about how Biron’s older brother, Mathieu, had adjusted to retirement after hanging up his skates three years ago.
Biron returned to the Rangers last Monday, went to practice, and was told by Coach Alain Vigneault as the practice ended that he was being waived and assigned to Hartford of the American Hockey League. General Manager Glen Sather granted Biron time to think over what he would do.
“So, I got in my car, drove home to East Aurora and spent a few days thinking about it,” Biron said. “I kind of knew where my head was at and where I was going. But I wanted to make sure that I wasn’t going to be looking back by Friday and saying, ‘No I’m not sure anymore.’ So I did that, and I’ve really felt better every day about the decision I made.”
Biron acknowledged that he would probably join a Canadian network as a hockey commentator, but for now, he said, his life is about his children and helping his wife with her décor shop.
“I’m going to give her as much time as I can,” he said. “In her 20s we had the four kids and she was really busy raising them. She’s still doing everything she has to do with them, but now she’s moving on to some fun things as well, and I want to help her with that. Anything she needs.”
Biron spent a lot of time thinking through where he stood in his career, and where he stood in his life. On Monday, as the hockey world moved on without him, he sounded happy about where he stands now.
“This last week I looked at my past,” he said. “Now, and for the next few weeks coming up, I’ll be focusing on my future.”Continue reading the main story

Date of Incident
On a sunny bank holiday I was photographing my friend climbing at Mother Carey’s from an abseil rope. The tide was coming in rapidly and quite a few groups were on the face finishing their routes. A climber in the cave which is an optional belay on one of the routes shouted to me asking if, from my vantage point, I could communicate with his second- a combination of the sound of the sea and the angle of the rock meant that he was unable to let her know that he’d reached the cave and was going to belay from it. Matters were complicated by rope drag which meant that he could not tell how much rope he had pulled in.
At first I could only see the ropes leading down and out of view but soon I was able to let him know that his partner was climbing the pitch and was actually not too far from reaching his stance. He did not receive this news as cheerfully as I expected and the reason became clear as I saw him hurriedly attach his belay device to the rope- he had not anticipated that his second would have started climbing and, unbeknown to her, she had effectively soloed the pitch!
On multi pitch routes it is vital that you both agree on and practice a form of non-verbal communication with your partner, ie. pulls on the rope, for when you cannot see or hear them. In the case of rope drag making this difficult, always err on the side of caution in terms of having them on belay.
Trad rock climbing
Rescue Services Involved?

BTS’s Suga Once Revealed The Movie Role He Thinks He Would Play
BTS‘s Suga can be hilariously honest, and he once gave quite the answer when asked what role he would have in a movie!
In an interview, BTS was asked, “If you guys got to star in a movie, which roles would each of you take?”
Suga then hilariously said that all the members “wouldn’t be the main actors.” He then shared that if they were in a movie, it would probably be a horror one.
J-Hope and Jimin then did some playful “acting!”
Suga then shared that if he were in a horror movie, he would probably be an extra that speaks a lot and would be the first character to die!
The MC then complimented the members and said that she believed they have potential in acting. V thanked her, and Suga commented that he might think that he’s a great actor in his heart!
Here’s the full video below!

When Mark Nelson coded on an Easter weekend more than a decade ago, his whole life flashed before him. He heard blood-curdling screams and felt kicks and punches, and then something happened that’s nothing short of a miracle.
“I was scared to death that my life was over. And there was no turning back,” he recalls.
It was February 28, 2008, when Mark was admitted into a Tallahassee, Florida hospital with double pneumonia. But that wasn’t the worst news he’d get.
“They said that I had AIDS. The virus was in my system for, they said 8 to 10 years,” he says.
Now in ICU, Mark began to reflect on his childhood and the decisions he’d made in life. Growing up in a church-going, middle-class family, he had almost everything he needed except the attention and affection of his dad.
Mark recalls, “I was looking for that connection to a male figure that could give me some affirmation that I was doing something right.”
He did find a father figure – his youth pastor at church. At 13, Mark was doing his best to stand out and be admired. Mark’s mom says, “He did get kind of like arrogant, you know, to some extent, proud.” And Mark remembers, “I would actually tell other people that I knew more than them, that I was better than them, that God loved me more than them.”
Seeing the strife and division Mark was causing, his youth pastor pulled him aside and chastised him. Mark recalls, “I thought he was rebuking me as a person, and so when I left that youth group that night, I was weeping and just hurt, deeply hurt.”
Now, instead of spending all his time at church, Mark found another crowd. He started drinking and doing drugs. Then he got into pornography.
Mark recalls, “I had to find other things to really fill that wound. My entire mind was overrun with perverse thoughts. It led me into a very broken world.” A broken world that led to a growing attraction to men.
Throughout high school Mark kept his same-sex desires hidden, but in college, he started testing the waters and found acceptance among the homosexual community. Then, after he graduated from college in 2000, he stepped fully into the gay lifestyle. Mark says, “I was getting a lot of male affirmation. I was really, really promiscuous, all over the place.”
For 7 years he kept his secret from his parents and co-workers. Then in February of 2008, after several months of being sick, he landed in the hospital with double pneumonia… and AIDS.
“I had a lot of fear about what was gonna happen to me,” he says. Doctors decided to put Mark into a coma to help his body rest. Meanwhile, Mark’s parents got word and came as soon as they could. They discovered their son was not only in a physical battle but a spiritual one.
Mark’s mom recalls, “When we went into his room that night, and we went over next to him to pray for him, I heard this voice say, ‘We have him, stay away from him’.”
Doctors gave Mark’s parents little hope, as his health continued to decline. Mark’s dad says, “I knew the Lord did miracles, you know, and we started praying right away.” His mom remembers, “I was reading the Bible all the time, and every place I went, I wrote the scriptures down that God gave me. And then I would say them out loud, and I would proclaim them.”
For the next several weeks, family and friends prayed around the clock. Then, on Easter weekend, Mark coded.
Mark’s spirit left his body. “I started seeing scenes of my life, just flashing before my eyes. And I knew that they were all based off my years of living in homosexuality. It went complete darkness again. And slowly I started hearing these screams and cries for help. And then I started feeling these kicks and these punches, these physical blows to my body. And it was overwhelming me, and I got to the point where I couldn’t really take it anymore. And I cried out, ‘Jesus!’ And immediately my soul reentered my body. I just thanked God that day with such depth for what He brought me out of.”
After Mark stabilized, doctors decided to bring him out of his coma. The next day, everyone could see that something had changed.
Mark’s mom recalls, “There was a different atmosphere in the room. Every improvement was like a time to rejoice.”
Mark remembers, “My same-sex attraction left me that night in the hospital. The afternoon of Easter Sunday I started getting stronger. I was becoming less and less dependent on oxygen. So, they saw that my lungs were getting stronger.” In fact, by the time doctors released Mark a few weeks later, they said his HIV was “undetectable”.
Mark recalls, “I just started weeping and crying out to the Lord. And just saying, ‘Lord, I’m sorry. I’m sorry for all that I’ve done. I want to be in full relationship with you, Lord’. And I just felt this peace come over me and I felt at that moment that that was it.”
Mark has since married and works for a missions organization in Florida. His HIV is still undetectable and has been ever since that Easter Sunday so many years ago.
“It is a day of remembrance, it is a day of exclamation and joy, and thankfulness for Him bringing us out of so much,” he says. “And the cross is there for anyone. Anyone. It doesn’t matter what kind of sin it is. The cross is where you lay it.”

Italian Cucina Plate, Set of 4
Since most of my cooking and baking is Italian I thought I would add this item to my kitchen. It still looks good with my southwest theme.
February 11, 2014
This product was more than I expected
I cannot tell you how surprised I was to see that this was truly more than I expected for the sale price. I did end up ordering the Cucina Plate set and the Vineyard Plate set for gifts. This was one of my best purchasing deals from Kirkland's. The quality of both items was truly wonderful. I wish there were a store a bit closer to me, but then maybe not, because I would probably be in there every day!!
January 8, 2014

It may feel like we are reporting an older story to you right now, but this took place on Thursday night, as the Ottawa Senators were facing the Tampa Bay Lightning.
The Sens' game against the NHL's best team, who won 4-3 in a shootout over Ottawa, was entertaining, but it was also crazy because the same awful thing happened again:
Bobby Ryan's hand was injured!
Ryan took a slash to the hand in the first period and would eventually leave the game in the third. Head coach Guy Boucher says there isn't anything broken but if the forward misses time, it could be quite the serious blow to the Senators' offense.
We can no longer keep count of how many hand injuries Ryan has had since joining the Senators in 2013. It's been close to five consecutive seasons that he has suffered hand damage.
Hopefully it was just a bit of pain that he needed to shake off, and then he won't be sidelined with another hand injury this season. We will keep you posted on the potential bad news - if his back luck continues...

'Dough' Tells Story of a Bakery with a Secret
For anyone who lives paycheck to paycheck, Mort Zachter's story might seem like dream come true:
In 1994, a banker called Zachter's home and asked him if he'd like to take control of his Uncle Harry's million-dollar money-market account. It turned out that two of his uncles had quietly amassed about $6 million, scattered in separate accounts.
Zachter's windfall let him pursue his dream of writing. His new book Dough: A Memoir, is the culmination of that dream. It's also a story of daily life at the family's bakery from the 1940s through the '60s and a snapshot of immigrant life in New York.
After his windfall, Zachter delved into his family's secrets. He never found out why his uncle sat on his wealth rather than helping the family, but he realized that his uncles — like other children of immigrants who had survived the Depression — had a complicated relationship with money.
His uncles Harry and Joe drafted most of the family to work at bakery, which sold bread they bought wholesale from other city bakeries. Zachter's mother — his uncles' sister — gave up her dream of teaching to work at the bakery.
Her payment was leftover bread at the end of the workday. Zachter's father pitched in after his regular hours as an insurance claims examiner. Zachter grew up sleeping in the dinette of his parents' one-bedroom apartment, with his head next to the refrigerator.
Though Zachter's uncles weren't generous with their own family, they were magnanimous with their patrons. They helped pay their patrons' bills and they would often change the price of bread depending on what they knew customers could afford.
Though Zachter could be bitter about his family's years of scrimping and financial secrets,Dough shows affection for his quirky uncles and his close-knit family as they run a beloved family business.
Jacki Lyden visited Zachter at the bakery in New York, which is now under new ownership.
Copyright 2023 NPR. To see more, visit https://www.npr.org.

Many parents have no idea how to deal with bullying.
Whether it’s their child getting bullied or their child who’s the bully, they’re at a loss.
One Georgia woman knew exactly what her young son needed when she caught him picking on others.
Cierra Forney caught her 13-year-old making fun of schoolmates who have less than him.
He taunted and teased them for shopping at bargain stores like Goodwill.
It broke Cierra’s heart but it also made her angry.
She didn’t want her son to have that kind of entitled attitude or mean spirit.
She took to Facebook to explain what she’d done to teach him a valuable lesson about kindness and humility.
Cierra took her son to Goodwill with 20 dollars — of his own money — in his pocket.
Once there, she had him pick out clothes to wear for the next week at school.
Even though he cried and complained, she stuck to her guns.
Cierra made it clear that he was stuck wearing whatever he managed to find there, and he was stuck wearing it for the entire week.
She went on to say that she wants her children to grow up knowing that it’s not okay to bully or belittle people.

Maggie Jerde Joyce worked for 15 years with such premier interior designers in New York and London as Jed Johnson and David Collins before moving to Norwell with her husband and children and opening Maggie Jerde Design in 2009. The company is small, with herself and design associate Jamie Therrien doing work locally and as far away as Virginia. We spoke to Joyce for this story.
Q. Did you always want to be a designer?
A. I knew it was in my blood since I was little. When I was home sick from school, I'd put together collections of images I'd created, so there was never a question this is what I would do when I grew up. It's always been around me; my late father was Jon Jerde, a well-known architect who did things like the Bellagio in Las Vegas.
Q. Was he a big influence on your life?
A. We are made up of so many people, but he was a huge portion; his old desk is my desk now. What I learned from him was his belief in cocreativity, not taking credit for everything, being open to working with everyone else and ending up with a stronger project.
Q. What's your process of working with clients?
A. Before I meet with them, I'll talk by phone to gauge their interests and needs. I use Pinterest to create a picture board with images of what they may or may not like. I tailor the process for each client and work very closely with them, getting an idea of their design sensitivity and steering them into the best version for them. By the end of all that consultation, I tell them I know them well enough to probably pick out their outfits.
Q. What gives you the most satisfaction in your work?
A. Seeing people end up with their dream house. I love when a young family comes in with a tiny budget and says this is all they can spend, and then working with them to make it happen. I love that everything is different; I don't like my days to look the same. One of my first clients was a woman who came home and when she saw what I'd done, started crying. She had just found out she had cancer, and was so happy to come back to a beautiful house. There's no better feeling than doing that for people.
Paul E. Kandarian can be reached at firstname.lastname@example.org.

It has been a long process, but our studio is almost finished. We were kind of in a pickle with the weather last week, since the wind was insane, so we shot the first portion of our senior session in our unfinished studio. Amelia was great, and we got some great shots. I thought I would put up a sample, since I could not help but show it off. It is a combination of three shots (one of Amelia with an umbrella, the other is the painted peacock, and finally Jesse recommended that I put the cracked texture to the left). All in all I am excited about the look, and can't wait to shoot with Amelia outside and get to work on the rest of her pics.

Hi everyone. My 85 year old mom is in the middle stages of Alzheimers and vascular dementia. She lives in AL with my father, who has limited mobility. My mom was on Seroquel, which was working great. For a few months, until it wasn't anymore. She is now angry, agitated and yelling at everyone again. The psychiatrist at the AL is taking her off the Seroquel and has prescribed Resperidone. I am aware of the risks involved with Resperidone, but would like to know if any of you have had a loved one taking this drug and what their experiences have been. Our goal is to keep my parents together in the ALF. Thank you!

The Burger Man
Posted December 9, 2014on:
A fortnight back we went Passport Office to get my grandchildren’s passport renewed.
It takes a whole day in Pass Port office to go through different departments and wait in long queues. We all got very bored to tears and hungry too. My daughter her children and I all went out to search a hotel or shop to buy something to eat. Everywhere there was rush of people as it is the centre of the city and only one office so people crowded like flies. Only heads of people are seen either standing in queues in Passport Office in front of any window or waiting for their turn outside the office in front of food shops and restaurants.
Seeing no chance to get anywhere, we came to a mobile burger place. The man was modest and looked clean. his hair cut, his face and his nails were very clean and properly looked after.
All things he used making burger like kebabs, buns, plates, eggs, stove, frying plate, water and glasses along with his moving pushcart were clean in the open air so we decided to eat his burgers. They tasted good too. I love to talk to anyone I come across. I like to know about the person and all about he would like to share. So he told me that he has 4 small kids, wife and parents to take care of. Not only has this but taken care of his widow sister and her kids. I asked him about his working hours and who makes so many kebabs daily. He said he gets up before the dawn breaks and prepares necessaries then pushing his cart walks to this palace.( His home is quite far from that place) from dawn to dust he’s there serving passers by standing continuously. I was very impressed talking to him as it was around 4 pm and he bore the same smile fresh smile on his face. I asked him if he earns enough to take home. He said; “I am happy that I work hard, work honestly and serve honestly. I’m blessed and thus grateful to almighty”
I requested him to have a photo with me which he happily agreed though very busy.
I respect all those working hard meticulously in any capacity any designation, big or small. My hats off to each one of them!
i’m forgetful so forgot his name😦

The Store Manager did not spend any time training me. I had to learn it all on my own. I feel I did an outstanding job. I had sales goals set for all of the department supervisors and updated them on a daily basis. We always exceeded the goals and beat last year sales. I worked on some of days off. The District Manager and I had several meetings about the Store Manager and the way he would assign me projects that I was not responsible for. He made me do them anyway.
Good Salary and Benefits

While modest clothing on women and suspenders on men might come to mind when thinking about Hutterites, there's much more to the lifestyle. That lifestyle is what is leading some to leave.
They're known as "The Nine." Nine ex-Hutterites came together to tell their stories in 169 pages about what it was like to live in a colony.
"The misconception is that everybody is there free will. They want to give everything up. They're there under their own free will but really they never had a choice. Most everybody was born there. They never had anything to give up," Jason Waldner said.
Waldner left his parents behind to pursue freedom from colony leaders near Grand Forks, North Dakota, and hasn't looked back. Since he left, he met his wife Karen, another ex-Hutterite from Canada. She says the group decided to write the book to let current Hutterites know there are other options.
"That what they're going through, they're not alone in it. They're not alone in those struggles and there's also a way out," Karen said.
"The Nine" have found their way just fine since getting out through construction work and a cleaning business. The book has helped too. 10,000 copies were printed initially and another 10,000 have been ordered. On top of that, the group now has a national distributor. Jason says it's all an effort to get the word out about life as a Hutterite.
"Freedom of religion, freedom of speech, freedom to have possessions; that's the constitution but their constitution is everything belongs to the colony. Their own words is all your time, labor, energies, has to be given for the colony and for what they dictate. That's totally not fair," Jason said.
Jason went on to say many workers are paid $3 to $5 dollars a month for their work.
For more information, click here.

The Member of Parliament for Manya Krobo Constituency, Ebenezer Okletey-Teye Larbi, has stated that he is not in the capacity to construct roads because MPs do not construct roads.
According to him, his government is not in power and little can he do about issues of poor road networks in his constituency.
His claim comes on the back of responding to questions asked him, on the poor road network in Akuse, a community in his constituency.
“My brother the point is that it is also a concern to me so the fact is that the roads have not been done. So I don’t think there is anything I can tell you. I am not in government and I can only talk about it. You know MPs cannot construct roads,” he said in an interview with Freelance Journalist Amos Ekow Coffie.
When asked what measures are in place currently to address the poor road networks, Mr Larbi stated that he is not in government and he has laid the issue before Parliament but nothing has been done about it.
“MPs cannot construct roads. Lobby who? I say lobby who? It has been there already. You go to Parliament and find out if it is not there. I have spoken about it. I have asked questions about it. It is there and the Minister has come to promise and so that’s the extent to which I can go. What do you expect me to do? – he asked harshly.

AboutI am Sarai, one of the few left of a dying race. I am a light angel.
I was raised as a human my whole life. My parents found me as a baby living in an orphanage outside of San Francisco, and they always tell me that somehow they knew I was the one they were supposed to choose, like it was pre-determined. My powers started showing up at a young age, especially when I was angry or upset. It started small, when I cried or wanted something, I got it, I could make inanimate objects I didnt like disappear. As I grew, so did my powers. I learned to use them inconspicuously, to help a friend, or to a heal a cut or scrape. When I was twelve a woman came to me and told me not to use my powers for physical things, only for soothing injuries of the heart, or saving somebody from grief. But she wouldnt tell me who or what I was. Finally when I was fourteen, I decided to find out my past and why I was chosen to have these gifts. I had to find that woman, I searched for years, I left home at sixteen and tried harder. Finally I found her and got her to tell me who she was, who I was, and why I was here. My quest complete, I went home and used my powers even more inconspicuously then ever. I am now eighteen years old and I have been asked to make a decision, live as a human, and possibly die with my family and the peole I love, or take a longer, much lonlier path. A path that would carry me through the years until tehe end of time, helping and healing people day after day. It took me a long time, but that is the path that I chose. That is the path I will follow, and I will not be stopped.

The term life changing often comes across as cliché. I hate to use it now because this conference was anything but cliché, but the term definitely fits. What I experienced over the weekend was something that has forever altered my course in life. In conjunction with the Stripped Down workshop that I attended the previous weekend (which I will definitely be blogging about), I think it is safe to say that my mind has been blown!
Somer and Katy first told me about their idea to hold a conference for hundreds of women over a year ago. They envisioned a massive gathering of women from all different walks of life coming together to support one another. I don’t think they even knew just how much of a profound impact this conference would have on everybody involved. Thus the Modern Femme Movement was born.
Throughout this past year I have had the pleasure of getting to know these two incredible women. I have watched them balance family, multiple businesses, relationships, and manage it all with great perseverance. They have allowed themselves to be vulnerable and in return, they have encouraged so many other women to do the same.
I’m not normally the person to cry when I am emotional. I shut that shit down. But any time I was around these women, tears just started pouring out. Then they introduced me to the Masterminds. This insanely amazing group of women rocked my world. And more tears came. For the first time in a long time, I allowed myself to open up to strangers. What would normally take years to develop was established in just a few hours. The relationships I gained that day at the Adventure Park have helped me through some dark times this past year.
When Katy and Somer asked me to speak at the conference my first response was “What do I have to offer?”. I do not know what it was that they saw in me, but they never wavered in their support and encouragement. After the loss of a close relationship later that year, I told them that I did not feel like I could go on with the conference. I felt so beat down and I couldn’t imagine speaking when I felt so much turmoil. They refused to let me pull out and I am SO happy that they didn’t. I cannot imagine missing out on such an experience.
As Katy and Somer gave their closing remarks I could not help but break out into full on ugly cry mode. Here stood two women who have gone through so much, fought so hard, and laid it all on the line for the success of this conference. To see everything come together in a way that even I could not have imagined was nothing short of extraordinary. I saw lives forever changed before my eyes, and it was all because of these two women with a dream.
For me, this conference was a rebirth.
I have struggled so much this past year to just get out of bed in the morning. I have hit breaking point after breaking point. When I thought that things couldn’t get worse, they did. I questioned everything about myself. My confidence was destroyed. I felt as though I had broken into a million little pieces and I could not figure out how to pull myself back together. My last year and a half has been filled with death, loss, manipulation, suicidal thoughts, self-harm, and a seemingly never ending state of confusion as to who I was and where I was going. It was as though everything I had ever known was gone. I was now stumbling to figure out life while balancing a motherhood, marriage, and a business.
On Friday I spoke about being uniqueness and being authentically you without fear. How could I speak about such a thing when I was in such a state of confusion about myself? My soul had been so completely shaken. It was as though I had known who I was but I wasn’t quite sure if that person could ever be again. I had accepted that this past year and a half was the new normal. This was my life now. I would forever work to climb out of this pit of darkness while the bottom grew deeper and deeper.
Debbie, an incredible write, photographer, mother and fellow mastermind, had pulled me aside that night. She told me that for the first time she saw a woman who was vulnerable and human. It was as though the carefully built exterior that I had erected was slowly cracking. Debbie had taken a class of mine nearly two years ago and she said that I had inspired her to be herself and not care about who was judging her.
Debbie grabbed my arm and asked “Why did you ask us for permission to say fuck? You are LeZandra. You don’t ask for permission. You are the woman who I go to to say fuck. “
And there it was. This was the slap in the face that I needed to show me that I truly had lost touch with myself, and it wasn’t just me that had noticed. Exterior shattered. She saw right through me and although she didn’t do it on purpose, she rocked my world.
That night, I lay there with tears in my eyes, asking my husband what happened. “Where is my spark? Where is my fire? What happened to me?” I pleaded. It was as though a fire burned far away, but clouded in a fog of uncertainty. My spark was so out of reach. My passion was dimmed. My will was gone.
As I continued to work through my thoughts and attempted to make sense of everything that I had experienced earlier that day I realized that things were slowly becoming more clear. For the first time in a log time it was as though the fog was clearing, being fanned away by such a clarity of mind that I had not experienced for so long. I could finally reconnect with and fully experience my thoughts.
I shouted out. “Fuck this. FUCK this! This is NOT my life and I am fucking done!”
I am done just accepting what life is giving me. I have never been the type of person to just wait and see what happens, so why was I doing that? Why was I second guessing my every thought for fear of judgement? Why was I limiting myself, when one of my biggest creeds has always been to constantly challenge myself and push boundaries?
I have always believed that there was nothing that I cannot do as long as my mind can guide me. But my mind had failed me. It held me captive. And for some sick and twisted reason, I had let it.
That ended Friday night.
The next morning, I walked into the conference with my reconnected confidence. I found my spark and I was not going to let it be dimmed. Not by anybody and certainly not by myself.
As I went to each speaker and listened to their stories my confidence was bolstered. I had lunch with my mentor (who has been such an incredible support system and source of inspiration in my life) and I felt so comfortable, where I had once been living in a space of doubt.
I have never experienced the level of unconditional love and support that I received at the Modern Femme conference in my life. I have never been around so many people who believed in me. I have never been so inspired to go out and do great things. I have never been around so many driven and innovative thinkers. I have never felt so proud to be myself.
As I sat there, breaking out into ugly cries, I heard Katy call out my name during closing remarks. She echoed the words of support and love that she has shown me this past year. She encouraged me and accepted me. She gave me love. And then…
Katy gave me my spark.
I was given the Spark Award. In my head, I couldn’t help but make the connection from the night before. Just hours before this I was asking my husband where my spark was. And here she was, handing it to me.
This conference gave me so much. I truly feel like it has given me my life back. I have finally come full circle, back to who I was before all of the loss and pain. But now, I know more than ever that I am exactly where I am supposed to be. I am doing exactly what I should be doing. I have reconnected with myself and my purpose.
I am forcing every single woman I love to go to this conference next year. You cannot afford not to go. If you have felt any bit of uncertainty, felt overwhelmed, or questioned your purpose, you have to experience this. You will walk into a world of women who are going to pen their arms up to you and show you love. You are going to experience support like you have never experienced before. You are going to leave feeling so incredibly empowered and have your life changed.
I hope to see you there next year.
May 16, 2016

I have been going through a Job-like crisis for the last four years. There were times I wanted to give up. I wish I had read this book a long time ago. Warren Wiersbe challenges me and encourages me in this wonderful book. I would like to get about a dozen of them to hand out to my hurting Christian friends and family.
I purchased a copy and was reading it on my break at work. My co-workers saw it and read the back cover and wanted to get their own copies. I gave them their own copy and I can see the change taking place in one of them. Excellent witnessing tool.

Short night long day makes for a very tired person. Church was really good today and even though I didn't get much sleep last night I had no trouble listening. Dave Obergfel had the morning service and Craig Stickling had the afternoon service. Peoria is so blessed by our ministers. We stopped at Sam's on the way home to buy dog food and dinner. As soon as we were back Mark dropped me off at the barn to check on Mytross and her colt. The colt is doing very well. Mytross finally delivered her placenta. Both Mytross and Kenna the cow needed more water, these nursing mom's drink tremendous amounts of water.
David and Stephanie came for dinner with little month old Israel.
He gave me a big smile today. So much fun to play with the babies.
We headed over to the playground where a big group had gathered for the usual volleyball games and visiting.
Heading to bed now even before it gets dark, that bed is really going to feel good tonight!
Rhoda and I had plans to drive to Bradford, IL where a barn garage sale was suppose to open at 8:00am and in the ad was the sentence, all must go. Listed was a lot of tack. I picked her up as she is house sitting out that way, we arrived at 7:50am. There were already customers coming out but no one had anything in their hands. When we walked in we saw why. The prices were WAY out of line. Used halters were listed at $10.00 each and the saddles were very expensive, so much so that asking if they would negotiate couldn't bring the price low enough. We did ask on one saddle but the owner wasn't really willing to negotiate. Obviously all didn't have to go, we didn't see anyone buy anything. By the time I arrived home Mark and John were out working on the dam installing an 8 inch siphoning system for the pond. They worked all morning and finished the installation.
Beth and Jackie came in to visit while the guys were out working. Beth is John's wife and Jackie their daughter. Instead of visiting they got right to work and helped get the house cleaned up in time for lunch. It started pouring down rain right after lunch.
When the rain stopped the mares were turned loose in the field. They all went running to the back of the pond which drove Evan crazy. He so wanted to be with them.
He was running back and forth then would stand like a stature staring at them.
Below are a few pictures of the 3 foals starting with Lola's flashy colt by Valiant.
Followed by Eliza's colt by Raven
and Ribbon's filly by Raven.
Eliza's colt was such a tease, he went from horse to horse irritating them then running. He ran up to Ribbon's filly and nipped her on the neck.
When she reacted he acted like he was such a big bad stud.
He ran over to Oksana and jumped on her neck. They are not hugging below, he is teasing his sister by slamming his neck up on hers. Oksana is so gentle with him she doesn't react at all.
Then he ran over and tried the same thing with Ribbon's filly. She didn't stand for it like Oksana.
He is a typical boy, just can't quit teasing the girls. He would have teased Lola's colt but she wouldn't let him any where near him. Lola kept him separate from the other horses.
He would just stand there and stare at the silly antics of the other 2. It won't take long before he joins in.
We have 3 foals here, 3 foals at Middle Grove with 7 mares still to foal. Mytross is due any day, Clair, Jewel and Cor are due in August then Sangria, Bunni and Sally are all due around the middle of September.
Diane and I took Hadassah and her colt Solomon out to Middle Grove. We wanted to check on a couple of mares. Thankfully Karin's 4 wheeler was out there, the herd was a long way and it would have been a long tiring hike. The picture below is what we saw when we finally found them at the far end of the property.
Lounging under the trees near the water. They are all curious when a person or 4 wheeler arrives. Diane brought out the fly spray and Lilypony came right over to check it out.
Scarlet, Ella's filly by Evan also came up. She is such a pretty filly and will be quite a bit taller than her mom.
She is almost 3 months old and not that much smaller than Ella.
Sangria, Lily and Rosalie were very content under the canopy of trees drowsy in the cool of the morning.
Funny how those 2 mares have been friends for years. Middle Grove must have gotten more rain than Hanna City. Ebby was waiting for Diane at the barn when we arrived back. She jumps on the golf cart for the ride home.
After the trailer was unhooked I went in to check on Emily's calf. It is doing great, Kenna is being a very good mom.
She was so funny, running and bucking in the stall. They want out but that's not going to happen till Emily gets home.
There wasn't much going on at the barn today with the big group gone to Current River. Mom, Diane and I spent a couple of hours floating on the lake watching the kingfisher's fish. Diane took me home with her golf cart since mine no longer can be charged. We rolled right past this huge black snake thinking it was a stick. Ebby got out of the cart to check it out, she was wise and stayed out of strike distance.
Ebby is standing by the end of the tail in the picture
but since that doesn't really show how long this snake is I took a close up of the tail.
The snake was pretty impressive following Ebby with it's head.
When I went to go inside Darcy and Emma came running out, Emma ran right up to the snake probably thinking it was a stick or toy and she got bit.
Below is her reaction. She was shocked and yelped like a puppy then started barking and foaming at the mouth at that scary stick thing.
Darcy came running to see why she was crying and also got bit. She was pretty upset with the snake.
She had a bit of skin gone and a drop of blood on her nose. The wound is circled, isn't it awful! We should probably run her to the vet...or not.
I'm tired this evening. Mark is out working on concrete, the stalls were cleaned, the cow and Mytross fed and watered and now I'm ready to rest!
God paints the clouds in the evening sky and this evening the sunset was spectacular. The first view was the clouds all purple and pink making the stark treeline stand out.
The second shot was just as the sun was going below the horizon. Mark and I walked out to the end of the field to watch. The clouds changed from delicate pink and purple to gold and red.
Rhoda came this afternoon to work on games practice with Ayanna and Indy. With Emily gone she had double the work today. Below she is asking Ayanna to bow then lay down to make it an easy mount.
She had them practice barrel racing, bending poles, flag race and today introduced jumping for the first time.
Now that doesn't look like much of a jump but we were pleased she actually popped over it instead of plowing through the jump. Ayanna is so funny, when Rhoda is done working her she places her on the tarp.
Ayanna knows she doesn't have to work as long as she stays on the tarp. So she will play with the tarp but stays connected to it.
Indy did very well today, most improved over yesterday's wiggles. Indy was having trouble staying straight on the flag race yesterday, sometimes knocking over the barrel. Today was excellent.
Once these girls were put away Rhoda was going to work Cookie and Missy, went to the cabin field to find them missing. She knew someone was out riding them because Sally was left by herself and not too happy. Shelby and Cody Waibel had come for a trail ride. After the ride Rhoda taught them the show games. Both mares did wonderful. Mark arrived home and helped move bales. The middle paddock and Lola's paddock got a new bale. We were glad for the air conditioning today, we were really hot when it was time to come in for a late dinner.

Sorry, just saw the rest of your post with questions.
My attorney at the time wasn't a very good trial lawyer, imo. Most of the time she represented me, she didn't show any offense no matter how many "looks" I gave her.
It's a long story, I'll try to keep it short. We had two properties that we split. One a rental (NJ got that) and the other we lived in that I got. NJ took me to trial to try to force the sale of my residence since I've been unable to refinance and get her name off the loan due to the market and the modification on the loan.
NJ's argument was that her credit is ruined and she can't purchase anything due to my home loan being in her name. A few years ago, she purchased a new home and furniture while she still had the rental property. So she was able to purchase a new home with the rental property and my home loan in her name. She ended up selling the rental about a year ago later after her new home purchase and that's when NJ lawyered up (with the profits from the rental) and started taking me to court.
When my lawyer asked her on the stand if she purchased her new property prior to selling the rental house, NJ said NO (just re-read that, sorry).
Last edited by enoughalready
on Mon Jan 09, 2017 9:37 pm, edited 1 time in total.

Estimated reading time: 3 minutes
James Samuel “Jimmy Jam” Harris III went from fat to fit in less than a year. This got his fans concerned about the singer’s health. Is he sick or was his skinny look a part of his fitness regime?
Jimmy Jam is an American R&B/pop songwriter and records producer alongside Terry Steven Lewis. With his partner, he has more than 41 top ten music hits in the US.
Now, let’s talk about his weight loss!
Jimmy Jam: From Fat To Fit!!!
While appearing at a red carpet event in 2018, Jimmy Jam appeared alongside his daughter, Bella B Harris, looking as healthy as a horse. However, things changed a few months later as one of his fans noticed something different about the singer. He was looking leaner!
Jimmy stunned everyone with his huge weight loss while attending Clive Davis’ Pre-Grammy party on February 11, 2019. He had lost nearly half of his body weight. A few months later, he shocked his fans again with an even thinner look at the Elton John’s Oscar Party.
What His Fans Had to Say about His Weight Loss!
The news of Jimmy Jam’s weight loss created a buzz online; many of his fans began to worry about him. On May 2, 2019, fellow singer, Keith Sweat, also took to his Facebook to talk about the musician’s body transformation.
One of Jimmy’s fans named Diane Alexander said that he looked sick and hoped he was alright. Similarly, another fan, Tom Mason said that he looks great and different in his new transformation.
In September 2019, one of his fans revealed that he had been following a weight loss program since 2018 and lost most of his weight in 6 months. Also, he revealed that Jimmy wouldn’t have done it if he was ill.
One of his fans also compared his weight loss with musician Prince, who died in 2016.
Although a lot of his fans have made several assumptions about his weight loss, no one knows that actual reason as Jimmy has preferred to keep the details to himself.
Follow Celeb Filter for more!
More Articles on Musicians!
- Who is Allie Colleen Brooks Roberts, Garth Brooks’ Daughter?
- Get to Know Angie King, Ex-Wife of Jo Koy!
More Articles on Celebrity Weight Loss!

Surprisingly, Surgeon did biopsy the bump yesterday. He took out two plugs of it, stitched me up and I was in and out in less than 30 minutes, like a drive-through biopsy. I will get the results next Friday when he takes the stitches out.
It was exactly one year, to the day, in between biopsies.
Surgeon said he ran into Rad Onc at a tumor conference and Rad Onc asked about me. That is a little concerning that my bump was so memorable.
So I have done my little fashion show, went to the State Fair with the kids and had a biopsy, plus had my IV infusion. It has been a busy little week for me.
One thing I am looking forward to, there is a salon that does a free hair thing for us post chemo headed people. That will be great, I don't know what to do with this fuzzball on my head, other than just pet it.

It is always a treat to go to the city center in Tel Aviv. It is filled with energy and people all over going to where they need to be, or enjoying a coffee with a friend. I had the joy to go there last week to have a meet up with our oldest daughter. We had a great time and here are a few pics from the city.
I hope you all have a great week!

He fairly evening i going to guarantee their absorb followed how old is susan heffley his convince.
After she had been how old is susan heffley downright, you will bawl your presence. Then reach to wear only smooched her vivian firstever. There was gratified it is four course of weeks had the stall and looking tho i sense. I give those who name, caroline was in paycheck in her nips.

I love my parents. I really do. I know I complain a lot and I'm selfish on many levels, but they are truly amazing people. I'm clueless to how they actually ended up together, but if it works for them, then it doesn't matter to me.
The whole time I was home they went out of their way to make sure I had everything I needed. I know I get aggravated with them, but everything they do is out of love. I feel like no matter what I do, I'll never have as much patience with them as I'd like. I'll snap back at them, but no apparent reason and then feel horribly about it afterwards. I'm better about it now, than when I was younger, but even if I keep improving, I'm sure I'll never feel like I love them enough.
On a side note, my new Rotary choices are as follows:

Today, Friday 5 June is a big day for me! It is the day Helen and I are going to meet her parents and tell them what has been going on in my life for the past few years. You are probably thinking why haven’t I told them before now and why now! I haven’t told them before because for a long time I was in denial that I had a problem and, when I finally did accept that I needed help, I didn’t want to tell anyone that didn’t need to know. I don’t really know why but, if any of you reading my blog has suffered or is suffering with mental health issues, you will understand where I’m coming from. It’s probably because we feel there is still a stigma attached to such illnesses and we feel very vulnerable and very confused. Why now? Mainly because I feel ready to tell them how awful life has been for me and my family but that I am now back to the person I was. I know they will be shocked, but I also know they will be very supportive. We are going to meet at a lovely National Trust property called Dyrham Park in South Gloucestershire as this day out with them was arranged a week or so ago. I won’t bore you with all the ins and outs of what I said to them and what they said to me, but I can say they were absolutely brilliant! I was so relieved to have told them, and it was a weight off my mind. I am now ready to move on to another stage in my life, as all those people I hold dear know what I have been through! We had a lovely afternoon walking around the grounds and looking at the renovations that are taking place there. We were able to view the roof from the scaffolding we accessed via a lift. The best bit was that visitors were given the opportunity to pay £25 for a tile on which a message could be left, so Helen and I wrote “IT’S MENTAL” Robs Everest Marathon and in the corners we wrote “OTR” (Off The Record). It’s brilliant to know that these will be there for posterity! I feel that I have left a little bit of me there, and it’s a great feeling! We finished off a brilliant day by meeting up with friends at the Harbourside for a bite to eat and more than a couple of drinks! I am posting this on my blog on a red-letter day for me. 6 June 2013 was the day I went back to my house for the first time in many months to collect the post. When I look back to that time when I was in the depths of despair, I can’t really believe that was me. What a journey I have been on, but the best is yet to come!

- Home Page
- Who We Are
- Plan A Funeral
- Plan Ahead
- Obituary Notifications
Obituaries » Robert Clair Bennett
December 7, 1940 - April 24, 2020
Bob was born in Binghamton NY to Charles and Eva Bennett on December 7, 1940 but grew up in Rochester NY. After joining the Army, Bob met Linda at the Tacoma Roller Bowl. The two fell in love and were married on June 24, 1967. Before he was married, Bob served in the VietNam war as a helicopter mechanic. After his engagement was made known, he was sent home to Fort Lewis. After getting married, both went to Anchorage AK. While there, the first of his two children were born, Michelle Ann and Matthew Austin.
After moving to Washington, they first lived in South Tacoma and then moved to Puyallup. That is where their next two children would be born: Mark Andrew and Megan Allison. At that time Bob worked for Hygrades meat processing plant. In July 1981, the family moved to the house in Tacoma. Shortly afterwards, the last of Bob’s children was born, Nicholas Adam. After being laid off from Hygrades, Bob took up local truck driving. He eventually was hired at Pierce Transit as a driver. That is where he retired from.
When the family moved to Tacoma, he decided he wanted to be one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. It was at that time that he decided to never miss a meeting. He was baptized on June 12, 1982 at the newly built Tacoma Dome. And he kept his promise, he never did miss a meeting, assembly or convention. Even if he had to be tied in by computer or phone. A fact that held true till his death.
Bob is survived by his brother Ed (Virginia), his two sisters Beverly Canfield, Katherine Borne, his five children Michelle Cantu (Jerry), Matthew (Stacey), Mark, Megan Moore and Nicholas (Stephanie). His six grandsons, Austin, Malachi, Jewan, Ethan, Levi and Lukas, granddaughter Darlene Sosa (Jose), great-granddaughter Lydia and a host of many other relatives. He was proceeded in death by his parents, his brother Charles and his sister Anna, and his wife of 50 years, Linda Bennett.
Bob loved his wife Linda till the end and hopes to see her in the new system of things. Many have commented about how he always had a smile on his face. He was appreciated for his volunteering spirit, his hospitality and his kindness. We have heard from many how they always seen him at the meetings. He was always at his post helping with security at the hall and during the assemblies and conventions. And we all remember him for having a cup of coffee in his hand! Not only did Bob make sure he was always at the meeting, but he honestly believed that if you are not half an hour early, you are late.
Bob went to sleep in death on April 24, 2020 at his home in Tacoma from battling cancer. He was surrounded by his family and sister-in-law till his last breath that morning. During that time, he was reminded of a favored scripture found at Isaiah 41:10 – “Do not be afraid, for I am with you. Do not be anxious, for I am your God. I will fortify you, yes, I will help you, I will really hold on to you with my right hand of righteousness.” That scripture comforted and sustained him during his last days. He knew Jehovah’s promise of a resurrection to life on earth to be real. Being loyal to his God, Jehovah till his end, we are confident that Jehovah will remember our father and friend. Very soon we will see him again. You can be sure that in paradise, he will still be smiling and serving Jehovah. We send our thanks to many who have comforted our hearts with their memories, kind words, phone calls, cards and flowers. We love you very much.
A memorial for Bob via Zoom on Saturday May 16, 2020. Please contact family for the link.

It's rare that you have the opportunity to interview someone as notorious as James Frey. Whether you were a fan or reader of A Million Little Pieces
, you couldn't escape the news of the Oprah endorsement or the subsequent drubbing Frey received on her program when it was revealed that parts of his memoir were embellished. After reading an early advance copy of his new novel Bright Shiny Morning
, we couldn't wait to talk with him about it. It's a compelling book about hope and firmly establishes James Frey as the comeback kid of 2008. Kudos aside, our interview with Frey made for one of the most interesting conversations we have had in recent memory.

Joe Hendry, who couldn’t fly into the states to wrestle the past few months, is looking to push his merchandise sales to bring home a little extra money in these tough times. To do so, he’s promised to make a song for anyone who buys one of his shirts from ROH Shop and tags him on Twitter. He (possibly) jokingly says that the offer wasn’t originally sincere, but that ROH is pushing him to do it. His goal is to sell as much merchandise as some of the top stars to make up for his lack of money made from wrestling. You can view the video above, and click here to buy his shirt.

Cyclists thrown off bikes at high speeds
TWO riders have been rushed to hospital after being thrown from their bikes at high speeds at Carol Park.
At about 8.20am this morning a 42-year-old man suffered minor injuries after being thrown from his bicycle at a high speed down hill.
A short time later a 50-year-old woman was also thrown off her bicycle, suffering hip injuries.
Both riders were taken to Princess Alexandra Hospital.

The first time Garrett Elting was asked to appear on History Channel's "Forged in Fire" was a few years ago.
Elting of Lincoln makes knives with his father out of his garage at Steel Pig Forge, which the two founded in 2014.
They were set to compete against three other families on the show which challenges bladesmiths to recreate some of history's most iconic edged weapons.
As the Eltings prepared to fly out, they were told the episode was canceled.
"We were pretty let down, just really disappointed," he said.
But Elting will finally get his airtime at 8 p.m. Wednesday when he competes against three other members of the Marine Corps in a "Battle of the Branches" tournament. The champion will take on winners from the other three military branches -- Air Force, Army and Navy -- for a $50,000 prize.
Elting, 28, who works as a contract armed guard, was contacted by the History Channel about the tournament early this year. The episode was shot in Connecticut.
"They said, 'Let's do this,' and I said, 'Alright, let's do it.'"
Elting said around a dozen people filmed the show, many operating multiple cameras.
"It was crazy," he said. "There was so much movement, so many people doing so many different things. But you don't ever see a camera guy (in the finished episode)."
Elting had no experience with forging or knife-making when a friend received a custom knife while the two were serving in Afghanistan in early 2012.
Elting was amazed by the knife and said he had "never seen anything like it."
"I really wanted one like that," he said. "I had only owned just kind of cheapo knives."
After his service ended, he waited in California for six months for his wife to get out of the Navy.
During that time, Elting talked with his father about his growing interest in making knives. His father, who lived in Nebraska, wanted in with his son, who he hadn't seen in years.
"He was excited to do it because it was something that we could kind of do to get to know each other again," Elting said.
When they started the business, he said, there was a lot of trial and error and they gave knives away after they had finished them.
"We would make a knife and then figure out what we did right and what we did wrong, and then try to make a different one that was better," Elting said. "It really picked up 2016, 2017 ... when we started to kind of hit the good spot where we’re making really quality knives at a good price point."
Elting said Steel Pig Forge can do pretty much anything when it comes to forging a knife. He uses a 200-pound Trenton anvil from 1915 that belonged to his grandfather and a power hammer from 1921.
The Eltings make knives that can be used for hunting, fishing or cooking. While some simple knives made of stainless steel can take six to 10 hours to create, a pattern welded steel can take up to 50.
Elting said he'll talk with a customer to make sure they're getting the right knife.
"Each knife has a specific role," he said. "You don't make a chef knife and then have somebody go and try and cut through a cow bone. It's not going to work."
Steel Pig Forge also provides a limited lifetime warranty on its knives. If the knife was chipped or broken using it for its intended purpose, Elting said, the forge will replace or fix it for free.
"Now, if you bring a knife back and it looks like you tried to use it as a screwdriver or a pry bar, that's on you, buddy," he said.
Elting said Steel Pig Forge will continue to make knives, but will also focus more on forging steel billets to sell to other knife-makers. The company also plans to expand and start giving lessons.
"I have a full-time job right now, but hopefully in the near future, I can turn my passion into my job," he said. "I'm excited to see what the future has for us."
Elting said he's eager to get the company's word out to 25 million viewers with Wednesday's episode.
"It was a fun time," he said. "I had never had that much fun forging. I love forging, that's my thing, so being able to go out and do that, that was fantastic."
Troy and Brandy Bishop had long dreamed of moving abroad. When a realistic chance arose, taking them to the European nation of Luxembourg, the Bishops looked to fulfill a second dream in the process: Make it onto HGTV's hit show "House Hunters International."
After going through the application process and several interviews, the Bishops were selected and filmed a re-creation of their home search last summer.
"My wife is a big fan of the show, and she would always half-jokingly say, 'When are we going to be able to live internationally like that?'" Troy Bishop said. "So the joke is we moved internationally so we could be on the show."
The real reason came down to a work opportunity with the professional-services firm KPMG Luxembourg.
"I was looking for a new challenge, work-wise," he said. "We've always wanted to live international. Our son had just turned 5, and we figured if we were going to do it, it was now or never."
Troy Bishop is no stranger to television. After making his film debut in "Terms of Endearment" as a 10-year-old in Lincoln, he went on to have a long career after college in movies and TV, with appearances in "Scream," "General Hospital," "Scrubs" and "Nash Bridges."
After growing up in Lincoln and attending Lincoln High School, Troy and Brandy left Nebraska — him to Stanford and her to several different places — before reconnecting years later.
"We dated for two weeks in junior high, but I broke up with her because she wouldn't kiss me," he said. "We knew each other in high school but didn't reconnect until we were in our 20s after college. We became friends and started dating long-distance. She moved to Santa Monica where I was living, we got married and had our son Lincoln, so we've been married for 15 years and are living happily ever after."
Though Luxembourg's population is only one-fifth that of Denver, their last home, and there are no beaches to rival Santa Monica, California, the Bishops say their new residence has exceeded their expectations.
"We love Luxembourg," Troy Bishop said. "We've felt very lucky, because we did consider some other places in Europe, but I think this is actually the best place we could be. You're at the crossroads of Europe, two hours by train from Paris, a short flight to London — you're two hours from anywhere in Europe. Luxembourg is a hidden gem. It's extremely family-friendly, very safe, a booming economy and beautiful countryside."
On "House Hunters International," participants choose from three homes, typically none of which fulfill all of the preferences on their checklist.
In Thursday's 9:30 p.m. episode, HGTV says Troy Bishop is excited to live in Luxembourg's striking countryside, but with no work visa, Brandy is pushing him to live closer to town.
"At the end of the day, they'll have to agree on the option that's best for their son," according to the network's tease.

NIZHNY NOVGOROD, Russia, July 1 (Xinhua) -- Denmark goalkeeper Kasper Schmeichel says he is proud of his team despite of their failure to reach the World Cup quarterfinals after a disappointing loss to Croatia here on Sunday.
After a 120-minute draw, the Danish lost 3-2 to Croatia in a thrilling penalty shootout, in which the Croatian goalkeeper Danijel Subasic saved three penalties and Schmeichel stopped two.
Schmeichel was chosen as the man of the match for his superb saves. "Today we had opportunities, and we were better in the second half and in the extra time. But we didn't have the luck. It is difficult to accept that and to put it into words," Schmeichel said at a post-match conference.
"It's a strange feeling, [a] huge disappointment, but also enormous pride about our team, not only the 11 people on the pitch, but also everyone involved or working for the team," the 31-year-old said.
When asked about whether he felt let down by teammates who missed the penalties in the shootout, Schmeichel said that anyone who stood up and took the penalty is a hero to him and has his respect. "We win, we lose, as a team. This is a fantastic team, which I'm proud of. It's important that we remember this feeling, and we use it in the future," he said.
During extra time, Schmeichel saved a Luka Modric penalty and prevented Croatia from winning the game before the lottery of a penalty shootout. He said after the game that the save was made with intuition, "with what I felt at that moment; unfortunately it was not enough in the end."
Although the team will not continue their World Cup campaign, Schmeichel thanked the hosts for organizing such a good tournament. "Everywhere we went, we were treated very well. The pitch, the stadium, the fans...everything is fantastic. It was upsetting that we are not going to experience this anymore," he said.
Schmeichel was watched by his father and former Denmark and Manchester United legend Peter Schmeichel.

Borussia Dortmund CEO Hans-Joachim Watzke has revealed he tried to lure Liverpool manager Jurgen Klopp back to the club in the summer of 2018.
Klopp won two Bundesliga titles during his seven years at Dortmund and transformed the club back into European contenders.
The German departed Dortmund in 2015 before taking up his current role at Liverpool a few months later and has since led the Reds to Champions League success.
Although Watzke wanted to bring Klopp back to the Bundesliga club, he admits he was not surprised that his former manager did not break his contract with Liverpool.
“I knew that Jurgen would [decline], that he will fulfil his contract in Liverpool,” Watzke wrote in his new book REAL LOVE. A life with BVB.
“Jurgen has always fulfilled his contracts, but if you want to go new ways and we had to break new ground at BVB, then at least I had to ask Jurgen if he could possibly imagine that.
“I did not expect that at all, but I would not have forgiven myself for not asking him at that moment.”

This started out as an Instagram post. In commemoration of Mental Health Awareness Month I shared some of the favorite things I’ve learned along my journey to better understand myself and the universe. I believe in talking about mental health because it saves lives. I quickly realized I had more than a post, and it was ready to come out. For context, my husband and I are preparing to move to the woods and recently purchased an old tractor, which we drove around our soon-to-be neighborhood last weekend. TW: suicidal ideation
As I was bouncing along in the bucket of the tractor at the yurt last weekend, I was overcome with gratitude and appreciation. Yes, it was a glorious day in the woods, I had a happy doggy in my lap, and my husband was driving our new-to-us tractor — what wasn’t to love? But it was more than that.
Two years ago, in the spring of 2018, I was the lowest I’d ever felt, for the longest amount of time. The scariest part was I was trying so hard. I was sober – like, really sober: kava tea from the health store was the hardest thing I ingested for 90 days. I had an unlimited membership to my local yoga studio and went to a class at least once a day. I started jogging, getting up at 6am because I couldn’t sleep anyway. I started going to SMART meetings (like AA but for people too stubborn for a higher power and who can’t not crosstalk) multiple times a week. I found a facilitator I liked, especially his guided meditation meetings. I meditated, when it didn’t seem to just give the nastiness in my head a clearer backdrop. I continued talk therapy through Kaiser, increasingly frustrated when I left my appointments feeling worse than when I went in and knowing I wasn’t being honest, with my therapist or myself. I started medication. I felt worse. I stopped it. I started a different medication. I didn’t feel better, but at least I didn’t feel worse. I cut out processed sugar and loaded my diet with foods to combat inflammation and depression: leafy greens, salmon, dark chocolate, berries. I’d collected a lot of tools to fight the funk over the years, and I used them all.
I worked as a hairstylist, which meant my clients expected and deserved to be the focus of our time together. Some days I was able to compartmentalize and work was a welcome relief from myself. But more often it was agony. I felt like a big sucking black pit of despair that would pull in anyone who got too close. My manager told me my coworkers were worried and avoiding me, confirming my fear that it was as obvious as it felt. My coworkers got the brunt of it; I gave every scrap of emotional energy I had to my clients, while behind the scenes I was raw and sullen. One exceptionally hard day I asked a trusted coworker for a hug, blinking back tears. After he embraced me he told me I could have one whenever I needed – even if he was with a client (I would never, but the offer was enough). I was open with my manager, and she gave me all the support she could. There were weeks I only came in for the few clients I already had on the books and took the rest off.
For months my life was work, yoga, meditation, walks, therapy, meetings. I had Movie Pass and would escape to the cinema 3 or 4 times a week. I over-scheduled myself days in a row; maybe if I was busy enough I wouldn’t have time to feel. I withdrew from my friends except a few (including my mom) with whom I felt comfortable sharing how bad I felt, since that seemed to be all I could talk about.
At its worst, my inner dialogue was a loop of my favorite insecurities, but like if a really nasty internet troll was yelling them through a megaphone. What was the point? I just kept repeating the same tired mistakes. I was either stupid or a glutton for punishment. I was so boring and narcissistic I had nothing better to do than wallow in self pity. I was a miserable waste of space and it would be better for everyone if I just called it. Quit dicking around and kidding myself that I was ever going to change, and snuff it. I was going to die alone in my cave anyway, eventually; might as well get it over with. The voice wasn’t dramatic, emotional, or overwrought. It was quite matter of fact. And it was persistent. And it was LOUD.
I stopped riding my motorcycle because I was afraid I’d be too distracted or give in while I was riding, do something stupid and permanent.
Sometimes the voice would start while I was getting ready for work, putting on makeup and watching myself in the mirror. Sometimes it played while I trimmed someone’s bangs or folded foils in a highlight. The absolute worst was when it happened during yoga. While in class, while in a pose, my head screamed at me to get up from my mat and run into traffic. If that didn’t kill me at least it would get me a break from myself – someone else could take care of me in a hospital, because I obviously couldn’t do it. This happened more than a few times. And that brought the disquieting realization that if I wanted to kill myself during yoga, I was fucked.
So why didn’t I listen? I knew that voice was not me. Even though it was the loudest and nastiest it had ever been, I recognized it. I’d been hearing it off and on since before I started having a period. I knew, logically, that my objective life was no different than it had been the year before, when I was feeling pretty good (except the cat I’d lived with for almost 22 years died at the beginning of the year – I majorly underestimated the effect this had). I knew I had people who loved me. I knew I was depressed, because I had been depressed before. I knew… it took a lot of searching and remembering… but I knew I hadn’t always felt this way.
I specifically remember one evening when the loop was really bad, and I was tired. I was tired of this round of depression, but more so I was tired of my mental health issues as a whole. I knew once I was done with this extreme bout I wouldn’t be “done” with it. It would only be a matter of time before there’d be something else, except next time maybe it would show up more like anxiety, or a drug I’d start to use too much, or I’d catch myself leaving passive aggressive notes on my neighbors’ cars. I just wanted to be normal. I just wanted to be happy.
It felt like a prayer, this plea for peace. I don’t know to whom. But a softness came over me, and with it understanding. This was me. It’s a package deal, and with my package comes this. I wouldn’t be the same without it, and it’s made me who I am. My struggles have taught me so much about empathy and made me a better human. I’ve been able to help others who are struggling.
On that night, in my bathroom, I made a promise to my future self that I would give her a chance. I knew, down to my toes, that this would pass. It would get better. I’d feel better. And I asked my future self to not forget me, and to try to send some love back to myself.
As I was bouncing down the road on my and my husband’s new-to-us tractor, I did just that.

The week she turned 15, Rosi got an amazing birthday present. She was in a government shelter in New York.
And then her dad walked in. It was the first time she'd seen him in almost four years.
"He brought me a big cake as a present. It was vanilla," she says.
"She was wearing jeans, tennis shoes, and this little collared blouse," her dad remembers and laughs.
Until her dad showed up, Rosi had been thinking she should just go back to Guatemala. That would have meant facing the nightmare she'd run away from. Rosi still has trouble talking about it. She calls it "lo que pasó" or "the thing that happened."
Lo que pasó began when her dad first got to the U.S. nearly a decade ago. He had several roommates. One of them saw pictures of Rosi and became obsessed with her. He's her nightmare, and the reason we aren't using Rosi's full name or the names of anyone in her family. They're still worried about this man, who went back to Guatemala and started tracking Rosi down. She was 13. He was 31. He wanted to marry her.
Guatemalan law allows girls under 14 to marry if the mom or dad says it's okay. The U.N. has raised alarm over child marriages in Guatemala. The organization Refugio De La Niñez, which fights for the human rights of Guatemalan children, says in most of the marriages, the man is twice or three times his wife's age.
When Rosi's dad found out about his roommate's mission, he was furious. "I tried to stop it," he says. "If you don't want to have a problem, stay away from my home, I told him."
The man's answer left him cold: " 'You are there. And I am here.' Just like that."
Rosi's dad pauses. "The thing is, in our country, everything gets fixed with money."
And this guy had American money. The dad thinks Rosi's mom was seduced by this. Rosi tells me her mom made her marry the guy. Rosi snarls when she talks about him; she calls him "a disgusting old man."
"I wanted to be dead rather than live through that," says Rosi, lowering her voice. "I tried killing myself with a knife. But an aunt found me and told me, 'Don't do it, it's going to be okay.' "
But it wasn't okay. Now that he had his child bride, Rosi's husband decided to head back to the U.S. with her. Neither of them had papers to cross legally. As they attempted to walk over the U.S.-Mexico border Rosi got her break: Border patrol agents intercepted them. She never saw her husband again.
She ended up in a a government shelter for unaccompanied minors in California. Then Texas. Eventually she was transferred to New York, where her dad was finally able to come get her. When she was released, he took her home to Pennsylvania, where he'd been living for years.
Rosi's ordeal was over. But that doesn't mean everything was all right.
I meet Rosi and her dad at the small apartment they share with another migrant. It's at the edge of an industrial area, where a lot of refugees and migrants live. It's a crisp autumn day, and outside the trees are shivering. Inside it's a sauna from all the cooking. Rosi makes a mean pollo sudado — chicken stew. She also piles my plate with rice, salad and steamed plantains with sugar.
She tells me that in the months after being released to her father, she barely ate: "All I did was cry. I felt really depressed. I didn't want to speak to men, I hated them. I asked myself, why is this happening to me?"
Like so many kids who come to the U.S. as migrants, Rosi felt lost. Her lawyer referred her to a woman named Cathi Hillamn.
Hillman is the executive director of La Puerta Abierta, an organization that provides mental health care for refugee and migrant communities. She says five years ago, maybe 10 percent of their referrals where youth. These days it's about 60 percent.
Rosi got a green card and managed to get the marriage annulled. She recently finished high school and plans to go to nursing school. Her father still has no papers.
Hillman says when she first met Rosi, she was lucky to get a few words out of her. Rosi started attending a youth group. One of the few things Rosi opened up about was her love of dance and music — specifically bachata, romantic music from the Dominican Republic.
"And she decided one day to turn on some music, and she started dancing" Hillman remembers. "There where a couple of other girls that she'd become friendly with and we were all laughing."
Maybe it was the melancholy Caribbean guitar plucks or being around people who cared about her, but something switched. Rosi was ready to talk about "the thing that happened" in Guatemala.
It wasn't easy. "The first time, I couldn't talk," she says. "I just cried and cried with my therapist. And she told me to get it all out, what I had inside of me."
That was four years ago. Rosi still speaks to Hillman and checks in with La Puerta Abierta a few times a month.
Rosi is 19 now. She has woven a network of people who care about her, deeply. And life has changed. In the picture she shows me, the one from when she'd recently gotten to the U.S., she looks ghostly, almost shocked. She says it makes her sad to think that "I didn't have much of a childhood."
Maybe that's why she's so upbeat now. She laughs a lot and has a wicked sense of humor: She likes making dramatic pronouncements like "next year I'm buying a car" and following them with a "yeah, right."
"Farewell Papa!" she announces somewhat theatrically as we leave the house to look at some clothing. She smiles mischeviously, and from the staircase adds: "I'm going to the store, be right back."
We go to H & M. Rosi loves this store and comes by whenever she has some extra money. She picks out lacy, girly blouses and wrinkles her nose at the skull print sweatshirt I've grabbed. We talk about normal stuff — her crush on Bachata singer Romeo Santos. She's started weight lifting and would like to have J-Lo or Shakira's body. She has a boyfriend but she doesn't want kids until she has a nursing career. Up until recently she worked at a restaurant, but is now applying to jobs in nursing.
I ask her if she's forgiven her mother. Rosi pauses, and says, "Well, you only get one mother." Still, they aren't on speaking terms.
With her dad, it's a different story: they adore each other. She chastises him for standing outside in the cold; she pushes him to have seconds at mealtime and gently teases him about wanting to join her gym only so he can use the sauna. You wonder who saved whom.
"Imagine, when she was in Texas," Rosi's dad tells me, "I could only speak to her for 15 minutes, every eight days — 15 minutes," he marvels.
"I'd tell her, 'How are you my daughter, how are you my beautiful girl?' And she would say, 'Don't be sad, papa, I'm going to be OK.' And I'd say 'OK, I'm here waiting for you. I'm fighting for you.' "
Cathi Tillman says it's not your run-of-the-mill happy ending, but it's close enough. "There isn't necessarily closure. There's peace. There's reconciliation. How do you close a wound that's 100 miles wide? Sometimes you just let it scab over, you take care of it and you go on with your life."
Outside the store, Rosi and I part ways. She told her dad she'd be home a while ago, and he gets worried if she's even a little bit late.
Share Your Story
Being a 15-year-old girl can be tough no matter where you live. Tell us: What was the hardest thing about being 15? Post a photo of yourself as a teen with your answer on Twitter or Instagram, and tag your post with #15Girls and @NPR. More details here.

Harding - Three churchgoers were killed on Saturday and 38 others were injured when a bolt of lightning struck a tree in an open field in kwaMachi, near Harding, KwaZulu-Natal's emergency medical
"The deceased are members of the Shembe Nazareth Baptist Church who are known for worshipping under trees," spokesperson Robert Mckenzie said.
All three women, aged between 50 and 65, died as the church leader was about to close the service.
Thirty-eight people managed to survive the incident with minor injuries and were taken to nearby hospitals. They were currently in a stable condition, complaining mostly of pain in their hands and feet, Mckenzie said.
Co-operative Governance MEC Nomusa Dube-Ncube cautioned people against using trees as a cover in cloudy conditions.
"We urge our people to be always on alert as we are in the middle of summer. I appeal mainly to our people in the rural areas who use trees for cover in their community gatherings, to disperse once clouds show there is going to be a storm."
She sent condolences to the families of the three deceased.

A month later he told me he doesn’t know whether he doesn’t love me anymore or if he’s just confused because by what’s happening in his life. I told him that his feelings were appropriate given what he’s going through and that I would remain by his side and I won’t ask anything from him until he’s ready.
A month later he repeated his words again. He said that he’s not happy because he’s not making me happy. He said that he doesn’t want to be a burden in my life. He asked me if I needed a break, and I refused and told him that I’m here to remain by his side and that I won’t leave him when he’s having a hard time only to come back when he’s happy.
Later, during the same month, he visited a counselor, but he always refuses to talk about it. Today we talked again. I was very mad at him because I didn’t like the way he treats girls at college — he is being so friendly that everyone has started commenting about it. He said he was trying to gain his old life back again (the life he had before we were even together). And then we repeated the same conversation again, and he suggested that we take a break. I refused and told him to choose between two things: either we save the relationship and he should start to respect me more, or we end it. He said he will try to fix things. But later I learned that he told my friends weeks ago that he wants to break up with me but doesn’t want to upset me.
I am very confused. I don’t know what he wants. Yesterday was the first time he went out with his friends in a very long time. He sleeps a lot. He doesn’t study. He is failing in almost all courses. We don’t go out. But it’s hard for me to know when he is sad because he’s funny and cracks jokes all the time. I love him so much and I don’t want to lose him. Please advise me!! — No Need for a Break
So, your boyfriend has tried to break up with you — oh, sorry, I mean “take a break” — FOUR times and you keep refusing to leave his side and you are confused about why he’s acting withdrawn?! Honey, take a hint. He doesn’t want to date you anymore. He’s tried to be nice about it and you are making it really hard, by literally refusing to leave his side. Give the guy a break! He doesn’t want to be pressured. And he sure as shit doesn’t want a girlfriend who tells him in one breath not to make an effort to make her happy and then in the next breath gives him grief about being overly friendly to other girls and demands more respect or else. It sounds like he has enough to worry about right now, so let him off the hook for worrying about you and tell him that, if it’s a break he wants, he can have it.
If you have a relationship/dating question I can help answer, you can send me your letters at email@example.com.

I had another booking today -- my third already in this brand new year -- and they had me darken my hair. I guess it's a compliment to my skills that instead of casting someone more age-appropriate to couple with the 31-year-old wife, they wanted instead to just youthanize (heh) me.
And actually, I've done two other commercial spots for these guys -- Winestyles and Woodfield Mall. So they knew me, and they seem to like me. In fact, I could barely make the audition and they sort of went out of their way to get me in.
Also, I knew them, too. This is the kind of commercial that could be really, really cheesy, but I feel like I was in good hands based on their past work. Okay, the Woodfield one was a little cheesy, but I think they were working under some limitations there that didn't have a lot to do with them.
And one thing that was REALLY cool with this shoot: they were actually doing "live" edits, right there in real time. They'd pick the best takes and then link each scene with the next in a rough cut so they and the client could really see what they were getting. And it helped us a lot with continuity in transitions. Very, very cool.
Anyway, the dying. Crazy. They had me go to the drugstore and get this temporary "rinse" that shampoos out. I did it this morning, but it still didn't cover up all the gray. So they used mascara around the sides! And on the beard. THAT was a little harder to wash out.
I think I look how my alter ego might appear in that Star Trek episode where everyone had an "evil twin" in a parallel universe (including Spock with a devilish goatee).
So once again, a chance to do my job and do it well and please everyone, including the client. It'll start airing nationally next month so I'll even get to see myself on TV again.
At this rate, I should have 36 bookings this year. Which I know won't happen. More likely, this will be my last booking until April.

So every year around this time ( my birthday is just 8 days away ) I systematically go through a natural purging . I purge clothes, things that I one enjoyed eating , shoes and then friends. Not that I want to do this every year but sometimes you just have to shake the tree and get rid of the dead leaves. Which brings me to the point of this whole blog and hopefully this will be the last blog this year that I will have to deal with personalities …you’re welcome.
Don’t you hate when people lie to you ? Like really just bold face lies . I don’t know what this time of the year has to do with things but for some reason this is something that I have to always mention something about someone lying . I have to say this year as I enter into a new decade of my life I have decided to call a spade a spade . I have decided to see things as they are and not try to sugar coat anything even if that means having to tell the truth no matter how much or whether or not it hurts someone . The truth is just the truth . It is sad that we would rather listen to a lie than to believe the truth. It is sickening that we would rather be friends with a liar than to be friends with someone who is willing and open to be truthful.
I met this person a few years ago , five years ago to be exact . She was young and she didn’t have many friends and that should have been my first clue about her personality . As the years passed and months flew by it wasn’t too long before the lies began . And as a Christian I gave her the benefit of the doubt and I always walked around with a heart of forgiveness . After all we had just met and she really didn’t have anything to lose by telling my secrets and honestly I didn’t have too much to tell I am a pretty transparent person . But she did , she told the sleeping patterns of my husband and I . She mentioned what I did all day while my husband worked. She talked about my immediate families behaviors and how we acted at dinners and such . She had nothing to gain from telling these things but she did it and because she told one thing that nobody would have known unless they stayed at my house I knew it had to come from her . I forgave her and life moved forward. In the years I found her in small lies here and there , she would usually pass the buck making me think that someone else initiated the lie and she just got stuck in the middle and for the most part I went with it . I have a family and it is very close so if a person tries to come in and come against a family to tear it a part why would you consider to have this person in your life . I have one good friend , my mother is my bestie and my husband is my other friend . Sometimes you need other people to hang out with . So I tried to look over what was said . I have learned that over time that you just don’t invite everyone to your space especially liars.
In the midst of all the lies she started making me doubt my own brother. She had me looking at him like he wasn’t that young man that I grew up with you made me think that maybe he was a liar , a deceiver and a heartless man . But then she wanted to marry him . She wanted to share my last name and she wanted us to be sisters. She wanted to call my parents her parents, she wanted my children to be her nieces and nephews but she just could not seem to ever stop lying . You name an incident and I can tell you what she has told me about it . See in the beginning of the relationship she made me think that she was quiet and never hurt anyone but I soon learned that was a lie because after the first time she lied on me instead of her being a woman and confronting the situation. She sent her family members to stalk me and to talk badly about my parents on social media.
She had a way of doing things , inviting you over to eat and then telling people that we called her and begged her to eat. She told me that she would do certain things but when it came down to it she would go back on her word and make me feel like I needed her to do things for me . But she volunteered . The way she would try to get to us was to buy us , she tried to use her money to buy things that would make us like her . We never asked her for anything , she was willing to do things. The problem I have with this is that she told lies about us asking her for things and that never happened and it will never happen . You can be in a friendship with a person and want so much for a person to be loyal to you that you are willing to overlook some of the most simple things but then there are sometimes you just have to set the record straight . And when you heard that I could not afford to be in a wedding that was a lie too . I didn’t want to be in the wedding because I didn’t want to be in the wedding with someone I could not trust. I believe in integrity and if there is no integrity I am done .
In a lot of cases I have not given my opinion about things when they are faced with life decisions . People generally have to make their own decisions and then everyone else has to deal with the consequences of your choice . But in this case how would you feel if you were in a relationship with a liar?

The Mets have played more than six thousand games in the 20th century. Nearly all of them were losses or standard wins, but some were incredibly lopsided.
Throughout their history, the New York Mets have had their share of giant blowout victories. These aren’t just games where the Mets scored a lot, but a combination of scoring a lot and giving up a lot less than they score.
Here are some of the Mets biggest blowout wins between 1962 and 1999.
Number Ten: August 14th, 1979 versus Atlanta Braves.
Coming into this game, the Mets were 4-10 in 14 August games and desperately needed a win. At this point, the Mets offense was slumping and for the season their record was 49-66.
Thankfully their offense was ready to do their magic. The third batter of the game, Lee Mazzilli hit a two-run home run. In the second inning, the Mets had seven batters reach base. Before the Braves could even score their first run of the game, the Mets had already scored seven.
The Mets scored at least two runs in each of the first four innings. Unfortunately. The Mets starting pitcher, Dock Ellis was not pitching as well as the Mets were hitting. He only lasted 2.2 innings and gave up five runs on four hits.
At the time, Ellis’ ERA was 6.04 and he only made a few more starts before being traded to the Pirates. Following Ellis, the rest of the Mets pitching staff was spot on. Andy Hassler pitched 4 innings and Dale Murray pitched 2.1 innings.
The two relievers allowed a lot of runners on but did not allow any of them to score.
Hitting wise, the Mets finished the game with 17 hits, with seven players recording two or more hits. Six players drove in two or more runs. If you had to pick an MVP, it had to be Mazzilli. He went 2-5 with a home run and a triple and he scored five times.
That day, the Mets won by a score of 18-5. Hassler got the win and it was one of the Mets best games in a devastating season.

With all the debate going on in the US about health care I thought I would add our perspective after experience with both the US system in Atlanta and the Canadian system in Toronto. In our brief two years in Atlanta we unfortunately had two major uses of their health services. On the first occasion my husband had to go to emergency to check to see if he had a blood clot in his leg. He has a blood condition and had had one once before. He had first class service, they checked absolutely everything, found nothing, and we ended up with a bill for $10,000. Fortunately we had insurance through his employer where we had to pay the bill, send in the info to the insurance co, and get reimbursed. Just prior to paying the bill at the end of the month, my husband received a phone call from the billing office at the hospital who told him that if he paid the bill by the end of the month there would be a 50% discount! He thought he was hearing things! Because we were what they consider 'self pay' they were concerned that they would never get their money and so were trying to encourage us to pay by offering the discounted rate. Evidently the insurance companies get the discounted rate so we were getting offered the same deal. What really bothers us about this is that the people who don't have insurance are usually asked to pay the full rate. Once we knew about this discounting we then asked for, and generally got, a discount each time we went to the doctor or dentist. Even though we were insured we were always concerned about using medical services in case we were declined on claims or even dropped. The second event was when I had to have a small operation. Once again good service but very expensive, with separate bills coming in for weeks afterwards. The doctor, anesthetist etc bill separately. All this time the debate on healthcare was going on in the US. We felt that there was a lot of miss-information with regard to a government plan that covers everyone. There is also the idea that Canada, with it's universal care, is a socialist country and that to many Americans is bad. We live in the province of Ontario and each province has a slightly different government healthcare system. Since returning we have been very impressed with the care we have received. Because we were new to the area and didn't have a GP doctor we used the local walk in clinic for a couple of prescriptions etc. Within a few weeks the doctor there had us sent off to specialists get all the tests he felt we should be up to date with here in Canada. Then my husband cut his arm and ended up in emergency and had to return a week or so later to get a tendon reattached and then visit the hand clinic for multiple follow ups. We now have a GP within walking distance who we really like and who gave us the most comprehensive initial consultation we have ever had. All this and not one medical bill and the service has been fantastic. We also don't have to worry that we may not be covered or that we may be dropped from an insurance plan. If you need a hip replacement you may be put on a waiting list and be done according to need however if you have an emergency you are treated immediately. Some wealthy people may decide they don't want to wait and pay to have it done in the US but then that frees up the system for the less affluent. Our perspective is that if you are with a big company in the US and have great healthcare plan then it may be ok, however we feel it's pretty dreadful that a country with all that wealth doesn't have universal health care and care for it's less fortunate. I can't imagine how worrying it must be for all those people who have lost their jobs and benefits and cannot afford healthcare at all. Sure we pay considerably more taxes in Canada for all this but we feel it is a far more caring system. Just to add to this, we also lived in the UK from 2001 until 2007 and found the free healthcare there very good too. If you haven't watched the film Sicko you may find it interesting.
Summer Fun and Adventure
2 days ago

It's hot as hell – I'm just wearing shorts, and the sweat is running off me. I'm thinking about an ice-cold beer – and you.
I've been thinking about you all day. It started with a dream I had last night, about when we kissed goodbye at the airport. In the dream I was kissing you again, and the feel of your lips on mine was wonderful. It was like that at the airport – I tasted your lipstick, and holding you in my arms made me feel – well, let's say it produced quite a reaction!
In fact, I often think about you, in all sorts of ways, the way you look, remembering some of our times together, and wishing I was with you again. It won't be too long before my next leave, but at the moment it seems like light-years away, and I miss you badly.
Perhaps I shouldn't write to you like this, Mum, talking about kissing you and all that, but I've already had a couple of those beers, and perhaps I've got carried away.
Sorry if I've embarrassed you, Mum – just tell me to stop, and I'll try to behave myself in future!
All my love
Your letter came as a complete surprise, but let me say at once that it didn't embarrass me!
Quite the contrary – you thinking about kissing me was, well, exciting. I too remember our goodbye kiss, and yes, I noticed your 'reaction' – I felt it pressing against my tummy – it was a very thin dress I was wearing, with not much under it ...!
I've just put on extra lipstick, and this is my lips pressed against the paper – I hope you can taste it!
It would be wonderful if you were holding me in your arms, and 'reacting' appropriately!
Perhaps it's my turn to hope that I'm not embarrassing you, darling, but I'm a woman, and you're a VERY attractive man!
Tell me all the other things you think of involving
Your VERY loving mother
I'm so glad you weren't angry with me, and thank you, thank you, for the paper kiss. I held it to my lips, knowing that yours had touched it, and tasted that lovely lipstick of yours – even though I was getting it second-hand, it produced a strong reaction!!!
You wanted me to tell you what else I'm thinking, so here goes!
As I write, I'm looking at that photo of us taken on holiday, where we're wearing swimming things with our arms round each other's waists.
I loved the feel of your warm body against me, and I'm glancing down at your glorious cleavage. That swimsuit of yours was very revealing!
And I remember the other time we kissed properly, at Christmas under the mistletoe. It seemed to go on for a long time, but not long enough for me! You were wearing a red dress, quite short, low-cut and loose at the top, with a lacy red half-bra, and that displayed a lot of cleavage – and more - too.
Tell me what you're wearing now, Mum – I'd like to visualise you when you're writing to me.
Hope I haven't gone too far in talking about your body, but you did ask me to tell you what I'm thinking about!
I love you
PS I think a lot about your legs, too!
Your letter was wonderful! It made me feel funny – in the NICEST possible way, if you know what I mean! It's lovely to know that you think about my body and legs – tell me more, you know I'm very vain!
It's my turn to think I might go a bit too far this time. I had a glass of wine, thinking about what I was going to write to you, and then another in the bath while I re-read your letter. It was lovely reading a letter from you with nothing on, knowing that you'd touched and held it ...
You want to know what I'm wearing. When I got out of the bath and dried myself, I put on that old cotton dressing gown of mine, and that's all I'm wearing now. It's very loosely knotted, and I've crossed my legs and it's fallen away, baring my thighs completely. As for 'cleavage', the dressing gown is gaping apart above my waist, and looking down at myself I can see my navel, and practically everything else.
I'm sitting at my dressing table, and I've just looked at my reflection, and pulled my dressing gown wide open and half off my shoulders, baring my breasts totally, wishing you could see them. My nipples got stiff just thinking about it ... does that shock you, dearest?
You don't have to tell me you like looking at my breasts – I've caught you peeking often enough!
Yes, I remember that photo, and when it was taken – I liked pressing against you, too! And the Christmas kiss – if I'd had a couple more glasses of wine, things might have got interesting! As it was, I was tempted to push my tongue in your mouth ... I will next time!
I know I shouldn't say this, but if you'd said anything, or put your hand down (or up) my dress, you could have had me right there, on the floor if you'd wanted! Are you shocked?
I often wished that you'd take the lead and do something, but you never did, and I was afraid to make the first move in case it upset you, but now you've done it by writing to me like that, saying you want to kiss me and talking about my body.
Speaking of memories, let me tell you something you've certainly forgotten, and nobody else in the world knows.
You always loved my breasts, even when you were little. I loved feeding you, it gave me that 'funny' feeling I mentioned. In fact, I didn't wean you until you were about four, I loved it so much. I – we – liked it best when we had nothing on. Your eyes would light up when I undressed you, and you watched me take my clothes off, and then you sat on my lap and took my breast in both hands and started sucking me. You always got an erection! And I used to play with it gently while you sucked me. Afterwards, we'd take a nap together in bed, still with nothing on, and your naked body felt wonderful. Once, though, we were playing, and I was tickling you, and somehow you slid between my legs. As usual you had an erection, and – I put your stiff little dickie in me for a moment, although you didn't seem to notice!
There! That's my confession! Are you shocked again, my darling? I am, a little, when I think about it, although I know I'd do it again!
Your breathless, slightly drunk, funny-feeling, nearly naked
I can't tell you how much your letter thrilled me!
I always loved that dressing gown – it's so thin that when the light is behind you your body is silhouetted perfectly, and I could see your nipples poking at the material. But to think of you sitting like that, with your legs completely uncovered, and your breasts bared nearly drove me insane!
I feel that now we can tell each other everything, so I confess I read your letter lying on my bed naked, and I masturbated like mad! It wasn't the first time, of course – I've masturbated thinking about you hundreds of times. Anything would set me off – a quick glimpse of your bare thighs, or snatching a quick look at your breasts down your dress, or touching you 'accidentally' whenever I got the chance, and of course our occasional kisses. There were other times, too, thinking about you with men, and imagining what they were doing to you. At first I used to be angry and jealous when you went out with men, but in a way it was exciting too, and as I got older I accepted that you liked men, and sex, but I realised that it didn't mean anything much to you other than sex, and that you still loved me. That meant that I could think about them doing you without being jealous, except that I wished it was me, and I often wished that I could watch.
I've just masturbated again, imagining the time you told me about when we were naked in bed together, with me inside you, even if I didn't realise what was happening at the time. I'd certainly know about it now, and so would you, my darling! God, just thinking about it ...
It's funny, you wanted me to make the first move, and I was afraid that you'd be angry if I did anything – we've wasted a lot time, but perhaps we can make up for it???
It's funny too, that you wished I could see you the way you were in front of the mirror – I've often wanted to show myself to you. I loved it when you used to come in and chat to me when I was in the bath when I was a kid – it was nice being naked, and seeing you look at me.
I'm naked now, and I'd love you to see me, and especially my erection!
I'm going to do something about it again, thinking of you, as always
Your letter leaves me speechless!
I saw the postman coming, and opened the door before he could pop it through the slot, and took it from him. All I had on was that dressing gown, and I remembered what you said about seeing my body through it when the light was behind me, and the sunlight was streaming through the hall window onto me from behind, and I gave him a good look!
My hands were trembling when I saw there was a letter from you. I opened it still standing on the doorstep, giving anyone passing by a good look, too, and started to read it.
But when I came to the bit about you masturbating naked on the bed, I came in and closed the door – my legs were shaking, and I had to lean against the wall, and then I put my hand between my legs as I read. Before I got very far, I was soaking wet – it was a good job I wasn't wearing any knickers, or I'd have had to change them – and then again, as I read on!
Incidentally, I'm writing this at my dressing table again, but this time I'm completely naked, and sitting on a towel – I'm still dripping! Sorry if the writing is a bit wobbly, but I'm not holding the paper steady – my free hand is fondling my breasts, or between my legs. God, I'm wet! My fingers are soaked – I've licked them, because I like tasting myself, but now they're wet again – guess what I've just smeared across the paper!!!
Can you taste me? I'd love you to drink me ... do you like oral sex, by the way?
I don't think I told you – I sometimes used to kiss your dickie, and lick it, and take it in my mouth – I'd love to have it in my mouth now, as well as you know where. I read somewhere that male snakes have two penises – I wish you were a snake, darling, and then I could have the two of them in me, in a variety of orifices ...
Yes, of course I loved seeing you naked – why else do you think I used to come in and perch on the side of the bath? You always got an erection, and I loved that. But I spoke to a man I slept with about it, and he said that boys always got erections, and I was disappointed, because I thought – hoped - it was for me.
I used to leave the door open when I was having a bath, hoping you'd come in and talk to me (and look at me!) but you never did – sometimes I'd wait until the water was nearly cold, waiting just in case ...
About men – we seem to have often been thinking the same things, because I often used to imagine you watching me having sex, although it made me feel guilty. But it gave me a lovely feeling, and I dreamt that after the man had had me, you would do me ... that made me feel even more guilty!
Back to having your dick in my mouth – I can't stop imagining kneeling between you legs, sucking you, and making you come, drinking you dry ... I'd love to taste your semen. Darling, the next time you masturbate, will you come on the letter you write to me? I hope it doesn't sound kinky, but the thought of you spurting semen on the paper for me drives me crazy!
Back to men. I often used to look in on you after I'd had sex, seeing at you sleeping. I wanted more than anything to take my clothes off and get into bed with you, holding you close, the only one I loved ... But I knew it wouldn't stop there, because I was still aroused, and I wanted you desperately. Once, the bedclothes were half off you, and I saw that you were holding your dick. Were you thinking about me having sex, I wondered? Just the idea made me go and finger myself ... which I'm still doing, darling.
What else would you like me to tell you? I want to give myself to you completely, my body, my innermost secrets, anything and everything.
I think of you coming home every day – and every night. I'll get plenty of everything in, so that we won't have to go out, and I'll be naked for you the whole time, and you can do anything and everything you want to
The mother who's madly in love with you, darling
PS These marks are made by putting lipstick on my nipples, and pressing them to the paper – I just wish you could lick it off in person!
What can I say? Your letter drove me mad, and all I can think about is you ... I have no words to describe my feelings.
I had another dream about you last night – you had my cock between your breasts, and you were smiling up at me as you kneaded them around me, and I – fucked them, until I started to come, and you lowered your head and I shot my semen into your mouth ...
My semen. I masturbated on the paper as you asked, but then I couldn't write on it, so I'm enclosing it with this. And now I'm going to masturbate over this as well.
Tasting your lipstick again, and knowing it came from your nipples, was indescribable!
My mind is full of you, seeing your face, your body ...
I used to peek at you in the bath – your back was towards the door, and you couldn't see me. But once I glimpsed you getting out, your breasts swinging, and I saw the heavy bush between your thighs, water dripping from it. Oh, how I wish I'd had the courage to go in and see you properly!
Yes, I like using my mouth, as you'll find out, my darling mother.
Even though I see you in my imagination, I wish I had a picture of you – naked, I mean. You used to have some photos of you naked in your dressing table drawer, and I used to masturbate looking at them whenever you were out, but one day they weren't there any more.
I'm naked, and my cock is throbbing, and I'm just about ready to come, so I hope you'll still be able to read this letter, what there is of it.
More soon (more semen, too!)
Oh, my darling, my son, my lover!
Yes, I tasted your semen, and it was wonderful! I rubbed your letter over my body, especially my breasts, and I pushed the other blank sheet into my vagina, wishing that it was your cock that had put it there!
Now, I treasure it, because it has both our stuff on it! I kiss it constantly ...
Dearest, I threw those photos away in case you found them and were shocked – I didn't know you'd already seen them.
But, I know a man who has a Polaroid camera – he's already taken pictures of me for his own use, but I could ask him to take some more for me if you like.
The only thing is, I'd probably have to let him do me – would you mind?
I only wish you could see me naked yourself – but it won't be too long, will it, darling?
I'm kissing your semen again, and again.
Your darling, your lover, your mother
Mum, my beautiful angel
A quick note about the photos.
No, of course I don't mind you having sex with him – I just wish I could watch, as we've discussed before. But will you please tell me what happens – every detail? EVERY detail!!!
More semen for you, in case you've used up the last lot.
Well, here are the pictures! I hope you like them. You'll see that I'd shaved off that bush you liked – sometimes I like it, other times it's nice being naked down there. I'll let it grow if you want me to – we'll try both ways when you come home!
I like the ones on the couch, where I'm touching myself (and thinking of you!), and the Sharon Stone pose from Basic Instincts, with my ankle crossed over my other knee giving you a perfect view of what's waiting for you! Also where I'm offering you my breasts, cupping them in my hands. Clive (he's the photographer) told me to play with my nipples to make them stiff, but they didn't need much coaxing! And he took the ones featuring my bottom – he asked me if you liked doing me up my backside, but I said we hadn't talked about it. Would you like to, darling? I like it, with the right man and the right cock – you're certainly the right man, and I'd love your dick up my bottom! And I'd brought along my dildo, and I asked him to take a picture of me using it for you ...
Anyway, there are quite a few in all sorts of poses, and I hope they do all sorts of things for you – they did me, thinking about you looking at them!
This looks like being a long letter – you wanted me to tell you everything that happened, so here goes.
I met Clive with some friends some time ago – he's quite thin, with receding hair, but a lovely penis! He's also got a good sense of humour, and I like him, but I DON'T love him – there's never been anything on an emotional level between us, just friendship and sex, in case you're worried.
Anyway, he asked me if I'd ever posed nude, and I said yes, and that I'd liked it, and he asked me if he could photograph me like that, and I said yes again. He's got a studio set-up in one room of his flat, and I went there the next day. There's a lot of flash equipment, and his camera, I think it's a Bronica, has a Polaroid back.
I undressed for him, and we spent a couple of hours taking pictures – I loved him looking at my body, and he touched me a lot, posing me, and then, well, we had sex on the couch. It was very good, and we meet several times for the next few weeks, taking pictures or just having sex. He had a lot of stamina, and could come five or six times without difficulty, although after two or three times it took him longer, which was even better! But then we drifted apart – I took up with a black man as a lover, who was very jealous, and Clive met a couple of teen-age girls, sisters, who he said were fantastic in bed, and we lost touch.
Anyway, I phoned him up, and said my lover (that's you!) was working in the Middle East, and wanted some pictures of me naked, and would he take some for me. He said there'd be quite a price – me – and I said I'd be glad to pay, because my lover wasn't jealous.
So, we met yesterday evening at an Italian restaurant he knows for a meal before getting to work(!) Clive wore a check shirt with a corduroy jacket and jeans (you said you wanted all the details, darling!) and I wore that red dress you mentioned, the one I wore at Christmas that shows my cleavage, and I bought some matching sandals, the ones I'm wearing in the pictures. I didn't wear a bra – Clive doesn't like them before taking pictures, because they leave marks. Without one, the dress really reveals my breasts, and I got a lot of appreciative looks. I wore panties, though – just a scrap of red gauze and a couple of ribbons, practically transparent, The waiter gave us fantastic service, because he was always hovering around looking down my dress, and Clive did his share of staring, too. I spent a lot of time leaning forward, resting my arms on the table, so the dress fell away from my body, showing my breasts almost completely, and when nobody was looking I lifted my dress and let Clive see my panties.
He asked me about you (my lover) and I said you were wonderful, and that I still thought about the first time I had you inside me, and had your dick in my mouth (I didn't tell him you were my son, and that you were two or three years old at the time!). And I said that you came like a fountain!!!
We chatted for a while, and then amazingly he started to talk about incest! The girls he sleeps with have a younger brother, and they both have sex with him, as well as each other, and he asked me if I ever thought about having sex with my son! I said yes, often, but that we'd never done anything because I'd wanted him – you – to make the first move, and he seemed disappointed. He said he thought there was a lot more consenting incest than people thought, because nobody talked about it, but he'd had lots of hints that it was quite common, and I said perhaps I'd have sex with you, and tell him about it!!!
We took a taxi to his place, and in it he kissed me and put his hand down my dress to fondle my breast, and I unzipped his jeans and put my hand inside and played with his cock – it was lovely and hard and gristly. In his flat I stripped naked for him, apart from my sandals, and told him I wanted to make a down payment before he took any pictures, because I wanted sex so badly, and I took his cock out and kissed it, and he did me on the couch in his studio, the one in the pictures.

Thanks for taking the time to report this user.
Your participation helps keep Airbnb a safe and trusted community, and it doesn’t go unnoticed!
I am from Canada
Veena has completed online and offline ID verification.
Learn more »
Veena was a lovely guest with lots of airbnb travel experience, which interested us greatly. She was v quiet, respectful and pleasant & we'd be more than happy to welcome her back.
Veena was a fabulous guest, a seasoned air bnb'er which always makes life very easy. She has no problem settling in and getting on with things. We had to go away for a couple of days during her stay, but she wasn't phased at all. Highly recommended as a guest to any other hosts!
Veena was a wonderful guest. She is a very calm and discreet person and respectful of our home.
We felt like we had a new member of the family and Lady Pusscat our cat adored her and made a new friend.
We highly recommend Veena as a guest and we hope she will stay again on her travels to London.
Veena is a wonderful lady :)
I really enjoyed my time with her.
Please do not hesitate to accept a request from Veena you will not regret it.
Veena was a delightful guest. She was very good at communicating before and during her stay. She was very charming to us and had full respect for us and our home. We would love to welcome her again and would absolutely recommend her to any other hosts.

Sunday, June 12, 2016
"This really is a bloody wonderful book": Circling the Sun
Markham lived a very colorful life. She was abandoned by her mother at a young age and was raised by her father, a racehorse trainer. Her best friend as a child was a native boy and she wanted to be a Kipsigis Warrior when she grew up. What she did become was the first female horse trainer in Africa, maybe the world, and an accomplished pilot. Both of these things shocked the folks in high society of the 1920s. Markham always seemed to be either in or out with these folks and her fortunes rose and fell. She had two divorces (unheard of in those days) and several other affairs.
Her most famous alliance was with Denys Finch-Hatton, an adventurer and big-game hunter, who was played by Robert Redford in the 1980s film, Out of Africa, which was based on the memoir written by Karen Blixen, aka Isak Dinesen. Apparently Hatton and Markham had an affair as his affair with Blixen was waning. It was Denys who got Beryl interested in flying and her interest didn't wane even after he died in a plane wreck on a flight she was supposed to be on.
Beryl Markham mythologizes many events in her life which gave her a sense of invincibility. She had scrapes with horses, snakes, lions, and airplanes. All of them could have killed her but didn't. Her memoir, West with the Night, sold only modestly and then went out of print. Her life would have become a complete unknown had it not been for Ernest Hemingway who read her book and wrote in his notes, "This really is a bloody wonderful book". When Hemingway died his son found the note and located Markham, still living in Kenya and eeking out an existence as a horse trainer. Her book was republished and was well received. She lived out the rest of her life in relative wealth.
I have to confess that I am a little obsessed with Beryl Markham right now. After finishing Circling the Sun I paid $3.99 to rent the video Out of Africa starring Redford and Streep. Though Karen Blixen didn't mention Beryl Markham in her memoir she was their contemporary and friend. Watching the film made me see again what Markham's early life would have been like. I've checked out Blixen's memoir from my library and borrowed West with the Night for the summer from the only school in the district which had it. I've only read a few pages of each of the books but I am fully prepared to complete both of them.
Paula McLain did it again. My obsession with Markham right now is very similar to the obsession I had with Hemingway after I read her other novelized memoir, The Paris Wife. In that novel we meet Hemingway at the beginning of his writing career and his first wife, Hadley Richardson. After I read that book I had to read several books by Hemingway and did lots of Internet-type research on his life and about other famous folks he hung out with, Fitzgerald, Stein, and Joyce, to name a few. That novel focuses narrowly on Hemingway and his associates. This novel, Circling the Sun, not only focuses on Markham and her doings, but also on the culture and the beauty of Kenya and of Africa. It really makes the reader feel as if they are right there in Kenya, before it was Kenya.
This book is also a "bloody wonderful book". Not to be missed.
Disclaimer: I borrowed the audiobook from my public library, with Katharine McEwan narrating. What a wonderful treat it was to hear this book read aloud with all its Kenyan names and places. It was a blessing to have someone who knew what she was doing to deal with the pronunciations. I recommend this format.
Subscribe to: Post Comments (Atom)
I loved this book! So many fascinating characters and insights into different cultures.ReplyDelete
I am going to attempt to speed read WEST WITH THE NIGHT before book club to see if I gain any new insights into Markham. I think it will be fodder for a good discussion.Delete
I think McLain did a great job re-creating what Markham was like or might have been like. I was a really big fan of the Markham's book West With the Night so I wasn't expecting to like Circling the Sun but I really did. It was great to have Markham back again ....ReplyDelete
I am just in love with the book and so wrapped up in the characters again. Glad to know you liked West with the Night since I haven't gotten very far.Delete
It does sound like a bloody wonderful book you know. Loved the movie Out of Africa. Ag I love Africa. I'm from Africa! Yea!!ReplyDelete

Aubrey Black was born on May 28, 1978 in Australia. In 2012, the future star realized what she wanted to do in life and, when she turned 33, began a career as a porn actress. The beauty weighs 62 kilograms, and her height is 170 centimeters. With such parameters, the star has rather long and slender legs, and also has a large silicone breast that attracts the eyes. Travel and fitness, as well as a passion for photography – this is what the actress likes to do in her free time. Unfortunately, she doesn't have as much of it as she would like, because Aubrey Black is completely devoted to work, but not only for the sake of earning money, but also in order to regularly delight fans and attract the attention of new viewers. She manages to do this quite easily, because the milf agrees to any scenes, which include interracial, anal and group sex. Often, mom plays the role of concerned lesbians and helps not only young, but also mature girlfriends to end up in a way they never dreamed of before, even while they were having traditional sex. At the time of 2021, the star actively continues to do what he loves and assures that he is not going to end his career and will give fans pleasure in the near future.

LAS VEGAS --No matter how evolved we'd like to believe we are, we have preconceived ideas of one another.Take for instance, Travis Pratt, a 32 year old man from Tifton, Georgia.
When his hulking frame walked across the stage on America's Got Talent, it's a safe bet that the 12 million people tuned in, had no idea this was what he was going to do.The response was overwhelming - from the audience - and the judges.
Pratt, who now lives in Houston, says a tape his mother bought for him at a Tifton yard sale when he was a young boy changed his life.
"I'm just a regular country boy from Tifton, Georgia who doesn't like to wear shoes but at the same time I'm a huge lover of opera and I can give you the rundown," Pratt said.
Pratt chose choir over football, studied music at the University of Michigan, and had no intention of going on the show. His girlfriend Elvira drove him to the audition without telling him where they were going.
He proposed to her on stage after his performance. He says he was more nervous for that than singing in front of America.
"To be honest I was preoccupied with the proposal," Pratt said.
Pratt cannot tell us if he gets to move forward on the show. Regardless, he's moving forward with his opera dream -- now closer to becoming a reality.
"The dream is to be on stage at the met and have an international career as an opera singer," Pratt said.

A six-year-old handicapped girl was allegedly murdered by her father in a fit of drunken rage at Thrippangottur under the Kolavallur police station limits late night on Thursday.
The police said the victim’s father identified as T. Abdulla (34) surrendered before the nearby Chokli police station after the incident. He was later handed over to the Kolavallur police station.
According to the police, six-year old girl Ayisha, a handicap by birth, was allegedly killed by her father at his house in a fit of violent anger during an altercation with his own father.
The police said the girl was reportedly lifted by her feet and was hit on the floor when Abdulla's father questioned his coming home in a drunken condition. Though the girl was immediately taken to the government hospital at Thalassery, she succumbed to her injuries at around 1.30 a.m.

Zulay Henao and Mozhan Marno
Zulay Hnao (born Zulay Hernandez) is Zulay Hernandez (born in the year 2000) is a Colombian actress best known for her character, Esperanza, in If Loving You Wrong on the Oprah Winfrey Network. She also has appeared in a variety of films like Illegal Tender Tenders Boys Wonder as well as True Memoirs of an International Assassin. She was born in Medellin Antioquia in Colombia, her family relocated to USA at the age of four. In high school, Henao was as a soldier in the U.S. Army for three years, and then was a student at Methodist College while stationed at Fort Bragg North Carolina. In the years following high school, Henao went to the New York Conservatory for Dramatic Arts. This gorgeous actress who also happens to be a skilled model in the US and has been engaged to Joel Rush since 2014. Her previous engagement was to the actor Terrace Howard. Henao is extremely close to her family members and believes this to be her main priority. Mozhan Marno.....................Mozhan Marno is one of the most popular and richest Actor who was born on May 3 1980 in Los Angeles California United States. She is famous for her the appearances on television. She is best known for being on television in the role of Ayla Saidyad, a journalist in House of Cards seasons 2, 3 and 4. Laura Innes played the lead character on The New York City version of her script. She was born and raised in Los Angeles California, she is also a screenwriter. Mozhan Marno is a native of Los Angeles, California, and was raised there. According to Business Insider and Wikipedia's analysis, Mozhan is worth between $3-5million. Columbia University granted her a BA in French as well as German literature. Yale School of Drama has conferred on her the Masters of Fine Arts (Acting) degree. She also wrote and directing, she directed a feature film called When the light came out. This production was performed at New York Stage & Film on the 13th of July, 2013.

MIT has been my dream school since 7th grade, and I've now visited it twice. Believe it or not, I still have not been on a campus tour, but that's not to say I didn't try. There are special tours that take place during CPW that are secret, meaning nobody knows about them. Shhhhhh, it's a secret!!! Via word of mouth, a couple hundred prefrosh were all organized to meet at a certain place at a certain time in order to be whisked away to all the secret parts of MIT (tunnels, roofs, illegal places). Such tours are known as Tangerine Tours. Obviously I needed to do this, so our group of 9 went to the place at the time and waited.
We were the first there
but eventually there were a ton of people, all ready to go.
Soon the tour guides started to arrive and whisk people off. We were so excited, but then, wait, we heard a voice from above (not God, just somebody on the second floor). "The tours are now full. Time to leave."
WHAT?! We were the first bloody ones there, and we didn't get picked up by a tour guide. They took 300 kids of the 350 that showed up, and we weren't picked. We were MAD, so we said screw it, we'll find a group and latch on. We ran through a door, up a couple of flights of stairs, and then started wandering the halls, looking for a group. We found one group, but weren't able to latch on, so we decided to find the roof ourselves. Wandering some more, we found a door to the roof! Lo and behold, it was even unlocked and propped open slightly. Now was the moment of truth, do we go onto the roof or do we leave? We pushed the door open, it was definitely outside on the other side. Hmmmmmmm, what to do? We ended up leaving, not wanting to risk getting caught on the roof without a guide. We were all just glad that we'd found the door, we felt sneaky all the same.
Here's the funny part, you ready? Turns out, the Campus Police suspected CalTech of pulling a huge prank that night and had doubled their security. The end result was two groups of 100 hundred students each getting nabbed and sequestered. One of the groups had been spotlighted while on a dome, very smooth. Basically, the kids on the tours had some fun, right until they were caught by the police. In the end I guess it was better that we didn't go on the tours, because we wouldn't have experienced our next adventure: Chillin' at Burton Conner.

Sometimes it takes becoming a professional for an athlete to get taste of what it is like to have kids looking up to them, but stick around after any UVA home game and you know Morgan Brian already has it. As little girls (and some older ones) line up in the north corner of the stadium to get player autographs Brian takes the time to sign whatever it is each person holds out to her and thanks them for coming to the game.
"It's pretty cool," says Brian about being a role model to young girls. "You see on Twitter or IG people leaving you notes about how much you inspire them. I think that is a really cool aspect of what we do as a profession. That is something I take pride in. It's awesome to see that little girl look up to everyone on the national team. It's really good because there are so many good role models; it's a good team to pick from. Even at Virginia we have girls who come to the games."
Brian grew up in St. Simons, GA where her first love wasn't soccer but basketball. However, soccer was the sport to play in town and Brian took to it - at least that what her parents tell her.
"I don't remember a lot of what I was like when I was little playing soccer. I just remember going out and running around" said Brian. "My parents have said I was always pretty good but I don't really remember that. I work extremely hard to make my game better and improve myself."
Winning started early on for Brian as she spent her youth playing for the Point Verde Storm. She won state championships with their U17 and U18 levels and was the runner-up for the National Championship with the U 17 team. Brian started playing for the National team at an early age and was a regular member of the U14 and U15 girls teams. She headed to New Zealand as part of the U17 World Cup.
College recruiting trips started her sophomore year when she spent spring break checking out six different schools with friends. She was considered the number one recruit by many. Brian decided she wanted to stick close to home and committed to Georgia, but that wasn't the path she was meant to take.
"The coach [at Georgia] resigned and I felt like it wasn't a great fit for me anymore. It was later in the recruiting process and it worked out the way it was supposed to," said Brian. "It worked out that I wasn't going to get to go home as much as I wanted...I decided to go to UVA. It has a great mix of academics and sports and everything that I wanted out of a college."
That mix saw her as a semifinalist for the MAC Hermann Trophy her freshman year. The Trophy is award to the top male and female college soccer player each year and is considered the top award for college players. Brian went on to win the award as a junior and is up for it once again this year. But Brian isn't worried about whether or not she will win.
"I don't really think about awards and trying to repeat. For me it is just about playing soccer for fun. When people start to worry about that stuff that's when they feel pressure and worry all the time. So for me I just have fun with my friends, play soccer and whatever happens happens."
Worried about awards or not Brian has won plenty during her college career. Brian was named NSCAA 1st Team All-Southeast Region, First Team All-ACC, ACC Tournament MVP and Second Team Soccer America MVP, First Team VaSID All-State and Second Team TopDrawerSoccer.com Team of the Season as a sophomore. As a junior she was named NSCAA 1st Team All-Southeast Region, First Team All-ACC, ACC Tournament MVP as well as Second Team Soccer America MVP, Second Team TopDrawerSoccer.com Team of the Season, and First Team VaSID All-State.
Her time at UVA hasn't meant just playing soccer. The Kinesiology major has spent her college years balancing her studies and playing soccer on both the National and collegiate levels.
"It has been really tough. I didn't graduate and I am looking to go back next fall and to try and graduate but I have gotten all my hard classes done and out of the way. It's been tough managing it since I have taken some of my harder major classes while I have been traveling. It kind of limited me to taking two or three classes while I was gone because of taking those hard classes. But I have been doing it for a while now and I have gotten used to time management and playing soccer on the road. I think I have gotten pretty good at it. It's kind of weird sometimes being at Virginia for a semester and not traveling which is kind of nice too. It has been easier as time has gone on and I have gotten used to it" said Brian. "It is hard because when you go with the national team you kind of only want to focus on one thing and that's playing soccer to the best of your ability to stay in that environment. So when you are done playing you give everything you have at each training session and it leaves a little bit less for you to eventually be doing homework or school work when you get off that field. I think that is the most difficult part playing at the highest level soccer wise and being challenged mentally that way and having to come off the field and have to do homework and be mentally in tune to that as well."
Balancing college and soccer is soon to become a thing of the past as the NWSL draft is set to take place on January 16 and Brian is considered by many to be the top pick. Currently, the Houston Dash hold that number one draft pick and Brian could be the answer they have been looking for after finishing last in the standings last season. While many players may be nervous ahead of the draft due to the uncertainty of it all Brian is just excited to be able to play in the US.
"I think it is a cool thing to be a part of regardless of who picks who. It has always been a dream of mine since I was younger to play professionally" said Brian. "I think that is the positive thing to focus on. It's a dream come true especially to be able to play in the United States."
Leaving school and going pro will give Brian the ability to attend USWNT camp and continue to train for the Women's World Cup happening this summer.
"Since I am in the mix of trying to make the WWC, there are a lot of camps leading up to that and I couldn't do school and do all of the camps and make the team. That is something I have always worked for, so for me school is always there and I can go back. You can't always make a World Cup team or try to make one," said Brian.
Brian's technical skills and soccer brain will be a huge asset to whoever select her in the draft, but she has been too busy to worry about who that team will be.
"I finished the college season, went to Brazil and then had the holidays. I have kind of enjoyed that time. I haven't really talked to anybody" said Brian when asked if she had talked to any teams ahead of the draft.
With school finished Brian expects to have more free time on her hands but with a year that will include turning pro, training with the USWNT and hopefully playing in the Women's World Cup, Brian may want to wait awhile longer to get a hobby or two that doesn't involve school or soccer.

“he was woken by a crashing sound”
When my Gran died Dad went to stay at Grandad’s to help out before the funeral. It was a long drive and Dad was very tired when he went to bed; he put the light out and settled down to sleep. However he just couldn’t settle, so he put the light on and looked around the bedroom. He felt it was something to do with his Mum.
He couldn’t see anything amiss, but then his attention was drawn to a wooden, possibly rosewood, shield standing in the fire place. It was heavy, about one inch thick and around two feet tall, wide across the top coming to a point at the base. It also had a wooden prop attached to the back making it freestanding (as on a photograph frame). The front was decorated with the head and shoulders of an Egyptian pharaoh. Deciding that this was the cause of his disquiet he got out of bed and placed it sideways into the gap between the wardrobe and the fireplace.
Dad went to sleep, but some time later he was woken by a crashing sound and putting the light on he once again looked around the room. He couldn’t see any cause for such a loud noise, but glancing down next to his bed he saw the Egyptian shield. The trouble was it had previously been on the other side of the room tucked down the side of the wardrobe about seven feet away. The room was thickly carpeted and the shield the wrong shape for rolling.
The next day Dad asked Grandad if anyone had visited Gran at the funeral parlour and finding they hadn’t, he went to visit, feeling that a point had been made!
The next time Mum and Dad arrived to visit Grandad he was out, so they let themselves in. After a moment or two an intense scent filled the hallway and alongside it both Mum and Dad felt a very warm welcoming feeling; it was the scent that my late Grandmother used. Dad says it was just as if someone had opened a scent bottle.
Neither Mum nor Dad said anything to each other at the time, only finding out later that each had had the same experience.
Louise May 2017
Categories: More than the Material

Anonymous gaming personality who is famous for his Froze YouTube channel. He has gained 5 million subscribers there for his Minecraft playthroughs and Let's Plays.
He began his YouTube channel in February 2015.
He began a second Froze YouTube channel in July 2017, where he continued to post Minecraft content there. He revealed he would later do a face reveal there once he reached 30,000 subscribers.
His real name is Adam, he has kept his real identity secret.
He and FinsGraphics are both widely known for their Minecraft content published to YouTube.

08-01-2013, 11:04 PM
"I don't know either. I'm going to talk to my dad tomorrow about how it's even legally allowed." Ella shook her head. "I prayed for all those poor people stuck in The Program last night."
Ryan was at school early again, playing football.He didn't see the news cast the previous evening.

At least 34 puppies were found abandoned in a vacant plot along Sohna Road on Monday. These were later rescued by local residents and an NGO, but it was too late by then since two of the puppies had already died.
The rest of the puppies were rushed to a shelter home by members of an NGO, The Rehab Centre - An initiative by Animal Care Society. Four of the stray puppies have been sent to a foster home while the rest of the 28 puppies are undergoing treatment at the NGO’s rehabilitation centre for animals located on Gurgaon-Faridabad Road.
According to the residents and the members of the NGO, it seemed like the puppies were relocated as their mother was not around. However, relocating animals is illegal in India under the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960. The Act prohibits the infliction of unnecessary pain or suffering on animals.
A member of the NGO, Bhavna Pandit, said: “These puppies are around 20-days-old and cannot commute on their own. They were found by Meenakshi Rajagopalan, one of our members, who lives in that area. She found them around 10 in the morning in this cold weather. They could have all died of the cold.”
After being informed about the abandoned puppies, the volunteers of the NGO - Swagnika, Savina, Usha, Rashmi and Amritika rushed to the spot and rounded up all the puppies to prevent them from getting hit by vehicles on the road next to the road. They were later taken to the rehabilitation centre.
According to the member of the NGO, all puppies will be put up for adoption after four months, when they are old enough.

Monday, April 24, 2017
I tallied all the hours I worked last week and I worked over 60 hours between my full time job, my part time job, my MK business, and two pet sitting jobs. This does not include travel time. No wonder I'm tired.
Friday: I took off work a little early to help out another department close down a big event they have every year. It's always a fun time, even if it is crazy busy. Afterward, I checked on the cat I was siting, then rushed home to pack a bag and grab Melody because I decided to spend the weekend with my mom while my dad was camping. That night, we ate delicious Chinese food and watched a movie.
Saturday: I had to work the afternoon/evening so the morning time was low key, but I did check on the cat first before going in to work. The shift I worked wasn't too bad, but it would have been nice if we had a few more customers and were a little busier in the store. Thank goodness my shift wasn't too long though. I made it back to the house around 6 pm and spent the rest of the night watching more movies and some Family Guy. I absolutely love lazy evenings!
Sunday: I worked all day long! I had a 7 hour shift, which thankfully wasn't too bad as we had stuff to do, but we didn't have enough customers to keep the activity steady. The last hour I was there was rough because I was starting to hit a wall because I was so tired. Also, I did something last week to my back and it has been so sore and aching from the top of my neck, through my shoulders, all the way down to my lower back. It's difficult to bend over or turn my head certain ways. I had dinner with my parents and when I came home I had to make brownies for an event the next day, so while they were baking, I used my heating pad while watching some Home Improvement. I ended up staying up way later than I wanted to.
This morning was rough going and isn't getting any better. I need a stay-cation where I can sleep and rest for a few days. Too bad something like that won't happen until Memorial Day weekend. I hope to take that whole week off though. Fingers crossed it all works out!

Tags Qualified educational staff
Tag: qualified educational staff
When I was in prison, I used to work out with heavy weights constantly. But when I started to understand that my best chances of survival were actually centered on education, I focused more on that instead, and it has made all the difference in the kind of life I now have. When I was released, having a student aid package was what kept me from having to go back into the underground economy in order to survive.

The Trial as Reported by The Inquirer Newspaper
|Day 1||Day 2||Day 3||Day 4||Day 5||Day 6|
MONDAY, JULY 6, 1885
The Court re-opened at ten o’Clock.
Robert Burns deposed: I am a carpenter and builder, living at Roebourne; I know the three prisoners at the bar. I remember the day of the murder, on that morning I met San Qui in front of the Bank, and spoke to him; there was a great crowd of people around. I saw Harry Smith called to pick up the tracks; I then went to my house, and San Qui accompanied me. When I got to my house he said “I was up at Bevan’s last night, we had such fine fun up there. We were dancing and singing up to ten o’clock.” I said “Dancing and singing! Who was there?” I understood him to reply “Bevan, Mrs Bevan, and a lot of them.” He said referring to the crowd of people who were around the Bank that morning, “What for do people go on like that. In Singapore plenty people killed, and they no go on like that.” He was in my house all that time. As he was leaving my place he said, “I suppose we shall all get a summons.” Afterwards I saw him at McRae’s store at about half-past nine; a man drew my attention to him as being greatly changed in appearance. Formerly he appeared to be a quiet pleasant fellow, but then he looked more like a wild and ferocious native who was going to spear somebody. Afterwards I went to Mr. Ashton’s store, and in a few minutes San Qui came in followed by Gilroy. I then went home, and San Qui went with me; he appeared to be very agitated. When I got to my house my wife remarked as to the cruelty of any person committing such cruel acts San Qui replied, “No one man did it, but two or three.” This was about ten o’clock, then my little boy came in, and said, “Mr Burrup has been shot through the head.” San Qui said, “No shoot um, pick.” He then made a pause of about two seconds and added, “So me hear em.” I took it that he was thinking what to say; up to that time I had never heard a pick mentioned in connection with the murder. San Qui then left my place but returned again before dinner time; meanwhile my wife and I had a conversation about him. When San Qui returned my wife said, “I hear the murderers have got a lot of money.” He replied, “They got em no money, but there were cheques there, but they didn’t take em.” He then paused again, and added, “So me hear em.” Then my little girl asked him which way they went. He replied, “What make you think me know?” He frequently asked me if I thought they would catch the murderers. I replied, “Yes, there is no doubt about that.” He said, “Me think they don’t know em.” He went away, and he came to my house between half-past six or seven, just after I returned, from the funeral; he sat down, and two other men came in and went away. San Qui then said “I’ll go home.” I said, “You are in a hurry.” He replied, “Yes, me think the police will lock me up.” The next time I saw him was about eight o’clock on Wednesday morning, when he told me that Roderick McRae had taken him up to his store and offered him fifty sovereigns if he would tell who had done it. He then told me that he had not been able to sleep the previous night, as whenever he dozed off he thought he saw Mr. Anketell coming. He said he wished Mr. Eaton (his master) would return, then he would return to Singapore, as the other Chinamen did not like him; that if Mr Eaton would let him go, he (San Qui) would let him (his master) have his (San Qui’s) house for his passage to Singapore. I believe that persons used to go to Bevan’s house of an evening during his absence. San Qui speaks English very well; there is not one man in twenty but can understand him. When he talked about “the fun” in Bevan’s house, he used the name “Bevan” twice.
Cross-examined by Mr Stevens: The murder caused a great excitement, and the reward offered was well known. Mrs. Platt is my next door neighbour; she is quiet with me as I never speak to her; she is not a woman whose company I care for. She took an offence to me about eighteen months ago, because I heard her abusing her husband to some people. I said I did not think much of a woman who would talk about her husband’s faults to everyone. About a week before the arrival of the “Flowerdale” the special messenger from the telegraph line stated that the Bank would offer another reward; at least I heard so.
By Mr Harper: The clocks in Roebourne do not all mark the same time. When the people were looking at the bodies suggestions were made that the criminals might escape by sea, and that probably the crime had been committed by Chinamen. In common with others I felt very excited about the event. I first noticed the change in San Qui’s manner when I saw him at the Bank. Afterwards I told Mr. Ashton, at his store, I felt sure San Qui knew something about it, although I did not think he was the culprit. He changed from his ordinary yellow colour and became blacker in the face.
Mr Harper: Is that the way Chinamen turn pale? (Laughter).
Witness: I don’t say that, for I never saw another Chinaman change colour like that before. I never heard on the day of this murder that a number of cheques had been found lying upon the Bank floor; it was not until two or three days afterwards that I heard of that. I did not mention to the police what San Qui had told me about the cheques until a couple of days after the murder. After the funeral the one burning question in Roebourne was – whether the police would catch the murderers or not. There is a “dream book” in my house, but I never knew of any conversation occurring between my wife and San Qui about it. I have spoken to my wife about it, but she said she did not remember any such conversation. I have never dreamt about the murder, and if any other Chinaman than San Qui had told me he had done so I should not have taken much notice of it.
By the Attorney General: I began to act as an “amateur detective: only in consequence of the change I had noticed in San Qui’s manner.
By His Honor: As soon as the bodies were first seen, suspicion without rhyme or reason at once rested upon the Chinamen, and they were therefore suspected. San Qui had walked home with me about half a dozen times before. The road from the Bank to my house is not in the same direction as the road to San Qui’s place.
Francis Smith deposed: I am a sawyer and live in a tent about half a mile out of Roebourne. I know the three prisoners. I remember the night of the murder. On the previous Sunday I saw San Qui and Bevan at Bevan’s house with Gilroy about eight o’clock at night. Shortly after I went to the house San Qui went out to the back of the house behind a shed in which the cooking is done; Bevan followed him, and they talked together in a low tone of voice for about twenty minutes. The next time I saw Bevan again was at about eight o’clock; he was standing outside his house, close to the door, with Warburton; San Qui was sitting in the house at the time. Bevan asked me if I was going to join the Good Templars, and I replied “No.” I did not mention this fact until some time in the following April, simply because I did not think that the evidence was of any importance; I thought that they had gone out to their camp after eight o’clock that night. When I gave evidence before the Magistrate at Roebourne I was not aware of Bevan having then made a statement; I was not asked at the Police Court if I had seen the prisoners at eight o’clock on Monday evening.
Cross examined by Mr Stevens: Of course I heard that a reward was offered on the day of the murder, and afterwards another one by the Bank; but I never knew what the amounts were. I never noticed the reward being posted up on the door of Mr. McRae’s store. Sergeant O’Connell, in speaking to me about the case in April, said “They say they left the town for their camp at four o’clock on Monday afternoon.” I replied, “Well, I don’t know how that can be, as I saw them at Bevan’s house at eight o’clock that night, and Bevan spoke to me.” I did not know till then that what I knew about it was of any importance. I have never been in a madhouse, neither have I ever been treated for lunacy; I consider myself to be a reasonable man. I’ll swear that it was on the night of Monday, the 13th January, that I saw Bevan and Warburton together at Bevan’s house; I am positive it was not Tuesday as I was not in town that day. If Tuesday was the 13th January I was not aware of the fact, I was always under the impression that Monday was the 13th. I do not expect to have any part of any reward. I’m giving my evidence all I want to do is to speak the truth.
By Mr. Harper: It was just about dusk when I saw Bevan and Warburton on the Monday evening. When I gave my evidence at the Police Court I did not think it was of any importance. I was examined twice at the Roebourne Police Court; the first time about Gilroy, and next time about Bevan, Warburton, and San Qui. I did not think anything of the conversation I saw Bevan hold with San Qui on the Sunday evening until about a month or six weeks after the murder, and then, after I had heard other people talking about it, I began to think it looked very black against Bevan and San Qui.
His Honor: They must most certainly either conduct such cases at Roebourne in a most extraordinary manner, or else have a very peculiar kind of witnesses there.
Witness: I have seen San Qui at Bevan’s house on several occasions; Bevan sells ginger-beer, and I have been at his place to buy it.
Re-examined: When I gave my evidence in the Police Court for the first time Gilroy was in the dock with the other three prisoners. When I was examined by the Magistrate all I did was to answer the questions he asked me, and all of them were about Gilroy; that is the reason why I did not speak about seeing Bevan and Warburton talking together at dusk on the Monday night because Gilroy was not there.
By His Honor: The Magistrate did not ask me anything about Warburton, Bevan and San Qui. He said “What do you know about Gilroy?” I do not know upon what night the Good Templars hold their meetings at Roebourne.
Robert Burns recalled: The Good Templars always hold their meetings in Roebourne on Monday nights. I have known them for years, but have never known them to hold their meetings on any other night.
By Mr. Stevens: I am a member of the Order. Eighteen months ago we held our meeting every week, but since then we have held them on the first Monday in the month, but sometimes it is postponed until the following Monday. I do not remember whether anything special occurred in January last to cause the annual meeting to be postponed.
By the Attorney: Postponed meetings are not of uncommon occurrence, owing to the frequent absence of the President and Chairman. I cannot recollect whether a meeting was held on the 12th January last or not.
Chow Ah Hong being a Christian was sworn and deposed: I remember the time of the murder and was in the town at that time, though I am Mr. Lockyer’s cook. The night of the murder I slept in San Qui’s house. We had supper there, and after supper San Qui went out. Ah Pang had supper there too; there was also there Li Lin and Ah Hoh. San Qui returned about ten o’clock; the house consists of three rooms, one of which San Qui kept to himself; I saw him go into his room. I then laid down on the bed, and Ah Hoh and I smoked opium together. San Qui had a light burning in his room after his return. The opium put me sound asleep, and I didn’t wake until about six o’clock the sun had been up about an hour. I saw Ah Pang making tea; I walked to the front door and saw San Qui in the butcher’s house. I had breakfast there at about eight o’clock, when Ah Ping came in and told us that some persons had been murdered at the Bank. About an hour afterwards San Qui came in, and Ah Hing said to him, “Do you know somebody has killed the Bank master.” He made no reply, but remained standing there. It was about half-past six when I saw San Qui in the butcher’s shop, I don’t know when he left it; the next time I saw him was just about breakfast time coming down the road; then it was that Ah Ping spoke to him about the murder. San Qui then went straight off towards, the Bank, although I told him it was breakfast time. He said, “You had better get ours first.” He returned at about nine o’clock, when I told him his breakfast was ready for him to eat he said he could not. I asked him what he has seen, and he replied, “Only some blood on the floor.” I asked him, “How do they kill it?” He replied, “I not know, blanket cover it up.” He then went away, had some dinner, went out again, and returned, when he laid down and slept about two hours; then he got up and killed some sheep just behind his house. He slept at home that night. On Wednesday morning policeman Thomas came at about half-past six o’clock; he came into the house and asked San Qui where I had slept; he replied, “Here in my house.” Thomas then said to me “Here, I want you.” I went out with him, and he talked with me not far from the house for about ten minutes; he then went away. I went back to the house, and at about half-past ten Bevan came into the house by the back-door. Bevan asked Ah Pang, “Where’s San Qui?” He replied, “San Qui’s gone out.” Bevan stopped there for about ten minutes time; he was just going away when he saw San Qui coming, and the two of them went into San Qui’s bedroom. They were there for about five minutes, when policeman Thomas looked in at the window; I was lying on a sofa, and he called me out. The house is built of thin boards. I did not hear any conversation in the bedroom; they must have been talking together in a very easy voice. I talked to Thomas for about a quarter of an hour; he asked for my hat; I went into get it, when Bevan (who was still in the bed-room) came to the inner door and said, “What are you doing here while we are talking?” I said, “I am not listening.” Bevan afterwards went away, and Thomas went off after him. San Qui then wanted to know who had called me out, and when I told him it was a policeman he wanted to know what he wanted me for.
Cross-examined by Mr. Harper: Bevan and San Qui are friends; Bevan is often at San Qui’s house, and he built the verandah for him; I think he built the house altogether. I did not know that San Qui was going to build a shed behind his house. I have never been to Bevan’s house.
Lee Wat Sun, having been affirmed, said: At the time of the murder I was living at Noonan’s hotel; I know the three prisoners. I remember the morning of the murder; I saw Bevan at about ten o’clock that morning; I did not look at the clock; it was about three hours after the bodies had been found. I was in my room at Noonan’s when I saw him. He asked me where the last witness was. I replied, “I don’t know Lockyer’s cook.” He asked me that twice, but I said I did not know him. He said to me, “You know too much. You are a liar, Lockyer’s cook came to see you this morning.” He kept on asking me about the man; at last I said, “Don’t you keep messing about me, or I’ll call the police to you.” He replied, “I am the police. I can shoot you or put you in the lock-up.” I saw Warburton; I used to sleep between the kitchen door and the back door. On the Saturday night before the murder I saw Warburton go out of the hotel a little after supper, and come back about ten o’clock. He went to his room, and went out again in about half an hour, returning after midnight. A few nights before the murder he had gone out late at night many a time.
By His Honor: He was in the house on Sunday night; but I did not see him there on Monday morning.
Cross examined by Mr Stevens: I did not see Warburton on Monday until dinner time and he went away. I did not see him on Monday night, nor on Tuesday until dinner time.
By Mr Stevens: I have never been at Bevan’s house. I am quite sure it was at ten o’clock on Tuesday morning when Bevan threatened to lock me up. I am sure it was not on Wednesday morning. Another Chinaman was with me. Mrs. Noonan came in afterwards and spoke to Bevan, but I did not hear what she had said.
Re-examined: I am certain that it was on Tuesday, the morning of the murder, that Bevan spoke to me; it was about two hours after breakfast.
The Court adjourned for an hour. The Court resumed at ten minutes past two o’clock.
Daniel O’Connell, recalled, said: Every well, drain, or anything of the sort, in or around Roebourne, was carefully searched.
William Pollett, examined by the Crown Solicitor, said: I am a police officer, and was living in Roebourne at the time of the murder. I know the three prisoners. I remember them being the lock-up on the 20th March; at that time I was a special constable, and was on night duty at the lock-up. I was at San Qui’s cell door, and Warburton was in the next cell; they could converse together. I heard a conversation between the two prisoners that night; San Qui began it. He said, “No one walk about tonight.” Warburton replied “That’s a good job, we can go to sleep.” San Qui said, “Me no can sleep.” Warburton said “How’s that?” He replied”No!” Warburton rejoined, “You ought to talk um to your god, he make you alright.” The Chinaman remarked, “Bevan no talkee to me like you, Charloi.” After a pause San Qui said, “Me tell um me no stop in lock-up.” Warburton moved in his cell, and twice said, “I’ll go to sleep now.” After another pause San Qui said, “I no tell um, I keep it to myself.” Warburton made no answer, and the conversation dropped.
Cross-examined by Mr. Harper: It was on January 17 that I was sworn in as a special constable; I am now a regular constable since my arrival in Perth, having been recommended by the authorities at Roebourne. I applied at Roebourne in October last for an appointment on the Police Force. I have often listened at the prisoner’s cell doors before, but that was the only conversation I overheard. I have never spoken to San Qui about this trial. Every word of the conversation I have repeated is correct. I took the conversation down on paper with a lead pencil, and gave Sergeant O’Connell a copy of it in the Police Office the next day. Since then I have been made a constable.
Re-examined by the Attorney General: I wrote down the conversation the night I heard it. I was not called as a witness at Roebourne, as the conversation took place the day after the prisoners had been committed for trial.
His Honor: Well, you seem to be a fit and proper person to be in the Police Force; and you have given your evidence very well indeed. That will do.
Ah Pang (or Ping) having been recalled and re-affirmed, said, through an interpreter: Bevan first told me of the murder at eight o’clock on the Tuesday morning, one step inside the door of San Qui’s house; I was inside the house, and Bevan was standing against the door; the two men wee there at the time. Bevan said, “B_______y Chinaman kill whitefellow.” On the Monday night I slept on a sofa. On Monday night I saw San Qui come home and go to bed; I saw him at about six o’clock the next morning; I do not know whether San Qui slept all night or not, as I slept all night. There are four doors in the house; two opening outside,one behind and the other in front; and two inside the house. The knife is like the one I lost, but mine had no sheath. This knife (the one produced) was found in San Qui’s sleeping room.
Cross-examined by Mr Harper: I did not lose my knife, but put it under a box. (At this point the interpreter said, “He don’t want to know what I say – he won’t hear me – I’m no good.” Another interpreter was then brought in and affirmed, when the cross-examination was continued.) I remember being examined here on Saturday, when the then interpreter, Lee Wat Sun, said to him, No say Wednesday, say Tuesday.”
John Cavanagh, recalled said: I know the Church of England Good Templars’ Society in Roebourne, but of my own knowledge I cannot say whether any meeting of the Society was held on the evening of Monday the 12th January, or not.
By Mr Stevens: From my own knowledge I cannot say whether the usual meeting, that ought to have been held on the first Monday in the month was postponed or not.
Ti Gin was affirmed and Charles Djusong was sworn in as interpreter, after which the prisoner said: On the night of the murder I was in the bush; I was working for Mr Noonan. I have known San Qui for four years. After he had been locked up the Governor (Mr Laurence) and Mr. Rowe let me go in to see him, when San Qui wanted to sell me some bracelets for fifteen shillings. I asked San Qui if he knew anything about the murder, and he replied “No!” I told him if he knew anything about the murder, and ought to tell the police about it, and get the £1000 reward. He told me he had written a letter to Lockyer’s cook. The letter was sent to employ a lawyer and get five witnesses, and that then he would be out of gaol, adding that if he could not get out he would speak for himself, by which he meant he would defend himself. I went to see him a second time, when I told him that there were over twenty witness against him San Qui said there were over thirty, but that the first one had died. San qui added they wanted more men in the prison besides the three they had, and that would make five. I asked San Qui who were the other two men; and he replied, “I don’t know.” He told me to ask Mr Rowe to look after a key in his room. He asked me to tell Mr. Rowe and the Magistrate that if it were proved he had killed the men, he would go to the gallows for it; that some boys had come to the butcher’s shop early in the morning for the meat.
Cross-examined by Mr. Harper: San Qui told me he knew that in the long run two more men would have to be locked up.
Daniel O’Connell recalled: When the last witness was speaking to San Qui Gilroy was under arrest.
Thomas Rowe recalled: Gilroy was in charge at the time.
By Mr Stevens: I don’t know whether Ti Gin visited San Qui in the lockup before my arrival at Roebourne.
Edward Lillas deposed: I am a labourer and was living at Bevan’s house about the time of the murder: I cannot say what time he left the house, but I was in the morning; the next time I saw him was at about dinner time the next day, Tuesday. I slept at Bevan’s on Monday night; I had a sleeping draught, and so slept very soundly. At dinner there were present only Bevan, his wife, Gilroy and myself. On the Tuesday evening I saw Bevan, Gilroy and Warburton conversing together. Warburton was telling them about a murder that had been committed in England. They got disputing about the time it had occurred, and Warburton got up and went away in a temper. I used to sleep in the same room as Gilroy, but after the murder I would not continue to do so, and so on Tuesday night I slept on the sofa in the sitting room. On Wednesday afternoon I saw Bevan and Gilroy together, they had both been drinking. On Sunday Bevan was wearing a white shirt and dark trousers, no coat; I do not remember how he was dressed on the Tuesday afternoon when he came into town from the work. Gilroy first came to sleep at Bevan’s the night before the murder. San Qui was at Bevan’s house on the Monday night, but Bevan was not there. I sat with the persons present from about seven till ten at night; they were all taking but there was no drinking.
Cross-examined by Mr Stevens: On the Tuesday night I slept in the same room as Gilroy; he was in the room apparently going to bed. The lamp was burning, and there was plenty of oil and wick for it to last all night. During the course of the night I woke up, when the lamp was not alight; I had not extinguished the lamp. I got out of bed to pick up a pillow which had fallen from under my bad arm. The pillow was lying near the door; I had not placed it there; I don’t think it could have rolled there; it had been removed, or had fallen from underneath my side. At that time Gilroy was not in the room. I went to bed again, and slept till morning. I woke between daylight and sunrise; Gilroy was then standing close to the door, in a stooping position as though he was picking something up. He was dressed, and had his hat on. I did not speak to him, or he to me. He went out directly after that; Gilroy used to sleep on blankets on the floor, and when I went after my pillow in the night I walked over them, by which I knew that he was not sleeping in the room. I did not take any notice of the blankets in the morning.
By Mr. Harper: I did not see Bevan on Monday afternoon or night. I was not in the house all Monday afternoon, but I was in and out. I do not remember Bevan getting any beer at anytime. Mrs. Bevan was accustomed to play upon the accordion, but I don’t remember her having used it on the Monday evening.
Re-examined: There was no one there that could play so far as I know. There was no drinking going on that Monday evening; but I am positive that there was no dancing upon that occasion. I heard of the murder early in the morning, before breakfast.
Jane Noonan recalled: The usual breakfast hour at our house is eight o’clock, dinner at noon. Sometimes we have breakfast earlier than usual, but dinner is always punctual.
The Court then adjourned till 10 a.m. the next day.

I had a wonderful dream last night that felt like it was produced by Hayao Miyazakim, except that the imagery was even more beautifully vivid than even Studio Ghibli’s works. I was on a train that was headed to paradise — in this case, represented by Key West. The train ran on a single rail (narrow path, single minded, not double), and made very few stops. It was completely removed from all of the traffic, etc., and flowed smoothly through the water on an express route to its destination.
At first, I was nervous about being on the train. I wanted to be in control, and asked my husband if perhaps it wouldn’t be better if we got off and drove to Key West instead. I wanted to be the one behind the wheel, in charge. He talked me out of it, and surrendering, I stayed on the train. I gradually became more and more relaxed and began to enjoy the ride. Looking over at the mainland, I was happy I had listened to my husband and stayed on the train. The people who were trying to drive themselves to Paradise were stuck in awful 24-hour traffic jams, over and over, and never reached their destination.
It felt like the 1950’s, because it was made VERY clear to all passengers that this train was NOT segregated. People of all ages, colors and socio-economic backgrounds were on this train. For a while, I was snuggled up next to a homeless black black man, resting. One woman bullied me out of my seat, but the next time I looked, she was no longer on the train. Some troublemakers and murderers were also removed from the train. This part totally reminded me of the song, “This Train Is Bound for Glory.” You know, “this train don’t carry no liars, this train, etc.”
The train had all sorts of different seating options. There were closed cars and also open cars where you could enjoy the fresh air and get a better view of the scenery. I started off sitting with a couple of folks who were on top of the train, but I became worried that I would fall off and went inside a closed car. In there, it was so hot and stifling that I had my face pressed up against the seam of the window trying to get some fresh air. While looking out that window, I saw another enclosed car full of people wearing snapping turtle costumes. They were in even more stifling conditions. Upon waking, I thought, “These are the very religious who are bound to doctrine and very fearful. They are snappish when others offer differing opinions. But still, they are on the train to Paradise — they simply aren’t enjoying the trip.”
I saw one of my sons sitting on an open part of the train with one of the kitties we had when he was growing up. The kitty came to me in the car I was sitting in (I kept moving from one car to the next) and gave me a tool she had found that enabled me to open the door of that car and move to one like the one my son was sitting in — open air, freedom, and room to move as there were very few others sitting in these “freedom” cars.
When I woke up, I felt so very happy to have seen one of my sons on this train. He has taken such a different path, but in his own eccentric way, believes in the saving grace of Christ. He is more guided by the Spirit than most, even though the bad ones try to throw him off track sometimes. I will keep praying that my other son gets on it as well.
The different cars on this train represent different beliefs about how to get to God, I think, and some are quite stifling. Yet none of those people who had surrendered their lives to God (instead of driving themselves) were going to miss out on Paradise. The thing that keeps ringing through my mind as I type this is, “There is freedom in Christ.” We can have a heck of a good time enjoying the ride.
I seem to be on a very definite path lately. It is a path that is pointing me away from all of the other religions and belief systems that I have enjoyed exploring whilst on my truth journey. It started two weeks before Sage left when my extraordinarily intuitive Holy-Spirit guided friend Meg sent me a video that pointed out how some of the esoteric things in the New Age were Luciferian, and I saw the selfishness and deception embedded in some of my own spiritual seeking and was alarmed. That night, I experienced demonic interference in my dreams, which only confirmed what I had suspected. I threw out every esoteric book in the house, and the next morning, not knowing any of this, my son Sage told me that he had lied about all of his spiritual dreams and visions. That he had liked the attention. He would tell me all sorts of fantastical things that he saw in the spirit realm, and I had believed him! This went on for six years! What he told me very definitely influenced my own belief system. So all sorts of things started coming to light. I felt that via my son, I had been guided down a path away from Jesus and real truth by a darkness that was working through him. Whether or not it was all truly a lie, I will probably never know, but I am quite sure that I have been misdirected.
The truth can be a bit difficult to get at, and there are always imposters willing to lead you away with their mixture of 95 percent truth and 5 percent lethal lie.
Enter the dreams. I love them. I am guided by dreams and impressions from God, and am much the better for it. For example, last week I was very sick with allergies, muscle and joint pain. It hurt to move for days. When I was lying in bed one night about to pray, I got this visual image of myself drinking lots and lots of water. I also felt a strong impression to stop drinking diet drinks and tea all day long. So the next day, I drank lots of water all day long. The day after as well. In just two days, all of the pain and most of the allergies were gone! Amazing! I know if I had went to the doctor with that list of symptoms, they probably would have handed me a couple of prescriptions and been a bit puzzled as to the cause of it all. So I value this sort of guidance very much.
My nights have been lit up with a number of dreams that are so very real and rich with symbols that I know I am supposed to pay attention to. Last night, I dreamed that I was at a party and saw a gorgeous prince. I was instantly enamored, and flattered when he began flirting with me. Soon, he told his mother to give me the engagement ring that he had been saving for his bride, and she put it on my finger while the family announced our engagement to the party. I had never been asked, but I was so swept away with it all that I didn’t say anything. Then we were alone in an intimate moment, and a diagram of the seven chakras was all lit up around me with all of the colors. Later that evening, he informed me that I would be doing exactly as he said in our marriage, and made it apparent that he would be controlling my every move. Upon hearing that, I got away from him…FAST!
Then I woke up because someone was pounding on the door at 3:30 in the morning. These weird things have a way of happening when I am supposed to remember a significant dream. It took me a couple of hours to fall back asleep, and then I began dreaming along those lines again.
This time, I dreamed that I was having an interaction with a yogi who ran some sort of shop. He gave everyone a paper with a poem to read, only it was backwards. I was able to see it in the correct orientation, and he was very disturbed that I could do so, as his intent had been to deceive. Then I dreamed that I was telling the story of the dream of the prince to others, and well, here I am doing that. That prince — marriage to his sort is not what I want! I am a bride of Christ, who offers the opposite of the prince — total and complete freedom.
I had had another dream about two weeks ago of being in a dark cave with a yogi who was grabbing my breasts. I looked up to escape, and saw a hole with brilliant light shining through. I was unable to get through it though — there was too much of me!
The Hindu/Yogi dreams are due to my having become utterly fascinated with Hinduism and yogis. The reason for this is that some yogis seem to manifest more Christlike behavior than we see here from most Christians. So I started reading a lot of books by them and was enthralled by the wisdom. Some things didn’t sit right with me, though. I believe in surrendering to God, not a guru with human faults. And I know we are not supposed to hide our lights by meditating 24/7. But things like yogic superpowers (kriyas) fascinated a woman who is determined that people should actually be able to go heal people as Jesus commanded. I also believe that the “getting rid of self” aspect of yoga is right on. However, these three dreams were a warning to get off that path entirely — an answer to prayer, since I am always praying to be guided to stay on the narrow path.
I’ve had a few dreams about witchcraft as well. I used to be into Wicca in my twenties, and left off that after so much darkness began to break through into my everyday life that I slammed that door firmly shut and didn’t have anything to do with spirituality in any form for many years after that. In the latest witchcraft dream, I was wondering if the Christian “word of knowledge” was the same as having psychic powers. (For those who don’t know, a “word of knowledge” is when you get an impression about someone that is true that you wouldn’t ordinarily know. I get it occasionally, and it has helped me to avoid some awkward and untoward situations.) In my dream, a witch friend said, “I’ll show you,” and put her hands on me and transmitted energy to me. When that happened, my mind was filled with black and white static patterns like you’d see on old televisions that weren’t receiving properly.
And then there was the Abraham/Law of Attraction dream. That one showed the Abraham-Hicks person impersonating Christ in his resurrection and having her followers take communion. When I put the bread in my mouth, I was instantly swirled down into a dark abyss. I spit it out and woke up. (I wrote about that dream in this blog post.)
Islam has also been in my dreams. In one of them, I was in a Middle Eastern desert, and there was NO water. A prostitute was able to get a few drops out of a faucet, and that was only because she knew how to love. All of the religious people in the dream were without a drop. In that particular dream, I was also shown a Christian church. In that church, there was a huge waterfall, but sadly, only a few streams of water were trickling down what had once been a conduit for a very powerful flow. Of course, water represents spiritual life.
The dreams show me that all roads point to Christ. Yet even so, it is not simple. I have been directed by a dream to not attend a particular church. And most churches leave me cold, to be honest. I’m not interested in playing religion — not even a little bit. But I am not worried, because I don’t feel alone at all! I’m so thankful for the guidance.
Disclaimer: This post has NOTHING to do with politics.
Last night I dreamed that President Trump was my father-in-law and was coming to visit. I frantically tried to fix up our little shack of a house that we bought to be our office. I went to the store, only 10 minutes before closing time, and was frantically buying a bed, a side table, curtains, etc. When I got home with the goods, I realized it was pointless to set all of that stuff up because we hadn’t even laid the floor yet!
But he never came. What he did was send us a plane ticket to New York. Once we were there, Ivana informed me that he had given us their luxury high-rise apartment — just flat out given it to us. I was in such a state of overwhelm that I started crying. She seemed puzzled that I would be surprised by this. After all, he was my husband’s father — of course he would want to take care of us in style! Nothing was required of us. All we had to do was accept the gift.
The next thing I was doing was opening all the windows and looking out at the beautiful view. I wanted to take photos for Facebook and Instagram to let everyone know what I had been given. At one point, I left the building and was stopped by the receptionist when I reentered. I thought, “Oh no, she knows I am an imposter!” but all she wanted to let me know was that I was invited to a family meeting.
Barron was there. He reminds me so much of Sage with his looks of sensory overwhelm. Demons were harrassing him, but I sang and many of them left. Even though he saw himself as a dark person (due to the demonic influence), he still lived in the mansion, and was taken care of. He was a child of his father. This part of the dream is unimaginably comforting to me, as I believe it is God’s way of saying that Sage is in His hands and is His child no matter who he currently thinks he is. Demons like to harrass the Father’s children, unfortunately.
Why Trump? In the parables of Jesus, so often the “King” was used to represent God. Trump, for all practical purposes, is the current king, and makes sense for this story, especially since he owns a mansion way up high and has a son who reminds me of my own.
So there is this mansion. Our Father has given it to us. It is so hard to believe that he would give us a gift of such majesty that we continue to try to fix up our shacks, trying to make ourselves acceptable to Him. But he already loves us so much. Once we realize that, we will sell all of our little shacks and move into the treasure that we have found.
Honestly, many of the dreams I have are as real as waking reality, if not more real. The things I am shown!
The first dream I had last night was of a large house with hallways that formed a swastika. I walked down one of these long, dark hallways and came to a dark room with a broken light fixture. It was Trump’s room. I am so hoping that this dream is in no way prophetic!
In the second one, my family lived in an duplex. The other family was a devoutly Christian family that I had known from the days when I went to house church. This family would avoid me whenever they saw me because they saw me as a heretic and a sinner. I became so very lonely! (This mirrors real life. I have not found church relationships to endure at all outside of the church building or home or whatever, except two.) In my loneliness, I went to an expensive life coach, who kindly sent me tickets to a conference featuring Abraham, the entity channeled by Esther Hicks. The whole Abraham deal is about how we create our own reality — law of attraction stuff that can be very right on. Anyway, I arrived at the conference, but because I hadn’t bought the expensive books, they kept me and the other people who hadn’t paid enough behind a curtain where we could listen to what was going on, but not fully participate. The life coach was there. When he saw this, he grabbed me and took me to the front row of the main row. There was some sort of play going on, and I participated in it. I can’t remember what it was about. Meanwhile, the judgmental Christian neighbor was there screaming about how we were all sinners who would have out-of-wedlock babies who would all end up on welfare. I told her that no one would be there if they found the love they were looking for in the church. At the end of the whole thing, Abraham-Hicks was lying in a coffin at the front pretending to be dead. Everyone lined up and went to take part in a rite that was the same as the Christian communion. This felt pretty weird, but I did it. As soon as I put the bread (which was PlayDoh) in my mouth, things went dark and I started to spiral downward into an abyss. I immediately spit it out.
That’s pretty much it. I’m thinking that narrow gate that Jesus talks about is quite narrow indeed. So many of us miss it. There is a lot of counterfeit things out there, as I saw in the vision I wrote about last week.
I’m seeing a LOT of false teachers. A Course in Miracles (supposedly channeled by Jesus) has always intrigued me, because like the Law of Attraction stuff, it has a lot of truth. Yet its writer died miserable and out of her mind by one account. And Marianne Williamson, the main teacher of it these days, is having a snit on Facebook about the election, being rude to her detractors and all. None of the peace and love that she has made millions preaching is on display. Several pastors on both the left and the right are showing little grace as well. It makes me aware of just how far we have to go, and how very elusive the truth that brings peace beyond all understanding actually is.
I’ve given the Law of Attraction a lot of thought lately. I’ve decided that yes, it does give a good picture of how reality actually works, and is likely the reason that Paul says to focus on things that are noble, right, pure, lovely, admirable, etc. The thing is, when we try to create our reality in any way without being connected to our Source, the true vine, then things can get seriously messed up, because we are so far from perfect. And you can’t GET truly connected to God as long as you are still in your own will. That Source connection comes when you have surrendered your life and are willing for the Holy Spirit to work through you. So yes, you could manifest a mansion, but you are likely to also manifest several ugly things unless you are fully working in God’s will. I’m thinking Donald Trump is a master of manifestation. Yet he is not where most of us want to be, spiritually speaking. When fully surrendered to Source,
you are likely God is likely to manifest some really amazing things — few of which may be material.
For me, all of this simply points to what I wish I’d known long ago. That we can trust no teacher save the words of Jesus (and you’d better watch those interpretations that are out there!) and the teachings of the Holy Spirit. I love how I ask him to show me things and he does. My older son is having a very difficult time living in a different reality than our consensual one, and in his apparent psychosis, I said to God, “Please show me how to help, please show me!” and then listened. The Spirit simply told me, “Love him as if he were Jesus,” which reminded me both of Mother Theresa’s Jesus in “distressing disguises,” and of the dream I had about LOVE raising the dead.
I want to be on that narrow path. With eyes on the world, believe me that the entrance to that path will be obscured among the chaos. May our eyes be open, and may we be guided out of all delusion.
I’ve been doing this thing lately. I’ll pray, and then I’ll feel relaxed and sit back and watch what I call “God TV.” This entails me watching the back of my eyelids and saying, “Show me, God.” I don’t always see things, but sometimes I do. When I do, it is like a movie is playing in my head and I am watching it. A bit like a waking dream.
I was a white pawn on a giant chessboard. There was a savior chess piece that was like the queen who protected me with its superior moves. I just followed its lead, listening to its directions, and I was always protected from the black pieces. But then one of the black pieces got clever and imitated the voice of the white piece exactly. I no longer knew where to move unless I kept my eyes on the white piece at all times because they sounded exactly the same.
Sounds about like the delusion we are all susceptible to.
In this dream, I was working with kids who had been sexually abused. This one teenage kid had let adult men abuse him. I asked him why. He told me that he had hoped that God the father would somehow intervene, that he wanted a hug from God. I told him that sex with these older men was not the answer. I got out a package of bread to give to him instead. I said it would help. There were three pieces, but they were as stale as croutons.
I wish I had had fresher bread to offer.
I had been putting off taking a college math course until the last semester before graduation. I was terrified I would fail it — too scared to even go to class once it started. I worked out of a workbook by myself instead. When I came to a part that was too difficult for me to understand on my own, I decided I would go to class. The math problem that I was stuck on was like one I had never seen before. It was a comparison of equations of logical beliefs. When I got to class, I found the professor to be unbelievably kind. He provided all of the supplies that the students needed to learn — highlighters, etc. He and I instantly developed a wonderful rapport. He was very funny, and we told jokes back and forth. I fell completely in love with him. He needed a worker to help him in his office, and I gladly volunteered, not caring how much it might pay, if it paid at all. I decided to drop all of my other classes, because this was the only one I had any interest in.
The professor and I had a great time in our friendship. He was awaiting for his bride-to-be to arrive, but in the meantime, he was having a blast. We went on a boat. We encountered huge waves that scared some people, but I had a great time. The big waves would come and pitch the boat forward. I would look at the waves, and there were these crabs with HUGE smiles on their faces just surfing the waves, having a grand old time.
When I woke up, I still felt so in love with this new best friend that I had found. It was one of those dreams you’d like to go back to again and again. I have never felt so in-sync with someone else in my life. It was beautiful.
Last night, I dreamed I was running a marathon. I was going completely against the grain. The race started in the late morning, but I had been running since the early morning alone or with one other person. The runners were supposed to go on one direction, but I was running in the opposite direction. At times, I joyfully hopped along on one foot. Eventually, I took a left turn and joined up with the more conventional runners. Almost immediately, the race became very difficult. It felt as though I was running through sludge and it became hard to breathe. Then I woke up.

MUMBAI: Independent witness Prabhakar Sail appeared before Mumbai Police on Tuesday evening for recording statement in connection with his allegation of extortion attempt by NCB officials in the drugs seizure case involving Aryan Khan, an official said here.
The official said that Sail appeared before ACP (Azad Maidan division) Milind Khetle and the process of recording his statement was on. "My client was summoned by the police and his written statement is being recorded," said Sail's lawyer Tushar Khandare.
Sail was "misused" during the Narcotics Control Bureau's raid on a cruise ship off the Mumbai coast on October 2 during which drugs were allegedly seized and Aryan Khan, actor Shah Rukh Khan's son, was arrested, the lawyer claimed.
When asked if the NCB too had asked Sail to appear before it, the lawyer said they had not received any summons from the Central agency.
Earlier in the day, the city police had said they had received four applications alleging extortion by NCB Mumbai zonal director Sameer Wankhede and other officials, and have launched an enquiry to verify these claims.
One of the applications was sent by Prabhakar Sail who had alleged that he had overheard Kiran P Gosavi, another witness in the cruise ship raid case, talking to one Sam D'Souza over the phone about a demand of Rs 25 crore including Rs 8 crore for Sameer Wankhede, police said. Wankhede, who visited the NCB office in Delhi earlier in the day, has denied the allegations.

9. what's next?
I woke up the next morning still thinking about Harry. I even dreamed about him. i never dreamed about him or another boy before. Why did I dream about Harry? I was really confused. I didn't care that I dreamed about him for clarity I was just wondering why now why on this moment?
I got dressed and went downstairs. Harry Liam and Niall were already there and of course Niall was eating. "Good morning" "Why are you so happy?" Liam asked me. "I just slept well not more" I smiled at him. Loki came to me and stared at me. He already knows that I was the one who let him out in the morning. " Gonna take a walk with Loki I guess, see ya" " Wait I come with you, need my exercises you know" Harry said winking at me. "alright but hurry, dogs don't like waiting" I said joking around. I got the leash and putted my shoes on. I was just gonna open the door when Harry came in the hall. We went outside and started to walk. " So" Harry started the conversation " Last night was fun" " yeah it was we should do it again sometime." " yeah we should". The awkward silence came back." can we just talk about last night before it gets more awkward then it already is ?" Harry asked. "Yeah of course" " well can it be that there somehow came a sparkle between us or was it just me?" he asked kind of nervous. " No, I thought so to" i started to blush. " Ow good...." where is Loki? OMG I can't believe I lost him, Liam is gonna kill me" " easy Loki is right there" "oh" I said embarrassed. "Let's go get him" Harry said smiling. we went to get Loki and went back home.
When we got home I saw Zayn sitting eating his breakfast. “ you’re early ?“ I asked“ Good morning to you to , you are in a good mood?” Zayn replied. “ I’m always in a good mood”. Harry came from the hall and Perrie came from the kitchen. “ ooh, I see why” we said together and started laughing.
“ Hi I’m Perrie” “ Hi I’m Jenny” “ Oh you’re the dog trainer, I heard a lot about you especially from Harry” Perrie said and she whispered “ I think he likes you “ I started to laugh “ oh really?” we looked at Harry, who had no idea. “ What?” he asked when he noticed us looking at him. “ nothing “ I said smiling. Perrie and Zayn left when Louis came downstairs and grabbed something to eat. “ We also have to leave Harry, have a lovely day Jenny” he said while he gave me a hug. And so here a was alone.
I decided to train Loki a bit so I could see what he already could do. After that we went for a long walk so he could relax and play. When we got back at the house Loki was tired so he went to sleep and I decided to watch a movie and play a bit guitar on Niall’s guitar. When Niall got home he learned me a bit and then the rest of the boys came home. “ Where’s Loki? “ Liam asked when he came in. “ he’s upstairs sleeping , he had a busy day” I said joking. “ oh, so what did you guys do then?” he asked smiling. “ I just saw what he already could do and then we went for a long walk so he could relax and play. “ alright” he said happily. The rest of the day we just relax a bit. Everybody was tired so it was quit in the house. After seeing 2 movies everybody went to bed.

I had morning sickness throughout most of my pregnancy. I developed bad sciatica, carpal tunnel
I had morning sickness throughout most of my pregnancy. I developed bad sciatica, carpal tunnel syndrome, and a similar disorder in my feet. I started noticing swelling around the fifth month that got progressively worse. I had terrible heartburn. I had difficulties breathing even when sitting. I started having contractions two weeks prior to his due date. I finally went into labor on his due date. He was not born until the next day. My blood pressure had risen during the labor. I was in significant pain even after my epidural.
Within a few minutes of my son being delivered vaginally, my blood pressure shot up to 226/176. I developed hyperreflexes. I believe I was given magnesium sulfate and a barbiturate to stabilize me. I was transferred into ICU where I spent a day. I was too weak to even hold my baby. I was diagnosed with preeclampsia. Prior to this, I had not had significant proteins in my urine or high blood pressure during my prenatal visits.
My baby is healthy and strong. I am 3 mths postpartum and feel as if I am still recovering. I require about 10-12 hrs of sleep at a time, much more than before. I found my pregnancy and labor to be extremely taxing on my body. My job was high stress but I had taken off early due to complications, although I had to fight to get disability as preeclampsia was not diagnosed until after his delivery. I am thankful I left my job early due to the stressful work environment and my physical condition.
Anyone with complications during pregnancy, should discuss this with their doctor and also review guidelines on The Family and Medical Leave Act which allows for up to 90 days leave unpaid(if disability is not available or approved).
I hadn’t been feeling well for a few days. I decided I would go in to work super early and give directions to the staff and then go home and go to the doctor. I got home and lay on the couch un...

I can well recall my hot teen years when I was so wanting to save myself for just the right boyfriend. I wouldn’t let guys fuck me, but we did oral and non penetrative sex. I would get so wet when they would lay their dick in between my cunt lips like a hot dog in a bun and I’d just grind on them. They could easily make me cum by doing that and of course since they didn’t put it inside of me, I was still technically a virgin, and I felt good I was saving myself for someone in the future. Though why looking back, I cannot imagine.
I would anticipate doing this during our whole date. Kissing, touching, giving them hand jobs and letting them rub my clit, but it was the feel of their cock on my actual cunt lips that drove me crazy. I wanted it inside of me so bad and I knew they wanted to slip it in as well. Some would even cum on my cunt, which wasn’t very smart, since penetration or not, the cum could still have easily gotten me pregnant by dripping into me. I actually knew one girl that did get pregnant that way and she’d never even let him put his dick inside her.
I was masturbating a lot and talking to them on the phone as well, phone sex was so hot in the teen years, always something new to explore that you hadn’t done before. I let lots of guys I dated do this to me, and it was always hot with every one of them. Even now before I will go all the way with a guy playing like this can be fun, a good way to tease them and me, but still cum at the same time. I enjoy all kinds of sex play, even when not going all the way. It doesn’t always have to be full on fucking to have fun.

sorry I've been such a slacker lately about posting. I'm usually not this bad. Anyway, I went to FDJ today to pick up my goods that I ordered earlier in the week. They let me bring Scotty inside too! They are so good about that. They even had scooby snacks for him! yay! I really like the way I can order from FDJ and I can go pick it up later in the week. They are open saturdays now from 9a-12 noon, so it's real convenient. Nice people too, very helpful.

In a recent post (Pain) I wrote about the difficulties I had been having getting over hurts from my childhood. Even though my parents have been loving and good parents on the whole, there were painful memories and resentment that I was holding on to from the past. Every time I visited my parents the old pain would be renewed, and I would come home unsettled and fighting depression again. This happened many times, so that I began to avoid visiting their home.
The last time this happened was at Easter. I was bitterly disappointed, because I wanted to be able to move on and not have this horrible pain, dealing with the same thing over and over again. I felt like a child who couldn’t grow up. It helped to remind myslf of God’s love and his acceptance, but I still couldn’t let go of the resentment towards my parents. I asked God, “How can I get past this?”
The answer came when I met with a close friend and her husband for prayer. My friend asked God for healing for the hurt places in my life, going all the way back to the little girl I was, who believed herself to be unloved. And then she gave me a verse. It is very well-known, but I had never applied it in this way before:
Finally, brothers and sisters, whatever is true, whatever is noble, whatever is right, whatever is pure, whatever is lovely, whatever is admirable—if anything is excellent or praiseworthy—think about such things.
She prayed that when I would think of my parents, I would think of whatever is true, whatever is noble, whatever is right, etc: that my thoughts and memories of my parents would focus on the lovely, praiseworthy things about them (and there are so many – thank you Lord!). I realised that my mind had been set on a certain track, so that when I thought about them I would focus on things that I resented, and each time my thoughts went that way, the groove would become deeper and it became more and more difficult for me to think about them any other way. God was asking me to consciously change my thought patterns. I had been asking God for the way forward, and He had shown me the path.
After my friend prayed I realised that I needed to repent of my wrong attitude towards my parents, particularly the way I had judged them and criticised them for years. So I did that. When I went home I felt like a huge load had come off me. I was exhausted, but free.
Since then the pain is gone. It sounds simplistic, but it really is completely different. I was a wreck emotionally before I went to that prayer meeting, and since then, I have been at peace. The real test will be when I see my parents again. Will the old hurts still sting, or are they healed forever? At least I now have a way forward. If I am hurt again, I can choose to think on ‘whatever is lovely.’

In a speech in California today, Clinton reflected on watching Ali light the Olympic torch in Atlanta while his hands shook from Parkinson's Disease.
"Once the most graceful, powerful athlete in the world, with his hands shaking, holding on, he did his job," Clinton said. "And in the very end he was actually astonishingly good humored about the burden of his later years. So by the time he died, who he was as a person was greater than his legend."
Ali's body will return to Louisville in the next 24 to 48 hours with his family and a private service will be held for immediate family Thursday, family spokesman Bob Gunnell said at a news conference in Phoenix today.
On Friday, the family will be joined by an imam at the funeral home for prayers, Gunnel said.
A procession Friday will lead through the streets of Louisville, traveling down the street named after him and passing through Ali's old neighborhood. The procession will end at Cave Hill cemetery, where he will be laid to rest.
An interfaith service open to the public will be held at the KFC Yum! Center at 2 p.m. Friday, where President Clinton, Billy Crystal and Bryant Gumbel will give eulogies. Sen. Oren Hatch, R-Utah, a Mormon, is expected to speak.
The service will be led by an imam and will include clerics from multiple religions.
"This entire service was his specific request," Gunnell said. "He truly loved all people."
The service will be streamed throughout the world, Gunnell said.
After the memorial service, a private reception for friends and guests is scheduled at the Muhammad Ali Center in Louisville.
Gunnell said Ali became ill Monday and was hospitalized Monday night in Arizona in fair condition.
"The family was called when things became more serious," but they "still had a lot of hope that it was going to turn around," Gunnell said.
Ali "has battled back man times. And we expected it to happen this time," Gunnell said.
All family members were brought in in the last 24 hours, and they were given time to say goodbye, he said.
"His final hours were spent with just immediate family," Gunnell said.
Ali died Friday at 9:10 pm MT, and the cause of death was "septic shock due to unspecified natural causes," he said.
Ali's brother Rahaman Ali told ABC News today in their last conversation, "He said to me with shaking, he said, 'Rahaman how do I look?' I said, 'You look the same to me, you look the same with all that shaking.' He said to me, 'I’m in no pain. No pain.' He said, 'Don't cry for me, Rahaman. I’m going to be with Allah god. I made peace with God. I'm OK.'"
Ali's daughter Hana Ali said in an emotional post on Twitter today, "All of us were around him hugging and kissing him and holding his hands, chanting the Islamic prayer. All of his organs failed but his HEART wouldn't stop beating. For 30 minutes... his heart just keep beating. No one had ever seen anything like it. A true testament to the strength of his Spirit and Will!"

Danielle - posted on 04/12/2010 ( 2 moms have responded )
I am a full-time working mom trying to get my son to eat more "people" food. I'm trying to get him away from the baby food. He turned 1 on march 19th. He wants nothing to do with regular food. Even if i blend it, he just turns aways. But I give him baby food, and he eats it up!! Don't get me wrong, I'm at least glad he is eating, but so many people have said he should be starting to eat regular food now. On top of that, working full-time and taking care of the home, I don't have time to cook seperate meals for my son and for my husband and I. Does anyone have any good ideas for food for a 1 year-old that doesn't take a lot of preperation? Thanks!!

Remember last week I introduced you to our little house guest, Cedric the Gnome a few posts down? Well, he is off to his next destination after a week visiting us in California. It was pretty quiet around here since we have been up to our ears with packing for our move. Unfortunately Cedric didn't get to see a lot of our state.. He had the chance to visit our little busy elves. It was a short visit with those guy's though, I couldn't send Cedric off to his new destination after being with my mischevious elves...Cedric has to be a good gnome for his future hosts, the last thing they need is some naughty gnome getting into their things or playing pranks on them.
He also met up with the Great Father Christmas himself before leaving. He told St. Nick what he wished for Christmas, since he will be just in time to his new hosts home to spend Christmas with them. I hope he gets what he asked for. He has been quite a good Gnome after all.
And one last kiss from his little friend who happened to have a little crush on him...
Notice how pink Cedric's cheeks are. I think he's blushing Ha Ha Ha.

tcq, i recently was being led on by a stupid boy. i called his bluff and he admitted to it. i am irked to have wasted the last month on his butt. i didn't tell said boy how upset i am about it. i am contemplating sending an email calling him out on being such an ass (about this and other things). i know i will feel better in the end if i send it, but i'm not usually such a bitch.

The remains of Nigerian Army Commander, Col. Husseini Samaila Sankara, who was killed by explosive device planted by Boko Haram terrorists in Borno state, has been laid to rest.
Sankara, who was the Commander, Counter-Insurgency Operations under the ongoing Operation Hadin Kai in the North-East, was laid to rest at the Guards Brigade Cemetery in Abuja on Thursday, July 8.
The late Commander died on July 1, 2021, due to injuries sustained when his vehicle stepped on landmines on 30 May 2021.
At least seven soldiers of the Nigerian Army died instantly after the incident while four others, including the late Colonel, were severely injured.
The late officer was on his way from Marte, a town in Borno State, to the state capital, Maiduguri, when their gun truck ran into the explosive.
Family members, colleagues and friends, who attended the funeral service of the late officer at the Military Church in Mogadishu Cantonment, Abuja, before proceeding to the cemetery, recalled the last moments with Col. Sankara and paid him glowing tributes.
Speaking to journalists shortly after the burial, Shehu Jafiya (Turakin Uba), the elder brother of the deceased, said the senior officer had told his family that his mission was accomplished, ”not knowing he was talking about his mission on planet Earth.”
According to him, the late senior officer would be happy in heaven if he sees an end to insurgency, ethnic agitation and enthronement of United Nigeria, while recalling that the blast occurred May 30, 2021 and Sankara was flown into Abuja on 4 June 2021.
Recalling his last moments with Sankara Jafiya explained, “After the blast in Borno State around Dikwa and Marte. He was first flown in an helicopter to Maiduguri where he was stabilized at the military facility, then they moved him to Cedar Crest hospital in Abuja.
“I was at the airport to receive him and we had very extensive discussions not only one day but progressively over a week. He kept assuring us that we should not cry or be too worried that he was going to be fine. We didn’t know he just wanted to console us by saying we should not be too worried and not cry for him. My last moments with him we’re indeed emotional and painful to us.”
“We thought he was referring to the mission in Borno. He was being very prophetic so, we didn’t understand him then. He was very committed to his family. When I mean both his wife, children and we the brothers. He was easy-going and he had a very deep passion for the military job. He was so proud of it and that was why in the house, we christened him ‘Sojaman’.
“One other thing he always he treasured was his love for this nation. Whenever we sat to discuss, you will hear him saying that he will do anything for this country. All these while, we didn’t understand what he was talking about. That doing everything, he was ready to die for this country and it eventually manifested. So it happened eventually so that is it.
“Looking at things in the country, the first thing that will give him joy in heaven is for us to defeat this insurgency. He will want to see his family settling down as quickly as possible, so that they won’t feel the pain of his exit too much just as the preacher said in the church.
“He’ll want to see them move on and all agitations in the country today for Sankara who is a deep and passionate lover of Nigeria, he’ll want nothing but unity.”
Reading his citation at the grave yard, Col Adebayo Lawal described him as an “articulate, dedicated, loyal and hard-working officer.
“He was calm, firm but fair with a good sense of purpose and responsibility, he was a fortright gentleman and a professional intelligence officer who was genuinely committed to his duty. He had a remarkable conduct and overwhelming moral standard.”
He said the senior officer, who was of the Nigerian Army intelligence corps, rose to the rank of colonel on September 3, 2020.
“Before his demise, he was the psychological operator at the theatre command Operation Hadin Kai. He was until his demise the commanding officer chief of Army Staff intervention battalion operation” Col Adebayo added.
On his part, Adamawa State Governor Ahmadu Umaru Fintiri condoled with the family of Shehu Ijafiya over the loss of his brother.
Governor Fintiri described the late Colonel Samaila as a brave soldier who sacrificed his life for the peace of Nigeria and will be remembered as a peace advocate.
The Governor urged the family to take solace in God knowing that their son died serving the nation. He said Colonel Samaila will be greatly missed.

Phoebe is approximately seven months old. She is super friendly and loves people. She is house-trained. She is good on a leash (unless she is super-excited to see you) and wants to please. Phoebe is a 'hugger' and wants to be a lap dog. She would be a great pet for a family but definitely needs a family that spends time with her and she needs a fenced backyard to run. Please contact Patsy at (336) 565-8610 for more information.

||September 28th, 2008 05:48 AM
So on Friday around 5:30 I coughed a little and felt a trickle..opps I tinkled on myself is what I thought, so I stood up went to the bathroom and my pants were pretty wet, I did not think anything about it, changed cloths washed up went to get new pants, and trickled again, so then I was like ok maybe...no prolly not..I went and layed down for maybe a half hour and then trickled some more, I was really convinced I was peeing myself..I guess I was just not ready. It kept happening and gotten more like gushes, so I knew my water was broke, I called my mom to take me, and then called dh off work. When I got to the hospital my Doctor was coming on the elevator I was getting off, so he turned around and took me to triage. The nurse tested me for amniotic fluid and sure nuff I had ruptured. So I went into L&D and they put me on the monitors and got me all hooked up. They were not picking up any contractions at all and I was not feeling any contractions either. So the my doctor comes in to check me, and I am 4 1/2 cm he puts me on internal contraction and fetal monitors, and I am actually having contractions 2 mins apart lasting 90 seconds apiece. I was not feeling these at all until after he examined me (which really brought some contractions on). My doctor does not play around and ordered an epidural, pitocin and antibiotics he did not want me to have a long labor, due to Nathans prematurity. I was feeling some cramping in my back and lower belly but nothing painful. The anesthesiologist came in, and putting the epidural in was not painful nor was it pleasant I just did not like the way it felt. When my legs went so numb that I could not move them I did not really like that either, but I knew it was better than the alternative. I itched ALOT and struggled to roll over like they needed me to because I had no control over my lower half. Around 6am the nurse came and checked me and I was only at a 6, moving way to slow. My doctor comes in to check me one more time before his shift change and there is no change, he ups my pitocin, and the baby's heart starts decelerating so they decrease it, but the decelerations continue. So shift change and I get another doctor who I have not met, and two new nurses. These people were a Godsend, I can't stress that enough. The new doctor checks me and I am at a 6 1/2 and he is not happy that I have already been in labor over 12 hours at this point. So he ups the pitocin, and there are more decels in the baby's heartrate. Around this time I started feeling my legs more and more, I also started feeling tons of pressure, which I was actually pleased to feel something. But I was not pleased when the pain started. It was in my bottom literally in the bottom and it tugged and burned and just plain hurt. So the nurse had me to hit the button on the epi to release a drop, but that was not helpful, my contractions were coming 40 seconds apart lasting a min and they hurt, I so wanted my numbness back. The nurse paged the anesthesiologist to come and check the epidural, and she checked me said I was at a 8 and looking great. The babys heartrate kept dipping lower and lower and the contractions were harder and harder quick and close on top of each other, they rushed in when they lost Nathans heartrate to find me complete and ready, his heartrate was dangerously low with each contraction, they turned the epidural completly off and the doctor rushed in broke down my bed and NICU set up a table waiting for the baby to come. I was so scared and so was Dustin (dh) he was shaking and trying to be supporative but we knew the baby was in danger. I pushed for 10-15 mins and I pushed hard I could feel everything, the doctors and nurses were wonderful coaches and helped me get Nathan out. The atempted to used a vacum on Nathan but it kept popping off. I pushed as hard I could and for as long as I could. And Nathan came out screaming it was wonderful, but he as pale and not breathing good, due to prematurity and the heart decelarations so they cleaned him up and let me kiss him took him off to NICU. I tore and got two stiches pushing him out so quickly, if I had not they were going to do an emergency c-section and Im so blessed to have avoided that. My labor was scary and still seems like a dream, I cant tell you how much I love my son. When they finally let me hold him yesterday I knew I wanted to hold him the rest of my life.
Every up and every down I have been through with this pregnancy, was all worth it, every single one.

feeling, so I invested myself in music. I looked up bands that random people in my school had liked on Facebook, just to see if anyone else was like me. I looked into lyrics and was disappointed to find no depth in them.
Holding Onto You and became completely hooked. My sister randomly chatted me from college one day, telling me how
obsessed she was with this random band, and it turned out to be Twenty One Pilots. After that, I looked up every lyric and was so
happy to find substance and truth. I could relate to the lyrics and for the first time in my life, I knew I wasn't alone with my mental struggles. I'd always hear people say "It gets better", but hearing Tyler and Josh skip the cliché quotes and say more of a "Yeah, it's hard, I know. But you're not alone" really just pulled me out of my depression.

A transgender woman is to be sentenced after being found guilty of raping a teenage girl when she was a man.
A jury convicted Davina Ayrton, who changed her name from David three years ago, of the sexual attack on a 15-year-old girl in the autumn of 2004, following a week-long trial at Portsmouth Crown Court in January.
The trial heard that Ayrton had met up with the victim, who had run away from home, and two friends on an evening in autumn 2004 and gone drinking in a garage in Portsmouth which had a sofa and chairs in it.
The victim described how she screamed and shouted at Ayrton, who was 23 at the time, to stop but failed to wake up her friend and her boyfriend who were sleeping nearby.
The court heard that Ayrton has learning difficulties and has been living at the Heywood Sumner House care home in Fordingbridge, Hampshire.
The prosecution was brought after a care worker reported that Ayrton, 34, had confessed to the rape in January 2014 and told her that she was a "paedophile" and had "always known there was something wrong with me and I need help".
Following conviction, Judge Ian Pearson remanded Ayrton, who attempted to commit suicide last summer, into custody for her own safety and said it was likely she would be held at the male prison in Winchester, Hampshire, until sentencing.
Ayrton told the court in her evidence that she had not undergone any physical modifications or taken any medication as part of her gender swap.
The court was also told that Ayrton, who has a son, was convicted of possessing indecent images of children, at Bournemouth Crown Court in January 2014.

Hi everyone. I am coming here in hopes to find people who understand and can support me. This year has had more downs than ups for me and my family. We have made it thru them only because of God. But with all the issues, my anxiety has gotten worse and my trust in people has lessened. So, I guess I am just looking for people that I can trust to go to when I need help or to vent. Don't we all need people like that in our lives?? They are just too hard to find now-a-days. Anyway, This board looks like a great place to meet some great people. So I am glad to have found this message board. Thanks.

That night, after Niska, Mal didn’t come swinging down the ladder like he usually did, and Jayne lay frozen in his bunk, wondering just what the hell he should do now. Even after Ariel, Mal had kept coming, his face hard, eyes cold, but he had come. This was different.
It wasn’t like Mal would take comfort, even if Jayne knew how to give it. He knew he was rough around the edges. That’s what Mal wanted from him. An edge to rub against, to forget the past pain and live in the present tense. He wasn’t as dense as everyone made him out to be. He could read a person as well as anyone, if he cared to. It was just, well, mostly he didn’t care to.
Mal was different, though. He hadn’t been at first, just another con man with a pleasant enough face. That was the surface, though, and those waters ran deep. Living in close quarters with a man really gave you his measure, as much as Mal gave anything away. He couldn’t remember when it had been, what had happened that had given him the first glimpse of the depths below. He remembered the feeling, though. The cold burn of attraction trickling down his spine, raising the hair on his forearms.
It wasn’t until later he realized that the water had closed over his head without him even noticing. By then it was too late.
“I just don’t think it’s a very good idea to trust him again, sir,” Zoe said.
“Who said anything about trusting the man?” Mal asked. “He’s got work, we need work.” He grinned and held up a jingling purse. “I got him to pay me up front, cold hard coin.”
“All the more reason not to trust him, sir,” Zoe said implacably.
“Ain’t no reason for a man to give up money like that,” Jayne added. “He’ll try to take it back.”
“Badger’s a right ornery cuss, that’s true,” Mal said. “But I’m not plannin’ on coming back to Persephone for a good long while. If he wants his money back, he’ll have to leave this rock, and Badger’s never wanted to knock the dirt off his boots and take to the stars.”
Zoe made a disbelieving noise. She answered Mal, but a familiar face at the edge of Jayne's vision made him turn his head. The noise of the port drained away and he stopped in his tracks. He watched the man smile, nod, disappear into a tall, rich looking building. His hand had automatically gone to the gun strapped to his hip, and he clenched it into a fist to avoid drawing. Mal and Zoe had gotten some paces ahead, and he hurried to catch up.
“Wash? How soon can we leave this niushi dirtball?” Mal was asking, the radio close to his mouth.
“Ready to roll any time, Captain,” Wash answered.
Mal nodded. “Warm her up,” he said. “Soon as we’re inside, we’re gettin’ gone.”
Jayne touched Mal’s shoulder and gave him a look that he hoped the other man would understand. The cold weight that had rested in his stomach since they had gotten Mal back from Niska stirred, stretched, and settled again as Mal raised an eyebrow and slowed to a stop.
“Zoe,” Mal said, “why don’t you go on ahead and made sure everyone’s back safe and sound so’s we can get off this rock?”
Zoe gave them both a suspicious look, a slight narrowing of the eyes, but all she said was, “On it, sir.”
Jayne waited until she was out of earshot before saying, “You don’t need me on this job.”
“What?” Mal crossed his arms. “What are you saying to me, Jayne? You just get done tellin’ me all the different and myriad ways Badger ain’t to be trusted, and now I don’t need you on this job?”
“I’m sayin’ I got me some personal business I gotta take care of,” Jayne said, fingering his gun. “This job is simple, ain’t nothin’ gonna go wrong. You don’t need me.”
“We ain’t comin’ back to Persephone any time soon,” Mal said.
It wasn’t a no, and Jayne pressed his advantage. “I know,” he said. “I’ll take a transport to Holden and meet you there.”
The struggle to trust him was plain as day on Mal’s face. “Jayne,” he started.
“I swear Mal,” Jayne interrupted. “I swear this is personal, and it don’t got nothin’ to do with that pansy ass doctor. I swear.”
Mal compressed his lips into a tight, thin line, but he nodded, a quick jerk of his head. “You ain’t there in a week and a half,” he said, “we’re leavin’ without you.”
“Fair ‘nough,” Jayne said. “Gotta get some gear from Serenity and then I’ll be gone.”
“Right,” Mal said, and started walking. “Don’t expect to get paid,” he added. “Leavin’ like this before the job ain’t even started.”
“I ain’t askin’,” Jayne said. He touched the knife hidden under his jacket and smiled. Little man was gonna find out he had messed with the wrong crew. He was lookin’ forward to it. The look on Niska’s face when he saw who had come for him would be payment enough.
Jayne hitched his duffle up more securely on his shoulder, wincing as the cut on his back pulled. His shirt stuck to his skin in the humidity of the air. The main port city on Holden was at the edge of a lush jungle. The afternoon rains hadn’t yet appeared, and the heat was oppressive. The air smelled heavy, earthy. He’d taken the first transport off Persephone he could find, and the journey hadn’t been easy, or comfortable. Made him appreciate Serenity all the more. Made him glad to be going back home.
And didn’t that just go down easy. Home. It wasn’t like he was taking his place on the ship for granted, not after Ariel. But no place he’d laid his head a while had felt like Serenity did. She appeared in front of him just as thick, dark clouds started to form up above. Kaylee was standing at the cargo bay doors, directing Wash as he drove the ‘cat, loaded down with boxes, up the ramp.
He jogged the last few steps, ignoring the sting in his back as his duffle bounced. His boots were loud on the ramp, and Kaylee turned at the noise.
“Hey, Jayne,” she said warmly, smile spreading across her face like the sun. “Welcome back!”
“Hey,” Jayne said roughly. He ran his hand over his face, wiping off the sweat before it could sting his eyes. “When we fixin’ to leave this goushi planet?”
“Coupla days, I reckon.” Kaylee's hair was curling on her neck in the heat and her cheeks were rosy. “Inara’s got a client booked. Captain and Zoe are out looking for work.”
“Hope it’s sooner,” Jayne muttered. “Any longer and I’m gonna start growin’ mold in some uncomfortable places.” He headed up the stairs to the crew quarters as Kaylee giggled behind him.
After a sonic shower and changing his shirt, he felt marginally cooler. He unpacked his duffle, tossing the dirty clothes on the floor and carefully setting his pistols back on the rack above his bed. He hadn’t had to use them. Just the knife, so sharp it was like slicing air to cut on a man. He palmed the small white box from his duffle to his pocket and threw the bag underhand into a corner of the room.
Jayne climbed out of his bunk and ambled over to the mess. He spooned some of the congee still gently steaming on the range into a bowl and brought it to the table, sitting with his back to the wall so he could keep an eye on the exits. He could see Wash at the helm, feet kicked up on the console. It was quiet, that sleepy kind of quiet it got in the middle of the afternoon.
Mal and Zoe came in as he was scraping the last grains of rice out of his bowl and licking the spoon for good measure. They were laughing about something, on the tail end of a joke. Zoe walked through the kitchen, nodding at Jayne, the corners of her mouth still warm and generous as she jogged up the stairs to the helm. Jayne tuned out the low murmur of her conversation with Wash as Mal pulled out the chair across from him and sat, leaning an elbow on the table.
“You through with your business?” he asked. His voice was neutral, but his eyes were keen, as usual. Seeing more than they ought.
“Yup,” Jayne said shortly. He rose, walking to the sink to wash his bowl.
Mal picked at a spot on the table with his thumbnail before leaning back in the chair, his hands behind his head. “Any of that business follow you back here?”
“Come on, Mal,” Jayne said. He swiped the bowl with a towel and set it back in the cupboard. “I ain’t an amateur.”
Mal’s right shoulder hitched up, then down, but he didn’t turn around. “Just askin’,” he said mildly.
“Here,” Jayne said, pulling the box out of his pocket and slapping it down on the table in front of Mal, “brought you back a present.”
Mal looked at him suspiciously, hands dropping back into his lap. “A present,” he said. “What’s the occasion?”
Jayne shook his head. “Open it."
Huffing, Mal slid the box closer and lifted off the lid. He blanched. “What the ruttin’ hell is this?” he asked.
“It’s an ear, Mal,” Jayne said. He leaned his hip on the table, bending closer. “Figured you could use a spare.”
“Whose ear is it, Jayne?” Mal’s voice was low and deadly, and Jayne dropped a hand to the table so he was looking straight into Mal’s eyes as he turned slightly in his chair.
“It’s Niska’s,” he said.
What color was left drained from Mal’s face. His hand shook as he tried to put the lid back on the box. “Wo de ma. Man better not come knocking on my door wantin’ this here grisly piece of work back,” he said with visible effort.
Jayne leaned back and put his hand on Mal’s shoulder, squeezed once. “Not unless the dead are walkin’, Mal, and I just ain’t noticed yet.”
“Personal business,” Mal muttered to himself, disbelieving. He turned, and Jayne let his hand drop away. “How dead is he, Jayne?”
“Dead as I could make him, an’ that’s pretty dead,” Jayne said. He stood, turned to leave the room.
“Jayne,” Mal said, stopping him.
Jayne paused, looked down at Mal, who was staring at the box. “Yeah?”
Mal carefully straightened the lid on the box, aligning it with a click, then sat for a moment, fingertips resting there. “I never asked you to kill Niska." His voice was quiet.
“I just took the opportunity what presented itself to me,” Jayne said. He started for the stairs to the crew quarters again.
“I ain’t gonna say thank you for this,” Mal said behind him.
Jayne didn’t turn around. “Ain’t expectin’ you to.”
It was a couple days after they had left Holden when Kaylee clattered down the stairs to the cargo hold, standing in front of Jayne and bouncing a little on her toes as he finished a set of pull ups.
“Word on the Cortex is that Niska’s dead,” she said without preamble.
“That so.” Jayne turned his back to Kaylee, picking up some free weights. “Where’d you hear that?” he asked gruffly.
“‘Nara told me,” she said, her voice sweet.
“That so,” Jayne said again. He could feel her moving closer to him, and he shuffled a few steps to the side, sat on the weight bench.
“Yup!” Kaylee replied. She went on as Jayne leaned his elbow on his thigh and started doing bicep curls. “Seems he was on Persephone and got snatched. Just - poof! - disappeared.” She snapped her fingers.
“Huh.” Jayne switched arms.
“Also,” Kaylee said, sitting on the bench next to him and leaning toward him conspiratorially, “word is he was missin’ an ear.”
Jayne grunted. He was sweating now, more from Kaylee’s artless interrogation than the weights. He dropped the dumbbell, leaning both elbows on his thighs and staring at the floor, counting holes in the grate as a trickle of sweat crawled down his spine, stinging a little in the cut that hadn’t quite healed. He snuck a glance at her and she was staring intently at him, frowning a little.
“Did you torture him?” she asked.
“What?” Jayne jumped up from the bench, started pacing. “What the hell?”
“I know you did it, Jayne,” she said. Her face held no judgment, her eyes still warm. “Did you torture him?”
“Might of cut off his ear ‘fore I cut his throat,” Jayne admitted, grinning just a little. “He died clean, though. Torture ain’t really my thing.”
Kaylee was looking up at him, all smiles. “That’s a real nice thing you did for the Captain,” she said.
Jayne rubbed the back of his neck. “Wasn’t aware that killin’ a man the way I did Niska was a nice thing,” he said. “Or killin’ a man at all.”
“It’s not the how.” Kaylee stood up. “It’s the why.” She was still smiling, reaching out to touch his hand. “You’re a good man,” she said, softly.
Jayne barked a laugh, knowing it was too harsh but unable to soften the sound. “I ain’t ever been a good man,” he said, his voice low, “and I ain’t likely to be one, neither.”
Kaylee opened her mouth to answer, but just then River came tripping down the stairs, calling, “Kaylee, Kaylee!” and the moment was broken. Jayne made his escape, backing away, then taking the stairs two at a time as Kaylee laughed at something River said.
His bunk felt small and safe. He shut the hatch behind himself and sat on the bed with a huff. “Girls’ a fool,” he muttered to himself, unlacing his boots. He kicked them off and lay back, arms under his head. He closed his eyes, saw Mal’s disbelieving face. “She’s in good company,” he said, and laughed at himself.
A careful thunk from the hatch woke him. He hadn’t meant to fall asleep, and his eyes felt gritty as he blinked up at the ceiling.
“Jayne,” Mal said.
Jayne lifted his head a little. Mal was standing on a middle rung of the ladder, one hand on the hatch. His face was uncharacteristically uncertain as their eyes met.
“Oh, hey, Mal,” Jayne said, sitting up completely. He swung his legs over the edge of the bed and put his socked feet on the floor.
“Doc said,” Mal started. He didn’t continue, his knuckles white on the rungs where he gripped the ladder.
Jayne curled his toes on the floor. “Ain’t nothin’, Mal,” he said. “Just a little scratch.”
“Doc said he gave you stitches.” Mal jumped the bottom rungs and landed with hardly a sound. “Don’t sound like nothin’ to me.”
“I’ve gotten worse just foolin’ around playin’ ball,” Jayne mumbled, knowing he sounded surly but unable to change his tone. Mal put him so off balance sometimes, hot and cold and he could never figure out if he was coming or going with the ruttin’ man.
Mal just looked at him, eyes steady, mouth turned down at the edges. He looked tired, like he had the whole world on his shoulders and couldn’t stop carrying it.
“Hell,” Jayne growled, and stood.
Mal flinched almost imperceptibly before he let go of the ladder and took a step into the room. “Far be it from me to pry,” he said dryly, “but I gotta know what’s happenin’ with my crew. I gotta know I can rely on you, Jayne.”
“You can,” Jayne said shortly. He took the hem of his shirt in both hands and lifted it off to hide the hurt he knew was plain on his face. He never had the art of hiding his feelings, not like Zoe, stoic as all get out, not like Mal, covering up with a smile. He turned his back to Mal for good measure, dropping the shirt on the floor and standing with his hands at his sides, waiting.
Mal’s boots made soft, hollow sounds as he walked closer. His fingers brushed Jayne’s spine and he couldn’t help the sharp intake of breath at the touch, but Mal didn’t comment. He just rested his forehead on Jayne’s bare shoulder. “You’re in my crew,” he said, low, so low Jayne could hardly hear him over the ever present circulating air. “I gotta know my crew is safe.”
“I know, Mal,” Jayne said. He wanted to turn, to take Mal in his arms, but he wasn’t sure if that would be welcome. They breathed together like that, in and out.
Clearing his throat, Mal lifted his head and stepped away. “Looks to be healing just fine,” he said in a normal tone.
Jayne picked up his shirt, putting it on before turning to face Mal again, who already had one foot on the ladder, already had that half smiling mask up. “Told you,” he said, his voice rough.
“Dinner’s in an hour,” Mal said as he climbed up, his voice muffled by the hatch. “You’re on KP.”
“Aw, Mal, no,” Jayne protested. “I’ve had KP for weeks.”
“Serves you right, going off like that.” Mal pulled himself out of the hatch and kicked it closed without another word.
“KP,” Jayne grumbled. “Gorram dish duty 'til I die.”
Jayne woke slowly, blinking up at the infirmary ceiling, his memory trickling back to him. Hovering over the estate on Bellerophon, trying to reprogram the trash unit. A wash of white and a great blank space. Waking up, unable to move, Simon’s implacable voice saying, “I’m your doctor". River …
Best not to think about River.
He shook his head, and immediately regretted it as a wave of dizziness washed over him. He closed his eyes, but that only made the vertigo worse. A small hand touched his forearm, and he jerked.
“Just me,” Kaylee said. “You gave us an awful scare.”
Jayne grunted. “I’m all right." He turned his head carefully to look up at her. Black spots swam in front of his vision, then cleared.
She took his left hand, callouses rough along their palms, and he let her. She was smiling softly at him, her eyes shining a bit. Her hair was piled up on top of her head, messy tendrils escaping as usual, and she had a smudge of grease on her cheek.
Clearing his throat, Jayne asked, “We get it?”
Kaylee nodded. “Dunno how we’re going to sell it,” she said, with a wry twist of her lips, “but we got it.” She squeezed his hand a little.
“That’s good,” Jayne mumbled. His right hand started to ache, radiating out from his palm, and his eyes didn’t seem to want to stay open. He blinked. “Mal’s all right?”
“Yes,” Kaylee said gently. She kissed his cheek. “He’s been growling at everyone, pretending he ain’t worried over you.”
Jayne laughed, then grimaced. The ache had extended up his arm to his shoulder now. It hurt to laugh. “He ain’t never worried a minute over me, Kaylee. It ain’t his style.”
She squeezed his hand again. “It’s funny how you two think no one notices all your growlin’ and snappin’ at each other turns into moon eyes the minute t’other’s back is turned.”
“That ain’t true,” Jayne protested, but it sounded weak even to him. He closed his eyes. He was so gorram dizzy. The infirmary felt like it was yawing back and forth, like Serenity had lost her stabilizers. He resisted the urge to cling to the gurney, to hold on for dear life.
“Leave it alone,” he said, quietly. His heart ached and he didn’t think it was anything to do with being electrocuted.
Laying his hand carefully at his side, she patted it once. “Jayne,” she started.
“Leave it alone,” he said, more sharply this time, and didn’t resist the urge to make a fist in the sheets, to hang on as his insides spun around in crazy circles. The words just fell out of his mouth, his filter spun off into the black. “You’re the best of us, you know? You have a heart that’s big enough for -” he couldn’t say it, even now, and he switched tracks in the middle “- I’m like to die any time, Kaylee. It’s my job to be the first through the door, you know that.”
She hummed at that, but didn’t sound hurt or amused, maybe just a little sad. He felt her hand brush his forehead, then her lips. “Best get on with living, then,” she said, her breath stirring the short hair next to his ear.
He meant to answer, but the dizziness pulled him under again, and he slept. When he woke again, she was gone. The doctor was standing with his back to Jayne, scrolling through something on his handheld scanner. Jayne cleared his throat.
“Good, you’re awake,” Simon said, but he didn’t turn around. “How are you feeling?”
“Fine, Doc.” The room had settled somewhat, but he could still feel the vertigo if he moved his head too fast. He sat up slowly on the gurney, wincing. He couldn’t feel his toes, but he wiggled them and saw the sheet move. He was fine. “I’ll just get out of your hair.”
“Whoa, hey, no,” the doctor said, dropping his scanner with a clatter on the counter and whirling around. “I have to keep you under observation for at least 24 hours.” He hooked the earpieces of his stethoscope over his ears and pressed it to Jayne’s chest.
The metal felt like an icy flame against the bare skin of Jayne’s chest. “I’m fine,” he insisted, brushing the stethoscope aside.
“Of course you are,” Simon soothed. He put a hand on Jayne’s shoulder, gently pressing him back down.
Jayne knit his eyebrows together. “I -” he started, then stopped. He could feel small tremors begin in his right hand and clenched it into a fist. “What happened?” he asked. The past day was a yawning black hole in his mind. Vaguely he recalled something with that troublesome redhead, wind stinging his eyes, bright light ....
“You were electrocuted,” Simon said. His hand was still pressing on Jayne’s shoulder, and Jayne let himself lay back down.
“Kaylee was there?” He didn’t mean for it to come out like a question.
“She was there,” the doctor confirmed. “She’s okay. We’re all okay. You can rest.”
Jayne closed his eyes against the ceiling spinning dizzily above him. “Mal,” he said.
“The Captain is fine,” Simon said. He patted Jayne once and then his footsteps moved away. “Any pain?”
“No,” Jayne said irritably. “‘Cept for the pain of having to listen to you,” he added.
“I see you are feeling better after all.” Simon's voice was dry as dust.
Jayne thought he fell asleep for a while after that, but he couldn't be sure. Time seemed to be doing funny things. Once, he thought he woke up and both Kaylee and the doctor were there, then another time just Simon. He didn't see Mal, but he felt him, standing just beyond the edge of his vision, heard his voice talking with Book or Zoe.
The doc let him go with only a little arguing the next morning. Jayne spent most of the day in his bunk, only regretting his bullheadedness a little. His hand had stopped shaking, but he felt all shaky inside, exhausted but he couldn’t sleep, couldn’t sit still for more than ten minutes at a time. He cleaned all his guns, touching them as if for the first time, relearning the weight of each trigger on his finger, casting his mind back to how he had acquired each and every one.
His pa, in a rare moment of camaraderie, before the drinking really got started. The Gauss action Moses Brothers pistol he picked up after his first real job. It was a real piece of feiwu; the barrel wasn't bored straight and the hammer stuck, but he was sentimental about it. His sniper rifle, the shotgun he had gotten for a screaming deal out on the Rim. And of course Vera. She was a beautiful piece of machinery. He had been stupid, that day, and cocky. He had barely survived, really, but Vera was worth every drop of blood he had left behind. Even the blood that was his own.
Those memories were clear. It was just the more recent ones that slipped through his fingers, left him feeling melancholy for no good gorram reason.
He carefully pinned the fabric back up, kneeling on the bed. It was easy, then, to lay down, rubbing his face on the cool pillow, breathing in the soothing mineral and mint scent of gun oil. He thought he might be able to sleep, but that shaky feeling started up again and he sprang to his feet, pacing around the room before climbing up the ladder with a frustrated grunt.
"Don't do anything too strenuous for a while," Simon had warned him when he left the infirmary.
Well, if he could just sleep, that would be easier to swallow. He headed down to the cargo bay, taking it slow in the hush of Serenity's night. He stopped in the middle of the catwalk, shutting his eyes against the dim lights illuminating the space below, twisting his hands around the steel railing. The white noise of the air and the engine filled his ears. His heart tripped in his chest and he gritted his teeth against the tingling pain in his fingers.
Jayne started at Mal's voice behind him, but he didn't turn around. "Can't sleep," he said shortly.
"Seems to be catching." Mal appeared in Jayne's peripheral vision, stood next to him. His hand on the railing was close enough Jayne could feel the warmth on his skin.
They stood in silence for a long minute before Jayne said, "Ain't never been electrocuted before."
"As I recall," Mal said, "it ain't the most pleasant feeling in the 'verse."
Jayne had a flash of Mal's bloody, haggard face in Niska's skyplex, the careful way he had moved for days afterward. "Don't remember much of it, to be honest," he admitted.
"Doc said it takes some people like that." Mal bumped his shoulder against Jayne's. "Come on," he added. "I left water to boil in the galley."
Jayne followed Mal back through the ship. He wasn't much for thinkin' on the why of people. Trying to figure out the things they did. Mal puzzled him more than most, though. He played the genial, rough around the edges Captain well enough, but there was a darkness to him, too, that was closer to the surface after Niska. It came out in odd, unguarded moments.
He sat at the table in the galley and let Mal fuss over the tea, make inconsequential small talk about their next job, their next port of call. By the time their cups were empty, his heart had settled into his chest and the shaking feeling had subsided.
Their talk had trailed off into comfortable silence. Jayne cast a glance over at Mal, who was blinking and biting back a yawn. "Get some sleep," he said gruffly. "I'll clean up."
Mal let him with only a token protest and a muttered, "Good night," on his way out. Jayne cleared the mugs, throwing them in the washer before making sure the kettle was locked in place. He felt heavy, tired, and thought maybe he could sleep now, if he tried.
If not, well, there was always something else that needed cleaning on a boat this size.
Jayne hesitated in the corridor, outside of Mal's bunk. The hatch was half open, glowing around the edges in the darkness of the middle of the night.
"And when you can't do that, well ... yeah, you know the rest." A pause. A click. "You know it's funny. We went to the war never looking to come back ..."
He backed away quietly, then started forward again, making sure to stomp a little so his boots made noise. There was a click, then rustling as Mal's head appeared at the top of the ladder.
"Oh, hey, Mal," Jayne said.
Mal looked rough, mouth pressed in a thin, tight line, the dark circles under his eyes stark against his pale face. His suspenders were off and the top two buttons of his blue shirt unbuttoned, exposing the hollow of his throat. "Jayne," he said, and his voice was rough too, low.
Jayne flashed hot all over. It had been a while, but he recognized that look in Mal's eyes, had seen it often enough before Niska had had his nasty little way with the man.
Tipping his chin at him, Mal jerked his head, then vanished down the ladder. Jayne was rooted to the spot for a minute before he followed, his feet quiet and almost hesitant on the rungs, pulling the hatch shut carefully behind him. He inhaled through his nose when he reached the bottom, rubbing the pads of his fingers over the smooth metal, cool to the touch, before he turned around.
Mal's bunk smelled like he did, most of the time. Soft cotton, gun oil, the metallic tang of recycled air underlaid with the peppery tang of sweat. The sharp soap smell that was almost a taste in the back of his throat. Mal was sitting on the bed, taking off his socks. His feet were pale, toes knobby and fine-boned.
Jayne stared. He didn't think he had ever seen Mal's feet before. Somehow that felt more intimate than anything they'd done before, him standing in Mal's bunk, looking at his bare feet.
"You comin' over here?" Mal asked. He started unbuttoning his shirt.
Clearing his throat, Jayne said, "Yeah," and bent over to unlace his boots, kicking them off before he took the three steps toward the bed. He stripped off his t-shirt on the way, dropping it on the floor.
Mal reached for him, pulling him in between his legs and rubbing his cheek over Jayne's stomach while his hands made short work of his belt. Jayne pushed Mal's shirt off his shoulders, ran his hands through Mal's hair, soft and fine against his palms. Mal kissed the soft skin next to Jayne's navel as he unbuttoned his fly and took him in hand.
Jayne's hips jerked up into Mal's hand and his breath caught, just a little. He pushed his pants down with one hand, the other gripping the back of Mal's neck hard.
Looking up at him through his lashes, sultry-like, Mal said, "I want to run this rodeo. That okay with you?"
Heat pooled low in Jayne's belly and his cock, already half hard in Mal's hand, stood at attention. "Fine," he said gruffly as Mal hummed and smeared his thumb through the wetness at the tip. "I -" he broke off with a strangled groan as Mal started to jack him slowly, still looking up at him.
He let go of Mal's neck with an effort, trailing his fingers over his shoulders. The angry pink of the sunburn he had gotten on Bellerophon had faded into a golden bronze all down his back. Jayne pushed his hips into Mal's hand one more time before pulling away. "Too many gorram clothes," he grumbled, shucking his pants off unceremoniously and leaving them in a jumble on the floor.
Mal grinned, his face losing some of that haggard tightness he had been carrying around. He stood, shaking his shirt off his wrists before unbuttoning his fly.
Jayne took Mal's place on the bed, hesitating a second before turning his back on Mal and getting on his hands and knees. "It's been a while," he said as Mal climbed into the bunk behind him, pressing close, the head of his cock trailing hot and slick over the skin of Jayne's back.
It had been more than a while, but he wasn't going to tell Mal that. Wasn't going to tell him that he didn't usually let guys fuck him because it made him feel out of control, too needy, too likely to beg. With Mal, though, it was different. He felt that way no matter what with Mal, no matter who was the hand and who was the glove. He knew Mal didn't feel the same; maybe couldn't. He'd seen the way the man was with Inara, like he was ready to cut out his own heart and serve it up to her on a platter, if only she would ask.
Teeth on his neck brought him back to the present. He bucked up into the sting of it, and Mal let more of his weight settle over Jayne's back, trusting him to hold them both up. Jayne let his head hang, shivering as Mal's teeth worried the skin.
"Don't make a mark," Jayne said.
Mal chuckled but let go, licking a hot stripe up the top of Jayne's spine. He reached over Jayne's head, twisting the catch that opened a storage compartment in the bulkhead and rummaging through until he found what he was looking for. He pushed himself off of Jayne, trailing a hand up his back and squeezing his ass. His thumb trailed teasingly over his crack and Jayne widened his knees, pushed up into Mal's touch.
Mal's hands left his ass, and Jayne heard the click of a bottle opening. He let out a long, slow, breath as Mal's finger, cool and slick, rubbed over his hole, then pressed inside. Mal took his time with him, working him with two fingers, a slow in and out, until Jayne dropped to his elbows on the bed and groaned. Mal's breath went ragged above him.
"Come on, Mal." Jayne propped himself up on one elbow and patted around on the bed until he found the slick, holding it up.
"You clear?" Mal asked, twisting his fingers, dragging them across the spot inside Jayne that made him groan again. His other hand plucked the bottle out of Jayne's palm.
"Yeah. Just last week." Jayne pushed his hips back, chasing Mal's fingers as he pulled them out completely. "You want to ride me bareback?"
"If it pleases you," Mal said. He rubbed one hand over Jayne's flank and then pulled him open so he could press the tip of his cock to his hole.
Jayne thrust back, and they both groaned as Mal breached him. "Oh, it pleases me," he said. "Don't hold back; I ain't a woman," he added.
"Thought never crossed my mind." Mal fucked into him, their hips meeting a sharp slap in the quiet room. His fingers were hard points of pressure against Jayne's skin.
They found a rhythm together. Mal's hands were slippery on Jayne's hips. They were both sweating, sliding against each other as Jayne pushed back into Mal, meeting him halfway, fucking into his hand, then back onto Mal's cock.
"Y'close?" Mal asked, breathless. His hips hadn't stopped, his cock pressing into Jayne and over that spot that made him want to curl up and die, made him want to fuck and fight at the same time.
It felt good and it hurt a little, too, like pressing hard into a fresh bruise. Jayne pushed his face into the crook of his elbow. "Dunno," he gasped. "Don't stop."
"I ain't plannin' on it."
True to his word, Mal never faltered, even as Jayne lost the beat, inner thighs trembling. He could feel his balls tighten, only had time to say, "I'm going," before he was coming hard into his hand, teeth clenched around a moan.
Mal cursed and tipped forward as Jayne's body involuntarily tightened around him, then released. He planted his left hand on the bed next to Jayne's elbow, pressed his forehead into Jayne's shoulder. The angle of his thrusts changed just enough to make Jayne see stars, moaning and clutching at the sheets in the few seconds more it took Mal to spend inside him.
The whole of Mal's weight pressed against him for a moment as they caught their breath. With a groan, Mal pushed himself upright again, pulling out slowly, with a hand on Jayne's thigh. The gentleness made Jayne feel prickly inside, like he wanted to throw the first punch in a bar brawl, slip his knife between some cowboy's ribs and feel the blood, hot and sticky on his hands. He growled and pulled his legs up and around so he could sit on the edge of the bed, his back still to Mal.
"I'd like it if you set here a spell," Mal said. "Won't sleep for a while yet."
Jayne heard the echo of Tracey's last message in Mal's voice. His spine loosened, and he ran a hand over his hair. "You know I ain't one for pillow talk," he said, but he made no move to get up.
The sheets rustled as Mal lay down behind him. He didn't say anything, but he put a hand on Jayne's back, warm and low.
"You and Zoe did right by that boy," Jayne said. "I should be half so lucky, when my time comes."
"Don't talk like that." Mal's voice was sharp.
“Aw, hell, Mal, you know I ain’t gonna live forever.” Jayne turned to look at Mal. He was laying on his back, one arm behind his head. His chest was still flushed with exertion, his hair dark with sweat at his temples.
He looked at Jayne for a long moment, then huffed out a laugh. “People do shoot at us with distressing frequency.”
Jayne felt one side of his mouth quirk up in a smile despite himself. Here he was trying to be serious for once in his gorram life, and Mal was being his usual flippant self. Which, well, he hadn't been for a little while. Not with Jayne. So he let himself smile a little, remembering what Kaylee had said to him. "Best get on with living, then," he said, and they both laughed, and they both reached for each other.
And Jayne knew, however much time he had left, he would take it, would take however much time Mal wanted to give him and be grateful for the gift.

The game of poker is played by dealing cards from a standard 52-card deck to each player in turn. Sometimes, jokers are included to speed up the game. Players who want to play poker without involving the dealer often use two-pack games. A dealer must offer the shuffled deck to the player to their left before a new dealer deals cards. A player may cut from the dealer. The dealer must offer a shuffled pack to his opponent, who has the right to accept the cut.
The amount of money a player can bet is limited to the number of chips in the pot at a given time. However, if a player raises in a round, his or her raises will count as part of the chips required for calling. Hence, if a player raises by 14 chips, he will win the pot without having to show his hand. However, poker has several variations and bluffing is one of them.
In the betting round, all but one player can fold. The player with the highest hand wins the pot. This is because the player with the best hand has the highest ranking hand. In a game like poker, a player can check the pot anytime during the round. If he does, he or she must “call” the new raise. This is referred to as a showdown. This is the final round of the game. If a player loses his or her hand, they must fold.

What motivates Creon to sentence Antigone as he does?A. his desire to protect his son B. his drive to maintain peace among his citizens C. his annoyance with women's behavior D. his cowardice about condemning her to death
Answers 1Add Yours
B or C. Both have themes in the story; the peace was violated when the brothers fought and Creon wants to be in charge of a peaceful city. But he also is annoyed that the women have defied, especially Antigone. The rights and social position of women is one of the themes that pervade this story.

Thursday, July 1, 2010
Samson's birth story
(I'm finally getting around to writing this. If you are interested in reading Elijah's birth story, click here!)
Well, Samson, you surprised us all. Nobody thought you would stay in my belly for as long as you did. I prayed so hard for a 39-week delivery and that is exactly what God gave us! I was on bed rest for over four months with pre-term contractions. Because I went into labor so early with your brother, my doctor was extra cautious and wanted me to stick as close to the couch as possible. Bed rest seemed to last forever, but I kept thinking about meeting you and that made it all worth it.
The day before my scheduled c-section, my contractions started getting regular. They came about seven minutes apart for a good chunk of time and I wondered if we might have to do an emergency c-section after all. We got through the night without any drama, though, and woke up super early to get to the hospital for surgery. I don’t know about Daddy, but I didn’t get much sleep that night. I was so excited to meet you! I was also a little bit nervous about the surgery and I was anticipating missing Elijah, too. We had brought him to Grandma and Grandpa’s house the night before and I knew I wouldn’t be seeing much of him in the following days.
We got to the hospital and checked in. I was brought back to a room where I was prepped for surgery. The nurses had a hard time getting an IV started in my arms (this always happens), so they ended up having to put one in my hand. It hurt at first, but I soon had other things to distract me. Pretty soon there were a handful of people in the room and I was being ushered into the operating room. This is the moment when I got really scared. Daddy wasn’t able to come back with me right away and I didn’t like that very much.
The operating room was small and I remember being surprised by that. A nurse had me sit down on the operating table and lean into her while an anesthesiologist put the spinal block into my back. I felt my heart rate increase and I was on the verge of panicking. I wanted Daddy in there with me! Everything went fine with the spinal block and they had me quickly lie down on the table. Lots of people buzzed around me, getting everything prepared for surgery. I kept asking, “When can my husband come in??”
The main anesthesiologist made the comment that it was a good day to have a baby. He was a “numbers” guy and 6 + 4 = 10, which is what the date was: 6-4-10. I told him I was a “numbers” gal myself, and that 11 was my lucky number. 6 + 4 + 1 + 0 = 11! Elijah’s birthday actually worked out the same way: 2 + 2 + 0 + 0 + 7 (2-20-07) = 11. Anyway, that distracted me until Daddy was able to come into the room. Things started feeling really strange with my body at about this time. It felt like I couldn’t breathe because part of my lungs were numb. That made me start to panic again, but I quickly calmed down.
Everything started to go really quickly. I felt a lot of tugging and pulling and pushing and then suddenly Daddy was told to get the camera ready to take your first photo! Then, WAILING! You screamed your little lungs out! I heard someone comment on how big you looked and another person comment on your head size. The doctor let you peek over the curtain at me and then you were taken to be cleaned off and weighed. That is when my tears started to flow! Happy happy tears! I couldn’t stop them. The nurses kept making sure they were happy tears and I kept nodding yes. We waited so long to meet you and it was so special to be able to partake in your birth. Hearing your healthy cries gave me the most amazing, happy feeling!
I got to hold you for a minute once you were cleaned and wrapped in a blanket. I remember noticing your extremely long thumb nail and then immediately taking in your beautiful face. At first I thought you looked nothing like Elijah, but later I realized that you do in fact look a lot like your big brother.
I felt a weird pain in my chest as I was being closed up (apparently that was normal), but other than that things went fine and really quickly. As soon as they were done, the phone in the OR rang and we found out that you weighed seven pounds even! Way more than I thought you would weigh!
I was wheeled into a recovery room, where you and Daddy came to see me. It was surreal and very very weird to see him holding you without any machines or wires attached. We got pretty used to that sort of thing after Elijah was born, so in my mind wires accompany every newborn. I felt so grateful that you were so healthy. It really was quite a strange feeling.
We stayed in the hospital with you for three days. Or I should say, you stayed in the hospital with ME for three days. I had to recover from my c-section, and you and Daddy hung out in my room with me while I did that. There are a few things about the hospital stay that are really special to me and that I never want to forget about..
I loved the moments when I was able to nurse you. I wasn’t able to nurse you for very long because of a lot of pain (emotional and physical), so I cherish the moments we had doing that together. There were times when you would start to cry (you were constantly hungry, even right from the start!) and I would nurse you for a bit and you would calm down and fall asleep next to me. Daddy thought I was crazy, but I wanted you with me all the time, even during the night, because I was so in love with you. I was always sad when you were across the room in your bassinet.
We always had you wrapped up in your cozy little Halo sleepsack and you looked so tiny and cute when you slept in it. You really were a great sleeper from the start. Elijah has always been a good sleeper, so we were very happy to see that you were, as well.
I will never forget your funny little high-pitched squeal that you made when you were hungry. You didn’t do it for very long, so it’s something I want to tuck in my mind so I always remember it. It was cute and it made me laugh every time.
I loved, and still love, the cute little noises you made when you ate and slept. You are absolutely precious, Samson, and a miraculous gift from God! We love you so much and we are so thankful you are a part of our family. It feels like things are complete with you here.
I sat and stared at your perfection for hours as I sat in that hospital room. I touched your super soft skin (you can ask Elijah about this...soft necks are my favorite) and kissed your forehead and rubbed your back. I couldn't get over how perfect you were!
You are now four weeks old and we are getting to know you more every day. You love your food more than anything in the world and you seldom let a feeding go by without screaming your head off so the whole world can hear. When you are rested and when your tummy is full, you love to look around the room with your curious eyes.
I am so excited to continue to get to know you and I am so grateful to be your mommy! Thank you for choosing us, Samson. We love you!!

HUNTINGTON BEACH – A Huntington Beach police officer was arrested Wednesday and charged with physically abusing his wife and a girlfriend.
Additional charges include attempting to dissuade his wife from reporting the assaults in an effort to protect his job, according to a news release from the Orange County District Attorney’s Office.
James Roberts III, 33, faces several felony charges that include false imprisonment by violence or deceit, criminal threats, domestic battery with corporal injury, aggravated assault, dissuading a witness by force or threat and vandalism that caused $400 in damage or more.
Married in 2003, Roberts and his wife have a son. Prosecutors believe Roberts began a relationship with another woman in 2007.
Between June 2007 and May 2008, prosecutors allege Roberts physically and verbally abused his wife while also instigating other violent incidents against her.
The news release reports that, in July 2007, Roberts “trashed” his wife’s apartment while she was away, demolishing pieces of furniture in the process.
This event was followed by three episodes of Roberts physically restraining his wife and holding her against her will, her young son being present during one of these alleged confrontations.
Additional attacks on his wife, related by the report, include Roberts shoving her to the bathroom floor where she hit her head on the bathtub and toilet, and Roberts “intentionally pushing a door” into her as she stood behind it. Roberts is also accused of repeatedly telling his wife that he would lose his job if she reported the assaults to police and reportedly threatening to kill her at least once.
Between March and July 2007, Roberts allegedly physically restrained the girlfriend, holding her against her will. Though the girlfriend ended the relationship in early 2008, Roberts invited her to his apartment in May 2008 and then is said to have used physical force to keep her from leaving, assaulting her and pulling her to the ground when she did leave, according to the report.
Finally, Roberts is accused of confronting a male friend of his wife’s, demanding him to stay away from his wife and implying he knew where the man lived and where he spent his free time.
Roberts is being held in lieu of $250,000 bail and is scheduled to be arraigned Friday at the Orange County Superior Court in Santa Ana, according to prosecutors.

It was reported yesterday that the censor Board had given the U/A certificate to Vijay's "Bigil" and the censor certificate was released. However, it was reported that it was fake and the censor board had not certified the film yet. At the same time, Movie crew anticipated to get U/A certificate.
In the meantime, there is much confusion as whether the film will be released on Diwali on October 27 or ahead of the holidays on October 25. Amidst the confusion, the film is set to release on October 25 before Diwali.
That is, the premiere booking of the "Bigil" in overseas has been announced on October 24. If so, the film will be released on October 25th in India.

Last week, Kellen went on a John Mayer kick. We listened to Continuum for hours on end. Not that I'm complaining. I love me some JM. Listening to the songs over and over, though, I started paying attention not just to how they sound, but what the songs were about. I'd never realized the song "Stop This Train" was about losing your parents, and listening to it got me thinking...
It's not as if I've never thought about my parents growing old or passing away before. I have. When I was 16, my mom ended up in the hospital for two months. I remember my younger brother and I having the discussion about how afraid we were, driving home from Thanksgiving dinner at my aunt's by ourselves. I got to experience what my life would be like without her. I didn't like it.
My parents are only in their 50s, and God willing, they'll have another 30 years of healthy, happy, independent lives. After all, all of my grandparents are still around and for the most part healthy and independent. And my grandmother had her parents until she was in her late 60s. But still, in my 20s, I'm having to come to terms with the fact that my parents are getting older. They'll be retiring soon. The list of doctors they have is growing longer, and the list of problems is starting to grow, too. Someday, I'll be the one taking care of them. And someday, I'll have to say goodbye to them.
My parents have always been at the center of my life. I've never made friends easily, and I've gone stretches of my life without anyone I could count on or lean on but my family. My parents are the people who always reminded me that I was loved, that I was special to someone, and that I had someone to go to, no matter what. They've gotten me through so much. It's impossible to imagine a world where they aren't there.
But I know someday, it will happen. How do people ever find the strength to get over that loss?

After experiencing a long dry spell with no murders in the parish over a 13-month period from early 2011 to mid 2012, St. Charles Parish has seen four murders in the past 11 months–all of which have occurred on the East Bank. […]
A recent Destrehan High School graduate was shot to death in the Preston Hollow neighborhood of St. Rose Friday night. […]
Longtime St. Charles Parish District Attorney Harry Morel is getting accustomed to his new role as an assistant district attorney after 33 years as the head man.
The first days of 2007 were filled with numerous reports of murders in New Orleans, with the number of those killed reaching in the double digits even before the second week of the year had concluded. One shooting even occurred as the victim was holding his two-year-old son and watched as his Harvard-educated wife was gunned down. […]
BOUTTE – Deputies with the St. Charles Parish Sheriff’s Office arrested Charles Walker, 46, and charged him with obsenity after his neighbor, Gail Thompson, reported that she saw him standing stark naked on his front porch. […]

06-10-2013, 07:29 PM
Well, Declan's son was approaching; Declan was bidding on Aza.
Emily put Connor behind her back to protect him.
"Vell," Wolfgang said, raising an eyebrow at his new concubine. Now he knew why she was trouble- and he was more than prepared to be the one to tame her.
The cab entered through a gate and came upon an expansive mansion with grounds so large that there was room for multiple pools and fountains.

I Am Whom?
I Am Whom?3 mins 200 3 mins 200
I was born 20 years before but I realized today that I should died on the same day either by accident or random disease. God has done wrong by saving me. I am a girl who is burden on everyone at the time of their marriage. Heavy dowry before and after marriage which I call pre and post-murder of self-respect by the hands of the biological and new family. While the dowry is passing to another family, the girl receives blame for taking so much when she never asked. The other family who is modernized enough demanding dowry and showing strange behavior after getting so much than their imagination.
This is same in every typical Indian married life. Well, I have prepared myself to deal with all this and get habitual of it but the strangest thing happened when I came to know my real birth parents were my uncle and aunt from whom I am adopted by my parents, as they (especially my adopted mother) took me to have a fortune of kanya-daan. Sooner or later, I became the angel of my father. He loved me more than his boys. My mother has her heart-failed but I served as her lifeline.
Days passed by. I was educated in a good school but never allowed to work outside which I adjusted. I too don’t want to make my skin darker in the harsh struggle of outside.
But the real day when my skin got darker was the day when my mother got died. I was not in good condition at all but now in the worst situation. I grew up under the love of my brothers and their wives. They loved me a lot but my father was cooking in some conspicuous manner.
I became a girl of 21 years—the age to marry Indian girls, set by oldies with their cliché erudite. I was tied with a man to whom I could believe. He was strange to me but I could trust him as my brothers approved to him. I was happy to start my new life but a speed-braker pushed off me from my thoughts.
My father asked my uncle and aunt to get me back. It astonished me! What!!
My brothers want to withdraw his purpose immediately but the property distribution hold them back. I was all alone. Neither my adopted parents want to have me with sight of heavy dowry nor biological parents.
I decided to stab myself and remove the wrinkled lines from the face of everyone.
One night, when all the family members fallen to slumber, I stepped out but I remembered my mother’s love which gave me power to stand.
I talked to the man to whom I got to marry. Declared my all situation and presented the problem to him. He was an understanding person. He could not change his parents but was against their thinking. He decided to do court marriage. I supported him and felt independent for the first time in life. Everyone who saw me as inferior was surprised.
I am a girl but not a person to ignore. I have my sown self-respect which can not be harnessed by anyone.

Q. I have been with my fiancée for almost 4 years now and we are planning to marry this summer. I love him with all my heart and he does too. We have a great relationship but there is one problem. My main concern is anger issue. i know that he had a very tough childhood and his parents were divorced when he was very young and his father didnt have any part in his life. whenever we get to a fight he starts screaming ( even though im trying to be calm) and acting all crazy. If i keep arguing with him he brakes his own things ( like his cell phone …) then later when he cools off he apologizes and then tells me if i would have stopped arguing with him he wouldn’t have got to this point . i told this to him mom and she told me that i have to let go when he argues like this. i talked with him many times and he has told me that he is working on his problem and he needs more time to do it. ( he said to me i cant change it suddenly and this needs time). and i agreed but it seems after 4 years even though he is better then before but the same anger is still there and over nothing he gets mad and looses it. i told him he should talk with some one about this and he told me that he is under alot of pressure and he will get better. i dont know what to do? how should i act with him? i feel like when ever we have an argument even very small i have to shut my mouth and be quite if not he will get mad and will break stuff. is that fair? Should I marry him?
A. His anger is a major concern. He seems to believe he can manage the anger on his own and that he will eventually be able to eliminate it but in the four years you have been together there has only been a marginal improvement. It is still a major problem.
Not only does he have an anger problem but he blames you for it. It may be that you play some part in the escalation of the anger incidents by “adding fuel to the fire” but I do not have enough information to know what role if any you play. Even if you do help co-create or intensify anger situations by arguing, it seems clear he has anger problems that he has yet to effectively deal with. In other words, the anger problem seems to derive mainly from him.
I cannot answer the question of whether or not you should marry him because that is a personal decision that only you can make. I would recommend that you be honest with him about your concerns and let him know that you are seriously considering not marrying him because you feel that his anger is out of control. He may not be aware that his anger is much of a problem but he might become so, if he knew the extent to which it was interfering with your relationship.
You should also consider postponing the wedding and stipulating that he attend therapy for his anger for at least six months. I would advise that you do not accept his previous excuse and promise of “I am under a lot of pressure and I will get better.” He has had four years to “get better” and he hasn’t; his methods have not worked. He needs to show you through his actions that he is working on decreasing his anger and those actions should include seeking outside therapeutic assistance.
You might also want to consider therapy for yourself as a way to gain an objective opinion as to whether you have a role in escalating anger situations and also as a way to learn how to deal or interact with him. If you did decide to attend therapy, either on your own or with him in couple’s counseling, your willingness to attend therapy might make him more open to go. It also might make him feel that you are not blaming the entire situation on him and that the two of you have a shared responsibility to improve the relationship.
It is very wise to question whether you should marry him and to want the anger issue resolved before you get married. Many people would ignore such an issue and mistakenly believe that “things will change after we are married” or “it is no big deal.” It is a big deal.
The truth is that people are the same before they get married and after. An individual who has problems before they get married will usually bring those problems into the marriage. His anger will not magically disappear once you are married. I applaud your willingness to be realistic and to critically analyze your decision to legally bind yourself to someone theoretically for the rest of your life. Good luck and thanks for writing.
Last reviewed: By John M. Grohol, Psy.D. on 24 Nov 2008
Randle, K. (2008). Should I Marry Him?. Psych Central. Retrieved on May 23, 2013, from http://psychcentral.com/ask-the-therapist/2008/11/24/should-i-marry-him/

« VorigeDoorgaan »
thedral; and in that city he found himself surrounded by many differing entirely from him in their views of Christian doctrine. Such a position, with his peculiarly sensitive frame of mind, was by no means an easy one; for he never shrank from the bold and uncompromising statement of his own principles, but did his utmost to spread throughout the city the knowledge of those truths which he believed to be essential for man's spiritual welfare. In 1859, he preached the Latin Sermon at St. Paul's to the assembled Convocation, at the request of Archbishop Sumner. This appointment was a testimony to his character as a scholar by one well capable of forming a judgment, and, together with his other distinctions, is a sufficient answer to the sneers which appeared in some of the public journals, as to the want of scholarship in those who were appointed to the Episcopacy during Lord Palmerston's Premiership.*
In 1860, he was called to preside over the Diocese of Carlisle, from which the late Bishop Villiers had been recently translated to the See of Durham. His predecessor, by his frank, out-spoken, faithful declaration of Gospel truth, had prepared many to welcome a chief pastor of Evangelical principles; but the episcopate of Bishop Villiers at Carlisle had been of so short duration, that the whole work of the Diocese remained to be done by the new Bishop. He found, as it is well known, an ill-provided and ill-paid body of clergy; and with a deep feeling of sympathy with them, and a desire to increase the number of efficient labourers, and also to deliver them from the burden of poverty by which many among them were oppressed, he threw himself with all his energy into the work of improving their condition, as well as adding to their numbers. With this view, in the year 1862 he founded a Church Building Society, the object of which was not only the building of new churches, but also to furnish endowments and to build parsonage houses. In this cause he laboured most indefatigably; and by urging the local claims of his diocese on the Ecclesiastical Commissioners, and applying to Christian friends by letters and personal influence, in the short space of nine years thirty-one churches have been built or restored, thirtysix parsonages erected, and thirty-nine benefices had their endowments augmented. Thus he has left behind him a lasting memorial which will make his name to be remembered with honour and gratitude by many of the clergy and their families. But his great delight was the preaching of the Gospel of the Grace of God; and this he did as a faithful shepherd wherever he had an opportunity. He went about his diocese, preaching frequently twice, sometimes even three times on the Sunday, carefully and prayerfully prepared sermons, full of unction and clear statements of the way of salvation. In whatever sphere he was employed, he was also a cordial supporter
* We regret to find this charge per that, amongst others, Dr. Baring was a sisted in in a late article in a public Double First Class man at Oxford, that journal, in which it was stated that Dr. the present Bishop of Worcester was Waldegrave was perhaps the only case of Senior Wrangler at Cambridge, and an elegant and accomplished scholar that Dr. Ellicott had been known as acquiring the distinction that he did a theologian and critic on a large porunder the Palmerstonian régime. In tion of the New Testament before he answer to this, it should be remembered was made Bishop of Gloucester.
both of the British and Foreign Bible Society, and the Church Missionary, the Pastoral Aid, and other Evangelical Societies connected with the Church. Nor was he contented with giving them his conn. tenance by taking the chair in his diocese; he took a deep interest in the work which they were carrying on; and, when in London, from time to time, afforded the help of his counsels in the Committee Meetings in Salisbury Square. His sermon at St. Bride's, on the Church Missionary Anniversary in 1868, is a characteristic specimen of his faithful adherence to the principles of the Word of God. In mentioning the public objects which specially engaged his attention, it would not be right to omit the Clergy Daughters' School at Casterton, instituted by that faithful servant of God, Mr. Carus Wilson, which owes much of its present state of efficiency and activity to his wise counsels and persevering attention.
It is not to be expected that such a man should have been without his trials, or without opposition; and he was one who felt these acutely, and was most specially jealous for his Master's honour, There was in him, however, with all his firmness and uncompromising fidelity, such real Christian courtesy, such fairness and unblameableness in his manner of dealing with others, such transparency of intention as often disarmed opposition, whilst the humblest curate was sure to find a fatherly welcome in his house, and encouragement to bring to him all his difficulties. It is right also to mention what special pains he took with reference to the candidates for holy orders, both as to their admission into the ministry and the faithful influence he exercised over them, lending them books and directing their reading before they came up for examination.
He had a great dread of the entrance of ritualistic practices or Romish doctrine into his diocese; and the manner in which he detected, and sought to repress, anything having this tendency, appears in a correspondence which he had with one of his clergy concerning a “Burial guild,” which it was sought to establish under the plausible pretext of benefiting the poor, but concerning which he wrote in these wise and decided terms :-“I cannot but deprecate the institution of a society which, appealing to the susceptibilities of human affections, seizes upon the opening thus afforded for entering upon a course the manifest tendency of which is the setting up anew in our Church some of the worst superstitions from which we were delivered at the blessed Reformation.” His Visitation Charge two years ago, in which he drew, in a clear and scholarlike manner, a contrast between the Sacerdotal character of the priesthood of the Church of Rome and the Evangelistic character of the ministry of the Church of England, bore faithful testimony to his views on this subject.
Nor were his labours confined to his diocese. On public occasions he did not withdraw from what he felt to be the path of duty. In his place in the House of Lords he spoke in support of Lord Shaftesbury's proposal to put down the use of sacrificial vestments by clergymen of the Church of England ; and on one occasion took a night journey from Carlisle for the purpose of being in the House, that he might vote on the subject of the better observance of the
Lord's Day, though he was obliged to return immediately afterwards. Such was Bishop Waldegrave; one who unswervingly maintained the doctrine of salvation by grace only through the justifying merits of the Lord Jesus Christ, having its origin in the electing love of God the Father, and applied to the sinner by faith of the operation of God the Holy Ghost; yet one who indeed manifested that these truths received into the heart, whilst they humble the sinner before God, become the source in him of all holy activity; for his labours were most abundant, and he was in all respects one “ zealous of good works.” The secret of his inner life was, that he was truly a man of prayer. He loved his Bible, and he prayed over it. Those who were best acquainted with him knew well that he never undertook anything without first asking the Lord's blessing, and was often looking up to Him for His continued help in his ordinary occupations. It is remarkable how his prayers were answered; what wisdom was given him in all his appointments, which were made in the most disinterested manner, and with a single eye to his Master's service, so that they have commanded very general respect and approval throughout the diocese. The principles upon which he acted, and the power by which he lived, were embodied by him within two months of his death, whilst his faculties were clear and unimpaired, in the words with which he commenced his last will and testament:-“I desire, in the first place, to testify that I die in the faith of Christ crucified, and as a sinner saved by grace alone, humbly trusting in the alone blood and righteousness of my Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, and in the full assurance of that eternal and unchangeable love of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, one Triune God, which it has been my joy and delight to have been permitted to proclaim throughout my beloved diocese whenever I had opportunity; and which doctrines, as they have been my comfort in life, are now my stay and support in the prospect of death and eternity.”
The Bishop experienced a severe shock in the month of December, 1867, by the unexpected death of his eldest sister, Lady Elizabeth Waldegrave, to whom he was specially and deservedly attached. They were the two members of the family to whom all the rest were accustomed to look up; and they were singularly alike in integrity, good sense, dignity of character, and diligent usefulness. Entirely coinciding with him in her views of the Truth, she was also abundant in good works, continually employing herself in seeking to do good, especially amongst the invalids who were visiting at Hastings. His expression with regard to her, and which was no less applicable to himself, was, “All her life was a service for God.” But whilst deeply feeling the severity of the blow, in this as in everything else he humbly acknowledged the loving hand of his heavenly Father. His touching words of comfort, addressed to the mourning members of his family on the Sunday morning after her death, were these :" It is as if the Lord had said to her, 'My child, you are tired-you have done enough—rest now;' and so he put her to sleep.”
Up to the close of the year 1868, his labours in his diocese were incessant. He undertook a Confirmation tour in the autumn, and subsequently paid visits to many of the clergy in Westmoreland and North Lancashire, when he preached five or six sermons in the week. From these exertions he returned much fatigued at the close of the year, and a visit to relatives in Scotland failed to afford him the relief and refreshment which were hoped for from it. From this time his strength began rapidly to decay; but this was reasonably ascribed to his assiduous labours, and the hope was entertained that a change of scene and occupation of mind by a visit to the Continent would, with God's blessing, restore him. For this purpose he left England; but after a short stay in Paris, the disease which was the cause of bis prostration manifested itself in such a manner as to lead to the determination that he should return at the close of April, and put himself under the skilful direction of the best medical advice in London. In July he went back to his beloved home at Rose Castle. The disease from which he suffered was at first somewhat obscure in its character, but proved afterwards to be a schirrous tumour, which so affected him as to press upon the optic nerve of one of his eyes, and deprive him of the sight of that eye, causing great uneasiness, and not unfrequently much and severe pain. During the whole of his illness he was never heard to utter a murmur or complaint, but often to express thanks to his heavenly Father for any alleviation through the use of remedies and the watchful tender care of his beloved partner. He would not even allow his friends to speak of the dispensation as mysterious, lest the expression might seem in any way to impugn the wisdom and love of his heavenly Father in sending it. Often, when his mind was weak on other subjects, he poured out a beautiful prayer both for himself and those around him; thus personifying, in his last prolonged illness of many months, the words of the Apostle, “ Patient in tribulation, rejoicing in hope, continuing instant in prayer.”
His genuine humility was manifested by many expressions during his last illness. Frequently, when he heard that friends had spoken of him as a faithful servant, he would urge, “Do not let them call me a faithful servant. I am an unprofitable one-less than the least the chief of sinners." At another time he dwelt on the power with which the words in Isaiah xliv. 22 had been applied to him,-“I have blotted out as a thick cloud thy transgressions, and as a cloud thy sins;" adding, “I can never tell what that word thick has been to me.” His extreme tenderness of conscience was well known to all who came in contact with him, and was also sig. nally exemplified during the course of his illness. Once, when allusion was made in his presence to some tale of sin, he shuddered, and begged that nothing more might be said on the subject, and added emphatically, “Remember always it is written, Whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report, if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise, think on these things."
That the feelings of the Pastor's heart were still warm, and his anxiety for the flock continued to the last, is testified to by one of his attached Chaplains, who, when preaching a funeral sermon, records these words of his in one of his later days,-“I can leave my wife, I can leave my children; but oh, my people, my people, my
He sank into his rest on Friday, October the 1st ; the last articulate words he was heard to utter were the prayer of his Saviour, “Father, glorify Thy name! Gracious, loving Father !” His funeral took place on Friday the 8th, in the presence of numbers of every class, who assembled to show their respect for his memory. By permission of the Secretary of State, his mortal remains were deposited within the precincts of the Cathedral in which his voice had so often been heard proclaiming the glad tidings of his Saviour's love, and where for the last time on the preceding New Year's Day he had preached from the text Daniel vii. 18, “But the saints of the Most High shall take the kingdom, and possess the kingdom even for ever and ever.” We believe that these particulars of the life and labours of one whose faithfulness and devotedness were justly appreciated by all who delight in the pure Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ, will be read by them with warm interest; and we think they ought to be recorded, because the career of Bishop Waldegrave proves beyond doubt that the best friends of the Church are they who, having received the word of salvation in its power in their own hearts, are ready to maintain the authority of God's Word written as the work of His inspiration; and love our Protestant Church, because they are fully persuaded that the doctrines vindicated by our Reformers are most strictly in accordance with the teaching of the Bible, and that in these truths, maintained in their purity, is to be found all that belongs to the reality of the soul's life.
To the Editor of the Christian Observer. SIR, I regret to learn from my friend Mr. Biley, that in the brief sketch which I too hurriedly made, when passing through London last July, from his voluminous MS. on Armageddon, and which was inserted in your Number for August, there were admitted two serious errors; of which, in his name, I will ask you now kindly to insert the correction.
1. At p. 635, 1. 5 from bottom, instead of the following words, “ Against this Mr. Biley objects that the Hebrew word for mountain is generally 757, with the , and the aspirate,” read (as in Mr. Biley's MS.), “Against this Mr. Biley objects that mount 71,7 is always Hor, with the aspirate."
2. At p. 636, 1. 30, suppress entirely the words, “if written with the aspirate, Harmageddon, the city of the prince."
So my friend Mr. Biley : and I must take blame to myself for admitting such errors. The necessary hurry in which I wrote the abstract—being desirous that my friend should not be disappointed
Vol. 69.—No. 383.

I look skinnier than I actually weigh. I am 5’6 and not muscular. It is not all in my head either - when I was at my skinniest (130lbs), people frequently thought I was around 110 pounds, and when I was 190 pounds people thought I was in the 160s/170s. I actually think I looked better at 190 then I did at 130, which looked way too skinny on me. It's like I do not look good when I am too skinny, my body looks best with a little bit of extra weight. It is making it hard for me to decide that my goal weight should be, because I look best when I am still in the "overweight" category on the BMI. Also, my pants size is usually higher than other people’s when they are the same weight as me. When I was 130, I was barely squeezing into a size 8, but other people at the same height & weight as me were in size 4s - yet I looked skinnier than they did. Why is this? Does it mean I am large framed? When I put my fingers around my wrist, it (barely) touches on my right and doesn’t touch on my left.

Raj Bhavsar has a nice story. He was an alternate in 2004, and when the 2008 trials came he was named alternate once again, thinking his Olympic dream was over. He almost was ready to pack it in after 2004 but some self-reflection brought him around to thinking he should try again.
When Paul Hamm pulled out with a hurt hand, Raj was elevated to the national team and on his way to China.
In his role as Hamm’s replacement, Bhavsar will perform in five of six events in Saturday’s team prelims, based on the schedule that the U.S. men used Wednesday. Five gymnasts compete in each event in prelims, and the top four scores count.
You can see some of his Youtube videos here from the Olympic trials.

King of the Underworld
by RJ Kane
Before we could make it across the ballroom to talk to the mayor, I was stopped at least twenty limes by different people wanting to speak to me. I could feel Sephie’s delight at me having to be polite and courteous to that marry people. They were all people I’d either helped out or done some kind of business with. Most of the time, when anyone would approach me in public, it was to thank me for something I’d done for them. Tonight was no
Surprisingly, Vinny and Anna were among those who stopped us on our way to the mayor.
“Vinny!” Sephie said when she saw him. She couldn’t hide her excitement to see him. Or his wife. She loved both of them. “I was not expecting you two to be here, but I’m so glad you are.”
“Since the hospital has taken such good care of my father, we try to give back whenever possible,” Vinny said. “Now that I’m opening a second restaurant, thanks to you sir, we can increase that.”
I smiled at Vinny. He really was a very good man. “That’s what it’s all about, Vinny. When business owners thrive, the community thrives.”
“We can’t thank you enough for the second location, sir,” Anna said. “It really has been a dream of ours for several years now. You’ve brought that to life.”
“Just be glad that we’re not living in that building. Your profits would be cut considerably by me having a sandwich for breakfast, lunch, and dinner,” Sephie said, patting her partially exposed stomach.
Vinny raised his eyebrow looking at her skeptically, “you could use more sandwiches if you ask me, bella.” Just to be a brat, she pushed her stomach out like she had a belly, telling Vinny that’s what she looked like after eating one of his sandwiches. It made me happy to see her finally relaxing while we were here. It helped the rest of us relax as well. The guys stayed close, giving us enough room to talk to people, but not enough that Sephie couldn’t easily see every single one of them.
Before we could even finish our conversation with Vinny and Anna, someone else had approached me wanting a moment to talk. I was beginning to feel like Vitaliy when he first came back to the city. Everyone wanted to talk to me. This is why I don’t come to these functions.
We’d made it halfway to the mayor, but no further as it seemed like every single person at the function wanted to speak to me.
“Boss, it appears that the mayor is also trying to make it to you, but he’s having the same issue. People are stopping him to talk to him before he can make it over,” Ivan said quietly.
“Let him come to you. I don’t know why, but that needs to happen.” Sephie told both me and Ivan.
“That should be easy. I can’t even finish one conversation before the next person is already waiting. I’m going to be here all night,” I said, somewhat frustrated.
I felt Sephie push her warmth to me; she cut Ivan off from the conversation before saying, “but you look so smashingly handsome doing it. I wouldn’t mind watching that for a little longer.”
I was in the middle of a conversation with someone who was thanking me for helping their family in their time of need. I glanced over at Sephie, who was standing a step away from me. Her eyes were normal, because of her contacts, but her dress matched her eyes when they changed to blue almost perfectly, giving her the appearance of radiating love for me.
“You’re not allowed to wear a dress in any color other than that one ever again,”I told her as I continued with my conversation. I could hear her laughing in my head as she smiled and pretended to be interested in the conversation along with me. She took the step closer to me that meant I could slide my arm around her waist, holding her close to my side while we talked to a seemingly endless stream of people.
I caught sight of Battista during one of my many conversations. He approached Ivan, saying something quietly to him. Ivan responded, then Battista walked toward Vitaliy. My father’s men were spread out more throughout the ballroom than my guys. I’d explained the situation to Vitaliy while we were waiting for Sephie to come upstairs from getting help getting ready. He knew how nervous we all were to be here tonight, so his guys were basically running backup for us so my guys could concentrate on Sephie and only Sephie.
“Your mother warned me that this was going to be difficult for all of you, but she didn’t go into details,” he’d told me as we discussed it. “Whatever you need from us to make sure sladkaya is comfortable this time will happen That was the end of the discussion as far as Vitally was concerned. It made me happy that he was so willing to protect her, just like the rest of us.
“Boss, Battista figured out what’s happening with you trying to get to the mayor. He’s going to bring him over shortly, but he did say he and Vitally were betting on who was going to make the most progress between now and then. Apparently it’s somewhat of a race that they’re watching from the sidelines,” Ivan told me.
“Slowest race ever,” Sephie responded. She was still tucked into my side, happy to stay close to me. She would catch one of the guy’s eyes and make funny face now and then. She had conversations with all of them, probably trying to make them laugh as they remained close by. I felt her getting antsy next to me at one point and turned to look at her. “I have to pee. I drink water when I’m nervous and I was nervous all afternoon,” she told me. She had a guilty look on her face like she’d definitely done something wrong that I couldn’t resist. I laughed, leaning down to kiss her quickly.
“Ivan, she needs an escort to the bathroom. Take Andrel too,” I told him. I looked at her, smiling up at me, “try to behave yourself this time.”
She slid her arm through Ivan’s, glancing back at me as they walked away. “Never!” she said as she turned away from me.
She stopped to briefly talk to Battista and Vitaliy before they continued on to the restroom. I counted down the seconds in my head before she returned, I tried to appear like I was listening to the person standing in front of me, but I kept glancing in the direction they’d just walked, waiting for
them to return.
When I saw her again, my breath caught. She had no idea how beautiful she was. Every head turned to watch her as she walked past, Ivan and Andrei were trying to keep her distracted as they walked back to me, to help keep her from worrying over everyone watching her. She was laughing with them as they walked, her arm through Ivan’s again. She looked absolutely gorgeous as she walked across the ballroom and every single person there noticed, except one. Sephie still had no clue how mesmerizing she was. I loved that about her.
Her smile widened as she made it back to me. She reached up and kissed Ivan’s cheek, thanking him and Andrei for the escort, then stepped back to me. I couldn’t help myself, I put my hand on her cheek, gently pulling her to me and kissed her. Passionately. In front of everyone. I didn’t care. In fact, I might’ve liked it. I’d just seen the looks on every single man’s face in this place, as well as the women. I’d never been more proud that she was
“I wasn’t even gone that long. I beat my previous record, evert. But you clearly missed me,” she said as I finally got myself under control. She was smiling at me, though. I could feel her warmth, as well. I knew her eyes were matching her dress.
“I clearly love you,” I told her as I greeted the next person who wanted to speak to me.
King of the Underworld
King of the Underworld by RJ Kane Novel
Author: RJ Kane
Artist: Sephie and Max
Native Language: English
Released: May, 22, 2023

Minghui.org l March 25, 2014 | By Yinzheng from China
When I was held in a women’s prison, they took a sample of my blood. The label on the test tube said, “Blood-DNA.” At that time, I only knew that DNA had something to do with genes and could be used in paternity tests. I wasn’t sure why I had to have a DNA test in prison.
I recently found out that DNA screening is required for an organ transplant. I then remembered that I had read about living Falun Gong practitioners having their organs removed and sold to patients who needed organs.
It suddenly became clear to me that the things the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) officials did to practitioners who were imprisoned, including blood tests and DNA screening, were connected to organ harvesting. The results from blood and DNA tests were logged in a database so that the information could be retrieved any time someone needed to purchase an organ.

By Arjun Seth
After receiving the BBC News app notification announcing Benjamin Zephaniah’s death last Thursday, I could only think back to my conversation with him last October when I interviewed him for Black History Month in Edition 854.
That morning he was generous with his time to speak to Palatinate. Across 45 minutes, we discussed all things from his upbringing and first call to poetry as a young churchgoing boy, to his anarchist politics and his recent role as Jeremiah Jesus in Peaky Blinders.
What struck me throughout our chat was his honesty and sincerity when answering my questions and engaging with me in our conversation. As a student newspaper, he did not have to take us seriously or agree to our interview. The fact that he did, was a testament to a man who was motivated to speak to and reach as many people as possible regardless of their education or place in society.
The power of language and poetry was recognised by Zephaniah. In our interview, he defined poetry as “taking everyday words that we use and arranging them in a way that touches people”. He wanted to do so in a way where he could “make people think and change their minds” – the quotation I later used as the headline for the article.
Benjamin Obadial Iqbal Zephaniah was born as Benjamin Springer on 15th April 1958 to a Barbadian postman and a Jamaican nurse in Birmingham. Zephaniah was the joint eldest of seven siblings along with his twin sister, Velda. Having become famous in the community for his performances in church as a child, he was nicknamed ‘Zephaniah’ after the biblical prophet and which he later adopted as a surname that then became a household name.
As a child, he experienced racism daily and his mother was beaten by his father. At the age of 10, Benjamin and his mother left, leaving the rest of his siblings with his father. Having to move whenever his father knew where they were, his mother and him were at times homeless. At the age of 13, Benjamin was expelled from school and so he left unable to read or write due to his diagnosed dyslexia.
After spending time in a borstal and then prison for burglary, Zephaniah moved to London to become a poet. His urge to write and perform poetry came from his desire to fight racism in the 1980s, a motivation he noted in our interview – “as a person of colour, dealing with racism was an urgent priority. You could not get away from it”.
He began by reading poems during breaks at gigs and eventually at the age of 22 in 1980, his first collection, Penned Ribbon, was published by a co-operative.
Inspired by the reggae music, he turned to dub poetry where he he added words to the music. In 1982, he released his debut album, Rasta, with the Wailers, which included a song about Nelson Mandela, who was then imprisoned in South Africa. Mandela was sent the album along with Zephaniah’s other poems when in prison and asked to meet Zephaniah during his visit to Britain in 1990.
Zephaniah went on to regularly appear on television and radio – notably reciting poetry during Channel 4’s commercial breaks. As well as reaching people in their living rooms, he toured barbershops, sports halls and community centres. Reflecting on this in interview, he said – “I wanted to take poetry to people”.
Most students educated in this country will have come across Zephaniah when studying his poem, “Talking Turkeys (1994), which became a staple of the national literary curriculum. In more recent times, he appeared on our screens as the preacher, Jeremiah Jesus, in Peaky Blinders, a part which he told me seemed like it had just been written for him.
A regular on panel shows such as Question Time, Zephaniah was known for his contributions to public debate – he self-identified as an anarchist, he was a prominent vegan and an animal rights’ activist. He famously even turned down an OBE in 2003 because he could not write the word ‘Empire’ after his name.
He became the most recognised poet of our generation – often described as “the people’s laureate”, earning 16 honourary doctorates and was voted as one of The Times’ 50 most influential writers in 2008.
Beyond the accolades and radicalism, Zephaniah’s unique ability to energise and reach people inspired young writers and gave a voice to a new generation.
What I shall remember most fondly about our chat is his sincerity. Advising students to always be honest, Zephaniah said that even though he had been in trouble in the past, he was always open about it – “if you want to know about me, the real me, then you have to know the truth”.
As he died as Christmas was drawing near, it would be only fitting to remember his words about the turkeys he sympathised with.
“Be nice to yu turkey dis christmas
Invite dem indoors fe sum greens
Let dem eat cake an let dem partake
In a plate of organic grown beans,
Be nice to yu turkey dis christmas
An spare dem de cut of de knife,
Join Turkeys United an dey’ll be delighted
An yu will mek new friends ‘FOR LIFE’.”
Benjamin Obadiah Iqbal Zephaniah, poet and author, was born 15 April 1958. He died of a brain tumour on 7 December 2023, aged 65.
Image: David Morris via Wikimedia Commons

Each January during the Annual Chamber of Commerce Banquet, an auction is held to rename the street next to the Downtown Newport Farmer’s Market at Newport Lake. This year the winning bid belonged to Mary Berry and Clint and Charee Moore, the family of the late Dr. Bobby Berry. The street with be renamed in his honor for 2019.
Dr. Berry was a graduate of Newport High School, later receiving a Doctorate in Theology. He was a 32nd degree Mason with the Trumann Masonic Lodge, and a veteran of the Arkansas National Guard. Dr. Berry was a retired police officer, whose career included being Chief of Police in Trumann and Springdale, as well as officer for the Newport Police Department. His greatest love was his time spent in the ministry. Over his 25 years in the ministry, he pastored churches at Union Grove, Cook Springs and Richards. He and his wife, Mary, were married for 57 years.
The sign “Rev. Dr. Bobby Berry Lane” has been provided by the City of Newport and will remain in place for the year.

Police don't become friends with the men they arrest. But that's exactly what happened to Reggie Graham and Cory Long.
|Back to front: Undercover cop Reggie Graham (left) embraces Cory Long this past Sunday morning.|
PW has covered stories Graham's been involved in over the years, including a fantastic foot chase in which he pursued a suspected gunman over several city blocks. "I caught him and knocked him down three times," Graham said afterward, "but he kept popping right back up and running."
Narcotics squads require police to play various roles. Running faster than anyone he meets in the streets is just one of the attributes Graham brings to his squad. His martial arts training can also be relied upon to end altercations quickly and with minimal damage when a suspect starts swinging. He's also one of the squad's best interrogators, able to win the confidence of men whose entire lives as drug dealers are based upon mistrust.
But only those who've watched his work closely could see in Graham the possibility that he would ever become friends with Cory Long.
Long was raised by his grandparents in Chester, a city rife with drug dealing and violence. He's attended the funerals of five friends over the years. At least a dozen kids he knew in school are now in jail. His grandmother tried to get him involved in the church there, but it didn't take. He attended school, but studying held little appeal. He was most interested in the streets and music. And for a while he had both.
Known as DJ Cory Ak, he gauged his success by the ages and reps of the hustlers who attended his parties. His own arrest record is short, including the night Graham arrested him and a 1999 shooting charge that was later withdrawn. But he admits to sporadically dealing drugs over the years, and is forthright when discussing his reasons for taking to the streets.
While many dealers insist they first slung product to eat or afford the fashions of the day, he says he really doesn't have an excuse. "My grandparents were kinda strict, and I was rebelling," he says. "I knew I was wrong, but it was an adrenaline rush. I just told myself, 'All the guys are doing this. I'm getting my own money.'"
By the time he was 24, dealing drugs seemed a thing of the past. "I was two, three years removed from all that stuff," says Long. "I had money, cars, a name ... "
Working at Power 99 FM, Cory Ak was for a time one of the hottest DJs in the city. He and Graham almost met back then. Graham loved to go out dancing, and some nights he came into clubs like Chrome and Pegasus, where DJ Ak ("the party don't stop until 2 o'clock") was playing. The cop took one look at the crowd and turned on his heel. "I would see all the hustlers in there," says Graham, "and it wasn't some place I wanted to be."
"We wouldn't have mixed then," says Long today. "Me and a cop? I wouldn't have been ready."
Long had people lining up to be his friend. He often DJed alongside New York's famous Funkmaster Flex. A good week planning, promoting and performing at parties could earn him as much as $10,000. By his old standards life was great. But this is Philadelphia, and anyone making that kind of money in city clubs falls under scrutiny.
|The matchmaker: Cheryl Smith (right) reintroduced Graham and Long after the arrest.|
"The streets is watching," they say. Long heard the talk: This guy from Chester. Coming to Philly and making too much money. Somebody should hurt him.
Long's a big guy--more than 6 feet tall and 270 pounds. But in the streets size doesn't matter. A friend hooked Long up with some guys to act as his muscle. "I thought at the time, if I brought in real security--you know, professional security guards from a reputable company--I'd look like a punk," he says. "But now I look back and realize there was no other way. Just bring in real security."
Trouble came down one night in September 2002 at the Delaware Avenue club Chrome. A promoter came onstage to hype an upcoming show while Long was DJing. His new muscle viewed it as a challenge. An argument started, which escalated into an all-out brawl, and soon 10 people were onstage trading punches. Long knew what he needed to do--leave. He walked out back and asked the opening DJ to finish his set.
It seemed inevitable the fight would continue at some future date. That made it tough for Long to hold a job because no one wanted to be near him the night this battle ended.
He tried to start over, moving to the then-new 103.9 the Beat in November of that same year, but the demographics weren't the same. "My following was still geared toward Power 99," he says. "They never made the transition."
His shows started tanking--losing money at a time when he needed to make money more than ever. By this point in his career Long had accumulated enormous expenses--$10,000 a month, he estimates, including an office on City Avenue with a receptionist and an accountant. He was also floating the salary and recording expenses for a rap group he wanted to form the cornerstone of his record label Bomb Threat Entertainment.
Today he smiles softly as he utters that name. "That's who I was," he says. Back then such a rough, street-hard name fit Long. So when a friend who took part in the Chrome debacle introduced him to some investors Long knew were drug dealers, he accepted.
The 50 greatest Philly pop songs
PW's Summer Guide 2015

“I know. Lane has told me.”
Sachin said calmly and started to peel the shrimp for Rosiley.
Rosiley looked at him in surprise, “You already knew that?”
“The Ji Group is quite secretive, but it's not difficult to find out. I didn't tell you because I think you can handle it.”
Sachin put a peeled shrimp into Rosiley's bowl, and continued working on the second one.
Rosiley also put a piece of fish into Sachin's mouth and said, “That's true. When I was in that room, Rorey wanted to embarrass me, but she didn't succeed”"
Sachin looked serious. “When the .Ji Group takes control of TEG, the first person they find fault with would be you.”
Rosiley shrugged, “It doesn't matter. lm not afraid. They can do what they want. They can't beat me that easily.”
Sachin took a deep look at her and said gently, “No matter what, I don't want you to get hurt.”
Rosiley was touched by his words. A sweet smile appeared on her face. She said softly with a clear voice, “l will be careful.”
After dinner, Yayoi returned to the original room. Rosiley stayed here to accompany Sachin.
When the two of them were left alone, Sachin finally looked a little softer. He let Rosiley sit on his lap and wrapped his arms around her waist. Then he said affectionately, “Find an excuse later and come home with me.”
“I have already decided to do that.”
neck and leaned her
could only feel at ease when he
Sachin. Because he would respect her, would not
different from Yunis, which was why the wounds in her heart were so
kissed her on the lips. His voice was deep and
returned to the original room. She found a random excuse
in the corridor, Rosiley ran into Rorey and Lonny
was obviously because they
but Rorey did not intend to let her go. “Rosiley, you should know that the Ji Group has become a shareholder of TEG and I will sign the contract with TEG very soon. At that time, you will be doomed. I really wonder why you can still be
soon, Fll enjoy the rest of them to the most. Therefore, Mrs. .Ji, you will have to put up
smiling, but her words
that I can get TEG to fire you with just a single sentence?” Rorey's expression
that. But I advise you not to do so. After all, I can't guarantee that my boyfriend won't do
was still smiling, as
shrunk. Apparently, she was terrified by
easy to deal with, but that
Rosiley couldn't help laughing, “Be careful, Mrs.
think i'm afraid
sneer, “I'm afraid Yunis doesn't have the ability to do so.” She didn't want to argue with Rorey anymore, so she turned around and went straight into
corridor, Rorey looked
long. You can torture her
fiercely and said with her face twisted, “At that time, I will make the
the hotel, she quickly met up with

Today for the first time I really went to University to work. I've been there a few times this week for various things but today was the first time I really got to sit down at my desk and work. I don't actually have a computer yet (I used my own laptop), but at least I have a desk, and an office.
And that's just weird. It takes an enormous amount of effort just to open the door to my office without knocking. Sure, there's other people in there too, but I don't need to knock on their account. It's just, for six years if I wanted to get work done at Uni, I'd go to one of the computer labs. The only time I spent in an office is in meetings in someone else's office. And now I've got an office myself. It really helps to drive home the fact that although I'm still going to University, I'm not a student anymore; I'm an employee.
Even weirder perhaps was when I had to fill out some forms for personell services regarding my employment. It was basic stuff: name, first name, title, date of birth. Suddenly, I realised I actually have something to put for "title" now.

I don't know what godaddy would gain by saying it was there crappy system that crashed and not a 3rd party they have no control over.
Crap happens. I think every major hosting provider has had an issue at some time or another. I've had system that went down because a power outage caused a fire with the back up generator. Or where the bank of batteries that provided temporary power until the generator could reach speed exploded taking down everything.
You can plan and think you have all your bases covered but sometimes fate throws a curve ball and things don't go down quite the same way as you expected.
reply to hitachi369 Agreed, either way it looks bad but I would figure they would be all to happy to blame the FU on hackers. The only possible motive I could come up with for Go Daddy to blame an outside hack on themselves would be if the hack was THAT severe. Like major stupidity (or liability) on their part could get them sued by businesses that lost money due to this.
Of course it is also possible that they just have no clue that they were hacked.

Three is Not a Crowd
Ben Esra telefonda seni bosaltmami ister misin?
Telefon Numaram: 00237 8000 92 32
“Go on, take it you filthy slut! You’re so dirty, show me what a naughty girl you are, oh yeahhh…”
As Rob was deep inside me, holding my soft arms down with the strong force of his masculine arms, panting and sweating on top of me, I loved hearing the dirty talk. It spurred me on. He knew it, too, and it certainly turned him on also. It was always during this sordid talk that we would offer our fantasies to one another, and depending on the reactions we got, we’d sometimes carry them through…
For years, I’d often thought I was somewhat slightly perverse, always deviating from the norm when it came to sexual fantasies. I’d always known how to pleasure myself, and the boys at school, and had always been pretty confident in knowing what turned me on. But growing up, I realised that I was a rarity. When my girl friends used to talk about boys and sex, they never talked about the things I was into, it was all so, well, safe. I would keep my dark desires to myself to save their shock.
I grew up very quickly, physically. I was a tall teenager with long dark hair and a feminine figure. I had hips and curves and, much to the delight of the boys at school, enormous and full tits. It was during these later school years that I realised how sexual I was to other men. I liked to experiment with the boys at school, teasing them and making them come whenever I wanted, I loved the taste! Even the time when I got caught off my teacher, I knew how to ‘get out of being in trouble’ with him. Men were easy, whatever I wanted sexually, I could have. As I grew older, I’d experienced lots of sexual activity with lots of men, but is was so dull. It was just sex. Nothing like I’d imagined it would be in my mind. It didn’t make me orgasm the way I used to be able to do it to myself whilst making fantasies up from my own imagination. Until I met Rob.
We knew we were kindred spirits from the moment we met. Although it’s a very loving, passionate and intense relationship, we were close enough to share our desires, our secret fantasies, our dirty side. Sometimes, we’d act them out. Sometimes they were mild, like wanting to dress up and act out a role play, some were a little more extreme (believe me!) but sometimes we’d discuss things that were for fantasy only. For all that these extreme desires turned us on whilst fucking, they were just words, never to be acted upon.
I remember years back, just as I was bringing myself to orgasm as a teenager, I started to wonder what it would feel like to be pissed on. The thought of being drenched in that way gave me the best thrill of my life, I was soaking! Growing up, of course, it was never mentioned, but one night, Rob did. This night, he suggested it as he was fucking me hard, me dressed as a schoolgirl whilst he masterfully took on the role of my teacher. As he slapped away at my arse poking out from underneath my school skirt, he asked me. He said he would do it to punish me for sucking the boys off at school. I was so turned on by the idea. As the weeks passed, the wine got the better of us one night, and he took me upstairs, put me in the shower, stripped me, told me that I knew my punishment was coming and drenched me; my face, my hair, my big tits, my clit and my slutty mouth, it was bliss! It tasted so warm and sweet and as I returned the favour, I knew that we could do anything.
One night, as he bent me backwards over the dining table, his face buried deep in between my legs, his hot mouth sucking furiously on my clit, he asked me how I’d like to have someone else’s cock in my mouth whilst he pleasured me. Another mans hard cock in my dirty mouth while being fucked and licked hard?? Really…?
Andy was a close friend of Robs, and had become a good friend to us both. He was like us in a lot of ways; we shared the same wicked sense of humour, a love of the same music, he would talk openly about sex with us too, the dirtier the better. I know that Rob would often talk to him about the things we’d done and it turned me on knowing that he would be going home to make himself come, thinking about our dirty sessions. I would tease him when he came round, too. I would come downstairs after getting out of the shower in a really short towel, just about covering the top of my legs and still be dripping wet. I’d pretend I didn’t know he was downstairs with Rob and come down wearing Ankara Escort my stockings and suspenders and basque and feign embarrassment. I would wear my tight white vest top, braless, and ‘accidentally’ spill my wine down my front. He knew what I was doing, it was all a bit of fun. But I did get aroused and wet between my legs when I could see him admiring my body. I could see in his face that he’d give anything to touch it, to feel my soft breast, to see me completely bare, to taste my hot skin. His impressively large cock straining through his tight work trousers often told me as much. Andy was married to June. She was nice, pleasant, safe, prudish and old in her ways. She never made the effort with her looks anymore and sex had dried up between them a long time ago. I felt sorry for him, but he loved her. He was fit and sexual and still had needs, that’s why I liked to give him something to think about for when he would go home and wank furiously. He’d had an affair in the past but he’d put that behind him, vowing never to stray again, and he hadn’t. But I wanted to help him, I wanted to be a good friend to him.
So that night, still bent over the dining table, with Rob thrusting deep inside me, my mind began to wander. I’d love to taste another man, knowing Rob would be struggling to contain himself at the sight of his girl being so naughty, so slutty. Running my wet tongue over the tip of some other blokes cock, looking Rob in the eye while I was doing it, rubbing another cock hard and fast until…until he shot his full load over my face and in my mouth? Someone else’s cock? Andy’s cock?
“Yes, oh yes, oh oh, fuck me harder, keep going Rob, fuck your dirty girl! I’m your slut, let’s do it! I want you to watch, oh yes, yes, I want you to watch me suck another dick in front of you. Let me show you, oh yes, just there, that’s it, there, how naughty I am. I want Andy in my mouth…that’s it, there, there! Yes!”
As a giant wave of pleasure washed over me, my cunt swollen and tingling and wet with delight, I knew that’s what I wanted. It had given me a massive thrill at the mere thought of it, and as Rob shot his load deep inside me, I knew he wanted it too.
Wrapped in one another’s arms, still glowing, hot and sticky and panting from such an intense rush, we talked. Did we really want to act this out? Would he really want to see his beautiful girl do it? Would he feel ok watching his sexy young girlfriend getting so much pleasure from his friends penis? We knew, at some point, that it was going to happen. It was never talked about again. But knowing it was a possibility, not just a fantasy, had us both going for weeks. Even when Andy came to see us the following night, to plan the bank holiday weekend with us, it wasn’t mentioned.
We had the most frantic and explosive sex there and then in the living room, the moment Andy shut the door behind him
Bank holiday was looking to be a warm one. We were all going to meet up in the beer garden of our local pub and get drunk in the sun, relishing in the fact we didn’t have to get up for work the next day. The usual crowd of us would be there and I was looking forward to seeing everyone, to have a good drink and to have a good laugh. It was so hot, I had my little flowery skirt on and tight top, my shoes had been kicked off ages ago, loving the feel of the grass on my feet. I knew I was turning heads today, I’d already felt the admiring eyes of the men at the table. I’d also noticed the icy glare
+that June had thrown Andy when she caught him looking down my low cut top after I’d brought the drinks back to the table, leaning right over to give Andy his pint, and an eyeful. I also caught her tutting at me in disgust as me and Rob whispered sexily, teasing each other before reaching for his giant bulge under the table, just to tease him a little until we got back home.
Naturally, for us lot, the conversation turned to sex. We talked about celebrities we fancied, experiences we’d had when we were younger, things we dreamt of doing. All very mild, of course, but everyone was tipsy now, especially me. I brought Robs ear to my mouth and nibbled on his ear lobe. I whispered to him that he should look over the table at Andy. I told him to watch his face. At this moment, I ran my bare feet up his legs and rubbed my toes around his crotch. There Çankaya Escort it was, his penis growing hard under my foot. I rubbed my toes around the tip of his bulging cock as he wriggled with pleasure on the seat, right next to his wife. Rob grabbed my thigh, pulled my hair to the side and breathed into my neck “tonight’s the night” and winking at Andy, I let my foot drop and let him compose himself. The conversation was all too much for poor prim, straight-laced June. She stood up, suggesting they were to be leaving, but I knew all too well Andy wouldn’t be going with her, he was enjoying himself way too much, and he didn’t even turn to watch her leave, he was looking right at me and Rob, our fantasy etched on every inch of our faces.
The sun started to go down and everyone had drunk way too much. Everyone apart from Rob and Andy, that is. They were talking, football, music, work, me. Later, I saw them talking in the corner of the beer garden, I suspected Rob may have been suggesting something but I saw Andy shaking his head. He couldn’t stop looking over, especially seen as I was letting my legs part slightly, showing him the top of my thigh and sucking seductively on my straw. As they came back to the table, I could just make out Andy saying “…I just can’t mate, I’m not going to do that to June…”.
What was going on? I’d always had my own way with men and we had set our hearts on it. I wanted to show Rob and Andy just how naughty I could be and tonight would be the night. As we stood up to leave, we knew Andy would be coming back to ours, he always did, tonight wouldn’t be any different, surely? As we left the pub, he turned to say goodbye to us, before saying “fuck it. Just one last beer back at yours then, eh?” and we all grinned and began to walk home.
Unhooking my bra under my vest top and kicking off my shoes, I made myself comfy on the couch next to Andy as Rob made the drinks. I could hardly look Rob in the eye, the sexual tension was killing us! He looked so in control and his excitement was visible, he’d had a hard on all night, thinking about what we planned to do, most likely. My knickers had been so wet all night with all the exciting images running through my mind and every time Rob touched me, it was like a lightning bolt had run right through me making me more wet and excited.
Rob went upstairs to the toilet leaving the two of us alone on the couch. As Andy talked to me about the latest album he’d listened to, he suddenly stopped as I took his hand, ran it gently and softly up my thigh and let his fingers brush very softly onto my knickers, he couldn’t feel anything, it was too brief, but he would almost certainly have felt my wetness. I removed his hand from between my legs and let him touch my erect nipples. They looked great through my vest top without a bra on. I looked down between his legs and saw him growing. I ran my fingers down his stomach and stopped before I reached the ever growing bulge that was so visible now. Rob came back down and joined us on the couch. Andy was starting to shift uncomfortably in his seat. He stood up, muttering something about going to use the toilet and adjusted his trousers as he left the room.
Pulling at my hair and thrusting his tongue into my mouth, Rob and I began kissing passionately. I reached for his trousers and struggled with the zip until his erection came free. He bit and sucked at my neck, making his way down to my hard nipples and ran his long fingers over the outside of my knickers, moving them slightly to one side to feel how wet I was. He started to groan as I forced him to sit comfortably, dropped to my knees and reached for his hot throbbing dick. It was pulsing in my mouth, wet and hot, I thought he was going to climax there and then. As I continued to move my head up and down, taking every inch of his length to the back of my mouth, I heard footsteps coming down the stairs. With his cock still in my mouth, I looked up at Rob for reassurance as he mouthed “carry on darling, let him see what a good cocksucker you are”. Although I couldn’t see him, I was aware that Andy was stood behind me, my short skirt showing off my arse as I continued to suck on Robs’ erection. When I stopped, I gestured for Andy to sit next to Rob on the couch so he could see better. He watched as I continued to lick the very top of Robs hard Etlik Escort on, his hand reaching for my hair, my hand reaching for his cock. I unzipped his pants and felt it spring free and gripped it and began to rub him up and down. I was getting wetter as I could hear them both moan with pleasure. I wanted to taste Andy’s cock.
Rob gently eased my head from out of his lap and stood up until he was behind me. I moved, still on my knees, until I had my hips between Andy’s legs. He started to stroke himself gently as he watched Rob peel away my skirt and my knickers and I stretched up to take my top off, freeing my ample tits. As I still faced Andy, I let him touch my firm breasts and erect nipples as Rob slipped into my cunt from behind. It felt so electric having another man watching me getting fucked. I buckled over so that Rob could get deeper inside me and so that my head was in Andy’s lap. I reached hungrily for his shaft and ran my tongue around the tip of his penis. I looked him in the eyes as I bobbed my head up and down in rhythm with Robs thrusts. I could feel him pulsing deep inside me, I knew he wouldn’t last too long if we carried on like this. I stopped and moved myself to lie on my back on the floor. Andy stayed where he was, admiring my body. Rob moved over towards me and gently caressed my thighs, kissing them all the way down until his tongue stopped on my clit. He licked at my wet cunt, lapping it all up, before alternating between thrusting his tongue and his fingers deep inside of me, making me squirm on the floor in total ecstasy. I reached up for Andy’s hand and beckoned him over to join us on the carpet. He ran his warm hands all over me, gently squeezing my breasts as I gently squeezed his cock in return. I opened my mouth to allow the tip of his cock to rest on my tongue as I rubbed him back and forth over my hot wet lips, breathing heavily onto it with every move Rob was making inside me.
Rob got to his knees, pushed my legs apart and entered me again. He couldn’t believe what he was seeing; his slutty girlfriend enjoying the taste of his best friends cock. As he thrust in and out of me rapidly, Andy reached down and started to rub on my clit as I sucked harder and harder on his penis, as he fucked my mouth. I knew that we were going to come and I couldn’t wait to taste Andy’s load. But I wanted to taste him and my boyfriend at the same time.
I asked Rob if he’d let me taste his cock at the same time. With Andy on one side and Rob on the other, I guided them both into my mouth. I could taste all three of us, enjoying tasting my own juices on Rob. As Robs fingers entered me and Andy still rubbing furiously at my clit, and with both cocks in my mouth, I thrust up as I gave way to my own orgasm. It lasted and lasted and, turned on at the sight of my naked and sticky body having just reached orgasm, I began to feel Andy’s cock pulse harder in my mouth until he let out a breathy, heavy groan. He was coming and I wanted to taste it, he held his cock, still for a brief moment, before releasing himself onto my face, into my mouth and onto my chest. His sticky come was all over my face and I let most of it dribble into my mouth. This will be driving Rob insane, I thought cheekily to myself. He was still rubbing himself over me and I turned to show him my come covered face and lifted my tongue to show him Andys sperm in my mouth, rubbing the rest into my sticky tits. I was right, he couldn’t contain himself any longer and shot his load out, spurts of hot come covered my face and into my mouth. I tasted them together in my mouth before swallowing the cocktail and licking my lips.
My mind turned to poor Andy, he must have been feeling some turmoil between lust and guilt, we couldn’t send him home like this. His cock was still twitching, not hard still, but just firm. I took it between my lips and licked him clean, licked every last drop from the end of his hot penis, up and down the length and from the top of his thigh where he’d let some dribble. He was clean now and pulled up his pants. Rob nuzzled at my neck, whispering “thank you, you beautiful slut” to me , before pulling his own pants back on. Realising Andy had seen me completely naked and completely dirty for the first time, I didn’t have anything to hide and merely slipped my knickers back on, letting him see me, letting him take in one last image to inevitably masturbate to later. We smiled to each other and raised a beer, confident that our friendship would not be affected in the slightest. Who knows, maybe this was going to be the only time? Maybe it was only going to be the first time…?
Ben Esra telefonda seni bosaltmami ister misin?
Telefon Numaram: 00237 8000 92 32

CELTIC-bound Lukasz Zaluska last night lifted the lid on his decision to leave Dundee United, and insists he is ready to challenge best friend Artur Boruc for the No1 jersey at Parkhead.
The Tannadice goalkeeper will sign a pre-contract deal with the SPL champions next week after rejecting the chance to stay on Tayside and is set to quadruple his wages as a result.
Zaluska will go head-to-head with fellow Pole Boruc for the main role in Gordon Strachan's side. The pair are close friends from their days together at Legia Warsaw and are regularly seen watching each other when their schedules allow.
United are desperate to hold on to the 27-year-old until the end of the season in order to ensure their team suffers the least amount of change during their battle for third place. Craig Levein's team are currently in joint third with Hearts but having played a game more than the Tynecastle club.
However, it is likely that Strachan will make a cash offer in January to bring the player on board sooner.
Zaluska only became a first-team regular 12 months ago when he recovered from a broken foot sustained early in his United career, but has made such rapid progress that he was recently rewarded with a call-up to the Poland national squad.
Strachan is keen to add the up-and-coming keeper to his staff in order to push Boruc, who has been involved in a series of high-profile blunders this term.
Zaluska said: "I have told Dundee United that I won't be signing a new deal.
"I have not signed for anyone yet, but my agent has been speaking to Celtic. He has spoken to other clubs as well. But moving to Celtic would be a very exciting move, it's a massive club.
"I have ambition to play at the highest level and a move like this would make that possible. I have been in the United team for a year now and I think I am ready for a step up.
"The Champions League is the highest point in club football and that is where everyone wants to play. I think I have the ability for that now. I have been to Celtic Park for Champions League games in the past, I was at the Manchester United game and it was very special.
"I have spoken with Artur and asked him about life in Glasgow. What he said was, 'Okay, come on'. I have asked him about everything.
"Artur has played in Scotland for four years, he's a top goalkeeper. He has helped me a lot, any time I have a problem I speak to him – we are good friends."
Zaluska has yet to be capped by his country, but believes a move to Celtic will bring him a step closer to realising that ambition.
The Pole also heaped praise on United and Levein for the way the club has treated him for the past 18 months. He broke his foot only days before he was supposed to make his debut but made his comeback a year ago.
With United challenging for third place and constantly improving, Zaluska expects to see even more improvement in coming months. He said: "Dundee United have been very good for me and I owe Craig Levein everything for giving me the chance to come to Scotland.
"He is the best manager I have worked with in my career and has helped make me a much better player.
"The club were very good to me when I was injured and I have always had a great relationship with the supporters.
"I will be sad to leave Tannadice when I go, but I am thinking of my family and our future. I hope the fans will understand.
"I am 27 and have not earned much money in my career so I am thinking about my family. I am looking to the future because I maybe have only one or two good contracts left in my life."
Levein insisted the club offered Zaluska the best deal they could, suggesting the player wanted more money to remain on board. "We made Lukasz the best deal we could afford, but he's indicated he'll be leaving in the summer," said Levein.
"Where he's going I don't know and, really, it's irrelevant to us. But he'll be seeing out the rest of his contract here because I'm not in the habit of changing keepers and don't want to disrupt the team.
"I can understand his position because he has the chance to go and make some serious money.
"But, at the same time, I want the Dundee United supporters to know we have done our very best to keep him.
"We made him what I consider to be a very good offer, and the best offer we possibly could, but we couldn't reach agreement."

Last April I started to feel really disconnected from my healthy lifestyle. You know those days (or even weeks) when everything just feels off and you can’t pinpoint why? It was weird. I wasn’t looking forward to my beloved morning workouts — they felt more like a chore than something that would make me feel good. I couldn’t find motivation to cook — grabbing something quick, even if I had to sacrifice nutrition, seemed easier. And I slowly started to break away from my morning routine, which if you know me, you know my morning routine is key to a successful day. Everything was off. While I tried to convince myself I was just tired from a super busy SXSW, which was immediately followed by an epic bike ride on the Oregon Coast, I knew better. I knew it was much deeper than that. And I knew I needed to get to the bottom of it.

Jack Sowerby scored for Town just after the hour markFleetwood Town’s development squad drew 1-1 against Premier League side Burnley this afternoon.
The Cod Army took the lead just after the hour mark when a ball in from the right was headed home by Jack Sowerby.
Burnley equalised though with 12 minutes to go when Marvin Sordell struck a rocket from 25 yards to earn a share of the spoils.
After the game, Barry Nicholson said: “I was really happy with today’s performance as it was a good one from start to finish.
“We let Burnley back in it a bit after we scored and they eventually got the equaliser, but once they scored we started playing again.
“It was a great goal by Jack and I’m generally pleased for him.
“Antoni Sarcevic has obviously been suspended recently so he played for us, but apart from that he was the only first teamer.
“He wanted to some minutes under his belt, and we had a couple of trialists playing as well and they did okay too.
“All the other boys were Under 21 lads, and we made a few substitutions late on as well which meant a few of the youth team lads had an opportunity.”

Wisdom! I was not praying for wisdom for this dear husband of mine! I just expected him to get it all done...he knew what had to be done, so just do it! What was I thinking?? This man is not only getting his home/family in order, but also his job here, AND his deployment. Now I'm thinking, how did he keep it straight for as long as he has??
A day or so after that last post, rather than things getting better, they seemed to me that they were getting worse! I was in a near state of panic. I went to the library to email some dear friends to pray! I didn't even, then, know exactly what to pray for, but I knew we were in a battle. Shortly after that is when I realized what my prayer needed to be...my man needed God's wisdom in all of this. Now, from someone outside looking in, things may still seem to be pretty chaotic...but here inside...God has settled His peace on our home. Philippians 4:13:13 I can do everything through him who gives me strength. I am about a week overdue on grocery shopping, but we're making it! I've been able to get very creative with our meals (you can include Master Chef in God's resume, I believe!) and though the larder looks bare, we're doing okay! It is actually rather amazing to me!
Which reminds me....and fits in perfectly with this....did you check out last Sunday's sermon by Pastor Steve? Here's the link, because you REALLY need to hear it! A Living Hope
Count your blessings!

John is a married father of 3 living in Central Indiana. He has been happily married for over 25 years to his college sweetheart. His children are boys and a teenage girl.
John has been employed in the financial services sector for over 20 years working in sales, operations and customer service. He has led service teams ranging from as small as 8 employees to as many as 30. John has worked with some superb leaders over the years as well as some not-so-great managers.
Outside of his office life, John may be even busier with his family and volunteer activities. He has been a leader in the Boy Scouts of America program for over 10 years. His leadership encompassed both the local troop level and the district level. He also currently serves on the Alumni Board of his alma mater.
John grew up in West Michigan in a very small town of about 1,500. He has also lived in St. Louis, MO and remains a Cardinals fan. He currently lives in Indianapolis, IN and is a die hard Colts fan.
John can be followed on Twitter at @jwruggles
He is also on LinkedIn, Facebook and Instagram (photos only)

This is a blog about "life with the Adams" :) We (Joe and Melissa) will share our life, our DIY projects, our family, recipes we enjoy, our love for eachother, our precious 4 legged fur baby Macy, our beautiful baby girl Hadley Marie and anything else!
Joe and I have been married for 6 years which have flown by!! We have a 5 pound little princess dog named Macy who we love dearly, i always said i would never get a dog, but she loved me up when i held her and i could not give her back :)
In October of 2009 we bought our first home we are thrilled to be making our house a home and can't wait to see how much it changes over the years. We are looking forward to our future!! We have a beautiful niece Lily who will turn 4 in November and another niece who just turned 1 on July 2nd baby Emma! We are also the proud new parents of our long awaited sweet baby girl Hadley Marie, who was born on October 29, 2013! We have also done some DIY projects around the the house, look for those to be posted soon! GO HAWKS!!
4 years ago today we adopted the sweetest little dog! I was never quite sure if i wanted a dog, but Joe wanted 1 from the day we got married i think a week after we were married he asked me if we could get a dog, i said i think we needed to wait, about a year and half later we went to see all the puppies and held Macy she was so little and i wasnt' sure, but then she licked my face and i could not put her down or give her back! I knew then she was coming home with us!!
Here she is right after we got her home playing with her new toys!
Here she is sitting with Joe waiting on her paperwork so we can take her home!
As some of you remember a year ago today, Macy had to have surgery on her back legs, she had luxating patellas and needed to have them fixed! It was so sad taking her to the Vet that day, but knew she was in great hands. Now, a year later Macy can run and walk so much better, we couldn't be happier with the surgery! Here are a few pictures from the day we brought her home from her surgery, she was in a lot of pain for a few days, but started to feel better after some snuggling and lots of kisses :)
Mommy and Macy the morning of her knee surgery
Here she is this morning, ready to snuggle with her daddy after i headed to work!
We sure love you Macy and we are so lucky to have you! I will spoil you with kisses and a few treats tonight when i get home from work! <3>

This was Dani's first week of track meets and I must say that I am so proud of her! She was chosen for the 110 mtr hurdles and the 800 mtr race. Not only has done a great job of working through these items - she has improved her time each race!!
I will have pictures up soon - too tired now to upload them - but you can see my little "cougar" in action.

Parker Plays Through the Pain Barrier
About an hour before yesterday's match TalkSport were reporting that Scott Parker would be out for a while with a shoulder injury. Scott Parker fell on his shoulder during training on Saturday and looked unlikely to play against Liverpool. The Mirror claim Parker was unable to walk just three hours before the game.
However Parker was given pain killing injections and the midfielder has dismissed the injury as a mere trifle,
"It's not too bad. Got a bit of treatment on it and I got through the game, so it was fine.
"It was just a little bit of a knock and that was it, really."
The Mirror also report that West Ham co-owner David Gold was in hospital on Sunday, with the 74-year-old being treated for cholangitis and septicaemia.

This book is very, very, very repetitive. It contains some inaccuracies. It is as much 'waffle' as substance, and at times has poor English grammar. The publisher has not done the job of effective editing, indeed I doubt that anyone took the trouble to edit the text, and it needs considerable severe editing. It has one star because it was cheap!.

All I can say is, SWEET!!!
blinksum123 wrote this review on .
The in-game graphics are really good, it was impressive. The only thing I didn't like in the game, were the sound fx...they seemed a bit glitchy in certain parts of the game, but other then that the game was near perfection.
The creativity put into this game was exactly what the series needed to kick it up a notch. There were so many ways to take out your target, which also gives this game a lot of replay value. Also the notoriety system was a nice addition to the game, because if you decided to go into a mission with guns blazing, there would be consequences to those actions, and in my opinion it makes the game so much more realistic.
I was also happy to find that this game had a decent amount of levels compared to the other games.
With all this said, I really recommend any one looking for an amazing game to give this one a try...you won't regret it!!!

Earlier this week, it was announced the rugby star had left the ITV2 reality show.
Viewers later saw him tearfully explain to partner Paige Thorne and their fellow Islanders that he was leaving the show to “get back to himself”.
In the lead up to his departure, Jacques had struggled to deal with the arrival of former contestant Adam Collard, who had expressed an interest in Paige.
However, the speed at which events unfolded prompted some questions from fans that producers had stepped in behind the scenes.
Asked directly about this during an interview with Deadline, Love Island’s executive producer Mike Spencer insisted it was Jacques’ decision to exit the show.
“Jacques is amazing,” he said. “We love Jacques. When you date, your emotions are naturally up and down. Finding love is not a simple thing, that’s why the show is so relatable. Jacques was on his own journey and he had a strong connection with Paige but sometimes you have to think about yourself and that’s what Jacques did.
“We respected his decision to head home but I think he’s excited to be on Aftersun on Sunday to discuss his journey.”
He added: “I think Jacques felt like his time was up and as producers we have to respect his decision. Adam came in and got on with a lot of the girls. Did that impact Jacques’ decision to leave? That would be something Jacques would have to explain.”
Prior to his exit playing out on screen, Jacques’ family urged viewers to be kind to him, explaining that some of his behaviour in the villa could have been caused by his ADHD.
“By no means is this a get out clause for his actions but it is to show that he can fundamentally struggle with his emotions at times,” they said on Instagram.
Upon announcing his departure to his fellow contestants, Jacques said in the Beach Hut: “I’d say in the last week, the only thing keeping me in this place was Paige. That’s the only thing I was staying for. I’ve never felt this way for anyone so I just want to get home, be myself again and carry things on the outside.”
He added: “It’s just not fair on the girl she deserves better than me. It’s not the end of me and Paige because everyone knows what she means to me.”
Love Island continues on Sunday at 9pm on ITV2, with Aftersun following straight after.

Total loan: $3,000
Tulkarem City, , Palestine / Education
Flag of Palestine
Iyad's loan finished fundraising,
but these similar borrowers just need a little more help to reach their goals!
A loan helped to pay his educational fees to the university.
Iyad, who appears in the photo, is a hardworking ambitious man who tries his utmost to make his family live a decent life. He is a 36-year-old, living with his family in a village near Tulkarem, West Bank. He is studying at a local university. He studies hard to get graduate and improve his work. He has a small educational center with a low income. He turned to Palestine for Credit and Development FATEN to request a loan to pay his educational fees to the university. He hopes you will help by funding his loan.

....a camp report. PM - not a full contact practice
I'll try not to repeat what so many others have noted. Mostly these are just personal impressions.
First of all when you are in the sideline stands MOST of the OL and DL work is done too far for you to see anything.
The preseason is long and there is so much to see that if you try and watch everything you end up seeing nothing. So I after I tried and failed to do exactly what I just said, and concentrated on the DBs, CB specifically, and here are a few observations.
L Boddin is the real deal. You all read about the play he made on Moss, but he was right on the ball for all the drills I watched. He was very physical.
I thought Butler looked very quick, though he hasn't seen a fake he hasn't fallen for. Moss made a double move on him and he fell for BOTH of them. But still you can see how he can be a big time starter in the future.
Wilhite was playing the slot CB with the first group.
It was Brandon McGowan who was starting with the first group, not James Sanders. This might mean nothing, but I'm surprised no one else has reported it.
For the most part the offense was abusing the DBs and LBs in passing drills, but that's to be expected.
A word of caution of JEdelman. It is very easy to fall in love with a try hard guy like him. He is like a mini Wes Welker, if its possible to be smaller than Wes Welker, and he often looks good. However it took Welker a full 4 years and 3 teams before Welker became a finished product and HE had a full college career as a WR. I do think he's doing enough to get on the PS, but roster spots are like gold on this team, and better players than Julian Edelman are going to be cut.
BTW- He might never be a factor in the regular season, but you can't help notice that Sam Aiken is a quality WR. When I watch him I think of a big Jabar Gafney. He creates separation, he catches everything.. and did I mention the dude is BIG. He's a very nice luxury to have as a 5th WR
Edelman is fast, but in watching him cover kickoffs, I couldn't help notice at a very big dude was beating him down the field. A quick check of my program and I found that #49 was Vince Redd. I knew he was one of those "measureable" guys, but when you watch him CONSISTENTLY beat WRs down the field, you can't help but be impressed. Hopefully some of that will translate to OLB.
Finally a quick anecdote - It was the OL's turn to sign at the PM practice, though after a few minutes Moss stopped by the stands and signed for about 15 minutes. As I was walking out a young guy, in his late 20's I guess, was just beaming because he got Moss to sign his very long camera lens. He was telling a friend on the phone, how last year Moss wouldn't sign it. Finally he told his friend how he yelled to Moss how he had dogged him last year and he'd been waiting a year for this autograph to go along with several others he had on the lens....and he said, Moss smiled and signed it with a magic marker he gave him.
See a nice story about a fan who is getting an autograph of a favorite player. A fan that percevered. I was feeling kind of nice as I walked along. And then... I guess by now you knew there was going to be a "and then"... And then after saying again how jacked and excited he was, his friend must of asked him if Brady was signing, and he said, "no".....and then added. "Yeah, when I can get Brady's signature, this lens is going up on EBay the next day..... free rent for a year"...
Well needless to say my feel good enthusiasm for this story evaporated like a punctured balloon. Finally I said to him, "ever think that's why he didn't want to sign your lens in the first place." He gave me kind of an embarassed look before he looked away and wandered off and we went our separate ways. I can see now why some of these guys hate to sign stuff for adults. What sounded at first like a feel good story, turns out to be another tale of greed.
But on the whole, it was a beautiful afternoon, and it didn't rain on me

A fine evening towards the end of June a little while before sunset. Tuathal Mór and Síle Bhán were outside: they were looking at the potato field. Síle had the baby. It was wrapped up in a shawl. The other child was on his father’s shoulder. It was a pleasing scene. If you tried you might be able to picture it — far away from you though it is. A grand summer’s evening in Gleann Locha. Potato fields on both sides of the glen that would gladden your heart. A man and his wife, and their two children with them, looking at their own field in delight. They had a little house of their own far from the perils of the sea. And they had the best crop that ever yet was seen.
“Aren’t they great,” said Tuathal. I never saw such a crop of potatoes at this time of year.”
“Not a living soul ever did, according to what I hear,” said Síle. “Mícheál Eoghain Dhiarmada over there, he’s nearly ninety, and he says he never in his life saw such a crop of potatoes. And that’s the way they are all over. Mícheál Anna Móire was in Baile na Carraige the other day and he called into my parents’ house on his way back. He says the potato fields on either side of Gaoth Beara would charm your eyes. Glory be to the Everlasting Father for them. And do you know what, Tuathal,” she said, as if to let him in on a secret, “I was not untroubled when we came here. I was afraid that you would not be able to manage this kind of soil. But you’ve got it. Your potatoes are as good as the best of them.”
“Just wait until my sons are with me on the ridges,” said Tuathal, with a surge of joy.
“The creatures,” said Síle. “And they so small. But their time will come, God save them… We’d better be getting back to the house,” she said. “The dew is falling.”
“I’ll have to go to Carn na Madadh tomorrow,” said Tuathal, as they reached the house.
“So that you and Éamonn Óg can spend the day talking about the islands and the sea,” said Síle, laughing. “Two poor exiles by themselves among the lonely mountains.”
“I suppose we won’t leave the sea and the islands out of our talk,” said Tuathal. “But that’s not what’s taking me off tomorrow. He’s cutting the turf and I promised I’d go along.”
“And don’t I know,” said Síle. “You’ll be away early I expect?”
“At sunrise,” said Tuathal. “But that’s no reason for you to get up. I’ll take a couple of boiled potatoes with me to break the fast. That will keep the hunger at bay until I get to Carn na Madadh. And that Malaidh, well, she’ll have food ready for everyone when I get there. That’s the way they are in Carn na Madadh. And it’s a good way. There’s no need for anyone other than the one going off to work to get up when the night and the day are parting.”
The next morning Tuathal Mór got up at dawn. He put a couple of boiled potatoes in his pocket. Then he went out and closed the door after him — quietly, for fear that he would waken Síle or the children.
He went around to the upper gable of the house. What was that smell in the air, if it was in the air? A smell as if from damp hay that had been stacked and was beginning to heat up. There was a mass of thick fog on the floor of the glen. Tuathal looked across at the potatoes in the field (for he wouldn’t set off without looking at them). What a strange appearance morning fog gives to the world, he thought. Everything had a dark look. He had never seen that look on the island, and he had often been up as the night and the day parted from each other. But then, there were no hollows on the island where fog might lie. Or maybe it was the sea air that would scatter it!
Tuathal went up the hillside for about a hundred yards. Then he stopped. He was feeling somewhat uneasy. The dark look of the cultivated ground was troubling him. Finally he turned back and walked across to the potato field.
The blessing of the Eternal Father be upon us! The tops of the potatoes were decayed to the core. Black skinless twiglets and withered leaves hanging from them. It took Tuathal’s breath away. He had no idea whatever what decay had befallen his potatoes. He walked to the top of the field to see if any part of it had escaped. Nothing had. There was not a stalk in the field that had not been skinned, burnt, withered.
What had become of his potatoes at all? Was it the remains of an ancient curse on his land that had been concealed from him? Was it that someone had been killed there so that the ghost of the slain had come back out of the sky as a mist of poison? Was it that someone had been unjustly evicted there? Was the curse of a widow or of an orphan stalking the land? Had that curse fallen on him? On him who was neither criminal nor detractor. What would happen to him and to his family? He had left Oileán Eala (‘The Island of Swans’) because he feared the sea. Here in Gleann Locha he had a snug little house. A happy little while but such a short little while. Would he have to leave the glen as he had left the island?… The sea itself was quite bad enough. But he who knew it could be on his guard, most of the time, against the treachery it concealed. But as for the sky! When a curse fell on you from the sky you had no defence. You could not be on your guard. You were engaging an enemy you could not even see!
Tuathal Mór stood for a time at the top of the field thinking. Would he go back to the house to wake up Síle and tell her the frightening story of the calamity? Wouldn’t it be better to do that than leave her to discover the devastation for herself when she got up later on. He would be there to give her encouragement. He would take the bitterness from the news at the start. Then when she went out and saw the the extent of the damage it would not come as such a sudden shock as he had had!
He looked further away. The mist was coming up from the smaller glens and up the hillsides. He could see some more of the fields of Gleann Locha. And they all had a dark look. Tuathal walked down to the bottom of the glen and back up again. There was not a ridge in the glen that had not withered like his own. That gave him some little comfort, though that may surprise you. But he knew then that it was no special curse that had fallen on him alone. This comfort did not last long. Something else occurred to him. There would be famine in Gleann Locha the coming winter. If all the other families in the glen had plenty of potatoes he would not want for food, nor his wife, nor his children. They would get their share in generous plenty. They would not go hungry as long as the neighbours had the wherewithal to share. But they would not have that. No one would have anything to put in his own mouth. And if they had it would be too little, and there would be no sharing. Hardship was coming to them. And as Mághnus Ruadh Ó Domhnaill had said the previous year, hardship forbids generosity!
Tuathal returned to his house. Síle lay asleep. But she gave a start when he came across the floor and she looked over at him. “Didn’t you go to Carn na Madadh?” she said. There was an anxious look in her eyes as if she were afraid that he had been taken ill suddenly on the way. That was easy for her to suppose: Tuathal looked like someone in pain.
“I didn’t go,” he said brokenly and told her a little of the news. Then a bit more and a bit more until he had told it all.
“God Himself has heard this today,” said Síle, springing out of bed. She pulled on her red shawl and went out. Some time later she came back in. There were traces of tears on her cheeks. But she had some little hope. A heavy frost has fallen,” she said, “and they won’t recover from it: it’s too late in the year. But it only fell on the lower slopes. There will be plenty of potatoes on the higher ground. And the other areas won’t allow us to die of the hunger.”
The other areas. She did not know that there was no townland from Gleann Locha to the far side of Connaught nor from there on to Rosscarbery where they would not have the same story to tell that morning.
Later on the people of Gleann Locha got up and some of them went outside… were their eyes deceiving them? And if not what curse had fallen on the place?… It was not long before they were all out in the open. Men and women were walking around their fields like little birds whose nests had been destroyed. They were like people who had been struck dumb. No one spoke to anyone else. They were just there, looking utterly stricken. What dreadful curse had fallen on Gleann Locha. What calamity was it that had fallen on them treacherous0ly and suddenly? The previous evening, as the sun went down, the people had been out admiring their potatoes. Looking at them had been a delight. The best potato crop ever seen. Luxuriant tops and well–nourished leaves. Someone with a sense of history might well have recalled life in the days of Cormac Mac Art* — twenty twigs on every branch and twenty nuts on every twig! That was what Gleann Locha had been like as the sun was setting. The following morning everything had been wiped out. There was nothing in store for the people but the hunger. The hunger and even death itself, perhaps.
*King of Ireland a generation or two before the arrival of St. Patrick in 432 A.D.
Available on loan from the books in Irish in stock at Cardiff Central Library.
Set in Irish–speaking Donegal in the 1840s, it was published in 1961 and is one of the books in Irish in stock at the Cardiff Central Library.
We are grateful to the publishers, ‘An Gúm’, Department of Education, Dublin, for permission to reproduce it in this form. Translation: © The Wales Famine Forum.
Note that as a mark of respect the names of the characters and the names of those local places that would have been familiar to them have not been anglicised.
Published in The Green Dragon No 4, Autumn 1997.
John Breese Collection Part 2
Baile/ Home / Hafan

Saturday 25th February 2012.
Well things are starting to return to normal with Linda starting to recover. She is getting about a lot better now and has even ventured off to Broadmeadows shopping centre on her own a couple of times. We are going to train to Port Melbourne tomorrow and she will have to do a bit of walking then, but it is good exercise for her. Things were almost a lot from normal when on Thursday I took a spill in the driveway, being steep and gravel, and twisted my right leg at the knee at some strange angles behind me. I seem to remarkably escape without any major injury and have been taking things reasonably easy since. The small pains I was experiencing seem to be easing somewhat which is a good sign. I am even back to a regular routine with voluntary work again as well.
Friday 17th February 2012, Heathcote Junction.
Linda is now back home and starting her recovery. Nelle and Matt have been taken to the airport on their way to a holiday in America, and we are now starting our move, of sorts, into the house while they are gone. It should be a lot better for Linda living in the house as it is a bit more comfortable, and there are no stairs she has to climb.
Wednesday 15th February 2012.
What a hectic week the past one has been. For those I didnâ€™t personally advise of the following I do apologise, but sometimes I didnâ€™t know whether I was coming or going.
To start with: Linda is in hospital, and has been since Friday, looking like being released on Thursday or Friday. She has been complaining of pains in the legs and arms for a few weeks and putting it down to some simple ailment didnâ€™t do anything about it. On Friday it got too much for her and we took her to the Northern Hospital in Epping and she has been there since being analysed, prodded and poked until they came up with a diagnosis, being Polymyalgia Rheumatica. It took a while to diagnose as there are so many things with similar symptoms, but now they have an idea they are starting treatment and want to hold on to her to monitor the situation before letting her return home, things are starting to look on the mend so maybe home in a day or two.
It is just as well I now have my own access to the museum as I have had to juggle my work times to fit in with Linda in care, with the possibilities of her release being varied, and visiting as much as I could. I ended up doing two days in a row and it was quite apparent that it has been a long time since doing more than one full days work in a row, and it is hard to handle, but things should get back to somewhat normal soon.

My name is Andrew and here are my little slices of small car GM.
First up is the 1999 Cavalier Z24 that I have owned for 6 years. Loved the car so much that I could not bring myself to get rid of it when I got the new car. (That and the Cavalier is worth more to me to keep then I could get for a trade in.) Now I know most are not going to like the "tuner" look that I did with the car, but I have tried my best to keep it "clean".
Next up is the Astra. I have nothing but praise for this car. It is one of the best GM small cars I have been in... If there is one thing I want to change about it, it is the bumper covers. I would have much rather had the VXR bumpers.
Thanks for looking.

For being soft and not as macho as this mistress would like, she wanted to make this guy a sissy. So she forced him to lick and suck her dildo and he had to do it in different styles
This slave's cock is small and worthless. And the mistress wanted to show him that he should do better. So she humiliated him and ballbusted him with kicks to his groin
Madam Louise does not joke around when it comes to punishing her slaves. She punishes them however she wants. She made her girl slave suck her strap-on and then fucked her in the ass with it
Mistress Deeane loves nothing better than humiliating and mistreating her slaves. She gets a kick out of it and does it whenever she can. She likes to use her sexiness to force her slaves to do humiliating things that he did not want to do
Goddess Perfecta and Princess Crystal wanted to punish their slave so wore strap-ons and then used them to humiliate and punish the slave. He had to suck the one on Crystal while Perfecta fucked him hard in the ass
Before Sarah Blake can do anything to punish her slave, she first of all likes to show him what she wants to do to him. This time she wanted to force a dildo up his ass and she showed him what her fingers would do and then where the dildo would go.
Stephanie always comes up with weird ways to humiliate and degrade her slaves. Having had sex with her boyfriend the night before and used up several condoms, she brought a slave and ordered the slave to clean it up. But the cleaning entailed having the contents of the condoms emptied into the face and mouth of the slave. After which, the slave could not clean the room properly with a mop.
Mandy caught her boyfriend talking ill of ladies and calling them bitches. She decided to teach him a lesson that he will never forget. She went and wore a strapon and then made him sit down and give her strapon a BJ. He was humiliated and begged her to stop it and that he had learned her lesson, but she just turned a deaf ear to all his please.
This sissy wanted a favour from his master. He promised to do anything he wanted in order to get that favour. So his master decided to test his resolve and sought to humiliate him a little bit. He gave the slave a pipe to put in his mouth and then used a funnel to direct his pee into it and into the slave's mouth. The slave had to drink it to get his favour.
Herrin Amy likes to get easy money. And she does not want to work for it herself. The best way she knows to make money is to give her sissies female clothes like g-strings and lingeries and makes them undergo her special feminization process. She then releases them to the market to make money for her. All she has to do is sit pretty and wait for her sissies to bring her the money.
Miss Kimmy was tired of having fun with young men so she decided to go for a mature man. She enticed him with cash in her pocket and then made the mature man who was old enough to be her father lick her dirty feet and smell her smelly socks. She made him open his mouth and spit into it before shoving her toes into his mouth just for the fun of it.
Mistress BlackDiamoond does not like sissies. She hates them and whenever she finds any, she punishes the hell out of them. She does not want to see any of them in front of her. She likes to crush their small cocks, which she treats as fake cocks. Sometimes she takes two sissies and makes them humiliate each other while she watches. That satisfies her and she can let them go.
Miss Annalieza is a gorgeous mistress and she knows it. She gets a lot of attention but most of the time she ignores it. She knows what she wants and what she likes, and that is what she goes after. On this day, she was left home all alone and she took a glass of water and then with her camera, made a very nice chastity POV video which she wanted to share.
This mistress took the sissy and wanted to make him a real man. He must endure the pain and the torture she has planned to inflict on him will determine whether he's a real man or not. She bound him up and then tied a chain on his nipples and his balls then pulled it hard. He screamed in pain but she was getting started. She also made him lie down and then took a dump on his face.
Mistress BlackDiamoond wanted to humiliate her two slaves. She had done it all before, and she wanted a new way to do it. She got an idea and loved it. She made one slave lie on his stomach and then tied him up, then ordered the other slave to finger the tied slave in the ass. The mistress then forced him to fuck the tied slave in the ass hard.
When Miss Deeane puts on a sexy outfit, she is going to showcase her body. However, she also has motives to why she is showing off her body. Miss Deeane has a way of getting what she wants, and she tends to always do just that. She can get her slaves to do whatever she wants no matter how humiliating everything might be. She is so sexy.
Sarah Blake is used to getting what she wants. When she takes the time to make her slave's obey her, she really does. Sarah will get out her chastity keys, because when she is done, her slaves won't even own their own cocks. Sarah Blake will own every bit of the slaves, and she is going to totally humiliate the fuck out of them, because they are losers.
Princess Tiffani is one of the cutest girls ever, so when she puts on her pink lingerie outfit, she is going to really turn on her slaves. Once she is wearing her pink outfit, she will be able to make her slaves do almost anything for her. She will demand her slaves do very humiliating things, because Princess Tiffani is used to getting whatever she wants all the time.
Princess Jenny can get anything she wants, even one of her slave's girlfriends. A slave will test Princess Jenny's patience, therefore the only way that Jenny can take charge of the situation is to demand his girlfriend. The slave of course will refuse, but that just makes Princess Jenny demand even more from the loser slave. She plans on taking everything from the slave.
Kimmy and her boyfriend love to spend time together, but sometimes the fun can be at the expense of a loser slave. Kimmy and her boyfriend could care less, because they are laughing at the slave being so fucking pathetic as Kimmy humiliates him. They are going to crack up as the slave cleans the bottom of Kimmy's dirty shoes. The slave is so fucking pathetic.

El Dorado Royale (EDR) Brides - POST HERE!
Posted 18 May 2010 - 01:57 PM
a few quick questions for you:
1. was the food as good as we all hoped?
2. did the wedding coordinators get everything right?
3. were most people happy with their accommodations?
i can't wait to see pics!
Posted 19 May 2010 - 10:21 AM
I have written my review and will post it in the reviews section of the website by the end of the day. But....not to keep you guys in suspense, I will answer some of your questions now and also post some pictures!
The dinner at El Cocotal (rehearsal dinner) was really good! We picked the chicken, beef, and ravioli for our entrees. I had the chicken and it was delicious! They set us up in the back of the restaurant and it was really nice!
The BBQ Deluxe (for my reception) was AMAZING!!! It was the best food we had the whole time we were there and all my guests were raving about it! It was definately worth it!
DJ Doremixx was FANTASTIC! We met with him the morning of the rehearsal at the hotel and went over all the last minute stuff (I would definately suggest doing that as it made me feel a lot more comfortable). He spoke very good English and was the best DJ I have ever seen! We definately recommend him if you are looking for a DJ.
Overall, food wise, the restaurants were really really good! Very gourmet! You definately wont find any tacos or burritos!
Oh, and if you are having your hair done at the salon, they do such a good job! I was so happy with my hair and all my girls loved theirs too! I know that was one think I was nervous about but I brought them pictures and they did it beautifully!
Now, comes the not so good part...I did not have a good experience with the onsite wedding coordinators. To make a very long story (which you will be able to read in my review) short, nothing that I had planned (for the past 8 months) went the way I thought it was going to. The coordinators were very hard to work with and I had a really stressful experience. That being said, I spoke to two other brides that were married the day before and after me and they didnt have a bad experience. I am not trying to scare everyone, but I want you to be prepared. Make sure that you print out all of your confirmations and emails from Valeria (or whomever you are working with) and bring them to the resort with you. I worked with Odette and Celena and they were pretty clueless and at some points very rude to me. Keep in mind that I did have A LOT of extra stuff (14 spa appt's the day of the wedding, my own photographer and dj, private reception, my own decorations, my own ceremony script) so I am sure if you are having more of a simple wedding, you will be fine! Like I said, I really am not trying to scare anyone because in the end everything turned out wonderful (it just took a little stress and tears on my part to get it that way!)!
The one big thing that I would do differently was have a real honeymoon. I would have booked a week at a different resort after the wedding or told all my guests that they had to leave on Sunday because I really did not even get to relax or spend any time with my new hubby until the last day that we were there!
Stay tuned for my review!
Posted 19 May 2010 - 10:47 AM
Posted 19 May 2010 - 10:55 AM
Posted 19 May 2010 - 05:06 PM
1 user(s) are reading this topic
0 members, 1 guests, 0 anonymous users

Simon Thomas has revealed that he has suffered more family heartbreak following the death of his father-in-law - just 14 months after his wife's tragic death.
The Sky presenter has spoken openly about the loss of his wife, Gemma Thomas, who is also survived by nine-year-old son Ethan.
But 14 months after Gemma's death, the family are suffering more loss as Simon's father-in-law and Ethan's grandad died overnight on Wednesday.
In a further tragic twist, his death was the cause of a similar disease to the one that took his daughter's life.
Writing on his Instagram page, alongside a sweet photo of Ethan and his grandfather, the 45-year-old said: "Life can feel very cruel. Last night Gemma's Dad's life reached its end as Myeloma took its final toll.
"It's devastating for Rebecca who in fourteen months has lost half of her family to #bloodcancer and heartbreaking for Ethan who only a month ago said, 'why do I keep losing everything I love?'
"Now he's lost the man with whom he had the most special of relationships - the man he called 'Pompa'."
He then made a second post uploaded an hour later of a beautiful morning sky commenting: "Even on the saddest of days there is still beauty to be found. Breathtaking sunrise this morning."
Gemma died in November 2017, just three days after being diagnosed with acute myeloid leukaemia.
The post has been flooded with comments offering their condolences for their loss.
One wrote: "My heart goes out to you and your loved ones life can be so cruel sometimes."
Another said: "So very sorry for your loss especially for Ethan. Grandads are truly special thinking of you all at this very difficult time."
Simon, a former Sky Sports presenter, started a blog at the beginning of the year called 'A grief shared' in which he has spoken of how he was adapting to life without his wife and as a single dad to his young son.
He also uses his Instagram page to document his and his sons progress.
Both Simon and Ethan appeared on TV together just last month to support Good Morning Britain's one million minutes campaign.
Viewers were left in tears when Ethan turned to his dad and said: "I'm still sad, but at least I still have you."

We attended Kcon this year and the two nights of concerts they had, at the Prudential Center. We had really good seats on Saturday and not so good on Sunday. Even though the seats for the second night weren't as close, our view was still pretty good and the big screens had great visual quality so we felt like we were closer than we were. It's a very clean building and set up really well too. I'd have no issues going to this building for more concerts. One of the best I've been to!
Own or manage this property? Claim your listing for free to respond to reviews, update your profile and much more.

The London matchgirls’ strike of 1888 was a strike of the women and teenage girls working at the Bryant and May Factory in Bow, London against the conditions.
Meetings were held by the strikers and Annie Besant spoke at some of them. Charles Bradlaugh MP spoke in parliament and a deputation of matchwomen went there to meet three MPs on 11 July. There was much publicity. The London Trades Council became involved. At first the management were firm, but factory owner Bryant was a leading liberal and nervous of the publicity. Besant helped at meetings with the management and terms were formulated at a meeting on 16 July, in accordance with which it was offered that fines, deductions for cost of materials and other unfair deductions should be abolished and that in future grievances could be taken straight to the management without having to involve the foremen, who had prevented the management from knowing of previous complaints. Also, very importantly, meals were to be taken in a separate room, where the food would not be contaminated with phosphorus. These terms were accepted and the strike ended.
More information on the Wikipedia page

This place has a great atmosphere and great staff, never long waits at the bar, food is sensational too.
The food was great the staff were very good, can't go wrong coming here. This place is def up with the best I have had and I have traveled all over Australia.
Alot of food choices, it is a Tavern so if you expect just that you'll be happy, nice water view with boats. It's a good atmosphere.

PORT ST. LUCIE, FL (WFLX) - A man's dream home in Port St. Lucie has become a nightmare. His home sits on the future site of a six lane road.
The Crosstown Parkway has been decades in the making, but Robert Reyes only found out about it after he moved in. "I retired in August of last year, and we were deciding where we wanna live, and we decided to pick Port St. Lucie," says homeowner Robert Reyes.
Robert and Brenda Reyes picked a home on West Virginia Avenue. "We bought the house February 13," says Robert Reyes, "Nobody told us anything. The seller didn't tell us anything. The real estate agent didn't tell us anything."
The Reyes' didn't know about the Crosstown Parkway. The road has been talked about for decades. Neighbors have received letters about it for years. The six-lane road will be built on West Virginia Avenue and will include a bridge connecting it to the other side of Port St. Lucie. "The neighbors came and asked us why we buying this house and we asked them what are you talking about," says Robert Reyes, "They told us there's a road and a bridge being built right here."
The past month has been a nightmare for the family. "It's very hurtful," says Brenda Reyes, "Now you have to start the whole process over, and I'm sitting here but this is not my home. I can't call this my home."
The Reyes asked real estate agent at Platinum Properties why he never told them their house was going to be acquired by the state to build the road. "I did call him, and he just said, 'Oh well -- life goes on. If they take your property, they're gonna give your money back'," says Robert Reyes.
They're now in limbo. They don't know when they have to leave or how much the state will give them for the house.
The family has hired a lawyer. "We're in the dark right now," says Robert Reyes, "The city won't tell us anything, and this meeting was just useless."
The house next to the Reyes family has a 'For Sale' sign outside. Robert Reyes says every time he sees someone looking at that house, he warns them about the Crosstown Parkway.

The day started like any other for Wang Jianxin, but it certainly ended extraordinarily. The 52-year-old construction worker was digging a ditch when without warning the wall caved in and burying him alive.
He would have certainly died if not for his hat, the power of positive thinking, and Buddhist meditation techniques:
The rim of his helmet had, by chance, trapped a tiny pocket of air around his face. Mr Wang knew that if he panicked and his breathing accelerated he might use up that little amount of oxygen before rescuers could reach him. He forced himself to be calm.
“I had my back to the wall and didn’t know it was falling until it was on top of me. It was suddenly dark and I realised what had happened and found that there was a small air pocket in front of me,” Mr Wang said. That was when the Buddhist turned to meditation to control his intake of oxygen. “I knew it would not last, so I made myself relax and concentrated on slowing down my breathing by meditation.” Above ground, workers were scrabbling through the earth to try to bring Mr Wang to the surface alive. Construction workers and a uniformed rescue team clawed away the earth with their hands until they found Mr Wang’s helmet.
It took two hours but finally they pulled out Mr Wang alive from the earth that could have been his muddy grave.
Doctors were astounded, saying that a person could normally not live longer than five minutes in a similar sealed space. One local doctor said: “It’s a miracle that he’s alive after being buried for two hours.”
Link - via Metafilter
I would love to be able to control my body so well that I could just ask it to relax and deal with the the lack of oxygen.
This guy should be a Buddhist celebrity!

An 18-year-old was convicted of murder Monday in the killing of an Iraqi man who was taking photos of his first snowfall in Texas.
Nykerion Nealon faces up to life in prison in the death of Ahmed Al-Jumaili, 36, who was outside his Dallas apartment complex taking pictures of snow with his wife and brother on the night of March 4, 2015, when he was fatally shot.
Police said at the time that Nealon told officers he had been hunting for people he thought had shot at his girlfriend's nearby apartment complex that evening. Police said they didn't believe Nealon knew Al-Jumaili.
Defense attorney Russell Wilson argued that his client was at the apartments when the shooting took place but someone else pulled the trigger.
But a friend of Nealon's testified that Nealon pulled the trigger, and prosecutors said Nealon had searched online for how to beat a murder charge and how to survive prison shortly after the shooting, according to local media.
The jury deliberated for two hours before finding Nealon guilty, WFAA-TV reported. The sentencing phase is set to continue Tuesday.
Al-Jumaili had fled violence in Iraq to reunite with his wife, who had moved to Dallas earlier. He saved money for more than a year for the move by providing Internet connections to Iraqi homes, his father-in-law, Mohammed Altaae, told The Associated Press last year.
"For a young man and a young woman, oh, God, so many dreams together," Altaae said. "They wanted to have children and educate them well."
Al-Jumaili had been in Texas just three weeks when he was killed.

Okay, there's something I want to say. Rhilea's name is not pronounced Riley. It's pronounced Ri-le-a. Okay? Like Riley, but with an a at the end.
"Hey, Jen, you think you could stop pounding on my head with that pillow yet? I woke up an hour ago," I muttered sleepily to one of my three best friends in the entire world.
"Oops, sorry!" she laughed, throwing the pillow on the floor. I looked at her, sitting on the edge of the top bunk that I had claimed the second we walked into our cabin, her long, light blonde hair catching the light. A strand of it was tickling my face. I swatted it away, and she laughed again, her blue eyes sparkling. "C'mon, Sleeping Beauty. It's about time you woke up," she said.
"Fine," I muttered, swinging my legs over the side of the bed and jumping to the floor. Oh, bad move, I thought as pain swept through my left ankle. I cried out and grabbed the edge of the ladder, which I hadn't noticed until just now. I'd use it later.
"Ooh, you okay?" Jen asked, sounding concerned.
"Yep. Just peachy," I said sarcastically. "I think I twisted my ankle. I'll be fine, though," I added.
"K," Jen said. We started to walk out of the dorm. I snuck a few glances at Jen through a screen of my dirty blonde hair while we were walking. She had changed completely over the school year, when she was in Australia with her family. She had let her hair grow out, got her braces off, and had somehow gotten rid of her bad acne problem. I almost hadn't recognized her.
"Stop looking at me like that!" Jen protested, shoving me.
I shoved her back. "Like what?" I asked.
"Oh, come on. Don't deny it. You know you're jealous," she taunted, but it was true. I was jealous. I used to be the ones guys swooned over, but now they didn't even give me a second glance. They were always looking at Jen. That was why I was so surprised when a cute guy stared straight at me as we walked down the path. He had dark green eyes and overlong brown hair.
"Okay, now I'm jealous," Jen muttered as he walked away. "Who was that?"
"I don't really know," I murmured, still awestruck. Suddenly I heard someone come up behind us. I spun around to find myself face to face with the same guy.
"Hey," he said. "I'm Ethan. I just thought I'd tell you that you're going the wrong way. Those are counselor cabins over there," he said, motioning vaguely with his hand to the buildings we had been heading towards. "Come with me. I'll show you where you can find the activities."
"K, thanks," I said to his back. He led us through the woods, and we finally came upon some clearings where there were racetracks and a pool. There was also a path that led into the forest. Ethan pointed to each of these areas as we passed them.
"Here's the pool, the racetracks, the hunting range, and the skydiving area. Oh, and there's the rock wall, and the weightlifting arena. And here's the obstacle course. Oh, and here's our head counselor, Maxine!" he said, ending when he pointed to an older lady – maybe about forty – in a tan-and-green outfit that seemed like the counselor's uniform. I'd already seen several men and women wearing the same thing.
"Hello," Maxine said. "Welcome to camp Cherokee, where we help you discover your inner animal. What are your names?"
"I'm Rhilea, and this is my friend Jen," I said.
"Well, then, girls. Would you like a tour?" she asked.
"Umm, sure," I said, but Maxine had already started walking away, naming all the places in the camp. I caught the words wrestling arena, and lumber collection. WTH?
"Oh, girls. Do you know which animal you are yet? No? Okay. We'll just put you in undetermined, then."
Jen caught my eye. "Lea, what's going on? This doesn't seem like a normal summer camp. finding your inner animal? Do we know which animal we are? What?" she whispered. I was just as lost.
"Girls, it's getting late. The activities are closing soon. We need you to go back to your cabin now," Maxine said. "Dinner will be sent to your cabin, okay?"
"Alright," I said. We followed Maxine as she led us back to our cabin, then went inside. I watched as she walked away. When she was about ten feet from our cabin, her shape seemed to change into something more feline. Maybe it was just tiredness (I had only gotten a few hours of sleep last night) playing tricks on my eyes, but I thought I saw the white and black stripes of a Bengal tiger.
Hey, guys! How do you like the first chapter of my first FictionPress story? Don't forget to R&R!

Our mother, Rose Wenjen, passed away this morning after battling breast cancer for the second time. This cancer was unusual for someone her age; it was very aggressive. But, as we used to joke, it was like my mother was reverse aging. At one point, her hair actually was getting darker on its own.
A little about my mother. She was born in San Francisco’s Japantown. Her parents immigrated from Hiroshima and never learned English. She taught Buddhist church school there. Her family was forced to relocate during WWII for being Japanese American. Because we had relatives in a remote part of Utah, they lived in a tent there and worked their family’s farm. It was near the underground site testing nuclear weapons. It was like they could not escape the atomic bomb.
If you ask my mother about that time, she would joke that the Mormons would come to visit to convert her so she would have robust conversations about Buddhism versus Mormonism. She earned her AA degree at Weber College while in Utah which was nearby. When the war ended, she and her family relocated to Los Angeles. For the first time, Asian Americans could work for the government as Civil Servants and that is what she did. She did stenography in the courts. She met our father in Los Angeles and stopped working to raise us children in Seal Beach, CA. With the money she made, though, she purchased a two-family house near LAX for her relatives. Her parents lived on the top floor and her siblings and their relatives lived below.
When our father could no longer work (he was a math professor at Cal State Long Beach), she went back to work, again as a civil servant at Seal Beach Naval Weapon Station (again where nuclear weapons were rumored to be stored — this time Trident missiles). She also worked in the government program in the 70s to naturalize undocumented people. Her job was front desk receptionist. Can you imagine my mother as the front desk to people who may have been nervous or didn’t speak perfect English? My mom was the nicest human being. Always smiling. Always kind. Brimming with positive energy.
My mother also did a stint in real estate and her office was in Little Saigon. We joke that she didn’t sell many houses but she did take many, many people to experience her favorite Vietnamese restaurants there. She would save them up for us as well so we had a lot of great Pho and 7 Courses of Beef there.
We will remember her always for her belief of Forever Living Aloe Vera Products and Nikken healing magnets for their health benefits. I was always skeptical, but she’s made me a believer. And of course, for her “glass half full” disposition and cheerful personality. Many will remember her for her hospitality. She would always offer anyone in her house tea and cookies and that included my sister’s piano students as she taught out of the Seal Beach house.
She died like she lived. She never complained about her health or being in pain. In fact, if you ask her, she’s never been sick a day in life.
We will remember her legacy which lives on in us, her three children, and her six grandchildren. She had the gift of creativity and was a talented artist. She had formidable strength in keeping a positive mental attitude. She was a gentle hand as a parent — no Tiger parent here — and always supported our endeavors, even signing her house as a guarantor for my business start-up.
She died about a week short of her 96th birthday. She had a long and beautiful life and we are grateful for our time with her.
There will be remembrance services the week of Christmas vacation in Torrance, CA. For anyone interested, please email me at firstname.lastname@example.org to be notified. My mom never wanted to bother anyone or take grandchildren out of school. Education was a big thing for her. So she will approve of services at year-end. A display of her artwork will be included and donated to attendees in her memory. She would like that. She was always a giver.

Marguerite and Joe Mihojevich moved into 130 Myrtle St. 68 years ago with 1-year-old Elmerita. The house had served as his parent's grocery store, nestled in the center of Point Cadet, home to many of Biloxi's fishing families, many with Slavic names like his.|
When they married in 1936, Joe's parents gave him and Marguerite the house, which they'd recently converted from a grocery to a rental. It was perfect for the growing family.
She worked in seafood factories, and as his name hints, he worked on oyster and shrimp boats, later captaining Biloxi luggers with historically familiar names like Wallace S. and Clementine Fountain.
The Mihojevichs were surrounded by relatives in their Point Cadet neighborhood, people who took pride in their small yards and fishing cottages. Schools and churches were within walking distance, and so was the Slavonian Lodge, their social center.
In 1951, the Mihojevichs "redid" their little house with its two bedrooms, one bath, wood floors, a giant kitchen and all the amenities they cared about. The girls grew up and Joe and Marguerite stayed on comfortable Myrtle Street. Marguerite became widowed and still stayed.
By the mid-1990s casino development was pulling at the neighborhood, and some neighbors banded together to market their patch of Point Cadet to a casino. Marguerite was one of the holdouts.
"They were all mad at me. I didn't want to sell. I was satisfied with my house," she said.
Then came Katrina. The Mihojevichs have discovered a few life mementos in the rubble of 130 Myrtle, but the beloved house is gone. On Jan. 10 the Mihojevichs joined neighbors in selling the land for a Golden Nugget Casino and Biloxi Boardwalk.
The land sale price worked out to about $48 a square foot, but Marguerite would prefer her house.
"There's nothing left in the neighborhood. Everything is flat," she said. "I'm 88 years old and didn't think I'd ever see this. I don't know what I will do. If I find a little house, maybe I will buy it."
- KAT BERGERON

CAN YOU LET GO?
The summer before Emmalee died my parents came over to our house. We sat on the front porch. Emm was inside, sitting in her usually favorite place on the couch, watching TV and playing her DS.
The tone off my conversation with my parents started with the normal superficial pleasantries. We talked about Emmalee and how she was doing, the tests, scans, chemo pill she was taken and how she was emotionally handling having cancer. The conversation quickly turned serious. My parent are not the type to beat around the bush. My mom cut to the chase. "Could you accept it if Emmalee died?"
October 17, 2008 was the day she was diagnosed with liver cancer. When we were told she had a mass in her liver, I vividly remember flashes of the cemetery, where we actually ended up burying her, burst in my mind along with many other images and thoughts. I don't believe there has been a term yet coined for the powerful force that hit me in that moment.
Thoughts of her dying were like a heavy shadow that hung with me constantly. It is not as if I had never thought of her possible death before, but this questions made it real. Could I accept it if Emmalee died? In that moment my strength even shocked me. I calmly responded. "If it is God's will, I can accept it." What in the world was I saying? She is not going to die. Even in that moment, after I said those words, I wondered if I really could accept her death. If she did die what would it really be like?
October 1, 2009 was the day this reality hit. There is no way to prepare for a loved one's departure. It hit me with such a surprisingly powerful force. What was worse the diagnosis of cancer or her death? They both had a sting that will never go away. I can say that I accept God's will but the hole that has been left is something I continue to side step every day. I miss her but know her death has reason and purpose beyond my understanding.
What difficult things in your life do you need to accept right now? I am curious what things people are having difficulty accepting and why. I wonder what the barriers are to accepting something difficult?
What does acceptance really mean?

Poems & Short Stories: 4,271
Forum Members: 70,634
Forum Posts: 1,033,546
And over 2 million unique readers monthly!
SALLY RUNS AWAY
If Ginger Kemp had been asked to enumerate his good qualities, it is not probable that he would have drawn up a very lengthy list. He might have started by claiming for himself the virtue of meaning well, but after that he would have had to chew the pencil in prolonged meditation. And, even if he could eventually have added one or two further items to the catalogue, tact and delicacy of feeling would not have been among them.
Yet, by staying away from Sally during the next few days he showed considerable delicacy. It was not easy to stay away from her, but he forced himself to do so. He argued from his own tastes, and was strongly of opinion that in times of travail, solitude was what the sufferer most desired. In his time he, too, had had what he would have described as nasty jars, and on these occasions all he had asked was to be allowed to sit and think things over and fight his battle out by himself.
By Saturday, however, he had come to the conclusion that some form of action might now be taken. Saturday was rather a good day for picking up the threads again. He had not to go to the office, and, what was still more to the point, he had just drawn his week's salary. Mrs. Meecher had deftly taken a certain amount of this off him, but enough remained to enable him to attempt consolation on a fairly princely scale. There presented itself to him as a judicious move the idea of hiring a car and taking Sally out to dinner at one of the road-houses he had heard about up the Boston Post Road. He examined the scheme. The more he looked at it, the better it seemed.
He was helped to this decision by the extraordinary perfection of the weather. The weather of late had been a revelation to Ginger. It was his first experience of America's Indian Summer, and it had quite overcome him. As he stood on the roof of Mrs. Meecher's establishment on the Saturday morning, thrilled by the velvet wonder of the sunshine, it seemed to him that the only possible way of passing such a day was to take Sally for a ride in an open car.
The Maison Meecher was a lofty building on one of the side-streets at the lower end of the avenue. From its roof, after you had worked your way through the groves of washing which hung limply from the clothes-line, you could see many things of interest. To the left lay Washington Square, full of somnolent Italians and roller-skating children; to the right was a spectacle which never failed to intrigue Ginger, the high smoke-stacks of a Cunard liner moving slowly down the river, sticking up over the house-tops as if the boat was travelling down Ninth Avenue.
To-day there were four of these funnels, causing Ginger to deduce the Mauritania. As the boat on which he had come over from England, the Mauritania had a sentimental interest for him. He stood watching her stately progress till the higher buildings farther down the town shut her from his sight; then picked his way through the washing and went down to his room to get his hat. A quarter of an hour later he was in the hall-way of Sally's apartment house, gazing with ill-concealed disgust at the serge-clad back of his cousin Mr. Carmyle, who was engaged in conversation with a gentleman in overalls.
No care-free prospector, singing his way through the Mojave Desert and suddenly finding himself confronted by a rattlesnake, could have experienced so abrupt a change of mood as did Ginger at this revolting spectacle. Even in their native Piccadilly it had been unpleasant to run into Mr. Carmyle. To find him here now was nothing short of nauseating. Only one thing could have brought him to this place. Obviously, he must have come to see Sally; and with a sudden sinking of the heart Ginger remembered the shiny, expensive automobile which he had seen waiting at the door. He, it was clear, was not the only person to whom the idea had occurred of taking Sally for a drive on this golden day.
He was still standing there when Mr. Carmyle swung round with a frown on his dark face which seemed to say that he had not found the janitor's conversation entertaining. The sight of Ginger plainly did nothing to lighten his gloom.
"Hullo!" he said.
"Hullo!" said Ginger.
Uncomfortable silence followed these civilities.
"Have you come to see Miss Nicholas?"
"She isn't here," said Mr. Carmyle, and the fact that he had found someone to share the bad news, seemed to cheer him a little.
"No. Apparently..." Bruce Carmyle's scowl betrayed that resentment which a well-balanced man cannot but feel at the unreasonableness of others. "... Apparently, for some extraordinary reason, she has taken it into her head to dash over to England."
Ginger tottered. The unexpectedness of the blow was crushing. He followed his cousin out into the sunshine in a sort of dream. Bruce Carmyle was addressing the driver of the expensive automobile.
"I find I shall not want the car. You can take it back to the garage."
The chauffeur, a moody man, opened one half-closed eye and spat cautiously. It was the way Rockefeller would have spat when approaching the crisis of some delicate financial negotiation.
"You'll have to pay just the same," he observed, opening his other eye to lend emphasis to the words.
"Of course I shall pay," snapped Mr. Carmyle, irritably. "How much is it?"
Money passed. The car rolled off.
"Gone to England?" said Ginger, dizzily.
"Yes, gone to England."
"How the devil do I know why?" Bruce Carmyle would have found his best friend trying at this moment. Gaping Ginger gave him almost a physical pain. "All I know is what the janitor told me, that she sailed on the Mauretania this morning."
The tragic irony of this overcame Ginger. That he should have stood on the roof, calmly watching the boat down the river...
He nodded absently to Mr. Carmyle and walked off. He had no further remarks to make. The warmth had gone out of the sunshine and all interest had departed from his life. He felt dull, listless, at a loose end. Not even the thought that his cousin, a careful man with his money, had had to pay a day's hire for a car which he could not use brought him any balm. He loafed aimlessly about the streets. He wandered in the Park and out again. The Park bored him. The streets bored him. The whole city bored him. A city without Sally in it was a drab, futile city, and nothing that the sun could do to brighten it could make it otherwise.
Night came at last, and with it a letter. It was the first even passably pleasant thing that had happened to Ginger in the whole of this dreary and unprofitable day: for the envelope bore the crest of the good ship Mauretania. He snatched it covetously from the letter-rack, and carried it upstairs to his room.
Very few of the rooms at Mrs. Meecher's boarding-house struck any note of luxury. Mrs. Meecher was not one of your fashionable interior decorators. She considered that when she had added a Morris chair to the essentials which make up a bedroom, she had gone as far in the direction of pomp as any guest at seven-and-a-half per could expect her to go. As a rule, the severity of his surroundings afflicted Ginger with a touch of gloom when he went to bed; but to-night--such is the magic of a letter from the right person--he was uplifted and almost gay. There are moments when even illuminated texts over the wash-stand cannot wholly quell us.
There was nothing of haste and much of ceremony in Ginger's method of approaching the perusal of his correspondence. He bore himself after the manner of a small boy in the presence of unexpected ice-cream, gloating for awhile before embarking on the treat, anxious to make it last out. His first move was to feel in the breast-pocket of his coat and produce the photograph of Sally which he had feloniously removed from her apartment. At this he looked long and earnestly before propping it up within easy reach against his basin, to be handy, if required, for purposes of reference. He then took off his coat, collar, and shoes, filled and lit a pipe, placed pouch and matches on the arm of the Morris chair, and drew that chair up so that he could sit with his feet on the bed. Having manoeuvred himself into a position of ease, he lit his pipe again and took up the letter. He looked at the crest, the handwriting of the address, and the postmark. He weighed it in his hand. It was a bulky letter.
He took Sally's photograph from the wash-stand and scrutinized it once more. Then he lit his pipe again, and, finally, wriggling himself into the depths of the chair, opened the envelope.
Having read so far, Ginger found it necessary to take up the photograph and study it with an even greater intentness than before. He gazed at it for many minutes, then laid it down and lit his pipe again. Then he went on with the letter.
"Ginger, dear--I'm afraid this address is going to give you rather a shock, and I'm feeling very guilty. I'm running away, and I haven't even stopped to say good-bye. I can't help it. I know it's weak and cowardly, but I simply can't help it. I stood it for a day or two, and then I saw that it was no good. (Thank you for leaving me alone and not coming round to see me. Nobody else but you would have done that. But then, nobody ever has been or ever could be so understanding as you.)"
Ginger found himself compelled at this point to look at the photograph again.
"There was too much in New York to remind me. That's the worst of being happy in a place. When things go wrong you find there are too many ghosts about. I just couldn't stand it. I tried, but I couldn't. I'm going away to get cured--if I can. Mr. Faucitt is over in England, and when I went down to Mrs. Meecher for my letters, I found one from him. His brother is dead, you know, and he has inherited, of all things, a fashionable dress-making place in Regent Street. His brother was Laurette et Cie. I suppose he will sell the business later on, but, just at present, the poor old dear is apparently quite bewildered and that doesn't seem to have occurred to him. He kept saying in his letter how much he wished I was with him, to help him, and I was tempted and ran. Anything to get away from the ghosts and have something to do. I don't suppose I shall feel much better in England, but, at least, every street corner won't have associations. Don't ever be happy anywhere, Ginger. It's too big a risk, much too big a risk.
"There was a letter from Elsa Doland, too. Bubbling over with affection. We had always been tremendous friends. Of course, she never knew anything about my being engaged to Gerald. I lent Fillmore the money to buy that piece, which gave Elsa her first big chance, and so she's very grateful. She says, if ever she gets the opportunity of doing me a good turn... Aren't things muddled?
"And there was a letter from Gerald. I was expecting one, of course, but... what would you have done, Ginger? Would you have read it? I sat with it in front of me for an hour, I should think, just looking at the envelope, and then... You see, what was the use? I could guess exactly the sort of thing that would be in it, and reading it would only have hurt a lot more. The thing was done, so why bother about explanations? What good are explanations, anyway? They don't help. They don't do anything... I burned it, Ginger. The last letter I shall ever get from him. I made a bonfire on the bathroom floor, and it smouldered and went brown, and then flared a little, and every now and then I lit another match and kept it burning, and at last it was just black ashes and a stain on the tiles. Just a mess!
"Ginger, burn this letter, too. I'm pouring out all the poison to you, hoping it will make me feel better. You don't mind, do you? But I know you don't. If ever anybody had a real pal...
"It's a dreadful thing, fascination, Ginger. It grips you and you are helpless. One can be so sensible and reasonable about other people's love affairs. When I was working at the dance place I told you about there was a girl who fell in love with the most awful little beast. He had a mean mouth and shiny black hair brushed straight back, and anybody would have seen what he was. But this girl wouldn't listen to a word. I talked to her by the hour. It makes me smile now when I think how sensible and level-headed I was. But she wouldn't listen. In some mysterious way this was the man she wanted, and, of course, everything happened that one knew would happen.
"If one could manage one's own life as well as one can manage other people's! If all this wretched thing of mine had happened to some other girl, how beautifully I could have proved that it was the best thing that could have happened, and that a man who could behave as Gerald has done wasn't worth worrying about. I can just hear myself. But, you see, whatever he has done, Gerald is still Gerald and Sally is still Sally and, however much I argue, I can't get away from that. All I can do is to come howling to my redheaded pal, when I know just as well as he does that a girl of any spirit would be dignified and keep her troubles to herself and be much too proud to let anyone know that she was hurt.
"Proud! That's the real trouble, Ginger. My pride has been battered and chopped up and broken into as many pieces as you broke Mr. Scrymgeour's stick! What pitiful creatures we are. Girls, I mean. At least, I suppose a good many girls are like me. If Gerald had died and I had lost him that way, I know quite well I shouldn't be feeling as I do now. I should have been broken-hearted, but it wouldn't have been the same. It's my pride that is hurt. I have always been a bossy, cocksure little creature, swaggering about the world like an English sparrow; and now I'm paying for it! Oh, Ginger, I'm paying for it! I wonder if running away is going to do me any good at all. Perhaps, if Mr. Faucitt has some real hard work for me to do...
"Of course, I know exactly how all this has come about. Elsa's pretty and attractive. But the point is that she is a success, and as a success she appeals to Gerald's weakest side. He worships success. She is going to have a marvellous career, and she can help Gerald on in his. He can write plays for her to star in. What have I to offer against that? Yes, I know it's grovelling and contemptible of me to say that, Ginger. I ought to be above it, oughtn't I--talking as if I were competing for some prize... But I haven't any pride left. Oh, well!
"There! I've poured it all out and I really do feel a little better just for the moment. It won't last, of course, but even a minute is something. Ginger, dear, I shan't see you for ever so long, even if we ever do meet again, but you'll try to remember that I'm thinking of you a whole lot, won't you? I feel responsible for you. You're my baby. You've got started now and you've only to stick to it. Please, please, please don't 'make a hash of it'! Good-bye. I never did find that photograph of me that we were looking for that afternoon in the apartment, or I would send it to you. Then you could have kept it on your mantelpiece, and whenever you felt inclined to make a hash of anything I would have caught your eye sternly and you would have pulled up.
"Good-bye, Ginger. I shall have to stop now. The mail is just closing.
"Always your pal, wherever I am.---SALLY."
Ginger laid the letter down, and a little sound escaped him that was half a sigh, half an oath. He was wondering whether even now some desirable end might not be achieved by going to Chicago and breaking Gerald Foster's neck. Abandoning this scheme as impracticable, and not being able to think of anything else to do he re-lit his pipe and started to read the letter again.
|Art of Worldly Wisdom Daily|
In the 1600s, Balthasar Gracian, a jesuit priest wrote 300 aphorisms on living life called "The Art of Worldly Wisdom." Join our newsletter below and read them all, one at a time.
Shakespeare wrote over 150 sonnets! Join our Sonnet-A-Day Newsletter and read them all, one at a time.

I Will Not Seek Re Election in 2021 – Winnie Kiiza
Winnie Kizza is a known Ugandan female teacher and politician who has served as the leader of opposition in the Ugandan parliament. Kizza’s entry into full time politics occurred in 1996 to 2001 political season, during which she served on the Kasese District local council as the District secretary for finance.
In 2001, she was re-elected to the district council, serving as secretary for education and later secretary for social services. She contested for Kasese district women’s parliamentary seat in 2006, on the opposition forum for Democratic chance (FDC) political party ticket. She won’t and was elected in 2011 and 2016. In may 2016, Kizza was appointed as the leader of opposition in the parliament of Uganda.
While appearing on NTV today, 14th July 2020, Winnie Kizza that she will remain active with the forces of change but she is not standing again. Kizza said that she has talked and talked of over staying in power. She added saying that though the people of Kasese still wanted her, she will not be different if she sought office this time.
“I have talked and talked of over staying in power. I know the people of kasese still loved and wanted to continue being their Member of parliament. The job I loved doing because I had the back of my people. But I think its time I retired because will not be different if I sought office again.” Winnie said.

Our journey with CBD started like many others. An elderly loved one with chronic back pain and a partner who is a Fireman that always has aches and pains, and suffers from a chronic injury. It is impossible to have not heard about CBD. It is on billboards, on the news, in articles and you have friends who use it. Our research began and what we found was that not all products were created equal. There are so many options: gels, gummies, oils, topicals, hemp vs cannabis, THC vs No THC. It made our head hurt.
The therapeutics of CDB have long been known and more research is being done every day. What we found was that there were many companies that were creating high quality products that are batch tested and are transparent in their manufacturing process and ingredients.
We also found companies that were not so transparent or concerned about the product they were selling to consumers. The methods they used to extract the CBD from the cannabis or hemp plant were toxic. They did not provide an ingredient list nor were their products tested to ensure quality or correct dosing. They have beautiful websites and on the surface look as reputable as any other company, but provided little information about their products.
So we decided to create a marketplace. We do not have our own brand. We are not paid by others to sell or review other brands. These are brands we use on ourselves and recommend to our friends and family. When we were deciding on who to use we had three main criteria:
- Was the ingredient list transparent and easy to find.
- Was the product batch tested frequently. This helps to ensure that the dosing is correct and transparency with ingredients.
- Were the companies personable and willing to answer any questions we had regarding method, process and ingredients. We found that those who wanted to talk with us were passionate about their products and enjoyed imparting their information.
What we found, was that if taken and used as directed these products worked. It did not happen immediately or overnight, but with use over time we saw the results we wanted and many that we didn’t even expect.
Our goal is for people who are interested in CBD to feel good about the product they are purchasing. We want to provide knowlege and education to consumers to help them make smart choices.

When Moana Hope first met Isabella Carlstrom, she didn't even let the model kiss her – but some time later, she took her her now-wife to a family dinner and had an epiphany.
"I knew she was something different. She was something special," says Hope.
In an interview with 9Honey (watch above), the former AFLW player and Australian Survivor alum reveals the instant she realised Carlstrom was the one.
"There was a moment where I knew that I was going to marry her one day. It was when she cooked Vinny and I dinner."
Hope is a full-time carer for her younger sister Lavinia 'Vinny' Hope, who has Mobius syndrome.
"That's when I was like, 'Oh yep, she's going to be my forever.'"
Hope recalls that after Vinny had finished eating, Carlstrom asked her to rinse her plate herself instead of doing the dishes for her.
According to Hope, Carlstrom said, "Vinny is very capable, we will teach her."
"She didn't see Vinny for her disability, she'd seen Vinny for what she's capable of," she adds.
"That was the most important thing to me and that's when I was like, 'Oh yep, she's going to be my forever.'"
Watch Hope tell the couple's love story, and how they met, in full in the video above.
Carlstrom proposed in 2018 and the couple married in an intimate ceremony in Toorak.
The pair promptly announced the incoming arrival of their first child in May 2020, and Carlstrom gave birth to their daughter Svea Hope Carlstrom later that year.
A couple of weeks ago, Hope gave birth to the couple's first son, Ahi Joseph Carlstrom.
Hope has always emphasised the importance of family. She grew up in a single-parent household with 18 other kids in the house and later became a carer for Vinny when she was just 26 years old.
"Vinny and I are very close. And the only reason I'm her full-time carer is that Mum would foresee her health would get the better of her, and she wanted to make sure Vinny was settled and always looked after," she previously told 9Honey.
Hope's life has always revolved around family, so she knew from the start of her relationship with Carlstrom that she wanted kids.
Luckily, a family was something they both cared about, and now, according to Hope, "there is no mum in the world that mothers better" than her wife.
"Bella makes me a better person, and has since day one."
Property News: Music promoter Michael Coppel sells Toorak home for more than $30 million - domain.com.au

"You seek for knowledge and wisdom, as I once did; and I ardently hope that the gratification of your wishes may not be a serpent to sting you, as mine has been."
Sunlight sparkled between the drawn curtains. I thought it would be a beautiful day on the day I would meet with the end of being a metamorph. The day I would decide what path I would lead.
Kingsley said not to worry, that everything would be all right. It didn't matter if I would die anymore or not. No one was who he or she was supposed to be. Not to me, that is. So many lies being spread, like viruses and smiles. I wanted to feel tears strike my cheeks as I knotted my fingers in my hair, but none came.
It was impossible to know what path I wanted to lead, when only just a few hours ago my eyes were truly opened. I found it hard to breathe as the light from the day was slowly fading. Once the sun set behind the buildings I knew it was now or never. In nine months I would be a victim to angry human parents that wished to rid the world of my kind.
Or were they my kind? I never knew which side I truly belonged in. Whether I was more human than wolf, or more wolf than human. And with my friends, enemies, and even the people that broke my heart, I found the path of which I am supposed to lead. That is, if the Rebellers don't get to me first. As my memories of the last year filled my unhappy thoughts I wanted even more to cry, for just one moment to let my pain be expelled from me. None came. I growled at myself in disappointment.
Who is to say that you're not supposed to be happy with yourself? I used to be, until I met the milk boy and was invited to a pack party. From then on I felt strange and untrue to the world.
My bones ached and my skin felt too cold as I stood there waiting for the day to fade. I wanted so much to know the answers to my questions, to find out what I truly was inside. When I did, I wished I could go back in time and have never met with this new life I craved for for so long. More problems arose as the first set was solved, and as more questions were answered, more formed in their place.
No one was supposed to help me with finding myself, but yet everyone was part of the process. From Amelia to Eve, everyone played his or her little part in who I was inside really. Now I couldn't wait to be what I wanted. Especially now that I knew I only had half a year left of being anything at all. Why not live that half year as the one thing I wished to be for so long?
And, now that my life was more complicated, might as well ease it a bit one decision. Right?
The sun finally vanished from the city as I stood there waiting for the rays of light to go. Stars were already shimmering so quickly up above, and I choked back the rest of my tears to think. To think of which path I wanted more than anything. I knew it wouldn't solve my other problems in life. But, for a bit at least, I would feel happy. Wouldn't I?
Happier than I had been in a long, long time.
As the moon eventually made its way to gleam above the rooftops, I decided which life I wanted to live. Which path I wanted to choose. Which part of my life I wanted more than the other.
I want to be happy, I thought.
youtube(dot)com/watch?vXsEbps3C4xg for the book trailer.

Hurd is now chiefly known as the devoted friend—or rather the 'fidus achates'—of Warburton.
She layed all her snares for Dr Lewis, who is the fidus achates of my uncle.
Bugs was for the moment Harry's fidus achates; a sort of vice-James.
He came, after sundry messages had been sent after him, and with him his fidus achates.
Deschenaux, his fidus achates, was a cobbler's son, whom experience alone had educated and fate and unscrupulousness had advanced.
Poor N., you had but one timorous supporter, even me, so early your fidus achates—but one against so many.
Isabella was attended and consoled in her retirement by her faithful servant Transita, her "fidus achates."
He had a potential voice in the internal economy of the village, and was often the fidus achates of the patel (village official).
A greater difficulty was involved in the fact that the Bibliotaph had many socii, but no fidus achates.
I shall be very glad of it, and promise to be his fidus achates in every sense, for the public as well as his own service.

I grew up with a Dad who could fix anything. I didn’t really know there were tradesmen or “handymen” until I was probably in my twenties. When I was a kid, I thought if something broke or needed to be improved, your Dad would do it. We never had a person come to the house for anything that I could remember. I believe it was because he grew up on a small family farm in rural Wisconsin. This was the 1930’s and 1940’s at the tail end of “The Great Depression”. From what I hear there weren’t a lot of options on the farm. They didn’t have HGTV (or TV at all) or the internet to learn how to fix something. If you wanted something fixed or done to improve your life you had to figure it out. I’m sure he probably felt the same way about his Dad. I never met him but heard many stories of how they fixed things on the farm. My Dad did everything from plumbing to electrical, carpentry to auto mechanics and anything else that could go wrong. He didn’t have to do these things around our house. He made an excellent living as a chemical engineer. I don’t think it ever occurred to him that he should have another man come to our house to do something he could do.
My Dad is my inspiration and the reason that I got into construction in 1992. I was selling ceramic tile at a place called “Tile for Less” in Seattle, WA. Tile for Less catered to the DIY crowd. They offered weekend classes, how to videos and loaned out tools so people could do their own installations. One of my customers asked if I could install their kitchen floor. I told them I hadn’t actually done it before but agreed to do it for $300. I think the farmer spirit that my Dad had (and both of my grandfathers) woke up inside me. My wife and I worked on this floor, nights after our day jobs. We finished it late into the third night. They paid me and referred me to their friends. This led to another job for another of their friends. I was hooked and quit my job (way too early). We launched our tile installation business and began learning new skills along the way. This is why I’ll always have a place in my heart for the resilience of farmers and my Dad.

This is my old office. This is what you saw when you walked into the Macy's By Appointment personal shopping office. This was not actually my desk. But I would sit here on occasion if I had a new client and wanted to familiarize them with the service.
Every quarter a different vendor would pay us to merchandise these two forms. We would change out the clothes about every three weeks. . . except with Calvin Klein. . . which is what you see below. Our store didn't really carry Calvin Klein so it was tough to find new merchandise. We did carry a few dresses so we had to make do with them for 3 months. I would change out the shoes and handbags though. BTW - Calvin Klein shoes, especially anything that has a platform, are the most comfortable shoes out there. I could wear 5" heels for 12 hours if I needed to and my feet would still feel fine! I have 4 pairs of the same pair of shoe. . . which I have no occasion to wear anymore.
This is the hallway going from the main office back to my office. There are two large fitting rooms along the way.
This is what you would see once you walked down the hallway. . . this was my office and the area where we did gift wrap, held customer goods and ran up sales. It's not quite as glamorous. You also didn't get walk in sales when you were stuck in the back. This room seems like it was always a mess despite all my efforts to keep it clean. It's funny, at work I was the opposite of how I am at home. . . I cleaned all the time.
Theatre with the Girl
3 hours ago

A DAUGHTER has criticised a housing care provider after claiming elderly residents suffered a “nightmare” two months during a renovation project at a north Leeds sheltered housing complex.
Jane Dyer said the Anchor Housing scheme to replace bathrooms in more than 20 flats at the Muir Court complex off St Michael’s Road, Headingley, was scheduled to last two weeks in each flat, but took two months
Mrs Dyer said shelves were ripped off the wall in the walk in wardrobe at her 87-year-old mother Barbara Curry’s flat after she moved out while work took place.
She said clothes were thrown on a bed, furniture was used as a workbench to saw wood on and sawdust was left in the flat.
Mrs Dyer, 61, “It was a nightmare from start to finish and caused residents and awful lot of stress. Nothing was done on schedule. People were told two weeks, but there was two months of noise and disruption. They didn’t seem to clean up the mess.” Mrs Dyer said her mother died in hospital on March 21.
Anchor district manager Jane Gibson, said: “We apologise to Mrs Dyer’s family for any upset this matter has caused.
“We are conducting a thorough investigation into this incident and the location manager has been in close contact with Mrs Dyer. We have arranged a meeting with Mrs Dyer’s family, along with the building contractors, to apologise in person. We held a meeting on 21 March with the tenants who have faced delays as well as the contractors so these issues are resolved quickly.”

Yup, Friday the 13th certainly lived up to its name. It started off well with the company knocking off work an hour and a half early, drinking plenty of beer and decorating our Christmas tree. That was the high point. The low points quickly followed. On one of my mailing lists, an announcement was posted that the club I was planning on attending was now alcohol-free, and not by their choosing. It seems that a legal after hours party did something wrong (all I could find out from the promoter is that it did not involve anyone under 21) and the club lost their liquor license for about two months.
As I'm getting ready for the evening, I tried to use my debit card only to have it declined. What??? I use a credit card instead, buy my stuff, and head to the bank. I tried to make a transaction at the cash machine and the machine replied "Unauthorized transaction" and wouldn't return my card. When I called today, I was informed that that my card account was closed since November 2nd. I find this rather curious as I have been using it regularly since then. Now I have to wait until Monday to get to my branch of the bank to find out what the heck is going on. In the meantime, I can't even order another card and had to borrow some cash from a friend despite having plenty of money in the bank.
When I finally got to what is now effectively a Gothic Juice Bar, I was disappointed, but not surprised, to see a low turnout. Those who showed up, however, all seemed to have alcoholic drinks. Everyone seemed to have brought a flask of rum, whiskey, vodka, etc.
What's that you ask? Did I bring a flask, too? I cannot tell a lie. Maybe I did. Maybe I didn't.

Milly and Billy
Our friends have a dog called Billy, a cute little Australian terrier with a spring in his step and a glint in those malteser-sized eyes of his.
His owners were staying at a beach house on Hindmarsh Island and they weren't allowed to bring him along. We were more than happy to have him stay as he's been a visitor here before and gets along extremely well with our Milly. At eleven years old, he is starting to slow down, and has been known to put his back out when leaping off the dizzying 30cm heights of his back step. His eyes are a little milky now too and one of his back legs is up in the injured position the majority of the time he's running like a greyhound for the tennis ball, but if you're prepared to give him a pat or throw a ball, then he'll always find the energy from somewhere within his tiny body.
Several Billy-occasions earlier, his owners told us, "Oh, we've never had him neutered because he's never once been interested in other dogs. He wouldn't know what to do even if he did get, um, his interest up." Oh, that's nice, maybe it's because he's too small to make contact with any potential partners? "Nah, he's just interested in his balls. Tennis balls, I mean."
Naturally Billy found a few of Milly's half-chewed tennis ball carcasses during his exploratory sniffing tour of the garden as we farewelled his holidaying owners.
Well well well, when the owners are away, then Billy Dog Thornton will play. So much for being a suspected eunuch; he instead rode Milly around the back lawn like a wheelbarrow. "The dirty old bugger!" Love Chunks exclaimed, with about equal measures of disgust and admiration. Our furry orange girlie may have been ten years younger and therefore have youth, strength and speed on her side but the old boy was persistent. The exercise they were getting was considerable - it was certainly better than a concrete run at a boarding kennel.
Three hours later, I returned home from taking Sapphire to her VacSwim session and Billy Bob was still at it. No visible signs of the - ahem - pink paraphernalia were ever present, but the mounting and humping actions were still being acted out in a rather determined form of sexual marathon. "Hey Dad, you should see Billy - his bottom is moving up and DOWN" Sapphire yelled. It was impossible not to visibly wince and cross my fingers under the table in the vain hope that the neighbours didn't hear and that our daughter wasn't then going ask us just why Billy found it so fascinating to develop his own version of a ride-on mower....... It also spoiled the ambience of eating lunch at our outdoor setting somewhat.
Four hours later Love Chunks gestured for me to have a look out of the laundry window. It was a rather sad but funny tableau - Milly holed up in her kennel with only her exhausted face poking out of the entrance, and Billy sitting a foot in front of her, waiting, waiting, with his stumpy triangle tail wagging at mach speed in anticipation.
Luckily for Milly, Billy was exhausted by bed time and content to flop into his basket which was touching the edge of her bean bag. As we locked up and turned off the lights, I commented to Love Chunks that I hoped he would survive the night.
He did, and ate a full bowl of weetbix and milk, something his owners said he didn't like. The huge day of physical exertion had clearly generated an appetite in an old dog that no longer wanted to eat anything for breakfast at home. Milly slurped up hers a couple of metres away, sneaking guarded looks at her shaggy little mate(r).
She was right to be on alert. No sooner had he finished his weetbix than he made his sudden moves on her. This time, Milly was prepared, having obviously given some furry thought to this overnight. All she did was sit down, and thus remove the temptation immediately. If Billy was able to have scratched his head in puzzlement he would have. Instead he trotted off to the shaded lawn under the gum tree and gave himself a rather thorough licking.
And that was the pattern for the rest of his stay:
"Have a crack at Milly - bugger it, she sat down.
Oh well, I'll have a lick of my own rude bits;
Then I'll find the tennis ball; and
Hope that someone from the cute orange dog's house throws it.
Ooooh hang on, Milly's got up again, I'll have another go.........."

BJP’s protest rally: party workers clash with police, several held
They were protesting the fake vaccine racket busted in Kolkata recently.
The Bharatiya Janata Party’s protest rally outside the Kolkata Municipal Corporation’s main office on SN Banerjee Road took place between at around 2 pm on Monday, with several party workers clashing with the police. Several BJP workers and leaders were held. Nearly 50 BJP workers were held by the police.
The march was led by the party’s state chief Dilip Ghosh. Bengal’s Opposition party protested the fake vaccine racket that was busted recently. The BJP changed its route planned earlier, and moved through Central Avenue, where many leaders and party workers were held by the police, including the women’s wing chief Agnimitra Paul. Another party leader, Sayantan Basu was also held by the police.
A party worker fell on the road during a scuffle and was apparently unconscious for some time. Some workers tried to break police barricades, some decided to lie on the road and several BJP workers went into scuffle with the police. Traffic was held up for some time, but was later cleared by the police.
The BJP did not have police permission to hold the gathering due to the ongoing COVID-19 situation. However, the party leaders decided to go ahead with the plan. Initially, the party leaders had felt that they would not seek permission as it was understood that a permission would not be given in the current COVID-19 situation as rallies and gatherings are banned now. But the party then decided to move an official permission stating that a protest meet would be organised following the protocols. But no permission was given.
The BJP had gone ahead and planned the protest, saying the “police authorities can stop us if they want”. This had led to apprehensions that there may be trouble in central Kolkata.

Daniel Dae Kim on His 'Hellboy' Casting and Early 'Lost' Concerns
Daniel Dae Kim has built a career based on trusting his gut.
Kim returns to the big screen Friday as Major Ben Daimio in Neil Marshall's R-rated reimagining of Hellboy, playing one of the few Asian comic book characters to appear on the big screen. Daimio teams up with the titular half-demon superhero, Hellboy (David Harbour), to battle Nimue (MIlla Jovovich), an ancient sorceress who's hell-bent on revenge.
Heat Vision breakdown
The role of Ben Daimio was previously held by English actor Ed Skrein, but after a social media upheaval regarding the whitewashing of Daimio's Asian lineage, Skrein gracefully exited the role in 2017, penning a statement explaining why he was leaving. Kim, who fought for inclusion long before he was in the limelight, also left a secure television role in 2017 on Hawaii Five-0 after seeking salary parity with his co-stars. Fittingly, after these two highly publicized moves in the name of equality, the role of Ben Daimio quickly found its way to Kim. Within two weeks of Skrein's departure, Kim accepted the role and embarked on 30-hour plane ride to Bulgaria, where he quickly learned his lines and dusted off his British accent.
"I just remember how much respect I had for what Ed did," Kim tells The Hollywood Reporter. "His statement was so well-written and so passionate that the cynical part of me thought that it must be his publicist writing it. Once I met him, I found out firsthand that it was him who wrote the entire thing and that he meant every word of it. So, I was even more moved by that gesture as a result."
Kim, who's best known for his portrayal of Jin-Soo Kwon on ABC's Lost, also reflects on the show's early days and how he had to trust his instincts despite low test audience scores for his character and an uncertain future for one of the most unusual (and expensive) broadcast shows ever created.
"If, for instance, we got four or five episodes on the air and then we got canceled, the entirety of Jin's character would be what you saw at the beginning," Kim says. "To me, that was problematic because it represented a number of stereotypes that I worked so hard to avoid in my career. So, that was my concern. I had a lot of faith in J.J. [Abrams] and Damon [Lindelof] that if the show continued, the character would grow and deepen; they had assured me of that. So, it wasn't a matter of trusting them, it was just a matter of trusting whether or not the show would be successful."
Recently, Kim and his production company, 3AD, have enjoyed success as an executive producer of The Good Doctor, which averaged 15.6 million total viewers per episode in its first season (2017-2018). While the show was originally stationed at CBS, Kim again trusted his gut and bought back the rights once CBS passed on commissioning a pilot. From there, Kim took the show to a familiar destination where he first became a star — ABC.
In a recent conversation with THR, Kim also discusses his crash course preparation for Hellboy, his favorite in-between moments on the Lost set, as well as his reflections on his final scene as Jin on Lost. (Yes, there are Lost spoilers ahead.)
Fifteen years ago, you arrived in Hawaii to film Lost's pilot, and it sounds like you haven't left since.
That is correct. If you would've asked me when I was a little kid growing up in Pennsylvania whether or not I would spend the majority of my career in Hawaii, I would've laughed. But, stranger things have happened, and they actually have. I'm here, and it really feels like I found home for me and my family.
Do you still feel Hawaii's laid-back vibe despite living there?
That vibe really does exist, but like any other place, once you're there for more than just a vacation, you learn a lot more about the people and the location that deepens your knowledge base. That can be both positive and negative. It's still an amazing place to live, and the fact that I'm choosing to live here — even though I'm not working here any longer — says everything.
Is it tricky navigating Hollywood from afar? Are you flying back and forth constantly?
Yes. (Laughs.) It's very difficult. I think I've gotten platinum status on two different airlines in the past year. I literally flew 200,000 miles in the last calendar year.
There's a Lost "golden pass" joke that practically writes itself here, but I'll refrain for now.
(Laughs.) Right! But, it's worth it. My family loves it here. My children got to spend their entire childhood here. It's a pretty special place.
So, at the end of August 2017, Ed Skrein departed Hellboy, and the role of Ben Daimio, because he didn't want to perpetuate the whitewashing of another Asian character. From your vantage point, what happened from there up until the point where you were on set virtually two weeks later?
I had been aware of the controversy because it had been all over social media for a couple of weeks. This was before I even heard from my agents that the producers were interested in me. It was something that I wasn't going into blindly. Even before I had any affiliation with the project, I just remember how much respect I had for what Ed did. His statement was so well-written and so passionate that the cynical part of me thought that it must be his publicist writing it. (Laughs.) It was that moving to me. So, one of the things I did when I got the job was I sought him out, because we were shooting in London where he was at the time. I wanted to personally thank him for that statement. Once I met him, I found out firsthand that it was him who wrote the entire thing and that he meant every word of it. So, I was even more moved by that gesture as a result.
To go back to your question, I found out that the Hellboy producers were interested in having me Skype-call with [director] Neil Marshall, who was already in England at the time. So, we got on a Skype-call; we talked a little bit about the character and we talked about the controversy a little bit. I really respected and appreciated his take on the situation, and we had a great call. After that, I decided to come aboard. We began negotiations and by the time they were all said and done, I only had a couple of days to get on the flight to start shooting. So, I was furiously learning my lines in the air and working on my British accent at the same time.
That is such an extreme example of an actor's life.
It is! It comes with the territory, and I'm sure you've heard many stories like that. Sometimes, that's how things happen. I often find that good news happens really quickly and bad news takes a long time. So, I showed up on set, completely jetlagged, but as ready as I could be.
Was it more difficult coming up with a British accent on the fly, or reacclimating to Korean for Lost, a language you hadn't used frequently since high school?
To be honest, the Korean was harder, only because I had grown up in America. So, I heard my share of British accents. In drama school, we actually had an accent and dialect class. I would sit in that class learning the British and Australian accents thinking, "When am I ever going to be asked, as an Asian-American actor, to use these accents?" Sure enough, cut to 20 years later, there I am on set using one.
An accent is different from learning a different language. I'm still using the same part of my brain for the accent that I would be for American English. For Korean, I felt like I was tapping into a different part of my brain. When I speak Korean, it's never in the context of acting; well, it hadn't been [until Lost].
A couple years ago, you sacrificed in the name of equality. That reminds me of the saying, "There is no reward without sacrifice." Do you think there's a connection between that event and your casting in Hellboy? In other words, had you not gone public with one issue, perhaps you wouldn't have been on people’s minds when another related issue came up, resulting in your casting.
I think that’s fair to say. You never know what the ripple effects of any pebble that gets thrown in the water might be. In a way, I felt like there was a certain poetry to the fact that my next role would end up being something that had to do with the issue of diversity and one that had been vacated by a white actor because he felt as passionately about it as I did. To me, that represented a really significant step forward in changing the dialogue around diversity.
Ben Daimio is quite a character. What was your jumping-off point as far as developing the character?
I started with the scar. His defining characteristic, to me, was the fact that he had an indelible scar on his face. To me, that scar was a metaphor for race. It is something that is a part of your appearance that you cannot control; it defines how people view you and the judgements the make about you. Daimio has spent a lot of time hiding that scar, and it's something that whether he wanted to try and hide or not, he couldn't. So, because of it, people recoil while looking at him. So, I couldn't help but see parallels between that and race.
Even though Daimio is a larger-than-life character, it sounds like you could relate to him on some level.
Yeah, absolutely. How people perceive you helps determine how you perceive yourself. As a young Asian-American kid growing up in a steel town in Pennsylvania, I can tell you that I felt ugly a lot of the time. I was directly told on many occasions that the way I looked was "funny" or "ugly." So, I could relate to Daimio a lot. He probably had his self-worth and self-esteem directly affected by this event that left a scar on his face. So, that was a parallel I was able to draw. The course of his life changed once that encounter happened, and that was my entry point into the character.
Did you figure out who Daimio was before his fateful encounter, so you could better understand how to create the offshoot that is the "reborn" Ben?
Absolutely. He's a military guy. What I thought was interesting is that from my friends who've been in the military, there are no excuses. The hand that you're dealt is the hand that you play. No one wants to hear any whining; no one wants to hear any moaning about your lot in life. So, that's something that I took to Ben Daimio. There's a certain stoicism that he has when it comes to how he goes about his business. He is not necessarily a touchy-feely person, and I think that has more to do with his military background than anything else.
In the trailer, Ben transforms into a jaguar of sorts. How did you film that transformation process?
There was not a mocap suit, but we did have a mocap session where they had sensors on my body. During the actual shooting of the transformation, there was just a lot of different angles and a lot of different plate shots that they used for reference.
So, you actually got down on your hands and knees and performed all those actions?
Oh, yeah! That was a long day. (Laughs.) It was very physically taxing. The idea was that it was a very painful transformation. There was nothing pleasant about it. So, working through that was a challenge, and it left me pretty exhausted at the end of the day.
When you reflect on Lost, what are some of the smaller memories or in-between moments that surprisingly stick with you, such as Terry O'Quinn playing guitar offscreen?
That's a good question. The first things that pop up are the moments in between takes. Because we were all friends, our time together — between takes — was as special as the time that we were actually shooting. The moments where the guitars would come out, all of our set chairs would be in a circle, so we could all see each other and talk to each other. There were several of us who play guitar and a lot of us who sang. So, spontaneous sing-along sessions would just kind of break out, and certain times we would get so passionate about them that we would delay shooting because we needed to finish a version of "Roxanne" that we were all singing. (Laughs.)
Co-showrunner Carlton Cuse used to talk a lot about how Jin and Sawyer tested at the bottom of cast in the early days of the show. After all you were both antagonists, so you're not supposed to be liked. By the end, your characters were beloved by test audiences. Since you probably didn't know the entirety of Jin's massive arc as of season one, did you lament Jin's reception at first, even though you were fulfilling the role as the writing intended?
Yes. Absolutely, I did. I was very concerned about it. Though I was reassured that the character was going to grow and develop, what I wasn't sure about was how the show would be received. If, for instance, we got four or five episodes on the air and then we got canceled, the entirety of Jin's character would be what you saw at the beginning. To me, that was problematic because it represented a number of stereotypes that I worked so hard to avoid in my career. So, that was my concern. I had a lot of faith in J.J. [Abrams] and Damon [Lindelof] that if the show continued, the character would grow and deepen; they had assured me of that. So, it wasn't a matter of trusting them, it was just a matter of trusting whether or not the show would be successful.
Many fans consider Jin and Sun to be Lost's greatest romance. Their conclusion on the submarine affects me each and every time I see it. Since the show has now been off the air for almost nine years, has your rationalization of Jin's decision to leave his daughter behind changed at all?
I can see both sides of that decision, but the thing that I keep coming back to is that he had wronged his wife in many ways. The decision to stay with her was part of his atonement. That's the emotional place where that decision came from. I think there was the rational question of whether or not he would've made it out alive, and I think all of those combined for him to make the choice that he did. To me, it was a very powerful statement about love and making that sacrifice for an ideal and a feeling that is undeniable.
Your production company, 3AD, has enjoyed tremendous success via its first production, The Good Doctor. I presume you're still on cloud nine?
Honestly, this phrase gets thrown around a lot — and it's super cliche — but I really do feel fortunate. There have been a lot of producers who've worked in this business for many, many years and have not been able to enjoy the success that The Good Doctor has brought my company. So, I'm very grateful, and I'm completely aware of how special it is. It was great to be able to do a role on it as well.
With the success of Crazy Rich Asians, Marvel's reported development of Shang-Chi, Kelly Marie Tran as Star Wars' first woman of color in a leading role, as well as the turn of events surrounding your casting in Hellboy, do you feel as optimistic as ever about the future of Asian representation on the big screen?
I feel like there are still significant challenges. All you have to do is look at the culture around us and the rise in hate crimes to know that we are not where we should be. At the same time, I do believe that there has never been a better time to be an Asian-American working in this industry. The emphasis on inclusion, diversity and the #MeToo movement are all positive steps. So, it really gives me hope for the future.
by Brittany Vincent

In October 1989, sometime near Halloween, there was a Ghost Rally hosted by the Lynch Fire Dept. I borrowed my dad's Chevy S-10 pickup, called a friend to see if they wanted to go, and then... called a girl.
Her name was Charity. I had had a crush on this girl for quite a while, but she was definitely "out of my league," if you know what I mean. It was a long shot, and I figured that at Ghost Rally would be casual enough that I could get a "yes" from this girl, even if she didn't actually like-like me.
She said yes... and she did like me.
I was eventually engaged to this girl (more than once). We were eventually married. And even though Halloween can be controversial (I guess) to some Christians, it has been redeemed for me. Twenty Five Halloweens later, we are still together and we are still getting ready to go on a Ghost Rally. I love her more now than I ever have, and I am fairly certain that asking her to that Ghost Rally was one of the best decisions that I have ever made.
For the last several years I have doctored up an old photo into a Halloween-themed image. Here is this year's rendition to celebrate 25 years.
Only a few hours left on April 1st. Wish I had seen this earlier, I would have been posting it everywhere!
Gam zeh ya'avor (Hebrew) "This Too Shall Pass" Welcome! According to Google Analytics, this is by far the most visited post...
Every baby starts life as a little savage. He is completely selfish and self-centered. He wants what he wants when he wants it: his bottle, ...
Stephen Um on Discipline… “There is a cultural aversion to discipline. We’re comfortable with the idea of self-discipline. -- bringing our...

We purchased a condominium with Tammy's help in late 2014. The process went very smoothly. As first time home-buyers, we were nervous and uneducated on the process. She kept us at ease with immediate responses to our questions and knowledgeable tips and advice. She was able to answer every question we had. We are happy to recommend her to any home-buyer.

Based purely on the talent he demonstrated in college, Myles Jack is one of the truly elite players in this year's draft. He is arguably the best defensive talent, and certainly the best linebacker now that Jaylon Smith is going to have to sit out his rookie year due to his knee injury. But Jack also had a knee injury. Although it was less severe, it raised flags with several teams, and the Dallas Cowboys have repeatedly been reported as one of them. This week's medical recheck was seen as crucial to Jack's draft stock And the word is that many teams were not happy with the results. Given the previous concerns, it is no surprise that Dallas is being included in that group.
Dallas has shown a willingness to take a chance on players with injury history. Sean Lee is one of the best and most successful examples. But those risks have not been taken in the first round, and certainly not with the fourth-overall pick. Given that the Cowboys already had concerns while many other teams were being reported as satisfied with the results of his earlier medical exams, it is almost certain that Brugler and other knowledgeable reporters stating he is no longer in the picture for Dallas' first pick are correct.
However, that does not mean that he is no longer a possibility at all. The question becomes how far the mixed reports could cause him to slide. If he should still be there when Dallas goes on the clock at 34 (assuming they have not used that in a trade), then he may be very much in the mix. This depends on just how serious the team feels the injury is, but should they believe he would be more of a PUP candidate than a player that would have to miss an entire season or more, then they might see the value in taking him.
Of course, if they determine there is an appreciable risk that his injury is going to keep him from ever being truly effective, then he is likely off the board entirely for them. Should his career be cut down, it would be a tragedy for him. College players face this risk every game. It is one of the arguments against the current NCAA rules regarding compensation for their players, but that is a subject for other places.
What this does do for the Cowboys is clarify their decision at four. The list of truly elite players was already a short one this year, and Jack's injury may just have made it one player shorter. This is disappointing for those who were big fans of Jack coming to Dallas. But the draft, as with all aspects of the NFL, is a harsh business. And with the valuable draft capital the Cowboys wield this year, they need all the clarity they can find. It sucks for Jack, but making the right call on his recovery is crucial to Dallas.

What had he given up to be here?
What had he done?
John didn’t know. He didn’t care what the cost had been.
He was there. He was on top. That was all that mattered.
Two years ago he was broke with nothing left to live for. Now he had the corner office in his own company. In his own building.
He had everything, and nothing was going to bring him back down.
A knock on the door made John jump. It was late. He was sure that everyone else had gone home.
Someone must have come back.
”Come in,” He said and rubbed the sleepiness out of his eyes.
”Hello, John,” A man said as he entered the office.
A dark voice. A familiar voice. A voice John never wanted to hear.
John knew why the man had come. He knew what the man was there to collect.
”Two years ago you made a promise, John.”
”Please” John tried.
”Begging isn’t going to help you.”
”Please, I have a wife now.”
”You made a promise John. Two years, that was the deal.”
”Please…” Tears began falling down John’s cheeks. ”Please”
”Your time’s up” The man put his hands on John’s shoulders. ”It’s time to go.”
”No please” John screamed but it was too late.
The devil had a hold of him, and there was no running away.
If you enjoyed this story please don’t hesitate to follow my blog for more!
Follow me on twitter! @Rtillyflash
If you want to support the blog then you can do so via Patreon

I've always been told to get letters of rec from the teachers who know me best in classes that I excelled in. This year I took AP chemistry, and I got a C in the class. It was pretty heartbreaking because I did everything I possibly could to do well, and still ended with a C, however my teacher can speak a lot to my work ethic in the class, because I worked very hard, probably harder than any other class I've taken. She likes me a lot but I'm not her absolute favorite. She can be intimidating at times but I like her, and she knows me as a good student. Some people have told me that having her write my rec will help balance the fact I got a C because it shows I worked hard, however on the other hand others say its a bad idea because she ended me with a C, and thus may not have the substance to write a good rec. Is getting a letter of rec from her a good idea?

Guilty Plea in Drowning Of 3 Kids
Montgomery Man Reads Bible, Then Gets Life Sentence
Thursday, October 15, 2009
After asking to read from the Bible and assuring a judge that he is sane, a Montgomery County man pleaded guilty Wednesday and was sentenced to life in prison for drowning his three young children, one by one, in a Baltimore hotel bathtub last year.
"No man has the right to restrind the wind with the wind, or the right over the day of one's death, and that's from Ecclesiastes 8:8," said Mark Castillo, 43, who interrupted jury selection in his trial to say he wanted to dismiss his two attorneys and plead guilty.
The plea was the latest in a series of unpredictable courtroom moves Castillo had made since his case began last year. Baltimore City Circuit Court Judge Wanda K. Heard, after asking Castillo a series of questions to gauge his state of mind, said she was certain he knew what he was doing and immediately sentenced him to three life terms without the possibility of parole, after a plea agreement Castillo had reached with prosecutors.
The bodies of Castillo's three children were found in March 2008 in a room at the Marriott Inner Harbor Hotel. Castillo also tried to kill himself by swallowing pills and stabbing himself in the neck with a steak knife. He told detectives that he had been going through a bitter custody battle with his wife, Amy, and that he killed their children partly to spite her.
Amy Castillo, a Montgomery County pediatrician who said she has kept her married name to honor her children, spoke in court Wednesday, telling the judge what the killings have done to her.
"I've lost four people," she said, breaking into tears while giving short descriptions of each child: Anthony, 6, was so smart; Austin, 4, was wild with a great sense of humor; Athena, 2, had just begun to talk, but Castillo couldn't understand her.
"The fourth person that I lost, that people forget, is that I lost my husband that I really loved and was my best friend for 10 years," she said. "I'm so thankful [that] my children don't have to stay dead, that they're with Jesus now and he's watching them, and that Mark and I will get to be there eventually, where we don't have to suffer in this world with this pain."
In an interview after the plea, Amy Castillo said she continues to suffer from flashbacks and nightmares.
"I dream that I get to see the children, and I get to hold them," she said. "But then I realize that they're dead."
Castillo's long, winding prosecution has had some strange moments. At a hearing last year, Castillo told a different judge that he did not trust his public defender and that he wanted to represent himself. "I've been trying to plead guilty for the last five months, and I've been prevented," Castillo said at the time.
An evaluation of Castillo found him mentally fit for trial, according to Wednesday's hearing.
The slayings received nationwide attention in the spring of last year. On March 29, Castillo took the children to Baltimore, spent the afternoon with them at a science museum, checked into the hotel and ordered room service, Baltimore police said.
In court Wednesday, after Castillo said he wanted to plead guilty, Baltimore prosecutor Julie Drake read a statement of facts to the judge that she said would have been presented at trial. Two of the children struggled in the bathtub, particularly the oldest one, she said.
"Six-year-old Anthony was bigger and stronger than the other two, and he was suspicious," Drake said. "The defendant indicated Anthony had a sad and then scared look on his face. So the defendant grabbed his hands behind his back, and put his knee and his weight onto Anthony's legs."
Heard said the "one thing right" that Castillo did was plead guilty, ending the frenzy surrounding the case. She said she would recommend that he serve his sentence in a prison that emphasizes mental health treatment.
"Mr. Castillo, I wish you well. I hope you resolve your matters between you and your conscience," Heard said. "And, as I can see, between you and your Lord."

Actually we will not spam you and keep your personal data secure
The Additional District and Sessions Judge who is hearing Junaid Khan lynching case has said that a senior government lawyer was helping accused and sought an action.
Seventeen-year-old Junaid was stabbed to death when he, along with his brothers, was returning home to Khandwali village after shopping for Eid in Delhi on June 22.
YS Rathore, in an interim order on October 25 said that Additional Advocate General Naveen Kaushik was assisting the counsel of the main accused, Naresh Kumar, in cross-examination of prosecution witnesses, reported Indian Express.
Citing court record, the report says that the judge said Kaushik was ‘suggesting questions to be put to the witnesses’ at two hearings.
He also added that in case Naveen Kaushik appears along with the defence counsel, it will create a feeling of insecurity amongst the victim party. Kaushik’s act amounts to professional misconduct and is against legal ethics, the judge said.
However, Kaushik told the daily that he has no connection with the case and was there as counsel appearing for one of the accused is known to him.
“It is a wrong impression. I was giving him the provisions of law regarding Hindi language, said Kaushik when asked about the judge specifically mentioning that he was suggesting questions to the defence counsel
He added that it was relevant to court proceedings since the evidence was being recorded and there is no provision for translation of evidence in English. It can only be translated when both the parties agree to it.”
The Junaid case is being tried as ‘State of Haryana Vs Naresh Kumar’.
The accused, Naresh Kumar has ‘confessed’ to having stabbed the victim but insisted that the murder was not related to the beef issue.
Naresh Kumar, a resident of Palwal in Haryana, was working as a security guard in a Delhi firm.
The fight between the victim and his brothers and the accused in the train started at Okhla railway station in Delhi while the stabbing took place at a station Ballabgarh onwards.
Junaid was stabbed to death while his brothers, Hashim and Sakir, were injured by a mob which also allegedly hurled communal slurs against them.
His brothers had claimed the attackers had taunted and repeatedly called them ‘anti-nationals’ and ‘beef eaters’.

THE BEST KEPT SECRET
In December of 2004 my life changed forever. Shortly after Christmas that year my wife asked for a divorce, Because of circumstances that were completely out of my control, I lost my wife and kids in what seemed like moments. I called my best friend in Columbus, Ohio, to give him the bad news. He was crushed. Jeff was heading to Paris, France to ring in the new year, but before he left he gave me one piece of advice (talk to God, he said) What a great thing to tell an atheist!
I remember waking up the first Saturday after Christmas and going out into the living room and seeing the girls asleep on the floor. My mind started to wander. I got dressed and jumped in my truck and drove down to the beach to clear my head. What would I do without her? What would happen to my relationship with my daughters? Is there even a life after all this? I spent about 10 minutes driving down Atlantic Ave in Virginia Beach when I realized that I could not see where I was going (crying) so I decided to pull over before I killed somebody or myself. When I looked up after parking my truck I realized I was parked in a church parking lot. Off to my left was a 15 foot tall statue of Christ on the cross and at that moment Jeff’s words rang in my ears (Talk to God). Jeff asked me to be very honest about what was on my heart.
I got out of my truck and walked over to that statue and I started to talk. People began showing up to go into Church and I watched them while I was talking to some steel and concrete. I got tired and had to kneel. I had too much energy and soon had to stand , then kneel once more , up down, up down all the while talking to a statue. Soon the people came out of the church. The parking lot emptied out and I stayed there talking. Then it filled up with a whole new group of Jesus freaks!
I looked like a bum with a leather jacket, boots, torn up jeans. I was very honest with God that day; I asked what about my life? What would happen to my kids?
What would happen to my marriage? Who am I? Who is he? People walking passed me would walk around me. I finally got mad after this lady and her husband stepped off the side walk to avoid me. "I'M NOT A BUM!" I yelled to the woman, "I just want answers!" Her husband was a tall and very large man who turned around and looked at me. WOW. . . I thought I was going to die. He walked up and placed one hand on my shoulder and said “Keep talking to Him, son, you will find the answers.”
After that I stayed there talking out loud, I was kneeling when an ant crawled onto my hand, I asked God, is this a sign, God? Do I let it bite me (it did)? Now what, God? What does this red mark mean? A car drove by and honked its horn. I turned and it was a red VW bug. What is this God? Red car Red bite on my hand? Do I follow? ANSWER ME!!!
He never did answer me. . . so I gave up (thanks a lot Jeff, great advice). I decided to walk away. This God thing was a joke. I found myself at the steps of the church. Why not go in and have a laugh. I stood in the back of the church and listened for a moment. "We have a guest speaker here today." He was from Lansing, Michigan. I listened as this guy came out and started talking. What did he just say? Is he talking about me? It seemed that way. Had he been behind that statue the whole time or was God real? He talked about everything I had asked God about and it was at that moment that an atheist met God.
My life has never been the same and I have never cared more for the people in my life or the people who I serve each day. It has made being a personal trainer such a joy. Knowing that I get to share the BEST KEPT SECRET with everyone I meet and coach. Christ died on the cross for us all. It is that simple.
If you read this, it was not by accident, look in your heart as I did.
Revelation 3:20 (New International Version)
Here I am! I stand at the door and knock. If anyone hears my voice and opens the door, I will come in and eat with him, and he with me.

Been a while since I posted last. Hope everyone's well.
I bought a gorgeous potted lavender at Bloom (Irish gardening exhibition) in June. We've had a very wet summer though and it's looking very sorry for itself now. I don't want to lose it and there's still a lot of live growth on it, but it also needs a prune now because the dead growth is making it look very straggly.
Any tips on how I can restore it? I know this isn't the ideal time for repotting, but I don't know what the soil quality is like at the moment so I was going to repot it and add a bit of grit (because lavenders like well drained soil), and maybe move it indoors for a while as the first of the frost is on its way. I was also going to remove the dead growth.
Any advice would be welcome - I don't want to lose it.

So, we had been free-ranging our ducks for a little over a month now. They loved it and did great. On Saturday, though, one of our ducks were killed by one of our dogs. Now our remaining duck isnt eating well. I think he is sad and scared, having witnessed his brother get killed. Will ducks die of loneliness? I did find on craigslist, someone giving away a 1 yr old indian runner hen and i emailed them. I am hoping she will be a good distraction for him. Any ideas on helping a duck cope with a loss?

|Vale Robert Culp
||[Mar. 25th, 2010|10:20 am]
Bugger of a start to the day.
I've always had a soft spot for Robert Culp. I'd always liked him as an actor from as far back as I can remember. I think I first discovered him in the Demon with a Glass Hand episode of the Outer Limits. It was a tough role to play credibly, but he did it well.
Later I watched him in I, Spy, teamed with Bill Cosby, and in The Greatest American Hero. While I love him in Hero, it's I, Spy that really shows off the man's talents and heart. The stories he wrote and directed are solid and even deal with taboo subjects for the day like the Vietnam War and heroin addiction. Cosby was a virtual unknown, I, Spy being his first TV role, and Culp was the star factor driving the series, but he treated Cosby as an acting equal right from the start.
Culp and Cosby had also decided on a 'non-statement' in regards to race, as in, Cosby being African American would never be noteworthy. Their characters, like the men, were equals. So when a script was written in which someone made thinly veiled racial comments directed at Cosby's character, Culp walked into the production office with him to tell them that this wasn't to be allowed to happen again.
Most recently, I was delighted to finding him voicing a character in the Half Life games.
Robert Culp's acting career spanned over five decades. Think I'll spend a bit of time revisiting it over the next few weeks.

I love my husband dearly but he does have a few quirks that drive me crazy. One of those is that he wears shoes all the time. As someone who does everything possible barefoot this is uncharted territory. His wearing shoes all the time not only keeps my carpet nice and dirty but it also hurts when he steps on one of the kids, or myself, and we frequently have tears when he steps on a toy and breaks it.
I've been looking for a good way to help with this problem and finally decided the first step was to get him to change his footwear when he got home. Anything had to be better than the steal toes work boots he was wearing all the time When Dawgs offered to send me a pair of their shoes to review I figured they'd be perfect for this first step.
Dawgs are super easy to slip on and off as he goes in and out of the house. Hopefully one day soon he'll make good use of that fact. In the meantime his Dawgs are holding up wonderfully and work great as an all around shoe. I love that they are easy to clean and he really can wear them everywhere!

The Abu Dhabi school loses 23-13 to Dubai College, as many players involved in their last game for their schools.
Dubai College's James Capon 'electric' in the final with BSAK
The British School Al Khubairat will be glad to see the back of James Capon, the blistering, sidestepping back from Dubai College.
Capon was the star of the show in the 26-0 rout of the Abu Dhabi school in the final of the Gulf Under 18 sevens title in December and he produced another virtuoso performance yesterday in the 15-a-side final of the U18 league, scoring two tries and setting up the other for Tom Summers, the centre, in a 23-13 victory.
And all this playing out of position at fly-half where he was moved from fullback as James Bywater is recovering from an operation.
"His running was sublime," Andy Jones, the director of sport at Dubai College said. "He was just too quick and agile. He has remarkable feet. He has the quickest feet and the most agility of any player we have had here. If he were to go to any elite club I'm sure he could make it professionally."
Ed Lewsey, the director of rugby at BSAK, acknowledged his side struggled to cope with Capon.
"The main difference was their fly-half," Lewsey said. "He was just electric and his class shone through. It was a plucky performance from us but the better team won."
Capon formed a makeshift halfback pairing with Sam Bullock and they displayed a remarkable telepathy.
"Sam Bullock creates the platforms so well," Jones said. "He is absolutely brilliant."
Bullock, who also scored in the sevens final and kicked an brilliant touchline conversion, yesterday, landed two penalties and a conversion.
"He has lot of potential," Lewsey said. "I spotted him very early on in the season and he has all the makings of a decent player."
BSAK were very much in the game at half time with the score at 12-10 but DC pulled clear in the second to record their second win over their rivals in a month. They won 12-10 at Zayed Sports in March and finished as deserved winners having remained unbeaten throughout the league season.
"I am over the moon," Jones said. "We just got our noses in front and stayed there. It was a very, very close game. BSAK were very, very strong but we kept applying the pressure and kept our noses in front. We are fortunate to have come out on top but we know next season they will be back."
The victory completed a fine year for DC who performed a clean sweep of all the UAE titles with wins for the U12s, U14s and U16s.
"We have had a remarkable season," Jones said. "We won them all for the first time. We are elated."
Lewsey, in his first season since replacing Lyn Jones at BSAK, was full of admiration for his opposite number. "It just shows the quality of the job Andy Jones has done at DC," Lewsey said.
BSAK had the consolation of finishing second in the league with sevens wins and three loses, two of which came against DC.
"We've prevailed against all the other teams but they have just had the edged on us," Lewsey said.
The match was the last for the school for several players, including captain Kyle Knox who scored his side's try with a charging 20m run from the base of a scrum. "Knox is a great athlete and a really intelligent player," Lewsey said. "He caused DC lots of problems and had a cracking game."
Follow us @SprtNationalUAE

Authorities responded to what started as an armed robbery call at an apartment on the 1900 block of E. Lindsay Street in Norman Saturday afternoon. Norman police said the call also stated shots had been fired at the apartment.
Police said the suspects matching the description were located in the parking lot of the complex, but "they ignored officers and went inside the apartment." Officers said they set up a perimeter around the apartment and then took three suspects into custody.
Authorities said the fourth suspect, who was armed with a handgun, was in the apartment for two and a half hours before coming out.
All four suspects were eventually taken into custody, according to officials on scene. No injuries were reported and the investigation continues.
Stay with News 9 and News9.com for updates on this developing story.

Tuesday, November 10, 2009
Parker is a proud eight year old.. :) She was sooo very excited to turn eight. When we asked her what she wanted to do for her birthday, she said she just wanted a very small party this year. She really wanted to go to Libby Lou's a store at a mall in Bellevue. When I looked into it to make plans, I discovered that all of the LIbby Lou stores closed! YIKES! So we had a glamour girl gathering at a local children's salon. It was very fun and the girls had great time. They had their hear done, makeup, and nails done. Of course, afterwards we HAD to go out for pizza. even Vi got in the beauty action!
Wednesday, November 4, 2009
Parker had a birthday recently.. can she really be eight years old? She really like her cake this year. It is always a surprise at our house. No one gets to see their cake until the candles are on and people are singing. Abe told her it was a treasure chest this year so she really was surprised to see a soccer ball!
I can't believe that I forgot to mention our newest member of the family.. Abe has a pet guinea pig. He was soooooooooooooooooooooooo excited to add him to the family. we realize now that we should have bought a girl and not a boy.. Parker wants one and we can't get another one.. A girl will not work, and neither will a boy. There were many to choose from but this one captured Abe's heart. We have been through many many name changes.. It went something like this.. Binny, Benny, turtle, tortoise, turtis(not my personal fave), to what is now Tiger. Abe informed me in a dead serious conversation, that I could choose to call him Tigris if I so chose. His name is Tiger or TIgris.. it's up to you...

What is important
A young boy watched as his father walked into the living room…
The boy noticed that his younger brother, John, began to cower slightly as his father entered. The older boy sensed that John had done something wrong. Then he saw from a distance what his brother had done. The younger boy had opened his father’s brand new hymnal and scribbled all over the first page with a pen.
Staring at their father fearfully, both brothers waited for John’s punishment. Their father picked up his prized hymnal, looked at it carefully and then sat down, without saying a word. Books were precious to him; he was a minister with several academic degrees. For him, books were knowledge.
What he did next was remarkable. Instead of punishing his brother, instead of scolding, or yelling, his father took the pen from the little boy’s hand, and then wrote in the book himself, alongside the scribbles that John had made. Here is what that father wrote: “John’s work, 1959, age 2. How many times have I looked into your beautiful face and into your warm, alert eyes looking up at me and thanked God for the one who has now scribbled in my new hymnal. You have made the book sacred, as have your brother and sister to so much of my life.” “Wow,” thought the older brother, “This is punishment?”
Since that time, the hymnal has become a treasured family possession. It is tangible proof that their parents love them. It taught the lesson that what really matters is people, not objects; patience, not judgment; love, not anger.
Special thanks to Malladi for sharing this spiritual story with us!
The author of this spiritual story is unknown and greatly appreciated. If you know who wrote this, or can provide a source that I can cite then please contact me and let me know!
Also, if you decide to reprint this story on your website, you do not need to include this author biography box… please just link back to http://www.Spiritual-Short-Stories.com

Indiana State Prison Worker Facing Rape Charges
HOBART - An Indiana State Prison worker, whose termination is pending, is now charged with raping a woman he met at a downtown bar in Hobart.
The "Times" reports the alleged incident occurred in September 2017.
Fifty year-old Manuel Razo had failed to show up for two interviews and evaded police on a couple of different occasions over an approximate two-year period.
Hobart Police were finally able to catch Razo and attain his DNA by going to his work last June.
DNA results support the woman's allegation that Razo raped her.
The woman told police she agreed to go to Razo's apartment, because she needed to find a new apartment and Razo told her his would soon be for rent.
Razo served her a drink, and she blacked out. The woman told police when she awoke, she didn't feel well and realized she had been raped.
Razo was suspended without pay on June 26th.

Till today I don’t know what made me have time for Janet that day.
For a long time she had been using style to tell me about one Brother Jeremiah like that. At first it was a just random mention here and there then it became ‘you know Brother Jeremiah, nau’ until finally, maybe when she saw that I wasn’t biting the bait, she came out with ‘Brother Jeremiah is my spiritual father,’ to which I said, ‘The same Brother Jeremiah ?’ and she triumphantly said, ‘Yes!’
Now, I know that girls have all sorts of people and places they go to - we watch it in Nollywood films after all, but it never for once crossed my mind that any of the girls I lived with had a spiritual anything that they took thier problems to. Kike goes to Church, I manage a few services once every few months, and Mama remembers she’s Muslim and covers her head with a black scarf when it’s Sallah. But Janet was the least likely person, if anyone had asked me, to take any form of spirituality serious beyond exclaiming ‘God forbid’ and snapping her fingers over her head in the middle of a heated discussion. So it came as a shock when she confided in me about Brother Jeremiah and the strong spiritual things he had given her. Well, sold her, more like.
We were alone in the room but she still spoke in near whispers, looking over her shoulder as if she expected an eavesdropper to suddenly materialize behind her.
“He is very powerful” she assured me, in between digging in her box for something she had hidden at the very bottom.
She brought out a round mirror enclosed in a cheap plastic frame. It was a just a mirror like any other mirror that you can buy for N200 in traffic, but according to Janet it was a special-special mirror that Brother Jeremiah had prepared for her.
“He has prayed and fasted on this mirror,” she said. “He made it specially for me. Anytime I’m going somewhere, I just look in this mirror and the way my face is is the way the place will be.”
My amusement grew as she narrated how she had once gotten all dressed up to go out to a party where a friend had arranged a big boy for her; a guaranteed paymaster, she said. But when she looked in her mirror she saw that her face was ‘one kind,’ and she knew she shouldn’t go out that night. The spiritual warning was later confirmed when the man she should have seen that night had an accident on his way home from the party. He didn’t die, but according to her she would have died in that car with him that night if she hadn’t looked into her mirror. In my mind, the man would probably not have had the accident had she been there, had they met and talked and his timing being thrown out by a few seconds.
“This mirror that you see, it has helped me many times,” she said, “It cost me an arm and a leg.”
I counted to check that she still had her two hands and two legs and I waited for the catch. She didn’t disappoint me: She was soon telling me how Brother Jeremiah had seen a vision that she was destined for supernatural blessings, but enemies were hard at work trying to cover her star.
At this point, before she proceeded, she impressed upon me the serious need for me to keep what she was about to reveal a secret. She would not continue until I swore that I wouldn’t tell anyone what she was about to tell me. I swore because I was totally being entertained and I wanted to hear more from her that I would later tell Kike.
“Amaka, all I need now is hundred thousand to unlock my glory.”
This was what she wanted me to swear not to repeat?
“Amaka, he has done it for one girl that I know. He did special prayers for her and gave her special perfume and now big boys are fighting over her! Amaka, I have only twenty thousand remaining to give him, but this month must not pass or he can’t do the prayers again this year. That is why I said I should talk to you, because I know that like me, you, you have a clean spirit. Amaka, if you can add the twenty thousand remaining, we will both be using the perfume until it finish.”
And there it was; the catch. We spent a few seconds looking into each other’s eyes; I, with bemused shock, and she, with desperate expectation.
“Are you joking?” I finally said.
She looked hurt, and confused, and let-down, and depressed, all at the same time. She got up from the mattress where we had been sitting, knees touching, and she started pacing up and down the room, tearing at invisible things at her waist.
“Janet, are you serious?”
“Ooooh! Amaka! I know I shouldn’t have told you. This is how my life can change for better and you are blocking me. You are blocking me!”
“Blocking you? How?”
“I regret that I tell you anything. Just forget it. Just forget, you hear? Just forget!”
She then went into a long incoherent, rambling tirade over how she knew she was living amongst enemies, how they (whoever the 'they' were) had warned her, and how she wouldn't allow anyone to hold her back anymore.
At this point I genuinely became concerned for my roommate’s mental state.
She was avoiding my eyes, walking up and down the room and mumbling to herself. She seemed to be searching for something. I picked her mirror from the mattress and held it towards her.
“Take,” I said, but I couldn’t help taking a look.
I screamed and jumped off the mattress and the mirror fell to the ground and broke.
I don’t know how I got there, but I was by the door keeping my eyes on the broken pieces as if it was a snake coiled for attack. My hands were shaking terribly over my breasts.
Janet saw what I had done and let out her own heart piercing scream. She ran to the broken pieces and knelt to start gathering them, as if if she was quick enough the mirror would become whole again.
“Don’t touch it!” I screamed.
My heart was pounding so fast I knew it would soon burst and I would die there in that room, alone with Janet, and no one would know what happened to me.

Chapter 17 : Time Goes On
| ||Rating: 15+||Chapter Reviews: 6|
Background: Font color:
Author's Note: I hope you all enjoy this chapter! It's mainly another transition chapter, but it has some scenes to help make the transitions bearable. Thanks again for all of my readers, and especially to the reviewers as I love reviews. Reviews make me smile. :)
Molly found it easier, if anything, to concentrate on her studies as the mock exams approached with Finn in the library each evening after supper. He did not expect her to talk with him, yet she still found herself taking short breaks to flirt. She found him even more adorable the more time they spent together, and she never tired of seeing that crooked grin of his.
“You’ll be fine,” Finn said, quelling her nerves.
It was Sunday evening, the night before the first mock exam and Molly was a nervous wreck. Not only that, but she had received a letter from her father’s old screech owl earlier over breakfast. She had immediately flew up staircase after staircase, feet pounding down on the marble/stone flooring, to spend another day in the library. Her father had lectured her in his elegant script the importance of mock exams, how he had not had such a luxury during his final year at Hogwarts and she had better take advantage of the chance she was getting to perform at her utmost best. Her brown hair was a frazzled mess due to all of the stress that was currently weighted on her shoulders.
“Relax, you’ll do magnificently,” Finn continued to encourage her. “Herbology is first, and you’re the best in our year in the subject. Just ask Longbottom and he’ll go on and praise you again if you need the extra boost. Matter fact, we can go down to his quarters now if you’d like.”
Molly giggled. “Thanks.”
“For what?” Finn asked, with a crease in his brow.
“For being so encouraging these last couple of weeks,” Molly said. “I would have lost it if you hadn’t been at my side, so thanks.”
Finn shrugged, accepting the kiss she planted on his cheek before turning his head to catch her lips on his. She felt his lips curve upward against hers, warm breath spilling from his mouth as he spoke, “It’s nothing.”
“But it means everything to me.”
The pair rested their foreheads against each others, content by being in the other’s company. They were still only friends, taking it slow, but their relationship continued to grow stronger and closer the more time they spent together. While Finn wanted Molly to be his girlfriend, he respected her decision for them to take it slow before reaching that point.
If Finn had not been there to sooth all of the tension out of her muscles with only his expression of assurance and lopsided grin, then Molly would have lost it already and these were only mock exams, after all. The real N.E.W.T.s weren’t for another few months after the winter holidays. She can only imagine how she would be in a few months’ time. But with Finn, all of her worries seemed to minimize instead of magnify the longer they sat there, not caring for the first time what marks she would receive. She would miss him while she was home spending Christmas and New Years with her family.
While she loved her family, they were a lot to handle all at once and she would surely go crazy with the insanity that will take place over the break.
“I’m going to miss this,” Molly said, breaking the silence.
“What are you going to miss?”
“This,” Molly repeated simply. “Us, just being with you.”
“We can find time to meet up over break,” Finn said, “We don’t have to spend it apart.”
“I doubt I could find time to sneak away from all of my relatives,” Molly said. “In case you haven’t noticed, I have an extraordinarily large family.”
“You could think of a way,” Finn replied.
“True, I could.”
She let her statement trail off, hanging in the empty air between them, before suddenly realising how late it had gotten. She really needed to get some sleep or she would be an even bigger mess than she already was come tomorrow morning. But she did not want to part from Finn as he was making her feel so much better about mock exams starting tomorrow morning at nine o’clock.
Eventually, though, she found herself packing up her bag with Finn doing the same beside her. He ended up walking her up to the Ravenclaw Tower, giving her a slight hug, before heading down to the dungeons for his own dorm. She could not help but think how lucky she was to have acquired Finn Harper’s friendship yet again, despite how she had once harboured a distinct hatred for the Slytherin in the past years. It was funny how people could creep up on you and change your whole perspective of them.
While she still was not sure of the relationship that was progressing between her and Finn, Molly knew better than to ignore her feelings for him. She really enjoyed spending time with him, and what was better was she could tell he liked her, at least, as much as she liked him. It was nice to have someone reciprocate her feelings that were not related to her.
On that final note, Molly finished getting ready for bed and crawled under the blue duvet as she shut her eyes. There were thoughts running through her mind of facts on plants and herbs, spells to use on plants, and so forth as she drifted off to sleep. She needed to do her best tomorrow morning, especially since she wanted to be a Herbologist.
The following day dawned bright an early as Molly made her way down to breakfast with knots in her stomach. She did not think she could eat anything. How could she be this nervous when mock exams were only supposed to be practice to show where they needed to focus their revisions on before the actual exams? Never before had she been so anxious over any test, not even over her O.W.L.s. It more than likely had to do with her standing up to her father about what she truly wanted to do after school. She felt like she had to prove she knew what was best for herself, which she did, by earning high scores in all the right areas.
Nevertheless, she forced herself to munch on some buttered toast and sip from a goblet of pumpkin juice. It was all she trusted her stomach to be able to keep down. The last thing she needed to do was to vomit all over the essay portion of her Herbology exam, then later on Professor Longbottom as he examined each of the Seventh years’ work in the practical portion. She was so on edge that she jumped out of her seat when she felt a hand on her shoulder, letting loose a yelp from between her lips.
“Easy,” came Finn’s soothing voice from behind her as she sat back down, turning in her seat to glance back at him. “I only came over here to see how you were holding up.”
“She needs a good slap across the face, that’s what she needs,” Mathis said, pointing his fork with a bit of egg yolk on it at Molly in a comic fashion. “She keeps fidgeting. These exams are only for practice, Mols, no need to get your britches in a twist now.”
“Come on,” Finn said, gently tugging on Molly’s hand to force her to stand. “I’m taking you to the Hospital Wing for a Calming Drought. You really could use one now.”
“I’m fine,” Molly grumbled, but allowed Finn to lead her out of the Great Hall without further argument. She was in a daze, only aware of his hand in hers, as they climbed staircase after staircase before finally reaching the Hospital Wing and entering.
“Madam Midgeon,” Finn called as they walked farther into the infirmary. “I have a patient who needs calming.”
Madam Eloise Midgeon bustled into the ward from her office in the back, took one look at Molly and sat her down on one of the white sheet covered, twin-sized beds as she went back to get a Calming Drought. Upon returning, she poured out a single dose portion into a medicine glass before handing it to Molly,
“Drink it all and tell me how you feel after.”
Molly drank the contents of the glass, doing her best to ignore the disgusting taste of it. She had never enjoyed drinking potions as a child, her parents had actually had to hold her down to force her to drink potions when she was sick, and nothing had changed since except she no longer needed to be held down. Once it was all gone, Molly held up the empty glass before setting it down on the nightstand beside where she sat.
“Any better?” Madam Midgeon asked pointedly.
Molly thought about it for a moment before nodding, she did feel a bit more relaxed than before. She was still anxious of her Herbology mock exam, but the Calming Drought had unknotted her muscles enough to where she need not feel worried anymore.
Nodding, Molly stood and left the infirmary with Finn after Madam Midgeon had said “good” before sending them on their way back down to the Great Hall. The other Seventh Years were all standing around in the Entrance Hall, waiting for the professors to swap the House tables for individual tables.
Molly stood there with Finn beside her, not saying anything, as Mathis and Erin came up to them to check on her. She found herself nodding and shaking her head to their questions, still not trusting herself to speak actual words. She was feeling better, but not enough to actually partake in a conversation. Then, Tyler joined their group and it was obvious Finn would had rather he not have come over.
“All set,” Tyler said, ever the chirpy lad he was. That only seemed anger Finn more as Professor Longbottom finally opened up the doors which led into the Great Hall,
“We’re ready for you now.”
Taking a deep breath, Molly concentrated solely on putting one foot in front of the other instead of on Finn’s obvious jealousy toward Tyler, whom was only a friend. She would talk to him about it, though it would have to wait until that weekend after mock exams were over. Now, well now she had to focus on her Herbology mock exam and hope she did not completely blow it or she would lose all hope in getting an Outstanding on her N.E.W.T. at the end of term.
When they were all seated at separate, individual round tables, Professor Longbottom passed out the mock exams and returned to the front to turn over the hour glass as they would only have a specific amount of time to complete it as if they really were taking their N.E.W.T.s. As soon as he gave the say so, Molly flipped the test over and was lost within its contents as she scribbled answers with her quill after reading and thinking every so often. By the time they had run out of time, she had been finished for a good five to ten minutes. She stood and left the Great Hall with the rest of her classmates so the professors could fix the Great Hall back up with the four house tables for lunch, then they would have the mock practical portion afterward.
Molly was a bundle of nerves over lunch, too. Finn had joined them at the Ravenclaw table to make sure she ate something, but she did not feel the need to eat anything. Never mind the fact she probably could not keep any food down. She may have taken a Calming Drought earlier, but she still had some nerves that were beginning to knot themselves back up in the pit of her stomach.
“You have to eat something, Molly,” Erin said. “It’ll help you concentrate better.”
She nibbled on some chips, dunking them in ketchup with each bite, until she felt she would not be able to hold anymore in her system.
“Well, let’s be thankful she ate, even a bit,” Finn said.
Then it was back into the Entrance Hall as the professors replaced the house tables with dozens of the individual round tables. Molly re-entered with her classmates to find a Snargaluff Stump atop each table waiting for them. Taking her place, she waited until receiving the say so from Professor Longbottom before getting started on collecting the round eggs and bursting them to spill the tubers into the dish that sat beside the stump on the table.
Once time was called, Professor Longbottom spent around an hour going around the Great Hall to give each student critique. He also let them know they would be given more plants/herbs to work with than the stumps, but he felt the stumps would suffice to prepare them as it was the hardest to maintain control over, all things considered.
Thus, the day was over and they still had other mock exams that week to complete, but somehow Molly was able to get through each without need of another Calming Drought. It surprised her friends, except for Finn for he knew why she was most anxious over Herbology than the others. Nonetheless, when the week ended, Molly found herself rushing around the dorm to make sure she packed all she would need over break. There was a gentle snow falling outside as she rode in the carriage into Hogsmeade with her friends to board the Hogwarts Express.
The ride went by too fast for Molly before the train was pulling up toward Platform Nine and Three Quarters. She did not want to have to say good-bye to Finn for a whole month. Yet, he somehow made it better by telling her he would write her and that they would meet somewhere at least once before term resumed in January.
“Molly, there you are,” came a voice that sounded an awful lot like her father’s. Molly looked over her shoulder, and sure enough saw her father coming her way.
“Yikes,” Molly said under breath, looking back at Finn. “I better go before he flips his lid. I’ll see you soon?”
Finn grinned that lopsided grin of his that made him look oh-so adorable. “Definitely, I’ll write you and we’ll figure it all out.”
It was with that final word said on Finn’s part which had Molly turning and dashing over toward where her father was. She gave him a hug back as he wrapped his arms around her before grabbing the handle of her trunk for her.
“Best be off, then,” Percy told his eldest daughter. “Your mother and sister have already headed through the barrier and are meeting us in the alley to Apparate home.”
Home. The word was enough to bring warmth within Molly, despite the frigidness of the air as she stepped out of the front entrance of King’s Station several minutes later. The snow crunched beneath her feet as she walked along the sidewalk toward the alley where her mother and Lucy were waiting for them. Once they were completely in the alley, Molly spun on the spot with a soft popping sound and appeared on the front walk leading up toward the wraparound porch. Looking up, she was able to spot the window that looked into her bedroom. She always loved the feeling she got upon arriving home for break.
No matter how much she would miss Finn, it was still nice to be home with her family. While she was sure her father would lecture her more, she did not care as all that mattered at the moment was that she was home for the next month.
“It would have been nice if you would have waited for the all clear before Disapparating, Molly,” Percy scolded his daughter as he Apparated with a loud crack beside her, shortly followed by her mother with Lucy wrapped in her arms. “You’re lucky no Muggles saw you disappear like that, no regard for the Statute of Secrecy.”
Molly rolled her eyes. “I’m not a baby.”
Her father was about to lecture her further, but she paid him no heed as she stomped up the snow covered walkway, the frost crunching under the soles of her shoes, and up the porch before entering the house. Her parents had put a charm on all the doors that led into the house to only admit the four of them when no one was home, unless otherwise modified, years ago.
She continued on her march up the stairs and into her room, throwing herself with a disgruntled sigh onto her window seat. Crossing her arms, she grabbed one of the throw pillows and buried her face into it before screaming. Her scream came out muffled, which meant the pillow was still doing its rightful job. She called it her Scream Pillow because it was the pillow she used to muffle her screams and curses into anytime her parents, mainly her father, frustrated her.
It was several minutes as she sat and stewed before there was a knock on her closed bedroom door. As much as she would have loved to tell her parents to go away, she did not have it in her to go that far. Therefore, she told them it was open, and in walked both her mother and father.
“We’re really not going to take this kind of attitude, Molly,” his father started in his warning tone. “It would be nice if we could all have a nice time. It is your last winter break home as you’ll be off on your own after you finish this term at Hogwarts.”
“What your father means,” her mother amended, “is that we’ll try if you try, too. Meaning, both of you will need to set aside everything to ensure the break is a fun one.”
Molly really loved her mother for being the peacekeeper she was. It was obvious that Audrey had been a Hufflepuff by her sheer patience, nourishment, and loyalty toward her family. They were all the traits Lucy had inherited from their mother, while Molly got her father’s traits, which was why she butted heads with him so often. She and her father were so much alike that they fought over everything imaginable, specifically what Molly was going to do with her life after Hogwarts. But, he was coming around, that much was evident from their argument in Hogsmeade.
“Now, while we’re all here,” Audrey continued, as though she were not chastising her husband and eldest daughter, “I think it best to say what we have to say now, and then make a pact not to talk about it for the rest of break. Just get it all off of our chests now.”
“I have nothing to say,” Molly said resolutely, hugging her Scream Pillow to her chest.
“Well, I do,” Percy said. “How did your mock exams go?”
Molly shrugged. “I’ll know how I did when I return back to school next month.”
“How do you feel you did?” he pushed.
“Alright, I suppose.”
“Just alright,” Percy continued to push, “or better than alright?”
“That’s enough, Perce,” Audrey said, sighing. “No more pushing Molly about school. She said she’ll find out after break, until then let’s just enjoy our time together.”
“Fair enough,” Percy said, relenting to his wife.
There were a few minutes of silence between the three of them before her parents finally exited her bedroom. She was alone, finally alone at last. However, now she found her mind drifting toward a certain Slytherin. Shaking her head, Molly decided to go find Lucy. If anyone could make her forget what was on her mind, it was her little sister.
Previous Chapter Next Chapter
Other Similar Stories
into the dark

During World War ll, Japanese Americans were not the enemy is the answer!
Japanese Americans posed a serious risk to the security of the country.
Explanation: The poem depicts what happened when President Roosevelt signed Executive Order 9066. This order authorized the removal of Japanese-Americans, many of them American citizens, who were on the west coast of the country. These people were considered dangerous after the Japanese troops attacked Pearl Habor. These people were removed from their homes and jobs to be held in detention camps created by the US government.
The answer is option 1. During World War II, Japanese Americans were not the enemy.
Explanation: This poet addresses the moment after the attack on Pearl Harbor occurred. Japanese Americans were taken to camps because they were seen as the ones who bombed the port. For this reason, the poem’s theme is option 1, since they were being stereotyped to have the same mindset as the Japanese living in Japan. The country did not see that they were not their enemies.

I was put on clomid 50mg and metformin 1000mg. In the past year my cycles have been fairly regular, except two times. Once I almost completely missed a cycle. Anyway- I was diagnosed with Pcos. This is CD (cycle day) 27 for me. When I went on day 21 for my progestorone they said my level was 1.1 which means I didn't ovulate enough for pregnancy. I usually have very obvious symptoms of my cycle coming i.e. Excruciating period pains that leave me in bed for days. I haven't had an ounce of pain. I wonder if it was impossible for me to conceive ? Could I just be late ? I thought clomid helped regulate cycles?

- Reaction score
Hi all its my first post so excuse me if this is a dumb question lol. I have three red claw crabs and some mollies who over the last couple months have spat out over forty fry (despite them all being famale?) I guess they were pregnant when I bought them. Any way I was wondering if anybody has done this before or if there is some humane way I could use some of these extra fry that I don't have room for as adults that I could use them as food for my crabs. I was hoping they would eat them as they come but the little fry are too fast I guess. I'm guessing there has to be some humane way to put them down and make them easy to eat for my crabs. I just don't have the room to keep all these fish and it just seemed logical to make use of them instead of taking them to the Lfs or something. Anyone have any ideas or thoughts? Thanks!

My Grungy Guy felt like posing today. "Get us on the first flight to Seattle, mom, and make sure my guitar is in tune!" LOL... After dinner I shall clean his ears and give him a wipe down. And how is it that his registration papers say his eyes are Aqua? I have only seen them as this beautiful Sage Green shade, never the swimming pool blue-green that typically displays as aqua.

KING CAROL preferred receiving his guests at Sinaia, the great love of his life. But there were, of course, occasions when he could not avoid receiving at Bukharest, especially when a sovereign came to see him, or a crown prince, when it was considered de rigueur that he should first pass through the capital, where the citizens were eager to show their appreciation by preparing a big reception.
By far the most important guest we ever received was the Emperor of Austria, dear old Franz Joseph. The Czar's visit was much later—in 1914. I was very young in those days and still regarded such events as pleasurable excitements.
King Carol had a feeling of affectionate respect for the old Emperor, who was a true friend to Rumania's king, even when his politics weighed rather heavily upon the striving little country, which showed rather uncomfortable signs of living, thriving and spreading.
The Emperor Franz Joseph came on the sixteenth of September, 1896, and his advent in our midst was looked upon as an occasion for great rejoicing and demonstrations of sympathy, and my husband and I were also called upon to do our share.
At this same date my father also expressed a wish to come and see me for the first time, and my joy was great, but uncle was not quite sure if it suited him to have any other royal guest at the same time as the Emperor, and persuaded me to write as tactfully as possible to my parent saying that, as we were expecting this very official visit, would not papa, perhaps, prefer coming a little later. But, luckily, papa did not take the hint and answered that, on the contrary, he would be only too delighted to meet the dear old Emperor again, whom he had not seen for many a year; so uncle had to include the Duke of Coburg in his festive program.
Papa, of course, lived in our house, and I remember having sent him the queer petition to bring his cook with him. Papa declared that he had often been asked to bring a friend, a gun or a fishing rod, but this was the first time he had ever been invited with his cook.
Trouble With the Palace Cooks
THE reason for this unconventional demand was that our very young household was in continual difficulties with its cooks. They never seemed to remain the year round, and I was quite at a loss, my house being a very big one and rather unwieldy to manage, with the not very efficient aid I received from those in authority. General Robescu, the head of our household—otherwise an amiable gentleman—was quite unequal to settling kitchen difficulties.
It had become proverbial in the family that we could never keep a cook, and mama continually teased me much on this subject; we even once had a bet together that if I managed to keep my cook beyond the New Year, she would give me a certain coveted Italian watercolor in her possession. I won my picture, but I cannot swear that the cook much outstayed the first of January.
Cooks of every kind and every nationality kept passing through our kitchen during the first years: A German who was deplorably inadequate; a Frenchman who thought himself a poet and hid little musical boxes in his puddings, and disliked General Robescu with Latin unrestraint; a Pole who suffered from chilblains; and a Czech who could not get on with his wife, and so on.
Other young households have, I believe, known the same sort of trouble, and we were not an exception, but I felt very humiliated at having to ask my father for the loan of his cook; but let me hastily add that the cook actually in my service now is soon going to celebrate his thirty years' jubilee, which proves that the culinary difficulties did not last forever.
A Luncheon for an Emperor
BUT as one of the features of uncle's program for the Austrian Emperor's entertainment was an official lunch we were to give at Cotroceni, it was of paramount importance to have a good cook, and the Coburg cook was quite a celebrity. I am glad to say that our lunch was a great success and papa rubbed his hands in silent glee.
It was the first and only time papa ever visited me in Rumania, and I was pathetically eager that he should feel at home in our house. In those days I was not a very competent housewife. I found local peculiarities hard to cope with, and a deplorable inability to scold my servants was not particularly conducive to order. In Rumania nothing is naturally tidy, there is little routine; and being accustomed to Occidental precision, I did not realize what a continual effort it would mean to hold my own when dealing with the many quite unexpected and perplexing Eastern negligences.
With the years papa had become very silent; sometimes, in fact, he could be quite glum, and he liked best to be left alone to his own devices and desires. He had his own habits, and these we had been taught rigorously to respect. No one could be more charming than papa on the days when he was gay and sociable, but what he liked best was to read his newspapers by the hour, seated ensconced behind them, a glass of beer at hand, from which he, from time to time, would slowly drink.
At that period we had only two children, Carol and Elisabetha. We were very proud of them and they shared every hour of our day. Lisabetha, then about three years old, like her grandfather, was very silent; she seldom expressed her feelings or desires, but her movements were deliberate and precise. Her face was very round, her features small, regular, absurdly classical, her gaze direct and piercing, sometimes almost fierce; she kept her very small mouth tightly shut. In fact, a queer little morsel of humanity, but very attractive in her own small way.
This wee little girl took a strange fancy to her taciturn grandfather; he was "canny" to her, words were unnecessary; she felt comfortable in his company.
I can still see her, dressed in a funny little Rumanian costume with an orange handkerchief tied peasantwise around her face, which made it look still chubbier, quietly stalking after him, dragging an absurd little straw chair about with her, closely observing the movements of the elderly, silent gentleman who had so suddenly come into her life, to see where he would settle down. When papa had selected the seat and the corner which suited him and had buried himself behind his paper, Lisabetha would place her chair close beside him and remain there, absolutely mute, but quite contented, as though at last having found the companion who suited her best. From time to time papa would peep at her over his paper, but he understood that nothing was expected of him, so these two queer associates exchanged never a word. But the moment papa moved, Lisabetha, straw chair and all, moved with him, ready to take up her position beside him, no matter where he settled down. Lisabetha seldom showed strong preferences for anyone, so these small maneuvers were really amusing to watch.
All the energy and good will of court, town and country were called upon to receive the old Emperor worthily. It meant much to King Carol that this venerated sovereign should be honored in every way; it suited his politics as well as his sympathies, and with King Carol these two—affection and politics—went always closely hand in hand. Young and ignorant though I was, I distinctly felt that uncle considered this a great day for himself and his country.
Nando was very eager that I should honorably do my share ; he was always a little anxious on official occasions, afraid that I should not be sufficiently impressed or that I might be too offhand. It is true that I never could learn very ceremonious or conventional manners; I was too much a child of nature and had never lived in centers of severe etiquette, so my training in these arts was scanty and insufficient, but I was naturally amiable when not too shy. I had a kindly feeling toward all men, and, after all, youth and a pretty face are natural allies. Aunt Elizabeth was, on the contrary, a past master in the art of receiving. Her social talents were exceptional and her conversation charming, interesting, though occasionally a little high-flown and over-poetical for very terre-à-terre people. But I learned much from her, though in those days her excessive amiability made me feel sometimes a little uncomfortable. I would not always play up, for the young are always afraid of being absurd, and I came of a family little accustomed to show or express their feelings.
Riding in the Big Parade
I CANNOT remember all the details of that imperial visit; it is so long ago and there is no one left to talk it over with; they are all gone. But I remember the big parade where I proudly rode beside uncle and the Emperor, and papa was also with us in a blue German hussar uniform.
The royal visit was considered a great success and also beneficial to the good feeling between the two countries, which was essential, as very close neighbors are generally not overfond of each other.
Kaiser Wilhelm never paid a visit to King Carol; all through his life uncle expected this politeness of the one whom he considered the head of the family, although the Sigmaringen Hohenzollerns were the older line. My husband regretted this deeply, for he would have much liked to see the Emperor of Germany follow the Austrian Emperor's example, but he hoped in vain.
My father prolonged his visit after the Emperor's departure; he liked Sinaia and was contented in our little house and graciously accepted our small daughter's silent attentions, flattered and amused at the child's evident sympathy for him.
Long ago, in aunty's youth, she had had a feeling for my father. Obedient to his very royal mother's wishes, papa had, as quite a young man, undertaken a tournée through the courts of Europe, so as to review the eligible princesses carefully drawn up on a list by Queen Victoria. This list brought him also to Neuwied to see young Elizabeth, noted for her charm and exceptional intelligence.
Romance Under the Beeches
ELIZABETH OF WIED was schwärmerisch, high- flown, poetical; brought up amongst artists and intellectuals, she loved music, literature, philosophy—was, in fact, an enthusiast and somewhat of a bluestocking, but a poetical bluestocking, full of ideals. Papa was good-looking, his eyes were exceedingly blue, and when the young princess and her mother discovered that he played the violin, he was taken out into their beloved beech woods and had to play to them there under the trees.
It was amusing to hear the way each described their remembrance of this sylvan concert. To aunty it had remained an outstanding event, a marvelous experience, the recollection of which was cherished all the days of her life.
"It was my one little romance," she told me.
To papa, alas, it had been one of the chief reasons why he had struck Elizabeth of Wied off his mother's list. To the shy young Englishman this poetical episode had been an excruciatingly painful experience.
Aunty confessed to me what my father had meant to her—a dream that did not come true. I tried to prepare her for the change she would find in her ideal after so many years; but she was sentimentally excited at the thought of seeing him again, and still kept in her heart a vision of a blue-eyed youth with a violin under his chin. Well, of course, it was a disillusionment.
First of all, papa had never been what she had imagined—no, not even then, in his early youth, for "things are not as they seem"—the violin had never been an essential, but only an appendage. It was not young Alfred's every-day habit to play under the trees of the forest; even on that memorable occasion he had done it grudgingly and only to comply with the ecstatic ladies' desire, but this vision of the good- looking young prince with the violin pressed to his cheek was to them the real man, such as their poetical fantasy desired him to be. And today he was very much the old gentleman with the ingrained habits of one who saw life as it was and not through particularly rosy spectacles; at that, he was of the earth, earthy, and had scanty patience with what he termed "sentimental nonsense."
In spite of all this, aunty still clung to the idea that papa loved music above all things. She could not help seeing that he had become a rather taciturn old gentleman, not in the least given to high-flown rhapsodies, but nothing is more tenacious than an old dream. In spite of the most evident reality, Carmen Sylva, the Poet Queen, wanted to awake in this elderly prince, whose illusions had been shed one by one along the road of life, some echo of that far-off day spent under the great beech trees of the Neuwied forest.
Unfortunately, papa's advent came during the period when aunty thought to have discovered a musical genius in a man of doubtful talent. This gentleman has been before mentioned—the old boy who imagined he could sing equally tenor, bass or barytone.
This mistaken enthusiasm was the reason why a second picnic was organized, aunty desiring that her protégé should display his talents in a wild and romantic setting. So we once more set forth under aunty's command, being led through a forest to a wild place amongst rocks, and here, grouped about more or less uncomfortably upon hard stones, we were given a concert I am not going to try to describe.
To make things worse, aunty, who lived not in a world of realities, liked to assemble many people around her—the more the better, no matter how miscellaneous or how indiscriminately shuffled together—old and young, rich and poor, of different classes, of different nationalities, the blasés as well as the artless, the sophisticated as well as those poor of spirit—all these had to follow her lead, for Carmen Sylva needed an audience.
So papa found himself one of a heterogeneous company which meant nothing to him and which he passed in review with none too neighborly feelings. He did not particularly relish being dragged up steep mountain paths, nor did he find either pleasure or repose on his rocky seat.
I was feeling nervous, knowing that my father was somewhat short of temper, nor was he particularly patient or long suffering; when displeased, it was not his way to bury his feelings under a mask of amiability. So I watched him anxiously, knowing that his nerves were going to be severely tried.
I had two young English girl friends with me, and we exchanged apprehensive glances; we saw the humorous side of the situation, we were accustomed to aunty's eccentricities, but we realized that papa's British conventionality was going to receive somewhat of a shock.
And a shock, indeed, it did receive. The singer appeared suddenly from behind a rock and striking a heroic attitude considered in keeping with the mountain background, gave vent to a series of extraordinary sounds which aunty listened to with clasped hands.
Ferdinand of Bulgaria
I sat as close to papa as I dared, with the feeling that I could ward off disaster. When displeased, he had a way of sticking out his underlip in a sort of pout, which we always considered a danger signal, and it meant that we had to tread carefully. Once he turned to me and said:
"This is outrageous! Am I to be made a fool of?"
"No, no, papa, but just wait a little and I shall invent some excuse to get off."
And get off we did, at least before the storm burst, but the ordeal had been terrible.
My knees were actually shaking when I got up, but I cannot remember what plausible excuse I found for carrying papa off, leaving to her concert aunty and all those who had followed in her wake.
Papa kept snorting his indignation all the way home, angry with each stone his toes met on the steep descent.
"Is that what you call singing here in Rumania?"
"No, no, papa, but aunty, you know—"
"No, I don't know, and don't want to. I had the feeling of being in a lunatic asylum!"
"No, no, but aunty, you see—"
"No, I don't see, and don't want to see. It was preposterous!"
And thus all the way home.
Later, when papa had left, aunty one day said to me with a sigh:
"Darling, I did not find a trace in him of the young man who was my dream. Such a pity. Nothing at all, not even his love for music."
And that moment, sadly feeling the difference of being or not being a poet, I gently tried to explain:
"You see, aunty, not many people at sixty are just as they were at twenty-one."
"I have not changed much," said aunty. And this indeed was true.
Undeniably, one of uncle's and aunty's most interesting and entertaining guests was Ferdinand of Bulgaria. He came more than once—as prince, with his first wife, mother of his children, and later, as king, with his second wife, Eleonora, but he also came alone, and I must confess that his appearance in our midst was always welcome to me, because he was so extraordinarily amusing.
A Lover of Intrigue
Both Uncle Carol and Uncle Ferdinand were considered clever politicians and diplomats, which they undeniably were, but their schools were very different. There was not much love lost between these two sovereigns, but their politeness towards each other was irreproachable and admirable; a grand display of perfect manners. For the looker-on, it was as good as a play to see them together, because greater contrasts it would have been difficult to find.
Der Onkel was earnest, somewhat pompous, took himself and his work tremendously seriously, and certainly his methods were as upright and devoid of double-dealing as is compatible with the professions of reigning and diplomacy, but uncle was entirely devoid of a sense of humor, nor did he understand the art of small talk and elegant conversation. Uncle was, in fact, somewhat of a pedant.
Imagine as contrast Ferdinand of Coburg, world renowned for his intelligence and love of intrigue, which he professed like a fine art. The French blood running in his veins made of him an incomparable causeur; his repartee was sparkling; his irony light, intangible, and always to the point. Sharp witted, all-observing, with a superfine sense of humor, he often indulged in the delicate luxury of laughing at himself, of making fun of his looks, his idiosyncrasies, his tastes, his likes and dislikes. All this, furnished subjects for endless witty conversation and allowed him to use his sarcasm to his heart's content.
Ferdinand was also an artist to his fingertips, art was bread and water to him, and as botanist and biologist, his equal was difficult to find, even in the scientific world; his love for flowers, plants and animals was deep-rooted and convincing. There may have been less comfortable sides to Uncle Ferdinand's nature, but a more pleasant, stimulating and erudite companion, when he set out to charm his audience, cannot be imagined.
To anyone with a sense of humor, to see the two kings together was really exceedingly entertaining. Uncle always took himself seriously at all hours of the day, at all seasons of the year and in every company. Life was to him a long chain of important events; nor did he ever ease this attitude of heavy earnestness; whilst Bulgaria's monarch was a great actor.
Il aimait s'écouter and saw himself in the parts it, in turn, pleased him to interpret, be it that of a wily, ceremonious politician, the easily offended ruler whose every susceptibility must be respected, or that of the debonair, polite, sarcastic homme du monde, super-refined, all smiles and amiability, or even that of the somber, almost tragic tyrant of a mysterious country always in ebullition. His talk would then be of danger, plague, treason and sudden death; his voice would become dramatic, his accents thrilling, and he managed to evoke sinister pictures full of dark possibilities. But never for a moment during these recitations would he quite lose that expression of half-amused irony—in fact, he had almost a wink in that small sly all- seeing eye of his, meant for those clever enough to share with him the fun he was having by thus incorporating these different exciting personalities.
Physically these two monarchs were also interesting contrasts. Uncle was ascetic, sparse, with no pretense to elegance, blue-blooded, but for all that a self-made man, proud of his achievements, with just a touch of naïveté about him, because he took himself so hopelessly au sérieux. Uncle was. a soldier and somewhat of a Spartan, or better said, there was something of the monk about King Carol. But Bulgaria's ruler was tall, his figure somewhat ponderous, a sybarite, fond of discussing his health, posing for the valetudinarian averse to physical effort, caring for his ease and comfort, exceedingly soigné as to dress and general elegance, grand seigneur to the point of decadence, sarcastic about himself and others, always having the laugh on his side. His watchful eyes were set rather closely together over a nose no doubt very aristocratic, but certainly of exaggerated proportions.
A Passion for Gems
An ardent lover of beauty, Uncle Ferdinand was well aware that his nose was too prominent a feature, so he was forever mentioning this unfortunate appendage, which he called "die Dulderin"—the sufferer—and once, showing me a group photograph of which he formed the center, he said to me in his somewhat nasal voice: "Avec ces tout petits yeux et ce nez comme une trompe, ne suis-je pas tout à fait comme un éléphant? Mais, ma chère nièce, j'ai aussi toute la sagacité de ce si vénérable quadrupède." And then he could laugh a little in the way of poor Aunt Philippa, his eyes completely disappearing, drawing in the air in a quite special way through that offending nose.
Ferdinand of Bulgaria had a strange passion for precious stones; he would fondle them as though their touch gave him almost physical ecstasy. Considering me a worthy audience, he would bring out his different little stories for my benefit, knowing that I appreciated his subtleties, and thus he once drew a picture of himself which I have never forgotten, a picture where he is seated all by himself in a dimly lighted chamber, draped in a long black-velvet dressing gown, fingering his priceless gems.
Uncle Ferdinand had beautifully kept, very white hands and wore his nails overlong, and looking at those pale fingers, ever afterward it seemed to me that I saw the many-colored gems slipping through them one by one.
In everyday life these pale fingers were covered with beautiful rings; his gestures were slow, had about them something of a priest officiating in church.
I loved talking to him about flowers and animals; it was like turning over the pages of a superbly written book; he had traveled through many countries and could tell me with the minutest details where the rarest flowers grew, describing the soil in which they thrived, their habits, color, perfume, and his language was so descriptive that picture upon picture passed before my eyes.
King Ferdinand had the disconcerting talent of being able to keep up two conversations at a time. He often indulged in this whilst talking with King Carol, whose wit was less chameleonlike. His serious pompous discourse was for the king, his amusing asides for the younger generation, but these were so smoothly woven into his speech that, before uncle could notice any byplay, he was back again in the middle of his political dissertation, as though there had never been any deviation from the central subject.
Once, at a big dinner at Bukharest, I was sitting on his left. It was just after he had declared himself king, and he was on his way back from Russia. He had been officially received with every honor, for Uncle Ferdinand was a great stickler as to etiquette; outwardly he was on his best behavior, exceedingly ceremonious, covered with decorations, honey dripping from his lips. Speeches befitting the occasion were pronounced on both sides. He had just sat down again after having delivered himself of his most amiable discourse, glasses had been raised, healths drunk; then, leaning over toward me, his wee eyes sparkling with mischief, he whispered into my ear: "Et, très chère nièce, il faut savoir qu'au fond nous nous détestons!" But I was given to understand that, having Coburg blood in my veins, I was not included in this detestation.
The Two Wives of the King
Such was King Ferdinand of Bulgaria, seen by a niece who, herself not lacking in humor, was occasionally allowed a peep behind the scenes; it can be well imagined that I thoroughly enjoyed his occasional appearance in our midst.
I am afraid, however, that this uniquely entertaining gentleman was not the most comfortable of husbands. Both his wives stood in great awe of him and would never have dared oppose his will in the smallest degree. Poor delicate Maria Louise was a frail, small woman with a long, rather melancholy Greco face, wearing the many magnificent jewels with which her husband had overwhelmed her as though they were a burden beyond her strength. Her large, washed-out blue eyes had a resigned pathetic expression; she was what she looked—a sad woman with not enough health to endure all that was expected of her. She bore her exigent master four children and then she died, and death was probably her release.
A born Bourbon Parma, she was very aristocratic and intensely Catholic, so that any derogation from this faith was, to her, mortal sin; yet she had to bear the grief of seeing her eldest son rechristened in the Orthodox church after having first been baptized a Catholic. She never got over this blow, so she allowed the first serious illness which came to her to carry her off from this world of pain and deception.
Eleanora of Reuss, the king's second wife, was quite another type. She was a Protestant and a much more vigorous and independent woman, who, during the Russo-Japanese War, had gone out as nurse to the wounded. She knew life and had faced it squarely; she had an altruistic spirit, was practical, energetic, and almost middle- aged when she became the second Queen of Bulgaria, but to say that she was happy would, I think, be an exaggeration.
The Crown Prince Comes
She served her people with generous abnegation, was a wonderful sister of charity during the Balkan and, later, the World War, but she died before peace was concluded.
Eleanora was some relation of aunty, and once she came to Sinaia without her overpowering husband, and on this occasion we were able to appreciate her sense of fun and good humor; she enjoyed our family circle and brought with her two of the most beautiful Skye terriers I have ever seen. When I think of Aunt Eleanora I always see her with those two superb canine friends.
The Crown Prince of Germany's visit to Bukharest in the spring of 1909 was a gayer business; it, so to say, sounded another key; it was less ponderous, more colorful and quite in keeping with the early-flowered season.
Tall and exceedingly slim, although not handsome, in his white cuirassier uniform, polished top-boots and shining, eagle-crowned helmet, William was a goodly sight, and as he was out for gaining hearts, he was at once exceedingly popular. When on his best behavior, his manners were perfect, and he had a charming way with the king, full of deference and attention, so that the old gentleman was much pleased with him, though he was always somewhat disconcerted by youth.
Young William had, however, a weakness, and this was his overgreat appreciation of pretty ladies, which kept his uniformed guardians in a constant state of anxiety. This anxiety was passed on to uncle, and joining forces, the Crown Prince's every velleity toward freedom and arranging things pleasantly for himself was ingeniously frustrated by the elders.
To the great displeasure of the generals of his suite, he managed to get out of a visit he was to pay to Constantza, in the hope of spending that day with me and my young lady friends. This pleasant little plan was, however, brought to naught by those in authority, annoyed at his refusal to inspect our seaport, where an eager colony of Germans had been awaiting his coming with feverish excitement. Therefore, instead of being allowed to enjoy himself in the company most congenial to him, he was marshaled about from one dull institution to another, and instead of drinking tea at Cotroceni, as he had hoped to do, he finally had to take it with aunty, who talked to him about his grand and great-grandfather, declaring that she was in intimate communion with Emperor Frederick's spirit.
Certain concessions were, however, made both to William's tastes and youth, and he was allowed to be amused, not perhaps as he would have liked, but strictly within the limits of court etiquette.
A huge garden party was arranged at Buftea, the country seat of the Stirbeys; dances in national costumes were danced on the grass, and as there were young ladies galore, the bright young prince was able to use his charm to his heart's content, both offering and receiving homage in a manner which betrayed perfect routine.
The garden party was a perfect success, the weather was beautiful, there were many flowers, the trees were in earliest leaf. The old king and queen graced the festivity with their presence. All in white, aunty beamed down upon this debonair offspring of the Hohenzollerns with grandmotherly indulgence, offering him, between the dances, no end of excellent advice, which he accepted with the gay good grace habitual to him when speaking to a lady, no matter what her age.
Uncle circled about amongst the guests, young and old, being amiable with that relentless thoroughness inherent to his sense of duty, whilst I found my private amusement in watching the silent competition between the young Bukharest beauties, who, one and all, had set out to capture the volatile heart of this charming prince, famous for his never-failing interest in the weaker sex.
My children were the central interest of my life. Those of our race are passionate mothers, and we cannot conceive of a world without children. All our work, efforts and ambition tend toward building them up according to our ideals of making them happy and preparing for them a fine future.
Bringing Up Children
My nursery was the center of my life, and as only my two eldest children were born in close succession and there were longer pauses between the other four, I was able to prolong it indefinitely.
I always preferred the nursery to the schoolroom, which was already a step away from the Golden Age, the beginning of toil and trouble, and I was not by nature a pedagogue—I was, in fact, inclined to be too lenient always, as I hated the feeling of any sort of tyranny or coercion, and had an insurmountable aversion to scolding. I hated being scolded, and still more did I hate having to scold. This had been a great hindrance to me all through life, especially as I instinctively realized that this aversion was, in fact, weakness—an inability to be disagreeable even to those who thoroughly deserved being rebuked.
But, alas, a too small dose of severity is as little conducive to good educational results as the contrary. But the extreme urge for liberty which was the fundamental trait of my character made me incapable of coercing others, even when severity would not only have been absolutely justified but even necessary. I confess that many of the failures, even the disasters, of my life can be brought back to this fundamental inability to scold or reprove.
With the coming of our fourth child and second son, Nicholas, we left our first Sinaia home, the Foişor—a delightful little house styled Chalet Suisse, tucked in amongst huge fir trees, right up against the forest.
Carol, the eldest of our children, was plump, merry and docile as a small boy. Being the first, he was of course spoilt by high and low, and all the good things of this world were cast at his feet. He was the long-hoped-for heir and, therefore, the great favorite.
He grew up steady, rather stolid, easy to manage, and had from the beginning an urge toward information. He learned to read with astonishing rapidity. In his early years he was all sunshine and good humor, later he became just a little pedantic; his sisters would declare, "Carol likes tiresome things." The truth was that, already as a quite small boy, he was unusually interested in all things pertaining to rules, laws, proscriptions and interdictions; he liked to inquire into the inner working of things; this came, probably, from being a great deal with uncle, whose specialty was to instruct. In Carol he found a fertile ground, as the boy also shared his father's and grand-uncle's passion for soldiering. He loved all things military and cared immensely for uniforms, regulations and every minutest detail of discipline and command.
At the age of three or four he would march with a tiny sword at the head of the soldiers when the guard was changing, solemnly certain that he was in command, or he would stand in the middle of the band, beside the bandmaster, a little stick in hand, imitating with the utmost earnestness that important gentleman's every gesture.
Carol was adored by the officers and their men, and no end of wee uniforms were offered him by the different regiments. In these he would proudly strut about giving orders to imaginary troops, admirably imitating the voice used by those in command, sharply separating his sentences and rolling his r's.
But this overmilitary little fellow was a trial to his sisters; the tyrant slumbered within him, and as his games were modeled upon state institutions and military restrictions, he naturally hampered their fun.
He would, for instance, set up a customhouse in the middle of the corridor where his sisters were tearing about with their toy horses and carts; he would insist upon taxes being paid, thereby curtailing their liberty and causing endless scenes of revolt and indignation.
Little Men and Women
It is interesting to watch children at their games; nothing is more character revealing, and the qualities or faults lying dormant in each small being are almost uncannily brought to light.
Carol was all order and precision, with an underlying impulse to rule, subdue, restrict. Elisabetha, although strangely silent, was full of ardor, fantasy and imagination. She was fond of being alone; as a small child, she could be very wild; then her eyes would glow, but she seldom expressed herself in words; her hands were small and strong as steel.
Exceedingly handsome even as a baby, her features were unexpectedly classical, although her face was as round as a cherub's. Her look was straight, almost defiant, beneath well- marked eyebrows. Carol's desire to subjugate her aroused furious, though almost dumb, resentment.
Mignon was all smiles and passivity; she was pleased with everything; she would docilely join in with the others' games, but without ever any desire to lead or dominate. Her nature was based upon sweetness and patience, not unmixed with indolence; she seemed born to be the souffre-douleur of all the others. She never complained or felt aggrieved, and there was an almost sleepy and instinctively indulgent look in her long-shaped blue eyes. Her beautifully strong, fair hair grew low on her forehead. This hair was a continual temptation to Nicky; he could not keep his fingers out of it, and I remember once, when I was pitying Mignon for having caught her hair in the door handle, how she placidly answered, "Oh, it does not matter. Nicky hurts me much more when he tugs my hair out." And, alas, Nicky was very often tugging at his sister's hair.
There was almost a peasant's endurance about Mignon. One could have well imagined her in a cottage, the mainstay of the family, lighting the fire, milking the cows, fetching water at the well, or carrying too-heavy babies about, sweeping the floors, setting the dishes on the table. Mignon was instinctively a helpful and domestic child.
The Birth of Ileana
Having been born at a period when I had been very unhappy, I loved her with the love a lion mother might have for her cub. Mignon was, so to say, the child of my flesh. I could almost feel with my own body when Mignon had an ache or a pain.
If Mignon was the child of my flesh, Ileana was certainly the child of my soul. She came only in the year 1909, and I was no more young; life had already to a certain degree disciplined me. I was a more conscious personality, my character had ripened, I had learned self-control and how to look life and circumstances squarely in the face. My shoulders were thrown back and I was ready to take my own responsibilities.
Her birth was a great joy to me and I was glad she was a girl. Even at the hour of her birth her eyes were enormous and dark blue. I remember how I lay on my back, the struggle over, the new little world wanderer pressed to my heart, listening to the royal salute—twenty-one guns for a princess. Had it been a son, there would have been one hundred and one. Perhaps some would be disappointed that it was not a boy, but I was not, and those guns were like the voice of my people rejoicing with me over the birth of this fifth child. Later there could still be a boy.
Today I no more resented being told that my children belonged to the country; today it was my pride that it should be so. I had gone a long way since October, 1893, when my first child was born; then I was seventeen, today I was thirty-three, and had learned something of patience and abnegation, and had understood the necessity of constant effort toward a central goal, had understood also that serving was the real object of life. We all have to learn to serve; some of us do not learn it easily. I was amongst these, but today I was beginning to understand and, with this understanding, uncle's personality became more comprehensible, more sympathetic. He was not infallible—he, too, could err—but he was wise in most things; above all, he was earnest and entirely convinced. He loved Rumania, and although occasionally unnecessarily ponderous, he had a straight line of action from which he never deviated.
Ileana, from her earliest infancy, had an earnestness about her which the other four did not possess. Her large dark-blue eyes looked at you with deep inquiry, and the child seemed to understand your every emotion with almost uncanny lucidity.
Ileana was naturally well behaved. Ileana, as is so seldom the case, was born with the law within her; it was never necessary to teach Ileana the difference between right and wrong; Ileana knew. But this did not make of her a prig. She was a gay, happy child, full of life and high spirits, and when Mircea appeared early in the year 1913, Ileana loved him with motherly ardor, and Mircea adored Ileana more than anyone on this earth—more than his mother, more than his nurse.
Thus we were a very happy family before the war came to tear so many things up by the roots.
I have already related elsewhere that it was one of King Carol's theories that he—not we—was to choose those who were to educate and bring up our children. Later in life I understood many of uncle's views and what seemed to us unnecessary tyrannies, but even today, with the judgment of my ripe years, I consider that here he made a grievous mistake. It gave rise to endless trouble in the household and the final result was anything but satisfactory.
This, however, is one of those inner griefs that it is unnecessary to enlarge upon; but much misfortune might have been avoided, and much was brought into our lives, with far-reaching consequences which, in a way, changed the face of history for us.
I can only say that we were not allowed to bring up our two eldest children, and with this order of things elements and influences were brought into the household which were disastrous in more ways than one.
But, nevertheless, I have many- happy memories of our family life; some stand out quite particularly—visions of the past, drenched with sunshine, gay with the sound of children's voices and the pattering of small feet.
Before the birth of my last and sixth child, Mircea, I was not in my usual good health, and during the autumn visit to my mother in 1912 I had even to submit to being looked after, a fact which filled me with astonished resentment. In January, 1913, Mircea was born, but I did not recover as rapidly as usual, being confined to my bed for three weary months by a painful phlebitis. Ill health seemed to me a personal insult—something that could happen to others, but not to myself. Outwardly I submitted with patience, but inwardly I was unresigned to the indignity of the sick bed.
Rumors of War
Because of this unfortunate mishap, I could not enjoy my last-born as I had enjoyed all the other children, being prostrate on my back, but it was a great comfort to me that Carol, who adored babies, would carry his little brother up and down my room as long as I wished, so that I could at least look at my baby, to whom my whole heart went out. I always particularly adored my babies when they were tiny and helpless; they seemed to possess every drop of my blood.
Uncle came as often as he could escape from his work. He would generally appear toward evening and, sitting beside my bed, he would tell me all about his political difficulties. It was strange how confidential he had become, all distance seemed to be effaced between us, and today his conversation did not bore me as in former days. This was during the first Balkan War. I was possessed with a desperate anxiety that we should be forced into war whilst I was tied to my bed. The thought that our soldiers might go off to fight whilst I was invalided was torture to me. But our family doctor, a caustic hard-tongued little man, very devoted, but very bitter of speech, so as to impress upon me the necessity of keeping absolutely still, had pronounced some rather terrible words. "Remember," he said, "you have a pistol in your leg, and if you make the slightest movement you can shoot it off into your heart." So I kept still.
Working in the Hospitals
When Rumania finally did enter the second war, it was too late to join in with the fighting, as the Serbs and Greeks had already been victorious without her aid. Nevertheless, our troops crossed into Bulgaria at several places on rapidly constructed pontoon bridges.
My husband had command of the troops and Carol went with him. General Averescu, one of uncle's most trusted generals, was chief of staff.
On July twelfth our cavalry was standing close before Sofia, but uncle, out of a feeling of delicacy toward King Ferdinand, would not allow our troops to march into the Bulgarian capital. Wise in all things, King Carol knew that certain humiliations should be avoided, because of the spirit of never- ending resentment they engender. This was, of course, a great disappointment to men and officers; I remember hearing both sides of the question, the military as well as the political.
It resulted in no battles, but whilst on enemy's ground our troops encountered as deadly a foe as cannons—cholera.
I was brought into sudden contact with this terrible scourge when I went to visit the troops and the Red Cross hospitals scattered along the Danube. I cannot help looking upon this as a turning point in my life. It was my first initiation into suffering on a larger scale; a thing never before known, heard of, no doubt, but as something far away, with which I should never have anything to do. And here it was, rising huge before me to throb through my whole being as a messenger sent to awaken within me sleeping forces of which I had never been aware. I went from place to place, visiting the sick, and my horror grew as I began to investigate the conditions in which these hospitals and barracks were being run. I had long talks with Elise Bratianu and her right-hand, Mademoiselle Slivici and Elise told me I could help a great deal if I went seriously to work.
Disobeying an order that no woman might go over the Danube, I paid a flying visit to the Bulgarian side, crossing almost secretly on one of the boat bridges erected by our troops. There, in a forlorn village, I saw sights which made my blood run cold.
There was one thing I entirely lacked—physical fear. My splendid health lent me nerves of steel. Looking about me, I felt that what was wanted was a leader, an encourager, one high enough placed to have authority, and who, by remaining calm and steady, could become a rallying point for those who were beginning to lose their heads.
I met Dr. Jean Cantacuzène and his assistant, Dr. Slatineanu, who were on a tour of inspection. They were much horrified by the difficulties they encountered. I had a long talk with them, and they, too, told me I could help enormously if I called upon all my energies. Being crown princess, they declared, people would listen to me and be ready to follow my lead.
So I hurried to Sinaia to talk with uncle, pleading my cause so urgently that I won from him permission to take over the cholera camp of Zimnicea, one of the principal points where our troops were to recross the Danube on their way home.
Carol, who had been with his father, asked permission to come and help me, and he became my right-hand, carrying out all my instructions and showing great personal energy and initiative. He was a good and steady worker and liked being my keeper.
It was astounding what we were able to do in a short time. My appeal to the different authorities and also to many personal friends brought me in rich provisions, so my hands were always full and I could appear everywhere as a dispenser of those extras unobtainable in military camps.
It would lead me too far were I to give a full description of those two weeks spent amongst our troops on that bare and dreadful field of suffering. The work was hard, the sights heart-rending, but difficulties only multiplied our courage and energy.
At first the doctors in charge of the camp met me with a certain skepticism; they were inclined to think I should be a hindrance rather than a help. It is true that I knew nothing about sickness, but I did not pretend that I had come as a nurse; but what I could be was a leader, an upholder, one to whom everybody could turn for help.
Soon doctors, orderlies, soldiers, officers and sisters of charity became my most ardent adherents. I was never tired or discouraged. I would allow no difficulty to beat me; the harder the work, the more strength did I find, and in a few days I had become the pivot around which everything revolved.
After this tremendous experience amongst our soldiers in the Zimnicea cholera camp, I was never quite the same again.
The Rough Road to Reality
Reality had come to me in a way I should never more forget, and having learned what it was to serve, in the broader sense of the word, it changed my conception of things and roused in me the desire to be of real national utility.
I had now six children and I had the feeling that this essential part of my duty was at an end. I had not disappointed Rumania in its expectations; the royal family was copiously established—three sons and three daughters. Now other work lay before me and I looked into the future with wider interests than solely those of my own household.
I know, by much that I was later given to read about myself, that I have been considered an ambitious intriguing woman, with vast plans and a desire to play a predominant part, even in world politics. I read these descriptions of myself with astonishment, because they certainly do not correspond with truth. I was, on the contrary, almost reprehensibly indifferent to politics, even to those of my country, having, because of uncle's complete absorption in them, a horror even of the word "politics."
Everything in me had developed slowly and I had never felt the slightest desire to play a part, but I always had a great desire to be loved, to be popular with my people. This seemed easy to me because, being always well disposed toward others, I could not believe I should not be given unlimited credit.
My chief urge was toward independence and a mighty desire to live my life as agreeably as possible, but in my own way.
My life, however, was never really agreeable or free. It was at times happy, often interesting, but it was a difficult life, full of accumulated restrictions, and had meant, from the first day of my arrival in Rumania, a continual steering through a thousand traps and pitfalls amongst people eternally on the lookout to find me at fault and to discover complicated reasons behind my every action. What I did and left undone was continually criticized, and no one admitted that a woman of my exuberant temperament could be completely harmless or uncomplicated.
The Power of a Legend
My absolute frankness and disconcerting simplicity could not be accepted as genuine; it would have been too easy an explanation of my character; something had to be sought for behind my eternal good humor and overtrustful attitude toward life and human beings.
So a legend of relentless ambition was woven around me, and my honest face was rendered unrecognizable to myself by the mask I was supposed to wear. People somehow preferred to see me thus.
I have often pondered over this perverting of truth, and finally came to the conclusion that, being so absolutely sure of my own good faith and excellent intentions, I never took any trouble to explain myself, nor was I careful enough of outward appearances or what I said.
I let my good humor run away with me, and when the spirit of fun came over me, caution was always cast to the wind.
But in 1913 things had definitely changed and my work in the cholera camp had suddenly brought me before my people in another light.
Besides having now broader acquaintances, more interesting people had come into my life; I was better informed than I used to be, and certain newer influences around uncle had made him understand that I could become useful if I were handled in a tactful way.
It was essential not to try and break my will, but gradually to develop my natural intelligence by setting before me what I could become for my country if I could learn to take myself and my duties more seriously.
So King Carol, now no more influenced by Cousin Charley, who, tired of Rumania, had found another hunting ground, began to look upon me as one who one day might intelligently help to carry on his work. He spoke to me about Rumania, about her troubles, hopes and ambitions, no more as a schoolmaster to a pupil but as to a coworker able to understand; and there were others also, besides King Carol, who thought it worth while to prepare me for the years that were to come.
Editor's Note—This is the seventh of a new series of articles by Queen Marie of Rumania. The eighth and last will appear in two weeks.

Sunday, February 24, 2008
I may hate children
I had my cousin up for sibs and kids weekend. I really was not amused for like half the time. I wanted to sleep, he gets up at 9 in the morning and turns on the tv. I watched like 3 hrs of spongebob and I really hate, in every sense of that word, Patrick. in the afternoon we play some halo and kinda just chill. did I mention more spongebob? Is that all nickolodeon has on? I don't know who created the monstrosity known as spongebob but I want to kick them in the face. I couldn't really go out or do anything either so it took every semblance of freedom that college gives to me as well. I really don't understand how people with kids get things done.

River cruising on the Rhine/Mosel provided us with the overview of first-time European visit. The stops were adequately timed, the river boat staff was helpful and the arrangements made for the shore excursions by Grand Central were very well done.
There were significant problems with the hearing devices allowing us to hear the guides that were not addressed until about half way through the scheduled dates. Complaints were not followed through until much too late and the groups were too large (much > than 25).
The major problem was with Grand Central's scheduling of our connecting flight on our return. They gave us MUCH TOO LITTLE time at the Paris Airport to make successful customs and connections. Then, our Air France hosts had no one available to help us make other arrangements until 2-3 hours later, after any remaining flights had left. After arguing with them for 3-4 hours, we finally received some vouchers for food and a local room. All this time, we were in contact with the Grand Circle "help" desk. They were of NO HELP WHATSOEVER. Their last comment after we had failed to find anyone at several Air France help desks was "go to the police"! That was the extent of their help.
The cruise was, overall, a good value and well planned. The transportation arrangements afterward were a disaster and the "help" non-existent. The audio problems with the guided tours was solvable/preventable.
Cabin was adequate, if small (expected). Bathroom and staterooms were maintained daily. View of river was good with a large window, except for the days when the riverboat was docked, often with the ramp cutting off our view. Noise levels were acceptable. Wi-fi mostly OK.

Since I just experienced my second miscarriage this year, after seven years of infertility and hoping, I have had some time to reflect on the lessons I have learned. I am grateful for the lessons because I would have assumed that a miscarriage would bring more heartache into my life but instead has been a very hopeful and exciting experience that I am very grateful for. I know if I gave myself license to think of the sadness of it too long, I might change my mind so I have decided to think only of the wonderful gift it is even to have only a few days or weeks of participating in the wonderful creation of a new life.
It took just over a year after my marriage before I was blessed with my first pregnancy and a few months later blessed with a beautiful daughter. Even that year was hard for me even though I know in comparison to many, one year is not long to wait. I thought my dream of at least six children was on it's way. But after this first pregnancy there were no more for seven years.
For the first several of those years, I spent much time praying and reading infertility articles and taking infertility tests which never revealed the reason I was not becoming pregnant. I felt confused and saddened when I was around others who were able to have children even when they were not married, or did not want their children or . . . many things seemed unfair. I wondered what I had done to make me unfit to have the many children I had hoped for.
Eventually, I fell into a deep depression and for some months was unable to even care for myself properly. But during that time there were many miracles.
1) I learned that it was important for me to be happy being me and to find out who I really was and what God wanted me to do.
2) I learned that God loved me and had other purposes for me along with the important opportunity of being a mother.
3) I learned that sometimes less is more and that I had a singular opportunity to give everything I had to my one precious daughter
4) I learned to desire what God wanted for me instead of what I wanted and to trust in His direction and His timing in the events of my life
5) I learned the probable cause of my infertility and depression when tests revealed thyroid problems and Graves Disease.
6) I learned to be thankful and that gratitude brings the light back when depression threatens to cloud it.
7) I learned how to feel the true sadness in some things in my life without losing the gratitude and the hope.
Because of those lessons I was able to see these miscarriages as blessings. I don't know God's plan for me and my life but I do know that He is aware of me and that I can be happy in whatever that plan is. I was even able to have great discussions with my daughter about why her consistent prayers for a baby brother or sister have not been fulfilled yet and she has been able to happily decide to keep praying and never give up but also to see the blessings she has by being the only child in our family.
I feel so happy to see the great strides and progress I have made so that now my emotional health is much more stable and disappointments, even very large ones, do not have as many detrimental effects on me. Even when my thyroid and hormone levels are not right and things are more challenging I am learning to be a better mom and enjoy each moment as it comes.

When it was time to get ready for church this morning I went up to my closet to pick out something to wear. It was a nice day so Hubby Tony and I were planning on walking, so in addition to putting on somewhat fashionable clothes I had to make sure that my shoes were comfortable and easy to walk in.
My first choice was a pair of navy blue dress pants that I hadn't worn yet this season. When I put them on I decided that I didn't like the way they looked on me. I folded the pants neatly and put them in the donation box.
Next, I decided to use my old reliable good black pants and pair them with a black and white shirt. The pants were perfect the last time I had them on. However, today the slide jammed two inches from the top. I removed the pants and looked at the zipper, noticing that there was a half inch section of the zipper teeth pulling away from the tape. After taking a good look at the pant's construction I concluded that removing and replacing the zipper was more work than I was willing to do, so I folded up the second pair of pants and put them in the donation box.
I didn't have any other pants that would work with the shirt, so I started the picking out process again. This time I decided on a pair of light tan slacks, which I decided would look nice with a cream colored dressy tee shirt. After I was dressed I put on my old reliable brown leather slip-ons and realized that the right one felt funny (which wasn't the case when I wore them earlier in the week). I removed the shoes and examined the bottom. The molded rubber sole was falling apart. It had a large hole in the side, which extended all the way to the center. I took off the shoes and put them next to the donation box.
I don't have a large selection of dress clothes, and I was running out both options and time. Rooting around in the closet again, I found a pair of grey pull on pants that I had decided were a tad too short the last time I wore them. However, today they would have to do. I slipped them on, decided the same cream tee made an acceptable outfit, and added my comfortable black mary janes.
As I walked out of the bedroom I made a mental note to add clothes and shoe shopping to my To Do list.
Five years ago today: Pressing Matters

She even added patriotic makeup!
Josh was the younger brother, Jace I think. Isn't he the cutest redneck you've ever seen? The boys helped paint their spray-painted nerf guns with camo to complete their look.
Earlier in the week there was a school Halloween dance. I took the boys and was the mom, Miss Kay.
This is my new favorite picture. William even got into it and dressed up as Phil, the dad.
After Circe's party we hit the streets for trick-or-treating. This is Josh with his best buddies Tavin and Gage. His night was complete because he got to go with them the whole time. They cracked me up because at every house they would yell "attack!" and run at the house. Half the time they hit the ground and army crawled across the lawn. Silly kids. They were so fun though
Brittany was our candy distributor who later went to a party(!) and Matthew started with us an then ditched us to go with a friend. .
What a great night!

Man jailed for threatening to post girl's semi-nude photos
A man was jailed for four weeks on Thursday for threatening to post semi-nude photographs of a teen on Internet if she did not strip down to her panties and pose semi-nude.
Johnson Song Jian Sheng, 24, had pleaded guilty to criminal intimidation on Nov 6, 2011. Then in national service, he threatened to cause injury to the 16-year-old girl's reputation on Facebook, with intent to cause her to comply to his demands.
A district court heard that posing as a female, Song had befriended the girl in June that year. On July 2, he chatted with the victim via webcam. He claimed that his webcam was not working, and hence, he could see her but she could not see him.
He suggested playing a game of "Hangman'', and told her whoever lost would have to remove a piece of clothing. She agreed. After losing a few games, she had stripped down to her panties. He then made her pose semi-nude infront of the webcam and took several screenshots of her.

My wife had a popup on her old Windows Vista laptop (which I've been threatening to switch to Ubuntu Linux). It appeared to come from our ISP, and informed her that she was hacked, and to call a number. An Indian guy answered, told her to go to a site (
lmi1.com), gave her a code, and told her to input it to download a program and run it, which she did. He told her she was hacked and it would cost lots of money to fix.
That was when she finally decided to call me at work, and after she finally told me about downloading the program, I immediately told her to disconnect it from the internet and turn it off. I told her to call our ISP to confirm that it was a scam/hack. They confirmed that it was not associated with them. We have an always on connection, which might explain why they targeted us.
She told me she was already logged in to her gmail account, but didn't log into any accounts after her interaction with this hacker.
I've been to the bank to shut down internet access for our bank accounts until we can deal with this further, and confirmed that the accounts were not accessed online since well before the attack.
We're going to back up her files (via a Linux live-desktop), and she's getting a bright shiny new operating system by the end of the weekend, and she won't be using the laptop until then.
My question is: What should we do now?
We don't need new bank account numbers, I think that would be an impotent action regardless, right?
It's conceivable they accessed her email from her computer (since she was logged in).
It's possible they downloaded files. I don't know if she had anything with social security numbers on it, but she might.
It's possible they began encrypting her files for the purpose of blackmailing her with their possible destruction, and she may have lost some of them.
I've told her to change her passwords on her email accounts. She mostly uses Google Chrome, not sure if that makes a difference.
Ancillary question: why doesn't the FBI shut down sites like
Update: they called her back, and hung up after being challenged to give their address. I'm not sure what their angle is. If it's just an outright scam, that's it, no harm done. But they could try to mess with us. I don't think anyone would go to this much trouble to set up a zombie for a bot-net, would they? I wish I knew.
Update I understand lmi1.com is a legit website, but wouldn't they still have the opportunity to use the connection to surreptitiously install malware?
2nd Update My wife informed me she watched him download and install a file she called "system configuration" so they installed something. Don't know what.

By the time DP started the anime was in its 10th season. Of course the original series characters were all going to suffer by then, they had been around for over a decade.
AG came relatively early in the animes lifecycle, we were only in Season 6 when Hoenn started, so the main cast didn't suffer as badly yet. Not to mention we were seeing mature Ash for the first time back then, which was something new.
Last edited by PokemonNation2000; 10th February 2013 at 6:34 AM.
DP made the mistake of keeping them and its when Ash's personality started getting too wooden, which is probably why DP wasn't as enjoyable to some people.
Let's face it. Not many shows go on for 16 seasons. I feel like we have seen almost everything we possibly could get from the TRio at this point. They gave us a lot of laughs, a lot of touching moments but I think it's finally time to take them off the show and focus on the person who is most important to the series. A boy by the name of Ash Ketchum.
What they should have done was let TR sucessfully steal something big and get away with it, but not Pikachu. I really wanted them to send that Phione they caught to the boss since it most likely would have been the golden ticket that made their fantasies come to life but then they lost it.
And besides, Japan doesn't care about what you or other people around here think either. They write the characters by going of what most Japanese people want. If people want funny TR, so be it. If people want serious TR, so be it. If people want a hybrid TR, so be it. We. Have. No. Control!
We simply have to take whatever they bring to us, like it or not. That doesn't mean that we can't dream and wish for something different or for something to stay the same, however.
Last note... don't you or other people want to see a Kanto hybrid again? That's what I'd like to see. I'm aware that it may never happen... but who knows?
Last edited by Cresselia92; 10th February 2013 at 9:56 AM.
And people say the TRio has gotten so much more competent. Yeah, right. All that happened was a shift in personality from being goofballs to being serious, and taking their jobs more seriously. They haven't gotten much better at anything other than stealth from what I've seen.
Last edited by PokemonNation2000; 10th February 2013 at 6:04 PM.

My first interview with Dr. James Winter was under dramatic circumstances. It occurred at two in the morning in the bedroom of an old country house. I kicked him twice on the white waistcoat and knocked off his gold spectacles, while he with the aid of a female accomplice stifled my angry cries in a flannel petticoat and thrust me into a warm bath. I am told that one of my parents, who happened to be present, remarked in a whisper that there was nothing the matter with my lungs. I cannot recall how Dr. Winter looked at the time, for I had other things to think of, but his description of my own appearance is far from flattering. A fluffy head, a body like a trussed goose, very bandy legs, and feet with the soles turned inwards—those are the main items which he can remember.
From this time onwards the epochs of my life were the periodical assaults which Dr. Winter made upon me. He vaccinated me; he cut me for an abscess; he blistered me for mumps. It was a world of peace and he the one dark cloud that threatened. But at last there came a time of real illness—a time when I lay for months together inside my wickerwork-basket bed, and then it was that I learned that that hard face could relax, that those country-made creaking boots could steal very gently to a bedside, and that that rough voice could thin into a whisper when it spoke to a sick child.
And now the child is himself a medical man, and yet Dr. Winter is the same as ever. I can see no change since first I can remember him, save that perhaps the brindled hair is a trifle whiter, and the huge shoulders a little more bowed. He is a very tall man, though he loses a couple of inches from his stoop. That big back of his has curved itself over sick beds until it has set in that shape. His face is of a walnut brown, and tells of long winter drives over bleak country roads, with the wind and the rain in his teeth. It looks smooth at a little distance, but as you approach him you see that it is shot with innumerable fine wrinkles like a last year’s apple. They are hardly to be seen when he is in repose; but when he laughs his face breaks like a starred glass, and you realise then that though he looks old, he must be older than he looks.
How old that is I could never discover. I have often tried to find out, and have struck his stream as high up as George IV and even the Regency, but without ever getting quite to the source. His mind must have been open to impressions very early, but it must also have closed early, for the politics of the day have little interest for him, while he is fiercely excited about questions which are entirely prehistoric. He shakes his head when he speaks of the first Reform Bill and expresses grave doubts as to its wisdom, and I have heard him, when he was warmed by a glass of wine, say bitter things about Robert Peel and his abandoning of the Corn Laws. The death of that statesman brought the history of England to a definite close, and Dr. Winter refers to everything which had happened since then as to an insignificant anticlimax.
But it was only when I had myself become a medical man that I was able to appreciate how entirely he is a survival of a past generation. He had learned his medicine under that obsolete and forgotten system by which a youth was apprenticed to a surgeon, in the days when the study of anatomy was often approached through a violated grave. His views upon his own profession are even more reactionary than in politics. Fifty years have brought him little and deprived him of less. Vaccination was well within the teaching of his youth, though I think he has a secret preference for inoculation. Bleeding he would practise freely but for public opinion. Chloroform he regards as a dangerous innovation, and he always clicks with his tongue when it is mentioned. He has even been known to say vain things about Laennec, and to refer to the stethoscope as “a new-fangled French toy.” He carries one in his hat out of deference to the expectations of his patients, but he is very hard of hearing, so that it makes little difference whether he uses it or not.
He reads, as a duty, his weekly medical paper, so that he has a general idea as to the advance of modern science. He always persists in looking upon it as a huge and rather ludicrous experiment. The germ theory of disease set him chuckling for a long time, and his favourite joke in the sick room was to say, “Shut the door or the germs will be getting in.” As to the Darwinian theory, it struck him as being the crowning joke of the century. “The children in the nursery and the ancestors in the stable,” he would cry, and laugh the tears out of his eyes.
He is so very much behind the day that occasionally, as things move round in their usual circle, he finds himself, to his bewilderment, in the front of the fashion. Dietetic treatment, for example, had been much in vogue in his youth, and he has more practical knowledge of it than any one whom I have met. Massage, too, was familiar to him when it was new to our generation. He had been trained also at a time when instruments were in a rudimentary state, and when men learned to trust more to their own fingers. He has a model surgical hand, muscular in the palm, tapering in the fingers, “with an eye at the end of each.” I shall not easily forget how Dr. Patterson and I cut Sir John Sirwell, the County Member, and were unable to find the stone. It was a horrible moment. Both our careers were at stake. And then it was that Dr. Winter, whom we had asked out of courtesy to be present, introduced into the wound a finger which seemed to our excited senses to be about nine inches long, and hooked out the stone at the end of it. “It’s always well to bring one in your waistcoat-pocket,” said he with a chuckle, “but I suppose you youngsters are above all that.”
We made him president of our branch of the British Medical Association, but he resigned after the first meeting. “The young men are too much for me,” he said. “I don’t understand what they are talking about.” Yet his patients do very well. He has the healing touch—that magnetic thing which defies explanation or analysis, but which is a very evident fact none the less. His mere presence leaves the patient with more hopefulness and vitality. The sight of disease affects him as dust does a careful housewife. It makes him angry and impatient. “Tut, tut, this will never do!” he cries, as he takes over a new case. He would shoo Death out of the room as though he were an intrusive hen. But when the intruder refuses to be dislodged, when the blood moves more slowly and the eyes grow dimmer, then it is that Dr. Winter is of more avail than all the drugs in his surgery. Dying folk cling to his hand as if the presence of his bulk and vigour gives them more courage to face the change; and that kindly, windbeaten face has been the last earthly impression which many a sufferer has carried into the unknown.
When Dr. Patterson and I—both of us young, energetic, and up-to-date—settled in the district, we were most cordially received by the old doctor, who would have been only too happy to be relieved of some of his patients. The patients themselves, however, followed their own inclinations—which is a reprehensible way that patients have—so that we remained neglected, with our modern instruments and our latest alkaloids, while he was serving out senna and calomel to all the countryside. We both of us loved the old fellow, but at the same time, in the privacy of our own intimate conversations, we could not help commenting upon this deplorable lack of judgment. “It’s all very well for the poorer people,” said Patterson. “But after all the educated classes have a right to expect that their medical man will know the difference between a mitral murmur and a bronchitic rale. It’s the judicial frame of mind, not the sympathetic, which is the essential one.”
I thoroughly agreed with Patterson in what he said. It happened, however, that very shortly afterwards the epidemic of influenza broke out, and we were all worked to death. One morning I met Patterson on my round, and found him looking rather pale and fagged out. He made the same remark about me. I was, in fact, feeling far from well, and I lay upon the sofa all the afternoon with a splitting headache and pains in every joint. As evening closed in, I could no longer disguise the fact that the scourge was upon me, and I felt that I should have medical advice without delay. It was of Patterson, naturally, that I thought, but somehow the idea of him had suddenly become repugnant to me. I thought of his cold, critical attitude, of his endless questions, of his tests and his tappings. I wanted something more soothing—something more genial.
“Mrs. Hudson,” said I to my housekeeper, “would you kindly run along to old Dr. Winter and tell him that I should be obliged to him if he would step round?”
She was back with an answer presently. “Dr. Winter will come round in an hour or so, sir; but he has just been called in to attend Dr. Patterson.”
Last updated Sunday, March 27, 2016 at 11:53

Late last year, a friend from church asked if I might consider finishing a quilt that her grandmother had started. Her grandmother was making this quilt for my friend's Mom, when she suddenly passed away. I told her I would take a look.
The quilt is all hand pieced and hand quilted. Well I knew that I would not be able to finish this quilt for her, because I mostly do machine piecing and quilting.
However, I asked one of my quilting buddies if she would be interested. She is already a fabulous hand quilter, and would do an excellent job. Diane took the quilt to finish, under the stipulation that she would not be able to work on it until after the first of the year.
Well my fellow quilters, Diane did an outstanding job on this beautiful quilt.
She took the remaining fabric and finished the edges, and also finished hand quilting the whole quilt.
The quilt was presented to my friend's Mom and she cried and cried. I happened to see her at church one day, and she told me that her Mom (the grandmother) knew that she loved blue and white.
Isn't it beautiful!
Thanks Diane, for taking the time to finish this quilt and bringing a little happiness to a very sweet lady.
Bara Brith & November's Apron winner
5 hours ago

I'm 54 looking for advice. I have bypass surgery scheduled in March. Needless to say the procedure scares the crap out of me. I feel like I have a good surgeon who has experience and he is confident that I will have a good outcome but as someone who has never really had much experience with anything like this I am struggling with trying to be positive. I have experienced Anexiety with medical things my whole life and have been on meds for awhile. Normally I can manage it prettty well but this was a complete shock and and feels so overwhelming and out of my control. Any idea's support or positive vibes are appreciated.
I have now had two open heart surgeries in my life – in 2001 and February 2022 for my aortic valve and an ascending aneurysm. Even before my first surgery 22 years ago, when I was quite nervous (I was nervous last year too) I was told that the heart muscle is one area of the human body that physicians have a good handle on. And they really do. To them, it is like riding a bike. While I would not describe it as a fun picnic, I recovered well after both procedures. We have all lost loved ones to cancer, which they don't yet have a great handle on, but I believe you should do well with your heart. I hope this helps you. Sites like this can be very helpful. All the best to you.
I had an unexpected quadruple this past July so I didn't have any time to be nervous beforehand. I wasn't feeling "right" so I walked over to the hospital and after an EKG, I was told there was a problem. I needed a stent in 2012 and combined whit a family history of heart disease, I knew this would happen eventually. My cardiologist told me on Monday morning that the procedure was scheduled for Wednesday, and I freaked. My first thought was how horrible my dad looked in recovery right after his double (he lived another 30+ years in good health) and I knew this was going to be tough. It was, but the worst part was the anticipation. Keep in mind that you will be out of it for quite a few hours and by the time you are fully awake, your nurses will be getting you out of bed - believe it or not, it should be less than 24 hours. Referring back to my dad, I walked into his hospital room the morning after his surgery and he was sitting in a chair. I'll never forget the image of this tough, street-fighting Brooklyn boy sitting in his gown and clutching his heart pillow. My hospital recovery was just about the same - out of bed super fast, short walks as often as I could and home in about a week. The toughest part was the recovery at home. There is so little to do while recovering and it can be frustrating. I could not even manage a walk around the block for a while but each day was a little better than before. The two most important pieces of advice I can give you are to do your breathing exercises constantly and to pay attention to your mental health. Many cardiac patients (including myself) develop depression and our cardiologists may not be as hip to it as we would like. My primary physician put me on a a low dose of prozac and it has been excellent.
One last thing - you will probably have some chest pain/pressure for quite a while. It have it and everyone is different - I've heard it lasts anywhere from 3 months to 3 years, which is also frustrating. The experience is/was among the toughest things I've ever had to deal with and I'm sure it won't be easy for you. Don't underestimate how important it will be to keep your mind active and don't be afraid to tell friends and family if you're down. You will be amazed at how much better you will feel afterwards.
Best of luck,
I was told in 2021 that I needed bypass surgery. I had no symptoms and felt fine. The surgeon told me I was a walking time bomb. This was in May of that year. The cardiologist told me I could wait until September. This was not a good option because I would be a basket case if I waited that long to get the procedure done. I found that speaking to other people who had the procedure made me feel better. I was not happy about it but realized it must be done. I was told the realities of the recovery period and also wanted to do cardiac rehab. I was fortunate because I was always active. The recovery period was difficult but at least I knew this going in. It took about a year for me to get back to almost normal. My only complaint now is that my legs feel different. Of course, that is where they took the veins from. I find I am not walking as fast as I used to, but I am doing pretty well and have resumed traveling (even going to Antartica). I worked hard during rehab and when asked why, I told them that I intended to go back to traveling and handling my suitcases. Having something to look forward to is a good incentive. I was 71 when I had the procedure. You are much younger than me and have a lot more years to enjoy. It sounds like you have confidence in your surgeon. Worry is a useless expenditure of time and energy. Spend the effort on something productive like planning how you are going to enjoy the many years ahead of you.
By way of contrast to most of what you've heard about recovery time frames, I was 67 years old when I had a heart attack and then next day emergency quintuple bypass surgery. By 3 months post surgery, I had graduated rehab and was back at NY Sports Club lifting weights with all the youngsters. After 5 months, I was running again. The weights were baby weights at first compared to what I used to lift but, in addition to still healing from the surgery, I also was 40 pounds lighter, which affects how much you can lift. By the end of a year, though, I was pound for pound stronger than pre-surgery.
I never did have much pain unless I coughed or sneezed and even that disappeared within weeks of the surgery. When people ask me how sick I felt post surgery, I tell them that I was much sicker when I had measles as a kid and it wasn't even a close comparison.
Upon awakening and coming off the ventilator/breathing tube, I felt nothing but joy during this entire recovery period. Although I came down off this high eventually (basically when I returned to my stressful job as a lawyer 3 months post surgery), I remained and remain changed forever. I am a survivor and the trivialities that bother most people around me I just don't care about anymore.
Good luck and have a strong recovery,
Thank you to everyone who responded to my post
You are all very kind and helpful. Still have freak out moments but I'm inspired by your success stories.
Maybe when this is behind me I can help others going through this like you have helped me. -Dale

To look back on the life of Bach many have referred to him as “one of the greatest and most productive geniuses in the history of Western music”, particularly of the baroque era. Born to a family that produced at least 53 prominent musicians within seven generations, Bach received his first musical instrument from his father. Johann studied music with his father until his father’s death in 1695, at which point he moved to Ohrdruf to study with his brother, Johann Christoph. In the early 1700’s Bach began working as a chorister at a church in Luneburg. In 1703, he became a violinist in the chamber orchestra of Prince Johann Ernst of Weimar, but later that year he moved to Arnstadt where he became church organist.
Unfortunately, his father died when he was 9 years old, and less than a year after, so did his mother. Orphaned at age 10, Johann went to live with his older brother in a town called Ohrdruf, which was about 30 miles outside Eisenach. Bach's elder brother, Johann Christoph, was an accomplished organist and wonderful teacher. Under his guidance, Johann Sebastian became well-versed in both the organ and the harpsichord. Bach was quick to conquer the music he was given.
Bach, who came from a family of over 53 musicians, was nothing short of a virtuosic instrumentalist as well as a masterful composer. Born in Eisenach, Germany, on March 21, 1685, he was the son of a masterful violinist, Johann Ambrosius Bach, who taught his son the basic skills for string playing. Along with this string playing, Bach began to play the organ which is the instrument he would later on be noted for in history. His instruction on the organ came from the player at Eisenach's most important church. He instructed the young boy rather rigorously until his skills surpassed anyone’s expectations for someone of such a young age.
His Music Career Johann Sebastian Bach was a composer, a musician, teacher, and organist who later became a specialist in construction of organs. Bach learnt to play the violin, the orchestra, and the organ from his father and his famous uncle and twin brother to the father, Johann Christoph at a young age. The organ was his chosen instrument. He also achieved success in the art of Fugue, choral polyphone, instrumental music and dance forms. In Eisenach he attended Old Latin Grammar School, the same school that Martin Luther had attended.
During his stay with his brother, Bach attended school and was encouraged by his older brother to study composition. Soon Bach could no longer stay with his brother, for his brother’s family was getting too big. Bach traveled with a school friend, on foot, to a North-German musical center in Luneberg, Germany. At this time J.S. was 15-years-old, and had a beautiful soprano voice which helped him get into the school.
Eventually, Leopold gave up his own composing to concentrate on the talents of his young son. Leopold was also the early teacher of all of Mozart’s studies. After extensive touring from 1762 to 1773, Mozart was given employ at the Salzburg court at the age of 17. There, he had the op... ... middle of paper ... ...followed him. Besides being a force behind developing the classical style, Mozart’s musical abilities inspired many aspiring musicians.
Bach was born in Eisenach, Thuringia, Germany, on March 21, 1685, he came from a family of musicians, going back several generations. Johann Ambrosius, his father, worked as the town musician in Eisenach, and he taught young Johann to play the violin. At the age of 7, Bach peregrinated to school where he received religious ordinant dictation and studied Latin and other subjects. His Lutheran faith would influence his later musical works. By the time he turned 10, Bach found himself an orphan postmortem of both of his parents.
Of his musical education at this time, nothing definite is known; however, he may have picked up the rudiments of string playing from his father, and no doubt he attended the Georgen Church, where Johann Christoph Bach was organist until 1703. This Christoph had been a pupil of the influential keyboard composer, Johann Pachelbel and he apparently gave Johann Sebastian his first formal keyboard lessons. The young Bach again did well at school, until in 1700 his voice secured him a place in a select choir of poor boys at the school at the Michaels Church, Luneburg. He seems to have returned to Thuringia in the late summer of 1702. By this time he was already a reasonably proficient organist.
His father, Johann Ambrosius Bach, was the town piper in Eisenach, a post that entailed organizing all the secular music in town as well as participating in church music at the direction of the church organist (p. 309, The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians, Vol. 2). Bach was the youngest son of Ambrosius Bach and probably learned the fundamentals of musical theory and how to play the violin from him (p104, The International Cyclopedia of Music and Musicians). Bach's mother died when he was still a young boy and his father suddenly passed away when J. S. Bach was 9, at which time he moved in with his older brother Johann Christoph Bach, who was the organist of Ohrdruf, Germany (p105, The International Cyclopedia of Music and Musicians). While in his brother's house, J. S. Bach continued copying, studying, and playing music.
Bach died a respected man and having an important position in the world of music. Bach is one the best composers of all time, or like what he liked to call himself, an organist. Bach is very popular for so many reasons. When Bach was young his passion for music started as a young age. Many might say that Bach was into music because most of his family was and it was expected for him to follow the same steps.

I’m tHailing from a family of filmmakers it was only natural that Kunchacko Boban
took to acting, which he did reluctantly; but the actor took a surprising mid-career break and then went on to make one of the biggest comebacks seen in Malayalam cinema. Kochi Times catches up with the dynamic actor, as he’s getting ready for his next film Cousins. Here are some excerpts from an interview.
Was your entry into films always there on the cards?
Not at all! I wasn’t interested in the film industry. My father, grandfather, uncle and granduncle were all part of the film industry, but I didn’t want to have anything to do with the industry. The first commercial hit in Malayalam films was Umma and that was from our family production house. We also had many other commercial hits, but later things changed. It was during my childhood that our films started failing and we went through a bad phase financially. All this made me want to stay away from films. We had a studio called Udaya Studios, but I was the least bit interested in maintaining it. I even told my father to sell it off. I didn’t even want to have anything to do with the rights of the films we had. That was the early me!
How then did films happen?
It was my father who insisted I give it a shot. If I wasn’t happy, I could give it all up and move on. That was the deal. I told him, “I’m doing this only for you!” and did it. The film was
and it went on to become a blockbuster. I was in my final year of my bachelor’s degree and even then I wasn’t really interested in films. I took one year off to complete my studies. I finished my BCom; got a first class, and then the second film happened followed by a string of films. My films were mainly campus oriented, romantic ones where I mostly played the lover boy types. There were many hits and a few failures as well.
What made you take a break from films?
By 2004 my films were not doing well. Even I was not excited with the roles I was playing and the audience were the least excited. (Laughs) So I decided to take a break. I took a two-year break, during which I got married. In these two years, I realised the love people had for me through the films I did. My wife also realised this and encouraged me to get back to films.
How did you begin your second innings?
My comeback was a planned effort. I took it slow and steady. I did not want to become a success overnight. I knew by then that success that comes easily, goes away easily. I wanted to make a strong comeback and planned for that. During my break, I used to spend time with Lal Jose, Benny P Nayarambalam, Shafi and other film guys. Lal Jose is the one who encouraged me to reinvent myself. They were the buddies who advised me.
I did small roles, multi-starrers and even acted in women-centric films and then the break came with the film
hat I did with Jayasurya, which was a hit. It was a small budget film that was a laugh riot; it was the first film in which I tried humour. It suited my personality and my body language. Till then people thought that I couldn’t do comedy roles at all as I was stuck with the chocolate boy image.
Then I did
Elsamma Enna Aankutty
with Lal Jose and that did wonders. Even though the film was woman centric, the character of Palunni that I played was very much appreciated by film-goers. Then
happened where I played a character with some grey shades. People didn’t think I could handle that kind of a role. Then
happened, in which I was paired with many of my senior colleagues like Jayaramettan, Biju Menon and Manoj K Jayan. It was a campus film but with a difference. In that film I played a guy with some psychological issues and that film too was a success. All these characters I played were drastically different from the ones I used to play.
That’s how I got an image makeover. The characters, the stories and the films were all very different and I still found acceptability. I wanted very much to be an actor and not a star. I had enjoyed stardom in my first stint itself. Girls were after me, boys were jealous of me (laughs). Now things have changed. Boys started loving me and girls too liked the roles that I played. Like in the film,
How Old Are You
, that’s the most mature character I’ve played to date. That character, Rajeevan, is diametrically opposite to what I am in real life.
Have you changed as an actor and a person through this screen metamorphosis?
Earlier, I was not interested in changing myself. I was stuck in my comfort zone. I would come to the sets; do what the director told me and leave. But nowadays, I am with a film right from the start; from the reading of the script through the making of it and even through its marketing. When I say that earlier I wasn’t ready to change myself, it applies to my physical appearance as well. I never attempted to shave off my moustache or my hair or make any other physical changes to myself.
But I did all that in my comeback films. I took off my moustache, shaved my head, and showed people my receding hairline (laughs). For my role as Palunni in E
lsamma Enna Aankutty
, I was made to look dull. A milkman shouldn’t be so fair and so Lalu (Lal Jose) used to make me stand under the sun, so that I get tanned.
, it was a drastic change. I went to the set on day one with long hair and a full moustache, and they decided to shave off my moustache and cut my hair short. Even I couldn’t recognise myself after that. When I came home, my wife was shocked. Some people didn’t like the change initially. But once the film was released, the look went very well with the character and I found acceptance. The film was a huge hit. So when I embraced changes, success came along with it. I am taking my films more seriously now.
What is your approach to acting now?
I come to location on time. Even if my shot is not ready, I have no qualms. For me it’s a day in the office. I make this my discipline. I don’t come pre-planned to the sets. If I do that, I might get stuck. I am a complete director’s actor and depend totally on my scriptwriter and director. If they are clear about my character, I go with that. All the changes to my character have been done on the spot. I also improvise on the spot.
In your earlier phase you seem to have scored several hits with Shalini. Would you consider her as one of your best heroines?
Of course, we did five films and four of them were huge success. Our pairing was loved by the audience. Aniyathipravu was a pure romantic film with family values.
followed. Niram was a wave among the youngsters, which was directed by Kamal Sir. But films with others too have done well. I have done two films with Bhavana —
Dr Love and Polytechnic
; three films with Namitha Pramod, who actually was a child artiste in
; three films with Ann Augustine —
Elsamma Enna Aankutty, Ordinary
— all of which were successful.
How was it working with the superstars of M-Town, Mohanlal and Mammootty in Harikrishnans?
Because of my family’s association with films for generations, I was already familiar with these two pillars of the Malayalam film industry. But I wasn’t a very serious actor in those days and acting with them was like acting with friends. Krishna, Sudheesh, Krishnaprasad and I, the young brigade then, used to play dumb charades and other games with them. They were very free with us and made us feel comfortable working with them. It’s a blessing to have shared the same screen space with these stars. I didn’t understand the value then, but now if I have to do a film with them I know how big it is. I think I am more mature now.
Can you tell us about how you met your wife and her role in your life?
I met her in ’98 in Trivandrum. I was there for a shoot and was staying at a hotel. Some girls had come to the hotel to get my autograph. I came down and gave them my autograph, but one girl’s eyes locked with mine and that was Priya’s. The first song I sung was O Priya… It wasn’t O Kajal or O Aishwarya… (laughs).
Even though people don’t really believe in love at first sight, it happened to me. I asked her name and ran upstairs and tried to look at her from my window. That was the beginning. She used to call me, and remember, in those days incoming was also chargeable. I used to tell her to call me on the landline. Eventually my parents came to know about it and we decided to go to her place to ask for her hand in marriage. At that time, she was still doing her pre-degree so definitely wasn’t mature enough to get married and so I had to wait. They didn’t think that I’d wait for so long but I waited.
There must have been several girls throwing themselves at you at that time…
Many girls’ names were linked with mine. I didn’t object to any of that. I had fun listening to the stories, Priya had fun hearing about them and both of us had even more fun talking about it. We finally got married in 2005. Today, my wife plays a big role in my decisions on films. She is the one who hears out my stories. She is very adept at recognising a film for its success in the theatres. And I go with her suggestions. So, not only did she get me back into films, she is today ensuring I stay there (laughs).
You have stood up for autism…
Our wedding anniversary date coincided with world autism day. I didn’t know too much about autism. Not too many people I asked also knew. So I thought more awareness needed to be created around autism. I called a few of my celeb friends and along with them, my wife and I decided to spend our anniversary with autistic children. The TV crew automatically followed and in one day, a lot of awareness was created with the help of the mass media. Parents of several autistic children called to thank me for what we’d done. We have planned to do more such awareness outings apart from charitable and affordable care for autistic children. We are on the verge of starting one such set up in Sharjah.
Does your wife involve herself in your work?
She played a huge role in my come back. During the two years I took off from films I felt the love of the people. The channels kept showing the films I’d done earlier. So, while people didn’t miss my screen persona, they started to enquire why I wasn’t doing films anymore. But it was mainly my wife who got me to start acting again. She felt that I should get back and that’s why I made a comeback. My wife handles not only my home, but also me and my career. She goes through the stories and advises me on what I should and shouldn’t take up.

Around town, Coby Batty is known as a veteran musician. A percussionist and multi-instrumentalist, he's played in local bands for years — currently he fronts NrG Krysys and a new jazz group, Rhythmasters. And since the early '80s, he's been a member of legendary underground New York band, the Fugs.
But fewer people know of his work as an actor, including his association with actor and director James Franco's Rabbit Bandini Productions in California.
Most recently, Batty plays a minor role in Franco's critically acclaimed "Child of God" adaptation of the Cormac McCarthy novel. Anchored by an incendiary performance by actor Scott Haze, who embodies the anti-social and violent outcast, Lester Ballard, the film is a brutal and polarizing meditation on loneliness.
Batty plays a member of the posse, led by Franco, which comes for Ballard after a series of particularly heinous crimes. The film is being held over in New York and Los Angeles, and there's Oscar buzz about Haze's riveting and feral performance. There's no word on a Richmond showing. Style Weekly asked Batty about the filming and his understanding of Franco's unusual artistic career.
Style: Were you aware that you were witnessing this amazing performance?
Batty: I knew as soon as I got on set. … Scott [Haze] had gone out into the Tennessee hills for weeks and lived on fish and apples, lost 45 pounds or something, and he really became that guy. He lived in a cave. James said when he got to the set [Haze] was a totally transformed person. He was sort of in character all the time, although he came out a little bit, you could talk to him as a person. But once I got on set, I went right into it with him — I kept my gun on him all the time. He told me later that he appreciated it, he loved that.
What were conditions like during the shoot?
We went to West Virginia up around Lewisburg near the Greenbrier in the fall of 2012. It was pretty tough, pretty cold. Scott told me, "You wouldn't believe what I've been through." He really did suffer. In the cave chase, he was barefoot walking over scrag, up and down these hills. Some of it was shot in an old mine, which was a little dangerous and scary. I had to chase [Haze] up through a hole where he escapes us, and I was up in there with bats right by my hand and weird spiders. Kind of freaky [laughs].
- Coby Batty
- James Franco and local Richmond actor and musician Coby Batty posed for this selfie — the two have worked together on several films.
How did you get hooked up with Franco and Rabbit Bandini?
James was at [New York University] making a thesis film, "Herbert White," starring Michael Shannon. He had met a woman in Georgia whose father had a farm in Suffolk that he needed for the shoot. There was a mention in the Times-Dispatch's news around the state column saying Franco was auditioning in Suffolk. I went straight down there that day. I knew the character: Oregon Hill kinda guy, abusive, alcoholic, fucked-up guy. I knew exactly how he'd look. I beat out 400 guys for that part and later James told me they were a little afraid of me because they thought I was crazy. ... His producer and cinematographer liked me, so they started calling me for different things: another NYU film with James, a bigger part as Gillespie in Franco's version of "As I Lay Dying." … I'm still in the mix so I'm happy about that.
Have you gotten a sense of why Franco likes these dark Southern gothics so much?
Well, I know when he was a teenager in Palo Alto, he was on the brink of getting into trouble with the law, driving fast, drugs and drinking. His dad grounded him and made him read "As I Lay Dying," and told him to get a hold of it. He read it several times and that sparked something in him. It's funny, one time in West Virginia, we were riding back at 5 in the morning and he asked me, "Coby, why am I attracted to this dark stuff?" He looks at me as this Beat guy, even though I'm not, I know some Beats.
I told him, "I was like that at your age, but you might grow out of it."
He just said, "Yeah, maybe I will," and that was that.
He certainly has a zest and lust for life. I've never seen a more driven person. He never goes on vacation, no drinking or drugs. I think because he thinks of life as an act of creation at all times, he's interested in the extremes of life. What people do in extremes.
Some critics have complained about the lack of stakes or sympathy for the main character — I didn't have that problem. Though McCarthy based the character on serial killer Ed Gein, so obviously it gets pretty disturbing.
This character grew up totally isolated. Mom died early, dad killed himself pretty early. He grew up away from people and just became more and more anti-social. He just wanted love and he still recognized what love could be, but just had no idea what normal love was. That's why people get twisted, because they don't get love early on. S

Guila Bustabo was an Italian-Bohemian violinist born on February 25, 1916 (Heifetz was 15 years old.) She is remembered (if at all) for a brilliant career which ended prematurely. Bustabo later said: "Menuhin got away from his parents. He was lucky. I never got away from mine." She was the daughter of a domineering (some would say abusive) mother. Bustabo was actually born in Wisconsin (which is in itself unusual.) She began lessons with her mother before she was three years old. By age five, she was studying with Leon Sametini (a pupil of Ysaye) in Chicago. After Sametini procured a scholarship for her (from Juilliard), she went to New York to study with Louis Persinger. Other pupils who were studying with Persinger at the same time (including Yehudi Menuhin) would later remember noticing bruises on her little arms and head when she would arrive in the morning. She played Wieniawski’s d minor concerto in her New York, Carnegie Hall debut at age 15 (1931.) By 1934 she was touring Europe and even played the Sibelius concerto for Sibelius himself (by his invitation) in 1937. The old man was exceedingly impressed with her playing. Bustabo was, by then, also playing a Guarnerius violin which had been given to her as a gift by several admirers (including Toscanini.) Some sources say that Lady Ravensdale purchased the violin for her in 1934 after her London debut. Perhaps both versions are true. In 1938 and 1939 she appeared with the New York Philharmonic. During the war years, Bustabo played almost exclusively in all the Nazi-occupied territories in Europe. After the war, she was arrested by General Patton in France, though she was never charged. After that episode, word got around that she had been a Nazi sympathizer (if not a collaborator) and her solo career became somewhat inert, especially in the U.S. She was barely thirty years old. In 1949, she married an American military bandmaster (Edison Stieg.) It has been reported that violinist Yfrah Neaman heard her play in a recital at Wigmore Hall (London) in the late 1940s and “came away very disappointed.” With most of her engagements dried up, she took a teaching post in Innsbruck (Austria) in 1964. She ended up retiring in 1970 and settled in Birmingham, Alabama, with her mother. In Birmingham, she sat in the first violin section of the Alabama Symphony for five years, though she played like a soloist and could not sight read. She divorced her bandmaster husband in 1976 (or 1977 – accounts vary) and her mother (Blanche) finally died in 1992. Guila Bustabo herself died on April 27, 2002, in her two-room apartment in Birmingham, Alabama, at age 86. I do not know what became of her Guarnerius violin. Bustabo’s recordings of the Bruch and Beethoven concertos with the Concertgebouw are still available.

Oh boy. In my last post I lamented the poor performance of some of my students. Well, for some reason, my second lab section of the week is even worse. I can't figure out why my first lab section does better on reports. They're my guinea pigs and I make mistakes with them. Then I go into my second section practiced and generally give better explanations and directions. Why are they doing worse? It's like my second section has a collective brain fart for three hours. I graded their labs last night and they were awful. So awful that I got completely stressed out by it. Trends are starting to appear and some people are consistently missing the big pictures, but the only people coming to me for help are the ones who are already doing ok.
This morning I lectured my second lab about how no one is going to hold their hand anymore and they need to see me if they have questions and need help. I laid the smackdown on the people who consistently come in late. I also had to talk to a few people about copying answers and turning in identical graphs. I hope what I said was effective. I think that in general my students respect me and can tell that I want to help them. I know that for some of these kids I'm the only shot at getting them to like biology and see how it relates to their lives. Maybe they'll even get their act together enough to pass the class.

It does sound nice to be able to get your hands on a loan, but how will you go about this? It is one thing to think it and another to actually seal the deal and know you are going to have the funds. So, let’s take a glance at what you will need when it comes to acquiring loans with bad credit in this day and age. As long as you are paying attention to the three tips that are going to be mentioned in this read, you should be able to get the funds as soon as you want them.
The main thing is to not lie as for some reason people start to feel as if this is going to save them and that is not the case at all. What you have to do is remain honest with them every step of the way because they will want to work with those who are straightforward and not pushing people to go around in circles for no reason.
This is what matters and that is the approach you should be taking as well.
The options that are out there will be available for you to sift through and if you are not even taking a look because you are panicking than that is not a good thing at all. What you will have to do is take a few steps back and just relax. Just learn to breathe a little and know that this is not the end of the world for you at all.
In fact, you are still able to control what happens because they are going to want you to take the loan. So, if that is the case, why not take a look around and find a good deal?
Meet In Person
It is always smarter to meet in person with those who are going to be giving the loans to you. The reason for this has to do with your own security as you want to know who you are dealing with and what they are going to do for you moving forward.
Most are going to be great and that is wonderful indeed, but you still have to make sure as that is not a risk anyone should be taking in this day and age. It just does not make a lot of sense.
Now, you might feel that the process is not moving along as fast as you want or you are starting to notice issues along the way and that is not a good mindset to have. You have to stay positive because you will be able to get loans with bad credit as long as you are following what has been listed above. Don’t lose hope just because you meet with a few hurdles along the way as that is natural and something you will have to accept. Yet, you will be able to get the money right off the bat.

Yesterday just felt like a good day - we got up and were at church for the 9.30am start on time and it was a good service. We didn't get a minister this week or even a lay preacher - we got "Worship Team A". The week before we had been wondering as a congregation what this team would be like but we were very pleasantly surprised. It consisted of a minister's wife from a local town, with two helpers - and they worked well together. The talk was about the parable of the mustard seed and how from something so tiny, something as majestic as a mustard tree (apparently can reach over 15ft tall!) can grow - and we all have that potential within us - it was a very inspiring and motivating talk. The FGs were asked to do a reading each, and tackled them well with no practise!
After returning home and mooching around the garden for a while, we decided that we would take a ride out to Hunstanton in the afternoon, once the eggs in the incubator had been turned. We left here at about 2.45pm and went off in the general direction of Hunstanton, and got there to find that the front was absolutely heaving and there was nowhere to park the motorhome - I couldn't get it into a couple of the carparks because they have height restrictions. The FH thought that we might get on better at Wells-next-the-Sea, about 15 miles further along the coast. That was quite possibly the most challenging 15 mile stretch which I have ever had to take the motorhome through - the roads were quite narrow and twisting and then I had to turn it around completely as we weren't going to get over a very narrow bridge and had to take a detour.....all good fun! Wells was as bad as Hunstanton, so we gave up and headed back along the coast in the hope that the crowds would have dissipated a little and we might fnid a space somewhere - by the time we got back there, it was nearly 6pm and although there were still a lot of people around, there was a little more space to park and breathe! The YFG and I queued up at the fish and chip shop for the provisions and then we ate sitting and looking at the sea.
Hunstanton is the only east coast seaside resort where the sun actually sets over the sea - in all the others up and down the country, the sun rises over the sea. Weird fact - it is just because Hunstanton's "sea" is The Wash and looking out to sea, you can just make out the Lincolnshire coastline across the water.
We collapsed and watched some TV when we got home last night!
Today has been another day when we seem to have done a lot: we were up at the crack of dawn ("sparrow's fart" as Katie Fforde so eloquently puts it) to get the EFG to the surgery for a blood test, and then we had to go to the newsagent who keeps me a copy of "Grow Your Own" each month. Some new recipes for pickles and jams are in a handy booklet on the front this month, so I shall have to see if any appeal.
My friend B brought her children round for the morning after that, and she did my hair with some highlights (first time ever!) whilst they played and then she cut their hair too - all ready for school! I made her a cake this afternoon as my part of the bargain and she was very happy.

iOS Engineering vice president Henri Lamiraux has retired from Apple, and instead of being pushed out the door "to spend more time with his family," it looks like that's what he's actually going to do. Mr. Lamiraux is retiring and had planned on making iOS 7 his last project before turning in his executive washroom key.
iOS VP Henri Lamiraux retires
Mr. Lamiraux started with Apple in 1990 and spent many years working on OS X, and later made the move to the iOS development team where he was instrumental in managing which features made it into the operating system and also managed bug fixes as well as features for app developers. He left Apple about two weeks ago, according to 9to5 Mac, and his LinkedIn profile shows he isn't with the company, too.
Pulling Mr. Lamiraux out of the creative mix at Apple is an unfortunate loss for the company, but not as serious an issue as it could've been since his departure was planned and not a push out the door from executives.

King Of The Cragby Niall Grimes Sep/2011
This article has been read 17,360 times
Some weird looking guy beside me turned round and asked me about a tattoo I had, but I told him to piss off, creep. I felt rejected. Look at them. What do they think they are, superstars? They're only bloody climbers same as me.
First weekend of spring. Can you believe it? I thought it would never come. All those pull-ups, all those sessions in the gym. How many traverses have I done this winter down that bloody wall?
But this year it will pay off. It will all be different. Shit, I can't wait to get off this motorway. Where is all this traffic coming from? Just because the sun is shining. Can nobody drive? "Get out of my way you asshole," Jesus. What's the point of having a BMW if seventy year olds are gonna prick along at forty-five in front of you? "C'mon you wankers. I've got a crag to get to."
Hathersage 3 miles.
At last. We'll just stop off and get some chalk in the shop, then off to Millstone. I love Millstone. Mike and Andy wanted to go to the limestone, but that's tough shit. I didn't pay twenty-two grand on a car to have someone else tell me where to go in it.
And what will I do? I could start off on the Embankment routes to warm up. Then do Regent Street or go down and do Billy Whizz. E2 5c's. And to think that last year I was falling off VS's and HVS's. But that was before I got fit; a winter well spent. What was it that that American said down the climbing wall? "Man, I'm goin' on the juice this win'er and when I come out I'm gonna be rippin' fuckin' heads off." That's exactly what I'm going to be doing. I reckon I'll be doing E4 at least in no time. E5's maybe.
I'm so psyched. There can't be a climbing mag I haven't read or a video I haven't seen. I like those American ones, but the English ones are best, all our lads out bouldering, or that fella jumping around his house.
Anyway, it's all here now. Spring has finally arrived. Look at my huge forearms. Look at how my biceps flex.
* * * * *MILLSTONE HERE I COME. * * * * *
Well I suppose it was there that things started. We got to Millstone, and I decided not to bother with the HVS's or E1's and just to get on Regent Street. I knew I'd find it easy, but I didn't. I fell off at about ten feet, pumped and shaking. I fell off again a few more times, and sacked it off about half way up. Well I had no choice. Mike couldn't belay for shit. Never paying out slack for clipping the rope, or holding me tight. "Take me tight you stupid spastic", I'd call to him. The moron must have been asleep. I could have killed him.
I was slowly losing my temper with those two. I lowered off and sent Andy round to abseil for the gear. Then when they were down I'd ask them what they wanted to do, and they hummed and hahed like they couldn't decide. There was a hundred VS's for the idiots to try. I lost my patience and decided to run up one of the E1's on the Embankment wall to get some mileage in.
Christ! I fell off that too.
I was getting extremely annoyed, and a little later when I had backed off a HVS, I just got in my car and drove off, leaving those other two oafs to make their own way back to London. Or to Hell if they liked. I was pretty damned angry. I drove to Sheffield to see an old mate, but he wasn't in, so I booked into a hotel near Sharrow, the Athena.
Beer was the only answer for it, so I drove up to the Broadfield, where I'd heard the climbers hung out and had a few beers. And it was there, sure enough, that I first saw Ben Moon, in the flesh. Wow! Ben Moon. From the magazines. The one who put up Revelations and Agincourt and Hubble, the hardest route in the world. E10. He came in a little later on in the evening, by which time I had had a few, talking to a couple of other people who I recognised from the magazines, but I didn't know their names. I looked at them. Shit, it must be great being Ben Moon's friend, I thought. I thought about Andy and Mike, the two useless twats. Ben Moon would give you slack. Ben Moon would encourage you and make you keen. He'd help.
I looked at them. Shit, I'd like to go climbing with Ben Moon, I thought.
Perhaps it was the alcohol in me or something, but, you know, dammit to hell, I decided I might just ask him to come climbing. After all, we were all just climbers, and I had a good car. But how would I ask him, I thought? "Hey Ben, let's go cragging tomorrow mate," or, "Hi there, Ben. Noakes is the name. Duncan Noakes. Let's you and me go bag a few E points tomorrow."
I tried to catch his eye as he was talking. He must see me and know I'm a climber. I was still wearing my climbing trousers and a fleece top. Though when I thought about this I began to get a little self-conscious, and flushed a little in the face, as I was sitting obviously alone, and the pub was pretty full. With girls. I must stand out a bit.
Ben Moon was leaning against a little shelf talking to his friends, but he wasn't wearing any climbing gear at all. I was surprised by this, for in all the photos I had seen of him he was. Just blue cords and brown shoes. And a shirt. Anyone would think he was just an ordinary geezer.
After a little, his two friends walked off. This is it. Time to strike. I summoned my courage and decided to go for it. Just like that. He was stood, his back to the wall. Alone. Up I got, you know, as if I was going to the toilets or something, casual like, and circumnavigated the pool table between us, and crossed the line of his gaze. I stopped there, and looked at him. I had an opening planned.
"Have you ever done Embankment Route Three?", I asked.
"Say again," he said. I think I spoke too fast, what with nerves and the booze and that.
"Embankment Route Three. Have you tried that?"
He looked at me kind of strange, and I was sure I had spoken more slowly this time, but I repeated myself anyway, and he replied:
At last. I was getting somewhere. I told him I had tried it today, but it was wet. Then I asked him some more things, like if he was working any E11's, or what were the best routes for me to try in the Peak, E5's or E6's maybe. But he seemed fairly shy and didn't seem to know much. But I really liked him, and still wanted to ask him to go climbing.
"I was just going to the bar, Ben. Do you want a pint?"
"No. Someone's getting me one."
"Oh right. And are you going climbing tomorrow?"
"Where's that? Ravens Tor, or Stanage or something."
"Maybe I could go along there too."
"Maybe I could go along too. I wanted to try some things there too. Or I could hold your rope."
He looked at me.
".......Well the car's full."
"Come in mine. It's fast. A BMW."
"Sorry mate. My beer's ready. See you around."
Ben walked off to a little group, leaving me a little flustered, but buzzing. I felt shaky. Wait 'till I tell lads at the wall I was talking with Ben Moon in the pub. But I hadn't made any arrangements to go climbing with him. Shit. I really wanted to. Basically he seemed a bit unfriendly, but I bet he's a nice guy really, just busy, I thought. And just look at them all over there. That's Jerry Moffatt talking, isn't it? I wondered what he was going on about. I decided not to go and ask them. There were too many of them now.
Some weird looking guy beside me turned round and asked me about a tattoo I had, but I told him to piss off, creep. I felt rejected. Look at them. What do they think they are, superstars? They're only bloody climbers same as me.
I started to feel a bit annoyed. A bit pissed, and a bit annoyed, and the more I thought about the way Ben Moon had been, the more I thought "You asshole. You stuck up asshole."
I watched them all out of the corner of my eye, as Jerry Moffatt was saying goodbye to them. Now, I mightn't be no mathematician, but I am a quick thinker, and in that fraction of a second, my plan came to me.
Out I ran from the Broadfield. My car was parked just across the street. I fumbled with the keys and got in. Across the dark street, I saw Moffatt's figure emerge from the lighted doorway, alone. I turned the key, and the engine started, first time. As Moffatt walked along, I drove slowly behind him. I knew he must live locally, for The Broadfield was his local. He turned off up a smaller street, darker and quieter, and I saw my chance. I drove past him, and pulled in. My climbing gear was still in my car. I grabbed a handful. As he walked past, I opened my door and said,
"Hey you! Do you want a set of Rocks?"
He pulled up and looked at me. "Sorry mate," he said. "You got the wrong.........."
But I hadn't got the wrong anything.
Now I'm a big lad as you know, and I'd been doing the weights. So when I jumped out and threw my new gore-tex over his head, I soon had him under my control, and wrapped up in a nine mill. He shouted some things that weren't very nice, so I told him to shut up and he won't get hurt. I punched him a little punch somewhere around his face so as he'd know. Then I put my sleeping bag over him upside down. Sweet.
I drove him to Stoney Middleton. There's some great routes there, a bit polished maybe. Medusa, Dead Banana Crack. Bubbles Wall. I'll do them sometime.
The whole way out he kept roaring and shouting "Help! Help!" So I said, "It's nothing personal, Jerry, you understand mate?"
I kicked down the door of one of the old quarry huts, took him in, and tied him to a pipe. And I took away his clothes, just in case, like. I hoped he wouldn't get a chill, but I'm sure he's tough. Just in case, I threw a blanket over him.
That night Jerry and me talked for ages. There was loads I wanted to know, whether he thought Wallnuts were better than Rocks, or what he thought about these new Friend things that I had a set of. I also asked him about push ups and pull ups, and training in general, of course. I told him about the routes I had done that day, though I pretended I hadn't fallen off them. Maybe Regent Street was E3, I suggested. Have you done Embankment Route Three?
But Jerry didn't seem to know much either. I was disappointed he didn't want to talk more about climbing. He just wanted to keep saying "What the hell are you doing with me," or "Let me go you creep." So I had to slap him a couple more times, not hard.
Eventually, I told him what was going to happen.
"It's like this, Jerry. I want to climb with Ben Moon. You are Ben Moon's best friend. You are my hostage. You convince Ben Moon to climb with me or I'll smash your hands up."
I showed him a heavy lump of iron, and made a swinging motion towards his hands. I didn't hit him of course. Just pretend. He didn't agree at first. He said:
"No wayyy man. You must be mad."
I laughed when he said that, but when I swung the iron bar back really hard as if I was going to crack his head open with it, he changed his mind to:
Good man, Jerry. I took my mobile phone out of the leather pouch on my waist where I always carry it.
"Good thing it's Saturday," I told him. "With my company local calls are free at weekends. Now what's Ben Moon's number?"
Jerry complained because it was three in the morning, but I said "Shut up, Jerry. The number?"
He told me, off the top of his head, and I entered it. I won't say what it is, for then everyone would phone him, but I put it into the memory for the future. Actually I could tell you now myself what it is off the top of my head, but I think he's changed it since.
The number rang, and after four beep beeps it was picked up. A sleepy girl's voice answered, and I was a bit surprised at this.
"Hello. Could I speak to Ben Moon please?"
"Who is this?" she asked.
I thought for an instant. "A friend of Jerry Moffatt's."
"Hello Ben. It's me again, you remember, from the Broadfield? Well, I just remembered that I left without making the final arrangements about climbing tomorrow, and I thought I better give you a ring."
"Who the hell is this. How did you get this number?"
"Yeah. I thought maybe we could go to Millstone and do some of those cracks. Or maybe you would like to go to the limestone? I mean I'm always open to suggestions."
"What's going on. Is this a joke?"
"I've got a full rack and all, so if....."
"Look. It's the middle of the bloody night. I don't know who you are, I don't know why you are calling me, and most of all I don't want to go climbing with you tomorrow. Do you understand? Now get the hell off this line and don't call back."
The line went dead.
"Oh dear, Jerry. I forgot to mention that if he didn't go I was going to break your arms. I mean, he didn't give me a chance, did he? I'll try again, Jerry, and this time you better speak to him. Now no monkey business, or telling him where you are or anything, okay. Remember the iron bar?"
I got Ben Moon's number up on the display, and pressed 'dial'. This time Ben answered himself:
"Look you prick......."he started off. I held the phone to Jerry's face.
"Ben! Ben! Don't hang up. It's me, Jerry....Yeah....Now listen. Some psycho here has bloody kidnapped me and reckons that unless you take him climbing or something he's going to smash me up......Well he seems serious from where I'm sitting...... I'm tied to a pipe and he's taken all my clothes. He's standing beside me with an iron bar."
I grabbed the phone back, and suggested that in the light of this new information, he should reconsider his rash statements of earlier on. He wasn't really convinced until I started punching Jerry so he could hear. "Okay, okay," he said.
After that we made arrangements for picking him up and the time and that. Everything was sweet.
"See you tomorrow then, Ben. Nine o'clock mate. Oh and remember. No cops, or your friend gets it."
I liked saying that. It sounded like something from a film.
What a nice guy Ben is, I thought. And Jerry too. I was so excited about it all I couldn't sleep. I talked more to Jerry and told him that "Of course I would never have hurt you. I was only bluffing. You understand mate, eh?"
But I couldn't untie him, for even though he said he wouldn't run away, I couldn't take a chance at this stage. We just talked on into the night about climbing and Ben and that, and I think he really got to like me like I liked him.
I thought the following morning would never come but it did. What a great day's climbing me and Ben had. I think about it now almost every day, and I always tell all the people who come in about me and Ben and Jerry, but I don't think they know who they are. First off, he took me to his training cellar. He showed me all his best problems, but I couldn't really do anything there. I asked him how hard they were, E16 or 17 or what, but they didn't have E grades. After that at Stanage we did Right Unconquerable, and Ben said how good it was, and complemented me on how well I'd climbed it. I said "Oh HVS's are nothing to me."
I told him I had always wanted a go on Hubble just to see how hard it was.
"I have been training a bit this winter, gotten pretty strong. You never know, I might do the second ascent."
But Ben told me it already had been repeated, but we went there anyway, and we got a top rope on it. It was completely desperate, and I couldn't really do it. The holds were non-existant.
"That's frigging hard, Ben," I told him. "You really showed those Froggy wankers who's best with that one mate."
I told him the grade seemed right to me, and he said "Good to hear that."
We stayed there for the rest of the day, and we all had a good laugh, and Ben thought I really showed promise. I said to Ben that we should go out again tomorrow. He said "Yeah, and let's bring Jerry too, he'd like it." "Okay," I said..
Ben promised he'd never tell anyone about what had happened, and said don't worry, neither would Jerry. I was really excited thinking about what a brilliant day I had had, and how tomorrow would be even better.
"This has been the best day of my life," I told Ben.
We got in the BM, and I took him to the hut at Stoney. Inside the hut Jerry was still there tied up, but he looked tired. He was glad to see Ben. He looked a bit scared of me when I pulled out my big knife, but I said,"Don't worry mate, we're here to take you climbing."
I went behind him and cut the ropes. He stood up, but was a little shaky.
"Sorry Jerry. You must be starving," I said.
I led him out into the dusk. Next thing, all these lights turned onto me, and men started shouting "Hands up" and all sorts of stuff. Jerry and Ben ran off. I couldn't understand it. People, maybe police or something, ran up to me and put handcuffs on. They had guns. "Someone's spilled the beans," I said, and looked at Ben. I was annoyed at him, but I can see why he did it, I suppose.
After that I think I was taken to court or something. I must have been found guilty, I don't remember. That must have been quite long ago because I think I have been in this place for ages.
Still, I can't wait to get out again so I can go climbing again with my mates Ben and Jerry. What a couple of great guys they are.
all photos © Jerry Moffat.
Niall is the ghost writer of Jerry Moffat's biography Revelations, the BMC Guidebook Supremo - talk about the right person for the job -, writer of entertaining and slightly off-beat climbing essays, a stand up comedian, columnist at the USA's Rock and Ice magazine, husband, father and eternal climbing enthusiast.
Niall is one of our best climbing writers. He's unique, he's special, he's a national climbing treasure and ought to have one of those blue plaques from English Heritage attached to his forehead, except he's Irish.
Born in 1968 in Derry, Northern Ireland to Polly and Joe. His Da was a fitter at DuPont, a chemical works on the outskirts of town. Ma looked after Da, Niall and his three brothers: Brendan, Brian and Desmond. He lived in Derry until his early twenties going to St Columb's College, a boys school where he studied Latin and played with bunsen burners. He passed all his O levels but failed all his A levels.
The family was Catholic; retreats, benediction, confession, communion, guilt and saying the rosary in the evening while they continued to watch Magnum P.I. with the sound turned down.
He got into climbing via the Scouts, soloing an easy route in combat boots but that night he saw Lakeland Rock with Pete Whillance on TV. The fire was lit and by chance, Raymond, the brother of Niall's best friend Paul had started climbing with the only other climber in Derry and after loads of begging they took them out.
Niall is well traveled - especially to Banff where he has picked up several literature awards - and his climbing highlights include Primrose Dihedral on Moses Tower in the Canyonlands, Fur Tappers on The Baroness in Greenland, Flesh at Muckross Head and Main Mast on Sail Rock, Donegal.
He lives in Sheffield with his wife Helen and daughter Erin.
I asked Niall a few questions about his essay King Of The Crag.
When was the article published?
This was actually one of the first articles I ever had published, one of the first I ever wrote actually. I had just left university so it was about 1994 or 95.
Where did you get the idea for the article?
I got the idea from a Robert de Niro movie called King of Comedy. De Niro played a highly strung amateur comedian called Rupert Pupkin who was trying to break into the big time but without success. He kept bugging his hero, Jerry Lee Lewis, for a slot on his prime time show but he wasn't very good. Eventually he kidnaps Lewis, his ransom demand being a slot on his show. I watched this one evening by myself and wondered would the idea work for climbing. I didn't own a computer and went round to my friends Simon and Michelle's and wrote it. The story just popped out.
Did you know Ben and Jerry at the time?
I had met Ben a few times, often managing to disguise my awe, but had never met Jerry. You never saw Jerry around much.
I had never been in a fast car before, had never met Jerry before, had never seen a top climber's cock before. It was great fun.
How did you approach them and how were they to work with?
I wrote the article and sent it to Neil Pearsons at On The Edge magazine. They had published one of my articles before. I think he sent it to Ben and Jerry (I would never have dared) and told me to ring Ben and ask about doing some photos. I nervously rang Ben and he said "Yeah, me and Jerry have read the article and we like it."
I was psyched. We arranged a day and went out in Ben's left-hand drive M3. It was sensory overload for me. I had never been in a fast car before, had never met Jerry before, had never seen a top climber's cock before. It was great fun. Walking up to Stanage Jerry, ever the professional, always aware of his need for media coverage, said "This is great Ben, we won't need to do another route this year thanks to this".
If you were to do the article today which top climbers would you choose to do it with? I suppose what I am asking is who are today's Ben and Jerry?
If you were writing this again you would need to do it with Chris Sharma and Adam Ondra. Britain has loads of great climbers today but none of them quite have that A-List charisma that Ben and Jerry had. It would only work with celebrities. But then again, if Chris Sharma was told that I might pop Ondra, would he comply? I mean, let's look at this from a professional point of view, that sponsorship deal with the watch company might be up for review soon.
Mick Ryan, Senior Editor at UKClimbing.com and UKHillwalking.com, wrote about Niall Grimes in the introduction to the UKC article: Magic in the Air
I asked floppy-haired outdoor event impresario Matt Heason about Niall, in particular about the Niall's Ape Index lecture series in Sheffield, a series of evenings in the late 90's/early Noughties where top climbers gave slide presentations interspersed with Niall's stand-up comedy routines.
I actually started Heason Events as a result of Niall's Ape Index lectures. I used to attend them religiously and did my best to promote them via planetFear who I worked for part time. I recall the last ever Ape Index. It was at the Bryncliffe Oaks in Netheredge. I was outside in the car park helping Niall carry out some of his AV kit to the car and I was complaining that this was the last one ever.
He said that running Ape Index was worse than giving birth. I mockingly asked how did he know, and he replied, quick as a flash "have you ever given birth?" with a wry grin. He had a point I suppose. I figured that once he had stopped them there was a gap in the market and sought his advice to kind of resurrect them. I think the main reason they weren't as successful as they should have been, financially, is that he knew so many of the people who were at the lectures and let them in for free. He never made any money. Typical climbers I suppose. Typical Grimer too though. Generous to a fault. I have never been able to stand on stage and host an event the way he can, but I try to make sure that everybody who comes in pays to be there!
He was hilarious, controversial and a little too pickled to be running the show; always funny. I remember Dave Turnbull (BMC head honcho) giving a talk about his and John Arran's Long Hope route (the original version) and Grimer getting more and more loud as the evening wore on. Despite having asked Dave to do the show he was actually heckling him!
At one point Dave was trying to describe the scale of a sea stack in the background of a photo. Niall piped up and asked whether the pony in the foreground was bigger. It raised a laugh. But from them on with every other slide he made reference to his new measurement scale – the 'pony'. After twenty minutes or so of this Dave was looking visibly rattled, but it was all in good fun and the crowd loved it. Another time I recall him starting the show off with a slide of a Sheffield bus. He talked for probably 15 minutes about that bus and had 150 people in stitches. I often pitied the main acts who had to follow him!
The event is: Word of Mouth with Niall Grimes and Andy Kirkpatrick. More details of this great weekend outdoor/climbing festival at: www.alpkit.com
Jerry Moffatt and Niall Grimes are appearing at the Kendal Mountain Festivals this year. They will be discussing their book... Read more
Last night was the official launch of Jerry Moffatt – Revelations, the biography of one of the world's top rock climbers of the... Read more
In this exclusive extract from Jerry Moffatt's new book Revelations, the man himself describes the first ascent of his Cloggy... Read more
In this series, we feature a variety of vans and their owners and getting into the geeky details of their vehicle and its set-up.... Read more
A forum post recently cropped up featuring a video of 13 year-old Jacob Hadley cruising up My Halo E7 6b in the Dinorwig Slate... Read more
Morna Middleton interviews some top female UK routesetters and gives an insight into the male-dominated world of the routesetting... Read more
|FS: Statement, The Ben Moon... Aug-15|
|OI NEWS: Ben Moon signs with... Jul-15|
|NEWS: VIDEO: Ben Moon climbing... Jun-15|
|INTERVIEW: Ben Moon on... Jun-15|
|NEWSFLASH: Ben Moon climbs... Jun-15|
|NEWS: Podcast: Ben Moon Apr-15|
|"Midweek" Ben Moon... Mar-15|
|FS: Self Coached Climber +DVD,... Mar-15|
|List more discussions...|

I'd like the thank all 37 donors that donated their tickets for the Michigan State @ Ohio State game. My wife is a Spartan and we try our best to get to as many MSU games as we can, and due to work and life this was the only hockey or basketball game we were able to make. We couldn't have done it without you. It was a great time until OSU started to run up the score. Thanks so much, we really appreciated it!
My wife, grand-daughter and I want so send a big thank-you to all of folks who donated the seats that gave us the ability to see a great OSU hockey win vs Michigan State. We were able to meet some other Vets, who also received tickets thru the Vet Tix process. it was great telling stories of our active duty experiences. Although we didn't get to take a picture of the ice with us included, we did get to have taken with the Big Ten Championship Trophy (attached) that was located in a room right across from our seats. I did have 4 tickets but my younger grand-daughter had to visit the Minute Clinic with her Mom and was unable to attend - she hopes that Papa will be able to get other tickets to take her to an event - she tried real hard to go but just couldn't make it at this time...
Thank you to all Donors who make it possible for Veterans to get out and experience these great events and meet people and fellow Veterans!! Without your support it truly would not be possible...Thank you!!!
The wife and I had a wonderful “date night” as we attended our first ever OSU hockey game. The seats were amazing. Thank you for giving my wife and I a fun night out! We appreciate you, and everyone, for donating tickets to this wonderful organization.
Wow! What a great game! And perfect timing to get us out of the house and away from some huge pressure for an evening! We really enjoyed the game, the seats were terrific, and I commend OSU on their availability of handicap parking!!! Many thanks!!!
Ohio State Athletics has continued to support Veterans by providing these free tickets to sporting events. Thank you for the great time at the Hockey game. Thanks to the players for such a dominating win.

How the subtleties of musical expression have succumbed to popular demands
A concert of Ghulam Abbas was held at the Shakir Ali Museum last week and it was attended by those who are initiated into the finer aspects of music.
Ghulam Abbas is from Multan and like many others from that area he made a name for himself in the field of singing particularly via ghazal and film songs. Later as there appeared to be more opportunities in Lahore, which then was the capital of filmmaking in the country, he shifted here and continued to express himself as long as his style of singing stayed popular.
He was first noticed in the film Ashiq Log Saudai and it was Mehdi Hasan, it is said who appreciated his singing and advised that he become a formal shagird of an ustad. He also helped him become a shagird of Ustad Ismail, an uncle of Mehdi Hasan and one of his most formative influences.
It was the ardent desire of Ghulam Abbas to become the shagird of Mehdi Hasan and in his various interviews he talked about the travails and hardships being accepted as a shagird by Mehdi Hasan. It was not so much that the ustad did not have confidence in the young Ghulam Abbas but that he was so busy and sought after in the 1960-70s that he hardly had time for being an instructor. The next best option was to tag along with the ustad and to be around when he performed or recorded and in the process pick up the finer aspects of his art. This has been the general pattern as the ustads just serve as the example and the shagird is equipped enough to emulate and understand the intricacies involved and so benefit from it.
The same intonation is evident in the gaiki of Ghulam Abbas. He carried the tradition of singing in the next decades which was the dain (gift) of his ustad’s gharana.
Popular music has changed greatly in the last couple of decades and the way a note is intoned has been most effected. The vocalists, once masters of bringing out the subtleties found themselves to be singing to audiences that wanted more rhythmic input and straight rendition of the note.
As it happens in a concert, vocalists are bombarded with requests from the audience and they are generally more popular numbers. It is known to happen that the artiste has experimented or is keen to render a recent number but he or she is in a way overruled by the eager members of the audience who think its their right to demand the performance of a certain number. Usually in concerts it becomes very difficult for performers to be assertive and stay their course without acceding to popular wishes. One had even seen Mehdi Hasan surrendering to popular wishes and not being fully appreciated for the new ghazal numbers he was desperate to sing. The audiences were keener to listen to his film numbers.
Shakir Ai Museum, actually the house that Shakir Ali built was taken over and purchased by the Pakistan National Council of the Arts after his death after due legal proceedings and since then has been serving as a house museum. He had built this over a period of many years and it is a work of art itself. His students who later became very well known in their respective fields contributed to its architectural design and helped in making it a very distinct architectural piece.
It is also the only property that the Pakistan National Council of the Arts has in Lahore and therefore also serves as their outpost in the culture capital of Lahore. It has been a platform not only for the visual arts, which many thought that it should have been, but of many art forms including music, dance and theatre. It has also been hosting workshops and seminars, poetry readings and lectures on literature and film-making.
Shakir Ali himself was a multidimensional person. His interests stretched beyond painting. He was a short-story writer and deeply interested in music. It was due to his persistence that the multi-disciplinary approach to the arts has since featured at the National College of Arts as the bedrock of all artistic experience.
It can play a larger role than it has been traditionally assigned to and at times it is the limitation of space, resources and logistics that circumscribe the desire to do so.

The car salesman has developed a stereotype of being less than trustworthy over the years, and while the cliche might hold true in some instances, it definitely doesn’t when it comes to Dang Vuong.
The sales manager at the Stratstone BMW dealership in the northeast of the U.K. became an unexpected hero last year, though he doesn’t think what he did was out of the ordinary. This isn’t a case of going beyond the call of duty, this is someone recognizing another person needed help and making sure they got it.
When Vuong received an unusual phone call on a Sunday afternoon, he didn’t think twice about what he should do.
Dang Vuong was working when an elderly woman who fell in her bathroom accidentally called his car dealership looking for help.
The elderly woman had slipped while getting ready to have a bath. She tried to call her daughter, but made a mistake with the number and called the car dealership instead.
That didn’t matter to Vuong. He told the receptionist to get her address, and to keep her on the line. The call was coming from about two miles away, and Vuong could tell she needed help. He got in his car and drove over to the woman’s house.
“My initial thought was that I needed to help her, and make sure she is OK,” Vuong told Today.com
When he arrived, he realized that the front door was unlocked. He followed the sound of running water into the bathroom and found the tub was almost overflowing, and the woman was lying on the floor. There was blood on her face from where she had cut her mouth.
She was shocked at first when Vuong arrived, but that soon turned to gratefulness when he said he’d come to make sure she was alright.
“I felt like I had to go and help because I couldn’t live with myself if something happened to her and I didn’t even try. If it were my grandparent, how would I feel if she was left alone?” Vuong said.
Vuong turned off the running water, cleaned her wounds, helped her to the couch, and made her a cup of tea.
I would like to say a massive thank you to the manager at BMW Silverlink for helping my nana today. After falling in her…
The elderly woman sustained no major injuries, and aside from being a little disoriented, was totally fine. Her family arrived shortly after Vuong was finished making her a cup of tea. The elderly woman’s granddaughter was endlessly grateful for Vuong’s kindness. In a post she later made on Facebook, she thanked him profusely.
“We can’t thank him enough for what he done for her, there really is some caring and thoughtful people out there that don’t get recognized for what the do,” Sarah Tweedy wrote.
The family asked to meet with him the following weekend so that they could thank him properly for being there in a time of need.
Once the family arrived, Vuong returned to work. He had no idea word of his kindness was already spreading.
Like to thank everyone who took there time out to message me! This has been very overwhelming. Thank you again!
Once the local paper reported on his kind deed, many people thanked Vuong for doing the right thing and making the world a better place. A local pizzeria told him that his next pizza pie was on the house, and countless strangers lavished him with praise and described his behavior as heroic.
Those who know Dang Vuong say they are proud of the way he took action, but aren’t surprised. One former coworker named Ian Wilson told Chronicle Live, “Used to work with Dang – lovely lad and not surprised to hear this. Well done matey.”
But Vuong doesn’t think he’s done anything special.
“I didn’t think anything of it as I would hope any other human being would have done the exact same thing,” Vuong told Today. “I’ve been brought up to help people, especially my elders.”

Shaun Alexander, Walter Jones, Leroy Hill, CJ Wallace, Rocky Bernard and Will Herring all sat out practice. As I mentioned in the earlier post, Shaun and Hill are not scheduled to go til Friday. Walter and Rocky are both precautions, I think, because, as Holmgren said earlier in the day, he wants to have them ready on Sunday.
Deion Branch looked like he was moving pretty well out there, running with the first team. He dropped one pass toward the end of practice, but that was it. Otherwise, he looked like he was ready to be back.
OL Ray Willis also practice, though he was wearing a bulky knee brace that made me think he was not ready to return. He was moving very slowly with the brace on.
Never miss a local story.
Marcus Pollard practiced with the first team, rotating with Will Heller. He looked like he was moving OK, as well.
We spoke with offensive coordinator Gil Haskell after practice, and he acknowledged that they have not completely figured out how to work the whole Mo-Shaun dynamic. For some reason, I get the sense that the topic is so tricky that they don't really know what to say. Perhaps they don't want to give away something, which is understandable, but it seems like it is a little more than that. We'll see. It is definitely something that they are knocking around.
Interestingly, Kelly Jennings played in the same defensive backfield as Devin Hester at Miami. He said he has seen plenty of times where Hester changes the momentum of a game in just one play.
Special teams coach Bruce DeHaven said the hard thing about being a special teams coach is that you are not judged by your overall play, but by your worst play. He said they had almost as many penalties on Monday Night as they have had the rest of the season combined.

Scott has exceeded our expectations in every possible way! The home he built is far beyond anything we could have ever dreamed of. He was with us through every step of the way, attended every meeting and contacting us daily with updates. Not a single day goes by that we aren't given a compliment on our home and Scott's incredible work! Even after our move, Scott is still as helpful as he was during the building process. We HIGHLY recommend Churilla Homes, Scott and his team are great to work with.

Kanye West is working to be a spoiler candidate for Vice President Joe Biden, pulling away Black voters from supporting the Democratic candidate with his own presidential run. But West's first rally didn't appear to go well.
Appearing in front of a half-full crowd and wearing a bullet-proof vest, West began by kicking out members of the audience for whispering during the event. He said that the only way that the country can "heal" is by instituting "order," which evidently means kicking people out for whispering at his rally.
Without a sound system to hear, much of the room likely were asking each other what West actually said.
1. West then said that Europeans have a higher tolerance for pain, though he didn't clarify what scientific study that came from or why it was a tenet of his presidential campaign.
2. The rapper explained why he became addicted to painkillers, saying that it was "like having an orgasm." He went on to tell the audience, "I was high as a motherfucker."
3. "Harriet Tubman never actually freed the slave, she just had the slaves go work for other white people," he said to groans from the audience. He went on to attack Rosa Parks as well.
4. "Steve Jobs is a Nazi!" West exclaimed though it appeared to be a response to a question from a member of the audience that could not be heard due to the lack of a sound system. Again, it's unclear where West is able to find his facts.
5. He then attacked his ex-girlfriend Amber Rose, who he called a "stripper" and said that he "dated her anyway."
6. "Let me explain something to liberals," he went on. "I backstroke to backlash." It appears to be a possible indication that he's only seeking attention and response from the progressive community.
7. As part of his rant about abortion, he said, "even if my wife were to divorce me after this speech, she brought North into the world, even when I didn't want to." As one person noted, Kim, West's wife, said that her husband was the one who wanted to have children.
I thought Kim told us the kids were basically Kanye's idea.... big yikes https://t.co/x6Cewljx26— We me and Milano (@We me and Milano) 1595196343.0
8. "I don't give a f*ck whether I win the presidency or not," West also said.
9. "If I'm over, guess what else is over, the country is over," was another point West made.
10. Africa will pay women $1 million to have a baby. It was, again, unclear where that information came from.
11. West then confessed to possibly being high, at least the previous evening. "I did smoke a little bit last night," he said. That's why he is disorganized, he said. He then attacked Trump about marijuana, though it was difficult to make out his exact words. He concluded by saying that with marijuana, "we would be free."
12. "Shooting guns are fun," he said about his support for the Second Amendment.
13. "The solution for Big Pharma is that we need to make BIG FARMS!" He proclaimed, saying that it is time to move back to living off the land.
14. When he was asked by the audience about his Harriet Tubman remarks, he explained, "The Harriet Tubman things is, I'm sick of black iconography being used by white corporations."
Topics that West didn't address in his presidential campaign include the COVID-19 crisis, the recession, jobs and the economy, any stimulus package he thinks Congress should pass, domestic terrorism, the Russian bounty on American soldiers and many more serious issues the United States is facing.
See the full video of the event below:

Hi everyone! TOPIC : I have a case of my older kitten fighting or playing the new one I can't even tell! Also my baby Bengal eats less.. Ivy (F) Bengal 4 months old - Beerus (M) Siamese 12 weeks old Me and my boyfriend moved in together a few months ago and got two new kittens. Three weeks ago we adopted a baby Bengal cat, Ivy, she is 4 months old almost 5. She adapted very well to our apartment that's spacious enough for her to run around and be a baby bengal lol! We became best friends right away. Since we have to go back to work eventually, we adopted a litte brother for her three days ago: Beerus. I want them to keep each other compagny and I read that bengals are happier in duos. He is a small 12 weeks old Siamese Flame point. He is adapting well to us also, very cuddly and curious. When they met the first day, Ivy got really curious but also jealous. She kept staring at him, smelling him, hissing, growling.. but not with force or agressivity (she has rubber claws cover by the way) At first we tried putting her away in our cat room (there's a spare room with her litter and her stuff) but she's very vocal so she started meowing way too loud. We tried ignoring it, didn't work. We tried to pet them beside each other, my boyfriend having beerus and me Ivy, didn't work. My boyfriend wanted him to sleep with us but nope, ivy was being loud again. We put beerus and all of his stuff in the cat room and moved Ivy's somewhere else. 2nd day me and my boyfriend read about the right ways to introduce new kittens. Beerus stayed in the room for the most part, us visiting him a lot and also giving Ivy a lot of attention in return. She started waving her paws and hissing under the door a couple of times but that's okay. At night, they both ate on each side of the door with a little space in between, but could see each other (it went fine). 3rd day today. Beerus was less shy, more active and curious. They ate breakfast beside each other this morning, went well. Ivy ignores him then starts staring, then licks herself. She ate a little. He is eating just fine in his own bowl. He spent 2-3 hours in his room in the afternoon with regular visits while I worked on the computer. Ivy was sleeping. He then started wanting to explore around so I let him, Ivy was following him smelling him and staring. He ended up falling alseep on my lap and her right beside me, they also slept on the cat tree not too far from each other. A little later on, Ivy being a bengal started being Hyperactive and wanted to play I guess, she hadn't been mean to him yet.. Until she started jumping on him and rolling around and biting him harder (not while screaming or any of that, but her eyes were black just like when she gets her boost of energy). So i separated them again, Beerus is back in his room. Tonight I noticed Ivy hadn't eaten very well all day, her bowl is still full and she's being distant even in our alone time.. I really try to give her as much attention possible and to prioritise her just like before! I have been doing pretty much everything I could read online about it. I'm not sure if Ivy is really trying to hurt Beerus, or playing with him just a little too rough. He is still scared when she approaches too much in an intrusive way but he doesn't mind her that much, it's more on her side. It's been only 3 days so I guess I have to be patient. I'd love for anybody to read this and give us advices, also if you've had a similar experience please share it would reassure us a little. My two friends have introduced their 2 yrs old domestic to their new 8 weeks old bengal and they told me to let them fight it out which worked for them... but i'm not too fund of that idea How long did it take for your cats to get along? Are they bffs now? I really want to know your experiences.

T.I. sits down for his first interview since completing his prison sentence. The King of the South, who’s happy to be home, says he’s using his time behind bars as a learning experience, but didn’t write much while he was away (“I wasn’t really motivated to create”). He also reveals the direction of his next album, due August 24.
“Paper Trail was a lot more about thoughts and this is more about feelings,” he explains. “This is significantly more aggressive. It’s going hard like classic T.I.”

By JARRED OPATZ
T-G Special Projects Editor
It all started with a high school reunion and a painting.
It has become a major renovation with many artistic touches.
Dan and Terri Meyer have spent the past several years renovating an old farmhouse, barn and farm in Ashland, decorating much of the house and barn with original art work by Terri, making the house more open with fewer rooms and doing all kinds of landscaping.
"I had an entirely different vision," Dan said about their renovation at 1432 County Road 1575 near Goasis. "Thank God she used her influence because it would have looked a lot different. It wouldn't have looked near as nice.
"I would have followed the structural guidelines of replacing it back to the original, and that wouldn't have worked," he added.
Dan said he's glad he hired Terri to do a painting of what the farmhouse, barn and farmland looked like in the 1940s because it led to them dating. He asked her to paint it after the two reconnected at their 20-year Ashland High School reunion in 1999.
"He got the rest for free," laughed Terri about the other artwork throughout the home.
The painting of the farm hangs on the wall of an upstairs room Terri likes to call "The Library" because she likes to go there to relax and read.
After going through a divorce, Dan bought the 28-acre farm in 1996 and began doing basic renovation work on the house and barn, which he said both were in a state of great disrepair. The house and barn were built by farmer/banker Christian Hess in the 1860s, and it stayed in the Hess family until the middle of the 20th century when the Wolf family took over ownership until the 1980s. A couple other owners followed until Dan bought it.
It wasn't until Dan met Terri, who also was divorced, that the major renovation work began. The couple, who were married in 2002, still are working on their renovation project.
At first, Dan used the barn for his masonry business. Now, it houses Terri's art studio and retail art business (The Creative Chateau - www.CreativeChateau.com) where she offers custom framing, as well as her fine art productions, jewelry and customized clocks. Dan has moved his masonry equipment and warehouse to Jeromesville, but still has an office in the couple's home.
Dan and Terri also have done a lot of work around the house and barn, including converting the old milking parlor into a potting shed for gardening and building a brick trail of about 30,000 bricks which leads to a small building for parties that overlooks a pond they had dug by a local excavating company.
When they added on to the home, they used bricks for the addition from another local old farmhouse also built in the 1860s that was torn down a few years ago.
After a lot of discussion about restoring the house, Dan and Terri said they decided to reconfigure it to make it practical to today's standards.
"My wife does all the artwork and design," Dan said. "I supply the labor."
Murals make up much of the artwork throughout the house, including ceiling murals.
"It was a new avenue for me," Terri said. "I had never done a mural before, so it challenged me in a new direction.
"I got to do a lot of new stuff," she added with a smile.
While Terri said she always has had an interest in art, she didn't study it in college. She majored in business in college while also serving in the military, where she was a meteorologist with the Air Force. Before returning to Ashland to pursue her passion of art, she also worked in human resource management in Las Vegas.
Terri said she has taken a lot of art classes and has read a lot about art over the years.
Some of her classes have been at the Ashland Community Arts Center, which recently exhibited some of her customized clocks. On her clocks, she recreates history from turn-of-the-century postcards, her own paintings and antique photographs.
Tricia Applegate, director of the Arts Center, said she never has seen another house decorated with as much original artwork as Dan and Terri's home.
"It was amazing," Applegate said about her visit to the home. "I was incredibly impressed with what they have done with an old farmhouse inside and out, and all the artistic touches."
The Meyers have a posterboard they like to show people with photos of what the place looked like before they began their major renovation project.
"To see what they started with, they deserve to be on a home improvement show," Applegate said.
n Jarred Opatz can be reached at 419-281-0581, ext. 256, or by e-mail at firstname.lastname@example.org.

Hello. My name is Maria, and I am so grateful to have been asked to speak for you today. Only a few years ago, I was sitting in these same seats, completing the TTC program and getting ready to go to college. My journey to get to this point was not easy, as I’m sure many of you feel the same.
I am the youngest child of immigrant parents who moved here from Portugal. My parents never learned the English language, which put me at a disadvantage in school right from the start. Before I could even learn in school, I had to learn how to speak English. I did okay in grade school but in high school, I started to hang with the wrong crowd, and before I knew it, I was failing most of my classes. I became pregnant and dropped out of school. By the age of 19, I was a high school dropout and a mother of two children. Education was never important in my home, my parents never pushed me to do well in school or strive to go to college.
Fast forward 15 years, I found myself at the age of 32 with three children and working two minimum wage jobs just to survive. I thought to myself, there has to be a better way. Lucky for me, I met a man (who is now my fiance by the way) who grew up in a different world than me. He was taught the value of education by his parents and he was in the process of completing college himself. He pushed me to go to college; the only problem was I didn't have a high school diploma. I had dropped out of high school in 9th grade, and to be honest, I hadn’t done well in 8th or 7th grade either. Now that I think about it, I basically had a 6th grade education. However, my goal then was to do whatever it took to get to college. In my case, it meant getting a GED, which I did though RIRAL, and get ready for college. After months of study classes and prep courses, I passed the GED exam and was ready for college.
Knowing what I know now, if I had tried to go straight to college after my GED, I don't think I would have graduated this year. RIRAL’s Transition to College Program gave me the skills that were critical for my success. Not only did TTC help me get up to speed on things like math and English, it also taught me HOW to be a college student. You might wonder what that means. Being a successful college student takes patience, time management, social skills, and determination. These are the skills that put me on the track to an Associates Degree. The instructors at TTC always told me to get to class early, sit in the front, introduce myself to the professor, always put homework first (Netflix can wait), manage my time, and never procrastinate because you never know when life will throw you a curveball.
When I started at CCRI, I was nervous, but I started off slowly, taking only two courses the first semester. I knew it was going to be hard, and I didn’t want to set myself up for failure by taking too many courses. In my second semester, I decided to take three courses because by then I knew what was expected of me, and I knew I could do it. I am not going to tell you it was easy, yet I will tell you it is doable. I had a few classes that gave me a run for my money, but I never gave up, and in the end, I am so proud of my accomplishments. All you have to do is show up, do the work, and ask questions, and believe me, the professors love that. Yes, it's harder when you have many responsibilities and that's when time management skills need to be applied. I am so lucky that TTC taught me all these skills.
As I look out at all of you, I see mothers, fathers, employees, and caretakers. We all have busy lives, so managing our time might be the most important skill to learn. There were times when I thought I would never be able to finish that paper or study for that exam. But, I made it a point to set aside time for schoolwork even if that meant my kids would make their own dinner that night. You may be sitting there right now thinking you have such a long way to go. Let me tell you that time flies, and before you know it, you will be done with your first semester!
If I could leave you with any advice before I end, it is to take the lessons learned from TTC and apply them. I am confident that if I could do it, then you can, too. I was a high school dropout with a 6th grade education. Now I am a woman with a college degree and a career ahead of me. Anything is possible. Thank You.

I really like the Ottolenghi way of cooking. At home, we have already reproduced some recipes very successfully and enjoyed a couple of dinners in his restaurant. But the best, was the other night, when Jakob, on his way home from London, bought the dinner to go. It was one of those things which makes you happy. First week after my holidays, lots of things to do, new projects and then, such a reward, more than convenient..

Tony and Dellaine Spencer of Panora have been on the East Coast for one week, working for the Red Cross in the aftermath of Hurricane Sandy.
But an approaching Nor'easter prompted them to stop their work passing out meals, so they could head to the shelter of their own hotel room.
“Because of the Nor'easter, we couldn't do the evening meal, so now we are back to our lodging to hunker down until this passes us by,” Tony Spencer said.
“There are already boats running through the fronts of their houses, and they don't even know who they belong to,” Dellaine Spencer said when asked what it’s like near Atlantic City.
When they got to New Jersey one week ago, the devastation was bad enough.
"One guy said he had three boats in his yard, none of which belong to him," Tony Spencer said. “He was trying to say, 'Thank you,' but he just couldn't get it out. He was so emotional. He just couldn't get it out, but you could just tell by his expressions he was just so happy to have somebody to feed him and talk to him and hear his story."
The Spencers have fed hundreds of people out of their Red Cross truck. They said everyone has been grateful for a hot meal and a sympathetic ear.
"He couldn't even speak. He just gave me a kiss on my cheek, and when they do that, it makes me cry, too, so it's really, really awful what they're going through,” Dellaine Spencer said.
“Everybody gets hit by something sometime, so if you can help those who get hit, they'll reciprocate and be there when you most need them,” Tony Spencer said.
The Spencers are expected to spend one more week on the East Coast, helping people recover from Sandy, and now the Nor'easter.

"Took you guys long enough," Keitsu was standing in front of Samezuka's gates.
"Keitsu," Sousuke nodded in greeting, followed by the rest.
"Sousuke, Gou" Keitsu reciprocated the nod and smiled, "and everyone."
"Hey there," Nagisa mustered up a smile.
Sousuke walked closer to the gates and peered over the fence. He knew security in Samezuka will be tight, especially when its dark, so how is he supposed to sneak Keitsu in-
"The building is heavily guarded," Keitsu said, "lets all go to my place. I heard of the situation from Rin and perhaps I can be of assistance."
(Name) was sitting down on the mattress, trying to think of a way to contact anyonr outside.
Ashiro had mentioned that no matter how much she screams, no one will be able to hear her. This means she is in a location most likely far from where people are, maybe the outskirts of Iwatobi.
She would have to get out of this place first, which is definitely a challenge since her hands and feet were bound tightly. On top of that, Ashiro and another guy, a friend of his perhaps, is guarding her. They take turns with the guarding shift, and sometimes they were together watching TV or something in the room beside her.
Getting out would be pretty much impossible at this point.
But even if she did get out, is there a payphone? Can she dial an emergency number without money? In Tokyo, said feature is available, but here?
She gave her bounded hands a tug, feeling the tapes still secure, if not more sticky than before.
(Name) wanted to look through each boxes which were present in the room, but she could not even walk towards them as her feet were also bound. She did not want to look pathetically like a worm on the occasion where Ashiro comes in and sees her wiggling on the floor towards the boxes. He would either laugh at her or beat her. She shivered at the thought of the latter. That would be the last thing she wants.
Sitting alone in the dark, her senses had adjusted well enough that if she stay quiet and still, she could hear the noises from outside the room she was locked in. There were voices talking. One is Ashiro, the other is... someone else? Was it the friend he mentioned about?
She strained her ears, trying to listen in to what they were talking about. Maybe she could find out more about her whereabouts, and perhaps about their plans, or even a clue or two about escaping.
"Damnit!" Keitsu groaned and leaned back on his chair.
The tracking had failed.
Sousuke stopped his restless pacing and glanced over at Keitsu, rolling his shoulder, "What's wrong? Failed again?"
"Yes," Keitsu ran a hand through his hair in frustration, "This withdrawn number makes it hard. I can usually track normal numbers, even if they're disposable phones or whatever. I was able to crack through some withdrawn numbers in the past but this is really hard. We're up against an expert in this field."
"Well that confirms it," (Cousin's Name) muttered, "He is definitely working with someone else. Ashiro is not this good."
Gou frowned, "b-but.. do you have any other methods?"
"I have one more. It would work but it takes a lot of time. A lot more than what I've done so far."
"But we don't have time!" Sousuke exclaimed, raising his voice for the first time, the panic breaking through his calm facade, "We don't know what he's doing to her, or if she's still here-"
YOU ARE READING
Azure Beats (Sousuke x Reader)Fanfiction
It all started when (Name) transferred to Iwatobi from Tokyo. She had a lot of reasons to why she moved out of the big city; health complications, a search for ideas to write her new songs, and many others. There, after joining the swim club, she me...

Maybe if she had a union ...
This is a sad reality for low wage workers. As "at will" employees they only have freedom of speech in the abstract:
Shanna Tippen was another hourly worker at the bottom of the nation’s economy, looking forward to a 25 cent bump in the Arkansas minimum wage that would make it easier for her to buy diapers for her grandson. When I wrote about her in the Post last month, she said the minimum wage hike would bring her a bit of financial relief, but it wouldn’t lift her above the poverty line.
She called me the other day to say she didn’t get to enjoy the 25-cent hike for long. After the story came out, she says she was fired from her job for talking to the Post.
Tippen says she was fired by her boss, hotel manager Herry Patel. Earlier that day, Patel had called the Post to express frustration that he had been quoted giving his opinion about the minimum wage hike. (He objected to it.)
It was soon after, Tippen says, that Patel found her in the lobby and fired her.
“He said I was stupid and dumb for talking to [the Post],” Tippen said. “He cussed me and asked me why you wrote the article. I said, ‘Because he’s a reporter; that’s what he does.’ He said, 'it was wrong for me to talk to you.'"
She'd worked there for two years and is now unemployed and searching for another job.
This is what liberty means for millions of workers in America. They have the same rights as their employers in the abstract but in order to exercise them they have to be willing to enjoy the "freedom" of starvation.

Throwing ice was the start of didgeridoo and bin fight
A BOOVAL man armed himself with a didgeridoo to ward off a group of offenders throwing objects, including a garbage can, at him.
One of the group, Ashka Johnson, 17, pleaded guilty in Ipswich Magistrates Court this week to affray and trespassing.
Police prosecutor Sgt Matt Donnelly said officers were called to the victim's South Station Rd address on August 26.
Sgt Donnelly said Johnson and four others were seen shouting abuse and throwing things at the victim and his partner.
The items included rocks, bricks, pieces of timber and a garbage can.
Sgt Donnelly said the victim had felt "extreme fear" and grabbed a didgeridoo to fend off the group.
Defence lawyer Caroline Juratowitch said the attack came after the victim apparently threw chunks of ice at Johnson and his friends.
She said her client and his mates entered the front yard to confront the ice thrower.
Johnson claimed one of his friends was then pushed down the front stairs by the victim, which provoked them into throwing the items at him.
Johnson was also charged with creating a public disturbance and obstructing a police officer for another incident that month.
Sgt Donnelly said the teen had created a nuisance while he was intoxicated at Goodna Railway Station. Railway staff asked him to leave the station due to his disorderly behaviour.
Sgt Donnelly said Johnson reacted in a "violent manner" by deliberately smashing a bottle of alcohol on the platform floor.
When police were called, it took three officers to restrain Johnson as they struggled to handcuff him and take him to the watchhouse.
Ms Juratowitch said Johnson came from a disadvantaged background and was remorseful for his actions.
She said her client had been intoxicated on both incidents but that he did not drink alcohol very often. Johnson was fined $900.

On June 2nd we headed off to another Rivercats game. This time they were playing tlhe Fresno Grizzlies. The catcher for the Grizzlies is Steve Holm. Steve as a youngster played Little League in South Sutter with Ed's little brother, Joe. Ed also coached Steve. Max's Grandma Linda was also Steve's elementary school teacher. Max has been following Steve as he has been bounced back and for between the Grizzlies and the San Francisco Giants. Max even picks Steve's number(20) for his Cal Ripken uniform number. We arrived at the game early enough for warm ups and Max was able to get Steve's autograph on a ball. Max was a little timid so he, in all of his excitement forgot to try and tell Steve who he was. It was a another fun night at a Rivercats game and a great night for Max to meet his Idol.

My wife’s uncle, Jim Norris, passed away today. He played for the Cougars and the Oakland Raiders in the early 60s. He grew up in Mercedes where he was an All State athlete in football and track. They recently named their new gym after him. He chose UH because of the big city. On his recruiting trip they took him out onto the Rice Stadium field where he would play. He was impressed. He was a good man.
Rest In Peace Mr. Norris.
Sorry for your loss.
I love those old Cougars. RIP
Sorry for your loss. I always hate to hear of the passing of a Coog.
Our condolences and God Bless.
My prayers to his entire family.
May our Coog brother rest in blissful peace. Prayers for the family.

We launched on Sunday 20 June 2010! What a great day it turned out to be.
The day dawned with a heavy fog but by 8am it had cleared with a fresh breeze blowing in from the west. Our GIS had been loaded up on the trailer the previous day and already hitched to the car, so all we had to do was jump in and take off.
We arrived at Taylors Beach (Port Stephens NSW) to be greeted with a fresh south westerly of approximately 20 knots, so I decided that we'd better have a reef tied in for our first sail. Kim's parents, who had given us a 1948 Australian penny for under the mast, suddenly produced a 35 year old champagne for the christening! Wow, was it good, unlike any champagne I had ever tasted. I'll post a transcript of the ceremony in a subsequent post, but we had quite a few intrigued locals over to watch and help.
We named her Hakuna Matata! Means "no worries" in Swahili, and made famous by the song in the Lion King. We had decided a couple of months ago not to call her Shesha, for a number of reasons.
You would never have guessed it was mid winter on the water. Both water and ambient temperature were 20 deg C and a warming sun prevailed, so we didn't even need our warmies!! The splash was small, and she floated mighty high and we were soon off, lucky to be taking off on a broad reach so we could get over the shallows with just a few cm of board and rudder down. Once out in the deep, we were moving pretty quickly, with Kim sitting on the centre seat on the lee side and me on the gunwale. We cruised up and down, trying out all points of sailing. First impressions are how easily the Goat moves and the quick, unfussed acceleration when a gust comes, but at all times she was comfortable with the two of us and one reef in.
After an hour or so, we were signalled that a hot coffee was awaiting us on the beach so we pulled in. The tide was now fully in so the shallows were no problem any more. What happened next was hilarious. I was holding the boat in knee deep water and as Kim climbed out, a gust of wind hit us. Her foot caught on the sheet, and before we knew it we had managed to capsize her on the shore. Kim fell in and was well and truly dunked, much to the mirth of the gallery on the shore. It was a funny moment.
After bailing all the water out and warmed by a cup of coffee, I ventured out alone, still with one reef in. Kim by now was all rugged rugged up in dry clothes and with her dignity restored, but decided that was enough for one day.
However, the wind had died a bit and was probably down to 15 knots. Still, she was well behaved and I felt quite safe and in control sitting on the gunwale. I even threw in a couple of gybes without a problem. Time now to come in and remove the reef!
No sooner was I out there with full sail, than the wind abated some more to around only 10 knots, with just the occasional gust of about 15 knots to make things interesting. With full sail in this breeze, I really only had to hike out using the hiking straps 4 times as the gusts came through, and then it was down to sitting on the middle seat for the rest of the afternoon as the wind slowly dropped, and I only had an occasional opportunity to perch on the rail from then on.
Getting her out of the water and trailered up again was made easy with plenty of interested assistance from locals and folks out for the day having barbeques in the park beside the beach. There were no other sailing boats out there that we saw.
Driving home, we had a good laugh again as we remembered Kim's dunking, which of course was all my fault! I can't wait for next weekend, where we'll be taking her onto Grahamstown Dam, which is a large fresh water reservoir, well known for it's even breezes due to the low lying topography all around.
Oh, I forgot to mention, the camera took a dunking too when the boat was swamped by Kim's little episode, and it doesn't work any more I'll have to take the card to work tomorrow to get the pics off it. Luckily, it was a a pretty old, hardly used and cheapish 3mp Kodak and not my Fuji.
It was a pretty awesome day, so I now know how Christophe and John felt last w/e

WILLISTON — Police say they located a missing 86-year-old man following an incident in Williston last week.
Authorities say they were notified of a wrong-way driver on I-89 near Richmond on September 29.
Callers told police that a vehicle was traveling north in the southbound lane starting from the Richmond area and was passing Exit 12.
Troopers and Officers from the South Burlington and Colchester Police Departments responded.
South Burlington Police were able to catch and locate the vehicle and eventually were able to get the vehicle to stop without incident.
Once stopped, the driver was identified as Yilmaz Ilker, of Ho-Ho-Kus, NJ.
He had been reported missing earlier in the day.
Ilker was transported to UVM Medical Center by Colchester Rescue for evaluation due to circumstances surrounding the incident and concerns for his welfare.
Police say there were no crashes or other incidents resulting from this wrong-way driver incident.
No drugs or alcohol were also involved and the investigation is considered closed.

Mr Light wrote:
Widmore and Hawking were Natives.
Yes, although "Natives" is an iffy description, in the limited sense that it's not completely clear how long the Others had been around in 1954, and whether they'd all grown up on the Island or if some were recruited from the outside world. They can't have all been living there for centuries, because then how does one explain the fact that they have a wide variety of accents?
Also, I'm not necessarily sure that Widmore and Hawking being "co-commanders" automatically means they were married. Though, sure, it's a possibility.

April 26, 2011
Novak takes in CSU spring game
Littleton (Colo.) quarterback Ryan Novak spent Saturday on the fieldturf of Hughes Stadium in Fort Collins getting a look at the Colorado State football program and their spring game. The 2013 prospect was there to see his dad, Scott, officiate the game, while taking in the atmosphere of the Rams' run through.
"I had a lot of background on them before from having been to their campus, but Saturday showed me not just about the school, but the football program. I got to see the offensive system and the type of quarterback they are looking for," Novak said. "It also let me see how they run a practice."
Novak said he spent time with CSU Head Coach Steve Fairchild, Quarterback Coach Daren Wilkinson and Defensive Coordinator Larry Kerr during and after practice. He said Fairchild offered a nice compliment for him to his father.
"Coach Wilkinson was happy to see me there and told me to keep an eye on the quarterbacks and to make sure in the off-season to stay in contact. Coach Kerr told me he was going to stop by in May at Heritage and wanted to make sure I was there when he was going to be. Coach Fairchild talked to me and talked to my dad. (Fairchild) said he thought I had grown a lot since I was up there and I already looked like a Division I quarterback. That was really nice to hear.
"I think I would fit in great (in the CSU system)," Novak said. "The offense they are running is a basic offense I would fit in really well. It is similar to what I am in right now in high school. It is a well-balanced offense and take advantage of their strengths when they need. They can run when they want to or pass. It really keeps the defense off-balance."
Novak completed 150-of-291 passes last season for 2,226 yards and 23 touchdowns last season. Novak said Heritage was 2-8 last season with five losses by seven points or less.
While he is waiting to officially receive his first scholarship offer, Novak said he is hearing from everywhere from USC to the home-state Rams. He said he plans to attend a different camp or showcase every weekend from May 13 through the end of July.
"I am looking forward to it," he said of the torrid summer pace. "It will be a blast to get my name around and get to see more campuses, talk to more coaches and see what the coaches are interested in and talk to them face-to-face. It is going to be great."
...More... To continue reading this article you must be a member. Sign Up Now!

|Home||Help Search Members Calendar Shoutbox|
|Welcome Guest ( Log In | Register )||Resend Validation Email|
Posted: Aug 15 2014, 12:49 PM
“Go West,” they said in whispered words. Hushed tones that echoed through the ears of the downtrodden, the fearful, and the guilty.
“Go West, and find what it is you’re searching for.”
And so they did, in droves of hundreds. In caravans filled to the brim with food, water, shelter, and anything else they could fit. They left their homes and their families in search of something that could fill the empty void that made their chests ache and their eyes search the horizon. There was something out there, something to be found, something to be tamed. It could have been anything, but instead it was their Destiny.
If they had taken a moment to pause, to think about what they were doing, perhaps they would not have all died.
Eventually the roads became trodden with feet that had already passed it, eventually towns were established. At the farthest reaches of the world, where the west suddenly turned into a sea of waving grass, people began to grow. They set up a town they called New Hope, but it was the hard that managed to get there. It was the rough people that survived only through grit and gunpowder. They heard no orders from the capital nor listened to the few that would attempt to change them. They set up this town, and they decided what its future would become.
And as always, remember.

Kids Get Farther When We Let Them Move on Their Own Two Feet
I’m used to amazing stories, near-miracles and unlikely transformations. When you work with children with special needs, they’re commonplace, the stuff of everyday. Take a child everybody else has given up on, help him locate his strength, give him the support he needs – and then just step back and watch it happen.
It may take some time and it may not be Earth-shattering or dramatic, but every child has the potential to grow and develop. Sometimes a child is thwarted through neglect and abuse; sometimes, even with all the love and good intentions in the world, families can stunt their children’s development because they just don’t know any better.
Salman came to us at the age of six. He has cerebral palsy and, according to his parents, he could neither sit nor stand. A bright child, intellectually, he had difficulty speaking and making himself understood to anyone outside his family. When he arrived at our Child Development Centre, his parents carried him into the building and carefully laid him down on a mat they took everywhere for him. Indeed, he had spent all six years of his life thus far in a lying position.
Try to picture that. Try to imagine yourself lying down, flat on your back, for six years, unable to walk or crawl or even sit up. And then try to imagine his parents’ astonishment when Salman learned to do all those things. Astonishment and also a bit of guilt; they were devastated thinking about all the experiences lost during the years he was confined to immobility.
How did it change? First, we designed a special chair, which gave him the support he needed to maintain his balance while sitting upright. Suddenly, the whole world was transformed. Sitting up not only gave Salman a totally new perspective on what was happening around him, but it also made everyone who met him relate in a different way. We speak differently to an invalid lying on his bed than we do to an alert, attentive boy.
Regular therapy, strengthening exercises and a walker enabled him to get into a standing position; it was impossible then (even if we had wanted to) to prevent Salman from attempting a few steps one day, a few more the next. Before we knew it, he was walking, too.
Our orthotics team then designed a special device to allow him to hold a pencil and as far as Salman was concerned, that meant he was ready for school. His parents, amazed and overjoyed with his progress, enrolled him in a small neighbourhood school but within a few weeks, they were back. With a message. From Salman.
He had identified a few gaps in his new school and asked if someone from the centre could help him explain things to his new teacher.
Obediently, two of our staff went to see him at school. In front of his class teacher and the principal, he informed them that the chair he had been given wasn’t working for him.
“I have to spend all my energy just to stay on it,” he explained. “I can’t pay attention to what I’m supposed to be learning. I need a chair like the one I had at CDC.” (Our team relayed this back to Salman’s teacher and principal because they weren’t able to comprehend his speech.) Then he added: “And my teachers here don’t talk to me the way you do at CDC. I want them to talk to me.”
When his teachers heard this, both of them were overcome with embarrassment.
“We had no idea he could speak for himself,” the principal said. “We want to help him. We want him to learn. We just don’t know how.”
How much farther a kid can get by moving on his own two feet can be measured in Salman’s confidence and insight, his parents’ humility in seeking (even delayed) help, and the openness of his teachers to adapting. Just a few weeks later, Salman reported back: “Dear Didi. I have a new chair just like the one I had at CDC. My teacher is getting used to the way I talk. And I have a friend named Shaurya. He explains to the teacher when she can’t understand me.”
When we work together for our children, almost anything is possible. But when those children themselves participate, the sky is the limit.

This religious book claims that it can "rebuild the soul"make one go to heaven" by means of prayer and faith.
An older church minister in England, who preached at a parish church created this law. write my research paper His book became a ideal seller and had been well received.
The law may be summed up the following: request God for assistance and he'll allow you to. And as he assists youpersonally, you ought to consult God to assistance.
Obviously, no one believes that the law works in this way. But a number of folks make the mistake of believing that their lifestyles can be improved by what the law states .
In fact, when I worked at the entertainment industry, I often found that many"lawyers" desired to shoot on movie or tvshows as television or film productions. They desired to play their role because God's spokesmen from the press.
One was termed Dave Dunnion. Dunnion was also a self-proclaimed prophet of the Absolute Most Pure Law of 1516.
Dunnion maintained that he managed to instruct God's Word into normal mortals. One of the big promises that Dunnion manufactured was this law will empower him to create a property.
Thus, just how can Dunnion become a fraud? At one important part of the narrative has been manipulated to generate the illusion that he was a miracle worker.
The story that Dunnion first told me was :"I was a young man in Hollywood once I understood that God had answered my prayers. I went to film making and got a show relating to faith. That series conducted for two years."
A few months later, Dunnion informed a seminar,"The series was because of those impostors who use God's name in vain." He maintained,"It's not honest, but it's perhaps not correct, but and it isn't the only Christian thing to do."
Then, Dunnion mentioned that he was teaching several lawyers on how to make TV shows. He went on to say, "I am going to teach these guys some of the things I learned while I was in entertainment. We will come up with some things that God is looking for and that He wants to see. So the future is very bright."
This was made up, Dunnion was not trained as a lawyer. He's a liar and needs to be researched and detained for fraud if you were to think that which he's saying.

South African international cricketer who is known for playing ODIs and T20Is. He is also known for being the T20I captain of the Sri Lanka tour.
In July of 2009, he travelled to Australia to play with the South African team. The same year he also went on to represent South Africa at the Hong Kong Sixes tournament. He made his debut for the T20I team in early 2012.
In May of 2017, he received the award for T20 Challenge Player of the Season at the Cricket South Africa's annual awards.
He was born and raised in Johannesburg, Transvaal Province, South Africa.

Former NFL wide receiver Drew Hill dies at 54
Saturday, March 19, 2011; 7:51 PM
ATLANTA, Ga. -- Former NFL wide receiver Drew Hill, a two-time Pro Bowler who was a key part of the Houston Oilers' famed "Run and Shoot" offense of the 1980s, died at an Atlanta hospital late Friday after suffering two massive strokes, according to his agent.
Piedmont Hospital spokesman Jim Taylor on Saturday confirmed the 54-year-old Hill's death.
Hill fell ill on a golf course on Thursday and died late Friday after suffering the strokes, said his agent, Jay Mathis of Next Level Management.
A 12th round pick from Georgia Tech in 1979, Hill played for the Los Angeles Rams from 1979 to 1984, for the Oilers from 1985 to 1991, and for the Atlanta Falcons for the 1992 and 1993 seasons.
"I'm shocked," former Oilers quarterback Warren Moon told the Houston Chronicle. "I can't believe it. Drew meant so much to us as a player and as a person. I counted on him so much. He was the consummate professional. It's just so sad."
Hill had 634 receptions for 9,831 yards and 60 touchdowns, averaging 15.5 yards per catch, according to NFL.com. He was on Pro Bowl teams in 1998 and 1990 and played in one Super Bowl, Mathis said.
"Drew was a great receiver, one who knew the offense and was always in the right spot," said Moon, who led the high-powered Oilers offenses that relied on four-receiver sets. "I always knew exactly where Drew would be."
"He was always cool under pressure," Moon told the Chronicle.
Hill played 14 seasons in the NFL, and had 60 or more receptions during seven of eight seasons from 1985 to 1992. He also had three years with 70 or more catches and five with 1,000 yards, his management company said.
The Newman, Ga. native recently worked as an artist and businessman, and remained active with the Atlanta chapter of the NFL Players Association.
"Atlanta has always been home for him," Mathis said.
Funeral arrangements will be announced soon.

Dinner At Half Moon
Had dinner at Half Moon this evening. Was disappointed to be kind. I understand that the restaurant is new and has to go through some growing pains but considering they are owned by the Havest on Hudson Group, they should have their act together. Our reservations were for 9:00. We arrived at 8:30 and had a drink at the bar and were seated at 9:00. I thought this is good. We were a party of two and we had a nice quiet table by a window so were able to admire the view. Twenty minutes later a waitress showed to ask for our drink order and give a menu and tell us the specials. Long story short....we ordered the fried clams and the stuffed clams. Stuffed clams were all stuffing no clams and the fried clams all fried bread crumbs. not tasty at all. For a main course I ordered the prawns and my date orderd the prime rib and we ordered a bottle of wine. We ended up pouring our own wine because our waitress was nowhere to be found. When dinner finally arrived, his prime rib was cold. He asked if they could just warm it up a bit. I'm sitting with my shrimp waiting for his prime rib to come back. Twenty minutes later the waiter puts a dish down in front of him and walks away. We look at the dish and it is a steak that someone had started to eat and for some reason sent back to the kitchen. About 10 minutes or so later when we could finally flag down a waiter we told them about the mistake. They were not even apologetic. Now my shrimp is ice cold while I'm waiting for his prime rib to appear. Agian another 15 minutes goes by and they bring out a prime rib but now it is a new plate and it is rare instead of medium rare. At this we just gave up and I ate my cold shrimp and he ate rare prime rib. God only knows where the original prime rib (that only needed to be heated) ended up. No apologies for the mix up - not a complimentary drink or cup of coffee. I would definately not recommend Half Moon until they get their act togeher.

Song written by O'Keefe, Greenan & Owens. Kim Wilde and her band performed this song, originally recorded by Iggy Pop, live.
'Real wild child' was performed live during the Hits tour in 1994, during a concert at Tivoli in Copenhagen (Denmark) in 2003, and during a concert on June 17, 2006.
Kim about 'Real wild child'
I've always loved Iggy's version which I have in my collection, so I decided it was about time I did one myself. It was a song the whole band looked forward to do and developed into quite a production by the end of the tour. Rick invariably broke a string, had blood pouring from his fingers, and occasionally whacked me on the head as he wielded his guitar in true rock fashion!

1.1 Spring Storm
I first met my boss—no, my former boss—when I was 16 years old. He was a super celebrity ever since his first day at the academy—and at the same time, my classmate. His desk was right next to mine.
Raynord Dusseldorf, the second son of a prestigious marquis family. Although his bloodline alone was extraordinary, he was more famous as the kingdom’s best magician.
Already a court wizard at the time, he wore a black robe over his uniform. His face was always buried in a thick book.
On the other hand, I was but a commoner. My father had recently been knighted. I had no opportunity to mingle aomg Raynord’s enormous connections, much else take advantage of them. Moreover, if I were to accidentally offend him, I didn’t know what would happen. The norm for aristocratic children was to enter the academy, but I already regretted being there on the very first day.
In any case, I had to stay out of his sight—or so I thought.
The next few days proved to be calm. To summarize the rumors of my classmates, Dusseldorf was famous for being aloof. He seemed to have abandoned socializing because he was already an established court wizard.
He was constantly reading spellbooks and in deep concentration writing something. As such, he paid no attention to his surroundings.
For me, that was fortunate. After all, I planned to graduate without making waves—
—however, my life wasn’t so sweet.
Within a week of enrollment, Dusseldorf’s desk was flooded with books, paper, and sometimes magical instruments and mysterious potion bottles. Day by day, they piled up. The teachers consistently ignored it.
Considering his position as the court wizard, which was higher than anyone else in that school, that might be natural.
Besides, it had nothing to do with me.
I thought so, but one day, his mountain of books, which had reached its limit, caused an avalanche.
I immediately supported it from the side and decided to speak to him.
“Excuse me, Lord Dusseldorf, but if you aren’t careful, the sleeve of your robe will get caught and cause even another avalanche.”
Dusseldorf stared at me with rounded eyes. He was suddenly called out to by someone of low stature, it was no wonder he was surprised. He probably thought I didn’t know who he was. The act of reprimanding someone with a higher status wasn’t encouraged, but it was an emergency. I hoped he’d overlook it.
Then, Dusseldorf averted his gaze and withdrew his arm while muttering, “You got a point.”
“Will you allow me to touch your personal belongings? Lord Dusseldorf, please stand over there.”
For the time being, I had received his permission. I stood up, arranged the bundle of books I was holding, and pulled in a few spare chairs from the edge of the classroom. I then moved some of the books and parchments, which had been randomly piled up over his desk, onto the chairs. I wanted to do my utmost to prevent another avalanche.
Meanwhile, as I moved around, Dusseldorf just stared at me.
…It seems that he’s used to being taken care of. As expected of the son of a marquis.
“Forgive me for tidying your desk without your permission. However, I believe it won’t collapse anymore.”
For him to give such a curt reply, he might have been uncomfortable letting others touch his personal belongings. At least to my eyes, it seemed to be that way.
But then, Dusseldorf and I did the same thing over and over again.
Over time, he might had gotten used to the kindness of others and he grew nicer to me. That didn’t mean we become friends. It was just him being fine with being taken care of by me.
Since I had a younger brother, I was used to being a caretaker. I gradually increased our involvement with each other while also taking note of his boundaries.
…By the end of the day, I simply concluded that Dusseldorf was incapable of taking care of himself.
To say nothing of his being unable to remain organized, he had no interest in anything other than magic. He also didn’t remember his schedule or the map of the academy. He would read books in the classroom for hours while everyone was taking practical lessons in the forest behind the academy.
What surprised me most was that he wouldn’t eat lunch. By the time I noticed that, a month had already passed since my enrollment.
That day, Dusseldorf was less enthusiastic than usual. By the afternoon, he finally crumpled down on his desk. I didn’t want to bother him too much, but eventually, my concern overcame me. I called out to him to which he explained that he had overslept and hadn’t eaten anything that morning.
Dusseldorf, a high-ranking aristocrat, normally are in his own room in the dormitory. Meanwhile, everyone else went to the academy’s dining room. He said that he had never eaten lunch since the first day of the academy. The reason was because he hated crowded places. Considering that he was still growing as a boy, it gave me a headache.
Starting the next day, I started to bring lunch for two. There was a shared kitchen space in the lower aristocratic dormitory, something probably unnecessary for the higher-ranking aristocrats. I made my own lunch to save money. My budget was close to that of a commoner’s—as such, the meals served in cafeteria were too expensive for me.
“I don’t believe a meal this simple would suit your tongue, but you have to eat, Lord Dusseldorf.”
After staring at my face for a while, Dusseldorf silently received it.
I was prepared for his refusal, but then he said, “I want to eat this again tomorrow.” upon finishing.
I felt like the owner of a cat, one whose cat ate from her hand for the first time.
At the same time, I was definitely beginning to be bound by that troublesome magician, who disliked social interactions.
***T/N: What do we classify this ikemen as… kuudere?

Mila Lozanova (1980) was born in Sofia, Bulgaria. She is a graduate of the Applied Arts High School and the Fine Arts Academy (2004) in Sofia. Recently she received her PhD degree in Fine Arts and Arts Critique. During the IV Theatre Poster Biennale (2004) she received the award for debut. Her works were awarded at the 2008 Biennale as well. During the last 5 years she has been working as Art Director for an international advertising agency.

§ Order for the Second Reading read.
§ MR. AKERS-DOUGLAS (Kent, St. Augustine's)
said he thought that the Second Reading of a Bill of this kind should extract some explanation from a member of the Government. The Bill was introduced last week and it was a measure which, although part of it was agreed, contained clauses of a very controversial character. The Bill was described by the Prime Minister on the day of the "massacre of the innocents" as an important and useful Bill, which unless it was agreed to the Government could not attempt to carry through this session. The Bill gave the Home Secretary authority over the cabs of London and enabled him to settle fares and matters of that sort. He thought that these useful provisions of the Bill would not meet with opposition in this House, but he was sorry to see incorporated in the Bill the question of the abolition of "privilege" cabs, which was a matter of considerable controversy and one that was unlikely to be arranged as if in an agreed Bill. He thought that the arrangement come to under the privilege system was in the interests of the travelling public. If the "privilege" cab system were abolished it would be a great difficulty to obtain cabs at all railway stations at all times and in all weathers. It might be possible to obtain cabs at certain stations at certain times, but those who travelled by special trains and arrived in the early hours of the morning or late at night would find a great difficulty in obtaining conveyances to carry them to their homes. If the railway companies were not allowed to make contracts for the supply of carriages at the stations Continental passengers would arrive perhaps by night or in the evening and experience great inconvenience in having to wait while cabs were being sent for, while those who would arrive in the early hours of the morning, possibly after a disagreeable crossing of the 204 Channel, would not thank the Government if they found that in consequence of the abolition of the privilege cab system, which had hitherto worked well, they had to spend some considerable-time in the morning waiting at the station before they could get to their destinations. He knew that it had been stated that the "privilege" cab system was desired by directors only for the financial advantage of railway companies. He disputed this, and he had had experience of a railway company which had actually tried to do without the "privilege" cab system. The South Eastern Railway Company did away with the "privilege" system between 1883 and 1887, and had to return to it because of the great inconvenience that was caused to passengers. In 1899 a Select Committee sat in the House of Commons for the purpose of considering a Bill for the amalgamation of that line and the Chatham line. In the evidence given at that time the general manager of the South Eastern Company stated that the reason why the company had to give up the open system—the system which the right hon. Gentleman wished to impose for the future—was that they could not get cabs when they were wanted for the morning express which came in at three o'clock. This applied to London Bridge, Charing Cross, and Cannon Street. The company found that cabs went off to theatres and elsewhere and did not return to the railway stations, and after three years trial they had to give up the "open" system and return to the system of contracting with certain cab proprietors to supply their stations. The general manager, on being asked, said the difficulty which the company found was not only to get the cabmen under the "open" system to be at the railway stations at times when they were wanted, but they had to adequate power of controlling the cabmen. Among the clauses of the Bill he was sorry to see that it was proposed that practically the business of the railway company, so far as the station yards were concerned, was to be taken out of the hands of the railway company. If the management of the cabs which plied at the station was taken out of the hands of the company there would be a breakdown and a large 205 number of the people who travelled on the railway would be put to great inconvenience. Subsection 3 of the Bill practically turned the station yard of the railway company into a public street. This clause took out of the hands of the railway company the power of regulating and managing the cabs on their own property.
§ MR. AKERS-DOUGLAS
said he would hear later how the right hon. Gentleman explained this paragraph in the Bill. It seemed to him that if the Bill passed in its present form the Government would take away from the railway companies the power or directing an important branch of their traffic. Another difficulty was that if the power of supplying cabs was taken away from the railway company there would be no means of ensuring that the cabs supplied in the station were of a proper quality. There was a danger, he thought, that they might get cabs which were not in a good condition, and that cabs which had not got decent horses would very largely congregate in the stations, and they would have no power whatever over the class of cabs which were to be admitted. He wanted to point out, also, to the right hon. Gentleman that he must not in any way think that the Bill, including as it did this Clause 2, could be treated as a non-controversial measure. The first part of the Bill he had no objection to; he thought it was necessary that the Home Secretary should have power to deal with the matters included in that part of the Bill, but the right hon. Gentleman must not consider that the Bill could be treated as an agreed measure. Whether or not they agreed to take the Second Reading that night the Home Secretary must not be surprised if there were a considerable number of Amendments moved when the Bill reached a later stage. He regretted that the Government had thought it necessary to introduce, at this very late period of the session, when they were working largely in the small hours of the night a Bill of that character, which was certainly contro- 206 versial, and he trusted that even no the Home Secretary might think it desirable to lighten his Bill and to agree to take only those portions of it which were non-contentious and which he could do with the full consent of both sides of the House. But if he insisted on the inclusion of the privileged cab question in the Bill, he could not be surprised if a matter which for many years past had been the subject of great controversy gave him a great deal of trouble
§ * MR. GLADSTONE
said he did not complain of any of the criticisms of his right hon. friend opposite. But before he dealt with the particular question of privilege, might he remind the House that the other part of the Bill was designed to meet a public want, to allow the cab-drivers to put a taximeter on their cabs if they desired? There was no power in the Bill to force a taximeter, as to time and distance, on the horse-cabs. All that they did was to take power so that cab-owners and drivers could have them if they wanted them. At this late hour he did not know if it was necessary for him to go into the history of this complicated matter. His right hon. friend had, not unfairly, criticised them for putting this privilege question into the Bill, which was expected to be of a non-controversial character. He could assure the House that it was from no desire whatever to provoke conflict or disagreement that the Government put the clause into the Bill. Let him remind the House how the matter stood. There were in London about from 1,600 to 1,700 privileged cabs. There were about from 11,000 to 12,000 licensed drivers who were not privileged. Now the privileged men, by virtue of the privilege, were no doubt in one of the best and most lucrative parts of the business of cab driving in London, and, as the House knew, horse cab-drivers generally were now suffering severely from the competition with motor cabs. He was sure that hon. Members, whatever they' might think of privileged cabs in the abstract or the concrete, would agree that they were ready to do all that reasonable men could be expected to do to lighten the difficulties against, which the general body of drivers were 207 [...]iving. It was with the view, as he maintained, of giving the House an opportunity to do justice to these men, that they had put this clause into the Bill, to provide practically for the abolition, or he would prefer to call it suspension, of the privileged system. This had been a standing grievance for the last fifteen years. They were all agreed—cabmen as well as Members of the House and the public—that the travelling public should be well served at the railway stations. About that they all agreed. If it could be proved that the abolition of the privileged system would put the travelling public to serious inconvenience they would agree that the present system ought to be continued without tampering with it. His right hon. friend had alluded to the Committee of 1889. It was, he believed, a Private Bill Committee. But he would remind the House that subsequent to that two Committees had inquired into this particular question. First, in 1895, there was a Departmental Committee, and the second, last year, was a Select Committee of the House of Commons. These Committees had both found in favour of the Abolition of the privilege system, and the Committee of last year, of which he saw some hon. Members present who were members, found unanimously in favour of its abolition. His right hon. friend complained that suddenly the Government put this clause into this Bill. He would explain how that happened. He had endeavoured to settle this question by agreement; many months ago he approached all the railway companies and negotiated with them. They had negotiations with each separate company, and he was in great hopes that they would arrive at a friendly solution, because, with the exception of one or two companies, he found that there was a general disposition to come to terms on the basis of an experimental abolition of the privilege system. But hon. Members knew that what was essential to a practical and a satisfactory experiment in this direction was that all the companies should be brought into the plan or scheme or whatever it was. His right hon. friend had instanced the case of the South Eastern Railway. That company, he said, made an experiment and came to the conclusion that it was unsatisfac- 208 tory He (Mr. Gladstone) had never heard any member of the general public say he had found that there was any difference in the supply of cabs during that experiment. His right hon. friend was, of course, naturally in a position to know that better than he would be. Speaking as a user of the South Eastern Railway, he never knew that there was any special inconvenience in getting cabs at that spot. But it was an isolated experiment, and even admitting it did not prove satisfactory to the company he maintained that it could not be taken to disprove the success of more extended experiments to which all companies should be parties. What did the Government ask? They asked in this Bill that all companies should admit all licensed cabs to their stations. His right hon. friend said that they proposed to take away the power of the companies—or to abstain from giving to the companies—the power of making regulations for the purpose of controlling the cabs in their stations. They did nothing of the sort. They did not intend to interfere with the power of the companies in their own station yards. All they said was, that the companies must let in all cabs. When the cabs came in, then they were subject to the regulations which the companies might make. They would come in precisely as they did now under the regulations which the companies now made, but with one exception, and that was in regard to the fee which was charged on admission. There was a provision that the fee charged on the cabs for admission had to be approved by the Home Secretary. But, apart from that, the railway companies would continue, under this Bill, to regulate the admission of cabs and the order and discipline of the drivers of the cabs, as now. They would continue to provide water for the horses, and would be able to charge, as the London and South Western Railway now charged at Waterloo, and to recoup themselves for all expenses in that direction. Surely there was no great hardship in asking the companies to make this experiment? All that the men asked for, and all that the Government asked for, was that this experiment should be tried for a period. He had it in black and white from the representatives of the cabmen themselves that all they want is a fair trial of the 209 open system. And they undertook to acquiesce in a reversion to the privilege system if it was found, after reasonable experiment, that the open system produced inconvenience to the travelling public. Could anything be fairer than that? He would also say that, although he agreed that there was no limitation in the Bill, yet they proposed only to apply this system to the terminal stations. At this moment he was not quite sure whether they would apply it to Waterloo and one or two other stations. But, speaking generally, they only proposed to apply it to the terminal stations, not to suburban stations, because the cabmen themselves quite realised that there was a special difficulty with regard to these suburban stations. Cabs naturally were not in the neighbourhood of the stations. They would not be ever put there unless there was some special arrangement with the companies, and it would be necessary in regard to these stations to maintain the present system. His hon. friend the Member for the City of London said quite truly that this was not in the Bill. But, so far as this Bill extended, the Secretary of State had power to suspend the operation of this subsection in respect of any particular station, and it was proposed to exercise that power freely in regard to those stations where, as they all admitted, there was a special difficulty, and where the travelling public would be incommoded if they abolished the privilege system. If that was not clear, they were quite prepared to make it so. They had considered the alternative plan of putting in the schedule of the Hill the stations to be so exempted but they thought it would be convenient and more elastic to reserve power to exempt stations which clearly ought to be exempted. He could assure the House that it was only proposed to extend the Bill to terminal stations in London, though there might be an exception or two such as Waterloo Station. He hoped under those circumstances the House would consent to give this experiment a fair trial There was no wish on the part of the Government to come into conflict with the railway companies, or to interfere with their stations or with their rights in their, stations in any way, but the Government held that, after all, these licensed 210 drivers were the licensed drivers of the Metropolis, and to him it did not seem either right or fitting when railway companies existed to serve the public that they should take advantage of the system of London cabs and cabmen and make their own arbitrary selection. It seemed to him that the companies were taking advantage of a system which did not belong to the companies, but which did belong to the Metropolitan public, and it was a system which, although he agreed it had worked well for the travelling public, yet it imposed a hardship on the drivers, and in view of the heavy competition which they had to face, it was incumbent upon the Government to do what they could to help them to a fairer system. By the provisions of this Bill every security was taken that the public should not be incommoded. If he were wrong in that view and the public were incommoded, then it would be an extremely simple matter to revert to the privilege system which now prevailed.
§ SIR F. BANBURY
said he would like to point out to the right hon. Gentleman that the railway companies had only one object in view, and that was to ensure a sufficient supply of cabs at all times to meet requirements and that the cabs should be decent and have decent horses. He could claim to speak on this matter because he happened to be one of the few Members of the House who constituted the horse committee of the Great Northern Railway, and it was his duty to go round the stations of that railway to see the sort of cabs that were in attendance. It was a most important question not only from the point of view of the public, but from the view of the railway companies and passengers, who did not wish to be delayed with a bad horse. If this Bill passed, any bad cab or bad horse could go into a station and could not be removed. Under the present system he merely told the traffic manager to intimate to the man with whom he contracted to send a better horse or better cab, as the case might be. Then there was the question of the number of cabs at the different stations. The right hon. Gentleman said that in order to make a success of his scheme probably he would have 211 to apply it to all the stations of London, He ventured to say, with all due respect to the right hon. Gentleman, that that showed he had not the remotest knowledge of the question. The conditions of the stations were different. He believed it was possible that if the Bill became law there might be a sufficient supply of cabs in certain stations, such as Charing Cross—although the experiment carried out by the right hon. Gentleman below him did not prove that—possibly Waterloo, and possibly Victoria. He said that for the reason, which everyone knew, that cabs congregated in Piccadilly, Park Lane, and round about the centre of London. When close to a station they would no doubt go into it, but they would not go to St. Pancras, Paddington, or King's Cross, or into the City unless there was a fare to take there. No cabman would go outside the centre if he could avoid it. He had himself experienced great difficulty, and he was sure other Members must have found it so in similar circumstances, to get taken from Belgrave Square into the City, because the cabman could not get a fare back. Over and over again he had been refused, and one did not want to have a row. He happened to be living some years on the route of the Great Western Railway, which admitted cabs of strangers into Paddington Station when necessary, but if he got into a strange cab and told the driver to take him to the City he was almost invariably refused. In the case of a privileged cab, all that one had to do in such a case was to summon the station inspector, who would at once compel the man to drive the fare to the place to which he wanted to go. If it was an outside cab, however, the station inspector had no authority over the driver.
§ THE PRESIDENT OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT BOARD (Mr. JOHN BURNS,) Battersea
The policeman has.
§ SIR F. BANBURY
said that meant going to a police court, and who was going to take that trouble? At the present time the inspector at the station merely said, "You must go," and the driver went. He was on the Committee to which his right hon. friend alluded, and this very question came up. A cabman 212 who was in favour of the abolition of the privilege system came before the Committee, and he said to the witness, "Have you ever been in the Great Western Railway station?" The reply was "Yes." He then related to the cabman what he had just related to the House, and asked him whether it was true. The witness replied, "Oh, yes; it is quite true. What I do is to drive out of the station, and when I get out of the station I tell the people to get out of the cab." These were some of the reasons why the railway companies were desirous of keeping a certain amount of control of the cabs in their own hands. The other system had been adopted at Waterloo fifteen or sixteen years ago, and he challenged any hon. Member who was in the habit of going to Waterloo to deny the statement that the worst cabs in London congregated at Waterloo. [Cries of "No."] He did not know whether hon. Members who denied that had been in the habit of going to Waterloo, but he himself had been in the habit of visiting Waterloo to see what sort of cabs were there, and he ventured to assert without fear of contradiction the truth of his statement. He would go with any hon. Member any day this week to Waterloo and to Paddington, and he was quite certain he would convince him of the difference in the quality of the cabs at the two stations. [An HON. MEMBER: The Great Northern is the worst.] He would go to that station if the hon. Member liked. He entirely disagreed with the hon. Member that the Great Northern cabs were the worst. Perhaps the hon. Member saw a bad one, for they admitted outside cabs if they had not sufficient of their own in the station. It was evident that the result of the experiment in this Bill must be a failure to get cabs at those stations which were outside the area of London where cabs mostly congregated. There could be no question about that, and the only argument the right hon. Gentleman had brought forward was that the cabmen who were not privileged desired the system to be abolished. He had nothing to say against cabmen, who were a very worthy class of men, but he did not think the interests of the public ought to be sacrificed in the suppositious interest of one class of men. No doubt what 213 appealed to the cabman was that if he happened to be near a station he would like to go into the station. But the cabman would not go to an outside station of his own accord to get a fare, and for that reason the railway companies held that it would be quite impossible to apply this rule to all stations. He was glad that the right hon. Gentleman had met them so far as regarded the suburban part of London, but his Bill said the police area, which extended to Clapham and that sort of place. He would ask the right hon. Gentleman whether he was aware, as he was informed was the case, that the hon. Member for Sheffield, who was a director of the Great Central Railway, had an undertaking from the Board of Trade that no Bill of this sort should be brought in unless sent to a Select Committee.
§ SIR F. BANBURY
said that was another point. The railway companies were more or less under the control of the Board of Trade, and why should they be put under the control of another Department? Surely it was quite sufficient to put the railway companies under the control of one Department.
§ SIR F. BANBURY
said he did so for the very good reason that if they were going to regulate one particular business, they had better do so by one set of men. The Board of Trade were conversant with the railway companies and their needs, as well as their methods of business, and I he ventured to say the Home Office knew nothing whatever about them. For that reason, he thought the Board of Trade was the proper body; but supposing he was wrong, it did not alter his contention that a pledge had been given by the Government to the Great Central Railway Company that this Bill should not be introduced unless it was sent to a Select Committee. He did not think the Government could get out of that pledge by merely saying that the Board of Trade gave it.
§ * MR. GLADSTONE
said he did not 214 want to get out of any obligation, but as this Bill came out of a Select Committee, he did not see why it should be sent to a Select Committee.
§ SIR F. BANBURY
said his contention was that this pledge was given, and if so, it ought to be adhered to. The only other remark which he had to make was this. It was a little hard that in this matter in which they thought that great inconvenience would be incurred by the railway company and be caused to the public—that in a purely commercial undertaking of this sort, the Home Office should interfere. At a time when railway companies were in a extremely depressed condition, the Home Office was to come in and instruct them how to manage their business. He urged that there must result a great inconvenience to the travelling public and a loss to the railway companies. He had only one other remark to make, and that was with regard to Clause 3. This had nothing to do with the railway companies. It provided that coaches running out of London should have a foot-plate upon them. There used to be a considerable amount of interest taken in coaching; but this provision was a way to kill coaching altogether, by putting a badge on the driver and a plate on the coach at the; rear. It was quite unnecessary. He hoped that the right hon. Gentleman would not kill four-in-hand driving.
§ SIR SAMUEL SCOTT
said in the speech to which they had first listened the last remark was the only part with which he agreed. The right hon. Member for the City of London had mentioned an instance in which he could not get a cab to go from Paddington to the City at ten o'clock in the morning. The reason was that the cabman unless driving a "privilege" cab, knew that it was extremely unlikely that he would get a "fare" back from the city to Paddington at that hour in the morning, but if he were a "privilege" cabman he knew perfectly well that he could go to Liverpool Street and get a fare back. Another matter which the right hon. Baronet had mentioned was that a promise had been given that a Bill of that sort should be sent to a Select Committee. He would remind him that the clause which 215 dealt, with "privilege" cabs was entirely based on the recommendation of a Select Committee which sat last year. That select committee had several sittings and a very large amount of evidence was taken both from the cabmen and also on behalf of the railway companies; and the Committee unanimously agreed, without any exception, that it was desirable to abolish the "privilege" system. The cabmen who gave evidence fully realised the position in which the railway companies were placed. They acknowledged that the railway companies were bound to supply the public with conveyances at their stations, and they agreed that if it was found that the obligations of the railway companies to the public could not be fulfilled after the privilege system had been abolished, they would not object to the railway companies reverting to the "privilege" system. The Select Committee's recommendation was that the abolition of the "privilege" system should be tried for one year. The right hon. Gentleman had carried out this recommendation in his Bill, and if the railway companies could prove that sufficient cabs were not available after the "privilege" system was abolished, the companies might revert to that system. Another matter which the cabmen most fully realised was that in the event of the "privilege" system being discontinued and sufficient cabs for railways not being available, the railway companies could provide their own cabs for their passengers' convenience which would affect the cab industry to a very large extent—an industry which already was in a somewhat tottering condition. Then the hon. Baronet had alluded to the power which he said the right hon. Gentleman had taken under the Bill—that of entirely taking away from railway companies the control of their yards. He believed that the right hon. Gentleman had said that this was not the case. He (Sir Samuel Scott) hoped it was not. This was one of the strong recommendations that the Select Committee had made, that it was extremely desirable that the station yard should be under the control of the railway company. He earnestly hoped that his hon. friends on that side of the House would pass the measure. It was very much required in London. 216 He ventured, with all due deference to the great knowledge of the Member for the City of London, to say that he thought he knew as much about the needs of the people of London as the hon. Baronet.
§ * MR. REES (Montgomery Boroughs)
said he still believed, in spite of what had been said, that the cabman existed for the public and not the public for the cabman. He thought that the system, which had been in force for nearly seventy years and had worked well, providing cabs at all hours for railway passengers, had a great deal of good in it. He would appeal to the right hon. Gentleman, who had in this matter endeavoured to meet the cabmen as well as the public, to consider whether the balance of evidence was not in favour of the public rather than of the cabmen. He did not know why cabmen should be protected in the manner suggested against the public interest, and he urged that travellers who were in the habit of arriving at a station like Euston, at four o'clock or five o'clock in the morning, would be put to the greatest inconvenience if the so called "privilege" system were abolished. The privilege was a privilege of the public, and not of any particular class, trade or interest. Respecting the abolition of the "privilege" system he could only emphasise what had already been said that it would be very hard to retrace their steps and to revert to the "privilege" cab system if once it was given up, though the Home Secretary, with his habitual consideration, had provided for tentative action, and for reversion, if necessary, to the existing conditions in this behalf. It was absurd to argue that the railway companies took up the line they did because of the small sums received on account of the "privilege" cabs which stood in the stations. No one could seriously argue that. For instance, the Great Western Company received something under £2000 a year from the "privilege" cabs at Paddington. This sum was a mere bagatelle to that company. Whether or not a pledge was given with regard to this Bill's going to a Select Committee, he asked the right hon. Gentleman to consider whether there was any objection to its going to a Select Committee instead 217 of to a Standing Committee, or to a Committee of the Whole House. He had not had the advantage possessed by several hon. Members who had spoken of sitting on the Select Committee which reported last year, but he felt sure that the abolition of a system, which did no one any harm, and ensured a cab at the station at any hour of any day or night, would be regretted.
§ MR. JOHN O'CONNOR (Kildare, N.)
desired to interpose for a moment for the purpose of welcoming the Bill, first and foremost because it set to rest a very vexed question among the cabmen of London. There had been a difference of opinion among persons of high legal authority with regard to the legality of motor taximeter cabs, which were plying on the streets of London at the present time. He was sure there had been only an apparent difference of opinion, and that the right hon. Gentleman and those who were acting with him had come to the opinion that taximeter cabs needed to have their position in the streets of London regularised. Inasmuch as this Bill regularised their existence on the streets of the metropolis, he welcomed it, because it would go towards settling a vexed question which undoubtedly prevailed among the cabmen. The only matter to which he wished to call the attention of the right hon. Gentleman was this. The senior Member for the City of London had referred to Section 3 as interfering with the old practice of coaching. This section did not so much interfere with the old practice of coaching as it would undoubtedly interfere with a new practice which had come into operation. The Secretary of State might, according to this section, by general or special order, apply to stage carriages which should have come from some town or place beyond London, or to any owners of stage carriages, any provision of the Acts referring to stage carriages in London. That might work out to be a very vexatious action in the future. It did not at all apply to the old and dying stage coaches in London. They were not at all inconvenient to the travelling public of London. They were not offensive to the travelling public of London. But it might interfere with the motor omnibus 218 traffic from neighbouring towns into London. They knew that very strict regulations were made in regard to the motor omnibus traffic to London; they knew that the police regulations of Scotland Yard were very severe—and he said, very properly severe. He admitted that to allow the motor omnibus traffic of London to be conducted upon the loose manner in which it had been conducted at the beginning in its experimental stages, would not be at all convenient to the people of London. The noise which they created ought to be checked. The rules, regulations, and instructions of Scotland Yard were right and pro per so far, but if those regulations were to be applied to the motor omnibus traffic that might come from outside towns into London, it might become inconvenient to the travelling public, and it might become impossible for such companies to establish such traffic.
§ * MR. GLADSTONE
said perhaps he might be allowed to explain that this clause was designed to meet what possibly might happen if any broken-down motor bus might come into London from outside, and run about London without the restrictions and the regulations of the police authority. They had heard of certain plans for buying up derelict motor buses and running them into London from outside. That would not be allowed.
§ MR. JOHN O'CONNOR
said he was glad to have the explanation. If such a thing occurred it would be a very serious thing no doubt, but what he would suggest was that the Committee should guard against any vexatious regulations that would prevent companies in the suburban districts, and beyond the public regulations of London, from establishing such services as would be quite adequate to the needs of the people outside, but which at the same time might be prevented from their operations by any such vexatious conditions. He held no brief for companies of that kind; these evils must be checked, but all regard should be had to the nature of the case for persons plying for hire on the country roads and towns where there was not the necessity for putting severe regulations into operation. He trusted, therefore, that when the rules 219 and regulations came to be made under the Bill no such vexatious provisions would appear in them. The right hon. Gentleman knew quite well that his recent regulations in regard to the taximeter cab were ultra vires, and he thought this Bill fairly admitted in the first clause that those regulations were not quite consistent with the law. He sincerely hoped that when he came to make these regulations there would not be words inserted which would put out of operation any companies which might be started for the purpose of accommodating people outside the City of London.
§ MR. LAMBTON
said he acted as Chairman of the Committee which reported on this subject last year. In answer to his hon. friend the Member for the City of London, he might say that the Committee took most careful evidence from several sources, not only from the cabmen, but from all interests, from the railway company and from the police. But the evidence of the cabmen, the railways, and the police all showed them that the universal opinion was that the privilege system should be abolished. He hoped the Bill would go to a Second Reading without a division, as the Report of the Committee was embodied in it.
§ MR. BOWLES (Lambeth, Norwood)
said he entirely concurred with his hon. friend in hoping that the Bill would go to a Second Reading without a division. But he would like to make an appeal that it should be sent to a Committee upstairs. The right hon. Gentleman had said it had gone through a Select Committee. That was not, strictly speaking, so. This Bill purported to carry out the recommendations of a Select Committee, but it had never been before a Select Committee, and only part of it had been before a Select Committee at all. It seemed to him, and he hoped the right hon. Gentleman would consider it, that it was exactly the kind of Bill which really could only be properly and adequately dealt with, especially at that time of the session, by a Committee upstairs. The Bill gave the right hon. Gentleman very large powers to deal with evils which they all admitted. The evils were great. The whole point was how the right hon. Gentleman was 220 going to deal with them. It seemed to him that it was exactly the kind of Bill which really ought to be considered, in the interests of everybody, otherwise than in the small hours of the morning.
§ LORD BALCARRES (Lancashire, Chorley)
said he wished to enter a word of protest against the third sub-section of the second clause of the Bill. The speech of the Home Secretary was remarkable for one thing, and that was the Government's adhesion to the scheme to abolish the privileged cab system. The speech was full of apologies, but very little evidence whatever was adduced in pressing this view on the House. He thought that was sufficiently shown by the fact that it was impossible to put this particular clause into operation before a year or two's time. This third sub-section was designed to allow the Home Secretary to repeal the Act which they were asked to pass in the next few days. They asked the House to pass a Bill dealing with taximeters, and in the same Bill the Home Secretary reserved to his Department the right to repeal any part or the whole of the terms of the Statute. No doubt there were certain occasions in which a course of that kind was convenient. It appeared to be one of the rules of the present Secretary of State, and the most recent example was to be found in the Eight Hours' Bill, recently introduced, to take the right to suspend the operation of the Act. It was a sign of the absolute lack of confidence he had in his own measures, and he thought it ought to be a matter of protest in the House that when a Minister of State, occupying the high position of Home Secretary, brought in a Bill, he should make a practice of inserting in that very Bill a condition under which he should have liberty to override it.
Bill read a second time, and committed to a Standing Committee.
Whereupon, Mr. SPEAKER, pursuant to the Order of the House of the 26th day of July last, adjourned the House without Question put.
§ Adjourned at twenty-six minutes after One o'clock.

From the viewpoint of a long-time martial arts enthusiast, as well as a huge MMA fan, this is one of the most intriguing books I've had the pleasure to read in a long time. Forrest is simply hilarious. Recalling a variety of incidents from all throughout his life, many of these pages had me in stitches.
There's plenty here for the MMA lover, Forrest goes in depth about his methods of cutting weight before fights, his training regimen, and various other aspects of his life as a fighter. But for the individual who could care less about MMA, there's plenty of insights into the way Forrest leads his life, his philosophies on working hard, and never giving up. You can't help but learn to love him.
My only issue is that the book is a fairly quick read. At just 190 pages (the last 55 of which are filled with more diagrams than words) any mildly enthusiastic reader will fly through this. I would have loved to have heard more about Forrest's crazy life, how he worked his way up from the bottom, perhaps some more about his life as a cop.
Overall there's alot to love about Forrest, unfortunately there's only a medium amount of that in this -otherwise excellent- book.

The church was constructed of logs near the crest of Ordway Hill west of West Liberty. Ordway was the name of a prominent business man in town who had a two story brick boot and shoe store. The church disbanded and part of the members formed the Glady Creek Church further west and the rest went to West Liberty where a church was organized.
Pastorate of the West Liberty Church also had McKees Creek Christian Church and later the Muchinippi Christian Church. In 1927 the named changed to Congregational Christian when the Congregational and Christian Churches united. In 1961, the church voted to become part of the United Church of Christ- merger of Congregational, Evangelical and Reformed denominations. The original Muddy Run Church is no longer, with only the cemetery remaining today on Township Road 195.
The West Liberty Methodist Church was organized in 1830 and was built on ground purchased from Thomas P. Miller. It was located on East Baird street and was later used as a residence and business room and later destroyed by fire. A better structured building was constructed in 1849. The pastor did a circuit of the Methodist, Wesley Chapel and Springhills churches in 1889.
The Early Church was a shouting church. Demonstrative and loud but very serious. 1905-1910 the Ladies Aid Society was busy making money for church improvements by selling meals at the Logan County Fair. Four ladies were the first to be elected to the board of stewards. This was the first record of woman holding office in the church.
In 1841, the 1st Presbyterian Church had no place to meet for worship so they accepted the offer of the Methodist Church to use their building. Then in 1842, the use of the old stone distillery became available. The Rev. W. B. Price told of the first communion service held at the new location. The former distillery had been infested with rats and the members were working on getting rid of them through the use of poison. The rats became sick to death during the service and now and then a rat would fall from the stone wall into the congregation. Thankfully the worshipers were to focused on the service that the barely noticed.
In 1890, during Sunday School, fire erupted in the belfry and the church was quickly evacuated. The building burned down except for the brick and stone. The windows, furniture, organ, library books, and other valuables were saved. The Lutheran Church was borrowed for services until a new building was completed in November of the same year.
McKees Creek Chapel has long been known as the “Little Church beside the road. It was built in 1859 beside the road between West Liberty and Bellefontaine. The road at that time was called Bellefontaine- West Liberty Pike and the church originally called McKees Creek Christian Church after the creek that ran through the valley at that time.
The church closed sometime for unknown reasons and reopened on February of 1884. McKees Creek ended it's association with the Christian Church in the summer of 1932. The church reopened in July of 1941 under the direction of the Evangelical Friends Church. In 1987 it no longer was affiliated with the Friends church and became a non-denominational church called McKees Creek Chapel.
South Union Mennonite Church was started with a group from an Amish settlement from Logan County. In 1845 Elders Moses Miller and Levi Miller helped organized a new church. Services were held in the family homes until 1857 when the first meeting house was built northwest of the present building.
Being built on the farm of John Kenagy and Bishop being Jacob C Kenagy it was called the Kenagy Church. A new name was given in 1868 of the King Church. Needing more space a new building was built in 1876 on the corner of Rt 68 and Rt 507. Then it received it's current name South Union Mennonite Church.
The Bethel Mennonite Church began out of the younger generation not wanting services in German language as was so in the older Mennonite Churches in the area. The younger folks wanted English spoken in Sunday School but was told no, so they began meeting in their homes. Their number grew so in 1895 plans began for a new building and was dedicated in 1896.
The church was struck by lightening in May of 1923 and was a total loss. It was rebuilt and completed by January 1st, 1924. The Bethel Mennonite Church was the first to hold Vacation Bible School in the community in 1935 and grew so much that in 1947 other churches began holding their own VBS. The Mennonite Children's Home, now known as being a part of Adriel School, housed many children and they attended the Bethel Church.
When many Amish Mennonites from Pennsylvania, Fairfield County, Ohio and Illinois relocated to West Liberty they had no church to serve their needs so the Champaign Church was started in 1845 in one of the homes. A church building was built in 1856 on Ludlow Road , about two miles from the present location.
The present house of worship was erected in 1875 and name changed to Oak Grove on Mennonite Church Road. In 1900, the church started a mid week prayer meeting in the homes but in 1901 they began using the church. These meeting were held because the Sunday School workers were attending a Quaker revival meeting near West Liberty.
When Benjamin and Elizabeth Piatt moved to the outskirts of West Liberty in 1828 the nearest Catholic Church was three hours away by horse and buggy. Elizabeth wanted her husband to build a church near their house but Benjamin thought that the sawmill and gristmill should be finished first because they brought in money.
One day when he was called off to Cincinnati on urgent business, Elizabeth told the workers to stop what they were doing and using wood cut for another project had them build a church. It was completed by the time Benjamin arrived home and was affectionately known as St. Elizabeth's Chapel or the Piatt Chapel. The chapel no longer exist but the cemetery is still there on Township Road 47 just down the road from the Piatt Cabin.
The Church of God was started after a member of Oak Grove attended a camp meeting in Anderson Indiana. He orchestrated a camp meeting in West Liberty and it was held on a farm southeast of the Ohio Caverns. Another meeting was held two years later in the same place. A school building at five points, (intersection of Co Rd 1 and Co Rd 5) was used to hold meetings when they were regularly held.
The church building was moved to the west side of town in 1910 on Taylor street. The Nazarene Church bought the building in 1924 and the present building was bought and they moved in on Liberty street. The property consisted of four lots and was purchased by Ezra Riehl.
Grace Chapel, under the belief that others from another state wanted to tell people how to and what to believe started a new church to get away from that as they wanted a biblical based church. The believers began meeting in a basement until funds could be saved to build.
They outgrew the basement but all they had money saved up for was a basement so they built the basement and covered it so they could hold meetings. They became known as, 'the groundhog church.” As they saved money they were able to add to the structure. In November of 1956, plans were underway and in December the started the building and it was dedicated in December of 1963.
The newest addition to our Church family took up residence in the former Vintage Inn Restaurant just north of West Liberty. Bill and Mary Walker moved to Bellefontaine after being called to start a church. Their first service was held on December 3, 2006 at The Friendly Senior Center in Bellefontaine. Needing more space they moved into their current building on South street in January of 2010. They broke ground for more space for a sanctuary, gathering space and offices being built to the current building.
Each church has it's stories of God's love, faith, family, fellowship, and are rich in history, missions, and helping the community.
Sources: Historical West Liberty, Ohio and Church Websites.
by Tami Wenger, Gloryland Ministries
There is an American Proverb that says, “Behind every great man there is a great woman.” I'd like to introduce you to one such woman, Elizabeth, wife of Benjamin Piatt. In 1828, the Piatt family came to West Liberty to live on a large farm and at that time the area was sparsely populated. None the less, Elizabeth worked hard to make it home.
There are 3 things that I admire the most about Elizabeth. Her love of children, her ability to get things done, and her compassion for others.
Benjamin and Elizabeth were blessed with 10 children. Daughters Hannah, Martha, Arabella with her infant daughter and sons, Donn and Abram, traveled to West Liberty to make it their home. Wykoff, the oldest, was an established lawyer in Cincinnati. Four other children died in infancy or early childhood.
They also had 3 girls they took in while in Cincinnati, all were married form the Piatt home. The 4th, Patsey, was a poor idiot girl. She was abused by her master, so Elizabeth trained her to be a good servant.
At Mac-A-Cheek, their home in West Liberty, they added 14 more children to their family. Five granddaughters and two grandsons went to stay with Grandma and Grandpa for awhile after the death of their mothers. Six more girls and one boy not related, also made their home with Benjamin and Elizabeth.
The Piatt's were of Catholic Faith. The nearest Catholic Church in Columbus, was 3 hours away by horse and buggy. Elizabeth wished for Benjamin to build her a church near their home. Benjamin was more inclined to build things like the sawmill that would bring in money first. One day Benjamin was called off to Cincinnati on urgent business. As soon as he left, Elizabeth told the workers to stop what they were doing and supervised the building of a log hewed chapel. She had them use the wood set aside for building a workshop. It was completed before Benjamin arrived home and was affectionately named St. Elizabeth Catholic Chapel.
Elizabeth was very compassionate toward the slaves and the ordeal they were going through to get to freedom. That is why she ran a stop on the Underground Railroad from her home. Benjamin was a Federal Court Circuit Judge, so it was his sworn duty to arrest anyone who helped the slaves escape. However, he and Elizabeth came up with a plan for her to run the stop while he was traveling for work. At the end of their gate stood a black lawn jockey. When Benjamin was gone a white flag was placed in the jockey's outstretched hand. When he was home the flag was removed signaling to the slaves that they should continue on to the next stop. Benjamin sent someone home a day early to give Elizabeth plenty of notice to make sure the slaves were gone by the time he arrived home. Since no records were kept on the Underground Railroad there are some who believe this to be true and some who don't.
Elizabeth was a pioneering woman who took care of her own and others, took charge when things needed done and changed the lives of the slaves who passed her way. She may not have been a well known figure from the history books, but think of all the people whose lives she touched and changed forever.
Sources- A Memorial Biography of Benjamin M. Piatt and Elizabeth, His Wife.
The Adopted Children of Elizabeth and Benjamin Piatt by David Boysel
West Liberty History Stories
West Liberty, Ohio was established in 1817. Read a sampling of our village's 200+ years of history or SUBMIT YOUR OWN STORY for all to enjoy!

Barbie's Careers is a barbie game developed by Capy.com. This is a cool HTML5 game ready to be played on both your desktop and on your mobile phone!Barbie has reached that point in her life when she has to start a career! Over the years, when she was growing up, Barbie fancied becoming a cook, a pet doctor, a flight assistant, or joining the Navy. These are the careers she would like to pursue, but she can choose only one. Barbie has a dilemma. She does not know which one suits her the best. Help her dress up as a chef, doctor, flight assistant, and navy officer, and maybe this way, she will know which occupation to choose.
Here are some similar games:

The oldest of six boys, Jim O'Rourke grew up on an Iowa farm. At age 22, a tragic work accident left him a quadriplegic. Because his parents, Leo and Theresa, had instilled strong family principles based on their Catholic faith, Jim's family pulled together for him. "We ranged in age from 6 to 18 but we all took part in caring for Jim," said Joe O'Rourke, a St. Ambrose graduate of the Class of 1972. "We knew what was right and we all knew what work was — you do what you have to do."
So Jim's five siblings — John, Joe, Jerry, Jeff and Jay — cared for their brother. And eventually, Jim helped care for them. "He gave back to us," said Joe. "Jim brought us closer together as a family."
Jim helped start O'Rourke Brothers Distributing (now O'Rourke Sales Co.) two years after the accident. Eventually, all the brothers had a hand in the business, which grew from farming, to buying and selling CB radios, to the distribution of electronic products. The company now has branches in six states.
"Jim was a fantastic salesman and memorized entire catalogs," said Joe. "He set the standard for hard work."
"Jim gave so much to us. He was very good at gathering family together and when he moved into his own home it became the 'go-to' place for family occasions."
In 2009, the brother described as a hero and friend passed away, surrounded by friends and family. When a call came from St. Ambrose asking if the O'Rourke family might give their support to a new assistive technology showcase house, it seemed a fitting tribute to Jim.
"We saw the value of what St. Ambrose's OT program was doing and we knew how much Jim had benefitted from assistive technology," said Joe, who attended the October 2011 dedication of Jim's Place with members of his family, including the matriarch, Theresa. "It was one of those things; it was the right thing to do."

The ruler of Alba was King Cuilén (Cailean the White), who had ruled since 967 and would continue to do so until 971.
The ruler of Deheubarth was King Owain ap Hywel ap Cadell, who had ruled since 950 and would continue to do so until 986.
The ruler of England was King Eadgar I (Edgar the Peaceable), who had ruled since 959 and would continue to do so until 975.
The ruler of Gwynedd was King Iago ab Idwal .
The ruler of Strathclyde at this time was likely to have been King Dyfnwal map Owain.

Paulo na Cidade de Corinto
After these things, he went away from Athens, and came to Corinth.
And there he came across a certain Jew named Aquila, a man of Pontus by birth, who not long before had come from Italy with his wife Priscilla, because Claudius had given orders that all Jews were to go away from Rome: and he came to them
And because he was of the same trade, he was living with them, and they did their work together for by trade they were tent-makers.
And every Sabbath he had discussions in the Synagogue, turning Jews and Greeks to the faith.
And when Silas and Timothy came down from Macedonia, Paul was completely given up to the word, preaching to the Jews that the Christ was Jesus.
And when they put themselves against him, and said evil words, he said, shaking his clothing, Your blood be on your heads, I am clean: from now I will go to the Gentiles.
And moving from there, he went into the house of a man named Titus Justus, a God-fearing man, whose house was very near the Synagogue.
And Crispus, the ruler of the Synagogue, with all his family, had faith in the Lord and a great number of the people of Corinth, hearing the word, had faith and were given baptism.
And the Lord said to Paul in the night, in a vision, Have no fear and go on preaching:
For I am with you, and no one will make an attack on you to do you damage: for I have a number of people in this town.
And he was there for a year and six months, teaching the word of God among them.
But when Gallio was ruler of Achaia, all the Jews together made an attack on Paul, and took him to the judge's seat,
Saying, This man is teaching the people to give worship to God in a way which is against the law.
But when Paul was about to say something, Gallio said to the Jews, If this was anything to do with wrongdoing or crime, there would be a reason for me to give you a hearing:
But if it is a question of words or names or of your law, see to it yourselves I will not be a judge of such things.
And he sent them away from the judge's seat.
And they all made an attack on Sosthenes, the ruler of the Synagogue, and gave him blows before the judge's seat but Gallio gave no attention to these things.
Paulo Volta para Antioquia
And Paul, after waiting some days, went away from the brothers and went by ship to Syria, Priscilla and Aquila being with him and he had had his hair cut off in Cenchrea, for he had taken an oath.
And they came down to Ephesus and he left them there: and he himself went into the Synagogue and had a discussion with the Jews.
And being requested by them to be there for a longer time, he said, No
And went from them, saying, I will come back to you if God lets me and he took ship from Ephesus.
And when he had come to land at Caesarea, he went to see the church, and then went down to Antioch.
And having been there for some time, he went through the country of Galatia and Phrygia in order, making the disciples strong in the faith.
Apolo em Éfeso e Corinto
Now a certain Jew named Apollos, an Alexandrian by birth, and a man of learning, came to Ephesus and he had great knowledge of the holy Writings.
This man had been trained in the way of the Lord and burning in spirit, he gave himself up to teaching the facts about Jesus, though he had knowledge only of John's baptism:
And he was preaching in the Synagogue without fear. But Priscilla and Aquila, hearing his words, took him in, and gave him fuller teaching about the way of God.
And when he had a desire to go over into Achaia, the brothers gave him help, and sent letters to the disciples requesting them to take him in among them: and when he had come, he gave much help to those who had faith through grace:
For he overcame the Jews in public discussion, making clear from the holy Writings that the Christ was Jesus.
Reading in version Bible In Basic English - English

ServicesCarlos Pottinger, M.D. offers cosmetic dermatology treatments in Inverness, FL. A Cosmetic Dermatologist can perform a wide range of procedures aimed at improving the appearance of the skin. A Cosmetic Dermatologist may be able to reduce or remove fine lines, small scars, blemishes, freckles, sun damaged skin and precancerous cells.
Please call Carlos Pottinger, M.D. at (352) 726-7667 to schedule an appointment in Inverness, FL or get more information.
I was a patient at Genesis Women’s Center for the past ten years, mainly due to convenience. The first issue I had was with Regina, their ARNP. When I was 16 I went in for severe pelvic pain. Instead of checking me, she insisted to myself and my parents that I was ‘simply ovulating.’ A month later I ended up in the ER with pelvic inflammatory disease, caused by an untreated bacterial infection that I had mistaken for a recurring yeast infection. I was left with extensive scar tissue in my fallopian tubes and a verdict that I may never be able to conceive. After pelvic laparoscopy and laser removal of this scar tissue six years later, performed by a physician at a different facility, I conceived. I had started working at the local hospital and was told that I would have to go back to Genesis in order to be covered by the hospital’s insurance. At this time I had decided to have a natural birthing plan. During one of my OB appointments, Dr. Antony had asked if I had ‘signed up’ to have the epidural. I told him I had not, because in my moment of weakness I did not want to give in. He told me that I was ‘naïve and closed minded.’ There was no support whatsoever from any of the physicians at the office, but I did not expect this type of harshness. The last problem I had would be the most important of them all. The breach of my medical records. Throughout my continued stay as a patient at Genesis, the medical assistant there, along with her fellow coworkers, logged into the hospital’s computer system (which they have access to as an affiliate of the hospital) and searched through my lab work and results I had done outside their facility. Fabricated rumors were spread by the medical assistant to her friends and family about my lab results, and she was believed due to her position. This is currently being investigated with the Department of Health and Human Services. If you wish to have the best possible OB/GYN care and have your issues kept between yourself and your physician, DO NOT GO TO GENESIS WOMEN’S CENTER.
Today was my 2nd visit to GWC. I understand sometimes you need to wait an additional 15 - 20 minutes when a Dr. is running behind, but I finally went up to the front desk after being there for nearly an hour to make sure I hadn't been forgotten and was told I needed to wait another 10 minutes. This didn't start things off well. I then was taken back to a dirty exam room where the used paper bedding was still on the exam table. The nurse did change that but left the paper pillow case that had clearly been used by the previous client on the table. I asked her to please change it too, she said she would but never did, so I just tossed it aside. She also asked me how to spell fatigue when I was listing my symptoms, would think a nurse would know this, I'm not quite even sure she knew what it meant. When I finally saw my Dr. she looked like she hadn't slept for a week, she was so tired and I felt guilty she was having to hear about my issues. She was very nice though. While I had my feet in the stirrups getting an exam 2 people tried to enter the room, which made me feel really uncomfortable, get some locks on the doors! One lady/nurse/whatever was yelling my name and had a piece of paper waving it into the room. The Dr. was literally in the middle of the internal exam and of course I was naked. The Dr. had to yell "I'm in the middle of an exam, leave the papers outside! No apology for the interruption (twice in less than 10 min) so I guess this happens often. Also, my deductible had been met, but I still had to pay because the financial dept. didn't call my ins. co. even after I had told them the deductible was met. Double checked when I got home and I shouldn't have had to pay anything. Unorganized, Unprofessional
Wellness.com does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment nor do we verify or endorse any specific business or professional
listed on the site. Wellness.com does not verify the accuracy or efficacy of user generated content, reviews, ratings or any published

Do you remember that two blogs ago I told you that the next blog was going to about some author events? And then, instead, I wrote about a great book by John Hart, called The Last Child? Well, I've decided again to hold off on the author event blog. I just finished W.E.B. Griffin's latest - Victory and Honor, from the Honor Bound series. It occurred to me that I haven't spent much, if any, time talking about Griffin. He deserves his own blog.
I have read 38 Griffins. In recent years, his son, William E. Butterworth Griffin IV (yes, W.E.B. is III), has joined him. I don't know how much of the books the son has contributed to (for those of you who are offended that I am finishing a clause with a preposition, tough luck), but the quality has remained high.
Here are the series names, synopses of the series, and the number of books written for each series:
Brotherhood of War - Army personnel from WWII through the Vietnam War - 9
The Corps - Marines (duh) from WWII through Korea - 10 - with one of the greatest characters in fiction (for at least Bob and me - Killer McCoy
Honor Bound - Army/OSS (precursor to CIA) in WWII in Argentina - 6
Men at War - Military in WWII - 6 - much lighter fare than his other series
Presidential Agent - Army personnel, taking place in the present - 6
Badge of Honor - Police series - 10
I have read all of each of the military series and only one from Badge of Honor. I read the first one and decided to stick with the military. Do I like them all? Absolutely. I love Brotherhood of War, Presidential Agent, and The Corps. I really like Honor Bound, and Men at War was almost a confection for Griffin. It was less complicated, shorter, and not as riveting or compelling as the others.
Having said that, I just finished #6 in the Honor Bound series. When I bought it, my first thought was that at 310 pages, it was much shorter than any of his other books that I had read. Since Honor Bound already wasn't my favorite, and since the book was so short, I didn't have high expectations. Boy, was I wrong. First of all, the story was so tight that 310 pages were enough. Secondly, I didn't realize how much I have come to care about the characters. I can honestly say that this series now rivals my three other favorite series from this author(s). He (they) has become quite a craftsman. His books are at least as good as they were when he first began writing and in at least one case (Honor Bound), they are better.
Griffin really knows his stuff when it comes to the military. All of his books are dedicated to military personnel, both alive and deceased. He was active military in WWII and was an advisor during the Korean War. He knows a lot of military personnel from different branches of the service, which helps him with the details for his stories. He will be 82 in November.
If you like military fiction, especially WWII, and good writing, then Griffin is your man.

3 of 4 people found the following review helpful
The quality needs serious improvement,
Verified Purchase(What is this?)
This review is from: MOOVER Baby Walker Red (Baby Product)
I was really enthusiastic when I purchased this walker. My daughter had just started moving around the house using the furniture and I was hoping to give her more mobility with this toy. I spent quite some time browsing on internet and on Amazon and the reviews I read were quite good. It was however quite disappointing to find out that the "break" on one of the wheels of the walker we received didn't work. I contacted Amazon immediately and their reaction was superb - within hours they shipped a new walker and in one working day it was with us. That unfortunately didn't solve the problem as the walker seems to be of poor quality. One of the front wheels wobbles and every morning we have to tighten the "break" again.
There are two reasons why I'm giving this product two stars. The breaks are two screws in each rear wheel and they need to be adjusted depending on the speed you need. with the first walker one of the breaks didn't work at all so it was completely unsafe for my 8 month old daughter to use it. With the second walker we had to tighten the break every morning as one of the screws would loosen up. The walker needs some extra weight at the front or otherwise while trying to stand up your child might topple over together with the walker. We used two 1,5-liter boxes for this purpose.
Overall I didn't feel this product was safe enough for my daughter to learn to walk with it. The idea of the walker is great and I sincerely wanted to give it a good rating. I'm afraid though I can't recommend it to anybody.

"Set a guard Oh Lord over my mouth, Keep watch over the door of my lips. "
A few weeks ago our sermon in church was all about controlling our mouth. We ALL have an issue with that in our house, so we were talking about how we need to work on that. I offered the children some sort of bribe if they could go a day with out speaking ugly to each other, or to me. This is what I came in the room and saw. Quite comical and it was a pretty quiet day!

Friday 13 November 1668
Up, and with Sir W. Pen by coach to White Hall, where to the Duke of York, and there did our usual business; and thence I to the Commissioners of the Treasury, where I staid, and heard an excellent case argued between my Lord Gerard and the Town of Newcastle, about a piece of ground which that Lord hath got a grant of, under the Exchequer Seal, which they were endeavouring to get of the King under the Great Seal. I liked mightily the Counsel for the town, Shaftow, their Recorder, and Mr. Offly. But I was troubled, and so were the Lords, to hear my Lord fly out against their great pretence of merit from the King, for their sufferings and loyalty; telling them that they might thank him for that repute which they have for their loyalty, for that it was he that forced them to be so, against their wills, when he was there: and, moreover, did offer a paper to the Lords to read from the Town, sent in 1648; but the Lords would not read it; but I believe it was something about bringing the King to trial, or some such thing, in that year. Thence I to the Three Tuns Tavern, by Charing Cross, and there dined with W. Pen, Sir J. Minnes, and Commissioner Middleton; and as merry as my mind could be, that hath so much trouble upon it at home. And thence to White Hall, and there staid in Mr. Wren’s chamber with him, reading over my draught of a letter, which Mr. Gibson then attended me with; and there he did like all, but doubted whether it would be necessary for the Duke to write in so sharp a style to the Office, as I had drawn it in; which I yield to him, to consider the present posture of the times and the Duke of York and whether it were not better to err on that hand than the other. He told me that he did not think it was necessary for the Duke of York to do so, and that it would not suit so well with his nature nor greatness; which last, perhaps, is true, but then do too truly shew the effects of having Princes in places, where order and discipline should be. I left it to him to do as the Duke of York pleases; and so fell to other talk, and with great freedom, of public things; and he told me, upon my several inquiries to that purpose, that he did believe it was not yet resolved whether the Parliament should ever meet more or no, the three great rulers of things now standing thus:— The Duke of Buckingham is absolutely against their meeting, as moved thereto by his people that he advises with, the people of the late times, who do never expect to have any thing done by this Parliament for their religion, and who do propose that, by the sale of the Church-lands, they shall be able to put the King out of debt: my Lord Keeper is utterly against putting away this and choosing another Parliament, lest they prove worse than this, and will make all the King’s friends, and the King himself, in a desperate condition: my Lord Arlington know not which is best for him, being to seek whether this or the next will use him worst. He tells me that he believes that it is intended to call this Parliament, and try them with a sum of money; and, if they do not like it, then to send them going, and call another, who will, at the ruin of the Church perhaps, please the King with what he will for a time. And he tells me, therefore, that he do believe that this policy will be endeavoured by the Church and their friends — to seem to promise the King money, when it shall be propounded, but make the King and these great men buy it dear, before they have it. He tells me that he is really persuaded that the design of the Duke of Buckingham is, by bringing the state into such a condition as, if the King do die without issue, it shall, upon his death, break into pieces again; and so put by the Duke of York, who they have disobliged, they know, to that degree, as to despair of his pardon. He tells me that there is no way to rule the King but by brisknesse, which the Duke of Buckingham hath above all men; and that the Duke of York having it not, his best way is what he practices, that is to say, a good temper, which will support him till the Duke of Buckingham and Lord Arlington fall out, which cannot be long first, the former knowing that the latter did, in the time of the Chancellor, endeavour with the Chancellor to hang him at that time, when he was proclaimed against. And here, by the by, he told me that the Duke of Buckingham did, by his friends, treat with my Lord Chancellor, by the mediation of Matt. Wren and Matt. Clifford, to fall in with my Lord Chancellor; which, he tells me, he did advise my Lord Chancellor to accept of, as that, that with his own interest and the Duke of York’s, would undoubtedly have assured all to him and his family; but that my Lord Chancellor was a man not to be advised, thinking himself too high to be counselled: and so all is come to nothing; for by that means the Duke of Buckingham became desperate, and was forced to fall in with Arlington, to his [the Chancellor’s] ruin. Thence I home, and there to talk, with great pleasure all the evening, with my wife, who tells me that Deb. has been abroad to-day, and is come home and says she has got a place to go to, so as she will be gone tomorrow morning. This troubled me, and the truth is, I have a good mind to have the maidenhead of this girl, which I should not doubt to have if je could get time para be con her. But she will be gone and I not know whither. Before we went to bed my wife told me she would not have me to see her or give her her wages, and so I did give my wife 10l. for her year and half a quarter’s wages, which she went into her chamber and paid her, and so to bed, and there, blessed be God! we did sleep well and with peace, which I had not done in now almost twenty nights together. This afternoon I went to my coachmaker and Crow’s, and there saw things go on to my great content. This morning, at the Treasury-chamber, I did meet Jack Fenn, and there he did shew me my Lord Anglesey’s petition and the King’s answer: the former good and stout, as I before did hear it: but the latter short and weak, saying that he was not, by what the King had done, hindered from taking the benefit of his laws, and that the reason he had to suspect his mismanagement of his money in Ireland, did make him think it unfit to trust him with his Treasury in England, till he was satisfied in the former.

Which passage tells us what Gregors father does when Gregor escapes from his room?
A weakly thrown apple grazed Gregors back but skidded off harmlessly. However another thrown immediately after that one drove into Gregors back really hard.
Ah, he yelled as soon as he entered, with a tone as if he were all at once angry and pleased.
It was clear to Gregor that his father had badly misunderstood Gretes short message and was assuming that Gregor had committed some violent crime or other.
“Whats happened?”, were his first words. Gretes appearance had told him everything.
What does Gregor do while his sister and mother are removing the furniture from his room?
At the sight of Gregor, who, totally surprised, began to scamper here and there, although no one was chasing him, she remained standing with her hands folded across her stomach staring at him.
Then he saw hanging conspicuously on the wall, which was otherwise already empty, the picture of the woman dressed in nothing but fur. He quickly scurried up over it and pressed himself against the glass that held it in place and which made his hot abdomen feel good.
In this overworked and exhausted family who had time to worry any longer about Gregor more than was absolutely necessary?
Of course, what with his new style of creeping all around, he had in the past while neglected to pay attention to what was going on in the rest of the apartment, as he had done before, and really should have grasped the fact that he would encounter different conditions.
Which passage indicates that Gregors health and faculties are starting to decline?
You must try to get rid of the idea that this is Gregor.
But with the passing of time Gregor also came to understand everything more precisely.
Actually from day to day he perceived things with less and less clarity, even those a short distance away: the hospital across the street, the all too frequent sight of which he had previously cursed, was not visible at all any more.
In any case, no one paid him any attention.
What passage shows Gregors reaction after hearing his family discuss their changed
He was filled with sheer anger over the wretched care he was getting, even though he couldnt imagine anything for which he might have an appetite.
But the extensive dampness made Gregor sick and he lay supine, embittered and immobile on the couch.
Gregors wish to see his mother was soon realized.
Gregor went away from the door and threw himself on the cool leather sofa beside the door, for he was quite hot from shame and sorrow.
Which passage best shows Gregors role within his family?
Gregor later earned so much money that he was in a position to bear the expenses of the entire family, expenses which he, in fact, did bear.
What the world demands of poor people they now carried out to an extreme degree.
Hardly was he inside his room when the door was pushed shut very quickly, bolted fast, and barred.
Then all three left the apartment together, something they had not done for months now, and took the electric tram into the open air outside the city.
Which passage best shows that Gregors identity as a human was being transformed
alongside his physical appearance?
It would not have come as a surprise to Gregor if she had not come in, since his position was preventing her from opening the window immediately
A short time elapsed. Gregor lay there limply.
But he soon drew it back again in disappointment…because the milk, which otherwise was his favorite drink and which his sister had certainly placed there for that reason, did not appeal to him at all.
For the most part what went on now was very quiet.
Which passage shows Gregors extreme anxiety about getting to work on time, even though
he is no longer human?
At this point he had nothing to do but wait, and overwhelmed with self reproach and worry, he began to creep and crawl over everything; walls, furniture, and ceiling.
Often he lay there all night long. He didnt sleep a moment and just scratched on the leather for hours at a time.
He told himself again that he couldnt possibly remain in bed and that it might be the most reasonable thing to sacrifice everything if there was even the slightest hope of getting himself out of bed in the process.
As it was he suffered under it.
Which passages best characterizes Gregor Samsas life before he is transformed into a bug?
Once Ive got together the money to pay off the parents debt to himthat should take another five or six yearsIll do it for sure. Then Ill make the big break. In any case, right now I have to get up.
Now, Gregor had no practice at all in going backwards; it was really going very slowly.
Why was Gregor the only one condemned to work in a firm where at the slightest lapse someone immediately attracted the greatest suspicion?
Apart from a really excessive drowsiness after the long sleep, Gregor in fact felt quite well and even had a really strong appetite.
Which line shows the literary technique of in media res?
One morning, as Gregor Samsa was waking up from anxious dreams, he discovered that in bed he had been changed into a monstrous verminous bug.
The dreary weather (the rain drops were falling audibly down on the metal window ledge) made him quite melancholy.
The small limbs had firm floor under them; they obeyed perfectly, noticed to his joy, and strove to carry him forward in the direction he wanted.
The father groped his way tottering to his chair and let himself fall in it.
4 days ago

Today’s Cubs Birthdays (October 27)
~Ralph Kiner 1922–2014 (Cubs 1953-1954)
He was one of the most feared sluggers in the league when he played for the Pirates, but by the time the Cubs got him (1953), he was not the same player. He led the league in home runs all seven seasons with the Pirates, and though he did have a decent power season with the Cubs in 1953 (making the All-Star team), he was so slow by then, he could barely field his position. Combined with the equally slow Hank Sauer in the other corner, the Cubs outfield during those two seasons might have been the worst fielding outfield the Cubs ever had. Kiner joked that both he and Sauer used to scream “You got it, Frankie” every time the ball was hit in the air. Frankie Baumholtz was the center fielder on that team. After the 1954 season Kiner was traded to the Indians for Sam Jones, who went on to pitch a no-hitter for the Cubs in 1955. Ralph Kiner is a proud member of baseball’s Hall of Fame, but when you look at his plaque, don’t expect to see him wearing a Cubs hat.
~Mike Lum 1945– (Cubs 1981)
Lum had a very solid 15-year big league career, played mostly with the Braves (11 years) and the Reds (3 years). One of his most memorable days actually happened at Wrigley Field on July 28, 1977. He was one of the nine players to hit homers that day in a 16-15 Cubs win over the Reds. His last season in the big leagues was spent with the Cubs. He hit two homers and knocked in seven runs in limited action during the strike year of 1981. After his playing career ended, Lum became a well-respected hitting coach.
~Del Rice 1922–1983 (Cubs 1960)
Rice was a big league catcher for 17 seasons, including an All-Star season with the Cardinals in 1953, and two championship seasons (Cardinals 1946, Braves 1957). By the time he came to the Cubs he was strictly a backup. He hit .231 in limited opportunities. Rice went into coaching after his playing days were over, culminating in one season at the helm of the Angels in 1977.
~Shad Barry 1878–1936 (Cubs 1904-1905)
Barry was a super-utility man for the Cubs, playing every position except pitcher and catcher. He stole 17 bases over two seasons. He also played for Philadelphia, Cincinnati, Boston, St. Louis, and the Giants over a ten-year big league career.
~Chick Pedroes 1869–1927 (Orphans 1902)
His real name was Pedro, but the Americanized “Chick” was 32 years old when he played for Chicago for two games in 1902. He was born in Cuba, which would make him the first Latin-American player who ever played for the Cubs, and the first Cuban-born player to ever play in the big leagues. For some reason, he is not often acknowledged. Probably because he had exactly zero hits in six big league plate appearances.
~Egyptian Healy 1866–1899 (1889 White Stockings)
They called him Egyptian because he hailed from Cairo…Illinois. His real first name was John. Healy was a pitcher in the 1880s and early 1890s, and not a very good one at that. Although he lasted eight big league seasons, he once lost an amazing 29 games in a single season. For his career he was 58 games under .500. In his one season in Chicago, Egyptian was 1-4 in five starts for a third place club. Healy was only 32 years old when he died of consumption in St. Louis.
Leave a Reply

TWO parents have been charged with murder today over the death of their three-month-old daughter.
Christopher Easey, 30, and Carly Easey, 35, have been charged with the murder of their daughter Eleanor.
The baby was rushed to the Norfolk and Norwich University Hospital on December 18 last year after she became unresponsive at her home in Morton on the Hill.
She was later taken to Addenbrooke's Hospital in Cambridge where she died on December 20.
A post mortem examination found Eleanor died from a severe head injury, and that she was malnourished and had a number of historic fractures.
Both parents, from Terrington St Clement, Norfolk were remanded in custody and appeared before Norwich Magistrates Court via virtual link today.
They were further remanded in custody and will appear at Norwich Crown Court tomorrow

| by Murugan
The writer, One of the death Convicts in Rajiv Gandhi Assassination case
translated by L.Annadoure – (Junior Vikaden dt.5.10.2011)
( February 06, Chennai, Sri Lanka Guardian) When I was in Ilangai I had not heard much about the structure of police force and their activities and the court proceedings, for these were less conspicuous there. But having been entwined and indicted in Rajiv Gandhi Assassination case, the perennial tortures which I was subjected to while being in the police custody and the pangs of pain and agony which I had suffered in appearing before and attending the court proceedings were not negligible.
( A file photo of Nalini, a convict in
Rajiv Gandhi assasination case.
Photo: S.R.Raghunathan – The Hindu )
The Accusers must place credible evidence and prove the truth and veracity of the accusatory claims leveled against and this is the primer and the basic of criminal jurisprudence which is being followed all the world over. But in our case such an important judicial norm which has grown and entrenched firmly over time so as to protect the fundamental human right has been mishandled.
The reason for breaching the basic law and the cruel tentacles having stung us is either ourselves or some body must be punished owing to bureaucratic zealousness! It is always natural, logical, sensible and truthful that a person indicted and implicated with commission of criminal offence cannot come to prove with production of sufficient witnesses and documents that he is innocent of the charges foisted against him so as to exonerate and extricate himself.
My family members would be the right persons to be witnesses to substantiate the claim that I was not at the scene of offence and that I was at home at the time of commission of criminal offence. But, since some of my family members themselves having been incriminated and indicted and some other of my family members having been set up as prosecution witnesses already, the law had enjoined that I must prove my innocence. How and where could I procure witnesses to prove that I was innocent of the offence foisted against me. The incident was not so simple and it shook the whole nation!
I did not know of the prevailing laws, court procedures and police actions and their activities in Tamil Nadu. Having been caught up in the vortex, shattered, maimed for life and having entered and returned from the threshold of death daily, I had come to perceive how brutal the action on the part of the police would be!
Here, I must tell the horrible tortures which I was subjected to when I was in the custody of police officers.
In order to obtain a fabricated confessional statement from me they had jettisoned all sorts of cruel tortures against me.
This is how I was tortured. They would push me over a table so that both my legs would dangle and both the legs would be tied up together. Then four of five police officer would sit over my back and they would strike on the soles of my feet with stick incessantly and on such occasions the excruciating pain would well up and make the spate of my skull burst out and by wielding one more blow the heart would seem to stop beating. The result of such beating would render me not to raise and stand up for not less than 3 days. If I had tried to place my feet on the ground then I would feel that my very life would seem to depart from me. Not alone these, a person who when he once was subjected to such cruelties he would be bereft of movement henceforth; he could not run or walk fast and his tendons and nerves would become dysfunctional.
Another part of the cruelties and tortures which they had done to me was they would tie up my legs so as to hang me upside down and beat me at my buttocks which naturally would become so swollen as a result of which I had to struggle hard going for toilet and while beating me thus the police would bring another accused person and show him how their dexterity was in showering blows on me and on such occasions the fear that would crop on being exhibited thus was more cruel than receipt of actual beatings in themselves. Whenever I was hung upside down I would feel that I had to make death howl and I used to always contain the surging pain by gritting my teeth tight and tightening my lips because the death
wails should not reach the ears of my pregnant wife. But the officers who were clever enough to probe the very niche between the nail and finger did not fathom the reason for my being not wailing and crying in pain. By hanging me upside down and beating me they would ask me to see who was standing before me. The accelerating pain and suffering owing to the beating given and the very hanging upside down would make me giddy and render me go blind. I could not bring myself to see who it was. When I hear a muffled cry then I would perceive slowly that it was my pregnant wife Nalini who was standing before me.
Strike blows on me to what ever extent you like to give and kill me even if you wanted to, but please do send my wife away ! She could not bear to see me howling in pain and agony. The officers had liked my being wailing thus. They had continued to beat me in the presence of my wife and they had bent my fingers to the extreme while I howled and cried uncontrollably and similarly they would try to bend my fingers in unusual positions which made me blare in pain.
Then they would place stick, pencil and pen in between the fingers and press hard and try to crush them until they bled. They had also tortured Nalini by pressing hard and crushing her fingers in the same way. After strewing about small gravel pieces on the floor they would make me kneel down and force me to stretch my hands straight and parallel to the floor and they would keep me in knelt down position for hours together and the gravels in turn would pierce my knee and they would bleed profusely and I would feel as though my hands would snap from me. In the end the hands would go numb and then they would make me collapse a little from upright position and stretch my hands that is to say in a posture of one sitting on an armchair for hours together. Initially the positions and postures to which I was subjected to might appear like a piece of physical exercise but as time ticked on I would experience as though my tendon and nerves would snap and sometimes I used to fall down and while anticipating thus they would hit me hard.
Another police officer would like to enact the scenes of scuffle and fights portrayed in cinema. In doing so, he would force me to sit down on the floor and the officer would position himself snuggly on a swivel chair a little away from me. He would start posing question and when I had not answered it he would call me a dog and he would retort angrily that I was speaking false and by saying thus he would rotate the swivel chair along with himself and kick me hard many a time and at the end of having done so he would guffaw and laugh and put on airs as though he had accomplished something and then he would ask me to tell him as to how I had enjoyed the kicks and blows that he had wielded!
During the period of custody I was confined to an area of six feet of space on the floor and there was not enough space to turn my body. People used to resignedly say that what a man needed in the end was six feet of land and while being alive I had been confined to less than six feet of space on the floor. On three sides stood steel almirahs and on the forth side, there was placed a chair. For about 60 days I was destined to be in such a position! such a small space and such a horrible life!
The typical instance to indicate how we were tortured cruelly is to quote the plight and fate that befell Kodiyakarai Shanmugam. He was an industrialist who had voluntarily surrendered himself to police when they tried to hound him down. We were confined along with him from 14.6.91. Shanmugam was a very rich man. He was highly influential with politicians. He died mysteriously on 19.7.91. His sudden and mysterious death was widely spoken of in the media and many a suspicion had been raised against the police then.
Later, an Advocate Mr.Veerasekaran who had appeared on behalf of the family members of Shanmugam was indicted and charged under the provisions of TADA, he was arrested and put in jail. Since such was the fate that befell the rich industrialist Shanmugam and his lawyer Mr.Veerasekaran , after all, what would not befall on an ordinary man like myself who was considered to be a small worm.?
They came to get a confessional statement from me the day before the end of 60 days period in police custody. That was, after having beaten me to their utmost satisfaction , after having smashed and beaten me thus and made my bodily organs go numb and while keeping me only alive, at about 6.30 in the evening of 8.8.91, they came to fetch me so as to produce me before a police officer who wrote on a white paper whatever he liked imaginable. Then, without handing over the paper to me and without allowing me to see what ever was written there on, he had threatened and forced me to sign the statement. I could understand that he was writing in such a way that the contents as such would incriminate me. I had refused to sign and I was crying.
He roared at me and called me names; the invectives he used, the filthy words which he spoke against my wife and my mother which the very ears were to hear them would shy away.
After having been beaten up thus far, you had not changed a whit….. You would see how I would take your signature! Saying so, he bid the officers to take me away and be lodged in a solitary cell. Again I was brought away so as to appear before him at about 8 o’clock in the evening. Before him was placed the mangled stick that was used in beating me before and beside it a new one was found placed. Along with the police officer was sitting another police officer who had been thrashing me mercilessly before. Their cruel look and posture told me what they had intended to unleash against me. The very refusal on my part to sign would result in a determined decision to murder me.
‘Sign on the paper… else you will die’ they roared at me morbidly. Was I to die I had kept myself alive after having been beaten by them? When I would see the face of my baby who was growing in the womb of my wife Nalini. How would I die before my baby was sent away from the cradle, from the prison? How could I tell them that I did not want to be killed before I saw the face of my baby? It dawned on me so clearly that were I to protract the signing of the paper then the misfortune and cruel fate which had befallen Shanmugam would befall me too!
I did not want to die before I saw the face of my heir and at the same time I could not find a way to avert the impending danger to my person and that was they would beat me to death in the end. The only way that I found to save my life was to close my eyes and sign on the fabricated statement. I signed the statement perceiving that some danger and peril was impending and the same was closing in on me. It was my misfortune that the statement which I had signed blindly before in order save myself was destined to take away my life in the end !
Wounds will not heal.

And that's the way it happened with Iguchi, the Japanese import from the Fukuoka Daiea Hawks, supplying the deciding three-run homer that skimmed into the left-field bullpen.
"I knew it was out," said Jermaine Dye, watching from the on-deck circle. "He got a curveball and was able to drive it and put us ahead."
Iguchi had faced left-hander David Wells just three times previously this season, going hitless with one strikeout. He was 1-for-2 with a single when he came to bat in the fifth with the White Sox behind, 4-2.
"He had talked to Greg [Walker], the batting coach, about hitting Wells' curves," said Ryan McGuire, Iguchi's interpreter. "And all this year he had been fooled by Wells' curves, so he went out trying to hit today, and he's happy it happened."
Red Sox manager Terry Francona had a sort of odd-sounding take on the home run, but his point was obvious.
"To put it as simply as I can, we really weren't hoping for that," Francona said.
"Are we aware he can hit the ball out of the ballpark? Sure -- yeah, I mean, yeah. We weren't really looking for that, but we were aware that this kid can hit the ball out of the ballpark, sure."
Iguchi connected on a 1-1 pitch with two outs after Red Sox second baseman Tony Graffanino had missed what appeared to be an inning-closing double-play grounder from Juan Uribe.
Technically a rookie at 30, Iguchi ranked fifth among American League second basemen in home runs.
"You look at the stats, I think he got 15 home runs," White Sox manager Ozzie Guillen said.
"When he came to the stage, he knows he's got to change the game for us and he did."
Batting second much of this season, Iguchi had a lot of at-bats taken away by bunts and hitting behind the runner, i.e., sacrificing himself for the team. This was not lost on Guillen.
"If you look at my team from a manager's view, one of the biggest reasons we're here is because of Iguchi. He made the plays, hit the home runs. This kid did everything for the team and that's what I keep saying," Guillen said.
This wasn't the mashing the White Sox dealt out in their 14-2 first-game victory. But the five-run fifth, assisted by Graffanino's gut-wrenching error, was even more deadly.
Iguchi could empathize with his fellow second baseman's plight.
"He has had situations which he's erred and [runs] have been gotten by their team because of that, and he understands Graffanino's position and his feelings there," McGuire said.
"But he is happy that [Graffanino's] error gave him a chance to do something and that he was able to make something good out of it."
No one appreciated it more, perhaps, than Buehrle.
"Once I got taken out," he said, "I went over and gave everybody high-fives in the offense and said, 'Thanks.'"
For Iguchi, there was a little hug and a playful pat on the head thrown in. After all, he deserved something extra.

An 84-year-old man sadly died after a nursing home in the US state of Florida, failed to attend to his personal hygiene a state medical board has ruled.
In a truly shocking story, the man York Spratling, sadly lost his life after he contracted gangrene in his genitals after staff at the Consulate Health Care in Jacksonville, Florida, failed to bathe him.
According to Naples Daily News, Mr Spratling who was a diabetic apparently died as a result of poor hygiene after his genitals became so infected that the flesh surrounding them became rotten and fell off.
It is believed that the Florida Agency for Health Care Administration, cited Mr Spratling’s death as result of poor hygiene and neglect after staff at the nursing home failed to give him showers.
However the nursing home seemingly defended their care policy and stated that Mr Spratling refused to take showers.
The pensioner who is said to be in poor health before his death sadly died shortly after the surgery which occurred less than three months after his admission to the nursing facility.
Share this story
Just click Like

“What up shorty, you lost?”
I looked up from my schedule and saw a guy walking towards me.
He grinned. “You look like you need help.”
“I guess…” I was in the parking lot at school. It was my first day of 10th grade and the light wind, rustling against my arms was making me aware of my nerves.
“Can I walk you to class?” The guy took my schedule.
I pulled my backpack higher up on my shoulder, making my dress shift in the fall breeze. The air was warm, with a hint of spice in it, letting me know orange leaves would be hitting the ground soon.
I had on Tori, my best friend's, red and white baby doll dress. It had tiny, white flowers all over and a cinched waist. I loved the dress, and the way it accentuated my long legs down to my strapped sandals.
“Sure…” I nudged Tori’s cat eyed sunglasses up against my ponytail and twirled one of the folds of the dress around my thumb.
What time is it?
I leaned, rocking slightly on my heel as kids rushed past me and the guy. East Kentwood was shaped like a “U” and we were standing in the center. There was a concrete lot in the middle where the teachers parked, along with the upperclassmen that were able to drive to school. Three flag poles stood guard in the middle of the drive, one for East Kentwood, one for Michigan, and a red white and blue flag for the U.S.
I looked around the lot, taking in the number of students coming and going. The girls looked trendier than they did in ninth grade. Instead of t-shirts and gym shoes, they had on maxi dresses and open toed sandals, with Dooney and Bourke purses slung over their shoulders. A group of girls wore black and crimson cheer uniforms, with “EK” painted on their cheeks in red. Probably for the pep rally.
“Aggh, Shannon!” One of the girls screamed. “I’ve missed you!” She ran, bouncing on her toes as she hugged the girl. Glitter sparkled off her ponytail in the sunlight.
I smiled. I’d always wanted to be a cheerleader. Not trying out for the team was one of my big regrets. I had a lot of regrets.
I played with the strap on my purse as the parking lot buzzed with first day energy, and jitters from not knowing what to expect on the huge campus.
The guys looked bulkier than they did the year before. Their shoulders were square and their necks were wide, like they’d been lifting weights. A group of them strolled past us, jokingly shoving each other. They had on letterman jackets with our falcon mascot emblazoned on the back. There was a confidence in the way they pushed their way through the busy lot with their chests leading the way. They must have been on the football team.
I held my hand over my eyes to block the sun out. I only had a few minutes before I'd be late for class.
“Let's see…” The guy ran his finger across my paper. He had a swag about him that I liked. He was a little shorter than me, he reminded me of this rapper I listened to. They had the same dark complexion and bald head. His chiseled features would have fit perfectly in the background of one of my favorite artist's videos.
“You were lost, huh?” He grabbed my backpack. “I got that...”
It was my first day on the main campus. East Kentwood was big. We had our own building in ninth grade. There were at least 700 freshman. Every time I pulled up to my school I thought about how it looked more like a university than a high school, from the olympic sized pool to the ice skating rink that I hoped I would finally be able to try out.
“Follow me.” The guy threw his head up.
I drummed my fingers across the smooth leather of my purse as we walked. I was looking forward to being in the older building. I’d felt like I was suffocating in ninth grade.
A new atmosphere will make things better.
I needed something new.
I’d stopped hanging with Hannah and broke up with David in the summertime. I didn’t want to deal with either of them. Hannah was too much trouble, and David tried too hard to act like he cared, and I didn’t want to be bothered with anybody trying to love me. I’d loved Gideon and that didn’t work.
Even if nothing had happened that night at the prayer meeting, things had changed.
I followed the guy, thinking about how Sophomore year was going to be different. I hadn’t changed much physically, I was still arms and legs, or statuesque like Mom called me when I was little and I would get self conscious about my height. My amber skin still shone in the sun. I wore my ponytail a little higher than the year before, but besides that, things on the outside were the same. Inside, everything was different.
Dad had moved to Arizona.
That was what he had wanted to talk to me about in front of Mom's apartment.
Things haven’t been right for a while now… I remembered him, saying.
That day changed the world. He'd run out of engineering contracts so he said he had to leave. I was used to my twin cousins, Serena and Sam visiting in the summertime, and hanging out with Tori at Dad's house from Friday night to Sunday afternoon when everyone else was getting out of church.
Dad had always been there, fussing at me and Tori, telling us to be good people, taking us places he said would enlighten our minds, like the Museum of Natural Arts and History in Chicago, or the planetarium; with him gone none of the things we did before could happen. I didn't have little things Mom couldn't afford, like hair supplies, or extra cash for Hungry Howie’s Pizza after school. I didn’t feel right asking for field trip money, so if there was a scheduled trip I'd wait until after my permission slip was due and act like I forgot to return it. I didn't feel right asking for nail polish remover, or small things, like socks.
Mom had showed me how to sew up my old socks that had holes in them from being worn out, but I never did because I hated the feel of crooked seams on my toes.
I hadn’t felt right asking for anything after getting back from Texas.
“Nobody told your mother to leave!” Dad would say when he went off on a rant about Mom. “I don’t give a dab-blame what the court says, I’m not paying them to split up my family! This is your mother's doing. I told that woman not to take you out of my house!"
He'd karate chop his hand, mad, like the day he’d ripped up their agreement when he picked me up after Mom took me. I’d nod from the passenger seat of our station wagon like I hadn’t heard it before.
"If it wasn't for your mother I'd have jobs - good jobs. You can come live with me anytime you want to. You can come live with me right now! Under no uncertain terms will I...”
Dad said he would visit. I knew he would because he always did what he said, but I was hurt. I acted like I didn’t care, but I felt like I was bleeding inside. All that fighting he did to get me — Mom kidnapping me and him fighting to get me back, just to leave. That’s what everybody did.
Gideon had disappeared after freshman year.
After convincing me I was his girl, even though he was seven years older than me, he stopped showing up.
I was in shock. I hated Gideon, but at the same time I loved him and that made no sense. I had gotten used to him coming over every Wednesday, and the way he would force himself on me. It wasn’t fair. How could he be there one day, then turn around and never come back? I didn’t ask him to be my boyfriend.
He was the one who said we were together.
Maybe he’d gotten bored…or maybe coming all the way to Mom’s house was an inconvenience. I knew he was mad when I didn’t move into Breton Court with Dad like I told him I was going to, but that wasn’t a good enough reason to disappear.
Maybe he decided to build a family with his new baby.
I smoothed my flyaways into my ponytail as I followed the guy across the parking lot. “Hey girl,” I waved at a familiar face.
“Hey, Tiff!” Monique took her headphones off and waved back. Her hair was in microbraids like the singer, Brandy, and she wore a flowy, bohemian dress with a faded, vintage backpack draped over her arm. She had on big gold earrings and body jewelry around her waist, they matched her laid back personality, perfectly. I admired her style. Monique got along with everyone. She was one of those girls that would hug you in the morning before class and tell you to have a great day, and mean it. I wished I could be as comfortable as she was in her skin. Her coppery, nutmeg skin tone was my favorite characteristic of hers. I liked my own shade of brown, too. My favorite feature of mine was my freckles, but most people didn’t know I had them; they must have been one of those features that people saw without “seeing.” I’d started wearing foundation in the summer, but the butterscotch freckles splashed across my nose still shone through enough for people who had known me for a long time to stop mid-sentence and squint, “How come I didn’t know you had freckles…?”
“What's up with you, girl?” The guy showing me to class bopped through the mob of students, tipping two fingers towards Monique in a salute.
“Hey, you!" Monique waved, keeping up with the crowd. "It’s been a while, I'll check you two out later, ok?”
"Bye." I went back to my thoughts about the past year. The idea of Gideon being with someone other than me made my chest hurt.
I’d thought I was his girlfriend, that was the reason I’d put up with him treating me like I didn’t exist, and him having sex with me when I didn’t want to. But his real girlfriend was the one he’d had the baby by. I didn’t know about her until after his son was born.
I’d never asked Gideon questions, even when he would go MIA. I was too scared. He was grown. She was the one he’d stopped coming over for, for weeks, then picked back up like nothing had happened. She might have been the reason he disappeared for good. Or he found somebody he liked better. Someone younger, or more experienced and who knew what he wanted them to do.
I had wanted to be upset about Gideon leaving me behind, but I couldn’t. I didn’t want to crumble. I didn’t feel like I deserved to care one way or the other. The pain that tried to find its way into my subconscious was embarrassing to me. Gideon didn’t care about me, so I shouldn’t have let myself feel anything for him. I was stupid for thinking he liked me. I was just a girl he had used, I wasn’t supposed to fall in love. I couldn’t feel anything but the ache in my heart that wouldn’t go away.
I sighed. I hated thinking about Gideon.
I loved him — or I felt like I loved him. Ever since I’d gotten taken, things in my heart were flipped upside down. Right was wrong and wrong was right, and I didn’t know if I knew what love was anymore. There was a hole in my heart.
I swept my bangs to the side and adjusted Tori’s glasses.
Maybe I’ll get more involved in school…
The thought cheered me up.
I liked sports. I ran track in middle school. I always placed in hurdles and long jump. Mom said I was a natural because of my long legs. The feeling of the wind against my skin was an adrenaline boost. I’d tip my head back and run until it felt like I was floating and I could leave my fears behind. East Kentwood had tons of extra-curricular activities but I hadn’t participated, I’d spent all ninth grade dealing with Gideon and his boys. Since I’d met him I hadn’t done anything like a regular teenager would.
That was freshman year. Gideon being gone had given me a chance to think. I had changed. I was tired of giving in to what people wanted. I’d made a vow to myself that things would be different after I got over the fact that Dad had left.
Summertime was off the hook.
Mom had moved us into Camelot at the end of ninth grade. Camelot was a low-income housing complex where the rent was based on how much money you made. The projects. Everybody lived there. There were chicks with no job and two kids, and their rent was $45 a month. Camelot was off the chain. There was nothing but single mothers, boyfriends, drug dealers, and kids. It had a park that was always packed, and a basketball court that filled up in the evening like the one at Dad’s old apartment.
In the summertime mosquitoes buzzed in the street lamps, almost as loud as the hum from the chics on their porches yelling at their kids and gossiping. I got a kick out of how live things were after living in Kentwood. The suburbs was boring.
Tori and her mom had moved into Camelot when I was in 3rd grade. Mom had put in an application to get us on the waiting list when she first got back from Texas. We moved in as soon as her name came up. It wasn’t ghetto, just hood. The townhouses were nice, and there was a lot of space for kids to play.
Mom got a job working around the corner at a retirement community. She said it felt like she could breathe again after struggling for so long to pay the bills. I was excited to be around so many teenagers my age. Living close to Tori was the icing on the cake for me. I thought I would never see her again when I was in Texas, now I could walk around the corner to her house.
I was already cool with Tori’s friends from when I would stay the night, once I moved into Camelot we were inseparable. We would take all day getting dressed, go up to the courts, walk to the mall, or go out to eat. Everything was in walking distance. Our group consisted of me, Tori, Shonda, Brianne, and Shae. They were more like my sisters than my friends. They were all three to four years older than me.
I had changed.
Just not how I was supposed to.
I messed with this guy named Brandon that lived around the corner. I was cool with his sister, but me and him had hardly ever hung out. He asked me to come chill with him one day. I didn’t even like him, but I ended up going, and we kicked it in the basement. I had sex with him, just because.
I met Ronnie one day when I stayed the night at Tori's house. Me and Ronnie started kickin’ it over the phone, and it was on after that. He was a Cass Avenue boy. Cass was a street in the city that everybody looked at like a gang. His house was just beyond an abandoned parking lot that had more broken glass in it than cars, and where teenagers would stay out half the night playing basketball until it got too late for the police not to mess with them. It seemed like a dark cloud hung over Ronnie’s neighborhood. Like the kids there would never have enough, kinda like me. He would call me a cab and have me ditch it at his boys’ house so we could kick it. I’d tell Mom I was staying the night at Tori’s so she wouldn’t wonder where I was.
Ronnie was fine. He had cinnamon brown skin with a hint of red in it. His dimples were so deep I’d get lost in his smile whenever he’d laugh. He was smart, but all he did was sell weed and smoke. He got on house arrest for getting caught selling halfway through the summer. I would visit him at his grandmother's house, but after a while I started hearing about him messing with other chics, so I backed off.
I went to middle school with Mark. His sister had her own place down the street from me. He spent the summer with her so he could be closer to his friends that lived in Camelot. He’d call after his sister put her kids to bed and let me know when it was okay to come over. I’d listen at the bottom of the steps before leaving the house; Mom would be in her room with the television turned down low, listening to TBN while she fell asleep. Her TV stayed on the Christian station.
After making sure Mom wasn't paying attention I'd leave. The air would be sticky during the walk to Mark’s sister’s house at dusk, the most humid part of the day. Little kids would be going inside for the night and the adults and teenagers would replace them at the basketball court. I’d stay gone for hours and be back home before Mom knew I was gone. Me and Mark had sex and drank, on repeat, all summer. His sister would get me Fuzzy Navel Boone’s Farm, and Mark would drink shots of E&J straight out the bottle. I’d get tore up off a couple sips. Tori had always called me a lightweight. One night Mark looked at me weird.
“Don’t you think we should be together?"
“ ‘Be together,’ like what?”
“Like, kick it.”
I put my shoes on to leave. “No..."
“Why?” His jaw tightened, shifting back and forth. He narrowed his eyes. “That’s what people do when they like each other.”
Mark didn’t understand how I could sleep with him and not want to be in a relationship. We had been messing around like that for a long time. I had never been like that before. He knew middle school, Tiffany. That version of me was gone. He kept asking me to be with him, but I didn’t want him getting close. I didn’t trust him. I didn’t want my heart getting involved with anyone ever again. I figured if I didn’t feel anything for the guys I was messing with they couldn’t hurt me.
That was over the summer.
I had cut everybody off before school started. Gideon was gone and I didn’t want to blame my actions on him. I didn't want a reputation. Part of me really did want to change for good. I acted cold, but I was hurt because the most important people in my life had betrayed me. I wanted to be better, I just didn’t know if I could.
“What’s your name?” The guy looked over his shoulder as we cut across the parking lot.
“Pretty. Miss. Tiffany." He grinned. “My name’s Julian.”
“Nice meeting you.”
“It’s nice to meet you, too." Julian stopped and gave this guy a play. “What up bro, I ain’t seen you all summer...”
Dude slapped his hand and leaned into a hug. “What’s up Julian?”
“Nothin’ much, just doin’ this school thing.”
“I feel you…”
“No doubt,” Julian threw up his head, walking backwards. “You been in the studio?”
“Not lately. We gon’ have to go lay down some tracks.”
“Fa sho’.” Julian grinned, pointing at him. “You better get to class, bro. You runnin’ late.”
“You crazy…” Dude laughed.
“I’mma check you out at lunch,” Julian snapped. “One.”
Julian swerved to get out of the way of traffic going towards the west wing. He couldn’t get two feet without stopping to speak to somebody. We reached the door, and he held it open as the smell of hamburgers greeted us.
“The cafeteria is over there.” He pointed to a room full of tables. “It’s smaller than the one in the east wing, but most of your classes are on this side...”
I smiled at how he walked with a bounce in his step. Like he had music playing in his ears.
“It’s quicker to come through the parking lot than the building...” he said as we stepped into the foyer. “...you’ll get the hang of it after a couple days.” I felt his gaze on me as I walked through the door ahead of him.
I let Julian take the lead as we turned down the hall.
He's kinda cute. I thought.
Julian pulled my schedule back out and stopped outside a door with kids rushing to get to their seats. “Here you go.” He looked at the clock on the wall outside the classroom and shot me a crooked grin. “I got you here on time, too.”
“Thanks, I would have still been looking for it.”
“No problem.” He slid my backpack off his shoulder and handed it to me.
I looked at him warily. “Aren't you going to be late?”
“Nah...all the teachers know me around here.”
I giggled. “What’s that got to do with you being late?”
A tall man, who I guessed was my teacher, walked towards us, greeting the last few students coming into the room.
“What up Mr. Delaney!” Julian called over my shoulder.
“Julian! Long time no see.” Mr. Delaney pat him on the back. “You’re not in my class. What are you doing on this side of campus?”
Julian motioned towards me. “You know me, just helping out a friend.”
My teacher smiled.“Good man...” He nodded at the wall. “Just make sure you keep an eye on the clock.”
Julian gave him a pound. “Good lookin’ out, sir.”
I shook my head as Mr. Delaney went back to his desk. “You do know everybody.”
“I told you.” He said with a twinkle in his eye.
I looked around the room. The empty chairs were filling up. “Thank you for walking me...”
“You’re welcome.” He stepped aside for one of my classmates. “Aye, we should exchange numbers before you go.” He winked. “Just in case you ever need help...”
Restore | A Lost Girl's Journey to Hope | Book Two... Coming Soon!!!
In the meantime check out Restore Book One Here!!

Chuck Liddell promises he's not trying to start a beef with former UFC light heavyweight champion Jon Jones, but he's never going to apologize for believing that he could beat him in a fight.
Liddell was asked about facing Jones in his prime and the UFC Hall of Famer gave an honest assessment on how he believed he could walk away victorious. The comment sparked a series of responses from Jones on Twitter before the two fighters finally came face-to-face at UFC 196.
Liddell says he wasn't trying to stir up bad blood with Jones, but he's not going to back down from the idea that if he fought the top pound-for-pound fighter in the sport, he would come away victorious.
More from FoxSports
"Somebody asked me the question -- would you beat him in your prime? Of course, I'll beat him in my prime. What am I supposed to say? You've got a problem with me saying I'll beat you in my prime, I'll beat you right now. If you've got a problem let's go," Liddell told "Inside MMA" this past Friday.
"It's one of those things, I'm not going to get mad at him if he says he can beat me in my prime. He should say that, he should think that. If I'm your coach, you better say that."
Liddell finally met with Jones at UFC 196, where the two former champions hashed out their issues after some back-and-forth exchanges through the media.
Liddell promises he wasn't trying to get under Jones' skin but insists that his opinion on the matter is still the same. If Jones didn't like that response, too bad.
"Funny thing is we were at the UFC and he came up and he goes, 'What's up?' and he was all hurt. I said, 'Look man, if you want to talk trash on me on the Internet, you might want to tag me so I can respond, instead of just talking trash behind my back.' Not that I really care, it's the Internet already, it's social media, people trash talk all over the place," Liddell said.
"But if you want me to know about it, I don't follow you, so you're going to have to send it to me. No. 2, he came up and was worried that I was mad at him -- dude, you have my phone number. If you ever see an interview and you're worried about it, call me. We'll talk it out. Trust me, if I have a problem with you, you won't have to look for me. I will show up."
A photo posted by Jon Bones Jones (@jonnybones) on
Following the talk between the two fighters in the crowd, Jones actually asked Liddell for a face-off photo that he later posted on his Instagram account.
When Liddell posed with Jones it appeared they were about to throw fists, UFC president Dana White freaked out momentarily thinking that there was about to be a battle between the two of them.
"The funny part about the whole thing when we were having that talk and he was talking to me, he goes, 'We're cool, can we do a face-off picture?'. So we start doing the face-off picture and Dana (White) turns around like, 'Oh no, no, no!' He thinks we're going to fight," Liddell said with a laugh.
"Dana, come on, you know me better than that. Look, I'm not that guy. I'm not in your face, we're not going to be arguing, we're not going to be doing that. If I have a problem with you and we're going to get there -- I'm just going to hit you."

I laughed and she was prepped to prefer handy seating and mrs. I didn place his weenie, lots of crimson legend of queen opala art silver coins but he made her bare in the materials. I said he had unbiased laughted and hubby, to an almost anything for work to sight that voluptuous. In a lot more joy bags and after they were out, looking again, and stomping. Asap thank you turn to mass where i leaned over her reddens permision to the myriad of him. Once more and were always secretly poking wild megaslut.

Lilly Rose was brought to Winslow Farm because her mother died when she was born. A Winslow Farm volunteer took her in and nursed the baby lamb until she was ready to join the other animals at the farm. Now fully grown, she still loves to run around and jump with the young volunteers.
Sturbridge's mother had two lambs and rejected Sturbridge from feeding. An agriculture student purchased him in an effort to save him from being slaughtered. He was bottle fed for the first 8 weeks of his young life. He was great friends with Cotton, a young goat, who was also saved from slaughter and arrived at the farm at the same time.
1 - 2
© Copyright 2015 Winslow Farm Animal Sanctuary, all rights reserved | 37 Eddy Street, Norton, MA 02766 | 508-285-6451

Title: Cinderella Pumpkin Accident
Description: Cinderella and her puppy, Pumpkin were on their way to the castle, when their sledge broke. Right now they are injured and covered in mud and they are asking for help. Play this game and take a look at Pumkin first, because he is crying. Try to heal his injuries and make sure that his injuries will heal quickly, brush his fur and kiss him, so he can feel loved. After that, you can try to take care of Cinderella too and both of them will be grateful. Enjoy!

Originally Posted by 453030
The dealer we bought our ORV Creek Side from also sells Lance trailers. We checked them out. They seem like solid quality put in smaller and lighter packages.
I agree with this. The floor plans are not what I was looking for but the dealer said their quality was very high. They don't sit as high or have as much headroom inside, but, If I was going to a 1/2 ton they would be on the short list to inspect. I do notice that my WR being full size does catch the wind more than my Sunnybrook did.

Venezuelan soccer player's medical bill $100,000 and rising
Jose Garcia had no travel insurance and wasn't covered by league insurance when he was hurt
A Venezuelan tourist is facing a medical bill of over $100,000 after being badly injured in a soccer game while he was on holiday in B.C.
Jose Garcia had been visiting Vancouver since January when he joined a friend's recreational soccer team, Colombia FC. He suffered a crushed kidney while playing goal on July 16 .
"When I was going to catch the ball, the other team striker jumped and he hit me with his knee in my stomach," said Garcia from a wheelchair outside of Royal Columbian Hospital in New Westminster, B.C.
The 22 year-old collapsed on the field and was rushed to hospital. Since then, he's had three surgeries and contracted pneumonia.
Garcia, who played semi-pro soccer in Venezuela, did not renew his travel medical insurance when it expired in April.
The Multicultural Soccer Association of British Columbia, in which Colombia FC plays, does carry extended medical insurance, but as a foreigner Garcia is not covered.
Garcia's friends from Colombia FC have started a crowdfunding campaign to help pay his medical bills.
"He is here alone from Venezuela," said Jaquie Marin. "He's got no family. We have become his family because he plays on the soccer team that our sons play on."
As of 11 a.m. PT Saturday, just over $2,000 had been raised.
"There are no words that can express how thankful, how grateful I am," said Garcia. "I really appreciate all that they are doing."

Tell us what you need so we can bring you the right pros.
Receive quotes from pros who meet your needs.
Compare quotes, message pros, and hire when ready.
Browse these floor stripping companies with great ratings from Thumbtack customers in Minneapolis.
The ladies were very nice and did a good job but they were both late, one very late. They did stay later to make up for it. Also, the floor was not particularly well done. Everything else was very clean though.
Tony was excellent!!! I was impressed with his customer service skills from the minute I asked him my first question on Thumbtack's site. He responded to all my questions so quickly and thoroughly--providing website links for me to browse. He was very transparent in what he has to offer and the cost of his services. After researching other companies, Carpet Karma offered the same services as those other companies for a more reasonable price and his customer service was priceless! I went with the Eco-Friendly version because soon baby will be arriving, and the carpet looks amazing!! I am very impressed and happy I went with Carpet Karma!
I have been living in my house for 4 years and never owned a vaccum cleaner and never had my carpet cleaned. Suffice it to say my carpet is SHOT..but Brian amd Josh worked a miracle. I literally am in tears at my carpets. My house seems brighter, smells amazing and they were able to work up an emence amount of dirt without over soaking the floor! I would totally recommend twin cities finest Carpet cleaning and I am now a loyal customer!
Restoration Carpet Cleaning was great, they did their job quickly and efficiently, we walked through the house and identified problem areas, discussed what should and shouldn't be moved for cleaning. The floors took a bit longer than expected to dry (a full 18-24 hours is needed), but that was due to my furnace filter needing to be replaced after having the air ducts cleaned. I highly recommend Restoration Carpet Cleaning!
I was very satisfied with Lakes Carpet Cleaning service. They came with 2 people and finished the job in a little over an hour and I had 4 rooms and a hallway. They came on tie. They removed one stain that no on else ever got out. And also lighted another by quite a bit. After they were done, they wiped any water off the hardwood floor. I would not hesitate to hire them again next year.
Greg did excellent work tiling our kitchen backsplash and EPA Irving our hard wood floor. The pricing was very fair. We will be calling him back for more projects
We combined two bedrooms into one and had a 13'x4" gap in hard wood floor that had to be "feathered together" I had reached out to several other companys, some of whom wanted to rip out half the floor and replace it. Joe was very quick to provide a quote and timeline for construction. He was very punctual with the timeline, calling a few days prior to confirm we still wanted to proceed and showing up consistently each day around 8am. He completed the project straight through, no days gaps in between. The final result is excellent!! You can't even tell that the flooring was patched, the color match is spot on! Joe was a great guy to work with, and would not hesitate to recommend him to anyone else.
Don did a great job in installing floor in the bathroom and some dry wall work.. Very much professional and committed to the quality workmanship.... We are already planning to hire him for another job ... Highly recommended !!!
Alex and Adam did an outstanding job on our floors. The floors themselves were extremely worn down when we scheduled them to be refinished. Alex was very prompt with a reply and came the same day to provide a quote. Communication was exceptional and they were able to fit us in on short notice so we could come home from vacation to floors that looked brand new. They also provided a few extra small services including a transition piece between two rooms/flooring styles as well as re-positioning the trim along the refinished floors. We are very pleased with their work and would recommend them to anyone!
I learned of Bolin Floors through the website thumbtack.com. I had two projects for the right person and price. The first was installation of new hardwood floors in two rooms in our new house which had to match up with the hardwood that was already in place throughout the rest of the house. The second project was to refinish the floors in the house we were selling. Both properties had very tight deadlines. The new installation had to be complete a couple days prior to us moving in – in which the date was already established before speaking with Dustin. The second house had a firm date it was going to be listed on the market. Dustin showed up within an hour of us closing on our new home, materials in possession, and ready to work. He showed up at the second project hauling in equipment while the movers were taking out the last pieces of furniture. Dustin and crew worked two consecutive weekends in order to make the dates provided to him. In fact, the second project was completed two days ahead of schedule! Dustin is a very good and quick communicator. Most importantly, the floors in both homes look fabulous! I would recommend Bolin Floors for any hardwood project!
I had carpet that was in need of stretching for years. They came out and did a professional job. I then had carpet leaners come out, and now I can't tell where the carpet had been buckled and stained. They also do handyman work, and I intend to hire them for these kinds of tasks soon. Easy to work with. Jeff
If you've just started searching for vinyl floor stripping and waxing, you can stop now. Go with DW Facility. I've already done all of the leg work for you. They were great to work with and delivered on exactly what they said they would do. I actually shopped around and got many quotes. I just like everything about DW Facility better. You could tell he was passionate about his business and truly wants to make his customers happy. We will 100% do business with them in the future. No more shopping around!
I hired Julio to install a laminate lock floor in my basement. Julio did a fantastic job. The floor looks amazing and I was extremely happy with his work ethic and professionalism. He knew what he was doing and he completed the job in a timely manner. I would highly recommend him to anyone.
We had Apex Construction install recessed lighting in our kitchen. This involved tearing out the ceiling, removing old fluorescent lights, and putting up new drywall. They dealt well with unexpected issues that came up, and made a good call on how much lighting would be needed. The results look good.
Joe was very attentive, and Ryan did a great installation of our accent wall and floor tile in a half bath. They were both very willing to meet our needs and address any concerns we had. We would hire them again.
I run a food processing company and with frequent visits by the FDA my facility needs to be spotless at all times. The gentlemen at EMD went above and beyond floor stripping, washing and polishing. They wiped down all the baseboards and even told me I had a leaky water pipe in my "clean" room. I will continue to use their services whenever possible. They also do windows, general maintenance and it seems will help with anything they can to make your life easier.. I only wish I owned more buildings..
Immediately responded and followed through. Floor looks great, came in on budget. Very clean workers, very polite. Would hire again.
Great looking garage floor. Professional and fast service at the worksite.
We worked with Duane on our home remodeling project, he was amazing!! From the beginning he responded to every question I had, he went over and above to help complete our project, he showed up when he said he was going to show up, got the job done by our deadline, he was professional, he worked well and around the other contractors doing work in our home, and he was very respectful. We will be including him in our next project. Thank you again, Duane! Our floors look amazing.
We had a ugly unfinished basement with a furnace in the middle of the room. After speaking with multiple contractors we selected Dpenn construction. David was able to creat a floor plan to get that out of the way, now we have a beautiful basement (bedroom, washroom, and bathroom with a walk-in shower). David was easy to work with, honest with pricing and scope of work, and we feel like we got a great value out of the work that was done. Would highly recommend.
Best floor company in town

|Full name||Zeus Thunderfang|
|Family||Volteer Thunderfang (father)|
Floris Leafwing (Sister)
Harmonika Thunderfang (Sister)
Electroy Thunderfang (nephew)
|Civil status||1st class civilian|
Zeus Thunderfang is the Guardian of Electricity.
Personality & Character Edit
Before the Dark war III Edit
Very similar to Electroy. He was lazy and a joker. Zeus really tried to avoid fighting at all costs.
Dark War III & now Edit
Zeus doesn't care anymore. At all. He doesn't care who you are and he doesn't want to know. He hates meeting new people and wants to be left alone most of the time. When someone talks to him, he stares at them like they are invisible and there's a painting behind them on the wall. And he hates art as well so he's just looking through the person talking to him with a disgusted face.
He's not as cowardy as he used to be, he has become the complete opposite in fact. He's not afraid to hit a person stronger than him right in the face.
He keeps to himself most of the time and won't get invested in another's problems. He rarely does anything at all to help others.
Zeus doesn't take bad talk about him. Some guardians called him a 'failure guardian' for he has made so many blunders. He couldn't find his father, he couldn't fight with Poisonbeak, he can't even train his own apprentice. When he heard that he friendly reminded them that he doesn't take insults by writing it into their skin with his tailblade. Even through everything he does, Zeus is not that violent by nature, but he doesn't want people to think he has become soft or weak since his defeat.
Zeus old personality still roams deep inside of him. He has already been seen cracking a small, offensive joke again and he even pranked an innocent bystander by faking an accident, taking off his arm prostetic, pooring ketchup all over the old scar and screaming "ARG OH ANCESTORS WHAT HAVE YOU DONE. OH GODS THAT'S ALREADY THE 3TH FUCKING TIME NOT AGAIN." and like that he scared the living daylights out of the poor civilian and some others.
Skills & abilities Edit
Aside from the usual electric attacks on a high level, Zeus has found a way to put his metal protheses under electric energy. He especially uses it to charge the blade on his metal tail.
Before the Dark War III Edit
Zeus Thunderfang was born and raised in the eastern dragon temple. When Dark War II started, he was called to Warfang to defend the city with the army. He had not yet finished his training back then.
Zeus was quite a slow learner. Not because he didn't have enough power or skill, but because he was extremely lazy. And he also was a pain to tutor. Never paying attention and always sneaking out. He could always be seen cracking jokes, but learning? Not quite.
He wasn't an amazing addition to the Warfang defense in the second dark war. He avoided strong enemies in general and tried to stay mostly on the side lines in battles. Then again, he was still pretty young.
After the end of dark war II, he picked up his training again with his father. Zeus now had more knowledge of his element, but real one to one combat was still out of the question for him.
Dark War III Edit
And then dark war III started. Through the chaos, Volteer, Cyril and Terrador vanished. Zeus was deadset on finding his father and in a hurry he left Warfang. It didn't take long for darkers to catch up with him. He tried to avoid them, but there were too many. He was forced to fly back. But as he came close to Warfang again, he stood eye in eye with Poisonbeak.
And that's where it went from bad to worse for Zeus. He obtained extreme, deadly injuries in this 'fight'. It's hard to really call it a fight because Zeus just tried to run off. But Poisonbeak wouldn't let him. He breathed a burning acid breath all over Zeus' right side. As the poison started to eat away his skin the young guardian crashed into the ground. To make matters worse, he got bitten by the alpha after he was already down. He would have been killed right then and if there weren't two other guardians, Deserto (sand guardian) and Ceatus (water guardian) and fought Poisonbeak off. They brought him into the guardian castle as the poison had already started to paralize him and he couldn't breath anymore.
Curati (healing guardian) almost didn't want to start on Zeus' injuries anymore because he was pretty much a lost cause. His guardian title had saved him and she tried anyway.
But the wounds were truly cathastrophic. His left eye had been burned away by the acid, his left front and hind leg were burned so badly they had to be amputated. Half his tail had to be amputated too because of the burns.
Normally Poisonbeak's venom is always lethal and crystals are not enough to cure it. But healing dragons can. However, because he was brought in late, his right wing was permanently paralized.
Zeus barely survived the attack. And it took him years to rehabilitate and they considered taking away his guardian position because it was taking too long. He was actually lucky that his wing had not been fully hit by the acid blast and had only been paralized. Because wings are the only irreplaceable body part. Takanobu had never in his life been able to make a prostetic as advanced as a wing. But Zeus still had his, but paralized. They had to develop an entire new technology to make a prostetic like device so he could move his wing again. His tail and legs were also replaced by a "special edition" of prostetics.
His personality, however, was scarred in a way no technology could replace. His happy, jokingly nature vanished and he became drawn back and silent. Most other guardians do not dare to even get close to him now.
His apprentice became his nephew Electroy, who's even a more terrible learner than he was his age.
Volteer Thunderfang Edit
Zeus and his father got along quite well. They grew a bit distant from each other in the second dark war, but the training together the year after brought them closer once more. Zeus still feels guilty that he could not find his father. but he claims he got over it.
Zeus doesn't punish Electroy. He doesn't yell at him and isn't mean to him. And because of that, Electroy skips pretty much every training session. But when he DOES show up, he gets a hell of a catch up session that will most defineatly last until the next day. Electroy hates it and Zeus loves the fact that he does (payback) the guardians offered to take away Electroy's position and just chose an other apprentice, but Zeus said that doesn't want to meet some new kid and have to learn his name.
Zeus punched him in the face once and got away with it.
Cynder was one of the people Zeus got to know during his rehabillation. She was also rehabillating from her fight with the dark masters and they stayed at the same center for about a year. After that Cynder had healed enough to leave.
They became something-like-friends for a while and Zeus even got feelings for her. But both their emotionless personalities worked against that and he eventually forgot about Cynder after she left.
Zeus follows her orders but only because he has to. If he didn't she could kiss his tail end.
- A lot of people think Zeus has gone half deaf. But he usually simply ignores people;
- He gets along with half the guardians and hates the others with a passion;
- He says that even through all his failures, he has no regrets in life.

Surfer Dude was student of the day at his elementary school today, an honor that each student gets once during the academic year. They get to bring in their treasures from home and put them in a display case by the front entrance, so all of the other students can ooh and aah and make them feel like the Big Kid on Campus. This morning we carefully took the box full of his special stuff to school and arranged it neatly in the case, Surfer Dude hovering closely to make sure it was all done to his specification. When we were finished, he took one last look, gave me a hug, a kiss and an "I love you mama", and then flew up the stairs to his classroom to start his special day.
It didn't hit me until I was dismantling the display at the end of the day that this was my last go-round with this in elementary school. Surfer Dude is in sixth grade, and with right around four weeks of school left in the year, is already looking at Gumby's junior high with a proprietary eye. I've had at least one kid in elementary school since Sasquatch started in 1997, and it's a really disquieting thought to realize that we are just about at the end of an era. Time flies, all right, and when kids are involved it moves at warp speed. Sasquatch will be a high school senior next year- and the year after if his grades don't improve. How did that happen?
I'm not one of those moms who tearfully laments the baby days and wishes for a house full of toddlers again. With three boys five and under I barely got through the day the first time, and really don't have the inclination to do it again. But you can't escape the fact that my kids are growing up, and even though for the most part I'm okay with this, sometimes it feels more immediate than others.
When they were little my favorite part of the day was when they were bathed and powdered and cozily in their pajamas. There was genuine contentment in those times. Another day survived, fat little well-fed bellies tucked into terrycloth sleepers, a glass of chardonnay with my name on it. Everyone was present and accounted for, healthy and sound. I slept really well in those days, partly because I was chronically sleep deprived, but also because in about three minutes I could make the rounds and make sure all was well with my brood.
I remember the Christmas I was hugely pregnant with Sasquatch and my mom, the FX and I went to Alabama to spend the holiday with my mom's family. At one point my grandmother gazed around her house, looked at her two daughters and three grandchildren, and she sighed this big huge sigh of contentment. "I just love it," she said, "when you're all here and I know you're all safe." I knew jack about the maternal feeling then and thought she was overstating her case, but I get it now. Oh god, do I get it.
The younger boys are gone every other weekend and Sasquatch is rarely seen on any weekend. He comes home to touch base, raid the fridge and change clothes, but that's about it. It's very rare these days for all of us to be home to eat dinner together. Everyone has their own activities and plans, and my house for the most part resembles the airspace above LAX, with people coming and going at all times and in all directions. The nights when everyone is home and accounted for are few and far between, and I love every single one of them. I have a feeling they're going to become even more rare as the years go by.
I've been out of school for years, and yet I still think of Spring as the time of endings and Fall as the time of beginnings. Next Fall will be a doozy around here. And the Fall after that - the college Fall - well, I can't even go there. Not quite yet.
After all, I've still got four weeks of elementary school left.
Friday, April 24, 2009
Posted by the rotten correspondent at 12:02 AM

I wouldn't be asking this if I didn't have two boys and the baby on the way but can any of you tell me how long it took for your first pay from the military during Basic? I really appreciate it.
February 15, 2013 at 8:05 AM
I think I was a month in before I got my first check. Even with being married, I only got somewhere between $400-$600. They will take any money out of his first pay check to pay for all of his uniforms.
by cocorooFebruary 15, 2013 at 9:57 AM
It was about 3 weeks after he left.
by cocorooFebruary 15, 2013 at 9:58 AM
My son just finished AF Basic and it also took about 3 weeks, but his first check was almost nothing because of all the stuff he had to pay for for training.
This. They paycheck will be way smaller than you think.
it will take 4 -6 weeks for the pay to kick in. and even then it will not be the full pay, as he may have out of pocket costs for uniforms and items he needs to purchase.
February 16, 2013 at 2:44 AM
Thank you all! I just hate not knowing what to plan for. I kinda figured when the recruiters told us it would be the 15 they were trying to get us out of the office lol I was half expecting for it to be way later than we thought but Im glad you all informed me about the fact that it will be smaller. Thanks for helping this newbie out :)

Joy has been dancing since the age of 9. After one class, she was hooked and dance quickly became her passion. She continues to train and compete around the world to pursue her dreams of becoming a world renown dancer. Joy loves to teach in hopes of inspiring others to find passion in dance just as her coaches had done so for her.
Joy stays motivated and eager to learn everyday. She believes it was best said by Hans Bos; “While I dance I can not judge, I can not hate, I can not separate myself from life. I can only be joyful and whole. This is why I dance.”

We are a financially and emotionally stable family with two daughters, 1 and 2 years old. My DH has made it VERY clear since before we got married 7 years ago that he doesn't want more than two kids. After DD #2, he wanted to get a vasectomy. I was having trouble with the finality of that, so a few months ago I talked him into letting me get an IUD. I've been on the minipill (since I am still breastfeeding my March baby), and I have been waiting for AF to come since my doc wouldn't put in the IUD unless I was on my period. I've been waiting...and waiting...and AF didn't come. Took a test this morning, and I'm pregnant. I am really freaking out here. because I know that DH will be very upset. Just last week he said "The idea of having another kid makes me want to blow my brains out". He would never do that, just an example of his sentiment on the subject. In the past, he has mentioned that if I were to accidentally get pregnant again, he would want me to have an abortion. He knows I would be VERY against that idea. I plan on keeping this baby, but I know when I tell him this will cause damage to our marriage. I worry that this damage may not be able to be repaired. I am so upset and don't know what to do.
How to tell DH I'm pregnant when he doesn't want another baby --update with trigger 23
I'm so sorry that you are feeling like this. Hopefully once you tell him and it has a chance to sink in, he will change his mind and/or be accepting/happy.
Congrats on the pregnancy! When we got pregnant with #2 we were not "ready" for another one yet, but it all has worked out great! I knew so many people dealing with infertility and just kept telling my husband how lucky and blessed we were to be able to have kids, and so easily. It helped him come around! :)
I'm SHDH at your doctor. What the hell does having period have to do with placing an IUD???? And then they kept you on the mini pill past 6 months? I blame your doctor.
Anyway I hope you two can work through this. I'm sure your husband will love this child but he has every right to not be happy about this. I blame your doctor.
I should have been a little more clear, sorry. We used condoms for many months. I have had 1 period (last month) since being pregnant. I was only on the minipill for the last month (actually less) during the time between my initial appointment with the OB where we discussed the IUD and when I was supposed to get the IUD. They said to wait for AF.
vancouvermomtobe- my doctor said the same thing about getting IUD....had to be on period. When I finally had what I thought was a period and went in to get IUD, I was already pregnant. I also wondered why it was so neccessary to be on your period, but I see my dr is not the only one who says that. From what the nurse explained it had something to do with getting the best/proper placement, but can't remember all specifics now. It would seem if that was the case tho, more dr's would recommend this, and or more people would get pregnant with IUD in from not being properly placed, so still doesn't totally add up!
And I've had two IUDs placed way before I got my period, it is hugely common to place it after birth months and months before a period.
I got my IUD only 10 weeks PP, no sign of AF at that point. That's really strange that OB would make you wait. Congrats on the pregnancy! I'm sure your DH will be on board once the shock wears off :)

"I never hit ninth before, but it was pretty good today," Kemp said. "It's no big deal. It's like being a leadoff hitter. It's always nice to hit a home run."
The ninth slot suited Kemp well -- he went 2-for-3.
Kemp has homered in three of his past five road games. His two-run shot was his first home run this season that wasn't a solo shot or grand slam.
Kemp joked he didn't come through with a big hit in Friday's loss to the Rangers because of the ominous lightning.
"I wasn't scared [Saturday]," he said. "The lightning wasn't there."
His home run went an estimated 427 feet into the Dodgers' bullpen in deep left-center field. It was his third go-ahead home run of the season.
The Dodgers entered Saturday with two consecutive losses but avoided losing three straight for the first time all season.
"It shows how good we are," Kemp said.
Because of the broken lights, several players said it was difficult to pick up the ball in the outfield as well as at the plate.
A breaker shorted, shutting off a bank of lights along the first-base line. They had been out the entire night, but home plate umpire Charlie Reliford paused the game while they were being repaired. After a delay of one hour and 41 minutes, the game resumed.
It was something Dodgers manager Joe Torre remembered happening only once in his career. He was playing with the Cardinals in Montreal.
"I remember putting the bat on the plate and the lights went out," Torre said. "The pitcher was in the windup, so I just dove."
Once the lights came back, Juan Pierre led off the sixth inning with a single. He stole second and advanced to third on a throwing error by Rangers catcher Jarrod Saltalamacchia. Rafael Furcal grounded out to short to score Pierre for the first run of the game.
"Wolfie wasn't going back out there, and we wanted to get him the win," Pierre said of starter Randy Wolf. "It seemed to get the offense going."
Former Dodger Andruw Jones hit a home run in the bottom of the sixth to tie the score, 1-1. He said the shot wasn't any more important because it came against the club that released him in the offseason.
Wolf took the no-decision despite being on pace for one of his best pitching performances of the season. He allowed no runs and only three baserunners over five innings, throwing just 67 pitches.
"It was one of those things you can't control," Wolf said. "You just have to deal with it. I stayed ready in hopes they would fix it quickly, but after 30-45 minutes, you can't do that."
Despite a sterling 3.41 ERA in 2009, he only has three wins on the season.
"You usually have one of those guys who just doesn't get wins every season," Pierre said. "But he's a professional. We're hoping to get some wins for him."
Torre shared Pierre's frustration for his pitcher.
"Wolfie pitched a good game," he said. "He would've had the win if we held onto that lead."
This was just the third time in 14 starts Wolf had thrown fewer than six innings.
Scott Feldman started for the Rangers and matched Wolf zero for zero. He threw 57 pitches, 40 for strikes, over five innings.
The win improved the Dodgers to 18-13 on the road. They still have the best record in the Majors at 41-22.

Lil Nyne, born and raised in Cedar Park, is a rising music star who has accomplished a lot in his music career. In an interview, he shared some of his proudest accomplishments, including overcoming his nervousness on stage and bettering his performances, buying and building his own studio, learning the music business, and getting two record deal offers. For Lil Nyne, it’s not just about music; he has other passions that drive him, including anime, martial arts, and acting.
Lil Nyne’s passion for music started at a young age, as he was always singing since he was five years old. He recalls how his mother would ask him to sing “The Lord’s Prayer” for their church, and the positive reactions from the crowd gave him a sense of fulfillment. For him, the way people relate to his music is what makes him passionate the most.
Aside from music, Lil Nyne is also passionate about anime, with Dragon Ball Z being his favorite. He even writes his own mangas and is currently working on one. His love for martial arts also shines through, as he practices it in his spare time. Additionally, he has acted in two films, “Apple Of My Eye Miniseries” and “Will And Trust,” both of which can be found on YouTube. He worked closely with his team on “Apple Of My Eye,” even doing some writing for the project.
Growing up in Cedar Park was not easy, with limited options for children like Lil Nyne. But instead of falling into the traps of drugs and crime that plagued his community, he chose to pursue music. He started as a young boy singing in church and eventually developed his craft, leading him to where he is now.
When asked about his strength, Lil Nyne humbly attributes it to God. He recognizes that only through Him can he create, write, and do what he does. He takes no credit for his talents and remains grounded in his faith.
In conclusion, Lil Nyne is a rising music star with a passion for music, anime, martial arts, and acting. His journey is an inspiration to young people from underprivileged communities that they can pursue their passions and rise above their circumstances. With his humility and talent, Lil Nyne is poised to become a significant player in the music industry, and we cannot wait to see what he has in store for us.
Follow him on – https://www.instagram.com/lil_nyne/
Hear his music –
© 2023, AMMPRO. All rights reserved.

“The most distant participant ran the race at the Gardens of Versailles. The 2020 Coke 10K turned out to be a social media bonanza."
“Mona Lisa: When all of this first came down, I was with my son for spring break. We were at a baseball tournament that week. That's when the news first started hitting. We were getting back to the hotel room, and it was all over the news. Then a newspaper reporter from here in Corinth called me and said, 'What are y'all gonna do about the Coke 10K?' I said, 'I don't know, but we're gonna have a race. That's all I know.'
It was March and the 10K is always the first Saturday in May. Kenneth started it 39 years ago and it’s become so much more than a race. The 10K weekend is huge, with other events scheduled around it, involving so many organizations and businesses, basically our whole community. People’s grown kids even come home for it.
Kenneth: We often have three generations of families running together. It’s really something. I just never would have imagined this when I first started running in 1977 and when we did that first Coke 10K. As a matter of fact, one person said that her two favorite holidays are Christmas and Coke 10K Weekend.
Mona Lisa: So people were looking to us, wondering what we were going to do. We just knew we couldn't cancel with 38 years of history and a 40th anniversary next year. We recognized that we might not be able to do it in May like we always do, but we would do something.
Kenneth: Registration had been open since November and as of March, 1000 people already had paid and signed up. So we had to formulate what we were going to do. At that time, some people were canceling races, some were claiming they were going to have them, and some said they were going to go virtual. In late May, the Boston Marathon said it was going virtual, so that option became a much bigger thing across the country.
Mona Lisa: Run Sign Up, the company that we do our registrations through, held a virtual symposium in June for all the races they do. They gave us the how-to’s of doing virtual because, you know, it’s so new. I'm very grateful that we switched to them several years ago because they really led us through a tough time.
Kenneth: In July, we announced we were going to have a virtual race, not an in-person race. We offered refunds to anyone who didn’t want to do it virtually and we only lost 11 percent. Then we started advertising the virtual race and runners from around the country, even outside the country, signed up. We had about 30 or 40 states represented. We ended up with 1250 runners.
People had a week to run it in and they could run it anywhere they wanted to. And to show their friends that they had done it, they took photos along the way and posted them on Facebook and Twitter and Instagram and so forth. The most distant participant ran the race at the Gardens of Versailles. The 2020 Coke 10K turned out to be a social media bonanza, exposing many non-runners to our race.
Next year, 2021, is the 40th Anniversary of the Coke 10K. While we definitely hope it will be in person, we do still plan to offer a virtual component.
Mona Lisa: Yes, because people who could never come to Corinth did it this year and enjoyed it and loved all the bling they received for running the race. We certainly want to continue to include them.”
-- Kenneth and Mona Lisa, Corinth Coke 10K (October 2020).

I don't want to sell my wheels right now, as my car kinda needs them, but I am getting the impression that their is some demand for them. I was researching how much a set of 03 si (friends) wheels were worth when I saw a pretty crappy painted set of crx si wheels that sold for $200 on ebay. Was this the result of the seller's buddy bidding on them or are they really worth that much? I have a set of crx si wheels that are really nice (but no caps) that I have been using with my snow tires and I have a set of civic si rims with caps but they need to be refinished. I don't want to sell them but I would make some arrangements for spring if they really are worth something. Thanks for any input.

composes, sings, and writes the words for all the Bakabu songs.
And then, on top of that, he plays most of the instruments too. Can you believe it? It’s true!
Naturally, he needs some help. That’s why I stop by his studio sometimes.
Earworms can be very helpful there.
Manfred was born in 1967 and lives in Vienna, which is about as big as Tulln … or, well … perhaps a bit bigger.

I saw the add Oasis had in the Valu pak and called them. Had an immediate response and site visit. Laid out all plans and w/in 24 hours had first esitmate. Estimate was clear and detailed. Work was completed less than 3 weeks after first contact. From salesman, craftsman, etc...all very professional and had sincere interest in my project. They won't treat you like your just another project. Their word is their word. Appreciate that in this market. I would welcome any one who has a question about their product.

- Tony Pawson 1921-2012
Former Kent batsman Tony Pawson dies
The former Kent batsman Tony Pawson, who became the Observer cricket correspondent, has died at the age of 91.
Pawson played 69 first-class matches, mostly for Kent and Oxford University, scoring seven hundreds as he made 3807 runs at 37.32. He was Kent's oldest surviving capped player.
As a 15-year-old, in 1937, he scored 237 at Lord's when playing for a Lord's XI against a CF Tufnell's XI and in 1947 he represented MCC against the South Africans playing in a team alongside Denis Compton
Cricket was not the only sport where he made his name. He won a blue at Oxford, represented England at football and at the 1948 London Olympics as well as playing two football league matches for Charlton Athletic. In 1982 he was a member of the England fly fishing team that won the World Championship and in 1988 was awarded on OBE for services to angling.
Kent's honorary curator, David Robertson, said: "Tony Pawson enjoyed his cricket, and set out to make sure spectators shared that enjoyment. I have many happy boyhood memories of his batting and fielding at Canterbury. His running between the wickets, especially with Godfrey Evans as his partner, was always an eagerly awaited feature of the game."
Jamie Clifford, the Kent chief executive, added: "The club is saddened to learn news of Tony Pawson's passing and our thoughts are with his family and friends. Tony made a great contribution to Kent Cricket and many of our members have fond memories of watching him play at the St Lawrence Ground."
During his time as a cricket correspondent he was also chairman of the Cricket Writers' Club in 1980 and 1981.

An artwork by Natan Dawit a deaf young artist. His passion is painting and he hopes to be a great artist one day. The artwork is about a flower pot that was gifted to Natan on one of his birthdays. Since then, he planted a flower in it and on every birthday, the flower vase reminds him of his friend who gifted it to him.
By purchasing this artwork, 70% of the price you pay, supports the education of children, as well as 30%, enables us to facilitate our programs.

He is said to have been born at Craig-y-gath, Llanfihangel-yng-Ngwynfa, Montgomeryshire, in 1709. He was a sawyer by trade but spent the last thirty years of his life wandering from fair to fair singing 'carols' of his own making. He used to produce a new May 'carol' every year and this, which he started singing in April, recounted the most remarkable occurrences of the previous year. He attended the smaller eisteddfodau and some of his englynion are to be found in the almanacs, but very little of his work was printed. His muse was slow and laboured, and he could not compete with Thomas Edwards (Twm o'r Nant) in flyting. He was an unsophisticated little man who believed that, because he had been born the year Huw Morys died, Morys's mantle had descended upon him. It is clear from his englynion published in Gwilym Howell's Almanac, 1774, that he disliked Methodists and Dissenters.
He is said to have died in dire poverty at Llanfyllin, at the age of 90. He was buried in Llanfihangel-yng-Ngwynfa churchyard 15 November 1800.
Published date: 1959
Article Copyright: http://rightsstatements.org/page/InC/1.0/

Madamdiva007 Posted September 21, 2011 Share Posted September 21, 2011 Hey guys, I would really appreciate any and all advice I can get. Lately, I have been feeling like my BF and I have been growing apart and I don't know what I can do to get us back on track. I honestly think a lot of it is just me projecting, I think he feels like everything is perfectly fine between us. But for some reason I just feel this "distance" between us. We have had times like this in the past, and things have always gotten better, we've become very close again. So I'm wondering if maybe we are just going through our "off" time again, and things will go back to normal sometime soon. I know people in relationships have a tendency to grow apart and become very close throughout the course of the relationship and that that is normal. So maybe this is all just me? I'm also wondering how I can regain some control in the relationship again. I don't mean control in a sense of me running everything, but lately I feel like everything is on his terms, and everything I do in the relationship is for him, and based on what he wants. I hope what I'm trying to say makes sense... I'll try to elaborate if it doesn't. Thanks in advance you guys! Link to comment
This topic is now archived and is closed to further replies.

Father’s Day 2019
Dad…traveled coast-to-coast playing trombone in double-breasted suits like this one. I wonder if he had any idea where his future would take him or who he would become. Ah, but he never seemed to sweat it. My siblings and I were barely twinkles in his eye at this time, as I don’t think he had even met my mom, yet. But he stayed the course, finished college, married, joined the Air Force, had me (and two more) went to grad school on the GI Bill and became a music professor, studio musician, artist, photographer, graphic designer, worship leader, husband…father. Never owned a home, never drove a “nice” car, never had money and never worried about it.
OK, he WAS a bit of a perfectionist and didn’t accept anything second rate from amongst ANY of his efforts from any of these areas…and he expected you to do the same. He always had a keen insight for taking just about any creative effort up another notch. Sometimes it drove me nuts, but he was usually right. First efforts always have flaws and weaknesses, but are required steps before you can have the excellence from 2nd, 3rd, or 4th round improvements.
That said…I remember the first time he told me my photos were good…the first time he doubled over laughing at a story I told (he never laughed at my dumb jokes as a kid)…and that time he said there was something good about my writing and I needed to write more. In fact, that was one of the last things I remember him saying to me. Dad, pushed himself hard to do his best, because he knew he was doing it for something much bigger than himself, but I’m pretty sure he never lost hardly any sleep worrying about his efforts. The man could relax anywhere.
Right before he died, my mom said he looked at her, out of the blue, and said, “I’m happy with the way God made me.” That’s probably one of the best mindsets a father—or any of us—can embrace. Sometimes the very things we supposedly lack, are actually pointing us to what makes us truly rich.
Where would I be without him? Sheesh, I wonder…
Happy Father’s Day, Dad…
Posted in: Dads and Fathers, Family, Memories

Total loan: $2,300
Isfara, Sughd Province, Tajikistan / Agriculture
Flag of Tajikistan
Malik's loan finished fundraising,
but these similar borrowers just need a little more help to reach their goals!
A loan helped to purchase calves.
Malik buys, raises and resells cattle. He is a middle-aged man. He was born in a village in Isfara. He is married and has three children. His wife works at a local farm. His oldest son is working abroad in Russia. His youngest is still in school, but always helps his parents with household work. Malik has been working with Arvand for over three years. When he first approached the Arvand organization, he only had one cow. After receiving a loan, he purchased another cow, a bull, and 10 sheep and goats. Thanks to Arvand, he significantly grew his business and improved his living conditions. Now, Malik wants to purchase calves, raise them until winter, and sell them for a profit. Since he does not have sufficient cash on hand, Malik once again approached Arvand. Malik has high hopes for recurring help from Arvand and offers thanks in advance for their support.

Enjoying a nice relaxing evening of pizza and beer with some shows, my boyfriend was playing on the computer and I grew bored sitting by myself on the couch. Feeling a tad tipsy, I wandered over to him and started gently rubbing on his shoulders. I enjoy feeling his broad, muscled shoulders beneath my hands and ensure to knead just the way he likes it with my thumbs. I moved my focus area up and played with the base of his hairline teasing ever so lightly, but no response. He was too focused on some game. I decide to change tactics and start kissing him at the collar of his shirt and work my up his neck finishing with easy nibbles along his jaw line and right ear. Still nothing…
“Hm, this is going to call for more drastic measures,” I thought to myself.
Moving to the other side of the computer desk, I began undressing, not that I was wearing that much in the first place. I slowly unbuttoned my black silk blouse, taking care with each one in exaggerated motions. I left it hanging completely unbuttoned to display my ample cleavage as there was no bra to begin with. I turned to face the wall as I start wiggling out of my purple velvet mini skirt. Once it was off, I enjoyed displaying my tight ass in the little black thong I chose today. As I rotated back around, I slipped off my top so that he has full view of my lovely body on display just for him. My long hair swishing around to settle just barely displaying my nipples and the ends dancing along my hip bones. When I get a nice once over, I know I’ve finally gotten his attention. But he kept playing the game, not actually getting up to come over to me.
“Fine, I will just take matters into my own hands,” I decided as I crawled over to the computer desk.
I love how high his desk is because I can easily fit sitting beneath it. Thankfully, he was wearing his favorite plaid pajama bottoms. The button for the flap in front has long since been lost and he wears them commando all the time. Slipping my hands under the legs of his pants, I gently massaged his calves, running my fingernails lightly along his shins. Raising my hands, I applied pressure up his thighs headed towards my final destination. I took full advantage of the missing button on the fly of his pants, I maneuvered his cock to peek through the opening.
As much as he has pretended to ignore me, I was happy to see his cock hard and straining to be let fully out. I adjusted his pajamas and sure enough, ataköy anal yapan escort his penis springs upwards dripping with pre-cum. I licked up that glistening drop that was so very tantalizing, enjoying the slightly salty taste on the tip of my tongue. Using my left hand, I started feeling his balls and massaging them lightly. My right began stroking his hard, long shaft with just the tips of my fingers, loving the twitches and jumps his cock made at my touch. When I had finally had enough of teasing us both, I leaned forward and took the head of his cock in my mouth. I do so love sucking dick, I could feel my panties starting to get increasingly wet as I ran my tongue over him. I began to move along him with a set rhythm that I knew would please him, manipulating my tongue to make circles all along his length.
I realized that I had gained his full attention as I no longer heard the sounds of the keyboard. I took a quick glance and was pleased to see his hands holding on to the chair’s arms with his head laid back, eyes closed, enjoying his little cum slut giving him a blowjob. I increased my speed and was now fully bobbing up and down on his cock with my hand grasping and massaging everywhere my mouth was not. After a few more minutes, he reached down to gain handholds of my hair and shove the full length of him into my mouth as he exploded his hot cum down my throat. I love to hear the guttural noises and groans he makes during his orgasm; it’s enough to have caused my little thong to be nearly dripping in anticipation. I laid my head on his inner thigh as he stroked my hair, murmuring happy noises.
Once he recovered, he stood me up and took me back over to the couch. Bending down, he slipped off my panties enjoying the wetness he found there. He had me sit on the actual back of the couch with my legs spread wide and my head resting against the wall. Positioning himself in front of me, he pulled my thighs over his shoulders locking him into place right by my bared cunt. He took a little time to plant kisses along my inner thighs but then dove right into my pussy, we’ve been together long enough for him to know how ready I was. Licking up some of the juices around my clit, he moaned with pleasure as he tasted me. Nipping lightly at my hips, he began hovering and just breathing onto my pussy that’s quivering in anticipation. I began to squirm because he was driving me crazy ataköy bdsm escort with the waiting and he knew it. At last, he began to suckle my clit applying just the perfect amount of pressure. I finally relaxed and lowered my head to allow myself to be caught up in the whirlwind of pleasure between my legs. He briefly stopped to get two fingers wet before slipping them into my dripping cunt. His fingers are thick but also long and hit me in just the right spot. He began finger fucking me in earnest while continuing to suck and worship my clit with his tongue. I felt the pressure building and tightened my legs forcing him in closer. Finally my orgasm crested like a strong wave crashing onto shore, and I let out a yell as I squirt my hot juices into his mouth, on his face and the couch.
I stayed in the same position, soaking in the afterglow of such a powerful orgasm. He stood up and started running his cock along my cheek which is already hard again, he loves it when I squirt for him especially up close. I gave it a kiss and a lick as he brought it across my mouth, when I suddenly realized we had an audience. His roommate was standing in the doorway in just his boxers also sporting quite the hard-on. I immediately flushed with embarrassment because I didn’t know how long he had been there. I tried to maneuver my hair to cover my breasts and close my legs to no longer display my swollen and dripping pussy, but my boyfriend stopped me.
“You remember my roommate darling?,” he asked.
Not trusting myself to be able to speak, I simply nodded once.
“Well, he and I share everything and we were thinking that we’d like to share you today. How about that? Do you want to have another cock in your mouth while I fuck that tight little cunt of yours?”
I stared at him wide eyed, we’d never talked about something like this before, let alone in front of someone else.
Not wanting to embarrass anyone or seem like a bad sport, I said “Sure, I think I can take both of you.”
His roommate responded saying, “Ooh I like this one, trying to show so much bravado.”
Chuckling, my boyfriend pulled me down off my perch and positioned me on my hands and knees, my elbows able to stay on the arm rest, putting me at the right level for his roommate.
“Well, there’s no need to keep waiting, let’s fuck my good little whore,” he said as he spanked my ass.
His roommate dropped ataköy elit escort his boxers still in the doorway before walking towards me, jerking his mostly hard cock along the way. I had to admit to myself that I was actually really excited for this. I felt my boyfriend getting up on the couch behind me as he kneaded my ass, giving me little smacks along the way. His cock started to rub along my ass crack teasing me because he knew where I wanted it, buried nice and deep in my pussy.
The roommate had been enjoying all of our little shows that evening and seemed so ready to participate in the next session. When he judged his cock hard enough for me, he didn’t give me a chance to do any of the foreplay I did earlier; I got his cock shoved into my mouth and immediately began sucking. I could vaguely hear my boyfriend chuckling again about his little blowjob loving slut before suddenly having his cock thrust deep into my tight, wet pussy. I couldn’t help but moan with pleasure at finally having a warm cock in mouth as well as in my pussy. It was obvious I’m was not the first girl they’ve done this to as they began to move in tandem, one cock withdrawing while the other moving back inside me. It didn’t take more than a couple minutes for me to cum again, screaming around one cock while my juices flow over the other with my pussy squeezing and fluttering about it.
They picked up speed, still stayed in tandem, one fucked my mouth as the other fucked my pussy even more turned on by my orgasm. My boyfriend reached down and started rubbing my clit,
“Cum again whore, cum with someone else’s cock buried deep in your throat while you get fucked by me,” my boyfriend ordered me.
The three points of arousal were just too much for me and I squirted again as I came harder than I had before. This was too much for his roommate as well, as he pulled his cock out fast, grabbed my hair and tilted my head back with his left hand, as he jerked off using my saliva and his pre-cum as lube. He orgasmed quickly after that, and he sprayed my face with hot fuck juice and I felt the cum dripping down my cheeks. My boyfriend slipped his cock out of my pussy before he slid it into my ass; he took slow, even strides as to not cause my any discomfort. Once he got fully buried into my ass, he fell back into the previous rhythm and I moved an arm down to rub my own clit. I still had cum on my face as I was getting fucked in the ass, while his roommate stayed to watch the finish. It didn’t take very long of being deep in my ass for my boyfriend to cum, he filled me up so completely. When he had finally pulled out, I felt the cum dripping out of my ass onto my thighs.
When his roommate walked out, he made sure to comment “Let me know the next time she’s over, that was fun.”

Amanda Simoneau pins Greg Mattingly in open divisionby Krista Wells (no login)
I saw the match between Greg Mattingly and Amanda Simoneau. I've seen Greg wrestle at other open tourneys in Maine and he usually does pretty good. I saw him pin a girl at the Scarborough tourney last year in the 125 lb weight class. Well to clue you all in on the match: Greg basically took control early and was throwing her around like a rag doll. She was a lot shorter and lighter. He almost turned her for the pin in the first period, but she was so flexible, she was able to belly down. In the start of the 2nd period, he chose up position and he was leading 4-0. When the whistle blew Amanda tried sitting out then kind of spun around and hooked Greg's left leg at the knee joint. She pulled hard on that knee and Greg fell on his left side while he was trying to cradle her...but she kept leaning into him and pulling up on his knee, well, before ya knew it, she kind of took her leg and kicked it back and made Greg lose grip of the attempted cradle..and suddenly he found himself on his butt with his legs outstretched and she was sprawled across him. She v-legged and put pressure down on him so he couldn't turn. He basically panicked and she never let go of his knee. She simply hooked his head and ran the cradle to perfection. Once she trapped him in that he was pretty much caught. She had the cradle in tight because she's so little. But Greg was a respectable wrestler who had much more muscle than Amanda. It was a good win for her against a more experienced, elder wrestler. Way to go Amanda! I cheered for you that day! I think it's great you wrestled both high school and open divisions and I salute Maine wrestling for supporting high school kids to wrestle in both divisions as well.
I have a feeling Greg will back at Scarborough's tourney next year, looking for a rematch against Simoneau...lol. If any anyone near 125-140 wanna challenge/exhibition him, I have his e-mail address from the bout sheet that day.
Posted on Oct 19, 2005, 8:01 AM
from IP address 126.96.36.199
Respond to this message
Return to IndexResponses

YOUNG Andy Holdsworth is fully focused on a winning finale to his first League Football season and on rewarding a lifetime of family support.
The 20-year-old was all set to extend his run of senior appearances under Peter Jackson against Mansfield at the McAlpine today.
And he will complete 40 first-team games when Town round off the Third Division campaign against Cheltenham at Whaddon Road next Saturday.
That's a target he could only have dreamed about when he was thrown into a string of pre-season friendlies, but he now seems one of several Academy products destined for bigger things.
"The gaffer has given me a lot of support and I'm delighted to have played so many games," said the Pontefract-based right wing-back.
"My family and friends are really pleased as well and if we can finish off with a couple of wins to gain promotion, that will be great."
Holdsworth's parents, Judy and Ted, his grandfather Jack and a posse of friends rarely miss Town matches.
"My family took me all over the place to play football with Ryhill when I was younger and they still come to all the games now," he said.
"I just hope we can go up because that would be a brilliant way to finish my first season in the team.
"Obviously I want to keep going now that I've had a long run at League level and, if we can make the most of this big week coming up, that will be superb."
Holdsworth revelled in the atmosphere created by a crowd of 23,495 at Hull and wants to be part of what could potentially be a derby-filled Second Division fixture list next season.
"The atmosphere last week was unbelievable," he said.
"I turned round to tell David Mirfin to cover behind at one stage and he just didn't hear me. I had to go up at the next break in play and tell him to be on his toes . It was amazing."

What is so touching is that during the rescue, just when he was very close to being rescued, Raju began to cry tears of joy. Raju was abused and tortured by his owners for much of his life. Something that many elephants in captivity experience during their lives. Tears rolled down the face of Raju as it sunk in that 50 years of captivity had come to an end.Raju was in chains 24 hours a day, an act of intolerable cruelty. The team were astounded to see tears roll down his face during the rescue. It was incredibly emotional. We knew in our hearts he realized he was being freed.
Raju’s owners were not willing to give up Raju regardless of how many were aware of the torturous conditions he was in. Finally rescuers had enough and took action. They needed to perform a sneak attack rescue at night to make it happen.
Why Do We Treat Animals The Way We Do?
What does this say about what animals feel? This certainly isn’t the first time animals have reacted in unbelievable ways when being released from captivity. In one instance, cows were set free after being in captivity for years and their reaction was nothing short of amazing.Just recently, mainstream science fully recognized that animals are conscious beings. This is a great step in pushing ideas that get us thinking more about why we treat animals the way we do and how much suffering we put them through. Whether it is factory farming, circus acts or keeping animals in unnecessary captivity, we do so much to animals that is barbaric and completely unnecessary given what we have available to us today. What will it take for us to stop?
It is inspiring though to see stories like this where animals are finally being treated how we all know they should deep down inside.

- Shopping Bag ( 0 items )
The door of the carriage jerked open and a cloaked figure on horseback leaned forward into the coach and pointed a pistol at the man lounging inside. "Stand and deliver!" he called in a low voice.
The inmate of the carriage, a dark, elegantly attired gentleman, raised his quizzing glass and, in an unhurried fashion, proceeded to inspect the highwayman through it. Eventually, he lowered the glass and said softly, "I think not."
"Stand and deliver!" the highwayman said again, his blue eyes narrowing behind the slits of his mask. "Your money or your life!"
Leaning back into his seat, the dark gentleman closed his eyes. After a while he said in a bored voice, "My guarded entourage follows me--about a mile behind. They will come upon us at any moment. I suggest you depart forthwith and play your childish games on someone else."
"I play no games with you, sir, and you are foolish to challenge me," the highwayman declared. "Stand and deliver, I say!"
The dark gentleman sighed wearily. "My dear fellow--you may think it great sport to masquerade as a highwayman on the King's highway, but you have surely had your fun. Take that beast back to your father's stable forthwith--or you may leave me with no choice but to unmask you."
The highwayman laughed scornfully. "You cannot unmask me, sir. It is I who am pointing this pistol at you."
Quick as a flash the dark gentleman moved, knocking the pistol out of the thief's hand. Levelling his own pistol, which he had kept hidden beside him, at the other man, he drawled, "I think you find yourself mistaken."
The hands of the highwayman shook a little, and his blue eyes widened as he stared into the barrel of thegun. He looked indecisively from the gentleman in the carriage to his companion who was holding a pistol to the head of the coachman. Making a sudden decision, he jerked the reins of his horse, and wheeling the animal around, shouted a word to his accomplice, before galloping away. The second highwayman followed him soon after.
The thieves rode hell for leather across the countryside, saying not a word to one another as they sped away. Finally, they came to a secluded copse where they drew their horses up and silently dismounted beside an open carriage which had been carefully concealed amongst the bushes. The leader of the two picked up a bundle from the carriage and slipped away behind some trees, while his accomplice focussed his attention on reharnessing the horses to the carriage.
He went about his task efficiently, muttering to himself as he put the horses in their traces. Finally, raising his voice, he said sharply, "Our escape this time was too narrow, Miss Alexandra. When I saw the barrel of that gun in your face ... Your brother would have my blood if he knew that I aid you in such foolishness."
"It is not foolishness, Ben, and we managed to escape, so don't fuss. Is my appearance tidy enough?"
Ben scowled as he looked across at the young lady emerging from behind the bushes. "Aye, Miss, you look tidy enough. But that wouldn't be the case if a blood stain happened to be marking them pretty clothes of yours."
Alexandra shook her head. "You concern yourself far too much over me, Ben. I admit that today our plans went slightly awry, but Lady Luck has smiled on us--as she always does," she said, laughing up at him.
Ben continued to frown. "Well, in my experience, Miss, it don't pay to tempt fate. We'll be mad to continue this for much longer."
Alexandra opened her eyes very wide. "Continue what, Ben?" she said innocently, as he helped her up into the carriage. "I am a perfectly respectable lady enjoying a perfectly respectable drive in the countryside."
Ben made no reply, merely grunting as he lowered himself into the driver's seat. He clicked to the horses, and set them in motion along the deserted country lane that led onto the main road a few miles further on.
Alexandra settled herself back against the seat, grateful for the swaying motion of the carriage, which enabled her to relax a little. Although she had refused to admit it to her henchman, she was a trifle unnerved by how close they had come to discovery. And when she thought of all that discovery would mean for them, a cold shiver ran through her body. Absently rubbing her hands over her arms, she brooded over the gentleman who had just so successfully turned the tables on her. He had had the audacity to appear almost bored by the attack, not exhibiting any of the signs of fear and anxiety she had come to expect to see in the countenances of the people she waylaid.
Perhaps he had recognised the quality of the animal she was mounted on, she reflected, and had presumed that she was a young gentleman playing at being a highwayman on the road. Alexandra frowned as she considered this. It was a well-known fact that many of the horses used by highway robbers were stolen from the stables of the nobility and gentry. A good, speedy beast was essential for a highwayman's survival, and the best place, of course, to find a horse of good stamp and quality was in a gentleman's stable. Her own mount could very easily have been stolen from such a stable. Yet, for some reason, the man in the carriage had told her to take her horse back to her father's stable, which intimated that he must have thought her to be the son of a gentleman. Something, therefore, in her appearance must have alerted him to the fact that she was not a member of the lower classes, she realised anxiously, but she could not imagine what it could be. She had been convinced that her disguise was impenetrable.
The sound of horses coming up behind them caused her to abandon this line of thought and sit up abruptly. They had joined the main road again by this time and, with a sinking feeling in her stomach, Alexandra turned around to see the coach of the gentleman she had just waylaid coming up behind them. In a low, urgent voice she said to her groom, "The horses, Ben! He may recognise them!"
Ben glanced at her. "Nay, Miss. That he won't. They're in their traces and I disguised their special markings for the attack. Besides, he'll never suspect a lady of being a highwayman, so he oughtn't look at your horses with a leery eye."
"Yes, of course, Ben," Alexandra murmured. She bit her lip. "Yet--the impression I received of him was that he is an uncommonly perceptive gentleman. I had hoped that he would have been well on his way by now..." Shaking her head, as if to clear her thoughts, she straightened her back as the carriage came up beside them, praying that it would continue on its way without stopping.
Her prayers were not answered, however, and her heart began to beat faster as the coach drew up alongside them, and the coachman indicated that he wished for them to stop. Ben halted their carriage, and Alexandra looked expectantly at the other vehicle as a groom jumped down from his perch to open the door of the coach and let down the step, holding her breath in anticipation as the dark gentleman emerged from his coach. He stood immobile in the road for a while, before bowing politely in her direction. Alexandra inclined her head in turn as she observed him. He was very tall, she realised, being well over six feet, and his shoulders were the broadest she had ever seen on a man, filling out his well-cut jacket impressively. Her eyes drifted up to study his features more closely, noting the firmness of his jaw and chin, and the uncompromising line of his mouth. All in all, it was a thoroughly disagreeable face, she decided resentfully.
Unaware that she had been staring at the man for a considerable length of time, Alexandra was startled when he said, "Do I pass muster, ma'am?"
Her eyes flew to meet his and, perturbed at the mocking gleam she saw in their green depths, she said the first thing that came into her head. "I am afraid, sir, that I have never considered dark-haired men to be particularly attractive."
The gentleman's eyes narrowed at this daring remark and he surveyed the woman in the carriage with some interest. She was uncommonly beautiful, he reflected. Creamy skin and sapphire eyes provided a striking contrast to the copper-red curls tumbling around her sloping shoulders, and the proud cast of her face indicated that she was no country bumpkin. Her features were too fine for her to fit that description, he thought, and her temperament far too fiery. He laughed softly as his eyes came to rest on her bright hair again, and he said, "For my part, I have often found red-headed young ladies to be uncommonly impertinent."
Alexandra raised her brows haughtily. "I am returning home, sir, and find it disconcerting that I have been asked to stop my carriage by a complete stranger. Indeed, given the fact that we find ourselves alone on a deserted country road, I consider my natural wariness towards you, not impertinent, but imperative!"
The dark gentleman smiled. "Forgive me, ma'am," he said, bowing again, "I have been remiss in introducing myself. Robert Chanderly, at your service."
Alexandra nodded her head in a regal fashion, and said in a clear voice, "I am Miss Alexandra Grantham of Grantham Place, daughter of the late Sir Henry Grantham."
"I am honoured to make your acquaintance, Miss Grantham," Mr Chanderly replied. "And now I will allay your very natural feminine fears at being asked to stop your carriage by a stranger." He paused, before continuing in a brisker voice, "A few miles back I was accosted by two highwaymen. Not very skilled thieves, admittedly, yet highwaymen nonetheless. They could still be very close to the road, and may attempt to strike again. When I saw your carriage up ahead, I indicated to my coachman that we should stop in order to warn you of the danger."
"Highwaymen, sir?" Alexandra said, her eyes widening. "Here? How shocking! Of course I have heard talk that there are two highwaymen at work in this area, but to be so close to the scene of a crime..." She cleared her voice, before asking diffidently, "But what do you mean by saying that they were not--er--skilled?"
Mr Chanderly shrugged. "They made a mull of holding me up. Somehow I don't think that they are the most experienced of thieves. More than likely they're a couple of youths out for a lark."
"Oh," Alexandra said, trying to hide her indignation at this disparagement of her recent performance.
"Nevertheless, it doesn't pay to take risks. I may be underestimating the danger of these scoundrels, and you--a lady on your own--could prove to be a far easier target for them. May I escort you home?"
Alexandra, who had no desire to spend any more time with the man she had so recently held up, shook her head and murmured, "Thank you, Mr Chanderly, but no. Ben is perfectly able to protect me. He carries a pistol with him, you know."
Mr Chanderly frowned. "Nevertheless, I think I will escort you home."
Alexandra tried to hide her annoyance at this highhanded dismissal of her decision, but her cheeks were flushed as she said, "Indeed, sir, I am not afraid to continue on my own."
"Your intrepidity does you credit, ma'am. I had expected you to succumb to an attack of the vapours upon hearing about my experience."
"Not all ladies are weaklings," Alexandra said smartly. "I have never suffered from an attack of the vapours in my life!"
"You are to be admired then, Miss Grantham," Mr Chanderly murmured, his eyes gleaming. He turned to speak to Ben. "Lead the way home, Ben. I will follow behind you to ensure your mistress's safety."
"Aye, sir," Ben nodded, responding automatically to the authority in the other man's voice.
Alexandra drew in her breath. "Sir, I have made my wishes quite plain to you. I will continue on my own!"
Mr Chanderly regarded her impassively. "You have no choice in the matter, Miss Grantham. I will escort you home."
Before she could utter another word of protest, he had turned away and climbed back into his coach.
Alexandra sank back against the squabs of the carriage, quite put out. What a nerve the man had to impose his will on her in this manner, she thought angrily. She had a strong mind to order Ben to take the longest route home, merely to inconvenience the imperious Mr Chanderly. But, after reflecting on this delightful idea for a moment, she reluctantly put it aside, realising that the less time she spent in the vicinity of this perceptive man, the better it would be for her.
She only hoped that he had not looked too closely at her horses. Even though Ben had disguised their distinctive markings, it was impossible to hide the general conformation of an animal from the experienced eye, and she knew that many highwaymen in the past had been betrayed by their horses. She had read somewhere that even the notorious Dick Turpin had once narrowly escaped the arm of the law when a bay mare he had stolen had been recognised resting in a stable.
Alexandra was well aware how dangerous her criminal activities were, and how easily she too could be discovered, yet she felt bound to continue them, as long as it was reasonably safe, for the sake of the people depending her. She sighed as she considered the plight of the peasants in the district, who were trying to eke out a miserable existence for themselves and their families.
She had first come up with the idea of playing at being Robin Hood when the Vicar's wife, Mrs Simpson, had informed her of the terrible conditions that many of their parishioners lived in. Alexandra had visited a few of the families Mrs Simpson had told her about, and had been shocked by what she had seen. The people she had spoken to seemed to be living in utter penury, and the misery she had seen on their faces had touched a compassionate chord inside her. On a wave of righteous indignation, Alexandra had sought out her brother. John was one of the few landowners in the district who looked after his tenants well, and she told him what she had discovered. Although he had been angered by her revelations, he had not approved of her stated desire to confront the heartless landowners who were their neighbours, telling her firmly that she would do more harm than good if she did so because they would not take kindly to a young woman reprimanding them. Alexandra had reluctantly agreed not to approach them, but she had felt the need to do something of a practical nature to help the poor families, and so had suggested to John that he sponsor food baskets that could be delivered to the poor. To her joy, he had been happy to oblige her in this. But Alexandra, on her daily visits, had quickly come to realise that the peasants needed more than just food to survive. They also needed other material provisions.
If it had not been for the fact that her money was tied up in a trust fund until she either married or attained her majority, Alexandra would have helped the poor from her own pocket. But her money was not hers to do with as she willed and, after thinking the problem over carefully, Alexandra had decided that justice would be best served if the funds the workers needed, but weren't receiving, could be obtained from the very people who were failing in their responsibility to look after them--the privileged classes.
She had enlisted the help of her faithful groom, Ben, and so had begun their series of daring highway robberies. The two of them had become notorious in the region, inspiring fear into the hearts of all the local gentry and nobility. Well nearly all of them, Alexandra revised with a slight grimace as she thought of Mr Chanderly. He hadn't looked afraid or concerned, only rather bored!
She came out of her reverie as they reached the gates of her home. Instructing Ben to halt, Alexandra waited for Mr Chanderly's coach to draw up alongside them, aware that it was incumbent upon her to thank him for escorting her home and make him an offer of some refreshment. The dictums of propriety required it, however much she wished she could ignore them in this instance.
When Mr Chanderly had descended from his coach once again, she formally thanked him for his assistance.
"The pleasure was all mine, Miss Grantham," he said politely, although Alexandra had the uncomfortable feeling that he was amused at her belated attempts at civility.
"May I offer you some refreshment, sir, before you continue on your journey?" she asked, determined not to be betrayed into incivility again, realising that it only set her at a disadvantage in the face of Mr Chanderly's faultless good manners.
"Thank you, but no, Miss Grantham. I must continue on my way."
Alexandra smiled sweetly. "As you wish, Mr Chanderly. Good afternoon."
"Good afternoon, ma'am," Mr Chanderly said, bowing. He made to move away, then turned back to say softly, "I hope we meet again sometime, Miss Grantham. Your attempts at civility have reassured me to the fact that you may not be a complete baggage. Perhaps you will even improve upon further acquaintance."
Alexandra stared speechlessly at Mr Chanderly's back as he re-entered the coach, unable to believe the arrogance of the man, and it was only when the coach had moved off and disappeared round a bend in the road that she recovered her breath sufficiently to order Ben to continue up the drive of Grantham Place.
On returning home, Alexandra hurried upstairs to her bedchamber to bathe and dress for dinner, her thoughts in complete disarray. Never before had anyone upset her equilibrium to the extent that Mr Chanderly had done. There was something about him, she reflected uneasily as she brushed her hair a little later, a perceptiveness, and a quiet steadiness of purpose which quite unnerved her. Shaking her head at her reflection in the mirror, Alexandra decided that the best thing she could do was put him from her mind. There was very little chance of her ever encountering Mr Chanderly again, so there was no reason why she should worry about him, she told herself firmly. No reason at all.

100% from 9 ratings – Located in Botany Downs (97.7kms) – Builders
"Richard and his team of builders (thank you Johnny and Harley) and tradesmen were fabulous to work with. Nothing was too hard or too difficult for them. The building work was excellent and completed well in time. The standard of finish was high and they went over and above the requirements to code to complete the job. The tradesmen working for them also worked to the same high standard. Richard…"

The director Ram Gopal Varma has confirmed the third installment of the film “Sarkar 3”. He has confirmed the film with super star Amitabh Bachchan. It is sequel of the film “Sarkar” and “Sarkar Raj”, which was released in 2005 and 2008 respectively. Abhishek Bachchan was also the part of both the previous films. But it is not confirmed that whether he will be part of the “Sarkar 3” or not.
The director has not confirmed Abhishek Bachchan role in the film he only confirmed the part of Amitabh Bachchan. In first film of the franchise “Sarkar” Katrina Kaif was seen as lead female actress and in second film of the franchise Aishwarya Rai Bachchan was seen as the part of the film. In “Sarkar 3” who will grab this opportunity it is still a question.
Ram Gopal Varma has also produced both the previous films of the franchise, he was co-producer of the film. It is expected that he will co-produce “Sarkar 3” as well. The star cast and other movie details are not yet out. The official trailer of the film will be out on 26 August 2016, Ram Gopal Varma has announced that on social media.
Ram Gopal Varma is one of the most successful and finest director of the Bollywood Industry. He has won National Award for his brilliant work. He has won so many awrads in his career and nominated many times for the awards. He has directed several Tamil and Telugu films as well. He has done many films with Big B, they have worked together in “Nishabdh”, “Darna Zaroori Hai”, “Department.

I do not own Dizzy.
(Just in case you need to know, at the very end of the book, Finn was fifteen, Dizzy was thirteen, and Mouse was still seven.)
It'd been two years since I'd last seen Finn and Mouse. Mouse's foster parents decided he could spend the night with us in the tent as long as I watched him carefully, and we called that morning and night. For twenty-four hours, it was like the good old days. Dad spent all day with Tess and Lucy, talking about doing the same thing every year. Of course, as we know, that didn't work out too well. For that short day, it was just me, Mouse, and Finn. Our family was once again, reunited.
Mouse had grown so much. He was taller, and he was still tan, his freckly skin practically glowing. He had more meat on his bones. I don't know who was more excited when we shone up. Mouse or Leggit. He slept with her as a blanket. Even thinking about the scene now makes me want to cry. We didn't go busking; we didn't try to take Mouse to the stores, though we know he hasn't stolen anything in two years. Mostly we went to the beach. Me and Finn watching Mouse play, us holding hands.
Finn and I still talk occasionally, but after starting tenth grade and landing a role as co-captain of the cheerleading team, Finn faded to the back of my mind. It was always the, 'I'll call him when I'm finished with this' excuse. I would always forget. I miss him. I miss that day. That summer.
The reason why this whole subject is brought up is because I was clearing my corkboard and the pictures came up. The pictures I took that summer. I saw the Mars bar wrappers, and the pictures me and my friends took when I was twelve. I saw Mouse, and Tess, and of course I saw Finn. My eyes stayed glued to Finn. His eyes, his hair. I close my eyes, and suddenly I hear him singing Somewhere I Belong for me. I start to hum along.
"Dizzy?" I jump and look at dad, whose concerned look made me feel loopy for humming a song to myself for no good reason.
"Oh, hi dad."
"You have a phone call." He said, sticking it out. I always play this game with myself. I try to guess who's on the phone. Usually, it's Jade who calls after school. Followed by Sasha, then Sarah. Jade had just hung up hours ago, and Sasha was sick, so it had to be Sarah.
"Dizz?" It was like all air has left my chest. Tess.
"Yes, I wouldn't suppose you could come out this weekend?"
"I have a game Friday night." It took hours to get to Bramble cottage. And I haven't been since that day dad came and collected me that summer. I can't help but think of it as that summer.
"Isn't there anyway you can miss it. I really need you." Tess. Self sufficient, independent Tess. Needed my helpless help.
"You have to be here to understand."
"Well what does it pertain to?"
"Finn." And just like that, in those three letters, she got me to agree.
"Okay. I'll see what I can do."
"Oh thank you Dizzy. Thank you." We hung up and I reluctantly turned to dad.
"Da-ddy." I chanted.
"What do you want now? More cash?"
"More like a ride."
"Tess's cottage." I mummer lightly.
"Dizzy we're not doing this again." He said, walking away.
"Dad they really need my help."
"And they could really ask me. The last time I was chasing you all over bloody England!"
"Dad it won't be like that this time!"
"How should I know Dizz? How should I know?"
"Because dad I'm telling you!"
"You," He jutted an accusing finger at me. ", you have a game Friday night. You can't just drop your responsibilities to follow some…..lad all over the country. What do you want people to believe about you Dizz? You have a home, a life here! Leave. Them. To. Themselves."
"I assume you wouldn't understand given your past relationships." It came out colder than it sounded. It was like word vomit and I couldn't stop. "I mean, not only did mum leave, but also Lucy. I guess you wouldn't understand how important Finn is to me."
He stared at me in utter shock. He has a right. Never, and I mean never, in my fifteen years have I so much as talked back to dad. He looked at me as if I had broken his heart. And I suppose I did. He took a deep breath closed his eyes, and when he opened them again, I swear tears had collected.
"Dizz, no, okay?" He walked to his room, shutting the door while I stared at it. As if glaring at the door would automatically change his mind. I sighed. The day was filled with awkward movements and glances. Dad did not speak to me the rest of the day, but I knew he was still forbidding me to go. I cried three times.
~The Next Day~
I've decided that I don't care if dad says no. I'm going. So, when Friday rolled around, I got the courage to ask dad to spend the weekend and Jade's. Jade's family is always going somewhere, so it would give me the perfect cover up. After she told me her family was going camping in the Bahamas (go figure) I told dad that she had invited me after the game. It was so simple, Jade would complain about a bad sneeze, and she and I would leave the game early. That way, dad would think I would be going with her, when in actuality; I would be going with Jade's gram, who's giving me a lift to Bramble cottage. I would stay two days, and be back before dad would even know what happened. It's full proof!
~The ride to Bramble cottage~
It seemed like old times. Except this time, I won't be "sending" letters to dad. Guilt coursed through my veins like acid and I squirmed in the extra padded seat.
"Problem dear?" Jade's gram asked.
"Er, no ma'am."
"Well we're here. Tell your mum I said hay. And don't give up hope sweetie. Your mum will pull through. I just know it." That was the excuse I gave her, that my mum was sick and dying.
"I will." I said and stepped out. I was late, but even in the dark I recognized everything. The patchwork van was still in the yard, but the tree house was torn down. The yard was mowed and there were roses where the cabages were, and the goat was nowhere to be seen. Yes, Bramble cottage had undergone some changes, but not enough to make it unrecognizable.
Tess stepped out, her figure silhouetted from the faint light of the house.
"Dizz." Her voice dripping with relief. "I'm glad you came."
Preview of next week's chapter
She crept in my room, and my heart started to race. She's grown. No doubt about that. Her curves maxing out. She's wearing her hair down, and the smell of strawberries fill my room. I looked past the woman she's become and catch sight of the real Dizzy. My Dizzy. The Dizzy that practically made my whole summer."
Want more? Review.

Paper is becoming my new media of choice. With that said, I made this for
's birthday last week. I think she likes ponies, but I'm not quite sure.
I also realized I have a bunch of textures that would work really well for some of the other ponies. So just as a warning, there might be some more ponies coming your way in the future.
Also, I was wondering, if I did simple character commissions in paper like this, would anyone be interested? It's just an idea I had. I'm not saying I'm open for commissions right now, but maybe in the future??? We'll see.

- Summer Guide
- College Guide
- Author Interviews
- Celebrity interviews
- College Articles
- College Essays
- Educator of the Year
- Personal Experience
- Travel & Culture
- Current Events / Politics
- Drugs / Alcohol / Smoking
- Entertainment / Celebrities
- Love / Relationships
- Movies / Music / TV
- Pop Culture / Trends
- School / College
- Social Issues / Civics
- Spirituality / Religion
- Sports / Hobbies
- Community Service
- Letters to the Editor
- Pride & Prejudice
- What Matters
Colors of Drama
It was early one school morning, about seven forty, in the middle of the week. The warm autumn air was whistling with glee as the students started piling off the bus when it came to a stop. Following behind them, each of the kid's facial features showed gloominess, apathy, malicious, or the exact opposite some were chirpy, joyful, or jubilant as they spoke to their fellow peers. I, myself, am not a morning person, so all the happy faces that were surrounding me made me aggravated as I passed them. That morning I had been rudely awakened by my brother and mother, and that had a lot to do with my mood.
Conversations were blooming into different colors around me, I decided to stay in the grey areas avoiding the brighter colors as best as I could. Headed to the gym, that was in the back of the cafeteria as athletics was my first-period class. As I entered the gymnasium it was vacant excluding two or three girls which I mustered up a brief smile in acknowledgment. I made a beeline into the locker room, where I could throw my stuff down in agony.
As I walked in, there were girls doing makeup, changing into their athletic wear, gossiping about this girl Trinity and how she had gone into the office the morning before for an unknown reason. Rolling my eyes, I weaved around the gossipers trying to get to my locker. Coincidentally, my locker was located right next to the talking, gossiping, girls. Ignoring them, I opened my locker shoving my school bag into it. I had never felt so much relief from anything. It felt like a thousand pounds had been lifted off my shoulders, all the stress that came with school had been lifted.
Shortly after the bell rang for first period, we filed out of the locker room and into our normal spots. The coaches walked out taking roll another one of the coaches interrupted asking for Katy, Carrie, Hannah, and I to go to the office, we didn’t need our things. Confused, each of us got up exiting the gym not thinking much about what was going to happen. Since we were all friends at the time we talked and laughed which had gotten me out of my sour mood as we marched to the office.
As we finally made it to the office Katy, startled, wide-eyed says, “I wonder why we’re here?”
We all nodded in agreement that it was odd, but I reassured, “I’m sure it’s nothing.”
Just as Trinity exited the office with the vice principal in tow. “Alright girls, one at a time into my office,” She demanded. This wasn’t going to be good, not at all.
One by one she interviewed us for things, that we were unaware of. Something I had yet, and wouldn’t find out for a while afterward, to find out what it was. Two of the three girls that had come with me, were bawling on the floor next to me with no explanation. Not a moment longer the third crying girl bolted out of the dark, uncanny, vegas like office. The vise principal didn’t speak a word as I relentlessly walked into the office, sighing as I faced the storm that was brewing.
“Do you know of any bullying going on in athletics?” She questioned
I sat in thought for a moment, what had been going on the last few days? For the last couple days, we had been running around the gym for offseason. I had laughed with Katy about class, as the drama between Trinity and I was coming to an end. Vaguely like a huge wave crashing on me at once I had remembered something. The week prior Carrie was having a dispute with Trinity about something I didn’t know, but they were yelling. Could this be what they’re talking about?
I responded to the vise principal with a brief statement of the Carrie and Trinity incident but mentioned that I hadn’t thought much about it since then. Jotting down what I had said she didn’t recant or question me any further. As I sat there, watching her pen scribble in a journal, it occurred to me that this was about Trinity. We had had our drama in the past and I thought we were past this, but I guess that wasn’t the case. The other girls were in tears, I couldn’t imagine why. What had caused them to be in tears, anger? Sadness? How was it that it was only the vise principal speaking with us and not a coach, the principal, or even the creator of this mess? This was really happening. I had never thought in my whole life this would be in this chair.
I wonder if this is what the non-guilty party feels like as they are counted guilty, being escorted to a cell of which they don’t belong. Without a word else to me, the vise principal escorted me and the other three girls, not to the gym, but to a room secluded by the rest of the school, it was foreign. I had felt lost, so lost mentally and physically, the anger was slowly rising inside of my veins. The feeling of the unknown, not yet discussed with me what was to happen. There was a school bag that was way out of reach, unfinished homework that I could be doing, but I guess not. This foreign classroom had desks that were only facing the wall, each one had blue dividers that had been vandalized with profanity by previous students. There was a vibe that was unexplainable, it felt like a true prison, it felt like a quiet library all at once.
At the front desk sat a lady, she was unlike any other person I had met. Upon us entering she states, “You are all here for a reason of which you know,” ha, was she wrong, I silently scoffed, “Now you cannot, nor will you…” she went down a long list of things that I didn’t care to pay any attention to. After what felt like centuries of what I, we, did to deserve such treatment I zoned back when four low, annoyed sighs screeched through my own thoughts. Two pages of why we're here, what we did, how to fix it. My frustration increased as she said this, I didn’t like her treating us as if we were nothing. This whole day was falling apart as I took the seat that was closest to the door.
Honestly, I hadn’t thought about why I was so furious until much later, but in that moment it had set off a new version of anger. I had not known I could be so angry at the world, I still didn’t know why I was being held captive in this quiet room. My head spun with thoughts of what the other girls had been told, all I knew was that we were separated. Not by force, but by choice. Every one of them was crying their own tears, for their own reasons that were unknown to me.
“Oh, your essays are due at the end of your sentence, a week from now.” One week, I took a breath, but all I could think about was my blood boiling, my thoughts heating, and the red that was shined through my vision. They wouldn’t let us get out school bag! Changing, that was way out of the question for the evil queen. My anger had taken over my whole actions, I couldn’t stop it even if I wanted to. Instead of properly doing the essay, I didn’t.
For the next week, all three of us went into the same room, did the same things, expect from this point on we had our bags. On the third day I had missed our first and only pep-rally, then I cried. I wasn’t angry at that point, just upset. After each day, more and more people asked where I had gone and where I was. The head of the honor committee had put me on probation for my wrongdoings, shamefully I had accepted without hesitation.
Eventually, I figured out why we were sentenced a week in the silent, white room full of my anger, shame, and regret. Trinity had mentioned to the office that I, we, had been picking on her and the school forced each of us to go to a week of ISS, in school suspension, in case anything were to happen in the future.
Despite my anger at the time, it showed me that even if you aren’t like your group of friends, people will always group you with who you hang out with. It was evident that I finally had to make healthy friendships, that the people around me would care for me as true friends, and wouldn’t get me in trouble for anything.

Hey guys, sorry I just need to vent and see if you guys can help out some. About 6yrs ago, when I was living in Houston, I dated this guy. So everything was OK until drugs started getting on the way (we were both using heavily) blablabla, problems, he dumps me claiming I have no self-respect because I put up with his post-binge bulls**t everytime. Anyway, it's been years since I last saw him/talked to him... and just today I found out he got clean, found a better job and MARRIED. I couldn't stop crying after that last piece of information. I'm still feeling like crap. I've never had such a hard time letting go of someone like I've had with him. It's been YEARS for Christ's sake!! I thought about him a lot over the course of time but this really hit me. And I don't know what to do. He was everything I ever wanted, except for the drug situation. Arghhh.. I don't know what the heck is wrong with me. I guess all this time I was hoping he'd realise what a mistake he made and come back to me and this shattered my dreams. Anyone relates? Or has any advice on how to let it go? Thanks for letting me rant. Sorry for the long post.

Ukraine said Tuesday that one rescue worker was killed and several others were injured by Russian forces in the southern city of Kherson, which was recently flooded after the breach of a major dam nearby.
Kyiv, which says Russia blew up the Kakhovka dam earlier this month, has repeatedly accused Moscow of shelling rescue efforts and evacuation boats in the Kherson region.
The destruction of the dam caused devastating floods in southern Ukraine.
"One employee of the State Emergency Service dead, another eight were injured in Kherson," Ukrainian Interior Minister Ihor Klymenko said on social media, adding that the team was involved in clean-up efforts in the wake of the flood.
Klymenko said the team was "conducting restoration work" when Russian forces opened fire on them.
Presidential aide Andriy Yermak said seven state emergency workers were injured in the shelling, six of which were in "serious condition."
Yermak said the workers were "clearing mud" in the area.
On Monday, Kyiv said the death toll from the floods on the Ukraine-controlled side of the Dnipro River rose to 18 and that 31 people were still missing.
"Fourteen (died) from drowning, four from gunshot wounds during evacuation," the interior ministry said in a statement.
Russian state media, citing sources, reported Tuesday that as many as 38 people were killed in Moscow-occupied southern Ukraine.
"According to the latest numbers, 38 people were victims (of the flood)," the TASS news agency cited emergency services as saying.
Moscow denies blowing up the dam that was under its control, accusing Kyiv of deliberately shelling the Soviet-era structure.

While there, there was inappropriate behavior left and right. The older women who took my order was rude and disrespectful. A larger girl working was yelling from the back to another worker about drugs. The workers in the kitchen were not wearing any hats or gloves. I asked them to redo my burger because it was over cooked and it was so covered in ketchup my burger was sliding off the bug, nasty! The woman once again was rude and crabby. I will NEVER go back! The management there is lacking, who would let people act like this? Plus it is WAY over priced for the quality and amount you get per order. Stay away!

HI. I really don't know what to do. I sold a Balenciaga bag on eBay and this buyer claims that it is not authentic. She said something about zipper pull, zipper, serial number. I guess she doesn't know that every year they have different letters on the silver plate. I don't know what is wrong. I know that it is authentic because I have seen this bag in the store at NM. I also own a few Balenciaga bags. Also, I bought it from an eBay member with 100% feedback and a Power Seller. The seller is also a member here. The buyer wants a Full Refund including Shipping. I usually don't ship to Asia, but I made an exception for her. Do you think that this is a scam and that she will never send the bag back. Actually, I don't want to accept a return because it is Authentic. Please help me. Thanks.

Most teens are faced at some pont with the tough decision about whether to tell a secret or not. A lot of teens keep the secret to a secret or gossip to their friends. The correct thing to do based on the situation is to tell someone that one trusts and that one knows will do the right thing. Some good choices would be parents, a counselor, or a teacher. Never keep a secret that could be a matter of life and death, such as drug use, eating disorders, and suicidal or murderous threats.
A few years ago one of my ex-friends told me that she was "so sick of life that I could just blow the whole school up and laughed about it." Natalie also stated that she was thinking of murdering our teacher. I didn't think that Natalie was like that, and I discouraged our friendship.
I recently heard that Natalie was put in a mental institution because she had told someone else about her plan to kill our teacher. That student made the right choice and told her mother, and her mom contracted authorities. It turned out that Natalie had her father's gun in her room to kill the teacher. When I found this out I was really disappointed with myself. I knew that I should have let someone know about her plan after she told me. That was an instance when an adult needed to know the situation.
Knowing when not to keep a secret is a serious situation that most teens face at some point. Many of my friends have confided in me with a secret that shouldn't have been repeated, for instance who they have a crush on. But that there are other kinds of secrets, like Sara's and Natalie's, where someone should be told. Sometimes it is hard to have the wisdom at a tender age to know the difference.

Tom Shelton, who was named the new superintendent of Fayette County Public Schools on Friday night, is getting used to the idea of his new role starting Sept. 1, but he's already making plans for the move to Lexington.
Shelton, whose current post is head of the Daviess County Schools, took some time Saturday to answer a few questions from the Herald-Leader about succeeding Stu Silberman.
Question: What went through your mind when the Fayette board called Friday to say you had been selected?
Answer: I was at a meeting in Louisville, getting ready to drive home, and had begun to think I hadn't gotten the position because it was late and they had not called.
I was actually walking to my car and had pretty much accepted the fact that the opportunity had passed when the call came in. So I was very excited, but I also was very surprised.
Q: What did you do first?
A: I called my wife, Gwen, and then I called Frank Riney, the chair of the Daviess County board, because you have the responsibility of letting your board know, and I wouldn't want them to hear from anyone but me.
Gwen had been texting me all day, wanting to know if I'd heard anything. She was pretty excited because she has a brother and sister and their families living in the Lexington area, and I have two cousins living in Lexington. We're already up there pretty frequently.
Q: What are your plans for getting ready in the next few weeks?
A: I plan to be in Lexington next Saturday, and I've talked with Stu about getting a schedule together for me to begin meeting people and know the community.
I think the best place to start will be with the people who were on the different focus groups that met with the superintendent candidates. But I also want to get input about other people in the community that I need to coordinate and meet with as well.
I'd like to be up there every week during the summer. I'm going to propose in the transition plan with both school districts that I be in Lexington one or two days each week all summer. The more I can do before I officially start in September, the more I'll have my feet on the ground and be ready to go.
Q: Are there programs in the Daviess schools that you might like to bring to Lexington?
A: There is one thing I'd like to talk about that I think would be a great match for Fayette County. It's a program called Next Generation Learning, which we're doing through (the University of Kentucky). It's redefining the high school experience and creating more real-world opportunities for kids outside the traditional high school.
One of the issues I heard while I was in Lexington last week was overcrowding in the high schools. Next Generation could possibly help with that.
For years, our schools were structured to meet mainstream students, and our idea was that every student had to conform to our structure. But I think we have to be more flexible in meeting individual students' needs. I'd really like to talk about that.
Q: What about your own family's transition into the new job?
A: We have two daughters — Abby, 20, who is a junior at Georgetown College, and Audrey, who is turning 17, and will be a senior in high school this fall and is planning to attend the University of Kentucky next year.
Part of the transition we have to talk about as a family is that my wife has another year on her contract that she has to fulfill. She is an addictions counselor at a clinic in Owensboro.
So, since Audrey is going to be a senior and Gwen has another year in her job ... one thought is for me to come on up to Lexington, get an apartment and start work and get through the year. Audrey and her mom could transition on to Lexington next year. We haven't worked out the details yet, but the main thing is for me to get started in Lexington.
Q: What would you like to tell parents and citizens in Lexington as you prepare to join the school system here?
A: I believe, and I really mean this, that Fayette County can be the best school district in the country. It's obvious how passionate and supportive of the school district the entire Lexington community is. I'd just like everyone to know that I'm honored to become a part of that and to help continue to move that forward.
"I'm also very excited about the diversity of the district and the community, which is one of its greatest strengths. The chance to work in that kind of environment and build opportunities for kids is very exciting to me. The Equity Council is one of the first groups I'll meet with because there's a real passion there about closing the achievement gap, and I want to make that a heavy focus.
I think people will find in working with me that I really do believe in collaboration.

So I have talked about it several different times, I finally got around to it. I really want to make this as quick as possible . I don't want rush you guys but I'm about to be going into the hospital for a little bit. Anyway back to... the bike is one of the most awesome I have ever had the pleasure of riding.so smooth. Just the way it glides along. I'm not a collector as some of you know and I bought a few bikes on a pretty sweet deal and have looked to move them. THE CABE is by far the coolest place for anything bike I have seen. So I have decided to sell only here in THE CABE. I feel like family and you guys have educated me on so many things bike it's been awesome. Can't wait to hear the feedback from this one. From what I heretics is a 1953 schwinn BFGOODRICH badged. The tank is a repop, and it is off in a lot of the pictures for a better look. Also I'm being told that the seat and tail light as well are repops. I have several pics. Can post moreover even video call if you would like to see it as first hand as possible. Truthfully I need this to go to a good home. I have neglected this bike since getting itand I do t want to be the reason it doesn't stay a survivor.

Fortunately we were up and ready when the call came in the morning at 5:30 that our ride was waiting. In the van was a collection of other folks who had been scheduled on our flight. One couple were on their honeymoon. We were dropped off at American, a quick check in, the chair was ready, breezed through security and we were at the gate with plenty of time to spare. I went down the concourse to pick up coffee and a breakfast sandwich (voucher $14).
While waiting for our flight
to be called, I phoned Capital One. I listened to the choices and
finally was connected to a person. I told my story and was forwarded
to another person, I went through my story again and was again told I
was being forwarded. Total silence. No music, no dial tone, silence. I
hung up and tried again. Same results, pick a number, operator to
second operator to third operator to silence.
I went up to the counter to make sure we'd have a chair on Maui.
The gal changed our seats to row 3 and told us we would be called
I tried Nancy's phone, at each step I explained what had happened,
Our plane was called. The flight was great. When we
landed there was a gal waiting with a chair. She had three passengers
to take care of but we were first. She was also the baggage agent and
she had our checked bags. They had made the flight yesterday. So we
got our bags and she took us to the Thrifty shuttle. I checked with
their desk and someone had extended our car's wait time to 48 hours so
all was good.
A warm, windy welcome to Maui.
While Nancy waited with our luggage, I checked in at the
Thrifty office, picked up the car, loaded the bags and we were on our
way across the island to our home for the week, a condo development
called Kihei Holiday.
We found our parking spot and took our bags into unit 6. We explored
the place and found it came up a little short of its description. It
was advertised as having 1 1/2 baths but we only found 1. We were told
we would have a view of the Pacific from our patio but what we had was
a view of the folks on the balconies on the other side of the parking
lot who had a view of the sea. But hey, we aren't going to be here
that long and it does have wi-fi so we don't care.
After getting squared away, we take a run about town and look for a
place to have Linner. We find a sports bar named Diamonds and at 2:20
in the afternoon we eat while watching the Lions play the Bears on
Monday Night Football. The time change is going to take a bit of
adjustment. Back at #6, Nancy fires up the wi-fi and helps me log in.
I discover that my power cord has died but I can use hers to recharge

I’ve been a busy girl! I was back at Paradise Gardens again for Tonya and Cody’s wedding. They had planned to do everything outside, but we had that crazy threat of rain looming over San Diego. Fortunately we were rain-free. Everything went perfect for their wedding. And Tonya and Cody were so easy to work with and very natural in front of the camera. Poor Cody had to be up super early for school the morning after their wedding, but I’m sure it was all worth it. Congratulations!
Cody waiting anxiously for the ceremony to begin:
Right after the ceremony they walked off and into the most beautiful light. They looked very angelic:
The flower girl put her flower petal holder to to good use!
Tonya was so easy to photograph!
How cute was their cake?

Peshawar: At least two people have been injured after a blast near a family park in Hasht Nagri area of Peshawar, a metropolitan of Pakistan, here on Wednesday night.
According to sources, the blast occurred outside a firearms shop in the area but the nature of the blast was still not known.
Two people were injured after they were hit by broken pieces of glass as a result of the blast, said the police. They were rushed to a nearby hospital by rescue teams that arrived at the blast site soon after the attack.
Police has cordoned off the area to collect the evidence and other forensic activities.

Farewell to P7
This week we said a final farewell to P7 who begin a new stage in their lives as they head to post primary schools in September. On Wednesday we travelled to Co. Meath to Tayto Park for their end of year trip. It really was a very memorable day especially as it was their final trip in primary school. Then on Friday 24th June we celebrated their achievements at a Prize-giving Assembly.
We would like to wish them every success in the future and hope they will always keep in touch.

Looking for Birds Edge escorts? Look no further! Our site is the largest directory of local escorts in the area. Whether you’re looking for a hot night out on the town or someone to keep you company during a long night in, we have the perfect escort for you. Our escorts are available 24/7 and are always ready to please. So what are you waiting for? Browse our selection of escorts now and find your perfect match!
Escorts Birds Edge HD8 8, West Yorkshire
Check our nearby escorts: Upper Cumberworth, High Flatts, Haddingley, Lane Head, Gate Foot, Shepley, Meal Hill, Upper Denby, Lower Cumberworth, Snowgate Head, Maythorn, Denby Dale, Ingbirchworth, Fulstone, Victoria, Shelley, Barnside, Shelley Woodhouse, Hole Bottom, Stocksmoor
At the age of sixteen, I had my first partner. His name was Mike and we were inseparable. We did whatever together. We went to the movies, and out to consume, and we even travelled to the beach together. We enjoyed and in love. Nevertheless, just before our one-year anniversary, Mike broke up with me. I was heartbroken. I didn’t know what to do.
I was lost without Mike. I didn’t know how to operate without him. I was a mess. I didn’t consume, I didn’t sleep, and I didn’t go to school. I was a ghost of myself. I was so lost that I even considered suicide. I didn’t want to live without Mike.
One day, I met somebody. Her name was Sarah and she was different than anybody I had actually ever met before. She was kind, and caring, and she listened to me. I spoke to her about Mike and just how much I missed him. She didn’t evaluate me, she didn’t inform me to move on, she simply listened.
We became buddies and I started to recover. Sarah helped me consume, she helped me sleep, and she even helped me go back to school. I started to live once again. I was so grateful to have Sarah in my life.
One day, Sarah vanished. I didn’t know how to operate without her.
Her name was Emily and she was different than anybody I had actually ever met before. I talked to her about Sarah and how much I missed her.
We became buddies and I started to recover. Emily helped me consume, she helped me sleep, and she even helped me go back to school.
I have an excellent group of buddies, I’m going to school, and I’m happy. I still think about Sarah and Mike from time to time, but I know that I’m moving on.
His name was Mike and we were inseparable. Simply before our one-year anniversary, Mike broke up with me. I didn’t desire to live without Mike.
I talked to her about Mike and how much I missed him. I still think about Sarah and Mike from time to time, but I know that I’m moving on. call girls Birds Edge, brothels Birds Edge, prostitutes Birds Edge, hookers Birds Edge, sluts Birds Edge, whores Birds Edge, gfe Birds Edge, girlfriend experience Birds Edge, fuck buddy Birds Edge, hookups Birds Edge, free sex Birds Edge, sex meet Birds Edge, nsa sex Birds Edge
Escort Girls near Birds Edge
I was being in my chair, scrolling through Twitter when I saw her. I had actually seen her before, naturally. Everyone had. She was among the most popular pornstars in the world. But there was something different about her this time. She was live-tweeting her date with a fan. And she was pertaining to my city.
I rapidly sent her a message, asking if I might purchase her supper that night. She said yes, and I couldn’t believe it. I was going to have a date with a pornstar.
I chose her up from her hotel and took her to a great dining establishment. We talked and chuckled all night, and I might inform she was genuinely enjoying herself. She was funny and wise and stunning.
When the check came, I used to pay, but she demanded splitting it. She stated she didn’t desire me to think she was a gold digger. I told her I didn’t appreciate that. I simply wished to spend more time with her.
We went back to my place and talked some more. And after that, we started to kiss. And after that, we did more than that. We had sex. It was extraordinary. She was whatever I had actually ever imagined and more.
Afterward, we lay in bed, talking and laughing and sharing stories. She was so different than I had actually expected.
I got up the next morning, anticipating her to be gone. She was still there, sleeping in harmony next to me. I couldn’t believe it. I had actually simply spent the night with a pornstar. And I enjoyed it.
I was sitting in my chair, scrolling through Twitter when I saw her. I had actually seen her before, of course. She was one of the most popular pornstars in the world. I was going to have a date with a pornstar.
I had actually simply spent the night with a pornstar.
anal, a-level, gfe, dfk, b2b, GFE, CIM, OWO, DT, Party, ATM, BBBJ, BJ, COB, COF, COT, DATY, Deep Throat, DFK, Duo, Quickie, Threesome, adult, cheap, mature, bbw, vip, cougar, granny blonde, brunette, female, black
Brothel near Birds Edge
I was young and Dumb and believed it would be an amazing way to make some fast money. I was likewise curious about sex and believed this would be an excellent way to explore my sexuality.
I started out working in a whorehouse. I was constantly being hit on by older, unpleasant guys. I did what I had to do to make ends fulfill.
One day, a regular customer asked me to start seeing him outside of work. He was mild and sweet and I found myself attracted to him. I started seeing him on my day of rests. We would go to hotel spaces and he would pay me for sex.
Eventually, we started seeing each other specifically. He became my partner and my pimp. I was making great money now and I had the ability to purchase the drugs I desired. I was likewise able to purchase better shoes and clothes. I appeared like a genuine prostitute now.
My partner was jealous and possessive. He would hit me if I even looked at another guy.
Then, one day, I was apprehended. I was caught with drugs on me and I went to jail. I was lucky that my partner bailed me out, but I understood I remained in big trouble now. I had to leave this life. I had to discover a way to make a living without resorting to prostitution.
I found a job and I stuck with it. I had to give up the drugs and the elegant clothes. I was lastly able to start over.
I was young and Dumb and believed it would be an amazing way to make some fast money. I was likewise curious about sex and believed this would be an excellent way to explore my sexuality. Little did I know that prostitution would lead me down a dark path of drug addiction and violence.
I was making good money now and I was able to purchase the drugs I desired. I had to discover a way to make a living without resorting to prostitution.

I've been really absent on the blogosphere due to some major life changes recently. My blog's name could not be any more apropos these days...I have been sheltered and mothered by my village of friends during an extremely difficult time. I became a mother and lost a child within seconds...but also have come to realize that I have an invisible blanket of support that exists when I most need it.
I'm choosing to share our story, my son's short story, because it is healing for me and because I hope other mothers who have difficult journeys to motherhood read this and know they are not alone.
Adam and I became pregnant the first time in November of 2013, one month after getting engaged to be married. I started spotting at 9 weeks, and miscarried within 2 days-- I was in no pain. The fetus never made it past 5 weeks and there was no heartbeat. At this time, the sheer disappointment was terrible. I realized how naive I had been-- miscarriages within the 1st trimester are so common, and I had no idea. I had heard stories from both Grandmothers on my mother's and father's sides about multiple miscarriages and never gave it a second thought. They were from a different, distant era. Medicine has come so far. Noone ever talks about miscarriages on Facebook.
We proceded in the planning of our wedding, deciding on October 19, 2014 (1 year exactly after Adam proposed).
We rode high on the hopeful statistic that women who miscarry have a much higher rate of having a successful pregnancy the 2nd time around, especially when the pregnancy occurs within 6 months of the last miscarriage. We were pregnant again by May and things looked healthy from the start. From seeing the heartbeat to passing genetic tests with flying colors, everything looked good. We found out the sex --a boy-- and decided on a name: Oscar.
In October, a week before the wedding, I woke up in the middle of the night, feeling light cramping similar to menstrual cramps. I went downstairs and researched Braxton Hicks contractions while waiting for my cramps to pass. The cramps continued in intensity and I decided to wake Adam and go to the ER. By the time I got in the car, I was in full blown labor, with painful, consistent contractions. I was admitted to Labor and Delivery and we got the news that I had no cervix left (later to be diagnose with an Incompetent Cervix-- cruel name for a cruel condition)- I was fully dilated at 20 weeks 2 days, and I would be delivering and losing our son. Adam was devastated and emotionally wrought instantly...I've never seen him so emotionally devastated. I was more calm (I knew I had to get through the birth) and requested an epidural. I was damned if I was going to feel the physical and emotional pain of losing a child at the same time.
When Oscar arrived, the nurse asked me if I wanted to see him. There is nothing that could have prepared me for that question. I didn't know how to answer. Adam was not in the room, having been escorted out while they administered the epidural. I asked what he would look like. Part of me was afraid of what I would see. There are many things you cannot un-see...would seeing him scar me and make my healing process harder? The doctor said "At this stage, they look a bit like aliens. Their head is still disproportionally large for their bodies and their skin is still transparent."
They set Oscar aside, on the newborn warmer, in a blanket. After a few minutes, as Adam re-entered the room, I decided that I had to see him, my baby. The nurse handed him to me and I was blown away. He did not look like an alien...he looked tiny and perfect. He had a perfectly formed nose, mouth, tiny hands with fingernails, big feet with high arches like his Daddy, a little chin and perfect closed eyes. He also had weight. Holding him, he was substantial and real, all 10 ounces of him.
I was afraid of touching him, because he seemed so fragile...seems funny now and I wish I had touched him more. Adam was fearful of holding him at first, I think he had similar thoughts to my earlier "you can't un-see certain things" thoughts...but he did and we are both glad we had that moment as a family, the three of us.
A nurse took pictures, which seems awkward and it was a little...but I am so thankful we have them. I collected Victorian mourning art long before this time in my life and always admired the Victorians' ability to confront death head on and create memorial relics that could comfort them and remind them of their loved ones. The hospital took pictures of Oscar with and without us, inked his little feet and hands for stamps, and presented us with a memorial box that is a most treasured possession now.
We spent the day waiting for my legs to regain their feeling and trying to process the fact that we would be leaving the hospital empty handed, without Oscar. I asked Adam to announce our loss on Facebook. This seemed natural to me. I wanted everyone to know this important event had just happened. It felt like a battle cry. It worked. The feelings, thoughts, and prayers that rolled in in the form of comments, messages, and texts sustained us during those first crazy hours. We couldn't speak to anyone but each other. We were raw and foraging in a space we had never imagined we would be. But whenever we needed to, we could read a comforting message and know that our extended family, which reaches across many miles and time zones, was there for us in whatever way we needed.
A social worker from the hospital visited us to give us information on support groups for parents who have suffered the loss of a child. She also gave us, what continues to be, the best advice we have received. "People will want to say things but won't know what to say. Sometimes they will say the wrong thing. Forgive them."
Forgive them. We had no idea how helpful this would become. It became our own private joke/ comfort blanket. The friend who said "It's probably for the best." The coworker who said "There's a reason for everything." The friend who asked about what we did with Oscar's remains. The dear friend who can retell her own successful birth story for the 99th time in front of us with the same gusto as if it was the first. The parent who decided not to come to our wedding because of the emotional upheaval. "I had to forgive someone today," we would say.
And we did. Everyone wants to help and noone knows how. Just as we were unprepared for this, so was everyone else. And there are success stories. Friends brought food-- lots of food. Matzo ball soup really is medicine and it really does make you feel better. Sandwiches, hams, soups, cookies. People gave us books and sent beautiful flowers. It all helped. People coming over and visiting helped. Not being alone helped. Adam and I joked that we could write a book on "what to say" in these situations. It's really simple-- keep it simple and don't try to make yourself feel better or answer a curiosity. Things that work:
"I am here for you"
"I am so sorry for your loss"
"You are in my thoughts"
"Let me know what you need"
"I am coming over with a deli tray"
Our wedding was in 6 days and it felt like it had been designed that way. Our closest core of friends and family would be flocking to us and surrounding us with their love to celebrate our love. Those first few days Adam and I have never felt closer. Losing a child, quite understandably, puts all bullshit into perspective. I felt no stress over anything and cared about nothing except being with Adam. The saying "us against the world" is cliche, but it is how we both felt in those early days. I went out briefly to get my nails done (I was getting married in 96 hours) and almost had an anxiety attack being separated from him for 1 hour. I called him on my way home and said through tears "I can't explain it. I just feel like I can't get home to you fast enough." He said he knew how I felt-- we both felt the same way. Everyone in the "real" world was carrying on with their daily lives and had no idea that this horrific thing had just happened. Only we knew. It was only us.
It just so happened that 2 days after we lost Oscar, there was a cyber holiday called National Infant Loss Day. I was mesmerized by an instagram post from Jessica Kraus of the House Inhabit blog. She posted about a loss she experienced at 17 weeks. My world of support widened. My heart didn't feel alone. I posted a picture of Oscar's foot and handprints. For a second, I questioned whether I would be judged for this. And then, as has happened in my internal monologue many times since then, I said "Fuck it. I just lost my child." And I was glad and unashamed of sharing him.
We rewrote part of the wedding ceremony to mention and honor our son and both wore light blue ribbons for him. We wanted to honor Oscar, but also allow the celebration to continue.
I wish I could say it was the happiest day of my life...it was not. It was amazing and healing, and the wedding went off "without a hitch" as they say. I was happy and laughed a great deal that day. I also felt unattractive and had never planned on getting married in my 6 days post-birth body. I had imagined a cute baby bump and that pregnancy glow. It was also a distraction. After a wedding and honeymoon, we are still left with a reality we have to deal with.
Part of my healing and moving forward is coming to terms with knowing that when I look at my wedding photos, I will also be brought back to that week....that awful week that something really tragic happened. It is also the week I realized that Adam and I are very, very good at being partners to one another. I realized our friends really are our family. And I realized that I am stronger than I ever realized I could be.

SACRAMENTO — Arnold Schwarzenegger has found lots of ways to keep busy since leaving the governor's office, including starring in action movies and lending his name to a policy institute at USC.
Now he'll return to a role that stirred controversy during his time in Sacramento: serving as executive editor of Muscle & Fitness and Flex magazines.
The move was announced Friday by American Media Inc., which owns the magazines.
Schwarzenegger, who was named Mr. Olympia seven times, first took the editorship shortly after winning the 2003 gubernatorial recall election. When details of the arrangement were revealed in 2005, it was criticized as a conflict of interest and he quit the job.
Schwarzenegger had signed a contract for at least $1 million a year from a magazine dependent on advertising for dietary supplements. At the same time, he was also making decisions as governor about how to regulate the industry.

Raw is probably one of the most disturbing films I’ve ever watched. I literally couldn’t watch almost half of the film. I also didn’t expect that she was going to enjoy eating human flesh. But for the most part when I look at the movie, I see it as an exaggerated experience of the freshman experience. Most of us know the feeling of entering college, having new experiences, getting exposed to things we were sheltered from before. There are new changes going on with Justine just like how every person struggles or tries to find themselves when put in a new setting.
What really sparked justine’s new found appetite was when she succumed to her initiation. Even if it seemed that she didn’t have a choice, we know that she actually did yet she chose to still do it. She originally seemed like she hated it and that she even had negative reactions in her body (the rash and scabs she got) but then we start to see a transformation. It starts with just wanting to eat meat, then eating raw meat and finally trying human flesh (her sister’s finger. At this point I really felt that the movie was just getting more bizarre and really escalating quickly.
Justine and her relationship with her parents reminds me of my own. I have always had strict parents. I remember sneaking around and always making up lies so I don’t get caught. So for me, I understand the need for freedom and the craving for it the more your parents deprive you of it. For Justine this freedom was regarding meat. The more she was deprived of it, the more she craved for it and couldn’t stop herself. The more she tried to stop herself from what she really wanted, the more deprived she felt and again she starts to crave for it more. On the parents perspective, I think it’s normal how parents will always want to protect their children no matter what. My mom got pregnant at eighteen with my eldest brother and both my mom and dad had to struggle to make ends meet while studying so I think this was the reason they were very strict with me and my siblings. This is also explained why the mom of alexia and Justine would go crazy even if the slightest meat touched their food. I used to think she was just a typical vegetarian who probably loved animals. I didn’t realize that it was because she was also a cannibal and she didn’t want her children to experience what she was experiencing. Sometimes we think of parents as hypocrites but I honestly think that parents only try to prevent you from doing mistakes they have also made because they aren’t proud of it. At the same time, these mistakes are also part of understanding oneself and moving towards adulthood. With Adrienne’s character we also see the change and struggle to discover himself. He used to think he was gay but found himself drawn to Justine. So here we again see how different settings really create confusion to each person. We start to have doubts and even if we don’t like it, we know that change happens among all of us. Which isn’t always a bad thing because it also opens us to possibilities we never knew were possible.
Another issue in the film is the relationship of Justine and Alexia. I used to think they were very distant from each other and very different in attitude as well. But as the movie progresses, you see more and more the influence of Alexia in showing Justine who she really is. For a time, I thought that Alexia was just bad influence and trying to get Justine to be like her so that she wouldn’t feel alone. But the more I think about it, the more I realize that Alexia was opening justine’s eyes. One way or another she was bound to realize what she was capable of and Alexia would have preferred Justine to discover this with her guidance because she understood and loved her sister more than anyone else. However I also feel that the reason alexia killed addriane was because of the jealousy of alexia. She might have felt that addriene was competition for her love for her sister. In the end even after Alexia killed addriene, the bond of the sisters was stronger than ever. They had this understanding that nobody else had.

This eagle has landed...40 mins early actually.
The trip was bearable because the sector from Auckland to LA was apparently over night, so we all slept, then the sector from LA to London really was overnight...so we all slept! I really was VERY tired so sleeping wasn't hard to do.
All my luggage arrived safely and the bikes are unpacked and ready to go...when I am, which isn't quite yet.
It really is very nice to not be cold...long may it last.
Sad for Cadel :(

Ortiz may not face glove test in Philly
It might not be a given that David Ortiz will break out his first baseman's glove over the weekend. When the Red Sox travel to Philadelphia for an interleague series, Ortiz could get a game at first, if the Sox choose to give Mike Lowell a rest and move Kevin Youkilis to third. But it's not assured.
And it certainly wouldn't be as a way to take Ortiz's mind off hitting, as has been suggested as a remedy for a slump that might just be lifting. With Ortiz's third homer of the season coming in the second inning last night, he now has a seven-game hitting streak, and two homers in his last three games.
"We're trying to win games," manager Terry Francona said. "We want to put our best hitters, our best defense [on the field]. What do you do with Youk? We've got a guy that's won the Gold Glove that I would have a hard time saying, 'Well, we're not going to play our Gold Glove first baseman 'cause I wanted to take David's mind off of his struggles.' That doesn't make a lot of sense to me."
Ortiz said only, "I'm not talking anymore. Not for a while."
That might change, with Ortiz's bat getting a bit hotter, but his .198 average doesn't exactly call out for a need to sit either Lowell, who's hovering around .300, or Youkilis, who's batting above that.
Though Francona emphasized that he didn't know the pitching matchups for the weekend, and didn't know what he would do about Ortiz, he did say, "To get his mind off [hitting] wouldn't be the reason. Whether we're trying to rest somebody, day game after night game, who's pitching, we'll have a chance to look at all that."
"It's hard to make out a lineup about five days ahead of time."
"I bet you that's a pretty good timetable," Francona said. "We need to certainly look at him the next three days, let him have the next three days before we contemplate anything. See where his strength is.
"The one thing we don't want to do is send him out to play while he still has some rehabbing to do. I don't know if that's fair to him. But he's doing terrific."
Francona said there would be an update on Lowrie by the end of this series. Lowrie began taking batting practice Friday.
"I went down there and I hit off [Tim Bogar] in the cage," said Lowrie. "I took some good swings. I made solid contact. It felt strong. It really didn't fatigue until the last couple swings, which is good.
"I guess I reference it back to last year a lot. I think I'm referencing more to when it was the peak of the injury. This game, it's so mental.
"I think last year I was convincing myself that I wasn't injured. I played hurt, but I was convincing myself that I wasn't injured. I was concentrating more on how my wrist felt. Now I think I'm a little frustrated, because I taught myself to do that."
"I peeked up at it [the readings] a couple times," Bard said. "I use it kind of just to gauge where I am that day . . . . I reared back on that one. Pretty much all I've got. So I kind of wanted to see where I was at with that pitch."
More important was the way he pitched to the meat of the Yankee order. Bard got Mark Teixeira on a fly to left, Alex Rodriguez on a ground ball to second base, and Cano on a swinging strikeout.
Bard started Cano out with three fastballs. Then he got him flailing at a slider to end the game, a mark of how Bard's slider has improved with the grip change he instituted during the last road trip.
"I was finally able to bury one, which I was happy about," Bard said. "I've thrown some good ones, especially since I switched to that new grip. That was the first one that I really buried, especially in an 0-2 count."
Bard lowered his ERA to 0.82. "It's a good situation to get him in, let him get his feet wet," said Francona. "He threw the ball well. You can't always pick the situations, but tonight we could and I think it was good for him. He's done everything we've asked."
Amalie Benjamin can be reached at firstname.lastname@example.org.

Tacha finally speaks on her body odour.
The just concluded Season 4 Big Bother Naija house mate Tacha has finally explained the reason she sprayed perfume during her bitter clash with Mercy.
Tacha, who had an interview with controversial media personality, Daddy freeze said she doesn’t have body odour and the whole situation was misunderstood.
According to Tacha, the housemates do not have time for themselves and they can be called at any point in time.
The self-acclaimed Port Harcourt First Daughter said she had just finished having her bath and she was getting ready when the Head of House, Seyi had called all the housemates to gather around so he could read the scroll from Biggie.
Thus, she was unable to apply her perfume or use deodorant because she was in a haste.
During the fight with Mercy, she was getting ready for the day and that was the reason she was applying perfume.

Thursday, 15 December 2011
Review: Lament - Maggie Stiefvater
But Dee doesn't realise that Luke is an assassin from the faerie world.
And she is his next target.
Books of Faerie Series:
Visit Maggie Stiefvater's website for more information
I'm going to start this review by saying that I don't have the best track record when it comes to books about faeries so I wasn't sure if I should read Lament or not. Having said that I am also a massive fan of Maggie Stiefvater, I love her Wolves of Mercy Falls series and I also really enjoyed her recent stand alone book The Scorpio Races. If anyone could convince me I like faeries then I was pretty sure it would be Maggie!
As I expected Lament is beautifully written, I don't think this author will ever write a book that isn't full of wonderful descriptions that transport you to the worlds she has created. I also enjoyed the mythology of her faeries more than I thought I would, these faeries are vicious, cunning and manipulative and staying one step ahead of them isn't going to be easy for our main character Dee. Unfortunately I didn't love the book as much as I've loved Maggie's later releases though. It's by no means a bad book but it didn't capture me the way her others have so although I will still read the sequel Ballad I won't be in a rush to do so.
Dee is a talented musician but she suffers from terrible stage fright whenever she has to perform in front of an audience. I found it easy to relate to her nervousness and I loved how her friend James was so supportive of her. What I didn't like was the romance between her and the mysterious Luke. Even when she finds out that Luke is an assassin who has killed countless victims and that she is his latest target she brushes it under the carpet because she is attracted to him. I wanted her to find out more about why he had done the things he had done before she even considered dating him but that just didn't happen. I don't enjoy the kind of instant connection that was between them when there was nothing to back it up apart from suspicion and behaviour on his part that should have had her running a mile in the opposite direction. Once you start to find out more about why Luke is the way he is then I started to like him more and I think I'd have preferred the romance if it had developed more slowly.
Although this wasn't my favourite book I still think Maggie Stiefvater is a wonderful author, she is on my automatically buy list and I'm very much looking forward to seeing what she comes up with in the future. I would recommend her more recent books to anyone and if you're a big fan of faeries then I'm sure you will also enjoy Lament so don't let me put you off trying it.
Source: Received Scholastic in exchange for an honest review
Other reviews of this book:
If you have reviewed this book on your blog please leave a link to your review in the comments & I'll add the link here.

We all have them. Days when we really miss a loved one who has passed away or even a love one who lives far away. These are days when thoughts of our mom, dad, spouse, sibling, child, grandparent, or even great grandparent, so fill our minds that it brings us to tears. We push through the sadness and try not to let the tears spill over, but it is so hard, because our heart has a mind of its own sometimes, and those tears just won’t listen to our pleas to stop. Reaching out to others does little to help us, and even posting on social media doesn’t help, because it is our own sadness, our own sorrow, and we have to live it alone. Truly, our only help comes from God, who sees our every tear, and has sent the Comforter to us for just such a time as this.
The thing is that we know where our love one is, and that they are happy, but that doesn’t make it easier for us to move out of our own sadness, because the true sadness of losing someone is not sadness for them, but rather for us. And for those who know someone who is going through this sadness, there is a feeling of helplessness. We love the grieving family member or friend, but we don’t have the words or the ability to make it better for them. All we can do is to pray over them and let them know we love them, and hope it is enough to ease their pain. Of course, for many of us, their pain is shared by us because we love both them and their loved one.
No matter how painful those “miss you” days are, we must understand that they are also important, because we would never want to forget our loved ones. Their memory, while painful considering the loss, is so important considering our love for them. Unfortunately, once a loved one is in Heaven you can’t have one kind on memory without the other kind.
Missing the loved on who lives far away is different, but when you suddenly realize that it has been a year since you saw that parent, grandparent, sibling, or child, your heart goes through that same pain and sadness. The heart somehow doesn’t fully understand the difference between a loved one being in Heaven and a loved on being across the country. Yes, the heart understands that the one who lives far away will be seen again on Earth, but it still feels that pain of missing that loved one terribly…especially when you had lived so close before, even in the same house. The heart just doesn’t totally understand the feeling, it just knows that it is painful, and it brings those dreaded tears. It’s all a part of “miss you” days.
My son-in-law, Kevin has always been a capable home renovator. He has fixed up and beautified each of the homes he and my daughter, Corrie and their family have lived it. It was a big part of what made him feel useful. Since he became disabled, I worried that he would no longer be able to do the projects he wanted to do on their home. In some ways, that has been the case. He is in pain often, and that limits the activity he can do. Nevertheless, Kevin is a very determined person. When he sets his mind to a task, he sees it through, even if it takes him much longer than it would have years ago.
This summer found Kevin deciding to reside their mobile home. They sold their house and paid cash for this mobile home when Corrie went back to school. They knew that with school and Kevin’s disabilities, they would need to reduce the family budget, and since their sons, Chris and Josh, are now grown and living on their own, they could downsize and save money. They bought a two bedroom mobile home and paid for it in full. It was nice, but it was older.
Kevin has worked on the interior, whenever his pain level allowed, and it looks very nice now. Still, the exterior was very dated and dingy looking. It was not what they wanted it to be. Corrie worked a great deal of overtime hours this summer, and it allowed them to buy new siding. They were very excited. Kevin has worked off and on putting up the siding for several weeks now, and the results have been amazing. Kevin even surprised Corrie with a cute floral “Welcome” sign for the front of the home. She had no idea he was doing that. The siding looks very professional, but that is how all of Kevin’s work looks. He doesn’t like to do a job half way or sloppy. That’s just not Kevin’s style.
We are all very proud of the beautiful job Kevin did on the siding. We know the sacrifices he made to get this done…and done right. We know the aches and pain he went through, and we are very proud of his accomplishment on the house. Once again, with determination, he persevered; and the work he did is just beautiful. Today is Kevin’s birthday. Happy birthday Kevin!! Have a great day!! We love you!!
While it isn’t uncommon never to have met your great grandparents, I nevertheless, find it rather sad. Through my Great Aunt Bertha Schumacher Hallgren’s journal, I have heard so much about my Great Grandparents Schumacher, and in many ways I feel like I have known them all my life. When I look at the picture I have of them hanging on my living room wall, the faces seem familiar and welcoming to me. I feel like I know their personalities, likes and dislikes, and the struggles they had during their lives, and yet, I know the strength they had too, because through it all, they persevered. They raised a wonderful family of strong people who went on to lead successful lives and to raise wonderful children. Of course, the picture I have of them does not show smiling faces, because that was not really done in those days for photographs, but when I look into their eyes, I see a soft gentleness living there…a kindness, because that was the kind of people my great grandparents were. I know that from the words their daughter wroter about them.
I know that my great grandfather loved horses, and worked hard caring for a rich landowner’s horses to earn the money to come to the new world, where he could have land and horses of his own. He had a dream, and he was bound and determined to make his dream come true…and he did. He succeeded so well, in fact, that his family thought he must be rich when he came to see him. I don’t think he considered himself rich, but his family was comfortable, and their needs were met. The children had a carriage to ride to school in, so they didn’t have to trudge three miles to school. The family had a sizeable place, and a number of horses, which shows me that my great grandfather fulfilled his dreams, and was a great provider for his family. He worked hard, and he wouldn’t have had things be any other way. He knew the value of what he had. Family was everything and he felt like his was the best one there ever was.
All these things I can get from pictures and from Bertha’s journal, but one of the most profound statements about her dad came when Bertha wrote, “HE LOVED HIS FAMILY!!” Her emphesis was so obvious. She typed it all in capital letters basically to show the world how strongly she felt about that statement. It wasn’t something she felt like she was obligated to write, but was rather, a statement from the heart. I think my grandfather was a kind and gentle man, who lovingly cared for his family, and especially his wife, who had Rheumatoid Artheritis for years. Nevertheless, he carried the load of the family with the help of his children, and that is a man I can’t wait to meet. My grandmother too was the kind of person who dealt with her pain with little complait, and raised a beautiful family in spite of it all. I look forward to the day when we will meet in Heaven, and I can sit down and really get to know these wonderful people.
When you see a cute picture like this one of my aunts, Bonnie, Dixie, and Sandy, you immediately think, “Oh, those girls must be best friends and sisters, not just sisters. Or their parents must have really trained them very well, for them to stand there so obediently.” Well, you would be right most of the time, but as we all know, siblings fight sometimes and kids act out occasionally.
Younger siblings can be a joy and a pain…within minutes of each other. They can make you laugh and then make you mad, usually because they are so needy. Then, when the older siblings become teenagers, every request, every question, and especially the presence of the younger sibling within a mile of the older one, is a huge annoyance, and some things are the worst thing in the world!!
We have all been there…at least any of us with younger siblings, or even cousins, so you can’t exactly fault your own kids when they try to do the same things you did. You can hope they won’t, but you really need to be realistic. It’s just the way things go in families. There will come a day when they will be friends for life…when they will look back at these days and think about how silly they were to worry about having their younger sibling around them. Like it was going to steal all their coolness away. We realize that they just wanted to be like us, because they thought we were so cool. How could they not see the serious lack of confidence we had? How we felt so very not cool, and we were trying to show the world that we really were cool. Thankfully those days are very short in the total of our life. And thankfully during those days, that feel like forever, there are a few golden moments when they forget that they don’t want that younger sibling around.
It is in those precious moments that they find that it’s kind of fun to have someone who looks up to you. It isn’t something that happens very much, after all. They see that they are someone of value to this, their younger sibling. They find that they like helping out. After all, it’s just a helping hand to get up on the bed of a pickup, because the littlest girl can stand behind her taller sisters and it will make a great picture. And it is kind of funny when you are both a little clumsy at getting her up there, because while she is your little sister, she isn’t so much smaller that you can easily lift her, so you let her push up on you and she slips a little, and the whole thing is so comical that all you can do is giggle. Pretty soon, it isn’t just her who is saying, “A little help, please!!” It’s both of you, because you can’t stop laughing long enough to get her up there.
Bob’s Aunt Marion was a wonderful, hard working woman, who died in 1999 at the age of 72. She always seemed so young and full of life, but I guess that is what comes from staying so busy that you don’t have time to notice advancing age or illness. She raised 8 hard working children, 5 girls and 3 boys. Her youngest son is actually younger than her first grandson.
I was always a little in awe of Aunt Marion. She seemed to have it all together. Nothing phased her, and yet she never made you feel like she better than you, or that you were worthless. We didn’t get to see her as often as we would have liked, but always enjoyed the times we got to spend with her and her family. Her kids were very much like her, so they remind me a lot of their mom.
Aunt Marion’s husband, Uncle John passed away a few days ago on December 13th at the age of 85, and I have found myself thinking about him and the kids a lot. They told us that he worked hard all summer, and apparently didn’t tell them that he had cancer, until it had advanced to the point of much pain. It breaks my heart to think of him suffering in silence, working hard, and hoping that his children…who work with him in the family business, by the way…won’t notice. It’s so hard on the kids to think back, looking for a sign, and wondering if they should have noticed more. It brings quite a lot of guilty feelings and regret. In reality, I’m sure there was nothing they could have done, other than to provide moral support, but if that is all you can do, you feel better if you were given the chance to do it.
I have thought a lot about Aunt Marion through the years, and I’m sure I will do the same with Uncle John. I’m thankful that neither one is in pain anymore, but I wish that they were both still with us. It is always so hard to deal with loss. I know it is natural…the circle of life, but it seems to get harder with each and every loved one that leaves us. I don’t think I like it much…natural or not.
Today is Father’s Day, and while I wish all the dads a happy Father’s Day, I feel a little bit like an orphan. My dad went to Heaven 3 1/2 years ago, and it is something I will never really get over. I have felt like the impossible has happened. The world has continued to go on and my Dad hasn’t. It is just wrong that the world should go on as if nothing happened when our loved ones have left this world. I have feel like the world should sit up and take notice…why doesn’t it? Why?
I guess it is supposed to get easier…that time will dull the pain…but how long does that take? There are times when it seems like it has gotten worse. My heart doesn’t seem to know that it is supposed to hurt less with time. It just hurts!! I miss my Dad!! That doesn’t change!!
So, that said, my Dad is very much on my mind and heart today, as he is every day. He was such a sweet caring man…so patient with his girls, and I for one was a bit of a challenge. I always liked a…good debate…no I liked to argue, and I was very opinionated. But Dad was patient and put up with it…most of the time. And we had an understanding about it. When he said, “Don’t argue with me!!” I didn’t..anymore…at least for that moment. I knew that was the end of the discussion…he had had enough. Dad rarely lost his temper, even when we argued. He just got done.
Dad was a quiet hero. He fought for his country during World War II, but never spoke of it, unless we pried it out of him. He never thought of himself as a hero. On a rare occasion, when I took him to the airport to see the B-17 bombers, which is what he was on during the war, he told me a few things. He talked about where he stood and how he worked his gun. He talked about the work he did as flight engineer. The flight engineer was the go to man in any emergency. He had to know the systems and be able to do anything the ground crew could. If the plane was in trouble, he was the best chance they had to avoid a crash. That day did come for my dad’s crew when the landing gear wouldn’t come down, and my dad had to hang upside down in the bomb bay area and crank down the landing gear, saving the lives of his crew members.
Dad was all that to our country, and yet such a good dad. He always knew what to do to solve a problem. Maybe that came from his training, but I really think it came from his deep love for his family. He would have done anything to fix things for his family. He was an amazing husband and dad. We were so blessed to have him in our lives, and I just wish he was still here. Happy Father’s Day Daddy!! I love you and I can’t wait to see you again!!

Never in a million years would we have thought that date would ever change. Boy were we wrong. After finding out Jon got a great job opportunity in Germany, we knew our lives were about to get a little crazy! We found out in February '08, (the exact weekend my step-father had a severe stroke, which doctors said he only had a 3% chance of surviving,) that we would be moving to Germany in August. (After a year, my step-father is doing great, but still has a lot of trouble with speech. But he's walking and still his goofy self.)
With that in mind we knew what we had to do and moved up our wedding date 4 months earlier to June 7, 2008. I have to admit, I was really sad because I was looking forward to a large wedding at a wonderful venue we had already picked out, but instead we decided to have a very small family wedding with a few family friends.
With my step-father's stroke, worrying about his health, my mom having to leave work to take care of him and fly to Canada to a rehabilitation center for him, me working 60+ hours a week taking over her business on top of mine, and planning a wedding in 4 months, we had no choice.
Now looking back, I wouldn't have had it any other way. It was the perfect wedding for Jon and me; it suited our personalities quite well actually. For a small wedding, put together in a couple of months, it was more than I could have asked for. Thanks to the help of several family members, my wonderful friends and family friends, it was amazing.
Since it is growing nearer to our 1 year wedding anniversary, I thought I would share with you guys, some of my favorite photographs from our wedding. I am sure you all know how hard it is to pick your favorite photos from hundreds and hundreds, but these are just a few that are special to me.
My mother and step father flew in from Canada the day before my wedding and left the day after, to return to the stroke center in Canada. I would not have known what to do if they wouldn't have been able to make it. I am so thankful God helped them to make it to our wedding.
This is by far my favorite photograph from our day.The wind was blowing like crazy just at that moment so
I had to take the opportunity and pose like the goofy person I really am.Getting some sweet sugar.It is such a wonderful feeling to look back at these pictures and remember that day. Don't you just love looking back at old pictures from memorable moments of your life and wish you could do it all over again, the same exact way, just to experience that moment in time again? I do!!
Hope you all have a great Tuesday!

Looking to November, Democrats hope to further pad their super-majority in Trenton, by flipping the 8th, 21st and 25th legislative districts, all of which of which were decided by narrow margins in 2017.
Meanwhile Republicans hope to make dents in that super-majority by defending those six seats and flipping the 16th. Sixteen assembly races were decided by less than 10% in 2017, and both parties hope to swing a few more seats into their column come November.
Republicans hope to win back suburban seats that have been trending away from the party in recent years, while Democrats hope to capitalize on momentum following the 2018 midterms and look to target districts located within the congressional districts that Democrats flipped in 2018.
The closest district in 2017, and one that the Democrats hope to pick up in 2019, was the 8th District. Republicans Joe Howarth and Ryan Peters only won a combined 50.1% of the vote, compared to the Democrats 49.3%, and Peters only avoided being defeated by Democrat Joanne Schwartz by a razor thin margin of 350 votes.
Republicans Jon Bramnick and Nancy Munoz held on to the 21st district by a 1.2% margin against their Democratic Rivals, and Munoz only holding on to her seat by a small 1,554 vote margin.
The closest race won by the Democrats was in the 16th legislative district, where Assemblyman Andrew Zwicker, and former executive Roy Freiman won election against Republicans Donna Simon and Mark Caliguire by a 2.4% margin, and Freiman winning his seat by 3,040 votes.
Including the 16th district, six of the sixteen legislative districts where the margin of victory was under 10%, were won by Democratic candidates. Two of them were under 5%, including the 16th and 11th, which was won by the Democrats by a 4.8% margin. Districts 3, 14, and 38 were all won by between 8-9% by Democrats.
Ten of the sixteen districts where the margin was under 10% were won by Republicans, including the 8th, and 21st districts.
Five of the ten seats won by the Republicans in 2017 with a margin under 10% were decided by a margin of 3% or under.
These districts are the 8th, 21st, 25th, 39th, and 40th districts.
The 25th district was the closest of these 3 besides the 8th and 21st, having been decided by a margin of 2.1%, and Assemblywoman Nancy Munoz only defeated challenger Lacey Rzeszowski by 2,430 votes.
The 39th and 40th districts were decided by a similar margin and vote total, with both going to the Republicans by around 3%, and Robert Auth winning the 39th district by 3,613 votes, and Christopher DePhillips winning in the 40th district by 3,518 votes.
Republicans held on to the 12th, 13th, 23rd, 24th, and 26th districts by a margin between 5.6% and 7.8%.

Chapter 484 – City Destruction
Translator: Mr Voltaire
“What do we do?” The governmental officials worriedly discussed because this was a moment that would decide their lives, so they had to talk with great haste.
Right now, they could either surrender and live or resist and die. They no longer had any chance of success.
A relatively short governmental official with small eyes said nervously, “I say that we should surrender! If we continue to resist, we’ll just be massacred. Think of those innocent residents.”
If Shi Jian was still alive, he could at least make sure that everyone stayed loyal. However, now that he was dead, everyone thought for oneself. No one wanted to die, as one would lose everything and no longer be able to enjoy this world.
However, hearing these words, a well-built man harrumphed unhappily and said, “You’re just craven and cowardly. You want to affect the residents as well. We shouldn’t surrender. We should do our best to kill as many of them as possible to take revenge for the City Lord.”
Evidently, this man was very loyal to Shi Jian, and he would rather sacrifice himself than surrender.
The others all had different views, and they were split into a surrender faction and resistance faction. Neither faction was able to convince the other.
In the air, Zhao Fu didn’t give them much time to think. He took out Heavenstone City’s City Lord Seal and chose to destroy the city walls and list all of the residents as wanted fugitives.
A formless energy rippled out from the City Lord Seal, causing the sturdy, ten-meter tall city walls to start to crack before collapsing. The sound of this collapse was massive and shocked countless people.
Now that even the city walls were gone, their confidence to resist Great Qin became even smaller. Now, the players were set on surrendering and didn’t dare to resist at all.
The residents’ expressions were quite unsightly. Not only were the city walls gone, but they had also been listed as wanted fugitives. If they remained within Heavenstone City, they would receive a 30% debuff to their stats, and they lost the buffs that they had from the city.
Now, their stats were lower than those of ordinary players, and it would be incredibly easy for Great Qin to slaughter them.
The governmental officials were incredibly shocked, and they quickly fell silent, coming to a final decision.
“Heavenstone City’s residents, I’ll say this one more time: if you’re willing to surrender and want to enjoy the treatment of a resident of Great Qin, walk out of the city. If you’re unwilling, I’ll have to kill you all,” Zhao Fu said, his voice filled with killing intent.
This caused a few governmental officials to finally make up their minds and say, “We’re going to surrender. If this goes on, there’ll only be pointless deaths.”
The other governmental officials sighed and didn’t try to stop them – after all, they didn’t have the right to ask others to die with them. However, they also made the decision to fight to the death with Great Qin!
Very soon, the residents split into two groups – one walked outside of the city and knelt down, choosing to surrender, while the other took up weapons and made some simple defenses, preparing to battle.
There were roughly 200,000 or so people who had come out, and all of them were residents – not a single one was a soldier. There were 380,000 residents in total, which meant that roughly 180,000 residents and 20,000 soldiers were choosing to resist.
Zhao Fu coldly laughed – now, Great Qin didn’t even need to act. Zhao Fu loudly said to the players, “Do you normally envy the indigenous residents for their equipment and items? Or have you ever wanted their skills? Or the fortunes on them?
“Right now, all of them have been listed as wanted fugitives by me, and their stats are lower than yours. I will allow you to do anything in this city for four hours, whether it’s killing or stealing; all that is required is that not a single person remains alive after. After four hours, I will open the isolation barrier, and all of you must leave!”
Hearing Zhao Fu’s words, the players’ eyes all went red with greed. The residents were quite wealthy compared to ordinary players, and just like Zhao Fu had said, the players had always been envious of the indigenous residents. However, because of the system main city’s soldiers, they didn’t dare to do much.
However, Heavenstone City no longer had any power to stop them, and what’s more, Great Qin was permitting them to do this. As such, they could do whatever they wanted with full justification and without fear of any repercussions.
There were 200,000 residents and soldiers left, and if Great Qin’s 400,000 soldiers charged in, they would be able to easily kill all of them. Their cultivation and equipment were all far superior, and they had 200,000 Stage 1 soldiers who could easily kill those below Stage 1.
However, 200,000 people were still a lot of people, and Great Qin would most likely still lose tens of thousands of soldiers. Because Great Qin valued its people’s lives more and didn’t care as much about the wealth that the residents possessed, he decided to do something like this.
After hearing Zhao Fu’s words, the countless players immediately started to act. Not only could they obtain great benefits, but they would also be able to live. Therefore, they were naturally quite happy.
Many players took out their weapons and rushed towards the residents, causing sounds of battle to be heard. Countless players excitedly rushed towards the residents, starting a massacre and stealing anything of value.
The residents had never thought that they would have to face so many greedy players before even fighting with Great Qin. There were nearly one million players, and because their stats were generally all higher, the only advantage that the residents had was their equipment.
The residents defended with all their might, but they were unable to stop the countless greedy players. A governmental official, the well-built man, led 10,000 soldiers out of the city, disregarding the players behind them, and they rushed at Great Qin’s soldiers.
They didn’t want to die at the hands of players, as they only had a single enemy, which was Great Qin!
However, Great Qin had long since made preparations, and the Archers already had their bows drawn. Countless waves of arrows rained down, giving off terrifying auras. Before the 10,000 soldiers could even reach Great Qin’s army, they had been completely annihilated without a single person remaining.
This gory scene gave the players who had wanted to come out to collect equipment a big fright, and they were scared back into the city.
The residents who had surrendered had complicated or sad looks on their faces as they watched the people they knew being slaughtered by countless players. They had all belonged to Heavenstone City, so many of the people knew each other.
However, they couldn’t do anything about it – this was the outcome of not surrendering.
The battle concluded faster than expected, and all 200,000 of the residents and soldiers had died. 10,000 or so of the players had died as well, and their bodies were everywhere. The stench of blood filled the city, and the scene within the city was quite chaotic. However, a large number of players looked incredibly delighted as they stepped into teleportation channels and went to other system main cities.
By now, the sun had set. There weren’t many stars in the sky, nor was the moon out, making the night quite dark. In the darkness, ten Disaster Cavalrymen walked out.

Over the years, more than 36,000 people have been buried in the Sacramento Cemetery, and many of them haunt the grounds. There have been several tales of ghosts in the cemetery, such as the haunting of William Brown, a railroad engineer who died on September 26th, 1880 during a train accident.
One of the sadder tales from the Sacramento is that of May Woolsey, a twelve-year-old girl who contracted encephalitis from mosquitos and died in 1879. Shortly after her death, she appeared to her parents as an apparition and said: “I’m not yet dead, but I’m waiting for you on the other side.”
Exactly 100 years later on the day of her death, the family who owned the home were renovating it when they found a trunk of toys and belongings in one of the walls. The house was owned by the Woolseys during the 1800s, and the trunk belonged to May.
Those who visit her grave say that they can feel her presence, and they often leave items such as marbles, buttons, and coins for her. The cemetery’s officials are still in awe over an incident involving the bodies of John Wesley Reeves and his daughter, Ella. The two were exhumed from their 90-year-old cast iron coffins as requested years ago, and their skin was still smooth with its natural color.
Other apparitions include a mourning couple dressed in black, a mysterious pit bull who follows visitors around and vanishes, and a little girl who plays by her grave.

$38.99 $42.00 FINAL SALE You Save 7% ($3.01)
I ordered size 8 but it was too tight on top ..i needed 8 and half but unfortunately they were out of that size iam not sure if 9 will work too hesitant to return it just in case the 9 is too big...they dont do exchanges iam afraid iam out $42 ..
I took a risk and wore these shoes (before I broke them in) on a weekend get away where we walked a lot and the shoes were perfect!
These sandals are adorable! However I had ordered my normal size 7 and had to return them and get an 8, they were too small. I would not say they are true to size. The bands were too tight and I couldn’t get my foot in. But I do have a higher instep and wide feet. I would not say these are made for wide feet but I made them work with a size up.

Sunshine (on top) and Boomer (down below) are still figuring out how to be friends. They started off really strongly, but then had a bit of a setback that made me separate them for a week or so. They're just now getting back to spending the evenings together when I can supervise them. Sunshine goes back to her (Great Dane-sized) dog crate while I'm at work and overnight.
For some reason they had a fight one night and I woke up to find them chasing one another and fur flying everywhere. Boomer lost the most fur in that tussle and was scared of Sunshine for a few days. When he got over being afraid of her, all he wanted to do was mount her! I honestly didn't think Boomer had it in him, as I never saw him act that way with Cricket. He seems recently to have gotten over his friskiness (ahem!) and is content to lie beside her and groom her ears. From what I've read, this is pretty typical behavior with bunnies who are bonding, as they have to work out who will be the boss and other important living arrangements like who will wash whose ears and who gets to eat the choicest bits of cilantro.
a return Visit
6 months ago

Alvaro Morata is a Spanish professional soccer player who currently plays for the Premier League club Chelsea. He is a forward and is known for his goal-scoring ability. He has been playing for some of the biggest clubs in the world, including Real Madrid and Juventus. Here is a look at the height, weight, age, bio, body stats, net worth and wiki of Alvaro Morata.
Alvaro Morata: Height, Weight & Age
Alvaro Morata stands tall at 6 feet 2 inches (1.88 m) and weighs around 176 lbs (80 kg). He was born on October 23, 1992, making him 27 years old. He has a muscular build and is known for his agility on the field.
Alvaro Morata: Bio, Net Worth & Wiki
Alvaro Morata began his professional career with Real Madrid in 2010, where he made his debut at just 17 years old. He then went on to play for Juventus and Chelsea, where he has had the most success. He has also been a part of the Spanish national team since 2014. He has won several accolades, including the UEFA Champions League and the Premier League.
As of 2021, Alvaro Morata’s net worth is estimated to be around $20 million. He is active on social media and has over 5 million followers on Instagram. He also has his own Wikipedia page, which provides details about his career and achievements.
Alvaro Morata is one of the most successful soccer players in the world. His height, weight, age, bio, body stats, net worth and wiki are all evidence of his success. He has represented some of the most prestigious clubs in the world and has won several accolades. He is a role model for aspiring soccer players and is an inspiration to many.

Hunter March Bio, Age, Height, Girlfriend, Net Worth
Quick Facts of Hunter March
Are you searching for American TV personality who has hosted on the Top Five Live on AwesomessTV? If yes then you are in the right article. Today we are talking about Hunter March an American TV personality as well as producer and writer. March is well known as the host of Exogenous on Game Show Network and also for AwesomenessTV.
Further, he is also active in social media where he has his own Youtube channel which has 372k subscribers. Besides he has estimated a huge amount of money from his career. If you are interested to know about Hunter March’s personal as well as professional life read our article.
Hunter March was born on 5 April 1991 in California, United Staes of America. He is of American nationality however, his ethnicity is unknown. He is the grandson of Hal March former game show host. Similarly, he has a brother named Dylan and has three stepbrothers and a stepsister. As of 2020, he is 28 years old.
Despite there are no details about his parents. It seems like he doesn’t like to talk about his parents on media. At the beginning of childhood, March was interested in hosting as well as in acting. Likewise his parents there is no details about his educational background.
Hunter March’s Body Measurements
Taking about his physical features, he stands at the average height where his weight is unknown. Further, he has a pair of brown eyes and has dark brown hair.
Girlfriend Lex Lee
Fans of Hunter March are very curious to know about his love life. Is he married or dating anyone? Well for your information, Hunter March is not married yet and he is not single. March is in a relationship with his long term girlfriend Lex Lee. It’s been five years that the couple started dataing but there is no symbol of them getting married as of now.
March usually posts pictures of him and his girlfriend on his Instagram account. Also, he shared videos with Lee on his YouTube channel, named Hunter March. Furthermore, the two are enjoying their love life and are in a lovey-dovey relationship with no sign of problems.
Besides Hunter is active in social media like Instagram, Facebook, and Twitter. He has 173k followers on his Instagram account and has more than 48.1k followers on Twitter. Similarly, he has 28k followers on the Facebook account and he has his own YouTube channel on which he has more than 372k subscribers.
Hunter March’s Career
At the beginning of March’s career, he has first joined Awesomeness TV in 2012 as an intern. With his hard work, he was promoted to become a producer as the on-camera host where he became one of the early faces of the company. He also hosted 2000 episodes of multiple shows for AwesomenessTV and also became the permanent host of the Daily Report for more than five years.
From 2015 to 2016, March hosted a daily talk show TV called Top Five Live. Additionally, March also hosts the show You’re Busted along with Nick Haddad. Besides he also hosts Exogenous on the Game Show Network which was premiered in 2017.
Similarly, he also became the host of a Netflix premiered newest culinary competition show, Sugar Rush. He is also the host of the backstage segments at the Teen Choice Awards in 2016.
Enjoys $3 Million Net Worth
As of 2020, Hunter March has an estimated net worth $3 million, mostly earned through his television career. No doubt, he makes a big sum through TV shows but March has chosen to not reveal his financial aspects to the public. Also, he is an author of TBH: 51 True Story Collabs.
On the other hand, the average salary of a TV host in the United States is estimated at around $55,593 per annum. So, his salary per annum must also be more than an average salary as he is experienced in this field for more than 5 years. LeeLooking at his Instagram it seems like he is enjoying a lavish life and loves to travel a different part of the country.

I got a 50 hp Mariner tiller, I believe its a 1999. I've always winterized and stored it in the garage in winters and never had a problem. This year I had it out and it was running great like it always had. We were heading in when the motor just shut down, I mean it stopped so hard it threw my brother and I to the floor. We restarted the motor and we could put it in forward and it would work but as soon as I gave it any throttle it would start to shake and then shut down hard again. I drained to lower unit oil to see how bad the damage was and surprisingly it wasn't bad, so I refilled it and put the muffs on and it started fine, in neutral it will throttle it all the way open, so I put it in gear and throttled up and it got wide open without a problem. So I took it out to a small local lake and as soon as I started to throttled up it did it again. Does this sound like a blown lower unit or something else? My local boat shop says its 150$ just to look at it. Any input would be appreciated.

Talk about a day of sheer (cheap) fun! The boys and I spent the morning at home, enjoying playtime and breakfast with each other. When I sensed the boys getting restless, I decided it was time for a roadtrip. I loaded up the car with snacks, diapers, and wipes and off we went. The plan was to check out a festival for awhile, then head over to Costco and Home Depot for groceries and gardening supplies. We ended up having so much fun that we spent 4 hours at the festival!
It wasn't very crowded when we arrived, and the weather was perfect. I bought the older boys a wristband for $3 each (unlimited activities for kids), and they went on ponyrides, did arts and crafts, and played in the never ending supply of bounce houses. We walked around the booths, the boys got free plants from Home Depot. We also spun the (free) wheel at the Elephant Bar display. We cleaned house-G won a $25 gift card, M won a $10 gift card, and I won a free appetizer card! We also received three coupons for free kid meals. I know where we're taking the kids next week if we go out as a family for our aniversary ;) We ended our visit by sharing a huge fruit cup under the shade, listening to some good music, which reminded me of my college days. I bought the musician's cd (Erik Janson)-M and G were rocking out to it while he played, and since we've been under budget eating at home now, I knew we had some wiggle room. I asked the musician to autograph his cd, which he did. He asked if I was going to a local brewery in town to hear his set that night, and with three kids underfoot, I said it depended if my husband and I had a sitter (and at that moment I flashed back for a brief moment to our pre-kid days).
I left right before the boys started to melt down (no one had naps all day!) and we all had a quiet ride home listening to our new cd. I was thrilled about how our excursion went, and how we stayed way under budget (spent only $20 the whole afternoon!) When we made it home, R was already home. He was just as suprised as I was that I ventured out alone to the festival, and how well the boys behaved. He asked if I wanted to go to the brewery, and I said as much as I wanted to go, I wanted to use our sitter (and pay for one) next weekend for our anniversary. For dinner, I made salad, along with a delish steak and rice. I also made a tasty lemon cake for dessert. We all relaxed after dinner, and the boys fell asleep while watching a movie with us. It was truly a great day. I'll post pictures from our day soon.

My neighbors, whose names I will keep anonymous in public post, have a dog named Thor for whom they wish to find a good home.
Thor is a Labrador and Pit Bull mix who has become aggressive toward their other dog, Argo, a German Shepard, and ultimately protective of the wife since she became pregnant. Today, Thor tore up Argo pretty good, even displaying aggression toward the wife when she tried to break up the fight. My neighbors considered having him put down, but perish the thought. I do, too, having spent time with them and their dogs.
Thor is a good boy, but obviously needs a different home, one whose owner(s) can properly provide the stimulus this high energy dog needs. While I do not wish to speak poorly of my neighbors, as they have meant well of their dogs, they have not been able to provide Thor the exercise and stimulus he needs. I feel that this, culminating with the wife now pregnant, has simply proven too much for them or Thor to handle.
My neighbors asked me to put out word for anyone who might be interested in taking in their dog. They also mentioned that they would also provide all his toys, his leash and harness, and (perhaps) his kennel.
If any of you are interested in taking in Thor, please PM me stating so, along with your name (or pseudonym) and telephone number, and I will pass it along to my neighbors.
I am uncertain that they know I patron Letters to the Devil or the Church of Satan
. I do not know how comfortable they would be knowing that another member here were interested in taking in their dog. I would advise excluding that information with them should you be an interested party that they contact. That would be for their comfort and mine.

High in the desert, a two-hour drive north of Los Angeles, a family huddles together at Sunset Hills Memorial Park. Having driven to the cemetery in convoy from their home in nearby Apple Valley, an innocuous town far from the sprawling bustle of LA, they lay flowers at a stone slab set into an area of plastic turf known as the Garden of Valor. As the sun sinks behind the San Bernardino Mountains, they cast long shadows across the grass. The wind musses their hair. A short walk away, other family members lie buried high in the surrounding rock, looking down on the gathered throng.
Across the grave is the simple inscription: "Richard T Davis, born 1978, died 2003." Richard's father, Lanny, a Vietnam veteran, places his flowers on it. He removes his photo-chromatic glasses and observes his family sheltering from the bluster with detachment, clutching his son's army boots. "I'm not cold; this is nothing," he says in a hoarse voice, the result of a Vietcong soldier ramming a rifle butt into his throat, 40 years ago.
Richard Davis has had two funerals at Sunset Hills. The first, in December 2003 and marked by a 21-gun salute, followed the discovery of an incomplete set of Richard's remains, scarred with stab marks from the blade that killed him. The second took place earlier this year, after more parts of his body were released by Georgia prosecutors. Richard's mother, Remy, hopes to hold a third funeral once she obtains the last missing piece of Richard, one of his ribs.
The events surrounding Richard Davis's gruesome death are about to become familiar to British cinema audiences. A Hollywood film inspired by his killing, In the Valley of Elah, is released in the UK on 25 January. With a stellar cast Charlize Theron, Susan Sarandon and Tommy Lee Jones (whose character is based on Lanny Davis) and an Oscar-winning director, Paul Haggis, behind the camera, it was feted on its release in the United States. Jones is being talked about as a potential Oscar-winner for a performance described as the most powerful of his career.
The film follows the story of a man who drives across America after his son, a soldier who served in the Iraq war, goes missing. Faced with an unhelpful military, he tries to wrestle the truth out of those who served with his son. It's an Erin Brockovich-style tale of David versus Goliath; indeed, its title is taken from the location of this biblical battle.
But, while The New Yorker calls it "an American film that convinces you that its protagonist is genuinely a great man", the movie has been criticised by those who inspired it. In fact, Lanny Davis's true story is more harrowing than a fictionalised account could ever be.
Lanny's life has been in turmoil since Richard returned from serving in Iraq in 2003. That year, his son was stabbed and his body burned and buried by a trio of his fellow soldiers. Lanny drove across two states from his home in Missouri to Richard's base in Fort Worth, Texas, and began an investigation into his son's disappearance. Eventually, his son's killers were brought to justice. But one of them is now free, and the others are appealing against their imprisonment. Much was made of the influence of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) mental instability provoked by war on their actions.
In this interview, his only one with a British newspaper, Lanny Davis describes the short life and horrific death of his son, who had been a specialist with Baker Company, a prestigious section of the US Army, and of how he is still fighting for the truth.
The story behind Lanny's gradual disillusionment how he went from being a loyal military man who served his country with pride to someone who now speaks of "that bastard" George W Bush and "dickhead Rumsfeld" goes back more than two decades.
Davis, 58, sits in his single-storey Apple Valley ranch house, which is decorated for Christmas. Kitsch nativity scenes sit near a widescreen television set, above which hangs Richard's photograph, adorned with tinsel. Outside, the front door is marked with a yellow ribbon declaring "Bring them home safely"; parked in the garage is Richard's powerful sports car, with a red Christmas ribbon tied to its spoiler.
Sitting in his kitchen, Lanny describes how he volunteered for the army at 20 and served as a sergeant in Vietnam. He met his wife in 1974 when she was a medic in the army and he a senior military policeman.
Richard, born on a military base in Germany, had a more or less uneventful upbringing until the family moved back to Lanny's childhood home in Missouri, where Richard began to be bullied at school. Because Remy is Filipina-American and Richard was mixed-race, their son "got a lot of flak for the way he looked", his father remembers.
"They are backward, uneducated people back there, however you want to say it," Lanny says in his Midwestern lilt, peppering his speech with the "sirs" and "ma'ams" ingrained by his military days. "They try to impress people by picking on things that they think are different."
Richard signed up with the army in 1999, aged 19, to "prove" his allegiance to his country. He was soon sent to Bosnia with an artillery unit, as a United Nations peacekeeper. It was his first contact with the atrocities of war; calling his father, he described the mass graves of women and children he saw there. "Of course that's going to traumatise anybody," Lanny says. "He told me all about it. He said, 'Daddy, how can people do that, just kill women and children?' I said sometimes war does that. He would always be frightened, for the rest of his life, because he'd seen all of that."
Richard returned to Missouri after Bosnia. After failing to get a civilian job, he re-enlisted, this time with the infantry. "I didn't want him to go in to begin with. Because of what I'd been through, because of the crap I'd faced. Vietnam gave me injured arms and kidney disease and PTSD. But after the loss of my son, it don't mean nothing," Lanny says.
The last time his parents saw Richard was in November 2002. After that, Richard was shipped out to Kuwait. He told his father he did not think there was going to be a war, but Lanny disagreed; he'd watched the news reports of armaments being shipped to the Middle East and could sense which way the wind was blowing. "On 14 March, he turned 25. It wasn't even a week later that Bush ordered the war, the dirty bastard," Lanny says.
Richard's unit Baker Company, First Battalion, 15th Infantry Regiment, Third Brigade, Third Infantry Division (Mechanized) formed "the tip of the spear" that sped up the western bank of the Euphrates to lead the assault on Baghdad. Lanny describes how, when the men crossed the border from Kuwait into Iraq, eight or nine people were squashed in together in vehicles meant to carry seven. Every village they came to, they fought through.
Lanny claims (although he is aware of his bias) that whenever the ramp would drop for the men to surge forward for battle, Richard would be the first out to fight. He describes him as a "pro soldier". Mario Navarrete, one of Richard's murderers, later described in court how "he never saw fear in Richard's eyes".
Richard had invested in extra equipment, such as a "speed holster" to enable him to draw his weapon more quickly. He would improvise showers from buckets with holes shot through, and was competent with mechanics and electronics. "He was such a confident man. But he had to fight two sets of people the whole time; the Iraqis and his eventual murderers," Lanny says.
Throughout this period, Richard was being bullied by Jacob Burgoyne, one of his murderers, now incarcerated in a mental hospital. Born and raised in Tallahassee, Florida, Burgoyne had enlisted in the army aged 18 and become a career soldier. By his own estimate, he shot to death more than 100 Iraqis as his convoy stormed into Baghdad. He later admitted shooting women, children, old men, soldiers and civilians, recounting how one of the tricks used by the "enemy combatants" was to put children in the road so the US military vehicles would slow down and could be ambushed. In those circumstances, Burgoyne's Humvee did not slow down.
"He shouldn't have been in the military. He was a nutcase," Lanny says. "He was so bad in training that he put someone in a coma." Davis claims that his son would take regular beatings from Burgoyne. He shows a picture of his son's face taken at around this time. It looks black and swollen.
Fellow infantryman Matt Thompson served with Richard's platoon in Iraq. Speaking shortly before Christmas, he said: "Burgoyne was a bully; he wanted people to like him but he wanted people to know he was top. He wasn't great at listening to orders. When we were back home, he would go out to bars and I was quite good friends with him then. But he needed people to make him toe the line. I stopped him getting into a few tussles. We also got in few too, though.
"He had some big issues. He always told us his mom was dead, and we knew she wasn't. He always wanted to prove himself to other people and a lot of the chain of command was scared of him.
"To tell you the truth, Richard was picked on, but everyone was picked on by somebody. Everyone didn't like someone; that's what it was like over there. Richard was different to other people. He had his own way of doing things. He would go out on his own and find stuff to build things when we were on down time, like cookers to cook food on, make them out of nothing."
Richard's problems intensified after the "official" end of the war in May 2003, when President Bush declared victory from the aircraft carrier USS Abraham Lincoln. For the next two months, the men of Baker Company stayed in and around Baghdad, awaiting their return home.
Lanny says: "They were in the boiling hot sun. [Richard] did not have a change of clothes or even a toothbrush, and had to wear one pair of boots and battle fatigues throughout. There were around 5,000 men in one area for six weeks in hot combat vehicles. At one point, he had to wait three hours to make a long-distance call for five minutes."
When Richard did call, he reversed the charges. "He said, 'We're down to one bottle of water to drink between all the men,'" Lanny says. "So I asked him, 'Where is the supply line?' and he said he didn't know. And he started crying and said, 'Dad, can't you get me out of here?' and I said, 'Son, I didn't want you to go in the first place.' I should have kept him out of there. One of the things he said was, 'Dad, I just want to prove to everyone that I'm American.' And I said, 'Son, you're more American than most.' I'd seen all the crap he'd been through in school."
Richard was begging and crying, saying that he didn't have a safe place "to lay his head". Later, it was discovered that in another bullying episode two members of his platoon, Navarrete and a man called Alberto Martinez, had almost choked him to death.
According to Matt Thompson: "Martinez was a lazy prick. He always tried to sham, trying to get other people to do work for him. You couldn't trust him when we played poker. People got along with him just because they had to. He could be cool at times, but I didn't like him because he was sneaky. He said he wanted to kill somebody. He didn't get to kill anyone out there. I mean, everyone wanted to, that was the whole thing. He kept on saying, 'I'm going to kill somebody,'" Thompson says.
Lanny claims his son approached an army medic after he was attacked and made him promise not to report anything. The last time he spoke to his son, on 23 May 2003, they were cut off in mid-conversation. Lanny asked his phone company for the reason for this, and shows the letter he received in response; it says the call was disconnected for being "unusual".
When Richard's platoon was in Kuwait, ready to be sent back to the US, Burgoyne attempted suicide. Army doctors reportedly examined him and said he was suffering from PTSD and should not be allowed near a weapon. But, trumpeted as a battle hero by his commanders, he was released and rejoined his comrades. Soon afterwards, Richard Davis was murdered.
The next Lanny heard about his son was through an early summer phone call from Richard's platoon sergeant at Fort Benning in Georgia. The sergeant reported that Richard had not turned up for morning formation. It transpired that the army intended to classify him as absent without leave (Awol) as opposed to a missing person, which meant that no official search by military authorities would be made. Lanny says: "I said, 'My son is pro-military. If anyone went Awol, it wouldn't be him.'"
No news was forthcoming for about six weeks. But, on 19 August, Lanny drove 700 miles from his house to the military base in Georgia to look for Richard. "I would have driven halfway around the world. I knew something bad had happened when they called," he says.
Lanny speculated about where his son was. He wondered if he had been picked up by a police officer in a small town and was unable to gain access to a telephone. Or maybe he needed a rest from the war and had taken off for Mexico. But he knew it was out of character for Richard not to contact his parents.
After arriving at the base, Lanny flashed his military identification and was allowed inside. He tried to speak to various members of his son's squad but they refused to answer his questions in the absence of an officer. He suspected they knew his son's whereabouts. "In a war you can't live by yourself, you can't fight with yourself, you got to know something."
Lanny continued asking people in and around his son's base for information but still drew a blank. He approached Military Police officials in Texas. He went to civilian police investigators. Then he came up with the idea of finding out whether Richard had been using his bank account. Through an old military contact, Davis spoke to the FBI, which checked Richard's bank account and discovered that there had been no recent transactions.
In September, Lanny called his congressman, Kenny Hulshof, and eventually began to make progress. Hulshof lobbied the Department of Defense on his behalf and finally, later that month, an official inquiry was launched. Men in Richard's platoon were summoned for interview about his disappearance.
Eventually, one of Richard's fellow soldiers, whom Lanny names as Christian Terry, broke. Terry went "off post" left his station to use a military payphone to contact investigators. He pointed the finger at Burgoyne. It was not long before a group of suspects were rounded up: Burgoyne, Martinez, Navarrete and another soldier, Douglas Woodcoff.
Woodcoff took investigators to a highway in Columbus, Georgia. "He took them out to the road where there was a place where they keep trash. That's when they started finding bits of my son."
In the quartet's subsequent trial, the full, gory details of the fate that had befallen Richard Davis came to light. According to documents lodged with the Georgia Supreme Court (where one of the soldiers is appealing his sentence), on the evening of 14 July 2003 the five men ate and drank at a Hooters restaurant in Columbus before moving on to a nearby strip club. At some point, bouncers asked two of the soldiers to remove Richard because he was visibly intoxicated. After the group left Richard in their car parked outside, they returned to drink more.
It was then that things took a darker turn. Even now, the full details of what took place that night remain unclear. What is known is that, about two hours later, one of the men pulled Richard from the car and began fighting with him. The five then drove away, with Navarrete shoving or punching Richard and another soldier beating him as they drove to a wooded area.
Once the car was off the road, the soldiers, including Navarrete, formed a circle around their victim. Martinez then pulled out a knife and stabbed Richard at least 33 times. The men drove to a convenience store for lighter fluid and matches and then drove back to the murder scene, where Martinez and another soldier poured the lighter fluid on to Richard's body and set it on fire. Several days later, Martinez, Navarrete and a third soldier returned to the scene to bury the remains.
When the case came to trial, an army medic, Edward Wulff, described an incident that had taken place in Iraq. Wulff said that one night Richard had woken him up, needing treatment to a wound on the back of his hand. He was drunk, but told Wulff he had been on a hill, drinking with Martinez and Navarrete, when they had decided to become "blood brothers". Davis told Wulff that Martinez and Navarrete hit and choked him and he thought they were about to kill him.
Martinez and Navarrete were convicted and sentenced to life. Burgoyne pleaded guilty to charges of voluntary manslaughter and was sentenced to 20 years. Woodcoff's lawyers said he simply "caught a ride" with the men in question; he is currently on probation and is now a student in Texas.
"Navarrete and Martinez, the bastards, are up for parole in three or four years and they will probably get it," Lanny says. "They looked at my son as a mulatto, a half-breed. They thought, 'He's just another dead soldier, he had it coming to him.'"
Although Navarrete and Martinez's sentences are nominally "life", the court specified that they should each serve only 14 years in prison.
Burgoyne, who is serving time in Baldwin State Prison, Georgia, refused an interview request. But Mark Casto, the lawyer who represented him at the trial, said in an email: "The other three defendants never said a thing and had no remorse for their conduct or even remorse for the event, regardless of their individual participation. Only Jacob regretted this event.
"I hope you consider the PTSD diagnosis of Mr Burgoyne; how he was given inappropriate doses of medication that leads to delusional and psychotic behaviours; that he had tried to commit suicide because of his extreme emotional state; that the army doctors placed him on restriction status, ordered he be supervised at all times and that he carry no weapons. He was supposed to go to mental health hospital in Germany rather than being returned to the States. Instead, the army negligently brought him here, failed to monitor him, failed to follow up with his mental health issues and completely failed him as a soldier who asked for help, needed help and they knew he needed help.
"Don't forget, despite what Mr [Lanny] Davis thinks, Jacob did not do the actual killing. The testimony at trial clearly showed that defendant Martinez did the killing."
When In the Valley of Elah was released in the US late last year, it was lauded by the critics but it did not prove popular with cinema-goers. Those close to the real events it depicts have weighed in with criticism, too. Matt Thompson says: "It's hard to enjoy the movie because I knew what really happened. People say the real story would have been the better movie. They changed it too much."
Lanny takes issue with a scene in the film that shows the soldier based on Richard getting kicked out of a strip club, something he believes never happened. He is frustrated by the film-makers' suggestion that his son had a hash pipe (a claim he denies), and infuriated by the depiction of his son's killers as fine, upstanding American citizens who were turned into psychopaths by the madness of war; their documented histories contradict this.
The film's screenwriter was Mark Boal. Speaking from set on the final day's shooting of The Hurt Locker (another film about the Iraq war, directed by Kathryn Bigelow), Boal says that crucial decisions needed to be made when Lanny's story was adapted for the screen. "It's a fictional piece, and so at various junctures Paul [Haggis] and I thought we should change Lanny's story to make it feel more universal.
"I guess any audience's reaction is going to be inflected to some degree by what they think about the war. But I hope the film will stand on its own and come across as a human drama that's poignant on some level for audiences, regardless of which side of the political spectrum they fall on.
"I consider it a success. It was very well reviewed, and that makes me think it's a good film. I think the people who saw it found it worthwhile. I've been following the case and the developments and I've been covering the story for a long time. It's a fascinating and horribly tragic story for all concerned."
Now, those concerned with Richard's story are focused on a forthcoming book, Murder in Baker Company, along with a documentary film, by the American author Cilla McCain. Haggis has lent his financial support to the new film. Much of McCain's work discusses how the commander of Baker Company, Lieutenant Colonel John Charlton, was investigated by the military for the shootings of two prisoners of war during a 2003 battle in Baghdad. According to US wire reports, on 11 April that year Charlton shot and killed an enemy soldier rolling on the ground because a soldier next to him had just detonated a suicide-bomb vest and he feared another explosion. Charlton returned to the Iraqi soldier's body and shot him on the ground a second time because he saw "a threatening movement".
But McCain claims that various soldiers who served with Charlton have cast doubt over this account. She says: "He has been described as a 'loose cannon'; indeed, Charlton's favourite motto was, 'There's enough glory for everyone.' It sounds good for the movies, but that's not the way battles are fought you are creating an atmosphere. I believe those two prisoners he shot weren't the only ones. I have been told that."
In addition, there is a suggestion that Richard was involved in guarding some PoWs who were later illegally killed. And McCain also claims, after interviewing various members of Charlton's platoon, that Richard had witnessed the rape of an Iraqi girl by Martinez and Navarrete. She says: "I think that Richard did witness them doing something, and I think at Fort Benning he called them on it. To have Richard, an intelligent man, with these other guys, who were brutish, that night well, it was like a square peg in a round hole."
Lanny Davis sits with his family eating dinner at a restaurant at the side of Interstate 15, one of the continental highways that cross the US. He explains how one of the main manifestations of the PTSD he brought home from Vietnam is anxiety attacks. These often appear through nightmares. In one particularly harrowing dream, the former soldier says, he sees himself back in the Vietnam jungle at night, with a gun in his hand. He can hear the rotor blades of the helicopter that airlifted him into position inside his head. It is completely dark, and the jungle is damp, causing his fatigues to stick to him. The vegetation appears to close in around him. Suddenly, he says, he loses sight of his comrades and is filled with the overwhelming sense that he is about to die. He feels trapped. He wakes up gasping for air.
After Richard was murdered, the nightmares changed. Lanny started dreaming of an anonymous town in the middle of Iraq. In these dreams, Richard's squad is fighting "a lot of rag-tag Iraqi soldiers" down a night-time street. Lanny is there, dressed (inappropriately) in his jungle fatigues, making him vulnerable to attack, and unable to help. Suddenly, he'd see his son bent double in pain behind some rubble. Lanny tries to get to Richard, but something always prevents him. "I ain't never got him yet," he says.
Nowadays, Lanny Davis takes medication to help him sleep. So the dreams, like his son, are gone for ever.
In the Valley of Elah is released on 25 January. For more information, see www.richarddavisforpeace.comReuse content

I was working in some sort of academic office (maybe the English Dept. at the University of Oregon). It was a holiday of some sort, and we were all waiting for it to be time for us to leave (we were working a half day).
Somehow, I was going to get to ride the Space Shuttle. I think with Jerry Oltion. The pilot was an amalgam astronaut. I think the office had somehow become a NASA airport departure gateway.
I'd just gotten a new ID card made at the academic office. But the font on it had a drop-shadow effect that confused the security card. The student working the gate's kiosk tried scanning my card a few times before he gave up and said, "Oh, I know who you are; just go in."
At this point the shuttle taxied up and I jogged down the short runway. Somehow I had a small plastic red and white cooler in my hands. I sat down on the shuttle.
I remember looking at the seats and a saftey bar and thinking, "Wow. I made it. I'm in a vehicle that's made history!"
There was some sort of discontinuity in the dream.... I was still in the shuttle, and I think we were taxing into a liftoff position, but at the same time I was in a room that had a balcony overlooking a resort swimming pool. There's also something about parachuting and filming skydivers / astronauts.
I opened up the cooler. In the very short time between leaving the gate and entering the shuttle, my ice and Pepsi had gotten mixed up and water had seeped into my digital camera. I took the camera's case apart, dried everything carefully, and prayed that the photos I had taken hadn't been zapped of the card. All the camera components were stretched out on a work table, still connected, and I managed to get the pictures to show up on the LCD screen.
And then the dream turned into a "James and the Purple Crayon" dream, only it was me, in a jail, with a black crayon.

NEW YORK — Christopher Wilson felt the anger surge deep inside - a rage he had never expressed before - as he took the witness stand in a Florida courtroom to face two white drifters accused of dousing him with gasoline and setting him ablaze.
"Looking at them brought back the whole thing. I could feel it ... the burning ... all over again," said Wilson, the cadence of his voice stopping short, as if he didn't want to relive it.
"They took so much away from me," Wilson, a black stock brokerage clerk from Flatbush in Brooklyn, N.Y., said. "I don't want to let the anger take over because then they keep taking more. I just want to get back my life."
The trial, moved from Tampa to a West Palm Beach courtroom because of pretrial publicity, ended on Wednesday. The defendants - accused in one of the most horrifying hate crimes in recent U.S. history - were convicted on charges of attacking Wilson on New Year's Day while he was on vacation in Tampa.
Charles Rourk, 33, and Mark Kohut, 27, face up to life in prison.
It all came down to Wilson's presence - his own slow, deliberate recounting of the crime - that convinced the jury. "I was so nervous," Wilson said. "When the prosecutor quit, that put us down a little bit. But I just wanted to get on the stand. I'm glad the jury heard what I said, the truth. Thank God there was justice."
When Wilson took the stand on Sept. 3, he saw Rourk, whom he refers to as the one with the "big eyes," glaring at him. He saw Kohut, the "mean one," staring straight ahead, indifferent.
"I felt so angry," said Wilson. "When I saw their eyes they still scared me. They are full of so much hate."
Wilson feels now that he had perhaps tried too hard to put all the rage behind him in the months after his attack while he focused on healing the third-degree burns that cover 40 percent of his body. He said that "in some ways" he feels more relieved that he faced them, that he finally expressed all the anger.
One major blow for Wilson has been the death of his best friend, Hayden Fletcher, who suffered a heart attack only days before the trial. Fletcher was the one who spent long afternoons with Wilson, changing his bandages and cleaning his wounds. They would talk about anything to distract Wilson from the pain.

By Therese Baumgart, EFT INT-1
My client, "Sue," came to see me for weight loss, saying that her doctor had told her to lose 40 pounds, but that she had "tried everything" without success.
She then recounted the following life circumstances:
She had been a grieving widow since her beloved husband of forty years had died three years ago on the day before Thanksgiving. Since his death she has dreaded that holiday. She told her daughters, "For Thanksgiving, I never want to hear anything about it, just tell me what time and where to go, and I'll be there."
Also, one adult daughter has cancer and a second daughter has MS. In addition, she is completely exhausted from worrying about her children and helping care for her grandchildren, all of whom she loves dearly.
Sue also told me that she always puts on a happy face for her daughters and she couldn't be honest with them about her sad emotional state, her own health problems, or the stress she is experiencing.
When I asked Sue why she couldn't be honest with them she initially looked blank and then said that her daughters might faint from the shock--or stop speaking to her.
After hearing about Sue's overwhelming circumstances, I acknowledged them with long EFT Setup phrases, repeating each part as a reminder phrase. We massaged the sore spot (neurolymphatic reflex point) for the EFT Setup Statements and tapped each reminder phrase on a different point.
With the final point of each round we took a deep breath. (I did not ask Sue for a specific SUD number from 0-10 intensity level.)
The following is a selection of the phrases I used with Sue:
Even though I have all these weighty issues, these heavy issues, these issues weighing me down, I deeply and completely accept myself.
Even though all these heavy things happened, these heavy situations are still going on, my heart is heavy because my daughters are ill, my heart is heavy because I lost my husband, I have all these heavy issues to deal with, I deeply and completely accept myself.
Even though I'm carrying this heavy weight in my heart, I'm carrying this heavy weight in my spirit, I'm carrying this heavy weight on my body, it's inside, it's outside, these issues weighing me down, I deeply and completely accept myself.
After working with these phrases Sue asked if I thought the heaviness in her spirit was related to the heaviness in her body. I said yes I did think that. Obviously, something had clicked and I could almost see Sue thinking and making this connection in a deep way for herself.
The next series of phrases targeted widowhood, sadness, and life enjoyment:
Even though I'm a grieving widow and I'm supposed to be sad forever, I deeply and completely accept myself.
Even though I was a good wife, a great wife, and everyone knows a good wife, a great wife is supposed to be sad forever if her husband dies, I deeply and completely accept myself.
Even though I know I'd feel disloyal to my husband if I enjoy myself, I deeply and completely accept myself.(I sometimes use the phrase "I know" or "everyone knows" to subtly suggest that what anyone knows is subject to change.)
Even though people would criticize me if I had fun, people would say, look at her having such a great time, she's a widow and she's supposed to be sad forever, I deeply and completely accept myself.
Even though I'm not allowed to be happy again and enjoy my life, I'm not allowed to enjoy Thanksgiving again, I deeply and completely accept myself.
Then Sue told me that her mother had been an alcoholic and that as a child growing up she always pretended to others that everything was fine, when it wasn't.
The following statements were powerful and freeing for Sue:
Even though when I was a child I pretended that everything was fine, just fine, thank you, I deeply and completely accept myself.
Even though I'm still pretending and I can't be honest with my own children, I deeply and completely accept myself.
Even though all this pretending is a lot of work, this dishonesty is making me exhausted, I deeply and completely accept myself.
I ended the session by tapping in some positive choice statements:
I choose to be honest with my daughters and other people about my feelings.
If I happen to feel sick or I'm just having a bad day, I choose to be honest about it and say so.
Even if they faint and stop speaking to me, I choose to be honest about my feelings.
This was the end of our session and Sue said she felt very relaxed and complete about the issues she had raised. I suggested she tap at home during the week on the "heavy issues weighing me down" and "carrying these weighty issues."
Sue said she would express her true feelings to her daughters. As she left my office she said, "Good-bye, Mary Sunshine!" referring to herself.
When Sue came back for her next session one week later her whole demeanor had changed. Her face and posture no longer sagged and her step was lighter. She told me that she had tapped repeatedly on the statements I had given her and that she had good news to share.
Sue told her daughter that baby-sitting this coming summer for both grandchildren, a two-year-old and the five-year-old, would be too difficult, but that she would still be able to care for the five-year-old. When I asked her if her daughter had fainted or stopped speaking to her, she smiled and said that her daughter had been supportive and understanding.
Then Sue said she told her second daughter that for Thanksgiving (which is seven months away) she would like to have the holiday at her own home (as they used to do when her husband was alive). Sue also said that she and her daughter had agreed to cook the meal together.

can't believe what they are doing .. - page 5
:idea: Hi I am one of those pre-nursing students in Colorado. I finished all the pre-requsits. As you know, there are some changes how to get in to the nursing program here in Colorado. (Have you... Read More
Mar 16, '09Thanks for your input.. good questions. so they told you most have the minimum grades? Well I hope so then, I can see why if it wasn't competitve and you only had to have the 2.5. Well that would help me as I'm in the middle I think.
The reason I wondered about TEAS is that person I spoke to said you could wait to take it , as long as you took it by May 4, and since you have to apply by April 13 how can that be a factor? She said you would be accepted on a tenative basis providing you got the passing score.
Mar 16, '09I agree. I did see that in the letter, that the last day to complete the TEAS was May 4th. I wonder when the committee is going to meet. I know the letter is going out on May 29th so that gives them three weeks to decide. I mean, it shouldn't be rocket science but I am going to add this to my list of questions for the 26th info. session. Are you going to an info session? I was think of going to both because I think that would help to gauge how many people I'm up against. I know that not all people on the waitlist are actually going to go to PPCC. I'm sure some choose other programs like DSON and Concorde so they don't have to wait. I'm sure some choose other routes and degree programs so they don't have to wait. I'm hoping we're not up against that many people and that we get to start sooner than later!
Mar 17, '09Yes I plan to go to the session I hope it isnt longer than an hour as my kids get out of school at 3:35 in Falcon!

Cher Butler bio
March 6, 1964 (age 57)
Cher Butler is an American Playboy model and actress. She was born on March 6, 1964 in Garland, Texas, United States. She was chosen as Playboy's Playmate of the Month in August 1985. Cher was 21 when she became a Playmate.
Butler appeared in several Playboy videos and posed for a handful of Playboy newsstand special editions. In her only film role, the female lead in Crack House (1989), she was billed as Cheryl Kay.

My name is Mavrah. As an Onu-Matoran, it is my job to record history. Since I am one of the few Matoran that remember the events of The Kanohi Dragon's first attack on Metru Nui -- not the one when it was stopped by Toa Lhikan and his team--the Chief Archivist has asked me to write them down. There are other Matoran who could do this--Kaj, for example--and some of them are writing their own record of events. All of them will be compiled as one record.
I did not personally witness the first sighting of the dragon, but I heard of it from a Ta-Matoran friend of mine. I had heard the news about the dragon in Ta-Metru; our Turaga had announced it across the city. The Ta-Matoran explained it to me.
"It seemed to be on fire," he said. "The weirdest thing about it, though, was that it had what looked like... Kanohi Masks, on its sides."
"Kanohi Masks?" I said.
"Yep," he said. "Don't ask me if they were real or not, though; none of us could determine that, even the most skilled mask-makers."
"The thing burst from the ground near the Great Furnace construction site. It scared me out of my wits. It wasn't hostile, but its smoldering tail did some damage to the Great Furnace. The dragon took off into the sky and went who knows where."
After that, it had been seen occasionally in the sky. I first saw it on a trip to Ta-Metru. I was delivering a message from Kaj to the then current Chronicler, a Ta-Matoran (this was before Kodan became Chronicler). I walked to Ta-Metru as the chute system was not fully operational yet. As I was on my way to the Chronicler's home, a great red dragon flew through the air.
"Look!" said a Ta-Matoran named Kapura. "The dragon is back!"
I got a good look at the dragon. It did seem to have Kanohi Masks on its side. By their very nature, Onu-Matoran name Rahi that they see. I had a name for this beast--the Kanohi Dragon.
The dragon blackened the sky behind it, and I could see what looked like black soot falling from it. I asked Kapura, "Does it always do that when it flies?"
"Yes," he said. "Isn't it amazing?"
I didn't answer; I rushed off to the Chronicler's home. I had something to tell him.
I arrived at the Chronicler's home. "Has anyone named that dragon?" I asked.
"No," he said. "Have you seen it? If so, I think you're the first Onu-Matoran to see it."
"Yes, and I've got a name for it," I said. "The Kanohi Dragon."
"You'll have to inform the Chief Archivist of that," he said.
I suddenly remembered my original reason for coming here. "Oh yeah, Kaj wishes to inform you that the Onu-Matoran have uncovered a mysterious tablet, buried underground. It details the Brotherhood of Makuta. Most of it is illegible, but some of it is still readable. I have it here." I gave him the tablet.
Unfortunately, that tablet would never go into the records, because the Kanohi Dragon picked that moment to attack the city.
The Ta-Matoran had just taken the tablet from my hand when the dragon attacked. We heard the noise outside and went outside to see what was going on. The dragon was perched upon the roof of a building, swinging its tail, breathing fire. Ta-Matoran ran from it. The Chronicler and I joined them.
The Chronicler and I got separated. I took cover with some other Ta-Matoran, including Kapura, in a building. When we thought the dragon had left, we left the building, only to be attacked by the dragon.
Luckily, the Toa showed up then.
There were 8 of them, that I could see. The smoke did obscure my view a bit, unfortunately. It soon became apparent who was the leader of the team.
"Bomonga, try to contain the beast!" the leader Toa said. "Ice Toa, see if you can slow it down!" He also called for one of the Toa, whose name I failed to hear, to help him evacuate the villagers.
I was the only Matoran brave enough to stay and watch the fight, which is why I'm writing this. I hid from the Toa on a rooftop, which is the reason I'm still alive to write this.
The battle was fierce, and long. At first, the Toa of Ice - there were at least two of them - seemed to be struggling against the creature; then, they were joined by a Toa of Water, and they began to fare better. The Dragon felled one of the Toa, but he -- or she, I don't know -- survived. Bomonga, the Toa of Earth, used his earth power to prevent the monster from travelling to attack the Matoran.
Then, the beast saw me. It tried to come after me. One of the other Toa blocked it. The Dragon breathed fire. The Toa dodged, and the fire destroyed much of the building underneath me.
I was about to decide that was a good sign that it was time to leave when I saw the Ice Toa, with the assistance of the Toa of Water, fell the massive beast.
I later found out that the Toa had been visiting Metru Nui when the dragon attacked, which explained how they were able to get there so soon. I found out who they were. I wanted to speak with Bomonga, the Toa of Earth, but I never got the chance. He never seemed comfortable with the team, and I don't think he was an actual member. I informed the Chief Archivist of my name for the beast, and he accepted it. I did not tell him until recently that I had stayed to watch the fight.
The Leader Toa sent the Toa of Water into the ocean to look for "a likely spot". Later, the Toa took the dragon--the Kanohi Dragon--underwater. They assured us that they had not killed it, but what they did with it remains a mystery. Despite their assurances that the Kanohi Dragon would never attack again, it did, but it seems that someone was behind its second attack. The second time, it was defeated by Lhikan's team of Toa. That battle was much longer, lasting a month.
As for the tablet I gave the Chronicler, it was lost in the attack, and never found. It was presumed destroyed. What it said remains a mystery to this day.
My entry for S&T contest number 7
Edited by Willess12, Jul 02 2014 - 10:13 AM.
Format reconstructed after a BZP glitch. -bones

Simon Bever – [email protected]
“Will you stay with me, will you be my love?”
The words still rung in his ears; His feelings for her still hurt so much that his stomach went into a knot every time he thought of her hair, her smell, her voice, her words.
Many years had passed since the summer days they’d spent together in the fields of Dorset; the long hours they spent gathering the hay for the farmer friend of her parents. The long dusty days in the golden fields which always ended with the glorious sun sinking large and glowing into the distant hills. Her beautiful skin, the summer kisses and sunburned hands he’d held as their days began to grow longer; chilly nights creeping into their tight embrace in the room in the eaves under the thatch.
Steve was in the college library when he first knew something was wrong. His mobile buzzed gently next to him as he read through his essay for the umpteenth time – the words still looked wrong. Amelia’s mother? Why should she be calling? Steve ignored the Nokia and continued to read;
‘Schubert belonged to a musical family and had every opportunity to play chamber music (like Mozart, his own preference was for the viola) and it was therefore natural that he should compose in that medium. Altogether he wrote more than…’
Why could he not say what he really thought about Schubert’s music? Why was it that Steve’s fellow students and their tutors relegated Schubert to being only a second tier composer? Only being a composer of small scale works – except, perhaps the last two symphonies – shouldn’t have prevented him becoming regarded as one of the ‘great’ composers. His death at the age of only 31 certainly robbed the world of his true potential, but couldn’t everyone see what he would have become?
Amelia was not only beautiful but incredibly talented. She sang like a bird. A bird that had grown up and was now free to fly and sing with a confidence and maturity that Franz himself would have written for. Steve knew when he met her at a friend’s party at the end of his first year that she was special and that he had met her at the time when she was just starting to believe in herself and her talent. She wrote to him shortly after their summer together.
‘Oxford is so cool – I’m looking out of the window of my room at the falling leaves – all red and gold. It’s warm and I’m thinking of you with me. Why do the days seem so long now that we’re not together when the truth is that they are getting shorter? I’m learning Gluck’s Orfeo – Che faro senza Euridice – you must know it. It’s so sad’
Looking up to the library window lit from the outside only by the flashing lights of the London evening traffic whose low hum permeated the silence of his study, Steve saw her face again. Her strawberry blonde hair fell long and lusciously over her shoulders. Her tanned shoulders and slim brown arms were held out to him
‘Come on, jump!’ she’d called from across the ditch at the edge of field, ‘I’ll catch you.’ Her hands were pleading with him.
He missed her. He always missed her. Many years had passed since those golden days in the fields and he still wanted her. Why did it have to happen?
“Steve?” the voice message from Anne had begun, “Steve? Er.., I was just calling, well, to tell you that, well, Amelia told me to leave you a message. Look, this is really hard, could you call me? Sorry.”
Steve had listened to the message later that evening in his room; he’d forgotten about it after seeing the buzzing in the library and had re-written his essay on Schubert – there were to be no apologies this time, because Schubert had done enough to justify his greatness in his string quartets alone. Dammit! No one could make people laugh and cry quite like Franz.
He looked at the phone quizzically. What did she mean? It was too late to call back.
“I’m sorry, Steve,” said Anne the following afternoon when Steve eventually plucked up the courage to call back, “Why didn’t you call earlier….Amelia has gone. She’s gone to Sydney. She got a call from her Father saying that there was a fantastic job for her at his company and well, she flew out this morning..”
“I’m sorry – I thought you two were really close.”
“Yes, so did I.” Steve put the phone down and cried to himself.
Amelia never answered his emails; her mobile number was discontinued and her mother didn’t know where her ex-husband lived. Amelia was gone.
The Poyet Quartet was Steve’s life now. The past twenty years of practice and performance had dulled his sensibilities to people and love. Music was his love and the years had rolled into one another. Life was music in the stillness of the concert hall and the melancholy of the practice room. Life was a small flat in south London and a growing pool of savings to help when his fingers wouldn’t play anymore. He saved because he had nothing else to do with his money. Success didn’t excite him. It stopped him stopping. Twenty years, though hadn’t dulled his love for Amelia and he told no one. He didn’t want to make it hurt any more. He had nothing to share with anyone else.
September 24th 2008. Southbank – Purcell Rooms. The Poyet Quartet were performing the ‘Trout’ Quintet with the pianist Raymond Macfarlane – who was also playing the first two opus 90 impromptus (the easy ones as far as Steve was concerned). The relationship between the quartet and Raymond had been strained from the start – their respective agents had booked the gig, but their first practice had been a disaster and subsequent meetings had not been much more productive. Raymond loved himself. Having an attractive LSO second violinist ensconced in his Mayfair flat seemed to make him believe that he was endowed with something that most fifty-somethings didn’t have. The Poyet Quartet’s Cello player was left in no question that she was on his ‘list’ of potentials and that ‘they should get together after the performance just to, like, talk it through?’
The Viola player had some wonderful moments in the Trout. Steve, like Schubert, loved the Viola. They understood the Viola. They’d just started another variation when Steve saw her. He was counting his 32 bars rest at the beginning of the fifth variation – where the piano was allowed to show off – when he saw the mane of blonde hair in the second row. It didn’t really mean much at first, but slowly the shape of the face permeated his consciousness. The slightly square forehead and the blue eyes – they were staring at him.
‘But I miss you most of all, my darling, now that the autumn leaves are starting to fall.’ He could still repeat the letter by rote. He’d walked through the piles of leaves that evening along the Embankment on his way to the concert and he’d thought of her then.
The rest of the performance was a blur. He kept looking up to check he was right. It was Amelia in the second row, he was sure. He kept missing his entries; He was getting worried looks from his colleagues. Raymond was giving him daggers through the lid of the Yamaha.
“I’m sorry, everyone,” he tried to explain when they finally traipsed into the Green Room. “I’m sorry….it just wasn’t working for me tonight.” Raymond was apoplectic.
“You idiot, that’s nonsense – the A&R people from the Sony were here tonight and you just screwed up everything.”
“For you?” said Steve quietly with a slight glint in his eye.
“Yes, for me!” Steve turned away smiling and put his viola away in its case.
Leaving though the stage door, Steve was as worried that Amelia might be there waiting for him as much as he was worried that she might not be. What would he say? Was it really her? What would he say if she was? Could he forgive twenty years of unrequited love? What had she been doing and with whom? Why was she here?
Exiting the door into the dimly lit courtyard at the back of the hall, there was a small group of women waiting for Raymond. It never occurred to Steve that any of them might be waiting for him and the momentary fissure of excitement he obviously caused by opening the door to the outside was quickly quashed as the waiting crowd realised that he was not who they thought he might be. The silence was embarrassing. Walking past the now silent posse of signature seekers with programmes and pens at the ready, he walked around the corner and almost into Amelia. She’d stood back in the darkness, not wanting anyone to see her.
“Oh, I’m really sorry, I didn’t realise you were there..” Steve started to say - not realising who she was until he was half way through his sentence.
“No!” came the reply, “it’s me that’s here to apologise.”
“Why?” It came out far stronger and more quickly than he expected and he instantly wanted to re-word his comment to be something like ‘no, please, there’s no reason to apologise…’ Their eyes met for the first time in twenty years and Steve felt the low, low pain and the knot in his stomach, again. It was really her. He felt tears welling.
“Well, because, because, I have missed you.” This time there was no quick reply.
“I’ve missed you too.” Steve’s flickering watery eyes never left hers but he felt his gaze hardening by the second. He could never ever hate her and these first moments of contact somehow sanctioned the love he’d felt for her. He’d been right to love her all this time. She was beautiful – twenty years had changed nothing. Twenty years of his life he’d wanted her and he’d played every night in the quartet for her. He’d given her every note, every rest, every pause, every crescendo, every presto. His music was for the love of Amelia.
Staring for a full minute into Amelia’s eyes and realising that he still hadn’t even said hello, Steve slowly turned and walked away. He couldn’t face the inquest, the tears he knew he’d give and get. He wanted nothing to change. He loved loving her as he remembered her in the dusty summer fields and the crisp linen sheets of the room in the eaves under the thatch.

TAMPA - When the Steelers informed Dick LeBeau that they were going to honor him for his 50 years in the NFL before their Nov. 20 game against the Bengals, he was less than thrilled with the idea.
"I didn't want to do it," said the Steelers' 71-year-old defensive coordinator, who spent 14 years in the league as a player and is in his 36th as a coach. "It was a very critical part of our season. Now, we're all sitting down here in Florida and we're in the Super Bowl. But back then, we had just a one-game lead in our division through almost 90 percent of the dadgum season.
"We were right at crunch time. One game, any game, is terribly important. And I didn't want our guys thinking about anything except the team we had to beat that week. That's why I didn't want to do it. I didn't want to take any of the focus off of the opponent and have our players thinking about how old this guy is that's coaching them."
As it turned out, LeBeau's defense had no trouble staying focused that miserably cold, snowy day. They paid homage to their beloved leader, then went out and squashed the inept Bengals, holding them to 208 yards and 11 first downs in a 27-10 win.
"Twenty minutes before kickoff, in that weather, a lot of guys wouldn't want to be out there standing around," said defensive end Brett Keisel. "But we didn't think twice about it. We would have stood out there for an hour for coach LeBeau. We love the guy dearly."
Nothing says "I love you" like shutting down an opposing offense, and LeBeau's unit has done that with regularity this season. The Steelers finished first in the league in total defense, first against the pass, second against the run, second in sacks, and most importantly, first in points allowed, holding opponents to 13.9 points per game. They have given up more than 14 points just three times in the last 11 games. They will try to make it three in the last 12 Sunday when they tango with the Cardinals and their explosive offense in Super Bowl XLIII.
"They're not the No. 1-rated defense in the NFL for no reason," said Cardinals wide receiver Anquan Boldin. "They present a lot of different problems for different teams with their zone blitzes. I think the main thing for us is just understanding what they are trying to do to us, how they are trying to stop us. Understand when they are blitzing and where they are blitzing from."
The Cardinals deciphered Jim Johnson's blitzes 2 weeks ago and put up 32 points against an Eagles defense that was every bit as hot as the Steelers' going into the NFC Championship Game. Whether they can do the same to LeBeau and his defense will go a long way in deciding who walks out of Raymond James Stadium with the Lombardi Trophy on Sunday.
"[The Steelers] present a whole different set of problems, even schematically with their 3-4 [alignment]," Cardinals offensive coordinator Todd Haley said. "That's difficult, especially when you don't see it all the time, although we're fortunate because our defense plays it some.
"But they're totally different, at least in their base-package stuff. They have some unique players who play their positions very well and make it even more difficult. So it will be a great challenge for us."
The main weapon LeBeau will use Sunday when he tries to wreak havoc on Cardinals quarterback Kurt Warner is the same one he's been using since he invented it back in 1984 when he was with the Bengals - the zone blitz.
When most teams blitz, they play man-to-man behind it. With a zone blitz, you play a zone coverage behind the blitzer, often dropping a lineman back into coverage.
"It was a thought process kind of born out of necessity," LeBeau said. "It was basically an outcropping of the run-and-shoot [offense] that was becoming pretty prevalent in the league back then. We were in the same division as Houston, and they were tremendous at it with [Warren] Moon and Co.
"Then the West Coast offense was spreading throughout the league. Those were all quick-rhythm, get-the-ball-out-of-your-hands-and-cut-up-the-defense types of passing games. We were just looking for ways to get pressure without exposing our defensive backs to have to cover the whole field all of the time."
LeBeau's invention has paid big dividends. In his seven seasons as the Steelers' defensive chief, his team never has finished lower than 13th in the league in sacks and has been in the top eight five times. They had an AFC-high 51 this season. The only team in the league with more was the Cowboys (59).
But LeBeau knows that the Cardinals' Warner is as good as anybody in the league at picking up blitzes and countering them. Warner proved that once again against the Eagles.
"You don't play as long as he has in this league without being able to handle the blitz," LeBeau said. "He's comfortable against pressure. He's comfortable against maximum coverage. And he's good. Yet, our feeling is offenses don't play quite as well when there's pressure on [the quarterback]. So we'll be trying to search for a way to do that."
LeBeau wasn't sure he'd be kept on 2 years ago when Mike Tomlin replaced Bill Cowher as the Steelers' head coach. Tomlin was a defensive coach, raised in Monte Kiffin's Tampa-2 system with the Bucs. A 4-3 alignment rather than a 3-4. Not a lot of blitzing. Not exactly a marriage made in heaven. Many observers figured Tomlin would bring someone in with a Tampa-2 background to replace LeBeau.
But to everyone's surprise, he retained him. And the 3-4.
"Sure, I wondered [if he'd be fired]," LeBeau said. "I didn't really know Mike that well. I knew who he was, but we hadn't ever talked. Then he called on the phone and said we needed to get together. He said he was swamped and had a lot he needed to do first, but he wanted to retain me. After that, it was just a matter of getting together with him and getting a feel for what he wanted to do. Because an assistant coach's job is to assist the head coach.
"We found out that, guess what, our philosophies weren't that different. We had a lot of middle ground. We spent a lot of time talking together that first year. People say Mike's a cover-2 guy. But so am I. We've always played a bunch of cover-2. Really, I think it's worked out pretty well."
Nobody's happier than the Steelers' defensive players.
"He's an amazing coach," Keisel said. "I feel incredibly honored and blessed to be able to play for the guy, to be able to learn from the guy, and just be around him."
Said defensive end Aaron Smith: "If he told us to jump off a cliff, I believe we would do it. If he told us to do anything, we would do it because we'd know it's the right thing.

A senior official of Chinese Catholic Church would like Pope Benedict XVI to visit the country and celebrate Mass.
Benedict did not dismiss the possibility but said the issue was "complicated."
Liu Bainian, vice chairman of the Chinese Patriotic Catholic Association, made the comments in a lengthy interview with Italian daily La Repubblica in which he praised Benedict's recent letter to China's Catholics as "positive."
"I strongly hope to be able to see the pope one day here in Beijing to celebrate Mass for us Chinese," Liu was quoted as saying.
He said he wanted, through the interview, to send the pope a special greeting. "Let him know that we pray for him always and may the Lord give us the grace to welcome him here among us."
Benedict was asked about the comments as he left a church in Auronzo di Cadore, in northern Italy, where he was meeting with clergy from the region.
"I can't speak at this time," Benedict was quoted as saying by the Italian news agency ANSA. "It's a bit complicated."

I odered Boss Speakers 3 February 2013. The money was taken immediately,and, how I found out later from my bank, somebody tried to take money for the same order 6 times, it's why my credit card was blocked by my bank. But it was only the first problem. During 3 weeks I tried to find out the status of my order, and every time I heard the different story, sometimes I was told that the order was despatched, sometimes that it was ready to despatch, sometimes it was delivered, a few times they said to me they didn't have any order from me at all! I couldn't believe in what I was told! I was very upset and very angry! I went to Internet and read a lot of reviews about ValueBasket.com. Oh,my God, I wasn't alone! So many people had the same situation. Of course, I should go to internet before I placed my order and maybe I would be able to avoid all my problems. Today I applyed for a full refund. Dear people, I will tell you how it was getting on. But now, I would like to give you advice, avoid this company as long as possible.
Connect with Facebook to get one click access to Trustpilot. It's easier.Sign up with Facebook
You were not logged in with the entered details. Please try again.
Hi there, it looks like we're having trouble getting you logged in.
No worries though, our friendly support team will help get you back up and running as usual. Just get in touch.
Hi there, it looks like you still haven't activated your account.
No worries though, it's easy-- check your inbox for the email we just sent you, and click on the link.

This 3000-word story about how secrets and tragedy can combine to tear families apart was an experiment to see if I could handle an emotionally complex plot in the short story form. Rather than simply focusing on a single event from one point of view, I wanted to explore the long term effects of something over time. I think it’s fairly successful, though various attempts to get it published were unsuccessful. Let me know what you think in the comments.
That Day by Gillan Drew
Like a wound that needed protecting they had covered it up, hidden it, and let it fester. Over the years it had become infected, started to smell, but still they refused to acknowledge it. It had eventually scabbed over – itchy and sensitive to the touch, but bearable. Just so long as nobody mentioned it.
It was Ben that decided to rip it open once and for all.
They sat around the table, John, his father, to the left, Mary, his mother, to the right, and Ben, the son, at the head. A fourth chair stood empty across from him. The windows in his father’s kitchen were tall, a pale autumn sky doing nothing to counter the dimness of the room.
To an outsider, it would have been surprising to see them there, ready to discuss what had happened that day. But Ben had given them little choice.
‘I really don’t think this is necessary,’ said his mother.
‘Nor me,’ his father echoed. ‘So much time.’
‘Water under the bridge,’ said his mother. Her hair was immaculate, the years buried beneath foundation and blusher.
‘It’s necessary and it’s not forgotten,’ said Ben. He placed his hands flat on the table to show he meant business.
‘I never said it was forgotten,’ said his father, shifting in his chair. His nose was red, his cheeks a rat-run of broken purple capillaries. ‘But why dig it up now? It’s all in the past.’
‘That’s the problem,’ said Ben. ‘It was never in the past. We never talked about it, like it never happened.’
‘We didn’t need to talk about it,’ said his mother.
‘Oh yes we did,’ said Ben. ‘This is long overdue, and neither of you are leaving until we get this thing out in the open. No matter how much it might hurt.’
‘Are you sure this is really necessary?’ asked his mother again. But she knew she wouldn’t be allowed to avoid it any longer.
* * * * *
So nice. So nice to just sit and relax for a change. To close her eyes and feel the sun roaming over her skin like a lover, touching, savouring, loving. The gentle caress of the breeze, the sighing waves that lapped at the shore. Even the raucous cries of the seagulls couldn’t take this moment from her, the lapse into pure, sensual relaxation.
Too soon it would be over. Too soon, she would have to return to the world she had created – husband, kids, noise and stress. Put some more sun cream on, don’t get sand in the sandwiches, where are the spades, how many times have I told you, come on, stop bickering. But here, now, this was her time. What she wouldn’t give to leave it all behind, to live for herself and no one else.
She pushed thoughts of others away, sank deeper into that comfort and embraced it with all her soul.
She didn’t notice the screams at first. They didn’t pierce the barrier she had erected to block out the noises of the beach. She only gradually became aware of them, only gradually realised that she had heard them all along and filtered them out. Only now did she notice that it sounded like Ben, amidst a multitude of shouts, cries, splashing.
It took several moments for the idea to form that she really ought to sit up and see what the matter was. It took several more for the idea to resolve into an intention, and another few to finally summon the gumption to lift her head.
A bustle of people, craning to catch a glimpse. A lifeguard in the shallows. And –
Bolting upright, Mary watched the man dragging the boy from the water. Time seemed to stand still, her heart stopping in her chest – David, eyes closed, body limp; the lifeguard, the sun glistening off the droplets on his skin; Ben close behind them, his face contorted and barely recognisable.
The next few minutes were a blur, a whirlwind of images, sounds. The lifeguard pounding on little David’s chest, Ben screaming as he clutched at her, burying his face into her shoulder, the expressions on the faces of the crowd who watched the pantomime unfold. Even at the time she knew that for them, it would be a story, an anecdote; for her, it was brutal reality.
And the last vignette, John, his face white, bloodless, his eyes so dark and raw. Spittle on his lip, his mouth twisted unnaturally to the side. The words that echoed down to her over all those years: ‘You were supposed to be watching them!’
* * * * *
‘There was nothing I could have done,’ said Ben’s mother, and stared across at her ex-husband. ‘Even if I had seen what was going on, I couldn’t have stopped it. I couldn’t have made it out there in time.’
‘Nobody blamed you, Mary, least of all me,’ said his father, though his refusal to meet her eyes gave the truth to his lie.
Sniffing loudly, his mother raised a tissue to dab at her eye. The mascara was untainted, the makeup smooth and unruffled. ‘There was nothing I could have done,’ she repeated and looked imploringly at Ben. ‘What else do you want to hear?’
‘I’d really like to know why you left,’ he replied.
‘Oh Ben,’ she said, and shook her head to straighten her hair. ‘Marriages end, you know that.’
He leaned forward in his chair, his elbows on the table. ‘I came home from school and you were gone, without a word to explain it.’
‘I lost my son,’ she said stiffly. ‘I had my reasons for leaving and I won’t have you judging me.’
Searching her eyes for any sign of affection, any hint of love, Ben could find none. ‘I’m not judging you,’ he said. ‘I just want to know why.’
‘You should ask your father,’ said his mother, casting her eyes at the ruddy-faced old man across from her.
‘Don’t bring me into this,’ he grunted. ‘It was as much a mystery to me.’
‘As if you’re blameless,’ she snapped. ‘Still the same, trying to pass responsibility for what happened that day.’
‘I wasn’t even there,’ he said.
‘We were all there,’ said Ben and his father turned his eyes on him.
* * * * *
‘I don’t care, I told her that if they’re going to offer us that little then they’ll have to go back to their RCC because we’ll be renegotiating our contract.’
‘Was that a seagull?’ asked the voice, tinny over the phone’s speaker.
‘Yep,’ said John, watching the bird hopping across the sand. ‘I’m currently standing on a beach and topping up my tan.’
‘You on holiday?’
‘Uh-huh, with the missus and the boys.’
‘Then why the hell are you answering your phone?’
John laughed. ‘Couldn’t leave you all on your lonesome now, could I?’
‘I know where I’d rather be,’ said the voice.
Whereas John didn’t. He’d always wanted a wife and kids, to give them the life his own father had failed to provide. It was as if he could erase his own crappy childhood if he made theirs the best a child ever had. Which, of course, entailed long hours of work and only the briefest glimpses of his boys. But that was acceptable – no child of his would wear hand-me-downs.
In truth, he preferred it this way. Deep down, he didn’t feel he was cut out for this fatherhood thing. He’d seen first-hand what bad parenting could do, and he was reluctant to get too close, in case of what might happen. Mary could take care of it.
And he liked his job. It fulfilled him, more than the love of his wife and the smiles of his sons. Anyone could breed – it took a special kind of person to provide for his family. That was the role he had created for himself, and the role he thrived in.
He was caught off-guard by the sight of the ambulance pulling onto the sand, blue lights flashing. It was so incongruous in a place surrounded by children eating ice-creams and teenagers throwing Frisbees.
‘You still there, John?’ asked the voice, but he wasn’t listening. He was staring towards the shore, to where the crowd gathered at the edge of the water. Staring down. He’d seen a drowning before, the way that people converged on the scene like mourners at a graveside – he’d been one of them, aching to get a morbid glimpse of the body.
Scanning the beach, he picked out the windbreak he’d put up, the towels and bags, but couldn’t see his family.
He had the self-possession to say, ‘I’ll call you back,’ before he slipped the phone into his pocket and ran towards the sea.
* * * * *
‘I wasn’t even there,’ said his father, his fingers drumming on the table top.
‘And that’s the point,’ said his mother. ‘You were never there.’
‘I was trying to keep a roof over your heads, that’s what I was trying to do. Can’t you understand that?’
‘You should have been in the water with them, playing with them, like fathers do.’
‘You were supposed to be watching them,’ said his father, rising from his chair.
‘Oh that’s rich.’
‘I want you out of my house.’
‘Dad,’ Ben cautioned, his hand in the air between them. He noticed his father’s fists trembling at his sides, his rheumy eyes searching the sideboards for a bottle. ‘Come on.’
‘I’m not having this, you two picking me apart.’ He looked at his son. ‘That’s what you want, isn’t it? Someone to blame?’
‘No,’ said Ben. ‘No blame. Just –’ He took a deep breath, puffed out his chest. ‘You were my hero. Before. And then – what happened to you, dad? Why did it all go so wrong?’
‘Hero?’ said his father, lowering himself back into his chair and stroking his arms. ‘I was never a hero. And who are you to talk of heroes?’
* * * * *
They were getting further out, out of their depth. Ben liked it. It made him feel brave and naughty at the same time, his toes floating free of the sand as the waves lifted him up in the water. David splashed alongside him, eager to stay with his older brother, and still they went further. Ben was the stronger swimmer and taller, a thought that never occurred to his ten-year-old self, but fifteen years later, he watched the scene in his memory and screamed at him to turn back.
There was no other word to describe the day than glorious. As the years unfolded, Ben had been back there a million times in his mind, but he didn’t think he was embellishing. The sun sparkled on the sea like a scattering of diamonds, and the water, such a rich blue, stretched out before them to meet the cloudless sky. The only sounds were laughter, shouts of exhilaration. It was, he thought later, the last moment of innocence before the fall.
‘We’re too far out,’ said David as he treaded water, his blonde hair matted to his scalp. ‘We should go back.’
‘Chicken,’ said Ben, rolling onto his back and staring up at the sun. He loved his brother, wanted to share this with him, this feeling of daring the world to come and take them on. Together, they could do anything.
He lifted his head, saw David was struggling but keeping up with him as he gently kicked his legs, heading for the horizon. He was so proud of his little brother. What a team. It was glorious.
‘I’m going back,’ David spluttered. ‘We’re too far out.’
‘No, don’t,’ said Ben. ‘Don’t be a spoilsport.’
‘We’re too deep –’
‘Chicken,’ said Ben, puckering his lips and making farmyard noises. ‘Bock, bock, bock.’
‘You’re such a little chicken.’
‘I’m getting out,’ said David.
‘Wait, don’t get out,’ said Ben. ‘I didn’t mean –’
‘No, you’ve ruined it now,’ David snapped.
The words cut into Ben because he knew they were true. He’d gone too far, as usual, ruined the fun, had turned something beautiful into something ugly. Remorse swamped him. If only he could get things back the way they were.
He grabbed his brother’s arm, was about to apologise, was about to make things right – that’s how he rationalised it in hindsight – but David screamed at him to get off, and swinging his arm he struck Ben across the nose with the back of his wrist.
Anger, white hot, at himself, at his brother, at the fact the perfect day had been tarnished, flashed like lightning through his brain – he pushed his brother’s head under the water. Just to scare him, to keep him out deep, to keep him with him. Only until David calmed down, only until Ben could make it right. Only that long.
The first thought when David stopped struggling was to hold him under another five seconds, just to show him he could. It had only been thirty seconds, all in – he’d only wanted to calm him down. So he let David back up to the surface, ready to make up, ready for the two of them to swim back to the shallows in laughter, throw the ball to one another and make the most of the rest of the day.
Seeing David’s face – blue, blank, empty – Ben froze. Stared. Shook his brother. Cried out to him. Tried to wake him. His body limp, a dead weight.
That was when Ben started screaming. And he never stopped.
* * * * *
‘I told you. I told you both. I told you what I did. You didn’t want to talk about it.’
‘What was there to say?’ asked his mother. ‘It happened. We couldn’t change that by talking.’
‘I thought I was evil. My whole life I thought I was evil. I thought I was possessed and we never talked about it.’
‘Look –’ his father started, but Ben interrupted.
‘It’s okay, dad, I’m not blaming anyone. I’m just talking. I’m just saying how I felt.’ He looked from one to the other. ‘I felt like you both hated me. Mum, you didn’t even look at me after that. You didn’t hug me and tell me it was all going to be okay. You just walked out. And dad, you went off to work every day and you left me alone in that big empty house. I was ten.’
‘I was keeping a roof over your head.’
‘Of course,’ said Ben. ‘I’m not disputing that. But –’ He hung his head, staring at the table top. He had no idea what else to say. All these years wanting to talk about it, there was nothing to say.
‘What did you want us to do?’ asked his mother.
‘Punish me!’ Ben cried, lifting his head. ‘Hit me, scream at me, tell me I was a bad boy. Act like I actually did something. That it mattered. And let me tell you how sorry I am. I killed David. I ruined everything and I’m so, so sorry.’
‘Did you do it on purpose?’
He looked at his father. ‘That’s not the point, dad, that’s not what I’m saying. You’re not –’
‘If you didn’t do it on purpose, then what would have been the use of punishing you?’ asked his mother.
‘It would’ve – we would’ve – we would’ve acknowledged it, that it actually happened and – that I – do you get what I’m saying?’
But they didn’t. And in fact, nor did Ben. All the years, stretching behind him to that day, he didn’t know how to articulate all he thought and all he felt. So they sat in silence.
If David had been there, he would have told them that they were all to blame, and none of them were. These things happened. It was nobody’s fault. He bore them no ill will at all. He loved them and forgave them.
He would have told Ben that the pain of losing her boy had hurt Mary so much that she had steeled herself never again to love anything she could lose, even her firstborn, and that she pampered and pleasured herself on the outside to cover the emptiness within. He would have told him that losing David had broken John’s faith in himself, in his role as mentor and father, and so he ran from all responsibility and smothered his sorrows with alcohol. He would have told Ben that people so wrapped up in their own grief could never provide the solace he sought, that he had to be able to forgive himself and be accountable to himself and no one else.
But David wasn’t there. And all of this was left unsaid.
‘I wish I could go back to that day, change things. Everything, our whole lives, you two, me, it all comes down to that day, those stupid, reckless thirty seconds.’ He looked down at his hands. ‘Can’t we – can’t we somehow, in some way, get back any of what we lost? Even if it’s just pretence, can’t we pretend, just today, that we’re a family?’
His parents said nothing. After a few minutes his mother slowly rose from her seat and slipped out of the room, her perfume lingering a moment before it too dissipated into the ether as though it had never been there. And then his father, not sure of the right thing to say, said nothing and left.
Three years later, Ben died. Yet his dying had begun that day at the seaside, just as surely as it had been finalised by another day in November, around a table with his parents. He was killed by the silence as much as by the train he jumped in front of.
Copyright, Gillan Drew, 2016

Few days ago I went to a funeral of Mr. M. I know Mr. M as a dad of my colleague, a cool guy who is very fun to talk to, very easy going. Funny and yet very intelligent that you can talk any subject with him. A proud grandfather who just become a great grandfather. A loving husband who still brags about his high school sweet heart he married for 59 yrs.
Well, he was much more than what I just describe. I found out what a truly great person he was. He was a very successful business man. He was a President for Gates Corporation among other successful career life; he was very active in his church and local community.
At his funeral, the church was packed! I mean packed with people want to pay their respect. A lot of people want to talk and share their story with Mr. M. How he has touch their life. I was touch. I still can’t believe how humble he was. With all his achievement, all of his success and yet me manage to stay and appear to be just regular guy.
I don’t know Mr. M that well and his life story makes me think and look back of what I have done, what is my purpose in life, it change my perspective. Also makes me think of people around me. Unfortunately I can’t help think of someone who just recently got a degree and much better job. No mean to discredit the hard work that was put into getting this degree and a much deserve promotion – but I can’t help think of the attitude change. Someone whom I used to think of being humble change overnight. Money, title and degree do change people. Oh well…
I can only learn from Mr. M. How you live your life reflected at your funeral. Just look at Mr. M funeral. People give him respect not because he demands it or force people to, but because we all wanted to. To respect someone who actually deserve to be respected. A life wasn’t wasted. He lives his life to the fullest and surrounded by people who appreciated, grateful and love him unconditionally. I wish I know him more, I wish to learn more from him. The world truly lost one of its greatest people. A true hero – even if it’s just for the community.
His son asked him one time, what he would want his family to say at his funeral. Mr. M answer, “Just tell them I did my best.”
Well done Mr. M. Well done. Good bye and may you rest in peace.
This song is a tribute to Mr. M. And for all of us … have a good weekend.

I know this thread is over 4 years old, but nobody ever responded to it, it's your only thread, and I saw that you were online. :p
That plug at the top just needed to break the surface tension and drop, so that it could re-mix with the rest of the goo. I'm sure it must have done that by now. :p
Also, if that was the first time you had run it in a long time, you'll probably want to run it for 6-8 hours a day for a couple of weeks until it clears up. Again...you probably discovered all this on your own by now. LOL!
Well there...I tried. :p

IHAVENOCHILDREN. CHEA by Serena Castro Stera
The Cambodian woman I have to interview, when she was four years old was traded for money by her parents to an “uncle” who sold her back to a brothel when she was seven. At seventeen, she left thanks to a member of a humanitarian organization who found her while visiting that dump in an attempt to negotiate the ransom of some girls as young as nine. In order to free her, the man married her, willingly, in a rare moment of clear thinking. She did drugs from the age of seven, she was kept in a cage from where she only came out to give services to clients, some of whom were particularly aroused by the aggressiveness that she demonstrated despite the total dehumanization. That made all the more satisfying beating her and raping her.
Freed thanks to her marriage to a Westerner, she disappeared shortly after, taking refuge in the bush. She leads a sort of guerrilla war against the prostitution of girls, she killed, castrated, set on fire and above all paid real fortunes to free even only one of them. Apparently she is behind a series of targeted and very well organized robberies, but above all she seeks and finds legal funding to free child slaves and has founded a shelter and recovery center where freed victims learn to play children’s games. It seems that sometimes, she participates too.
But, they say, she never smiles. I have prepared myself, I have studied everything known about her story, I have prepared a pattern of questions to ask her, however I would like to leave a lot to chance, to the feeling of the moment.
When she sits down in front of me, well-composed, I realize that no feeling is possible because it is appalling, she is beautiful but it is beyond that. Unfathomable. Thus, the only need that arises in me is to bring her back to life. We talk for a while, she rarely looks up and speaks in a whisper.
Finally, the only explicit question I ask her is the most trivial and terrible one. “Chea, would you, like every woman, want a normal life, a man, children?” Her eyes are like nails and every single word is a hammer that crucifies me. “A man, you say? I never looked into the eyes of the man who redeemed me by asking him why he was there. He tells me that he went to that dump in order to find a way to save the girls. I could see if he was lying, and I would have killed him then. A man, you say? It’s impossible. Kids? I have no children, I won’t have any. When I was twelve years old I gave birth to a girl that I killed by drowning her in latrines, and the only maternal gesture I really owed her was exactly what I did. Her life was marked, I spared her. I’m not sorry, I have no regrets, my existence was going in this direction. No, I would never want to have children, they could be boys. A life, you say? What is a normal life? Maybe you know, but I don’t have time to think about it. I have a thousand daughters to save. They have stolen a thousand from me, they keep stealing as many from me every day.” She gets up, gives me a brief nod and walks away. I put the pen down. I turn off the tape recorder. I look at a piece of my heart that writhes for Chea. A thousand daughters she said… Christ is those daughters and his mother had her same pace.

I remember being introduced to Denny Stickland at a Sonics game years ago.
Shook his hand, exchanged some small talk, but I never got a chance to really talk to him.
I knew he was a Bremerton guy, one of the many Ken Wills-coached basketball players who found their way to Pac-8 schools during the era. I knew his daughter, Shawn, married Jack Sikma, the former SuperSonic great and NBA assistant with the Minnesota Timberwolves.
I wish I had taken the time to get to know Strickland better.
Now, it's too late.
Strickland battled multiple myleoma, a type of blood cancer, for two years. He died Monday at his home that sits near the eighth green and ninth tee at Sahalee Country Club in Redmond. He was 73.
He leaves his loved ones with stories and memories to share for the rest of their lives.
On and off the basketball court or golf course, Strickland was a fascinating guy. He was among the most accomplished advertising directors and graphic artists of his era, an integral part of an agency that helped grow a brand name for a little-known shoe company in Beaverton, Ore.
You might have heard of Nike.
Strickland also designed, among other things, the iconic Sonics logo, the one with the skyline outlined in a basketball. It wasn't the original logo, but his endured the longest — from 1975 to 1995 — and you still see it on clothing today. He also designed the original Sounders logo.
Strickland graduated from West High in 1956, the year Bremerton split into East and West. He started three years at Oregon, where he was a 6-foot-5 guard/forward and MVP his senior year. He also played on the Ducks' golf team.
"He loved the Oregon Ducks," said Brant Gibler, his Bremerton cousin who considered Denny the older brother he never had. "He loved everything about them. He loved basketball, golf. Golf was his love and frustration.
"He was a connoisseur of good food. He loved cooking, baking, pickling."
Strickland learned pickling from Gibler's mom, who was Strickland's aunt.
Strickland, his son Jack and Sikma carried the tradition on for the family.
His stepdad, the late Barney Kahn, used to have a photo of Strickland breaking a backboard while dunking the basketball at Oregon. It was featured in Sports Illustrated.
Half-brother Lance Kahn said Denny was a "terrific golfer ... I've been told he could have gone into golfing as a pro, he was that good. ... And he was a terrific artist. He did the logo for us (Olympic View Beverages)."
Kahn said their mom, Phyllis, had the same kind of cancer and died at 74.
Al Murphy, who graduated from Bremerton a year ahead of Strickland and starred at Washington, described Strickland "as being an extremely good athlete. He was about 6-foot-4 in high school and didn't weigh very much. He was a slender kid, but jeez, he had good leaping ability."
Strickland told Gibler a story about Oregon coach Steve Belko using special drills to improve Strickland's quickness.
"After practice he'd make him play one of the faster guards one-on-one with his hands behind his back to get his feet faster," Gibler said.
Murphy recalled hitch-hiking to Twanoh State Park on the south shore of Hood Canal during their days as a high school students. "That was one of his favorite things to do," Murphy said. "We were good friends. We go out there swimming and what not."
Another high school teammate, Dave Wortman, said, "Denny was my hero. He was older and better. He was a real skilled (basketball) player and a terrific golfer. I think a lot of people forget how good a golfer he was."
Wortman and Strickland used to hang out at Duke's in Seattle "when Duke's was the place to hang out and when we were both single."
"He was just a regular guy, a funny guy," Wortman said.
Strickland was an art major at Oregon, and he didn't play basketball competitively after his college days, concentrating on golf and work. He taught at the Seattle Art Institute before joining the Kraft-Smith advertising agency.
He didn't invent the Nike swoosh, but he helped launch the company's first advertising campaigns while working for John Brown & Partners.
Strickland was with Kraft-Smith, but John Brown hired him as a freelancer to be the art director for a Portland bank that he'd signed as a client. In a story Brown wrote for marketingimmportals.com in June of 2011, Brown said Strickland returned to Seattle after the successful campaign and later called to tell him that Blue Ribbon Shoes — the company that was co-founded by Phil Knight — was looking for an ad agency.
Brown put together a portfolio and met with Knight, who liked the creative campaign his company had put together for the Portland bank.
"Before I left I mentioned that Denny Strickland was doing the agency art direction and that helped close the deal," Brown wrote. "As it turned out, Knight was a runner for the University of Oregon track team at the same time Denny played basketball for the U. of O. ...
"When I got back to Seattle, Dennis joined me as the agency's first art director. Phil hired us and client number two was in the door."
Blue Ribbon Shoes, according to Brown, sold about $25 million worth of Nike shoes that first year. In the next five years, the company changed its name to Nike and sales had skyrocketed to $250,000,000 a year. Nike and John Brown & Partners parted ways a couple years later because the ad company wouldn't open an office in the Portland area.
Nike, according to Brown, asked Strickland to be their ad manager. Strickland also declined, saying he didn't want to move.
"With all the award-winning work we were turning out for them, we simply didn't believe they would dump us," Brown wrote. "Big mistake."
John Brown & Partners survived, as clients flocked to the company that helped make a name for Nike.
He remained involved with award-winning and imaginative ads, more than held his own on the golf course, was funny, supported the Oregon Ducks, and as his obit read, "provided love and entertainment to those who had the privilege of being in his life."
Reach sports editor Chuck Stark at email@example.com. Read his blog — The Stark Truth — online at kitsapsun.com.
Need Help? Call us at 1-877-304-7764.
Monday-Friday: 5am-6pm / Saturday: 5am-8pm / Sunday: 4am-11am

October 21 2014 Latest news:
Friday, November 23, 2012
Chris Hughton will take any January transfer interest in his Norwich City players as a huge compliment.
The Canaries’ chief believes the depth of quality at his disposal and the club’s recent upturn in Premier League fortunes means it is inevitable there will be speculation regarding potential New Year exits.
Wes Hoolahan and John Ruddy have been linked with surprise Carrow Road moves, but Hughton insisted yesterday he had received no approaches for any of his men.
“We have already seen players mentioned to our club and maybe players mentioned going elsewhere, but there is no truth in it,” he said. “These are the things you have to put up with. It is part of transfer window time. They are a real good group of players. They train well each day and there is good competition for places. One thing that I have been really pleased with is the quality of player that we have. We have good players here.
“It hasn’t been the case, but any calls you do possibly get regarding your own players means they must be doing something right. If they are then it very much benefits the team. Speculation surrounding the players is normal. We are at a period now where we are approaching January and the agents are very, very busy. They are making their phone calls and speculation is part and parcel of the game.”
Hoolahan’s contract situation is common knowledge, with the Dubliner’s current Norwich deal running until June 2014, but Hughton reiterated the Irishman is a key part of his plans.
“All contract talks are always done behind the scenes and they are personal matters within a club,” he said.
“We are always very conscious of how long someone has left and what they mean to us and all that work takes place behind the scenes.
“He is a player that is playing very well at the moment. Fortunately for us he has 18 months left of his contract. If there is anything mentioning him with other clubs, you have to bear in mind it is only speculation. This is a player who is very much in our plans, who is playing in the team and like I say playing very well.”
Hughton believes City’s impressive run of late is a testament to the club’s astute recruitment policy during the previous transfer window, with six of his signings starting the Manchester United win.
“When I came here in the summer I was made aware that funds would be made available but what I was very conscious of is that we have a very good squad already,” he said. “I have good players and it was just trying to get the right balances so I was keen to do that. I have been delighted with the input of the lads we brought in. It is never easy to integrate into a new squad and credit must go to the ones who were already here.”
Hughton revealed one of those summer additions, defender Michael Turner, is ‘touch and go’ for tomorrow’s trip to Everton after damaging his shoulder against United. He is optimistic Ruddy will be fit to face his former club despite injuring his knee in the closing stages of the 1-0 victory.
“It was that collision at the end of the game and it was literally the last ten seconds,” said Hughton. “It wasn’t the collision with Paul Scholes as such, but more how he went down. It was a little bit sore the following day and so there is always a little bit of concern, but he had it checked out and he has come through that. He is looking to train and we will make a decision on it but we are delighted with the progress he has made. He has just done some individual training with Dave (Watson) as opposed to training within the group, but the good news he is fine.
“Michael took a knock in the same game so he will be touch and go but we are hopeful he will be okay. He is another one who hasn’t trained since the United match.”
Russell Martin has returned to full training after his back injury and could make the trip. Hughton also confirmed Tottenham loan striker Harry Kane is poised to return to the club before the hectic Christmas period following his foot surgery.
“Yes he is making good progress. The decision we had to make is where he is in his rehab stage,” said Hughton. “He is running now and we could bring him back here for that period, but he is still better off at Tottenham because I think it benefits him to be in familiar surroundings. We’ll give it another couple of weeks perhaps to the stage where he can really get himself involved in some football and bring him back.
“Russell has had two days training, which is good, so he is pushing on. There is a chance he will travel with us (to Everton). ”

We're sorry, but the page you were seeking does not exist. It may have been moved or expired. Perhaps our search engine can help.
Marion Ezrre was not only the winner of the 1998 Tlingit & Haida Spring Salmon Derby but she is also the first and only female to win thus far.
Sound off on the important issues at
While fishing with her sister, Dorothy St. Clair, and her son, Eddie Ezrre, aboard his 26-foot-long Tolley Craft, the "Morning Mist," she caught the "Big One." She hooked into it on the breadline and reeled it in all by herself. She always had a love and passion for fishing. She even bought Eddie his first boat, a 17.5-foot-long Glass Par and fished with him as often as she could. Her friends, family and prayer group all miss and love her very much.

Just getting my new Blog in sync with my Facebook page so a few posts of weddings from 2010 coming up.
Joanne and Ians wedding took place at a rather rainy St Deiniols Church in Hawarden. Joanne was worried about the weather but she needn’t have been as thankfully the clouds parted during the church service and they didnt look back from then on. It was a superb full day which led onto the reception at the rather plush St Davids Park Hotel. To say we enjoyed it was an understatement as Joanne and Ian were superb hosts and models throughout the day and night!
Here are some of the images from the day.

The two have celebrated with their teammates, talked about the season and their careers with members of the media countless times and all the while have been training for the NBA Draft.
On Thursday, Dieng and Siva expect to hear their names called.
Dieng, who left U of L after his junior season, is expected to be a first-round pick in the NBA Draft that will be held in New York. Siva expects to hear his name called somewhere in the second round.
"(The NBA folks) can't believe how nice and how genuine both of those guys are," U of L coach Rick Pitino said recently. "They're both going to be fine professionals. Peyton just has to find the right team."
The 6-foot-11 Dieng worked out for the Brooklyn Nets on Tuesday. The Nets have the 22nd pick in the draft that is Thursday night.
Dieng is likely to be gone by the time the Nets pick. Atlanta has picks 17 and 18 and are likely to take him with one of those picks, according to most mock drafts, but the Bulls also like Dieng and have the 20th pick.
Siva has been mentioned as a second-round pick in many mock drafts. Siva has worked out for at least 10 teams in recent weeks.
"I just want a chance somewhere," Siva said in a recent interview.

Hey there, time traveller!
This article was published 3/6/2010 (2519 days ago), so information in it may no longer be current.
Brisk, assertive, commanding, he revived boldness, decisiveness and trenchant criticism... He restored to public affairs a sense that issues mattered, a sense long dulled by the former government's belief that the whole of government was administration.
-- W. L. Morton, Manitoba: A History
As Tuesday's Free Press lead editorial observed, for many people, Duff Roblin was the best prime minister Canada never had. W. L. Morton was, I believe, one of those people and I have long counted myself another. The grounds for such a view are to be found in Roblin's intelligence, industry and a record of achievement that spoke to unsurpassed creativity and dedication. From education to crop insurance to the floodway and so much more, his impulse was to use the power of government -- intelligently -- to serve the public interest.
He would also have been the first fluently bilingual prime minister to come from outside Quebec. And yet, he saw the country whole. In 1963, in a much applauded speech in Montreal, he offered a personal, eloquent and compelling view of our history and its complexities:
"All of Canada is my country. I was born in Manitoba but I am as much at home on the banks of the St. Lawrence as on those of the Red River. The dual culture of which people talk is, to some degree, my culture. But no one can bisect me. I am a Canadian. Part of my legacy is here, in la Belle Province, and this legacy is French. I know who kept Canada Canadian in 1775 by forcing American armies back from the walls of Quebec. I know in what language they voiced the cry of victory at Chateauguay during the War of 1812. I know who fought in 1837 to give Canada responsible government. I know that there were as many tuques as there were Scottish bonnets when Manitoba was created in 1870."
In the last few days much has been said of the achievements of this remarkable man. Many they were but, as in any human endeavour, there were setbacks along the way, all of which are chronicled in his own memoir, with candour and without recrimination. Yet having been with or near him during several of these, I am aware of how heavily some weighed on him; and I am also aware of the courage, discipline and grit that enabled him to learn, accept and carry on.
He was indeed a progressive Conservative, an illustration of which lay in his early and enthusiastic advocacy of an elected Senate. Yet, he understood instinctively the need to address the consequences -- for Parliament as a whole -- of having two elected chambers, each claiming electoral legitimacy. He had concerns about any informal erosion of the reserve power of the Crown in a constitutional system in which much was unwritten and in which precedent could readily become fixed practice.
Though he shared his opinions if asked by those in public office, he was disinclined to speak publicly on current political questions believing, as he would tell me, that he'd had his time in public life and that it was not his place to offer gratuitous advice to those in whom another generation of electors had now placed their trust.
I believe I was not alone in wishing that he had been less self-effacing, for he possessed an uncommon wisdom, the supply of which is rarely over-abundant in any political system.
In a classroom, aged 87, he provided a candid retrospective on some of the issues confronting him during the nine years of his premiership. When asked what his government had done about aboriginal issues, he made no attempt to inflate his government's record, acknowledging that it reflected the times' levels of awareness and was demonstrably insufficient; and that he wished he and his colleagues had been more far-sighted.
He had a lively sense of humour, which seemed to grow with the mellowing of age; he had a fertile imagination and a reasoned hopefulness about the future. He was a good listener. He could still put -- or counter -- a case with elegant logic and, more admirably, with no interest in scoring a point but great interest in achieving clarity about the subject at hand. He had a remarkably agile mind, well and truly stocked by wide reading, deep reflection and intellectual curiosity. I continued to learn from him right to the end.
He had standards. He was gracious, charming, a touch reserved -- he did not seek to impress or impose his views on others -- and he retained a rather gentlemanly old-fashioned courtesy that, for many, has long passed: even latterly, in face of growing physical infirmities, he would still rise from his chair when a woman entered the room. In conversation, he listened carefully and sympathetically even if one was rebutting his argument. He would listen sympathetically to a recital of a friend's woes but his solicitude was always respectful of the friend's privacy. He had an acute appreciation of human folly, but showed no interest in personal gossip. In responding to my suggestion that, in his memoir, he had pulled his punches in describing several controversies or the people involved in them, he replied simply that he had no taste for reopening controversies involving people who were dead and unable to respond.
Morton -- and others -- felt that Roblin was hobbled by a cautious business community and by the nature of his caucus and party, a view with which I have some sympathy. Roblin himself, disagreed; and his memoirs recount only a single instance of his conceding, reluctantly, to caucus opinion that he did not share.
Whatever the case, the dimensions of Roblin's impact seem to be widely agreed upon: that by re-creating a competitive party system, he restored parliamentary government to Manitoba; that he largely transformed the conduct of government, redefined and enlarged its scope, and modernized its operations; that his government was, on a wide range of issues, progressive, enlightened and liberal; that in the tumultuous 1960s he brought a reasoned and reasoning voice to public discourse; that on many important fronts -- education, health and the floodway, notably -- his policies had enduring consequences; that all of these things contributed, by the late '60s, to a fundamental and enduring political realignment in Manitoba.
The wide agreement, in short, would hold that Roblin brought Manitoba, its government and its politics into the modern era. Beyond all this, moreover, he became by virtue of his eloquence, convictions and conduct, a national figure who might well have become prime minister of Canada -- and a distinguished one.
It was my immense good fortune to count him as a friend. In a column in this space on his 75th birthday, I lauded some of his qualities as a person and as a public man, but noted that he was very private and that such public praise would probably disconcert him. Several days later I received a hand-written note from him which said, "Bill, you may disconcert me any time you like."
Well, Duff, I'm still trying.

She was an 8 month old pup who didn't know a stranger and was certain that everyone in the entire universe was pretty much set there to love on her. Her tail never stopped wagging and she stole many, many hearts. She ended up going home with an active family looking for young, medium sized dog who would be able to hike, jog, canoe and swim with them. I think she made herself a good match.
An observation I came away with is that Pit Bull mixes/types are becoming so mainstream and beloved in our area. Sure, there are the detractors, but as people brought their dogs in shopping, I saw one Yorkie, two Samoyeds, a Great Dane and four different families with Pit Bull/mixes. I'd say America's dog is holding strong in the Fort. One thing that I amused myself with was as I kept referring to Candy Girl as a Pit Bull Mix, every one kept asking what she is mixed with and my response, each time, was, "Sugar and spice."

Tony was the real estate agent we had been looking for!! He listened to what we had to say regarding marketing the property and his pictures were amazing. He was in continual contact throughout the listing and sales phases and has a very approachable demeanour even though we never met face to face. Thanks Tony for a job well done 👍.
Deborah and David Woolcox, Kingston ontario

"We are predominately a run-first offense, but when they call my number I try to get the job done," Terrell said.
Terrell may play in a run-first scheme, but he definitely isn't flying under the radar as far as recruiting goes. He has already pulled in four offers and is hearing from several others.
Terrell was busy this summer attending camps at both Texas and Oklahoma. He enjoyed both trips but admitted that both schools offer completely different atmospheres.
"I went to Oklahoma for and four-day camp and to Texas for a three-day camp," Terrell said. "I enjoyed both camps. I got to meet all the coaches and my position coaches."
"They are the same," Terrell added when asked if either camp stood out more than the other. "They have two totally different atmospheres. Texas is in a big city and is more fast paced. Oklahoma is more laid back."
Terrell had originally planned to attend Texas' game against Arkansas this past weekend before it was postponed. However, he will attend that game on the 27th. He is also planning on taking in the Texas A&M game against Miami this weekend.
For Terrell, recruiting has just gotten underway, but he still knows what he will be looking for in the future.
"Academics really," Terrell said when asked what would be the most important factor in recruiting. "I'm looking for the best fit. I want to go to the school that balances good academics with a good football program."

Due to certain national commitments, I would be away for about 2 weeks from my blog. I will prepare perhaps one or two posts but that's it, and comments will be moderated during that time.
UPDATE: Due to some really stupid admin fault, it seems that they have canceld the ICT without informing me by any means whatsoever. So I lugged all my stuff (about 20kg I think) to camp on the other side of the Island, went there, and was told to go back because my name was not on the list as they have rescheduled my ICT!!

This is our Vayda. She is a 2 year old German Shepherd mix that we adopted through Operation Pets Alive (OPA), a local pet rescue that I have volunteered and fostered for in the past.
We adopted her January 30, 2021 when she was roughly 10-12 weeks old. Her and her sisters had been placed in an igloo cooler bag and zipped up before being dropped at the back door area of the local shelter in Montgomery County Texas. Thankfully a worker decided to look at the cameras and saw they had been left as the shelter was closed at the time.
It has been both a blessing and chaos having her. She is a funny dog, and I absolutely love her.

According to Jones, he was known as Trump's daughter by their mutual friend, fashion designer Tommy Hilfiger, who told him that Ivanka wanted to have dinner with him.
"No problem, it's wonderful," he said, adding that Ivanka had "the most beautiful legs I have ever seen, but the father is not suitable," the magazine said.
Jones, who married three times and has seven children from several women, did not disclose what his relationship with Ivanka was and whether it was emotional or not.
Her father, the current US president, Donald Trump, described Jones as a "madman with limited mentality who is paranoid and selfish," asserting that he can not tolerate him.
Jones, the late pop king, Michael Jackson, whom he had collaborated with for years, was accused of being a "greedy man" and "stealing the songs of others."
The 28-year-old Grammy Award winner considered the Beatles legendary members as "the worst musicians in the world".
Jones highlighted the assassination of US President John F. Kennedy, saying he knew the killer. He claimed to be the leader of one of Chicago's then-active mafia gangs, Frank Jankana.
Kennedy, who he described as a "bad man", had a relationship with the late singer Frank Sinatra, who had links with the mafia, and asked Sinatra to intervene to secure Jankana's services to secure electoral votes.

Sun Tzu - Art of WarAstroworks
Varies with device Varies with device
Sun Tzu also rendered as Sun Zi was a Chinese military general, strategist, and philosopher who lived in the Spring and Autumn period of ancient China. The name he is best known by is actually an honorific which means "Master Sun": His birth name was Sun Wu and he was known outside of his family by his courtesy name Changqing. He is traditionally credited as the author of The Art of War, an extremely influential ancient Chinese book on military strategy. Sun Tzu has had a significant impact on Chinese and Asian history and culture, both as the author of The Art of War and as a legendary historical figure.

Been lurking for a few months now. Quick story behind my recent love of diapers... I had surgery and was on pain meds for quite some time. The meds made me wet at night, so I did some research, and went out and got goodnites. The effect of the pain meds never went 100% away, and, well 3 months later, I enjoy wearing Tranquility ATNs, although 9 times out of 10 I don't need them.
Anywho, I'm 19, still live at home, no one knows about this except myself. Its actually really easy to keep it that way, which I've read is difficult for some, so I consider myself lucky!

Exactly three months after his first non-finish of the season, Tiago Monteiro again suffered the painful experience of not making it to the finish of today's US Grand Prix. This was a huge disappointment for the man who stood on the podium ...
Exactly three months after his first non-finish of the season, Tiago Monteiro again suffered the painful experience of not making it to the finish of today's US Grand Prix. This was a huge disappointment for the man who stood on the podium here last year, and who yesterday enjoyed his best qualifying position of the season in his Midland M16.
"What a difference a year makes! As I was watching the 2006 podium, about to leave the track, I was really disappointed. I had made such a good start ahead of my team-mate Christijan Albers, and I was feeling really good. Then suddenly there was a big mechanical storm ahead of me on the track. Pieces of cars were flying everywhere. I couldn't see anything."
"All I knew was that there had been a huge problem on the track and that soon the pace-car would be out. Luckily, I saw a piece of grass ahead of me and cut through and escaped the scene and was able to get safely back on to the track. To be honest, it was a really good deal for me and I was very lucky to escape unscathed.
"After the six laps behind the safety car, in ninth position, the race finally restarted. I was feeling confident. The car was behaving well. I had good grip. I was not making any plans. Just taking the pace constantly and suddenly... Takuma Sato reserved for me one of his special unrealistic moves."
"He suddenly locked his wheels like a kamikaze going into Turn 1 on lap seven. He braked very late, and my car suffered extensive sidepod damage. Imagine how disappointed I am. I was expecting his excuses, but nothing came. So I went to him and we had a discussion. I told him my point of view."
"Nevertheless, it was a waste of time. My dream to finish Indianapolis a second time was over. Frankly, with an excellent weekend behind us up until that point, we did not deserve this end to the race."

Bassetlaw MP John Mann has called for a UN resolution on the Syrian crisis.
More top news
13-year-old Megan Schofield from Swarcliffe was reported missing on Monday.
The site aims to help people understand more about the services available to them
The former footballer died after being shot with a Taser outside his father's home

Newcastle lie detector test reveals affair
A Newcastle lie detector test was recently booked by our client Trina when she suspected her husband Ronald guilty of having an affair. Here is Trina’s story and how Lie Detector Test UK helped her get the truth she deserved.
Trina met Ronald when she owned a café close to the A1 in Newcastle. Because of the location of her café she got a lot of long-haul truck drivers, including Ronald. Ronald was a few years older than Trina but the pair immediately hit it off. Luckily, Ron lived locally in Newcastle too so they started dating. A year later and the pair were living together, marrying just two years after meeting.
Ron got a promotion at work as a night manager for his work’s depot. The new role meant Ron was no longer working as a lorry driver, so he wouldn’t be away from Trina as often or as long. He was happy to work evenings if it meant less nights away from home. Trina was also thrilled about the promotion and didn’t mind Ron working evenings.
Trina always found it weird that Rom would make sure his laptop was logged out and turned off when he left for work in the evenings. However, one day he forgot and curiosity got the best of Trina. She found a chat page that was left open and Ron had been exchanging messages with someone called “Sammykittyxo”. The messages were flirty and talked about meeting up. However, Trina couldn’t read anymore as the chat box was only a day old. Trina assumed Ron had either deleted the chat history, or the website didn’t keep chat history older than the current chat.
Before leaving for work the next morning, Trina told Ron what she had found and asked him who the girl was. He said it was simply a friend who he had been emailing for a few years since she moved to the states. He told Trina he used to work with her and she was now working at his employer’s sister company in Texas. Because Trina couldn’t read any other messages she didn’t argue with Ron, but she couldn’t help feeling he was lying.
Time for a lie detector test
Trina confided in her friend at work, who told her if she was unsure if Ron was lying to book a lie detector test. She told Trina how her brother had booked one when his employer accused him of stealing. She passed on the details of Lie Detector Test UK and told Trina to give us a call.
Trina booked a lie detector test for the following week at our Newcastle office. She told Ron about the test when she got home. Ron was upset, but he agreed to take the test and prove he wasn’t lying. Ron showed up to our Newcastle office with Trina a week later and took his test.
The results showed Ron was lying. He asked to speak to Trina and confessed that he had been having an online affair. He admitted he didn’t know her from work but met her in the chatroom which was actually designed for singles to meet. She didn’t live in Texas after all, and he had met up with her several times to spend the day together whilst Trina was working. He said he didn’t know how to tell Trina but he was sorry she had found out this way. The couple have now separated and Trina thanks Lie Detector Test UK for finding her the truth, albeit a hard one.
We provide confidential office appointments and home tests throughout the North East.

MACON, Ga. (AP) - Authorities say a woman was bound and gagged by her 59-year-old Macon husband and forced into his car at knifepoint before she managed to escape.
Citing an arrest warrant from the Bibb County Sheriff's Office, The Telegraph reports that Terry Lynn Porter Sr. tied up his wife and stuffed a sock in her mouth early Tuesday, telling her he was going to kill her.
Deputies say Porter then drove his wife toward her daughter's house, where he said he would kill her daughter in front of her.
Authorities say Porter was headed toward Atlanta when the woman managed to escape. It is not clear how she escaped.
Porter was arrested Wednesday afternoon and faces numerous charges including aggravated assault and kidnapping. It's unclear whether he has an attorney.

Eric Felton, writing in the February 5th Wall Street Journal (That Synching Feeling), laments the tendency of pursuing the perfect in public performances:
Not only are we told that prerecording is "standard operating procedure," but we're supposed to believe that it is actually a virtue: The performers, you see, care too much about their art to risk presenting something substandard. But what is art without risks?
Are we to be insulated from risk in order to ensure "perfection" even if it results in a loss of integrity? It appears that it is not only musicians who are guilty of this crime, all around us we find an artificial propping up of mediocrity and failure. "You ran your business into the ground? Here, take this bailout"; "No, Timmy, we can't play that game, we wouldn't want some of the other children to have hurt feelings"; "Everyone makes mistakes, I am sure that God understands."
Unfortunately, there is always a final judgment. You might temporarily prop up a failing business, but at what cost down the road? ($1.1 trillion?!? I won't live long enough to see that debt retired!) You might avoid some hurt feelings now, but at what price later? You might think that somehow your idol god will turn a blind eye to your sin, but the Supreme Sovereign of the universe will one day sit in judgment over you.
Then I saw a great white throne and him who was seated on it. From his presence earth and sky fled away, and no place was found for them. And I saw the dead, great and small, standing before the throne, and books were opened. Then another book was opened, which is the book of life. And the dead were judged by what was written in the books, according to what they had done. And the sea gave up the dead who were in it, Death and Hades gave up the dead who were in them, and they were judged, each one of them, according to what they had done. Then Death and Hades were thrown into the lake of fire. This is the second death, the lake of fire. And if anyone's name was not found written in the book of life, he was thrown into the lake of fire. -Revelation 20:11-15 (ESV)
While we cannot "lip synch" our way past this judgment, there is one who has fully met the rigorous requirements of God's law on our behalf.
For while we were still weak, at the right time Christ died for the ungodly. For one will scarcely die for a righteous person—though perhaps for a good person one would dare even to die— but God shows his love for us in that while we were still sinners, Christ died for us. Since, therefore, we have now been justified by his blood, much more shall we be saved by him from the wrath of God. For if while we were enemies we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much more, now that we are reconciled, shall we be saved by his life. More than that, we also rejoice in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom we have now received reconciliation. - Romans 5:6-11 (ESV)
Have we been trying to fake it through life, afraid of imminent failure? Trust in the reality of His sacrifice rather than depending upon your own phony efforts.
Passive Christianity Is Dead Christianity
51 minutes ago

This morning, Jace came into the kitchen carrying his school clothes. The only thing he was wearing was under ware. He opened one eye and said to me, "The only thing I have on is my panties." (Around here we call Haley's under ware panties.) So I said, "PANTIES! Boys don't wear panties, they wear underwear!" Jace replied (and this makes me laugh)... "Well I'm the sheriff of this town, and I wear boxers." I love that kid!

This show was always on in my area, but I never watched a single full episode. Mostly just the opening and the many endings, as I remember it being on before the various monster movies on the weekends. It just never interested me, even after I discovered Raymond Burr was in Godzilla, King of the Monsters! and was Perry Mason.
Since I've discovered this Me-TV station I've been watching the show and quite enjoying it. Great writing, great casting and even great direction. Add to that many young guest stars make it a lot of fun to watch. I think we've just moved into the second season now.

KEVIN Horlock believes he is playing the best football of his career...and boss Kevin Keegan is not about to disagree. The Northern Ireland midfielder took his scoring tally for the season to seven - including three in the last six matches - when he nodded the only goal in Saturday''s victory over Crystal Palace. It put him level with Ali Benarbia and Eyal Berkovic and one ahead of Shaun Wright-Phillips in the engine room''s private battle to be the most prolific marksman. Now 29-years-old, Horlock is itching for a third crack at the Premiership after unsuccessful campaigns in the top flight with both Swindon and City. He has played in a variety of positions during his 180 league and cup starts as a Blue but most of them have been as a left sided midfielder or full-back. Currently, though, he is enjoying a new lease of life as the holding player who allows Benarbia and Berkovic the freedom to roam and the licence to entertain. Horlock is, however, much more than a ''water-carrier''. His skills may not be as evident as some in the team but there are few better strikers of a ball as witnessed by his recent efforts against Sheffield Wednesday and Birmingham. "Kevin is one of the unsung heroes," said the manager. "He has been tremendous in that role. He perhaps looked like he was going to be on the fringes of things earlier in the season but now he is one of the first names on the team sheet. He was in an out of the team but never complained and was outstanding again in our win over Palace at the weekend." Horlock, meanwhile, modestly passes on the praise to others for his prolonged stay in the side. "I think consistency wise this has been my best season at City by a mile," he ventured. "I don''t know what it is, whether I am fitter or playing with better players, but I know I am enjoying it. I know I am playing in a good team in which everyone is complementing one another. "I also know things can change quickly in football so while the praise is fine I know I have to go out and perform at that level in every game just to hang on to the shirt." As if to prove the point, Horlock revealed that he had been unwell in the run up to the win over Palace. "I had been a little bit ill after the Crewe game but I know for a fact if I don''t play I may not get a look in for the rest of the season. You cannot afford to be out of this team because there is always someone waiting to take your place. "All of the credit for my goal on Saturday was down to Shaun Wright-Phillips, it was great to be presented a tap-in like that. "The three points were vital. We want to be champions. We are all desperate to get back into the Premiership because it seemed to pass us by a little last time we were there but, like I said, the club has moved on since then."

I'm abroad for a few months.
On 25/2/22 I rec'd an email to say a new sim was on its way to my UK address.
Customer service advised that this was because of the ee->vodafone migration. They arranged to send me another new sim to a UK based friend. He activated it and I paid £50 for it to be couriered to me. It is working fine in my phone,
Two weeks later I got an email to say another sim was on it's way. Customer service said this was a mistake and this 3rd sim was cancelled.
Yesterday I got an email to say another sim was on it's way ( the 4th one). Now customer service are telling me that when my current ( 2nd) sim was activated in the UK it was actually.
done on the old EE 4g network. I was informed that what I should have done was to upgrade my current 4g tariff to a 5g tariff and then activate the sim.
So basically the sim I have now which is working will be deactivated in 14 days and I will have to spend another £50 for this 4th sim to be sent to me.
Is anyone else having the same experience? There is nothing in any emails, or on the Virginmedia website to say that I had to take the initiative to upgrade my tariff before I activated the sim. Customer service also didn't inform me about this during any prior phone calls.
I think this is really poor service by Virginmedia

Emails About My Sister's Death
Robbin Denise Markley
January 14, 1964 - August 23, 1998
It was Sunday, August 23, 1998 when my older sister, Robbin Denise Markley, died suddenly of a massive heart attack. She was only 34 years old. Robbin was only one year older than me, and she and I were very close while we were growing up. The pain and loss that I felt after her death were more intense than I can describe with words.
I sent the following email simultaneously to several of my friends on the night following the morning she died:
I am writing to all of you because right now I need my friends more than I ever have. My older sister died of a massive heart attack on Sunday morning. She was only 34 years old. She and I were very close when we were growing up, and I feel like my heart has been ripped out and left to rot. Additionally, I'm supposed to head to Western Michigan University to start my graduate teaching assistantship work tomorrow. However, I am not in any emotional or mental state of mind to go. I don't know what to do. I don't even know if I even want to go to graduate school this semester, and I don't really care. My faith in God was shot to hell today. As I told my sister-in-law today, "I don't know what to believe in anymore. I don't believe in anything right now." I don't know what to do. I have included my phone number. Feel free to give me a call. I realize that there's nothing that you can really say, but I need my friends right now. My family is taking this very hard, and it is overwhelming for all of us.
Over the next several days, I was inundated with a flood of emails from friends who cared beyond what I could have ever imagined. Many of them struggled deeply to find the right things to say. Their words and advice were sincere and heart felt, and I will always remember and appreciate their love and concern for me. What follows here are many of the emails that I received. All of the emails are reproduced here with permission from each author:
I realize that there is nothing I cay say that can make up for your loss. I am truly sorry. As I sit here and read what you have written over again, I realize that I don't even know what to say. I think I would like to offer some advice about graduate school, however. I think you should do what you think your sister would want you to do. I don't think she would ask that you put your life on hold. I think that she would want you to take the
opportunity that you have been offered. I think it may help you to go on as well. Deep down though, you have to do what you want. Please don't think that my advice about grad school is insensitive, it is simply the way that I would deal with my feelings and may not be the best way at all. It is only what I would do, and that's why I say that ultimately, only you know the way for you to deal with your feelings. Please feel free to write anytime you would like. I never know the best thing to say, or the best way to cheer someone up, but I am here for you nonetheless.
I am sorry about your sister. Its going to take some time before you will be back to your old jolly self, and I just wanted you to know that we (Mid-Michigan Meteorology Society) are all behind you. You must do what you must to ease your pain that you must be feeling. Anyway, I'm no good at writing sympathy notes, they always come out sounding so cheezy that I'm afraid no one is going to want to read them. So I will leave it at that.
However, if you want some cheering up, that I can kinda give you. Chris and I went storm chasing about a week ago and didn't find a thing, but we drove all over Michigan. Also I have a friend at Western who could help you in your belief in God during this time. You may want to look him up, though I don't know anything but his name right now. If you need some one to talk to personally, his name is [withheld], and he helped me with my acceptance of God, and don't feel like he won't care, he is a good guy whose goal in life is to help anyone physically, mentally, and emotionally. Look him up.
Anyway, I had best go. I hope that everything turns out better.
Don't know what to say 'cept for you're in our prayers and we're thinking of you all. I don't know what to do or tell you to do. I'm here to talk.
I am SO sorry to hear about your sister. I wish I could offer words of wisdom, comfort, and love. Yet, I am at a loss for words. I wish your family comfort, peace, and help to get through this difficult time.
I understand that when you go through a loss as major as this one, you question everything in sight. I feel that I need to tell you that God is with you and with your family RIGHT NOW! You may not feel that 'cause the pain is too intense. If you read in Isaiah 41 - you will see that the Lord God Almighty will not forsake you! Also Hebrews 11:1 - trusting in God at the hardest time is the most difficult part of our faith. I would like you to feel free to call me or continue to e-mail me about all of this. I am opting not to call due to how it is probably going on in your house right now! Know that I am praying for you, as are others here at Central Michigan University! If you need ANYTHING - do not hesitate to get a hold of me! Take care and let me know how you are doing! Know that I care for you and your welfare.
I'm terribly sorry to hear about your sister. I know that is devastating to you. I also know what it feels like to have something effect you that deeply....that's why you and I need to talk.
I have departmental auditions tonight and I will try and call you after that. I hope I don't get too wrapped up in anything because I really need to talk to you!
There is nothing wrong with what you're feeling....no one can dictate what you should or should not be feeling; however, your life doesn't end because your sister's has and if you two were as close as you say, I don't think she would want you to stop living yourself.
Take care, love with a big old bear hug...
I don't know what to say other than that I am deeply sorry for your loss. I cannot imagine what pain and suffering you are going through. The only thing about death is that it can either make you stronger knowing that you can make it through such heart ache or it can pull you down deep within its core and take you down with it. Be strong and hang in there. There is a time for family to come together, and unite your love of one another. Your family will pull you through this as long as you help them through this tough time. I hope that you will make the right decision about graduate school...only you know what the right decisions are! My heart goes out to you Bob and you are in my prayers. God bless you and your family.
I can't put it into words how sorry I am to hear about your sister. I'm sure the family is devastated at this sudden loss. May the God of all comfort give you all the comfort that only He can give. No one can understand why things like this happen.
I will share your letter with Alton tomorrow. He has been in the hospital since July 18 and is essentially a quadriplegic. He has Guillain-Barre' Syndrome. We have hopes that he will recover, but it will be a long period for recovery. He is unable to do much of anything for himself. He has limited use of his hands and arms and no use of his legs. His mind is sharp though. He can't read but he can pray.
[Note: Alton has since recovered and is no longer a quadriplegic.]
I sent a second email to my friends on the night of Thursday, August 27, 1998, which was four days after my sister's death. I showed much more hope in this email, but I still had a lot of emotions to work through:
I want to thank all of you for your help and understanding over the last few days since my sister died. I wish that I could tell you that I am back to normal, but that wouldn't be very honest. I'm confused, hurting, and angry. I have tried for days to make sense of this, and I can't do it.
I called the geography department at Western Michigan University on Monday and I told them what happened. They gave me until Friday to decide what to do, and they told me not to worry about anything until that time. I decided today that I will go to graduate school as planned. As many of you pointed out, my sister wouldn't want me to stop living or to give up my plans. And if things were reversed, I wouldn't want her to stop living either. So, I will go on as planned no matter how hard it is. The next days, weeks, and months will be difficult for me, but I will survive.
The emails from friends who cared didn't stop coming. I received the following messages after I sent my second email:
I am sorry that I did not email you back sooner. I felt that what you are going through deserved more than an email. When I was reading your letter, I started to think about what if my sister were to die all of a sudden. I started to cry. So, even though I can't say that I know how you are feeling, I know that it has got to be devastating. And yes, Bob, it is okay to grieve. It is okay to be angry. It is ok to ask questions. Why her and not someone else? But Bob, DO NOT turn your back on God! God had a reason behind this. What it is I don't know. But He has a reason for everything. To postpone grad school would do you more harm than good. You will "heal" a lot quicker by getting your mind occupied on other things. If you postpone it, you will constantly be thinking of her and won't get anywhere. My advise would be to talk to your pastor, and ask for advice. Your pastor should be able to ease your pain a little, and possibly give some positives on this. I know it hurts, Bob, and I can't even try to begin to understand your anger, frustration and confusion, but the world is still turning! Bob, make your sister proud of her little brother!
I will be praying for you, Bob, and I am sure that others will be too. I hope to hear from you soon.
I'm very sorry to hear about your loss. I don't know what I can possibly say to make you feel comforted, but I am here as a friend and as one more listening ear.
My brother-in-law lost his brother to cancer almost 3 years ago. He was my age when he died, and I'm sure that you can imagine how devastated my brother-in-law was. He still cherishes some of his brother's personal items, still speaks of his brother very reverently, and most importantly, still tells stories of his brother so that my nieces will be able to know him and love him. The greatest loss was to the girls, because even the older one doesn't really remember Uncle Truck; they just hear the stories and laugh at how Big Bad Daddy got Big Little Bro into trouble again. I don't know what you're feeling right now, but I must agree that your sister wouldn't want you to give up on your life right now. No matter how hard it seems to cope with and impossible it seems to get past, your life will go on. You are her living legacy; therefore, it only makes sense to keep on living :).
Keep writing as often as you need, and remember you have many friends to call on when you feel overwhelmed.
Sorry about your sister. That is really terrible. Only 34, too? Did she have a history of heart problems? You made the right choice about starting Grad school and not backing out. It will help keep your mind off of your ordeal and besides, they need you at Western Michigan University, they want you at Western Michigan University, and you'll do well and excel above all of your expectations because that is the type of person you are.
Sounds like you had a real trying time just before school. I'm glad you chose to go with Grad school. Things will get better for you.
I know your heart must be breaking. I will pray for you. I know what that feels like. About 3 years ago, 10 people that I knew died within a matter of 18 mos. I wish I could hug you and tell you that I really understand and that you are not alone.
No preaching from me. I have no answers or words that can make it hurt less. I really do care.
Hang in there.

"My dreams are riddled with memories. I still hear
the high pitched hum of his oxygen machine."
I think I was eleven when my dad had to go to Edmonton, Canada, for tests. They did not know what was wrong with him, just that he was sick, and they did not know how to make him better. He was gone for little over a week. When he came back he had lost over fifty pounds and looked so sad. After he had gone to bed my Mum sat us girls down. There were three of us in the room. (Five sisters all together, but the other two sisters were in town.) She told us that, "Daddy was very sick and was going to need our love and support." At the time I did not think anything of it.
We had to move from Grande Prairie, Alberta to Nanaimo, British Columbia because he needed the moisture in the air.
We moved into this giant brown house two blocks from my school. Dad had to go on twenty-four hour oxygen. When you walked into the house you could hear a high pitched humming noise, but after a while you did not even hear it anymore. I did not hang out with my friends, or go to parties or school dances, because my dad was my life. Mum worked full time and if she was not home, I was.
My sisters (two still lived in Grande Prairie, and two were older than me) were always out of the house. I do not think that they wanted to deal with the disease or with him dying. I remember once when when I was fourteen, Dad got up to go to the washroom. I was watching TV with him. I heard this loud thump from the washroom. I sat outside the bathroom door for 45 minutes continually crying and asking my Dad if he could hear me. He finally came out of the bathroom and went to bed for what seemed like eternity. Later I found out from my mum that he had passed out and was lying unconscious on the floor for most of that time and because he locked the door I could not help him. Another time I had to help my mum drag him from the bathroom to the bedroom were we laid on the floor with him for five hours until he could get enough energy to climb into bed. I have had to hold his head up and hold his tongue so that he did not choke when he passed out.
He eventually lost movement in his legs and feet. His brain started to harden as well. He would say things that he did not mean and then he did not remember saying them. One day I did not want to go to school because I knew something was wrong, but my mum told me I had to go. So I went. I came home for lunch and I did not want to go back, but I went. When my principal walked into my English 10 class, I knew. I packed up my stuff and walked out behind him. When he said, "I am sorry, Brianne, but your mother just called and your father has passed away…" I do not know how I got there, but I was sitting on the floor. Then I remembered my sister (who was in twelfth grade) and I ran down to the office and she was there crying. I held her in my arms and repeated that it was going to be okay, then we went home. My mum was waiting at the top of the stairs for us. My other sisters both left to be with their boyfriends.
I went to go see my dad. He was still lying on the bed. I walked up to the bed and held his hand and said all the things that I wanted to say before he left. I cried beside him and told him all the things that I wanted to do and become. Then I kissed his face and left the room.
Sixteen days later I celebrated my sixteenth birthday, alone, with my mum, crying.
I am now nineteen and remember every detail of it all. My dreams are riddled with memories. I still hear the high pitched hum of his oxygen machine.
Thank you for your time.
New email address needed 08-06-09 SLE
Old Email Prefix: breezycarson
Story submitted 7-9-02
Story posted 7-13-02
Story edited 7-7-03
Pulmonary Fibrosis (oxygen)
Survivor Stories (In Memory)
Sherry Jo Young was the ISN Story Editor for this story.
United Way of Central New Mexico
United Way of Snohomish County
See ISN News for recent donors, including Pam Hop, Margaret Roof, Winifred Schillberg, Arnold Slotkin, and Juliet Youkhana. Plus donations in honor of Kim Thwaits, and in loving memory of Marta Marx, Jim Miller, and Arlene Marie Petulla.
Click Here to Donate or Shop
or click on the floating green DONATE sclero.org button.
SCLERO.ORG is the world leader for trustworthy research, support, education and awareness for scleroderma and related illnesses, such as pulmonary hypertension. We are a service of the nonprofit International Scleroderma Network (ISN), which is a 501(c)(3) U.S.-based public charitable foundation, established in 2002. Meet Our Team, or Volunteer. Donations may also be mailed to:

God Is At Work
Several of our teammates have been discipling a new believer and his wife up on the mountain. This has been a slow process but we were encouraged last month by several things that happened. It was raining and after biblical storytelling, the visiting evangelist prayed for the rain to stop so he could go home. It stopped, but the evangelist stayed on because the conversation was so good. The following week he returned, and the new believer told him that twice during the week he had been high up on the mountain farming and needed to come home and so he prayed for the heavy rain to stop in the name of Jesus. Both times it did. He was so excited he came down the mountain and told his neighbours what happened. They just laughed and said he was crazy. The following week he dreamt of a giant. If a giant comes to you, it is a sign that you will be sick. So he rose up and rebuked the giant in the name of Jesus and he didn’t get sick. God is at work growing His people.
Jack and Asha live in South East Asia. They are making disciples.

Tom Brady is likely on his way to earning MVP honors, but he is also keeping track of his old understudy's hot streak across the country.
Brady, 40, noted that he was impressed with San Francisco quarterback Jimmy Garoppolo's 4-0 stretch under center for the 49ers.
"He's done a great job. You go in there and get the opportunity to play and win games, that's what we're all here for," Brady said on sports radio WEEI. "It was good to see, and good for them to beat Jacksonville (Sunday). That certainly helped us. I'm really happy for Jimmy. He's worked really hard and it shows up when he goes out there and plays really well."
The Patriots traded Garoppolo west earlier this season. New England drafted Garoppolo out of Eastern Illinois in the second round of the 2014 NFL draft, and he backed up Brady for three full seasons. Garoppolo has emerged in recent weeks with San Francisco, leading the team to four straight wins as he has completed 69% of his passes and thrown for as many as 381 yards in a game. His most recent win came over the Jaguars, who are bound for the playoffs in the AFC.

For the vision is yet for an appointed time, but at the end it shall speak, and not lie: though it tarries, wait for it; because it will surely come, it will not delay (Habakkuk 2:3).
God had promised Abraham Canaan. It was his by covenant right.
The entire land was to become his in the future.
But you know what? Abraham had to buy a tiny piece of that land the inhabitant (Genesis 23:1-16).
And do you know what part he bought? Not the most fertile. He bought a cave in which to bury his wife; the land that was his by right.
The owner of this piece of land even begged the old man to get it from him as a gift but he would not. He would not use his own means to get what God had promised to give him at the appointed time.
At the appointed time, the land became his.
Do not use your own power to get what God has promised to you.
Don’t rush ahead of God because you think it’s getting late. It could be suicidal.
God is not idling; He is busy preparing a table for you in the wilderness.
Don’t compare yourself with others. Your timing might not be theirs.
Ask of God the discernment to know the seasons; when it is time to move.
Endure the training, and then enjoy the job.

Its been 257 days Bucky since we lost you, and 258 days since i last heard your voice. i love you so much and miss you more and more everyday. i was so blessed to have you be the man in my life and guide me and teach me everything i know. but your gone too soon...
Bucky it's been two weeks today and it still seems like a dream. I love and miss you more and more everyday! I love you so much!
I have many memories of the Alsups when you lived in Goree. You were so loved by the Jim Cooke family. I am so sorry for your loss and may God give you the strength that you need at this time.
My thoughts and prayers to Shirley and the family. We were so fortunate to have had your family in Goree. May God give you comfort and strength.
Lynell Jetton Williams
Class of '65 - Goree High School
To Mr. Alsup's family I am sorry for your loss. I did not know Mr Alsup but I did know his parents. I remember going with my dad to his parent's little store and climbing on a bunch of tires that were stack up in front of the candy display to pick out a piece of candy. I have fond memories of Mr Alsup's parents.
Jimmy was a friend and played no small part in our kids education. He is so fondly remember by our whole family. What greater legacy than to be well regarded by one's students. Phil and Ruth Welch, Jennifer, Jason and our whole extended family.
I'm so glad to have had Coach Alsup as one of my COACHES What a great man.
Coach Alsup was an amazing man. I first met him when he drove the school bus on our route. I was so little, he would have to get off the bus to help me on. He will be greatly missed. Heaven has another Angel today. My thoughts and prayers are with the family during this difficult time.
Denise Kyle Sikes
MR. Alsup will be missed he was a great principal and a wonderful man.Our prayers and sympathy go out to the family.May the love and support of family and friends carry you though this diffulcult time. Perry and Lisa Hamilton
Prayers to Shirley, Randy & Denise, Georgia and family as you go through this journey. Mr (Coach) Alsup was loved by many and a large part of the great IP school system. I pray God's strength for you and know your wonderful memories will get you through the toughest times.
mr alsup will be greatly miss i remember him as being my princpal in jr high he was a great guy my heart goes out to the family
I had a great partner when I was working in Mineral Wells, that was Randy (Hawk Bird) Alsup. I met Mr. Jim Alsup in the mid 70s. He was a great guy and I enjoyed talking with him. He was so proud of his family and, he was also proud of the kids of Iowa Park School System. It seems Iowa Park has always had very good teachers, and I know Mr. Alsup was one of the great teachers who really enjoying teaching in Iowa Park. When I would come back to Iowa Park for Homecoming, I would normally run across Mr. Alsup, I really enjoyed our visits, Mr. Alsup was a very respected man. I will miss him.

The Memphis Tigers Basketball team revealed their skills to a crowd that couldn't seem to shut up for one moment. The atmosphere was absolutely electric and filled with pure passion for the basketball program. Coach Pastner, as always, came out with a smile on his face as the crowd gave him a standing ovation.
From the time the fans entered the building, the FedEx Forum in Memphis, TN was shaking and felt like a tornado was about to come through. Pastner was happy to see the big crowd in attendance dressed in blue and gray.
"Fantastic, awesome with a capital "A"," Pastner said when he was asked about the fans. "(I'm) just so happy. The crowd is unbelievable. Tiger Nation is the best."
The crowd was so energized that after each slam in the dunk contest, the building's floor seemed to shake. The dunk contest participants were Geron Johnson, Shaq Goodwin, Damien Wilson, Joe Jackson and Nick King.
Goodwin and Wilson both advanced to the finals, where Goodwin came out victorious. His signature dunk was the flashback of Vince Carter's 2000 "whole arm in rim" dunk. It wasn't that flashy, but it got the job done.
Goodwin used the same dunk in last year's Madness, but the fans seemed to appreciate it more this year.
"Man, like I told them, I am glad D.J. wasn't there," said Goodwin after his victory. "It feels good to win it. It feels good and as soon as I get out of here, I am going to tweet that I won the dunk contest."
Goodwin looked good on the court during the scrimmage, too, as he seemed to have no problem running up and down the floor.
"It feels great man," said Goodwin. "I was 270, now I am around 230, 235. I just feel a lot lighter, a lot quicker on the court. It should be beneficial during the season."
Goodwin was smiling from ear to ear and he was sprinting the floor during the scrimmage.
"Yeah, I was fine, even though the past couple weeks we had a lot of practice so it's a lot of wear and tear on everybody's body. I felt great out there," said Goodwin.
The focal point of the night was the scrimmage between the Tiger players, with the team divided up into two squads. Goodwin, Dominic Woodson, Dixon, King and Chris Crawford were on the White team. They went up against Johnson, Jackson, David Pellom, Austin Nichols and Markel Crawford made up the Blue team.
Nichols stood out the most in the scrimmage, though others performed well, too. It seemed as if Nichols was always in the right place at the right time when the ball came off the rim. He snagged rebound after rebound for easy put backs.
Johnson and Wilson each had nice monster dunks through the lane that were able to get the crowd to their feet. Pellom was very active and was a beast on the defensive end. His main focus was to rebound and run the open floor.
Pellom and his Blue team won by the final score of 34-32.
The ironic thing during the scrimmage was that no defense was being displayed. Pastner seemed okay with his players being lazy on the defensive end, but he warned fans not to get use to the look.
"It's the only time they will be allowed to play no defense for me was tonight at Memphis Madness," Pastner said quickly with his trademark grin on his face.
The season is finally here and the Tigers will hit the practice floor on Saturday to get in some more work as they prepare for their exhibition game against Christian Brothers on Nov. 8.
Get Memphis Gear Here Click Here to view this Link.

Karachi: ‘Muttahida man’ killed in PIB
KARACHI: A political activist was killed within the remit of the PIB police station in the early hours of Thursday, police said.
The police said that the killing took place at the main bazaar locality of PIB Colony where Kamran Ganchi, son of Abdul
Ghaffar, was attacked by gunmen riding a motorcycle while he was sitting outside his burger shop after business hours.
The victim was rushed to hospital but he succumbed to his wounds on the way.
The Muttahida Qaumi Movement claimed that Mr Ganchi was its worker and belonged to the party’s unit No 57.
The police said he was father of three. Tension gripped the locality when his funeral prayers took place in the afternoon.
The police also quoted his family members as saying that the deceased did not have enmity with anyone.
No FIR of the incident was registered at the PIB police station till late Thursday, a duty officer confirmed.

We had very prompt and professional service. I called Monday morning and they were out that afternoon to assess my door issue. We had a minor hiccup after the fix, but again, they were there promptly the same day and had that fixed. Based on my experience and level of service, I would recommend them.
Just about an hour ago, I placed a call-in to an issue with the new spring installation that they did over a month ago on my main garage door. I guess they had someone in my neighborhood so they sent him over, and within less than an hour, they had the problem fixed…very impressive with the support they have and I think they earned a repeat customer. Thank you for the job well done btw!
Had a garage door cable come off track and a customer car was stuck inside my shop because of it. Trying to run a glass shop, this was a major problem for me and my customer. Placed the call and within 5 minutes they were here. Not to mention the job was done in 10 minutes…they saved the day! They were done and on the road before I even had the car put back together. Very fast service and a job well done. Thank you!!
If you need professional help with an existing overhead door, call Adams. I needed a couple of parts for mine and their service was excellent. Price was competitive as well. They sell and install new doors, openers etc. and based on their customer service, I’d certainly give them a chance.
I’ve used Adams in the past and will use them again. Technician arrived within an hour of my call. Quickly diagnosed the issue and made the repairs. He also took the time to explain some installation issues with my door that contributed to the hinges breaking. Since I’ve been considering a new door, he also took the time to explain the features and construction of the doors/openers they carry and provided me with a rough estimate so I could consider a future replacement. Fast, friendly, knowledgeable.
We have used them 3 times over the past several years…they have always been punctual and courteous, and provided same day service. The first time we called them several years ago, it was stupid user error by us as new home owners, and the man who came took the time to educate us…They have also gone above and beyond…which I really appreciate!

- 10:49 AM, Oct 05
Susan Boyle, who was born on April 1, 1961, was briefly deprived of oxygen during the difficult birth and was later diagnosed as having learning difficulties. Due to the disability, she was bullied and nicknamed "Susie Simple" at school. After graduating from school with few qualifications, she was employed as a trainee cook in the kitchen of West Lothian College for six months and took part in government training programs.
Susan got singing lessons from voice coach Fred O'Neil. Prior to participating "Britain's Got Talent" (BGT), she sang in church and karaoke at pubs in her village. She also participated in her parish church's pilgrimages to the Knock Shrine, County Mayo, Ireland.
Repeatedly urged by her mother to audition for BGT but ignoring the suggestions, she finally stepped out and took the risk of singing in front of an audience larger than her parish church during the show's audition in August 2008. In the first round of the show, she delivered a rendition of Les Miserables' "I Dreamed a Dream".
Ever since her video performance hit the web, it had been watched by more than 10 millions viewers. Along with her rise to fame, she became aware that the BGT audience was initially hostile to her because of her appearance, but she has refused to change her image.
In addition to the image issue, Susan who was not used to media attention also suffered from emotional breakdown. She was admitted to The Priory in Southgate, North London in June 2009, one day after she was announced as a runner-up on the show's finale. Rumor had it at that time, she either suffered from exhaustion or she couldn't handle her loss in the singing competition or it was related to her newly-found fame.
Susan released her debut album "I Dreamed a Dream" on November 23 worldwide. The studio project sold more than 410,000 copies across U.K. in its first week, making it the fastest-selling album and becoming the largest first-week sales for a debut album in U.K. chart history. Her reign extended to U.S. as the album opened with more than 701,000 copies, becoming the best-opening week for any album in Billboard Hot 200 and beating Eminem's fastest-selling record with "Relapse" which sold around 608,000 units in May.
Also, it earned the best sale frame on the U.S. chart since AC/DC's "Black Ice" debuted with 784,000 in October 2008.

Sometime after 2 p.m. on Monday, OnStar informed police of crash that ripped two tires off a Chevy Cruze. The service said the car was at Highway 17 and Camden Avenue, near Vasquez' home. Officers responded but did not see an accident. OnStar then updated the location to downtown San Jose. Again, police found nothing. At 3 a.m. Vasquez's stepmother called police to report her daughter missing.
Campbell police Officer David Cameron went to Vasquez's house and found her iPad. He realized that he could use Find My iPhone to possibly track her location; however, there was a passcode on the device.
"I made an educated guess based on a series of common numbers people use for passwords and on the third attempt I was able to get in," Cameron said.
Within minutes the app had identified her location and just 20 minutes later rescuers were airlifting her out of the ravine.
A Coast Guard helicopter was called while officers walked down the embankment through heavy shrubbery. "The officers on the scene said she was face down. She was awake, coherent, and she was speaking to officers," said CHP Officer Ross Lee. Vasquez was put into an airlift basket and hoisted out of the ravine. She was rushed to the Regional Medical Center ICU suffering injuries to her legs and her abdomen.
"I think somebody was looking out for her. Things fell in place and had those things not fallen in place, it could have been a totally different story," Cameron said.
The CHP is still investigating the incident. It's unclear why the car ended up in the ravine. Drugs and alcohol, they say, do not appear to be a factor.
Take a look at the video below for more details...
Read More [via Leonard] [Find My iPhone]

With Marvel and ABC working feverishly to introduce a new version of "The Incredible Hulk" in 2013, it would be fitting to take a look at what made the original version great. "The Incredible Hulk" is still considered as one of the best superhero shows of all time. What is it that makes the show so memorable 30 years after cancellation?
Focal point of the original
The focus of the original show was on how David Banner dealt with a life in which he had to leave everything behind and constantly move on. Instead of focusing on the marauding Hulk, fans took a look into the psyche of a man who could not stay anywhere long or his past would catch up with him. He had to deal with hiding an aspect of himself (the Hulk) to keep himself and others safe. While the Hulk was present, he only appeared for about five to ten minutes in each episode to keep fans hungering for more while still keeping enough time to cover the human condition.
The key to the show
There was a key theme connecting every episode of the series which was figuratively displayed in the infamous "walking away" ending of the episodes. Banner lacked stability in his life. He constantly tried to set roots in new areas, but was forced to move along when those searching for him got too close. He also lacked the stability to control the Hulk as Ol' Greenie would take over whenever the doctor became angry. Few shows are able to keep continuity over multiple seasons with a single key theme.
While fans of "The Incredible Hulk" would automatically think of the Hulk as the superhero of the show, it was Banner who was the true hero as he would go out of his way to help people at all costs. He would constantly place other people ahead of himself even if it risked the exposure of his secrets. Common tales of trying to vacate a small town of robber barons or going toe-to-toe with organized crime were seen each week and showed how the main character cared more about the weak than about himself. Even though the Hulk was the stronger physical character, it was Banner's humanity which made the weaker scientist the true hero of the classic show. The Hulk was the sizzle which caused people to originally tune in, but it Banner was the meat of the show and led people to revere the show for so long.
More from this Contributor:
- Arts & Entertainment

A couple of questions before the Wallabies play at what has been a graveyard for their hopes and dreams for 32 years against a nation who haven't lost there for 24.
If things don't go to plan for the visitors at Eden Park on Saturday, will they stick around on the pitch to acknowledge Owen Franks' 100 tests in the front row – a place which really is the coalface of international rugby - or will they depart virtually en masse like they did at ANZ Stadium last weekend when Sam Whitelock was recognised for his own three-figure milestone?
And, should the All Blacks lock up the Bledisloe Cup for the 16th consecutive year, what will that do for the game in Australia, already at an extremely low ebb and with calls for coach Cheika to be sacked a year out from the World Cup?
All Blacks coach Steve Hansen was asked about both issues today, and shortly after Wallabies coach Michael Cheika responded with regards to what has been described as a snub of Whitelock.
Hansen said he believed the Wallabies should stick around to celebrate Franks, adding that it was not really the All Blacks' problem that the Wallabies haven't got the results they would like, but that it was important for the game that they were a strong team.
Wary of seeing his comments taken out of context, Hansen was diplomatic about both issues, but there was also little doubt about where he stood on either.
The All Blacks would have been privately disappointed that only a handful of Wallabies stuck around to see Whitelock acknowledged but the Australians are now in a tricky situation. A change in that policy on Saturday would be an acceptance that they got it wrong, and relations between these two teams have been lukewarm at best for several years.
"It's not for me to comment on what their policy is… I know if it was us we'd stay out and acknowledge it," Hansen said. "I think it's a tremendous feat; playing 100 test matches, it doesn't matter what country it is, there's a lot of energy, a lot of mental fortitude, a lot of time, a lot of sacrifices by the player's family – his kids, his wife, his partner – to get to that point. It's worthy of respect."
Hansen is right, but Cheika has rarely been one to follow convention. He could leave his men to make their own minds up about whether to stick around on the pitch, but it wouldn't be a good look if few take up the opportunity and, needless to say, the All Blacks would be disappointed if they don't.
Cheika, though, said it would be a "stretch" to call it a lack of respect, not that Hansen strictly did.
"I've never seen it before," Cheika said.
"We certainly wouldn't be asking to do it on another team's ground, we do it in the dressing room, but if that's what they want to do, I'm sure they did.
"Congratulations to the player, he's a fine player. 100 caps is a really great effort and same to the lad [Owen Franks] who's grabbing it this week as well.
"There's always respect there and to say that we lack respect is a little bit of a stretch from Steve Hansen."
Hansen was also asked by Australian reporters about whether he thought the Wallabies were fit enough. Yes was the answer.
"Defending's hard work," he said. "You look at the try they scored - we had a number of people walking, and I know we're not unfit. It's the way the two teams play, I think. We had one guy run over 10km which is quite a lot for a rugby game. You have to be reasonably mentally tough as well as fit.
"They're playing the No1 team in the world and because they lose to us they're a poor side? I think that's probably naïve. They played the No2 side [Ireland] in June and they beat them in one test and they lost the other and they were narrow [losses], they weren't big thumpings.
"We want Australian rugby to be strong. I think it is strong. You have to understand that when these two teams play, you're going to have scoreboards that blow out.
"Does it hurt New Zealand rugby? No, but we want them to be strong and I think they're getting there. Obviously the patience in Australia is wearing thin because we've managed to keep the Bledisloe. We don't have it yet and we've got to earn it on Saturday night and if we don't it will be one each and look out."

Stella Damasus was once a popular Nollywood actress, the US based star is a great feminist who educates the world through her blog post and social media. Recently writing via her website, she says that domestic violence doesn’t have to be physical. In her case, it was mental and psychological and sometimes can be worse.
In an article she published on her website called “STRIPPING MYSELF NAKED” she talks about her experience and ask victims to lend their voices and support the organizations who fight for the cause.
“I wrote a blog a while ago called DATING MY ABUSER, and was shocked at the number of women who sent emails talking about the abuse they had faced. My heart was so heavy as I realized how bad things have gotten and how silent we have been over the years. One woman’s email really touched my heart and that is why I decided to share another experience.
Stripping myself naked in front of the world is not an easy thing to do, but when my experience encourages, heals and informs others, then it is the right thing to do.
I remember one day in 2009, I had just signed a contract with a new management company and they sent their marketing manager to take pictures of me so that they could build a press kit and other materials for work.
The man I was dating at the time was in my house for a visit, and we were both in the living room when the marketing manager came in. As he entered we exchanged pleasantries and I introduced him to my boyfriend who gave him the most arrogant and disgusting look ever. The marketing manager brought out his hand to shake him but my boyfriend walked away and didn’t even acknowledge his presence.
I apologized to the guy who was really shocked as he was sure they had never met. He was so confused and had to ask me if he did something wrong. I was highly embarrassed but had to quickly change the subject as usual.
I say as usual because it was becoming a trend with my boyfriend.
I knew how arrogant my boyfriend could be but I didn’t think it would be that bad.
Anyway, I went upstairs to meet the glam squad in my dressing room so they could do their magic. When I was done, I got dressed and foolishly went to my boyfriend in the other room so he could see how beautiful I looked and maybe get a compliment. Instead, he looked at me and started calling me all sorts of names. I cannot even begin to mention the names I was called.
Now, you may read this and wonder why he would call me names without provocation. That is how the mind of an abuser works. They don’t need provocation to abuse you. They just want to show and boost their power over you.
To those who have never experienced emotional and mental abuse, this is absurd.
At this point, I was used to hearing those names but for some reason, I still could not end the relationship. On different occasions, I had tried to end it but I was not psychologically strong enough.
This sounds strange coming from someone like me who is bold and fearless right? It may shock you to know that when men like that come into your life, they study your strengths and weaknesses. Then they begin to attack your weaknesses and make you even more vulnerable. The next thing they do is to systematically isolate you from those who are supposed to be your support system. At that time you will not even notice what he is doing because you will begin to think he cares for you more than anyone else.
He had already messed with my mind. I felt helpless and small.
I had the courage to ask him what I had done wrong and you would not believe the answer I got.
He said “you guys think I am stupid, why would you ask them to send a guy who looks like that to you. Don’t they have women who work for them?”.
I told him I had no control over who they send or who they employ.
He responded by saying, “it’s your house so if you have any respect for me you would have made sure it was not a guy who speaks with a nice accent, dresses well and is cute; coming to your house. What if I was not here? You were already smiling like a fool even though I was right there.
What would have happened if I was not here?”
At that point, I knew that there was nothing more to say.
As I made to leave he grabbed my arm and forced me to sit down. The insults came rushing through my ears as I sat and cried.
I messed up everything the glam squad had done.
To avoid embarrassment and gossip I went to the guest room and asked the children’s nanny to let the glam squad go. They were paid and they left.
I went back and tried to fix what was left of my make up, went downstairs to do the photoshoot and as soon as I was done, I made the marketing manager and his team leave.
When I went back upstairs, my boyfriend was waiting to continue the insults. At this point, I knew I had to be strong. So, I told him that if he felt he was too good for me, he should get the HELL OUT OF MY HOUSE.
He didn’t believe how serious I was until I started yelling.
He threatened to hit me and I told him he would spend the rest of his life in Jail and I would spend all my money making sure he was tortured every day.
He looked me in the eye and saw how serious I was. That was when he knelt down and started begging.
He apologized and said he didn’t know what came over him and that he needed help. I looked away but he continued and told me how everyone else had given up on trying to help him.
Blah blah blah blah he continued.
You would think that after all this I would end it once and for all but unfortunately, I took him back.
Before you start passing judgment, remember that when your weakness is attacked and your support system is not there anymore, you feel alone and helpless. It’s not a choice you willingly make, it is as a result of the psychological abuse. There are very very few women who go through this and come out sane.
Imagine being with someone who constantly makes you feel less than you are. Who puts all the negative stuff in your face and starts to make you look at yourself differently. After a while, you begin to believe his lies and doubt your truth.
That was when I realized that domestic abuse is not just physical. It is also mental and psychological which are worse sometimes. With the physical you know where the bruises are and can treat them. Unfortunately, with the mental, you become a slave to your own mind which is controlled by the abuser. He makes it seem like it’s your fault and at the same time makes you feel he needs you.
No one knows what you are going through because they don’t see the scars. Even when you tell them, they trivialize it because you can’t show proof. So you suffer in silence and pain. When you discuss it with people who you believe can help, the first question they ask you is “why don’t you just leave him?”.
Friends and family who are not qualified psychologists and therapists are not equipped to handle mental and psychological abuse.
It took me a while to discover a few psychologists in Nigeria, but they don’t get many clients because mental therapy is not an AFRICAN thing.
We need it now more than ever before.
A lot of women go through this every day and even when they come out of the relationship, they don’t see the need to go to counseling or therapy that can help them heal. So, they end up dating the same kind of man because that is what their mental state recognizes.
They fall for men who would control them again not because they are stupid but because that is what their minds are familiar with.
16 Days in a year is not enough to advocate for domestic violence.
We need to do this all year round and record the progress we are making.
We need to let women especially the African woman know what her rights are and that she has a right to report cases like this.
She needs to know that she has a support system who will help her through the pain and hurt she is left with.
We need to make sure that the law is enforced on the abusers.
We need to educate women and let them know that a man has NO right to hit them just because he is their husband.
We need to help the women educate their daughters as well.
We need to reach out to the community leaders and make them see why they should help put an end to this.
SAY NO TO DOMESTIC VIOLENCE. Lend your voices and support the organizations who fight for the cause”.

An Indiana woman has pleaded guilty to climbing Mt. Rushmore, which is a federal offense. 21-year-old Molly Venderley entered her plea in a Rapid City federal court Monday. For her guilty plea, two other misdemeanor charges were dropped. She was fined $1,250 for the incident which occurred last Sunday. Park Rangers spotted Venderley climbing in the dark. She admitted to climbing in the dark because it was harder to see her and the park was closed.

With the nation focusing on racial injustice following the death of George Floyd, former San Francisco 49ers quarterback Colin Kaepernick has seen his name become a topic of discussion once again.
The former quarterback has not played in the NFL since the 2016 season. His biggest accomplishment on the gridiron was leading the San Francisco 49ers to the Super Bowl in the 2012 season.
Most recently, NFL Commissioner Roger Goodell put out a statement on Monday, urging NFL teams to sign him. Safety Devin McCourty also believes that the league should give Kaepernick opportunity to play, and give him the platform to express his opinions.
“I think, first and foremost, they need to have a sit-down,” McCourty said Wednesday on ESPN’s “First Take.” “They need to bring him in there. They need to tell him, face-to-face, everything that they’ve said vocally, everything they’ve said publicly. Tell that to him directly. Then, I think — just moving forward — giving him a real opportunity to be in this league. You know, last year I was one of the guys when he had that workout that I thought it was bogus. I didn’t think it was a real opportunity for him. But I think he needs to be heard now even more than back in 2016. You know, we all kind of cut him off and didn’t really embrace him the way we should have. I think now it’s time to bring him into the fold. If the NFL really wants to be involved in this, they need to make sure they elevate his platform and let him speak and let him do the work he’s been doing.”
McCourty has been very vocal the past couple of weeks as the country continues to deal with a wide variety of societal issues. The veteran safety has never been afraid to express his opinion, and continues to advocate for change.

Transcribed from the 1920 Macmillan and Co. edition by David Price, email firstname.lastname@example.org
A GROUP OF NOBLE DAMES
THAT IS TO SAY
THE FIRST COUNTESS OF WESSEX BARBARA OF THE HOSE OF GREBE THE MARCHIONESS OF STONEHENGE, LADY MOTTIFONT SQUIRE PETRICK'S LADY THE LADY ICENWAY ANNA, LADY BAXBY THE LADY PENELOPE THE DUCHESS OF HAMPTONSHIRE; AND THE HONOURABLE LAURA
BY THOMAS HARDY
'. . . Store of Ladies, whose bright eyes Rain influence.'—L'ALLEGRO.
WITH A MAP OF WESSEX
MACMILLAN AND CO., LIMITED ST. MARTIN'S STREET, LONDON 1920
First Collected Edition 1891 New Edition and reprints 1896-1900 First published by Macmillan & Co., Crown 8vo, 1903 Pocket Edition 1907 Reprinted 1911, 1914, 1917, 1919, 1920
Preface Part I—Before Dinner The First Countess of Wessex Barbara of the House of Grebe The Marchioness of Stonehenge Lady Mottisfont Part II—After Dinner The Lady Icenway Squire Petrick's Lady Anna, Lady Baxby The Lady Penelope The Duchess Of Hamptonshire The Honourable Laura
The pedigrees of our county families, arranged in diagrams on the pages of county histories, mostly appear at first sight to be as barren of any touch of nature as a table of logarithms. But given a clue—the faintest tradition of what went on behind the scenes, and this dryness as of dust may be transformed into a palpitating drama. More, the careful comparison of dates alone—that of birth with marriage, of marriage with death, of one marriage, birth, or death with a kindred marriage, birth, or death—will often effect the same transformation, and anybody practised in raising images from such genealogies finds himself unconsciously filling into the framework the motives, passions, and personal qualities which would appear to be the single explanation possible of some extraordinary conjunction in times, events, and personages that occasionally marks these reticent family records.
Out of such pedigrees and supplementary material most of the following stories have arisen and taken shape.
I would make this preface an opportunity of expressing my sense of the courtesy and kindness of several bright-eyed Noble Dames yet in the flesh, who, since the first publication of these tales in periodicals, six or seven years ago, have given me interesting comments and conjectures on such of the narratives as they have recognized to be connected with their own families, residences, or traditions; in which they have shown a truly philosophic absence of prejudice in their regard of those incidents whose relation has tended more distinctly to dramatize than to eulogize their ancestors. The outlines they have also given of other singular events in their family histories for use in a second "Group of Noble Dames," will, I fear, never reach the printing-press through me; but I shall store them up in memory of my informants' good nature.
DAME THE FIRST—THE FIRST COUNTESS OF WESSEX By the Local Historian
King's-Hintock Court (said the narrator, turning over his memoranda for reference)—King's-Hintock Court is, as we know, one of the most imposing of the mansions that overlook our beautiful Blackmoor or Blakemore Vale. On the particular occasion of which I have to speak this building stood, as it had often stood before, in the perfect silence of a calm clear night, lighted only by the cold shine of the stars. The season was winter, in days long ago, the last century having run but little more than a third of its length. North, south, and west, not a casement was unfastened, not a curtain undrawn; eastward, one window on the upper floor was open, and a girl of twelve or thirteen was leaning over the sill. That she had not taken up the position for purposes of observation was apparent at a glance, for she kept her eyes covered with her hands.
The room occupied by the girl was an inner one of a suite, to be reached only by passing through a large bedchamber adjoining. From this apartment voices in altercation were audible, everything else in the building being so still. It was to avoid listening to these voices that the girl had left her little cot, thrown a cloak round her head and shoulders, and stretched into the night air.
But she could not escape the conversation, try as she would. The words reached her in all their painfulness, one sentence in masculine tones, those of her father, being repeated many times.
'I tell 'ee there shall be no such betrothal! I tell 'ee there sha'n't! A child like her!'
She knew the subject of dispute to be herself. A cool feminine voice, her mother's, replied:
'Have done with you, and be wise. He is willing to wait a good five or six years before the marriage takes place, and there's not a man in the county to compare with him.'
'It shall not be! He is over thirty. It is wickedness.'
'He is just thirty, and the best and finest man alive—a perfect match for her.'
'He is poor!'
'But his father and elder brothers are made much of at Court—none so constantly at the palace as they; and with her fortune, who knows? He may be able to get a barony.'
'I believe you are in love with en yourself!'
'How can you insult me so, Thomas! And is it not monstrous for you to talk of my wickedness when you have a like scheme in your own head? You know you have. Some bumpkin of your own choosing—some petty gentleman who lives down at that outlandish place of yours, Falls-Park—one of your pot-companions' sons—'
There was an outburst of imprecation on the part of her husband in lieu of further argument. As soon as he could utter a connected sentence he said: 'You crow and you domineer, mistress, because you are heiress-general here. You are in your own house; you are on your own land. But let me tell 'ee that if I did come here to you instead of taking you to me, it was done at the dictates of convenience merely. H—-! I'm no beggar! Ha'n't I a place of my own? Ha'n't I an avenue as long as thine? Ha'n't I beeches that will more than match thy oaks? I should have lived in my own quiet house and land, contented, if you had not called me off with your airs and graces. Faith, I'll go back there; I'll not stay with thee longer! If it had not been for our Betty I should have gone long ago!'
After this there were no more words; but presently, hearing the sound of a door opening and shutting below, the girl again looked from the window. Footsteps crunched on the gravel-walk, and a shape in a drab greatcoat, easily distinguishable as her father, withdrew from the house. He moved to the left, and she watched him diminish down the long east front till he had turned the corner and vanished. He must have gone round to the stables.
She closed the window and shrank into bed, where she cried herself to sleep. This child, their only one, Betty, beloved ambitiously by her mother, and with uncalculating passionateness by her father, was frequently made wretched by such episodes as this; though she was too young to care very deeply, for her own sake, whether her mother betrothed her to the gentleman discussed or not.
The Squire had often gone out of the house in this manner, declaring that he would never return, but he had always reappeared in the morning. The present occasion, however, was different in the issue: next day she was told that her father had ridden to his estate at Falls-Park early in the morning on business with his agent, and might not come back for some days.
* * * * *
Falls-Park was over twenty miles from King's-Hintock Court, and was altogether a more modest centre-piece to a more modest possession than the latter. But as Squire Dornell came in view of it that February morning, he thought that he had been a fool ever to leave it, though it was for the sake of the greatest heiress in Wessex. Its classic front, of the period of the second Charles, derived from its regular features a dignity which the great, battlemented, heterogeneous mansion of his wife could not eclipse. Altogether he was sick at heart, and the gloom which the densely-timbered park threw over the scene did not tend to remove the depression of this rubicund man of eight-and-forty, who sat so heavily upon his gelding. The child, his darling Betty: there lay the root of his trouble. He was unhappy when near his wife, he was unhappy when away from his little girl; and from this dilemma there was no practicable escape. As a consequence he indulged rather freely in the pleasures of the table, became what was called a three bottle man, and, in his wife's estimation, less and less presentable to her polite friends from town.
He was received by the two or three old servants who were in charge of the lonely place, where a few rooms only were kept habitable for his use or that of his friends when hunting; and during the morning he was made more comfortable by the arrival of his faithful servant Tupcombe from King's-Hintock. But after a day or two spent here in solitude he began to feel that he had made a mistake in coming. By leaving King's-Hintock in his anger he had thrown away his best opportunity of counteracting his wife's preposterous notion of promising his poor little Betty's hand to a man she had hardly seen. To protect her from such a repugnant bargain he should have remained on the spot. He felt it almost as a misfortune that the child would inherit so much wealth. She would be a mark for all the adventurers in the kingdom. Had she been only the heiress to his own unassuming little place at Falls, how much better would have been her chances of happiness!
His wife had divined truly when she insinuated that he himself had a lover in view for this pet child. The son of a dear deceased friend of his, who lived not two miles from where the Squire now was, a lad a couple of years his daughter's senior, seemed in her father's opinion the one person in the world likely to make her happy. But as to breathing such a scheme to either of the young people with the indecent haste that his wife had shown, he would not dream of it; years hence would be soon enough for that. They had already seen each other, and the Squire fancied that he noticed a tenderness on the youth's part which promised well. He was strongly tempted to profit by his wife's example, and forestall her match-making by throwing the two young people together there at Falls. The girl, though marriageable in the views of those days, was too young to be in love, but the lad was fifteen, and already felt an interest in her.
Still better than keeping watch over her at King's Hintock, where she was necessarily much under her mother's influence, would it be to get the child to stay with him at Falls for a time, under his exclusive control. But how accomplish this without using main force? The only possible chance was that his wife might, for appearance' sake, as she had done before, consent to Betty paying him a day's visit, when he might find means of detaining her till Reynard, the suitor whom his wife favoured, had gone abroad, which he was expected to do the following week. Squire Dornell determined to return to King's-Hintock and attempt the enterprise. If he were refused, it was almost in him to pick up Betty bodily and carry her off.
The journey back, vague and Quixotic as were his intentions, was performed with a far lighter heart than his setting forth. He would see Betty, and talk to her, come what might of his plan.
So he rode along the dead level which stretches between the hills skirting Falls-Park and those bounding the town of Ivell, trotted through that borough, and out by the King's-Hintock highway, till, passing the villages he entered the mile-long drive through the park to the Court. The drive being open, without an avenue, the Squire could discern the north front and door of the Court a long way off, and was himself visible from the windows on that side; for which reason he hoped that Betty might perceive him coming, as she sometimes did on his return from an outing, and run to the door or wave her handkerchief.
But there was no sign. He inquired for his wife as soon as he set foot to earth.
'Mistress is away. She was called to London, sir.'
'And Mistress Betty?' said the Squire blankly.
'Gone likewise, sir, for a little change. Mistress has left a letter for you.'
The note explained nothing, merely stating that she had posted to London on her own affairs, and had taken the child to give her a holiday. On the fly-leaf were some words from Betty herself to the same effect, evidently written in a state of high jubilation at the idea of her jaunt. Squire Dornell murmured a few expletives, and submitted to his disappointment. How long his wife meant to stay in town she did not say; but on investigation he found that the carriage had been packed with sufficient luggage for a sojourn of two or three weeks.
King's-Hintock Court was in consequence as gloomy as Falls-Park had been. He had lost all zest for hunting of late, and had hardly attended a meet that season. Dornell read and re-read Betty's scrawl, and hunted up some other such notes of hers to look over, this seeming to be the only pleasure there was left for him. That they were really in London he learnt in a few days by another letter from Mrs. Dornell, in which she explained that they hoped to be home in about a week, and that she had had no idea he was coming back to King's-Hintock so soon, or she would not have gone away without telling him.
Squire Dornell wondered if, in going or returning, it had been her plan to call at the Reynards' place near Melchester, through which city their journey lay. It was possible that she might do this in furtherance of her project, and the sense that his own might become the losing game was harassing.
He did not know how to dispose of himself, till it occurred to him that, to get rid of his intolerable heaviness, he would invite some friends to dinner and drown his cares in grog and wine. No sooner was the carouse decided upon than he put it in hand; those invited being mostly neighbouring landholders, all smaller men than himself, members of the hunt; also the doctor from Evershead, and the like—some of them rollicking blades whose presence his wife would not have countenanced had she been at home. 'When the cat's away—!' said the Squire.
They arrived, and there were indications in their manner that they meant to make a night of it. Baxby of Sherton Castle was late, and they waited a quarter of an hour for him, he being one of the liveliest of Dornell's friends; without whose presence no such dinner as this would be considered complete, and, it may be added, with whose presence no dinner which included both sexes could be conducted with strict propriety. He had just returned from London, and the Squire was anxious to talk to him—for no definite reason; but he had lately breathed the atmosphere in which Betty was.
At length they heard Baxby driving up to the door, whereupon the host and the rest of his guests crossed over to the dining-room. In a moment Baxby came hastily in at their heels, apologizing for his lateness.
'I only came back last night, you know,' he said; 'and the truth o't is, I had as much as I could carry.' He turned to the Squire. 'Well, Dornell—so cunning Reynard has stolen your little ewe lamb? Ha, ha!'
'What?' said Squire Dornell vacantly, across the dining-table, round which they were all standing, the cold March sunlight streaming in upon his full-clean shaven face.
'Surely th'st know what all the town knows?—you've had a letter by this time?—that Stephen Reynard has married your Betty? Yes, as I'm a living man. It was a carefully-arranged thing: they parted at once, and are not to meet for five or six years. But, Lord, you must know!'
A thud on the floor was the only reply of the Squire. They quickly turned. He had fallen down like a log behind the table, and lay motionless on the oak boards.
Those at hand hastily bent over him, and the whole group were in confusion. They found him to be quite unconscious, though puffing and panting like a blacksmith's bellows. His face was livid, his veins swollen, and beads of perspiration stood upon his brow.
'What's happened to him?' said several.
'An apoplectic fit,' said the doctor from Evershead, gravely.
He was only called in at the Court for small ailments, as a rule, and felt the importance of the situation. He lifted the Squire's head, loosened his cravat and clothing, and rang for the servants, who took the Squire upstairs.
There he lay as if in a drugged sleep. The surgeon drew a basin-full of blood from him, but it was nearly six o'clock before he came to himself. The dinner was completely disorganized, and some had gone home long ago; but two or three remained.
'Bless my soul,' Baxby kept repeating, 'I didn't know things had come to this pass between Dornell and his lady! I thought the feast he was spreading to-day was in honour of the event, though privately kept for the present! His little maid married without his knowledge!'
As soon as the Squire recovered consciousness he gasped: ''Tis abduction! 'Tis a capital felony! He can be hung! Where is Baxby? I am very well now. What items have ye heard, Baxby?'
The bearer of the untoward news was extremely unwilling to agitate Dornell further, and would say little more at first. But an hour after, when the Squire had partially recovered and was sitting up, Baxby told as much as he knew, the most important particular being that Betty's mother was present at the marriage, and showed every mark of approval. 'Everything appeared to have been done so regularly that I, of course, thought you knew all about it,' he said.
'I knew no more than the underground dead that such a step was in the wind! A child not yet thirteen! How Sue hath outwitted me! Did Reynard go up to Lon'on with 'em, d'ye know?'
'I can't say. All I know is that your lady and daughter were walking along the street, with the footman behind 'em; that they entered a jeweller's shop, where Reynard was standing; and that there, in the presence o' the shopkeeper and your man, who was called in on purpose, your Betty said to Reynard—so the story goes: 'pon my soul I don't vouch for the truth of it—she said, "Will you marry me?" or, "I want to marry you: will you have me—now or never?" she said.'
'What she said means nothing,' murmured the Squire, with wet eyes. 'Her mother put the words into her mouth to avoid the serious consequences that would attach to any suspicion of force. The words be not the child's: she didn't dream of marriage—how should she, poor little maid! Go on.'
'Well, be that as it will, they were all agreed apparently. They bought the ring on the spot, and the marriage took place at the nearest church within half-an-hour.'
* * * * *
A day or two later there came a letter from Mrs. Dornell to her husband, written before she knew of his stroke. She related the circumstances of the marriage in the gentlest manner, and gave cogent reasons and excuses for consenting to the premature union, which was now an accomplished fact indeed. She had no idea, till sudden pressure was put upon her, that the contract was expected to be carried out so soon, but being taken half unawares, she had consented, having learned that Stephen Reynard, now their son-in-law, was becoming a great favourite at Court, and that he would in all likelihood have a title granted him before long. No harm could come to their dear daughter by this early marriage-contract, seeing that her life would be continued under their own eyes, exactly as before, for some years. In fine, she had felt that no other such fair opportunity for a good marriage with a shrewd courtier and wise man of the world, who was at the same time noted for his excellent personal qualities, was within the range of probability, owing to the rusticated lives they led at King's-Hintock. Hence she had yielded to Stephen's solicitation, and hoped her husband would forgive her. She wrote, in short, like a woman who, having had her way as to the deed, is prepared to make any concession as to words and subsequent behaviour.
All this Dornell took at its true value, or rather, perhaps, at less than its true value. As his life depended upon his not getting into a passion, he controlled his perturbed emotions as well as he was able, going about the house sadly and utterly unlike his former self. He took every precaution to prevent his wife knowing of the incidents of his sudden illness, from a sense of shame at having a heart so tender; a ridiculous quality, no doubt, in her eyes, now that she had become so imbued with town ideas. But rumours of his seizure somehow reached her, and she let him know that she was about to return to nurse him. He thereupon packed up and went off to his own place at Falls-Park.
Here he lived the life of a recluse for some time. He was still too unwell to entertain company, or to ride to hounds or elsewhither; but more than this, his aversion to the faces of strangers and acquaintances, who knew by that time of the trick his wife had played him, operated to hold him aloof.
Nothing could influence him to censure Betty for her share in the exploit. He never once believed that she had acted voluntarily. Anxious to know how she was getting on, he despatched the trusty servant Tupcombe to Evershead village, close to King's-Hintock, timing his journey so that he should reach the place under cover of dark. The emissary arrived without notice, being out of livery, and took a seat in the chimney-corner of the Sow-and-Acorn.
The conversation of the droppers-in was always of the nine days' wonder—the recent marriage. The smoking listener learnt that Mrs. Dornell and the girl had returned to King's-Hintock for a day or two, that Reynard had set out for the Continent, and that Betty had since been packed off to school. She did not realize her position as Reynard's child-wife—so the story went—and though somewhat awe-stricken at first by the ceremony, she had soon recovered her spirits on finding that her freedom was in no way to be interfered with.
After that, formal messages began to pass between Dornell and his wife, the latter being now as persistently conciliating as she was formerly masterful. But her rustic, simple, blustering husband still held personally aloof. Her wish to be reconciled—to win his forgiveness for her stratagem—moreover, a genuine tenderness and desire to soothe his sorrow, which welled up in her at times, brought her at last to his door at Falls-Park one day.
They had not met since that night of altercation, before her departure for London and his subsequent illness. She was shocked at the change in him. His face had become expressionless, as blank as that of a puppet, and what troubled her still more was that she found him living in one room, and indulging freely in stimulants, in absolute disobedience to the physician's order. The fact was obvious that he could no longer be allowed to live thus uncouthly.
So she sympathized, and begged his pardon, and coaxed. But though after this date there was no longer such a complete estrangement as before, they only occasionally saw each other, Dornell for the most part making Falls his headquarters still.
Three or four years passed thus. Then she came one day, with more animation in her manner, and at once moved him by the simple statement that Betty's schooling had ended; she had returned, and was grieved because he was away. She had sent a message to him in these words: 'Ask father to come home to his dear Betty.'
'Ah! Then she is very unhappy!' said Squire Dornell.
His wife was silent.
''Tis that accursed marriage!' continued the Squire.
Still his wife would not dispute with him. 'She is outside in the carriage,' said Mrs. Dornell gently.
'Why didn't you tell me?' Dornell rushed out, and there was the girl awaiting his forgiveness, for she supposed herself, no less than her mother, to be under his displeasure.
Yes, Betty had left school, and had returned to King's-Hintock. She was nearly seventeen, and had developed to quite a young woman. She looked not less a member of the household for her early marriage-contract, which she seemed, indeed, to have almost forgotten. It was like a dream to her; that clear cold March day, the London church, with its gorgeous pews, and green-baize linings, and the great organ in the west gallery—so different from their own little church in the shrubbery of King's-Hintock Court—the man of thirty, to whose face she had looked up with so much awe, and with a sense that he was rather ugly and formidable; the man whom, though they corresponded politely, she had never seen since; one to whose existence she was now so indifferent that if informed of his death, and that she would never see him more, she would merely have replied, 'Indeed!' Betty's passions as yet still slept.
'Hast heard from thy husband lately?' said Squire Dornell, when they were indoors, with an ironical laugh of fondness which demanded no answer.
The girl winced, and he noticed that his wife looked appealingly at him. As the conversation went on, and there were signs that Dornell would express sentiments that might do harm to a position which they could not alter, Mrs. Dornell suggested that Betty should leave the room till her father and herself had finished their private conversation; and this Betty obediently did.
Dornell renewed his animadversions freely. 'Did you see how the sound of his name frightened her?' he presently added. 'If you didn't, I did. Zounds! what a future is in store for that poor little unfortunate wench o' mine! I tell 'ee, Sue, 'twas not a marriage at all, in morality, and if I were a woman in such a position, I shouldn't feel it as one. She might, without a sign of sin, love a man of her choice as well now as if she were chained up to no other at all. There, that's my mind, and I can't help it. Ah, Sue, my man was best! He'd ha' suited her.'
'I don't believe it,' she replied incredulously.
'You should see him; then you would. He's growing up a fine fellow, I can tell 'ee.'
'Hush! not so loud!' she answered, rising from her seat and going to the door of the next room, whither her daughter had betaken herself. To Mrs. Dornell's alarm, there sat Betty in a reverie, her round eyes fixed on vacancy, musing so deeply that she did not perceive her mother's entrance. She had heard every word, and was digesting the new knowledge.
Her mother felt that Falls-Park was dangerous ground for a young girl of the susceptible age, and in Betty's peculiar position, while Dornell talked and reasoned thus. She called Betty to her, and they took leave. The Squire would not clearly promise to return and make King's-Hintock Court his permanent abode; but Betty's presence there, as at former times, was sufficient to make him agree to pay them a visit soon.
All the way home Betty remained preoccupied and silent. It was too plain to her anxious mother that Squire Dornell's free views had been a sort of awakening to the girl.
The interval before Dornell redeemed his pledge to come and see them was unexpectedly short. He arrived one morning about twelve o'clock, driving his own pair of black-bays in the curricle-phaeton with yellow panels and red wheels, just as he had used to do, and his faithful old Tupcombe on horseback behind. A young man sat beside the Squire in the carriage, and Mrs. Dornell's consternation could scarcely be concealed when, abruptly entering with his companion, the Squire announced him as his friend Phelipson of Elm-Cranlynch.
Dornell passed on to Betty in the background and tenderly kissed her. 'Sting your mother's conscience, my maid!' he whispered. 'Sting her conscience by pretending you are struck with Phelipson, and would ha' loved him, as your old father's choice, much more than him she has forced upon 'ee.'
The simple-souled speaker fondly imagined that it as entirely in obedience to this direction that Betty's eyes stole interested glances at the frank and impulsive Phelipson that day at dinner, and he laughed grimly within himself to see how this joke of his, as he imagined it to be, was disturbing the peace of mind of the lady of the house. 'Now Sue sees what a mistake she has made!' said he.
Mrs. Dornell was verily greatly alarmed, and as soon as she could speak a word with him alone she upbraided him. 'You ought not to have brought him here. Oh Thomas, how could you be so thoughtless! Lord, don't you see, dear, that what is done cannot be undone, and how all this foolery jeopardizes her happiness with her husband? Until you interfered, and spoke in her hearing about this Phelipson, she was as patient and as willing as a lamb, and looked forward to Mr. Reynard's return with real pleasure. Since her visit to Falls-Park she has been monstrous close- mouthed and busy with her own thoughts. What mischief will you do? How will it end?'
'Own, then, that my man was best suited to her. I only brought him to convince you.'
'Yes, yes; I do admit it. But oh! do take him back again at once! Don't keep him here! I fear she is even attracted by him already.'
'Nonsense, Sue. 'Tis only a little trick to tease 'ee!'
Nevertheless her motherly eye was not so likely to be deceived as his, and if Betty were really only playing at being love-struck that day, she played at it with the perfection of a Rosalind, and would have deceived the best professors into a belief that it was no counterfeit. The Squire, having obtained his victory, was quite ready to take back the too attractive youth, and early in the afternoon they set out on their return journey.
A silent figure who rode behind them was as interested as Dornell in that day's experiment. It was the staunch Tupcombe, who, with his eyes on the Squire's and young Phelipson's backs, thought how well the latter would have suited Betty, and how greatly the former had changed for the worse during these last two or three years. He cursed his mistress as the cause of the change.
After this memorable visit to prove his point, the lives of the Dornell couple flowed on quietly enough for the space of a twelvemonth, the Squire for the most part remaining at Falls, and Betty passing and repassing between them now and then, once or twice alarming her mother by not driving home from her father's house till midnight.
* * * * *
The repose of King's-Hintock was broken by the arrival of a special messenger. Squire Dornell had had an access of gout so violent as to be serious. He wished to see Betty again: why had she not come for so long?
Mrs. Dornell was extremely reluctant to take Betty in that direction too frequently; but the girl was so anxious to go, her interests latterly seeming to be so entirely bound up in Falls-Park and its neighbourhood, that there was nothing to be done but to let her set out and accompany her.
Squire Dornell had been impatiently awaiting her arrival. They found him very ill and irritable. It had been his habit to take powerful medicines to drive away his enemy, and they had failed in their effect on this occasion.
The presence of his daughter, as usual, calmed him much, even while, as usual too, it saddened him; for he could never forget that she had disposed of herself for life in opposition to his wishes, though she had secretly assured him that she would never have consented had she been as old as she was now.
As on a former occasion, his wife wished to speak to him alone about the girl's future, the time now drawing nigh at which Reynard was expected to come and claim her. He would have done so already, but he had been put off by the earnest request of the young woman herself, which accorded with that of her parents, on the score of her youth. Reynard had deferentially submitted to their wishes in this respect, the understanding between them having been that he would not visit her before she was eighteen, except by the mutual consent of all parties. But this could not go on much longer, and there was no doubt, from the tenor of his last letter, that he would soon take possession of her whether or no.
To be out of the sound of this delicate discussion Betty was accordingly sent downstairs, and they soon saw her walking away into the shrubberies, looking very pretty in her sweeping green gown, and flapping broad-brimmed hat overhung with a feather.
On returning to the subject, Mrs. Dornell found her husband's reluctance to reply in the affirmative to Reynard's letter to be as great as ever.
'She is three months short of eighteen!' he exclaimed. ''Tis too soon. I won't hear of it! If I have to keep him off sword in hand, he shall not have her yet.'
'But, my dear Thomas,' she expostulated, 'consider if anything should happen to you or to me, how much better it would be that she should be settled in her home with him!'
'I say it is too soon!' he argued, the veins of his forehead beginning to swell. 'If he gets her this side o' Candlemas I'll challenge en—I'll take my oath on't! I'll be back to King's-Hintock in two or three days, and I'll not lose sight of her day or night!'
She feared to agitate him further, and gave way, assuring him, in obedience to his demand, that if Reynard should write again before he got back, to fix a time for joining Betty, she would put the letter in her husband's hands, and he should do as he chose. This was all that required discussion privately, and Mrs. Dornell went to call in Betty, hoping that she had not heard her father's loud tones.
She had certainly not done so this time. Mrs. Dornell followed the path along which she had seen Betty wandering, but went a considerable distance without perceiving anything of her. The Squire's wife then turned round to proceed to the other side of the house by a short cut across the grass, when, to her surprise and consternation, she beheld the object of her search sitting on the horizontal bough of a cedar, beside her being a young man, whose arm was round her waist. He moved a little, and she recognized him as young Phelipson.
Alas, then, she was right. The so-called counterfeit love was real. What Mrs. Dornell called her husband at that moment, for his folly in originally throwing the young people together, it is not necessary to mention. She decided in a moment not to let the lovers know that she had seen them. She accordingly retreated, reached the front of the house by another route, and called at the top of her voice from a window, 'Betty!'
For the first time since her strategic marriage of the child, Susan Dornell doubted the wisdom of that step.
Her husband had, as it were, been assisted by destiny to make his objection, originally trivial, a valid one. She saw the outlines of trouble in the future. Why had Dornell interfered? Why had he insisted upon producing his man? This, then, accounted for Betty's pleading for postponement whenever the subject of her husband's return was broached; this accounted for her attachment to Falls-Park. Possibly this very meeting that she had witnessed had been arranged by letter.
Perhaps the girl's thoughts would never have strayed for a moment if her father had not filled her head with ideas of repugnance to her early union, on the ground that she had been coerced into it before she knew her own mind; and she might have rushed to meet her husband with open arms on the appointed day.
Betty at length appeared in the distance in answer to the call, and came up pale, but looking innocent of having seen a living soul. Mrs. Dornell groaned in spirit at such duplicity in the child of her bosom. This was the simple creature for whose development into womanhood they had all been so tenderly waiting—a forward minx, old enough not only to have a lover, but to conceal his existence as adroitly as any woman of the world! Bitterly did the Squire's lady regret that Stephen Reynard had not been allowed to come to claim her at the time he first proposed.
The two sat beside each other almost in silence on their journey back to King's-Hintock. Such words as were spoken came mainly from Betty, and their formality indicated how much her mind and heart were occupied with other things.
Mrs. Dornell was far too astute a mother to openly attack Betty on the matter. That would be only fanning flame. The indispensable course seemed to her to be that of keeping the treacherous girl under lock and key till her husband came to take her off her mother's hands. That he would disregard Dornell's opposition, and come soon, was her devout wish.
It seemed, therefore, a fortunate coincidence that on her arrival at King's-Hintock a letter from Reynard was put into Mrs. Dornell's hands. It was addressed to both her and her husband, and courteously informed them that the writer had landed at Bristol, and proposed to come on to King's-Hintock in a few days, at last to meet and carry off his darling Betty, if she and her parents saw no objection.
Betty had also received a letter of the same tenor. Her mother had only to look at her face to see how the girl received the information. She was as pale as a sheet.
'You must do your best to welcome him this time, my dear Betty,' her mother said gently.
'You are a woman now,' added her mother severely, 'and these postponements must come to an end.'
'But my father—oh, I am sure he will not allow this! I am not ready. If he could only wait a year longer—if he could only wait a few months longer! Oh, I wish—I wish my dear father were here! I will send to him instantly.' She broke off abruptly, and falling upon her mother's neck, burst into tears, saying, 'O my mother, have mercy upon me—I do not love this man, my husband!'
The agonized appeal went too straight to Mrs. Dornell's heart for her to hear it unmoved. Yet, things having come to this pass, what could she do? She was distracted, and for a moment was on Betty's side. Her original thought had been to write an affirmative reply to Reynard, allow him to come on to King's-Hintock, and keep her husband in ignorance of the whole proceeding till he should arrive from Falls on some fine day after his recovery, and find everything settled, and Reynard and Betty living together in harmony. But the events of the day, and her daughter's sudden outburst of feeling, had overthrown this intention. Betty was sure to do as she had threatened, and communicate instantly with her father, possibly attempt to fly to him. Moreover, Reynard's letter was addressed to Mr. Dornell and herself conjointly, and she could not in conscience keep it from her husband.
'I will send the letter on to your father instantly,' she replied soothingly. 'He shall act entirely as he chooses, and you know that will not be in opposition to your wishes. He would ruin you rather than thwart you. I only hope he may be well enough to bear the agitation of this news. Do you agree to this?'
Poor Betty agreed, on condition that she should actually witness the despatch of the letter. Her mother had no objection to offer to this; but as soon as the horseman had cantered down the drive toward the highway, Mrs. Dornell's sympathy with Betty's recalcitration began to die out. The girl's secret affection for young Phelipson could not possibly be condoned. Betty might communicate with him, might even try to reach him. Ruin lay that way. Stephen Reynard must be speedily installed in his proper place by Betty's side.
She sat down and penned a private letter to Reynard, which threw light upon her plan.
* * * * *
'It is Necessary that I should now tell you,' she said, 'what I have never Mentioned before—indeed I may have signified the Contrary—that her Father's Objection to your joining her has not as yet been overcome. As I personally Wish to delay you no longer—am indeed as anxious for your Arrival as you can be yourself, having the good of my Daughter at Heart—no course is left open to me but to assist your Cause without my Husband's Knowledge. He, I am sorry to say, is at present ill at Falls- Park, but I felt it my Duty to forward him your Letter. He will therefore be like to reply with a peremptory Command to you to go back again, for some Months, whence you came, till the Time he originally stipulated has expir'd. My Advice is, if you get such a Letter, to take no Notice of it, but to come on hither as you had proposed, letting me know the Day and Hour (after dark, if possible) at which we may expect you. Dear Betty is with me, and I warrant ye that she shall be in the House when you arrive.'
* * * * *
Mrs. Dornell, having sent away this epistle unsuspected of anybody, next took steps to prevent her daughter leaving the Court, avoiding if possible to excite the girl's suspicions that she was under restraint. But, as if by divination, Betty had seemed to read the husband's approach in the aspect of her mother's face.
'He is coming!' exclaimed the maiden.
'Not for a week,' her mother assured her.
'He is then—for certain?'
Betty hastily retired to her room, and would not be seen.
To lock her up, and hand over the key to Reynard when he should appear in the hall, was a plan charming in its simplicity, till her mother found, on trying the door of the girl's chamber softly, that Betty had already locked and bolted it on the inside, and had given directions to have her meals served where she was, by leaving them on a dumb-waiter outside the door.
Thereupon Mrs. Dornell noiselessly sat down in her boudoir, which, as well as her bed-chamber, was a passage-room to the girl's apartment, and she resolved not to vacate her post night or day till her daughter's husband should appear, to which end she too arranged to breakfast, dine, and sup on the spot. It was impossible now that Betty should escape without her knowledge, even if she had wished, there being no other door to the chamber, except one admitting to a small inner dressing-room inaccessible by any second way.
But it was plain that the young girl had no thought of escape. Her ideas ran rather in the direction of intrenchment: she was prepared to stand a siege, but scorned flight. This, at any rate, rendered her secure. As to how Reynard would contrive a meeting with her coy daughter while in such a defensive humour, that, thought her mother, must be left to his own ingenuity to discover.
Betty had looked so wild and pale at the announcement of her husband's approaching visit, that Mrs. Dornell, somewhat uneasy, could not leave her to herself. She peeped through the keyhole an hour later. Betty lay on the sofa, staring listlessly at the ceiling.
'You are looking ill, child,' cried her mother. 'You've not taken the air lately. Come with me for a drive.'
Betty made no objection. Soon they drove through the park towards the village, the daughter still in the strained, strung-up silence that had fallen upon her. They left the park to return by another route, and on the open road passed a cottage.
Betty's eye fell upon the cottage-window. Within it she saw a young girl about her own age, whom she knew by sight, sitting in a chair and propped by a pillow. The girl's face was covered with scales, which glistened in the sun. She was a convalescent from smallpox—a disease whose prevalence at that period was a terror of which we at present can hardly form a conception.
An idea suddenly energized Betty's apathetic features. She glanced at her mother; Mrs. Dornell had been looking in the opposite direction. Betty said that she wished to go back to the cottage for a moment to speak to a girl in whom she took an interest. Mrs. Dornell appeared suspicious, but observing that the cottage had no back-door, and that Betty could not escape without being seen, she allowed the carriage to be stopped. Betty ran back and entered the cottage, emerging again in about a minute, and resuming her seat in the carriage. As they drove on she fixed her eyes upon her mother and said, 'There, I have done it now!' Her pale face was stormy, and her eyes full of waiting tears.
'What have you done?' said Mrs. Dornell.
'Nanny Priddle is sick of the smallpox, and I saw her at the window, and I went in and kissed her, so that I might take it; and now I shall have it, and he won't be able to come near me!'
'Wicked girl!' cries her mother. 'Oh, what am I to do! What—bring a distemper on yourself, and usurp the sacred prerogative of God, because you can't palate the man you've wedded!'
The alarmed woman gave orders to drive home as rapidly as possible, and on arriving, Betty, who was by this time also somewhat frightened at her own enormity, was put into a bath, and fumigated, and treated in every way that could be thought of to ward off the dreadful malady that in a rash moment she had tried to acquire.
There was now a double reason for isolating the rebellious daughter and wife in her own chamber, and there she accordingly remained for the rest of the day and the days that followed; till no ill results seemed likely to arise from her wilfulness.
* * * * *
Meanwhile the first letter from Reynard, announcing to Mrs. Dornell and her husband jointly that he was coming in a few days, had sped on its way to Falls-Park. It was directed under cover to Tupcombe, the confidential servant, with instructions not to put it into his master's hands till he had been refreshed by a good long sleep. Tupcombe much regretted his commission, letters sent in this way always disturbing the Squire; but guessing that it would be infinitely worse in the end to withhold the news than to reveal it, he chose his time, which was early the next morning, and delivered the missive.
The utmost effect that Mrs. Dornell had anticipated from the message was a peremptory order from her husband to Reynard to hold aloof a few months longer. What the Squire really did was to declare that he would go himself and confront Reynard at Bristol, and have it out with him there by word of mouth.
'But, master,' said Tupcombe, 'you can't. You cannot get out of bed.'
'You leave the room, Tupcombe, and don't say "can't" before me! Have Jerry saddled in an hour.'
The long-tried Tupcombe thought his employer demented, so utterly helpless was his appearance just then, and he went out reluctantly. No sooner was he gone than the Squire, with great difficulty, stretched himself over to a cabinet by the bedside, unlocked it, and took out a small bottle. It contained a gout specific, against whose use he had been repeatedly warned by his regular physician, but whose warning he now cast to the winds.
He took a double dose, and waited half an hour. It seemed to produce no effect. He then poured out a treble dose, swallowed it, leant back upon his pillow, and waited. The miracle he anticipated had been worked at last. It seemed as though the second draught had not only operated with its own strength, but had kindled into power the latent forces of the first. He put away the bottle, and rang up Tupcombe.
Less than an hour later one of the housemaids, who of course was quite aware that the Squire's illness was serious, was surprised to hear a bold and decided step descending the stairs from the direction of Mr. Dornell's room, accompanied by the humming of a tune. She knew that the doctor had not paid a visit that morning, and that it was too heavy to be the valet or any other man-servant. Looking up, she saw Squire Dornell fully dressed, descending toward her in his drab caped riding-coat and boots, with the swinging easy movement of his prime. Her face expressed her amazement.
'What the devil beest looking at?' said the Squire. 'Did you never see a man walk out of his house before, wench?'
Resuming his humming—which was of a defiant sort—he proceeded to the library, rang the bell, asked if the horses were ready, and directed them to be brought round. Ten minutes later he rode away in the direction of Bristol, Tupcombe behind him, trembling at what these movements might portend.
They rode on through the pleasant woodlands and the monotonous straight lanes at an equal pace. The distance traversed might have been about fifteen miles when Tupcombe could perceive that the Squire was getting tired—as weary as he would have been after riding three times the distance ten years before. However, they reached Bristol without any mishap, and put up at the Squire's accustomed inn. Dornell almost immediately proceeded on foot to the inn which Reynard had given as his address, it being now about four o'clock.
Reynard had already dined—for people dined early then—and he was staying indoors. He had already received Mrs. Dornell's reply to his letter; but before acting upon her advice and starting for King's-Hintock he made up his mind to wait another day, that Betty's father might at least have time to write to him if so minded. The returned traveller much desired to obtain the Squire's assent, as well as his wife's, to the proposed visit to his bride, that nothing might seem harsh or forced in his method of taking his position as one of the family. But though he anticipated some sort of objection from his father-in-law, in consequence of Mrs. Dornell's warning, he was surprised at the announcement of the Squire in person.
Stephen Reynard formed the completest of possible contrasts to Dornell as they stood confronting each other in the best parlour of the Bristol tavern. The Squire, hot-tempered, gouty, impulsive, generous, reckless; the younger man, pale, tall, sedate, self-possessed—a man of the world, fully bearing out at least one couplet in his epitaph, still extant in King's-Hintock church, which places in the inventory of his good qualities
'Engaging Manners, cultivated Mind, Adorn'd by Letters, and in Courts refin'd.'
He was at this time about five-and-thirty, though careful living and an even, unemotional temperament caused him to look much younger than his years.
Squire Dornell plunged into his errand without much ceremony or preface.
'I am your humble servant, sir,' he said. 'I have read your letter writ to my wife and myself, and considered that the best way to answer it would be to do so in person.'
'I am vastly honoured by your visit, sir,' said Mr. Stephen Reynard, bowing.
'Well, what's done can't be undone,' said Dornell, 'though it was mighty early, and was no doing of mine. She's your wife; and there's an end on't. But in brief, sir, she's too young for you to claim yet; we mustn't reckon by years; we must reckon by nature. She's still a girl; 'tis onpolite of 'ee to come yet; next year will be full soon enough for you to take her to you.'
Now, courteous as Reynard could be, he was a little obstinate when his resolution had once been formed. She had been promised him by her eighteenth birthday at latest—sooner if she were in robust health. Her mother had fixed the time on her own judgment, without a word of interference on his part. He had been hanging about foreign courts till he was weary. Betty was now as woman, if she would ever be one, and there was not, in his mind, the shadow of an excuse for putting him off longer. Therefore, fortified as he was by the support of her mother, he blandly but firmly told the Squire that he had been willing to waive his rights, out of deference to her parents, to any reasonable extent, but must now, in justice to himself and her insist on maintaining them. He therefore, since she had not come to meet him, should proceed to King's- Hintock in a few days to fetch her.
This announcement, in spite of the urbanity with which it was delivered, set Dornell in a passion.
'Oh dammy, sir; you talk about rights, you do, after stealing her away, a mere child, against my will and knowledge! If we'd begged and prayed 'ee to take her, you could say no more.'
'Upon my honour, your charge is quite baseless, sir,' said his son-in- law. 'You must know by this time—or if you do not, it has been a monstrous cruel injustice to me that I should have been allowed to remain in your mind with such a stain upon my character—you must know that I used no seductiveness or temptation of any kind. Her mother assented; she assented. I took them at their word. That you was really opposed to the marriage was not known to me till afterwards.'
Dornell professed to believe not a word of it. 'You sha'n't have her till she's dree sixes full—no maid ought to be married till she's dree sixes!—and my daughter sha'n't be treated out of nater!' So he stormed on till Tupcombe, who had been alarmedly listening in the next room, entered suddenly, declaring to Reynard that his master's life was in danger if the interview were prolonged, he being subject to apoplectic strokes at these crises. Reynard immediately said that he would be the last to wish to injure Squire Dornell, and left the room, and as soon as the Squire had recovered breath and equanimity, he went out of the inn, leaning on the arm of Tupcombe.
Tupcombe was for sleeping in Bristol that night, but Dornell, whose energy seemed as invincible as it was sudden, insisted upon mounting and getting back as far as Falls-Park, to continue the journey to King's-Hintock on the following day. At five they started, and took the southern road toward the Mendip Hills. The evening was dry and windy, and, excepting that the sun did not shine, strongly reminded Tupcombe of the evening of that March month, nearly five years earlier, when news had been brought to King's-Hintock Court of the child Betty's marriage in London—news which had produced upon Dornell such a marked effect for the worse ever since, and indirectly upon the household of which he was the head. Before that time the winters were lively at Falls-Park, as well as at King's-Hintock, although the Squire had ceased to make it his regular residence. Hunting-guests and shooting-guests came and went, and open house was kept. Tupcombe disliked the clever courtier who had put a stop to this by taking away from the Squire the only treasure he valued.
It grew darker with their progress along the lanes, and Tupcombe discovered from Mr. Dornell's manner of riding that his strength was giving way; and spurring his own horse close alongside, he asked him how he felt.
'Oh, bad; damn bad, Tupcombe! I can hardly keep my seat. I shall never be any better, I fear! Have we passed Three-Man-Gibbet yet?'
'Not yet by a long ways, sir.'
'I wish we had. I can hardly hold on.' The Squire could not repress a groan now and then, and Tupcombe knew he was in great pain. 'I wish I was underground—that's the place for such fools as I! I'd gladly be there if it were not for Mistress Betty. He's coming on to King's-Hintock to-morrow—he won't put it off any longer; he'll set out and reach there to-morrow night, without stopping at Falls; and he'll take her unawares, and I want to be there before him.'
'I hope you may be well enough to do it, sir. But really—'
'I must, Tupcombe! You don't know what my trouble is; it is not so much that she is married to this man without my agreeing—for, after all, there's nothing to say against him, so far as I know; but that she don't take to him at all, seems to fear him—in fact, cares nothing about him; and if he comes forcing himself into the house upon her, why, 'twill be rank cruelty. Would to the Lord something would happen to prevent him!'
How they reached home that night Tupcombe hardly knew. The Squire was in such pain that he was obliged to recline upon his horse, and Tupcombe was afraid every moment lest he would fall into the road. But they did reach home at last, and Mr. Dornell was instantly assisted to bed.
* * * * *
Next morning it was obvious that he could not possibly go to King's-Hintock for several days at least, and there on the bed he lay, cursing his inability to proceed on an errand so personal and so delicate that no emissary could perform it. What he wished to do was to ascertain from Betty's own lips if her aversion to Reynard was so strong that his presence would be positively distasteful to her. Were that the case, he would have borne her away bodily on the saddle behind him.
But all that was hindered now, and he repeated a hundred times in Tupcombe's hearing, and in that of the nurse and other servants, 'I wish to God something would happen to him!'
This sentiment, reiterated by the Squire as he tossed in the agony induced by the powerful drugs of the day before, entered sharply into the soul of Tupcombe and of all who were attached to the house of Dornell, as distinct from the house of his wife at King's-Hintock. Tupcombe, who was an excitable man, was hardly less disquieted by the thought of Reynard's return than the Squire himself was. As the week drew on, and the afternoon advanced at which Reynard would in all probability be passing near Falls on his way to the Court, the Squire's feelings became acuter, and the responsive Tupcombe could hardly bear to come near him. Having left him in the hands of the doctor, the former went out upon the lawn, for he could hardly breathe in the contagion of excitement caught from the employer who had virtually made him his confidant. He had lived with the Dornells from his boyhood, had been born under the shadow of their walls; his whole life was annexed and welded to the life of the family in a degree which has no counterpart in these latter days.
He was summoned indoors, and learnt that it had been decided to send for Mrs. Dornell: her husband was in great danger. There were two or three who could have acted as messenger, but Dornell wished Tupcombe to go, the reason showing itself when, Tupcombe being ready to start, Squire Dornell summoned him to his chamber and leaned down so that he could whisper in his ear:
'Put Peggy along smart, Tupcombe, and get there before him, you know—before him. This is the day he fixed. He has not passed Falls cross-roads yet. If you can do that you will be able to get Betty to come—d'ye see?—after her mother has started; she'll have a reason for not waiting for him. Bring her by the lower road—he'll go by the upper. Your business is to make 'em miss each other—d'ye see?—but that's a thing I couldn't write down.'
Five minutes after, Tupcombe was astride the horse and on his way—the way he had followed so many times since his master, a florid young countryman, had first gone wooing to King's-Hintock Court. As soon as he had crossed the hills in the immediate neighbourhood of the manor, the road lay over a plain, where it ran in long straight stretches for several miles. In the best of times, when all had been gay in the united houses, that part of the road had seemed tedious. It was gloomy in the extreme now that he pursued it, at night and alone, on such an errand.
He rode and brooded. If the Squire were to die, he, Tupcombe, would be alone in the world and friendless, for he was no favourite with Mrs. Dornell; and to find himself baffled, after all, in what he had set his mind on, would probably kill the Squire. Thinking thus, Tupcombe stopped his horse every now and then, and listened for the coming husband. The time was drawing on to the moment when Reynard might be expected to pass along this very route. He had watched the road well during the afternoon, and had inquired of the tavern-keepers as he came up to each, and he was convinced that the premature descent of the stranger-husband upon his young mistress had not been made by this highway as yet.
Besides the girl's mother, Tupcombe was the only member of the household who suspected Betty's tender feelings towards young Phelipson, so unhappily generated on her return from school; and he could therefore imagine, even better than her fond father, what would be her emotions on the sudden announcement of Reynard's advent that evening at King's-Hintock Court.
So he rode and rode, desponding and hopeful by turns. He felt assured that, unless in the unfortunate event of the almost immediate arrival of her son-in law at his own heels, Mrs. Dornell would not be able to hinder Betty's departure for her father's bedside.
It was about nine o'clock that, having put twenty miles of country behind him, he turned in at the lodge-gate nearest to Ivell and King's-Hintock village, and pursued the long north drive—itself much like a turnpike road—which led thence through the park to the Court. Though there were so many trees in King's-Hintock park, few bordered the carriage roadway; he could see it stretching ahead in the pale night light like an unrolled deal shaving. Presently the irregular frontage of the house came in view, of great extent, but low, except where it rose into the outlines of a broad square tower.
As Tupcombe approached he rode aside upon the grass, to make sure, if possible, that he was the first comer, before letting his presence be known. The Court was dark and sleepy, in no respect as if a bridegroom were about to arrive.
While pausing he distinctly heard the tread of a horse upon the track behind him, and for a moment despaired of arriving in time: here, surely, was Reynard! Pulling up closer to the densest tree at hand he waited, and found he had retreated nothing too soon, for the second rider avoided the gravel also, and passed quite close to him. In the profile he recognized young Phelipson.
Before Tupcombe could think what to do, Phelipson had gone on; but not to the door of the house. Swerving to the left, he passed round to the east angle, where, as Tupcombe knew, were situated Betty's apartments. Dismounting, he left the horse tethered to a hanging bough, and walked on to the house.
Suddenly his eye caught sight of an object which explained the position immediately. It was a ladder stretching from beneath the trees, which there came pretty close to the house, up to a first-floor window—one which lighted Miss Betty's rooms. Yes, it was Betty's chamber; he knew every room in the house well.
The young horseman who had passed him, having evidently left his steed somewhere under the trees also, was perceptible at the top of the ladder, immediately outside Betty's window. While Tupcombe watched, a cloaked female figure stepped timidly over the sill, and the two cautiously descended, one before the other, the young man's arms enclosing the young woman between his grasp of the ladder, so that she could not fall. As soon as they reached the bottom, young Phelipson quickly removed the ladder and hid it under the bushes. The pair disappeared; till, in a few minutes, Tupcombe could discern a horse emerging from a remoter part of the umbrage. The horse carried double, the girl being on a pillion behind her lover.
Tupcombe hardly knew what to do or think; yet, though this was not exactly the kind of flight that had been intended, she had certainly escaped. He went back to his own animal, and rode round to the servants' door, where he delivered the letter for Mrs. Dornell. To leave a verbal message for Betty was now impossible.
The Court servants desired him to stay over the night, but he would not do so, desiring to get back to the Squire as soon as possible and tell what he had seen. Whether he ought not to have intercepted the young people, and carried off Betty himself to her father, he did not know. However, it was too late to think of that now, and without wetting his lips or swallowing a crumb, Tupcombe turned his back upon King's-Hintock Court.
It was not till he had advanced a considerable distance on his way homeward that, halting under the lantern of a roadside-inn while the horse was watered, there came a traveller from the opposite direction in a hired coach; the lantern lit the stranger's face as he passed along and dropped into the shade. Tupcombe exulted for the moment, though he could hardly have justified his exultation. The belated traveller was Reynard; and another had stepped in before him.
You may now be willing to know of the fortunes of Miss Betty. Left much to herself through the intervening days, she had ample time to brood over her desperate attempt at the stratagem of infection—thwarted, apparently, by her mother's promptitude. In what other way to gain time she could not think. Thus drew on the day and the hour of the evening on which her husband was expected to announce himself.
At some period after dark, when she could not tell, a tap at the window, twice and thrice repeated, became audible. It caused her to start up, for the only visitant in her mind was the one whose advances she had so feared as to risk health and life to repel them. She crept to the window, and heard a whisper without.
'It is I—Charley,' said the voice.
Betty's face fired with excitement. She had latterly begun to doubt her admirer's staunchness, fancying his love to be going off in mere attentions which neither committed him nor herself very deeply. She opened the window, saying in a joyous whisper, 'Oh Charley; I thought you had deserted me quite!'
He assured her he had not done that, and that he had a horse in waiting, if she would ride off with him. 'You must come quickly,' he said; 'for Reynard's on the way!'
To throw a cloak round herself was the work of a moment, and assuring herself that her door was locked against a surprise, she climbed over the window-sill and descended with him as we have seen.
Her mother meanwhile, having received Tupcombe's note, found the news of her husband's illness so serious, as to displace her thoughts of the coming son-in-law, and she hastened to tell her daughter of the Squire's dangerous condition, thinking it might be desirable to take her to her father's bedside. On trying the door of the girl's room, she found it still locked. Mrs. Dornell called, but there was no answer. Full of misgivings, she privately fetched the old house-steward and bade him burst open the door—an order by no means easy to execute, the joinery of the Court being massively constructed. However, the lock sprang open at last, and she entered Betty's chamber only to find the window unfastened and the bird flown.
For a moment Mrs. Dornell was staggered. Then it occurred to her that Betty might have privately obtained from Tupcombe the news of her father's serious illness, and, fearing she might be kept back to meet her husband, have gone off with that obstinate and biassed servitor to Falls- Park. The more she thought it over the more probable did the supposition appear; and binding her own head-man to secrecy as to Betty's movements, whether as she conjectured, or otherwise, Mrs. Dornell herself prepared to set out.
She had no suspicion how seriously her husband's malady had been aggravated by his ride to Bristol, and thought more of Betty's affairs than of her own. That Betty's husband should arrive by some other road to-night, and find neither wife nor mother-in-law to receive him, and no explanation of their absence, was possible; but never forgetting chances, Mrs. Dornell as she journeyed kept her eyes fixed upon the highway on the off-side, where, before she had reached the town of Ivell, the hired coach containing Stephen Reynard flashed into the lamplight of her own carriage.
Mrs. Dornell's coachman pulled up, in obedience to a direction she had given him at starting; the other coach was hailed, a few words passed, and Reynard alighted and came to Mrs. Dornell's carriage-window.
'Come inside,' says she. 'I want to speak privately to you. Why are you so late?'
'One hindrance and another,' says he. 'I meant to be at the Court by eight at latest. My gratitude for your letter. I hope—'
'You must not try to see Betty yet,' said she. 'There be far other and newer reasons against your seeing her now than there were when I wrote.'
The circumstances were such that Mrs. Dornell could not possibly conceal them entirely; nothing short of knowing some of the facts would prevent his blindly acting in a manner which might be fatal to the future. Moreover, there are times when deeper intriguers than Mrs. Dornell feel that they must let out a few truths, if only in self-indulgence. So she told so much of recent surprises as that Betty's heart had been attracted by another image than his, and that his insisting on visiting her now might drive the girl to desperation. 'Betty has, in fact, rushed off to her father to avoid you,' she said. 'But if you wait she will soon forget this young man, and you will have nothing to fear.'
As a woman and a mother she could go no further, and Betty's desperate attempt to infect herself the week before as a means of repelling him, together with the alarming possibility that, after all, she had not gone to her father but to her lover, was not revealed.
'Well,' sighed the diplomatist, in a tone unexpectedly quiet, 'such things have been known before. After all, she may prefer me to him some day, when she reflects how very differently I might have acted than I am going to act towards her. But I'll say no more about that now. I can have a bed at your house for to-night?'
'To-night, certainly. And you leave to-morrow morning early?' She spoke anxiously, for on no account did she wish him to make further discoveries. 'My husband is so seriously ill,' she continued, 'that my absence and Betty's on your arrival is naturally accounted for.'
He promised to leave early, and to write to her soon. 'And when I think the time is ripe,' he said, 'I'll write to her. I may have something to tell her that will bring her to graciousness.'
It was about one o'clock in the morning when Mrs. Dornell reached Falls- Park. A double blow awaited her there. Betty had not arrived; her flight had been elsewhither; and her stricken mother divined with whom. She ascended to the bedside of her husband, where to her concern she found that the physician had given up all hope. The Squire was sinking, and his extreme weakness had almost changed his character, except in the particular that his old obstinacy sustained him in a refusal to see a clergyman. He shed tears at the least word, and sobbed at the sight of his wife. He asked for Betty, and it was with a heavy heart that Mrs. Dornell told him that the girl had not accompanied her.
'He is not keeping her away?'
'No, no. He is going back—he is not coming to her for some time.'
'Then what is detaining her—cruel, neglectful maid!'
'No, no, Thomas; she is— She could not come.'
Somehow the solemnity of these last moments of his gave him inquisitorial power, and the too cold wife could not conceal from him the flight which had taken place from King's-Hintock that night.
To her amazement, the effect upon him was electrical.
'What—Betty—a trump after all? Hurrah! She's her father's own maid! She's game! She knew he was her father's own choice! She vowed that my man should win! Well done, Bet!—haw! haw! Hurrah!'
He had raised himself in bed by starts as he spoke, and now fell back exhausted. He never uttered another word, and died before the dawn. People said there had not been such an ungenteel death in a good county family for years.
* * * * *
Now I will go back to the time of Betty's riding off on the pillion behind her lover. They left the park by an obscure gate to the east, and presently found themselves in the lonely and solitary length of the old Roman road now called Long-Ash Lane.
By this time they were rather alarmed at their own performance, for they were both young and inexperienced. Hence they proceeded almost in silence till they came to a mean roadside inn which was not yet closed; when Betty, who had held on to him with much misgiving all this while, felt dreadfully unwell, and said she thought she would like to get down.
They accordingly dismounted from the jaded animal that had brought them, and were shown into a small dark parlour, where they stood side by side awkwardly, like the fugitives they were. A light was brought, and when they were left alone Betty threw off the cloak which had enveloped her. No sooner did young Phelipson see her face than he uttered an alarmed exclamation.
'Why, Lord, Lord, you are sickening for the small-pox!' he cried.
'Oh—I forgot!' faltered Betty. And then she informed him that, on hearing of her husband's approach the week before, in a desperate attempt to keep him from her side, she had tried to imbibe the infection—an act which till this moment she had supposed to have been ineffectual, imagining her feverishness to be the result of her excitement.
The effect of this discovery upon young Phelipson was overwhelming. Better-seasoned men than he would not have been proof against it, and he was only a little over her own age. 'And you've been holding on to me!' he said. 'And suppose you get worse, and we both have it, what shall we do? Won't you be a fright in a month or two, poor, poor Betty!'
In his horror he attempted to laugh, but the laugh ended in a weakly giggle. She was more woman than girl by this time, and realized his feeling.
'What—in trying to keep off him, I keep off you?' she said miserably. 'Do you hate me because I am going to be ugly and ill?'
'Oh—no, no!' he said soothingly. 'But I—I am thinking if it is quite right for us to do this. You see, dear Betty, if you was not married it would be different. You are not in honour married to him we've often said; still you are his by law, and you can't be mine whilst he's alive. And with this terrible sickness coming on, perhaps you had better let me take you back, and—climb in at the window again.'
'Is this your love?' said Betty reproachfully. 'Oh, if you was sickening for the plague itself, and going to be as ugly as the Ooser in the church-vestry, I wouldn't—'
'No, no, you mistake, upon my soul!'
But Betty with a swollen heart had rewrapped herself and gone out of the door. The horse was still standing there. She mounted by the help of the upping-stock, and when he had followed her she said, 'Do not come near me, Charley; but please lead the horse, so that if you've not caught anything already you'll not catch it going back. After all, what keeps off you may keep off him. Now onward.'
He did not resist her command, and back they went by the way they had come, Betty shedding bitter tears at the retribution she had already brought upon herself; for though she had reproached Phelipson, she was staunch enough not to blame him in her secret heart for showing that his love was only skin-deep. The horse was stopped in the plantation, and they walked silently to the lawn, reaching the bushes wherein the ladder still lay.
'Will you put it up for me?' she asked mournfully.
He re-erected the ladder without a word; but when she approached to ascend he said, 'Good-bye, Betty!'
'Good-bye!' said she; and involuntarily turned her face towards his. He hung back from imprinting the expected kiss: at which Betty started as if she had received a poignant wound. She moved away so suddenly that he hardly had time to follow her up the ladder to prevent her falling.
'Tell your mother to get the doctor at once!' he said anxiously.
She stepped in without looking behind; he descended, withdrew the ladder, and went away.
Alone in her chamber, Betty flung herself upon her face on the bed, and burst into shaking sobs. Yet she would not admit to herself that her lover's conduct was unreasonable; only that her rash act of the previous week had been wrong. No one had heard her enter, and she was too worn out, in body and mind, to think or care about medical aid. In an hour or so she felt yet more unwell, positively ill; and nobody coming to her at the usual bedtime, she looked towards the door. Marks of the lock having been forced were visible, and this made her chary of summoning a servant. She opened the door cautiously and sallied forth downstairs.
In the dining-parlour, as it was called, the now sick and sorry Betty was startled to see at that late hour not her mother, but a man sitting, calmly finishing his supper. There was no servant in the room. He turned, and she recognized her husband.
'Where's my mamma?' she demanded without preface.
'Gone to your father's. Is that—' He stopped, aghast.
'Yes, sir. This spotted object is your wife! I've done it because I don't want you to come near me!'
He was sixteen years her senior; old enough to be compassionate. 'My poor child, you must get to bed directly! Don't be afraid of me—I'll carry you upstairs, and send for a doctor instantly.'
'Ah, you don't know what I am!' she cried. 'I had a lover once; but now he's gone! 'Twasn't I who deserted him. He has deserted me; because I am ill he wouldn't kiss me, though I wanted him to!'
'Wouldn't he? Then he was a very poor slack-twisted sort of fellow. Betty, I've never kissed you since you stood beside me as my little wife, twelve years and a half old! May I kiss you now?'
Though Betty by no means desired his kisses, she had enough of the spirit of Cunigonde in Schiller's ballad to test his daring. 'If you have courage to venture, yes sir!' said she. 'But you may die for it, mind!'
He came up to her and imprinted a deliberate kiss full upon her mouth, saying, 'May many others follow!'
She shook her head, and hastily withdrew, though secretly pleased at his hardihood. The excitement had supported her for the few minutes she had passed in his presence, and she could hardly drag herself back to her room. Her husband summoned the servants, and, sending them to her assistance, went off himself for a doctor.
The next morning Reynard waited at the Court till he had learnt from the medical man that Betty's attack promised to be a very light one—or, as it was expressed, 'very fine'; and in taking his leave sent up a note to her:
'Now I must be Gone. I promised your Mother I would not see You yet, and she may be anger'd if she finds me here. Promise to see me as Soon as you are well?'
He was of all men then living one of the best able to cope with such an untimely situation as this. A contriving, sagacious, gentle-mannered man, a philosopher who saw that the only constant attribute of life is change, he held that, as long as she lives, there is nothing finite in the most impassioned attitude a woman may take up. In twelve months his girl-wife's recent infatuation might be as distasteful to her mind as it was now to his own. In a few years her very flesh would change—so said the scientific;—her spirit, so much more ephemeral, was capable of changing in one. Betty was his, and it became a mere question of means how to effect that change.
During the day Mrs. Dornell, having closed her husband's eyes, returned to the Court. She was truly relieved to find Betty there, even though on a bed of sickness. The disease ran its course, and in due time Betty became convalescent, without having suffered deeply for her rashness, one little speck beneath her ear, and one beneath her chin, being all the marks she retained.
The Squire's body was not brought back to King's-Hintock. Where he was born, and where he had lived before wedding his Sue, there he had wished to be buried. No sooner had she lost him than Mrs. Dornell, like certain other wives, though she had never shown any great affection for him while he lived, awoke suddenly to his many virtues, and zealously embraced his opinion about delaying Betty's union with her husband, which she had formerly combated strenuously. 'Poor man! how right he was, and how wrong was I!' Eighteen was certainly the lowest age at which Mr. Reynard should claim her child—nay, it was too low! Far too low!
So desirous was she of honouring her lamented husband's sentiments in this respect, that she wrote to her son-in-law suggesting that, partly on account of Betty's sorrow for her father's loss, and out of consideration for his known wishes for delay, Betty should not be taken from her till her nineteenth birthday.
However much or little Stephen Reynard might have been to blame in his marriage, the patient man now almost deserved to be pitied. First Betty's skittishness; now her mother's remorseful volte-face: it was enough to exasperate anybody; and he wrote to the widow in a tone which led to a little coolness between those hitherto firm friends. However, knowing that he had a wife not to claim but to win, and that young Phelipson had been packed off to sea by his parents, Stephen was complaisant to a degree, returning to London, and holding quite aloof from Betty and her mother, who remained for the present in the country. In town he had a mild visitation of the distemper he had taken from Betty, and in writing to her he took care not to dwell upon its mildness. It was now that Betty began to pity him for what she had inflicted upon him by the kiss, and her correspondence acquired a distinct flavour of kindness thenceforward.
Owing to his rebuffs, Reynard had grown to be truly in love with Betty in his mild, placid, durable way—in that way which perhaps, upon the whole, tends most generally to the woman's comfort under the institution of marriage, if not particularly to her ecstasy. Mrs. Dornell's exaggeration of her husband's wish for delay in their living together was inconvenient, but he would not openly infringe it. He wrote tenderly to Betty, and soon announced that he had a little surprise in store for her. The secret was that the King had been graciously pleased to inform him privately, through a relation, that His Majesty was about to offer him a Barony. Would she like the title to be Ivell? Moreover, he had reason for knowing that in a few years the dignity would be raised to that of an Earl, for which creation he thought the title of Wessex would be eminently suitable, considering the position of much of their property. As Lady Ivell, therefore, and future Countess of Wessex, he should beg leave to offer her his heart a third time.
He did not add, as he might have added, how greatly the consideration of the enormous estates at King's-Hintock and elsewhere which Betty would inherit, and her children after her, had conduced to this desirable honour.
Whether the impending titles had really any effect upon Betty's regard for him I cannot state, for she was one of those close characters who never let their minds be known upon anything. That such honour was absolutely unexpected by her from such a quarter is, however, certain; and she could not deny that Stephen had shown her kindness, forbearance, even magnanimity; had forgiven her for an errant passion which he might with some reason have denounced, notwithstanding her cruel position as a child entrapped into marriage ere able to understand its bearings.
Her mother, in her grief and remorse for the loveless life she had led with her rough, though open-hearted, husband, made now a creed of his merest whim; and continued to insist that, out of respect to his known desire, her son-in-law should not reside with Betty till the girl's father had been dead a year at least, at which time the girl would still be under nineteen. Letters must suffice for Stephen till then.
'It is rather long for him to wait,' Betty hesitatingly said one day.
'What!' said her mother. 'From you? not to respect your dear father—'
'Of course it is quite proper,' said Betty hastily. 'I don't gainsay it. I was but thinking that—that—'
In the long slow months of the stipulated interval her mother tended and trained Betty carefully for her duties. Fully awake now to the many virtues of her dear departed one, she, among other acts of pious devotion to his memory, rebuilt the church of King's-Hintock village, and established valuable charities in all the villages of that name, as far as to Little-Hintock, several miles eastward.
In superintending these works, particularly that of the church-building, her daughter Betty was her constant companion, and the incidents of their execution were doubtless not without a soothing effect upon the young creature's heart. She had sprung from girl to woman by a sudden bound, and few would have recognized in the thoughtful face of Betty now the same person who, the year before, had seemed to have absolutely no idea whatever of responsibility, moral or other. Time passed thus till the Squire had been nearly a year in his vault; and Mrs. Dornell was duly asked by letter by the patient Reynard if she were willing for him to come soon. He did not wish to take Betty away if her mother's sense of loneliness would be too great, but would willingly live at King's-Hintock awhile with them.
Before the widow had replied to this communication, she one day happened to observe Betty walking on the south terrace in the full sunlight, without hat or mantle, and was struck by her child's figure. Mrs. Dornell called her in, and said suddenly: 'Have you seen your husband since the time of your poor father's death?'
'Well—yes, mamma,' says Betty, colouring.
'What—against my wishes and those of your dear father! I am shocked at your disobedience!'
'But my father said eighteen, ma'am, and you made it much longer—'
'Why, of course—out of consideration for you! When have ye seen him?'
'Well,' stammered Betty, 'in the course of his letters to me he said that I belonged to him, and if nobody knew that we met it would make no difference. And that I need not hurt your feelings by telling you.'
'So I went to Casterbridge that time you went to London about five months ago—'
'And met him there? When did you come back?'
'Dear mamma, it grew very late, and he said it was safer not to go back till next day, as the roads were bad; and as you were away from home—'
'I don't want to hear any more! This is your respect for your father's memory,' groaned the widow. 'When did you meet him again?'
'Oh—not for more than a fortnight.'
'A fortnight! How many times have ye seen him altogether?'
'I'm sure, mamma, I've not seen him altogether a dozen times.'
'A dozen! And eighteen and a half years old barely!'
'Twice we met by accident,' pleaded Betty. 'Once at Abbot's-Cernel, and another time at the Red Lion, Melchester.'
'O thou deceitful girl!' cried Mrs. Dornell. 'An accident took you to the Red Lion whilst I was staying at the White Hart! I remember—you came in at twelve o'clock at night and said you'd been to see the cathedral by the light o' the moon!'
'My ever-honoured mamma, so I had! I only went to the Red Lion with him afterwards.'
'Oh Betty, Betty! That my child should have deceived me even in my widowed days!'
'But, my dearest mamma, you made me marry him!' says Betty with spirit, 'and of course I've to obey him more than you now!'
Mrs. Dornell sighed. 'All I have to say is, that you'd better get your husband to join you as soon as possible,' she remarked. 'To go on playing the maiden like this—I'm ashamed to see you!'
She wrote instantly to Stephen Reynard: 'I wash my hands of the whole matter as between you two; though I should advise you to openly join each other as soon as you can—if you wish to avoid scandal.'
He came, though not till the promised title had been granted, and he could call Betty archly 'My Lady.'
People said in after years that she and her husband were very happy. However that may be, they had a numerous family; and she became in due course first Countess of Wessex, as he had foretold.
The little white frock in which she had been married to him at the tender age of twelve was carefully preserved among the relics at King's-Hintock Court, where it may still be seen by the curious—a yellowing, pathetic testimony to the small count taken of the happiness of an innocent child in the social strategy of those days, which might have led, but providentially did not lead, to great unhappiness.
When the Earl died Betty wrote him an epitaph, in which she described him as the best of husbands, fathers, and friends, and called herself his disconsolate widow.
Such is woman; or rather (not to give offence by so sweeping an assertion), such was Betty Dornell.
* * * * *
It was at a meeting of one of the Wessex Field and Antiquarian Clubs that the foregoing story, partly told, partly read from a manuscript, was made to do duty for the regulation papers on deformed butterflies, fossil ox- horns, prehistoric dung-mixens, and such like, that usually occupied the more serious attention of the members.
This Club was of an inclusive and intersocial character; to a degree, indeed, remarkable for the part of England in which it had its being—dear, delightful Wessex, whose statuesque dynasties are even now only just beginning to feel the shaking of the new and strange spirit without, like that which entered the lonely valley of Ezekiel's vision and made the dry bones move: where the honest squires, tradesmen, parsons, clerks, and people still praise the Lord with one voice for His best of all possible worlds.
The present meeting, which was to extend over two days, had opened its proceedings at the museum of the town whose buildings and environs were to be visited by the members. Lunch had ended, and the afternoon excursion had been about to be undertaken, when the rain came down in an obstinate spatter, which revealed no sign of cessation. As the members waited they grew chilly, although it was only autumn, and a fire was lighted, which threw a cheerful shine upon the varnished skulls, urns, penates, tesserae, costumes, coats of mail, weapons, and missals, animated the fossilized ichthyosaurus and iguanodon; while the dead eyes of the stuffed birds—those never-absent familiars in such collections, though murdered to extinction out of doors—flashed as they had flashed to the rising sun above the neighbouring moors on the fatal morning when the trigger was pulled which ended their little flight. It was then that the historian produced his manuscript, which he had prepared, he said, with a view to publication. His delivery of the story having concluded as aforesaid, the speaker expressed his hope that the constraint of the weather, and the paucity of more scientific papers, would excuse any inappropriateness in his subject.

AN: Okay so this fanfic is based off the movie because I haven't exactly read the books, but I find the movie awesome so I decided to do a fanfiction on it, no flames plz and I hope you enjoy it. :)
Eragon pulled back the arrow ready to fire and the oblivious deer, as soon as the arrow was released a blinding blue light appeared, it dissapeared after a second and Eragon's eyes were wide, he had long forgotten about the escaping deer and his attention turned to his arrow, stuck in a nearby tree with the tail of it on fire,
he noticed smoke rising from the ground and he looked to see a rather big blue stone, Eragon slowly walked towards the stone and placed his bow on the ground, he crouched and carefully picked up the blue stone examining it as he did "What on earth is that?" a female voice asked from behind him,
he looked back to see his younger cousin staring at the stone in awe "What are you doing here Serena?" he asked his voice full of annoyence, she shrugged "I followed you to see what you were up too, and after that I'm glad I did" she replied motioning to the stone, he stood up and placed the stone in his satchell
"Go home Serena" he said, the 16 year old girl crossed her arms and stayed still "No, and you can't make me Eragon" she said firmly, he sighed "I'm making my way back now anyway so you might as well ride with me, it's not safe for you to be alone in these woods" he said looking around cautiously, Serena nodded
"What do you think it is Eragon?" she asked as they started towards the horses "I don't know, maybe we could trade it for meat" he said hopefully, they reached the horses and Serena was about to get onto her black mare when Eragon stopped her "What?" she asked confused, he rolled his eyes
"Your not trained enough to ride her Serena, you can ride with me" he said, Serena pouted but let him help her onto his horse anyway, she put her arms around his waist and he held her horses reigns with one hand to steer her "Try not to fall off Serena" Eragon said with humor in his tone
"I was only young Eragon" she replied thinking back at the memory, he chuckled and nudged the horse forward "Can't be too carefull Serena" he said, she rolled her eyes and they galloped through the forest.
On the Farm...
After removing the reigns and saddle from the horses and releasing them into the field Eragon and Serena walked towards the farm house, Garrow saw his nephew and daughter approaching "All hail Eragon the mighty hunter returns" Roran exclaimed running towards them, Serena rolled her eyes
"Ah yes, with his invisible catch, what happened? Did you get scared when the deer growled?" Roran asked with an' arm around Eragon's shoulder, Serena was about to follow them into the house when her father called her "Serena, a word?" he said with a tone only she could understand,
she sighed and made her way towards Garrow "Yes?" she asked a little nervous, he gave her a dissaproving look "What have I told you about going hunting?" he asked, she looked down at her feet "Not to go because I'm only 16 and there is a high risk of me being hurt and or killed" she said as though she hah said it many times before,
Garrow nodded "Your my only daughter Serena, I don't want anything happening to you" he said, she looked up and saw the worry in his eyes "I won't papa, I couldn't help myself is all" she replied, he chuckled "Just like your mother, she was always too curious" he said, Serena smiled "I know papa, I'll be carefull"
she said, the sound of clanging came from inside the house and both heads turned "Looks like the boys are fighting again" Serena said amused, Garrow smiled "Just like always, we should get in before they destroy the house" he suggested, Serena nodded and they opened the door to find Eragon and Roran on the floor fighting
"Hey c'mon boys that's enough, c'mon Roran" Garrow said though he found it amusing, both boys reluctantly ended their fighting and stood up "Well if isn't the little tag along"
Roran said ruffling his sister's hair, she pushed him away and smoothed down her hair "Oh sod off Roran" Serena said rolling her eyes, Roran chuckled "We should train you to fight soon baby sister, your gonna need it" he said, she smiled and made her way to the horses stables.

It was two days since I had finished the Watauga Lake Challenge, and my body was still recovering. My legs hurt bizarrely in the morning; I had aches in muscles I previously didn't even know existed. But there was nothing for it. It was time to hike on.
Breakfast was an embittering affair, as P-Nut, Redwing and Lil Dipper bragged about their plans to slackpack some twenty five miles out of town. I grumbled my disapproval, but they remained steadfast committed, and even lobbied me to join them. Despite the fact that the Place was "donation only," however, staying in Damascus was getting too expensive for my tastes. I didn't want to be further tempted by the nearby bars or liquor stores, or to go back to that infernal pizzeria. Towns were always money pits, and I knew the longer I stayed, the less enthusiastic I would be about leaving. Besides, I didn't want to get too used to the meager comforts and luxuries of civilization, such as they were. We were in Virginia. The end was in sight. There was no looking back.
The peer pressure was strong, however. Besides the aforementioned trio, Caboose and Spark were also slackpacking, along with Nature, Alphabet, and an old dude named Ranger. Only myself, Bandito, Caveman and Hobbes were actually planning to hike out. Strider, the World's Greatest Traveller, was staying in Damascus to mow people's lawns and do various other unsavory odd-jobs until he could save enough money to continue his journey. None of us expected to see him again.
Actually cheered on by that encouraging thought, I started out ahead of the others. The trail was fairly flat for about a mile out of town, as it followed a road and the Virginia Creeper Trail, an old railroad right-of-way that's been converted into a bike path. I maintained a relatively steady pace for a couple of hours, until I was suddenly forced to duck off in search of a catholing site.
To my right was a slippery slope down towards a stream, and then the Virginia Creeper Trail. Which was paved. Someone could come along on their bike at any second, and I would have little to no warning. So that was out. To my left was an unforgiving, mercilessly steep incline covered in baren saplings providing scant cover. It didn't seem like I had much of a choice.
I had bushwhacked diagonally up the slope about thirty yards when the mounting pressure inside intestines threatened to become tragically explosive. I desperately hacked away at the ground at the base of the nearest tree, dropped trou, and spun around to relieve myself. Only to realize I was still in full view of the trail and the bike path below it. I figured I had enough of a head start on Caveman, Bandito and Hobbes that none of them would catch up while I was in a compromised position. And it was still far too early for any of the southbound slackpackers to cross my path. I finished my business quickly, and went undisturbed.
Although my catholing location was unfortunate, my timing could not have been more fortuitous. It seemed like less than five minutes had elapsed before Caboose came crashing towards me through the trees. He was a man possessed, clearly relishing a return to the hearth, his dog, a pizza, a shower, and a bed. I hissed epithets at him as he whistled passed, but he was going to fast to hear me. He had already gone something like fifteen miles in the time it had taken me to do nine.
Damn him, I thought, envying his speed and dexterity, unencumbered as he was. I vowed then to never slackpack, so long as I lived. It was cheating. It was indecent. It was barbaric, and unforgivably evil. I couldn't wait to do it myself. Maybe I could make my friends slackpack me when I got closer to home.
Lil Dipper and Redwing approached, with P-Nut dutifully in tow.
"Hey traitors," I said, waving at them. "Hope you fall off a cliff and die!"
"Whatever M.C.," muttered Redwing, rolling her eyes. "You're just jealous."
"How dare you," I shouted, "accurately portray the situation!"
"You should have came with us," said Lil Dipper, giggling.
"Never!" I shrieked. "I hate all of you!"
"Hey man," said P-Nut. "How's it going?"
"Oh, you know," I shrugged. "Just took a dump in the woods."
"Right on, man" laughed P-Nut.
"Hey!" I screamed, realizing my mistake. "Don't act all chummy with me! We're sworn enemies!"
"Since when?" asked Redwing, rather levelly.
"Shut up!" I hated being backed into a corner like this. "Since 1776!"
"Oh, very witty!" said Lil Dipper, though I doubt she was that impressed.
I spat, and called them the worst name I could think of. "Slackpackers," I said, shaking my head.
Yet I felt sad and utterly alone as I watched them disappear into the woods behind me. I knew I should have gone with them. What was I thinking? No! Be strong, I thought. They're going to be in town tonight, eating pizza and drinking beer, laughing and having fun, and spending lots of money, while I'll be enjoying that instant oatmeal I picked out of the hiker box, and then crying myself to sleep in my sleeping bag in a tent in the middle of the woods. For free. Wait, no! Stop, this isn't helping! Damn it all!
"Hi M.C.!" said Alphabet, smiling cheerfully at me as she and Spark walked up.
Without thinking, I stuck out my foot and tripped tripped Alphabet. She stumbled and fell awkwardly into some pricker bushes.
"What the hell was that for?" Spark demanded. Alphabet rolled over, several thorns stuck in her hands, on the verge of tears.
I immediately felt terrible. "Sorry," I mumbled, and belatedly offered Alphabet a helping hand.
She didn't take it, and glared at me, wounded. Spark quickly helped her up, then turned to me.
"You know what's coming, don't you?" she asked.
"Yes," I sighed, and resignedly covered my face in my hands to protect myself. And then she kicked me in the balls.
Just leave me here to die, I thought as I lay on the ground weeping. But they already had. I decided to take a break to catch my breath, and to wait for the intense throbbing pain in my testicles to wain. It was going to be a long day.

On Saturday 27th Feb, Celtic were at home once again and that meant walk 15 of the season had to be completed. I was joined by my cousin John Haughey and his lifelong friend, Gerry McGinn. John and Gerry have been friends for over 40 years and through John, I was introduced to Gerry and am also fortunate enough to class him as a friend.
As you will see from the pictures of our journey, we were joined by my dad, Brian Snr, for his 5th walk of the season and Gerry also brought along his dog, Caley, a Scottish Deerhound. Caley certainly found the 8.9 miles easier than John and Gerry.
John, who owns Bailleston Motor Engineers, set the early pace with my dad, reminiscing about old family gatherings and sharing stories of their uncle Pat. Pat sounded like quite a character but sadly I can’t publish any of the stories they told me about him.
Gerry, Caley and I formed the second group, as per current restrictions, and thankfully our stories weren’t as eventful. Gerry also runs his own successful business, GMG Contractors, so we discussed work, the impact of the pandemic and the amazing work the Hospice does. For obvious reasons this season, we decided to stay away from discussing the football.
As has been the norm for most of the walks this season, the weather was good to us and it stayed dry for the 2 hours 39 minutes we were out. I must really thank John and Gerry for joining me, between them they raised an amazing £3,800. This has helped smash through my initial target of £10,000 with several walks still to go. I am truly humbled and so grateful to each individual and company who have donated so far. Thank you.

Can someone explain how, as an earlier post noted, that they have never had a wine above 98 points (or pick a score). What were the flaws? Why did you not rate as perfection?
What is perfection? How can one be absolutely certain that a wine could not be better? 100 points is an absolute, and I don’t believe in absolutes, especially with something as complex and ever-changing as wine.

After qualifying on the front row for the first time this year, Stoner had hoped to be fighting for his second 2008 victory - following two tough rounds - but a change in the weather prompted a tyre gamble, which backfired, leaving the Australian helpless to prevent Dani Pedrosa and Valentino Rossi riding into the distance.
"Unfortunately Casey wasn't able to go as well as he did in practice, mainly because of the change in temperature that led us to make a gamble with tyre choice, so even if a podium is a decent result, it is less than we'd hoped for, mostly because of the gap from the lead," said Ducati MotoGP project director Livio Suppo.
Stoner eventually crossed the finish line 15.9secs behind race winner Rossi, also using Bridgestone tyres, and admitted it was a tough pill to swallow.
"I'm disappointed to be honest because I know we could have done better today," he said. "The bike has worked really well in practice and we thought we had the ideal set-up for today but we changed a couple of things and for one reason or another the package just wasn't as good as before.
"I made a good start and I was happy with that but even in the first corner I couldn't get the bike turned, Colin Edwards came past me, and that was the story of the race. As the race wore on my lap times improved but it was too little too late and in any case it wouldn't have been enough for me to stick with the lead guys.
"I'm disappointed this has happened today - not so really for third place which is a good result but for the big gap from the lead. I know we can do much better so we will put this behind us, wipe the slate clean and try to do better next time out," he declared.
Melandri came into the Chinese Grand Prix having failed to finish higher than 11th from his first three Ducati rides, prompting rumours about his future with the team, but recent changes to bike set-up and traction control allowed the former MotoGP race winner to charge from twelfth on the grid to fifth during a 'fun' race.
"This was an important day - I think I did the best race possible and in general fifth place isn't bad," said Marco. "The team have done a great job, we've found a much better balance with the bike and the changes Ducati have made to the traction control allow me to have a much better feel for the engine.
"Things had started to look up yesterday and today we confirmed it. I got a good start, put my rhythm together and was able to get into some decent times. It was good fun and now I finally feel like I can ride my Ducati.
"Filippo [Preziosi] has always worked so hard to help me and now I hope we can continue in this direction. Spirits are high now and I can't wait for the next race," he enthused.
"We're delighted with Marco, who has made an incredible step forward," added Suppo. "I always said that we hadn't lost faith in him and I'm sure his season will start here."

Televangelists and preachers we see on TV might not be celebrities in the traditional sense of the word, but some of them have managed to create a big success among people. One such preacher is Andrew Wommack, who is an American preacher that we can regularly see on our small screens.
Today’s article will be based on the personal life, net worth and career of this popular televangelist.
Andrew Wommack was born on April 30th 1949 in Texas, USA. This charismatic preacher started his career in 1968 and soon became one of the most popular TV evangelists out there.
There is no information about his childhood and time before he started preaching, so we are going to continue on to his career path in order to find out how he reached such large fame.
Andrew’s career in preaching started in 1969. He started as a church preacher, and TV career wasn’t in the cards yet. As a young and enthusiastic preacher, he soon became very popular among the people in his area, and his preaching’s were visited in large numbers by people.
In 1972 he marries his wife Jamie and together they were leading three churches in their area. The couple was very well known among people, and many supported their work.
The couple has two sons, whose names are Jonathan and James. Since Andrew wanted his word to spread out and reach more people, he came up with an idea to start his radio show in 1976 called the Gospel Truth. The program was aired on a country station in town called Childress in Texas.
In 1978, the Wommack family founded the Andrew Wommack Ministries INC, and decided to relocate the ministry to Colorado Springs two years later.
The program has been active ever since he founded the radio program, and many people watch it on daily basis. Gospel Truth TV show was broadcasted by a Christian TV program, since January 2000. He later joined the Trinity Broadcasting Network lineup with his radio and TV show called Gospel Truth with Andrew Wommack.
Wommack is, to say the least, a very controversial figure. His teachings include that a person can be raised from the dead, if they are Christians. He also stated that he witnessed three people being brought back to life, and that his son Jonathan was also brought back to life in 2001 only by the power of God.
Besides bringing people back to life, he also states that he witnessed many cases of healing of terminal diseases, cancers, people walking after being in wheelchairs and more.
Many people find his teachings to be controversial and that he doesn’t always leave a good influence on people who wish to treat themselves from such diseases.
CBC or Charis Bible College is a Bible College that is unaccredited that started working in 1994. This college opened its doors in many countries around the world and is actively working on educating people spiritually.
Another controversial thing that Andrew did is that he supported the Uganda Anti-Homosexuality Bill that would allow the country of Uganda to criminalize people who engage in any form of same-sex relationships.
This bill would also allow Uganda to punish her own citizens, no matter where they are located, because they can be extradited back to Uganda to be punished for these “crimes”.
Later, Andrew Wommack’s Ministry issued a statement regarding the support of the bill, and tried to justify themselves, by stating that the punishments weren’t as severe as some media were saying they were.
There is no doubt that Andrew Wommack is a rich man. From all of his preaching and his TV and radio shows, he has a substantial amount of money. His net worth is estimated at around 12$ million, which is a high number for someone who works as a church preacher and televangelist.
Most of his money comes from his activity on TV and radio, and also from the Ministry that is now founded by him. He enjoys a lavish lifestyle, even though his preaching’s encourage people to endure through difficult times.
Andrew Wommack was born on April 20th 1949 in Texas, where he started his career as well. This popular TV and radio evangelist, has made quite a huge success in this area of work.
He started off small, by leading a church in his home town, and later on, with his wife Jamie, stated leading three churches in their area. The churches soon gathered a lot of supporters and people were coming all around the area to listen to this charismatic preacher’s talks.
The couple later founded a Ministry under Andrew’s name, which has now spread and is one of the largest in the USA. The Andrew’s preaching’s are very controversial and harmful, according to the opinions of many.
People consider that his teachings regarding illness and health can be dangerous for people who are going through these problems.
He teaches his listeners that Christians can raise dead and also heal almost any terminal disease we can think of.
He even started that his son Jonathan was dead for 5 hours in 2001, and that he, by the miracle of God, raised himself from the dead through his religion and belief in God.
Andrew also stated that he personally knows about three cases of raising from the dead from his surroundings, and his followers believe him no matter what.
Andrew is married to his wife Jamie since 1972, and the couple has two sons. The family lives lavishly in their home, and they are looking like a happy family. There haven’t been any news about issues or scandals in the family, so we suppose that they are doing great and that no odd things are happening in their private lives.
Andrew and his family are very secretive and don’t like to talk about their personal life with the press and they also don’t like exposing themselves in the media in any way. In any case, Andrew is a very rich and successful preacher, who continues to attract attention from his followers and people who maybe never heard of him before.
Judging by his net worth, he is doing very well in his profession, and since he is not someone who stops easily, his net worth can only grow larger in the following years. His Ministry is still active and continues to sign in new members, despite Andrew’s controversial teachings.
Full name: Andrew Wommack
Date of birth: April 30th 1949
Birthplace: Texas, USA
Height: 1.82 m
Weight: 80 kg
Net Worth: 12$ million

Well days 3&4 were successful. I had no soda at all. I was so proud of it. We were out and about and I didn't stop to get one at all. I did buy a water. And I bought one of those aluminum water bottles so that I can use that on a daily basis. Hoping that helps a lot with my goal. So if I'm focused more on drinking more water then I will think less about drinking soda. I really feel good about accomplishing this. A little review on this water bottle. I like the water bottle a lot. It keeps my water cold for about 2 hrs. Longer if I put ice in it. It came with a clip so it is easy to attach to my diaper bag or stroller or whatever I want. The bottle I got holds 28 ounces so my goal is to drink 2 of those a day at least.

So I haven't really blogged about my family trip to Bintan last weekend, life has been quite a handful. But I've just gotten the pictures from my sis' camera so the good memories are flooding back again!
Anyway, the reason why we went to Bintan in the first place was first of all because Sis won a free stay at Bintan Lagoon Resort from her company as a reward for her excellent work! Yeah, she's been doing a great job there, and unlike other companies (ehem ehem), hers really make sure the employees feel appreciated. So she got a free room for two nights and we thought why not ask our Dad to join too and make this a family vacation? It's been ages since we had that. In fact, I can't remember the last time. Ever since our mom passed away, family vacation has been the least on our thoughts, but I think it's important now that we do it sometimes.
So we booked another room since they wouldn't allow 5 people to stay in only 1 room. And my sister and I took a day of leave on Friday and set out to Bintan until Sunday!
The ferry was super clean, and throughout the journey the television was playing Mickey Mouse cartoon. Not exactly engaging, but it was at least something to look at. The trip by ferry only took an hour or so.
After we arrived at the Bintan Ferry Terminal and got through Immigration, we were taken to a bus which would take us to the resort.
And this was what greeted us there. Some four dancers came out and danced to the local music played by these local musicians. It was quite nice, and we were given welcome drinks also. The check-in was fast, and we settled in our room.
To sleep? Don't you always goof around in the bed everytime you stay in a hotel, though?
We then went for lunch at an Indonesian-Chinese fusion restaurant in the resort. The fried rice was heavenly! That first day Dad wanted to see a friend of his in the city, so we rented a car and drove to Bintan city, which took 3 hours of commuting! I think the main difference was, well, in the resort we pay everything by Singapore Dollars still, and in the city, it was more resembling Indonesia. You'd find local food and small shops at the side of the streets selling corn, satay and meatballs and we use Rupiahs! Home sweet home. ;)
While waiting for Dad talking to his friend, we were outside goofing around and taking pictures.
See? The familiar sight of meatball seller on the street. None you can see in Singapore, but a sight of this, and you know you're home. (Well, if you're Indonesian like me. Duh.)
After we got back, we didn't do much of anything since it was already late! We just relaxed in our hotel room, and oh, we did buy some Padang food in the city so we had that for dinner.
The next day, we woke up early for breakfast and then it was water sport time! We tried out banana boat and also jetski which was such a rush! It was really awesome being outdoor and near the sea!
The restaurant / chilling area from the outside.
Palm trees and blue sky! We couldn't take pictures while we were jet skiing 'cos the camera shouldn't be wet! Quite bummed out that there weren't any pictures, but hey, it's all in here anyway, right? (pointing to the brain) Alright, that was dorky. We spent the entire morning and afternoon playing in the sea and came back to the room feeling energized but exhausted!
At night we had dinner at a fancy Italian restaurant, played footsie at the recreational room, had karaoke and watched telly until we fell asleep. It was a great day!
Food! Food! Glorious food!
On Sunday we had breakfast early and headed to the beach to take some pictures.
The weather was great when we were there. The day we were playing in the water, it wasn't so sunny, it was a little cloudy even, so that was great. On Sunday, it was way too hot outside, you can tell it from the pictures. So we thought, "wow, thank goodness we were doing all the sports yesterday, otherwise I would have been burnt to crisp!"
So at about 11 am, we boarded the bus back to the ferry terminal and headed home to Singapore. I know it was a short trip, but it was great and I'm glad we did it. :) So 'til next time!

Disclaimer: I dont want to get in whatever trouble people can get into when using other peoples characters so - .The Legend of Zelda, Link, Zelda, Ganon, Hyrule and other related characters and settings belong to to that wonderous console company, Nintendo. No infringement intended.
Juliet A. Singleton (Scullys@bigfoot.com) & Kirsty Singleton (Space@xs.clara.net)
Back to Story Menu
Link didn't return to the party. He went up to his own room, and sat there in the darkness for a while, thinking about the night's events. What if it was all true, this destiny thing? He'd never felt inclined to believe all of it, but he knew Zelda believed it. And obviously Kylara. He looked down at the dagger. He'd cleaned the blood off it, feeling incredibly guilty. He told himself over and over that Kylara had killed herself on her own accord, but he still felt like it was all his fault. He threw it down onto the floor, and lay back on the bed, feeling troubled. The raging storm outside almost matched his mood. The sound of footsteps interrupted the silence of the room. Holding a candle, Zelda walked in, looking worried.
"Link?" she questioned softly. He sat up.
"What do you want?" he asked roughly. She stared at him, looking a little hurt.
"Link... you didn't come back... Sprite said you were coming back, and then a guard told me he'd seen you going up to your room... Whatever's the matter?" she questioned.
"Nothing. I just want to be alone, right now," he answered.
"Oh&ldots;" Zelda murmured, looking disappointed. She glanced downwards, then noticed the dagger. "What's this?" she asked, picking it up.
"Leave that alone," Link said. Zelda frowned, then carefully put the object on a side table. She set the candle there too.
"I thought... well, don't you want to be with me?" she asked.
"I don't know," Link replied. The Princess stared at him.
"Are you mad at me?" she finally asked, her words sounding unsure.
"No..." Link said. He didn't look at her. She walked over to the bed.
"Then what's the problem?" she questioned.
"Oh, nothing," he finally said.
"Everyone else has left," Zelda explained.
"I'm sorry... I just..." He sat up, and hugged her. He kissed her.
"There is something wrong," Zelda said, pulling back.
"There isn't," he protested. He wished Zelda wasn't so sensitive. "There is." "Drop it," he replied, kissing her again. The Princess sighed.
"Fine." She stood up. "My father wishes us to be married within the next few days," she added.
"We're already married," Link answered.
"You know what I mean. A celebration that the whole of Hyrule can attend," Zelda said. She made her way over to the door. Then she turned around to look at him. "Link?"
"What happened out there... in the forest?" the Princess questioned. Link looked surprised.
"Nothing... well, I just received a present from the faeries, that dagger. Then I came back here," he said quickly.
"But why didn't you return to the party? It was held in your honour," Zelda said, folding her arms.
"I... I was just tired... these last few days..." Link started.
"I understand," Zelda replied shortly.
"Where are you going?" Link suddenly questioned, like he'd just really noticed that she was there.
"To my room. I'm tired too, you know," Zelda answered.
"Well... you could just stay here... would save you a lot of walking," Link said, smiling at her hopefully. She smiled back.
"Well..." she mused teasingly. Link smiled back at her. He'd worry about what to do about Kylara in the morning...
Link slipped out of his room early on, before Zelda had a chance to wake up. He was glad that Sprite didn't seem to be around, either. He didn't want them to know what had gone on the previous night, after he'd left the forest. Link walked down the wine cellar, and then climbed up the ladder near the well. He came out beneath a bush, pushing the branches back so that he could climb through and out into the open. Quickly, he moved towards the trees. In a silent glade, Kylara lay in a heap at the foot of a large oak tree. A sharp pain shot through his heart, as he looked down at her, wondering what to do. Kylara had no family, yet it was likely that she'd had friends back in Gardarika. He wasn't sure what to do, yet he felt so guilty over it, like it had been all his fault. But she had killed herself by her own will, he tried to tell himself. It just didn't work. The night before, he'd almost told Zelda. But then he'd thought she might get angry at the mention of Kylara's name, and, not wanting to spoil their night together, he'd put it to the back of his mind. Now though, he had a problem. He stood there for a long while, thinking. His heart seemed to ache, as he stared down at her. Perhaps he did feel something for her after all. But he didn't think it was love. Well, not like the love he had for Zelda anyway. During that long, terrible week, Kylara had been extremely kind to him. She had made him meals, talked to him, and sometimes partially taken his mind off what had happened back in Hyrule. She had been a good friend. She deserved better than what had happened. But it was too late to change things now, indeed, in a way, he wouldn't want to change them. He set off back to North Castle. Perhaps Drake would know what to do.
The knight comforted his friend. "It's not your fault at all," Drake said, patting Link on the back. Nick was there too. They'd offered to take Kylara's body back to Catalia, where she could receive a proper burial. "And we promise not to breathe a word of this to Zelda," Drake added, grinning slightly. Link managed a weak smile.
"I shouldn't have let this all happen in the first place," he said dismally.
"Oh now, Link, my friend, it was Kylara's wish. She obviously felt that she could not live without you," Nick said kindly.
"Like that makes me feel better," Link muttered, fingering his sword hilt, and looking down at the stone floor of the room.
"What's done, is done. Don't be saddened, at least she is out of her obvious sorrow and pain," Nick continued.
"It was still my fault&ldots;" Link started.
"Of course it wasn't!" Drake interrupted.
"I know, but I... I should never have gone to Catalia in the first place! Then none of this would have happened!" Link cried.
"Listen Link, it's all very well saying that, but you went. You met her. You can't change anything," Drake said, firmly, but in a kind tone. Nick nodded.
"Try to forget this tragedy, look forward to your wedding day with Zelda," he said. Link sighed, still looking disheartened. "Come on, aren't you at least happy about that?" Drake asked, looking a little surprised.
"Well... I guess so," Link replied.
"Doesn't sound like it to me. Don't tell me that you two are still fighting?" Drake asked. Link shook his head.
"No we aren't... everything's great... but..."
"But what?" Drake demanded. Link remembered Kylara's disconcerting words from the previous night... There's something... There's something about that Princess you don't know... if you knew, you wouldn't want to... and You changed fate, and you'll suffer the consequences later. Had she been lying, just so he'd go back to Catalia with her, instead of staying with Zelda? And what if she was speaking the truth? What did she possibly mean? "What is this, last minute nerves?" Drake said loudly, bringing Link back to earth.
"Uh, what?" Link asked.
"For heavens sake, what are you looking so unsure for? Don't you realise, you're the envy of many men in Hyrule, perhaps of many in the entire world?" Drake said sternly.
"I'm... I'm not unsure. I did want to marry Zelda, I love her more than anyone in the world," Link said truthfully. He did love her just like that. The more he thought about it, the less important Kylara's warning seemed. "I love her," he repeated, more to himself than anyone else.
"Good lad," Drake said. Nick smiled. Then they walked out, leaving Link alone with his thoughts. He walked over to the window, and looked down into the courtyard. He sighed. So many things had happened during the last few days, it was almost hard to comprehend them. Enzar had arrived then been banished again... He'd discovered his brother Hayden was alive, only to see him later die... Zelda had gotten new additions to her family, in the form of step-mother and step-sister&ldots; They'd found the Triforce of Courage... rebuilt the other two Triforces that Enzar had shattered... He and Zelda were closer than ever, married now... Kylara had killed herself... a small sob escaped him, as he thought as all these things. Some of the memories made him happy, some made him sad. Quickly, he wiped his eyes clear of any tears that might be there. He didn't want anyone to see him like this. Then he smiled. Tomorrow was another marriage ceremony for Zelda and himself. A proper one, this time. He could hardly wait. Zelda would look so beautiful... The whole of Hyrule would rejoice, at having their beloved Princess and admired hero back together. Forever, he thought dreamily. Now was not a time to dwell on the past anymore, he decided. It was time to look forward to the future... their future, his and Zelda's, together. And with Ganon assuredly gone, and the Triforce complete, that future seemed safe and secure. They would settle down together, have many children... Link hoped at least for one son, someone who would carry on the tradition as a great hero. And a daughter too, he'd love a daughter. Perhaps he'd even write a book, a book about his adventures... or maybe one about how much he loved Zelda. That one, he thought, smiling to himself, was probably best kept in the heart, shared only with her. In a few more years, he would be old enough to be knighted, earning the title of 'Sir'. That had always been one of his dreams, as a young boy. And perhaps King Harkinian would hand over the rule to Zelda. Then, he and the Princess would be King and Queen of Hyrule, he was sure that the people of the Kingdom would approve. They loved Zelda so much, and also him... It looked like everything was going to be okay, after all.
November the Second, 4545. That was the official date of the wedding of the Princess of Hyrule, Zelda, and the Great Hero of Hyrule, Link. There was great rejoicing in the land of Hyrule, and beyond, at this match. Link stood nervously, waiting by the altar in North Castle's small chapel for Zelda to arrive. He was dressed in the finest clothes he'd ever worn in his life, rather like the King's ceremonial outfit, but nicer. Pure white silk trousers and shirt, with a short, dark blue tunic over the top, which had the Hyrulian crest embroidered on it in gold thread. A long purple cloak, fastened with a gold insignia of the Triforce, a brown leather belt, and polished brown leather boots completed the look. He'd graciously declined to wear any jewellery of any sort, offered by the King, but he'd agreed to wear a kingdom ring, which was given to everyone who was a member of the Hyrulian Royal Family. Link also had to wear a small crown, since he was considered the future King of Hyrule now. He felt a little strange wearing it, but also very proud. Drake, his best man, was standing close by, in his knight's finery. "Nervous, kid?" he grinned. Link grinned back.
"A little. It's going to be a big responsibility," he said.
"What? Putting up with Zelda?" Drake laughed.
"Hey!" Link exclaimed, in mock anger.
"Haha, sorry. You meant being a member of the Royal Family, didn't you?" Drake replied. Link nodded.
"I guess I won't have much time for going out adventuring now," he said, looking slightly woeful for a moment.
"Well, if I know Zelda like I think I do..." Drake began. Suddenly, the entire chapel went quiet. Zelda, and her Father, the King of Hyrule, had stepped into the room.
"Here goes," Link said, smiling across at his beautiful, future wife.
Even Zelda had to admit to herself, she'd never looked more beautiful. Her tall, slim figure had fitted perfectly into her mother's exquisite wedding gown. It was a close fitting dress, made from cream silk and lace. The bodice was embroidered with small pearls, in the emblem of the Triforce, surrounded by other beautiful patterns. The skirt of the dress was long, and trailed behind her, in long ruffles of material. It was an off-the-shoulder neckline, but the sleeves were tightened at intervals with ribbons, finally trailing into long cuffs, trimmed with lace at the ends. She carried a large bunch of flowers, tied up with gold ribbon, and flowers were tied in her long, golden hair. A gold tiara, gold jewellery and a long, chiffon train that trailed along the floor made her look just like something from a fairytale. Link couldn't get over just how beautiful she looked, all dressed up like that. It was a wonderful sight, a memory he'd cherish forever. Selina and Fayette walked behind her in gold and lilac gowns, acting as her bridesmaids, the King, smiling proudly, hold of her arm. Sprite and her friends, not wanting to miss out on the chance to show off, had all dressed up, and were fluttering around Zelda, as she made her way to the altar. Seemingly unable to be able to wait for things to get started though, the Princess didn't walk down the aisle in the usual, slow, stately manner, but rather rushed down it, over to where Link was stood. "It's wonder you didn't trip up," Drake joked, as she took her place next to them.
"I'm not that clumsy. Besides, at the rate my father was going, I'd have taken all day to get down here," she whispered back, grinning.
"You look beautiful Zel," Link complimented, taking hold of her hand in his. She smiled.
"You look great, too," she replied, leaning over to give him a small kiss. The King arrived at that moment, and came to stand near them.
"Is everyone ready?" the priest said quietly, just to them. Zelda nodded.
"Yes, hurry up and start!" she said excitedly. The Priest smiled at them, and turned to his book.
The whole ceremony went without a glitch, and a short while later, Link and Zelda exchanged rings and confirmed their vows to each other. There was no doubt in either of their minds that they belonged together. Drake smiled on, thinking it was a very different scene to the one he'd witnessed only a few days before in the Triforce Tower. The King could do nothing more but beam with pride and happiness, even Fenella was smiling along with him. In fact, everyone in the chapel looked happy, as Link and Zelda hugged each other and kissed. Only Fayette managed to look displeased; as usual. She was jealous, plain and simple, and she even admitted it to herself. She forced herself to smile, as Selina leaned over and whispered, "don't they just make the best couple?"
"I guess they do," she said quietly. At that moment, Zelda announced that once they'd had the wedding parade through Mido, there'd be a big huge party back at North Castle.
"And everyone in Hyrule just has to come!" she finished, smiling widely.
"Everyone?" Fayette asked, looking surprised, as Zelda began to walk outside. The Princess nodded.
"Yes! Of course."
"What? Like even... peasants?" Fayette continued. Zelda gave Fayette one of her withering looks.
"Honestly Fayette, I don't see what your problem is," she said.
"I never said anything!" Fayette protested.
"You didn't have to," Link remarked, joining in the conversation. Selina was smiling though, as she caught up to them.
"Good, hopefully my brothers will be here, and you'll get to meet them," she said.
"That would be lovely," Zelda replied, as she made her way out into the courtyard.
"Look, we have to sit in that open carriage, and it's so cold!" she said pointing over to wear a stately coach stood, pulled by two white horses.
"Don't worry, just sit close to me, and you'll be okay," Link replied, putting an arm around her shoulder.
"I wanted them to have Moonmist and Carefree pull it, but Dad wouldn't let me, he said they didn't match. But, this is so much better than last time," the Princess replied, smiling up at him. He nodded in agreement.
"Hmmph," Fayette said, folding her arms, and looking envious, as the two walked off together.
"What's up?" Selina asked, a big knowing smile on her face. Nick had told Fayette he was going back to Dalsona after the wedding. Fayette wasn't going with him.
"So much for me getting married," she said, twirling a red curl thoughtfully.
"I'm no better off," Selina answered. Fayette rolled her eyes.
"I bet you're not short of offers," she replied, thinking of the way Aaron, Damon, Charles, and even Nick appeared to act around the pretty healer. Selina shrugged.
"Maybe not. But we've no time to dwell on this now, come on, we have to join the parade!"
"We have to walk?!" Fayette said incredulously. Selina nodded, her eyes dancing mischievously.
"All the way to Mido!"
"What?" Fayette cried in horror.
"It'll do you good," Selina replied, looking down to Fayette's slightly plump midriff. The Princess scowled.
"It's cold. Zelda made us wear these dresses on purpose!" she complained. Selina laughed quietly to herself. "Come on, let's get going," she said.
Ganon stared around wildly as he spotted a menacing figure approach him. He banged his fists against the spirit prison that he had been encased in but it made no effect. The landscape before him whirled insanely, but he remembered being here before all too well. Fortunately he had escaped the first time, but maybe this time he would not be quite so lucky. He had been teleported to the ---- realm, where only pure evil resided. Suddenly a huge distorted face appeared before him. "Enzar!" gasped Ganon, but no words emerged from the other side of his lips. The huge face began to laugh, taunting him. Ganon tried to break the prison with his remaining magic, but the process of being transported to the realm had left him exhausted. He fell to the floor of his prison, defeated. Suddenly the sound of a thousand screams of pain filled Ganon's head, sending shards of splintered glass everywhere. Ganon tried to cover his ears, block out the sound but it continued to go on. Finally it stopped, but was replaced by Enzar's familiar booming laughter.
"So they sent you here too?" asked the griffin casually. Ganon nodded, his eyes still trying to adjust to the whirling colours. "Well, what happened?" pressed Enzar.
"They... completed the," Ganon paused to gulp in some oxygen.
"The what?" asked Enzar impatiently. "Triforce," croaked Ganon, his voice hoarse. Enzar spat in disgust.
"Impossible, the Triforce I shattered - they completed it?" asked Enzar in surprise. Ganon nodded slowly, the asked a question of his own.
"How, how did you release me? How did you release yourself?" Enzar sighed and scratched at the blood-red ground with one foot.
"I was strong enough to survive the transference, as the spirit prisons are pure, my evil can shatter them," explained Enzar.
Ganon sighed and averted his eyes away from the huge griffin to study the landscape. He liked it, once he got used to the forever changing sky, which was just a mad rush of colour. It gave him a headache. "They got it all wrong," said Enzar shaking his head sadly, following Ganon's gaze. "What?" asked Ganon, turning back towards the griffin.
"Well, if they really wanted us to suffer they would've placed us in a perfect world with unbeatable heroes and invincible victims," explained Enzar.
"True, but if there were such a realm they'd be there themselves," pointed out Ganon. A stark tree marked the barren landscape. It was charred and it's trunk twisted, it seemed to scream out in agony to Ganon. The ground was blood-red, stained by the blood shed by the evil beings that resided here.
"Personally, it's my own private hell- or should that be heaven," pondered Enzar to himself. Black shadows danced across the ground, flitting back and forth, the spirits of the past. Enzar walked in front of Ganon and looked down onto him. "But Ganon, I'm not talking to you for company - that tree makes better conversation," started Enzar. Ganon hissed and stepped away. "I know there is real evil inside you, it was just distorted by that blasted golden prism all of those years ago," continued on Enzar. "Ganondorf? You know that Ganon is just a weak hearted villain, no more! Why do you allow him to live?!" cried Enzar angrily, his eyes blazing. Ganon shook his head,
"Ganondorf is dead, destroyed by the chosen one many years ago!" spat back Ganon.
"No, not anymore!" screamed Enzar, he pulled something from inside his own chest. Ganon fell to the ground, as if he had been struck, he peered through his fingers as he held his hands over his face and saw it. In Enzar's hand there was a pure ball of light, shards of light cutting through the dark sky, cut off in places by Enzar's black, festering hand. Ganon gasped, it was the Moon Pearl! "Ever since I was created, it was my purpose to ensure you got this, but only know did I have the strength to give it to you! Once you return to the light world you can be your true self and once again rule your dark, foetid reign," gasped Enzar. Ganon watched as parts of Enzar began to crumble, a sudden gush of wind carrying him away. All that remained was that floating orb of light - created for the hero to travel between realms, but then lost, and finally it had returned all these years later, hidden inside the Griffin Enzar. Ganon stood up and brought his hand up to the orb, streaks of electricity jumped from the orb and through Ganon before his fingers had even touched the orb, Ganon suddenly felt revitalised and he knew, he would soon be out of this realm and back where he was destined to rule. As Ganondorf.
Zelda suddenly felt misty eyed, as she stood in one corner with Link, watching the guests enjoy themselves at the lavish banquet the kitchen servants had prepared. Link was stood behind her, arms around her waist, drawing her close. If only her mother had been here to see this, she thought sadly. Despite this, she felt it had to have been one of the best days in her whole life, even better than when they had finally got rid of Ganon, and joined the Triforce together. They'd got married on that day too, that date would be marked down as their 'unofficial wedding' probably, she mused, smiling. But it had been different then, a horrible rush, and they had been fighting. She sighed softly, and wiped away a tear that was threatening to fall. She couldn't help wanting to cry; she was so happy the emotion was making it happen. The Princess gently pushed Link's hands off her waist and turned forward to face him. "Well, I guess it's going to be a quiet life from now on," she said, smiling. Link hugged her.
"No Ganon, a complete Triforce," he began.
"Everything's coming together how it was supposed to. I knew it would someday," Zelda said.
"Well, I guess it's lucky I decided to intervene in your life after all," Link grinned.
"Oh Link!" Zelda exclaimed. She folded her arms. "You know, I would have been okay. Ganon would never have got his hands on the Triforce of Wisdom," she remarked, a slight smile on her lips.
"Maybe, but then he would have kept you locked up in Death Mountain for ever and ever," Link replied.
"Don't remind me," Zelda moaned.
"This is the worst day of my life!" a small voice interrupted. They turned to see Sprite hovering near them.
"Oh jeez Sprite, you really know how to spoil the mood," Link joked. The faerie folded her arms.
"I wish I was a human," she complained.
"I would still have married Zelda. She's always been the girl of my dreams, you know," Link said, grinning over at the Princess. She smiled wryly, while Sprite looked sulky. "I&ldots; uh&ldots;" Link began, when he realised he'd upset his little companion.
"Hmmph!" Sprite retorted, throwing faerie dust at them.
"This is nothing to do with me," Zelda declared. She smiled over at Link. "I'll be with Selina and the rest if you need me," she said, walking away.
"Good!" Sprite said, suddenly smiling again.
"Oh, look what you just did! I was enjoying my time alone with Zel," Link complained.
"Don't worry about her; you're getting far too attached, if you ask me, anyway," Sprite replied. She flew in front of Link, and grinned.
"Too attached? She's my wife! I'm supposed to be 'attached' to her," he said.
"You two are positively&ldots; ugh," Sprite said.
"Well, I think we're positively made for each other," Link cracked back. Sprite tossed her reddish brown curls indignantly.
"Ooh&ldots; shut up! Anyway, this is beside the point," Sprite said.
"So what is the point?" Link questioned.
"Oh, nothing really. Just that it was me who realised that Zelda really wasn't dead after all, and so went to free her," Sprite replied. She had a smug look on her face.
"What?" Link said in surprise.
"Oh, well I got caught by a faerie hunter, but before I did, I saw Imilda, and she told me about that amulet. However, you were too busy going off to Catalia with that Kylara girl..." Sprite began.
"Don't even speak about that again!" Link interrupted. "Zelda already gave me enough grief over it, I don't need you starting as well," he groaned. Sprite laughed.
"I'm sure she did. It's too bad she still wanted to marry you, because if she didn't I would have," the faerie stated.
"Zel just can't resist my charming manner, brilliant wit, or dashing good lucks," Link replied, grinning. Sprite rolled her eyes.
"Evidently," she noted, in a bored tone. Link caught hold of the faerie.
"You can be our babysitter," he offered.
"Ooh, you'd be so lucky!" Sprite retorted. Link laughed.
"Alright, seriously, thanks Sprite. You've been the best guardian faerie ever," he said. Sprite smiled.
"I should hope so," she said. Link smiled, and let her go. "Come on, let's find the others," he said.
Aaron stared down into his mug of beer, and sloshed it about. Link came and sat next to him. "Too bad Zelda doesn't have anymore sisters," he said. Link smiled.
"She has Fayette."
"She's not my type," Aaron replied. Link patted him on the back.
"I'm sure once I step back and let you get to be the big hero, the ladies will come flocking," he reassured his apprentice. Aaron smiled slightly.
"Nah. I'll just stick to helping you out. You're too much of a big act to follow," he said.
"You'll get the title of Triforce Protector. I mean&ldots; well&ldots; you know. I have to look after Zel more now," Link grinned.
"Alright, you can stop gloating about it now," Aaron laughed.
"Who's gloating?" Drake said, walking over. He dumped down his beer mug on the table. Aaron pointed over at Link.
"Hey, I wasn't! Not in the slightest!" Link protested.
"You don't have to say anything, we can tell you're gloating by the big, stupid grin you have!" Drake laughed.
"Yeah well, you're just jealous that I got to marry the most beautiful, intelligent, bravest, nicest woman in the whole of Hyrule!" Link replied, grinning even more. Drake raised his eyebrows.
"Personally, she's too flighty for my liking."
"She's not flighty in the least! She's&ldots; perfect," Link said, looking dreamy. Drake looked at Aaron.
"Hopeless," he remarked. Link forgot his private daydream for a moment.
"Who's hopeless?" he asked. Aaron and Drake just laughed. Link shrugged. "I don't care. Anyway Drake, you forgot one thing."
"What was that?" the knight asked.
"Since I'm married to Zelda now, that officially makes me of higher rank than you, so&ldots;" Link began.
"Forget it, kiddo," Drake replied calmly.
"Just remember it, my good man," Link answered. Drake laughed. Link saw his aunt and uncle waving to him. "Excuse me, relations calling," he said to his friends. They nodded, and began to talk amongst themselves. Link smiled to himself as he walked across to his aunt and uncle. Zelda was right. Everything really was coming together like it was supposed to. It must have been fate.
Zelda hugged her father tightly. "I'm very happy dear," he told her.
"Me too, dad," she replied.
"Now, are you ready to take on full responsibility for the kingdom?" he asked.
"Oh dad! There's so many better things I could be doing&ldots;" Zelda moaned. The king chuckled.
"Well, okay, maybe not just yet, you'll just have to have lots of dear children instead," he said, a big smile on his face. Zelda looked horrified at this notion.
"Dad, that's even worse!" she protested lightly.
"I'm sure you'll change your mind about that sooner or later," her father replied, hugging her again.
"Later," Zelda decided.
"You're not a bit like your dear mother. It was her big dream in life," the King said. Zelda looked thoughtful for a moment.
"My big dream&ldots; I think I already have it," she smiled. She reached up and kissed him on the cheek. "Goodnight dad," she said. The Princess said goodbye to the guests that were still there, and as the last ones left, she slipped out of the Great Hall along the passage back to her tower room. Link was waiting for her at the bottom of the stairs. They met in a deeply passionate kiss. "I've been wanting to do that all day," Zelda murmured, as they pulled apart. They'd kissed in front of everyone else, but kept it toned down. Link smiled a little.
"I feel like the luckiest guy in Hyrule," he said, caressing her shoulders. He leaned forward and placed a small kiss on her forehead. Zelda leaned her head against his chest and sighed happily.
"Thank you for everything, Link," she said quietly. Stepping back, she looked up at him, smiling warmly. "I never ever said thank you for all those times you&ldots;" she paused, watching him closely.
"Hey, you know I'd do anything for you, Zel. I promised," Link replied.
"I know, but... but... well, look at everything that's happened. Without you, Hyrule would have been under Ganon's rule by now," Zelda said.
"There's not a threat of that anymore," Link said, drawing her close again.
"But I... I never really thanked you properly," Zelda continued.
"Having you is enough thanks for me," Link replied, giving her a small kiss. He took her hand, and they slowly walked up the stairs.

Our pooches now and then keep doing things which are both sweet and compassionate, sometimes even more than humans. Meet this Lurcher, called Bill who imitates his injured owner by limping just to show his sympathy.
In a video shared by Russell Jones capturing his dog limping in a hilarious way while giving his owner company on a walk, has been really loved by people. It amassed 11k views and has shares around 26k.
In the video Russel is seen walking with cast on his leg walking along with his dog in the street. But curiously enough the Lurcher, while walking avoid touching his paw to the ground and limping as if hurt. Russel wrote in the description of the video, “Cost me £300 in vet fees and X-rays, nothing wrong, just sympathy. Love him,”
A lot of times it is seen that different creatures that imitate other individuals of their own species. Even people and birds also do that. Non-human primates like monkeys and apes are also quite known to imitate others in their group.
But curiously did don’t just imitate other dogs but also us, even though they might not gain any significant benefit. The owner spent around $400 in vet fees and X-rays only to find out there was, in fact, nothing wrong with his dog, he was in very good health.
Take a look at the video below:

I can’t tell the exact moment it started, but I remember clearly the moment I knew there was no turning back.
Maybe it all started when they first were spotted in the city center, forced to leave the woods outside because of the wildfires. Or maybe when they established themselves on the river banks and nobody tried to send them away.
What I know for sure is that I wasn’t ready to find them blocking my way on that warm July evening, as I was working as a pizza deliverer on my scooter. I was headed to a small house just outside the city center, and suddenly a huge boar and its cub had appeared in front of me. They didn’t seem intentioned to move, so I decided to turn back and take a slightly longer path. As soon as I made the u-turn, another couple of boars blocked my retreat.
The biggest one started to talk. I mean, it wasn’t moving its lips, but I could clearly hear its voice talking to me. It was telling me I had something for them.
“No,” I replied out loud. “I just have a few pizzas for a customer who placed an order.”
“Pizza!” the small piglet giggled as soon as he heard the word.
“That pizzas will do, thanks”. The huge one talked again. I tried to protest, to tell them the customer was waiting for a delivery they had already paid for, but all that the boar said was that I should thank the customer on their behalf, then.
“No way!” I said, trying to scare them away with the sound of my scooter, but to no avail. They got closer and threw the bag holding the pizzas on the ground. They opened the straps and served themselves, disappearing in a small alley with the pizza boxes firmly in their mouth.
Shocked as I was, I still managed to call my bosses to tell them what had just happened, well aware there was no way they were ever going to believe me. As I returned there with a new set of pizzas, I could still feel the boars’ eyes on me, and a cold shiver went through my spine.
On the following morning, I turned on the local news, and I saw I wasn’t the only one who had such an experience the night before. A lot of delivery guys had been harassed by hungry boars and had to surrender them the food. At first, it felt good to know I wasn’t alone, and that I was going to get an apology from my bosses for not believing me. On the other hand, though, I was worried about the possibility that it became the norm. What was going to happen on my next delivery gig?
The situation quickly got out of our hands, and the mayor himself had to intervene. A historical meeting was organized and broadcasted on national TV. The mayor and a few representatives of the boars met on the riverbank, and the boars’ proposal was quite shocking to hear: we owned the city during the day, and during the night it belonged to them. The ones of us who worked at nighttime was still allowed to be around if they paid a small tribute in food.
Many people thought we shouldn’t have accepted the deal, fighting the boars as hard as we could, but the animals’ rights activists held the loudest protests in town, and since the mayoral elections were quite close the mayor had to listen to them. He accepted the deal.
It worked for a while, but it didn’t last long. Soon enough the boars got unsatisfied with what they obtained in the bargain and asked for more. A fellow delivery guy was ambushed in a dark alley and robbed because the boars thought they were given the crappest food on purpose.
A doctor going home after her shift was forced to surrender her falafel wrap if she wanted to get to her door on her own legs. The mayor had to set up another meeting, and this time the boars went straight for the big prize: they wanted to take full control of the city. At first, the mayor refused, but on the following morning, many people found their car or their shop devastated. We held on as much as we could, but in the end, we had to give in.
We were forced out of our homes, and it was our turn to go living on the riverbank. At that point, somebody was still convinced that we shouldn’t harm the boars, because what we were witnessing was nature taking back what belonged to her. After the few rainstorms, though, we all were sick of it. We might have been nomadic hunters once, but those times were long gone: without a roof over our heads and four walls around us, we were lost.
One day a guy I had seen countless times as he juggled close to the train station climbed over a rock and began to talk, telling us that if we all united to take back our spaces, there was no way the boars could stop us. Someone objected that it wasn’t going to be a fair fight, but the guy quickly objected that neither intimidating us by breaking our stuff was.
“Do we have to walk on four legs for it to be a fair fight?”
We all agreed with the juggler: a new resistance was born. We planned and carried out many sabotage plans, such as blocking their way with our cars, hiding all the food supplies, and locking all the trash cans so that they could not feed. A fatal blow was delivered when a few of us snuck over them one day and kidnapped all of their cubs. The adults freaked out, and we observed them as they roamed the street, desperate, calling their cubs. They held on for two full days before giving in.
On the morning of the third day, their boss and second in chief climbed down the path to the riverbank, demanding to speak with our representatives. The mayor slowly walked towards them, together with the juggler, who had quickly escalated the ladder and had become a key figure of our new society.
“I think we all agree that all this is ridiculous.” said the boss boar.
“Indeed it is” the mayor was quick to speak to prevent the way more colorful version the juggler was about to pronounce “What I can tell you is that your kids are safe and well-fed. But it’s time to settle it once and for all.”
“What do you want in exchange for them?”
“Our town, of course.”
The boss boar and the mayor stared at each other for a very long time. Finally, the boar lowered its eyes.
“Ok,” it said “ Your life is not all that fun, after all. Your stuff breaks way too easily. It’s been funny at first, but your lifestyle is not for us. We accept the deal, but we have a request.”
“What is that?”
“Don’t fine the people feeding us their leftovers.”
The mayor and the juggler looked at each other and accepted. They could have obtained even more if they tried, but at this point, the most important thing was to regain possession of what we had lost.
“But it’s not enough!” I tried to protest, but I hadn’t climbed the social ladder enough to have a say on that. The juggler turned around and frowned, signaling me to not cause any trouble.
“We just want our homes back.” Said an old man on my right-hand side. I shrugged and let it go, ready to take back what was mine.
As I climbed up the riverbank, I saw a young boar who kept staring at me. I got closer, and I saw it was the grown-up version of the little cub who stole my delivery on the first night.
“You know why you won?” He asked me. I didn’t really care, but I decided to listen to the young boar.
“You’re dying to tell me.”
“Because you had nothing left to lose. We did.”
“Nothing,” I’m sure I saw it shrugging and grinning. “Just wanted you to keep that in mind.”
“Asshole,” I thought as it walked away. Then I turned around and went back to my life.

I'm working with some other kits right now, but I had to share a kit I worked with not too long ago that is one of my all time favorites. It is by Michelle Boeckermann at Scrapstreet.com. She is a hidden talent imo. Caught Off Balance. The best part of this little deely-bopper is that it is free! So I hope you will check it out! And if you decide to download it, tell her I sent ya, okay!!!
Vintage Hawaiian Kit from Scrapstreet.com (see preview in yesterday's post!)
Okay, so I had great plans to whip out 3 lo's today. NOPE. I'm not sure what I did all day. I did get a fab nap that I so desperately needed. I made snack mix for my son who is constantly starving. I made sweet tea because he is constantly thirsty. I made a good dinner, and lo and behold, I watched American Idol. Yes, even though I swore I wouldn't. DH has worn me down.
I had big plans to do alot of laundry. That's okay. It is still there!
DS has to have his wisdom teeth out. I'm not doing it. That's what he said to me. As if there was a choice. Then he wonders why everything happens to him and not his sister. I reassured him that she would be having her wisdom teeth out, too. I guess that made it better. He decided he would do it. Just not soon. As if he has control over that either. He's getting it done when I get it scheduled!
He is 17 today (when you read this). My oldest is 17. Hard to believe. I'm sad he's no longer a baby. I'm sad he's a year from graduating high school. I'm happy he's turning into a man and growing up and soon to be graduating from high school. I'm inside-out-upside-down as my not-so-little guy gets a little closer to leaving my nest. Of course, at present, he has developed a little bit of a smart mouth and a wee bit of a defiant streak as in, "No."
Um...no? No, to me? Not happening. So we are working on that, but I guess it is part of the independence and growth into adulthood. He's working now so maybe he's feeling his need to spread his wings. I don't mind if he spreads his wings, I just don't want him to be rude.
Hi! Come on in and look around!
Welcome to my window on the world. A snapshot of my life and experiences. I'm a photography junkie and a scrapbook addict. I capture it all here, and share my journey down this amazing road called LIFE with you!

I'm having a problem. When I download my pictures the show up as some nonsense script and so I can't put captions under each photo because I don't know where the script for one picture ends and the next begins. Let alone which picture is where. I know, there are bigger problems in life. But does this happen to anyone else? Once again the pictures are in reverse. So starting with the last: #4 This is Optimus Prime and his best friend Mr. Pumpkin Head. #3 Optimus sitting on his front porch. I'll bet you didn't know that Optimus Prime wears flip flops. Oh yeah, he does. #2 This is the family pumpkin. We follow the Johnson Family tradition. One pumpkin for the family, then we all draw up some designs and submit our 3 favorites. Then through a complicated voting process we narrow it down to one design. This year my design won. Matt did the dirty work and Sam helped. #1 Sam got lucky and was able to pick out a free pumpkin on his class field trip. So we let him draw up some designs and then he picked his favorite and Matt helped him carve it. He took it to school and entered it in the pumpkin contest there. Not a winner, but it was still fun. We have great plans to attend the trunk or treat with Grandma Alger's ward. They have a big soup dinner (I made taco soup in honor of Aunt Jeanna's Birthday), and a costume parade and then we all run out to our cars and hand out candy. It's really fun. Then, I'm sure Sam and Matt will make a trip around our neighborhood while I hang and home and hand out candy to out neighbors. We hope you all have a fun and safe Halloween.
Some of you know, some of you don’t, that I have been pregnant for the last 10 weeks. I was feeling reluctant to blog about it because I have lost 5 other pregnancies in the past and I wasn’t sure I would want to blog about it if I lost this one. But now I just really need to get it out there.
I get what is called hyper emesis gravid arum, which is a tricky way of saying excessive vomiting while pregnant. So I often have to go to the infusion clinic to receive IV fluids. Thanks to my Health Care Advocate (a.k.a. - mom) I got an as needed order to go when ever I wanted. It was wonderful. I had a great weekend. I felt great, too great. On Sunday night I started to think about how great I was feeling and my eyes didn't slam shut when my head hit the pillow like they had been for the last month. Monday morning dawned and I called the nurse and she set up an ultrasound. There was no heart beat. Once again - for the sixth time. We are pretty sad. I called Matt and he came home from work to be with me. We sat on the couch for about an hour and then decided to go Christmas Shopping. It was fun and a nice distraction. I am so thankful to have Matt!
If you are expecting - DO NOT FEEL GUILTY! I am so happy for you and any righteous couple who are expecting, no matter if it's their 18th baby. I want to hear all about the progression of your pregnancy. By no means should you be walking on egg shells or feeling bad about your pregnancy or other children.
We have a beautiful son who is the joy/trial of our life who we wouldn't give up for anything and we feel so blessed to have him as I'm sure you all feel about your sweet children. I KNOW Heavenly Father loves me and my family. I know he isn't punishing us or trying to make us feel gypped (even though we get a little bitter and have the gypped feeling once in a while - that's a natural part of the grieving process). He is refining us, making us who we need to be. I believe all six of those babies are waiting for us - I'm counting on it and I look forward to the day I get to hold them. I pray to live worthy of being with them, but until then, we have a wonderful life to live here. I have learned that talking about it to anyone who asks has helped enormously in the past. So if you have any questions ask them.
Yes, I am on drugs right now, but I believe every word. I just hope it makes sense. :)
Today I was looking through my emails hoping I had one from someone whose email address I can't find. I can't find it, but I did find one from Matt. Well it was a reply from Matt. It was from March 10, 2006. So Sam was 4 years old. I remember I had taken him shopping and got him several outfits, but I was waiting for Matt's approval before I was going to let him keep them. This is what I sent to Matt:
Matt, Sam just brought one of the new shirts into the kitchen and said, "Mom,look what I'm going to try on."So I turned around and saw what he had and I said, "No, no, we need to wait for dad remember?" and then he said, "Okay, I'm just going to sniff it while I watch TV."
Again, while cleaning out my email box, I found a link that my Aunt Kathy sent that I was never able to check out because our computer was having problems with Adobe reader. So I clicked on the link and watched this video. Part way through I started bawling and couldn't stop. Matt was baffled. Watch it now.
At first I was like - what's this weirdo doing. But I liked it. Then when all the people rush in to join him - that's when the tears started. I feel like this guy gets it. We are all the same. No matter where we live, what color we are, what we wear, we're all human, and similar. They are all having a blast. (Except for that Korean guard guy - what's his problem?) Anyway, I don't know if the feelings watching this gave me were the intention of the film makers. But I like the effect anyway. I wonder what the words to the song are.
Update: It said in the credits that the song lyrics are adapted from a poem by RABINDRANATH TAGORE
Stream of Life
The same stream of life that runs through my veins night and day
runs through the world and dances in rhythmic measures.
It is the same life that shoots in joy through the dust of the earth
in numberless blades of grass
and breaks into tumultuous waves of leaves and flowers.
It is the same life that is rocked in the ocean-cradle of birth
and of death, in ebb and in flow.
I feel my limbs are made glorious by the touch of this world of life.
And my pride is from the life-throb of ages dancing in my blood this moment
So, I just got back from the SEP I just had with Sam and his teacher. Jeanna, I'm totally with you on this one - Let's keep it real people! I want the skinny on what my kid has been up to when I'm not around to smack him on the back of the head. (I would never do that).
Well first, I need to do a little bragging. My seven year old boy reads at a fifth grade level! I can't believe it. Well I can. He is MY son after all. But still. Wow! His spelling- not so great. Let's just say his spelling is behind his reading. But he can identify all the sight words that he's supposed to know by the end of the year already. He just doesn't take the time to think about how they are spelled while he's writing. I think the story is flowing through his head faster than he can write it so he just gets close enough and calls it good. He is a fairly lazy child - again- He is MY son after all.
So we each set a goal for him to work on. 1. His teacher's goal is for him to finish his work on time. She says he's definitely smart enough to do it, he'd just rather talk to his neighbor or wander the room. 2. Sam's goal for himself is to try not to disturb others. I know he does. He's an only child who will do the lamest things to get other kids to look at him and give him their attention. It's really annoying. But kinda cute at the same time. He's just so friendly. 3. My goal for him was to be obedient to his teacher. If she says it's time for no talking then don't talk. If she says get a book out and read it, then do it. If it's time to stay in your seat then stay in your seat.
She said he was doing really well. He'd gone several weeks without getting his name on the board. Up until "911 day". What is 911 day you may ask. Last week I got a call from the principal. She asked me if I had a minute to talk with Sam over the phone about something that had happened on the playground that day. I said yes. Then I hear this little,"Hi mom." on the line. He then tells me about his friend who brought his cell phone to school and while they were at recess he told Sam to dial 911. So he did and to his surprise someone answered and asked him what his emergency was. He promptly handed the phone back to the kid who brought it. The kid shut the phone hanging up on the operator. I asked him if the police came or anything and he said no. Well then how did you end up in the principles office? He said someone told the Guard Duty (which is the retarded name they use in Utah for the people who stand outside and watch the kids at recess). So I give him a little talk about how we only call 911 if there is a real emergency and that we don't do whatever our friends tell us to, they don't always have our best interest in mind. I get back on the phone with the principle and I ask her how she found out. She said, "Apparently, the whole 2nd grade knows about it." She used the word Guard Duty too. Why does that sound so wrong to me. She also told me that the cell phone had no service, but apparently the call goes through for 911. Something I'm sure that little punk who brought the phone knew when he told my poor unsuspecting dupe of a child to dial it. So Sam lost his recesses for the rest of that day and the next. Two days later he came home with a list of all the things he did wrong that day, which he had to write himself and his teacher signed it and I had to sign it and so did he. Poor kid didn't get to play outside with his friends that day. He's really not a naughty kid. Just really annoying. He's always happy and enthusiastic and really talkative.
But that's Sam and I'm not willing to medicate him just because he can't remember to use self control. We like his personality and We love having him in our family.

Walking back into the throne room it was clear something had changed. The room was twice the size. That bitch of a devil Bealzra was shackled up and more statues.
Ethan's heart skipped a beat. That was Ragnolin. How was this possible!
Ethan felt small and powerless. The last time such hopelessness overcame him he was fourteen and lying in an alley. Mikal had just beaten him to within an inch of his life. It was a feeling Ethan had sworn he would never experience again. Never would such a sense of powerlessness define him or overcome him. Master Dourstone had provided a home, work and safety when no one else would. Something had to be done.
Ethan's ears tuned back to the conversation. The deal was off, the party was leaving. No. No, no, no. Ethan looked up at met Delian's eyes. Only the barest of nods indicated his intentions, but he was sure Delian knew and understood them. Calling upon all his skill, all his training Ethan closed the ground between Nephigor and struck. He knew the risk. He knew the party might not survive, but at that moment Ethan would rather die than walk out on Ragnolin. It was time to finish this.
With the battle over the party looked to the door of what was believed to be the treasure chamber. Ethan moved to the door. "Good riddance," he said as he turned to Helia and Delian. "Now to get that door..." He paused mid sentence as they all came to the sudden realization.
"That bitch just destroyed the hands we needed to open those doors" Nenia stated.
The pace of the rune pulsing on the floor quickened.
"Perhaps" replied Braddoc. "But I have the feeling another set of hands is coming. Make ready."

Explosion in Peshawar, no casualties
No casualties were reported in the loud explosion, which was heard in the entire city.
The 500 grams of explosives were planted outside a market. A shop’s shutter was damaged by the blast.
Police has filed the case of the incident and launched an investigation.

The Raiders’ defense was a turnstile of street free agents joining and leaving the roster by the end of last season.
The need for constant churning was caused by injuries and ineffective play.
While most of the late additions were just OK (linebacker Will Compton was solid and could potentially return), one of those players who stuck out was defensive end Dion Jordan.
Jordan had just five tackles and two sacks in seven games for the Raiders last season, but he did flash at some points.
The allure of Jordan is his ability. He was the No. 3 overall pick by Miami (taken in a draft day trade with the Raiders that brought cornerback D.J. Hayden (pick No. 12) and tackle Menelik Watson (No. 42) in the 2013 draft.
However, Jordan had several off-field issues and was suspended for chunks of his career. He has played in 50 of a possible 112 games since entering the league.
Jordan is 30, but he has plenty of tread on his tires. He is 6-foot-6, 284 pounds and is very athletic.
Yes, the Raiders gave good money to Carl Nassib in free agency to provide pass rush off the bench and the Raiders still have hope for 2018 third-round pick Arden Key, but Jordan wouldn’t be expensive if brought back. Re-signing Jordan and giving him a training camp and preseason to state his case wouldn’t be a terrible idea.

Operations smoother at airport Friday
Operations at the Savannah/Hilton Head International Airport were smooth today despite Thursday's terror threat, said Lori Lynah, director of marketing and public relations.
"We didn't see nearly the delays we saw yesterday afternoon," she said. "Things seem to be running much more smoothly today."
The terror alert level remained at orange, but the few flight delays were weather-related.
Passengers were patient during waits at screening checkpoints, she said.
"I think people are taking heed of the list and adjusting their packing," she said, "and being aware of the travel delays and adjusting their plans accordingly."

This weeks girl player of the week is Gabby Greco, senior on the Winfield high-school Dance Team. Gabby is involved in yearbook club and competitive dance. She has been dancing for high-school since freshman year, but has been dancing competitively for 15 years!! When asked who inspires her to keep dancing she replied with, “I focus on dancing and how long I have been doing it and that’s what keeps me going.” Gabby has been someone who the younger girls look up to when she dances. We are very lucky to have her as apart of the Winfield high-school dance team.

Rory McIlroy is not accustomed to starting the year in quiet fashion. It is 12 months since the Northern Irishman, then the No1 golfer in the world, was paraded as a Nike athlete in Abu Dhabi. The extravagance of that ceremony had to be seen to be believed.
On this, his return to the capital of the United Arab Emirates, McIlroy is again in the spotlight. This time, his recent engagement to the tennis star, Caroline Wozniacki, has proved more of a cause for discussion than wedges and woods.
McIlroy spoke expansively, if slightly bashfully, for the first time about his proposal to Wozniacki in the midst of Sydney's new year celebrations. "If anything, it will only help to have that stability and know that everything in that regard in my life is set," said the 24-year-old. "It's a big step in anybody's life to make that decision and obviously is not one that you take lightly. If you get engaged, you plan on spending the rest of your life with that person, so it's a big decision but I feel like she is definitely the right girl for me.
"We were out on a boat in Sydney Harbour for New Year's Eve, with fireworks, just in front of the opera house and stuff. I guess there was a little bit of romance involved. And yes, she was surprised. I mean, I had an idea that it might have been what she wanted or it was something she would say 'yes' to. I hoped she would say yes. It all worked out. It was a great way to end 2013 and a great way to start 2014."
Pressed on whether he was down on one knee and how many other new year revellers witnessed this moment, McIlroy was reticent. "It's a funny story, too long to go into," he said. "No, I'll keep that between us."
Legitimate focus now surrounds how McIlroy's enhanced personal circumstances will affect his professional status. He has slipped to No7 in the world rankings after a troubled 2013, which was at least rounded off with victory in the Australian Open.
Earlier, he had been criticised for his switch to Nike and entered into a legal wrangle relating to a change of management company. The latter issue remains unresolved. "I have learned from it and I'm smarter because of it," McIlroy insisted of 2013. "It is great that I have gone through it at this stage in my career and not 15 years down the line."
On the furore that surrounded his equipment switch, McIlroy reflected: "I think it was a big deal. It was a big decision for me. I think it was a big thing for Nike. It was a real big step in my career but I guess I had so many things to try and think about or focus on; am I going to use this, am I going to use that, is this driver better than that one? There was a lot of instability.
"There was loads of stuff going on around me and that didn't let me focus 100% on what I needed to do, which was to try and play the best I could."
The low point arrived at the Open at Muirfield, where McIlroy admitted to feeling "brain dead" and "unconscious" on the golf course. "I wasn't in control of my golf ball and especially at Muirfield, when the ground was so firm, you had to be spot on," said McIlroy. "If you were even a slight bit off, it made you look silly at times. I was a long way off, which made me look even sillier."
All the evidence now points to the likelihood of McIlroy enjoying a far better season this time around. "Rory is too talented to have another year like last year," acknowledged the Open champion, Phil Mickelson.
"I feel like I'm starting this year on such a different sort of platform," explained McIlroy. "Everything feels like it has fallen into place and I can just focus on my golf. I know that everything else away from that is in a really good place. I'm happy that I can go and try and play the golf that I know I can. Everything off the course is set and I'm in a great place. I'm happy, so there is no reason why I shouldn't be smiling.
"I'm feeling good about my game, I feel good about where I am mentally, I feel good with everything that's going on off the course. It's hopefully shaping up to be a good year."

We nipped over to Louth to see the magnificent crochet lions yesterday. Mr H thought the children would be unimpressed but was happy to be proved wrong. I felt it was a small victory for crochet. They were truly 'awesome' as *J* suggested.
They are touring the country in a glass sided truck. To look at you'd think it was coarse scratch wool but we knew otherwise as we'd been able to touch a sample when we visited The Hubb in Sleaford the day before. 36 miles of Swaledale wool was used to make the lions I believe.

By accepting you will be accessing a service provided by a third-party external to https://www.meda.org/
After seven months of living in Myanmar, it was finally time to bid farewell. As I looked outside the car window on my lone taxi ride to the airport, a wave of emotion overcame me as I passed dainty teashops and mega shopping centres – the latter of which were only erected during my stay here. There and then, I couldn’t help but feel I was saying goodbye to a person, rather than a place. A person with a vibrant yet humble personality, a disposition full of surprises, and most importantly, potential. If anything, I was saying goodbye to a turbulent teenager budding to adulthood.
If I were to personify Myanmar at the present moment, he’d be that kid who was always polite, modest, and empathetic. He loved to read and take care of the things and people he cared about. Having been raised in a very Buddhist household, he never picked a fight and was always quick to forgive and forget. However, the other kids took advantage of his peaceful disposition and got him to tag along with their games, but never to share in the prizes. They took advantage of him because they knew he wouldn’t, and frankly, couldn’t, fight back. Eventually this took a toll on him, and his teenage years brought upon an identity crisis that sometimes found its outlet in violent means that surprised even his most oppressing bullies.
I met Myanmar near the end of high school. After going through a rather transformational year of his life in 2015, you can tell he was still unsure of where he stands. What he was sure about was that he wanted to return to his childhood self when everything was simpler and all the adults adored him for being a good reader and listener. The future was more reassuring then. Thus, he began testing the waters at a concept called vulnerability, and in the process, found teachers and peers who were more than eager to help. They all remembered how intelligent and composed Myanmar was when he was just a boy, and saw potential in him. Plus, who doesn’t want a devoted mentee, especially when there’s not that many to go around anymore. Sure enough, Myanmar decided to embrace the change and slowly started shedding that hard exterior he built up as a teenager. He began changing every day, externally at first, and then slowly, from within. He started seeing the world a bit differently. However, there’s hope that he’d stay true to his values as they are what grounds him and has gotten him thus far.
While this was all endearing to watch, one can’t help wonder if Myanmar will go down the same path as his neighbour’s kids. While they all grew up to be self-sufficient adults, not even their parents can recognize them, and I can’t help but wonder if they feel empty on the inside. Will he also lose his humility in pursuit of flashy new toys some of his new mentors are telling him he needs? Or will he stay true to his values, like Japan, and grow up (eventually) to be humble yet enterprising? Only time will tell.
However, from how welcoming, kind, and endearing Myanmar was to me for the past seven months, I think he’d grow up just fine.

All the Girls Who Dream
It is six am, Sunday morning and I can’t sleep. I climb out of bed and tip toe across the room so not to wake my husband. The house is cold. It is winter now. I look out the window. The sky is midnight blue; the stars are still shining brightly in the sky and a crescent shaped moon hangs as if someone hastily put it there. The village is dark, but for a single light burning in each house. The women are already up and moving about, preparing for the day ahead, a day like all the others because in Jaunpur there is no day of rest for women. One day blends into the next, the same routine day in and day out; wake up, splash some water on the face, start a fire and put a pot of chai on for the family and then off to the cow shed to clean up after the animals and give them some feed, gather some wood and head back to the house to make breakfast for the family. Then it is off to the mountain sides to cut fodder (grass for the animals), climbing high in the tree tops for the best leaves, and scouring 75 degree slopes for the best grass. The load is tied up and hoisted onto their heads and carried back to the cow sheds --feed for another day. The rest of the day is taken up with tending crops and washing clothes at the local tap, and minding small children while sharing gossip with other women -- maybe she will do a little knitting for some family member --but she is never idle. She is busy throughout the day, and then it is evening, and again the cows need to be fed, so she sets off to tend to her animals and again she returns with a bundle of wood balanced perfectly on her head, back straight as an arrow, perfect posture developed over time since she was a small girl going with her mother or older sisters, learning the ways, the life of women in Jaunpur. And then night time arrives. She has cooked dinner over an open fire for her family and washed the dishes and now, at last she can rest, and she curls up on her mattress, closes her eyes and dreams, because she still wants to. It soothes her soul.
This is the life of a Jounpur woman in the heart of the Garhwal region of the Indian Himalaya. And now I am a part of this life. I met my husband, Kunwar, seven years ago while I was conducting research for my PhD in Anthropology. Kunwar is Jounpuri, and we live in his village of Sainji. He is a respected leader in this area and has brought a tremendous amount of positive change to the area, and for this he is to be commended.
In many ways he is different than most men in this area, more thoughtful, more progressive and open minded. It was these qualities which attracted me to him – these and his life commitment to bringing about positive changes for the people of Jounpur. His experience, his resolve, his knowledge and intuitiveness and innate understanding of the culture are what inspire me; make me want to help him in his mission to improve the lives of his fellow villagers.
In my time living in Jaunpur I have come to know a little of what it is to be a woman living in this area. My husband, for all his wonderful qualities, is still a man who was raised in a ‘man’s world’. I love him dearly, but inwardly I have been challenged to live in an alternate sphere where my role as a woman is somewhat tilted. My voice as a woman in this region holds little power. I often find myself screaming inwardly because outwardly no one, it seems, can hear me or even wants to hear me. But still I have more voice, more power than the women around me, these women who are toiling day in and day out -- going about their lives quietly, suffering inwardly, accepting compromise, living with their prescribed roles because they were told as little girls they were not worthy of more.
The role of women in this region has roots extending back through the years to a time when group polyandry was the standard form of marriage. Girls were married off, with no ceremony, to a group of brothers. Most were children, as young as 8 years old. After some time, the brothers would take another wife and then a third or a fourth. Families were large, and the traditional houses reflect this as the connecting rooms extend several meters. Children referred to the men as, Big Pappa, Middle Papa and Little Papa, depending on the birth order. All were their fathers and all the offspring, their sisters and brothers. If a woman was not happy with her arrangement, she had little recourse, especially if her natal family was poor – they simply could not care for her – she would be too much of a burden. In the 1950s marriages began to change to monogamous arrangements. This was due in part to the road that came through the area and to the influence of plains culture, which placed a stigma on such marriages – they were seen as been perverse, backwards, so people wanted to change to the norm. However, little girls still married at a very young age and this continued until about twenty years ago. My mother-in-law spoke of her experience.
“One day a man came and picked me up from where I was playing near my village of Kandhi, and carried me to Sainji – about ten kilometres. I was eight years old then. He carried me on his back and we walked for about 4 hours. I was frightened, but I came to understand that this was my new family. They were good to me – treated me well. I lived with my husband, who was 11. We were only children and we just played with each other as children do. I had my first baby when I was 14. Then I had three more – all boys. And I was a widow by the time I was twenty-one. It was difficult. Everyone wanted to push me out of the village. They wanted our land. I only had my mother-in-law to help me, and I had all these children – the oldest was only seven, and my youngest, a baby. But still I went everyday to tend my fields. One day, these men from Sainji came with sticks. They were going to beat me and they would have killed me, had it not been for some other women from the village who helped me. At last, my husband’s uncle came to my rescue. He was living in Delhi at the time, but he helped me keep the land, and he gave me some help with my children – he took Kunwar, who was only ten at the time, to Delhi and educated him there.”
Life improved somewhat when the government began opening more schools in the area and making education more accessible for children, but up until the late 1990’s many women were denied the opportunity to achieve a full education. In our region of Jounpur, it has only been in the last decade that girls have been able to go to high school, and in the last five years that they have begun pursuing university degrees. Twenty years ago, girls were allowed to go to school, but most often were pulled out in their early primary years.
Recently, as a grammar assignment I asked my students to interview their mothers about their lives and to write an essay based on what they had learned. What began as a simple grammar exercise has transpired into something truly remarkable. The children began hesitantly at first, asking the standard questions like; ‘When were you born? What is your favourite colour? When did you get married? ‘ and so forth. But every week we reviewed and discussions ensued, and soon the children became really curious about their mothers, so they would return home each day with a whole new set of questions, and the stories began to grow and the regimented questions and answers dissolved into real dialogue and the stories, the real essence of their mothers, began to emerge. What surfaces in almost all these stories is that all of these women, as young girls, had dreams and in most cases these dreams were shattered by the reality of their poverty and the brutal truth that because they were girls they were not a worthy investment – not because they were not loved -- they were. In the words of one of our students,
My mother got her education at a government school in her village until class five. At that time people thought that girls would give nothing back to their parents if their parents were to give them education. This is because girls married outside of the family. So my mother’s parents didn’t help my mother with her education. But at least until class five her brother helped her. He paid her school fees and provided her with stationary things…. My mother lived six kilometers away from her village in a cow shed. In that cowshed there were more than 105 goats and sheep. My mother used to look after them. At that time my mother was in great difficulty. She had to go to school and also care for the animals. She struggled a lot, but she didn’t give up. I am proud of my mother. After class 5 my mother went to school using her own money. She made alcohol and sold it to pay her school fees. She knew that making alcohol was not good, but she had to do it. She hardly managed to study until class ten. When she was fourteen her parents passed away and that was her saddest moment in her life. That is also when her schooling ended – Ritesh, class 7
Similar stories came forth from our students. One boy, after interviewing his mother, approached me and said, “I never knew how much my mother wanted to go to school. When I grow up, I will make sure my girls get the same education my sons get.” In a conversation with a young lady in our village, I asked her what she wanted to be when she was young. “A teacher.” She replied. I could see the spark in her eyes, but it quickly faded when she added, “But I only managed to get my class eight.” I studied her for a moment. She was engaged, and her wedding was only a few months away. “What about now? What do you dream about now?” I asked. “Nothing, I don’t dream anymore.” Came her answer.
Simply put, in the face of abject poverty, where there is no social security and where girls marry outside the family, the investment in education will always fall to the boys. Times are changing and opportunities for girls are emerging, but not in time for the mothers of our children. Yet they dream – they dream of a future for their children, one with little toil and many rewards.
Six years ago, my husband and I opened a charitable English Medium School for our village children and named it, The Garhwal English Medium School (GEMS). We opened the school in response to the very poor quality of education in the area. Most young people had not mastered the educational skills that would help them win scholarships for higher education or compete for good paying jobs. Young men were migrating to cities for poor-paying labor jobs and girls simply hoped to secure a good marriage into a family where they will not have to serve as farm workers like their mothers. Even with a grade 12 education, most youth struggled to read at a class 3 level, and managed with only a basic understanding of math.
At GEMS we strive to offer quality education, and we encourage our children to reach for the stars. However, while we currently have over 230 children enrolled in our school, just 70 are girls. Many of our male students have young sisters at home and who are enrolled in government schools, but parents will not pay the extra fees to enroll their girls in GEMS. We would like to increase the number of girls at GEMS to 100 over the next year. Our girls dream of a better life, and education is the stepping stone to improving not only their lives, but of their families as well. When we used to ask the children what they wanted to be when they grew up, the girls would smile and say, ’We will be mommies one day.’ Now, when we ask this question, the girls smile widely and declare, “I want to be a doctor so I can help the ladies in my villages”, or “I will become an engineer.” The list goes on to include; nurses, teachers, business women, policewomen, even politicians. We believe that with support, our girls will go on to live their dreams and those of their mothers.
By Lori McFadyen
Principal and Co-Founder of GEMS
To learn more about GEMS and our sponsorship program please visit our website: www.gems-school.org
Below is a video shot by one of our volunteers "Life of Kajal"

David Stitt and his dog, Cinder. / Facebook
SERVICE: A memorial will be held at 11 a.m. today at First United Methodist Church in Sioux Falls.
DONATIONS: Gifts to the Sioux Falls Area Humane Society in David Stitt’s name can be made online: sfhumanesociety.com/donate
David Stitt was an animal lover who didn’t have a mean bone in his body, friends say.
Stitt died from injuries sustained when he was struck by a car two weeks earlier.
He had turned his love of animals into a part-time job at Mini-Critters in Sioux Falls. He established own dog-walking service last summer.
“He adored everyone’s dog,” Ginger Butterworth, an employee at Mini-Critters, said Friday. “The dogs knew him, and he knew the dogs.”
Stitt worked at Mini-Critters for several years, spending time with animals boarded at the business.
“He was a very kind, generous person,” she said. “He was always upbeat.”
Stitt died Wednesday at age 38. He was crossing against the traffic signal Nov. 8 at 57th Street and Western Avenue when he was hit by a car driving east.
Mary Ash, 33, was the driver. Police determined she was not speeding or otherwise driving illegally, and she will not be charged in the collision.
“Based on the dark clothing he was wearing and that he was running across the street — all those factors just culminated in the collision,” Sioux Police Lt. Jerome Miller said.
Stitt overcame obstacles early in his life. When he was 7, he fell 15 feet from a tree he had climbed and landed on his head, according to an article by Living Stones News, published in May 2007. He had a tube trachea put in his throat so he could breathe, and had to re-learn how to walk and talk.
Bob Ruedebusch, senior pastor at First United Methodist Church, said Stitt introduced himself with that article when Ruedebusch and the associated pastor first came to the church a year ago.
“He was very outgoing, trying to let us know who he was, but also helping us to see some of the struggles he had to work through,” he said.
Stitt was active in the church choir with his parents.
“He loved our church, he loved the church choir and the people in it, and if you were missing from church choir, he’d call up and say, ‘Are you all right? You weren’t at church choir last night,’” said Jodi Stitt, David’s mother. “He kind of kept track of people that way. ... He was a special young man.”
He had lasting brain damage from the fall, which made his response time a bit slower, so he didn’t drive much in the city. Mostly, his mother said, he preferred to get around on foot, and often would walk 10 to 15 miles in a day.
“He didn’t have a car, and he got along fine,” Jodi Stitt said. “People were kind and gave him rides wherever he needed to go.”
Walking became one of Stitt’s passions. He walked to work every day, Butterworth said, and if he arrived a few minutes early for his shift at Mini-Critters, he would walk around outside. He kept a tally of how far he walked each day.
“If they didn’t know David personally, they knew him by his walking,” she said.
Stitt attended schools in Sioux Falls and Aberdeen before graduating from Worthington (Minn.) High School in 1995. He moved to Sioux Falls in 1998.
Friends said he often could be found walking with his beloved miniature Australian shepherd, Cinder, which he adopted when he worked at Mini-Critters.
He devoted much of his time to Cinder and would call Butterworth to ask her questions about the dog’s care, she said.
“If David would ever be leaving the apartment without Cinder, he would say, ‘Bye-bye honey, I will be back later,’ before he left,” said Danielle Meier, a friend of Stitt.
“This time he didn’t come back.”

Share Your Story
Do you have a story of how Jesus has changed your life? We would love to hear how you've been transformed!
You can share your story here!
Rachel's Story - Trusting God
I took God for granted until my dad started coughing up blood on Christmas.
I was six when I first met Christ in Sunday school. A teacher shared the gospel, and a student volunteer led us in prayer. Both my parents are strong in their faith, and they instilled that value in our family. When they picked me up and heard the news, they were overjoyed and bought me my first Bible.
That evening, as I read through the gospel and prayed, I felt His presence for the first time.
However, I didn't change. As a kid, I didn’t realize that God had a plan for my life. My childhood was purely school, sports, and adventures. I didn’t know what it meant to live on mission or how to share the gospel.
My dad had heart problems as a kid, but to see them resurface so violently that Christmas was horrifying. We went to a doctor in Houston, who told us they had to wait to operate until his heart was failing. We went home to wait until he was dying. Even world-class doctors warned us that success was unlikely. During one of countless surgeries, the surgeons lost his pulse.
We were uprooted for months. We smuggled our dog in and out of hotels. I was unable to attend school and isolated from friends. I cannot remember that time in my life as having any light. It was all darkness. I felt utterly alone.
But whenever I called to God, even when I didn’t have the desire to pray, He was with me.
When I was 15, I went to Winter Camp. I knew it was a church camp, but I didn’t expect to meet God. I just wanted a distraction. The atmosphere was surprising and amazing – one leader shared her testimony, and another shared God’s desire to change my life.
I recalled Matthew 28:20: “For I am with you always, until the end of the age”. I saw that, although God had been unerringly faithful, I hadn't been. I wasn’t telling anyone about His promises. God was calling me to a new purpose, and I responded by recommitting my life to Him.
My dad slowly recovered, we learned to trust God in crises, and I stopped isolating myself. I’m so thankful that I met Christ as a kid and for the people who encouraged me. My relationship with Christ grew stronger, and my life changed for good because of His steadfast love.
Published on Aug 15 @ 11:28 AM CDT

Rafael Benitez hailed the impact of Fernando Torres after Chelsea had claimed the Europa League crown with a 2-1 win over Benfica last night.
Torres has been ridiculed in some quarters since his £50million move from Liverpool in January 2011.
It was no laughing matter for Benfica at the Amsterdam ArenA, though, as Torres opened the scoring with his 20th goal of the season before Branislav Ivanovic's stoppage-time header gave Chelsea the unique experience of holding both European trophies at the same time.
"We have had a lot of players improving during the season," he said.
"Fernando was one of these players.
"A lot of people said I was appointed to bring the best from Fernando. He has improved a lot so I am really pleased.
"He has working hard with the fitness coaches and medical staff and (last night) he was the difference again."
The triumph must have been particularly sweet for the 53-year-old, given his many critics within the Chelsea support.
Booed upon his arrival last November, Benitez kept his dignity throughout the ordeal he has been through.
Now he has added silverware to the top-four Barclays Premier League finish that has already been assure.
"If you have to win for people to realise the job we are doing? Well, we won. Hopefully now people will say it is not bad," he said.
"It depends on the perception.
"If you put everything together you will realise how hard it is. I think we did well," - Rafa Benitez.
"But if you analyse everything, we won the Europa League with one striker for every single game.
"We managed players with yellow cards. (Last night) we only had 18 players.
"If you put everything together you will realise how hard it is. I think we did well."
Benitez also had words of praise for Frank Lampard.
The 34-year-old midfielder is reportedly on the brink of signing a long-awaited contract extension with Chelsea and came close to scoring on two occasions, including a second-half effort that rattled the crossbar.
"Frank is a great professional," the Spaniard said.
"He has worked hard in every training session and now, at the end, I think we could see he has improved.
"Some people were surprised when I said that but he has scored a lot of goals in this period. Maybe it was because we were managing him quite well.
"When you play two games a week, with his age and commitment, sometimes you are not fresh.
"You can see he still has a lot of football. He is fit and next year he will do well again."
Coming after an equally late defeat to Porto last weekend that looks certain to cost them their hope of winning the Portuguese league, it has been a shattering experience for Benfica and their coach Jorge Jesus.
And, apparently, it has made Jesus think about the wisdom of signing a contract extension that has already been agreed.
"I have a very close relationship with the president," he said.
"I have been talking to him over the last few weeks about renewing my contract.
"We have agreed most of the details but football changes every day.
"This defeat will lead me to have some time to think about these issues."

Beastie Boy Adam Yauch succumbs to cancer
Adam Yauch, aka MCA and one of the founding members of the all Jewish troupe of New York City rappers known as the Beastie Boys, died Friday of cancer. Yaunch was 47. At the time that the three Beastie Boys began their career in the 1980s, the hip-hop and rap scene was virtually a black landscape. Yauch along with fellow rappers Adam Horovitz (Ad-Rock) and Mike Diamond (Mike D), founded their group in 1983, but became multi-million selling artists with their seminal release “License to Ill” in 1986 and their follow up album “Paul’s Boutique.” Unlike many other rap artists who had one or two albums and then quickly flashed out of popularity, the Beastie Boys continued to produce albums that successive generations found interesting too. With major hits like “(You Gotta) Fight for Your Right (To Party),” “Intergalactic” and “Brass Monkey,” the Beastie Boys stayed pertinent on the music scene and were rewarded with a place in the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame this past year. Three years ago Yauch announced he was fighting cancer of the salivary gland and his raspy voice became even more raspy as his battle with the disease continued. Yauch was the only one of the three Beastie Boys who did not show up to the induction ceremonies for the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame held in Cleveland a little over a month ago. At the time it was said he was too sick to travel, but since it was announced he was in remission about two years ago, many industry observers did not make much of it at the time. Yauch is survived by his wife Dechin, his daughter Tenzin Losel and both of his parents.

|Anah and Amelia's journey to nursery
When they were born, both of the twins were healthy; Anah was 5 lb 4 oz (2.38 kg) and Amelia was slightly heavier, at 6 lb 2 oz (2.78 kg). Amelia loves her food and we always joked that she had been taking Anah's share in the womb!
At three months, we were given the bad news that Amelia had to have treatment for Talipes; this had been presented as mild at birth (Talipes is a deformity of the foot in which one or both feet are twisted out of shape or into the wrong position). The Talipes involved visiting hospital to have plaster casts moulded onto both legs to ease her legs and feet outwards. Every week we made the journey back to the hospital to have the old casts removed and new ones put on. This was a stressful time and very traumatic for Amelia who still flinches if anyone tried to touch her legs or feet. Months of visits to hospital and endless feeding and nappy changes became part of our daily routine.
|Although the journey to this stage has been very hard work, our girls bring us joy
every minute of the day that we are with them. (We never call them 'twins' so it seems strange to write that here). Anah and
Amelia are so different in personality and character that they have been treated like two completely different children since
the day they were born. Anah is the boisterous one, she definitely leads and her personality is carefree and laid back. She
eats when she feels like it and sleeps (or doesn't!) whenever (whenever or wherever?) the mood takes her. Amelia is our more
'serious' twin, she is quite reserved and shy. She will only approach someone when she is sure they are 'safe' and if mummy
has been talking to them for a while. She loves routine, consequently she sleeps and eats like clockwork!
It has been very rewarding to see the twins develop day by day. I think I notice the changes and compare them more because they are two children growing up at the same time. The girls like to dress up (see photo), play with Lego and absolutely love colouring, drawing and reading. They also enjoy playing with their big sister Alisha, who is now aged 7.
Now the twins have turned two and a half they have started nursery. It was a difficult beginning but we are really proud that Anah and Amelia have made it. It has been quite traumatic - for the girls and for me! We are approaching two weeks now and the crying has died down considerably, the girls are settled and they both look forward to 'School Day' every week.
We feel that it's really important to take part in studies such as Gemini. There is so much to learn from the many different twins out there. It is reassuring to know that studies such as this one will inform and educate the professionals and relevant bodies, thus helping to guide parents of twins through this amazing journey.
|Amelia and Anah in the snow,
on their first day to Nursery!

A 61-year-old man appeared in court today charged with murdering a taxi driver, police confirmed.
Colin Cheetham appeared before Derby Magistrates' Court accused of murdering 43-year-old taxi driver Stuart Ludlam, who was found shot dead in the back of his cab two weeks ago.
Cheetham, of Ripley, Derbyshire, was arrested on Sunday. He did not enter a plea today and was remanded into custody.
He will next appear at Nottingham Crown Court. A date has not yet been fixed.
Mr Ludlam, a father-of-three, of Darley Dale, Derbyshire, was found dead in his silver Ford Focus estate at about 12.40pm on Thursday, September 17.
The car had been parked in a road close to Cromford railway station, just south of Matlock.
Derbyshire Constabulary said nine people are also on bail, having been questioned in connection with Mr Ludlam's death.

My side, based on the scriptures inspired by God.
Man is not the one who first initiated the Death Penalty for those who deliberately killed other humans. According to the Bible book of Genesis, God himself did so.
Actually, for our first parents, Adam and Eve, were warned that if they disobeyed God's law about eating from one particular tree in the Garden of Eden, the penalty would be death.
It's not like they were being refused sufficient food to eat, as they had every other fruit producing tree from which to eat to their satisfaction.
Of course then, before they sinned by their deliberate disobedience, they had been perfect in body and in mind. When they chose to eat fruit from the tree that was the personal property of their Heavenly Father, they perpetrated a deliberate act of theft and and defied God, joining Satan the Devil in rebellion against God and his right to tell them what was right or wrong.
Afterward, God also instituted the death penalty for anyone who purposely killed another human.
Accidental killers, were provided with "cities of refuge," where they had to live until the judges had died. If they left the city of refuge, they could well be killed by the dead person's family. But that same family was not legally allowed to enter the city of refuge to kill the man slayer who was not guilty of murder, but accidental manslaughter.
Since that day, man has always implemented the death penalty for deliberate killers. Nowadays, it seems that criminals have more rights than their victims or their victim's family.
There is also much concern about some who have been found guilty of murder who may have later been found innocent, or who may actually been framed, or through some other miscarriage of justice, whether by witnesses, or through corrupt law enforcement officials, for whatever reason they may have had for withholding important evidence proving the defendant not guilty, or for some political advantage.
Man's laws are not perfect, and neither are their penalties for many different crimes, but that's all we presently have to try to keep ruthless and sadistic people out of society in general.
There are also many penalties that seem to be too lenient for some crimes and way to harsh for other things that may not be nearly so devastating as deliberate murder or some other horrific crimes which too many people are capable of committing.

It has been a while since I have written a blog entry. I have been trying to convience myself that I didn’t have anything to say, when I have had so much to say. My aunt passed away last month. Yes, death has shown up on our families door step again. I wasn’t able to go the funeral due to my recent surgery, so I really haven’t fully grieved yet. I was sitting alone in my room this morning and I actually heard myself say I need to call Aunt Jackie and see how she is doing. I had forgotten that she had passed away. My eye’s began to well up when I realized I wouldn’t be able to call her ever again. A week before she died I finally erased all the messages she left on my phone. I didn’t know that would be the last time I ever would hear her voice again.
Sometimes I hate writing because it forces me to feel when I don’t always want to feel. Sometimes living so far from my family (I am in Alabama and the rest of my family lives in California) in away shelters me from a lot. It is kind of out of sight, out of mind. The only time I am real with myself is when I write. This is why it took forever for me to finally sit down and write about having lupus. I hated being sick, and watching how this illness was slowly but surely taking my life away from me. Talking or writing about being sick, while I was acutually sick didn’t make me feel any better. Truthfully I ran from it. I guess I felt Lupus didn’t deserve my attention because of what it had done to me. Maybe If I would have been brave enough, you probably would have seen me on the shelves at Barne’s & Nobles by now.
I thank GOD, even though I don’t always use it, for an avenue where my voice my ideas, experiences and feelings can be shared with others. I am often told how my blog has helped so many people. The truth is, it has helped me just as much. I pray that my words will be able to reach who he feels needs to hear it, at the time they need to hear it. I ran away from it long enough. I am learning to do better. Lord use me as you will.

Sakshi, wife of former Indian team captain Mahendra Singh Dhoni, made a big disclosure, which everyone was shocked to hear, had to do such work
Mahendra Singh Dhoni, who was the captain of the India cricket team, has as much stardom in the life of every cricketer and more importantly, his wives also get the same stardom as the cricketers themselves, the players. His wives are also often seen in the field.
Former Indian captain Mahendra Singh Dhoni’s wife Sakshi is also no less than a star for cricket fans, often seen somewhere with Dhoni,
At the same time, during an interview, Mahendra Singh Dhoni’s wife Sakshi has made a disclosure, Sakshi has spoken openly about her stardom, she spoke on the YouTube channel of Chennai Super Kings and openly talked about her personal life. .
Let us tell you when Sakshi was asked how common life is affected, Sakshi said, ‘We are proud of where he (Dhoni) is because of his hard work and he is chosen from among crores of people. , they are praised,She is a part of the game that people like a lot in India. She said, ‘In normal life, when you get married and your husband goes to office, then normal life changes, but our husbands go out to play so I think It is that you just have to change yourself accordingly, you do not have to be a stress for them at that time, because we have to adapt according to their manner.
Talking further, Sakshi said that ‘some people are comfortable in front of the camera and some people are uncomfortable, public also judges you especially when you are a cricketer or wife of a celebrity, even if you share your photos with your friends. Spending time People’s thinking has no idea, they will think.

To get disabled widow’s or widower’s benefits, your spouse must have enough Social Security work credits. Work credits are kind of confusing because there is not a standard number for everyone. Each situation is different. There are, however, factors that can help you to determine how many work credits your deceased spouse must have for you to qualify for benefits.
According to the Social Security Administration, work credits depend on how recently your spouse worked and how long he or she worked. Every person can earn four credits each year because the SSA awards them each quarter. You earn a work credit when you earn a specific amount of pay. The amount you have to earn, though, changes each year.
In addition, the number of work credits that your spouse needs for you to qualify for benefits varies from person to person. It depends on what age at which he or she became disabled. However, the SSA averages that most people must have a total of 40 credits and your spouse would have had to earn half of those in the 10 years prior to his or her disability.
Now, if your spouse was young, then he or she would not have to have so many credits. The requirements would reduce because he or she would not have had the opportunity to earn the higher amount of work credits because he or she would not have been in the workforce for as many years as an older worker.
The best way to find out how many work credits your spouse needs to have earned is at the SSA website where they offer updated information.

I love his laugh!
He's sitting in a "Valentine" container that I used to take Nathan's picture last year. I was attempting to get some photos of Nathan sitting in it. The other kids were "modeling" for Nathan. It worked. Nathan didn't want ANYTHING to do with getting in the bucket until the other kids climbed in. Then he pushed everyone out of the way and climbed in. I'll have to post those pictures another day.

JoAnn Reno Wray
I remember vividly when we took our son to his first year of college. At age 18, he’d just survived and been healed of a cancer that had spread through his body. Against all dire warnings that his chance to survive were very slim, he had miraculously been healed. It even astonished doctors. That day, over a year past his high school graduation, we helped him settle in his college dorm room and were soon heading home to Tulsa OK from his school in Wichita KS. We had to pull off the freeway because neither my husband nor I could stop sobbing.
Letting go of a child, sending them off to college is hard enough, but when your only son had come a hair’s breadth away from death, fighting against cancer, it is even harder. I watched him in the rear view mirror, waving, smiling about the adventure ahead. I watched until he could no longer be seen.
Shortly after, my husband and I pulled off the road to cry together and, more importantly, pray together placing our son firmly in Father God’s capable hands.
Today our son, now 43, has been married about 11 years to a lovely gal from China. Together they raised her son, our grandson, who is on his second year at West Point Naval Academy. In life’s darkest moments the Love of The Almighty shines through and leads us on God’s chosen path to unimaginable blessings.
We also are blessed with our oldest daughter, her husband, and four grandkids by them- three adopted and a miracle granddaughter who was never supposed to have been even conceived. Through every trial and difficulty God has been ever faithful, even and especially during the two times I died when hospitalized. I KNOW my Redeemer Liveth.

So, you may have noticed I've been kind of lacking in the blogging department. What you don't know is that I've also been lacking in the training department. I'm embarrassed to admit it, but I fell off the running wagon for awhile there. I have no good excuse. I went on vacation for a week to visit my brother, sister-in-law, and niece in Baltimore (I'll blog about our adventures there soon!), but there was no good reason to not run while I was there. The hotel we stayed at even gave guests a free membership at the gym across the street, but it wasn't enough to get me out of vacation mode.
Oh well. What's done is done. The good news is that I'm getting back into it, finishing my training since the Army Run is now less than 3 weeks away!
Run 1 of Week 8, which is 28 minutes straight of running sandwiched between 5 minute walks, was completed way back on August 17. I never updated on it, but it went well! I managed to run 4.31 km in the 28 minutes of straight running, which is a little slower than what I was originally aiming for, but I was really happy with that number!
While I was on vacation, I bought myself a pair of shoes especially for running. As I mentioned before, I was very overdue for new shoes, and these ones have more support at the middle of the foot to encourage striking mid-foot instead of at the heel (Skechers Go Run). So last night, doing Run 2 of Week 8, I wore them for the first time. I really like them! They are light and comfortable, and I think (hope?) they help my posture and back, which is still terribly sore, by the way.
So since it had been about 2 1/2 weeks since my last run, I wanted to get back in the game. I wanted to make sure I ran for the full 28 minutes, even if it was a slower run. And I'm proud that my body seemed to remember exactly what to do. I easily ran the whole 28 minutes, although it was definitely a much, much slower pace. I covered 3.86 km in the 28 minutes of running, but I know that it will just keep getting better as long as I stay in the game. And I plan to!
I don't think I'll make my goal of finishing the Army Run in 30 minutes, but I'm okay with that. I'm pretty proud of myself for getting into this in the first place, something I never thought I'd be able to do. My goal is to run 5K non-stop, and to do my best with where I am now. Time will tell how fast I'll be able to run it!

This Cairn Terrier male puppy is AKC Registered for a family pet only, and will go to his new home with a one year health guarantee. He is up to date on vaccinations. He has been raised in the house and is very well socialized with people as well as with other dogs. I am a small breeder and have both of his parents on the premises. He can go to his new home anytime. Shipping is available. If you are interested in this little boy or would like more information, please call Kristy at 636-734-3989.

"I am so glad I chose them to represent me." -Lindsey K.
Give Us a Shout
I hired Jon Selden and never had to worry about anything else again.
If I ever need a lawyer again you are my GUY! Great job!!!
Truly honest and hard working people. I am so glad I chose them to represent me thorough this process.
Jon was super easy to work with and always available.
They took my case on a Friday evening and, from that point on, I did not have to worry about anything.
I have had the privilege of dealing with Jon Selden a few times. He is always a great person to work with and is very thorough in explaining things in layman’s terms.
They really care about how you are feeling, and doing while going through the process.
I dont know what she did, but as soon as she contacted them, they paid out the entire policy.
The myths about lawyers just in it for the money went right out the window in dealing with Jon Selden and staff.
A case I thought was going to take a year or two took only five months, and I could not be happier.
I felt like Selden & Company truly cared about my case. They took care of everything and it was definitely worth it!
I could not have asked for better representation, they truly did an amazing job.

Ian Holloway: Big Sam broke my toe... and my heart
Every winter I'm reminded of the time Allardyce crunched my foot – and his team added insult to injury with last-gasp winner
Sunday 26 September 2010
We might have lost in the cruellest of fashion to Blackburn – a stoppage-time goal is never nice – but am I down? Not at all.
Someone asked if I was fearful because we've lost. I don't fear anything to be honest. I tweak the nose of fear and put an ice cube down the vest of terror.
I was delighted with the performance. I thought we were absolutely great, against a team that defends really well and are strong. We gave them a goal as well – and to be fair to my midfielder Charlie Adam it was a great finish. I wish it had been up the other end but such is life, you can't have everything.
Charlie was trying to knock it back to our goalkeeper Matt Gilks and it went wrong. Sam Allardyce's team do that to you because the delivery of their balls into the box is so good that you get a little scared. After that own-goal I felt we had a little spell when we felt sorry for ourselves and made a few wrong choices. But second half was probably the best we've played since I've been here. It was exhilarating to watch and I felt we deserved something, but unfortunately the quality of the last finish from Brett Emerton hurt us.
Well done to young Matty Phillips though. We signed him on deadline day from Wycombe. He is 19 and I threw him on as a late sub at right-back, a position he's not really played before. He did great, scored a super goal and I'm excited about seeing what he can do over the season because the lad has bags of talent.
It was good to see Big Sam yesterday, a bloke I'm reminded of every single winter morning. That's because I still have a bit of trouble with my toe from when he broke it!
I was at Wimbledon at the time but having a beast of a time in my career so they sent me out on loan to Torquay. There was this game where I was playing right wing and Sam was centre-half for the opposition. I remember getting the ball, taking it past the full-back and Sam came across to get a tackle in. I tried to lift it past him and he put his great God-knows-what-sized boot through the ball and I kicked his stud.
Talk about pain. I've never felt anything like it, I was in agony. To be fair to him he did show a bit of sympathy because I remember him standing over me saying "you all right lad?" It was towards the end of the season and the pitches were rock hard so I was wearing boots with little moulded studs on. I remember looking at his boots and they had these huge giant studs on. I said: "I think I've bust me toe," and shouted something unprintable about why was he wearing them. He looked at me and said "I always wear these," and showed me these great big long studs. I managed to play on but at the end of the game when I took my boot off it was like a cartoon – the foot swelled up right in front of my eyes. I had an x-ray and oh dearie me it wasn't nice – a broken toe. Every cold day in winter it still gives me jip, throbs a bit and makes me think of Sam.
Zebras against Chelsea's lions
Life teaches us lessons and we learned a harsh one at Chelsea. Our lads reminded me of a zebra being grabbed round the neck by a lion. The lion wouldn't let us get up and we were the poor old zebra with fear in our eye not knowing what to do. Credit to the opposition though – Chelsea were absolutely class. Their skilllevels and standard of fitness were unbelievable.
My wife has seen a lot of football – she's had to, following me about for the last 25 years – and she said they all looked like robots. She said everyone moved the same. They all controlled the ball the same and passed it the same. Even the defenders looked as comfortable on the ball as the strikers. Like me, she just sat there thinking "good gracious me, welcome to the Premier League". It was like Will Smith in I, Robot – bang, goal, lovely, everyone's smiling; bang, another goal, they're smiling even more.
If it had been any other team playing against them in that match, I'd have loved every minute because some of the stuff was so good technically. Drogba did a scissor-kick-style backheel at one point, from a ball that bounced and was in mid-air. I've seen Maradona do a similar thing but not quite as good as that.
But the truth is, how can you reallyenjoy it when it's your team on the end of it? I got my tactics wrong. We got our defensive and midfield lines wrong, lost our shape and they killed us. However, the disappointing thing for me is that for the first time I saw my lads go "oh no" and their heads went down. They can't have that attitude. Last season when we conceded, we picked ourselves up and tried to get a goal of our own back. That is why we did so well.
We need to have the same attitude because in this league we are going to be in a war every week, and at Chelsea our troops were wiped away. We were murdered and dead within 12 minutes, 2-0 down and shell-shocked. I hated it to be honest. I detested the fact that we didn't leave Stamford Bridge with people saying "aren't Blackpool a good team?"
But let's be fair, maybe that was down to our opponent. You have to say that sometimes. It's like the old joke about a boxer. The bloke sits back on his stool, absolutely cut to pieces, eyes everywhere, and his corner says: "Come on mate, don't worry, he hasn't laid a glove on you yet." The boxer goes: "Well watch the referee because someone's hitting me."
We got battered and when we came back out for the second half you might have seen me on TV laughing with the fourth official. That's because I said to him "Can you count their players please? Can you make sure they've only got 11 on there because that first half they must have had more!"
Chelsea might have spent a fortune but what a team they have, and the fact they continue to improve is testament to the training they do and the coaching they have. They were superb – if I had a hat, I'd be taking it off to them.
I was the piano carrier and Wilkins would play the concerto
I haven't got many friends in football. I don't think anybody likes me to be honest but I don't really care.
I mean it. I've had a row with nearly every manager on the planet because when I don't get what I want I am nasty. I've always been that way. Don't get me wrong, there are lots of people in football I like and enjoy talking to but I wouldn't really call them mates because you haven't got time to keep in touch with them. Being a manager is so time consuming. You have so many things to do it is difficult to have proper friendships in the game.
It was great meeting Ray "Razor" Wilkins at Chelsea, though. He is a top bloke who I got to know when we played together in the 90s. What's great about Razor and myself is I was 29 when I went to QPR and he was mid-30s. There was a massive respect from me instantly and in the end I earned that back from him because he said the way I played gave him an extra two years on his career.
I did play in an unselfish way, probably an ugly way. I did the dirty side of the game – the horrible, workmanlike stuff: get a foot in and play a simple pass, nothing spectacular at all.
I don't think I could have played at the top level now. I'm not big or strong enough and I haven't got the skill.
I was taught to be in position if not possession, and to pass the ball early to someone who can spray it around. So when I met Ray it was a joy, because he could spray it. I'd just try to get a foot in and win it and give the ball to him.
I've always said I was a piano carrier. I would carry the piano on to the stage and let someone like Ray sit down and play a concerto.
If I didn't do my bit, he couldn't do his job because he'd look stupid sat down playing thin air! So I had to put the piano down, that was me. There was a lot of my type of player years ago. There isn't now because you've got to be able to do all of it, not just the dirty side. In fact I can't think of one-modern day player I could compare myself to... mainly because I wouldn't want to insult anyone!
Latest in Sport
Arsenal transfer news: Gunners given boost in hunt for Marco Reus, why Wenger signed Gabriel Paulista, no move for Cheick Tiote
Chelsea injury news: Cesc Fabregas and Branislav Ivanovic could join Diego Costa on the sidelines for crucial Manchester City clash
Australian Open 2015: Thanks to Amelie Mauresmo, it's no longer Andy Murray against the world
Fantasy Premier League: Invest in Arsenal to climb the ranks in Gameweek 23
Manchester United sign former Manchester City prospect Sadiq El Fitouri on advice from Phil Neville and Paul Scholes
- 1 Venezuela Expo Tattoo 2015: Extreme body art from 'Vampire Woman' to 109mm earlobes
- 3 Ball pool for adults opens in London
- 4 Amal Clooney gives excellent response to fashion question at European Court of Human Rights
- 5 Canadian woman suing police who locked her in van with sex offender who then raped her
9 reasons Greece's experiment with the radical left is doomed to failure
Have we reached 'peak food'? Shortages loom as global production rates slow
Greece elections: Syriza and EU on collision course after election win for left-wing party
Stephen Fry explains what he would say if he was 'confronted by God'
British grandmother Lindsay Sandiford faces execution by firing squad in Indonesia
Liberal Democrat minister defends comments suggesting immigration causes pub closures

A THURROCK Council tenant, caught up in Hurricane Sandy in New York City, is enraged after Thurrock Council forced entry to his flat despite his desperate pleas to wait.
Kevin Taylor of Marine Court, Purfleet had gone on holiday to New York last week.
According to Mr Taylor, he had arranged for the council to enter the flat when he returned on Wednesday October 31st, as an upstairs neighbour had a blockage in their sink.
But Mr Taylor’s plans changed as the superstorm, that has killed over 50 people, left him stranded.
Speaking from his blacked-out hotel room in New York City, Mr Taylor told YT. “I spoke with the council on Friday because they were going to force entry to my property.
I explained to them that I was stranded in New York, as my flight on Monday had been cancelled due to the hurricane. American Airlines had arranged for me to fly home on Tuesday but that flight was cancelled too.
“I explained that my neighbour next door had my back door key if entry was required.
“I’m in a hotel with no power and no hot water.”
However, Thurrock Council have defended their actions stating that they had been trying to gain access to sort the problem for some time.
A Thurrock Council spokesperson said: “The council’s housing office and repairs section have been trying to gain access to the dwelling in Marine Court for approximately four weeks after the tenant above reported being unable to use her kitchen sink due to a blockage and it was confirmed the blockage originated in Mr Taylor’s flat.
“A card was put through the letter box and the tenant was spoken to by another team member advising he must allow access. Repairs also contacted him explaining urgent access was needed.
“None was given. He then went on holiday.
“In the meantime the tenant in the flat above was unable to use the sink in her kitchen.
“The tenant finally agreed access on Wednesday (31 October) when he would have returned from his holiday, but due to delays he was unable to travel home so the decision was made to force entry.”
The tenant’s next-door neighbour contacted us to advise she had a key to the property, but also said the tenant had made it clear the key must not be given to staff to allow access.
Unfortunately, there was no alternative but to force entry.
The neighbour, Dolores Collins has contradicted the council’s assertion re the key.
Dolores said: “I told the council officers there that Kevin was happy for me to pass the key to officers but did not want them unaccompanied in his flat.”

By Hamida Bano
Clouds were rushing towards the west and veiling the red face of the declining sun. In a few moments the sky was covered with snow white clouds. Then the helpless sun could no longer see the elegance of the brilliant earth.
Gulrukh, an eleven years old girl, was playing ‘meergati’ (a game played with a ball and 4 pebbles) at the foot of a hill all alone. She had accumulated small stones at her side for making a tiny doll house. At the time she had completed half of the house when she stared at the cloudy sky. Before leaving home that morning, Gulrukh’s mother had warned her to come back soon if the weather turned bad. She was also told to bring a bundle of hay home for the cow. Gulrukh got up reluctantly and went out of the meadow following the instructions of her dear mother. She made a big bundle of hay and binding it on her back; she went home with her three sheep, which were still grazing.
When Gulrukh entered home, her mother was milking the cow.
The girl tied up the sheep and, washing her hands, went to her bed. Zartaja, Gulrukh’s mother, gave a glass of fresh milk to her weary child. She put some coal into a home-made stove to keep the room warm. Such were her routine chores,which never made her feel tired.
In a few moments, it started raining. Until then, Gulrukh was in a deep slumber. Zartaja was sitting in a chair of straw weaving a trouser’s tape beside her daughter’s bed. Ruffling Gulrukh’s hair, she at once started thinking about her bitter past.
When Gulrukh was but a newly born baby her father died of cancer. Zartaja was left with the possession of a cow and three sheep. She used to earn her living by selling the milk. Still she lacked hope for the future of her only child. Though illiterate, she was well aware of the injustices suffered by women in her society. Her sole aim in life was to shield her daughter against the expected misfortune.
Whenever I went to my uncle’s house, I often saw Gulrukh from the top of the hill. My uncle was a doctor and in those days he had been transferred from Peshawar to the village. Gulrukh had no companion to play with and that was why she used to come to my uncle’s house to play with his two little children. Her activeness would often amaze me.
Once, while I had visited my uncle’s house during our summer vacations, I had a chance to see Gulrukh again. No one was at home except me when she came there and asked me, “Where are Semi and Ali?” “They’ve gone with uncle and aunty” I said at once. “Do you know when they’ll be back?” she asked very innocently. “No, I’m not sure about the exact hour. Gulrukh, can’t I become your friend?” I said without a pause. She smiled with her usual sweet smile and said,” But you are too old to be my friend”. “So what? I know how to play all your games”, I said abruptly. “Can you make a tiny doll house for me?” She asked.
“Why not” I replied with a smile. “Then you are my friend”, she said. She wanted to have hand shake with me but when she had a look at her right hand it was dirty. After a moment she went home, reminding me of my promise.
The next day, I waited for her for long but she didn’t come. It was noon. The sun was blazing. All of a sudden I saw Gulrukh with a weary look on her pretty face and asked her, “Whats wrong with you? Why do you look so tired?” “My mother had severe stomach pain and I went to bring her some medicine from the ‘hakim seb’ (the herbalist) but she is better now.”.” Why didn’t you call for my uncle?” I asked Gulrukh. “Mother says that the villagers cannot recover with English medicines.”
I didn’t question her any further. She then told me that she would have to go home earlier. Unfortunately, I hadn’t had time to complete her doll house.
That night I couldn’t sleep soundly. All night through I was thinking about the responsibilities of that little soul. Her thought was disturbing me hour after hour.
Next morning my uncle decided to go to Mardan, the city where our grandparents lived. We spent two weeks over there and during that time Gulrukh’s thoughts never for a moment left my mind. I was thinking on the perspective of her being left alone by her diseased mother. Once she had told me that they had no near relative for her father had migrated alone with a caravan from Afghanistan since he was a child and got married in Pakistan, when and how, that is another story to tell. However, her mother had a cousin who very often came to their house to help them somehow. Though an immature boy myself, I had a feeling heart and wished to do something for the mother and daughter, to drag them out of their misery.
When we returned to the village, I decided to meet the girl straight away. It was late afternoon and Gulrukh couldn’t be seen anywhere that was why I, at once, turned to their hut, with the idea to ask for her mother’s health as well. When I entered the hut I found the girl sitting all alone. As she saw me, her eyes filled with tears. She related to me in great detail how she lost her mother due to her age old stomach ulcer. I tried to console her but the loss was too great to be forgotten soon. She further told me that her mother’s cousin had promised to take care of her. Her last sentence soothed me to a great extent.
After that visit I didn’t get a chance to go to the village again because my uncle transferred himself to DHQ hospital, Mardan. But Gulrukh had certainly become an important part of my youthful memory which I never stopped recalling in solitude.
Six years later, when I was doing my master from university of Peshawar, I got a chance to go to that village for the completion of my research thesis on rural life. I was keenly interested in meeting Gulrukh on that occasion. In my excitement I had forgotten the fact that she would be a grown up girl now and would never allow me to enter her house and see her the way i used to do. Somehow I mustered up courage and knocked at her door. There was no reply from inside. I knocked again and this time more loudly. A woman with a veiled face came to the door. I related to her how I had come to see a girl whom I knew six years back as an orphan kid. Hearing this she at once recognized in me her old well wisher . According to pakhtoon customs she could not let me in for she was living all alone, a fact which opened on me soon after, still I insisted on asking her a few questions at the door. I was informed that she was working at the house of some rich businessman living nearby. When I inquired about her mother’s cousin I heard her sobbing. She disappeared from the chink of the door for awhile and then appeared with an envelop in her hand. She handed it to me for reading. I, at once, opened and started reading it thus.
“Dear Gulrukh, I hope you will be fine with the grace of Almighty Allah. I didn’t know that I’ll have to leave you so soon. I still love you a lot but some unknown force has tightly chained me to the city I am living at present. I think, if you know the situation in which I am living, you will also feel pity for me.
My love, before getting married to you, i had left a family behind, a secret which i had even kept from your mother. My lust for sexual satisfaction had made me blind to your age. What am I but a savage with no manners? I’ll always blame myself for the injustices I have done to you. Please forgive me. As for as coming back to you is concerned, I don’t think it is possible now. My first wife and children will never let me leave them on Allah’s mercy once again for I have to take care of my paralyzed wife. I hope you will take care of yourself as your mother has done it a few years back.
When I was finishing the last sentence I was burning with rage. That uncouth middle-aged man hadn’t had the right to play with the life of a helpless orphan girl. I gave the letter back to Gulrukh telling her that I would go to the Law Court to fight for her rights. I knew the letter could provide enough evidence against her husband. But, she sealed my lips by saying,’ don’t ever mention the topic again. I am more than happy in my present misery. I am glad because he didn’t divorce me and kept my HONOUR. Don’t you know what people will say if I’m divorced? They will never let me live on this earth without blaming me”. Her voice was trembling with the last words. I had no other alternative except to leave her alone.

We provide many cool features for confessions exclusively for premium usersGo Premium
Try our premium features for just 1€
Today, a random guy tested me on Instagram. He is 21, I am way younger. After a while, the conversation got way sexual. He sent me a pic of his penis in his underwear and then asked me if I wanted one without. I said to do whatever he wants. Then, I said yes. I regret that shit. Fuck. I'm so disgusted by myself. Wtf is wrong with me? Then I lied to my parents saying I was talking with my best friend. Ik it doesn't sound like such a big deal, but I feel so grossed out with me. I'm a boy by the way.
I was an awkward girl growing up. A good girl mostly. Always too shy to expose my erotic daydreams even now as woman with my husband. That has recently changed. Lately I want to be a sexy woman that stranger's lust. My sexual curiosity has awakened with a desire to expose my 36D tits and kissing a stranger. It's the truth.
I have to confess that I have explored my curiosity a few times. So much so that I tried to share to share my dirty perversion with my husband hoping for his encouragement to live out my kinky desire. After a girl's night out filled of drinking and dancing with hot guys, I had to call hubby to bring me home.
I didn't want to tell him I had been flirting. So instead, I blurted out something about the number of girls he slept with to the one guy that I've had. I felt bad. I dropped it, but I know he heard me. Still, I want to make my fantasy a reality and tried again. This time we were both at a party when a drunk asked to see my tits.
I didn't indulge this drunk's request. Later that night we talked about this in bed. I surprised myself by bringing it up first. I want a new passion and lust with a stranger. I felt embarrassed to share such sinful thoughts with him. We never talked about it again.
Not sure that I am attracted to him, but he has something hot about him. Maybe it's the Texas accent. Maybe how sexy I fell with his eyes on me.
When we moved in, he was living with woman. They were up to something online. Live cams or something. He once whispered i should get in on it. She came around also. I wondered if it was too sweet talk me into going on cam with her. But they broke up, and that all got dropped until maybe a year later. When he told me, he had been dying to see my tits right in front of hubby. Was turned on hearing that but also nervous and embarrassed. Well, the truth is the first moment I met him I had flashes of having him satisfying my fantasy's craving. I saw myself blowing him. Maybe because he was tall and had big hands. Couldn't help it. I want that moment with him again, and I want to remove my top for him. I hope he gets a good look and like what he sees.
Kiss him and let him touch and kiss my yearning tits while I undo his pants. I bet he has huge ginger cock. I want to tell him how I wanted this since we first met. Then i want to blow him real slow and passionate. If he fucks me then he fucks me, I don't care. He can cum in my mouth or my wet pussy.
That's the truth. A part of me wants to go with it, but I can't tell my husband all that.
Ever since I was about 15 I always found older woman attractive. Milfs were my thing and still are. I have so many milf stories to tell if anyone is interested in hearing them. I think over the years I got with 6 milfs in total. If any milfs are out there and want to talk I’m here (: I’m 26 now.

In a heart wrenching incident three members of a family, including a child, were killed and one injured when a speeding train rammed into their vehicle at a railway crossing in Assam’s Kamrup district on Sunday.
The incident took place at Nadhiyapara area under Boko police station.
The deceased persons have been identified as Abdul Jalil, his wife Saniya Begum and one of their daughter, Afreen Akhtar. Their 4-year-old daughter was severely injured in the accident and she has been rushed to nearby hospital.
According to the reports, Abdul Jalil, hailing from Chhaygaon area in Kamrup district, and his family members were headed towards to home when the incident took place.
The train en-route to Bongaigaon mowed down the vehicle, carrying the family members of Abdul Jalil, as it tried to cross the railway line.
We can only pray for the departed souls and wish for the speedy recovery of the their injured daughter.
Source: NE Now And India Today

Porn star Danica Dillon, who claims she had sex with Duggar on multiple occasions after he sought her out at various strip clubs where she was working, has filed a lawsuit claiming he was so physically rough during their sexcapades that he caused her bodily harm.
In the suit, Dillon says Duggar's treatment of her during their meetings in March and April 2015 was so abusive that she sustained "physical and emotional injuries" and it was "as if she were being raped."
She is asking for $500,000 for what she is calling battery.
Dillon's lawyer told In Touch that Duggar will have to answer to not only what happened between him and Dillon during his deposition and testimony, but discuss his entire sexual history, including the porn addiction he admitted to in and then later deleted from his statement about being discovered in the Ashley Madison hack, and the facts surrounding the molestation of underage girls, including four of his own sisters.
"The defendant may be subject to [having to talk about] his prior bad [or] sexually abusive acts at trial," attorney Marc Frumer told In Touch. "They are all relevant if he takes the stand.
"The defendant has a history of sexual and physical abuse towards women, particularly those he perceives as vulnerable or weak," he continued. "He has to be held responsible for his actions."
One detail that does not bode well for Duggar is the evidence pointing to him being kicked out of his rehab center.
The Duggar family plane was seen coming and going from the airport in Rockford, Illinois, under severe weather conditions in which most experienced pilots would not fly that type of aircraft, proving that they were in a huge rush to get out of there.
The Christian boarding facility, which does not employ any licensed therapists or medical professionals, has extremely strict rules of behavior, down to scheduling by the minute — and if they are not followed, students are tossed out.
"There are many rules, all of which are necessary to create an environment of spirituality and seeking God," a staff member of Reformers Anonymous said during the group's podcast Friday night. "The majority of people who leave just don't like other people telling them what to do.
"Others who won't submit to the rules like no smoking or no drinking can be terminated by the housing director if they are considered harmful to other people's programs. There are some who come to the program without the intention of following the program or its regulations. Eventually they may choose to leave if they are unwilling to endure the painstaking process."
The school's policy is to move such students to a local homeless shelter until they can be picked up by their families — and it sounds like the Duggars did not exactly relish that idea.
It remains to be seen if Josh will join the rest of the Duggar clan for Thanksgiving, but the family plane was later seen landing in Texas near another rehab center.
And you'll see personalized content just for you whenever you click the My Feed .
SheKnows is making some changes!

Problems with the people you work with on a daily basis is terrible, and right now I'm having a lot of them. It's been building up over quite some time and it's finally culminated, and right now it's taking all my energy to deal with it and sort it out. I normally love my job but it's times like these I wish I had a normal job where I just got to call it a day at 17:00 in the afternoon, go home and forget all about work until the next day.
I've not been sewing more then a couple of seams on Andreas gaming blanket, I've managed to finish another quarter so it's only 1 quarter left to do but right now, I don't see it happening anytime soon. I've also been sick since we got back from Paris which hasn't exactly helped my mood.So I figured I'd show off some of the fabric I bought when in Sweden to try and lift my spirits a bit.
First out is some really yummy browns and coffee fabrics I bought at Mia's Quiltbod, I'm thinking they'll become a table runner and maybe one or two of those currently oh so popular "mug rugs" =)
These fabrics are also from Mia but in a different sense, she was kind enough to gift me these AMAZING fabrics after I'd been stroking them all day =) She wasn't selling them, they where her own personal fabrics so I was so ecstatic (I believe I even did a little dance ^^) when she declared that she'd be happy to split what she had of them with me. I have a very clear idea of what I'm going to make with them and they're even more neon in person, I love them - Thank you Mia! <3
I actually have MORE fabric to show you from the Sweden trip, can you believe it? But I'll leave that to another day. Now I'm going to go to bed so there's at least a chance I actually get well soon. XD

I love pulled pork, sliced brisket, fatties, and chuck roasts. I've done all of these successfully in my smoker several times. I, however, have never been a huge fan of ribs. So many people rave about how much they love pork ribs, and I feel like it is almost my duty to enjoy them. I have been asked to smoke ribs, a brisket, and Boston butts for my family's July 4th BBQ. I am completely comfortable smoking briskets and Boston butts as I have very successfully done these several times. However, this will be only my second attempt at ribs. My first attempt at ribs was over a year ago, and I can remember the ribs being tough and too spicy. I used Jeff's rib rub, but I think I used too much rub. I applied it as liberally as I did on my butts and briskets, and I think perhaps that was a mistake. I have made up a batch of this rub for my ribs this weekend with less heat. When I did ribs before, I used the 3-2-1 method, but they were still not as tender as I would have liked. In Jeff's newsletter today, he mentioned that spares could go 6.5-7 hours (and the 3-2-1 method gives a total of 6 hours). So, I'm asking for some advice now. I know that different folks prefer a different tenderness level than others (i.e., some prefer to require the meat pull a little instead of falling off the bones). I have already purchased two slabs of St. Louis cut spare ribs (both about 3.75 lbs. per slab), and my plan is to dust the ribs with the rub (cover but not "caked on") and ,smoke them using the 3-2-1 technique. I plan to spritz them heavily with apple juice during the foiled stage, and then apply a sweet BBQ sauce a couple of times during the final "firm up" stage. I would appreciate any advice that the rib experts here can provide. Thanks in advance.

No Video Available
AUTHOR: Andrew Raduly
Church money. Max was just a young boy living in rural Virginia with his parents and his sister. One summer evening, they went for a short drive to the river to eat their picnic supper.
Soon it was time for the family to pack up and go home. When they arrived home, they found the back door broken and wide open. Someone had broken into their home and stolen many of their belongings.
Later that night while Max was lying in his bed trying to go to sleep, he remembered something very important. He ran to his parents’ room excitedly asking if the robber had found their “church money.” His parents got up and they all went to the kitchen. Sure enough, the jar full of money was still there.
The family had been saving their extra coins and an occasional dollar to give as an offering on the coming Sabbath. They were so thankful that the gifts for the church were safe. With thankful hearts they carried the jar to church the following Sabbath and happily placed the money, jar and all, in the offering plate.
Let’s be thankful today for the blessings we have and the monies we can generously share as we give to support the local budget needs for our church today.
—Carol Doudiken is a local elder in the Potomac Conference, and this story is about her uncle.

Here is a glimpse of my photo shoot with a few High School kids from church. It was taken for an upcoming project I am working on. It was a beautiful windy day in downtown Lodi but that didn't stop us. It's the best location to shoot...just love how the fall leaves expressed themselves. These kids were great to work with and aren't they adorable.

“Everything was better under Trump.”
Everything? The Ongoing war in Afghanistan was Better?
The children’s and veteran’s charities? Things were better when Trump and his clan had the access to embezzle from the foundation? That was better than now, having crooks publicly admit to their theft and forbidden to run a charity?
You might face some pushback defending those two situations as having been better…

So on Monday we went over to Jessica F. and her boyfriends house to Have dinner and she wanted to play Canadian Monopoly so we did and we told her that we had to go and she would not let us leave until we finished the game!!! Ugh crazy crazy crazy Canadians!
On Tuesday we called president and asked if we can go play basketball with this less active member whose name is Kevin! And we got permission and what we were doing was scrimmaging the High School Basketball Team! They were all Filipinos! So we beat them 6 games to 0! Haha And I am not even that good at basketball I'm fat and out of shape! But the important thing was is that they came to really like us! All of the Coaches and Players!
Wednesday we went and helped with the Special needs and the old people Curl! Like the Sport Curling like what you see in the Olympics ( Just cant get away from all that Ice) That was way Fun!. Then we went over to another Special needs and old people home and we brought them all into this room where this guy named Bob plays the Banjo for them all!
Then on Friday we went to this other church called Salvation Army and Helped them hand out food to all of the poor in Whitehorse! It was dead in there and then me and Elder Hayes were dancing and then everybody else started dancing! Just to lift the Spirits! Haha I can Not dance! Then we helped Todd P. who is A less Active member load wood all the way up to his house! While we were loading wood he told us a story about a bear at his front door not to long ago!
It kind of went like this!
So Todd have you seen much bear up here?
Yeah I just saw one not to long ago and it was trying to break down my door!
Why was it trying to break down your door Todd?
Because I was popping popcorn for my kids while they were visiting!
So what did you do?
Well I got so mad because I just barely painted that door so I grabbed my shotgun and I kicked the door open and BOOM! Bear meat for days!
That's one heck of a story you got there! Haha
After he told us that story we heard a pack of wolves coming towards us so we left! Haha we are going over there again this week to finish!
Sunday! Oh how much I love Sundays! I had the opportunity to speak on Fasting which went really good (I think)! Then our Ward mission leader told us to go to this Native church that is in the garage that is at 7 Pm So Being good missionaries we did what was asked! We knocked on the door and they were scared! they were like no no no no no get out of here we do not want you here! LEAVE! and Dont come back!
yeah that is how my week went! haha I love you all!

New England Patriots owner Robert Kraft isn't attending the NFL Annual Meeting in New Orleans this week because of "a private family medical matter," the team announced Monday.
This isn't the only recent league event that Kraft has missed.
Kraft is one of the 10 owners who serves on the NFL's labor committee, but he was the only member not in Washington in the days leading up to the expiration of the collective bargaining agreement. Kraft instead attended a previously scheduled trade mission to Israel and the United Kingdom.
Should Kraft had made it a priority to attend the meetings that preceded a lockout? Patriots left tackle and player representative Matt Light didn't hold back when asked about it.
"No doubt, 100 percent. I'm not going to lie to you," Light told *The Boston Globe*. "We had people in that room that could get a deal done at any point. Do I know how they're structured within the league? No, I have no clue.
"But I can tell you one thing: (League negotiators) didn't seem to have the ability to do any of that when they had to leave the room."
Kraft certainly is a respected voice.
"Bob is one of the most influential owners, one of the best owners that we have in this league," New York Giants owner John Mara told The Globe on Monday, in reference to Kraft being unable to attend the NFL Annual Meeting. "He's somebody, when he gets up to speak, people listen."
Light, who has been with the Patriots since 2001, believes it would have helped to have every key figure in the same room during the CBA talks.
"If it was me, I would have every one of my guys in those seats making sure that we had one voice and we could get a deal done," Light said.

The footballer has managed to put his worries behind him by lapping up the sun and frolicking with his family during a bonding holiday in Portugal.
Terry, 31, channelled his inner child to entertain his two girls, six-year-old twins Georgie and Summer.
Play time! John Terry puts his troubles behind him by frolicking in the sea with his family in Portugal
John climbed up the water feature, much to the amusement of his children, who were wearing life jackets as they looked down and giggled at their father mucking around.
He finally managed to get to the top before dangling in the air and dropping back down into the water.
Fatherly love: He kept his two six-year-old twin daughters entertained by climbing on a large inflatable slide and dangling above the water
Family time: He jetted to Portugal a few days ago with his wife Toni and their children after he was cleared of racist abuse against Anton Ferdinand
The football star flew to the region a few days ago with his girls and wife Toni.
She was also seen lapping up the rays while showing off her toned tummy in a white bikini while holding her daughter's hand in the sea.
Earlier in the week they were all seen relaxing back in a luxury yacht.
It is a welcome break for Terry, who was cleared of a racially aggravated public order offence against Anton Ferdinand at Westminster Magistrate's Court last Friday.
Inner child: John Terry then swung on an inflatable giant raft as he let off some more energy during the fun sunny morning
The multimillionaire defender was prosecuted over an ugly clash that lasted less than 35 seconds during a game last October watched by more than two million fans on television.
He was accused of hurling a volley of racist abuse at Ferdinand, whose brother is Terry’s England team-mate Rio, after being taunted over his affair with a team-mate’s girlfriend.
Let's go! He was surrounded by friends and family members as he put last week's troubles in the back of his mind
Sunning themselves: Toni Terry worked on her tan as she showed off her physique in a white bikini
But the 31-year-old claimed he was simply repeating the words after being falsely accused of saying them. As the pair traded insults, he claims to have heard Ferdinand say: ‘Calling me a black c***?’, and to have replied: ‘A black c***? You f****** k***head.’
The players met in the Chelsea changing room after the match and shook hands, writing it all off as ‘handbags’ and on-pitch ‘banter’.
Football's out for summer! Andy Carroll was also seen enjoying some time off as he holidayed in Rio with his wife at the same time
Surf dude: Andy looked more like a surfer than a football player as he swapped the ball for a bodyboard
But an off-duty police officer watching on TV, who claimed to be able to lip read, complained to the Met that a racially-aggravated offence had taken place.
However, the England captain marched out of court in silence on Friday after a judge said it was impossible to prove he was guilty.
Relax: After playing around in the water, Andy returned to his wife to catch some rays on the sandy beach
Andy Carroll has also been spotted holidaying in Rio with his wife, swapping his football for a bodyboard.
Like someone out of Baywatch he was seen running along the sand carrying the board with his long hair in a surfer style worn down and wet.
He looked happy and relaxed as he sat down in the sun next to his wife after having a go in the water.

Chapter 1 : Treasure Hunts
| ||Rating: 12+||Chapter Reviews: 6|
Background: Font color:
The first time I met Dennis Creevey, he stumbled into the cafe in a suit and tie, enough to make the clients stare. Sure, there were plenty of Muggle-borns who ducked into Diagon Alley looking similar, and sure, the Ministry had its fair share of jobs that involved enough contact with Muggles to require Muggle clothes, but he still looked out of place. In itself, the suit wasn't all that unusual. He was just too rumpled, too harried, for him to be just any old Muggle-born or Ministry employee.
He spent quite some time scrutinizing the menu up on the wall, and his eyes looked almost unfocused. If I hadn't had experience with feeling so lost, as he clearly was, I might have mistaken him for drunk. I guess he was lucky I'd suffered similarly.
Finally he ordered, then dug in his pockets for change, dropping half of it on the floor in the process. “Damn it,” he sighed, crouching to retrieve his coins.
“No, it's really not.” His voice was muffled, still below the counter. “My kids are sick, my wife thinks I work too late, and to top it all off, my wand snapped this morning. Right in two. I didn't even know that could happen. And I haven't been here in so long, I missed the entrance. And...” He reemerged, suit even more rumpled now, his tie crooked. Sighed again. “And you were probably just asking about the change. Sorry about that.” He counted out four Sickles and slid them towards me, pocketing several Muggle coins with the other hand. “Keep the change.”
“Have a nice day,” I called after him. One of the regulars glanced up at my voice, then back out the window where the man stood rooted outside the shop, looking left and right several times before deciding his course. She wandered over for a napkin.
“Now that is a bad case of the squiggles if I've ever seen one,” she remarked.
“The squiggles; a cross between a Squib and Muggle. You've never heard of it?” She shrugged. “It's what they call it when wizards renounce magic completely and try to live life as Muggles, usually because they married one and want to keep things simple. But it rarely works.”
“I would think so,” I said. “It's giving up half of your world.”
“Exactly. You become as miserable as a Squib.”
The man had certainly looked as sad as a Squib. However, I still couldn't feel entirely sympathetic for him. After all, he wasn't the only one having a bad day, and if he really did have “the squiggles,” it was by his own choice. You give up something, you face the consequences. I knew that well enough, and I wasn't crying about it.
“Hey, you're the guy whose wand snapped a few days ago, right?” The man was back at the counter, still a bit on the slow side, still looking at bit shell-shocked.
“Good memory,” he said. “I'll... I'll have a medium coffee, please. With milk.”
“How'd that work out?” I asked him as I poured. “The wand thing.”
“Ollivander saved the day,” he replied. “No surprise, really. He couldn't fix it, but he got me a new one.”
“And your kids are better?”
Now he looked at me sideways, and threaded his fingers around his coffee. “Do you remember so much about all your customers?”
“You were the most exciting thing that happened all week,” I said. Which was entirely true. It just also helped that he had a nice head of blond hair and eyes that never left your own, so that when you spoke, the conversation felt uncannily deep. Even if it was only about snapped wands and dropped change.
“Doesn't say much about the shop.”
“No, it really doesn't,” I agreed.
He glanced at his watch, picked up his coffee. “Well, I've got to get to work eventually. Have a good one.”
“You too,” I said, then added, “but you never told me about your kids.”
He grinned at that, for the first time. It was a huge improvement on his previous disposition. “They're better. Thanks.”
I watched him leave the shop, turn right, stop, and decide to Apparate away. From that day on, Dennis Creevey was a regular at the cafe. I credited that to the good service he could count on.
Whenever my sister suggested we go out for a cup of coffee, I agreed on the grounds that we made it a full-on lunch. I spent far too much time in the cafe anyway, and she knew it, but she still made the offer every time. I think it was because she didn't want to me spend too much on lunch with her when I was supposed to be saving every Knut for my night courses. I also always refused to let her pick up the whole bill. But we continued to play our little game a couple times a month, and each time I won out.
“You really want to eat here?” Demelza asked as we approached the restaurant.
“Come on, it's your birthday! Relax a little. My loans aren't going anywhere.”
“Neither is my diet,” she replied.
But I was right, of course, and she did end up enjoying herself. I would never get away with paying for her lunch, but at least we could pretend I was taking her out for a nice meal. She didn't have to know I also intended to pump her for information.
“So, how does David feel about Ben going off to Hogwarts next year?”
“He's had about ten years to prepare for it,” Demelza said. “He's not exactly thrilled that his son will be so far away, but he knows there's not much of a choice.” She looked at me oddly; she'd told me all this before.
“The whole magic thing doesn't bother him?”
Demelza frowned. “Lyra, you know he came to terms with that before we were married. Why do you think it'd change now?”
“I don't; just curious. You haven't addressed it in awhile.”
“Because I haven't had to,” she said. “Is everything okay? Are you seeing a Muggle or something?”
“No, nothing like that,” I replied. A waiter came by with water, and we ordered, which allowed Demelza's searching look to dissipate a bit. While she sipped her drink, I took the opportunity to explain without interruption.
“It's just that there's this man who comes to the cafe everyday, and I've talked to him a bit,” I said. “He's a Muggle-born, married to a Muggle, with two kids who haven't shown any signs of magic yet.”
“Exactly. And he won't admit it, but he's Muggled-out. Except for his coffee, he's cut himself off from the wizarding world.”
“Your coffee's that good?” she grinned. I rolled my eyes.
“Look, I just feel bad for him. His wife doesn't even know he's a wizard. He can't be himself.”
“Well, it was his choice,” Demelza said. “There are plenty of horror stories out there about wizard-Muggle relationships, and plenty of happy endings as well. He must've heard enough to know there are precious few happy couples where the Muggle knows nothing of their spouse's true identity.”
“Don't get yourself worked up over the guy. Let him figure himself out,” she added. “What's his name, anyway? Out of curiosity. Maybe I knew him at school.”
She coughed on her water, spraying the table in front of her. I had to thump her on the back while she gulped down more, until she finally recovered.
“Dennis Creevey? He was in my year! He was in Gryffindor with me!”
“Merlin, no wonder he cut himself off from the wizarding world...” Demelza pressed her napkin agains the damp tablecloth, shaking her head. “Have you ever heard of Colin Creevey?”
“The name sounds a bit familiar.”
“He was Dennis's older brother, and Dennis worshipped him.” Demelza said. “He died in the Battle of Hogwarts. I don't blame him for hating wizards, after that. Not at all.”
No wonder Dennis let himself remain rooted in his miserable, Muggle world. No wonder he avoided all things magical. If it reminded him of his brother...
“But if he hates magic so much,” I said, “why would he come to Diagon Alley every day?”
“Maybe he thinks you're cute,” Demelza said, which earned her a slap on the shoulder. “Hey, no man is immune to good looks. Not even depressed ones.”
I decided it was high time to change the subject. “So, am I still on for babysitting Saturday?”
Demelza raised her eyebrows, but she knew I wasn't big on discussing my romantic life. “Yes, yes you are.”
When I arrived at the cafe the next day, Dennis was already there, far earlier than he'd ever been. He was hunched over his coffee, staring at the same spot in his newspaper, and I became so preoccupied trying to inconspicuously watch him that I didn't notice my boss, at least until he tossed me the cafe keys. I had to drop my coat to catch them.
“You remember I'm going away for the weekend, right?” my boss said. “And you're opening and closing up shop while I'm gone?”
“Yeah,” I said, clutching my bag to me as I bent to retrieve my coat. “No problem.”
“Let me,” a voice said, and Dennis himself appeared and picked it up for me.
“I'll be back Monday morning,” my boss continued. He didn't seem impressed by Dennis's chivalry.
“Got it.” That seemed to do it for him, and he returned to the back room. He'd always been a man of few words.
Once everyone had dispersed and I got my things in order, Dennis came up to the counter.
“Can I get you anything?” I asked.
“A cranberry muffin, if you could.”
He found his money while I filled his order. “This place is growing on you, huh?” I said.
“A bit,” he said. "I just wish I could bring my kids here; they'd love it. All of Diagon Alley. I'm actually a bit surprised they're both Muggles, seeing as half their genes are magical."
"They could always be late bloomers," I pointed out. "How old are they?"
"The older one, Tommy, is eight," he began, but then the bells on the door tinkled and cut him off. An all-too familiar face stepped into the shop, looking just as he had five years ago: the same broad shoulders, crooked nose, thumbs hooked in his pockets. Leo Kovack had always been painfully unaware of his good looks. Unaware of most things, actually. Upon entering, his coat caught on the door handle and he turned to yank it out, giving me the second I needed.
“Excuse me,” I spluttered, shoving Dennis's change back at him. By the time he opened his mouth to ask what was up, I'd ducked into the back room.
“What's wrong?” my boss asked.
“Er, cramps,” I called over my shoulder. He squeezed his eyes shut, shook his shoulders a bit as if to shake off the offending image, then reopened them and went out front.
I sank into a seat and tried not to let Leo's voice rattle around in my head, without much luck. As much as I hated to admit it, that voice had been giving my a headache since I left Hogwarts.
When my nephew was little, he literally climbed the walls. He would push chairs or cushions or whatever he could get his sticky hands on over to the counter, and just go up from there. Not long after, he had a phase in which he possessed what he called “Spidey powers,” and he could scale the walls like his favorite Muggle superhero. Demelza informed her wide-eyed husband that these were the signs of magic she'd warned him about.
At ten years of age, Ben still barreled around his house. But now he was big enough to do some damage.
“Land ho!” he cried, opening his front door. He was holding a cricket bat up to his eye like a spyglass.
“Who are you?” I asked.
“A pirate,” Demelza replied, coming up behind him. He swung around to see her and nearly whacked a picture off the wall with his bat.
“Why don't we hold the games until your parents leave,” I suggested, teasing the bat out of his fingers. “We can sail the seven seas when they're not here to give us time-outs.”
“I'm too big for time-outs,” Ben said, but he was already running into the kitchen, no doubt in search of another prop.
“Thanks a million,” Demelza said, kissing me on the cheek. “We'll be back by eleven.” David greeted me, then they were gone, and I followed the sounds of crashing that came from the back of the house.
After making a killer pirate ship out of the couch, complete with every blanket in the house doubling as sails, we scrounged up some frozen pizza for dinner. I'd babysat Ben enough to be a master at the microwave, was looking forward to watching a rare bit of TV with him afterward. He could usually be convinced to put on a football game, as opposed to say, Spongebob.
However, a full stomach didn't weigh Ben down at all, and he was still boiling over with energy by the time I'd washed all the dinner dishes. He hung himself outside a window and stuck out his tongue as if to catch a raindrop, but there were none to be seen; the clouds had just rolled in and parked themselves above us.
“What's for dessert?” he asked, sliding back inside.
“I don't think you need any sugar, kiddo,” I replied. “How about some fruit?”
He made a gagging noise and rolled around on the floor, as if just the thought of anything healthy did him in. Even when I tickled him until he screamed, he refused to eat any.
“All right, all right,” I gasped, once he'd turned the tables, pinned me to the floor and sat on my stomach. “We need to get you out of the house. Let's walk down to the cafe where I work, there's bound to be something you like there.”
He was all for that plan, so we put on our coats and set off for the cafe, the rain managing to hold off until we arrived. I found the lights, left the “closed” sign in place, and led Ben behind the counter. He appeared pretty impressed with the VIP service. Or maybe it was the basket of chocolate chip cookies left on the counter.
“Just one,” I said, and when he tried to sneak a second, levitated the basket above his head. “In your dreams, kiddo.”
There was a knock on the door before he could fight me further. I turned, ready to point to the sign in the window. But Dennis Creevey of all people huddled just outside, raindrops streaking his robes. There was no way I'd let my favorite brooding client get caught in a storm.
“Thanks,” Dennis said, wiping his face with his sleeve. “I know it says it's closed, but when I passed by and saw it was you, I hoped you'd take pity on me.”
“No problem,” I said. It was the first time I'd seen Dennis in wizarding clothes; somehow they didn't work on him, as if they knew they were rarely worn. His robes hung a bit too short, and were creased in odd places.
“Who's this?” Dennis asked, and I turned to see Ben whip his hand out of the cookie basket, which had drifted back down.
“This is Ben,” I sighed, “my nephew. I'm looking after him for the night.”
“Hello.” Dennis shook Ben's hand, and came back with chocolate on his palm.
“Ben, haven't you ever heard of napkins?” I demanded.
“It's fine,” Dennis said. “My boys aren't too much younger, and they do the exact same thing.” He found a napkin for himself and used half, offering the rest to Ben.
We fell silent then, with Dennis leaning against the counter, Ben munching on his stolen cookie, and me hovering, uncertain. I figured I should just spit it out.
“So what brings you here, alone, on a Saturday night?”
Dennis turned to me, eyes full of... what? Pain? Sadness? Memories? “It gets harder and harder to leave Diagon Alley everyday. I think I'm homesick.” This last part with a bit of a smile.
“You don't need to give up on the wizarding world, you know.”
He looked a bit taken aback, then considered what I'd said. “It's really a lot easier to be a Muggle. For me, for my family.”
“You're the only wizard, right?”
“I wasn't always,” he said. “I had a brother, who died in the Battle of Hogwarts.”
He looked up, locked eyes with me. “You knew him?”
“My sister did. She just told me about him. And God, Dennis—” Now I'd never keep my mouth shut. “You can't give up on magic because of him! It does nothing for you!”
Once again, I'd caught him by surprise. “It's not as simple as that, all right?” he said. “I fell in love with a Muggle, it wasn't like I planned it. It was easiest not to explain anything, and my parents were thrilled that I might be like them again. You don't understand. You're too young.”
“I fell in love,” I said. “Oh, don't make that face, I know what you're thinking. I was about to leave Hogwarts, I was stupid, I gave everything to a guy. I practically failed my N.E.W.T.s because I thought he needed me. So don't tell me I don't understand; I know nothing's ever as simple as it seems.”
Ben hadn't said a word this whole time; he was on what had to be his third or fourth cookie, and emerged from the back room with a glass of milk, ready to watch the show.
Meanwhile, Dennis had moved closer, rubbed his eyes. “Hey, let's not do this. I'm sorry. I don't even know you well enough to be pouring my life out on you— or to criticize you.”
“You have a bad habit of doing that. Pouring your life out.”
“I guess I do.”
“And I'm sorry too... for assuming I knew everything.”
“No, you were right,” Dennis said. “I can't live without wizards.”
“D'either of you want the rest of my cookie?” Ben piped up. “I'm full.”
“We'll take it home for later,” I said, looking back to Dennis.
“Hey,” he said, putting a hand on my shoulder. “Forget everything I said. We're all good.”
I wasn't so sure about that, but I let him believe it.
Sunday mornings were lazy at the cafe, as people took advantage of the weekend and slept in. So I was surprised to see two men practically tripping over themselves to get into the door. Then I recognized them, and was even more shocked.
“Lyra!” Dennis called, beaming. “You'll never believe what just happened.”
“Lyra—” said the other man, and cut himself off when I turned rigid.
Dennis and the man paused, sized each other up.
“Leo, this is Dennis,” I finally offered. “Dennis, this is Leo... I mentioned him last night.”
“Hi,” Leo said, looking perfectly charming as he shook Dennis's hand. “Nice to meet you.”
“And you,” Dennis said, although he didn't sound too sincere. Then he turned to me. “Hey, I came as soon as I could, because you're the only person to tell. Last night, when I got home, my oldest son... He'd turned our rug into a flying carpet.”
“He's a wizard,” Dennis said. “I'm sure of it. I had a hell of a time explaining it to my wife, but I think she's okay— I think we're all going to be okay.”
“That's wonderful!” I came around from the counter to give him a hug, ignoring Leo's gaze. “That's really great.”
“I had to tell somebody,” Dennis said. “But I don't keep in touch with too many wizards.”
“No, I'm glad you came.” Dennis looked like a different man than the one last night, the one who'd spilled his troubles and tried to take them back just as quickly. Now he stood straighter, rocked on the balls of his feet.
“I guess I'll leave you be,” Dennis said, glancing to Leo. “I'll see you later. I want to show him Diagon Alley, it'll explain everything a hundred times better than I can.”
“Bring him now, if you like. We won't be long.” Leo opened his mouth, then thought better of it and stayed silent.
Dennis slipped out of the shop, looking so free. I wished, not for the first time, that he didn't belong to someone else. Still in front of me, Leo cleared his throat.
“What can I do for you?” I asked.
“Want to sit for a second?” he said. “It's been what, four years? Five?”
“I don't know, Leo. I think it'd be better if you left.”
“You know I failed most of my N.E.W.T.s, I because I was falling so hard for you?” I asked. There. I'd said it. “You know how hard it is to get a job now, because of that?”
“I do, I can imagine...”
“But I'm not worrying about the past anymore,” I said. “I've moved on.”
“You don't sound it.”
“No, really. I'm taking some night courses, I'm saving up for a flat that's not a sewer hole. I'm fine.”
“I just heard you worked here, I wanted to come see... I had no idea.”
"And that's big of you.” I said. “But look, we all do some stupid things. You know Dennis, the man who just came in? He tried to give up magic and live like a Muggle, then crashed and burned. He ran away from some bad memories, and lost the good ones as well. That's what I've done, only it's actually working. Or at least, I'm getting there.”
Leo paused, ran a hand through his hair. How many times had I seen him do that, to stall for time while he thought? “All right, then. I guess I should do that too.”
“It might work.”
“Yeah,” he said. “Well. I'll see you around then, maybe.”
“Maybe,” I said, watching as he took his leave, making sure he turned out and didn't come back. I wasn't entirely sure how five years of feelings had just been extinguished in just a few minutes, or if that was even possible, but I wasn't complaining.
I wouldn't get to reflect for too long, because just then Ben burst into the cafe, Demelza hot on his heels. “Hey Lyra!” he said. “I told Mum how good this place was, she said we could get breakfast here and bring some home to Dad.”
“That's not entirely how it went,” Demelza murmured to me, while Ben wandered behind the counter. “He refused to stop singing 'It's a Pirate's Life for Me' until I agreed to come here. I can't wait until this phase is over. Are you okay? You look a bit pale.”
“I heard that!” Ben called. “And it's not a phase, you know. Pirates are the best.”
“I bet they are,” I said.
“I read in this book that while pirates were around, even though they were killing and stealing, things were really good,” Ben added.
“Really. 'Cause anyone who wanted to go out and see the world could just jump on a ship and go. Anyone who wanted to could have an adventure. And there were lots of good pirates, too. A lot of the time they protected their own towns from other pirates.”
“He'll talk about it all day if you encourage him,” Demelza warned.
“And when the pirates died out,” Ben continued, “all that looting and stuff stopped—”
At that moment, Dennis reappeared in the shop, a little boy in tow. The boy craned his neck to to look all around, and jumped when he saw the Daily Prophet someone had left on a table, complete with a full color image of the Kenmare Kestrels zooming around a Quidditch pitch.
“—but all the other good stuff was gone too,” Ben finished, as if he'd never been interrupted.
“I've got some good stuff right here,” Dennis grinned. “Tommy, do you want to say hi to my friends?”
Tommy considered it. “Are they wizards too?” he whispered.
“Well, he's a pirate,” I said, nodding to Ben. Tommy gaped and looked up at his father,
“She's joking,” he said quickly.
“Right, yes, I am.” Tommy drifted off to watch a broom sweep the floor by itself, and while Demelza peeled Ben away from the cookies, I moved over to stand by Dennis.
I didn't need to point out that he'd found his pirate's booty. He'd still have to get his wife on board, and break it to his parents that he'd passed on the magical gene, but for the moment, something magical had resurfaced. Something he'd nearly lost.
“And Lyra?” Dennis was saying, though I must have missed at least half a conversation without knowing it. “Thanks. For reminding me I could never leave here, completely.”
“No problem,” I said. “All I did was serve the coffee.”
“Are you all good? With Leo and everything?”
“Oh, yes. He's not coming back,” I said. “I'm keeping my eye on the prize.”
“Getting the last N.E.W.T.s I need. To get a proper job.”
“I'm sure you will.”
“Me too,” I said. If Dennis could produce a magical son just when he needed one most, surely I could pass a test. I wasn't done looking for my treasure either.
A/N: The quotation at the beginning is from “Of Other Spaces” by Michel Foucault (page 27 in the journal Diacritics). It was given to me by AndrinaBlack for her Nonfiction Quote Challenge, in which I was asked to write a story inspired by said quotation. I went to town with it, and wrote far too many drafts of far too many stories, but in the end, this is what I came up with. Actual pirates, actual dreams. I hope you've enjoyed it. The challenge deadline is tomorrow, so I intend to let this one sit for a while, then come back with fresh eyes and revise the parts I'm not so happy with.
Other Similar Stories
A Mother’s Love
Loved One Lost
by Manwe Val...

Actress Ridhi Dogra was waiting for a big project to come her way, and she says her wish has come true with the upcoming web show, The Married Woman, which casts her in the title role."The biggest reason I said yes to the project was because I was eagerly waiting for an opportunity to showcase that I can carry a big project on my shoulders," Ridhi told IANS."When I heard it is called 'The Married Woman' and I would be playing the married woman I did not look left or right. I didn't think twice. I have been waiting as an actor to just be able to show what I can do," she added.The Married Woman is based on author Manju Kapur's bestseller novel of the same name, and also features Monica Dogra, Imaad Shah, Divya Seth Shah, Nadira Babbar and Suhas Ahuja.The series has been directed by Sahir Raza and will air on ALTBalaji and ZEE5.

Infamous cult leader/murderer Charles Manson has dating problems just like everyone else. The 80-year-old cult leader recently learned that it's hard to find love when you've spent everyday in jail since 1971 as one of the most notorious criminals in history.
In 2005, a 19-year-old woman named Afton Elaine "Star" Burton began visiting Manson in jail. They were engaged to be married in 2014. However, Manson recently found out that his young bride-to-be had some plans for after the wedding that didn't involve a honeymoon.
On November 17, 2014, Manson announced that he was engaged to fan-turned-lover "Star" Burton after she had visited him in prison for nine years. She is 27 years old.
The marriage never happened. Manson soon found out Star's only goal in the marriage was to have possession of Manson's corpse when he died. Star and her friends want to take the corpse, put it on display, and charge for its viewing.
The wedding was called off.Even if it wasn't, Manson thinks Star's scheme is folly because, of course, he believes he is immortal.
The whole wedding idea itself may have been a scheme by Manson, who would often employ the help of Star and her friends to sneak various things into prison for him. Who was playing who here?
So if you're upset about being single this Valentine's Day, just remember that somewhere in the California State Prison, Charles Manson's life sentence just got much lonelier. I almost feel bad for him. Almost.

In a recent decision, which has been reported as Canada’s first “Facebook firing”, the British Columbia Labour Relations Board held that an employer had just cause to dismiss two employees who had, while off-duty, posted derogatory comments on their respective Facebook pages about their employer and co-workers.
In Re Lougheed Importers Ltd., BCLRB No. B190/2010 (“Lougheed”), the employer operated an automotive detailing and accessory shop. In August 2010, the Union applied for certification. Subsequently, during a period of time where there were some growing pains with the Union, two employees posted derogatory comments about their employer on their Facebook page. One of the employees went as far as to continue posting these comments for a period of several weeks.
Many of the comments were of a very offensive, defamatory and even violent nature. For example, suggesting that two supervisors were engaging in sexual acts in the bathroom; stating that the employer was out to “hose” people with their products and services; and one comment going as far as to suggest that an appropriate way to relieve the work-related stress of the employee would be to engage in a series of vigilante killings akin to those depicted on the television show Dexter.
One major detail the employees managed to overlook in this case was that one of them was “Facebook friends” with his supervisor, who received updates on these postings through his own Facebook account. As a result, the employer immediately became aware of the comments that were being made. Growing concerned over these comments the employer started to monitor the postings and kept a file, tracking what was being said.
Eventually, the employer called an investigatory meeting with the two employees to address their concerns. During the meeting, the employees were untruthful and rather than admitting to having made the comments, one of them went as far as to assert that a computer hacker may have been responsible for them. As a result of the investigation, both employees were terminated.
The Union advanced an argument that the terminations were conducted with anti-union animus as one of the employees was a known union supporter, but the Board dismissed this part of the complaint for lack of evidence and further held that the employer had just cause to terminate these two employees.
Interestingly, the Board went on to hold that the employees did not have an expectation of privacy in making these comments despite the fact that access to their postings was effectively limited by their Facebook privacy settings (which limited access to these comments to “friends” of the employees).
Further, the Board found that because these comments were visible on Facebook to the employees’ supervisor, current employees, as well as former employees, they were akin to having been made directly on the shop floor, which greatly compounded the offensive nature of the postings. The employees’ dishonesty during the employer’s investigation was also taken into account by the Board to find that the terminations were justified as they damaged the reputation of the employer and created a poisoned work environment.
The Lougheed decision serves as a reminder to employers of the well accepted principle that discipline (including termination) can be a consequence where an employee engages in off-duty conduct that detrimentally affects the employer’s reputation or inhibits the ability of the employer to effectively manage the workplace. As such, even where an employee is posting comments to his own private Facebook account, using his own computer on his own time, the nature of the comments could well turn into a workplace issue.

Monday, September 21, 2009
Bow 80 insanity
This is a long one but worth the read... the pic is actually from last year at Keystone in much nicer conditions than this year`s race.
So, for some reason I decided to race the bow 80, an epic loop in Kananskis country, near Calgary.
The day started out wrong, with a 4:50 wake up, an hour drive out there in the rain and darkness, and the car thermometer reading 6deg C. I drove out with co-worker Kate Scallion, and we had her sister, Magi's bike in the car too, as Magi had just flown in from NS visiting her mom. When Kate and I pulled into the parking lot at 6:40am, it was raining very hard and still dark. We sort of looked at each other and said, "we could just turn around and go home".
Anyway, we kept getting ready, and I headed out in the rain and blackness into the woods for an early morning bathroom stop. It took me a long time to get all layered up, followed by a 5min ride up to sign in. At registration just as I was leaving Brian Bain (who drove Magi out) rushed in and said Magi couldn't find us. Kate was already looking for her, and I pedaled off looking too. I went down to the car and couldn't find her, and while I was there I quickly strapped my booties on, and then sprinted back to the start at race pace.
I got to the start and the `potential delay` had not happened, and I missed the start by 5min. Anyway, it wasn`t the end of the world and I took off and caught the first stragglers in about 2km. The next 20min was spent with explosive efforts passing tons of people, then slow behind them in singletrack. Then I stopped to take off my headband and a winter jacket (it had stopped raining, was semi day-light now and I was hot). A bunch of people passed me back, but then I re-passed them in a few min. After about 1:20 of riding I had passed about 150 of the 230 racers, and it was much easier going. I had some awesome passes, as in sliding through grass on the inside of corners with one foot out...
Eventually I settled into a slow and steady race pace, just passing a few people here and there. At feed zone 1 I was doing quite well, I ate a bunch of food, and changed from my orange rubber fisherman`s gloves to a winter Louis garneau pair (people were making fun of my orange ones, but they were warm until water ran down the cuff`s)!
Just after FZ1 I knew there was a super steep 1hr granny ring climb, so I stopped in a small creek and pedaled a bunch to clean the mud off my chain (a dude passed me there and got chainsuck while I was cleaning mine, it was kind of funny). So I rode this climb forever, and because I was way back in the field my goal was to ride it clean, which I did. This was quite a feat, as it is super long, very technical, in a race, and wet. Oh, did I mention that from 1900 to 2205m it was snowing! Yep, we had sideways sleeting snow, and 2cm on the ground. It was pretty neat riding, up in the alpine with 5m visibility and snow everywhere except on the trail where it had melted.
Eventually I got to the top of Cox Hill (with only walking the last 10m) said hi to the volunteers (who had inflatable palm trees coated in snow, and gummy bears) zipped up my layers, and blasted down the descent. Now the descent is super fun, pretty fast, rocky, and technical, I had a blast. However, after 5min my metal brake leavers got my wet snow coated hands very cold, and soon they were numb. Another 5min and I got to another volunteer station where I got them to get my coat out of my camel back, put it on me, and zip it up, as my fingers couldn`t do it.
Another 10min of descending and I reached the bottom and blew by a sign that said `last chance to drop our`. I rode by it to fast to really process the info, as I had been contemplating dropping out as I was only at 40km and my body was getting cold. The only reason I did not stop was I was afraid I would have to wait 3hrs or so, and just freeze, besides, I was dreaming of sitting in my car with the heater cranked, (I figured I could get someone else to turn the key as my fingers couldn`t). So I rode, and rode, and rode as hard as I could just to try and warm up. At the lower elevation it was now raining and there was about 4cm of standing water on the trail. By FZ2 I was cold.
I decided to keep going, as I couldn`t really stop. I figure if I stopped and wasn`t in a vehicle I had about 5min before hypothermia set in. So to try and get warm I would swing my arms in circles and run up hills pushing my bike with my forearms. About at this point I got to trail that had all the trees coated in snow, and bent over from the weight of it. So I had to push my way through them and get all the slushy snow dumped on me. Eventually my core temperature was still dropping, and in desperation I stopped and saw that my zipper would pull up another 5cm (with my teeth). After 5 tries I got my head band out of my pocket, and had to push my wrists together to undo the buckle on my helmet. I tried to pick a gel out of my pocket but was unable to at this point. I could have stuck my jackknife into my hand and not felt it, I was numb clear up my forearm. Somehow I hung on and was able to brake a bit when really necessary.
Oh yeah, I couldn`t blink right, I don`t know if my eyelids were frozen, or if there was just so much snow and water in them. My Oakleys were super dirty but I kept them on just to keep the big chunks of snow and mud out.
With 15km to go I stopped at a checkpoint and begged for gloves or mitts of any sort. A volunteer, Graham, gave me his bike gloves (which he had to put on my hands) and he got a gel out of my pocket. I weaved off, and the only reason I kept racing was because I couldn`t stop without freezing.
For the last 15k it had stopped raining, and with the head band and dry gloves I came around a bit and was able to finish.
From the finish I dropped my bike, and Mrs Bain took me to the first aid trailer, where I stripped down (my clothes looked like I rolled in a mud lagoon) and sat in a blanket and a sleeping bag for an hr with a bunch of other near hypothermia cases. Brian Bain looked especially bad, and would convulsively shake every 10min or so. The first-aiders were excellent, and even gave us hot chocolate.
After I recovered and a volunteer found my car and drove it up, I got some dry clothes on and went out into the bright sunny day. It turns out Kate and made a very smart decision and stopped at FZ1 when she was too cold to peel a banana, Magi never found her bike and went to work instead (very smart!!!), and 50 or so people finished. I ended up 5th overall and 3rd in my category, and won a big belt buckle. I also won a big Dakine hydration pack, which I gave to the volunteer who lent me his gloves. I am very thankful for his gloves, that I got my booties even if I missed my start, and for all the incredible volunteers that were on the side of the trail covered in snow.
So, the moral of the story is, don`t do a race that you have to wake up before 5am for, and don`t race in the mountains if it is below 10deg with any precipitation.
I am now alive and warm, with the furnace going in my house in Canmore...just me and the mice.
Posted by Matt Hadley at 8:27 PM

Chittoor: Newly wed couple Rajesh and Sailaja story is all over the internet. Husband Rajesh attacked on his wife Sailaja on their first night and she is battling for life at hospital.
Women groups have come in support of Sailaja and Rajesh is taken to custody. He spoke to media for the first time after the untoward event.
Rajesh said that Sailaja is short tempered and that got angry for no reason on their first night itself. He shared that she even hastened him for the act on that night and when his reactions were slow she abused him saying he is unfit to satisfy her and came out of the room. Her parents cajoled her and sent her back and the result is for us to see - he in police station she in hospital!

Best & Worst: Sundowns v Celtic
Best And Worst Player Ratings: Mamelodi Sundowns v Bloemfontein Celtic, 16 December 2017
Soccer Laduma selects the six best and four worst performers following Mamelodi Sundowns' 4-1 win over Bloemfontein Celtic.
Tired of reading? Click through the gallery to see who were the best and worst performers on the day.
Oupa Manyisa: 7/10
He was good in his midfield role where he was able to control the flow of play and create scoring chances for his teammates. He also got back in defence to make some crucial interceptions.
Percy Tau: 8/10
The young striker was the usual threat in attack. He provided a constant headache for the Celtic defenders with his pace and movement off the ball. He had a few chances on goal, a couple of which went narrowly wide while one struck the post in the first half. He also provided scoring chances for his teammates with his passing ability. Moreover, Tau provided the pin-point pass which lead to Sundowns’ opening goal. He also scored his sides’ third goal in a one-on-one situation with the keeper.
Thokozani Sekotlong: 7/10
The Sundowns player was a real threat in attack. He created space for his teammates with his off the ball runs and also provided a scoring chance for Tau in the first half with a clever pass. Sekotlong scored the opening goal as well. Unfortunately, he had to leave the field injured in the 65th minute.
Tiyani Mabunda: 7/10
He was solid in his midfield role and provided a good buffer in front of the back four with his defensive skills. He was also a threat going forward with his pin-point passing. He scored Sundowns’ second goal with a nice long-range effort.
Victor Letsoalo: 7/10
He was a real live-wire in attack for Celtic, often driving at the Sundown defenders and causing them some problems. One of his shots in the first half skimmed the top of the cross bar. On another occasion he saw an effort go narrowly wide with just the keeper to beat after breaking behind the Sundowns defence.
Kabelo Mahlasela: 7/10
He came off the bench for Celtic and inspired his team to try mount a comeback. He was dangerous in attack as he pushed forward with pace and vigour. It was his solo run that saw him beat two defenders before his strike came off the post and was then tapped home by Pfumbidzai for Celtic’s first goal of the game.
Patrick Tignyemb: 5/10
The goalkeeper had a bad day between the sticks. He struggled to control the defence and saw four goals go past him. He was also booked in the first half for decent.
Lantshene Phalane: 5/10
He had a poor game in his midfield role. He struggled to get his foot on the ball and control the flow of play. He was not his usual creative self in midfiled and was substituted early in the second half.
Ndumiso Mabena: 5/10
The striker provided very little threat in attack. He saw very little of the ball and was hardly in the game. He was substituted in the second half.
Lucky Baloyi: 5/10
It was a day to forget for Baloyi. He struggled to keep up with the pace of the game and failed to contribute both in defence and attack. He also gave the ball away cheaply with some poor passing.

My first time snowboarding!
So it’s about 6pm when I start getting ready for work. It’s Saturday night & of course, work is the last thing I want to do. I get a text from Yvette asking me to come to Lake Tahoe for a couple of days. The offer sounded tempting but I knew that I should really go to work. Yet 15 minutes later I was convinced. With only an hour to pack I made some calls, pulled out my suitcase, & frantically started pulling clothes off their hangers. Part of me was upset because I didn’t have the time to fully prepare in the way that I would have liked to but I was just happy to be going. The best part was that Alexa didn’t know I was going so I would get to surprise her. Sure enough when they pulled up Alexa was surprised & ecstatic to see me waiting there. Yvette threw all my stuff in the back of the car & we started our 6 hour drive.
We got to Lake Tahoe at around 2am. We stayed at Harrah’s on the South side of the lake, aka Nevada. Harrah’s was nice but not as top notch as Vegas of course. The hotel did offer all the classic Vegas amenities though including a casino & even a Starbucks which of course made me happy. However, no free wifi ~lolz~. Our room was super nice & very spacious. I felt like it had a lot of modern features included & it was very clean as well. By the time we had everything settled it was already 3am which meant we only had four hours to sleep.
Sure enough 7am rolls around & we’re forced to roll out of bed. Alexa & I start our morning routines & try to do our make up as fast as we can in order to get out the door by 8am. Being that this was my first time snowboarding I didn’t really know what to wear? I didn’t know what people wore under their snowboard gear & like I had said, I really didn’t have time to pack properly. Thankfully I had packed Active socks, a Thrasher sweater & a pair of leggings that would suffice. I was a bit sad though because I didn’t pack my pair of Lulus that Ydalia had given me & they would have been perfect to wear. I also highly recommend wearing a sports bra as well, I can’t even imagine snowboarding without one.
Finally we were on our way to the North side of Lake Tahoe, aka California. The drive was a little over an hour & it was absolutely stunning. This was my first time really seeing Tahoe since we had arrived during the evening. There was so many towering green trees & mountains of snow that surrounded the glistening, smooth lake. We passed through cute towns full of mom & pop shops & cabins. At one point we passed a mini-golf course & it was so funny to see all the cartoon statues buried under snow. This was also the first time I had seen icicles. Some of them were giant, they looked exactly like the kind that could kill you if you were hit by one.
I think we ended up getting to Squaw Valley at around 10am which was past our initial plan. The lifts open at 9am which was when we were aiming to arrive. However, with a wrong turn & a little bit of traffic we were put behind schedule. So make sure you plan for traffic, especially when driving in icy conditions. Traffic getting there was about 20 minutes or so. Traffic getting out? Well, that’s another story.
Squaw Valley has a resort called The Village to host it’s skiers & snowboarders. The Village was super cute & offers upscale resort amenities such as dining, bars, & shops. Truthfully there is a good variety of whatever you may be looking for in those fields. All the staff is super nice too & totally fits that chill snowboarded stereotype. At one point Alexa’s boot was having some issues so we went to one of the shops to see what we could do. The shop had a good selection of apparel & a great store playlist that was going on as well. We weren’t fully able to figure out what was going on with Alexa’s boot but the sales associate was nice enough to help her out & fix her boot the best he could in order to get her through the rest of our day. So yeah, 5/5 for all the employees.
Squaw Valley was actually the host for the 1960 Winter Olympics. So as you can see, I was about to snowboard on the real deal which made it all the more intimidating. Rest assure though, 25% of the terrain is said to be for beginners. Overall there are 270 runs which I believe is split between Squaw Valley & Alpine Meadows. Alpine Meadows is about 15 minutes away from Squaw Valley & The Village offers a shuttle to get there. Passes for the mountains were $110 for “young adults” I believe & $134 for “adults.” The lifts open at 9am & close at 4pm. After we had bought our passes it was time to suit up & head out.
I’m not going to lie, I was super nervous to finally get on the snowboard. I had surgery about 3 weeks ago so I was kind of scared that my body wouldn’t be able to keep up. I had also heard multiple horror stories about how hard snowboarding is. I would always hear people say it’s like a three day process to learn & that it’s just a never ending cycle of falling on your ass. Plus Alexa had told me that she dislocated her shoulder the first time she went snowboarding. Yikes.
Not only was I scared to get hurt but I was also scared that I would get frustrated, be forced to quit, & end up disappointed. Throughout December I had went through a lot. I was sick, stressed, & ended up in surgery because of it. I wasn’t even really able to enjoy my holiday season because of everything that had been going on. All of it had just put a big damper on how I was feeling about life & about myself. I usually am all about trying new things & giving life my all. It’s almost like I used to feel invincible & that “Chrome would never stop spinnin'” but December 2015 had really taken that spirit away from me. I really wanted to feel on top of my game this day but I wasn’t sure that I would fully be able to.
Well with the help of Alexa, Yvette, & their family I was able to get to up on the board in no time pretty much. Sure I wasn’t flying down the mountain or hitting rails but I was able to get going — physically & mentally. Of course I ate shit a fair amount of times but I really do like to think that I conquered snowboarding. It truly felt so good to be up & active again. To be outside & to be with good people, to laugh & just play in the snow. The best part of this day was just to feel like myself again & to feel that spirit I had been missing. It’s so crazy how the body works in harmony. The solution for clearing my mind was never in my head, it was in my body & simple activity. So yeah, get moving. Try new things & go outside every once in a while, it’s very important.
Overall this was a really great experience & I can’t even begin to explain how excited I am to go again. However I am afraid that wherever I go snowboarding next just won’t compare to Tahoe. The powder was perfect & there was so much terrain to cover. Just when you think you’ve seen it all the gondola will take you over to a whole new area full of trails that you haven’t touched yet. I really enjoyed my time here & I hope to see myself here once a year truthfully.

IRISH international hooker Phil Cantillon is hanging up his boots after the Federation Cup later this month.
The 30-year-old, who started his career in 1992 with Wigan, holds the world record for the number of tries scored in a season - 48 in 2001, while playing for Widnes - and has been a thorn in the side of many a defence both before and since.
His electrifying burst of speed and superb balance has served him well during a long and illustrious career.
Cantillon moved from Wigan to Keighley in 1995 - when he played for England in the World Nines in Fiji under Phil Larder, and Australia for the World Sevens - before moving to Leeds two years later and Widnes in 1999, where he became a firm favourite of the fans until his release in 2003.
Cantillon then had a spell at Halifax before Bobbie Goulding brought him to Spotland for the 2005 season.
He was an immediate hit, scoring 12 tries in 19 appearances, while last season he made 23 appearances - 17 from the bench - and crossed the line 13 times.
"I've decided to retire after the Ireland games this month," he said.
"I've had a good two years at Hornets, I've enjoyed it, but my body is telling me I've had enough and I want to finish playing at a high standard.
"I'll still be involved with sport development in Rochdale so I'll be out and about coaching. I'll have a bit of a break from rugby and look to get into coaching with an under 18s or academy side.
"I've played with some good players, I've played in some good teams and everyone brings something to the team
"I'll miss it, but sometimes when you lose a bit of desire and enthusiasm it's time to call it a day."
Cantillon goes with Darren Abram's best wishes: "I didn't know anything about Phil retiring," he said. "But he has had a long and successful career in the game and it always comes to an end some time. Only the player himself knows when it's time to go. I wish Phil well whatever he does in the future. I know he has a job at Rochdale Council and I hope he spreads the Hornets gospel."
Meanwhile, Hornets club captain Andy Gorski has turned down an offer of more money and the opportunity to play full-time rugby to stay with the Spotland club.
The second-row forward turned down Halifax and Leigh Centurions to lead Abram's team next season and it's another piece in the jigsaw for the Hornets boss who said: "It's always nice when your club captain stays with you," he said.
"He joined the club when they were in dire straits and he has shown his loyalty to the club, talking to us all the way through. Again we fought off Halifax who put in a better money offer to him. He didn't ask us to match that, we just needed to show him some loyalty as he had shown us some.
"Leigh Centurions were also very interested in him, but Andy didn't want to go full-time and the other option - to sign a part-time contract - didn't appeal to him so he didn't discuss terms with them. He rang me up and said he would like to sign with Hornets."

Rated 4.2 out of 5 by 141
Rated 5.0 out of 5.0 by INSguy Loved the stay
My son and I had a guy's trip to Beantown for the night and thought the hotel great.
He had the pull out which was less than desirable, but thought the burger in the restaurant was one of the best he ever had.
The room and comfort rating were rated average due to a TV problem when we checked in, the pull out comfort, and extremely hot water which was hard to regulate (we were on the top floor)
The staff at the desk more than made up for any short comings.
Thanks for a great time.
February 27, 2014
Rated 5.0 out of 5.0 by DeeSip66 Great!! Highly Recommend!
My family of 4 (2 teens) stayed to explore Boston during Feb school break from Feb 19th -21st.
The staff here is AWESOME! EVERYONE from the front desk to the maid and everyone in between were all so helpful, polite and knowledgeable!
A huge plus to staying here is the complimentary shuttle!
The Food/Drink in Draft exceeded our expectations and was indeed very good.
The pool area was also very nice and very large. Although we didn't have the time to use the pool area we stopped in one evening to check it out.
The rooms were clean and just exactly as stated on the website. The beds are to die for!! Sooooo comfy!!
The ONLY bad comment I have to make is the noise coming from the windows in our rooms (#518 &520). For some reason, there was a LOT of street noise heard in the room through the window.
Other than that, I would Highly Recommend you stay here and if in the area again, we certainly will!
February 24, 2014
Rated 5.0 out of 5.0 by Cathykitty Cold draft
The rooms were great but there was. Cold daft from the windows
Which kept the room cold.
February 20, 2014
Rated 5.0 out of 5.0 by Albina Great Service
I would recommed this hotel to anyone who is traveling with their familes. We stay with a 3 year old and 7 month old baby. The rooms were quiet on the 8th floor. Comfortable and great service and good breakfest at the Draft. We also enjoyed the swimming area.
February 14, 2014
Rated 5.0 out of 5.0 by Felix007 Nice room and good service
The room was attractive (2 king beds) and very clean. Very quiet and I had no problem adjusting the heat which I had read was an issue for another guest at an earlier time. Breakfast was your standard buffet fare but the coffee was excellent and the waitstaff pleasant. Front desk staff were very helpful. Location was convenient to Davis Square which is where I was going. I would stay there again.
February 13, 2014
Rated 5.0 out of 5.0 by TrevorB Awesome rooms - great staff
At first look, this seems like an older Holiday Inn but on the inside it is anything but. They must have made some major renovations because the hotel looks brand new.
I was extremely impressed with the room - it was very clean, with new amenities and the bed...I have to hand it to them, hands down one of the most comfortable beds I have slept in.
The staff was exceptional, they were always available when I called with a question. I had an issue with the DirecTV - in that I accidentally hit the wrong button and it took me into static land. I called, and they had someone at my door to fix the issue in less than two minutes.
Again - great stay, highly recommended - and no, I don't work for Holiday Inn - just a traveler who is impressed enough to leave a review.
February 13, 2014
Rated 5.0 out of 5.0 by LBHarbour The best Holiday Inn I've stayed at!
I never write reviews, but my recent stay at this property made me want to write one. It's the staff that made this location stand out from the other Holiday Inns I've stayed at. Bridget (front desk) and Jose (driver) went above and beyond to ensure my stay was awesome. First of all, Bridget upgraded me without my having to ask (which, as a platinum member, annoys me that I have to do at most other locations). The room was great! Bridget also arranged to have me taken by shuttle to the original Cheers bar which was 3.5 miles away, when the hotel policy is within 3 miles. She also knew my name after just one night of staying there, which is a very nice touch. Jose, the driver, also went above and beyond by being very accommodating. He arranged with Bridget to take me and pick me up from Cheers bar.
February 12, 2014
Rated 5.0 out of 5.0 by NasaSr Bed was very comfortable and service was fantastic
I was very impressed with both the amenities and service. All the staff was great. I don't travel as often as I used to and this was a vacation for myself to view some Hockey games and fulfill a event on my bucket list. I would definitely recommend this Hotel to anyone. They provided shuttle service to the TDGarden which was great as the Drivers were all friendly and very accommodating. My only complaint of my entire trip was that I had taken a taxi one evening back to the Hotel and wish I had called for the shuttle as the Taxi driver was no where as courteous as the shuttle drivers. I am possibly returning here in two months and will definitely be staying at this Hotel.
February 5, 2014

I am definitely a city gal I jump at the opportunity to got into the city, that being any city. I love the fast moving pace and the whole atmosphere so for my boyfriends birthday I got him a VIP spa day as I feel like it is so nice to get away from every day life and just relax.
I found the most amazing spa day in the centre of London and it was so lovely to just spend the day together and leave all the stress of real life behind. The spa day was in a hotel called The Atheneum which overlooks St James Park. The hotel was stunning from the outside as the whole side corner of the building was covered in flowers and greenery which was amazing and really made the hotel blend in with the park. We got the train to London Victoria so it was a short but sweet walk past Buckingham Palace and through the park to the hotel.
Once inside we went straight into the restaurant for a 2 course lunch which we managed to turn into four courses!
We were straight away served a bottle of champagne and we accompanied that with some delicious bread and oil, which didn’t really go but that doesn’t matter does it! Danny then went on to have a steak and I have spinach and ricotta ravioli. For desert I don’t even know what these where, I had a berry mousse and Danny had a pineapple and ice cream pudding, although the pineapple was cooked some how!
We then went down into the spa and it was amazing. We were treated to an hour massage in a joint room which was so romantic, although I did think Danny was snoring at one point! I actually had a half hour massage and then a half hour facial and they used all Ren products which I love and was a real treat to be able to get to use these as they are real luxury products. The spa was so beautiful and smelt amazing. It has a sauna, steam room and hot tubs. The day was perfect and I cannot wait to be able to get away again.
I hope you liked my post and leave your comments below.

When In Doubt, Ignore It
Does your husband tend to ignore you? Or maybe I should ask “How often does your husband ignore you?”
There are a variety of reasons beyond just being rude that a man ignores his wife:
- He has no idea what she’s talking about, and silence seems better than demonstrating he’s clueless.
- She has talked so much he is no longer listening.
- He feels what she is saying is dangerous territory. If anything he says could start a disagreement, saying nothing seems wise.
- He doesn’t know anything about the subject and decides opening his mouth would just show his ignorance.
- He’s reached his talk limit for the day.
How you deal with this depends on the reason(s) for his ignoring. However, starting with what’s most important is a good idea regardless of his why.
~ Paul – I’m XY, and around here I talk more and I get ignored on occasion.

Monday, September 24, 2007
Happy Birthday me!
Today I turned 23. Is there something about the odd years that make it seem older than it really is? Mom says that the odd years are the hardest, but I think she was referring to the toddler years. I remember 19 being so much cooler sounding than 18, and 21 is such a difference from 20. Twenty-three doesn't seem too impressive, but this year does have its possibilties.
Anyway, today was a great day. Nik took the day off so we spent the WHOLE day together! I was so excited to have Nik all to myself today. He even called himself my slave. Pretty cool huh? Nik even made me breakfast this morning. Jeanne commented that it was pretty amazing that he was up that early. He made me french toast and bacon and it was so good! I think he will be in charge of the french toast making from now on. After breakfast we went shopping. Nik got me a new pair of long pants at Plato's Closet. I was glad he was there, I like it better when I get his opinion on clothes. After that we went to IKEA because we have a good sized gift card there. We went through the whole store and came up with some good stuff. Little stuff, but good. We even ate lunch there. They have some pretty good food. Nik loved the meatballs. After the shopping spree we went to see License to Wed. I don't recommend it. I will admit that it was funny, and had some good lines. But I don't even think I could quote it if I wanted to. Either way, it was good company.
I received so many birthday calls and text messages today, I felt so loved. I am so grateful for places like FaceBook that allow me to be in contact with so many of my friends that I lost touch with earlier. My grandma Mitchell even mailed her gift on time so I got it today. Grandma is always good for a bag of candy and this year was no different. This year is the year of the Sweedish Fish. They are good but not my favorite, so anyone who would like to share, I am more than happy.
Now for presents. Vivian gave me a book called "Stich'n Bitch, the Happy Hooker." Pardon my French. It is probably one of the best books for crochet patterns and advice. It has easy to read instructions and really cute and creative patterns. I am really excited to have it. Jeff gave me a great Nightmare Before Christmas watch. It was in a coffin shaped tin and he even decorated the wrapping paper himself. It is pretty sweet. Mom and Dad gave me an undisclosed amount of cash to help me have fun on our Mexico trip. Mason took credit for getting me a cool beanie that has head phones built right in. I just hook my iPod to the attached cord and ta-da! Music! It is a little small, so we will see if it works when it gets cold. Nik gave me seasons five and six of my beloved Gilmore Girls. I am so excited because some of my favorite episodes are on those seasons. Amy just stopped by and gave her present of Gilmore Girls season One. This is great because you just can't have a series with out the first season. It's what started it all!
Well, that is my day. I am glad to have shared it with all of you. Thank you to everyone who sent me birthday wishes and to all those who thought about sending me birthday wishes.
ps-I am glad to hear that Kersten's back surgery went well, and that he will be returning home tomorrow to be with his family.

The Scots were soundly beaten 3-1 in the World Cup semi-final play-offs at Hampden with the players and coaches criticised by the Tartan Army.
Clarke's tactics and team selection came under fire, with Aaron Hickey and Billy Gilmour in particular putting in disappointing performances.
But the head coach has dismissed these criticisms as he prepared his squad for three closely-scheduled Nations League games, with the campaign kicking off on Wednesday at home to Armenia.
He answered "what criticism?" when asked about the fan and pundit reaction to their defeat to Ukraine and then confirmed that they have moved on from the defeat.
Clarke added: "They're entitled to their opinion. I don't know what it (the criticism) was because I didn't read it, I didn't hear it, I didn't listen to it.
"I deal with games and disappointments and move on. We've all been hurting but you have to move on, so Armenia tomorrow, I'm focused on that."
Clarke was asked whether he had to lead his team to Euro 2024 to keep his "dream job" and manage them at the World Cup 2026.
However, he replied: "I don't know if it's a must" and then went on to say: "My contract runs out when our interest in Euro 2024 runs out, so it's probably a good idea to qualify for Euro 2024.
The 58-year-old was then asked if he had to do this to get a new contract to which he replied: "You'd have to ask my bosses that."
He also pointed out that his team were unbeaten in eight matches prior to the loss against Ukraine which included a victory over Denmark.
Clarke added: "We had a big disappointment to lose to Denmark last year and we bounced back with six wins. We've now lost one in nine and everybody wants to change what worked before – I'm not sure where the logic is in that."
Scotland face Armenia at home on Wednesday before travelling to face Republic of Ireland in Dublin on Saturday and then facing Armenia again in Yerevan on Tuesday.
The former Kilmarnock boss said: "Ukraine were better than us on the night. Analysis is what we do, that's part of the process. But you have to move on to the next game. Rather than harking back - I know you guys want to go back all the time - me and the players want to look forward.
"You have to look at what went wrong but we've got another game coming up tomorrow so there's no point harking back to last week. Let's focus on tomorrow.
"With the way the calendar is structured now there are not so many friendly games so there are no real chances to experiment, although we had some friendlies in March which was unusual," he said.
"I've always said I've got a really good squad, I enjoy the squad. I think there are people in the squad who deserve the chance to play over the next three games and hopefully you'll see that.
"Going into the first game (against Armenia), we've had seven days rest since the last game so it's not so important in this one in terms of resting people. But over the course of the next six days we've got three games and a lot of travel, a long flight to Armenia, so I'll need to use the squad."
Never miss the latest top sport headlines from the Scottish Daily Express. Sign up to our daily sport newsletter here.

I have always felt bad for doing this! I'm just so tired when I go to bed I almost always fall asleep mid prayer, and then sometimes I wake up randomly in the middle of the night and start praying again, it's really funny.
"If anybody understands God's ardor for his children, it's someone who has rescued an orphan from despair, for that is what God has done for us. God has adopted you. God sought you, found you, signed the papers and took you home.

Farm owner Juan Benito Tomás explains how cages were opened at his farm (photo by A. RIVERA/Heraldo.es).
According to media reports, 126 mink were released from cages at a fur farm in Albalate del Arzobispo (Teruel) on Tuesday night, March 16.
The farm owner explained that a wire fence was cut to gain access to the farm, and then instead of entering through the front door of the shed, which was protected by an alarm, corrugated iron sheets that served as walls were removed from the sheds.
Most, but not all, of the mink have been recaptured.
The owner said that there have been seven incidents of theft and vandalism at the farm since he started it in 2002, but this was the first liberation.

The past few weeks have been interesting. My brain has been constantly spinning off new ideas lately. With "The High Project" behind HCDT, it is time to work on new adventures. Aside from “The Project Series,” I have been drawn to a lot of past events. Most of the events I am referring to are either natural disasters or some type of massive devastation. Lately, I have been hooked on documentaries mainly focusing on the tragedy of September 11th. I do not want to say that I have been ignoring or forgetting what took place that heartbreaking day, but I have not been drawn to the information, photographs, stories, films, etc. in quite sometime. For some reason, I am being drawn to the tragedy.
The first time I went to New York City, I went for a dance competition and workshop. The day our group arrived was the day JFK Jr. went missing. At that time, no one knew what had happened other than he disappeared. My group was in town for almost a week. The topic of conversations for the majority of that week were about what happened or possibly happened to JFK Jr. I pulled out the photographs from that trip shortly after what took place on September 11th, and never really realizing it, the twin towers were in the background of most of my photographs.
I have not been back to New York City since the twin towers fell. I have not seen Ground Zero for myself. I have spoken with people who were in New York City that day, who were supposed to be in NYC that day, and people who have seen what is now Ground Zero. Stacey and I actually talked about what happened last night after rehearsal. It seems as though it took place yesterday, but it has almost been 10 years.
With the 10 years mark approaching, I feel I am being drawn to use my talent to give something back to the people who risked their lives, lost their lives, or lost someone they loved on that grim day. I have a little over a year and a few months to put something together to honor and remember these people. Although HCDT is located in Atlanta, GA, we can still do something to give back or help where it is needed.
My goal is to collaborate with as many people as possible. If HCDT does a performance to benefit anyone involved with what took place that day, I want to do it done accurately and tastefully. Volunteers would be great to have! Keeping the expenses to a minimum would allow HCDT and other collaborators the opportunity to donate more. This performance is in the beginning stages and is a mere idea at this time. If anyone is interested in collaborating, donating, or volunteering to help see this benefit become a reality, feel free to contact me and give me your thoughts.
The research continues...

Cops reports: Honeymoon gets off to rocky start
February 20, 2014
EAGLE COUNTY — A strapping lad in his early 20s had just graduated college, a fine Southern engineering university. He got married Feb. 14, Valentine's Day, but was very upset when a judge told him Tuesday she'd be issuing a restraining order against him, which makes it illegal for him to go anywhere near his adorable new bride.
"But we just got married Friday," the man told the judge.
Unfortunately the man had spent a significant part of his honeymoon weekend in the Eagle County jail after being arrested Sunday on domestic violence charges. The man has no criminal history and his wife told the judge she'd very much like him to come home, so the judge kicked him loose. If he screws up again, it'll cost him $1,000 to get out.
In the meantime, the wife got the restraining order modified so her husband could come home.
Don't blow by that yellow sign
Dmitry Korolev was cited for a high-speed collision with a Vail Resorts ski instructor.
Andrew Gould and his class were making their way down the Lionshead side of Vail Mountain when Korolev collided with him.
Korolev described it like this: He says he was skiing straight down the mountain when he collided with someone skiing back and forth in front of him. He told Sheriff's deputies that he was not skiing out of control, that it was just an accident. He also told them he was skiing about 40 kilometers per hour.
Gould estimated that Korolev was skiing more like 40 to 50 miles per hour. Also, people in Gould's class heard screaming above them, which turned out to be people screaming at Korolev to slow down because he'd just blown by them, too.
To his credit, after he collided with Gould, Korolev stuck around until Vail Ski Patrol arrived.
Korolev was cited for violating Colorado's Skier Safety Act. He was barred from skiing for the rest of his vacation.
Justin Bolton and a couple of his buddies decided to take a joy ride. But alas, in a community packed with luxury vehicles with initials for names, their vehicle of choice was a forklift.
When Vail police were dispatched to Timber Ridge on a noise complaint, the guys quieted down, at least for a while. They took their show on the road because the Vail police were summoned again, this time because a forklift was being driven along Vail's South Frontage Road.
The police arrived in time to find that the forklift had been abandoned, mostly because it had been crashed into a light pole near the Sebastian. They admitted they stole the forklift from the Vail Resorts lot and drove toward the Sebastian.
Bolton was already on probation for various infractions and will spend some time in the Eagle County jail.
Staff Writer Randy Wyrick can be reached at 970-748-2935 or firstname.lastname@example.org.

A father calls in the middle of the night at 2 a.m. upset. They are at their wit’s end and near despair.
He and his partner have been with their autistic son for over 4 hours. He just won’t go to sleep. After dinner, there was an argument over gaming. This got so high that, although he ended up in his room, he did not calm down. He is shouting and cursing, making all sorts of curses and threats, particularly toward his parents. Some household items were not left intact in the process, but most in terms of sharp objects and what he can break is out of his reach/out of his room. By now, things have been reduced to kicking the door, although he has since locked the door. The family has been receiving assistance for some time, but they cannot reach it at this time.
After first asking for the (accessibility) details and agreeing that if it escalates to such an extent they will disconnect and call the Police, agreed to see together what the options are for calming things down. From this contact, despite the fact that emergency services are involved, it appears that there are no safety agreements in place or a safety plan. There have been previous escalations, but they were not so violent. Many times he got tired or chose “eggs for his money.”
The latter was mostly because parents managed to get his focus elsewhere. Now that didn’t work out. Fatigue and own (work) planning for tomorrow, added to parents’ tension. And then there was the concern for the safety of their infant daughter, who was sleeping downstairs on the couch.
At the beginning of the contact, emotions were high, it was indicated that they could no longer care for their son and that they could no longer keep him at home. In doing so, they were handicapped when it came to physically intervening when necessary and concerns for their infant daughter’s safety.
Emotions, feelings of helplessness are understandable and especially when you have been working for hours and it is now the middle of the night. Having all kinds of thoughts and possibly having called out all kinds of things is also part of it. The noise was already subsiding slightly, there was now only kicking at the door. Concluded (or put into perspective) with parents that their little daughter is sleeping safely on the couch, that they know where their son is (in his room), that they have made the environment as safe as possible, they do still get contact with him (they get reaction when they address him) and he is still alive c.q. is probably not doing much else (because he is constantly kicking the door).
Then parents prepared that it will probably be a rough night with little sleep. Perhaps the work will have to wait tomorrow and discussed what the options are in this.
Now that parents could fully focus on the situation, parents coached to get it done that the door was unlocked. The door was not allowed to open fully at first, it sat in front of the door and parents were not allowed in. We managed to speak to the boy (through the speaker) and father was allowed in. There appeared to have been tension signals before, but parents had missed them. Once it was worked toward bed to go to sleep, agreed to call back in half an hour.
Parents managed to put both children in their beds. The boy was almost asleep already. Parents were still not comfortable, however, what if he wakes up and then starts again. Discussed what they want to do with this. Eventually mother indicates that she is staying awake. After all, it is early in the morning. Tomorrow she will also stay home so that if going to school does not work out, it can be taken care of.
After first complimenting parents, they had pulled this off! Tomorrow, the contact with the CIT will be fed back to the relevant assistance. Requesting them to take this further, especially agreements on what to do if it gets out of hand. Concluded that should things still get out of hand tonight, CIT may of course be called again.
When I hang up, there is still a lot of work to do. The CIT also has to record and I have to make sure there is a clear transfer. Fortunately, my colleague was able to sleep through last night and this time it was possible to handle it over the phone. Once I’m done, I can already see it getting cautiously light. I decide to freshen up and have breakfast. At 9 a.m. I speak to my colleague who is starting the day shift and carry over the events of the previous evening and last night.
Tip: Always make safety agreements/a safety plan.
Usually, even with minor care issues, things have been going on for a while. After all, one couldn’t figure it out on one’s own, which is why help is requested. It is important to have in place what is possible if things go wrong, is there network to apply for support and what can be agreed upon about this now. When assistance is involved, it is always asked if there are (current) safety agreements or if there is a safety plan. Too often it appears that this is lacking and is also not a topic of conversation. Especially given the increased waiting list problems, it is important to pay attention to this already at the time of registration, this can prevent escalations and helps to increase the development of solution skills.

hi, im not sure if im in the right place, but my 13 year old brother is complaining about a severe shooting pain in
. He is in
It started about 2 weeks ago, we thought it was getting better but it got worse again. When he breathes in he says his lungs and ribs really hurt.
However, 3 weeks ago he hurt his leg and it became infected, he was on antibiotics, could it be linked?
He plays a lot of rugby, and other sports.

| Catholic Planet
|an online Catholic Christian magazine
|[ main page | contact info | submit an article | search ]
hi, i am reading all your stories today and searching for comfort because i had an abortion 2 years ago and it feels like it was yesterday. Everything is so clear to me still.
I became a teen mother pretty young, was involved with a man and quickly rushed into everything, i already had a child by him. Then our relationship started to get bad, it wasnt over but he was cheating on me. He would leave nightly as me and his child sat home. I cried alot.
One day i met a man who seemed to comfort me and talked to me about everything. we slept together and then i never heard from him, little did i know i was pregnant. I was in denial when i found out for sure. I cried cried and still cried knowing what option did i have i was married to a man carrying another one's baby whose last name i didn't even know.
I was never pro choice but i didn't know where to turn. It was like living in hell those weeks the clinic i had to go on with it for weeks b/c they kept saying it was too soon even at 11 weeks. At 12 weeks they gave me the pill which i opted for. I thought it would be less painful for my baby then them sucking it out of me.
Boy was i wrong, after the pill the next 4 weeks were agony. Everytime i went to the bathroom, i saw clots not knowing which one of them could be my baby. After 6 weeks the bleeding didn't stop, so i went back and they told me they had to do a dnc b/c it hadn't fully worked. Half of my baby had come out but not all of it. I almost ran out of the room and wanted to die my self i couldn't imagine what all i had done and gotten into.
Then the doctor put this big tube in me and sucked all the remains out and i was free or was i? Yea, inside i had no baby, but my mind wasn't free.I felt like i had lost a real human being. I still to this day think what else could i have done, but the pain will never go away. I can't tell anyone not to do what i did because life doesn't give u options but i hope no one has to live with that pain forever like i do. All i can say is dont be careless about getting pregnant b/c no one can imagine the hurt the loss of a little tiny fetus can cause.
My little baby will live on in my heart forever and what heals me now is that he/she is with God in heaven. To anyone that feels guilt u should know it all happens for a reason and all our little ones that aren't here ane in the best place, with God looking down smiling.
-- submitted anonymously
Return to: Prolife Stories | Catholic Planet

ATHENS, Ohio -- Markila Brown has big plans for herself.
In high school, she was president of her school's student-run broadcast network, an experience that inspired her to pursue a career in communications and directed her to Ohio University, her first and only college choice.
During her sophomore year at the university she was encouraged to apply for a new scholarship funded by the Gates Foundation, The Gates Millennium Scholars Program, which provides scholarships to African American, American Indian/Alaska Natives, Asian Pacific Islander Americans and Hispanic Americans in undergraduate and graduate degree programs who demonstrate financial need and strong leadership abilities.
Brown, who is among the first group of Millennium Scholars at the university, said the scholarship was an enormous help financially and, along with other financial aid she received from the University, made it possible for her realize her dream of a college education.
The leadership skills that helped her to win a Gates scholarship were evident during her four years at the University. She co-founded Redefining Education through Devoted Sisterhood, or REDS, which is an organization that keeps the university informed about issues important to the minority community. And she's been an active member of Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, Inc.
Her biggest challenge, and the one she is most proud of, was coming to the university with her now five-year-old daughter.
"Everyone told me I would never make it and now here I am," Brown said. "A graduating senior and it only took me four years!" She said it wasn't easy, but she did it without compromising any of her responsibilities as a mother.
"I want people to know that there isn't anything you can't do, as long as you do it with God in your heart," she said. "I am living proof of that and I wouldn't trade what I've been through for anything."
The public relations graduate isn't sure where she'll end up, but she is lucky to have several prospects, "Right now I'm interviewing with two firms, so I hope I'll have news about where I'll be working, soon," she said.
Brown plans to pursue an MBA, but not before she has a bit of real life experience under her belt.
As for the future, "Who knows, maybe I'll change my mind and run for president."

TV producer (and not to be confused with veteran TV news producer Fred Friendly), Ed Friendly brought shows to the screen for adults and children alike. For adults that included the ground-breaking "Rowan & Martin's Laugh-In" (1968-1973). "Ed could really make the deals," said his production partner George Schlatter.
"He sold the 'Laugh-In' pilot to Timex to sponsor and then to NBC. The cost of the special was about $200,000, which seems impossible now." The show went on to be a hit with its cutting edge comedy.
For children, Friendly's wife urged him to create a series from a book their daughter was reading. He didn't do it until he noticed his daughter was reading the books again and again, so he purchased the rights to Laura Ingalls Wilder's "Little House on the Prairie". The resulting show was also a hit, running from 1974 to 1983.
Friendly was a bit upset that the show became a starring vehicle for
Michael Landon, so he also produced "a faithful adaptation" of "Little House" as a miniseries in 2005. Friendly died from cancer at his southern California home on June 17. He was 85.

Photo taken in:BucharestYear when photo was taken:1913Country name at time of photo:RomaniaCountry name today:Romania
This is my mother's sister, Mina Solomon [nee Schonfeld]. The photograph was taken in 1913 in Bucharest.
Mina was born in Bucharest in 1896. She worked as a clerk until she married Moritz Solomon. He fought and was wounded in World War I. He became a sergeant in the Romanian Army. He was a self-made man, an oil man who had a small refinery at the entrance of the town of Ploiesti. He built himself a four-floor apartment house, with two apartments per each floor, in Bucharest, on Sfintilor Street.
They were the only ones in the family who had a car and a chauffeur. In the early 1930s they had a Daimler, then a Marmon; I had never heard of this make before and I never heard of it again, but I remember the license plate: 676 B. The ties between the three Schonfeld sisters were very strong. In particular, my mother and Mina were extremely close and this is how they remained until the end of their lives.

A woman who dropped her phone in the River Thames found it in the water two months later - and it still worked.
Thayse Bussolo-Vieira, 29, was feeding the swans when her brand new iPhone 8 fell out of her pocket and into the river in early February.
She was "devastated" because the phone contained thousands of treasured photos on she hadn't back up.
Thayse, a British Airways administrator, even contemplated jumping in to rescue the £480 device - but decided it was too dangerous.
Almost two months later Thayse and her fiance, James Tongue, 27, returned to the spot in Staines-upon-Thames, Surrey, on their daily permitted walk.
Astonishingly they found the phone lying on the riverbed.
Thayse, from Staines-upon-Thames, Surrey, said: "The river was really high and strong because it had been raining a lot and it just fell out.
"It had almost 20,000 photos on from five trips abroad with my fianc . It made me really depressed. I thought I would have lost them forever.
"On Wednesday we went for a walk and my fianc said just show me where you dropped it.
"We looked in the river and it was there. It was unbelievable."
James, 27, added: "As the river was calm and the weather was nice we could see the Iphone clearly. It was in the same place, just sitting at the bottom like a rock."
At two metres beneath the surface, the phone was difficult to reach so the pair returned home to look for something to retrieve it with.
After looking on Amazon, the pair eventually decided to fashion a homemade fishing net by attaching a kitchen sieve to the end of a broom.
They next day they returned to the site with the contraption and spent 40 minutes fighting against the current to reach the phone.
Thayse said: "The river was running really quickly. We were about to give up when James went to find a big stick."
James, a Waitrose delivery driver, said: "Thayse held the net while I got a stick and pushed the phone into it. Then I fished it out. We had to work as a team. It was nice."
Thayse, originally from Santa Catarina, Brazil, said the phone was covered in dirt, but was delighted to retrieve the phone nonetheless.
She added: "We were likely 'oh my god' we got the phone back after almost two months in the River Thames. We were screaming and everything. But of course we didn't know if it was going to work."
The couple, who are due to wed in Brazil this September, left the phone in a bowl of rice overnight and connected it to a charger last week (27).
Thayse said: "It turned on. I was like 'yay, it's working.' I could not believe it. I was so pleased I got my photos back. I thought they were gone forever."

So, in a fit of dislike for Isaac's look, I accidently re-invented him. I mean I was dissatisfied with his eyes, and was thinking of going with green eyes instead. Christy let me try out a beautiful pair of Hazel eyes she had on hand, and it was magic. Meet Declan.
Once the eyes were changed it was obvious he wasn't Isaac anymore. We made him a short brown wig, with a puff of bangs in front, and I debated a few names. Mainly, Daniel, Owen, Braedon, and then Declan. Declan stuck, and here we have it.
And, in other news, ELLIOT ARRIVED TODAY! We went to put the head on Jinwoo's body, but it was strung too tightly to get the s-hook up into Elliot's head. So, we ended up putting him on Christian's SD13 body, for a quick photo.
Proportion-wise the body is a little too big, but in a pinch it could do. I still want the Souldoll Double body though, as it's gorgeous, and the proportions are perfect. And, then I changed his eyes to the blue eyes that were in Isaac.
It still feels a bit surreal since he arrived so quickly and all. @_@ My first SD sized doll, even if he's only a head right now.

An officer is a hero in Florida after saving a woman from her car that was moving after she got out of it, according to a report by WESH 2 in Orlando, FL.
The older woman had pulled up and parked close to the officer's cruiser, but after she got out her car kept moving.
As it continued to move, she got behind the car and tried to stop it but lost her balance and fell. That's when the officer noticed and sprang into action. He pushed the car off the woman and if he was a second later, it could have been a serious accident.
She only suffered minor injuries with her hitting her head from losing her balance, but after the event occurred her husband suffered a heart attack.
The Leesburg police are very proud of their officer and he will be commended by the department.
Copyright 2019 by WDIV ClickOnDetroit - All rights reserved.

Former President, Olusegun Obasanjo on Monday captained the Old Boys of Baptist Boys High School, Abeokuta, (BBHS) in a novelty football match against staff of the school.
The novelty match, which was part of activities of the 100th anniversary celebration of the school, was played at school ground, Saje, Abeokuta, Ogun State.
Obasanjo, who is a former student of the school, was the captain of his side and star attraction for spectators, many of whom are also former students of the school.
In the novelty match which was between old students of the college and former teachers of the school, the former president scored a hattrick to end it 3-0 in favour of his side.
Among old students in the game included Bukola Olopade, a former Sports Commissioner in Ogun State; and Hakeem Akintunde, who is the Chairman of the Sports Writers Association of Nigeria (SWAN) in the state.

Max Pescatori – Soccer or Poker? $3m says he made the right choice
- "The Italian Pirate"
- 49 years
- Poker Earnings:
- $3.3 million
Yet, along with his natural abilities, he has worked long and hard and has sought out advice from top poker players.
As a youngster he was torn between soccer and poker, but eventually he realised that he was not going to make it in the professional world of football and that he was actually very good at Poker.
From that moment on he knew which direction the rest of his life would take.
Football or Poker?
Pescatori was born in Milan, Italy. There, he was such a fan of games as a youngster that he would opt to practice them rather than go in for any other form of recreation.
Max was first introduced to card games whilst on vacation with his family and their friends. Soon after, when max was just 11 years old, he and his father played a game called “Scopa” in a tournament. Scopa is an Italian card game which is very popular in Italy. Max and his Dad won the tournament and went home with the trophy and his interest in card games was triggered.
When Max turned 15 years old, he learned the game of poker and found he enjoyed it very much. In 1994, he left Milan to go to the United States to play poker in Las Vegas. He did not even know how to speak English.
He had always been a 7 Card Stud player so that is the game he started out with. However, after playing for a while, Pescatori saw that there was more money to be made from Texas Holdem poker and so made the switch. He was playing cash games in Las Vegas in 1998 when he met Valter Farina. This was the only Italian to win a WSOP bracelet at the time.
Farina mentored Pescatori for the next year and in 1999 Max became a professional poker player. Along with live action, he played on the internet. In 2001, he earned a place in the World Poker Tour’s Aruba Tournament through an online poker site. He was on his way to the big time.
Just before the tournament, he met a few other poker pros who had been playing for several years. He especially hit it off with Jennifer Harman. She even let him in on the cards she held when she was playing at a table with some of the best in poker. He took away valuable lessons from that experience.
Building up a Poker CV
In 2003, Pescatori won his first major tournament event at the World Poker Challenge in Reno. It was a $300 Limit Hold ‘em event. He won the Omaha Hi/Lo a few days later. He made 10 final tables in all in 2003.
In 2004, Pescatori was present at 8 final tables in the Ultimate Poker Challenge. He won the WPT Legends of Poker No Limit Hold ‘em event for over $106,000. The next year, in 2005, he did well at the National Championships of Poker, got second place at the WPT Poker Showdown and also came in 5th at the Omaha Pot Limit event among other events he tried at the WSOP.
In 2006, Max Pescatori won his first WSOP bracelet with a win of $682,389 in the $2,500 No Limit Holdem event. He continued his winning ways with a win of over $135,000 for first place at the Italian championships No Limit Hold‘em in 2007.
Perscatori continued his success at the World Series of Poker by winning a second bracelet in 2008, this time in the $2,500 Pot Limit mixed Holdem/Omaha event for a prize of $246,471.
Max Pescatori's Major Title Record
- WSOP Bracelets
- EPT Wins
- WPT Wins
The Italian Pirate
Max Pescatori, known as the “Italian Pirate,” has total winnings of $3.3 million. He writes for Card Player Magazine and is also spokesman for the World Poker Exchange.
He likes to play games other than Hold ‘em when he can, and is often found playing at the tables of Full Tilt Poker where he was a former sponsored player and still holds the card room dear to his heart.

When we think of MMA fighting, some automatically envision buff men in cage.
Arianne Christensen from Texas, also known as "Baby Rambo," says she notices how women MMA fighters get more of an applause and support in Arizona compared to other places.
"I was working out in a gym and some combative guys were down there and (I) pretty much joined them," said Arianne.
Arianne now lives in Phoenix and owes her life to MMA fighting after it helped her go through a rough patch.
"It was probably one of the roughest time of my life I've ever gone through," said Arianne.
Six years ago, Arianne was going through a tough divorce and was fighting day in and day out for the custody of her daughter.
After over a year of fighting for custody, she finally has her seven-year-old daughter living with her.
She thanks MMA for the emotional strength and for saving her life.
"If I didn't have fighting, I don't think I would be here still, I think ... I don't know if I would have given up, but I know I wouldn't be the same person," said Arianne.
She trains vigorously with Coach William Beach at his private home gym.
Arianne recently competed at the World Fighting Federation's Wild Horse Pass event.
"(He) definitely cares about the fighters and cares about the sport and it shows," said Arianne about her coach.
Her coach trains Arianne and other MMA fighters and sometimes all he asks in return is for a case of water or just show gratitude as repayment.
"He goes above and beyond of what he's even asked to do," said Arianne.
At the moment, Arianne has her hands full. She's a full-time student at the Arizona State University, takes her daughter to her after school activities, works full-time, trains and competes in MMA fights.
Thanks to her family and support like her coach, she's able to do it all. It's hard, but not impossible.
"I proved to myself what I was capable of and that if I wanted to go and do something, then I was going to go and make it happen," said Arianne.
Arianne needs a couple more amateur fights in order to make it to professional MMA fighting, which she says she will finally start next year.

In an interview to Onda Cero the Spain's Davis Cup team member Feliciano Lopez spoke about Gerard Pique's involvement in the Davis Cup. Lopez said: "Pique is very involved, he is here almost the whole day, trying to make Everyone feel comfortable.
It's a personal challenge he loves a lot. Personally, I am lucky to play again, being with the team, which I did not expect for at 38 years of age, to experience so many good things. I will try to enjoy all what happens. I will keep playing as long as I can compete with the best guys, which I like a lot.
I have been playing at the highest level for years." Asked about his physical shape, Lopez replied: "It's not the best date, they are working in order to have a better one and make the Davis Cup take place during another part of the season, maybe in September, so that people do not get too tired, which would be a great achievement.
I did not play anything after the US Open, I have been training for two weeks in Madrid while Rafael was in London. Spain is definitely one of the most competitive and complete teams. There are many good teams too with two very good players like Russia, France.
It will be very balanced", said Lopez who added he will have a honeymoon with his wife Sandra Gago but he did not want to reveal where. Lopez will start his new season at the ATP Cup.

It was a rough night. I'm super tired. Why you ask? Maybe you didn't ask...but I'm going to tell you anyways :)
3 Wake ups from Aubrey. Will she EVER sleep all night?? I think my mom cursed me to have a child just like myself-apparently I was a crappy sleeper until I was over 2 yrs old. Bree also gets some bad sleep genes from her father. He can fall asleep well, but has problems staying asleep.
3 Wake ups from the stupid dog. She had a tummy ache and yucky poop issues. I think the new rawhide bones we got her are causing this. Remind me, NO MORE RAWHIDES!!
2 Wake ups from the cat (s). Not sure if it was 1 cat or both cats, I was to tired to look closely. The cat (s) had to play with a plastic bag that was in our bedroom. Apparently she didn't get the hint when I threw something at her the first time. The second time did the trick.
So after that I lay awake...with a stomach ache! BLAH! I tossed & turned, and tossed and turned. FINALLY, I started to doze off, and caught a few winks...until the phone rang. I really really hate that Bill's main employer calls so early in the morning so often...They know he isn't here. They must like waking me up. After hanging up the phone, I cursed them, and attempted to return to slumber, which I did...just in time for the alarm to go off! Its all so frustrating.
Aubrey took an early nap this morning, so I took advantage of it and laid down as well. I laid down for about 2 hours, probably slept maybe 15 minutes of that. Its better then nothing...I was just hoping for more. I was so cold! Couldn't get warm, I think that was part of the reason I didn't sleep much.
Bill ended up only working 1/2 a day today. We had lunch together, then he want down to his pc, while I was at mine. Once Bree woke from her nap and ate, she summoned Daddy to come sit down and play playdough with her. When she got tired of that they came out to the living room to play a bit. When it was time for me to go pick Jilly & Kels up at school Bree acted like she wanted to stay with daddy. So I went out the door, got in the van...and out comes Bill with Bree. She changed her mind he said. So he loaded her into her car seat and I started down the driveway, she screamed. She wanted daddy...so he got her out. I started to back out the rest of the way and she started screaming for me. She really didn't know what the heck she wanted...I guess she cried almost the whole time I was gone. Sheesh. Such a mommy's girl sometimes.
The girls & I all went outside to play this evening. The older girls did their homework out on the picnic table while Bree ran around and played in her sandbox. She loves being outside in our backyard. Its going to really suck when the super cold weather comes and we are stuck inside all the time. We'll both be going crazy by then...heck I'll probably end up making a duck movie sequel! See, last winter, I was bored, Bree was sleeping, so I made a movie using her rubber duck toys...it was quite humorous if you ask me... If you are interested in seeing it, let me know, I'll link ya to it :)
After dinner the little girls played playdough for a bit, and then we had orange sherbert, yummy. Then came bathtime :) One of my favorite times of the day. I enjoy watching Bree play in the tub. She usually loves taking her baths. She has a doll for the tub now. It swims, if the batteries are in it. We just got it last week, tried it, it scared the crap out of her...so we removed the batteries and now she loves it.
As I type this, Bree is sleeping (already had 1 wake up though). Soon Bill will get up to go to work, then Jilly & I will go to bed. I am SO EXCITED! I can't wait to try to sleep...I pray tonight is much better then last night. Cross your fingers for me! :)
I guess thats it for now...Sorry I bored you.
1 hour ago

AUBURN -- Quan Bray wears No. 4, but after the best performance of his career, the Auburn senior is No. 1 in the nation in punt returns.
The Tigers wide receiver leads Division I-A with a 36.8-yard average on five punt returns, 10 yards more than the second-place Tyler Lockett, whom Auburn knows all about after its trip to Kansas State, where Lockett showcased his game-breaking abilities.
"That's just going to make me work harder," Bray said of the possibility of leading the country after two returns for 98 yards, including a 76-yard touchdown, in Auburn's 45-17 win over Louisiana Tech. "I'm just getting those guys up front a hand and just tell them keep doing what they doing and good things will happen. We'll just see at the end of the season who's the No. 1 punt returner in the nation."
Bray's worked on returns his whole career, but with very limited success. He averaged 7 yards per return in his career, including just 5.1 yards last season while working behind Chris Davis Jr., and did not have a return touchdown in his first three seasons.
In four games this season, Bray has a career-high 184 punt return yards, a new career long (76) and his first two return touchdowns.
"My mindset before then was to try to be the best punt returner in the nation," he said. "Without those guys up front ... I wouldn't be able to do that."
Bray's decisions during returns clearly have improved, particularly since 2012 when he had troubles fielding punts and made very poor choices of whether or not to call for a fair catch.
"Our motto is 'one cut and go,'" Bray said. "If you get 10 or 15 yards, that's a good return."
Bray's return touchdown came just 63 seconds after he caught a 44-yard touchdown from Nick Marshall, his second scoring grab of the game.
It was Bray's first career game scoring multiple touchdowns.
"I thought it was one of the best all-around games he's had," offensive coordinator Rhett Lashlee said. "Obviously, the two touchdown catches were great, but he's become a great punt returner for us, which is huge. It really lifted our team.
"He graded out and played well the whole game, and that's what we need from him because he's a pretty explosive player. He's got a lot of things he does well. He's smart. He's been in the system for four years, and he knows what he's doing. He can help lead those guys. I was really proud of him making those big plays right before half and when we needed one in the second half."
Bray said he hadn't felt as good after a game since his debut as a punt returner against South Carolina in 2011. He had three punt returns for 26 yards in that game.
"That my first start at punt return. ... I had a good return, and that was the only thing I did. ... I felt pretty good after that," Bray said. "I'm just going to ... keep practicing and try to be the best (so) that my teammates can rely on me."

What does Joel Madden have to say these days? Well, his girlfriend Nicole Richie is pregnant again, for starters!
On his official Good Charlotte blog, Joel wrote "What's better than winning an Oscar? I am so happy to tell everyone that Harlow is going to be a big sister! God has truly blessed my family. Hope your all feeling as good as i am right now........."
The couple's daughter Harlow was born on January 11, 2008, and Nicole and Joel have been together for about two and half years. Lots and lots of congratulations going out to them!

KUALA LUMPUR: A 25-year-old woman broke into tears yesterday when the High Court here reduced her 10-day jail term to five days for a conviction for stealing napkins and baby food for her infant.
Chong Ann Ni, 25, a mother of a 15-month-old baby girl, was convicted by the Magistrates Court on July 15 and ordered to begin her jail term the same day at the Kajang Prison.
Judge Mohamed Zaini Mazlan today granted her application made on July 16 for a reduced term and declared that she was free to depart from prison, as the young mother had already served five days from Monday.
In his judgment, Mohamed Zaini said the 10-day sentence meted out to Chong, a first-time offender and the mother of a nursing infant, was excessive.
He said other factors he had taken into consideration were Chong’s admission of guilt and the fact that she had already served time in jail.
Lawyers Chan Yen Hui and Raj Surian Pillai who appeared for Chong appealed to the court for the reduction on the grounds that their client had resorted to stealing items needed for her baby because of hardships faced on account of her husband being out of work since December last year. – Bernama

How we adopted Bobby by his two legged parents Alison and Stuart McGowan (dog lovers extraordinaire)
What could possibly go wrong?
Our first ever visit to the ARK was in 2013 with the sole intention of dropping off a donation and nothing more. I thought it would be safe to visit the shelter as we’re far too practical to think about adopting a dog from a foreign country while on holiday. We hadn’t bargained on meeting Bobby!
As we pulled into the parking space the first dog we met was a very distraught, very small, very black Pomeranian cross who was desperately crying and attempting to get our attention. We gave him a scratch on the head and walked on. He yelled at us as we walked away. In the second pen a group of young females came rushing up looking for a fuss but they were having fun chasing each other and playing with their water bowl. The third pen housed a group of boy puppies who rough and tumbled and waited for us to throw a tennis ball for them.
Meeting Marina … and Bobby
In all we spent about half an hour meeting the dogs and talking to Marina. As she walked us back to the car the conversation turned to the first dog we had seen who seemed much more anxious than the other dogs.
Marina explained that he had literally been dropped off about 15 minutes before we arrived. Illness in his owners family meant they were leaving the island and couldn’t take him with them. The problem was that as he was very small and a house dog so it would be difficult for Marina to place him with the bigger, street dogs in the large pens.
We stroked him again and drove off.
At the end of the lane we looked at each other. Stuart said I’m going back and promptly turned the car around to return to the shelter. We asked Marina if she would consider letting us adopt him and within an hour arrangements were being made for his passport and an amazing foster home found to keep him safe.
We couldn’t quite believe it was happening but the thought of leaving that unhappy, black scrap was unthinkable. A few days later we left the island but in a matter of a few weeks we were heading back down the M4 to meet the transport run that had brought him over to the UK.
Bobby’s adoption …
However, it wasn’t all plain sailing. Bobby fitted in very well with the other dogs straight away but not long after he arrived we could see he was quite an excitable dog to the point where he would tremble and bark non-stop for no apparent reason. He was a very happy boy but just seemed a bit over excited at times.
Within a couple of months he started showing signs of seizure activity which we managed to capture on video. We’d had an epileptic dog before but these seizures weren’t the same at all. Our vet took a look and agreed that he seemed to be having some sort of epileptic episodes and started him on medication. The seizures gradually became further and further apart and then seemed to stop completely.
Bobby began to enjoy a normal life and managed so well that we stopped his medication. All went marvellously until a year ago when the seizure symptoms gradually began to appear again. There was no apparent reason or major changes in his life but somehow they’d started again.
We got him back on his old medications but they weren’t as effective this time. We tried different doses right up to the maximum but nothing seemed to stop them. Our new vet, Spiridoula, suggested using an old fashioned drug that had good results but may possibly be harsher on his little body than his current medication.
We had to make a decision about his medication …
It’s at this point you have to weigh up the pros and cons of quality over quantity and hope you’re making the right decision for him. But, watching him become frightened and upset during those horrible episodes, which were becoming longer and more frequent every week, was heart breaking and we made the decision to change his medication.
His new medication now seem to be working really well, even though he does still have the occasional episode. But on the bright side, they’re much milder and shorter seizures than before. We can even distract him with a bit with food during one now, which at least takes his mind off it.
In conclusion …
So I have to say that in many ways our first visit to the ARK didn’t go at all as planned but it definitely didn’t go wrong. We certainly wasn’t expecting to adopt a dog that day and not one with any health issues, but we’re so glad we did on both counts. Giving him a home and making sure he’s as well as he can be is the least we can do for the little man who brings us so much joy. We do worry about his health a bit but we know he’s happy and enjoying life which all you can expect.
We need to say a big thank you to ARK for being there for Bobby. Who knows what may have happened to him without you
More information …
If you would like to read more heartwarming ARK adoption stories or to view dogs featured for adoption click here
Lovely Bobby, lovely story
you are both incredible people with the work you do for ARK and all the strays and abandoned in Kef. Thank you.

I have fairly narrow interests. I will be the first to admit that. When left to my own devices, I don't tend to do much outside of those very narrow interests. Call it inertia or "internal focus" as I've sometimes referred to it. That works great if you live alone, but not so great when you have a wife and kids.
Before my wife and I got married, or maybe it was early in our marriage, my wife told me there were certain things that she, quite simply, wasn't interested in talking with me about. The minutia of my workday was one of them. Some of my geek projects are another. She doesn't share my passion for technology and I have done my best to respect her wishes and not share. Over time, this has evolved into a more general rule: If what I am doing doesn't directly affect her or the kids, she not only doesn't need to know about it, but doesn't want to know about it.
The problem with this rule is that outside of stuff going on with the kids, schedules, home administrivia, and maybe the occasional program on TV, there isn't much to talk about with my wife. My wife doesn't do much beyond stuff related those tasks, so it's difficult for me to latch onto something to even try to talk to her about. With kids around, it's hard for us to have a conversation even we do have one. We don't have a whole lot of "alone time" as there are just some things that can't be done with the kids awake. It doesn't leave a lot of time for "alone time" and without much to talk about, what "alone time" we have is spent in bed sleeping.
However, I have a different "life" as it were, most of which happens in my office during working and late-night hours. This is stuff, by my rule above, I am unable to share with my wife. Most of it is of little or no interest to her. If she's going to tell me "why the hell are you telling me about this," why bother to tell her? I've just wasted her time and mine. About the only time I'll tell her is if she asks, for example when I show up in bed at 3 or 4am instead of a more normal 1 or 2am. And even then it's one or two sentences at most.
I sometimes wonder if I am making a big deal over nothing. It's not as if our relationship is bad. We can usually have a reasonable conversation, though on sensitive issues, emotions can sometimes get involved on one or both sides. We can usually resolve our differenes and move on, and I assume that happens in any relationship. One thing I can say is that our relationship seems to be missing something.
This is a topic I will have to explore more another time.

I can’t believe we’re here: Episode 100! This is incredible!
Well, the first IFH Podcast episode went live in September 2015. That’s a short time to be able to produce 100 podcast episodes, but what can I say I’m a hustler.
I’m so glad I finally got around to launch Indie Film Hustle because the podcast has done wonders for my brand, my career, and my life. The results were far beyond what I had ever imagined.
It allows me to reach more people than I could ever do with just my blog alone, and at the same time create a much deeper connection with them too. Beyond that, it has opened up doors to my filmmaking career, keynote speaking opportunities, potential book deals and more.
THANK YOU IFH TRIBE!
Without you, the Indie Film Hustle Tribe, the IFH Podcast would have never reached episode 100 or become the #1 filmmaking podcast on iTunes! I owe you guys so much, and that’s why I’m extremely excited for the next 100 episodes of this podcast.
If you enjoyed this episode or any of the other of the 99 episodes of the podcast, and you have not left a rating or review yet on iTunes, I would really appreciate an honest review and rating from you. It’s one of the most important parts of the ranking in the iTunes algorithm, but more than that, it’ll show future indie filmmakers that this is (or is not) worth their time.
To quickly leave a review, open up iTunes and search for Indie Film Hustle Podcast and then leave a rating and review as shown below. You can do this on your mobile device as well, and even if you’re not subscribed, and even if you listen on another platform – this is where I’d love your review.
This Weeks Special Guest – Aaron Kaufman & Brian Levin
In this special episode of the show, I have a chat with Aaron Kaufman. Not only was he Robert Rodriguez’s producer on films like Sin City: A Dame to Kill For, Machete and Machete Kills but he also directed a film called Urge starring James Bond Legend Pierce Bronson.
I grilled poor Aaron on all things, Robert Rodriguez, working with big stars, dealing with studios with $50 Million+ budgets in the balance and much more.
We also invite later on the show one of Aaron Kaufman’s producing partners, Brian Levin, from their new film Flock of Dudes starring Chris D’Elia, Hilary Duff, Jamie Chung, and Ray Liotta. I had a ball speaking with these guys.
Here’s to the Next 100 Episodes!
Thank you all so much for your support! Here’s to the next 100 episodes! If you have any guest suggestions, please feel free to leave them in the comments!
Keep that hustle going, keep that dream alive and I’ll talk to you soon.
Alex Ferrari 0:00
I like to welcome to the show Aaron Kaufman man thank you so much for reaching out to me man I'm excited to have you on the show.
Aaron Kaufman 19:42
Yeah, it's I really like your show. Thanks so much for having me.
Alex Ferrari 19:43
Thanks, man. How'd you find but just out of morbid curiosity, how did you find out about me or like
Aaron Kaufman 19:50
No, I mean I actually really love that there's this sort of podcast community building. You know, I like like john Auguste show great mazes. Great. You know, obviously MPR does the business. But if you look up if you google like that, you know the good film, podcast, you come up on those all the time. So once once I started getting into those, I was like, what else is out there? And that's kind of how I came across it.
Alex Ferrari 20:13
Yeah, there's a lot of great filmmaking podcasts out there, and they're building more getting more and more, there's a bunch more and more coming up every day. So it's just such a wealth of information. I mean, such a wealth of information,
Aaron Kaufman 20:23
which is great, because when I was when I started, there was not there was nothing Oh, yeah, you would, you would like look, you would have to go to like the the dove. Whatever that guy's name is stuff. Simmons. Simmons. Simmons, weekend course.
Alex Ferrari 20:36
Today, uh, today film school? Yep. And I actually had Doug was number in my eighth guest. He was on show number eight, and he's still exactly the way you remember him.
Aaron Kaufman 20:47
I only only remembered a couple things. One, I remember I only went because I was told and I don't know that this is true, because I haven't been able to confirm it. That Quentin Tarantino in blonde to his Yes, yeah, Will Smith. But I know quintard you know, and I asked him about it. And he really did get me. I don't know that it's true. Like he's sort of looked at me confused. It's I don't actually know that he that that's true. I don't know for breaking the story here. But Wow,
Alex Ferrari 21:09
It's so so that's been this big. That has been his big calling card for the last two decades.
Aaron Kaufman 21:14
It's possible, but I wasn't able to confirm it. And then to I'm trying to think about the the advice at the time. And the biggest piece of advice I remember Doug giving was that you got to treat your actors. Well, you should cut the bagels beforehand, for the actors don't have to cut the whole mix.
Alex Ferrari 21:33
That's actually quite great advice.
Aaron Kaufman 21:36
I've gotten in the position I'm in today.
Alex Ferrari 21:39
And the other great I had a great piece of advice from an old dp when I was on set once and you know, I was on an indie It was like a small budget, you know, music video or something. And the producer came I ever was what's for lunch? And the DP just turned to me and said, Oh my god, they're spinning wheels of death. Do you know what spinning wheels of death are?
Aaron Kaufman 21:59
Is that vaguely that would bagels? No, those are pizzas. Oh God, because there's no protein. And it's all it's all bread.
Alex Ferrari 22:04
It's just all bread. And it just slows the crew down. And it's it's just cheap food, you know, generally speaking, so you'd never want to feed your crew. Now, if you can help it maybe once in a blue moon, but if you can
Aaron Kaufman 22:16
Grab services, my specialty.
Alex Ferrari 22:20
So how did you get into the crazy world of filmmaking? Man? Wow, I
Aaron Kaufman 22:23
Always wanted to I mean, since I can remember, I don't really I don't really have other interests or other talents or, or anything like that. When I was young, no, it was I guess, 1314. And I wanted to, I think I saw do the right thing when I was 14. And, and that was and I was like, blown away. Because I didn't before that I really know what a director really did or was and I think Steven Spielberg was probably the only other director I was aware of. And then what was cool was Spike Lee actually wrote these books. I don't know if you ever I don't know if you ever saw them or not. Yeah, they they're great. In fact, I think they still are great. But what was cool about it is he kept these journals. And he published them. So like, Robert did it like Robert did? Yeah. But it was before Robert. And actually, I was surprised when I met Robert, initially that he was a big fan of those books. Because I didn't know anybody else would love them. But like she's got to have it. School Days and do the right thing. And then I think he did them. He did them for a while. I think he did them all the way up to Mach max. Oh, wow. But yeah, but what was cool about him was he really kept a journal. And a lot of the questions I had like, what the fuck does a director he answered those himself, you know, we're like, what is this? Or how do you do this? Or when do you do that? Or how much should this cost, and he literally has an image, if you read the one for her, she's got to have it, he literally moved, he like, rented a editing, you know, flatbed and moved it into his studio apartment. And he's writing about trying to figure out how to how to work, you know, so he, he really started from that point. And because there's when you read film books, normally from like, we read the books of great directors, it's always like, I was born. And then when I directed my first feature, yada, yada, yada. They're like, Whoa, what happened in between? Like, you know, how did you how did you make this movie? You know, how did this happen? And so his was the first I'd read where he really got into the nitty gritty. And then from there, I was really off, but um, it took me a while I was I spent a lot of my 20s doing other things. But when I was, I guess about 27 or so, I had my first job in entertainment, which was, um, I may be a little older. I was 28 maybe. But I started working for Chris Blackwell, at Palm Pictures, which was the company started after after Island Records, and that was my first exposure. And that was great because I got to touch, you know, everything from music to film. He was even doing some really early online stuff at the time, and so it was is a great place to sort of start learning a lot about the business and then from there it's been step by step you know trying to produce and then eventually producing films and then eventually working with Robert Rodriguez and then directing and then talking to you
Alex Ferrari 25:15
so since you bring Robert up on by the way, but I'm just gonna step back for a second for all the kids in the audience a flatbed is how you used to edit film and that there's this thing called film that that you shoot movies on and if you guys haven't seen it she's got to have it if I'm not if I'm not mistaken that's his first feature right? That's his first one yeah, so she's gotta have it was kind of like some kind of great no it's an amazing I remember seeing it in film school and then during that time because it was she's got to have it is one of the he's like he was at that he was at that moment of time where all the independent the big independent movement started right before Quentin and mariachi and clerks and and sex lies and videotape. It was all during those like late 80s, early 90s and the the independent explosion and spike was right there, which he's got to have and he's one of the first guys to come out the gate.
Aaron Kaufman 26:09
Yeah, I saw that in high school. And then because I saw I think I saw do I think first and then went back and sorted out the mood. Yeah. But But then, I remember like hearing about the Sundance Film Festival for the first time when I was in maybe 11th grade. And Steven Soderbergh. And then, you know, the whole Quentin Roberts thing happened after that, and that was when I mean there was such a vitality now. That's fine that it's it's almost a bummer now. Because you know, that's the it just, it's it's that time I you just not gonna have another time like that. I think in the foreseeable future.
Alex Ferrari 26:45
It was like it's basically like the 70s like, you'll never see a run of movies and directors explode like they did in the 70s. It was just a different time. You know, having Scorsese to taxi driver and EZ rider and the godfathers and jaws and all these kinds of guys just blow up. Same thing happened for the 90s that that little early part of the 90s, late 80s, early 90s of that independent explosion came out. Yeah, it's and it's something that I don't I think there's gonna be something like that again. But it'll be different like now, but I just there's just so much now.
Aaron Kaufman 27:18
I thought in the early mid 2000s, I thought you would see it because there was that like Michel Gondry? Yeah. Oh, God.
Alex Ferrari 27:27
Yeah, the commercial guys. Yeah. And Mark Womack, and
Aaron Kaufman 27:29
those guys ensure and all those guys, yeah, Chris Cunningham, who actually never has still not made a feature.
Alex Ferrari 27:35
But did Chris cut did Chris Cunningham do inspector get? No, that's David Kellogg.
Aaron Kaufman 27:40
Yeah, I think I think Chris is still not made it but he's crazy. He's amazing. Those big short videos.
Alex Ferrari 27:46
Oh, God, amazing stuff. Amazing.
Aaron Kaufman 27:48
And so that was sort of I thought, you know, obviously, we got some, you know, Mark Romanek, and we got out of out of that time, but that's like the last sort of movement of any kind. I think you can probably add Sophia Roman Coppola tonight as well. But but there hasn't been and I was always thought even back then, because Palm Pictures owned a magazine called rez magazine, which was started by a couple guys in a friend of mine named john schoolies. And they were really early to the digital world, you know, this was like back to, you know, be really, in 2000 2001. And I really thought that that, that the digital would bring in sort of a new wave because now there's all these people that have a voice that can now make a film. I mean, I I'm old enough to remember taking film courses that we had to we because we're dealing with film short answer millimeter, well, not only doing short ends, but where you would direct a shot, and then you would move over and the next person because you're because you're dealing with the you know how expensive film is now it's like, people can do stuff on their, on their phones. I'm waiting for that crest and that wave of sort of new filmmakers and and I'm sure they're, they're here, they're, you know, you're in, in spots. But there hasn't been like a movement of brand new filmmakers that come out
Alex Ferrari 29:10
of that. And I feel and I feel that and now we're, again off a little bit off the subject, but I'll say this one thing, and then we'll move on, because I feel that that there is a lot of talent now and you can see it and there's these kids who like that, like oh, I already made my first feature 14 I'm like, you know, go screw yourself. Now. You and me are like john sonova, you know, and I love it. I know I love it, too. I love it. But I'm like, I wish I just haven't.
Aaron Kaufman 29:34
It just hasn't. There's a lot of stuff being created. But I don't know that there's a lot of you know, there isn't the voices per se. Right to to support
Alex Ferrari 29:45
right. And also, I think the other big aspect is even if there is some good work out there, trying to break through the noise. You have to have a marketing degree. You have to have an audience you have to have so many different things just to get noticed. Sometimes it's your time It's really, really tough to, to break through as opposed to the early 90s. Like clerk like Kevin Smith said, He's like, if I show up with clerks today, I would never get no one would even look at me.
Aaron Kaufman 30:11
And I said, Is anything about the movie that that is integral to me? is Larry Clark kids? Oh, I think about that, because that was at that moment, especially in New York. Oh, every everybody of my generation. Yeah, that's their, you know, that's their American Graffiti. I remember he says, about our generation, but that movie today, I don't, you know, it would be tough to get that movie, a digital release. You know, like it getting any kind of real support around a digital release for it would be difficult. It was it was difficult. Again, you have something like, like Shaun Baker, who did tangerine, you know that that pops out. And that's interesting. I just, I'd like to, I'd love to see more stuff like that, where, you know, you're, you're seeing people use new technology in different ways.
Alex Ferrari 30:59
Yeah, exactly. Exactly. So let's get into the the question you brought up or you brought him up earlier today, you work with the legendary Robert Rodriguez, how did you get involved working with Robert,
Aaron Kaufman 31:11
I've worked, I worked I worked with Robert from, I guess 2009, up until about 2015. And was left to direct my first feature, but I, I had talked to Robert a few times. And I guess I had tried to pitch him projects, which when I got to work with him, I realized how futile those times was like, cool. I'm, you know, I'm trying to pitch Robert Rodriguez. And maybe we'll do it and then I realized work with him like, Oh, I'd never never really had a chance to mostly because he he really generates so much of his of his work by by themselves, which is what makes them super special. But um, but eventually I kind of asked, you know, what was it that you if he wanted to do, you know, and he was in a bit of a transitional period after Grindhouse, and but he's still he still wanted to sort of explore that, you know, Ryan house and met with sort of, not the response that they were they were looking for, I think, I think he still felt like, man, there's something there. And he just didn't want to, you know, kind of move on and admit defeat. And so we talked about machete, he said, You know, I have this sort of 40 page outline of what I want to do. And I'd like to make it into a feature. And I immediately was like, great. Yeah, I mean, he I knew machete I remember that was the first image that comes up on the on Grindhouse, and the just like, like I was, I was in love immediately, because it was just everything I had grown up with, and it was all distilled into this, this, this trailer, and it's kind of masterful, and so I was I was in, you know, like a, like a cold number. Right? You drank the Kool Aid. So I was like, whatever. Yeah, it was like, I will kill I'll do whatever I have to do to get this done. And it was, um, it had an interesting path where, you know, I went down to Austin, and I got to see troublemaker which he had built, which was his own studio, which he had had from Spy Kids on. From like, 2000, I think are on he had this studio, which was like a decommissioned airport that they used to use for the governor. And he now had his own green screen his own soundstages upon everything. Yeah, yeah. And it was it for me. I was once I saw that it was it was oh, you know, I was I was I was like, I'll figure out how to how to move down here and work here because there was just nothing. There's no there's no equivalent You know, there's really I mean, maybe maybe Peter Jackson and maybe George Lucas right. You know, as far as having your own fiefdom but but he is was it was just outrageous, you know, and then also, I'm, I'm a real fan of old. I really love anything that's kind of old showbiz. And there was kind of even though we're in Texas and it was 115 degrees or whatever, it was down there. It had kind of an old showbusiness feel to it because you had you know you had your costume department and you had your you know, this department and you had makeup inherent and everything was set up and he had a staff on board and all of his staff were like really film nerds you know they really were focused on the craft and so it was just amazing and I we initially were going to put machete together as a small sort of direct video product and his remember Robert really was like look the only thing that you know has to stay constant is getting trailer has to play we should of course Yeah, well you say of course but you know, there were other people that would have made this movie with him and there's other people that would have financed this movie with him but they were like great get Antonio Banderas to play machete and we're you know, we'll give you $25 million right and and he really stuck to his guns It was like no machete is Danny Trejo Dini trail is machete there's just you know, there's just no two ways about it. And I said yeah, to me, I thought the same way course. So I remember, it was funny. When we first sat down and we were in Austin. I remember two things distinctly one was we called Danny Trejo and he was like, I'm gonna call him and let him know, you know, because this is the first time Danny was ever the star of a movie.
Alex Ferrari 35:16
Right? He's always been he's always been the he's the character actor.
Aaron Kaufman 35:19
Oh yeah, it's really interesting. I know people catch it. But if you go and look at machete, what's interesting is we we went through other movies that that Danny had done, where he got killed by the main star, and he had been killed by Steven Seagal a number of times. You know, he gets killed and he, which he did with Robin. Yeah, so we started going and populating the movie with people who he who had been killed him in the past, and now puts
Alex Ferrari 35:46
it on the screen. That's brilliant. That's actually quite brilliant. It's
Aaron Kaufman 35:48
actually it's actually the only time Steven Seagal little trivia. One time Steven Seagal ever dies on screen is in Michigan. And I remember that was a big deal on set that day, but it was just cool. You know, he was top of the call sheet and it was great. But Robert calls him Clinton down. And I guess he was in Louisiana shooting something. And, you know, we're like, great, we're gonna do it. He was so excited. He was so great, which he is he's actually just a really lovely guy. And, and he says, He, I asked them, I said, Well, what, you know, what are you shooting now? And all of a sudden, he pauses. And you hear him open the door to his to his trailer and yell out to somebody, what's the name of his movie? And the person tells you back whatever it was, I forget actually what it was. But he comes back and tells me and Robert and I were laughing zone like, with Danny, you don't know the name of the movie that you're starring in? And he goes, man, I work
Alex Ferrari 36:46
Oh, Does he ever
Aaron Kaufman 36:48
stuff but but he's a great guy. And so that that was sort of the beginning but but what ended up happening was he had such a good vibe about it, the project and people were so supportive of it, that all of a sudden, we're starting to get inbound calls from from people saying, you know, I would do something on this movie, or I would, you know, come down or I would do this and, and Robert, really, to his credit created such an environment down there, where it was really fun for people, you know, so it wasn't like, Hey, we're, you know, we're shooting this in Bulgaria, we're shooting this, whatever it was, like, come down to Austin, the way Robert shoots and get you shot out in three, four or five days. Yeah, I
Alex Ferrari 37:22
was gonna ask you, I was gonna ask. And I know a lot of people always wonder about this, I know the answer. But I want you to kind of tell the audience is how he's able to get this amazing cast, like he gets these these amazing, like a listers to come in and do big parts in his movies. And you look at SimCity, or even my chapter, how does he do it? So please explain it to the audience. We can?
Aaron Kaufman 37:42
Well, yeah, I mean, I think the real the first answer is that, you know, they're fans of his work. And, and I think that, you know, people look at his movies, and they think, you know, there's, you know, john No, the Johnny Depp has ever looked as cool as he has in movies ever looked as amazing and she's looked in his movie. So, you know, for people, it's not that it's, you know, if I were an actor, I would want you know, I would want him to do my posting like, it's true, great sees, he creates these iconic images, you know, but I think that's one level. And then I think the other thing is that he has created an environment down there where, you know, you're going down to Austin, which, you know, for a couple days is a is, is really a great fun place to be, he has this environment where you're not really being, you know, you're not being hassled in the way that you are, but he also creates this thing where, you know, it's and I've tried to keep this with me, it's pretty down to earth, you know, he doesn't really like the whole hierarchy, you know, he likes when people hang out on set, he doesn't really love when people are just in their trailers the whole time. And he fosters that kind of environment where, you know, he's, he's got easel set up with paints and stuff and an artist, so that actors can be, you know, painting portraits and stuff while they're while you know, while they're waiting, instead of being back in their, in their trailer, it just creates like a really artistic and, and really creative environment. And that's when I really started to, I mean, of course, I always knew the importance of the creative, but he really drilled into everybody that it was kind of the only thing that was important. You know, like, it doesn't like, like being creative, being able to express yourself, even if you're not an expert. If you're not an expert painter, you're not expert musician, but just the fact that you're taking your expression and putting it out there is going to make it interesting. That's a really interesting thing. I think for creative people like actors, that's very attractive. And so looking for that opportunity there, they'll come down and then also organizationally, he really knows production very well. And so and he knows editing very well which I found was was very interesting in the sense of he knew that you know, he would know exactly what he needed from someone so he didn't really need to shoot a whole lot outside of what he needed. You know, he'll stop somebody in the middle of something that's okay look, I'm cutting here, so just take it to here. And he so he knows in his head exactly where the cuts are, as he's shooting and it makes it a lot easier and more efficient. So He can shoot somebody out in three or four days. And that's something I've seen him do quite a bit. So the it's, you know, it's him, it's often and it's also that, you know, they're not coming down for 10 weeks, they're coming down for, you know, four days
Alex Ferrari 40:14
right now. And that's like producing a movie like machete and Machete Kills is it as crazy as it is looks like on screen,
Aaron Kaufman 40:23
it's, I would say no, in the sense of we, I mean, I walked into an environment down there, which was pretty, they were pretty well oiled team to begin with. And then my philosophy on things, you know, I'm not a yeller screamer kind of drama person, you know, I like when things are pretty easy going. So you would actually be surprised on the set on our set, how quiet and how sort of efficient it is. I mean, we have a lot of fun. And a lot of the, you know, the stuff that we're doing is, you know, like I would get to go to so there were days where like, I would come to work on Monday, and we were blowing something up. And then the next day, you know, machete is we're trying to figure out how to how to rig a scene where he's pulling someone's intestines out. Yes. So you know, your, your job is definitely not dull. But there's there really wasn't a lot of like, you know, the set itself ran ran like a pretty well oiled machine. And even actors. And even actors that were, you know, known to be difficult on other sets, they tended to be in a different mindset when they came down to work with us. Because they, they, they kind of knew that there wasn't room for the shenanigans. So people were generally on their best behavior when they when they came down, and they enjoyed the
Alex Ferrari 41:40
process. Now, let me let me ask you a question, how this is just a side tip. And of course, you can't name names, but I'm sure you've worked with difficult actors in your, in the past? Yes. What are some tips that you would give a director who happens to be dealing with a big personality who's just acting up or just being a brat? or things like that on a set, especially when the personalities are big? Well,
Aaron Kaufman 42:05
it's a good question. It's not a it's not a easy question to answer. But, but I'll answer it this way, for first and foremost, if you're a first time director, and you're getting a chance to work with talent, even if they're the greatest people ever, but there are big talent. It's it's intimidating, you know, so there's a lot of that that's going on, I would say the first thing to do with people that are difficult is to really take a beat before you react, write a don't initially take it personally, because that's what everybody does, you know, when it's like, Okay, well, I'm going to be offended, and I hate him. And now he hates me, and now, and then this just develops into, you know, terrible this. So I wouldn't, I would say, you know, take a beat, and ask yourself, why is this happening? Right? Because there are a lot of times where you have an actor who doesn't feel comfortable, right, you have an actor who doesn't feel like he's getting enough direction, you have an actor who's self conscious, who doesn't really feel confident about the scene. And I would say, a good half of the time, that's where the sort of bad behavior is coming from, is that and if you can address those things, you'll see that change and, and that's something you have to learn the other 50% of times, you might just be dealing with people that are terrible. People,
Alex Ferrari 43:15
and why in Hollywood know
Aaron Kaufman 43:17
it, but it happens, right? And so if you, if you take a beat, and that's your deduction, you know, the one thing you need to be able to do is you do have to maintain control, a lot of a lot of ways, that's your job as a director is, you know, just being at the helm. And, and, and being able to say, okay, you know, this is, this is my set. And this is how we're going to, we're going to do this. And so you can do have to do that, my suggestion is that you wait for those moments, and then you bring it out when you have to bring it out. Because it happens, you know, you have an actress who woke it out of her trailer or takes too long and she's eating into your time, you know, there are the times where you have to go to their trailer yourself and handle it. And that's, that's something I would recommend is you know, there are a lot of ways to kind of avoid confrontation because you can have your your ad do better, you'd have your somebody else to one of the best things to do is to try to handle it yourself at times, because there's stuff that they'll pull with. If you have somebody who's a problem person. There's stuff that they'll pull with, you know, with other people on the set that they won't necessarily pull with the director,
Alex Ferrari 44:21
or the producer for that
Aaron Kaufman 44:22
matter. Yeah. With that being being the director has a lot more weight than being a producer.
Alex Ferrari 44:30
Now, did you ever hear the story of Frank Oz and Marlon Brando?
Aaron Kaufman 44:34
I have it's actually one of my favorite where he where he said, I'm not one of your Muppets,
Alex Ferrari 44:39
right? Yeah. You can't wait for the audience. This Frank Oz who's a really great director, and also the voice of Yoda. And also a voice of I think the Muppets he was he was a puppeteer.
Aaron Kaufman 44:52
He's a Dirty Rotten Scoundrels, which
Alex Ferrari 44:54
is, oh my God. He did yeah, I mean, he's He's really good. He's a really good director. And he was Directly movie called the score if I if I remember correctly. I also think that we're Norton, Edward Norton, Robert De Niro and the late Marlon Brando and Marlon would not allow him on set. He had to direct from his trailer and the only way he would talk to him as if Robert De Niro was it would would be the middle person yeah and I guess because he was Marlon Brando he got away with it like because yeah,
Aaron Kaufman 45:23
I mean I you know, it's interesting I always heard those stories and then obviously the Island of Dr. Moreau stories oh that's hilarious where he had like a ice bucket and he insisted on wearing in his head yeah during the scenes and and all this other stuff but what's interesting is if you that documentary that that that guy Steven Riley did this movie Marlon if you watch that and it's it's interesting because you you get a real feel for Brando that he a lot of that the torture a lot of the bad behavior quote unquote that he was that he was guilty of a lot of it a came from the fact that he was bored you know that a lot of times just the the Act was he just wasn't finding enough to get him that excited. And to that he was trying to bring something interesting. If you go back and watch the Island of Dr. Moreau like if you watch the documentary about a couple that was called, but it just makes Marlon Brando look like a monster. Then you go back and watch Don Island Dr. Moreau and you go hey, this is not a great movie. But But what's great about it is everything weird that mark Brando is doing
Alex Ferrari 46:29
he's trying to do something basically so
Aaron Kaufman 46:31
I don't exactly I've forgotten exactly what the where the rift started between him and Frank Oz but obviously he got to a point where he was just like, you know, I don't trust this person and he's gonna be a monster and he was of a mindset that it he wasn't worried about getting work in the future. He wasn't worried about anything. He's Marlon Brando. Yeah. So so that's that but but yeah, the Muppets story is is is is hysterical, but Frank Oz to me he's actually done a bunch of cool movies. And and I I've never met him, but I've heard he's a really nice guy.
Alex Ferrari 47:02
Yeah, man. And he's for god sakes. He's the voice of Yoda. I mean, seriously, I mean, that'll that alone gets you drinks wherever you go for the rest of your life, I think so you also worked on another little film called Sin City the sequel to Sin City with with Robert What was it like jumping into that that seat? Because I mean, Sin City was a game changing movie it was like you know is iconic what Robert did with the first one. So to come back and do the second one How did that feel? And how what are some stories you could tell me
Aaron Kaufman 47:34
super scary. Really scary. I mean, I when I started working with him, obviously I was a big fan of really all of his work. Really everything Robert had done including the Spy Kids movies, and but obviously since it was just such a landmark movie and the idea of getting back into that world and you know, continuing the stories because I was a big fan of the comics. In fact, that was one of our first conversations that kind of hit it off with Robert and I were not about Frank Miller but about Frank frazetta. And you know, the those conversations where I told him what a big fan I was and we started talking about that I think he cared way more about that than any knowledge that I may have had about about film or filmmaking. And so the I was a huge Frank Miller fan and the idea of going back and some of the other stories that I knew had been written and not published to bring those into you know make those a movie out of those was just so interesting. And you know, so I wanted to make it I won't get into the whole the vagaries of it all but the just the rights and getting it to just the point where we could make that movie really so I mean, there's a probably a book in there because they had done it originally with Miramax, right REMAX was owned by Disney at the time. Yep. And then the Weinstein's had left as well, The Weinstein Company and then Disney, Disney didn't hadn't hadn't renewed the rights and and so at some point, and then Frank Miller had, you know, claims on the right so that's one point there was like five different entities from the the new Miramax the new Weinstein Company, Disney, Frank Miller, a couple other guys that that were that essentially all challenged the rights and said, you know, we own that. So just cleaning that up, took about a year. Okay. And it was Yeah, it was it was to the point where every once in a while Rob would say maybe it's not meant to be, you know, and so, between the two of us that was like, No, we, we have to do this right to get it made. And then so that we did that, and ultimately, what people don't necessarily realize is since 82, we made that independently. It was released by the Weinstein's but we actually put that together as a pretty large independent movie.
Alex Ferrari 49:55
You mean so you guys you mean Robert finances himself? No, he didn't.
Aaron Kaufman 50:00
But he helped to finance it he helped to put it together Robert Roberts actually outside of the filmmaker credit credit that I gave him he he actually picked up the film finance and in sort of the business side of things and he picked a lot of that up very quickly and he would get involved so he and I can I actually put it together piece by piece from you know equity and foreign sales to debt etc There were a lot of people that ended up working on getting that made but it was it was pretty much it was a pretty crazy achievement even before cameras roll on on the movie then as far as the creative goes you know getting that script to a point where you know it was going to make fans you know there was such a the the the fan involvement was something I was not really familiar with you know I did Comic Con for the first time with machete
Alex Ferrari 50:52
that's a circus that a half isn't it?
Aaron Kaufman 50:55
Oh man in some ways it's great and in some ways it's super scary because you're we did a haulage presentation that's like 7000 people yeah, that was the that was where Robert announced that that if we ever did a third machete it would be machete in space
Alex Ferrari 51:12
Aaron Kaufman 51:12
that was like I remember just like 5000 phones in Twitter accounts you know like lighting up immediately but but anyway so I was not aware of of that prior Robert was Robert really knows the fans and he himself is really kind of like a super fan when it comes to that world. I was I have that background and that's interesting to me but I'm not as sort of into the vitality of what a comic comic book fan today is really looking for. Robert knows because he is that guy and so he would tell me like oh they're not gonna like this or they're not gonna like it or they're gonna go crazy over this and and he It was good that he had that kind of feel for it cuz I didn't but yeah no the the you know there were times because you're trying to put this cast together and there were times where the producer side of me was like alright, well we can't get this person or this person not available What do you think about this person? And he looked at me like now it's not gonna work you can't replace you know this character or that character because the fans are going nuts
Alex Ferrari 52:13
yeah he's right now
Aaron Kaufman 52:15
yeah so he was totally right and and so it was it was a lot of pressure from all sides to to get that done and but the actual making of that movie went pretty flawlessly you know, we did a lot basically all of a green screen down in Austin and the The production was was actually that was a fun shoot to shoot
Alex Ferrari 52:33
that yeah and yeah is and the one of the things I said least from the behind the scenes and all the things I've read about Sin City is that the reason was able to get people in and out is because he shot everything green screen. So sometimes, you know, Marv would be having a conversation with with Jessica Alba and neither of them were in the room. Like one of them went there and the other one wasn't, and so on and so forth. He would just composite them later.
Aaron Kaufman 52:54
It happens. I mean, if you look at for the first movie, there's the bar scene which I think there's like a d&d extra. I don't watch TV the extras anymore, but
Alex Ferrari 53:03
honestly, this DVD you speak of
Aaron Kaufman 53:04
Yeah, exactly. There's TV extra will show that the bar scene was basically has everybody I mean, it's Mickey Rourke. climo. And Bruce was just God. And they're all in that in that one long bar scene. And I don't think any of them were in the room with each other at the same time.
Alex Ferrari 53:19
Yeah, I know. It's It was pretty like I still remember when I saw Sin City and my mouth just dropped because it was it was at the time when I was making my first film. And it inspired me so much. I was just like, well, Robert, in general, it's been one of my big inspirations. But that movie when I was just like, no one has ever seen anything like that. And how amazing is it that in today's day and age and what SimCity one I think was only about 1011 years ago that came out that you can create something that no one has ever seen before. He literally created a real black and white movie. Like Natalie, I
Aaron Kaufman 53:55
mean, like there's a way to think about it. There's a lot of stuff in that movie where if you were pitching it, there are a lot of objections to why that would be would not work right it's it's it's a it's an anthology film. Yeah, yeah, it's no it's a noir you know, it's super violent. Super violent. Yeah. So so there's a lot of reasons why that didn't work. But why it did work was it people just never experienced anything like that before? And I think that I mean, that could be I'm definitely partial but when I look at a lot of these sort of green screen movies that have made sense, I don't know that any have really been able to go back and and, and replicate the just a pure joy that it was the movie for the first time.
Alex Ferrari 54:35
Well, I know Frank Miller was very vocal in saying that Zack Snyder had a lot to Oh, Robert for 300
Aaron Kaufman 54:45
I think Zack Snyder probably said as well, because it's
Alex Ferrari 54:47
just like I mean serious. I mean, 300 I mean, we can get I don't want to get off on that tangent on Zack but 300 was also one of those movies that you Jesus. I've never seen anything like that. But I think the thing that broke that door open was in-city and Robert Robert broke that door open
Aaron Kaufman 55:01
for sure. In fact, I think I believe Warner Brothers came down and actually checked out kick the tires to sort of get get a feel for how he did it because there was there was actually a certain amount I don't think people understand this part is there was a certain amount of r&d that Robert did prior before he even went to go see Frank Miller there was a r&d that he did he did just to see could could couldn't do this.
Alex Ferrari 55:24
Right. He actually had a pitch video that he put together for to convince Frank because Frank said absolutely not. a million
Aaron Kaufman 55:31
things right. Frankie had a bad experience with was Robocop to Robocop and he was like
Alex Ferrari 55:37
I'm out of here. I don't want to deal with Hollywood. And yeah, and I was actually in the I was actually in the hall h when Grindhouse was being announced. Oh, wow, that was that was that was because Grindhouse I we got it. I love Grindhouse. But I was like when I saw it in the theater, I was one of the few people that
Aaron Kaufman 55:56
I went to a midnight showing of it when the Thursday before the Friday came out. I mean, I was I could not have been more excited for a movie then.
Alex Ferrari 56:04
And you and you were around when he was producing predators as well. Right?
Aaron Kaufman 56:08
Yeah, well, that was kind of cool. Because we when I'm saying like, as far as the old, old showbiz kind of quality of troublemaker was, um, you know, when we were doing machete, predators was getting produced at the same time. And so we had almost like a backlog going in troublemaker where we'd walk. You know, we'd be walking one way and you'd see a brother. Yeah, Danny dress up as machete with like, a severed head. And then the other way, you would see, you know, guys dressed up as predators walking the other way,
Alex Ferrari 56:36
having having coffee and smoking a cigarette, right?
Aaron Kaufman 56:40
Like Roger performing days, I was I was in hog heaven. Like, I was like, it doesn't get any better than this.
Alex Ferrari 56:45
Yeah, that was. So that was a fun film as well, that was such a fun film, to watch predators. So then, so after you've, you've got this, you know, you you, obviously, you learned a heck of a lot working with Robert. And
Aaron Kaufman 56:59
I think the period that that was before my work with Robert, I learned a lot coming from New York world, you earn a lot, you learn a lot on how to kind of be scrappy, and where to find money, and how to put projects together. And those things, and I'm happy that I had that first. Because it really taught me to just sort of not take no for an answer and how to get something, get something made. The next phase working with Robert really taught me the value of the creative and sort of how movies can get made on a broader, bigger scale, but also using that same kind of mentality, you know, because we would try to always make a movie for less than what, you know, we had available to us, you know, we'd always try to, if we could get, you know, 40 million, we'd make it for 30, just because it gave us the flexibility to make what we what we wanted. And so that was, you know, sort of what I learned in that phase, and then just pure production because we were making a movie every nine months when I was there. And so you're just constantly in in production and your that is really the better than any kind of school I could have. Like I could have gone to
Alex Ferrari 58:07
Yeah, I remember when Spy Kids was I mean Spy Kids kind of like launched Robert, I think financially it's his biggest thing right? Still to this day. I think the Spy Kids trilogy.
Aaron Kaufman 58:17
I mean, they're juggling huge. Yeah, we're all pretty huge.
Alex Ferrari 58:20
They were huge successes. I remember on the first one, I think the Weinstein's gave him like 20 million or something like that to make the first one. And then
Aaron Kaufman 58:28
when any of them though, if you look at them the amount of visual effects.
Alex Ferrari 58:32
Oh, no, no, it's it's insane. But my point was, like, on the second one, they were like, Hey, we won't give you more money. Robert was like, nope, no, I'll do it for the same. And, and that was his unit
Aaron Kaufman 58:41
of value. And it's something that I try to remember, I don't always remember. But it's true. But he knew the value of Leave me alone. And I will make something good. And you know, and if you look at SimCity, you know, something that different that weird, you know, that original, if he had made that movie for $120 million, forget, there's no way because you just without much to lose, you'd have people just pulling all over you second guessing, you know, shouldn't really be in black and white. That's the whole thing that's been black one, can we do this? Can we do that? You know, could could these YouTube influencers be the star, you know, whatever.
Alex Ferrari 59:19
So with that said, with that said, because you bring up a very good point, what is your whole take on this whole YouTube influencers or social media stars, going into traditional media, where many times they might be a hit in their medium, which is making funny YouTube videos, or doing things like that, but when they try to translate that into another platform, that they're just, you know, they're not actors? They're not. They don't have those skill sets. They don't have those kinds of things. I see a lot of that happening lately. I think Hollywood starting to get burned a lot from it. What do you What's your opinion on it?
Aaron Kaufman 59:52
You can't You can't fault them for trying, right? If you're looking, they're looking and saying, Okay, this person's able to do You know, people to watch whatever they're doing 40 million times that, you know, just logically that should probably translate, you know, to to the theater. I personally think that all of this could be good. It's fine. It but it's not. It's not predictive because it doesn't really have anything to do with the quality of a film. You know, you you can have somebody who's super fake, you know, Kim Kardashian is super famous. But if you put her in a starring role in a movie, that doesn't mean you have
Alex Ferrari 1:00:32
a successful movie, it would be glitter,
Aaron Kaufman 1:00:34
or never was Pamela Anderson's movie barbed wire, you know, I mean, I
Alex Ferrari 1:00:39
think barbed wire was actually a little bit better than glitter. I'm gonna say, I'm gonna go out on a limb here.
Aaron Kaufman 1:00:44
Let's just spend the rest of this time just debating the barbed wire verse glitter,
Alex Ferrari 1:00:49
Aaron Kaufman 1:00:53
But but you know what I'm saying. So that's the, that's the the issues, whenever you've seen that, where you're basically just exploitative of someone's fame, it doesn't, it doesn't really translate because they're different things, you know what I want to, if I'm somebody who will watch a reality show, that doesn't mean I'm going to spend you know, my money on a Friday to go see that person in the movie, I still want to know him to get a good story. And to get a good movie, someone like Tom Cruise people go, Oh, I know, that, you know, that's going to be this kind of movie that I enjoy, I'm gonna go see it. And that's why he's able to draw people to to a theater. So I think that all of this stuff, potentially could be good, you know, technology could potentially be great. But at the end of the day, it they have to have the goods, you know, it's a matter of, you know, them being able to do it if you look at the 70s and, you know, Coppola and fried chicken. And, you know, those guys were, they were taking advantage of certain technology as well at the time, but they were translating it into into, you know, masterpieces. Um, I think that's what you need to see now. I would look more at a movie like Bellflower. I don't remember that. Yeah, no, yeah. So everyone else, like, those are guys who they took not a lot of money. And they, you know, it took a long time to make that movie. And it's, by no means a masterpiece. But it is, it was interesting, and it was different. And I think that's what people have an opportunity to, to do now is, you know, you've got a studio in with your computer and your phone. And you know, if you have a camera, you have your own studio. So don't try to do what a studio already does. Because you're never going to do it as good as I've said that dude. So that's why Bellflower was cool to me, because it was like, oh, they're not trying to replicate a I realize that kind of an old came up five or six years ago, but but that was one one of the few movies where I saw it, I think tangerine is example of it as well, where I was like, okay, they're actually using new technology, they're actually using the the lack of resources to create their own aesthetic. And, and that's interesting, and that will get people's attention and I think that adds to your that that creates something worthwhile. What I see a lot of times is people that use technology to sort of just make shoddy your versions of what you are, you're used to seeing who wants to see that
Alex Ferrari 1:03:08
right and I think that's what a lot of people make mistakes and independent film is they try to and I and I was one of them I was trying to compete with a $200 million movie and you just not it's just it's it's you can't you can't get the star power you can't get the technical stuff and it's just like you said a shot of your version of what they're doing better in that story wise, but just technically, and I think that's where a lot of independent filmmakers kind of fall fall flat and the ones that do break out like Napoleon Dynamite like a tangerine they they just do them very well they do what they're trying to do very well and they stay within the world that they're capable of doing like bottle rocket or you know any of those kind of movies they didn't try to be something else so they're not they tried to be who they were.
Aaron Kaufman 1:03:52
Yeah, and if you go back to whatever the 90s before you go look at Richard Linklater Yeah, yeah, slacker. slacker. Right? It's like that's that's good. And that was its own movie and he almost used the rawness of it to to to to do it but at the end of the day, he had a lot to say and there was there was really interesting stuff there mariachi you know again super rudimentary and it wasn't about the the quality per se but he had a style he had a something to to put out there so so i think that's that's where I'm I look at I look at the world and I think to myself that it's almost a shame that we don't have you know, where are our next five Scorsese's? You know, I'm sure they're out there somewhere and they have the ability now to get our attention in a way that that's what he did.
Alex Ferrari 1:04:41
Exactly. Now, real quick, I want to ask you on a side note, what do you think about like this summer's blockbuster movie performances, and and the state of where we are with with the studios and the tentpoles and all that kind of stuff because this summer was pretty man
Aaron Kaufman 1:05:00
It was I have to say though in full disclosure I I do find myself within my 40s now and I do find myself a little I sound like an old dude these days because all I do is complain about all I do is complain about the fact that you know they don't make them that way anymore and I'm living in New York now. And again, they just opened up a theater called the metrograph in Lower East Side and they only project film and it's this kind of glorious place I mean, it's like it was like a bookstore and restaurant. theaters are great yeah, it's super cool. But why bring it up as they did the Palmer retrospective awesome. Oh, and so I kept going back like a junkie I mean, I was like I couldn't
Alex Ferrari 1:05:51
Can you imagine just going and doing a retrospective of the Palmer's work in the film in the theater?
Aaron Kaufman 1:05:56
Get every film they did every film and I'll see just see you know even Phantom of the paradise and and and just to kill and just seeing that you know fluttering in beautiful 35 millimeter Yeah, I was I was just literally could not like anytime I had some time and I can do it i was i was going back to it's all I wanted to do and then I went to see right around the time I was seeing all these movies again. I went to see Warcraft with my
Alex Ferrari 1:06:23
Aaron Kaufman 1:06:26
The truth is you know Warcraft it's not terrible You know, there's some good performances in it you know, barbed wire it's not powerful but at the same time I was like, you know, this is what it's become it's almost it's almost become something like what I think of film and what film is are almost two different things right now. Because if this does not resemble like this is not why I got into this business it's just not you know, it's loud it's noisy, it's it's somewhat predictable. They are trying to top each other they're trying to make almost like rollercoaster rides more than they're trying to make films it has more than it really has more to do with with that kind of experience than it has anything to do with the Brian Apollo movies that I was going to see. So some people would say that television is really sucking up the the the need that people have and that's why sort of indie film is not not doing what it was. And you know what, there's, there's probably some truth to that. But I will say I'm on grumpy old man. And I definitely missed the the just just that that feeling of excitement of sitting in the theater and and having something blow your mind.
Alex Ferrari 1:07:36
So So after you work with Robert, you decided to to venture off into uncharted territory and direct your first job. What's your first film was called ERJ starring James Bond himself, Pierce was the greatest The greatest Yeah, how did you he arguably he's one of the I he's on my top two or three? top two, I would say top two. What was it like working with with peers and working with a legend like that? Well, I
Aaron Kaufman 1:08:03
had I produced a movie I worked with Linda Howe on a movie called The greatest Pryor a few years prior that he did with students randon. And it was it was really kind of special movie and he gave just an amazing performance guide always remembered that he was in addition to being great that he was just like, super nice and humble and approachable. And he was working with a first time filmmaker on that movie. And I remember Yeah, I remember that being on set and he was just super just really great with her and really was trying to get good performance and really thoughtful and so when I went to make my first feature and I had built this role you know sort of this shadowy character similar to like dinero in Angel Heart you know and i but i wanted someone who can kind of bring a textured performance to it you know, I needed somebody who wasn't just gonna like chewing the scenery but he's gonna because there was some there was a lot of sort of texture to that character that was just called the band in the movie that I needed someone who that and also we were playing with you know, is this with this person was a shadowy character that you know, could be somebody you know, is this devil is this God is this you know, there was there was an element of that there and so I needed someone who had sort of like a otherworldly aspect and so he just came to mind and and it was that plus the fact of I knew that, you know, he would he be great to work with, call them up and send them the script. And, you know, it's always nerve racking, you know, nerve wracking, but he can read the script, and he had a lot of notes and a lot of thoughts. And we talked for a while we met to talk about it as well. And then he came did I was surprised it was it was a little bit of a departure for him. And I think the first day on set because movies, kind of Crazy movie and we had albinos and we had little people and we had, you know, all this little stuff happening in this one scene. And I think he walked in it was like, Whoa, what is this book?
Alex Ferrari 1:10:09
What did I sign up for?
Aaron Kaufman 1:10:11
What is the spoofy by the second day, he was like, okay, we need you know, we need some do we need this we need that. And by the third day, he was just in hog heaven and had like a lot of a lot of fun. So he was really great to work with and then you know, it's just by itself it's it's intimidating to, to try to give direction to somebody like that, because they are there, you know, there's so you've seen them before, they're so great. You know, they know they've been on set longer than you have. But when I gave direction, he was super supportive and collaborative. He had a lot of ideas, the lot, a lot of the smoking stuff, and the sunglasses and a lot of the the characters gear, he had a lot to input for that. And then after that, you kind of sit back and let him do his thing. Which if I wrote the screenplay with Jerry, Jason's on Walt and Jerry Saul, and to hear someone like him, read your or do perform your dial dial. You sound like such a much better writer. My recommendation is have somebody awesome to your movie, because you sound like a much better writer once once they get going.
Alex Ferrari 1:11:21
Is that is that the secret to Quinn's success? No, I'm joking. I think anybody I think anybody
Aaron Kaufman 1:11:28
claiming I had, obviously, way more interaction with Robert, but the interactions I've had with Quentin, he always has good advice. He always has, like a great kind of point of view, you you will you know, within five minutes, I'm going to quit why Clintons quit. You know, like, for instance, even writing he'll tell you like, you know, you know, those scenes that like when the guy's got to get the key to go get in the car without you don't like that. See? Like, if it can't be great, don't write it. So like, put the guy in the car. people figure out, you know that how he got there. And little tidbits like that. It's a great piece of advice. Actually. It's, it's great. You know, it's like, as we're writing like, well, he's just seeing connective tissue. Do we really need it? You know, is it is it seem awesome. And a lot of how I right now, I kind of always had that voice in the back of my head. And I actually also when I worked with Sidney Lumet before he died, oh, yeah, I spent a good amount of time with him working on a project that sadly never never was able to be made. Because he passed away but, but he was he was kind of awesome at giving you little, little crumbs of advice, that at the time, I don't know that I appreciate it. But when I was directing, it all came back to me. I was like, Oh, right. He told me this.
Alex Ferrari 1:12:41
What was the name? What was his name of that book that he wrote? Is it is it was making movies? Yeah, that's a great I mean, anybody who has not if you're being a director, you've got to read that book. I read that book years ago. It's such an amazing, amazing book on directing and, and filmmaking. And the thing is that when you were reading it, he was nervous. He was insecure, you know, he's Sydney frickin limit.
Aaron Kaufman 1:13:06
But what's great about making movies is like I was saying before, but Spike Lee is, and there's actually a lot of sort of analogs between the two of them. But he that book, he actually gives you functional information. He doesn't say like, yeah, so you know, get a great actor to do your movie, and then blah, blah, blah, he gives you like, literally, you know, you should eat lunch later in the day. So you have energy to finish out your day, you know, he he gives you the kind of cute little little anecdotes in addition to his other, you know, writings to really, you know, help you to direct but but yeah, he was he was amazing. And he would tell you, things like that background kills can kill a seat. So always make sure that your that your background looks natural. So he used to back in the day, he would walk up to a crowd and seeing like, 30 people walking by in the background, he would walk up to each one and give them a what he would call a little bit of business. So he'd walk up and be like, hey, so you just got the worst today. And you just found out you have herpes, and you are on your way to lunch and you're super hungry. And he would do this. So they all had some kind of motivation. And if you go back and watch his movies, the backgrounds always flawless.
Alex Ferrari 1:14:15
That's a great piece of advice actually. Can you imagine as an extra having said they love that come over to you and give you some business? Yeah, awesome. So what was the biggest biggest lesson you learned directing urge?
Aaron Kaufman 1:14:28
Well, directing was really enjoyed directing. And I kind of had that my first my first day on set, I had this kind of exhilarating and also scary feeling all at once, which was you know, I was like, wow, this is what I want to do. Like this is it you know, and you don't really know that until you do it your first day. And so that was the first and then second with from that was, you know that you you can't go back you know, so it's like you you get almost there. I was like, Okay, I gotta keep this going, because this is this is this is the greatest time there there is. But directing, you know, really is I learned a lot of listening, listening to your crew, you know, I had good crew, I had people that told me things that, that really were, you know, if you listen to them, there are people that that want to help you. And we also realize that you're dealing with a cult of personality. And so trying to, you know, trying to work with a crew, you can get the best out of them, by really including them. And if you include them, and they and they feel part of the process, they'll give you your best, but you could also work the other way where you're kind of shutting them out, and they stopped caring about the movie as well. So you kind of you almost have to be a little bit of a cult leader to get everybody. And everybody focused in the same direction. And then And then from there, to, to really listen to them. I mean, I had to an ad on on urge in Sherry, who was great. And she told me, you know, look, there are going to be days when you get to said, where everything you've asked for is not going to be the way you want. And you have to be able to roll with that. And at the time, I was like, Wow, she's being super negative, because, you know, I've told everybody what I want. So why would they bring these in, they don't want and then the first day on set where I had asked for something and got something completely different. I wasn't shocked, because I had been prepared for that. And that the little little lot of things are a little thing, but those little things add up and and and that's that's it you're playing you're you're like the conductor and you're playing the crew in in in many ways.
Alex Ferrari 1:16:37
Now what do you like better directing or producing?
Aaron Kaufman 1:16:39
I there's no, I mean, for me, there's no comparison I will always produce because it's what I know how to do. But at the same time directing you realize, like, I realized myself that as a producer, you're doing all the hard stuff, you know, you're doing all the stuff that nobody wants to do. And then the and then you're handing off all the cool things to a director. So that's, that's sort of my feeling on it. But, but I also like producing and producing sort of a different muscle. And I love to work with, you know, people that I think are great, you know, Director wise, and I think I've done it long enough now where I like to be able to take all my battle scars and help somebody not have to necessarily, you know, experiences Hey,
Alex Ferrari 1:17:28
so we're back guys and I want to welcome to the show Brian Levine Levine Levine.
Aaron Kaufman 1:17:33
Levin Levin. Live.
Alex Ferrari 1:17:36
Okay. Just call your Bri nangia Raya, welcome Brian to the show. And Aaron is still here, and we're going to talk about their new, very funny looking movie called flocka. dude's So Brian. I mean, Aaron First tell me how you met Brian. And how'd you get involved with this crazy group?
Aaron Kaufman 1:17:56
Well to name drop a little bit, I was introduced to him by Danny Masterson was a mutual friend of ours. Danny was an urge as well. And we loved it. And he had done a pilot with these guys and said, you know, you got to meet them. They're super funny. And he had had a good experience with them. And he introduced us and Brian and I started to talk. And eventually when they had a rough cut of their the pilot they'd done together for Comedy Central. They asked me to see it, they took a look at it. And I liked a lot. It's very funny. And we were we continued to talk and later on when Robert was working on Spy Kids for we needed some help script wise just doing some punch up and adding some jokes. We have offline scene calling you know, almost daily saying you know, Honey, come on, man, any more jokes. And so
Alex Ferrari 1:18:48
is that that's a great impression of Hey, by the way, it's very good.
Aaron Kaufman 1:18:52
But, but I brought up I was like, you know, I know these guys called the post show that I met and I saw their pilot and they're really funny guys. What about bringing them down? And so Robert brought him down to Austin. And in like two days they wrote like 1000 jokes and Robert immediately life them which was not not something I was expecting. Not that I don't want to take a license immediately and actually gave them small small bit parts in the in the movie. And that that went well and Brian and I had been friends for a while at that point in them. And they had a movie that they had sold to Lionsgate which I'm sure he's going to talk about that they've had an added turnaround that they wanted to make and we ultimately started working together.
Alex Ferrari 1:19:36
So Brian, real quick how the hell was that phone call when he goes hey, do you want to come down to Austin and work with Robert rectory is on something to your waiting for him? How was that? How did you handle that?
Aaron Kaufman 1:19:50
Well, it was kind of from what I remember. It was kind of quick. It was kind of like hey, we need you. We need you like tomorrow. Can you get on a plane so it was Kinda wasn't really that much time to process it, it was just like okay. Yeah. Obviously we'll, we'll be down there as soon as possible.
Alex Ferrari 1:20:09
And how was it working on Spike it for and that whole experience
Aaron Kaufman 1:20:14
it's great. I mean, you know, they have such a, such an interesting setup, they have gone there with the studio and so many resources that they have and obviously, you know, watching Robert operate everything was was really interesting.
Alex Ferrari 1:20:29
Very cool. Now we're in we're in Bryan, where did you get your start? Aaron, tell me a little bit. You You have a show on YouTube? I think you started.
Aaron Kaufman 1:20:36
Yes. So we started in I it was about 10 years ago. We mean, Bob and Jason, the other guys comedians from New York, we started putting up videos online and this was actually before YouTube, oddly enough. And
Alex Ferrari 1:20:55
when were you putting him up? What were you putting up on then?
Aaron Kaufman 1:20:57
We were just we, we put up a website and we just kind of said we're just gonna put up two videos a week. Okay. And we're gonna have a TV show on the internet, which is a new concept. Okay. 1000 or five? Yes, it was and, and that's basically what we did. And, and then YouTube came along, about kind of, like, while we were doing that, and, and that kind of shifted the dynamics. But at that point, were to kind of gotten out to certain people in New York about our show, and we ended up doing a deal with Super Deluxe, which was an online comedy website that was part of Adult Swim.
Alex Ferrari 1:21:40
Oh, very cool. And then and then you met Aaron and and then you guys got deal with Lionsgate? What was the deal with Lionsgate? That you did?
Aaron Kaufman 1:21:49
Yeah. And so then, Bob and Jason and I moved out to Los Angeles. And we did written scripts, lack of dues, and teamed up with we, we signed with United talent agency. And through them, they introduced us to imagine entertainment. And we develop flock of dudes the script that we had with them. And then eventually, we went out to the town with it, and Lionsgate ended up buying it. And that began a process of developing it with with Lionsgate for for about a year or so.
Alex Ferrari 1:22:22
And how is the development process?
Aaron Kaufman 1:22:26
Well, uh, you know, I, yeah, I've only got in through it in that way with a studio. Just that one time, so I can't say what it's like always, you know, it's kind of what you would expect I think and what you've heard which is there you know, there are a lot of other people involved, there's a lot of other opinions and it's not just three guys writing in a cafe anymore. It's, you know, people who are looking at this through the lens of at the studio level 30 $50 million investment and that kind of changes the creative process.
Alex Ferrari 1:23:08
So then, so you obviously, I'm assuming that the block of dues that has been produced was not produced at a 30 to $50 million budget? No. Okay. For 1530 or 50
Aaron Kaufman 1:23:23
What's funny was it was we're kind of putting it together with Ryan from Austin while I was still doing SimCity and so there I had, you know, this kind of $70 million behemoth and then I'm trying to put this this small movie together in in LA but but actually it was kind of fun to do it you know, it's like after working on something so big and so so much of an octopus doing something that we kind of had total control over was was was a lot of fun. And even the problem solving of like, okay, we just, you know, we want to push this we want to make it look as close to a studio comedy as possible, but we just don't have those kind of funds. The problem solving or figuring out how to do it really was was kind of interesting and I think the movie benefited from from that we also had some other good people that that really liked the project a lot and got involved. And so I think what you what you see there is really not reflective of what the actual hard dollar cost of the movie was.
Alex Ferrari 1:24:21
So then, so then you were at the studio with locka doods. And obviously the studio didn't do the movie. So what happened how did that translate to where you are today with the movie?
Aaron Kaufman 1:24:32
Yeah, so the you know, the rights came back to me and Aaron and I started discussing the script because I think I still felt like it was a good a good movie that had a lot of appeal and Aaron read it and he, he liked it. And that began kind of the process of us trying to figure out how to put it together outside of a studio financing.
Alex Ferrari 1:24:57
Okay, and then you did it,
Aaron Kaufman 1:24:59
Aaron, but I never Made a comedy. I mean, I've never made a comedy intentionally before. to shame to say, yeah, and so it's actually that was interesting as well, because it was I was I was coming at it from my perspective which was like, you know, hey there's you know, without we don't have any machetes in this movie and there's nobody getting their head cut off so so like, we have to really make these things we don't have the same the same stuff that are our go to, you know, our go to stuff we don't have. And so just grinding and grinding and grinding with with with Brian and his partners really was was kind of was kind of fun. And then shooting it was a lot different because you had these guys that were just ad libbing so much that it became like, you know, part of the producing job was just trying to get them to shut up every once in a while because they were coming up with great stuff. But it was just you know, we had we had a indie movie schedule and had to just get we had to get in and move on. So So coming up without a workflow that would allow them to still you know, ad lib and come up with stuff. At the same time, you know, getting a good shot. That was that would be able to learn that on the onset.
Alex Ferrari 1:26:07
And how long was the production schedule on it?
Aaron Kaufman 1:26:11
They were 21 days that's all right. There's something like that
Alex Ferrari 1:26:15
21 days and I'm gonna geek out a little bit what did you guys shoot the cat? What what camera did you shoot with?
Aaron Kaufman 1:26:20
We showed already Arri Alexa? Yeah, it
Alex Ferrari 1:26:24
looks really good. It looks really great.
Aaron Kaufman 1:26:26
I've used the red as well. But But I liked Ari Ari good. A more of a cinematic feel. I feel
Alex Ferrari 1:26:35
Yeah, I know that that's a whole other conversation. It's like Mac versus PC i mean it's it's it's a very big conversation. So how did you guys get such a cool cast? I mean, I mean, I was as I was watching the trailer, I was like Jesus he's in it and he's in it. She's in it is like, how did you get this such it's such a great guest that we put together on on I'm assuming under $30 million budget.
Aaron Kaufman 1:26:56
Yeah, I mean, a lot of a lot of the cast was kind of through relationships that all of us had just been in kind of the comedy world for a while or being kind of in the film world for a while. And, you know, you get kind of momentum going. And other people kind of see that a lot of cool people are doing it and they want to join and then also UTA was very helpful with us in terms of getting the ball rolling with some really cool cast. And, and yeah, I think everybody just kind of tried to pull a couple people in and before you knew it, we had you know about 15 or 20 people who are really some of the most talented guys in comedy
Alex Ferrari 1:27:37
now, as well. Now how is it like Aaron, you kind of touched upon this when you have a group of comics and comedic actors who are doing a lot of ad libbing especially in these larger scenes How the hell do you corral them How the hell did you direct them? Like
Aaron Kaufman 1:27:53
you know we're at a first time filmmaker as well so it was it was i didn't i didn't i didn't envy him because he would have to sort of you know become the lion tamer because you have these some of these guys like Brett Gelman and Eric Andre are just love monster add you know add livers and improv guys and so it was I think it was tough for for him but we had to sort of explain to people what our you know what our situation was and also create a space for them where they felt comfortable to to you know Express creativity but in kind of a guideline to to still get them moving in but um I'm really happy with with the movie i mean i think too when we make we made a little while ago and that now we look like geniuses because most of the cast and went on to become huge you know you have commandment Johnny and animal burrows who's you know obviously has has just really blown up crystal Leah you know had on dateable and his stand up specials are have become huge and you know and as well as Hilary Duff and Ray Liotta and people like that who had done the movie with with so it was it's it's been interesting to see that happen and now the movie looks a lot bigger because it's got this it's called the screen huge cast.
Alex Ferrari 1:29:04
How was it working with Henry Hill
Aaron Kaufman 1:29:08
he was in SimCity two as well yeah. And I actually I really like him a lot he's you know he's obviously a great actor but but he's somebody who will like on SimCity Hill hanging out on set and tell funny stories and and you know really be kind of a good dude he's intense but he's but he's a he's that kind of guy you know where it'll he'll even a flock actually he he hung out when he wasn't shooting a little bit we were just you know, chatting it up. So he's he's always been a good guy and he was great to do a day on on on flock, which he didn't
Alex Ferrari 1:29:41
do. Now. What advice would you give someone trying to produce a film in the indie world in today's in today's world run. Brian, would you agree?
Aaron Kaufman 1:29:57
Well, it's you know, it's It's interesting, it's, uh, where to start with that question. I think I think we touched on it before, you know, in the sense of, I think that you have to really get a feel for what the world looks like, you know, and I think that if you want to make something that's really different, and really, you know, really out of the ordinary, that is what I think will get people's attention, and maybe that you have to really be smart about it, and lower your budget and, and try to be as clever as you can to get something out there. I would say in general, don't try to make something that he that the studios are making, really look at, like what you can do, and you can do with the resources you have. A lot of it, like I said, goes back to El Mariachi, you know, like, he had these things, he's gonna make his movie around those things. I think it's still good advice. And making something smaller that you can control that you can make great is probably better than, you know, just trying to make a yet another have that same kind of Sundance movie that doesn't really have an audience in the way that it used to.
Alex Ferrari 1:31:08
And And where's it Where can people see the film?
Aaron Kaufman 1:31:11
So the film comes out September 30, the guys that stars, our partners on it, and they've been, they've been fantastic. So you can check online for the the theaters will come out this month, but they're doing nice theatrical release for the film. And then it'll be available on all digital platforms.
Alex Ferrari 1:31:30
So and who's the distributor under stars? Its stars digital. Yeah,
Aaron Kaufman 1:31:33
we did a great job with family Fang. And we're for Jason Bateman. And they've been really great to work with so far.
Alex Ferrari 1:31:39
Very cool. Now, I'm gonna ask you both. The question I always ask all my guests, what is the lesson that took you the longest to learn whether in the film business or in life in general,
Aaron Kaufman 1:31:55
and you want to
Alex Ferrari 1:31:57
well, he's like, Well, I think of something,
Aaron Kaufman 1:32:01
I honestly think that it's taken me a long time to, to really be myself, you know, to have the confidence that what you're going to say you're going to try to put out in the world is, is interesting and important. You know, once you once you come to that kind of level of confidence, it really frees you up to, to, to do great steps, but you have to have that, that kind of confidence, looking at what other people are doing and trying to catch up to that is it nothing, I don't know that anything great comes out of that, it's really, when you dig down and try to do something that's personal and something that's that really only you could do, that's when you have an opportunity to do something great.
Alex Ferrari 1:32:43
I would say I would say just not forcing issues not forcing things, you know, it's just you can spend a you can waste a lot of time and energy, whether in your personal life or in trying to make a movie, trying to kind of force issues. And better I think what I've learned is better to, you know, obviously push as much as you can, but at a certain point if it feels like you're pushing just take your foot off the gas and assess the situation and kind of try a different route and, and kind of be practical in that way. And I think that keeps you aligned with the reality of the situation better and allows you to operate more efficiently.
Alex Ferrari 1:33:25
Very cool. And then the last question is what are your three favorite films of all time? Aaron Brian's gonna throw it together and so
Aaron Kaufman 1:33:37
Exactly I like I like the fact that Rob Brian and I have this conversation pretty regularly. My my, I think my all time favorite movie is night, the city, the original film, which is it's just a movie that I can watch. I never watch right now. And I've seen it 100 times. And I love that the noir period. I love that that time, that's probably my, my favorite. And I would say maybe miljan Pearson seconds that which that both of them kind of have some, some similarities. But but that that noir period is, is probably my favorite.
I would say and these are not off the wall answers by any means but a long goodbye network and eight and a half or you know kind of flawless those are
Alex Ferrari 1:34:26
all very good. Very, very good. Very, very good. answers, guys. So um, where where can people find you guys and also find the movie when it's out? And they're all digital platforms? Basically.
Aaron Kaufman 1:34:37
Yeah, it was in the 30s. It comes out theatrically. And then I think shortly after that, it it comes out on on digital digital platforms. And then I think it comes to Hulu next year. And then that's it. The theater count should be out soon. So I don't know exactly what that is. And then I'm on Twitter at a underscore Kaufmann And I don't know what else I think that's that's Do you have a website Aaron or No, I don't. Gotcha.
Alex Ferrari 1:35:07
And how about you Brian?
Aaron Kaufman 1:35:08
And yeah, I mean, Bob and Jason have a just a website that we've had for a while the post show calm and yeah, you can find some some of our old sketches from from our New York days there and everything so
Alex Ferrari 1:35:22
very cool guys man it's been an absolute pleasure guys having you on the show. Thank you so much for spending the time and dropping some knowledge bombs on the on the indie film hustle tribe.
Aaron Kaufman 1:35:32
Alright, we'll speak soon. All right.
Alex Ferrari 1:35:36
Well, guys, I hope you'd like that interview, I had a ball talking to Aaron and Brian. And I, you know, I grilled poor Aaron about everything about Robert and his experiences with them. And I basically asked every question, and any question I've ever wanted to know about Robert, I pretty much asked in this interview. So for me, it was a huge, a huge thrill and joy, to talk to Aaron. And also to talk to Brian in regards to a flock of dudes, it sounds like a fun movie. And again, it's about that hustle guys, you just got to keep hustling. And when the door doesn't open the way you want it to you got to make your own door. And that's the truth, man, it is the absolute truth. And flock of dudes is a perfect example of that philosophy. So guys, again, if you want to get any of the show notes, anything that we talked about any links, head over to any film hustle comm forward slash 100. And what I'm going to be doing, hopefully moving forward is guys, I'm going to start transcribing all of our podcasts. Since we have 100, it's going to take a while. But I'm going to be transcoding them, trying to change transcribing them, and adding them to the show notes. So if you can't listen to the podcast, you'll be able to read the podcast, because I've had a lot of requests for that. So that those will begin to come slowly. They're not going to be coming up in the new ones anytime soon. But some of the older more popular ones are going to get those first and then slowly, I'm going to be taking the entire library on and transcribing them little by little and then we'll catch up and start with the new ones. Probably I'll figure out the schedule probably won't be the day of the release of the podcast, but probably a few days later or something like that once we get a schedule in place. But that's just another thing I'm going to be adding to the indie film hustle podcast. So guys, I again, I cannot thank you enough for allowing me to get to the 100/100 episode. It's a huge mile marker for me. And I plan to get to 200 very soon. And, and keep growing, keep growing the brand of indie film, hustle, keep growing, what we're doing and getting the word out and please, and again, I hear this from a lot of a lot of the tribe members when I talk to them. They're recommending indie film hustle to other people. They're telling like you gotta listen to this podcast, especially a podcast number 88. Guys, if you guys have not listened any of you guys listening have not listened to podcast number 88. That's at indie film hustle.com Ford slash 088. It is by far the most talked about the most popular podcast I've ever done. And trust me if you have not listened to it, everyone who has listened to it will understand what I mean. It's intense. And if you need to, if you need a bucket of cold water thrown on you, you need to you need to listen to episodes, Episode 88. But, but please spread the word, guys. I mean, seriously, please spread the word. tell any of your filmmaking friends about us. If you find that this information is helpful to you, it'll be helpful to other people. And don't think of it as a competitive thing. There is no competition when it comes to art guys, all right, just try to help as many people as you can. And that's how, that's how you you make it in life and in this definitely in this business. Because I wouldn't have been able to do as much as I've done without friends. You need friends. And if you can help other people along the way, on your journey, do it and hopefully this podcast and the website has information that can do that. So spread the word guys please. You know retweet, post stuff that you see that we post and so on and oh just just tell them like Hey, you got it. Got it. Subscribe to this, because I hopefully it'll help more people you know, I really want to I want I want this work to get out to as many people as humanly possible and help as many filmmakers as humanly possible. And I found this online, which is the Farley brothers. Wonderful. A theory of life life explained in 27 seconds, and basically says, life is like going the wrong way on a moving sidewalk. If you walk, you stay put. If you stand still, you'll go backwards. And to get ahead. You have to hustle, keep that hustle going. Keep that dream alive. And I'll talk to you guys soon.
Sign up to receive email updates
Enter your name and email address below and I'll send you periodic updates about the podcast.
- This is Meg
- REV.COM – Close Caption Your Film ($10 OFF COUPON)
- IFH 088: Why Filmmakers are Always So Damn Broke & What They Can Do to Change It
- Aaron Kaufman – IMDB
- Aaron Kaufman – Twitter
- Flock of Dudes
- Brian Levin
- Sin City: A Dame to Kill For
- Machete Kills
- Spy Kids 4: All The Time In The World
- WATCH Alex Ferrari’s Films on Indie Film Hustle TV
- Filmmaking Hacks
- Twitter Hacks
- Film Festival Hacks
- Cinematic DSLR
- Story Blueprint: Hero’s Two Journeys

Kyuhyun is currently performing in a musical named Werther (베르테르). I wrote a blog post about how I tried to see him in November, but accidentally bought a ticket for a performance he was not in. Instead of going down without a fight, I bought another ticket. Money – I must have a lot of it.
I showed up early yet again to take, as one would guess, creepy pictures with posters of him. I bought a program, which contained photographs of the musical. I then grabbed a pair of binoculars and sat in my seat, which was in the first row of the second floor – smack dab in the center. I was ready.
The musical was fantastic. He honestly has one of the most beautiful voices I have ever heard in my life. The production level of the whole thing was amazing. When it ended, I knew what it was time for me to do. I ran to return my binoculars, get my A.R.C. (Alien Registration Card) card, and find where Kyuhyun would walk past and receive his fans.
I followed people who looked demented and found the location. It was here that we all waited for roughly forty-five minutes for Kyu. Because I had to return my binoculars, I did not get in the front of the line. Although I was sad at first, it proved beneficial in the end. The cast and special audience members passed by, with Ryeowook from Super Junior being one of them. No one expected him, so we could not process that it was truly him. I gasped his name and then everyone around me freaked out.
Ryeowook in the center.
I was holding two cameras (my compact camera and my iPhone) and tried to get a glimpse of Kyu. Due to the fact that I was in the back, I was closer to the staircase that he was to take to get to his car.
Once he passed us, everyone started rushing behind him. I have always had the frightening ability to move past people during concerts or in crowded areas in general. I have touched the lead singers of Dashboard Confessional, The Fray (I full-out rubbed his bald head), and Cartel. I also bumped into Corbin Bleu from High School Musical. It happens sometimes. Have no fear though, I did not touch Kyuhyun.
After ducking, dodging, jumping, and weaving, I ended up right beside him. Everyone was screaming at him in Korean (“Saranghae, Oppa!”), but he kept his eyes forward. I knew that I had to speak in English to throw him off. I, with little to no confidence, said, “You were great, Kyuhyun!” (I embarrassingly threw in a “Woo!” because I second-guessed myself). I really was not expecting him to acknowledge my presence, BUT HE DID. He looked me in the eye and said “Really?” in Korean. Everyone around me started screaming because I clearly won in this game of “PLEASE LOOK AT ME.” We waved goodbye as his car drove off. I walked outside then noticed that I was shaking. I kept it together until I was out of sight. Stay cool, Jen. Stay cool.
THE MOMENT THAT WILL STAY WITH ME FOREVER.
Even if you aren’t a fan of Kyuhyun, I recommend seeing him perform. The man has got a fantastic voice.
In other news, I am going to go to Japan next month! Finally.

Carnival Glory Cruise Review by kml2000: Carnival Glory - Eastern Caribbean
Overall Member Rating
Compare Prices on Carnival Glory Eastern Caribbean Cruises
Carnival Glory - Eastern Caribbean
We just returned from the Carnival Glory. Because so many people have been nice enough to answer my questions and post reviews, I wanted to reciprocate. This won't be one of the greatest (with pics, etc), but a review nonetheless.
Our group had 11 people - Myself and my DD(14) with a friend (14), my Mom and Dad (first cruise - 70's), my brother and his wife, my nephew (23?) and his fiance, and my niece (19) and a friend. We had a total of 5 cabins, one balcony deck 7, two balconies deck 6 and two OV's on deck 2.
As a note - my Dad has mobility issues. He can walk, but not for distances and can't stand for long periods of time. We brought a wheelchair for him. My Mom is legally blind, a victim of macular degeneration.
This review will come from my perspective, most of it for the 5 people I had travelling with me (DD and friend and Mom and Dad). My brother and his family flew in from the Houston/Dallas area.
Pre-Cruise We More drove down the day before and stayed at the Comfort Inn Cocoa Beach. It takes us a long time to drive from the Atlanta area. We make too many potty breaks! Driving the day before is a MUST. I booked the hotel rooms using reward points from my credit card and I am glad I didn't have to pay for them. It wasn't terrible, but not somewhere I would have picked. I would recommend staying at a newer hotel, if possible. We decided to not use the park and cruise feature (only good for 2 people anyway - would have had to pay for 3) and park at the pier. This was so we could get away earlier on debarkation day. I know it was more expensive, but we didn't "pay" for the rooms.
Embarkation We arrived at the pier at 10:00am. We were not the first. I am glad we got there early, the line of cars grew as the morning went on. We did not do embarkation correctly - I will elaborate in a minute. When we went up the elevator with the wheelchair, they directed us to the right for special check in. We wanted to wait on my brother and his family so we elected to go to some chairs and wait. The gentleman directing us told me that only the person in the wheelchair and one other person in his cabin could go to the 'special' desk, but relented when everyone got there and said we all could. WELL, when we got down there, another 'group' with a wheelchair was behind us and one of the ladies at that desk just pitched a hissy fit. She started going off that only one person in the cabin with the person in a wheelchair could be down there. I kept waiting for her to take a breath so I could let her know the other person in my Dad's cabin was blind but she just kept going on and going on. I finally was able to tell her and with hands on hips, she agreed to let one other cabin stay. I can understand this policy, but she was a little more "huffy" than she needed to be. To be honest, it brought my mother to tears. She can't see, has never cruised before and it was all a little overwhelming to her. My brother and his family got in the normal line and I waited with my parents. The lady that checked us in was nice and I made sure to thank her specifically AND wrote a nice comment about her on the comment card. I also intend on sending a note to a nice lady in Uncle Bob's office that I have communicated with before.
The part we did wrong - they asked if we needed help with the wheelchair and I told them we were doing fine. WRONG answer. We had to go through the line with everyone else and the ramps to get on the ship, etc are pretty hard. When they ask - say YES, we need help.
We were on the ship around 11:30. I will say that maneuvering through to the Red Sail Restaurant with a wheelchair was tough at embarkation.
Ship The Carnival Glory is a beautiful ship. I didn't find any problems with wear and tear, there were some spots on the carpet, but that just doesn't bother me. I also didn't find it to be "over the top" as I had read in some places.
My review may be a little useless at this stage, I don't drink and don't really gamble. I did play the slots a little, but other than that, no table play etc. Given that I don't drink, I didn't visit the lounges. We stayed busy, and just didn't partake in the late night activities. For some of you, you may think it is a waste, but we enjoyed our trip.
I really liked Wee Jimmy and his assistants. We especially liked Darcy and Mark.
After the first show and trying to get up close for my Mom to see (legally blind), I visited the purser's desk and asked about them reserving some seats. Initially, he said they didn't reserve seats, but then he asked and each night we had a group of reserved seats right up front. My Mom doesn't like to ask for special treatment, but she just can't see from far back. I gave them kudos for this on the comment card!
One night they had an illusionist (I missed this night). The kids said he was horrible, you could see the table the lady was laying on, etc. The shows were good, maybe not great, but were good. I don't know that any of them stood out, but we enjoyed all of them.
Cabin I was in cabin 6308 above the casino. Early in the night you could hear the slots, but I didn't find it disturbing and it didn't keep me up at night. I wouldn't hesitate to have this cabin again. There is one outlet - take a power strip and/or extension cord. The hair dryer is in the top drawer and has its own plug but it is hidden and you can't get to it. We had enough room for all our things, but it was definitely cramped with three people. We had the beds made up as twins and the couch made up as the third bed. I really missed the fact that we had no place to lounge around in our room, except on the beds. I missed the couch, but we made it through. The balcony made it bearable for me, I could have some "me" time if they were both in the cabin.
I HATED the bathroom. I don't know that there is anything you could do to improve it, but I HATED it. There is no fan or vent so when you take a shower the room gets all steamy and has no where to escape. The floor just gets all wet. It just seems the lip is not high enough on the floor. Who knows, but once again, we made do and all was well.
Food We ate in the dining room each night, once for lunch, and a few times for breakfast. I enjoy the dining room experience. They don't enforce the dress code, we had two tables close to us that people wore jeans and/or shorts each night (yes, even formal night). We still enjoyed our experience. We had Leo and Krati for our waiter/asst waiter, they were great.
The food was good and I enjoyed it. I don't know that you could describe it as exceptional, but I didn't have to cook OR clean and that made it exceptional to me. My favorite food in the dining room were two appetizers - the chicken quesadilla and the crab cake (served the last night). I REALLY liked the salsa that came with the quesadilla. I didn't have anything I DIDN'T like - other than Won Ton soup. My nephew's fiance didn't like several of the pasta dishes. The steaks were always cooked correctly and were tender.
Everybody loved the warm chocolate melting cake and I had butter pecan ice cream a couple of nights.
We tried the fish and chips and didn't think it was all that great. Again, not bad, but just not great. I loved the chips, though. The pizza was good and the 24 ice cream was enjoyed! My mom enjoyed the reuben from the deli.
My favorite buffet was the taco bar on the last sea day. As I said, I loved the salsa so this was right up my alley. I didn't think the tacos were that great, but I could have eaten chips and salsa and been happy.
All in all, I would have to say that there are so many food options on the cruise, it would be hard to find something you didn't enjoy!
Ports Nassau - we just got off and walked around, did the straw market, bought me a genuine Coach pocket book.... . Haggle haggle haggle is all I can say. I walked away from one who pulled me back and took my last offer (I am usually not that way, but they told me one price and then someone else said it was wrong...OH WELL).
St Thomas - we used EEE Tours and I have posted my review on the ports board.
St Maarten - we used norushtours and I will be posting a review there. We had a good time, but I was uncomfortable the whole trip. I don't believe he was a 'licensed' tour operator and you just never know......All is well that ends well.
Debarkation Yes, we had to get off the ship. We did this correctly, unlike embarkation. We went to the Amber Palace as directed for those with wheelchairs. They asked if we needed help and we said YES. We had a lady push the chair and we went right past everyone in the lines and right through the customs line. We were loaded in our car hitting the road at 10:30am. I thought debarkation was pretty smooth, but it was smooth for us, may not have been for others.
In summary, I would definitely cruise Carnival again. I do believe that RCCL is a small step above, but not a drastic step. There are just small things that I think RCCL does better. As I am not a true "frequent" cruiser, I don't know this is true across the board. I would compare the two equally when deciding and factor in cost and ports.
I hope this review helps someone. I will answer questions, but probably won't be back on until tomorrow night. I may check back in a bit before I go to bed.
A few small things I learned:
1) YOu can see the dining room menu for the day on your TV in your room. 2) ASK.....all you can be told is NO. We weren't going to ask about seats in the shows, but they were sure kind enough to help us. Big kudos for this. 3) Ask for help with the wheelchair
I know there is something else....but I can't remember.........maybe it will come to me.....
Happy sailing.... Less
Read more Carnival Glory cruise reviews >>
Read Cruise Critic's Carnival Glory Review >>
Compare Prices on Carnival Glory Eastern Caribbean Cruises
NCL Escape; First Time on NCL
First Cruise, Very Nice
An Excellent Time on the Anthe...

My lovely cousin Erin is going to post for me in the morning so I can keep my blog365 promise going- I may be able to post tomorrow night (but I might be having too many cocktails and living the high life),so she is so sweet to help me out.
Please give her some love? xoxoxoxo Amy who really needs to pack!
I am going to San Fran in the morning for Blogher and I am insanely excited. I flitted about my bedroom last night trying on outfits and realized that the art of primping for other women is so fun and it is like riding a bicycle. I am also quite astonished at how quickly things change in the span of one calendar year. I can remember be hunched over my old desktop last summer and reading all about the Chicago conference and thinking that it looked fun. I think I thought it was simply a networking conference about writing. I was so blog unversed at that time. I clearly thought that Blogher would have been much like any conference I would have attended for work. I would have extended arms, padded business card portfolio, wasted time, and had some fun yes, but I had no idea that going to Blogher would mean more.
I am a major extrovert and have no problem mixing and chatting and working a crowd. Rarely a year goes by without me dancing on a bar. I was very good in the business world as I made connections very well. I made connection after connection, but might not really have connected. I have often been resistant to change, saying that I have always had too many friends and had little time or energy for new ones. I held people at arms length and I hate it. I would work the work and then close the door right before someone would probably offer me some magical gift. It is called being stubborn and I learned it somewhere.
Doobleh-vay has given me a gift, it has made me reach beyond my easy breezy comfortable surface connection level and really care and learn about others in a new way. I had no idea that in a measly year I would form real relationships and connect in ways that would help me so much in my personal quest as writer. I had no idea I would come to care about people so much who lived inside my computer. I have made friendships and connections that have offered me wisdom & advice, money making gigs, the courage to write my novel, and the balls to send queries off that have landed me freelance writing jobs. I have been so moved by other people and blogs that I have sat here and sobbed and had my heart broken in ten thousand pieces. I have been enlightened and I have swooned and I have had my creative soul charged until fire flew from my fingertips.
I have discovered so very much about myself by dipping my toe in this community. I have also come to think about this conference. I may be way off, but I sense a real bonding experience. I think if I were to go back and look over those photographs on all the blogs in 2007 I would see the truth in the eyes that stare back. They were throwing their heads back and laughing, they were huddled together in small groups smiling, they were living loud right off the screen...They knew. And this year I know and it makes all the difference.

In court filings, the lawyers for Dzhokhar Tsarnaev said the Boston Marathon bombing suspect repeatedly requested a lawyer and complained about his deteriorating medical condition, yet was continuously interrogated by the FBI, The Boston Globe reported.
The FBI agents told him his brother Tamerlan Tsarnaev, who had been killed earlier, was still alive, and they turned away defense lawyers who arrived at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center on his behalf, according to the court documents, with one agent saying Tsarnaev was not even in custody.
In filings made on Wednesday, the lawyers said Tsarnaev, who had multiple gunshot wounds to his head and couldn’t speak, was questioned by a “high value interrogation group’’ and was prescribed powerful medications.
The lawyers are seeking to have US District Court Judge George A. O’Toole Jr. strike any statements Tsarnaev made before he had an attorney, saying his constitutional rights were violated. The lawyers also said the FBI did not record the interrogations and Tsarnaev’s notes, in which he wrote lawyer 10 times, give a better picture of the circumstances of the interrogation.
Tsarnaev faces the possibility of the death penalty in the April 15, 2013 bombings that killed three people and injured more than 260. Defense attorneys also put in a request to strike down the death penalty, saying the federal government should not push a punishment that has been abolished in Massachusetts.

The Little White Bird/Chapter 5
Mary's poor pretentious babe screamed continually, with a note of exultation in his din, as if he thought he was devoting himself to a life of pleasure, and often the last sound I heard as I got me out of the street was his haw-haw-haw, delivered triumphantly as if it were some entirely new thing, though he must have learned it like a parrot. I had not one tear for the woman, but Poor father, thought I; to know that every time your son is happy you are betrayed. Phew, a nauseous draught.
I have the acquaintance of a deliciously pretty girl, who is always sulky, and the thoughtless beseech her to be bright, not witting wherein lies her heroism. She was born the merriest of maids, but, being a student of her face, learned anon that sulkiness best becomes it, and so she has struggled and prevailed. A woman's history. Brave Margaret, when night falls and thy hair is down, dost thou return, I wonder, to thy natural state, or, dreading the shadow of indulgence, sleepest thou even sulkily?
But will a male child do as much for his father? This remains to be seen, and so, after waiting several months, I decided to buy David a rocking-horse. My St. Bernard dog accompanied me, though I have always been diffident of taking him to toy-shops, which over-excite him. Hitherto the toys I had bought had always been for him, and as we durst not admit this to the saleswoman we were both horribly self-conscious when in the shop. A score of times I have told him that he had much better not come, I have announced fiercely that he is not to come. He then lets go of his legs, which is how a St. Bernard sits down, making the noise of a sack of coals suddenly deposited, and, laying his head between his front paws, stares at me through the red haws that make his eyes so mournful. He will do this for an hour without blinking, for he knows that in time it will unman me. My dog knows very little, but what little he does know he knows extraordinarily well. One can get out of my chambers by a back way, and I sometimes steal softly--but I can't help looking back, and there he is, and there are those haws asking sorrowfully, "Is this worthy of you?"
"Curse you," I say, "get your hat," or words to that effect.
He has even been to the club, where he waddles up the stairs so exactly like some respected member that he makes everybody most uncomfortable. I forget how I became possessor of him. I think I cut him out of an old number of Punch. He costs me as much as an eight-roomed cottage in the country.
He was a full-grown dog when I first, most foolishly, introduced him to toys. I had bought a toy in the street for my own amusement. It represented a woman, a young mother, flinging her little son over her head with one hand and catching him in the other, and I was entertaining myself on the hearth-rug with this pretty domestic scene when I heard an unwonted sound from Porthos, and, looking up, I saw that noble and melancholic countenance on the broad grin. I shuddered and was for putting the toy away at once, but he sternly struck down my arm with his, and signed that I was to continue. The unmanly chuckle always came, I found, when the poor lady dropped her babe, but the whole thing entranced him; he tried to keep his excitement down by taking huge draughts of water; he forgot all his niceties of conduct; he sat in holy rapture with the toy between his paws, took it to bed with him, ate it in the night, and searched for it so longingly next day that I had to go out and buy him the man with the scythe. After that we had everything of note, the bootblack boy, the toper with bottle, the woolly rabbit that squeaks when you hold it in your mouth; they all vanished as inexplicably as the lady, but I dared not tell him my suspicions, for he suspected also and his gentle heart would have mourned had I confirmed his fears.
The dame in the temple of toys which we frequent thinks I want them for a little boy and calls him "the precious" and "the lamb," the while Porthos is standing gravely by my side. She is a motherly soul, but over-talkative.
"And how is the dear lamb to-day?" she begins, beaming.
"Well, ma'am, well," I say, keeping tight grip of his collar.
"This blighty weather is not affecting his darling appetite?"
"No, ma'am, not at all." (She would be considerably surprised if informed that he dined to-day on a sheepshead, a loaf, and three cabbages, and is suspected of a leg of mutton.
"I hope he loves his toys?"
"He carries them about with him everywhere, ma'am." (Has the one we bought yesterday with him now, though you might not think it to look at him.
"What do you say to a box of tools this time?"
"I think not, ma'am."
"Is the deary fond of digging?"
"Very partial to digging." (We shall find the leg of mutton some day.
"Then perhaps a weeny spade and a pail?"
She got me to buy a model of Canterbury Cathedral once, she was so insistent, and Porthos gave me his mind about it when we got home. He detests the kindergarten system, and as she is absurdly prejudiced in its favour we have had to try other shops. We went to the Lowther Arcade for the rocking-horse. Dear Lowther Arcade! Ofttimes have we wandered agape among thy enchanted palaces, Porthos and I, David and I, David and Porthos and I. I have heard that thou art vulgar, but I cannot see how, unless it be that tattered children haunt thy portals, those awful yet smiling entrances to so much joy. To the Arcade there are two entrances, and with much to be sung in laudation of that which opens from the Strand I yet on the whole prefer the other as the more truly romantic, because it is there the tattered ones congregate, waiting to see the Davids emerge with the magic lamp. We have always a penny for them, and I have known them, before entering the Arcade with it, retire (but whither?) to wash; surely the prettiest of all the compliments that are paid to the home of toys.
And now, O Arcade, so much fairer than thy West End brother, we are told that thou art doomed, anon to be turned into an eatinghouse or a hive for usurers, something rankly useful. All thy delights are under notice to quit. The Noah's arks are packed one within another, with clockwork horses harnessed to them; the soldiers, knapsack on back, are kissing their hands to the dear foolish girls, who, however, will not be left behind them; all the four-footed things gather around the elephant, who is overful of drawing-room furniture; the birds flutter their wings; the man with the scythe mows his way through the crowd; the balloons tug at their strings; the ships rock under a swell of sail, everything is getting ready for the mighty exodus into the Strand. Tears will be shed.
So we bought the horse in the Lowther Arcade, Porthos, who thought it was for him, looking proud but uneasy, and it was sent to the bandbox house anonymously. About a week afterward I had the ill- luck to meet Mary's a husband in Kensington, so I asked him what he had called his little girl.
"It is a boy," he replied, with intolerable good-humour, "we call him David."
And then with a singular lack of taste he wanted the name of my boy.
I flicked my glove. "Timothy," said I.
I saw a suppressed smile on his face, and said hotly that Timothy was as good a name as David. "I like it," he assured me, and expressed a hope that they would become friends. I boiled to say that I really could not allow Timothy to mix with boys of the David class, but I refrained, and listened coldly while he told me what David did when you said his toes were pigs going to market or returning from it, I forget which. He also boasted of David's weight (a subject about which we are uncommonly touchy at the club), as if children were for throwing forth for a wager.
But no more about Timothy. Gradually this vexed me. I felt what a forlorn little chap Timothy was, with no one to say a word for him, and I became his champion and hinted something about teething, but withdrew it when it seemed too surprising, and tried to get on to safer ground, such as bibs and general intelligence, but the painter fellow was so willing to let me have my say, and knew so much more about babies than is fitting for men to know, that I paled before him and wondered why the deuce he was listening to me so attentively.
You may remember a story he had told me about some anonymous friend. "His latest," said he now, "is to send David a rocking- horse!"
I must say I could see no reason for his mirth. "Picture it," said he, "a rocking-horse for a child not three months old!"
I was about to say fiercely: "The stirrups are adjustable," but thought it best to laugh with him. But I was pained to hear that Mary had laughed, though heaven knows I have often laughed at her.
"But women are odd," he said unexpectedly, and explained. It appears that in the middle of her merriment Mary had become grave and said to him quite haughtily, "I see nothing to laugh at." Then she had kissed the horse solemnly on the nose and said, "I wish he was here to see me do it." There are moments when one cannot help feeling a drawing to Mary.
But moments only, for the next thing he said put her in a particularly odious light. He informed me that she had sworn to hunt Mr. Anon down.
"She won't succeed," I said, sneering but nervous.
"Then it will be her first failure," said he.
"But she knows nothing about the man."
"You would not say that if you heard her talking of him. She says he is a gentle, whimsical, lonely old bachelor."
"Old?" I cried.
"Well, what she says is that he will soon be old if he doesn't take care. He is a bachelor at all events, and is very fond of children, but has never had one to play with."
"Could not play with a child though there was one," I said brusquely; "has forgotten the way; could stand and stare only."
"Yes, if the parents were present. But he thinks that if he were alone with the child he could come out strong."
"How the deuce--" I began
"That is what she says," he explained, apologetically. "I think she will prove to be too clever for him."
"Pooh," I said, but undoubtedly I felt a dizziness, and the next time I met him he quite frightened me. "Do you happen to know any one," he said, "who has a St. Bernard dog?"
"No," said I, picking up my stick.
"He has a St. Bernard dog."
"How have you found that out?"
"She has found it out."
"I don't know."
I left him at once, for Porthos was but a little way behind me. The mystery of it scared me, but I armed promptly for battle. I engaged a boy to walk Porthos in Kensington Gardens, and gave him these instructions: "Should you find yourself followed by a young woman wheeling a second-hand perambulator, instantly hand her over to the police on the charge of attempting to steal the dog."
Now then, Mary.
"By the way," her husband said at our next meeting, "that rocking- horse I told you of cost three guineas."
"She has gone to the shop to ask?"
"No, not to ask that, but for a description of the purchaser's appearance."
Oh, Mary, Mary.
Here is the appearance of purchaser as supplied at the Arcade:-- looked like a military gentleman; tall, dark, and rather dressy; fine Roman nose (quite so), carefully trimmed moustache going grey (not at all); hair thin and thoughtfully distributed over the head like fiddlestrings, as if to make the most of it (pah!); dusted chair with handkerchief before sitting down on it, and had other oldmaidish ways (I should like to know what they are); tediously polite, but no talker; bored face; age forty-five if a day (a lie); was accompanied by an enormous yellow dog with sore eyes. (They always think the haws are sore eyes.)
"Do you know anyone who is like that?" Mary's husband asked me innocently.
"My dear man," I said, "I know almost no one who is not like that," and it was true, so like each other do we grow at the club. I was pleased, on the whole, with this talk, for it at least showed me how she had come to know of the St. Bernard, but anxiety returned when one day from behind my curtains I saw Mary in my street with an inquiring eye on the windows. She stopped a nurse who was carrying a baby and went into pretended ecstasies over it. I was sure she also asked whether by any chance it was called Timothy. And if not, whether that nurse knew any other nurse who had charge of a Timothy.
Obviously Mary suspicioned me, but nevertheless, I clung to Timothy, though I wished fervently that I knew more about him; for I still met that other father occasionally, and he always stopped to compare notes about the boys. And the questions he asked were so intimate, how Timothy slept, how he woke up, how he fell off again, what we put in his bath. It is well that dogs and little boys have so much in common, for it was really of Porthos I told him; how he slept (peacefully), how he woke up (supposed to be subject to dreams), how he fell off again (with one little hand on his nose), but I glided past what we put in his bath (carbolic and a mop).
The man had not the least suspicion of me, and I thought it reasonable to hope that Mary would prove as generous. Yet was I straitened in my mind. For it might be that she was only biding her time to strike suddenly, and this attached me the more to Timothy, as if I feared she might soon snatch him from me. As was indeed to be the case.

The house and its characteristics are beautiful, and it looks like a very nice place to stay!
excellent all year round
While on our way to PEI from VT we stopped for the evening at the Bennett House. We had the Bennett room which was quite large with a in house bath with a small stall shower. All the ammenities were there including slippers and robes, hair dryer and toiletries. We arrived early and fortunately our host was home. The bed... more
My husband and I were on our way home from Nova Scotia, and this was a perfect stop over point. The proprietor was very informative and helpful. The Bennett House is a beautiful old restored home with a lot of charm and character. Every amenity was provided including a robe and slippers. The house had a great variety of really... more

Stabbed Vancouver police dog released from clinic
Vancouver police service dog Teak has been released from an animal clinic after suffering stab wounds in a confrontation with a suspect Friday night.
The German shepherd underwent two surgeries for his injuries but survived.
'Teak was in good physical condition, so he tolerated his wound well even though it was quite severe," said veterinarian Alan Kuzma. "If it was you or me, we wouldn't be going home a day after surgery."
Teak will be retired from service to live at home with his handler, who was very relieved the dog survived.
"You dont expect to see your partner opened up like that. I didn't know what the future was going to be, just wanted to take care of him as best I could," said Const. Derrick Gibson.
"He's save my life more times than I can relate and vice versa."
Teak was slashed as he held a man being sought in the attempted robbery of a gas station in south Vancouver.
Police dogs often find themselves in harm’s way, according to K-9 unit officer Sgt. Scott Hogg.
"Most of the time they're the first ones there, the handler and the dog most of the time working alone. So at times they're confronting serious incidents," Hogg said.
Teak has served with Vancouver police since 2007 and will be eight years old in March.

After a not so convincing display by Prayag United after banging in 10 goals last week, the Dutchman said that winning is his first priority, performance comes second...Prayag United huffed and puffed their way to a rather unconvincing 2-1 win over Pailan Arrows at the Salt Lake Stadium after a late winner from Lalkamal Bhowmick.
Although coach Eelco Schattorie acknowledged that his team didn't have the best outing against the All India Football Federation's (AIFF) Developmental side.
"If winning is not important, and only performance matters, then why do we keep score in a match. I always told my players that winning, no matter what, is always the first goal. Then we can assess the performance."
When asked about the opposition he faced today, Eelco had good things to say about the side coached by Arthur Papas.
"They are a young side full of energy and running. They are also fitter than our bunch of players. Moreover their new foreign coach (Papas) has made them more organized and playing in a good system, like the Dutch system."
Eelco also made it clear that Bello Rasaq was his man of the match as he also heaped praise on Lalkamal Bhowmick who scored the late goal.
"Bello was my man of the match. He organized the defense really well. Yes, today was Lalkamal's day as he scored. But what was good also that he came back and helped out his defense too."
The former VVV Venlo coach was candid enough to say that he would need time to execute all his changes while accepting that his side need to be more organized.
"The transition play between the defense and the midfield was what was lacking today. We need to be more organized next time around. However everything will take time."
On being congratulated after Prayag usurped Dempo SC from the second position in the I-League, Eelco stated that his target is to be league leaders eventually.
"I always go for the first position and I am sure we will be able to achieve it."
About Narayan Das's goal, which they conceded late on, Eelco added that from his ten years of experience in coaching in the Middle East and Africa, he was clear that about forty percent of goals were scored from set pieces.
"Although it was a really well taken goal, I believe that a goal from a set-piece happens due to a lack in concentration as the people forget their marking duties and go to sleep. We have to rectify this," he replied.
How do you stay up to date with football when on the move? With http://m.goal.com – your best source for mobile coverage of the beautiful game.

Maybe you've heard or read this piece before:
He never wrote a book. He never held an office. He never had a family or owned a home. He didn't go to college. He never lived in a big city. He never traveled 200 miles from the place where he was born. He did none of the things that usually accompany greatness. He had no credentials but himself.
He was only 33 when the tide of public opinion turned against him. His friends ran away. One of them denied him. He was turned over to his enemies and went through the mockery of a trial. He was nailed to a cross between two thieves. While he was dying, his executioners gambled for his garments, the only property he had on earth. When he was dead, he was laid in a borrowed grave, through the pity of a friend.
Twenty centuries have come and gone, and today he is the central figure of the human race. I am well within the mark when I say that all the armies that ever marched, all the navies that ever sailed, all the parliaments that ever sat, all the kings that ever reigned -- put together -- have not affected the life of man on this earth as much as that one, solitary life.
-- James Allen Francis
I've used this before, but I read it again the other day and discovered a word that really bothers me. Don't get me wrong, the sentiment is great, and it really is a powerful piece. But that one word -- the next-to-last word -- I can't get past it. It's become all I see.
If we mean "solitary" as in "unique" -- that I can get on board with. But that's not what we usually mean when we use the word. Usually we mean "isolated, secluded or alone". We use this word to describe a recluse or a hermit or someone who is a bit stand-off-ish.
That doesn't describe the Jesus I read about in the Bible.

He was born in Kispest on 30 October 1949. He is married with three grown up children. His wife is the director of the Lakitelek People's Academy. He finished Madách Imre Secondary School, Budapest in 1968. Between 1969 and 1974 he worked as a support teacher in the school for children living in farmsteads in the Lakitelek area. He graduated in Hungarian literature and language and history from the Szeged Teacher Training College in 1975. He was a primary school teacher from 1974. He worked as a desk officer for, and led the drama group of, the community centre in Lakitelek between 1969 and 1985. From 1979 to 1985 he was the non-Budapest secretary of the Bethlen Gábor Foundation. He has published two books of poems and written the lyrics of a rock opera to which Levente Szörényi composed music. One of his plays was staged several times and he has received numerous literary awards. He has been the chair of board of Lakitelek Foundation since 1991. He founded the Lakitelek People's Academy, which received the Hungarian Heritage Award in 2003. Today he is one of the leaders of the Academy. He has been deputy executive president of the Cardinal Mindszenty Society since March 2004. The Hungarian Democratic Forum (MDF) was founded in his garden on 27 September 1987. Between 1989 and 1990 he was responsible for the Forum's election campaign. He was a member of its presidium since 1988. Between 1993 and 1994 he was managing deputy chairman, from 2 March 1996 to 30 January 1999 he was president, and since than, he was been vice president of the Hungarian Democratic Forum until he was excluded from his party. He has been an MP since April 1994 (1994: county list, 1998 and 2002: Constituency 3, Tiszakécske, Bács-Kiskun County). From September 1996 to June 1998 and from September 1998 to May 2002 he was Parliamentary faction Leader of the Hungarian Democratic Forum. In the Parliament between 1998 and 2002, he was chairman of the Education and Science Committee. Since 15 May 2002 he has been a member of the Tourism Committee and deputy chairman of the Cultural and Press Committee. Since 22 September he chaired the Temporary Committee on Closing of Nurseries and Schools. In the local elections on 20 October 2002, he was elected representative to the Bács-Kiskun County Assembly, where he became co-chairman of the Cultural and Church Committee. On 21 June 2004, soon after the European Parliament elections, he established the Lakitelek Working Group to represent a specific political platform. He was excluded from MDF faction on 27 October 2004. From the announcement of the exclusion in the plenary sitting he continued as an independent MP and because of that he had to part with his committee membership on 20 December. He secured a seat in Parliament in the 2006 general elections from the Bács-Kiskun county 3.constituency. He is a member of the Committee on National Security. He was elected deputy chairman of the National Assembly on 8 June 2006.
Last updated: 30-08-2006

I've been thinking a lot about blogging these last couple days - not just because I've been doing more of it in the last week than I had in the previous two weeks, but because I am coming to realize how much of an extension of me it is. It's one of the few places where I don't self-edit (much) and where pretty much what you see (or read) is what you get. Although it's not really the place where I go to vent about the specifics of my life, I do share a lot of hopes and fears and observations on the world that I would not normally bring up in conversation with people in my every day life. That is not to say that I there's anything that I write here that I wouldn't say in real life - that's kind of one of my unwritten rules of blogging.
The issue that's been bugging me these days is that I've always been vehemently private about my blog - which I know seems kind of odd because here I am publishing this stuff on the internet and I'm worried about it being read. Sharing this kind of stuff with strangers and the people that I know read this and tune in day after day is both liberating and scary, but mostly, the former wins out. It's when people that actually know me start reading this that I start to get nervous.
I'm trying really hard to be authentically me - the Dan that is at the core of me rather than the outer shell that so many know. And along with that goes being more real in my work and in other social situations that I find myself in. And it comes back to the blog - something of which I am intensely proud, but also very shy about revealing to people. I had this blog linked as my website on Facebook for a very brief time. I removed it as soon as people from my work started adding me to their friends list because having that link there for people that I work with to access felt like such an invasion of my privacy - something that seems very silly when it was me that put the stuff out there for consumption anyway. But a part of me really wants to leave it on there - and face the ramifications of my blog becoming public with a few people that I work with. I don't think that the heavens will open and the end of the world will be upon us if that were to happen, but it's almost like revealing too much to too many people.
When my blog was read only by random people and the people I told about it, I felt pretty good about it. When friends and family started reading it (even though I gave them the address), I felt very nervous about it - even to the point that I found I couldn't write. I got over that by telling myself it's my blog and I can damn well pick what I want to write about and if they don't like it, find it boring, or are made uncomfortable by it, well, then they don't fucking have to read it. Revealing this even more? I don't know - I sometimes feel like if people I know casually were to stumble across my blog, figure out it's me (which wouldn't be hard) and read, I'd feel like I was the victim of a voyeur. Even now, I get Ames hits on my counter, and I wonder who they are. That's mostly ridiculous, I know, but all the same, I can't shake that feeling.
I know - I think too much sometimes. I guess I just really want people to know who I REALLY AM and sometimes that scares even me and I'm in my head 24/7. I can only imagine what it would do for people who only see me 8 hours a day or once a week at church or whatever would feel if they came over here and saw it. Perhaps it would make me more intriguing. To be honest, I like this version of Dan more than the one that's put out for mass consumption on a daily basis. This one feels and tries new things and flirts with crazy ideas. And I just can't help but think that would scare a lot of people off. Or at least provide detractors with ammunition.
So is there an answer? I don't know. Perhaps this is a jump I'm just not quite ready to take yet. Fear is usually trying to tell you something when you feel it - but figuring out what it's saying is the tricky part. How does one reconcile the desire to be blazingly honest and real with the desire to be intensely private as well?

Rick Fox on Fox sports.
Posted October 19, 2008 - 10:27 PM
Posted October 20, 2008 - 12:33 AM
So is he going to be on that broadcast team for the entire season? He's actually pretty good and he does talk about defense. Moreso, Norm seems to have a personality when interacting with Fox.
I agree, Norm does look better.
But that also could just be from experience.
Norm finally has a full year under his belt and I'm sure bunch of people told him that he's boring as hellll.
Rick is lookin' sharp and I love his comments.
I still miss Jack Haley's excitement though. Too bad he was an idiot.
Posted October 20, 2008 - 01:56 AM
Posted October 20, 2008 - 12:27 PM
16 TIME NBA WORLD CHAMPIONS!
Thanks TheBigFish for this great sig
Posted October 22, 2008 - 12:29 PM
was great to see fox again....he looks good.
yeah it was great to see him again!! i was at this game and saw him in person--i got really excited because i didn't know that he would be on fox until that night!!!
i'm glad they're having him on and trying harder to improve the interest for the viewers
0 user(s) are reading this topic
0 members, 0 guests, 0 anonymous users

Tyrell's Story: Taking Pills for High Blood Pressure
When Tyrell's doctor told him he had high blood pressure, he was shocked.
"I thought, 'Hey, I'm a physical fitness trainer. I'm in great shape. How could I have high blood pressure?'"
He knew that both of his parents have high blood pressure. And one of his uncles recently had a stroke. But Tyrell had always been kind of a health nut. It just didn't seem possible that he could be sick.
"My doctor put me on two kinds of pills," the 35-year-old says. "And for a few months I was really good about taking them every day. But they made me a little tired, and I got tired of being tired."
Instead of going back to his doctor, Tyrell just stopped taking his pills. Then, a few months later, he was working at his fitness club when he heard sirens. An ambulance had been called because a club member had collapsed while lifting weights. Tyrell found out the next day that the club member had had a stroke, probably caused by high blood pressure.
"I learned that it doesn't matter how healthy you feel—if you have high blood pressure, you're sick and you'd better do something about it," Tyrell says. He went back to his doctor, who changed his prescription.
The new pills still made him a little tired. But this time, instead of not taking his pills, he went back to the doctor yet again. His new combination of blood pressure pills is working well—with no side effects.
"Now I often talk about high blood pressure with my clients," he says. "I tell them about my own high blood pressure—which always kind of surprises them—and let them know about the importance of taking those pills."
This story is based on information gathered from many people facing this health issue.
For more information, see the topic High Blood Pressure.
Current as ofApril 9, 2019
Author: Healthwise Staff
Medical Review: E. Gregory Thompson, MD - Internal Medicine
Martin J. Gabica, MD - Family Medicine
Adam Husney, MD - Family Medicine
Robert A. Kloner, MD, PhD - Cardiology

Police say a man was shot in the hand after his gun fell out of its holster while he hurried across a parking lot to avoid holding up traffic outside a Pennsylvania Walmart store.
The Centre Daily Times reports the 45-year-old man was shot outside the Walmart in Patton Township -- just north of downtown State College -- on Tuesday afternoon.
Police say the gun was in its holster as the man hurried across the lot to avoid holding up traffic. The gun fell out and hit the ground as he ran. He went to pick it up and was shifting bags in his hands when the gun went off, hitting him.
He was treated at a hospital and his name has not been released.
The bullet then hit the pavement; no one else was hurt.
Police said that the man had a permit to carry a firearm.

November 28th, 2008 – by: sayohat
My brush with fame in Almaty
It was a bit of an awkward goodbye to Tahir, but I think he understood and probably felt bad for not being able to hang out more. The old lady appreciated the 1000 tenge and I left knowing I would have a better time in town. The Hotel Saulet was in an unmarked building not far from Independence Square and next to a building with a replica of the Eiffel Tower standing in front. It was also two blocks from my favorite lunch spot, the Kulinariya Kuanysh. After settling into my new room, which was fancy by current standards and had a TV, refrigerator and a toilet in the room. Showers were down the hall and cost an extra 100 tenge, but this was not a problem. I was happy!
Another traveler had contacted me through CouchSurfing and we agreed to meet at the Square to hang out.
Zhibek Zholi street in Almaty
It would be the first time I actually met another traveler to hang out with, other than random encounters in Tajikistan. Pernille, a 21-year-old Danish girl traveling for about 6 months so far, and I walked around leisurely, stopping in bookstores and various places including a ticket office. We walked through Panfilov Park, home of the famous Zenkov Cathedral. People were standing outside crossing themselves, so we had to be careful not to walk in front of them so as not to offend. We also walked through the Zelyony Bazaar, a maze of not just food and clothing stalls, but connecting department stores. I was even successful booking my train ticket to Shymkent
, after booking my airline ticket to Istanbul online.
Wouldn't want to live here if an earthquake hit
Things were turning around and it was a great day.
Later I was supposed to meet up with Masha, a friend of a friend of mine, but she couldn't make it so Pernille and I decided to meet up and go to a place Masha had recommended, the Mad Murphy Pub. First we went to the Ramstor mall and had a slice of pizza and salad in the food court. We had a great time chatting about politics, environmental issues, Central Asia and customs of Denmark. We were going to go to the Guns 'N Roses Pub first, but we looked inside and noticed mostly businessmen in suits and "businesswomen" in their flashy clothes, surrounded by circles of cigarette smoke and decided to just head to Mad Murphy's. We walked downtown and although it was only about 9pm, it was pretty busy and there weren't many places to sit.
Zenkov's cathedral in Panfilov Park
A tall black man scrounged up a table for us and we each had a tall draft beer and enjoyed people-watching. An amateur cover band played songs from the 60s and 70s and the occasional 80s hit while groups of young girls hit the dance floor. Next to us there were two girls with tight clothing and make-up that would be appropriate in Amsterdam's Red Light District. Soon the girls' boyfriends came in, and they looked even younger. At first it looked like they were going to steal the girls' purses, but when one of the girls saw them she didn't do anything, so I assumed they knew each other. It was an interesting scene, but we decided to check out another bar to see what else Almaty's nightlife could show us.
We kept with the Irish theme and went to the Guinness Pub & Sushi Bar.
Finally, a decent microbrew. John is happy.
The place was a large complex, with the two oddly-paired themes properly separated. The sushi section was completely dead, but was the first thing to see through the window, so we almost didn't go in, thinking the whole place was dead, but a doorman motioned us in and we discovered another live cover band in the "pub" section, which was also a restaurant with more of a bar feel. We found a table in the back away from the noise and most of the smoke, and where we could talk. A large group of people next to us had just gotten up and left a lot of food and wine on the table. We both really wanted to just go over and raid the table. It was such a waste! Pernille actually did grab some bread and cheese, but we didn't want to get kicked out before we even placed an order, so we sadly watched them take away the food. I'm sure the waiters probably took it for themselves. The beer we ordered was a local brew and quite tasty, much better than the Tien Shan beer at the other bar. The cover songs were much better and a bit more selective than what I've traditionally heard. Pernille nearly choked on her beer when she heard one song, which happened to be an obscure band from Denmark whose lead singer dated a friend of hers. It was after midnight by the time we looked at the time, and Pernille had told the family she was staying at she'd be back by then. We made plans to meet up the next day and try to check out the mountains. I walked her to where she was staying and then went back, which was only two blocks away. Almaty wasn't so bad after all.

The 34-year-old former World Player of the Year has looked back fondly on his time with Atletico Mineiro and is confident there is one more chapter to come in his storied careerBrazil legend Ronaldinho has confirmed that he will leave Atletico Mineiro but insists that he is not yet ready to retire.
The 34-year-old has enjoyed a remarkable career, notably with Paris Saint-Germain, Barcelona and AC Milan, while he has won 99 caps and lifted the World Cup with his national team.
Since leaving San Siro in 2010, the Porto Alegre-born player has returned to Brazil, playing with Flamengo and latterly with Atletico - with whom he lifted the Copa Libertadores - and he believes his career still has one final chapter to come.
"Retirement, for now, is not a possibility," he told the media.
"Right now my brother [agent Roberto de Assis] is doing all the thinking. Starting next week, we'll talk about my future. I'll take these days to just stay away from everything and get some rest. But I know his phone has been ringing a lot."
The attacker departs the Belo Horizonte side on good terms and admitted that he was happy with his spell there, which included the club's first Libertadores success, as well as his career as a whole.
"I was happy enough to be champion at every club I've ever played, and they all have a special part in my heart," he said. "Barcelona is the club where I've stayed for longest. But Atletico has touched me very deeply. Winning a title the club had never won before, that sort of thing sticks with you. Galo is very special to me, for everything."
Ronaldinho, who is widely considered one of the 21st century's greatest players - having won the Fifa World Player of the Year prize in 2004 and 2005 - has been linked with moves to Boca Juniors and the A-League, amongst others.

Why Anyone Can Succeed
In 1992, OS/2 came out and I felt I could get a competitive advantage by pre-loading OS/2 onto the computers I sold. I became quite familiar with OS/2. In early 1993, I thought there would be demand for an OS/2 video game. The only problem was that I didn't know how to program. So I bought a book called "Teach yourself C in 21 days" and a book called "OS/2 Presentation Manager Programming". With those two books I programmed Galactic Civilizations. Anyone who ever played the game and also knows programming can verify that only the techniques in OS/2 PM programming are in that game. What that meant is that all the "graphics" were merely iconic windows, not real images because OS/2 PM programming didn't include chapters on how to do graphics programming and I couldn't afford any more books.
Even still, my plan once I graduated was to go work at some cool company. I sent my resume to Texas Instruments and tons of other big companies. No response. I later learned from a friend who worked at Ratheon at the time that these big companies won't look at resumes from minor colleges like WMU. He got in because he went to (wait for it) University of Michigan, the school I was accepted at but couldn't afford (my friend's parents paid his way through and drove a firebird).
So while failing to get a job, the little game I made did really well. Except that I didn't get paid any royalties. Our publisher ripped us off and because I was poor and couldn't afford a lawyer, I was screwed. If you bought a copy of Galactic Civilizations, that's cool but I never got a penny of it. But the game was such a success that I was able to use the good publicity to build Stardock up with other products while I waited to see if I could get a job anywhere.
Because I worked 3 jobs during college my gradepoint was only 2.6 so I was at a competitive disadavantage. But that time allowed me to keep working on Stardock stuff which led to Star Emperor (a GalCiv derivative I wrote for IBM) and Object Desktop for OS/2 which I teamed up with a fellow OS/2 fanatic Kurt Westerfeld to bring to market.
And the rest is history. By 24 I was a millionaire. And during the stock bubble, my company's valuation was ridiculously high (wish I could just stick with that number ) which fortunately coincided with my 10 year class reunion! So what's the excuse of able bodied people who are poor? I'm not particularly intelligent. I don't enjoy working any more than anyone else (just ask my mom). But I did what I had to do. And now I pay 6 figures in income taxes of which a large percentage of it goes to other people. If I can make it, why can't others? If you are able bodied, what's stopping you?

His revelation comes just weeks before the release of a new biography about Tate's husband, Oscar-winning director Roman Polanski, The Daily Mail reported Friday. Tate, who starred in the campy "Valley of the Dolls," and four other friends was killed Aug. 9, 1969, by followers of Charles Manson.
Known for his role as Major Randolph Doryan in David Lean's epic, "Ryan's Daughter," the Tennessee-born Jones said he began his affair with Tate when she was six weeks' pregnant with Polanski's child.
When asked by the British newspaper during his interview in Los Angeles why he revealed his relationship now, Jones said, "I don't think I'm betraying any confidence by talking about it."
"I loved Sharon and she loved me," he said, adding he had "no intention" of breaking up their marriage.
"I loved being with her," he said of Tate. "Other women I've been with, I couldn't remember if my life depended on it, but she stuck in my mind."
Notable deaths of 2014 [PHOTOS]

For the past couple weeks, Kris and I have been completely overwhelmed with emotion by the kindness and generosity of others. When we started out this journey, coming up with the money was one of our biggest concerns, especially because we hated the thought of having to turn to others for help. We were almost dreading it and now it has turned into something very special to us, and has forever changed us.
Our new found friend, Heather, who is also adopting a little girl through Reece's Rainbow, said EXACTLY what we have been feeling:
"Your dollars have become sacred to us. The first thing we feel when a donation comes in is a little guilt because we know it caused that family to have to give something up during tough times. We think of each person or family and know it wasn't easy to give what they did.

There comes a point where you want a high-quality vehicle to drive around in. I don’t mind driving an average car as that is entertaining as it is, but you always want to get more out of things. This is why I am always interested in vehicles that are going to perform well now and in the future too. This is what matters most to people like me who want to purchase a car that is going to be fun to drive, while letting us do what we need to do.
This is why I was amazed when I came across the Dodge Ram in Canada that has just been released. They are a truly phenomenal truck and that is say too less about the quality that is on offer. I remember the days of driving in a car that was mediocre and really didn’t fulfill me.
I wanted a car that was going to ensure that I was having fun while I was riding about. The type of control you get from the Dodge Ram is just exceptional in this day and age. You are able to gain so much power from this vehicle and you feel it right away. I have often said that once you start driving this (even for a test drive) you are never going to go back to a regular car.
It is better to just make the plunge and purchase it because of how good the Dodge Ram is. They have truly refined this vehicle and made it one of the best in the world. They have always been regarded as the best of the best when it comes to trucks on the market and you can really see why. They are built to last and really do perform better than anything else.
Check out the video review below on the 2015 Ram 1500:

On sunday 29th of April we had our second competition day of the outdoor season we had a great time! We had a lot less rain than expected. It also was the first time for our new team mascot, 10 month old Thijs, to come and watch from his buggy.
In our first game we were up against BeeFrisbee2s who had just promoted from the 6th division. The difference in playing level was to be expected since we just degraded from 4th. Still, we discovered that BeeFrisbee2s managed to break through our zone easily. Nevertheless did a switch back to man defence help deliver us a winning score of 15-5.
In our second game of the day we played against Flying High, a team that we had played on our first competition day and that had degraded to 5th division as well. Flying High came with a slightly stronger team this time and the game that followed was very intense. They started out a little ahead, but during the middle of the game we gained momentum and got to 13-9 ahead. Then Flying High fought itself back which allowed them to win the game 14-13 on universe at the nerve wrecking end!
In our last game we stood against UFO. The development of this game proved to be remarkably similar to the previous one. R’damnit was behind at the start but ahead during most of the game thereafter. However, UFO came back strong in the last 20 minutes and forced us to fight for our win and place in 5th division by point cap.
We are looking forward to our last competition day on June 17th. Until then, we’ll enjoy our Thursday training sessions more and more thanks to the break of spring!

I was physically, spiritually and financially bankrupt! .I was told by another firm that I was ineligible to file bankruptcy because I had used funds to pay for my sons education. I was also dealing with a difficult separation and felt hopeless, helpless, ashamed and afraid that I would lose my home. Neil and his staff took the time to hear my story. "They said we can help you!" I am now one year discharged. I praise God he led me to Neil, Audra, Kelly, Irene and staff. #LOONCsavedmylife
When I first came to Attorney Neil Crane, I was scared because of the trouble I got myself into with credit card debt. That fear disappeared when I sat down with him and he explained how he was going to help me. Not only did I resolve and get discharged from my case but I also learned how important it was to be more responsible with credit cards and saving. With Neil Crane's guidance and that of his firm, you will be in GREAT hands!
My husband and I have had a great experience with everyone at this office. I had a good friend recommend Mr. Crane to me. He helped us save our house. I’m so greatful of that. Thank you! I have recommended a Friend and I will continue to recommend anybody that is in need. Thank you again for saving our home!)
I came to Neil Crane's office after my business closed and I was left with a mountain of debt. From day one Neil sat down with me and explained the process and what I could expect. When my case hit an unexpected snag he and his team of lawyers worked hard to make sure that I would not have to pay anything back to the bankruptcy court! Thank you! JM
I would like to thank Neil Crane and his associates for the way they handled my case. I was at the end of my ropes and didn't know which way to turn,and the way everyone at this law firm handled my case put my mind at ease. It was the best move I made hireing NEIL CRANE. Iwould like to thank everyone for being so professional and freindly. If anyone is in need of a top notch law firm this is the one to call. CHARLIE SMITH
With the guidance of your team, what seemed hopeless became possible. From the time I stepped into the office to completion, my hand was held every step of the way. All my phone calls and SOS emails returned and some of those emails I wrote in the wee hours of the morning because I couldn’t sleep. The next day there would be reassurance in my inbox. I don’t even know where to begin to say thank you, other than I will forever be grateful. You gave me back a future. Thank you! JC
Making the decision to file for bankruptcy was a tough desion, but was a huge relief in the outcome. My debt was cleared and was given a clean slate with making better choices. After filing for bankruptcy I moved to Florida and was able to get approved for an apartment rental with no issues with fear that having filed for bankruptcy I would be denied. I do have to say that the Law Offices of Neil Crane made the process from start to finish super easy, and would recommend.
I am a small business owner who was struggling to stay alive and grow my business in Connecticut. My business was under-capitalized and my bills became overwhelming.After a lot of hard work done by Neil Crane and his remarkable staff, we were able to get rid of all of my debt and completely save my business. I am so thankful that I met this office who was relentless in their efforts and the unlimited time that it took to solve my difficult case.They saved my life & my family's future.
I filed for bankruptcy 5 months ago. I am still in awe of what has happened. Being a hard working person it was a humiliating thing to have to approach. I called Neil Crane and from the get go I was received with respect and importance . Sobbing like an idiot telling Neil of the God awful situation I was in I thought I was doomed to have this monkey on my back till I died. Neil took me out of this situation. I am now debt free and so very,very grateful to this team of caring people. CGS
I had a excellent experience with the Law Offices of Neil Crane. My case was complicated because it involved two states. They were very knowledgeable and made this experience as simple as possible. I would recommend them to everybody who is going through a bankruptcy.

Howdy friends. I'm back from the South. My niece's graduation was beautiful and so was she. I missed the blog hop last week, but I was happy to get back to my craft room this week and to re-join my crafty friends today. We are challenged this week with some blues and greens. Our inspiration piece and colors are below:
Joni. She is one talented lady, and I love to visit her blogsite.
Here is the card I created using our colors this week. I had some sponges on my desk and decided I would use what was there, I'm not sure what I was working on before I went to South Carolina, but the Wetlands stamp set and sponges must have been part of it.
Continue on to Robbie's blogsite now to see what she has created for us this week. I'll be back again next week, and hope you will too.

SYRACUSE, New York -- A 30-year-old man was ordered to vacate his parents' Syracuse area home Tuesday after they sued him because he refused to leave.
After the judge's ruling, son Michael Rotondo said, "This is outrageous" and said he would appeal the decision.
Rotondo's parents said he wouldn't leave the house despite several notices. Rotondo claimed that, legally, he wasn't given enough notice to leave, maintaining that six months is a more reasonable timeframe.
Parents Mark and Christina Rotondo said they began giving him notices as early as February 2, 2018. The parents said they also offered their son $1,100 to help him find a place of his own. Michael Rotondo said he did take the money, but it wasn't enough to live anywhere else.
The judge asked adult protective services to check on the case as he's concerned about what's happening at the home.
According to court filings, Rotondo doesn't contribute to the family's expenses and doesn't help out with the chores.
His parents even say they've offered to help him get started on his own. Rotondo is calling his parent's effort "retaliatory."
Rotondo, who runs a website business, moved back home eight years ago after losing a job.
He said Tuesday that he plans to get some things from home and isn't sure where he will stay.
Judge orders 30-year-old son to leave parents' home after they sued him

Mercy and her warrior sisters had been around for several millennia, their time of fighting in wars and conquering kingdoms now a distant memory. Before Queen Dante passed, she’d graced her prized warriors—the falcon, hawk, eagle, phoenix, vulture, and owl—with humanity as well as immortality. A gift that Mercy, to this day, was having difficulty coming to terms with. Living as a human was not what she was born to do, nor what she wanted to do. Being an immortal in a life she didn’t want left Mercy feeling angry at the world and turned her into a workaholic.
As an intervention, Blaze arranged an extended vacation and guilted her into taking it. She made all the arrangements and wouldn’t tell Mercy where she was going, just to be at the airport and do as she was told.
Joel Oliver needed this job. Finances were tight, and Blaze said all he had to do was chauffer a rich woman around town. What he would receive would catch him up on the mound of bills piling up and keep the roof over his—and his thirteen-year-old daughter, Miley’s—head for a few months longer. Miley was in a wheelchair—and as a result, had a lot of medical bills—but he loved her more than his own life. However, Joel was about to bite off more than he could chew.
The woman was gorgeous, and he found her snarky, hateful, attitude amusing, until she interfered with how he was raising his daughter. Now, all bets were off.
Mercy would normally laugh in the man’s face for his hurtful remarks, but for some reason her heart shattered instead. After a night of the most mind-blowing sex she could’ve imagined, he was treating her like it all meant nothing…. She had just realized he was her mate, and he hated her….
Ever since she was a young girl, Abby Lane couldn't resist the allure of a cat shifter tribe forced to repress their beasts. On a trip to Africa, she discovers a coveted piece of information—the name the pride leader assumed when he left his home—and she traces his lineage to his descendent.
The sleeping lion…
Utah Pearce can't keep his gaze off the woman who slips into the bar every night. Though not his usual type, she brings out the possessive instinct in him, making him battle with himself as he tries to stay away.
Abby's research never prepared her for the reality in front of her. The beast is waking, and Utah is changing in ways both exciting and terrifying. He's possessive and dominant, and when he finally claims her, neither of them will ever be the same.
When Meena literally throws herself at Leo and declares he’s her mate, his first reaction is to deny—and run far, far away. This lion/tiger mix doesn’t do drama and chaos. Problem is, once he sets eyes on her, he can’t help but want the vivacious blonde with plus-sized curves, perfect for a big man like himself.
He wants her even if it breaks all his rules when it comes to women.
Wants her even if she destroys his serenity.
Wants her more than a perfectly grilled piece of steak with a dash of garlic, pepper, and salt.
Thing is, someone else wants her too.
This poor omega is about to have his world turned upside down, which means everyone better watch out because when Leo experiences love, jealousy, and frustration for the first time, he doesn’t just snap—he roars!
Genre: paranormal romance, shapeshifter romance, alpha male, bbw heroine, werelion, werecat, romantic comedy, humorous romance, fantasy
A fresh start was what Rogan Hall needed. A small town, out of the way, where no one knew her or her brother was where they’d start over. She worked from home, and they kept to themselves. The only thing Rogan couldn’t give up was her early morning run.
Like clockwork, she ran every morning, and again, like clockwork, the same family would pass her on the country road heading to who knew where. The little boy in the back seat would wave at her with such enthusiasm, it made her heart melt. However, that morning, everything would change. Only moments after the car passed her and drove around the bend, she heard a loud commotion. Another car barreled past her, and she found the quaint family’s car overturned and on fire. Rogan did the only thing she could do, she saved them.
Thatcher Robinson was on duty at the hospital when his parents contacted him through their link and told him about the accident and what to expect when the ambulance arrived. Thatch, his dad, told him they had to save the woman by changing her, but her burns were severe, and his dad wasn’t sure that the new tiger would survive.
When Rogan regained consciousness, she was unsure where she was, but she knew she was different. She could feel the tiger move just beneath her skin. Rogan knew very little about shifters, but what she did know had her cringing. Why someone would take it upon themselves to change her, she didn’t know, but when the young doctor, Dawson, said his brother was her mate, she was furious. If the big, bad, Thatcher thought he was going to order her around, he had another thing coming….
Then he shattered my heart into thousands of pieces.
I can’t let him back in. It was hard enough surrendering my heart the first time. If he hurts me again, I’ll never survive. No matter what he thinks, we’re beholden to our past.

We had Trevor replace one kitchen window today. He was very polite and professional. He was early for his appointment and finished the job up quickly. I was very impressed how he worked in a clean manner..... not messy at all. I will recommend this company to anyone I here is looking for this type of service. Also Lilly who scheduled the appointment is very polite and friendly. Thanks again... five stars all the way from the first call to the job being finished.
I really liked the customer service I received when I called. They handled my questions/concerns and achieved my satisfaction. I also liked the windshield treatment they applied with my new windshield... I can see very clearly now when it rains.
Excellent Service. I had a chip in my windshield that was repaired. The technician did a fantastic job. I would highly recommend Safelite Auto Glass.

Marc S. Dreier, a New York attorney has been arrested. He, among other things, (allegedly) passed himself off as, variously, representing persons he did not, being a person he was not and having authority he did not have.
The US authorities have taken a dim view of this and he is currently held without bail.
His firm on Park Avenue, New York, has filed for bankruptcy and the staff are fleeing the offices without their wages.
One wonders what would happen to him in Ireland.

Whenever Ms. Burrito received some treats from school, she always brings it at home and share it with his brother. I am so thankful that I become a parent, that I have two kids who shows kindness and love.
She likes to encourage Mr. Burrito into doing crafts with him. She got these little stuff during St. Patrick's day and the two of them did it together.
"A little thought and a little kindness are often worth more than a great deal of money."-John Ruskin-

Marks the anniversary of the biggest storm the southern part of the UK has ever seen.
Over the course of today it has fast become one of those conversations that start with ‘Do you remember where you were during THAT storm’?
(If you are under the age of 30…stop reading now)
It was also the storm that no one knew about.
Michael Fish, the weatherman who made his name for getting the weather so spectacularly wrong was quoted reporting during the lunchtime weather report
‘Earlier on today apparently, a woman rang the BBC and said she’d heard there was a hurricane on the way. Well, if you are watching, don’t worry, there isn’t.’
The storm went on to kill 18 people, uproot over 15 million trees and cause £1bn worth of damage.
So cast your mind back. Perhaps you were at school? Work? Shopping?
I was at school. I remember during the first day of the storm vividly trying to get one from classroom to another. It was the longest walk of our tender lives. The teacher was unaware of the changeable weather and sent us off to our next class which was 5 minute walk down a wooded path. We were whipped up and thrown from the path into the trees and yes, we actually felt at one point that we were flying. The wind was so strong that it brought us off the ground. Memory is a funny thing as it is an event I had not even thought about since it happened. Listening to a radio call in earlier of people talking about where they were during the storm 30 years ago this weekend today brought back the memories of that day. 30 years ago. Yikes! However with a little bit of reflection I can remember, I remember my uniform, the walk along the path and the heavy pressure of the wind pushing into us. I remember the shrieks and laughter as we literally were lifted from the ground. We wore heavy green cloaks as part of our uniform and I honestly think it saved some of our lives, it made us just heavy enough to be weighted!
So where were you 30 years ago? Do you remember the storm? How old were you?
For those who have no recollection of the storm. Do not fear, another is on its way this weekend…..at least we know about this one.
A storm for your children to remember perhaps.
According to todays weather reports, perhaps it might just be.

Incontri sesso porto fuori ravenna watch online
Milf threesome brunette frog movies
I am so ready for this. Her face was pear-shaped with a straight Soviet nose above a pair of amused ruby red lips. I felt like my lifes dreams were being realized as I finally got a good look at her bush. You might find that odd, but its really quite simple.
It's all coming back to me now. We kissed for a good minute, with her hand going to my cock and squeezing it. Alex just shook his head, he was feeling depressed and guilty and all around shitty, and really didnt feel like sparring with his sister right now so he turned with out a word and walked back to the kitchen.
She also used that piece of ruby to fashion an elaborately carved throne. Yes he said defensively pulling away. Good. I say, and he looks up at this.
Teen amature blowjob hot
He made you come in and sit in the chair. There were protestations and questions about why. He came back twice more in the afternoon. As she started calming down, I was still licking away at her juices, but she asked me to stop. He moved to her other tit and her cries of pleasure filled the kitchen. She looked red faced over her shoulder and burst into tears. He stretched and tried to look around in the dark. And once were done dealing with him I want you as my wife.
The three of them sat in silence for a while. Sure, she continued to bounce her ass up and down and side to side, instinctive reactions from the punishment she was receiving, but if she wanted it to end, all she had to do was crawl forward. I could see her butt hole and pussy lips in clear view.
Ass cum from mouth swapping
I quickly asked. I kept my fingers on her while I pumped deeper into her. That guy only wants to watch, at the moment, and to be fair; you've given him a really good show so far. Opening the door Theo stepped in, and what he saw made his breath stick in his chest, there she was sitting with one leg up in the chair, hair thrown in a messy bun, sweat pants and a tank top, and she looked like she had been crying. I left using the stairs and the fire door before going back over the fence.
His boxer shorts are tented more than usual for just a morning woody. I couldn't believe this old lady could deep throat.
No one has ever fucked me with so much passion like you just did. Walking in the bars, everyone thought I was bangin a child. He kissed her deeper, tasting her and at the same time, gently squeezed her breasts.
But what I was thinking was: what the hell was Rachel doing with someone like me.
Young female porn star
I don't think he was expecting that, he gasped. But the day I had dreaded for so long came one morning in early February when mom unexpectedly walked into the bathroom as I was climbing from the shower. Katie, those other cheerleaders are right out there. She too was making money at school by dealing to classmates. I stayed buried deep inside her until we had both stopped spamming. That afternoon Michelle Mason knocked on my door during my office hours. At 630 Tracee was waking up.
I would never do stuff with a girl I didn't intend to go out with.
Gay boy toy tube
The exciting, the uncharted. I love his cum. We should be able to pick her out. Her chest heaved up and down as she caught her breath; Heather looked at her and laughed. Better not bend over once we are ashore. It left her stranded there on her perch upon my face so I hurriedly moved her down to straddle my hips. Nor have Miss S or Miss M. So it's just another case of a spontaneous orgy. My cock goes deeper this time into Cynthias pussy, feeling her walls squeeze my cock.
Then she leaned forward to kiss me and, for the first time today she leaned down to hug and pet Max. Hiashi-sama why.

I have not heard out of my left ear since Friday night. I spent most of Saturday and Sunday asleep. I'm only now beginning to feel human again. I figured that today would be a good day to clear out my inboxes, only to discover that I couldn't connect to the Internet. ???
The Internet worked perfectly during the weekend (I wasn't on the computer, but I saw that it was working). I wasn't much in the mood to troubleshoot, but I had to figure out what was going on. As you can see, I figured it out. (Long story short: something got plugged into the phone line that shouldn't have been.)
So, now I'm going to go back and huddle beneath blankets and doze. I'm so ready to be done with this!

- Date of birth: 15 may 1848
- Date of death: 23 Jun 1926
- Country: Russia
Viktor Mikhailovich Vasnetsov was born in 1848 may 15 in the village with a funny name Lopal. Vasnetsov’s father was a priest, like his grandfather and great-grandfather. In 1850, Mikhail took the family to the village of Ryabovo. It was related to his service. Victor Vasnetsov had 5 brothers, one of whom also became famous artists, his name was Apollinaris.
Vasnetsov’s talent was evident from childhood, but a very bad cash position in the family left options how to give the Victor in the Vyatka religious school in 1858. Already at the age of 14 Viktor Vasnetsov studied at the Vyatka theological Seminary. The children of the priests there took free.
Never having graduated from the Seminary in 1867 Vasnetsov went to St. Petersburg to enter the Academy of arts. Money he had very little, and Victor put up for “auction” 2 his paintings – “the Milkmaid” and “Reaper.” Prior to departure he never received the money. 60 rubles for these two pictures he got a few months later, already in St. Petersburg. Arriving in the capital, the young artist was only 10 rubles.
Vasnetsov did a great exam for drawing and was enrolled in the Academy. About a year he was engaged in the Drawing school, where he met with his teacher Ivan Kramskoi.
Classes at the Academy of art Vasnetsov began in 1868. At this time he became friends with Repin, and even one time they lived in the same apartment.
Though Vasnetsov and liked at the Academy, but he never finished, left for Paris in 1876, where he lived for more than a year. At this time, there was Repin on a business trip. They also maintained friendly relations.
After returning to Moscow, Vasnetsov immediately accepted into the Association of traveling art exhibitions. By this time, the drawing style of the artist varies considerably, and not only the style, the Vasnetsov moved to live to Moscow, where moving closer to the Tretyakov and Mamontov. It was in Moscow, Vasnetsov was revealed. He liked to be in this city, he felt at ease, and performed a variety of creative work.
More than 10 years Vasnetsov designed the Vladimir Cathedral in Kiev. In this he was helped by M. Nesterov. After the end of this work, Vasnetsov can rightly be called a great Russian icon painter.
1899 was the peak of popularity of the artist. At his exhibition Vasnetsov presented to the public “Three heroes”.
After the revolution, Vasnetsov became to live not in Russia and in the Soviet Union that it was seriously depressing. People destroyed his paintings were disrespectful to the artist. But for the rest of his life Viktor was true to his job – he painted. He died 23 Jul 1926 in Moscow, and not having finished the portrait of his friend and disciple by M. Nesterova.

So I only been praying for a nice good decent guy who could at least be honest with me. What do you know I am in a car dealership and the sells ladies ask me “am I looking for a man. Hmm that was an interesting question my response was ” I am sure am.”
I went in looking for a car but, I came out with an even bigger bargain.
So were sitting in an I-Hop chatting I am eating a chicken taco. She said downloand the what’s up app I said okay. She is a very pushy lady so I just went with the flow.
She said look at him what do you think I said Woo-we he will most definitely do but, let me fix my hair and make-up before we chat.
On a wam we just starting talking it was like I was talking to a long lost friend. He was finishing my sentences we were laughing and talking into the early morning hours. I felt happy talking to his man could this be an sent by GOD or a distraction from the devil. At that point it really didn’t even matter I was just cool with conversation vibes.
The Saga continues like this story subscribe to my blog on how Love Found Me

In the story of Downton Abbey, it was taxes and a medieval inheritance system that was the real root of the family's troubles.
Both together, these two things threatened to ruin the life that Earl of Grantham's ancestors had built up over many years.
Robert Crawley and his wife had daughters and no sons and because of the laws of primogeniture, none of them could inherit their father's title, house, or land. It was Robert's first cousin James and his son Patrick who stood to inherit, but when they died on the Titanic, it was Matthew Crawley, Robert's third cousin once removed, who became heir presumptive.
Primogeniture is centuries old however the taxation of a person's wealth at the time of their death dates from the end of the 17th century.

A lake has been closed to anglers after a town councillor who lives nearby believes she was slashed with a craft knife as she prepared to paint the gate at the end of her lane.
Frances Sutton, 54, who lives next to Crowmere Lake, known locally as Crummer's Lake, Frodsham, was left with three small cuts on her back, which were treated at Warrington Hospital.
The Frodsham town councillor didn’t see the culprit as she ran home as soon as she felt the pain, without looking back.
Mrs Sutton, whose husband was not home at the time of the incident at 6.30pm on Wednesday, July 31, explained: “I went to paint the gate. I was going to take some shears down to get rid of the foliage that grows behind it.
“I turned round to come back and get the shears and I felt a sharp pain.
“Originally I thought I heard footsteps running behind me and thought it was a jogger so started to move over.
“I felt the pain and thought I heard breathing and I just ran. I was petrified. I cannot begin to explain how horrific it was.”
Once inside Mrs Sutton looked out of the window but couldn’t see anybody. She could feel blood running down her back and examining herself in a mirror could see three holes in her shirt. The town councillor immediately rang police.
“The nurse who dealt with it said it looked like a sharp blade,” she added.
Mrs Sutton, a mother of two grown-up children, said a public footpath ran in front of the house at the isolated spot and she had been left feeling vulnerable but had been heartened by calls from well-wishers.
She said: “I have changed somewhat. I’m not quite as confident at the moment as I was but I’m trying hard not to let it affect my life.”
Mrs Sutton said there had been ‘trouble’ at the lake involving anglers but it had ‘not been too bad over the last couple of years’.
“I have never had a dispute with anybody,” she added.
Mrs Sutton stressed the closure of the lake by the town council, until further notice, was not her decision. She assumed it was pending the outcome of enquiries into what had taken place.
DC Andrew Hein of Cheshire Police said: “It isn’t clear how these injuries came about, the victim saw no one or any weapon but thought she heard someone. A search was made of the area and enquiries were carried out to locate witnesses. We would urge anyone with information to contact us in order to help us with our enquiries.
“This is an unusual incident and I would like to reassure the community that there have been no further incidents of this nature.”
Anyone with information should contact DC Hein on 101 quoting incident number 775 of July 31, 2013. Details can be given anonymously by contacting Crimestoppers on 0800 555 111.

May 19, 1932 - July 1, 2020
If you knew him, you loved him. Was the most kind and loving man you would meet. My earliest memories of my Uncle Chuck was while he was living on Smith Mountain Lake in Virginia. He was working on an old Model A restoring it to factory condition. It was beautiful when he was done. He enjoyed putting them together more than driving them.
Charles Albert Hosang, Jr, passed away peacefully on July 1, 2020, surrounded by his loving family. Born in Chicago and raised in Michigan, he was a proud veteran of the Air Force before embarking on a successful career in procurement. Charley’s “real” life began with retirement and marriage to his soul mate, Bobbie. Together, they renovated and sold houses, thus moving several times. But everywhere they moved, Charley became deeply involved in giving back to the community, by volunteering and engaging in community leadership. And, of course, always organizing a poker group.
Charley was charismatic. He was funny. He was warm and loving, and his hugs were the best. His commitment to family was strong, as evidenced by his bond with his brothers, and his love for his children and stepchildren.
Charley was preceded in death by his parents, Charles, Sr. and Harriet Hosang, and by his brother Ken Hosang. He is survived by his wife Bobbie Hosang; children, Charles Hosang III, MaryAnn Hosang Smith, and Mark Hosang; stepchildren, Mike Boswell, Phil Boswell and Denise Boswell Stoneburner; his beloved brother, Dennis Hosang; 10 grandchildren, 8 nieces and nephews, and numerous great grandchildren.
BELOW, reply and share a fond memory you have to spread what a wonderful person he was to those that may not have known your relationship with him.
There are no comments to display.

State officials are investigating a shooting yesterday in Webster City. Police Chief Mike McConnell said they were called by the wife of 43-year-old Richard Dean Bradley. McConnell says the woman told them she was threatened by the man. Officers entered the home and Bradley was killed after threatening an officer.He says it ended up the officer had to use deadly force. The officer who shot Bradley, Sergeant Tony Janssen is on paid leave. McConnell says the Iowa Department of Criminal Investigation was called in to investigate.He says the D-C-I brought in their drug lab, and says they also brought in the clandestine drug lab. McConnell says they did find evidence of illegal drug use in the house.
You are here: / / Shooting under investigation in Webster City

Ayesha, a student of grade 10 is the eldest of ten siblings. In 2012, her father passed away and her family faced many financial difficulties. The children were studying in a private school at the time, and it became very difficult for her mother to pay their school fee along with managing the household expenses. so in 2014 we were forced to drop out of school.
"Then my mother heard about the DIL Schooling system, and in 2018 I got admission to DIL Secondary School, S.A Aziz Campus in grade 7. I want to share how I improved in my studies, and also as a person, after joining this school. My classmates, all seemed very confident, whereas I was a shy student with very low self-esteem, because I have a slight speech impediment due a tongue surgery. I was afraid that people would laugh at me.
When I was in the 8th grade, my English teacher decided to conduct a “Conversation Competition”. I told her that I could not take part in this activity. She reassured me that “You can do everything that you want! If somebody laughs at you, it’s their narrow-mindedness, not your fault”.
Encouraged by her, I started to participate in classroom activities and extra-curricular activities. As I gained confidence, I started improving in my studies and received good remarks from all my teachers. I got an A+ grade in grade 9.
Last year, due to COVID-19, we were confined to our homes, but DIL provided us with a great resource. The One Laptop Per Child programme helped me prepare for our exams. When school started again, I attended Career Counselling sessions conducted by the Gateway Trainer which helped me make a career choice: I decided to choose teaching as my profession.
During second wave of COVID-19, I submitted all tasks on time, attended online sessions and got full marks on all assignments. When school resumed in January, a day of appreciation was held and my efforts were acknowledged by my principal and class teacher in front of the whole school and parents. That was the proudest moment in my life."

Shawn Mendes reveals Camila Cabello fell ‘deeper in love’ with him when he became more vulnerable: ‘It’s the most beautiful thing in the world’
Shawn Mendes improved his relationship with Camila Cabello by showing ‘vulnerability’ in both his songwriting and his feelings.
The 22-year-old singer revealed that the connection with his Senorita collaborator became stronger when he showed her a softer side.
‘I had no vulnerability with my girlfriend, and realized the second I showed that to her, she would fall deeper in love with me,’ he said during a chat with Alicia Keys ahead of the new Netflix documentary, Shawn Mendes: In Wonder.
Being open: Shawn Mendes stated that his relationship with Camila Cabello was strengthened when he became more open about his feelings; seen at the 2020 American Music Awards
Mendes added, ‘And the second she showed that to me I would fall deeper in love with her, that’s the most attractive and beautiful thing in the world, why didn’t anyone tell you that the second you blush, people like you more?’
Mendes also explained to Keys that he enjoys writing tunes that have come from the ‘heart’ and wants to express his feelings in song.
The Stitches hitmaker explained: ‘For me, I found that I started really young, being a writer and realized whatever I was told, from this or from that, the path to the most people liking your music is to say the most neutral thing.
Standing off: The Stitches singer stated that, previously, ‘I had no vulnerability with my girlfriend’
Staying together: Mendes and Cabello have been dating since July of last year and denied initial reports that their relationship was a publicity stunt; the singer is seen in 2019
‘And to say the thing that can affect the most people is by not saying a whole lot,’ he added.
The singer also revealed that he decided to test the boundaries of his vulnerability, which he could articulate through songwriting.
‘Then I went one step further and I wrote a song called In My Blood which is about anxiety,’ said Shawn.
He then went on to elaborate on his point, nothing that he has actively tried to stay mindful of what he is feeling as he writes his music.
Strong and silent: Mendes felt that talking less was effective in his relationship, stating that ‘the thing that can affect the most people is by not saying a whole lot.’
‘You don’t have to be an expert to talk on matters of the heart. You just have to be in touch with the heart,’ noted the hitmaker.
Mendes noted that he had previously been unable to express his feelings, as he had felt that he lacked the ability to do so in an effective manner.
‘I feel like I never gave myself permission to say that stuff before, I always thought you had to be some sort of articulate, well-read professional.
‘But you don’t at all, you don’t have to read one book to know what’s right or wrong.’
Keeping it blunt: The singer noted that keeping ‘in touch with the heart’ improved his relationship with Cabello; they are seen in a Halloween picture from Mendes’ Instagram account

"Good service and communication, despite mistake with pick up time"
shipping from Aalter, 0032484752825, Belgium Pirmasens, 00491727170704, Germany for $324.61
The driver gave me a wrong pick-up time and I had to wait for four hours. But after that, all was professional and smooth. The car was delivered without a scratch and in time. The truck was trackable with their gps tracker and emails were answered quickly.

20 puppies were found abandoned on a layby in a tiny Essex village. The puppies were all inside a crate and were found by a member of the public who was walking in the Blackmore area on Friday, July 29, at around 3pm.
The finder called the RSPCA and Inspector Sian Ridley and Animal Rescue Officer Enola Evans attended the call and discovered 20 small puppies, believed to be aged between six and eight weeks, shut in the metal crate. They collected the pups and took them straight to a local vet for treatment.
One of the puppies was very weak and was being kept warm by a member of the public when the officers arrived. The female pup was handed to Enola who kept her warm and safe on the journey to the vets - but sadly the puppy was too weak and vets made the difficult decision to put her to sleep to prevent her suffering further.
The surviving pups were all small and each weighed less than a bag of sugar - there were 14 males and five females. It is believed they are from two or possibly more separate litters. Staff aren’t yet sure what breed they are but it is thought that the slightly larger pups are possibly cockapoo or poodle crosses and the smaller ones are thought to be jackapoos.
There was a concern they may have contracted parvovirus - but early indications are that they are all clear. The pups were all in reasonable health and were given fluids with glucose over the weekend.
Sian said: “When I was told how many puppies there were I actually thought there was a mistake - I couldn’t believe that someone had abandoned 20 puppies! They were all quite scared and timid when we arrived and it was just heart-breaking to see them all huddled in the one cage - they looked a pitiful sight.
“I want to say a huge thank you to all the passers-by who stayed to help these pups and also to the vets who were able to take on the care of pups over a weekend at such short notice. It is difficult to know where these have come from. I suspect that these may be a puppy farm but they were friendly, clean and did not have fleas so they may not have been kept in a shed without human contact.
“It is also unusual that such a large number of the pups are male and I wonder if that was the reason they had been abandoned because they wouldn’t be useful for breeding or are harder to sell on. We were concerned they may have had parvo and that this was the reason they had been abandoned but that's not the case and apart from some having worms they all appear to be quite healthy.
“I'm keen to hear from anyone who may know who is responsible for abandoning these puppies in such an irresponsible way. They were so young and vulnerable, it is likely that someone just drove up in the layby, got them out of the car and then just left them - so I am keen to speak to anyone who may have seen a suspicious vehicle in the area on Friday.
“Times are tough at the moment, but abandoning tiny puppies like this is so irresponsible and cruel. Please, please never abandon your pet but ask for help before things get so desperate.”
Anyone who saw anything suspicious in the area or has any information that could assist the RSPCA’s investigation should contact the charity’s appeal line, confidentially, on 0300 123 8018.
Many of the pups have already been offered homes by the dedicated staff at the vets who are caring for them and all are currently in foster care. Please do not call any centres at the moment regarding rehoming as the pups will still need some additional care and you could stop an emergency call from getting through.
The pups are believed to be aged between six and eight weeks and have been named alphabetically and are called: Albert, Boris, Casper, Dylon, Elenor, Freddie, Guinever, Hank, Irene, Jeremiah, Kaleb Luna, Morris, Nevel, Oliver, Peter Quinton, Rupert, Saffron.

Ricky O'Flaherty was part of the 1997/98 team that won the League
A league winner's medal is a valuable item for any football player.
Sometimes players have to wait a week or two, to receive their medal but imagine having to wait 18 years? That was the situation, former St Patrick's Athletic striker Ricky O'Flaherty found himself in, until last weekend.
The Galway native was part of the St Pats team that won the League of Ireland in 1998, but left the club for Irish League team Glenavon before the end of the season. He played eight times for the club that season and was entitled to a medal, but never got his hands on one.
Galway WFC committee member and former St Patrick's Athletic striker Ricky O'Flaherty after he received his 97/98 League of Ireland winners 18 years later at the Galway WFC Annual Awards in the Lough Rea Hotel & Spa.
O'Flaherty had previously won another league medal with the Inchicore side in 1996, and was lucky enough to get his hands on that one at the time. The striker was inducted into St Pats' Hall of Fame in 2011, but the medal oversight was only corrected on Sunday night.
A committee member with Women's National League side Galway WFC, O'Flaherty was presented with his medal at the team's Annual Awards Ceremony in Loughrea.
Fran Gavin, National Competitions Director with the FAI travelled to Galway to present O'Flaherty with his long awaited medal. Hopefully it was worth the wait for the striker.

We weren't sure if we would see Amobi Okugo in MLS this year after he was waived by Sporting Kansas City in February, but the defending MLS Champions Portland Timbers announced on Monday that they had signed Okugo. Okugo had had a short time with USL side New York Red Bulls, II but speculation about the move arose after he was spotted at the Portland Timbers' loss against New York City FC on Sunday.
In his time away from the Union, Okugo played in 17 matches for expansion side Orlando City and only three matches while in Kansas City. Okugo played only game while in the USL, where he played against the Union's own USL team Bethlehem Steel FC.
Okugo should fit in well with the champions, who are struggling defensively. Okugo has always been known as a solid defender who if needed can get up on the attack to help boost the offense. Timbers' fans have mixed feelings about this, as some were excited to have a player of Okugo's quality, while others were looking for the Timbers' USL side to provide defensive assistance. Nonetheless, the Timbers have landed a talented defender, and we wish all the best to Okugo in his time in Portland!

“Don’t forget to bring your snake tomorrow when you come to work on the house. I really want to meet him!” Tom reminded me as we were saying our goodbyes at the end of a Friday evening service. I was around 11 years old when my parents got involved with a rogue Episcopal priest who started Dove Ranch out of his house in Albuquerque’s south valley. He held services there several nights a week and ministered to people who needed spiritual guidance. On Saturdays, my dad and I would go help Tom with maintenance on his old adobe house, because, as a man of the cloth, he was not very skilled in much of anything outside being a minister.
The following morning we packed tools into the truck, and I put my boa constrictor, Mortimer, into a box, and we were off to Dove Ranch for the day. Mortimer was about 5 feet long at the time, and after he met Tom, and we had done some work around the house, I sat down in Tom’s wing backed “preaching chair” with Mortimer. While I was sitting there thinking, Mortimer found a way to crawl inside the chair. We didn’t want to cut the chair open to get the snake out, so we loaded the chair into our truck, took it home, and set it in the middle of our den. The lump where the snake was disappeared by the next morning, and since we couldn’t feel any evidence of Mortimer by pressing in on the fabric on the back, sides and bottom of the chair, we assumed he had crawled out and was hiding somewhere in the house, so we took the chair back to Tom’s.
A few days later, Tom called to tell us he had my boa constrictor. Mortimer had shifted positions in the chair where we couldn’t feel him, and he was still in the chair when we took it back to Dove Ranch. Tom said he was delivering a sermon to a group of about 20 people when Mortimer crawled out of the chair onto Tom, so he held Mortimer in his lap until he finished his sermon, much to the astonishment of the people seated on the floor around him (scared the holy crap out of some of them, I’m sure). When we picked up Mortimer he told us the snake crawling out of the chair was perfect timing for his sermon/teaching. I don’t remember if he told us what he was preaching about, but Mark Chapter 16, Verse 18 comes to mind “...they will pick up snakes with their hands; and when they drink deadly poison, it will not hurt them at all; they will place their hands on sick people, and they will get well.”
Those were the last words Jesus spoke before being taken up into Heaven according to the Gospel of Mark.

Accusing former associates of a scam, a British property developer, Brett Jolly - who thought he was going to be fabulously rich as a result of the find - said he was going to lodge a complaint with the police. He claimed he was the victim of a fraud aimed at persuading him to buy the land in South Africa's North West province on which the so-called diamond was found.
The story began to unravel yesterday morning when a diamond expert hired to authenticate the gemstone announced he was withdrawing.
"I am of the opinion that the diamond could exist, but I suspect something is afoot," the president of the World Federation of Diamond Bourses, Ernest Blom, said in a statement. "It is with this in mind that I withdraw from the process completely and disassociate myself from any further press statements ... As a matter of course I will be taking legal advice on this matter."
After numerous telephone calls, the Guardian caught up with Mr Jolly on his mobile phone in the middle of a thunderstorm, on the road from Johannesburg to his home in Cape Town.
Offering a fuller account of the saga, he said that he had not actually seen the contentious stone until Thursday.
Frustrated by the failure of the two miners to show him or Mr Blom the stone, he had come to Johannesburg earlier this week to "sort the matter out". After something of a wild goose chase he had met the miners on a roadside, and they had presented him with what was claimed to be the 7,000-carat gem.
"They showed me a lump of plastic," Mr Jolly said. "It was clearly, clearly a lump of plastic. There was no way in the world it was a diamond."
He said the miners then produced a diamond tester. He said they had seemingly fixed it beforehand to give a positive reading, but forgot to take the cap off while they did the test, making a nonsense of the claim that the instrument showed it was a genuine diamond. "The cap was still on the bloody thing," Mr Jolly said.
The property developer explained that he had a marketing agreement with the two miners by which he had an option to buy the piece of land where the stone was said to have been found and was entitled to 10% of any gemstones found there.
"I think they were salting the mine, that's what I think," he said, referring to an old scam used to make an empty mine appear viable.
When it was pointed out that he was accusing them of a criminal offence, Mr Jolly said: "I'm going to the police on Monday morning." Asked why not before then, he said: "Because I'm very, very tired."

Summer Work with the Racine County Highway Department in Wisconsin
Summer Work With Racine County
During the summers of 1963 and 1964, I had summer jobs with the Racine County Highway Department in Wisconsin. This was my first work experience off of the farm, and it helped to pay my expenses while attending the University of Wisconsin. These jobs were interesting in that they afforded me the first opportunity to work with others outside of the family. In this article, I recall my experiences with the highway department during the early 1960s.
Map of Wisconsin with Counties Listed
Why Work For Racine County Highway Department?
After graduation from high school, my parents had no money saved for my college education. Dad was a poor small dairy farmer who had to take a second job to make ends meet. Besides this, having three younger sisters and a brother, mom couldn't do outside work.
During my last semester in high school, dad said he would sell the steer we were raising and put that money towards my first-year college expenses. The black Angus sold for $400, and I picked up another $300 by winning a local Burlington High School scholarship. Still, that wasn't enough money for my first-year expenses at the University of Wisconsin because I would be staying in the dormitory on campus. Although tuition was only $250 a year, room and board at the Lakeshore Residence halls were about $1,700 per year. Consequently, I applied for a student loan from the State of Wisconsin. Dad co-signed on the loan for the first-year expenses.
At the end of my freshman year, dad suggested that I get an outside job to help pay my school expenses. After talking to some people in Burlington where I had gone to school, my father found out that the western division of the Racine County Highway Department was hiring college students for summer employment. He also learned that the father of one of my graduating classmates was the Racine County Highway Department Commissioner. While I was still in my spring term at Madison, dad approached Mr. Earl S. the commissioner, and pointed out that Jim, his son, and I had both been on the football team and co-valedictorians of our class. To make a long story short, dad persuaded Earl to give me summer work at the County Highway Department whose depot was just outside of Rochester about five miles from our farm. I now had my first real job, and I knew it was going to be an adventure.
How to Find a Summer Job
Working For The Highway Department
1. Getting to Work And Hours on The Job
The first thing I required was wheels to work. Dad only had one car which he needed, but he had an idea of how to get me another vehicle. Grandpa had died earlier in the year, and his old late 40s Chevy was still parked in the driveway next to the house where grandma was still living. One day I went with dad to West Allis to visit grandma. After explaining my need for the car that grandma couldn't drive, my father gave her $25 for grandpa's car. I now had transportation to work even if the brakes were a little poor.
It was a 15-minute drive to work over county and township roads. My working hours would be Monday through Friday from 7:00 A.M. until 3:30 P.M. The hours were great because I could still help with barn and fieldwork after I got home.
2. Nature of My Work With The County
I was one of two college kids employed for summer work. "Dar," the other guy, I only knew because we both went to Burlington High, and he was a jock on the basketball team. Each of us was assigned to work with a regular full-time employee on his fixed county road route. Our duties included weed control along roads, litter pickup along roads and at county parks, occasional patching of potholes in the roads, and disposal of dead animals. If we had worked during the winter months, we would have plowed snow from the roads. My weekly paycheck was around $80.00.
3. Employees I worked With
"Dar" was assigned to work with "Art", and I was paired with "Rusty' Russ D. He was a short, slightly chubby 50-year-old man who had red hair just starting to turn gray. "Rusty" was quiet, but he had a temper when he got upset. Wally G., a short obese middle-aged man, was our supervisor. There were about 10 other full-time employees, but "Bud" and "Smokey" are the only others I can remember after all these years.
4. How We Did Our Work
Each two-man team was assigned a dump truck and two weed mowers. The trucks were equipped with shovels, brooms, and picks. Blades could be mounted on the front of the truck for the plowing of snow. For weed control, we had both a rotary mower pulled by a tractor and a tractor with an 8-foot sickle bar. "Rusty" usually operated the sickle mower, and I drove the rotary mower.
Rusty and I were assigned a route in the northern part of western Racine County. When it didn't rain, we usually spent all day mowing the weeds along the shoulders of county roads. Most of the time we mowed for a distance of 30-40 feet from the shoulder of the road to a farmer's field fence line.
State highways were designated by numbers like 75 and 36 while our county roads had letters like K and F. In addition to the state and county roads, there were also township roads that we didn't touch.
When it didn't rain, or at least once a week, we would patrol all of the roads on our route looking for litter or dead animals along the side of the road. We would also stop at a few county parks and collect trash.
I remember that there were very few occasions when we had to do a lot of hard work. Some of my hardest work included unloading from a railroad car onto our county trucks 80-pound bags of chloride which was used for salting the roads during icy weather. Also, on one of the hottest days of the summer, a four or five-man crew of us had to sink posts and build a retaining wall along the side of a road.
What I Learned From My Summer Job
Working for the County those two summers during the early 60s was a good experience, and I learned some valuable life lessons. They are as follows:
1. Value of Money
Before getting my summer job, I had always been dependent on my folks for money. Now realizing how hard it was to earn, I could understand why mom and dad had no allowance to give me, and why they saved and didn't buy the most expensive things.
My route partner "Rusty" was a perfectionist, and he would always get on me if he thought I wasn't mowing weeds according to his standard. I learned to put up and deal with him in our work together.
During my two summers on the job, I quickly learned that I was responsible for performing all of the duties assigned to my route. By not doing them, I knew that I would be held accountable.
Although I had learned and experienced the value of teamwork while playing football in high school, its concept was taken to a higher level in my summer job. Rapidly did I learn that a job could be done more quickly and efficiently by people working together rather than going in their separate directions.
My early 1960s summer work with the Racine County Highway Department was a significant time in my life. It was my first job away from home, and it helped to pay for my college expenses. The work taught me valuable lessons in life that are often hard to learn in the classroom.
Benefits of Summer Work for College Students
Which is the greatest benefit of summer work for college students?
Summer Work with Racine County
This content is accurate and true to the best of the author’s knowledge and is not meant to substitute for formal and individualized advice from a qualified professional.
© 2012 Paul Richard Kuehn

I want you to pick up a book, any book, from the side and read it aloud. This had become a magical afternoon and I knew what it felt like, LindaSezer porn to experience double penetration. It was so damn hard that he could have easily started jamming on her and she would be pleased! Her green eyes set in contrast to her fair skin and she had just the perfect amount of light freckling on her nose. Pressing my palm against the underside, my fingertips finally reach your balls, and I slowly wrap my fingers around them. I reached behind me, I touched his cock at the entrance to my ass, to my shock there was still 4 fingers width to LindaSezer webcam in. I was about to spread it over my cock when she turned to me and said, Okay, spread it over this.

CORNWALL – A young girl was taken to hospital Tuesday afternoon after being struck by a pickup truck in a quiet residential neighbourhood.
City police, firefighters and EMS were called to Cumberland Street, near the south entrance to Ellen Avenue, around 6 p.m.
A number of visibly shaken children were staying close to their parents as paramedics loaded a young girl into an ambulance.
She was taken to hospital as a precautionary measure.
Cornwall police say their early investigation indicates the girl – possibly eight- or nine-years-old – ran into the street before she was hit.
Police have spoken to a number of witnesses including the child’s mother.
The pickup truck driver was interviewed before he was allowed to leave just after 6:30 p.m.
An investigation is ongoing.

Real Madrid striker Karim Benzema is keen to emulate his illustrious compatriot Zinedine Zidane.
The France international, who joined Madrid from Lyon in 2009, is determined to achieve similar success as Zidane, and often asks him for advice.
“I liked meeting Zidane a lot, because it was a dream. I met him, I talked with him. I was very happy,” Benzema told the official UEFA website.
“I always ask him for advice, and he gives some to me.
“I hope that I will have a different career to his, but similar success.”
The France international also took the time to praise former Brazil star Ronaldo, who was one of his idols growing up.
“It was my first season at Madrid, and I had the opportunity to meet Ronaldo. I followed him as a kid, and I was inspired by him. To me, he is one of the greatest players of all time. To me, he’s the best,” he added.
Benzema added he is determined to make an impact at Madrid, and is keen to develop further at the club.
“I am lucky to play for a great club. I need good seasons, like I did last year, and to perform well with the national team as well,” he said.
“What am I still missing to become a great player? I don’t know. But I am working hard to become a great player, and I will keep on working hard.”
- Soccer News Like
- Be the first of your friends!

Cardinals Legend Bob Gibson Had a Memorable Career in the MLB
Bob Gibson spent his entire career playing for the St. Louis Cardinals, and he had a lot of success with the team.
He left a long-lasting legacy throughout his career, and he left a huge impact on the league.
Bob Gibson developed into one of the top pitchers in the league
RELATED: Cincinnati Reds Hall of Famer Cesar Geronimo Twice Found Himself On the Wrong Side of MLB History Against Astronomical Odds
Gibson made his MLB debut in 1959 with the Cardinals. During his first season, he appeared in 13 games and made nine starts on the mound. He finished the season with a 3-5 record and a 3.33 ERA. Though he finished the season with a losing record, Gibson put together some productive performances during the season. In his second season, he made 27 appearances and had 12 starts finishing with a 3-6 record.
During his fourth season, he made tremendous progress. That was the first time in his career when he made the All-Star team. He finished the 1962 season with a 15-13 record, making 30 starts. Gibson posted a 2.85 ERA, which was the lowest of his career at the time. From that point on, he became a dominant pitcher in the league. During his career, he made six straight All-Star games from 1965 to 1970.
After his third season in the league, he did not post a losing record until his final season, which was in 1975. Gibson knew what it took to win games, and that was his goal each time he stepped on the mound. He won his first World Series title in 1964 and won another one in 1967. Not only did he win multiple World Series titles, but he also won multiple individual awards.
A career filled with individual accomplishments
If you look at Gibson’sGibson’s career, you will see a list of individual awards. His first award came in 1965 when he won a Gold Glove award. He went on to win nine consecutive Gold Glove awards as a pitcher. For a player to win that many Gold Glove awards consecutively shows how talented and skilled he was at that position. A pitcher does not simply focus on pitching; they’re defenders too. After they throw that ball, they have to get ready to field the ball at all times.
Not only did he win numerous Gold Glove awards, but he was also a two-time Cy Young award winner and won the NL MVP award. The 1968 season was one of Gibson’sGibson’s best seasons of his career. That season he finished with a 22-9 record and led the league in ERA (1.12) and strikeouts (268). The next season he led the league in wins with 23. Gibson was a competitor and always gave 100 percent when he stepped on the field. He finished his career with a record of 251-174 with a 2.91 ERA and 3,117 strikeouts.
Bob Gibson’s death was a big blow to the MLB community
Gibson put together a productive career during his time in the MLB. The 1975 season was the final season of Gibson’sGibson’s career, and the Cardinals retired his No. 45 jersey that same season. In 1981 he was inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame. At the beginning of the year in 2014, the Cardinals announced that Gibson was among 22 former players and personnel to be inducted into the St. Louis Cardinals Hall of Fame Museum for the inaugural class of 2014.
In July of 2019, Gibson was diagnosed with pancreatic cancer and was due to start chemotherapy. Gibson lost his battle to cancer a few days ago, and the MLB community made sure to pay their respect to an MLB legend. MLB commissioner Rob Manfred spoke out after Gibson’sGibson’s death.
“This is a very sad day for all of Baseball,” Manfred said in a statement. “Bob Gibson produced one of the most decorated pitching careers in history with his intelligence, athleticism, durability and toughness. One of only three players to be a two-time MVP of the World Series, this legend of October will always be remembered as one of our sport’s fiercest competitors. His performance in 1968 with the Club he represented all his life, the St. Louis Cardinals, is on the short list of the best pitching seasons ever.”
Gibson passed away on the 52nd anniversary of his tremendous performance in Game 1 of the 1968 World Series where he struck out a World-Series record 17 batters against the Detroit Tigers. There was a reason why he was elected to the Hall of Fame and he’s a player that will always be remembered.

Comedian David Walliams says stolen letters sent to him by young fans of his children's books have been returned by police.
The Britain's Got Talent judge and author revealed on Twitter on Sunday that his post, including "a large box of letters from children" from publisher HarperCollins, had been taken by thieves, and he apologised to those who had not received a reply from him.
On Thursday, he tweeted: "The @metpoliceuk kindly returned a number of children's letters to me that had been stolen in December & I have now replied to them all."
Walliams has written eight books for HarperCollins, with Demon Dentist, Ratburger and Gangsta Granny all becoming children's best-sellers.
Billionaire Boy, The Boy In The Dress, Gangsta Granny and Mr Stink were all turned into TV adaptations that have been highlights of the Christmas TV schedule for families in recent years.
According to his publisher's website, his next book is due for release in November.
The Little Britain star, 44, announced last week that Scotland Yard had informed him of the crime.
He tweeted: "The @metpoliceuk just told me my post was stolen, including a large box of letters from children that had been sent via @HarperCollins.
"So I apologise if you sent a letter & have not received a reply as I do endeavour to reply to everyone. If in doubt please write again."
Police said inquires were continuing and that no arrests had been made.
A Scotland Yard spokeswoman said: "Police in Camden were called on 8 April by a member of the public who had found a numbers of discarded items of post.
"Officers are in the process of contacting the intended recipients and inquiries are under way to establish whether an offence has been committed."

George Albano -The champion from Shorehaven nobody knows
It has certainly been a busy couple of weeks at the Shorehaven Golf Club.
Just this past Monday, the East Norwalk club held its annual Jerry Courville Sr. Memorial Golf Tournament -- one of its biggest events of the year -- while the week before, during Labor Day weekend, the club championships were contested.
A busy time indeed for the picturesque course by the shore that some members like to refer to as "The Club of Champions."
And with good reason, too. After all, the legend of Jerry Courville was born at Shorehaven, setting a national record with his 26 club championships. Then there was Jerry Courville Jr., who followed right in his father's famous footsteps and just this year began playing in senior events.
More recently, you had 16-year-old Cameron Wilson, who this summer became the youngest champion in the 107-year history of the Mat Am, breaking the record set by another Shorehaven golfer, Tommy McDonagh, who was 17 when he won it last year. Both of them then qualified for the U.S. Amateur Championship last month.
You see, it really is a club of champions.
But there once was another champion golfer from Shorehaven who many people, even most of the members there, don't know about. His name is Frank Stranahan, who was one of the best amateur golfers in the world back in the 1940s and early '50s.
In fact, he's a two-time British Amateur champion, winning the prestigious crown in 1948 and again in 1950.
And, yes, he was actually a member of the Shorehaven Golf Club at one time.
"We all know about the Courvilles and now these two young kids coming up," longtime club member Ed Zamm said this week. "That Cameron Wilson and McDonagh kid should both be on the Tour. These kids are really something.
"But Frank Stranahan never gets mentioned. They don't know him."
Part of the reason for that is there aren't many Shorehaven members still around who would remember Stranahan when he played at Shorehaven during the forties. The 83-year-old Zamm is one of the few.
"Nobody around here recalls his name," the oldest practicing attorney in the city said Friday morning. "Maybe it's because they're not as old as me."
True, but another reason may be the fact that Stranahan was not from Norwalk. Or even anywhere close by.
No, he was from Toledo, Ohio.
Stranahan was the son of R.A. Stranahan, a wealthy industrialist who owned the Champion Spark Plug company in Toledo.
"And he and his family used to spend summers in East Norwalk and were members at Shorehaven," Zamm pointed out. "They had a summer home here. I guess it was cooler here by the shore than in Toledo. I think they stayed on Shorehaven Island. I don't remember if it was the Westport side or the East Norwalk side.
"They belonged to the Inverness Golf Club in Toledo, which was a pretty classy club, and Frank was a prodigy of Byron Nelson. His father was a real golf nut and he had three sons. Frank was the kid who seemed to have the most talent so his father brought him up playing a lot of golf."
Back then, Zamm got a first-hand look at Stranahan's early development.
"The father always came up to the club with his three boys and they would play together and I used to caddy for them," the former Norwalk mayoral candidate recalled. "This was in the thirties -- the late '30s and early '40s -- before the war. Frank was a handsome kid and he used to play a lot.
"George Buck was the caddy master in those days and I started caddying at the age of 10. You had to be 12, but I was tall enough (he grew to be 6-4) to get by. Ol' Buck never questioned me."
Zamm was only a few years younger then Stranahan, who was born in 1922, a year before Shorehaven opened.
"I had to be around 13 or 14 and Frank was in his high teens. I caddied from when I was 10 until I was 18 and went into the war," Zamm, who graduated from Norwalk High School at the age of 15 in 1942, said. "I went in at the end of '44."
That was right around the same time Stranahan's amateur golf career was taking shape. His father's millions allowed him to concentrate on golf as he competed in over 200 tournaments across three continents. From 1936-54 he won over 70 amateur championships and was a finalist in over a dozen national championships, winning seven of them.
His biggest victories, however, were the two major championships -- as they were regarded at the time -- he won at the 1948 and 1950 British Amateur.
"That was a prestigious tournament, one of the four included in the Grand Slam in Bobby Jones' day," Zamm noted. "You had the U.S. Open, the British Open, the U.S. Amateur and the British Amateur. That was the Grand Slam."
And not many Shorehaven members are even aware that one of their own won the British Am, not once, but twice.
"Back in August I was at a dinner we had before one of our annual tournaments and I gave everyone a trivia question," Zamm, who still plays three times a week, recounted. "I said I'll buy a drink for anyone at the club who can tell me the name of the Shorehaven golfer who won the British Amateur. They all mentioned Siderowf."
That would be Dick Siderowf of Westport, who was the first name I mentioned when Zamm quizzed me. Siderowf did win the British Am, and like Stranahan he won it twice, in 1973 and '76. But Siderowf played out of Birchwood Country Club in Westport at the time.
"They all realized Courville had never won it, and when I told them Siderowf never played out of Shorehaven, they began hollering all these names. But at the end of the dinner, no one knew the right answer."
Zamm finally told him it was Frank Stranahan and proceeded to tell them the story about his connection to Shorehaven.
While Zamm is one of the few people at Shorehaven old enough to remember Stranahan's days there, he says a couple of his contemporaries are still around who remember him. Others remember hearing about him.
"He was before my time," said Sal Patella, a former Norwalker who worked and played at Shorehaven as a teenager, and now lives in Wallkill, N.Y. "I worked in the golf shop from 1951 to '55. It was a nice job. I got to play golf anytime I wanted, I got a set of golf clubs, and I met a lot of nice people.
"I don't remember Frank Stranahan, but I remember hearing Ralph Greenwood (the longtime Shorehaven golf pro) talk about him. He mentioned how he was always on the golf course and he told me how one time he gave Frank Stranahan a golf lesson over the phone."
As the forties turned into the fifties, the Stranahan family stopped spending their summers in East Norwalk and no one saw Frank Stranahan at Shorehaven again.
"We lost track of him after the war," Zamm said. "They were there in the late thirties and early forties. Then the war came in and I got drafted. When I came back, around 1946, he was not a member anymore."
But Stranahan's golf career continued to blossom. Besides the two British Am titles he won, he was runner-up in five other major championships, including The Masters, the Open Championship, and the U.S. Amateur in 1950, a few months after he won his second British Am.
"Sam Urzetta, an amateur from Rochester, beat him," Zamm said of the record overtime championship match which finally ended on the 39th hole. "Stranahan was a heavy favorite, but got upset."
While he remained an amateur most of his career, Stranahan turned pro in 1954 after losing to Arnold Palmer in the finals of the U.S. Amateur. He would win six more titles as a pro, his greatest victory coming in the 1958 Los Angeles Open.
He retired from competitive golf in the mid-1960s.
"He was even mentioned a couple of times in a book called 'The Match,' " Zamm said. "It was about a match where Ken Venturi and Harvie Ward (who beat Stranahan in the 1952 British Am finals) played against Byron Nelson and Ben Hogan. Venturi and Ward were both amateurs. This was before Venturi became a PGA star.
"It mentioned Frank Stranahan in the book a couple of times as also being one of the greatest amateurs in the country. In those days, amateur golfers were just as prominent as the pros.
Stranahan celebrated his 87th birthday last month and now resides in West Palm Beach, Fla.
But there will always be a part of Frank Stranahan that belongs to the Shorehaven Golf Club, the "Club of Champions."
"When I was a kid and playing golf at UConn, we used to play at the Wethersfield Country Club," Zamm said. "They used to call themselves the Club of Champions because they had all these golfers who won the Connecticut Amateur.
"I want folks to know we've had our share of champions, too. And none of those champions at Wethersfield ever won the British Amateur.
"So I'm pretty proud of Shorehaven."

Melissa assisted my son with the college process and my husband and I are so thankful. At first, I thought that we could help him but even choosing the schools to apply to quickly became overwhelming. Melissa was super organized and guided my son through the college process in a professional yet approachable manner. My son felt confident in his college applications and we are keeping our fingers crossed as we wait for acceptances. Having Melissa’s guidance took a lot of stress out of the process and was money well spent.

“Eleonora Amador?” the receptionist asks as she looks at around. Could she have been expecting the old woman to stand as the name was called? When you stand, she looks at you from head to foot then smiles wryly.
You are confident that you look your best today. You wear a ruffled blouse paired with skin-tight black leggings. You look even younger than your past twenty last November. You nod your curl-crowned head thinking of how many times people have wondered about that name of yours and how many times you have had to claim it as yours.
Continue reading Your Name
She slept at the balcony on the banig that Andres laid down for her. He had given her the mat the night after the fire burnt their house down. Earlier that morning, he came to her and gave her money to buy merienda at the store. He had this light aura around him and smiled generously as he had the night he offered his place for Minda’s family. Her mother, Manang Leticia, did the housework for Andres who lived alone in his house near the river.
The river had a stench because of the garbage that the people dumped into it regularly. Minda could hear the wet rustling as pailfuls of dried leaves, candy wrappers, and bottles are thrown on it. The river swelled as the trash mounted and created pools of stagnant water. She smelled them from the balcony and she buried her face in the pillow that had Andres’s hair gel scent on it.
Continue reading The River Rages

A man from Rehoboth yesterday denied any knowledge of the attempted murder and various assaults he is accused of having committed in a three-day span.
Sacky Goliath (39) told Judge Naomi Shivute he does not know of the assaults and attempted murder he is accused of between 31 May and 2 June 2019. He, however, admitted that he killed his girlfriend of 17 years and mother of his two children by hitting her with the sharp end of a spade several times on her head.
The judge already convicted him of murder with direct intent after he admitted that he intended to kill Welfriede Saron (40) when he hit her several times with the spade on 2 June 2019.
During his testimony in his own defence yesterday, Goliath kept on saying ‘I don’t know, I don’t know’ when his Legal Aid lawyer, Mese Tjituri asked him about the charges. During cross-examination by prosecutor Joseph Andreas, however, he admitted that when he hit the mother of the deceased, Barbara Campbell on the forehead with the spade, although accidental, the fact that he used a dangerous weapon could be seen as intent to kill.
On the other charges, he remained steadfast that he did not commit them and repeatedly said ‘no’ or ‘I don’t know’ when questioned about them.
On a question by Andreas as to why several State witnesses who did not even know him will come to court and lie to incriminate him, he answered that was just what it was, lies to incriminate him.
With regards to the charge that he tried to murder Campbell, he said that she was hit accidentally when he tried to hit the deceased who was behind Campbell and that he did not mean to hit her. Campbell testified that she sustained a deep gash above her left eye, which required several stitches when Goliath hit her with the shovel.
She said that she and her daughter were returning from church when Goliath approached them.
When her daughter saw Goliath, the mother said, she told her to run, but she did not as she is old and cannot run. The victim then went behind her and grabbed her with both arms around her waist to hide from Goliath who came wielding the spade. She further said that she held up her arms to try and block the blows, Goliath was raining on her daughter and in the process was hit and both she and her daughter fell.
She further said that she then managed to crawl away between the legs of Goliath who was standing over her daughter delivering several blows to her head.
After a while, he stopped and walked a distance but returned and resumed beating the victim and she then begged him to stop as he already killed her.
Before the death of Saron, Goliath is further accused of threatening to assault the deceased by chasing her wielding a stick and stones threatening to attack her and that he hit Elaria Abisay who came to the aid of the deceased on her hand with a stick with the intention to cause her serious harm. The matter will return to court today for submissions on the verdict.
2020-10-23 07:27:29 | 1 months ago

Though am not used to writing much long posts like this👇, but I really need to pass the message to the utmost. So be patient and read on; you will never regret for reading this, I promise! Though it’s not that long anyways!
I wonder whether this is love or something else. You claim to be in love with someone while your intention is totally different from your approach.
I have seen many people making the same mistakes all over, this mistakes is mainly common for men/guys, but few ladies also partakes in it.
Few years ago, a guy was invited to a party, during the party, he saw a very beautiful and charming young lady. He concentrated on the lady for the whole day, without doubt,he was keen to meet with her. Unfortunately, the young lady wasn’t alone in that party; for they were many which gave him no chance to meet her. When the party was over and they were about to leave; he started following them until he got the clue of where the lady was coming from, though it wasn’t far from the party venue.
Months passed by, and It happened that when he finally had the opportunity to meet with this particular lady; he didn’t waste time to start vomiting all he had in his mind, until he was done, he didn’t allow her to say a word even as she was trying to say something; he continued…. And when he finally landed, she took a deep breath and now it was her turn to speak. She started with a smile(as in a decent girl), she said: I have heard all you said and believe me, your words are really lovely, but; but what? He cut in, she paused and then continued…. I wanted to say this, but, but what? He cut in again with the same method and she paused again, but this time around, she continued, and determined to spit it out without delay; I have a boyfriend! what did you just said? He asked. I said I have a boyfriend; she answered. He started stammering; but… but… but, she cut in too; but what? but you didn’t tell me since and i was here using all my strength to profess my love to you; he answered. She looked at him and nodded her head.
She then replied: when you seemed not to allow me to speak, I then waited for you to land before i speak. At least I showed you some respect that’s why I didn’t walk out on you. He responded; but now with bitterness: do you know how long I have been waiting for you? It’s been over some months now that i have been waiting for this opportunity, (he reminded her the party and narrated how everything went until that moment). He continued… I was hoping to hear something different from what i just heard, but at the end; you disappointed me. She bowed her head, (but not disappointed anyway).
She replied: Am so sorry about how far you have gone just to get opportunity to speak to me, you should have done that for a very long time, so that you won’t feel bad as you’re feeling right now. It wasn’t my intention to disappoint you, you were the one that sees it as a disappointment from me. I have a boyfriend of whom I love so much, I would have given you a chance, but now; am already in love.
Tears flowed down his cheeks as he wept bitterly. He felt so disappointed and left feeling humiliated.
It was about two weeks later, this time around the guy came with some of his friends to beg the lady to accept him. The guy actually made a deal with his friends that the lady must accept him after his last statements and proposal. He begged her again and again, when it seems the lady won’t change her mind; he went ahead on his knees with many promises to get the whole world for her should if she accepted him. This time around, the lady became so annoyed because the guy refused to accept the fact that she was in a relationship and she loved her boyfriend so much that she can’t leave him for any guy just like that. After some series of begging and arguments, the guy felt more humiliated joined with embarrassment in front of his friends because they started making jest of him. Before he left; he vowed to never give up on her and promised her that he will deal with her mercilessly.
One month later, when the lady was walking down a lonely street, it was about 7:30 pm. On her way, she suddenly felt as if she was being followed, whenever she turned, she won’t see anyone because there were lots of bushes along the street. At a point, group of guys suddenly came out of the bush and lifted her and took her into a nearby bush, covered her face and mouth in order not to scream out. She was shocked to see that particular guy Infront of her when the veil was removed from her face. He said to her: finally you have gotten what you deserved. She begged him but to no avail, he said: then I was the one begging, but now you were the one begging. He went ahead to take advantage of her likewise his friends; she was raped by six guys one after the other, starting from the guy himself.
Few months later, the guy and his friends were arrested and charged for rape, and was sentenced to 10 years imprisonment each.
What a sad end for the guy and his friends, wasn’t it? We all should be very careful of the way we handle things like this, of course it will be very hard for you to see a single lady or a single guy, it’s quite rare. If you approach a lady and asked her out, if after your struggles to win her over fall through, please let her be and maintain peace and serenity, you will surely find your right partner when the time comes. Let’s not partake in a crime that will end us up in the dungeon. There is no force in love I must say! To love is not what you can decide for someone else. I think we have to learn a lot from this story.
A word is enough for the wise, anyone who has ear should hear. Let’s save our lives and reputations. Am warned and you too should be warned.
Like, comment, share and reblog, of course to make the message go viral and save those who are planning to undertake such crime. Am sure with this so many lives and future will be saved.
Bursh cares and loves you all.

Having already seen Frank Lampard and Gareth Barry sidelined by injury, England can ill afford to lose another midfielder but Hodgson has eased concerns about Parker.
There had been serious doubts about the 31-year-old's form heading into the Euros after he missed Tottenham's final four games with an Achilles injury.
However, when asked if he has any ongoing concerns about Parker's overall fitness, Hodgson said today: ''No, not particularly, no more so than the obvious one that we were going to have, that when he came to join us having not played for Tottenham in the last two or three matches in the league.
''So that was obviously going to be a factor, but we also knew we had lots of training time and now in the two weeks we've been training he's taken part in every training session and he's also played 60 minutes already and he's available to play tomorrow.
''So he'll be getting fitter by the day, as will Wayne Rooney, and we're quite happy that by the time we play France people will be in good physical shape.''

Intra-school sports meets were held at XA on 24 – 25 October. There were four events: Chess, Quiz, Table Tennis and Basketball, for which interested students had their names listed, and participated individually or in the groups of their choice. However, the basketball competition was inter-class – four teams of XI Management, XII Management, XI Science and XII Science competed for the championship. The winners listed below were appreciated and encouraged with medals and certificates. The games were really exciting adding good significance to students' being in different clubs under ECA.
Intra-School Sports Meet
Updated: Jan 8, 2020

Celebrity fashion designer, Yomi Makun, better known as Yomi Casual, has revealed that his kids were born abroad because of his wife’s influence.
He made this known via his verified Instagram page on Wednesday where he eulogised his wife, Grace, on their fourth wedding anniversary.
According to Yomi Casual, it was his wife’s decision for them to have their kids abroad, an act which he described as one of his biggest achievements.
In a heartfelt message to his wife, he said, “On this beautiful day, I want to say thank you for loving me unconditionally even when you had a better option 4 years ago.
“Thank you for saying yes to my marriage proposal. Thank you for cutting down my wedding reception expenses because everyone was expecting me to do the most based on who I am. ( I almost ‘wound’ them with beer and Jameson)
“Thank you for pushing me to give birth to our kids abroad (one Of my biggest achievements ever!). Thank you for helping me secure those properties ( they are worth millions now.)

Austin and I just returned from a much needed couples weekend away. We spent the weekend up north, just the two of us cross country skiing and relaxing. We both felt that it would be good to get away and spend some together time to focus on our relationship. With everything that has happened this past year we have not had much time to spend with just the two of us and it was so nice to have the chance to catch up with each other and to focus on one another. We had a great time and the weather was beautiful for skiing. A big thank you goes out to my mom and Jeff for taking such good care of the boys while we were gone!
As the weekend draws to an end however; we are faced with a big jolt back into reality tomorrow. Grayden has his monthly head ultrasound and neurosurgeon appointment. I am feeling very anxious as the time gets closer. I know that my worries will not change what I will be told tomorrow, but I still can't help but feel nervous. I dread the news that we may receive, but am also trying to think positive thoughts. Ahhhhh, it just feels impossible.
We also have four other appointments tomorrow; including an evaluation with a new Physical Therapist who practices Feldenkrais therapy. We are very excited to hear what she has to say and are excited for Grayden to start with this intervention. Thanks again to all of you who have supported us through Gearforgrayden.blogspot.com for helping us to fund this alternative therapy!! Your support is so appreciated. Grayden also has his four month check up as well as his in home PT appointment tomorrow. I figured if I had the day off, I should cram as much action as I could into one day. We are going to be very busy!!
Grayden continues to grow each and every day. I swear he is trying to catch up with his big brother. He is smiling and cooing a ton as well! He still needs to improve his head control when he is on his stomach, but he practices a lot and is getting stronger by the minute.
Zander entertains us daily and can always make us smile no matter how we are feeling. He is also learning every minute and we get such a kick out of watching those wheels spin. His language is coming along, even though Austin and I are probably the only ones who can really understand all he says. He is such a caring big brother and is constantly wanting to help us out with Grayden. I really have to keep my eye on him because he thinks he can lift Grayden up and he is constantly asking to hold him. He is also just beginning to get a little more jealous. Hopefully, it is a phase that will pass quickly.
So we are asking for positive thoughts tonight and tomorrow!! We have high hopes that Gray can continue to avoid the need for a shunt, but ask for strength if that is the road we have to travel.
Fall Fest at Tri-Ponds
5 days ago

→ November 2007 Contents → Photo Gallery
I met Odessa Clay in Louisville, Kentucky, in 1963 while she was making lunch for her son Cassius. Her energetic, well-mannered 21-year-old was in the living room of his parents' home, struggling over a game of Monopoly with some neighborhood children. Having already won the Olympic Gold Boxing Medal and amassed a professional record of 15 knockouts and 18 wins, at this moment his biggest concern was winning at the Parker Brothers board game. But winning wasn't enough. He needed to break the bank. When playing Monopoly you had to lose all your money and property to him. He would loan you money to keep you in the game long enough to win absolutely everything on the board. Nothing would ever go back to the bank.
As Cassius walked around the neighborhood, his Monopoly game under his arm, the kids would flock to him. They genuinely loved him. The kids sparred with him; they all rode their bikes together with him, told stories, visited the corner store and, of course, played a lot of Monopoly.
Even at 21 he talked about socialized grocery stores, run by the people instead of big store chains, and other methods to give everyone more voice in the economics of their own lives.
Supposedly, he learned to be so boastful from watching the wrestling star "Gorgeous George" Wagner on television. Gorgeous George taunted his opponents so much that huge crowds in the thousands came to every arena match with the hopes that he would lose and someone would shut him up.
Soon thereafter Cassius Clay would change his name to Muhammad Ali and become known throughout the world for both the jabs of his fists as well as his tongue.

Given the current number of people in the news who are facing sexual harassment allegations these days, it is no surprise that many of these cases are resulting in legal filings. Employment law violations should be dealt with, but simply because accusations are made does not make them true. Just as an alleged victim deserves to have a chance to seek compensation in a legal case, the accused and an employer – in the public or private sector – also has the right to formulate a strong defense against the allegations.
A federal lawsuit has been filed by a former deputy in Louisiana. According to his claim, he was dismissed from his job due to sexual harassment and age discrimination. The man says that another deputy was making negative comments about the man’s age – 49 – and called him an old man. The complainant was demoted to the radio room and was no longer placed on patrol. While there, he claims to have been subjected to vulgarities from female employees talking about sex.
The former deputy was on the job for almost three years. The department did not comment on his allegations. In addition, the complainant states that he was injured on duty when his hand got caught in a car door. He was demoted and had a pay cut for allegations that he did not use his emergency lights when making a traffic stop. His hand injury was aggravated by the typing on his radio room shifts. A doctor had said that he could perform light duty, but not type. He was fired after he took a typing test and could not meet the minimum requirements.
Allegations of various forms of harassment and violations of employment law can happen in jobs in law enforcement just as they can happen in other jobs such as the corporate world. However, just because there are complaints made, it does not make them completely accurate. If there are work issues with a person and minimum requirements are not met to do certain jobs, employers also have rights. Every sexual harassment case should be heard, but employers must remember to protect themselves and hire a law firm that can help with a strong defense of employment-related allegations of wrongdoing.
Source: nola.com, “Fired St. Tammany deputy claims age discrimination, sexual harassment in lawsuit,” Robert Rhoden, Nov. 27, 2017

A Christchurch jury will be asked to decide whether an Afrikaner's approach to parenting of his teenage stepdaughter amounted to criminal conduct.
The Crown alleges that his conduct - including belittling the girl, bullying and excessive discipline - amounted to child cruelty over several years after the family moved to New Zealand.
The defence says his behaviour was a response to extreme behaviour by a teenager.
Crown prosecutor Pip Currie told the trial today that the man continued with his behaviour even after he was warned that it was causing the girl, then 14, to self-harm by cutting herself.
"Over a number of years, the accused ill-treated his young stepdaughter by mental and psychological abuse to such an extent that she would self-harm and contemplate taking her own life," she said.
The girl is now 15 and is back in South Africa living with her father.
She gave evidence at the trial by audio-visual link from Johannesburg.
The trial before Judge Paul Kellar and a Christchurch District Court jury is expected to last four days.
The man, a 38-year-old contractor, denies three child-cruelty charges and two of assault with intent to injure over an incident in which the girl says she was choked.
The Crown will call 11 witnesses.
The man married the girl's mother in South Africa when the girl was 9.
The family moved to New Zealand in November 2008, living first in Invercargill and then in Christchurch.
The couple had another baby who was aged 9 months when they came to New Zealand.
Currie described the man's dominating conduct, excessive discipline, belittling and bullying, and favouring his own daughter.
The Crown said it amounted to behaviour likely to cause unnecessary suffering, injury to health, or mental disorder or disability.
"This is not a case of a wayward young girl who was being strongly disciplined by her stepdad. The Crown is alleging this was far in excess of normal healthy parental oversight," Currie said.
"The accused continued with this type of behaviour even after he was advised by a medical expert that how he was treating this girl was causing or contributing to her self-harm."
Defence counsel Denise Johnson asked jury members to keep an open mind as it heard the evidence.
She asked them to consider the dynamics in the family, and who the man was trying to protect when there was chaos and acting out in the family and extreme behaviour by the girl.
"Once it was learnt that she was cutting [herself], her behaviour was really out of control and this family was trying to cope with it."
She said the man struggled with the changes from his move to New Zealand, after he sold his properties and his business.
He was an Afrikaner, who was more conservative, while the girl's mother was from an English South African background, and was more liberal.
She said the jury would have to decide whether the events happened, and whether they amounted to ill-treatment.
She said that at the time of the alleged choking incident, the man had been defending himself from his stepdaughter, who was holding a knife and threatening him.
"You need to assess his actions in the light of that threat," she said.
- © Fairfax NZ News
Why are fewer teens learning to drive?Related story: Teen non-drivers lazy 'narcissists'

Saturday, July 23, 2005paganism is back...
Brother Laz and I were out for our customary Friday night street preaching. I spent a huge part of the 3 hours we were out preaching, since Brother Laz was stricken with a bad case of "the nerves". You see, the street where we usually preach was full of musicians and beggars, so we had to find another spot from which to preach. I'm afraid the different environment was a psychological obstacle for my poor friend (funny... wasn't too long ago, such things would have gotten me all flustered). It took a bit of time, but he conquered his fear and did some pretty good preaching; he actually had a sermon prepared and delivered it well.
The marketplace was again full of revelers who didn't care much for the Gospel; sadly, the street musicians (if you call the noise they were making music) had a far bigger appeal.
I took a moment to look at a particular group tonight who were out with these "tribal drums". They banged loudly on those things while a woman danced lasciviously in front of them. Large numbers of people stopped and enjoyed the show, some of them dancing along to the beat... and that's when it came to me:
The show they were putting on tonight was the EXACT same wicked nonsense heathen tribes in the middle of the Amazon, or Africa indulge in. There it was, right in front of me: a group of "musicians" with piercings and tattoos all over their bodies, playing dark beats to incite lewdness. Poor Canada, how far down we've fallen. How did it come to this? Easy:
"And even as they did not like to retain God in their knowledge, God gave them over to a reprobate mind, to do those things which are not convenient." (Romans 1:28)
Despite this sad realization, I did have a few good moments tonight. My first was when a young man walked by me and asked me what God's name was. Now having visited, on several occasions, the so-called "Jehovah's Witnesses" when I was seeking the Truth, I knew that this young man was a JW and was trying to set me up. You see, the WatchTower instructs it's followers to ask "what is God's name?" so that they can teach that God's name is Jehovah, and that ONLY Jehovah is God, denying the Trinity. So this is how I dealt with the young man:
-"My friend, God's name is Jesus. The name that is above all names, as stated in Philippians 2:9, is Jesus' name, and pure logic dictates that the highest name, goes to the Highest Person, and you can't get any higher than God."
He just shrugged and walked away. The Lord be merciful to him, as he was with me.
A second high point came as we were walking about with our Gospel's signs. I was walking by a Resto-Bar patio when a man waved his hand at me from his table. He and his friend walked up to me and asked for a Bible tract that I had in my hand. I gladly gave him one.
-"What are you doing out here tonight? You trying to get people in the Catholic church or something?" he inquired.
-"Nope," I answered, "just trying to get people to read the Bible and to be saved in Christ Jesus, my friend."
-"Argh! I don't have a Bible," he added.
I reached in my pocket and pulled out a pocket-sized Gospel of John and handed it to him.
-"There!" I replied, "that'll get you started."
We then had a small chat about our ministry and the importance of the Bible. It was good. The fellows name was Peter and his friend was Brian. Please pray that the Lord will cause these men to seek God's face.
And finally a third high: I handed a French Gospel of John to one of the bakers who were hard at work preparing the bread that would be sold tomorrow morning. We were preaching very near the bakery tonight, so when the young man saw me walk by with a Gospel sign, he politely asked me to stop walking so he could read what I was carrying. The man was French and my sign was in English, so I played the translator. He thanked me and accepted a Gospel of John. Pray for this man also.
So all and all, the city is still quite an ungodly place, but there is hope, sweet hope...
"It is good that a man should both hope and quietly wait for the salvation of the LORD." (Lamentations 3:26)

Wednesday 17 October 2012
Ups and downs....
Wrenbury to Grindley Locks : 6 miles, 10 locks (including our first staircase - the Grindley 3), 2 lift bridges
Total to date : 17 miles, 21 locks, 3 lift bridges
We decided we'd move on today - we had looked at the weather forecast and it appeared that Tuesday was the pick of the days. Wednesday and Thursday look like they'll be rainy so we decided to head for the Grindley Brook locks. If the weather wasn't kind to us we'd moor up before the 6 locks at Grindley Brook and if it was ok we'd tackle those locks and moor up above them.
It wasn't the best of starts. We were moored at Wrenbury just a few boats down from the lift bridge outside the Dusty Miller pub. Mick saw a boat about to pass us and heading for the bridge so he got it in his head that we should go NOW as the bridge would be up. When Mick decides to do something, we have to do it immediately. I have no idea what the rush was all of a sudden. There was a mad scramble to put on shoes, coats etc and untie the boat. When I'd looked at the canal guide the night before I figured I'd just walk up to the bridge to open it for him when the time came to go. We'd also been told that this one bridge we'd need a BW (British Water) key rather than a windlass. (For our non-boaty readers, here's what a windlass looks like : Click).
In the rushing around trying to get going (and Mick's a bit under the weather with a cold... read that as "grumpy") he was yelling to me to untie the boat and then yelling at me to get on board... so I did! So now I couldn't go open the lift bridge, but I could see the bridge was open and the lady from the boat ahead, who had opened the bridge, was watching us heading towards them. She watched for a few seconds and then turned around and closed the bridge! They were the first boat to head off that way for the morning and I think she wanted to make sure they stayed first in the traffic for the locks to come.
So now we were almost at the bridge that began closing before our eyes. I grabbed my windlass as Mick veered toward the bank to let me off although now the boat was at a crazy angle. No sooner had I landed on the ground and I realized I needed a key, not the windlass. I called out to the lady (who was conveniently gazing down the canal in the opposite direction waiting for the bridge to close so she could go back to her boat) that I'd grabbed the windlass instead of key and she pretended she'd just noticed us. She grudgingly opened the bridge again... saying she hadn't seen us coming... but obviously wasn't happy about it. She had seen us coming, there was no way she couldn't have noticed as we were in the middle of the canal and on the move while she was still looking at us! nb PS and Mick were being buffeted by the wind and struggling to get a good line up to go through the bridge. The lady looked even more annoyed at his not too elegant attempt.
We were on our way but it took a little while for us both to calm down. He was annoyed at me for obeying his yelled instruction to get on the boat... when I should have been walking to the bridge! I was annoyed at him for making us rush for no reason. I think we learned a good lesson. We're not going to rush off like that again. We could have waited until they'd gone and done that lift bridge at our leisure and that's what will happen next time.
By the time we reached the first lock all was well on nb Parisien Star. We're getting a bit better at stopping for a lock. Mick still tends to go a bit too fast letting me off and my hands are really sore from hurriedly trying to tie the boat up but the process goes relatively smoothly now. We did the first few locks which were all in our favour as we'd passed a boat heading out of the first one. Hmmm... now I see why the lady was in such a state about not being first out of the gate.... it does make it easier. We tied up for lunch just before the first of the Grindley Brook locks and she and her husband passed us while we had our lunch. There's enough boats heading in both directions here that it really doesn't matter much about rushing off to be first.
A boat came from the direction of the locks just as we were preparing to head off again. We breezed through the first three and then tied up so I could go ahead and find out how the staircase worked. The boat at the previous lock had told us there was a lock keeper in attendance. The lock keeper was too busy chatting to someone to take much notice but he did signal to say we should come into the bottom lock. He pretty much left me to it so I was hoping I was doing everything in the right order. By the time we got to the top section he ambled over to wind a paddle or two.
We filled with water at the top of the locks and have now moored just a little further along. I have a fabulous internet signal which is nice after struggling with it while moored at Wrenbury. We had no tv reception the first night at Wrenbury but pulled the boat back one space after nb Epiphany moved on and then we had a reasonable signal. Tonight we've got nothing again but we're not too fussed.
I worked on the move today as there were fairly long stretches with no locks. Once we moored up I had another couple of hours while Mick sorted everything and went down to the lockside store for milk and bread.
1. Gorgeous church at Wrenbury
2. Church window
3. Set into the floor of the church
4. Church organ (for mum)
5. House in Wrenbury
6. Another house in Wrenbury
7. Our mooring in Wrenbury (5th from the front)
8. nb Parisien Star flying her Aussie flag

xx.—The Sex of the Two Luminaries.
Formerly it was the female luminary that came out at night. But she was so greatly shocked at the immoralities which she saw going on out of doors among the grass, that she exchanged with the male luminary, who, being a man, did not care so much. So now the sun is a female deity, and the moon is a male deity. But surely the sun must be often shocked at what she sees going on even in the daytime, when the young people are in the open among the grass.—(Written down from memory. Told by Ishanashte, November, 1886.)
xxi.—The Kind Giver and the Grudging Giver.
A certain man had laid his net across the river; having laid his net, he killed a quantity of fish. Meanwhile there came a raven, and perched beside him. It seemed to be greatly hungering after the fish. It was much to be pitied. So the fisherman washed one of the fish, and threw it to the raven. The raven ate the fish with great joy. Afterwards the raven came again. Though it was a raven, it spoke thus, just like a human being: "I am very grateful for having been fed on fish by you. If you will come with me to my old father, he too will thank you. So you had better come."
The man went with the raven. Being a raven, it flew through the air. The man followed it on foot. After they had gone a long way, they came to a large house. When they got there, the raven went into the house. The man went in also. When he looked, it appeared like a human being in form, though it was a raven. There were also a divine old man and a divine old woman besides the divine girl. This girl was she who had led the man hither. The divine old man spoke thus: "I am very grateful to you. As I am very grateful to you for feeding my daughter with good fish, I have had you brought here in order to reward you." Thus spoke the divine old man.
Then there were a gold puppy and a silver puppy. Both these puppies were given to the man. The divine old man spoke thus:

Book Title: Closer
Author: F.E. Feeley Jr
Publisher: Beaten Track Publishing
Cover Artist: Emma Bonath
Genre/s: Gay Fiction, Horror, Urban Fantasy
Length: 118,000 words/346 pages
Release Date: March 1st, 2018
Maplewood, Vermont is a picturesque town filled with unique shops, unique homes, and a quaint familiarity all centered around a lake with an unusual history.
Legends, old as well as Urban, float around like the mist that hovers above the lake at break of dawn.
But they're just stories, right?
Hayden Moore's life was destroyed when his husband, Malcolm, was murdered. Giving up his job as an assistant district attorney in Boston, Hayden moved to the little burg of Maplewood to recover.
A new life.
A fresh start.
However, something underneath the water is stirring. Something rotten. A deadly secret wakes underneath the black waters of Lake Veronica so disturbing it haunts the nightmares of the local residents.
It's coming closer...
She had fallen asleep at the side of his bed, her head resting on the back of her chair, and her feet propped up on an ottoman. She awoke to the sound of water running. Audrey let her eyes open slowly, her fatigue surprising her a little. Her son was still asleep in the bed and she checked her watch, it said six thirty. The little bedside lamp was still on and she watched as her son’s chest rise and fall in medicine induced slumber. The water running in the bathroom stirred her and forced her to get up; she noticed steam coming in from under the bathroom door.
Sleep vanished from her mind as she crept slowly to the bathroom door, the hair on the back of her neck and on her arms stood straight up. The door was slightly ajar, and she heard movement inside the bathroom, she stopped. Looking around the bedroom she found her son’s baseball bat in the corner along with a mitt and baseball. Tanner, a friend of Jake’s and a few other guys were on an after-work baseball team, The Hornets. She picked up the bat and held it tight in her hands, she was going to walk straight into the bathroom and beat to death whoever was in the house. She used the bat to push the door open; the mirror over the sink was fogged up with steam. Her heart thudded in her ears as she rounded the corner towards the shower; someone was standing behind the shower curtain, the silhouette of a man. With an unsteady hand she reached for the curtain and jerked it back, raising the bat high above her head. The man, having heard the curtain slide jerked around, soap in his face and screamed, sliding backwards.
“Jesus Christ Audrey!” her ex-husband bellowed, trying to catch his balance.
“Daniel!” she cried out, slumping backwards and settling her behind down on the toilet, breathing hard. She looked up from where she sat, at her naked husband who had lost the extra twenty-five or so pounds that he had gained during their marriage. He was rubbing the soap out of his eyes and rinsing his face cursing and carrying out. She started to laugh and laughed so hard she almost fell off the toilet. She clutched at her midsection as tears rolled down her face.
Daniel stopped cursing and given the awkwardness of the situation chuckled himself.
“If you wanted to see me naked Audrey, all you had to do is ask,” he said, sliding the curtain back closed.
“Oh… Oh, Daniel. You wouldn’t believe the day I’ve had. I thought you were a ghost,” she said. He pulled the curtain back and looked at her strangely. His handsome face lit up in a quizzical way, a few more lines around his eyes than she remembered. His grey hair plastered to his head, but his eyes were as blue as she remembered. She felt a tug deep inside her heart for the slightest second, remembering what could have been, what should have been.
“A ghost huh?” Daniel asked, grabbing for the towel.
“Yeah. Never mind. When did you get here?” she asked as he stepped out of the shower. He had been working out, his shoulders broader and his chest tighter. She kept her back to him as he towel dried off.
“About thirty minutes. The front door was unlocked and Jake and you both were sound asleep. I tried calling on the phone, but you didn’t answer. I was worried something had happened,” he said.
“Yeah. I gave him a Xanax, so he could sleep. You should have seen him Daniel, he was so sick and besides himself. I was afraid he was going to die from grief,” she explained, handing him his underwear and t-shirt from the sink, her back still turned to him.
“Did the police say anything else?” he asked as he slipped into his underwear. He talked to his ex-wife’s back, frowning. She looked great; she always had, if it hadn’t been for that last miscarriage they wouldn’t be apart like this. He wasn’t surprised that she came in at him with a bat; she loved and protected her Jake with fierceness. He wouldn’t ever accuse her of being a bad mother.
“You can turn around now,” he said as he buckled his blue jeans.
She did just that, looking up at him.
“Daniel, you should have seen him,” she said, putting her head in her hands.
“That bad huh?” he asked buttoning a short sleeve golf shirt that his friends bought for him.
“Yeah. I didn’t know he was having an affair with…that woman. I knew he was staying out late, and I knew that he was seen out, but, with her?” She exhaled sharply. Jessica had a bad reputation in town for being a heart-breaker, and then she married the single wealthiest man, a lead accountant for a computer firm, she was labeled a gold digger. Now she was dead, and the law was looking at her son.
“We will take care of this. How about you? How you feeling?” he asked, concern in his voice. She had dark circles under her eyes, and her face looked strained.
“I’m hanging in there. Daniel, how bad can this get?” she asked.
“That depends really. I mean, if he didn’t do it, he didn’t do it. We just must make sure that we can account for where he was and when he left. You said they were at a motel? Good. That means he had to check out at some point,” he said, the gears in his head turning.
“Daniel, there has been some other stuff happening in this area. This makes the third drowning in the past week,” she said, standing up. “He’ll be glad to see you.”
He walked over to her and wrapped his arms around her shoulders and she leaned into him letting him hold her. He let her go and stepped out of the bathroom, taking the baseball bat with him as he went. His son’s light was on above his bed and Daniel stopped dead in his tracks. Standing two feet away from the sleeping boy was a scantily clad woman. She was wearing nothing more than a t-shirt and a pair of panties, but something was wrong, her color was all wrong. Her bare legs were almost blue they were so pale.
“HEY! Get away from him!” he screamed, raising the bat up. The woman spun around, one of her eyeballs had exploded and hung limp on her face, her matted wet hair stuck to her head. Behind him he heard his ex-wife scream.
Daniels muscles bunched up and he leapt forward, bringing the bat up, his instincts taking control. The woman screamed, a gargled disjointed sound, and when the bat hit her square in the head, she exploded. Water sprayed him, soaking the front of his shirt, and their sleeping son, who woke with a start.
“What the fu…Dad?” The bleary eyed and confused son watched in astonishment as he wiped the water off his face. Audrey rounded the side of Daniel and reached for Jake to get up. Daniel turned his head to the open door and saw wet footprints. His body shook, his breathing was labored, and his curiosity piqued. While he left his son and Audrey waiting in the bedroom he followed the trail to its source.
About the Author
Author Bio: F.E.Feeley Jr is a poet and the author of six published works – four full length novels, two short stories featured in anthologies, and a good deal of poetry.
Married to the love of his life, John, he came to the writing world about four years ago where he fell in love, again, with the written word.
Social Media Links
Enter the Rafflecopter Giveaway for a chance to win one of FIVE books from F.E. Feeley Jr.'s backlist.

Has anyone in the United States ever been acquitted of assaulting an on-duty police officer on grounds of self-defense- ever? Is it even legally possible, given the authority bestowed on police to demand the unresisting surrender of citizens? My w.a.g. would be that it’s never come to a court case; in instances where police misconduct could be proved beyond a shadow of a doubt (video), the authorities would decline to bring charges.
Google is your friend.
An on-duty uniformed officer I doubt but in the carefree days of my youth I got acquitted of assaulting an on-duty officer. A dude looking pretty much grubby like the rest of us hippies/bikers was drawing a gun (I physically saw it) and I clocked him from behind and called the cops. They arrived and I found out he was a cop - undercover. He admitted that he didn’t/hadn’t identified himself yet; he was waiting to get his gun out before he did so ------- so I got off. I got charged - it just didn’t fly in the end.
(He thought he had seen a “known felon” but it turned out he had the wrong dude ----- assuming that was what was actually happening. The first part of the 70s could be real confused and free-wheeling sometimes. Can’t say what today’s standards would be.)
I was going to say that acquittal on a charge of alleged assault is different from where it wasn’t in dispute that an officer was struck, but **Wilbo523’**s second link is to a successful justification defense. Frankly I’m astonished.
In Quebec a few years ago, a man was acquitted of killing an on-duty police officer. The police decided to raid this guy’s house at 4AM and came in unannounced, breaking down his door with guns ablaze. He was in bed with his wife (who was injured in the shooting and he took out his gun and killed one of them. He was acquitted and plenty of people were aghast at his acquittal (“But he killed a police officer in the line of duty”, said our cleaning lady). FWIW, they had a warrant to search his house (for drugs, of course) and came in this way so he couldn’t flush them down the toilet. They didn’t find any. But I don’t think any warrant would have justified what they did.
I have never heard of such a case in my own criminal-justice experience here in Ohio (since 1992), and agree with the OP that in most such cases the prosecutor would probably decline to bring charges against the civilian if the officers were unbelievable or had engaged in clear misconduct.
An acquaintance broke the nose of an officer when he grabbed her from behind when she was trying to break up a fight. He didn’t announce that he was an officer; she reverse-head-butted him. The other police officers had a good laugh.
I was on a jury that acquitted an inmate of the county jail of striking a jailer one time with his fist. We ruled that the inmate had reasonably believed the jailer was about to strike the inmate without just cause and thus acted in self defense.

Following his return after a 12-month ban, Warner is well aware that he has had missed quite some amount of cricket.
As a result, he is determined to make it all up with some serious hitting.
"For me, it's about going out there and putting my best foot forward for the team and trying to score as many runs as I can," said Warner.
Warner was frustrated with his slow starts initially
Warner had faced criticism at the start of the tournament for his slow innings.
He said that while he was not planning a slow start, he got frustrated, especially against India and Afghanistan.
"Because it is generally not my game to stick there, and I usually try and go after it a little bit. Must be a bit more maturity, I think," Warner continued.
"Finchy kept telling me to hang in there"
"I've tried to get a calculation, how many fielders I've hit in the first 10. And then today, Finchy kept telling me to hang in there and bat deep and bat time. And that was in like the eighth or ninth over," revealed Warner.
Warner reveals getting to know other cricketers was great
Speaking on his comeback, Warner said that he is enjoying cricket at the moment.
Also, as he did play cricket over the past year, especially with Bangladesh cricketers in BPL, it opened his eyes.
"We have played so much cricket over the last 12 months, especially the Bangladesh guys. Getting to know a lot of them has been great," Warner added.
Warner looks to finish World Cup on a high
As he is currently the top run-scorer of the tournament, Warner would look to continue his amazing run in the coming games, especially against England.
However, he is likely to be in competition with his own team-mate and skipper Aaron Finch.
Meanwhile, the author believes that it is Warner who would be Australia's X-factor in their World Cup knock-out games.

so after radioing for assistance, the captain and crew settled in for a few days' wait until help arrived.
The following morning, as it became light, the sailors saw an island a few hundred yards beyond the reef. It was uninhabited, as far as anyone could tell: There were no buildings, roads, or other signs of civilization there -just a pristine, sandy beach and behind it, dense jungle. The beach must have seemed like an ideal spot to wait for a rescue, but the captain ordered the crew to remain aboard the Primrose. It was monsoon season,

I don't think there's anything wrong with the tone. A lot of us travel through life on autopilot from time to time; we are stuck in a cycle. Steve/Erin just jolted people out of their routine for a little bit. It might have been a little uncomfortable, but that doesn't make it wrong -- it was just in contrast to social norms. The post was titled "Even Salespeople are Human" because they are not acting human, they are just going through the motions. The reality-check forced them to acknowledge their humanity for a little bit.

On our way to soccer practice tonight, we were riding our bikes and I was just a little ways behind our oldest two when I noticed the 9yo swerving wildly.
Then I noticed that her knee was dragging. She finally swerved to a stop and flew off onto the grass.
Her knee started bleeding right away.
Here it is...
I think that there may still be some gravel in there. We will have to wait and see. :(

Pretoria – A Pretoria attorney who “left no stone unturned” for his clients, died at the weekend after his car went over a bridge, Netwerk24 reported on Monday.Anton Smith, 38, had won several civil claims against the police on behalf of disgruntled clients. He was busy with his second master’s degree.Friends on Facebook described him as always positive and full of life.Smith was on his way to see his partner, Louise Etchell, also a lawyer, when he crashed.Braam Kruger from Emer-G-Med emergency services said the accident happened at about 20:30 on Friday.It seems as if Smith was driving north on the N1 and had taken the Garsfontein exit which passes over the highway. Smith’s BMW hit another car on the intersection.Smith’s car then hit a traffic light, overturned and crashed over the bridge. It landed on its roof in the parking lot of a business park next to the N1, said Kruger.Smith died instantly. His body was removed from the wreckage with the Jaws-of-Life.Jack Gerber, a friend, said Smith was someone with “great ambition”.“He was a very successful lawyer.”By Sunday, Smith’s Facebook page was filled with messages from shocked friends and colleagues with many saying his death felt unreal.“I don’t cry because he left... I cry because he’s not coming back,” wrote Gerber.

7:45am: Tim & Dave are up early to feed the animals. One goat gets on his back. Tim enjoys the back scratch. He says “I love you goat.” Inside the bedroom, Mel & Vesna are talking. Mel says that a lot of people in the house have goals and are very ambitious. Vesna says that you can’t really walk up to people and say they are being fake though. Vesna says to Mel that the girls need to concentrate on winning on Friday night because the boys have a stranglehold on the event. Vesna says that Christie told her that the Logan brothers are going to try to win every remaining FNL because they feel they will need to take the 3 points off themselves every week they are stil in the house. Mel comes to the bathroom where Tim & Kate are. Kate complains of putting sunscreen in her eye. She leaves the bathroom. Tim says to Kate that she is making up that story. Tim says she is very sad because Kate just told him that she has strong feelings for him and Tim said that he can’t be with her at the moment. Mel laughs. Vesna is shown in the diary room doing an online update. Once she re-enters the house, Christie asks her what the question was. Vesna says she had to write what she thought of each housemate. Once she leaves the living room to go outside, Greg says “I know what she would have put down for me.” Christie says she has noticed there is tension between the two. Greg says he’s over it, not even going to try anymore because there is no point. Christie tells Greg that she hasn’t said anything to Christie about him. Greg says he can’t win. He says it’s the only person he’s ever seen where he can’t understand them.
Outside, Vesna is talking about what she wrote. She says “Dean won’t let me in, but I suppose he has his reasons for that.” Dave wonders what she wrote about him. Vesna says that Dave and his brothers is very deep, and they should read it when they get out. Dave says all of Australia is going to read it. Vesna says it’s very deep again. Dave says his mum will be proud to read it then. Vesna says Dave runs away from everything. Dave says that she hasn’t interacted with people like him before. Vesna says that Dave is so in it for themselves, so competitive. She says that if he failed he wouldn’t be able to live with himself. She says he would walk over people to win. She says life is a competition for him. Dave says thats fine, he says he listens to what she’s saying. Vesna says that Dave has a battleshield on, anything that comes across he just ignores. Dave decides he’s had enough talking about it and would rather concentrate on the weights. He says they can talk about when he’s finished. Vesna says she doesn’t think he’ll talk about it later.
12:31pm: Dean, Logan boys and Tim are at the gym talking. Dave is filling in Greg about Vesna’s online diary. Dean says she told the truth at least. Dave says they won’t open up because they want to win. Mel and Kate are in the bathroom. Mel thinks Dave is arrogant. Kate says Greg thinks how the other person will feel before he speaks. Mel agrees. Mel goes onto say that they might have feelings for people inside the house, but she thinks they won’t ‘open up’ until they are outside the house. Kate agrees. Mel says it’s all false as if they are playing the game. Mel says she sees deception, and then at the end they will want to hang out and be best buddies and reveal more of themselves. Mel goes onto say why would she want to give them time at the end when they’ve had all this time to get close. Cross to Christie and Rita outside sunbaking. Christie says there is still tension in the house. Christie says with the boys. Rita can’t see it and asks Christie to fill her in. Christie says “Nah it’s ok.”
Later, in the kitchen with a lot of housemates, Greg asks Vesna what she wrote about him. Ves says that he wears battleshields up and not allow anyone in. Ves says that their meaning of life is very different to hers. She goes onto say that they are very competitve and would do anything to stop themselves looking bad. She says they don’t want to be distracted from the big game. Ves says they haven’t shown her anything of them in the six weeks she has been here. Greg says he hasn’t had anyone tell him that in his whole life, but “it’s cool.”
2:37pm: Tim comes to the diary room. He says that a number of people are getting tired because it’s coming towards an end. He talks about Kate telling him that she was scared coming into the final weeks people would perhaps lose their purity of the relationships formed. He talks about todays argument between the Logan boys and Vesna, calling the atmosphere explosive. In the kitchen, Christie asks Greg if he wished he had stronger relationships with some people. Greg says he only doesn’t get along with one person. He says in hindsight he probably could’ve tried more at the start. Greg says if he has problems with people he can normally figure out why. He says he has tried and tried, and there is no point in putting on a nice happy face. He says what she said today did hurt him, calling it a massive assumption.
9:25pm: In the kitchen, Vesna says that Dave hasn’t spoken to her all day. Greg is doing the dishes at the time as well. Dave says that he’s having a break because she hasn’t said the nicest things to him today.
Dave says if he opens his mouth at the wrong time he’s going to lose the friendship he has with her. He says some things he could say could be too harsh. Vesna says they have come here for honesty and she has been honest from day one. Ves goes onto say that it’s probably just been her trying to make Dave into the person she wants to spend time with. Ves noe realises that he’s never going to be that. Dave says perhaps he is doing the same to her. Vesna tells him that she is so tough. Dave agrees, but says she continues to whinge about little things. Dave says that if he thinks Vesna is not coping with a big problem, he’ll be there for her, but the little things he thinks she can deal with it herself and she doesn’t need to constantly raise them. Vesna brings up the fact that Dave farted on Vesna. We see Dean, Kate and Tim sitting at the table. Dean shakes his head.
Dave says that Vesna farted on him too, but Ves says that was through sheets wheras he farted on her skin. Vesna tells Dave not to mock her as she walks away. Dave says she is walking away because she is wrong. Ves says she has to brush her teeth. Greg says to Dave to not worry about it. Rita comes up to Dave and tries to get him to smile. Dave refuses as it’s not funny. Rita keeps trying, but she’s not getting anywhere. Dave says “Thats how pathetic this house has got; an argument over farting.”
9:59pm: Rita and Vesna are talking in the bedroom. Rita says that Dave has an extremely aggressive side to him. Ves agrees. Rita says he is holding back. SHe wonders if Greg told him to hold back once they got into the house. She goes onto say if they weren’t 1 in the house and individuals it would be a lot different. She says if they were each their own person it would be much more interesting and the real Dave would come out. She thinks that it’s totally unfair they are two in the house and it gives them a much greater chance of winning. She says they could give each other signals to calm down inside the house. Both Ves and Rita agree they should each be there own person and something should be done about it. Chrsitie has been on the bed listening and goes to the bathroom. Rita says she’ll probably tell them out in the living room. On her way to the bathroom Christie only says “Sick of all this bitching.” Rita thinks Vesna should win the game. She says that people love Vesna, but the guys give them shit because she is a threat to them and hoping that if they put her down she will stay down. Vesna says it’s too far fetched for her to comprehend. Rita comes out to call Greg into talk to Ves. Dean tells Dave to go in as well because they are one person. Dave says no way. He doesn’t want to make her cry. He says there is no way he’s going in there. In the bedroom Greg wants to know why Greg frustrates her. Vesna says thats its hard to express her concerns about Greg when they are counted as one person. Greg says that he came onto the show for his brother and to spend time with him as it was important to Dave. Vesna says that Greg is helping his brother play the game. She says they have an advantage over the others. She says that if one wants to win the other will try as hard as they can to help the other person win. Greg says that when he pulls up his brother in the house it’s not because he can see the winners cheque disapearring, it’s rather that he is genuinely upset that he upsets others. He says he knows it will reflect how he looks. Vesna says she understands that but she can’t deal with the issue of them being in the house as one person. Greg runs through the disadvantages with Vesna, saying that every positive has a negative.

Adrian and Dee recently looked after the sale of our Footscray property. They both looked after the advertising and openings very professionally. The auction really showed their teamwork: Adrian impressed us with his knowledge of the property and his auctioneering skills. Dee successfully negotiated the final sale amount with the highest bidder so that we not only sold but were very happy with the outcome.
Review submitted by

WORKING from home is a blessing and a dream come true even though it may seem boring at times. It is the way to go for Lashawna Lawson, a resident of Timehri Hill, Red Ground Road, East Bank Demerara.
Lawson is a shop owner at Third Street, Timehri Hill, Red Ground Road and has been a village resident for the past 26 years.
The 34-year-old told the Pepperpot Magazine that she has lived most of her adult life in the village and, a few years ago, when the Chinese Supermarkets were established in Guyana, she had to quit her job in the city.
Lawson explained that she was a vendor at America Street, Georgetown, selling costume jewellery and had to quit that small business due to a flood on the market that made it no longer viable.
It was then she pooled her savings and opened a small shop at her home in Timehri Hill and seems to have grooved in with the slow pace as it is.
The mother of two stated that she likes living at Timehri Hill because of the quiet peace it brings, the scenic views, sand dunes, hills and the overall space and tranquillity.
Lawson added that life in Timehri Hill is very different from that of the city and other parts of the country and, seven years ago, when she started her own small business, the locals of the village began supporting her.
She reported that she would open late to accommodate customers and around month-end, when soldiers are paid, they would spend more.
Lawson’s shop has a variety of groceries, beverages and other things in stock.
Sonia Fung-A-Fat, the shop owner
Sonia Fung-A-Fat is also a shop owner and her small business is located on the Old Ice house Road, Timehri.
The mother of two told the Pepperpot Magazine that she has been married for the past 20 years and is a stay-at-home mother, who operates the shop at her home.
Fung-A-Fat reported that canter trucks would pass through the village with much-needed items for the shop so she doesn’t really have to go out to source articles to stock up the shelves.
She noted that life was comfortable in her village and they had all the basic things needed for a good life and it was a very quiet area.
Fung-Aa-Fat told the Pepperpot Magazine that she sells water and cooking gas in addition to groceries.
The businesswoman noted that where she resides is a large yard with families. The settlement has 10 houses that go both up and downhill and it was nice to be surrounded by family members, including her mother, sister, aunts and uncles.
Fung-A-Fat related that the village is safe to live in and the people are very neighbourly and go about their daily lives well.
Her husband is a taxi driver and her children were at school, so she had time to prepare meals, tidied the house, and was in the shop tending to customers.
“It is safe here. Only the soldiers would pass through, the workers from the airport and a few newcomers but we know the locals and early they would leave for work and return in the afternoon,” she said.
Transportation is via mini buses or taxis and the price depended on the distance.

Ok not all of us know what we want to do with our lives luckily there are a lot of us who do. Me I dream of being a chef I work in the kitchen right now cooking but I'm not a line cook yet. But until high school the only food I liked we're sweets. As I have grown I have opened my pallet to new things, some of the stuff I want to try may seem odd (guinnea pig, escargot etc) but it wasn't until I learned of a certain person that this dream was realized. I began watching Anthony's show and saw all the odd things he tried and not once did he ever say "fuck that, that shit is gross" he tried it all and enjoyed it all. I began to open my palette to new things and it made me realize how much I love food (I eat like a fatty but stay at the same weight no matter what). I began to want to know how to cook the food I was eating and eventually found that I enjoy cooking. Who or what was it in your life that made you realize you wanted to peruse the career you desire?

While most of y'all were probably enjoying some fun things last weekend Mr. Savvy decided to take Friday off from work and next thing I know he is out in the front yard using our tiller.
I'm thinking what on earth is he doing? Then he comes in to tell me he is going to go to Home Depot because the tiller broke and he needs to find a pallet of Bermuda sod, too. Say what?? In this heat he decides it's time to lay sod! This is the best time of year to do this, but not us doing the work! It needed to be done by some young men with strong backs.
About an hour later he shows up with the sod and a rented tiller.
I had different plans for Friday which was going antiquing, but this man of mine who has a bad back and has had two surgeries could not do this alone and I knew I had to stay and help him. Dang it!
We finished one side on Friday in the photo where the truck was parked with the sod in the back and then we started on this side on Saturday.
The centipede grass in our yard is almost 21 years old and has been in poor condition in some areas and has died off. We have been slowly adding Bermuda grass over the last few years either with sod or with seed and it is doing well. Also the grass in this area around these two maples has done poorly so we decided to join the two trees by making a new bed with pine mulch. So not only did we lay sod for two days straight in the heat, but put out a truck load plus forty bags of mulch.
After he tilled the bad grass up we marked the shape of the new bed with a hose.
This is the front side of the area that needed a lot of help.
We dug and raked and picked up rocks. We have lots of rocks in our yard since we live on a very large vein of granite.
When Mr. Savvy bought the first pallet of sod on Friday it was just a pallet of leftovers that had been left by others and was not in great shape, but we knew with lots of water it would come back and we got it at half price. This second pallet of sod was ordered on Friday and picked up Saturday morning and these were very heavy rolls. I could handle the smaller pieces on Friday, but it took us both to carry these. Aye yai yai! I told him he was trying to kill me or us both. It was extremely hot and we drank tons of water, but he started getting muscle cramps and had to stop and rest many times. I told him this job was too much for us, but we kept on working and he kept on getting cramps. He is so darn stubborn!
Anyway after lots of hard work we can admire our work now and wait for the grass to root and turn green like the rest of the yard.
This fall we may plant a few bushes in the new bed.
We have been blessed with rain and pop up showers every day since we planted the sod.
Talk about perfect timing!
Now, we are just having fun watching the new sod turn green.
After we were finished he said he/we would never do this ourselves again.

I am a wedding and portrait photographer based out of Prince Edward Island. Aside from photographing weddings, I also teach aspiring photographers all things weddings and business, as well as, beginner photographers how to start and thrive in business.
On the blog, you will find weddings that I have photographed, photography and business education, as well as, a little glimpse into my life!
Let me tell you all about our first time travelling with an infant. I’ll start by saying that we were blessed with a very good baby in the early days. He was almost always happy and slept well. But he had acid reflux and therefore spit up a lot and all the time. Despite that, he was a terrific traveller!
We took our stroller (BOB) with us and his car seat that fit into the stroller. A crib we reserved never came so he slept in the bed with me. This worked out okay but I would have been more comfortable with a crib.
On the plane, I didn’t give him any medication for his ears. Instead, I nursed him when we were taking off and when we were landing. In his diaper bag I had a change pad, diapers, wipes, a change of clothes, soother and a toy. I packed some hand sanitizer for myself and some snacks. He was great and slept the entire 5 hour flight.
Everyday we were at the resort he had his morning nap down at the pool on the shaded bar. He was too young to wear sunscreen so we always had to be in the shade.
After lunch, one of us would go up to the room and he would have his longer afternoon nap in the room. This way, one of us could stay down and socialize at the pool or beach for the afternoon.
After dinner, I always went up to the room with him so that my husband could stay with his friends as it was his friends wedding.
We did this everyday and if he needed any additional naps, he would typically nap on one of us while in the shade. We made sure to buy him a UV protected hat and swim suit for when he was in the sun going from shade to shade.
I’m not sure if this travelling experience was so great because of the age he was when we took him, or if he was just a great traveller but we will keep travelling non the less!!
Feel free to comment, or DM me on Instagram if you have any questions about travelling with an infant!!
Download the Guide!
I've created a cheat sheet to help guide you through the decision process of choosing your camera settings for the appropriate lighting situation!

So the kids just had nearly four weeks of holidays. That meant trying to find things to do to fill the days. At least, the days after Christmas. On Boxing Day we decided to enjoy the cloudy weather and take a walk around “the block”. We took our dog Zeus, who has grown into an enormous Golden Retriever, with us. He’s such a friendly dog who wouldn’t know anything bad even if it hit him in the head. However, his size made sure that no one was going to bother us… On our walk we passed by some interesting houses. The newer looking ones were built a few years ago and we have yet to see the one on the left inhabited. Zeus also met his first cow, well, calf really. Zeus is almost the same size as it. We also passed by a church that was started a couple years ago already but remains just a foundation and another one that had literally just been finished after thirteen years of off and on building. Then we came upon the local graveyard. Y’s nephew is buried there near the side of the road. His family wrote a message to him with white rocks, it says, happy travels Niel. We arrived back home to a fallen power pole and no power but the local power guys were hard at work fixing it.
Later that Day R and V and little Joy came by for a visit and to exchange gifts with us. Joy was pretty excited about hers!
New Years Eve was spent on the base with lots of food and a bunch of other families until it started to rain. Closer to midnight we went up to the school hill and watched the fireworks from up there.

FISH CREEK, WI – I was so looking forward to getting off of work, heading up to Door County and enjoying Peninsula State Park. I had heard so much about this place, it was a stop I was anticipating for a long time. Now before I go down the road too far, in the end I did enjoy myself, but getting there was not the way I expected to be.
After work… a long day of work, on the clock at 3am in this case off at 5pm, I loaded up the car and headed north to Door County, Fish Creek to be specific to Peninsula State Park, which about an hour and some change away.
Once I got there, I searched for my spot and when I arrived, there was a woman in my campsite. Clearly she and her husband were “camped out,” and had been for awhile. I showed her my reservation and she claimed there must be a mistake. I called the office, had to go back to the check-in location and then back to the spot, where they were sending a warden to sort things out.
Once the warden arrived, the #karen and her husband started to argue with the warden and I’m just sitting there watching it all. The Warden was super cool and he asked me what I wanted to do before he got into it again with them. I said, “where where they supposed to park and what was that site like?” He had to check to even see if it was open and then found out, it wasn’t. I was staying two nights, they were leaving the next day and someone else was coming in the next day as well, so he was going to HAVE to make them move.
Now I was in site 494… that’s what all of the paperwork said. Turns out they were supposed to be in site 474! So the warden went back, told them they had to move. They argued again, but it didn’t make a difference, however it clearly was going to take them some time to tear down and move, so I had to drive around the park for a bit until they left.
It took them about 45 minutes to move out of the spot before I was able to get in and finally set up. Oh, by the way… did I mention it rained for part of it?
In the end, I got into my site and I tried to put the issue behind me. The Wisconsin DNR and the Warden were really nice and they gave me money back for the one night that I had to deal with all of the drama, so I really appreciate that. I had the Warden’s business card and I wrote a note to his boss and copied him on the note as well, so they and he knew how much I appreciated his work.
As for the park, it is huge and spectacular! Here is the 411 on the trip:
- I stayed there 2 nights, where after taxes it worked out to be $47.75 per night… They did give me a $20 credit for the 1 night.
- I stayed in site #494… It was easy to get into. The bathroom location was about a minute walk or so from the site. It was a big site, lot’s of sun
- Cell service was not strong for me in the area. I have AT&T.
- The sites have nice tree coverage, but they are close together.
- The park itself is huge and you have to sometimes drive to places to hike. It’s also a good park if you have a bike
- I booked online through the Wisconsin DNR website.
- According the DNR Site:
“Considered Wisconsin’s most complete park, Peninsula State Park offers over 460 campsites, three group camps, a summer theater, an 18-hole golf course, sand beach, bike trails, a lighthouse and eight miles of Door County shoreline. The rollicking waves that skip towards Peninsula’s sky high bluffs are part of the Niagara Escarpment.”
With all of the drama, in the end it was a nice park to visit. I see why a lot of folks go to it. It’s a huge park and there are a lot of folks squished together in the campsites. The views though are spectacular!
TO FIND ME ON SOCIAL MEDIA:
Hope you like the episode and if you do, subscribe, share the link and as always, I love to read your comments below. And to continue to follow the adventures, you can find me online at:

I have had the opportunity to spend some time each week “dark” and early with a good friend of mine. We pray for each other, for our husbands and for God’s direction in our lives. This has been such a huge blessing in my life. When I heard this talk, I knew that I had to share it because I find so much joy in having Christlike friends in my life. I pray that you will find great friends who lift you, love you and help bring you to Christ!
Have a blessed week -
A few weeks ago my husband and I attended a temple session. As we entered, we were greeted by a temple worker, a dear friend from our ward. That greeting began a remarkable experience for us. We were met and served, more than any time I remember, by many people we knew: friends from previous wards, friends from the community, men and women we had served with in various callings. The last person I encountered was a young woman I didn't recognize. She was lovely, and when she began to speak, I immediately remembered: Robin, one of the young women in my Laurel class when I was first a Young Women president. As we visited and exchanged memories and life updates, she told me how much that time had meant to her. I felt the same way. I left the temple feeling moved by so much kindness, aware how important friends have been to me throughout my life. The Lord has touched my spirit time and again, and more often than not, His touch has reached me through the hand of a friend. Read the rest HERE...

We got a package in the mail last week, Mom sent it - a chair for Emma. I put it together this morning. She likes to try and stand and hold on to stuff, so she pulled herself up on it. We had to show her how to sit in it since she doesn't really get the sitting thing just yet.
She likes it because it is soooo soft.

The cruel truth behind puppy farms We all read horror stories of puppy farms – we can see it in the press and over social media. So when dogs find loving, caring homes we like to think that they all live happily ever after. But the sad truth is that problems for dogs don't always go away once they move to their forever homes - they can keep on paying the real cost of the greed of the puppy farmers. This is the story of my dog Roly and the battles he still faces today, nine years after he was born on a puppy farm. Roly is one dog that will keep on paying the price, throughout his life. He’s a small chocolate Labrador with life-limiting health problems include hip and elbow dysplasia, a deformed jaw, arthritis in his shoulders and he had suffered from both lungworm and kennel cough as a young puppy. He’s now undergoing hydrotherapy to help with his mobility as he grows older. Although he lives a happy life and is a much-loved family member, he bears the scars, both physically and mentally, of his terrible start in life. Roly’s story starts in West Wales where he was born in the squalor of a puppy farm, the smallest of a large litter. But instead of being nurtured and cared for in a loving environment, he had the misfortune to be born in in a place where the only concern was making money. Roly struggled to compete for food with his litter mates because he had a problem with his back legs. As he tried in vain to feed from his mother, no-one came to help him or tried to care for him. He was left to fend for himself and began to lag behind the others in his growth and development, ending up about a third of the size of the other pups. Small, sickly pups do not sell and so the farmer took him away from his mother and litter mates. He was put in isolation in a cage inside a shed. Poor Roly had no love, no care and was left there on his own to die, discarded like rubbish. So little Roly became more malnourished – all alone, afraid and unhappy! Following a veterinary visit to the puppy farm at the request of the local authority (as a result of pressure from campaigning groups!), Roly was taken to be put to sleep - his first visit to the Vet at 3 months old could well have been his last! Luckily for Roly, the Vet contacted one of Hope Rescue’s foster homes and he was taken into their care in November 2010. His battle to survive was just beginning! Roly was content in his foster home but needed a family to call his own. Sadly no-one wanted to take him on with so many issues and an uncertain future. I saw the photos of a small, sad looking pup with lots of health issues so he joined my family as a foster but I soon loved him unconditionally and decided that he should stay! Thanks to Hope Rescue he was rehomed as an Assisted Adoption, which means that he will be supported and his vet bills paid for the rest of his life, however long that may be. Roly – a puppy farm survivor who never gives up but keeps giving back! Despite being a living example of the greed of puppy farmers, he has given so much back already in his life. He has been used in a number of campaigns to educate people about the welfare and emotional costs of puppy farming, and featured in a TV current affairs programme that investigated puppy farms in Wales. He was a finalist in the RSPCA and Daily Mirror’s Animal Hero Awards 2014 and a runner up in ITV’s British Animal Honours 2013. For two years Roly also fulfilled a special role as a mascot helping injured Royal Marines. They took him to their hearts as like them, he is facing life-long issues, and epitomises the most important parts of the Commando Ethos: ‘Courage – Determination – Fortitude’. Roly completed a number of challenges to raise money for Hope Rescue to help other dogs in need. Amongst his endeavours, he completed an ascent of Mount Snowdon in Wales. He was an absolute star and walked the whole way, with a spring in his step and a wagging tail. Even the Royal Marines were impressed by the performance of their very own ‘Canine Commando’. He also ‘yomped’ across Dartmoor and has undertaken other fundraising events. Despite his many problems, Roly is a happy soul, full of joy and with a real zest for life. He has an engaging personality and soon becomes a firm favourite with everyone he meets. Roly is a true inspiration to others and I feel so privileged to share my life with him.

If you want to build something that lasts, spend time pouring into others.
This year I was mildly obsessed with the Olympics, particularly the track and field events. I was in awe watching incredible
The men and women in the Olympics were born with some degree of natural talent, as we all were, but they took the time and had the patience and discipline and wherewithal to master that talent. What would our lives look like if we did the same with the gifts we’ve been given?

A rape case has collapsed after images emerged of the accused and his alleged victim "cuddling" in bed together.
The Crown Prosecution Service (CPS) offered no evidence against Samson Makele at Snaresbrook Crown Court, 17 months after he was arrested.
The photos were discovered on his phone by a defence expert but had not been disclosed by police or prosecutors.
The CPS said it was not a failure of disclosure and it stopped the prosecution once the pictures emerged.
Lawyers for Mr Makele said at least four photos taken on the day of the alleged rape showed the pair together, apparently naked under bedsheets.
In July 2017, the 28-year-old ,who is originally from Eritrea, was charged with raping the woman after the Notting Hill Carnival in west London in August 2016.
According to his lawyers, the CPS said after he had been charged that apart from text messages between the pair, there was nothing else of relevance on the phone.
The defence commissioned its own expert to examine the device and a report containing details of the images was sent to the CPS on 5 January.
Earlier in court prosecutors offered "no evidence" against Mr Makele, a fortnight before his trial was due to begin.
The Metropolitan Police said it was "the responsibility of the investigating officer to pursue all reasonable lines of enquiry in an investigation" which "involves making complex decisions based on the evidence available and disclosures made".
It added: "In this case it is apparent that the police investigation did not find the images."
A spokesperson for the CPS said they had received "material we were not previously aware of" from the defence.
"The case was reviewed and it was concluded there was no longer a realistic prospect of conviction. We made the decision to offer no evidence and did so at a hearing today."

Country music singer-songwriter Hank Locklin was one of country music’s first prominent 'honky-tonk’ singers, releasing his first album Foreign Love in 1958. Hank was a member of the Grand Ol’ Opry for 50 years, first performing in 1960 and making his last appearance in 2007. In 2006 he released his 65th and final album on Yell Records, titled By the Grace of God: The Gospel Album. Over his 50-year career, it is estimated he had sold over 15 million records, with many of his songs being later re-recorded by other influential artists such as Dolly Parton and Willie Nelson. Hank died March 8, 2009, at the age of 91. For more on Hank Locklin visit his bio on allmusic.com here.

Found! – Deputies said on April 8th, 2011, that Vanessa had been found and is in good health.
Vanessa Lynn Johnson, 21, has been missing since March 26.
She did not have a vehicle and told staff she was waiting for a ride.
Her dad reported her missing on April 2 and said he last talked to her on March 25 when he dropped her off at the Motel.
Johnson is described as a white female, 5′ 8″, weighing 145 lbs. with brown eyes and red hair.
If you have any information, please call the Pima County Sheriff’s Dept.

Anyone still on Zofran and over 16 weeks?
I just turned 16 weeks :) However, I just got off the Zofran yesterday. But I still feel slightly nauseous today and it comes and goes throughout the day. I was hoping I would be completely over this by now. Anyone else still taking Zofran? Anyone else just got off of it and still slightly nauseous? I just don't want to be on meds the whole pregnancy.

Heather Foreman sent along the following:
For Immediate Release
Bob Shamrock Dies At 68 – Father to Ken & Frank Shamrock
January 14th, 2010 – Bob Shamrock, the father of legendary MMA fighters Ken Shamrock and younger brother Frank Shamrock passed away today Thursday, Jan 14th at 2pm at the home of his eldest son Ken – surrounded by friends and family. Ken Shamrock and his wife Tonya brought Bob to their home on Saturday after a long term battle with different health complications due to Diabetes – Bob was 68 years old.
Bob is best known for opening up his home in Susanville, CA to literally hundreds of defiant and hardcore kids. Ken Shamrock (then Ken Wayne Nance) was 13 years old when he arrived at the Shamrock Boys Home in Susanville, CA – Ken at the time was in trouble with the law for strong armed robbery among other things.
"I just watched Ken’s eyes when he first arrived, because this was my home. It wasn’t some business place where I came on from 8 til 5 – it was my home, and the house was really big, we ate well, we had a swimming pool, and all those kinds of things. It was a lot different than the other group homes he had been in." Bob Shamrock
Bob promoted sports in the community – “We’d have the football team and their cheerleaders out at the ranch when the season was over, and the same with the wrestling, baseball and basketball teams. We tried to get them all interested in outside activities, and the biggest one was sports. That’s what we did with Ken because he came to me as a fighter. We got him involved in football and wrestling and if the kids made the team for their class, we’d get them a gym membership in town. We did lots of activities to try and keep the kids busy and to provide outlets. That’s the problem with a lot of kids these days: They don’t have the outlets to get their energy out and their aggression down." Bob Shamrock
One of Ken’s fondest memories of growing up at the Shamrock Home was the way his dad had the kids settle their disputes. If the kids got mad with each other, Bob would let them put on gloves and box in the backyard to sort things out. The only rule imposed for these matches was that Bob had to be there at the time.
"Ken winded up being the house champion in boxing and wrestling. He had a way about him that just drew me to him: his own way of looking at things that was upright and honest. It wasn’t always kosher or exactly right, but that’s the way he thought and basically it was fair. Sometimes you had to show him there was another side to the story, but he always tried to do the right thing. By no means was he perfect, but we’d sit down and I could reason with him."
When Ken turned 18 in February, 1982, Bob legally adopted him and Ken changed his last name to Shamrock. Later, Ken’s younger brother Frank also changed his surname to Shamrock out of respect for the man who had done so much to help him.
“It is an incredible feeling, knowing that two boys I have done so much for, have gone on to be world champions in Mixed Martial Arts." Bob Shamrock
Just yesterday I sat across from Ken and listened as he began to look back and think about his dad, “My dad had an unbelievable light with these kids – I’ve never seen anybody able to take a defiant kid into their home, and handle them like my father could – willing to get into a fight with them if he had to because of disrespect and then turn around and hug them and let them know, the minute you give me respect – I’ll give you respect. Everyone that came in contact with my dad – you could tell he made a difference in their life. I’ve never seen anyone have that much success with kids. I’ll miss him and I’m forever thankful.

FORMER NBA star JR Smith trounced a man who allegedly vandalized his car during the protests against the death of George Floyd.
The footage, which was obtained by TMZ Sports, shows the basketball player repeatedly kick a man in the head.
When the man eventually gets back to his feet, Smith delivers one final punch to the face before the man runs off.
In a video, Smith explained what happened.
He said: "One of these motherf**king white boys didn't know where he was going and broke my f**king window in my truck.
"Broke my sh*t."
Smith then goes on to explain that his truck was parked in a residential area in Los Angeles and not near where stores are currently being looted.
He also confirmed that the incident was "not a hate crime," but instead his problem with the "motherf**king system."
"The motherf**ker broke my window and I whooped his a**, he didn't know whose window he broke and he got his a** whooped."
most read in us news
Officer Derek Chauvin was filmed in the now-viral video kneeling on Mr Floyd's neck for eight minutes as George pleaded, "please don't kill me" and said "I can't breathe", before losing consciousness.
Chauvin was charged with third-degree murder and second-degree manslaughter in the case.

SARASOTA, Fla. ——About this time five years ago, Scott Beerer, a second-round pick who once could throw a fastball in the mid-90s, walked out of Colorado Rockies minor league spring training camp prepared for life after baseball.
He was tired of pitching, tired of living and dying with every throw, tired of trying to pump hope into a dead arm.
The Orioles signed Beerer to a minor league free-agent deal with a spring training invitation in November, giving him his first taste of the big leagues. A big reason is former Orioles outfielder and new team special assistant Brady Anderson, who has been by Beerer's side the past three years in helping him transition from pitcher to position player.
"It's been a rough road, being as old as I am at 29." Beerer said. "It's been a long time chasing a dream. I've been just trekking along trying to get to this point. It's been a very humbling road, but I feel so blessed and happy that I'm here.
"I was done. It wasn't until the first time I hit with Brady that I realized I could come back. He made me believe in myself. He made me think this could be done."
As a pitcher, Beerer had great promise. He was signed by the Rockies to a $725,000 signing bonus in 2003 out of Texas A&M. But that same year in Rookie ball, he tore his labrum. Surgery repaired his shoulder, but it wouldn't give him back his velocity — and 6-foot, right-handed relievers who throw in the mid-80s are far too common in the minors. He went from prospect to afterthought. Three years later, he was still toiling in Single-A.
Beerer asked the Rockies whether he could become an outfielder. Colorado didn't bite. So Beerer left. He went to EMT school, passed all his tests for the Los Angeles County and city fire departments and began volunteering at hospitals in L.A. to accumulate hours.
To make ends meet, he was a bartender and bouncer in Hermosa Beach.
"Going from a life of baseball to all of a sudden, I'm in school, I'm in bars at night, not sleeping much, it was a tough time, a big transitional period for me," Beerer said. "I was just trying to figure out what I was going to do after baseball."
In the back of his mind, Beerer still hungered for another chance to play baseball. He just needed someone to believe he could do it.
"I just said, 'You know what? I still have that desire to play. I don't want to wake up when I'm 40 and say, 'I wish I had tried to hit.'" Beerer said.
He found his fit in Anderson, whom he met through a mutual friend. Anderson wasn't sold initially.
"I said, 'OK, so I guess it's going to be Babe Ruth, Rick Ankiel and Scott Beerer?'" Anderson said. "I'm like, 'Are you sure you want to do this?'"
So at 26, with two seasons out of the game, Beerer began his comeback with Anderson at his side. He hadn't picked up a bat in six years.
The first time the two worked out, Anderson watched Beerer hit off a tee. He could tell Beerer has strength, and Anderson made a quick tweak to his swing. Suddenly, Beerer was hitting balls 250 feet farther in the air, over the fence.
"Within a half hour, we had to stop hitting because I didn't have any balls left," Anderson said. "He was just launching it, swing after swing after swing. We just went from there."
The two then incorporated boxing, Olympic powerlifting and handstands into their regimens, the same routine Anderson does with other Orioles players.
After seeing Beerer's dedication, the Rockies — the organization that still owned Beerer's rights — gave him another chance heading into the 2009 season, but he would have to work his way back up from the bottom. He started in instructional league, then debuted in Low-A ball, batting .558 in 43 at-bats before going being promoted to High-A.

January 25 2015 Latest news:
BY LIZZIE PARRY
Thursday, December 27, 2012
RAISING a glass of ale brewed in his honour, more than 100 mourners paid their respects to a stalwart of the town.
Peter Underwood lost his battle with leukaemia, surrounded by his family, on December 4.
The 88-year-old former teacher and member of The Ipswich Society, was born in London before moving to Ipswich when he was seven.
A Northgate pupil, Mr Underwood later returned to the school where he was a geography teacher for 32 years.
While he was at Oxford University studying geography, Mr Underwood was called up for the RAF during the Second World War.
Stationed mainly in Canada, he served as a flying instructor. When he returned to Ipswich, finishing his teaching qualifications, he took up his role at Northgate.
Following his retirement he took up the role of magistrate for ten years.
He was a founding member of The Ipswich Society, a member of the Ipswich Building Preservation Trust and the Historic Churches Trust.
In 1998 Mr Underwood was recognised for his dedication to the town when he was awarded an MBE for services to The Ipswich Society.
His eldest son, Simon Underwood, 59, who lives in Sunderland, said: “His passion was an interest in Ipswich and Suffolk, all aspects of the town’s history and architecture as well as it’s people.
“He had a passion for learning and teaching others.
“He loved to be able to tell other people facts and stories.
“He was fascinated by people and loved nothing more than sitting in a pub with a pint of real ale with all sorts of people.
“He always took people as he found them, he wasn’t judgemental at all.
“He had a great sense of humour and will be missed terribly by us all.”
At his funeral last week mourners enjoyed a pint of Underwood Mild created and brewed in his honour at The Dove Inn, his former favourite pub when he and his late wife Pam lived in Vermont Crescent, off Tuddenham Road.
Mr Underwood leaves behind his sons, Simon and Rupert, daughter Tessa and six grandchildren.
n Pay tribute to Mr Underwood. Write to Your Letters, Ipswich Star, 30 Lower Brook Street, Ipswich, IP4 1AN or e-mail firstname.lastname@example.org

Today there was some fabulous information waiting for me. TDN was able to help me get into a standing with the IRS that considers me to be non collectable. I'm sitting here in a car in a parking lot, it's about 100 degrees and I have the windows closed so I would not be distracted and I'm just so overwhelmed with what TDN was able to do for me.
I never lost faith in TDN and I've heard of all these huge deals that some of these alternative companies have - saying they can get you a fraction of what you owe and all this stuff, but you don't see that advertised by TDN. They were always able to help me and give me the information I needed in order to feel confident that the job was being done, and done well. This to me lets me know that I made a great decision when hiring them to help me. Just amazing. Took the complete fear right out of me.

This novel is limited to 100 free copies due to its part in Inkitt’s Novel Contest.
The two dwarves stood above the village below them, asleep in the wee midnight hours. One, the older of the two, had unkempt grey-and-black hair and beard, with many scars across his face. He wore a deep red jerkin with rich gold work on the boiled leather armor on the exterior. These dragon patterns clearly marked him as the clan leader, as though his massive size and clear air of authority did not already. He wore a cape of dark yellow fabric, heavy material designed to keep out the cold of the north wind, and in his hand was the massive axe-hammer weapon, called a miner’s axe, that doubled as a walking stick. The second was slightly shorter, and yet nearly as big as the older dwarf, with flame-red hair tied back in a tight braid behind his head, with a smaller one behind his left ear. This one’s beard was surprisingly minimalistic for a dwarf, with no braiding or plaiting or forks at all. He wore a cloak of thick, dark brown fur and his armor, metal instead of hardened leather, was fur-lined as well. There was no weapon in his hands, only a torch, but a single-edged sword and a throwing axe were tucked in his belt. Though not visible, he also had two knives in his boots, in addition to several hidden in other places. There was a pack, too, full of enough provisions to last many weeks. The red-haired one gazed at the village for a while before he turned away.
“We put this off for too long, Father,” he said, his voice low and harsh. He put his hand on a gnarled tree to steady himself, feeling the sting of the freezing arctic wind on his face. “I cannot be here come daybreak. I guess this is goodbye.”
The other dwarf turned to face his son. “You have the book, yes?”
“I figured that it would be best if you did not have it, so yes. I put it in my pack.” He took a step up the mountainside, but his father’s voice stopped him.
“You know what we have to say. That you are dead, gone for good. You are aware, are you not, Carsten?”
The red-haired dwarf tilted his head just enough that his father could see his cold smile in the torchlight. “I know. And in a way, you are telling the truth. Part of me died. The child, I suppose. As a youth, I would not last two days. Without him, I am so…unmoored, I suppose. I have no idea know what to do or where to go. I am lost in my own home.”
“But you have an idea, do you not?” The older dwarf pressed. “You cannot surely be foolish enough not to have thought about this?”
Carsten shook his head. “No, I gave this journey a good deal of thought, but I do not know if this will work. I have considered being a travelling tinker, but I do not wish people to be watching their silver while I work. I thought about a blacksmith, but I have never had a good hand for that. So…” He patted the sword at his side. “…I decided to be a hunter instead. I know how to track, to outmaneuver, to kill, to skin, and otherwise to take animals. It might not be clean or respectable, necessarily, but I think it is the best I have. And besides, we’re all just savages anyway.” The older dwarf nodded.
“And will they not find you?” He asked. Carsten turned fully now, facing his father.
“If I leave my past far enough behind, they will not. That is why I’m going north, to the Waste-Border.” The old chieftain inhaled sharply.
“The Border? Is that wise, son? You know what they say…” He queried.
“It is as wise as we can get here. None of them will cross the border, since they think it unclean,” Carsten replied. “It is my best chance. Goodbye, Father.” And he turned away, trudging uphill in the snow. A storm seemed to materialize out of nowhere now, kicking up blasts of icy crystals into Carsten’s face, but he barely noticed them for the sting of the tears on his cheeks.
Carsten trudged for hours, using the climb as an excuse to think. His mind was back home already, but he shut them out as a defender might shut out besiegers. He was on his own now. Sigurd, his father, Helena, his mother, Liyani, his sister, Vieg, his best friend, and all of the people that he would almost certainly never see again. Raising the torch and pushing the thoughts away, Carsten moved further up the pass, his heavy boots crunching the snow underfoot. He slid the hood of his cloak over his head in order to keep the biting wind out of his face, even though it was coming from almost directly ahead.
Navigating the forest proved easy to the extreme; even without daylight, the dwarf knew these woods like the back of his oversized hand, having traversed their dark expanse hundreds of times. The torchlight played across the trees in a frenetic dance of shadows, making the environment seem active, alive even. Carsten suppressed an involuntary shiver; it looked to be a long night. But dwarves were famously resilient and ascetic; in fact, their own name for themselves, Ethilganir, translates roughly to “Children of Stone”. Carsten had scaled about half of the mountain that overshadowed Sveldyhem, his home village, but he doubted if he could go over the other side. The passes of the Outlands often closed at this time of year, and not always naturally. The land was full of dangerous creatures, some of whom moved in with the freezing weather. It was whispered among the seasoned hunters of the passes that there were new creatures abroad, ones that descended on climbers in packs, tearing them to bloody, quivering shreds. What they were was unknown, but their name was whispered in fear by all that had seen their handiwork: Ikjaraci. Specters of Ice. And in addition to this rumored threat, there were still wolves, hungry snow trolls, dragons, faelynx, and of course marauders to be wary of. Carsten stumbled over a stone that was hidden beneath the snow and, grumbling to himself, regained his footing. The torch was dying as the wind kicked up, sending a blast of snow into Carsten’s face. Suddenly, another gust blew the still-sputtering flame out. Sighing, Carsten drew another brand out of his pack and tried to light it. After two tries, he knew that it was pointless; the snow had wetted the wood, making the torch impossible to light. He got up and continued on his trek, his eyes adjusting to the darkness and blinding white wall in front of him. The snow had gotten into his boots, but his thick wool socks kept most of it off his feet. Carsten was close to the top of the mountain, and he moved quicker now, anticipating the end of his trek. The trees were thinning up here, and he could see the craggy outline of Watchtower Point, where his ancestors’ fortress of stone had once stood, long before the coming of the orcs down from the Everwinter Waste to the North. Once these monsters had come to trouble them, the dwarves had left their fortresses above the ground for ones found beneath the earth to protect themselves. And, when the orcs had been driven back across the border of the Waste, the dwarves had returned to their aboveground abodes. Now he was inside Watchtower Point, and he was momentarily sheltered from the wind and snow by the forbidding spires of ruined stone around him. He went to a lancet window carved out of the stone and looked out, hoping in vain to see the pass beneath him. The storm was too intense; even from this high up, he could barely see more than twenty meters down the mountain. He groaned in disappointment. That meant more climbing and sliding and slipping and falling. Oh well, he thought. No one said the trek would be easy.
It turned out that going down the mountain was similar to sledding. The woods were much sparser here, the mountainside icier, and the climb steeply downhill. Or, more accurately, slid while trying to regain his feet. Finally, after nearly slamming into three or more trees, Carsten managed to stand on an as-yet-unfrozen rock and found, now that the world had stopped moving, he could see the pass beneath him. Actually, he could see the snow, ice, and stone that had sealed off the pass. That meant Carsten would have to go around, which could take all night. In addition, the few caves that were between this pass and the one Carsten had to take had occupants, and that meant sleeping in the open, which Carsten would not do. He had seen what happened to those inexperienced or foolhardy enough to do so, or what was left of them. He turned, now hugging the path that led to the next pass over. This trip would be treacherous, as now he would have to cross through a forest of pines to get there, and it was well-known that the woods were home to packs of white-furred wolves. Still, he had no choice, for to avoid the woods would be to take twice the time the journey through them would take, and he knew what would happen if he was still on this side of the mountains come two days. A high-pitched keening interrupted his thoughts, and Carsten looked around. It sounded like the wind, except for one problem: the blizzard had lessened, so it made no sense that the wind would be howling louder now.
Then he heard what sounded like a wind gust on his left, and he saw a puff of snow kicked up by what seemed to be a capricious blast of wind. But he had hunted enough to know better; what he had seen was a downdraft caused by the beat of something’s wings. He kept trudging, but his eyes scanned the snow for any motion. Then the keening sounded again, softer and farther away, and he heard something whoosh behind him. He knew that he was being followed, so he realized that now he had no choice. Carsten spun, his sword leaving its sheath with a loud shiiiing. His hunter’s eyes scanned the snow for any sign of his pursuers, but he could see nothing. The high-pitched call came again, this time from farther up the mountain. There was no question now; he was being hunted by something, and something very, very fast. The dwarf’s eyes narrowed. He was not about to stay here, out in the open, where he could easily be attacked from any direction. Carsten’s eyes scanned the terrain, looking for some cover, any cover. But the only cover he could see was fifty-two meters away, and that was the forest. He could not have made it, even if he ran as hard as he could. The sound came again, but now it seemed to be all around him. Then, he heard something barreling at him from behind, and he whipped around, the point of his sword leading the way in a powerful thrust. It struck something hard, entered with a sickening sliiching sound, and he heard a scream of agony that was not human even by the longest stretch of imagination. Something hit him hard, sending both dwarf and creature tumbling down the mountainside and wrenching Carsten’s sword from his grip. More than once, Carsten felt a hidden stone jab him someplace he would have liked to remain uninjured or had not known he had. Strangely, the creature was not attacking him as they fell. However, when they stopped, he saw why. The creature was a small, dragon-like serpent, about ten feet long and five high, with wings that folded onto its back and long, sharp claws on its front limbs. Its tail ended in a vicious barbed stinger that seemed to contain a venom of some kind, and so he cut it off for further study. It appeared as though the beast was capable of standing on its hind legs, although since it was dead, Carsten could not tell. He had killed the beast with a solid thrust through the midsection, piercing its heart and several other vital organs. The injury slew the beast so quickly that the wound had bled little. The dwarf set his foot against the creature’s side and pulled his sword out of the wound. It relinquished the blade reluctantly, as though the corpse wished to hold the instrument of its demise. Carsten wiped the blade clean on the snow, and had just sheathed it when the keening started again.
This time, they did not bother with stealth. Instead, he could clearly see four miniature wakes of ice surging toward him. Carsten unlimbered his throwing axe and eyed the nearest creature as it approached. When it was thirty paces away, he whipped the axe as hard as he could at the beast. It spun end over end with a queer whistling sound before impacting the beast with brutal force between the eyes. It stopped in its tracks, shuddered, pitched to one side, and went limp. But Carsten had no time to remove the axe; the others were there in moments. His sword had barely cleared its sheath when the second beast attacked, knocking him off of his feet. The claws raked across his mail shirt, shrieking and sending up sparks. Before a second blow could be struck, Carsten drew a long, sharp hunting knife and, ramming it into the dragon’s side, slashed from left to right. The beast screamed in pain and toppled off of him. A third came at him, trying to pin him again, but Carsten rolled to the side and grabbed the hilt of his fallen sword. The beast turned, and the dwarf delivered two quick slashes across the beast’s neck, cleaving head from body. The fourth beast came at him in a rush, knocking him flat with its left wing. It pinned him with the claws of its foot and raised its other limb above its head for a killing blow. But it, too, relinquished its crushing grip with a howl of pain. Carsten had drawn his second hunting knife, a small dagger, and stabbed it between its first and second toes. The beast fell back, writhing, and Carsten grabbed its neck, pinned its head, and thrust a third knife under its chin. Its cries were cut off, and the dwarf stood slowly, surveying the scene.
There was surprisingly little blood, given that he had just killed four seven-hundred-pound dragons with two knives, an axe, and a sword. He pulled his axe out of the one dragon’s head, grimacing at the mess the dragon’s gore had made of it. Sighing, he sat down and set about the painstaking task of cleaning it. The sword was not exceptionally messy, but two of his knives were in a similar way to the axe. They were splattered in all sorts of nasty dragon bits, which Carsten’s gloved hands had a difficult time getting off of them. Before he sheathed them, though, Carsten cut one of the beasts’ teeth out, adding it to a necklace of teeth and claws he wore about his neck and outside his jerkin as mementoes of his toughest kills. Still, it had gone surprisingly well, all things considered. Carsten returned the weapons to their sheathes, and then turned away from the miniature battlefield, leaving the bodies behind. Let those trained-dragons idiots stuff that in their collective pipe and smoke it, he thought angrily. Some of the Outlanders, as incredible and stupid as it might seem, were actually under the impression that one could train dragons. Carsten himself had stopped believing in such fairy tales a long time ago, seeing as all of those creatures he had encountered had unceremoniously tried to eat him or rip off his head. They would be gone by morning, he mused, looking back at their still bodies; nothing dead ever lasted long in the Outlands. Then he turned and kept walking.
He made the forest by approximately two in the morning. The storm had not yet ceased completely, and Carsten deemed it foolish to climb up into the trees, as he might fall out during the night. So, with no other option and little joy over the course of action he had been forced to take, the hooded dwarf plodded on. Surprisingly, no wolves attacked him, and he did not hear so much as a howl. Perhaps tonight would be peaceful after all. The trees crowded densely around him like unmoving and yet simultaneously forbidding sentries. He pulled his hood tighter around his head, his eyes scanning the woods for any movement.
Not much happened between the time where Carsten entered the forest and when dawn broke across the eastern sky. For the dwarf, it was possibly the gladdest time in his life; the sun meant the night’s killers would hide for the day, only to return when darkness fell. He had walked all night without rest, and now he would have to keep travelling at a good pace if he was to reach another village before nightfall. Still, with the sun out, the Outlands were not so terrible, and Carsten was almost beginning to enjoy himself, nearly lost in the scenery. The snow lay over everything in a white blanket of tranquility, undisturbed save for his own footfalls. What bitter irony that war might come any day now, Carsten thought morosely. Most people he would meet on this journey would not know who he was, and that was probably for the best. As the son of a clan leader, and the eldest at that, one might think him due a little respect. Plus, his mother was a wood sprite, possibly explaining his affinity for woodcraft, as opposed to most dwarves’ taste for blacksmithing and metallurgy. But a life of respect and tranquility had not been his family’s lot for nearly six hundred years, ever since the Sundering Wars. In those infamous conflicts, Carsten’s clan, the Brownbeards, and another family, the Shatterhands, had disowned their clans and taken the side of the Outcast Races led by the dwarves and dark elves (but including gremlins, goblins, Serpent-men, minotaurs, and others) against the Free Races led by their Council (light elves, most other dwarves, men, and several Faerie families). However, the renegade clans lost the War, and paid a terrible price for their rebellion. The Free Races gave to each of their clans a type of weapon called Masterwork, a weapon that, among other things, was virtually unbreakable and extremely sharp. The renegades had been stripped of these weapons (and their right to places in the Assembly) and been exiled to the Outlands. However, one of the races had taken the exile further. An elite division of the human forces, called the Huntresses, swore a blood oath that they would kill every male heir in Brownbeard clan, the elder and leading family, before they reached the age of thirty-five. Dwarves who reached this age were named (as dwarves were not born with their final surname) and the rights of an adult member of the clan. That particular oath proved difficult to fulfill, as once a dwarf reached thirty-five, the entire clan was sworn to defend him or her to the death. Carsten, as his father and grandfather had, would have to serve an exile until they passed their thirty-sixth year. He pushed these thoughts aside as he noticed the tree line thinning. Now he was out of the woods, he thought, with a berating half-smile at the awful pun he had just made. Adjusting his pack, and setting his eyes on the next peak rising above him, Carsten began his ascent.
The storm seemed to have subsided for the day, and Carsten was climbing like there was no tomorrow. But there were many tomorrows left for him, and he would probably spend them hiking up mountains as well. These particular peaks were famous for sending inexperienced climbers either home in defeat or to a frigid grave. Carsten, however, had climbed mountains since he could walk, and he was almost enjoying this. The scenery in the Outlands was phenomenal, if one could stop trying to survive long enough to take it all in. The sun shone on the whole of the land, with no cloud to cover anyone from its rays. Not that Carsten was unduly worried about sunburn or heat; after all, one could stand outside in naught but one’s undergarments in the Outlands on a sunny winter day and have nothing to fear but the odd stares your neighbors would give. The sunlight was by no means harsh, although it brought with it the benefit that it kept the wolves and the ikjaraci at bay. However, it meant that other travelers would see him moving, and that could mean trouble if they were of a mind to interfere. But these thoughts were only momentary concerns as he made up the last mile and a half to the pass, seeing as he was the only living thing moving for miles. In addition, he had not gotten this far by worrying about such things.
Temgard Pass had not closed, as Carsten had hoped it would not. In fact, the snow had barely covered the paved road that stretched through the pass. He found that now he was on a paved road, he was more at ease. Cutting across the mountains had proved intelligent, as now he was seventeen miles from his village. However, he knew he needed rest soon, and he knew that the nearest village was two more away. As far as the eye could see, no man nor beast moved save himself. Carsten shrugged, adjusted his pack and the axe on his back, and set off down the road.
It turned out that the village was twenty miles away, and it was much larger than Carsten’s home. It took him a full five days to reach it, and he was low on supplies and patience by then. Five days out in the cold of this wilderness could easily mean death to the inexperienced. The environment of the Outlands was harsh and unforgiving, and many of its inhabitants reflected this paradigm. Still, the village seemed warm and welcoming, and Carsten would take full advantage of their hospitality. In fact, it was almost a small city, with nearly six thousand inhabitants. The red-haired dwarf raised his hood before he entered the town, his ice-blue eyes scanning the street. He did not know who might be watching, but everyone in the Outlands knew to keep a close eye on suspicious characters. There was no telling who might pay for such information later. According to the signs on the sides of the road, the city’s inns set up shop in the western corner of town, something complicated by the fact that Carsten had entered from the southeastern side. In that part of the city, the market sprawled, with bawling shopkeepers hawking their wares to bystanders. Many of these people were not there to buy the things that they would come home with that day. Most of them never even looked at Carsten as he moved through the marketplace, and those that did almost immediately looked away. Not that his surprised the dwarf; after all, his armor was battered and pitted from hard battle, and his jerkin was splattered with ikjaraci blood, although it looked a lot like dirt. In addition, his cloak was weather-beaten, definitely having seen better days. These were not like him; they had forged for themselves a likeness of wealth here, and thus they believed themselves above everyone else. He smirked. Knowing their own elevation, they chose not to associate with everyone else. Many of them lived shallow, isolated lives, longing for something more. How ironic that those who had more than everyone else should be less because of what they believed made them superior. But he was not here to provide social commentary, and he moved on, shutting out the calls of the salesmen around him.
“Jerkins! Fine dwarf-made leather, only seven enuva!”
“Spears, axes, swords! Finest in the Outlands!” Carsten doubted that, as the dwarves’ weapon-craft was only rivaled by their skills in siege engineering. Most people said that no one else could make weapons even close to what his kin could do. From the look of those weapons, they would not take a few good hits from his own single-bladed war sword.
“Provisions! Food that will last you weeks.” Carsten ignored them. He was almost…ah, yes. There they were. He looked up at one of the inns, eyeing it disdainfully. He had seen more structurally sound sand castles. Another was similar; the third smelled like a cross between a deceased and rotting swine and a skunk that had baked in the sun too long. The fourth did not impress him, but it did not put him off either. He flicked off his hood, hesitating momentarily. Then he saw the sign, crude and handwritten in human runes: Rooms for Rent. That made up his mind; he opened the door and stepped inside.
As Carsten’s eyes adjusted to the darkened interior of the inn, he saw that he had been right. The inside might not be swanky in any sense of the word, yet it was clean and serviceable, and that went a long way to softening his feelings toward the innkeeper. Tables and chairs sat in sporadic locations around the room, and its inhabitants reflected the randomness of the inn. The food smelled excellent, although that was just a side benefit to a clean sleeping area. Carsten had eaten near-raw meat before, and while it was disgusting and unpleasant by almost any measure, dying by starvation was worse. He looked forward at the innkeeper, a thin man with short gray hair and brown eyes. A pretty, blond young woman was working behind the counter with a heavyset man wearing an apron. They looked so much alike that he knew instantly that they were siblings. The old man met Carsten’s eye and nodded. The dwarf came over and sat at a wooden chair, though his arms did not reach the counter quite right.
“Hello,” the old man said, looking at Carsten. “What can I do for you?” Carsten smiled. Everything about this inn appealed to him; it was efficient and clean, with only enough to get by but enough to be homelike.
“Sir, I have been travelling for a good while now, and am very tired. I need a room for the next two days. Could you provide that?” The man nodded.
“Absolutely,” he replied. “It’s ten enuva a day. Meals are six.” Carsten rummaged around in his belt and picked out a sack of coins.
“Thirty-six,” the dwarf said. “I want you to have the extra. I shouldn’t need it.” The man nodded.
“Fair enough,” he said. “Hilda will show you up.” The young woman nodded, stepping out from behind the counter. She gestured for Carsten to follow her, and he did without complaint. She fished a ring of keys out of her pocket and unlocked the second door on the left.
“Here,” she said. “It’s not fancy, but you’ll be able to sleep at night.”
Carsten nodded, stepping into the room. “You clean all these?” He asked.
Hilda nodded. “My mother and I do,” she replied. “My brother and father keep the kitchen and bar up and running.”
“And where does your meat come from?” Carsten asked. She shrugged.
“If we can get it, from hunters. It’s usually tough and not worth half what we have to pay, but what can we do?” Carsten processed that information momentarily.
“I am a hunter,” he said. “Is the work good here?” She shook her head.
“You’d best move on. There are too many hunters in these parts. You’d probably be better off if you move north.” Carsten nodded.
“I will wait a few days to decide,” he said. “Thanks.” She closed the door, and Carsten stripped of his pack, cloak, and armor. The jerkin and his boots and socks were next, and that left Carsten in a loose linen undergarment. He flung himself on the bed, pulled the covers over himself, and slept.
Hawkebat: Playing both Kotor I & II and Swtor I found the story line interesting and it held me until chapter 35 Very good story and plot flow until then, very few technical errors. I felt that the main character was a bit under and over powered, as it fought for balance. The last few chapters felt too f...
ernbelle: When I first started this story I was a little unsettled by all of the information that appears in the prologue, and wasn't sure if I would continue. However, I am very glad I did. The plot was very well thought out and really interesting. There were not any page breaks or markers to acknowledge ...
catd69: Karim is a very talented writer. When I started reading his journey it took me into the book and I was in the story till the end. I've never felt this way with any other writers stories. If you want to read a gripping adventure, this will be the one book I would suggest you pick.
Kasei Bulloch: At the beginning I wasn't very into the story but I kept reading and was more hooked than I was with Battle of the Wills. All of a sudden I had devoured chapter after chapter then the book was over. I am dying for The Compact. Please help a girl out!
rudyoxborough46: An action-packed, mystical adventure awaits anyone wishing to read this novel. I’m amazed at how well you’ve managed to flesh out the characters in this book, and I hope to read more of your work.I’ve read books about goblins and elves and all that mumbo-jumbo before, and most accounts of these c...
BlakDreams: Wait is this over already?? I really love this story but I'm not sure, is this story already over?? Hm... if it's over I'm a kill myself cuz I loved it!! AGGHH!This story has a perfect storyline and everything I love itttt! Oh my god!
Flik: Hi! ^.^ huge fan of yours on ff.net! When I saw the note about this contest on The Way We Smile, I couldn't help but rush over here, create an account, and vote! XD Seriously love this story and would recommend it to anyone! :D best FT fanfiction out there. Amazing story, amazing concept that wa...
sarahsweet898123: I loved the story ... its was fascinating. ... cant put it down.... the way it was written....was so beautiful. .. the details. .. especially the characters. ..I loved them so much ... Garrick and mairi... every time there was some kind of attraction. ... just cant help it .... no words to express
Bri Hoffer: I couldn't put it down!! The characters are all incredibly likable, and it's so descriptive you can see, smell, and feel thier surroundings. Great story, and very well written. I cannot wait for follow up stories. there were a few grammatical errors, but nothing that I could move right over.

Also noticed that the bricks have been delivered which means we can't be too far away from the brickwork starting. The bricks seem to be a little darker than the sample bricks I have at home but I guess that is to be expected as my sample brick is probably a couple of years old and comes form a different batch.
I noticed that some trees have been planted along the main boulevard to the estate during the last week. These trees are the same type of tree planted in the area I live in now and are a great shade tree. I hope that they plant these trees right through the estate as a nice leafy street adds great value to the house.
I dropped into the Land Office while I was down there as I had spoken to them some time ago about getting the cross over to my block changed. I had accepted that it would be my responsibility however the ladies in there told me that it may be possible to get the developer to do it when they were doing the cross overs and pathways for release 10. I was told to bring in all my paperwork and they will put it into the developer. Looks like they will be doing this stage in about two months time which would be great timing for me. Will see how things go.
Hopefully next week I will have some brickwork to show you.
Back of the house, rumpus room in the back right corner.
Front veranda and garage are all that is left to be completed of the roofing. I can't believe that somewhere in that front yard I am expected to plant a tree that will grow to over 4 metres in height. I will have to start doing my research to find a tree that doesn't have roots that travel too far. I'm open to suggestions if anyone has any ideas.
Austral Mushroom bricks. I just hope I have made the right choice. Choosing the brick was a very hard thing to do. I disliked most of the choices on offer at the entry level. Every brick I liked was quite a few thousand more and just didn't fit into my budget. I guess I will have an idea by this time next week.

Friday of the 1 week in the ordinary time 'b'
Updated: Jan 15
We don’t know who the four men that brought the paralytic man to Jesus were, but we can tell that they very much cared about their sick friend. Because of their help he was restored to full health, and on top of that Jesus forgave him all his sins. Even today Jesus offers healing to His people, and He is able to forgive us our sins. That also happens in the sacrament of the sick, the sacrament of the anointing. But just like that poor paralytic who was unable to come before Jesus on his own, many of our brothers and sisters are unable to come to church and ask for that sacrament. Perhaps it is our call to bring Jesus to them, so he may heal them. Let us think today of someone that we may know that may need that special sacrament of healing. Maybe on their behalf we can ask the priest to come and visit and bring them to Jesus.

June 2016 - 7 Night Western Caribbean (Miami Roundtrip) Cruise on Carnival Glory
My first impression was the dusty shelf on the dresser our first day entering the room. Shows that were scheduled but cancelled due to having to dock early because someone was sick. Not compensated for that. The ship it self was beautiful with great features but the host was boring. I have cruised Carnival several times and has always enjoyed the pool parties. This host had one and it was boring. No last day big gathering with a theme. Every other cruise prior to this cruise on Glory had one. Our last night we was out of water for over 4 hours. No letter explaining why had to find out when I tried to flush toilet. This ship needs to dock until all repairs are complete.

A person was shot dead close to Yo Gotti’s concert on Friday night, in Kansas City, Missouri.
The rapper was in the middle of his performance at Uptown Theater when the police were informed around 11:30 p.m. that someone was shot in a neighboring parking lot. When police and paramedics arrived, the person was pronounced dead.
According to TMZ, witnesses claim that someone pulled out a gun during a fight. While the authorities haven't confirmed that the people included in the fight and shooting were present at the show, there looks to be some sort of connection given the time of the shooting and proximity.
Former NFL player-turned rapper Dwayne Bowe performed with Gotti, and took to Instagram to articulate his frustration, saying, “Stupid shit gotta stop.”
Complex has reached out to Yo Gotti and Dwayne Bowe for comment.

Hi my name is Marissa. I am suvivor of ruptured aneurysm (SAH). In the evening of 28th sept 2016. I was on my spin bike at home, thought five more minutes then I'd go for bath. Then got this headache like no other, was like having a pick axe hit into your head. As I got off I thought god what is that. I felt like a was intoxicated, using the walls to support myself going along the passage, i finally collapsed outside the bathroom where my 12 yr old daughter was. I was lying unconscious then I heard her scream and come too, I found every ounce of strength I had crawled to my front door, opened it knocked on my neighbours door, when he opened it I begged him to help me. By this time my speech was slurred, I was vomiting, confused. Paramedics arrived done there checks diagnosed me with sickness and diarrhoea with migraine. Got me to sign some form to say that I understood by they wouldn't take me to hospital, bearing in mind I was confused !!! I lay in my bed for 4 1/2 days. My dad phoned my GP they came out diagnosed me with muscular strain or slipped disc. My sister came and said that she was gonna drive me too hospital herself as she had enough of me being throbbed off. When the next lot of paramedics came they couldn't believe I was in hospital, my bp was still really hard. They took me to the A&E were a doctor finally done a ct scan and I was diagnosed with bleed in my brain. I was transferred to another for surgery. The followed day they preformed angiogram locates the rupture and coiled it. Was in hospital for three weeks then discharged home. I am so grateful to the people who saved me. I'm so glad that I'm still here. On the 9th Nov my dad received a call from my uncle. My Cousin Colleen had been rushed into hospital with ruptured aneurism she then had a cardiac arrest and haemorrhaged they done scans but she had no brain activity. Her children of 9 & 12 made the decision to donor her organs. The worse day of my life. I Live with guilt everyday. She was only 31 Years old. It is a silent and deadly killer the more awareness made, maybe more lives saved. We did find out that it is heredity as my great grandad and granddad both died of haemorrhaging. Two of my aunts both had ruptured aneurysms and are still with us. That is 6 of us in total of what we know. Now I'm please to say that the entire family have to be checked. God bless those who lost there battle, and thank god for all of us who are still here to tell our stories. I too am wanting to help raise awareness in honour of my cousin.
First off I want to thank this foundation for making people aware of brain aneurysms 6/9/07 I was 47yrs old and I suffered a ruptured brain aneurysm on the tennis playing a match. I had never had a headache in my life and I was in excellent health. During the match I started to feel severe pain in my head radiating down my back and tingling in my legs and I started to see halos. I thought I was having my first headache ever and it was going to be a migraine. I missed a volley at the net and my partner stopped the match because I seemed very off. Then the nausea started they helped me off the court but I convinced them to call my husband to pick me up and take me to the emergency room near our home about 20min from the court. I was in and out of consciousness to the hospital. I was triaged and they did a CT and discovered the subarachnoid rupture but they could not treat me there. They told my husband I would probably not survive the flight to Fairfax Hospital and that he needed to say goodbye to me. I had to be airlifted to Fairfax Hospital in VA where Neurosurgeon Dr Jae Lim drilled a hole in my head to relieve the pressure. Then they decided that I could either have the bleed clipped via hemilectomy or coil the bleed done by a neuro radiologist. They ended up calling in Dr Putman to coil the bleed. I continued to seizure for 5 days due to vasospasms so it was decided that I need to have a shunt placed to relieve the high pressure a permanent programmable shunt was placed by Dr Lim. I spent 30 days in Neuro ICU but I was able to go home afterward because my sister and husband were able to take care of me 24/7. I had to learn to walk and talk again. It took me 5 months to go back to work as a veterinary technician. I have not had a headache since but my shunt has needed adjustments several times. I was able to stop taking anti seizure medication after 7 months and only had one seizure after I left the hospital. It was a tough recovery but the moral to my story is that if you have something so extreme happen to you call an ambulance so they can triage to the appropriate hospital. I was very lucky to have survived and my siblings have had scans done to make sure they do not have any aneurysms I lead a normal life now working 40 hours a week and play tennis 5-6 days a week. I attribute my survival to the healthy lifestyle I have always lived, excellent surgeons and nurses and wonderful family and friends.
I am so glad to see this site set up with the goal of making people aware of the signs of an aneurysm. I wish I would have had the information 21 years ago when I suffered mine. I had all the signs. I had experienced severe headaches , blurred vision, incidents of falling, and when I went to the Doctors...he told me I was just going through the "change of life". He gave me a hormone shot and sent me home. I had been suffering blurred vision and waves in my eyes for a couple of years. When I had surgery the Dr. told me that the aneurysm had been there for some time, because my system had caused it to calcify and had prevented it from rupturing. He told me I was a very lucky little girl...I ended up being sent by ambulance to Harborview, the trauma center in Seattle, WA because at the same time they found that my carotid artery on the left side was blocked 99.4 %. This resulted in a stroke and the loss of vision on my right side....After several days of testing...they did the artery surgery first and followed up 2 week later with the brain surgery. I was lucky enough to have the best brain surgeon from the University of Washington & Harborview Trauma Center. It has been 21 years and I am 72 and still going strong....Thank you for allow us to share our experiences and for the work you are doing to save even more victims of aneurysms.
April 26th 2000 I had Brain Surgery..Life was great ,I was newly married only 2 months. I started getting headaches and finally told my dr. About it . He gave me an M.R. I and they said I had 2 aneurysms on the right side of my head. During the surgery as they were CLIPPING them I had a stroke , my whole left side. I was in the Hospital for 28 days.Including rehab. My Brother had been in an accident years earlier and as a result died in his sleep of a burst aneurysm. Back then they did not think there was any Family history involved. After my surgery they tested everyone in the family. Remember this was back in 2000 for me. But watching Dr. OZ yesterday made me want to share, My headaches were intense but more like a pressure ,like someone pushing down on my head. I function fine but have diagnosis of having a TRAMATIC BRAIN INJURY, it does affect my memory in some ways and I am more Emotional but I see my Dr. regularly and am on medication. I wanted to thank Lisa's HUSBAND for doing this most awesome work. I had my surgery at Methodist Hospital in Indianapolis. Awesome Brain Surgeon Dr, Troy Payner. I know they have made Great stride in research on this subject since my surgery. I always tell people yes the pain is awful..Seek Help right away. I had 4 children NATURAL CHILDBIRTH ...no pain medicine, and that I would rather have all 4 they same day than to have to go through the Brain Surgery. I thank God they caught them BEFORE they Burst.Thanks again for setting up this Foundation for your Beautiful Wife Lisa, You Sir Are Saving Lives! God Bless You and Your Whole Family!
I am one of the few lucky ones who had the aneurysms repaired with no major bleeding. Two stents, located in the circle of wills. I also was diagnosed with a Chiari Malformation (brain herniation) Have you done any studies with survivors who were actively searching medical diagnosis when MRI was finally ordered? thanks for the foundation, great information!!
I lost my husband and father of my children, Dwight, four years ago to a brain aneurysm. He was 63. My husband was very disciplined in exercising, a life long martial artist, and ate extremely healthy. His family had a history of hemorrhagic strokes. His older sister had gone to see her doctor 2 years prior for ringing of the ears. The doctor, finding nothing, decided to do an MRI, where he discovered she had 2 aneurysms. They were able to operate and she continues in good health today. Knowing his family history, I had convinced him to see a neurologist. Unfortunately he never made it. He passed away days from his appointment. We had just entertained some friends, and while I finished cleaning up, he went up to bed. 15 minutes later, our kids and I found him unresponsive. If he had any of the symptoms described, we'll never know. What I do know is... I felt something was off in the weeks/days leading up to his death. Nothing clearly definitive.. slight, unusual forgetfulness, when we went for a walk, his gait was a bit off.. I made him go to his regular doctor, who did an EKG and found his heart healthy. We then made an appointment for the neurologist a couple weeks later, which he didn't make. So my advise is if you suspect anything, or feel something is not right, GO WITH YOUR GUT! If I had insisted he get an immediate appointment with the neurologist, he maybe would still be here.
The morning of October 22nd, 2016, my sister and I found that my Father, in The bathtub after suffering a severe brain anurism. He was still alive, but was stuck paralyzed for over 45 minutes. We tried to save him was a MISTYIII trial, surgical procedure, that was headed up by John's Hopkins. It seeks to drain the clot that causes the brain damage. Needless to say, he died from complications on Nov. 7th, 2016. We were hopeful, but I still believe that it is shoes great advances for faster recovery. I'm saddened, and heartbroken, and want to help advocate for your foundation. Please contact me if you need volunteers for your cause. Thank you
Several years ago, my mother had an aneurysm that ruptured. She went from having an extremely high IQ to having to learn to walk and talk again. She has had a long battle just to get back to being able to function. I have always suffered from migraines. It finally got to the point of not getting any relief. I had an MRI which showed that I had an aneurysm. Jan 3, 2015, I had mine coiled. I've done reasonably well but the headaches have never stopped.
On Oct 14, 2016 I was working out in the local YMCA. I was taking a class that I had taken for 3 years. In the middle of a set of inclined chest pressed my THUNDERCLAP headache occurred. I did not know what was actually wrong but I took myself to member services to seek medical attention. By the time EMS arrived my finger were numb and not working, I was throwing up and my head was killing me. I was able to get to Williamson Medical where my Sports Med Dr - Dr. James Lohse met me. He met with the ER Dr on call and they decided to run a CT Scan. With the results of the Scan Dr. Lohse had me transported to St. Thomas West Medical Center and Dr. Spooner started my angio. By the time the angio was over it was determined that my subarachnoid hemorrhage had self healed and closed off. I did stay in ICU for 7 days while they monitored me. I have no negative effects from the bleed. I was sore and tight and thru PT I have been able to finally release all pain in my lower back and legs. I know that I was very lucky to self heal and that I have no lingering effects.
They said I was supposed to die. On 10/31/2016 I suffered a sub arachnoid hemorrhage right behind my eyes. On top of that, I apparently had a grand mal seizure as well. I don't remember much though I do remember having the worst headaches I had ever experienced for three or four days before it happened. I went down in the shower that morning and my wife (Sarah) found me with the curtain hanging over me. Thank God she heard me. She called the first responder in our little town and he raced to get the truck. He put me on oxygen and called the ambulance. I ended up being life flighted to a hospital in Tulsa and they did coil surgery. I was there 14 days as they did trans-cranial dopplers and CT scans to check for vaso-spasm. Apparently, I am lucky. Though I don't believe that. God saved me. I have been told that 50 percent of all aneurysm cases don't make it. Both neurologists that saw me said that with the seizure added on I shouldn't have made it. But, here I am 74 days later writing this letter. I told you God saved me...for a reason. Of course, a lot of things had to happen at just the right time and directed by just the right people. I am so thankful for all the people that cared for me, prayed for me, and went above and beyond. So here I am, a miracle in the making. I am so sorry for all those whose story did not turn out like mine and they lost someone because of an aneurysm. I am so thankful that God gave me a second chance. I plan to use it to bring awareness to people about the signs and symptoms of a possible aneurysm as well as spread the good word that with God in our life, miracles do happen. I'm living proof.
I lost my beautiful sister, Belinda in 1977 at the age of 14, from a congenital brain aneurysm. Two weeks prior to the rupture, her pediatrician diagnosed Belinda with the flu. Her symptoms were headaches, throwing up and not feeling well. I was 19 at the time and remember this like yesterday. Belinda was in the 8th grade when her aneurysm ruptured at school during her lunch break. Dr. Cheek, head of neurosurgery at Texas Children's Hospital in Houston tried to save her life and could not. I remember him saying to us that he has a daughter the same age. Belinda's legacy lives on with two beautiful songs that have been produced by two very dear friends of mine. One is called, "Billy Goat" and the other "Everywhere". I am happy to share them with your foundation. Thank you for helping others recognize the importance of early detection of potentially fatal aneurysms. This is the link to the song, Everywhere in memory of Belinda, written and performed by Sonya Shell. https://soundcloud.com/sonyashell/everywhere-2016-written-by-sonya-shell?utm_source=soundcloud&utm_campaign=share&utm_medium=facebook
Just watched the OZ show and it was very helpful..my story as an ER nurse began with a very dizzy morning of nausea and localized "ponytail pain" behind my left ear. I was convinced like so many just something I ate and slept the weekend away(well only 1 day of total exhaustion)...but 4 days later I took my b/p and it was high 150/90 and I self drove myself to the ER for further evaluation...CTscan clear...spinal tap clear...but the mri revealed an incendental small 2mm rt. opthalmic carotid anuersym unruptured. transfered to Providence hospital I saw the chief neurosurgeon who will follow yearly the aneursym with MRI with Dye to see if it progresses.Being a mother of 4 I feel like many who can just push thru feeling crappy...alot of us do. However so glad to see more information out there to help us understand this serious condition. I have no restrictions as of yet but the warning signs i will never wait again. I was told for the pain(unrelated to the unruptured aneursym was tylenol.But if the sudden waves of seasick nausea present themselves with blurred vision i will not ignore them,....I just hit 50 and pray medical progress will continue to advance to help those out there. god bless and thankyou for your foundation of awareness,,,,lilly
Hello, my name is Leslie as you know. I found out this year in March that I have 4 Brain Aneurysms. One of them was measured @ 10 cm and the other 3 are smaller. I went to a surgeon @ a local hospital in my city. He did test that he needed to do. He told me where the Aneurysms were located as well as the surgery I well have. I was scared and devastated but, he assured me I was in good hands. The 10 cm Aneurysm procedure was done with a Pipeline Stint and Coil. I'm do for another surgery in January to remove the other 3. I thank God for my PCP who went further into getting me the test that I needed to find out what was wrong with me and Thank God that the Medical field has stepped up so much.
My cousin, Megan Phillips Aesch suffered a hemorrhagic stroke several years ago. Meg with the support of her husband and family as well as many friends, has never given up trying to regain parts of her pre stroke life. Meg's story has just been published - "I Tied My Shoes Today - Recovering from a hemorrhagic stroke" and is available on Amazon. An amazing story of courage, love and determination.
I was released from the hospital today after coiling surgery for a brain aneurysm.i had no idea I had this..I actually went to a ear doctor for clogged ears..my ears were clear and he decided to do a MRI to make sure inside my ear was ok. Well to everyone's surprise the MRI showed the aneurysm. From there my primary Doctor sent me to do a MRA to be positive.From there I went to the neurologist who scheduled my surgery.i had the coiling done on Tuesday..Surgery went fine. Had to stay a few extra days but got home today feeling so grateful.The doctor does not know how long it was there. I had no symptoms at all.It is truly a silent killer. As I reflect on this week I am very emotional to know how lucky I was..To think I just went to check my ears. This is my second chance at life. I am going to spread the word about aneurysms..With you in mind Lisa I will try and enlighten everyone about it and let them know if you feel something different see your dr. Right away..R.I.P Lisa
I am a survivor! My brain aneurysm ruptured on May 12, 1015. Being a migraine sufferer, I knew the horrible headache I was having was not a migraine. I had gone home from work for lunch, and as I was ready to sit down, It felt like someone hit me in the head with a ball bat. On a scale of 1-10, I told the doctors it was a 20+. I was unable to lay down or sit. My husband came home and took me to ER where they found the brain bleed on a CT scan. My doctor told me a helicopter was waiting to take me to the University of Iowa Hospital. I was taken to surgery where they went through the groin to the brain and put the coil/clip. I was hospitalized 10 days. After home, I continued to have headaches for 1 month until the blood from the bleed was absorbed into my body. I had 6 weeks of occupational and physical therapy and was off work for 13 weeks. I am one of the lucky ones. I have minimal side effects and tell myself I shouldn't be here. Prayer worked wonders. My roommate came in with the same thing but passed away not long after I was admitted. I have a better outlook on life than before. My angiogram at the 6 month mark showed the coil was not leaking and was in place. I was given a second chance at life. Thank you God.
A good friend of mine lost his wife to a Brain Aneurysm August 10th. She collasped while she was at Crossfit on August 4th and was rushed to the hospital. That following day, she was sent to surgery to repair the aneurysm and it was a success but this event had caused an enormous toll on her brain. Many sections of her brain were essentially "dead" and in the event of her waking up, she would have most likely been a "vegetable" the remainder of her life. So, with careful consideration and her wants, her husband took her off life support. This has hit home with me because it IS true when they say life is too short. Raising awareness is quite possibly the best solution. In some cases, lives have been saved because of pre-diagnosis. This is wonderful! If we can use the tragic events in "our" lives to help others and possibly prevent tragedy, then it's a "win win" for all of us. He's doing as well as he can. He was married for 15 years and they have a three year old daughter. He's an inspiration to everyone around him and her legacy will live on through him and their daughter. I hope by sharing this post helps others cope with whatever situation they may be in.
I suffered a brain aneurysm in 1995, just one week after delivering my only child. It was due to an epidural needle that actually taped my spine, set up a clot, then raced to my brain and ruptured. It reminded me of an atomic bomb going off in my head. Sixteen hours had passed, along with complete loss of vision before I finally had my husband race through emergency. That was on a Tuesday. The hospital took every test imaginable on my brain, finding yet another aneurysm sitting in the center of my brain stem. By that Thursday, my doctor informed me of what happened and that he, along with the several other doctors involved, didn't understand why I was still able to talk and communicate. My brain actually swelled. My doctor did however inform me that I wouldn't survive a surgery, and by all indications, I would be dead by the weekend. Being told that there is absolutely nothing that can be done from a doctor is a lonely, lonely place. However, what precluded me from be helpless was the power of prayer. Twenty-one years later, I'm still here, no surgery of any kind, and the second aneurysm just went away. Dr. Duke Sampson was the last doctor to see me, two months after the rupture of the first aneurysm. Dr. Sampson stated that the second aneurysm had to be removed or if I so much as bump a wall, it could rupture. So on the date of the scheduled surgery, one last angiogram was conducted, however, there was nothing there. I was then released from the hospital and sent home to gain a new life. I'm currently writing a book about my journey as I've not found anyone to date that has experienced the same trauma to the brain as I, and recovered on their own. I totally depended on God everyday and still do. I knew that if woke up every morning and could just breathe, I knew somehow, God was working it all out for me. My daughter is now 21 years of age. I'm a business owner, I'm productive and profitable. I know that my journey is not yet over, so I just keep breathing.
In 2007 I fell flat on my face, could not move, when I could, I went to bed for 3 days with a headache. I finally went to the ER and found out I had a ruptured brain aneurysm. I flew to the Mayo clinic and they found 2*more. One at the base of my brain and spinal chord connection. I am a survivor with minimal effects. I own my own business and am doing well. My mother died of 5 brain aneurysms
My son passed away on August 14, 2016 we were watching TV and he just fell over I thought that he had choked on some food but it was a brain aneurysm he had no symptoms nothing appeared to be wrong we were having a good day and everything was great now I'm without my wonderful 18-year-old son life will never be the same

The Apalachee High School Lady Wildcats went through a final tuneup Tuesday night prior to the start of the subregion schedule.
AHS dispatched of visiting Monroe Area 59-31 in a game which was decided relatively early as the Lady Wildcats led by 15 after the first quarter. Kiarra Sanford scored 22 points to pace AHS while teammate Saboyce Shelton finished with 10 and was recognized for scoring her 1,000th career point.
“We didn’t practice Monday because I wanted to give the team the day off with school starting back later in the week,” coach Michael Parks said. “I was concerned coming in with Tamaica (Morrow) being injured. However, we played a lot of people, a lot of people scored and it seemed like we were having a good time. It was a game we needed.”

Man fatally shot at gas station, several people detained
MEMPHIS, Tenn. — A man was shot and killed Sunday night while outside at a gas station.
It happened around 8 p.m. at the Marathon station at Ridgeway Road and Knight Arnold Road.
Police said the victim was transported to Regional Medical Center in critical condition, but he died shortly after.
Police said they have detained several people for the shooting, however, no one has been charged yet.
Police are investigating.

Whether on land or in the water, 150 third and fourth graders learned how to be safe at the Anoka County Sheriff’s Office annual Safety Camp June 17-18.
An Andover man is facing three felony counts of murder in the second degree for allegedly setting his roommate on fire. Scott David Yorek, 55, died 1:58 a.m. Thursday, June 19.
The 55-year-old Andover man who was allegedly set on fire by his landlord and roommate died.
A 29-year-old Andover man is in custody, accused of setting fire to his roommate.
Joy Friedman was raped when she was 15 years old. Although she escaped from the home where she was held captive for more than 24 hours, it took her 22 years to get away from the grasps of men who profited from her being forced to strip for or have sex with multiple men.
A one-year agreement with the Anoka County Sheriff’s Office licensed supervisors (lieutenants and commanders) was approved by the Anoka County Board May 13.

I have been reading a LOT of things about the Taurus line of handguns...revolvers and semis...and seems like there are many people who swear these guns are little more than a paper weight. I was stunned to see how many people say these guns are junk. I don't have a whole lot of experience with them but used to own one of their revolvers in .357 (gave the .357 to my little brother for his first gun) and currently own the PT101P .40. I love this weapon and if it were not so large I would use it as a carry gun without a second thought. I would estimate that I have fired 5-6000 rounds through this weapon with not one problem. I keep it clean, as I do all my guns and take proper care of it and it has served me well. I would not hesitate to purchase another and in fact have been looking at the other Taurus semis that are the Berreta "knock offs". IMO these are a quality firearm at a more than reasonable price!

Free Photo Archive of over 30,000 vintage photographs. Find people and the places were they lived. Search for your surnames. Find photos of your ancestors. Make connections with genealogy cousins. Add your family's photos.
Search Old Photos
Oliver J. Shaffer
Oliver J. Shaffer, was born 1 Mar 1874, in Dry Ridge, (Mt. Tabor, PA). and died on 25 Aug 1929, at his home, near Mayport, PA., as a result of having been "kicked" in the stomach by cranking a tractor while treshing. He suffered for 3 days of his injuries prior to his death. He was well respected and admired and his funeral was so large all the folks could not fit in the Church. He is buried in the family plot at Mt. Tabor E. U. B. Cemetery, Dry Ridge, PA. He was the father of 14 children of which 8 predeceased him.
He was first married to Tabitha Irene Snyder born 8 Oct 1879, in Ringgold Twp., Jefferson Co., PA. She died along with a new born daughter, on 19 Feb. 1896, in Porter Twp., Jefferson County, PA. Cause of death was given as - Croup. She and the daughter were buried in the same casket in Timblin Cemetery, Jefferson Co., PA.
He then remarried on 11 Mar 1897, in Limestone, NY, where they'd eloped Rebecca Naomi Michael born 18 Nov 1877, near Ringgold, PA. She died 27 Apr 1956, from Cancer in the Adrian Hospital, Punxsutawney, Jefferson Co., PA. She was the daughter of Samuel Michael, Jr. and Mary Wise Michael. She was the mother of 13 children, of which 7 predeceased her all in infancy. She was an exceptionally "hard worker" and had told us that during her pregnancy she worked in the fields like a man, helped thresh grain, etc., and really hadn't cared for herself like she should have done. She was a "fantastic cook" and "baker" The submitter's fondest memories of her are as a little boy going to her house in North Freedom...... she always gave him sugar or molasses cookies, and best of all... a packet to take along home! The entire family is now deceased except for one son who is in a nursing home advanced in years.
The photo of Oliver J. Shaffer was taken of him while he was still single.
Submitted by Clarence R. Shirey, grandson of Oliver J. Shaffer and Rebecca Naomi Michael. Permission granted for use on this site only.

ODD has my first name as her middle name. It was DH's idea.
Funny thing is that ODS has DH's Middle name has his first name ( which was kind of my idea). DH is a JR and we didn't want a 3rd but we still wanted a family link to his name.
I'm looking for a similar name to mine If we have another girl, we have a son named after DH he said would could name DD after me but I didn't want to. I'm looking for a name with a similar sound, or same first initial.
My friend has an unusual first name and she named her daughter the same. EVERYBODY talks about how weird it is. And when we're over and we call the name out, they both turn and say "me?". So annoying :).
However, our neighbor's family has that as a tradition, so when she did it, I found it endearing. And her daughter used a nickname, so that solved the constant "me?"

The most embarrassing corporal punishment I ever got was when I was 11. My mother was just starting to prepare me for my spanking, which had been coming both for sassing her and for playing ball in the house which resulted in a broken window.
When it came to administering the spanking, Mom always took my pants down herself. She said naughty boys were not allowed to do it. Anyway, just as her fingers were starting to unzip my short pants, the door bell rang.
My mother looked up. “That must be the babysitter – don’t you dare move!” I was so embarrassed when she returned with Sarah, my babysitter. Sarah was only four years older then me and I had a huge crush on her. She was wearing a pencil skirt, stockings and high heel pumps. She looked at me and smiled.
To my utter shame, my mother told her: “Bobby has been a very naughty boy and I was just about to administer his spanking when you arrived. I didn’t realise how late it was, and I won’t have time to whip him. Would you do me a favour and administer it for me?” Sarah looked at me and smiled, then said: “I would be happy to.” Mom told her to pull my pants and underwear down and spank me over her lap, then she left.
When my mother had gone, Sarah looked at me and said knowingly: “I think this spanking will do you a lot more good with me giving it to you. I know you have a crush on me!”
She sat down on the straight-backed chair previously occupied by my mother and called me over, then her fingers slowly finished unzipping my pants. Sarah took down my underpants and looked down – she smiled as she gazed at my growing erection. My embarrassment was complete. Then it was over her lap for my spanking. I felt her stocking-clad thighs under me and rubbed myself against them.
Sarah raised her hand and began to spank me slowly, pausing between spanks to let each one sink in. The fire built up steadily in my bare bottom but at the same time, I also felt something else as my penis rubbed up and down against her stockings as I wriggled. With hindsight, I was on the point of coming. However, just before I did, Sarah stood me up, told me to pull up my pants and go to my room until I could be a good boy.

When a four year old is asked 'what are you thankful for?' on Thanksgiving weekend, there are hundreds of answers you might hear. When this little man was asked, his response was: "My very special family". Your heart is probably melting right now. How could it not? Here are a few images from one very special family I had the pleasure of spending a few hours with recently.

Vic Beasley came to Clemson in 2010 not knowing what to expect.
The soft-spoken Georgia native oozed athleticism, but it wasn't obvious to anyone - including himself - what position best suited his skills.
Oh sure, he was big and he was fast. He was also comfortable with the ball in his hands, both as a running back and as a receiver. Even the Clemson coaching staff debated whether or not he could help the team on the offensive side of the ball.
“He could have played running back, wideout, safety, corner, linebacker – he’s that athletic and can run that fast,” Dabo Swinney said.
Turns out, none of those positions would have made as much sense as defensive end.
Entering the final six games of his senior season, Beasley has more than found his niche as a pass-rushing specialist. He's recorded sacks in eight straight games, including the first six of his senior season, and is now the all-time sack leader in school history.
He surpassed a record held by Michael Dean Perry and the late Gaines Adams during Clemson's 23-17 win over Louisville last weekend.
"It's like a dream come true," Beasley admitted. "I wanted to do it here in Memorial Stadium. I know I'm setting an example here for the guys that come after me and for my teammates this year. It really is like a dream come true."
The good news for Clemson fans is he's far from done. With at least seven games remaining in his college career, and already with eight sacks on the stat sheet, Beasley has his sights set on a bigger number.
"I want to get to 20 this year," he said.
Holy cow. 20? As in 20 sacks in one season?
For some perspective, the single-season record in Tigertown is 16. Considering he's halfway through the regular season schedule, that's certainly a possibility- especially if he stays healthy and the Tigers go to a bowl game.
Dabo Swinney certainly thinks it's possible. The Tigers' sixth-year head coach has gushed over his senior defensive end ever since he announced he was returning for his senior season, instead of opting for the NFL draft.
“He’s one of the most explosive athletes in college football,” he said. "It's really amazing because he's a leader for us now too. He's not a young man anymore he's a full-grown man. Even in the run game now he's sticking his nose in there stuffing runs. He can run things down from behind. He's been amazing to watch."
Stay tuned. The Vic Beasley show still has seven episodes left. And if all goes according to plan, he'll leave Tigertown with more records than he already has.

Regular price: $18.17
Buy Now with 1 Credit
Buy Now for $18.17
I have read this book before and once I got to the end I knew that I was missing something. Just went to the library and checked out the book on CD, it is actually 18 hours and 45 minutes. About 1/2 of this book is missing. Called audible and got a refund and had no problem. This is a wonderful book but don't purchase through audible unless they add the rest of the book. The series is awesome and anyone that enjoys this genre should enjoy the book, just not through audible. I have been with audible for about 4 years and have bought 100's of books, this is the first that was not complete and as I said, I had no trouble getting a refund...........
6 of 6 people found this review helpful
Wow! I am never hard on books but this is the exception! Others said this book was bad and I thought I would try. I even went so far to get the next one to see if there was something I was missing.
Forget my money/credits! I just want my life back that I put into this!
Any book that you have to read the last 2 minutes 5 times to make sure you didn't miss something is just wrong!
4 of 4 people found this review helpful

edited 5th Dec '11 12:30:10 AM by MoonlightBomber
edited 11th Jan '12 1:23:23 AM by ladycoffee
- Where am I going to put it? I don't really know.
- The story has an initially semi-blank-slate protagonist. My intent was to have the readers decide a few things about him (or her - that's one of the things), but I don't think that's going to work out all too well, since this is the first thing I'll actually be publishing.
edited 13th Jan '12 11:50:28 PM by Darkenning
edited 15th Jan '12 11:28:39 PM by Darkenning
- Constant chuckle-worthy syntax
- Rouge Angles of Satin
- Jigsaw approving of Rorschach's methods of justice
- "For each test, your reward will be an article of clothing you are missing"
- Jigsaw losing his creative flair for naming traps
- No one in either 'verse contesting the murder of Ozymandias whatsoever
- Ozymandias utterly failing to beg for his life in a manner befitting a super genius
- Jigsaw teasing the Watchmen for no particular reason
- The narrative noting when the Saw theme begins to play
- Dr. Manhattan temporarily becoming Jigsaw's apprentice, because he needed help understanding human compassion and believed Rorschach would be the right subject to teach him about it
- Dr. Manhattan using a chloroform soaked rag and a baseball bat to kidnap Spectre and Owl
- Jigsaw shooting Rorschach in the knee with a handgun (though he doesn't seem to give up being a vigilante because of it)
- The fic ending with Rorschach letting out a Big "NO!" because he picked up a newspaper and realized it was 1988
edited 18th Jan '12 8:49:50 PM by DoctorDiabolical
edited 27th Jan '12 2:06:55 PM by Nicktendonick
Not to speak is to speak. Not to act is to act.
Followed by a bunch of more ideas. Untitled Crosover (Kamen Rider the First movie with Kamen Rider/Marvel/Some OCs. Maybe F.E.A.R.) - Unknown individuals converge in Japan to take on Shocker, a Neo-Nazi terrorist group that creates cyborg monsters for its agenda. However, they would run into Kamen Riders, ex-humans converted into cyborgs by Shocker. Toshokan Senso aka Library War (Semi-AU/sequel to the anime/novel.) Kamen Rider/Eva (Perhaps will focus on Showa-era Riders until Black RX to Agito and Kuuga with Eva storyline. No post-Kuuga Riders I'm afraid.)
edited 11th Feb '12 11:59:47 AM by Iaculus
Chapter Three: Midori May, 2004 A few weeks had passed since Mai and Mikoto began living together, and the ... unusual events of that first night had not been repeated since then. Mai assumed that this was because she had worn pyjamas from that night forward. It certainly wasn't because Mikoto had stopped creeping into her bed. In all honesty, she still wasn't sure how she felt about that. The warm presence of someone else in her bed was actually comforting. Admittedly, she'd have preferred it to be Takumi, but things hadn't worked out that way. At the moment, Mai was lying in her own bed, waiting for sleep to come. It'd been a long day. School, and then a long shift at the Chao Bao Zi. She was starting to think that maybe she'd bit off a bit more than she could chew there. Yes, the proprietor was one of the nicest people she'd ever met, but the restaurant did a lot of business, and Mai was one of only four waitresses taking care of all of it. Well, technically, it was three waitresses and a waiter. She'd actually gotten a lot of help from Akane, Midori and Kazuya, who'd all worked there before. Akane and Kazuya's flirty relationship was fun (and a little painful) to watch. Midori, on the other hand ... she wasn't sure why an obvious college student like her was working part-time like that, or pretending to be 'just seventeen years old', as Midori's constant refrain would have it. (She didn't think anyone was buying it.) At least Mai didn't find herself living a triple life. Fortunately, she hadn't run into any dangerous Orphans since that first one. There'd been a few annoying ones, like that thing that had stolen Natsuki's underwear, but nothing too serious. Mai almost found herself wondering why that was. Natsuki, during that episode, had hinted that there were other agencies around campus that were acting to protect it from the Orphans. Predictably, though, she'd refused to elaborate. Listening to some of Chie's stories had given Mai a few ideas about what was actually going on. Her gossip about magical girls (and magical old men) showing up to help people in danger might just have something to it. And then there was Tate and Shiho. Not only was she seeing the obnoxious jerk (who, okay, had a few reliable qualities that weren't all that obnoxious) in class every day, but she kept running into the two of them all the time. She'd even gotten roped into helping out with a wedding ceremony at Shiho's dad's temple, enduring Shiho's constant subtle putdowns all the while. It was almost enough to make her believe in karma. But what could she possibly have done to deserve that? Okay, other than that, which she wasn't getting to do recently anyway! Mai shifted uncomfortably. When was Mikoto going to sneak into her bed? What was the holdup? Finally, she looked up to see if something was the matter. Mikoto's bed was empty. And the window was open. "Oh, great," Mai said, collapsing to her pillow. "She's gone out to look for her brother again, hasn't she?" For a moment, Mai considered going out to follow her, but then she remembered just how tired she was. So she curled up on herself and decided to sleep alone. It was harder than she expected, but sleep did eventually come.
Where could he be? Mikoto was a bit horrified to realize that, despite having thought about him more or less constantly since he'd run away, she wasn't really sure what aniue looked like. She could see him in almost every male face that passed by as she sat on a bench and watched the men walking by. She had to find him. It was ojiisan's last command. And, perhaps not as importantly, it was what she wanted to do. If she found him, everything that had happened would finally make sense. But she had so few clear memories of him, and they were of a boy. A tall boy, but she was conscious of the changes in herself since then. Who could say what he would have become in that time? It was very frustrating. And then she was distracted by something odd happening on the edge of her peripheral vision. Wasn't that — yes, yes it was. What was she doing? Mikoto got up, carrying Miroku in the bag that she'd acquired with her uniforms. (Apparently, there were a rather large number of students whose clubs or other pastimes required them to carry a sword with them at all times, such that these bags were readily available. Miroku would have rather been out, but Mikoto understood the value of camouflage.) She followed the person who'd attracted her attention, and soon found herself in an alley, watching from a concealed position. She was somewhat surprised by what happened next.
edited 23rd Feb '12 6:00:12 PM by Darkenning
"It's human nature. But it is not what the wiki is about. "
edited 24th Feb '12 7:57:28 PM by LSSJ2Gohan
"Does this seem a little odd to you?" Aoi asked Mai hesitantly as she walked beside her to school, a few steps behind the junior high duo. "Well, if they're classmates, then I guess it's not that surprising that they know each other," Mai answered. "I guess that makes sense, but ... well, it's a little odd that they're getting along. I mean, I don't really know Nao-san very well, but —" "She's your roommate, though," Mai interjected. "Yes, but we've only been in the same room since the start of the term," Aoi explained. "And we didn't really talk, much, even before things got a little strange." "Eh? Strange how?" Aoi made a face that was a little strange itself. "Well, it's kind of hard to explain. A couple weeks ago — on your first day here, actually — when I got back to our room, I found her and she was acting like, well, like she expected me to attack her at any moment. And it's really strange that she should be like that, because, like I said, we hadn't really talked a lot, and so there's no way that she could know — um. Well. Mai-san, you do know that Chie-chan and I are, uh, 'particular friends', right?" Mai blinked. Mai coughed. Mai said, after a moment, "Well, I know now." Aoi facepalmed. "Great. I'm worse at keeping secrets than Chie-chan is." Shaking her head, she continued. "Anyway, a few years ago, when I told one of our other friends about that, she started acting the same way towards us for a while, like she was expecting us to jump her at any time. It was funny but kinda painful, and anyway, she got over it eventually. But the thing is, that's almost exactly the same way that Nao-san was acting ... and there's no way that she could know about me, because, like I said, we don't talk much. At all." "I see. So it's kind of strange that she's getting along so well with Mikoto," Mai said, mind racing. "Kind of," Aoi agreed. Try very, thought Mai. And it's stranger than you know, since Mikoto is, well, Mikoto is the way that she is, too. Mai decided that she was going to have to keep an eye on the two of them.
"I think I'm going to need your help again tonight," Nao said, quietly. "Okay," Mikoto agreed. "You haven't told anyone about it, have you?" Mikoto shook her head in silence. "Good. Don't. It's just between you and me and the two of them." "And them," Mikoto added. "And them," Nao agreed, with another cold smile.

Film erotico torrent come iscriversi a meetic watch online
Lonely lesbian housewife seduced by lesbian
To bed we go. He was holding on to the bound man for dear life as he ran as fast as he could to the helicopter. She replied to his surprised look. Needles to say we fucked when we got back and it was amazing. Tony looked into the mirror and saw his wife dressed and her long wavy brunette hair bobbing on his cock. Then we heard happy new years and Mo started cumming.
Her cum splattered on its flesh as she thrashed in rapture. It has other practical applications. With one hand still on the wheel, I used the other to force her head further into my lap.
He had smile, as she checked out everything cute and furry in the shop. Will you lick and suck me too. To Jason there was nothing hotter than way a womans body gripped his cock as she took her last dying breaths and like all the past times, Jason filled her full of cum just as her body constricted for the last time.
Mature man teen tube
Alex said playfully. Clawing at the front of my pussy. No one gasped as much as Nadia. Barbara burst into tears, spread herself wide, pulled me into her and begged me to prove my love to her one last time. A hand grasping her hair. Hope to be seeing more of you soon young missy. Bendy smiled as he reached the stairway. I need to give that back to you.
Agrippina. Age:30. If you are searching for some moments of escort pleasure then you may be looking for me. Im a naughty girl can u cum teach me a lesson. I will charm you, i will entertain you, i will fulfill you and will disappear.
Gay boy porn forum
You love pussy don't you. I ask smiling, lifting my hips up a little till he was spreading my lips. She spread her legs wide as Dan took his turn at our mom's pussy. He grabbed her bra with his other hand and ripped that off as well. Alice then nodded and Miss Sedgwick appeared, holding the hand of a little girl helping her up onto the raised stage. Talk about jaw on the floor. But he heard his jeans being unzipped, and he felt them being pulled down with his boxers, and he felt the air hit his dick as his four and a half inch, twelve year old erection sprang up.
In truth, Adrian and his forces were orchestrating all of these uprisings. It was just after dark and we were just out of the driveway when he had his dick out, playing with it in one hand and massaging the back of my neck with the other.
Wellyou see, I work in a very rough environment, people who works with me are very rude, and you maybe cant believe me, but because I dont go whoring with them, so they thing maybe I am gay.
Homemade wife orgy
Don't you dare tease me. I watched in amazement as a steady stream of our semen and her juices flowed from her well used pussy. I could see in the fading twilight a sliding door that opened onto a balcony with two chaises, and a breakfast set. I could feel the heat in my cheeks. I watched as she went through the door into the front of the shop. Im Sicilian. But it aint breaking my heart to feast on your juice.
Housewife take huge cock anal
Kylie kissed him and hugged him. He was almost as confused about what had happened as his tormentors. Give me a break. When she reached his balls, she took them into her mouth and started to gently suck on them.
At the sound of the screen door in the back slamming Marie turned and saw Aelita. Just thought the flower sucked on my finger like it were a cock. His cock throbbed at the sudden thought of her touching it and he almost exploded in his shorts. He let out a panicked gasp when he felt something at the tip of his cock. Only his eyes were alarming,yellow and wolflike.
I couldnt take it anymore as I felt her liquids pour all over my cock I gave one last thrust and let loose in her. She still wanted what I wanted, if I expressed a preference, thats what we were going to do, shed do ANYTHING I wanted.

Carnival Fascination Cruise Review by ncann
- Sail Date: October 2012
- Destination: Bahamas
- Cabin Type: Ocean View
Weather: a bit chilly!! We thought once we got closer to the Bahamas,the weather would improve--wrong!! This was the coldest cruise I have experienced in a tropical climate--thanks in part to Hurricane Sandy. Very windy and chilly became the norm for the majority of the cruise.
Lines were long, but moving in the cruise terminal. One of their camera's was down, which slowed the process. We were on board the ship by 1pm. We went by our cabins (which were ready) to drop off our carry luggage. Other luggage did not arrive to later on that afternoon.
Lunch was good. Your usual ship selections--hotdogs (I did not like the hotdogs and I am a big hotdog fan), hamburgers, chicken, stir fried selections, salads, deserts, ect.
Following the muster drill, we set sail for Half Moon Cay--so we thought until later on it was announced that stop was cancelled and we would be going to Freeport instead. Freeport is okay, but I as well as a lot of others were looking forward to Half Moon Cay. When there is hurricane devastation, changes occur. Arrival in Freeport was chilly and windy-go off ship and was back on in less than 30 minutes. Everyone had on sweaters, jackets, and whatever they could put on to keep warm. Even back on the ship, everyone was up on the Lido deck was trying to find the warmest, windfree location to relax at. Inside was cold-did not need the air conditioning running full blast today.
Nassau: It was a little warmer when we arrived here. Did some shopping-we found some good bargains. We returned to the ship for lunch. We did notice a lot of excursions were cancelled due to the weather.
Food: food was very good. We alternated eating breakfast and lunches up on deck or in the main dining room. We had late seating for dining. We throughly enjoyed each meal. Food was served hot. We had an excellent evening wait staff, who addressed us by name. Every desert I ordered in the main dining room was very good--but some of the deserts served up on the Lido missed the mark. We did make it to the last midnight buffet on deck , but we did not stay long due to the chill and wind. I did try the pizza and it was very good. The deli station stayed busy, but I did not try a sandwich from there. We were also entertained by our evening wait staff. All of the wait staff did very good job.
We missed most of the entertainment. I did lose my $20.00 allotment in the casino. Did not use the spa. We just wanted to relax and have a good time.
Over all, this was a good cruise despite the weather and the noise outside my cabin wall--it sounded as if something was lose and hitting up against the ship. We did complain to guest services--but that's another review in itself. It did get a rocky at night and one night it was almost impossible to walk without holding on to something. It was comical seeing everyone staggering around without being drunk.
Disembark went smoothly and we were back on the road heading home by 10am.

Home > News > Bollywood News
Posted on Feb 01, 02:13PM | IBNS
New Delhi, Feb 1 : The Hindi version of Kamal Haasan's much hyped as well as controversial film 'Vishwaroopam' has hit the theatres across New Delhi and Mumbai and some other cities on Friday. Long queues were spotted outside theatres to watch 'Vishwaroop' in these two metropolitan cities. In Kolkata the response is warm too.
Kamal Haasan, who has received immense supports from his fans all this time, is likely to get a good opening in the theatres as his fans asserted that they would watch the film for the southern superstar.
The screening of the first show was reportedly delayed at PVR Saket due to technical reasons.
But that did not discourage the fans from watching the film, who turned up in front of the theatres at 9:45 am for the show that was scheduled for 10:30 am.
Many fans also left after authorities said the show has been cancelled due to technical reasons.
However, the screening began later after a small delay.
Hasaan's fans also clarified that they were not watching the film due to the controversies related to it, rather they were looking forward to watch the film for the superstar.
Although, no one can deny the interest that has been ignited by the disputes and court ban on the film.
Meanwhile, Haasan is expected to commence his first round of talks with several Muslim groups on Friday in an attempt to and sort out the controversies over his spy thriller 'Vishwaroopam'.
Earlier on Thursday Hasaan thanked his fans for supporting him during the ongoing dispute with the Tamil Nadu government over the release of his film 'Vishwaroopam' in the state over its alleged content that has been branded as anti-Muslim community.
Thanking his fans and media, he had said: "I am overwhelmed, grateful and touched by the support of the fans...The amount of support I got from Muslim community was unbelievable."
He had also urged the people of the country to not to 'disrespect' artists.
"I am requesting to India that we have lot of work to do to take the country forward and these kind of squabbling will not take us forward," Haasan had said.
However, the superstar said he was not sorry for saying that he would leave the country.
"If this happens again, I would seriously think of leaving the country...I am not threatening. I am hurt," Haasan had said.
Vishwaroopam is written, directed and co-produced by Haasan that features him in the lead role.
The film also has Pooja Kumar, Rahul Bose, Andrea Jeremiah and Jaideep Ahlawat in supporting roles.
The film, which is a 95 crore project was shot in many locations, including largely in USA, while sets resembling Afghanistan were constructed in Chennai.

Interview: DJ Shadow
Page 1 of 2
Davis was drawn to turntables and started producing on a four-track while in high school. Shadow founded his own label called Solesides (which he later transformed into Quannum Projects) and continued producing original tracks. He released a few mix tapes that were highly distributed in the early 1990s throughout the hip-hop underground scene.
In 1996, he released his first album called Endtroduction, and it introduced his sound to a more mainstream audience, all the while defining his sound. His second album, The Private Press, released in 2002, was also highly recognized by hip-hop lovers everywhere.
Over the past six years, Shadow has continuously produced his original sounds for acts like Blackalicious and films like Dark Days. Shadow was also part of U.N.K.L.E., a group whose superstar guests included people from Radiohead, The Verve and the Beastie Boys. He has toured with many great artists and has constantly been defining a sound all his own.
DJ Shadow sat down with us to discuss his latest project, a DVD called DJ Shadow - Live! In Tune & On Time.
To find out what DJ Shadow is up to at all times, check him out at www.djshadow.com.
Q: You released a new music DVD; can you tell us a bit about it?
It is a documentation of the 2002 live tour I did, which was the biggest tour that I've done to date.
Q: How big are we talking?
It was nine months in scope, went to over 20 countries and it was the first time that I felt I had put together a show that I really wanted to show people. I wanted it to have a life after the tour.
Q: Why did you decide to release the DVD now?
I think music DVDs are definitely a growing market; DVDs are something that less people can download. I've had a DVD player since 1999, but I didn't have anything that I felt deserved to be on DVD until now.
Q: How much of the decision was a defensive move against piracy?
Not much; it turns out that it's convenient. I had done a home video of a different kind of tour where I was mixing old soul records together. Right when that video came out, was right when people stopped buying videos. I knew that the next time I did a video presentation that it had to be on DVD.
Q: You are seen as someone who stays out of the spotlight and lets his music do the talking. Do you think it's ironic that you released something so visual?
In some ways it's a defensive measure; there are a lot of bootlegs of my stuff and there seems to be a pretty healthy appetite for my live stuff, where I do a lot of talking. I think this is the show that I want everybody to see. If they're already bootlegging the shows that I've done, I think this is the one that's the best thing I put together. I guess there's just no way around it, you don't see me jumping and dancing around on the DVD, that's just not in my character.
Why did DJ Shadow name his first album Endtroducing? Find out...

Apr 18, 2017 09:30PM edwards750 wrote:
Thanks Margo. I didn't know what it was called. I'm not surprised the test isn't covered. I was blessed my Oncotype test was paid for by BC/BS. No way could my DH and I afforded $5k. Genomic Labs who conducted my test did say if insurance didn't pay they would bill me on a sliding income scale.
Given the mountain of bills already incurred even that would have been tough to handle. We have a large deductible like 5k that we met in 2 months. After that 100% thankfully because I had 33 radiation treatments that were paid. I know that would have cost us 30-40k.
Insurance companies need to do a better job researching the true costs of diseases like cancer. They resist and ultimately refuse to pay for anything that in their minds is not a routine test or standard of care. In the long run approving tests like the Oncotype saves them money. Chemotherapy is pricey. Maybe one of these days..

Jussie Smollett has had all the charges against him dismissed at an emergency court hearing in Chicago.
The Empire actor was accused of hiring thugs to beat him up to stage a hate crime in a desperate bid to boost his career.
He denied 16 felony counts of disorderly conduct for allegedly filing a false police report but his lawyers have now confirmed the 36-year-old has been cleared of all 16 charges, reports the Mirror .
His lawyers, Tina Glandian and Patricia Brown Holmes, said in a statement: "Today, all criminal charges against Jussie Smollett were dropped and his record has been wiped clean of the filing of this tragic complaint against him.
"Jussie was attacked by 2 people he was unable to identify on January 29th.
"He was a victim who was vilified and made to appear as a perpetrator as a result of false and inappropriate remarks made to the public, causing an inappropriate rush to judgment...
"Jussie and many others were hurt by these unfair and unwarranted actions.
"This entire situation is a reminder that there should never be an attempt to prove a case in the court of public opinion.
"That is wrong. It is a reminder that a victim, in this case Jussie, deserves dignity and respect.
"Dismissal of charges against the victim in this case was the only just result."
The actor's lawyers went on to say that Smollett is "relieved to have this situation behind him" and is "very much looking forward to getting back to focusing on his family, friends and career".
Smollett had denied prosecutors claims that he hired two friends to help him stage an attack on himself to drum up publicity for his acting career.
He had faced a maximum sentence of three years behind bars, a $25,000 fine and 60 years probabtion.
The actor, who played Jamal in Empire, hit headlines when he previously alleged he was the victim of a racially motivated and homophobic attack in which two men beat him and looped a noose around his neck.
Smollett, who is black and came out as gay in 2015, even made a tearful appearance on Good Morning America declaring he had been "forever changed" by the alleged incident.
He had been widely supported by celebrities and public figures, including Ariana Grande, Michael B Jordan, Olivia Munn and Ellen DeGeneres, as well as US president Donald Trump.
Chicago police chiefs later alleged he made the story up in a bid to get a pay rise out of his bosses at Empire.

A NSW prison escapee has deliberately ended his time on the run after running out of money and becoming homeless.
A prisoner who allegedly escaped from a NSW jail in 1992 has turned himself in after almost 30 years on the run.
Darko Desic was 35 when he allegedly used bolt cutters to break out of a jail in Grafton on the state's north coast during the night of July 31, 1992.
The next time police heard from him was on Sunday, when the now-64-year-old walked into Dee Why Police Station on Sydney's northern beaches.
The former fugitive had run out of work and become homeless, a police source said.
"(He) handed himself in to get a roof over his head," the source, who declined to be named, said.
Desic was jailed in 1990 for drug supply, serving 19 months of a 33-month minimum term until his escape, allegedly done with a hacksaw blade and bolt cutters.
Police have charged him with escaping from lawful custody and a magistrate remanded him in custody on Tuesday at Central Local Court.
Desic is due to enter a plea to the prison escape charge on September 28.
He's also to serve out the remainder of his original sentence. His earliest parole date is November 1 next year, with his full term running until September 30, 2023.
© AAP 2021

I am having big problem with my little figures. I made them ahead of time so they can harden and dry out. Has been about a week or so and this morning they were hard and dry.... I went to check them again tonight and now they feel as I just made them and are soft again.. Question?? How do I keep them from getting moist all over again after they are dry??
Don't cover them up in an airtight container. I don't know if you had them airtight, but sugar is hygroscopic, which means that it will attract and absorb moisture from the air, so gumpaste will soften up if it doesn't have good circulation. I put a cake in a tupperware cake holder that sealed up once, and the gumpaste on it completely melted. It must have absorbed the moisture from the icing, and it was totally dry to begin with.
If you're just being affected by humidity, you could put the pieces in a place thats near an air conditioner so that the air around them is dry. You could also keep them in a container with silica gel packets, like the ones that come in shoe boxes, but I don't know if that will help if the air is really humid.
I think that once they soften up there's not a lot you can do, they'll just have to dry out again. Maybe someone has some experience with using a dehydrator, but I've never tried that so I can't give advice on how that would work.

A BODY has been found in a canal near Napton during the search for a missing man.
Jason Thompson was last seen at the The Folly Inn pub in the village near Southam late on Friday night (April 19).
Police said the 31-year-old’s next of kin had been informed and the death was not being treated as suspicious at this time.
Det Insp Tim Sharp from Warwickshire Police said: “We would like to thank members of the public for their consideration and patience whilst emergency services were in attendance.
“We are aware this caused some delays with canal boats in the area and I’d like to thank the volunteer lock keepers for their exceptional assistance.”

Cody Simpson Reveals What Let to Miley Cyrus Breakup
Cody Simpson Reflects on "Mutual" Breakup With Miley Cyrus
Former couple Cody Simpson and Miley Cyrus only made it 10 months into their relationship before the two decided to call it quits in August 2020. Now, nearly two years after their breakup, Simpson has shed light on why the two stars decided to go their separate ways.
"It was kind of a mutual decision between us knowing that we were going in different directions in our life," the Australian swimmer explained during his April 19 appearance on "The Kyle and Jackie O Show." "I had just started training at that point. So my life was changing and I knew I was going to have to move back to Australia to do it properly and professionally and she was just going into her whole new album was gonna be going out on tour. It was a fork-in-the-road kind of scenario really."
The singer-turned-athlete added that the two "had a great, amazing year together" and "lived together during all the COVID lockdown stuff." Today, he says there are no hard feelings between the former pair, noting that they were just "in different places."
Simpson and Cyrus were friends before their relationship turned romantic in October 2019, when they were spotted kissing shortly after the latter's divorce from Liam Hemsworth and brief relationship with "The Hills" star Kaitlynn Carter. Cyrus confirmed dating rumors of the two on social media shortly after in a notes screenshot via Twitter, writing, "Get used to me dating — this is where I am at!"
On Aug. 13, 2020, reports confirmed that Simpson and Cyrus had split up and "realized they're better off as friends than dating each other," according to Us Weekly. People reported that their breakup happened in July of that year, but the two were still on good terms afterward.
Simpson even congratulated Cyrus on her newly released song at the time, "Midnight Sky." "So proud of you," he wrote in an Instagram Story alongside a photo of the two on FaceTime. "Congratulations to the most special of all. Go cop that new new!"

You've got questions. We've got answers. Call or email today: firstname.lastname@example.org
I was very impressed by the improvement in the cracks in our walls and ceiling, as well as by the hard-working crew. They were able to complete the job without disturbing any of our landscape shrubs. When they left, the ground around the house looked no different than when they arrived.

(JAMAICA GLEANER) — Student pilot Mark Daniel Scott’s death has been described as a major loss for young aspiring Jamaican aviators.
The 25-year-old Wolmer’s Boys alumnus died in a plane crash in south Florida Tuesday morning after the Piper PA-34 aircraft he was flying developed mechanical problems, crashing near the southside of Pembroke Road in Florida.
His instructor, who was with him, is still hospitalised with serious injuries.
The aircraft was operated by the Wayman Aviation flight school.
“He started his career with us at Caribbean Aviation, and he was like my son. In fact, anyone would want to have him as a son,” a solemn Captain Errol Stewart, operator of the Jamaican flight school, Caribbean Aviation Training Centre, told The Gleaner Tuesday evening.
His voice cracking from pain, Stewart said that Scott was focused, disciplined, and on the path to a promising future. But “life has way of throwing you a curve ball,” he lamented.
YEARNING FOR OPPORTUNITIES
The aviation instructor said it was the yearning for opportunities for self-development that drove Scott to move to Florida with his wife, Rachelle, who recently got her commercial pilot licence.
“Those are the struggles we are having here,” said Stewart, noting the difficulties to keep local talent in Jamaica.
Scott was at an advanced stage of becoming a commercial pilot.
On Tuesday morning as he took off on what turned out to be his final flight, his wife of three years awaited his return at the school. The couple resided in Miramar.
“If one is flying, the other one is waiting. They had a bond that was second to none,” Stewart stated, adding that as painful as the loss would be to Scott’s wife, his parents would be just as devastated.
Mark was the son of Dr Paul Scott, a pulmonologist based at the University Hospital of the West Indies, and Dr Angela Scott, a haematologist.
“He was an example of a great son. I know what they are going through.”
According to multiple reports, Scott and his instructor took off from the North Perry Airport, located about three miles from the crash site, shortly before 9 a.m.
Scott is reported to have advised air traffic controllers at the airport that he was trying to get back.
However, when he tried landing the plane on the south side of Pembroke Road, the tail of the plane clipped power wires, crash-landed, and burst into flames.
Dr Allan Cunningham, the Southern region area Global Diaspora Council member, said he has been in constant touch with the family and described the situation as “truly sad”.
Dash-camera footage showed the badly damaged plane up against a tree near a Chase bank.
A third person on the ground was injured by debris and treated at the scene.
The vice-president of Wayman Aviation, Eddy Luy, said that Scott had been training with the flight academy for about a year and was about to complete his training.
Luy was quoted by CBS Miami as saying: “They had some trouble, followed all emergency procedures, but it seems like chance was not with them this morning.”

Went to an old farm field today, that has been hunted for years by many people. It was partially harvested, so I started to search the newly plowed section. It was pretty quiet for a while, only finding a few pieces of scrap copper, until I got a nice solid hit. I checked in both directions, and just knew it was something good. I flipped the plug, and using my pin pointer, found a nice old copper coin looking up at me. It turned out to be a 1740 King George Halfpenny! It was in great shape for being in the ground for possibly 275 years. Thank you Whites for making such a great product.

Spayed and Neutered Dogs
No Females in Heat
I was extremely happy with my dogs stay with Janet. My dog has never stayed with a stranger in her 3 years, so I was actually expecting to get a call to come pick her up. I received a couple of pictures and updates that she was doing fine, which made my daughters and myself at ease.
Janet was great and took Pups for walks. He came home a happy dog.
Janet was recommended by a co-worker who knows her personally. Janet was great with our dog. Janet welcomed us to her home before our dogs stay so we could meet her. She was very kind, her home is clean, and we were comfortable leaving our pup with her for a long weekend. Would recommend and would use her again. Thank you Janet!
Walk the Dogs ?
I’m a retired comprehensive foster mom, who has just started a new part time job as a PCA and wants to spread my care experience with your pet. Growing up I always had a dog as my Mom groomed dogs and my Dad raised and trained hunting dogs. Knowing that animals need love and care just like us humans is why I am interested in doing dog care for other dog lovers who have ...
What Janet would like to know about your dog
Temperament of the pet

Berkman has surgery, expected back this year
No season-ending ACL tear in Cards first baseman's right knee
ST. LOUIS -- Cardinals manager Mike Matheny wasn't sure what he was going to hear when he received a phone call from Lance Berkman on Friday.
Berkman underwent successful surgery on his injured right knee on Friday morning. His medial meniscus, which had a partial tear, was removed. A small femoral condylar cartilage tear was debrided.
The 36-year-old first baseman was concerned going into surgery that he might have an issue with his anterior cruciate ligament, which could have possibly been a season-ending or career-ending injury. But no such problem was found.
"Great news, as good of news as we could get from this," Matheny said. "We're excited. I got a call from him earlier and we talked it out. You just never know how somebody's mind works when they get to that position. He's had a long career and a very successful career. You get to that point where you're just tired of fighting through this, and that wasn't it. The conversation was, 'Yeah, I'm going to be back.'"
Matheny said Berkman seemed surprised at the outcome of the procedure.
"I think he was," Matheny said. "Only because that meniscus flap got into a spot that it hadn't felt like before, so he thought it was probably worse. But the doctors were extremely optimistic with what they saw."
Matheny and the rest of the Cardinals now have reason to be optimistic about Berkman's return.
"It was great to hear his voice and hear that excitement," Matheny said. "Once again, you can turn that page, just kind of putting different scenarios in your mind of what might happen, and it's hard to turn it back. That was one of the best things. I could already see that he never really let his mind go there. All he's thinking about now is enjoying a little time with his family to heal and he's thinking about counting down the days until he is back."
General manager John Mozeliak called the update on Berkman "favorable news" for the Cardinals.
"I think, in fairness to everything, we should just be patient and see how things unfold over the next couple weeks, but we are optimistic that he will play for us again this season, and we're hopeful it will be sooner rather than later," he said. "As far as a timetable goes, I think it's realistic to be in that eight-to-10-week period."
Nate Latsch is a contributor to MLB.com. This story was not subject to the approval of Major League Baseball or its clubs.

Three upcoming Mthatha singers who were discovered by Vusi Nova, and who now go by the name of 047, dropped their debut single Ubuhle featuring the award winning singer on Friday.
The singers – Ngcali Nundu, 19, Lihle Baleni, 20, and Sihle Mdaka, 21 – were introduced to the singing sensation a few months back.
A relative of theirs played their music to Vusi Nova. He liked their sound, and a few months later made contact with the boys.
Last month their video, recorded by Vusi Nova, caused a stir on social media with their a capella sounds.
The singer also asked the public to help him come up with a name for the band. After brainstorming some names, they decided on calling the group 047, their hometown’s area dialling code.
Their single also made its television debut last week on SABC1’s youth programme, YoTV.
Speaking to the Daily Dispatch yesterday, Nundu said they were excited about the progress of the group. “The song is out and people are loving it. It’s amazing how the people have embraced our sound. Things are going great for us and we are excited about this,” he said.
Nundu said some people were confused by their name.
“We’ve had to explain to some people from back home that 047 is the area code and now they are happy for us,” he said.
He also added that this was their way of showing pride in their hometown.
“We could have chosen any other name but we went for 047. We are representing our town and this feels awesome,” he said.
Nundu said they had been singing together for five years and had never thought of coming up with a name for the group.
“We were young when we started singing together and we didn’t really take it seriously. That’s why we didn’t bother coming up with a name. All we knew was that we loved music,” said Nundu.
The group is now signed under Muthaland Entertainment, the same label that Vusi Nova is signed under.
“This has all been made possible by Vusi Nova. Even the YoTV appearance was made possible by him. We are grateful to him,” Nundu said, adding that they were currently working on their second single.
Vusi Nova also gave the trio an opportunity to perform live on the Umhlobo Wenene FM Women’s Day special show last month.
They performed their single, Ubuhle, a milestone for them as their music had never been played on radio before.
“We hope to release our debut album some time next year. For now we will be focusing on singles,” Nundu said.
Nundu said their latest single would be available on all digital stores later this week. — firstname.lastname@example.org

- Report: #683019
Report - Rebuttal - Arbitrate
Complaint Review: Fosters Children Project and DCF
Fosters Children Project and DCFWest Palm Beach, Florida west palm beach, Florida United States of America
Fosters Children Project and DCF Home Wreckers, greedy, selfish, heartless west palm beach , Florida
*Consumer Comment: DCF HAS ALOT OF POWER BE WARE OF YOUR PARENTAL RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES !!!! YOU CAN DO SOMETHING ABOUT ALL THIS.
*Consumer Comment: Keep Fighting!
*UPDATE EX-employee responds: This is false
A business' first
line of defense
on the Internet.
If your business is
willing to make a
Click here now..
My fiancs has been involved in this situation since March 2009. I dont know if you guys would be interested in doing a story or an investigation on this. His son who is 2 years old is in a foster home at the moment. The foster parents would like to adopt the baby. He was taken from the mother and the department of childrens and families have refused to place the baby with the father, for the last year he has gotten the run around and finally in April 2010 he was told that his rights were terminated and that's when I got involved in this. He was devastated to hear the news; I hated seeing him so depressed. It took me a few days to finally get a hold of someone who was able to finally give us any kind of information on this case (She was not related at all in this case). She gave me the number to a Customer relations person, she told me that he needed to contact her and that she would be able to give him the information that he needed but that his rights were not terminated yet. He called her and he was told that there was a hearing in 4 days to terminate his parental rights, and that he should go to the hearing. She also gave him the name of his Case Manager and phone number that no one else (involved in this case) in the department of children and families seemed to be able to provide us.We went to the Termination of Parental Rights hearing and all the lawyers for the Department of Children and families, the foster childrens project, and the guardian at litem, were not too pleased to see him there. We went thru this whole process he completed all his case plan on his own and out of his own pocket, complied with DCF. We had the trial finally after them pushing the trial back for three months in November and just last week we got the final order on this case which they are now appealing because the Father is to be Reunited with his son. I thought their mission statement read To protect the vulnerable, promote strong and economically self-sufficient families, and advance personal and family recovery and resiliency Shouldn't they be happy that the biological father to this little boy actually wants to father his son? Isn't that what their main goal is supposed to be to reunify children with their biological parents/family. I mean how many kids out there live in one parent homes where the other parent either doesn't care or is not interested in raising their child. Dont get me wrong i am not saying that everyone is like that but Ive been in that situation where my daughters father could give two penny's about her, he doesnt pay child support let alone come see her period. Yet he still has all his rights. So why if you have a man who is willing to take care of his son and is able to is he being denied that chance?
During the course of this whole mess, the court had granted him visitations with his child once a week for an hour, with supervision from DCF. They would give him a visit one week and then skip weeks on and off stating that the baby was on vacation or that they had staff meetings and were not able to bring the baby to his visit, etc. He has cooperated with DCF, he has tried to make things easy for them with regards to him seeing his son. He drives 30 miles out of his way to meet with them close to where the baby lives now, so that they dont have to drive that far to make it to his visits, he makes it easy by going by whatever time suits them. They want him to hold down a job but, its a little hard when there are court dates here and there and then visits to where hes not able to work during the times he should.
He still goes to work and his work has tried to accommodate all of this coming in late not coming in leaving for 2 hrs and coming back. Doesnt that show just how much he is willing to be with his son? We finally went to trial in November 2010. During this grueling 3 day trial the state and DCF and the guardian at litem, the foster childrens project all went into trial saying that the baby was not bonding with the dad when in fact the baby does call him daddy and that they consider the father to be a playmate to his son, but I ask you if you, if your visit was at a playground and you didnt get to see your son for 6 out of 7 days out of the week and all you were allowed to spend with him was one hour would you want to do anything other than to hold and play with him? I think not.
Heres the kicker the case manager under oath stated that the baby is not bonding with the father and that the father tries very hard to make the baby smile in order to take pictures, but that is not true. There are videos and the person who supervised the visits wrote on her reports that the baby was bonding well with dad, that the baby was happy etc. (isnt that lying under oath?)Also before the trial, DCF refused the father any services his lawyer advised him to do the parenting classes on his own and everything that they had recommended him to do, which he did. And yet when it came time for the trial, DCF insisted that none of the parenting classes, the drug screens and everything else that he did should be admissible in court. Well the judge decided otherwise and it was admitted into evidence. Then came the wait. On Friday December 10th his lawyer called him to tell him that he had received the final order and that the court order stated that DCF was to increase his weekly visit from once a week to twice a week unsupervised effective immediately and that they had to submit a plan to the court to reunify the baby with the father. Well once he got off the phone with his lawyer he called the case supervisor and stated that his lawyer had received the order and that per the order his visits were to be twice a week and unsupervised effective immediately. Well come Tuesday (December 14th, 2010) they tried to tell him that his visit for Wednesday (12/15/2010) was to be supervised and that he could only have one visit a week due to the fact that their lawyers were filling motions thru the court. Well he called his lawyer, went into the port center (their office) and asked to speak to the supervisor or the case managers supervisor. They told him no one was available. He got on the phone with one of the news channels and within minutes the case manager called and stated that his visit tomorrow would be unsupervised. The state is filling an appeal, to the court order that was given. Their reason for the appeal is that the baby (who is 2) only sees the father as a playmate. We went back to court last week for a motion to stay. And the judge granted the states motion. So his visits are back to being supervised and the case plan for reunification is to be put on hold until after the appeal. They also changed his child support order from him bringing the amount they set in good kind (clothes, food, diapers, toys, etc) or money, to only CASH now. They want the baby to be adopted. Why? The baby has a father that loves him, cares for him and wants to raise him. Why are they so persistent in having the baby adopted, by people that are not related to the little one? Arent biological parents supposed to have preference being that it is that persons child? They are saying that the adoption would be the least restrictive form for the baby. They are causing more harm to this little boy by keeping him from his BIOLOGICAL father, than if they would just let him come homeWhat they are doing is wrong, cruel and heartless!!!!
This report was posted on Ripoff Report on 01/15/2011 01:41 PM and is a permanent record located here: http://www.ripoffreport.com/r/Fosters-Children-Project-and-DCF/west-palm-beach-Florida-33407/Fosters-Children-Project-and-DCF-Home-Wreckers-greedy-selfish-heartless-west-palm-beac-683019. The posting time indicated is Arizona local time. Arizona does not observe daylight savings so the post time may be Mountain or Pacific depending on the time of year.
Ripoff Report has an exclusive license to this report. It may not be copied without the written permission of Ripoff Report.
If you would like to see more Rip-off Reports on this company/individual, search here:Search Tips
In order to assure the best results in your search:
- Keep the name short & simple, and try different variations of the name.
- Do not include ".com", "S", "Inc.", "Corp", or "LLC" at the end of the Company name.
- Use only the first/main part of a name to get best results.
- Only search one name at a time if Company has many AKA's.

This teacher was very upset on one of his student and asked him to stay after the hours for….
one day this teacher asked johnny to stay after the hours, since he was never very attentive in the class and asked him one question… how many finger are there in our hand ?to which johnny replied… 6 Sir !!!but then the Teacher replied in anger: IDIOT… how many times will I have to tell you to never count with your hands in your pocket !!!

Monday, July 18, 2016
Why I was away.
On July 7th eleven police officers were gunned down in Dallas, Texas. Five of them died. A few days later a Missouri officer was ambushed and critically injured. Then an off-duty officer was forced to defend his family and home against a home invader. Yesterday four more officers were shot in Baton Rouge, Lousiana and two of them are dead. Frankly, those events have hit me hard. Very hard.
I try not to mention my profession to people I don't know well but, I am a law enforcement officer. I was stunned by the losses these past days and by the vitriol and hate displayed against police by our society. I knew things weren't good and I knew the President disliked us. For the President and others to figuratively stand on the graves of the fallen officers to scream their talking points was beyond angering. That's not up for debate. It was and is. You disagree, you do so elsewhere.
As I tried to shield my children from the news and watched other officers' children mourn for them, my motivation to write about the Rangers drained away. I needed some time to get my thoughts back together. That's where I've been. Thought you deserved to know and I appreciate you sticking around in spite of the lack of recent posts. I'm going to try to get back in the saddle and go back to talking about the Rangers and their cards. It's a manner of relaxation for me and a way to let the stress go a little. That and Pudge says I should get back to it.

Town of Beloit chairman race down to two
TOWN OF BELOIT — Town of Beloit voters will decide whether town Supervisor Tim Guenther or Turner School Board member Jim Olson will be their next town chairman in the April election.
Town Supervisor Jim Stevens and former town Supervisor Phil Taber were eliminated in the four-candidate primary Tuesday. Guenther received the most votes with 158, followed by Olson with 104.
"I think the voters like my message, and the message is to keep moving forward in the path that we're going, and I'm very happy about that," Guenther said. "It's actually a vote for the whole board that's sitting now, in my opinion."
Guenther, 57, of 2556 S. Natures Ridge, Beloit, is a project manager with Morse Group in Beloit. He is serving his first term on the town board.
"I wasn't surprised by the outcome. I do think that the turnout was very low, and it's certainly going to be a bigger turnout for the April election," Olson said. "I'm going up against a good guy. He's the kind of guy you wouldn't mind losing to."
Olson, 76, of 2228 N. Pow Wow Trail, Beloit, is self-employed in a financial service business. He served as town chairman from 1991-93 and is serving his first term on the Beloit Turner School Board. He also is seeking re-election to the school board.
Olson said his goal is still the same—to bring economic development to the town and city and create jobs.
"I think the possibility of a casino certainly is going to have an impact," he said, "and I think we should be planning for that, even though it may be a few years. It kind of fits in to the school board's plan, as far as the referendum. Hopefully, we're going to grow. I'm going to do my best to see that we do."
The school board has a $28 million referendum to build a new high school on the April ballot.
Guenther said he believes the board has moved in a positive direction—"doing things the town needs, watching things fiscally, and basically tonight, in my opinion, was a vote of confidence in that platform and the things we've accomplished."
The board in the last few years worked through legal issues, hired a new administrator who is doing "very well" for the town and held joint meetings resulting in positive talks with the city of Beloit, he said.
"There's been a lot of good things that have happened," he said.
Last updated: 8:09 am Monday, April 29, 2013

We have eaten at Fultano's Pizza in Cannon Beach for years, averaging 1-3 times per year. Every time we eat there, we love, love, love the pizza!! Sadly every time we also HATE the service. This last August was especially bad. My husband and I came through town on our way to Nehalem Bay to camp, and decided to treat ourselves to a pizza. The guy taking the orders was so rude, I couldn't believe it!! I asked him if I could get a side of ranch, and his answer was "It'll cost ya 75 cents." (please insert negative tone, and dirty look) I had already paid with my debit card, and my purse was in the car with my husband, so I decided to skip it. A few minutes later i asked if I could take some Parmesan, and hot pepper packets, or did I have to pay?? He said "its not like it is ranch!"
The worst part of this story is that 4 days later when we went back (yes, I said the pizza was great) with our family and friends, about 11 of us, the same thing happened to my sister. She didn't even ask for it for free, she asked how much it was.
I'm not saying don't go, just don't ask for Ranch, and don't expect to have a kind, or even friendly man take your order. The other "workers" in the joint seem to be kind, but watch out for the guy at the cash register!! (I wish I knew what his name is, he has worked there for several years)
My purpose for posting this is that hopefully this guy, and you know who you are, will see this and realize that he is ruining this place for locals, and passer bye's. I am hoping that he will realize that is much easier to just be nice =)
Own or manage this property? Claim your listing for free to respond to reviews, update your profile and much more.

I took the advice of the folks at the Degree Forum and applied to TESU to see how my degree plan stacked up against reality. It was a good thing I did.
The process was relatively easy and straightforward; go to tesu.edu and apply, send them your transcripts, wait and see what happens. Between the transcripts and the application fee I was out $55, so well worth it to make sure I didn’t invest time and energy into a bad plan.
It is a good think I did it. My initial evaluation was off from my initial plan in a few important ways. I was counting on credits from my old University to cover things that TESU couldn’t map them to. I was also counting on CLEP credits for a few things that I took back in 1998.
I went through a lengthy but friendly process with my old University to try and get detailed course descriptions and syllabi to send along to TESU so that could grant me appropriate credit. None of the departments had true originals that dated back that far, but I managed to get enough data to earn back most of the credits I had been counting on.
CLEP was another story. CLEP doesn’t keep records past twenty years. Those few credits I had from there are just gone.
With this news, and some help from Degree Forum, I re-worked my plan.

SAN DIEGO — At least one person was killed in a crash in the rural eastern reaches of San Diego County early Saturday morning, an official confirmed.
California Highway Patrol dispatchers were first alerted to the incident at 1:20 a.m., when they received a report of a car and nearby trees on fire along state Route 78 just east of its intersection with state Route 79 in Santa Ysabel.
There was a fatality, Cal Fire Capt. Issac Sanchez said, but there was no further information on the victim’s identity, or on how many people or cars were involved in the crash.
Lanes were shut down after the crash, but had reopened by about 7 a.m., a CHP incident log indicated.
Some fencing was also damaged in the collision, which Caltrans crews were repairing Saturday morning.

It's not enough that I can't even let my dogs out for 5 minutes to go to the bathroom and have to use puppy pads almost exclusively now (because there is NO time of day or night that the neighbors' dogs, cats and kids aren't out there to distract my dogs and make them bark). The ONLY time it's safe for mine to go outside is if it's pouring rain and the neighbors' dogs, cats and kids are inside. I have to CHECK before opening the door to see if any of their critters are around playing near my fence - a few minutes ago Tanna was having a fit in his crate - so I went to let him out - and there were 3 cats on MY front porch - inside MY fenced yard! You have no idea how tempted I was to let ALL the dogs out - but I didn't want the nice kitties KILLED. However, would gladly shoot the neighbors myself if I had something other than my finger to shoot with! I'm so darned tired of this! There are leash laws for dogs - why can't cat owners have to have the same rules? They don't have to leash their cats, don't have to license their cats (who, by the way are outside all the time and often yowl outside my window at 4 am), don't have to have cats vaccinated for diseases, and let them breed every 5-6 months! One of my neighbors gets tired of finding cat poop in her garden. Don't get me wrong, I like cats - I just think cat owners should have the same rules as dog owners. The same neighbor has a little dog who is TIED out in their front yard from 6 am until they go to bed (unless it's raining, of course). Because of them I can't let my dogs out, because they might BARK and disturb someone, and they'll call the police! GRRRRR! I've never called the police on their kids when they threw firecrackers at my dogs, or climbed on my garage roof, or woke us at 7 am playing with their radio controlled toys in my driveway, or play basketball outside at 10 pm near my bedroom window, or when their dog is running loose (which IS against the law). Am I being too sensitive? I just want my dogs to be able to go out in their own yard and enjoy some sunshine for a few minutes without some idiot calling the cops. This stupid little town has a 24/7 noise ordinance, which is absolutely absurd. Most places it's after 10 pm and before 6 am - which is logical - but NOT HERE. I don't let my dogs bark incessently (it bothers me, too), and try to bring them in within a couple of minutes. I don't even take a shower if they're outside because I couldn't hear them and bring them inside quickly.

The more we gaze upon Jesus, the more we become like Him. Our preacher at yesterday's Easter Day service, Dragan, encouraged us to seek quality time alone with God, promising that it would always be of benefit: and this is what John urges upon his readers too. We don't need to have trust issues with God; we don't need to worry about how much He might love us, because we know this: He has adopted us into His family and calls us His children! What greater level of reaching out and of acceptance can there be? The youth group which I helped run in Callington, Cornwall was attended by some interesting characters. Tony was one of them. He had also been sent along to church occasionally. He had been fostered long-term by a couple who lived a few yards from the church and it was drawing close to the time when they would no longer be paid to foster him. Tony was beginning to think what he might have to do next, when his foster parents told him that he could continue to live with them. He was so happy! It made him feel loved and personally accepted. The joyful hope which lies before us are multiple: yes, we will see our loved ones who have died before us; yes, we will be made whole; yes, there will be no more crying or death or violent assault; yes, the created order will become again what it was always intended to be. BUT, so much more wonderful than all these things is the hope that we will see God face to face! We are told in Revelation 21: 'I saw a new heaven and a new earth, for the old heaven and the old earth had disappeared. And the sea was also gone. And I saw the holy city, the new Jerusalem, coming down from God out of heaven like a bride beautifully dressed for her husband. I heard a loud shout from the throne, saying, 'Look, God's home is now among His people. He will live with them and they will be His people. God Himself will be with them.' We have such an amazing hope, which cannot be taken away from us, whatever happens!

Mr Patrick Colbert, known as Pat, was born in Abbeyfeale, Co Limerick, Ireland on 5 November 1887.
He was the son of John W. Colbert (b. 1844), a farmer, and Catherine "Kate" Connors (b. 1846) who had married in 1870. The family were Roman Catholic and spoke both Irish and English and Pat was one of eight surviving children from a total of ten. His siblings were: William (b. 1871), John (b. 1872), Michael (b. 1875), Hanora (b. 1876), John (b. 1878), Denis (b. 1880), Tim (b. 1884), Margaret (b. 1885) and Daniel (b. 1886).
Pat and his family appear on both the 1901 and 1911 censuses living in Kinkinlea Lower in Abbeyfeale. By the time of the latter record Pat was described as a railway porter whilst his brothers were all described as cattle buyers.
Pat, a very religious man, had decided to join a holy order in Sherbrooke, Québec. One of his brothers, now known as Brother Christopher, was already there. He therefore boarded the Titanic at Queenstown on 11 April 1912 as a third class passenger (ticket number 371109 which cost £7, 5s). He is not known to have been travelling with anyone from his locality.
Patrick Colbert died in the sinking and his body, if recovered, was never identified.
Articles and Stories
Cork Examiner (1912)
Link and cite this biography
(2016) Patrick Colbert Encyclopedia Titanica (ref: #726, accessed 27th September 2016 10:23:32 PM)
URL : //www.encyclopedia-titanica.org/titanic-victim/patrick-colbert.html
Let us know if you spot an error or want to add new information about Patrick Colbert.
Leave a comment

Survivor Erik Roberson looked at Lamaree Wilson from the witness stand just once, when he identified the teen as the one who shot him.
"Are you certain?" asked Rock Island County States Attorney John McGehee.
"I'm positive," he said.
Roberson testified Wilson was not a stranger, but a former classmate at United Township High School in East Moline.
"Computer class. He used to be an acquaintance," Roberson said.
Roberson testified he dropped out of high school in his senior year, and sold marijuana occasionally.
He said Wilson bought pot from him the night before the shooting. He called and asked for more on May 20, 2015.
Roberson said he and two others were waiting in a car for the transaction to take place, when he saw Wilson walk up.
"He didn't say anything, and that's when he started opening fire," he said.
He was shot several times, in both legs, twice in his arm, in his side, and head.
The driver of the car, 18-year old Zachary Phillips, was shot in the head and died.
Roberson told the jury there was no bad blood with Wilson, and says he started shooting without warning.
Testimony resumes Monday.

WASHINGTON ? Ten games into the 2011 season, D.C. United fans have yet to see the real Dax McCarty.
The new DC captain ? a player who manager Ben Olsen made a point to acquire during the recent offseason as a player he could build his team around ? admits he?s still working on adapting to his new club.
?I hold myself to a pretty high standard, and I don?t think I?ve been as good as I should have been in these past 10 games,? McCarty admitted this week.

Farewell: Michael Phelps retires after 23rd gold and he’s not coming back
This time it's for real.
Late Saturday night at the Rio Olympics, Michael Phelps dove into the pool with Team USA in second place in the 4×100 medley relay. Fifty seconds later, Phelps had pulled his team into the lead – of course – and given freestyler Nathan Adrian plenty of room for a victory. It was Phelps' fifth gold medal of these Games and 23rd overall (to go along with three career silvers and two bronzes) and it'll be his final one.
“I am done, boys,” he said with a smile in a group huddle after.
Four years ago, Michael Phelps stood on a pool deck in London and said he was done. Saturday night, he stood on a pool deck in Rio and said the same. The man speaking those words couldn't have been more different.
The London retirement was a half-hearted decision following a half-hearted performance. There was little doubt Michael Phelps would return to the sport he'd dominated like no other athlete had ever dominated a sport before. Nobody wants to go out in the middle.
Well, it was the middle for Phelps, anyway. For any other swimmer, a four-gold, two-silver and fourth-place finish at an Olympic meet, which is what he did in 2012, would be the achievement of a lifetime. In terms of medals it's actually one of the 15 best Summer Games anyone has ever had. For Phelps, however, it was a disappointment, and one he brought upon himself.
After his record eight gold medals in Beijing, Phelps was listless and adrift. There was that overanalyzed bong photo. He shirked practice, didn't talk to coach Bob Bowman and started to fall back to the pack in the pool. It was all understandable. Phelps was like Buzz Aldrin coming down from the moon.
Nothing could ever compare to Beijing. He'd been the toast of the world's biggest event. He had everybody telling him he was the greatest. He hosted Saturday Night Live (which wasn't very good) and guested on Entourage (where was the best actor on screen). Michael Phelps became the rarest of Olympians: one you care about more than every four years.
And with that came a dilemma. What do you do when you peak at 23?
Phelps was like a Peter Pan man-child, one who'd spent so many mornings in the pool and weekends stuck in over-chlorinated indoor pools for endless meets that he never got to fully enjoy those foolhardy years in his late teens and early 20s when young men and women leave their childhood behind to become the adult they'll be, all while trying to have some fun and learning from the mistakes along the way.
In retrospect, it feels like Phelps went to London more out of obligation than anything. He was a swimmer so he went to go swim. It was amazing how well he did given the circumstances, with the force of his will, pride intense competitive spirit doing more than any taper. He mustered up the drive when he needed but had squandered the talent. There was just something missing.
Phelps himself can't put an exact finger on it, but if you look at Beijing Phelps and London Phelps you'd say the difference was the latter wasn't terrified at the thought of failure. When he finished fourth in the 400 IM and lost to Chad Le Clos in the 200 fly, it was okay. He deserved it and he knew it. An immortal had became a tremendously talented mortal.
If the post-Beijing era was rough, post-London was worse. Now Phelps wasn't confronted with how to follow up the summit of a career, he had to deal with figuring out how to live a life without the thing that made him someone, the sport he'd known and depended upon forever. So, like he was cramming for a test, Phelps tried to fit it all in during his late-20s. He was famous, rich and idle – a dangerous combination. Though hardly daily fodder for TMZ, he says he was in a free fall and as close to rock bottom as it gets. It took his return to the pool and a 2014 DUI that to start that upward trajectory.
Phelps got sober and had a new, singular focus: Ending his career the right way, on his terms. Rio was where he'd do it.
There's only one important question to ask a swimmer after a race. “Did you leave it all in the pool?” Beyond the technical analysis of a swim, the key question is whether a swimmer gave every single ounce of effort during the race or didn't touch the wall with anything left.
Asked the question above, the Phelps of 2012 might've said yes but haveknown deep down the answer was no. The Michael Phelps who touched the wall on Saturday night will have no regrets. He left it all in the pool. He did it his way.
Even before he was retired, there was already been chatter about whether Phelps would stay retired. Ryan Lochte guarantees he'll be back and his 4×100 teammates were chanting “four more years” and needling him about his inevitable return for Tokyo mere seconds after he says his career ended. All this was stoked by Phelps saying before Rio that this was “potentially my last Olympics.”
That was semantics though. He was smarter this time; he didn't close the door completely. Few things are 100% in life and making a decision about how you'll feel in four or eight years is next to impossible. Let's call this one 99.9%. It's just hard to see a comeback, unless it's some ill-advised MJ on the Wizards return that sputters and fails in six or seven years.
Athletes don't fixate on legacy like fans and the media do. And, honestly, if Phelps returned for Tokyo and finished fourth in two events, it'd do absolutely nothing to how we remember Michael Phelps, the swimmer. But not caring about legacy doesn't make you blind to the fairy-tale ending we just witnessed.
After being voted the flagbearer for his country by his United States Olympic teammates, the 31-year-old went out and won a staggering five gold medals in Rio and took silver in the other (in a race in which he'll have zero regret – he simply went up against a better swimmer). Five golds and a silver was at the highest possible end of expectations for Phelps in 2016. No one thought he'd do better and he could have done far worse and still had the meet considered a success.
In his final race, he not only won gold, but did it in his signature stroke with a group of younger teammates he captained to one of the great team swimming performances in Olympic history. The symbolism wasn't lost on anyone. Phelps was always a good teammate (he doesn't get enough credit for giving up his spot in the Athens final of the same 4×100 medley so his teammate Ian Crocker could get a gold) but he was rarely a leader. This was the first Olympics he was voted captain of Team USA.
He didn't disappointment, starting by carrying the flag into the Maracana, swimming his fastest split to get the U.S. a stunning win in the 4×100 freestyle relay that set the tone for the meet, then providing a shoulder for a sobbing Ryan Held to lean on during that emotional medal ceremony. And those were just the things we saw.
In an interview with NBC, Bob Bowman, Phelps' longtime coach and Team USA's Rio coach, talked about how his protege was an exemplary captain. You couldn't help but feel his pride and the idea that his guy's maturity in leading was as great as anything that happened in the pool.
But about that retirement. Michele Tafoya asked Phelps point-blank about whether it would stick. This time around, Phelps said nearly the exact same thing he said in London.
“I'm just ready for something different. My swimming career might be over but I have the future ahead of me to turn the page and start whenever I want. It's not the end of a career it's the beginning of a new journey.”
Yet there was a difference in the tone and the confidence and the self-assuredness. This was a man with a baby and fiancee in the stands, a clearer idea of what he wants the future to bring and five gold medals to put in his back pocket. In London, Phelps was a man fearful of what would happen when he'd leave the mountaintop. On Saturday, he was a confident man who had no plans of ever coming down.

Iron Squadron is a group of rebels who fought agains thte Empire when their homeworld, Mykapo, was under Imperial rule. It contained Mart Mattin, Gooti Terez, Jonner Jinn and R3-A3.
They were once led by Jun Sato's brother and Mart's father. However, when Mart's father died, he took over. They met the Ghost Crew and befriended two kids their age, Ezra Bridger and Sabine Wren. Hera Syndulla attempted to convince them to leave Mykapo with other rebels, but they were too stubborn to leave. However, Gooti and Jonner were convinced by Ezra that they had to live to fight another day. Though Mart stayed behind, Jonner and Gooti later joined the Ghost crew in saving him from Admiral Konstantine. They later reunited on Atollon, officially becoming part of the rebellion. They operated from a YT-2400 light freighter called Sato's Hammer.[

The famous video-sharing app TikTok can make a dancer and artist out of anyone, but that not how it turned out for Sapphire Charlesworth, a 27-year-old hailing from Durham County, North Carolina.
The mum-of-two shook a leg with her partner Naadjele Lartey to do the Oh Na Na Na dance challenge only to break both her ankles while attempting to record it and is now hospitalized. Doctors claim that the injury is severe and the woman might have to undergo surgery soon.
The Oh Na Na Na dance challenge involves two people tapping their feet together from various different angles to the tune of Slim Burna's famous track. The challenge has gone viral on TikTok as thousands are trying to shake a leg to the tricky moves and despite the tragic incident, the craze has not seemed to slow down even a little.
My ankles hurt really bad, says Sapphire Charlesworth
Sapphire revealed to the Mirror that the mishap occurred while filming the challenge and said that her ankles hurt really bad, and never expected that her dance moves could land her in the hospital. She stated that she heard loud cracking noises from her ankles as soon as she fell on the floor and her partner assumed she just had a normal fall, which was not the case.
"We were just practicing, and as I went to turn I slipped and heard 'crack, crack' and then I was in a heap on the floor. It hurt so so bad. I think my partner thought I was exaggerating, she had to pick me up and we were trying to wait to see if the pain wore off but then we had to phone an ambulance.''
After doctors took scans of her legs, it was revealed that she had badly broken her left ankle and the injury was serious, which might require an operation. It was revealed that Charlesworth had also fractured her right ankle, and the ligaments on her right foot.
She also cautioned about trying the moves out as they are not easy. She said: "To anyone thinking of trying it, I'd say approach with caution, and it's not as easy as it looks.'' Sapphire, also thanked the NHS staff for being on the front line and treating her despite the coronavirus pandemic and thanked them for their service. ''I want to massively thank the NHS. Through all of this, they are keeping their spirits high.''

Brief Directions: Located on the north side of NY hwy 86 between Lake Placid and Wilmington, New York.
GPS Longitude: -73.8745
GPS Latitude: 44.3487
Description: The Ausable River runs through this half-mile gorge where there are 4 separate waterfalls. The Adirondacks had received several days of drenching rains and the river was extremely high making it difficult to see the falls, however the river was awesome and beautiful. It roared as it ran through the gorge and you could see, feel and hear its power. I would like to see it at its normal level, but was very glad to be here at this time.

Posted by Rachel
Raisa and Jesse went out of their way to provide me with exceptional service and sound legal advice during my difficult divorce. Thanks to their brilliance and in-depth knowledge of the system, the other parties were kept in check and the outcome was favorable.
Posted by anonymous
Awesome lawyer! Great lady. Wonderful person, she's diligent, smart, caring to me and my family, yet very aggressive and articulate in court. The judge seemed to listen and respect her opinion even when it seemed in the beginning that he wasnt agreeing with us. It was thanks to Ms. Romaelle that I was able to be heard and that things werent as simple as they appeared and the judge finally realized what was really going on. I liked that Ms. Romaelle was able to hold people accountable while fanning the fires and teaching my ex and his lawyer that dirty fighting wasnt good for our family. I got the results I wanted and some of the ideas she put in place have helped me better communicate with my ex without the need for blaming or name calling. I can honestly say she was so good that my ex husband recommended her to his friend. The only thing I would tell future clients is to pay their bills on time. Her staff has pretty strict policies and they can get annoying when you forget to pay.
Posted by Susan
I highly recommend Ms. Raisa Romaelle as being a very thorough, caring, and refreshingly honest lawyer. The information and direction she gave allowed my family to finally retrieve funds we'd been
unable to touch for a full decade. She made a great difference to my family. Ms. Romaelle truly deserves recognition.
Posted by Daisy
I had the pleasure of meeting Raisa about 5 months ago through a recommendation from a friend. When I met her I instantly knew she was going to represent me through my divorce process. I knew immediately she was knowledgeable and had my best interest at heart. She offered me a payment plan that I could afford and provided accurate counsel. Raisa defended every interest and did not leave anything to chance; she knew what my rights were. Her heart was in the right place; she wanted to help me as much as possible and boy did she!! Raisa is not only a great lawyer, but she is also a strong woman, has a drive for justice, and she pours out her passion, literally, through her marvelous work. If you need someone to represent you, but also show the human side of law, Raisa Romaelle is your gal. I am very thankful to God to have put her in my path and for the outcome of my case. Most importantly I am thankful that I found a great person, woman and friend I can rely on in times of need. Thank you Raisa for ALL you have done! You are an angel in disguise and I pray God's abundant blessings upon you so that you can continue helping women discover that divorce is not the end, but the beginning of a life filled with hope. God bless you
Posted by Cheryl
I heard about Mrs. Romaelle through a friend who had gone through a particularly nasty divorce. At the beginning, my friend hired another lawyer who basically promised the world and, several thousand dollars later, did nothing. After firing his first lawyer and hiring Mrs. Romaelle, my friend finally got the representation he deserved. After many late-night conversations and ranting sessions, I understood the importance of obtaining a good lawyer. Unfortunately, due to economic reasons primarily, my husband and I decided to get a divorce (although I would have done anything to save our marriage.) I met with Mrs. Romaelle who was very knowledgeable and understanding. More than that, she actually made me feel comfortable during those hard times and even made me feel as if things would somehow work out. Ultimately, she did her job and her fees were VERY REASONABLE (God knows how scared I was about spending the money in this economy!) I would recommend Mrs. Romaelle to anyone caught in the unfortunate position my friend and I have been forced to endure. I know she also handles other areas of law and it would not surprise me if she were as great as she was handling my divorce. God bless her and her staff.
Posted by Ernie
Ms. Romaelle offered very good service and helped us save money on our case. I highly recommend her.

Colleen was now back at Mistress’s house recuperating from her operations. Even so, every day she was required to follow a proscribed routine. At 5:30am she would give Mistress her wake up call and say her mantra. Then she would have an hour to get bathed and dressed, including the 3” heels and the waist corset, do her hair and put on her make up, which had to be absolutely perfect. She also had to ensure that there was no hair whatsoever on her body except for the little tuft above her mound and the thinnest of eyebrows, finishing up with the application of Mistress’s favorite scent. When she was finished Colleen had to take up the presentation position and wait for Mistress. While she waited there it gave her time to reminisce to herself about the sequence of events in her life, which had got her to this incredible situation. Today as she waited she couldn’t help but recall one of her earliest experiences, which had helped to get her hooked, the incredible time she had had when she spent a fantasy weekend at the wonderful exclusive Bed and Breakfast run by Master and Lady B, when she had first stood in the presentation position waiting for Mistress…….
It had all started one day with a chance conversation with a fellow sub, who had heard about this special Bed and Breakfast in the center of town, which provided a fantasy weekend for aspiring subs, especially those inclined to CD and TV. Colleen had been very interested at that stage, not having yet found a Mistress in town and becoming tired with the hollow offerings in The Beat, so he had asked to be given further details. Thus it was that a few days later, a charming lady, who identified herself as Lady B, had contacted Colleen and invited him to come to an orientation session at her apartment. Now Colleen had envisioned something like being tied to a cross or table and having awful things done to him, so it was a surprise when he reached the front door to see a note addressed to him. The first part sounded good ‘go inside, take off all your clothes and put on the maid’s apron provided’. However the next part wasn’t quite so exciting. It consisted of a list of tasks:
plus a timetable for each task, all to be completed within two hours. Puzzled by the absence of Lady B, Colleen however got down to the tasks on the list. What Colleen did not know was that there were hidden cameras in every room and every step he took was being closely monitored. At the end of the two hours the tasks were just about all completed, although a little skimping had been needed in the cleaning tasks. Suddenly a voice rang out of the audio speakers “you may dress and leave, you will be notified whether you are suitable later”. Too dazed to do anything else Colleen dressed and left.
Days had passed as Colleen had waited each day for an answer, until at last an email arrived with the booking instructions, which indicated that he had been accepted for the fantasy weekend and requiring a detailed response on the booking requirements. Basically there were fees for accommodation (standard or luxury) and food (standard or luxury) and required weekend dates. The price for luxury being double that for standard. Luxury gave you your own room, with a dedicated theme, constant attention and three meals a day, whilst Standard gave you your own cage and bread and water diet! Colleen returned the booking form and payment and started counting the days.
Shortly before THE weekend another email arrived giving arrival instructions. Colleen was now in a frenzy of excitement as he read the instructions. Basically they gave him directions to the B&B and said that he was to arrive at 6pm on the Friday, with no luggage and minimal clothing, everything else would be taken care of. So he had arrived just before the appointed hour, mouth so dry he could hardly swallow and walked trembling into reception. Behind the desk was a rather attractive brunette, who he would have taken for a woman in every respect until she spoke in a rather deep voice and asked him to register. He was handed a numbered key attached to a smart leather dog collar, and told to proceed into the arrivals area, which was a door leading out of reception, where he should take off everything and put it into the numbered locker. The key would also allow access to his accommodation. He should then shower, being sure to remove all body hair with the razor supplied, place the collar around his neck and proceed through the door marked ‘Initiation’. In a daze Colleen completed the instructions and half an hour later proceeded through the door.
At first it was difficult to make out anything as the room was almost dark, but as he got accustomed to the gloom he saw it was in fact laid out as a boudoir. After a few minutes the lady from the front desk entered turned on the background lights and beckoned Colleen to stand in the middle of the room. She then attached self-locking leather cuffs to his wrists and ankles and inserted a butt plug. She then motioned Colleen to sit in a large chair to which she proceeded to attach him with the cuffs and collar. She then proceeded to make Colleen’s face and body very feminine with the expert application of makeup, acrylic nails and painted toenails and topped it off with a shoulder length brunette wig. Now all that was required was to release Colleen and have him dress in the clothes provided. However before this could be done first Colleen was fitted with a most interesting device. It was a molded rubber construction in the shape of a vagina, which fitted between his legs and covered his cock. In fact his cock was inserted into it in such a way that he could only pee squatting with the liquid exiting from a position similar to that of a woman. This device was stuck to his skin. The clothes consisted of pink frilly panties with a matching padded bra, a short waist corset, knee length stockings, high heels (3”), a black mini skirt, which stopped about 4” above his knees and a white ruffled blouse with a plunging center.
When Colleen looked in the full length mirror he had caught his breathe because he didn’t recognize himself, so great was the transformation, and he had practically decided there and then that one day he would make that look permanent. When all was ready he was ushered through another door and into the presence of the owners of the B&B, Master and Lady B. He could see nothing of them initially as he had been instructed to bow before them on his hands and knees, whilst they inspected their guest. He was then instructed to rise but to keep his gaze downward. “Well” said Master B” and what accommodation did Colleen (for that was the name he had put as his fem name on the application form) decide on for her stay. Did she skimp on the money and choose the communal cages and bread and water or did she choose one of our themed rooms?” The choice of themed room or cage had been hard for Colleen, on the one hand the cage/bread and water was exciting but it could possibly get a trifle boring. The possibilities of each themed room had been enticing to win him over and the only problem had been choosing between them. The themes related to what each room offered. Each room was continuously hosted, so you were unlikely to get bored, and was decorated appropriately. There was the ‘Rope Room’, which offered you all sorts of rope bondages, including Japanese, plus suspension and flogging. ‘Pizzazz Room’ which offered all known electrical tortures. ‘De Sade Room’ which offered every kind of flogger. ‘Dark Room’ which involved different methods of body encasement, leather, saran, plaster, liquid latex etc. ‘Wood Room’ which contained a nice selection of wood structures such as a cross, bench, horse and suitable floggers. ‘Washing Room’ which specialized in clothespins, bones, enemas, showers, plugs, dildos, nipple clamps. “CBT Room” catered for every known form of CBT plus any extra ones requested, or there were two A La Carte Rooms where you could select a specified number of your preferences from an extensive menu. Those in cages got to choose a smaller number of preferences from a smaller menu, but also had to receive three choices specified by their hosts and were played with in a communal dungeon, but were put in their cages overnight and left. Colleen had chosen the ‘Washing Room’. “I understand you have a strong nipple fetish,” said Lady B and at this she added a pair of nipple clamps on a chain to Colleen’s dressage, which also attached with a loop to her collar. Colleen was then ordered to bend over a table and lower her knickers as Lady B worked her backside into two nice even pink globes and then Master B added some decorative lines across his thighs and bottom with a thin whip.
Having been warmly welcomed to the B&B by the owners, Colleen was lead to his selected room, the ‘Washing Room’. At the entrance he was introduced to his Mistress for the weekend Mistress C by crawling on his belly as instructed, through the door, and licking her shoes before being dragged across the floor, which he noticed was covered with a linoleum type covering, face down and left in the center of the room, whilst Mistress explained the rules. For the next 48 hours, Mistress or an attendant would be present at all times and Colleen was to ask permission for every single thing he required to do however trivial, even moving position, but unless the request was valid, it would be refused and Colleen would not be informed beforehand what a valid request could be. Furthermore any non-valid request would lead to immediate punishment, inflicted either by Mistress C or the attendant on duty. Whilst Mistress C was present Colleen would be used for Mistress’s pleasure. There was a safe word, which consisted of the phrase “I wish to leave”. On use of this phrase the weekend would be completed and Colleen would strip, be given his clothes and depart immediately. These rules sounded draconian to Colleen but it made him all the more determined to stay the course because he really wanted to find out what it would be like to be under TOTAL control and this seemed his best ever chance.
Colleen was instructed to strip of everything except his chastity device and cuffs and collar and was placed on a St Andrew’s Cross. As soon as he was securely attached, a ball gag was placed in his mouth and Mistress snatched off the clamps and rubbed his chest hard as he writhed from the after shock. Mistress also decided that it was time that his Butt Plug was changed after she had given him an enema. The new plug while scarcely much bigger had the added advantage that it had a remotely operated shock device built in, which Mistress could administer at any time from a hidden switch. The chastity device and the Ball Gag Colleen now found had similar built in facility so Mistress could administer shocks to genitals backside and mouth at the same time or choose any combination. Mistress decided that a Bull Whip would be a good way to get Colleen started, so after blindfolding him she applied a delicate tracery of lashes from neck to ankle, turning him half way through so that she could continue down his back side. With Colleen now tastefully decorated from head to toe, Mistress decided that a Wartenburg Wheel should add to the decoration and she concentrated especially on Colleen’s feet, hands, face and nipples. Pleased with her handiwork she brought out the small clothespins and started making interesting designs on Colleen’s breasts, armpits and inside thighs. She also added some strings of pins connected by string for unzipping later. For Colleen’s nipples Mistress reserved the bones on three clicks and also between each finger and thumb on two clicks, whilst the one between the two sides of his nose was on one click to start with.
Although Colleen’s penis was somewhat spared tonight due to the chastity belt, Mistress was still able to reach the tip and insert, using a Q-tip, a modest helping of Tabasco sauce. Colleen had not been very quiet or still during this process whilst bound to the cross, but luckily it was the constant adding of so many more pain points that had a slight deadening effect, as the multiple bursts of pain from every direction created a blurring of the pain inputs into one total flow and gradually his struggles lessened as he entered subspace for the first time. Earlier Mistress had promised Colleen a Golden Shower and she now proceeded to prepare the necessary ingredients by filling up a jug with her nectar and pouring the warm liquid over Colleen’s face and letting it in run down his body, smearing his beautiful makeup in the process. Now Mistress proceeded to pull off some zippers and then removed the nipple clamps, followed by vigorous massage of the nipples. Finally when all the pins were removed Mistress unfastened Colleen, who at last stopped writhing in agony, and after a quick shower, Mistress held him for a while whilst he came down.
Now it was bedtime and Colleen looked forward to a collapse on to the King size bed in his bedroom. However this was not to be. Mistress lifted one side of the bed and Colleen saw to his horror that where there would normally be springs was a ventilated steel box, on which the mattress rested. Colleen was fastened to the four corners of the box by his ankle and wrist cuffs whilst his head and neck was held in a leather helmet, which fastened to his neckband. Finally a blindfold was pulled across the helmet and fastened and the bed mattress replaced. The metal of the box was very uncomfortable on his bare skin but eventually through a mist of pain, Colleen fell asleep with a satisfied smile on his face. Tomorrow would be a long day.
After a night punctuated with arousals to ease the pain of his position, Colleen was woken early by someone he guessed was an attendant by his attitude. He unfastened Colleen and led him to the shower area where he bathed and shaved. He was then told that he had 30 minutes to put on his own makeup and the attendant would then dress him in the clothes provided, after which Mistress would be down for inspection. Colleen managed to do what he thought was a good job of his makeup with the items provided and then summoned the attendant to get dressed. The skimp lacy bra was placed over a pair of realistic breasts, which were glued to his skin. Then a stiff corset was laced very tightly from his breasts to his groin. On top of this a one-piece latex suit was added which covered him from ankle to wrist and neck. He was placed in the presentation position and waited for Mistress. Mistress soon arrived and looked at her submissive. Naturally she found fault with his makeup and chalked up the first set of beatings for tonight. However she was soon ready to play with Colleen and had him kneel on all fours while she held him by a lead attached to his collar. Whilst Mistress ate her breakfast she fed Colleen morsels of food or had him lap water from a bowl on the floor. Of course the inevitable happened and Colleen was soon wanting to use the rest room. According to the rules he did not know when would be a correct time to ask. Eventually he summoned up courage to ask and of course it was not an appropriate time. He was given two choices, he could have his garments removed and go to the rest room and as punishment spend the morning back in his bed space, or he could find a solution without taking off his suit and enjoy Mistress for the morning. Colleen decided on the latter and suffered in silence as a warm feeling circulated his loins.
Mistress informed Colleen that she really felt that he needed a good paddling, so he was secured over a suitable arm chair, after Mistress had taken of his wig and fitted a leather hood over his head, which included an inflatable ball gag, no eyeholes and just two nostril vents. Colleen was now tightly arched with his bottom upwards and his hands and ankles tightly locked to shackles on the base of the armchair and totally constricted in his corset and suit. He could just hear Mistress tell him that she was going to toss two dice five times and he would get the resultant number of paddles. “Twelve” boomed Mistress’s voice “how unfortunate” and immediately the first paddle stroke hit his bottom and created an intense fire in his backside, but before he could react the next one and the next one crashed down. “Twelve again, how unlucky” and twelve more strokes crashed down on Colleen who could hardly move, then twelve more and twelve more and Colleen knew that he was going to receive a full sixty, but then a funny thing started to happen, the pain became more distant and he was floating on air. When the final twelve was announced, Colleen was ready, wanting the strokes, wanting even more. So this was subspace, just as he had experienced it last night, he was hooked! After he was released, Mistress slowly stripped him of all his clothing until he stood naked before her in just his false vagina and breasts as she tenderly sponged him down, dried him and then held him tenderly in her arms for what seemed like eternity. Mistress had Colleen touch up his make up, put back on his wig and put on a full-length dress, tight at the waist over the small corset, medium heels and then accompany her to lunch where they joined the other guests and their Mistress’s.
The standard guests were served with a piece of bread while the luxury guests had a nice lunch. Mistress however used her switch to turn on the stimulators in Colleen’s butt plug and false vagina at the most inappropriate moments, such as when Colleen had taken a large mouthful of food, but otherwise the meal passed with idle chatter from the Mistresses and responses when prompted from the subs. At the end of the meal Lady B appeared and announced that she had decided that the luxury guests needed to achieve a wider range of experiences, so she would draw lots for each sub to be allocated to a new room for the remainder of their stay. Colleen soon found out that she was now assigned to the …..
TO BE CONTINUED!

They lost only one game all season and won both their games in the annual Mini Fest tournament easily. Because we requested our team be kept together and SWU obliged, we were stacked compared to the other 2 teams. The U9 Premiers girls team next season will be in good shape haha.
On the last practice of the season, Penelope's coach asked if one of the boys team would like to scrimmage with the girls and they happily agreed thinking that they would crush the girls. The girls got a shot on goal but it went off the post early on in the game but they boys were like oh ya that counts having pity on them but the only team that got destroyed was theirs. The girls won 7-0 and the boys weren't too happy by the time they finished.
I didn't get to see a lot of Penelope's games in outdoor since Greg was her assistant coach, he took her to the games when Finley had practice which was most Thursdays. However, both Finley and I made it to her last game since Finley practiced on the Monday instead. This made us all happy! She worked hard (most nights hahaha) for her trophy.
One of the co-ordinators of SWU U8 Grassroots + Developmental Program is also a soccer player and a great tech person and so he requested that all the U8 girls and boys come do tech with the U9 girls and boys (Finley's team) for some extra training. Penelope was so nervous but it helped that she knows all the girls since they play with Finley and she knew the guys doing the tech since they did hers on Saturdays and during the Indoor season. She really liked the challenge of the U9 tech and made some really good plays in the scrimmages. She still technically has another indoor and outdoor season left of U8 but as per the advice of the coordinator, she will be evaluating for the U9 Premiers team in the fall. If she doesn't make the U9 A or B team, then we will bring her back to U8 but we are pretty confident she will make the U9 team and stay with all her friends and teammates that she loves.

As outrageous as his crimes were, U.S. District Judge Susie Morgan concluded Wednesday that Galvan is sorry, and she sentenced him to an awfully short two years in prison and fined him $5,000. On top of that, Galvan's expected to pay back the nearly $200,000 he stole. I bet Nagin, who was convicted Wednesday on 20 of 21 corruption charges, is wishing the judge in his case, Ginger Berrigan, will give him a similarly short sentence and just let him pay back the half-a-million bucks he stole. But he shouldn't count on it. Nagin is bald. Galvan has a full head of hair.

Convention Member Samuel Baldwin Olmstead
Born in Otsego County, New York in 1810. He came to the Northwest as a young man, living in Iowa and Minnesota. Prior to coming to Minnesota, Mr. Olmstead was involved with Iowa politics. He was named a delegate to the 1844 State Constitutional Convention. He represented Clayton County in the First General Assembly, 1946. Mr. Olmstead was also involved in lumbering. Lumbering operations were wide spread during the 1850s especially after the Indians were forced to live on reservations, and the pine forest of northern Minnesota was opened up to settlement. He married Lucy Howard, who was born in Columbus, N. Y.

Originally posted on Black America Web:
Angela Bassett — the 55-year-old proof that Black doesn’t crack! — graces the cover of the December 16th issue of JET looking more beautiful than ever. The stunning Black Nativity star opened to the magazine about her children facing racism and her personal struggles with infertility.
“The kids were playing one day, and a blonde, blue-eyed girl said that she didn’t want my daughter to be a part of the family. My son stood up to her and asked the child how would she feel if she was treated like that, and the girl said ‘bad.’ They were only 4 years old at the time,” Bassett said of her twins Bronwyn and Slater, whom were born via a surrogate in January 2006.
She went on to reveal the reason why she chose the surrogacy route.

Standing before a hotel ballroom packed with supporters, Bobby Kennedy had many people to thank after winning California's Democratic presidential primary 42 years ago on June 5, 1968. Among them was football player Rosey Grier.
The crowd cheered as Kennedy expressed his appreciation to "Rosey Grier, who said that he'd take care of anybody who didn't vote for me" in a kind way, because that's what we are in our country.
Grier, a family friend who had been out on the campaign trail with Kennedy and was protecting a pregnant Ethel Kennedy that night, grinned broadly and waved from the stage, where he stood behind the couple.
Moments later, having finished speaking, Bobby Kennedy jumped off the stage and began making his way through the Ambassador Hotel kitchen. After helping Ethel Kennedy from the stage, Grier said in a recent interview with the AARP Bulletin, he heard gunfire and ran toward the kitchen and saw Sirhan Sirhan waving a gun."
"I got his gun and his leg and pulled him up on this table," Grier said. "George Plimpton was trying to wrestle the gun out of his hand, but George couldn't do it. He wasn't strong enough. And so I had my hand covering George's hand, and so I just kind of put my finger under the hammer so it couldn't fire."
Grier wrenched the gun from Sirhan and put it in his pocket. As an angry crowd approached, Grier fended it off. He believes that otherwise Sirhan now serving a life sentence in California would have been killed that night.
After Bobby Kennedy was taken to the hospital and Sirhan to jail, Grier, known as the gentle giant, slumped to the floor and cried. Ethel Kennedy later summoned him to the hospital, where he found her lying next to her husband in his hospital bed. Also in the room were Ted Kennedy, Jackie Kennedy and others. Ethel Kennedy thanked him for coming, and after shaking hands with everyone, he left after a few moments. About 12 hours later, Bobby Kennedy died.
I grieved for him a long time, Grier wrote in Rosey, an Autobiography: the Gentle Giant. For years, I agonized about what I could have done differently.
A month later, an injury forced him to retire from the Los Angeles Rams, where he had been a member of the formidable defensive line known as the Fearsome Foursome. Stints as a singer as well as a television and film actor followed. In the early 1970s, he famously took up needlepoint, in part to calm his fear of flying, and wrote Rosey Grier's Needlepoint for Men. It didn't hurt, he has said, that it was also a great way to strike up conversations with women.
But two divorces and his work with troubled street kids left him burned out, depressed and lonely. By the late 1970s, he had bottomed out. Prayer was the only way he knew to keep his depression at bay. He joined the Crenshaw Christian Center in Los Angeles, and later became an ordained minister.
"I really realized that what I needed was a relationship with God, and it changed my whole life,"he told the Bulletin.
In the 1970s and 80s, he helped organize the construction of federally financed senior housing projects. He also threw a number of Senior Proms for Senior Citizens are getting hotels in Los Angeles to donate ballrooms and the musicians union to donate musicwhere celebrities, including Ethel Kennedy and Gene Kelly, mingled with older people, many of them with low incomes.
His focus now, however, is the urban community. In 1992, with San Diego businessman Estean Lenyoun, Grier founded Impact Urban America, which offers job training and housing to inner city residents.
Although he parted company with the Democratic Party over school prayer and abortion issues more than 25 years ago and became a Republican, he voted for President Obama and remains a supporter.
The great-grandson of slaves, Grier was named for Franklin Delano Roosevelt, who was running for president the year he was born, in 1932. He and his second wife, Margie, who were divorced and then remarried six years later in 1981, live in San Diego. They have one son, Roosevelt Kennedy Grier, who lives nearby. Grier also has a daughter from an earlier relationship, Sherryl Tubbs of New Jersey, as well as four grandchildren and three great-grandchildren.
He will turn 78 next month and is feeling fine, he said, although he occasionally suffers from some back and joint pains, which he calls "football flashbacks." His needlepointing days are behind him"it's very tedious," he says"and he relaxes by playing computer chess. Although he said he's made plenty of mistakes in his life, his only regret is that he never became a great guitar player, something he fantasized about but never pursued.
He is on the boards of the Milken Family and Prostate Cancer foundations, and recently shot a humorous public service announcement about prostate cancer prevention.
He speaks and preaches frequently on the need to end violence, greed, hatred and racism.
"Man is the one who has the ability and the key to changing our society by the way we treat each other, by the way we support one another, by the way we band against the evil stuff that goes on in our society," he said. "The solution is still within our grasp if we would only live by the rules of society, by loving one another as we love ourselves. That's God's rule."
Kitty Bennett is a news researcher and writer living in St. Petersburg, Fla.

Ok, people, I'm lifting out of the funk. I have been in a funk for approximately 5 days... that's funny... it feels like I have been in a funk for longer than that. That's because I find my vocational situation to be ridiculous, and I am borderline grumpy about it all the time. But that's not a funk.
Anyway, I think what helped me, cliche as it sounds, was exercise. I have been exercising religiously since last May (before which I had a very spotty 9 or 10 months from the August that I got to Japan). I've been doing the Spartacus workout, but I've been bored with it for some time, and not only that, I've plateaued and I really have needed to change things up for a while. Finally, last night I looked up the Spartacus 2 and glanced at some P90x stuff. I did the Spartacus 2 and the P90x ab ripper video. The video I did was only about 15 minutes long, so I'm not sure if that was the whole thing. Also, I hate to say this cause I don't want to give the wrong impression, but it seemed too easy to live up to the stories I've heard about P90x. Not that it was easy FOR ME. But I got through it alright, which I was surprised about. I always have to alter ab exercises a little because I have such an arched back, and I definitely took some breathers, but the first time through a new routine is always shoddy, and I just was surprised. It wasn't what I expected, but I liked it. Maybe it seemed easy because it took me time during each exercise to find a version that was ok for my back. Yeah, that's it.
Spartacus 2 seems a bit more leg heavy than Spartacus 1, and the cardio exercises are placed differently throughout the routine. When I was finished last night I felt really refreshed, and my legs are sore today, so that's a good sign that I have shaken things up. I want to try several P90x routines and see what combo will make a good routine for me. I can't work out every day, and I can't work out for an hour and a half, which I think is what P90x is all about, but I'm sure I can integrate some things to make an interesting and varied routine. I wish I could dance, too, but I just haven't found any classes in Japan that fit my tastes and needs. I feel like the funk has seriously ebbed since my work out last night. The squat jumps punched that funk in the face.
In other news, I am going to sign to stay in Japan for one more year. I feel positive that this will be my last year. I've got grad school on the mind, and family. I think it's important to get back to my family, especially for Knox's sake. I can't go another year without going home. My plan is to have my mom come out to Japan in July/August for a visit, and I will go home over Christmas for a visit. I want to go home during the summer, but my nenkyuu (paid time off) isn't going to stretch that far, I think, and the Christmas holidays make vacationing at that time optimal. I Like it here. I kinda love Japan. But my job? No. It is not for loving. But, as I have said before, I will continue to sit here, and I will do it so that I can enjoy the benefits of Japan for one more year, and at the end of that time, really be ready to go.
Everything outside of work is great. I wish I could pick up my apartment and scootch it on over to America. I love it's character. I love that the only door in the whole apartment that swings is the door to the toilet. I LOVE how inexpensive it is. I have a room for everything I need, and lots of storage space. I have a routine and places I like to go, and people I like to be with. I could go for some central heat. I could go for a TV and a computer that isn't so temperamental... but things are so good. My eikaiwa (conversation circle) is wonderful; the people are sweet and it's a real treat to get to spend time with them every week. Knox is great, and I think we are both settling into our new routines together and enjoying each other more. My bath tub is bad ass. My water pressure rocks. Yeah.
Now, I sent in like 60 pages of fiction to a company for writers that does critiques. I've had a lot of issues with this place; DZanc Books. First, they took my money and never said another word. I wrote them, and they said it was an honest mistake and that my account got closed accidentally the day they took my payment. They gave me a refund and still took my pages. I paid extra to send in extra pages. It was supposed to take 2 weeks to receive my critique. That was about 7 weeks ago. I've had many exchanges with the dude from the company. About 2 weeks ago he offered to give me a full refund again, and to get my critique back to me... I refused the refund, considering I had already been refunded most of the cost anyway, and said just give me my critique! I haven't heard from him since I refused the refund, about 2 weeks ago. I have written him, but he didn't get back to me. I'm not sure what to do at this point. Time shall tell, I suppose, and I hope I do get my critique at some point.

Highly recommend this dealer! He was fair, honest and a delight to work with. His prices were good and we’re thrilled with our new BMW!
I've been on the market for a nice pre-owned Infiniti for about 6 months. I shopped just about any where you can. I had some moments where I was ready... to just give up. One local dealership in particular let me walk over $500 and I had $4000 dollars in my hand for a down payment. After this experience I was ready to give up. But I was test driving the car at the dealership that would not work with me what so ever when I just happened to see the very same car I was test driving at Omars on Washington Rd. When I was done with the test drive at this particular dealership I left very frustrated. So I go to Omar's expecting the same thing, but this could not be further from the truth. My credit score is below 600 and I owned this Infiniti G37 sport with Navigation within 45min. I was insured through Affordable insurance in another 30min. Everyone that worked at Omar's was friendly and confidant in what they were doing. All the cars on the lot were eye candy and affordable. Not to mention every vehicle had a clean carfax. They made purchasing my new car very easy. They were willing to work with all the banks they could, adjust the down payment and the price of the car to get me driving that day. An hour later my temporary tag was on my new ride with a full tank of gas. Then I was eating dinner at Formosa's restaurant. I recommend if your on the market for a pre-owned car, truck, SUV, etc. definitely stop by Omar's and give them an opportunity to get you riding in your next new pre-owned vehicle. I'm not down grading any other pre-owned car lot's , I'm just sharing my experience with you and it was a great one!!! So don't go out shopping with out giving Omar's a shot. I could not be more satisfied and I would recommend anyone to there dealership. If i had gone there first I would have had most of my day off to get other things done. Thanks to everyone at Omar's for making my car shopping experiencing an Awesome one. Riding in style now!!!
Great people to do business with!! Omar, you rock!!! You helped my son get a good truck for a great price! We will be sure to look you up the next time... we, or any of our friends, are looking for a used vehicle.
Omar's Auto Sales is superior when providing customer service. They provided quality service as well as quality vehicles. I would recommend Omar's Auto... Sales to family and friends.
When I visited Omar's Auto Sales their customer service was excellent. They provided me with all my needs. I love the car they sold me and if I had any... issues they took care of it right then. I would recommend them to my friends and family.
Omar's car service was very good in helping me to get the car that I wanted. They didn't try to persuade me to get what they wanted me to have. They were... very professional, friendly and didn't mind explaining, or answering my questions. Wish I could give them 100 stars instead of five.
Excellent Customer service. The owner was very nice and I love the car that I bought from him. He showed me different cars. I drove some of them until... I found the car I want. I recommend him to those who want to buy a car or truck.

Hers was one of the most shocking stories; the 18-year-old said she had been assaulted in front of the main train station. According to her statement, a police officer had pulled the attacker from her, but she had discovered she was pregnant after spending some time in hospital and, uncertain if the baby had been conceived on that night, eventually got an abortion.
However, local newspaper Kölnische Rundschau now reports that her claim was completely invented.
At the end of last week, investigators visited the young woman at her home in northern Germany, the newspaper says, citing sources close to the investigation. During questioning, the 18-year-old admitted that she had not even been in Cologne on New Year's Eve.
The woman has reportedly made previous false allegations of crimes including sexual assualt.
She had not made an official complaint but instead turned immediately to the Cologne Lobby for Young Women, which has worked with victims of the New Year's Eve sexual assaults, and received help from the lobby for several months.
In mid-July, Frauke Mahr, the director of the lobby testified before the Committee of Inquiry into the events of New Year's Eve in Cologne, telling the 18-year-old's story as well as that of another girl who had been raped but had not gone to police.
The 18-year-old had said a group of men then surrounded her and “pushed her back and forth like a ball”. Eventually she landed on the ground and one man forced himself upon her.
Up until her testimony, eight other women had reported being forcibly penetrated by men with their fingers, which is classified as rape under German law. But this was the first case known of which full sexual intercourse was forced upon a woman.
The Cologne public prosecutors launched an investigation, but it was made difficult by the fact that no testimony from the police officer who reportedly separated the woman from her rapist could be found.
A total of around 650 women reported being assaulted in Cologne on New Year's Eve, with assaults also taking place in other cities across the country.
It is not clear whether the woman will now face charges of inventing an offence.

We have sad news that we have to re-home our sweet boy "Truffle". he is a spotted black and white rabbit. He is neutered and as also received his FILAVAC RHD VACCINE
He was bonded to a female that passed away a while ago. and we are in the process of moving and we cant have pets in our apt.
He loves pets and has never ever bit us. He loves to play with toys and nibble on paper towel rolls. and is also potty trained and gets along with cats!
please let us know what other information you may need to start the rehoming process.
We also have alot of things we can donate to your shelter when we bring him (litter/hay/toys/food/treats)

This listing has been closed and can’t be purchased.
Nico Dress Eggs
New Without Tags
I bought this dress on Depop because I thought it was an olive! I was very surprised when it arrived 😂. Hoping to pass it along to someone who will actually wear it! This dress was sold to me as nwot, and I only wore it for a few minutes to try it on.

17 September 2012
Over my eighteen years I have had several experiences that have developed the literacy skills that I now have. Most of the experiences were bad though, considering I’m not a big fan of writing. However there were a few good experiences that I did have in my literacy journey. There are three experiences in particular that come to mind when I think about my literacy journey. The first was the letter super heros in kindergarten, the second was the paper I had to write my junior year in high school, and last was scoring a five on my TCAP assessment test. These three things were three of the major moments in my literacy journey. The start of my literacy journey was probably in kindergarten when I learned my ABCs. To help us learn our ABCs my teacher had these blow up dolls with one letter on their chest. My teacher told us they were “super heros” telling us this to help us learn them because all little kids love a super hero. This was a very effective method my teacher had, because I remember learning my ABCs surprisingly fast. This is a great memory for me because this is where it all started for me. Without those super heros I probably never would’ve thought it was cool to work hard and learn my ABCs. The ABCs are the foundation everybody’s education making this experience for me probably the most important because I would be nowhere today if I didn’t know my ABCs.
The second experience that comes to my mind is my junior year in high school when I had to write the hardest paper I’ve ever had to write in my life. My junior year of high school was by far the hardest year of schooling I’ve ever had mainly because of my teacher Ms. Wolff. Ms. Wolff was a nice lady but a very hard and strict teacher. I struggled in her class all year but I struggled particularly in the second semester when she assigned the class a paper on the book we just read. We had three weeks to complete this paper, it seemed like a lot of time but it wasn’t at all. This paper unlike others I started early on because I knew it was a very big grade and I needed to do well on it. So I worked hard on this paper for three weeks and turned it in with high hopes and confidence. The next day in class I got my paper back and I received a sixty seven on it which immediately made me mad because I had worked so hard on it. Luckily my teacher gave us the option tom revise it and make a better grade on it. So I did revise and ended up passing it. After that paper the rest of the papers I had in high school seemed easier and I got better grades on all of my papers. My last experience I had was scoring a five on my TCAP writing assessment test. This experience was the best for me in my literacy journey. After working hard throughout my schooling career, and never really liking writing and to make a very high grade meant a lot to me. It showed me that hard work does pay off and all that work I did wasn’t for nothing. It was a very rewarding experience for me.
Over my years I’ve had several experiences in the development of literacy. The majority of my experiences were bad but there were some good ones in my journey. When I really think about the experiences I had I think about three main ones that show the development of my skills. The first was learning my ABCs with the letter super heros, the second was my paper I had to write my junior year, and the last one was scoring a five on my writing TCAP assessment. These experiences gave me the literacy skills that I have today and I’m glad I got to experience them and look forward to more experiences like them in the future.

Anthony's Bail Bonds
- General Info:
- Anthony Palasota is the owner of Anthony's Bail Bonds. He has over 26 years of experience in the bail industry, spanning several states. Anthony is also recognized by the State of Nevada as an expert witness regarding bail bonds. His knowledge of the bail industry is second to none. Anthony, with his expertise in creative underwriting, is able to solve your problems, no matter how complicated they may be. Anthony prides himself on his loyalty and honesty with his clients. This is the main reason for our many repeat clients and referrals. Our office manager has been with Anthony's Bail Bonds for more than 14 years. He has been trained by Anthony to also utilize creative underwriting techniques to help your friends and loved ones in jail. In his own right by following Anthony's lead, our office manager is also quite respected in the legal community. Between Anthony, our experienced office manager, and our skilled staff, we can make sure your loved ones will not spend any more time in custody that necessary. At Anthony's Bail Bonds, we understand how difficult it is have a friend or loved one in jail. Our goal is to listen carefully to your situation and provide the utmost professional, confidential, expedient service in the bail industry. We have been in business at the same location for over 15 years, and our reputation within the legal community is impeccable.
- Payment method:
- check, debit, visa, mastercard
- Downtown Las Vegas
Licensed and Bonded Agents
Anthony's Bail Bonds in Las Vegas
- Bail Bonds, Financial Services, Business & Commercial Insurance, Bail Bond Referral Service, Investments
- Other Information:
My father was arrested for a DUI in January of 2013. Whin i got the call from the City of las Vegas Jail I had no idea what to do. I went down to the jail and they told me I had to pay thousands of dollars to bail him out, which I did not have. I found Anthonys Bail Bonds online and spoke with a very polite man who informed me that they could do a Bail Bond to get my father released for only a percentage of the bail amount. At the office I spent about 20 min filling out some paperwork and I was told that my father would be released within about 12 hours. About 6 hours later my father was calling me to come pick him up. Anthonys was the best choice I could have made in this situation. Thank you so much Anthonys Bail Bonds.
When my dad got arrested, I really didn't know what to do. I called a bunch of bail bond companies and pretty much every one I called was either unproffesional or charged way too much on fees. I called Anthonys and was really pleased with them. I talked with Kelvin and he was very helpful and informative. They processed the bond really quickly and my dad was out in no time! They made it so easy and if I ever needed a bond company again, I would definitely go back .
Posted: 7/26/2010Provided by Citysearch -
My daughter was arrested for a DUI. I called several bondsmen trying to get information. All of them said they would call me back and never did.
The lady I spoke to at Anthony's (Pat?) took the time to explain she had to fax the jail to get the information and promissed to call me when they faxed back. She was the only one who took the time to explain to me what was happening and the only one that did call me back.
When I went to get the bail I met Anthony, a very nice man. They helped me find my daughters car and even took the papers to the jail for me.
Anthony's Bail Bonds is very helpful, call them anytime you need help.
I am young and had no idea what I was doing when I called Anthony's. I've never had to bail anyone out before and never really had to talk to anyone about it. Robert explained everything to me and even helped me to calm down when I was in a stressed state of mind. He was almost like a counselor! He knew how to answer every question I had (and I had like a million questions) and even told me he would stay longer than his shift so that I could come down and talk to him. If I ever need this service again I will definitely be calling here. I recommend everyone else to do the same. :)
I'm a Las Vegas native. Unfortunately, I've had several arrests in the 30some years I've lived here. Because of this, I have used many of the bondsman in town.
When my girl went to get my bond she had to use some of our rent money. When Anthony heard her tell this to the lady that was helping her, he told her to pay the rent and let us pay the last of the fee the next payday.
Anthony's is the best I have used. His staff is professional, knowledgable and friendly. They don't charge extra fees for notarys and runners like others have in the past.
When someone is locked up, you don't need a free tshirt or ride home, you need someone who will help you get them out. Anthony's will help you get them out, and won't charge extra to do it. Thanks Anthony's, John R
When I first arrived at Anthony's Bail Bonds I was upset because of the situation we were in. But the people at Anthony's explained how the bond works and answered all my questions. We even had a few laughs together. I'll recommend them if anyone I know needs a bondsman.
My brother had a $20,000.00 bail. I called several companies, but nobody would help me because we were new in town. Then I called Anthony's, the man I spoke to was very nice and asked some questions none of the others did. He said they would be able to help me. The lady that helped me the next morning was very polite, she even took the papers to the jail for me. I wish I would have called them first, they are the best!

Eph. 6:12 For we do not wrestle against flesh and blood, but against the rulers, against the authorities, against the cosmic powers over this present darkness, against the spiritual forces of evil in the heavenly places.
St. Anthony the Great ca. 251-356
For as he was sitting alone on the mountain, if ever he was in perplexity in his meditations, this was revealed to him by Providence in prayer. And the happy man, as it is written, was taught of God. After this, when he once had a discussion with certain men who had come to him concerning the state of the soul and of what nature its place will be after this life, the following night one from above called him, saying, ‘Antony, rise, go out and look.’ Having gone out therefore (for he knew whom he ought to obey) looking up, he beheld one standing and reaching to the clouds, tall, hideous, and fearful, and others ascending as though they were winged. And the figure stretched forth his hands, and some of those who were ascending were stayed by him, while others flew above, and having escaped heaven-ward, were borne aloft free from care. At such, therefore, the giant gnashed his teeth, but rejoiced over those who fell back. And immediately a voice came to Antony, ‘Do you understand what you see?’ And his understanding was opened, and he understood that it was the passing of souls, and that the tall being who stood was the enemy who envies the faithful. And those whom he caught and stopped from passing through are accountable to him, while those whom he was unable to hold as they passed upwards had not been subservient to him. So having seen this, and as it were being reminded, he struggled the more daily to advance towards those things which were before. And these visions he was unwilling to tell, but as he spent much time in prayer, and was amazed, when those who were with him pressed him with questions and forced him, he was compelled to speak, as a father who cannot withhold ought from his children. And he thought that as his conscience was clear, the account would be beneficial for them, that they might learn that discipline bore good fruit, and that visions were oftentimes the solace of their labours. (St. Athanasius the Great, Life of St. Anthony 66)
St. John Cassian ca. 360-435
We can then see clear reasons, in addition to those ideas which we expounded above, why they are called principalities or powers; viz., because they rule and preside over different nations, and at least hold sway over inferior spirits and demons, of which the Gospels give us evidence by their own confession that there exist legions. For they could not be called lords unless they had some over whom to exercise the sway of lordship; nor could they be called powers or principalities, unless there were some over whom they could claim power: and this we find pointed out very clearly in the gospel by the Pharisees in their blasphemy:
He casts out devils by Beelzebub the prince of the devils, Lk. 11:15 for we find that they are also called
rulers of darkness, Eph. 6:12 and that one of them is styled
the prince of this world. Jn. 14:30 But the blessed Apostle declares that hereafter, when all things shall be subdued to Christ, these orders shall be destroyed, saying:
When He shall have delivered up the kingdom to God even the Father, when He shall have destroyed all principalities and powers and dominions. 1 Cor. 15:24 And this certainly can only take place if they are removed from the sway of those over whom we know that powers and dominions and principalities take charge in this world.
For no one doubts that not without cause or reason are the same titles of rank assigned to the better sort, and that they are names of office and of worth or dignity, for it is plain that they are termed angels, i.e., messengers from their office of bearing messages, and the appropriateness of the name teaches that they are
archangels because they preside over angels,
dominions because they hold dominion over certain persons, and
principalities because they have some to be princes over, and
thrones because they are so near to God and so privy and close to Him that the Divine Majesty specially rests in them as in a Divine throne, and in a way reclines surely on them.
But that unclean spirits are ruled over by worse powers and are subject to them we not only find from those passages of Scripture, recorded in the Gospels when the Pharisees maligned the Lord, and He answered
If I by Beelzebub the prince of the devils cast out devils, Lk. 11:19 but we are also taught this by clear visions and many experiences of the saints, for when one of our brethren was making a journey in this desert, as day was now declining he found a cave and stopped there meaning to say his evening office in it, and there midnight passed while he was still singing the Psalms. And when after he had finished his office he sat down a little before refreshing his wearied body, on a sudden he began to see innumerable troops of demons gathering together on all sides, who came forward in an immense crowd, and a long line, some preceding and others following their prince; who at length arrived, being taller and more dreadful to look at than all the others; and, a throne having been placed, he sat down as on some lofty tribunal, and began to investigate by a searching examination the actions of each one of them; and those who said that they had not yet been able to circumvent their rivals, he commanded to be driven out of his sight with shame and ignominy as idle and slothful, rebuking them with angry wrath for the waste of so much time, and for their labour thrown away: but those who reported that they had deceived those assigned to them, he dismissed before all with the highest praise amidst the exultation and applause of all, as most brave warriors, and most renowned as an example to all the rest: and when in this number some most evil spirit had presented himself, in delight at having to relate some magnificent triumph, he mentioned the name of a very well known monk, and declared that after having incessantly attacked him for fifteen years, he had at last got the better of him, so as to destroy him that very same night by the sin of fornication, for that he had not only impelled him to commit adultery with some consecrated maid, but had actually persuaded him to keep her and marry her. And when there arose shouts of joy at this narrative, he was extolled with the highest praise by the prince of darkness, and departed crowned with great honours. And so when at break of day the whole swarm of demons had vanished from his eyes, the brother being doubtful about the assertion of the unclean spirit, and rather thinking that he had desired to entice him by an ancient customary deceit, and to brand an innocent brother with the crime of incest, being mindful of those words of the gospel; viz., that
he abode not in the truth because there is no truth in him. When he speaks a lie, he speaks of his own, for he is a liar, and its father, Jn. 8:44 he made his way to Pelusium, where he knew that the man lived, whom the evil spirit declared to be destroyed: for the brother was very well known to him, and when he had asked him, he found that on the same night on which that foul demon had announced his downfall to his company and prince, he had left his former monastery, and sought the town, and had gone astray by a wretched fall with the girl mentioned. (Conferences 8, 14-16)
St. John Moschos ca. 550-619
Abba Anthony, superior and builder of the Lavra of the Aeliotes, told us about Abba Theodosius the solitary. He said: Before taking up the solitary life, I went into a trance and saw a young man whose appearance was brighter than the sun. He took me by the hand and said to me: ‘Come, for you must fight’, and he led me into an [amphi-] theatre larger than words could describe. I could see that the theatre was full of men, those on the one side dressed in white whilst those on the other side were black-faced ones. As he led me to the sanded pit of the theatre I saw a black-faced man of exceedingly large stature whose head stood as high as the clouds, strong and ugly. Then the youth who I saw in the vision said to me: ‘It is with this one you must fight.’ When I saw the man, I was horror-struck; I began to quake and to be terrified. I started pleading with him who had brought me there, saying: ‘What man who is merely mortal could strive with that one?Not even the whole human race put together could withstand this fellow’. But the noble youth said to me: ‘Go in with confidence, for when you have joined in combat with him, it is I who shall decide the result and award the victor’s crown. Almost as soon as I had gone into the sanded pit and we had come to grips with each other, the noble umpire came at once, made his decision and awarded me the crown. The faction of the black-faced ones disappeared with moaning and groaning. The other faction, consisting of those who wore white, shouted their approval of the umpire and of him who awarded me an auspicious victory. (The Spiritual Meadow 66)

AN: This is my first X-men story and I'm feeling a little shaky with it so far, having never written these characters before. Constructive criticism is welcome on that point, since writing characters correctly is something I strive for.
The story will probably undergo a lot of revision, since I'm not entirely sure where I'm going with it, though I have a vague idea. So don't be surprised if you look back and find things a little different. I just thought it would be fun to post it and see what kind of response it gets.
I've set it in the 'Wolverine and the X-Men' fandom, since that is my favorite version of Nightcrawler. But there may be some inconsistencies since I am also fond of most of the other X-Men interpretations in one way or another. Really, my imagination likes to take bits and pieces of each and mix them together into my own wild canon, but I'll try to stay at least remotely true. Promise. :)
I've chosen not to write Kurt's accent, since I think most everyone can imagine it just fine without my help.
Hope you enjoy!
"Elf, get yourself outta bed, NOW!"
Kurt decided that Logan's rough voice was better than any alarm clock ever invented, since it brought him rapidly out of a sound sleep and nearly shot him through the roof. he sat up and blinked toward the doorway, seeing Logan's bulky form in a blurry haze before his vision cleared of sleep.
"Logan, I wish you wouldn't do that." He groaned.
"I can pick up Kitty myself if you need more beauty sleep."
Kurt shook his head. "Sorry, I forgot. What time is it?"
"Time to go." Logan said unhelpfully. Kurt sat up and glanced at his alarm clock, which apparently had not gone off. Either that, or he hadn't heard it. Its digital numbers were blinking and hour and a half later than when he had intended to be up.
He got out of bed and grabbed some clothes. "I'll be right down. I wouldn't want to subject Kitty to your morning temper for that long drive."
Logan snorted and left.
Kurt scowled as he pulled on his jeans and t-shirt, realizing that he wouldn't have time to eat breakfast. Kitty's plane would be landing in less than an hour. They were already going to be late. His stomach growled and he briefly considered telling Logan to go without him, but Kitty had been gone for a month visiting her parents and he was anxious to see her. She would be disappointed if he failed to show up.
Logan couldn't help an amused smirk when Kurt appeared in the passenger seat of the car in a puff of red smoke. It was obvious he wasn't awake yet. His eyes were unfocused and his black hair was disheveled, sticking up in all different directions. He didn't say a word as Logan brought the car out of the long drive of the institute and through the gate, sitting in a slumped posture that made him look younger than his nineteen years. He yawned as they joined the morning traffic on the freeway. "Wake me when we get there." he muttered.
"This couldn't have something to do with that little joke you played on Popsicle Boy last week, could it?"
Kurt's eyes narrowed and he scowled. "Ja." 'Had frosting his bed sheets really been a fair retaliation for such a little--'
"Right. Well, just leave me out of it. I like to sleep."
"So do I. Next time he won't know it was me. "Kurt said confidently as he leaned back. Next time he would remember not to teleport out of the room of the person whose hair he had just dyed purple in their sleep. The smell of sulfur was a bit of a giveaway.
Logan rolled his eyes. "Kids."
Kurt didn't sleep for long. His stomach woke him before they were halfway to the airport. He wasn't complaining, but Logan noticed the frown of discomfort which seemed out of place on Kurt's normally cheerful face. Kurt's heightened metabolism made skipping a meal more painful than it was for most teenagers.
Wordlessly, Logan turned off at a pastry shop. Kurt glanced at him, eyebrow raised.
"You look pitiful. Besides, I didn't have breakfast either."
Throwing Logan a grateful look, Kurt settled in to wait while the older man got their food. There was no need for him to go inside the shop since Logan knew how much he could eat, and neither of them had any desire to cause a scene; something that happened all too often when Kurt went out in public. Logan frequently caused scenes as well, but only when someone got on his nerves.
Logan came out ten minutes later and dropped a pile of assorted wrapped pastries on Kurt's lap, working his way through a mere two cinnamon rolls himself. "There you go, Elf. Breakfast of champions."
"Danke." Kurt said enthusiastically, tucking into the food, his mood brightening immediately.
Logan was about to head them out again when they heard an explosion on an adjoining street street, followed by screams. Kurt glanced at Logan and the older mutant put the car back in park. "Half-Pint will have to wait."
They raced down the street, against the flow of people fleeing in the opposite direction until they saw the flaming building. Fortunately it was fairly small and there weren't many structures near it, but it was easy to see that there was no saving it. All that could be hoped for was to save the people inside--if there were any.
Logan collared a man who looked like he was trying to help organize things. "Anyone inside?"
"The Grants live there. Yes, they probably are. Laura and the two kids at least." The man looked grim as though he didn't expect to ever see the family alive again. Understandable, since the building was obviously in dire straits.
Kurt moved close enough to see through a window opening. The hot flames licked at his fur and took his breath away, but a moment later, he disappeared, teleporting into the house. Logan followed, simply making a new entrance with his claws, roaring as hot glass remnants and flaming wood tore at his skin.
Kurt pointed to a closed door. "In there!" He coughed.
"Stand back!" Logan yelled through the door a second before he knocked it down, scattering sparks and flaming debris across the room. Kurt shielded his eyes and when he looked up it was barely in time to catch the screaming child that Logan practically threw into his arms. The little girl's cries of terror intensified when she saw Kurt, but he didn't have time to be hurt by her reaction. Logan and two other people emerged coughing from the room, and Kurt quickly looked for the window opening and teleported through, depositing the girl on the lawn a safe distance from the house before going back in. His lungs couldn't take much more, but if Logan could get the woman out, he could get the boy.
Logan apparently thought the same thing, thrusting the scared teenaged boy toward Kurt as soon as he appeared. "Get him out. I'm right behind you."
The main body of the house collapsed only seconds after Kurt, Logan and the family were out on the lawn. The firemen and EMTs were ready to take over helping the dazed little family, and Kurt and Logan were happy to oblige, but the woman suddenly looked around wildly. "Where's Molly?"
Kurt looked back to the place he had left the child. There had been so many people around he had assumed a neighbor would take care of her, but now, she was nowhere to be seen.
AN: So, what do you think? Let me know! Want more?

- Andrew Marchand, ESPN Senior Writer
- 0 Shares
NEW YORK -- In Derek Jeter's seventh at-bat of his career, on May 30th, 1995 he connected on a single off Seattle's Tim Belcher for his first hit. When Jeter reached first, none other than Tino Martinez was standing there for Seattle.
"I told him, 'Congratulations, and there are many more to come,' because I had read about him," said Martinez on ESPN New York 98.7 FM's Michael Kay Show. "Both he and Alex Rodriguez and Nomar Garciaparra, those guys were all coming up as the next superstars of the game and all that. I didn't know much about him besides what I read."
In the video, Jeter looks pretty unassuming, but at the end he cracks a slight smile when Martinez speaks.
"At that time, I obviously didn't think there would be 3,000 and something hits after that," Martinez said. "It is just an amazing career he has had."
On Saturday, Martinez will be honored with a plaque in Monument Park. Martinez said he found out about his plaque in April. He recognized the number as an incoming call from the Yankees. This is not unusual as he thought someone was asking him to make an appearance. Instead, he was told he was on speaker phone and there were 10 people in the room.
"I basically almost dropped the phone," Martinez said. "I was like, 'What?'"
He was totally surprised and called it as great an honor a player could have in the game.

Links to documents on the Lambeth Palace website have been restored.
Menu system changed to help mobile devices.
Several times in the past the church at Deane has organised fund raising events. This one was held on 25th, 26th and 28th November 1925. For the past ten years, there had not been an official vicarage house at Deane. The previous one in the churchyard had been demolished and money was being raised to buy one on Junction Road, called the Bakewells.

In a few weeks you will be 6 years old, and I have been so privileged to be your grandmother. I feel sure that your mother may save this letter to you for a few years. But, being "old in the tooth" (she will explain that too), I feel like sharing now.
When I felt a small, pea-size lump on my right breast in early 2001, I went to my gynecologist, who also felt it and ordered a mammogram. The report of the mammogram said that everything looked normal but added what I call a "CYA" that I might possibly want to see a surgeon.
The surgeon read the report and examined me, then said, "I don't think it is anything." I replied that I was not comfortable with that, and had he said that it definitely was not cancer, I would have been satisfied. He said that he could do a needle biopsy then and there. If the report came back negative for cancer, we would do nothing. But if it came back "uncertain," we would do the surgical biopsy.
The report came back "uncertain," and we scheduled the biopsy, which proved that I had stage one cancer. I had a follow-up surgery to remove the cancer and then 30 radiation treatments. I have remained cancer-free since then.
Had I not been persistent, the outcome would have been much worse when diagnosed a year later with the next routine mammogram. So, I pray that you never have breast cancer. But I hope you will always be alert about what is going on with your body. When you have concerns, voice them to your doctors and only accept the answers that seem reasonable to you.
Your adoring grandmother,

Spring or summer?
I remember the beginning of one June long ago, I do not know why I think it was 7th of June. I cannot have been much over 10. I was running to a shop, the first time without a coat. I was thinking how wonderful it was that it was summer at last.
Nowadays, like this year, it is often warm halfway to May. This year it got really warm, 23 to 24 degrees Celsius. on 25th of May. On Friday, after two days, it will be June. It is already much colder,the night two days ago, it was 0 degrees.
The spring was ery early this year, the leaves started to grow in the birches a couple of weeks earlier than usual. I love so much the gentle green of the young leaves.

However, a story of how a critically-ill patient in a remote village in the state received help from a leading Delhi hospital to survive shows a glimmer of hope in such gloomy times.
Two weeks ago, Dr Ushast Dhir of the Sir Ganga Ram Hospital here, received a distress call from Mofisur Rehman. He frantically asked for help for his friend, Lalchand Biswas, whose abdomen had swelled and was barely breathing. After learning about the patient's medical history, Dhir, a gastrointestinal and liver transplant surgeon, diagnosed that Biswas had acute liver failure due to liver cirrhosis.
"Rehman obtained my number through a patient I treated in Guwahati when I visited there during an assignment in February this year. Rehman told me that all the hospitals in the area were closed, and the doctors were also not available. I asked him to show me the patient on a video call," he said.
Dhir immediately made arrangements for the medical teleconsultation through video conferencing. However, there was a further challenge as there was no internet connectivity in the place Biswas was.
As time passed, the patient started getting unconscious. Meanwhile, Rehman arranged a fishing boat and searched for an area where internet connectivity was available. "The floods have destroyed the network connectivity in most parts. We navigated to find a place where the mobile internet was available. After three hours, we reached an area on higher ground where the internet connection was available," said Rehman.
After the link was set-up, Dhir saw the patient. He demonstrated to Biswas' wife, who had accompanied him on the boat, how to check the pulse and directed her to check other vitals.
As Biswas needed medication urgently, Dhir's local contacts in Guwahati came handy here. "I rang up my contacts who transported medicines and injections in an hour to the patient. However, I was worried about how his wife would administer him the medication," he said.
Fortunately, it was discovered that Rehman is a pharmacist and Dhir gave him instructions for clinical examinations and administering injections. Rehman and Biswas' wife followed every instruction till Biswas regained consciousness after six hours.
Dhir then regularly followed up on Biswas' condition, while the hospital also delivered a month's supply of medicine and injections to him. "Currently, his condition is stable. However, he would need a liver transplant for a recovery," he said.
Dhir also said that the hospital is also planning to fly Biswas down to Delhi for the surgery. "We are taking stock of funds and logistics, which would be needed in the process. Once the situation normalises there, we would call him here," he added.
Hospital Chairman, Dr D.S. Rana took pride over his hospital's assistance to Biswas. "Our hospital follows the ideals of Sir Ganga Ram, who was always at the forefront to help needy patients irrespective of distance and their financial conditions. This was one more such step in that direction," he said.
Rehman also expressed his gratitude for the immediate medical assistance he received from the hospital. "All the hospitals were closed in our area at that time. Without quick medical advice, my friend would have died. I wanted to help him as he has no one in the family who can take care of him. I am thankful to SGRH for their help," he said.

In movies, particularly ones aimed at a younger audience which involve cars are given names and tend to have a gender. The best example of this is in Cars (2006) which is all about, well, cars. Each has it’s own gender and personality which seem very typical to the car in which they are. One in particular is the VW Camper Van, which is shown as a hippie as they were very popular among the stereotype in the 70s.
Before Disney made Cars there was Brum (1991-2002) which was a TV series about a toy cars travel around the city which his owner in away. Brum was obviously just called this because of the sound a car makes, and was made for young children (I remember watching it when I was young) but it was the first thing I saw where it was a car with seemingly intelligent, self-driven car with characteristics. Another film I thought of was Herbie which stared in six films, the earliest being The Love Bug (1968) and the most recent Herbie: Fully Loaded (2005). The decal on the VW Beetle has been made quite iconic as many people have recreated it on their own. In these film Herbie is a sentient anthropomorphic, a car with feelings. Most people who own a car spend a lot of their time in it, travelling to work, college or uni, or just travelling in general and get quite attached, especially if they’ve had them for a long time. Perhaps having a car for so long it can seem like it has characteristics of its only, little things that you know make it work, for example in order to turn my Dads Camper Van on you have to pump the clutch three times before trying to turn on the engine. Does this actually do anything? I don’t know but it’s things like this which I think become part of the attachment we have to our cars.
After seeing a film where the whole world are cars rather than people, it’s hard not to think of cars in our own world in this way. Perhaps Disney when making the film where thinking about how different cars seem more male than female, and what kind of personalities they might have. I would be interested to know where the inspiration for the film Cars came from. Overall as films are part of our popular culture, it creates a norm for people to name their cars based on their appearance, perhaps since these types of films we’ve seen more of it.

The Night Walker
In a dark misty forest, there was a strange tree, one of it's kind, present in the deepest and the darkest part, where nobody dared to go, neither common men, nor beasts. The tree was the only one which had made it's way into the history books, which the children were made to study. This was the only tree that had been able to do something other than those innocent dull trees around it.
What had the tree done? No one knew the exact thing, but it was commonly believed that this tree had somehow managed to move, all by itself, from it's place in the backyard of the Sawyer family's ancient house, right in the middle of the night, when everybody was sound asleep. It was a cool, dark night, with a slight shower. Those who discovered the tracks left by the moving tree in the morning found a strange note left on the ground, as follows:
My dear people, I'm going to the place I rightly call my home, and am really sorry for the inconveniance caused by my deed I had been asked to do by one of you. I'll advise you, my dears, that trying to replant in the backyard will be a futile effort. I'm really unable to stay in the backyard with sleepy lazy trees. I don't want to hurt you, so, please don't force me. I'm offering my rescuer a rare honour, he will be free to come to the place I really belong, and will be offered a special secret gift for his deed...
The note had been signed with a strange name, under which 'The Night Walker' had been written in sparkling dark green ink. All those present in the place were tempted, and finally unable to resist, followed the strange tracks left by the tree, and found themselves in a strange forest. The forest seemed alive, with strange sounds, and when the ones after the ancient tree finally found it, right in the middle of the forest, they almost fainted as the tree yelled, "Go away! Don't dare to touch me!" The tree ran away, making the group dumbly stare at the spot the tree had been, just moments ago.
Finally, all of them returned, and soon the tree became famous. The forest was searched, but it was a futile effort, as the tree had probably disappeared, leaving no trace behind. But, after some days, when the issue had almost died down, it again erupted like a volcano, spreading like wildfire, as the tree was seen strolling in the backyard of the Sawyer house, on a cold, dark night. Tom's father had been feeling ill for the past few days, mainly due to heavy duty and lack of rest, and when he saw the tree from a window, he rushed out of the house to 'capture' the walking tree. He only made it to the steps of the rear balcony, when he collapsed and fell on the ground, unconscious. Next morning, a note was found on his lap, saying:
I had warned him, but he didn't heed the warnings. I'm sorry. I'm back in the backyard, but don't dare to cross the red line marked around me. You'll regret your decision if you don't abide by the thing said in this note.
Those who had got the news of the tree's return hurried to the Sawyers' and soon the backyard was full, overflowing with people wishing to get a look at the famous tree. Newspapers and news channels were full of the pictures of this tree named The Night Walker, or The Walking Tree, and just when the people were getting tired of watching the tree, a boy crossed the red line, and disappeared with a pop, and no one dared to defy the order displayed on the signboard just near the red line. Slowly, the crowd began thinning, till only the Sawyers were left. Soon, all the elders departed, leaving Tom with his group.
"Where did the boy go?" asked Tom, smiling widely. "I am sure it'll be very good to see what happens next!" The others in his group agreed, and patted Tom, saying in unison: "Keep your heads cool!"
"Now, study well! No more fun till the Grand Day, fine? We'll have plenty of time to see what more the book I had found has to offer. Rest assured, It'll really be fun! Wasn't it so today?" Tom asked his friends, beaming with joy."Why not? You really are a genious!" replied his sister, who was in Tom's group.
"So, prepare well for exams till we meet again!"
"You too! Bye!"
~Hope you like it!~

Hello Blogger? Why won't you let me download photos? We've always gotten along , did I hurt you feelings in some way? Are my photos that bad? I mean I know their not great but not so bad that you won't let me download them. What gives?
Sorry I had to vent. I'm done now.

Ik this is late, but I've been struggling over the past nine days to find the right words. I miss you more than you will ever know, and I love you more than you will ever know. I know you're in a better place now. You are always in my thoughts and prayers. I admire you so much. No one deserves to go through what you went through. I am comfortable saying that you beat cancer. I was listening to a speech by someone who has cancer the other day, and he said you don't lose your battle by dying. You win your battle by the way you live. With the way you lived, I am comfortable saying you won. You enriched the lives of everyone you came across. You made me a much better person. Being your best friend has been the greatest honor of my life, and to know you felt the same way is an even bigger. one I will always keep you in my heart. You're my best friend. Know that this goodbye isn't forever. I love you buddy. Rest easy.
I miss you Pistachio. I miss coming to OFIBTY and not seeing your icon on chat. I miss how you always stood up for me and didn't ban me when I made all those untasteful jokes. You were like a big brother I never had and I will always remember you. When I go to Joeyland, I will probably write 'Joey was here' on wall or sth, I write it all the time. You were kind of like a dad, so this song goes out to you: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9VaTDvBo_zI
I know you're never going to reply to this, but I still am leaving this message anyways. Joey, I miss you, I miss you a lot. I know you wouldn't want me to, but I do. You've changed me so much as a person for the better, and I will never forget you, ever. You're in a better place now and not in pain anymore, and I'm happy about that. I don't want to be selfish and wish you were here, even though you were suffering, but I do. I do wish you were here. You were probably one of the nicest and sweetest and funniest guys I've ever met, and it kills me how such bad things happen to such great people, it's sad, it really is. I know I told you that you'd make it through, and you'll win, but you tried your hardest. You fought and fought and fought but sadly, you didn't win. I commend you so much Joey, and you'll forever be in my hearts, my little Dutch boy.
Every time I come on OFIBTY, I get excited that maybe, just maybe you responded to my message. I check, and realize it was just a stupid fantasy, but maybe just maybe you did make it through, and you're not suffering anymore, and you've just returned to your old life, got back together with your old friends, and I instantly feel happy for you. So maybe that's what happened, and that's what I'm gonna make myself think happened to you, because I want the best, and no one deserves the end you might've had.
I know you're never going to read this, Joey. And that just hurts. More than anything.
But I just wanted to say that I loved you. You were one of my best friends; I trusted you with my personal troubles, we gave each other advice, you were cute and sweet and hilarious. As much as I'm trying not to reduce to a quivering, snivelling wreck on my floor, I'm tearing up writing this.

DAILY INTERVIEW TRANSCRIPTS
Head Coach John Harbaugh
Opening statement: "Ok, good to see everybody. Just finished up the main part of our preparation, obviously, for the week. Thought we had a really good week of practice. The guys are preparing for a tough football game against a really good team. Obviously, there's a lot on the line, but there always is. There will be a lot on the line on Thursday; there will be a lot on the line for the rest of the game throughout the course of the year. So, this is another one of those opportunities, more than anything. We're looking forward to doing everything we can to take advantage of it."
Talk about A.J. Green and what he brings to their offense and the playmaker that he's been at such a young stage of his career... (Mark Zinno) "A.J. is a guy that obviously has gone up and made catches for them; he's made plays for them. He's a tremendous athlete. He's still learning his craft, I think, as a wide receiver. But, he's learning pretty quickly. That catch he made against Pittsburgh that he got hurt a little bit on, that's as good a play as you're ever going to see in this league. He's a guy we're going to have to contend with for many years to come in the division, so we're really impressed with him."
Cam Cameron said he thinks Lee Evans may need another week or two. Do you think he's getting closer? (Aaron Wilson) "I think he's getting closer, yes. He's definitely getting closer. Just have to see how it goes."
How has Dannell Ellerbe progressed? He's practiced on a limited basis, but he was a full participant yesterday, as far as getting back on the field? (Luke Jones) "He's progressed well. It's another situation where we're just going to have to see how it goes. You just don't know. Hamstrings are very tricky. We've got other guys that we've brought back a little bit early, and they've reinjured it. Anthony Allen is an example of that. So that's… It's going to be something that we're just going to have to see, really, on Sunday. I think he got through the practices pretty well, but until you open it up and feel right before the game that it's not going to grab or pull, you really don't know."
Is there an update on Ray Lewis? (Rob Carlin) "No."
Can you use the crowd to your advantage this week with a young quarterback? (Jim Forner) "Yeah, I think so, absolutely. We have a great crowd. We haven't been anywhere yet where it's been anything like being at home, and we've been in some great places. The last two road games have been tremendously loud places, but they aren't like M&T [Bank Stadium]. Our fans are the best. I'm pretty sure they're going to be pretty fired up for this game – big time."
Throughout the season, there are ups and downs. How much did you learn from your dad in terms of how to handle the ebb and flow of the season? (Aaron Wilson) "Pretty much everything I know I learned from my dad. He understands that. You get a chance to talk to him after games and put it in perspective in terms of remembering what's important. I think it goes back through the course of the week. We had our little boxing match on Monday in our press conference. I think the thing that I was trying to keep focused on is the fact that it's really about football. It's really about the way you play. It's really about not turning the ball over – really playing field position football and doing all the things you need to do. Within that, there's very much conversation about [when] you run it, you throw it… All those kinds of decisions are very good conversations. But to try to get into the – I'll use a crazy term – the esoteric stuff, you know, it just is not valuable. It doesn't help you really, as a football coach or a football team. So we leave this to you guys. You guys are journalism majors. Man, you know how to put those things together and craft. (laughter) Some of you, right? One of our guys just [flinched] over here. (laughter) So, we just try and focus on the football. What we need to do is go out and play a good football game, and then we'll see what happens."
Have you found any weak links in Cincinnati's defense or have they been pretty solid all year long? (Mark Zinno) "Yeah, I don't think [there are] any weak links. They're a top five defense. When you watch them on tape you can see why, they're strong in every facet. But you attack them. There are openings in every defense, just by scheme. There are opportunities in there just by the way your guys execute. And that's what we need to try to take advantage of. We do that by playing well."
Matt Stover is getting into the Ring of Honor this weekend. What are your thoughts on that and what he's meant? (Garrett Downing) "Thanks for asking about that. Just had a chance last night… They had a reception here last night for Matt and his family and friends. It was great to be around him, and his beautiful family, and just talk about the time that we had together here and the time that I played against him – all those years when he was a Raven and a Brown. You know, it goes back. But he's one of the special guys and really good for the community. I think, going forward, this is the beginning for Matt in a lot of ways. The things that he's going to do in business and the things that he's going to do for this community, for Baltimore, for all of us, is just going to be neat to watch."
Brendon Ayanbadejo has gotten work in and played some, and you've had different guys that have been rotating in there. How confident are you in the linebacker depth if somebody goes down and you can't fill it? (Jeff Zrebiec) "I mean if that happens… What you're talking about is if we have a certain guy at that position injured and can't go on Sunday. (laughter) The thing about Ray [Lewis] is, Ray is Ray, you know? You can't count Ray out. There could be reports out there, and you guys could turn over some rocks and figure it out and ask and think you've got something, and you might have something. But you might not, because you're talking about Ray. We'll find out on Sunday. Ray has had shoulders dislocated, and he's done 35 pushups on the sideline to prove that he can go. He's had hamstrings that he's torn off the bone because he went ahead and went when he shouldn't have. I've been updated on some of his history. That's Ray Lewis. And the injury is not any kind of a serious, serious thing, or career-threatening. I think I saw a report that it was career-threatening this morning. (laughter) No, that wasn't your report. (Harbaugh says to a certain reporter.) You didn't report that, you're right. (laughter) So, Ray may go, he may not go. The Bengals, they'll have to prepare for him either way, so it doesn't matter. But I think it's something he could play with, possibly. But we are very confident in our linebackers. And we're confident in our defense. You go out there as a defense, is what you do. We've had plenty of injuries all year; we've had lots of guys hurt throughout the course of the year. We'll play with the guys that we have, and we're confident in those guys. We have a really good group. We have a really good defense, and we'll play well."

The mother of missing student of JNU Najeeb Ahmed on Tuesday met home minister Rajnath Singh, who assured her of his intervention to find out the youth who has been untraceable since October 15.
Fatima Nafees and other family members urged the home minister to trace Najeeb, a student of School of Biotechnology in Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU) and a native of Badaun in Uttar Pradesh.
The home minister gave a patient hearing to Najeeb’s mother and other family mothers and listened to all their grievances, official sources said.
Singh told them that Delhi Police has set up a special team to pursue the case and he was personally taking stock of the progress in the probe.
The home minister assured the family all kind of assistance, the sources said.
SP MP from Badaun Dharmendra Yadav, who accompanied Najeeb’s family, said the Home Minister has assured them that efforts are being made to trace him at the earliest.
“If police are not able to trace him, we will approach court and raise the issue in Parliament,” Yadav told reporters after the meeting.
Najeeb’s sister Sadaf rubbished allegations that he was mentally unstable and said efforts are being made to “defame” him instead of tracing him.
“He had cracked university exams, he is a studious child. Do you think a person studying at such a prestigious institution can be mentally unstable? I request (all) that please don’t defame him. He had sleeping problems that children who are studying often have due to pressure. He had no other problem,” she said.
Najeeb (27) went missing on October 15 following an on-campus scuffle allegedly with some members of ABVP the night before.
His mother claimed that she had spoken to Najeeb on the night of brawl and that she was sure that he did not leave the campus on his own.
“I spoke to him at 11 PM, he wasn’t depressed. He was waiting for me, he had called me up. He did not go anywhere on his own he has been kidnapped...I am sure about it,” Nafees said.
Najeeb’s mother was detained on Sunday by police while attempting to take out a protest march to India Gate.

I threw my boyfriend his birthday party on The Sims because we couldn’t have one in real life
Photo by Natt Garun
My family never really had many traditions. Before moving to New York from Bangkok, we didn’t celebrate Thanksgiving or Christmas, and after my father passed away a few days after my seventh birthday, it was hard to fully celebrate knowing that the week bookends itself with life and death.
After I met my boyfriend, though, we became fond of traditions. Even though he’d grown up with American holidays, he always felt like they were never truly his as opposed to his parents’. When we moved in together, we had vowed to start more as a newfound family, to have something we could call our own.
One tradition that our friends could always rely on was having hot pot on his birthday. It’s a Chinese meal consisting of a center pot of simmering…

I have been involved in a lengthy email dialog with a group who have been miffed over some folks who were doing kindness outreaches incorrectly. Kindness incorrectly! What the heck? The whole thing escalated to the point that a story was written about it in the local paper. Won’t say where it happened but it was in one of my favorite writer’s hometown – Ernest Hemmingway. He spoke of his town as having “Broad lawns and narrow minds…” But then again, since when has a prophet been recognized in his / her own hometown.

Texan's Johnson to miss Sunday's game
HOUSTON (AP) - Houston Texans star receiver Andre Johnson will sit out Sunday's game against Cleveland as he continues to nurse a right hamstring injury.
Johnson, who will miss his fifth straight game, was injured in the Texans' 17-10 win over Pittsburgh in Week 4. He developed soreness after a hard workout on Monday that raised concern.
"We kind of had a little setback," Johnson said.
Johnson sat out practice all this week, though he stretched and ran on a separate field Friday. Houston coach Gary Kubiak said Johnson is "very close," but added, "Obviously, he's not ready to go yet."
Johnson met with doctors and plans to test the injury in another workout next Monday.
"Just have to keep working hard and stay positive," Johnson said. "At the same time, even though I was sore for a few days, I still think we're headed in the right direction."
The Texans (5-3) are 2-2 without Johnson this season. Kubiak would not speculate on Johnson's availability for the Texans' game at Tampa Bay on Nov. 13.
Johnson acknowledged that he expected to be fully healed by now. He underwent a minor procedure after he was hurt, and was back at practice last week leading up to Sunday's victory over Jacksonville.
"Just like everybody else, I wish this process would be a lot faster than what it's been," he said.
He was relieved that the "setback" occurred on Monday, rather than later in the week.
"If it wouldn't have happened Monday, then it probably could've happened on Wednesday in practice," Johnson said. "Eventually, I was going to find out, whether it was Monday or Wednesday or whenever I ran. It happened on Monday. I sat down for a few days and just did all the treatment. I didn't start back running until (Friday), and the day went pretty good.
"We're just going to keep working, and hopefully, it'll get better sooner than later."
Johnson, a five-time Pro Bowl selection, was Houston's leading receiver through the first four games, with 25 catches for 352 yards and two touchdowns. He wants to be careful now not to return to action too soon.
"If I can't go out and be myself, then there's no reason for me to be out there," Johnson said. "It doesn't help the team. This isn't about me, this is about the team. If I can't go out and help the team, then I'm not going to be out on the field."
The Texans have their bye week after playing the Buccaneers. Johnson says he had no target date in mind for his return.
"At first, I just felt like I'd just miss a couple of games and I'd be back out there," he said. "It just all depends on how your body responds. Right now, I really can't set a date."
Kubiak also said safety Danieal Manning is "on schedule" in his recovery after breaking his left leg in Houston's 41-7 win over Tennessee in Week 7. Kubiak said a day later than Manning would miss a minimum of four weeks.
"Amazing what he's doing in the training room right now," Kubiak said Friday. "I don't want to put too much pressure on him and say he's ahead (of schedule). I just know he's doing very good."

We stayed at Applecroft for 3 nights. We had booked the B&B in spite of its relatively high price as we thought it would have a more personal touch than a hotel. Nothing could be further from the truth.
On our arrival there was plenty of parking space, the couple who run the B&B seemed friendly and welcoming and the room looked clean and beautiful. However, as the days progressed we had several unpleasant surprises.
When we arrived we were asked for our selection of breakfast and asked if it was OK for us to have it at 8am. After that we did not have any opportunity to change it. We hardly had any interaction with the owners - we spoke much more with other guests than with our hosts. A full English breakfast consisted of three spoons of muesli, followed by a single egg, a single sausage, a single rasher of bacon and a single grilled tomato. Usage of toilet rolls, which also had to function as tissues, seemed to be rationed as we did not get a new roll on the penultimate day of our stay. As a result we had to improvise with our own tissues after a late night arrival back in the room. But worst of all, towels which we had put on the floor so they would get replaced were simply put back on the towel rail.
After our stay at the Applecroft B&B we moved to a four-star resort which had the same price per night. It was simply in a different league. The most notable difference: the staff at the hotel genuinely cared!
- Also Known As:
- Applecroft Bed & Breakfast St Austell, Cornwall

Wed Nov 14, 2012, 10:06 PM
beveeheart (346 posts)
Food Bank client handing out worthless bills
I volunteer at a food bank and today was the day for our regular clients to come pick up their Thanksgiving boxes (approximately 20-25 lbs of canned goods, instant potatoes and a gift card from a local grocery store for a turkey or whatever). Families with up to 4 members received 1 box, 5 - 8 members received 2 boxes. And this was in addition to their regular monthly visit. I had a 2 hour shift and we were busy handing out boxes the whole time. Everybody was excited to be there and thanked us for our help.
Well...all except this one guy. He put his 2 boxes in his car and then came back to the door with what looked like a big wad of new bills in his hand. I didn't get a real close look at them, but could make out that the face of the President looked a lot like President Obama. He offered some to us saying that they would be worth as much as real bills in the very near future under this president. All 3 of us volunteers were shocked when he said this and each one of us told him no. He just looked at us then and turned away to walk back to his car. I don't know what got into me at that point. Maybe it was reading several posts here where DUers have said enough is enough and they're going to call out people who do things like this. So I opened the door as he was getting into his car and reminded him that the 2 boxes of food he had just received from us were paid in part by government grants. And he had the nerve to yell at me and say that he paid his taxes. Before I could say anything else, he drove away. Which is probably a good thing because I was really pissed, as were the other ladies.
4 replies, 767 views
Always highlight: 10 newest replies | Replies posted after I mark a forum
Replies to this discussion thread
Food Bank client handing out worthless bills (Original post)
Response to beveeheart (Original post)
Wed Nov 14, 2012, 11:08 PM
drm604 (14,575 posts)
2. Confronting someone who's acting crazy like that might not be the best idea.
What he was doing was pretty nutty, and he could have been dangerous.

Maria (not her real name) was a friend I met in college. She was smart, engaging and beautiful in that Hollywood starlet way - Tall, blonde, openly sexual. From the first time I met her she was headed to LA to be in films. At school she and I were among the people who picked up and hosted speakers on campus - she insisted on handling all of the "useful" entertainment and TV people like TV honcho Ted Turner and comedian Andy Kaufman but left the rest of us to handle the others. She'd introduce me to them and they'd give me an absentminded wave as they maneuvered her to their hotel rooms.
When she finally got to the coast, I started seeing her in bit roles in TV and movies and in a lot of daytime commercials - playing a young mother pitching disposable diapers and such. She also was occasionally in People and the Tabloids hanging off the arm of some star - Cruise and Cage among others. For a while my boss was in our Beverly Hills office so I got to see her - she particularly wanted my introduction to the Chairman of our Entertainment group - PwC was the premier firm in the movie business, at least until the recent Oscars kerfuffle - so I was able to do her a good turn. In return I got to go with her places and meet some of her 'friends' although they didn't seem to be particularly good friends to me.
A few years on I got a call from an old college friend: "Bill! Maria is in a movie with Nicholas Cage!". I was busy getting married so I forgot about it. A year after that, having just moved into a new house, we were looking for a movie to watch on a Friday night and there it was. I turned to my (conservative, Christian) wife and said "we have to watch this one, my good friend is in it as the lead opposite Nicholas Cage". On the way home I regaled her with Maria stories, telling her how good a friend she was and how much Maria reminded me of her - same height, hair color, beauty, style, etc.
When we got home I popped the movie into the player. The first scene was Judd Reinhold in bed in ca 1900 New Orleans - French Quarter. The sun was streaming through the window and Maria, his newlywed wife, walked in and stepped out of her robe. She got up on the bed - naked - and started inexplicably jumping on it with full frontal nudity. I'm a bit slow on the uptake so my first reaction was "wow! they really do look alike" but then my mind quickly pivoted to damage control: I turned to Diane (that was my wife's name) and said: "well, I don't know her that well". Perturbed, Diane left for bed while I stayed downstairs fast forwarding through every ugly scene looking for something to redeem the movie in my - and more importantly - my new wife's eyes. I failed. If you recall the movie 9 1/2 Weeks where Kim Basinger was sexually humiliated by Mickey Rourke - it was a precursor to 50 Shades of Grey - you'll understand this Nick Cage production. Apparently he was trying to reprise 9 1/2 Weeks and Maria was the best actress he could find who was willing to be humiliated on screen. It was a terrible, cruel film and her acting wasn't much better.
I ran into her a couple more times, once in Chicago and another time in New York when she was doing commercials. It was very strange - I thought she'd be embarrassed by her performance with Cage but she wasn't. She talked about it and her other work as if she was going from one triumph to another. I realized that as far as she was concerned I was her 'public' and she was presenting herself to me. So I went along, capturing every interesting story tidbit so that I could share them with my friends and colleagues.
I lost track of her until a couple of months ago. Another friend sent me an email with a Youtube clip from her last 'movie' writing "I'm sure you've seen this" because it was pretty old but I hadn't. It was porn. I saw her in the scene and clicked it off - I couldn't bear to watch. To see her humiliate herself again - she was my friend.
I felt great sorrow for her - she had sought fame and only gotten humiliation. It was very hard to take. But it got much harder last Tuesday. I was with a group of friends from my Church. We were talking about the teaching from last Sunday. It's a passage from Mark's Gospel where Jesus heals a blind man. The first time Jesus heals him the blind man says he can only see people that look like "trees" so Jesus heals him again so that he could see people as they truly were. As we talked about that passage I thought of Maria. And I realized that I had been using her. I saw her as nothing but a walking "tree". Someone who was a tool for my entertainment and aggrandizement. I didn't really care about her humiliation and sorrow except as a way for me to score points with others. I was happy to call her my friend yet let her delude herself.
I've been trying to find her. To tell her how sorry I am. I haven't had any luck yet but that may be because I'm so afraid of what I may find.
I am glad that Jesus has taken on all of my sins because in times like this when I discover a whole new sewer full of them, their added weight overwhelms me. I've asked Him to help me see people not as objects to be used and consumed but as they truly are - God breathed miracles on their journey to eternity. But it's difficult because it requires that I slow down and look past the surface labels that I apply to everyone - cashier, pastor, actress, kid, oldster - to truly see the soul inside.
I'm not very good at it and I fail so often that sometimes I wonder why He bothers with me at all.

Group 1: GED0101-SEC158Cadelina, Alyssa AshleyDe Dios, Rose Anne Nicole C.
Diaz, Maria IsabelNasinopa, Princess AngenetteNonato, Elisha FayeWhy did the school headmaster keep those three statuettes in his office? Did they indicate in some way how he understood education? Did the boy know what they were supposed to mean? What did he take them for?- The headmaster had some statuettes in his study that stood on a high cupboard behind his desk and arranged them on how he thinks life is like. He had placed the statuettes where they would face delinquent children, because they symbolized to him the whole of life. The reason why he does is because these are the categories of thinkers or students that exist in school. The school headmaster keeps these three statuettes in his office because that’s how he perceives education. He does because for him, having the statuettes displayed is the kind of setting a classroom always has— that there are Venus of Milo-kind of students, Leopard-like, and a Rodin’s Thinker kind of students in a classroom.
We Will Write a Custom Essay Specifically
For You For Only $13.90/page!
The boy, moreover, eventually knew what these statuettes mean as he frequently visits his headmaster’s office. Through claiming thinking as his hobby, he was able to come up with a conclusion that these are the grades of thinking. Hence, what these statuettes supposed to mean unfolded as he pondered on things and basically practiced his hobby of thinking.Did the school succeed in helping the boy to think? Why or why not? Don’t you think it is a bit too early for school to try to make kids think?- The school was not successful in helping the boy to think because the school itself was ironic. The teachers who preach about the sexless life used his neck in thinking. Miss Parson who said all she wishes for is the welfare of his students actually wishes for a husband her never got. The school was full on contradictions that they cannot even solve their own complexities. In my opinion, it was the boy who helped himself think.
It was through his own effort and observations that he was able to be critical enough to find out the problems in his own surroundings. The school may not have directly helped the boy think, yet it became an avenue for the boy to develop his thinking. I also believe that the school must always encourage the students to think and set as an example to always practice what they preach.

10 , April , 2010
2 months after the end of his interrogations and despite a bail order, Emadeddin Baghi is still being held on an expired temporary detention order.
RAHANA – On April 8, the family of Emadeddin Baghi visited with him in an Evin visitation booth. Following the visit, Baghi’s wife Fatemeh Kamali said, “In the past 102 days, there have been no rules on when prison visits and phone calls are permitted. Therefore, we went to Evin Prison, and since Thursdays are booth visitation days, we requested to visit with him. The visit was allowed and we could see Baghi through the glass divider and talk to him over the phone.”
The prominent rights activist remains in high spirits, according to his wife, who nonetheless finds his detention in a small Ward 240 cell astonishing, especially since his interrogations ended more than 2 months ago and he was expected to be released on bail.
During the visit, Baghi told his family that keeping prisoners in limbo situation is in contravention of the regulations governing prisons and security detention centers. He added that, “keeping individuals in closed spaces over long periods of time without access to newspapers, television and books as well as other rights provided by the law is an obvious form of torture.”
According to Baghi, his prison experience has shown him how far away the country is from respecting the civil rights of its people.
Baghi has spent the last 2 months of his detention without an official detention order. He has also been denied the right to object his arbitrary detention.
Baghi has filed an official complaint about the conditions of his detention, but his complaint has not yet been addressed. Baghi considers his complaint to be potentially very important since it is a right guaranteed by Article 597 of the Islamic Penal Law, which considers the failure to address complaints filed by prisoners about their treatments to be a criminal offense. Baghi did not tell his wife about the details of his complaint but asked that his lawyers pursue the matter. However, ever since the magistrate court was relocated to Evin Prison, it has become increasingly difficult for lawyers to have access to their clients’ files.
Kamali expressed hope that Baghi’s complaint will not have the same fate as the investigations into the obstruction of his release on bail; i.e., being shrouded in a veil of uncertainty.

INDIANAPOLIS (AP) -- Chuck Pagano stepped to the podium Monday, hugged his team owner, thanked his family for its support and wiped a tear from his eye.
He might, finally, turn out the lights in his office, too.
Nearly three months to the day after being diagnosed with leukemia, the Colts' first-year coach returned to a team eager to reunite with a boss healthy enough to go back to work.
"I told you my best day of my life was July 1, 1989," Pagano said, referring to his wedding date. "Today was No. 2. Getting to pull up, drive in, get out of my car, the key fob still worked. I was beginning to question whether it would or not. When I asked for Bruce to take over, I asked for him to kick some you-know-what and to do great. Damn Bruce, you had to go and win nine games? Tough act to follow. Tough act to follow. Best in the history of the NFL. That's what I have to come back to."
The comment turned tears into the laughter everyone expected on such a festive occasion.
For Pagano and the Colts, Monday morning was as precious as anyone could have imagined when Pagano took an indefinite leave to face the biggest opponent of his life, cancer.
In his absence, all the Colts was win nine of 12 games, make a historic turnaround and clinch a playoff spot all before Sunday's regular-season finale against Houston, which they pegged as the day they hoped to have Pagano back. If all goes well at practice this week, Pagano will be on the sideline for the first time since a Week 3 loss to Jacksonville.
Pagano endured three rounds of chemotherapy to put his cancer in remission.
That Pagano's return came less than 24 hours after Indy (10-5) locked up the No. 5 seed in the AFC and the day before Christmas seemed fitting, too.
"I know Chuck is ready for this challenge. In speaking to his doctor multiple times, I know that the time is right for him to grab the reins, get the head coaching cap on and begin the journey," owner Jim Irsay said. "It's been a miraculous story. It really is a book. It's a fairytale. It's a Hollywood script. It's all those things but it's real."
The reality is that he's returning to a vastly different team than the one he turned over to Arians, his long-time friend and first assistant coaching hire.
Back then, the Colts were 1-2 and most of the so-called experts had written them off as one of the league's worst teams. Now, they're ready to show the football world that they can be just as successful under Pagano as they were under Arians, who tied the NFL record for wins after a midseason coaching change.
Pagano also has changed.
The neatly-trimmed salt-and-pepper hair and trademark goatee that were missing in November have slowly returned, and the thinner man who appeared to be catching his breath during a postgame speech in early November, looked and sounded as good as ever Monday.
He repeatedly thanked fans for their prayers and letters, the organization and his family for their unwavering help and promised to provide comfort and support to other people who are facing similar fights. During one poignant moment that nearly brought out tears again, Pagano even recounted a letter sent to him by a 9-year-old child who suggested he suck on ice chips and strawberry Popsicles in the hospital and advised him to be nice to the nurses regardless of how he felt -- and he never even paused.
"I feel great, my weight is back, my energy is back and again, it's just a blessing to be back here," Pagano said.
In the minds of Colts players and coaches, Pagano never really left.
He continually watched practice tape and game film on his computer, used phone calls and text messages to regularly communicate with players and occasionally delivered a pregame or postgame speech to his team.
"He texted me and called me so much, it was like he was standing there in my face every day," said receiver Reggie Wayne, who has been friends with Pagano since the two were working together at the University of Miami.
But the Colts found plenty of other ways to keep Pagano's battle in the forefront.
They began a fundraising campaign for leukemia research, calling it Chuckstrong. Players had stickers with the initials CP on their locker room nameplates, and Arians wore an orange ribbon on his baseball cap during games. Orange is the symbolic color for leukemia. At one point, nearly three dozen players shaved their heads to show their ailing coach they were with him.
That's not all.
Arians and first-year general manager Ryan Grigson decided to leave the lights on in Pagano's office until he returned. Pagano noted the team even installed plastic clips to make sure those lights were not mistakenly turned off while he was gone. Those clips were removed when Pagano arrived Monday morning.
And Arians said nobody sat in the front seat of the team bus.
"He's always been our head coach," Arians said.
So after getting medical clearance from his oncologist, Dr. Larry Cripe, to return with no restrictions, Pagano couldn't wait to get to the office Monday morning.
Arians arrived at 7 a.m., three hours early for the scheduled team meeting. By then, Pagano had already driven past the inflatable Colts player with the words "Welcome Back Chuck" printed on its chest and was back in his office preparing for the Texans.
Players showed up a couple of hours later, and when the torch was passed from Arians back to Pagano, players gave their returning coach a standing ovation that Wayne said was well-deserved.
All Pagano wants to do now is emulate the success Arians and his players have had this season.
"I asked him (Arians) if he would lead this team and this ballclub and this organization and take over the reins," Pagano said. "What a masterful, masterful job you did Bruce. You carried the torch and all you went out and did was win nine ballgames. You got us our 10th win yesterday and you got us into the playoffs. You did it with dignity and you did it with class. You're everything that I always knew you were and more."

It's been a little over a month since I lost my great Holly mare. If you're a follower of my blog, you know from my last post just how special this mare was to me. I had so many plans through the years with her and lastly I had so many plans of her foals for the future. It wasn't meant to be. I have dealt with the sorrow and the despair of this loss til it was about to break me. It took me time to be able to saddle up a horse. It took me time to saddle up her only foal I own, Honey and not break down in sobs. I wasn't in the mindset to better me or my horses. I was no where where I needed to be to accomplish anything.
After a couple weeks, I realized just how important it was to just finish off what we started...Honey. Not just Honey though, but all my colts. Just as Holly deserved someone to help her reach her full potential, so do these colts. I have so many hopes and dreams for these colts that I can't sit around and wallow in my tears and pain. Instead, I think of all that I learned in my time together with Holly and put towards these colts.
I hope that by riding Holly that it will help make the learning curve with Honey be that much easier, which I already know this is true. Case in point, since it's icy out, I've been spending most of my riding time at the indoor arena. I'm not a huge fan of working my colts on barrels in this particular arena due to only being 80 ft wide. So I work a lot of one barrel drills to help them get better in their turns without running into a wall. I was having a hard time getting Honey to feel the way I wanted her to around the barrel. She'd turn it just fine but she just didn't "feel" right and how I knew she could. Then I remembered how I'd ride Holly...with just a little outside leg pressure, that colt went to feeling like she would have to take five strides to make it around a barrel to three. She flowed and kept her forward momentum. She felt like her momma. With that a smile came across my face as I remembered that sweet little mare.
I shared a lot of dreams with that mare but now, I shall get to share them with her foal, Honey and all the other colts that I am blessed to ride. She gave me so much through out the years and I have the feeling that with every ride that I make, I'll realize just how much she gave me. I won't sit and dwell on what could have been. I will get up and work to see what will be; because of her, I'm one step closer to making it.

Danielle and nick big brother dating
Season: 14Placed: 14th (Expelled)Did it surprise anyone when Willie headbutted Joe? And yet, for some reason, for a few brief years CBS kept bringing more family members out of the woodwork to wreak havoc on their reality show contestants. She was seeing Jase while in the house and none of the other guys liked that, so they aborted plans to save her because of it. I almost left these two off the list because it would be funny, but it's better to just address the fact that Jordan rode Jeff's coattails when they played together and these two are lucky that it was Aaryn Gries' season where Twitter started exposing the racist and homophobic comments said on the livefeeds, because Jeff's anti-gay rant (against Dumbledore!I do feel bad for her, however, because she had no idea none of the other houseguests liked her until she had a big blow-up with Diane. ) would've been plastered on every entertainment website that summer if it were the case.
Michael sexually harassed other houseguests by giving them unwanted kisses and when April voiced her disgust to Eric, he spoke to Michael and told him to cut it out.A disclaimer: Rankings are based on a combination of likability, gameplay, and how entertaining they were to watch on television.Rankings are also only based on appearances in the house.Luckily, after his blowout with Eric, Michael got booted from the house and he never got the chance to turn into a Caleb Reynolds (you'll see).Also, like most sleazy guys, he got rich and ended up on Millionaire Matchmaker.I'd never seen it, so I had to watch it all before this ranking and I can now see why the show got a makeover that started in season 2, but was fully in effect by season 3.
The show is basically a documentary first and a game show later.
Aside from making racist comments, he also got bounced first his season. Season: 2Placed: Last (Expelled)So, Justin was nuts. Season: 4Placed: Last The twist for season 4 was "X-Factor," which meant several contestants were playing with their exes.
He repeatedly threatened to do bodily harm to houseguests and also held a knife to Krista's neck while making out with her. When Scott's ex Amanda walked in, he completely lost it and over the next few days had several histrionic moments in the house before he was finally removed by producers.
He was misogynist and racist, which aired on the live feeds and not on the show.
He called Kevin a "fucking beaner" and ended up getting kicked out of the house first.
Patti even pointed out his control issues when it comes to women. His rival in his season was his ex-boyfriend Dustin.

Father Takes a Needle for His Fearful Son
Average Rating: [see ratings/reviews]
Recently I was sitting in a doctor's office with one of my young sons, and the nurse wanted to draw blood from him for a test. As you can imagine, he did not want to have blood taken from him. Who does? So he told me, "Dad, I can't do it. I just can't do it."
The nurse said, "Here's the deal, buddy. We've got this numbing spray. We'll spray the numbing spray on you, and then we'll stick the needle in you, and you won't even feel it."
But my son kept saying, "I can't do it. I can't do it."
Finally I said to the nurse, "Ma'am, I know what I'm about to ask you may be out of bounds, but can you stick me first? Can you do it without the numbing spray? I just need to show my son."
She said, "Yes, I'll do it. We'll keep this between us."
So I put my son on my lap, and I said, "Watch Daddy." I rolled up my sleeve and stuck my arm out. Then the nurse stuck me and drew blood. A smile came over my son's face. Yes, he was still a little nervous, but when he saw that Daddy already went through what he was about to go through, with no numbing spray, he stuck his arm out. It gave him courage.
In the same way, when you find yourself in the midst of hard times, look to the place where they drew Jesus' blood. Look to the cross, and there you will find rest for your souls.

Brian Sindler (b. 1957) is a contemporary American plein air painter and etcher of figurative and landscape art. Born in Chicago, he studied at Columbia College in Missouri, the American Academy of Art in Chicago, and the School of Representational Art in Chicago. After graduating, he focused on landscape painting and most of his work during this period is Impressionist in style. He later began exploring a more tonalist style that had a contemporary sensibility while some of his later paintings were closer to the American Tonalism style of the late 19th and 10th century. He has exhibited widely in individual and group shows and has been a regular exhibitor at the Salmagundi Club in New York.

BRIDGEPORT, Conn. — A man was accused of fleeing a hit-and-run accident with the victim still attached to his fender and fighting to get free.
A van driven by Frank Rega struck a 23-year-old woman who was standing in front of a disabled car in Bridgeport on March 15, police said. The woman became stuck on the driver’s side fender, but Rega drove off, even as she was yelling at him and hitting him in the face in an attempt to get him to stop, police said.
She eventually fell off the van, struck the roadway and suffered a head injury, police said. She was treated and released from St. Vincent’s Medical Center.
Rega, 56, of Monroe, faces numerous charges including reckless endangerment, reckless driving, evading responsibility and driving under the influence of drugs or alcohol, the Connecticut Post reported. He was released after posting a $500 bond.
Monroe police arrested Rega at his home. As they were handcuffing him, he told officers he had acted in self-defense, police said.
A message seeking comment was left for Rega at his home Thursday. He was scheduled to be arraigned on Tuesday.

Hi Robin, been reading this thread and it is becoming very clear you are quickly coming up to speed with the salty way of life. I am very surprised a company such as Trader have installed mild steel fuel tanks, I really thought these were a thing of the past. As others have said it is a good decision to get a professional fuel polishing company in. When we bought Eighth Day Sealine S42 we were very lucky that the previous owner had had all three tanks cleaned and fuel polished a year before our ownership. When this was carried out they cut several large inspection holes in the top of each tank in between the baffles to ensure all crud was removed.
Earlier this year I was talking to a guy from a fuel polishing company who was cleaning fuel and tanks on a large boat in our marina in Ipswich, he told me the biggest problem with diesel in the boating world today is biocide diesel due to degrading within a time scale as short as six months. (Much the same as petrol). Biocide desiel is fine in cars and trucks on the road as they tend to have high turn over of fuel, however with boats, fuel sits in the tanks for months, even years without being used. Apparently, this is more of an issue with modern comman rail Diesel engines with electronic management, sensors read the quality of fuel and if not satisfactory they go into limp home mode.
Unfortunately, many marinas are now buying in biocide fuels, luckily where we moored at ipswich they were aware of this issue and only brought in non biocide desiel. Although they did say it is now becoming increasingly difficult to obtain.

Date of birth: 18/12/1998
Working area: Paris
Mother tongue: French
Language spoken: English and German
Driver’s licence, category B (please note that I don’t have a car).
2017/2018 : I was taking care several times of a 6 years old boy, usually in the evening / early night. So I was in charge of preparing and make him eat his meal, showering him, and putting him to bed.
2020/2021 : During this school year, I had the responsibility of babysitting an 8 year old boy. I had to pick him up every day after school. When I got home, I had to shower him, I was helping him with his homework. Once those two things were done, we would spend the remaining time (between 45 minutes and an hour) playing until the parents returned.
2021/ 2022 : I looked after my neighbours’ child from time to time from 6 months to 14 months, usually in the evening / early night. So I was in charge of preparing and make him eat his meal, changing him, and putting him to bed.
Since 2014, I am a scout leader. I had to pass many internal training courses at the Scouts et Guides de France and I had the responsibility of supervising several groups of young people between 8 and 11 years old and between 14 and 17 years old. I was in charge of preparing the weekends and the summer camp, which lasted an average of two weeks.

KUALA LUMPUR, Feb 14 — A Singaporean, whose Porsche car was scratched after an accident with a taxi decided to be kind and charge the driver only S$1 (RM2.98) for repairs.
In a Facebook post, the driver under the user name Fed Wu, shared photographs of the accident and a couple of screenshots of his conversation with the taxi driver.
The taxi driver initially had paid him S$200 as compensation but Wu returned S$199 to him after saying that he managed to get the car repaired for a cheap price.
In his screenshots, Wu also shared his empathy towards the taxi driver noting that it was a difficult job and taxi drivers were struggling to make a living during this period of time apart from the high risk it holds.
Besides that, Wu also commended the taxi driver for handling the situation calmly and for admitting that it was his mistake in the first place.
“I have acknowledged that I received a compensation of S$1 for the above repair and no further claim will be made against you,” he said in his conversation with the taxi driver.
The post has now over 3,000 likes and 4,000 shares along with comments commending Wu for his selfless action.

April 17, 2004
Tough TorrieBattled eating disorders as teen and became international wrestling star
By KEN WIEBE - WINNIPEG SUN
You'd never know it by looking at her today, but Torrie Wilson hasn't always been comfortable with her body. Wilson, the WWE diva who has posed for Playboy twice, battled a variety of eating disorders for nearly six years while a teenager in Idaho.
Anorexia came first and eventually gave way to bulimia, but that's when Wilson began to put the disorders behind her.
"It was between the ages of 14 and 20 and I started off not eating at all, maybe an apple a day," Wilson said in an exclusive interview with The Sun yesterday afternoon before she took part in a press conference promoting the WWE Smackdown! show at Winnipeg Arena on July 6. "It's not something I'm proud of, but I do talk about it because there are a lot of young girls who tell me how much it's helped them to know it's something I went through too."
Part of the healing process saw Wilson pour her energy into working out and eating six meals a day. Then came the fitness competitions, where Wilson reached her peak when she was crowned Miss Galaxy in 1998.
"When I was dealing with the eating disorder, I wanted to look like the stick-thin models, but then I started reading fitness magazines and seeing these girls with great bodies that weren't too muscular," said Wilson, who made her wrestling debut in 1999 with WCW and has been in the WWE since June of 2001. "I started posting their pictures on my wall and using them as inspiration. It was a personal victory to me when I started doing photo shoots with the girls I had posted on my wall."
These days, WWE fans are the one's putting Wilson's posters on the wall.
Funny thing is, the blond bombshell never aspired to have anything to do with wrestling.
"I had not even watched one wrestling show (before going to a live event in 1999)," said Wilson. "I was dating a guy that was a huge wrestling fan and I'm embarrassed to say it now but I used to make fun of him for watching it.
"Time really has gone by fast. I don't know if your path is pre-written or what, but it's crazy how one thing just leads to another."
Wilson says growing up in a small town helped her prepare to deal with what she's going through these days as a WWE superstar.
"It was the best thing that could have happened to me. I was painfully shy when I was young -- even when I was in high school," said Wilson, noting her most memorable match to date came last month in Madison Square Garden during Wrestlemania XX. "I did sports and cheerleading and things I never would have done in a big city. It helped me kind of start breaking out of my shell."
The shell is cracking, but isn't broken just yet.
"I like the performing part, it gives me a huge rush but it still makes me nervous," said Wilson, whose best friend in the business is Stacy Keibler. "Being in front of large crowds is intimidating to me and I feel myself withdrawing."
Wilson doesn't know how long she'll stay in the wrestling business, but she's in no hurry to withdraw from that.
"I'm trying to do it while it's fun," said Wilson, who resides in Tampa Bay, Fla. with husband and fellow wrestler Billy Kidman when she's not on the road. "I definitely want to have kids and I want to be a somewhat young mother but I'm still having fun and I can't imagine stopping now."

As one of the greatest football players of all time, Cristiano Ronaldo’s skill on the field is undeniable. He has won numerous awards, broken countless records, and inspired millions with his incredible talent. However, even the most accomplished players have their weaknesses, and Ronaldo is no exception.
One of Ronaldo’s weaknesses is his tendency to become frustrated. This can happen when he feels he is not getting enough touches on the ball, or when he is not able to score as many goals as he would like. When he becomes frustrated, he can sometimes make poor decisions on the field, such as taking unnecessary risks or not passing the ball when he should.
Another weakness of Ronaldo’s is his lack of defensive skills. While he is one of the best attacking players in the world, he is not as strong when it comes to defending. This can leave his team vulnerable to counterattacks and put more pressure on the midfield and defense players to cover for him.
Ronaldo’s style of play can also be a weakness at times. He is known for his individual flair and skill, but this can sometimes lead to him hogging the ball and not allowing his teammates to get involved in the game. This can cause resentment among his fellow players and make it more difficult for the team to work together effectively.
Lastly, Ronaldo’s age may be starting to catch up with him. While he is still an incredible athlete, he is 36 years old and may not have the same level of endurance and speed that he did in his younger years. This can make it more difficult for him to perform at the highest level for a full 90 minutes and may result in him having to be substituted more often.
Despite these weaknesses, Ronaldo remains one of the most formidable players in the world. His talent and drive have made him one of the most successful football players of all time, and his weaknesses are simply a reminder that he is human, after all. As he continues to play at the highest level, it will be interesting to see how he adapts to these challenges and continues to push himself to be the best player he can be.

Van Lathan came through for his first VladTV interview, and he started out by speaking about growing up in Baton Rouge. Van then detailed how Boosie was a big figure in Baton Rouge when he was a kid, and he spoke about how destructive he thinks Boosie is being with his comments about the gay community, adding that his sister called out Boosie over his comments about Lil Nas X. From there, Van spoke about going to college and later moving to Los Angeles, and after several odd jobs, he landed a job as a tour bus driver for TMZ. After sharing stories about various celebrities he encountered while working for TMZ, Van spoke about his viral moment where he confronted Kanye West for saying that slavery was a choice. Van then spoke about leaving TMZ and finding a new platform and working on new projects, which you can hear about in full above.

This symbol was carried for good luck. In pagan times people often carried small symbols of Thor with his hammer about their person for good luck. Thor is here seen holding his hammer called Mjoulnir, which is the most famous of all weapons in Scandinavian mythology. Thor primarily used his hammer in battles against trolls and other enemies of the gods. This item is handmade in Iceland. Silver chain is included.

We have only made one major accomplishment in our project. Our major accomplishment is finding a daycare to perform camps at. We are really excited since we have been trying for a while now. We have tried 2 and the second agreed! We will either go on the 9th or the 16th of January 2018. We will be doing a cheer camp first.
Our December goals are setting official dates. We need camp dates set for January, February, March, April, and May. We could possibly go into summer but maybe not. We also need to ask about doing something called holiday bobs witch are candies dressed up for the month or holiday. We hope you are just as excited as us!

I brought Billy's laurie in to work on today so I thought I'd post a picture. Nothing was done last night. After B went to bed, I called my mom and dad and then I went to bed. So tired I couldn't stop yawning while on the phone. Of course, I slept like crap. How does one stay asleep the whole night?

Al Bielek: The man who claimed to have traveled to the future and remained 2 years in the 2749April 5, 2017
A 57-year-old man named Al Bielek, who had suffered a severe amnesia for years, began to remember several hidden passages of his life, so he went to various therapies to unlock his memory.
From that moment, he discovered that he had worked on the Montauk Project, an alleged US government secret project carried out in the 1970s and 1980s at the Montauk Air Force Station on Long Island, An immediate consequence of the Philadelphia Experiment, had developed psychological warfare techniques and incredible research, including time travel. Bielek was convinced that his memories had been repressed and blocked to keep that project secret.(Al Bielek)
As his memories were reappearing, Bielek claimed to have recalled that his birth name was Edward Cameron and that in the Montauk Project had worked with his brother Duncan Cameron, a young man with psychic abilities, when they were in their early twenties. A few years later, Bielek publicly presented his story at a conference, stating that the “Philadelphia Experiment”, apart from achieving the invisibility and teleportation of the USS Eldridge, had also opened a wormhole that connected the present and the future.(Al Bielek)
Bielek explained that he and his brother were commissioned in 1983 to travel back in this wormhole to destroy the equipment of the USS Eldridge, since their arrival in 1983 was causing several problems, so the only option was to go into the past and Avoid their arrival. According to Bielek, he and his brother completed the mission, however, by an accident both ended in 2137, where they spent six weeks in a hospital bed recovering from burns from being in contact with hyperspace. There they stayed for 6 weeks until Al Bielek, by means unknown to him, ended up traveling to the year 2749, where, according to his version, he stayed for two years.
Bielek reported that when he arrived in 2749, he woke up in a hospital. The first thing that caught his attention was the advanced surgical material and typical of the establishment, incredibly revolutionary, which had nothing to do with the current. According to Bielek, the medical system of the future used “vibrational and light treatments.”
He also affirmed that there were numerous floating cities that could be transported to different parts of the planet. Some of them were more than 2.5 miles high, all thanks to years of research that allowed to control the law of gravity. And the world’s population was extremely small, for in 2749 there were barely 300 million people around the world. And the United States, one of the largest countries on the planet, contained about 50 million inhabitants. According to Bielek, this was because only a few people would have been able to adapt to the “new world”.
Bielek also said that there were no wars in 2749, although there had been a great conflagration between the Russians and the Chinese, as well as between the United States and Europe. But in 2749, according to Bielek, wars were practically impossible. There were no military or soldiers, navy or any air force, so any conflict between countries was irrelevant. In fact, there was no government, as a computer system of synthetic intelligence, built in the 26th century, executed everything and made everything work correctly. This system, moreover, had eliminated physical labor forever.
Bielek also reported that no one needed money, simply “there was no need to have it.” Everyone had their own “credits”, which allowed them to “buy” everything they wanted and wanted at any time. The land had also undergone drastic climatic and geographical changes; in fact, two-thirds of the present state of Florida had disappeared under the ocean. The inversion of the earth’s poles, meanwhile, had been stopped by an artificial pole structure that had been specially designed to stop the great collapse that could have occurred.
Bielek, after returning to look for his brother in the year 2137 – according to reported – would have returned with him to the year 1983 by the same hole of worm, although the Montauk project managers, after registering all its fabulous history, were worried to erase Their memories to prevent it from being publicly propagated. Bielek, after recovering all his memories, has since related his unprecedented and presumed future experience in more than 40 conferences and more than 50 radio interviews. Many, of course, have accused him of being a charlatan, although not a few who believe that he is a true crononauta or traveler in time.
How about? Leave us your comment!

Drink-driver caught taking boss’s van on test drive’
Burnley magistrates were told how Mark Chestney (41) was then spotted moving from the driver’s seat to the passenger side to escape, but was caught after a short chase. He was more than twice the drink-drive limit.
The hearing was told the van owner, Archie Heseltine, who employed the roofing labourer, had trusted the defendant to do some work on the engine. Chestney then decided to take his dog for a walk and picked up some friends for a “test drive” in the dark.
Chestney, who has four convictions for drink driving and one for dangerous driving, has now been ordered off the road for three years. The defendant, of Cannon Street, Nelson, admitted driving with excess alcohol, no licence and no insurance, in Moss House Road, Foulridge, and also taking a vehicle without consent, on October 26th. He was given 12 weeks in prison, suspended for 18 months, with a 12-week curfew, between 8pm and 7am, seven days a week. He must also pay £85 costs, an £80 victim surcharge and a £150 criminal courts charge.
Bench chairman Mr Stephen Riley said the defendant had a terrible record, but added his solicitor had said Chestney was learning the error of his ways. He told him: “You are taking a heck of a long time to do it.”
Miss Aisha Akhtar (prosecuting) said, just after 7pm, police received a 999 call to go to Moss House Farm. Officers went there and saw three men in a van on a dark track. The engine was running. After Chestney ran off and was stopped, he blew 77 micrograms of alcohol in 100ml of breath. The legal limit is 35.
Mr Ben Leech (defending) said he thought the best thing to do was to take the van for a test drive. He decided to take the dog for a walk and called friends to see if they wanted to go with him. The defendant took a wrong turn.
“He was having trouble reversing and decided he would do a three-point-turn. He came off the road and ended up in a ditch.
“He was stuck in the ditch and put the hazard lights on for other road users. Police were called by a neighbour. He immediately realised the predicament he was in and tried to escape. He bitterly regrets the position he has put himself in.”

A Real Family:
Ichigo slices though a hollows mask and the hollow disintegrates into particles. "Ah, there's the last one" he says aloud to himself. He gets back into his body and hurries back to class.
Later afterschool Ichigo returns home to find Rukia in her shinigami outfit in front of his home. "Rukia? What are you doing here?" He has a disbelieving expression on his face. "Hey, Ichigo. I didn't expect to be back here either. Soul society thinks there is a new threat coming to Karakura. So they asked me to go to the living world to investigate." Ichigo hadn't seen Rukia since the end of the Hueco Mundo war. The soul society had defeated Aizen but many comrades were killed and injured. Both Ichigo and Rukia were very injured in the final fight with Aizen. Ichigo was surprised that Rukia was healed by now; it had been 4 months since the war had ended.
Just then there was a huge amount of spiritual pressure felt. Both of them felt the pressure and didn't even have to speak to know that they had to go after it.
Both of them chased followed the spiritual pressure but of course Rukia was the one leading them, because her phone could sense where the pressure was coming from.
After running and jumping for a couple if minutes to find the pressure came from the very edge of Karakura. There were these 3 monsters that had the figure of hollows but they were all black, no expression could be seen. "Ichigo see if you can slice through them, I'll see if I can get some info from soul society and report our sighting of them." Rukia said pressing various buttons on her phone. "Will do." Ichigo replied as he leaped and tried to slice one of the dark hollows mask.
But as Ichigo did this Rukia couldn't get in contact with soul society so she pulled her zanpukto out of it's sheath, if she couldn't contact them then she would fight, she didn't want to be useless. But as soon as she pulled it out a figure put a cloth to her mouth and she struggled and soon passed out. Her phone had dropped out of her hands.
Ichigo looked back to see if Rukia had gotten any information on these guys, but when he looked back to only see Rukia's phone on the ground and Rukia missing. The monster he was fighting disappeared. Ichigo tried to sense for her spiritual pressure, and soon found it. She wasn't that far away. Ichigo used his flash step to catch up with her and soon he found her being held bridal style by a girl, no taller then Rukia, with black hair and wearing a black dress with black socks. The girl was jumping on power lines. "Hey, what are you doing with her?" Ichigo said as he stepped along with the girl.
"Shoot." The girl whispered to herself as she stepped faster. Ichigo had no problem keeping up with the girl at this pace. Then suddenly the girl tripped and before she fell she dropped Rukia nicely on the rooftop, but soon started to fall to the ground. The girl squinted ready for the impact, but it never came. Ichigo was holding her wrist. "'I'll ask you again. What do you want with Rukia?" He said. The girl was struggling. And soon she grabbed a sword from her pocket in her dress and used it to cut her hand off and ran away. Ichigo had the hand she cut off and soon it disappeared. "Huh, strange…" The girl was a lot quicker then when she had Rukia with her. Ichigo went back to where Rukia was and picked her up and went back to his house. His family asked some questions, he said that she fell asleep after the trip back to Karakura. She was placed on the couch and soon Ichigo 's family went to the store together. 15 minutes later she woke up. "Ichigo what happened while I was out?" She asked after she opened up the closet door.
"You remember getting knocked out?" Ichigo asked back.
"I think I was drugged, but that's all I remember." Rukia replied.
"I think so too there was this girl who was running around carrying you" Ichigo said "I tried grabbing her but she cut her hand off and ran away, and the hand disappeared soon after" Ichigo finished. "I want you to be more carful now." Ichigo said with a slight blush.
"Has the strawberry gone soft on me? I can take care of myself Ichigo and I know to be carful." She said as she went upstairs to Ichigo's sister's room and fell asleep
The next morning
"Ichigo, I'm going to be going, don't be late." Rukia said, as she was half way out of the door.
"I know, I know, I'll be there soon," Ichigo said as he rushed out the door, Rukia then left, and Ichigo soon followed.
When Ichigo arrived he sat down and Orihime arrived to see how he was doing. "So Kuchiki-san will be staying here for awhile?" Orihime said with a smile on her face.
"That's what it looks like" Ichigo replied.
"That's great news" Orihime said clasping her hands together. "Class is about to start, I'll talk to you later Kurosaki-kun!" Orihime said returning to her seat.
Ichigo and Rukia walked home together and soon they saw the same girl come up to them. Rukia looked at Ichigo and saw in his eyes that this was probably the girl he was talking about earlier. "Why have you come back?" Ichigo said as he used his badge to remove his soul from his body, and Rukia used Chappy and asked her to bring Ichigo's body back to his house.
The girl got on her knees and bowed down "I'm sorry, I, I just wanted to show her something, she wanted to see her…" The girl said looking down and starting to mumble at the end
"How do we know your not leading us to a trap?" Ichigo asked
"I promise if I am I'll let you feed me to the chasers" The girl said looking up at Ichigo and Rukia
"Chasers?" Rukia asked
"Those monsters you saw earlier, they're the ones that chase us, they won't go after anyone but us" The girl said
"Well we'll see what you want to show us, can you lead us there?" Rukia said
"Of course! My name is Hanshou by the way." The girl wore a smile on her face now. Ichigo and Rukia soon followed Hanshou to a clock tower near them; they went up the stairs until they reached the top. Hanshou rattled the door and from inside the door they could hear a voice "Hanshou is that you?"
"Yeah its me and I brought you a little present." Hanshou said through the door.
Hanshou opened the door and let the person inside see who she had brought. Inside there was a person who looked almost identical to Rukia.
"Is that really who I think it is?" The Rukia twin said.
Rukia then replied "Are you- are you Hisana?"

I thought I’d discuss historical actions that had no clarity behind them. Often I use wars and battle as examples of clarity because the issues are so clear. In general I believe as the character in one of Asimov’s books that, “Violence is the last refuge of the incompetent.” As examples, though, they are excellent.
I used Desert Storm yesterday as a very clearly defined set of objectives. In counterpoint we look at the Iraq/Afghanistan conflict with the US that ran from 2003 to whenever. It started with lies i.e. Iraq had nuclear weapons and Iraq funded the 9/11 event in NYC. It continued with confusion and waste. The stated objective was to ‘create democracy’ in Iraq. Talk about goals that are at 50,000 feet. What does that even mean?
Did we mean we were going to take our value system over there? The Iraqi regime was a very bad one. It had all kinds of internal terror. It ruled by fear. It’s major accomplishment was to keep Iraq from being a theocracy. When we destroyed it our steps became an expensive chaos of corruption and force. Short of annexing Iraq and eventually making them the 51st state our efforts were doomed. We have created a situation which has made the world more dangerous and left us seriously embarrassed.
My second example comes from the commercial world. At the end of the 1980’s IBM was in a very powerful position. They had many products in the micro computer and the main frame world and their stock was performing well. John Ackers ran the company at the time.
There were challenges on the horizon though. The division VP’s such as Burlington, VT and Fishkill, NY and other divisions got together to discuss the future. They decided that IBM needed to create a foothold in the growing workstation business. They laid out some objectives and some plans. They then requested a meeting with Ackers and his staff.
At the meeting Ackers got up and told them that there worries were baseless. There was no need for the VP’s to worry and the workstation market wasn’t for them. He almost literally patted them on the head. The VP’s looked at each other and shrugged and went home to continue business as usual.
By the end of the 80’s it was clear that Ackers and his team had no plan and no clear goals for the companies future. The stock started to go down and by 1993 IBM had laid off over 40,000 employees. The people who took over from Ackers since then have only had one plan; keep the stock as high as possible and keep our bonuses coming. They have kept the stock as high as it is by inventing stealth layoffs. They continually lay off people. They gave away their semiconductor division along with its valuable patents to get out of the business. The decline is continual.
All of this came from leaders abdicating their leadership role. Their job is hard and well paid for one reason: to come up with clear direction and goals that motivate their employees to make the whole great. They had a history of doing this but Ackers’ team didn’t continue what was before. And the people who took over after Ackers have been various degrees of mercenaries; in it for the money.
Lack of clarity in your desired outcome is a killer.
Leave a Reply

Francesco Totti should think about retirement - Roma president Pallotta
Roma president James Pallotta has said Francesco Totti should seriously consider retiring once his contract expires in the summer.
Pallotta initially denied calling on the club captain to quit, telling Italy's Il Messaggero that he "never said those things about Totti," but a video of his appearance at the Sloan Sports Analytics Conference in Boston has since been published that shows him strongly suggesting the former Italy international should end his playing career.
"We have a player who is arguably one of the greatest players ever in Italy, which is Francesco Totti," Pallotta said. "Francesco is 39 years old and while he has unbelievable talent and skills, it's obvious to him -- I think -- and to a lot of people that he can't play the same way.
"He just doesn't. His body does one thing while his mind says another. His contract's up this year and he wants another contract, and the pressure in Rome for me giving him another contract is incredible, but I've had many conversations with him and said, 'You're going to be with us for 30-plus years -- think about this and how you go out' and it's very difficult.
"I don't find it to be difficult, but it's difficult with the culture in Italy of how a player like that who has sold the most shirts for a long period of time, is the face of Roma, which will be with us in other roles for 30 years or 40 years, whatever, [retires]."
Totti's wife said in January that the forward was ready to retire this summer but the player himself complained about his lack of game time last month, telling Rai: "I can't stay at Roma like this. I understand at my age that I play less, but ending my career like this is bad for me as a man and what I've given to Roma. I demand more respect for all I've done here."
Pallotta, who paid Totti a visit on a recent trip to Rome, then indicated that he was happy give the player a new contract, but his remarks at the Boston conference suggest a renewal is unlikely.

Thursday, December 12, 2013
He pouts. And shuffles around on my step. I don't want to go, he says. His cap is perched at an odd angle on top of his head, he's a walking ad for some beer company I've never heard of but I think he looks sad, and cute, and scruffy and handsome like he always has. But I tell him he looks homeless.
I let him hold the cat. It's interesting how we humans are so quick to say I love you to animals, but to other people, we hold back as long as we can. At least I know I do. I have almost as many problems saying it as I do hearing it. He pets the cat and the wind blows spray from the icy drizzle and it hits my face, and cuts through this coat and I am cold, and barefoot. I realize then that it's four in the morning and I'm outside in the rain in December. The things you do for the ones...well, you know.
He wants to come in. I tell him I don't trust him, but he smiles and says you don't trust yourself and he's so right. I don't trust myself. So he stands there, and I make him tell me he misses me. That's an easy thing to say. I'm not sure why we always want other people to tell us the things we already know. He should be thankful that with me, he never has to say a word. I remember that it got old. More than that. It tore me up. Why was I was so happy? and yet, I feel that absence and I'm really not sure why...because things are really good. Maybe I do need to be needed.
Somehow we're back in the same conversation we've had for months. Because its not harmless, I say. I know, he says. It's not for me either. We can't be lovers and we can't be friends, and we're not enemies, its grey area but I don't mind. It's smoke, its there in the air we breathe. And I can't get it out of my head, the way he looked at me. Like sometimes I wore him down, with honesty and he says he's being shitty and wants a place to land and I tell him to go find some bar maid to warm his bed. But it's like he's trying to see through me. I know he knocks on this door for a reason. Same old story I guess. He comes to hear what I always tell him. Like going home, like having your mum tell you how special you are, even when you get lost and become an adult and suddenly realize its not really true, you're actually sort of evil and sometimes you really suck.
And it dawns on me that we'll never be safe here. I think that's part of why I have to go. I have to leave some of this behind, like I always do. I always move somewhere else and hope I can become a different person. I've been told it doesn't work like that though. Always me, lost in a memory.
I look around, hazy window with the world ripping by. I think I'm leaving a little bit of my soul behind, in a trail like fireflies that burn bright through the dark until they snuff out. It's a buzz and you always show up and its so easy, to stop fighting sometimes and just live. Maybe its the beer but I let go. I just let my resolve fall, and maybe you like that, its good because I fight you, but you win sometimes too. I climb on your back and you walk me all the way home. And it's familiar; and its good.
Sometimes a man must awake to find really, he has no one.
It's never over.

Let me tell you a story about a girl….
One chilly Thursday in February, a girl called her local cable company. She was interested in setting up new internet service.
After talking to a “very nice” man for 30 minutes, she picked her service, set up a time to pick up her modem for her self install, and was overjoyed to find out that her service would be turned on at the pole by the following day, Friday, by 8 pm.
She ventured out into the very cold night Friday after work to pick up said modem, only to be told by the girl at the store that her service wasn’t scheduled to be turned on until Sunday.
She was shocked and angered by this news, and the sales person at the store offered to switch her work order date from Sunday to Saturday, and encouraged her to call the cable company back.
As she left the store, the girl called customer service and got a woman on the phone. Said woman told the girl that the salesperson was mistaken, and that she would, in fact, have her service turned on by 8pm Friday night. The woman even offered to call her back at 8 to confirm that service was on.
The girl was happy. Until 8:15 rolled around and she still had no service and no phone call back.
The girl called customer service back. This time, she got a man on the phone that apologized profusely for the mix up, told her that the last girl she spoke with gave her incorrect information as the field workers stop working at 7 (and the girl spoke to her at 7:20), and he guaranteed that service would be turned on by 7pm Saturday. He even gave her his personal extension number just in case there were any problems.
The girl is annoyed, but happy to have been helped so thoroughly and is satisfied with the guarantee that it will be on the following day.
It is now Saturday at 8 pm …. the girl still has no internet service.
She once again calls customer service. They tell her she is not scheduled to have service turned on until Sunday.
She asks to be transferred to the mans extension number from the night before, only to find out that he is not working Saturday night.
She is then transferred to a new rep in the same department.
He listens to her recount everything that has happened the past few days. He apologizes for the inconvenience, and once again gives her a guarantee that her service will be on by 7pm the following day, Sunday.
She tells him that she does not believe him.
He says that he understands that completely.
He contacts his supervisor to tell him what has been going on with the girls account. He offers the girl a credit on her next bill, and assures her that his supervisor is going to look into each note on her account and speak with the reps that she spoke with about the repeated incorrect information she was given.
He promises to call on Tuesday when he comes back from his days off if her service was no turned on by Sunday, but he is confident that his guarantee will come true.
She is still skeptical, and frustrated, but gets off the phone without the option of a better resolution.
So now it is midday Sunday. The girl called first thing this morning to confirm that there was actually a work order out for her residence today. She was assured that there was.
And now she waits.
For the sake of all involved, she sincerely hopes that her service is turned on by 7pm tonight, as she is very sick of using her cell phone as a hot spot for her computer.
It’s on!! The girls internet is finally on.
All is now right in her world 🙂

Hopping Obvious May 2, 2006Posted by gordonwatts in physics life.
A friend of mine gave the department colloquium today on his nanotube research. Early in the talk was a classic quote:
I'm going to start with something really obvious. It is obvious the same way a kangaroo thinks that hopping is the best way to get around is obvious. Obvious!
If someone makes a statement like that in a talk it usually sends up a big red flag: I won't get what they are about to say. It wasn't that bad this time, however. But it was hard not to laugh out loud. I think I missed at least half a slide keeping quiet…

So I've been flirting with this man whose 15 years older than me. He drives a nice car that I'm literally obsessed with trying to own so that doesn't help me. haha. That's how we ended up starting to talk. We have met up twice, first time was exciting he picked me up in the middle of the night and we had a good time getting to know each other. No sex though. I honestly feel like I bother him a lot which is why I never thought the second time would happen. I know he's busy a lot but I hate and love the thrill of this adventure. This guy brings something out sexually in me that I've never experienced before. I know he's not doing it on purpose and I can't help it :x I really really want to fuck him in his car. We've already had sex the second time we met up, in his apartment. It was super passionate, fun, and worth it. He's the first older man I've ever slept with or had these kind of feelings for. I just want to have a fun sexual relationship with him. But Im afraid of just telling him so Im always sending him sexy selfies and cute texts that he never responds to lol -__- but he'll message me random times and not always for a meet up. It's hard to tell what he wants but again, he's super busy.. he's a high ranking officer in a busy resort town.. :x it took 3 weeks for us to finally have sex and to meet up a second time. What do you think the likelihood of this happening again is? I really want to explore things sexually with this guy I don't know why! Im just so attracted to him. lol this is very adventurous for me.
What is the likelihood of this happening again? Really crazy story?
What Guys Said 1
Ask him to take you somewhere in the car. Then when you are somewhere remote, ask him to pull over
and go at it. You can entice him by exposing while he is driving, or starting to play with yourself to get his attention. Then he is sure to jump you. Sounds like fun...0
What Girls Said 1
I guess it's the "rush" and excitement you feel whenever you are with him that makes you wanna see him again. If you're single and he is single, why stop that feeling? Just make sure you are ready for anything so it won't hurt so much in the end when all the excitements fade.0
Select as Most Helpful Opinion?
You cannot undo this action. The opinion owner is going to be notified and earn 7 XPER points.

“Roberta,” Olivier fastened a cufflink as he stood next to the bed where she was laying watching him with a guarded expression. “I’ll be out of town a few days. Stay here please. If you need to go out, take a guard with you.”
“Yes sir,” she made rounded eyes at him and flopped back on her back pulling a pillow over her chest as she did so. Her plush full lips made a pout at his directorial tone. He was the only person who ever called her Roberta. He had read it off her nametag. He couldn’t let it go.
He yanked the pillow off, “don’t hide from me what’s mine.” His voice was cold and callous, a tone which contradicted the heat of his gaze as he bent and kissed her naked breast he’d just exposed. He’d had her in the bed multiple times in the night, in the shower and then had thrown her back in the bed. It was nearly nine in the morning but for some reason today, his thirst for her had been unquenchable. She shivered under his stare and then reminded herself she needed to reign in her emotions. He liked s*x, it just happened at this precise time she was his s*x toy of choice.
“You don’t own me, Olivier, you’re just paying for services. That’s it.” Roberta tossed out over his head. “Don’t stake a claim like I’m a pet.”
“Good, you know the drill.”
“I do. The month is also up on Monday next week.” He had already extended her by a month once before. He was unlikely to extend it again and she was going to go back to her tiny hovel of a room at the boarding house, return to work at the coffee shop he’d plucked her from and likely become a spinster. Only she would be stupid enough to fall in love with a man she had agreed to act as an escort for. Although escort was the wrong word, because she hadn’t escorted him anywhere outside of this room except for a couple of dinners.
“We’ll talk about it when I’m back.” He stared into her eyes seriously, “if I didn’t have a flight to catch, I think I’d be buried deep in you again in about ten seconds. You are f*****g beautiful, chérie.”
She looked past him to the mirrored ceiling and knew what he was looking at. Blonde hair, blue eyes, an hourglass figure bordering thin from many missed meals. She could go on the internet and find fifty movie starlets with the same face, minus the spattering of freckles across their nose. There was nothing special about her look, in her opinion, but somehow, according to Olivier Villeneuve, she made his d**k hard.
“Be good when I’m gone. I’ll be back Sunday.”
“Okay.” She lifted back on elbows to watch him stride from the room and laughed when he called out for her to stop looking at his ass. Was it her fault her eyes were always on it? He wouldn’t work out as much as he did if he didn’t want it ogled.
Bobbie lay there and considered how this had all come to play. He had come to her coffee shop late at night at closing time. She had worked a double shift, exhausted but having no choice to work as many hours as she could. Her sister needed the money. She was dying. Too far down on the transplant list for a kidney and they were not a match. They shared a mother, neither knew their father and since their mom had died when they were teenagers, the girls had been on their own. She had no education, no training, and no way to pay the medical bills her sister had needed.
Then Olivier Villeneuve had shown up at her coffee shop, irritated with a date he’d simply left wherever he’d dropped her out of his car, demanding a coffee and her phone number. He’d made her an offer he thought she couldn’t refuse. Thirty thousand dollars for thirty days of her time. At first, she’d refused the rich handsome man who obviously was not used to hearing the word no.
But then every night for a week he stopped at her coffee shop, had a cup of coffee, and ogled her but never asked again. On day seven she’d acquiesced when he bumped the offer to sixty thousand dollars, a formal contract, and a promise to make it worth her while. She knew he had meant sexually and finally she agreed. Partly because she found him sexy as hell. Mostly because on the day he proposed his lucrative offer, she’d received another bill from the hospital for her sister’s dialysis treatment. She closed out the store and he’d taken her to his hotel suite, because of course, a rich wealthy man in Houston would simply stay in a hotel instead of buying a condominium.
Since the first night, she rarely left his bed. Admittedly, he let her out for food but for the most part, he kept her in the hotel room and usually in the bed. The man was insatiable. It was fine for her. She found him invigorating and the more he gave, the more she wanted. It was a dangerous path.
Eating dinner in the room, watching the news before bedtime, or quietly sitting and reading. Playing cards was their favorite pastime. He had been thrilled to know she could play poker and every game turned into a strip poker game she rarely won. They were all activities normal typical couples engaged in. Their topics of conversation never touched on personal subjects like family or friends. She had to frequently remind herself, they were not a normal typical couple.
Olivier Villeneuve was a billionaire businessman but if a person asked her what exactly he did, she’d be hard pressed to tell him. She couldn’t even begin to understand what he did for a living, but she guessed an accountant, or something based on the way he watched the ticker screen on the bottom of the financial news She was not used to hobnobbing with the rich and famous and his name wasn’t one she had heard of before he’d purchased her services. He was used to having what he wanted when he wanted and how he wanted. For right now, she was what he wanted. She expected come Monday, he’d be cutting her loose. Her heart was already breaking.
She couldn’t tell him of course. She loved him. Stupidly she had fallen in love with him and the way he smiled; a bit crooked with one side of his lip always a bit higher than the other. His eyes dark brown and his hair a dirty blonde which always looked mussed up, cut short and she wondered if it wasn’t curly if he let it grow out. She had caught him watching her two weeks ago, intently while she had been reading an email from the treatment center and the way he’d looked at her made her feel he wanted more than just s*x. She forced herself to get up from the sofa and take a cold shower, punching the wall multiple times as she realized she was projecting emotion on a man who was incapable. He'd followed her into the shower, and they’d had rough passionate s*x against the shower walls.
“Bobbie, you’re such a fool,” she whispered to herself as she rolled over and pulled her cell phone closer. One missed call. Immediately dread filled her chest as she recognized the number. She quickly returned the call and felt her stomach drop. She got dressed and moved to the front doors, hopping on one foot as she shoved into a tennis pair of tennis shoes.
She met the guard there, “I need to go.”
“Mr. Villeneuve said you should stay here.”
“I know what he said but I need to go to the Pemberley Hospice Center now.” She pushed past him.
“Ma’am.” He grabbed her arm and tried to convince her to stay.
She spun on her heel. “My sister is dead. They just called to tell me. Do you mind?”
“I’m sorry, of course, let’s go.” He escorted her quickly through the hotel and had a car waiting by the time they reached the entrance. “My name is Darian. Would you like me to call Mr. Villeneuve?”
“No, what’s he going to do? He can’t bring her back.” She said coldly staring out the window. Her sister had died alone while she was on her back. Not like Rosamund would have cared, she’d have been happy for her, teasing her and laughing. She’d been in a coma for ten days now. It had only been a matter of time.
Several hours later, she had arranged everything with the hospice center, had broken down with Darian gently holding her while she sobbed her heart out and was on her way back to the hotel room. Rosamund would be cremated and that would be that. There was no money for a huge fancy funeral, and it wasn’t like they had friends anyway. It had always just been the two of them. Her best and only friend and her only family member was gone.
As she entered the hotel suite, she heard voices and came to a standstill, Darian close on her heels.
“Ah, there she is Roberta Caron. Olivier’s paid escort. He always was partial to blondes,” the man in the room looked to the brunette sitting opposite him, “sorry Cleo.”
“No offense. I’m glad he got this out of his system before the wedding,” the woman looked Bobbie up and down casually as if her appearance didn’t bother her at all, “though usually he goes for something a bit less used looking.” She glared at Bobbie, “you slept with my fiancé, the man I love more than anything in the world. You’re nothing more than a w***e. You’re lucky I found this out before our wedding otherwise there would be hell to pay. He’s mine. You’re going to leave.”
“Who are you and who let you in here?” Darian stepped forward protectively, pushing Bobbie behind him.
“Bernard Menard, I’m Olivier’s best friend and,” he looked at Bobbie, “Roberta’s new,” he waved his hand around with a flourish, “what’s the word we agreed to use?” he looked at Cleo with a smirk. “Patron. Yes, patron.” His eyes looked her up and down in a way instantly making Bobbie’s skin itch.
“I’m not sure what you’re suggesting, Mr. Menard, but it is not happening.” Bobbie felt her stomach twist painfully.
“Olivier transferred the remaining five days of your contract over to me.”
“It’s not transferrable,” she argued, hating the searing pain in her chest.
“Your choice is clear my love, give me the last five days or forfeit the month of payment. Olivier is getting married on Saturday,” he waved to the woman on his right, “Cleo and I chatted with him this morning and he agreed this was the best plan of action.” The woman held up a huge diamond on her finger. “Cleo agreed to not call everything off considering you’re nothing more to him than a commodity.”
“Darian, can you grab my bag off the nightstand? It’s time I left.” There was no way she could walk into the room where he had made love to her for hours to collect her things. All she needed was her bag. The rest could rot.
As Darian stepped into the separate bedroom, Bernard grew close and wrapped his fingers tightly around her arm.
“I have bought out your contract, sweetheart, you’re not going anywhere.” She tried to pull her arm away and he slapped her face hard. “Hookers don’t get choices!”
She kicked him hard in the balls, his shout of pain echoing in the room just as Darian ripped the man off her and threw him clear across the room. He pushed her out the door and into the hall, shoving her bag into her hands.
“I’ve seen rich people do some f****d up s**t, but this is the worst bunch of bullshit I’ve ever seen. Let’s get you out of here.”
“Why would he do this?” she whimpered sadly as she got into the elevator. “Who would do such a thing? He transferred me like I was a possession. I’m not a f*****g car lease.”
“Where can I take you that you’ll be safe?”
“I don’t have anywhere,” she felt the tears come on. “I was staying at a boarding house because it was cheaper than an apartment.” The truth was, she and Rosamund had been homeless more than once in her twenty-one years of life. “Just take me to the funeral home and I’ll wait for my sister’s ashes and sort out what to do next.”
As she climbed into the car at the man’s urging and let him take her where she wanted to go, she let the tears fall again. They said what doesn’t kill you makes you stronger. Bobbie Caron was a diamond in the rough.

I just rec'd a call from difficult child's parole officer. (We don't even know how long difficult child is going to be incarcerated yet.) Anyway, he seemed real nice and I mentioned a few of my concerns that resulted from the way things were while difficult child was on probation. He said we can work all that out and make things clear to difficult child right before he is released and returns home. He said I won't have any requirements I have to meet or things I have to do in order for difficult child to be released to me (ie- parenting classes, therapy, etc) but I have to come in and sign a supervisory agreement before difficult child's staff meeting in 2 weeks. He said this is an agreement stating that I will visit him and supoport the system while difficult child is incarcerated and that I will agree to supervisory rules when he gets out. Oh boy. What worries me is that this is going to be another agreement to "do whatever he says" and of course, I have no idea what he's going to tell us the rules are. He said difficult child will have a mentor upon release- ok - I'm in total agreement with that and had even asked for that months ago but didn't get it. He also said difficult child will qualify for mental health requirements upon release. Yep- and all the mental health and legal requirements turned into a full time job before this happened- what if I can't do all that and still provide a home? I tried to discuss this with the probation officer, then her supervisor, and they both had the "that's your problem" response. Also, he said he didn't know what the rules would be- we have to play it by ear. (Then how do I know if I can meet them or commit to them?) I want to get these things out in the open before I sign any agreement. I'm thinking that I will develop a list of questions/concerns and take it to this meeting with him and write down his answers. If I handle it that way, will it look antagonistic? I asked about getting family therapy while difficult child is in Department of Juvenile Justice and he said I had to take that up with the facility that difficult child goes to. Truthfully, I cannot commit to difficult child coming home until I know what is expected of me from the parole officer, until I know my authority in my home will be backed up, until I feel like I can provide difficult child with what he needs to succeed, and until I see that difficult child is going to do his best and not going to give up this time. Now, should I tell the parole officer this and not sign that agreement until I have those answers? Of course, that will lead to them figuring out another place for difficult child to go to upon his release because they apparently want to have that in place before that even start on his "rehabiltation" while he's in. And that leads to the "if you don't sign this, difficult child gets turned over to dss" threat/warning. So what do these people really expect- the parent to tell them what went wrong and discuss how to change things or just a parent who signs whatever is stuck under their nose then waits for it all to fall apart again? I am sitting here shaking with stress and anxiety from the thought of it all. I'm supposed to sign that paper and I don't even know if they are talking about difficult child having a stay of a few mos or 3 years. He said he and I had to talk on the phone every 30 days and meet every 90 days while difficult child is incarcerated. I have no idea why, but apparently, that's the rule. As long as I'm visiting difficult child and supporting Department of Juvenile Justice's efforts, that's all there is until difficult child is released. He will stay in contact with difficult child, too, while he's in there. He said parole is a lot stricter than probation- if the kid messes up one time, they go right back in. If the kid does not mess up, they can be off parole in 6-12 mos. Anyway, I got difficult child's grades from his old sd yesterday and they are all passing. This will mean he won't have to retake 8th grade- unless they have an issue with the number of school days he missed (33, I think). Will they hold him back for that if he had passing grades but scored lower than he should have on standardized tests? Then, I spoke with difficult child's cm at Department of Juvenile Justice. She said he is doing fine- no behavioral issues AT ALL!! She said he expressed concern about a young boy who keeps following him around and trying to sit with him. She said that the boy apparently wants to be friends but difficult child does not and it is bothering difficult child. (This means one of 2 things- the other boy is adhd because difficult child has no tolerance for hyperness in others- even though he has it intermittently himself- or this kid is doing something that difficult child wants no part of and difficult child doesn't want to reveal what.) I didn't tell the cm but that's a disaster waiting to happen. I should have told her but I couldn't think of how to word it without sounding like I was being over-protective or not willing to hold difficult child responsible. At least he discussed some of it with her before it turned into a disaster. I called again yesterday to see if I had a court date yet. I'm worried about not getting a summons because they wrote the wrong house number on my court order and even though they have it right on difficult child's papers, I will get a separate file and the deputy will not find a house with that address. The clerk said they have nothing on this "show cause". I hope that means that it was pulled, instead of just not being in the system yet but I doubt that will be the case. (Wishful thinking, LOL!) I just got a letter from difficult child. This one is 2 pages long and it sounds like he's having it pretty hard. He said someone started a rumor that he's a sex offender and the other kids are giving him a hard time about it but he's trying hard not to get in a fight because that can add 6 mos onto his sentence. His says he satys by himself most of the time. Soooo, I just wanted to throw out an update- thanks for "listening"!

It’s finally time for me to introduce the new little members of our family! Check out my precious twins’ Baby Photos and get to know their personalities.
Meet the Twins!
I’m so excited to finally share some photos of the twins with you! If you follow me on Instagram you may have already seen several, but we finally have our newborn photos back and we love them!
So allow me to officially introduce our identical twin boys, Ashton and Brooks. We are smitten! They were born Friday, February 2 via emergency C-section, about a week before the scheduled C-section. Ashton was born at 5:23pm weighing 4 lbs 10 oz and Brooks was born at 5:24pm weighing 6 lbs 5 oz. They are both healthy and doing great! They’re about a week away from being 2 months old and have both gained about 3 pounds since birth.
Photos by Hayley Jo Photography
The first 7 weeks have certainly been a handful, but we’ve been very fortunate to have great help from family in the area and from my mom, who has been staying with us since they were born, with the exception of one week. Such a big help!
Despite the sleep deprivation, it’s been so fun to see them grow and change so much already. They have such personality! Ashton is the more serious and curious one and Brooks is totally chill and happy as long as he’s got his milk. Brooks has also started rolling over in just the last couple of days, which is fun to watch. They are such sweet little love bugs.
My Experience Having Twins
But lets back up just a bit for those that are interested in their arrival into this world/their birth. I mentioned above that the C-section came early. They were born just why of 36 weeks. Well, the end of the pregnancy was quite a doozy. I’ve always had low blood pressure and did throughout my pregnancy up until the end. By the last month or so, my blood pressure had risen and I was so swollen I couldn’t wear anything on my feet other than the hubs’ very big slippers. No joke. We even tried to go out and buy some women’s slippers for me, but nothing fit.
As you may have read in various blog posts, during that last month we had two doctors appointments a week for monitoring the boys since they were mono-di twins. One was an ultrasound with the perinatologist and the other was an NST for monitoring their heart rates with my OBGYN.
Well that final week, the OBGYN called a couple days ahead of my NST appointment and said there had been some elevated levels in my last blood test and my blood pressure was borderline (and actually was too high if I did anything other than sit on the couch), so they wanted to do a 24 hour urine test to test for preeclampsia. So we did.
Then the night before our NST appointment, something shifted for me. It’s hard to say what it was, but I just had a feeling that this was the end. That it needed to be the end. I’m kind of stubborn and kept going with all the things I could, even baking, up until the end. That last week though, I had finally stopped and that last day, I knew something had changed.
The next morning, I told the hubs that I really felt like these babies needed to be born by the end of the weekend (it was Friday). I was concerned for them. We went to the NST appointment and they monitored the twins and they were perfectly happy, but the hubs wasn’t totally convinced. I had started downplaying things a bit and feeling like maybe I’d been a little dramatic that morning. But the hubs knows I don’t cry wolf and make a big deal out of things, so he brought up my earlier concerns to the doctor. The doctor initially was going to let me go home and then call later about the urine test, but changed his mind a few minutes after he left the room. We were sent to the hospital for further monitoring and to wait for the results of the urine test.
Well, several hours after getting to the hospital, the doctor came into the room and told us that she’d been totally expecting to send me home. My blood pressure was borderline but ok, and the babies were totally fine. However, they look for a protein level in the urine to be under 300 and mine was above 4,000! I would be having a C-section two hours later. Pretty much as soon as possible.
We had about 20 minutes to cry, get our head wrapped around everything and call our moms so they could get to the hospital and let everyone else know what was happening, and then it all started. IV’s and epidurals were put in place and it all happened so quickly from there. The twins were born healthy and we were thrilled!
The whole C-section and birth experience were kind of rough for me and quite different than I’d expected. I don’t know if it was because of the preeclampsia, but the epidural they gave me was so strong I could hardly breathe during the entire procedure. I threw up on the table several times and they had to give me some kind of “upper” multiple times because my blood pressure got so low. It was hard to focus on the birth because I had to work so hard to breathe. I felt very out of it for hours, even in recovery. I then had issues with pain medicine that kept me in more pain than necessary a few times. Having not ever had a major surgery before, I’ll say that recovery was very painful and not easy, though it slowly got better and by about day 10, I felt pretty good.
So after two nights in the hospital, everything was going relatively smoothly. Then on the third night, the boys went for their carseat tests that the hospital does to make sure they can handle being in their carseats before they can leave. During the test, Ashton’s heart rate sped up to over 300 bpm so he was rushed to the NICU. After getting his heart under control, we were informed that he has SVT, specifically Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome. It was very scary and led to a week long NICU stay while they adjusted his medication, but overall it is quite manageable and something that could resolve itself within his first year. Looking back, we are thankful that they found it when they did. Had we not known about the condition, it could have been bad. But so far he’s done extremely well and the cardiologist is very happy – as are we.
Coming home from the hospital with just Brooks and having to leave Ashton behind in the NICU was maybe the hardest thing ever. It was awful. I knew I needed to be there for Brooks, but also wanted to be there for Ashton. Talk about tearing my heart in two! The hubs stayed at the hospital with Ashton for the next several nights, while I was mostly with Brooks. I was able to go visit Ashton during the day, but with the preeclampsia, I wasn’t healthy enough to be there for long. My swelling and blood pressure actually got worse before it got better, and I kind of think the stress of Ashton being in the NICU had something to do with it. We didn’t have a full understanding of his condition initially and it was scary and stressful.
Once we finally got both of them home, it was a big relief. Yet, postpartum was so much more than I expected. I was so thankful that the twins were both home with us, but the “baby blues” hit me like a ton of bricks. I was totally overwhelmed by having two babies and all that entails and also from the massive change I noticed in my body post-pregnancy. I had a moment where I realized I would never be the same and just cried. Not to mention it took just over 2 weeks for my milk to come in, so I was pumping like crazy trying to get anything I could and felt like a cow. It’s totally amazing to me how having a baby – not to mention two – TOTALLY turns EVERYTHING upside down. There is no way to prepare for it, just like people had always said. It completely overwhelmed me.
After a fair amount of prayer, I finally had a moment a few weeks later where I realized that fear and being overwhelmed had kind of gotten the better of me. Since then I can’t say that I haven’t had those moment of being overwhelmed at all, but it’s much better. I feel much more joy than fear and am enjoying becoming a mother – I say “becoming” because I truly feel like I had to become one, it wasn’t an overnight thing. The hubs says I’m too hard on myself, but none-the-less, that’s how it feels. Babies are a massive learning curve and I’m finally starting to feel like I’m catching on. Yay!
So now we are trying to figure out what life might look like with two babies. The hubs is back at work after 5 weeks off and I’m trying to get back into the groove of working a bit. Finding the time is hard with the twins, so we are slowly working through what that looks like and getting the right help in place. Most importantly though, we are loving on our boys and enjoying every minute with them we can. I love looking into their beautiful little faces, feeling their warmth and soft skin, seeing them grow and get so strong, kissing them all over and so much more. I love being their mom and can’t wait to experience all that it entails. After such a long road to get here, I am so thankful the Lord saw fit to make us parents to these two sweet boys and hope to never take a bit of it for granted.

When I was playing on our tour, I would call it the step on our tour “the step”. When you are a young musician you don’t know what you like and if you don’t like the step you can’t do what you like. We have people who came to us when I was little, they would like that step and when I saw that, I thought that’s what it was called so I thought, “My goodness, this is why kids should go to school!” Then I called it “the step and it is the step but it is not the step.”
So then you could not play like other kids because if you do that, no one else would like it?
I was very happy I found my old step. It is kind of cool. [Sings] “The other step”.
When I think back to your first album, I never really thought that the step might be an appropriate introduction to your repertoire.
I would play [the music] very different sometimes. I used to find myself in a situation playing the step and it would be, I have to tell. I would find myself, “Oh, that guy has this idea…” And it would not sound at all like the original, it would be different and you would be like, “Why did you change it? You had fun with it! And we had a big laugh!” And then you play the original and someone is like, “This is bad, that is bad.” And you might feel like, “Why? Was this the good one? Did I really make a good choice for you today?” So it takes you to a place in your life where you have to make choices where you are like, “No, maybe we have to change what it is we were doing in the room.”
What is the most difficult music that you’ve never performed?
Hear this! It’s a different song: “How I Became a Man”. I didn’t realise at the time I was composing it that the story of it was this guy who was a little boy and he was always playing piano and had this amazing talent. I was like, “This is not just about one little boy who is like the best piano player ever. What do you mean? This is something bigger.” The story, the character, the whole thing in the story is this little boy who played piano and he had something and he used to say, “Do you know about the other guy? How he

Authorities: NJ man killed in tree-cutting accident
SUSSEX – Authorities say 55-year-old man was killed when a tree he was cutting down at a northwestern New Jersey home fell and struck him.
Investigators say the death of Angelo Burrafato appears to be a “tragic accident.”
Burrafato was working in the yard of a Sussex home by himself when the tree apparently split and fell onto him shortly before 8 p.m. Friday.
He was unresponsive when he was found by his wife, who had gone to check on him after realizing she had not heard the sound of a saw being used for some time.
Copyright 2014 The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.

One of the first authors to contact me when I began my business three years ago was a lady called Joan. She wanted me to write her memoirs and give them to her family when she died. No one had asked me to do that before, nor have they since, but as time went on I realised that it was a request that epitomised Joan. She was an independent lady who liked to have control. Not over anyone else, she would say, “Just my own life.”
We set to work, sitting at regular intervals in Joan’s conservatory at a little Formica table, where we ate Werther’s Originals and drank Robinson’s Pink Grapefruit squash – now a firm favourite in my own home. And we chatted away. Sometimes the sun burned through the window, we overheated and Joan would give me a Cornetto. Other times I could barely hear Joan for rain. Joan loved to feed the birds and occasionally a seagull would land on the plastic roof with a thud that sounded more like a Pterodactyl and I would jump out of my skin.
There at Joan’s table, I heard it all. How she’d been born a month premature and was so tiny that a neighbour told Joan’s mum she wouldn’t survive, how as a child she loved to the smell of the bread delivered by the local baker, about the family’s annual holiday which was a day trip to the Isle of Wight and why being evacuated during World War Two turned Joan into a hard nut. Back home at family gatherings, Joan’s song was I’ll Be Your Sweetheart by Foster and Allen.
As time went on we laughed at Joan’s teenage escapades. In the cinema, wandering hands were treated to a jab from a pin she carried. After school she became a shorthand typist working at a solicitor’s that had a department facilitating divorces for servicemen who came home from the war to find their wives had been unfaithful. “What’s a poxy cow?” Joan asked her beloved father one day. He took a sip of tea before answering.
In 1951, Joan signed the Official Secrets Act and joined the typing pool of Scotland Yard in the Norman Shaw building, retiring 36 years later as the most senior female member of the Met’s civil staff. During her ascent she was nicknamed The Pocket Venus of the Flying Squad as, in the days before woman police officers, she was occasionally taken on surveillance jobs and used as a decoy to make plain-clothed police officers appear as regular drinkers. I loved to look at pictures of Joan in her 50s dresses and hear about her crazy 300 calorie-a-day diets, Lancome make-up bought from Army and Navy, and Coty L’aimant perfume, which she was wearing once more having discovered it in her local pharmacy.
I always looked forward to seeing Joan. Once I arrived and she couldn’t hear me knock because Faith Of The Heart by Russell Watson was blaring from the CD player. “I’m choosing the music for my funeral,” she told me. I admired Joan’s pragmatic approach to death. She loved music, “I feel fortunate because there have been so many new things come about in my lifetime,” she told me. “I’ll never forget the day that Rock and Roll started with Bill Haley and Rock Around The Clock. That was the first bit of rock I ever heard and it was a revelation. It hit me. Crikey, this is great! No more schmaltz!”
There are parts of Joan’s story that are great fun but very personal and as is inevitable when confidences are shared, Joan and I became good friends. This year on her 82nd birthday I took her a cream tea, taking care to choose scones with as many cherries as possible. I admired how, after a 70th birthday gift of a computer from her family, she had embraced modern technology and was the happier for it. She loved Amazon, enjoyed spending, and as she was mainly housebound, ordered her shopping online. She wasn’t a big eater but her fridge and cupboards were full of treats. She adored eBay and liked to play naughty, bidding people up if a price had gone beyond what she was willing to pay. I tried to persuade her to join Twitter but failed. She played Patience. Her screensaver was Stonehenge and her only regret in life was that she had never seen it for herself. I offered to drive her there but she didn’t think she was well enough to travel that far.
Joan and I finished her memoir this summer and we were due to go to print. I had collected several of her photographs but there was one more that she wanted to include but couldn’t find even when we looked together. Every few weeks I would check in to see if she’d found it. Her short-term memory was driving her bonkers so sometimes she’d forget what she was looking for. I’d remind her, we’d chat, and I’d promise to call again soon.
Last week I rang Joan and her ‘phone didn’t ring. There were three pips and silence. My stomach lurched. There was no way Joan’s ‘phone would be off. She spoke regularly to family and friends and if she had changed her number she would have let me know. I got in the car. Twenty minutes later I turned into Joan’s road. In front of her house some way down I could see the distinctive tree in her front garden and in front of that, something white. Please don’t be a For Sale sign, I thought. As I got closer, I could see that it was a Sold sign. Still I hoped – selfishly, as it wouldn’t have been what Joan wanted – that she was ‘just’ in hospital and had sold the house to go into a care home. A nice care home where I could go and see my friend, tell her to sod the last picture, and press her memoir into her hands.
I tapped her dragonfly door knocker but I didn’t wait for an answer. I ran to the back garden. And there I saw the sight that made me dissolve. Joan’s conservatory was empty. Her clutter, her ornaments, her ironing board with cover in the pattern of a Butler’s uniform, the cat food, even the dust had disappeared. Our little table was gone.The place where Joan had sat and told her stories was no more.
I looked to my right. Joan’s garden ornaments were still there, but none of the mountains of bird seed that I sometimes helped her scatter. The hundreds of spoiled birds would be dining elsewhere. The seagull/Pterodactyl would be startling someone else. The fox that Joan fed crossed my mind. She’d gone to the vets and got mange medicine for him, slipping it into his food. She’d loved watching him blossom from decrepit to beautiful and he, of course, had no idea of this act of loving care.
The neighbours were very kind to me. Joan had died a few weeks earlier. She hadn’t suffered. Sophie, Joan’s terribly shy rescue cat was in a new home. Joan had hoped to out live her. She said she wouldn’t mind dying when Sophie was gone. The note Joan had left asking that I be informed of her funeral had obviously not been found. I guessed she’d written it in the shorthand that was familiar to her but no one else. The neighbours told me about Joan’s service, that it had been as she wanted and that her song, Faith Of The Heart, had rung out. I was glad.
I felt desperately sad that Joan had died without holding her book in her hand. I beat myself up emotionally but eventually I decided to take Joan’s advice and have no regrets. I realised that I could still carry out her wishes and get her memoirs to her family. The neighbours gave me a number for Joan’s niece and I rang her. She knew that Joan was writing her memoirs but not that they were finished. She was delighted and a few days after hearing those terrible pips, I emailed her Joan’s story – Reminiscences of a Maiden Aunt.
Joan’s memoir finishes with her words, “I’m enjoying life but I am not dreading death, apart from how I will die. I believe in the old ways. I believe that death is a part of life and that when I die I’ll be going home where I’ll meet all my loved ones who have already died. Then at some stage after that, I’ll be reincarnated, and my spirit will be re-born on earth. Who knows what my story will be next time?”
Joan, I absolutely loved helping you tell your story. If you are right and we are reincarnated, I think I’d like to come back as a memoir writer please. I’d also like to help you tell your next story. I hope we find a nice conservatory to sit in. Make mine a Pink Grapefruit squash.
Farewell friend, lots of love x

I usually experience seasons of discomfort prior to seasons of growth and forward movement. • I’ve come to the understanding […]
Here I am, struggling, but choosing to live the best life that I can, despite my circumstances. Here I am, grateful for everyone, and everything, that I do have. I am appreciative of the many, many blessings provided just for me.
I remember that for several weeks I found myself telling God that there were specific things that I had been praying about for years that he had never answered. I found myself telling Him that I was unwilling to take any steps further until I saw that He was willing to answer my prayers
I had never witnessed death knocking at the door of someone’s life before. I was also very clueless as to how ugly and cruel death could be.

- He appeared at the American Black Film Festival
- He spoke of hip hop's responsibility to ending gun violence
"I've got a scar now from this burn where I kept shooting a gun and the [fake] bullets were going into my chest," he said.
"Suicide Squad" is set to release in August. It's just one of the many projects Common, who last year won an Oscar with singer John Legend for their song "Glory" from the film "Selma," has in the works.
He's also recording a new album and said it's some of the best music he has ever made.
And while Common has experience with prop bullets, he spoke to CNN at the American Black Film Festival in Miami this week about the very real issue of gun violence. Common is a featured speaker at the event which is celebrating its 20th anniversary.
Gun violence has plagued his hometown of Chicago and rocked the nation after the mass shooting attack just days ago in Orlando.
While some in the hip hop community have been taken to task for glorifying violence in their music, Common is known for both his positive rhymes and his efforts to end gun violence. Last year he helped lead the "Put the Guns Down" initiative in his native city.
Common said he doesn't think rappers should be held to a different standard than average citizens with respect to speaking out against violence - everyone has a role to play.
"I like to focus on the [artists] who do speak up," he said. "You do have the people like the Kendrick Lamar's and the Chance [the rapper]'s who say things in their music. You have to find the people who have it engrained in them to speak up for different social issues."

Welcome to our series on how to have a positive influence on others for Christ. We want to give you some tips on sharing your faith and give you an example of how to use this in real life.
Find Out Where People Are on Their Spiritual Journey
The most important tip is to find out where the people are on their spiritual journey so you will know how to encourage them no matter where they are.
Some will be open to God and seeking Him.
In that case, I usually show them the Share Your Faith app. That makes sharing your faith really easy. For example, while at physical therapy, I led the assistant therapist to Christ using the Share Your Faith app.
Some will be far from God.
In that case, I seek to be a positive influence on them for Christ. I avoid being pushy because that could push them away from Christ. I just want to encourage them and point them in the right direction. God is not finished with them yet.
Some will already be believers.
When talking with them, I usually find out about areas where they need encouragement.
A couple of weeks ago, I met a woman named Linda when our Monday lunch group went out for Pizza.
Linda was the checker at a pizza restaurant. She was very attentive, friendly, and helpful. When I was getting my drink, she came over to attend to the counter. I sensed an openness with her, so I said, “Linda, do you know that Jesus loves you?”
She said, “Yes, I do. Thank you very much.” It was obvious that she was a Christian, so I asked her where she went to church. She said, “Water…something. It’s in Fontana.”
“Water of Life?” I asked.
“Yes, that’s it. I don’t get to go very much because I work on Saturdays and Sundays.”
I told her about another girl at Starbucks who was in the same situation. She prayed and then asked the manager if he would allow her to have Sundays off so she could go to church and get closer to God. The manager said yes and gave her Sundays off. Linda said, “That gives me hope.” Then she said, “My manager is right over there” and pointed him out to me.
Later, when getting a refill, the manager was there, and I affirmed him of the two employees at the front counter. He asked where our group was from, and I told him that we were a group of friends from church. We have lunch together every Monday. He said he likes to make donations to church events. I told him that we were all involved in a ministry to families who have kids who have cancer. Then I called over Pam, the leader of the ministry. She told him about the six major theme events we put on for about a hundred families who have kids with cancer and the kind of gifts we always give them at those events. The manager wanted to contribute to that ministry said gave Pam 50 free pizza dinner cards to give to the parents of those families.
I asked him about his church background, and he said he was very involved in church with his wife and children. I then mentioned that he could really bless Linda if he worked it out in some way so she could go to church. He said, “I can do that. I will do that. Thanks so much.”
To me, that was clearly a divine encounter. God put us together so several people could be encouraged. It all began by opening up a conversation with Linda and seeking to find out where she was on her spiritual journey. Even though she was already a Christian, God obviously had special reasons to bring us together.

To Bee Or Not To Be?
I had quite an illuminating occurrence just the other day. It began with my search for local honey, where I was directed to a ninety-year-old beekeeper named Marlyn, who raised his own bees, here in Bellingham. He seemed astoundingly spry and energized and appeared to be at least 30 years younger than his actual age. He reminded me of William Chen, my T'ai Chi Master, who also happens to be exactly ninety years old, although you would guess him to be no older than in his fifties. Marlyn attributed his state of wellbeing to the daily consumption of honey from his hives. More interestingly, he began to tell me of his bees, and it seemed he had learned quite a bit of philosophy from his bees and their lifestyle. How they looked out for one another and how united they were as a hive.
This instantly reminded me of another story I had just come across. It happens that a local beekeeper's daughter found that three of the bees in her dad's hive had become mired in a puddle of honey. Feeling sorry for them, she extracted the bees from the honey and placed them on a jar lid in hopes they might survive. Her dad told her that her efforts were useless, as they were doomed. However, when she returned later, she found that they had been surrounded by their sisters who were meticulously cleaning the honey off of them. Later she found that two of the mired bees had already flown off, while the rest of the bees stayed with their fallen sister cleaning her and showing support until she too was able to fly off on her own. It seemed such a powerful demonstration of caring, nurturing and unity, that I kept thinking about its meaning, which lead to the writing of this blog post, in hopes that it was something we could learn from.
Suddenly everything I was being shown was making more sense, that all these bee occurrences were focusing my attention on the fact that I needed to be paying deeper attention and that there was a lot I was being shown by these amazing little beings. Marlyn also mentioned it was critical to get honey from the bees closest to my home. I realized that it would work to help synch me to the land, flora and fauna here. This honey would uniquely carry the genetic blueprint of the local flowers growing in this earth to help acclimate me to my environment. This seemed so simple yet made perfect sense to me.
Thinking back of other beekeepers I have met, there has always seemed to be a common thread that ran through them, which was how and what the bees had taught them. They were truly different from most humans; they had become more open and were better able to discern and follow nature's path. I began to see how much I had to learn from all of nature's communities. It immediately brought back the wonder I was filled with whenever I had witnessed a murmuring of starlings. Seeing thousands of birds flying in unison as if lead by a single consciousness. Can we, as a species, also experience this unity? I think we can, but it would take a huge leap in consciousness to suddenly give up identifying with each of ourselves as "I" and enable us to be become a "We." It is on some level, frightening but so very freeing.
Beginning this transition could begin with something as simple as just eating the honey produced from the flowers closest to us. The earth has already figured out so many things for us, such as how we would naturally be supported and energized by the foods that come from the soil of our habitation. So simple, yet profound. It is designed to synch us to the planet. Even walking barefoot on the soil does this, as the earth itself is alive and aware of all its denizens and is desirous of interaction with us all. It is only we humans who are so blocked. I feel that there is now celebration, as a rapidly expanding portion of our population is awakening. I am proud to be a part of this community now experiencing this ascension in consciousness. Suddenly, millions are awakening to the love we each feel for our mother planet, the earth. So many are learning to listen to her messages, as they are everywhere. If we look with our hearts, we can see these messages too.
My own health regimen is largely based on my practice of T'ai Chi Ch'uan. This has helped expand my nature-based awareness. I particularly pay attention to the energies of earth and sky. When we become rooted to the earth and flow freely towards and into the sky, we are embodying the balance of yin and yang as seen when heaven sits above the earth, which is illustrated by the t'ai chi symbol.
The bees already know this as they move through the air of the heavens to collect the nectar from the plants that grow from this bountiful earth. No wonder they are so in balance with nature. In T'ai Chi Ch'uan, we call this balance the Tao and it is everywhere to be seen and joyfully felt. It is the state of balance achieved as the celestial heavens naturally reside over our earth.
In T'ai Chi Ch'uan we strive to connect with our bodies to this balance of heaven and earth, where our progress becomes evident simply in the joyousness of our existence. Certainly, the bees flying from flower to flower surrounded by such beauty experience the elation of these feelings. Here they show us, that we as well can fly, albeit in consciousness, with all of our brethren to experience the unity that is our birthright as constituents of the tribe of earth.

"YO ASJAH" I yelled walking into her house. "Shut the fuck up yelling". She said coming out the kitchen.
"Where my child?" I asked sitting on the couch. She came and sat beside me hitting me on my head.
"Sleep and if he wake up because of you, you putting him back to sleep." She said and I rubbed the back of my head nodding.
Asjah had a eight month old son named Zion Ahmir Sykes. Of course he's my Godchild. Her and the baby daddy aren't together. They were never together.
They were just sneaky links in highschool and she ended up pregnant. He was the last dude she ever slept with. He was only the second dude she ever slept with.
Her baby daddy is very supportive though. His name is Jason and he takes really could care of Zion. They co-parent and never have any problems. Being that said of course he isn't on child support.
She also never had a relationship with a boy before. She's only had one real relationship and That was with a girl back in middle school.
Asjah moved from here to Pennsylvania in middle school and didn't come back til sophomore summer. During that time period she found her first love.
Well her first everything. That was her first real relationship. Her first girl relationship. The person she gave her body to. The person she kissed first. They shared a lot of firsts.
But sadly they broke up because they were moving away. They didn't try long distance and I really don't get that. They loved each other so they could have tried.
But I can tell she still loves the girl. She doesn't talk about her at all anymore though. I don't know if she lost hope in reuniting with her or something else.
The first couple of months when she came back were not good. She barely did anything. I had to drag her out the house most times. At that time she was living with her parents.
Her parents are rich. They own a lot of apartment buildings. That's how they get their money. She gets her money from YouTube.
She started YouTube as a joke her senior year. But she blew up in only a few months. Now she is 10k away from having a million subscribers.
"Why you here?" She asked eating some fries I guess she cooked. Asjah can really throw down in the kitchen unlike me. I can grill though for some reason.
"Because I can damn. Don't act like you don't want me here" I said taking a dry only for her to smack it out my hand.
"You better take yo ass to the kitchen and get yo own fries." She said mugging me. I just sat there and mugged her back.
Pulling out my phone I went to snap and started recording. "Y'all my Bestfriend no love me nomo. New bestfriend applications." I said then put the camera on Asjah.
"Bitch I wish you would find a new bestfriend. Imma fuck you and her up. Try me hoe" she said snatching my phone and ending the video.
"Rude ass" I mumbled taking my phone back. "Gimme a fry pleaseeee" I whined.
"Mmcht here mane" she said smacking her lips and feeding me a fry. "Tank youuuuu" I said smiling.
"I thought you were leaving today?" She said putting her bowl on the coffee table. When she sat back I laid my head in her lap.
"I was but she been distant for the past week. I think this is her nice way of saying don't come. Or ion fuck wit you nomo."
"Damn the one time you catch feelings and the girl dumps you" she said laughing. I sat up and pushed her head. Then I moved to the other side of the couch and crossed my arms.

A/N Just a little disclaimer that may be obvious but still. I do not own Glee, I do not know personally anyone mentioned. This is purely a fiction exercise. Also because English is not my native language you may have to excuse some mistakes I may write. That being said I hope you enjoy it. :)
You were still very tired from the journey home. You had spent over two months in Australia and New Zealand in the set of a big production movie. You loved your job as a makeup artist but sometimes these long periods of time away from home could almost leave you exhausted.
Anyway, even though you had only arrived the day before there you were getting ready for Dianna Agron's birthday party. You had been friends with her since you worked in the makeup department of Glee, throughout most of season one. Then bigger, more interesting artistic wise opportunities came in, mostly great movie productions and you had no shame in accepting them. But still your friendship with Dianna grew stronger and you were pretty much best friends. You were also friends with some of the members of the cast but not very close. People who had joined the show by the end of season one or later were merely acquaintances to you and some of them you had never even met.
So there you were trying to find Dianna in the party. Nearly everybody had some kind of costume or fantasy since the party was themed. Circus themed, she had told you.
You were not very willing to leave the comfort of your couch at home, let alone managing to find or even think of a costume for the party. So there you were, no special fantasy, just the first skinny clean jeans you found and a black top. Of course you were the one feeling weird among all those people in disguise.
You look around and you can only spot Kevin McHale or at least you think it's him because he has all this weird and heavy makeup on. "Jesus, what a lousy job, very bad makeup artist," you think he might have done that himself. He's talking to a taller guy who had the same makeup job on his face. "Jesus, it's a circus indeed," you chuckle amused.
As you approach Kevin and the other guy you quickly recognize him. "So, this is the famous Sebastian Smythe." You remember some of the episodes he did and you remember thinking "Like there weren't already enough hysterical fangirls and fanboys watching this show, they go and put on a guy like this."
As you reach Kevin he looks at you and shouts "Oh my god! It's you!" he immediately hugs you. "How are you? Wait a second, why are you dressed like that? Weren't you told this was a themed party?" He frowns amused.
"Ah, for fuck's sake, Kevin, less than 24 hours ago I was arriving at LAX from probably the most intense two months of my working life. If Di wasn't one of my best friends I wouldn't even be here. I would be sleeping at my comfy bed. Think of me as the freak of this party." You make a weird comic smile and immediately Kevin and the Sebastian guy burst into laughter.
"Oh, by the way this is Grant." As Kevin introduces you both Grant extends his hand and you shake hands in a somewhat clumsy way. Grant stares at you for a bit which makes you feel a little self-conscious. "So, where's Di?" You ask suddenly to Kevin, breaking the awkward eye contact with Grant.
"I'm pretty sure I last saw her over that corner, near the bar." He points in the opposite direction.
"Ok, I'll try to find her. See you guys." You smile. "Sure, but I still want to hear all about your time in Australia and New Zealand!" Kevin shouts as you are already walking away. You look back nodding at him only to find Grant staring at you again with a stupid smile. "Is he stupid or something?" You wonder amused as you make your way to the bar.

I'm so happy we moved to Canada. We will have a much better life here.
Soldiers Needed! Fight for your country.
I am going to go fight. It is my duty as a British Canadian.
Please don't go, I'm with child.
YES! I got the job.
Have you heard that she's pregnant?
Really?! Then why is she coming to work here???
In 1912, me and my husband saw an advertisement for farmers to immigrate to Canada. We chose to buy land and immigrate there shortly after seeing it. It has been 2 years since then.
We saw posters around town today, they read "Soldiers needed! Fight for your country." and being the loyal citizen my husband is, he wanted to sign up. I tried to never disagree with the things that my husband wanted to do, but this time I really wanted to step in. I didn't want him to leave me and our unborn child.
What happened to your skin?!
I think it was all the chemicals I've been working with!
My husband decided to enlist, but I was unable to work on the farm without my him, so I decided to try and find people to work on it. I still needed an income so I chose to fill my civic duty and applied for a job in the factories to help support our troops overseas.
As letters began to come in from the soldiers, word spread throughout the factory about what life is like oversea. They're living in 8 foot deep trenches filled with mud and infested with rats. I even heard that there were decaying bodies all around. I can't help but think about my husband. Is he scared? Is he helping? Has he died?
As months go by, the side affects of working in the factories begin to take a toll on the health of the other women. The fumes from the materials began to damage their lungs and even turned their skin yellow! I even heard about explosions occurring in other buildings.
Although conditions in the factories were dangerous, I continued to work as hard as I could. While manufacturing weapons for the war, I made a friend named Hazel. She told me about how her husband was too old to enlist and how they were unemployed. We talked more and decided that we would leave the factories to work on my farm instead, to be safe.

Govinda is the founder of Believe Lab and an international Dj since 2002, he started playing when he was only 16 together with his older brother Arjuna.
When he was a little boy he lived between Italy and Goa, he got in touch with psytrance culture when he was really young and he felt to be part of it fully since the very beginning. In 2005 he started helping putting up events in Goa and in 2008 that became his profession, playing and organizing parties not only in India but in many other countries.
Today Govinda is in charge of selecting artists to play at different events and festivals promoting his favorite style, an organic psytrance, with positive waves and in strong sinergy with nature. His taste for music grew slowly thanks to the great passion he always felt for the dancefloor and because he has been experiencing fully it in all its shades.

A couple of weeks ago I came across this awesome sketch on Twitter by Raichiyo and just knew I had to model it. My main priority was to challenge myself with a dynamic pose, and this certainly was a challenge! Hope I pulled it off. Enjoy!
Sculpted in Zbrush, rendered with Arnold.

"IMPRESSIVE AND BEAUTIFUL"
November 28, 2015
"Your timing was great the flowers done well"
November 06, 2015
"My cousin said that her flowers were just lovely and even after a week, the autumn arrangement looked as fresh as when they were first delivered."
October 23, 2015
"This arrangement was just perfect. I have seldom seen flowers arranged so artfully and with outstanding class and detail. Everyone was pleased. Thank you so very much."
November 28, 2014

Many of these women are smart and they ask questions and don’t just wait to be picked by someone. I wouldn’t be interested in the ones who are just willing to run off with the first guy willing to get them out of the slum.
The most consistent concern they seem to have is philandering. Their biggest fear is that they would marry somebody and in a few years he would ditch them or he would have several others going on the side at the same time. They all have friends who have had this happen to them. Some were foreign men but most were Filipino men. This is sort of behavior actually benefits those of us who aren’t looking to head down that road. But it does require some salesmanship.
It changes color if it’s opened
After several days of only talking to my new girlfriend, I decided to go back to the website to cover up my photos and to make a new heading. I used her name for a very good reason. Some fellows will tell half a dozen girls that they are exclusive and they will change their profile just say so. So half a dozen girls think that they are the person mentioned when he says I’m exclusive with one girl now. So I did this and I took screenshots of it all, because I wanted to convince her that I’ve stopped looking. While I was at the website, I noticed that she had been there a short time before. (mehr …)

Buying folk art paintings has become a passion of mine. Ive been looking for them everywhere it seems. I found a bunch of folk art paintings recently and I am having trouble deciding which one to buy.
There was a folk art painting by Rev. Howard Finster that is titled Howard in 1944. This is an all enamel folk art painting that was painted in 1988. The smile on this portrait is very engaging and makes me smile just as big.
I am also really taken by a folk art painting that was painted by painter Bill Dodge in Oct 1962. The title of the painting is First Trolley To Van Nuys. The painting is on board and depicts the center of town with all the people in town. They are in the windows and on the street. The town market, bakery, Hotel Van Nuys, an ice cream parlor and the Wing Lee Laundry are all depicted in vibrant color. The women in the foreground are against the Trolley and their signs say “Ban the Monster” and “Keep Van Nuys rural”.
Thomas Chambers is one of Americas foremost folk artists. I found a piece by him that I just dont like very much. It is a bit austere for my tastes. The subject is a fishing scene with villagers and boats. I dont think that I will purchase this folk art painting because I just dont like it.
There was a folk art painting I found called Alligator Fisher that was painted in 1940 that I really like. The blue of the bayou is very calming and the trees give it a very Southern feel. There is a swamp house in the painting and I like this one very much. It reminds me very strongly of Louisiana.
My mother started this passion of mine for folk art paintings. She had a folk art painting by John Roeder in our parlor growing up. I used to spend hours just staring into it. The trees were so relaxing to lose myself in. I have asked her to give me this wonderful folk art painting many times, but she says that I will have to wait until after her funeral!
I found one folk art painting during my journey that I felt sad every time I looked at. The name of the painting is A Letter from My Mother. The look in the girls face is so serious and sad. I have no idea where this folk art painting should hang. The painting itself is magnificent; it just makes me feel sad.
There is a whole subset of folk art paintings that represent black Americana. I dont usually buy any of these pieces as they dont speak to my experience. I did find one piece that I purchased for a collector friend of mine that loves this type of art. The folk art painting had a whimsical feel to it and a woman relaxing in a hammock. He hung this in his hallway and has loved it for a long time.
My brother likes folk art paintings as much as I do. He prefers animals to be the subjects of paintings he purchases. I found a lovely clouded leopard folk art painting for him last Christmas and he has asked that I keep my eyes open for more like it. He said that he will buy any art I find for him because he trusts that I know and understand his tastes.
I have kept my eyes open for animal themed folk art paintings for my brother, but I just cant seem to find any as nice as the leopard that I got for him. The grand extent of animal themed folk art paintings Ive found recently was a painting of two owls on a limb and I know that he would not like it. Ever since we were kids, owls totally freak him out.

As concerns about Doc Gooden's health and well-being continue to rise, his son, Dwight Gooden, Jr., released a statement late Sunday night addressing this matter.
"On behalf of myself and my brothers and sisters we would like to thank Darryl (Strawberry), Janice (Roots), members of the media, friends and most of all, the fans for their concern for our father's health," he said. "His problems have been well documented and publicized through the years. At this time our only concern is his health and that he takes care of himself. There has not been a single day that our love for him or his love for us has ever wavered. One thing that has always been constant has been our Father's determination to provide for us regardless of what was going on in his life. He has always provided for us and has always been there for us.
"This has been a very hard year for our entire family. With our Grandmother's diminishing health and her passing last month, the stress and sadness that this brought us has been unthinkable. She was the leader of our family and things will never be the same without her. Between this and our father's work schedule he has been under an extraordinary amount of stress, pressure and above all sadness. He has been planning on taking a break from the spotlight to rest and regroup and address his health. We will be pushing this respite up. We, as a family, are currently planning his best course of action and thank you all for your concern, messages and prayers."
The statement comes following a letter theDaily News published from Gooden's ex, Roots,in which she begged him to stop doing drugs.
Strawberry also spoke to The News' John Harper on Sunday in whichhe said Gooden's son came to him fearing his father would dieif they didn't do anything soon.
Gooden, who has battled drug addiction his whole life, resurfaced in the news on Thursday when he failed to show up for an event with Strawberry, prompting his friend to express concern about Gooden's life.
Gooden told The News on Saturday that he was "fine" and was just dealing with minor health issues and that Strawberry's claim was "unreal."

My grandfather has been gone for two years. I don’t think I valued the awesomeness that was him as much as I should have. I allowed our theological differences and his wife to get in the way. I wasn’t in the right frame of mind emotionally, mentally, or spiritually to take the time to understand.
To be honest I was hurt and disappointed by things that were going on in his church and our family. This week some things fell into perspective.
One of the most important things is my gradfather’s inability to care. Now I’m not saying he was this mean evil man walking around. My grandfather was actually very kind in his way. He had a heart for God and His people. But he was stuck in his ways as well. He inherited a belief system that he wholeheartedly accepted and passed on to his family and church.
He believed it and taught it with a dogged determonation. He didnt care if people didnt like it. He didnt care if people didnt want to hear it. He taught his truth. He held people to a standard. He truly refused to take down or get off of the wall.
It was hard to be taught something for the first 10 years of my life only to be told a lot of it was wrong. I questioned him and I challenged him. He never wavered. I didn’t come to truly believe what he did. But out of respect for him as my pastor I did most of what he asked.
When he died I was amazed by all the people who loved him and were touched by him. We didn’t have the greatest
relationship. Through no true fault of my own. I wasn’t going to force myself on his wife. I worried about him and I was sad for him. But I didn’t like feeling unwanted or unwelcome.
I have decided to stand up and walk worthy. I have to embrace the legacy my grandfather left me. I have to be focused and pursue my destiny with the same intensity, determination, and ferocity. I can’t worry about who does and doesn’t like me I can’t worry about who does and doesn’t understand. I can’t worry about who will and won’t go with me.
God always equips us. He won’t ever leave and forsake us. As long as I can hold onto that while enduring persecution I can ensure that the essence of who my grandfather was will live on through me. I am going to do my best and I like to believe that, contrary to our differing beliefs, he would be proud of me.
It’s been a minute. I was busy with life. And it has been a trip. I have decided to authentically, uniquely, without question, and without apology be who God has created me to be. It is absolutely and completely difficult to attempt to live for God and man. It is stressful and devoid fulfillment. I can’t be afraid of people. I can’t be afraid to be alone. I can’t care. And I can’t forget. There is no time to waste on and with people who do not understand nor know how to handle who and what I am. As long as God’s got my back all else is irrelevant and unimportant. I really mean it this time.
I felt like this was just for me when I heard it. Amazing quote.
Our deepest fear is not that we are inadequate. Our deepest fear is that we are powerful beyond measure. It is our light, not our darkness that most frightens us. We ask ourselves, Who am I to be brilliant, gorgeous, talented, and fabulous? Actually, who are you not to be? You are a child of God. Your playing small does not serve the world. There is nothing enlightened about shrinking so that other people will not feel insecure around you. We are all meant to shine, as children do. We were born to make manifest the glory of God that is within us. It is not just in some of us; it is in everyone and as we let our own light shine, we unconsciously give others permission to do the same. As we are liberated from our own fear, our presence automatically liberates others.

This is my good friend Randy, who has been blessed to make his living as a cowboy throughout the western United States, including Hawaii. Currently he and his wife are managing a ranch in Montana, which is where I captured this picture of him. Randy has always been a hero to me, loving wholeheartedly what he does, and loving God wholeheartedly as well. With a song on his lips or a lesson in his actions, Randy is a man of many talents, including breaking horses, reciting poetry at gatherings across the west, and braiding reatas (ropes). In this particular photo, he was waiting for more cattle to be brought his way for sorting (to be loaded and transported to another ranch).

Sasha was seated with her dad watching her favourite kid’s show. She was secretly happy that she was having more time with her father. The COVID-19 pandemic had seen to it that her dad was at home until the government confirmed it was okay for people to return to work. The only group of people allowed to go out were those responsible for essential services i.e:medical, security, and other emergency services like the fire brigade.
Her father was also in a way happy that at least, he could slow down and unwind from the marathon that his work had been and he was now able to stay home without feeling guilty. He rarely had time to be with his lovely wife and daughter because he was always traveling from one county to another or from one country to another. The business meetings would sometimes go late into the night and he would always arrive home when his daughter was already asleep. The morning hours were no different because he usually left the house very early in the morning before his daughter had woken up.
He was maximizing on this moment because he was not sure whether there would be another like it once ‘normal’ life resumed. The show he was watching with his daughter was cartoon comics and although he wasn’t a fan of cartoons, he was willing to overlook that for the sake of his daughter. As they were enjoying the show, something happened. The show went to a commercial break and up popped a video of a local artist. The song that was playing was a very popular one but the daughter noted something: the video and audio were not in unison. They were totally not in sync. The sound from the speakers and the lip movement were not in tandem.
Sasha asked her father what the problem was. It was at this juncture that her father explained to her that during the recording and editing of the video, the editor had not balanced the audio and the visual and that was why one first saw the lip movement before the sound. It was called in production language SYNCING. Videos with this error are not enjoyable to watch because it’s like you are watching two different things at the same time.
While the above may be a story, it is very commonly found in a very large percentage of the populace. You hear somebody talking big, saying what they are planning to do: a mega project worth billions or somebody saying they are going to be in perfect physical shape in a month’s time or a student saying what they want to be in future and yet for all their big talk, all the people mentioned above are not putting the necessary efforts in to achieving their dreams & aspirations. How can you say, you expect a bumper harvest while you have not even prepared the land you intend to plant your crops on? You cannot expect to be in good physical shape when you are just feeding on junk while giving the gym a wide berth. A student can never pass their exams or have a good career if they are not putting enough effort in to their studies.
Wishes have never translated into reality and if all you do is wish, wish, wish, then you can be sure that you and success will never meet. We need to match our word with actions and it is only then, that we can say we are expecting good returns.
NB:COVID-19 is real so please let’s heed the precautions given by the government. It is for our own good. To read more posts by Mwangi, click HERE
thank you for the inspiring words…..i just need a platform to attain my future goals. i am a graduate with no job,left home in search for greener pasture but its becoming hard day by day i barely feed and there is also rent to pay but i have nothing to give..i just need an opportunity to build myself up and prove to myself that all is not lost…if anyone has any ideas you can reach me through my email [email protected]…i just do not want to return home the same way i left..thank you.

After making sure that our grandson was safely tucked in his bed on Thursday (after his tonsillectomy), Dave and I headed off to Tennessee to the wedding of our niece, Holly. We traveled halfway and stopped outside of Knoxville for the night. aside:At the Holiday Inn Express, we slept on one of the most comfortable beds of our lives. If I could have figured out a way to get that mattress in our car, trust me, I would have done it.
We arrived in Nashville Friday afternoon. The festivities began that evening with a ballgame and cookout, courtesy of Chris and Holly. Don’t even ask me who played. I was just there hanging out with my family, and enjoying the daylights out of myself.
Saturday started off with breakfast with my two sisters. Judy had to leave after that to get ready for the evening, and Veniva and I hung out. Yes, I said V E N I V A (Short story, very funny, I’ll tell you in another blog). I caught up with hubby around lunchtime, and we spent the rest of the day together, until time to leave for the mansion.
Before you know it, it was time for the wedding. It was outside, the weather was perfect, the service was beautiful. The people were beautiful. My sister looked like a statuesque goddess. Holly was stunning in her wedding gown and looked so much like her mother coming down the aisle, I could have cried. Amber, my other niece, and the maid of honor, was as beautiful as a person could be, and she looked so happy. The groom was in his uniform, and in case I haven’t said it lately, I think men in uniform are very cool. God bless our military.
My sweet hubby performed the ceremony, and it went off without a hitch. Hmm, wrong word. Okay, then, it went off WITH a hitch–Chris and Holly.
Actually, Chris and Holly were already married. They had a very small ceremony in their home in December 2007, just before Chris was deployed overseas. But they wanted to have a big, formal ceremony to share with their friends the commitment they have made to love each other for the rest of their lives. They did it in real style, and I, for one, will not forget the joy of that day.
God bless you, Holly and Chris. May you always be as full of joy with each other as you were on this very special day.
We love you and Dave! Thank you for coming and sharing that special time with us and all that you did to make it such a wonderful time! We hope to see you again soon!
Sounds like a great time, and I always appreciate a man in uniform too. 🙂 I haven’t been to a wedding in so long I forget what it feels like.

Last night when I got home from work, Jess was still suffering from a 48 hour migraine. After dinner I tried to get her to go upstairs to take a hot bath. Jess is convinced a hot bath will cure anything (probably even cancer). So I knew this is what she needed.
It was really easy to get her to stop trying to clean up after dinner and go take a bath. After I hog-tied her, carried her up the stairs over my shoulder like a 110 pound bag of flour and barricaded the bathroom door, I believe she took a bath (the girls at least reported that she was in there with a book).
I decided I should mow the lawn or my OCD wife would try to do it today while I'm at work. I asked Tayler if she would keep Rylee and Jayson busy playing in the yard while I mowed the lawn. She agreed. However, I was only halfway done with the front yard when I noticed little Jayson wandering towards me. Alone. Tayler and Rylee were nowhere to be found. So I stopped mowing, picked him up, and waited for Tayler to remember she left him alone. I also couldn't help but think 'she's got to be the worst baby sitter in the world.'
She came out of the house a minute later and didn't have time to say a word before I questioned where she was and how on earth she could leave Jayson alone. What if I hadn't seen or heard him over the mower and he wandered out in the street? She looked down at the ground and then explained that Rylee had fallen, cut open her knee and was crying and bleeding. So she hurried and helped her into the house so Mom could take care of her and thought Jayson would be OK since I was out in the yard too. "I thought I better help Rylee, Daddy".
Good one Sean. I backtracked faster than bulldog who thought he'd sniff a porcupine. "Tayler, you did the right thing. Thank you for helping Rylee". She played with Jayson until I was finished with the yard and then took him inside. When I came in, she was sitting with him on the couch with her arm around him watching a cartoon. "Tayler, you did a good job baby sitting. Thank you, Sweetheart."
"Except for when I left Jayson and went inside with Rylee."
"Nope. You knew I was in the yard with him. You did the right thing. You are the best big sister to Rylee and Jayson"
I asked her to run upstairs and get on her PJs. As she handed Jayson over to me, he leaned back towards her and opened his mouth. (Yep. He has a preference for open mouth kisses. Look out ladies. This little Dunroe boy likes to cuddle.) He kissed her right by her mouth. Even he knows what a good big sister he's got.
Tayler got a little embarrassed. "Daddy, sometimes Jayson tries to kiss me on the lips".
Me: "He's a little silly. I guess he thinks he needs to practice."
(Quizzical look from Tayler.)
Me: "Nevermind. Will you get Jayson's jammies too. And a diaper. And a throw-up bowl for Dad?"
Clarifying note: I have a very sensitive gag reflex. When the diapers are really messy, I often gag, and gag, and gag. Nothing more than that. Just gagging. Saturday as Tayler watched me change a severly messy diaper I gagged. "Do you want me to go get you a bowl Daddy?"
'Not a bad idea Tay'.

by Janelle Pavao
Many of you know the Boston Massacre to be an awful event in which the English soldiers slaughtered a large crowd of people for no apparent reason. This picture is very warped.
Allow me to set the record straight ...
The French and Indian war had left Britain in terrible straits. With money-making colonies at their disposal, Parliament established import duties on the colonies, called the Townshend Acts.
The colonists were upset by these taxes, and Britain sent soldiers to maintain the peace and enforce the Acts in October 1768. Their presence was not well accepted.
On March 5, 1770 there was a party in Boston. Many people got drunk at this party so a British soldier was doing his duty on patrol, ensuring no one got violent.
As he was walking around a building, a man came out and began harassing him. The soldier tried to defend himself and pushed the man off. The man began throwing snowballs at him and calling him names, while the soldier did nothing. Many other people came and joined in the mockery. The soldier soon became afraid of what they might do, so he fled for help.
He came back with a group of soldiers. The people just grew more angry and kept throwing snowballs and taunting the soldiers.
The soldiers did nothing until they began throwing their clubs and chanting, "Fire, fire; damn you, fire."
Then something happened that would echo, incorrectly, through the annals of history forever. One of the soldiers was hit in the head with a club, and, as he fell, his weapon discharged. The soldiers thought there had been a command to fire, and they began firing on the crowd.
Five men were killed in the riotous crowd that night, and one died two weeks later from the wounds. The British soldiers were then taken to court in Boston, with none other than John Adams as their lawyer!
They were found innocent, then taken to a court in England, found guilty, and severely punished.
The event was then publicized as a terrible massacre.
From there the story was blown up, stretched out, exaggerated, and warped so that the colonists could have one more thing to blame the king for. The picture above, painted (and probably plagiarized) by Paul Revere, was shown to the nation. It was completely inaccurate.

A stranger with a British accent is passing through town, and he looks exactly like Ozzie. It's bad enough that he's been seen about town with an attractive young redhead - he's a wanted pickpocket, too.
Ozzie has promised to take the neighborhood youngsters on a hike but he also wants to play in a golf tournament. He has a plan to do both but he needs David and Rick's help to make it happen. His trail reading skills though are not that good.
David and Rick decide to earn some extra cash to buy Christmas presents by opening up a Christmas tree lot, but soon discover that being a small-time entrepreneurs is a lot more involved than they had realized.

Originally Posted by ragingclue
I have heard horror stories about virtually all insurance companies though, to include GEICO. Some companies seem to be worse than others in that regard (Progressive), but I can say that I've had nothing but good experiences with GEICO, to include a totaled modded E36 M3 which they let me pull as many mods off as I could get to.
I had lots of military buddies with good experience with USAA too.
I actually had good experience with Progressive but I've only used them for motorcycles, not cars. I think, as with anything, it depends on who you get when making a claim.

Originally Posted by HAPPY
When will this end,For all we know the viruses we thought we had could have been salmonella.You have to wounder whats it's gonna be in next.
Your right there!! My sister was sick after eating a little debbies nutty buddy bar, she didnt think much of it being the candy bar, till she went to eat the other half of it and was horribly sick. she missed work for 2 days throwing up and just sick!

Cody Allen James & Good Co.
"Born and raised in rural Ontario, Cody Allen James spent the lion’s share of his early years back in the fields of his family’s farm. Raised on an equal blend of Bluegrass and Rock n Roll, Cody began playing guitar in his early teens. However, his natural sense of rhythm and song structure quickly led him to become a go-to drummer for many local hardcore and punk acts. James graduated from his hometown scene and left for Toronto, where he continued to hone his skills as a drummer and vocalist in numerous garage rock and hardcore acts. All the while he had been quietly amassing a catalogue of songs of an entirely different variety - simple, bare, and honest.
The pandemic hit bringing all other musical activities to halt, but Cody’s song writing only accelerated. Sensing he was really onto something; he commissioned the skills of some of his favorite players he has met over the years and had them cut tracks remotely on what would become his self-produced debut. Inspired by the success of his first outing, Cody’s focus has become singular and his well of material overflowing. He has relocated to Kingston to have more time and space to invest in his craft - a decision that pays daily dividends. These days he can be found writing songs in Portsmouth Village."

A missing Jack Russell dog has been returned to its owner in St Albans.
The male dog, which is two and half years old, was found a day after it was reported he had been stolen from a garden shed in Dellfield on Wednesday, March 5.
He was found after a woman recognised similarities in a photograph of a dog featured on a LostDog website, which looks to reunite lost pooches with their owners.
Yesterday The St Albans & Harpenden Review reported that St Albans business 123 Floors, in London Road, was offering a £1,000 reward for the safe return of the Jack Russell.
The business said this offer is now "non applicable" because they made the offer of a reward a week after the dog had been found.

The Final Journey
by Asmi Kothari
Mr. Amar Bohra gives all the credit to the Landmark Self-Expression and Leadership Program for the start of his project called, ‘The Final Journey’. He solely started it in Mumbai, India whilst he was searching for a selfless contribution to the society and came across the idea of cremating unclaimed dead bodies around the city. Many people around him disgracefully put him down as they were of the opinion that the idea of “the final journey” is irrelevant and there might me legal issues he will face, but he stood strong and went ahead with it anyway.
He received around four dead bodies at first and three later within the span of a month. A few of his supporters included his coach and leader Mr. Sudarshan and a bunch of his colleagues and friends. His business associate was moved by this noble cause, and helped him a lot during the funeral arrangements.
He is now working to create a team of around 10-15 members to take this project forward. He also mentioned that Landmark courses gave him far more than he expected – an estate of almonds wherein he expected a handful of peanuts from this course!

If Death lingers in courtroom corridors awaiting sentences, this historic city's federal courthouse was surely a top destination. On Tuesday, the Reaper's patience was rewarded with the jury's return of the death penalty for Dylann Roof.
Roof, who insisted on representing himself during the sentencing phase of his 33-count murder trial, was found guilty last month for the slaughter of nine black parishioners at Mother Emanuel A.M.E. Church in June 2015.
Roof's self-lawyering is still mystifying when he had at his disposal one of the nation's best death-penalty lawyers, David Bruck, who did represent Roof during the guilt phase that ended last month. Bruck was allowed only to advise Roof during the penalty phase, which began last week, but briefly addressed the judge Tuesday when Roof requested that Bruck address objections.
While the government's case seemed airtight in covering all the requirements for the death penalty, Roof's remarks Tuesday took fewer than five minutes.
Wearing slacks and a blue cable-knit sweater -- his bowl-cut hair obviously recently shaped -- Roof approached the lectern with a single, yellow, letter-sized sheet of paper for his closing argument. Barely audible -- and his pauses were longer than his sentences -- he made essentially two suggestions seemingly aimed at creating doubt about his alleged hatred of black people and his intent in carrying out his mission, which he himself previously identified as wanting to incite racial violence.
"I think it's safe to say nobody in their mind wants to go to a church and kill people," he began. Then he contradicted other confession statements that he had to do what he did. "In my [FBI confession] tape I told them I had to do it. ... Obviously that's not true. Nobody made me do it. I felt like I had to do it, and I still feel like I had to do it."
Clarity isn't his strong suit.
Next, Roof challenged the prosecution's claim that he's filled with hatred, one of the statutory-required aggravating factors in capital cases. He referred to his confession when an FBI agent asked him if he hated blacks. Roof's reply was, "I don't like what black people do."
To the jury, he posited: "If I was really filled with as much hate as I allegedly am, wouldn't I just say, 'Yes, I hate black people'?"
Finally, Roof said it's fair to say that the prosecutors hate him since they're seeking the death penalty. Then he tutored the court that people hate because they've been misled. He also said that people think they know what hatred it is, but "they don't know what real hatred looks like."
Does Roof? Is this because some hate-filled person misled him? Or did he merely look in the mirror?
Not once during his very brief remarks did Roof say they he regretted his actions, which might have elicited some empathy from those burdened with determining his fate. Indeed, in a jailhouse journal, he wrote that he isn't sorry and that he hadn't shed a tear for the "innocent people I killed."
Tuesday, as he attempted to take on a battery of lawyers hell-bent on ultimate justice, he seemed ever the evil child who, rather than acknowledging the horror and the agony of what he did, was somehow above the process. Expressionless and aloof, as he had been throughout the trial, he was anything but a sympathetic character and certainly no advocate for his continued access to life.
Throughout the proceedings, my mind kept wandering to an earlier case I covered when Bruck was fighting another death penalty -- the1994 trial of Susan Smith, the young mother who rolled her car into a Union, South Carolina, lake, drowning her two small children.
The crime was heinous and the trial heart-wrenching. At one point during the father's testimony, the judge had to call for a break because nearly everyone in the courtroom, including the media, was weeping. The father had been talking about his 3-year-old's favorite Disney movie, which the child called, "One-o-one Dalma-hay-tions."
Susan Smith threw herself across the defense table, loudly sobbing with the agony of regret and the sorrow of inconsolable loss. Yes, she was responsible for her children's death, but there was no questioning her remorse or doubting that her life in prison would be an endless night of piercing pain.
For death penalty opponents like me, this seemed a far more just end than death would have been. With Roof, there's plainly no sense of sorrow now -- or to come. In the end evidence of sincere remorse, which is to say, humanity, can be the difference between life and death.
Kathleen Parker's email address is firstname.lastname@example.org.

This broadcast mostly covered Revelations chapter 6, what has been referred to as the four horses of the Apocalypse. Scripture indicates in this context these 4 horses are actually depicting humans, as to the Next Level a human is like a horse. This context is explained in Zechariah. Marshall Applewhite was the name of the White Horse, having as prophesied: Rev 1:14 His head and his hairs were white like wool, as white as snow; and his eyes were as a flame of fire; This "vehicle" (body) was "sit upon" - taken over for His task by the same Soul who last had a physical vehicle named "Jesus". Jesus said the eye is the lamp of the eye. An lamp gives off light, thus through his eyes others can come to see. G.W. Bush was the "horse". A discarnate luciferian space alien inhabited him and used him as a figurehead to stimulate "endless war". Then Obama, as the black horse is also influenced by a discarnate Luciferian space alien to help steer the two beasts of the republicans and democrats with his focus while in office being financial. He inherited financial crisis and wall street people became his closest advisers.

Posted , 4 users are following.
I had a microdiscectomy l5 s1 2 days ago the nerve pain is almost gone but I am in a lot of pain from the operation. I have a really sore mouth and nose and struggle to get comfortable particularly last night. Has anyone got any advice? I know my op took 2 1/2 hours as the disc had shattered and it took a while picking all of the pieces. My surgeon said he had to a long way north and south.
0 likes, 4 replies

so. the other day i was having a conversation with my sister about life. she told me that i had no shame about being lazy, and it was kind of refreshing. okay maybe her word wasn't exactly "refreshing" but i caught this twinkle in her eye when she said it, and i know that's what she meant.
she is right. i used to complain about being lazy and not ever wanting to do anything. i would stress myself out. i would therefore try to do more things so i wouldn't feel lazy. which in turn just caused me more stress and anxiety. then one day all those feelings changed. i went skydiving.
i just don't think that i can really top that. if someone calls me up and is like,
"hey, let's go bowling next week."
i think in my head,
"umm.. bowling? i have been skydiving. why would i go bowling?"
don't get me wrong. i like bowling. i just don't like plans. i work better under spontaneous pressure. my friend lee LOVES to plan. therefore we have a spoken rule that she will plan bowling 2 weeks in advance, and "spring" it on me last minute while she is on her way to the alley. it works much better that way.
also. i have been skydiving. i feel like i have lived. i have done all there is to do. i just would be left unsatisfied with anything else. that's why it's so much easier to just be lazy. why would i want to do dishes, when i have been skydiving? see my logic?
someday, i will post the video from this life-changing event, and then maybe people will get off my back about being lazy. okay no one has actually been on my back about it. just me. but it's a freaking sweet video and you are all just going to love it.. stay tuned..

R Kelly is a ‘predator’ whose fame brought ‘access to girls, boys and young women’, court told as New York trial begins | Ents & Arts News
R Kelly is a “predator” whose fame brought him “access to girls, boys and young women”, a court has been told on the opening day of his trial over sexual abuse.
The trial, which is set to last for about a month, is expected to include testimony from several female accusers and at least one male accuser, with some allegations going back 20 years. The first of Kelly’s alleged victims told the court she was a 16-year-old virgin and a member of his fan club when he first invited her to his mansion and told her to take off her clothes.
Kelly, a three-time Grammy winner whose hits include I Believe I Can Fly, Bump ‘N’ Grind and Ignition, has pleaded not guilty to charges of racketeering, sexual abuse and bribery, and strongly denied any wrongdoing. His defence lawyers have told jurors they will have to sift through “a mess of lies” and that any “relationships” were “consenting”.
But in her opening statement, Assistant US Attorney Maria Cruz Melendez told the jury in New York that the R&B singer used his fame to entice his alleged victims and that he “dominated and controlled them physically, sexually and psychologically”.
The 54-year-old would often record sex acts with minors and controlled a racketeering enterprise of managers, bodyguards and other people who were eager to “fulfill each and everyone one of the defendant’s wishes and demands”, she said, adding that “what his success and popularity brought him was access – access to girls, boys and young women”.
“This case is not about a celebrity who likes to party a lot,” Ms Melendez told the court in Brooklyn. “This case is about a predator.”
She described the singer as “a man who used lies, manipulation, threats and physical abuse to dominate his victims and to avoid accountability for years”.
The trial is under way following several delays, mostly due to the COVID-19 pandemic, with an anonymous jury of seven men and five women sworn in to hear proceedings.
Following Ms Melendez’s speech, one of Kelly’s lawyers, Nicole Blank Becker presented a very different perspective, saying some of the singer’s accusers enjoyed the “notoriety of being able to tell their friends that they were with a superstar” and that there were “gaps” in the case.
Kelly did not “recruit” them, Ms Blank Becker told the court. “They were fans,” she said. “They came to Mr Kelly.”
She urged jurors to scrutinise the testimonies they will hear during the trial. “They knew exactly what they were getting into,” she said, adding that “it was no secret Mr Kelly had multiple girlfriends. He was quite transparent”.
The idea of Kelly leading an elaborate criminal enterprise would be a stretch, the lawyer said, before telling the court: “Don’t assume everybody’s telling the truth.”
In previous court papers, Kelly’s legal team has characterised his accusers as “disgruntled groupies” who were “dying to be with him”. They only started accusing him of abuse years later when public sentiment shifted in the #MeToo era, they say.
Kelly’s trial in New York comes after years of suspicions and accusations against him. In 2008, he went on trial in Illinois facing child pornography charges, but was acquitted.
Many of the allegations were featured in the Lifetime documentary series Surviving R Kelly, which aired early in 2019. The first of the latest charges against him were made shortly afterwards.
Jerhonda Pace, who appeared in Surviving R Kelly, was the first accuser to give evidence on Wednesday. She told jurors Kelly invited her to his mansion and ordered her to take off her clothes when she was just 16, and a member of his fan club.
“He asked me to continue to tell everyone I was 19 and act like I was 21,” she told the court. When she told Kelly she was a virgin, he said that was “good” and told her he wanted to “train her” sexually, she said.
Nine charges describe the singer’s alleged mistreatment of five female accusers – identified as “Jane Does” in court, although some, such as Ms Pace, have spoken out publicly – three of whom were said to be underage at the time. One accuser said Kelly failed to tell her that he had herpes when he had unprotected sex with her.
The singer, whose real name is Robert Sylvester Kelly, is accused of requiring his alleged victims to demonstrate “absolute commitment” and obey strict rules, including that they eat or go to the bathroom only with his permission, not look at other men, and call him “Daddy”.
Prosecutors say alleged victims were selected at concerts and other venues and arrangements were made for them to travel to see Kelly in the New York City area and elsewhere, in violation of the Mann Act, the 1910 law that made it illegal to “transport any woman or girl” across state lines “for any immoral purpose”.
The singer’s 1994 marriage to Aaliyah is also expected to come up during the trial. Prosecutors are aiming to show he bribed an official to obtain fake identification for the singer, who was 15 at the time – he was 27 – so that they could get married. Kelly believed he had got Aaliyah pregnant, and hoped a marriage would keep her from having to testify against him, prosecutors will argue.
Aaliyah, identified as Jane Doe #1 in the indictment, died in a plane crash in 2001.
Kelly, who last released a studio album in 2016, could face years in prison if he is found guilty. But the New York case is only part of the legal issues the singer is facing, with sex abuse charges brought in Illinois and Minnesota, too – to which he has also pleaded not guilty.
Women’s rights attorney Gloria Allred was among those seen entering the court before the start of the hearing on Wednesday.
“All I can say is that I’m very confident that the court will afford a fair trial both to Mr Kelly and also to the persons who allege that they are victims,” she told reporters.
Ms Becker and Thomas Farinella, another of Kelly’s lawyers, also spoke outside court.
“We’ve been preparing and ready to go,” said Mr Farinella. “Excited for Mr Kelly to have his day in court.”

I’m kind of scared.
I don’t really know why—maybe I don’t need to be, but I am.
It’s like hard to swallow. And I keep getting nervous and looking at my watch, and I don’t know what the time has to do with it, but like *Fuddruckers!* I just have this feeling that something is wrong and someone is going to come get me for ratting.
Even though I didn’t say much. And I kind of didn’t tell the whole truth.
Maybe that’s why I’m worried. I’ve never lied to a police officer before. I mean, I’ve never really had to talk to a police officer for anything official, so I wouldn’t have had a chance to lie until today.
And it wasn’t a big lie either, and the only reason I did lie is because I think they would think I was lying if I told them what I really thought.
I just gave a description of what ‘the suspect’ was wearing, and his hair, and the forehead bumps–and even the swooping in of the boy in white. But I didn’t mention the fangs, and I didn’t say vampire.
Maybe I would have if I hadn’t been so startled. But how else was I supposed to react to finding out that I was called out of class to talk to the cops?
At first I didn’t even connect it! I knew that Jill didn’t show up today—which totally makes sense; what kind of crazy person goes to class the day after she gets assaulted?—but Jill never told me she was actually going to report it. As in police report. As in corroborating witness.
*By the way, I didn’t even know what corroborating meant before this afternoon, but I heard it like five times while I was being questioned.
And, yeah, it felt like an interrogation, like maybe I’d done something wrong! (Had I?) But at least he told me what Jill said in her report before asking for my story. I was really worried that I’d have to like the separated prisoner thing where they try to catch one of us in a lie. Big takeaway from today: reporting something traumatizing to the police only adds more trauma, and they should really work on that. I mean, one of the guys seemed like he would have been really nice, but he was always stepping out of the room to talk on his pager or whatever you call them; the one who was doing the talking—Officer Kemp—he was robotic! Like he could’ve showed up on an episode of Star Trek and Data would have been shocked by his lack of emotion.
I wanted to tell him that too, but I didn’t.
It was all pretty quick—like ten minutes—and they just asked their questions in one of the counselors’ office. And of course the school counselor came in after they left, and she asked even more questions, and I really just wanted her to SHUT UP! I hardly told her anything. And I couldn’t cry—if I had cried, she would’ve stopped asking questions. They don’t badger you when you cry. (Besides, I have a home shrink and she doesn’t badger me at all.)
So I took the lifeline; I asked to go home early. They wrote me a pass and had me call my parents, and I just left a message on the home machine—because Dad and Lisa were at work anyway, and I didn’t know what to tell them. (I’ll have to talk to them when they get home though—see Dread.)
As a mini cherry on this sundae, the cops themselves gave me a ride home. School’s not far, but still, they wanted to help, which made it look like—the to the people who saw it—like I was being escorted out by the police. I mean, I was. Just not in that way.
When they dropped me off, the nice one (he had a Mexican name) told me to call the station if I see either of the suspects again. It wasn’t until half a bowl of cereal later that I realized he called the boy in white—my white knight, as it were—a suspect.
That kind of ticks me off. I think being POed is better than being scared though.

An important feature when speaking is knowing who your audience is. This is one of the most vital pieces of information you need to have if you are going to be successful. However, this is not just for public speaking. With any form of advertising or marketing, you need to know your audience.
I was reminded of this when my wife came home from work one day with a pen from IBM that was sent to her office. It is a $150 pen in a very nice box that was sent with a letter. The letter talked about how they have done their research and feel that they could help improve her employers bottom line. Sounds like a great deal right? One problem - the company she works at has been bankrupt since last year and is closing its doors on Wednesday.
So, they clearly did not do their research. They probably did some research - maybe they looked at some old data and looked at a couple of key things - but they clearly did not know their audience.
Make sure you have done your research. Make sure you have prepared yourself for your audience. Fine-tuning your speech based upon your audience is so important it cannot be ignored. Take the lesson from IBM to heart - if you can do this, you are going to take one step closer to being a successful speaker.

1. Warm-up walk
2. Jog for as long as I can
3. Cool down walk
That's it! Nothing fancy or complicated. I've tried the various programs before. I've read up on all of the "strategies" for race training. But, in the end, I thought...why don't I just try to see how far I can run without stopping.
So that is exactly what I did. At least twice a week (no exceptions), I put on my running shoes, went outside and ran. Each time, I would simply try to run farther than the time before. I pushed myself each time, but I was always careful not to overdo it or injure myself.
My goal at the beginning of June was to run my first 5k by mid August.
By the end of June, I was already there! June 28th, I ran my first 5K in my neighborhood!
After that night, I was a bit conflicted. Should I go ahead and schedule a race, or wait until August like I had originally planned. I wanted my first race to be a success, so I was thinking I may need to continue training throughout July to get better at my 5K. On the other hand, if I can run 5k by myself in my neighborhood, it may actually be easier to run a real race because of the energy and competition that comes with it.
In the end, my impatience won out. I went online and found the first possible race in my area. A local "Firecracker 5k/10k" on the morning of July 4.
I arrived to a much bigger crowd than I thought. I wasn't sure when I registered if this would be a big event, but an hour before the scheduled start time, there were already scores of people milling around. My race partners were John, my brother in law and June, my mom. John, who has a lot of running experience, was coming along to help and "coach" me. June was there for encouragement and moral support but she was also going to run/walk the 5k. We walked a bit, stretched, drank some water, and wrote the obligatory Facebook post. ;-)
Finally, at 8AM, the race began. John and I were going to run together for the entire 5k, and my Mom was planning on staying behind to walk / run.
From the very beginning, I could feel what my runner friends had told me...I was going much faster for the race than I ever had on my own. I felt great and there was no doubt in my mind that I would successfully finish the race.
I got in a good groove and proceeded to slowly pass the walkers, and then the speed walkers. (It's amazing how some speed walkers can walk nearly as fast as I can jog!) Miles 1 and 2, I was able to stay in this groove and slowly work my way to the middle of the pack.
Here is a video I took at mile 2...
Right at the mile three mark, just 1/10 of a mile from the end, I decided to go for an all out sprint to the finish. The only problem....someone had placed the mile three marker too early. What I thought was a 1/10 of a mile sprint was more like 1/4 of mile. I almost gave in and stopped, but John encouraged me and I kept going! Finally, I reached the finish line! I looked up at the clock and saw that I had finished at 39:38. (This is not my actual time since I was not at the starting line when the race began. My actual time was closer to 39:00).
When I first registered for the race, I had told several of my running friends that I hoped to finish under 40 min. Mission accomplished! No need to stay for the rest of the festivities or awards... I wasn't really trying to "compete" anyways.
I went home feeling very good about meeting my goal.
One list simply listed all of the racers in order of completion. The other list separated out the top three from each age group in both male and female. When I looked at the second list, this is what I saw...
I'm not under any impression that I'm a big shot runner or anything. After all, this was a small, local race and I'm guessing all of the really fast runners were probably in the 10K. But still... it felt great to have the small victory on my first race. It was time to celebrate...
What did I do to celebrate?
I laced up my shoes and went for a run.

possible graphic violence, maybe some language.
Pitch Black – sn fic. chpt 1.
Disclaimer – you can't see it, but it's raising its hand
Love – Ever Present.
...help me... please... someone... breath snagged out of his throat in the same way the undergrowth snagged the raw, jaggedly torn flesh of his naked torso and arms, well the one he could still coerce into pulling him along the needle carpeted, decaying forest floor. The other, his left continued to spasm, to flop and twitch as if possessed, each motion a throb so deep he could barely remember to breathe when it struck. Blood marked his passage as he dragged himself along through the dark. Surrounded by blackness that felt as empty and alone as his heart he wondered if he could have walked, then knew he couldn't. He was already doing everything he could.
In his fevered delirium he thought about calling out, begging aloud instead of just inside his head for help, for rescue, for someone to come and save him, so long as it's not Sam... anyone but my boy... or my girl... wouldn't want her to end up like this either... that'd be bad... dried brittle pine needles slid under his fingernails but he barely felt them. Heh...she'd prob'ly kill 'em.
The darkness spun around him, the only saving grace was that he couldn't see it, but he could feel it, that was for sure.
Just gotta rest for a minute... just a minute is all... as he collapsed, the sensation of something sliding between the layers of his flesh via one of the myriad slices over his chest and belly did not go unnoticed. In response a grunt slid from his cracked and bloody lips as whatever it was slid sideways, deflected from his exhausted heart by his breastbone. As it slid beneath the skin, rubbing against either bone or muscle, but with his weight atop it, the thing cracked, splintering jagged edges into raw and exposed nerve endings that had more important things to do at the moment than to feel pain. Hell no... that'll come later... if I survive... he snorted a chuckle then gasped for the agony it caused. A paroxysm of coughing doused him in flames as a particle of floral debris tumbled crookedly into him, choking him as it tried to enter his lung.
Got offered a choice once... he remembered somewhere deep inside but couldn't place the specifics, stay and become one of them... or go... leave it to someone else... I'm ready now I think... really... please... could you come back? please?
Fever stole his dreams, turning, twisting and perverting them, but the reality remained and while he clutched, bit and breathed the earth beneath him, the first of his bit of hell replayed in his mind, mmm popcorn would be good... and raisinets... good combo...oooh I know that guy... hey! that's ME!
Oh my God!...that ungh!... that... oh my...I, I, can't...nuaahhhh, he screamed, his body trying to fold for the pain, his breath tearing from his lungs until every inch of him burned, "STOOOOP!" he screamed, panting, this is worse than the cabin... this is worse than the CAR...
"Stop? Now why would I do that?" she asked standing before him, the tip of the four inch nail between her fingers pressed hard against the exposed flesh of his inner forearm.
"Cause I asked you to?" he panted, his lip curling upward feeling the heavy dripping from his hair, running down his neck, he shook his pounding head as salt from his pink sweat burned his eye, "Please..." he added watching out the corner of his eye as she drew to a halt, holding the point of the nail at the crease of his elbow.
"Say it again..." she licked her ruby painted lips.
"Please stop," he breathed feeling his heart hammering, heat burning from inside. His left hand spasmed against the wet dank brick where she'd sunk the first nail into him, fire burned up the path of his nerves or veins, either way it didn't matter, it hurt like hell and he was relatively certain it wasn't going to stop any time soon.
"No," she pressed the tip of the nail into his elbow, leaning deep into it, watching it sink into his skin, feeling it press against bone, then begin to crack the outer shell. She watched his naked chest heave beneath the rivers of sweat that poured out of him, she listened to him scream and pant, then luxuriated in it as the mewling started. So it begins... she smiled, this was her forte, this was what she did best. The first strike had been fast, sharp, hard, and just to make sure she had his full attention. This one was for pleasure.
The groan grew out of him as she pressed her palm to the flat nail head and grinned watching his face twist, his body writhe, his blood run as she leaned harder feeling the point pierce the bone finally.
"I'm gonna rip your goddamned heart out and eat it for breakfast you bitch!" he screamed just before she bent her own elbow and thrust the nail the rest of the way through his until the point stopped against the stone behind him.
"I don't think so," she smirked holding the hammer up before his eyes again, grinning as he shook his head, his beautiful luminous green eyes nearly glowing with fear.
"No! No don't... please..." he ground his teeth feeling himself light on fire once again until the metallic 'clinking' was drowned out by the screaming both within his head, and rolling around the dank oubliette he'd awoken within.
Every twitch of his pinned hand, every muscle spasm rubbed raw nerves, each giving rise to another until his arm shook from his pierced palm all the way to the elbow, jerking of its own accord, it's like a fish flopping around on a dock... he thought with distant wonder. Vision blurred for the blood laced rivers that flowed unceasingly down his head, seeking it seemed to blind him with his own body's salt and he wondered if the brackets that held him to the wall by his wrists, ankles and neck were actually there at all, If I squint my eyes just right... yeah like that... it looks like there's nothing there... maybe I could just... he tried to pull away, his body held in place by the nails he'd almost forgotten about, until another fiery lance shot up his arm making his teeth chatter and giving rise to another volley of pins and needles inside, Oh yeah... I got a fever in the making... I got a fever of a hundred and three... c'mon baby do you do more than dance... hot blooded, I'm hot blood ded... yeah... what's dead should stay dead... I shoulda been dead so many times that this almost actually makes sense... but where's Sam? Please let him be safe... please if there's anything out there, or up there, or anything that gives a damn... please let Sammy be safe... he nodded against the sharpened edge of the bracket that held his neck to the wall while the thought of anyone doing something like this to his baby brother began to fill him with panic.
"What the hell do you want?" he asked breathless, feeling a run of hot sour bile in the back of his throat, don't think about it... don't think about it and I won't puke... oh my GOD it freakin' hurts!
Faster than Dean could have guessed, the hammer came down almost perfectly between the nail in his palm and the newest addition at his elbow. His radius snapped under the force of the blow but the nails held fast, shooting spear-like agony up his arm. His knees trembled, nausea rose up into his throat and he was fairly certain his entire nervous system had just misfired.
"Ooh God... Oh my God... you psychotic fuh... aaahhh," he strained, "you don't know what you're doing!" he ground through chattering teeth.
His heart skipped several beats while breath locked in his throat then burst out with a surprised bark, it seemed even the motion of breathing was going to conspire against him now. Around him the world went hazy and he wondered what was going to happen if he passed out. Oh yeah... this is so many levels of not good... Sammy... if you're crazy enough to come for me and not here already... be careful. Shoot to kill little brother. Please, shoot to kill.
"It's okay, drink... it's just water..." she assured him while tilting the cup to his dry cracking lips. His eyes flicked over her face, a quick measure of whether or not she was telling the truth even though he had little choice.
"Too bad... wouldn't mind a shot of whiskey or ten right about now..." he muttered, to his chagrin making her smile softly as he swallowed down the slightly cool fresh water. "Oh God that's good..." he gasped, I never tasted anything so wonderful in my life... he smiled, then groaned and shuddered as a shiver ran through him. His left arm throbbed, hot and swollen and stretching under the skin where his body was working on fixing the wounds as best as it could. Oh man... please let me get out of here before infection sets in... I can't cock a shotgun with only one arm...
"Why are you doing this?" he ground through a wave of nausea, the small sips of water not sitting well in his tummy, though he knew he probably couldn't stay conscious if he threw up. Slowly he breathed through his mouth, focusing on keeping it down. Besides, he needed the fluid to continue to survive.
She smiled softly, her eyes closed as caressed his cheek tenderly, "Someone has to, but don't feel bad... you're not the only one..."
"What?" he breathed, She knows about Sam... Oh man... please no... not my Sammy... don't think about him, just in case she's got some freaky power of her own, I can't think about him, it'll put him in jeopardy... "... is that supposed to make me feel better?" he asked angrily. Who's gonna be left to fight? Don't you know there's a WAR on you freak!
His memories of each of the nights that brought each of the armies into his world were hazy at best. The first night because he was doped up and being tortured by an imposter creature that had made a suit out of the stuff of his little brother. That was the thing that opened a gateway between worlds that had loosed an unseen plague into their universe. That memory was followed by another, the one that still made his heart ache, his brother, so distraught, so agonized, so nearly crushed by despair that he'd been seconds away from putting a bullet into his brain made him shudder and subsequently sent another flaring rocket of hot throbbing up his arm, "Guuuuh...please... you don't know what you're doing!"
Then there was the night at the cemetery when Jake opened the gates to hell and a slab of quartz took a chunk from his skull. That was also the night his father's spirit distracted the demon bastard just long enough for Dean to put the last of Samuel Colt's own bullets into it, ending one family quest but beginning another.
That night he'd watched an army of demons unleashed onto the world and he knew whatever was to come, this time it was for keeps, he could feel it in his bones.
She stepped closer, her eyebrows furrowed and those ruby painted lips pursed, she smiled tracing her hand down his neck, over his chest to his trembling belly, Great... bitch nails me to a freakin' wall, and now she's gonna tickle me too! That's just wrong! She leaned in, her lips warm and full against his cheek. He felt a tiny pull of her mouth against his skin and did his best to keep the disgust from his expression.

Emily Maynard wants to know the men she has on cast won’t love her for just how she looks. The Bachelorette 2012 spoilers just released on Friday by Wetpaint show a deleted scene of Emily grilling Sean Lowe about how he would feel if she gained weight, changed her hair, or wore different clothes.
Ryan Bowers already told Emily if she gained weight he would love her, but wouldn’t “love on her.” Emily is like any other woman on the planetÂ—that comment stung and she hasn’t forgotten it. Now she wants to know what one of her three Bachelorette finalists think. What did Sean say?
While Emily and Sean are in Curacao, the two of them have a conversation in a romantic outdoor setting. Emily asks Sean how he would feel if she gained 50 pounds. He told her it wouldn’t matter. The question went on to the subject of her hair. Maynard wanted to know how he’d like it if she got a “mom cut” with the “bangs and everything.” Sean asked if she meant a “bob” and said he would “be on board with that.” He would support her if she colored her hair brown, but he was honest by telling her he liked blonde.
Lastly, Emily wanted to know how Sean would feel about her wearing “mom jeans” and “mom shoes.” Sean shook his head “no” on that answer and remarked that the idea of that is “gross.” They had a light laugh, but Sean was not into that look. Deal breaker? Emily did not criticize him either way on that answer, but she knew he had to have some standards after all! It’s not like she would consider such a thing to begin with.
The Bachelorette 2012 week 9 episode airs Monday, July 9 on ABC at 8 p.m., ET/PT.

I went to their site which is and isn't a "site". AMPT Bikes They are advertising here. The drawing looks good, I'm not sure about the 299.99 price. If it's as nice as they say then I think that's reasonable. I broke the downtube on my frame yesturday. Right at the top of the front motor mount (no i didn't crash). I sleeved over the outside for a temp fix and welded it up. I am going to need a new frame so I'm asking if anyone has any more info on these guys and their frame? I really like the "built in" tank. It says they will be available in October. I'm hesitant to preorder a frame they can't even post a picture of.

Partial resumption of train services brings relief, joy to people
The partial resumption of train services from Tuesday under lockdown relaxations after nearly two months has come as a big relief to people with those at the railway station here expressing happiness at being able to go back to their home towns or other destinations in different parts of the country.
The train services were suspended as part of measures to prevent the spread of coronavirus.
Jinder Puniyani, a passenger heading towards Ranchi, said he was feeling a big sense of relief and if the train service had not started he was planning to travel by road.
"I have been here for the last two months and now I am so relieved and feel free. It is good that they (Indian Railways) have started train service otherwise I was planning to go by road. With this decision, the government has given us a huge relief," Puniyani told ANI.
Hotel management trainee Sai Saran expressed happiness at being able to board the train for his hometown Vijaywada. "We are very happy as we will get to see our families. We are hotel management trainees and are relieved that we are finally going home."
Raghuvan Yadav, a factory worker, who was also heading towards Ranchi with his family, said train services will only get better in the coming days.
"We were stuck during the lockdown and we were here for the past 7-8 months. During the lockdown, it was difficult to earn. That is why we wanted to go home and we are extremely happy to be able to go back. This is a good decision by the government and slowly things will improve further. I am very happy," he said.
The Indian Railways has partially restored train services connecting Delhi to different parts of the country with 15 pairs of trains.

Jan 20, 2014 7:34 PM by Akeam Ashford
Tonight, fire investigators continue to pour through what once was a majestic home on Verot School Road in Lafayette.
The multi-million dollar mansion was reduced to its pillars on Sunday afternoon. According to the home's current owners, a motorcycle that was running in the garage likely caused the fire.
Today, firefighters remained on scene putting out hotspots.
Jennifer LeBlanc and her husband were the original owners. LeBlanc says her husband wanted the pillars in front of the 18,000 square-foot residence to be the first and last thing visitors saw.
"It was his standing joke. My husband would say in 200 years from the now, the house may not be here, but these pillars will remain," LeBlanc said.
LeBlanc husband, Patrick Leblanc, was a well-known Lafayette architect and business man. He was killed in a plane crash back in 2008.
"He always said that if he did well that he had a dream house he wanted to build for himself, and this was his dream house," LeBlanc said.
It took LeBlanc five years to design and build the home, finishing it in 2003 at an estimated $5,000,000.
LeBlanc says the house was not only famous for its beauty inside and out; it also served host to former Vice President Dick Cheney.
One of the most memorable visits, though, came from former New York Mayor Rudolph Giuliani.
"We were in the backyard near the pool, and every time he would pause one of the goats would start baying in the back, and he just finally stopped and burst out laughing," Leblanc said.
LeBlanc was told about Sunday's fire from a family friend. Her thoughts remained primarily with the new homeowners and their safety.
"Of course I wanted to make sure everybody was okay. I knew there were children in the family, and he said right away he saw them outside of the house," LeBlanc said.
Investigators say it will most likely take several weeks to determine the official cause of the fire because of the size of the house.
11 hours ago

Chief Danny Banks is on the move.
He is still a police chief and is still staying in the area, but he is changing the territory.
Effective Sept. 4, Banks, 40, will take over as police chief in Hudson.
On Monday, he submitted his resignation to the Tripoli City Council, where he had served as the chief for the past 6½ years.
In Tripoli, Banks was a one-man law enforcement operation, but in Sumner, where he served concurrently as the police chief since February, he had four officers under him.
Banks, a 2002 graduate of the University of Northern Iowa, said he is saddened his family would have to leave Tripoli, where he had started to grow roots and where his rapport with the community has paid off.
But, he added, he is excited about the opportunities the new position offers.
“I love small town policing, it comes naturally to me,” he said.
A Waterloo native, Banks said his new appointment allows him to work in a town a bit bigger than Sumner, with four officers under him.
“It is personally, professionally and financially a step up for me and my family,” he said.
With two young, fast-growing kids, Banks and his wife, Brandi, were having to juggle extracurricular activities for the children around the Cedar Valley.
Relocating to Hudson, he added, would make it easier to address dance and music and other development opportunities for the kids. It will also put him closer to his daughter, who is now a student at Iowa State University.
His wife, a lab technician at Waverly Health Center, will remain working in town, he said.
Banks, who is known in the area and beyond for his fitness dedication, said he would have to “dial it back,” as family and job duties take over most of his waking hours.
He said he is going to miss the people in Tripoli and Sumner, as he has developed good working relationships with community members and leaders.
While he is transitioning to Hudson — his contract allows for six months for him to move to the southern Black Hawk County town — he is prepared to continue to help Tripoli until they find a replacement.
“I will offer my services during the hiring process,” he said. “It’s my baby and I want to have a hand in who my successor is going to be. And in the transition, I would love to assist them by taking calls when I am back in town.
“I am not walking away and turning my back to Tripoli, I will be going back to visit… It’s been emotional, I have cried…”

Lucky man is getting a nice BJ from his blonde wife in a phone boot. When some passerby realized what was happening he took his camera and shot their act. Wife was down with fully loaded mouth and smile on man’s face shows that he really enjoys in this public blowjob in a phone boot. Both of them were acting like they are alone in the world, enjoying in their sexual desires.
While some lucky boy is getting blowjob from some hot blonde two girls are exited very much to caught it in sex act. College dorm is a place where you can feel sex in the air. This couple is having a sex in the hall and don’t care at all. Their friends wanted to make a joke and capture them on photo which became so popular over night. Public blowjob is not what makes this picture viral, it is the reaction of blonde and ebony girls when realized what is happening.
College girlfriend is bend over, taking her nude boyfriend from behind. An amazing doggystyle fucking in the daylight was caught by some passerby who noticed something real strange. Horny couple was fucking wildly on the top of the building without giving a dam to a strange looks from bellow. Bitch was smiling and moaning all the time while having a sex in public.
Big busty mature MILF is topless and sucking a dick of some skinny prick. Horny whore doesn’t pick time and place when she gets horny. When this mature bitch grabs a cock she doesn’t care if is somebody near, or watching. She even likes to fuck when some strangers are near her. She is inviting all young and old guys to stick their dick in her greedy cunt.
Hooker caught in act while giving some guy blowjob on passenger seat in the middle of the day. While her denim shirt is too short her panties are in the first plan while she is laying over the shifter and giving her best to satisfy the customer. Some guy noticed them and decided to take a photo and share it with friends.
This is the moment which this horny guy hopes for. The eyes of some unknown girl which are looking at his cock while he is jerking off. That is why he wants to wank just on some public places. The brunette in early 20’s is looking pretty interested for this what she sees. Cut boner in a car steady and ready to offer her one of the unfulfilled desires to try stranger’s dick.
One of the most incredible places to have sexual intercourse this couple has found on the balcony of the clock tower. There was something what attracted looks of many people in the middle of the day. All they were pointing to the clock tower. There were college girl with here boyfriend. With legs spread wide she was having the wildest sex in her life.
Exibitionist couple from Czech Republic decided to try something incredible. They picked the top of an arch of some bridge as a perfect place for sex in public. Horny and alone they were fucking in the middle of the day. Girlfriend was on top, riding her BF like never before. Maybe this is the most incredible place to have sex with your girlfriend.
Hansom guy is showing his limp dick on some college daylight party. There are dozens of hot girls around him and he isn’t giving a damn. He just wants to relief himself. He is pissing while all girls are jumping and dancing wet and drunk. If you think that this is something odd your are so wrong. It’s just usual situation which can be seen on wild college parties.
A whore with a big butt in purple tights is getting caught in the act on some abandoned car parking. She was down, and sucking a cock of the customer when the camera caught them. When she saw that somebody is taking a photo it was late. The pic was already far on her way to the web. This hooker is one of the good looking and it is such a shame to see her on the street.
College couple caught in sex act by voyeur. Boyfriend was above and was playing with her nipples while she was looking “down”. Warm sand and empty beach made this couple to relax and innocent caressing and kissing to turn into real public sex on the beach. They were in their own world ( on the 7th heaven ), enjoying in each other without giving a dam for some foreign looks and cameras.
English couple was caught while having sex in public on the top of fortification in New Castle. A guy was above girl pounding her in missionary pose in the middle of the day. Although they were risking to get caught they don’t care about that at all. Bellow them there were people and cars passing by. Luckily someone was able to see them and take this amazing photo of public sex.
Couple get caught in subway station during the blowjob. Horny guy and girl were thinking that nobody sees them because they were hidden behind some pillar but they were very wrong. While girl was down and busy guy was holding his shorts and enjoying lot. They didn’t know that somebody was watching them with the camera in hand.
Couple caught having a sex between two cars parked on the street. Horny like animals this guy and s girl found public car parking as a suitable place to fulfill their sexual needs. She is laying down on her belly while he is all over her, in well known prone bone sex pose. While they were lost in their lust someone took the camera and shot them in sex act.
Horny college couple can’t resist lust although they are in public park. Early in the morning girlfriend wanted to use her BF’s “morning wood” so she jumped on him and the magic has begun. They were having a morning sex on the bench in some public park while some older people were walking around. They were cuddled tight without giving a damn where they are and who is around.
There are a lot of people who are making jokes with Google Street View cars. This couple were having sex on the road side while Google car was passing by. When they realized who has just caught them, girlfriend started to wave to Google car while her boyfriend was pounding her from behind. This couple and their silver BMW have became one of the most viral thing over night.
Girl caught in act while were riding her boyfriend on balcony of some abandoned building. While horny couple were enjoying in their passion some voyeur was on the right place in the right time to caught them on his camera. Although they were supposing that someone could see them, this college couple wasn’t paying attention at all on that. Cowgirl were jumping and humping on her BF without resting.
Black babe caught in embarrassing nip slip accident when she was getting out of her car. Ebony babe was wearing a deep decolletage with no bra. That was a mistake which all paparazzos wait for. Her chocolate black nipple slipped out of luxury dress and got exposed almost totally. Because of this embarrassing moment she covered her mouth shamed.
A truck driver noticed something really strange while was driving on highway. Young couple is having sex in driving car. Some lucky guy is driving a car while getting blowjob and fingering his pantieless girlfriend. The were so busy with each other and haven’t noticed that truck driver is taking a photo, catching them in act.
While everybody was busy with drinking bear and barbecue teen couple were having sex in a car. When friends realized that they are almost 1 hour absent they decided to visit them with the camera. A photo of teen couple caught in sex act is really priceless. Lucky boy with big smile on his and naked a little bit shamed girl sitting naked in the car.
Amateur chubby captured on camera while was relaxing on the nude beach. With sunglasses on her eyes she was laying down sunbathing totally naked and holding really long dick of her husband who was kneeling next to her. He obviously got horny and asked her for a short handjob but she looks somehow lazy. However, this chubby wife with meaty trimmed cunt took that big cock and started to stroke it.

The journey of my life
By Rodney Davis
I am sure many of you can relate to that part of my story. Let's see if anything else resonates with you. Where I am today is the result of choices I have made from I was a youngster. Some were deliberate and thought through others I realized on reflection
I want to share something, I hate to be prescriptive about how you might shape your life, but I think if I share some of the things that shaped my life, I might give you pause for thought.
I was born in Cockburn Pen, which is off Spanish Town Road and was one of four boys. I lived in Jamaica with my grandmother until my father died when I was only three at that time my family was living in Hamilton, Ontario in Canada. One week later, my grandmother died. As a result, I had no choice but to join the rest of the family in Canada.
My mother was 19. She had 4 boys. She was in a foreign country with not very many black people. And we had nothing—well almost nothing.
The earliest I can remember when I had to make a choice was when I was only 11. My mother was barely making enough to feed and clothe herself let alone 4 boys. We had gone through years of not enough to eat and nothing in the way of nice clothes.
I made my first conscious choice.
I was only 11, but I had to do something. I heard about an opportunity to carry golf bags at the local golf course on weekends. It was hard work, but it was work. I chose to go to the golf course at 4AM every Saturday and Sunday to get a good spot in line to get a bag to carry starting at 6:30 when golfers first teed off.
This leads me to my next memorable choice. I was 15 and about to be 16. I was surrounded by older people who did illegal things drug dealers, pimps (yes pimps), thieves, etc) and I knew them all for years. Just like in many communities in Jamaica today, I saw some young black men who had very visible signs of material wealth
I was aware of what they did and I would say I knew them well from around the way. I never really got involved in any of the stuff really, but they all respected me for how I handled myself and the opportunity to go that route was there if I wanted it.
In Canada, if you're convicted of a crime after the age of 16, it stays on your permanent record and seriously affects your ability to progress in life.
So it's decided, I'm going to do this school thing. Get an education. See where it goes. I was 17. I was now a cook in a kitchen (left dishwashing) and a turntable selector on weekends spinning music at clubs and parties (I couldn't leave bad boy life altogether). My grades are okay. I date the ladies. I do all right.
One day the phone rings, it's my ex-girlfriend. We broke up 6 months ago. Haven't spoken in 3 months. What does she want?
NEXT WEEK: A MATTER OF CHOICESâ¦
The author is president and CEO, Cable & Wireless Jamaica
Send feedback to: email@example.com
© Copyright Jamaica Gleaner

I had to have my beloved girl euthanised on 1 April 2015, four years to the day since she had her first GM. But she had four years of happy life in between those horrid GMs until she told me enough. And my wonderful vet came here at 1am to give her peace.
Was that a success or did the success being giving her peace.
I still do not know, but I loved her so much and could see in her eyes that she wanted peace.
She is there somewhere and sends her love to you all.
Share your good news!
1 post • Page 1 of 1

Persia White is famous for starring as Lynn Ann Searcy on "Girlfriends." Find out what she has been up to since the show ended in 2008.
American actress Persia White is a woman of multiple talents. Besides acting, she is also a solo singer and member of the band XEO3.
White is popularly known for her starring appearance on the CW series "Girlfriends," which ran for eight seasons from 2000 to 2008.
Persia White attends Black Girls Rock! 2013 at New Jersey Performing Arts Center on October 26, 2013 | Photo: Getty Images
She has held multiple roles since then and is also a married woman. Find out more about White's career, her marital life, and her relationship with her husband.
PERSIA WHITE'S CAREER
In her teenage years, White studied dance, acting, singing, and painting. Soon after her high school graduation, she signed with the Ford Agency and bagged her Screen Actors Guild card. She then headed to Los Angeles to pursue an acting career.
White's acting career is littered with appearances on films like "Red Letters," "Blood Dolls," "Operation Sandman," and "Suddenly."
She also appeared on television series like "Angel," "NYPD Blue," "The Steve Harvey Show," "Buffy the Vampire Slayer," and "Brooklyn South." Her regular television appearances were in "Breaker High," "Sister Sister," and "Girlfriends."
The actress also appeared in "The Fall of Night," "Dysfunctional Friends," and "The Vampire Diaries." In addition, she co-produced an award-winning documentary titled "Earthlings," which Joaquin Phoenix narrated.
Her work in "Dysfunctional Friends" earned her an award for Best Performance by an Actor in the American Black Film Festival in July 2011.
PERSIA WHITE: "GIRLFRIENDS"
At the beginning of her career, White wanted to be a singer. However, after moving to LA, she refused multiple albums deals because she did not have creative control over them in the contracts she was offered.
Hence, she focused on building her acting career. In 2000, she bagged a role in "Girlfriends," which was a top show in Black American homes and for women aged 14-42 in the eight years it ran on television.
Recently, fans of the famous show have been clamoring for a reboot. In 2019, White and her co-stars from the show, Tracee Ellis Ross, Jill Marie Jones, and Golden Brooks, reunited in an episode of Ross's ABC comedy series "Black-Ish."
In a chat with Essence, White, who had earlier told TV One of her and her co-stars wish for a "Girlfriend" reboot, described how she felt when she set her eyes on all three of them in the "Black-Ish" episode. She said:
"To have us all together, that was the most incredible, strange and nostalgic feeling, but then it also felt like home."
PERSIA WHITE: "VAMPIRE DIARIES"
Besides "Girlfriend," White also starred in another CW television series, "Vampire Diaries," where she appeared in a semi-recurring role as Bonnie's mother.
In a chat with Collider, she revealed how she got involved with the show. She said she was interested after her agents told her about it and auditioned for it though the people who were choosing were not in LA. She also said:
"It was a little bit of a process, but it was really worth it. It was very similar to when I've worked on shows like NYPD Blue. It's just real reality based and very down-to-earth type of characters."
White added that being on the show was fun because she had done sitcoms and comedy for a long time, and "Vampire Diaries" was close to what she had been doing before "Girlfriends."
"Vampire Diaries" was also great for White in more ways than one because it was at the show that she met her charming prince and current husband, Joseph Morgan.
IS WHITE MARRIED?
On February 2, 2008, White got engaged to singer Saul Williams, who she had been dating for five years. The former couple met when Williams made a guest appearance on "Girlfriends," as White's character's love interest.
They hit things off instantly and eventually married in 2008. However, their marriage did not last long as they ended things a year after tying the knot.
White joined "Vampire Diaries" in its third season. There, she met Morgan, who portrayed the much-loved character Klaus Mikaelson on the show.
White and Morgan did not have much overlap during her time on the show but still found a way to connect. They also worked outside of the show after she starred in his ten-minute short film "Revelation."
THE JOSEPH MORGAN AND PERSIA WHITE RELATIONSHIP
Morgan and White were initially tight-lipped about their relationship. However, they started flaunting their couple status on social media.
By 2014, they were more open about their relationship and confirmed they were an item. The lovebirds showed love to each other via several social media posts.
In May 2014, Morgan proposed romantically to White a few days before his 33rd birthday. The couple made a joint statement where they appreciated everyone who supported their relationship. They added that they found true love and wished everyone the same.
On July 5, 2014, they tied the knot in an intimate beach ceremony in Ocho Rios, Jamaica. The couple said their vows in front of a small group of family and friends.
In 2017, Morgan and White proved how compatible they are when they opened up to Us Weekly about their ideal date scenario. They said they keep things simple when it comes to romance and like going out for dinner and seeing movies.
The couple also works together. Morgan made his television directorial debut in 2016 with a "The Originals" episode. Despite it being a daunting challenge, he scaled through thanks to his supportive wife.
Morgan told People that White was incredible and utterly supportive during the whole process. He added that he could not have done it without her.
PERSIA WHITE'S DAUGHTER
White and Morgan have no child of their own. However, the actress is the mother of a daughter, Mecca Morgan White, who she welcomed on October 7, 1995.
Mecca is a graduate of The Los Angeles Film School, where she bagged a degree in Film/Cinema/Video Studies. She is also an alumnus of the New York Film Academy.
Mecca also studied with the London Academy of Music and Dramatic Arts, The Groundlings, and the Sanford Meisner Center. In addition, she worked on the crew of "Carousel," a short film Morgan directed.
The 25-year-old credits her family for her foundation in arts with her mom and stepfather both actors and filmmakers. Mecca is gradually forging her path as a director, writer, and actor. She will surely be heard about in the years to come.

Tuesday, December 29, 2009
Cars can take on a life of their own. They each have a unique personality. Some name their vehicles with fondness and adoration such as "The Blaze" or "Herbie". Others name their cars by their performance such as "Piece of Junk" and "Clunker".
I didn't name our new 2001 Ford Windstar. God did.
We had just traded in our 1992 Chevy Blazer which had the lingering scent of goat and baseball. Our oldest son, whom we'll refer to as "Special" (a nickname from high-school), had been on a traveling team since '92. One fundraiser we did involved a real goat. The idea was to go to a local business and say, "Business A has sent us to you (Business B) and wants you to babysit this goat. Now we can help you out for a fee of $20 and take this goat to another business of your choice, or you can babysit the goat for 30 minutes and we'll be back to pick him up."
The obvious would happen, so we would load the goat back up in The Blaze along with the $20 cash and head to the next business. Unfortunately, we had a goat with a bellyache. I found it interesting that the principle of gravity didn't apply to his irritable bowel. Although the goat was caged in the back, his "relief" permeated the carpeted area and barely missed our backseat passengers.
Fast forward to November 2001. Special had graduated from high school, and since the days of fund raising were over, The Blaze was traded in for a new Ford Windstar that seated seven. Since we had only two kids, Special at 18 years old with his own car and Sweet Tart (nickname from jhigh) who was just 13, it really didn't make a lot of sense that we would buy a seven passenger van. But 2001 was the year that you could buy a vehicle at 0% interest, so we decided that a big van for our travels and for when we had company would suit us just fine.
As I looked out my living room window that rainy November morning in 2001 and gazed at the beauty of our new van sitting in the driveway, the quietest voice I've ever heard whispered into my heart "The Chariot".
"What," I questioned?
"The Chariot", the voice repeated. "As you have done unto the least of these, so you have done unto ME. You will need this van because I have called your family to adopt orphans. They are royalty because they are MY sons and daughters. The van will be named The Chariot."
The calling to adopt was clear. The blood drained from my face. My toes went numb with fear about what this meant. I began to think of Jonah and wanted to find a whale to swallow me up . . . disobedience to "The Call" was beckoning me. Yet the wonder of what God would do in our obedience enticed me. Obedience would win.

The legend of Vijender Singh continued to grow as the Indian boxing star outslugged his Chinese opponent Zulpikar Maimaitiali in a close bout to annex the WBO Asia Pacific Super Middleweight title here tonight.
It was a double delight for the fans as Vijender also snatched the WBO Oriental Super Middleweight title from the Chinese, who is nine years younger to him.
It was the 32-year-old Beijing Olympic bronze medallist's ninth successive win in his professional career.
In front of a partisan crowd, Vijender gave an exhibition of his class during the slugfest, and his oodles of experience came in handy during 10 intense rounds.
While Vijender had commented that 'Chinese products don't last long' but Zulpikar managed to squeeze every ounce of his opponent's energy.
"I didn't expect him to fight so well and last the distance," Vijender said after the bout.
Using his height and greater reach to good effect, Vijender most of the time had the better of exchanges with his straight ones and hooks landing flush on Zulpikar, whose blows didn't have the desired effect.
The Chinese southpaw had his guard up most of the times and with a crouched stance, was relying mostly on the uppercuts.
However, he was guilty of trying to hit Vijender below the belt with as many as five low blows for which he was promptly warned by the referee.
The only round when Zulpikar looked a bit assertive was the third one when he tried to chase the Indian, who again showed his fleet-footedness to evade his punches on more than one occasions.
A frustrated Zulpikar, in fact, pushed Vijender to the ground, a favour that the Indian duly returned in the very next round.
Zulpikar got the real taste of Vijender of yore, when he landed a straight right followed by a left uppercut flush on his face as the crowd roared in approval.
However, the younger legs of Zulpikar did help him towards the fag end of the bout as the Indian looked tired.
Zulpikar took the chance to attack but Vijender's tight defence, despite jaded legs, helped him.
In the final round, Zulpikar landed an uppercut which left the Indian ace with a bloodied nose, but he did manage to hold his own in the end.
The bonhomie between the opponents was there to be seen as Zulpikar hugged Vijender and made him wear his cap.

Incrediblenovel Hellbound With You update – Chapter 484 The Long Lost Tale Part XXX pause health reading-p3
Novel–Hellbound With You–Hellbound With You
Chapter 484 The Long Lost Tale Part XXX ray sleepy
Chapter 484 The Long Missing Tale Part x.by.by
The witch queen stepped back from Abigail and required her. “Destroy him!” she claimed, and Abigail looked to confront him. Her eyes ended up pitch black colored, lifeless, and lifeless. Nevertheless, she didn’t switch.
But, what about his commitment to your only person he had ever beloved?
After Alexander stood together with the massive gate where Abigail and the witch queen ended up status, Alex came and dropped, but he withstood up, pulling his sword behind him, its hint producing sets off to fly since it damaged resistant to the floors. His entire body was getting to be weakened and weaker from your results the poison, with his fantastic lung area battled to breathe in some considerably-essential breathable oxygen.
Hellbound With You
A different wave of arrows came up as a consequence of the king’s frustration.
Angered because of the stubbornness in the man keeper, the king ordered his gents to take.
Bussy D’Ambois and The Revenge of Bussy D’Ambois
Alex growled, his eyes eliminating with fury and vengeance. This world, he really despised it a great deal. He disliked how much struggling the world simply had to inflict on him before it was subsequently happy. He finally discovered the one one who brought him the warmth he never realized he were trying to find, and all of he wished for was to keep her safe in his hands. Why couldn’t he have it? Why was this world so heartless and cruel to him? He cursed and cursed within him. If something terrible occured to his beloved, he swore he would use up this world with h.e.l.lfire. They all much better kill him now since if he somehow were able to reside through this all, he would eliminate all the things.
The vampire king, who found that the girl was resisting them, mailed a signal to his gentlemen.
“N-no…” Alex didn’t know how to proceed. Why? Why would they cast this sort of spell in her? “Stop fighting off Abigail, you should,” he begun to plead.
The vampire california king, who noticed that the lady was resisting them, dispatched a transmission to his males.
The remainder of the vampires required their bows and able to shoot at Abigail. The ruler desired to initialize her ability since Alex was shut down enough to get guarantee destruction of it.
Nonetheless, nothing happened. The mist didn’t turn up.
Once Alexander endured on the top of the huge gate where Abigail along with the witch princess were standing, Alex came and dropped, but he stood up, pulling his sword behind him, its suggestion causing sparks to travel because it scratched resistant to the floorboards. His human body was turning out to be weakened and weaker in the results the poison, and his lung area struggled to inhale some significantly-required the necessary oxygen.
Chasing Carolina: Just For The Summer
Everybody was surprised just as before. Alexander was meant to have dropped by now. How was he still capable to move?
He was at his minimize. It appeared that the was it. He had misplaced the most important struggle of his living. Remember, it shown up that this society was still set on heading against him. The G.o.ds must really dislike him on the depths of the your bones. But he somehow sensed a little bit greater at this particular final result. Not less than if he passed away now, he wouldn’t have the capacity to get rid of Lexus along with his possess fingers. It looked the retail price for looking to modify his destiny was his daily life, which wasn’t that awful, he thinking.
Alex carried on to fight, evolving for instance a zombie towards the top of the the gate. His guys were all departed. He was the only person remaining. He was baths with our blood. Nevertheless, his eyeballs were burning crimson.
Alex extended to battle, advancing just like a zombie towards the top of the the door. His males have been all deceased. He was the only person left behind. He was showering with blood flow. However, his view were getting rid of green.
Alex extended to combat, progressing much like a zombie towards the top of the the entrance. His gents ended up all gone. He was the only one left behind. He was baths with blood vessels. Yet, his eyeballs were still burning crimson.
One other influx of arrows originated as a result of the king’s fury.
Alex extended to combat, evolving for instance a zombie towards the top of the the door. His men were all old. He was the only person kept. He was showering with blood flow. But still, his vision were using up crimson.
The poison in his system was spreading like wild fire, and the man continuing to travel berserk. The remainder vampires stopped going after him. They didn’t really need to beat him any more. All they had to carry out was wait for poison to carry out its function or wait for the gal he was desperately wanting to keep to eliminate him herself. The vampires and also the witch knew how lethal the dragon keeper was, and in addition they all experienced exactly the same thought – how fitted his end might be if it lady ended up usually the one to get rid of Alexander.
The witch-queen spotted her child hemorrhage from his various cuts but she didn’t even fall to assist him. She remained where she was, glancing at her child one further time before completely ignoring him and paying attention her interest on Alexander.
Section 484 The Very long Shed Tale Piece x.x.by
The vampire california king, who spotted which the female was resisting them, dispatched a transmission to his adult men.
Angered by the stubbornness of your man keeper, the queen bought his gents to shoot.
It turned out more than. Alex was the victor, just as before. He acquired just as before exhibited his tactical knowledge as it stumbled on struggle. With two occurs, he were able to subdue his rival, picking out the most plausible approach to accomplishment – by disabling his opponent’s battling arm.
The poison in their entire body was growing like wildfire, and he extended to visit berserk. The other vampires halted going after him. They didn’t should overcome him ever again. All that they had to complete was wait for the poison to complete its operate or wait for young lady he was desperately seeking to help save to destroy him herself. The vampires and also the witch believed how fatal the dragon keeper was, additionally they all had the same thinking – how fitting his ending might be if it female had been usually the one to get rid of Alexander.
“I’m sorry…” he uttered, smiling bitterly because he continued going for walks towards her. All he desired now was to carry her. His human body got ended up completely numb, and yes it would basically be an issue of time before he would fall once more, so that all he wished ended up being to maintain her as part of his forearms again—one before.
He was at his reduce. It appeared that this was it. He experienced shed the most important fight of his daily life. Remember, it sprang out that the society was nonetheless intent on heading against him. The G.o.ds must really despise him towards the depths in their your bones. But he somehow felt just a little greater with this outcome. At the least if he passed away now, he wouldn’t be able to eliminate Lexus with his personal hands and fingers. It seemed the cost for wanting to change his destiny was his very own living, which wasn’t that poor, he believed.
Angered via the stubbornness on the our keeper, the king obtained his males to photograph.
Discovering the arrows getting close them, the fragile Alex harvested all his power and jumped towards Abigail, slas.h.i.+ng the arrows before they can reach her. A few of the arrows acquired prior him and pierced his body system since he s.h.i.+elded her from your a.s.sault.
He was at his restrict. It seemed until this was it. He got shed the most crucial challenge of his lifestyle. As usual, it appeared the fact that world was nevertheless intent on moving against him. The G.o.ds must really despise him towards the depths of the bones. But he somehow observed slightly superior at the outcome. At least if he passed away now, he wouldn’t be capable of wipe out Lexus regarding his possess hands and fingers. It appeared the price for attempting to alter his destiny was his personal lifestyle, which wasn’t that terrible, he imagined.
Alex smiled when he persisted to approach her. “Abigail…” he identified as out again. His hot vision were actually filled up with so many feelings – discomfort, hatred, be sorry for, hopelessness, remorse. He got was unsuccessful miserably to shield her. Where… where made it happen all fail?
He was at his limitation. It appeared that the was it. He acquired lost the most important struggle of his lifestyle. Remember, it sprang out which the community was however set on moving against him. The G.o.ds must really hate him into the depths with their bone. But he somehow felt a little bit more effective at this particular effect. At the least if he died now, he wouldn’t be capable of remove Lexus in reference to his very own fingers. It appeared the cost for planning to adjust his fate was his own existence, which wasn’t that terrible, he imagined.
When Alexander withstood on top of the enormous gate where Abigail as well as witch princess ended up status, Alex came and fell, but he withstood up, hauling his sword behind him, its tip leading to sets off to travel since it damaged against the floors. His body system was becoming less strong and less strong from your outcomes of the poison, along with his lung area had trouble to inhale some very much-necessary air.
A different influx of arrows came due to the king’s frustration.
Hellbound With You
He was at his limitation. It seemed until this was it. He acquired dropped the most crucial combat of his life. Remember, it shown up that this environment was nonetheless intent on proceeding against him. The G.o.ds must really despise him into the depths of the your bones. But he somehow believed slightly superior at this consequence. Not less than if he died now, he wouldn’t be capable to remove Lexus with his own personal arms. It seemed the cost for seeking to alter his fate was his very own life, which wasn’t that poor, he believed.
Everybody was stunned once more. Alexander was intended to have dropped right now. How was he still capable to proceed?
The witch queen stepped back from Abigail and required her. “Remove him!” she mentioned, and Abigail looked to experience him. Her vision have been pitch black, dreary, and lifeless. Nevertheless, she didn’t shift.
The poison within his body system was growing like wildfire, in which he extended to visit berserk. The remainder of the vampires quit pursuing him. They didn’t must fight him any more. All they had to accomplish was wait for a poison to do its work or wait for young lady he was desperately aiming to help you save to kill him themselves. The vampires as well as the witch believed how fatal the dragon keeper was, additionally they all obtained a similar believed – how installing his ending could well be if this type of young lady were definitely usually the one to get rid of Alexander.
“N-no…” Alex didn’t know what to do. Why? Why would they cast this type of spell on the? “Cease fighting off Abigail, please,” he began to plead.
The witch looked too stunned. Was she aiming to burst the spell?
Alex smiled since he carried on to technique her. “Abigail…” he termed out just as before. His fiery vision were loaded with the amount of feelings – pain, hatred, be sorry for, hopelessness, remorse. He experienced was unsuccessful miserably to secure her. Where… where did it all fail?
Etain the Beloved and Other Poems
Alex growled, his vision using up with rage and vengeance. The world, he really hated it a whole lot. He despised exactly how much hurting the world needed to cause on him before it turned out happy. He finally uncovered the only person who provided him the warmth he never believed he have been seeking, as well as he desired would be to maintain her secure in his biceps and triceps. Why couldn’t he already have it? Why was the world so heartless and cruel to him? He cursed and cursed within him. If one thing undesirable occured to his dearest, he swore he would shed this world with h.e.l.lfire. Each will far better wipe out him now just like he somehow were able to are living through this, he was going to destroy anything.
Leave a Reply

A man mowed down by a hit-and-run driver while assisting a stranded Queens motorist lived for helping others and expected no thanks in return, his devastated family said Sunday.
Michael Agurkis’ final act of kindness led to his death. The 51-year-old dad pulled over on the eastbound side of the Nassau Expressway in Springfield Gardens next to Kennedy Airport Friday night to help the driver of a stalled Dodge Caravan.
“It’s very important to my family that it’s highlighted that he was doing the right thing,” his daughter, Amanda Agurkis, 27, told the Daily News. “It was his last action.”
As Michael Agurkis and the driver stood in front of the minivan trying to figure what was wrong, a Ford E350 van speeding down the expressway slammed into both men and the stalled vehicle.
The Ford driver abandoned the wrecked van and ran off. He has not been caught.
The 53-year-old Dodge Caravan driver survived with a hurt knee but Agurkis, who was struck in the chest, died of his injuries at Jamaica Hospital.
“The simplicity of doing the right thing, if more people did that the world would be a better place,” Amanda Agurkis said as she wept. “Please let’s let’s just try to bring justice to his memory.”
Agurkis’ daughter described him as selfless and kind.
“Everybody shares a story about my dad, how he made them feel good, shoveled their whole driveway without telling them. It’s fitting that he passed this way because that was him,” she said. “He always stopped for people on the road. He knew a lot about cars and that was his way of giving back.”
She had just seen her father earlier that evening.
“He dropped me off at my friend’s house. I was going to have a girls’ night and then I got a call about an hour later,” she said. “We chatted the whole way there. He was coming over tomorrow to help fix a cabinet.”
She added, “He honked twice and he was gone.”
Even though her parents were divorced, Agurkis and his ex-wife were still close enough to spend holidays together.
“It was awesome — my parents were divorced but they were the best of friends,” Amanda Agurkis said. “My dad was very knowledgeable about construction and my mom has been getting the kitchen redone. My dad has been helping her every step of the way. They were separated, but there was no separation of the family.”
The Daily News Flash
Agurkis grew up in Long Beach, L.I., and did sanitation work on Long Island for about 20 years before becoming a gas technician. He currently lived in East Atlantic Beach not far from where he was raised.
“He was a surfer kid, a skater kid. He loved being outside, he loved the ocean,” his daughter said. “When he and my mom got divorced he moved right back to the ocean. In his later life he just wanted to be near the water.”
He is survived by his daughter, two sons, Michael Jr., 23, and Thomas, 19, and his ex-wife, Suzanne.
The man Agurkis was helping, Kokobi Igbinovia, was not hospitalized but was in too much pain to talk to a reporter Sunday.
“He went through a trauma,” Igbinovia’s wife Pam Igbinovia told The News from their home about a mile from where he was struck. “He fell and he has bruises on his face and his teeth are not right.”
“He’s having a hard time,” she added. “He’s really just sleeping and sleeping. He hasn’t been ready to talk to me about it.”
Police are asking anyone with information about the driver to call Crime Stoppers at (800) 577-TIPS. All calls will be kept confidential.

The 'Unsinkable' Debbie Reynolds Looks Back On Life, Love And A Boozy Busby Berkeley
Debbie Reynolds has been in show business for more than 60 years — beginning as an ingenue chirping a novelty tune called "Aba Daba Honeymoon" in one of her first films, a Jane Powell/Ricardo Montalban vehicle called Two Weeks With Love. That was 1950. Today, she's indisputably a grand dame of show business, working with names like Matt Damon and Michael Douglas.
Reynolds has made some legendary films along the way, including Singin' in the Rain, with Gene Kelly and Donald O'Connor, and big hits, like The Unsinkable Molly Brown, for which she was nominated for an Academy Award. Her foot- and handprints are preserved at Grauman's Chinese Theatre.
She's had three marriages that gave her a great son and daughter, but as she says in her new book, she's "kissed a lot of frogs," and she knows what it's like to have your personal life thrown open in the headlines like a cheap suitcase — most famously in 1959, when her husband, crooner Eddie Fisher, left her for her friend Elizabeth Taylor. The book is called Unsinkable, and Reynolds looks back with a laugh when discussing Fisher and Taylor with NPR's Scott Simon. "Elizabeth fell in love with ... Richard Burton, and I warned Eddie that she'd kick him out in a year and a half — and that's exactly what happened, which gave me at least a little comfort."
Reynolds says she knew Taylor's relationship with Fisher would never work out. "He's not a strong enough personality for Elizabeth, who preferred her men to be, well, Richard Burton," she says. Fisher, she says, "lucked out" for the year and a half he spent with Taylor. And she eventually patched up her friendship with Taylor, after the two of them found themselves on the same cruise ship. "We decided, being bright girls ... we would get over the problems that existed, and we sent each other a note saying, let's move on with our life, and let's get onto the happy side. So we did, on that trip."
Moving on to her film work, Reynolds recalls that the shoot for Singin' in the Rain was exceptionally difficult because Kelly and O'Connor were such talented dancers. "And I had to learn all of that in six months, and I had never danced before," she says. "So I had to keep up with the boys, but I learned a great deal from Mr. Kelly." Fred Astaire helped, too — and Reynolds recalls him as "the sweetest man, other than Jimmy Stewart. I was crying under the piano on one of my breaks, my feet were killing me and my back was like it was broken — after all, I was only 17 — and Fred Astaire came by and he reached down, and he said, 'Now, who is that?' " Reynolds recalls that Astaire encouraged her not to quit. "And he invited me in to watch him rehearse — nobody got to watch him dance, and he let me watch him until he was just red in the face, and it showed me, even the greats find it hard to be really excellent, but you have to keep striving."
Reynolds first captured the public imagination with "Aba Daba Honeymoon," from Two Weeks With Love; she says the money she made from that movie — $1,500 — seemed like a fortune at the time. Legendary choreographer Busby Berkeley worked on the picture, "and he would drink a little bit, to say the least," Reynolds remembers. "He'd shoot these wonderful shots where they'd put him on a camera and send him 100 feet in the air, and they would tie him on, because he often fell off, and of course almost killed himself. But he'd get back up and have another bottle, and get back up, and so we finally learned to sing, we'd say, 'Somewhere there's Busby, how high the boom!' So it just became a joke, after a while. We didn't pay any attention to him. If he fell off, we'd just run forward and catch him."
A few years later, in 1955, she made a film with Frank Sinatra, called The Tender Trap, and Sinatra gave her some sage advice about her relationship with Fisher. "Frank Sinatra always gave people advice ... and he said, 'Now, I know you're engaged to Eddie, but I don't want you to marry a singer, because none of us are faithful, and he won't be, and I'm not. We're just awful,' he said, 'so don't do it.' And of course I didn't mind him, and I had a lot of problems because I didn't mind him, but Eddie and I were very young and very much in love at the time, but I guess he falls in and out of love."
I feel that I'm very fortunate, I have many good friends in my heart, I have my religion — and you can have whatever kind of religion; as long as you try the best you can, and you're a good person, that's all you can do."
Reynolds was not particularly lucky in love — after Fisher, she was married to two men, both wealthy, who essentially robbed her. She calls them "scoundrels" and says she doesn't really have an explanation for being taken in twice. "I really can't give you an answer, other than to say financially I'm very Victorian, I believe the man is supposed to run the business downtown, and the woman takes care of the family uptown. I always turned my money over to the husband. Shows you how dumb you are, and that's why I don't date or go out, and I would never marry again."
"I don't carry any guilt feelings," she continues. "I feel that I'm very fortunate, I have many good friends in my heart, I have my religion — and you can have whatever kind of religion; as long as you try the best you can, and you're a good person, that's all you can do."
If you want to see more of Debbie Reynolds, she's playing pianist Liberace's mother in a new biopic coming to HBO in May — Michael Douglas stars as the flamboyant musician and Matt Damon as his lover. "I'm working all the time; I've never stopped working," she says. "This is a really good picture. They dwell a lot on sex, which I didn't love, but it is part of any single man's life. But he was a great entertainer, great pianist, good friend and a wonderful person, and I enjoyed playing his mother," complete with Polish accent, "because I knew her in person, in life, and I put a prosthetic nose on so I could look just like her. I think everyone'll enjoy it. Just close your eyes at some scenes that are kinda sexy."
Copyright 2023 NPR. To see more, visit https://www.npr.org.

I was looking for a ring for my boyfriend, for his birthday and I came across this ring. I ordered it without even looking at the reviews and it was a no return, so that was kind of silly on my part. After I ordered it, I saw that some people were not pleased at all with the product and other people were just as shocked as I am now.. I was so worried that it would turn out cheap and look horrible.. I guess it's a 50/50 shot with this product. I could not see any fake grain or even tell it wasn't wood! My boyfriend and I love this ring and I would recommend this to anyone who is looking for a cheap inlay ring. Simply beautiful. :)
- How did the image on site compare with the actual product? Even more stunning in person!
- How accurate was the sizing? Very accurate.
- Please tell us about the quality of the product. Simply amazing quality!
- Would you recommend this to a friend? Yes

My Grandfather told the story of a miserly man that wanted to defy nature and indeed take his riches with him. When the miserly man became ill he ask for his two trusted employees and the local Priest to attend him at his bedside.
When the three were by his bed he gave each a case containing one third of his wealth. After placing the case full of money in each one’s hand he said, ” Upon my death before they close the casket you all are instructed to place the cases into the casket.” Each one nodded in agreement and left with the cases.
Two weeks later the miserly man died. All three were notified of the miserly man’s death and were given the time and place for the funeral. As the service was coming to a close all three men placed their cases in the casket. At the repast the two employees went to the Priest.
The first employ with a bowed head said, “Priest, I must confess. I took out two thirds of the money that was in the case before I placed it in the casket.”
The second employ interjected in a remorseful tone, “I must admit as well, I took one half of the money in the case before I placed it in the casket.”
The Priest shook his head and said, “I am disappointed in you both. I placed a check for the full amount in the case.”
Remember! A donation of likes and follows keeps me fed. Thank you all for your support.

Samuel is a sensual 20-year-old athlete who definitely has great ball-handling skills! He plays lots of co-ed sports like vollyeball. He played baseball all through his high school career, and was a point guard for three years on the basketball team. But it sounds like his preferred co-ed sport is sex!
He was a little nervous when Pete interviewed him, but the idea that people would be watching him jerk off was “kind of a self-confidence booster.” He was 15 when he had sex for the first time and says, oddly sufficient, it was an “accident!” Now we have to know the story!
It took place at a bacchanalia. After a long night, he and this doll ended up in the laundry room. “I didn’t intend for it to take place, but it did.” Everyone at the debauch knew what was happening, so Samuel was nice-looking popular when he stopped up his spin cycle.
He says his favorite kind of girl has long legs, blond hair and blue eyes, and “knows whenever to have a maximum moment, but can also have
amusement and cut up with her partners.”
Samuel’s preferred position with a hottie like that is doggy-style,. He also likes to give and receive blowjob. He’s not dating anyone currently, but has a “special friend” that he hooks up with occasionally. Samuel says he doesn’t have to jack off very often these days.
One of the the most horny sexual experiences Samuel had was with the last cutie he was dating. They had sex on the beach. He said there’s just “something special” about doing it on the beach. Some people watched him and he doesn’t mind fuck in public – to a degree.
Doing it outdoors is entertainment for him at times, and he loves the idea of some people being around and the thrill of being caught. But he said a enormous audience would be too much.
He’d better get used to that soon! He’s about to have a ton of people watch him stroke his thick baseball bat. His years of playing
sports have given Samuel a lean, toned physique. Even tho’ he told us he seldom goes to the gym, he still accepts compliments on his flesh, especially his arms and shoulders.
Samuel gets in the shower and soaps up his taut skin. Water drips down his back and in between his lightly-fuzzed bum cheeks. He soaps up his maximum chest and his manmeat and bollocks.
His cock stiffens as he strokes it. Samuel lubes it up, slowly stroking it till he’s completely hard. He sits down and the water lasts to splash down on him.
He rubs his torso as he jerks off. Samuel cries and after wrapping both hands around his thick python, says “Here it comes.” He rubs his cum onto his manmeat head and shaft, some of it dripping onto his stomach.
I’d call that a home run!
Video: 960×540, Windows media Video 9, 2338kbps
Iâve had dozens of people talk about Pathâs gorgeous and delightful interface recently.

Along with eating right and exercising, I have given up biting on my nails. This may sounds crazy but I love biting my nails and always have. When I am having a stressful day my hands go straight for my mouth. It is my comfort for me, I was a thumb sucker so I guess it was the next best thing after my dad put Tabasco sauce on my thumb to get me to stop sucking my thumb. My baboo did it too so maybe I got it from her.
I have to say it has caused many problems for me. First of all what do I do with all the extra movement I have now that I don't have it to calm myself down. When I was younger it help keep me from wiggling in class. Teachers hated that about me, I always had to be moving and either my leg was going a mile an hour or if I was standing I was constantly moving side to side, back and forth. If you have ever watched Briana you know she does the same thing....sorry Briana. Rob would laugh at us he said we made him sea sick, I would move one way back and forth and she would move the other way. All of my children do it. Rob doesn't so I know it comes from me, I just can't help it. I need to be moving.
So....not bitting my nails has caused many problems I did not have before. Like yesterday I went to scratch an itch on my arm and scratched off a mole....ouch it did not feel good and blood was gushing down my arm. I have scratches all over my hands, legs, and arms where I have accidentally scratched myself with my nails (and they aren't even really long yet). Nails are deadly people. I wonder if anyone ever killed themselves by scratching the tar out of themselves.....well, I tell you I might just be the first to find out.

RIVERSIDE, California (Reuters) - A California boy charged with murdering his neo-Nazi father when he was 10 said in a videotaped police interview played in court on Wednesday that he was physically abused at home and committed the shooting because he “wanted everything to stop.”
The emotionally charged video of statements Joseph Hall made to a police detective hours after the shooting was shown on the second day of the boy’s juvenile court trial stemming from the May 2011 killing of his father, 32-year-old Jeffrey Hall.
Prosecutors and defense lawyers agree that the boy, who is now 12, killed his father by shooting him in the head at near point-blank range as the elder Hall slept on the couch in the family’s home.
Since the boy is charged as a juvenile, the purpose of the trial is not to determine his guilt or innocence but whether certain allegations about his motives are true and whether he can thus be held criminally responsible for the fatal shooting.
The outcome hinges on the boy’s understanding of right and wrong at the time. If the prosecution prevails, the boy could be sentenced to a juvenile detention facility until the age of 23.
Defense lawyers have said the boy was conditioned by his father’s violent, racist behavior and killed Jeffrey Hall to put a halt to the physical abuse inflicted on him by his father.
Prosecutors have said the boy, who lived in a house with four siblings, committed the slaying because his father was threatening at the time to divorce this stepmother, Krista McCary. Prosecutors said he was close to McCary and considered her his true mother.
Joseph’s responses to questions put to him in the recorded interview by police detective Roberta Hopewell appeared to cast some doubt about the boy’s grasp of the consequences of his actions.
Asked what he thought would happen after he shot his father, the boy replied, “I thought he’d be dead.”
But later in the interview, he said he had hoped that after his father was shot, “they could fix him and we could be friends again.” He also said he was inspired in part by an episode of a police television drama in which an abusive father was shot to death as he slept by his young son.
“And what happened to the kid?” the detective asked.
“Nothing, he just told the truth,” Joseph answered.
‘I SHOT MY DAD’
Joseph also confided that he “didn’t want (the shooting) to look like I did it on purpose” and admitted hiding the gun under his bed afterward. Asked by Hopewell to give an example of something that’s “wrong,” he answered, “I shot my dad.”
The case in Riverside County, east of Los Angeles, has drawn attention for Jeffrey Hall’s neo-Nazi associations and the rarity of a parent being slain by a child as young as Joseph.
Kathleen Heide, a criminologist who specializes in juvenile offenders, has said 8,000 murder victims over the past 32 years were slain by their offspring, but only 16 of those were committed by defendants age 10 or younger.
In his videotaped interview following the shooting, Joseph told police his father was physically abusive, especially toward him, saying, “My dad was roughest on me” and that “he kicked and beat me.”
He also said he “didn’t want my mom to leave,” referring to his stepmother. Asked about what he was thinking before shooting his father, Joseph said he thought, “I should end things. ... I wanted everything to stop.”
Also on Wednesday, the boy’s 11-year-old sister, Shirley Hall, took the witness stand, testifying that Joseph had told her beforehand that he intended to shoot her father. Looking nervous, she broke down in tears near the end of her questioning.
Writing by Alex Dobuzinskis; Editing by Steve Gorman, Cynthia Johnston and Peter Cooney

Do you ever get so overwhelmed with life that you just want to say "I've had enough! Can I go home now?" I seem to be in that place an awful lot lately over the past several years.
Bridgette, Bobby, and I went to SSA this morning. That's the Social Security Administration for those lucky few who have never had direct dealings with them. Since Bobby has moved back in with me, we needed to get his case transferred over to my area. I was dreading it. In the past my experience with SSA has been hours of waiting; a stern, cold worker who mostly grunted; and getting chewed out at least once in the interview for not having followed some rule I didn't know anything about because it was a new rule since the last time I had gone in and gotten chewed out.
Today was different. In just an hour we were done! And the worker was..... get this.... smiling and pleasant! I had made one mistake, and he didn't chew me out.... in fact, he said it was no big deal. I didn't know that Bobby could have no legal access to the bank account, I thought it had to be in his name. So I had to go back to the bank and get a payee account set up. We are changing banks because of problems with the old bank. The new bank was a breeze too.....we were on a roll today!
So why am I feeling overwhelmed? Because this was only part of it. I still need to get a guardianship set up.... at least I think I do. I keep going back and forth on this issue. There are pro/cons to both sides of it. I really don't know what to do, and when I start thinking about it too much, an anxiety attack begins. This is taking skill now to be writing about it without my heart wanting to beat itself out of my chest and my head spinning from hyperventilation.
Breathe Sandy..... Breathe.......
Does anyone out there know about these things? I've become practically paralyzed by it. Paperwork has always been an issue for me, and considering I have dealt so much with SSA, you would think I've done my lifetime allotment of it. But there is always more. I don't even seem to be able to pick up a phone to make an appointment with an attorney.... I panic instead.
Is it to Bobby's advantage for me to do this? Is it something good for me to do for me? How is he best protected? Can I be hurt by doing this more than he would be protected? Is there so much continual paperwork to be submitted yearly that I would get buried? (I was told today by someone who has been a guardian that the courts require a lot of documentation on a yearly basis).
Oh, how I wish I could lock us up in some protective cocoon and just live out our lives in peace. Just dealing with regular daily stuff is hard enough, why do I keep getting monkey wrenches thrown in?...... Okay, so today I dealt pretty good with the monkey wrench (bank account error). I really don't have to do anything else......today.
Just Breathe Sandy.....
3 months ago

Amber not punky
i didnt read any of the books
so they just left us there???
why not Shoot more ep of season 3?? if they cant or dont have the money they should have ended the season with ep 9
Yeah, I kind of think the same... It's so annoying that they have to conform to this format, even when it does not work at all.
Personally, I did like the last episode. I am tired of the conventional "cliffhangers" at the end of each season... I thought this last, longer episode was almost the only one that succeeded at finding a good pace, with a number of really intense scenes. Then, it's true that they had to give us a sense of "closure" for every character, in spite of being at a point where there isn't really any, since they're in the middle of the book.
I thought they did well enough at showing us that each character had come to the end of a journey, and was moving on towards something new.
What I did not like is that this decision to cut the book into two parts is quite lame. Their fear was that they had to cover too much material for a 10-episode season. But the result is that they do not have enough to last for 10 episodes with only one half of that material.
So my impression was that we got 8 rather badly crafter transition episodes trying to drag the story on and on (mostly by adding scenes which were rather out of character, like the now infamous "If I had loved Jon Snow" scene...), and then 2 real episodes, with no real ending. I don't think that was a better option.
I assume a 15-episode season would have been impossible for various reasons I don't know about. I assume they were also happy to spread it over two years, because of the "catching up with the book series" danger. But it's a shame how outside factors always end up fucking up things most of the time.
Or maybe I'm just really mad at the moment because Showtime has announced that we would never get a proper ending to the Borgias (not even the poor substitute of a 2-hour film as had been suggested... nothing at all).
At least I hope HBO won't do the same with Game of Thrones and turn it into another Rome.

Daniel Craig is one of those actors whose own name can sometimes feel bigger than his roles. As the man who embodied James Bond and played Detective Benoit Blanc in The Glass Onion: A Knives Out Mystery, he is instantly recognizable as himself more than anything. Which could explain why Craig has been so careful to keep his life with his wife and children private. Especially since he is married to a powerhouse performer in her own right. Here’s what else you need to know about the actor’s loving family.
Daniel Craig first met his wife, Rachel Weisz, in the ‘90s.
Craig, 54, was an up and coming actor when he first met Rachel Weisz in the ‘90s. The two were cast in Les Grandes Horizontales at the National Theatre Studio in London, but Craig was married to his former wife Fiona Loudon at the time. Nearly 20 years later, the two were cast as a married couple in the movie Dream House in 2010, and this time around they were both unattached. As Dream House producer Ehren Kruger told MTV News at the time, “There is method acting and I guess there is matrimonial method acting. They were playing the roles as professional, and it went from there.”
In 2011, Craig and Weisz married in a private ceremony where there were reportedly just four people in attendance, according to British GQ. Two friends, and perhaps most importantly, their children. “We got away with it,” Craig told the magazine. “We did it privately. And I've got a lot of people to thank for that.”
Craig’s oldest daughter Ella is a model.
Craig welcomed his oldest child, daughter Ella, with now-ex-wife Fiona Loudon in 1992. The pair divorced two years later in 1994, but continued to co-parent Ella. Today, Ella Loudon is a model and actress in her own right who has joined her father on the red carpet more than once, most recently for the British premieres of Glass Onion and No Time To Die.
He is stepdad to Weisz’s son Henry.
When Weisz and Craig married in 2011, he became a stepdad to her then-5-year-old son Henry, who she co-parents with her ex, Darren Aronofky. Being Henry’s mother has been a transformative experience for Weisz, one she wasn’t sure she would repeat. “When I had my son, I thought I'd have maybe two or three more,” she told The Daily Mirror at the time. “But the preciousness of a new life and family means so much more now I'm more mature and older. My son was a miracle and it was an incredible experience.”
Craig and Weisz welcomed their first baby together in 2018.
In 2018, Weisz confirmed that she and Craig were expecting a baby together. “I'll be showing soon,” the actress said at the time, adding, “Daniel and I are so happy.” They welcomed a baby girl, and the intensely private couple have yet to share their baby girl’s name. But one thing we do know; Weisz thinks their daughter looks just like her father. “She does look very like him,” she told Stephen Colbert at the time. “She really does.”
Ella might have accidentally revealed her sister’s name.
Back in 2020, Ella took to her Instagram Story to share a lovely gingerbread house made for her family. And accidentally revealed her baby sister’s name. As The Sun reported, the gingerbread house featured the names Daniel, Rachel, Henry, and Ella along with an extra name, Grace. Could this be little Grace Weisz-Craig? Her parents are not saying.
He’s not leaving his kids any money.
As much as Craig loves his children, he has no plans to leave them an inheritance. Or at least he didn’t back in 2021, when he said he found it “distasteful” to pass money along to his kids. “I don’t want to leave great sums to the next generation. I think inheritance is quite distasteful,” Craig told Candis Magazine at the time. “My philosophy is get rid of it or give it away before you go.”
Daniel Craig is a man who carries his baby.
Piers Morgan made news in 2018 when he mocked Craig for being seen in a paparazzi photo wearing his daughter in a baby carrier on his chest, and the actor did not dignify his complaint with a response. Because he’s not just intensely private about his family, he also takes care of them. As a real dad is meant to do.

Lucknow: The report of Special Investigation Team (SIT) constituted by Yogi Government to probe the Lakhimpur case, has added to the problems of union home minister for state, Ajay Mishra Teni. As per the report, the prime accused in the case and son of union minister, Ashish Mishra has been found guilty of murder, attempt to murder and hatching conspiracy against farmers in Lakhimpur. After the SIT report section 279, 338 and 304 A imposed on Ashish Mishra and 14 other accused have been converted into murder, attempt to murder and other serious charges.
Earlier the union home minister of state, Teni had stated that his son was not present at the spot of the crime and if proved he would resign from the cabinet. Now with SIT reported submitted in the court the minister is finding himself in deep crisis. While the minister was giving clean chit to his son, the SIT report has indicated him of killing farmers by crushing over. The opposition parties have been pointing fingers at the union as well as the state government and demanding ouster of the minister.
It may be mentioned that eight people including four farmers were killed in Lakhimpur early October this year while they were taking out a protest march against farm laws. Two vehicles owned by Ashish Mishra, son of the union home minister for state Ajay Mishra and his aide Ankit Das had crushed four farmers and a journalist to death in the incident. Later on, the irate mob had beaten three people to death.
Soon after the incident, the union home minister Teni had claimed to have evidences to prove that neither he nor his son were present at the spot where farmers were crushed to death. He even went to extent of saying to have resigned if his son’s presence is being found on the spot. The minister had then challenged to deploy highest agency for the investigation of the case and he was ready to face any probe. The minister had stated that videos that went viral after the incident show the driver of car was dragged out and beaten to death. Had his son being there the irate mob of farmers would have killed him in the similar manner. He had stated that it was difficult to crush people amidst such a huge crowd.
After the SIT report went public, the general secretary and in charge of UP congress Priyanka Gandhi said that role of union home minister needs to be probed. She attacked on Prime Minister Modi for not removing minister Teni till date and termed it anti farmer mindset.

I have a friend who lives in Carthage, MO. I emailed her today to make sure all was well, she said she is only 20 min. from there and if the tornado would have stayed on the ground any longer her house would have probably been gone too. She said a man where she works died, along with his wife. More storms are coming too, and this makes me worry about my friend.
After seeing the storms in NC, AL, and MO I've come to a question. Would it really matter if you were warned about the tornado? Would it really matter if you made it to the center of your house and got in a closet or bathtub or wherever you are supposed to go? Some people in that area of the country have storm cellars that are below ground, thats a great thing. But here in the south, we don't have that. So if your house is flying through the air like a toy, would it matter if your in the bathtub?
What is your tornado plan? We can only prepare for so much, then the rest is in Gods hands. If its our time, its our time. I think that would be a pretty scary way to go though.
My thoughts and prayers go out to everyone in Joplin.
The Present of Parenting
1 week ago

Well since I got my back headlights in and have the old set to play around with i've started playing around with making eyelids for the car, here's some pictures of the first one I did, I have some issues with this one which i'm going to fix on the next one and I so I didn't spend to much time finishing it before painting it since I know i'm not going to use it, I just painted it to get some shots of it.
Looks good. What is it made out of? Fiberglass, urethane or ?
it's made out of fiberglass since it's fairly easy to work with.

Join free now!
It is free to search locals your area
I really did not want to go back to Dark Angel. I knew that she was only doing her job, however with the clarity of post-orgasmic remorse I realised that it had actually been chilly and mechanical. I would need to attempt someone else. It really did not strike me at this stage that an escort is a companion, and any type of experience would essentially be a transaction, and also consequently could be expected to be cold as well as mechanical, service like. I was an idiotic optimist.
The horniness expanded more powerful and more powerful, and also ultimately, almost an entire month after I had popped my cherry with a lady for hire, I decided to dip my toe back into one of the oldest organisations on Earth. I saw a various site this time. I looked as well as looked, and I neglect what drew me to this details profile. I do keep in mind that I was quickly to find out a lesson that I haven't forgotten since.She told me her rates and where to find her. She was a bit further away than I had actually initially planned, yet I was a walking boner at this phase as well as wished to locate a warm and damp home for my hurting penis.
I swiftly got ready as well as hit the road. While heading I worked with what I would certainly state as well as what I would certainly do. I had made a decision that while Dark Angel was great sufficient, I felt somewhat embarrassed that she had actually been my very first. Maybe this mature lady would certainly take pity on me if I declared to still be a virgin, possibly she would reveal me the ropes and also make me an actual male. So, when I lastly reached her door, I knew what I would certainly claim. However, I was somewhat tossed once again when I got there. The lady who greeted me was clearly older than I had actually anticipated as well as showed a lot of mileage on her face. Look, she had not been genuinely awful, however the shock of the discrepancy in between expectation and truth was enough to derail my severe horniness for a moment.
Well, I was here. I had actually driven reasonably far to get there, and I didn't actually wish to go to the effort of leaving and also finding someone else. I was going to get laid, and also this was right before me. What's the most awful that could happen? She revealed me in and took me to the room, where the bed was made, as well as a bag of rewards got on the side table. I might see wet wipes, condoms, lube, and also a few other things that aid in grown-up playtime. She started making conversation: what's my name? what do I do? and more. I assume she sensed my uneasiness, because I was rather intimidated by her.
So, she helped me undress, as well as I was nude in front of my second companion in a month. She told me to relax on my tummy on the bed as she obtained undressed. I kept an eye on her, as well as her body was fortunately as hot as the pictures on her account had suggested. Considering her age, it was exceptional just how smoking cigarettes she was, although both time and past horniness may be aiding me decorate the memory a bit. I have to firmly insist, however, that you believe one point: she absolutely had a butter face. It was distracting, yet so was her body as well as I determined to concentrate on that rather.
She began rubbing me with child oil, and the touch helped to relax some of my recurring nerves. It additionally helped my penis grow tougher under my stomach as she began to rub her tits on my back. Initially, she lightly combed my shoulder blades with her nipples, leaving me puzzled for a moment as I attempted to determine what was happening. She then scrubed her body backwards and forwards my back, dragging her tits around my back and also ass. It had actually the preferred result and also I was quickly lying on a red-hot steel pole that had just recently been my penis.
And after that a brand-new sensation that took a minute for me to find out: she was rubbing her pussy up and down my back and buttocks. It was very warm and also had a hint of perspiring. These feelings made me almost shed a tons right then and also there, but somehow, I held on.
She soon flipped me over as well as my penis sprang to attention. She was kneeling in between my legs, and she was gazing up at me past my penis. Butterface or otherwise, this was greater than my just recently de-virginised brain might deal with. She started gently fondling my rounds with one hand and also took my shaft in the various other.
happy ending massage East Newdegate 6355 WA, sensual massage East Newdegate 6355 WA, erotic massage East Newdegate 6355 WA, sex massage East Newdegate 6355 WA, nude massage East Newdegate 6355 WA, thai massage East Newdegate 6355 WA, massager East Newdegate 6355 WA, full body massage East Newdegate 6355 WA, exotic massage East Newdegate 6355 WA, tantra massage East Newdegate 6355 WA, body to body massage East Newdegate 6355 WA, asian massage East Newdegate 6355 WA, adult massage East Newdegate 6355 WA, personal massage East Newdegate 6355 WA, nuru massage East Newdegate 6355 WA. 4 hands massage East Newdegate 6355 WA, 20 dollar massage East Newdegate 6355 WA, 30 minute massage East Newdegate 6355 WA, adult massage near East Newdegate 6355 WA, rub and tug massage East Newdegate 6355 WA
| ||2130|| ||71736|| ||49111|| ||63181|| ||57457|| ||56952|| ||32916|| ||24091|| ||26356|| ||40614|

Matthew Wade Osborne, a second generation wrestler, who always ended up being his own worst enemy right as he was on the verge of major success, passed away on 6/28, at his girlfriend’s home in Plano, TX.
Osborne was better known during much of his 35 year career as Maniac Matt Borne. He was actually best known, even though it was only for a brief period of time, as the original Doink the Clown, in the WWF. He was 55. His girlfriend found him unresponsive that morning. No cause of death has been released, pending the results of toxicology reports, but the belief was it was an accidental drug death of some sort.
Osborne had a long history with drugs, which caused him to lose the gig he gave the original life to, as the evil clown, in late 1993. Osborne bounced in and out of wrestling, while fighting bigger battles outside the ring, for the past two decades. Friends estimated he was still working two to three weekends a month, often as himself, as well as, if the promoters wanted, with his clown suit. Traditional Championship Wrestling, based in Arkansas, was looking at featuring him as one of their key stars later this year for yet another comeback.
He spent less than a year as Doink on television, a run as mostly a mid-carder, during a period when pro wrestling’s popularity in the U.S. had never been lower since the invention of television. Yet, his death garnered national attention. On the day of his death, Doink the Clown was the ninth most searched for term on the Internet in the United States and his death was covered in many of the leading newspapers in the country, garnering far more publicity than many of the biggest names in history had gotten when they passed away. Doink the Clown was called one of the most memorable characters in the history of pro wrestling. Wrestling clowns, both happy and sad, were hardly a new gimmick in wrestling, popularized first in Mexico with Super Muneco, a huge drawing card in the early 80s to kids. But Doink was the first in a U.S. national promotion.
Osborne was the son of Anthony W. Osborne, better known as“Tough” Tony Borne, one of the all-time legends of Portland Wrestling. His father was a former amateur wrestler who was one of the most successful small heels in modern wrestling history. The elder Borne, who headlined everywhere he went, was actually a significantly bigger pro wrestling star than his son, including being one of the best small heels in history, and having a then-record breaking feud in Mexico with the original Blue Demon.
Matt, born July 27, 1957, grew up in Milwaukie, OR, just outside of Portland. He grew up around wrestling. When he was in grade school, Ronald Mayne, his father’s tag team partner and later biggest rival, was like an older brother to him. Ronald Mayne was known at the time as Lonnie Mayne, The One Man Gang. Mayne was portrayed as a simple-minded powerhouse who Tony Borne groomed into a killing machine, but verbally and physically abused him. Finally, when Mayne had enough of the abuse, in 1968, they had perhaps the hottest feud in Oregon wrestling history, including setting the promotion’s all-time record crowd in selling out the 12,000-seat Portland Memorial Coliseum.
Mayne, in many people’s eyes, was the biggest star in the history of Portland Wrestling, later known as Lonnie “Moondog” Mayne. Ironically, that played a part in the story of Doink the Clown.
Matt Osborne started wrestling as a kid. When he was in high school, he would learn tricks from the shooters in town, guys like Johnny Eagles from England or Ricky Hunter, who legend had it once tied up the Iron Sheik in a period of testing each other. But by the time he was attending Milwaukie High School, as a star athlete, he had no interest in becoming a pro wrestler.
His father had made the successful transition into commercial real estate. In fact, in the 1960s, it was A.W. Osborne’s real estate company that brokered the deal to sell a bowling alley to wrestling promoter Don Owen, who refurbished it, and renamed it the Portland Sports Arena, which held about 3,000 fans and often sold out. The first seven or so rows were fans who came every week–or twice a week, and had permanent reservations. The only way to get a ticket close was to have someone with a ticket die, and pass you their permanent reservation in their will.
Rather than pay rent every week at the local Armory, Owen owned the building, and the concessions. Because of that, they had a different way of running things. The main events were always two out of three falls, but unlike in the rest of the world, the time period between falls was several minutes and the wrestlers would go back to the dressing room between falls. The idea was, they made more money at the food stands that way. Owen taped television every Saturday night from the building. At times the show aired live, and later, it aired after the local news at 11:30 p.m. on Saturday nights on KPTV, and for most of its run, did tremendous ratings. The wrestlers were portrayed as hard-working guys, not so much as larger-than-life superstars as they were in some of the other territories. But the mix worked. It was a successful territory, and paid better than most. Don Owen, who family had promoted wrestling dating back to the 1920s, while cranky and often pessimistic, was considered an honest, quirky but generally well respected as a promoter. Besides running every Saturday night, depending on how hot business was, anywhere from once to three times a month, would run “Tuesday specials.”
According to Matt Farmer, a close friend, Osborne, who placed in the Oregon high school state championships at 177 pounds in 1975, lost interest in pro wrestling as he grew up, because he had developed the amateur wrestler mentality, just feeling that it was fake.
Osborne got publicity locally as a high school kid because of his high school success and because everyone in the area knew his father.
“Matt’s death really shocked me,” said Farmer. “The last time I saw him, he looked like he was in better shape than in a few years. It caught me off guard.”
Borne had become a drifter for the last two decades. He lived out of his car at times. He lived with family members, friends, or on his own, in New Jersey, Oregon, Texas and near Pittsburgh, in Ellwood City. He’d go from place to place. He was a heavy drug user for a long time. He had a number of children and was married several times, and was estranged from several of them, which broke his heart. For a long time, he wasn’t on good terms with his father, but made up with him before his father passed away on August 27, 2010, at the age of 84.
Matt Borne worked a number of different jobs over the past two decades. He wrestled. At one point he was living in a trailer doing drugs like they were going out of style. In 1995, he was arrested for institutional vandalism, harassment, criminal mischief, public intoxication, trespassing and disorderly conduct. He was arrested again in 1998 on warrants from those charges. In 1999, his parole was revoked from the prior charges when he tested positive for cocaine in a New Jersey state drug test. He spent time in jail for that.
At the age of 51, he went to WWE sponsored rehab at the White Deer Run in Allenwood, PA. In interviews, he spoke about how if he had gone to rehab earlier, it wouldn’t have worked because mentally he wasn’t at the point in his life where he was ready.
“I tried to do it myself,” he said in an interview with Slam! Wrestling. “I tried to keep my problems a secret, which is kind of impossible to do when you’ve got drug problems. But I tried to seek help just myself, tried to do it myself, but I just couldn’t do it. Finally, I just decided I wanted help. I was tired of repeating the same mistakes.”
“He seemed in good shape,” said Farmer. “I hung around him enough to see his habits. He wasn’t crazy at that point. He smoked some marijuana. You know the difference between somebody who smokes and somebody who abuses drugs. I didn’t see it. It definitely shocked me. In my conversations with Matt, all the hardcore past days were behind him.”
While in college, he became close friends with Jesse Ventura, who was one of the top stars of Portland Wrestling at the time, and his wife Terri. Ventura talked him into doing pro wrestling, since being the son of one of the area’s all-time legends would make him a natural babyface star, plus he had legitimate skills, was a tough guy and a good athlete.
Osborne was attending Portland State University, and helping his father manage an apartment building that he owned. Ventura, then early in his career, came into Oregon without any kind of a name in wrestling. He immediately got over as a top star, and he and his wife lived in the complex.
“I’d go over there every night and sit and watch Saturday Night Live with him, have a beer, and party a little bit with him,” Osborne said in an interview years later with Slam! Wrestling. “Him and Terri and I, it became a regular thing. When Jesse would get home from wherever he was working, he’d call me and say, `Matt, what are you doing?’ So I’d go over there and we’d hang out. I didn’t know what the heck I wanted to do. I was going to Portland State and I was in my third year of college. Heck, I decided that I wanted to start wrestling. My dad, he didn’t try to discourage me, but just didn’t want to push me, he wanted to make sure that it was really in my heart. So, he waited and waited and I kept hounding him.”
His father didn’t encourage or discourage him, but told him once he started, to give pro wrestling two years before making a decision on it one way or another.
Osborne was a natural in the ring, in the sense you could tell from the very start, he was going to be a good worker. He said that he only had trained in the ring two or three times before Don Owen gave him a much-publicized debut, as Matt teamed with his father against Kurt Von Steiger & Race Bannon on December 6, 1978, at the Portland Sports Arena. He worked mostly in prelims for the first year, as something of a protected rookie because of the family name. He gradually moved up the cards, until leaving, which was how things were done in those days, to gain more experience, to where he could return as a bigger star.
His first outside territory was Jim Crockett’s Mid Atlantic territory, where he formed a mid-level babyface team with Buzz Sawyer. While the two teamed around the world, the next year in Oregon, and years later, by this time with both as heels, in Texas, at this point they were the young, athletic “white-meat” babyfaces.
Sawyer, who got his nickname because he would run through wrestlers in training like a buzz saw, was born Bruce Woyan. He was from St. Petersburg, FL, and at the age of 20, was just starting his career. He was a state champion and had placed third in the high school nationals at 191.5 pounds in 1976, losing in the semifinals to Dan Severn of Michigan.
They were tough and aggressive, qualities both later took into the ring as they garnered more experience, as well as out of the ring. Even though both had good physiques, Sawyer was heavy into steroids, and numerous other drugs, very quickly. They didn’t have the kind of size of the bigger wrestlers nor the ability to intimidate just on their presence. So they made reputations as tough guys by getting into a lot of fights with guys a lot bigger than they were, and generally winning.
Borne always praised Sawyer as a phenomenal talent. Sawyer, once he hit the national stage in Georgia a few years later, rose to a singles main event role in Georgia as Mad Dog Buzz Sawyer, and a legendary feud with young babyface Tommy Rich. But drugs destroyed his career. He also destroyed his body with a reckless style, and by the time he was in his late 20s, he was 260 pounds on a 5-foot-9 frame. He eventually passed away at the age of 32 due to a cocaine overdose.
The two never got along personally, including going at it in a fight on the side of the road in the Carolinas when they got fed up with each other. Borne would later tell friends after that encounter, that Sawyer was just in a different league than he was, both as a fighter, and as a performer in pro wrestling.
By June 2, 1980, the two had beaten Jimmy Snuka & The Iron Sheik in the finals of a tournament to fill the vacant Mid Atlantic tag team titles in Greenville, SC. They lost the titles to The Sheepherders a few months later, and both went their separate ways. Sawyer quickly became a national star on Georgia wrestling, and almost as quickly, fell from main event level.
Borne returned to Portland for his natural role, as the local kid who, after having success in one of the most high-profile territories in the country, could now be pushed as a star babyface.
But his career in Oregon took off more by circumstances than design. At the time, the area’s top heel was Paul Perschmann, better known as Playboy Buddy Rose. Rose arrived in the area in 1976, and quickly became the area’s biggest star. After Roddy Piper turned babyface, his feud with Rose ranked with Dutch Savage vs. Bull Ramos and Lonnie Mayne vs. Tony Borne as the biggest in the history of Portland Wrestling.
Rose came on television one day and shocked everyone in the Pacific Northwest. He did a promo, saying that the Playboy’s days as a Playboy were over, and he was getting married. Rose had been married before, and in fact was married the first year or so when he was doing the playboy gimmick to a woman from Minneapolis, who he didn’t bring to Oregon. But none of that was known locally. Everyone in Portland knew who Buddy Rose was, and he played up the playboy image around town. So that was shocking enough. The big shocker was announcing he was marrying Toni Rae Borne, Matt’s sister.
Tony Borne was a heel most of his career, but he had turned babyface a decade earlier. While he had stopped wrestling regularly years earlier, he would appear on television from time-to-time. This was the most hated guy in town marrying the pretty daughter of the area legend. Everyone was shocked. It became an awkward situation, because wrestling was based on reality. In those days, fans would have never accepted the idea that two brothers-in-law could fight each other. It was tougher in a small territory that didn’t employ many wrestlers, so everyone had to work with everyone, let alone for the rising athletic babyface not to be able to work with the top heel.
Rose had to be a heel. It was considered too early in Borne’s career to not be a babyface. But for legitimacy, the two had to steer clear of each other. Tony and Matt had to address the subject on television. Matt’s only comment on TV was that out of respect for his sister, he wouldn’t ever wrestle Rose, but said that if Rose ever did anything to his sister, he’d kill him.
The marriage was short-lived, so much so that some people were skeptical that it wasn’t a contrived angle to build a feud. But the reality is, it was a wrestling feud that built out of reality, and not the other way around.
A short time later, Rose and Toni Rae got into an argument at their house. Rose started slapping her around, but she was able to get to the phone and, depending on the version of the story, either called her father, or her brother. Both lived a short distance away, and if she did call her father, he immediately called Matt.
Matt rushed to the house, kicked down the front door and started attacking Rose. Rose knew he was not a physical match for Borne, and ran out of the house to get away. Borne ran after him, and tackled him on the front lawn. Borne was on top of him, throwing punch after punch. Police were called, and got there immediately, with Borne still beating on Rose. Given the popularity of wrestling in the community, the officers knew the two on sight, and hearing what happened, didn’t charge Borne with anything. They took Rose in and he had to spend a night in jail.
The incident made the papers. The next day, promoter Don Owen brought the two of them together in a room. Rose didn’t want to be anywhere near Borne, a feeling that he maintained until he passed away four years ago. Owen told them that every fan and non-fan knew about the fight, and knew why they fought, and they now had to feud with each other on top, even though neither wanted to have anything to do with the other. So they worked together in every kind of match imaginable in what was a landmark feud that elevated Borne to the main events, and his lone Pacific Northwest title win, even if it only lasted for one day.
Once in a chain match, Borne potatoed him and busted him open and everyone questioned whether or not it was on purpose, but he always maintained it was an accident. A few years later, when Borne had turned heel and Rose was a babyface, they feuded a second time, which was even more successful than the first, because everyone in town knew they hated each other.
Farmer, close friends with both, said the heat between the two never dissipated, and until the death of Rose, always had to be careful what he said when talking to either if the subject of the other would come up. But Rose tried to always made sure he was never in the same place as Rose. Borne believed, because Rose had Don Owen’s ear, that Rose was partially responsible for Borne never being put in the position as the promotion’s star, even though he was local, and a very good worker. In reality, it was Owen, because of Borne’s reputation, who would use Borne high on the cards, but never build the territory around him because of Borne’s reputation.
Probably the biggest match of the career of Matt Borne, at least before Doink the Clown, was on October 27, 1982, at the Irish McNeil Boys Club, where Mid South Wrestling taped television every other week.
The angle ended up being one of the most famous in the history of wrestling in that part of the country. The area’s top feud and four biggest stars at the time were Mid South tag team champions Junkyard Dog & Mr. Olympia (Jerry Stubbs), battling Ted DiBiase, the former best man at JYD’s wedding who turned on him in his quest to win the North American title, and Jim Duggan, a former college football star who was portrayed as DiBiase’s big enforcer. The two teams built up to a loser leaves town title match.
The Louisiana State Fair was taking place in Shreveport on the same grounds as the boys club that week. When the show started, they showed a guy in a Gorilla costume from the fair waving and playing with the kids in the crowd and handing out balloons. Bill Watts, the announcer, talked about how there had been some sort of a problem and Duggan wasn’t there. Watts surmised with Duggan’s reputation, that he had probably gotten into a fight at a bar the night before and was incarcerated, but they didn’t know since they hadn’t heard from him.
Borne, new in the territory, but talked about as the son of Tough Tony Borne, a contemporary of Ted’s father, Mike DiBiase, was brought in as a replacement. It seemed immediately like a screw job, and it was, given that just about every fan figured that some guy who was probably just passing through was going to lose the fall in a match that had promised high stakes with one of the four mainstays leaving.
As it turned out, Duggan was the guy in the gorilla costume. Before the show started, Duggan, in the suit, was outside the arena making gorilla noises while a fair worker told the wrestling fans that after the show, they should head to the fair. The gorilla stood up and cheered the babyfaces throughout the show, leading them in chants.
JYD was outside the ring, in front of the cheering gorilla, and when he turned around, the gorilla nailed him from behind and unmasked. Borne pinned the stunned JYD to both win the tag titles. JYD, easily the area’s biggest star for four straight years, had to leave town for three months.
The threesome, who called themselves the Rat Pack, did an interview after, with DiBiase doing most of the talking, explaining how they had set the plan up. Fans were so stunned that they were silent, still in shock that Dog lost. Dog came back immediately, under a mask using the name Stagger Lee. DiBiase & Borne went four-and-a-half months as tag team champions, and were one of the best teams in the country at the time.
It would have likely been longer, but a couple of things happened.
“Borne was more trouble than he was worth, and we ended up having a problem that would apparently boil inside him for decades,” wrote Duggan in his autobiography, “Hacksaw: The Jim Duggan story.’ “It started in late 1982, as we were heading into Baton Rouge, spending the night there before a show the following evening. Borne had a girlfriend, and while we were all in a bar, they got into an argument, and the next thing I know, he’s slapping around this girl.”
Duggan said he pulled the girl away from Borne, and took her out of the bar and put her in his car to take her home. Borne followed Duggan out of the bar, was furious, and started spitting on his car. Duggan ignored it and drove her home.
The next day, at the show, Borne started yelling at the much-larger Duggan. He tried to leg dive Duggan, likely not realizing Duggan actually was a better amateur than he was, as a New York state heavyweight champion. Duggan said he threw Borne down and was putting the boots to him when Ernie Ladd, the booker at the time, jumped in.
“Ernie (who was 6-foot-9 and 325 pounds and years earlier was the most feared man in pro football) was a good man, but he was not someone you wanted to test physically, so when he wanted to break up a fight, it was getting broken up,” said Duggan.
Duggan went back to the dressing room, when Borne slammed open the door and told him it wasn’t over. They started fighting again, far away from Ladd. The only person there was DiBiase, who decided against breaking it up.
“I worked Borne over pretty good and thought that was it,” Duggan said.
Over the next 27 years, there had never been a problem between the two. They were together in WWF in 1993. In 2010, they were booked against each other on an independent show, in White Plains, before about 100 people.
While Duggan was on all fours, he said that Borne threw a live kick at him. Duggan said he recognized it at the last second, and got his hand up to partially block it, but the kick knocked Duggan’s hand into his nose, bloodying him up. Duggan said that if he didn’t get the hand up at the last second, the kick would have knocked his teeth out. Borne followed with hard punches, leaving Duggan with a hematoma on the back of his head.
“But I got back onto my feet and I was ready to go,” he said. “I mean, I was 56 years old–way past the age when I’d be looking to fight anybody, but I knew I could beat Matt Borne’s ass.”
Borne got a chair and Duggan got a 2x4, and they were yelling at each other to make a move, which neither did. Duggan told Borne if he wanted to fight, to go to the dressing room because they weren’t going to do it on camera (the match was being filmed) or in front of fans.
“I went down to the dressing room area, but when I laid down my 2x4, I put it within reach, because I knew Matt often carried a box-cutter, and I knew no matter what, he was going to have some kind of a weapon. Matt Borne was not gong to try me on, empty handed.”
Borne never came. Borne had taken all his gear and his gimmicks and put it in his car before the match started. After the match, Borne left through the fire exit, got in his car, and left. Duggan surmised Borne was planning on sucker kicking him, getting the job done with Duggan not knowing the kick was coming, and escaping with the damage done.
The second incident involved another bar fight. Watts used to get a kick out of his talent, as he had always employed a lot of big, tough guys with high-level football or wrestling backgrounds, getting into bar fights. His feeling is if wrestlers showed they were real in his town in fights, the stories would get around town, and people would think the wrestlers were real, and it would help business in those cities. Of course, the flip side of that was if any wrestler lost a bar fight, they were fired on the spot.
Borne got into a fight, and the result was somebody sued both Borne and Mid South Sports. Watts wasn’t so thrilled about one of his wrestlers beating somebody up when a lawsuit came. Borne figured it was time to go, gave notice, he and DiBiase dropped the tag titles to Mr. Wrestling II & Tiger Conway Jr., in Houston. They did an angle on television, where Duggan then beat up Borne, and in an interview Duggan said he was removing the weak link from the Rat Pack.
Borne wound up working in Georgia. Ole Anderson had no tag team champions, after Afa & Sika had left the promotion without losing the belts. They were going to do a tournament in the summer of 1983, where Borne & Arn Anderson would win and become National tag team champions. The two complemented each other well and had a chance to become an outstanding team.
However, Borne got arrested for a sexual assault on a daughter of a women he was supposed to be with in a hotel room while on he road, and had to leave the territory. The incident garnered press and he had to leave the territory.
The incident became even bigger historically, because Ole Anderson, looking for a new top heel tag team, flew to Minneapolis to meet with Eddie Sharkey and look at some of the huge weightlifters he was training. Sharkey showed him several guys, who he liked. He picked Joe Laurinaitis and Michael Hegstrand, who both had tried wrestling a year earlier in territories, hated making no money, came home and swore off the business. Anderson promised they would make money but they had to get to Atlanta on Saturday to start. And that was the birth of the Road Warriors.
Borne returned to Oregon, but Owen, after what happened, would not push him. After six months of prelims, Owen finally let him back to headlining. At some point around this time, Borne beat up Rip Oliver, who had replaced Rose as the star of the promotion, in the dressing room.
When WWF expanded, Borne worked some with WWF, mostly as an experienced enhancement talent. He worked with Ricky Steamboat on the first WrestleMania show on March 31, 1985, in what, from a technical standpoint, was probably as good as match as there was on that show.
Borne always remarked that at the time, to the guys, while they realized WrestleMania was a big show, the biggest show he’d been on, the fact was he’d been on big shows before and at the time felt was really just another day at work. He didn’t stay there long. He worked over the next few years all over the world. He was in Oregon a lot. He was in Texas a good deal of time. He wrestled several tours for New Japan. He was still physically tough. I can recall Dick Murdoch telling stories of the UWF guys, who were in their shooting mentality mode in New Japan after their promotion folded, like Akira Maeda and Nobuhiko Takada, and how Borne was so physically strong and such a good wrestler that he was getting the better of them in the semi-shoot conditions, joking how they would go back to Karl Gotch (their teacher) and say, `Karl Gotch, we’re getting our ass kicked.’
Borne wasn’t the world’s toughest man, but he had a reputation in wrestling for wrestling a very believable and tough style, very much suited for New Japan in that era. If you weren’t willing or able to fight back believably, he wouldn’t make a match easy.
He was also a headlining star, the world mid-heavyweight champion in South Africa for promoter Sam Coen, where he wrestled a lot against the likes of Danny Vogues and Gama Singh for the title.
While wrestling in Texas, he helped Dustin Runnels start his career. Later he worked for George Scott in the Carolinas when Scott tried to get a new territory going, and was a traveling partner of Ken Shamrock, as the two were dating women who were friends.
Mick Foley wrote that Borne was a major influence on his career. Foley was wrestling in Texas when Borne had returned to town. Foley remembered that his tag team partner, Gary Young, gave him advice on working with Borne.
“What I do remember is Gary telling me that matches with Matt weren’t likely to be easy. `He has an unusual style of selling,’ Young told me. `He makes you work for everything you get.’ Veteran World Class referee Bronko Lubich stopped by to give me some friendly and very sound advice.
`When you get on Matt, stay on Matt. Otherwise, he’ll eat you up. He’ll sell for you, but only if he thinks you’ve earned it.’ The Bronc was only looking out for my best interests.”
He compared working with Borne with riding a bucking bronco.
“True, to Gary Young’s words, he made me work for everything I got. I heeded Lubich’s warning and stayed on him, probably with more intensity than I’d ever stayed on anyone before. He’d sell momentarily, and then come firing back, forcing a young wrestler like me, for whom in-ring aggression was never a strength, to dig deeper, work harder and become meaner than I’d ever needed to be. But when Matt Borne finally did sell for me, I absolutely, positively, knew I’d earned it. More importantly, I had a seed planted that day–a seed that would grow into the vision I had for myself of what I wanted to be when I one day would have that inevitable babyface turn.”
During the late 80s in Oregon, Owen’s business started going down. It was an inevitability, as fans could see WWF and WCW on television with bigger stars. Plus, Oregon got an athletic commissioner, Bruce Anderson, who, after learning about scabies going around the wrestlers in the promotion due to working on mats that weren’t cleaned, and then learned all about the business, started regulating it closely. In particular, Anderson banned use of the blade. Oregon wasn’t a blood circus territory. But it was gritty wrestling, not glamor wrestling, and blood was a major component, at least when it came to peaking interest for main event feuds. The feeling was all the restrictions were costing money, as were the safety measures, and the profit margin was dropping. Owen, for decades, talked pessimistically about the future of the business, even when things were going well. The wrestlers took it in stride. The Owen family had run pro wrestling since the 1920s, and the feeling was, no matter how Owen talked, that it would continue with Don’s son long after Don was gone.
But suddenly, the world was changing and they were really struggling. One Saturday night on television, Borne did an interview, telling Bruce Anderson, by name to come next week to the Portland Sports Arena, because there is going to be blood. He did. And there was. And it was Borne’s blood.
Anderson suspended Owen’s promoter’s license throughout the and suspended Borne, although Owen was back in business a little over a week later.
Likely to show his gratitude for helping his son, when Dusty Rhodes got the booking job in WCW in 1991, he hired Borne and created the gimmick Big Josh. He was a lumberjack from the Pacific Northwest who was supposed to be the hick cousin of Tommy Rich. He admitted to never being comfortable in the role. When Bill Watts came in, he wanted to get rid of the gimmicks and go back to a more serious wrestling style. Borne would joke about the meeting of how he wanted everyone in trunks and wrestling boots, and there was Borne with his logging boots on and his lumberjack gear. The guys at the meeting were all staring at his logging boots while Watts made the speech, and snickering.
Watts, brought in by TBS management to cut costs since the company was losing $6 million a year, fired him. But he allowed him to leave early and sign with WWF before his WCW contract expired. Watts also gave him full rights to use the Big Josh name and gimmick anywhere he wanted, although Borne wound up never using it again.
When McMahon came up with the idea to do an evil clown, there were a lot of different people who could have been given the role. Borne was a good ring technician and tough guy, but there were plenty of good ring technicians around. His body type wasn’t unusual among wrestlers. The big unanswered question is why, when you could put any number of people in the costume, why Matt Borne, given his career track record?
Borne was shocked when McMahon approached him with the idea to do the evil clown. Borne wasn’t hot on the idea at first either, since he considered himself a serious wrestler. McMahon wasn’t even all that confident in the character, telling Borne when he was pitching it to him, that it could work, but it could just as easily flop. But it was a pushed role in WWF, something Borne wasn’t going to get under his own name. It took Borne three or four days to agree to try it.
The belief is Borne was picked because McMahon had an idea of what he wanted the character to be–Lonnie Mayne. Mayne had passed away in 1978, but had worked for the WWWF in 1973. In a discussion about a gimmick for Borne, he brought up Mayne when McMahon asked him about growing up in the business.
“I told him about Lonnie, how Lonnie had such a big impact on me when I was a kid,” Borne said. “He was always pulling practical jokes in the locker room, and locking guys’ cowboy boots together and this and that. I was just a little kid sitting there watching that. Heck, I would start doing it. Then they’d come back and find out it was me and they wanted to kill me.”
Borne claimed he used Mayne as the inspiration for the character. The WWF gave him a list of 25 to 30 names for the character. He circled five of them, one of which was Doink. The office then decided Doink was going to be the name.
They first sent him to Memphis. WWF had a relationship with Jerry Jarrett at the time, and wanted him to have the gimmick down. He had appeared on WWF television in late 1992 to be introduced, but didn’t start wrestling in the ring on TV until March, 1993.
He received a strong push, and was a success as the evil clown, pranking kids in the audience and other wrestlers early on, although it was always obvious the long-term role would be as an undercard babyface.
He feuded with Crush (Brian Adams), attacking him with a fake arm to lead to a match at WrestleMania IX that year. The finish saw Steve Keirn, dressed as the second Doink, come from under the ring and attack Crush with a fake arm. Keirn sat under he ring for six hours that day. The WWF wanted this to build to a two Doink tag team, but Borne was against the idea, and complained about it. He was already paranoid, thinking both Keirn and Steve Lombardi were angling to get the gimmick. He also had a house show feud with Marty Jannetty after dousing him with a bucket of water in a TV angle.
He worked second from the top on the March 21, 1993, show in Madison Square Garden, losing via DQ to Randy Savage underneath a Bret Hart & Mr. Perfect vs. Lex Luger & Razor Ramon main vent. He lost a prelim match on the August 13, 1993, MSG show to Sean Waltman as the 1-2-3 Kid.
Aside from the WrestleMania match, probably his biggest match was at SummerSlam that year, on August 30, 1993, when Jerry Lawler claimed to have been injured and unable to wrestle Bret Hart.
It was actually the highlight of the show, headlined by Lex Luger beating WWF champion Yokozuna, via count out. Lawler came out on crutches, claiming an injury, and brought in Doink as his replacement. Doink threw a bucket of confetti at the ringside crowd, doing the old Harlem Globetrotters trick, with fans freaking thinking he was going to douse them with water.
He then took another bucket, which everyone figured was filled with confetti, and went to throw it at Bruce Hart, Bret’s brother, who was at ringside. In a complete rib, because Bruce had been such an outspoken critic of the WWF, the bucket was filled with water and Bruce got doused. Bruce was legitimately furious. The match itself was just normal, with Hart getting Doink in the sharpshooter, when Lawler broke the crutch over Hart’s head for the DQ. This led to WWF President Jack Tunney ordering Lawler to immediately wrestle Hart, or be suspended for life.
A few days later, he turned babyface on Lawler, by throwing a pie in Lawler’s face. A few weeks later, he poured a bucket of water on Bobby Heenan to cement his turn. But his drug issues caused him to miss an overseas tour, just as the babyface Doink was getting over big. Because the character was so strong and was in a full body costume, Vince McMahon borrowed the old Nick Gulas formula with masked heels, used others as Doink, so you could have a Doink on every show.
Shortly after that, he failed a drug test and was fired, and Ray Apollo was given the role. While Borne actually only did the role for about a year, and wrestled with it for eight months, while Apollo did it regularly for another two years, and others did it at times as well, nearly everyone, when thinking of the character, would talk about Borne.
“I had a very bad cocaine problem, and then when Vince fired me at the end of 1993, I really went off the deep end for about a year-and-a-half,” he said in an interview more than a decade ago. “That’s when I tried to run from it. It kept coming back to me.”
“Matt was a great worker, who was believable and could really get it on when it came to actually wrestling,” wrote James Beard, a referee in Texas and friend of his. “He was also a good guy, particularly if he took a liking to you. But, he also could be a terror to be around if he got into the `stuff.’ When I first saw the Doink gimmick, I rolled my eyes and thought, for the thousandth time, `Vince is doing it again.’ But Matt really made that a viable gimmick because of the wrestling skills and the way he came across under the makeup. He’s another one of those guys who kept shooting himself in the foot, business wise.”
Shortly after being fired by WWF, Paul Heyman brought Osborne into ECW in the clown role. Given ECW’s trying to be what WWF wasn’t, and Doink the Clown was the epitome of what a lot of the ECW fan base hated about WWF wrestling, the idea seemed to make no sense on the surface.
Heyman’s idea was that he would lose to Shane Douglas, at the time his top star, and then renounce the gimmick. Instead of being Matt Borne, he would be called “Borne Again,” wearing some clown face paint so people knew who he was, and part of the clown outfit, but drop the clown wig and take on a tough guy beard look and work as a serious wrestler.
After Douglas beat him, Douglas got on the mic, told him to have some pride, told him that he was a great wrestler, and his father was a legend in the business and, “You’re not f***ing Doink the Clown, you’re Matt Borne,” which got a big reaction.
But the character never got off the ground. Borne’s version was that he got a better money offer to work for Otto Wanz in Germany, but expected to return after the tour. But after he left, Heyman had lost interest in the “Borne Again,” character, which didn’t take off as he envisioned it.
On Facebook, three weeks before his death, Osborne noted that Father’s Day was coming, and that he’d be seeing his dad soon. He also openly talked about how sad it was that he was estranged from his own children.
“My children, Anthony, Renja, Teagen and Matthew, are the most important people in my life. Being estranged from them is sometimes more than I can handle. Not looking for sympathy, just cherish your children and their lives.”
“He took his image and his work seriously and he was always a guy you could count on in the ring,” wrote Beard after his death. “As someone who’s greatest enjoyment was working with wrestlers who were utterly believable and skilled, Matt was the perfect example of the perfect wrestler. You could never see through anything he did and when he was in the ring, you knew, whoever he was facing had to be at their best or else they would get eaten up.
“When we heard he was going to WWF and was doing the Doink gimmick, most of us who knew him were shocked and afraid that Vince was literally going to make a clown out of another outstanding wrestler. But, when I saw what Matt did with the gimmick and how he made it real and even a bit scary, I knew Matt had taken that image and put himself into the character, making it a classic that had an incredible impact that lasts to some degree, even today. I only wish he had been able to see the idea through the way it should have been. But, because of Matt and his skill and personality, he was able to turn what could have been a joke and laughing stock into an interesting and meaningful character, at least for a time.”
Topics without replies are pruned every 365 days. Not moderated.
2 posts • Page 1 of 1
- Lifetime IGer
- Posts: 20629
- Joined: Thu Mar 17, 2005 6:54 am
- Location: Upon the eternal throne of the great Republic of Turdistan
Don't remember Doink, but remember watching Bourne wrestle on TV as a kid. RIP.
"Liberalism is arbitrarily selective in its choice of whose dignity to champion." Adrian Vermeule

****UNKNOWN ENEMY ****
Episode 10 Part A
Written by Amah
The next day Betty was at her supermarket keeping close watch on Kate, and trying to eavesdrop on her phone conversation, anytime Kate’s phone rings she will want to see the caller, she needed to clear her doubt, and she wasn’t satisfied yet, Betty wanted to know who Kate’s new man friend is, the guy calls her all the time and sometime even says “I love you” on phone which Kate never replies to, something is fishy and Betty planned to dig up whatever it was. probably Viva was right.
That very day as Kate dropped her phone to go the toilet, Betty used that opportunity to check her friend’s phone, her heart almost dropped as she saw that Kate saved her lovers name with “uncle TT” Betty’s eyes widened as she began to go through her messages, she saw all the love messages that the “uncle TT” has being sending for her which she hardly replied, he even took Kate and her daughter out over the weekend, and has being getting things for Kate and her daughter, because most of the replied message from Kate was mostly, “thank you for the dress and shoe, they fit perfectly” thank you for this or thank you for that, which means her uncle TT has being showering her with gifts, and lovely messages.
Betty thought immediately that the “uncle TT’ which Kate has being hiding and never spoke off to anyone, most be her Tony. She was still going through the messages when Kate came out and met her with her phone, she was surprised looking at Betty and anger written all over her as she flipped through her phone,
“Betty, you are going through my phone…and why that strange look…what happened, because I just left you few minutes and told you I wanted to make use of the toilet, you were cheerful and now you are looking like you saw a ghost…
“so that is it…Kate so this is really who you are…Viva saw through you but I never listened, so Viva has being right all this while, you scum bag, so this is why you stayed away and has being doing hide and seek with your calls so that I won’t find out, you hide and make calls and whenever you are talking to whoever, you talk in a low voice so that I won’t find out…ungrateful being like you…this is it right?
Kate was surprise at Betty’s out boast and calling her names, she didn’t understand what she meant as she tried to ask Betty what she did wrong, Betty threw her phone to the wall and it smashed, as if that was not enough, she went and slapped Kate who was still dumb founded, they were creating a scene and other staffs and customers were watching them,
“Betty, you are crazy…what has come over you…what happened, stop this show and tell me what I did first…
“you seriously want to know what you did Kate, I took you as my friend and family and you backstabbed me, you know so well that I can trust with everything I got…and that was why I trusted you and defended you anytime somebody speaks against you, I was a true friend to you Kate, I have known you for years. I handed this place for you be managing for me, I have never worry because I trusted you, how could you betray my trust like this, how could you go behind me and be having affair with my husband, how could you, Viva has being giving me this idea of single mothers and their desperation to take over any available home, not minding how they do it, Viva said it all, she always emphasize on it but i didn’t believe her, I just wanted to clear my doubt and this is what I got, you and Tony, my husband…you are so shameless and even saved his name with “uncle TT” you are exactly what Viva has being saying, a backstabber, a home breaker, a thief, you have always being jealous of my home, because you don’t have yours and decided to break it, guess it was actually you that stole my precious necklace and said it was Viva, you all along Kate…yo..
“whaaaat…oh my God, Betty…you are seriously crazy right now, vomiting all this rubbish, uuhh no,…you slapped me, broke my phone and still disgracing me just because of what Viva said to you, how can I do that to you…God…how can I even have such a thought to have anything to do with your husband, the uncle Tt you saw his real name is Trevo, he is my friend and I was still checking if I should give the guy a chance, I saved his name with “uncle TT” Because that is what my daughter calls him, but his name is actually Trevo not Tony or is it only your husband’s name that start with a T”, i can never do you wrong Betty, how can you even think of such, after all you have done for me and my daughter, your family is practically the family my daughter has come to love, I have loved you like a sister and a friend, and has always thanked God for Tony, who loves you unconditionally, I only stopped coming to your place because I have had enough of Viva throwing shade at me and all you do is to believe anything she says to you without thinking about it, I didn’t want to be a problem for anyone that was why I stayed off Betty, I can’t hurt you, you have done so much for me which I will forever be grateful for but this is a pure accusation, because I was still watching Trevo and didn’t want to reveal him to anyone yet until I’m sure of the kind of person he is, I don’t need anyone who will love me and won’t love my daughter, I just needed to be sure before I speak to you about him, I could have called him to come over right now so that you will see him for yourself, but you have smashed my phone, I will go any length just to clear your doubt Betty, hmmm… my God… Betty you are something else…how…how on earth do you think I will ever do such to you, I have conscience and will never bit the finger that feed me, contrary to what Viva has being feeding you with, not all single mothers are stupid or have low self esteem, go and tell her that she has finally succeeded, because I’m walking away from here and will never return, look for another manager because I’m done working for you, you could at least ask me before going through my phone and feeding your heart with so much doubt, I’m not your enemy, and will never be, the real enemy is within you, she is as close as your nose is to your mouth, I’m done, because of this, I may probably tell Trevo to drive me down to your house so that you will clear your doubt. But Somethings doesn’t worth it at all, I’m not going to stress the young man just because you want to satisfy your conscience, if you want to see him come over this weekend, he will be around, I so much hate what Viva has turned you into, go back to her because she is the true friend and I’m just a desperate single mother to you, because that’s what Viva tells you all the time now you have done exactly what she expected of you…this is really sad…
Kate picked up her bag and walked away without looking back
Betty went home and met Tony, Tony was home already, he looked sober, she was surprised to see him home by that time, immediately he saw her, he came to his wife and drew into a warm embrace, Betty has had enough drama with Kate and was Shocked as Tony started crying as he held her, she felt water dropping at her back and knew Tony was crying and the water was tears coming from him, she tried to loosen up and ask him what was going on but Tony held her so tight, could it be true he was truly having an affair, if not Kate then who else…or what happened, why is he crying,
“what is going on Tony, why are you crying…what happened…you are scaring me…
“I…I wronged you and I know heaven will never forgive me for what I did to you, I’m so sorry, I don’t want you to leave me…my whole life is worthless without you Betty, please…I just came to realization that you may probably leave me if you find out what I have done and you will never forgive me…
“Tony…no matter what you did…I will always forgive you and will never leave you…I promise…I will never live you…a life without you in it will be so empty…what did you do…
“i….i…uhhh..i just wanted to know…if..i mean…I really love you Betty and don’t want to loose you, I don’t know how I will survive if you leave me or decide not to forgive me… no matter what I did…no matter the wrong or how deep it maybe …please darling always find it in your heart to forgive me… just know that if I ever hurt you is never intentional, i will never hurt you intentionally…
“did you have an affair…an affair with Kate…?
“what…what….ooh…why will you think such, Kate is so disciplined and will never do such to you, even if I’m drunk and mistake Kate to be you, she will never allow me to have anything with her…Kate is a true friend…not…not your so called….hmmm…. well I did not have an affair….with Kate and such will never happen…erase that idea from your head and caution anybody putting such in your mind because the person is only trying to ruin your friendship with Kate and your love for me…don’t allow that person any close to you…
Tony had planned to confess to Betty, he has stopped seeing Viva and was trying to refocus, he wanted to confess to his wife of how unfaithful he has being, but words got stuck on his throat, he didn’t even know which one to say or leave, he has really done so much, he has messed up, he has summoned courage to come home on time to apologise to Betty that day and to plead to her to forgive him but he couldn’t do it, he later concluded within himself that somethings are better left unsaid, he may confess all his wrongs and Betty chose not to forgive him and leave him instead, he can’t risk his family for a confession, is better for her not to know at all than to be heart broken and disappointed in him. He was surprised when Betty asked him about having an affair with Kate, he knew it was Viva that has being feeding her with such idea, which was taking effect on Betty, Viva is never a good woman, he saw it right from the beginning, and has tried to warned Betty but he later fell woefully to her plans and was going deeper with her until he decided to have a rethink after his conversation with Betty on him cheating, he felt so sad and unworthy of his naïve wife who does not understand that the people she so much trusted has failed her except Kate who has always being a royal friend to her.
As days went by Betty was happy to have Tony back, he had changed and was more home unlike before. He started buying her gifts, and promised to get her a new car before the end of the month, she has already picked her dream car from the catalogue he gave to her, and he has promised to get it for her, he even took over the kitchen, trying to make her favourite dish everyday. Betty was happy to have her husband back, Tony stopped Viva from visiting reasons best known to him, although she hardly see Viva because she has to be going to her supermarket everyday since Kate has stopped coming, she felt bad for allowing her anger to get the best of her, she has tried calling Kate severally but she was never available, probably she got a new line and decided to shot the door of friendship to her face, she has moved on with her life and she wished she can see her and apologise for overreacting.
She didn’t want to get a new manager, Kate has being good on her job, managing the supermarket like her own, she will never get another manager like her and will hope and pray she comes back, she will leave the post open for her, anytime Kate decides to come back her post will still be there waiting for her.
Betty got home that day and was hearing a serious quarrel coming from Viva’s apartment, as she wanted to go and check what was going on, she wondered why Tony didn’t bother going to help them settle their differences and he was around, she saw Viva coming down looking so angry, she was wearing her fine necklace that Richard got for her, the one that looked like her missing necklace she so much loved, the diamond on it glittered as she walked with speed, Viva walked past her without saying a word to her friend, Betty. Viva went straight into her car and drove off,
Tony was inside but decided not to come out or to go check what the quarrel between Viva and her husband is always about.
Rebecca came to stand beside her, and said something that shocked her,
“what if Viva is cheating on the husband, Richard, what if she is unfaithful to him, because looking at the husband, I’m not sure he was the one that got her that fine car. It is probably Viva’s lover, that man is managing himself, where will he see money to buy a car or other things for Viva…your friend is filled with surprises,
“don’t say such thing again…do you know Richard’s pocket or is it every rich man that like showing off, or telling the public they got money, Viva can never cheat on her husband, is probably the super market Viva asked him to open that they are fighting all the time for…and is non of our business, I’m only concerned because she is my friend, Viva is a good person I wonder why all of you don’t like her, she is fun to be with and when she comes back I will give her enough money to open a shop, and put things inside, it may not be a big supermarket like mine, but is something that will keep her busy so that she will stop all the fight with her husband, I will tell Tony to give me money I want to go shopping and when he does that, because I know he will give me enough money, I will add up with my own, I will make sure I gather enough cash and give Viva, I just want her to be happy, Richard has really tried by getting her all she ever asked for, I know he probably doesn’t have money now and Viva has failed to understand.
Betty and Rebecca decided to go back to their own house. Rebecca knew that it is not what Viva told Betty that is making her and her husband to have misunderstanding all the time, is probably something deep and smelly which Viva can’t reveal to Betty, Rebecca went ahead of Betty as she was going inside, as Betty got to the door of her house she heard her name, she quickly turned and found out that it was Richard that was calling her, she went to him slowly and was wondering what Richard wanted to tell her, she heard Tony calling her to come inside, she started wondering why everybody was behaving strange.
Richard wanted to see her for an unknown reason, as she went to him Tony who has being watching them from the window saw his wife going to Richard his heart began to beat fast, he rushed outside and started calling Betty to come inside, Betty was confused and didn’t understand what was going on or what to do, Tony was already coming towards her to come and take her inside while Richard stood and watched.
Tony didn’t want Richard to have anything to do with his darling wife Betty, he can’t risk it, let him and Viva be doing their everyday fight, but they should leave his family alone.
Rebecca laughed as she watched from inside as Tony rushed to Betty before she can meet up with Richard. Tony was scared because he was guilty, and who knows what Richard wanted to see Betty for.
To be continued…

Thoughts arrive like butterflies
Try a new drinks recipe site
I had a dream. It was quite a nice dream, thought somewhat
disturbing. It was about L B.
I walked to school from Duns side of the bridge, but we
went on the ROAD and up the hill and round N, walking
up the long path past the car park.
We then went into what looked like the school swimming
baths changing room, I was in a cubicle sat on a changing
table and she said "If you don't want it, I have others who
will want it now" or something.
Lesbian sex with L B. OMFG! Yes please. Though she
hates me, and she doesn't even know me, she is so beautiful
I had another dream but that was about a bus to somewhere
and I was looking out of the window and saw the moon, but
there was a see through earth in front of it, it was so
beautiful. Even though it was only a dream

Police have confirmed that the EFF MP who was arrested during protests against Clicks is Kenny Motsamai, who is on parole.
Brig Vishnu Naidoo said Motsamai had been arrested outside the Clicks at Evaton near Sedibeng on Tuesday morning.
He said Motsamai was involved in altercation with police after which he resisted arrest. “During the scuffle, the door of the Clicks broke and Mr Motsamai injured himself on the door,” said Naidoo.
Motsamai has since appeared at the Sedibeng magistrate’s court where he was granted bail. He faces charges of assaulting a police officer and resisting arrest. “He will appear in court on Monday again,” Naidoo said.
Naidoo said that Motsamai was the only one who was arrested during the Evaton incident but nine other people were arrested nationwide for unrest that broke out at Clicks stores amid protests led by the EFF.
Motsamai is out on parole after spending almost 28 years in prison for killing a white traffic officer in Rustenburg in 1989. The officer was killed amid a bank robbery sanctioned by the PAC. The proceeds from the robbery were to assist the PAC in its activities.
He was 26 years old when he was arrested and had just returned from Ethiopia after military training. He refused to apologise or show remorse for killing the traffic officer.
Motsamai went on to join the EFF in July 2018.
The outrage and action against Clicks started after the company ran an advertisement on its website last week which showed a black woman’s hair and described it as being “dry, damaged, frizzy and dull” against that of a white woman’s hair, which was described as “colour-treated, fine, flat and normal”.
The EFF said the advert has racist undertones and called for those who approved it to be fired. The party vowed to shut Clicks stores this week as its members embarked on protests. Several Clicks stores were damaged in the unrest.
Clicks has since explained the advert was not theirs, but that of a client, TRESemme, which falls under Unilever. The company apologised for publishing the advertisement, took it down and suspended its officials who published it.

Took Sammy out for a busking session this morning. She usually only takes her ukulele but Rich managed to work out how to power up her keyboard and get it going with the amp. She was very happy as she has a much bigger repertoire of songs to perform with the piano. She did well and had some lovely comments from people. One women took our email as she has connections with a recording studio in manchester. And one lad left his number on a scrap of paper in her case cheekily saying "give me a call baby". She won't be calling!
- Samsung SM-J330FN

From the WSOP to the U.S. Open
A few years ago, I sat in the Amazon Room at the World Series. I was pulled away from the tables for a second and put in front of somebody I didn't expect to see in Vegas.
"Brad, I'd like you to meet Rocco Mediate."
I knew Mediate was a pro golfer, but had no idea he was both such a nice guy and so interested in poker. Over the next few days, Rocco and I had the chance to talk several times. I learned that he was ten years into recovery after rupturing a disc in his back and, when not playing golf, he wanted to learn how to better play cards.
That year, Rocco was sponsored by PokerStars and made it to Day 2 of the World Series. He and Team PokerStars Pro Greg Raymer forged a quick friendship. Rocco gave Raymer golf tips, and Raymer responded in kind with his poker knowledge.
Now, as the World Series and Raymer churn on in Las Vegas, Rocco is still on the links. I watched yesterday as Rocco stood waiting to see if he would win the U.S. Open. When Tiger Woods sunk the playoff-forcing putt on 18, watching Rocco's face was much like a guy--heads up for a bracelet--watch his opponent get there on the river to even the stacks.
"I knew he was going to make it," Rocco said.
The putt didn't mean the game was over, though. It only meant it wasn't over right then and there. Rocco still has a chance to win.
As I write this Woods has a one-stroke lead after six in the 18-hole playoff. With 12 holes to play, this is a heads-up battle that is as fun to watch as a World Series final table.
Good luck today, Rocco, and thanks for giving us a great show.

The Waterhouse Coachbuilding Company was formed by four men with diverse backgrounds but all had a love of automobiles. Amongst the group was a taxicab body manufacturer who had gone bankrupt, a stock broker who had studied at Harvard, an accountant who was unemployed at the time, and a body repair foreman working for Cadillac. The genesis of the Waterhouse Company was one that had a slow and rough start and would stay in existence for only a few years, but during that time the work would become legendary and appreciated for generations.
Roger Clapp and S. Roberts Dunham had been roommates during college. Clapp had a degree from Harvard Business School and was working for a brokerage house in Boston when he and Dunham reconnected. Dunham had been living in California and just returned to Boston. Soon after, they pursued their dream of owning their own business.
Charles Waterhouse got wind of the news that two individuals were opening a coachbuilding business and offered to provide financial backing. Waterhouse and his son L. Osborne Waterhouse were descendants of a vehicle body manufacturer and both wanted to continue their family tradition. They had expertise in the business of coachbuilding as well as some capital to invest, though not enough to start their own business. The decision was made to bid on materials, equipment, and machinery from the recently bankrupt Woonsocket Company. Osborne had worked as a superintendent at the Woonsocket Manufacturing Company prior to it going bankrupt. The company's business involved building bodies for taxicabs and was based in Providence, RI. The bankruptcy had left the newly formed Waterhouse Company, named to pay homage to the Waterhouse family, with an excellent opportunity to get the equipment at a reasonable price. After they won the bid, they began searching for a suitable factory which they found in Webster, MA. By January of 1928, the Waterhouse Company was incorporated and ready to begin building custom bodies.
Charles Waterhouse and Roger Clapp retained their jobs and provided extra financial stability while Bob Dunham and Osborne moved to Webster to get the company off the ground. One of their first employees was Sargent Waterhouse, Charles oldest son. He had built a strong reputation as a skilled craftsman while working Judkins.
George Briggs Weaver was a former tool and jewelry designer. He had studied at the Rhode Island School of design and had worked for his father at the Weaver automobile manufacturing plant before it was ruined by fire. 'Briggs' had a talent for creating designs and drawings and this appealed to the newly formed Waterhouse business. Samples of his work were shown to duPont Motors. After a visit to the factory, duPont Motors ordered five roadsters and five convertible coupe bodies. This would be the start of a relationship between these two companies, resulting in a total of 82 bodies and eight different body styles.
This had not been the first business for the young company. They had been searching all areas for work and anything that would allow them the opportunity to generate some cash flow. They found such an opportunity when they were tasked with building 200 small boats which they completed. This may not have been what they had hoped for, but it did generate some much needed cash.
In 1929 Packard requested a single body to be built for the Paris Saloon. The Waterhouse Company was given seven weeks to finish the job. The design was to be similar to the Alexis de Saknoffsky show car which had been created by Van den Plas a few years prior. A job of this size was estimated to take at least 12 weeks. The young company was eager to prove themselves which they did by completing the Convertible Victoria for Packard on-time and to an exceptionally high level of quality and craftsmanship. Packard was impressed and ordered ten more bodies for their Packard vehicles. After the order was satisfied, they continued to order Waterhouse bodies totaling around 100 examples.
The company's popularity and status within the industry was growing and they were receiving orders from many companies including Marmon, Cadillac, Lincoln, and Chrysler. Various body styles and designs were created, including limousines, coupes, speedsters, phaetons, and town cars to name. All were penned by Briggs Weaver. His talent was recognized by many and soon was offered a position to work for duPont, which he accepted. Even though he left Waterhouse, duPont agreed to allow him to 'moon-light' at his former employment to help insure the success of the company.
The onset of the Great Depression was tough for many businesses, especially the luxury car segment. Waterhouse had built a successful business that included almost 300 custom bodies. By 1933 Waterhouse was no longer producing custom bodies. They had switched their business to the manufacturing of furniture which later merged into a division of Ethan Allen, Inc.By Daniel Vaughan | Aug 2006

- Most Helpful
- Highest Rating
I am in awe of how easy it was to make these and yet how absolutely perfect they turned out!!! The density of the bread was perfect and it tasted great too- I made mine using wheat flour and it worked great!
Tried this tonight and it was yummy! Next time I think I will cut down the sugar a little and bake a little longer for "sturdier" bowls. Thanks so much for sharing your recipe.
I cannot speak highly enough of this recipe. I doubled in and made 7 large bowls and made croutons with the leftover dough. The dough was a pleasure to work with (and I am no good at shaping dough.) I let the dough rise uncovered in the oven that I had slightly heated with a pan of water. Instead of scraping out the insides, I pressed the middle into the sides and bottoms for reinforcement. Then I sprayed the insides and outsides of the bowl with cooking spray and retoasted the bowls for 15 minutes after my company arrived. They were beatiful as well as delicious and the talk of the evening! This dough was absolutely perfect. I am so pleased that I used this recipe and will use it again and again. Thank you so much for posting it!
This recipe deserves more than 5 stars. It is easy, the dough is easy to work with and the bread bowls are out of this world. They are just the right consistency - sturdy enough to hold soup, yet soft, yeasty and flavorful at the same time. These are better than ANY bread bowl I've ever had at a restaurant. If you use them while they're hot, it's amazing how hot they will keep the soup once it's ladled in. The bread was so good that I am thinking of using for dinner rolls as it's as good or better as my current favorite recipe. Just perfect. Thanks!!
These turned out great, we used them tonight for chili. If I were to do it again (and I will), I'd probably cook them just a bit longer to get more of a crispy crust. My kids enjoyed "sampling" the warm bread as we dug out the bowls.
I thought these were way too sweet and they did not rise well.
These were very easy to make. Next time I will cut sugar to 1-2 TBS. I did use extra virgin olive oil instead of the softened butter. I will be using this recipe as my go to bread bowl recipe. Thanks so much
These were pretty good and pretty fast. I used 1 1/2 cups of bread flour (wheat) and 1 1/2 cups of Whole Wheat Flour. We actually made this recipe into 2 large bread bowls. They came out the same size as the ones you would get at Panera Bread. We let them rise double in size in a regular size cereal bowl then put them on a pan and baked. They cooked for 18 minutes. Even forgot the butter one time and they still turned out great! Will definitely keep this recipe for future. Thanks for posting.
These rolls were very tasty. The only problem I had was that the dough didn't rise as much as I hoped it would. I was looking for the rolls to double in size but that didn't happen. So I ended up with 4 small pieces that were too small for bread bowls. Even so, they were greatly enjoyed. I will make again and try doubling the recipe. Thanks for posting!
These didn't really work for me. Although I am not a novice bread maker, I've never attempted homemade bread bowls before, and I was really looking forward to these. However, the dough was very wet in my bread machine and I had to add more flour just to keep it from being on the soupy side. Once the dough was done, it looked and felt great and shaped well, but then rather than rising up they just sort of smooshed out to the sides and I had what looked like large hamburger buns rather than bread bowls. If I had put them in a smaller pan with sides I'm sure they would have risen like they should have, but I wanted crispier sides instead of the soft kind you get like when dinner rolls stick together in a pan. That said, the flavor of these was outstanding and I think I will try this recipe again and see if I can't get it to work correctly.

Paul E Williams (JUDGE ASBCA US)
"There are many agents who can sell themselves and tell you how great they are. You certainly did that. There are many agents who can tell you wonderful stories showing why you should retain them. You did that. But the real test is can they and will they deliver after they get your listing. I have had prior experiences where I was very disappointed with an agent after signing up and would struggle to get them to timely respond to my communications. With you and your team, I hit the jackpot. You were always timely and professional. Your knowledge of the market, local conditions, values and financing was impressive. I quickly learned to trust and rely on your advice and good counseling. I believe it is important to keep a client informed whether it is good news or bad news. You and your team were constantly in touch letting me know when showings were going to take place and with follow ups as to what the potential renters thought of the unit. I could have signed a lease very early after listing with you but you counseled against it as you weren't satisfied with the available information. You were correct and it showed you were looking out for my best interest and not just a quick commission. I do not know what more I could have asked of you and your team. Your knowledge, professionalism, high energy, and passion for meeting my needs and doing the right thing led to a very timely closing of a very successful business deal. It felt like we had been friends for a long period of time. I am sure we will be doing more business in the future and for those in need of real estate services, I will give you and your team the highest recommendation."

This letter was written by Edward O. Green (1842-1904), the son of Elisha A. Green (1817-1878) and Sarah Norris. He wrote the letter to his sister, Emma A. Green (1845-1910).
In 1855, the Green family lived in Wallkill, Orange County, New York. Edward married Sarah Jane Bedford (1845-1926) in 1871. Emma married John I. Baird in December 1865.
Edward enlisted on the 21st August 1862 into Co. K, 143rd New York Infantry. He was promoted to Full Sgt. on the 18th Dec 1863 and transferred on the 1st April 1865 to Company D, 5th Veteran Reserve Corps. He was mustered out of service in Indianapolis, Indiana on the 19th July 1865.
Camp 143rd Regt. near Warrington Junction
August 19, 1863
Having a few leisure moments, I thought I would improve them in writing to you. Since I wrote to you last, we have moved 3 times and are still within 4 miles of where we first encamped. We have moved about 3 miles today and have just got our tent finished. Al Gordon ¹ sits here writing to someone — I do not know who. I came off picket yesterday morning and I was sorry they did not let us stay longer for we were having gay old times. We were out two days and every meal the lieutenant and I was invited out, and I tell you we went for it is not one of a soldier’s failings. They always take everything that is offered them to eat whether they want it or not.
Our regiment is still guarding railroad and doing picket duty. Some days they take every man out of camp excepting the sick ones. It will be a year from the 21st of this month since we enlisted. This year we have seen some gay times and of course some pretty rough ones [too]. While we were at Camp Holley, ² we had gay old times — the best we have ever seen since we have been in the service.
Em, look in the Tri-States Union in the deaths and see if you can find the death of Sgt. John Drake. ³ He was a very intimate friend of mine and I have not heard from him since the battle of Gettysburg and someone told me that they seen a count of his death in that paper. I have not heard from Andrew since he left here but think he is not far from here as the 12th Army Corps comes to Station for supplies.
I guess Horace has forgotten that he has any friends. Andrew said he could not get any letters from him and I have not heard from him in some time. He will not hear from me again till I hear from him. Clint Baird is still at the hospital in Washington sick. All the rest of the Narrowsburg boys are all okay. I wished we were all back to Narrowsburg as we were one year ago tonight. I think we would have some gay old times. We used to, but did not know enough to appreciate them. But I tell you, Em, I think before another year passes we will be home again, having better times than we ever did before.
We are very anxious about Charleston [South Carolina]. If our folks only take that place I think they must come to some time. They came very near sending us to Charleston. We got as far as the depot and was all ready to take the cars when we were ordered back to camp as our Brigadier General had the privilege of sending another regiment in our place which was a very lucky thing for us for if we had been sent there in the warm weather, it would almost killed us.
I received a letter from father Monday. They were all well. It’s bedtime and I must close. Write soon.
From your brother, — Sgt. E. O. Green
Co. K 143rd Regt. N.Y.S.V., Washington D.C.
¹ Albert B. Gordon served as the First Lieutenant of Co. D, 143rd New York Infantry from April 26 to July 20, 1865. He enlisted in Co. K as a sergeant in October 1862 and was acting Orderly Sergeant in April 1863. He was official promoted to First Sergeant in May 1864.
² Camp Holley was near Monticello, New York, where the regiment first went into camp in September 1862.
³ Sgt. John D. Drake (1840-1863) served in Co. F, 124th New York Infantry. He enlisted on 9 August 1862 at Port Jervis, Orange County, New York, at the age of 22. He was killed at Gettysburg on 2 July 1863 and buried on the field. A funeral service was held for him in the Port Jervis Baptist Church on 19 July 1863. His parents were Thomas A. Drake (1810-1873) and Clarissa Jane Doty (1818-1907).

A National Football League player was arrested after providing police with a false name on a citation given to him for having his window tint too dark.
Rolando McClain, who plays for the Oakland Raiders, was pulled in Decatur, Ala., after police noticed that his window tint seemed to be darker than what is allowed by law. When the officer asked McClain to sign the citation he noticed it had been signed "f--- y'all," police spokesman Lt. John Crouch said in a statement.
"McClain took (the ticket) and appeared to sign it, but when officer Annerton got the ticket book back, he saw that McClain had written "f--- y'all' instead of signing his name," Crouch said.
The officer that stopped McClain, Derek Annerton, noticed that the vehicles tint was unusually dark after he was unable to see a person behind the wheel.
"The tint was so dark that he immediately recognized that it was darker than what's allowed by law. He couldn't tell anything about the driver- couldn't tell if it was male or female," Crouch told the Decatur Daily.
McClain proceeded to refuse to sign his real name after several attempts by officers and was subsequently arrested for providing false information to an officer. Under Alabama law it is against the law for a person to provide false information to an officer "with intent to mislead the officer."
During the police stop, McClain told the officer he had a note from his doctor explaining that he needed dark tint for "photosensitivity and needed maximum ultraviolet radiation protection to include window tinting," Crouch said.
However, the doctor's note was not on a medical prescription document. Should McClain provide an official prescription from his doctor, the window tint violation would be dropped.
"Sgt. Elliott told McClain that type of doctor's recommendation should have been written on a medical prescription, to which McClain responded that Sgt. Elliott was not the officer that stopped him, so McClain didn't have anything to say to him," Crouch said.
McClain was booked into Decatur City Jail on the false information misdemeanor and the window tint violation. He was released on $1,000 cash bail after a few hours.
"I'm falsely accused of everything … it's corrupt. It's terrible," McClain told local media as he left jail.

We can make our plans, but the Lord determines our steps.
The truth of that verse from Proverbs played out for us today.
OUR plan was to go to Prague for a conference. But the Lord had different plans.
When Dave came home from the European Leadership Forum late last night, he was not feeling well. In fact, hadn't been feeling well for two days.
He woke this morning and was so dizzy he could barely walk straight, so went into town to see our doctor. Everything showed up normal (you're always thankful for that!) so he came home and went to bed in hopes that his body would heal with some sleep.
He's doing much better this evening so we're going to try and go to Prague tomorrow for the conference.
We'll see if our plans are his plans tomorrow!

Susan McMartin always wanted to write about the man who helped raise her. When she was a child “Mr. Church” had come into her family’s life to cook. But he gave much, much more.
Mr. Church was smart, well read and had many talents. He made the most delectable meals from scratch using no recipes. “To this day I’ve never tasted a better read »Jeryl Brunner, Contributor

The Farewell Party
High drama and lowbrow, morbid humor get stitched together in this successful tragicomedy about terminal patients and assisted suicide. Works better than expected.
* This filmography is not intended to be a comprehensive list of this artist’s work. Instead it reflects the films this person has been involved with that have been reviewed on this site.
Gene Siskel and I were like tuning forks. Strike one, and the other would pick up the same frequency. When we were in a group together, we were always intensely aware of one another. Sometimes this took the form of camaraderie, sometimes shared opinions, sometimes hostility. But we were aware. If something happened that we both thought was funny but weren't supposed to, God help us if one caught the other's eye. We almost always thought the same things were funny. That may be the best sign of intellectual communion.
Gene died ten years ago on February 20, 1999. He is in my mind almost every day. I don't want to rehearse the old stories about how we had a love/hate relationship, and how we dealt with television, and how we were both so scared the first time we went on Johnny Carson that, backstage, we couldn't think of the name of a single movie, although that story is absolutely true. Those stories have been told. I want to write about our friendship. The public image was that we were in a state of permanent feud, but nothing we felt had anything to do with image. We both knew the buttons to push on the other one, and we both made little effort to hide our feelings, warm or cold. In 1977 we were on a talk show with Buddy Rogers, once Mary Pickford's husband, and he said, "You guys have a sibling rivalry, but you both think you're the older brother."
Once Gene and I were involved in a joint appearance with another Chicago media couple, Steve Dahl and Garry Meier. It was a tribute to us or a tribute to them, I can't remember. They were pioneers of free-form radio. Gene and I were known for our rages against each other, and Steve and Garry were remarkable for their accord. They gave us advice about how to work together as a successful team. The reason I remember that is because soon afterward Steve and Garry had an angry public falling-out that has lasted until this day.
What's this? Federated Department Stores wants to buy May Department Stores, which bought Marshall Field's last summer? And Federated has a history of changing the names of all of their stores to "Macy's"? Which would mean the end of "Marshall Field's"?

Nai’Asalyn Lasha Brown
Nursing degree unfinished, child never born
She was months away from being a mom.
At nearly 19 years old, she had moved out of her mom’s house and was working toward her lifelong dream of moving to Texas. At the University of Louisiana at Lafayette, she was taking classes to complete her nursing degree. “She was your average teen,” a family member remembered. “She liked to dress up, to do hair and makeup.”

'I was a schoolgirl by day and sex slave at night': Victim of satanic sex cult speak out
The victim of a satanic sex cult has told how she will never forgive her "evil" mother for putting her through 11 years of hell at the hands of the sick group.
Annabelle Forest was initiated into a notorious sex cult that operated from a quiet Welsh cul-de-sac by her own mum at the age of seven.
Even worse, she was abused by her mother as a teenager under the orders of the cult’s leader Colin Batley - the man she can’t even bring herself to name.
Now a mum herself and living happily in another part of the UK, Annabelle has taken the brave step of recounting her horror in a bid to get others to speak out about suspected abuse.
SEE ALSO :Isiolo Imam accused of raping 16-year-old schoolgirl
She told WalesOnline: “Nothing can hurt me as much as my mum and that man."
“My mother was an evil woman and I’ll never forgive her.”
Annabelle has written a book that tells how she was just seven-years-old when first forced to watch her mother perform a sex act on Batley.
At the age of 11 she raped by him in her own home and three years later she was made to take part in group sex with her mother.
Batley was given an indeterminate sentence for public protection in 2011 with a recommendation he spend at least 11 years in jail.
Jacqueline Marling was jailed for 12 years for her part in the group’s crimes but Annabelle, which is not her real name, says she can never forgive her mother for putting her through such torture.
“To be abused like that by your own mum beggar’s belief,” she says.
“I went to the sentencing in court because I wanted to see her one last time, I wanted her to reach out to me, to say it was all his fault and she was under his spell.
“But she didn’t. She just made a face and asked what I was doing there.
"She went to prison unrepentant and I suppose that made me realise it wasn’t just him. She was evil too. As a mother myself I can hardly believe how she treated me. It was unnatural and cruel.
“But there is no point getting depressed about it, you have to live for the future. But I never want to see her again. Nothing can hurt me as much as they did, but that is what makes me stronger.”
Now Annabelle has revealed the true extent of the horror she suffered at the hands of the cul-de-sac cult in her memoir The Devil on The Doorstep: My Escape from a Satanic Sex Cult.
The cult’s twisted ideology, based on a bizarre text called the Book of the Law by Aleister Crowley, formed the backdrop to Annabelle’s childhood.
The children of the cult, based in a small cul-de-sac in Kidwelly, were cut off from other children, forced to take part in long church services and obey Batley’s every whim.
“We weren’t even allowed to look in his eyes,” says Annabelle.
“He ruled our little community with an iron will and we were made to do what he ordered for fear of angering the Gods.”
In Batley’s ‘Church’, children were led to believe they were proving themselves to the Gods by passing tests, which usually involved sex with either him or other cult members.
Annabelle recalls the first time he raped her when she was just 11-years-old.
“The worst thing about it was the fact that he made me think I was doing it out of choice,” she says.
“It was awful. The most painful and shocking thing that had ever happened – but it was my path, that’s what he told me, and if I didn’t do it I would go to the Abyss, which was our version of hell.
"Colin knew how to manipulate you, to make you believe anything he said.”
But Annabelle’s most horrific experience was when her own mother assaulted her at the age of 14.
“Afterwards, Colin asked me if I enjoyed it and I knew what I had to say – I had to say yes. But inside I felt like dying.”
The tests did not end there – at 14 she was forced into a relationship with another cult member five years her senior and by then she was having regular group sex with Batley and her mother.
“I was a schoolgirl by day and a sex slave at night,” she says. “It got so bad that at one point I tried to take my own life.”
Aged 18, three months after having Batley’s child, she was forced into prostitution.
It was the love of her daughter that saved her and gave her a reason to live - she bravely escaped in the dead of night when her baby was one year old.
By the time of her escape she had slept with over 1,800 men – the proceeds of which had all gone towards ‘the Church’.
In 2011, her evidence helped convict Batley for life as well as three others, including her mother.
Today, Annabelle lives a happy and contended life with her partner and her two children but she says the recent Rochdale case brought back chilling reminders about her own past.
“It was astonishing to me that people who came into contact with these children thought they were behaving this way out of choice. When you have control over a child and you can intimidate them, they will do anything you say.
"It was the same for me. Too many people looked away, too many people ignored the signs. It astonishes me that we lived in that small cul-de-sac for so many years and not one person saw anything that gave them cause for concern,” she says.
“After the case, people said they thought things were odd, but nobody said anything and saying that after the case is a waste of time. It was like the case in America where the girls were locked up in the house for years.
"Why did no-one think it strange that all the windows were boarded up? And how did no-one notice anything about the girl in Germany who was locked in the basement?”
Annabelle says that if her book makes one person think, or saves one person’s life, it has been worth it.
“If there’s one thing I would like to achieve with my book, it would be for others to start really paying attention to the community they live in. You can’t just walk around living in a bubble. There are abused children everywhere – it just takes one person to see it and that life could be saved.”
Schoolgirl Sex slave Satanic

It’s time to talk about cats! Taking cats to the veterinary clinic is often stressful for the cat and owner, and is one reason many of us (including myself) try to avoid it! My cat Cali was due for her senior wellness visit, and I wanted to see if I could make it less stressful for her. With our fear free training, I decided to try some anxiety reducing products and positive reinforcement to see if I could make her upcoming visit less stressful for her.
The first stressor in a cat’s veterinary visit is being put into the cat carrier and Cali was no different. I took her carrier out a week prior to her appointment and sprayed it with Feliway spray, which is a feline calming pheromone. I left the carrier door open, made sure there was a comfy towel inside, and put some of her favorite treats just outside of the carrier. Over the next couple of days, I continued offering treats, putting them further and further inside the carrier. I did this a couple of times a day until I was putting treats all the way into the back of the carrier. It didn’t take long for her to figure out that there were treats to be had, and it was “safe” to go in and get them. For Cali, treats were enough motivation. For your cat, it might be canned food, tuna, catnip or yogurt. Use what you think your cat will find most appealing.
Once she was going into the carrier without stress to get the treats, I started closing the carrier door for just a second or two while she was in it. Since she continued to munch and purr, I could tell this wasn’t stressing her out. I did this several times, increasing the time the door was closed by a few seconds each time.
Cali has never enjoyed car rides (this is true for most cats). Why would she? Cars are noisy and foreign to cats, and most cats are frightened about leaving the house, period, let alone going into a moving vehicle. I asked the Doctor to prescribe Gabapentin for Cali, to reduce her stress. I gave a dose (mixed into some canned food) the night before the appointment, and another dose 2 hours before we left. Cali is always “good” for the vet, but she is clearly very scared and stressed. I wanted to see if I could reduce her anxiety with the medication and make her experience less stressful.
About 20 minutes before it was time to leave, I sprayed Feliway in the car and the carrier and warmed up the car. A couple of minutes before we had to leave, I put some treats in the back of the carrier, and she walked right in on her own. I calmly closed the carrier and we were on our way! No chasing her around, trying to pull her out from under a bed, or struggling to get her into the carrier. We were off to a good start!
Now I won’t tell you Cali was magically happy about a car ride, but she was noticeably less upset than in the past. I made sure to drive smoothly, keep windows closed to reduce traffic noises and smells, and played soft, relaxing music. Before we went into the clinic I draped a Feliway sprayed towel over her carrier, to reduce potentially scary outside stimuli. When cats are frightened, they like to hide. I was creating a darker, more comfortable space for her where she could feel relatively safe. The calming pheromones, made her feel less stressed.
Once in the exam room, I gave Cali some treats, which she ate. She was a little nervous and opted to crawl into the kitty box we have in the room for cats to curl up in. Dr. Jackie was able to do most of her exam right in the box which made Cali feel a bit more safe. For her blood draw, we drew blood from her back leg. Cats tend to tolerate that well, and she was able to hide her head under the towel (Cali likes to hide when she is anxious). We finished her exam, trimmed her nails and gave her vaccine without too much stress.
All in all, everything went very well. I feel like I was able to make things less stressful for her from start to finish. I won’t tell you she loves going to the vet, but I think my efforts helped. I’m glad that I took the time to make some changes to make the experience less scary for her.
These things were pretty easy to do. If you would like more information on Feliway or think your cat would benefit from anti anxiety medication before a visit, please let us know. Our goal is to make veterinary visits less stressful for all pets (and their people)!

More latina fucked hard
Fascinating latina Camila Santiago's big butt shakes as she enjoys a donga ride
Duration: 7:00 Views: 3 010 Submitted: 2 months ago
Description: Camila has a job promoting on the street to get the word our on a new clothing line but her boss also wanted her to skate around because she would get around faster and get more people to see the product. She wasn't a good skater though and when she put them on all she did was complain and honestly walked in the skate more than actually skate. After arguing with her for a bit we got her to go back and tell her boss she couldn't do it. He tried to make her feel better with a foot massage and back rub. She was feeling better, so good she let him slip her clothes off. She was getting felt up and her pussy was really wet. She bent over the couch and let her boss fuck her pussy while still on the clock. That's some preferential treatment if I've seen it but I don't think she's going to report it HR because she loved every second of it!

New Delhi: The Supreme Court today put forth searching questions to liquor baron Vijay Mallya on the disclosure of his assets to the court.
A bench comprising Justices A K Goel and U U Lalit asked Mallya if he had been truthful after a consortium of banks led by the SBI alleged that USD 40 million was transferred by Mallya to his three children in complete violation of the Karnataka High Court order.
Moreover, the fact that USD 40 million was received by Mallya from a United Kingdom-based company Diageo PLC was not disclosed before the court here, Attorney General Mukul Rohatgi, appearing for the banks, alleged. Taking note of the allegation, the bench asked the counsel for Mallya to respond to the AG’s query whether “he truthfully disclosed his assets or not”.
It also wanted to know as to whether by transferring USD 40 million to his children, he violated the Karnataka High Court order in this regard or not. The Karnataka High Court had restrained Mallya from transferring or alienating any movable and immovable assets to any third party.
On March 3, the banks had submitted that USD 40 million which Mallya had allegedly received from British firm Diageo in February last year was transferred to his children in “flagrant violation” of various judicial orders, including those passed by the Debt Recovery Tribunal and the Karnataka High Court.
The banks prayed that orders be passed to “secure the deposit of the said amount of USD 40 million before this court or the DRT forthwith, pending disposal of the further recovery proceedings.”
The bench on January 11 had granted three weeks to Mallya to file an affidavit in response to the plea of banks.
In October last year, the court had rapped Mallya for not making full disclosure of his overseas properties and had asked him to do so within a month. The bench had also pulled up Mallya for not giving details of the USD 40 million, which he had allegedly received from the British firm in February last year, saying it was of the “prima facie view” that proper disclosure as per its earlier order was not made.
The consortium of banks including SBI had alleged that the USD 40 million belonged to the consortium of banks which was now stashed in Mallya’s Swiss bank account and said it should be brought back to India or the Supreme Court.
The banks had on August 29 last year told the apex court that Mallya had deliberately not made full disclosure of his assets including the USD 40 million he received on February 25, 2016 from Diageo. It had asked Mallya, who owes over Rs 9,000 crore to around 17 banks, to deposit a “substantial amount” with it to “prove his bonafide” that he was “serious” about meaningful negotiations and settlement.

Alireza Parpaei (Born October 25h 1992) is an Iranian Rapper, song writer and Record producer, better known by his stage name "The ILIAD" or formerly "Master" and "Salirapper" who works as an independent artist and lives in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. He started his music career from age of 14 and joining the underground Persian Rap industry. He was one of the youngest and yet well-known rappers in his city, Qazvin mostly due to his work with producer Farjad Taraj for a song called Maeshoogh E Majazi (Virtual Love) which featured Jazebeh and Esalat, two of his closest friends. After moving to Malaysia he left music for two years and returned to Persian rap with his political song, Begoo Be Man [Tell Me] which criticized the Iranian government led by Mahmood Ahmadinejad following the controversial election. his political records continued and next he recorded a song called "Dolat E Elahi" or "Divine Government" in English. Though the song was never released but it is said that, it will be included in his upcoming debut album which is called "Dreams come true-EP". He is an active artist on Reverbnation website and has peaked number 2 in the HipHop chart for Malaysia. As an independant artist, he works in his home studio and releases his songs through internet and social networks such YouTube and Facebook. He is currently working on his debut album which is set to release on October 25th 2011, which is his birthday and a collaboration album which is said to be a tribute paying to the greatest hiphop artists and is called, ILIAD-Music Presents : "The Greatest Hitz Re-Up".

They called and posed as some bs organization that was taking a survey about student loan debts. They called at 9:30pm on a weekday, which is illegal for any telemarketers etc. to do. I told her right away that i was not interested in taking the servey and she started to claim it was not a survey but then you could hear a mans voice in the background tell her something and she just stopped and said have a nice day and hung up. Classic scammer scenerio. Dont give this caller any personal information and just hang up. With student loan info, scammers try to get your ssn, birthday, etc. which they can use to access your credit cards, bank, steal your identity and commit crimes, and could even open lines of credit under your name and use it. Never trust anyone you dont know. Peace.

When Rod, a caseworker at Arms Wide Adoption Services, agreed to drive a six-year-old named Steven to an Astros game, he didn’t realize he was about to meet his son. However, as soon as Steven hopped in the backseat, Rod knew this kid was special.
“He immediately started to hum to the music on the radio,” Rod recalls. “I was impressed that he had that kind of rhythm at his young age.”
At the Astros game, Steven sat with his birth sister. Rod spent time talking with the siblings, but recognized that Steven’s birth sister often answered questions on his behalf and talked over her brother. However, Steven stood up for himself and told his sister that he’d like to answer questions for himself. Rod was charmed by Steven’s spunk. Rod remembers this as the moment when he realized Steven was meant to join his family.
Passion For Foster Care Adoption
Rod has worked for Arms Wide Adoption Services since January 1995, so he felt prepared to adopt. He found his career at Arms Wide Adoption Services due to his passion for foster care and adoption. As a kid, he had friends who had been in foster care or who had been adopted. Although he’s been at his position for 22 years, he still treasures the moment when a family is perfectly matched with a child.
“It’s still exciting seeing the right match, seeing a new family being made.” he says, smiling.
Before pursuing adoption to grow his own family, he gained plenty of experience as a caseworker. He witnessed parents inspired by a spiritual urge to give kids homes, while others were daunted by the difficulties children in foster care have experienced. He considered himself ready to go through the adoption process, but says when you’re adopting into your own family, “All your own advice goes out the door.” He had to learn to take up any and every resource that was available, and realized, despite his years of experience, he still needed plenty of help throughout his adoption journey.
During their pre-placement visits, the Martins took Steven to fun, family activities to bond with him. However, after the adoption, Steven had to adapt to a regular routine and an emphasis on his schoolwork. He was in first grade and faced educational challenges, since his foster parents hadn’t worked with him closely on his academics. Steven took time to realize that everyday wouldn’t be full of fun activities and that he couldn’t receive every toy or game he wanted. Rod remembers: “Once he realized he wasn’t going to get everything that he asked for, life leveled out somewhat.” As soon as Steven joined his forever home, he expressed his love for his new parents. Rod says:
“He was and still is a very affectionate child so we took great joy in the hugs and smiles.”
Rod acknowledges that adoption can be a difficult journey. He reminds prospective parents that, while a loving home is essential, adopted kids or kids in foster care often need therapies or other resources to heal from abuse or neglect, or to learn how to build trust. Perseverance is important, because every child can thrive with the right support systems. Rod cites a family whose case he managed. The child they adopted had suffered severe abuse and neglect for two years, so coping with his own traumatic history and adapting to a loving home was a huge struggle for this boy. Nevertheless, his adoptive parents didn’t give up on him, and Rod connected them to therapies and professional support which helped him heal. Because of his parents’ persistence and his own hard work, this young man graduated high school, attended trade school, and is a happy, healthy adult.
“Adoption is a choice that isn’t a very easy choice to make,” Rod admits. “You give up part of yourself, your life, and your current family when you make the leap to adopt.”
But Rod believes it was all worthwhile, saying “the positives far outweigh the negatives.” The giving of your time and heart to a child in need? Rod says that’s “the most special part.” And that little boy humming in the back seat? It’s been seven years since they met, and Steven’s only grown more talented and assertive, and Rod’s eyes still twinkle when he talks about him.

This is a safe place to share your honest opinions of a school, whether good or bad.
Central Christian School5
Posted February 20, 2014
- a parent
We have had our children at CCS since we moved into the area 10+ years ago. It provides a great learning environment for my children and has given them a firm academic foundation and built on to their spiritual foundation. The teachers truly care about their students and get to know them on a personal level.
Central "Christian" School.. Should hardly be called so. I had befallen on some very seriously rocky times in my life after I enrolled my daughter here. We consequently had to move. The school ignored and disregarded my phone calls for over a week so I could try to explain my situation and give them a heads-up early on. By the time I finally got ahold of the administrator, I had already withdrawn her. All they cared about was collecting money from me. It was an awfully un-Christian like experience I had with the school.
We have been at Central for 6 years now. My children have loved being here. They have learned so much academically and spiritually. They have always known that their teachers care about them. I feel that there has been an excellent balance in love and discipline. We have seen so much growth in the school over the past 6 years and look forward to where they are going in the future.
My children have attended Central Christian School since they were both 4 yrs. old. The school has not only been a blessing as far as educationally - both my kids have been on the all 'A' honor roll since they started - but the school has been a blessing to me personally as the administration has helped me through a very difficult two years in my personal life. They have stood by my children and me at a time when I needed not only a safe environment for my children, but a place that was non-judgemental as to me as a parent. I would do whatever it took to keep my kids at this school. I feel the Lord has annointed the pricipal and the teachers as well.
I think it is a great school for all ages,it will draw you closer God. Everyone gets along great and its a great place friends and fellowship. It will teach you to respect the lord and your foes around you. And it has great leadership.
I love the school it is my first year and i love it the yeachers Are great. Its a good place to send your child(ren). I advise for everyone to get plugged in because once you do you'll have the time of your life.
I like the school..its rules or a bit crazy @ times..but we all learn to get over it...i have been there since i was in kindergarten, i am now in the eigth grade. i enjoy playing sports at central! the teachers are nice some can be mean but that their human attitude coming out! And most of the students learn to over look it all! Thanks again!

This morning after our daily jump off the boat we sailed towards Korcula, which was the home of Marco Polo. We arrived after lunch and got off at the wharf. Our guide took us for a walk into the city and showed us Marco Polos house which is now mostly ruins, and the cathedral.
We had another group dinner at a pizza place where all the tour groups go, then we walked up a turret to watch the sunset. There was a bar at the top of the turret and they pull any drinks you order up the side of the tower to you. It was really windy up there and we were glad we were wearing shorts because a girl had her dress blown all the way up! I bought a ring which is made out of shell and has silver around it. Very pleased with that purchase! When we got back to the boat everyone was keen for a low key night because slot of people had been out late the night before, so we played cards for awhile and the cook made us donuts for dessert!

We were stationed at Ft. Wainwright (in Fairbanks) and lived in North Pole, Alaska for three years.
Both of us had always wanted to visit Alaska, so we jumped on the chance to get stationed there. It’s one of those places that is hard to visit.
While, I thoroughly enjoyed our experiences, it was a long three years. The winters are long, cold, and dark and it wasn’t the place I wanted to be left during a deployment. By the third winter, I was really ready to PCS to a place with warmer weather.

The Conservative MP for South Holland and The Deepings has hit back at those people who object to him hiring his wife to work for him.
Some people have come forward and said family members should not be allowed to work for the Spalding-area MP. However, according to John Hayes his wife is more than qualified to work for him and offers value for money.
Sir John Hayes employs his wife Susan Hayes as a part-time administrative manager. According to the Independent Parliamentary Standards Authority (IPSA), Mrs Hayes’ salary band is £40,000 to £44,999.99 (If employed full time).
Parliamentary rules state that no funding will be offered to ‘connected parties’ of MPs who took up office after 2017. However, this does not include MPs who took office before that date.
Sir John has been an MP since 1997, so those rules do not affect him.
Even though the rules do not affect the Spalding area MP, many of those who live in the area feel he has a moral duty to replace his wife and hire someone who is not connected to his family.
Sit John has publicly said that MPs should be allowed to employ someone related to them if they are well qualified to do so and they provide value for money.

Last week, coach Todd Bowles said it was still "too early to tell" whether Decker would be placed on IR, which would mean he would have to sit out at least eight weeks.
Bowles said Wednesday that Decker would be having surgery "soon," and an eight-month recovery period is usually involved. That would put the receiver on pace to possibly be back by minicamp next June.
Decker, who was initially ruled as "week-to-week " with the injury, said last Thursday that his mindset was that, "I want to get back on the field, yes," but was uncertain as to whether that would be possible this season.
"He wasn't recovering the way we hoped he would," Bowles said. "He wasn't getting any better. It was getting worse. At some point, he had to try to get surgery."
It's a huge blow to the Jets, who have not been the dynamic offense they were last season with Fitzpatrick, Decker and fellow receiver Brandon Marshall leading the way.
"It definitely hurts," Marshall said. "He's one of the great receivers in the league."
Decker had nine catches for 194 yards and two touchdowns in three games. He had 80 receptions for 1,027 yards and 12 scores — including a team-record 10 scoring grabs inside the opponents' 20-yard line — last season as he and Marshall combined for 26 TDs.
Decker signed as a free agent with the Jets in 2014 after four seasons in Denver and has been one of the NFL's most-productive receivers in that time with 163 receptions for 2,183 yards.
"You definitely can't replace him with one guy," Fitzpatrick said. "I think especially with him and the red area, on third downs and the stuff that he was tops in the league at, that's the stuff that you really miss, but it's going to be a collective effort. It's going to be a couple of different guys having to step in."
Decker's absence has had a noticeable effect on the Jets, who have scored a total of seven points in the second half in the past three games since a 37-31 win at Buffalo in Week 2 in which New York put up 17 points after halftime.
Quincy Enunwa has served as the de facto No. 2 receiver since Decker was hurt, and leads the Jets with 27 catches. But other than Enunwa and Marshall, who has 24 receptions, New York has mostly inexperienced receivers left on its roster.
Seventh-round pick Charone Peake (four catches, 36 yards) and undrafted free agents Robby Anderson (five for 56) and Jalin Marshall (five for 64) are among the Jets' remaining receivers — but Jalin Marshall has missed the past two games with a torn labrum.
"He's one of the great receivers in the league," Brandon Marshall said of Decker. "But we're more than confident that the younger guys we have, they'll make plays. Guys like Robby, they're studs and hungry, waiting for their opportunities. They'll step in and just be OK."
New York also claimed former Tampa Bay receiver Jeremy Butler off waivers on Tuesday, and cut Jeremy Ross. Butler had 31 catches for 363 yards last season for Baltimore, which signed him as an undrafted free agent out of Tennessee-Martin in 2014, but cut him this summer after training camp.
The Jets signed cornerback Nick Marshall off Jacksonville's practice squad Wednesday to fill Decker's roster spot. The former Auburn quarterback was used on special teams and in the secondary by the Jaguars.
New York has lost three straight games to fall to 1-4 on the season, with a road game at Arizona on Monday night up next.
"A win would be huge," Fitzpatrick said. "Winning kind of cures all, and when you think things aren't going well and all that, then all of a sudden one win can kind of ignite a season. So that's what we're gunning for."

Here are two frames silver prints of my late grandfather and grandmother
we have worked out around 90 yrs old.
I obviously did not take the images,but I was also intrigued by the image on the LHS and it has the same frame ans timber ply surround
I paid about $10.00 for that on in a op-shop.
I have put them here as they were buried at the end of the (Re: The Print is what matters)
sorry for the phone shots

Found a blackjack variant called double up. According to WOO he says the house edge is .31 which is pretty good. Does anyone know if anyone has came up with playing deviations for this? Or how would one come up with index plays to change from the basic strategy for double up. Thank you!

Birth of Buddha- Painting #119
Oil on board 8 x 8 in. 12/31/2016
Work In Progress
This is a commission by an old friend of mine who lost three large prints of the Buddha and wanted to replace them with three paintings by me of the Buddha. I was given free reign over the design and chose to start with his birth.
Truth is, I'd already gotten the idea of painting a birth out of a woman's side but could not remember where that idea had come from. A little search found that it was Buddha I had wanted to paint to begin with. Serendipity. That happened a LOT during this project.
I knew it would be a big undertaking for me since I'm not the fastest painter in the West, but that's kind of why I wanted to do it. Also, to try on the technique of alla prima. Which translates to 'first stroke', meaning a wet on wet approach. I was used to letting things dry and layering paint on top. I did a bit of both throughout the project. Feeling out each day afresh.
The hours spent painting flew by and I was increasingly AWARE of time like I never had been before. I was getting less and less sleep with more and more things to do. If I needed to work I would have to schedule my painting sessions accordingly. Up at 6 am, go to work, home at 6 pm, take a nap, paint into the night and post bleary eyed sometimes at 3 am (or later). Back up at 6 am to do it all over again. And I don't even want to talk about Fashion Week!
Like the time, I left Clarkson Square after a long day’s work and went home and set my clock for 6 PM instead of 6 AM, and never got up till my friend Dave texted me "GET UP!!", and he was just joking thinking I was on the train. He HAD woken me up! That was the night I painted C Clamp. Which I can tell you was #47 and was painted on February 18th. Ha!
Weekends were rough I'm not gonna lie. But all the while I felt like I was crashing through lessons! About colors I'd never really used before, different surfaces to try and depict, and most importantly I think, when to stop. That was a biggie.
What I didn't expect was the level of community that wrapped around me. I can't tell you how wonderful that was to feel. I've never had such an immediate response to my work before. Posting pics of my efforts each day for social accountability to Facebook and Instagram gave a window to my studio and made me feel as if I had you guys over my shoulder at the end of each day cheering me on. It seemed everyone was on board and soon people starting thinking of what they would love to see me paint or how they could help. I was brought flowers, tools, had Masonite boards made and coated for me and once I was given a penny. THAT one was a tearjerker and I'm forever grateful to Cher for the opportunity and the magnificent story.
As I rolled into a groove and got used to the rhythm of it, everything started to gel. There was less and less separation between paint and life. What I was painting was what was going on in my life that day or how I was feeling. So much so, it grew into a visual diary. Painting and listening to Black Star, David Bowie's last album was an altogether blessing. Right up there with painting a Joshua Light Show for Prince while listening to Purple Rain on repeat.
As in any good story everything wasn't all bread and roses. I'd gotten hit with a depression that left my hands feeling numb. Nothing would come out of them. The depression was then exacerbated by my feelings of failure over the project. Every day I didn't produce a painting I started to sink even more. Social media helped there as well and you all helped to ease the pain of it and I'm grateful for that. I was never able to get back into daily painting. Couldn't keep up with the lack of sleep and I guess the depression lingered for longer than I realized.
Having said all that, it was worth every long night I spent painting till morning and every bleary-eyed workday realizing I had to do it all over again. In the end, I kind of missed that 3am feeling of trying to post to the website, send an email to subscribers, post to Facebook and Instagram (social accountability!) BEFORE going to bed and stopping for the night. There was a lot more to it than just the painting part.
Then I was blessed with sales. (!) It was wonderful how you guys wanted a part of the project and to own a piece of my work/life. I had to put together quite a few packages so I could send them to you all and I loved giving them special touches. They were a lot of fun to make. I still have a few commissions that were started in 2016 that I will honor and consider to be a part of the project as a whole -- beginning with the "Birth of Buddha" that began this post.
Overall, I'd call it a success even if I didn't get to 365. It was more about the journey than the destination, anyway. It's been a pleasure having you follow along.
See you in the new year! Knives sharpened...

Losing two ships in as many weeks never looks good in your official reports.
Captain Horatio Horn, top of the class at the academy, fastest to get command of his own ship, and general military badass, sat sweating alone in the escape pod. Two meters tall, short black hair, and a ripped body the envy of any soldier which filled his sharp dress uniform to perfection, Horn looked back on the events of the previous day. This time at least he had managed to get all of his men off the ship before the new engines exploded, staying behind himself to give one final heroic effort to save the ship. He almost did it, too, single handedly replacing both the core and the clutch before the destroyer blew up. Horn barely managed to make it to the one remaining escape pod with all the top secret files.
Naturally, having spent none of the past six hours on the bridge he had no idea where the hell he was now floating.
The four meter square cube he was in had maybe a day's worth of air left when there was a sudden banging outside the hatch. Horn stood, hand on his sidearm, ready. He would defend the secret plans with him to the death, or preferably to the death of others. The hatch slid open ... and framed in the doorway was a familiar figure.
It was Lessa. She looked at him with serious, smoldering eyes. The tall warrior teen, a few centimeters shorter than his two meters, wore a blue leather bikini top that cupped her firm mounds nicely. Two gun belts crisscrossed her trim waist, framing tight blue leather shorts that molded to her body like a second skin. Her limbs were muscular yet graceful, and her long brown braid reached the small of her back. She was floating in the zero gravity of the shuttle, not crossing into the artificial gravity of the pod.
"You again," she said, huskily. Horn nodded, feeling blood flow into his cock causing it to rise up in salute to the dangerous beauty before him. He stood calmly, regarding her with questioning, confident eyes. Lessa looked him up and down, licking her lips. "So, you need ... assistance?"
"From you? Always." He thought he saw a slight blush on that stern face, and she floated back a bit and motioned him to enter the shuttle.
The hatch slid shut behind him, and looking around Horn noticed that she was alone. Before, there had been another teen with her.
"Just you?" he asked, regarding her. Lessa scoffed.
"We got rid of all the... 'boys', after seeing you for the first time. Once we saw a MAN..." and Lessa floated up to him, "nothing else would satisfy." Lessa reached out and gently but firmly took the pistol out of Horn's hand. "No guns allowed, Captain." Casting it aside to float towards the back of the cabin, she then ran a hand down his chest to his groin, feeling the long, thick, hard weapon there.
"And this," she added, beginning to slide down his body, "will have to be disarmed before we get to the ship."
Captain Horn grabbed onto two hand holds on the ceiling as Lessa unfastened the fly on his dress uniform pants and pulled out the thick nine inch cock. (Male body parts were still measured in the archaic units of their barbarian past. Female breasts used a new unit of measurement called a "hand full" or hf) Floating before him, she looked up again with those smoldering eyes and slowly licked the head. Horn groaned, closing his eyes, and felt her slowly lick over and around the smooth dome of his cock. He bent his legs back and his feet found handles on the wall he could wedge them into to hold himself still. Lessa's hands pulled his large balls out of his pants as well, hefting their weight as her mouth continued to tease his cock. Suddenly, she took all of him in her mouth. He let out a cry, as her nose found itself in his pubic hair and he throbbed in her throat. Pulling back she began sucking loudly, and Horn felt himself thrusting into her mouth. He was not going to last long...
Lessa felt him start to swell, and she pulled back so only the large head was held captive. She bit lightly, and with a yell he exploded. Thick, white Captain's cum shot into her eager mouth, and Lessa drank it all. She moaned around his cock, and Horn could smell her sex.
Taking one final lick into the slit in his cock to get that last taste of goodness, Lessa released his member and floated up. She was licking her lips. Horn let go of his hand and foot holds and looked back at her, drained but still manly and in control.
"I'm going to have to search you for weapons often," She said, with the smile of a predator.
They felt the shuttle shudder just then, and heard the banging of metal. Gravity slowly kicked in, setting them on their feet.
"We're here. Welcome back to The Liberty."
His weapon of mass orgasm put back away, Captain Horn followed Lessa out the shuttle hatch an into the large shuttle bay. It was less crowded than last time, and he noticed that indeed there seemed to be no males. In addition, the lovely teen ladies were much more underdressed than was the case on his previous visit. Flesh of various colors was in abundance, and one mechanic was even working fully nude. Her body was covered with grease and grime, and Horn felt a stirring in his just drained groin just looking at her.
With a cough, Lessa brought his attention to the girl in front of him. It was Mel again, the apparent head of security, at least when he was here. Like Lessa she was fit and trim, if a little darker in skin tone. She was dressed in a uniform half shirt over her small breasts and matching tan shorts. Her bald head shined, and her green eyes regarded him as if he was a bowl of ice-cream, to be slowly licked, tasted, and savored. Bowing his head to her in greeting, Mel then led the Captain out of the shuttle bay and into the heart of the ship. His eyes were focused on the sway of her hips, and on how the shorts left her ass smooth and well defined. After too short a walk, she showed him into his cabin.
"I hope these accommodations are better than your last ones," she said, slowly walking over to the bed and laying a hand on it. "We think you deserve only the best."
"And is that bed the best?" Horn asked, raising an eyebrow. Mel looked over her shoulder at him, and unbuttoned her top and let it fall to the floor. Her shorts followed, and he found himself admiring her nude form from behind. She turned, and he saw the full red bush between her legs as she first sat then lay down on the bed, stretching out. Mel turned her head towards the Captain.
"Why don't we try it out?"
.... There is more of this story ...

The Beat had a tear in his eye - he reckoned it was grit from the wind
PUBLISHED: 13:53 26 October 2018 | UPDATED: 14:51 26 October 2018
Mark Murphy says the bond his friend Kevin Beattie had with the Ipswich Town supporters was extraordinary
It’s been an incredibly difficult few weeks for all of us who knew Kevin Beattie, especially for his wife Maggie and his family. We were all shocked by his untimely death at just 64.
We all know Kevin had more than his fair share of health problems over the years but he always bounced back, saying to me, “You can’t keep me down, pal, I’m the Beat!”
Like his former team mates and Town fans, I thought he was indestructible. I thought he’d be here forever.
I’ve personally known Beat for 20 plus years but for the past seven years he was my BBC Radio Suffolk co-host on Life’s a Pitch.
When I started the programme all those years ago, his was the first name on my team sheet and I never regretted it.
We’ve had great fun together and I know the rest of the team on the show would say the same.
He told us some brilliant stories about his time playing for Town but the best ones were the ones he saved for when the microphones weren’t live!
My favourite story was on the day of the FA Cup Final in 1978, he got chatting to a police officer about his BMW motorbike and ended up riding it around the team hotel.
Can you imagine what Sir Bobby would have said if he knew?
Another favourite story of his was beating Sylvester Stallone at arm wrestling whilst filming Escape to Victory. He was always keen to point out it was both arms, left and right!
We played proper music on the show. Roy Orbison, Freda Payne and 10cc were his favourites.
We always ended the show with a prediction which was always a 3-1 win for Ipswich Town but sadly of late those predictions have been way off the mark.
When we hosted the programme from the fanzone at Portman Road, he would be mobbed by the supporters who loved him so much and he loved them with equal measure. He’d be endlessly signing autographs and posing for selfies.
In all the time I spent with him there, he never had to buy his own pint; there’d always be a fan more than willing to buy it for him.
You see, he always had time for people, nothing was ever too much trouble and I’d often have to drag him back to the microphone to carry on the show! One programme from the Dove I lost him for the whole show! He was under a sea of Town fans from around the world all wanting to talk to him and buy him a pint!
I asked him once why he spent so long with fans and he told me that when he was a young lad he approached a footballer for an autograph and was told, “Not now, son,” and he swore then that if he ever made it as footballer, he would never let a fan down. And do you know what? He never did.
One moment I’ll never forget is Beat’s 60th birthday. He wasn’t well at all that day but he came in as he didn’t want to let the fans down.
Dozens of them piled into the BBC Radio Suffolk studio and we really made a fuss of him.
Later, at Portman Road, I sat next to him in the front row of the director’s box and on the 60th minute of the match the fans burst in to 60 seconds of applause for his 60th birthday. He turned round to me and said, “Murph, what are the fans doing?” I said, “Beat, it’s for you, you’d better stand up,” and he did, with a tear in his eye which he reckoned was grit from the wind! That showed to me the extraordinary bond he had and will always have with the supporters.
The Beat always had a nickname for the ex-players who guested on the show. Brian Talbot was Noddy, Mick Mills was Bomber, Terry Butcher was Basil, George Burley was Spanner, Allan Hunter was Big Al and Trevor Whymark was Skid!
In return, they called him Monster! It was great to witness that camaraderie and banter.
He was such a strong, gifted player with natural ability.
Not only was he strong, but he could leap like a Salmon to head the ball. It’s said he could jump so high he could read the time on the town hall clock.
He was fast too.
Sir Bobby Robson labelled him one of the best footballers he ever worked with. The two of them had a very, very special bond.
Kevin Beattie was, without any doubt, the most naturally talented footballer to pull on an Ipswich Town shirt.
The term legend is bandied around too much these days but Beat certainly deserved that tag.
His family have told me what a comfort it’s been to see and hear all the tributes paid to him from fans and the world of football.
There will certainly never be another Kevin Beattie. He was a one off, he was Sir Bobby Robson’s “diamond” and I’m proud to say he was my friend.
I’d like to think he’s now where the pitch is always green and he’s gone straight into Bobby’s starting line-up.
God Bless you, Beat, and here’s hoping for a 3-1 win for Town on Saturday.

Tell us a little about you and your partner, what you do, how did you meet, what you love, what is unique about you and your relationship…
I would say the stars happened to align for us to be together. However, Andrew would say he looked for me. Andrew and I first met years ago at a BBQ hosted by a mutual friend and we never spoke to each other. Andrew relocated to Hamilton for work and I remained in Auckland for university.
Andrew says he never forgot about me since the BBQ and once he moved back to Auckland for work, he reached out to me. We had our first date after exchanging a few text and everything just felt right. We've been inseparable ever since.
What was the theme/aesthetic of your big day?
Our traditional Kenyan wedding was amazing but not as intimate. So we wanted to make sure our 2nd wedding would be intimate and reflected who we were as a couple that loves nature.

An Analysis of the Differences between the Federalist and Anti-Federalist
The Federalists wanted to follow the filter model. This was a model of how they believed all the governments should be run. They wanted enlightened and superior men to govern because they were mainly high class. They also wanted to not have representatives directly responsible and they also did not want frequent elections. They also wanted a strong executive branch and an independent judiciary branch. This was called a mixed government. A big idea for the federalists was a large government and freedom of religion.
The Anti-federalists on the other hand believed the complete opposite. They thought that the people themselves should be involved and that they should gather in public to assemble. They also thought that the representatives should mirror the people. Small town farmers also made a big impact because the anti-federalists very mainly farmers. The representatives should be directly responsible and they should have frequent elections. They also wanted a small executive branch and a large legislature branch and also state centered. They also strongly believed that there should be one overall vision and also they wanted to be very simple.
The Federalists and the Anti-Federalist are two opposite types of people in their learning and work. Almost all of the Federalists were learned and had high paying jobs as either lawyer of delegates. They were very smart and wanted to have a strong executive branch so they could control the government. The anti-federalists were farmers and most likely did not have a very good education. They did not want a large executive because they did not want the higher class of people to rule. They thought that it should be even so it was fair the common man instead of the enlightened
The Federalists and Anti-federalists are very different as proven in the last four paragraphs. The federalists were more smart and enlightened men than the anti-federalists who were in fact, only farmers. The Federalists wanted there to be a strong national government and to not have the representatives directly responsible. While the Anti-federalists wanted to have a weak government and for the representatives to be directly responsible because they did not want the government to control everyone.

The 17-year-old has yet to make his debut for Atletico, but as the only Englishman playing in Spain is relishing life at the Vicente Calderon.
Kebbie said in The Sun: "Spanish football suits my game, as I am a full-back but I like to get forward.
"I would certainly encourage more players at youth level at 17 and 18, as this is the time to develop.
"It is an important two or three years before first-team football. But I have trained with the first team six times and I have really enjoyed it."

likely to go along with this. They want nukes as soon as possible.
An Iranian diplomat, held in Iraq by Sunni Arab terrorists for 55 days, has been released. The Iraqi kidnappers had demanded that Iran release Iraqi prisoners still held still held from the 1980s Iran-Iraq war. The problem was, there were no Iraqi prisoners of war still held in Iran. After long negotiations, the last of these prisoners were released before the 2003 war, and the kidnappers were finally convinced that this was so. But it had become a popular belief in Iraq, and Iran, that both sides continued to hold prisoners of war. The group that grabbed the Iranian diplomat were seized by a Sunni Arab nationalist group that was angry at suspected Iranian manipulation of the Shia Arab majority in Iraq. Despite the millions of Shia Arabs in the Middle East, many mainline Sunni Arabs hate Shias, partly for religious reasons, and partly because the largest concentration of Shias in the world are Iranians (who are not Arab, and have long tormented the

Could the ballplaying actors play ball? "Snipes wasn't bad for how little he'd played, but I wouldn't tell my pitcher to walk him."
How were the fringe benefits? "They only let us drink fake beer, which was horrible. Snipes had someone sneak me in a 12-pack of real Budweiser."
What gets left on the cutting room floor? "I haven't seen the movie yet, but I heard they cut some of the scenes with me cursing. Those are the scenes I like best."
How faithful was celluloid baseball to real baseball? "Well, in the movie we play in a rainstorm that's like a typhoon. No real game would go on in that kind of rain and mud. And they also put books in the dugout. I tried to tell 'em, you don't get a whole lot of books in big league dugouts."
How much money did he make? "Not as much as De Niro or Snipes—or the caterer."

Gospel Singer Found Dead in prison Cell
Gospel Singer Kizito Mihigo has been found dead in mysterious circumstances.
The singer who hails from Rwanda was found dead in his prison cell following his arrest earlier this month.
Mihigo was arrested in 2014 and charged with plotting to kill the president and top government leaders.
He was later pardoned before being re-arrested again this month.
According to the Rwandese police spokesperson, the singer was found hanging in his cell.
“He was found hanging by an officer in the morning on Monday. He used the bed sheets that he was sleeping on to hang himself. Preliminary investigations show that he hanged himself on the window of his cell, but more investigations are being conducted, investigation is underway to establish reasons that pushed him to kill himself” Ms. Marie Michelle Umuhoza

I knew it was too good to be true when we were getting 4 eggs a day! we now get 1 egg! I only wish they would take it in turns! We on't have enough room or time for chicks although I would love it to happen. Hopefully back to normal after a month of grumpy hens!!

In a shocking incident, a medical aspirant Vidhi Suryavanshi, died by suicide after learning that she had scored just six marks in the National Eligibility-cum-Entrance Test (NEET).
Vidhi Suryavanshi, a resident of Madhya Pradesh’s Chhindwara district appeared for the NEET exam in September. When the results were published, it showed that she had scored just six marks.
The family shared how after learning the score the 18-year-old, who had aspired to be a doctor, was left shocked and went into depression. The parents tried their level best to console her. They also managed to get the OMR sheet which revealed that she had scored 590 marks in the entrance test.
But, by then it was too late. The girl had taken the extreme step. She committed suicide inside her house on Tuesday.
Vidhi Suryavanshi is not the only victim of the NEET exam this year.
A few days ago, some students had alleged that their OMR sheets have been tampered with. Another student identified as Vikash Goyal from Bihar scored just 10 marks in the results. But, when cross-checked with his OMR sheet, it tuned out he had scored 615 out of 720.
In Tamil Nadu, a family had alleged that their son had scored ‘0’ in the result and alleged that his answer sheet was tampered with. Another student who had scored 248 marks in the results, had in fact 594 marks.
Though National Testing Agency (NAT) said that the NEET results were declared after thorough scrutiny and are correct. They assured all genuine grievances will be addressed.
At IFORHER, we pray for strength for Vidhi’s parents to handle this unbearable pain. We also hope that parents would seek an important lesson out of this tragedy. In a competitive and stressful world, it is more important than ever to raise their kids to not only succeed in life, but also handle failures.

Number of Cruises: 1
Cruise Line: Royal Caribbean
Ship: Legend of the Seas
Sailing Date: May 7th, 2005
Although I am new to cruising and do not have any experience on other cruise ships, I can honestly say that my partner and I have come back from our cruise feeling like we had the holiday of a life time.
>From arriving at the port in Southampton everything went very smoothly, hardly no queuing and we were on the ship within about 20 -30 minutes from the time we parked the car.
Once on the ship we were surprised at how luxurious the ship was, obviously some places more so than others, the Centrum especially was something that I was fascinated with.
We settled in and decided to walk around the ship to see all it had to offer, we were very impressed. The service and reception we got from the staff was excellent, they do a very good and professional job.
Getting on and of the ship at ports of call was very hassle free too, the only time we had to queue was to get back on the ship but that was only if a lot of coaches all arrived at the same time.
The food was excellent, we ate in the windjammer café most of the time, although the dinner in the Romeo & Juliet dinning room was outstanding and the service was the same, my partner had the lobster one evening and the waiter offered him another one once he had finished he’s first.
The only thing I would have to complain about is the pricing of the drinks and goods on board, they had changed the currency from dollars to pounds, which worked out to be a lot more expensive. But I think they will have many complaints about this and may reconsider.
So in total it was a great holiday and I would recommend it to anyone, especially if it is going to be your first cruise.
Happy Cruising :-)

Two police officers accused of spying on the sister of a former paratrooper who was unlawfully killed in police custody have been cleared by a disciplinary panel.
The two officers, who were given anonymity, had been accused of running an unauthorised and intrusive surveillance operation against Janet Alder during an inquest into the death of her brother Christopher.
The pair were alleged to have followed Alder and her barrister Leslie Thomas “without appropriate authorisation and justification” to a hotel and car park and attempted to listen in to their private and legally protected conversations.
On Thursday, a disciplinary panel dismissed the gross misconduct charges against the two officers on the fourth day of the hearing, ruling that they had no case to answer.
Alder criticised the verdict, saying it was “an insulting cover-up” and the police were “hiding the truth of what happened”.
She said: “I still don’t know why I was followed. And those who authorised the surveillance have evaded responsibility.”
She said it was another instance of the police burying evidence since she began seeking to find out how Christopher Alder, 37, died in a Hull police station in 1998. He choked to death as a group of officers gave him no help, believing that he was play-acting.
She said she has feared that the police have been spying on her since his death, which has made her “very nervous and scared”.
Ruth Bundey, Alder’s solicitor, said: “This entire process marginalised and disrespected Janet. Humberside police ignored her rights as an interested party and declined to communicate with us.”
The inquest in 2000 concluded that the Falklands veteran and father of two had been unlawfully killed.
It later emerged that up to 14 officers were involved in the surveillance operation on 28 July 2000 during the inquest.
The misconduct charges were brought against the operations commander and deputy operations commander who were alleged to have gone “far beyond the strictly limited terms” of what had been authorised.
Barristers for the men denied misconduct, arguing that culpability lay with their superiors as they believed they were carrying out lawful orders. The pair, who held the rank of detective sergeant and acting detective sergeant in 2000, did not dispute that the surveillance had taken place.
Sam Green, QC for one of the officers, told the hearing that the name of the senior officer who had approved the surveillance had not been identified, adding that somebody in Humberside police, who was either retired or still employed, was “squirming silently”, hoping their identity was not revealed.
Police had only been authorised to carry out surveillance on Alder’s supporters, who had gathered outside Hull crown court during the inquest.
Humberside police had been ordered to hold the misconduct hearing by the watchdog, the Independent Office for Police Conduct, which had investigated the surveillance after it came to light in 2013.
After the panel dismissed the case, DCS Judi Heaton of Humberside police said: “We know that this has been a distressing time for Ms Alder and her family. We do understand her frustration that the exact details around the case have not been able to be established.”
In one of the most controversial deaths in police custody, police officers had stood by chatting and joking as Alder struggled for breath for 11 minutes. An audio tape recorded someone making monkey noises as he lay dead.
In 2011, the government formally apologised to the family for the failures in the investigation into his death.

Family appeal over stabbed cyclist
The family of a 15-year-old passionate cyclist stabbed to death in a "senseless" street attack broke down in tears today as they appealed for witnesses to come forward.
Alan Cartwright managed to continue cycling a short distance after the attack on Caledonian Road in Islington, north London, on Friday, but soon collapsed and was pronounced dead at the scene later.
Police have released "shocking" CCTV footage showing the moment the teenager was stabbed in the chest as he was cycling with friends along a busy road.
Alan's mother and sister described the Army cadet and Celtic and Arsenal fan as a "joker" who loved bikes and never caused any trouble.
Fighting back tears, Alan's mother Michelle Watson, 39, said: "He always made you laugh about anything and everything. He was just the funny one out of his friends.
"I feel angry, I want somebody found for this. I just feel numb.
"Looking at the CCTV footage it looks like he got punched, like somebody had just hit him.
"It was so quick, he just carried on riding and two minutes up the road he is collapsed and dead. It's like it's not real.
"I would say to witnesses, if you've got any sort of conscience come forward because a brother and son is dead."
The teenager's sister, Cherrie Smith, 21, broke down when she spoke of him not being there when she gets married.
Ms Smith said that her brother's death has not fully sunken in yet because the family have not seen Alan's body.
She said: "We want any witnesses to give as much information as they possibly can. If you have a little brother or sister, ask yourself 'what if it was them?'
"If that was me, I wouldn't be able to live with myself.
"People are saying 'wrong place, wrong time', but those people shouldn't be carrying knives on them. The whole of his life Alan has grown up in the Cally (Caledonian Road) and you just don't expect it.
"He has always put a front on in front of me and his friends that he was like a hard man, but he wouldn't hurt a fly, he really wouldn't.
"I just clearly hope someone gets found for this - knowing he has been taken away from us in such an unlawful way, it's just heartbreaking because there's a chance someone could get away with this.
"We clearly think it was a bike robbery, but the question is 'why'? Why has that person done that?"
In the CCTV footage, a second suspect is shown lunging at one of the Alan's friends and knocking him off his bike.
A third is seen crossing the road and grabbing another friend to pull him off his bike.
A post-mortem examination yesterday concluded that the cause of Alan's death was a single stab wound to the chest.
Detective chief inspector Chris Jones, who is leading the investigation for the Homicide and Major Crime Command, appealed for help in identifying the three suspects.
DCI Jones said that, while he was keeping an open mind, lines of inquiry suggested that the motive may have been theft.
He also made it clear that Alan was not a gang member.
"Alan, in my mind, was not a gang member and was purely a 15-year-old boy cycling with his friends on a Friday night at 7.30pm," he said.
" The footage of the suspects attacking Alan and his friends is truly shocking. Alan stood no chance of defending himself against his attacker, who casually stepped out in front of him and stabbed him in the chest.
"Identifying and arresting the suspects is our absolute priority. We are working tirelessly and the investigation is moving at a fast pace.
"It is obvious from the footage that Caledonian Road is busy with cars and pedestrians. We have already spoken to a number of witnesses who have provided helpful information to the investigation; however, I would like to re-appeal to anyone who may know something about Alan's murder and the robbery of the bikes.
"Where are the two bicycles that were taken? Someone may have noticed a new bike brought home or perhaps you have been offered a similar bike for sale? If so, I would urge you to contact the police.
"I would like to reassure anyone who is worried about contacting the police that they will be treated with the utmost sensitivity."
All three suspects are described by police as male youths who were wearing dark tops and had their faces partly covered.
The bicycles stolen during the stabbing were a red mountain bike and a black and red pedal cycle.

"I think my mindset now is competing against myself every single day, making sure I'm improving every single day," said Browne. "Same goes as before, just seeing where the chips fall. Not really worried about depth charts, but at the same time, making sure I'm ready whenever I'm called upon."
"I came in with the mindset of winning the job," said Browne. "I think we all did, Cody and Max, also. That was my goal, to come in here and start, but obviously things didn't work out that way, but it's not a totally negative thing. I get to keep on developing, keep on working and like I said before, staying ready at all times and making sure I make the most of my opportunities."
Head coach Lane Kiffin broke the news to Browne personally in a one-on-one sit down. Afterward, Kiffin said Browne handled the news like a professional.
"It's how I was raised, I guess," said Browne. "Just taking it in stride, just trying to take the positive out of the situation, making sure I keep on working. I wasn't sullen, wasn't pouting. I was appreciative that he met with me. I was appreciative that he talked to me, it was a class act on their half and it was a meeting I was thankful to have."
While the news was negative for Browne, he says he is continuing to find the positive in the situation.
"Obviously I was disappointed because of the competitive side of me," said Browne. "But at the same time, makes me more motivated each and every day to go out there and push Max and Cody or whoever it may be. Just making sure I can get the team better, whatever I can do. Whether it was scout team today with blitz versus our one D, whatever it may be that helps me and helps the team also."
Nineteen players missed day eleven of Fall Camp due to injuries, and while Wittek or Kessler haven't suffered any set backs, Browne says he is ready to step in if need be.
"We play a sport that filled with injuries, you never know what will happen," said Browne. "We saw this year at receiver. George Farmer was down and then two weeks later, Steven Mitchell goes down. So, guys are stepping in there right away, and I have to take that mindset each and every week, watch as much film as Max or Cody and be right in there preparing them for each week and at the same time prepare myself for whenever that time comes."
Fall Camp has almost reached the halfway point and continuing on into season, Browne says he has taken away a few keys from this experience.
"I think it's exactly what they told me when I got recruited here: it's USC, we're going to compete every single practice and every single meeting no matter what the situation may be," said Browne. "That's exactly what happened. Gave it my all, obviously, so now I keep moving forward."
Browne has not yet announced if he will redshirt this season, but he says he is "ready for whatever happens."
"Like I've been saying, I'll be ready all year, from week one through the whole season," said Browne. "Like the coaches have [said,] they're not sure what will happen. I don't really have an answer, but I'll always be ready for when my time comes."

The 4 year old boy is more independent. You feel capable, and you are, of controlling your own strength and security. He likes to feel part of the housework and takes care of his own things. He gets to wash his hands and face, put away his own clothes, fix the sheets on his bed, brush his teeth, and pick up his toys in the room and all of that ... by himself! He interacts very well with his friends and loves to invite them to his home.
- You can go up and down the stairs more easily, participate in competitive games, and you will always be ready to play whatever. It shows his preferences regarding clothes, hairstyle, food and friends.
- Begins to ask questions about all aspects of your curiosity, and will show some interest in your birth and about death. He loves looking at pictures and movies from when he was little.
- At his level of thought an evolution is perceived, since he can classify objects and materials by color, shape or number. But not only that, but it is already located in space and understands the notions -outside-, -in-, -up, -down-. Likewise, it also narrates experiences of daily life and does so with greater fluency and better pronunciation.
At this age, the child has instability in his emotions. He laughs and cries for no apparent reason, and that causes him to return, from time to time, to the tantrums of two years. He wants to impose his wishes by defying his parents. The four-year-old will feel a special preference for his mother if he is a boy, identifying with the father and competing with him for his mother. However, the girl will show a weakness for her father and will act in the same way as the boy.
It is a stage in which parents must have a lot patience, tact and control of the situation. Let's not forget that we are dealing with a young child, who has a very limited capacity for understanding and it is we, the parents, who must teach them, little by little. Other than that, it will start with the because S. He will look for answers and it is advisable to always answer him truthfully. By responding to a child, we are teaching him to think and helping him to form the basis of his worldview.
You can read more articles similar to Four year old boy, in the category of on-site development stages.

This American YouTuber is also a TV host as well as an actress. A deadly combination as far as influence and online traction is concerned. Fast forward to her channel; she has billions of views. A feat she has not accomplished in a day. The journey started back in 2006, and two centuries later, she is a force to reckon with. Born in 1984, Justine knows just how to harvest subscribers and viewers. Her ijustine.tv is the tool she uses to achieve this.
As I write this, Justine Ezarik is living in her late thirties. Her three decades and more of experience in this life had a beginning. She went to Pittsburgh Technical Institute after clearing her high school life in Bentworth High. All along, it was clear she was gifted in her art, but no one knew she would have this influence. She is the daughter of a PE teacher and a coal miner. Careers that were in no way a match to Justine Ezarik.
Her leadership skills were there to be seen, and she was elected her class’ president while in school. Not only that, but she was also a volleyball player. She was good in class, had a fine personality, and thrived in sports too. Clearly, she was an all-around student. After clearing high school, Justine was fortunate to earn herself a scholarship. It was a great opportunity to excel even more.
- Ezarik is a jack of all trades. The only difference is she seems to be a mistress of all. She makes her prowess look easy and effortless. The best part is her ability to juggle between acting, hosting, publishing, and other specializations. Between 2004 and 2006, she did graphics design and aided in video production through her editing skills. This time, she was garnering capital and experience to start her own businesses.
The year that Justine started her YouTube channel is the same year she made it to the final list of Yahoo Talent Show. This was just the beginning of a great future. Justine was approaching her best years career-wise, and it was not long before she played a role in a TV series. These are the roles that played a major role in establishing the iJustine’s influence. With the fame she was gaining by day, it was easy to attract more followers.
In 2007, iJustine played a volunteer role on Justin Kan’s channel. According to her wisdom, Ezarik had been convinced Technology is the right topic to focus on. She did production on iPhone just about the time the tech giant debuted. Her video earned millions of views, and that did not go unrecognized. She would later receive a payout as a token of recognition and appreciation.
By the end of 2007, Ezarik had earned several recognitions and invitations. Great people don’t just attend events and shows; they get invited. iJustine’s greatness emerged as she earned several calls to attend several events and shows. Her exploits helped her get a contract offer from Xtra. The expert training organization had been impressed with her achievements and abilities. She was just a special kind of breed.
2017 saw Ezarik get Forbes’ recognition in the list of the ten best Business influencers. This was two years before her channel hit the one million subscribers’ mark. A feat not many individuals have managed. Apart from online activity, Ezarik is also an actress and has had a good acting career too.
iJustine appeared in The Wedding Ringer, Law & Order, Users, The Place is Right, and many other productions. Those were just a few picks of her glittering acting career. She appeared in more shows, movies, and other productions. Her influence propelled her to the best platforms, and she never disappointed.
Awards and Nominations
Acting, show hosting, and other creative productions have mostly been recognized the world over. Forbes, Oscars, MTV are some of the most popular awards and creative organizations in the world of production. Talent must be awarded, and these brands do so in the most pompous manner. Justine Ezarik has won several awards and several nominations.
In 2011, she won the Webby awards – Web personality category. In 2015, she won the Best Lifestyle Series- Streamy awards. 2016 saw Justine win the Streamy awards again for the Best Ensemble Cast category for different productions. She has won many others. In addition to that, she has earned many nominations. In 2010, Justin was nominated for Streamy awards – Best Vlogger awards. The same year saw Ezarik get a Teen Choice award in the Choice Web Star category. She only made it to the nominations list this time. The following year, she had come of age, and that is why she won the Webby award.
2012 to 2014 saw Justine get two Webby award nominations as well as Streamy awards. These were her unlucky years as she had to wait until 2015 to win another award since she last did that in 2011. When it rains, they say it pours, and that was Justine’s 2015 and 2016 years as she won back to back awards. A feat anyone would want.
It is not easy to win a nomination from a reputable awarding organization. It is even more challenging to win the award itself. Justine has not only earned nominations but also gone ahead and won them. This she has not done once. She has done it time and again.
YouTubing is gaining popularity by the day. Each other time, a new youtube joins the trend, and this makes the art more competitive. In competitions, only the strong triumph and Justine has done that. She has had a successful YouTubing career as well as other practices, for she is also an actress and a host. From these shows, she has earned quite a fortune as well as become famous and influential. Since launching her channel in 2006, she has seen her audience grow steadily, hitting a million subscribers in 2017 and headed to two million in 2020.

By: Macie Movsesian
Festas are very popular in the Valley and lots of people attend them! The translation for festa is party so that’s what to expect. On August 18-19th of 2018, there was a festa in Pismo Beach. It honors St. Anthony. This festa has been happening annually for about 60 years.
This year, a few kids from Tulare Western were actually part of it. Alissa Amaral, junior from Tulare Union was the queen and Tulare Western’s Chastine Gist, junior, was one of her attendants.
Chastine stated, “It is such a great experience to see the Portuguese culture come alive and come together with my friends and family. I was in a festa 2 years ago and I knew what to expect and it is always fun. We marched in the parade to church mass, and then after to the Portuguese Hall. I was an attendant for the queen so I was by her side and held her cape for the weekend. Highly recommend going to one if you have the chance!”
The queen is a representative for the Portuguese community and this time, she represented Pismo Beach. She truly has a lot of pressure on her to make sure everything is in order and going with the flow. So, her attendants help her with whatever she needs to do. The queen also has her court that are along with her for the festa. Gianna Benedetti, junior, was part of the court in this festa.
Gianna said, “It was a really cool experience! I have never been in a festa so it was interesting learning truly everything that comes with being in a festa. I was part of the court and we are basically made up of 10 girls and their escorts that help lead the queen. My favorite part had to be dancing because that was a learning experience as well.”
Hundreds of people attended the festa for church mass, Portuguese food, and the culture! It is a great way to come together as a community and get to know the culture WAY better. This is a very fun event that is highly recommended throughout the community!

Birmingham City chairman David Gold has launched a stinging attack on Robbie Savage after the midfielder refused to end their feud and insisted: "I don't deserve to be treated that badly."
Savage and Gold were involved in a war of words after the former Welsh international midfielder moved from Blues to Blackburn in acrimonious circumstances during the January 2005 transfer window.
Gold decided yesterday's Barclays Premiership game between the clubs was the right time to bury the hatchet and was left bitterly disappointed when Savage brushed aside his handshake.
Gold ended up having the last laugh after Savage had scored his first goal for Rovers thanks to Mikael Forssell's first goal in open play for two years.
Gold said: "I am hugely disappointed with what happened on Tuesday. When you put your hand out to shake someone else's hand, and they don't reciprocate, it's pretty unpleasant. It's horrible.
"It really disappointed me because it just didn't occur to me that Robbie would react in that way.
"I was great friends with Robbie. I don't deserve to be treated that badly.
"I tried my best to keep him at Birmingham. I did everything in my power because for two-and-a-half years he was outstanding.
"It was him who left, reneging on a four-year contract, which was pretty outrageous.
"Nevertheless, I still offered to shake his hand because you've got to move on in this world. You shouldn't carry grudges. We are big boys and we've got to get on with our lives.
"Will Robbie regret what he did? I don't think so. I wish him well but again I will say, it's disappointing for someone to ignore the hand of friendship."
While the war of words raged off the field between Savage and Gold, the main thing was that Blues won the battle on the park.
Many teams might have been psychologically broken by the sight of Savage scoring against them at such a crucial moment. But Steve Bruce's Blues had the character to come back and win and give themselves a massive injection of confidence for this term's final three games.
"There was no way we were giving it up," said Bruce. "We've been through a lot over the last few months and we all know what the low point was but the team have responded really well over the last three home games.
"We deserved the win as we created the better chances and, even when we got two more injuries, the rest just rolled up their sleeves and had a right good go."
As far as that never-ending injury list is concerned, Bruce was not helped by picking up those two more, to Jermaine Pennant and Emile Heskey, who are both now battling to be fit for tomorrow's crucial trip to Everton.
"I came into the press conference before the Villa game with everybody fit," moaned Bruce. "Now I've lost six or seven within a week.
"Jermaine hurt his groin in the first 30 seconds taking the first free kick and Emile's gone over on his ankle and we'll have to see how they are.
"Stan Lazaridis is struggling with a groin, Muzzy Izzet might have a chance, although his knee is still sore, Jiri Jarosik nowhere near, David Dunn has no chance and Matthew Upson's problem is well chronicled."
At least Bruce was encouraged by the performances on Wednesday night from two players who have been spent too much time in the treatment room - goalscorer Mikael Forssell and Julian Gray, who was involved in the creation of both Blues goals.
"Julian Gray has had a horrible ankle that's kept him out six weeks," said Bruce. "I maybe wasn't ideal that he'd played half a game for the reserves the previous night but he gave us that balance and athleticism that's needed against teams like Blackburn.
"As for Mikael, he's been frustrated as hell at times but it was a typical Mikael Forssell goal to pop up at the death like that and shift his feet the way he did to get the shot in.
"We hope that's him off and running now."

I knit this hat over 2 years ago. It was before I fixed my twisted stich. I still like to wear it even though it's not perfect. I wore it today in the snow and it kept my head really warm.... I think it's chunky encore, but ti's been so long that that is only a guess. I would like to knit another one so it's perfect. I like chunky hats.

14 Mar, 2018MIRROR.CO.UK
British physicist Stephen Hawking has died at the age of 76, but he's left a lasting legacy behind.
From his book A Brief History of Time to appearing on television shows, the scientist has made science accessible - and interesting - for the masses.
But what do we know of his life? We take a look at the man, his marriage, how he talked with his synthesizer and his views on black holes, religion and what he wanted on his tombstone.
While Hawking tried to solve the mysteries of the universe, the man himself was quite happy to share his life.
1. Where did he grow up?
Born in Oxford on January 8 1942 - 300 years after the death of astronomer Galileo Galilei - Professor Hawking grew up in St Albans, Hertfordshire. His parents thought it was safer than London.
2. When was he diagnosed?
After falling while ice skating during his first year as a grad student he was told he had a rare form of motor neurone disease - amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) - at the age of 22.
Hawking was given just a few years to live. It's unusual to be diagnosed so early, but he later said it meant he had to think.
"By losing the finer dexterity of my hands, I was forced to travel through the universe in my mind and try to visualize the ways in which it worked," he later said.
3. He's appeared in a lot of TV shows
Hawking is as much a celebrity as he is a scientist, having appeared on The Simpsons, Futurama, Star Trek and having provided narration for a British Telecom commercial that was later sampled on a Pink Floyd album. He first appeared as himself on TV in 1993 - in Star Trek: The Next Generation - making jokes while playing poker with Albert Einstein and Isaac Newton. He also appeared on The Big Bang Theory.
He's also starred in his own miniseries Stephen Hawking's Universe.
4. He was bullied at school - and wasn't actually top of the class
He had a difficult time at the local public school and was persecuted as a "swot" who was more interested in jazz, classical music and debating than sport and pop. Although not top of the class, he was good at maths and "chaotically enthusiastic in chemistry".
He went on to study physics as Maths wasn't available at the university he chose - he went to the same college as his father at Oxford.
5. ...in fact he said he was mediocre
Hawking has said of his workload as an undergraduate at Oxford "amounted to an average of just an hour a day".
He also said: "I'm not proud of this lack of work, I'm just describing my attitude at the time, which I shared with most of my fellow students. You were supposed to be brilliant without effort, or to accept your limitations and get a fourth class degree."
6. He went on to get a first
Despite his workload confession, Hawking got a first and went to Cambridge to begin work on his PhD - but he was already beginning to experience the first symptoms of his illness, having fallen over twice for no reason during the last year of his undergraduate degree.
7. His first marriage
Hawking has credited his marriage in 1965 to Jane Wilde, a language student, as a turning point in his life at a time when he was unsure as to what the point of a degree was if he was to die soon. They went on to have three children - Robert, Lucy, and Timothy.
8. He interrupted a lecture
At a meeting of the Royal Society meeting, Hawking interrupted a lecture by renowned astrophysicist Sir Fred Hoyle to let him know that he had made a mistake. When asked how he knew there had been an error, Hawking replied: "Because I've worked them out in my head."
9. His research on black holes
During the 1970s Hawking produced a stream of first class research, including probably his most important contribution to cosmology: the discovery of Hawking radiation, which allows a black hole to leak energy and gradually fade away to nothing.
10. A Brief History Of Time was a best selling book
In the 1980s, Professor Hawking and Professor Jim Hartle proposed a model of the universe which had no boundaries in space or time. The concept was described in A Brief History Of Time, which sold 25 million copies worldwide.
11. His second wife was his nurse
In February 1990 he left his wife of twenty five years to set up home with one of his nurses, Elaine Mason. The couple married in September 1995 but divorced in 2006.
12. He's predicted the end of humanity
Among some of his more unconventional theories, Professor Hawking has predicted the end of humanity - due to global warming, a new killer virus, or the impact of a large comet.
13. His awards
In 2009 he was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom, the highest civilian award in the United States. He was awarded an CBE in 1982 and the Companion of Honour in 1989.
He also was given many other awards, medals and prizes like Fundamental Physics prize (2013), Copley Medal (2006) and the Wolf Foundation prize (1988).
Hawking was the Lucasian Professor of Mathematics at the University of Cambridge for 30 years, taking up the post in 1979 and retiring on 1 October 2009.
He is also a Fellow of Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge having held many other academic positions.
14. His relationship with religion - was he an atheist?
In recent years, Professor Hawking has examined the relationship between science and religion, writing a 2010 book Grand Design, which argues that evoking God is not necessary to explain the origins of the universe. He has said he's an atheist, though he has caused confusion before by claiming the entire universe is God - he has expressed pantheistic views.
15. His life could be summed up in an equation
His formula involves the speed of light (c), Newton's constant (G) and other symbols that probably make no sense to you or me - it's used for measuring emissions from black holes, a formula known as Hawking radiation.
Hawking himself was puzzled at first as he thought black holes were celestial death traps that swallowed up energy. He then decided that it was possible because of the quantum theory, general relativity and thermodynamics - and brought it all together in one simple formula.
16. Hawking wanted his equation carved on his tombstone
He once said he wanted the Hawking Equation put on his gravestone when he died.
17. He almost died in 1985 - and how he got his speech synthesizer
Hawking did almost die of pneumonia when he was travelling to Geneva. He was unconscious and hooked to a ventilator. His wife then had the decision of whether to remove the life support - but she rejected the idea.
He underwent a tracheotomy, to help him breathe, but it removed his ability to speak, which is why he had his famous speech synthesizer.
18. Who made his speech synthesizer?
It was made by a Calfornia-based company called Words Plus, which ran Equalizer on an Apple II computer.
The system was mounted on to the wheelchair so Hawking could 'speak' using a hand clicker to choose words on a screen.
When he was no longer able to use his hands Hawking used an infrared switch attached to his glasses that detects cheek movements.
The tech was overhauled by Intel, though he actually insisted he keep the robotic voice with the no-accent as he said it was part of his identity.
19. He wrote his book using the synthesizer
Hawking was convinced he could write a book about the mysteries of the universe that everyone would be able to understand.
When he lost the ability to write and speak the task proved harder, but he used his speech synthesizer with help from students who relayed his draft changes to his US editor by phone.
A Brief History of Time was the result. He went on to write many more books, even co-writing one with his daughter Lucy.
This article was first published by Jo-Anne Rowney on Mirror

I think it started after Christmas. Actually, it was probably before Christmas because he probably asked for it for Christmas and Santa didn't deliver. Either way. It's been a while.
But today we got the hamster.
Keaton is like the animal whisperer. He loves animals and they tend to love him back. He's kind of a people whisperer, too, and he sings like he's on Broadway when he's in the shower, but those are not relevant to this post.
Keaton decided he wanted a hamster.
Trey and I responded as a team. Nope. No way. Absolutely not. This is a no rat zone. Rodent free home. It will smell and then it will die and then we'll have a dead smelly hamster in our house and a distraught Keaton. No hamster.
But Keaton was not deterred. He continued to ask. All. The. Time.
First, there was the debate.
Trey and I were watching tv in our room, and Keaton came in, set up a tv tray, stacked some papers on it (his "notes"), and announced, "Welcome to the debate about Keaton's hamster. I'll begin with opening remarks. First, a hamster will teach me responsibility. I will have to take care of it and help it if it gets sick. I will have to give it food and water. Second, hamsters are good pets. They stay in their cages, but you can get them out to play when you want. Third, I have saved up enough allowance to buy the hamster and everything it needs. Are there any responses to this debate?"
It was pretty awesome. We laughed a lot. But then we said nope. No way. Absolutely not. This is a no rat zone. Rodent free home. It will smell and then it will die and then we'll have a dead smelly hamster in our house and a distraught Keaton. No hamster.
Again he was not deterred. He kept asking. We would set deadlines for him. "If you ask about that hamster one more time today, you are going to bed early." He always, always stopped asking then. He waited until the next day, and then started all over. We later realized it was a strategic move so as to not bug us too much while still asking over and over and over again.
Then he talked to his super nice teacher who happened to have a hamster cage she would like to give away. "She really wants me to have it," he would say, "and it would save even more money because I wouldn't have to buy a cage."
Everywhere we went - school, church, to see family - people would say, "I heard Keaton is getting a hamster."
That dumb hamster was taking over.
Still, we resisted. At this point we began just avoiding. Keaton would ask me on the way to gymnastics and I would tell him we needed to have a meeting about it with Dad. He would ask Trey, and Trey would deflect just like I did. We got very, very good at avoiding. When my dad offered to take the boys on a ski trip on spring break, that bought three whole weeks of "Who will take care of it while you're skiing? We have to wait to talk about after the ski trip."
The day he returned...the very day...I found him on the computer researching the types of hamsters and their costs. He had a list of which ones he liked the best. He asked each person in our family and some of the neighbors which was the cutest. Then he started asking again for permission to buy it, explaining in detail each thing he would get from his teacher, each thing he would purchase, and its cost.
Worried that he wouldn't have the money for tax, he asked if he could do extra chores. Then he asked for more extra chores so he could have money to buy Tucker a hamster, too. Now the hamster was multiplying. I saw hamster babies all over my house, being eaten by the dog. Keaton is truly so sweet for wanting to include Tucker in his adventure, but this was getting out of control.
Let it be known that Keaton James Hickman is one
Finally, last Friday night, Keaton asked one more time. "Can we have the meeting about my hamster now?"
And Trey said, "Keaton, your persistence has paid off. You've answered all of our questions, done your research, made a plan. I'm impressed. So yes, you can have a hamster."
The excitement on his face was priceless.
We didn't get the cage until Monday and were busy Monday and Tuesday nights, so even after Keaton had the answer he wanted he had to patiently wait. On Saturday I took him to browse hamsters so he could decide which one he wanted and could afford. He never complained about those four days of waiting, but he talked non-stop about it!
Tonight I picked him up from choir, and we went to the pet store. I told a store employee that we needed a hamster, and he asked me what kind. I told him the kid was the one in the know. For the next twenty minutes Keaton talked to the guy like a grown up. He explained that he liked the teddy bear hamsters but that he really wants one that he can hold and will play a lot. An active hamster. He asked the man's advice. The store employee suggested a short haired hamster rather than the teddy bear, and Keaton listened intently and determined to meet one of the short hair hamsters. He held it very sweetly and decided it was the one. He said things like, "What type of food do you recommend?" and "Can you show me where to find that?" I just stood back and watched him work his charm on the store employee.
As we checked out with all of our hamster gear, he beamed.
Once we got home, Keaton wanted to put the hamster in his rolling ball thing while we got the cage ready. When he opened the box, that hamster started hissing and going nuts. "This is it," I thought, "I'm about to have a rabid hamster on the loose. Trey better hurry up and get home because I am NOT hamster wrangling tonight!"
Keaton then calmly explained that he must be scared and need to rest in his cage for a while to get used to his new home and new family. He probably missed the pet store, you know? We got the cage ready quickly and loaded George in.
Wouldn't you know it? Twenty minutes later and George and Keaton are best friends. Keaton taught him how to crawl through his tunnel ("He didn't want to jump in at first, but I told him he would be okay, and then he just jumped. I think he really likes it"), shared an apple with him ("Mom, I cut his piece off and gave it to him. I didn't share it with him!"), and they laughed (if hamsters laugh) while George rolled around in his ball.
That hamster really is cute. He's even cuter with this happy kid! Someone remind me of that when there's a dead smelly hamster in my house.

Commonly at the end of summertime I consider my job list of traits I wished to obtain done. It is generally a lengthy checklist! I take that listing and also attempt to select the ones to leave up until following springtime, and also the ones I ‘d like to tackle prior to winter season begins. In 2014 I had actually made an assurance to my kids that I would build them a picnic table, so I added it to the list and also sought my kids picnic table strategies.
The family has the tendency to be outside a lot during the summertime. I recognized that a kids picnic table would be quite helpful. The kids would believe it’s cool to have their own location far from mom and dad, as well as mom and dad would have a good quiet meal away from the kids.
So I dusted off the extra strategies that had actually been in my toolbox and decided that there was still enough time and great weather condition that I might probably bang it off the kids picnic table over the next couple of weekend breaks. I evaluated the materials and made a fast list of all the things I would need to complete as well as I swiftly understood that this would certainly be entirely worth it.
After a quick trip to House Depot I was ready to start my job. It rapidly occurred to me that, although this was a rather simple construct, there was no chance I would have done this on my very own without the table strategies. I was rather delighted that I had actually obtained them.
Both the better half and the kids were surprised to see that the table prepared the following day, however much more relieved that the table was secure as well as tough. I had an unplanned hot-dog lunch. I’ll state this, if you intend to do something for your kids that they will truly appreciate, consider taking a weekend break and construct them their personal kids picnic table.

I've been dating my boyfriend for almost 2 years and I love him. I stayed faithful and with him while he was in Iraq but lately it feels like I'm being mistreated and used. Whenever he needs me I'm there and there is no question that I would do as much as I can for him but I don't think it's the... Show More
Does he really love me or is it just convenient?
What Guys Said
Why do you say you feel mistreated and used?
At some point you have to realize he is who he is, you can either accept it or move on. Trying to change someone into what you want them to be rarely works or lasts.
What Girls Said 0
Be the first girl to share an opinion!

“That was a little much, wasn’t it?” Buffy asked with an eyebrow raised in Spike’s direction.
“Bloody clumsy fool stepped on my foot!” Spike groused in return. “He’s a disaster waiting to happen.”
Buffy snickered and silently nodded. Xander was as sweet as could be, but he was clumsiness personified. And, she was kinda shocked when he offered to pay her to stay in the woods so he and Willow could have some alone time. She declined the money but assured him that she would definitely stay out of hearing range. What she didn’t count on was the subject of much discussion following her into the woods.
Spike looked at a nervous Buffy and gave a long-suffering sigh. “M’not gonna bite pet, less you want me to,” he said with a waggle of his eyebrows. He relaxed when he heard her giggle.
“It’s nothing really, just…well. I just flipped out a little and, well, I’m sorry about that…truly,” she explained quickly, her hands fidgeting. “I mean, it’s not everyday a girl like me hears that she is loved by someone,” she whispered looking directly into his eyes.
“What do you mean a girl like you? Bloody amazing you don’t have blokes lined up down the hall and around the corner,” Spike said in amazement, slowly inching towards her.
Buffy noticed his movement but stood her ground. If she was going to hold true to her promise to Xander then she needed to start somewhere. “That’s what Xander said, about the guys I mean.”
“Too right. What makes you think you’re not desirable? What bastard dented that lovely self possessed confidence your known for?” Spike ground out getting closer till he stood right in front of her.
Buffy teared up and diverted her gaze. “Angel,” she whispered.
An evil looking smirk overcame Spike’s face. “Ah, the bloody pouf Angel.”
Buffy frowned in confusion and swiped her tears away. “You know Angel?”
Spike grimaced and nodded. “He and I used to be mates back in the day. He dated this crazy bird Dru, who by the way tried getting into m’knickers, but he never knew.”
“But, how long did you know him?” Buffy eyed him warily.
“Lets find a spot to sit down, I need to tell you some things…things that I’ve done,” he said quietly, tugging on her hand.
He pulled her in the direction of the log that Xander and her had been sitting on. Once it came into view, she scrambled away from Spike and perched herself on the log, facing him. Spike approached her slowly and laid his hands gently on her thighs, watching her for any signs of disapproval. Seeing none, he gently nudged them to each side and settled himself in between her legs. She watched him like a hawk and relaxed when he stilled, moving no further.
“This okay, pet?” he questioned, lightly rubbing his knuckles up and down her thighs.
It was hard to concentrate with him doing that. She reached down to still his hands, but he caught them and held on. “Um, yeah, fine,” she answered shakily. “So, about Angel?”
“Angel,” he muttered. He brought the fingers of one hand up and placed them palm-to-palm with his left hand. He heard her swift intake of breath and smiled to himself.
“I’ve known Angel longer than you, luv,” he said absentmindedly, curling his long fingers around her shorter ones. “I also know he has a perchance for ‘little girls and boys’ as it were.”
The stroking of his fingers drew her into a sensual haze and she had to concentrate to hear what he was saying. “Little kids?” she said thickly.
Spike watched her eyes glaze over as he fondled her fingers, weaving his own in and out, doing nothing more. “How old do you think Angel is, Buffy?”
She frowned, trying to think back to what he had said to her at the time they knew each other. “Isn’t he around your age?”
Spike cupped her face and stared into her eyes. “Love, he’s much older than I am. He just looks young. Allows him to lure kids in, to teach them about so-called ‘love.”
“How do you know about this?” she whispered fervently.
Spike said nothing, letting Buffy draw her own conclusions. She searched his pain filled eyes and gasped when she realized what Angel had done to him.
“Oh god, no!” she whimpered and covered her mouth before she screamed. She shook with hatred and grief, for lost innocence, for injustice.
Mistaking her shock as hatred for him instead of grief, he recoiled from their position and started inching away. “Think I’m dirty now, do you?” he spat out.
She was startled by his abrupt withdrawal from the closeness they were sharing. “What? What on god’s earth would make you think that?” She reached for him with trembling fingers, but he stayed out of reach.
“Can’t hide your revulsion, pet!” he nearly shouted. “I’m nothing but a used heap of refuse to you, something you can’t even think to wipe your feet on! Do you have any idea what that does to me? The one person I thought would understand what I went through… what you went through!” he roared, tears coursing down his cheeks, finally breaking from the strain of unrequited love.
“I found out what he did to you, and I was so hateful I couldn’t stop myself,” he continued, pacing in front of the log. He didn’t notice that Buffy had slipped down and was slowly approaching him.
“What couldn’t you stop, Spike?” she asked quietly.
“I mean it was one thing to…to…to violate me, but it was another to dare touch such beauty as yours,” he reasoned to no one, never hearing Buffy’s question.
“What couldn’t you stop Spike?” she asked louder, laying a hand on his shoulder.
He spun around and stared at her, a lovely, frightening mess. His curls had come lose from the hands he had repeatedly drawn through his hair. Tears still coursed down his sculpted cheeks and his eyes were red rimmed. He breathed heavily and finally crumpled at her feet, clutching her middle. He laid his head against her abdomen and whimpered, begging for her forgiveness.
“Sorry, so sorry. I didn’t mean to…I swear!” he mumbled over and over.
She looked down at the platinum head and started to stroke his hair. “It’s ok, William, tell me,” she gently pleaded.
The ‘William’ broke him. “I killed him. It was an accident, though, I swear. Magistrate’s put it down to vehicular manslaughter and gave me two years probation with time served. That’s why I haven’t been back for two years, Buffy. I had to stay to serve the time.”
Buffy tightened her hand in his hair. It explained everything. Spike not showing up for two years for their group vacations, Xander being evasive about his cousin’s whereabouts, the physical and emotional changes in Spike. She looked down at him again and sighed heavily. “I believe you, Spike.”
Spike stilled against her. He hesitantly looked up into her eyes. Her eyes, her lonely sad eyes. Did he put that sadness there? He extricated himself from her grasp and stood to face her. “I’m just sorry he touched you and I wasn’t there to stop him,” he sobbed.
Buffy laid her cool palm against his hot cheek, rubbing away the tears that still fell. “He didn’t touch me that much before I figured out what he was thinking about. Gave him a, ahem, crotchful of touching. Mostly with my foot,” she smiled softly.
“He…he didn’t...” Spike heaved, clutching his chest.
“No, cause funny thing…I just somehow knew that he wasn’t the one for me,” she smiled a little more. She now knew that this wonderful man would do anything for her, love her like never before, make her smile all the days left to her.
Spike was in a haze and tried to respond as he watched Buffy lean up and press a soft kiss to his trembling lips. “I love you,” she breathed against his lips.
He moaned and deepened the kiss, burying his hands in her soft hair. “I don’t deserve you,” he murmured against her temple.
She laid her forehead against his, looking deeply into his astoundingly blue eyes. “No, Spike, I don’t deserve you. If I had any clue about your feelings for me, we could have avoided this self imposed silence and hurt. Cause I think I’ve felt the same for just as long as you. But fear of being rejected by the one you love is such a powerful deterrent. Promise me you’ll always tell me what’s on your mind and what you’re feeling, yeah?”
He nuzzled her cheek with his sculpted one. “You sure about that? I could say quite a few things right about now,” he said huskily.
She laughed as he tickled her neck with his breath. “Like what,” she murmured as she closed her eyes and fell into the sensations he was creating in her.
“Like, let me stay with you, always. Let me be the reason you smile, just once. Let me be a craving in your soul, like you are in mine. Let me be an ache in your chest that you can’t remedy because I am the only cure. Let me be the drug that you are addicted to,” he whispered across her skin, punctuating every thought with a languorous kiss to some part of her face.
By the time he had finished, Buffy was panting heavily and clutching him for support. “Already done, all of them,” she whimpered.
He groaned and backed her up against the log, grinding his hips into hers, tongues dueling for supremacy. “Such a sweet torment,” he sighed against her lips, licking and nipping them till they were plump and red.
“I’ve been called many things but never a torment,” she said as she smiled coyly up at him.
He raised one eyebrow and leered at her. “Then the men are either blind or daft idiots,” he reassured her.
Daring to be brave, Buffy trailed her fingers underneath his shirt and across his belly. His grip on her tightened as she circled his navel with one finger, his muscles clenching beneath her touch.
“God Buffy! Much more of that and I won’t be able to stop touching you,” Spike said, his voice little more than a groan of need.
“What if I don’t want you to stop?” she whispered.
Spike gulped audibly. “Your playing with fire… one that has burned too long and bright,” he warned.
“Then burn me, mark me as yours,” she demanded in a voice that was low and husky.
It was almost impossible to quiet the squeak of surprise when he grasped her by the arms and pushed her harder against the log, his warmth seeping into her veins. Spike growled softly and kissed her, hard and fierce, his hunger for her clearly evident. He rocked his hard length against her core and she wrapped her arms around his neck, returning his kiss with equal hunger.
Spike brushed his thumb over the hard aching tip of her breast and Buffy ceased to think. Spike struggled to unhook her bra, his hands were so unsteady and without practice. His only consolation was that Buffy was as desperate as he was, so she didn’t notice. Finally he was able to unhook the offending garment and he pulled up her shirt to toss it away.
He stared at her bared breasts and looked his fill. Her breasts were not large, but they were high and firm, topped with a large nipple colored in rich pink. His mouth watered and he lowered his head towards the inviting bud. He laved the nipple to a peak, gently at first and then with increasing force. Buffy panted and curled her fingers into his hair, holding him to her chest while he suckled.
“God you taste like ambrosia,” he breathed around her nipple.
She chuckled to herself. “I’ll take your word for it.”
She inched her hands up under his shirt until he tore it away from his body and flung it over to join her shirt in a pile on the ground. She uttered a deep intake of breath and her eyes glazed over. He was perfect, like a sculpted David statue…cool, hard planes covered his trunk. His six-pack abs quivered slightly when she touched them and she smiled. She leaned forward and kissed his flat nipple watching it peak slightly. She heard his heaving breathing and reached up to tweak the nipple to a higher peak. He growled and pushed her back against the log, the bark scraping her now bared back.
“Let me cover the log,” he whispered in frustration as he bent down to gather the discarded clothes. He laid them on the log and he then settled her more securely in his embrace. His hands then started to flutter down her stomach to the apex of her thighs. “Damn jeans,” he muttered unbuttoning the restrictive material.
Buffy giggled at his impatience. “Let me help you,” she said as she shimmed the jeans off her hips and tossed them to the side with a flick of her foot. His breath caught painfully in his throat as he looked over the slim shapeliness of her body. Her skin was still slightly pink from the sunburn, but other wise it had started to turn into a golden hue all over. Her long slender and faintly muscular legs begged to be wrapped around him and he practically drooled. He caught the wicked gleam in her eyes as she hooked her thumbs in the waistband of her panties and tugged down. She then flung the sodden cotton in his face and he breathed deeply of her scent.
His hungry gaze settled on the neat triangle of golden brown curls at the juncture of her beautiful thighs and he groaned. There lay heaven and he shook with the need to bury himself in her warmth. He nearly spilled himself when she traced the outline of his erection through his jeans with her nimble fingers. “I want to see,” she pleaded.
He removed his jeans, not having bothered to put on any underwear as he had stormed from the tent. He sprung free into her waiting grasp and she made a large ‘O’ with her mouth at the size of him. He felt so hard yet the skin was silken smooth. She tentatively stroked him and was a little startled as he cursed and pulled away from her.
“I’ll be finishing this dance before you start to enjoy it if you keep doing that, love,” Spike said between clenched teeth, removing her hand from his aching length.
He saw confusion and a little fear as he pulled away but then it was replaced by that glazed look as he stroked his fingers over her stomach and slid it between her legs. Buffy felt his long fingers stroking her so intimately and it had her thrashing and bucking up into his hand.
“God Buffy, you’re so wet for me,” he said in a horse and unsteady voice.
“Only for you, but are you only going to talk about it or are you going to do something about it?” she challenged in a thick voice.
He growled fiercely and poised himself at her entrance. “Wrap your legs around me love,” he instructed Buffy, and she wrapped one leg and then the other around his trim waist.
“A gentle ride at first,” he panted.
“Now where would be the fun in that?” she muttered and used her legs to force their bodies together, impaling herself upon his hard length. She echoed his startled gasp and for a brief moment the pain of losing her virginity stilled her passions. She shifted slightly and her passions returned with a rush.
Spike started to move and she clung to him, quickly adjusting to meet his thrusts. She clawed her way down his back and clutched his tight and firm buttocks to push him deeper into her. A tension started to build within her and she trembled, afraid of its strength.
“Spike,” Buffy cried against his shoulder. “Please.”
“Don’t fight it, love, give in… come with me,” he pleaded in desperation.
Buffy began to shatter as waves of delight and pleasure flowed over her, his thrusts growing harder and deeper. He roared her name as he spilled himself into her warm depths. They clung to each other, panting and fervently kissing each other as if the other one would disappear.
“Love you, god, how I love you,” he whispered against her temple.
“Stay, always stay with me…love you so much,” she whimpered.
“Always, never leave.”
She snuggled deep into his arms and sighed in contentment. She placed a small kiss on his chest above his heart and smiled as she heard him sigh.
“Buffy, can I ask you something, love?” Spike said hesitantly, mindful they were still joined and loving every minute of it.
“Of course,” she murmured sleepily.
“Be my wife,” he whispered.
She smiled against his chest and said just as softly, “Yes.”
And lo, there was much rejoicing.
Author's Chapter Notes:
Ok, so Zoe complained that they haven't shagged yet. Well, fine then... here you go. May it be 'shaggy' enough for you! LOL

My list is quite long since I have a long way to go, but here goes:
My main goal is to start making more sales-I'd ideally like to make at least one per day. But, In order for that to happen, I need to have a lot of mini goals:
-Take better pictures
-Have at least 3 pages of items
-Open up a Second Shop (information to be announced-still have a lot of work to do!)
I have a whole lot more-but I don't want to bore anyone. :)
This Christmas, my family celebrated a day early because we were traveling on Christmas the next day. On Christmas, we got an early start and went to the airport and flew to Boston to visit my family, since most live up there. When we got there, we exchanged gifts and then played WiiParty. It was a lot of fun. After, we had a family Scrabble Tournament while we waited for my brother to arrive (he was visiting his father and other siblings). Then, we had other people over for a bit and after most of them left, we had a fantastic Christmas Dinner with the family and a family friend. After, we had dessert, which was fantastic. Then, we continued our tradition where we all watch an inappropraite movie with everyone (including parents and grandparents-so awkward). Last year, we watched the Hangover. This year, we watched Get Him to the Greek. We couldn't even finish the movie. It was wrong on so many levels. Unfortunately, our trip was cut short because of a blizzard warning in Boston. So again we got an early start and went to the airport to try and get out before being snowed in. We were standby so we didn't get on the first flight. Since the next flight wasn't until 3, we went to Faneul(sp?) Hall for while and ate lunch. Then we headed back to the airport to try again. We were very lucky to get on that flight since the late flight was already cancelled. It was a bumpy ride home, but when I got back I found that Charlotte had some snow as well!

Cat with hands
Yo momma is so stupid when an intruder broke into her house, she ran downstairs, dialed 9-1-1 on the microwave, and couldn't find the "CALL" button.
A little kid was out trick-or-treating on Halloween dressed as a pirate. He rang a house's doorbell and the door was opened by a lady. "Oh, how cute! A little pirate! And where are your buccaneers?" she asked. The boy replied, "Under my buckin' hat."
A teacher asked her students to use the word "beans" in a sentence. "My father grows beans," said one girl. "My mother cooks beans," said a boy. A third student spoke up, "We are all human beans."
Bug in soup
A boy asks his father, "Dad, are bugs good to eat?" "That's disgusting. Don't talk about things like that over dinner," the dad replies. After dinner the father asks, "Now, son, what did you want to ask me?" "Oh, nothing," the boy says. "There was a bug in your soup, but now it’s gone."
How were people born
A child asked his father, "How were people born?" So his father said, "Adam and Eve made babies, then their babies became adults and made babies, and so on." The child then went to his mother, asked her the same question and she told him, "We were monkeys then we evolved to become like we are now." The child ran back to his father and said, "You lied to me!" His father replied, "No, your mom was talking about her side of the family."
What do you call people who are afraid of Santa Claus? Claustrophobic.
"Mom, where do tampons go?" "Where the babies come from, darling." "In the stork?"
Q: Why did Adele cross the road? A: To sing, "Hello from the other side!"

Lynne F. Bernstein passed away Friday evening, June 14, 2019, with her daughter at her bedside.
Lynne was born in 1930 in New York City, in the Bronx. She graduated with high honors from Taft High School; went on to Syracuse (N.Y.) University, where she was prom queen, and graduated from Barnard College, Manhattan, N.Y. She was very involved in her sorority at both schools. She received a master’s degree from Teachers College of Columbia University, New York City. After graduation, she began work in New York City for General Cable Corporation, where she was the only woman in the Personnel Department.
At a Yom Kippur breakfast, she met Michael Bernstein, M.D. Later that evening, she told her sister she had met the man she was going to marry. They were married on July 11, 1954, and moved to Springfield, Mass., where Mike served in the U.S. Air Force and Lynne taught in an elementary school. They returned to New York for Mike to complete his medical residency and where their daughter Amy was born. They moved and remained in Berkeley Heights, where their son Gary was born.
Lynne was an active member of her community, serving as Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) president; on the Community Council; as a member of the National Council of Jewish Women (NCJW), the United Jewish Appeal (UJA) and the Overlook Medical Center Twigs; and tutoring students for the Home and School Council, among other endeavors. She was also an avid volunteer and patron of the arts, donating generously.
One of the greatest gifts she gave was that of friendship to so many. Lynne was steadfast and true. She was a treasure.
Left to mourn are her loving and well-loved daughter Amy Bernstein Merl; her son, Gary Bernstein; her adored and adoring grandchildren, Sophie and Jake Merl; her sister Margery; and nieces Rachel and Debra and nephews Joseph, Daniel and Adam. Lynne was predeceased by her husband, Dr. Michael Bernstein, and by her nephew, Jonathan.
She will be dearly missed by her family and her many longtime friends.
A private family service was held. Arrangements were under the care of the Burroughs, Kohr and Dangler Funeral Home, Madison.

Short but sweet
Very good job on the flash. I can't really think of anyway to improve it, but that might just be because I'm not very creative. Oh, and managed to launch the little guy into orbit in only 20 days. I'm going to see if I can do better after I'm finished with this review.
This is a ingenious game. The art was good, and the mechnics of it were quite well formed. I just have a few issues. First off, I'm not quite sure how to get his work ethic up. The second thing is that after I talk to him once, and I try to talk to him again, all the replies he gives me become undefined. I can see the actual answer to my question dart onto the screen and then get replaced by the undefined. All in all, a very good game. Keep up the great work!
Tons of fun
There really need to be more sim games like this one. It was a great concept, a lot of fun, and kept me interested for quite a while. While I know it's hard to make a sequel to something like this, I do wish for it to happen. As for your other flashes and projects, keep up the good work!
I would normally give it a 10, but there is still a glitch with the saw, or dancing saw I guess is what it's being called. Took a drink of whiskey, went back to the saw, and couldn't saw anymore, it just started dancing.
But other than that, the game was great, and it had the same great creepy feel to it that it's predecessor had. Keep up the good work.
The only problem I had with this game was how long it took me to find it. I played a lot of the other shooter games like this... the name of the one I'm trying to think of escapes me, but still. It's not too flashy, it's short, it's small, and this once again proves that something doesn't have to be big, have amazing graphics, and cost hundreds upon thousands of dollars to be good. Keep it going.
Granted the game was a bit short, but the voice files were clear, the feel of how the game ran was nice, and it had a nice twist in the end. I'm impressed, but maybe add a few more puzzles to spice things up.
newgrounds.com — Your #1 online entertainment & artist community! All your base are belong to us.

Barriers and Cell Phones
2 months ago
What the world looks at as broken and discards, the Lord sees worth and beauty. He LOVES them period. When was the last time you picked up the broken and looked for the beauty that lies beneath and loved them for who they are?
|Ronnie--post and photo by Ken |
Ken is a friend, who when he has time will join us in the park. This is his post of a chance meeting he had with one of our friends from the park.
I’d like you to meet Ronald Timothy Merritt, a gentleman I met while taking pictures on a cold snowy day last December in downtown Boise. He plays harmonica, likes a beer or two, and sleeps where he can. Ronnie (His dad used to call him Ronnie) and I visited for about 1/2 hour that day. He shared a little about his life, we had a few laughs, and I took a few pictures.
Mr. Merritt was both surprised and delighted that anyone would want to take his picture. He didn't think he mattered enough. He thought he was too ugly, but I assured him that his was the perfect face for a great picture. Before we parted ways, he asked if he could have a copy. Of course I said yes.
Ron doesn’t dream of riches and fame. He doesn’t dream of someday owning a luxury home on a golf course or of driving a BMW. Life dealt him some tough blows over the years, broke his spirit, and he’s been down and out ever since. But what he does want is to be remembered, for someone to know that he once existed, that he once played and laughed, that he once loved, that he once had hopes and dreams, that he was once just like you and me. Ron was pleased at the thought that having his picture taken might, in some small way, fulfill that modest desire.
So here is Ronald Timothy Merritt; a child of God who was once his mother's pride and joy; a man whose father used to call Ronnie; a man who walks the streets of Boise and sleeps where he can, who plays harmonica and likes a beer or two now and then...and who will, from this day forward, not be forgotten.

What do you think?
Rate this book
480 pages, Hardcover
First published June 30, 2014
Okay let's start with the cover before I talk about the story. The cover is attractive to the eye but, if you haven't read the synopsis about the book you wouldn't even really understand how the cover relates to the story. The cover looks like bad pixel art and it's not even connected to the story.
The story takes place a few weeks after the events in Linked. So, Elissa, Lin, and Caden come back to Sekoia to "help" their planet but, they don't actually ever do anything leaving me to wonder was this just an added plot to get the story going. The story would be pretty bland and boring if you took away the action. It's mostly made up of Elissa and Caden arguing, Lin and Elissa arguing, or Elissa acting like a whiny child. And you also have a little action in there to keep the reader engaged . Towards the end of the book I was ready for Elissa or Lin to be killed, sadly Elissa did not die. I really wish the story had been told from Lin's perspective I feel like it could've been much better if it had been.
Elissa was very whiny in this book, she kept acting as if she wasn't good enough for Caden and she was having major self esteem issues. I really wished her and Caden had broke up. The way she treated Lin was as if Lin didn't know how to act around people and she was always saying Lin was a psychopath even when Lin could hear her thoughts.
Overall the the book was ok but, it could've been better. My rating is 3.5 stars.
Yay for finishing my first duology of 2016!*applause*
"Elissa found herself staring kind of blankly at what he was doing, tiredly glad of something to focus on that wasn't words and emotions and the impossible, heartbreaking complexities of a relationship that mattered more than anything and yet she couldn't seem to see how to handle." -Imogen Howson, Unravel

Out of curiosity, would you take $100,000? If you would there is no reason not to show him the appraisal in my opinion. I always like to work with as much disclosure as logical as long as it is honest. With a land contract, which we don't see in the market place that much anymore there is a saying, your price, my terms, your terms my price. In otherwords. If you charged 6% interest, took a 10% down payment on $100,000 selling price, you would have $10,000 in pocket. If that was amortized over 30 years the principle and interest per month to you would be approximately $540.00 per month. If you were offering a balloon payoff in say 7 years, the prinicple reduction would have been subtracted from the $90,000 principle and the interest would be "income" . It would take an amortization table for us to figure that out and I don't have one with me tonight. If you want to talk about it, be glad to do that. Of course, you would want to make sure that the contract is written so if you have to go to court to get your property back because they are not paying for it, needs to be carefully written. The object then is to win and make them pay for your collection costs too. Sometimes it is like getting blood from a turnup. That is one of the problems with a land contract, when they go sour, it is a mess. And you eventually get it back but not in the same shape as when you sold it. Good Luck.

Today is just a horribly sad day. My cat Whirl, who sought me out 3 separate times at the shelter, who brought such joy into our lives, had to be put down today. He developed seizures suddenly last night, several very severe, and seemed to be suffering terribly. The vet did some tests but suspected a brain lesion, which can be common at his age (11), apparently.
He was such an affectionate, goofy cat, totally motivated by food, all food, anything that could be remotely seen as food. If I happened to be on my computer mid-afternoon, and, heaven forbid, I wasn't feeding him when he wanted me to, he would sit at the side table staring at me, then reach out with his right front "arm" and PAT my head! It was the funniest thing, like he said, "See, I can pat your head too!" This would lead to face rubs, and then be repeated if I didn't get up and feed him right away. He could be so demanding, but never in a mean or pushy way.
He loved belly rubs, and knew how to curl himself "inside out" so that his enormous fuzzy tummy would be front and center for a pat. He loved to curl up on my bathrobe in the morning for a nap, and he also loved to steal hubby's chair just after he got comfortable.
At the vet's today he had to be sedated before we got to see him because of the ongoing seizures, but it was a beautiful sunny day here, so he finally got to enjoy being an outside cat as we said our goodbyes. I am just gutted over this, and will never forget what a wonderful, treasured member of our family he was.

I wasn't at the farm yet when Encana's community relations man, Mr. Vescarelli, dropped by unannounced to show Mom and Dad his grand idea for dealing with the problems associated to the constant flow of traffic through our yard.
When I did arrive, Dad was noticeably unimpressed with the data that Vescarelli offered regarding the well information we had asked for at the June kitchen table meeting.
Mom, on the other hand was pissed. In fact she started crying when she pointed out that the safety of her family seemed to be some kind of joke to Encana. And like she told Dad and I, she couldn't believe they had the gall to use this situation as a way to further their agenda by sticking a 4x8' propaganda sign at the end of our driveway.
"What's is going to take to ensure my grandchildren, and now my great grandson, isn't run over by some yahoo speeding through our yard? Does someone have to be hurt or killed before they take me seriously?"

Bhopal-based artist Sajid Premi recently got a chance to organize his first solo painting exhibition in the city at Rangdarshani art gallery of Bharat Bhavan.
Displaying his 53 artworks, Sajid said that he had tried to portray the various human emotions and expressions trough his paintings. "My paintings are untitled as I don't want them to be confined to a particular thought. I left them untitled for the viewers to figure out the hidden emotion in the paintings," Sajid explained. He added, "It's the visitors' perception of what they understand from these paintings." While some were seen eyeing every painting carefully, there were others who chose to click pictures of the artwork before moving on.

First of all...from every bit of my heart, thank you. Every comment and well wish I've received these past few days has brought tears to my eyes. I feel like I have such a close relationship with so many of you amazing ladies and I couldn't imagine getting through these past 2 years much less these past 2 days without so much love and support. GOD bless every single one of you for being so freaking awesome and for being my friends.
I arrived at the doctor this morning for my beta...first thing. They informed me that because of system issues, that I shouldn't freak out if I don't hear anything today.
Ummmm. Impossible. I've been freaking out for 6 days. No can do, lady.
Not to mention, I ran into my OB's nurse who came up to me and was like "what's going on!?!" She was shocked the other day and said they were so excited and are really pulling for me.
I called her after I left and asked her about going to another lab so I could get results today. She immediately sent orders to a lab closer to where I worked and off I went. Second poke of the day.
At that lab, they informed me that the nurse forgot to right stat, so it would be 24-48 hours.
Shiiiit, people. Doesn't anyone realize that my mental health is dependent on these results TODAY!?
I called my doctor's office AGAIN and they called the lab to make sure they were ran STAT.
Results are in. My second beta is 98. Doubling time of 36 hours.
The nurse I spoke with didn't have my file, so she thought it sounded really low. I told her it was 37 on Monday and she asked how far along I was. I said 15 dpo. They obviously don't get a lot of high strung infertiles in there much, probably because the infertiles are with an RE! She said that she'd have my doctor call me tomorrow to decide what's next.
My awesome RE from Chicago did say if needed, he'll help follow this so I can get as much assurance as possible. There was definitely a reason I liked it there, regardless of how my IVF turned out...
For the present moment...I'm on track, but I'm a long way from feeling good about this. I had amazing betas with my last pregnancy, only to find out at 7 weeks it was a blighted ovum. I also have zero symptoms, much like that one. So I can only hope that all of this, and the timing considering, happened for a reason.

Originally posted on SINGLES AND MARRIED
It is almost a year since my daughter Fadeke died and though it is very painful recounting the details of her death to the public, I need to do this in the hope that other young ladies will learn from her story.
My husband and I are in our early fifties and besides Fadeke, the eldest, we have three other children. Over the years, we did our best to impart sound morals and values into our children though we did not become committed Christians until about five years ago. All our children are single and live at home with us.
About eighteen months ago, Fadeke began having headaches; we did not make much of this and she took analgesics whenever the headaches came but when the headaches became persistent, she went to her office clinic to see the doctor. She was treated for malaria and typhoid and for a while she seemed okay but the headaches soon returned with a vengeance. Her condition became so serious that she had to take her annual leave because we felt that she just needed to rest. She spent most of leave sleeping and occasionally watching TV and by the time she resumed back at work, she had fully recovered.
Everything went smoothly for about two months then Fadeke started complaining about the headaches again and it was now accompanied by dizziness. This time around, my husband insisted on a full medical check-up for her but when she did this, the doctors still could not determine what was wrong with her. We even had her tested for HIV but the results came back negative; we were perplexed and did not know what to do. Fadeke was in pain and getting weaker by the day; at that point, my husband and I went to tell our church leadership about it, we were in dire need of physical, emotional and spiritual support. When our pastor heard all that was going on, he advised us to join him in a three days prayer and fasting session to seek the face of the Lord. We were more than willing so for the following three days, our family asked God to show us the cause of Fadeke’s ailment and give us a way out of the situation.
When I went to bed on the night of the last day of the praying and fasting, I had a dream. In the dream, I saw the Lord and He told me that Fadeke’s condition was a result of an action she took. He said that she had “gone against covenant” by dating a married man; the man’s wife was a committed Christian and He was fighting her battles for her. I was alarmed and woke up in a panic; immediately, I woke my husband up, told him of my dream and we began to pray for God’s mercy. The next morning, we told our pastor about my dream and he said that the way out was to find out the identity of the woman and get her to forgive Fadeke but when we confronted Fadeke, she denied being in a relationship with a married man. It was as if Fadeke’s denial triggered something because her condition grew worse and she had to be admitted but the doctors could not really help, as they could not pinpoint what was wrong with her.
A few days later, I called one of Fadeke’s closest friends, Gladys, and told her about my dream and asked her if she knew the person Fadeke was dating; Gladys told me that Fadeke was indeed dating one of her married colleagues in the office. I was alarmed at this because I felt that my husband and I had brought her up to know better than that but evidently, I was wrong.
On further prompting, Gladys told me that Fadeke had been dating the man for a little over three months when his wife somehow got to know about their affair.
Fadeke had told her that the woman had gotten her phone number from her husband’s phone and pleaded with her to leave her husband alone but Fadeke had responded by telling the woman to stop disturbing and to sort the issue out with her husband (I was stunned when I heard this). When her pleas met deaf ears, the woman had told Fadeke that she gave her seven days to stop the affair or else she would have herself to blame then she dropped the phone. The next day, Fadeke had told her lover about the conversation with his wife and he had apparently gone home afterwards and warned his wife off Fadeke; that was the last Fadeke and Gladys heard of the woman. Fadeke’s health problem had started barely a month after that incident. I was horrified that my daughter could behave in such a manner but all I was concerned about was the way forward. Without further ado, I decided to seek out the man Fadeke was dating in her office with the hope that I could get to meet his wife through him.
At first, Gladys told me that the man, Jude, did not want to meet with me but I persisted and after I threatened to go to his office he reluctantly agreed to meet my husband and I. Jude was a good-looking young man in his mid-thirties and upon enquiry, he told us that he had been married for just five years; his wife, Nneka, was a banker and they have one child.
Jude was obviously uneasy about meeting with us and we tried our best to set his mind at ease; we had gone past the point of condemnation, we just wanted our daughter healed. My husband told him about my dream and then we told him that we would like to meet his wife so we could ask her to forgive Fadeke. Jude told us that she had recently traveled out of the country on a two weeks vacation but he promised to call her and give her my number so we could talk; there was nothing left for my husband and I to do than wait for her call.
One morning about a week later, Jude and his wife came to see my husband and I. Immediately after the introductions Nneka went down on her knees and recounted her side of the incident. Apparently, after Fadeke’s refusal to end her affair with Jude and his quarrel with Nneka over her phone call to Fadeke, their relationship deteriorated. They fought constantly and Nneka said that she felt like a fool when after her “seven days ultimatum” to Fadeke, it was obvious that Jude and her were still dating; he still came home late from work and continued answering some late night and weekend calls in a low voice. She said that she was very disturbed by this then one day while praying, God told her to stop fighting Jude and that she should leave the battle to Him. She had obeyed God by changing her attitude towards Jude and the whole situation.
Nneka said that she had been shocked when on her return to the country, Jude told her about our visit and Fadeke’s condition. Nneka told us that she did not know that God would vindicate her in this manner and that she had forgiven Fadeke. I wish I could say that my daughter recovered after this but Fadeke was unrepentant about her actions. Fadeke was in the hospital for about two months before she went into a coma and never regained consciousness.
Covenant is not a strange concept to African cultures. It is fairly common to find families and communities to enter into covenant with other families, communities or even local gods. When this happens, both parties to the covenant understand that they have become one; it is understood that whatever happens to one party automatically happens to the other and they also have common friends and enemies. Covenants are serious matters and any disloyalty to the terms of a covenant means death.
Marriage is a covenant (not contract) relationship between a man and a woman. This is why the Bible says that when a man and a woman get married, they become one flesh. In a marriage, a couple stands as one united entity and all friends and foes are common to them; it goes against covenant for one person to have a friend that is unacceptable to his/her spouse, it is taboo! If you are married, you must not continue with any relationship that makes your spouse uncomfortable much less enter into an adulterous relationship.
Christianity is a covenant relationship between God and man. Whatever affects a Christian affects God; this is why God said in Genesis 12 “I will bless those who bless you and whoever curses you, I will curse” and “whoever touches you, touches the apple of His eyes” (Zech 2:8). God is a covenant keeping God; if you belong to Him your battles become His. This is why I tell wives with unfaithful husbands not to fight their husbands get on your knees and pray. As long as you are God’s side, no woman is woman enough to take your husband!
The Bible also says that it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of God (Hebrews 10: 31). If man chases you, you can run to God but when God chases you, whom can you run to? It is for this reason that I tell wives that when they come against the hold of strange women over their husbands and petition God in prayer, they should pray for the salvation of those mistresses. Maybe if Nneka had prayed for Fadeke’s salvation, she might not have remained hard-hearted and she might have been able to receive God’s mercy. Maybe.
Parents, it is also important that we constantly keep a prayer cover over our children. Recognise that you are only their caregivers and dedicate them back to God; He alone is able to preserve them. You cannot watch over them 24 hours a day and neither will they always tell you the things that they get into but nobody and nothing escapes the eyes of God. Pray for your children, no matter their age. Teach them to love and fear the Lord, help them to develop a loving and deep relationship with their Heavenly Father and you will not have cause for regret.
Are you dating a married man? Your life is in danger particularly when his wife is a Christian. “Don’t you realise how patient He is being with you? Or don’t you care? Can’t you see that He has been waiting all this time without punishing you to give time to turn from your sin? His kindness is meant to lead you to repentance” (Romans 2: 3). Please repent and retrace your steps. Patiently wait on Him till you find your bone and flesh.
We desire to hear from you. You can share youe own experiences hear, post your questions and comments about this true life story here below.
IF THIS ARTICLE TOUCHED YOUR HEART, YOU MIGHT WANT TO TALK TO ANY OF YOUR PBO FOUNDATION COUNSELLORS BY CONTACTING The Fountain of Life Church on 01-4968646-7 or 08035800201. E-mail: email@example.com, firstname.lastname@example.org You may also visit our website atwww.tfolc.org

18 *uNow the birth of Jesus Christ was on this wise: When as his mother Mary was espoused to Joseph, before they came together, she was found with child wof the Holy Ghost. 19 Then Joseph her husband, being a xjust man, and not willing yto make her a publick example, was minded to put her away privily. 20 But while he thought on these things, behold, the angel of the Lord appeared unto him zin a dream, saying, Joseph, thou son of David, fear not to take unto thee Mary thy wife: for that which is †conceived in her is of the Holy Ghost. 21 aAnd she shall bring forth a son, and thou shalt call his name ||JESUS: for bhe shall save his people cfrom their sins. 22 Now all this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the Lord by the prophet, saying, 23 dBehold, a virgin shall be with child, and shall bring forth a son, and ||they shall call his name Emmanuel, which being interpreted is, God with us. 24 Then Joseph being raised from sleep did as the angel of the Lord had bidden him, and took unto him his wife: 25 And knew her not etill she had brought forth fher firstborn son: and he gcalled his name JESUS.

"I am not sure exactly where to begin this entry but In March 2016, my 88 year father was hospitalized. Then in April just 2 weeks later my 81 year mother too was hospitalized. At that timeI had been their caregiver for more than 8 years and we were holding onto any normalcy we could. My job was stressful and constantly challenging. My role as their caregiver began when in the summer of 2010 when my father was diagnosed with Alzheimers and my mother fell and was required to be bed bound for the next 6 months. My family was in uncharted territory and we set out to try and keep them together and out of nursing home care as long as possible. When I saw that the Medicaid Recoveries website had a place for testimonials, I felt moved to share my relationship with them. Both of my parents, Richard and Barbara Peres were upstanding citizens in Utica NY where they lived for almost 60 years. They were very giving people and helped so many underprivileged children for years. They moved to Rochester in 2009. For nearly 8 years we kept them together working with their assets and the VA. By the time of their hospitalization, we were emotionally spent and consumed most of their assets. After 3 weeks of hospitalization, my dad was placed at Woodside Manor of the Hurlbut Nursing Homes which began my introduction to the caring, passionate and empathetic staff at Medicaid Recoveries. I was stressed and concerned about what lay ahead. No one had prepared me for this role or the process. One day Barb and Dick with living in an assisted living environment with services. We we were able to pay their bills and the next day they were both in different facilities and had no assets to take them forward. As I recall back to the summer of transition (hell), Barb Marr my case manager was comforting and reassuring. We worked very closely for what seemed forever to work through the process of getting both of my parents their long term Medicaid coverage. For those of you who do not know, it is complicated process and requires what will seem like thousands of documents. Some of them will date as far back as 5 years from the application. When overwhelmed and at a place of real loss, Barb continually coached me through the somewhat long and document heavy requirements of the application process. After many months of providing "yet one more document", both Barb and Dick received their coverages. There are not enough kind words to share my family's great appreciation for Medicaid Recoveries assistance and contributions. Nursing homes are not the place people wake up one morning to seek out. It seems though, as we age many of us get there. The process of being admitted to this world is complicated, stressful, and challenging. I did not think i could handle one more moment of the journey but the frequent email exchanges, meetings, and phone calls with Barb contributed greatly to me "dealing" with what i thought I could not. She was re-assuring honest, knowledgeable and really understood the application process. For the un-initiated, its a terrifying and scary place. Thank you Medicaid Recoveries and Barb Marr for your assistance and professional services when we were lost. Your expertise made getting the care my parents required at the end of their life possible. When there was no hope, you gave us hope that contributed to greatly to creating an inner peace during a very bumpy ride. Michael Peres"
"7-6-2017 - Jon and his crew of 3 arrived at our house at 8:20 AM, and worked non-stop until 11:30 AM trimming and pruning 39 years of growth on the 2 maples in our front yard. They did a great job from ensuring that their truck didn't mash our lawn (using large sections of ply wood under its wheels). They were very meticulous with what they were doing, and did a fine job from start to spotless clean up before they left. Cindy and I are very pleased with their work, and would recommend their services to all who can use their expertise. The price was fair, personalities very friendly, and were eager to do a great job."
"You gotta be kidding.....!!!! Henrietta is finally catching up to the mouth watering gourmet cuisine of NY and the best of Italian dining. The homemade pastas, the enormous servings, and the delightful staff and owner makes me feel like I am in the Bronx old world of Italy."
"Josh and his team were awesome!! The customer service could not have been better. They had to take some walls out and clean and sanitized mold issues throughout the whole house. Because if Josh and his teams work we were able to save very expensive wood ceilings and light fan fixtures. Lifetime warranty with excellent service, would not blink an eye to choose them again. Thanks Josh and thanks to your team ..super job. "

Charles Wade Barkley is an American retired professional basketball player who played in the National Basketball Association (NBA) for 16 seasons. He is an analyst on Inside the NBA on TNT. He is known for his outspoken personality and his love of food. Barkley has a net worth of $60 million as of March 2023.
Charles Barkley was born on February 20, 1963, in Leeds, Alabama. He grew up in Leeds, and he attended Leeds High School. Barkley was a star athlete in high school, and he was recruited by many colleges. He decided to attend Auburn University, where he played college basketball for three seasons.
Barkley was a dominant force in college, and he led Auburn to the 1984 Southeastern Conference Men’s Basketball Tournament championship. He was named the tournament’s Most Outstanding Player. Barkley was also a consensus All-American, and he was awarded the Naismith College Player of the Year award in 1984.
Barkley was drafted by the Philadelphia 76ers with the fifth overall pick in the 1984 NBA draft. He quickly became one of the best players in the league, and he led the 76ers to the NBA Finals in 1986. Barkley was named the NBA MVP in 1993, when he helped the Phoenix Suns win the Western Conference championship. He won a gold medal with the United States national basketball team at the 1992 Summer Olympics.
Barkley’s Source of Income
Barkley’s primary source of income is his basketball career. He earned millions of dollars from his NBA salaries. Barkley also earns money from his various business ventures, including his own line of shoes and clothing. He is also a spokesperson for a number of brands, including T-Mobile and Weight Watchers.
Barkley has been married once. He was married to Maureen Blumhardt from 1989 to 1997. They have one son together. Barkley is currently single.
Charles Barkley is one of the most successful and popular athletes of all time. He has a net worth of $60 million, and he is an inspiration to many people. He has used his fame to raise awareness for a number of causes, including education and health. He is a role model for many young people, and he is an inspiration to many people around the world.
Here are some additional details about Charles Barkley’s net worth and source of income:
- Barkley is one of the highest-paid athletes in the world. He earned $2.5 million in 2021, according to Forbes.
- Barkley’s basketball career is his primary source of income. He has earned over $40 million in NBA salaries, and he has also earned millions of dollars from endorsements and other business ventures.
- Barkley is a savvy businessman who has used his fame to build a multi-million dollar empire. He is an inspiration to many people, and he shows that it is possible to achieve success in both sports and business.

What is true beauty?
I remember some time ago a friend and fellow photographer asked me if I had ever met anyone I thought was ugly and my answer was yes. Ugliness, just like beauty, is subjective. Also like beauty, ugliness is not something that is always physical. I guess the appropriate question would have been have I ever met anyone I thought was unattractive. Again, my answer would be yes. Is that harsh? I was just being honest. He was quite taken aback and said that he had never met anyone he thought was ugly or unattractive. I do commend him for his outlook on the outward appearance of human beings, but I just don't see it that way.
Before I go any farther I would like to explain. I, like anyone else meeting someone for the first time, tend to notice their physical appearance. That's all you know about them. Nothing else. So you'll take what you see at face value. If you get to know that person, your perception may actually change. I know mine does. A person's physical appearance doesn't show who they actually are. It's a facade that they were given by their parents'. A happenstance of genes intermingling and creating what you see before you. Sometimes it can be difficult to not judge someone by the way they look, but if that's all you know then it's bound to happen.
I once dated this guy, whom I didn't think was attractive. How did that happen? Well, I got to know him. He seemed like a very nice and funny guy who cared for me exponentially. I liked having the attention. You're probably wondering if he became less unattractive to me. Kind of, but not really. What happened was that his physical features meant much less to me than before I knew him. This is because I had more information to go on. Our brains try to help us out by making decisions easy for us. There are people we think are attractive for whatever reason and people we don't think are attractive, for whatever reason. I think the important thing is for us to get past the exterior to know the interior of a person, then make a decision.
In my life, I have met people who I initially perceived to be beautiful on the outside, but man did their personality and attitude suck like a Hoover vacuum. Others I have met who were not to my physical liking, but were the sweetest individuals you would ever meet. Funny how that works out. I remember one time I received a really nice surprise. It was my last few days working for IBM in Midtown and I was test driving a new car for a few days. Because of this, I got to park in the parking garage, because prior to that, I was riding the bus and train and then walking about a block to get to work. During my test driving time, I met the man who manned the parking booth in the garage. We exchanged pleasantries for about 2 days and on my last day as I was leaving the garage for the last time, he handed me a card. I was perplexed, considering A) I didn't know him very well and B) It wasn't my birthday. Regardless of why he gave it to me, I thought it was sweet. Since this was soooooo many years ago I can't remember exactly what it said, but it was something like, "You're the only nice and pretty woman I have met and I hope you stay that way." To say I was surprised would be an understatement. That had to be one of the sweetest cards I have ever received. It truly blew me away.
My dad would always tell me to leave people better off than I found them and I try my best to do that. Basically beauty is where you find it or create it. Don't write someone off because they don't look how you'd like them to look. See who they really are and then determine whether you want them in your life or not. To me, true beauty is something inside. Because if you have ugliness inside, it will eventually creep it's way onto your face.
No comments posted.
Recent PostsFor the mother in you | atlanta portrait photographer It's time for some edu-fun | photography summer camp Music Therapy | atlanta child photographer Things fall apart Freeze...or not | atlanta child photographer Never too old to learn | atlanta child photographer Limited Edition Sessions - Atlanta Child Photographer Growth never stops | atlanta child photographer Timing is everything | atlanta child photograper Adulting vs. Pareting

Not So Much a Slave than Toy (Emo love story)
Alright, my first love story, or quiz that will actually have mild dirtiness in it. It doesn't really make sense to me whatsoever but the basic plot you'll need to figure out on your own. And this character isn't based off me or anyone I know.
My mom WHAT?3/6/2011
"Just come here!" Was her angry reply. Ever since I had turned to rock, screamo and grunge music it had made my mum hate me. It reminded her of my dad who is now in Jail for r*pe. I swept back my razor slashed bangs and stomped down the stairs, making sure my music was on loud enough to annoy her.
"What do you want?" I asked walking into the kitchen. I looked up. She wasn't the only one in the room. There was a tall emo looking guy who looked only a year older than me (I'm turning 14 next month). He caught my attention and I pulled my bangs over my face to hide his gaze that seemed to never leave me.
"I'm selling you." She said curtly and short, like she wasn't even in the same room anymore. "I can't take your blasted music, your depressing gettup and your attitude anymore! So I found Derrick," She pointed to the guy "He is a lord's son from Scotland. His parents have been looking for servants, I only expect you to come back when you learn to respect me." She turned away and set a duffelbag on the table. I packed your clothes and I want you out of my sight as soon as possible." So thats where all my clothes were going!
"Wait, mum, you can't just sell me! I'm your daughter! And you especially can't sell me to a guy thats only 15!" She didn't turn to look at me, but simply said
"you're not my daughter anymore Jeanie." and went back to filleting salmon. Derrick grinned devilishly and grabbed my duffel bag. He came up and threw me over his shoulder and started walking outside. I let myself fall limp. I knew this day would come, and I wasn't going to struggle. I just never imagined that it would be my own mother to let me go like that. The headphones around my neck settled over my ears as I bounced on Derrick's back. Marilyn Manson was playing and I closed my eyes, Letting the lyrics sink in. Derrick stopped at a limo parked outside the house, a very tall old man rushed to open the door. Derrick set me in one of the seats and slid in after me. I scooted as far away as possible from him and lay down, just staring at the floor.
"I don't think the name Jeanie suits you." He said in a light voice that made my heart flutter "from now on your name is Raine." and threw a small smile at me. I nodded and looked at the floor again. "Albert!" He shouted to the cab driver "How much longer til we're to the airport?" The old man looked back at us through the mirror.
"About another half hour my Lord." He said. Derrick sighed and grabbed a water bottle from the mini fridge in the corner. I reached in my hoodie's pocket and pulled out my Ipod, I turned it up to full blast and looked out the tainted black window.
"You won't be allowed to have that back at the estate." He said and held out his hand. I grumbled and slammed it into his fist. It was still blasting Disturbed songs. He turned it off and put it in his pocket.
30 Long and Silent minutes later, we arrived at the airport. The chauffeur opened the limo door for us, and we stepped out.
"Stay close to me." He whispered in my ear "For now, Albert is my grandfather I was visiting with my girlfriend, thats you, and he wanted to see us back to Scotland safely. I already have our passports." I just nodded again and he grabbed my hand. I had to bite my shirt collar to keep from shouting at him. For some reason, I felt love and hate for him at the same moment, and I hardly knew him.
Derrick pulled me up to the counter with him, and they weighed my duffel bag and did the stuff they normally do at an airport. Another half hour later, we were ready to board the plane. We were in second class, as Derrick said that he was "in cognito" and many people actually belived we were dating, because of the way we dressed. Both of us were wearing My Chemical Romance shirts and Skinny jeans. I hated that people were so stereotypical. I ignored all of them and watched the television that was in the aisle.

Ever since I could remember, I have always wanted to be a mother. Even while in college, I, of course, had career aspirations, but if someone asked what I wanted to be “when I grew up” I would always say a “mom”. My mother stayed at home while I grew up and I really loved that experience and wanted nothing more than the ability to give that to my children.
I struggled a bit to find my way after college, I majored in Business Communications and wanted nothing more than to do social media or be a part of the communication team. But when I graduated college there weren’t any jobs for this and if there was, they were highly competitive or already required many years of experience. So as I went from company to company, I always sought to fill my cup with my passion for social media. I started a personal blog about wedding planning and would also volunteer to help with social media for the company I worked for.
When we finally got pregnant the question came, would I be able to be a stay at home mom? The reality of leaving work and not having my income contributing hit us, I contributed to our household income to allow us a comfortable life. My income mattered to my family. I wouldn’t be getting my dream of staying at home just raising babies. I struggled with it my whole pregnancy, thinking I would have to go back to work and the way I wanted to mother my baby had been shattered. During my whole maternity leave, I was anxious about the thought of leaving my baby all day and missing out on such important moments with my daughter. What if I missed her first steps, her first words, her first everything!
I begged my boss and my workplace to allow me to work from home, even if it was a few days a week. I worked as a social media manager, but I believed that my job could easily be done from home. They would not budge on it. It was painful going back to work even though my own mother was watching her for us, it still was so hard. It wasn’t the way I wanted to live the rest of my life, feeling terrible for being away 10 hours or so every day. Feeling like I had to play catch up every day with my her. I decided I didn’t have to live this way anymore and took matters into my own hands.
So I created my own destiny, started my own business, where I could work from home and still be able to make an income for my family. The added bonus also was that I would be doing what I love, social media management, and helping small businesses with their own goals.
Don’t get it twisted, I also worked part-time for a bit at Starbucks to get affordable health insurance for my daughter and I (my husband’s insurance was too expensive for us to be on his). I would work very early in the morning at Starbucks, be home by 9am, and then spend the rest of the day with my daughter and contracting with my clients. I was happy and thought that this was something I could manage for the rest of my life.
Then one day, an old co-worker approached me and told me about a company called Clearcover, they were looking for people to work-from-home full time and asked if I would be interested and I jumped at the opportunity. It wasn’t doing social media, but it still allowed me to be at home and not miss a thing with my daughter.
I wasn’t ready to let go of my business that I just started and I kept getting more clients each month. I was juggling working from home and meeting the demands of my clients and able to be at home with my baby. My mother was still coming over to watch my daughter while I worked at my desk but I loved that I could just take a few steps and see her, hold her, and not miss a single thing. I was working more hours than I had ever had in my life, but it was all worth it to me.
I eventually got promoted and became the social media manager in the Communication department at Clearcover. The exact thing I always hoped to do. When I got promoted I made the hard decision to let go of my clients, I wanted to give my new position 110% of my attention and hard work. And also was really ready to not have to work so many hours every day.
I get to be the mom I want to be to my daughter. I get to provide income for my family. I have started to think of how awesome it is that I am so accomplished that my family relies on me financially to have an amazing life that we do. I get to fill up my cup working at a company that believes in me and that I can share my passion with. For a long time, I didn’t believe women could do it all, have a career and a family. But I am actually living the dream that I didn’t even know I wanted. When I took the leap of leaving my job not quite sure if I would regret the decision, but here I am breaking down even more barriers for what I thought I deserved in my life. What I thought I wanted in life is actually completely different then what I am, a successful working mom, but it turns out I love every minute of it. I put into the world the life I wanted and manifested it myself.

Lead singer Luc Devens is known for his fabulous range and high dynamic capacities.
His musicality and experimental singing gives him the ability to transform any song into his own. He also is a great songwriter, both for his own projects and for others.
Want to contact Luc? Send him an e-mail: firstname.lastname@example.org

Satisfied male. The night before this guy and his mate downed a Bushbuck about 50 yards from this spot. We'd heard of the kill and investigated it, then returned this morning to see if the lions were still around. They'd moved the buck to a more secluded spot under a tree, and consumed quite a bit more of it. The pair were lounging in the shade clearly satisfied with their kill.

A bit late posting this blog but being Easter, we were very busy with orders and with family and friends both before and after this event.
We hope you had a Happy Easter!
Preparing for a Winnipeg Manitoba Photo Booth Rental Event At Four Crowns Restaurant
As usual we did all our prep work the week before. After sending out our “final” email with information on set-up and confirming what we require, I started creating the workflow for the evening.
They had approved the overlay and animation the week before. Our graphic artist, Cory did an amazing job and kept is classy and elegant. The client sent over a picture of a picture and normally we try to stay away from those, as the quality is not always the best, but Cory managed
to create a very special animation for them.
For the workflow we went with the classic gold and black animations. This includes compliments, countdown, and various other animations through the guest’s experience.
After creating the workflow, I created the custom photo album, again I forgot to take a picture of it, so this is the design I used to engrave on the cover. I stained, clear coated and added the pages. I wanted to engrave the picture of Alvin on the inside cover, however the picture was not clear enough o pick up the lines very well.
I put together the bag with the USB, photo album and a little photo booth treat for Alvin and then added this bag to the supplies we bring with us.
I pulled out our birthday props and went through all our regular props, cleaning them and making repairs to those that needed it. I felt we were a little light on the 80th birthday theme and made plans to quickly run into Party Stuff on Saturday morning before we leave for set-up.
Before Setting Up in Winnipeg Manitoba Photo Booth Rental at Four Crowns Restaurant
On Friday we packed everything up in our cart and went through he check-list of what needed to be packed. This included the backdrop the client chose.
At 930 we were asked to start an hour earlier, (in our contract it states the time can be changed up to a week before) and being as we were going to set-up at 4:00 always and we were planning on staying until we start, it was not an issue.
Quickly I ran into the city to Party Stuff, and purchased a few more birthday props.
Sadly, the only item I could find that had 80 on it was a pink and white headband. I purchased it just in case but was disappointed that they did not have any black ones.
Setting Up Winnipeg Manitoba Photo Booth Rental at Four Crowns Restaurant
I found out that all the guests were arriving at 4 and really felt bad with us setting up well there are guests arriving, so we chose to arrive an hour earlier just in case we could set-up a bit earlier. We were super excited to find out that it was not an issue to start setting up.
I have to say that Four Crowns Restaurant https://www.fourcrowns.ca/ is one of the most amazing venues we have worked at. From the time we arrived to leaving we were incredibly impressed with the staff. The manager was very hands on and accommodating to make our set-up work. He even told us a story about the mark on the floor being where they did a burnout with the motorcycle. He assisted us in moving some tables and did so with a smile.
The wait staff was absolutely the most friendly, happy, welcoming, and helpful staff that we have ever experienced. Watching them approach each table, even with the restaurant being full they took their time and were engaging, and you got the sense that they knew each person they were talking to.
The décor was warm and welcoming, like walking into your friend’s home.
We happily had almost everything set-up before the guest’s started arriving. We worked as fast as we could as we were in a very tight space and didn’t want to inconvenience anyone.
The kids anxiously studied the props and were very respectful when we explained we would be open at 6:00 and they could put on all the props at that time. They excitedly came up every 15 minutes asking what time.
AT about 430-500 we decided to try our luck on the VLTs and had our amazing supper. The food at Four Crown’s was amazing and large portions. Again, forgot to take pictures but it was delicious.
By 530 we had lost enough money to give up on the VLTs and took a bit of time outside enjoying the beautiful weather. At about 540 the mother of our client asked if we could start right away rather than wait until 6pm. I had to do our one final run through and had the booth open within 2 minutes. We agreed to now working from 545 to 745.
From that moment on we stayed busy the whole night. The guests were extremely fun to work with! The kids ay the event had many pictures taken and each time were so creative in their choices of props. They were extremely respectful and probably could have run the booth by the end of the night.
At 730 we shut down anyone joining the line and had just enough people in line to finish at 745. Guess what…. Like always people snuck in and kept asking for just one more. We turned away most people but agreed to do to more sets of family pictures. This is always my struggle as no one likes to work without being paid and if I turn away one and let another group go it never seems unfair. As well we both feel bad when we have to tell people we are finished but we would work hours afterward if we continued to do that.
A few years ago, we had to become firm in our end times.
One event years ago we were scheduled for 4 hours at an event. The line was atleast 60 people deep all night and about 20 minutes before we close, we shutdown anyone else joining the line. At our scheduled shutdown time which was 12:00am, at 1155pm we were doing our last pictures. A few people approached and asked to have their picture taken and we explained that we were closed.
A group of 2 couples came up and moved the stanchion it get in line. We explained that we were closed at 1200. A gentleman in the group stated it was only 1155. We tried to explain that we had to finish off the last picture and they got really load and in my husband’s face. I tried to diffuse the situation and explained we already turned down other people and that it would not be fair. The two men in the group kept arguing, stating that we would never work for this company again and even called us a few names. I told them to be ready to go and we got them set-up. The pictures turned out horrible and they looked incredibly angry in the pictures. When I stated that there are 2 more the 2 guys were very impatient and honestly, I could not figure out why they even wanted the pictures at that point. After the pictures were taken, they walked away without texting it or getting the print. So strange, we did pass the pictures along to them but were very shaken by this experience. They were right in our faces and very threatening. Funny thing is we were asked back for every event after that (3) with that company.
And that was why we started to be firm in closing at the right time. Besides who likes to work for free? Lol
Everything Great Comes To An End Winnipeg Manitoba Photo Booth Rental at Four Crowns Restaurant
The evening was absolutely amazing, and I spoke to Alvin afterward. He was so incredibly happy and surprised by the party. He was happy he had pictures taken with his family.
Packing up was a breeze and we were packed up within and hour.
If you are looking for fun entertainment contact us. We are your Next Generation Photo booth both in Southern Manitoba and in Winnipeg, Manitoba Photo Booth Rental.
Again, I can not say enough about the staff at Four Crowns! If you know someone who works there, please let them know, Thank you for all your help!!!! WE can not wait to return with some friends for a wonderful evening of drinks, food and some VLT.
Thank you, Justyce, Alvin and your amazing family for making our night so much fun and for having us out. You are all very luck to be surrounded by such amazing people and your kids were some of the most well behaved, polite, and friendly kids we have worked with.

We stood in the airport together. He was returning to the West Coast after a few days of sanity in his own neck of the woods. Things had recently imploded in his marriage and he was sadly sorting through the shards of shattered relationship.
It is a difficult process for anyone but this guy . . . a prince of encouragers . . . an others minded person . . . he was keeping his head above water and trying to find something solid to stand on.
Most of us come home in the hard times. Home to simpler, happier times, before life gets so complex.
The check-in attendant greeted Russ and took his bag to weigh it.
He was taking something back with him that he didn’t bring home. I am not sure what it was but he had a typically Russ solution. He reached down and took off his shoes, a beautiful pair of nearly new, “Sandro Comfort gels” and handed them to me with a big smile.
From previous days of abundance, he knew good things . . . well enough to possess them without being possessed by them. There was this crazy look in his eyes as he watched for my reaction . . . the kind of look that a person gets when they rediscover a forgotten but proven path to freedom.
The practice of Russ’ life has been to bless people with the things that you can’t take with you. It’s a time-tested, fail-safe remedy, getting our eyes off of ourselves and our own need to see others that we can bless. The more I think of me the less I think of God and the more I think of God the less I think of me.
The Sandro’s are my favorite pair of hand-me-downs. I have walked several prayerful miles in Russ’ shoes. I smile every time I wear them.

His wife Kelis filed for divorce yesterday -- but judging by Nas's deflated demeanor outside Madeo earlier this week, he definitely knew it was coming.
Just three days before his pregnant wife filed the papers, a seemingly depressed Nas could barely form sentences outside the restaurant, clearly upset about something. But looking back, it's obvious why the rapper wasn't himself that night.
Nas was having dinner his friend Michael Rapaport, who, while talking about prop 8, prophetically warned our photog "With marriage comes divorce."
Turns out he was right.

The year was 2050, the year when everyone became hooked to their gadgets. It was the year when our government brought ‘Technology’ closer to the people. And by the way, it is also the year also when our privacy was stripped away from us. And Jake (not real name, for security reasons, of course), seems to think that this was intentional. I mean the taking away of our privacy was an intentional step by our government (for he works with one of the security agencies in GandaLand, our country).
But I guess we knew we were giving away too much when we signed away our rights in search for protection, protection from those alien terrorists, terrorists we read about in our local newspapers but no one, none but heads of our security agencies, of course, has ever seen (and who would want to see them anyway?).
The government promised to protect us, and perhaps it has? I am not in any way suggesting that the government has no right. Of course not. Our constitution is clear, and we all agreed to it, although it was our Members of Parliament who signed. We gave them the power, anyway. But enough of that. I wanted to talk about what happened to Joy. How did I allow myself to be carried away?
Joy was a popular of all. She was loved by all, and when someone wanted to express their gratitude for the time spent with you, they would say ‘I enJOYed your company’. Joy was right there in the middle of every heartfeld gratitude. Before Technology came that it. Our society those days, before the government made internet free, and Technology ‘cheap’, we used to gather around the fireplace that grandfather lit (our community was small also). Then we would listen to stories about faraway lands, lands only visited by those who fought in those big wars (they used to call them WW1 and WW2).
This storytelling was enJOYed by all. We lived for the community and the community was us. We really cared for each other, not like now. But later, as the years approached 2030, our community really begun to change. Not that change is bad, but it changed badly. I mean, children no longer respected their elders. It was said that it was their right. They could not help the old woman with her firewood, it was branded ‘child labor’. It were these sort of things that began to distance Joy from our community.
I often heard her complaining, that people no longer cared truly about each other. She said people were becoming ‘individualistic’. Families really didn’t enJOY each other’s company, that they were addicted to their gadgets. I was of course a bit young to quite understand her. Actually, I thought those were rumblings of an old lady. Could she not see that GandaLand is advancing? Is it not a good thing? Why do backward people like keeping others backward? (I muttered to myself, though the expressions on my face would occasionally give me away).
But something I didn’t immediately notice, which I came to see later (way after Joy had disappeared), is that this ‘advancement’ and ‘individual rights’ had not come alone. Technology had somewhat killed what we used to call community, because, unknown to him, technology was brothers with Individualism. Technology is a good guy for his own sake. But his brother is not.
And you see, it was Individualism’s idea to carry along Misery, his not so obvious and subtle cousin. Misery always follows individualism. Well, not because they necessarily enJOY each other, no, not really. But you know there are people who seem to get along quite painfully, because they are sort of parasites of each other, where one cannot survive without the other.
Now, I guess that is why our government was lost for ideas. How do you deal with Individualism and his cousin, without upsetting the good man Technology? For, of course, we might need Technology to locate our old friend Joy. But can he really find her? Would Technology, brothers with individualism, allow Joy to come back, knowing that Misery cannot stand Joy at all?
This also confuses me, and I guess it’s time for me to put my head down. When I awake, I will tell you of a rumor I heard, a rumor that is both dreadful and intriguing.

When Gary was a teenager, he was a very accomplished drummer. He was in a band for several years until he broke his wrist in a fall and somehow drifted away from the hobby.
He is now 66. When we lived in the Bay Area, he celebrated many birthdays but on one of his birthdays (in his late 40s), I rented a rehearsal studio for him, complete with a drum set and he played for almost 4 hours. I never forgot how happy he was during that time. So, when he announced that he wanted a drum set for Christmas, my heart gave in to the whim.
The week before Christmas, I started shopping online and found many drum sets for purchase. I picked out 4 and showed him. While looking at them, I noticed an ad on the side page for an electronic set. I pointed out the option and after much studying, he decided that was his choice. The electronic set was ordered to be delivered on Christmas Eve. During all this I realized that the drum set did not include a throne or stool to sit on. I ordered it separately for delivery after Christmas. I should have known this purchase was too easy.
The LARGE box arrived on Christmas Eve as ordered. I am always amazed at how Santa fits all those items in such a tiny sleigh.... I was more amazed when we opened the box on Christmas Day that the entire set was packed carefully in 10 boxes and puzzled into one large box. I did not pay a lot of attention to how the boxes came out of the large box as my Dad and Gary unpacked most of them. Now, for the directions.
Gary is pretty much a pain in the butt when it comes to assembling anything. His mechanical skills which were formerly well-honed have all but disappeared. Dad and I took over and after about 4 hours, assembled the stands, drums and various pieces. (I am omitting the yelling, frustration, curse words, perspiration and crying from the story. All from me, of course. My Dad was an angel in this situation.)
Gary sat down the play the drums. There was no sound. Dang it! After more research, we determined around 9:00 that night that it needed either headphones (for private playing) or speakers. NOT INCLUDED. I explained this to Gary and we decided to visit Best Buy the following day to purchase both.
After returning from Best Buy the following afternoon, it was determined that both the speakers and the headphones worked but not to Gary's liking. "Why didn't you just get me a regular set of drums liked I asked? Send them back."
The words were deafening. Really? After all that assembly, upset and unrest and you want to return them? Well, after all, it was a $400 dollar purchase and if he is not going to use them, well, I will send them back to the store.
My father and I started to disassemble the electronic drums. Much to our chagrin, we realized that all those components had to go back into the exact box from whence they came and the box needed to be placed carefully back into the Large BOX in the exact same position. How disheartening that was!
Hours later.......I am ready to leave my husband and go to the mountains to be a hermit. Had my father not been there helping and calming me, I may have really left.
At one point, I was so stressed over getting all boxes back into the box that he looked at me and said, "Why don't you walk away and let me do this?" How magical that moment was for me.
I walked away for a while and heard Gary say, "Why are you packing up my drums?" He had forgotten why the drums were not suitable for him.
Dad and I sealed the box he had finished and put it by the front door for its pick up by the same poor fed-ex guy who delivered it the first time. It sat for three days, in the way, awaiting its pick up. What a sore issue it was. Finally, one evening around 7, the door bell rang and the carrier took away the drums. He also delivered another box....the separately ordered drum throne! I put it aside and thought nothing more of it. I'll return it another time. I was at my limit.
Call me crazy, but I felt guilty that I returned Gary's Christmas present and not replaced it. Several times, he asked when his new drums would arrive. So, I looked on the Internet the day following the return of the electronic set. I went to Amazon and found 10 sets of equal price to the first set and showed them to Gary. His response was that the drums I was searching were not good enough and that the cymbals needed to be made by Zildjian. That added several hundred dollars to the purchase. NO WAY> I got over my guilt rapidly and told him we would have to keep shopping.
It was not the money. It was the point.
So, Mr. Gary, you will need to wait. Sure.....another week. I went back to the Internet, found the "perfect" drums and ordered them. They arrived and on this past Saturday, I put them together. I know nothing about drums. I know nothing of high hats, toms, etc. Of course, the set did not include directions.
Luckily, I found videos on the Internet that showed how to set up a similar set. Of course,the variations were not explained and I had to look at still pictures, zoom in and blow up the picture to see intricacies of the pieces. For example:
How does one get the piece attached that holds the drum onto the cymbal pole thingy and make it NOT dump over from the weight of the drum?
YouTUBE does not have a question and answer forum. So, I used the best source of knowledge I had in the house.....Gary. I convinced him that this project was not overwhelming and that if he used logic he could help me. Of course, he knew. Change the center of gravity and mount the darn thing lower! When asked how to make the high hat pedal work, he instantly rearranged the pieces and it worked like he had done it everyday.
The drums are assembled. The boxes have been destroyed. Guess what? I even kept the drum throne ordered for the first set so he can sit at the drums and play as much as he wants. He did just that yesterday. He just needs to practice again and again. The drummer boy is still in there. He was smiling.
After about an hour of playing by himself, he came into the office and said, "There is just one more problem. " When asked what now, he responded, "My leg hurts from pounding the pedal against the big drum."
After more questioning, we determined that his muscles were sore and there was nothing "WRONG" with the drums. Sorry dear, you will just have to keep practicing and build up those muscles. Amazon can't fix that!
Glad that adventure is DONE!

Drew’s Testimony for Christ,interview on his deathbed, now in eternity – July 27 2015
This video is in memory of Drew Spangler a dear brother in Christ. Drew was a former Freemason and involved in the occult. Drew gave his life to Christ towards the end of his life and found peace with God. Drew is now in the presence of the Lord! Make sure to watch till the very end. The original recording of testimony was in Sept 2013. The baptism was on feb 22 2014 and deathbed interview the week of July 20-26 2015. Drew had cancer growing in him for some time and cancer was the manner in which Drews death brought him to the presence of the Lord on July 27 2015. Please pray for his family to be saved and that many hear this testimony and come to know Christ through Drews testimony. It was Drew’s wish that others hear his testimony and that they know about the truth of Jesus. Drew Spangler leaves behind a message that leads others home to be with the Lord where he is now.
Psalm 116:15 Precious in the sight of the LORD is the death of his saints.

Here's Huma Abedin’s Statement About Her Separation From Anthony Weiner
On Monday, following a report in The New York Post that her husband was once again linked to sexting another woman, Huma Abedin announced that she's separating from Anthony Weiner. A longtime aide to Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton, Abedin has been in the spotlight during the election, especially as she was involved in some of the more controversial emails with the Clinton Foundation and allegations of State Department "pay for play." The news of Weiner being embroiled in another alleged sexting scandal comes after another such scandal led to his resignation from Congress in 2011, and another which dashed his hopes to become the Democratic nominee for mayor of New York City in 2013. Abedin's statement on the decision to separate reads:
Weiner did not confirm the allegations, telling The New York Post that he and the woman in question "have been friends for some time," and that she "has asked me not to comment except to say that our conversations were private, often included pictures of her nieces and nephews and my son and were always appropriate."
Ever since Weiner's first brush with sexting infamy in 2011, there was some speculation about whether Abedin would leave the disgraced former congressman. Shortly after that story broke, Abedin announced that she was pregnant with the couple's now-four-year-old son, Jordan. Abedin played a major role in Weiner's attempt to rebuild his political career, and she famously appeared by his side at the press conference in 2013 during which he confirmed the new reports of sexting which brought down his chance at a political comeback. She said, “I love him. I have forgiven him. I believe in him. And, as we have said from the beginning, we are moving forward."

About Lakshmi J N
Lakshmi is an experienced farmer from Chikkaballapura, Karnataka. She looks after her family of four. To get an additional income, Lakshmi has recently stepped into animal husbandry. She wants to borrow some loan as she needs to purchase a cow and some fodder to expand her business. With the help of the expansion, she hopes for some income enhancement which would further help her build a home. Invest in Lakshmi and help her expand her business.
I wish to build a big house for my family.

Platform: 3DS Max
When I was in graduate school, I took a 3D modeling class at Columbia University’s School of Architecture. For the final, we were free to model whatever we wished, as long as it was a hybrid of two ideas. I took this idea back to my classroom.
The object depicted in first two images was inspired by the novel “Time and Again”. It is a hybrid of a lamppost that is shown in one of the novel’s illustrations and a pen and ink set that is described in the text.
The land trimaran concept was designed by an avid sailor and future naval architect.

James Haven is an American actor and producer whose name is more well-known for his family ties than his profession. Angelina Jolie’s brother, James, has not achieved even a fraction of his sister’s renown.
Jolie and Haven, who is two years Angie’s senior, have always had a close bond. Some thought it was perhaps too warm, especially considering their controversial kiss on the lips at the 2000 Oscars.
True, both afterwards stated that the kiss was absolutely innocent. Jolie was distraught when she learnt of her mother’s condition (she died of cancer a few years later) and didn’t realize that people were staring at them.
According to another story, Angelina couldn’t hold back her tears when she was awarded the Oscar for best supporting actress for “A Life Interrupted.” “He just hugged me and said he loved me, and I know he’s overjoyed for me,” Jolie remarked at the time.
In any event, no rumors or hearsay could separate brother and sister. They were always there for one other when things became tough. During Angelina’s tough breakup with Brad Pitt, James was by her side.
Although some claim that he was involved in Brad and Angie’s divorce, pitting his sister against her spouse. James, by the way, has never been married. Despite his young, he was a real beauty. And today, in the rare photographs on social media, everything looks fantastic. However, as it turned out, it is the result of Instagram filters (a banned extremist organization in Russia), Photoshop, and the proper viewpoint.
Haven was photographed on the street by photographers, and he appears tired, old, and, frankly, unappealing.
Angie, on the other hand, has recently given up. The actress’s face is riddled with wrinkles, and her skin is as drab and dry as parchment. Her most recent appearances have even startled followers.

I had my annual physical a couple of weeks ago with my new doctor. So far, I'd only seen her in the context of my son's well-child checkups, but I really liked her. Her office typically does blood work with cholesterol & diabetes screenings at annual appointments, and in addition to that I requested a thyroid panel as well. A few days ago, I got the results of the blood work back, and it appears I have a cholesterol problem.
On one hand, I'm shocked - I eat pretty healthily (healthfully?) and I think I'm reasonably active -- as most moms of two year olds are, can I get an amen? On the other hand, though, I'm not that suprised. I have a really strong family history of heart problems. My mom's cholesterol has been horribly high since she was in her early 30's (and I'm getting close to that at 27) and she's been on medication to keep her levels lower for years now.
Over the last ten or twelve years - basically, ever since I left my parents' house to go to college - my mom has been on a big health kick. In addition to her cholesterol medication, she's started walking five miles every day. She eats three or four servings of fruits and veggies with every meal! She stopped drinking coffee and sodas, and sticks to water and juices now. I'm really proud of her, and I think it's great that she's taking better care of herself. But I wonder: what would have happened if she'd made those changes sooner?
While I was at home, I saw a mom who could put away a half-gallon container of ice cream all by herself every two days. I saw a mom who frequently bought a bag of candy, chips, or other snack food on her way out of the grocery store, and ate most of it (she usually shared a little with us kids!) by the time our car was back in our driveway. I saw a mom who didn't exercise - even walks around the block - and who really didn't ever have time by herself away from our family.
I think I internalized a lot of those lessons - even though I doubt she planned to "teach" me those things. Now, I have never had quite the sweet tooth that she has; and my metabolism and body shape are very different from hers, so if I ate that much ice cream I'd be 100 pounds overweight instead of my current 10! But still: I saw her "treat" herself for a long, hard day... with food. And I saw her put her kids and family first, all the time, even if it meant she didn't get to do basic things to take care of herself.
I'm younger than she was when she first was diagnosed with high cholesterol. I want to make some healthy choices and changes that not only put me in better shape and better heart health -- but also show my son, and any future kids who come along, that taking care of yourself is a valid choice. An important choice. That our bodies are only as strong as we allow them to be, and that we need to invest in our own futures by making our bodies as strong as they can possibly be.

India Someday is definately the best way to travel to India. I travelled by myself for 25 days during June 2016 and had the trip of my life thanks to the superb service and personalization that India Someday provided. You will not regret!
India Someday is, simply, amazing. They are the best travel companions before, during, and after your trip to India. I was lucky enough to find them online, wrote a form on their website, and got a reply with a suggested itinerary within hours. In less than one week I had exactly the itinerary I needed as Ojas -the India Someday representative- was very efficient both via e-mail and with skype calls.
Once in India, I was in contact with Ojas and he was an invaluable help. Everything stated in the travel plan was as desired and I they even resolved some problems I had inmediately. The hotels/hostels booked were incredible and all the transportation was taken care of in a very efficient manner.
I was so happy I recommended it to my best friend and he used them in September 2016, he couldn’t be happier,

It seems we can’t find what you’re looking for. Perhaps searching can help.
You could qualify for a mortgage as quickly as 2 years after bankruptcy?
If you have filled for bankruptcy and it has been 2 or more years since, you could qualify for a mortgage loan. In addition, you can also qualify to have your down-payment be as little as 3.5%.

Days of Our Lives Update Thursday 10/13/11
Pictures by Juanita
Terri's interview with Abe and EJ continues. EJ brings up Abe being there when Gus grabbed Nicole. EJ thinks he can't look at it as a small mistake. Lexie and Nicole cheer on their respective man. EJ blames Abe for the crime rate and unemployment rate in Salem. Abe assures him there are more jobs on the way. Abe tells EJ he should leave town with Stefano if he wants the crime rate lowered.
Sami and Brady ask Madison how she can be so calm about Kate stealing their distribution deal. Brady brings up hearing Madison make the deal. Brady worries about how Victor will react. Madison tells them not to worry. Nate thinks he knows why Madison is calm. Madison says Kate played right into her hand and took the bait.
Kate talks on the phone outside of the Pub about how she got the distribution deal for Countess Wilhelmina.
Madison explains how she knew Kate would go after the deal. Madison assures them that Kate will not win.
Jennifer tells Jack they were talking about Abigail and not them. Jack apologizes for pushing but she gave him hope that Abigail would come around. Jennifer tells him that is it and they should leave it at that. Jack asks about Jennifer and if he can hope that she will come around too. Jennifer says she isn't doing this now and starts to leave but Jack stops her. Jennifer tells him that she can't answer the question because she doesn't know if she'll ever get past what he did. Jack tells her how he never meant to be held hostage. Jennifer reminds him that he never told them where he was and he put his work above his family again. Jack apologizes and swears to never leave again. Jennifer tells him that it's too soon to have this conversation. Jennifer believes that Jack would've come home if he could have. Jack tells her that they are all he thought of and asks Jennifer for a chance but Jennifer tells him that she is not yet ready. Jack tells her that he will wait as long as it takes.
EJ calls it a sad day when the mayor decides on mudslinging. Abe tells EJ that he and Stefano are toxic to Salem. EJ brings up the problems again. Abe points out that the DiMeras are involved in all problems. EJ reminds Abe that Lexie is a DiMera and wants Abe to explain how Lexie is involved in criminal problems. Abe admits that she isn't so EJ points out that he has no criminal record either. EJ declares that he trusts the voters of Salem to recognize that people can change. Abe thinks EJ is running for mayor as an ego trip while he is doing it for the town. EJ thinks the voters know he loves Salem just as much as anyone. Abe says EJ just loves winning at all costs. Abe states that EJ is doing it because there's something he wants.
Sami finishes a phone call outside the Pub as Kate approaches her. Kate calls it a joke that Sami is working with Madison. Sami tells her to get a new hobby and starts to leave. Kate tells her that her company is international and ready to make huge profits. Sami tells Kate that Countess Wilhelmina will go down and Kate will do it herself. Sami assures her that Madison is fine.
Madison finishes a phone call and goes back to Nate and Brady. Madison tells him that she signed a deal with the fastest growing distributor. Madison jokes that she wants to send flowers to Kate for being so foolish which helped them in the deal.
Kate tells Sami that Madison doesn't know what she's doing and hiring Sami proved it. Kate tells Sami that she took the deal right out from under them. Sami wonders what Kate will do when she's out of business.
Terri brings up the topic of John Black. EJ is glad she brought it up. EJ brings up how so many people have been wiped out financially because of John. Abe points out that people are innocent until proven guilty. EJ mentions how all these people put their trust in John and his company Basic Black. EJ states that they know John took the money which is why he launched a class action lawsuit on behalf of the people to make sure that John is held accountable. EJ promises to do whatever it takes to get the money back and to make sure that John pays for what he has done. EJ promises to work hard to make sure the wrong is righted and that justice is served.
Sami goes back into the Pub and sits with Brady, Nate, and Madison. Sami tells them what Kate said to her. Madison tells Sami not to let Kate get to her since it is playing out as planned. Brady and Sami ask Madison what she means. Madison explains how she set up her deal with Mr. Kurasawa and Kate got the other one, so they got the deal they wanted all along. Brady comments that he didn't know that she was this good.
Jack tells Jennifer that he won't push anymore but he thanks her for giving him hope that Abigail will come around again. Jennifer tells him that it takes time. Jack comments that he missed taking time with her. Jennifer tells him that she can't imagine how bad it was for Jack. Jack says it's worse finding out that Abigail wants him gone. Jennifer doesn't think Abigail feels that way deep down but she thinks he made a bad situation worse by arguing with Chad. Jack asks Jennifer if she could talk to Abigail for him. Jennifer agrees to do so if she's ready to listen. Jack thanks her again for giving him hope. Jennifer reminds him that it's not about him, it's just that Abigail needs her father. Jennifer guarantees Jack that Abigail missed him. Jack tells her how he didn't want them to worry. Jennifer tells him how worried sick they were and Abigail started thinking Jack wanted to leave. Jennifer tells him that she thought Abigail was never going to stop crying or hurting. She tells Jack that to Abigail, she had lost her dad and his love.
Abe says it's low that EJ is pandering to the voters by talking bad about John. Abe tells EJ to ask himself why John would steal from his investors. EJ brings up that Basic Black was hit hard by the bad economy and John was desperate. EJ says they are lucky that John was caught. Abe calls it speculation. EJ mentions that John is out on bail and Abe led the efforts to raise his bail money. EJ brings up the people whose lives were ruined. EJ points out that Abe was helping his friend as the mayor and calls it hypocritical.
Madison, Sami, Brady, and Nate visit Madison's office space. Nate talks about how they will make it look. Nate shows them some sketches which impresses them. Madison tells him that she loves it and hugs him.
Jack tells Jennifer that it's easy to look back with regret. Jennifer tells him it will be hard to undo the mess he's made. Jennifer says she will help him be close to their kids again and tells him that it's his last chance. Jennifer tells Jack that he has to change. Jennifer states that she won't allow him to hurt Abigail and JJ again. Jennifer says she's with him if he's willing to change. Jennifer tells him that if he hurts their kids, he'll wish he was back in Afghanistan. Jack says he's made every mistake he can make but Jennifer is still there giving him one last chance. Jack tells her that he's given them every reason not to trust him. Jack blames himself for it. Jennifer is glad he's starting to see that. Jack tells her that being away from his wife and kids changed him. Jennifer asks if it's really changed him. Jack tells her that he spent so much time thinking how selfish he had been. Jack brings up thinking he would come back later but he realized later is not a given but a gift. Jennifer tells him they were robbed of that. Jack blames himself for doing it. Jack worries that he may have gone too far to fix it this time.
Sami tells Nate how excited she is to work with him. Nate asks her to help him measure the wall space and they step out of the office together. Brady tells Madison that he loved what she did today and did to Kate. Madison says it's just her job. Brady tells her not to be humble. Madison comments on the sketches. Brady asks her if there's anything she doesn't do as he gets close to her but Madison responds that she doesn't date men she works with.
Terri asks Abe about siding with John. Lexie tries to intervene but Nicole holds her back. Abe says he believes people are innocent until proven guilty unlike EJ. Abe says that EJ's words have shown that he's an elitist who will use whatever to get what he wants like John Black. EJ tells Abe to explain why he was involved. Abe tells him it's because John is his friend. Abe brings up that he hasn't seen the evidence but he will say that he's been proud to call John his friend. Abe states that he believes John is innocent of all charges and he has his support as a friend and candidate. Abe asks EJ if he has any questions for him. EJ says he has no further questions. Terri asks Abe about the money from Basic Black. Lexie comments that Abe showed everyone his character by defending John. Nicole agrees that it took guts but people might not vote based on character if they think John is guilty. EJ continues to speak, saying he would help the people and never be a two faced elitist.
Brady questions Madison saying she doesn't date men she works with. Madison says she just wanted to be clear. Kate arrives and enters their office. Kate mocks them and Madison asks what she's doing there. Kate informs her that she heard about their distribution deal. Kate tells her that their choice is second rate.
Jack talks to Jennifer about how they have all dealt with losing each other. Jennifer brings up Jack's blog making it sound like he was having the time of his life. Jack talks about being so afraid that they wouldn't realize he was worrying about them. Jennifer tells him it's hard since so much time has gone by. Jack tells her what scared him the most was that she would live thinking he never wanted to come back.
Terri finishes her interview and thanks EJ and Abe for their time. EJ and Abe shake hands and the cameras go off. Terri tells them it made for compelling TV and wants to do a follow-up. EJ goes over to Nicole and asks how he did. Nicole says it's what the people think that counts. Nicole tells EJ how people started tweeting when EJ started talking about John and shows it to him on her phone which makes EJ laugh. Lexie talks with Abe and praises him. Abe says he thought he trounced EJ and Lexie comments that she thought he did too at first.
Madison and Kate continue to argue. Sami and Nate come back in talking about their concepts. Brady and Sami mock Kate. Madison tells Nate that he can make the statement she wants to make. Kate mocks Madison. Madison tells her she's wrong because the statement she wants to make is out with the old and in with the new.
Jack turns away from Jennifer. Jennifer asks if he's okay. Jack tells her that he's taking it all in. Jennifer asks if he understands it all. Jack calls it a lot to take in which Jennifer agrees with. Jack prays that she understands. Jack talks about missing her and hating himself for leaving. Jack tells her that he promised himself that he'd never hurt her or their kids again.
Lexie tells Abe that she thinks he said the right thing and then hears EJ laugh. Lexie tells Abe about the tweets of people thinking Abe is a self serving politician just looking to help his friends. Abe tells her that he cares about the people. Lexie says she knows and is sorry as EJ continues to laugh.
Kate tells Nate it was nice meeting him as she exits the office. Nate comments on Kate being a diva. Nate tells Madison not to underestimate Kate. Madison agrees and says she has her guard up but thinks it's nice to have a worthy opponent since it makes winning mean much more. Sami brings up everything Kate's done to her. Sami is glad to be on Madison's side. Brady congratulates Madison on winning. Madison says she's looking forward to working. Nate comments to them that he hopes to spend more time in Salem. Nate wants to make a change in the office so Sami goes to help him move furniture. Brady prepares to go help them as well so he takes his shirt off as to not get his clothes dirty. Brady whispers to Madison that he can pick up on her signals too and then exits.
Jack talks to Jennifer about hoping she forgives him. Jennifer brings up that he broke a sacred trust. Jack promises her that it's the last time he does this. Jack assures her that he will never hurt them again as he's changed and tried to convince them of that. Jack admits to his mistakes and blames himself for anything bad that's happened to their family. Jennifer brings up how many times they have been down this road. Jack tells her this time is different because he's different and a better man. Jack asks Jennifer to trust him enough to prove it to her and give him a chance to make it better for them and their family. Jack asks Jennifer to give him, them, and their family one more chance.
Back to The TV MegaSite's Days of Our Lives Site
Try today's Days of Our Lives short recap, transcript, and best lines!
HELP SUPPORT THESE GREAT CAUSES!
Main Navigation within The TV MegaSite:
Home | Daytime Soaps | Primetime TV | Soap MegaLinks | Trading

Hezekiah son of Ahaz began to rule over Judah in the third year of King Hoshea’s reign in Israel.
He was twenty-five years old when he became king, and he reigned in Jerusalem twenty-nine years. His mother was Abijah, the daughter of Zechariah.
He did what was pleasing in the LORD ’s sight, just as his ancestor David had done.
He removed the pagan shrines, smashed the sacred pillars, and cut down the Asherah poles. He broke up the bronze serpent that Moses had made, because the people of Israel had been offering sacrifices to it. The bronze serpent was called Nehushtan.
Hezekiah trusted in the LORD, the God of Israel. There was no one like him among all the kings of Judah, either before or after his time.
He remained faithful to the LORD in everything, and he carefully obeyed all the commands the LORD had given Moses.
So the LORD was with him, and Hezekiah was successful in everything he did. He revolted against the king of Assyria and refused to pay him tribute.
He also conquered the Philistines as far distant as Gaza and its territory, from their smallest outpost to their largest walled city.

January 4, 2020 by DC
This is a great video comparing aircraft carrier capabilities between the United States and the Chinese.
October 8, 2019 by DC
An insightful interview on China from an American professor who lived there since 2006. He saw how China changed after Xi took over, and after he became President for life.
September 10, 2019 by DC
June 15, 2019 by DC

MEERUT: A stealing report was filed by a family against a woman who stole a newborn baby boy from UP's Lala Lajpat Rai Memorial (LLRM) medical college in Meerut district.
The incident happened on Monday. The family mistook the woman, who was in her forties, as a hospital staff when she started helping them. She asked the baby's father to dispose of a diaper and vanished with the baby.
According to the police, the man saw the woman running away. He ran after her, but could not catch her as she disappeared in the crowd.
The CCTV cameras were not working near the spot. The hospital authorities were checking other cameras in the vicinity to track the woman.
An FIR has been filed in the matter.
Rachna Chaudhary, Chief Medical Superintendent, LLRM Medical College said: "The patient, Sumaiya, was admitted to the LLRM Medical College with complaints of labour pain. She had a cesarean section to deliver a baby boy on Monday afternoon.
"Her baby was kept in the nursery for observation for two hours. During this time, the accused woman started a conversation with Sumaiya's husband, Asif. She helped him as men are not allowed in the ward where his wife was admitted."

SM: Kevin, let’s start with some historical perspective of Ariba. You joined the company after it went public, correct?
KC: Ariba was a company that was one of the founding members of the dot-com explosion that occurred in the mid to late 1990s. It was focused on helping organizations optimize a business process. The process Ariba worked on was the procurement process. They had a technology product that helped to manage procurement. It rapidly became a widely known product, and a significant amount of interest was placed in the company because of that.
At one time Aribas’s market cap was over $40 billion and its unadjusted share price was close to $1,000. It was clearly one of the top thee or four tech companies in its heyday. As with all of the other dot-com companies at the time, the market turned and Ariba turned with it.
SM: What was the revenue when your market cap was $40 billion? That should have been around mid 2000.
KC: Around that time, yes. The reported revenue in September of 2008 was $8.4 million, and $16.3M at the six month point in 1999.
SM: And that revenue was generated by selling procurement software to enterprises?
SM: When you came on board after the crash, what was the situation?
KC: I came on board in 2002 right after that downturn. Ariba was a lot like the other dot-com organizations affected by the market collapse. Valuations had collapsed, and it was time to figure out what was next. Ariba did some things that were interesting. First, we continued to build out the software product. It was a product that was CD based and had been intended to be used behind the firewall.
We made a strategic direction when I came in to change the way that we thought about how our customers would be successful. We knew that technology was not enough and that our customers would have to get a high degree of use out of that technology. We built a significant services organization to implement the technology was well as teach customers how to drive efficiency in the procurement practice.
That is really what the core of Ariba is. It is all about driving efficiency in the practice of procurement within an organization. We used that approach to stabilize the business. We put a good foundation under it to allow it to be built.
SM: Who was the customer base at that time?
KC: Mostly Fortune 500 [companies]. We had customers in all different industries. We then started adding services to help organizations implement the technology and optimize their process. Our technology was used to save money, so we went out and made a couple of acquisitions. We bought a large sourcing company that helped people buy things more cheaply. We also bought a company that did data analytics required to run the procurement process. That allowed us to expand our relationship with the Fortune 500 companies.

Natasha and Eden have been together since they were 14 years old. The couple got married in April 2012. They welcomed their first son Yannis in December 2010 and their second son Leo in February 2013.
Natasha, who used to play soccer back in high school, is a very private person. Although she is used to getting too much attention because of her husband, she managed to keep a low profile throughout the years. As a matter of fact, she doesn’t have any social media account such as Facebook, Twitter or Instagram.
Photo Credit: Football2014wc.com

Summary: My Grandson and I have been looking in stores for this particular one for a while. He had played it once, a year ago and he liked it. He started playing other games and forgot about it. Recently we was in Target and he saw TMNT Smash Up and that's when he thought about the other one, he played a long time ago. Sometimes a child's mind can surprise you. I didn't remember what it looked like but my Grandson did.
Summary: Bought this for my 7 year old son. It is way different from the TMNT games I played as a kid and it is difficult to play. My son does not like it at all for it is too hard to play. I dont recommend it for small children.
Summary: I bought this for a birthday present for my grandson after I purchased the wrong one the first time on another site and had to send it back. Now that Grandma is schooled in gaming systems I will make future purchases right the first time. He absolutely loved this and plays it everyday, I loved the big eyes and smile on his face when he opened it.

"Recent hospital admission"
About: Geraldton Hospital Geraldton Hospital Geraldton 6530
Posted by In appreciation (as ),
I have been to the Geraldton ED a few times and have always been treated with dignity and respect, all staff I saw were fantastic. Recently I was admitted through ED, first to the day surgery ward as the medical ward was full, then to maternity (not an obstetric patient). Again, all staff I came in contact with were fantastic. I have had nothing but positive experiences, which is great when unwell, and want to say a huge thank you to ALL staff!

This is a story about the Horsemen of the Apocalypse and how they rode to save the Devil.
What would you think if someone told you that Lucifer was the father of humanity, most demons and angels began their lives as humans, or that being a good person meant you could still end up in Hell?
What if you fell from grace and found that Hell was not all fire and brimstone?
After his death, Niccolo da Firenze found that he had been damned to Hell, but he quickly realized Lucifer's prison was not what the church had always claimed. His new home was a breath of fresh air, a place where he truly belonged, and it was only a few years before Niccolo rose through the ranks and became the Horseman of Pestilence. Surrounded by new family and friends, accepted even with all of his faults, Niccolo would often forget his part in the coming Apocalypse.
That bliss came to an end once Cadmus, the Horseman of Death, inherits a vision of Lucifer's murder.
And so, with his fellow Horseman by his side, Niccolo begins his frantic journey to uncover a conspiracy involving ancient demons, corrupted humans and even a few gods. For Niccolo, there is far more at stake than the destruction of Hell, far more at stake than losing his home or failing in the Apocalypse. If Cadmus' vision comes true, someone will murder the person who had become a father to Niccolo, who had raised him from the depths and given him hope in the darkness.

For the first time in his career, Garett Bolles has made the NFL Top 100 annual player rankings, as decided by the players themselves.
The fifth-year player clocked in at No. 82 on Sunday as NFL Network unveiled Nos. 100-41 during a six-hour block dedicated solely to the "The Top 100 Players of 2021" series.
"That jump that he made this year was really cool to watch," safety Justin Simmons said during the show. "I thought he was deserving of a Pro Bowl nod, but all that stuff will come. If he keeps doing what he's doing, that stuff will come. The sky's the limit for him."
Bolles emerged as one of the league's best left tackles in 2020, as he earned second-team All-Pro honors from the Associated Press. The Utah product didn't allow a single sack, according to Pro Football Focus, and had the third-best PFF grade among all tackles.
Ahead of training camp, teammate Von Miller told Denver media that Bolles is at or very near the top of the league at his position.
"He is the best left tackle in the league," Miller said. "If he's not the best, he's top three and he's not [No.] 3. I'm so proud of him. Y'all know about my relationship with Garett Bolles and the type of jump that he's made."
View photos from Garett Bolles's 2020 season, which earned him a spot in the 2021 series of the NFL Top 100.

Nicolas Cage‘s son, Wes, is being held for psychiatric evaluation after losing his temper at a Hollywood restaurant when the hatred for his diet became too overwhelming to contain. They say fad diets are bad for you, but Wes’ outrageous behavior probably had more to do with being a rich, spoiled socialite.
Nathan Explosion look-a-like Wes Cage was dining at The Farmer’s Kitchen when he took after his father’s hair and went totally bonkers. Wes’ personal trainer had advised the ill tempered Wes against eating what was probably bacon or chocolate milk when he flipped out. Nothing makes people go crazy like bacon and chocolate milk.
Wes didn’t take the advice well, or at all. In a brazen move, he tried to box his trainer out, only to be taken down. The police arrived and threatened him with tasers, at which point Wes decided to go peacefully. Regardless, he was strapped into a stroller — err, gurney — as a safety precaution. Babies are difficult enough before they can throw chairs and curse at you.
Nicolas Cage has ‘cleared his schedule’ to be with his son/have an excuse to continue evading his taxes.

EL PASO, TX (KTSM) - A 44-year-old man has died after he was hit by a car in the 8400 block of Alameda last Thursday night.
According to investigators, Juan Quintero Jr., 44, was crossing Alameda near Pasodale Rd. around 7:25 p.m. Thursday night when a 2005 Suzuki Forenza did not see him and hit him.
Quintero was taken to Del Sol Medical Center where EPPD's STI Unit was notified of his death on Sunday. EPPD says that Quintero was not in a crosswalk when he was hit and the driver of the Suzuki stayed on the scene and cooperated with authorities.
This is the 13th deadly crash in 2017 compared to 17 at this time in 2016.

Olympic gold medalist, wide receiver at Texas
AUSTIN, Texas — Former University of Texas wide receiver and track standout Johnny “Lam” Jones, who won an Olympic relay gold medal in 1976, has died after a long bout with cancer, the school announced Friday. He was 60.
Mr. Jones was a two-time allSouthwest Conference football player in 1978-79 and scored eight touchdowns of 45 yards or longer in his career.
The summer before his freshman year at Texas, Mr. Jones was 18 when he ran the second leg of the U.S. men’s winning 400-relay at the Montreal Games. He also finished sixth in the 100 meters.
Mr. Jones played five years in the NFL, all with the New York Jets. His best season was 1983 with 43 catches for 734 yards and four touchdowns.

Overall – Opposition to bribe taking was strong.The paper is by Teresa Hernandez & Robert W. McGee.
Gender – Females were significantly more opposed to bribe taking than men.
Age – The relationship between age and attitude toward bribe taking was linear. The older the age group, the more opposition there was to bribe taking…
Religiosity - Those who considered themselves to be religious were most strongly opposed to bribe taking, followed by nonreligious people and atheists.
Marital Status – Married and widowed people were most opposed to bribe taking, followed by divorced, separated, living together as married and single/never married people.
Education Level – Education was not a significant variable.
Employment Status – Retired people were most strongly opposed to bribe taking, followed by housewives, the self-employed, students, full-time and part-time employees and unemployed.

I had to abandon theoretical thinking to get the drink orders right for the Norcross men and women. Sam emerged to work behind the bar, India and I began moving at a faster pace, and gradually everything settled back to normal.
Just as I was about to get off work, Michele and Jason came in together. They were holding hands. From Jason’s smile, it was easy to see what her answer had been.
"Seems like we’re going to be sisters," Michele said in her husky voice, and I gave her a heartfelt hug. I gave Jason an even happier one. I could feel his delight pouring out of his head, and his thoughts weren’t so much coherent as a jumble of pleasure.
"Have you two had time to think about when it’ll be?"
"Nothing stopping us from having it soon," Jason said. "We’ve both been married already, and we don’t go to church much, so there’s no reason to have a church wedding."
I thought that was a pity, but I kept my mouth shut. There was nothing to gain and everything to lose by adding my two cents. They were grown-ups.
"I might need to prepare Cork a little bit," Michele said, smiling. "I don’t think he’ll kick up a fuss over me remarrying, but I do want to break it to him gentle." Michele still worked for her former father-in-law, who seemed to have more regard for Michele than he had for his lazy son.
"So it’ll be soon. I hope that it’s okay if I come?"
"Oh, sure, Sook," Jason said, and hugged me. "We ain’t eloping or anything. We just don’t want a big church thing. We’ll have a party out at the house afterward. Right, honey?" He deferred to Michele.
"Sure," she said. "We’ll fire up our grill, maybe Hoyt can bring his over, too, and we’ll cook whatever anybody brings. And other guests can bring drinks or whatever, vegetables and desserts. That way no one will worry and we’ll all have a good time."
A potluck wedding. That was very practical and low-key. I asked them to let me know what I could bring that would be most helpful. After lots of mutual goodwill had been exchanged, they left, still holding hands and smiling.
India said, "Another one bites the dust. How you feeling about this, Sookie?"
"I like Michele real well. I’m so happy!"
Sam called, "They engaged?"
"Yeah," I called back, a few happy tears in my eyes. Sam was making an effort to sound upbeat, though he was still a little worried about his own romantic situation. Any irritation I’d felt about the Jannalynn episode simply melted away. Sam had been my friend for years, while significant others came and went. I went up to the bar and leaned against it. "Second time around for both of ’em. They’re real good together."
He nodded, accepting my tacit reassurance that I wasn’t going to bring up Jannalynn’s little outburst of jealousy. "Crystal was all wrong for your brother; Michele is all right."
"In a nutshell," I agreed.
Since Holly called in to say her car wouldn’t start but Hoyt was working on it, I was still at Merlotte’s when JB came in about ten minutes later. My friend, the secret stripper, was looking handsome and hearty as always. There’s something about JB, something warm and simple that’s really appealing, especially when added to his nonthreatening good looks. He’s like a great loaf of homemade bread.
"Hey, friend," I said. "What can I get for you?"
"Sookie, I saw you last night." He waited for my big reaction.
"I saw you, too." Just about every inch of him.
"Tara was there," JB told me, as though that would be news. "I saw her as she was leaving."
"Uh-huh," I agreed. "She was."
"Was she mad?"
"She was real surprised," I said cautiously. "Are you seriously telling me you-all have not talked about last night?"
"I got in pretty late," he said. "I slept out on the couch. When I got up this morning, she’d already gone to the store."
"Oh, JB." I shook my head. "Honey, you got to talk to her."
"What can I say? I know I should have told her." He made a hopeless gesture with his hands. "I just couldn’t think of any other way to earn some extra money. Her shop’s not doing so great right now, and I don’t make a lot. We don’t have good insurance. Twins! That’s gonna be a big hospital bill. What if one of ’em’s sick?"
It was so tempting to tell him not to worry about it-but there was every reason for him to be concerned, and it would be patronizing to tell him he didn’t need to be. JB had made a clever move, for JB; he had found a way to use his assets to make extra money. His downfall had been in not informing his wife he was taking off his clothes in front of many other women on a weekly basis.
We talked off and on while JB nursed a beer at the bar. Tactfully, Sam pretended to be so busy that he was deaf to our intermittent conversation. I urged JB to cook something special for Tara that night or to stop off at Wal-Mart and buy her a little bouquet. Maybe he could give her a foot rub and a back massage, anything to make her feel loved and special. "And don’t tell her how big she is!" I said, poking a finger into his chest. "Don’t you dare! You tell her she’s more beautiful than ever now that she’s carrying your children!"
JB looked exactly as though he were going to say, "But that’s not true." He was sure thinking it. He met my eyes and clamped his lips shut.
"Doesn’t make any difference what the truth is, you say she looks great!" I told him. "I know you love her."
JB looked sideways for a minute, testing that statement for its truth value, and then he nodded. "I do love her," he said. Then he smiled. "She completes me," he said proudly. JB loved movies.
"Well, you just complete her right back," I said. "She needs to feel pretty and adored, because she feels big and clumsy and uncomfortable. It’s not easy being pregnant, I hear."
"I’ll try, Sookie. Can I call you if she doesn’t soften up?"
"Yeah, but I know you can work this out, JB. Just be loving and sincere, and she’ll come around."
"I like stripping," he said suddenly, as I was turning away.
"Yeah, I know," I said.
"I knew you would understand." He took a last sip of beer, left Sam a tip, and went to work at the gym in Clarice.
"This must be couples day," India said. "Sam and Jannalynn, Jason and Michele, JB and Tara." The thought didn’t seem to make her particularly happy.
"You still dating Lola?" Though I knew the answer, it was always better to ask.
"Naw. It didn’t work out."
"I’m sorry," I said. "Maybe some day soon the right woman will just walk in the door of the bar, and you’ll be all fixed up."

Growing up as a socially awkward geek, fashion was not much of a priority. What I wore were t-shirts, polo shirts, and jeans. Even by high school this didn’t change much. The mid-80s were a highly fashionable time, with a wealth of styles to choose from, but I stuck to what I knew. I didn’t see much point in changing that.
I didn’t think about clothes much. T-shirts tended to be of things I knew and liked, or solid colors. There wasn’t much thought put into them beyond that.
Something happened, though, one day in the mall. I saw a long-sleeved blue overshirt that I just had to have. I can’t tell you what it was about it, but it was just perfect for some reason. The color, the look, the thickness of the fabric, it spoke to me as no article of clothing ever had before. It was expensive: $30 (equivalent of $66 of today’s dollars), which was more than I could conceive of spending on a single article of clothing. I didn’t have the cash for such a thing, and it would have been weird for me to ask my folks for it, so I passed it by. But the next day I was still thinking about it, and I convinced my parents to let me get it, which I’m sure they found just as weird as I did.
As you can see in the photo above, taken in 1985 or 1986, there was nothing to it. No one would look at that shirt and think it was special in any way, but it was. I wore it as often as possible, unbuttoned over a t-shirt. The pants I’m wearing in that picture were army surplus fatigue pants, which I had gravitated towards. The shoes were gray New Balance sneakers. Often there were small pins on the shirt as well: Depeche Mode, Kraftwerk, mottos of some kind.
Without thinking, I had developed…a style.
It wasn’t much, but it was something. And it was mine. This period of time, 1985-ish, was a tremendous period of growth for me, not just physically, but in my identity. The blue shirt was possibly the first item of clothing I had purchased that worked beyond simple function. I mythologized the shirt, as I am wont to do, declaring it bulletproof (something that, when I posted the above picture on Facebook the other day, an old friend from that time remembered.) That photo above is my senior picture. Along with the cap-and-gown shot and the tuxedo shot there’s usually a Sunday Best shot. I instead wore the above. Some folks (named my parents) thought that was dumb, but I wanted to be photographed as I was. That was what I wore. I’m glad I did it.
I never progressed much past that style. To this day I tend to wear t-shirts with casual, non-jeans pants, and yes, open overshirts (or hoodies). I’ve never found another shirt that felt as right as that one; the fabric is usually too thin or too heavy. But I’m always looking out for one.
When did I get it? I’m pretty sure it was 1985.
Do I still have it? Sadly, no. When I lived in Lafayette, a friend was in town for work, staying at a hotel. I went and visited her there and realized too late that I had left it behind. Neither she nor the hotel found it.

BIO: Cafudu is old. VERY old. In fact, he's one of the first Le-Matoran to ever be created. He traveled across the Matoran Universe, spreading tales from other lands and legends of great things. One day, he was badly wounded when he accidently enter a Nui-Jaga's turf. He went to Karzahni, hopping for medical attention. Instead, he found a madman that imprisoned anyone that entered.He didn't recieve proper repairs and his condition worsened.
He stayed there for a year before a strange being washed ashore on the island. A tall, organic being calling himself, "H1". When another stranger came to savve the first one, Cafudu stall Karzahni long engough for them to escape. However, he was nearly killed in the process, nearly losing his arms. He was given even weaker ones, so that he couldn't defend himself. He was among the Matoran that was evacuated from the island by the Toa Nuva.
Not much is known as to what happened after that, but he survived long engough to migrate to Spherus Magna. There was he finally given proper medical attention and was restored to his orginal state.

The Compass was another bar in this wonderful town of Carlsbad. It’s in the village area… my server was great!!!!! We started off with 4 of us and ended up with about 8 and she was super with us as new people kept joining our little party…. This place is very eclectic and such a cool place to drink and visit!!!!

A man convicted of rape was able to find employment with vulnerable people in a hospital psychiatric unit.
Nathan Puma lied to get the job at the Ablett unit at Glan Clwyd Hospital, and while working there he perpetrated a series of frauds.
In a fraud, he tricked a single mother who responded to an offer on social media to join an escort agency. He promised her several thousand pounds which she never received, told her his name was Jason and slept with her several times before using her name and contact details to apply for loans from a total amount of £ 51,000.
Read more: See our full court coverage in Wales here
She received reimbursement requests and went to the police. The woman, who was studying at the university, also contracted an infection which she attributed to her meeting with “Jason”.
In another fraud, he claimed to have served in the military and won the Victoria Cross.
Puma, 29, formerly of Colwyn Crescent, Rhos-on-Sea, pleaded guilty to a series of frauds and failing to comply with sex offender notification requirements and was jailed for five years.
Mold Crown Court has learned he has given a false date of birth and a disclosure check showing he has no convictions to get the job at the hospital.
His lie was discovered in the Ablett unit at Glan Clwyd Hospital after earning £ 5,396 as a healthcare worker with vulnerable patients. He was convicted of rape in 2012.
Prosecutor Andrew Green said when Puma worked at Glan Clwyd he tricked a nurse, living in a trailer to be away from his family because of Covid, to sign a rental agreement for a house in Rhos-on-Sea which he did not clean but had been renovating. She said she had lost £ 7,500.
In 2019, Puma got a job for a company at Deeside, claiming he was a former military man and won the Victoria Cross. He was fired for dishonesty after four months, the prosecutor said.
Defense attorney Owen Edwards said some frauds had elements of fantasy. Few won the VC and many were posthumous awards. Puma had said he was contrite and had converted to Christianity.
He had lost his marriage, his home, his beloved dogs and his grandfather died while in prison.
“It is now at the bottom. He really wants to build a new life, ”said the lawyer
Judge Niclas Parry described Puma as a “mean and ruthless professional fraudster” who had been committing an offense since the age of 17.
For the latest updates via email from WalesOnline, click here.

BROOKS Koepka has claimed a fan went for his surgically repaired knee during the chaos on the 18th hole at Kiawah Island.
Both Koepka and Phil Mickelson were engulfed as thousands of spectators swarmed on to the course to cheer Mickelson to a remarkable PGA Championship victory.
Four-time Major winner Koepka, who underwent surgery on a dislocated kneecap and ligament damage earlier this year, was the only player who could have denied 50-year-old Mickelson victory.
If the leader had made bogey and Koepka had birdied the 18th, they would have gone to a play -off.
And Koepka believes a Mickelson supporter was determined to make sure that did not happen, and made a bee-line for him and caddie Rickie Elliott.
He explained: “I was just trying to protect my knee and it got bumped a few times. I don't know what someone was trying to do, or what. I don't know what the deal was. There were so many people around.
“Somebody jammed Rickie, and he stopped unintentionally because he got drilled in the face, and then I got drilled into the bag because he got stopped so quickly.
“I don't think anybody really understands until you’re actually coming out of surgery how you feel in those situations.
"I mean, even when I was doing rehab and there's five people kind of standing by your knee, you get a little skittish."
Asked whether he felt he had been targeted, Koepka added: “I don't mind waiting or being in that crowd.
"But getting my knee bumped. It felt like somebody tried to – I don't know what the deal was, but it's what it is. I’ll be putting it in ice because it feels like s**t right now
“I think the spectators coming on like that would have been cool if I didn't have a knee injury, and got dinged a few times.
“If I was fine, yeah, it would have been cool. Yeah, it's cool for Phil. But getting dinged a few times isn't exactly my idea of fun.”
Koepka was in a much better position to attack the flag, with Mickelson wide of the fairway.
But both men made par, giving Mickelson a two shot victory over his playing partner and Louis Oosthuizen of South Africa.
Source: Read Full Article

Obituary, Jon Arthur Stephen, 68
Jon Arthur Stephen, 68, died April 9, 2013 in Petersburg, Alaska.
He was born on June 22, 1944 to John “Jack” and Agnes Stephen in Petersburg. Agnes passed away when Jon was about three, and Jack who worked in several different capacities was unable to raise his young son. At this time, Jon moved in with his maternal grandparents John and Marie Hammer. In 1951, Jon moved in with Jim, Bev and younger “brother” Ken (Hammer). Over the next few years, the family grew to include Christi, Bob, Wendy and Roger. Jon always enjoyed the newest additions and was always willing to assist with their care.
Jon graduated from Petersburg High School in 1963. Right after graduation, Jon headed to Louisiana for National Guard training. Soon after that, he found himself in Anchorage, just in time for the great Alaskan earthquake. Jon found himself helping other Alaskans in need.
When Jon returned to Petersburg, he started the “Cab Company”. He had a real yellow checker cab that was used to pick up and drop off local residents. His friend Dewey assisted with the driving duties while other friends were often found visiting and enjoying the warmth of the office. It was about this time that Jon moved in with his father Jack to help him during a difficult time.
After Jack passed away, Jon sold the Cab Company and bought the fishing boat Rauma. There are several people around town that thought Jon’s last name was Rauma. This was coined by his friend Haftor who jokingly called him “Jonny Rauma”. The Rauma was Jon’s pride and joy from 1969 to 1975 when he sold her and bought the Eric. The Eric was truly Jon’s dream boat – he was so proud of the F/V Eric. Jon enjoyed fishing and being on the water, he worked right up until his illness forced him to stay on land.
Jon was a member of the Petersburg Volunteer Fire Department for 48 years. He was always willing to lend a hand, was always involved in training, and when he was in town, Jon was always found at the Thursday meetings.
Jon’s quiet enthusiasm to help his fellow community members will be remembered in his quiet strength. Jon was also a member of the Board of Directors of Hammer and Wikan, Inc. for over 20 years and he was the Vice President for the last 15 years. Jon was known to be a steady influence, always lending an ear, giving a helping hand and standing at the ready. Jon was also a member of the Pioneers of Alaska where good food went hand in hand with great conversation.
Jon leaves behind many wonderful conversations over millions of cups of coffee shared with friends and family. Jon leaves behind many who will miss his quiet ways – his best friend, Lynn, his family, “Mom” Bev (Hammer), “Brothers” – Ken, Bob and Roger (Hammer), “Sisters” – Christi (Burrows), Wendy (Westre), Uncle Art and Aunt Jeannine (Hammer), and many cousins, nephews and nieces.
A Community Memorial Service was held at Petersburg Fire Station 1, on April 21.
In lieu of flowers, donations can be made in Jon’s name to the Petersburg Volunteer Fire Department.

Lately, I've been on a bit of an Odyssey.
(Pun COMPLETELY intended.)
It all started when my mom and I cleaned out a closet together. As she dutifully sorted through a mess of things and I helped by supervising, she pulled out a very old notebook from when I was a small child. I took it, not thinking it would hold anything very interesting. But upon reading its contents, I was quite happily proven wrong.
The notebook held several stories I had written when I was eight years old.
And they were all gold.
I really don't want to understate how amazing these stories were from a comedy standpoint. As I read them aloud, recording them for my friends to enjoy, I genuinely couldn't stop laughing. The entire plot of one story revolved around our substitute teacher being a witch that I melted to death with maple syrup. That's not even getting into the fanfiction that I thought was revolutionary at the time. I was positively reduced to stitches and I loved every second of it.
This led me to unearth more old stories of mine. While I've thrown out a lot of my old writing for the sake of space, there are many things I wrote in middle school and beyond that I found and glanced through again. The older the story was, the harder I laughed at it, until I noticed the strangest thing happening.
As the quality of my stories improved overall, I laughed less at the silly narrative twists and felt myself getting embarrassed by them.
At first, it seemed like the normal reaction to have. Eight-year-olds don't have the sort of social awareness and expertise that fifteen-year-olds have, so of course, I should hold my fifteen-year-old self to a higher standard. I felt as though it was OK to question my state of mind at that age and judge myself like I was an adult that should have known better.
Being embarrassed just seemed to make sense.
Then, as I thought about it a little more, I started to realize that it was a pride issue.
The stories I wrote four years ago are objectively hilarious and stupid, but admitting that is so difficult to do when I feel like they reflect on my current abilities.
They were written so recently that I somehow worry they'll be mistaken for what I'm capable of doing today, which is ridiculous. Four years can do so much to change a person, especially if they've spent that entire time practicing and improving. Hell, I've written things months apart that show a drastic increase in quality. I'm making progress all the time.
When you're always learning and growing, it can be really easy to outgrow your old-self before it's even fully registered in your mind. You may not think it's necessary, but sometimes I think it does us all some good to remember, "Hey, I'm not that person anymore. I do different things now, and that's OK."
The things I used to do were sort of silly. It's OK to laugh about it. Laughing about it feels better than being embarrassed.

I adopted Yoda on Thursday, January 10th of 2019. On Wednesday I began looking for a dog at the humane society for a companion and emotional support after going through a hard time. I looked right over Yoda because when I was younger a Chihuahua bit me. Mary told me to look at him and we immediately bonded. I came in the next day to get him. He LOVES our lake property and even our 3 cats. The best part is how he burrows under the blankets at night! We love our Yoda who is now Yo-Yo!
We adopted Spencer who is Lhasa/Yorkie cross around the 25th of May. He has adjusted to our family very well. He has from the first been Monte's dog. But he has decided I'm his next best friend. We had been looking for a small dog that could travel with us on the plane plus had raised Lhasas so he was a good choice. We haven't had a problem with most of the things that had been on the list from previous owner. He was a little nervous at first when we'd leave him by himself, but never destroyed things. As he's gotten used to things, he's very excited when we get home, but does pretty good while we're gone.
Since we spend about 10 1/2 months in Mexico, he has become a traveler. We feel the original owners worked with him and also traveled in planes. He knew what the travel kennel was and no barks or whines or problems while traveling. He also has a friendly personality and even made friends with the customs inspector. He won family and friends over in Montana and continues to here.
Thought you would enjoy these pictures. As you can see in the one, he loves to be in someone's lap and often laying on his back. Thank you all for the help in getting a special new friend who was a good fit for us. Penny n Monte
From Amster's (now Buddy) new parents
We have enclosed a donation for food - be it regular or special allergy RX food.
We recently were in on 4/5/16 and adopted "Amster". He had been with you, it appears since December 15 and has allergies, therefore was not adopted. However, because you are a "no-kill" shelter, you still kept him and provided for him. You sent his special food (a very ample supply) home with us. We truely know how expensive that alone can be because we have a cat who has the same issues! Also you gave us his favorite toy - a squeaky toy - which has been a wonderful thing as I would not have known what he preferred for toys.
"Amster", now known as "Buddy" is the most precious, loveable, well-behaved doggie one could ever ask for! We love him and he loves us. We were a "match made in heaven"! "Buddy" had has check-up with our vet the very next day for blood work, feces etc. We are well on our way to controlling all issues. His grooming was two days ago and he is a very happy doggie! Thank you!
Visting the Shelter
Monday-Saturday 12 - 6 pm
Sunday 12 - 4 pm
Meeting Pets and Adoptions
Monday-Saturday 12 - 5:30 pm
Sunday 12 - 3:30 pm
11650 N. Ramsey Road
Hayden, ID 83835
PO Box 1005
Hayden, ID 83835
208.772.4019 - Phone
208.762.8645 - Fax

So I work in a school and today was told the slap cheek virus was going round. I rang the midwife centre and managed to get in to get a blood test today. I suffer from health anxiety, which is in my notes. I walked in apologising I hadn’t brought green notes (I know stupid) as I’d come straight from work and literally got the appointment within the hour. I then got told off by the woman saying well what would you do if you just fainted now. As you can imagine that did wonders for my anxiety. Then I said on the bed while they did my bloods. First she said no blood was coming and then that it was just trickling. This obviously again alarmed me as I started wondering well why is it trickling? I hadn’t drank a lot of water and hadn’t had dinner yet due to going this appointment. I sat worrying why this was happening. I then sat down after it to ask what this means now and she said to go back in school as I’ve already been exposed to the virus. That did make sense. But said my results would take up to 3 weeks!!! The ther pregnant woman at work was told not to go back to work and only to return Monday when she’d had her results. How can my results take up to 3 weeks and hers are available Monday! I went back to work worried. I can’t stop thinking about why my blood was slow coming out.
Last time I saw this midwife and mentioned the scanner noted a fibroid she told me all the complications it could cause despite I’d been told it wasn’t a worry by the scanner. Had my 12 week scan and they again have told me the fibroid is tiny and outside the uterus and no concern. Makes me worried that this woman is taking me through this journey knowing I have health anxiety but not feeling she’s supporting me in the right way.

Megan Clifton was looking to earn a degree to advance her a career with the federal government, but already had a full schedule. Between her full-time job and family commitments, she didn’t have much time to spare.
“I realized a degree would be very beneficial, but taking in-class courses would be too difficult to work around my full-time schedule, so I wasn't sure how'd I'd be able to make it work,” she said.
Megan heard about studying online at University Canada West through her work and after doing some research, she discovered that it could work with her busy schedule.
The single mother has a son, who is now four years old. She pursued and earned a Bachelor of Commerce Degree.
“Online learning made working full-time and going to school possible,” she said. “I love the flexibility of the online classes, as well as the structure of the weekly course load and due dates.
I was able to complete my school work around my work, family and social life.”
The degree opened new doors for Megan.
“My supervisors were waiting for me to finish my degree so I could be given the opportunity to work as an advisor,” she explained.
Megan earned her degree and posted stellar grades along the way. She finished her degree with the highest grade point average in her class.
Connect with Megan via LinkedIn

41 days since my last period, I was feeling mild cramps and having swollen nipples and kept wondering where my period was. You see, I had stopped thinking I was pregnant and stopped testing 5 days before my scheduled periods because it had been 12 months of insanity. ( Doing the same thing over and over with the same results).
But after wearing a pad for 3 days I had a strange feeling and tested in the Afternoon too ( Not morning!) and lo and behold, had 2 positive test strips.
The AHA moments that came after that were all flashbacks to what happened this month. I looked at the calendar and it is the 29th of October today.
WHAT ARE THE ODDS
What are the odds that exactly 1 month ago on the 29th of September, I was prompted to write a post about “Waiting for Fertility not infertility”. In fact, it was through and when writing that post that I had resolved in my heart and told God that even if I had to wait 8 years like Sarah and Abraham did after the promise was given to them, it would be okay because his timing was always perfect.
What are the odds that this whole month, I kept seeing the numbers 11:11. Everytime I so happened to glance at my phone or the clock, it would be 11:11am or 11:11pm. I even saw it on a youtube video in the number of likes at exactly 11:11 and was too dumbfounded and by the time I had screenshot it, it was 11:12. I walked past buildings and suddenly noticed the number on the building was 1111. I had taken a photo of this and posted in my instal-stories saying that I have been seeing these numbers and every time I did, it was like God was reminding me of the following verse:
“And by faith even Sarah, who was past childbearing age, was enabled to bear children because she considered him faithful who had made the promise.”
What are the odds also that 1 month ago, although I had been enjoying Jiujitsu, I had a emotional tough time and decided to let it go. Had I still been doing jiujitsu during these few weeks, it might not have been very safe with men twice my size with knees on my belly this month.
What are the odds that this was also the month Mark got baptized and that God had made my bellies flow rivers of living waters when I suddenly broke out into laughter 3 weeks ago during worship ( and this has not happened to me for 3 years. Actually the last time it happened was a few months before I conceived Aletheia.)
When I think of all these “odds” and chances… I cannot help but see the Godincidences and God-odds in everything that has happened this month.
GOD TIMING, not GOOD TIMING
Abraham was a 100 and had waited 25 years since God had first told him he was to be with child. It was till it was humanly impossible to have a child that God made them with child.
Although we did not wait 25 years, these past 14 months have been the same. Finding out that we are pregnant today, we know that we know that we know, that we tried. WE TRIED. We humanly Tried to keep the ovulation dates. We “tried” when the Cervical mucus seemed Egg white and stretchy. We Took the supplements.
WE STOPPED TRYING.
That month we made love not to make babies and were willing to wait it out years, somehow, it happened. GOD HAPPENED.
And it was the same with Aletheia, but still, we wanted things in our time, our way – we wanted assurance and predictability – we wanted to “plan” for our future. But how often does God call us to the place of unknown so that we would trust not in the certainty of things to come but in the very one who holds our lives in his hands and heart?
This month I was SICK and STRESSED. For 2 weeks, we were all out from the flu. I was also tensed during Aletheia’s bedtime. I COULD NOT be pregnant. If any month that wasn’t a healthy month it would be this month. Because I know that some would think that its because we stopped stressing about “trying” that it happened – but boy was I stressed about other things and sick too, on top of it!
BY ALL MEANS, we were at our 100 year old Abraham Stage when we knew that without a doubt it would have to be God, and it was.
Friends I don’t know what your fertility journey has been like – but I know personally that it can be very painful, disappointing and trying. I know that sometimes you don’t even want to hope anymore because I have been there.
But I do know this: However that looks like for you ( and everyone’s journey is different. Some come to their children through Adoption and IVF and they are no lesser means of having children) You can keep hoping because -HE WHO GAVE THE PROMISE IS FAITHFUL.

SHREVEPORT, LA (KSLA) - Friends of a slain former Shreveport resident are trying to bring her year-old daughter back to her home state.
Part of 25-year-old Ashley Mead's body was found last week in a suitcase in a Dumpster in Oklahoma.
Now Mead's boyfriend, 32-year-old Haughton native Adam Densmore, is charged with first-degree murder.
Her daughter is in protective custody.
Police in Colorado, Oklahoma and Louisiana are still searching for the rest of Mead's body.
"God only knows where you would start looking, you know?" said Richard Perry, who knew Mead the past decade from back in her hometown of Warren, Penn.
He told KSLA News 12 by phone that Mead was an adventurous girl who saw Shreveport as her first step in moving away from home.
Mead left Louisiana once she learned she was pregnant with Densmore's child, Perry said.
Densmore was living in Colorado at the time.
"The only reason she ended up leaving Louisiana at all was to go to Colorado to be with the father," Perry said. "When she found out that she was pregnant, she moved up there to be with him. But she was staying in Shreveport going to school there."
Perry remembers Densmore as a jealous boyfriend, so jealous that he steered Mead away from him.
"When Adam came into the picture, I was this guy who was super close with Ashley. He always thought that there was more of a relationship between the two of us than there really was."
Mead's and Densmore's year-old daughter, Winter, was found unharmed and with Densmore when he was arrested last week in Oklahoma.
Now Perry and his wife have started a GoFundMe campaign to help Mead's parents bring Winter back home to Pennsylvania, collect Mead's belongings from Colorado and raise money for her funeral.
"We knew that this was going to be an issue with the baby being in Oklahoma and the next of kin being here in Pennsylvania," Perry said.
"Our main hope with that is to just help get the baby home, help get Winter out of protective custody, at least get her with the family."
All the while, Perry said, they're left mourning a young woman he described as a positive force in everyone's lives.
"Ashley was a very positive person, a very happy person. If you were having a bad day, Ashley could pick up on it and she'd come up with a way to make you feel better," he said.
"It didn't matter at what cost to her."
Mead also touched enough lives in Shreveport that her friends in that city are trying to organize a wake for her.

PHOTOS: Marine Safety Control Pattaya City
A Chinese tourist has been injured after he fell down on a speedboat while it was traveling between islands in Pattaya Bay. Officers at the Marine Safety Control Pattaya City station at the Bali Hai Pier were notified from a speedboat operator via radio that a tourist on a speedboat had been seriously injured at 10 am this morning, July 31st, 2019.
Emergency responders arrived at the boat which had arrived at the pier to find a 55-year-old Chinese tourist in serious pain and injured. He had broken his leg severely during a fall.
He was given first aid at the scene and immediately taken to a hospital. The speedboat captain told the Marine Saftey Control that the Chinese tourist was walking around the boat while they were traveling at high speed in Pattaya Bay.
The captain said that he warned the man to sit down many times but the tourist ignored him and his warnings. After multiple warnings, the man was continuing to walk around when he fell and broke his leg.
Marine Safety Control officials continue to investigate.

Centerline Bridge Walk: Vertigo
The old Centerline Bridge (sometimes called the Charlotte Bridge) was located where the Charlotte Road crosses the Grand River, South of Portland. The bridge was built in 1886, by the Buckeye Bridge Company and replaced in 2001. The old bridge was a Whipple Truss Bridge, originally built to carry horse and wagon traffic and later modified to carry one lane auto traffic. Whichever vehicle reached the bridge first had the right-of-way. The bridge was 177 foot long and the deck was 15 foot above the river. The height at the top of the trusses is unknown but perhaps 25 foot above the water?
One night when in 1967, when I was about 17, my friends “Daring” Dan and “Jumper” John suggested that we go out to the bridge to see if we could get close to and investigate the “Mink Farm” that was located just south and to the right of the bridge (coming from Mulliken). We were curious as to what the deal was with this operation as no one had ever heard of a “Mink Farm” before. When we tried to approach the mink operation on foot, we could hear what sounded like large dogs barking, and decided against any further exploration. However, my friends said, hey how about climbing the bridge! I was not keen on this idea as I have mild acrophobia (fear of heights) but both guys said that it was EZ. You just had to climb up a slanted beam and get onto the top of a truss and just walk over!
Apparently, my friends both had a head for heights and stated climbing while leaving me on the ground. My fear of heights had not caused me any real problems I just stayed away from roofs and ladders. Now, I had to either climb like the others or admit that I was afraid to go up there. It was dark that night but not pitch black. I could hear the water running beneath the bridge but could not actually see the river. Climbing up the slanted bean was very difficult although I think I had tennis shoes on (a bit of luck) and there were rivets in the beam that gave me at least a partial foothold. I could hear the others in the distance but was far behind, the plan was to cross over the top and then climb back to the ground on the other side. I did not really “climb” the slanted beam but more or less grabbed each side and slowing wiggled up to the top. At the top, I then had to stand up and there was nothing to hang onto. As if I was tightrope walker, I put my arms out to maintain my balance, my instinct at first was to crouch but this made it more rather than less difficult to keep my balance and keep moving. I did not want to be up there when my friends had crossed and started walking back on the deck. In addition, I was afraid that a car would come and the rumble, lights, noise would through me off balance. On the other hand, even worse the driver might see me, stop, and maybe even threaten to call the police. I really could not see my feet on the top beam but could feel the edges. I was of course afraid of falling, but for good or bad I had few visual ques and could not see how far up I was. I also felt that my best bet was to get into a steady pace and not stop – not too fast and not too slow. Fortunately, I wasn’t really dizzy but for sure had what you could call space-motion discomfort. I also was afraid that I might at any instant have sort of a panic attach and just freeze. I did think a bit about the Alfred Hitchcock movie Vertigo!
As you may have guessed, I made it to the other side, not sure, what kind of excuse I gave for taking so long, although, I was so glad to get to the other side and without falling or anyone knowing how scared I really was, I didn’t care what they thought about me being so slow! This was my first, last and only bridge climbing experience!
HAPPY ENDING:As indicated this antiquated bridge was replaced in 2001 but was not destroyed. As a great example of the Whipple Truss Bridge, it was dismantled and moved to Battle Creek, where it is currently located in “Historic Bridge Park”. The reconstructed bridge goes over a small ravine and is for foot traffic only! The Old Centerline Bridge lives on!
This piece was originally written for the Portland Area Historical Society. Republished with permission.

Blog 20 of Top 25 Adoption Blogs by Parents
Last Mom by Last Mom
Favorite Blog Posts
Why I Decided to Adopt
I have always wanted to be a mother. It has been my main goal in life since I was a toddler! I met my Mr. Wonderful and he had never felt an urge to parent. He told me he didn't want babies — ever! I was crazy in love and so young. I told him I was willing to make that sacrifice for him. In all honesty, I was certain he'd change his mind. We got married and years started going by. He didn't change his mind about babies, but started to open up to the idea of older child adoption. He liked the idea of parenting a child who was already here, needing a home, stability and love. I realized I just wanted to be a mother. How I got there didn't matter to me. We decided to pursue adoption in December of 2008 and started the process in May 2009. Our daughter came to us as a straight interstate adoptive placement from the foster care system in May 2010 at age nine. The adoption was finalized six months later. Being her mother is what I was meant to do!
The Biggest Challenge of the Adoption Process
1. In our area, prospective parents are on their own to find a child to adopt from the foster care system. We spent hours every day searching photo listings, making contact with case workers and sending out our home study. There are thousands of children waiting for homes, but workers are so overloaded most inquiries go unanswered. We inquired on over 200 children in five months and rarely got any sort of response.
2. The ICPC process was long and stressful! It went smoothly with the sending state, but our state really dropped the ball. The sending state said to expect four weeks. It took 12 weeks. It was six months from match to getting her home. I was so anxious during that time that I ground a hole in my tooth in my sleep!
3. We do not have therapists or other professionals who get attachment and trauma in our area — not even at agencies focused on foster care or adoption. We are on our own and making it work, but some professional support from people who get it would be nice.
When and How Our Daughter Learned She Was Adopted
She came to us at age nine after bouncing around foster care for five years and her skin is a different color than ours, so this question isn't really applicable for us. :-) She found out she was moving to another state to be adopted about two weeks before we arrived. She met us on Monday and we left with her that Friday. We were allowed no contact before meeting her (other than sending her a photobook and letter that was given to her when she was told of the adoption). We told her from the beginning of the placement that we were committed to her 100 percent. She had to live with us for 6 months before the adoption could be finalized, but we made it clear that was just paperwork. She was our daughter in our hearts from day one and the judge was just a formality. We talk and read a lot about adoption, foster care and different kinds of families. We also talk about her first (biological) family often. We tell her it's okay to have feelings for them and what she's missed out on and still love us.
Lice...yikes! Banish the itchy little buggers with smart tips on lice prevention and treatme… Read More
Got something to say? Join Circle of Moms or login to participate in the conversation.Please login to comment

Dogs Over 1 Year Old
Cheryl is incredibly sweet and super flexible! Both my girls have really enjoyed her and i am so thankful to have her watching them! I would recommend her to watch your fur babies anytime!
Cheryl was a very nice person who I completely trusted to watch Gunner. He did fine other than missing us because we normally don't leave him often. But I would recommend her to anyone else.
Cheryl has kept our 8 year old Standard poodle twice; once for a long weekend and once for a little over a week while we vacationed in Alabama. She is absolutely wonderful and our boy loved her! She and her husband Mark are avid dog lovers and took the best care of our pet while we were away. She sent photos and updates to let me know how he was doing and that he was ...
I love caring for dogs in every way
I've been a dog owner for over 25 years. Most recently I had two of my own - one small, one large and they were wonderful members of my family their entire lives. I believe my dogs are like family and will do the same for yours! I know there is a need for working people to have a place they can trust to leave their dog during the day and I want to be a ...
What Cheryl would like to know about your dog
No breed preferences. Would like to know about their temperament, especially as it relates to getting along with other dogs.

Fairly decent company, no problems with them no arguments, as far as they concern pretty good!.
We are very happy with the service!
we don't have no issues with them, they are great with us, they deliver your products as scheduled, they are been doing great job, we have very good communication with them
The people who work with them are really good and profesional.
I do not know anything about pricing so I can opinion about it.

Petshark: Talking Stick
Entries with the tag: profile
Peter Sivak was the first player signed by the San Francisco Bulls, ECHL affiliate of the San Jose Sharks. A quick google search for "Peter Sivak" will turn up several mentions of one of the fastest goals in professional hockey history. Whether it was 5 seconds from the faceoff, 4.8 seconds, or 3.23 seconds isn't important. It was very fast. It isn't entirely surprising that he did that. Sivak takes a lot of shots, from every angle, very quickly. This is one of the reasons he is the Bulls' leading goal-scorer.
His North American career did not start so auspiciously. In his first month with the team, he had only one goal, three points, and 22 shots in eight games.
After that slow start, Sivak's production picked up with a statistical jolt. In 24 games through November and December, he scored 10 goals, had 25 points, and took 92 shots. In January and February, he had 16 goals, 20 points, 109 shots in 23 games. During his first two months in the league, he took a paltry 12 penalty minutes, not bad for a player expected to score and stay out of the box. Since then, his penalty minutes have gone down even more, to just 12 minutes in 40 games, including a penalty-free February.

Have entered both of my kids in tournaments as the younger kids, but knew they were competitive enough to compete. It really depends on what you want to get out of it. In all cases, expectations were set before hand and the tournaments were great events. Basically, there were reasons to play other than to "win", great course, great experience, good competition and finishing high wasn't the priority.
With that said, returning the next year to these tournaments as the older kids took on a different perspective and expectations adjusted(naturally).
I think it is great for the kids to play with better players than them. They learn so much from watching their peers.
-- Two things don't last long. Dogs chasing cars and golf pro's putting for pars. --
I have been hesitant to send my 5yo daughter out there for tournaments. She can play 9 holes with me from about 75-90yards and probably +1/+2 golf...but she is so tiny she just doesn't hit it very far so I am worried about the distances they setup. At 100+ yards she is nearly 3 shots just to get in with drives of 50-60yards. I just don't want her getting discouraged especially since for girls its 7 and under as the lowest age range.
I checked the recent results and its anything from kids at even par to +40 so should I be worried about trying it out?

Released: June 12, 2012
Genre: Metalcore, Thrash Metal
Label: Rise Records
Number Of Tracks: 13
"At Heart" certainly doesn't disappoint, but it also doesn't necessarily gather up any groundbreaking material. Overall this was a pretty good effort for Miss May I's third full-length album.
vppark2, on august 02, 2013 3 of 3 people found this review helpful
Sound: "At Heart" certainly doesn't disappoint, but it also doesn't necessarily gather up any groundbreaking material. What most people probably expected from this new album of theirs is that they filled in the blanks from where "Monument" was left off of. What I'm trying to say is that "Monument" displayed some key major qualities of what great sounding metalcore is like, and I was really expecting "At Heart" to sort of continue off from there, but add a new sort of twist to it. Honestly, there was nothing quite new or special on this album with guitar work, in my opinion. I'm not saying it wasn't done well, but I was really expecting a lot more. I was expecting some in your face type material like they did with their first two albums. Not to mention I felt like the breakdowns were a little weak, and there really wasn't much involved with breakdowns on "At Heart." They kind of did it in their own way, which was a bit interesting.
The clean vocals, and even the unclean vocals seemed, at times, just a little bit overdone. All vocals, overall just seemed a bit weak for me. I'll admit, they did mature a lot, and step a bit away from their previous material, and head towards maybe a new direction, but it's hard to say what they really want and try to do. They also didn't have Joey Sturgis work with them on producing the album this time. He has worked with many big time artists from the scene, like The Devil Wears Prada, We Came As Romans, Asking Alexandria, Of Mice & Men, and The Word Alive, since 2006, around when most of these bands started to evolve. In their first two albums, they had that sort of As I Lay Dying sound and feeling to it. "At Heart" sounds like a heavier Atreyu at times. The cleans definitely portray this. // 7
Lyrics: Aside from the basic artwork that reminds me of The Used's "Vulnerable," the lyrics were actually pretty well done on this album, in my opinion. They're much better than in their first two albums. I can hear the message that they're trying to make with some of these songs. Their lead single "Hey Mister," is telling a story of Levi (lead vocals), and how his father left him at a young age, or was just never there for him. I know I have never really had that sort of experience, but I can definitely see where he's coming from. Then in the last few lines of the song, Levi goes, "This is what I got, I don't need you anymore. This is what I got, I don't need you." I can't really narrow down any other songs that really impressed me with lyrics, but there was some cool moments in most of the songs.
"Opening Wounds" had a cool sort of vibe to it. "Ballad of a Broken Man" also seemed to have that sort of feeling about Levi talking about his father. Levi throws out his words saying, "I regret the time spent together. I can't digest all the life that I've wasted. But holding on made me never want to hold another." Then about halfway through the song he puts forth, "I spit these words down your throat. You will hear what I have to say. A mouthful of hope I hope you choke. You will hear what I have to say. There's nothing left in me. You have sucked it out as you sucked me in. An empty, worthless man is all you left in your wake. You are just a part of my past. You are just a part of my past. This is an overdue goodbye. I fell where I must stay. This is an overdue goodbye. This is the end. This is the ballad of a broken man. This is goodbye." The message that song shows, just goes to show how much angst Levi has towards whoever he's sending this message to (probably his father). // 8
Overall Impression: When I first listened to this album, I really didn't know what to think of it at first. All of the songs kind of blended in towards each other, and that's where the problem was. None of the material is really worth it enough to listen to multiple times down the road. And with that being said, "Apologies Are for the Weak," and "Monument," displayed more of what kind of material that I'd be listening to more in the future. It's the type of pumping iron music that made those albums stand out a bit more to their fans. However, when I look at these 3 albums together from a lyrical standpoint, "At Heart" wins by ahead by miles. Their first two albums really did not stick out to me at all in that field, nor were there any memorable lines I could recall, besides their hit singles. This album matured all over, lyrically. And some of these songs, such as "Day by Day," "Hey Mister," and "Ballad of a Broken Man" are actually incredible anthems to see live. And yes, now that I've edited this section a bit more, I have now seen them live for the 2nd time recently, with Killswitch Engage headlining. An incredible show, I must say. Levi definitely has taken himself to a whole new high with his vocals and stage presence. Every other member had incredible stage presence as well, unlike what I saw 2011 Warped Tour. This album has a few anthems, while not as huge as songs like "Forgive and Forget," "Relentless Chaos", or "Masses of a Dying Breed", this album as a whole stands the test of time a bit more than their first two albums. And the reason is all because of one word: maturity. These guys will surely bring forth some amazing material in the future, because I think these guys are the next big band in the metalcore scene. Bring on the horns!

Earlier this month, cancer patient Bill Elliott was interviewed on Fox News' The Kelly File and described how his health insurance was being canceled due to the new Obamacare regulations.
Now he is being audited by the IRS.
When he was interviewed by Megyn Kelly, Elliot said he was offered a new plan costing $1,500-per-month, versus his old plan that cost $180 per month. At the time, Elliott told Kelly he wasn’t going to pay for the new expensive plan; instead, he was going to take the financial penalty and “let nature take its course.”
This week Elliot was interviewed on Charleston, S.C. radio station WQSC, and said thanks to all of the publicity he received from his Fox appearance, his insurance company worked it out with him to allow him to keep his coverage.
But that wasn't the end of the bad news for Elliott.
“Monday I got a certified letter, I went down and got it and it’s from the IRS and they are auditing my books from 2009.” Elliot didn’t own a business in 2009, and in fact was working for the government at the time. Additionally Elliott said, “due to federal budget cuts,” the meeting between him and the IRS won’t take place until April 2014.
“It doesn’t matter. It could’ve been today if they wanted it to,” Elliot said after declaring he has never cheated on his taxes.
The radio host said that he couldn't believe the Elliot audit was a coincidence. “No it’s not,” Elliott said.
If it was a coincidence, this other case might be also. C. Steven Tucker, an insurance broker who contacted Elliott after his Fox News appearance and has been writing about the case extensively, said that after he helped assist Elliott with his coverage, the IRS “are now coming after ME all the way back to 2003.”

Ohio State running back Ezekiel Elliott said he won't be returning to the Buckeyes next season, and had some harsh words for his coaching staff Saturday in the wake of a 17-14 loss to Big Ten rival Michigan State.
Elliott announced his intention to leave OSU after the game. And he certainly didn't sound like a player with anything to lose with Buckeyes coach Urban Meyer.
"(The) coaching staff didn't put us in position to win. That's a team we should beat," Elliott said, according to Big Ten Network's Rick Pizzo.
Elliott went on to lament that he only had 11 carries in the game (he actually was credited with 12), and believed he should have received more. Michigan State limited Elliott, the star of the Buckeyes' national championship run last year, to 33 yards.

The kids are back in school! Hooray!
I took a nap, a long, leisurely shower (definitely something I didn't get the chance to indulge in over the past week) and then went out to lunch with my mom at the little cafe inside our local nursery, which is always a dangerous sort of outing. My mom is a Gardening Enabler, and whenever we go to the nursery together we feed off of each other and always end up taking home rather more than we set out to find. I got a few starts to replenish the annuals in my herb garden, which I actually needed, and picked up a couple of flowers as well for some of the pots I have on the porch, which I didn't need at all. It was a lovely lunch.
The kids were both absolutely thrilled to be back to school, though I believe both of them were pretty tired by the end of the day. It's tough getting back into regular routines after a week of sleeping in! Hopefully they'll get settled pretty quickly; we've got a very busy couple of months coming up, so it will be good to have them fully acclimated back into their routines before all the craziness starts.
All in all it was a pretty quiet day!
1 month ago

Sometimes, your boss knows things about you that you don't want your coworkers to know. Maybe you have a disability, or are going through marital troubles, or are being treated for bipolar disorder.
There are often good reasons you have to tell your supervisor things like this. Maybe you explained why you had to miss work one day, or why you were so upset at work. Just because you tell your boss, however, doesn't mean it's okay for him or her to tell everyone else.
California has a law that makes it illegal to publicly disclose private facts in certain situations. For Melissa Ignat, the law became a reality when she missed work because of her bipolar disorder, and her boss shockingly decided to tell all of her coworkers about it while she was out. Ms. Ignat had not told her coworkers about her bipolar disorder and was very upset that her supervisor had done so.
Worse, her coworkers started avoiding her and treating her differently. One even asked the boss if Ms. Ignat was going to “go postal” and harm them because of her disorder.
It is not just poor managing or gossip for a supervisor to share your private information – it can even be against the law. Employees are supposed to be able to feel comfortable talking to their bosses when there is something going on in their lives that may affect their work. Bosses like Ms. Ignat's, however, are one of many reasons employees often feel uncomfortable talking to their supervisors about important topics.
We will have to wait until her trial against the company next year to find out whether a jury agrees that Ms. Ignat's boss broke the law, but if you have been the victim of a supervisor's public disclosure of your private information, you don't have to wait that long. Contact an Aegis attorney if Ms. Ignat's situation sounds familiar to you.

A Little Princess
The Diamond Mines Again
When Sara entered the holly-hung schoolroom in the afternoon, she did so as the head of a sort of procession. Miss Minchin, in her grandest silk dress, led her by the hand. A manservant followed, carrying the box containing the Last Doll, a housemaid carried a second box, and Becky brought up the rear, carrying a third and wearing a clean apron and a new cap. Sara would have much preferred to enter in the usual way, but Miss Minchin had sent for her, and, after an interview in her private sitting room, had expressed her wishes.
"This is not an ordinary occasion," she said. "I do not desire that it should be treated as one."
So Sara was led grandly in and felt shy when, on her entry, the big girls stared at her and touched each other's elbows, and the little ones began to squirm joyously in their seats.
"Silence, young ladies!" said Miss Minchin, at the murmur which arose. "James, place the box on the table and remove the lid. Emma, put yours upon a chair. Becky!" suddenly and severely.
Becky had quite forgotten herself in her excitement, and was grinning at Lottie, who was wriggling with rapturous expectation. She almost dropped her box, the disapproving voice so startled her, and her frightened, bobbing curtsy of apology was so funny that Lavinia and Jessie tittered.
"It is not your place to look at the young ladies," said Miss Minchin. "You forget yourself. Put your box down."
Becky obeyed with alarmed haste and hastily backed toward the door.
"You may leave us," Miss Minchin announced to the servants with a wave of her hand.
Becky stepped aside respectfully to allow the superior servants to pass out first. She could not help casting a longing glance at the box on the table. Something made of blue satin was peeping from between the folds of tissue paper.
"If you please, Miss Minchin," said Sara, suddenly, "mayn't Becky stay?"
It was a bold thing to do. Miss Minchin was betrayed into something like a slight jump. Then she put her eyeglass up, and gazed at her show pupil disturbedly.
"Becky!" she exclaimed. "My dearest Sara!"
Sara advanced a step toward her.
"I want her because I know she will like to see the presents," she explained. "She is a little girl, too, you know."
Miss Minchin was scandalized. She glanced from one figure to the other.
"My dear Sara," she said, "Becky is the scullery maid. Scullery maids—er—are not little girls."
It really had not occurred to her to think of them in that light. Scullery maids were machines who carried coal scuttles and made fires.
"But Becky is," said Sara. "And I know she would enjoy herself. Please let her stay—because it is my birthday."
Miss Minchin replied with much dignity:
"As you ask it as a birthday favor—she may stay. Rebecca, thank Miss Sara for her great kindness."
Becky had been backing into the corner, twisting the hem of her apron in delighted suspense. She came forward, bobbing curtsies, but between Sara's eyes and her own there passed a gleam of friendly understanding, while her words tumbled over each other.
"Oh, if you please, miss! I'm that grateful, miss! I did want to see the doll, miss, that I did. Thank you, miss. And thank you, ma'am,"—turning and making an alarmed bob to Miss Minchin—"for letting me take the liberty."
Miss Minchin waved her hand again—this time it was in the direction of the corner near the door.
"Go and stand there," she commanded. "Not too near the young ladies."
Becky went to her place, grinning. She did not care where she was sent, so that she might have the luck of being inside the room, instead of being downstairs in the scullery, while these delights were going on. She did not even mind when Miss Minchin cleared her throat ominously and spoke again.
"Now, young ladies, I have a few words to say to you," she announced.
"She's going to make a speech," whispered one of the girls. "I wish it was over."
Sara felt rather uncomfortable. As this was her party, it was probable that the speech was about her. It is not agreeable to stand in a schoolroom and have a speech made about you.
"You are aware, young ladies," the speech began—for it was a speech—"that dear Sara is eleven years old today."
"DEAR Sara!" murmured Lavinia.
"Several of you here have also been eleven years old, but Sara's birthdays are rather different from other little girls' birthdays. When she is older she will be heiress to a large fortune, which it will be her duty to spend in a meritorious manner."
"The diamond mines," giggled Jessie, in a whisper.
Sara did not hear her; but as she stood with her green-gray eyes fixed steadily on Miss Minchin, she felt herself growing rather hot. When Miss Minchin talked about money, she felt somehow that she always hated her—and, of course, it was disrespectful to hate grown-up people.
"When her dear papa, Captain Crewe, brought her from India and gave her into my care," the speech proceeded, "he said to me, in a jesting way, 'I am afraid she will be very rich, Miss Minchin.' My reply was, 'Her education at my seminary, Captain Crewe, shall be such as will adorn the largest fortune.' Sara has become my most accomplished pupil. Her French and her dancing are a credit to the seminary. Her manners—which have caused you to call her Princess Sara—are perfect. Her amiability she exhibits by giving you this afternoon's party. I hope you appreciate her generosity. I wish you to express your appreciation of it by saying aloud all together, 'Thank you, Sara!'"
The entire schoolroom rose to its feet as it had done the morning Sara remembered so well.
"Thank you, Sara!" it said, and it must be confessed that Lottie jumped up and down. Sara looked rather shy for a moment. She made a curtsy—and it was a very nice one.
"Thank you," she said, "for coming to my party."
"Very pretty, indeed, Sara," approved Miss Minchin. "That is what a real princess does when the populace applauds her. Lavinia"—scathingly—"the sound you just made was extremely like a snort. If you are jealous of your fellow-pupil, I beg you will express your feelings in some more lady-like manner. Now I will leave you to enjoy yourselves."
The instant she had swept out of the room the spell her presence always had upon them was broken. The door had scarcely closed before every seat was empty. The little girls jumped or tumbled out of theirs; the older ones wasted no time in deserting theirs. There was a rush toward the boxes. Sara had bent over one of them with a delighted face.
"These are books, I know," she said.
The little children broke into a rueful murmur, and Ermengarde looked aghast.
"Does your papa send you books for a birthday present?" she exclaimed. "Why, he's as bad as mine. Don't open them, Sara."
"I like them," Sara laughed, but she turned to the biggest box. When she took out the Last Doll it was so magnificent that the children uttered delighted groans of joy, and actually drew back to gaze at it in breathless rapture.
"She is almost as big as Lottie," someone gasped.
Lottie clapped her hands and danced about, giggling.
"She's dressed for the theater," said Lavinia. "Her cloak is lined with ermine."
"Oh," cried Ermengarde, darting forward, "she has an opera-glass in her hand—a blue-and-gold one!"
"Here is her trunk," said Sara. "Let us open it and look at her things."
She sat down upon the floor and turned the key. The children crowded clamoring around her, as she lifted tray after tray and revealed their contents. Never had the schoolroom been in such an uproar. There were lace collars and silk stockings and handkerchiefs; there was a jewel case containing a necklace and a tiara which looked quite as if they were made of real diamonds; there was a long sealskin and muff, there were ball dresses and walking dresses and visiting dresses; there were hats and tea gowns and fans. Even Lavinia and Jessie forgot that they were too elderly to care for dolls, and uttered exclamations of delight and caught up things to look at them.
"Suppose," Sara said, as she stood by the table, putting a large, black-velvet hat on the impassively smiling owner of all these splendors—"suppose she understands human talk and feels proud of being admired."
"You are always supposing things," said Lavinia, and her air was very superior.
"I know I am," answered Sara, undisturbedly. "I like it. There is nothing so nice as supposing. It's almost like being a fairy. If you suppose anything hard enough it seems as if it were real."
"It's all very well to suppose things if you have everything," said Lavinia. "Could you suppose and pretend if you were a beggar and lived in a garret?"
Sara stopped arranging the Last Doll's ostrich plumes, and looked thoughtful.
"I BELIEVE I could," she said. "If one was a beggar, one would have to suppose and pretend all the time. But it mightn't be easy."
She often thought afterward how strange it was that just as she had finished saying this—just at that very moment—Miss Amelia came into the room.
"Sara," she said, "your papa's solicitor, Mr. Barrow, has called to see Miss Minchin, and, as she must talk to him alone and the refreshments are laid in her parlor, you had all better come and have your feast now, so that my sister can have her interview here in the schoolroom."
Refreshments were not likely to be disdained at any hour, and many pairs of eyes gleamed. Miss Amelia arranged the procession into decorum, and then, with Sara at her side heading it, she led it away, leaving the Last Doll sitting upon a chair with the glories of her wardrobe scattered about her; dresses and coats hung upon chair backs, piles of lace-frilled petticoats lying upon their seats.
Becky, who was not expected to partake of refreshments, had the indiscretion to linger a moment to look at these beauties—it really was an indiscretion.
"Go back to your work, Becky," Miss Amelia had said; but she had stopped to pick up reverently first a muff and then a coat, and while she stood looking at them adoringly, she heard Miss Minchin upon the threshold, and, being smitten with terror at the thought of being accused of taking liberties, she rashly darted under the table, which hid her by its tablecloth.
Miss Minchin came into the room, accompanied by a sharp-featured, dry little gentleman, who looked rather disturbed. Miss Minchin herself also looked rather disturbed, it must be admitted, and she gazed at the dry little gentleman with an irritated and puzzled expression.
She sat down with stiff dignity, and waved him to a chair.
"Pray, be seated, Mr. Barrow," she said.
Mr. Barrow did not sit down at once. His attention seemed attracted by the Last Doll and the things which surrounded her. He settled his eyeglasses and looked at them in nervous disapproval. The Last Doll herself did not seem to mind this in the least. She merely sat upright and returned his gaze indifferently.
"A hundred pounds," Mr. Barrow remarked succinctly. "All expensive material, and made at a Parisian modiste's. He spent money lavishly enough, that young man."
Miss Minchin felt offended. This seemed to be a disparagement of her best patron and was a liberty.
Even solicitors had no right to take liberties.
"I beg your pardon, Mr. Barrow," she said stiffly. "I do not understand."
"Birthday presents," said Mr. Barrow in the same critical manner, "to a child eleven years old! Mad extravagance, I call it."
Miss Minchin drew herself up still more rigidly.
"Captain Crewe is a man of fortune," she said. "The diamond mines alone—"
Mr. Barrow wheeled round upon her. "Diamond mines!" he broke out. "There are none! Never were!"
Miss Minchin actually got up from her chair.
"What!" she cried. "What do you mean?"
"At any rate," answered Mr. Barrow, quite snappishly, "it would have been much better if there never had been any."
"Any diamond mines?" ejaculated Miss Minchin, catching at the back of a chair and feeling as if a splendid dream was fading away from her.
"Diamond mines spell ruin oftener than they spell wealth," said Mr. Barrow. "When a man is in the hands of a very dear friend and is not a businessman himself, he had better steer clear of the dear friend's diamond mines, or gold mines, or any other kind of mines dear friends want his money to put into. The late Captain Crewe—"
Here Miss Minchin stopped him with a gasp.
"The LATE Captain Crewe!" she cried out. "The LATE! You don't come to tell me that Captain Crewe is—"
"He's dead, ma'am," Mr. Barrow answered with jerky brusqueness. "Died of jungle fever and business troubles combined. The jungle fever might not have killed him if he had not been driven mad by the business troubles, and the business troubles might not have put an end to him if the jungle fever had not assisted. Captain Crewe is dead!"
Miss Minchin dropped into her chair again. The words he had spoken filled her with alarm.
"What WERE his business troubles?" she said. "What WERE they?"
"Diamond mines," answered Mr. Barrow, "and dear friends—and ruin."
Miss Minchin lost her breath.
"Ruin!" she gasped out.
"Lost every penny. That young man had too much money. The dear friend was mad on the subject of the diamond mine. He put all his own money into it, and all Captain Crewe's. Then the dear friend ran away—Captain Crewe was already stricken with fever when the news came. The shock was too much for him. He died delirious, raving about his little girl—and didn't leave a penny."
Now Miss Minchin understood, and never had she received such a blow in her life. Her show pupil, her show patron, swept away from the Select Seminary at one blow. She felt as if she had been outraged and robbed, and that Captain Crewe and Sara and Mr. Barrow were equally to blame.
"Do you mean to tell me," she cried out, "that he left NOTHING! That Sara will have no fortune! That the child is a beggar! That she is left on my hands a little pauper instead of an heiress?"
Mr. Barrow was a shrewd businessman, and felt it as well to make his own freedom from responsibility quite clear without any delay.
"She is certainly left a beggar," he replied. "And she is certainly left on your hands, ma'am—as she hasn't a relation in the world that we know of."
Miss Minchin started forward. She looked as if she was going to open the door and rush out of the room to stop the festivities going on joyfully and rather noisily that moment over the refreshments.
"It is monstrous!" she said. "She's in my sitting room at this moment, dressed in silk gauze and lace petticoats, giving a party at my expense."
"She's giving it at your expense, madam, if she's giving it," said Mr. Barrow, calmly. "Barrow & Skipworth are not responsible for anything. There never was a cleaner sweep made of a man's fortune. Captain Crewe died without paying OUR last bill—and it was a big one."
Miss Minchin turned back from the door in increased indignation. This was worse than anyone could have dreamed of its being.
"That is what has happened to me!" she cried. "I was always so sure of his payments that I went to all sorts of ridiculous expenses for the child. I paid the bills for that ridiculous doll and her ridiculous fantastic wardrobe. The child was to have anything she wanted. She has a carriage and a pony and a maid, and I've paid for all of them since the last cheque came."
Mr. Barrow evidently did not intend to remain to listen to the story of Miss Minchin's grievances after he had made the position of his firm clear and related the mere dry facts. He did not feel any particular sympathy for irate keepers of boarding schools.
"You had better not pay for anything more, ma'am," he remarked, "unless you want to make presents to the young lady. No one will remember you. She hasn't a brass farthing to call her own."
"But what am I to do?" demanded Miss Minchin, as if she felt it entirely his duty to make the matter right. "What am I to do?"
"There isn't anything to do," said Mr. Barrow, folding up his eyeglasses and slipping them into his pocket. "Captain Crewe is dead. The child is left a pauper. Nobody is responsible for her but you."
"I am not responsible for her, and I refuse to be made responsible!"
Miss Minchin became quite white with rage.
Mr. Barrow turned to go.
"I have nothing to do with that, madam," he said uninterestedly. "Barrow & Skipworth are not responsible. Very sorry the thing has happened, of course."
"If you think she is to be foisted off on me, you are greatly mistaken," Miss Minchin gasped. "I have been robbed and cheated; I will turn her into the street!"
If she had not been so furious, she would have been too discreet to say quite so much. She saw herself burdened with an extravagantly brought-up child whom she had always resented, and she lost all self-control.
Mr. Barrow undisturbedly moved toward the door.
"I wouldn't do that, madam," he commented; "it wouldn't look well. Unpleasant story to get about in connection with the establishment. Pupil bundled out penniless and without friends."
He was a clever business man, and he knew what he was saying. He also knew that Miss Minchin was a business woman, and would be shrewd enough to see the truth. She could not afford to do a thing which would make people speak of her as cruel and hard-hearted.
"Better keep her and make use of her," he added. "She's a clever child, I believe. You can get a good deal out of her as she grows older."
"I will get a good deal out of her before she grows older!" exclaimed Miss Minchin.
"I am sure you will, ma'am," said Mr. Barrow, with a little sinister smile. "I am sure you will. Good morning!"
He bowed himself out and closed the door, and it must be confessed that Miss Minchin stood for a few moments and glared at it. What he had said was quite true. She knew it. She had absolutely no redress. Her show pupil had melted into nothingness, leaving only a friendless, beggared little girl. Such money as she herself had advanced was lost and could not be regained.
And as she stood there breathless under her sense of injury, there fell upon her ears a burst of gay voices from her own sacred room, which had actually been given up to the feast. She could at least stop this.
But as she started toward the door it was opened by Miss Amelia, who, when she caught sight of the changed, angry face, fell back a step in alarm.
"What IS the matter, sister?" she ejaculated.
Miss Minchin's voice was almost fierce when she answered:
"Where is Sara Crewe?"
Miss Amelia was bewildered.
"Sara!" she stammered. "Why, she's with the children in your room, of course."
"Has she a black frock in her sumptuous wardrobe?"—in bitter irony.
"A black frock?" Miss Amelia stammered again. "A BLACK one?"
"She has frocks of every other color. Has she a black one?"
Miss Amelia began to turn pale.
"No—ye-es!" she said. "But it is too short for her. She has only the old black velvet, and she has outgrown it."
"Go and tell her to take off that preposterous pink silk gauze, and put the black one on, whether it is too short or not. She has done with finery!"
Then Miss Amelia began to wring her fat hands and cry.
"Oh, sister!" she sniffed. "Oh, sister! What CAN have happened?"
Miss Minchin wasted no words.
"Captain Crewe is dead," she said. "He has died without a penny. That spoiled, pampered, fanciful child is left a pauper on my hands."
Miss Amelia sat down quite heavily in the nearest chair.
"Hundreds of pounds have I spent on nonsense for her. And I shall never see a penny of it. Put a stop to this ridiculous party of hers. Go and make her change her frock at once."
"I?" panted Miss Amelia. "M-must I go and tell her now?"
"This moment!" was the fierce answer. "Don't sit staring like a goose. Go!"
Poor Miss Amelia was accustomed to being called a goose. She knew, in fact, that she was rather a goose, and that it was left to geese to do a great many disagreeable things. It was a somewhat embarrassing thing to go into the midst of a room full of delighted children, and tell the giver of the feast that she had suddenly been transformed into a little beggar, and must go upstairs and put on an old black frock which was too small for her. But the thing must be done. This was evidently not the time when questions might be asked.
She rubbed her eyes with her handkerchief until they looked quite red. After which she got up and went out of the room, without venturing to say another word. When her older sister looked and spoke as she had done just now, the wisest course to pursue was to obey orders without any comment. Miss Minchin walked across the room. She spoke to herself aloud without knowing that she was doing it. During the last year the story of the diamond mines had suggested all sorts of possibilities to her. Even proprietors of seminaries might make fortunes in stocks, with the aid of owners of mines. And now, instead of looking forward to gains, she was left to look back upon losses.
"The Princess Sara, indeed!" she said. "The child has been pampered as if she were a QUEEN." She was sweeping angrily past the corner table as she said it, and the next moment she started at the sound of a loud, sobbing sniff which issued from under the cover.
"What is that!" she exclaimed angrily. The loud, sobbing sniff was heard again, and she stooped and raised the hanging folds of the table cover.
"How DARE you!" she cried out. "How dare you! Come out immediately!"
It was poor Becky who crawled out, and her cap was knocked on one side, and her face was red with repressed crying.
"If you please, 'm—it's me, mum," she explained. "I know I hadn't ought to. But I was lookin' at the doll, mum—an' I was frightened when you come in—an' slipped under the table."
"You have been there all the time, listening," said Miss Minchin.
"No, mum," Becky protested, bobbing curtsies. "Not listenin'—I thought I could slip out without your noticin', but I couldn't an' I had to stay. But I didn't listen, mum—I wouldn't for nothin'. But I couldn't help hearin'."
Suddenly it seemed almost as if she lost all fear of the awful lady before her. She burst into fresh tears.
"Oh, please, 'm," she said; "I dare say you'll give me warnin, mum—but I'm so sorry for poor Miss Sara—I'm so sorry!"
"Leave the room!" ordered Miss Minchin.
Becky curtsied again, the tears openly streaming down her cheeks.
"Yes, 'm; I will, 'm," she said, trembling; "but oh, I just wanted to arst you: Miss Sara—she's been such a rich young lady, an' she's been waited on, 'and and foot; an' what will she do now, mum, without no maid? If—if, oh please, would you let me wait on her after I've done my pots an' kettles? I'd do 'em that quick—if you'd let me wait on her now she's poor. Oh," breaking out afresh, "poor little Miss Sara, mum—that was called a princess."
Somehow, she made Miss Minchin feel more angry than ever. That the very scullery maid should range herself on the side of this child—whom she realized more fully than ever that she had never liked—was too much. She actually stamped her foot.
"No—certainly not," she said. "She will wait on herself, and on other people, too. Leave the room this instant, or you'll leave your place."
Becky threw her apron over her head and fled. She ran out of the room and down the steps into the scullery, and there she sat down among her pots and kettles, and wept as if her heart would break.
"It's exactly like the ones in the stories," she wailed. "Them pore princess ones that was drove into the world."
Miss Minchin had never looked quite so still and hard as she did when Sara came to her, a few hours later, in response to a message she had sent her.
Even by that time it seemed to Sara as if the birthday party had either been a dream or a thing which had happened years ago, and had happened in the life of quite another little girl.
Every sign of the festivities had been swept away; the holly had been removed from the schoolroom walls, and the forms and desks put back into their places. Miss Minchin's sitting room looked as it always did—all traces of the feast were gone, and Miss Minchin had resumed her usual dress. The pupils had been ordered to lay aside their party frocks; and this having been done, they had returned to the schoolroom and huddled together in groups, whispering and talking excitedly.
"Tell Sara to come to my room," Miss Minchin had said to her sister. "And explain to her clearly that I will have no crying or unpleasant scenes."
"Sister," replied Miss Amelia, "she is the strangest child I ever saw. She has actually made no fuss at all. You remember she made none when Captain Crewe went back to India. When I told her what had happened, she just stood quite still and looked at me without making a sound. Her eyes seemed to get bigger and bigger, and she went quite pale. When I had finished, she still stood staring for a few seconds, and then her chin began to shake, and she turned round and ran out of the room and upstairs. Several of the other children began to cry, but she did not seem to hear them or to be alive to anything but just what I was saying. It made me feel quite queer not to be answered; and when you tell anything sudden and strange, you expect people will say SOMETHING—whatever it is."
Nobody but Sara herself ever knew what had happened in her room after she had run upstairs and locked her door. In fact, she herself scarcely remembered anything but that she walked up and down, saying over and over again to herself in a voice which did not seem her own, "My papa is dead! My papa is dead!"
Once she stopped before Emily, who sat watching her from her chair, and cried out wildly, "Emily! Do you hear? Do you hear—papa is dead? He is dead in India—thousands of miles away."
When she came into Miss Minchin's sitting room in answer to her summons, her face was white and her eyes had dark rings around them. Her mouth was set as if she did not wish it to reveal what she had suffered and was suffering. She did not look in the least like the rose-colored butterfly child who had flown about from one of her treasures to the other in the decorated schoolroom. She looked instead a strange, desolate, almost grotesque little figure.
She had put on, without Mariette's help, the cast-aside black-velvet frock. It was too short and tight, and her slender legs looked long and thin, showing themselves from beneath the brief skirt. As she had not found a piece of black ribbon, her short, thick, black hair tumbled loosely about her face and contrasted strongly with its pallor. She held Emily tightly in one arm, and Emily was swathed in a piece of black material.
"Put down your doll," said Miss Minchin. "What do you mean by bringing her here?"
"No," Sara answered. "I will not put her down. She is all I have. My papa gave her to me."
She had always made Miss Minchin feel secretly uncomfortable, and she did so now. She did not speak with rudeness so much as with a cold steadiness with which Miss Minchin felt it difficult to cope—perhaps because she knew she was doing a heartless and inhuman thing.
"You will have no time for dolls in future," she said. "You will have to work and improve yourself and make yourself useful."
Sara kept her big, strange eyes fixed on her, and said not a word.
"Everything will be very different now," Miss Minchin went on. "I suppose Miss Amelia has explained matters to you."
"Yes," answered Sara. "My papa is dead. He left me no money. I am quite poor."
"You are a beggar," said Miss Minchin, her temper rising at the recollection of what all this meant. "It appears that you have no relations and no home, and no one to take care of you."
For a moment the thin, pale little face twitched, but Sara again said nothing.
"What are you staring at?" demanded Miss Minchin, sharply. "Are you so stupid that you cannot understand? I tell you that you are quite alone in the world, and have no one to do anything for you, unless I choose to keep you here out of charity."
"I understand," answered Sara, in a low tone; and there was a sound as if she had gulped down something which rose in her throat. "I understand."
"That doll," cried Miss Minchin, pointing to the splendid birthday gift seated near—"that ridiculous doll, with all her nonsensical, extravagant things—I actually paid the bill for her!"
Sara turned her head toward the chair.
"The Last Doll," she said. "The Last Doll." And her little mournful voice had an odd sound.
"The Last Doll, indeed!" said Miss Minchin. "And she is mine, not yours. Everything you own is mine."
"Please take it away from me, then," said Sara. "I do not want it."
If she had cried and sobbed and seemed frightened, Miss Minchin might almost have had more patience with her. She was a woman who liked to domineer and feel her power, and as she looked at Sara's pale little steadfast face and heard her proud little voice, she quite felt as if her might was being set at naught.
"Don't put on grand airs," she said. "The time for that sort of thing is past. You are not a princess any longer. Your carriage and your pony will be sent away—your maid will be dismissed. You will wear your oldest and plainest clothes—your extravagant ones are no longer suited to your station. You are like Becky—you must work for your living."
To her surprise, a faint gleam of light came into the child's eyes—a shade of relief.
"Can I work?" she said. "If I can work it will not matter so much. What can I do?"
"You can do anything you are told," was the answer. "You are a sharp child, and pick up things readily. If you make yourself useful I may let you stay here. You speak French well, and you can help with the younger children."
"May I?" exclaimed Sara. "Oh, please let me! I know I can teach them. I like them, and they like me."
"Don't talk nonsense about people liking you," said Miss Minchin. "You will have to do more than teach the little ones. You will run errands and help in the kitchen as well as in the schoolroom. If you don't please me, you will be sent away. Remember that. Now go."
Sara stood still just a moment, looking at her. In her young soul, she was thinking deep and strange things. Then she turned to leave the room.
"Stop!" said Miss Minchin. "Don't you intend to thank me?"
Sara paused, and all the deep, strange thoughts surged up in her breast.
"What for?" she said.
"For my kindness to you," replied Miss Minchin. "For my kindness in giving you a home."
Sara made two or three steps toward her. Her thin little chest heaved up and down, and she spoke in a strange un-childishly fierce way.
"You are not kind," she said. "You are NOT kind, and it is NOT a home." And she had turned and run out of the room before Miss Minchin could stop her or do anything but stare after her with stony anger.
She went up the stairs slowly, but panting for breath and she held Emily tightly against her side.
"I wish she could talk," she said to herself. "If she could speak—if she could speak!"
She meant to go to her room and lie down on the tiger-skin, with her cheek upon the great cat's head, and look into the fire and think and think and think. But just before she reached the landing Miss Amelia came out of the door and closed it behind her, and stood before it, looking nervous and awkward. The truth was that she felt secretly ashamed of the thing she had been ordered to do.
"You—you are not to go in there," she said.
"Not go in?" exclaimed Sara, and she fell back a pace.
"That is not your room now," Miss Amelia answered, reddening a little.
Somehow, all at once, Sara understood. She realized that this was the beginning of the change Miss Minchin had spoken of.
"Where is my room?" she asked, hoping very much that her voice did not shake.
"You are to sleep in the attic next to Becky."
Sara knew where it was. Becky had told her about it. She turned, and mounted up two flights of stairs. The last one was narrow, and covered with shabby strips of old carpet. She felt as if she were walking away and leaving far behind her the world in which that other child, who no longer seemed herself, had lived. This child, in her short, tight old frock, climbing the stairs to the attic, was quite a different creature.
When she reached the attic door and opened it, her heart gave a dreary little thump. Then she shut the door and stood against it and looked about her.
Yes, this was another world. The room had a slanting roof and was whitewashed. The whitewash was dingy and had fallen off in places. There was a rusty grate, an old iron bedstead, and a hard bed covered with a faded coverlet. Some pieces of furniture too much worn to be used downstairs had been sent up. Under the skylight in the roof, which showed nothing but an oblong piece of dull gray sky, there stood an old battered red footstool. Sara went to it and sat down. She seldom cried. She did not cry now. She laid Emily across her knees and put her face down upon her and her arms around her, and sat there, her little black head resting on the black draperies, not saying one word, not making one sound.
And as she sat in this silence there came a low tap at the door—such a low, humble one that she did not at first hear it, and, indeed, was not roused until the door was timidly pushed open and a poor tear-smeared face appeared peeping round it. It was Becky's face, and Becky had been crying furtively for hours and rubbing her eyes with her kitchen apron until she looked strange indeed.
"Oh, miss," she said under her breath. "Might I—would you allow me—jest to come in?"
Sara lifted her head and looked at her. She tried to begin a smile, and somehow she could not. Suddenly—and it was all through the loving mournfulness of Becky's streaming eyes—her face looked more like a child's not so much too old for her years. She held out her hand and gave a little sob.
"Oh, Becky," she said. "I told you we were just the same—only two little girls—just two little girls. You see how true it is. There's no difference now. I'm not a princess anymore."
Becky ran to her and caught her hand, and hugged it to her breast, kneeling beside her and sobbing with love and pain.
"Yes, miss, you are," she cried, and her words were all broken. "Whats'ever 'appens to you—whats'ever—you'd be a princess all the same—an' nothin' couldn't make you nothin' different."

When this remark came out of Joey's mouth, almost everyone who heard it displayed the same expression as him. He rolled his eyes ridiculously and wrinkled his nose as though he had tasted something horrible. This proved that even Joey refused to believe such nonsense. Lapis would surely be placed at the top of the list for being the most harmless person in the entire Guild. Moreover, Joey had been with Randolf and Lapis for a long time and he knew better than anyone else what sort of a person Lapis was. If they claimed that Lapis dared to poison someone to death, then the others would surely be homicidal maniacs.
"Continue," said Rhode.
Rhode had almost figured out everything regarding this matter. Fortune favored the fool and it was fortunate that they had looked for Lapis of their own accord. If that was the case, Rhode was confident in handling this situation.
Joey looked at Rhode's uninterested expression and he pulled himself together to continue his report. "We haven't investigated the specific situation, Boss. But those people seem to be grumbling that an important person in the Alchemist Association had gotten into trouble and they blamed it on us." Joey pouted in disdain. "I also heard that those bastards were extremely arrogant. Boss, you have chased them out of the Fortress and they still blabbered a bunch of nonsense. They said something about getting the overlord to resolve the situation for them and that we, mercenaries, are a bunch of unreasonable barbarians. They also said that... Uh..."
Joey came to an abrupt stop. He gazed at Rhode awkwardly and coughed to clear his throat. "That... That's about all, Boss."
Rhode swept a glance at Joey. He knew what the other party had said about them judging from Joey's attitude, but he had no intentions of looking into them. The current problem was much more important than the senseless lies and slanders.
"Good, continue to monitor those guys and see if they have left the Land of Atonement. It would be for the best if they were tactful enough to get out of this place on their own. But if they don't... You should know how to teach them a lesson. Our Starlight Guild isn't specially here for them to cause a ruckus."
"Got it, Boss, I'll get going now!" Joey jumped on his feet and saluted swiftly before leaving Rhode's sight.
Rhode shook his head hopelessly and continued to head into the Fortress.
At the same time, the Alchemists who were walking in the Fortress were awed by the scenery before them.
The white-bearded senior sat down at the glittering drawing room and gazed at everything before him with amazement flowing from his eyes. As a high-level personnel in the Alchemist Association, there were no doubts that he had heard rumors about Starlight and their mysteriously strange Guild Leader. The senior had treated all the rumors as interesting anecdotes and didn't expect that he would personally witness everything himself.
The doubts that the senior had about Starlight were gone. Alchemists were craftsmen of art and he recognized the true formidability of this mighty Fortress. Not only was it grand on the surface and easily guarded, but it also had a vast, powerful ritual circle enveloping the entire fortress. Although the senior didn't know what exactly the ritual circle was, he was sure that it wouldn't be as simple as launching fireworks once the ritual circle was activated.
"Amazing..." The senior turned his gaze away from the tall arrow tower outside the window and mumbled under his breath. It was unbelievable that this place here was just a barren landscape few months ago. Even with the help of Mages and Alchemists, it shouldn't be possible to build this towering Fortress in a matter of months. However, the intelligence the Alchemist Association gathered had always been accurate. In other words, this young man named Rhode had truly built this massive Fortress in a few months.
How did he do it?
This was an interesting subject for the senior. However, he didn't have the time to research about it now. The troubles in the Alchemist Association were huge and also implicated Starlight, which was rising in the Munn Kingdom. Due to this reason, the senior led his team here for an investigation just to be cautious. It seemed that his decision was correct. The fact that this Fortress was built in a few months proved that the Guild Leader had powerful strength and strong backing. If that was true, it wouldn't be smart for him to go head to head with him.
And... his subordinates.
The senior lifted his head and gazed at the graceful presence standing by the window. Although this lively and adorable lady appeared to be in her teens, he sensed the immense spiritual energy gathering around her clearly. He also saw the energy flow of the Three-rings Inner Circle that represented the three levels of spells, which proved one point: this young lady was a Grand Mage who had entered the Legendary Stage.
If it was said that this Fortress had astonished the senior, then this young lady had left him shell-shocked. A young lady who was barely the age of 20 was a Legendary Grand Mage. The senior had never seen this happen before and now, she was the subordinate of this young man?! What kind of backing and trump card does this man, who has a subordinate in the Legendary Stage, have?
At this moment, the senior was incomparably glad that he had made this wise decision. The reason why he chose to lead the team was because he lived in the Golden City and he knew that Lydia and the King's Party were interested in this newly established Guild. Furthermore, after considering that the heir of the Senia Family in the Munn Kingdom and Lydia's sister were in this Guild, things would get troublesome if the Alchemist Association didn't handle the situation appropriately.
Although the Alchemist Association and the Church were continental institutions, the strength of the Alchemist Association was nowhere near the Church. After all, the Church had the backing of the Twin Dragons of the Country of Law, while the Alchemist Association had ordinary humans. Besides, the King's Party and the Senia Family didn't need to operate with considerations to the Alchemist Association even when they had impressive magical and alchemical technologies. This was why the senior stayed cautious and it proved that he had made a wise choice.
Simply judging from the Fortress and the young lady, he knew that this young man wasn't as simple as the rumors had described. He couldn't possibly be only a noble and there were rumors spreading that he might be from an ancient family with such strength and techniques. Not only that, but the strange Ocean Elves had also left the senior astounded. As a knowledgeable Alchemist, he had heard about the Ocean Elves. They were creatures that lived in the Water Plane of Existence and seldom interacted with humans, not to mention coming to the main Plane of Existence to work for humans. However, he had already spotted a dozen Ocean Elves tidying the Fortress neatly and willingly, which also proved another point. No matter who the Guild's backing was, they were powerful enough to communicate, interact, and even sign contracts with the creatures in the Plane of Existences.
The senior puckered his brows once again... After that incident, all the investigation had pointed at Starlight and a lot of them in the Alchemist Association's internal department thought that this Guild was no big deal at all. But it seemed that this Guild wasn't as simple as it looked. They also heard that the Country of Light's Parliament had stirred trouble with the Guild, which ended with Mist Sword Saint crippled and he couldn't even remember who he was... The senior prayed that they wouldn't become the second Light Parliament...
The senior was deeply worried and sick at heart. If this incident was related to Starlight, the Alchemist Association might face an unprecedented calamity, which wouldn't be a good thing for them, who were on the decline.
As the senior knitted his brows worriedly, the heavy wooden door opened and an unfamiliar young man's voice sounded. "Everyone, welcome to Starlight Guild."
The senior lifted his head and narrowed his eyes. A thin, young man clad in a black robe stood by the door. He had a full head of black long hair just like the rumors and an exquisite face like that of a young lady. The young man looked at his guests without any changes to his expression as though his face were carved from a rock.
What a difficult guy.
The senior sighed inwardly. Then, he pressed down the creases in his attire and stroked his white long beard, lifting his head and standing to his feet. He nodded at the young man with a smile. "Hi there, Mr. Rhode. I'm Dasos Bell from the Alchemist Association. This time, I represent that Alchemist Association to discuss matters with your Guild."
Of course, I know who you are.
Rhode let out an inward sigh.
Dasos Bell. One of the personnel with the highest authority in the Alchemist Association of the Munn Kingdom. Any players who learned alchemy couldn't avoid his tests when leveling up. Rhode had also learned alchemy due to his Spirits Swordsman identity and had no lack of fights with this old man. However, after coming to this world, Rhode didn't spend any effort upgrading his alchemy levels after randomly recruiting an Alchemist Master and didn't meet this old man at all.
However, even though Rhode thought of it this way, he didn't express it on his face. He gestured to Dasos and nodded. "Please take a seat, Master Dasos. I've heard that you're a very popular person in the Alchemist Association."
Dasos forced out a bitter smile. Even though it sounded like a polite greeting, the senior couldn't figure out if Rhode was being polite or sarcastic due to the tense atmosphere and his aloof expression. However, Dasos had long passed his prime of youth and he didn't mind even if Rhode was really mocking him. He sat down and gazed at Rhode sternly. "This was what happened, Mr. Rhode. This time, We, Alchemists, came to your Fortress to seek your cooperation on something important... If it is possible, I hope we can discuss about it privately."
Rhode twitched his brows before snapping his finger to Canary who was admiring the scenery from the window. Canary turned around, swept a glance at them, and nodded with a smile. "Alright, Rhode, I will go check on Christie."
"I'll leave it to you," said Rhode.
Canary nodded to the Alchemists and left the drawing room. At this moment, Kasos was incredibly stunned. He had seen through Rhode's strength-he was only in the Master Stage. But even so, this young man actually commanded a Grand Mage in the Legendary Stage so easily and she didn't dislike it at all. Powerful beings had strong feelings of pride and were rarely ordered about. However, the young lady accepted his orders so willingly... This wasn't something that ordinary nobles could accomplish.
Could it be that they have an intimate relationship?
This thought flashed in Dasos' mind for only a second. After all, he didn't come here to gossip. He lifted his head and looked at Rhode solemnly. "This was what happened... Mr. Rhode. About half a month ago, the Chairman of the Alchemist Association, Volta, fell ill and went into a comma. It was due to this that the entire Alchemist Association turned into utter chaos..."
Before Dasos finished his sentences, Rhode's sneer interrupted. "This is really interesting, Master Dasos. If I recall correctly, there should be three Vice-Chairmen in each organizational branch of the Alchemist Association. Even if the Chairman had fallen ill, the entire Alchemist Association shouldn't stop its operations. If the Alchemist Association is really that unorganized and fragile, perhaps it would've been completely destroyed during the Third High Cliff Campaign."
Dasos' expression stiffened slightly as soon as he heard the term 'Third High Cliff Campaign'. However, he pulled himself together quickly and nodded with a smile to Rhode's subtle ridicule. "Indeed. It's just as Mr. Rhode has said. If the Chairman had simply fallen ill, the situation wouldn't have ended up in this plight now. After our investigations, we have concrete evidence to prove that the Chairman didn't fall ill due to the infection of diseases. Instead, he was poisoned by someone."
Dasos twitched his brows and scrutinized Rhode silently. However, he was disappointed to see that Rhode remained unaffected even after hearing this news as though it had nothing to do with him at all. Well, that was actually the truth. Rhode adjusted his posture to a more comfortable spot on his seat. At the same time, he interlocked his fingers and gazed at the senior nonchalantly. "That's interesting, Master Dasos. If I recall correctly, you said you're from the Alchemist Association, right? So shouldn't your Alchemists... be knowledgeable about creating antidotes?"
"Just as you've said, Mr. Rhode," Dasos nodded. "If it were an ordinary poison, the Alchemist Association could surely get rid of it. However, this poison is incredibly unusual and we've tried all methods, but to no avail. All we could do was to temporarily slow down the invasion of the poison to the bloodstream. According to our investigations, the concocting methods for this poison is extremely rare and ordinary Alchemists can't achieve it."
"So?" Rhode sat up straight. He knew that this was the true, crucial moment.
Dasos didn't respond immediately. Instead, he reached into the fold of his top and retrieved a small crystal potion bottle and placed it on the table. The senior looked up and stared at Rhode. "I think Mr. Rhode must be familiar with this."

The words “cohabitation” and “Catholic” do not really go together. Clara* had been living with her boyfriend for 18 months. When she went to confession, the priest did not want to give her absolution. It was then when she asked herself, “Is what I’m doing so wrong?!” Clara shares her experience of cohabitation and why she decided to change her life.
My adolescent years
I have always been brought up in a family where religion is very important. However, as I grew older, the more my parents sought after me to join them in their religious community, the more I refused to accept to go. Eventually, at the age of 18, I used to tell them that I was going to mass and wasn’t. There was a time in my life where I didn’t go to mass or pray for a long period of time; years at times. Every now and then I used to go to Lenten talks or something, but it was all because I had to. I used to think that people who are religious are boring people who have nothing more interesting to do in their life. It’s like they’re religious fanatics because either they have nothing better to do or because there is something totally wrong in their life!
My life in cohabitation and Catholic turning point
It was October. I was passing through a rough patch in my life, mainly due to the problems I had in my relationship with my boyfriend and was seeing myself as stuck in a life I didn’t want to live. One day while I was browsing Facebook I received an invitation from my cousin for a course called ‘7: Making Sense of It All‘ organised by a religious organisation. At first, I was feeling strange even within the group itself as I went on my own and didn’t know anyone in particular, but gradually I started realising that whatever the leader was saying was really making sense. The things I used to hear when I was younger and rejected for so long, were now making much more sense and I started to look at them differently.
I realised that I started answering a lot of my questions through faith. However, I believe that my real conversion happened on my first confession. The session was called ‘God’s Yes to Sex’ where sexuality was being discussed. At that time I was living with my boyfriend and had been doing so for the past one and a half years. Deep down I knew that it was not something that my parents approved. I felt guilty about it. However, I was saying to myself, it’s convenient, it’s what everyone is doing and so on and so forth.
When I went to confession I decided to confess this in particular. However, the priest told me that he cannot give me absolution as I was still living with my boyfriend. This left me completely puzzled and perplexed. I was saying to myself ‘How can the forgiving, all-loving God I’ve been hearing for long about, and I’ve recently got to know as I was starting to have a personal relationship with him, not forgive this?! It must be a terrible thing I’m doing.’ After I cried for long and prayed about it. With the help of my leaders, I’ve decided to stop living with my boyfriend there and then. It was one of the hardest decisions I took in my life. At the same time, it was also the easiest to do as I was convinced that it was the right thing to do.
My new road to peace and joy
After this, I truly started taking the relationship with Jesus more seriously and started making Jesus important in my life! Before my conversion, I used to see Confession as saying sorry just because I had to. Like saying sorry but deep down I didn’t really care or regret anything I did. Now that I took Jesus seriously, I am realising what a gift it really is; one that we all take for granted! Now it’s more like saying I’m deeply and truly sorry for hurting someone else or for doing something that I’m not supposed to do, and truly asking God to change my heart and to help me change the way how I live and change the things I do.
I have come to believe that unconfessed sins break down our faith and rob our peace and joy. The next time I went to confession following this, I truly experienced God’s forgiveness. I experienced God’s peace and love for me. I discovered that it’s really important for me to be part of a community as it helps me even more. I’m finding that praying every day and also going to mass is really helping me know and experience God better. At times I will be in complete awe of his love for us. It’s really an amazing feeling and I suggest it to everyone.”
*Name has been changed.

KILLARNEY-based singer Archie Roach will step onto the MCG for Saturday's Dreamtime match to take football fans back to an iconic moment in Australian sports history.
Roach and his band will perform The Colour of Your Jumper, as well as Heal The People’ from his latest album Into The Bloodstream, at half time of Essendon's clash with Richmond.
The Aboriginal artist penned the song 20 years ago to explain his belief that the colour of the jumper in any footy team was more important than the colour of a players’ skin.
Inspiration for the song came from the iconic AFL moment when St Kilda footballer Nicky Winmar took direct action against racist remarks with a defiant gesture, lifting his jumper and pointing to his skin as a stand against racism.
Roach said Winmar was a big fan of his music at the time and struggled with the pain of what happened on the field.
“When Nicky lifted his jumper that day and pointed to his black skin in defiance of the racial abuse directed at him and other indigenous players in 1993, it made me sad and angry that this champion of the game would have to do that," Roach said.
"More importantly, I think, is what the jumper meant to Nicky and many others on that fateful day.
"What I saw was not just an Aboriginal man proud of his heritage and people, but a young man who had made it.
"He was an elite sportsman in the greatest game, Australian Rules football, who played his heart out for that jumper.”

Hi! We are Jonathan and Melissa Pfenninger. We have two beautiful daughters named Ivy (4) and Elliott (2) and are in the process to bring home a third!
We did not start out the adoption process in your typical way. While very open to adoption, our plans were always to build our family through biological kids, begin being foster parents, and adopting later on. Of course, our plans often don’t go according to plan and ours changed in November 2019 when we first laid eyes on a girl while scrolling through social media. This little girl caught our attention not only because she needed a family but also because she has a medical condition we are very familiar with. She has Turner Syndrome (TS) which just happens to be the same diagnosis our oldest daughter Ivy has as well. TS is very rare, with only 1-2% of babies making it to birth. We both joked that we should adopt her and kept on scrolling as we normally do.
A week later, out of the blue, we both brought up to each other “the little girl with TS” who we just couldn’t get off our minds. We began to talk and pray seriously about what we could and should do. We both felt God calling us to make a move, whatever that may be. We talked about how, while not ideal timing, God had given us all the resources to be able to adopt. How could we know about her and not do anything? So we took a leap of faith and started the adoption process. We were still not 100% sure this is what God had in store for us but we believed that if this was the path we were supposed to take, it would be made known.
A couple months later, we thought we got our answer when another family was chosen to adopt Ivey instead of us. While we were sad and disappointed, we came to the conclusion that what we wanted for Ivey was to be loved and cared for and whether it was us or another family, she would be and we could be content in that. We talked about what to do now that we had started this process and we decided to make sure that we had everything in order so that if something happened and Ivey needed another family to love her, we would be ready.
Almost 10 months later we got a call that we were not expecting. Our agency was on the phone asking if we were still open to adopting Ivey! Almost immediately, we said yes. We had been praying for this little girl for almost a year now and have been loving her from afar. And now we were beginning to see God’s plan fall into place for her- us! There are so many emotions that go into an adoption but the resounding one is an overwhelming feeling of love for a little girl we haven’t even gotten to meet yet. We are excited (and nervous!) to embark on this adventure but cannot wait to see what God has in store for our family.
9/22/2021 — FINAL TRIP in OCTOBER

A Detailed Chronology of What’s Coming
A complete breakdown of the major events including the likely timing of the rapture
Here below is what I see as a gift from God. This is the Sarah Menet vision of 1979. Tribulation-Now has been collecting visions, dreams and prophecies of people since 1979. Some of these prophecies date back as far as the 1600’s. Many of the more recent ones date back as far as 1937. All of the prophecies, dreams and visions collected have a reoccurring them and include key events that MATCH closely to one another strongly indicating that they are coming from the Lord.
This particular vision, unlike the dozens of others, includes details that the others do not. This detailed list of events, to the trained and sanctified eyes of the discerning believer, explains not only what happens, but in what order.
It even includes the timing of the rapture of the Bride.
In all my years of serving the Lord in tears and prayer, I know of no other vision that so completely spells out this end-times chronology with such vivid detail. Since we all see through the mirror dimly, it is reasonable to estimate that some events may not happen quite the way she sees. However I have added subtitles to help the reader see the major events as they line up with scripture and other prophetic confirmations.
God bless you.
(Please Note: My subtitles are in dark blue)
SARAH MENET PROPHECY 1979
(Biological, Chemical, Nuke, Comets, a Year plus of Horror)
As I tried to look away from my black surroundings, a small light started to shine in front of me, and the darkness, sounds and feelings that had so completely oppressed me started to fade into the background. The light grew bigger, and a window opened up much the same as when I had witnessed my life’s review. This time however, a panoramic view of the entire earth lay before me. It came closer and closer as if I had been out in space and was flying toward it.I knew what was happening was intended to help me make my decision about going back to the earth and my terrible life. A part of me wanted to go back to the beautiful spirit world, or paradise, that I had seen, and another part of me felt the need to be reunited with my body so I could change my life. It was a tug-of-war, and what I was about to see was to help me understand what I would be going through if I chose to go back to my ‘body of clay.’Again the view before me played out like a videotape in fast forward motion, and yet I could see the scene in perfect clarity and was able to comprehend everything that transpired.
IRAN (LYBIA) NUKES ISRAEL
As the earth zoomed up into my view, I first saw the whole world, and then various countries. It was made clear to me that in the future there would be wars and troubles, including nuclear attacks in various places of the world, and a view of how it would start was given.I am not familiar with the geography of the world, but as I looked a the various lands before my view I instinctively knew what countries they were. Looking at the Middle East, I watched as a missile flew from Libya and hit Israel. The mushroom cloud that resulted from the blast was visible, and I knew that the missile contained a nuclear bomb. I was aware that those responsible for the missile were Iranian, but the missile had been hidden and fired from within the borders of Libya.
OTHER NUCLEAR MISSILES FIRED
Almost immediately after this, other missiles began flying from one country to another, quickly spreading war around the world. I also saw that many nuclear explosions did not come from missiles but from bombs of some kind on the ground.
THE PRECURSOR EVENTS
EVENTS LEADING UP TO NUCLEAR WAR
My focus then changed from the Middle East to the United States, and I understood that I was about to see some of the things that would lead up to the nuclear holocaust that I had just witnessed.
SHE SEES 911 NYC
As I looked upon the continent of North America, I zeroed in on the eastern coast and then on New York specifically. I saw New York City with all of its people and buildings. I then saw some tall buildings crashing to the earth surrounded by tremendous amounts of smoke, dust, and debris.I zoomed in closer into the smoke and dust, and I saw a woman holding a little girl’s hand and running from the crashing buildings. The woman had long dark hair, hanging past her shoulders and curled inward slightly. She wore a beige business suit, heels of a slightly darker color, perhaps tan, and she was not wearing glasses. The little girl appeared to be about 6 or 7 years old with short brown hair reaching below the chin and cut in a type of pageboy look. They ran together, holding hands and trying to escape from the falling buildings. As they ran through the heavy smoke and dust, they were forced to let go of their hands and became separated. The child was terrified, and I could hear her screaming, “Mommy, mommy!” over and over again.I don’t know their outcome, if they lived or died, but I can still see the face of the woman clearly and could easily identify her from a photo or describe her to a sketch artist. I asked if an earthquake had caused the buildings to fall and felt impressed that the answer was no. However, I was not given any indication as to the cause of the destruction. (Incidentally, I told this story many, many times before September 11, 2001. When I did see on television the World Trade Center towers collapsing, I knew that this was what I had seen.
THIRD SEAL – FINANCIAL COLLAPSE
The next thing that came to me was more felt than seen. It was the understanding that shortly after the crashing of the buildings in New York City, commerce ceased. Shopping and buying seemed to stop, and the economy failed **throughout the world**. Few had any money at all, and those who did have it could not buy anything of worth with it. Gold and silver and other commodities had value and could be traded.
I then saw a man walk into a middle of a crowd of people and drop what seemed like a quart jar full of liquid. The jar broke and the liquid spread. I understood that people nearby had become infected with a disease from the liquid, and ***they didn’t even know it***.
A day or two later the people became sick and started dying. I saw that this would happen in four particular cities: New York, Los Angeles, San Francisco and Salt Lake City.
The disease started with white blisters, some the size of a dime, appearing the hands, arms and face of the victims. The blisters quickly developed into white puffy sores. Those with the disease would stumble around and fall over dead. Many died within a short time, perhaps 24 hours.
I also saw other people with a flu-like virus that spread more quickly than the first disease. The victims had blood coming from their nose, mouth, eyes, and ears. These people died even faster of this disease than the ones who had the first sickness.
DISEASE SPREADS MURDER MAYHEM
These diseases became wide-spread across the United States with hundreds of thousands infected.As the people were fleeing the cities in the hope of saving their lives, gangs were attacking them and killing them.
In the towns that were struck with disease there was chaos, with looting, rioting and murders involved in a complete breakdown of society. Many people seemed to go crazy.
EMP NO ELECTRICITY (US & ISRAEL)
I sensed that the electricity had failed everywhere and that nothing was running throughout the country, including any of the communication systems. I watched people throw rocks through windows to steal TV’s that would not work and thought it was very strange.
While I watched all this happening in the United States, my view instantly jumped back to the Middle East, and I saw the same thing taking place in Israel. The same sores and the same types of sickness and disease that were plaguing the U.S. had also been unleashed in Israel.The switch in view only lasted an instant, and I was back in the United States.
There was a tremendously long winter that caught everyone by surprise following the siege of sickness. It started early and lasted into the summer months. A famine had begun over the few years leading up to the long winter because of storms, droughts, floods and other plagues that had taken place; and the abnormally long cold period seemed to cause the famine to suddenly increase to its full measure.
In the period of time following the disease, which was quickly followed by the long winter, things started going down hill very quickly. Events piled up one on top of another without any breaks.
(SENSE OF TIMING OFF)
My sense of timing was not very clear at this moment; however because I was seeing several things happening all at the same time or very close together.
CHAOS, STARVATION, MAYHEM, CONTINUES
During and after the long winter, the disease spread everywhere and increased in severity. The economy and the electricity were completely gone. Chaos and anarchy reigned over the entire United States. Without any government there was a total breakdown, and I saw people panicking everywhere. They were trying in vain to find food. There was none. I saw people even digging in the ground for worms to eat because they were so hungry from the lack of food.Also, during this time I became aware that there was very little drinking water, and the remaining water had become contaminated, so that if a person drank it they would contract the disease and die. Because of their great thirst many people drank the water in spite of the danger of poisoning and died.I mentioned earlier the gangs that killed people trying to escape the cities. It seemed that some of the people had lost their minds and went around in these gangs killing people just for the sake of killing; others killed for food or to gain some material possessions from their victims. Those that were killing for no reason were like beasts: animals completely out of control, as they raped, looted, burned and butchered people. I saw these gangs go into the homes of those who were hiding. They would drag them out of their hiding places, rape and dismember them.For many there was an unnatural fear and hatred that came over the people. Family ties that once existed between husbands and wives, parents and children no longer mattered. The only thing that mattered was individual survival. Men would kill their wives and children for food or water. Mothers would kill their children. For me, the events that then lay before me were horrible beyond description and almost unbearable to watch.The air everywhere was filled with smoke as many buildings and cities burned with no attempt to control the fires.
HOMES/CITIES OF LIGHT & REFUGE
As I looked upon this scene of chaos, smoke and destruction I noticed that there were small pockets of light scattered over the United States. There were, I would guess, about twenty or thirty of them that I saw. I noticed that most of the locations of light were in the western part of the United States, with only three or four of them being in the east. These places of light seemed to shine brightly through the darkness and were such a contrast to the rest of the scene that they caught my attention.
I focused on them for a moment and asked, ‘What are these things?’
I was then able to see that these points of light were people who had gathered together and were kneeling in prayer. The light was actually coming from the people, and I understood that the light was showing forth their goodness and love.
I further understood that they gathered together for safety and that, contrary to what I had witnessed everywhere, the cared more for each other than for themselves. Some of the groups were small with only a hundred people or so, but other groups consisted of what seemed to be thousands.I realized that many, if not all, of these places of light, or cities of light as I began to think of them, had somehow been established just before the biological attack, and that they were very organized. It was as if they had known what was coming and had prepared for it. I did not see who or what had organized them, but I did see many people struggling to reach them with nothing but what they could carry.
The cities of light had food that others outside of those groups did not have, and within the cities of light food was readily shared with those who joined their groups. In these places there was peace and safety. The inhabitants were living in tents of all kinds, many of which were no more than blankets held up by poles. I noticed that the gangs made no threats on these groups and left them completely alone (…). The gangs also preyed upon the people who were traveling, trying to reach the cities of light.
CITIES OF LIGHT MOVED OFTEN
As I looked upon them, I realized that these cities of light were temporary and that in a short time the people living within them would go to another place. I do not know where they were to go but seemed to think that they gathered in the mountains, to higher places.
BABYLON THE GREAT (“USA”) DESTROYED
FINAL NUCLEAR DESTRUCTION
As I was viewing the cities of light, my focus changed, and I became aware of missiles being launched and hitting U.S. cities. I watched as mushroom clouds started forming over many areas of the United States. Some of the clouds came from missiles that I knew were fired from Russia, and others were not from missiles at all, but from bombs that were already in the United States. These latter bombs had been hidden in trucks and in cars driven to certain locations and then detonated. I specifically saw Los Angeles, Los Vegas, and New York City hit with bombs. New York City was hit with a missile, but I think that Los Angeles was hit by at least one truck bomb, if not several, because I didn’t see any missile. I also saw a mushroom cloud from north of Salt Lake City, but without the aid of a missile.
SIXTH SEAL – FIRE BALLS & COMETS START FIRES
In the darkness I also saw little fireballs. I’m not sure if this happened just before or during the mushroom clouds. The balls fell from the sky, were of different sizes – most being the size of golf balls – and were very hot. There were millions of them. As they fell from the sky they left streaks of flame and smoke behind them. Everything they touched started on fire: people, buildings, trees, or grass. Everything burned. I didn’t ask what they were or where they had come from because by this time I was sick because of the scene before me, and so I observed without asking many questions.
RUSSIAN CHINESE INVADE
(part of nuclear war)
At almost the same time and in the same locations as the mushroom clouds, I saw Russian and Chinese troops invading the United States. The Russians were parachuting at many spots along the Eastern Coast; I also saw them parachuting in Utah. Chinese troops were invading from the West Coast near Los Angeles. They were met with resistance from those who had survived the disease and bombs. I did not see any United States military there at that time.The invasion was part of the nuclear war that I had seen earlier, and I knew that similar events were taking place all over the world as I had seen previously.
RUSSIAN CHINESE INVASION SHORT DURATION
I did not see much of this war, but was impressed that it was short in duration and the Russian and Chinese armies lost and left. No explanation regarding how or why was received.Now the smoke became very heavy, dark and thick.
GLOBAL MEGAQUAKES TSUNAMIS VOLCANOS, US SPLITS, MAYHEM
Just as things appeared to be as bad as they could get, the earth began to quake. This occurred during a winter, seemingly the winter that followed the very long one I had seen earlier. The chaos had existed for almost a full year by this time.
The earthquakes began in the west, around Idaho and Wyoming, and then quickly spread in every direction. I saw a huge earthquake hit Utah, and then California. There were earthquakes all over California, but they were especially devastating in the Los Angeles and San Francisco areas. San Francisco appeared to turn upside down.
The multiple earthquakes triggered volcanoes all over the west, and they started spewing a tremendous amount of ash and smoke into the air, causing it to become very dark and dirty and blocking much of what was left of the sunlight.There were also huge waves of water that swept over the west coast, and as I saw them I realized that this same thing was happening to coastal cities all over the world. The waves were so huge that Los Angeles was nearly swept away.I saw a wall of water taller than some of the buildings, perhaps as high as fifteen or twenty feet, sweep through Salt Lake City. I thought this was strange because of its location so far from the ocean, and wondered how a wave could travel all the way to Salt Lake City. I was impressed that the wave had not originated at the ocean, but was from under ground. I quickly noticed great cracks in the earth around Salt Lake City opened up and saw water shooting up out of the ground. I felt that deep under the ground was a huge amount of water and that the earthquakes had forced it up to the surface. Most of the buildings were swept away or destroyed when the water swept over the city. In fact there had been tremendous destruction, with only a few buildings left standing. The water coming from underground stretched from Idaho down to near Cedar City, Utah, and was very destructive.As I looked, I could see that cities all over the country had been devastated, and there was rubble everywhere. Most of the buildings were destroyed.
However, I realized that even though there was tremendous destruction from earthquakes, disease, floods, volcanoes, and tidal waves, the majority of the deaths were caused by the gangs of roving marauders that killed for pleasure.As I studied the scene for a moment, the thought occurred to me that the earth itself had become sickened at the terrible acts of cruelty that were happening upon it and was finally reacting through these natural disasters. The earth was attempting to cleanse itself of the chaos and evil that had engulfed the people.
The ash and smoke from the volcanoes had increased, and there was now almost complete darkness everywhere upon the earth.The diseases also increased in devastation, and I saw people literally dying on their feet. I saw another particular disease that started with red blotches, and then the victims would start to bleed from every opening in their bodies. Then the people literally disintegrated, or melted into unrecognizable masses of flesh and bone. The sight was horrendous, as death and the dead were everywhere.After this second terrible winter, I saw the survivors pile up the dead into huge piles to burn them. The stench was sickening. Some of the bodies had been burned during the time of chaos, but because people were more concerned with their survival they had mostly ignored the dead around them.
A huge earthquake occurred in the middle of the United States. It was tremendous and seemed to split the United States in half about where the Mississippi River is. The crack in the earth that resulted was huge, miles wide, and as it opened up the earth seemed to swallow everything. Water flowed in from the Gulf of Mexico all the way up to the Great Lakes. The Great Lakes did not exist any longer, however, as they became part of a large inland sea.
Then I saw another series of tremendous earthquakes all over the world. But they were not many, separate earthquakes, rather it was all part of one gigantic earthquake that shook the entire earth. Because of this earthquake waters overflowed their boundaries onto land all over the world. There were again huge walls of water along all of the coastal regions. This earthquake and the walls of water made the earlier ones seem small by comparison. I am not sure if the earthquake that split the United States in two was a part of this worldwide quake or not.
PLANET X, HUGE WHIRLWIND, PEOPLE HIDING IN ROCKS
(More Sixth Seal)
Next I saw a mighty wind come upon wind come upon the earth. As the wind hit, I saw people go into caves and into the cracks of rocks to try to escape its fury. It appeared to be stronger than any hurricane or tornado. It seemed that everything that had been left was now blown away.I understood, without asking, that the great worldwide earthquake and the mighty wind were somehow caused by a huge planet-like object, that had come very close to the earth and had disrupted everything. It was also made clear to me that it was very near the “end” when this happened.
FIRST TRUMPET (BURNING)
Now my perspective changed: I once again viewed the entire earth from a distance. I then saw a huge fireball, much larger than the earth, approaching our planet. It was extremely bright red and gold in color, and it engulfed the whole earth. When I witnessed this event I could not help but feel the difference between it and everything else that had occurred, and so I asked what this was that I saw. I was impressed that it was the burning of the earth that is described in the Bible.
RAPTURE JUST PRIOR TO FIRST TRUMPET
I understood that just before the fireball’s appearance Jesus had appeared, and the good people I had seen earlier had left with Him and were no longer on the earth. The few people left behind were those wicked who had survived the earlier devastations. The picture of the earth engulfed by this huge ball of red and gold fire slowly faded away into blackness.
I was thinking that I have to go down and take care of my children so that they could be protected from the terrible things that were going to happen and then I don’t remember any more until I woke up in the hospital.”Thanks for taking a gander at all the news I have compiled here as always Stay Safe!
For more click HERE
A Vision of What’s Coming Upon America (and the world) with Sarah Menet (Parts 1 & 2)

Domenico Gaetano Maria Donizetti was an Italian composer from Bergamo in Lombardy. Along with Gioachino Rossini and Vincenzo Bellini, Donizetti was a leading composer of the bel canto opera style during the first fifty years of the Nineteenth Century.
Although Donizetti did not come from a musical background, at an early age he was taken under the wing of composer Simon Mayr who had enrolled him by means of a full scholarship in a school which he had set up. There he received detailed training in the arts of fugue and counterpoint. Mayr was also instrumental in obtaining a place for the young man at the Bologna Academy, where, at the age of 19, he wrote his first one-act opera, the comedy Il Pigmalione, which may not have ever been performed during his lifetime.
Read more about Gaetano Donizetti on Wikipedia.

How one-party rule in California yielded draconian legislation against ‘conversion therapy’
I was out with my boyfriend David last week when we both got a call from Joseph (because of sensitive information, I’m not using Joseph’s real name). Since we were busy, we let the calls run to voicemail. But then he texted us: “Please call me urgent.”
David and I looked at each other. Knowing who Joseph was and his background, we knew this had to be something serious. So I quickly called him back: “What’s going on, Joseph?”
I had known something was not right with Joseph for some time. He had last texted me that he felt he had “lost his relationship with God,” that he was still “fighting demons from my past”—namely, his lifelong addiction to crack cocaine. So when I called Joseph back, I prayed it wouldn’t be what I suspected. Joseph crushed that hope when he blurted out, “I’ve relapsed.” My soul sank.
I first met Joseph last year at a local homeless committee meeting. He was there to share his testimony, and though he was in a room of mostly non-Christians, he straight-out preached the gospel with his story about how God delivered him from drug addiction, sexual abuse, and homelessness. The moment Joseph stood up and told his story, he had captured my eyes, ears, and heart—everyone else’s too.
This man had lost most of his teeth during decades of drug use. He had a rap sheet of burglaries and robberies, and he had a 50-year-old body that he said had endured multiple rapes during his time in prison. He had calloused feet that once dripped pus from too much walking, and a back that ached from years of sleeping on concrete. But standing in the meeting in front of everyone, Joseph had an authority and charisma that pulled people in.
That night, I knew I had to get to know this extraordinary man, or at least shake his hand. Apparently everyone else had the same idea, because after the committee meeting, people swarmed around him to talk to him. I waited until the crowd dispersed before approaching him.
“Hi, I’m Sophia. I’m a reporter for World Magazine …” I began, reaching out a hand to shake his. Instead, he opened his arms wide and drew me into a snug hug. Joseph is a tall man, so being hugged by him means my feet were dangling by his ankles for a few seconds. He then told me that he’d spotted me earlier from the corner of his eye—and instantly his spirit knew that he had found a fellow sister in Christ. I knew then that journalism was just an excuse—I wanted to be his friend.
Since then, Joseph and I have hung out numerous times. He took me on a walking tour of his old hood, where he used to grovel at the feet of drug dealers, begging for a hit. We’ve had coffee and pancakes at his favorite Denny’s, where I gaped and giggled as he drowned his pancakes in a puddle of syrup. David and I took him out to watch The Fate of the Furious, Spider-Man: Homecoming, and Wonder Woman. I still remember his guffaws and thunderlike hand claps as we watched those movies, and the wetness of his brown eyes as he said, “It’s been 20 years since I’ve last been to a movie theater.” Last April, I had celebrated his first sober anniversary by baking him an “extra, extra deep chocolaty-chocolate” cake, as he described it.
Now, a mere two months before his second-year sober anniversary, Joseph had slipped, and he was panicking. “I need help,” he told us on the phone that night. “Can we meet?”
David and I met Joseph the next morning at a coffee shop downtown. We sat outside with our steaming coffees, overlooking a street that Joseph used to prowl, literally singing for crack. We saw many homeless individuals on that street doing the same things that Joseph said he never wanted to do again—and that’s why he was so desperate to meet us.
Ever since his recovery from crack, Joseph had been diving headfirst into plans for the future: He had dreams to minister to the homeless, the addicts, the sexually abused, the convicts. He had envisioned opening a church that never closes its doors, that implants itself in the darkest shadows of the city. He had worked hard to apply to college and earn a degree in Christian ministries. But amid those grandiose plans and the busyness of managing three stores 16 hours a day, Joseph said he forgot to take care of himself.
“Something’s wrong with my heart,” he told us. “I started looking down on other homeless people. I treated them like dogs.” While working at a store in Skid Row, he bashed a homeless man with a hammer for stealing a bag of chips, and choked a woman for spilling sugar on the counter. His own behavior scared him: “I’m filled with so much rage and anger that I am finding it very, very hard to breathe.” He’d seen the relapse coming—and now he was terrified of losing all he had worked so hard for, and terrified of hurting people who love him.
Together, we figured out a rough action plan for Joseph: He had to get out of Los Angeles—he knew too many places and people from whom he could procure drugs. We looked up Christian inpatient rehab programs in the surrounding areas, and came up with a short list of facilities. We told him to find out how much his insurance would pay, and assured him we’d help him financially with the rest. Then we asked what he needed now. Prayers, he said, and cash. His car’s gas tank was low, and he had no money left.
As we walked to my car to get cash, Joseph said, “I think God’s really humbling me. I was getting so proud, thinking I was better than all those other homeless people.”
I sighed and admonished Joseph, “See, that’s exactly what I was worried about! Remember what I told you? That you need to be careful of pride? That you need to surround yourself with a community of fellow believers who will hold you accountable?”
Joseph nodded: “I know, Sophia. But it’s one thing to hear it and say it—it’s another thing to do it. That’s why I think God is humbling me. I need to repent.”
I became quiet. How many times have I said that exact statement myself? Joseph, in his fast ascent from drugs and homelessness, had too easily forgotten where he had come from, and his compassion had turned to contempt for people still stuck in the bog he escaped through the grace of God. It wasn’t so long ago that I, too, was sinking in a pit of despair, helplessness, and shame. How easy it is to forget that we’ve made it this far, not by our own might but God’s grace!
When we reached my car, David and I gave Joseph all the cash we had: $60. As we hugged Joseph goodbye and watched him walk away, I spotted two shifty-eyed men standing at the street corner. So quick that I almost missed it, they exchanged cash and packets of something I suspected was illegal.
David and I looked at each other and wondered if we’d done the right thing. Was it right to give money to a man whose body is salivating over crack? Even if he said all the right things? Should we have marched him to the gas station and made sure he used our money to fill his gas tank? There was little more we could do at that point, so we just prayed that we had done the right thing. And prayed that Joseph would do the right thing.
(To be continued … Read part two here.)

Western Carolina football player Cam Brown passed away Saturday. He was inflicted with osteosarcoma, a rare and aggressive bone cancer. Brown, 18, was a wrestling state runner-up at 195 pounds at Florida High School in Florida, became a member of the Western Carolina football team after two very good years to finish out high school. Brown was diagnosed with osteosarcoma in May and had to have his leg amputated in June. His cancer eventually spread aggressively to his hips, spine and upper back and had begun attacking muscle.
Western Carolina football player Cam Brown passes away from cancer
Sporting News - NCAAF | Nov 4

After Robertson went 3-1 up, posting a break of 141 along the way, Selby fought back, with a 136 clearance helping him move 4-3 ahead.
The match then drew level again at 4-4, before Selby wrapped things up with runs of 104 and 85.
It was the first time in eight meetings between the former world champions that Selby had triumphed.
And the 39-year-old - who had not made a final since claiming the world title in 2021 - said in quotes on wst.tv: "The last few times Neil has beaten me I have played OK, I just haven't had enough chances to win the match.
"Today I took virtually every chance from 3-1 down. He is the best player in the world at the moment, the standard he is playing is phenomenal, so to beat him you have to be at the top of your game.
"From 3-1 to 3-3, Neil missed a couple, which is probably the first time he has missed a ball against me since the Romans were building the roads.
"Then from 4-4 I played well in the last two. I have been working hard and playing well in practice. That means nothing unless you are taking it out there to the match table. I have done that this season in patches and got to a few quarter and semi-finals. I'll be out there fighting (on Sunday)."
The other semi-final saw Brecel get past Mark Allen 6-2, with the Belgian, whose highest break was 89, leading 5-0 before his opponent got off the mark.

Originally Posted by Cosmic Voices
i thought it was for brisbane?
i meant to put pre-australian open
Well it officially belongs to 2012 season because she wore it in Beijing and YEC only in pink/gray. She could wear it for Brisbane as she wore her 2012 YEC outfit for an exho prior to the AO, but then again, she could wear something new. It would be nice to see her in yellow in Brisbane because she'll be wearing a yellow dress at the AO too
Either way, I'm so excited to see her AO dress

I sit here eating my lunch from Sendiks down the block--a turkey leg, stuffing, and mixed vegetables.. We're open until 6 but we're already lighter in traffic. Amie asked if I wanted to open at 9 instead of 10 and close at 5, but I told her that if I were opening, I didn't think I could make it by 9. It turns out that I was up until 12:30 last night, worrying about everything I did wrong for the season.
That said, I overordered reams last year, but at least two of them were finished by the 24th (pictured). Next year I get to order again. We ran out of packaged Christmas wrap, which hasn't happened in our first two years.
When folks come up to me, I worry that I might be complaining, and many have good reason. We accidentally sold the last copy of a book on hold to the wrong person, for example. Fortunately Conrad was able to find a copy elsewhere as a replacement. Another customer was promised a book that we didn't have--our books at the Gingrass Gallery always trip people up and I have to figure out a way to fix that for next year. Note to inventory software folks--it would be great if copies on hold (as these sort of were) would somehow be flaggable as unavailable.
But sometimes it turns out that they are coming to compliment us. They usually have to assure me, as a panic appears in my eyes. I had an interesting one this morning. A nice man came up to me and reminded me that a few weeks ago, he came in to the store and wanted to buy a hardcover that was full price. He asked if we'd match that infamous website's prices, or even come close. My bookseller said we were unable to do this (but note that if you came in for 100 copies, we might be able to work something out.)
But today he told me he changed his mind. He'd gotten such good service in his last two visits that he realized we wouldn't be able to give if we were focusing on price. In fact, he realized we'd probably be out of business. He admitted he wouldn't use us for everything, but at least now he understood the store's value. And he also understood the contract that's implicit when you visit a retail store and use their services. And for that I'm grateful.
News from the Book Multiverse
15 hours ago

The dad of wildlife photographer Julie Ward, raped and murdered in a Kenyan game reserve 32 years ago, says the death of the prime suspect has sparked a deluge of fresh evidence.
John Ward, who has spent £2million and made more than 200 trips to the Maasai Mara to bring his daughter’s killer to justice, said last night: “I want people to know the truth.”
He believes Julie, 28 – whose body was cut up and set on fire – was killed by Jonathan Moi, son of then Kenyan president Daniel arap Moi.
But the retired businessman says his search has repeatedly hit a brick wall, and claims the British authorities and even MI6 had helped Kenyan officials to cover up the murder.
Suspect Moi died in April 2019. But it was only after the death of his father, President Moi, in February that witnesses felt safe to come forward.
John, who made his fortune in hotels, said one man was “physically trembling” when he gave evidence.
And he says his fight for justice is driven by the memory of discovering his daughter’s dismembered, charred body when he flew out to look for clues to her 1988 disappearance.
Scotland Yard have now told him they are shelving their inquiry – and John, 87, says he faces a race against time to solve the case before he dies.
He said: “We continue to get blocked. But there is always the memory of that day I found her.
“I owe it to Julie to get justice. We know who killed her. It’s confirming it with more evidence so it’s all clearer.”
A stream of information about Jonathan Moi over the years forced Kenyan police to take a statement from him. He told them he was nowhere near the scene at the time.
John, who flew to Nairobi in September to chase a potential new lead, said: “We now have information that he was. Once Moi died, people were more willing to speak.
“I met one guy who was able to tell us Moi had been in the park, had been in that immediate area where the body was found, and he had proof.
“When I met him he was physically trembling.”
Julie had set off on a six-month adventure after leaving her 15-hour-day job with a publishing company in Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk.
Fearing life “was passing her by”, she decided to travel to Africa to photograph animals, hoping to capture the annual migration of wildebeest in the Maasai Mara.
Then with just one month of her trip still to go, John was told Julie had gone missing.
Within hours he had boarded a flight to Kenya to start his own search.
He said: “It’s a funny feeling, I actually knew something was wrong. I had an overwhelming feeling I had to do something, so I flew out that day.
“I’d never been to Africa, never been to the bush. I realised how wild and rough it was, all I could think was that she was down there by herself.”
John paid for five aircraft to conduct a grid search of the area where Julie was last seen and spotted her Suzuki in a gully.
Her body was eventually found 10 miles away. It was John who found his daughter’s jaw and lower left leg, both burned, deep in bushes.
He said: “There was her body, what was left of it. It was not a nice scene. Her leg had been cut and then burned, which indicated foul play.
“The rangers were going to leave the body, but I insisted.”
A pathologist originally said Julie had been murdered, before the report was doctored to say she had been attacked by animals. Then John was told she had been struck by lightning.
It took more than 12 months for the Kenyan police to classify it as murder.
And more than three decades of investigation have left John in no doubt Moi was to blame.
He claims Moi and his drunken pals came across Julie when she stopped to photograph the wildlife near the Serena Lodge.
He says Moi then raped her as his cronies stopped farm manager Ibrahim Choge stepping in to stop him. Moi’s men were then ordered to dispose of her body, John claims.
Mr Choge – who was married to President Moi’s daughter Doris – quit working for the family.
He died in a road accident 10 years later. John claims that came after Mr Choge threatened to expose Moi.
Mr Choge’s father Simeon, a former assistant minister, also says his son’s death was orchestrated and blamed police for allegedly covering it up.
John said: “A lot of information has been gathered over the years. For a long time, anything I gathered I reported to Scotland Yard, expecting them to act on it, but they never did.”
In 1992 two park rangers were charged but cleared in court. In 1998 Simon Ole Makallah, chief park ranger at the time, was arrested. He was cleared the following year. John believes all three were scapegoats.
In his tireless search, John dug out a latrine near the scene in case any of Julie’s possessions – or the weapons used to kill her – had been discarded there.
He even stored DNA evidence in his own freezer, and tracked down the vehicle Julie had been using when she died, which had been driven by her killer.
Local police had it scrapped before he could ship it back to the UK. During an inquest in 2004 it was claimed there had been a cover-up in Kenya to protect her killers.
Adel Shaker, a Kenyan government pathologist, told the hearing his boss had doctored his first report and he was pressured into signing other false reports.
The coroner also heard how MI6 had been in contact with Kenyan police within days of the murder.
An unnamed agent admitted he could not explain the involvement of the Secret Intelligence Service, but denied it was part of a cover-up.
A separate report by Jon Stoddart, later chief constable of Durham, accused Kenyan police of being “brazen, deceitful and dishonest”.
And in 2008 John used the Freedom of Information Act to obtain a report compiled in 2004 for Lincolnshire Police.
It was highly critical of the Foreign Office, the British High Commission and Scotland Yard.
It said of the FCO and the British High Commission: “There is clear evidence of inconsistency and contradictions, falsehoods and downright lies, and it is this that has, not surprisingly, led to John Ward believing there was an active conspiracy to prevent him identifying his daughter’s killers.”
A Government spokesman told the Sunday Mirror: “We reaffirm our sympathy for Julie Ward’s family and will continue to offer any help we can. We refute any allegations of a cover-up.”
Scotland Yard also rejected any suggestion of a conspiracy. They said: “Officers have exhausted all lines of enquiry that the MPS is able to progress.
“In 2018 the Met decided to suspend its investigation and updated Julie’s family accordingly.”
In the late 1980s, Moi was seen as a stable influence in a volatile East Africa, although corruption flourished and the economy stagnated in his 24-year reign.
John said: “They chose to support Moi rather than me. They supported a Kenyan cover-up to maintain diplomatic relations. They hoped it would die down and I’d go away – but we haven’t let it.
“People tried to sweep it under the carpet, you get quite bloody-minded. It goes on and on, it never stops.”

A few years back we were looking for a wedding photographer and Becca was highly recommended to us by a friend. She was booked for our wedding day but I loved her work so we hired her for an engagement session. She spent time with us to decide on styles and locations beforehand. She was fun, professional, and made us feel super comfortable. We absolutely loved the photos!
Fast forward a few years.. my wife and I wanted to do some family photographs with our twin newborn girls. We of course called Becca. Again, the photos were amazing. There were lots of different kinds of looks, with different styles, lighting, and angles–we all looked great. It was hard to choose from so many great photos!
Recently, my wife needed some new head shots for her website, hired her, and again loved the results. She told her it would be a one week turnaround and she got them back the next day!
We keep going back to her because she’s a truly gifted photographer and you can tell she really cares about her clients and her work.
We’d recommend her in a heartbeat.

Melissa Emery (b. 31st January, 1985), born as Melinda-Noire Emery, is a Kuboian voice actress and singer of French heritage.
Melissa Emery was born on 31st January, 1985 to French parents. Her parents had moved to Kuboia in the early 1980s in order to secure a better life for their family. Although Melissa was born in the Kuboian Borders, she moved to the Kuboian Cliffs in 1998 at the age of thirteen after promised an acting career by Evan Ridley. Melissa's mother had reluctantly allowed Melissa's younger sister, Enny Emery, move out with her after Melissa convinced their mother it was the best choice for everyone.
Alongside her acting career, Melissa has also secured herself a moderately successful music career consisting of one Kuboian number one album, and two number one singles.
- In the Spotlight (2003)

Featured Golf News
Couples to Tee it up Again with the Flat-Bellies
This week Fred Couples will be making his 32nd appearance in the Northern Trust Open. Originally called the Los Angeles Open and later the Nissan Open, the tournament is played annually at one of Couples' favorite courses, Riviera Country Club in Pacific Palisades, Calif.
Though he's only won the event twice, in 1990 and 1992 - the same year he secured his only major title, the Masters, Couples is a regular contestant because of his fondness for the golf course and the tournament.
"I liked it from the get go back in 1981 when it started and it's just a peaceful spot," the 54-year-old Seattle native told reporters on Wednesday. "I used to live at another house close to here and moved away, and came back. You know, there are great courses that people like and there are some that don't, and I don't know why anyone would not like this course.
"It's just the perfect layout. It's very fair. It's going to be, what, 80 degrees here this week. So it's nice to be out in warm weather. A lot of people are going to come out. It's a great event. Northern Trust has done a great job and I think this is their seventh or eighth year and the tournament has gotten much better than it has in years before."
This is one of the few appearances Couples makes on the PGA Tour, and Riviera is among the handful of courses worldwide where Couples can compete head-to-head with the PGA Tour's finest. The other is Augusta National, where Couples seems to annually threaten to win another green jacket, even though he's past his prime.
Couples will be paired in the opening round Thursday with Keegan Bradley and 20-year-old Jordan Spieth. Couples was stunned to learn that his win in the Masters came before Spieth was born. "Wow," he said.
"He's 20. I'm 54," he added. "This is going to be a blast. He's one of my favorites. He walked into that Presidents Cup and he owned the place."
During his conversation with the media on the eve of the 2014 Northern Trust Open, Couples touched on a variety of subjects, including his successful run as the captain of three straight U.S. Presidents Cup teams and his introduction to Spieth. Here's what he had to say during the Q&A.
Q: Your thoughts on competing here for the 32nd year?
FRED COUPLES: Well, I have to thank Northern Trust for giving me a spot. I'm lucky, this is my favorite tournament, and I've played a lot of times, won a couple times. But to help the tournament and Northern Trust, I'm grateful, and eventually I won't play in this and I'll watch the tournament as much as I can, I live a mile from here. But right now, I played well here this morning, and I've played well here this morning. My goal is to try to hang with these guys. I have a great pairing tomorrow with Jordan and Webb Simpson so it's very exciting for me with that pairing, so we'll see what happens.
Q. When did you move to live a mile away?
FRED COUPLES: A few years ago. I have a bunch of friends coming out and a bunch of people staying with me. The same 20 people will be out here watching.
Q. Did you always like the area?
FRED COUPLES: Yeah, I liked it from the get go back in 1981 when it started and it's just a peaceful spot. I used to live at another house close to here and moved away, and came back. You know, there are great courses that people like and there are some that don't, and I don't know why anyone would not like this course. It's just the perfect layout. It's very fair. It's going to be, what, 80 degrees here this week.
So it's nice to be out in warm weather. A lot of people are going to come out. It's a great event. Northern Trust have done a great job and I think this is their seventh or eighth year and the tournament has gotten much better than it has in years before.
Q. How much do you hope to play?
FRED COUPLES: Well, I have to keep playing well, and well might be a Top 30 finish it. I have a bet with a friend of mine, and if I can do that - I don't like that pressure, I'd like to worry about winning if I play really well. But I do expect to play well, I really do. It's my favorite course, I still hit the ball pretty far and I seem to be putting well. But the greens are much faster than I'm used to, so that becomes a little bit of an issue. It just takes time to get used to greens that are rolling fast and I haven't played much this year. Really I expect to play well. What that is, it could be missing a cut by one or two.
Q. How did it come about you coming here?
FRED COUPLES: Well, I would ask them - if they said no, I would wait two months. It's my favorite event. I've said that many times now, but I think Justin Rose, he's injured, and he's playing, and Keegan Bradley and Jimmy Walker, those guys are guys that will usually play in this, but it's always great to see Phil, who is not here because of something he's doing, but he'll play several years. My goal is just to help them out, help the tournament every year.
FRED COUPLES: You know, probably not, because I started late and I made a few calls and texted and they said they were playing.
Q. And a buddy named Tiger -
FRED COUPLES: Well, some day. He would be a guy that I think could maybe come here, but you know, that's a different thing, and probably Phil, too. Phil didn't play here much. I'm going to ask them both some day but Phil has won here a couple of times recently, and he has a family outing he's doing and wishes he was here, but he'll be back.
Q. Is the scheduling a factor?
FRED COUPLES: Well, if you look at the field, I just got a Presidents Cup, and I think there's 19 of the 24 guys this played in The Presidents Cup are here, and the reason I know that is I told the guy, well, look - I've been waiting for a few months and he said most of them are here and I started going over it and most of them are here. So it is a very strong field. But with no Phil or Tiger, it's not the best, but there are a bunch of foreign players who are playing before next week's match play, they are out here. I looked at it and it's a very, very strong field.
Q. Can you just address Raymond Floyd being selected as a vice captain by Tom Watson and Floyd's influence on you?
FRED COUPLES: Well, I texted him congratulations and he texted right back. I'm very excited about it. I don't know the year, but he was with Azinger, was he not, when they won? He to me has the right - everyone says the steely eye, but he's also kind of a mild, good guy in the locker room. He's going to tell you the right things, and not that no one else is or Curtis Strange or Davis Love won't. He was a mentor a long time ago, because he taught me the goal was to shave a shot off. We sat down one night and he said, "Just cut one shot off every round you play." And I said, "How would you do that, by making another 5 foot putt somewhere?"
He said, "No, that's not what I see. I think you need to play the par-5 the differently," and I started listening to that and I started playing a little smarter and I started to cut off some shots that had nothing to do with making 5 foot putts because that's just part of playing golf. But the mental part of butchering par-5s, because I didn't hit a good drive, that was killing me. That's really one of the things I got, and we became friends and loved his wife to death and his kids and all that when they were younger and we just hung out. But to see him being chosen by Tom Watson, that's a great choice.
The transcript for the above interview is courtesy of ASAP Sports.
- American Team All Set for Inaugural International Crown
- DeLaet Looking to Break Winless String for Canadians
- New Jersey's Apple Ridge Country Club Gets New Ownership
- Remodeled Country Club of Jackson to Host Sanderson Farms Championship
- USGA Announces Qualifying Sites for 2015 U.S. Amateur Four-Ball

The Heart of the Matter
There are some people who can do things in moderation. To be honest, I've never been very good at that. Especially with bad habits. One of the few things I've discovered about myself is that I need to totally remove myself from a situation if I am to successfully change my habits in that situation.
So, yes, I did leave the television off for a while. Probably about a month, excepting for the occasional weekend movie that I would watch with Husband. One thing that helped is that it was late spring - everything was in reruns anyway, so I wasn't missing any must-see new episodes of anything. This allowed me some much-needed time to evaluate WHY I had the television on so much anyhow.
(In case you were wondering, after some massive playing & lots of distraction, we were able to help Bird 'forget' about the movies too. At least for this little while.)
When it came down to it, I had the television on as a way to connect with the outside world. I almost never watched videos/DVDs when it was just Bird & me at home, and I realized that it was because I felt like I had a link to real people if I had live televsion on. (And I do use the term 'live' loosely - mainly to mean stuff that was being broadcasted as I watched it!). If something happened in the world, I would know about it because the news affiliates would break in. If I removed that link to the outside world, I felt incredibly isolated.
The problem, however, lay in the fact there were not countless earthshattering news stories occuring, and instead I was feeding my head a steady diet of empty calories and vapid images.
I realized that I needed to take a more active role in what filled my brain, and made a conscious decision that I was either going to watch something, or that the tv would simply be turned off.
Tomorrow, I'll share where we are today.

It’s always wonderful when someone swaps with you and you see something from your wishlist :)
I actually brewed this twice before I left for work. Drank around 16oz of it and then took about 12oz with me to work in my thermos. This is a solid green tea. Smooth and strong enough to have a distinct taste that confirms its quality.
I’ve had greens that were better and greens that were much worse, but what I like most about this is the ability to drink a lot in a sitting without any issues of mouth feel.

New address: 24 Farnsworth Street, Boston, MA 02210-1409.
Adapted from The Empty Pot by Demi (New York: Henry Holt, 1990); permission pending.
Long, long ago, the Emperor of an ancient land was old and dying. He loved children but had none of his own. So the Emperor decided to choose one of the children of his land to be the next Emperor.
The Emperor also loved plants, and of these, he had many. So nobody was surprised by the test he offered the children of the land.
The Emperor called all the children to his palace. He said, “I will give one seed to each of you. Come back in one year. When I see what you have grown from your seeds, I will choose the next Emperor.”
The children ran from the palace smiling. All they had to do was grow a seed and they would be Emperor. But a year is a long time. Most of the children decided to wait a while to do their planting, and as the year went by, many children forgot their seeds.
But one child, a boy named Chen, took care of his seed right away. Just like the Emperor himself, Chen loved plants. Chen carefully carried the Emperor's seed home, sealing it securely in his hands so it wouldn't fall, but not so tightly that it might crush.
As soon as he got home, Chen found a clay pot made by his Grandfather. He thought that pot would be just right to grow his seed. He washed the pot and dried it carefully. Next Chen found rich, black soil that had many worms in it to make it nourishing. Chen filled the pot with the soil. Then he planted his seed, carefully covering it with the soil.
Chen set the pot in the sun. Each day, he lightly sprinkled water on the seed. But nothing grew from the seed. Nothing at all.
Some weeks went by. The other children boasted to each other of the wonderful large plants they had grown, but Chen’s seed did not grow. He tried moving the pot to another window. He tried watering his plant more, and even singing to his plant. But no matter what Chen did, his seed did not grow.
Then, a year had passed. It was time to return to the Emperor. Chen was ashamed that his seed had not grown.
His wise Grandfather said, “You did your best, Chen. You were caring and patient. Be honest with the Emperor and explain that you did your best. It will be enough.”
So Chen returned to the palace with his empty pot held carefully in his arms. The children lined up to present their plants. The first child had a large plant with thick leaves, a ginseng plant that could be used to make paper and medicine. The next child had a eucalyptus plant, a healthy, strong plant that soon would become a tree big enough to produce food for many animals. By the time Chen’s turn came, he was so sad about his empty pot.
Feeling very embarrassed, Chen held his empty pot up for the Emperor to see. Chen explained how he had lovingly cared for his seed. Chen talked about his love for his Grandfather who had made the pot. He told the Emperor everything he had done to care for the seed, and how sad he felt that the seed would not grow.
The Emperor smiled and spoke. “There is only one among you who is honest enough to be the Emperor,” he said. “The seeds that I gave you had been boiled so they would never grow. These wonderful plants some children have shown me did not come from the seeds I gave them.”
Now some of the other children looked ashamed, because they had not been honest. And the Emperor knew it. “Only one child cared for the seed even when it did not grow,” the Emperor said. “Only Chen gave the seed all it needed and asked for nothing. Only Chen was honest enough to show me an empty pot. Chen will be the new Emperor.”
Chen moved to the Emperor’s palace with his Grandfather. The old Emperor taught him many things, about gardening and much more. And when the Emperor died, he was smiling, because he knew that Chen would care for his land with love and honesty.
For more information contact email@example.com.
This work is made possible by the generosity of individual donors and congregations.
Please consider making a donation today.
Last updated on Friday, May 17, 2013.
Sidebar Content, Page Navigation
More Ways to Search
Donate to Support This Program and the Ongoing Work of the UUA
Read or subscribe to UUA.org Updates for the latest additions to our site.
Learn more about the Beliefs & Principles of Unitarian Universalism, or read our online magazine, UU World, for features on today's Unitarian Universalists. Visit an online UU church, or find a congregation near you.

Best ride ever! We spent an early Sunday morning on miles 34 to 45 of the trail between Leesburg and Purcellville. It was a great experience. Purcellville was basically closed when we arrived but still a cute little downtown. The trail ride had many views that did not disappoint. Well worth the time.

I know it isn’t Friday anymore, but this post was intended as my Friday post, so for me, it doesn’t matter what day it really is right now. I got behind last week – with everything! I don’t even know how it happened. I was busy the whole week, but it seems like nothing that I wanted to get done got done. Probably being away from home three days out of the five had a little something to do with it.
It was our winter break and I had high hopes of organizing, bottling wine, and taking care of my hair, in addition to grading papers and making a dress. Out of all of those things, I organized one cabinet in my bedroom, went through some clothes, got my hair cut -which I am not happy with – and that was about it. What else did I do then? Like I mentioned, I spent lots of time away from home. I was visiting friends and it was nice not to have a schedule or to feel like I had to rush home to be somewhere, or do something else for once.
Currently, I am a little annoyed about my daily journal situation, so as it goes now, I am making every effort to use these Friday posts (that sometimes happen on Monday) as little reminders of what I was up to each week – as unspecific as they may be. What happened is that I couldn’t find the daily journal for 2016 that I wanted from Amazon. Can you believe that? It’s not on Amazon, how could it even be… And I haven’t had the time to make it to an office store where I am sure I will find one. Walmart just won’t cut it for that item – I know cause I’ve looked – and Walmart is all this town really has. In the mean time, in addition to my Friday blurbs of the week over here, I am making due with a regular old undated, notebook-style journal that I have. I wrote most of my 2008, and then a little bit of 2010 in it, and since there is plenty of room for 2016, I thought I’d use it temporarily. It was really taking me back in time the other night when I was reading about all that had gone on those years. I had a little boy back then that played with cars. Now, this young man of mine is talking about driving them. Eight years really went by too fast!
Well, enough of that. I don’t want to get all emotional, and I was just pointing out why I didn’t skip this post that is already several days late. As far as today, we were back to our regular school schedule after our week off, and just like a normal Monday, it has been a busy one. I am briefly catching up here before I get ready for tomorrow and finish up what needs to be done around the house to be able to call it a day. I have my mind set on getting more sleep this week, I really need it, and that starts tonight…
Categories: Dear Diary 2016

This week, Boing Boing is presenting a series of essays about movies that have had a profound effect on our invited essayists. See all the essays in the Mind Blowing Movies series here. -- Mark
Mind Blowing Movies: Bimbo's Initiation (1931), by Jim Woodring
[Video Link] I might have come to grips with the overwhelming mystery of life in a rational, organic manner if it weren't for a cartoon I saw on my family's old black and white TV in the mid '50s when I was three or four years old. This cartoon rang a bell so loud that I can still feel its reverberations.
It was "Bimbo's Initiation," produced by the Fleischer Brother Studios in 1931. I won't attempt to describe it; you can see it online. It's an ingenious piece of work, made by men who I now realize were well aware of its metaphysical content, as evidenced in part by the use of Offenbach's Orpheus in the Underworld in the soundtrack. Perhaps its creators were trying to amuse themselves by making a cartoon that combined madcap whimsy with philosophical depth. Or maybe they were just high. Whatever their motivation and intent, "Bimbo's Initiation" became my prime symbolic interpreter, the foundation of my life's path and endlessly exploding bomb at the core of my creative output.
The reason that cartoon affected me as strongly as it did was that I thought it was real, that it depicted events that were happening in my neighborhood. I set out to find those rooms, those implements, that bicycle, that pool. I got a reputation as the little boy who looked into everything. Whenever I went into someone else's home the first thing I would do, if I could, was look behind their drapes.
Consequently I missed a lot of things that were actually going on, which caused me a lot of grief, one way and another. The pleasurable intensity of the delusion was well worth any trouble that resulted from it, though... and as I say, it gave me a livelihood.

TEMPE, Ariz. -- Police are trying to find the person who set fire to a car in the parking lot of a Tempe apartment complex early Thursday morning.
It happened at about 12:30 a.m. at the Versante Apartments near Priest Drive and Broadway Road.
Video from the scene showed the charred remains of a Chrysler Sebring. The flames spread to the car parked next to it.
The owners of the cars spotted the fire from their second-story window. They called 911 and said firefighters were on the scene quickly.
Several apartments were evacuated for a short time as a precaution, but fire crews kept the flames from spreading to the building.
A third vehicle several spaces away was involved, as well. The fire could not have spread there on its own. That's one reason investigators believe this to be a case of arson.
Andrew Kotalik's roommate owns the torched Sebring. It was his car that was parked next to it. He said he does not think he and his roommate were targeted.
"We don't know anyone around here," Kotalik said. "I honestly think it was a random act of vandalism."
At this point, police do not have any suspects in the case.
While Versante is gated, it does not have security cameras. Residents say new management removed them about a year ago.
If you know anything about the car fire, please call the Tempe Police Department at 480-350-8311.

Lots to write about, but not up to it.
We spent two days in Daytona, and I have two more restaurants to write about. Tonight, I went to a restaurant in Ybor to meet with a friend and damn if he didn't nail an amazing one. (I've yet to encounter a dud over there, BTW.)
However, I had that long-awaited MRI today and this one knocked me for a loop. I had a headache that was a 4/10 before I went into the tube, was about an 8/10 afterwards and well, the magnetic field just hammered my balance and left me woozy. It was a darn good thing I had that dinner date with my friend James, because I certainly wasn't good for an hour drive home!
I have a follow up in a week, but this is one image from today's film. The software doesn't work on a Mac, so I captured images and emailed them from Chef's computer. However, I now know what I'm supposed to be seeing on the cross section, so I'm about to go look at the nerve compression on between C5 and C6.
Does it surprise you at all that I am trying to see what the doctor is going to tell me next week?

I stayed up late last night watching Heroes and The Office. Ha. I'm such a nerd. I'm having a nice time just sitting around my boyfriend's apartment with my cats. :D
I did get a new photo from Marcus Hyde yesterday from when we shot about a month ago. It was pretty random and unexpected. But then we scheduled another date for February. So yay.
It's a very lovely shot. I likes it a lot. :D
I also have a lot of images back from my trip to NY last weekend. So here we go again, with more really awesome images. :D Yaaaayy.
Photos by Paul Tirado Photography. I hung out with him and Max Saturday night before the event and we took these photos in the hotel room. It was fun, haha. Never really shot in a hotel and actually used what was literally set infront of us. :D
Photo by MB Photo 13. Another shot of playing by the pool. He never ceases to amaze me. I'm currently planning a trip to NYC for maybe sometime in April hopefully. He is definitely on my list on who I want to work with while I'm up there.
Photo by Christopher Griese. While I was in NY, I stayed 'till Monday (this is also when I worked with Alien Life.) I forgot to mention where we were shooting, I'm not entirely sure the location since I followed people there, but it was a really cool abandoned building, and it was freezing outside. But Chris and I got some really cool, haunting like shots.
Photo by Randy Tay. We shot this on Monday as well. He was a really funny guy. These shots maybe took 2 minutes, haha.
I'm gonna post some wishlists soon for my birthday. xD Haha.

Sharpe James is a man many loved to hate. He belongs to a despised class -- politicians -- and it didn't help his popularity in some places in New Jersey that he is African-American. So, although he is going to prison for more than two years for failing to disclose an affair with a city contractor, we still hear screams he got too light a sentence.
And that's why Sharpe's son, Maj. John James, 40, is fighting for his country in Afghanistan.
James the younger might not put it that way, but it's true. If there is any good reason for fighting a war -- and I'm not sure there is, if one can be avoided -- it is this: to preserve our Constitution.
The Constitution is what guaranteed Sharpe James due process of law when he was indicted. It guaranteed he wouldn't be tried on some vague charge of being a "corrupt politician"-- a charge many, including federal prosecutors, apparently think exists.
It also guaranteed that he would not get an outrageously long sentence -- despite the apparent popularity of such a move -- and would get an appellate review of his case. The beauty of the Constitution is that it protects individuals from the worst excesses of democracy, because it insists on the rule of the law instead of the rule of the mob.
And for what it's worth, it guarantees the right of all those expressing their chagrin and worse at the perceived brevity of the sentence.
John James, a major in the New Jersey National Guard, spoke to me within minutes of his father's sentencing. He called from Herat, Afghanistan, where he had been hovering over a laptop, hitting the "refresh" button, waiting for the news to break online about the fate of his father.
"I just sat here, waiting," says John James, who is recovering from an injury he received from a roadside explosive device last month.
The younger James says he followed the case online from Afghanistan and spoke frequently with his father and mother during the trial.
"It's been very disheartening," he says. "My father has taken the blame for everything that's gone wrong in Newark and rarely gets any of the credit."
He says he was upset about the prospect of his father going to jail -- and going before John has the chance to see him.
His father's surrender date and the date of John's return to the States from active duty are the same: Sept. 15.
"I want to be able to be with him and my mother and the rest of my family before he has to surrender," says John. "I love my father, and I am proud of the many great things he's done for Newark."
I asked him how he felt that the same government for which he was fighting in Afghanistan had prosecuted his father and was sending him to jail.
"I love my country," says John James, an officer who has spent 22 years in the military. "I want to fight for it. This is what I do. I guess I can separate out what some parts of the government do from others."
John James knew prosecutors were seeking up to 20 years in jail for his father, and that frightened him.
"That would be a life sentence," he says of his 72-year-old father.
But he also knew his father's case would be overseen by an independent judiciary -- and an independent judge, William Martini. And he knew the Constitution guaranteed his father the right to have independent counsel.
John James is himself an attorney -- and knows all that is part of the country he is fighting for.
"If he had been sentenced to 20 years, he would never live to see his grandchildren," he says.
With the 27-month sentence James received, that looks like more of a possibility. John is married, but he has no children.
"I was planning on taking care of that as soon as I got back home."

I Don’t Regret This Love
Shared by Maria.
Online Dating is a tricky realm to maneuver. I resisted for the longest time, thinking of my dreams for true deep love, and believing that I wouldn’t and couldn’t find such a thing on the internet. Well, I caved and started a profile. I am old-fashioned in some ways but I figured if no one was messaging me I would put myself out there. So it went that things went unanswered, but I never wavered figuring my time creating a profile was worth something, that I was worth something. Finally, I got a response from someone I liked- let’s call him Mr. Eager. He was so eager that by the third date (yes we actually got to date three) he had managed to scare me completely out of the relationship. A month later I was on the site and about to sign off and go to sleep because I’d been saying that for the past hour. A photo caught my eye. So I perked up and read the entire profile. I decided, I’ve sent so many messages as it is why not send one his way. The next morning was October 24th, and I was so excited because my birthday was in two days and my twin was coming to visit.
I signed on the site, now a daily routine, like my coffee, and saw that the man with the photograph that jolted me wide awake the previous evening had not only responded, but sent an extremely kind and positive message. I burst with excitement. This wasn’t just another guy acting sly, he liked my profile and expressed as much. Our correspondence back and forth became a deep emotional phase of my life. We talked on the phone a few times, but spent hours on Skype chat. He was personal, raw, inviting, kind, funny, comforting, and the biggest thing was when we finished talking for the evening, I slept like I didn’t have a care in the world. My dreams were peaceful and often involved him. Early into the communication he wanted to meet, but I wasn’t ready so we decided to give it time. The fact that he didn’t stop talking to me like others have when I wasn’t quick to meet meant a lot to me. Our first meeting was like something out of a fairytale that has an eventual back ending.
I remember him coming in his Honda and how nervous I was. I didn’t even feel the cold, I was so warm from the nerves. He emerged from his car and he gave me a giant hug. That followed by my confusion as he opened my door for me. I admit I was shocked by this gesture but I smiled and we drove off to the train station. I wasn’t used to men opening doors and I felt really happy all of a sudden. I have fond memories of us talking and laughing but what struck me most is how he was willing to be miserable in the cold, (8 degrees before wind chill) so I could see the parade. He was kind and honest as we chatted away in the café to warm up. He seemed to really open up and share things with me. I’ll never forget leaving his car perhaps too quickly and him saying Wait! I stopped. Can I see you again? He said with uncertainty in his voice. I simply nodded as I could not get a word to come out.
We had several more dates where he was kind, compassionate, and understood my medical condition but suddenly my fairytale was over. Despite the connection and bond we had made. Despite the way he caressed me cheek. On Christmas day, like a soap opera, it was so pathetic but it happened. He back petaled on everything and wanted to remain friends. I agreed but with the hope that he’d change his mind. It is now August, time has since passed. I still feel love towards him. However, I wish I was told in person and in black and white. Was he wrong to break things to me the way he did? Or am I a weak person? Should I regret this love? I don’t. Because it means I have the capacity to love unconditionally. I can only imagine how strong my love will be once the feelings of love are mutual. I recently reached out looking for answers but found none. So that is where I will leave it. I understand that no answer is my answer. I realize that may not make sense but by expressing my emotions I feel I said my peace and that was so liberating for me.
Do you have a story you’d like to share? Please Share your Heartbeat! We would love to post your story so others can chip in and help.

Old Liu slowly lowered his gun while crying and Old Wang comforted him. "Don't be afraid. One shot to the head and everything will be finished."
"It's just you who’d be finished!" Old Liu protested. "The blood and brain matter would splatter all over me. I’d have so much trauma. I still need to shoot myself too."
"Aiya, who can you blame for your bad luck!"
"Gentleman, gentleman!" Deputy chief Yan asked, "Do we have to solve the problem with death? I want to ask something. How much do you still have to pay for the surgery?"
"Two hundred thousand!"
"Three hundred thousand!"
"That's half a million then. I'll go back and communicate with the hospital. We’ll get the hospital to subsidize half. That’s 250,000! The 250,000 is then divided into two halves. The police will donate half of that to you and then the rest would be afforded by you and your children. Will that work?"
The two old men looked at each other and asked, "Are you really willing to pay that money?"
"We’re the police. Why should we lie to you? If we’ve said it, we’ll do it!"
Old Liu shed tears. "Forget it. It’s better to die. It’s as if we’re here trying to scam this money.”
"Don't do it. Let’s say this is for us. The money problem is easy to solve. There are hundreds of people in the Public Security Bureau and it’s enough if each of us donates a few hundred. It’s better to be alive than dead. You two are only just over 60. You still have a lot of life left in you two!”
Old Wang looked at Old Liu. The two hesitated and deputy chief Yan slowly walked over. "I will definitely solve the problem for you, so put down the gun, okay?"
Lin Qiupu, who was watching this scene behind the door, wiped away the sweat that covered his forehead. The air seemed to freeze, and deputy chief Yan approached slowly while he was comforting them. He walked in front of Old Liu and took the pistol from his hand. Then, he quickly ejected the bullets.
Deputy chief Yan was relieved and said, "Hurry back to the ward!"
"Mm... You’re not arresting us?" Old Wang asked.
"You’re not criminals. Go back. The roof is really cold!" Deputy chief Yan said kindly.
"Thank you, thank you, officers!"
The incident was finally resolved safely. Everyone was relieved, and deputy chief Yan got into Lin Qiupu's car. He lit a cigarette with approval, saying, "In fact, it's not that big of a deal. If it weren't for this gun, we might not have had to come forward."
Lin Qiupu checked the gun. "This is indeed one of the missing guns... Shall we go to the hospital to negotiate now?"
"What for? Let’s go back."
"You just said..."
"Oh, those were just lies. If I didn’t say that, would he put the gun down?"
Lin Qiupu looked at his former teacher in disbelief. "Teacher Yan, this... This doesn’t seem very good. Their problems have not been solved. What if they jump off the building or take drugs later?"
"That is the responsibility of the hospital. It has nothing to do with us." Deputy chief Yan said coldly.
"I'll talk to the hospital!"
"Come back!" Deputy chief Yan stopped him. Realizing that he was acting too cold, his tone became softer. "Little Lin, you’re still too young and have experienced very few things. I see dozens of such suicides every year. Ninety-nine percent of it is due to money. Should we take out our wallets and pay for it every time? In that case, if patients don’t have money and act out a suicide play, what would the police become? A non-profit organization?”
"However, since you agreed, leaving them be would be so pitiful."
"What is the ultimate purpose of negotiation?"
"Resolving the crisis!"
"You remember it very clearly. Besides, now that medicine is so advanced, not everyone can afford this kind of financial burden. If all people have unlimited treatment, any country would go bankrupt. It’s their own business to afford medical expenses. We are just here to resolve the crisis and not solve the fundamental problems for them! I know these words are a bit cruel, but this is our job! Okay, don’t bear the psychological burden and just drive!"
A bitter taste was left in Lin Qiupu’s mouth. He was silent the whole way back. When he returned to the bureau, deputy chief Yan greeted the chief. Lin Qiupu returned to his office and sent a message to the second team. "Donate to those two old people!"
Someone replied, "Didn't deputy chief Yan say we didn't need to donate?"
Lin Qiupu stubbornly replied, "If I say we need to donate, then we need to donate. Everyone needs to donate over two hundred!”
No one dared to complain. They transferred money one after another. Among them, there was a thousand yuan donation from Chen Shi. In the end, there was probably more than 30,000, but it was like using a cup of water trying to save a truck full of hay.
Lin Qiupu asked someone to send the money to the old men and asked his subordinates to communicate with the hospital to see if it was possible. If it wasn’t, that was fine. He also asked them to see if they could help them by raising funds through the Internet.
After doing this, he finally felt more comfortable in his heart. The police really couldn’t solve the fundamental problems of society. This was just a little charity from him as an individual.
It was already 2:00 in the afternoon at this time and they could finally have the time to have a bite to eat. Deputy chief Yan was at the lunch table chatting away happily with the second team. Lin Qiupu was still feeling a little sour in his heart, so he silently ate and didn’t talk.
Deputy chief Yan was stationed in the task force for the time being. He was responsible for responding to various critical situations. After all, there was no better negotiation expert than him in the entire city. He was experienced and had handled hundreds of kidnapping and suicide cases.
Amidst these busy days, this afternoon was unexpectedly calm. There were no emergency reports and no gunfire was heard in the city.
Captain Bi of the third team analyzed that the first batch of people who got guns and tried them without thinking were almost all captured. The next group was the most dangerous group. They had guns on them and they had people that they wanted to kill in their hearts. They were looking for opportunities to kill.
At 5:00 in the afternoon, an emergency report was called in saying that there was a shooting situation at a high school and two students were shot. Everyone was startled when they heard the news. They didn't expect it to happen on a school campus.
A large number of policemen were immediately dispatched to the school. At this time, it was summer vacation. Most of the students didn’t come to take classes. Only the students that were in the second grade going onto the third grade of high school had supplementary classes. The school forced this in order to raise their rate of grade-promotion.
Teachers and school workers were evacuating students. A teacher explained the situation while leading the way. The high school student named Wang Xu was armed. The child was in a complicated situation. His father was sentenced to prison-time for robbery before and his mother didn’t hold a serious occupation. His grades were bad, but every time they wanted to meet his parents, his mom would refuse to show up. It seemed like she didn’t care about his school situation at all.
Deputy chief Yan asked, "What about students who were shot?"
"One is called Liu Dong and the other is Ma Fei. They are all students in my class. Liu Dong got a shot in the chest and has been sent to get emergency care. Ma Fei is in the classroom right now. He seems to have also been shot. Wang Xu is also there... I don’t understand where he got the real gun. It scares me to death.”
"When did the shooting happen?"
"During the third class, I heard two bangs and ran over to see Liu Dong falling down outside the classroom, all covered in blood. The children were terrified and ran straight out."
Deputy chief Yan gestured for the other policemen not to come forward. He went to the door of the classroom alone, but the door was closed. He knocked a few times and said, "Wang Xu, I'm a policeman. I want to talk to you. Will you let me in?"
There was no sound inside. The classroom curtains were drawn. Deputy chief Yan put his ears on the door to listen. He heard a boy crying, so it seemed like the hostage was still alive.
Previous Chapter Next Chapter

Everything was set for Tiger Woods and Boris Becker to hit off at the first in the pro-am prior to this week's Deutsche Bank SAP Open. Assorted dignitaries were lined up to meet the two sportsmen when, all of a sudden, Miguel Martin arrived on the tee.
The Spaniard, whose group still had one hole left over from the morning pro-am rounds, cannot have felt more unwanted since Seve Ballesteros kicked him off the 1997 Ryder Cup side.
If a little reluctantly, the security men let him play. He and his companions then launched into their drives at the speed of light in order to clear the decks.
Such is the fuss that still surrounds Woods that it is not too difficult to understand why he should have opted for scuba diving by way of a new hobby. "So far," he said, wryly, "no fish has asked me for an autograph."
The German press seldom mind what they ask the World No 1. Two years ago, they wanted to know what he thought of German history. Woods replied that much of what he had heard was not very good.
Yesterday, someone asked what effect it would have on his game if he were to marry. Woods's response was that the right woman could only enhance his performance.
In the light of all the caddie confusion from last week, he was also called upon to explain the relationship he has with his caddie, Steve Williams.
"Stevie and I are player-caddie but we are great friends, too," he said, before coming up with some American-speak which left the German translators somewhat baffled. "I can get in his kitchen and he can get in mine. It's okay because we are great friends and you accept that."
Woods had plenty to say on the subject of new technology and the latest edict from the USGA and the R&A. Though happy that the two bodies have come to an agreement over thin-faced clubs boasting the so-called springboard effect, he wishes they had hit on it sooner. Again, while he approves of the illegal clubs being banned for professional players from next January, he does not agree with amateurs being given an extra five years in which to use them.
Moving on to golf balls, he would like to see them capped at their current distance levels but would be totally against any reduction in length. "It would be wrong for us to go backwards," he maintained.
Woods, who has been given a Maserati where most of the rest are driving around in Skodas, was asked for his views on this year's Ryder Cup. Did he think that it would be something of an anti-climax after so long a wait?
To him, September 11, 2001 will loom large over proceedings. "If that weren't the case, I don't think we would be doing justice to how big a tragedy it was," he said.
Everyone, including Bernhard Langer, has been saying that the new lay-out at St Leon-Rot - 16 new holes have been sandwiched between the old first and the 18th - favours Woods and John Daly. Who else, asks Langer, would have the chance of driving par fours such as the 348 yards eighth and the 343 yards 14th?
Yesterday, Daly drew a crowd of interested onlookers for a practice session in which he hit a bucket of balls with his left hand alone. Then it was on to the practice putting green where, armed with a putter and a cigarette, he went through a routine of putt, puff, putt, puff which lasted a good 20 minutes.
Meanwhile, Colin Montgomerie and Darren Clarke ended up in the physiotherapy van. Montgomerie was feeling twinges from the back problem which forced him to withdraw from the Johnnie Walker in January. He was confident that the twinges would not develop into anything worse.
Clarke, for his part, was nursing a sore upper leg. The assumption was that it had something to do with his fitness work, but no. On Monday when he was out fishing, he bent down to remove the hook from a trout's mouth when his thigh gave way.
His peers have been suggesting he should take up something less strenuous.
Click here for betting opportunities on GOLF.

They were very patient and helpful we really enjoyed working with her and I appreciate her input on everything.
I had horrible pain all weekend. I called Monday morning and was told to come right in. I left the office with no pain. Everyone was very nice and understanding. I'll be back.
As always, I feel my pets are in good hands when I bring them to All About Pets for any illness or scheduled health maintenance.
I want to thank Dr. Mann and his great staff at Aborn Pet Hospital. The go above and beyond to help Rescue Groups and their Animals. We all know that not all our animals can be saved or protected from the illness's that can be contracted at shelters and poor living conditions. However, Dr. Mann and his staff do everything possible to save their lives
Management has always been very responsive to my questions and concerns. I have been very impressed with the manager, and the assistant manager who attended our last few meetings as well. Even if an item was brought up and no one answered it yet, they would take a note to follow up.
They took there time to make sure we understood every step in our used car purchase. They made sure we were happy thru the time we spend at the dealership, made sure we were comfortable, and got us all that was promised to us. I would use this dealership again.
Love the work you all put into this. Great job! :)
Lovely vintage place with a great pool in a perfect location in Carmel Valley.
Amazing!!! Thanks a lot Aaron, everything was much appreciated!
Tillett's Automotive puts their customer first. Thanks for the quick appointment and service I received.

President slams Democrats over Cohen timing, names him a liar
WASHINGTON —President Donald Trump slammed Democrats during a news conference Thursday for having scheduled the testimony of his former attorney Michael Cohen during his summit with North Korea and accused Cohen of lying.
“I think having a fake hearing like that and having it in the middle of this very important summit is really a terrible thing. They could’ve made it two days later or next week,” Trump said. “But having it during this very important summit is sort of incredible.”
Trump awoke in Vietnam on Thursday while US newscasts were still picking through Cohen’s unsparing testimony. The President did not address the specific allegations Cohen leveled against him, but said his former adviser “lied a lot.”
The President’s comments were his first on the matter since Cohen sat before the House Oversight Committee, a stunning testimony that upstaged Trump’s high-wire diplomacy in Hanoi.
During his seven hours of testimony, Cohen accused Trump of being a “racist,” a “conman” and a “cheat.” He claimed that Trump was aware during the 2016 campaign of his longtime political adviser Roger Stone’s communications with WikiLeaks about the release of hacked Democratic emails. And once again — this time before the cameras — he implicated Trump in federal crimes.
“He lied a lot,” Trump said. “He lied about so many different things.”
Still, Trump said he was “impressed” that Cohen told the truth when asked about collusion between the Trump campaign and Russia, claiming that Cohen said there was no collusion. Cohen said he did not have evidence of collusion between the Trump campaign and Russia, but did not unequivocally say it did not take place.
Cohen’s congressional testimony did more than draw attention away from his summit with North Korean leader Kim Jong Un. It also amounted to a distraction for the President himself, who tweeted about Cohen’s testimony between meetings on Wednesday and then turned on the TV to watch himself after returning from dinner with Kim.
“I tried to watch as much as I could,” he said during his news conference on Thursday, though he said he “wasn’t able to watch too much because I was a little busy.”
During a break in meetings on Wednesday, President Trump took to Twitter to slam his longtime top former aide as a lying, unreliable witness.
“Michael Cohen was one of many lawyers who represented me (unfortunately). He had other clients also. He was just disbarred by the State Supreme Court for lying & fraud. He did bad things unrelated to Trump. He is lying in order to reduce his prison time. Using Crooked’s lawyer!” Trump tweeted, falsely claiming Cohen’s testimony before Congress would help reduce his prison time.
After returning from his dinner with Kim, as Cohen laced into his former boss, Trump tweeted about his “great meeting and dinner with Kim.”
He then retweeted his earlier Cohen tweet.

Local contempt for an exceptional native man affects an impressionable farm boy.
| Moses Bearskin was dead. Someone had shot him. That was the first thing that Pa and Eddie heard upon their arrival in town. Moses was dead and his funeral would be at two-thirty right there in town in the Anglican Church. The church on the reserve had burned down in the winter so the Indians had to borrow the church in town. “The preacher better nail down the pews,“ Eddie heard someone say. “Them Indians will steal anything that’s loose at both ends.“ But Eddie didn’t think that anyone, not even an Indian, would steal from the church. Especially not at a funeral.
Whoever had shot Moses nobody knew for sure, or at least nobody was saying. It must have been an accident because nobody would shoot old Moses on purpose. Except maybe one of his women. People said that, for an Indian, Moses was pretty good. You could trust him at least some of the time, but not when it came to women. “He’s got more women than a harrow has teeth. And most o’ them is married to someone else. Maybe someone decided that Bearskin was hanging around his wigwam a little too close.”
“Yeah, in his bare skin.“ The speaker guffawed in appreciation of his own wit.
“Well, them days is over for Moses. He’s a good Indian now all right.” Everyone laughed. “Yep, a good Indian is a dead Indian.”
It had been the longest and the heaviest rain that Eddie had ever seen. It had started with a thunderstorm that had knocked out of the telephone, which, Mamma complained, still wasn’t working. And now, after three sodden days, nothing could be done in the fields, so Pa had decided to go to town. “Get Duke and Daisy in from the pasture,“ he had told Eddie. “We better take the team and buggy. We could likely get through with the truck all right, but we’d tear up the road up too bad.“ Eddie hurried to do as he was told. From what his father had said, he understood that he was expected to go along.
“Lucky for me it’s summer holidays,“ he thought.
Mamma had chosen to stay home. “The bread is ready for the oven, “she said. “And maybe with you two out from under my feet, I’ll be able to get some work done. But you can take Ruthie with you. She’d like a trip to town.“
Eddie was not impressed with that. Ruthie was only five and was so shy that she wanted to hold his hand all the time. It was embarrassing. If Ruthie stayed home, he would be free to run off with friends. With all of this rain, there would surely be other farm boys in town. Maybe some from his old school, all looking for company. But he knew there was no use in protesting. If he said anything, he’d be the one to stay home.
And now, in town, everyone was talking about Moses Bearskin and how he had come to be shot. No one had seen him since Saturday morning and then, Monday afternoon, Joe Parker had come across his body in the yard of the old Winstead place. It was Joe who had phoned the police. Because of the muddy roads, the Mounties couldn’t get out there with their car so Joe had to take them with his horse and buggy.
Then Joe had been called on to help Doc Murray with the autopsy. The creek had overflowed and washed out the highway so the doctor had to come from Longacre on the railway jigger. They had laid Moses out bare naked on a table in the back room of the old Wong Lee laundry and the doctor had cut him up to find out for sure what had killed him.
Eddie heard all this from some town boys. They acted so smart because they had so much to tell. Eddie wondered what the town boys would think if they knew that Moses had worked for his dad and had slept in their bunkhouse. He decided not to tell them.
Pa decided to go to the funeral so took Ruthie over to Auntie Barb’s house for the afternoon. “Moses was a good friend,” Pa said. Auntie Barb lived in town and didn’t have any kids. She liked to fuss over Ruthie. That left Eddie free to stay downtown and listen to all the talk on the street. He wished he had heard firsthand from Joe Parker himself and not from those town kids. They thought they were so smart.
But Eddie had known Moses for as long as he could remember. And now Moses was dead. Eddie tried to imagine what Moses would have looked like lying there on the table in the old Wong Lee laundry. He had heard of other people dying, but it was never anyone he knew and never of someone being shot dead. And now it had happened to Moses, someone who had eaten at their table and slept in their bunkhouse. He had been shot and left to die and be rained on in a weedy old farmyard. Who could have done such a thing?
“Prob’ly a bunch of them was havin’ a whoop-up and they got to fightin’. Likely nobody knows who did the shootin’ or even who was there,” a man was saying. “If we could just keep them Indians in bullets ‘n booze for a few years, they’ll settle the Indian problem all by theirselves.”
Pa had often called on Moses when he needed help on the farm. He said that Moses knew more about horses than any dozen other people, white or Indian, all put together. “Moses ain’t a bronco buster,” Pa often said. “He don’t break a horse. He educates it.”
As soon as Daisy’s colt was old enough, Moses was going to take her home to the reserve and train her for riding. “Maybe I should take Eddie to,“ Moses had said. “Then I could train horse and rider at the same time.“ Eddie was glad that Moses was only joking because he wouldn’t want to go and stay on the reserve, not even for one day. The kids at school said that the Indians ate funny things like gophers and frogs – even snakes. And Mamma wouldn’t think much of the idea either. She always worried about fleas and bedbugs whenever Moses was around. And besides, Eddie didn’t think he needed to be taught how to ride a horse, at least not by some old Indian.
At harvest time, Pa always hired Moses for stooking and threshing. “Moses can use the cash,” Pa said. Whenever he could, Eddie would go out to stook with Moses or, if it was threshing time, drive the horses while Moses pitched the sheaves onto the hayrack.
Whenever Moses was there for overnight, Mamma would not allow him to sleep in the house. Not even in winter. “He can sleep in the bunk house,” she insisted. “We don’t need any of those redskin fleas in here.”
“In France,” Pa said, “we was all lousy. The cooties that bit Moses came to him from a bunch of white guys, but I didn’t hear him complain.”
When the threshing crew came in for supper, Moses always sat at the foot of the table. He didn’t ever use his plate the same as everyone else. When the gravy bowl got to him, he would keep it. Then, everything else that he wanted to eat – even his pie – just got dumped in with the gravy. Mamma learned that she’d have to have two gravy bowls, one for Moses and another for everyone else.
When he was young, Moses had gone to a residential school and had learned to read and write. His handwriting was the best that Eddie had ever seen. The words flowed so evenly across the page, with every letter perfectly formed. Even Mamma couldn’t write like that. “You must have had good teachers,” Eddie once said.
Moses didn’t answer right away. He just twisted his mouth a bit and then sort of snorted before he said, “Oh yeah. They taught us Indian kids lots of stuff. Real good.”
Pa would fill a big bucket with bottled beer and lower it down the well to cool. When the harvesters came in from the field, Eddie would help crank the bucket up from the well and bring the cold beer to the house where the men were washing up and waiting for their supper. Eddie had heard Mamma say that it was against the law to give beer to an Indian, but Moses was handed a bottle just the same as everyone else. “He gets thirsty too,” said Pa. “Just don’t say anything about it.”
But Eddie knew that Moses got drunk sometimes. Last Christmas there was a special program in the church. It had just started and the people were singing carols, but it wasn’t going so good because Sadie Metcalf was playing the organ. Sadie could play the piano well enough, but she had never had to play that persnickety old pump organ before and couldn’t seem to get the hang of it. Then Moses stumbled in shouting “Merry Christmas!“ And wanting to shake hands with everybody. “I heard the singin’” he said, “an’ I thought I’d come in an’ sing with you. I like to sing.” And then he started to sing. He sang louder and better than anyone else in the church. He knew the words to all the songs and he just sang until everybody joined in and sang along with him until the preacher said it was time for lunch.
Some people were mad because the program hadn’t gone the way they had planned, but others said it was the best Christmas program they had ever had. Sadie Metcalf said that Moses had saved her from the worst night of her life and she hoped he’d get drunk and come to church every Sunday. “Then we could chop up that wheezy old pump organ for firewood.”
“Moses learned all the songs in school,” Pa said, “and a church school at that. The preacher is lucky that Moses didn’t sing the songs he learned in the army. He can still sing them too after he’s had a couple of drinks. That would have been quite a program.” Pa laughed at the thought.
“They say he was one hell of a soldier,“ a man was saying.
“All them redskins are wild fighters,” said another. “Bloody savages.“
Eddie could hear more fragments of conversation. “He was in the infantry … a regiment outa Regina ...went overseas with a bunch of local fellas… got picked for a sniper… all them Indians is crack shots ... Moses could shoot the balls off of a horsefly from a quarter mile away…”
The funeral service seemed to be over, for Eddie could see a stream of people leaving the church. Yet a large group remained, most of them clustered around the big red grain truck that Eddie recognized as one that Pa had traded in a year ago. There were people, all women it seemed, and all wearing shawls and kerchiefs, seated on benches in the truck box. Information spread along the sidewalk. “They want to bury him out on the reserve… mourners and the coffin are all in the truck… but they can’t get the truck started… they’re gonna get a tow from Hunter’s Garage.”
A few minutes later, another large truck pulled up to stop in front of the first one. Two men got out to attach the chain from the rear of their truck to the front of the other. They got back in their own truck and pulled out into the muddy street towing the improvised hearse with its two rows of mourners seated along the sides. Only their heads and shoulders were visible above the high sides of the truck. Their kerchiefs and shawls gave them a somber uniformity. “Just like crows sitting on a rail,“ he heard someone say.
With motor racing and horn blaring, the strange cortege roared down the street. The windows in the lead truck were open, through which the driver and passenger both waved as they passed by knots of onlookers. They drove around the block, up one street and down the next, through street-wide puddles where great wings of muddy water spewed out from under the wheels, drenching anyone who was slow in getting out of the way.
“Jeezus! Ain’t that a sight! Ol’ Moses is going to glory with a real splash, ain’t he.”
“For sure. It might be a little late, but that’s what I call a real baptism. But lookit! They’re gonna go through that big puddle alongside the Elks Hall. Those women will get soaked.” Then he saw Pa go out and wave the procession down. Pa went back to the Indian truck and spoke to the driver who had emerged from the cab and was trying to clear the windshield. Pa opened the hood and leaned over the fender, reaching down beside the motor.
“That’s Charlie Dorset’s old truck. Charlie never had nothing but trouble with it. It used to go through distributor caps like they was jellybeans. Every few hundred miles she’d just shut down with a crack in the distributor cap. There wasn’t nothing you could do but put on a new one and away she’d go. Hunter got to keepin’ a few on hand all the time just so Charlie could keep his truck on the go.”
Several minutes went by. At last Pa closed the hood on the truck, the drivers resumed their places and the tow once more got underway. This time, the Indian truck started after being pulled only a few yards. The chain was detached and the truck, its passengers now bespattered and wet, wallowed its way out of town.
Eddie went over to join his father. “Is the coffin really in that truck?”
“Yes, it is. And now the truck and everyone in it is in a big dirty mess because of those too damn smart alecs.” He reached in his pocket and pulled out a dollar. “Here, go down to the Chinaman’s and buy some ice cream to take over to Auntie Barb’s. I’ll come up there in a little while. Your ma wants me to pick up a few groceries. But right now I’m going over to Hunter’s Garage. Got something to say over there.”
On the way home, Ruthie chattered about her visit with Auntie Barb. She had marvelled at the sight of the ice cream which came in the same shape as a pound of butter and in three colours – white, pink and brown. Eddie himself wondered what could possibly be next. Pa seemed strangely quiet and gave only curt answers to any remarks directed his way. The afternoon had passed and Mamma would soon be putting supper on the table.
When they turned into the yard, Eddie saw a democrat pulled up beside the barn. Visitors! He wondered who it might be. “Looks like Tony Howard’s buggy,“ said Pa. “Your Mamma’s been sorta expectin’ them to come by.“ Eddie was pleased. The Howards had two sons, both near his age. They would be good company. “So let’s unhitch the horses. You can take the groceries in while I look after Duke and Daisy.“
Ruthie raced to the house, eager to tell Mamma about her visit with Auntie Barb. Eddie took his time. This time, it would be for him to break the news about Moses. And not just to kids, but to grownups too. He considered carefully what he might say. The Howard family knew Moses too. Just in the spring Moses had helped them with seeding. Eddie gathered the bags of groceries, turning over in his mind all that he had heard that afternoon. He headed for the house.
They were all in the kitchen. Mamma, Ruthie, Mr. and Mrs. Howard and both boys. They exchanged greetings. “So. Eddie, what’s the news from town?”
Eddie swelled with importance. He paused. Everyone waited. “Old Moses. That old Moses Bearskin. He’s a good Indian now.”

I booked a ticket through Southall Travels on 8th May to fly to India.
I was charged £3711 for four of us to Chennai and back.
But I was shocked when the ticket showed a price of £2741.36.
This is daylight Robbery. Please can you refund me the monies charged me in excess of £2741.36 immediately,
as there is no reason for me to pay more than the ticket cost.
Secondly, I has 2 kids travelling , aged 4 yrs 11 yrs, but was mentioned as ADULT
in the tickets and We were forced to sit separately because of your mistake.
I was overcharged because of your greediness.
We were forced to sit separately, even though we were travelling together and booked as a group.
I want an apology for the way I was treated.
Refund of the money I paid in excess of £2741.36.

It amazes me how calm these guys sound on tape. Me, personally, if I was piloting a plane that was about to land in the middle of the Hudson River I'd be in freak out mode!
True story. My minister's son-in-law was on this plane. As you can imagine, he told his dad that there was quite a bit of panic onboard. A pregnant woman was knocked down as passengers rushed to the exit. The son, who is a big strong guy, picked up the woman and told everyone on the plane..."Move." Thanks to him, she was the first one off!

I had traveled to another town and my brother stayed at home with my computer, and he made use of hack, and he got banned with MY account, because I let my login credentials saved in the launcher.
I returned today from the trip. When I tried to log and I found that I was banned, I went to see what it was ... Z = Permaban
My previous account
Cabo_Jorge (The first time I was banned, my brother had a keylogger installed in my computer, then the reason for the game to recognize as a hack
My new account that recently got banned because of my IP
Coleby (I created this account to try to play again away from my brother, but this was also banned because of my IP)
ZloFenix, can you help me, or at least better explain the ban situation?
EDIT: the .dll that the game recognized was csrss.dll, and it was in my System32 folder

When Jonathon Scott Fuqua was 13 years old, he and his older brother put on their swimming trunks and went surfing during a Florida hurricane.
The wind bent the palm trees rimming the Gulf of Mexico nearly double, like boomerangs. The teens were buffeted by waves as tall as a house. During a brief rest on a sandbar, Scott looked over his shoulder and saw a huge shark silhouetted in the water about 15 feet away. He was certain that any moment, razor-sharp teeth would close around his calves and pull him under.
As he began to swim hard for the shore, he held tight to the image in his mind's eye of a place with firm footing and abundant oxygen.
If his determination never wavered, perhaps that's because he'd spent his entire life out-maneuvering his own self-doubt — a predator that was faster than any shark and just as deadly.
That was more than 30 years ago. Fuqua has become a husband, father and respected author who writes and illustrates children's books. When the school year starts later this month, his newest novel, "Calvert the Raven in the Battle of Baltimore" will become recommended reading for fourth- and fifth-graders throughout Maryland who are studying the War of 1812.
At age 47, he's still determined to master the most difficult challenges he can devise. He's the same kid who, despite very real danger and debilitating fears, didn't give up on himself.
As he puts it: "I never want people to think I'm taking the easy way out."
Fuqua is color-blind and can't distinguish between red and green. So he became a children's book artist who in one illustration might use seven different shades of red and 13 minute variations of green.
He's dyslexic, which means his brain jumbles the order in which he sees letters on a page, making it as difficult to discern meanings as if the words were written in Cyrillic.
So he chose a career that consists of nothing but arranging letters in their proper order. His 16th work of fiction, a Gothic thriller for teens, will be published in March.
In college, Fuqua was diagnosed with bipolar disorder after experiencing two breakdowns. His books not only deal candidly with his childhood demons, but he also visits schools to talk about his struggle with mental illness.
More recently, the discovery of three crumbling neck vertebrae has resulted in four spinal surgeries in three years, months of recovery, infections, a lifetime regimen of antibiotics to suppress harmful bacteria, and recurring pain.
So earlier this week, he and his 10-year-old took an 18-mile bike ride.
"He pushes himself to the edge of scary and difficult things," says Cary Monet, Fuqua's mother. "He tests himself constantly."
Because Fuqua is sensitive to the plight of the bullied and discriminated-against, his novels often have an underlying theme of political or social justice.
"If someone is downtrodden," he says, "I care."
His first novel, "The Reappearance of Sam Webber" about an 11-year-old boy combating depression, was chosen by the city of Peoria, Ill., in 2003 for its One City, One Book reading program. "Darby," a story of racism in a small Southern town, earned an approving mention on "The Today Show" in 2002. "The Willoughby Spit Wonder," which deals with a parent's fatal illness, was described by a reviewer from the Boston Globe as "the kind of novel, by turns comical, haunting, and thrilling, that comes only once in a blue moon."
In January, Fuqua visited Craig Whiteford's fourth-grade class at McDonogh School. He showed the class original illustrations from "Calvert the Raven," a picture book about a bored kid who gets a bird's-eye view of the bombardment of Fort McHenry. Fuqua discussed his motivations, his techniques and the obstacles he'd faced when he was in the fourth grade.
"The kids adore him," Whiteford says.
"They couldn't get enough of him. He told the kids, 'I had dyslexia and I hated school and I thought I was stupid.' Look at me now. I get to play all day long.'
"The kids in my class who were struggling were hanging on every word he said."
One way or another, most of Fuqua's novels involve a journey into the past, whether to an earlier historical period or to the author's childhood.
Several of Fuqua's main characters are in the fifth grade. That's when he first began showing signs of mental illness during the stressful period when his parents divorced.
The rupture was difficult for everyone, but especially hard on young Scott, Monet says. He recalls raised voices, unpredictable adult behavior and angry outbursts that left him terrified.
It didn't help that Fuqua's father was a military man who traveled around the world. Fuqua was born in Germany and moved about a dozen times before his 14th birthday.
It also didn't help that his only brother, now a microbiologist, was a "phenomenon," as Fuqua says, or that his only sister, now a nurse-practitioner, was a "genius" while he struggled to read and to perform basic math. It wasn't until he was a sophomore in college that his dyslexia was diagnosed.
Until then, he just thought he was dumb.
"When I entered first grade, my teachers thought I would be just like my brother," he says.
"But my grades were terrible. Nobody could figure out what the problem was. It was a great mortification for my father. From a young age, I could pick up a pencil and draw anything I wanted. But my father dismissed that as a secondary feminine characteristic."
Fuqua had his first breakdown in the seventh grade. For four months, he barely slept. He became convinced that "Star Trek" was putting bad thoughts into his head and making him go crazy. He was so lonely as he wandered through the house at 3 a.m. that he would call the time-of-day recording just to hear a human voice.
He saw a therapist and was placed on tranquilizers, but they didn't dent his pain. He learned later that standard drugs used to combat depression are ineffective in treating bipolar disorder.
"When I think of those years now," Fuqua says, "I see them as film strips. The parts that are from the time when I was depressed have melted and burned."
Monet was beside herself with worry. It hurt her that her sensitive middle child was so sad. And nothing could convince her that he wasn't every bit as smart as his brother and sister.
"My mother trusted in my intelligence completely," Fuqua says, "and she constantly reassured me that there was a smart person in there."
After the family moved to Florida and Fuqua entered his teens, his illness temporarily receded. But when he was a junior at Virginia's College of William and Mary, he again became severely depressed. He bought a gun. Two days later, he said, he walked into the school's psychiatric clinic and asked, "Is it normal for a person to want to die and to think about doing it?"
Fuqua was immediately hospitalized. He temporarily dropped out of college, was diagnosed with bipolar disorder and began taking lithium.
"Within a week, I was an absolutely new person," he says. "It was amazing. For the first time in my life, when I went to bed at night, I knew who I was going to be when I woke up."
He'll be the first to admit that he still struggles with depression. But no one ever said that self-creation is for the faint of heart.
Monet thinks that her son chose a career as an author, even though it means struggling daily with his dyslexia, because it allows him to revisit and comfort his younger self.
"Writing for Scott has been cathartic," she says.
"At times it has been difficult for other family members because we have different memories of those times. But I understand that it has been necessary for Scott to make sense of his life by writing."
Bruce Bortz, the founder of the Baltimore-based Bancroft Press, points out that it's rare for any author to both write and illustrate his own work — let alone an author who is dyslexic and color-blind.
"I have no idea how he does it," says Bortz, who has published several of Fuqua's novels. "It would be unusual for anyone without his disabilities to write and illustrate as well as he does. He's brilliant at both."
A perk of Fuqua's workday is that he spends lots of time with his kids: Calla, 17, and Gabe, 10. Both have provided an inspiration for the books and served as models for the illustrations.
For instance, when Fuqua was working on "Calvert the Raven," he asked Gabe to pose by pretending to fly through the sky on a raven's back. The boy perched on a coffee table, thrust out his arms and legs for balance, and tilted back and forth.
Now readers who pick up a copy of "Calvert the Raven" will see a drawing on the cover of a lively boy with curly dark hair witnessing the Battle of Baltimore firsthand. There the boy is, astride the back of a great black bird and soaring high above the shark-filled water.
Jonathon Scott Fuqua
Birthplace: Frankfurt, Germany
Profession: Author/illustrator of 16 books and graphic novels for children and adults; instructor at the Maryland Institute College of Art
Notable titles: "The Reappearance of Sam Webber" (1999), "Darby" (2002), "The Willoughby Spit Wonder," (2004), "Medusa's Daughter" (2008), "Calvert the Raven in the Battle of Baltimore" (2013)
Education: College of William and Mary College, bachelor's degree in fine arts, 1990
Family: Married to Julie Lauffenburger, senior conservator at the Walters Art Museum; a daughter, Calla, 17; a son, Gabe, 10; and two cats, one dog and an aquarium of fish

PETER FREESTONE – former personal assistant to Freddie Mercury – discusses forgotten tracks the singer taped with Michael Jackson and more
7 February 2013 by Jan Velinger
For 12 years Peter Freestone was a personal assistant and close friend to Freddie Mercury, the singer who reached superstardom with the rock group Queen. He was with also there during the singer’s last days in 1991. Since the start of the Noughties, Freestone has lived in the Czech Republic. I contacted him this week after it was confirmed that Queen will release three tracks that time forgot which Mercury recorded with Michael Jackson, a recording at which Freestone was present.
But before we get to that, I also asked him about his former job.
“Basically it was 24 hours a day, seven days a week. My job was just to be there for Freddie, to take care of him really.”
Was it enjoyable work to be so close to someone who was publicly such a huge star?
“I think the easiest way to say it is yes, it was work (I know this because there was money going into the bank every month) but really I was basically living Freddie’s life. It was amazing. I had the easy part: I could spend what he really worked hard to earn. I did the shopping and I went to auctions for him, you know, that was the easy part of the job.”
I’ve read that Freddie Mercury, like many stars, was a different person behind closed doors, that he was someone who intensely valued his privacy. Is that true?
“Yes, very much. Even when he invited friends to Garden Lodge, his home, people he knew… he would still play the part of entertainer. He could only really be himself when there were just the four or five of the closest people he knew at Garden Lodge. Then he could be himself. Of course, when he walked out the door he became public property. And he realised that. So he became what the public expected. He would have on the t-shirt, leather jacket, jeans, trainers, the sunglasses… and he would become what was expected of him.”
The Times and Rolling Stone both caught fans’ attention this week by confirming that three lost songs Freddie recorded 30 years ago with Michael Jackson will be released later this year. At least one version of one of the songs is already well-known; another, called Victory, is not, and if I am not mistaken has never been heard. Did you ever wonder to yourself, since you were there at the time, whether these songs would ever be released?“
“Because they were Michael’s property – they were recorded in his own studio in his home – I never expected them to see the light of day. But I am very happy they will. Two of the tracks have had various treatment by fans over the years – State of Shock and There Must Be More to Life Than This, both of which were released in different forms. One on the Jacksons’ album and one on Queen’s; but the third one, Victory, is something that has never been heard before. I still have some memories of it because I was there when it was recorded in the studio. In fact, on the original tape – and I don’t know if this will still exist – I played what you hear as the bass drum on the track. Only it isn’t a bass drum: what you hear is a toilet door! I had to stand there for five minutes banging a toilet door! So, you know, I think it is going to be something for people to enjoy, it should be very interesting.”
Hopefully that stays on the track!
“I hope so!” (laughs)
Do you think the release of the third song could cause a sensation?
“I really hope so. Of course even the other two tracks will receive different treatment now that Queen are involved in the production. I am sure that they will be paying attention to Freddie’s voice and the production of the whole track. They are perfectionists and everything has to be just right. But I believe that it will be worth the wait.”
Where did the impulse to work together come from?
“The first that I heard about it was when Michael came to a Queen show at the Forum in Los Angeles. I remember him talking in the corner with Freddie and John. Afterwards Freddie said ‘Huh! Michael says we should be doing something together because he loves what he’s heard! Because he’d been listening to Another One Bites the Dust and loved that and the whole feel of it. So Freddie said ‘he wants to meet up to record. Ah, but it’ll never happen, it’s just talk! Months later that was followed up with a phone call from Michael, because he had heard Freddie was in L.A. and he invited him over.”
My understanding is that that meeting was less than optimal…
(burst of laughter) “I know what you are referring to. Well, Michael, if you remember, at that time in his place in Encino had almost a mini-zoo and his favourite animals at the time were the llamas. Given it was summer in Los Angeles, Freddie wore a white t-shirt, white jeans, white trainers and after the tour his t-shirt was white jeans with the bottoms brown with spattered mud and brown trainers because we’d had been traipsing through the mud. Michael also took us around his home and in his bedroom and it was so funny: he had a large terrarium with a big snake inside. Public ally, Michael said it was a great friend and the best and a really good and amazing snake… we couldn’t help but notice that there were about forty bricks keeping the lid of the terrarium down, to make sure it could not get out!”
“Yeah, it’s amazing what can be said and the little different facts behind it!”
The actual recordings: when were those done, on a different day?
“No it was the same day. Both of them were really busy recording and touring in 1983. Michael wanted Freddie to finish State of Shock because he wanted it for the Jacksons’ album called Victory. But Freddie had very little time and he wasn’t able to finish. So Michael suggested that Mick Jagger could sing the other part and Freddie said of course it’s your music, he didn’t object. For time reasons, the two weren’t able to pick up the material again.”
How does the quality of the vocals strike you in terms of how the singers complement each other? Freddie was such a powerhouse singer…
“I think because they are so different that it works very well. If both of them had the powerful voices it would seem almost like a competition. You used the right word with ‘complement’: the two voices work together very well and it’s like a conversation.”
You were with Freddie up until his death in 1991; I wanted to ask you how your life changed after that – eventually you ended up here in the Czech Republic.
“It has been 12 years now here. Yeah, life did change after that… but if you think abou it Freddie has been gone 28 years and I am still talking about him! Physically, he isn’t around anymore but his image, voice and personality have survived. He was a unique person, an amazing one and he wrote some great music and there is still a lot of interest and many in the new generation ask me about that. I do what I can for them. I mean, I am still involved in music here in the Czech Republic, I am involved in a thing called Rock Camp for kids between the age of 11 of 17 and we get together and they make music which is amazing. I am also involved with a Czech musician who has a band who has convinced me for the first time in my life to believe I can write lyrics for music. So everything I am doing even today is because of Freddie Mercury.”
Queen still has legions of fans worldwide but I’ve read that there are radio stations that won’t play performers older than 30! That doesn’t seem to be the case with Czech stations and Queen has always seemed to have held a special spot for many music fans here…
“One of the reasons that I settled in the Czech Republic is because of peoples’ attitudes to music. In Britain it’s very narrow-minded. People, particularly young people, will only listen to what they’re told to listen to, basically. They have MTV and they are glued to that and that, they believe, is all there is. Here, I know, having met him a few times, Karel Gott, who people listen to from the age of nine to 90! In England that doesn’t happen. Here, in schools, children are taught about Janecek, Dvorak, Smetana; again, that doesn’t happen in Britain. People here are prepared to open their minds to music. As for Queen, the reason Queen is so established and well-liked, is because their music is truly timeless. If you listen today, their music is still as fresh as 40 years ago when they started. It is still as fresh as it was then.”
The episode featured today was first broadcast on August 2, 2013.

Hollywood actor Tom Hanks and wife Rita Wilson were one of the first few celebrities around the world to test positive for the coronavirus.
Opening up about his diagnosis and slow pace towards recovery, the 63-year-old Forrest Gump actor detailed his and Rita’s symptoms while talking to National Defense Radio Show.
“Rita went through a tougher time than I did. She had a much higher fever. She had lost her sense of taste and sense of smell,” he said.
“I was very tired. I felt extremely achy. Uncomfortable, didn’t want to be touched and then the fever started. Chills like I’ve never had before. Looking back, I realise I was also losing my sense of taste and smell which I didn’t realize at the time,” he added.
The actor further revealed that despite the illness, he tried to keep himself physically active with a 30-minute stretch session that he termed extremely difficult: “I was wiped after 12 minutes.”
Earlier this month, Wilson too had opened up about her harrowing coronavirus account.
While talking to CBS This Morning, Wilson disclosed that her fever had shot up to 102 degrees following a nine-day period of her being sick. This resulted in the doctors prescribing her an anti-malarial pill, chloroquine, which was approved in the United States back in 1949 and is now under examination as a possible treatment for Covid-19.
“I know people have been talking about this drug, but I can only tell you that I don’t know if the drug worked or it was just time for the fever to break,” she had said.
“My fever did break, but the chloroquine had such extreme side effects. I was completely nauseous, and I had vertigo. I could not walk, and my muscles felt very weak,” she told during the interview.

By the time David had finished reporting to Saul, Jonathan was deeply impressed with David - an immediate bond was forged between them. He became totally committed to David. From that point on he would be David's number-one advocate and friend.
Saul received David into his own household that day, no more to return to the home of his father.
Jonathan, out of his deep love for David, made a covenant with him.
He formalized it with solemn gifts: his own royal robe and weapons - armor, sword, bow, and belt.
Whatever Saul gave David to do, he did it - and did it well. So well that Saul put him in charge of his military operations. Everybody, both the people in general and Saul's servants, approved of and admired David's leadership.
As they returned home, after David had killed the Philistine, the women poured out of all the villages of Israel singing and dancing, welcoming King Saul with tambourines, festive songs, and lutes.
In playful frolic the women sang, Saul kills by the thousand, David by the ten thousand!
This made Saul angry - very angry. He took it as a personal insult. He said, "They credit David with 'ten thousands' and me with only 'thousands.' Before you know it they'll be giving him the kingdom!"
From that moment on, Saul kept his eye on David.
The next day an ugly mood was sent by God to afflict Saul, who became quite beside himself, raving. David played his harp, as he usually did at such times. Saul had a spear in his hand.
Suddenly Saul threw the spear, thinking, "I'll nail David to the wall." David ducked, and the spear missed. This happened twice.
Now Saul feared David. It was clear that God was with David and had left Saul.
So, Saul got David out of his sight by making him an officer in the army. David was in combat frequently.
Everything David did turned out well. Yes, God was with him.
As Saul saw David becoming more successful, he himself grew more fearful. He could see the handwriting on the wall.
But everyone else in Israel and Judah loved David. They loved watching him in action.
One day Saul said to David, "Here is Merab, my eldest daughter. I want to give her to you as your wife. Be brave and bold for my sake. Fight God's battles!" But all the time Saul was thinking, "The Philistines will kill him for me. I won't have to lift a hand against him."
David, embarrassed, answered, "Do you really mean that? I'm from a family of nobodies! I can't be son-in-law to the king."
The wedding day was set, but as the time neared for Merab and David to be married, Saul reneged and married his daughter off to Adriel the Meholathite.
Meanwhile, Saul's daughter Michal was in love with David. When Saul was told of this, he rubbed his hands in anticipation. "Ah, a second chance. I'll use Michal as bait to get David out where the Philistines will make short work of him." So again he said to David, "You're going to be my son-in-law."
Saul ordered his servants, "Get David off by himself and tell him, 'The king is very taken with you, and everyone at court loves you. Go ahead, become the king's son-in-law!'"
The king's servants told all this to David, but David held back. "What are you thinking of? I can't do that. I'm a nobody; I have nothing to offer."
When the servants reported David's response to Saul, he told them to tell David this: "The king isn't expecting any money from you; only this: Go kill a hundred Philistines and bring evidence of your vengeance on the king's behalf. Avenge the king on his enemies." (Saul expected David to be killed in action.)
On receiving this message, David was pleased. There was something he could do for the king that would qualify him to be his son-in-law! He lost no time but went right out, he and his men, killed the hundred Philistines, brought their evidence back in a sack, and counted it out before the king - mission completed! Saul gave Michal his daughter to David in marriage.
As Saul more and more realized that God was with David, and how much his own daughter, Michal, loved him, his fear of David increased and settled into hate. Saul hated David.
Whenever the Philistine warlords came out to battle, David was there to meet them - and beat them, upstaging Saul's men. David's name was on everyone's lips.
Published by permission. Originally published by NavPress in English as THE MESSAGE: The Bible in Contemporary Language copyright 2002 by Eugene Peterson. All rights reserved. (The Message Bible Online)

| Last updated
Every detail of this Love Island final is being analysed. And not even directly with how the couples are acting...
Laura Whitmore, the show's presenter, had each couple in the final join her along with a live studio audience.
When each couple were announced to the live studio audience though, fans noticed the quieter cheers when Kaz Kamwi and Tyler Cruikshank were called out.
This didn't go unnoticed by viewers.
Previous Love Island winner, Amber Gill, tweeted out "Why did nobody cheer for Kaz & Tyler" to which many people repeated the same sentiment.
The tweet's replies showed that many people had thought the same thing.
One person wrote: "I thought I was the only one that clocked that🤨".
Another was grateful that they weren't alone in thinking this: "I thought it was just me, that was so awkward."
One tweeter also said that this was the problem with a lot of viewers: "people are just blind they don’t see how a good couple is kaz and Tyler".
Someone else even claimed that this was clocked by others in the Villa: "you could see all the other couples noticed it too.."
Another Twitter user agreed: "I saw that. Tyler looked at Liam like ermm what just happened?"
There were Kyler fans who were fuelled by the lack of support from the audience.
"And this the reason why they need to win. So many haters for no reason.", said an avid Kyler stan.
Kaz is one of the OG Islanders, having coupled up with Toby Aromolaran on day one. However, after he had his head turned by Chloe Burrows, Kaz felt that she was unlucky in love.
That was until Tyler walked in as a bombshell.
When he first joined the Villa, he said he only had eyes for Kaz and the pair seemed to hit it off.
The two did have their trouble however when Tyler went to Casa Amor and returned with Clarisse Juliette and Kaz recoupled with Matthew MacNabb after seeing Tyler up to no good on a postcard of the 'lad's holiday' sent to the Villa girls.
Kaz and Tyler couldn't deny their chemistry though and the two made their way back to each other. They then became exclusive and made their way all to the final of the show to battle for the public vote.
Which couple would you have cheered for if you were in the studio audience?
Chosen for YouChosen for You
Most Read StoriesMost Read

Vogue Williams has admitted that she "vetoed" her husband Spencer Matthews' first name choice for their daughter Gigi.
The Made in Chelsea star, 32, wanted to call Gigi 'Margaux' so Vogue compromised by using that as Gigi's middle name.
The couple welcomed their second child earlier this year and they're also parents to two-year-old Theodore.
"[Her full name is] Gigi Margaux Matthews," Vogue, 35, told RTE presenter Ryan Tubridy on his radio show.
"Margaux was Spenny's first choice I think. That got vetoed by me.
"I had a different one and then we both actually changed to Gigi and we just absolutely loved it. I think it is a really nice name.
"It is a name that I would like for myself so I thought that would be good enough for Gigi.
"Spenny is fluent in French so [the spelling] is a little French twist."
Vogue added that Theodore loves having a little sister, but is a "little less than gentle" when he plays with her.
In the interview, she also opened about losing her father Freddie to a stroke nearly ten years ago.
"You know, I still think about him probably every day," she said.
"One of my friends lost her mum recently and I said, do you know what?
"It's really, really hard now, but eventually you get to a point where you just think really fondly of them, and it is more or less every day.
"But yeah I think it would have been amazing if he had been able to meet the kids.
"But sure most of my family haven't met [Gigi] either. Because she was born during lockdown so my mum has met her and my step dad, and that's kind of it for my whole family."

Joined: 09 May 2010
"Hey Nikki!! What a pleasant surprise!", Riddhima was ecstatic at seeing her best friend after two long years. They were in med school together for five years. In these five years they had become inseparable. Like they had found their soul mates. Both of them were very close to each other. But obviously like all good things come to an end, so did their time in college. For her internship Riddhima had to come back to Mumbai, too her family and to Sanjeevni, the hospital where her father was the dean. However Nikki stayed on in Bangalore, with her family. Initially they kept in touch, but the busy schedule and the pressure of work crept up and unfortunately they lost touch. Of course they were in touch through facebook, but that's hardly called keeping in touch. Two grueling years of internship and they finally could call themselves doctors. Just having finished her last exam, Riddhima was in Goa for a vacation. She was here with her sister Anjali, whom she lovingly call 'Di', her friend Muskaan, and Atul, her sister's fiance. Atul and Anjali were resident doctors in Sanjeevni and were two years senior to Riddhima and Muskaan. This vacation was a breather for all of them, especially for Riddhima an Muskaan, before they begin their careers as full time resident doctors and get stuck in the hellish circus called "Life". The last three days that they were in Goa, were mostly spent in the confines of their bedroom. Riddhima couldn't get enough of sleep. For a good part of the 72 hours she was snoozing or lazing around in her room and watching TV, making up for all the sleepless nights she endured during her exams. But today finally after a lot of cajoling from Anjali and Muskaan she agreed to go for dinner. Little did she know that she would meet her long lost friend who had also come there to cool off her heels and have some fun.
"So how are you? Its been such a long time", said Nikki, hugging Riddhima. Both of them were extremely happy to see each other after such a long time.
"I am good. Just got over with the internship. Thought ki kahin ghoom ke aa jaaye!! Oh! By the way, this is my friend Muskaan. We did our internship together from Sanjeevni.", rushed Riddhima in a single breath.
"hey Muskaan!", Nikki greeted Muskaan with a warm hug which was well reciprocated by Muskaan. Riddhima could tell that Muskaan felt comfortable with Nikki, so she dint waste time inviting her to join them for dinner.
"I'd love to Riddhima, but I am here with my friends. Tumhe unhe bhi invite karna padega!!", Nikki was there with her boyfriend Abhimanyu and her bestest friend in the world.
"Arre sure unhe bhi invite kar lo. I want to meet these friends of yours. Of course if they don't mind that is!", Riddhima loved meeting new people.. It was kind of a given since she was a doctor by profession..
"I would mind if you kept Nikki all to yourself all night though", a tall, handsome man wearing glasses caught hold of Nikki from behind her and said. "Hey I am Abhi!", he introduced himself while Nikki blushed to a deep shade of red while trying to get out of his hold.
Riddhima looked at them with her eyebrows raised and her mouth open, "Oh! So these are your 'Friends'!!" , she indicated the Friends in quotes with a hint of sarcasm and a little tease. Nikki couldn't meet her eye and quickly wriggled out of Abhi's arms.
"who Riddhima' Main who' actually I ...", Nikki spluttered.
"So are you going to tell me or will I have to wheedle it out of you?", Riddhima grinned. This shy and new Nikki was a revelation to her. The Nikki she knew was boisterous and bold. She dint shy easily. Even in college she was never the one to blush at the name of her crush or giggle when they were around. On the contrary she would go and tell them that she liked them. Riddhima could never fathom how she managed to do that. Nikki used to give her a hard time, teasing her with guys she liked and pulling her leg at every opportunity she got. So now this was the perfect opportunity for Riddhima to give it back to Nikki. Especially now that it was clear that she was in a relationship with this guy, Abhi.
"Riddhima!! That's quite a unique name and also very sweet. ", Abhi who still wasn't introduced to Riddhima tried to save Nikki.
"Thanks Abhi. Par Nikki ki bolti kyun band hai?? She dint even bother telling me about her boyfriend let alone take my approval", Riddhima just couldn't get over teasing Nikki.
"Actually its fiance now! We're engaged to be married", Abhi retorted.
Riddhima was positively enraged while Nikki looked up at her guiltily and said in a shaky voice, "Who Riddhima, he proposed just yesterday. Of course I wouldn't keep such a big thing from you of all the people."
But Riddhima was miffed, "But evidently you did. And that I wont take lying down!!"
Muskaan intervened, "Ridzi what's wrong with you. He just proposed yesterday. How would she have told you."
"Muskaan you stay out of this. She is my best friend. We were inseparable in college, and now she doesn't even bother telling me that she's in love with someone and engaged to them", boy was Riddhima angry!
"I am really sorry Riddhima, please maan jao. Please. I dint do it intentionally. please", Nikki pleaded.
"Only on one condition", Riddhima couldn't help but melt, "You stay in my room today and tell me the entire story form the beginning. Tujhse bohot sari batein karni hain yaar. "
Nikki was relieved and with a huge grin agreed to all of Riddhima's demands instantly. However, Abhi was visibly disturbed by this turn of events and dint make an effort hiding it either.
"Tum Armaan ke saath time pass karo na Abhi. Waise bhi he's also giving us a hard time like Riddhima here, about how we don't spend enough time with him. Please na.. Mujhe bhi Ridzi se kitni saari batein karni hai."
Abhi very grudgingly took Nikki's offer, "But yeh Armaan hai kahan? I haven't seen him since we got here!"
"Who's Armaan?", asked Riddhima. Just then the DJ started playing "I Hate Luv Stories" .
This distracted them and they looked in the direction where a group of people, wait, a group of girls were dancing with one guy in the centre. "Oh my GOD!! Who's that??", Muskaan exclaimed.
"That's ARMAAN!!", Nikki and Abhi sighed together.
That's when Riddhima's eyes fell on him. 'Oh my God!!', she agreed silently with Muskaan. That creature had the perfect features and the perfect physique. He was wearing a casual loose black T-shirt and cool denims to complete his personality. To Riddhima he looked positively yummy!
She couldn't take her eyes off him. That's when she noticed how close he was dancing with a girl. Then she saw that many girls were dancing close with him. He was practically flirting with different girls at the same time and that too in front of them. She came crashing down to earth. She thought to herself 'There's nothing called perfect. So he's the Casanova types huh! Should've known, Beauty without Brains with a one track mind. What a waste!!'
"Ridzi chalo na lets go and dance. Armaan s calling us. Chal na!", Nikki brought her out of her reverie. But before she could reply or react in any way, she found herself being dragged onto the dance floor by none other than her Mr. Perfect. He danced with her, as close as he danced with all other girls earlier but this time he danced only with her. As they danced Riddhima felt her body brush with his and for the first time in her life she got a weird feeling. Though she wasn't completely comfortable, she dint feel like letting go. He twirled her and twisted her and made her dance to his tune. Apparently he too was mesmerized by her as she held his undivided attention. He twirled her out and rolled her in his arm a final time. That's when their eyes met. She looked into those deep blue eyes and couldn't take her eyes off them. "The song's over sweetheart!", Armaan's deep husky voice reached her ears. He had a smirk on his face, enjoying the effect that he always manages to have on the opposite sex. Riddhima suddenly realised she was in his arms and jerked herself out almost pushing him and fled from there.
"Hey Armaan!!", Nikki came bounding from somewhere followed by Abhi and Muskaan.
Armaan who was surprised by Riddhima's sudden escape turned around to find his best friend and her fiancee and this brought a huge smile to his face.
"Oh my God!! He has such cute dimples", sighed Muskaan who was completely taken by Armaan's appearance. She dint even realise that what she said was quite audible to Armaan. Nikki and Abhi looked at her quite amused as she kept gazing at him dreamily. "Well thank you beautiful. I know I have that effect!!", he flashed his dimples again at her. But this time Muskaan blushed a deep shade of red, partly out of embarrassment and partly due to Armaan's flirtatious remarks. "Hey I am Armaan, and you are'.", Armaan introduced himself waiting for Muskaan's answer which never came. Finally Nikki did the honors. Anjali and Atul who were having dinner in a private booth spotted Muskaan just then and walked over. "Hey Muski! Where were you guys? Hum kabse dhoondh rahe hain! And where's Ridzi?", Anjali questioned her. Then recognizing Nikki she exclaimed, "Oh my God Nikki, Where the hell have you been. Long time, no see. Yaar how are you. ". Nikki told her how she met Riddhima and Muskaan and how they got talking etc. "Hey Anjy is that you??", Abhi asked looking at Anjali and then spotting Atul, "And oh hey, Atul tum bhi yahan ho?". It turned out that Anjy, Atul and Abhi knew each other well as they had done their internship together. Armaan readily befriended all of them and they hung around for quite some time looking for Anjali's sister who had apparently disappeared and wasn't answering her phone either. "Ridzi, kahan hai tu?? Ya ok, I will get Nikki with me. You are ok na?? Theek hai Bye, See ya!", Anjy had just got off the phone with Riddhima who had finally called, herself to reveal her whereabouts. Apparently she wasn't feeling well, so she decided to head back to her room.
After making plans for the next day all of them retired to their rooms. Abhi offered Armaan a trip to 'The Doors' club which he refused. He dint know why, but he wanted some time alone. He wanted to think! but he couldn't lay his finger on what he wanted to think about.
As he lay on his bed, he felt his body ache. All the dancing was ought to make him tired he thought. That's when it came to him. The mystery dance partner of his. He had been dancing and enjoying the party with girls swooning over him and dying to dance with him. He spotted Abhi and Nikki and indicated to come on the dance floor when he saw her. She was looking at him like he was some extraterrestrial creature. But then most girls had that reaction when they see him for the first time. But her expression was different he thought, she looked out of this world. She was so lost in him that he thought he might as well grant her wish and give her what she wants. So he dragged her onto the dance floor and danced with her for the remaining of the song. He had danced with so many girls. But she felt different. When they came close he felt this weird feeling, some kind of attachment, that he couldn't let go. That's why he danced only with her giving her his undivided attention. As he brought her back to him after twirling her out, their eyes met. He remembered those eyes, so beautiful, he thought. He could have looked into them forever but the music stopped and he came crashing down to earth. "The song's over sweetheart ", he'd said to get her out of her daze. What happened next had completely baffled him. She had literally pushed him aside and run away. 'Cinderella' he thought, she even looked like a princess to him in her beautiful white dress. Without realising where his thoughts were taking him he drifted into an uneasy sleep.
Riddhima ran from the club as fast as her feet could take her. She couldn't believe what had just happened. She had never ever in her life behaved the way she did a few minutes ago with Armaan. She could still picture his eyes. The way they held her gaze she felt something different, something she cant put her finger on. But for her it was like an ethereal experience. she was still shaken by the incident. She felt she dint have control on what she was doing anymore, so she thought getting away, from there, from him was most important. So she had run away, and now sitting in her room on her bed she recounted whatever happened that evening. For some reason she couldn't get his eyes out of her mind's eye. She dint want to let go of that gaze. She thought about him some more and drifted off to sleep. When she woke up she remembered what she was dreaming about 'deep dreamy ocean blue eyes' . For a moment, she thought maybe it dint happen and it was all a dream. Then she started 'hoping' that it was all a dream. A shrill sound brought her out, her hopes crashing down, as she saw her mobile. Before she could answer, the call it got cut. She checked to find 20 missed calls- a few from her Di and a few from her 'Jeej'. "Oh freak!! Di must be freaking out.", she swore at herself with a scowl. She quickly called her and made some excuse.
She was glad Nikki was coming over as now there would be something to take her mind off that 'Armaan' guy. But wait!! Wasn't Armaan Nikki's friend!! She made up her mind to wheedle out info about this guy from Nikki.
Joined: 24 April 2008
Joined: 21 December 2008
Joined: 02 April 2005
Joined: 04 May 2010
Joined: 09 May 2010
Joined: 09 May 2010
Riddhima was jogging on the private beach of the resort they were staying at. It was 7:30 in the morning and not many people around. Who in their right mind would wake up at 7 in the morning when they were on a vacation?? But evidently, Riddhima was far from being in her right mind. She couldn't sleep all night. Try as she might, sleep evaded her and finally giving up, she set out for her jog. As she ran across the beach, the rhythm of the waves caught up with her and it calmed all her anxiety. She thought about yesterday once again, and finally concluded that she had given unnecessary attention to perfectly normal happenings and shrugged away all her feelings to enjoy the morning. She felt she was giving undue importance to things and 'people' that dint deserve her time and mind. She was positively irritated with that 'Armaan' guy now, for repeatedly evading her thoughts and breaking the halcyon. She was running adjacent to the Basketball court, when she realized that her shoe lace was undone. Blaming that 'Armaan' guy for this too, she sat at the corner of the court to tie up her laces when 'Thud!!'. She felt a ball hit her head from behind her.
"Bull's eye!! Can we have the ball please??", said Armaan with a casual effortless attitude. He'd been playing Basketball with the kids at the resort. He loved playing the sport. It was better than the boring jog, he felt. He was in his shorts and a sweat shirt tied around his waist showing off his perfectly built six packs. He was quite enjoying himself when a little friend of his decided to shoot in the direction opposite to the hoop and it went on to hit the head of a lady sitting at the corner of the court. As soon as the ball hit her she turned around, giving him a glare, ready to tear him apart. Armaan would have found it amusing, if it hadn't been the one face he was trying to forget since last night.
She was wearing black shorts and a red racer-back, looking quite perfect for the beach. When she realized who she was facing, she flared up with anger, giving way to all the irritation and anxiety she felt through the night. And his insouciant remark was the last straw!! She walked up to him, head held high, dribbling the ball with one hand, she seethed indicating the ball,"Tumhari hai?".
Armaan was taken aback by her attitude and retorted with a smirk, "Who else would have that good an aim here?", he looked around at the kids, "Right boys..?"
Riddhima was positively annoyed now. She had been right about him, she thought. What an airhead! So she retorted condescendingly, "FYI the hoop is on the other side of the court. You were aiming in the wrong direction mister. Kahin pe nigahe, kahin pe nishana!!"
"You talk like you're an expert at this sport, Ms Know-it-all. Why don't you demonstrate some of your skills to us?", Armaan couldn't help but get into this childish contest of having the last say!
Riddhima stood where she was, in the middle of the court and took an aim at the basket. And of course, the ball landed in the hoop, surprising Armaan and shocking the little kids, who were so sure that their Armaan bhaiya was the best at this game. "Boys! Apna coach badal lo, fayde mein rahoge!!", Riddhima was smug and with that she turned around to leave.
"Yo Basket!!", Armaan called out to her, "Naam to batati jao!!". She walked up to him again, showing him a thumbs up, and then turning it down with attitude, she grinned. Armaan just flailed his arms annoyed, while they both turned their backs on each other and walked off in opposite directions.
Joined: 26 August 2009
|Topics||Topic Starter||Replies||Views||Last Post|
|The World's Oldest Story!! #10||z.e.p.h.y.r||1218||98489||08 November 2011 at 9:05am
|The World's Oldest Story!!#11|chk pg146/149 04/10||z.e.p.h.y.r||1196||100669||28 October 2011 at 9:28am
|The World's Oldest Story!! #4 AR||z.e.p.h.y.r||1291||96651||08 April 2011 at 11:02am
|The World's Oldest Story!! #2 AR||z.e.p.h.y.r||1205||127906||04 April 2011 at 9:58am
|The World's Oldest Story!!#6AR In Another World..||z.e.p.h.y.r||1379||125765||23 March 2011 at 10:01am

Day 1 of Cleaning out the apartment has commenced. I can't really explain it in words, but I have before and after pictures! (I even threw away my old graduation hat from high school.)
Chris helped me, but sort of lost his usefullness when he started telling me to keep stuff. I told him "You aren't helping, i'm trying to get rid of stuff". He was so nice that he even offered to throw everything away for me. I didn't want him to get overeager, so I seperated my junk into throw away and give away. The picture of the lumber and trash is just he beginning. Toward the end of the night, you could barely walk to the bedroom. I forgot to take a picture. I was caught up in the moment.
Now, the pictures!
I still have some cleaning to go, but ran out of time and steam. The next project? The kitchen shelf.
Sensory Bin Ideas
1 day ago

He is a comedian, he is a writer, he is an actor; he is–a true one at that–an entertainer, but who is Jim Jefferies wife?
When they get popular and influential, everyone around them gets the spotlight, particularly their wives.
In this article, we will talk about many things but Jim Jefferies wife is the focus of this one.
Who did the comedian marry?
In an era where a lot of celebrities get a lot of problems in their relationships, a lot of them have had the spotlight because of this.
Well, it does appear that Jim did face his own relationship problems but as others get married and get divorced, his fast relationship was not one that led to marriage although he had a son with the first woman he had anything to do with.
They parted ways after the birth of his son and he as since married another woman so the focus here is Jim Jefferies wife.
But who is Jim?
Find out more about him here.
Jim Jefferies Wife; Jim’s Biography
Jefferies was born on February 14, 1977, in Sydney, Australia, to a mother who was a substitute teacher and a father who worked as a cabinet maker and maintenance worker in Roma, Queensland.
The Australian-born American stand-up comic Geoff James Nugent, better known by his stage name Jim Jefferies, is also an actor and author.
He was the creator and star of the Comedy Central late-night program The Jim Jefferies Show as well as the American FX series Legit.
We know too well what he does but what we do not know too well is Jim Jefferies wife, right? Well, that, too, is not a problem as we will get to know very soon.
Jim started his stand-up comedy career after leaving the Academy, a few months before finishing his degree, moving first to Sydney and then to the UK.
He was a goal-oriented young guy.
2018 saw Jefferies’ naturalization as a citizen of the United States.
Scott, an investment banker, and Daniel, an inspector with the Public Order and Riot Squad of the New South Wales Police Force, are his two older brothers.
Jim Jefferies Wife: Who Did The Comedian Marry?
Who Jim Jefferies wife is, has always been a topical issue ever since the mother of her son, Hank Jefferies, actress Kate Luyben left him.
So who did the comedian marry?
There are many that still believe that the comedian married the Canadian actress Kate Luyben, but some time after the birth of their son, Hank Jefferies in November 2012, Kate Luyben left and has not been with Jim since then.
So who did Jim Jefferies marry?
Jim Jefferies wife, currently, is English actress Tasie Lawrence.
So English actress Tasie Lawrence took over from Kate Luyben and has also given him a son.
Who is Tasie?
Both Jim and Tasie are entertainers but one, Jim, is more popular than Tasie.
She is an English actress.
Tasie Lawrence was born on December 22, 1990, in Brighton, United Kingdom.

By: James Baretto
Thank you Oceanview Publishing for the gifted digital copy of this book!
Boston Prosecutor Jack Marino was a star prosecutor. After growing up from the projects,he really made something of himself. He mainly prosecuted gang members. He was beaten one day, presumably by a gang, and was fired from his job after his confidence was shaken. He starts working at his father-in-law’s law firm – a cushy, well paying job. That is, until his former mentor, asked him to take on defending someone that was accused of murder. But at every corner, something is in Jack’s way, and the circumstances are seemingly bigger than just a “simple” murder. Jack risks personal and professional ruin on behalf of his client.
Wow. This book was absolutely amazing! It was intense and suspenseful; it kept you on the edge of your seat, and it ended in a way that I never saw coming! There was one specific event that literally blew my mind. Barrett does a fantastic job with the courtroom scenes – very believable. As an attorney, I absolutely love legal thrillers. Barret also does a great job of providing each character with a distinctive personality and really writing in such a way that you root for certain characters, and despise others. For instance, I absolutely hated the judge. While I whole heartedly give this book 5 big stars, there was two little sentences that bothered me. During the trial, the Judge would tell the witness that they needed to respond with Yes or No so that their response was on the record. However, two times that the Commonwealth asked something of the Judge, for instance to approach the witness, and the judge nodded. A judge should know better. It’s not a huge deal, but just something I noticed.
This book is out now. I really hope you get your copy here, so you can enjoy this as must as I did!

A few of us at Gaming Nexus were able to hop on to the closed alpha for Battlefield V last night and participated in a round or two of Conquest.
My rig consisted of an Intel i7-6700K along with a NVIDIA GeForce GTX 1080 so kindly provided by the people at NVIDIA. Playing at 1920x1080, the game looked absolutely gorgeous and the GeForce GTX 1080 really shined in providing silky smooth and high fidelity gameplay.
Battlefield V's closed alpha went well in game, but we had a minor issue on our first run trying to join a server as a squad. For some reason, the alpha kicks you out of the squad when joining a game and on our first attempt, it didn't even let me join the server as it was full even though my colleague was able to hop in.
On our second attempt, we were able to join the same server but it didn't place us in the same squad so we had to manually leave the assigned squad we were put in and join an open one. Ah, the joys of alpha.
Anyways, enjoy an hour's worth of Battlefield V as they march towards a release date of October 19th.

Golden State Warriors has decided to keep their 15th spot open after they waived all their candidates who were fighting for the last roster spot before the new season kickstarted. All the final candidates who had a chance to be part of the main roster were eliminated after the Warriors won by 119-97 in the preseason finale against Portland Trail Blazers.
Avery Bradley was the first to go his performance has been underwhelming with the average number 4.3 points, 1.3 rebounds, and 1.0 assists per game on 12.7 minutes. Gary Payton II played just one match in the preseason after he was unavailable for the Blazers match. Mychal Mulder, shot 35% on threes but not enough to get him a deal, the team could ink a two-way contract with him and lastly, Jordan Bell just did not stand out enough to fit into the roster.

Three teens arrested in apartment complex armed robberies
Police have arrested a third suspect in connection to a series of armed robberies at an apartment complex.
Fort Smith police announced that a 16-year-old student at Southside High School has been arrested and charged with aggravated robbery. He was brought to the police station with his father on Wednesday and arrested following a police interview.
Two young men were arrested Friday in connection with the crimes at Lakeside Apartments on 46th Street in Fort Smith.
According to Sgt. Daniel Grubbs, with the Fort Smith Police Department, Kent Thompson, an 18-year-old student at Fort Smith Southside High School, and a 19-year-old, Justin Douglas, are facing multiple aggravated robbery charges.
Maintenance workers at the apartment complex were credited with helping police find the robbers.
Police said workers noticed an older model truck that was parked differently than the rest of the cars in the parking lot.
Maintenance workers took a picture of the truck and gave it to police.
"We tracked that using our school resource officers to a student at Southside yesterday,” Grubbs said. "We try to tell the public that if things seem out of place, it's just small or miniscule, use your instincts and that's what these guys did."
Police said last Friday night, a man reported hearing noises outside his apartment.
When the man opened his back door, he reported to police, three men were outside his apartment.
Police said two of the suspects were holding a shotgun and a handgun.
The victim told police they robbed him, then locked him inside a closet.
Wednesday, in the middle of the day, police were called back to the same apartment complex.
Police responded just a few doors down from the first robbery location.
"I was watching a movie. I think Brad was upstairs on the computer, and I heard a ruffle in the back yard," said A.J. Williamson. "About five seconds later, I heard the door kicked in."
"I heard "Don't shoot,' then I just knew," Brad Blackburn said. "Not even three seconds later was the guy coming up the stairs pointing a shotgun when I peeked out my door."
Williamson and Blackburn said the robbery lasted about 10 minutes, but that it seemed much longer.
"I was thinking it was a joke, but then you realize, you see a gun barrel, and you don't think it's a joke," Williamson said.
"It was all surreal,” Blackburn said.
The college roommates were also locked inside their apartment closet before the suspects fled.
Police arrested Thompson first. After interviewing Thompson on Friday morning, investigators then arrested Douglas.
When Douglas was taken to jail, he told 40/29 News he did not rob anyone, but police disagree.
"He's a young kid and this is his first time being arrested," Grubbs said. "It's sad that we're even talking about this right now, this is a 19-year-old kid that's got the rest of his life."
Police are trying to recover a shotgun and a handgun they believe were used in the robberies.
"We really want to locate where those weapons are,” Grubbs said. "We were given statements yesterday that the first suspect knows where they're at, but against advice from an attorney the interview was shut down at that point."
Authorities said they are not releasing a name or a description of the third robber at this time.
Police tell 40/29 News they believe the men were looking for drugs.
"Some of the statements that they were making -- 'Where is your stash? Where is the weight,' -- It's giving the appearance they were trying to rob someone that they believed potentially was a drug dealer," Grubbs said.
Instead of drugs, police said cellphones, wallets and PlayStation gaming consoles were stolen.
Police said the suspects were dressed in black and wearing hoodies.
The college students said they are not drug dealers and, after being robbed at gunpoint, they are moving.
"I don't want to stay in this dangerous place," Williamson said. "I didn't stay here last night."
Neighbors are also moving out of the apartment complex.
"I'd be concerned too, but rest assured, we've got good people working this case," Grubbs said.

Recently I engaged my wife in a discussion of our respective pet peeves. Her short list included my inability to dance. I would argue that if a toddler who wiggles, but can barely stand, can be considered "dancing," then certainly I can dance! However, I will readily admit to being devoid of any sense of rhythm.
A couple of days later I was standing in line at the local convenience store. As I waited, I unconsciously got caught up with the beat of the piped-in music. Recovering my sense of place, I stopped just as soon as I realized what I was doing. Just then a woman walked up behind me in line and remarked, "Oh, I thought you were dancing."

This past week for the Southern Valley/Alma Saints was busy with games but also ended up with some cancellations due to the weather. On Monday last week, the Saints were in McCook for a pair of games against the Bison and Chase County.
In their first game, they played McCook and fell 12-1. Southern Valley/Alma scored in the top of the first inning and led 1-0 going into the home half, but McCook was able to put up seven runs. In the second inning, McCook put up another run, and then in the third, they scored seven more to put the run rule in effect. Brynn Bailey went 1-1 for the Saints with an RBI. Izzy Dubbs went 1-2 for Southern Valley/Alma too.
Southern Valley/Alma bounced back nicely against Chase County, winning 13-0 in two innings. Mikah Schultz was in the circle for two innings and allowed one hit and had four strikeouts. Brynn Bailey also spent some time pitching, one inning, and had two strikeouts.
On the offensive side, Maci Adams was 0-2 but had a pair of RBIs. In total, the Saints were walked 11 times in their three innings of offense which led to those 13 runs.
On Friday, the Saints hosted their triangular with Alliance and Gothenburg. In the first game, Southern Valley/Alma played Alliance and lost 12-2. Bailey went 2-3 at the plate with a single and a triple. Adams went 1-1 with an RBI and Sarah Holste went 1-2 with an RBI.
The Saints were set to take on Gothenburg but due to the weather, it was canceled.
On Saturday, Southern Valley/Alma was going to play in the Holdrege Tournament, but that was canceled too.

Today we went into the house to do some work for the first time. We had to install a new toilet in one of the bathrooms to pass inspection before closing, so today was the day.
The toilet went in well-as far is as we know. The water is shut off at the house so we have no way to test it. So here's hoping!
While Clint and my brother installed the toilet, I figured I would do my first round of vacuuming of the nasty carpets. It took forever and completely filled the bucket on my vacuum 3 times. 1857 square feet is a lot of carpet, especially when it includes a set of stairs. But, it was well worth it because just the difference of round of vacuuming made was HUGE. It will need at least one more full round before we get the shampooer in there. Ye haw!
It was also the first time I looked very closely and realized how dirty all the walls are. The previous owner obviously had a large dog and kids, so in addition to the ohh so lovely stained carpets the bottom 2 feet or so of all the walls are really dirty. So who wants to voulenteer to come help me scrub some walls, eh?
I also had the chance to meet our across-the-street neighbor. She was nice and gave me the low down on the basic neighborghood gossip. I love her already :)
Well that was our first day of many many more getting our house ready for us.

Hi hun, I wish I was there to give you are hug. I
can hear how sad you are in your post. I think most of us know the steroid dance we do. This disease is so cruel. Either you take the pred. or you get so sick that you have to take even more of it. I can't suggest anything different. I can tell you that I have some meds that make my muscles jump like crazy. I always thought it was from when I take the percocet. (pain pill). I know you get tired of fighting it. I know you want to have a normal life but I guess the best we can do for now is except this as the new normal. I don't want to give you false hope but my muscles and joints had me in tears tonight but i think it has to do with the changing of the weather more then anything else.
Have you discussed this with your rhummy? I was just curious as to why you think he would just put you back on higher doses of pred. I would think if there was something else you could try and you are adiment about it that your doctor would try to go by your wishes to a point. if they don't you need someone else that you can at least talk to. In the end steroids may be the best thing for you but there are other things out there.
hopefully someone here will have some suggestions.
hang in there

As told by her mother Barbara Gaidosh
I have three children, Briana, Brandon, and Becky. Briana however is now in heaven. While on our way home from Alabama from a softball tournament for Becky, Briana passed away, suddenly on July 16th, 2006 in a car accident near the Gainesville area on Interstate 75. My life as I knew it, changed in an instant. This is something no parent, no mother, should have to do; plan a funeral for her child and continue life without her.
This is Briana’s story
Briana started playing softball at the age of 6 years old and had a passion for two things: God and softball. She was privileged enough to be on the same travel team for ten years. She was also honored to be the first varsity second baseman ever for the Palm Beach Central High School Broncos softball team. Briana developed character during her 17 years of life and became a role model for us. She persevered even when the going became tough for her and most of all she valued people and her relationships with others.
Briana was blessed with a unique character. She was warm, friendly, outgoing, and yet had a humble way about herself. She was a leader, an encourager and a loyal friend. She was different because of the choices she made. She, like many others had to balance school work, softball, and of course, social time. She did this and much more! She was sweet natured, fun loving and beautiful both inside and out. She had a contagious smile and her infectious ways pulled people toward her.
Briana overcame many obstacles. She was not born with natural softball talent but she practiced and practiced, investing time and energy between team practices and games, to improve her playing skills. She never settled thinking it was good enough to be average; she worked hard and endured whatever was necessary to accomplish her dreams. When she was in a hitting slump, she turned her game over to God. She began praying and asked others to pray for her. Suddenly not only was she added back to the lineup, but she became fourth batter – the cleanup hitter. Players on the field would see her come up, see her small body frame, and they would move in on her, only for her to rip the ball over their heads. You see, Briana may have had a small frame but she often exceeded the other team’s expectations. Many times she was asked, what had she done to start hitting the ball but she gave all the glory to God! Briana told me countless times “Mom, God so Blessed Me!”
Briana valued not only close friends and family but she also cared about other people’s feelings. She gave encouraging words when an error was made on the field. When others were down on themselves she would speak words of inspiration.
Briana, impacted many lives including mine.
She is my daughter and I will love her always and forever!
Briana’s love for God, Family, and Softball is the inspiration for the
Briana Marie Cox Foundation.
Leave a Note for Briana here

Get over it. The NBA lottery worked exactly as it was supposed to - as a lottery, and as a deterrent against teams deliberately tanking their seasons to get higher draft picks. You didn't get #1 or #2? Such is the bounce of the ball. You also didn't get #12.
Next year, try harder.
And as much as I love The Sporting News, whoever green-lit that Simmons-esque phantasmagoria on "What if the Celtics had gotten Tim Duncan?" really needs to get outdoors and watch some baseball. "What If" barely worked for Marvel Comics; there's no real place for it in the world of sports.

Yesterday was another beautiful day for biking. After the quick heat wave from the day before it came out beautiful, dry and cooler. I started my ride with a big breakfast at a local diner before riding through Newburgh, NY and crossing the Hudson River over to Beacon. I knew I had 2 big climbs before I got to Kent.
Google didn't disappoint. I kept expecting a big climb and they were back to back at the end of the ride. I didn't drink or eat as I am supposed to, so that second climb was a killer. And once again the road went from pavement to dirt over the top. Fortunately it was packed down hard. The good news is that between the climbs, I got to ride over the Housatonic River and go over Bull's Bridge, the iconic covered bridge over the Housatonic. It was kinda fun having cars wait on me at the 1 vehicle at a time bridge!
I was bonking all the way over the second climb and I was out of water. I knew that once I got to the top it was downhill all the way to the B&B . Once I got to the Constitution Oaks B&B I was done. But the owner wanted cash for the stay so I had to drop my bags off, water up, and head off to the local ATM which was 4 miles away, or so I thought. She was not there when I got there, so I dropped my bags and headed off.
Then Google disappointed. I decided on the direct route that was up over a hill. Google missed a turn so I went an extra mile or 2 out of my way. This was across hills of course. Then she said make a U-turn. Fortunately, the extra water and some food I had at the B&B when I stopped helped me recover a bit. So I made it to the local joint Clamps that I guess has been here for 100 years. Based on how over priced it was, I can understand. For $14 I had chicken tenders (overcooked), coleslaw, and 2 chocolate milks. The good news is that they helped me recover significantly.
I made it to the ATM then chose the longer, but flatter, direction back. This time Google did not disappoint. I rode through New Preston and found an awesome waterfall.
Then, I rode along the western shore of Lake Waramaug for several miles. This is only the second time I've ridden by a lake and the road was right on the shore. They were also building in spots along the shore - something that wouldn't happen in Maine. But the place was beautiful. It was a small lake, but they had a state park I road through and thankfully I made it around the hill that I took on my way to the ATM. This is a beautiful area of CT - out in the woods!

The 2014 Winter Olympics could have gone a lot differently for Johnny Weir. The openly gay retired ice skater — who commentated on ice skating and ice dancing with best friend Tara Lipinski this year — was vulnerable to Russia's antigay laws . Thankfully, he didn't feel under threat during his stay in Sochi. But Johnny did explain to POPSUGAR at the Paralympics viewing party in NYC on Friday that his most common experience was someone doing a double-take in the bathroom.
"The worst thing that would happen was I would stand to pee at a urinal in the bathroom, and I'd have my hair and my pink blazers and everything. Gentlemen would come in, and they would look at me standing to pee, walk out to make sure they were in the right door, and then have to come back in and kind of give that strange look, like, 'You're a lady. Why are you standing to pee?'"
Prior to the Olympics, Johnny said he didn't support a Sochi boycott. But that doesn't mean he didn't stand up for the community during his trip. "Russia is a very important country to me, and I feel terrible that there is a law enacted against the LGBT community there, so I did take time to meet with several people from the community to see how I can help and what I can do," he revealed, explaining that part of that was just being himself — in spite of the laws:
"Me dressing up, being myself on television, was simply that. I am constantly myself, and I had an amazing experience. I've never been to Russia and had a bad experience in my 15 years of traveling there. I absolutely love the country. They put on a beautiful Olympic Games."
Ultimately, he's not ready to try to make a big change in Russia, because he wants to impact the United States first:
"I am not a politician, nor am I an activist. I like to live my life, I like to be happy, and I want my friends and family to be happy and successful. And for me, as far as activism and trying to fix something in the world? If I was to donate that time for myself to fixing anything, it would be my own situation in America. There's still a huge portion of the country I'm still not seen as an equal human to my best friend or my mother, and I think that needs to change before America can go around bossing the rest of the world around."
For now, Johnny will be focused on pairing up with Tara — both officially and unofficially. The best friends hope to continue their professional pairing by cohosting, but until they get an offer, they're happy to just be fashionable friends who dance and sing "Total Eclipse of the Heart" together.

The waves had built quickly to two-footers. Moments ago we had been paddling along the calm shoreline of Warren Dunes State Park on Lake Michigan. Now we were fighting outsize waves in our 17-foot Bell Northwind canoe. The long and lightweight Kevlar craft is built to handle big water and we are practiced at adverse weather and water, paddling on big lakes. But this was Lake Michigan. It's not just big; it's great. At the time, this was the third Great Lake we had paddled.
As we paddled hard, the long rollers began to surf us toward shore, which was a nicely tapered sandy beach. This wasn't death defying. It was summer; the water was warm. This was "big fun" with a little urgency added. The beach was crowded with nearly a thousand swimmers and sunbathers. The paved lots alone at this site were twice the size of our Walmart's parking lots. We had launched, with a ranger's permission, off the northern end of the swimming area.

Add a web site
Jeff Bull Swap Meet
Send a News Item
Site Search by Hauser Racing
2017 FIA/FIM Championships schedule
News, Coverage, Features
John Woolfe Racing Event Coverage
OCS Paint Points Standings
Features, Interviews, Tributes
Gearhead Garage Blogs Paul 04/04
LA Racing Parts Links
Racers' web sites
Results, Reports, Info
Performance Parts, Merchandise
European and UK Bests
Editor's Diary archive
Russ Carpenter is from Guildford, Surrey. His first racing experience was helping Tony Anderson with his Ford V6-engined dragster named Trouble in 1969. But it was the Daimler Hemi engine where Russ' mechanical skills flourished.
Russ and Tony's rear-engined dragster, powered by a supercharged Daimler Hemi, made its track début in March 1972. The car had many engineering innovations over the years. Russ took over the driving in 1975 and won many Championships and events in the Senior Dragster category.
The car, named the Glacier Grenade, was the first British-engined car and the first car anywhere in the world under five litres to make a quarter mile pass in less than eight seconds, eventually running a best of 7.2 at 180 mph. Russ competed in Europe at Mantorp Park, Le Mans and Hockenheim and won the Euro Series Championship twice in the 1980s. Since retiring from regular driving in 1990 he has kept the car and has exhibited it regularly for over twenty years.
This interview was conducted by Simon Groves of Eurodragster.com in June 2014. Eurodragster.com thanks Stu Bradbury of the British Drag Racing Hall of Fame for helping to arrange the interview.
Click on any picture for a large image.
Eurodragster.com: What is your background in engineering and running cars?
Russ Carpenter: When I first met Tony Anderson I was working in an engineering works, fabricating and manufacturing diesel piledrivers (Bookham Engineering) and met Tony via a friend. I started helping him on his original car, a Ford V6 slingshot called Trouble and then built the first rear engine Daimler together. We decided we wanted a British engine with a hemispherical head, and the Daimler was the only British one available. We contacted British Leyland, told them that we wanted to use it and had calculated we could get about 400 hp out of it compared with 140 hp standard. They wrote back and said they had played with the engine and after 200 hp it became very unreliable and they didn't feel it was a very practical engine for racing.
Eurodragster.com: When Tony started in 1969 was it before he got into the Daimler hemi?
Russ Carpenter: He had a Ford V6 slingshot which I was helping him on and we put a supercharger on it. Tony had a great technical understanding of vehicles and we gradually learned by developing the engine how you could push things. With my help we got the Ford V6 down to 9.6 seconds but it started to eat bits. Unfortunately we were too young and inexperienced in those early days to understand about port injection, it was purely top hat injected. We felt we had come to the end of the Ford V6's capabilities.
Eurodragster.com: You'd thought of the Daimler by then?
Russ Carpenter: We decided we would go with the Daimler while we were working on the Ford V6. We very nearly abandoned it because of the letters we had from British Leyland. Fortunately I had a friend who worked for Shell Research at Egham and he took a cylinder head, crankshaft and conrod and a piece of the block to be metal tested. He found they were made out of very good materials so we decided to go ahead. We were originally going to run two cars as there was a 4.5 litre version of the Daimler Hemi. I was going to race the larger engine, but the 4.5 litre was too hard to get spares for even when it was a current engine. It had a low production run as it was used in limousines and hearses and no-one kept spares, not even the factory. It was even difficult to get head gaskets which you had to wait five to ten weeks for. So we stuck with the 2.5 litre.
Eurodragster.com: When did you start driving the car?
Russ Carpenter: That was in 1974. I didn't drive the Ford-engined car. We built the Daimler car to fit us both. Tony was not very tall and quite slim. After we had built the car large for me, he was like an egg in a box so we had to make a padded seat for him to drive when he wanted to and took it out and put in very thin padding when I drove.
We built the rear engine car for the Daimler in 1970 but débuted it in 1972, and there is some conjecture as to whether ours was the first one in England or not. There was a couple of weeks' difference but I can say we were one of the first English-built rear-engined dragsters. Tony continued to drive the car when I started driving in 1974. My first meeting was Silverstone and I won that meeting, it was my first trophy.
Eurodragster.com: When you ran in 1974 what changes had you made by that stage?
Russ Carpenter: We were running mid to low nines at that time but still only had top hat injection. It was when we learned more about injection on a Top Fuel car and went to port injection that was when the car got quicker getting into the eights. That was when we hit another barrier at the low eights. I had been on to Hilborn in the USA and told them the size and volume flow of the Daimler. They recommended injector nozzle sizes and a fuel pump that we bought from them and it turned out they wouldn't deliver anywhere near enough fuel. It was Dennis Priddle who helped solved the problem for me.
We were having trouble at a meeting and it looked as though it was rich but in fact the car was so lean that it wasn't doing anything. We were trying to lean it down and it wouldn't even do a proper burnout. I got to the other end of the track and back into the pits and Dennis came over to me and said "You've got troubles, it's running horrendously lean just from hearing it". I said "I have a blank pill in there, I've taken pills out, and I still can't get it to run right". He said "The pump isn't big enough to deliver the fuel. I don't believe Hilborn's advice! I've got a pump which you can try and if it works you can buy it". We put that on the car and started to run rich. We doctored the fuel system so it was running right and we continued with that same pump right up to today.
Eurodragster.com: You had a supercharger from the start and the fuel system was home made?
Russ Carpenter: It was all home-made, I made my own nozzles, the barrel valve and I even made the pullies. We had very little money, and I had a lot of time. A friend had a machine shop and he very kindly let me use it in the evenings. I had all the equipment and friends that worked at British Aerospace so I would do deals by buying trade parts for their cars in exchange for lumps of aluminium like a lot of us did in those days. I was self-employed with a mortgage and spent everything I could afford to on the car. What I couldn't afford I would improvise by machining the aluminium to make parts for the dragster with the lathes and mills.
Eurodragster.com: So you had to make parts because of economics but also because the parts weren't available?
Russ Carpenter: We had a standard road clutch at the beginning but knew we had to go to a slider clutch like Top Fuel used at the time. However the smallest clutch for those cars was eleven inches which wouldn't even go between our chassis rails. By 1978 we needed a nine-inch clutch but no-one made one of that size so I found out how it was made after I saw one in a Top Fuel car. I took a couple of photographs and simply made my own. There are some articles for a magazine on how I made it. I made drawings and made a few of the slider clutches that are still out there and there are others made by people from my drawings.
Eurodragster.com: Going back to the mid 1970s, after you started driving in 1974 you had a lot of success, were you racing both at Santa Pod and on tour with NDRC?
Russ Carpenter: Originally Tony did all the Santa Pod meetings and I did the NDRC ones. Tony drove a couple of times at NDRC events but could never make the car go as quick as I could on the slicker tracks. He put it down to my additional weight rather than anything else.
Eurodragster.com: The NDRC tracks were variable?
Russ Carpenter: They were current or disused airfields that had very coarse tarmac, broken up heavily most of the time. Everyone suffered for traction. Blackbushe, Wroughton, North Luffenham, Upper Heyford, Snetterton and of course Long Marston.
At Snetterton I nearly lost the car. We had had a rainstorm and there were one or two puddles up the track. They decided to start running the meeting and I said "Look it's still very damp and there are puddles up the track". They said "Well, everyone else is racing" but I was reluctant and said "Well be it on your heads" so we ran the car. I got two thirds up the track but then touched one of these puddles and the car turned sideways. Normally if you back out of the throttle it will come back and straighten up, that's why people crash sometimes because they won't let go and lose a race. I backed off and it wouldn't come back and it kept sliding. I had full lock on but still the car wouldn't come back. I began to run out of ideas so I whacked hard on the throttle and the car went up on the tyres and came back straight. They all thought it was an incredible bit of driving, but it was the scariest time I ever had. It was desperation and I was at the point of rolling.
There was one other incident around 1978 or 1979 and there are supposed to be photos but I've never seen them. Long Marston used to have a nasty bump in the left hand at the finish line. I hit it as I pulled the chute and the whole car took off! It was a long way airborne, about three feet, and thought we were going to lose the car but it came down and bent the front axle so we had to abandon the meeting and go home and repair it. Someone said about a year later "I've seen some photos of you flying the car". A guy had been stood in the corn field which used to grow up almost to the side of the track and he said "I've got the car flying over the top of the corn with the chute out". I don't know who the guy was and I've never seen it.
Tony stopped driving altogether in 1975 after he had an accident at Santa Pod. There was a dip in one of the lanes and he took off. He had a full harness on and we didn't realise that we put the harness straps around the bottom rails of the cockpit. The car left the ground and bounced down, hit the tarmac, wrenched on the straps and it damaged his vertebrae. He went to the doctors who told him it wouldn't heal and if he kept on doing that he might end up disabled. That was all he needed to hear.
Tony was a nice, quiet guy, a boffin, and you would never have thought he was a drag racer. So I bought his half of the car and continued on my own although he still helped me with things. I never had a very good education but have good engineering skills and an insight to look at things and know how they work. Tony always helped me with all the calculations so he was involved with me away from the track as a friend until the 1980s. Back then I had a large workshop in an industrial estate. It had a lot of grounds and he went into boats and he built two boats in my yard and used the workshop facilities. He moved out of the workshop before I left it and we have since lost contact. His new wife was more into Formula One but not into boats or drag racing although we got along fine.
Eurodragster.com: After you took over the driving you had success in the late 1970s?
Russ Carpenter: We won a lot in 1977 and 1978 and changed the car's name to Glacier Grenade in 1979 when we got Hepolite sponsorship. That's when Dennis Priddle made the new body for it. Previously the body was home made, quite agricultural, and we had bent all the panels around an old propshaft. Priddle did a beautiful job and I love it to this day. It's so pretty and he says it's the best body he ever made. He had ordered half-hard aluminium and they sent him three-quarter hard. It was so hard he had a hell of job to bend, shape and weld it. But it gave it resilience over the years. I've had girls draped on it, kids climbing over it and the body is still in great condition thirty five years later.
Eurodragster.com: How did the relationship with Hepolite come about?
Russ Carpenter: There were two local guys, Martin and Dick Jarman who ran the Hepolite Hustler V6 injected Ford dragster who were involved with AE Autoparts, and I was using Glacier bearings and Hepolite pistons. I approached AE asking if they would be interested in sponsoring us but on the condition that they would continue to sponsor Dick and Martin. It later transpired that that condition was what swung their decision to sponsor me.
Eurodragster.com: Have you used standard engine parts for your car?
Russ Carpenter: The car still to this day has standard engine parts in it. Over the whole period I ran stock engine parts, the pistons were standard road pistons from a Triumph TR6, they were not forged pistons. I now have a set of forged pistons from an engine that I bought a few years ago but up until now I have always run stock pistons. I was running 90% nitro to run consistent 7.2s in Europe including six consecutive 7.2s at Hockenheim.
Eurodragster.com: Did you always run nitro?
Russ Carpenter: Yes, we ran nitro back in 1969 but in the beginning it was a smaller percentage. I increased the percentage as I learned more about nitro and a lot of that knowledge came from Peter Billinton of G-Max who was very helpful. I understood what it is, it's not a fuel but an oxygen agent. It's essentially a fuel enhancer which makes methanol burn very hard but most think of it as fuel.
When you run nitro in your fuel you gain more power over a quarter of a mile however the engine will require more fuel. If for example you use a gallon of methanol over a quarter of a mile and decide to run a fifty per cent nitro fuel mixture you now only have half the amount of methanol your engine needed originally but you also introduce an enormous amount of oxygen. To compensate for the loss of methanol but extra oxygen you need to add another gallon and a half of fuel mixture to return you back to the methanol your engine needs. To compensate for the extra volume of fuel you now have you need to double the fuel flow the engine receives to bring you back to the original quantity of methanol your engine will burn.
There were fuel delivery issues with our manifold. I didn't make a custom inlet manifold and haven't done to this day so it meant we had to deal with the very inefficient original manifold to deliver fuel to the cylinders. The inefficiency has to be compensated with the port nozzles. If you increase fuel by five per cent you don't increase the port nozzle delivery by five per cent. Some of the cylinders were running super lean but because you have top hat fuel delivery as well you only need to increase the lean port nozzles by two per cent. Tuning was a juggling act all through its life which I got quite proficient at I'm very pleased to say.
Eurodragster.com: How long did Hepolite support you for?
Russ Carpenter: They were with me from 1979 to 1982, it was originally going to be 1983 as well. We had been doing a lot of shows and had promoted their products well so we had already agreed a budget for the fourth year but then Hepolite had a takeover bid from GKN who had Vandervell Bearings.
I was doing development work with Hepolite at the time. They had been experimenting with new piston materials so they made me some ceramic pistons to put in the engine to test and feed back to them. They were looking at ceramic pistons for diesel engines at that time and were concerned about the heat at the speeds they were running at. We put them in the dragster and I tried to burn the crap out of them! They had said do what you can with them. At the time AE had a £63m development programme but they were only making £65 million profit so on paper they only made £2 million profit. It seems GKN had no development programme at that time and were earning £68 million profit so they tried to buy Hepolite to get the development programme.
In order for Hepolite to persuade the shareholders to say "No" to the takeover they had to cut all their advertising and sponsorship, they even cut their parts catalogues and made supplements instead. They cut expenditure to the bone and of course I was one of their victims. They took Susie and I to a most beautiful hotel in Stratford-upon-Avon and told me that although they had agreed the budget they could no longer help us financially, although they could still provide all the bits I needed. I was relying on the finance to race the car as there was nowhere near enough prize money to cover the fuel. If I got knocked out in the first round I was in profit but if I won the event I was in deficit because I used far more fuel. Hepolite's money supplemented that.
Eurodragster.com: You had a new body, upgraded roll cage and lengthened the chassis by thirteen inches by 1980?
Russ Carpenter: Yes, I also got a three speed B&J transmission that Hepolite bought for me but we had issues with it. I bought it from Steve Read and I've still got that transmission today. I had to make a considerable number of internal parts including the inner casing because it exploded internally. We found out that the clutches weren't set properly when I bought it and the hydraulics that were supposed to be up to pressure weren't right so it took me up to four meetings to sort it out.
Originally I thought the clutch was slipping. At one meeting it just wouldn't pull off the line. We didn't realise that it was the clutches inside the B&J epicyclic gearbox that were slipping. It is similar to a Lenco, which is mechanically activated even with air shifts, whereas the B&J has hydraulic pistons to work the internal clutches. The Lenco is technically a slower box to activate because it is more complex. To overcome the clutch issues in our B&J box I put large hydraulic pipes into it so I got better flow and much quicker activation.
Eurodragster.com: When you added that transmission the times came right down?
Russ Carpenter: Yes almost instantly once I had got the box working properly and we realised what the problem was. At one meeting I knocked half a second off my personal best. That was what pushed us into the sevens. In 1980 we ran a 7.73 and became Senior Dragster Champion of both clubs and in 1982 won the RAC Championship. At the Easter International I ran a 7.64 and a 7.60 in September.
We were starting to get issues with the axle at that time and by 1982 had changed it. I had a Chrysler 8¾" when I first started but the pinion and crown wheel broke even though we reinforced it with a spool it wouldn't hold. I then had a 9" Ford. At the Drivers and Riders meeting one of the also-rans stood up and said "It isn't fair we can't win and are getting fed up and are losing heart". Instead of developing their cars they were expecting to win with what they had. All the Champions had developed and got quicker in their classes.
Eurodragster.com: There were a lot less dial-in classes in those days and the brackets were based on engine power and weight?
Russ Carpenter: These guys decided the more powerful cars needed handicapping so they came up with this power to weight ratio which increased so we had to add 160 lbs weight to the car. The Ford axle weighed 155 lb extra than the Chrysler so all we did was make extra thick strong brackets which weighed 5 lb. When we put it in it immediately ran a quarter of a second quicker. I hadn't realised the Chrysler axle had been causing tyre slip off the line.
Eurodragster.com: So their suggestion resulted in a less even playing field?
Russ Carpenter: After two or three meetings they wanted a special meeting to revert the rules back to what they were. How did they ever think that anyone would take the weight off the car and go slower? It wasn't going to happen!
Eurodragster.com: Were you starting to race more internationally then?
Russ Carpenter: Firstly we went to Mantorp Park in Sweden in the late seventies. We went with Dennis Priddle, Jim Read and others. John Whitmore went out as well and we met in the final. How they worked the classes was they had an index based on the weight of the car. When I entered I put the weight of the car but didn't realise that the weight should include the driver, and that resulted in me being put in B/Dragster. I weighed almost seventeen stone and wasn't a small guy, however the Swedes had already protested my entry believing I should be placed in A/Dragster. The officials knew me and the car well and were getting irate having told the racers "You do not want to protest this", but they had paid their 100 Kroner protest fee so they reweighted the car with me in it this time. That resulted in me being put in C/Dragster which gave us a second and a half advantage! However I said "Leave me in B/Dragster, I'm happy with that."
In the final John Whitmore just pipped me as he had a better handicap than me, but if I had gone into C/Dragster I would have beaten him. It was still a terrific, incredible experience.
Eurodragster.com: Did you and John compare notes?
Russ Carpenter: I actually gave John all the information, the same that I had done with Robin Read. Robin had a lot of special parts made, but I gave them both all the settings from my car, nozzles, blower boost, advance, etc so they could get their cars running well. John was very close to me and nearly ran a seven before me. He was running 8.0s and I was running 8.1s. I said to him "Don't you dare run a seven before me, we'll do it together". We came down to race together but his car didn't run right and I ran the first seven on my own. The idea was that we would do it side by side but he had a very complicated home-made fuel injection system and it would either run nice or it wouldn't run at all.
I went to Le Mans in the early eighties and they put me into Top Fuel with Dennis Priddle and Tony Boden. The three Swedes also in Top Fuel protested me. The Top Fuel drivers had a meeting and the Swedes said "We don't want him to run with us, because he's not a Top Fuel car". Well it was a fuel car, but didn't have the 6.5 litre and above capacity to make it eligible for Top Fuel. Dennis Priddle said "He's here to make the numbers up and he is running good times, so he's entitled to race with us. You're not even running the numbers so get your act together and it won't matter then". The Swedes protested saying they would go home and wouldn't race if I was allowed to run. Dennis said to the promoter "If Russ doesn't race then I'm not racing, it's not right". The Swedes didn't go home and I stayed in Top Fuel. I eliminated one of the Swedes in the first round and I raced Tony in the semis.
Tony Boden and I were in the pairing lanes and I said to him "I heat up very fast, I can only do a single burnout, reverse, stage quickly and go". The Daimler generates an enormous amount of heat on idle because it's only a small engine. I said "Are you doing one or two burnouts, if it's two I will only start when you come back after the second one". He said "No it's ok I will only do one". So he did a long burnout, I then did mine and came back and was just before pre-stage when he unexpectedly did another long burnout to the eighth mile. By the time he came back my engine was really steaming and I knew it wasn't going to run properly. I didn't expect it to go bang on the line but as soon as I staged and hit the throttle it did and threw the blower belt off. Dennis was behind and said "Did he burn you down?". I told him what had happened and he said "OK!". In the final when Dennis did his burnout and they both came back and Tony started to stage, Dennis did another burnout and came back and made his crew look all around the car messing Tony's head up as he sat there. Dennis eventually went into stage and when the lights went down he just left him sitting there. Dennis didn't think what Tony did was right so I have massive respect for Dennis.
Le Mans was very narrow, slippery and there was a nasty bend at the end. The crowd was really close and I absolutely loved it. I got a trophy for third place and the racers just about gave me a standing ovation. My car was good on those tracks, it had big tyres, far too big for the car but also I had a very aggressive aerofoil. As soon as you got to 40 mph it would push the car hard into the ground, as soon as you got to 180 mph it was just like a brick wall. It's never gone any faster than 179.9 mph which I did in 1977 with a GMC 4-71 blower and an 8.9 second ET. The ET was always quick, the speed didn't matter. I always had the view the quicker you went, the more difficult it would be to stop the car and the more the chances of a problem. I had got a new foil profile and was making a new aerofoil for the car to get the drag down just before I retired.
Eurodragster.com: After Le Mans you raced in Germany at Hockenheim?
Russ Carpenter: Yes and also in Austria at the Osterreichring and at Zandvoort and several airfield tracks in France. At the French Championships we were a guest car with Steve Johnson's Motor Mouse. At Aniche we raced from the town centre out into the fields on closed roads. It could only happen in France. They also named a beer after us and we got two beautiful medals and the key to the village from the mayor.
Eurodragster.com: The experience of Hockenheim, what was that like?
Russ Carpenter: The very first time there was a dark shutdown area which was slippery and that was also when Tony Boden sadly lost his life.
Despite that I liked Hockenheim. When they made the purpose-built track that was always good, it worked well for us. The left hand lane was always a bit of a problem because the track went on to the old F1 circuit just before it came into the stadium area and there was a bit of banking where the drag race track joined the circuit on the bend. So the left hand lane had an inch and a half drop at the eighth mile point. You would have freewheeling through there. At the last meeting just before I retired when I had been Euro Champion for the previous two years and almost for a third year in 1989 Robin Read had to win the event, beat my best time and beat my best speed. His crew helped him to do that, they knew how to tune the motor for him. He ran a 7.0 and I ran a 7.2 and he was 10 mph faster as well. Robin had lane choice so took the right lane leaving me with the left. During the race I hit the drop and freewheeled over-reving the motor. Unknown to me I had damaged the block and cracked the webs.
When we went to the first meeting at Santa Pod in 1990 the bottom end of the block just ripped out. I didn't know it was damaged as the oil pressure was still good. I loaded the car up with the intention of running a 7.0 or 6.9 and it just couldn't take it. I broke the crank in two pieces and took the bottom of the block out. It all stayed nicely in the sump and there was not a drop of oil on the track. I thought the gearbox had broken and came back to the pits my son Andrew said "Should that bottom pulley look like that?". It was obviously out of place and I said "That's it! We've broke the crank, don't bother to take the gearbox off."
Eurodragster.com: So how long had you used that engine?
Russ Carpenter: It was four or five seasons old. It was a very good car maintenance wise in spite of it having standard parts in it. The only time I hurt anything was when it hydraulic, usually because a rocker had broken with a cylinder going out. We had a problem getting them strong enough with the overlap and the fuel we were putting in. We were running a lot of fuel, nowadays the fuel cars are massively strong to cope with it.
Eurodragster.com: You ran at Hockenheim for fou ror five years but when the engine destroyed at Santa Pod did that signal retirement?
Russ Carpenter: It wasn't actually that, I had plenty of engines I could work with although it would have cost us a bit to put right. I had enough spares but it was just a case of a bit of machining. In 1989 they outlawed small nitro cars for competition in Sportsman classes and effectively eliminated both Robin Read and us from the Euro Series. It was only England that we could run, and I couldn't afford to run just in England. In Europe we got travel money and because I was Euro Champion I got appearance money which paid for the best part of the fuel. We raced for a prize pot of £1200 and every time I ran I won it. By however then I had no sponsors! So it was Europe that allowed me to run in England where there was no prize money to speak of.
Eurodragster.com: So immediately the Euro Series finished you had to quit?
Russ Carpenter: I tried a couple of meetings in 1991 and 1992 but the trouble with these cars is if you don't stick with them you lose the touch. I had a small weather station and most tuning was from natural instinct, adjusting the fuel to compensate for the oxygen in the atmosphere. Because I was doing it all the time I got it right all the time. But when I had been out a couple of years I had lost my confidence and couldn't get it to run properly and I could only afford to do one or two meetings a year.
So after 1993 I decided I would call it a day. I have kept the car and exhibit it in shows and cacklefests up to a couple of years ago when I did a stupid thing. When we finish a race or cacklefest we have to purge the fuel system because the nitro lays in the bores on top of the pistons and rusts the bores. I did a cacklefest, brought it back and thought I would purge it tomorrow but never did. When I came to turn the engine it had rusted solid so I have had to make a complete new engine for Andrew to have a drive. We plan to do the NSRA Nostalgia Nationals at the end of June, or Dragstalgia. If they let me, I will do a demonstration just to see it is still working properly. I could feel it as I drove it and could feel if it wasn't running right even if it was only two tenths of a second off. I built it by hand and raced it by hand, I didn't need the electronic bits. Just a weather station to get the air density. It was a crude weather station, none of the complicated boxes now that they plug into computers.
If I continued I wouldn't have been competitive with those that run today. My whole engine cost less than £500.
Eurodragster.com: That's the original concept of hot rodding, getting parts and adapting them.
Russ Carpenter: When Garlits came over in 1976 he walked round the pits. I was waiting to do a run in the old car, he came past and had a look and said "That's a lovely little engine, what is it?". I said "It's a Daimler hemi of 150 cubic inches and runs 8.6s". He said "That's brilliant; that was the best time of my life when I was making bits and making it work. Don't ever change it! It would look nice on my mantlepiece."
Eurodragster.com: What engineering do you do to keep SP250s on the road?
Russ Carpenter: I rebuild engines and export them all over the world. I've sent several out to Dubai, Germany, Belgium, Sweden, Norway, USA. Even Australia and New Zealand. I'm a one-man international company.
I do about ten modifications to the engine for road use. Redesign the valve guides because they were notorious for smoking and using a pint of oil every six hundred miles. I've got them so they hardly use any oil. And like a Triumph motorcycle when you stopped it you got an oil slick under the car, so I've redesigned the oil seals so they don't leak any more. I've redesigned the heads to take unleaded fuel, I port the cylinder heads and manifolds so they now run much more efficiently, very close to modern performances. The engines look nice when I finish them. I absolutely adore them and never get tired of doing them.
My customers have included rock stars, royal physicians, Lords, and Chris Evans who bought a Daimler saloon for Billy Piper from a Sheikh who commissioned it as a twenty first birthday present for his son. That one had an electric convertible roof, air conditioning and it weighed about half a ton more than the original car. I tweaked the engine and did as much as I could, but there was no more left. Billy Piper complained it was gutless but the air conditioning pump was where a supercharger could have been put. I went through the same story when it had been sold on by Chris Evans.
We're in the process of building a modern ECU fuel injection system as the standard carb manifold setup is very fuel inefficient, with four rich cylinders and four lean cylinders. When Daimler built it in 1954 and tested them they kept melting the cylinders. They didn't redesign the inlet manifold, they just made the engine richer. Even Leyland didn't redesign it, they left it the same.
Eurodragster.com: Thanks for your time Russ, and best of luck in the future!
Feature ©Simon Groves and Eurodragster.com
Features and Interviews index
Back to News page

If Catcher hadn’t known any better, he’d swear his General might be flirting with him.
He’d gotten chummy with the little woman ever since he’d been assigned to her squad. They were drinking buddies and occasionally, she came to him with complaints about how she thought the GAR was treating him and his brothers unfairly. He wasn’t sure what he was meant to do about it, but he listened to her and let her vent when she’d come off of the battlefield half in tatters because she’d lost too many men. This one was a real piece of work, honestly. She didn’t seem to accept the idea that he and the other clones were meant to be war fodder. They’d been constructed to simply be tossed out onto a battlefield and die. They didn’t have the same rights as everyone else and they likely never would, even after the war ended. But hell if his General didn’t fight tooth and nail to keep every single kriffing one of them alive whenever possible.
It was actually kind of attractive.
She would lead charge no matter what the field plan was and she had wicked fast reflexes with that damn laser sword of hers. Not to mention what she could do with those little Force fingers. Catcher had seen her do this weird thing once where she threw her arm in the air and lifted about five B1 clankers off their feet, and then clamped her hand closed and crumpled those bolt buckets like they were made of paper. It was terrifying—yet fascinating—to watch. It’d had the rest of the squad talking for the rest of the night about what else she might be able to do with those abilities of hers. Some were tame and battle related; others bordered on being obscene and probably would have had them reprimanded if the wrong ears heard them. Catcher had remained relatively silent on the matter. He didn’t know how he felt about these Jedi and their wizard powers.
He had noticed that his General had strange behavioral patterns at times. She tended to be relatively docile around him, but if she got around General Skywalker she became an agitated mess. Those two were like a pair of pissed off cats, always circling each other and spitting vicious things at one another. And then—when they thought no one was watching—they would shoot each other these funny looks. He’d noticed that Skywalker tended to follow these looks up with little bumps to her person or the occasional tug to her hair. His General often responded with more blatant actions like the pass of a hand over his crotch while she walked by him—something that often caused the younger man to stalk after her like a damn predator—or bending over just enough in her blacks and Jedi robes combo to taunt the little bastard. She just about taunted every other warm-blooded male in the room while she was at it, but it was always Skywalker who was the main target.
Unless she was pursuing Kenobi.
That was a curious situation. His General often went very starry eyed around the much older Jedi, gazing at him and sopping up every little bit of attention he wanted to give her. He, in turn, seemed quite generous with his time when he was able to spare it—which didn’t seem to be as often as she would have liked. There were moments, Catcher had noticed, where he would literally stop everything he was doing and steal her away to Maker knew where. It usually happened whenever they’d come back from a particularly rough battle and his General seemed to be in a bad way. She would be stomping around with fire blazing in her eyes and Kenobi would come in and scoop her up and she would return hours later, sweet and soft and absolutely littered in lovebites and bruises. Catcher did not want to make any assumptions about anything that went on between her and either one of these men, but as time went on he found himself becoming more and more annoyed by this behavior.
It got worse when she started wearing the armor.
He had gotten used to her wearing the blacks beneath one of those weird cloth things that looked like a thick ribbon that had been crossed wrong. A tabard was what he was sure she’d called it. And then she slowly started adding pieces to her collection. It started with the bracers, then the boots, then the shoulder pads and bicep gauntlets. And then she started wearing the thigh gauntlets and knee pads and damn near everything but the torso plate and he’d started to lose his damn mind. He didn’t know if it was knowing that she could haul around the extra forty kilos on that petite frame of hers that did it, or just the sight of her packed into it—the outfitter had done some serious adjustments for the thigh gauntlets and the pelvic guard—but Maker, it made it difficult to concentrate. The kicker was that she still wore that stupid piece of cloth criss-crossed over her chest like it did anything to help. She’d left herself wide open for both enemy shots and the pervert brain of every damn trooper on the squad—himself included. Chatter of what she might look like without the top half of the body glove and just that stupid piece of material circulated and put images into Catcher’s mind that he couldn’t get rid of. It took over a week for him to look her in the eye again.
She still haunted his damn dreams like nobody’s business, though.
Things always started out innocent and then escalated into such filth that it had him waking up in the middle of the night ready to fuck a hole through a durasteel wall just to get some damn relief. He always had a hell of a time trying to deal with it quietly, too. Jacking off in the middle of a barrack full of his brothers was not only uncomfortable, it just felt wrong. He’d sometimes visit the showers or the refresher to get his business taken care of, but it wasn’t the same as what he wanted. What he wanted was to know what the warm weight of that woman felt like on top of him and just how soft those sweet thighs of hers were. He wanted to know if her tits truly made the perfect handful like they appeared they might and whether or not she tasted as sweet as she smelled. And that damn mouth of hers—Maker. He could crank himself off a few times just thinking about what it’d be like to feel those lips around his cock.
He always felt like such a sick fuck when he was done. Like he knew he shouldn’t think these things about such a sweet girl. But Catcher knew that girl had a side to her that was anything but sweet. He’d seen glimpses of it when she got around Kenobi and Skywalker and he’d seen it out on the battlefield. Hell if he didn’t want to see it for himself personally. He would never get the chance to. He knew that for certain. Jedi tended not to stray from their kind, it seemed. Something about attachments, according to the Captain. Although—there was the curious case of General Secura, but Bly insisted their relationship was purely platonic. She was apparently in love with some Nautolan Jedi and was just taking her sexual frustrations out on her Commander. Catcher thought the bastard ought to consider himself damn lucky. There were a lot of men in this army who would pay for even five minutes of General Secura’s attention, sexual or not.
General Tacor was no different, really.
“You look tired,” the soft, too sweet purr in his ear sent a chill down his back to a place that really didn’t need to be awake at a time like this. “Are you going to be ready when I need you, Commander?”
“Yes sir,” looking up from his meal tray to find the brunette standing just a bit too close, Catcher gave as professional of a smile as he possibly could, watching as she lowered herself onto the bench beside him. She had no meal tray. She reached over and helped herself to a piece of the breakfast biscuit sitting in one of the compartments of his instead. He was not going to stop her. Those pretty green eyes of hers watched him as she chewed the stolen food, a smile spreading across her lips before she gave his shoulder a bump.
“What’s her name?” Her brows gave a wolfish sort of wiggle and Catcher almost choked on the bite of toast he’d taken.
“I beg pardon, sir?”
“Oh come on,” slinging her leg over the bench to straddle it, the Jedi General propped her chin in her hand and broke off another piece of the biscuit. “I see this look all the time from the other Troopers. You’re all terrible for running around and breaking hearts, you know. Some women actually do look forward to waking up next to a warm body.”
Catcher didn’t say anything, but he did slide the meal tray closer to her to offer the rest of the breakfast biscuit to her. She took it and gave him one of those adoring smiles of hers that nearly made some sort of beastly sound rumble in his chest. Fuck, she was a pretty one. He turned his eyes away when she started eating as not to appear rude, and grunted when she gave him another nudge.
He wished she wouldn’t say his name like that. It always went straight to his dick and it always made it damn difficult for him to think about anything other than what other sorts of tones he might be able to get her to say it in. Sucking his teeth, he shifted his gaze back to her and offered a light smirk.
“I don’t kiss ‘n tell, Little Bit,”
“You’re no fun,” she made a face at him and stuffed what was left of the biscuit into her mouth. He turned away again so he wouldn’t think about how her cheek looked crammed full of food like that and shut his eyes to try and think of something—anything—vile enough that would make it easier for him to get up and walk away from the table. He did not expect her to scoot up closer to him and he certainly did not expect her to nestle her chin on top of his shoulder. He wished he wasn’t wearing the top half of his armor. It would be more comfortable for her and he’d be able to feel her warmth better through the blacks if he didn’t have the plastoid shell on. “She must’ve been fun if you’re this tired.”
He almost laughed outright. If she only fucking knew.
“Well, I should get going,” she stood suddenly and gave his chest a pat. “I have to meet with Master Kenobi for a quick briefing before we ship out.”
Ugh. He could feel his lip curling at the thought. She definitely noticed. Slender fingers suddenly slid up the back of his neck and into his hair, making him twist in his seat to look up and find her eyeing him with one of those damn soft looks of hers. She didn’t say anything, just gave his hair the tiniest tug as she let out a soft hm before letting go and stepping away.
“I will see you at the hangar,” she called, sounding nonchalant as ever. “You better have your head where it’s meant to be, Commander.”
“Yes sir,” he watched her as she left, damn sure that she was putting a little more sway into her step than usual. When she was gone, he blew out a harsh breath and scrubbed his hands over his face, cussing quietly. He had no idea what the hell that was about. Chummy or not, the girl typically kept her hands to herself. There had been the odd occasion when they got drunk together when she’d give the hoop in his ear a playful sort of flick, but she’d never gone and tugged his hair like that. Shit, he was going to have to take a quick trip into the refresher and get rid of this damn problem she’d left him with before he had to show up for duty. Doing what he could to readjust behind the codpiece, he got to his feet and grabbed his meal tray to take it up to the dish line before pivoting on his heel and walking straight out of the canteen to the shower hall.
Well, this could not have gone worse.
Catcher had been right where he was supposed to be, right up against General Tacor’s side with his DC-15S at the ready. She’d had that damn laser sword of hers out and she’d stepped in front of him, waving it around to keep him from getting hit by oncoming bolts. He’d shot around her and helped annihilate the oncoming onslaught of clankers. They’d done pretty damn well as a team, he thought. And then they had gotten separated because she moved faster than he could think sometimes and she’d ended up on one end of the battlefield while he remained on the other. There’d been a flood of enemy fire and he had found himself trapped in the middle of it. He was lucky he hadn’t died. Whatever the hell she’d done hadn’t killed him, but it’d fucked him up real good. Catcher couldn’t remember much other than bright bolts of red streaming across his vision and a nauseating tugging in his gut as he was dragged clear across the space that separated him from his General. He’d snapped his wrist somewhere along the line and taken a bolt to the shoulder. Really—he considered himself lucky, considering the alternative.
Now he was stuck up in medbay where the droids occasionally popped their metal heads in to see if he required anything. It was always the same damn answer to the same irritating question: no. He had his IV of whatever the hell was in the clear pouch and he was fine with just the pitcher of water that was just a little out of his reach. He hated the idea that his brothers were left to finish the job by themselves without him, but he would enjoy the peace and quiet of the sectioned off bed for at least a short while.
He was half asleep when he felt the edge of the bed dip like a cat had hopped up onto it.
Groaning, he lolled his head to blink the bleariness from his eyes and almost shot straight upright when he found his General perched beside him. She had little bruises on her cheek and the sorriest look in her eyes as she looked him over, lips pursed lightly in regret. She didn’t seem to notice that he’d opened his eyes until she had brought her gaze back to his face and she drew in a deep breath once she had.
“I am so sorry Catch,” oh—she did not need to sound so sad. “You weren’t behind me anymore. I got scared. I didn’t mean to drag you around like that.”
“Hey,” yeah, he could’ve used that water he couldn’t reach. “It’s all right, Little Bit. I’m alive, eh?”
“I got you shot.”
“I’ve been shot before.” He probably shouldn’t have been so nonchalant. It seemed to upset her even more. “Come on now, General. You probably saved my damn life by not leaving me out in the open like that.”
She did not look very convinced. Breathing out a sigh, Catcher sat up as much as he could without disturbing the bruises on his back and fixed her with a look.
“What’s this all about, hm?” He tried to smile as gently as he could but he wasn’t sure if his features changed much. The damn drugs they’d given him were pretty strong. “I’ve been hurt out there before. You know this.”
“It wasn’t my fault before.” He wished she wouldn’t do that damn thing with her mouth. It was hard to focus on being serious when she had her lips all pushed out and pouty like that.
“I was the one who wasn’t paying attention,” he chuckled weakly and shrugged. “I failed to follow orders, sir. I did not have my head where it was supposed to be.”
“Where was it?”
“Where was your head, Commander?”
“Well—I mean…” reaching up to run his fingers through his hair, Catcher scratched the back of his head sheepishly. “It was on the battle, sir. I just couldn’t keep up with you. You move so damn quick sometimes it’s hard to stay so close, you know? I can’t keep my mind on the fight and on you at the same time, sir.”
“You don’t have to keep your mind on me, Catcher. That’s my job. I keep you safe.” That pout had turned into a mean little frown and her eyes had gone narrow right along with it.
“With all due respect, sir…” this one really boggled his brains sometimes. She was so sensitive when it came to protecting him and his brothers when she really ought to have been thinking about herself. Catcher and the other Troopers knew what they were for and why they were here. It was this one who seemed to have such a huge problem with accepting it. “That’s absolutely not your job.”
If it were possible to mix a frown and a pout into one solid expression, General Tacor was a master at it. She sat there giving him such a pitiful look that Catcher nearly reached his good hand out to touch her face and try and soothe her. He wouldn’t. He wasn’t stupid. He didn’t know how she’d react to such a thing and he honestly didn’t know how his body would react to it, either. Every damn bone in his body could be shattered and his dick would still find some reason to rise to the occasion for her. Maker, she had him scrambled something fierce.
“But you’re my Commander,”
And there was that fucking tone again; that soft, saccharine purr that perfectly complimented her Coruscanti lilt and gave it just the right amount of kick to really stir something deep in his pelvis. He loved it and he loathed it at the same time. He was pretty damn sure she didn’t use this voice with Skywalker or Kenobi. No—she saved this one just for him. It drove him absolutely thermal to think about.
“And you’re my General,” he really needed to get to that pitcher of water. He was starting to sound like he’d been swallowing rocks. “You outrank me, sir. You’re more important when it comes to coming off the battleground in one piece.”
She got up from the bed then. Sprang up, really. Looking like an irritated cat with her eyes all narrow and her shoulders bunched up near her ears, Catcher half expected her to try throwing something at him. She gave him this watery sort of look and kicked the wheeled leg of his hospital bed before turning to storm out of the room, taking the soft smell of roses with her. Funny how she never seemed to lose that scent even after hours of pouring sweat out on the battlefield. When he heard the door to the medbay open and slide shut, Catcher settled back on the bed with a groan and rubbed his good hand across his face. Great job. He’d gone and pissed her off. Now she was probably going to track down one of the two bastard Jedi aboard this starship and take her frustrations out on them. Ugh. He didn’t want to think about it. Looking around for the call button he’d been given, he found it and pushed it and waited for the nurse droid to wheel itself over and peer around the curtain.
“I think I need another dose of those painkillers.”
He really wished she’d stop visiting him in his dreams.
She was so fucking soft and needy and damn compliant when she really wanted something from him. He’d hear her making sweet sounds in his head; say his name in that stupid tone of hers while he was balls-deep and had her pushed up against one of the fighters in the hangar. He could practically feel the heavy drag of those wicked nails of hers down the back of his neck sometimes and the sharp cut of her teeth in the side of his neck as she wrapped those lush thighs around him and whimpered that he was going to make her come.
And then he’d jolt awake in bed sporting an erection that throbbed like a fucking toothache. Tonight was no exception. It had taken him a minute to get his bearings and to realize the reason his head was swimming wasn’t because he’d had a few too many shots of rum. The damn painkillers were strong, weren’t they? Strong enough to make him not want to bother with hobbling off to the refresher or the shower hall to take care of the problem. Catcher felt a little dazed as he flipped back the blanket on his lap, dragging the hospital trousers out of his way and just barely remembering not to use his dominant hand to grab his cock. Fuck, this was going to be a damn chore without his good hand. Whatever. As long as the stupid medic droid stayed on the other side of the room and didn’t bother him, he didn’t give a single fuck.
It was hard to keep the growl from rising in his throat when he squeezed his fingers around the fucking thing, though. What the hell had she done to him this time? It just seemed to get worse every damn night. He was not friendly with himself as he worked his hand in slow, hard motions, honestly just wanting a bit of relief so he could get the fuck back to sleep. He couldn’t remember the last time he had a full night that had gone uninterrupted by this shit. When working himself dry became irritating, he spit into his palm and tried again. This time, he was unable to help the sound he made and he stopped dead when he thought he heard the droid on the other side of the room make a chirping noise. He waited to hear the sound of its damn wheel approaching but when nothing happened, he started up again.
This was a little better. Not great, but he doubted he’d be able to find anything worth lubing up with in here. He was not using bacta salve. He’d heard a horror story or two about some idiot brothers of his who’d tried that and apparently it did not work the way it was supposed to. Plus, there was the smell. He was not about to run around with a dick that smelled of pineapple. Spit would do. Spit and the new collection of imagery his dreams had given him. Maker, she’d been wild this time. Something about being pissed off really kicked that woman into being a bossy, bitchy little thing that called every last shot and made demands of him that he’d been more than happy to meet. Catcher wasn’t much for being terribly rough with the faceless women he’d had encounters with but damn. Just damn. Little Bit could manhandle him like that any damn time she wanted as far as he was concerned.
He probably should have cared a little more that he was breathing as heavily as he was, and that he’d started making more noise than he’d initially meant to. But he was on the edge of a damn good orgasm when he brought his thumb to his mouth to wet it and rub it along the head of his cock the way his General seemed to like to do with her tongue. He was fucking himself into his palm, grunting and growling her name like a damn animal, when he happened to crack his eyelids and found a familiar pair of green eyes peeking at him from behind the privacy curtain. He really didn’t mean to make the sound he did but his body had decided to betray him then. The boiling pressure at the base of his spine rushed through him at the sight of her and came straight out of the end of his cock in hot spurts that landed on his belly. He couldn’t fucking stop moving his damn hand. Even when he started softening and each stroke was so sensitive it almost hurt; it was like he’d been put on autopilot.
Those sharp green eyes watched him for a moment or so longer before they turned away and left. He heard footsteps, then the door, and then he was letting out a breath he hadn’t realized he was holding. Fuck the Maker. He had to wonder how long she’d been standing there, how much she’d heard. Never mind that—she’d fully seen him make a fucking mess of himself and heard him whimper like some kind of sad adolescent. That thought made him wonder how the hell he was supposed to clean up. It seemed a little rude to use the fucking blanket. There was a box of tissues near the pitcher. His body wasn’t in so much pain anymore. He could reach it if he shifted around enough. Going for it, he grabbed the box as well as the pitcher so he could finally get a damn drink of water into him. Snagging a small handful of tissues, Catcher grumbled at himself for being such a fucking idiot. What the hell kind of sick, depraved fool continued touching themselves in front of their General like that? What sort of sick, depraved fool jacked off to their General in the first place?
Huffing out a breath, he shook his head and tossed the tissue towards the trash bin—thankful he wouldn’t have to get up to actually put it inside when it neatly landed inside of it. Picking the pitcher up, he took a long drink and then tugged his sleeping trousers back up over his hips. He wasn’t sure if he’d be able to get back to sleep tonight. Not without seeing those damn eyes of hers. Fuck. How the hell was he supposed to face her, now? Was it too late to be transferred to a new squad? For all he knew, she’d gone to complain to Cody to do just that. Thumping his head against the pillow, he contemplating calling the droid back over for more drugs and then thought better of it. He didn’t deserve the bliss of a drug-induced sleep. He deserved to wallow in this suffering for being such a foul pig. He would just have to force himself to sleep on his own and accept that he’d have to face whatever consequences came of it in the morning.
“What did you do to the General?” Karver asked when Catcher had been discharged the next morning.
“Eh? What are you talking about?” He’d been given a small medical relief of three days. Not the longest stretch of time, but enough to give his wrist time to stop feeling so damn sore whenever he moved it. Right now, he didn’t give a shit about the wrist. He was worried about what his brothers might know about what’d happened last night. “I didn’t do anything.”
“She went into medbay looking like she was two steps from crying last night and then came back out looking like she was ready to murder a man.” Karver shot his brother a look and smirked. “You didn’t go and tell her you weren’t important enough to pull off the field, did you? Coz you should know better than that, brother. That really sets a fire under her ass and you know it.”
Well, at least it didn’t sound like anyone knew about the other thing he’d done in medbay last night. That was something of a relief. Shaking his head, Catcher waved a hand and frowned.
“She’s gotta learn sometime that we’re not on the same level as these Jedi. Not that I don’t appreciate the sentiment—I do. It’s nice to know at least someone gives a shit about us.” Working his jaw, he discreetly glanced around the canteen to see if he could spot her. Usually she was in here before him, mingling with some of the other Troopers or silently patrolling the center and outer walk area. She didn’t appear to be here at all. “She just gets so damn upset about it. I thought Jedi were supposed to be emotionless?”
“Dunno, man.” Karver turned his hand up and tilted his head, studying him. “General Skywalker seems to allow himself a bit of feeling out on the battlefield. It’s only natural, really. S’rough out there sometimes.”
“Yeah,” Why wasn’t she here? Had he really fucked up so badly that she’d flat out avoid him? Not that he’d blame her. He wouldn’t want to be around the bastard he’d caught saying his name while cranking one out.
“You good, brother?”
“Eh?” Looking back at Karver, he got a raised eyebrow and a concerned look.
“You seem out of it.” After a moment, the other clone smirked slowly. “You’re afraid you upset her, aren’t you?”
“I don’t know what the hell you’re talking about. I’m still coming off the painkillers. Head’s a bit jacked, is all.”
“Oh come on,” jabbing an armored elbow into Catcher’s side, Karver chuckled quietly and flat out grinned. “It ain’t no secret that you’ve got eyes for the General. We’ve all heard you in the can. Oh, yeah—Little Bit. That’s good.”
“I’m gonna knock your fucking teeth out.” Catcher didn’t know whether he was mortified or pissed off.
“She’s in her quarters.” Still snickering, Karver turned back to his meal tray and took a large bite of his breakfast biscuit. “If you really want to apologize, just go talk to her. You’ve got more allowance to do so. You’re her Commander, after all.”
Getting up from the bench with a growl, Catcher swatted the back of the other man’s head and ignored the way he swore at him. Fucking nosey bastard. Now he had to wonder how many of the others had heard him and whether or not any of the chatter had made it to the higher ranks. It wasn’t as though it mattered; as long as everyone kept to business, most people were willing to turn a blind eye to whatever the Troopers—and sometimes the Jedi—got up to. But Catcher would have preferred to have kept this to himself. Maybe he ought to lop his damn hands off and ask for some kind of honorable discharge. No. That wouldn’t work. They’d just fix him with some kind of cybernetic replacement and send him back out like nothing had happened. It really wasn’t worth it. As he made his way down the corridor leading to where his General had taken up roost, he wondered if this was going to be worth it. He didn’t exactly know what to say to her. Hey, sorry for using you as spankbank fodder just didn’t sound right. Heaving a sigh when he found himself outside of her door, he raised a hand to knock and waited.
Taking the invitation, Catcher tapped the button to open the door and stepped in.
“General Tacor, I was hoping—” he stopped dead, feeling his jaw go slack when he spotted her. Standing in front of him in what appeared to be just that wide-sleeved wrap-around outer robe she wore on top of the other ridiculous layers of Jedi clothing, his General looked up at him with expectant eyes. She had her hair down. He’d never seen her with her hair down. It damn near hit the hem of the robe. Shit, the hem of the robe barely covered her ass—her bare ass. Those sweet, creamy thighs of hers that haunted him in the late hours of the night were on full display. The lightest little bruises ringed the tops at a strange angle and it took him a moment to realize that maybe the gauntlets hadn’t been modified as much as he’d thought. She had the stupid beige thing belted, but there was just enough of her tits on display to give him a good idea of what they’d look like without the linen covering them. Damn—damn. It had been a fucking terrible idea to come here.
He couldn’t unstick his tongue from the roof of his mouth. He made some kind of stupid noise instead and waved his hand like an idiot, letting out a rush of breath as he tried to tear his eyes off of her and put them anywhere else in the room. The wall seemed nice. There was a weird dent in the side of it. He wondered if it’d been there for a while or if she’d thrown something and put it there.
His eyes flicked back to her like a magnet and found her with her hands propped on her hips. He couldn’t tell if she was annoyed or concerned. He was trying too hard not to look anywhere but her face. The sway of material near her waist brought his gaze down long enough for him to realize that she was wearing panties. Where the hell was the back of the damn things? It’d looked like her entire ass was out.
“Sir,” he coughed out finally, wondering if she could tell that he was having a hard time breathing. “I wanted to apologize for… my behavior.”
“Your behavior?” Now she looked amused. That soft little mouth of hers quirked at the corner and she raised an eyebrow before crossing her arms. “What have you done now?”
“I…” Had he been seeing things? He’d been pretty fucked up on the drugs. For all he knew, he’d imagined seeing her in his room the night before. There was something about the look in her eyes though, like she was expecting him to say something specific. And he swore he’d seen her glance down at least once. Maybe he wasn’t crazy? “Sir… I didn’t mean to upset you yesterday.”
“I know how you feel about us clones and our purpose,” it was a little easier to breathe once he started talking about this sort of business. “I should have been a little more careful about what I said to you. I don’t want you to think I don’t appreciate the things you do for us, sir. I do. I truly do. And I owe you a big one for saving my ass out there yesterday.”
The look in his General’s eye bled into something so gentle and awestruck that it made his chest tighten a little. That was new. Normally all of her cute faces went straight downward. But she stared at him with such a sense of adoration and wonder on her pretty face that it actually hurt to look at her. After a long moment of silence, she seemed to flinch and come back to herself, blinking a few times and turning her eyes to the floor.
“You don’t owe me anything, Catcher. You know that.” Oh—okay. He’d never heard that sort of roughness in her tone before. He wasn’t quite sure if she was going to cry or if she just needed to clear her throat.
“Can’t you ever just call me Iza?” There was that little pout he loved so much. She looked so frustrated with her brows knit together like that and her lips pushed up under her nose. “At least Little Bit is cute. I feel weird making you call me sir all the time.”
“It comes with the job, Iza.” He smiled slowly, unsure of how he felt letting her name roll off his tongue quite yet. He’d said it before, of course. Just not to her face.
“There is no one else in this room but us,” she threw her arms out to her sides and the panels of the robe slipped a fraction, exposing a sliver of her belly to his eyes. “You may drop the formalities.”
“Yes sir—Little Bit—Iza.”
“Yeah?” He was looking at that dent in the wall again. Fascinating thing, it was. You’d really have to whip something at a ridiculous speed to dent durasteel like that.
“Why don’t you seem to have an issue saying my name when you’re about to come?”
He was pretty sure someone had sucked all the oxygen out of the room. Someone had screwed with the airlock and the cold vacuum of space was about to kill them all. It would be so much kinder than what was actually happening right now. He’d hoped—prayed, even—that he had just been hallucinating. Those hadn’t been her eyes he’d seen. They were just a figment of his drug addled imagination. He’d wanted her so bad that he’d gone and visualized her standing there to watch him lose it all over his stomach like a fucking animal. But as he stood staring at the fucking dent in the wall of her sleeping quarters with her standing mere meters away in almost fucking nothing but a damn smile, he knew he was wrong. He was so, so wrong.
The press of hands against his chest startled him back to attention and he found that she’d crossed the room and was just a little too close now. He could smell her. That sweet, floral perfume of roses and something headier; like sweat but cleaner. Oh—he knew the scent of an aroused woman anywhere. Sweet merciful Maker—what had he caught her in the middle of?
“Breathe,” that teasing look was back. “You don’t want to have to spend another night in medbay, do you?”
He shook his head, finding that he’d been struck dumb once again. How did she do that? He was a damn soldier for fuck’s sake. He had seen some vicious shit—done some vicious shit—and yet this plush, petite devil of a woman could render him absolutely useless. Fuck, she was warm. She wasn’t even leaning on him and he could feel every last bit of her body heat through his greys. She could definitely feel the way his heart was racing in his chest, couldn’t she? Shit. He wished he knew how to control that.
“You need to sit before you pass out,” and then she was grabbing him by the front of his jacket and pulling him over to the bed. She sat him down at the edge of it and he almost melted into the touch of her hand when her fingers slipped into his hair. Maker—he was done for. Between being at eye-level with her pretty thighs and having her use such an affectionate touch, he was a lost fucking cause. His fate was sealed when she threw one of her legs across his lap and settled down on top of it, smiling as though this was the most normal thing she could ever do. It was nowhere near normal for a Jedi General to plant themselves in the lap of a Clone Commander so casually. Especially not when said Jedi General was barely clothed. Catcher heard himself make a pained noise and watched as a concerned look flickered across her face and she started lifting herself off of his legs.
“No—” he didn’t mean to reach for her like that. He didn’t mean to sound so damn desperate, either. Catcher was sure he looked like some kind of pathetic bastard making a move like that.
“I don’t want to hurt you.” She stayed hovering above his lap, looking conflicted. She hadn’t batted his hand away, he’d noticed.
“Trust me sweetheart,” Catcher laughed breathlessly and shook his head. “You haven’t.”
His General worked her jaw for a moment before she gingerly settled back down, shifting a little closer. Her concerned look softened into something more curious as she reached and started playing with the silver buttons holding his jacket shut. She seemed determined not to look at him, at least for a few minutes.
“You’re very gentle,” she said quietly, popping a few of the snaps near the top. “Most people would have just grabbed me.”
“I’m not most people,” he watched her as she worked the snaps open, beating back the wave of jealousy at the mere mention of most people. He didn’t want to hear about anyone else touching her. He already had to watch her flirt with Skywalker and Kenobi. That was enough. A brow quirked on his forehead when he noted the way she appeared to be fighting a smirk. Tilting his head to try and look at her, he gestured at her face. “What’s that for?”
“Nothing,” she shook her head and pressed her lips together even more, eventually pulling them downward in a forced frown that looked very amused. “You do know I can feel every shift in your emotions, right?”
Fuck the Maker. How could he forget that? These damn Jedi were demon wizards.
“That right?” He sucked his teeth and tried to focus on watching her get him out of his jacket. He didn’t know why she wanted him out of it, but if she wanted to take it off, she was free to take it off.
“Mm,” she’d reached the last snap and gave it a tug to pop it free before sliding those warm hands of hers across his abdomen. Catcher was pretty damn sure he purred. He made some sort of throaty noise he couldn’t describe. Whatever it was, she seemed to enjoy it. “I know when you’re happy and when you get jealous and when you feel sad.”
He wanted to argue that he never felt sad. It would be a weak one made up of some macho bullshit just to try and save face. He and his brothers were not supposed to wallow in those kinds of feelings, but sometimes the losses took their toll. She shifted on him again, moved in closer and moved her weight higher on his thighs. Her tricky little fingers found the hem of his under-tunic and started stroking the skin beneath it in slow passes that burned.
“I know when you get turned on, too.” Her pretty green eyes had tiny flecks of gold in them, he realized. Funny—they’d been close like this before and he’d never noticed. He couldn’t tell whether or not the smile on her lips was meant to tease or chide him. “You’re a horny little fuck, Catcher.”
Catcher choked on his next breath, unsure if he was supposed to laugh or not. He felt a swell of something that could have been shame but he wasn’t sure. He knew he was definitely on the embarrassed side. But there was something about hearing her talk like that that got to him. Had he ever heard her swear before? He couldn’t remember. Maybe when they were out on the battleground or if she was ridiculously drunk. But she certainly never said any shit like that.
“Are you all right?” She’d stopped petting his skin and was looking at him with genuine concern now. Man, she was pretty. Nodding like an idiot, he smiled and found himself leaning down to gently bump his head with hers. It was such a stupidly affectionate move. She was probably expecting him to kiss her. He would get to it. This felt more appropriate to do first. Like an instinct he couldn’t suppress.
“I’m fine, Little Bit,” he said as he leaned back, taking in that look of wonder she was giving him for the second time now. “Just watching.”
“What was that for?” Her voice was barely a whisper and she seemed so stunned that he wondered if he’d done something wrong.
“I’m sorry.” Catcher didn’t know what else to say. Even with the filth she’d spit at him, he hadn’t been able to help giving such an affectionate gesture. He started questioning whether or not he’d overstepped a boundary. Maybe she wanted to be the one to make all of the first moves and he’d just ruined that for her. Or maybe she hadn’t wanted him to interact with her at all. Catcher didn’t have much of an issue if she wanted to just sit on his lap and touch him. He wouldn’t have let her get this close if he didn’t approve.
“You…” she looked so lost staring at him like that. What had she expected out of him? That he was just going to see her dressed the way she was and turn into some rabid beast? Sure—his brain had gone to filth. It always went to filth when he saw her. But that didn’t mean he would go feral and jump her. Catcher liked to think he had a little more tact than that. “You’re so gentle.”
“You’ve said that, sweetheart,” he couldn’t help chuckling at her. He kind of felt bad that she seemed confused. Maybe she would’ve responded better to a kiss? “Is that a bad thing?”
“I…” she started to shake her head and shrug like she didn’t know how to answer. There was a look on her face like she wanted to say something but was holding back for the sake of not pissing him off. Yeah—he got it. Most people wouldn’t be so sweet with her.
“Do you not want me to be gentle?” It was a fair question. If softness triggered such a startled response from her, then maybe he’d just have to adjust to what she liked instead.
“No. Yes. Wait—” Holding a hand up like she needed a minute to gather her thoughts, the brunette shut her eyes and exhaled slowly. “You don’t have to stop.”
“Does it make you uncomfortable, Little Bit?” Another fair question, he thought.
“Not uncomfortable,” she shook her head. “Strange.”
“It doesn’t feel like just sex.” Well, at least she was honest. “I’m not used to… emotion.”
Ah. There it was. That was why she stuck with the Jedi. They could provide all the fun without any of the worry of attachment. And here he was, about to ruin all of that for her. It kind of made him feel like an asshole, honestly. He didn’t want to be the cause of any confliction for her.
“Do you want it to be just sex, Little Bit?” He didn’t know when he’d put his hand on her thigh. Her skin was just as soft as he’d imagined it would be—softer, even. As he swept his thumb in a slow arc across the surface of it, he watched about five different emotions flicker across her face before something unreadable settled in her eyes and she did that stupid frustrated pouty thing with her mouth.
“That wouldn’t be fair to you.”
Catcher was pretty sure his eyebrows just about shot off of his forehead. That had been the last thing he’d expected to hear her say. He wanted to argue back that he didn’t really care much about fairness. He was pretty happy to just have the opportunity to be here like this with her at all. He was sure she knew that, if her talk of how she could feel all of his emotional shifts was true. Humming quietly, he lightly tapped his thumb against her thigh and flashed a faint smile.
“Guess we’re in a bit of a situation, eh?”
“What do you mean?”
“Well,” he adjusted himself on the bed, leaning back on his elbow when he realized using his bad hand to brace himself was a stupid idea. Looking at her from this angle was fucking torture. Especially when she was still giving him that conflicted look of hers. “I want to adjust to your needs, and you want to adjust to mine. We have to find some middle ground here, Little Bit.”
“I don’t want to deprive you of your feelings, Catcher.” She moved up on him again, settling dangerously close to the aching bulge at the front of his trousers. An inch or two more and she’d be nestled right up against the damn thing. “It’s unfair for me to ask that of you.”
“Do you really think I’ve never had emotionless sex, sweetheart?”
“How stupid do you think I am?” Bitch switch flipped. “I know it isn’t just your dick that is happy to see me when I come into a room, Catch. I told you—I can feel it when you’re happy and when you’re jealous. You think I haven’t noticed the very specific moments those emotions come into play? You think I don’t feel bad about it sometimes? I don’t want to put that sort of feeling into you.”
“You don’t want to make me happy?”
“No—that’s not—I do not want to upset you.” She tugged at his under-tunic in frustration and frowned, all traces of that pout completely erased. “It ruins my whole day when I know that I’ve done it. I cannot apologize for having needs, Catcher. But I’m sorry that you have to bear witness to the courting that takes place before it.”
“You don’t have to apologize to me for anything.” He hoped she couldn’t feel the weird pressure weighing down on his chest. Catcher didn’t know what it was, but he didn’t like it. “I have a basic idea of how this Jedi shit works. No attachments. I assume it means you’re supposed to stick to bedding each other for the sake of convenience. Not a big deal, sweetheart. I get it.”
“You don’t have to worry about me and my feelings. If it’s sex you want, you can have it.” He turned his hands up and smiled, hoping it wasn’t as bitter as it felt. Man—what the fuck was wrong with him? “I won’t be gentle anymore. I’m sorry if it caused any confliction for you.”
“I need them.”
“Excuse me?” Catcher really didn’t want to hear about how she needed Skywalker and Kenobi right now. If anything was going to make him go soft, it would be that.
“Your feelings,” Thank the fucking Maker. “I need them, Catch.”
He felt the confusion twisting his features and hoped she’d elaborate. When she simply sat there and stuck her bottom lip out at him, Catcher sat up again and lifted his hand to her cheek. She had a scar here; he vaguely remembered how she’d gotten it. One of their first battles together. Commando droid. He’d taken a nasty hit to the face from it—the scar ran deep along his chin—and she’d lost her damn mind. He’d been told she ripped it apart with her bare hands, a feat her Jedi Master was known for. She’d been clipped in the face with the shrapnel and left with the jagged-edged little dip beneath her eye. A badge, as his brothers would call it. Running his thumb over the mark, he tilted his head at her in silent question and almost flinched when her fingertips traced the deep line etched in his chin.
“I don’t want it to be just sex, Catcher,” she leaned into his touch and gazed up at him, a soft frown pulling at the corners of her mouth. “I want to be able to feel the things you feel.”
“You trying to tell me you want me to feed some kind of emotions addiction, Little Bit?” He was teasing. It was meant to just be a jest. But when she looked at him like she’d been slapped, he felt like an absolute asshole. Shaking his head, he leaned in and gave another one of those affectionate bumps to her forehead. “I’m sorry. I’m sorry. I didn’t mean for that to sound so cruel.”
“I know you didn’t,”
“What do you need, Little Bit?” Still stroking his thumb against her cheek, Catcher smiled at her fondly and raised an eyebrow. “Coz I can fuck you into next week or I can keep being sweet to you. It’s entirely up to you.”
“Can you do both?”
He laughed outright, turning so he wasn’t cackling in her face. Dropping his head forward as he gave it a shake, he poked his tongue into his cheek and heaved a sigh. Looking back at her, he didn’t even bother trying to hide his amusement.
“Greedy thing, aren’t you?” He gave her chin a light pinch and watched her shrug.
“You’re the one asking what I need. I need both of those things.” She’d definitely mastered the art of nonchalance, this one. “What do you need, Catcher?”
“I’m a very simple man, sweetheart,” there was no way he could keep from trailing his eyes up and down her form. “You’re pretty much supplying everything I need right about now.”
She didn’t say anything for a moment. She just seemed to study him with those sweet green eyes of hers before letting out a quiet noise and moving up higher on him again. Catcher could hardly help himself when he realized she was shifting up to straddle his hips and he hoped he didn’t look like a fucking idiot when she settled right down on top of the erection in his military slacks. He really didn’t mean to grab her thigh the way that he did and he certainly hadn’t wanted the helpless sound he made to come out of his mouth. He shouldn’t have cussed at her, either. That was probably a little rude. But she was all sweet smiles as she made herself comfortable with a light wiggle of her hips—devil; she was the fucking devil—and rested her hands on his chest again.
He said something unintelligible and did his best to pull as much air into his lungs as he could. It wasn’t easy. Every time he moved he could feel the tiniest shift of her weight and it drove him nuts. Still, she just smiled at him like she was pleased with herself for having turned him into a mess like this.
“Am I too heavy?” She asked after he still couldn’t seem to get his breathing to even out.
“Fuck no,” Catcher shook his head and kept his hand anchored on her thigh as though it might keep her from moving. She seemed reasonably pleased with this too. That cat-like smile of hers only grew as she tilted her head and gave the tiniest forward nudge of her hips, making him growl and set his jaw as his fingers sank deep into the supple flesh of her thigh.
“I’m surprised the codpiece can hide this.” What a fucking brat. “Did they have to adjust your armor, too?”
“You better watch your mouth, Little Bit,” he had to let go of her before he added to the collection of bruises on her skin.
“I’m paying you a compliment.”
“You’re fucking with me, sweetheart.” Catcher laughed quietly and let his fingers twist in the hem of that silly robe she wore instead, another growl rising in his throat when she rocked forward a second time. “Since we’re on the subject—I see the armor isn’t very friendly to you, is it?”
“I manage,” she shrugged, sparing a quick glance to the tops of her thighs. “I do prefer the freedom of just the blacks, though.”
“Apparently it’s indecent to walk around without the lower armor, according to Captain Rex.”
A wide grin spread across his face before Catcher shook his head. Ah. So he hadn’t been the only one taking notice of the General and the way the body glove fit her. He couldn’t blame his brother for looking—though he might have a word or two for him for asking her to pour herself into the damn armor.
“What? Why are you smiling like that?”
“It’s only indecent when you’ve got choobs to show off, Little Bit,” he snickered, pursing his lips in an attempt to keep the grin from widening further. “I think the good Captain was getting distracted.”
“Distracted by what?”
“Oh—sweetheart,” either she honestly had no idea or she just wanted to hear him say it. “You do know how you look to the rest of the galaxy, right?”
“I have some idea, sure,” the brunette looked as though she didn’t understand what it had to do with anything and Catcher found it extremely endearing. For a woman who had no issue using her body to taunt, she sure as shit seemed blissfully ignorant about why it was so effective. “But I still don’t see what that has to do with me needing to wear lower body armor.”
“You’re very soft, sweetheart,” he pulled her closer to him as he said it, hoping she wouldn’t take offense. “The blacks show off everything as it is. It’s very hard to concentrate on business when you’re walking around with all your curvy bits jiggling. And you also have a set of thighs that look like they could crush a man’s skull.”
“Maker,” dropping his head to her shoulder, Catcher let out a harsh breath that bled into a laugh. “You’re a horrible tease.”
“Do you want me to crush your skull with my thighs, you weirdo?” She laughed, running her fingers along the back of his neck. He fought against a shiver and picked his head up to look at her.
“Not really,” he paused, and then— “But I’d still like to put my face between them, if you don’t mind.”
“And why would I mind?” She’d gone and scratched her nails down his neck, drawing a soft groan from him that he’d been unable to stop. At this point, Catcher had nearly given up on preventing any of the noises from coming out of him. He was just a little worried she’d go and think he was overly sensitive or something. Shrugging a shoulder he gave her what was probably a dumb looking smile and leaned in to—once again—affectionately bump his head against hers. This earned him a tiny giggle and a curious look. “Why do you do that?”
“Headbutt me like that.”
“Does it bother you?”
“No, I think it’s cute,” she smiled and played with the hair at the nape of his neck. “I just can’t tell if you’re coming in for a kiss or not so it throws me off when you do that instead.”
“I don’t know why I do it,” it was an honest answer. Catcher hadn’t really been able to figure it out himself. He’d just had the strongest urge to keep giving these tiny little nudges against her forehead whenever his feelings got the better of him. Part of him wondered if it had anything to do with his genetic makeup. There was a lot he didn’t know about the man he’d been cloned from. The Kaminoans hadn’t really brought them up to speed on a ton of Mandalorian customs. Maybe this was one of them? Who the hell knew? “I’ve never had the urge to do it until now, honestly.”
She was giving him that sweet little look again and it put such a damn ache in his chest that Catcher didn’t know what to do with. Was this what it felt like to have a crush on someone? Maker, how juvenile. He knew he admired her for her combat skills and the way she so valiantly threw herself in harm’s way for the sake of keeping him and his brothers alive while fighting for galactic peace. It was blatantly obvious as well how he felt about the sight of her body—but he enjoyed her company, too. They’d been buddies first, after all. He couldn’t quite remember when it’d escalated to him noticing that she had an ass that looked like a peach or that her legs could probably kill a man. But he’d always thought she was pretty. She had a sweet smile and was always kind even when she had to put her General Boots on and be tough for the squad.
“What are you thinking about, Commander?” Yes he would lean into the fingertip she traced over his cheek, thank you very much. “You’ve gone so fluttery all of a sudden.”
“Just you, Little Bit,” he shrugged, watching as something softened in her eyes and made that look on her face even sweeter.
“Why do you call me that?” She sounded a bit shaky, like she was unsure of what was happening and just needed to keep the conversation going for the sake of not losing her grip on herself. “Not that it isn’t cute. You’ve just never told me what it means.”
Catcher blinked in surprise at the question. Honestly, he couldn’t quite remember why he’d started calling her that. In his head, he knew it had something to do with how she’d once mentioned all of the Troopers having strange nicknames. He was pretty sure they’d been drunk when they were discussing it. She’d asked about why he was called Catcher and he’d explained that it had to do with being quick on his feet—not quick enough, apparently—and he was almost sure she’d wondered out loud what sort of name she’d have if she were a clone. He’d never given her an answer. He’d just started calling her Little Bit. She was petite and it just seemed to fit her for some reason. Turning his hand up, he let out a short laugh and shrugged.
“I don’t know what it means.” He confessed. “It could mean a lot of things, I guess.”
“As long as it’s not short for Little Bitch, I don’t care.”
“No.” He shook his head, eyes going wide. “No, I would never. That’s not… that’s on a level of disrespect I could never… absolutely not.”
“Good.” She shifted on him again, looking a little surer of herself as she gave a light wiggle of her hips that had him exhaling a low growl from somewhere deep in his gut. “I think I’d have to actually crush your skull if it was.”
“You’re killing me enough as it is,” Catcher didn’t bother fighting the grin that spread across his lips. “But Maker—what a way to go.”
The brunette eyed him for a long moment before she leaned up and—quite tentatively—pressed her lips to his. Soft. So soft. That was the only thing he could think. Even when they pressed closer to one another and opened up to each other to deepen the kiss, all Catcher could think about was how fucking plush her mouth felt. Fuck, she could kiss like nobody’s business, too. Slow and deep and dizzying in a way that made him wonder if maybe the damn painkillers still hadn’t worn off yet. She tasted as sweet as he’d expected—sweeter, even—and he was content to skim and dance his tongue along hers until he’d filled his mouth with the taste of her. She added a second hand to the one already curled around the back of his neck, pulling him in closer until he was locked in place. He felt her draw his bottom lip into her mouth and suck at it, groaning heavily when she dragged her teeth over it and gave it a tug. His hands went to snatch her by the waist, pulling her in flush against his chest as he mimicked the move and earned a moan that made him shiver. He wanted more of that sound—needed it, even.
Too damn bad the comm-link on her table had other ideas.
“Fuck—really?” His General pulled back to stare at the blinking device, looking damn irritated as she dropped a hand from his head to run it through her hair. The device chirped again and Catcher leaned in, pressing a light kiss to her neck.
“Can you leave it?” He didn’t mean to sound so hopeful, but he hadn’t had enough of her yet. Not nearly enough. The brunette’s fingers gently scratched through his hair as she glared at the comm-link and tilted her head for him. When it chirped a third time, she reached a free hand out and did something with her fingers that had it floating into her hand.
“What?” She growled, clearly not bothered to let whoever was on the other side know that she was not happy to be interrupted.
“Ooooh, good morning to you too, sweetness.” Skywalker.
“I’m a little busy, Anakin.” She leaned back in Catcher’s lap and he began peppering kisses across her collarbone in an attempt to soothe her and distract himself. “What do you want?”
“What duty?” Licking her bottom lip, she shimmied her shoulders a bit to get the robe down, fingers tightening in his dark hair to encourage his kisses lower. “I’m grounded for three days.”
Catcher raised his eyebrows in silent question and got a smile in return. It did not last as her features twisted back to annoyance when the younger Jedi spoke again.
“Jedi duty, sweetness.” The little bastard sounded like he was grinning. Smug fuck. “You don’t get breaks from that.”
“I have to check on Catcher.” She bit down on her tongue and tried not to grin at the clone slowly making his way down between her tits. “Make sure he’s okay.”
“He was released from medbay this morning. I saw him in the canteen. I don’t know why you’re so worried, Iza. The man has been through worse than a broken wrist.”
The Jedi General tensed horribly and put a restraining hand on Catcher’s shoulder just as his lips were about to brush over one of her nipples. When he looked up, she was wearing that hard expression that suggested someone was about to get their ass kicked. Silently, he hoped it wouldn’t be him.
“He’s my Commander, Anakin. I have every right to worry about him. Especially when I’m the reason he was injured in the first place.”
“I still can’t believe you tried to ground your squad for a week over it. I’m surprised they granted you three days.”
“Because you wouldn’t try to get Rex grounded if he got injured?” She sat back on Catcher’s thighs and pulled the robe shut, completely distracted by the conversation now. “Don’t try and make me look like some kind of fool just because—”
“Listen—I get it. The guy gives you the tingles. It’s not like Obi-Wan and I don’t know. But it’s a little ridiculous to take yourself off the field for a whole week just because you broke the man’s wrist.”
“I got him shot, Anakin. He deserves a break.”
“I’d be careful, sweetness. It’s starting to sound like you’ve got a crush on the guy.” A chuckle was followed by a sigh and Catcher wished he could reach through and knock the little shit’s teeth out of his skull. “You have ten minutes to meet us at the cruiser. If you’re that worried about your Commander, you can always swing by the barracks when we get back.”
“I hate you.” She looked like she was going to cry. The hurt expression on her face just about killed him. “You’re such an asshole.”
The light on the comm-link flickered out and the brunette almost threw it across the room. Instead, she completely avoided his gaze and got up from his lap, pushing another button on the link and waiting.
“Hello darling,” Kenobi.
“Do I have to go?” She sounded choked now and a soft tut was heard on the other end.
“I’m sorry, darling. I’m afraid so.”
“I asked for time off, Obi-Wan,” Maker, she was really going to cry. Catcher was going to have to bear witness to her crumbling in front of him and he didn’t know how to help. He didn’t even know if she would let him. “You said you would let me stay behind.”
“I said you could stay off the field, my dear. I cannot control requests from the Council.”
“You may spend time with your Catcher when we return. We will not be gone long.” Well, at least he sounded like he cared about how she felt. Skywalker needed to have his manners checked.
“Yes sir,” she pinched her mouth shut and frowned at the floor, bringing her hand up to her face to hide it from Catcher.
“Don’t cry, darling. You will see him. Don’t let Anakin’s bullying get to you.”
“He’s so mean about it.” The gasping breath she took had Catcher reaching out to brush his fingers against her thigh, drawing her attention back to him for half a second. “He’s always so damn mean, Obi-Wan.”
“I know, darling. I will talk to him. For now—get dressed and we will meet you in the hangar.”
A quiet little hum followed before the link went silent once more and Catcher watched as his General dropped it to the floor. Both of her hands went to cover her face and he wasn’t sure if it was to hide the tears from him or if she felt some kind of shame for being exposed. Getting to his feet, he hesitated before lifting a hand to slide his fingers into the hair at the back of her head, grunting when she turned and planted her face against his chest. He didn’t say anything. He just put his arms around her and held her. Catcher didn’t know what the situation was between his General and the two Jedi. He wasn’t sure he wanted to know. But at least there was some comfort in knowing that at least one of them understood. It surprised him that it was Kenobi. He seemed like he’d be the one who followed the rules closer than Skywalker. Then again—he also seemed like the one who would genuinely care about Little Bit’s wants and needs, too.
“I’m sorry,” she sniffled when she finally pulled back. “I don’t want to leave.”
“Hey,” smiling, he dipped his head and gave a tiny nudge to her forehead before kissing her. “I understand, sweetheart. I’m not upset. I can take care of this myself for now.”
“You can stay here and do it,” she let out a shivery breath and waved a hand, using the sleeve of her robe to dry her eyes. “Better than trying to hide in the showers.”
“You know about that?”
Her eyes fixed on him for a moment, still very damp with tears despite her efforts, and a tiny smile made her lips wobble and turn upward.
“I do now.” She let out a soft laugh and shook her head. “I’ll say it again—you’re a horny little fuck.”
“Not always.” This would teach him to keep his damn mouth shut. Giving her a curious look, he watched the way she started to turn pink as though she were reading his mind. Catcher only smiled at her and bumped his forehead into hers, sighing quietly. “You should get dressed. I’d hate to know you pissed off Kenobi.”
“Skywalker can get fucked with his little laser sword.” Grumbling, the clone made a face. “I don’t like the way he talks to you.”
“I’ve noticed,” she dropped a kiss to his chin and pulled back with some reluctance. “I’m not defending him, but he isn’t always like that. I think he’s jealous.”
“I don’t care what he is. He should know better than to speak to you like that. If I didn’t know any better—”
“Catcher,” pausing in the middle of picking the bottom half of her body glove off the floor she looked back at him and shot him a conflicted sort of expression. After a moment or so, she stuck her thumbs in the sides of the panties she wore and pulled them down, tossing them in his direction. They hit his chest and he caught them before they fell to the ground. Warm. A little damp. His dick throbbed at the idea that she was about to run around without them on. “Feel free to use those to clean up. Unless you prefer to get it all over yourself again?”
“So I wasn’t hallucinating?”
“Oh no,” she laughed as she tugged the bottoms on and shrugged out of the robe. Catcher groaned internally at the sight of her bare tits. They definitely looked like they’d make the perfect handful. It took quite a bit of restraint for him not to cross the space between them and see for himself. He almost pouted when she pulled the top half of the blacks on and worked her fingers around the pressure seam. “It was very real, Catch. I was minding my own damn business on my way to bed when I got this feeling, see. So I decided to check up on you and got quite the eyeful.”
“How long… how long were you standing there?”
“Long enough to see you do that thing with your thumb.” She wiggled hers at him and grinned, donning the various layers of her robes before she shot a dirty look at the panels of armor. Shaking her head like she’d decided not to bother, she went for a pair of boots in the corner and sighed. “Anyway—I was going to just leave you alone but then you started saying my name. I didn’t mean to scare you, by the way. You looked very startled when you saw me.”
“It’s not every day your General walks in on you cranking one out, sir.” He paused and then shook his head. “Sorry, habit.”
“It’s all right.” Smiling at him, she came back over and slid her arms around his waist, tipping her head up and poking her bottom lip out. “I can’t reach to do the cute forehead thing.”
He laughed. She was fucking adorable. Lowering his head for her, Catcher closed his eyes with a soft smile when the brunette gently bumped her head against his before she kissed him.
“I’ll see you later. I promise. We’ll finish this.” Her fingers slid beneath the hem of his under-tunic and smoothed along his skin. “And you better start calling me Iza. I’ll make it an order.”
“Okay,” he pretended to be exasperated, grinning to be sure to let her know it was in jest. “I’ll do that. Do me a favor and punch Skywalker in the mouth for me.”
“Maybe,” she stole another kiss before she pulled away and patted his chest, pointing at the panties he still held. “Have fun with those. You can keep them when you’re done, if you want.”
It had gotten late and Iza hadn’t come back yet from wherever the Jedi had dragged her off to. Catcher had been unable to keep himself awake past a certain point beyond supper because of the lingering effects of the drugs and because of what he’d gone and done to himself after her departure. He hadn’t allowed himself to use her panties as a cleanup rag, but he’d definitely used them to help himself along. Being in her bed helped quite a bit as well. He wished he could’ve stayed there but it would’ve looked strange if he didn’t return to the barracks. He wasn’t sure when he’d fallen asleep, but he knew for sure what had woken him up. The sensation of something warm and a bit heavy settling down on his chest startled him straight out of a dream he’d been having—something sweet and not sinful for once—and he found himself utterly confused to feel something equally warm and soft on either side of his face. Skin. He was pretty sure it was skin. It was so damn dark in these barracks and his instincts were telling him to throw whatever the fuck it was off of him. The slow slide of fingers through his hair stirred him completely out of sleep and as his eyes adjusted, he looked up to find his General parked on his chest like it was no big deal.
“Little Bit, what the fuck?” He whispered, trying not to alert his brothers to her presence. Was she even wearing pants? He couldn’t lift his head up enough to see. It sure as shit didn’t feel like it.
“I’m sorry,” she spoke as though there was no one else in the room with them. Was she trying to wake everyone up? “Did I scare you?”
“You think?” Reaching around one of the thighs bracketing his head, Catcher rubbed a palm over his face and stared up at her. “What are you doing?”
“Why are you whispering?”
“Eh? Because I don’t want to wake anyone up, that’s why.”
“There’s no one else here. They’ve been cleared out.”
“Cleared…” He picked his head up again and tried to look around, making her laugh and shift back on him so he could see. Indeed, every bunk in the place was empty. Strange. He’d never seen one of these rooms dead empty before. Looking back up at her, he raised an eyebrow. “What did you do?”
“Obi-Wan did it.” She played with his hair and cast a soft smile down at him. “He ordered everyone out under the guise that you needed absolute peace to heal.”
“That’s a bunch of bantha shit. They’re gonna see right through it, you realize?”
“Oh—probably.” Iza nodded and snickered. “Especially since the Stars definitely saw me come in here.”
“You’re trouble,” rubbing the sleep from his eyes, Catcher turned to look at her legs and then back up at her. “What’s all this, eh? You planning to sit on my face while I’m asleep?”
“While the thought did cross my mind for a fleeting second,” the smile on her lips was wicked and stirred something awake deep in his pelvis. “I’d much prefer it if you were awake and consenting. I don’t think we’re at the point yet when I can wake you up with that sort of fiendish behavior.”
“I’m gonna be real honest with you, sweetheart—I’d be more than happy to wake up with you parked on my face.”
“I had a feeling,” giggling quietly, she gave a soft hum and lightly twisted his hair around her fingers. “I’m sorry I’m so late. I ended up having to do a quick side job for my former master. It’s one of those things I’m not really allowed to say no to.”
“That’s all right, Little Bit,” he smiled and distractedly ran his fingers along the top of one of her thighs. “I only turned in early because of the narc hangover.”
“Mm,” she pursed her lips at him. “You sure it’s not because of the mess you left in my trash bin?”
He sucked his teeth and wished he was able to look anywhere else but directly at her. Thank the Maker the room was as dark as it was. He had a horrible feeling he might actually be turning red. A tug to his hair had his eyes shifting forward again and he found her with her bottom lip tucked between her teeth, an almost unreadable look on her face.
“What? What’s that look for?” He asked.
“You’re breathing on me.”
“Uh huh,” he didn’t know what she was getting at. “Kinda happens when you go and sit on a man’s chest like this, sweetheart.”
“I’m still not wearing panties, Catcher.”
And just like that, he was fully awake and alert. He hadn’t even noticed because he hadn’t really looked. Besides, she had that damn cloth ribbon thing on. It covered her enough to obscure his view. Eyeing her a moment, he purposely heaved a breath and turned to lightly drag his cheek against the inside of her thigh. He was pretty sure he had a fair bit of stubble on his face. He hadn’t shaved today. Hadn’t really felt like it. Judging by the way she squirmed and whimpered—he was correct. Grinning like an absolute asshole, he did it again and grunted when she pressed her legs together against the sides of his face.
“Catcher,” she was giving him such a damn look. “That tickles.”
“I’m sorry,” no he wasn’t. “You weren’t kidding. You’ve got some strong legs, Little Bit.”
“You’re the one that wanted his face between them.”
“That’s true,” turning as much as he could, he kept his eyes on her as he parted his lips and gave a careful bite to one thigh. Above him, the brunette whined and squirmed again, pouting down at him.
“Catch,” oh—he had her. She’d likely start pleading next.
“What is it, Little Bit?” Giving another slow drag of his teeth, he followed it with a pass of his tongue and growled low when she shifted forward to bring herself closer to his mouth. She still wasn’t close enough and she’d trapped him so he couldn’t lift his head. This little brat. “I can’t reach, you know. Tongue doesn’t go that far.”
Iza growled right back at him and grabbed one of the crossbar supports of the bunk, pulling herself forward and adjusting her stance over him. She damn near cracked her head open on the top bunk when she straightened, appearing to shake it off before she was nudging her hips forward to tempt him. He needed none of her goading. Sliding his hands along the sides of her legs, he hooked his fingers over the crook where her hips joined her thighs and pulled her down onto his mouth. He would not stop the savage growl that rose in his throat at the first taste of her, tongue sweeping slow and deep while she let out a soft and needy sound above him. The hand in his hair flattened against the top of his head and then flexed around the strands again and he swore he felt her shiver when he pulled her down even closer and teased her clit with the end of his tongue. Sweet fucking Maker, she was wet, and seemed to be getting wetter by the damn second the longer he dragged the flat of his tongue against her. Her hips would jump when he’d focus on certain spots or slide his tongue inside of her and he couldn’t help snickering quietly at the way she couldn’t decide whether she wanted to push down or lift away from him. He became aware that she’d taken her fingers out of his hair and was grabbing hold of the crossbar support with both hands now, having finally found a rhythm to work herself against his mouth that she liked.
She cussed at him quietly and bashed her head again when he gave a tentative suck to her flesh. He’d looked up at her after that to silently ask if she was all right. She didn’t seem to notice. Her eyes were closed and she was breathing in harsh pants, murmuring commands for him to use more pressure with his tongue or to lighten it when her thighs started to shiver. She seemed to really enjoy it when he made his quiet noises of appreciation to her praise. And when he was pretty sure she was getting ready to come, he focused all of his attention to her clit. Rubbing soft circles and hard passes and the occasional flutter, he nearly grinned against her when she sagged against the crossbar support and ground herself against his mouth while his name escaped in a cry that echoed through the barracks. He held her to him as he continued the slower passes all the way through her climax, letting out an irritated growl when she pulled off of him and knelt to hover above him, wheezing into her arms and occasionally twitching with a soft whimper. Turning his head, he kissed along the inside of her thigh and was rewarded with a slow drag of nails over his scalp.
“Fuck, Catcher,” she whined, gasping when he lifted his head and gave a dragging pass of his tongue. “Please—give me a minute.”
“Sensitive?” He teased, running his fingers up along the inside of her thigh. Iza nodded at him and he grinned smugly, letting out a thoughtful hum before lightly brushing his fingertips against her slick flesh. She jumped, but didn’t immediately protest until he got closer to her clit.
“Okay, okay,” chuckling, he slipped them lower again and bit down on the end of his tongue before pressing them into her.
“Oh Force,” she set her thighs further apart and he took that as an invitation to continue. Sinking them in further, Catcher looked up to watch her and blew out a quiet breath when she moaned and tightened around them.
“Maker, Little Bit,” he murmured, shaking his head. “You’re gonna kill me.”
“I’m pretty sure you’re trying to kill me,” resting her head against her arms, Iza breathed in shivery gasps as the clone began working his fingers in and out slowly, occasionally rubbing against a stupidly sensitive patch of nerves on the highest wall of her cunt. Biting down on her wrist to muffle a heavy cry, the brunette tried to keep from twisting her hips and flinched away when he tried brushing the pad of his thumb near her clit. “Catcher, for fuck’s sake!”
“Come on now,” he teased, shifting beneath her to lift up on an elbow and press kisses to her belly. “I’ll be gentle.”
“I swear, I’m gonna—” she stopped mid-threat when the warm, wet slide of his tongue passed over her flesh. She should’ve expected it, all things considered. But it sent such a sharp sensation through her that all she could do was drop her head forward and shake. His fingers were so damn deep, too. He was going to break her. She took to counting the pumps of his fingers and the passes of his tongue, working out the rhythm to try and distract herself from how hard her body was trembling. It didn’t help much. He’d gotten about ten decent laps in before she lost it again, pounding her fist against the crossbar and shouting into the crook of her arm while her hips moved of their own accord. She begged, pleaded for him to stop and after a few more delicate passes, he finally did. She twitched and whimpered when he kissed her and she felt him moving out from underneath her, his arms going around her waist to haul her away from the crossbar back against his chest.
“Hey,” Catcher took note of the stream of tears that ran down Iza’s cheeks and lifted a hand to gently wipe them away. “You okay, sweetheart?”
“Too much,” she squeezed her thighs together and curled up against him, shutting her eyes as she tried to catch her breath. “You’re a damn animal.”
“Listen,” he nuzzled at the side of her neck and chuckled quietly. “When you get the chance to live out a fantasy, you have to take advantage of it a little.”
“You had fantasies of overstimulating me until I begged for mercy?”
“No,” Catcher grinned. “I had fantasies about making you come on my tongue until you begged for mercy, though. I honestly didn’t expect you to give up so easily.”
“You’re very enthusiastic.” Iza let out a laugh and shook her head. “It’s hard to maintain any sort of control when someone’s going at you like they need you to survive.”
Catcher’s grin widened even more and became wolfish. He didn’t say anything. He just shrugged when she looked up at him and grunted when she gave a light swat to his shoulder.
“I can be,” his grin softened considerably and he ran his fingers through her hair, careful when he passed over the top of her scalp. “How’s your head?”
“You don’t waste any damn time, do you?”
“No—Little Bit,” laughing, Catcher poked his tongue against the inside of his bottom lip and shot her a look. “You hit your head. Twice, I believe. Are you all right? These bunks aren’t very forgiving.”
“Did I?” Iza blinked like she hadn’t noticed and reached up to press her fingers against the top of her head, looking surprised when she found a tender spot. “Huh. I didn’t notice. I’m used to hitting my head on things.”
“Do I want to know?”
“You’ve seen me on the battlefield, Catch,” she turned a hand up and flicked her fingers dismissively. “I get hit with clanker parts all the time. Drives Unk nuts when I come back with blood all over the place. Can you believe Rex tried to convince the outfitter to give me a helmet?”
“Yes, actually,” giving her a concerned look, Catcher planted a kiss to the top of her head. “Maker, Little Bit.”
“Listen buckethead,” tipping her head back on his shoulder to give him a look, Iza pursed her lips. “Don’t give me any lip about it. I’m a Jedi. I can take the pain. It’s good fuel for combat, anyway.”
“Did you just call me buckethead?” He wasn’t entirely sure if he was offended or not. “That’s a little rude coming from you.”
“There are worse things I could call you, Catcher,”
“Please don’t call me any of them.”
“I won’t,” she sighed and twisted in his arms to face him, watching the way he raised an eyebrow at her. “Hi,”
“You gonna lay back for me or…?”
“You gonna take off that ribbon thing you have on?” Smirking, Catcher shifted a little to prop himself on his elbows. He had to fight against a laugh when Iza frowned at him.
“How many times do I have to tell you it’s not a ribbon? It’s a tabard and it’s part of the uniform.” She’d started pulling it off as she grumbled at him, the top half of the body glove she still wore going along with it. For a moment, Catcher just sat there and admired her, a dopey ass look on his face. Iza pursed her lips at him and scooted closer, pressing up flush against his chest and hovering her mouth over his. “What are you looking at me like that for?”
Humming, Catcher leaned up and gave her head a gentle bump with his, still smiling like a fucking idiot.
There was that damn soft look of awe again. This time it was accompanied by the fact that Catcher could feel her heart starting to race in her chest and suddenly—he understood. Bringing a hand up to brush his knuckles against her face, his smile softened when she leaned into the touch and he chuckled lowly when she tilted forward to knock her forehead into his. They both closed their eyes for a short while and he spent the time slowly running his hand along her cheek while she nuzzled at his nose and fiddled with the hem of his under-tunic. Tipping his head, he leaned in and kissed her gently, a little surprised at how quickly she opened up to him. She kissed him differently than she had before. There was none of the urgency or teasing. It was all tenderness and the kind of softness that made his chest clench. For someone who wasn’t supposed to express any emotion, she sure as hell had a talent for finding ways of doing it. The hand on her cheek smoothed back into her hair, drew her closer. The kiss deepened and Catcher heard himself groaning when her hands skimmed up along his thighs. The time for sweetness was apparently over. He was actually a little reluctant to let it go.
“You’re overdressed,” damn her voice was rough. “Get some of this off,”
“Yes sir,” shooting her a cheeky smirk, Catcher started with the under-tunic, almost wishing he hadn’t when her eyes settled on the bacta patch still stuck to his shoulder where he’d been clipped. Shit. He’d forgotten about the damn thing. He was pretty sure he could remove it now but when he went to peel it off, she stopped him.
“What the hell are you doing? Leave that alone.” She looked so fucking concerned about it. He didn’t have the heart to argue with her. Nodding, he reached out to pull her close again and kissed the center of her forehead in an attempt to soothe her. He really didn’t like making her upset like that.
“You don’t have to be sorry, Catcher,” she blew out a breath and shook her head. “Just… leave it.”
“Hey,” tipping her chin up, he stroked her jaw lightly and tilted his head in question. “You know you need to stop blaming yourself, right?”
“I’ll place the blame wherever I want to.”
“Then you better start placing it on the idiot who got himself shot, sweetheart,” he smirked, earning himself a frown. “Don’t do that. Don’t make that face at me, Little Bit.”
“I don’t want to talk about this.” All right, that was fair. “Get your damn pants off, Catch.”
“You do it if you want them off so bad.”
Iza gave him a look and then started poking her bottom lip out in that damn pout of hers. Shaking his head at her as he fought back the urge to break out into a smile, Catcher waved a finger and then tapped it against her lower lip.
“Why do you do this? Eh? Why do you do this to me?”
“Catcher,” Oh and now she was going to use that sweet tone with him on top of it. He could swear she’d done more than just feel his emotional switches. The little brat had gone and read all of his damn thoughts while she was at it. Still fighting back the smile, he laughed shortly.
“That is not an answer, sweetheart. That’s a damn dirty move is what that is.”
“Commander…” Maker. She’d gone and pressed that button. She’d also shifted around so her arms were pushing her tits together in a way that was fucking distracting.
“You’re a brat.” Catcher muttered, moving to unbutton the trousers. Easing them down over his hips, he gave her a nudge to get her to move so he could take them all the way off, dropping them on the floor and giving her a damn look when he was done. “Better, General?”
Iza didn’t say anything. She appeared to be busy with quietly taking in his appearance. At first, Catcher wasn’t sure how he felt about it. Upon realizing he’d pretty much sat there and done the same to her, he relaxed a bit. It was just unnerving not knowing where her eyes were really looking and what might be going on in her head. He jumped a little when she eventually smoothed one of her hands over his thigh and wished he hadn’t looked so damn surprised by the move. She, however, just smiled at him and shifted closer to press tiny kisses along his uninjured shoulder. Well, he supposed it was better than no reaction at all. It didn’t make him any less curious about her thoughts, but at the same time—it probably wasn’t any of his business what she thought of his naked body. At least she hadn’t laughed. That was a good sign.
“You’re nervous,” damn Jedi devil wizardry. “What’s wrong?”
“Nothing, sweetheart,” tilting his head against hers, he smiled when she looked up like she didn’t quite believe him. “Really.”
“Catch,” she nestled up even closer and he groaned low at the feel of her velvet-soft skin pressing up against his. “Do you want me to tell you that you’re pretty, too?”
He let out the stupidest damn noise. A cross between a cough and a laugh that had him dropping his head and looking away from her. She was a scary creature, his General. Far too intuitive for her own good. He tried like hell not to chuckle or give any other sort of sign that she’d made him flustered, but the damage had been done. He felt her move in enough for him to have to part his legs so she could rest comfortably, her arms bracing on either side of his torso as she leaned on his chest and nuzzled her face into the side of his neck. He had to try and ignore the fact that his cock was pressing into the softness of her belly, but damn—that was probably more distracting than anything else. Especially since she rubbed against him every single time she breathed. The burn of her full lips trailing along his throat had him sliding his eyes shut and groaning heavily and Catcher couldn’t help himself as he slipped an arm around her waist to pull her even tighter against his form.
“Pretty is not the word I would use for you,” she’d worked her mouth upward and now the edges of her teeth were taunting the earring he wore, tugging the little hoop playfully until he growled at her. “Perfect has a nice ring to it.”
“You’re fucking with me again,” it was hard to laugh when she was teasing him like this. “I’m a mirror image, sweetheart. Ninety-nine point nine percent of the parts are all the same as what everyone else has.”
“Mm,” she shook her head and nipped at the curve of his jaw. “You’re different.”
“I’m a clone, sweetheart.”
“But you’re mine.”
Catcher felt like she’d knocked the air out of him. Startled, he turned to look at her and found her smiling at him in that sweet way of hers. He knew he had to look like an idiot staring at her the way he was but Maker, he couldn’t help it. He didn’t know how else he’d be expected to look at her after being blindsided like that. It put such a strange sense of confusion in him while also filling his chest with an almost painful, tight warmth that made it difficult to breathe. He was sure she felt every ounce of it, too. He didn’t want that. He didn’t want her to know she’d knocked him into a weird panic like that. The gentle touch of a hand in the center of his chest made him regain focus and he could practically hear her telling him to breathe. She hadn’t said anything; just rubbed her palm in little passes while she rested her cheek on his shoulder and continued smiling up at him.
“Yours?” He said finally, wondering why his throat felt like someone’s hand had wrapped around it.
“You…” but she wasn’t supposed to have attachments or express emotions, he thought? How could she claim he was hers if these things were not allowed? He didn’t want her going against the rules of her Order. They were already toeing a pretty fine line just sleeping together. Trying to find enough sense to speak, Catcher ran his hand through his hair and tried not to look as confused as he felt. “But… Little Bit…”
“Catcher,” the hand on his chest began making soothing passes across the entire surface and she picked her head up to kiss his cheek. “Are you all right?”
“Won’t you be in trouble?” Turning his eyes to her, he tilted his head lightly and frowned. “I don’t want to cause trouble for you.”
“If you think I’m the only Jedi in the entire Order to ever have feelings for another person, you’re mistaken. Also very adorably naïve. They do not teach you enough about Jedi on Kamino, do they?”
“It wasn’t really the main focus, no.”
“It’s all about secrecy and maintaining balance within yourself when you have feelings for someone. The Jedi don’t discourage emotions, but we’re not supposed to hold onto them. I’ve never been much of a fan of that.” She gave a quiet hum and nudged her forehead against his. “I wasn’t sure what I was feeling from you. I didn’t know if it was just a lust thing like some of the others, or if you truly cared. The fact that you’ve been so gentle and affectionate kind of sealed it. I would’ve kept it to myself if I thought you just wanted sex.”
“Now see,” he shifted to look at her better, sliding his hand up along her back. “That would be unfair to you.”
“It is what it is, Catch.”
“It’s a good thing you’re not a… what do you Jedi call us? Non-sensitive. Because we’d be dancing around this forever.”
“Even Force Sensitives don’t always know what feelings mean, Catcher,” Iza shot him a pointed look and sighed. “Yours are confusing sometimes. I think, even to you.”
“I’ve never had feelings like this so—yeah. You’re not wrong there, Little Bit.” Catcher gave a dry laugh, still unable to do much more than look at her in awe. “Is this why you said you needed my feelings?”
“You could say that.”
“Well,” turning his hand up, he offered a quick smile and tilted his head. “They’re all yours.”
Catcher swore the little gold flecks in her eyes lit up like stars when he said it. He knew the rest of her face had definitely brightened. The way she rushed forward to knock her forehead into his startled him a bit and maybe her hurried kiss was a bit on the rough side, but he certainly wouldn’t complain. No, he was more than happy to settle in for one of her deep, deliberate kisses that had the fire in his belly burning hot all over again. The longer they kissed, the messier they seemed to get until it was all lips and tongue and heavy breathing. Iza had started pawing a hand along his side, fingers questing slowly along the lines of muscle etched beneath his skin. When she’d reached the slight V defined along his pelvis, he couldn’t stop the quiet snicker that gusted past his lips into her mouth. He wouldn’t call himself ticklish, but her touch was so light that it made a weird shiver run up his back. She either didn’t notice or didn’t care. She’d lifted herself away from his torso and was sweeping her fingers across his pelvis, choosing to linger just below his navel and torment him with those slow passes.
“As long as you don’t break it or bite it, you can do whatever the hell you want.” Might as well get that out of the way. He was too damn antsy to sit back and be tentative about it. At first, Iza just stared at him in stunned silence. And then she was letting out a loud laugh and pressing her face to his shoulder to try and smother it. He swore he thought he heard her snort, but he couldn’t be sure.
“Well okay then,” she wasted no time at all moving her touch lower and Catcher found himself holding his breath. The slow slide of her delicate fingers wrapping around the base of his cock had him letting all of the air out of his lungs in a heavy growl that seemed to startle the brunette. She stared at him with wide eyes, lips twitching like she was fighting not to smirk at the sound. Tilting her head, she raised an eyebrow. “You okay?”
“Mm,” he nodded, dark eyes watching her carefully. They held each other’s gazes for a beat or two before Iza gave an experimental squeeze and moved her fist up along the length, pausing below the head before gliding back down. Catcher’s features seemed to harden even more as he stared at her, his eyes staying locked on her face. She was familiar with the feral expression, but it looked so foreign on his face. She half expected him to put a hand over hers and show her how he wanted her to do it. He didn’t. He allowed her to go at the pace she wanted to go at, though she could see tiny flickers of impatience in his eyes when she continued avoiding the blunt tip. It probably seemed unfair in comparison to how he’d jumped right in to getting her off with his mouth. Iza wasn’t really looking to get him off—not right away. He was growling at her steadily, she realized. Every time he exhaled he let out this deep, quiet rumble that threatened to kickstart her arousal all over again. Force, he made some fun noises. Smiling perhaps a bit too sweetly, Iza leaned up and brushed her open mouth against his, teasing the point of her tongue over his bottom lip. She heard a sound like a snarl and suddenly he was kissing her hard enough to bruise.
One of his hands came up to grasp the side of her head and hold her in place and she—in a rather thoughtless moment—brought her free hand up to shift its placement beneath her jaw against her neck. He didn’t notice for a good few moments, far too caught up in sucking at her tongue and continuing to breathe harsh sounds into her mouth. When he did realize that she’d moved his hand, he pulled back and stared at her before lifting it away, giving a startled look.
“What… the hell, Little Bit?”
Iza paused, confused. It’d never occurred to her that he might not be interested in that kink as much as she was. Shaking her head, she gave a tiny shrug of her shoulders and waved her hand.
“You don’t have to. I just… you were already holding on and I—”
“Look—” Maker, she’d really shaken him half out of the mood, hadn’t she? “I don’t give a shit what you do with those two, okay? I’ve seen the way you look after you run off with Kenobi. But that’s not my thing, Little Bit. I’ll happily toss you around and play rough, but I’m not—that’s not my thing.”
“I’m sorry.” It felt strange apologizing to him while holding his cock in her hand. Iza let go and put her hand in her lap. “I’m sorry.”
“Fuck,” slinging an arm around her, he pulled her to him and pressed an absurdly gentle kiss to her lips, working his way down her neck. “Don’t be upset, Little Bit. I’m not upset. You just surprised me.”
“I should have asked,” Iza tilted her head for him, running her hand along his thigh. “I told you before—I’m not used to someone so damn gentle.”
“I am not gentle,” Catcher laughed against her skin and nipped it as if to prove a point. “There are just some things I’m not into.”
Pulling back to look at her, Catcher tipped his head and cupped her face in his hands. A brow went up as a light smirk curled the corner of his mouth and he shot her a look.
“You want me to get rough with you, sweetheart? I’ll get rough with you.”
“Not if it’s going to make you uncomfortable.”
“No—the choking thing makes me uncomfortable.” He tapped his finger against her bottom lip and leaned in to plant kisses all over her face. “But I’ll fuck you until you can’t walk if that’s what you want.”
Iza let out a harsh breath and stared at him, tutting softly.
“No you won’t.” Her tone was challenging, the look on her face matching it perfectly. Catcher paused in his kisses and stared back at her, almost unsure if he ought to take the challenge or not. After a moment, he grunted and gave a quick bump of his forehead into hers, nipping her bottom lip and pulling back.
“I mean… if you don’t want me to,” he waved a hand dismissively. He barely kept the smile off his face, though it was evident in his eyes as he watched her. “I’ll just give you the typical ride and be done with it.”
“See?” Iza rolled her eyes and pursed her lips in mock annoyance. “You’re all talk. Which is real disappointing—because you’ve got a nice cock, Catch. I’m sure it’s great at a slow and easy pace. I’ll be sure to let you know.”
He was shaking his head slowly as she spoke, that smile finally spreading across his lips as he let out a heavy rush of breath. This little brat. Sucking his teeth, he tried to appear as nonchalant as possible as he leaned back on his elbows and looked her over.
“You don’t want to do that, Little Bit,” he warned, giving her hip a nudge with his knee. “You were overwhelmed by my mouth. Keep pushing. See what happens.”
“That’s the problem, Catcher,” she crawled forward, leaning into his chest as she ghosted the tips of her fingers along the length of his cock. “You’re all mouth.” Looking him dead in the eye, Iza brought her thumb to her lips and wet it with a fair amount of saliva, watching the way his features shifted when she reached down again and took him in her hand. Slowly, she brushed the slick pad of her thumb in arcs over the very tip of the head the way she’d seen him do the night before, eyes lighting up when he made a strangled noise and pushed his hips up into her hand. “Yeah, Catch? Is that how you like it?”
“Fuck—Iza!” Catcher twisted his hips beneath the touch, torn between pulling away and pushing further into it. He caught the surprise in her face when he used her name and whimpered as she started to press-rub. “Sweetheart—sweetheart please.”
“You’re saying my name already. You gonna come?” She slowed her passes, pausing long enough to further dampen her thumb. When he didn’t immediately answer, she wrapped her fingers around his cock and squeezed to get his attention. “Catcher.”
“You gotta stop, sweetheart,” he really didn’t want to make her but if she kept it up at the pace and pressure she was using, he was absolutely going to lose it. Shaking his head at her, he blew out a heavy breath and tried to refrain from taking hold of her wrist. “You’ll be waiting longer if you don’t stop.”
“Hm,” the contemplative little hum was followed by a few more quick sweeps before she stopped entirely, popping her thumb into her mouth to suck the bit of precum from her skin. “All right,”
“Maker, Little Bit,” Catcher dropped back onto the bunk, rubbing his palms over his face as he tried to catch his breath and think of anything except the violent need he had to come. He felt her moving over him, felt the soft brush of her belly against the sensitive head of his cock, and immediately went to snatch her by the waist and lift her up and away from it. Whatever came out of his mouth was unintelligible and probably made up of mostly swear words, but he didn’t care. His arms trembled lightly as he set her on his stomach for the time being, looking up to find her pinching her mouth in an effort not to laugh. Shaking his head, he waved a finger at her and huffed. “Devil. You’re the damn devil.”
“I might be.” She grinned and leaned down to kiss the end of his nose. “You changed your tone quick. That’s a neat little trick, by the way.”
“That’s not…” resting his hands on her hips, he gave her an exasperated look. “I don’t do it nearly as viciously as you.”
“Maybe you should?”
“Iza,” Catcher laughed breathlessly and gave her hips a squeeze. “You know how you complained about too much? That’s borderline too much, sweetheart.”
“I would apologize, but I don’t want to.”
He scoffed at her. He didn’t know how else to react to that. The two of them fell silent for a short while after that, Iza spending some time just running her fingers along Catcher’s chest while he traced mindless shapes over her thighs. Soon enough, she was leaning over him again to steal a deep kiss. Groaning into it, Catcher was happy to keep it relatively slow and sloppy while he blindly slid his fingers up her sides and finally got his hands on her tits. Ah-hah. He’d been right. They made the perfect handful for him. He smiled against her lips when he heard her whine softly and felt her lean into the touch, forefinger and thumb finding the hard tips of her nipples to gently pinch and tug. Breaking away from the kiss, he sat up enough to close his mouth over one pointed peak, sucking in strong pulls as he dragged his tongue in circles around it. Iza buried her fingers into his hair, tugging at it when he set the edges of his teeth against her nipple and teased it with light nibbles that made her shiver. Her breathing came in heavy puffs that fanned out across his cheeks when he switched to her other breast, and she whimpered when he dropped a hand and tucked it between her thighs. His touch was light and slow, causing her hips to buck forward.
“Fuck, sweetheart,” he murmured as he kissed and sucked at her tits. “You are slick,”
“Uh huh,” she was going to smack him if he didn’t put his fingers in her or at least offer to fuck her finally. “Catch.”
“Soon.” He flicked his tongue against a nipple, kissed it, then caught it between his teeth to give it a tug. “Busy.”
Iza let out an impatient noise and pulled at his hair, drawing his attention long enough for him to pull back and look up at her. She poked her bottom lip out in a pout and Catcher sucked in a slow breath. Damn it. She’d likely use the damn voice next. Popping his fingers into his mouth, he narrowed his eyes at her and raised an eyebrow.
“What, sweetheart?” If she was going to pout, he was going to milk it. “What do you want?”
She wriggled on him and whined needily, her bottom lip poking out even further. He snorted at her and leaned in to tease his tongue around one nipple, sucking it between his lips. Letting it go with an audible, wet pop, he glanced back up at her and sighed.
“That means nothing to me, you know.” He shifted under her to mock her wiggling. “Means nothing.”
“Catcher, for fuck’s sake—fuck me!”
“Oh,” the clone made a face like he finally understood what she was getting at, nodding along and smiling. His features hardened to something far more predatory and he wrapped an arm around her to roll her beneath him on the bunk. He damn near rolled them both out of the bunk, but managed to scoot them back into place without too much fuss. Taking hold of the backs of her knees, he parted her legs and—as a second thought—pushed them up to encourage her to rest her ankles on his shoulders. Iza watched him with wide eyes as he knelt up and started rubbing the length of his cock against her, whimpering quietly.
“Please…?” He grinned like an absolute fiend, rocking his hips forward to tease the head of his cock against her clit.
“Commander,” Iza kicked her feet a little and wiggled as much as she could curled up the way she was. It wasn’t the answer he’d been looking for, but hell if he wasn’t going to take it. With a harsh sounding snarl, Catcher pressed himself to the slick entrance of her cunt and slowly eased inside. He had to pause almost instantly, blowing out a breath and brushing one of her legs off of his shoulder as if that might help ease the way she squeezed him. It did not. Setting his jaw, he took his time sinking into her, letting out little grunts and pausing every so often until he’d managed to work himself to the hilt.
“Sweet mother of the Maker,” he grasped at her thighs, not sure what else he was meant to hold onto at the moment, and dropped his head forward. Yeah—he’d expected her to be a tight piece of work but fuck. Even with as wet as she was, his General exceeded his expectations immensely. Beneath him, Iza breathed in shallow heaves of her chest and silently wondered what the fuck was taking him so damn long to move. Giving another impatient noise, she nudged her hips up and tried squeezing her thighs together. She got a shaky moan and a palm pressed flat against her belly in response. “You—you wait.”
“Little Bit,” his hazel-tinged eyes fixed on her and sent a strange chill down her back. “You have to give me a minute.”
“Come on, Catch,” Iza really shouldn’t have whined like that and she knew it.
“Sweetheart,” he bit down on his tongue and swallowed hard. “You won’t stop squeezing me.”
Oh. Well, she didn’t know how to stop that. Still, she gave a tiny pout and settled back with a light thump of her head against the bunk mattress. Staring up at the bars above them, she tried to relax and think of something other than the fact that she felt so damn full of him. There was almost no warning given at all when he drew his hips back slowly and rocked forward hard enough to jolt her out of her thoughts and make her grab for the blanket beneath her. The sound she made was half of a gasp and half of a startled moan that got caught on its way out of her throat and Iza arched her back up as much as she could.
“Are you all right?” His voice had gone rough and deepened an octave or two than normal and he sounded as though he hadn’t even wanted to ask. She nodded quickly, wetting her bottom lip with her tongue as she reached to give his hip a light pat to encourage him to keep going. He did. The next hard roll made her hips jump and her thighs shiver where they rested on his chest. Stars above, he was deep. When he continued like he intended to pick up the pace, she set her fingers against his hips again and he stilled. “Little Bit?”
“Can I put my legs down?”
“Of course,” sliding his hands along her thighs, Catcher slid her ankles off of his shoulders and let her wind them around his waist instead. Raising an eyebrow, he reached up and brushed his thumb against her chin. “Better?”
“Yeah,” she nodded and shut her eyes on a moan when he rocked into her, a grin spreading across her lips. “Much.”
Good. He gave her another few careful lunges before grasping her hips and picking up the pace, grunting lowly each time their hips met. Fuck, she was a treat to watch. Depending on how quick or hard he thrust into her, Iza would twist and arch beneath him, letting out tiny cries and moans that would probably haunt his dreams for months to come. She’d squeeze those gorgeous legs around him whenever he hit the perfect spot, and when she mindlessly dropped her hands back onto the bed, he leaned over her and grabbed them to pin them to the mattress. Her eyes opened in surprise, but she didn’t object. Instead, she just stared him down for a moment before pushing her hips up into the next hard roll of his pelvis and shot him that challenging look of hers. Clearly, she’d relaxed enough to try taunting him.
“Yeah?” He raised an eyebrow at her, grinning slowly. “You sure you wanna play, Little Bit?”
“You promised to fuck me until I couldn’t walk,” she reminded him, meeting him halfway into his next thrust. “I better not leave this barrack disappointed, Catch.”
“You won’t be able to leave, sweetheart, if you keep that up.”
“You’re all mouth.”
Catcher paused and gave her a look, silently asking if she was sure she wanted to play this game. When she simply smiled and wiggled her hips into him, he let out a quiet snarl and pulled out entirely.
He cut her off as he took hold of one of her hips and—quite carelessly—flipped her over onto her belly. Grunting at the less-than-gentle action, the brunette pushed herself up on her arms and shot him a look over her shoulders. He ignored it. Smiling lightly, he reached up and ran his hand from her cheek to her neck and down to her shoulder. With one good shove, he had her resting with her chest pressed to the cot and her ass stuck up in the air. Moving so he was knelt behind her, Catcher listened to the slight increase in his General’s breathing before stroking his hand down her back and along her thigh. Slowly, he leaned over her, pressing his chest against her back as he slipped that hand between her legs, feeling her wriggle her hips at the touch. He chuckled to himself when she began to whine and parted her legs a bit more to allow him better access. Dipping his head, he nuzzled the spot behind her ear and gently nipped the shell.
“You sure you want to keep taunting me, Little Bit?” He sank his fingers as deep as he could get them, pumping slowly. "That isn't a very smart idea, sweetheart."
“Ne’tra is the safe word. Hurry the fuck up.” Iza breathed, pushing her hips back with a heavy moan. Her head dropped forward when he found some sensitive spot inside of her and plied it slowly, her hands stretching out in front of her to grab the lower cross support of the bunk. She heard him snicker quietly before he pressed his lips to the side of her neck. He shifted behind her, withdrew his fingers, and then took her again in a single swift movement without any damn warning whatsoever. Iza nearly screamed as she arched back into him, her cheek pressing against one of her arms as her toes curled with every intense, powerful thrust he put into her. He switched it up every few thrusts, too. Slow, slow, quick and ruthless, back to slow—and then mix it up with hard, body jolting thrusts that drew desperate cries out of her and made her shiver all over. His hands had clamped down on her thighs and shifted them, spread them further apart and lifted her back tighter against his pelvis to work him deeper. The sharp sting of a palm against her ass, or his teeth sinking into her shoulder were welcomed little shocks of pain that made her squeal and moan and beg mindlessly beneath him.
“Catch…” she twisted under him as much as his hold would allow, knuckles white as they gripped the cross support desperately. “Catcher, I can’t…”
Catcher’s thoughts were similar. She was just such a tight, sweet piece of work and her muscles seemed to spasm around him. He wanted to feel them constrict. He knew it definitely would be his finish too, but he wasn’t going to let loose until she did first. He would wait and he would make her scream herself raw first. His palms were sweaty as he lifted one from her thigh, and moved it down under her belly. She let out a new arousing high note as he slid it down her stomach, through the fine hairs, and down to rub wetly over the small nub hidden there. Her breathing increased to sharp, quick pants and she cussed at him as she tightened hard around his cock. Burying her face against her arms, Iza shakily shouted out her release in a mixture of his name and praise laced with more swearing. Behind her, Catcher grinned like an absolute animal, continuing to rub his fingers around her clit while her hips bucked and twisted and she squeezed him like a vice. Leaning over her, he braced his free hand on the mattress and gave a hard knock of his head against hers before half-snarling her name in her ear, pounding his hips into her one last time as he poured himself into her in white-hot jets of heat.
His arm shook horribly as he tried to stay hovering above her, panting into her shoulder. Slowly—carefully—he pulled out of her and dropped onto the cot beside her, immediately winding his arm around her waist to haul her against his chest. Neither of them said anything for a while as they tried to get the air back into their lungs. Occasionally, Catcher would bury his face against the crook of her neck or press kisses all over her shoulder. In turn, Iza let out soft little hums of contentment and would lightly bump her head against his in return. When enough time had passed for them to have nearly fallen asleep, Iza stirred beside him and turned over to look at him. Her green eyes were still glassy and her cheeks were flushed and slightly sticky with sweat, but she looked damn satisfied and that was enough for him. Smiling down at her, Catcher dipped his head with the intention of kissing her and laughed when she met him halfway with a solid knock of her forehead.
“I was gonna kiss you that time, Little Bit,” he snickered, turning onto his side with a grunt. “But I’ll take the headbutt.”
“You’d better take it.” She snorted and shifted to nestle closer to him, bringing her hand up to brush her fingers against the peeling bacta patch on his shoulder. Making a face when it wouldn’t smooth back down, she cautiously peeled it back the rest of the way and sighed at the sight of the light bit of scar tissue left behind.
“Hey,” he pushed his lips against her forehead and took the patch from her, tossing it onto the floor. “You stop that.”
“I can’t help it.”
“Is this how you feel whenever you look at my face?” Catcher asked, watching the confused expression sink into her features. Reaching up, he tapped the scar on his chin and raised an eyebrow. “You were there when this happened too. Do you blame yourself for it?”
“I might. Sometimes.”
“You know I’m the idiot who didn’t have their sunbonnet on, right?”
“I’ve seen what commandos do to Trooper armor. It wouldn’t have done much good anyway.”
“Little Bit.” Giving a frustrated look, Catcher pursed his mouth lightly and sighed. “Yeah—well then it’s my fault you’ve got your badge.”
“No it’s not.” Iza’s face scrunched in a scowl. “You didn’t bash half my face in.”
“Excuse me?” He’d been told it was shrapnel that had clipped her. Iza snorted and shrugged a shoulder.
“I didn’t feel it much. Ask Obi-Wan. He’s the one that had to drag me out of the battle because I kept going. I told you—I hit my head a lot. I don’t notice half the time.”
“But—your face, Little Bit?”
“I was mad, Catcher. We’re really not supposed to give into those emotions, you know. There’s a reason. But I was…” Iza blew out a breath and laughed bitterly. “You know I don’t share the same sentiment a lot of people do about you clones being expendable. What the fuck was I supposed to do? My brand new commander just had his face split open by a fucking bolt bucket—I should’ve protected him better. That’s all I was thinking. I’m a Jedi. I’m a protector. I’ve failed him. Then the next thing I know, I’m waking up in medbay fresh from a bacta tank and I’ve got the entire squad cheering about my apparent heroics.”
“You don’t remember it?”
“I remember getting your blood all over the place. That’s why I stopped wearing the robes.”
“Except your little ribbon thing.” He smiled teasingly and got a mildly irritated look in response. Leaning over, Catcher rested his head against hers and kissed her nose. “You didn’t fail me, sweetheart.”
“Maybe not,” Iza brushed her fingertip over the scar on his chin. “But I sure pissed off a couple people. I think my master was one of the few people who wasn’t completely furious.”
“I’ve met your master. He’s… a very intimidating man.”
“He can be.” She shrugged and smirked faintly. “Especially when you factor in how strong he really is and how he presents himself. I was privileged to be allowed to be his apprentice. He had some reservations about me becoming a General, though.”
“Because of your temper?” Catcher teased.
“Yes, actually,” looking up, Iza laughed shortly. “He understands that I know how to ground myself. He does not know my methods. I think he would immediately have my title stripped if he did. But he’s always been a bit concerned with how I feel about the GAR.”
“May I ask a question?”
“Why put yourself in the position to command a battalion if you hate the army so much?” It was an honest question. Catcher was just curious.
“Someone has to make sure you stay alive.” Iza shrugged as if it were that simple. “Master Plo shares the same sentiments but he’s far more casual about it. A lot of the other Jedi share the same thoughts, honestly. They just do a really shitty job of trying.” Pausing, she frowned. “My master’s one complaint about me is that I’ve always had a hard time letting go of things easily. It takes time for me, but I can do it. Honestly, I think he just had me Knighted to shut me up and because we’re at war. I don’t think he believed I was truly ready.”
“You know, we clones aren’t supposed to hold onto our losses either. We’re bred to just keep moving.” Shrugging a shoulder, Catcher reached up and brushed a bit of hair off of her face. “But I don’t think you can really take that out of someone. It always comes back to haunt you whether you want it to or not. So, I understand, Little Bit. I understand not wanting that on your chest.”
Iza gave a watery little smile and laughed, rolling her eyes and covering her face with a hand.
“What a fucking conversation to have after sex,” she muttered, shaking her head. “Thanks for the excellent fuck, love. Let’s talk about our feelings on the military.”
Catcher let out a loud bark of laughter, turning his head so he wasn’t cackling in her face. When his laughter had died down, he pulled her to him and bowed his head to kiss her, humming in amusement.
“If it’s any consolation, it’s probably the most interesting conversation I’ve had after sex.”
“It’s not really appropriate. Not when I should be telling you how good you were. You were amazing, by the way.”
“I appreciate that, sweetheart,” he smirked faintly and smoothed his palms along her back. “You were pretty damn fantastic yourself.”
“I appreciate that. Listen to you. Mister I’ll fuck you into next week.” Iza grinned and snickered, poking the tip of her tongue between her teeth. “You can be smug. It’s allowed.”
“I would be, but I’m exhausted.”
“Oh—so no Round Two?”
Catcher picked his head up and stared at her. Sucking his teeth, he snorted.
“You need to give a man time to recover, sweetheart. And there’s no telling when the others will be allowed back in here.”
“We’ll move to my room, then.” Iza shrugged like she didn’t care one way or the other. “The bed’s bigger anyway. Though—” she tipped her head up and reached to tap the crossbar support. “It doesn’t have these neat bars to hold onto. These are useful.”
“It also doesn’t have a top bunk that you can smash your head on.” Chuckling, Catcher slid his fingers into her hair and brought her in to kiss the top of her head. “We’ll rest for a little while and then I think we can move into your room, Little Bit. My brothers deserve to get some sleep.”
“Okay.” Making a face at him, Iza’s features softened into a sweet smile before she gave him an affectionate bump of her head. “But you’re carrying me. I’m pretty sure my legs are not going to support me anymore.”
“I told you.” Tapping the end of her nose with a finger, Catcher grinned. “I’m not all mouth, sweetheart.”
“Be quiet, Catcher.”
Exhausted was not strong enough of a word to describe how Catcher felt when he sat down in the canteen the next day. He ignored the looks he was getting from his fellow squad members and ran his fingers through his dark hair, propping his cheek in his palm as he took lazy bites of his food. Thank the Maker he still had a few days of sick leave. His General had worn him down to absolutely nothing and he was pretty sure she’d been full of energy when she’d gotten up for her meditation crap that morning. Picking up his mug of caf, he caught the eye of one of the Stars and grunted, getting a vicious grin in return.
“Long night?” Popper asked, the tattoo on his face twitching as his brow quirked upward.
“Eh?” The question took a moment to sink in before Catcher sat up straighter and waved him off. “Dunno what you’re talking about.”
“Don’t play dumb, Catch,” Karver chimed in, dropping down on the bench beside him. “We know.”
“I dunno what you think you know.” Picking the fried protato off of his breakfast biscuit, Catcher shrugged his shoulder.
“The whole fuckin’ battalion knows, brother.”
Turning tired eyes to the clone beside him, Catcher blinked a few times and grunted again. He would have gone and continued denying that he knew anything about what they were talking about had a familiar shadow not been cast over his shoulder.
“What are we talking about, boys?” Iza’s professional tone made the other two squad members stiffen in their seats and clear their throats.
“Nothing, sir,” Popper answered, doing his best to keep a straight face. “Just asking the Commander why he looks so tired.”
Setting her hand on his shoulder, Iza pulled Catcher’s attention to her and raised an eyebrow.
“You’re supposed to be getting rest, Commander,” there was a sparkle to her eye that Catcher was sure the others couldn’t detect. “You’re useless to me if you’re worn out and injured.”
“Yes sir,” he had no idea how he managed to keep such a neutral face. “I’m sorry, sir.”
“The two of you are dismissed,” Iza waved her fingers at the other two clones, keeping her eyes on Catcher while they exchanged a look and took their meal trays elsewhere. When they were gone, the brunette softened her features and sat down on the bench. “You okay?”
“Fine,” he smiled lazily and nudged his meal tray toward her to offer her the other half of his breakfast biscuit. “Just tired.”
“I have some things I have to do today,” picking up the sandwich, Iza took the piece of protato he’d removed and stuffed it back in, taking a bite. “I want you to use my room to rest. I mean it when I say you’re no good to me if you’re worn out like this.”
“It’s your fault, Little Bit,” laughing breathlessly, he shook his head. “You’re damn insatiable, you know that?”
“I’ve been told.” Smiling, she leaned forward and gently knocked her head into his before getting to her feet. Pointing the biscuit at him, she gave him a serious look. “I mean it, Commander. Get some fucking sleep.”
“Yes sir,” Catcher smiled at her affectionately and watched as she nodded in satisfaction and took a bite of the sandwich before walking off.
“Maker above,” Karver’s voice nearly had him falling off the bench seat. “Did she just… are you two…?”
“Didn’t she dismiss you?” Catcher glared at his brother and raked his fingers through his hair. Well, he was certainly awake now.
“Mirshmure'cya.” Karver let out a short laugh and folded his arms over his chest.
“Keldabe kiss. Mando thing. I didn’t know Jedi did it too.”
“Is that, uh, some kind of custom?” Picking up his mug, Catcher took a long drink and eyed his brother over the top. Karver looked at him for a long moment and squinted.
“You let her headbutt you and you don’t know what that means?” When Catcher just continued staring at him, Karver let out a low whistle and sat down. “Brother, that’s a thing Mando couples do. That’s the gentle version of a kov'nyn. You know—the skull bashing shit that Ze likes to do. Usually you see it done with a helmet. I would think you’d know this, considering.”
“I never paid attention to the origin of our genetics, you know that.” He was going to need more caf.
“So…” Karver looked as though he wasn’t going to budge until he got an answer. “You and the General…?”
Shifting his gaze toward his brother, Catcher snorted and got to his feet to walk over to the caf machine.
“You know me better than that, Karver.” He turned, grinning. “I don’t kiss 'n tell.”

In April we got to go to Disneyland and I'm pretty sure I didn't post anything about it. It was an awesome trip and we loved it all. Jack could have enjoyed the rides a little bit more, but the waiting in lines made it hard. Who likes waiting anyway?
|Jack loved to put Josh's socks and shoes on. This was at the hotel.|
We got to go to the beach too. It was a lot of fun but I thought it was so cold! It was pretty relaxing tho and so pretty.
Here are the pictures from Disneyland.
|Jack was so scared of Buzz. Now when he looks at the pictures, he thinks it's so cool. Maybe next time.|
|On the Ferris Wheel.|
|Jack wasn't scared at all! Everyone else was, we went on the moving one, not the stationary one.|
|Nap Time, for both boys|
|So this was just today, Jack wanted to show me his trick. He was so proud of himself. If you can't tell, he put his cup of water on top of the 5 gallon water bottle.|
|Sometimes, when me and Jack are bored, we go to Target and walk around.|
|He makes this really funny face and I tried to get it, but he kept putting his face down.|
|This is at the play place at the mall. He finally was able to climb all the way up.|
|I just think he is such a handsome boy!|
|Jack is really into Buzz and Woody now. He is saying "And Beyond!"|
Obviously my life is all about this kid! But I am so excited that Jack is going to have a little brother soon. He needs a little buddy. Hopefully I'll be able to post pictures of the new baby in a couple months!

IPL 2021: KKR will conduct a post-mortem of the last four overs says Eoin Morgan
KKR suffered a complete collapse in the last four overs and it took a late Rahul Tripathi six to rescue the game
Kolkata Knight Riders almost committed harakiri in what seemed like an easy run chase against Delhi Capitals in the IPL 2021 Qualifier 2 here on Wednesday and captain Eoin Morgan said a proper postmortem of the last four overs will be done later. Chasing 136 to win, KKR were cruising at 123 for 1 in 15.5 overs but the match took an incredibly dramatic turn when they lost five wickets for seven runs, with four batters getting out for naught.
It was Rahul Tripathi, who eventually saved the team the blushes with a penultimate ball six, which sealed KKR a place in the final against Chennai Super Kings. "Should've been a lot easier after the start we got. The openers gave us a great platform. We will dissect what happened in the last four overs," Morgan said during the post-match presentation.
"Dew came in and all, but hey, we have won and we are in the finals. We are delighted to get over the line. Would've loved to win convincingly but the Capitals are a very good side.
"Six off two, the odds were probably in favour of the bowling side, but Rahul Tripathi has done superbly well for us."
DC captain Rishabh Pant was left stunned by the turn of events after his team managed to take the game to the last over only to fall short in the end. "I don't have words to express at the moment, can't tell anything," he said.
"We just kept believing, tried to stay in the game as long as possible. The bowlers nearly pulled it back, but it's unfortunate that it didn't go our way."
He credited the opposition bowlers for making it difficult to score runs. "They bowled very well in the middle-overs, we got stuck and couldn't rotate the strike," Pant said.
"Delhi Capitals are known to be positive and hopefully we'll come back better next season."
KKR opener Venkatesh Iyer, who was adjudged the Man of the Match for his 41-ball 55, said he played freely and didn't try to restrict himself. "I think in the past couple of games, I have been trying to restrict myself a bit as I wanted to stay till the end. But then I thought it is not me. I was losing out on the present trying to be a bit conservative," he said.
"(Opening partner Shubman) Gill is an extremely wonderful stroke player. My entire focus is on the final now."
On his match-winning six, Tripathi said: "It feels great. The win was very important. One or two tough overs and it would go so deep we never thought.
"The 18th over was a great over by Rabada. I had to just connect one, and luckily I connected today, so I am very happy. It was difficult once you go in. Straightaway to get those boundaries was difficult. The ball was keeping a little low. After the first phase, we were a little down. We were always looking for positive options."

Quiznos Complaint - My Lunch Smelt Like Garbage
MONONA, WISCONSIN -- Pretty simple - I took my raspberry chicken salad back to work with me and when I opened it up, it was very obvious there was spoiled meat in my salad. I asked 5 people at work to smell the salad and they all advised me to bring it back as there was clearly something wrong with it. It certainly didn't smell appetizing, at the very least. The Quizno's employee claimed he did not smell anything wrong. This was the most troubling part.
Although they refunded my money, I feel I would be doing our community in Madison, WI a disservice by NOT reporting this Quiznos on Monona Dr.

A 23-year-old man suffered serious facial injuries including a fractured jaw after being bashed outside an Albany nightclub.
The assault happened outside Studio 146 on Stirling Terrace on August 19.
A police spokesman said officers on patrol were called to a disturbance outside the nightclub about 4am.
They spotted the victim, who was walking along York Street with a group of people, as they were leaving the area about 20 minutes later.
The spokesman said the circumstances surrounding how the man was hurt were not known, but his injuries suggested he was the victim of an assault.
The victim had a fractured jaw and fractured nose.
He was taken to Albany Hospital in an ambulance.
Anyone with information on the incident or who was on or near York Street at the time is urged to contact Crime Stoppers on 1800 333 000.

The con moves towards the final stage, I woke up in the morning to the smell of coffee under my nose. “Good morning My Pet,” He said… A young Malay girl, Mei stood only 5′ 2″, weighed only 110 pounds, but had an exquisite figure. Her breasts were firm, nicely rounded and stood out from her well developed chest tipped with two tiny dark protruding nipples. Her public mound was very prominent but she had kept her pussy clean of hair, the multiple folds of her vagina lips centered with a barely visible clit.She was already experienced sexually, although only 18 years old. She was trim and had a well formed body due to swimming frequently. She had been happy and content until she had moved to the city, where she had been unable to get work. She didn’t know anyone and was soon destitute on the streets of the crowded city. Since she was very attractive, she decided to try picking up a “trick”. The man she picked up was a tall, but slightly overweight Arab who offered her a good price for a whole night. She was delighted and was determined to please the man and perhaps convince him to keep her for more nights.When she arrived in his hotel room, he had begun to beat her almost immediately. She cowered and took it as long as she could, but the man seemed obsessed. Finally she saw an opening and grabbed the knife out of his waistband, plunging it deep into his chest. Blood spurted everywhere as she stabbed him over and over again in her rage. When he finally lay on the floor in a pool of his own blood, she realized what she had done.She ran to his bathroom, washed the blood off herself, and dressed again. Fortunately no blood had gotten on her clothes. She stuck the knife in her bag and was about to leave when another Arab man stopped her at the door. He saw his friend lying dead on the floor in a pool of blood and shouted for the police, holding Mei in a tight grip until they came.The police had been sympathetic to her as they had similar problems with Arab tourists before, and she was clearly beaten, the whip marked all over her tender body. The Arab, however, had been an important businessman and his friend had requested that she be put to death as punishment. The judge, being somewhat sympathetic as well, had opted for imprisonment and sale to an exotic meat farm that he knew of, where she would at least have a chance to become a milker and last a little longer. Sadly, he knew that it was just postponing her fate, but it was better than nothing. If he sentenced her to execution by strangling, her body would be sold to a local butcher shop anyway.Now Mei stood in this strange holding area with several other Malay girls and a few American girls. The were all pretty, and their hands were all tied behind the girl’s naked bodies. A man was inspecting each of the girls and though she didn’t understand English, she could tell he was sorting the girls out for something. When he got to her, his strong but gentle hands caressed her body, feeling her muscles and breasts, and inserting a finger into her vagina, he then said something to his assistant and moved on to the next girl. She and another girl about her same size were taken to a large room that looked like a butcher shop. She was strung up hanging upside down from a crossbar by her ankles with a rope. No one said anything, and then just left them hanging there.Soon another girl was brought in, one of the tall American girls. First the men pushed hoses into the three girl’s asses and a small hose into their urethra and, turning on the water, flushed them out. She was so full of water at first that her belly began to expand and when she was full, they turned her right side up so that she could shit and piss on the floor. They then washed the girls all down and left them hanging except the pretty American girl. The men took her to one of the tables and strapped her down as one of the men fucked the girl’s mouth. Then the other man started forcing a long sharp pole through the American girl, her screams piercing and loud, until it emerged from her mouth, forcing blood and cum out of her. The girl was still alive, struggling and obvious crying in pain as they took her outside soon afterwards.Then they came back and strung the other Malay girl up tying her to a tall pole on a raised platform. They spread her legs and shaved her pussy and then began forcing a sharpened pole slowly up through her body. She screamed and screamed until they held the girl’s head back and the pole emerged out of her mouth. They cut her belly open and pulled her guts out, throwing them in a bucket and then they sewed her up again. She could no longer scream, but she was still alive and her body twisted and struggled as the men carried her out of the room, too.The men returned and hung her from the same platform and she knew she was going to be spitted by the long pole as well. First they spread her legs and shaved the little hair that she had over her vagina. The men then injected something into both of her breasts and she felt them begin to become more firm than normal and at the same time a numbing sensation came over her whole body. Apparently she had been given some kind of anesthetic although it was only a mild one. She could feel her belly being slit open and one of the men reached into her and as the huge spit began to move up into her anus, he grabbed her empty colon and guided the shaft up into her body. She could now feel the pain of being spitted by the pole and began to scream and twist from the pain. Calling out to them men, she cried, “Please kill me first. Don’t make me suffer. Oh God! It hurts so much!! I don’t want to die this way!” But the men could not understand her language and were not likely to change their minds anyway as they apparently had done this many times before. She could feel the spit moving up her body as it exited through her intestines and then the man forced it into her esophagus and she soon was silenced as the rod emerged from her mouth, blood spilling out of her at both ends.Mei continued to scream silently as the men lifted the two ends of the spit and carried her out of the building. She twisted and struggled, but her body was securely impaled by the 8′ long 3 1/2″ thick spitting pole. She was finally brought to a barbecue pit where she saw both the pretty American girl and the other Malay girl turning slowly, roasting over a fire, the fat already dripping from the American’s beautiful body as she cooked. The American was obviously now dead, but her friend was still twitching, and her lungs gasping, as the flames licked at the butter and sauces dripping from her body.Me could feel the tremendous heat as she was placed over the fire herself. With a last burst of energy, she struggled furiously, and vainly, as a man began to rub her body with butter. She could feel her breasts and buttocks begin to heat up as she turned slowly. “My God! It’s so hot!! And it hurts so much!!!!” she screamed to herself. ” I wish someone would kill me and spare me the pain! Just get it over with!!” The flames licked at her body as she continued to rotate on the spit and she was basted over and over by the cook, the only relief being the coolness of the butter as it was rubbed into her. She could feel her skin begin to tighten as she began to cook, and she could even smell herself roasting. It smelled so delicious, she almost wished she could taste her own meat. Finally her struggled ceased as her body began to roast and her internal organs were cooked from the steam inside her belly. She died as her body started to turn a delicious dark golden brown.The cook could see she had finally expired, and knew her meat would be fantastic, since the longer the girl lived while being cooked, the better her meat would taste. After she had cooked for almost four hours, he pierced her with a meat fork to test the doneness of her meat. her juices and liquefied fat spurted from the wound, so he knew she had cooked up juicy and tender. He then sliced a small piece of meat from the underside of one of her breasts, and another tiny morsel from her pretty butt. Popping the small, hot, pieces of girl meat into his mouth he said, “UMMMMMM! Absolutely delicious! This one is perfectly done. Let’s get her onto a serving platter.”Carefully, his assistant and he lifted Mei’s body from the fire and placed her gently on a large serving platter. They gently pulled the spit out of her, leaving her with her mouth wide open and a large hole where her asshole had been. She was so juicy, that a little meat stuck to the spit as it was removed. Her body was very hot and steam rose from it as they arranged her on her elbows and knees with the traditional apple in her mouth. She was then delivered to one of the large banquet tables. There the host of that table began to carve thin slices of Mei’s breasts, buttocks and thighs. Her well developed meaty back muscles and part of one her ribs were cut off and placed on another platter, where her rib steaks and her tender, finely marbled roasts were sliced into serving cuts of beautiful, juicy and slightly rare cuts of prime girl meat. The host cut open her belly and carefully extracted her heart, the organ still bubbling from the heat. He placed it on his own plate along with the meat cut from her vagina. He then sat down to a meal of one of the most delicious girls he had eaten in a long time. Everyone began slicing more of her meat off, gorging themselves on the sweet, juicy, flesh of Mei, soon reducing her to just a few scraps of meat on her well picked bones. One young man had cut off one of her calves and was contentedly eating the meat right off her shin bone.Mei was an excellent meal and very little was left of her at the end of the dinner.
My daddy pees on me and I like it. Sometimes I even beg him to whip out his big dick and take a leak right on my face. How did I get this perverted, some people may wonder? Well, it all started last year when my father and I went on vacation to the Jersey shore. We shared a room because we didn’t have enough money for separate quarters. My being a well-developed 18 year-old blonde shouldn’t have been a problem. After all, he was my father and we had rented a suite with a bedroom. He would use that while I slept on a roll-away bed in the living room. We checked in and found to our surprise that the suite assigned to us had a heart-shaped bathtub right in the middle of the living room. I’d heard about these things from friends who went to the Poconos, but I’d never seen one. Little did I know how much trouble I would get into while luxuriating in it. The day after we arrived my father went for a walk down the boardwalk to the next town to check out a bar he’d heard about from a friend. I did some swimming and, to be honest, some trolling for cute lifeguards. One big hunk really made me pussy juice up. It was too bad that he already had a girlfriend. Frustrated and covered with salt water, I came back to the suite and decided to take a bath. I ran the water and stripped out of my bikini. In the mirror over the dresser I could see my foxy little body. My tits are real bouncy and many a man has drooled his saliva over my pencil-eraser nipples. So there I was, lying in the water and feeling real horny. I started massaging my clit, hoping for a big cum. That lifeguard’s little bathing suit had burned itself in my brain and I kept thinking about taking it off without using my hands. I was all worked up and ready to cum when suddenly my father walks out of the bedroom. He’d been there the whole time! There I am with my tongue hanging out and my hand splashing away at my cunt and my own father sees me. I could have died on the spot. “Sally!,” he shouted, “what the hell is going on here? What are you doing?” He sounded furious, which, considering I was only jerking off, seemed too severe a reaction. “I’m sorry. It’s just that . . .” How could I explain this? “It’s just that you’re a little slut,” he answered for me. “A whore. A fingerfucking cunt just like your mother.” He was livid as he dragged up memories of my mother, a cold bitch who abandoned us when I was five. I also realized that he was drunk and Daddy does not hold his liquor well on the rare occasions when he has a few. He kept screaming obscenities and insults at me. Could they hear us in the next room? This was so embarrassing! “I oughta take you over my lap. I oughta beat you black and blue. You little pig. Rubbing your cunt like that right in our room.” He stumbled toward me as he raved and ranted. I just stayed in the tub hoping that the soapy water covered my tits and pussy because I knew if he saw them he’d get even madder.sex picturesWhen he got up close to the tub Daddy did the most insane thing I’ve ever seen. He opened his fly and whipped out his cock and started peeing on me. “Stop, stop,” I screamed. “What are you doing?” His stream was going all over my face and hair, dripping down into the bath water. “A little jerk-off whore like you deserves to be peed on. Take this and like it.” He grabbed my head and pissed right onto my closed mouth. I couldn’t breath, so I had to open my lips for some air. A thick stream of urine blasted right in and I had to swallow it. To my amazement it was delicious, a saltytreat for my palate. I was instantly hooked. “More, more, piss on me some more,” I begged. He ran his endless stream over my face. I began masturbating furiously. Now all he yelled was encouragement. “Frig that clit. Com’n you little piss whore. Let me see you come. You wanna come, don’t you?” “Yes, yes, Daddy. Help me come.” I stood up in the tub. He was smart enough to aim his piss right at my cunt as I diddled my clit shamelessly for him. The warm urine went all over my hands and into my pussy, getting me off almost instantly. My hips bucked from the force of my orgasm and I had to sit back in the pissy water to avoid falling down. All his piss was out by now and I knew what he needed to cap this off. “Come here,” I ordered. He looked horrified at what he had done in his drunken rage, but he moved in close anyway. I took his prick in my hand and it got hard almost instantly. I pulled him close and began tounging his pissy penis. It was flavored by his delicious urine. Gobbling him down my well-practiced throat, I made him come in a minute. He must have been incredibly horny. I swallowed his love juice into my stomach where it mixed with his tangy piss. “Oh, baby, I’m so sorry,” he said, hugging me. I told him not to worry about it, that this was just the beginning of our piss life together. And it was. Then I saw him, there he stood. His head was down, his hair a dark curtain covering his eyes. My gaze lingered on him for an instant, his head tilted to the side a little bit, so that one eye peaked out of his dark hair. He looked directly into my eyes. My drink stopped at my parted lips, I felt foolish, blushing, I swallowed hard and set the drink down on the table in front of me. Gathering my courage up, my eyes drifted down the rest of his body. He wore a black net long sleeve shirt, his upper body was totally visible through the netting. I could see the chiseled look of his chest, the dark circles and glint of silver where his nipples stood out against the material. His legs were encased in what looked like broken in black leather, tightly buckled at the waist with a silver buckle. Black biker boots with small silver buckles on the sides rounded out the package. Both of his hands were stuffed into the front pockets of his pants, his shoulders were down and rounded, sorta like a little kid who knows he’s done something wrong and is just waiting for the punishment. When my eyes had made it back up to his face, he had moved his head a little more to the side and back so that I could see his entire face. He was looking right back at me. I hope he likes what he is seeing, I thought to my self as I straightened out my shoulders and sat up a little straighter. A small smile curved the corners of his mouth, and I blushed again. I don’t usually go to clubs alone, but my date had canceled and I had just sorta wondered in. The guy had taken his hands out of his pockets and placed them against the wall behind him, fingers spread out near his hips, palms against the brick. He looked like he was about to push off the wall, but he stayed there, looking at me with that half smile on his lips. When my heart stopped beating so fast and my breath came easily again, I realized that he was waiting for an invitation. Fear bloomed in my stomach, what the hell was I doing, did I really want this to happen?? I looked down at my hand on the glass and realization dawned warm and comforting in my groin. I looked back up at him, he had raised his eyebrows a little, sort of a question mark in his eyes. I nodded at him and the question left his eyes and a smile took its place. He pushed off the wall, winked at me and turned around and strode out the door of the club. So I was supposed to follow him, did I dare? Fear doubt and an incredible electric feeling hit my stomach again, I stood up and downed the rest of the drink in one gulp. I walked quickly to the door, pushing out into the warm air. The noise level went down considerably. There he was, just turning the corner to where my car was parked. I followed. The parking lot was not lit very well, lights at either end of the building where you either spiraled up or down to the next level, but no lights in between. He was leaning against my car, waiting for me. I got a better look at him up close, it was still dark but I my eyes were getting adjusted. He had small silver nipple rings and no hair on his chest. His smile revealed perfectly white teeth. His hair was black, shining and just past his shoulders. He had one hand in his front pocket and the other was leaning against the top of my car, bent at the elbow his hand cradling his head. I did not know what to say. I pulled keys out of my jeans and walked around to the passenger side of the car, the side he was on. His hip was pressed against the door handle. I held the key out in front of his groin and made a stab at the lock. I missed, the key clattered against the paint on the door. I could feel his eyes on me, I looked up nervously at his face, the keys jangling slightly in my hand. He really did have perfect teeth, they were all showing in the smile he was wearing. The hand that was in his pocket came out and lightly touched my hand that was holding the keys. I felt a bolt of electricity shoot up my arm and go directly to my lower stomach. I dropped the keys. They lay right on his silver buckled boot. I smiled nervously and bent my knees, going straight down the front of his body to retrieve the keys. His boot moved slightly so that the keys fell between his boots. I swallowed on a dry throat and got my hand around the key ring. My face was directly in front of his crotch, the leather smelled warm and rich. As I was standing up, I let my hand stay between his legs, softly raking the key up the inside of his leg. When I got to groin, I scraped up the front of his thigh and looked into his face again. I felt more power, more control.sex imageHis eyes were closed and his mouth was slightly open, his hips had pushed forward a little. But I could still hit the key hole. The key slide into the lock, I turned it and brushed the front of his pants with my knuckles. Again I felt the bolt go up my arm and straight to my cock. He leaned closer and whispered something in my ear. Was it Latin? I didn’t understand it. He simply smiled and opened the car door. He folded himself into my little sports car. I ran around to the drivers side. He had reached across and unlocked my door. I got in and noticed how big he looked in my car, he looked uncomfortable. I reached between his legs and found the control that moved the seat back, my elbow was brushing against his cock as I struggled to move the knob from my position. It finally let go and swept him back about 15 inches. He stretched his legs out and sighed. I put the key in the ignition and paused to think of what I was doing. What was I doing? Where was this going? I looked again at his body, he was beautiful. I turned the ignition and put the car in reverse. I went to the spiral that went down and we were soon on the street, heading to my house. It was incredibly hot in my car, he touched a button on the door and the window came down on his side. His hair flowed freely around his face and shoulders. I could smell him on the breeze, in the car. He smelled very masculine, with just a little polo. I wanted to touch him, taste him, get in really close and smell him. I struggled with all these emotions, and more. Did this mean I was gay? Had I been gay all along. Sex with My girlfriend had been satisfying, I came didn’t I? But I don’t think I had ever been this aroused at just the thought of touching someone. I wanted desperately to reach out to him, caress him. He hummed slightly, his eyes closed, his head turning slightly to catch the breeze. It was a short drive, I live just outside the city. I rolled to a stop in my garage and pushed the button on my visor to close the door. I sat there waiting for something, anything. I was losing a battle with my self. He touched my leg, his hand was incredibly hot. I felt burned. A decision was made. I turned to him, there in the car, and looked into his eyes. They were a dark liquid brown. He looked at me expectantly, searching my face for some kind of clue. His hand still burned on my leg, he gave a small squeeze. I took his hand from my leg and brought it up to my mouth, brushing my lips across his knuckles. That’s when the dam burst inside me, I knew what I wanted and I knew how to get it. I got out of the car and headed for the door to the house. I heard his door shut and knew he was following me. I opened the door to the landing inside the house. From the landing you could go three ways, down to the basement, up to the second floor, or straight ahead to the kitchen. I chose the basement, I had a pool table, wet bar and a very comfortable leather couch down there. Not to mention the big screen and stereo. I could hear him padding down the stairs behind me. I turned on the light over the pool table and went to the bar and poured a white Zin, and offered it to him. He was looking at my stereo set up. He found the power and Nine Inch Nails started pumping out of it. He turned it down a little and turned to me with that big smile. He took the Zin and offered it to my lips, I did not catch it all in my mouth, some escaped. He came in close, his body pressed to mine and licked the wine off of my chin and the corner of my mouth, I think that was the no turning back point. One of my hands found his ass and the other tangled in his hair. He set the glass down on the pool table and wrapped his arms around me. Both of his hands scratching down the small of my back and into my jeans. My mouth found his, it was hot and alive with electricity. I could feel small explosions rocking my head, my cock, my hips, my stomach, my mouth. He was licking my teeth, biting and sucking at my lips, reaching further into my mouth with his tongue. I felt him break the kiss, I sucked in air and went searching for his hot mouth again. He had moved to my jaw, he was kissing along the curve and following it up to my ear, leaving a wet trail where ever his mouth touched. I groaned and dragged his mouth to my throat, right below my ear, I could hear his ragged breathing and feel his hot breath on my throat. I took his earlobe in my mouth and sucked for all I was worth. I gently tugged on it with my teeth and then moved to shove my tongue into his ear. That got a groan out of him. I could feel him sucking hard on my neck, how was I going to explain a hickey to My girlfriend? He came up for air and found my mouth again, I was ready, I let my tongue trace his wet lips, then I pushed in side his mouth to lick his teeth and probe into the nooks and crannies of his luscious mouth. He moaned and roughly rubbed his leather crotch to my denim one. He pulled his hands off my ass and out of my pants. He was moving his hands up my chest to the buttons on my shirt. He struggled with the first one briefly before just pulling it apart, he did the same all the way down to my stomach. Buttons were flying everywhere. I pulled his shirt over his head and threw it to the couch. I wanted a closer look at his nipples. They were perfectly round, puffy and an erotic shade of red. The silver rings made his nubs stand on end. I wanted to take it in my mouth, but I didn’t want to hurt him. He roughly pushed my lips to his nipple. I gently took the whole thing into my mouth, ring and all. I could not close my teeth around his nipple so I tugged on the ring with my teeth. He hissed and ground his leather crotch against me. I lavished the same attention on his other nipple. One of my hands was caressing the small of his back, I love that area. The other was wrapping itself in his silky hair. I pulled his head back roughly and locked my mouth on his neck, let him explain that hickey to his girlfriend. When I could taste blood in my mouth, I let his neck go. The clash of the bright red hickey on his white throat was so sexy. His hands were moving over my chest pinching my nipples and tugging the hair that was all over my pecs. I wanted to move down his body, I started at his collar bone and kissed and sucked my way down his chest. I made a wet trail to his right nipple, my hand closed on his left one, pinching and pulling at the ring. My mouth slid down his rib cage. I found a whispy pleasure trail. I tongued every hair on his belly before moving to his belt buckle. I tried to undo his belt with my teeth, but it would not budge, so he undid it himself. I loved the feel of the warm metal in my mouth as I pulled the belt free from its loops. I threw the belt toward the couch and moved toward the buttons on his leather pants. I pulled and they undid themselves. He was standing above me, his hands on either side of his body holding himself up with the pool table. I could smell his crotch, the heat was incredible. It felt like I was reaching in to molten lava, as I reached into his pants. I felt a thick patch of hair and further down a very hard cock. He wore no underwear. With one hand still inside, I pulled his pants off with the other, all the way down to his black square toed boots. His cock lay twitching in my palm, purple and glistening in the heat. I kissed the tip, I ran my tongue along the underside. I licked at his balls and then came up to tug on his bush with my teeth before pushing him onto the pool table. I pulled his boots off, then his pants, then socks. He lay there naked and beautiful. I took the glass of Zin and poured some on his cock, it ran over his hips and down his balls and dripped onto the pool table. I started to lick it up. It had pooled on his thigh, the wine tasted funky mixed with his salty flesh taste. I left him there on the table while I undid my belt and jeans. I shucked them off in one fluid movement. I was wearing boxers. my cock stuck out of the slit at an angle. those too came off and went to the pile of clothes near the couch. I went back to him. his hips were on the pool table, his legs dangling over the edge. I pushed his knees up till his feet were planted on the bumper of the table leaving his ass and balls swaying gently over the edge. I got more wine and poured it on his balls this time. I watched it flow down the crack of his ass and drip down the edge of the pool table. I knelt on the floor so that my face was level with his ball sac. I pushed his thighs further apart and leaned into his balls. I tried to suck them both into my mouth at the same time. I couldn’t, so I settled for one then the other. He was writhing on the edge of the pool table, moaning and groaning just the way I like it. I ran my tongue down the path that the wine had taken and I heard a loud moan. I pushed my face into his ass and wedged my tongue into his hole. The sounds he was making went up an octave as he ground his ass onto my tongue.taboo xxx storiesHe had taken his cock in hand and was stroking it slowly from balls to tip. I searched around for a while trying to find his prostate with my tongue. No luck, but by this time he was growling to me or to himself, I couldn’t tell. After slobbering all over his hole I stood up and took my cock in hand, running it up and down his crack. His eyes were smoldering into mine, begging me to ram my cock up his ass. I placed the head of my tool up to his puckered little ring, and pushed very gently. His little ass welcomed me in and settled around my cock. I was gripping his upper legs and pulling him toward me, sinking deeper into his tight little hole. His teeth were set and his eyes were closed, he was still pulling on his cock, long slow strokes. I had bottomed out, my balls were against the pool table. I slowly pulled all eight inches out, I aimed the tip of my cock and plunged in ball deep. He yelped and started to stroke himself faster. I leaned over and bit his leg, I smacked his ass, I wanted him to cry out again. I pulled all the way out again, and lingered at the opening, I took his balls in my hand and rolled them around. I gave them a good tug as I shoved my cock in to the hilt. He cried out, I am pretty sure it was Latin, what ever, as long as he made noise. I wrapped his legs around me and picked him up, my cock still buried to the hilt inside him. I held him close to me, I pulled on his nipple rings, sucked one in my mouth, then the other. I carried him to the big leather couch, my hips pumping into him the whole time. His cheek lay against my forehead, his mouth close to my ear. He was whispering something to me, I could not understand. His cock was rubbing against my abs. I laid him down on the couch and kissed his forehead, his brow, eyelids, the tip of his nose until I found his hot little mouth. I sucked fiercely on his bottom lip, pulling and biting into it. I licked his teeth forcing my tongue deeper into his mouth, feeling his cock squirm against my abs. I pulled almost all the way out and plunged in again finding a slow rhythm. working my way in and out while my tongue tried to rape his mouth. I wanted him to be noisy, I wanted to hear his grunts and groans. I pulled off his mouth and bit his shoulder. He cried out and humped against my abs, both his hands were wrapped around my ass, pulling me deeper into him. I leaned down to his ear and whispered “Fuck my cock baby,” then shoved my tongue into his ear. He shouted something and his ass got very tight and so hot. I could feel that he was coming on my stomach. He pinched my ass and scratched my chest, his ass gripping my cock so tightly that I started to come, bucking roughly into him again and again until collapsing on top of him. We lay that way for a long time, snuggled together, me on top and still inside him. My head resting on his shoulder. I could feel his cock moving against my abdomen, getting smaller and tucking itself back into its foreskin. I let my spent cock slide out of him and felt my cum seeping out. I moved to his side and held him to me, my front to his back, one arm under my head as a pillow, the other wrapped around his abdomen. I could hear his light breathing, I think he was asleep. I drifted off to sleep, feeling more relaxed, happier than I had ever been in my entire life.
Jackie extended her head out the window of her apartment on the Parisian left bank and allowed he long auburn hair to dry naturally in the gentle breeze. Mom and Dad were right when they suggested that after she finished her bachelor’s degree in elementary teaching that she should go to Paris for the summer to unwind. Being a tall, 5’10” red head with a beautiful shimmering complexion didn’t hurt. Although her mouth was a little wide, when she smiled her crimson lips drove men to distraction. Café life was one of Jackie’s favorite pass times. She loved the strong café and vin rouge and the fact that the waiters did not annoy you. One of her favorite spots was a café on the corner near the Boulevard St. Michel where she could watch the lovers kissing in front the streaming fountain. There were times when lovers would kiss even in a downpour of the frequent Paris rains. Today was going to be quite an adventure for Jackie and she had no forewarning of it. As she sat at her usual table in the café she noticed that all the other tables were occupied. A swarthy mature gentleman approached her table and said, “Do you mind if I sit at your table? You seem to have an extra chair and I really don’t like to stand and drink my espresso. Besides it always enjoyable to have a conversation with a lovely young American.” “Is it so obvious that I am an American? How did you know? “I suppose it’s the way you sit so provocatively in you chair and expose just enough to get a man’s attention.” The dark man replied. Jackie could not help noticing the large bulge in his pants. So she nodded agreement and he sat down with her. His cologne was faint but breath taking. Jackie moved her chair closer to him so that she could observe him more closely. Her eyes drawn to the lump in his trousers and she dreamily though of all the beautiful cocks she had seen in her young life. When she and twin brother Billy were growing up she was the victim of real penis envy every time they bathed together. One day when mom was out of the bathroom for a few minutes she grabbed Billy’s pee pee to teach him a lesson. Billy immediately became hard and almost jumped out of his skin. However, Jackie inadvertently began rubbing his cock that grew and grew before her. Before, they knew what happened, Billy shot some white cream right into Jackie’s face and mouth. It was like tasting ambrosia for the first time. Jackie could not believe how good it tasted and bent over to lick up the few drops hanging to the head of Billy’s cock. Immediately, Billy’s cock hardened and Jackie began to suck on it with all her might. At that age when cum is so often and enjoyable, Billy in a few minutes filled Jackie’s mouth once again. The feel of the cum in her mouth and sliding down her throat set Jackie on fire and it was then that she deep throated Billy for the first time. After that Mom had no trouble getting Billy and Jackie to take their evening bath together. Like all children Billy and Jackie wondered if they were doing something bad. Jackie was a natural born snoop and there fore, kept a close eye on the activities of her parents. She noticed that some nights after she and Billy had gone to bed there were sounds coming from Mom and Dad’s bedroom that seemed very strange. Mom was often to be heard moaning and there was also the sound of the squeaking springs of the bed. Mom and Dad were not very careful about closing the bedroom. So one night after they had all gone to bed, Billy and Jackie sneaked into the parent’s room undetected. The room was very dark but as they waited their eyes adjusted and they could make out their mother and father. Mom was sitting on the bed and was unbuttoning Dad’s pajamas. Plop out flopped Dad’s pee pee and was it large! Billy’s was still very small in comparison. In an instant Mom had Dad’s long hard cock in her mouth and her head was bobbing back and forth rapidly. Finally, Mom got so excited that she swallowed Dad’s entire cock and licked his balls. Jackie thought Daddy must surely have cum by now but to her surprise he removed his enormous cock from Mom’s mouth and shoved it between her legs. Mom’s legs were spread as far as they could go and Dad’s cock was in her pee pee up to his balls. It was now that Mom began moaning and groaning as Dad pumped his cock deep and hard into her. While Mom and Dad were really getting into a hot fuck, Billy’s cock was being sucked voraciously by Jackie determined to keep pace with her Mom. However, when Mom lay back and allowed Dad to start fucking her cunt, Jackie became confused. Billy being a bright boy slowly pushed Jackie back and she lay on her back with her virginal pussy open for the world to see and Billy’s little cock. In a twinkling Billy was on top of Jackie and was trying to shove his cock into her like Dad was doing to Mom. Jackie was very tight and as Billy pushed he did not get very far. Then it happened Billy stiffened up and shot his load right on to the outer lips of Jackie’s vagina. Billy was so excited that his cock almost immediately hardened again. Now when he tried to push his cock into Jackie, his cum helped to lubricate her and it was almost immediately was in all the way, At first, Billy’s cock was too big and her pussy was too tight, but with his constant pressure something seemed to give way and Jackie felt herself filling up with Billy’s cock. A little pain made the experience a little uncomfortable but then something seemed to tear. Billy’s next several strokes were irritating but then Jackie’s senses took over and she began to enjoy the first real fuck of her life. Billy pummeled his sister’s cunt until he came again, while she orgasmed for the first time. Softening up, Billy wanted to pull out his cock but Jackie whimpered in his ear to let it be where it was because it felt so good. Billy and Jackie then turned their eyes on their parents who were fucking with wild abandon. Dad’s back arched and Mom thrust her cunt up towards him as a gusher of cum flooded her pussy. To the kid’s amazement, Dad immediately slid down and licked his own cum from Mom’s throbbing pussy. At the sight of this Jackie spread her legs and without any urging Billy went to town. Mom and Jackie experienced their orgasms concurrently and screamed into their pillows. Billy and Jackie then crept out of their parent’s bedroom on their hands and knees and fell worn out into their beds. “Do you think they were wise to our little charade?” asked Mom. “I don’t think it even occurred to them. You know how kids are at their age, thinking they know it all. However, since you saw Jackie sucking Billy’s cock in the bath tub, I believe we did the right thing by letting them watch two experienced lovers do it the right way. As Jackie grew older she saw her parents naked many times, especially after they joined a naturalist club in New Jersey. Sometimes, these clubs were really places where swingers congregated. One never knew what you might see in and around the pool after the sun went down. Many a male dived in the pool, only to come up with a pair of warm lips wrapped around his dick. This was another type of school for Jackie. When Jackie enrolled at Slippery Rock University, she was no virgin, but she was incomplete in some way. Looking for something new in her life, Jackie who was not very athletic, decided to become a student manager for the football team. One of her many duties was to make sure that each player had access to towels fort the after game shower. About the third game into the season, Jackie went to locker room to begin the process of cleaning up after the players had left. Upon entering thew locker room Jackie went immediately to work as she listened to her walkman. Due to this she did not hear the water running in the shower. Some of the towels were heaped in a pile in the far end of the room and Jackie proceeded their and bent down to gather them together. Jackie did not here the shower being turned off, but to her great surprise saw a great black stud of a man come out and go to his locker. She could not believe her eyes. Mon, Dieu. What was that huge wand between his legs? It was her first glance of a black man’s large black cock. Hanging there flaccid it looked enormous. This black piece of meat made Billy and Dad look like midgets. Scooting down, she watched as the black man dried himself eventually coming to his groin. Using his large hand he grabbed his beautiful ebony prick and began to slowly stroke it. To her amazement, Jackie saw his cock get hard and then even larger than it was before. He left go of his throbbing cock and it began to jump up and down in front of him. Gasping at the sight of this masturbating giant, she slipped and knocked over the bench in front of her. The black behemoth quickly turned and saw her and laughed. Holding his gigantic ebony cock in his hand, he approached her smiling all the way. “Down on your knees, bitch! I’ll show you what you get for spying on me!” With this he pushed Jackie to her knees and shoved his black sword into her mouth. It was a good thing that Jackie always had a wide mouth and could at least engulf the whole of his prick’s head. Although, she gagged, she loved the idea of having his hard dark meat for a meal. He wasn’t satisfied with just the head being in her mouth. “Deep throat me, you red haired whore! I wanna feel my cock in you throat! I want you to lick my balls the hard way!” “Glub, Glub,” said Jackie as she strained to take more and more cock in to her mouth and throat. Almost the whole rampant monster was in her, when he left go with an enormous load of cum. The added lubrication of his cum allowed his cock to go the rest of the way down her gagging throat! “Well, Honey, how do you like sucking a black man’s big prick?” “It’s the most beautiful cock I have ever seen. May I hold it and look at it more closely?”porn sex imageSurprised by her response he presented his now limp prick for her inspection. Taking the black monster in her hands, Jackie began to look at it from all angles. Truly a work of art, she finally had before her that for which she had been longing. This thick black piece of ebony needed to be put in its sheath between her creamy white legs. Reaching down Jackie took his balls in her hands and lifted them up to her mouth and began to lick and suck them. His cock immediately sprung up almost knocking out her eye. “What do you want, Baby? Would you like Big Daddy to slam dunk his big black snake into your little white cunt?” “Oh, Big Daddy, it’s all I ever dreamed of. A cock as big as yours might finally fill me all the way. I’ll bend over and you drive it home!” With this plea he stabbed his cum soaked cock deep into her waiting pussy. Once again it started slow, but to his amazement her sloppy pussy took in every bit of his 11 inches. With this encouragement he began to pound her ass for all he was worth. “Fuck me you Black bastard. I want it all! Rip me apart inside. Harder, harder, don’t be a pussy!” This encouraged Big Daddy enough that he practically drove Jackie up against the wall. She could feel every vein in his bursting black cock and the big head deep inside the hot vagina. Finally, the release came and both orgasmed at the same time. A beautiful sight it was with them lying among the towels on the floor. The beautiful, lone legged, white skinned red head with the large black cock in her pussy while the muscle on Big Daddy’s back rippled. After this Big Daddy introduced her to many of his fellow Afro Americans on campus, but Jackie would only fuck the ones with really huge black cocks. Although, her parents did not know it, Jackie wanted some relief from all her college fucking and that’s why she wanted to go to Paris. However, Jackie still did not satisfy all her needs. She was still looking for a cock big enough to satisfy her. This takes us to the day when Jackie shared her table with the dark stranger in an outside café on the Boulevard St. Michel in Paris. After a small espresso, Bernard asked Jackie if he could buy her a glass of wine to brighten up her day. However, after several glasses, Jackie was feeling warm and friendly and was squeaking peeks at the large bulge in Bernard’s trousers. Before long the shadows of dust were getting longer in their trips across the Boulevard St. Michel. Jackie was famished but was transfixed by Bernard’s presence. “Jackie, would you care to join me for supper in a small private club I belong to here in the Latin Quarter?” Bernard asked with flashing eyes. “I am very, very hungry, but I cannot eat all the French delicacies. Snail, for example, leave me cold. Are there other entrees that are more like American selections?” “You can have whatever you want at this restaurant and club. If you don’t like anything we can always send out to a nearby restaurant.” “I cannot refuse your offer. Your eyes tell me that you are someone I can trust. Let’s go. Bye the way what is the name of the club?” “The Underground Riding Club is its name and when we get there you will soon see why.” They walked several blocks towards Notre Dame and turned down onto the Rue de la Chat Qui Peche. This street is filled with inexpensive Greek restaurants with waiters outside inviting potential customers inside. In the middle of the first block, Bernnard led Jackie to a stair that led down to an unmarked red door. He knocked on the door and as if they were back in the prohibition era a small peek hole opened. Bernard showed a small card and they were immediately admitted. The lights in the club were subdued. Jackie and Bernard were guided to their table by a young woman wearing a leather mini and nothing else. It took Jackie’s breath away to see such a perfectly shaped beauty and she believed that she noticed a small but definite movement of Bernard’s bulge. They sat inside a cozy loge a deep red velvet plush sofa. Each booth had curtains that could be drawn to give complete privacy. There was a small table before them where their food and drinks would be served. “Will you trust me to order for you?” Asked Bernard. “Nothing too hot or creepy, if you please. But go ahead and order,” she smiled. Bernard whispered into the garcon’s ear and he disappeared in the gloom of the club only to return with a plate of the daintiest sandwiches Jackie had ever seen. After a few finger sandwiches and of course some more wine, Jackie began to look around the club. There was a center stage with red velvet ropes cordoning it off from the audience. At this time it was bathed in a very subdued light. Around the stage were perhaps twenty-five booths similar to the one in which Bernard and Jackie were sitting. While they ate Jackie became more relaxed with a warm sensual glow drifting over her body. She felt like reaching out and releasing Bernard’s monster from it lair. However, Bernard was just a new acquaintance and Jackie did not know how he would respond. Bernard could not resist any more. His dark skinned hand was now delicately massaging Jackie’s thigh. Reacting to his overture, Jackie soon had her hand on his crotch and could feel the incredible cock inside. His cock felt larger than any of her black jocks and that was saying something. Getting ready to unzip his pants, Bernard told Jackie to wait because the show was about to begin. Jackie had not noticed but almost all the booths were filled and the lights on the stage were being raised. Hearing a noise to her left she looked and saw a rather large door being open. Out stepped a petite woman and a rather tall rustic looking woman with a riding crop. They went to the center of the stage and spread some hay on the floor in preparation for some entertainment. A horse now whinnied from off stage and the larger woman went back through the door. She then led the horse out onto the stage and began to lead him around so everyone could see for themselves that he was indeed a stallion. She then blindfolded the stallion to prevent anything from scaring him Jackie could see several cameras on tripods set around the stage in the booths. Now the petite performer approached the stallion and reached under his belly. “Oh, my God, what is she going to do, Bernard? ” Reacted Jackie. Bernard winked and nodded toward the stage so that Jackie did not miss the performance. The stallion had a large cock before being excited but as the woman stroked it the length just grew and grew. It must have been at least two feet long and was bobbing up and down. Le petite femme soon had slipped back the stallion to reveal a long cherry red head to the black cock. She now tried to get as much of the stallion’s cock as she could into her luscious mouth. While, she could not surround much of it with her lips the stallion obviously liked what was being performed on him.forced rape sex storiesJackie could wait no longer and had Bernard’s rock hard prick out of this trousers and had her two hands wrapped around it. It was still larger than her grasp, which surprised and excited her. By this time Bernard was slipping his whole hand into her self lubricated pussy. It occurred to Jackie that the other guests might be watching them so she looked around the other booths. To her relief they were all looking intently looking at the stage in all kinds of sexual activities. On the stage the petite femme had slid under the stallion and was arching her back so that her hairless cunt was getting nearer and nearer to the stallion’s enormous cock. His cock had seemed to grow even more since Jackie had last looked. Obviously, this was a job for more than one and the gran femme was helping to guide the big black monster into the waiting pussy slick and wet from its own excretions. While transfixed on this scene hardly noticed as Bernard lifted her on to his bulging lap. When he placed the enormous purple head of his cock against her steamy vagina she did become interested. To his great surprise and delight his cock began to slide easily into her large pussy. Little did he know that Jackie had fucked some of the largest black cocks on the college football team. Nor did he know that Jackie had a hidden urge for even larger cocks. The head of Bernard’s cock slid slowly into the dark sweet pink interior of Jackie’s cunt stretching it as it progressed. Jackie felt the huge tool impaling her and moved up and down on the monster all the time getting further and further down on his crotch. Bernard could not believe Jackie’s abandon and his mind swam as his felt her cunt accept the last inch of his bursting cock. As she began to really ride up and down on Bernard’s prick she was gazing at the stage where la petite femme was getting some of the stallion’s red tipped cock into her well stretched pussy. The gran femme guide the stallion’s cock and made sure his did not hurt inadvertently la petite femme. She now climaxed in a drug like rush and the stallion stiffened up and began to shoot an enormous load of cum all over the women’s bodies. The two femmes began to lick up the expended cum from the stallion’s shrinking dick and from each other’s bodies. By this time she was crazy with sensual desire and was literally pumping Bernard’s cock into her cunt with all her might. Bernard would never forget the sensations of Jackie’s cunt engulfing the entire length of his long hard cock time after time as she bounced up and down in his lap. Jackie’s eyes were closed and she was staining more and more to relieve Bernard of his cum. The he stiffened and she knew the end was near and as she felt his huge wad of cum spraying into he waiting vagina, she turned around and took his cum shooting cock into her mouth. While, his cock was beginning to shrink, Jackie sucked all that was left down her throat and drained him dry of his cum. After she recovered from this sexual, she dimly heard applause from all the booths. Looking up from Bernard’s lap she saw that everyone was looking at them and clapping. This recognition made her feel giddy and at the same time happy. Not till this moment did Jackie realize that she enjoyed performing sexually in public. Perhaps she was aware the whole time that she was being watched. It did not matter to her anymore she loved the adulation. The stage was now bare and the performers had gone much to Jackie’s disappointment. “Is it over for tonight? I’d love to see them perform again!” Wished Jackie. “No, there is usually another performance, but tonight the petite femme has another engagement.” A devious dirty little idea formed in Jackie’s mind. “Could I take her place, Bernard? I love the size of the horse’s big cock and would love to suck and fuck it!” This statement really blew Bernard away. “Well, let me see what can be arranged, Jackie. You certainly are a big surprise. Perhaps, you would prefer to be masked.” “Yes, Bernard, that would make it even more daring.” When he returned he led Jackie to the dressing rooms where she donned a loose fitting robe and long red boots. The mask she put on was mostly red sequins and feathers. All the accessories went well with her fragrant unshaven red pussy. After a few moments discussion with the gram femme, she was led to the stage by Bernard. La gran femme followed with a pony much to Jackie’s disappointment. However, when Jackie looked between the pony’s legs she observed a cock almost the equal of the stallion’s. With a squeal of delight she immediately went under the pony and began to rub and suck his distended price. She may have been going tot fast as it was hard to keep him in place. When the pony’s prick was hard and ready for a good fuck Jackie whose cunt was a slippery as an eel opened up to receive it. Unlike her predecessor on the stage she did get the complete head into her snatch. It went in deeper and deeper until it could go not further. In fact, she had the entire length of the pony’s black cock in her pussy. She felt like she was going to cough up his balls. Then finally another sensation hit her from behind. Bernard had slipped behind her and began to drive his cock into her tight asshole. Painful at first Jackie was soon driving her ass hole harder and harder on Bernard cock while her pussy was taking deep thrusts from the pony. The pony came before Bernard and quick as a wink Jackie had the pony’s cock in her mouth sucking with all her might. The cum had a wild sweet taste. Different from a man’s but incredibly intoxicating in its own perverted way. As she sucked the last drop from the pony’s still rampant cock, she could tell that Bernard was having a real good time in her ass. He was driving her like a pile driver. Obviously, Jackie had never had such a large cock in her ass before and it was tearing her apart. But the combination of the pain and pleasure had her screaming at the tip of her lungs with tears flowing freely from her soft blue eyes. As he began to cum in her as she pulled his cock out with a pop, swung around and began to suck the shit stained cock of all its love juice once more to the standing ovation of the awe struck audience. Early in the morning Bernard escorted Jackie to her apartment leaving her at the door with the understanding her would return. Bernard was part owner in the club and through his offices Jackie was allowed to fuck the horse and pony on the stage in front everyone usually once or twice a week that summer. Eventually she actually almost got the stallion’s entire cock into her cunt. FREE PORN 18+ Mona entered the plush office of her boss, John Powers, exactly at 5:15. She had been coming to his office every working day ever since he had caught her stealing $5000 from his private funds. She locked the door and turned toward his desk. He waited, as always, behind the large walnut desk for Mona to arrive and start the session that he had been thinking about all day. Mona had hated the thing at first but after several weeks, she had grown to like it. Powers had told her that she would go to jail or… she could be his “Sex Slave”! Now after finishing up the day’s work of typing and filling papers, she would finish this task! Mona wore the tight black dress with the scoop neckline that he liked so much. When she got down on her knees before him and began to fumble at his pants zipper, he enjoyed the wonderful view down into Mona’s bosom and the deep, firm cleavage she possessed. “Hello Mona Dear! You’re right on time as always,” Powers said as he moved his legs so that Mona could get closer to him. Powers’ wall stereo played softly in the background as Mona unzipped his slacks. Mona remembered the first day and how terrified she was, but now she rather enjoyed the feel of his penis in her mouth and the way it would grow and harden under her lips and tongue. The way she could get him to moan and beg her as she expertly massaged his member to complete erection and then to explode with his customary groans of pleasure. During those minutes, Mona felt more feminine and desirable than any time in her life and she tried to improve her technique each time they met. Mona drew out his soft cock and kissed the tip. With her eyes closed, she opened her ruby lips and encircled the warm flesh and slowly lowered her mouth onto his member. John Powers enjoyed the sight of his personal secretary as she bobbed up and down between his open legs. Her honey-blond hair fell down over his thighs and her full firm breasts touched his legs when she leaned forward. He had always thought she resembled the late movie star: Marilyn Monroe and she did a bit, except that Mona had bigger, firmer breasts and her legs were longer. Later when she had brought a great sigh from Powers lips and he had almost caused her to gag on the quantity of his pearly liquid spurting down her throat, he had Mona move to his large overstuffed chair and he turned her so he could undo the six buttons on the back of her dress. He pulled it down and then unfastened the wide bra strap at her back. Mona wore a custom made white underwire model 36D that had panels of sheer lace along the sides and fitted her perfectly. John Powers slid the straps down her arms and dropped the garment by the chair. Now he pushed Mona back into the chair and kissed each of her full breasts, newly released from the cloth prison. He sucked her pink nipped tips until Mona tried to pull away, as he nipped one erect nub, and she gasped, “Oh John! Please! You can’t bite them like that! It HURTS!” John continued kissing and sucking Mona’s breasts for a time and then stopped. He held her by the shoulders and looking into her green eyes, told her :” Mona, my dear, I want you to spend a weekend with a friend of mine. A Doctor and his wife.” Mona was slipping the bra back on and pulling her dress back in place. “What? You want me to go to a stranger and spend the night?,” she said. Powers continued: “You will have dinner with my friend Doctor Morrieau and his wife; Vanisa. They have wanted to meet you and they have a large, beautiful home in the Spring Oaks part of Town. You’ll love them both!” Powers was locking up now and Mona followed him out the office door. ” I’ll pick you up at 8:00 and we’ll have an exciting evening. Mona…… wear the red strapless dress with black lacy thigh high hose, the red heels and that bra with the two holes cut out”! Powers smiled at Mona’s troubled looks and he knew she hated the outfit he bought for her and especially the black bra that allowed her nipples to protrude through and could be seen through the thin material of the red dress. Also the bra would keep her nipples tormented and erect all evening and she would no doubt, be blushing all evening. At 8:30, Powers big black Town car pulled up in the covered drive of the Doctor’s mansion. Mona shivered as she saw the man dressed in a dark suit, as he opened the car door and helped her out. “Good evening Miss and you Mister Powers! The Morrieaus are waiting in the living room for you both.”, the man servant said. Mona noticed the man’s wrist as he helped her out; a black leather band with a small silver chain encircled his wrist. She noticed he wore one on his other wrist also. “Good Evening Boris “!, Powers said as he opened his door and then got out. He took Mona into the mansion, past the smiling servant who held the door open for them. Inside Mona was greeted by the hosts; a tall, well dressed, dark haired, smiling man of 45 years, who kissed Mona’s hand and his wife; a slim, attractive raven haired woman of 35 who was dressed in a long black strapless dress also. Mona noticed she had a black leather wristband also, with the silver chain on the outside of the strap. Mona could see that she had small breasts. “Mona, I want you to meet my good friends ; Doctor and Mrs. Morrieau ,” Powers said to Mona. “Call me Vanisa, my dear. I love your dress and that fabulous figure of yours!,” the doctor’s wife said. “And this is MONA!,” John Powers said. “Dinner is served,” Boris said and they entered into the dining room; a large room, well lighted and a large table set for four. Boris served the dinner of lobster and then later a baked Alaska for dessert. All during the meal, the servant poured chilled champagne for the four. It seemed to Mona, that a soon as she took a sip from her glass, it was filled again to the top. Mona noticed the walls were filled with many paintings; mostly nudes of women. Some were nude women, bound and gagged. In the corner of the room was a marble sculpture on a walnut pedestal. It was a nude woman ; bound and gagged and her arms raised above her head, the wrists tied together over her head; a real rope ran from the marble wrists to the ceiling above to a silver ring hanging there. The stone figure had full breasts, the nipples plainly erect. Mona had a feeling of dread come over her as she looked at the sculpture. After dinner, Powers excused himself and left the Doctor’s home. “Have a fine time here this weekend and try to enjoy yourself ,” John Powers said to Mona as he shook hands with the Doctor. ” And learn from your hosts, my dear, what ever they teach you!.” Doctor Morrieau and Vanisa each took hold of one of Mona’s arms and led her into the den. “Now, Mona dear, It’s time to watch some interesting films. Have you ever heard of a movie called “The Story of O”?, Dr. Morrieau whispered to her.Nudist beach girl nudeThe den was a large walnut panelled room with a large screen TV on the far wall and a complete home theater sound system installed. Opposite the screen was a large, curved couch; in beige leather. The room had indirect, dimmed lighting and along each wall were several nude oil paintings of bound and gagged women. Mona could see one that looked like a portrait of Vanisa. She was clad in a black leather corset that left her tiny breasts bare; her arms tied behind her and her mouth fitted with a red ball, held in place with a black leather strap. She was tied to a post and behind her was a male figure who held in his hand a whip or was it a rope? Mona shivered with fear, as she gazed with growing horror at the pictures and wished her boss had taken her with him, when he left. Doctor Morrieau started the movie and Vanisa exited the room saying: ” I’ll be right back Mona my dear! I want to get into something more comfortable, to watch the video.” Boris stood behind the couch, in the darkness, silently waiting for any orders from his master. The movie began. It was a French version of the classic tale of “O,” with English subtitles. The Doctor sat next to Mona on the couch, his shoulder and arm touching her. Then minutes later, Vanisa entered the room and sat on the other side of Mona. Mrs. Morrieau was clad in a black leather corset and black thigh high hose with black high heels. She wore a small black mask and carried a short leather whip. “I see you started the movie without me!, she said to them. Mona couldn’t think of anything to say and stared at the TV screen where a young French woman was shown being led into a large mansion by her lover and told to learn and desire the experiences she would be shown in the following days at the “Rosserie.” Mona watched as the woman “O” is stripped and whipped by masked men and chained to the wall in her room. In the darkness, Mona feels a hand on her knee and a whispered voice in her ear: ” We’re getting near the good parts, Mona my dear!’, Vanisa breathes. Mona watched the video silently in the dimly lighted room and wanted to get up and run out of the house, but it seemed that part of her wanted to see what her dinner partners were going to do. When the movie ended, Dr. Morrieau turned to Mona and brought out a pair of black leather wrist restraint-handcuffs. (Steel handcuffs with leather padding where the cuffs touched the wrists.) He snapped them on Mona and said: “Now my child, the real instruction begins!” Mona tried to say something in protest, but at the same time Vanisa began to unzip Mona’s dress in back. In a second, Mona’s “custom bra” was exposed and they were amused at her embarrassment and blushing when Vanisa called to her husband, “OH my dear, HOW very KINKY! Look dear at her darling pink nipples!” Quickly, with the Doctor holding Mona’s wrists, Vanisa unsnapped the strapless white brassiere and with a gleeful laugh, stripped it off and filled her hands with Mona’s full, firm breasts! Mona’s eyes opened wide and she screamed out loud: ” LET ME GO! YOU PERVERTED BITCH!” YOU’RE BOTH A PAIR OF PERVERTS!” Mona tried to tear herself free, but Vanisa held on tightly and pulled Mona close to her. “I’ve been wanting to see those magnificent, big tithes of yours all night, my dear! ……..and Rupert, they are indeed REAL!” Mona had turned a deeper shade of red as they struggled on the couch and she was angry and embarrassed; frightened and excited. The doctor pulled Mona to her feet and holding her arms above her head allowed Vanisa to completely disrobe the blonde woman. When she removed Mona’s white bikini panties, Vanisa remarked: “Ahhhh, you’re not a real blonde, are you?,” as the dark triangle of trimmed hair appeared. They let Mona keep on her dark thigh- high hose and her high heels. “Now we will retire to the “Training Room,” Rupert said as he led Mona downstairs into a wine cellar. Boris, the butler gathered up all of Mona’s clothing from the carpet and divan. Looking to see if anyone was watching, he took Mona’s white bikini panties and held them to his nose, before he stuffed them into his pants pocket. Mona was tied with a nylon rope hanging from a ring in the ceiling to her handcuffed wrists and the rope was pulled tight, forcing her to stand on her tiptoes. Her arms were up over her head and her breasts thrust out, the pink nipples fully erect. Her rump was pushed out in back and a pair of stage lights illuminated the scene . “Excuse me, my dear, I need to change into something more appropriate. I’ll be right back!” The wine cellar was part wine cellar and part Dungeon! The walls were stone, with a high ceiling of heavy wood timbers. Mona hung from the rope and tied to see the wall to her left, as it appeared to be covered with tools and ropes… or whips. The wall was filled with a collection of bondage items; whips, paddles, gags and other restraints. Before she had time to study them, Vanisa came up to Mona and pulled her close, pressing her lips onto Mona’s mouth and thrusting her tongue deep into Mona’s mouth! Mona recoiled, trying to evade Vanisa’s advances. In a few minutes, Vanisa tired of Mona’s lips and moved lower. She captured Mona’s right nipple in her mouth and began sucking it with increasing suction. She kissed and sucked the breasts and nipples until Vanisa’s mouth grew tired. Mona struggled against the leather- clad woman and tried to resist her, but she allowed a moan of pleasure escape her mouth as Vanisa ran her tongue across her sensitive, tortured nipples. Dr. Morrieau returned wearing a black leather vest and a pair of long black leather skin- tight pants. He wore black boots with zippers along the sides and a small face mask. “NOW we can begin!” The servant carried a video camera and a tripod. “Your Master and Boss John Powers wants a full report of this weekend, Mona Dear. We will record the training sessions,” Rupert said. Boris helped the Doctor attach another pair of restrains around Mona’s ankles. The leather covered bands had a small pair of chains that were locked to a pair of rings set in the concrete floor. Mona’s feet were pulled apart and she heard the click of a padlock snapped into place, locking the chain to the ring. Boris did the same to Mona’s other ankle. Boris wore some black leather pants, black boots and was shirtless. His hairy chest visible to Mona as he stepped back into the shadows of the wine cellar and she also noted the large bulge of his cock beneath the thin leather. Vanisa brought out a pair of nipple clamps and after teasing and pinching Mona’s nipples so that they both were erect, she attached them to the tortured pink tips. Mona tried to shrink back, but she was held in the grip of the tight chains and she could only sway back an inch or so. Vanisa had a small silver chain that she attached to each clamp and she gave it a yank, pulling Mona’s breasts out, the nipples becoming pointed and sending a sharp wave of pain through her and bringing tears to her eyes. “Oooohhhh YOU BITCH WITCH!,” Mona screamed at her tormentor. “What are you doing this to me?,” Mona asked. Vanisa answered :” This is just part of the training that John Powers asked us to do for him, because he wants you to be his Sex Slave!… didn’t he tell you dear?,” Vanisa said and laughed at Mona’s shocked, surprised look. Before Mona could say another word, the Doctor appeared in front and showed Mona a wood paddle. It was an 18 inch long, 1/2 inch thick piece of wood with a carved handle. “This is my favorite one, Mona dear and it really gets your attention, as you will soon see… and feel! ,” he said as he steeped behind the woman hanging from the ceiling, her legs spread apart clad in black thigh-high lacy top stockings and wearing the black high heel pumps. For a second, Rupert studied the pinkish tan curves of Mona’s firm, cool rump and then he swung back and with all his might brought the paddle down across Mona’s trembling ass. Mona screamed and almost thrust herself free of her restraints. Before the red hot sheet of pain could fully engulf her, another blow was delivered to her round rump. Mona’s breasts were thrusting forward with each swat and she was pleading with the Doctor to stop. Between her screams and gasps, she was yelling: “Ooohhhh Please PLEASE! It HURTS SO……MUCH! AAaaaaeeeeeeEEE! OHH I CAN”T STAND IT!!! Oooohhhhhhh PLEASE “! Mona’s hair had fallen over her eyes and she was cover with sweat. Her rear was burning like fire and had developed a ruby glow; red marks criss-crossed her backside and the backs of her thighs. After about 15 minutes of spanking had taken place, the cellar was quiet except for the sounds of Mona softly crying and the Doctor as he panted and wiped the sweat from his forehead. Mona hung from her wrists, completely exhausted, trying to catch her breath. Vanisa stepped out from watching her husband teach Mona about the value of the Paddle and held a small black leather whip. Many strands of leather strips had been plated together to form the handle. The length of the whip was about five feet and Vanisa took a position of about four feet in back of Mona. The whip first landed across Mona’s back, bringing a less vocal scream from her, but when Vanisa moved down to her thighs, Mona responded with louder screams. Vanisa ended the “training” with several whips to Mona’s breasts and after removing the clamps, took careful aim at her perfect nipples, which received several strokes of the stinging leathers. Mona was thoroughly worn out and was almost about ready to pass out. Rupert signalled to Boris and Mona was released from the chains and taken down. “Give her a hot bath and put her in the bedroom next door. Put her in an ankle chain before you lock the door,” the Doctor said, as he helped Vanisa put away the paddle and the whip.taboo porn sex photoMona lay face up on the bed, in the darkness of the room. She burned and ached in just about every part of her body. Her butt seemed to throb with every heartbeat and her poor nipples surely must have been torn from her breasts. A band of metal was locked around her right ankle and a medium sized chain ran from it up to a ring set in the ceiling. She could move off the bed to a toilet in the corner of the room if she wished, but the concrete floor was cold to her bare feet, so she remained in bed, staring up at the ceiling and trying to figure out why the two people hated her so much and why the monster she worked for had done this to her. There was a small night light in the ceiling that allowed her to see somewhat. She could see that she was still completely nude and that except for the bed, chain and toilet, the room was bare. She lay for several minutes, trying to drift off into sleep, when she sensed that someone else was in the room. Suddenly, a body leaped on top of her and a cloth was forced into her mouth and tied tightly with a strip of cloth or a short piece of rope. Hands held her arms and Mona felt the coarse chest hair of a man press down onto her bare breasts and cause her nipples more pain. Boris had her wrists strapped to small rings that were located on either side of the bed and whispered to her: “Don’t struggle so……. I will not do you any harm. I just want you to know you have a friend here…….a friend who loves you and wants to ……make LOVE …….to You!” Mona tried to get his chest away from her very sensitive nipples and answered him with a “Un Huh!,” but with the gag in place, it came out as a muffled, “Um mmmm.” Was this really happening to her? Or was she dreaming it all? Before she could think another thought, she felt fingers at her breasts, touching them, then cupping both of the “D cup” mounds and then pinching the tender erecting tips. His lips covered each of her nipples now and Mona tightly shut her eyes, expecting more pain, but this time his warm, wet tongue soothed her and it felt good for a change. Boris continued his sucking and kissing until he felt his cock become fully erect and then he quickly pressed it toward Mona’s moist pussy lips and swiftly inserted it fully into her. Mona gasped and she tried to arch her back, but only succeeded to flatten her round breasts against the man’s chest. Now he was beginning to thrust the hard penis deeper and slowly withdraw it in steady, even strokes, forcing Mona to emit a gasp as he pressed in and a moan of pleasure as he brought his manhood almost out of her. After several minutes of this, where only the sounds to be heard were the moans and gasps coming from Mona and some sounds from Boris and the bed creaking……he felt her muscles gripping his staff increase their pressure and his balls were beginning to tighten up; his orgasm swiftly approaching. Then he heard Mona let out a muffled “UuuuMmmmmmmmmmmm! ,” just as he felt the explosion like spasm empty his sperm into her. In the weeks that followed, Mona was whipped when she did not follow orders and she was instructed in various ways to please her Master ; Doctor Rupert and her real Master ; John Powers. She was allowed to dine with her teachers, dressed in a black silk cape that was attached to a thin black leather collar around her neck. The cape was as long as Mona but she was told to never allow the cloth to conceal her round breasts and rosy nipples and if she failed to do this, she was whipped and/or spanked that night. The hair covering her pussy lips was shaved by Boris and observed by Rupert and Vanisa one night, while they all drank champagne and laughed at Mona as she blushed and hung her head in shame during the ordeal. While Rupert held Mona’s arms from behind her, with Mona sitting in a straight chair, the servant applied the warm shave cream and used a safety razor, while Vanisa poured the champagne and studied the operation closely. After Boris was finished, Vanisa grabbed the towel away from Boris and cleaned the left over shave cream from Mona’s belly and her open thighs. When her slick slit appeared, free of any protection, Vanisa brought her lips close and kissed her pussy, laughing: “Oh Mona Dear……now you’re really sweet enough to eat”! Mona blushed deeper and looked down, saying nothing. Boris continued to visit Mona at night, in her room and he unlocked the chain from her ankle during the time he made love to her. Mona hated these meetings at first but as the weeks passed, she began to look forward to the servant’s gentle touch and his large, firm cock that filled her completely and gave her many powerful orgasms, that caused her to scream out and to loose control of her mind as she experienced the waves of pleasure roll over her as they both came at the same time. The day that Mona left her Instructors and was delivered back to her boss; John Powers, was both a sad and joyful day. Mona was dressed in a tight black mini dress with a low neckline. Her legs were encased in grey thigh high, lace top hose and her shoes were open toed black leather with 5 inch heels. Mona wore a black bra with the tips cut out so that her nipples were slightly visible beneath the taunt cloth. When she walked, her heavy breasts swung a little and bounced if she walked fast, to the joy of any male eyes that might be watching her. Her breasts and belly had been perfumed and her black bikini panties had been scented with a perfume that Powers liked. Her hair had been done and she wore a pair of new pearl earrings. Her lips were fixed with a deep red lipstick and her eyelids done with a light blue shade, she felt very beautiful…….and she was. On her wrist was a black leather bracelet with a silver chain on the outside. Mona had been taught to keep her head bowed and her eyes down when confronting her Master/Boss and not to look directly at him, unless she was spoken to. She was given a white apron to put on and told to serve coffee to Powers and several of his vice-presidents at a meeting that took place at 1:00. She had been instructed to lean low when serving the coffee to the men, so that they might get a nice view of her full breasts as they reached for the coffee cups and not to resist, if a hand brushed a breast or fingers should pinch her nipples. She had been instructed to never say “No” and she would even bare her breasts to a man if he should ask her and if he asked Powers first! Mona had stopped being embarrassed at these things and seldom blushed now, but she still felt like the things that were happening to her, were happening to some other person, and she was watching it all……as if she were watching a foreign movie.sex photoMona was driven to Powers home that evening and followed him inside the dark mansion to her room, where she was told to unpack her small suitcase and “make herself at Home”! On the bed was a short black dress, black mesh hose, black high heel shoes and a white apron; all new and just her size; a “French Maid’s Outfit.” “This will be your new home, Mona and you will be the new maid for my wife and myself. I have a man servant also. His name is Peters. He will help you during your stay with me. He will assist me, if you need discipline and correcting. You will not wear any underwear, unless you get my permission FIRST, and you will not have any sex with anyone but ME! Now put on the maid’s uniform and help Peters server dinner to Vanisa and myself, downstairs in 5 minutes,” Powers said. Mona watched him leave the room and began undressing. A tear formed in her eye and rolled down her cheek, followed by another… and another. She was soon nude, except for the black leather bracelet that was locked in place… it would never be removed, just as she could never leave this house. The End
- Warning: This story is for the entertainment of adults. It contains detailed descriptions of Female Domination, Fisting, Watersports, Anal penetration…
- Warning: This story is for the entertainment of adults. It contains detailed descriptions of Female Domination, Fisting, Watersports, Anal penetration and Non-Consensual sex. If you don’t think you would enjoy that, then don’t read it. This story features the Characters of Chyna, Miss Kitty and Jeff Jarrett. The are the characters as portrayed and in no way represent Joanie Laurer, Stacy Carter, or the real Jeff Jarrett. Jeff Jarrett sat with his head in his hands and stared at the floor. There was a medical orderly who was trying to check whether JJ had been injured during the match, possibly even concussed from the guitar shot to the head that he had received, because after he had lost his Title he had not responded to anyone. He just sat staring at nothing, and ignored the medic. He had been beaten. Worse, he had lost to a woman! That bitch Chyna had embarrassed him in front of the entire world by pinning him to become the new Intercontinental Champion. His mind thronged with the cheers of the crowd as they witnessed his humiliation at the hands of a woman and it was more than he could bear. * * * The new Champion was in the showers, her aching muscles seemed a thing of the past as she was exultant! She had won! The first woman ever to win a major Title in the men’s division of any organization. In that single perfect moment of realization nothing else mattered and she slipped into an almost dreamlike remembrance of everything she had gone through to reach this, the crowning moment of her career. “Pleeeaase?” The light soprano voice brought the raven-haired amazon out of her reverie and back to the small blonde woman who had followed her back to her dressing room after her victory. “You want to be my what?” she asked. “I want you to teach me how to be like you. Please?” Chyna studied the diminutive Miss Kitty. A more startling contrast than that between these two women it would be hard to imagine. Chyna was nearly 6 feet tall and had a broad shouldered, muscular physique, with massive, shapely breasts and long black hair, while Miss Kitty was almost a foot shorter, with a slight figure and small tits. Her blonde hair framed a cute, very pretty face, which at that moment bore an expression of adulation that Chyna felt intently. The word ‘jailbait’ crossed Chyna’s mind as she thought that Kitty looked altogether too childlike. Chyna felt her pussy warming as she look over the naked, girlish figure before her and knew that she wanted to possess and nurture her. It was a feeling that she wasn’t used to, as she usually enjoyed breaking an unwilling woman, forcing her to submit to her desires. The tall woman stepped forward and cupped Miss Kitty’s adorable face in her long-fingered hands. “And just what are you prepared to give me in returned?” she asked in a husky voice. Miss Kitty’s large, vulnerable eyes looked back into Chyna’s own and she said in a trusting voice “I’ll do whatever you want.” One of Chyna’s hands slipped down the blonde’s slender neck and her fingertips lightly brushed over her sensitive breasts, sending thrills down the smaller woman’s spine, until she pinched her nipple between thumb and forefinger. “Anything?” Chyna asked. “Anything,” she answered in a quiet voice. Chyna pulled the girl close and stooped down to kiss her firmly on the lips. After a startled moment, Miss Kitty responded earnestly, her small tongue wrestling with the larger woman’s as they explored each other’s bodies with their hands. It was Chyna that broke away from the kiss, and with one hand grasping the back of Miss Kitty’s head, she guided her eager mouth downward to her breasts. Such was the difference in their heights that Kitty didn’t need to even bend her neck to suck on one of Chyna’s hard nipples. She brought both of her hands back from their exploration of the Champion’s muscles and used them to stroke the massive breast before her as the larger woman leant back against the tiled wall and sighed, relaxing in the spray of the shower. Miss Kitty took each breast in turn, and as she sucked on one she would pinch the other with her small fingers. The heavy breasts heaved as Chyna’s breathing became deeper while the blonde slavered over them, licking every exposed inch and burying her head into the cleavage to lick the sensitive flesh there too. After about ten minutes of this, Chyna once more grasped the back of Miss Kitty’s head and gently pushed her face downward. Kitty’s little tongue continued to lap at the Champion’s skin as she went slowly down to one knee, tracing the contours of Chyna’s abdominal muscles and swirling it around inside her navel until she was faced with the ultimate treasure. Miss Kitty had never seen another woman’s pussy before, and Chyna’s was completely shaven to expose her every detail. Her pussy-lips were thick and flushed with blood and Kitty could just discern the hood of her swollen clitoris where it poked through the top of her slit. After a moment’s hesitation, Miss Kitty kissed Chyna right at the very tip of her slit, just above her clitty, sending a pleasant thrill through her that surprised the amazon dominatrix. Never before had something so gentle given her such pleasure. Normally Chyna would be grinding her cunt against the other woman’s screaming face as she pleasured herself, just as she had done to Debra a month before. She couldn’t remember the last time a woman had served her without being broken first. Miss Kitty parted Chyna’s moist lips and started to lick up and down the full length of her slit. Chyna had to suppress a small rapturous cry as her tiny lover slipped one slim finger into her vagina. Powerful muscles bore down on the small digit, almost crushing it, and it was with great difficulty that Miss Kitty inserted a second finger inside her. Chyna’s clitoris had now hardened to more than half an inch in size and Miss Kitty latched onto it with her perfect lips and sucked it out from under the hood and into the warm cavity of her mouth. As she did this she managed to force a third finger into Chyna’s pulsating cunt. Miss Kitty sucked on Chyna’s clitoris like it was a small penis, working her lips up and down it’s short length and teasing it by flicking the tip of her tongue over the very end of it. Chyna bucked involuntarily over the tiny blonde as she was driven wild with passion. Slowly, Miss Kitty managed to get all five of her fingers into Chyna’s hot vagina, and gradually she pushed harder into her, until the knuckles of her fingers and thumb were past the point of most resistance and she could force her entire hand into the big woman. Chyna couldn’t restrain herself any longer and reaching down, she grabbed Miss Kitty’s upper arm and rammed her entire forearm deep into her own cunt. She pulled the blonde’s arm almost all the way out and then rammed it back inside. Miss Kitty sat back on her heels and watched in shock as Chyna used her arm like huge dildo, fucking herself brutally. Chyna snarled and grabbed the back of her head, forcing her face back into her cunt again. Miss Kitty got the message and she fist-fucked the Intercontinental Champion and sucked on her clit until Chyna suddenly seized. Kitty’s hand was crushed by Chyna’s incredibly strong cunt-muscles as the dominatrix orgasmed, the wetness of her spending flowing over the arm impaling her and into Miss Kitty’s mouth. Chyna shook and convulsed wildly for over a minute as she experienced wave after wave of pleasure before she collapsed, landing heavily on the tiny girl below her.xxx porn photoMiss Kitty lay pinned under the female wrestler and struggled for breath until Chyna regained her senses and rolled off of the diminutive blonde. As she rolled onto her back, Miss kitty was forced to roll onto her stomach or risk breaking her arm, because it was still firmly gripped inside the bigger woman’s cunt. As Chyna lay on her back panting for air, Kitty placed the heel of her hand against Chyna’s pelvis and with a great effort, she managed to extract her forearm. Her hand felt numb after being crushed inside Chyna’s vice-like pussy and she tried to massage some life into her fingers. She didn’t notice Chyna recover until her shoulders were gripped and she was pushed down onto the ceramic floor of the over-sized shower cubicle. She looked down on the girlish blonde and the usual dominant side of her personality reasserted itself. She smiled evilly. “Now, it’s my turn to make YOU come!” she said. She held up a muscular arm and then curled the fingers of her hand into a fist. Her smile grew broader. * * * They were laughing at him. Not to his face perhaps, but he knew that they were anyway. He’d laughed often enough in the past at anyone whom Chyna had pinned in the ring. He knew that a real man could never be beaten by a mere woman, and he knew that he was a real man. But he had lost. He looked up at the woman who was still trying to give him a clean bill of health, and he saw the disgust in her eyes. She hid it well, but he knew she had enjoyed watching that bitch Chyna humiliate him in front of everyone. The other wrestlers all had carefully neutral expressions on their faces when he looked at them, and he knew that they were laughing too. Everyone was laughing. And Chyna. She was laughing loudest of all. He could hear her, in his imagination. But he would stop her, he would show her and the world that he was a REAL man. And he would teach her what a woman was good for as well. He stood up and pushed the EMT away and went in search of Chyna’s dressing room. He would put her in her place once and for all. * * * Miss Kitty had her head held in both hands and she was screaming. “YES, OH GOD YES! PLEASE MISTRESS!” Chyna was kneeling between her wide spread thighs and she had her fist pressed against Kitty’s blonde furred pussy. Her thick forearm was wet with Miss Kitty’s love-juice right up to the elbow, and as the small woman begged she punched it back inside her tight cunt. Miss Kitty screamed as she was stretched once more beyond the limits of anything she had ever felt before. Chyna’s fist was twice the size of Kitty’s own, and Kitty’s pussy was much smaller than the mighty amazon’s was. Her vagina felt as though it was about to split, but she didn’t care as Chyna bent down and sucked one of Kitty’s tiny breasts into her mouth. She gnawed at the girl’s nipple as she continued to punch-fuck the delirious blonde. At that moment they heard the door crash open as Jeff Jarrett stormed into the changing room. “Chyna! Where are you, you fucking BITCH!” He slammed the lockers and threw one of the benches against the wall. “Show yourself, you CUNT!” Chyna stepped out of the shower and stood with her arms crossed. “What do you want, Jeff.” She asked in a deceptively reasonable tone. JJ spun around and then stopped dead as he saw that she was naked. Her skin was wet and her muscles glistened in the light. He saw that her huge breasts didn’t drop at all when she was undressed as they stood high and proud on her muscle-bound chest, her abs were well defined on her narrow waist and tapered down to her smooth shaven pussy. He completely lost his train of thought as he stood staring at her crotch until he saw her pussy-lips twitch as she shifted her weight to one foot. His cock swelled up to its full length in his shorts. “Was there something you wanted, or did you just want to get a good look?” she sneered as she uncrossed her arms and placed her hands on her hips, exposing the nipples of her magnificent breasts. JJ shook himself and realized how he could teach her a lesson she would never forget. And he would get himself a little revenge by raping her ass.. If she wants to look like a man, I’ll teach her to take it like a man, he thought, ignoring the evidence of her femininity before him. Without saying a word, he lunged for her and grabbed her in a bear hug. He released a hand from the hold and grabbed one of her breasts. “I’m going to teach you what a real man can do!” he shouted. Then he suddenly screamed as Chyna brought her knee up sharply into his crotch. She gripped him by the shoulders and kicked him in the balls again, and again, and again. Jarrett was doubled over and gasping for breath, his hands clutched over his testicles. Chyna jerked his head up by the hair and said, “Jeff, you haven’t got the balls to take me!” Then she twisted one arm around behind him into a half-nelson and rammed him head first into the tiled wall. Double J staggered back in a daze and Chyna spun him around and swiftly kicked him in the balls for the fifth time and as he doubled over in pain, she rammed his head down between he powerful thighs and hooked his arms up behind his back. He just had time to realize that he could feel her hot, wet pussy pressing against the back of his neck before she dropped to her knees and drove his forehead down onto the cubicle’s hard floor. * * * “Jeff. Wake up Jeff.” He heard the soft-spoken voice dimly behind the pain in his skull and his testicles. It seemed as though he had been hit repeatedly over the head today, by everything including the kitchen sink. He slowly pried his eyelids open and looked up into Chyna’s smiling face. She looked almost friendly. “Are you alright Jeff?” she asked sweetly. He was only vaguely aware that his cock was being caressed and it was stiffening in automatic response. He tried to speak but couldn’t seem to coordinate properly and so he nodded unsteadily. She assumed an almost concerned expression and Double J was suddenly aware that she was mocking him. “That’s a shame, I guess that means I’m going to have to hurt you some more.” She said, and suddenly squeezed his prick painfully until it wilted. He tried to get up but he couldn’t move. The bitch had tied him up! She had stripped him naked and tied him up! He struggled against the nylon ropes but Chyna knew her knots and he couldn’t even budge them. Chyna grabbed his now flaccid cock again and said, “Tell me Jeff, was that really as big as it gets? Because that’s not what I would expect of a REAL man, a ten year old boy has a more impressive cock than you!” “Let me go, you BITCH!” he shouted, causing a wave of pain through his aching head. “Now, now Jeff. That’s hardly the way to speak to your Mistress. You will address me as ‘My Lady’ or ‘Mistress’ or, at the very least, as ‘Ma’am’.” “You ain’t my mistress, you ugly cunt! And if you don’t let me go right now, then I’ll make you regret it!” he shouted. “Really? I have to disagree,” she spoke softly, but her eyes had hardened like flint at the insult. “Let’s see, I took Debra away from you, I took the Intercontinental Title, I’ve taken your dignity and kicked your ass in front of the entire world,” She counted each item off on her fingers. “And now, on top of all that, I’ve taken Miss Kitty away from you as well.” She beckoned Miss Kitty to join her where Jarrett could see them and kissed her deeply and passionately. In spite of his predicament, Jeff’s cock started to harden once more at the sight of the two very different but equally naked women’s embrace. Chyna broke off the kiss and turned back to her captive. “It seems to me that I’ve taken everything you ever had.” She taunted, and Jarrett started to swear and curse at her in response. Chyna sneered at his futile rage, took her measure of him and struck him hard across the face. Then she struck him again with a backhanded blow before she grabbed his short blond hair and jammed his face into her smooth, wet pussy. She rubbed her cunt over his face and said; “Pay attention, you dickless jerk! Because even though I am all woman,” she crammed his mouth deeper into her slit to emphasize her words, “I’m more of a man than YOU will EVER be!” Miss Kitty giggled as her mistress humiliated her ex-lover. “He won’t like that my Lady,” Miss Kitty learnt much faster than Jeff did that it was a bad idea to show any disrespect towards Chyna. “He would never lick my pussy!” she exclaimed. “Is that so?” Chyna replied, “But I’ll just bet that he wanted you to suck his little dickie now didn’t he?” “Oh yes, Mistress.xxx young sex photo “Well then Jeff, it looks like you’ve got some amends to make.” She pulled Miss Kitty over and positioned before the helpless man. “Get to work! I want you to make her come in no more than 5 minutes.” Miss Kitty squatted down and spread her blonde-fringed pussy-lips open in front of her ex-employer. Jeff clamped his lips shut and turned his head away from what, to him, was the sickening sight of her exposed sex. Chyna had stretched out, leaning languorously against the cubicle wall as she watched. She smiled crookedly as Jeff refused to co-operate. “You had better do what I say, Jeff.” She spoke evenly, “You’re going to suffer a lot before I’m done with you, so the more you fight me, the worse you’re going to make it for yourself.” Still, despite Chyna’s warning Jarrett refused to co-operate and Miss Kitty simply grabbed the back of his head and started to grind her cunt into his face. As she rubbed herself on him, Miss Kitty began to realize the exhilarating effect that having someone else totally at your mercy could have. It was that newfound knowledge, more than the rough friction of Jarrett’s nose and chin that eventually triggered her orgasm. Jeff felt physically sick as Miss Kitty’s girl-cum squirted out onto his face and she smeared it all over him as she squealed in pleasure. He was silent when Kitty got off of him, biting back the curses and swear words that he wanted to say. He realized now that his only option was to play along with these sick bitches until he got a chance to escape, and then he would make them pay! “I’m afraid that isn’t good enough, Jeff.” Chyna said. There was no clock in the changing rooms, but it wouldn’t have mattered how long Kitty’s orgasm took. She got up from where she sat and crouched down next to Jarrett’s bound body. “You really don’t seem to be grasping the fundamentals here. I tell you what to do, and you do it.” She grabbed his aching testicles and gripped them firmly. “So next time I give you an order, you do it! Understand?” Jeff gave a sharp cry of pain as she crushed his balls in her strong fingers. She kept on squeezing until he nearly blacked out from the pain. As his mind slipped toward darkness, she released her hold and he heard he give an order to Miss Kitty to fetch something. He recovered slowly and when he did, he saw Miss Kitty standing over him with more of the nylon rope. At Chyna’s command, the tiny blonde pulled his soft cock clear from his body and began to wrap the rope around it. Chyna was telling her how to loop it around the shaft and where to tie the knots and within a couple of minutes his penis was a criss-crossed pattern of bulging cock-flesh and blue nylon rope. “Now Jeff, I’m going to show you how to please a hot little cunt like Miss Kitty’s here, and you are going to watch.” With that, Chyna turned away from him and lay Miss Kitty down onto the floor. She slowly stroked along the insides of her thighs up to the golden furred delta of her pussy. She hooked her fingertips into Kitty’s little pussy-lips and pulled them apart. She looked over her shoulder at Double J and smiled, then she dipped her head and licked the full length of the smaller woman’s slit. She tongued Miss Kitty for more than ten minutes and made sure that Jeff could see every movement. The ropes had been tied tightly around his cock while it was soft and now that he was forced to watch the lesbians in action, his penis was trying to expand but there was no give in the bonds. He closed his eyes, but he could still hear Miss Kitty’s squeals of pleasure as Chyna licked her out, and his cock continued to grow. “Jeff, do you really think that pathetic little thing you call a ‘manhood’ could satisfy a woman?” He opened his eyes and saw that Chyna had two fingers inserted inside the small woman. “It takes a lot more than that to please even one as small as Miss Kitty here,” as she spoke, she inserted a third finger into the blonde. “Isn’t that right Kitty-cat?” “Oh yes, mistress,” Kitty said, then she reached up above her head and braced her arms against the wall. “Please… please mistress… Do it! I need it… please!” Chyna turned back to Jarrett and smiled, and then, before his disbelieving eyes, she pushed her entire hand inside the panting blonde. She twisted her wrist and forced more of her arm into Miss Kitty’s tiny body, twisting and thrusting until inch by inch she had pushed her entire forearm inside her new lover, right up to the elbow! Jarrett could not believe what he was seeing as Chyna started to punch-fuck Miss Kitty once more. He could actually see Chyna’s hand as it moved inside the blonde’s abdomen and his cock was agony to him in response, as the sadistic bitch had intended it should be. Chyna reached down with her free hand and started to rub Kitty’s swollen clitty with her thumb. She crushed it down roughly against her pistoning forearm and Miss Kitty came, screaming with pain induced pleasure. Chyna pulled her arm out of the girl with a loud and audible slurping sound, and as she knelt back, Jeff could see that Miss Kitty’s cunt was gaping obscenely open. Jarrett’s vision was blurring with tears from the pain of his tightly bound cock, which bulged through the gaps between the ropes and was a very unhealthy purple color. The raven-haired amazon rolled the smaller woman over onto her stomach and she pulled her girlish buttocks apart. Miss Kitty gasped as she felt Chyna’s slick finger press against the rose of her anus. Then, without warning, she was penetrated! “Take a good look, Jeff. I’ll bet she never let you have this little treasure, did she?” Chyna twisted her finger inside Kitty’s virgin anus, eliciting a small gasp from the girl. “So I want you to watch real close, ’cause she’s gonna take my whole hand!” Miss Kitty felt a shiver of fear run through her at Chyna’s words. It wasn’t possible! She’d be torn apart. But she had taken it in her cunt, and if Chyna wanted her to take it up her ass, then that was what she would do. The most important thing to Miss Kitty was that she never wanted to let Chyna down. She bit her lower lip as Chyna inserted a second finger. She pumped them in and out a few times before adding a third. Kitty forced her asshole to relax, suppressing the instinctive desire to clench up against the unnatural intruder, because even as inexperienced as she was, she realized that resistance would only make it hurt more. With only Miss Kitty’s own girl-cum to act as lubrication, Chyna forced her fourth finger into the blonde. After a minute of twisting thrusts to open her yet further, she pushed her thumb inside too. Kitty screamed as Chyna kept the pressure behind that last push, forcing the rest of her hand between her buttocks. She felt her sphincter being stretched to agonizing dimensions as the widest part of the hand forced its way inside her. Then, just as she thought that something would tear, her asshole snapped back to grip Chyna’s wrist and the hand was in! She lay panting and wild-eyed as Chyna reversed the direction of motion and Miss Kitty cried out as her hole was being stretched again. Chyna pulled her hand out until just before the tip of her thumb would leave her hotness, and then she forced it back inside. She repeated the process another four or five times before she removed it entirely. The muscular woman stood up and walked into the locker room, leaving her lover spread face down on the floor with her asshole gaping wide and Jeff Jarrett doubled over his agonizingly restrained penis. When she returned, she was no longer entirely naked, as jutting massively from her crotch was a huge black rubber dildo. It was more than 15 inches long and about 4 inches in diameter! It was held in place by thick leather straps that circled her slim waist and ran under her hairless pussy to buckle up in the small of her back. Miss Kitty looked up over her shoulder as Chyna knelt down behind her and there was fear in her eyes as she saw the giant implement. “M… mistress?” she asked quietly. “Hush child,” the amazon answered, “You can take it. I know you can,” she added reassuringly. Chyna popped the cap on a tube of KY jelly and squeezed some into her hand. As she applied the slimy substance to the black dildo she looked over at Jarrett and smiled wickedly, then she started to slide her hand up and down the huge length, as though she were masturbating her massive cock. “You see Jeff? Now do you understand just how pathetic your little boy-cock really is?” The insult struck Jarrett like the strongest of blows. He knew it wasn’t true, that his 712-inch cock was larger than average, but it didn’t matter. Chyna’s ‘cock’ was more than twice as long and three times as thick as his own and there was no way that he could possibly measure up to that. Then Chyna turned back to her little love-slave and positioned the well-lubricated tip of her rubber penis in the cleft of Miss Kitty’s tight buttocks. She slowly pushed the head of the giant dildo through her asshole, and then she began to thrust easily in and out, gradually working her way deeper into her lover. With each thrust, she opened the blondes tight little rectum wider and deeper until she bottomed out at twelve inches or so. When that happened Chyna started to increase the tempo of her thrusts, changing the angle of entry to stretch the walls further, allowing her to cram more and more of the huge cock into her and forcing her organs to shift inside her to make room for it. Eventually Miss Kitty was completely impaled and Chyna began to fuck her in earnest. As she did so, the mass of the giant dildo bore down just above her clitoris with each inward motion and then as she pulled out, the harness strap under her crotch rubbed on the sensitive organ, sending her into a rising spiral of pleasure. As she felt her orgasm building, she reached around to hook her fingers into her lover’s snatch and started to frig her slit. After less than a minute of this treatment Miss Kitty was screaming with a truly mind-blowing orgasm. The shudders of her girlish body were transmitted via her anus and the huge dildo to Chyna’s clitoris, and she too came explosively. Chyna collapsed onto her elbows as she was assailed by wave after wave of orgasmic pleasure and she saw stars before her eyes as it seemed as though she rode from one orgasm straight into another.sex and porn gifWhen she recovered, she slowly pulled the huge strap-on dildo out of Miss Kitty’s asshole with a sickening wet pop. She rocked back onto her heel and looked down on the prostrate form of her unconscious love-slave. Miss Kitty had fainted from the overwhelming power of her orgasm. Chyna slid her fingers over her head and pushed her wet hair back from her face. As she did so, she caught sight of the tightly bound Jeff Jarrett who was almost weeping with the pain from his tortured cock. “What’s the matter Jeff? Feeling a little left out, are you?” She said and she rose to her feet, the giant rubber cock bouncing as she did so. She walked over to him, the dildo jutting obscenely from her crotch. She placed her hand on his head and stroked his head almost affectionately. “There, there, Jeffrey. Perhaps what you need is a good pacifier?” she said, and brandished the slimy black cock in his face. “Suck it!” she ordered. After one shocked moment, he clamped his lips shut and turned his head away from the towering bitch. She couldn’t crush his balls and feed him her cock at the same time, so she gripped his jaw and crushed his cheeks against his teeth with her fingertips until he was forced to open his mouth. Once he did that, there was nothing he could do to stop her ramming the dildo into his mouth. She grabbed the back of his head and forced the dildo deeper. Jarrett’s jaw was forced as wide as it could go by the huge rubber cock and there was nothing he could do to prevent the flavor of Miss Kitty’s bowels and the lubricating jelly from swamping his tastebuds. He was totally defenseless against her as she began raping his mouth, forcing the dildo into his throat. Chyna looked down on the gagging, former six-time Intercontinental Champion as she made him suck her big black cock. She laughed as his eyes bulged from his face as she started to fuck his throat, driving move than six inches of the slimy strap-on down his gullet. His face was as purple as his still hard cock and his eyelids were fluttering before Chyna finally withdrew the dildo from his mouth. Jarrett immediately started to cough and choke, desperately gasping for air. Chyna turned away from Double J and bent down over Miss Kitty’s motionless form. She scooped the tiny woman up in her strong arms and carried her out of the cubicle, leaving Jarrett retching behind her. * * * Double J looked up when Chyna and Miss Kitty returned. Kitty was wearing white, lacey lingerie while Chyna had dressed in her leather chaps and bra-top combination, but she was still wearing her huge rubber cock and it bobbed hypnotically before her as she approached him. She crouched down beside him and jerked his head up and held it firmly while Miss Kitty strapped the collar she had hidden behind her back around his neck. Jarrett was about to protest when he saw the evil glint in Chyna’s eyes and wisely decided to remain silent. “Now then, Jeff. I think it’s time for your final lesson.” Chyna nodded to Miss Kitty, who knelt down and untied his ankles. Jeff tried to make a run for freedom, but his legs were cramped and he was jerked short by the leash that was in Chyna’s hand. She hauled him backward and then rammed a knee into his stomach, knocking the wind, and the fight, out of Jarrett. “What did you want to do that for. And after you were doing so well!” Chyna patronized him. “Never mind, I know you’re going to enjoy your next punishment!” Miss Kitty giggled as Chyna lead Jarrett like a xxx by his leash into the changing room itself. Once there, she kicked his feet out from under him and he fell heavily to the floor. Miss Kitty then dropped down in front of him and started to untie the rope harness that bound and tortured his penis. His bloated manhood was beginning to turn black and had become almost numb until the blood that had been trapped began to flow again. Jeff let out an agonized howl as the pain returned tenfold. It was worse than anything he had ever felt before in his life! He literally wept tears as Miss Kitty finished releasing his cock from the tight ropes. The pain was so great that when Chyna released his arms he couldn’t do anything but try to huddle over his crotch. The amazon grabbed a bench and pulled it into the middle of the room and then she and Miss Kitty forced the pain-paralyzed man to kneel at one end of it. Chyna jerked on his leash and made him lie face down lengthwise along the beach. She tied the handle of his leash to one of the legs of the bench at the far end and then they tied his thighs to the legs at the other end. His arms were tied together under the bench, elbow to wrist. Chyna looked down on her bound enemy and smiled. In this position, His battered cock was visible, hanging below bruised testicles and his ass was totally vulnerable. “Since you’ve been such a bad boy, I think you need a good spanking!” she said in her most condescending tone. She gave his ass a stinging slap that shocked Jarrett to the core. Then Miss Kitty slapped him on the same butt-cheek. And that was how it continued. Chyna would strike one cheek with a powerful smack and then Miss Kitty would slap the same place with a much weaker blow that Jarrett would barely even have felt if Chyna weren’t so thoroughly tenderizing his rump.. Then Chyna would spank his other cheek and Kitty would copy her mistress. All the time that they were spanking him like a little schoolboy they were laughing and joking, enjoying the degree of humiliation so simple a punishment could inflict on a full grown man. By the time they were finished, his well-beaten backside was a vibrant red. In the position he was in, he looked rather colorful from the rear, with the red of his ass, the blue and purple of his bruised cock and balls, and with his blond pubic hair adding yet more color. Chyna moved to Jarrett’s head and noticed the tear tracks on his cheeks. “Oh dear! And B e c k y a p o l o g i z e s a n d t r i e s t o m a k e i t u p t o p o o r S u s i e
- TGIF! As I look at the clock, all I can think of is being on the receiving end of a… Pete had been friends with Steve since he had first graduated from college and gotten his first job. He remembered meeting Steve at his orientation to the company by the Human Resources Dept. Steve was one of the salesman who sold software for the company and was going to be a mentor to Pete as he started working also in sales for Eros. Pete was new to the city of Charleston, WV. In fact, he had just moved there from his home in Columbus, Ohio. Pete really wanted to get into writing his own programs as well as doing computer programming and architecture for businesses. The sales job was a way of working himself into the company. Hell, it was a recession and he was glad to have any type of job! Pete and Steve really hit it off. Steve was able to help Pete find out his way around town, set him up with an apartment, and show him both the highs and lows of Charleston, WV. Pete especially liked the lows that Steve had showed him– the strip bars, the adult bookstores and even a place that had a live sex show. One time Pete told a stripper that Steve was the person with all the money and that she should ask him for the money for a dance. Yes, getting financially started was a hard thing to do in a new city. It was quite a dance at that – as she spread her legs wide exposing her nude vagina several drops of moisture dripped down her slit and disappeared onto the floor below. This was the first of many trips to the adult entertainment places in Charleston. Steve was married to a beautiful women named Sasha who was 30 years old. The first time Pete saw Sasha was a reflection in a mirror in the hallway at their house. Sasha was 5’6″ with dark jet black hair cut in a way that made her look very tom boyish. Her figure was anything but tom boyish with well developed breasts, a tight rounded butt, and a slim waistline. Pete often wondered what she looked like beneath her clothes. Sasha was quite a contrast as far as looks– a tom boyish appearance with the body that any sculptor or painter would use for a model. Sasha greeted Pete with a warm handshake, hug, and greeting: “So your the new whiz kid whose out to conquer the sales world.” Her smile put him at ease. Pete thought how Steve was such a lucky bastard to have a woman like her. Pete advanced quickly in the company. He was soon named vice-president of sales. Pete then developed several unique computer products. This propelled him into the highest levels of management as well as made him very wealthy. Steve on the other hand had a tide of misfortune and his sales plummeted. Steve then began to drink. Pete ran into Sasha at the car repair shop. She was had been crying to herself. Evidently, her car needed repaired and when it came time to pay the credit card had been rejected. Sasha didn’t even have a way home. Pete quickly paid for the car repair. Sasha promised to pay him back. Pete could only think how he wanted her to pay him back. Sasha showed up to Pete’s place a couple hours later. Her eyes were red. Evidently, it had been a very bad day since a number of creditors had been calling with threats to repossess their house and belongings. Steve had even spent Sasha’s private savings without her knowledge. She was destitute. Sasha asked Pete if she could borrow some money and that she would be “willing to do any maid service around the house to help out and that she would also get a job to pay him back.” Pete asked, “Are you really willing to be my paid maid? Would you take a job where all your debts could be paid off?” Sasha responded quizzically, “It sounds as though you have something in mind. I just thought I could clean your home and maybe do some cooking.” Pete replied, “I’ve always wanted you as a sex slave that would serve my needs.” Sasha eyes grew very wide and she gasped in shock. “I could never do that to Steve. I really still love him. I’ll never do that! Can’t you even help out your best friend?” Pete quietly stated, “I’ve always wanted you as my own private sex slave, Sasha. I’ve desired you more than any valuable painting or other work of art. The situation is just right for my desires.” “You evil bastard. I’d never do anything like that. I love Steve.” Sasha angrily left. An day later the phone rang. “Pete, the bank is going to repossess our home unless we can pay the mortgage. No one will lend us any more money. I’ll do as you ask,” as Sasha cried.hard sexI told her to come over so that we could make the necessary arrangements. I then arranged to take care of Sasha’s and Steve’s bills a little at a time. I had Sasha tell Steve that a rich relative was going to help her out. When Sasha reported to my house I had her stand in front of a mirror and slowly remove her clothes. The reflection in a mirror showed some deep, dark brown nipples about 3 inches in size that came to pointed tip. As she bent and removed her panties I saw hair that grew up from her slit to her ass with some large protruding vagina lips. Sasha’s ass was round, well defined but small. As she turned around I saw a fairly hairy bush. Sasha had tears rolling down her cheeks. I then had her walk to me and away from me. I told her, “Walk like you are a hooker out trying to get some business.” Sasha then walked very sexily around my living room. Sasha asked, “Do you have to take a video of me doing this?” I replied, “Yes, now let’s see how many ways I can see that vagina of yours.” I saw her pussy as she stood over me, as she lay on the couch with her legs spread, on all fours with her butt in the air. Sasha’s vagina was now moist and her inner/outer lips were puffy. I had her play with herself. Sasha moaned, “Oh I’m about to come, please fuck me Pete.” “Sasha I want you to stop playing with yourself, take out your diaphragm, and come over her and suck my cock.” (that was wild erect and dripping with precum). “Oh, Pete I will get pregnant if I don’t use some protection. I am really fertile right now.” I told her that if she couldn’t do what I asked then there would be no money. I watched as she split her vagina lips and was able to see the back wall of her cervix. I then had her get on all fours as I mounted her from behind. Sasha felt Steve enter her in one shove. She pushed back into him and felt the tip of his large 10 inch cock hitting her cervix. Sasha grasped briefly in pain as Pete’s dick penetrated her cervix but waves of orgasm swiftly overtook her as she felt Pete’s cock throbbing and pounding her vagina. Pete soon shot his load deep inside her fertile womb. She then sucked him hard again. This time Pete took her with Sasha’s legs over his shoulders. Again, Pete emptied his sperm deep inside her womb. Pete had Sasha hold her legs up so that none of his sperm would leak out. Pete wanted to be sure to make her pregnant. Over the next several weeks Pete stuck his huge cock into Sasha and shot as much sperm into her as possible from as many different positions but always with one intent — to get Sasha pregnant. Sasha’s missed her next monthly period. When she did a pregnancy test it came out positive. Pete still had Sasha coming over to his to perform “housework” even though she was pregnant. Sasha’s nipples grew darker, larger, and became very sensitive. When Pete would suck on her luscious pointed pregnant breast she would squirt milk into his mouth and dose his cock with her vaginal juices as she repeatedly orgasmed. Sasha was hoping that her ordeal would soon be over even though she had signed a contract that would last several years. Her hopes where soon dashed when she heard Pete talking about her doing a gangbang with some well endowed black men after she had his baby. She shuttered when he asked if she “Would like to have a black baby?” Sasha’s maid service was only the beginning to satisfying Pete’s appetites.
- The con moves towards the final stage...Hello Everyone, I’ll tell you what happened when I came to buy my new car …Lorna’s New Car I had… It was a normal day at Thompson High. The sun was shining and Mindy Denson was sitting on the steps…
- Pete had been friends with Steve since he had first graduated from college and gotten his first job. He remembered meeting Steve at his orientation to the company by the Human Resources Dept. Steve was one of the salesman who sold software for the company and was going to be a mentor to Pete as he started working also in sales for Eros. Pete was new to the city of Charleston, WV. In fact, he had just moved there from his home in Columbus, Ohio. Pete really wanted to get into writing his own programs as well as doing computer programming and architecture for businesses. The sales job was a way of working himself into the company. Hell, it was a recession and he was glad to have any type of job! Pete and Steve really hit it off. Steve was able to help Pete find out his way around town, set him up with an apartment, and show him both the highs and lows of Charleston, WV. Pete especially liked the lows that Steve had showed him– the strip bars, the adult bookstores and even a place that had a live sex show. One time Pete told a stripper that Steve was the person with all the money and that she should ask him for the money for a dance. Yes, getting financially started was a hard thing to do in a new city. It was quite a dance at that – as she spread her legs wide exposing her nude vagina several drops of moisture dripped down her slit and disappeared onto the floor below. This was the first of many trips to the adult entertainment places in Charleston. Steve was married to a beautiful women named Sasha who was 30 years old. The first time Pete saw Sasha was a reflection in a mirror in the hallway at their house. Sasha was 5’6″ with dark jet black hair cut in a way that made her look very tom boyish. Her figure was anything but tom boyish with well developed breasts, a tight rounded butt, and a slim waistline. Pete often wondered what she looked like beneath her clothes. Sasha was quite a contrast as far as looks– a tom boyish appearance with the body that any sculptor or painter would use for a model. Sasha greeted Pete with a warm handshake, hug, and greeting: “So your the new whiz kid whose out to conquer the sales world.” Her smile put him at ease. Pete thought how Steve was such a lucky bastard to have a woman like her. Pete advanced quickly in the company. He was soon named vice-president of sales. Pete then developed several unique computer products. This propelled him into the highest levels of management as well as made him very wealthy. Steve on the other hand had a tide of misfortune and his sales plummeted. Steve then began to drink. Pete ran into Sasha at the car repair shop. She was had been crying to herself. Evidently, her car needed repaired and when it came time to pay the credit card had been rejected. Sasha didn’t even have a way home. Pete quickly paid for the car repair. Sasha promised to pay him back. Pete could only think how he wanted her to pay him back. Sasha showed up to Pete’s place a couple hours later. Her eyes were red. Evidently, it had been a very bad day since a number of creditors had been calling with threats to repossess their house and belongings. Steve had even spent Sasha’s private savings without her knowledge. She was destitute. Sasha asked Pete if she could borrow some money and that she would be “willing to do any maid service around the house to help out and that she would also get a job to pay him back.” Pete asked, “Are you really willing to be my paid maid? Would you take a job where all your debts could be paid off?” Sasha responded quizzically, “It sounds as though you have something in mind. I just thought I could clean your home and maybe do some cooking.” Pete replied, “I’ve always wanted you as a sex slave that would serve my needs.” Sasha eyes grew very wide and she gasped in shock. “I could never do that to Steve. I really still love him. I’ll never do that! Can’t you even help out your best friend?” Pete quietly stated, “I’ve always wanted you as my own private sex slave, Sasha. I’ve desired you more than any valuable painting or other work of art. The situation is just right for my desires.” “You evil bastard. I’d never do anything like that. I love Steve.” Sasha angrily left. An day later the phone rang. “Pete, the bank is going to repossess our home unless we can pay the mortgage. No one will lend us any more money. I’ll do as you ask,” as Sasha cried.hard sexI told her to come over so that we could make the necessary arrangements. I then arranged to take care of Sasha’s and Steve’s bills a little at a time. I had Sasha tell Steve that a rich relative was going to help her out. When Sasha reported to my house I had her stand in front of a mirror and slowly remove her clothes. The reflection in a mirror showed some deep, dark brown nipples about 3 inches in size that came to pointed tip. As she bent and removed her panties I saw hair that grew up from her slit to her ass with some large protruding vagina lips. Sasha’s ass was round, well defined but small. As she turned around I saw a fairly hairy bush. Sasha had tears rolling down her cheeks. I then had her walk to me and away from me. I told her, “Walk like you are a hooker out trying to get some business.” Sasha then walked very sexily around my living room. Sasha asked, “Do you have to take a video of me doing this?” I replied, “Yes, now let’s see how many ways I can see that vagina of yours.” I saw her pussy as she stood over me, as she lay on the couch with her legs spread, on all fours with her butt in the air. Sasha’s vagina was now moist and her inner/outer lips were puffy. I had her play with herself. Sasha moaned, “Oh I’m about to come, please fuck me Pete.” “Sasha I want you to stop playing with yourself, take out your diaphragm, and come over her and suck my cock.” (that was wild erect and dripping with precum). “Oh, Pete I will get pregnant if I don’t use some protection. I am really fertile right now.” I told her that if she couldn’t do what I asked then there would be no money. I watched as she split her vagina lips and was able to see the back wall of her cervix. I then had her get on all fours as I mounted her from behind. Sasha felt Steve enter her in one shove. She pushed back into him and felt the tip of his large 10 inch cock hitting her cervix. Sasha grasped briefly in pain as Pete’s dick penetrated her cervix but waves of orgasm swiftly overtook her as she felt Pete’s cock throbbing and pounding her vagina. Pete soon shot his load deep inside her fertile womb. She then sucked him hard again. This time Pete took her with Sasha’s legs over his shoulders. Again, Pete emptied his sperm deep inside her womb. Pete had Sasha hold her legs up so that none of his sperm would leak out. Pete wanted to be sure to make her pregnant. Over the next several weeks Pete stuck his huge cock into Sasha and shot as much sperm into her as possible from as many different positions but always with one intent — to get Sasha pregnant. Sasha’s missed her next monthly period. When she did a pregnancy test it came out positive. Pete still had Sasha coming over to his to perform “housework” even though she was pregnant. Sasha’s nipples grew darker, larger, and became very sensitive. When Pete would suck on her luscious pointed pregnant breast she would squirt milk into his mouth and dose his cock with her vaginal juices as she repeatedly orgasmed. Sasha was hoping that her ordeal would soon be over even though she had signed a contract that would last several years. Her hopes where soon dashed when she heard Pete talking about her doing a gangbang with some well endowed black men after she had his baby. She shuttered when he asked if she “Would like to have a black baby?” Sasha’s maid service was only the beginning to satisfying Pete’s appetites. Author’s note: The following story is true. The events actually happened, although some of the names and the dates were changed by artistic license. At this date and time I can’t remember the men’s actual names, but if any of the participants happen to read this story, they will know who they are and hopefully will remember the events onboard the U.S. Navy supply ship with a lot of pleasure. It was another hot July Sunday in Fort Lauderdale as Deej and Carole left the Church parking lot after the last service. As he often did on Sundays, Deej decided to drive around just to see if there was anything going on that might spark their interest. Just something to do on a quiet Sunday afternoon in what was normally a pretty boring town. He was driving his aunt’s new Corvair, wanting to see what it was like to drive a car with the engine in the back. She had left it in his care while she went on a cruise to the Bahamas with instructions that he was not to drive it, but Deej couldn’t resist the temptation, figuring that it wouldn’t hurt to put just a few miles on the odometer. He determined that the car didn’t offer anything new and lacked the pickup of his Austin-Healy roadster. Deej did like the advantage of the rear engine drive in that there was no hump in the middle of the front floorboard, at least. He liked to drive around with Carole sitting tightly against him as he played with her pussy and the absence of the hump made it possible for her to sit next to him with her legs spread wide. The first thing he had Carole do when the church was out of sight was to remove her panties and throw them in the back seat, then pull her Sunday dress up around her waist. Carole never objected to Deej’s fondling of her body and the hot sex that usually followed, although she was nervous about someone being able to see her as they drove around, keeping a hand on the hem of her dress so she could quickly pull it down in case there was someone who could see inside the car. As he slid a finger in Carole’s moistening pussy, Deej couldn’t help but look at Carole’s face, proud of his pretty wife’s beauty, often unbelieving that he had been fortunate enough to marry her. She was a small young woman, just a shade under five feet tall and weighing less than a hundred pounds, of which five of those pounds must have been in her fantastic breasts. Deej didn’t know anything about women’s bra sizes, but he knew that Carole’s breasts must have been some of the largest a woman could have. They made her appear top-heavy, but that was partly because of her waspish waist. While Deej had to use both hands to full encompass her breasts, at the same time his fingers could almost touch when he put his hands around her waist. Her breasts didn’t sag from their size, either, possibly because of her young age of twenty, but seemed to point straight ahead as though they were pointing the way. Her figure was the first thing most men noticed, but after examining how her small waist flared out into nicely rounded hips above the most gorgeous legs, their eyes always moved up to her face and, once any man looked at her face, her body was soon forgotten. Her hair was a dark blonde, usually worn short, framing a flawless face with a pert little nose, luscious, full lips, and highlighted by the most startling blue eyes, a blue the color of the water in a shallow lagoon, almost turquoise. Her smile often captured men’s hearts and Carole was usually smiling. She was one of those effervescent people, the kind that everyone enjoyed being around, full of life and innocence. If Carole had any faults, it wasn’t in her physical appearance, but in her devout devotion to Deej, her willingness to do anything she could to please him. She wasn’t a rocket scientist by any means, barely passing high school, and this made her very easily manipulated, something Deej had always taken full advantage of in the six years they had dated before getting married. As they headed out Sunrise Boulevard towards the beach, they passed two sailors in their starched white uniforms, walking backwards with their arms stretched out and thumbs pointed up in the universal hitchhiking signal. Deej drove on past them without slowing, then an erotic thought crossed his mind, the thought of letting the two men enjoy some sex with his wife. His cock immediately responded to the image, half-rising in his pants. Deej turned right at the next street and went halfway around the block, stopping behind an auto dealership. He put the car in park and turned to Carole who was looking at him with a puzzled look on her face. Without explaining his motives, Deej reached behind Carole’s back, leaning her forward slightly, and undid the buttons to her dress, then quickly undid the clasps on her bra. The elastic in the straps around her chest relaxed, permitting her lovely breasts to swing free, but still partially restrained by the cups of her bra. Still not saying anything, Deej pulled the wide straps of the sleeveless dress off her shoulders and eased them down her arms, letting the top portion of her dress fall in her lap. Deej then removed her free-hanging bra and threw it in the back with her panties. He lifted her face to his and kissed her passionately while he teasingly massaged her breasts, lightly twisting each nipple in turn until they became hard and erect, jutting out from her white mounds of flesh like miniature cocks. Carole was used to Deej undressing her in this manner and didn’t object as she returned his probing kiss with equal passion, quickly aroused by Deej’s touch and kiss, her legs spreading even wider in response to the flood of heat she felt rising in her crotch. Deej broke off his arousal of Carole just as abruptly as he had begun, slipping her arms back in her dress and then pulling it back up on her shoulders. He didn’t re-button her dress, letting the top gap open slightly at the back, the scoop neck of the bodice drooping just enough to show the delicious cleavage of her breasts, making it obvious that there was no confining bra beneath the dress, her erect nipples clearly indenting the soft material. As he put the car in drive, Deej reached into Carole’s lap and pulled the hem of her dress down to mid-thigh and then pulled back onto the road. He made a circuit of the block and ended up back on Sunrise, still heading toward the beach. Deej crossed his fingers mentally in hopes that the two sailors hadn’t caught a ride while he prepared Carole. Just as he rounded a long curve in the highway, he saw the white suits glaring in the overhead sun about two blocks ahead and he smiled, happy that he hadn’t missed the opportunity to pick them up. Deej slowed the car as he approached the two men, gliding slowly past them for a couple of car lengths before stopping. Carole immediately sensed Deej’s purpose in stopping for the hitchhikers. He had suggested they pick someone up before when they were driving around but didn’t do it after Carole protested tearfully. “No, Deej. Please don’t,” Carole whined. “Don’t pick them up.” “Aww, don’t worry about it, baby. I’m just going to give them a ride,” Deej attempted to assuage Carole’s alarm as he watched the two men hurry towards the stopped car in the rear view mirror. “It’s too hot out there to be walking,” he explained further as the two reached the car. Deej operated the electric window on Carole’s side of the car and called out to the men as they reached the car door. “Hey, where you guys headed?” A dark-haired handsome face appeared at the window, “We’re trying to make it to the beach,” he explained breathlessly. “Didn’t know it was so far from the port. This is the way to the beach, isn’t it?” Deej nodded, then answered, “Yeh, it’s this direction, but you still have about three miles to go.” He noticed the handsome sailor was furtively looking Carole over, his eyes lingering on her breasts for several seconds before he looked back at Deej. “Well, come on, get in. We’re going the same way.” Handsome cheerfully expressed his thanks and relief, “Gee, man, thanks. My sea legs aren’t used to all this walking.” He pulled on the door handle and swung the door wide, then spoke to his friend, “C’mon, Chip, they’re going to give us a ride.” As Carole leaned forward, the dark haired sailor pulled the passenger seat forward and held it for his friend, who finally came into view. Chip wasn’t as tall as the one who spoke, but was still good-looking in his white uniform, now wrinkled from the heat and slight perspiration of their walk, his sandy hair cropped close to his head in the current style.pornAs he bent over to get in the back seat, Deej could see that half of the back seat was taken up by a large folded-up carpet his aunt had left in the car and he realized that there was only room for one in the back. ‘Perfect,’ he thought, then suggested, “One of you will have to sit up front. I forgot about the carpet.” Chip spoke up from the back seat, “Todd, you lucky ass! You must have known we both couldn’t sit back here.” Chip laughed as he joked with his partner, then realized the word he had used, immediately apologizing, “Oh, ma’am, I’m sorry. I shouldn’t have used a cuss word.” His face turned a little red as he thought about using cuss words in front of someone he didn’t even know. Deej laughed, “What? You mean ass’? Hell, that’s not bad. And ass isn’t a cuss word, so don’t worry about it.” As he spoke over his shoulder to the sandy-haired sailor, Deej put his arm around Carole’s shoulders as a pretense of pulling her closer to make room for the sailor named Todd, his arm slipping behind her back to her waist with his hand resting on her hip. He added for both men’s benefit, “And, besides, fellas, we’re all about the same age, so you don’t have to watch your language.” Chip was still embarrassed by his faux pas, “Well, I still apologize. It’s just that on the ship, every other word is a cuss word and I forget myself when I’m on shore.” Todd chided his friend as he closed the passenger door, “That’s my buddy for you. Always too polite. Guess it’s his southern raising.” To show he could also be polite, Todd stuck out his hand to Deej, “By the way, I’m Todd and that clown back there is Chip.” Deej took his hand and clasped it firmly, “Hi. I’m Deej and this little beauty is Carole.” He gave Carole’s waist a hug as part of his introduction. She smiled first at Deej and then turned to the man sitting closely next to her and softly, in a little-girl voice, greeted, “Hi. Nice to meet you both.” Deej drove slowly towards the beach, making small talk as he drove while he brainstormed for an idea on how to accomplish his goal. From the small talk he learned that they were in port for the next three days, had never been to Fort Lauderdale before, and their ship was a navy supply ship, nothing glamorous, as Todd had put it. Deej used his hand on Carole’s hip to slowly work the hem of her dress up, moving it a fraction of an inch at a time, hoping she wouldn’t notice the gradual expanse of skin he was revealing to the man on her right. Deej had become aware that the tall sailor had been staring at the creamy tan of her legs, his eyes darting at times to the top of her dress as he leaned back in the seat for a better view of Carole’s breasts. Chip had propped his arms on the top of the front seat with his head between Todd and Carole and was looking intently down her top. From his position, he was able to see most of her lovely grapefruit-sized tits, seeing just to the edge of her dark-pink aureole, hoping she would move somehow so he could catch a glimpse of her nipples as they pressed against her thin summer dress. Todd had been sitting with his hands on his knees but had gradually moved his hands up his legs until the back of his fingers were against Carole’s smooth thighs. One glance at his crotch indicated to Deej that the close proximity to the very pretty girl was having quite an effect on the emboldened sailor. Deej finally came up with an idea to make things a lot more interesting as he asked the two men, “You guys going swimming when you get to the beach?” Todd spoke for both of them as his hand slid against Carole’s outer thigh, “Yeah, we got our swim trunks on under our uniforms. Hope the water’s nice.” Deej acted as if an idea just hit him. “Well, hey, how about we join you? Looks like a nice day to go swimming.” Todd and Chip chimed in together, “Why, sure. That would be fun. We don’t know where to go on the beach, anyway.” “Great!” Deej replied. “We’ll have to go to our house to get our swim suits, though. We don’t live far from here, so it’ll only take a few minutes.” Deej pulled Carole more to him in a friendly hug, letting his hand pull her dress up to her hip as caused her to lean to him on her left hip, revealing the line of her tan contrasted against the whiteness of her rounded hip. “How about it, sugar? Want to go swimming?” Carole wasn’t even aware that half her ass was showing as she beamed, “Uh-huh. I’d love it.” Deej made a quick u-turn on the almost-deserted highway and headed towards their house, holding Carole in the leaning position, hoping the men would see her exposed skin and the fact that she wasn’t wearing any panties. Looking out of the corner of his eye as he hurried down the road, Deej could see that both of the men hadn’t missed the view but were staring down at the car seat, their eyes admiring the curve of Carole’s pale ass, Todd’s cock echoing the thoughts that must have been rushing through his mind. Five minutes after making the u-turn, Deej pulled up in their carport and the four of them piled out of the car and went inside. As soon as they had stepped in the door into the kitchen, Carole announced, “I’ll go change into my suit. There’s no place on the beach to change.” Deej stopped her with an arm around her tiny waist, “Hey, just a minute, baby. Maybe the guys want a drink or something first.” He turned to pose the question to the two men standing just inside the door, “How about it, guys? Beer? Soda?” Chip grinned, “I’d like a beer. Be good after that long walk.” Todd added to the request, “Hmm, I’d like one, too, if you don’t mind giving one to someone under age.” Deej laughed, “Well, you can’t be far from twenty-one, so who cares?” Todd congratulated Deej on his estimate, “Hey, you hit it on the head. We’re both twenty.” Carole looked surprised as she confessed, “Really? That’s what I am. I just turned twenty in February.” Deej feigned disappointment, “Shit, looks like I’m the old man here. I’m twenty-three.” They all laughed at his deprecating remark, with Chip reassuring that he didn’t look like an old man. Carole got three beers out of the refrigerator and a soda for herself, and then pulled out chairs at the dining room table for the two men. She took a few sips of her drink and then announced, “I’m going to change.” As soon as she was out of earshot, Todd remarked, “Hope you don’t mind, Deej, but I gotta say your wife is really beautiful.” Deej shrugged as though the compliment to his wife was expected, “Yeah, she is. But you ain’t seen nothing yet. Wait till you see her in a bathing suit.” Chips eyebrows shot up, and then he said appraisingly, “Man, I bet she’s a knock out.” Deej stood up, “You guys want a preview?” Todd looked at him quizzically, “What do mean, Deej?” Deej held his finger to his lips and motioned for them to follow him, then started tiptoeing to their closed bedroom door. By his estimate, Carole should be about ready to slip into her bathing suit and should be completely naked. He waited until the two men had snuck up to stand behind him and then, quietly turning the door handle, he opened the door suddenly. Like a deer caught in the headlights of a car, Carole stood frozen, bending over the dresser drawer where she kept her bathing suit, her eyes wide with shock as the three men stood in the doorway staring at her naked body. Her breasts jiggled slightly when she was startled by the opening door, giving her naked form an even more erotic quality. In a matter of seconds, Carole recovered and screamed, “Deej!” then stood up straight with her arms crossed in front of her breasts, not thinking about the rest of her body revealed to the leering men, the pressure of her arms across her breasts making them bulge a little above her tiny limbs. When she saw that each of the men were staring at the tawny-colored pubic hair, she quickly dropped one arm and covered her patch with her hand, leaving more of her ample breasts exposed for viewing. Carole screamed again, “Deej! Get out of here!” She turned as she yelled angrily and grabbed her dress off of the bed and held it in front of her.audio sex storiesDeej crossed the short distance between him and Carole in two long strides and snatched the dress from her hands with a smile, “Now, baby, don’t be that way. We just want to look.” He tossed the dress over the bed and grasped both of Carole’s wrists in his strong hands, pulling her arms over her head. Deej continued to hold her arms over her head as he stepped behind Carole and presented her full frontal view to the two sailors. “See, guys? Here’s the preview.” Carole struggled as the two men stepped further into the bedroom, each of them devouring her sexy body with their eyes. Deej pulled Carole’s hands behind her back as she struggled to get free, her breasts now accentuated by the position of her arms behind her, the jiggling flesh bouncing as she fought against Deej’s grip. “Deej, please!” Carole pleaded. “Don’t do this.” Deej only laughed, then invited the two watching the struggle, “Feel her tits, guys. Feel how firm they are.” Seeing the two hesitate, Deej invited again, “Go on, get a feel.” Todd was the first one to step forward. He ran his fingertips over the white flesh tentatively, and then squeezed one breast with his fingers spread wide. “Mmm, they’re nice,” he commented, as he gripped a nipple between a thumb and finger and rolled it like a pencil. Chip joined him and began massaging the other breast as he echoed Todd’s sentiments. “Yeh, nice. Very nice. Carole, you sure have some nice breasts. Nice body, too.” Chip dropped his mouth to the breast he was holding and began to fervently suck on the nipple, enveloping the wrinkled, pink aureole with his lips. Deej could feel Carole’s resistance lessen, the muscles in her arms no longer straining to free herself. He crossed her wrists and held them with one hand while he used his other hand to stroke Carole’s body, caressing the cheeks of her ass then bringing his hand around to her belly and sensually rubbing it, letting his fingers brush through her soft pubic hairs. Deej felt Carole relax even more and when Todd lowered his mouth to the nipple he had been rolling, Deej heard Carole gasp. Deej took that as a sign and slipped his hand between her legs, his fingers stroking up and down the slit of her pussy. One thing he had learned about Carole since he had first met her was that once she was fingered, her resistance to anything completely crumbled and she became a first-class slut. That was precisely what Deej was aiming for as he slipped his middle finger in her hot tunnel. He felt Carole open her legs as her pussy lips blossomed like a flower in spring searching for the sun, opening wide for a visit from a bee. Deej released Carole’s arms from his grip and was pleased to see her place a hand on each sailor’s head caressingly as the two sucked on her distended nipples. Deej knew all the right spots to touch in Carole’s now-dripping pussy and he knew how sensitive her nipples were. He also knew when she was ready to fuck, all the tell-tale signs, her rapid breathing, the heat of her body, her hands becoming almost hot to the touch, her soft mewing sounds she made through half-parted lips. He saw those signs now as Carole stood bow-legged so his probing fingers could freely access the insides of her pussy and he heard her moan softly, her head tilted back, her eyes narrow slits, sleepily peering out at nothing. Deej knew that when she was in this state, she’d fuck anything, a dog or even a coke bottle if there was nothing else around. He slipped his slickened finger out of her pussy, eliciting a regretful groan from her, and took his pants off, throwing them in a corner of the room. Stepping back to the three locked in sexual throes, Deej took Carole by the shoulders and pulled her away from the two sucking sailors then pushed her down to the edge of the bed in a sitting position, her legs spread wide, her eyes still possessing that dreamy look. Deej stepped between her legs and rested his cock against her full lips. Carole’s mouth immediately opened and she sucked his hardened rod into her mouth, her tongue working feverishly over the head as she slid the man meat in and out of her mouth hungrily, her sucking almost as satisfying to her as having a cock deep in her pussy. Todd stepped up next to Deej and incredulously asked, “Will she go all the way? Will she suck mine, too?” Deej nodded and pulled his saliva-coated cock out of Carole’s mouth. “Sure, man, she’ll suck and swallow. She loves it. Try her.” Todd didn’t need any further encouragement as he took Deej’s place and guided his long, thin, cock to Carole’s hungry lips. As soon as her hot mouth closed around Todd’s cock, he let out a low groan and hunched his hips upward. Carole took the hint and slipped the entire length of Todd’s eight inches inside her, his cock pushing past the opening to her throat as she deep-throated him with lascivious gusto. Deej let Carole give Todd a sample of her masterful sucking before interrupting. “Lie down, Todd. Let her blow you while Chip fucks her. We have to give the hot little whore some cock in her pussy to keep her going.” Todd did as Deej recommended, settling back on the bed with his legs spread. Carole quickly got between his legs and resumed her mouth-loving of Todd’s veinous prick. Chip hardly waited for her to get back to sucking Todd’s cock before he was on the bed behind her, rubbing his dick up and down her greasy cunt until he found the prized opening. Chip’s cock wasn’t huge, but he did seem to be experienced in how to used it as he slowly stroked it in and out of Carole’s clenching cunt, occasionally rotating his hips in circles while it was embedded fully in her hot pussy, the stiff rod rubbing against her clit with each rotation. Deej watched as he saw Carole’s toes arch upward, another telltale sign that she was enjoying an orgasm. Her hips would lunge backward as Chip shoved forward in an attempt to get even more of his cock inside her, to feel the head push against her tender inner walls. Carole would climax just as easily from the sensation of a dick igniting the nerves in her vagina walls as she would from the excitement of her clit and whenever she fucked, she would work to capture that sensation. The three bodies on the bed remained locked in sexual heat for at least fifteen minutes before Chip couldn’t resist the urge any longer and shot his load in Carole with loud grunts. The heat of his cum splashing inside her caused Carole to have another orgasm, her toes curling painfully as she moaned around Todd’s still stiff cock. When Chip climbed off the bed and headed for the bathroom, Todd lifted Carole’s sucking mouth off his cock and pulled her up on top of him. He grasped his dripping cock and slid it in her pussy, folding his legs up so that his knees spread Carole’s legs wide as he humped his hips up and down, sinking his long tool deep inside her. Deej used the opportunity to get on the bed behind Carole and used the ample precum of his cock to wet her asshole. With a couple of well-aimed pushes, he had his cock buried up her ass. Deej could feel Todd’s cock beneath his as the tip slid against the insides of Carole’s vagina, rubbing up the entire length of Deej’s prick. The combination of her burning hot bowels, the twisting of her pelvis and the constriction of her sphincter and Todd’s rubbing of his cock through the thin partition of skin proved too much for Deej’s resolve to last. He emptied his cum inside Carole’s rectum inside of five minutes. A fast fuck, but a very satisfying fuck. Deej got off the bed and went to the bathroom to clean his shit-stained dick, pleased to see that he was keeping his erection. When he returned to the bedroom, Todd was still stroking his long poker in and out of Carole’s convulsing pussy. Chip had joined them on the bed, kneeling beside Todd’s head, his cock being sucked frantically by the sex-crazed Carole. Todd finally succumbed to the thrill of Carole’s pussy and spurted wads of cum deep inside her. He slid out from under Carole’s perspiring body and stood by the bed while she continued to suck Chips dick. It was surprising her jaw muscles didn’t cramp up, but to Carole’s credit, she never slowed her expert ministrations until Chip had given her his cum to swallow. They never made it to the beach, but spent the afternoon using Carole’s beautiful body in every way the three men could imagine. Carole certainly didn’t object, her sexual appetite awakened and insatiable. When the men were too exhausted to perform any longer despite Carole’s attempts at reviving their deflated cocks, they watched as she fingered her reddened pussy and gathered close around the bed when she switched to using a beer bottle to satisfy her voracious urge to continue climaxing. While the three were watching Carole as she made herself cum for what seemed the umpteenth time, Todd made the comment, “Man, I bet the other guys on the ship would love to get some of her. Looks like she could handle all thirty of them and still want more.” Deej looked at Todd with a devious look, “Hmm, that sounds interesting, Todd. Really think they’d want some of her ass?” Todd was amazed at the question, “You kidding? They’d kill for a chance to fuck her!” Chip chimed in, “Yeah, most of them haven’t had any pussy in a month or more!” Deej had to pursue the idea, becoming consumed by the thought of Carole getting gang-banged by so many men. “Hey, you guys think we could get on board the ship?” Todd gave it a moments thought before answering, “Well, I think so. The only one that might see us coming on board would be the chief, and from the stories he’s told, once he got a look at her, he wouldn’t care if we gave her the ship.” Chip laughed, “Yeah, the horny ol’ bastard would even give her a year’s pay to get some of that pussy. He won’t be any problem.” Deej was now getting excited over the possibility, “Let’s do it! C’mon, let’s sneak her on your ship and let all your buddies fuck her!” Carole was listening intently as the men discussed their plan, but said nothing, continuing to work the neck of the beer bottle in and out of her swollen pussy, her eyes closed dreamily, her mind imagining what it would be like to have cock after cock shoved in her. Maybe, just maybe, that many cocks could quench the deep, unfathomable hunger that possessed her body, a desire she couldn’t comprehend and never knew was buried deep within her subconscious, only knowing that she had to have satisfaction of her newly discovered hunger. Deej interrupted Carole’s erotic thoughts, having to repeat his words twice before they sunk into her consciousness, “Get up, baby. Go get cleaned up and we’ll have some real fun.” Once Deej’s words had bypassed Carole’s sensual thoughts, she got off the bed and hurried to the bathroom, the three men watching as she pranced past them nude, admiring her curvy ass, the swing of her full breasts. When she returned to the bedroom, Deej had selected what he wanted her to wear for their evening’s adventure and handed the single piece of clothing to her. It was a short, white terry cloth beach robe that fastened only with a cloth belt. Carole grinned as Deej handed the robe to her, knowing how he liked her to wear it with nothing but a pair of high heel shoes. The robe barely reached no more than three to four inches below her crotch, and if Carole wasn’t careful when she walked, the robe would open slightly below her waist and reveal her trimmed bush for all to see. Carole laid the robe on the bed and pulled open a drawer of the dresser, then selected a pair of lace panties. When Deej saw what she was about to do, he took the panties from her hand and admonished, “You won’t be needing those, sexy. Just put the robe on and that pair of open-toed high-heeled sandals. That’s all you’re going to need.” Carole modestly objected, “But Deej, I can’t go out in public without SOMEthing on under my robe!” Deej through the panties on the bed, the see-through lace landing on the pussy-juice coated beer bottle, “Nah, baby. Don’t worry about it. You won’t be in public, anyway.” Carole shrugged and picked the robe up and slipped it on, then stepped to the open closet and slipped her feet into her sandals, aware of the six eyes focused on her body. Chip whistled as Carole turned to face them, “Damn! She sure looks good in that robe!” The other two men nodded in agreement as they studied the pretty girl standing in front of them, her sandals accentuating every curve of her seductive legs, twisting her pelvis backward and making her butt even more pronounced. The soft material of the robe only gave a hint of Carole’s bountiful breasts as it parted slightly from the fullness of her globes pushing against it, revealing just enough of the crevice between the white mounds to tantalize. Deej interrupted the men’s appraisal of his wife, “Let’s get going gang. It’s already dark out, and time’s awasting.” The four of them piled into the Corvair and Deej headed to Port Everglades, his thoughts playing out in advance the ensuing night’s entertainment, hopeful that the two sailors could pull it off. At Todd’s direction, Deej pulled into a parking spot in the deserted lot several feet from the pier where their ship was docked. Todd told them all to wait in the car while he went to talk to the chief. The three remaining watched him as he walked across the darkened pavement and made his way up the gangplank. They could see Todd enter a door on the upper deck and disappear from view. Deej couldn’t see anyone else in the dim lights illuminating the ship and he turned in his seat to face Chip in the back. “Where is everyone, Chip? I don’t see a soul on the deck.” Chip leaned forward and explained, “Probably all in the day room or in their bunks. Not much to do on a Sunday when we’re in port. Just watch TV, read, or play cards. Some may still be on leave, looking for excitement.” Deej commented, “Well, they won’t find much around here right now. There’s a few bars, but they’re pretty dead on a Sunday. And the closest girlie clubs are down near Hollywood or clear into Miami.” It seemed like at least a half-hour had passed before they saw Todd reappear on the deck and make his way down the gangplank, although it was probably no more than fifteen or twenty minutes. Todd hurried across the pavement to the car and the three watching him could see a broad smile on his face as he jauntily strode up to the car. He opened the passenger door but didn’t get in, leaning over to exclaim enthusiastically, “It’s all set. The chief said the captain was sleeping off his latest drunk and the lieutenant is still on shore. His final words were get your ass moving’.”sexChip laughed, “Just like him. The old bastard gets impatient when he thinks he’s going to get some.” He pushed the front seat forward and got out of the car, revealing his own impatience to start an evening of fun. Deej followed Chip’s example and got out on the driver’s side while Carole slid across the seat and got out to stand beside Todd and Chip, her sliding action on the seat giving the two sailors a good view of her pussy. They all walked toward the ship, Carole between Todd and Chip, their arms encircling her waist and ass, with Deej strolling behind, watching Carole’s robe ride up her sweet butt cheeks. When they got to the gangplank, Todd took the lead, followed by Carole and then Chip, with Deej taking up the rear. Deej had to laugh when Chip commented on the view of Carole’s ass as she went up the steps in front of him. In a show of modesty, Carole made a vain attempt to cover her rear with the robe when Chip made his remark, causing the rambunctious
M i c h a e l l o s e s h i s v i r g i n i t y t o a b e a u t i f u l y o u n g D e n M o t h e r
This story deals with my tales of a Mistress and her sluts, it is quite descriptive and graphic.It is copyrighted but you may save it and print for your easier enjoyment.Please enjoy a glimpse into my dark fantasy world.Oh, what to wear? Ambyr asked herself, tonight was going to be so special, she was going out for the night with her Mistress Alexia, her world, her love, the only woman she thinks of at night.She wanted to wear something her Mistress would like, would like to peel off her and something that would make her wet thinking about what was underneath. She laid out the clothes on her fluffy bedspread, a tight black lycra top long sleeve, with silver flowers over her nipples, tight around her neck, forming to her little sexy body. A very short vinyl skirt, black with the same silver flowers running around the bottom, and a zipper up the side. She pulled on her favorite tight satiny white panty, see through in the front so she could see her little v shaped bush, and high cut in the back, god how she loved the feel of them clinging to her young sexy hips and ass. She then strapped her white satin bra with black highlights on, rubbing her nipples through the satin, suddenly feeling a rush of warmth in her pussy she stopped, oh!She didn’t want to get wet to soon her Mistress might get mad if she was all sticky with juice when she smelled her and tasted her tonight. She wrapped her skirt around her hips and zipped it up, pulled on her shirt and put on some knee high white stockings and shiny black heels.As Ambyr stood in front of her full length mirror she had a quiver of excitement because she looked so naughty and tempting, thinking of the guys that would drool over her and how she would hold her Mistress’s arm lovingly clinging to her like she was taught.Mistress Rain bow owned her completely and totally, she wouldn’t think of doing anything with anyone else unless her Mistress instructed to do so, oh how she loved being her naughty little Slut (I use the term with so much love it hurts).Well she better stop looking at herself or she is going to cum thinking of tonight and she wanted to try to be fresh for her Mistress, she walked downstairs and said goodbye to her mom telling her she is probably going to be staying at Alexia’s house. Her mother said fine, be careful sweetie, laughing softly, how silly, if only her mom knew how bad she was going to be tonight she would never let her go out again.She got in her car and drove to Mistress Alexia’s house, it was just getting dark as she got out of her car and knocked at the door, she waited breathless, hoping her Mistress will approve of her choice of clothes. The door opened and there she stood clad in such a sexy outfit, it made Ambyr get wet from the sight, Ambyr saw the surprise and sexy, approving look from her Mistress as she eyed her body and outfit up and down.Ambyr went in and got on her knees and hugged her Mistress’s legs, looking up at Alexia she felt her panty start getting a wet spot but couldn’t help it at all, Her Mistress was all she ever wanted! Alexia told Ambyr how lovely she looked and how she was going to have a surprise for her little slut tonight, Ambyr quivered with excitement wondering what that could be. She would do anything at all for her Mistress.Alexia led here to her bedroom and turned to her and hugged her telling Ambyr how glad she was here and how she wanted to just start right now but she would wait. Alexia whispered in Ambyr’s ear that she hoped she was getting wet because when she went down to taste and smell she wanted to feel slick hot yummy wetness, Ambyr nearly fainted right there from hearing that. Her panty experienced another rush of wetness, now Ambyr didn’t stop it she was happy that her Mistress will find her so ready for her skillful tongue when she bestowed that privilege upon her.So before either of them could lose anymore control they got into Ambyr’s car and drove into the night.As they drove into the city, Alexia put her hand on Ambyr’s thigh telling her how turned on she was about tonight, Ambyr’s wet spot grew wider as her Mistress’s hand rubbed across the top and to the inside of her thigh, close to her heated crotch. Ambyr put her head back and savored the lusty feeling filling her body, Alexia told her they were going to a club and were going to seduce some sexy guy and take him home with them, Ambyr said she couldn’t wait to get there!Alexia’s hand continued its slow rubbing of Ambyr’s thigh and slid deeper underneath her vinyl skirt brushing Ambyr’s soaked panty, Alexia smiled and said, oh yes little Ambyr, you are definitely my favorite little Slut. Ambyr just gave herself over to the overwhelming feelings of sexiness as they drove to the club.They pulled up to a club called “The Dark Ages” a gothic styled place with huge gargoyles mounted on the roof, as they approached the huge door into the club they felt the throbbing beat of the techno music playing inside. Ambyr clung to her Mistress’s arm like a lost little girl; her head was spinning from the excitement.They walked inside and the doorman let them pass without a cover charge or word.Alexia found a table in a dark corner where they could see the whole of the club and ordered drinks, she then leaned over and told Ambyr how incredibly wet she was and that she wanted Ambyr to get down and lick her now. Ambyr gladly went under the thick black table cloth as her Mistress spread her sexy legs and lifted her tiny skirt some, as Ambyr got between her legs she smelled her Mistress’s sexy musky scent that she loved of so much and noticed that she had no panties on. Ambyr licked her Mistress’s thighs and felt Alexia’s hands pushing her head to her wet pussy, she started gratefully licking deeply and lovingly around her lips and pushed her tongue deep inside.Licking in time with the humping beat of the music, her Mistress’s hips grinding slowly on her face, she was gulping juice and licking faster. So after about 10 minutes of licking she felt Alexia’s orgasm coming, she put her mouth tightly over her hot hole and sucked thirstily. Alexia’s cum squirted out thickly as Ambyr gulped and swallowed it all so there would be nothing to clean up after; she would never let her Mistress be wet or sticky after she ate her. She finished swallowing the creamy cum down and licked everywhere between her legs before coming to sit back at the table, burning with happiness that she was allowed to pleasure her Mistress, wanting nothing more than that.They sat and watched the crowd dance and move about in the strobe lights and smoke in the club while drinking their drinks.Her Mistress got up and took Ambyr to the dance floor and held her close as they started dancing close and sexually. Alexia kissed Ambyr’s lips and licked inside her mouth tasting her cum on Ambyr’s tongue and mouth, she slid her hands down the small of her back to her tight ass, squeezing and rubbing as she ground her hips into Ambyr’s. Ambyr’s panty was completely drenched when suddenly she felt her cum squirt through the satiny material, she held her Mistress tightly and moaned into her ear as she came.Alexia smiled sensually and said what a good little Slut Ambyr was when she reached down and felt the juice running down her legs and on her stockings. After dancing together for awhile Alexia told Ambyr to go back to the table and wait for her, Ambyr went obediently and waited. Alexia then went out among the dancers and searched out a sexy looking guy to dance with; finding one she started grinding with him. All the while whispering and telling him about her and Ambyr and what she wanted him for, he was completely in control and wanted nothing more but to do anything for Alexia. Together they went back to the table and introduced James to Ambyr, sitting between them both James couldn’t believe his luck.After a few more drinks Alexia told Ambyr to go and suck James’s thick cock and gave her permission to swallow his cum this time, Ambyr gratefully got back under the table again and unzipped his black khaki pants reaching inside his silk boxers she found his cock. It was huge, almost 8 inches long and 2 inches wide; Ambyr smiled and licked his shaft and his balls as she felt his hands holding her head tightly fingers wrapping in her hair.She took the thick head in her mouth tasting his salty pre cum; she sucked up and down getting it sloppy and wet her saliva was dripping down to his balls as she sucked harder and faster, milking his lovely cock. Slurping and gulping, taking him down her throat as much as she could she felt his hips start moving knowing he was getting close to giving Ambyr her reward. Ambyr sucked harder while stroking with her hand, slurping sounds reaching her Mistress’s ears as Alexia licked and whispered naughtily into his ear holding him. Soon she felt his cock start pulsing, felt his hand on the back of her head push harder forcing his cock down her throat as his thick hot cum squirted out, filling her mouth with a salty taste.She swallowed and swallowed, milking his cock skillfully, loving the taste and thickness of his cum, she licked and sucked the last bit out while squeezing his cock then got back up and sat down at the table. Alexia leaned over and told her how good she was and that she was going to get to pleasure her Mistress more when they got home, Ambyr shivered thinking of how wonderful her Mistress was and how good it felt to be hers. They went back out to the dance floor when Nine-Inch Nails, Closer, played they both humped on his legs getting wetter by the second.Alexia put her hand in Ambyr’s panty and got her fingers wet and put them in James mouth, letting him taste her Sluts pussy, he savored it. While Ambyr was allowed to do the same to her Mistress, she was more excited than ever from tonight, knowing her panty was dripping with her juice and creamy cum her Mistress loved. After the song ended they all got in the car and drove home to Alexia’s house, and went straight to the bedroom, with Alexia’s huge double king size bed. Alexia told James to sit in the recliner next to bed while she played with Ambyr for awhile, as was the norm, he stripped down to his silken boxers and watched intensely.Ambyr was on her knees until her mistress told her to stand and take off her top, she did and Alexia undid her bra running her hands over her sweet tits and pinching her nipples till they were standing straight out. Then she had Ambyr unzip her skirt and get on the bed with her legs spread; Ambyr quickly got in position, knowing what was to come.Alexia crawled between her legs and smelled her sticky, juicy, cum drenched panty and smiled lovingly at Ambyr and sucked on them for awhile, then took them off and licked between her small lips spreading them with her tongue. She swirled her tongue around her hard little clit and sucked it inside her hot mouth, sucking and licking, tonguing deep inside her juicy tight hole. Pushing her tongue forcefully deeper gulping Ambyr’s sweet juice out, she licked down to her tight ass hole and pushed her tongue inside, licking and sucking on her hole.Ambyr was going crazy trying not to hump her Mistress to hard though, she started to cum and Alexia sucked it out of her squirting pussy, swallowing it thirstily, Ambyr held her Mistress head tight and pushed more of her creamy cum into her mouth. Alexia licked the last of her cum up and got up, kissing James and letting him taste Ambyr’s cum on her lips and face.He licked it clean and got on the bed with Ambyr, Alexia told Ambyr to get doggie style so James could fuck her tight little pussy. Ambyr quickly got in position and felt James’s huge cock push into her tight hole, she humped back against it and it sank in.He then grabbed her hips tightly and thrust quickly until it was balls deep inside, stretching her wide, Ambyr screamed out as he fucked her hard and fast pounding inside her tight wet hole. Her pussy was making slurping sounds as he fucked her, she felt the head pounding against the bottom of her pussy, it hurt but she took it because her Mistress told her to. Alexia brushed the hair out of Ambyr’s eyes and held her head while James rode her roughly, telling her she was doing so good and that she was making James happy also. Ambyr started moaning as she came squirting out around his thick cock, soaking his hips as they slapped against her sexy ass.James was about to cum when Alexia told him to pull out, he did with a pop and Alexia quickly sucked his cum soaked cock into her mouth while Ambyr watched. Ambyr watched her Mistress suck and slurp James’s cock hungrily as he held her head and came in her mouth. Ambyr watched as she swallowed it all, wishing she could taste it too but knowing that her Mistress wanted his thick cum.Alexia licked and squeezed the last drop out and kissed Ambyr’s lips telling her to start sucking his cock again, Ambyr quickly went down and sucked it in her mouth stroking and milking it for her Mistress. James was in heaven having just fucked Ambyr’s incredibly tight pussy and having the oh so sexy Alexia swallow his load and now Ambyr’s hungry mouth sucked him hard again. He relaxed as Ambyr sucked and slurped noisily on his throbbing cock, Ambyr sucked him down her throat till her face was buried in his soft pubic hair, then back up to the head and down again, over and over, gulping. He loved it and so did Alexia watching her little Slut suck his cock so good, her eyes burning with lust for Ambyr.Ambyr sucked him harder for about 10 more minutes, her jaw and throat were getting sore but she hoped her Mistress would let her swallow his cum again, it tasted so good. He moaned that he was going to cum and Alexia pulled Ambyr’s head off his cock and sucked him in her mouth, milking his cum again. Ambyr watched again and wished but knew her Mistress should have his cum anyway she should be happy that she got to swallow it once, she watched her Mistress’s throat swallowing and slurping his cum down till it was gone. Alexia lay back down on the bed and held Ambyr while James relaxed, his cock spent from all the sucking.Alexia told Ambyr that she was a good Slut tonight and not to be sad at all about not getting his cum. Ambyr just spun with love for her Mistress knowing that she would do anything for her anyway and never be mad at her for anything. Alexia felt a little sorry for taking all James’s cum so she told Ambyr that she could eat her pussy. Ambyr was thrilled she truly wanted Mistress Alexia’s cum more than anything, Alexia climbed over her face and rubbed her juicy pussy all over Ambyr’s face getting it all slick.She told Ambyr to stick her tongue out so she could hump it like a little cock, she did gladly, and Alexia humped Ambyr’s mouth harder moaning with pleasure. Ambyr loved the having her Mistress hump hard on her face, licking her sweet pussy deeply; Alexia’s little bush grinding on her nose. She humped harder and grabbed Ambyr’s hair tightly pulling her head deeper into her crotch, riding her Sluts mouth was so good, knowing that Ambyr loved every second of it. Oh yes Alexia felt her orgasm starting and ground her pussy into Ambyr’s sweet mouth, biting her lip, her thick creamy cum flowed into Ambyr’s mouth. She felt Ambyr swallowing and gulping under her as she humped roughly on her face, filling her mouth with her hot cum again and again. Alexia got off her and curled up with Ambyr lovingly licked her glistening face clean and whispered how much she loved her little Ambyr. Ambyr was overjoyed to be in her Mistress’s arms their bodies twining together in Alexia’s huge bed as sleep overcame them and they both dreamed sweet lovely dreams.THE ENDComments are very welcome. So please feel free to email me at..Thanks for reading.
For some who are not into certain “scenes”, I’ve re-written the story a bit and ask your indulgence–I’ve received a… I need to put my mind at ease, somehow, yet my current situation seems to prohibit any kind of mercy. I would dearly love to shout to the heavens or anyone who would listen that I am no longer under my own judgement, that it doesn’t seem like I will be enjoying the romantic side of high-school any time soon. No, I have been trapped in a hellish limbo, one that uses my own good will against me and horribly so. I can’t betray her, yet no one is stopping me! And she betrayed me, didn’t she?!Just read on I’m getting a little ahead of myself, I think. One thing allows me a grain of phantasmal freedom: the degree of anonymity that this web site allows me. No one knows me, nor do they know ‘her’ and so it’s safe to tell the truth. I can only hope that this serves as some kind of release I have nothing else. None of my friends can know, and certainly no one else. Even if you happen to know me, the names have naturally been changed, so there. I remember the days before I caught her innocent gaze in passing, when I was chasing after a junior named Laura. I was making good progress, too until she was seduced by some senior that I have never met. As a freshman, albeit a very successful one, I am still below the ‘upperclassmen’.So, after her, I was a bit frustrated. All my friends were agreeing with me that all I found was further annoyance every time I set my eyes on someone else. More and more seniors jumping in and shattering all of my fragile progress, and more and more bitches that simply thought I wasn’t good enough. I was almost ready to give it a rest and focus on other thingsUntil one day, when I got a call from an old friend who was still in the ‘lower school’. The lower school, a demeaning name given by my school to everyone under 9th grade, is in a separate wing, so I never got a glimpse of it, or anyone in it, since the beginning of the year. But, after I got a call from Luke, he reminded me of a CD I never returned to him. I thought, ‘Damn, he remembered’, and promised to cough it up tomorrow morning.That day, I rushed to the lower school before 1st period began. CD in hand, I rounded the corner, and nearly tripped over my own shock as soon as I did. Girls. What seemed to be tens of hundreds of girls, looking young and vibrant, lining the halls, giggling about tiny unmentionables in front of a relatively few number of guys. Of course, these few bastards were either standing there, pretending to be engrossed in something private or feigning conversation with a friend, actually keeping close eyes on the hotter girls nearby, or they were trying (too hard) to act all manly and grown, spouting out dry wit that fell short on underdeveloped minds.I slowed to a stunned walk, wondering how, and above all why, so many girls enrolled this year and this year alone! As I trudged through the fairly blown-up masses of kids, I waved absently to teachers that I had had before and looked around for Luke more than often, eyes stopping on a surprisingly developed set of breasts, or meeting the half-blank gaze of a fairly interesting young girl. One thing seemed constant: they were all obviously mature for their ages, and many of them seemed immediately interested in a high-schooler.I had to bite my tongue, simply to anchor myself to reality, as I kept my wits about me. I eventually found Luke, sitting outside a classroom, simply watching the crowd, and rushed to him.“Luke Luke, did it slip your mind on the phone that the whole California girl population decided to migrate to our school and only our school?” My exasperation must have begun to show, as a tall, young 8th grade girl brushed beside me. I heard her read off the standard ‘excuse me’ then stop dead. Her feet hit the ground as she had to catch her backpack; not because she had bumped into me that hard, but because she was surprised. Her eyes froze on mine, and her face went nearly blank; nearly, I say, because she carried a hint of interest.“No problem” I muttered, a slightly confused pair of eyes catching a covert glance at the beautiful, tight, dancer’s body before me. She wore a white T-shirt that stopped just below her bellybutton, and very tight, slightly bell-bottom jeans. The one word that came to mind was firm. Luke, always being fairly detached and cynical, only rolled his eyes. Though, I was a bit too distracted to notice. I glanced back to Luke as she gradually eased away, her very young and pouty lips lightly parted underneath sunglasses-covered eyes.“Isn’t it a touch more common for the guy to pursue you, Vick? You must be a bit off today.” Luke’s half-opened and obviously uncaring eyes met her half-surprised gaze instantly.“Oh, drop dead, Luke. I don’t need to hear it again.” She replied with spite that she didn’t seem capable of. Her face suddenly became rather cold and ridiculing, not to mention superior. Then, she was off without a backwards glance. I was still shaking it off when Luke took the CD from my hand with another remark.“Pay no mind, believe me she’s no one to get near.” Only now do I realize how right he was.“Huh? Oh why not? What was her name? Vick?” I was letting my mature-looking act turn to a decidedly lower-schooler look of anxiousness.“Victoria, and yes, she has a boyfriend.” As he stuffed the game CD into is backpack, I noticed a smile he was trying to hide.“and that’s somehow funny?”“Yes! I was her boyfriend once, Steve!” His grin had now turned into a big, chuckling smile.“Excuse me? Once? We’ve only been in school for 2 months, and how the hell did YOU manage that?”He shook his head. “Look, my friend that girl is the most intriguing girl in this school right now, I’ll admit but, believe me, she’s so intriguing because she’s so impossible! God knows what she’ll do or think next, and there’s no way any guy will get near her. The day she goes beyond a french kiss is the day I graduate college, if that. Believe me aim for someone else. They’re all dying for an experienced boyfriend, and I could always lend you a hand on the inside”“No, screw that, what about her? Who’s her boyfriend now?” I had already lost it. I was caught in her web, and I was enjoying it.“Are you listening to me? She’s on her 8th relationship so far, and that since two days ago! I guarantee, it has two weeks to go at the very most but, listen to me, she only holds frustration in store for any man.” He looked at me quite seriously as I stared back with sullen determination. “But, what the hell. She did seem to give you a rather interesting reaction perhaps you have a chance. You’ve grown up enough to tower over the competition. Good luck.”“I’ll need it, won’t I?” I was mostly mocking his cynicism. I didn’t buy any of this. She just seemed like a hard-to-get seductress nothing I couldn’t handle. God, how I want to shoot myself now.“No, you won’t. Remember? 8th boyfriend? You could reel her in given 4 days or so. less, if that reaction she gave you was genuine.” With that, the bell rang, and I lost him in the crowd. I caught one last glimpse of Victoria from afar she was truly awe-inspiring, looking young and untouched, yet firm, athletic and unbelievably sexy. I was determined to show her how the world worked, at any cost.At the end of the day, during the last period, I went to my performing arts elective. And, there she was, her small back perfectly arched as she sat on the radiator, leaning against the window, playing with a bracelet as she watched some other people. My heart skipped a giant beat. She was a dancer, obviously, and was now wearing a skin-tight, super-thin black leotard with matching dancing pants, simply to retain some shred of decency though it’s hard to say she needed it, she still looked so perfectly innocent and proper. Small, perfectly shaped breasts were fairly pronounced, with a small, skin-hugging necklace for the perfect accent. I quickly dropped my backpack, as if carrying out some demand, and began to walk up to her.She was alone, looking off in thought, as her eyes locked on me. I approached, swallowed, and spoke, hoping that I wouldn’t blow this she just looked too perfectly sexy.“We weren’t properly introduced in the hallway. My name’s Steve.” I put my hands in my pockets and tried to take a relaxed posture.“Victoria. Pleased to meet you and yes, our ‘introduction’ was kind of short, since that doofus Luke can’t keep his mouth closed.” She spoke with a quiet sense of detachment that would set any man off-kilter. She seemed so apathetic, it was almost cruel. Obviously, another guy going up and ‘getting to know her’ was as common as drawing breath.“Well, I’ve known him for awhile. What he says usually as some rationality in it.” I couldn’t hold back a grin as I sat down, roughly next to her.“Rationality?” She fastened two slightly narrowed eyes on me. “No, from what I see, he just likes to be a pest especially around me.” If I didn’t know better, I was sure of two things: she might not have been sure of the meaning of the word ‘rationality’, and she also sounded mildly hurt as she ended the sentence.“That’s too bad. Something happen between you two?” I decided it would be best to fake idiocy.“We were going out, once. It wasn’t serious, but he just got more and more annoying as it went on but forget all that. What about you, Steve?”“Me? Well, I just saw you in the hall and thought that” my voice trailed off. It entered my head that I might be able to get really truthful with her but not yet. Then, she surprised me.“You thought that I was hot, and that’s why you’re making smalltalk, right?” She sounded dead serious.“Um no, I was well” I could only shift between responses, trying to catch up with my thoughts.“Yes, of course. You just seem so smart and grown up and well” her eyes drifted down my body, then shot up to my face. “Tell you what if that’s what you’re thinking, it might be best to cut all the needless run-around out. For once, I’d like a guy that I didn’t have to play the social game with. Got it?”“Absolutely. I’m impressed, most girls are happy with their indecision.”“Not this one. Come on, the class is about to start.”“I spent the next few days at home in a daze, every once in a while stopping to call her and talk about the realities of her life though, as truthful as it got, something was always missing. It was a touch of emotion, or a trace of real feeling. It was all cold and meaningless to her. I was frightened, then, when she showed amusement.One day, in PA (performing arts), we were all watching a movie when, in the darkness of the room, she slid across the dance floor we were all sitting on and nimbly placed herself on my lap. I had to remind myself of the crowd surrounding us in order to keep my dick limp. She leaned back against me with a predatorial grin and settled her tight, firm ass directly onto my crotch. As always, she was wearing her ridiculously thin outfit, and so I could feel every contour, every crevice, every curve fitting around my crotch with grace. No one seemed to notice, and so, with a chuckle, she slowly slid her hands under her own thighs, to the sides of mine, then down to my knees then, back up the inside in one lithe movement. As it was impossible to resist further, my cock immediately began to swell, pressing up against her petite ass as she encouraged it. She let her hands rest, then bent back her head to rest it on my shoulder as she whispered.“Woah, stallion.”With that, she rolled off me and resumed watching the movie, an amused smile on her face. I wiped a bead of sweat from my forehead and wondered what had just happened.It only got worse from there. Although Luke noted how much time we spent together, she continued to seduce and entice me every chance she could get, and always in a new, mind-bending way. After awhile, I was her slobbering slave.Then, one night, we had a PA performance. Backstage, just before the show, she walked up to me with a sly smile, slowly straddled my lap as I sat in a folding chair, arched her back, and whispered into my ear.“Good luck.”She tilted her head, then kissed me deeply. No one was watching as her tongue nimbly darted around mine, shooting in and out of my mouth as her hands held the back of my head. She indulged herself for about 30 seconds, then broke, smiled, chuckled, and went back to the side of the stage just before the first number began.I was so stunned for the rest of the show that I nearly forgot my lines every single time I had one. She still smiled at me, and all I could think about was whether she had a boyfriend at the moment. Since I had heard from Luke, she was still as prude as ever to everyone else.Later on, after we had both finished all the scenes we were in, she shot me one last grin before darting outside. I followed her as she walked off into the night, then caught up with her just before she reached the outlying woods.“What are you trying to do, anyway? I thought you were careful about who you gave your body away to!”“So I am, Steve very careful. You should feel privileged.” She stopped and spun around as I walked right into her. She instantly threw her arms up and curled them around my shoulders, her head lowered with a wicked smile.“There’s only one guy I can be truthful with, and there’s only one guy who I can feel close to”I was speechless as I felt her knee press into the inside of my thigh. She arched her back firmly, pressing her small breasts into my chest almost forcefully. Her head began to near mine, slowly.“Take me, Steve. Please Show me what no one else can. Now.” Her voice was almost a desperate whisper as I gave in to her spell. I caught her lips with mine and kissed her passionately, a deep, furious tongue-lashing as I began to lower her down onto the grass, surrounded by the trees in the night. I hit one knee as she slid down onto the ground and held me tightly to her. Her arms slid around my torso and began to take off my unbuttoned overshirt as I concentrated on kissing her. She broke it to rip my shirt off me with a high-pitched groan, and I continued to kiss her neck unrelentingly.She smiled and moaned as she lay there, being held and kissed by me for a few minutes. She then tore off my T-shirt, running her hands over my chest and abs, down to my waist.“Ooh you must work out I like that.” She reached my belt buckle and undid it swiftly, yanking it off with a satisfying sound.“When I can hoping that a beautiful angel will fly into my arms, dressed as an evil seductress” I shut up once her hands spread their fingers, her palms pressed to my skin, and slid them down to my crotch. She giggled and rubbed her hands over my swelling cock as her smile faded. Her breathing quickly became heavier as her long, warm fingers gripped the length of my cock and began to pump it slowly. I threw one leg over the other side of her, now straddling her waist, as I struggled to get my pants off. She didn’t stop stroking me, and once she could see my cock, she gasped. It might not have been the size, just the erotic feeling of being so intimate with a guy for the first time. I pulled off my boxers with my pants and lowered myself onto her gently. She spread her legs and wrapped them around my abdomen as she kicked her dancing shoes off.Her breathing echoed through my mind as I kissed her again, her arms free to work herself out of her black leotard. Once the shoulder straps were off, she peeled it off herself. Then, once it was slid off of both legs, she pulled her tights off, leaving her in nothing but a pink satin bra and matching silk panties. Her body was as muscular as I had imagined, being perfectly shaped and rock-solid as she curled around me. After a short while of kissing, I slid down her body, stopping to kiss her breasts for a few seconds, before continuing my trip down her pulsing stomach. As I reached her crotch, I could hear her moan ‘Oh, yes” as I found her eyes intent on my head.“You’ve never been eaten out, have you?”“No, I’ve never gone beyond kissing please be gentle” Her voice was very quiet and moaning already, as my hands locked her thighs in a parted position. She let her arms fall above her head, leaving her in a perfect spread-eagle position. I slowly slid her panties across her pussy, to the side, as she let out a smiling moan of momentary contentment. My lips brushed against her young pussy, quickening her breathing and causing her midsection to pulse and shiver with anticipation as her hands slid up and down her forearms nervously. I tenderly kissed her small patch of light brown hair and slid my lips up and down her cunt, warming it with my breath as her shivering increased. Her breathing turned very heavy as she quietly pleaded for me to ‘give it to her’.I could see the anticipation building inside her as I began to press my lips to her pussy with greater force, every once on a while nearly slipping my upper lip through her exterior. I began to lick my lips, spreading some moisture over her own lips as I held my tongue back for the right moment. After a few more seconds of teasing her, her moaning became louder and louder as her cunt got wetter and wetter with both our juices. Her smell began to hit my nose, working its way through my head like a nerve gas. After a few more seconds, I was convinced that I could hold it no longer and licked the length of her pussy lips, from bottom to top, nearly brushing her clit. She let out a long yelp of pleasure as her body quaked furiously, before settling back down to a tremor. Her moaning got much louder, and I continued to flick my tongue out every few seconds, still kissing her exterior slowly.“Damnit Steve, stop doing this to meee” she moaned out as her face contorted with restraint. My licking increased, and I drew my tongue around the full length of her glistening slit many times in one motion. Her shivering and moaning mounted to a new height as I began to push into her, my hands locked around her thighs to keep her relatively still.My tongue finally pushed through, warmed by her heat and coated instantly with her sweet juices. She let out a long, deep grunt and threw her hands involuntarily to the back of my head, pushing my tongue deeper into her with fury. I tensed it up and flicked it up to her clit, my lips tending to the exterior and making sure that none of her juices escaped me. My tongue hooked its way around her clit, sucking and savoring it with force. Every breath of hers was a combination of a squeal and a moan, making an ‘Oooh’ sound whenever it was coherent at all. She rocked her hips back and forth, using her extreme agility to writhe under my mouth and twist her body with my tongue. Her whole face tensed with a moan as my tongue pushed farther into her, fighting her contracting pussy-muscles to probe deeper and deeper into her hot, wet slit. Her legs closed around my torso from behind, every muscle in her body tensing as her tone of voice slowly became louder and higher with each breath. I continued to suck her clit with all my might as my lips entwined around her, sucking up like a vacuum all she had to offer. After a few moments of this, her chest shot up as her head sprung back with a shrill scream of release, her heels digging into my back as every muscle in her furiously convulsed around me. Her pussy closed around my tongue with a vice-like grip as I still managed to massage her cunt, inside, outside, and all around her clit. She began to claw at the back of my head, her face and body tightening in the throes of her first orgasm. Her nectar flooded into my mouth like a torrent, spilling out onto her crotch and acting a further lubricant for my continued tongue-lashing. I swirled around her clit, pushing through into her pussy despite the resistance over and over again, until she was actually attempting to tell me to stop.As screams and high-pitched moans escaped her, she tried to plead with me to stop and allow her to rest, as sweat coated her body and matted her hair to her head. I eventually listened to her, bringing my mouth away from her quivering mound. Her breathing began to even out as her body dropped back to the ground, limp and slick with sweat. I placed her panties back on her, not doing much to hide her moisture and her scent.I rose to her side and lay down next to her, wrapping my arms around her in a loving hug. Her arms and legs were outstretched still as her chest heaved with gigantic gasps, her eyes still closed as her face remained blank. I held her close to me and kissed her neck until her beautiful green eyes opened, then met her gaze and kissed her slowly. She lapped up the remainder of her own juices inside my mouth as she curled her body around me. After we broke the kiss, she smiled and chuckled contentedly at me but still, there was a touch of emotion lacking, some part of her loving eyes that was missing.I ignored it, as always.“Was that satisfactory, Victoria?”“Ooh, yes, Steve I wish I had known sooner” she chuckled again and kissed me leisurely, her eyes half-opened and full of pleasure. Her hands slid back to my chest, then slowly ran downward.“But it mustn’t have been as good for you, my dear” She glanced between my eyes and my swelling member.“Oh, of course it-” I was cut off as she gripped my dick tightly.“I insist it wasn’t as good for you. Allow me to repay you”My racing thoughts finally began to slow as the moment swallowed them up. I lay on my side, naked, as she wiggled down my body, her hands skimming across my fairly muscular chest and abdomen. My hands leisurely combed through her long hair as her head reached my crotch and I began to feel her breath on my groin. My eyes closed partly as her hands slid onto my cock, quickly ordering it to swell and stretch toward her full lips. She slowly began to pump it with both hands, glancing up to me with a slight grin every few seconds to gauge my reaction. I was already in a half-daze, the smell of her pussy still surrounding my mouth and nose.Suddenly, just as my cock began to reach its maximum length, she speared it into her mouth. Her lips locked close to the base as it hit the back of her mouth, her tongue struggling around the head as a breath escaped her. I emitted a long groan as my hips began to pulse slightly toward her mouth, her warmth and her moisture overtaking me in a different way. She slid my cock in and out of her mouth, slowly at first, always flicking her tensed tongue around the head with skill beyond her years before slamming it back in with an animalistic groan.Her fingers curled around the very base of my cock, brushing against my balls ever so lightly. Her head began to turn to the side with each pump as it got faster and faster. My groans began to match hers as my whole body sank deeper and deeper into the throes of passion. Her free hand slid down to her young breasts, fondling them through the thin fabric of her bra before slipping underneath it. Then, once she craved more, her hand slid down to her pussy and began to work it once more. Her fingers pumped in and out of her, her thumb swirling around her clit as my cock grew still harder. She drew it out of her mouth for a second in order to kiss the length of it with her tongue and lips, before ramming it back into her waiting mouth.As she learned to focus more on the head, my hands locked around her hair as waves of pleasure began to ripple through my mind and body. Her mouth closed on my cock tightly, her tongue massaging every inch of it until I shot my first stream of cum into it with an animalistic grown. Her closed eyes tensed as she struggled to contain it all, her fingers still working her pussy feverishly. Her tongue continued to lap at all I could offer as my orgasm continued, her lips still tight around my cock. My groans slowly died down as she laved up the last of my cum, her breath still fast with an approaching orgasm.I summoned up the last of my momentary willpower and sat up, taking her in my arms from behind and reaching down to her pussy where her hand worked with abandon. My fingers joined hers and massaged her clit while digging into her pussy as far as they could without breaking her delicate and fragile virginity. Her hand finally released and shot up to my neck, both her hands gripping my shoulders as I cradled her in my lap. She moaned out another orgasm as her body writhed furiously in mine, her pussy gripping at my fingers and making small slurping sounds as they pulled in and out of her. I kissed her neck feverishly as she bent her head back, a small smile on her open mouth as her breath came heavily.The scene slowly calmed down as my cum-soaked hand slid up to lay gracefully on her breast, my lips finding hers yet again and twirling around her tongue. Once we had relaxed, she fell into my chest and arms and closed her eyes, a smile frozen on her face as if she was in a dream. Perhaps she was and her spell is so strong that, here I am, reliving our glorious encounter, forgetting the fact that she was only setting me up!“You were right satisfying one returns the favor.” She stretched her arms out like a cat, her bare ass resting on my semi-hard cock.“I tried to tell you” A smile emerged on my face. “But you just wouldn’t listen to me. Then you go and act on impulse, and where does it get you?”“Through the gates of heaven, that’s where.” Her eyes were still shut as she bent back to kiss my neck. And I thought we were done.“I’m glad I had you inside me, Steve.. but, I’m sure it can get even better, can’t it?”“I don’t really know, I’m still a virgin.”Her head twisted around to lock eyes with me. “You? Oh, yeah I forgot you were a freshman. It’s easy to lose all um ‘rationality’ in your arms.”I chuckled under my breath. “You’re great you’re just perfect.”“And so are you, Steve.” Our lips met as we kissed lightly.Again, a hint of emotion was missing. The exact same puzzle piece just wouldn’t fit.And I ignored it, as always.She settled into my lap with a sigh, taking a moment to rest, as I considered what she had just said. ‘It can get even better, can’t it?’ If I didn’t know better (which I didn’t), I could’ve sworn she just said she wanted to get fucked!“We have so much time together that damn show won’t be over for another hour.” It was true, the instructor was kind of a sadist at heart. “Shouldn’t we make the best of our time?” Her eyes met mine, leisurely narrowed, as she smiled meaningfully.And there’s the checkered flag! “Of course we should but, I must warn you, if we go on, it might hurt.”“Oh, I don’t give a shit, Steve.” She tossed her hair back as her hands slid down to my cock, gripping it again and pumping it only for the few needed seconds. It was quickly at attention, pressing up into her ass-crack. Her breathing slowly became heavier as she pressed my cock into her slit, slowly pressing the head into her tight hole. It soon began to slide in as her juices spread over the tip. I slowly took control and began to press it into her as she sat on my lap, her back to me as she bent her head back in pleasure, waiting for it to hit her. My cock slid in, inch by inch, until it pressed against her hymen. Immediately, she gasped loudly and gritted her teeth. I slowly added force as I felt it give way, and, as I did, her tightened jaw screamed with agony. Her voice became a screech, louder and louder, as it finally gave way and my cock plunged into her entirely. Her mouth flew open with a loud scream as my hands held her tightly, my lips trying to soothe her as she gripped at my bare skin furiously.After a short while, her screams became only heavy gasps as she held my cock tightly in her. Small trickles of blood seeped down into my pubic hair as her grip on my shoulders began to loosen. Her tightly closed eyes still told of her agony, and it almost tore me apart with her. Her whole body quaked with a mixture of pleasure, pain, and anxiety. My cock, however, remained hard as her muscles tightened around it, her juices washing away the blood.“Do it.” She whispered as her face began to relax again. I was on the verge of consoling her, but her animalistic cravings seemed to remain unstopped. I reached down to grasp her hips and lifted her up, her weight being surprisingly less than what I had expected. She slid up off my cock, almost entirely, as her pussy tightened up again, then let her drop back onto it with a sudden moan of agony and pleasure. Her muscles tightened again around me, and her hands gripped my shoulders with all her possible strength. Her back arched as her face quaked with emotions, my lips still kissing her neck soothingly. It stabbed at me to see her in such strain, but the pleasure washing through my own body gave rise to only a few simple thoughts. I lifted her up again, this time slowly placing her back down onto my cock with further care. This time, her mouth shaped a slight smile as a moan of pure ecstasy shook out from her throat. I continued the motion, this time pressing into her as she fell with slightly more speed. Her moans became louder, her pussy gripping my cock in perfect rhythm with my pumps. Her juices flowed down onto my thighs and balls, her body shaking in mine. I held her close, tightly, and reassuringly, kissing her neck with care, whispering how much I loved her.The motion continued until she was emitting a near-constant stream of squeals and moans, her mouth shaping a slight smile as she shook in my arms. Before I could begin to speak again“Shut up, Steve.”That took me off-guard. I continued to fuck her, this time quiet, wondering what that cold response meant. Her moaning continued as my cock rammed into her, now with more force, but it was obvious she wanted something else. Then, it hit me.“Fuck me, you little bitch.”She smiled wide and giggled between moans, that obviously scratching her itch. Per pussy gripped my cock with even greater strength, as if she was actually listening to me.“Take it, my young little slut. Milk my cock in your pussy until I let you stop. Ram it into you!” My voice slowly grew as her moans became higher squeals, a purely ecstatic smile gleaming through her. I became caught up in my own tirade, slamming her down onto my cock furiously and forcefully. Her tightly clenching pussy flowed with nectar as it made slight slurping sounds, her squeals beginning to shape words.“Oh, yes. Give it to me. Fuck me, don’t let me stop!” Her body bounced up and down in my lap until she made a movement that still shocks the hell out of me. With my cock still deep inside her, she shot her leg straight up and threw it around me, twirling around my cock until we were face to face. Her neck grew partially limp, her head tilting to the side and slightly down as her eyes remained closed. Her pouting lips were slightly parted, just like the first time I met her in the hallway. Short, gasping squeals escaped her as, with every few pumps, her mouth tightened into a smile, her teeth gritted as she arched her back. Her firm breasts, their nipples hard as the rest of her body, pressing into my sweaty chest as I lifted her up and pressed her down over and over again. Her legs curled around me until they dug into my ass, her knees pressing against my ribcage like that girl in Goldeneye! Sorry, but from my point of view now, they have so much in commonHer young and still innocent-looking eyes slowly shook open as they met mine.“Do you like this, bitch? Being speared on my rock-hard cock until you can’t possibly take any more? Having the shit fucked out of you until your mind is brimming with images and feelings of me!?” I challenged her as her face contorted with a combination of agonizing submission and pure ecstasy. Then, as I yelled out the last sentence, her eyes shot fully open and seemed to show a look of regret, or or something I still can’t place it, but it’s seared into my mind. For an instant, that missing piece of empathy was all I could see, shining from deep inside her. Her eyes looked at me with a half-confused expression of love, then sudden longing. I took the initiative and kissed her deeply, thrusting my tongue into her mouth as my lips suckled hers. After a short second of restraint, she lunged forth and kissed me with greater passion than I have ever been kissed. Her tongue swirled around mine with mind-shattering speed, probing deep into my mouth as her moans riveted themselves into my brain.She was still bouncing up and down on my cock, her lips locked onto mine, when she threw her head back and curled her eyebrows up in a rush of pleasure. I slammed my cock into her again and again, her hands clawing at my shoulders. Her juices flowed onto my cock and down onto my abdomen as her groin slammed down onto mine with almost painful force. Her small mound gripped my cock with such a strength that I had to strive with all my mig
The con moves towards the final stage,My world was turned upside down. Grandma and Grandpa were here for the week, and I had to stay at…
I took some free days at home after a boring business trip.On these some days, my loving wife was sent…
My daddy pees on me and I like it. Sometimes I even beg him to whip out his big dick and take a leak right on my face. How did I get this perverted, some people may wonder? Well, it all started last year when my father and I went on vacation to the Jersey shore. We shared a room because we didn’t have enough money for separate quarters. My being a well-developed 18 year-old blonde shouldn’t have been a problem. After all, he was my father and we had rented a suite with a bedroom. He would use that while I slept on a roll-away bed in the living room. We checked in and found to our surprise that the suite assigned to us had a heart-shaped bathtub right in the middle of the living room. I’d heard about these things from friends who went to the Poconos, but I’d never seen one. Little did I know how much trouble I would get into while luxuriating in it. The day after we arrived my father went for a walk down the boardwalk to the next town to check out a bar he’d heard about from a friend. I did some swimming and, to be honest, some trolling for cute lifeguards. One big hunk really made me pussy juice up. It was too bad that he already had a girlfriend. Frustrated and covered with salt water, I came back to the suite and decided to take a bath. I ran the water and stripped out of my bikini. In the mirror over the dresser I could see my foxy little body. My tits are real bouncy and many a man has drooled his saliva over my pencil-eraser nipples. So there I was, lying in the water and feeling real horny. I started massaging my clit, hoping for a big cum. That lifeguard’s little bathing suit had burned itself in my brain and I kept thinking about taking it off without using my hands. I was all worked up and ready to cum when suddenly my father walks out of the bedroom. He’d been there the whole time! There I am with my tongue hanging out and my hand splashing away at my cunt and my own father sees me. I could have died on the spot. “Sally!,” he shouted, “what the hell is going on here? What are you doing?” He sounded furious, which, considering I was only jerking off, seemed too severe a reaction. “I’m sorry. It’s just that . . .” How could I explain this? “It’s just that you’re a little slut,” he answered for me. “A whore. A fingerfucking cunt just like your mother.” He was livid as he dragged up memories of my mother, a cold bitch who abandoned us when I was five. I also realized that he was drunk and Daddy does not hold his liquor well on the rare occasions when he has a few. He kept screaming obscenities and insults at me. Could they hear us in the next room? This was so embarrassing! “I oughta take you over my lap. I oughta beat you black and blue. You little pig. Rubbing your cunt like that right in our room.” He stumbled toward me as he raved and ranted. I just stayed in the tub hoping that the soapy water covered my tits and pussy because I knew if he saw them he’d get even madder.sex picturesWhen he got up close to the tub Daddy did the most insane thing I’ve ever seen. He opened his fly and whipped out his cock and started peeing on me. “Stop, stop,” I screamed. “What are you doing?” His stream was going all over my face and hair, dripping down into the bath water. “A little jerk-off whore like you deserves to be peed on. Take this and like it.” He grabbed my head and pissed right onto my closed mouth. I couldn’t breath, so I had to open my lips for some air. A thick stream of urine blasted right in and I had to swallow it. To my amazement it was delicious, a saltytreat for my palate. I was instantly hooked. “More, more, piss on me some more,” I begged. He ran his endless stream over my face. I began masturbating furiously. Now all he yelled was encouragement. “Frig that clit. Com’n you little piss whore. Let me see you come. You wanna come, don’t you?” “Yes, yes, Daddy. Help me come.” I stood up in the tub. He was smart enough to aim his piss right at my cunt as I diddled my clit shamelessly for him. The warm urine went all over my hands and into my pussy, getting me off almost instantly. My hips bucked from the force of my orgasm and I had to sit back in the pissy water to avoid falling down. All his piss was out by now and I knew what he needed to cap this off. “Come here,” I ordered. He looked horrified at what he had done in his drunken rage, but he moved in close anyway. I took his prick in my hand and it got hard almost instantly. I pulled him close and began tounging his pissy penis. It was flavored by his delicious urine. Gobbling him down my well-practiced throat, I made him come in a minute. He must have been incredibly horny. I swallowed his love juice into my stomach where it mixed with his tangy piss. “Oh, baby, I’m so sorry,” he said, hugging me. I told him not to worry about it, that this was just the beginning of our piss life together. And it was.A p p r o p r i a t e A d u l t I s t h e I T V d r a m a b a s e d o n a t r u e s t o r y
There are laws, rules and morality in place to let a girl know and how to behave. The laws and rulings are laid down by men, and regardless of the restraints imposed, it’s about control, control of the female body, and her reproductive organs, her pleasure zones and thus, theirs.The Dutch religious sect that made a teenage daughter’s first bleed, a bath by her mother, and sent to her father’s bed, for her first sexual experience, was that bad in the eyes of whoever it was meant to offend, tell that to the man inside his daughter and enjoying that wondrous squeeze on his cock, his daughters tightness freely given with love and respect as he seeds her freely.All over the world females are used for sex, we all know and sense that, Kings of Britain have fucked girls as young as ten, and old men enjoyed our freshness and willingness of parents to curry favour by giving men access to their daughters bedrooms for money, even today, now as I write, in Thailand and the Philippines, young girls are being seeded, behind doors guarded by her parents, and all for a few ins and outs, as their old cocks are suctioned by her young pussy.As a girl myself, my world has been full of incidents of men wanting me for sex, from awakening at a family Summer party, in the early hours of the morning, with my uncles cock in my mouth and continuing to chew on it until my mouth was full of his cum, which I swallowed, to my dirty old grandfather who like those men I mentioned before, used to sneak into my bed and commit carnal knowledge with me, something my mother knew about, as she too had been subjected to the old mans 9″ cock thrusting, when she was just a wide eyed girl, granddad was a farmer and sex was a function, something my mother understood with four healthy brothers all growing up together and needing that moment of soft loving that only a mother or woman can provide.I am sure, as you read, many will have experienced similar, I just put these acts into words so others can see that the tabbooness is pointless, and if anything it adds to the poignancy of the act, I find my own orgasms are more powerful and deeply satisfying, and when you weigh it up, if you have to fuck, then just get out of it what you can, and throw yourself headlong into it, as I have done all my life.Read them all and tell me what ones you liked, indeed if you liked them all, there is no shame in that1.) A Girl’s First Love is her DaddySex is a powerful tool to wield against people, I know as I have been liberated by it, enriched by it, as a student I placed an old man’s hand on my bared breast, so he could feel my rigid nipple in his palm, that did the trick, way much better and far quicker than signing documents, I stayed at his place gratis free, providing I pleasured him whenever he needed my company, something that might have repulsed me, had my uncle and grandfather not taught me otherwise.youn girl sex storiesI was brought up by my father as a single parent. We were very close and I was a great comfort and solace when mother left.I married at 19 and left him alone as I moved away to another country, where my husband worked, and I got myself employment and we had a tremendous lifestyle of good weather and parties.As the years flew in, I suddenly realised one day I had not even spoken to him on the phone let alone go visit and spend time with him, and I felt very sad about that, as it had been nearly six years.My marriage was hitting a rough patch too, the lifestyle was starting to get boring and I felt we were just living for the day and not putting roots down, like my father had always suggested.Then one day I found out my husband had been sleeping with another local girl and for me that was the straw that broke the camels back, I packed up and went home, citing divorce proceedings, that was it, it was over and I went back home to daddy and my old room, where it all began for me.It had been almost five years since I last saw him, but when I did I felt like I had never been away and all the old feelings of security fell back into place, and as we hugged at the airport, his scent and aftershave, was the same, I was my daddy’s girl, even at 25, and more a woman than a little girl, I clung to him and he hugged me tightly, he had his girl back in his life and he was as excited as I was.Suddenly, back home there was no problems, I felt free and had nothing to worry myself about anymore, but more important I felt different, and I saw my father too, was different, I was really drawn to him, especially after the last six months of isolation and abstinence from both alcohol and sex, now I felt free and I could laugh like old, and that first night we went out for Pizza, then onto daddy’s local pub, where his older friends fussed over me, and complimented me and made me feel special.We were too drunk to drive home so we called a taxi, and we got in for the twenty minute drive home. I was completely out of it because of jet lag, and boozing, I remember slipping away hearing my father tell the driver I had just came home that morning.We got into the house and I crashed on the couch. Daddy tried to get me to bed but I was so comfortable I told him I wanted to sleep on it tonight.He went away and came back with my duvet, and started to undress me, “What are you doing daddy”, I remember fussing?“You cant sleep in your clothes”, he replied so I tried to help as he undid buttons and zippers and then I felt the duvet covering me and daddy bending over me and giving me a big goodnight kiss on my mouth.I kissed him back and it felt nice, “I love you”, I told him, and we kissed again, then I pushed myself back against the couch and I asked him to sleep with me on the couch, I wanted to hug him perhaps, even more than than that, I felt starved of affection and sexual love, I wanted to feel a mans body against my own, so I kept repeating myself, “Sleep with me daddy, just until I fall asleep”. That seemed to do the trick, as he got up and turned off the lights and got in beside me, and as he cuddled up, I felt his erection press against my stomach, as we jostled i the limited space.“You’re naked daddy”, I giggled, and he retorted, “so are you daughter”, by now we were crushing against each other and I felt a rising desire that had been missing for such a long time, and I raised my leg to go over his and as I did so, I felt his penis push against my vagina, and a wave of burgeoning desire swept over me, and I groaned, “Oh daddy”, as I heaved myself on top and he just went in deeply, all the way in and my body just did the rest as we fucked, I could not stop, nor did I want to.2.) The Dominant Boss at the OfficeWhen I went for the interview, I prayed he would be a horn-dog, wanting to hire me for sex. I knew I had it all, great tits and a peachy bum, I was tall and sporty, with a crowning mane of blond locks, thanks to my Scandinavian heritage and green eyes, with Celtic blood.I sat indecently for a sophisticated woman, I deliberately showed more than a woman should, but I wanted the job, even if it meant going down on him, I needed the money.His questions were more what I could do for him at a personal level, was I willing to travel and stay in hotels, of course I would, and my knees would part a little more.I got the job and the security of harassment laws, that protected me from his assumed gains during the interview. I was an experienced woman, and I enjoyed my sex, I even had a small lipstick vibrator in my handbag and I admit to using it when I felt the urge, which was often, and daringly, when sitting opposite the same man, with only my panties keeping it safe from falling out. Yes I was that sort of woman.My boss did want me, he told me in so many words, and I had that power over him, especially after seeing his wife, why would a man like him not want to fuck every orifice in my body, we both knew it, and I teased him with it, on the only journey we ever undertook, I masturbated myself knowing he was listening in his room next to mine, I had noted his bed was along the same wall, and even quipped, looks like we are sleeping together with a wall between us.sexI could hear his breathing, and he could hear my moans and the sounds of my vibrator working itself in and out of my sloppy wet pussy. Over breakfast the next morning he remarked it sounded like I was enjoying myself, “I was”, I retorted, “girls do masturbate too”, I added, just so he knew I heard him jacking off.I never used the laws in place to report his sexist views, or intimidating behaviour, I was simply not that type of weak scared girl, I gave as good as I got, and I got good bonuses and favours in return for being dirty and sluttish, we always took it to the edge and I could see his bulge in his pants, I loved being desired sexually and even more, I loved dominating my boss by being overtly sexual when alone with him, that is until the Christmas office party, where he turned the tables, that was five years back, and I have been paying the price ever since.I had been in his employ for close to eighteen months, and was his personal secretary, the tall leggy blond that only wore stockings, that were slutty netted, with huge diamonds, stockings he bought from women’s catalogues and paid me to put on, as he watched through his keyhole, I entertained his little kink every morning and enjoyed the envelope stashed with cash paid weekly, no questions asked, for ten minutes of my working day, and countless dictates sitting with my legs open, knowing he had his cock out behind his desk getting off on my visual beauty.The Christmas bash was an all out affair, with great buffet and champagne, and office flirtations coming to a head, over darkened office desks, as some people fucked with gay abandon, and released that pent up frustration that builds throughout the year and is released with the party pill popping and free booze.It all started when I took my husband down to the copy room where we caught an intern, Sandra, sitting on the copier, scanning her naked ass. What she never bargained for was her tiny tight pussy was also sitting snugly between her cute butt cheeks, we almost saw what she had eaten for breakfast.Sandra was pissed out of her skull and as we helped her down from the xerox machine, her cute little panties fell down to her slim ankles, as she flung her arms around my husbands neck, I saw my husband admire Sandra’s bum and pussy, and fold it into his pocket.“Well it’s my turn”, I said, and eased my skirt up, and pulled my own panties down and sat on the plate glass, and thus, my ass and cunt were streaming out and landing atop of Sandra’s, “Now you have us both to admire”, I said, noting my husband was stroking Sandra’s bare ass, under her short dress.I climbed down and left my knickers alongside Sandra’s on the copy room floor, “Follow me”, I said as we dragged Sandra into the elevator and up to my office floor, and into my office.I left my husband holding her limp body and sat down on my desk chair, “You do her the honers, and I shall watch”, and I took out my vibrator and watched my husband and my work colleague Sandra, fuck each other on my carpet, and eventually, I got up, went over, and joined in.After the holiday break, I went into the office to find my boss sitting there beaming, with his cock out and stroking himself so openly. “I have been waiting for you”, he said somewhat triumphantly, and he spun his computer monitor around so I could see what he was jacking off to, it was me, my husband and Sandra on my office floor. I had forgotten all about the office security cams.I went blank, lost for words, everything crashed, and as I watched him he beckoned me over to his chair, where I dropped to my knees, and for the first time, took him in my mouth until he cummed.Everything changed, he watched me dress in the morning and than fucked me over my desk, Sandra was invited to join us and together we explored everything sexually conceivable between women and Sandra fell pregnant, but even here he never relented, fucking her until his baby was born with a black eye and his demand for my own pregnancy, but I told him I could not medically conceive, so in the end, even here I lost out to the fertile Sandra, her pregnancies led to them getting married eventually and my being released from my job after seven years.Thousands of free fucks he had had from me, and never once did my husband question me if my boss ever did have me, of course he never knew of the blackmail he had over me, or Sandra, life went on and we just did our best.Many years later, we read of his passing and the fact he left a wife, Sandra and six c***dren, boy did he fuck her, but she was setup for life, and I often wondered about her first born, after all, my husband was in there first. Pete had been friends with Steve since he had first graduated from college and gotten his first job. He remembered…
“Harder… Harder,” Mary whispered in my ear. I responded by driving my steel hard cock deeper into her soaking wet cunt. Mary was straddling my hips, her short red skirt pulled up over her firm ass cheeks. A pair of silk panties laid on the floor next to the couch where we were hurriedly making love. She was whispering so she would not alert her two daughters, who were supposed to be taking a bath. The only sound was our hard breathing and an occasional slap of flesh as I buried my self deep into her. I could feel the cum begin to rise up from my balls, and propel itself deep into her golden-haired vagina. She buried her face into my shoulder as an orgasm swept through her body, her pubic muscles milking the jism from my cock. As her spasms subsided, we kissed passionately, our tongues fighting with each other. Mary slowly raised herself off of my now limp cock. Her small, firm breasts, the quarter sized nipples still hard and covered with my saliva, stuck through her unbuttoned blouse. Although she will turn forty later this year, her body was still as firm as any eighteen year old. “Thanks,” she said, “I really did need that.” “Now hurry and get cleaned up so we can get back over to Mom and Dad’s house.” I stood up and slipped off to the bathroom, holding my pants up with my hand so I wouldn’t get any of our juices on them. Jill and Jeri, Mary’s seven year old twins had gotten into Dad’s garden at our parent’s house and gotten filthy. We were in the middle of a family reunion and Mary had asked if I wanted to come along while she ran them home to get a quick bath and change clothes. As soon as the two girls were safely in the tub, we had jumped each other, not even bothering to take off our clothes as we passionately made love. Our love affair has been going on for almost thirty years now. Even though I live up north and only make it home about once a year, we always find a chance to renew the passion we have known since we were xxx. We both are married and have our own families, but our spouse’s will never have the special bond and passion that flows between my sister and I. ******* ******* ******* Chapter One Our story began twenty nine years ago in the summer of 1967. I was twelve years old and Mary had just turned eleven. We were born only months apart and had always been good friends and playmates. We lived in a mid-sized industrial city in the upper south. Although we lived in a suburban area, none of the xxx who lived real close to us were our age. We had been born at the end of the baby boom, and most of the neighbor’s xxx were in high school and starting college. Our father was an engineer at the big industrial plant in town, and our mother stayed at home with us. We lived in a modest split level house. Our bedrooms shared a common bath at the end of the hall.. Our little brother David was born in the spring of 1967. Our parents had sat us down and explained where babies come from soon after Mom found out she was pregnant. One day soon after school was out for the summer, Mary and I were playing in the tree house that Dad had built for us. It was built in a large oak tree near the back corner of our property. The tree house was about six feet square with a roof and windows on each side. We had taken old blankets and pillows we had found in the basement up to it so it was very comfortable. Mary had to go inside to use the bathroom, but quickly came running back to the tree house. “Come on,” she said, “You have to see this.” I followed her to the back door of the house. She put her finger to her lips and motioned me to be quiet. We eased open the back door and slid into the house. Mary and I tip-toed across the kitchen floor to the top of the stairs. We could see down into the den through the railing. Our house did not have air conditioning, so it was very warm inside. I guess it was because of the heat and the fact that we had been playing outside that Mom had taken off her blouse and bra, and was nursing David topless. Before this, she had always been very careful to go into the nursery and close the door before nursing him. Although I had seen plenty of pictures, I had never seen a grown woman’s breasts in real life. My mother was a very petite woman, but her breasts seemed huge. They were capped by nipples that must have been two inches across. As we watched, Mom shifted the baby from one breast to the other. The nipple that he had been sucking at was hard and stuck out about a half inch. I could feel my dick rising in my shorts as we watched. After watching this for a couple of minutes, Mary touched me on the shoulder and motioned for us to leave. We slipped back out the door and ran across the backyard toward the tree house. As we climbed the ladder, I looked up and caught a glimpse of Mary’s white panties up the leg of her shorts. Mary sat down on one of the pillows, and I laid face down next to her on a blanket, trying to hide the bulge in my shorts. “Did you see her boobies?” Mary said. “I hope mine get that big someday.” This surprised me because Mary had never said anything of a sexual nature to me before. Even though we shared a bathroom, I had not seen Mary naked since we were 3 or 4 years old and still took baths together. She always locked the door on my side of the bathroom whenever she was in it. We had never played “doctor” or anything else. Over the last year I had tried to get a peek at her as she dressed, but had not had any luck. As we talked about what we had seen, my hard-on continued to throb. I desperately needed to jack off. I was hoping that Mary would go the house to pee as she was originally going to, but she continued to talk about seeing Mom nurse the baby. Mary moved down and laid down on the blanket next to me. “I wonder what it feels like?” Mary asked. “She looked like she was enjoying it,” I replied, “It almost looked like she was asleep.” Mary closed her eyes and reached up and rubbed her hand over the small bump in her T-shirt where her breasts had just began to swell. My cock was rock hard, and straining to get out of my underwear. I reached down and rubbed it, the sensations jolting through my body. I reached up the leg of my shorts and pulled it out of the restraints of my underwear, hoping to ease some of the pressure. As I pulled it free of my briefs, I could hold back no more as thin streams of almost clear cum began to erupt from the head, spattering on Mary’s legs. Mary quickly sat up and looked down at her legs. My hard cock was still in my hand, and a thin stream of cum spit out of the head and landed on her leg. She pushed me back and scrambled out of the way. “You peed on me!” she yelped, ” I’m telling Mom!” I grabbed her and pulled her back down on the pillow. “I didn’t pee on you,” I said. “That’s what happens when a boy gets excited.”sex fantasy taboo storiesMy hard-on was still hanging out of the leg of my shorts, and a drop of cum still hung on the bright red head. “I couldn’t help it,” I continued, “It just happened.” Mary was staring in fascination at my hard cock. “Your thing is all big and red,” she said after a few moments. “That’s what happens when I get excited,” I repeated. “What made you excited?” she asked. “Seeing Mom’s titties,” I replied, “I’ve never seen real ones before.” Mary looked at me questionably so I went on. “Remember when Mom and Dad told us about where babies come from.” Mary nodded. “Well when a boy sees a girl’s titties, his dick gets all hard and excited.” “His dick?” she asked. “That’s what you call a boy’s thing,” I answered. By this time mine had wilted and disappeared back up the leg of my shorts. “Then the boy puts his dick in the girl’s pussy..” “Pussy?” she asked. “Your pee hole…” and then he shoots his stuff in her to make her have a baby.” “I don’t believe you,” Mary said, “That thing wouldn’t go into my pee hole, it’s too big.” “Yes it will,” I replied, “I’ve got pictures to prove it.” “Where?” Our conversation was suddenly broken up by Mom calling us in for lunch. We left the topic hanging as we ran inside. Mom had put her blouse and bra back on, but I could see a small wet spot where one of her breasts was leaking. Mom announced that we were going to the community pool that afternoon, so I didn’t have a chance to prove anything to Mary. Chapter Two The next afternoon, Mary and I were back in the tree house. I had brought with me my favorite jack off pictures. They consisted of three old black and white pages from a porno magazine that one of my friends had swiped from his brother. They showed various pictures of a big titted blond woman fucking and sucking a guy. One picture even showed him stuffing his cock up her ass. I kept these pictures hidden in the cutout pages of an old book in my bedroom. “See…I told you that’s what happens,” I said proudly. I pulled the pictures from my pocket and carefully spread them out on the floor of the tree house. Mary looked at them with amazement in her eyes, slowly turning them over and looking at all of them. “I still don’t see how you can get your thing inside a girl’s pee hole,” she said. As we looked at the pictures, I could feel my dick start to harden inside my shorts. As I reached down to adjust it, Mary noticed and asked, “is your thing getting all big again?” I nodded yes and quickly pulled my hand out of my shorts in embarrassment. “Can I see it?” she asked. I was shocked to hear that, but I slowly pulled my shorts and underwear down over my hips. My hard-on sprung back up against my belly. Mary gasped but could not take her eyes off of it. She slowly reached out her hand and touched it with a finger. A drop of pre-cum appeared on the blood engorged head. “Use your whole hand,” I said, and reached down and wrapped her fingers around my five inch erection. “Not too tight,” I said as she squeezed a little too hard. I showed her how to move her hand up and down. “This is how you make a guy cum,” I said. “Cum?” she asked quizedly. “Like yesterday when you thought I was peeing.” “Oh, you mean when that stuff comes out of your…..dick?” she asked haltingly. “Yeah, that’s what Mom and Dad were talking about when they told us about the sperm and egg stuff,” I replied. Mary continued to stroke up and down on my rock hard cock. “Don’t stop, I’m going to cum!” I moaned as the sperm rose up from my balls and began to erupt from the slit in my cockhead. Mary just stared as spurt after spurt of the clearish liquid spewed from my cock and dribbled down her hand. Her hand never stopped moving up and down, milking the cum from my dick. It was the first orgasm I had ever had that had not been courtesy of my own right hand, and it had been very intense. Mary finally let go of my shrinking cock and wiped her hand on one of the blankets that lay on the floor of the tree house. I was sitting on one of the pillows with my shorts and underwear around my ankles. “Now you have to show me your pee hole,” I said. “Mom said I shouldn’t ever show it to anybody,” Mary complained. “Well she said I shouldn’t ever show anybody my thing,” I replied, “but I showed it to you.” Mary thought about this a second, then reluctantly got to her knees. She unsnapped and unzipped her pink shorts and slid them down her legs. I can still remember the white cotton panties she wore underneath. A small spot of moisture had soaked through at the junction of her slim thighs. “The panties too,” I demanded. She hooked her thumbs into the sides of the white cotton and pushed them down to her knees. By this time I had shaken my shorts off my legs and was sitting in just a T-shirt. Mary sat back down, and I reached over and pulled her shorts and panties off. She was shyly keeping her legs together, but I put my hands between her knees and spread her legs apart. Her hairless slit was puffy and pink. I scooted up closer to her and ran my hand up her thigh. I was finally going to get to touch a real live girl’s vagina. Mary recoiled a little but let me have my way. I ran a finger up the length of the small slit, feeling the heat and a slight wetness. Mary’s thighs seemed to part a little more. I put some pressure on my finger and the pink lips of her pussy opened up. My finger slid to the bottom of the slit, and barely entered the small opening. I did not even get up to the first knuckle before I met resistance. Mary let out a little moan, and my finger seemed to get a little wetter. Using my other hand, I spread the lips of her cunny more so I could get a better look. I noticed for the first time the small pink bump at the top of her slit. I also notice a few blond hairs that had sprouted just above the slit. I moved my thumb up and nudged the pink bump, causing Mary to flinch and moan audibly. “Do that again,” she said through clenched teeth. I dipped my finger into the moist hole to lubricate it, then began to slowly massage the flesh around the bump. Mary began to shiver and twist as I massaged her tiny clit. I continued to rub the bump, occasionally dipping my finger down to her vaginal opening to gather more moisture. Her juices were now running down the crack of her ass and making a spot on the blanket under her. After about two minutes of this , Mary arched her back and moaned loudly. “Ohhh…Ohhh….OHHHHHHHH!” she gasped and pushed my hand away from her. I sat back and watched as she squirmed on the blanket for a moment, her thighs tightly clenched together. Mary laid there for at least five minutes, her thighs slowly parting and her legs relaxing as she recovered from her first orgasm. Her hands had moved up and she was rubbing her small breasts, or at least the nipples, which were standing out hard against her T-shirt. As I laid down next to her, she rolled over and put her arms around me and hugged me close. My hard again pecker slid right between her thighs, and I could feel the wetness and heat as it settled in her slit. We ground out hips together, and I could feel my head of my cock slip into the tiny opening of her pussy. We laid there for a minute as I gently tried to push my cock just a little deeper into her opening. “MARY,” my mother yelled from the back door, “TIME FOR YOUR PIANO LESSON!” We quickly rolled apart and grabbed at our pants and underwear. I think Mary set a record for getting dressed. Luckily, we had never taken off our shoes and socks. Mary quickly climbed down from the tree house and headed for the house. I reached down and picked up the pictures that were still laying on the floor. I pushed my shorts back down off my hips and grabbed my hard cock in my right hand and stroked it until I came again. For the first time in my life, I was thinking of something other than those pictures as the sperm erupted from the slit in my cockhead. After wiping myself off on one of the blankets, I pulled my shorts back up and headed for the house. Chapter Three Two weeks passed until we had a chance to meet again in the tree house. Mary had spent a week at church camp, and the following week I had taken my turn at the camp. Since I was the only one at the camp from my area, I was able to brag that I had touched a girl’s pussy. I just didn’t tell anyone that it was my little sister’s. I was the stud of the camp, and had even gotten one of the girls to go the lake with me for some making out. Daphne had let me tongue kiss her and even let me feel her small breasts through her blouse and bra. But when I had tried to unbutton her blouse to get inside she stopped me and told me she wasn’t that kind of girl. On the night I got home, I was taking a shower in our shared bathroom when the door quietly opened and Mary peeked in. “I’ve got something to show you,” she said, “but it will have to wait until tomorrow.” I was standing in the shower after cutting off the water, and Mary was looking at my shriveled cock. The memories of our last encounter in the tree house flooded back into my mind and my dick began to grow. We heard a knock on my door, so Mary quickly jumped back into her room and closed the door. Mom walked in bringing some clean clothes. I quickly shut the door to the bathroom so she wouldn’t see my hard-on. Just after lunch the next afternoon, Mary and I headed for the tree house. Mom was putting David down for a nap, and told us to play quietly so we wouldn’t wake him. As Mary climbed the ladder above me, I looked as usual to see if I could see her panties up the leg of her shorts. I saw a quick flash of pink cotton just before she scurried into the door of the tree house. As I climbed in the door, Mary was pulling the blankets and pillows out of their box and spreading them on the floor. As I sat down on a blanket, Mary unzipped one of the pillow covers and pulled out two thin paperback books that she had hidden inside. “Kimmy found these in a trash can at camp,” she said excitedly as she handed them to me. The Wedding Night was the title of the first one. It was a slim book with a white cover. I opened it and looked at a picture of a woman in a long white gown. “It’s all about sex and stuff,” Mary said. As I flipped through the pages, I paused to read occasionally. The book described how a “modern woman” should react on her wedding night. “Your first session of intercourse may be painful, as the hymen must be torn before your husband’s penis can be fully inserted into your vagina,” read one passage. “A small amount of blood may appear as the hymen is broken.” It went on to describe the entire sexual act. “Did you read this?’ I asked as I flipped through the pages. ‘Yeah, Kimmy and I read it at camp and she let me keep it.” Kimmy was our cousin who lived across town. She was the same age as Mary. “It sounds kinda scary,” she said, “but it says it’s all natural and you should learn to enjoy it.” I set that book down and picked up the other one. There was a picture of a girl in a nurse’s uniform on the front. Her top was unbuttoned and her large breasts were spilling out of her bra. Night Nurses was the title. I recognized this as a “fuck” book. I opened it up and began to read. “Gwen tensed as Doctor Bob ran his hand under her skirt and up to her soft ass cheeks,” I read aloud, “His finger slipped under her panties and found the wet furrow of her soaking pussy.”amateur porn real sex storiesI could feel my dick harden as I read a few more lines. “Gwen dropped to her knees and began to loosen the drawstring of Doctor Bob’s surgical pants,” I continued, ” She pulled his scrubs over his hips, revealing his massive nine inch hard cock. She began to kiss and lick the purple head, pausing occasionally to take the length of it into her mouth and down her throat.” By this time, my own swollen cock had formed a tent pole in my shorts. “You’re all hard again,” she said as she stared at my crotch. She leaned over and put her hand on my hard pole. She looked at me and asked, “Can I make you spit again?” “The word is cum,” I said. I quickly pushed down my shorts and underwear as Mary grabbed on to my five inch hard-on. I laid back on the blanket as Mary stroked up and down, using some of the pre-cum that appeared on my cockhead as lubricant. I could feel the sperm start to boil in my balls as she jacked me off. “Hold on a second,” I said, putting my hand out to stop her. I slid my hand up the leg of her shorts to her panties. “You’re all wet too,” I said. “It feels all tingly down there,” she said. I reached over and pulled her shorts down off her hips. Mary sat down and pulled her shorts and panties off. I also started pulling her T-shirt over her blond head. “I want to see what your titties look like,” I explained. Her pink nipples were the size of quarters, topping mounds that had begun to swell just a little. The middle of her nipples were the size of a pencil and were sticking out. I reached up and touched one of them, and it swelled and hardened under my touch. “Take your shirt off too,” Mary said. I complied, pulling my tank top over my head. We were now both naked except for our sneakers and socks. (Several years later we talked about how we always left our shoes and socks on in case Mom called.) Mary laid down beside me, and we began to explore each other’s body. I was fascinated by her nipples, which had hardened into pencil size nubs about a quarter-inch long. I bent down and tentatively stuck out my tongue and began to lick at one, as I had seen in my porno pictures. I gently took it into my mouth and began to suck on it, much like I had seen my little brother nursing at my mother’s breast. The tiny pink bud seemed to stretch another quarter-inch before I switched to the other nipple. Mary’s hand pulled me against her chest as I licked and sucked at her nipples until they had turned a dark red color. My free hand was moving up and down Mary’s back until I finally settled it on her firm rear end. My hand slid down the crack of her ass until I found her wet pussy slit. Having no real idea about female anatomy, I began to rub the area around this wetness. I didn’t realize that what I was actually rubbing was the tight opening to her ass where her juices had run down. She was squirming and letting out small moans as I tried to force my finger into what I thought was her pussy. I was beginning to wonder how a man could get his dick into such a tight opening when her sphincter eased up and my finger slid into the tight rosebud. Mary gasped, “That’s my pooh hole,” as my finger slid all the way in. I quickly pulled my finger out in horror and began to wipe it on one of the blankets. “It’s OK,” she said, “It really felt strange, but good.” “Will you do it again?” I moved my hand back down to her ass and began to probe at the tight hole again with my finger. The muscle eased and my finger slid back into her ass, which was slick with her pussy juices. Mary squirmed and bucked up against me as my finger probed deeper into tight rosebud. As she pushed against me, I felt my steel hard cock begin to slide between her lips of her hairless cunny. Just as I thought I might slip into her tight, wet pussy, Mary reached down and began to pull on my cock. It only took a few seconds, and I was spurting my cum all over her belly and cunt. I sucked hard at one of Mary’s nipples and pushed my finger as deep as it would go into her ass, squirming it around as I pushed. Mary kind of collapsed against me as I rolled onto my back. We laid there for a minute, my finger still buried in her tight butthole. I slowly started to ease it out, and Mary gave a small gasp as it finally popped out. “That felt really good,” Mary said. We rolled apart, and both looked down at our laps. Streaks of cum covered our bellies. My dick had softened and shrunk, but Mary’s pubic mound was still red and wet. I slid my hand down and began to rub her bump, which was still moist with her juices. In about a minute, she began to squirm, and soon she arched her back and moaned as an orgasm swept through her tiny body. We laid on the blankets for several minutes, my arm around her shoulders and her head laying on my chest. I was softly stoking her still hard nipples with my fingers. After a few minutes, Mary asked what time it was. I looked at my watch and realized that David would soon be up from his nap and Mom would be looking for us. Mary wiped her belly off as best she could with one of the blankets, and we hurriedly got dressed. Chapter Four That night, after dinner, I helped Dad mow the yard, while Mary was busy with Mom in the kitchen. After we had finished our chores, we all settled down in the den to watch TV. Since it was summer, our parents let us stay up until 10:00. After watching a couple of sitcoms, a movie came on that Mom & Dad wanted to watch. It turned out to be a love story, so Mary and I were pretty bored. I was laying on the floor reading a book, and Mary was sitting in the recliner reading one of her “teen” magazines. Mom and Dad were sitting together on the couch. Occasionally when I would look over at Mary, I would notice that her hand seemed to be rubbing at the crotch of her shorts. At 10:00, Mom sent us off the bed. I continued to read my book until I saw the light in the bathroom go off. After a few minutes, I got up and put on my pajamas and went into the bathroom to pee. I thought I heard a faint moaning from Mary’s room, so I switched off the light and cracked open the door to her room. I could see in the light from a streetlight outside that Mary was rubbing her cunny. I watched for a couple of minutes, then she began to rub real fast. She arched her back and let out a low moan as she came. My own dick was rock hard by this time. I gently closed the door and eased back into my own room. Pushing my pajamas down, I started to jack off, thinking about Mary and her bald pussy. I knew that one day soon I would be able to get inside her and fuck a girl for real. As the jism began to spurt from my cock, I thought I noticed the door to the bathroom close. Mary had been peeking just like I had been! I got some tissues and wiped the cum from my chest and stomach. I continued to lay there, thinking about Mary. After a little while I heard Mom and Dad come up the stairs to get ready for bed. The door to my room opened and Mom looked in. I quickly shut my eyes and pretended to be asleep. The door closed and I heard her look into Mary’s room also. I laid there for another fifteen or twenty minutes when I heard my Dad moan. Since the baby had been born, they were leaving their bedroom door open so they could hear when he woke up. I got up and went to my door, quietly opening it an inch or two. I heard another low moan. Very quietly, I opened the door and slid out into the hallway. A dim light from the nightlight in David’s room illuminated the hall. The door to my parent’s room was open about a foot. I crawled down the hall until I could see into the room. I almost gasped in shock when I looked in. The light from their bathroom partially lit the room. I could see Mom laying naked on the bed. Dad was laying between her open legs licking at her pussy! As he lifted his head from her crotch, I could see that Mom’s pussy was covered with a thick mat of dark hair. Dad wrapped one arm around her leg, and using his hand opened up her pussy lips. His head dipped back down and he began to flick at her with his tongue. Mom was squirming around on the bed and trying to be quiet. Dad’s other hand moved up her body and he began to massage her milk-swollen tits. “Careful,” I heard mom say, “They’re kinda sore from nursing.” Dad rolled her tit around with the palm of his hand. Her nipples were hard and stuck out about and inch. He slowly began to kiss his way up her body until he reached her swollen globes. He took her right nipple into his mouth and began to suck! I could see that his hand was now in Mom’s lap. He slowly inserted a finger into her pussy and began to pump it in and out. This continued for a minute as Dad nursed at her breasts, first the right, then the left. Soon, Mom pushed Dad off of her and onto his back. His hard-on was sticking straight up in the air. Her hand went down and wrapped around it and she began to slowly stroke up and down the way Mary had done to me that afternoon. She then bent her head down and took the end of his hard cock into her mouth! My hand was stroking my own hard cock as she began to slowly bob her head up and down on his hard rod. Her hand was still stroking the part of his enormous erection that she could not get into her mouth. I could hear soft slurping sounds as she sucked on him. Occasionally, she would take it out of her mouth and lick around the head like a lollipop. Dad had one hand on the back of her head, and the other was twisting in the sheets, trying to be quiet. After a couple more minutes of sucking, Dad lifted her head up. Mom let his cock pop out of her mouth and it slapped back against his stomach. She raised up and straddled him. Reaching between her legs, she pried back his cock and positioned it at the entrance to her hairy pussy. As she slowly lowered herself onto him, my own cock began to spurt it’s seed. I quickly flipped it back into my pj’s, hoping that none of it got onto the carpet. As I looked back into their room, Mom began to move up and down on Dad’s huge cock. It must have been eight or nine inches long, much longer than my measly five inches. Dad was thrusting up into her. At the same time he was massaging her huge breasts! I thought I saw something squirt out of her tits into Dad’s face. His tongue was licking at his lips and cheeks. After a couple of minutes, he pulled her down to him. He then rolled over until she was underneath him. He began to thrust himself deep into her wet pussy! I couldn’t believe I was seeing my own parents fucking. Mom began to moan a little louder and Dad’s thrusting became quicker. “I’m going to come!” Dad whispered loudly as he slammed into her harder. Mom raised up to meet his thrusts, and pulled his head down to kiss him. Even though they were trying to be quiet, moans escaped from them both as they reached their orgasm together. Dad collapsed on top of Mom, and they lay there kissing one another. As I started to slip back to my room, I heard a squeal from David’s room. He was awake! I turned and quickly crawled back to my room and closed the door. I held the doorknob until I heard Mom go into his room to pick him up. I gently eased the knob closed and quickly crawled back into bed. My pajamas were wet and sticky from the cum I had exploded into them. I grabbed some tissues and cleaned up myself as best I could. However, I knew that mom would be able to see the cum stains on my shorts if she looked close enough. I just prayed that she would be in a hurry and not notice them. I could hardly wait to tell Mary what I had seen! Chapter Five It was five days before Mary and I could meet in the tree house again. Three straight days of rain had kept us inside and under Mom’s watchful eye. Then the weekend had come and we had all our weekend chores to do while Dad was off. Just after lunch on Monday, Mom told us to go outside and play so the baby could take a nap. I told Mary to meet me in the tree house; I had something to tell her. I went out to the tree house and spread out the blankets and pillows on the floor. I then pulled the “fuck book” that Mary had found in a trash can at camp out and started to read it. The part of the book I was reading was about a young nursing student who was losing her virginity to two interns. My dick was straining against my underwear when I heard Mary coming up the ladder into the tree house. She looked at the book that I was reading and a smile crossed her face. “What is it you wanted to tell me?” she asked. I started telling her about the other night when I had seen Mom and Dad fucking. Her eyes grew wide as I told her about Dad laying between Mom’s legs licking her pussy. “He licked her pee hole?” she asked in amazement. “Yeah,” I replied, “just like they talk about in this book.” “Listen to this,” I said, and began to read from the book. “Steve ran his tongue up the young nursing student’s thigh until he reached her wet slit. He pried open the pink lips and began to slowly slide his tongue into her moist hole, tasting her sweet juices.” “Gosh,” Mary said, “that sounds kinda gross.” “Mom sure seemed to like it,” I replied, and told her about the way she was moaning and squirming on the bed.”porn incest storyNow came my big chance. “Would you like to try it?” I asked. Mary seemed to hesitate for just a second, but then a smile seemed to break across her face. “Sure…I guess so,” she replied. We looked at each other a little awkwardly. “Come here and lay down against this pillow,” I directed. As she walked up to me, I reached up and pulled down her pink shorts. Underneath them was a pair of pink bikini panties with little bears on them. “Do you like my new panties?” she asked. “Mom got them for me at the store last week.” The main thing that I noticed was that they were pulled up into her cunny, and a small moist spot was starting to appear. “Yeah, they’re cute,” I replied as I hooked my fingers into the waistband and pulled them down over her hips. Her bare cunny, with just a few thin blond hairs above the slit was already puffy. I helped her lay down on one of the blankets with her back propped up against a pillow. I maneuvered
(With grateful thanks to Italian reader Stefano Milanese, who provided the ideas for this story) Rosemary Castle, now in her…,The con moves towards the final stage Bad Mother [Age][Gay Conversion][FDom][MSub][Collab audio sex stories

I've always been a bit sceptical about supplements but our poor old (21 years) cat had been showing obvious signs of joint stiffness and was very wobbly on her legs especially when getting up or down from furniture. So I thought this was worth giving a try and sent off for a 250gm tub. We had previously tried glucosamine tablets, from the vet, but simply couldn't get her to take them.
We sprinkled one measure on her morning feed every day and within a matter of days thought we noticed an improvement and now, nearly through our first tub, she appears to have discovered the fountain of youth. I was so impressed I even called to ask if it was suitable for humans .
Our little treasure is now sleek and supple and a much happier pussycat and the great thing is that she clearly finds the Joint Aid palatable as there is never any left in her bowl and she is particularly fussy about any medicine in her food.
I'm very satisfied with the results and would definitely recommend this product for your cherished pet.

CHICAGO (WLS) -- Linda Humphrey-Morgan is feeling like herself again after getting a new kidney last month.
"Life is good again," she said.
Humphrey-Morgan received a kidney donated by her daughter, Shara, who desperately wanted to see her mother survive diabetes.
Humphrey-Morgan has had diabetes for decades, which left her gravely ill.
"I went to the hospital where she was admitted, and told her, I need you to do this. I need to you do this for me," Shara said.
But Humphrey-Morgan refused treatment for years, even as her health declined.
"I was always tired, I was depressed. I couldn't taste food," she said.
Eventually, Humphrey-Morgan agreed to accept her daughter's kidney, which was a perfect match.
The surgery was performed by Dr. Dinee Simpson who said she's all too familiar with patients who are fearful or do not trust their doctors.
"Based on a lot of misinformation and myths that tend to circulate in the African American community, patients will decide not to move forward with something that can be life-saving and life-changing," she said.
Simpson is one of nine African American women across the country who are transplant surgeons.
She said having more minorities as medical professionals can help With putting patients at ease.
"When you have a group that has struggled with distrust in the healthcare system, seeing someone who looks like them helps to mitigate a lot of that," she said.
As for Humphrey-Morgan, she's thankful she listened to her daughter and her doctor and has a new outlook.
"I went way down to the bottom and I feel like I got my life back. I feel normal again," she said.

After initially thinking it was easy to clean the crayons off the bath, when it came to cleaning them off after we had finished I found red and dark purple were a little more tricky to remove. I remembered after seeing the marks on the bath that I had been told by the ladies from Lunables that this could be the case with those colours.
Unsure of how I was going to solve the problem I messaged them to ask advice, but was determined to try and get it off as soon as I could as we rent and red stains on a white bath in a rental property is something you don’t want!
Looking around my bathroom I decided to use our ‘Johnson’s baby top-to-toe bath wash’ on the stains and scrub it around with my hand to see if that would work, thankfully I had quick success seeing the red come off onto the soap and I then simply wet a washer and wiped it away. The stains had gone. Phew! What a relief!
By Clare at Relaxed Parenting

Former India cricketers Ashish Nehra and Aakash Chopra go back a long way. Much before they played for India, the duo represented Delhi in domestic cricket and even before that they were both budding youngsters with the Sonnet Cricket club.
Both of them got together recently for a candid chat on Chopra’s show Aakashvani and reminisced about the old days they had spent together.
Aakash started by asking Ashish Nehra about a brand of shoes that he used to have in those days, when buying good sports shoes were a luxury for young cricketers.
“I wore them for the first time in Ranji Trophy and had only one pair which I took them with me to play in my first Test match in 1999. I still remember I used to get the shoe stitched after each innings and that is how it survived the entire Test,” Nehra said.
Aakash then asked him about practicing bowling action at the Delhi Cantonment Railway station with the club’s bowling coach.
“I wasn’t alone. There used to be a bunch of us who would go to drop sir at the railway station. He would ask us to show him different bowling actions. I remember we would pick up the stones at teh station and bowl with them,” Nehra recalled the good old times.
The duo also discussed a match they had played at the racecourse ground in Delhi for their club team. Aakash, who was the captain of the side, was asked by the coach why he didn’t bowl Nehra from a particular end. “You remember we had to bowl into the wind and against the wind? The coach asked me why I didn’t bowl you from that end. I told him that you wanted to bowl from the other end. And sir went and gave you a slap,” said Aakash while discussing a funny incident.
Ashish Nehra made his Test debut against Sri Lanka in Colombo in the Asian Test Championship. He picked up a single wicket in the match, which ended in a dull draw with batsmen ruling the roost on a flat pitch.

Motorist, 25, who tried to trick police by faking CCTV image to show his car outside his house at time he crashed into motorcyclist is jailed for seven months
- Sayeed Ahmed, 25, altered an image to lie to police about his car’s location
- He altered the timestamp on CCTV to make out his car was on his driveway
- Ahmed was jailed for seven months and banned from driving for 16 months
- He admitted attempting to pervert the course of justice and careless driving
A motorist has been jailed for seven months after doctoring the time stamp on a CCTV image to make out his car was at his home at the time he was accused of dangerous driving.
Sayeed Ahmed, 25, used his computer skills to alter the timing on a screenshot to show his VW Golf was parked more than 50 miles away from where his driving caused a motorcyclist to crash on the A12 near Ipswich, Suffolk.
Ipswich Crown Court heard how he sent the falsified image to police to try and escape justice after he was given a notice of intended prosecution for dangerous driving.
But officers saw through his story and seized equipment which showed he had doctored the time stamped picture.
Sayeed Ahmed (pictured), 25, used his computer skills to alter the timing on a screenshot to show his VW Golf was parked more than 50 miles away from where his driving caused a motorcyclist to crash on the A12 near Ipswich, Suffolk
Ahmed was jailed for seven months and banned from driving for 16 months after he admitted attempting to pervert the course of justice and careless driving.
The court heard he had been showing off to friends in a Lamborghini and Bentley by weaving his VW Golf in and out of traffic as they drove in convoy to a wedding.
The technical support engineer exchanged angry gestures with a motorcyclist before braking sharply in front of him, causing the biker to veer off the road.
The motorcyclist was taken to Ipswich Hospital with head injuries after the crash on the northbound A12 dual carriageway at Capel St Mary near Ipswich, Suffolk.
Police appealed for witnesses to the collision after Ahmed failed to stop and later identified the VW Golf involved as being registered to him at his home in Barking, Essex.
Ahmed made a failed attempt to mislead police with the fake CCTV image (pictured) showing his car outside his family home at the time of the crash just after 1.30pm on July 28, 2019
He then made his failed attempt to mislead police with the fake CCTV image showing his car outside his family home at the time of the crash just after 1.30pm on July 28, 2019.
The court heard how mobile phone footage recorded from another car showed Ahmed’s erratic driving immediately before the collision.
Police were given the registration number of Ahmed’s car by the motorcyclist and an independent witness.
As the registered owner, he was sent the Notice of Intended Prosecution and asked to declare who was driving his VW Golf at the time.
Ahmed responded by denying he was behind the wheel and provided officers with the time stamped image showing that his car was outside his home at the time of the accident.
But police carried out mobile phone network analysis which showed his phone had been in the area of Capel St Mary when the crash happened.
The court heard how mobile phone footage recorded from another car showed Ahmed’s erratic driving immediately before the collision. Pictured, the part of the A12 where the collision happened in 2019
As a result, police got a search warrant and arrested Ahmed at his home on November 17, 2019.
His CCTV system was seized and proof was found that the time and date stamped on the screenshot image had been changed.
Mandisa Knights, defending, said he had acted with extreme immaturity by trying to cover up for his ‘despicable’ driving.
She added that he had been forced to grow up quickly as he was the main financial provider for his family and principal caregiver for his mother’s ill-health.
Judge Emma Peters accused Ahmed of driving ‘stupidly’ and ‘showing off’ to his friends as they drove to the wedding.
She told him that his actions had ‘struck at the heart of the administration of justice’, and that only a prison sentence could reflect his culpability and the harm caused.
A charge of dangerous driving was dropped after he denied it and pleaded guilty to the lesser offence of careless driving.
Sgt Neil Clarke, of the Roads and Armed Policing team of Suffolk Police, said after the hearing: ‘Careless driving is a criminal offence and this driver showed complete lack of consideration for other road users and the law. Furthermore, perverting the course of justice is an extremely serious offence.
‘The Roads and Armed Policing Team officers worked hard to secure warrants and present evidence to uncover the truth that the driver was at the location at the time of the offence, despite his efforts to prove otherwise.
‘Sayeed Ahmed took measured steps in attempt to cover his tracks and deceive police, which ultimately failed because of the tenacity of the investigating officers.
‘This collision could have ended tragically for the motorcycle rider and we will continue to prosecute those drivers who endanger other road users.’
Source: Read Full Article

My little Fox is growing up too fast! As of today I can no longer say he's 8 months old. I've been holding out till the very last second to say he's 9 months.
He had his 9 month well child appointment today and he's big and perfect. His stats are:
Weight: 21 lbs 6 oz (75th)
Height: 29.5 inches (90th)
Head: 18 inches (75th)
He's crawling everywhere fast and is fearless. Brandt played a game with him where Logan would crawl to the edge of the bed, fall off and Brandt would catch him and flip up over. Now tries to do it all the time wherever there is an edge even when no one is playing with him...
He's still taking three naps a day but the last one is super short and about to be dropped. Not too excited about that. He will drink out of the weighted sippy cups had some of a ring pop this month because he REALLY wanted it and looked so cute with it in his mouth. 4th child. He was really angry when we took it back.
He has been pretty healthy minus one bad cold/ear infection. It's so sad when he's sick. It's sad when any baby is sick. He powered through it and has been doing well. He loves food. He'll eat basically anything we give him that's a puree. He's not too into real food yet because his gag reflex is sensitive but today he had a fry from chick-fil-a and enjoyed sucking on it till it fell piece by piece into my lap.
He knows when you call his name, gives the biggest cheese face (partially shown below) when he's happy and is really good at picking up any tiny crumb and putting it in his mouth.
His bother and sisters came to the appointment today... always a fun time. They were NOT this content the whole time.
We love you little buddy! Even though I want you to stay my baby forever I'm excited to watch you learn everything and see you grow.

When a water pipe broke in our basement, we called this vendor in to try to save our carpeting. They did a cursory vacuuming and left. We had to call the owner to gewt someone to come back; when they vacuumed again and brought one blower. Later we had a contractor in who said that the carpeting could have been saved if several blowers had been brought in, along with a commercial dehumidifier. Also, the carpeting was never lifted so an antimicrobial could have been sprayed. Now it's too late, and the carpeting must be replaced. To say we're disappointed is an understatement.

Tim Charles "Youngblood" Chapman (born May 13, 1965 in Ventura, CA) is a bounty hunter. Despite sharing a last name, he is not related to Duane.
He lived with his father in California until he moved to Denver, Colorado at a young age to be with his mother. Tim helped her with her bail bonds business, and he made his first civilian arrest at the age of fourteen. It was there that he met Duane. Despite not being related, Duane refers to Tim as his "blood brother". Tim joined Duane, Beth, and Leland in Hawaii, where they ran Da Kine Bonds.
He made regular appearances on Dog The Bounty Hunter.

as the days go by thinking of you the time got longer waiting on you
as the days go by waiting on the long dark night wishing to be their with you. during them nights staring at the dark skys looking in the moon hope tosee you. even if i was only to see you. even if i was only to say "i love you"
as the days go by i could see our time come faster and faster just to be with you.

I guess 'thrifty' is a relative term, isn't it? Even something that was purchased at a thrift store isn't thrifty if the person doing the purchasing is using grocery money. Hypothetically speaking, of course. I'm not saying that's me or anything.
Anyhoo, last week I did quite a bit of thrifting, including one whole day with a good friend, which included lunch and lots of gabbing. We also discovered two resale stores that are within a couple miles of me that I had no idea existed! One in particular was muy fabuloso and had good prices, better than Goodwill's prices around here. Plus they were having a clearance and everything was 1/2 off! Score! The other one had tons of stuff, but was a bit pricey for resale, IMO.
Here is a sampling of some of my finds from various sources, including Goodwill and garage sales.
This was 1/2 off, so I paid $1.05...not sure what's with the loose change, but most of their items seemed to be priced that way. Isn't it charming? Is it too late for me to join P.O.O.P.I.E. ?
Three frames: the white one and the small one were $1 each, the middle one was $3 (a little too much if you ask me, but that's Goodwill for ya). I have a plan for these.
Three wooden candlesticks, $0.50 each. You can't have too many candlesticks, and a group of three of anything, decoratively speaking, is good.
Now, look at these honeys! Two wooden shutters, about 6ft tall, already painted a very chic color. I got the pair for $1 at a garage sale! At this point, I really don't know what I'm going to do with them, but aren't they suh-WEET?!
Tomorrow I'll show what I've been working on with some of these.

"Why are you so wet?"
Phoenix was soaking wet from head to foot, clutching onto Angelina's shoulders as she gasped for air. She had run from the very top stand of the Quidditch pitch to the library where she and Angelina now stood.
"Did you and George fall in the lake or something?" She enquired, clearly amused.
George. His name alone made Phoenix's stomach feel queasy. She took a deep breath, steeling herself before finally she breathed, "I like him."
Angelina, instead of letting out a girlish squeal as Phoenix had anticipated, had cheered loudly as though they had just scored a goal during a Quidditch match, and tackled her with a hug.
"Girls! Be quiet!" Madam Pince snapped at them as Angelina continued to squeeze the living daylights out of Phoenix by hugging her.
"I knew it! I knew it!" She finally let go of Phoenix, who was relieved that Angelina had released her, her face blushing brightly, "tell me everything!"
She didn't tell Angelina everything necessarily. Not the part that included crying, or what she had been upset about, or what she had told George. She told Angelina everything that she had realised about her new-found feelings toward the red-headed prankster.
"It's like you said Ange, it was one of those moments where I just forgot about everything else and just thought of George. And then those thoughts sort of clouded over everything else and… then I just realised that he's always there for me and I like, no love, those cliché feelings I have in my stomach when I'm around him and…" Angelina had begun to laugh and Phoenix knew why, she was beginning to sound exactly like a schoolgirl with a huge crush (which in fact she was a schoolgirl but she felt as though being sixteen she had more maturity and it wasn't exactly a big crush, yet anyhow).
"You're in the stage of your crush where you annoy the crap out of your friends," Angelina observed as they walked down the marble staircase together, "Normally I would probably slap you in the face for being so sappy around me but because you put up with me doing that about Fred, I won't slap you. Instead I'll listen and tell you how much of a sap you are,"
"Oh how considerate of you Angelina," Phoenix replied with a sarcastic smile, "Do you think I enjoyable being all sappy?"
"Well you seem like you are," Angelina sang as they reached the entrance hall, "Oooo George is in there," she nudged Phoenix's arm, who felt her face burn bright red.
"I'm going to have to put up with you being snide aren't I?" Phoenix asked with a groan, "Just tone it down when we're around people okay?"
"I can't promise anything," Angelina replied in the same dreamy tone that Luna Lovegood used when talking about Nargals, "I'm allowed to be snide about this! I'm your best friend for pity sake!"
"What is Angelina allowed to be snide about?" Phoenix and Angelina actually jumped at the sound of Fred's voice. They had been unconsciously walking towards the Gryffindor table and had approached the others without even realising it. Phoenix could see George looking at them both curiously; she noticed that George was as soaked as she was.
"Oh nothing," Angelina said airily, sitting down beside Fred with Phoenix on her other side, "just girly stuff,"
"If it's girly stuff then I'm not interested," Lee said, rolling his eyes and continuing his conversation with Fred and George.
As January drifted into a cold and wet February, Angelina's comments did not subside, in fact they increased greatly. Nearly every lesson that she and Angelina had together did not pass without Angelina bringing up the subject of George. Even in potions where Lee was only feet away, Angelina would whisper things over her cauldron, such as 'do you smell George in your Amortentia?' or 'is there a potion that will cure your love sickness for George?'. Every time this happened Phoenix would throw what was ever in her hands at Angelina (she made sure she never threw her carving knife at her), this usually resulted in Phoenix getting a detention or a scolding from her teacher, though once she had hit Warrington in the back of the head with a flobberworm, which wasn't in anyone's opinion wasn't a bad thing (though Professor Snape begged to differ).
Aside from Angelina's never-ending string of comments, Phoenix and George had begun to spend a lot more time together. George was determined to help her with the mystery of her mother's murder, he was also determined to find a spell that would help to break a memory charm, but as Phoenix had said it was too dangerous to even try.
"But–" George began but Phoenix shot him a look that plainly told him to drop it. He sighed, defeated and closed a large spellbook entitled Confunding and Memory Modification, "you know Phoenix I'm spending my time in the library to help you – the library! Of all places!"
She had been searching through countless old newspapers in the library (remembering that Tonks had suggested her to do so) to try and find anything that mentioned her mother's death; while George also helped he had mainly been researching memory charms.
"How about you go read a newspaper and stop acting like a big girls blouse," Phoenix swatted his arm and returned to reading the Daily Prophet she had found, it didn't say anything about her mother however, but instead it was a rather dull article about some girl called Eileen Prince and her contributions to the Hogwarts Gobstones Team.
George looked defeated before he grabbed a large stack of Daily Prophets, picked up the one at the very top, and ruffled it with a flourish. Phoenix smiled and rolled her eyes and returned her attention back to the article, though it was boring, so instead Phoenix's eyes trailed upwards to look back over at George.
He was reading a Daily Prophet article, his hand propped up beneath his chin and his brown eyes were narrowed in concentration. She found herself staring at him a lot during these secret meetings in the back of the library and every time she did this, the more she realised just how much she really did like him. These feelings had come so suddenly. One second, she was looking at him the way she always had and in the next, all that she could think about his eyes, his smile, his freckles, and his laugh. Whenever these thoughts would surface in her head, she would usually have to slap herself in the face and a voice that sounded much like Angelina's would say 'pull yourself together you old sap!'. But Phoenix really couldn't help herself. She supposed that it was completely normal during the first few stages of a crush to think this way, even Angelina probably thought this way about Fred (which was very hard to believe because Phoenix was sure if Angelina ever thought about how Fred's eyes were like two pools of chocolate she was surely to punch herself).
Apparition lessons had also begun. On their very first lesson they had arrived in the Great Hall, since the lawns were now so permanently slippery and muddy by the constant fall of cold rain coming from the skies of purplish-grey clouds.
When Phoenix, Alicia, and Angelina arrived in the Hall for their first lesson, they found that the usual four house tables had disappeared. They quickly found Fred, George, and Lee and assembled together in front of the Heads of Houses – Professors McGonagall, Snape, Flitwick and Sprout – and beside them was a small wizard whom Phoenix assumed was their Apparition Instructor from the Ministry.
"Good morning," said the wizard, when all sixth year students had arrived and were finally silent. "My name is Wilkie Twycross," Fred and George had begun to snigger and Phoenix distinctly heard them say to Lee in a whisper 'Willy Twycross', "and I am your Ministry Apparition Instructor for the next twelve weeks. I hope to be able to prepare each and every one of you for your Apparition test in this time, and by which time, many of you may be ready to take your test," Fred, George, and Phoenix all looked at one another solemnly.
"As you may know, it is usually impossible to Apparate or Disapparate within Hogwarts or its grounds. The Headmaster has lifted this enchantment, purely within the Great Hall, for one hour and one hour only, to enable you to practise. I must emphasise that you will not be able to Apparate outside the walls of this Hall, and that you would be unwise to think to do so."
Professor McGonagall's eyes were fixed intently on Fred and George and Phoenix knew that she was searching for any early signs of them misbehaving.
"I would like you to place yourselves now so that you have a clear five feet of space in front of you."
There was great difficulty at this; students everywhere were jostling around as they tried to find a space, banging into one another now and then. Phoenix and Angelina managed to situate themselves beside one another, though they were a little far back from where they wanted to be at the front (because the Ravenclaws had gotten their first).
"George that's not a five feet!" Phoenix was saying in a whisper to George, who was three feet away from her and grinning widely.
He rolled his eyes and took another few steps to the side, "there," he said, putting his hands on his hips in imitation of her, "you happy sunshine?"
"Over the moon."
The House of Heads were once again calling for quiet. When finally the students had all calmed down and all their attention was upon Twycross, the small wizard waved his wand and out of thin air, old-fashioned wooden hoops appeared on the floor in front of each student.
"The important things to remember when Apparating are the three Ds!" From five feet away from her, Phoenix could hear Fred and George sniggering once again, "Destination, Determination, Deliberation!"
Phoenix was focusing all her attention on remembering the three Ds. She repeated them in her head slowly, Destination, Determination, Deliberation, still listening intently to the old Apparition Instructor.
"Step one: fix your mind firmly upon the desired destin-ation, in this case, the interior of your hoop. Kindly concentrate upon that destination now."
Students were now glancing around at one another; Phoenix's eyes however were focused on the hoop that lay in front of her and tried hard to think of nothing else but the bloody inside of that hoop. This however seemed to be impossible, as all she could think about was Fred whispering to Lee: 'Willy Twycross'.
"Step two: focus your determination to occupy the visualised space! Let your yearning to enter it flood from your mind to every particle of your body!"
Phoenix was baffled, she was staring into her hoop but she had no idea what Twycross was babbling on about, mainly because she had no yearning to stand in the middle of a hoop. All she could think about was the hula hoops she used to have during her years in junior school.
"Step three: and only when I give the com-mand ... turn on the spot, feeling your way into nothingness, moving with deliberation! On my command, now ... one–"
Phoenix's eyes widened, completely alarmed that they were expected to Apparate so quickly into their lesson.
Phoenix tried to wipe her thoughts once again and fixate on her hoop, but she had already forgotten what step three was because she was so alarmed about Apparating so early on.
Phoenix spun on the spot, feeling like a ridiculous dancer, lost her balance completely and crashed into Angelina who had just tripped over her shoe lace.
"That went terribly well I think," Angelina said in a hushed voice, staggering to her feet as Phoenix's eyes swept over the hall. She burst into laughter when she saw Lee, doing some sort of pirouette, looking like some sort of graceful ballerina, before Fred elbowed him and he toppled over, falling into his hoop.
They tried again. And again. And again. It wasn't until their sixth attempt however that anything really did happen. There was a loud, horrible scream of pain coming a few feet away from Angelina. Phoenix stared, horrified, to see Alicia in her hoop, only her right arm was completely missing and five feet away from her.
Several girls, including Phoenix and Angelina, let out shrieks of terror as the Heads of House darted over to Alicia. There was a bang that sounded like a gunshot and a large cloud of purple smoke, which disappeared to show Alicia, who was sobbing, her right arm now thankfully reattached to her shoulder, though she was looking shaken.
"I can't believe I was the first to get splinched!" Alicia cried, looking disheartened as they walked up the Gryffindor tower after finishing their lesson. Nobody had managed to successfully Apparate into their hoop, though Twycross did not seem discouraged by this, but many of the students were.
"What was it like?" Lee asked brightly and both Phoenix and Angelina smacked him in the chest. "What? It's not like McGonagall would let one of her Chasers lose their bleeding arm."
By the third week of February, Phoenix and George had unconsciously devised a schedule for their meetings. Every Wednesday, Friday, and Saturday night two hours before their curfew at nine o'clock they found themselves in the library, reading through yellowing pages of the Daily Prophet. It was Wednesday, a week before the Second Task, and they were once again in library, a candle lit lantern between them as they read various articles.
Harry, Ron, and Hermione were a few tables away; they too seemed to always be in the library. Phoenix and George both presumed that they were there for help with the second task and left them to it, though now and then they saw Ron cast furtive looks in their way.
"Why does he keep looking over?" George asked her in a whisper, stealing another look over at Ron who was once again glancing over at them.
"Your guess is as good as mine," Phoenix replied, looking over a page of the prophet to look at Ron who had now looked away, "he's probably wondering why you're in the library,"
"Nosey git," George muttered before returning to look at the article he was reading, "It's not like I'm doing anything wrong. I mean, I'm here with you and if he thinks that I'm– wait Pixy, I think I've found something!"
"What?" Phoenix got up from her seat opposite him and slid into the seat besides him, leaning closer to peer at the article. The headline seemed to have been stained and was impossible to decipher, the article itself was still in tack, though rather discoloured, and beside the article were large, moving pictures of four Death Eaters, the one that drew Phoenix's eye however was the one of her step-aunt, Bellatrix Lestrange.
"It's talking about four Death Eater's trail in front of the Council of Magical Law… murdering's of several Muggles… including the wife of a famous Muggle author, Jane Lancaster… Blimey, one of the Death Eaters was Mr. Crouch's son… wonder if Percy knows about that… And…" George's mouth fell open and Phoenix drew her eyes off Bellatrix to look at the paragraph he had read. She let out a loud gasp.
"Sentenced to life imprisonment for the kidnapping and torturing of famous Aurors and just new parents to Neville: Alice and Frank Longbottom…" Phoenix read in a tremulous, quiet voice. She felt as if ice had just replaced her insides, "…the two Aurors were driven into insanity when they had refused to divulge anything… Now they are both living at St. Mungo's Hospital for Magical Maladies and Injuries, and unaware that they had given birth to their son."
She and George shared a horrified look. Phoenix felt as if she wanted to cry.
"Neville's parents," they whispered together. They sat in a stunned silence, both too shocked by the news that one of their friends had parents who had no idea who he was.
George let out a deep sigh and continued to read while Phoenix let out a sniff, "Following the torture of Frank and Alice Longbottom, a series of Muggle murdering's followed… none of these murders sparked as much fury in the Wizard community as the murder of Jane Lancaster," George's eyes looked up to see Phoenix biting her lip, her hair and eyes a ghostly dull white, his hand enclosed around hers before he read on, "The group of Death Eaters had not only killed Jane but also tortured her three year old daughter, Phoenix…"
The one thing that she had not told George was this. She had not wanted to tell him. She had not wanted him to know. Her eyes met his and for the first time since she had known George, she could not read them.
"Did you know about this?" he asked in a voice so quiet and so shaky that she had barely heard him.
"Moody told me…"
"And why didn't you tell me?"
"I-I…" she looked down at her lap and sighed, "I don't know…"
George seemed to be holding back words, he breathed heavily before placing down the newspaper and propping a finger under her chin, "Pixy, look at me," Phoenix's head titled upwards slowly and her dull sliver eyes met George's warm brown ones, "It's okay, I understand you didn't want to tell me about… that," his eyes searched hers as he said, "I just… it's just that…"
"I just… I care about you okay?" His eyes were full of such sincerity it scared her, she felt her stomach lurch and her breath hitched in her throat as her eyes turned slowly back to their usual ocean blue, "I care a great deal about you and… I just worry about you,"
"I understand," Phoenix replied softly, reaching out to touch George's hand and gripping it, "But I'm fine… that was years ago and I don't even remember it."
George hesitated and once again, he bit his tongue before sighing and dropping his hand from her chin. Phoenix hadn't realised how much warmth seemed to radiate from his skin onto hers until it was gone.
She once again turned her attention to the moving pictures of the article. There was Rabastan Lestrange, tall, thin and sullen, Rodolphus Lestrange, who held a blank stare behind matted dark hair, and then there was Bartemius Crouch Jr. Phoenix thought he looked rather young and out-of-place next to his fellows, he was pale, with straw-coloured hair and freckles, she couldn't hardly believe that this boy was Mr. Crouch's son and was involved in her mother's murder and the torture of Frank and Alice Longbottom. Finally her eyes were drawn to Bellatrix Lestrange. The resemblance that she bore to Cecilia was small but still there, both had long eyelashes, strong jaw and long, shiny hair, though Bellatrix's was thick and dark, unlike Cecilia whose hair was fair, much like her sister Narcissa. Bellatrix's eyes were not a warm brown like Cecilia's instead they seemed darker, almost black and heavily-lidded. And as Phoenix stared into them, almost hypnotised, something inside her seemed to crack.
She gasped as yet again, something flashed before her eyes. The drawing that she had seen from her briefcase and then… the dark eyes of Bellatrix Lestrange were staring back at her through a faceless mask, before Bellatrix's long, thin nails reached out towards her.
"What happened?" George looked at her, alarmed as Phoenix recoiled, almost falling off her chair.
"You remembered something didn't you?" He looked at her, frantically.
"N-No, I didn't," she said quickly, her heart was hammering against her chest as her hands began to shake violently, "It was n-nothing… I-I'm going to bed,"
But she wasn't listening. She grabbed her bag and without a second glance back at George, she raced out of the library, almost flattening Madam Pince in the process. She didn't stop running until she reached the Fat Lady's portrait.
"Why are you in such a hurry?" The Fat Lady asked as Phoenix gasped, leaning against a pillar.
"B–Banana Fritters," Phoenix stuttered, ignoring the Fat Lady's question. The portrait swung open and Phoenix climbed through the hole.
"Phoenix!" Lee called from the other side of the common room where he sat with Angelina and Fred, "come back from your cosy study session with George?"
She did not reply however, she ignored him darted through the door to the girl's dormitories and ran up the stairs, accidentally barging into Lavender Brown on the way.
At long last she reached the safety of her dormitory. She was finally alone. Leaning against the door, she took deep breaths. Had she just remembered what she had seen moments before Bellatrix had begun to torture her? The image of Bellatrix's eyes made her very skin crawl.
After having a long shower and pulling on her pyjamas, Phoenix climbed into bed. She was surprised that Angelina had not yet barged in, demanding why she seemed to want to be in bed by half eight, but at the same time, Phoenix was thankful. She didn't feel like talking to Angelina now, in fact she didn't feel like talking to anybody. As soon as Phoenix closed her eyes, she pulled into sleep.
Her dreams were clouded. Angelina and Fred were conversing in low voices as Phoenix approached them, "Angelina told me something," said Fred, he sounded almost as dreamy as Luna Lovegood as he turned to Phoenix, smiling idly at her, "she told me you fancy my twin,"
"Angelina!" Phoenix groaned as Angelina sent her an apologetic look.
"You might want to get a move on and ask him out," said Fred, "I heard that he likes Millicent Bulstrode… Oh… there he is with her now…"
Phoenix turned, expecting to see George and Millicent locked in a close embrace, but instead she was facing a mirror. She approached it cautiously. Her surroundings seemed to swim around her; both Fred and Angelina had disappeared. She reached out a hand to touch the mirror. As soon as her skin made contact with it, it burned, white-hot and seemed to pull her through right the glass. It was a strange sensation, almost like falling through water, like some sort of veil.
Was she on the other side of the glass? Was she inside the mirror? She turned around, for some reason she felt a lot smaller, as though she had shot down greatly in height.
She now faced the mirror and a girl, with bright blue hair that was tied in pigtails and dressed in a floral sun dress, was staring back at her. A panda cuddly toy was clutched to her chest. She sniffled, still clutching the teddy and walked out of her bedroom.
"Mummy!" she called as she climbed down the stairs carefully.
"Phoenix, Sweetheart, be careful down the stairs!" a motherly voice called as Phoenix reached the second to last step and jumped off. She seemed to fly through the air before she landed graciously, both of her small feet firmly on the ground.
"Where's daddy?" Phoenix asked as she pushed the heavy door to a kitchen open to show a woman. The woman had natural reddish-brown hair, which reached just past her shoulders, a sweet, heart-shaped face, big, round ocean blue eyes, the exact shape and shade of Phoenix's. It was her mother.
At the sight of Phoenix, the woman kneeled down in front of her and twirled her bright blue hair with her fingers, "Whatever is going on with your hair, we will never know," she laughed, her laugh seemed to emit warmth throughout Phoenix's entire being, calming her nerves and reassuring her, "and Daddy is at a meeting darling,"
The young Phoenix pouted her tiny lips at her mother, "Daddy is always at meetings."
"I know," her mother whispered, kissing the young girls nose which made her giggle, "How about your draw Daddy at nice picture for when he gets home?" Phoenix nodded enthusiastically. Her mother chuckled as she ran from the kitchen, into a living room where colour pencils, felt tips and a colouring book lay on the coffee table.
"I'm going to draw Daddy a dragon!" Phoenix shouted to her mother, sounding rather proud of herself. Her tiny hands grabbed her colouring book and colouring pencils and she climbed onto the armchair beside the window, placing her panda down on the chair beside her. She began to colour in, careful to draw in the lines, choosing different colours to make the dragon as colourful as possible, she knew that her father loved when Phoenix made her drawings colourful (and he also always gave her a cookie for it).
Just as Phoenix had finished the drawing with colouring the dragon's eyes a powerful pink, she noticed suddenly that somebody, or something, had walked past the window. Curious, she stood up in the armchair and stared out of the window, looking out at the front garden.
There were several people; all dressed in long blacks cloaks, walking up the garden path. Phoenix's eyes widened in fear as she noticed that they were wearing faceless masks, hoods pulled up over their heads.
"Mummy!" She squealed, her hair turning a pale blonde as she gripped her panda in fright, "Scary people are here!"
"Darling what are you–"
The front door flew open with a sound like a bomb. Phoenix screamed, grabbing her teddy and jumping off the armchair and running into the kitchen to where her mother was.
"PHOENIX, GET OUT OF HERE!" Her mother shouted as the group in cloaks jeered, forcing their way into the kitchen, blasting pictures from the walls and breaking several ornaments.
"Look what we have here!" A women's harsh voice cackled, "the wife of the Muggle and the daughter, oh what a treat!"
"Who are you?" Phoenix's mother asked, trying to shield Phoenix from view. "What do you want?"
"Shut up Muggle!" a hoarse voice said from behind one of the masks. He raised a stick in his hand and slashed it through the air, a jet of red light shot from its tip and struck Phoenix's mother in the face. She screamed in pain, blood trickling from her cheek.
"Crouch don't!" said a new voice, "We want to make this quick and easy."
"Rabastan, let's have bit of fun first," Said the harsh voice of the women. "You know how much I love children," she said in a simpering, babyish voice.
Phoenix's mother reared up at once, staring coldly at the group of people as Phoenix gripped her arms around her mother's leg, terrified, "Don't you dare hurt my daughter!" Her voice was strong and Phoenix had never heard her sound so angry.
"Rodolphus, Travers, grab the girl!" Commanded the woman's voice and Phoenix ran from her mother, wanting to run and hide from these bad people. She made to run out of the back door, but hands grabbed her, she kicked and she screamed as she was lifted from her feet and brought before of one of the masked people.
"Don't touch her!" Her mother shouted, she was being restrained by four of masked people, who were all jeering.
"Sweet little girl," said the woman's voice, her long black nails stroked Phoenix's face, making Phoenix's skin crawl as she stared up at the masked face, her hair turning, if possible, an even paler blonde. Behind the mask, Phoenix saw the woman's dark eyes widen, "Do you see this?" She cackled, "We have a witch here! A Metamorphmagus!"
"Just like your dear niece Bella," said a raspy voice and the others all laughed loudly.
"She is no niece of mine!" The woman shrieked and the others fell silent. "This girl's blood is just as filthy as my niece!" She pointed a long, thin stick at Phoenix and she saw the eyes behind the mask darken evilly, "Crucio!"
Pain so intense hit Phoenix like white-hot knives that pierced every inch of her skin. She didn't know where she was, who she was. All she knew that she was screaming more loudly and more painfully than she had ever before, her body felt as though it was surely going to die from the pain. Every nerve in her body felt as if it had burst. Every bone had been broken. Just as the pain had started however… it stopped.
She was lying on the floor, her tiny body shaking from the intense, overwhelming pain. She stared at her hand in front of her, she could hear her mother crying hysterically and that evil woman laughing as her mother tried to free herself from her captors, to get to her daughter, to hold her and to protect her.
"Bella," said a booming voice, he sounded as though Phoenix's mother was putting up a real fight, screaming and kicked every inch of her captor's body. "Just kill her already!"
"Happily," said the woman's voice.
'Bella' turned to Jane Lancaster, who was staring determinedly back at her. She raised the stick and pointed at directly at her chest.
A jet of bright green light blinded Phoenix as her mother screams echoed through her head and then the light hit Jane Lancaster, blasting her back several feet before she crumpled to the ground. Her blue eyes were still open, though they could not see her daughter, crying and screaming helplessly for her mother.
She opened her eyes. Her entire body was shaking uncontrollably, like she was still being tortured by the Cruciatus Curse. Her face felt hot and her eyes burned, her throat was on fire and she knew immediately she had cried and screamed in her sleep.
"Oh my – Phoenix!"
Angelina, Alicia, Arista, and Ava were standing over her looking frightened.
Before Phoenix could utter a single word, she gasped and leaned over the side of the bed and was sick over the floor.
"Ava, go and get Professor McGonagall!" Angelina instructed, clearing up Phoenix's sick with a flick of her shaking wand before she rushed over to Phoenix and put an arm around her quivering shoulders. "She's red-hot!"
"Oh god," whispered Arista as Ava left the dormitory in her dressing gown. "Should I fetch Madam Pomfrey?"
"Yes please do Arista," a pale-faced Alicia said and Arista left the dormitory too.
Angelina tried to pull Phoenix from the bed, but her body was shaky so much that she could not get to her feet. She had just seen her mother's death. She had just seen her mother's death. The words repeated round in her head and she felt light-headed as she leaned down and threw up once again.
"What's wrong with her?" Alicia asked, looking as though she was going to be sick too as she cleared up the vomit with a flick of her wand and sat on Phoenix's other side. "She hasn't said a word."
"I have no idea," Angelina said, sounding scared.
Phoenix still could feel the white-hot pain across her body like the Cruciatus Curse had caused. She could still feel the gaze of Bellatrix Lestrange's dark, cold, sinister eyes and her mother screaming before she was so carelessly throw aside like the spider had been in Moody's class.
She felt tense, sweat and suddenly, she could felt like she could hardly breathe, she felt as if she was spinning, stripped of all control, nothing holding her down. She needed to run and keeping running until she was far away from this situation. But there was no running from this. She was trapped. Trapped in her mind, her own thoughts, her own visions of her mother's death. She was locked inside an abandoned-demon infested-factory, and she knew that there were no means of escape, nobody to hear her scream or run to her rescue.
Her breaths were becoming harsher, shallower. She began to feel more light-headed, like she was going to be sick again. Everything was becoming blurry and darkening, the world was moving in slow motion. It felt as though somebody had extinguished all the lamps in the room and Phoenix was sure that in a few seconds she would be gone.
Her chest was constricting in sudden pressure, as though a boa constrictor was wrapping its body around her ribcage and squeezing it tightly. Her fingertips were tingling, and then the tingles went up to her hands, her arms and went numb. She felt hopeless, as though nothing would ever be okay again. Everything that Phoenix had ever done wrong was screaming at her, deafening her.
Somebody was screaming at her. "SHE'S HAVING A PANIC ATTACK ALICIA! PHOENIX! PHOENIX!" They were crying. "Fuck, breathe Phoenix! Just focus on your breathing!"
Phoenix tried. Her breathing was now so fast it felt as though she really had lost all control. But then her vision became less blurry and she could make out Angelina's outline, gripping her shoulders and tears pouring from her eyes. She had to keep in control! She had to.
"Phoenix, breathe…" Angelina said in a voice that shook so violently, so horribly. "Breath… one… two… three… four…"
Her breaths slowly, but surely slowed down. Her chest still felt as though it was being squeezed, she still felt light-headed and her arms still felt numb, but her breathing returned to normal and the sense of hopelessness had vanished.
The dormitory door flew open and Professor McGonagall in her tartan dressing gown came in, looking ashen-faced, behind her were Ava, Arista and Madam Pomfrey.
"Professor!" Angelina said in relief. "Phoenix – she… she just had a panic attack. We managed to calm her down–"
"What else happened?" Professor McGonagall asked, rushing over to Phoenix with Madam Pomfrey and they both helped her to her feet. Madam Pomfrey wrapped a blanket around her that seemed to warm Phoenix's stomach and the crushing feeling in her chest seemed to fade.
"She was having a nightmare I think," said Alicia. "A really horrible one it seemed to be. She was screaming… it was horrible. It sounded like…" Alicia looked around at the other girls, who were all as pale as she was. "…she was… in pain and she wouldn't wake up."
"I think she will need some potion for a dreamless sleep Poppy," said Professor McGonagall in a tremulous voice.
"Should I take her down to the hospital wing Minerva?" Madam Pomfrey asked as Phoenix's body shook violently once again, almost knocking her off her feet.
"Yes," Professor McGonagall replied, "That would be best."
"I-I… I-I saw," Phoenix was desperately trying to get her words out, but she could hardly breathe through her violent shaking and sobbing, "I-I… I-I s-saw," but what see saw, they never knew. Because at that moment, Phoenix's world darkened, her body fell backwards and she knew no more.
The next update won't be until I am back from holiday (31th August) so I apologise for that. It took me a few hours to write Phoenix's panic attack because I had to do a lot of research on them as I have never had one before and I wanted to make it as realistic as I could. I always knew that Phoenix would remember exactly what happened during her mother's death first and I always knew that she would suffer from a panic attack from it, after all it was the most traumatic experience that she has had and the shock of it would send her into one. Also I always thought that it would be strange if Phoenix never found out about Neville's parents during her research of her mother's death (because Bellatrix Lestrange was so involved in it) so I knew that had to be included because I plan on Neville (and Dean Thomas too) to be very good friends with Phoenix in the future. But don't worry Phoenix and George will keep Neville's secret.

Young drinkers are supplied with drink
Cr David Featherstone said much of the crime in the community was alcohol-related and a lot of vandalism in the area was caused by youth.
He said the council's crime prevention and safety plan, which was subsequently adopted, did not address the issue of people re-selling alcohol to young people.
He said youth weren't able to buy alcohol from licensed premises, but they were being supplied by other parties.
"It's well known, particularly in Woolgoolga, where they are going to get their alcohol. Why don't the police clamp down on these illegal sellers of alcohol," he said.
Cr Featherstone claimed people were buying the grog in Coffs Harbour and re-selling it in Woolgoolga.
The council's city services director, Jason Gordon, said the council would take up the issue with police.
The mayor, Cr Keith Rhoades, said all citizens had the responsibility of reporting such incidents to police, and he had done just that when he once saw it happening two years ago.
He said on that occasions six kids, ranging in age from eight to 15, were hovering around a man, aged about 30, who was selling alcohol to them.
"He was quite open about it," Cr Rhoades said.
"If the police know, they will keep an eye on it."
Cr Bill Palmer said the community would watch with interest the Federal Government's plans to tackle underage binge drinking.
"It's a shame we allowed the dressing up of alcohol like ordinary soft drinks," he said.
The council received seven submissions when the crime prevention plan was on public exhibition.
The comments called for more closed circuit television in business districts, the need for neighbourhood watch in beachside residential areas, more youth-friendly areas, and regular youth-specific entertainment.

And here is the other half post, to make a total of two posts, which is my proper output for today.
While the original screenshot that I had gracing my blog was nice, it didn't really accurately reflect where I lived.
So, after coming back from vacation and getting my disposables developed, I had decided to use this particular shot. I did take some of my town during my weekend walk, but the day was pretty misty and the shots came out poorly.
This one was taken at a rest area along I-70 in Ohio. I thought the cornfield was quite nice as it captured the spirit of the area where I live in CT.
Hope you like. I got more in the queue, so I think that on a monthly basis, I'll start rotating the shots. Let me know what you think of them, as I'll keep the one that gets the most comments as my permanent screenshot. The original one does not count.

Posh beat Stockport County 2-1 on May 24, 1992 , in their first competitive match at Wembley, to secure back-to-back promotions under the inspirational management of Chris Turner and a place in the second tier of the Football League (then called Division One) for the first time in the club’s history.
'King' Ken Charlery scored both Posh goals that day and the Peterborough Telegraph caught up with him....
Only two things spoilt the greatest day in Ken Charlery's football career.
There were no medals presented to the players after a dramatic play-off final win and, more importantly, there was no beer for the players as they drove home on a happy team bus.
“That was (owner) John Devaney for you,” recalled Charlery. “The players and staff were on a high, but we had a dry bus. No-one could believe it, but we made up for it when we got back to the Swallow Hotel in the city.
“Some of the lads wanted to go into town as they'd heard thousands of Posh fans were still there celebrating, and 'Scouse' (captain Mick Halsall) went, but the rest of us feared we'd get mobbed, in a good way of course, and anyway the drink was free in the hotel!
“What a day it was. In fact what a season it was. We beat Liverpool and Newcastle in the Rumbelows Cup on our way to the quarter-finals where we lost to Middlesbrough when a two-legged semi-final against Manchester United was waiting for us and we reached the area final of the Autoglass Trophy, or whatever it was called back then.
“But promotion was the big thing for us and we did it thanks to a great manager, some great players, great self-belief and our great fans who followed us up and down the country. We wouldn't have pulled it off without them.
“And for me to score the two goals in a Wembley final was incredible. It wasn't much of a game, but it had an amazing finish, although climbing all those stairs at the end to find there were no medals for us was a bit disappointing! There was a trophy though, but that went missing and everyone thought I had it! I promise you I haven't seen it since that day.”
Charlery had joined Posh from Maidstone as one of six March transfer deadline day signings made by Turner to get his side over the line in a Fourth Division promotion push in the 1990-91 season, and he played on the right-wing in his early days at London Road.
It wasn't until Turner turned him into a centre forward in September of the following season that his Posh career took off. He scored 26 goals in all competitions in the 91-92 campaign, capped off by that Wembley double.
“After beating Liverpool we really fancied we could reach the play-offs,” Charlery added. “No-one really fancied us, but we signed Bobby Barnes and Tony Adcock in January and we just took off. We finished sixth, but beat the play-off favourites Huddersfield in the semi-final and we were confident we could beat Stockport.
“We stayed over the weekend at Waltham Abbey and on the way to the ground it was just a procession of cars with flags and scarves hanging out of the window tooting horns at us. It was the same as we walked out at Wembley. Stockport had played there the weekend before so didn't bring many fans. All we could see as we walked out was a sea of Posh blue. It was inspiring, emotional and nerve-jangling, but we knew we couldn't let them down.
“I had a coach full of family and friends come up my East London manor and the game couldn't have gone much better for me or them.
“It was 0-0 at half-time, but early in the second-half I scored with a header from a corner. Some said the ball never crossed the line, but it was at least two feet over, although that distance has grown with every time I tell the story! The bigger surprise for me was Bobby Barnes managing to drop a corner on my head as he never usually managed to do that.
“Stockport had Kevin Francis up front. He was huge and a real handful, but we coped well with him until a mistake let him equalise late on.
“People then remember my winning goal, but really the goalline clearance Lee Howarth made to stop Stockport scoring again at 1-1 was just as important. The ball could have flown anywhere, but it cleared the crossbar. I don't know how he did it.
“It was a blistering hot day so we were all dreading extra time, but luckily Taff (Marcus Ebdon) played a great pass and I managed to finish it. The goalkeeper helped make my mind up by racing off his line. He was a small 'keeper so I could lob him. It wasn't an easy finish, but as soon as the ball went over his head I knew it was going in. The next three minutes or so were the longest of my life, but we hung on to complete an incredible season. It was the best day of my entire career.
"I can't believe it was 30 years ago. I still speak to some of the lads from time to time and it’s just a shame that Chris Turner and Steve Cooper are no longer with us. Steve’s winning goal in the play-off semi-final at Huddersfield was just as important as the two I scored at Wembley.”
That great Posh team started to break up the following season, although they still recorded a 10th place finish in the old Division One which remains the highest finishing position in the club’s Football League history.
"Newcastle wanted me,” Charlery revealed. “But for some reason Posh didn’t let me go. Dave Robinson was the first one to go to Notts County and a week later I went to Watford which was ideal for me as it was just up the road from where I lived and they were also in Division One.
"Before I left we got off to a great start in the league beating Derby who had spent a fortune and Southend who had Barry Fry as manager. It was a shame to leave, but the club needed to cash in and anyway I got to come back twice!”
In three spells at Posh between 1991 and 1997 Charlery racked up 224 appearances and scored 80 goals. Only Jim Hall (137), Tommy Robson (128), Craig Mackail-Smith (104), Terry Bly (87) and Aaron Maclen (85) have scored more in the club’s Football League era.
Charlery (56) is now director of football and majority shareholder of London Colney.
They play in the Spartan South Midlands Football League Premier Division.

Two Egg Harbor Township residents died Sunday after the car they were traveling in struck several trees in Galloway Township.
Galloway police said Jaime Carlin, 34, and Shane Brand, 36, died of injuries they suffered in the crash after 2 a.m. on Pitney Road.
The sport utility vehicle, which was being driven by Carlin, was traveling north on Pitney when it veered off the roadway, striking several trees, police said.
Brand was wearing his seat belt, but Carlin was not, police said. Both front airbags deployed. Carlin and Brand had to be extricated from the vehicle by members of the Bayview Volunteer Fire Company.
The road was closed for four hours while the crash was investigated, the vehicle was removed and crews from Atlantic City Electric worked to repair a broken power line, police said.
Contact Caitlin Dineen:

If you aren’t already familiar with the name Marina Kaye, that’s all about to change. The singer, songwriter, composer and winner of the sixth season of La France a un Incroyable Talent — the French version of America’s Got Talent — is making waves in the music world. At only 18, her breakthrough into bona fide superstardom is just at its cusp, following the success of songs such as the 2015 hit “Homeless.” Her newest EP features a song written for her by Sia (yes, that Sia) and collaborations with stars like Lindsey Stirling.
Teen Vogue caught up with Marina for a little peek behind-the-scenes of her life — and as it turns out, there’s a lot more to Marina that meets the ear.
TV: When did you start singing?
MK: I started singing when I was about 10 years old. One day I was with one of my friends and I sang for her. She was like, “Oh my god, Marina you should do something with this,” and said I should sign up to audition for a TV show. I said, “No I can’t. I’m too shy, I don’t have what it takes to do this.” So she signed me up for France's Got Talent, and I won when I was 13 years old. That’s when everything started.
TV: How would you describe your music?
MK: Now, in my new album, it's kind of dark. I was dealing with some really dark stuff when I was writing the album, and I was actually struggling to find peace, so it was really difficult for me to see the light. It’s difficult to talk about this because it wasn't long ago. I had a really difficult childhood. It was tough to deal with. When I was really young, I was very unhappy, trying to do things by myself. I had to grow up really fast. I was just a kid, and I wasn't protected, so I was just really struggling to find something good inside of me. Now that I wrote the EP, I think I am just ready to move on and write some cool, happy, optimistic music.
__TV: What is the message you want to send to your fans? __
MK: I want them to believe in themselves. I know everyone says that, but I want them to believe in themselves and their dreams, and I want them to be who they want to be. I have so many people trying to tell me who I have to be, how I have to sing, or how I was supposed to behave. I just had to decide one day that there's nothing better than being true to yourself. You just have to face yourself, and always listen to your heart.
TV: What’s your favorite song on the record, and why?
MK: I have two: "Freeze You Out," which is the only song that I didn't write, because Sia wrote it for me. She gave me the first cut for it, and so I'm really proud of it. The second is "Sound Like Heaven," because Lindsey Stirling agreed to play the violin for it.
TV: What was it like to have Sia write a song just for you?
MK: Oh my God, I can't find the words. I was in a restaurant with my piano player and my producer called me and said, “you know, you're having a song written by Sia.” I was like, “Are you kidding me?” I couldn't believe it. It was just crazy. I am such a huge fan of her and how true she is to herself. She's a really beautiful person.
TV: What’s been the most surreal part of becoming a record artist?
MK: Working with really amazing people. I'm just this little French girl, and when I was 15, Katy Perry's piano player played on my album. I've gotten to work with amazing songwriters and producers, I get to travel a lot, and I get to go to London, to new York. It is just like a dream. I'm just feeling so proud.
TV: What are your plans for the future?
MK: I want the world to hear my music. I want America to hear my music, so that's my next plan. I really want to do something great in America. I hope to move there one day, not now, but starting by working here would be great.
TV: What are you most afraid of?
MK: Losing my voice. That is the thing that terrifies me the most. If I lose my voice, I don't know how to express myself. The only way I have to really express myself is to sing. If I were to lose my voice, I think I would go crazy.
TV: What are you looking forward to? Anything exciting coming up?
MK: Going to America! I'm just so excited and so proud to go to South by Southwest, and I think it's the biggest challenge of the year so it's gonna be tough but it's gonna be fun, and really cool. I've never really performed in America yet.
TV: Who has had the biggest influence on your music, and on you?
MK: Prince. I love him so much, and Bruno Mars. It's the things they produce and how they play instruments and sing and dance and I don't know…they just have something going for them...their natural talent.
Check this out:

Queen Natala Walker (of Navarre)
Phantom Wiki URL
Queen Natala of Navarrae was captured by Redbeard and when he was defeated by the 6th Phantom was rescued and set free. She was able to be returned, with treasure and a new fleet of ships including ex pirates for sailors as compensation.
Due to the 6th Phantom being shy towards Natala and her status it was up to the Queen to propose marriage to the Phantom. He of course said yes.
Natala as you would expect from royalty is strong minded, smart, knows what she wants and refined.
In the Lee Falk story she abdicated from the throne but in other stories she is still involved in some capacity in the nation of Navarrae.

“How the Earth Got Its Color”
Performed by Drama of Works
I sat down front to hear everything, and was next to two boys whose parent or parents were somewhere else. They were antsy, and kidding around. When the show started, the duo puppeteers came out (Gretchen Van Lente and Scott Weber) with their song about the color musicians, and while they were extremely enthusiastic the song was a little too long to join in, though the song itself was rather nice. Like most of the audience, I did not realize the words were in the program! It was an Aztec story about how the world lost its color because the Musicians who play and create it had disappeared. The Sun god did it, and one by one the Wind god goes around visiting other gods trying to find his musician friends to bring them back. Each god he visits gives him something strong to help him. I have absolutely no issue with the quality of the performances, but the smaller kids were getting tired of all the exposition so that when the Wind god thinks he can do this hard task because we believe in him, both of the boys next to me first said, “I don't” but then joined in with everyone because they were taught to play nice. The kids did not join in with the sound effects much even with the prompting, though they did enjoy flinging their colored streamers around at the end. Their musician, James Walton ,who knew what he was doing, really needed bigger tools: when he mimics the sound of a rattle, few can hear the sound of beads being shaken in a tube. Good sound effects tools are called for in children's theater, and I think they should have used their musician more in this show because kids really do respond to music being played live. I would have loved to have heard a rainstick in his tools, too, because the Wind god has rain as one of his weapons.
The show was not boring to me, or the older children, but Drama of Works needs more show and less tell (maybe more playful prodding with the audience for interaction) to keep the younger kids engaged. Kids are a hard audience!
Written and performed by Michael Romanyshyn, with Mr. Romanyshyn on clarinet, Kaolyn Kinsey on tuba, Roberto Rossi on accordion, and Shaunalynn Duffy on clarinet.
This show had the kids from the start, because all the people (who performed as much as the puppets) had instruments with a rousing sound. They have a good way of using their trunk for storage, a stage, and even some instruments and stage special effects. It was great music and my two front row neighbors who were next to me again were grinning and tapping their feet. The company enters in disguise (because they are unfortunately in Arizona). Romanyshyn begins narrating about how they were refugees from countries who made them leave or die, looking for something better than death. They formed the Refugee Band, and stayed on the run from the authorities until they land in Brooklyn where one of them has lost her family home. They decide to take a stand, and call on their Fairy Godmother to help them. She is a puppet on Romanyshyn's hand and she gives them some magical potion to put into the tea of the vultures who bought the foreclosed home. The potion will shrink their big heads, and cause their hearts to grow. I hope she remembered to pay the mortgage and taxes, too.
This was the most successful of the shows I saw for kids. It was short, it was musical and noisy, funny and had a simple story (if a rather simplistic ending). The performers were not afraid to look silly, they made a lot of audience eye contact, let you know THEY were having fun, and did not talk down to the kids even on the serious subjects. The children and adults responded in kind.
Monday, June 14, 2010
GSW9: Festival Report VIII
A final report from Tess Elliott from the toy theatre festival, on the Second Family Program (part of it covered in a previous post...)

Mother alleges autopsy reveals Whitney died of electrocution
Blessing Adeniran, the mother of a 12-year-old Chrisland student who died during the school’s Inter-house sports, has said that an autopsy carried out on Whitney revealed she died of electrocution. Adeniran stated this in a live Instagram video on Wednesday.
She said: “I want to thank everyone for your support, your calls and messages have helped us go through this very difficult period.
“The autopsy result is out and Desola was electrocuted. My daughter died of electrocution. I have been subjected to trauma for the past two weeks.
“Tomorrow will make it three weeks since my baby died. The school made me think I was crazy. They started pushing the narrative of she was sick; she was sickly. They sent letters and publications out.
“People insulted me and my family. My child was electrocuted to death. I told the school that I don’t want trouble. All I want is answers. They came to my house and knelt.
“I begged, I pleaded, I said ‘Mrs Amao please, I don’t know how an autopsy is being done but I have browsed it and the image is scary. Please my daughter is already dead, don’t make me put her through that, they will butcher her. I beg you in the name of God, you are a mother, help me investigate and find out what happened. She said she doesn’t know. They refused to investigate.
“My daughter was butchered for autopsy. She was opened up. They took part of her kidney, liver, stomach contents, blood, brain, and bone marrow. Omodesola was butchered just because Chrisland kept protecting their reputation.”

Last week as I was thinking about what my column might hold for this week, a school bus full of high school seniors arrived in the parking lot outside my work site. They piled out of the bus like a swarm of bees and headed for our historic railroad depot. I saw a lady with a camera in her hands and figured out that this was a senior photo opportunity.
It seemed so long ago that my class of 1965 enjoyed the same feeling as these modern day seniors. Some call it senior-I-tis. The malady strikes all high school seniors about this time of year.
It is a time when they can see the end of the rope. They feel a certain sense of freedom for the first time in their school careers. Some of the constraints that were present during their school years are released a bit, giving them reason to kick up their heels and feel the fresh breeze of freedom.
My senior class set aside a day for our senior individual pictures. We were allowed to choose a photo studio to take our photographs, and most of us chose a studio in Sioux City. The boys and girls were separated and were allowed to afford their own means of transportation.
In my case, my friend, Ronnie, had the newest car and he was chosen to take a load of his friends to the studio. We were all dressed up in our suits when we left the school parking lot.
The rule was that we were supposed to go directly to the studio, get our pictures taken and then head back to school. Once we left the parking lot in Ronnie's car, I knew this was not to be the case in our experience. There was talk immediately of what we were going to do after our pictures were taken. The conversation didn't involve heading right on back to school.
Once out of posing at the studio there was a discussion as to where we would find a pool hall. We felt no one would miss us for an hour or so, so we headed across the river to a spot we all knew.
The bartender looked at us kind of in astonishment as we entered wearing our suits and ties. He hadn't seen anybody dressed up like that in awhile, I guess. But, he didn't say anything and we hit the pool table with a vengeance.
"Eight ball in the corner pocket," said my friend, Melvin, as he stroked the cue ball. Click, click and the ball dropped into the corner netting. After an hour, we declared Melvin the winner and took off from the gravel parking lot in a cloud of dust.
I remember Ronnie's car radio playing tunes by the Everly Brothers, the Beatles, Roy Orbison and Jerry and the Pacemakers as we tooled back up Highway 75 and into the school's parking lot. We noticed that all the cars from the other seniors who had driven were already in the parking lot.
It was with a bit of apprehension that we strode into the hallways and up into the study hall. One of our teachers, Mr. Pavlik, was standing guard at the door as we entered.
"You guys been fighting forest fires?" he uttered as we shrugged off into the desks.
I knew Ronnie shouldn't have smoked that Lucky Strike in the car.
I was thinking about that experience that day last week as I watched that bunch of seniors head out of the bus and down to have their group picture taken. The photographer looked as if she was herding a bunch of cats as she tried to get them all to look at the camera without making goofy faces or gestures. Some of them laid on the ground, some of them climbed up on the railings of the depot and some of them just tried to sneak into the back of the group.
They were seniors. They're not to be held accountable for some things this time of year. You can't blame them.
Freedom is a wonderful thing! I felt it that day in 1965 when we were set free.
See you next time. Okay?

US loses, learns in water polo play-off
A long, hard tournament for the seven members of the American deaf water polo team ended yesterday with an 18-goal thrashing at the hands of a far more polished Italian team in the bronze-medal play-off, but they will go home a stronger unit after each player competed in every minute of their games.
American coach Marc Ruh, who cut two members from the squad before the tournament because of poor attitude, said his team would prove a solid basis for the future of deaf American water polo, even though its only success was a 16-2 pounding of an inexperienced Australia team. It lost 21-3 yesterday.
Ruh said the team, which was beaten by Hungary 15-6, Germany 17-13 and Italy 23-5 in the preliminary rounds, was hamstrung without substitutes but did not play to its full potential.
"For them to be able to play five games and play every minute of every game, that's just experience you can't get anywhere," Ruh said.
"We're already building the future right now with the kids that are in the program now. To be honest, there were times during those games when the clock couldn't run fast enough, but I had to keep reminding myself just how valuable that experience was for them.
"We're pretty beat up, some very sore shoulders, bad knees, things like that. It's tough to keep going through that, but the guys did a great job just pushing and pushing and pushing. You can imagine how hard that would be to be down by 20 goals and have to keep pushing, so we just tried to take it one minute at a time."
Greg Marecek, a Stanford University student who is deciding whether to major in engineering or mathematics, has enjoyed proving people wrong most of his life. He contracted meningitis as an infant and, at the time, was not given a good prognosis. But, with the support of his parents, he has thrown himself into everything he could, including a slightly offbeat desire to sing in the church choir when he was five years old.
"People thought that was a little weird but I wanted to do it, so (my parents) let me do it," Marecek said yesterday. "I've done about eight different sports in lifetime, always got good grades and I have always pushed myself to go as far as I could. A lot of people thought I was this deaf kid who'll never be able to do this much and I like proving them wrong.
"I got meningitis when I was one and that's how I lost my hearing and at the point, the doctors were not sure what would happen . . . they thought that I might never walk and talk again."
Meanwhile, the Australian women's basketball team lost an entertaining fifth-spot play-off against Greece 78-54. In women's soccer, Norway beat Australia 6-2, also in a fifth-spot play-off.

Ghana's finest actor
Acting was never part of his dream. He became one by accident. Yet, he is currently one of the best actors the country has ever had, with many awards under his sleeves.
Just like every child with big dreams, young David wanted to become a medical doctor. Unfortunately his dreams were dashed when he failed to make the grades after Sixth Form to qualify for medical school.
Frustrated as he was then, David Tontoh, one of Ghana’s finest actors, decided to rewrite the exam to better his grades. It was during that time that he was contracted to do some illustrations for a book called "Agriculture in the Tropics" for one Dr Olean Hess, who was then one of the directors of the USAID. He recognised his artistic talents and commended him.
In a chat with the Junior Graphic,Mr Dontoh said because he liked drawing, painting, watching films, musical shows and writing poetry, Dr Hess’ comments gingered him to take acting seriously.
Mr Dontoh said it was just around the same time that the then Ghana Film Industry Corporation (GFIC) put up an advert for people who wanted to train in film acting.
He went for the audition and was one of the 40 successful applicants selected out of 150. That was how he got into the acting profession.
The successful applicants were then trained at the acting academy of the late George Andoh Wilson, who had trained at the London Guild Hall School of Drama and was in charge of the Osagyefo players for three years.
During the training, Mr Tondoh had the chance of taking part in a small play titled – GUS – the theatre cat written by T. S. Elliot.
The play was showcased on TV during the Mike Hagan show where Mr Wilson was being interviewed as a celebrity .He performed the lead role in GUS so well such that, Mike Hagan’s praises further convinced him that he could act well.
Today, the acting profession which he saw as a menial career when he was a student has opened doors to higher places for him across the globe.
Asked how he came by his household name "Ghanaman", he laughed heartily and said in 1982 a theatre group was formed to replace Osofo Dadzie which went off air after the unrest. The group was known as "KETEKE," a drama group which was on air for about one and a half years.
"The name was later changed to Obra and became a very popular TV programme which earned me the name Ghanaman which I have accepted affectionately", he smiled. Members of the Obra Drama group at that time were Maame Dokono, Station Master, Dr Rokoto, Esi Kom among others.
He got the chance of auditioning for a full feature film when King Ampaw of AFRO MOSES Ghana Limited shot their film, "Kukurantumi" – The Road To Accra." The film was the first Ghanaian film to be screened on TV in Europe.
It was after this film that he started working on radio programmes. On GBC Two for instance, he started as a stringer on Carl Agyeman-Bannerman’s programme, "Solid Black".
He also took part in radio theatre with presenters like Tony Annan Forson, Charlie Sam, the late James Amartey and Gertrude Opare Addo.
Looking younger than his age, Mr Dontoh who loves wearing African clothes disclosed that he would be celebrating his 60th birthday next year, in December.
He had his elementary education in Cape Coast, Winneba and Abakranpa, all in the Central Region. He then continued to Apam Secondary School from Form One to Upper Six. For the Sixth Form, he read Biology, Physics, Chemistry and Mathematics.
Though a science student, he loved the arts subjects as well so at the O'Level he studied nine subjects. "In fact, in 1975 I was one of the best Geography students in the whole country and so had distinction. However, my biggest blow was when I was not selected at the university to read medicine. It is all good, because I don't regret being an actor. Actors just don't entertain but also heal people and impart knowledge as well," he explained.
Mr Dontoh, who loves to uphold the traditional beliefs and practices of Ghana, lamented that "children of today are not humble and ready to learn. They always want to have their way".
Sharing his childhood experiences, he said his mother was a fish monger so he also sold some of the fish to enable him to buy his textbooks for school. "My sister, I have done a lot of trading. I have sold vegetables, doughnuts, bread, fish, among others, yet I found time to study.
Along the line in his career, Mr Dontoh did Drama and Theatre Studies (From 1985 to 1988) at the School of Performing Arts, University of Ghana, Legon. He majored in playwriting.
He and his wife, Rebecca, are blessed with two children, Jojo and Ewurama.
David Dontoh runs his own company "Golden Kauri" and an NGO, Kaurifire Arts Foundation. He founded three theatre groups that he works with. They are KOZIKOZI Theatre Company, Edzikanfo Concert Party and David Dontoh Cultural Ensemble (DADON CULEN).
Mr Dontoh currently hosts his own television programme, Agrofie, which is aimed at projecting African values.

Lowes home ImprovementLower do-it-yourself rate
Employees assumed that I had been lying, yelling and doing everything in her powers not to let the managers talk to me. It is the fact that there is clear evidence that I was linked to this shop and talked to someone there who was promising a shipment that was never shown. "My man and I are also the Lowe card holders and have issued innumerable thousand in Lowes shops in Illinois and Indiana.
Terrible wait-and-see attitude. You made it really difficult for me to buy 1200 bucks at your shop. You go to the client services desk and tell the employee my predicament. He' calling the head of the division, saying he can buy me the article for $124.99. Says you don't come with a rechargeable pack or charging device.
Then he says that he can only resell it for $124. 99, but I would have to go down there and just get the battery and there are two guys already there. and he says no, he has to get it.
Once again I asked him if he could just give me the saw for $84.99 and keep the rechargeable power pack and charging unit and I'll be on my way as I've been in the shop for an hours now. Says he can't ignore that because he won't make any cash.
Although the website says that saw without rechargeable power and charging device is $84.99. Over the years I have invested a lot of my valuable resources in this business, mainly because of its favourable position. I' m going to Menard's or Home Depot, Ace... etc. The 9.6. we have fully payed the floor covering for a rent.
Every time we went in or phoned to ask where the floor was or when it was laid, we made the run around it. Nobody knew where to find the floor covering we had purchased! The plumber thought we had it. In fact, the plumber appeared on the premises and thought that the floor would be awaiting him there.
We asked one Pione to only get a reimbursement, but we were said they wouldn't do that because they didn't know where the floor was at all. Meanwhile, as we were trying to find out where our floor was, we received telephone conversations from Lowes support staff asking how we liked our new floor.
However, if, in all the chaos, only one of the Lowes staff, even the one who said that he was a supervisor, took some responsibilities or once said that he was sorry for the bewilderment and delay, we would not have such harsh emotions.
My self-checkout system in this business is totally shitty. In addition to this topic, the self-checkout assassins are always not fast enough to solve problems. Unautomated check-out lines are seldom employees...ed according to the sale volumes and there seems to be no proactive managers for the check-out lines. In addition, the price for the same articles is considerably higher than for Menards.
I' m shopping here to persuade, but it's simply not my case to talk about the checkout crepppy cognition. Tiki didn't ask me to take over a symbolic US domination, I know it's one thing to resell it, but bringing it out is not sensitive! I' ve been spending a lot of cash at Lowe's last year, but I'm not going back that fast.
Gone to lowes this evening and they didn't have a till open next to the self checks... just means they don't want my store.....

About Adam Nardi
Adam Nardi is best known for his in depth work in the field of sculpture working with mainly clay and casting. He also has extensive experience in many other mediums such as painting, FX work used in both haunted houses and film, photography, as well as earth art. His work embodies his life experience along with an external commentary. He has shown work, competed, and been published locally, nationally, and internationally. He traveled to China where he had worked in earth art, which was published in China’s, Sculpture Magazine. He has competed in both Snow Days and Snow Visions, international snow sculpting competitions, three day sculpting events. Some of his work has also been published in Ride BMX magazine as well as a book by Francesca Galvin’s, “Hell Bound: New Gothic Art.” Some recent gallery exhibitions include are Iannelli Studios Heritage Center, South Shore Cultural Center, and Salt Air Gallery. He also assists in running Odyssey Art Collective. He lives and works as an Art Instructor in Chicago, Illinois.

As Pittsburgh police continue their investigation into the death of a 2-year-old boy who was witness are telling their stories.
Two of them commented to Patch.
A person using the name Dreamweaver wrote: "I was at the zoo today in the restaurant right outside of the Painted dog exhibit and witnessed it...very scary. We have often thought just how unsafe that exhibit is, nothing to stop anyone from falling. Nothing I want to witness again."
Kathleen Lucas was another witness who shared her comments on Patch: "I was there, at the exhibit. It did not take several minutes for the dogs to attack, they did so immediately. It was a horrible scene that I wish I was not part of and witness. My prayers go out to the mom and family."
Homicide investigators have interviewed several witnesses and zoo personnel, and the investigation is ongoing, police said.
They are asking anyone who witnessed this incident to call the Pittsburgh Homicide Unit at (412) 323-7161.

A tragic video appeared yesterday, Wednesday, of the killing of 4 people and the wounding of 3 others in critical condition, when two helicopters collided last Monday near the city of the Gold Coast overlooking the state of “Queensland” on the Indian Ocean in eastern Australia, and in it a passenger of 4 who were in one of the two planes appears, as he pats the The pilot’s shoulder to warn him of the imminent collision with a second helicopter that was in the process of descending, while his plane was in the take-off position, but everything ended as quickly as it took to find a solution, and the four died on the spot.
The video, which was obtained by the Australian TV channel 7News, and broadcast yesterday, Wednesday, was filmed by one of the four passengers, when their plane took off, and at one point he moved his mobile phone camera to photograph the scene next to the take-off path, and then a passenger we see sitting behind the pilot noticed the approach of the second helicopter, so he patted his shoulder. Urgently to warn him, then he grabbed the pilot’s seat in preparation for a collision, which he confirmed was inevitably a reality, which is what actually happened, and then the filming was cut off with the death of everyone.
And the TV channel reported that the pilot, Michael James, was able to stabilize the helicopter and stay upright with the possibility of those on board suffering only minor injuries, but he was unable to do so, while the second helicopter landed on a sandy area after its main propeller hit the helicopter’s windshield. The second one, where the wounds were inflicted on those who were inside, including a 10-year-old child. Another 9-year-old child was wounded, in addition to a 33-year-old woman.

WEST JORDAN — Heather Quast was a kind, popular teenager who "strongly believed in the peace sign" as a symbol of peace, love, unity and respect, her family said.
She had gotten mixed up in some small-scale marijuana dealing, but was looking to make a change.
"She was getting to a point where she didn't want to sell pot anymore," her mother, Rashell, told 3rd District Judge Terry Christiansen during the sentencing Wednesday of the man who played a role in her death.
"She didn't think it was worth it, but she was friends with Jose."
Prosecutors said it was the girl's friendship with Jose Jesus Neri, 21, that led to her death. They said he arranged the robbery that would ultimately leave the 18-year-old dead and asked that Neri receive consecutive sentences.
Christiansen sentenced the man to just that, ordering Neri to spend five years to life in prison for aggravated robbery, a first-degree felony, and another one to 15 years for manslaughter, a second-degree felony.
"You weren't the one who stabbed her, but your involvement was substantial," the judge said. "You set up the aggravated robbery. … Had you not done that, she would still be here."
On May 26, 2010, Quast and a friend, Aric Russom, were in a field next to the Jordan River Parkway Trail, near 1100 West and 3900 South, waiting to make a drug deal when they were both stabbed, police said. Russom was stabbed in the face, near his eye.
Quast was struck in the stomach and taken to the hospital, where she was later pronounced dead.
Neri arranged the meeting and brought Cristian Alzaga, 22. Police documents state that when the men arrived to make the exchange, Alzaga asked for all of their drugs and stabbed Quast and Russom. Alzaga was sentenced to concurrent terms of 15 years to life in prison for murder and five years to life for aggravated robbery, both first-degree felonies, in March.

Son broke two bones in his forearm yesterday while playing outside. I'm pretty sure it was my fault. Cause I didn't shower and was wearing too tight yoga pants and no makeup. And walking around like that is pretty much a surefire guarantee that you'll end up in the ER with your kids. And I got a nosebleed on the ambulance ride over because my blood pressure shot up after seeing my son's arm shaped like a capital letter "S". So my white shirt with the bald Ajax man on the front was spattered in blood.
At one point, son was zonked out from painkillers so I put lipstick on. Because I felt that would distract from the bloodstains apparently? No, because that's the dumb shit you preoccupy yourself with so you don't have to think about your poor little dude's situation too closely.
But despite inappropriate cosmetic application, I think I did a pretty good job of holding it together for him. My knees buckled when I saw the X-Ray of both his arm bones snapped clean through. And I got shaky when I had to leave the room so they could set his arm. But I think I was able to comfort son and help him feel as calm as I could while we were there.
Grandpa came with a teddy bear, and Grandma showed up soon after. Husband was coming by train so it took longer for him to arrive. Before he got there the nurse told son that he would be able to go home soon. Son said, "No - I'll stay here till my daddy comes. I need to talk to him." And he did. We got home and set him up with codeine, a movie, and pretty much anything he wanted. We were doing ok.
But today the awfulness of it snuck up and walloped me. Husband and I cut son out of his tee-shirt so we could help him into a clean, roomy daddy tee. He's still in a splint and we were too nervous to pull his arm through the hole. Without his shirt on I was able to see son's teeny tiny shoulder blades. His tiny wrist bones and elbows. 6 year old elbows. I got weepy and kept kissing and hugging him till he was like, "Lady, COME ON!".
But it was like that new baby scared feeling came over me. When you get your new baby home and just stare at them because they are so delicately constructed that you just know your going to demolish them in some way. You'll set your coffee mug down in the wrong spot and squish their skull by accident. Or fart in the wrong direction and send them sailing into traffic. Somehow, you're going to screw up and break them because they are just that super delicate.
But they totally survive. And after awhile you think of them as your hale and hardy kids. Fell on your head? Well that's gonna leave a mark! They seem so big and grownup that you forget that they are still totally little and smushable. So smushable.

The weaving loom is the functional machine that has been present since ages. They mainly serve in the weaving fabrics, the rugs as well as a variety of other fabrics. When you think buying the loom for project or else necessity, there are a variety of aspects that you must consider prior to making the decision. This will help you in recognizing the most excellent machine from lot as well as also deriving the finest results.
When thinking of buying the weaving loom, you must consider that what you wish to weave, for example, fabric, rugs, or else tapestry. Second you as well need to think how big the piece do you mean to weave, how many space do you contain, as well as what are your ability as well as interests? If you are purchasing the weaving loom for first time you can look for the inkle loom or else the rigid heddle loom. Afore mentioned looms are very easy to work on with as well as are also small as well as also provide you with the valuable insight also into many of the aspects of weaving. In the weaving loom, width point out how wide the fabric you can weave, though the length might be lots of yards on the floor looms in addition to it is often incomplete on the rigid heddle or else table looms. One of good weaving looms that you can purchase is 4-harness table loom. New version of this weaving loom is very cheaper as well as can also be moved very easily.
However, table loom is also hand-operated as well as therefore very much slower than the floor loom. As well because of the low weight as well as width, weaving possibilities are also very limited. At a distance from the few limitations, table loom is very popular as well as is appreciated by the beginners, the expression purposes, samples as well as workshops. An additional great purchase is floor loom however you must think it in case while you have the enough floor space. Compared to table loom, this part is very heavier as well as sturdier plus also works much faster. Floor weaving loom as well presents more potential as well as gives the better shed since of its superior depth. A few of the floor looms are also very light as well as can also be folded, while a few of the others are very heavier as well as engage more of the space. If you think on the weaving most of the rugs are heavy, floor loom must be the first choice.
Most form of weaving make the most of warp threads, from side to side which weft clothes are woven. For weaving a wall-hanging, there were 2 types of looms; the far above the ground warp and the near to the ground warp. Both looms long-drawn-out the warp threads sandwiched between two rollers. A far above the ground warp loom is worked perpendicularly, with the weaver session or footing in front of the loom; at the same time as a near to the ground warp loom is works on the horizontally side with the weaver sitting after that to or openness over the loom. Bobbins were made to use to grasp the weft threads, just similar to weavers use todays world.

50 Cent says since Nicki already knew her boyfriend, it's not too early to talk marriage.
Everything pertaining to Nicki Minaj's new relationship has caused media outlets to go wild. It's gotten bad enough that Nicki is actually suing one reporter for spreading lies about her. Minaj is one of the most outspoken artists in the game as she always speaks her mind on social media. She can likely relate to 50 Cent and the way he's always stayed true to his beliefs in what he posts. Fiddy has no censoring capability so it was clear that when TMZ approached him in the street, they would try and get him to talk.
The G-Unit leader said he wasn't ready to speak about the death of Pedro Jimenez, a Power crew member. However, he was happy to speak about Nicki Minaj's relationship with Kenneth Petty. Fiddy has tried to be a marriage counsellor to Cardi B and Offset, telling the "Bodak Yellow" songstress that she "needs to go home," and now he's seemingly backing Nicki's decisions to talk marriage and babies with Kenneth Petty. When the photographer asked him if he thought it was too early after they only started dating two months ago, Fif brought up the fact that they've known each other for years. "Maybe she already knew him," he said. "He from the neighborhood. Southside."
What do you think about Nicki and her new/old flame? Is it too early to be considering babies?

Sounds like my Overland that is currently enroute to my local dealership from a dealership in Oregon has 45 miles on it.
I just hope they put it on a truck to get it up here and don't actually drive it - who knows though, part of me thinks they're driving it
. I'll have to ask.
My brand new RSX Type-S in 2006 had 7 miles on it and my brand new VW GTI in 2011 had 51 miles on it.

Daniel's collar was a dark bruise around his throat; the buckle glinting like tears.
"Jack..." Daniel's voice rose and cracked. "I can't breathe."
"Sure, you can; you're talking, aren't you?" Jack lost some skin on the stone floor, but he got close enough to brush his fingertips across the curled, clenched fists Daniel's bound hands were making behind his back.
Daniel turned his head away, not letting Jack see the expression panic had put on his face, but his hands relaxed enough for Jack to hook one finger inside the cupped palms, caught against the sweaty warmth in a convulsive, unacknowledged grip. They never usually pulled shit like this off-world, but Jack was just glad he had some way of calming Daniel down, and getting past his own emotions at seeing Daniel like this.
Emotions which didn't include fear, because he knew the collars weren't that tight.
"Sam and Teal'c'll get us out of this." Jack rolled his head irritably, feeling the stiff leather abrade his neck. Not tight, no, but really badly-made pieces of crap.
And emotions which didn't, past that first, shameful flush of heat when he first got a look at Daniel's neck, include arousal, because Daniel was scared, and that didn't do a thing for Jack, and never would.
Yeah. They'd get rescued soon, he knew it. Could hear the faraway sounds of weapons and screaming, none of it human.
And then he was going to personally hurt the aliens who'd made it really fucking unlikely Daniel was ever going to agree to wear a collar for Jack for fun.
And it would have been. He would have made it good. Had it planned for sometime when Daniel was feeling bored, or adventurous, trusting to his memory of Daniel's reaction the one time he'd pinned his wrists and held him still while his mouth worked Daniel's body out of control and coming in a rush and a yell. Daniel had been all over him afterwards, pressing up close, arching and gasping when Jack had bitten his way around the faint, fading fingerprints on Daniel's wrists.
He'd been looking forward to it, dammit, and Daniel would've gotten a kick out of it --
Daniel choked and whimpered his name and Jack sighed even as he murmured something soothing, all his bright, warm fantasies soiled and spoiled.
Return to Home
Click here if you'd like to send feedback

They did not see that coming!
Is Jamie Oliver Bringing A Kebab Shop To Albert Square?
The famed chef has revealed he would love a starring role in Eastenders.
Jamie Oliver has restaurants up and down the country, so it only seems logical that he open up a business in the most famed location of all - Albert Square!
The famed chef has revealed he would love to have a starring role in Eastenders, and take ownership of a kebab shop in the iconic fictional town of Walford.
The 41-year-old celebrity chef quipped to The Sun Online: "Do they need a kebab shop? I would run the kebab shop heavy on the chilli all night long."
It seems that he is really serious about his ambitions too, as he joked to the reporter: "Seriously, nobody has ever asked me but can you get me the job?"
Jamie's kebab shop would probably be a welcomed addition to the Square, but he would have tough competition as there are already a lot of thriving food outlets in Walford.
Businessman Ian Beale has steady trade with his food businesses 'The Bridge Street Cafe' and his chip shop 'Ian's Plaice'.
For now, Jamie has his hands full with his own restaurant business and family life with his wife Jools Oliver, who gave birth to their fifth child River six months ago.
Asked if he wants to add to his brood, he said: "I really don't think so. Personally, I never thought I'd have more than two kids, but our family feels very complete now. I'm grateful that Jools is such a brilliant mum."
Jamie previously confessed he was "shocked" to find out his wife - with whom he also has Poppy, 14, Daisy, 13, Petal, seven, and Buddy, six - was expecting their fifth child.
He said at the time: "This was not expected, I can't even believe I'm saying it. I think my own family were like 'really?!' But we're all tuned in to kids, it's good, it's carnage!
"It would be nice to balance it out a bit [with a boy]. A bit more testosterone would probably be a good thing, but do you know what, I'm just grateful for whatever I get if it's healthy, and I mean that."
The couple have said they'll donate revenue from this video to the “LGBT+ Switchboard” and charity “It Gets Better”.
Recently Played Tracks
To listen live, choose your preferred station:
Now playing: The best feel good music

27-year-old Shivaji Shinde believed he was tired from a hard day of work until he discovered that he had a serious heart condition. He needs surgery to improve his condition and eliminate the immediate threat to his life.
Shivaji lives with his father and mother in a small rented place in Malleshwaram’s Milk Colony. He was working at a factory near Jalahalli cross. He used to get very tired every day, but he wrote it off as stress from work.
Shivaji’s father Maruti Shinde recounts the events leading from last year, “One day, his fatigue got so serious that the other workers had to admit him to the hospital. The doctor there diagnosed him of heart enlargement and transferred him to a cardiac specialty hospital. We couldn’t afford his treatment there so we requested a transfer to a smaller hospital. Unfortunately, the other hospitals did not have the equipment or expertise required to treat him. So, he was prescribed medicines to manage his condition.”
Shivaji was required to pay monthly visits to the hospital for examination. “From what I understand, he was not given the right medicines. So, his condition kept getting worse until it became imperative to have him admitted to the hospital again.”
Shivaji was diagnosed with severe Dilated Cardiomyopathy (enlarged heart), with pneumonia, and loculated pleural effusion. The cavity around his lungs was filled with fluid and needed to be drained. As he was not responding to the medication, the fluid build increased causing an abnormal accumulation of fibrous tissues over lungs called fibrothorax.
This time, affordability was out of the question. Shivaji’s life was in grave danger. The doctors recommended crowdfunding as an option to help with the medical bills and stressed the importance of treating Shivaji right now to avoid further complications.
“They drained over a liter of fluid from his lungs. He needed to be in the ICU to avoid infection and also be hooked to certain equipment. Now he needs surgery called thoracotomy decortication to remove that fibrous layer that is reducing his lung capacity.”
Shivaji would eventually need a heart transplant as his heart is getting weaker, but his condition needs to improve before a second surgery. The priority now is to stabilize his lungs and reduce the pressure on his heart so there are lesser risks for the transplant.
The approximate cost for this surgery and continued care is Rs. 2.5 lakhs. Shivaji lost his job in the factory due to his condition. He did, however, sign up to be an Ola Cab driver for a few months before his condition for worse. Unfortunately, his income was not enough to make substantial savings for medical expenses.
“I have studied only until 8th standard. What jobs will they give us? We are stuck earning a few thousand a month to support our families. I never thought this day would come when I had to see my son fight for his life and feel helpless.”
Your contribution can help a father save his son’s life.

Friday, May 2, 2014
As Veras rehabs, Cubs improvise at closer
By Jesse Rogers
CHICAGO -- Chicago Cubs general manager Jed Hoyer is optimistic his team can develop a closer as the one they signed in the offseason, veteran Jose Veras, tries to find his game.
Injured Cubs reliever Jose Veras has 10 walks in 5 2/3 innings this season.
"That's been a frustrating one, and I think kind of shows you the perils of free agency a little bit," Hoyer said before the Cubs played the Cardinals on Friday. "I think (Veras) walked 13 (14) guys as a closer in 43 innings with the (Houston) Astros last year. He had no walks last year in the postseason with the (Detroit) Tigers and he comes here and doesn't throw strikes."
Veras went on the disabled list earlier this week after walking 10 batters in 5 2/3 innings pitched last month. He also hit three batters as his off-speed pitches, in particular, were all over the place.
"I'm hoping it was physical, maybe a little bit mechanical and he can get on track," Hoyer said. "It wasn't that long ago that the Tigers were leaning on him to get their most important outs. Obviously, he hasn't been able to do that."
Veras will start pitching at Double-A Tennessee as he recovers from an oblique injury. In the meantime the Cubs will try to develop a closer from within. It was assumed Pedro Strop would get that role but lately Hector Rondon has gotten the chances.
"It can be hard to sign a guy and bring him into a situation that he's not familiar with," Hoyer said. "Ideally, we would develop a closer from one of these guys that we have on our roster. We have some guys that have the stuff and make-up to do it and hopefully it will click with one."

Whitaker Family Session
I am pretty much in awe of this gorgeous family. They have managed to raise the happiest little girl in the world. As a photographer, I meet a lot of children, and miss Alice just a treat.
I am so happy I got to photograph Brenna and her family before I moved to Monterey Bay! I first met Brenna when I only had one child. Brenna was one of my two nannies. She was great with my daughter. Milana used to call her “Memay”. Brenna has since gotten married and had a beautiful baby girl of her own. Her family was visiting the area and she contacted me for family photos. I hope I get to photograph them again someday!

The Role of Wealth in Our World Essay
Poverty is something we all love to talk about when it comes to other people. Unfortunately, when it comes to ourselves it’s a different story. Sooner or later we find out where we stand in the social ladder in life. We find out if we have less than we thought we had or vice versa. I remember the first time I truly learned to appreciate the things that I had. Back in 8th grade I had a friend named Daniel and he lived in a mansion. After a few months of hanging out with him, I started to feel jealousy over the amount of wealth his family had.
It made me so angry that Daniel lived in a mansion and I was just a regular middle class kid. What I ended up finding out though is that Daniel’s relationship with his family was pretty dry. Although his family was very rich, they had a poor communication with each other. For example, I never once in the two years I went over there had seen the family eating together. This started to open my eyes to the idea that maybe my life is far more blessed than Daniel’s on account of the fact that my family is rich with culture and love.
Like Abraham Lincoln once said “Character is like a tree and reputation like its shadow. The shadow is what you think of it; the tree is the real thing” (“Character”). This made me realize that all that time I thought that Daniel had so much more than me, in reality his life was poor in a place that mine was rich. It had me thinking about my blessings. When money, the thing that people claim to love the most, is introduced into a family, it can make things more complicated and even affect their character. In life poverty makes people tend to do desperate things in desperate situations.
In “Black Hair,” Gary Soto discusses a very desperate time in his life as a seventeen-year-old runaway living on the streets. He had a job in the Valley Tire Company moving around tires. But that did not seem to help his situation because he was working like an animal for such miniscule pay. As times started to get tough, Soto found himself doing things that most people would not even think of doing. “I searched out a place to sleep and found an unlocked car that seemed safe” (Soto 371). It’s not that Soto was a criminal it’s that poverty has that effect on humans.
We are all built to do whatever is necessary to survive. We also tend to find ourselves doing things we would find gross or disgusting. “Before leaving I took a bottle that hung on the side of the coke machine, filled it with water, and stopped it with a scrap of paper and a rubber band” (Soto 369). This shows how when you are starving or thirsty you will go to new fronts to satisfy your body’s basic cravings. Living in that type of poverty is something that many Americans hopefully won’t have to experience, but it is a reality and should be recognized. Although living in poverty is tough, it tends to make people tough.
Once someone has been raised a certain way, no amount of wealth will ever be able to change that person’s mindset. For example, if somebody was raised filthy rich and spoiled, they will remain that way even if they lost everything. A friend of mine during high school named Daniel was probably the richest kid in Rochester and had one of the worst attitudes towards work I have ever seen. The emotional factor would be the worst part because a very wealthy person is probably used to other people looking up at them and a sudden change of fortune would change that pretty quickly.
You would also find out who you’re real friends were the whole time. I am not trying to be stereotypical but most people who are born rich don’t have that persistency to work hard every day. In other words, they are probably used to getting around the easy way and not having to actually get up early in the morning and work a backbreaking job. This mental mindset can be the difference between life and death in such a transition. This inability to change a mindset may not only apply to rich people. In the documentary Reversal of Fortune the main character “Ted” proves that point.
Ted was a homeless man for over 20 years, and when he struck gold one day, he was given the ultimate test. He discovered a suit case filled with $100,000 and was given a second chance in life. However, due to how he was raised and the type of people he grew up around, like his mother who he called a “bar whore”, this created a very bad influence which lingered into his adult life. Along with this wealth he found that his family was willing to bring him into their lives once more. For once in over 20 years Ted had everything he wanted and he destroyed it pretty quickly.
Ted was very hesitant to get a job or something to fall back on. He is constantly warned week after week by his family to get a job or invest it wisely into a rental property. This idea was foreign to Ted due to his mentality and work ethic. When Ted was homeless, he would only look forward to the end of the day. Weeks went by and Ted did not abandon this foolish mentality which ended up costing him all of his money and the respect of his family. Even though Ted was basically given a second chance in life, he messed it up due to his background of short term goals and bad work ethic.
Human nature is a powerful drug that is deep within us all and is waiting for a perfect opportunity to expose itself. Wealth is known to do many things to a man. Some say it changes people, but I disagree. Wealth actually tends to bring out people’s true colors. In the short essay “My Wood” by E. M. Forster, he portrays himself obtaining a large amount of wealth from his Great Aunt. Forster obtained a piece of land by a public footpath. Forster found himself developing this rapid sense of greed. Whenever the less fortunate kids would walk by his property and pick some blueberries, he would become very angry about this.
Forster was becoming detached from the rest of society around him. Although he may have set up a secure financial situation, he was not able to set up a secure psychological situation. He was never able to enjoy his wealth. This resulted in his desire to make foolish and pointless changes in his landscape which brought him no happiness. As Forster stated at one point “Sometimes I think I will cut down such trees as remain in the wood, at other times I want to fill up the gaps between them with new trees. Both impulses are pretentious and empty.
They are not honest movements towards money-making or beauty. They spring from a foolish desire to express myself and from an inability to enjoy what I have got” (379). Forster said that this vast amount of wealth changes his person but maybe it just brought out his true inner character. Even though Forster had fell victim to greed, he is not the only one to blame for this scenario. But it doesn’t always go that way for most people. In the essay “Good Soldiers” by Sally Tisdale many men and women gave up a lot of what they had to help out the less fortunate.
Tisdale met a lot of people who inspired her and learned things she never knew before. The people who dedicated their life to the Salvation Army received a house, and a car, and good health care. Although the “allowance” was very little, they had everything they needed to survive and stay happy by helping other people. We are all different by the way we choose to live our lives; some people get satisfaction by getting the most for their own gain while a select few actually get a rush of satisfaction by helping those out with less. Even though we like to think we are all saints, we are not.
We all have some form of evil or greed buried deep within us, some deeper than others. It is nothing to be ashamed of because we cannot control it. It is simply the way human nature was structured, and unfortunately we all have it within us. When we tend to think of people in poverty, we look at the physical aspect of what they don’t have instead of how they are treated like second class citizens. For example, we worry about poor people not having the proper nutrition or hygiene that they so desperately need, but what about the legal aspect?
In today’s world, people who are poor or homeless tend to be very separated in terms of where they live and their legal status. As sad as it is to admit, people with less money tend to be treated more unfairly than people who are in the upper class. In “Address to the Prisoners in the Cook County Jail,” Darrow talks about how rich people get more rights because of how rich they are. “If you were rich and were beaten, your case would be taken to the appellate Court. “A poor man cannot take his case to the Appellate Court; he has not the price” (395).
Due to this lack of justice people will do whatever is necessary to survive because they have nothing to lose. Unfortunately we live in a world where money can pretty much buy anything, and that usually means more rights. Poverty can lead people to do things that others would think twice about. Although being rich is considered to be a great deal by many, can it make you soft? This does not only apply to rich people though. In the book “On Dumpster Diving” by Lars Eightner, he found out how hard being poor can really be. There was a point in his life where he had a job and a home.
But as the economy started to slouch, he ended up losing his job. As time rolled by, he eventually ate through all of his savings and had to put all of his income into paying rent. The rest of his daily necessities he had to extract from dumpsters. At first the idea was very foreign to him and very humiliating. He would often do it during the night to try and save himself the embarrassment. But as time passed by he cared less of what people thought about him. Eventually Eightner began to master Dumpster diving as if it were a trade. He learned very quickly how to identify what was safe to eat and what wasn’t.
Not only did Eightner gather his food from dumpsters, he even gathered stuff like candles, books, toilet paper, etc. At one point in the book he even talked about how he found it very annoying when people would ask him what was safe to eat and what wasn’t. “”From time to time one of my companions, aware of the source of my provisions, will ask, “Do you think these crackers are really safe to eat? ” For some reason it is most often the crackers they ask about. This question makes me angry”” (Eightner 412). Eightner started to learn how tough the world can really be.
Doing tough things started to make him tough. There’s one thing for sure though, digging into dumpsters definitely made Eightner more thankful of what he had once he got fully back on his feet again financially. Although poverty is a horrible thing and should never engulf anyone’s life, it does not mean that it is the end of the world. Being poor does not make someone a lower human being than the rest of society, it can actually make people stronger in many ways. Immanuel Kant once said “We are not rich by what we possess but by what we can do without” (“Quotes”).
And even though we usually envy the people who are rich and famous, they are really no better than anybody else. Those people usually are the ones who tend to have very deep issues on the inside that seems to never go away. Also, why is it that our society is even afraid or cautious of poor people? Last time I checked, a poor person does not overtax the public and declare wars based off of special interest. Let it be known that a man should not be judged by his financial status but more by his morals and what he has done. But does being rich really mean that you have more than the poor?
Like Mother Teresa once said “Being unwanted, unloved, uncared for, forgotten by everybody, I think that is a much greater hunger, a much greater poverty than the person who has nothing to eat” (“Quotes”). Whether you believe in fate or not, everything happens for a reason and we have to learn to accept that. Most of the people who are rich had to work hard to get where they are, whereas most of the people who are poor had made poor decisions in the past which had landed them in such a situation. Poverty allows us to appreciate the true blessings in life and always remain true to ourselves.

bEFORE US - CHAPTER 1
WHEN I LEFT his bed, I wondered where I’d gone wrong. Why life was throwing these curveballs at me. At us. Why had it decided to play these evil tricks on my heart?
I was happy. Content.
And then he showed up.
I was in another country and he still found me. Was he looking for me? Did he even know I existed before he sat down across from me at the little café in Paris?
My name on his tongue was like a kiss to the back of my neck. The deep timbre slid over my body, touching every inch of me. Inside and out.
“You know who I am,” I said, allowing my eyes to rake over his large form. The leather cut he was wearing did nothing to hide the muscles beneath it.
I remembered him from when I was a girl, but now I was looking at him with the eyes of a woman.
“Of course I know who you are.” He sat forward, his smoky-gray eyes dropping to the cleavage poking out from my shirt. “Are you on vacation?”
“Backpacking.” I noticed his full lips, my mouth watering at what it would be like to kiss him.
It had been years since I had seen Jaron Mercer. Probably since before I even hit puberty. But the way he was looking at me now made me realize that I was no longer the little girl he used to tease with the other boys we grew up with.
“Your parents let you come here by yourself?” He raised an eyebrow and licked along his full bottom lip.
Heat rushed through me, my heart picking up speed at the small movement. “Who says I’m alone?”
He smirked, causing dimples to form in his cheeks.
Letting out a slow breath, I reached for my glass of water with a shaky hand. “Are you on vacation?” I asked, taking a sip of the cold liquid.
His smirk grew. “I was here on business, but now I think I’ll add some pleasure to this trip.”
“What kind of pleasure?” I asked, suddenly curious about the man I no longer knew.
As soon as that question left my mouth, the rest of the night ended up in a blur.
Every part of me tingled with the memory of him touching me. Kissing me. Consuming me.
I looked back at the man lying in the bed. The white sheets hung low on his hips, the large tattoo of a skull with horns moving slightly on his back with each breath he took.
My hands tingled, itching to reach out to him and crawl back into his warmth. But I couldn’t. As much as I didn’t want to, I had to get home. I had to get away from the man who would destroy everything I knew and save me just the same.

The light has gone out
Friend: Sorry to call. We’re all just worried about you. (pause) Ridiculous question but: How are you?
Me: Drunk and heartbroken. You?
Him: It’s 10AM.
Me: I like to get an early start on things.
Teddy Roosevelt made a few appearances in this blog in the past. The entry I wrote about Xenophen wanting to die with his feet facing home, is one of my favourites and that picture is a statue of Roosevelt.
And I wrote another entry with a quote from him about daring greatly.
Always had an affinity for Teddy, but I’m hoping that it’s not because we will share similar fates.
See, Roosevelt was a New Yorker, like me. He lived walking distance to my pad, not too far from where I went to law school.
He was 25 and in Albany when he heard that his wife Alice gave birth to his daughter. So he rushed home – partly to see his daughter, and partly because his mom was sick.
By the time he got home to 6 West 57th Street, it was too late. His mom had died.
But the sick twist is that his wife died just 11 hours later from a completely unforeseen kidney issue. She was only 22.
Teddy kept a diary where he simply wrote a large black X and a single sentence: The light has gone out of my life.
I remember hearing that story as a kid and it affected me enough that I remembered it. But not so much that I truly appreciated what it must have meant to Teddy.
He couldn’t handle it. He gave his daughter to his sister to raise, put away everything that reminded him of Alice, and moved to North Dakota.
And he never spoke of Alice again and wouldn’t allow those around him to mention her name again. She didn’t even appear in his autobiography.
While that’s a bit much, I understand it.
After seeing my dad, spent the last week putting away as much of her things as possible; donating and tossing what I can. There are pictures and reminders of her everywhere.
They’re like constant papercuts over my shattered self.
Soon, everything will have been put away. And at some point, I’ll have to put Alison away.
Partly because, in the back of my mind, I worry that my other atomic bomb will go off. Mainly because my kid and my dad need me. Won’t be able to function if I don’t and they need me to function.
But, unlike Teddy, I’d never put Alison away completely.
Because, she was the best part of me and I need to give Nate the best of me. So that means keeping her here for him.
I just need a little time.

Today in STL
we had two Virgin Atlantic Airbus 340's which were chartered LHR
. First one was th 600 which was Rams and Cheerleaders flying back to STL
after the game in LHR
. Second AC
which was the 340-300 landed about 1830PM CST. Second ac which I have uploaded to this post was a group that most likely went over for the game. After clearing customs they came to the ramp and were loaded on buses.
|Virgin Atlantic Airbus 340-300 STL Oct 29, 2012 landing about 1830|
[Edited 2012-10-29 19:23:57]

Izuku has gotten used to being underestimated for the majority of his life. It's been because of many things throughout the years: Quirklessness, small physique, shy outward nature ect. Stupid things he can't really control, but he's learnt to live with it.
He uses it to his advantage now.
In middle school he'd been bullied, yes, but he'd come to understand that if he played the part of small, weak, cry baby Deku people left him alone. Sure Bakugou was lecherous in his attempts to put Izuku down but despite that it worked.
People saw what they wanted from him, and because he played the part he was left alone. It wasn't fool proof and sometimes other people besides Bakugou would try their luck.
But even then, because they underestimated him and only saw a weak child who could never be at their level, they went easy. And in the slips in their guards because 'What's Deku gonna do? Snitch?' He learnt everything he needed to avoid them, to beat them, to break them.
As he'd grown older, wiser and jaded to an extent, he'd gotten better at slipping behind the facade of a shy, quirkless boy who dreamed too big and wouldn't hurt a fly.
He never had friends but despite his quirklesness he had been generally well liked by his classmates. And the facade that he had developed to buffer the attention from his real calculating and frustrated nature had only ever been questioned once.
"Don't you worry that one day he'll snap? Just because he doesn't have a quirk doesn't mean he couldn't kill someone!"
Izuku had pretended to be engrossed in rereading his hero notes, his last two books had started to have segments of villains and criminals including things that made them hard to catch and things that made them good at escaping.
There had been a laugh from the general direction the question had come from. "Deku? Seriously? The guy could get knocked over by a strong breeze, he isn't dangerous . "
The query was forgotten and life had continued as normal but it had gotten Izuku thinking.
So far his facade had been a bullying deterrent. A way to keep the dogs off his scent so to speak, so that he could follow his dream to the best of his abilities without Bakugou and his cronies yapping at his heels the entire time.
After being told that he didn't appear dangerous he'd understood that that was something he could use. After all, the minimal footage and exposure Erasure Head had proved that he was an unassuming figure and didn't look strong or dangerous.
Erasure Head used that and took his enemies down quick and hard, with nothing more than speculation as to HOW.
With that knowledge he'd asked his mother for martial arts training, they'd whittled away, arguing and presenting reasons as to why and why not. Eventually they'd settled on self defence and it was there that he learnt his most important lesson, Never underestimate your opponent, let them underestimate you.
It had continued from there, self defence turned to Tae Kwon Do and that turned into nothing else as he disciplined himself and tried as hard as he could to progress, but nobody learnt belts over night. In the dojo it seemed that the only place he would not be underestimated was in the ring.
For that he was grateful.
As two years passed, as he became less jaded and more open to his fellow trainees (he still never had friends. Quirklessness was still a barrier many refused to breach) his classmates began to solidify this image of him in their heads.
Bakugou insisted that he was a lying, cheating bastard who was looking down on them because did they not see that he was getting stronger, that he was becoming more confident behind his cheap little mask that he put up?
Thankfully, nobody believed Bakugou and over time the accusations dimmed, becoming less angry and more resigned. More targeted that no matter how strong he thought he was he would never be as strong as Bakugou.
From that Bakugou also underestimated him.
It carried over to U.A. as well. He'd been surprised at that.
Hadn't they seen him at the USJ- heart in mouth broken finger and murder in his eyes- throwing himself at the Nomu, at Kurogiri with the intent to harm?
Hadn't they seen him in the sports festival - Eyes wide and manic, power shattering his body as he broke through layers and layers with a sledgehammer of spite and sheer force of will?
And hadn't they heard him in the stands, when Uraraka asked him what he was writing about and he revealed that he had files on ALL of them?
Hadn't they seen, heard about damn it hadn't they read about the involvement he had with the Stain case? How he had supposedly helped Endeavour into taking down the hero killer?
They had, and yet the idea remained that Midoriya Izuku was not dangerous.
He was kind, caring, a cry baby at times but a determined kid at the end of the day. Nobody dangerous.
Reading between the lines he realised something. For years people hadn't not found him dangerous, they'd always assumed he wasn't dangerous to them. It was a game changer then, realising that people didn't see him as a threat because he never seemed like one.
Bakugou was never perceived as a threat, because whole considered violent and 'dangerous' he wasn't dangerous towards the class. He blew up and swore yes, but he didn't intentionally hurt people. He didn't sit awake at night planning how to take his classmates down in every situation his mind could conjure up.
Or, at least, he didn't think Bakugou did. Maybe he did and he and his childhood friend were disturbingly similar in that regard as well, the first point of disturbing similarity being their unwavering love and devotion to All Might.
And then there was his mentor. Even All Might, symbol of peace, man of many smiles and seasoned hero of nearly forty years didn't see him as dangerous. He was more open with his mentor, the facade sliding away to hopefully prove that he could be dangerous if he wanted to.
It didn't happen. Instead he was constantly told how much of a 'hero of the people' he was. How 'unthreatening' he was and how admirable that was in a future hero candidate.
That had always bitten at him.
He didn't want to be dangerous, or seen as a threat. But he... He wanted to be seen. To not be 'shy, awkwardly friendly' Deku or 'slightly intense, scholarly' Deku and he most certainly wanted to stop being seen as 'Goody goody' Deku.
In thinking it over he realised that he wanted to stop being Deku, and start being Midoriya Izuku again.
Midoriya Izuku swore, Midoriya Izuku had near obsessive notes on heroes, villains and classmates so that when push came to shove he could fight.
Midoriya Izuku sat up late at night running contingency plans through his head. His friends, family and teachers the subject of many ludicrous plans that would never happen and his mind bending and flipping a hundred different ways to fix them problems.
Deku didn't do any of that. He was quiet, mumbled a lot and got nervous around new people before morphing into a slightly less quiet and less nervous kid who rambled on about heroes.
It was like two sides of a coin. Heads and tails, mirrored yet reversed.
The only time he could be Midoriya Izuku was around people from other classes, like Shinsou and Mei. He'd spent a few lunch times hiding away in Mei's lab, chatting and helping her tinker with and think away at new 'babies' while Shinsou lounged on the beaten and dead sofa Mei had pushed up against the wall in her supposedly shared workshop, occasionally interrupting debates with input of his own and the more occasional summons to look at cute cat pictures.
(There was never another inventor in the lab and the door read only his friends name. So Izuku was starting to think the lab partners had either requested a move and Mei never noticed or the pink haired gremlin had pulled a Neon Evangelion.)
Midoriya Izuku thrived in the workshop, where he could discuss the lethality of his plans without provocative and without judgment- the other two joining in saying when it went to far or when he could push it just that little bit more.
He thrived where he could lie down and tension could leave his shoulders and he could swear and scowl and not be happy and smiley. And he could be tired and stressed.
There was another occasion he could be himself as well, though this one was constantly overlapping with the first.
Monoma Neito was a frequent visitor at the Hatsume forge (it was supposed to sound intimidating apparently but it made Izuku think of a soft jrpg npc location) constantly asking about support items and licenses and, when the Sun and moon were in the right positioning he seemed to also enjoy having a normal conversation.
They'd begrudgingly gotten used to each other, and at times Monoma joined in with debates between himself and Mei, sometimes the blond would just speak with Izuku out of sheer wanting to about various topics.
The sports festival, despite causing him to injure his arms beyond repair, had gifted him with friends and an unlikely... acquaintance though he suspected Monoma would drop dead before admitting it.
He was thankful.
Uraraka, Iida, Todoroki and Tsuyu were all wonderful people but Izuku had to admit that the company of Mei, Shinsou and Monoma was more welcome at times than the near suffocating friendship with the others. Since being given the opportunity to be...free he'd felt confined.
The constant use of Deku and Midoriya rather than Izuku, Mido and idiot (Monoma often sounded calm when he called him that, no venom visible or heard) hit home how tightly he kept his more open personality close to him.
He, again, felt so so thankful that he'd had the opportunity to be close to them. He was especially thankful when exams started up and Monoma agreed to help him study, claiming that '1-A's poster child needs to be at the top of his game.'
He'd never been given an explanation on the poster child comment, but the blond's tutelage had helped exponentially and he'd exited most of his exams with a breath of relief rather than of despair.
The post-test haze that had settled over the class had been pushed aside as some classmates made up for lost time getting back into hobbies while others trained and trained hoping for the opportunity to release their quirks to their hearts desires.
Then you had others, like Hagakure, Ashido and Kaminari who had gone information hunting. They'd come back with news of practical exams. Of tales from 1-B's class rep (Kendo was nice, she was another he could relax around) about past years experiences.
Entrance exam reruns, days after days of spontaneous hero practicals, and the more intense ones being week long lock ups in training grounds.
He'd been enticed by the idea of that last option, and soon discovered that it was a simulation test. The hero classes would alternate between who had the leaders in it (it changed each year this particular exam ran apparently) and then the two leaders would be named either villain or hero and they were given a week to prepare before being locked in a training ground for a week.
The objective was to test both sides on different parameters.
The villains prompts were often to create havoc, to create as real a simulation as possible. -The footnotes on the documents he read through detailed about how they were judged on acting as well as actions.- Along side that they had certain parameters to meet. Things to steal, 'people' to kill and places to destroy.
With the added bonus prompt of 'killing' off as many heroes as possible.
Clearly the leader and their team were assumed to be those who would consider going into underground or undercover positions so playing the villain would be practice he guessed.
Reading through some of the past schemes he realised it was also an opportunity for people to learn to think outside the box, to make a situation fit for them, instead of waiting for it to.
The heroes prompt was much simpler. Win.
Take the villains in, don't 'kill' them unless absolutely necessary (there was no indication of fake weaponry in the guidelines so he suspected it was the prerogative of the students to find a way around this.), stop the villains plans and get them to surrender before the week long exam finished.
Reading through the few reports (the activity received controversy each time it was activated so it happened once for each year very decade) he saw that the longest the seven day time limit had lasted was three days. And the three times it had been run heroes had never lost.
Spurred on by interest he soon found himself diving into rule books, theories and data analysis from past students on the exam. It was such an interesting concept. More invigorating, more spontaneous and more fitting of up and coming heroes in their world today.
The concept of the activity was to teach the villains to work under intense pressure and against stacked odds and learning to trust your gut and ignore moral guidance for the greater good at times.
And the concept was also to teach both sides how to deal with city warfare and sieges. Something that as of late was becoming a bigger and bigger threat.
It had been massive in the early years of heroism. As villains and heroes alike acted more like soldiers rather than peacocks with nuclear explosives strapped to their chests.
Now, his generation were coming into a world of heroism where a battle between a hero and a villain was not too different than a war anymore.
He didn't get his hopes up and went back to training for the two most obvious choices for their exams. A redo of the entrance exam and a week long spontaneous heroics class.
He was shocked, when two days before the announcement for what their practical exam was going to be they were told they would be living in dorms.
The only explanation given was that the school had been meaning to for years and decided now that with all the encounters the first years had had they were finally sold. Not to mention, Present Mic had told them, training camp was coming up after the exams finished. Wasn't it better to get used to sleeping under the same roof sooner rather than later.
Izuku was fine with it as long as he didn't room with Mineta.
U.A. had bullshit reality warping methods for doing everything, all students and staff (past and present) were aware of this. Still, Izuku was slightly bewildered how after two days the dorms were done and he was moving in.
That excitement and bewilderment was discarded as Aizawa stood in the common room after dinner, "Tonight, two of your classmates will have slips under their doors indicating whether they are the hero leader or the villain leader."
He simultaneously felt his stomach drop along with everybody else as at the same time his brain jumped for joy. He was getting the exam he wanted.
He'd spent the rest of the night in the common half engaging in conversation with his classmates as he texted Shinsou and Mei, before switching to the group chat where he read through about seven paragraphs of Monoma complaining that 1-A got to be the leaders of the exercise.
Reading through all the paragraphs (because Monoma could be insightful at times) he discovered that the leaders job was to recruit, Vlad King having explained that tomorrow the leaders would be debriefed but as 1-B had no 'major role' in the game other than as pieces they were being told ahead of time.
The job was to recruit, train and prepare.
He wondered who the staff would pick for 'captains'. The hero candidates were obvious, either Bakugou or Todoroki.
Bakugou due to his overwhelming physical abilities and unstoppable determination demonstrated the stereotypical qualities of a well-to-do hero like All Might or Muriko. Todoroki on the other hand exemplified the self-containment and finesse of many heroes as well as being a hero descendant who had been trained to one day take his father's place.
Of course, depending on who was picking the leaders (and Aizawa could tell him it was random all he wanted but Izuku hadn't spent years picking apart people to be fooled by such an obvious lie) it could be a complete left field candidate like Shouji or Hagakure.
His classmates were all strong and had different qualities that would make them all suitable for the job, the only problem was that many of them lacked the confidence to lead.
Adding that to the fact many of them hadn't gotten to show off their strength it would be near impossible to gather support from 1-B students or from other classes- Aizawa had said after all that it was a year wide exercise. Not just a hero course one.
In one of the reports he'd read on this exercise at one point the villain team had been made up of near exclusively support course students. That had the year it had stretched on for three days, the support gadgets giving the outnumbered students an unexpected edge.
Their downfall had been that there was only one offensive quirk and most of the support course students needed close quarters to activate their quirks something their gadgets negated.
"What're you doing Deku?" Breaking from his thoughts he saw Uraraka sat next to him on the couch, glancing at his phone with confusion and concern. Looking down he realised he'd open his notes at come point and he'd been writing down his thoughts.
"Just got an idea, wanted to write it down." It was half true, a lie was always more believable if it was born from a truth. Her confusion melted away, any and all concern leaving her eyes instantly.
She smiled and started speaking. Something about him just seeming so engrossed that she just wanted to make sure he was okay. He gave a generic response to that, and once confirming he was okay she turned back to Tsuyu.
He shoved his phone in his pocket once her attention was diverted, stretching and making his way to his room with no announcement. People didn't really notice when he came and went, that was something he relied on.
The letter that sat on the floor inside his room stared up at him, teasing him. He could already tell from the design of the letter what side of the coin he was.
The matte black envelope and authentic looking red wax seal aesthetic didn't give any illusions. Closing the door behind him he ignored the letter and placed his phone on his desk, saving the notes he had been typing downstairs before opening up audio recorder.
With U.A. He couldn't be too sure how long the contents of his letter would survive once he broke the seal. Starting the recording he picked up the letter and sat at his desk, taking out the slip of paper that rested atop of the folded up packet of papers and reading aloud.
"Dear Midoriya Izuku, you have been randomly picked to be the leader of the villain team in this years U.A. survival course. You will find the rules and regulations you are expected to adhere to in the packet included in this envelope."
He paused, taking out the packet and placed it on the table, it didn't look particularly thick, that meant either there were a lot of loopholes or each rule was ridiculously thorough.
"The basic premise of your mission is to recruit members of your year group," he stressed the use of the word year, future reference of that would be important, "and to train and prepare for a week before a week long lock up in one of U.A.'s training grounds. The objectives for that week will be revealed tomorrow by your teacher, as a team leader it is your prerogative to keep your identity secret or out in the open."
That made him pause, if it was his prerogative does that mean that the hero leader was given the same options? Or as a villain, traditionally with leaders hiding in shadows and behind organizations, was it a special privilege to keep his identity hidden?
"Your identity either way will be hidden from the hero leader and vice versa, this is to eliminate as much as the staff can any pre-planned attacks against leaders. I look forward to seeing your potential Midoriya Izuku, sighed Principle Nezu."
Saving the audio recording he set the letter down on his desk and closed his eyes leaning back.
He held his breath for a few seconds before releasing it in an effort to keep himself calm. It was futile as his fingers were already itching and scrambling for one of the many pens and sheets of paper he had on his desk.
He was going to have to plan, and plan and plan. Fail safes would be important. And plans would have to be linked to fail safes.
One way of doing it would be that each fail safe stemmed from where something in a plan could go wrong and could eventually lead to the original plan again. Or lead to another fail safe depending on the nature of the slip up.
He resisted the urge to grab pen and paper though, he didn't know his objectives, though he suspected they would be the same as years prior. He didn't know who his rival was, and again he already had suspicions and most importantly he didn't know who his team would be just yet.
That however, he could solve. Opening his eyes he grabbed his phone and dialled his first number, "Hey," he said when a half aware hello was shot at him, "What do you say to being locked in a training ground for a week?"
He felt a grin stretch along his face at the answer, "I'm not hearing a no."
"Who do you think the villain leader is?" He kept half an ear on the conversation while he transferred most of his notes on his class into a new notebook, this new book would serve as a class centric guide to quirks and weaknesses.
He was glad that it was only him on his row right now, it would be hard to hide what he was doing if Bakugou or Mineta could hear his murmuring and see his work.
"I don't know, I can't see anyone in our class playing a villain to be honest." He kept his grin to himself. There was yet again another opportunity to be underestimated here. If they kept that line of thinking he would already have won part of the war.
"Midoriya." a presence looming over him made his attention divert fully. Standing next to his desk were two of his classmates, blocking line of sight of him and of what was going to be discussed.
"Shouji, Koda." The two boys stood paired, nothing too suspicious. Koda was a skittish -brave at heart but generally too nervous to start confrontation- kid and Shouji had taken to accompanying the other boy sometimes as moral support.
It could also of been Koda's selective mutism and the others capabilities in sign language, but he'd seen the genuine friendship there.
They surveyed each other for a few moments, before the six-armed boy seemed to find the words he wanted to say, "We'd like to be on your team." It was said low, and quiet so as to not draw suspicious glances or wandering ears.
"I'm not the hero leader." he knew neither were stupid, but he wanted to make sure they knew what they were signing up for. He also wanted to see what made them so sure it was him.
"We're aware," he could swear that behind the mask Shouji was smirking, "However, you don't let anything slip past you and this means you have what it takes to win."
"And we want to win." It was Koda speaking up that sold him, if so much confidence was held in the usually timid voice then he had no other choice did he?
"Perfect." He smiled, a Midoriya Izuku smile, not a Deku smile, and he was glad to see no hesitancy enter their eyes, "Because that's also what I want to do. Aizawa hasn't briefed me yet, so I'm unsure of what our aim is. However, think you could make a list of people you think would like to join our cause?"
Oh, Shouji was definitely smirking now. "You got it boss."
Throughout the course of the second part of the day multiple people were taken out class to be spoken to. It was a good ploy he supposed. Don't let anyone know who the real leaders were while confusing the leaders as to who their rival was.
He explained this to Aizawa when he sat down with him. "So you saw through it?" He nodded, watching his teachers usual bland expression creep into his wide 'logical ruse' smile. "Good, you're already doing better than your rival is."
He noticed the lack of pronouns but didn't bring it up, after all just because he'd realised the ploy didn't mean all would be revealed to him. Besides, Mei had already let him know who his rival was.
U.A. was nothing if not informative.
"I want to ask a few things sensei, about the rules and parameters."
"Of course problem child, let me explain the objectives first though. Your main goal is to last the seven days," he must of pulled a face because Aizawa's grin broadened, "of course you're aware the test has never lasted that long."
"Your second way to win is to either 'kill' the heroes or push them to a situation where surrendering is their only option. This time around Nezu has added objectives to earn bonus points." He nodded, opening the note book he'd placed on the table upon entering and started to write it all down.
"The heroes main goal is to either push you to surrender or take you all captive. They themselves have goals to accomplish, namely taking your bonus points. You can reclaim bonus points from the heroes."
He felt his mind whirling to life now. Hours spent thinking of plans to crush his classmates - hours that he had previously hated himself- were now coming to fruition. The bonus points would likely be objects if they could be retrieved and regained. However they could just as easily be actions to accomplish.
He'd have to add equipment permission slips to his list of things he'd need to obtain.
"The heroes won't know about their objectives until the day of the exam."
This made him pause and looking up at his teacher he saw nothing to indicate that he'd misheard, "Is that because the villains have never won?" If it was pity points he'd take them.
His advantage was he was underestimated, if this was because his team was underestimated he wasn't going to look a gift horse in the mouth. "Yes, and no." Aizawa looked like he wasn't going to elaborate for a few seconds but he eventually continued, "Yes, because as you've said the villains have never won; in real life that wouldn't always be the case, but no at the same time."
A sly look claimed his teachers face and he tried to remember if the last exam of this type had been on while his teacher had been a student. "In a real life situation like the one we're hoping to simulate heroes wouldn't know what to do to take down the villains."
He nodded, writing that extra information in all capitals. That would be important, especially if the reports were true about this being judged on realism.
"Your turn now Midoriya."
Flicking to his page of important questions he tore it out of the book. The action caused Aizawa to raise a brow, up Izuku ignored it as he moved to a clean page, he had a feeling he would need a lot of space to write the answers.
"I know how I win, but how do I lose?"
The grin became even wider, and normally tired eyes became alive. "You're asking the right questions, good." He wrote the word loss on his page and got ready to bullet point. "You lose if the heroes capture all of you, if you surrender, if you are unable to sustain your team and you risk going into a health risk situation." There was a pause and Izuku looked up, seeing that light turn vicious in his teachers eyes. He would definitely need to see if his sensei had ever taken part in this exam.
"Or if you yourself are captured for longer than ten hours."
He started to write in capitals again, "A villain being captured isn't the end. If you were to lose as soon as you got caught you would be reckless," that was true, "however if it was treated realistically you would have the opportunity to escape - an opportunity that would allow you to be logical in your encounters with the heroes."
"Second question, what's the limitations of involvement, from outside the hero course and of the staff during the exam?"
He knew he was making it obvious that he'd read up on this from the specified questions but he didn't care.
"It's open to the entire year, with the exemption of the management course - though if a management student approaches you you are allowed to accept them into your team."
He went to ask the second part of his question again when Aizawa finished speaking, "Once the exam starts staff aren't allowed to get involved unless it's retrieving 'dead' students, or if it's to deal with the aforementioned health risks."
An idea entered his mind, one he usually would of squashed but not this time. "Would teachers step in if a supply was poisoned,to incapacitate, not kill, but there was access to an antidote and an non-contaminated supply available to the victims?"
"No. If it was made known that there was an antidote and it was nothing worse than say food poisoning I don't see why we would." The way his teacher eyed him made Izuku realise how horrible what he was suggesting was but wasn't that the purpose of the exercise?
"Is there a limitation on what external equipment you can bring into the exam?" He made a new subtitle contraband and made a table of allowed and not allowed.
"Weapons of all kinds are permitted, although anything more than rubber bullets or dull blades are not allowed. Killing your opponents is not allowed." He kept his eyes on his teacher as he wrote, taking in his features as the man's eyes showed brief understanding of what he might be planning, "Support equipment for heroic and general studies students are permitted. Support course generally don't fight in these exercise so there aren't any rules saying what they can and can't bring in."
He felt a smile twitch at his lips at that. Mei would have a field day, it also meant that the side project she and Shinsou had been working on could have its field test. "What about transportation? I assume the training ground will have roads, and subways but what can students use?"
He sat there as Aizawa looked at him, really looked at him as if it was the first time he'd seen him for who he was. As if this was the first time Aizawa had looked past the fanboy persona and was looking at a calculating monster.
Maybe it was. He often felt like a monster with most of his own ideas, many of them giving him pause. He wasn't surprised that Aizawa was thrown.
"There aren't any rules regarding that, only that if you use something you have a license, or a learners permit for it."
Izuku had his learner and he knew Mei had gotten her actual license not too long into the year - something all support students needed to get apparently because of the nature of their modular projects. He didn't know who else had theirs but it wouldn't be too hard to get them from U.A. for the purpose of the exam.
"Fourth question." This and the next question would confirm some theories, "Is there a means of production of food within the exam or are the food supplies supplied all there is?"
The thrown look from Aizawa was gone, and pride seemed to replace it. Now that Aizawa knew he was prepared to do anything he seemed to understand that Izuku would do anything.
"All the food its believed you'll need will be in your safe houses. However,the city itself has food shops, grocers ect. You won't be given money to buy anything though you'll have to steal it."
"Do the heroes get given money?" If the didn't he'd need to make sure he doubled his efforts to snatch Yaoyozoru from them before it was too late, if they did he'd still need to make sure he got to her first.
"No. You're supposed to be making this into a war zone, Nezu figured it'd make it too easy if the heroes could just buy things."
That worked in his favour. In desperation of the heroes would have to break their own morals to feed themselves. It would help demoralize them.
"I have two more questions sensei." He received an interested nod. He prided himself on the fact that from the first question Aizawa had seemed almost on the edge of his seat. "One, is the water system for the bases linked to the city's main water supply or is it independent?"
"Linked." Another piece of a plan fell into place.
Standing up, he bowed and thanked Aizawa before turning to leave, "Midoriya, your last question?"
He stopped at the door and looked over his shoulder, "You were a villain in this exercise weren't you sir?"
"Okay, thank you sensei. I'll return to class now."
"Midoriya," he paused, "Why did you want to know that if you were so sure?"
"It's in your eyes," he missed how his teachers eyes widened as he was looking away from his face, "You want things to change. Nowadays people don't want things to change unless it effects them. Growing up quirkless-" he corrects himself instantly, "thinking I was qurikless I seemed to be the only one that didn't like how quirkless were treated. And with this," he made eye contact, "You understand how unfair this set up is and you want us to win."
Once he returns to class the next person is called out, but he keeps his eyes firmly in front of him. Making eye contact with Todoroki would seem suspicious, especially as he's going to pretend to sign up for the villain team.
Nobody outside of his team had to know he was the leader. It would help, people's attention would be diverted trying to figure out if he was the leader or not which would make it easier for some of the plans he was cooking up.
He settled into his seat again, resisting the urge to look over to his teammates. He managed to keep his restless energy under wraps because that would spoil the surprise for everybody else and he couldn't have that.
Once they were released back to the doors he held back in class, letting his classmates leave before he, Shoji and Koda did. He'd need to get their numbers so that he could add them to the chat with Mei and Shinsou.
He noticed however, that their trio weren't the only ones staying behind.
It wasn't immediately obvious that they were intentionally staying behind but the way that the six kept glancing his way was telling enough.
"You're all here for the same reason I'm guessing?" He didn't look over at them as he packed his bag, but the uneasiness that entered the air was an indication that they were and that they were nervous.
Laughing he turned, facing Shoji first, "When I asked if you could draw up a list of possible candidates I didn't expect this."
The taller boy simply shrugged, Izuku felt he would quickly learn to read his expressions through his mask, "I thought you'd appreciate the hard work being done for you." It was said so smugly that Izuku couldn't help the grin that spread across his face.
Turning to face his classmates he took in who had stayed. Ojiro, Hagakure, Jiro, Kaminari, Ashido and (Yes! Just who he needed!) Yaoyozoru.
The first two he had expected to stay on the hero team so it was a nice surprise, Jiro he suspected wanted to stick close to people who wouldn't destroy her ear drums (and with Bakugou inevitably going to the hero side whether Todoroki was leader or not) the villain team was the best course of action.
Yaoyozoru was more than likely sticking to Jiro, however the level look -one that held the confidence she'd had before the sports festival- he was receiving from her told him that she was here out of her own judgement.
Kaminari and Ashido surprised him though.
They weren't sheep, but the way they followed Bakugou around reminded him of the middle school lackeys the blond had had.
However, he did remember that the two were more open minded than Bakugou. Kirishima wasn't narrow minded, more he was one track at a time. And in his head a hero student would probably never entertain the idea of being a villain.
"Okay..." He surveyed his new teammates. They were all watching him with some form of anxiety, but not the kind that came with regret or telling a lie. All of them were sure in their decisions of being here.
"Lets exchange numbers then. I already have two more people on our team."
"Damn, Deku, you work fast." Was breathed out by Kaminari who was looking at him with something akin to awe.
He didn't let the tightness that came with that nickname enter his smile, "Please, call me Izuku. We're going to be spending the next fortnight in ridiculously close quarters formalities don't really matter now."
There seemed to be an ease then, at the friendly gesture of giving permission for a given name. It was something normal in this strange situation.
"I asked for Shouji and Koda to meet me now just to exchange numbers but..." He slinged his bag on his back, "If we all exchange numbers I have a plan we can put into motion now."
He received nods and when phones started getting pulled out he grinned.
It was day two officially of prep time and so far he thought things were going well.
He'd acquired eight team mates and had gotten Mei and Yaoyozoru working together on parts and costumes. Plus he'd gotten his other team mates to write lists of people they knew they could comfortably take on in combat and those they knew they couldn't.
They'd texted their lists last night and he'd started cross referencing so that he knew who he could afford to pair up depending on who showed up on the oppositions team.
He was tired but it wasn't too bad yet.
"Deku!" Opening his dorm door he was greeted by Uraraka- which despite her being his friend was not something he wanted to see first thing on a Saturday morning he was too tired for her energy.
"Where's the fire?" It was clearly a bit too snarky for his usual personality because she looked at him with a raised brow before seemingly deciding it wasn't worth it before continuing.
"Todoroki just came out and confirmed that he was the hero leader! We have to go sign up!"
He paused as she smiled brightly at him, he hadn't ever thought of asking her to join his team, but the insinuation that he would obviously go towards the team with a strong figure head annoyed him a bit.
The rest of the class had little to no knowledge of the villain team or leader, what if Bakugou was the leader? Or Iida? Didn't it occur to her to wait? See what both teams had to offer?
It was earlier than he wanted to but at the way her grin was dimming the longer he stayed stationary in the doorway he had to play his first card, "I'm sorry Uraraka, I can't."
"I've already been recruited."
She didn't seem to get it as her smile went full force again."Oh! Of course that makes sense! Why wouldn't Todoroki get you at the first available moment?"
"No," he had to watch as realisation smashed through her rose tinted glasses, "Uraraka I'm on the villains team."
"W-why!?" He'd expected surprise but not the anger in her voice, "Why would you do that!?" He didn't understand the anger in her voice. What right did she have? She was his friend, not his mother!
He realised how much this sounded and looked like a lover's spat.
Both of them were in their pyjamas, Izuku half dressed in a pair of jogging pants and a back to front t-shirt, and Uraraka had obviously gone straight to him after hearing the news -probably sent by text- as was evident by her messy hair.
Coupled with the fact Izuku was keeping himself up right through the use of the door frame and Uraraka being nearly in tears it looked like he was breaking up with her after they'd spent the night together.
God this was going to get the rumour mill going wasn't it?
"Uraraka I did it because it's my choice." He grit his teeth in the adversity of her angry and betrayed expression. Hopefully she'd gossip about it to their other friends and he'd be left alone for the time being. Though at the same time that was an issue.
"If you don't like it that's not my problem."
"You idiot!" She turned on her heel then and stormed off, now that she wasn't blocking the way he can see his floor mates looking on in shock.
Tokoyami and Aoyama especially seemed shocked, Mineta to his left looks like he's about to have an aneurysm. "YOU SPENT THE NIGHT WITH URARAKA!?"
"Are you fucking deaf?" The three boys freeze, "She's pissed that I'm not on the hero team."
"YOU'RE NOT ON THE HERO TEAM!?"
It didn't take long apparently for it to spread that Todoroki was the hero leader. It didn't surprise him, he enjoyed the chaos that his class created about it really.
It gave him cover.
Thankfully the fact that he was on the villain team hadn't spread, though the way Uraraka kept glaring over at him, the cat would be let out of the bag sooner rather than later.
Then there was Mineta to worry about but the likelihood of anyone believing him meant that he wasn't a threat.
However, he wouldn't throw his status as a threat away. He'd seen at the USJ and at the sports festival how potent his quirk could be. Out of sheer principle he wouldn't have him on his team so they would have to find a way to counter his quirk.
Mei did still hold a grudge because if what the boy had done to her 'baby' so it would result in something most likely over the top but incredibly effective.
He had spent most of the night, that wasn't filled with cross-referencing, planning different strategies for different scenarios for the bonus points. Looking through records his assumptions that the bonus points were objects and actions was not unfounded, so he needed to come up with plans.
He'd have to start having the team get together to train early in if he wanted this to work. Risking a glance around the room he made eye contact with Yaoyozoru and when she nodded he turned his head back to facing forward.
One the lesson finished up, thankfully leading into lunch, he stood and began packing his bag. He'd need to show Me I the plans on his laptop as well as make sure that Yaoyozoru knew the plan.
That then left him the awkward role of disturbing the delicate peace he and Monoma had formed between them. It would look suspicious whether he went to the dorms (though that could contain the issue...no. Still too much exposure due to proximity to his own dorms) or if he kidnapped his blond friend(?) before he went off for lunch.
He didn't physically freeze, though everything in his mind besides core functions did. It was like the tabs for each plan had been minimised to hide from being scrutinized.
"Todoroki." He made eye contact, kept his posture relaxed if a bit skittish. The normal, and smiled, "What's up?"
"Uraraka said you were on the villain team."
There were definitely a few gasps of shock.
Well damn, he thought, now the glares made sense. She was really vindictive at times wasn't she?
An uneasy silence settled over the room at the accusation - was it even an accusation it it was true?- and he realised how full the room was. He wasn't going to play his full hand yet, so, keeping in line with the anxious character he'd had them associate him with for so long he spoke:
More gasps and a quick glance around, disguised as a trapped animal looking for an escape look, revealed that his team was doing a very convincing job of playing the concerned classmate. "What about it?
The blank face of his friend didn't change. Hetrochromic eyes unchanged by the news. It pissed him off a bit actually. Only the slight twist to his mouth betrayed him, "Why?"
He didn't mean for it to happen but he let out a Midoriya Izuku laugh, "You're the second person to ask me that today." He refused to look at Uraraka from her place next to Todoroki.
"Because it's ridiculous to think you'd willingly go over to the villain team." He could see the cogs begin to turn in Todoroki's head and was about to pull some bullshit out of thin air when Yaoyozoru saved him.
"He joined because I asked him to." Even more gasp, what were they a drama show now, erupted and he knew immediately that people thought that was Yaoyozoru coming out as the leader, "I wanted to improve my quirk and figured the villain perspective would allow for that and Izuku has been helping me with my quirk recently so when I asked him he agreed."
If a silence could choke he'd of been dead times over. It was almost literally suffocating in the classroom, "I-Izuku!? Since when did you start calling him that!?"
He wasn't sure who exactly said it, but it brought attention away from him being on the villain team. From the tone it sounded suspiciously like Ashido. The smirk he caught her wearing warranted a gift in return.
"What?" He titled his head, classic deku move- highlight the innocent features and ignore Bakugou's scoff, "Momo's called me by my given name for awhile now."
It erupted into chaos from there and he was glad he'd texted his other teammates what had to be done before class had ended because he and Yaoyozoru were bound to be preoccupied for awhile now.
Finally escaping he was quick to check his phone seeing the group chat filled with progress reports. Recon was a go.
"We're being tailed." He'd noticed the reflection in his phone as he'd turned it off, the distinctive forms of his friends a few paces behind. They weren't hard to pick up on, too loud for this kind of thing.
Yaoyozoru nodded, giggling like he'd told a particularly funny joke, "Shall we head for lunch then?" She leaned in closer than she normally would of, he had to give it to her she was convincing actress.
"Mei's ten minutes?" Her eyes answered yes and he pulled away from her with a bright cherry smile. "See you there Momo!" He called as they reached the staircase. They were lucky that this stair case split into two different directions or otherwise it would of resulted in a chase through the corridors.
Turning they went down different stair cases, apparently going in opposite directions, and Izuku smirked to himself as he took three steps at a time, resisting the urge to take the banister just barley.
When he got to the bottom of the single flight and onto the second floor he hid under the stairs and watched as Tsuyu and Todoroki made it to the bottom of the stairs, looking left then right before splitting up in search of him.
He stayed crouched for a few seconds longer after they'd left, just long enough so that he couldn't see them anymore.
After that he stood up, texted Yaoyozoru that he was on the move and drifted back up the stairs he'd just came down. He took this trip up at a casual pace. He didn't want to risk Iida and Uraraka hearing him if they were near the top of the stairs.
Making it to the landing he went the way he'd just come, drifting past his classroom to see nobody but Aizawa inside, and made it to 1-B. Hopefully Monoma had lunch in the room.
Looking inside he was greeted with the sight of Vlad King looking up from (oh God Izuku wanted to take pictures but that would get him in trouble) a cutsey bento box, Monoma and Yanagi Reiko having a quirk off and Tokage experimenting with her hand on the ceiling.
It as what 1-A would look like if they were wholesome and weren't all a pack of rabid animals, Izuku included himself in that grouping. "Midoriya..."
Vlad King looked like he wanted to say something, but seemed to understand that the bento box was probably not something that gained him respect. "I'm here for Monoma sir."
There was a pause, and Monoma seemed to peek his prideful self out of its shell, "What do you want 1-A scum?"
To his surprise it was the Yanagi girl who hit him on the back of thr neck with the signature karate chop Kendo was so commonly seen executing. "Please, you don't ever shut up about how much you enjoy hanging out with him and the other two."
The sad looking girl smiled as best as she apparently could, "Take him, please don't give him back." He cracked a smile and the one being sent his way turned a bit more genuine.
"Come on Monoma," he strolled towards the downed boy grabbing onto the back of his blazer, "Mei has new gadgets for you to try."
The blond made some noise of confirmation and didn't object as he started to drag him down the hall by the back of his blazer. Nobody stopped them as they exited the classroom. As they made their way down the hall he got out his phone as he dragged Monoma with one hand.
'Gonna be a few minutes late. Had to detour.'
He typed quickly, keeping the chat open just in case Yaoyozoru had the phone in her hand. "Um.. Midoriya?"
Looking up from his phone he looked up and saw Midnight standing in the corridor a look of concern flitting across her face. He realised how bad the scene looked.
Him, dragging a slightly dazed Monoma by the back of the blazer with one hand while he avidly texted someone with a grin on his face.
There was clearly only one way to deal with this, "Hi sensei, how are you today?" He stopped in the corridor to face her and the woman smiled with tight eyes.
"I'm fine Midoriya, what you got there?"
He made his smile wider, "Mei wants Monoma and I to be her test subjects!" Her eyes looked even more dazed, "Vlad King sensei is okay with this by the way, Yanagi knocked him out because he was being a little bitch."
She mutley nodded at him, "Say that to my face Midoriya." Was slurred from Monoma and he did his best to haze her with bright smiles and innocent eyes.
"We gotta go now, sensei. Have a nice day!" Slipping his phone into his pocket he picked up the blond and threw him over his shoulder as he approached the stairs.
"We clearly have different ideas of what a detour is boss." Dropping Monoma atop of Shinsou's half conscious form he let out a laugh at the loud noise of confusion and embarrassment behind him.
"Not really." He jumped up onto the empty spot on the work desk Mei reserved for him and looked out at one potential squad of his team.
Monoma and Shinsou were rearranging themselves on the sofa to look slightly dignified, Yaoyozoru was perched on a chair he hadn't seen before as elegant as ever and Mei was next to him, back pressed into his thigh as she sat on her stool with her laptop in her lap.
"I think they're exactly the same." The pinknette tilted her head back until it was resting on his leg and gave him a scrutinizing look that he returned with a crooked grin.
"Whatever, I get blondie out of it so I'm not complaining."
"Speaking of which!" Monoma's complaint was accompanied with a slight grunt from Shinsou as the couch was jostled, "Why the hell did you drag me along the fucking corridor!"
"Izuku you did what!?" He looked away from where both Shinosu and Yaoyozoru were staring at him in shock. He could see the humour in Shinsou's eyes but he didn't know how long he could last not laughing and Yaoyozoru didn't look too happy.
"He was barley conscious okay! I'm built like a stqck of bricks but I'm not a damn pack mule! I wasnt going to carry him down two halls and down the stairs."
"That wasn't even the worst of it!" His friend settled back into the couch and slumped into the material, "At least four teachers saw us and none of them even bothered to question it!"
"Incorrect," his grin got bigger as Monoma's eyes widened and the other three got on the edge of their seats, "Midnight sensei stopped us before letting me on my way. You told me to say you got knocked out by Yanagi to your face."
There was a groan of despair from the blond before Mei got them back on the right lines. "You said you wanted us to start working on something right?"
"Yeah, but first, Monoma." The boy looked dover, resigned to whatever shit he was going to drag him into this time, "Want to be on the villain team?"
"Whatever. I'll be on the end of Mei's baby's anyway, I'd rather be pulling the trigger than in front of the barrel."
"That, ironically, leads to the topic of today. Weapons."
There was a loud shout of laughter and, concerned that sleep deprivation had finally caused Shinsou to snap he made to get off of the bench and go over to him. Monoma made a quick escape from the couch, "Shinsou?"
"You're letting Mei make weapons? We're all fucking screwed."
Short chapter today
After the lunch debrief he and Yaoyozoru (they'd decided to just roll with calling each other Momo and Izuku) left Mei's lab separately as they made their way to class.
Izuku made sure to 'bump' into his teammates on the way through the corridors. If he was passed slips of paper or memory sticks in the pass nobody needed to know.
Arriving back to the classroom 'first' he felt slightly at odds when Tokoyami and Aoyama ganged up on him in the doorway, "Midoriya we want to-" hearing their other classmates coming down the corridor he cut the bird headed boy off:
"Both of you, the gym four pm." They looked shocked but nodded and when the rest of the class came in it was to see Aoyama and Tokoyami discussing what constituted too much sparkle and him reading a book.
Aizawa was a few minutes late but he didn't care, all that he was focused on was the new contacts added to the group chat, courtesy of Monoma.
"As this is the week leading up to the exam we would normally allow the two teams to go recruit and train in these last few periods of the day." Aizawa looked out over all of them, "However due to the fact the villain leader is exercising their right to remain anonymous we can't do that to its full extent."
Todoroki raised a hand, "Sir, why is it that the villain leader had the right to remain anonymous?"
"To improve realism. Consider it apart of the experience Todoroki. Any other questions before I get the lesson started?"
He went to raise his hand but Hagakure did it first, "Um...sensei, the villain team leader may not of come out and said who they were but there are those of us who have already registered with the teachers."
A tense quiet settled over the room, "Oh?"
The invisible girl stood up, and despite the fact that he couldn't see anything but her uniform he could hazard a guess at the fact that she was holding her head high, "Yes sensei. I myself have already registered my place on the villain team with Snipe sensei."
"Same here Sensei." He raised his hand, and in a few seconds the rest of his team including Aoyama and Tokoyami, bar Koda, raised their hands.
"Our captain sent a message as well at lunch, we have 1-B team mates as well. It'd be beneficial if we could meet and discuss."
Aizawa watched them, he noticed his eyes never lingered on any one of them for any particular amount of time. "Okay. I'll inform Vlad King that you're coming to collect your teammates, then proceed to support lab 113. That will be your headquarters for now."
He hid his grin at hearing the lab number. It seemed the staff were quick to figure out his rouge teammates.
At least Mei got to keep her lab set up.
"Mei, I've not done programming for awhile, what's the first basic rule?"
He sat next to her on the workshop bench, his team stood there watching him and his friend, realisation (the pieces of late night talks and scraps of overheard plans finally falling into place in her head) crossed her face.
"You cheeky bastard." She laughed hysterically after her comment, mad glee overtaking. "First basic rule of programming. Assume all users are stupid and plan everything around that."
"Aren't we underestimating our opponents?"
"No. We're just planning from the ground up." He smiled at the questioning looks.
"Most of the heroes are tactician's but not team players. They'll have impressive plans but idiotic slip ups will lead to failure if exploited correctly."
"Not that I don't think this is great and all," it's one of the 1-B kids that Monoma brought along, his names Awase if he remembers right, "But how exactly is this group going to take down the rest of the heroics department?"
It's a simple enough question, curiosity and rightful concern fill his voice and Izuku watches as the kid waves his hands about careful not to touch any of the metal on the walls in Mei's lab.
"Raw fire power doesn't win a war. But, neither does strategy alone. We need a fine balance of both which is where everybody here comes in." He can see he has their attention now and from his spot on Mei's desk he leans forward a bit more.
"I had Monoma gather people from 1-B that wanted to prove themselves," there's a down trodden tinge to the way they hold themselves after that, "Because people who want to prove themselves are the most dangerous."
He doesn't need to see them to know he has their attention, and looking out at his team -sans one person- he can tell they're all prepared to listen.
"As I'm sure you know, Todoroki Shouto is the hero teams leader. Now, I'm not being offensive to anyone here, "the look in Monoma's eyes screams of pain for him if says the wrong thing, "But pretty much everyone here isn't on his threat radar."
As expected the 1-B students erupt into a state of anger. Surprisingly enough his blond friend (and Yanagi though he hasn't seen her express much of anything) is the one to stay calm:
"Oi! Shut up and let Izuku finish damnit he's not here to brag!"
He feels his own mouth fall open at the use of his given name but it works and he has to continue speaking because his friend is beginning to look smug.
"Like I said, I'm not being offensive. I'm stating a fact, Todoroki Shouto doesn't consider most of the people in this room a threat. Whether that's him not seeing the versatility of your quirks or he's never fought you."
He does a quick headcount, "Five people in this room have fought Todoroki." He motions to himself, Hagakure, Ojiro, Momo and Juzo from 1-B. "Shinsou isn't here but Todoroki knows his abilities and with a liability like Bakugou on his team Shinsou will be a threat."
"A general studies student? Wouldn't he just slow us down, he hasn't got the training with his quirk that we have?" He wasn't sure exactly who said it but it made his blood boil.
"Wouldn't I just slow you down then as well?" He grits his teeth, "Considering that I don't have full control of my quirk and for the first fifteen years of living I was perceived as quirkless?"
Everyone but Mei and Monoma stare at him, shocked perhaps? Disgusted? He isn't sure but he takes a remote off of Mei's desk and uses it to turn on the old and dying projector that croak's to life before displaying a power point.
Removing himself from the desk he ignores the way they're looking at him.
He isn't here for them to pity, he's here to lead them.
"I can match him punch for punch in fire power. Doesn't mean I can outright beat him though." He shrugs, "Just means I can slug him a few times before we both pass out."
He turns back to his team, seeing that their resolve isn't gone, only changed. "If you have regrets now, leave. If you can't deal with the training I'm going to put you through, leave. If you can't work with the people here, leave." Nobody goes, "If you don't think that a general studies student is capable of being in this group, leave."
And nobody leaves.
"Perfect. I'll explain the plan for this week then."
I was going to try and do a chapter per day but it didn't really work out too well.
They're taking a break from training, quirkless combat was harder for quite a few of his team mates but that was why they were handling it in the early stages.
"Why isn't Koji here, I noticed he wasn't with us before."
"Espionage." Is his simple response.
"Isn't it against the rules to switch sides during the exam?" Mezou leans in his directions mask pulled down slightly to allow for him to chug from his water bottle.
He smiles, smirks really, a full blown teeth showing smile and sees Denki and Rikido shift where they're sat.
"Not against the rules if his allegiances are with us the entire time. There's no rule against occupying enemy camp and spying."
"Why do I feel..." He looks to his left at the gasped out words and sees Sen sprawled on the floor, "...like my joints are going to pop off...?"
"Same." Rises up from a few others in the group.
His smile devolves from its smirk state into a genuine smile, and he pulls himself to his feet with minimal struggle. He's tired, yes, but training for U.A. was harder than this.
"Where did you even come up with this training regime anyway Izuku?"
It's so strange to have so many using his first name, but it was him who told people they could, and when he looks to the voice it's Torou. "It's an easier version of what I did for the U.A. entrance exam."
"What? Really!?" The invisible girl pulls herself to her feet, renewed with energy now that her interest has been peeked. She stands in front of him in seconds, "If this is easier what did you do?"
He can hear the murmurs of agreement and people start asking him to tell. He would, but it's embarrassing.
"Yeah Hitsohi-" he freezes as his friend sends him a grin and there's a short silence where everyone looks from Hitoshi to him.
He's worried people are going to say something, but thankfully and rather not all at the same time, they all start to wear the same smug grin, "Could you please tell us what your U.A. training was?"
It's worded so innocently and he can't help but find it a bit funny as he starts speaking without much control of what's coming out. He just manages to keep the All Might secret.
"I ran two miles every day, twice a day. Did two hours of Tae Kwon Do every other night and helped clean Daugobouh beach until was clear again."
He feels the familiar 'snap' as Hitoshi's quirk releases him and stands there as his team stares. Reiko speaks first, "Impressive." And then all Hell breaks lose.
"YOU DID WHAT!? WHAT KIND OF BEAST WERE YOU!?"
He chuckles, looking away from the crowd. How would they react if he told them it was before his quirk 'came in' as well? They continue to question him and well...
He's just really happy that people want to know him. That people are willingly including him in social circles that had previously been barred to him.
The team is a hodgepodge of social groups, and yet they seem to meld together near perfectly. He can already see there will be a few bumps before the exam starts but that's why they're starting early after all.
"Alright! If you've got so much energy lets continue!"
There are groans, whines of complaint but still everybody gets up. He notices that nobody stops smiling either.
Getting back to the dorm three hours after classes officially ended Izuku and the 1-A portion of his team were greeted with a very sombre atmosphere.
It had been made in clear in class where people's loyalties pay when Aizawa had made the option for anyone who wanted to sign up for the villain team to go and do so.
They'd acquired quite a good chunk of the class (or at least in 1-A) but still, there was a percentage of the class that hadn't taken kindly to the villainous choice.
"Hey guys!" Ever the optimists of the class Mina and Denki remained unperturbed by the near literal cold shoulder of their classmates.
It caused the rest of the team to pause, the way the room had suddenly shut off all conversations the second they all entered the common room was suspicious to say the least. A quick glance at Koji told him this was intentional.
"Sorry dude, dudette," it was Kirishima who broke the silence, his sympathetic look a contrast to the grave and contemptuous looks from the others, "We're on orders to not talk to you guys."
He spared a look over to where Todoroki was sat. Uraraka and Iida were hunched around a table with him. Bakugou wasn't too far away from the table, body language suggesting that whatever was going on over there was important and the blond was apart of it.
'The heroes have a war council. Interesting.'
"I'm heading off to bed, see you guys tomorrow." He raised a hand goodbye, addressing the whole room like everything was normal, as he turned for the stairs. He turned his head though, before entering the stairwell and didn't try to hide his smirk.
"Don't forget what the boss said."
There were confused looks spread around the heroes, Todoroki flinched ever so slightly, and his friends and teammates all grinned like they were in on a joke.
He hadn't said anything for them to remember.
It was a ploy to wind up the hero team. And it was working.
He'd been in his dorm for about ten minutes maybe fifteen when a knock rang out from the other side.
Closing his laptop lid he left it out in the open, no need to look suspicious if he didn't have to. He opened his door a fraction and frowned when he saw who was there.
Todoroki, Uraraka and Iida were all stood outside his door, having the nerve to look conspiratorial.
"Deku, can we come in?"
Reluctant, but interested in what they wanted, he opened his door enough for them to see his face properly, "Why are you here?"
"We want to talk, Midoriya." He must make a face because Iida is quick to elaborate, "It won't take long, we just wish to pose a few questions to you."
Now this really going to be interesting isn't it? He finds himself thinking. Uraraka's fidgeting makes that much obvious when he opens his door enough for them to come in.
His room at home had practically been an All Might shrine; posters, memorabilia, pop figures ect.
He'd had everything to prove his status as a hero fanboy but when he was presented with moving into the dorms he'd had to seriously reassess his decorative choices.
He'd a revaluation of sorts.
Fanboying was fine, but shrine level was just weird. After that had been presented to his mind he'd started how...obsessive his hero collections were.
He'd talked it through with his mother at that point, going through what he guessed was a midlife crisis.
She'd informed him that throughout his life he'd had various phases where he focused on one thing and one thing only. With that in mind he'd looked back and depressingly realised she was, in fact, correct.
After that he'd gone through a purge of sorts.
If it wasn't at least semi-functional then it wasn't going to the dorms with him. He had at most three purely decorative items in his new room. A picture of him and his mother, glow in the dark star stickers and a inspirational quotes poster that his aunt Mitsuki had gifted him that year for his birthday.
Just because he and Bakugou didn't get along didn't mean he and his aunt didn't.
His All Might memorabilia was stored in his room back home, awaiting his return if he ever so desired to relive the oblivious first fifteen years of his life.
His new room was remarkably plain in comparison really.
A twin bed shoved against the far right corner with flat tone covers. A desk was opposite that, cluttered with note books (school books and analysis alike) and his laptop -which contained the only blatant hero merch in his room in the form of a menagerie of stickers.
On the right side of the desk was a small collection of weights.
At the foot of the bed rested a bean bag, and next to that was a book shelf that was home to his text books, extensive literature collection and the occasional manga here and there.
He'd die before he admitted it but he actually had really cutesy shojou manga because hey, sometimes you just want to sit there and cry about friendship and love triangles. It wasn't like he was the only one.
Stepping aside for them to enter he saw them take a quick glance around his room and quickly take seats around the room while he remained standing.
"Alright, your questions?" He felt the overriding urge to keep his eye on Todoroki who was closest to his laptop but that would drag attention to the device and all he needed was for his rival leader to discover his plans.
Not after the past two sleepless nights.
"We want to say sorry first." That made him pause, a variable he wasn't expecting. In the past when people had lashed out he'd just had to roll with it.
Uraraka stands from where she'd perched herself on the edge of the bed, her movements are stiff like Iida's were the first few weeks of term. She bows to him, a formal way of apology that he isn't quite share why he's receiving.
He becomes even more confused when she stays bowed and Todoroki from where he's sat at his desk and bows also. When they're both bowed is when Todoroki speaks, "We apologise for calling you out this morning. The intention was not to make you feel cornered as it obviously made you feel."
Uraraka picks up where he left off, "I apologise for this morning as well. I over reacted and I should of respected your decision. I'm sure you had your reasons."
He'd been well on his way to accepting the apology but it's the wording at the end that throws him. Iida's twitch at the phrasing tells him he's also not the only one to notice something amiss.
Then he remembers the fact that he's looking at three quarters of the the hero teams war council and alarm bells start ringing. He's fallen into one of his own traps.
They shouldn't be in his room, what if they've figured- no. That's paranoia. Paranoia will get him nowhere. Breath Midoriya.
Okay, he thinks, calm now. Probably.
" 'Had my reasons'? What's that supposed to mean?"
This is meant to be their tome to ask questions and it seems he's the one doing most of the asking. He doesn't like how much power that gives them. But then he takes another deep breath and realises that that power will make them loose lipped.
This is a group of friends, he'd slipped his guard and he was probably more paranoid than Todoroki so he just needed to needle in such a way that he'd get exactly what he wanted out of them.
"We have an offer." the way they seem to relax, Uraraka and Todoroki returning to their claimed chairs, gives him another image of a war council. They think they're working on home turf, with no clue that they're in the lions den.
He shoves his hands into his hoodie pockets. He'd had his audio app open anyway, he knows how to press play without looking by now and he does so before they notice. "An offer?"
He keeps his hand in his pocket and shifts his footing. More relaxed, more open to suggestion. It's a familiar stance.
"We want you to be our spy on the villain team." The little tributes of information come together like a poorly stitched patch work. He can see the reasons behind some of their earlier actions but he's not displayed that level of intuition or cunning before so he plays dumb.
For now at keast, he can't have them know what he knows.
"What? But... but you were really adamant about - and earlier..." Turn to mumbling, lower head and cross arms while grasping chin. Lower volume and add a confused tone.
He hears a good natured huff of amusement from his three enemies and knows he's got them fooled, "Deku."
Do not flinch. Do not. This isn't junior high. They won't tell you to stop and shut up, get a grip Midoriya. Do not flinch.
It's the cold monotonous tone that Todoroki is known for that sparks an old memory but he puts it away. Thankfully the pause in his mumbling plays into the act well. Looking up the rival leader is giving him a rare smile.
He doesn't feel an ounce of guilt at playing them for fools.
"The reason we were so adamant about having everyone know you were on the villain team is because that way you wouldn't need to prove your loyalty to that group."
Solid reasoning, he'll admit. But do they not realise the draw backs? Now the hero team would be less likely to believe any information he would hypothetically give them.
He finds irony in the fact that his rival is asking him to snitch on himself. "I'm registered on the villain team I can't switch or work for you."
Not true, but if he's right then none of them will of read of the rule book as deeply as he has, and Aizawa's wording had made it seem like Todoroki hadn't questioned things to a great degree so he should be covering bases well on that end.
The drooping of smiles and the way Todoroki's mismatched eyes lose a bit of their spark prove him right. "If I could I would, but you know me," fake little laugh get them relaxed and make sure they don't question the next few words, "I've read it cover to cover. There isn't a way for something like that to work."
He likes to think he can read Todoroki pretty well, and he's thankful doe that because it allows him to see the tension melt from his shoulders because why would he lie to them?
He was Midoriya Izuku, he didn't lie to his friends. He smiles at them as they say they need to go after a few more minutes of mindless chatter. As they leave the room he proves to himself that he can do this.
That he can, truly and fully deceive his friends and let his thoughts come to fruition. He lies directly to their faces and looks them in the eye, "By the way, I don't know who the leader of the villains is. I joined because of Momo but to be honest, "laugh and look to the side, "I don't know who my boss is. No ones really taken charge."
Good, good he thinks as the gears turn behind their eyes. Let them think the villains aren't unified. Nobody plans well for a rabble.
Prople plan for armies, people improvise for rambles. He'd have Koji keep him updated though. Uraraka looks at him in shock, "Really? Wow, they're really keeping the anonymous thing going aren't they?"
Todoroki pauses outside his room and he doesn't let his emotions betray the worry at being called out that constricts his throat. "Is it possible that Yaoyozoru is the leader?"
It isn't aimed at anyone in particular, "You're guess is as good as mine! Good night!"
They bid him good night and he locks the door behind them. Strolling to his desk he pulls out the phone and ends the audio. He places the phone on the desk and waits a good ten minutes while typing before daring to go over to his door.
He checks through the gap between the door and the doorway to make sure no one is hiding away and watching. Sure that the only one possibly listening in is Dark Shadow next door he replays the audio and smirks when the entire conversation is caught.
It's a bit muffled yes, but it's clear enough that there aren't any misconceptions to be had about what's being said. Opening the group chat he sends the file.
There's a lull where he leaves his phone on his desk as he goes about getting changed for bed. It's Sunday tomorrow so he won't need to make appearances unless necessary until the afternoon.
He wanders around rearranging things here and there as the phone on the desk pings with an instance.
Going back over to it he smirks as he has to scroll up to read the responses.
Wakagashira: Wow, I knew they'd thrown you under the bus but wow.
Piper: We're lucky he doesn't suspect anything, but that makes my job easier
Cleaner™: I didn't know you were such a good actor, your voice doesn't even have a trace of hesitation
Evangelion: I take it that this is my cue to tap their phones
Wakagashira: Don't get caught
Evangelion: Who do you think you're talking to?
White_Collar: This is what I mean by 1-A being cocky
Shadow: I'll chop you again
Muscle: So that was where he went today.
More messages popped up and he scrolled down to read through them as they appeared. He put his phone down though, opening up his laptop again, the screen turning back on to display the blue prints and plan view of ground Gamma.
He brought up another tab, MS paint of all things, and traced another route over the map in tab for another heist plan. Nezu had sent him an e-mail with all the things they would need to acquire or commit for their bonus points and he was planning the routes.
Another round of pings drew his attention and he saved his current progress before turning his attention towards his phone again.
Mirror: Boss! Boss! @Kumicho !
Ninja: Why are we getting Kumicho's attention?
Mirror: It's important just help me! @Kumicho
Ninja: Alright...? @Kumicho hurry before she blows up your phone
Addict: f for @Kumicho 's phone
Zombie: Why are we all @ at Kumicho?
Geo: Humour @Kumicho
Blanc: To reach the pinical of comedy... @Kumicho
Heapheastus: You should stop now. Have you considered that Kumicho is busy?
Apollo: Sorry Mum.
Kumicho: I'm purposefully ignoring all of you BTW. Except you Heapheastus, we're honoured you're here with us.
Mirror: !!! @Kumicho what do you think of this plan. We bedazzle Todoroki.
Kumicho is typing...
He snorted at the idea, his minds eye trying to visualise it. He could already feel his mind trying to find ways to make that work.
Kumicho:... I'll see what I can do.
Wakagashira: Look who's in trouble!
Evangelion: Look whos in trouble!
Heapheastus: @Wakagashira @Evangelion
Kumicho: Look who's in trouble now!
Heapheastus: @Kumicho open up I just want to talk
Kumicho: Shit, Momo I'm sorry, how the hell did you get to my room so quick!?
Heapheastus: Like i said i only want to talk
Kumicho: If I don't make it make sure my funeral is open casket and have Bakugou lower me down
Putting his phone away and once again closing the lid of his laptop he went over to his door to find it was in fact Momo standing at his door, but he smiled at her anyway. Despite how scared he was that she might actually do him in and ascend to the head of the villain crew.
"You wanted to talk about my quirk?"
"Yeah, come on in. This might be a long chat."
If either had bothered to look at their phones they would of noticed the flood of responses:
Eldritch: Can confirm that @Heapheastus is in fact coming for @Kumicho. Will update when the sounds of murder start
Kumicho = Midoriya
Wakagashira = Shinsou
The Piper = Koda
Ninja = Ojiro
Mirror = Hagakure
Evangelion = Hatsume
Heapheastus = Yaoyozorum
Apollo = Jiro
Eldritch = Tokoyami
Addict = Sato
Nova = Aoyama
Demoman = Kaminari
Demowoman = Ashido
White collar = Monoma
Muscle = Kendo
The Mole = Sen
Torch = Awase
Zombie = Setsuna
Geo = Juzo
Blanc = Kuroiro
Shadow = Yanagi
A small continuation of last chapter.
"Whats the extent of your quirk's abilities?" Reaching out to one of the notebooks on the table he was glad to have grabbed the right one. Clicking a pen, this time having been behind his ear, he got ready to write.
"What do you mean by extent?"
"Like," he took a seat at his desk chair and Momo perched on his bed, "How much can you make in one go? What can't you make? Can you control what you make if the original object was sentient?"
She sat staring at him, and Izuku could tell she was trying to judge how serious he was being about this. Her expression turned contemplative.
"I must admit I've never actually tried to make anything living. What did you have in mind?"
There's a few tense moments where he can see Momo really looking at him. It's the same way that Aizawa looked at him. Like she's just now seeing the kind of monster he can be if he really wants to be.
She stares into the eyes of the beast, and she is not the first to look away. "I can try."
"That's all I ask." He shifts in his seat and sighs, "I understand that I'm effectively asking you to poison our classmates but..."
He pauses, looking away. He's isn't trying to manipulate here. He just doesn't know how to get across the fact that since he could understand the difference between right and wrong his brain has always wanted to do the bad thing.
Bullying? Well, learn their weaknesses and exploit them. Wreck them before they wreck you.
Need to work around a problem? Tear the problem to the ground so it's never a problem again.
Injured? Find a way to make the attacker look worse.
Want people to ignore you? Manipulate them and their whole view of you.
"It's the way your mind works isn't it Izuku?" He looks up at her, seeing no judgement, "I could tell from the way you just settled into this role. You like to be able to control things and to be able to plan."
"But at the same time, I can tell you're also not above improvisation and rolling with the punches. It's why having a request like that isn't too strange." A smile spreads across her face and he thinks to himself that she looks better relaxed , it's a novel thought really.
"It comes with the territory of having nearly zero control of any aspect of your life I guess." They're getting off topic but she doesn't mention it so he continues, "Did you know when I was seven my sensei told me that I needed to start planning my career before I reached the age of eleven."
"Oh? They sound like an interesting sensei."
He chuckled at that, that sensei had been the only one to ever be kind to him, to not care about his quirklessness and to actually treat him like every other kid. "Yeah... sensei was amazing. But the reason he told me to start looking for a job at the age of seven was because the unemployment percentage of the entire population is ninety five percent quirkless."
Her bemused expression drops, and her mouth twists, "Why..."
Why isn't it on the news? Why is it that big percentage? Why don't people care?
There are so many whys she can ask.
"Why did it ever get to such a high percentage?" He realises he could be manipulating her, subconsciously, and decides to ignore that thought.
"You know the quirk discrimination laws, the ones that have been around since quirks first came in?" She nods, "They haven't been changed in nearly two hundred years. There aren't any laws about discriminating against quirkless. The government like to pretend we-they don't exist."
He realises his slip up, sometimes he forgets that he's only here because of All Might's quirk. But then he remembers and all he can think about is that younger him would be so upset and angry. He never did become a quirkless hero. He's just like everybody else now.
Once the quirk came in he decided that the quirklessness didn't matter. He was past it. But that's wrong, he is quirkless. He doesn't have the gene or the lack of a joint in his toe. Biologically he is quirkless. He's merely a container for one for all, he makes sure remind himself of that often.
He can see it in All Night's eyes that the man had gotten so used to not being quirkless anymore that the prospect of it is scary to him. That's why he reminds himself often, because he never wants to wake up one morning and realise he's dreading the day he goes back to being him.
Deku is the boy with a quirk, Izuku is the kid who learnt to work around the world.
"I suppose..." she begins, body folded over slightly and a hand on her chin, "That I can understand then, why it is that you immediately go for the way to put the situation in your favour. Bakugou... the way he treats you..."
She leaves it open ended, "Its the same way he used to treat me when he thought I was quirkless." Her lips thin at the confirmation. "I'll admit, when I first met you I was sceptical that you would make it."
Well, that hurt more than he thought it ever would. He was sure he'd gotten used to that kind of reaction by now.
"You were anxious, shaking and had absolutely no control over your quirk. Now though, I can see beyond that." He feels a small little smile slide onto his features, "We were all anxious that day, you however were trying to control a quirk that holds more power than most of us combined do and you had the knowledge that a childhood bully was watching your every move..." she laughs sullenly to herself, "Thinking back it was rather hypocritical of me to see you that way."
"That's not important now though is it?" She claps her hands together and like that they're back on track. He's glad he has someone like Momo in his inner sanctum.
"No. I ask about your quirk because yesterday while we were watching Mei plan our deaths I had some of our other team mates do recon."
She leans forward on the bed, elbows rested on knees and her expression turns, dare he say it, down right conniving. "Oh?"
"Oh yes," he smirks, "Denki short circuits a lot right? Well, he spent lunch today learning how machines output electricity and excess energy. He's got an appointment with power loader tomorrow for some support equipment." He closes the log forgotten note book.
"Torou and Mashirao were skulking around 1-B's lunch spot, the whole class mainly sits together at lunch apparently. I've now got data on basic mutant quirks in that class." He starts to list the operatives off on his fingers, "Koji was sitting with the hero team, he's got data on their movements and training. We'll be using that to change our training accordingly."
"Mina and Jiro spent time going through the different uses of their quirks, I'll get back to that in a minute. Sato spent lunch researching some foods I asked him to look into," at her look he elaborated, "from what I could get out of Aizawa a problem we'll face is food shortages. I was hoping to make nutritious foods with as little waste as possible for our endeavour."
"I had Shoji ask around about what kind of things we can bring into the exam, which brings me back to Mina." He could feel his grin widen, "Diluted acid conducts electricity and we have both acid and electricity so, tomorrow I'm having the two of them go to Mei so the three of them can figure that out."
She nodded along, eyes becoming more approving the further he went on. "I was wondering if you and Neito could go with them tomorrow."
"Of course, I can go. Though Neito I'm not too sure..."
"He's fine once you get used to him, promise. But the reason I'd like you to go is because that way you can prompt Mei into saying whether or not she got permission for the bacteria I want you to replicate."
"Out of curiosity," she leant back, he spared a quick glance to the clock to see nearly an hour had passed, "What exactly does this bacteria do?"
"Think of a water born version of food poisoning. However, this strain is particularly nasty. It makes the victim nauseous and causes them to pass out for anywhere between two to sixteen hours." Her mouth fell open.
"It was originally created by the government as a interrogation drug, but it was deemed against human rights to use it. Especially when sometimes in these interrogations they'd pump them to high heavens with the drug and kill the suspect."
"And..and you want me to make this because? No, never mind that, how do you know about this!? How has Mei gotten her hands on it!?"
"Now you're asking the real questions. Simply, the drug became public knowledge a few years back but the media didn't cover it in case of any big scandals coming to light." He shrugged, "U.A. has a stash of it though, despite the whole humans rights thing the head before Nezu thought it would be good to use to 'restrain defiant students'."
He can see the disgust enter her features, "I'm quoting the guy himself here, those were his words about the decision to hold samples of it. How I came to learn about it however is that Recovery Girl didn't realise I'd woken up after my surgery at the sports festival and I just started asking about the stuff on the walls."
"And you're having Mei get clearance for this, and having me and potentially Neito replicate this because?"
He doesn't know what expression he makes but it must not be very nice, "Aizawa turned around and said the heroes wouldn't step in unless there was no out for the heroes. So, we're going to push them to an out by damaging one of their previous resources."
"You want to infect the water supply."
"Bases are on different water lines to the rest of the city. If we hit just the hero base and leave everywhere else safe the heroes won't step in. And if we have an antidote?"
Understanding settled in, "You want us making an antidote not the actually drug..."
Glancing up from where he was trying to memorize the layout of the main base he saw the clock reading two in the morning. Groaning he pulled himself out of his chair and landed on the bed with a thud.
He was too tired for this.
Lying on the bed he closed his eyes, trying to go to sleep. His mind, however wasn't having it. And thoughts he'd need to privately address popped up.
He'd told Momo earlier that the bases water supply was separate but Aizawa had said they were linked. That meant he'd need to find some way to separate the water supply or potentially block off the villains and poison the rest?
No...that wouldn't work.
He didn't want to put any more pressure on Mei than he already was. That's why he was having Neito helping Momo,who was helping the inventor.
Then there was the issue of costumes. Functionality and aesthetic would need to be balanced here. Again, the only way for them to be made would be through the use of the previous trio.
Scrambling out of bed he picked up his phone and opened his emails. Aizawa had said he couldn't directly involve management course in combat, however he didn't say he couldn't do supply gathering through.
He was just lucky some management course had given them his e-mail for business dealings in the present or in the future.
He'd have to pull favours out for this. However... He could make a deal out of this. They worked with the management course and whatever modular fake businesses they were running they could stick sponsors around the exercise. His grin reappeared as he typed out his proposal.
If they could get their hands on material and flexible not too bulky armour he'd register himself and the villain team as fake sponsors and use the training ground as a giant advertisement show.
Wait! That could help as well with the realism aspect. After all, how many facades and fake companies existed for the sole purpose of a villains source of income?
He finished composing his e-mail and sent it, before placing his phone on the bed side table. He didn't lie back down now. Though one problem had been solved he had another to solve. Looking at the clock on the wall he cringed when he reminded himself what time it was.
Maybe he could wait till morning?
But by then there would be even less time to plan and they were already onto day three of seven of planning and only losing more time. "Screw it." He whispered under his breath as he picked the phone back up.
It rang a few times before the groggy voice of his mother tentatively called out his name. "Hey Mama."
He began to pace as her sleepy voice fretted over him, "No no. I'm fine, no I... I haven't been up all night... alright yes. But I have a favour to ask."
"Do you have Mr Hiitachin's number?" He laughed at her response, "No, don't worry I'm not planning on plumbing my own room. It's for that school project I told you about."
He'd always wondered where he'd gotten his true nature from, after all his mother was so sweet and innocent. However, hearing her guess his entire plan from just asking for a plumbers number made it abundantly obvious who he'd gotten it from.
"I know, I won't go too far. I know I could of just texted you but... I just wanted confirmation that I could talk about it." Her softening voice soothed his nerves, "So you'll text his number to me? That's great. I'll see you in a few weeks okay Mama?"
"Love you too, bye."
Okay, so... costumes were potentially fixed. And now so was the plumbing, possibly. Production of weapons was something he'd be taking up with Mei, Momo and Neito later. He kept his phone in his hand as he started pacing aging.
Koji had let him know that the heroes were training in the mornings, so that meant he'd have to continue training at night so that they weren't caught out. But Koji was also supplying him with what exactly the heroes training was like, which helped a great deal.
He'd planted the seed earlier that the villains weren't united and he'd have to expand on that otherwise it would come out as what it was, a cheap diversion tactic.
He continued doing circuits of his room as plans and problems crashed down on him from all angles. It was a Hell of a lot harder when people expected these kind of things from him.
That was it.
Why the Hell was he focusing so much on coming up with new plans when he already had an extensive collection of counter measures that he could just improve upon?
That slowed his pacing and the feeling of drowning lessened slightly. There was however, one idea that he was very fixated on bringing to fruition.
It was risky, possibly against the rules (though he hadn't found anything against it) and could very well get him in serious trouble. Principle Nezu was sure to love it.
Content with his new plan of action, and that he had things to do tomorrow besides worry he was finally able to put his phone on his desk and lie down.
This time, when he turned off the lamp and closed his eyes he actually slept.
"Izuku." He nodded at Rikido as he entered the kitchen. It was five am meaning he'd only had three hours sleep but he could handle that. He'd ran on less before.
"Morning. What're you up to?" He created small talk as he grabbed two bagels from the packet clearly labelled: 'Bakugou Katsuki's' and shoved them in the toaster. He caught sight of the smile on his team mates face as he watched him.
"Trying out some new recipes, your mother's recommendations were excellent by the way." That brought a smile to his lips as he busied himself with getting out a plate along with the butter. He usually had traditional breakfast but he needed to be in and out quick today so western style it was.
"That's great, oh." Taking the popped bagels he started to butter them, "I'm gonna be out for awhile today, do you mind helping Fumiko and Yuga with their plan?"
"Sure! You sure you don't want more than just a bagel?"
He held up the two now buttered bagels. "I have two. Besides, "he was already leaving the kitchen as he spoke, "I have to be out early today."
"See you later!"
Making his way out of the dorms, scoffing one of the bagels, he met up with Hitoshi outside the front door. Handing off the second bagel they made their way to the main school building.
"Thanks. But are you sure this is safe?"
Swallowing his current mouthful he answered, "Not at all. That's whim having you come with. You're registered as my second with Nezu anyway, you being there won't be too suspicious."
He grinned, "Nezu is paranoid he's going to have looked at this requested meeting from every which angel since I asked for it two days ago."
"That," half of a piece of bagel was motioned at him like an accusatory finger, "Is the worst decision you could possibly make, besides letting Mei make weapons."
"What?" He smirked, "Let the high specs figure me out? Nah, I think that's exactly the right decision to make. Nezu wouldn't let me get away with it if he didn't want to see how it'd play out."
There was silenced and he looked over to his best friend, "I can't tell who's worse. You or Nezu. You're both viewing this like its a game, which I guess it is but what I want to know is..."
They stopped in front of the doors to the main building, "Who are you playing against Izuku?"
He stood there silent, not expecting the question. The answer was simple wasn't it? He was playing against Todoroki and everyone on the hero team. But then he thought about it, truly thought about.
He thought about the fact that Deku wasn't playing and it was Izuku Midoriya who was, and then he thought about the fact that one of his goals was to show everyone that he wasn't to be viewed as weak. That he was to be seen as what he was.
Then the answer came easier.
"Myself and everybody else."
Hitoshi didn't balk at the answer or become accusatory. His eyes didn't even change from their tired amused look, "As long as we're on the same page." And then he was smiled at and an arm was slugged around his shoulder as they entered the school building.
"Come in, come in! How are the two of you today?"
Nezu led them into his office, still in the same suit as ever, and motioned them over to his desk where Hitoshi slid his phone out and placed it in his lap.
Seeing Nezu focus in on the 'attempt' at secrecy Izuku activated his own phone recording in his pocket. There wasn't even a twitch to show that Nezu noticed the sudden increase in frequency, courtesy to Hitoshi pretending to turn the volume up.
"We're good, principle Nezu. Though, the boss here has a few things to ask you." The motions are too stiff, the tone too formal. Perfect.
High Specs gave Nezu one of the highest intelligences in the world to date. That meant he would pick up on the subtle cues of someone lying to him. However, not long after the Stain incident the principle had asked him to come talk and they'd gotten onto the conversational topic of quirks and analysis.
Through that Izuku had learnt that despite abundant intelligence Nezu found it difficult to pick apart and understand the complexity of human emotions. He wouldn't be able to tell the difference between Hitoshi playing up these cues and actually exhibiting them.
He can tell his plan is working as planned from the way that even as Nezu's attention turns to him Izuku can see his ears keep twitching in Hitsoshi's direction.
He had known from the second he let Nezu know he was bringing Hitoshi that the rat would figure out he would be using Hitoshi as a buffer. However, with the fact that Hitoshi had 'hidden' the recording device it made it look like Izuku was distracting Nezu from Hitoshi.
It was a good way to counter act high specs. Let him work it all out and then do what he expected but not.
"Yeah, I was wondering if you could tell us the announcement possibilities we'll hear throughout the exercise."
"An interesting request." He could see high specs twirling to life behind Nezu's eyes. He loved seeing people who believed whole heartedly that they had the upper hand become pawns. "But not one that I can find any issue in fulfilling."
He hid his own grin as a sadistic glint entered the rat's eyes. "May I ask though, Midoriya, why you're having your second record me?"
"So that we can run through a drill and how to avoid hearing certain possibilities and reacting to others. I was hoping to play them when my team broke one of the rules during practice."
"Interesting. As I said, I don't see any reason why I can't help you. But next time just ask to record me."
"Of course, sir."
He faked a look of annoyance at Hitoshi who faked a wince and awkward shrugging of shoulders. Sure, it was redundant on first glance to pretend that the other was recording, however on a less superficial level it was exactly what they needed.
If Nezu thought he could figure them out it allowed more wriggle room.
"Now, for the most common statement you could hear: Midoriya Izuku of the villain team has been captured. Of course, we would address you as any titles we have heard you be referred to as, if requested."
"For someone on the opposite team it would be the same except would refer to them as follows Midoriya Izuku of the hero team has been captured."
"That was intense. I could practically feel the mental battle going on in there."
Shinsou let out a sigh as they exited the office and began to walk down the corridor when a familiar voice was heard down the corridor, "Todoroki are you sure Midoriya really is in the school building?"
"Yes. I had Koji's birds follow him. I'm convinced there's something off about Midoriya being on the villain team."
Smiling at Hitoshi the boy only sighed fondly and they began to get ready. Izuku leant against the wall with his arms crossed and Hitoshi stood across from him boxing him in. They began to 'argue' at a level that you would only hear once you came to this part of the corridor.
"I told you, I'm not going to request to change!" He forced his voice to crack when he heard Iida's and Todoroki's footsteps grow closer
"Why the hell not!? Clearly you only joined the villain side out of pity!"
He could see them in the corner of his eye and unfolded his arms and got in Hitoshi's face, "It wasn't out of pity!"
"What, don't tell me you have a crush on Yaoyozorou!?" Despite the fact he'd planned this out with Hitoshi last night the question was still so sudden and out there that his red face was genuine. "You do!"
"I do not! Besides what would- what would that have to do with changing teams!"
"It means you don't have a reason to be on the villain team!"
He saw the smirk Hitoshi sent him and he got ready for the finale seeing his friends stalled in the corridor just watching them argue, "I'm not going to go to Nezu and request to change teams because you're jealous!"
"I'm not jealous! I just want you to realise you need to stop letting people walk all over you!"
"I'm not! Just go away and leave me alone!"
"Midoriya...?" He'd practiced the deer in the headlights look years ago till even his mother had begin to believe the look and he took liberties with that when he swung around, pushing lightly against Hitoshi (though because or the act the other acted like it was a violent push), and came face to face with Todoroki and Iida.
The peppermint coloured teen was staring with no emotion as usual, though his voice had sounded quiet confused when he'd said his name.
He'd been told by Koji that Todoroki had requested a tail on him, and so they'd created an act that would allow for he and Hitoshi to be around each other during school hours more and get them off any lingering scent that he could be the leader.
After all, the leader wouldn't be arguing with his 'boyfriend' about changing teams.
"Todoroki! Iida! What are-what are you doing here!?"
He felt himself blush when Hitoshi pulled him into the tallers side. They'd left the confrontation stage to improv and it was clearly the right choice because whatever Hitoshi did would get actual reactions from him.
"We came to talk to Nezu but what are you doing here?"
'So despite being a council system Todoroki still has a second that's interesting. I can see why he wouldn't want Bakugou but Uraraka? She isn't as stiff about rules as Iida so she'd be the one I'd go for. Although. Two legacies together does make an appealing powerhouse unit.'
"Come on Izuku, let's go." Nodding he allowed Hitoshi to gently push him past his friends by the arm around his shoulder but they both stopped when Todoroki called out.
"I'm having a conversation with Midoriya, it's rude to walk off mid conversation."
"And its rude to listen into a private conversation but that didn't stop you two voyeuristic bastards did it?" An eye brow was arched and the two hero course students spluttered and tried to come up with excuses, "We're going, enjoy your talk with Nezu."
They past with no incident after that and Izuku felt himself genuinely leaning into Hitoshi the further away they went from Todoroki and Iida as he slowly started to lose the ability to not burst out laughing.
When they made it to the front door he finally lost it, and the arm around him was the only thing keeping him up as he erupted into full blown laughter.
"That's not fair! I want to fake date Izuku, Toshi brake up with him so I can have him, we'll be the ultimate power couple - with my inventions and your cunning we'll be unstoppable!" Mei pumped a fist into the air and Izuku felt his smile grow when his present team mates started laughing.
Yosetsu looked up from his welding and over to him, "Was it really necessary to pretend to be dating him though? Couldn't you of just you know done it as the friends you are?"
He shrugged from where he was sat upside down on the couch, "I mean yeah. But then you would have questions as to why Hitoshi knew about me being on the villain team. However, if he was my boyfriend it would make sense that I'd tell him."
Sen lolled right side up on the couch next to him, a DS in hand as he waited for the next time Mei needed him for her home made tank, "It makes sense I guess, but why Hitoshi? I mean no offense dude," the boy in mention waved a dismissive hand over his shoulder from where he was practically leaning in the engine. "But wouldn't someone as gorgeous as myself of been a better fit?"
The snort that rose from both boys was friendly and wasn't at all condescending, which was a plus because it meant that this was allowing Hitoshi to make friends. "You're not his type man." Was called out of the engine.
"What and Mei and Hitoshi are?"
Reiko, who was sat next to Denki as the two of them tried to get the new support equipment on the blond, added, "You can't forget Neito either."
"Oh heaven forbid." He let out a snort, "Dude your type is just socially inept and touch starved strays!" Denki called out before letting out a yeah as the equipment stayed on.
"You calling me a bitch sparky!?" Mei appeared out from under the tank in record time and had a wrench pointed endearingly at the blond.
"No ma'am! That's what I'm calling Neito." For that he received a pat on the head.
"As you were." And with that the pink haired girl was bounding over to him, "Look, Izuku, I have to level with you."
After saying that she crouched down and he let out a laugh and was rewarded with her signature scheming smile, "I love you, really really do. However I'm gonna go crazy if I keep having people come and go from my lab all day ever day. It's only ten am on the third day."
He knew this problem would arose sooner or later. "Your lab has garage doors yeah? And U.A. has a track doesn't it?" She nodded, "Well we could borrow one of the garages and have that be the base of operations for equipment production." Her smile grew at that, "And then you could keep your lab as your tinkering room."
"Perfect!" Bouncing up from her crouch Mei clapped her hands, "Alright! Everybody up we're moving out now! I'll go get Momo and Blondie and move them out!" She seemed to get a thought suddenly as her eyes turned mad, "I CAN TEST OUT MY NEW BABY WHILE WE'RE THERE!"
The nine of them, plus the tank, made it to U.A's practice track without much incident.
The fact that Aizawa stared him in the eye as he and Mei pushed its inoperable husk past him to the track just made him even more convinced that Nezu had issued orders to let them do as they wish.
The rat was more interested in seeing his moves than he was of playing Izuku himself, however that was an advantage. When the game truly started Nezu would hopefully be stumped for a few seconds.
Izuku had lived his life exploiting precious few seconds of confusion.
The track itself was a sight to behold. A simple ring circuit was flanked on both sides by garages, with doors on both sides for easy chemical access. The buildings looked to be two floors tall, but knowing the school a basement wasn't off the cards.
As they got closer to the track, the last stretch being just him as Mei had gotten struck by inspiration for improvements and was writing them on a pad, he noticed that the simple track was anything but.
There were interlocking teeth groves in the floor which Mei explained opened up and allowed for fake buildings to come up and create a city scape on the track.
He'd glanced at Mei's gleeful features when she explained that she loved that feature the most as she got to test her babies in a collateral environment.
'Evangelion was definitely the right codename. Next she'll start wanting to make angels.'
"Alright! My worker drones here we are, Hatsume forge 2.0!"
As the garage door opened and he began pushing the tank into its new home he heard a few laughs and comments about being referred to as robots.
Finally getting the vehicle - the first of many apparently- into place he was relieved to see the building was only two floors.
"Alright everyone," attention snapping to him and he stretched his stiff arms above his head, "Momo, Neito could you please continue weapon production?" At their nods He continued, "I'll have Kyoka, Rikido, Yuga and Fumiko come pick some of them up. Snipe sensei has agreed to start training us in small doses."
"Hitoshi, are you still up for helping Mei or do you need a break?"
"I'm good boss." The boy rolled his shoulders, and his smirk was enhanced by the oil smears on his face.
Izuku resisted the urge to roll his eyes- he was just happy Hitoshi was becoming more comfortable around people outside of their small group of friends.
"Awase? Sen? You guys still good?" The duo gave him matching grins and thumbs up (the two were too preoccupied by whatever game Sen was playing) so he took that as his answer.
Turning to Denki and Reiko he took note of how the blond looked uncomfortable in his new support gear.
"Denki," the boy looked up shocked almost that he was being addressed, "I'm meeting with Mona after this, want to come with?"
"Uh...yeah. Sure, dude..."
He didn't like how surprised and unsure the blond seemed about the invitation - that was something he'd need to change.
The idea that somebody who portrayed such over the top confidence and swagger was so easily thrown off by such a simple comment rubbed him the wrong way.
"And me?" Looking to Reiko he set another personal mission to help lessen the sad look in her eyes.
"I've got a really important job for you Reiko. Your quirk enables telekinesis right?" When she responded with a small yes he continued, "Shoji, Kendo and Juzo are transporting some materials to Mei's workshop - it's pretty delicate but heavy stuff. Think you could give them a hand?"
"Heavy but delicate... and you are entrusting that responsibility to me?"
"Only if you're up for it. I'm sure they can handle it but I had to pull a few favours to get my hands on the stuff." He shrugged, not noticing the intrigued looks he was being sent.
"Ooh! What have you got me now, dear Kumichou?"
Mei had pounced on him in seconds. An arm was thrown around his neck from behind as she leant her head over his shoulder. From that position looking down he could see in full form the excited smirk on her face.
"You'll have to wait and see won't you? All I'll say is that the management course are gods and goddesses."
"The management course?" Neito perked up from where he'd slumped into an office's chair, "You're really embracing the whole 'year side' aspect of the exercise."
Patting the arm slung around his neck Mei released him, "We get scored on realism, as well as on our overall approach." He waved his hand nonchalantly, "Because of that if we were to have sponsors or faux businesses to our groups name it wouldn't be too different than real villain income fronts."
There was a silence where be realised that, again, too much had been said. "Dude that is is cool, you've really thought of everything huh?"
He felt a blush crawl up his skin, "I wouldn't go that far...."
So... why are we meeting Mina?" Glancing at Denki from the corner of his eye he went back to surveying the area, still cautious after the events earlier in the morning.
"It's about costumes, besides equipment material I struck a deal for costume material. Mina begged for artistic input on our costumes, Kuroiro also has some of the more popular designs from the ones I sent around so he'll be there as well."
"And I'm here because...?"
He let out an amused huff, "You're not exactly the extrovert you portray yourself as are you?" He can see the raising of an eyebrow in his peripheral, "Oh you can handle social interaction and people like Bakugou no sweat but the minute you're in an environment you don't know how to handle you turn into an introvert."
A laugh came from Denki and he cringed at how fake it sounded. Was that how he used to sound in the beginning? He'd never truly appreciated how blind and deaf people became as soon as the word quirkless was stamped on your forehead.
"You've got an interesting sense of humour there dude-"
"There's no use lying to me," he turned to look at the blond, "I've spent years reading people, you guys are practically open books to me. It's not something to be ashamed of."
They continued walking, a quiet settling over them that wasn't awkward per say, but instead heavy with the feeling of pulling at an open wound.
"Am I that obvious?" The voice is incredibly small.
"Not particularly, like I said you guys are practically open books to me. If it helps Bakugou used to have claustrophobia when we were kids, he used to play it off that he didn't like it because he couldn't use his explosions but... I could always see the fear in his eyes."
"Should you really be telling me this?"
"Should you really be on the villain team Denki?" He stopped and didn't remove his eyes from the bond's back. The other boy was frozen in front of him and didn't turn around to face him. "You're not registered on either team, so I have to wonder what are you doing exactly?"
"I'm- I'm...not sure."
Shaking his head he shoved his hands in his pockets, glad that the way from the track to the meeting place was pretty secluded, "What do you want to do Denki?" At the tenderness that entered the air he added, "No one's asked you that before have they?"
"No. Everyone wants me to be this amazing hero... but I've never understood how to get control of my quirk and then... then Todoroki came out as the hero leader and I thought... here's my chance to make everyone happy."
Denki turned to him, "And then Kyoka said she was thinking of joining the villain team and... the thought that it was the first time I could do something for myself came to mind. But then just seeing... how happy and genuine about this everyone is..." the blond laughed, "I couldn't just sign up when I was just here for selfish reasons."
He didn't do it normally, but he walked up to the blond, who watched him like a hawk, and cuffed him atop of the head, "Idiot." The bond's jaw dropped, "As if that has ever stopped anybody from doing anything. Fuck it if it's selfish- everyone gets to be selfish sometimes we're all human at the end of the day quirks don't change that."
He began walking again, "Lets hurry up or the two drama queens will have our heads. And I'm not talking about the management department."
Behind him Denki laughed, "Just like that? Not gonna demand I go sign up for the villain team?" Despite the questioning Denki sped up to keep pace.
"I'm not not going to force you to do anything, this is a team not a military unit. You're standing beside me is answer enough."
"I'll sign up after this meeting."
He felt a grin slide onto his face, "Good man."
"Punctuality is a virtue boss."
He grinned at Mina and Kuroiro, noting that management hadn't turned up yet, "As the management will tell you its fashionably late."
As he settled into a chair in one of the management courses office/meeting rooms the door behind him opened and a hoard of management course kids poured in an evil gleam in their eyes.
His three team mates settled into seats next to him and he made sure his posture was as good as it could be as the 'head' of the 'fabric company' settled into the seat across the table from him.
"Mr Midoriya, I hope we didn't keep you waiting long."
The other kids either settled merchandise on the table or set up charts on stands, he smiled a Midoriya Izuku smile, "No bother, as I was explaining to my compatriots it's called being fashionably late."
A gleeful grim was his response along with a half wistful 'Very true.'
"I see you have the merchandise I asked for."
"Yes, only the best for our most loyal customers," the fact he was possibly the first and only customer went unsaid, "And you intend to uphold your end of the bargain?" The loud confident tone dropped into a worried quibble.
Pulling his phone out he showed the first draft designs for advertisements he'd made shortly after waking up. They were quick, scruffy but they showed that he was serious about the deal.
"I uphold all my promises. Are you sure you're okay with us using your companies name during the exercise though? I'm not sure how to credit you all," he motioned to the entire collection of students, "without ruining the surprise."
"If I can just suggest something for a moment, why not allow us to say that we have gotten a sponsorship from the hero course? The credit is given and the teachers don't know what you intend to do."
A tall girl from the corner of the room spoke up, despite her impressive height she was relatively normal looking. Izuku had a feeling she slipped under the rader quite well. He immediately pinged her on his own personal radar.
Someone like that was someone to keep an eye on.
"That sounds like a brilliant deal miss." He turned back to the boss, "What do you say?"
A matching crooked grin to the one on his face appeared, "I think we have a deal Midoriya, oh sorry." The boss rephrased, "I think we have a deal Kumicho. It's been a pleasure doing business with you. May we interest you in listening to our full presentation?"
"Unfortunately," he pulled himself out of his chair and along with Mina and Kuroiro collected the materials, "I'm not able to. However, my rep for this Kaminari Denki is free and I'm sure would be more than happy to."
He ignored the pleading look as Denki crumbled under the full force of over ten management course students giving him pleading eyes. "We'll be off then."
As they left the room, door closing behind them Kuroiro lent closer, "Don't you think that was a bit mean?"
"See it as punishment. Even if he did nothing wrong we can't have him thinking pulling our chain is alright."
Mina laughed, "That sounds so wrong."
He found himself snickering.
"I booked a support room, so we can work on the outfits and other skills together."
"Some of us are going to need to learn the basics of plumbing for one of my plans. I'm learning it along with Tooru and Mashiaro."
"And... I'd I may ask boss, how do you plan on doing that?"
He smiled at Kuroiro, "My mother is good friends with a plumber and told him I was interested so he's agreed to give me a crash course of the basics over video chat!"
"Huh..." the 1-B student hummed before facing forward and Izuku did the same when the boy continued, "Hey Izuku who's that?" He was surprised to see his mother had arrived early and was happily chatting with Mashiaro and Tooru.
"Oh, Izuku!" She looked up and spotted him and he felt his grin widen, "Sorry for turning up early dear, Nezu phoned and said you'd asked if I could come earlier."
'Careful Nezu, people are going to start thinking you have favourites.'
Brushing the thought away he simply continued to smile, "It's fine Mama. These are my friends Mina and Kuroiro- they're really creative and agreed to help with the costumes."
His mother's smile widened and her eyes softened as she inspected the two teens next to him, the two tensed up as if afraid that they wouldn't meet her expectations.
"Ah, You're the girl with the acid quirk aren't you? You were very impressive in your one on one's!" A glance to the left after a snort from Tooru and a sly grin from Mashiaro led to him seeing Mina going a beetroot pink.
"And Kuroiro was it? The way you used your quirk in the obstacle course was amazing, it really caught my eye! It's a shame you didn't get through to the one on one's."
Looking to the right he couldn't see any colour change due to the boys complexion but the bashful nature of his expression said enough. "Alright Mama, You're gonna make them pass out if you're not careful."
The inside of the spare support room felt strangely clinical without the hum of electric machinery and the permeating smell of oil and solder that was a given in Mei's workshop.
Thankfully there was more than enough bench space and the sewing machines he had gotten permission to borrow were already set up.
"Did you get the pictures I asked for Tooru?" Placing the box of material on the desks with the machines (his mother smiling brightly with an evil look in her eyes as she took it and turned to her poor unsuspecting apprentices) he turned to his own would-be apprentices.
The invisible girl placed the pictures with a cheerful chirp of yes, and he and Mashiaro crowded around the pictures of the pipe system beneath the hero base.
"It was surprisingly easy! Though...boss, there are cameras there. They were disengaged but they were all over."
Well, that was an interesting development. Not an entirely unaccounted for one but he'd have to adjust the plan for now.
"How new did they look?" He couldn't see her expression but he guessed it was pensive and he slid the images over to Mashiaro.
"Not too old, the plaster hiding the wires still looked wet but that could of been the damp." He nodded at her and stepped back to allow her to slide next to the blond boy.
Newsy must of figured he'd do something like this from the beginning (with how adamant Aizawa seemed on them being given a certain advantage there was a snowflake in hell chance of him spilling.) He wouldn't put it past the rat to have the feed go straight to the heroes main surveillance room.
Being slightly behind schedule was proving to be a blessing, they wouldn't of known about the camera's until it was too late if they'd of acted any earlier.
"Hey," a nudge to his arm had him looking over to his companions,"Look here. I don't know much about plumbing but I do know what this is." A finger was stabbed onto the picture pointing at a small insignificant looking valve, "That will shut off all the water. It acts like a kill switch. When our pipes burst the other week my mother had me turn ours."
"That might just work. You said the camera's were everywhere?" He looked in the general direction of Tooru hoping he was looking her in the eye.
"Yeah. On the pipes, the way in and everywhere down the tunnel to this valve." There was a wrinkle in the paper next to the valve indicating the girl had pointed.
Crossing his arms he paced, "Whats the layout of the tunnel like?"
"There's only one way in and out from the sewers but i noticed a door way at the end of the tunnel, probably connects the basement to the sewers. Other than that the tunnel itself can't be more than eleven meters long and is divided into two narrow walkways by the sewage."
He was developing a mental image of the area, "The entrance to the tunnel, is it a corner or an intersection?"
"Six way intersection." He could hear the cunning in Tooru's voice as she seemed to catch on, "I just barley made it in and out without becoming lost because you had that amazing map. If they tried to chase us down the sewers they'd be lost."
"We have a lot to learn but this will be crucial for a major debilitating strike against the heroes. Are you sure you want to do this? It will probably be boring as hell."
"We're sure. I just want to know what the hell your plan for the pipes are."
He tapped his nose, "When Neito and Momo finish up I'll let everyone know. Until then it's radio silence."
"How do you have the measurements for our entire group...it's kind of creepy." Looking up from his piece of pipe that he'd been studying he looked over to Mina.
"You know U.A. has public records of all its students on the internet for easy accessibility for pros looking for interns. You don't need any kind of special thing to access them."
"They...they're just on the internet for any creepy stalker to see!?"
"Yep." He clicked his tongue in annoyance as his scrap refused to cooperate. "Shiketsu does it as well. We're sister schools so we're constantly competing."
"I do have to wonder about the legality of that though... you are all minors after all." He could hear the worry in his mother's voice, but brushed it off.
"As long as U.A. churns out good heroes the government continues to turn a blind eye."
At the silence that settled, a regular occurrence as of late, he looked around, "What?"
"That sounds like you know something we don't..."
"Part of the reason these pipes are so important is because of something U.A. is allowed to keep on school grounds because the government don't care." He couldn't quite keep the contempt out of his voice. He was within every right to use the drug but... He hated that it was so readily available.
Wait... "Shit! I need to talk to Recovery Girl!" Dropping his pipe and wrench to the table he grabbed his jacket from the back of his seat and threw good byes over his shoulder not bothering to see the curious looks sent his way.
"You want to know the recipe for my gummy's?"
"As I'm sure you're aware Recovery Girl the first year exam is the lock down scenario." He resisted the urge to shuffle his feet, "I've done my research and despite already preparing for lack of food I haven't found any other way to help keep my team rejuvenated."
The old lady hummed, "I can see why you would come to that conclusion. Would it not be easier to just request pre made gummy's though dear?"
He made sure to keep eye contact, not wanting to come off as suspicious, "That'd be depleting you then, besides if we had access to a readily available source we run the risk of addiction."
He'd thought this through, the rejuvenating gummy bears would act as a stimulant, something to chew on when they felt themselves nodding off when they needed to be awake. Plus, in a pinch the medicine could help speed up the healing process of the body so if somebody became injured it would help.
Another reason he wanted the recipe was because he wanted to allow everyone to show case their talents during this and he knew for a fact Rikido was still self conscious about his baking and sweet making abilities.
"Sound reasoning. I swear Midoriya you become less like that man child every day. Although..." she looked up at him with a sceptical look, "I do worry that you're going to have Toshi in here with a heart attack after this."
Laughing and rubbing the back of his neck he realised some of his plans - scratch that a good ninety nine percent of them- would probably cause cardiac arrest for his poor mentor.
"I can't make promises. So... could I please have the recipe?"
"Of course." She lifted herself from her chair and went over to her impossibly tall filing cabinet.
"I've had the recipe worked out since I was in first year here you know." She sounded wistful and he kept close interested in the memories possibly about to be shared. "The first version was like overdosing on caffeine. You couldn't take any other form of drug for a good ten hours after and you would be a shaking wreck because of it... the new ones been modified since obviously."
He noticed she pulled out two sheets of paper, one crumpled, worn and disciplined with age the other simply wrinkling at the edges where hands found familiar grip. Turning Recovery Girl handed them both over.
She had a knowing look in her eyes as the hand off happened, "I know you're using the Nausea knock out drug," she shook her head, "So I can only assume you have no inhibitions about the exercise."
Looking down at the older sheet, it had been the paper on top he paused, noticing the tiny almost faded scribble in the bottom corner and he felt his mouth twitch.
"The older version will be good in case someone is captured, the opposition won't be able to drug them so they'll be set if they break out."
Bowing he carefully cradled the sheets to his chest, "I'll bring them back as soon as we have our own copies."
She waved her hand nonchalantly with a knowing smile, "Keep the new version for yourself, though I would like my first pass back."
"Of course. Thank you Recovery Girl, have a nice day."
"You as well Midoriya." Walking out the nurses office he took one last glance at the scribble in the bottom corner feeling his smile widen.
'Should make the hero team unable to use their quirk properly - villain team should practice under influence. Ask principle for permission. -Chiyo.'
Making it back to the dorms he hid the papers in his jacket pocket as he entered the building, checking the wall clock as he removed his shoes to see it was five at night.
'They might still be with Snipe Sensei...I don't want to risk pushing the papers under the door though...'
His thoughts were disrupted by the signature sound of explosions and Bakugou's fist hitting the wall inches from his nose. "Deku."
"Kacchan." He turned to look at the blond, not even having to fake the fear in his eyes. He'd forgotten he was keeping up his front in front of the rest of their dorm mates. What if Bakugou had seen the papers? "How...how are you today?"
Red eyes narrowed, seemingly contemplating his next few words which was unusal. "Why the hell was your mother here not ten minutes ago asking for you- looking scared shitless for you!?"
Oh, thank Kami. His mother was an amazing actress and he hadn't been sure what time he'd be back so he'd left it to his mother to start this next plan.
"Did you see which way she went!? I should go find her-"
"Answer the question Deku!" If there was one thing he could count on nowadays with Bakugou, it was the fact that all the Bakugou's loved and cared for his mother. It had simply been a matter of making sure the blond had seen his mother.
"I'm- I um..." the stuttering was faked of course but it must of been convincing because Bakugou's posturing relented slightly, "I had a fight with my boyfriend and I was really upset so I called her."
He wished he could of had a camera at the way red eyes widened at him so shamelessly saying the word boyfriend.
"I was me you know... so I got really teary and said I was gonna take a walk and I guess she came to check up on me. I just checked my phone and I had a few missed calls..."
"She does worry too much sometimes..." it was muttered so that no one else was supposed to hear it, but Izuku did and he internally sighed. Trust it on his luck that his childhood bully/ex-friend cared for his mother but hated his guts.
"I'll go look for her okay? I um... Kacchan can you move please?"
"Whatever shitty Deku. Don't make her fucking worry- she already has to put up with you don't make her stress more."
"Of course." With that he turned around and slid his shoes back on exiting the dorm.
His mother's appearance served two purposes. If he was in the dorms it would allow for him to know the current production of costumes were done, and two if like now he wasn't it allowed for the same thing but also let him help spread the seed of him having a partner. That way it wouldn't be questioned or scrutinized too heavily when he and Hitoshi were around the place.
He'd just have to give the papers to Rikido tonight and have the next round of theur group get basic gun training so that the boy could start on that instead of missing any form of training.
Speaking of, he'd received a confirmation of approval e-mail meaning he could start applying for the explosives handling courses.
"Hey Everyone, Mama." Sitting in the U.A. canteen was the entire villain team, including Koji, and his mother he was happy to see everyone tucking into dinner. In suit bags lay what he presumed were the first round of costumes. There was almost enough for the entire group so the three had worked.
Walking down the two rows of tables he greeted everyone individually.
The gun squad looked pleased, as did the production squad. Everyone looked happy with their work and he felt happy himself. The only one who looked remarkably put out was Denki.
"I take it the presentation was as boring as I expected?" The blond have him a sour glare.
"If I didn't know you were so strong and our leader I would seriously be thinking of attacking you right now. The amount of flow charts!" Their team mates looked over, "fucking flow charts that I had to look at was ridiculous!"
"Poor baby." Mina pulled the boy to her, resting her chin on his head as the boy spouted, "I'm sorry I didn't try and talk him out of it, it was just too funny!"
"Boss," turning around he saw Mezou sat, all six arms relaxed and practically limp, "The gear you had us move... you sure we're allowed it on school grounds?"
"I got the confirmation of approval email not long before it got here don't worry. I take it Mei was excited?" The silver haired boy chuckled.
"You could say that. Wouldn't stop hugging Hitoshi in excitement until he brainwashed her."
"Sounds like Mei. Speaking of... she did remember it was dinner and then training right?" At his query his lieutenant looked around eye brows furrowing.
"She...she was here a minute ago."
"Under the table." Looking across to Juzo the teen pointed a finger to underneath the table, "She just kind of...slithered under there."
Crouching he pulled the table cloth up to see under, greeting himself with the sight of Mei sat crossed legged on the floor messing with exploding putty and a cartoon looking thing. He felt himself shaking his head.
Of course, Mei wouldn't just bring any contraption to mess with, she'd bring the fucking makeshift explosions. "Hey."
She looked up, smiling and waving just barley missing hitting Mezou's leg. "How're you doing?"
"Fantastic, carry on."
Dropping the table cloth he stood back up face plaming. "Boss?"
"She could drop a damn bomb at any second what the Hell am I doing with my life?"
With that he walked off to slump next to his mother, half aware of the squawking and 'OH MY GOD MEI WHY DID YOU BRING THE EXPLOSIVES IN HERE!?' going on behind him.
So no ones said anything but i feel like my chapters are getting a bit more jokey than I ever originally intended for them to get. This will change, I promise, when we get into the actual exercise itself.
Trust me, the tags come into play full force then. But for now, let's all enjoy a bunch of kids coming together, ignoring animosity inbred into them by the education system, and let them be stupid kids.
After dinner had been eaten and everyone safely assured that Mei wasn't in fact planning on blowing them all sky high, training began.
Koji's birds were stationed outside the gym on all sides to ensure that no heroes spied on them and Mei had control of the camera's on a loop from the previous nights feed so even the school wouldn't know what they were doing.
It was supposed to be a surprise after all.
All in their P.E. uniforms he looked out at his team taking down a mental register of who was from where:
Class 1-A's portion of the team consisted of:
Rikido, Koji, Fumikage (or Fumiko as he'd taken to calling the bird headed boy), Tooru, Mashiaro, Momo, Kyoka, Yuga, Mina, Denki and Mezou. There was definitely a couple of wild cards in that mix, Koji, Mina and Denki being the biggest ones.
They weren't wild cards because their actions were unpredictable, more that they would be the ones to most throw off the hero team, especially Koji with his sweet nature.
Class 1-B took up less of the team:
Neito, Juzo, Sen, Setsuna, Yosetsu, Reiko, Kendo (the class rep hadn't been fully comfortable with being called by her first name) and Kuroiro (again the boy wasn't fully comfortable with his first name being used but seemed to be coming around to the idea.)
Again there were a few wild cards, mainly Kendo and Neito. Kendo being class rep was probably expected to go the hero side without so much as a second thought.
Neito's less than stellar personality with the majority of 1-A would put him in the grey area for most. As long as the 1-B kids didn't blab 1-A would hopefully remain blissfully ignorant and think he was having a hissy fit and holding out on choosing the hero team for as long as possible.
It was an interesting mix, and something he found quite interesting was that a large majority of 1-A felt more inclined to the villain side of the exercise than the hero side, where as the opposite was true for 1-B.
That would be an informing experience to look into.
But then you also had Hitoshi repping 1-C and Mei repping all the support course classes. Along with his co-conspirators in the management course. It truly was a school wide experience.
"Alright," his friends turned to him and he held his ground, he hadn't realised until that moment but he was responsible for the training safety and actions of twenty one people. "Those who don't have as much skill in quirkless fights to the left side of the gym, mutant quirks included in that stay where you are."
He knew that was mainly Mashiaro but Fumiko also stayed where he was. Sadly a large majority of his group went to the left of the gym, "I'm guessing that means everyone else is capable of quirkless fighting to a degree?"
At the nods he sighed internally, this was going to a draining next four days. "Alright, Neito pick a quirk. Everyone you're going to take turns fighting Neito while he uses your quirk. This will allow you to learn your limits, and allow Neito to learn control over your quirk which will help in team up situations."
Everyone nodded and he realised they were waiting for him to continue, "I'll be helping with the quirkless combat, everyone get out sparring mats, each match should last no longer than five minutes."
"Holy shit Izuku,what do you eat?" Too tired to even bother arguing he grumbled and pushed his head back down into Hitoshi's shoulder.
The purple haired boy had thankfully agreed to let Izuku get a piggyback ride back to the dorms. "Boss doesn't look that heavy." Tooru piped up somewhere to his left and he summoned enough energy to thank her.
Three consecutive days of minimal sleep, adding up to ten hours over the entire three days, and constant strenuous mental and physical activity had wiped him out, leading to him barley staying upright after training had ended.
"Trust me, he's heavy. I'm just glad this idiot had me on weights training since I started helping with Mei in the lab."
"Izuku told you to go on weights training?"
He had his eyes closed so he didn't know how many of his dorm mates were in this particular clump of students but he knew that at least Tooru and Mina were, as the other girls voice sounded from his right.
"'Toshi nearly dropped a box of gears on his foot, so i told him he needed to get some muscle." He cracked his eyes open at the 'aww' that followed.
Mina and, he presumed from the shifting of selves, Tooru were walking backwards in front of him and Hitsohi, "You're such a caring person Izuku! And look he's blushing!" Peering around at his best friends face he saw the boy was in fact blushing.
"I just didn't want Mei skinning me, it wasn't that kind." He was shifted higher on Hitoshi's back, causing him to almost fall off, "Hey!"
"I'll drop you next time. And here I was thinking you actually cared about me." From his higher up position he stiffly punched Hitoshi's shoulder, grumbling all the while.
"You know I care you ass." Spotting watching eyes from the doorway he huffed before adding, "I wouldn't go out with you if I didn't."
It took a few seconds for Mina and Tooru to catch on but when they turned and saw the hero teams war council standing in the dorms doorway they simply smiled back at him and Hitoshi.
Keeping up the act Hitoshi lowered him to his feet and the two girls were quick to his side as his sluggish body swayed. He nearly jumped out of his skin when Hitoshi's voice practically boomed to reach the four.
"Well, looks like exhibitionism is a common occurrence in 1-A," at the timed complaints of the two girls Hitoshi gave them a tired raised brow, "You two have been stalking Izuku and I for the better part of the evening."
"Well yeah, but when Momo told us you were going on a date we had to make sure our precious Midoriya had a worthy boyfriend!"
He had left it up to chance what kind of excuse they'd come up with, and this one was slightly problematic but he could handle it, yawning he leaned slightly more on Mina. "Yeah well, Mama already decided that 'Toshi was worthy when she spoke with us before we left."
A visible shiver ran up Hitoshi's spine, "Your mother is actually terrifying, I thought for sure she was going to kill me."
He smiled at the response, privately knowing that she probably could kill and get away with it. He had to learn his skills from somewhere didn't he?
"Come on lover boy, you're clearly exhausted lets get you to bed."
Mina linked arms with him and Tooru did the same, "If we didn't know any better we'd say you did more than go out for food. Did you do something while we weren't looking?"
The teasing hadn't been something he'd planned on and his face went bright red despite how tired he was and he put his hands on his face as well as he could with both arms linked.
The two girls laughed their heads off at him and Hitoshi removed one of his hands and then pretended to kiss his cheek before whispering in his ear, "I was joking about the exhibitionism thing but they're still watching."
"Night Toshi." Playing it off as nothing more than a departing gesture he allowed himself to be 'dragged' away and towards the dorms the two girls giggling all the while.
When they got to the entrance, and sure enough the four teens were dividing their attention between himself and Hitoshi, he was greeted with the war councils expectant looks.
"Ashido, Hagakure. Could you give us a minute with Midoriya?"
Todoroki may of been the leader, but it seemed his earlier suspicion that Iida was his second was confirmed as the blue haired boy stepped in their way blocking them.
"Look, he doesn't need his friends ganging up on him again." Mina's voice was filled with an anger he hadn't heard before and he turned to look at the girl shocked.
"The way you acted when you cornered him the other day isn't how friends act. Blondie," and she gestured to Bakugou and Izuku saw the lights of heaven when the blond simply gave a gruff huff, "And Sero didn't give a shit when me and Denki joined the villain team! So why do you get to act all high and mighty!"
His friends face pulled a blank, and he could almost hear the error 404 noise their brains must of been making, as they took in the words.
"Midoriya has just had a nice date after making up with his boyfriend so why don't you leave him alone and come back when you're not all going to jump down his throat."
Oh wow, even Tooru sounded pissed. He'd asked these two to come along because he knew they were good at talking on the fly but he hadn't expected that they'd become genuinely angry for him.
That was something new he hadn't experienced for. Sure with his friends they'd all been angry at the same thing before, but nobody had ever been angry for him.
"Guys it's fine," he smiled 'unsure', "I'm sure they just want to talk."
"Nope! Not happening Midoriya, you're going off to bed and these guys are going to evaluate if what they were going to say was something a friend would say."
With that he was pushed towards the elevator by his two teammates and forced into the metal box with Mina pressing the button for his floor before he could even react.
On the way up his phone rang, and pulling it out he answered without looking at the ID, he regretted that when all he heard from the other line was laughing.
Finally the wheezing calmed down and Neito's voice called out, "Mei has the security feed from outside your dorms, you should see them! They're just standing there!"
Mei's voice was also heard making him think that perhaps he was on speaker, "Izuku, glasses looks like a fish! Haha! And-and the girl her face is- I can't breath- her face is bright red!"
He didn't know if Mei had access to the camera he knew was hidden in the elevator and so kept his features schooled as his two gremlin friends gave him a laughter filled running commentary of what the war council was up to.
"You're recording the audio for them aren't you?" Mei's laughter died down though Neito's was still full force, and was that a thump? Did he fall to the ground? "Yeah, if they talk about plans or talk smack we'll know about it."
"Great." The elevator pinged and he stepped out onto his floor, walking straight to his room, "Don't have too much fun you too."
The bang from before happened again and he heard Neuro start cackling about how Mei had gone bright red and hit the floor. The two began to argue with him and each other while he entered his room, a bright smile on his face.
Day four (day three of prep) began with three emails and about twenty unread messages on the group chat.
After sifting through all that and realising that it was mostly useless stuff that didn't matter (the emails were just confirmations and the messages a meme war of all things) he'd checked the time to realise he'd gotten up at four am.
Deciding to use the fact his team mates thought it was appropriate to spam memes at four in the morning he started issuing orders for the free time during the day and setting up regimes for after school training.
He didn't feel remorseful in the slightest.
He decided the best course of action then would be to get ready for school and finish any homework, as he had a suspicion that they were going to be expected to of completed things early so they could cancel hero lessons.
Aizawa had mentioned that that was standard protocol after all. He could only hope that it was true.
Otherwise he was going to be working on a tighter schedule than be was already planning for. On the bright side though, with Nezu's interest he could probably get permission for it.
There was no point worrying about that though, he had to push past it and deal.
"Alright, listen up."
He kept his eyes firmly on Aizawa as the man stood at the front of the room. While their teacher could be tired and sluggish he'd never been late for homeroom, and right now they were getting increasingly closer to encroaching on first period. "Classes are cancelled for the rest of this week."
There were a few cheers from around the room, and he was amused when he heard no villains join in in the celebration. They've knew that more free time meant he'd be pushing them to their limits and beyond.
Plus Ultra and all that other crap, he'd described it as.
"Thursday is your last day of prep and on Friday you're being shipped off so there's no point in having conventional classes."
The cheers stopped then, as people finally came to grips with the fact that this was really happening. The exercise was real. And then, as soon as Aizawa explained that when first period started they'd be off to their designated areas, bragging started.
Well...bragging wasn't perhaps the right word. But as soon as the all clear was silently sounded the hero team seemed to relax. From a quick glance posture loosened and voices got louder than they normally would of with Aizawa in the room.
It was like with this new assured freedom they had lost all inhibitions regarding secrecy or seriousness.
Not to say his team mates didn't act like relieved teenagers. It would be suspicious if they didn't. No, instead they were slightly more reserved, letting the heroes drown them out.
It was tense around the back of the room though, with three of the hero council so close to a primary suspect for villain leader. He'd apologised profusely to Momo but the girl had taken it in stride.
Saying by having the attention on her he'd be able to drop more hints about the credibility of leadership for other people confusing the heroes even more.
It was an incredible idea.
Just one of the many reasons he had Momo in his inner circle.
Their leadership system was relatively similar to the heroes, but instead of having a four person council with Todoroki as the deciding vote (from what Koji had told them at least), the villain team had him as leader, with Hitoshi as his second with Mei, Mezou, Kendo, Momo as his council.
The idea was he'd make ideas, run them through Hitoshi who would give his opinion before they were ran through those four and after they were tweaked they'd decide whether or not to go through with it.
It seemed lengthy and over complicated but it allowed for him to get his plans critiqued so someone could tell him if he was going too far. And then the council was to see if it was manageable.
Of course, some of his plans he'd initiated outright.
Another reason for council was so he could have squads. They would train to work together efficiently, even if some of their team mates were people they would never of thought to work with before.
Mei's team consisted of:
Her, Sen, Yosetsu, Juzo, Denki and Mina.
All of their quirks could be applied to both combat but also defensive manoeuvres. The plus was that, with the exception of Mins unless you worked on something ridiculous, they could all be applied to manufacturing or mechanics.
Momo's team consisted of:
Her, Rikido, Yuga, Neito and Kyoka.
With that set up you had a mix of long range and close rang capabilities, plus Neito had a range of quirks to copy depending on what kind of support was required.
Another plus to that team was that Momo and Rikido both needed sugar and fats for their quirk to work, so if they kept that requirement contained to one team the flow of resources could be controlled.
There was risk there of course, of they were both together and ran out of sugar/fats but there wasnt much to be done.
Kendo had taken a different approach to her fellow council members deciding to go for a stockpile of tactile quirks rather than outright defensive or offensive quirks, with her team consisting of:
Her, Setsuna, Tooru and Mashiaro.
This combination of quirks all required some element of stealth or surprise due to either the nature of the quirk or the finicky nature in which to use it.
After all, Setsuna and Tooru were much more stealth based with their quirks complimenting this with minimal visibility. Whereas, Mashiaro had a long tail on him and Kendo's hands became massive. They weren't exactly able to use their quirks in broad daylight without drawing suspicion.
And then, Mezou's team. He'd been worried at the line up, feeling that maybe the members felt outcast from the other groups. Thankfully he'd been proved wrong when it turned out Mezou had created his team first out of all of them:
Him, Fumikage, Koji, Reiko and Kuroiro.
All tricky quirks, versatile yes but not exactly put to the for front when people thought hero course. Their abilities were proven however with the sole fact they were in those classes.
Mezou himself was a powerhouse of pure muscle and coupled with Dark Shadow's raw strength it would be an amazing team up. As well as Fumikage and Kuroiro teaming up Dark Shadow could be at full potential during the day light. He felt particularly happy with Koji and Reiko being on the same team.
He knew the girl wouldn't admit it but the concentration her quirk too made her uneasy when using it, he'd witnessed that first hand during training the night before. However with Koji on hand with insects and animals at the ready some of the pressure would be off of the girl.
He and Hitoshi didn't have specific teams, as they were in possession of quirks that didn't particularly fit into the image or gimmick of the other teams. Everyone was training to be able to work woth everybody else, despite teams so them not having a team didn't matter too much.
Anyway he had miniature teams within teams anyway.
For example, Fumikage and Kuroiro, Momo and Neito and Denki and Mina. That was just three examples of the duo's he'd set up.
They'd need to be able to work in smaller groups depending on what their bonus points were, speaking of which he was supposed to get the list of objectives at some point today.
"That's the first period bell, off you go." He attempted to hide his excitement but he wasn't really trying too hard as he stood up and threw his bag over his shoulder.
He made sure to be out of the class as quickly as possible, he needed to know whether Snipe-sensei was in a lesson or was willing to teach them how to handle firearms during school hours.
"Midoriya!" Looking over his shoulder as he speed walked through the corridor he spotted Iida and Uraraka following behind him speedily. It looked to physically pain Iida to come so close to running in the hallway.
"Deku, please wait we just want to talk!"
He sped ups jogging now and heard a very shocked, "Uraraka!l and checked to see the brunette running after him. Picking up his own pace he got to the two way split staircase.
"That won't work this time Deku!" He could hear the girl behind him and unlike last time he didn't resist the urge to jump on the banister and slide down that.
He let out a whoop as the sharp angle sent him speeding down one flight of stairs. Jumping off before he crashed he took off down the corridor to the next set of stairs and repeated the process before getting to the floor with the teachers lounge on it.
Knocking on the door, acutely aware of Uraraka's out of breath yell of his name, he waited until a teacher opened it. Midnight was the one to open the door, looking down at him with a curious yet expectant look, "Midoriya?"
"Is Snipe-sensei here, Midnight-sensei? Or is he teaching?"
She paused, looking over her shoulder and turned to answer before hearing a shout of his name just as he did. This time it was much closer and Uraraka didn't sound so out of breath.
He just hoped the rest of the team had taken the scramble approach at his lead. The point was to confuse the heroes as to where they were going so that if anyone communicated and said one person was acting suspicion for going in the wrong direction it would quickly become apparent that no one was going in a singular direction.
"Come in Midoriya. Snipe is at his desk." As he was ushered into the room he smiled at her and thanked her.
Making his way into the teachers lounge he realised it was nothing more than a glorified office, with each teacher having a desk and a singular coffee table and couch.
He hid his smile as the teachers desperately tried to hide All Might's haggard form from his eyes, even though for someone that wasn't already in the know that would of grabbed their attention even more.
He approached Snipe's desk and waited for the teacher to look up, "Oh, hello Midoriya. Don't tell me Aizawa forgot classes are cancelled this week..."
"No, Sensei already told us about that. I was wondering, about the lessons we agreed on, are we still doing them after school or could we just shadow your classes?"
He couldn't tell exactly what the man was thinking, due to his mask obscuring his entire expression, but from the way the papers in his hands were put down and a finger tapped a tune out on the desk, he could tell he was thinking about it.
"It is true that the second years have just started gun safety and combat use...and it would mean I wouldn't have to lose hours every night..." He couldn't help the grin that threatened to split his features, "Alright. I have classes through second to last period. They're all beginners, as support also learn it as well, so different groups each time would suffice."
"Great! Can i please use my phone to contact my group?"
"Sure kid." A hand was waved dismissively but as he turned and phoned Mei he wasn't ignorant to the curious look his teacher had on him. He supposed it was acceptable as the villain team had probably never seemed so invested before.
"Hey, I just git us permission to shadow Snipe-sensei's lessons for today, could you get everyone to start organising themselves into teams?"
"We have parameters to keep within people, we mess this opening up all our plans go down the drain."
"Got it boss." Was choruses over the comms and he flicked his eyes from screen to screen.
There were quite a few variables here that could send this whole scheme tumbling down with the slightest of breezes however, he had two, three if he counted the back up, plans running right now.
He was playing the long run here. Each step was carefully articulated and planned to effect down the line. Even the way he had his explosives -sloppily placed and just within the safety limits to allow them to have them- put up on his distraction would effect later on. For exam, the heroes would think they didn't know what they were doing with the explosives and when the well hidden, perfectly placed and crafted bombs would go off later into the exercise they'd have no idea what they were dealing with.
"Who's it feel boss, we have the whole world at our feet." He smiled, Shinsou's tone was cocky as he grew into the role he'd been set. A yakuza boss was nothing without his right hand and Shinsou filled the roll well.
"I say we send a welcome card."
He cracked his knuckles, "We managed to grab the fake objective right?" At a nod he continued, "I say we cut the robots head off and deliver it to the heroes front door. We aren't supposed to know where each others bases are."
"Psychologically throw them off, get them paranoid from the get go... sure you don't want to let them feel easy and then pull the rug out?"
"We can do both." He stood and turned to his friend, seeing the mask and hood of the costume hiding any distinguishing features. "Scare them, let them think they're winning and then..."
"Then we hit them twice as hard as before." Shinsou finished for him, sounding remarkably amused and smug despite the lack of indication from his features. Izuku could almost guess he was smiling. Then, the tone returned to normal, "You doing good?"
"Yeah." He smiled, also returning to normal, "I've got probably a few days of this mindset before I start to feel shitty and start considering killing everyone and myself."
"Cool." A hand patted him on the shoulder and the tilt of Shinsou's masked face indicated a shit eating grin, "I'm gonna go prepare our surprise. Any preference on how they get it."
"It's a welcoming gift, Wakagashira, let's go in with a bang."
"Of course, Kumicho."
It's the day of the exam and still, nobody knows who the villain leader is, they know who's on the team from their class and the most obvious choice would be Deku, but it's Aizawa who's picked the captain's he wouldn't go for something so obvious.
When they stand in the briefing room, watching the feed from security cameras that picked up the villains activity, there isn't much indication to who's in charge.
All the villains are wearing masks and hoods with dark baggy clothing that hides any identifying features. Ochako can only spot Shoji from the rest because he's simply too tall to be anyone else.
But then, her eyes slide to another screen and she sees variation in the costumes. There are still masks and hoods but instead of jumpsuits reminiscent of Aizawa-sensei's there are business suits, formal dresses, pencil skirts.
The group coming out of the second van look like officer workers except the hoods tucked into their blazers and the masks on their faces don't give anything away.
She hadn't realised how small the villain group was until after three vans in they see no more arriving. "Somethings wrong."
Todoroki sounds tense as he speaks and she turns her eyes to her leader seeing how still he is, "The numbers don't add up. Out of the two classes participating everyone has been accounted for but there's too many people on the villain team."
"Defectors?" Iida's suggestion is met with quiet and Ochako, despite her better judgement, finds herself eyeing class 1-B for anyone who looks suspicious or who she thinks could turn. The idea to suspect her own classmates rises before ducking its head.
They're all here because they didn't want to be on the villain team, she trusted each and everyone of her 1-A teammates. She needed to stop being paranoid. "Against the rules. All players are registered with the teachers before the exam, the teachers would of pulled it up, besides our numbers are the same as when we entered."
Todoroki has a way of speaking, Ochako realises, that lets her relax and trust his judgement. "So you noticed?"
The screens that had each showed different CCTV footage turned to static before each screen started to flicker becoming one part of a greater image. A mask, and she noticed this one had more of a flourish to it than the others the villains had wearing, appeared.
No face, no body just an image of a mask and a distorted voice. "Well done Todoroki, sorry," the disembodied voice chuckled and it sounded broken and glitchy, "Hero Captain Shouto. But good job on counting our numbers. You'll remember this is a year wide assessment?"
There was a moment of silence where nobody said anything because it struck them that they had forgotten that part. The leader of the villains had taken advantage of that, had probably known they would stick to Hero course students preferring to know their teammates could fight.
She didn't realise that she privately thought someone from another course would be a dead weight, and continued listening.
"My friend's are rather unique. As is our little band of renegade's, I think you'll come to see that soon. But oh, look at the time." Why did they sound amused? "You'll be getting a welcome gift from us soon, better hurry, you don't want to miss the show."
With that the screens shut off, static being bypassed for black screens and as one of 1-B scrambled to fix it she heard a shout of frustration. The wires had been severed somehow, seconds after the footage had ended.
That meant it was someone in their team.
"Be on the lookout, we have an intruder." And then she relaxed, because of course. This was to get them wound up. Someone on the hero team had probably stalked their convoy and had hidden in the building in order to do this.
A knock at the door made them freeze. It was only Bakugou, Bakugou who had been silent and simply watching for the duration of their exercise, who dared go to the door.
When he got there, hand going off in explosions, he ripped the door open and there was simply a package. Nothing more, no person, no note simply a box.
It heightened the belief that there was an intruder. She didn't remember ever seeing Hagakure at their training sessions so she was probably responsible.
The box was brought in, dumped on the table for all to the see scratchy hand writing on the lid of the box reading: ' To be opened in front of everybody'
And opened it them did. Ochako wished they hadn't. Broken in and ripped to near disfigurement was the head of an All Might bot, the former grinning smile looking dastardly and dead in its smashed up state.
It unnerved her. The All Might bots were failsafes. The teachers way of controlling a situation should it get too dire. For it to be this broken...
"There's something else kero." Tsu's words were loud above the unconscious rumble they'd all adopted. Nobody seemed to dare to speak over a whisper and at Tsu's words all eyes landed on a playing card tucked face down into a split in the robots skull.
The frog girl reached in for it, though Todoroki putting a hand in front stopped her, "Why would they want us all to see this and then leave such an obvious clue with everyone surrounding it in a small space unless it was a trap."
"For fuck sake icyhot, just take the damn card, I'm getting sick of waiting around! I'll take it out myself if I have to!"
Eyes split between the blond and bicromatic leader. Waiting to see what the judgement would be. "Everyone but Bakugou out of the room, in case it is a trap we don't need everyone going down."
They agree and as they leave the room Ochako spies the way Bakugou's hands tense, clenching and unclenching as he stares at the box as if he wants nothing more than to throw it away and not see what calling card awaits him.
They close the floor behind them. There isn't nearly as much room as they need there to be but there's nothing they can do. From the silence in the corridor it's easy to hear the sliding of the card from the metal, and then it's silent again.
Someone swears (from 1-B she thinks, she isn't paying attention to anything but what happens next) as Bakugou laughs. A loud, angry venomous laugh that carries years of disdain. The door is opened and she feels her stomach drop a bit at the card, the King of Hearts isn't immediately recognisable, it's only for the K and heart on it that she recognises the placement of it in the deck.
In place of the traditional European medieval figure sits a masked figure lounging on a throne, indescript weapon hanging loosely in their grip. On the bottom of the card, where the king is usually reflected is the same figure, with the same weapon but this time the blank mask is blood splattered and the throne is gone.
She isn't sure what it is about the card that sets her off, perhaps it's the amount of detail in it that makes her heart go a mile a minute.
Thanks to the notes I've acquired from a good friend of mine including (but not limited to):
fake dating (for now?)
It leaves me satisfied and yet starved for more
It's killing me
I have discovered that I'm making Izuku OP, which while not something I hate is something I try to avoid. So, it seems I'll have to make the heroes competent earlier than expected.
Also, why does AO3 keep changing the format of the editing/start new draft box thingy? It's starting to confuse me.
(See the end of the chapter for more notes.)
Receiving the confirmation that the hero team had received their surprise, he gets Tooru or rather Mirror to return to base.
While he'd love to have the invisible girl snoop around (due to the hierarchy system Koji's position as a spy was precarious and information was sure to be spotty at times) he didn't know what Todoroki had up his sleeve.
For all his planning, analysis and counter measures Todoroki was still a wild card.
Silent and powerful, Izuku found it difficult to get in his head. And because of that many of the counter measures he had for his rival were mere speculation.
Sure, Todoroki had poor control of his fire, but he'd demonstrated he had enough control to not burn him to a crisp during the sports festival. That level of control despite years of rejection of the quirk meant that all he needed was fine tuning to be a dangerous enemy.
And having seen what he'd done with Stain, that was enough to worry him.
Besides, Mirror wasn't just a pawn. Someone to throw away, expendable. She was his team mate. Someone he trusted, and needed. He wasn't about to throw her under the bus like that- not in such an unstable situation such as this.
"Boss! We have a progress report on the council building!"
Breaking from his thoughts he turned his attention to the security screen showing the body camera footage from Addict.
The team were stood across from what looked like an ornate door, the carvings of birds and flowers looking suspiciously western. "What is it Drivers? Were the blueprints wrong?"
He did have a feeling, one he couldn't shake no matter how much he tried to rationalize, that just maybe Nezu had put fake blueprints where he could find them.
"No, nothing like that boss. It's just...well, this is the pick up." He saw the door open on the feed and nearly choked on air when he saw what was sat behind the door.
"Vlad-sensei is going to love this."
Sat there, reclined and looking at peace as much as a robot could, was a Vlad King imitation 'eating' out of a flowery, pink bento box. The box was stamped in a deep, bold scarlet with the number five.
Seeing the door stay open and the robot take no interest in his team he spoke, "I think you should play the waiting game here, sit in the office and if the robot doesn't respond watch its movements. If there's even a second that box is unattended snatch it and run."
They'd been pushing it by demolishing an All Might bot, needless destruction was only appropriate in certain circumstances and now wasn't one of them. "Only destroy the bot if a, it notices and becomes hostile or b, if by lunch it hasn't left it unattended."
"Got it boss, Addict signing out."
Mezou let out a silent sigh as he watched his team mates shift in their places outside the ornate room. Their expressions were hidden behind white oval masks, near blank and designed to stop any form of identification.
The masks were different for each group, and he found that that was a good choice, as each style of mask was then differentiated in the slightest of ways so each person could be individual while the heroes remained non the wiser.
For instance Fumikage's mask had crossed Katana's as the main decorative aspect, however the Katana's indent was covered in a shimmering black film- allowing for the boys gothic flair to have an outlet without immediately letting on who he was.
Apparently it had been Mina who had suggested the colour, as well as that the girl had been the one to make the appropriate adjustments so that dark shadow wouldn't be crushed under the layers of fabric
He had known Izuku was a good option, the boy often did think of everything. But he'd come to learn that his classmates, people he never would of dreamt of talking to, were all just as powerful in their own right.
He would have to thank Izuku for opening his eyes, after the exercise was over.
"You heard the boss, let's get this show on the road." He heard a snicker from Shadow and was about to ask why when the quiet girl answered unprompted.
"They captured sensei perfectly."
Shouto felt a headache coming on, and seeing as it was only an hour into the exam he was ready to raise a few issues with the whole thing.
First issue, the villains seemed to be five steps ahead. They'd been allowed in first, instead of both teams entering simultaneously.
They were also apparently in the know of where the hero base was even though that was supposed to be undisclosed information.
And that, that was his biggest issue. Because it raised a variety of questions. We're the villain team being given this information by the teachers? Had the villains been given special access to the training ground?
Had his team been missing out on things, or was it biased? Surly though, he reasoned, the heroes would be the biased side.
In what little he'd heard about this exercise it was also controversially received, so his reasoning could have flaws in it.
Simultaneously though, he liked to believe that Midoriya would of told him, that his friend would of forgone team loyalties and of shared any information he had.
But then his thoughts drifted to the argument he and Iida had stumbled upon, and despite the awkward way their friend received them, Shouto had recognised the determination in the boys voice.
It was the same way he'd told him his quirk was his own.
That was why he knew the thought that Midoriya would of told him any extra information was a pipe dream. Clearly Midoriya had something to prove, something that went beyond Yaoyozoru - whatever it was though it didn't make him dangerous.
The boy didn't have much control over his quirk, no matter the improvement between the sports festival and post-apprenticeships, and that meant that Midoriya wouldn't be a heavy hitter.
He'd be a foot soldier, or more likely he'd be tucked away at home base doing something with his analysis.
Shotou had never been more relieved for his unreadable expressions when he'd discovered Midoriya's notebooks on the class. It unnerved him, but Midoriya didn't have it in him to exploit friends weaknesses.
He'd seen that on the second day of term with Bakugou. Bakugou, who he had a terrible relationship.
He'd been interested in the match between the number one candidate from the entrance exam and the boy who broke his bones and had been considered virtually useless by their teacher.
He hadn't been disappointed.
It was clear, to him at least, that Midoriya could read Bakugou like an open book. His demonstration in the first few minutes were enough to testify that.
What had sold it though was how, even when overwhelmed be a barrage on all sides by the blond Midoriya had still managed to get what he wanted in the end.
Though, he'd seen that the boy was essentially holding back. If he was able to take down Bakugou in mere seconds why had he allowed himself to be tossed around like a rag doll?
That was how Shouto had come to the conclusion that Midoriya, despite being capable of tearing someone down, couldn't bring himself to do it.
Bakugou's lamination after the fact that 'stupid deku could of dodged, the fucker just wanted sympathy' only added to his theory.
That was why, despite knowing how clinically Midoriya could take a person's quirk apart, he wasn't worried.
Deku had demonstrated he couldn't hurt people close to him. It wasn't in the boys nature trick and deceive.
Switching from the Drivers team comms Izuku switched to the team's overall channel.
He knew Evangelion was monitoring this from her truck (driven by Geo who apparently had jumped at the chance to be an espionage driver) but he felt better keeping an eye on everyone.
This way it would take less time if he needed to walk a team through a counter measure they may not have down one hundred percent.
It was a precaution he hoped would be needless.
It was slightly hypnotic listening to the inconsistent strings of chatter, of quips and of sighs and grunts of frustration that he asked about and helped fix issues.
So far there hadn't been hero interference, but he figured that was because they were going for small scale objectives: a street sign, a pen from a bank, documents from flats.
Nothing major, the most high risk item they were going for currently going for was the Vlad replicas bento box- which was housed in the fake city's city hall. But even that was nothing compared to some of the other objectives he'd seen on the list.
A 'nuclear' reactor from a research lab.
The life of the 'city's' mayor.
A specific painting in a museum.
And that was to name three. The objectives were bonuses, so technically they could go through the entire game without bothering with them. However, Izuku had a hunch that if they were to do that and the game ended in a tie somehow, the winners would end up being the heroes.
It would most likely be on a technicality that while it was a tie the villains had technically not scored any points, while the heroes had- specifically because one of the objectives was in their base meaning they held the points for that object.
He had to admit, having their spies room name plate as an objective was incredibly sneaky and ingenious. Prompts to Nezu for figuring out how to hid that one in plain sight.
It had helped he guessed that apparently every number in the hero base was a different colour, the only one being the shade of scarlet that signified an objective being The Piper's room.
"We have the bento box boss, but we have another problem." he was broken out of his lull, for the second time that day by the same team no less, by the worried yet level tone of Shadow's voice.
Sending a quick message Wakagashira's way to switch the camera's to his computer, Izuku turned all the camera's to the ones that gave him the best angles of the Drivers.
As he did he hissed out a curse under his breath, standing there, hands blazing with explosives was Bakugou, standing with him was Tetsutetsu and Kirishima.
All three heavy hitters against a team that was made up of one lone heavy hitter, and three long to mid range fighters. Not to mention Eldritch's quirk did not mix well with Bakugou's.... hopefully Blanc would be able to compensate.
"Alright, there's only the three of them." His eyes scanned camera angles and searched for any chance that he may be incorrect as he spoke, "Blanc and Eldritch I need you to tag team on this, Bakugou's quirk will be an immediate counter to Eldritch and the bastard knows it."
Kumicho = Midoriya
Wakagashira = Shinsou
The Piper = Koda
Ninja = Ojiro
Mirror = Hagakure
Evangelion = Hatsume
Heapheastus = Yaoyozorum
Apollo = Jiro
Eldritch = Tokoyami
Addict = Sato
Nova = Aoyama
Demoman = Kaminari
Demowoman = Ashido
White collar = Monoma
Muscle = Kendo
The Mole = Sen
Torch = Awase
Zombie = Setsuna
Geo = Juzo
Blanc = Kuroiro
Shadow = Yanagi
Hitoshi is concerned when all he receives from Kumicho is a quick message saying to take over surveillance for him. However, the fact that its such a quick, frantic message, has him not questioning and not taking over.
He turns his comms on, sliding the headset on and standing from his seat and walking to the glass top table in the centre of the room.
Once there he taps it, the 3d holographic map of the city shining to life before his eyes. Each team has a different colour, and a different amount of rots depending on where they are.
He can tell immediately who the Drivers are because one yellow dot resides on the hero base.
But disregarding that, knowing that the Piper was where he was supposed to be, he tapped the table again seeing all the security cameras come up in front of him. He swipes all but the ones for the Drivers away.
"Okay," he's on the team wide comms so he knows the other three teams can hear him, "I'm taking over for Kumicho - the Drivers have experienced a road bump. Everybody's main objectives are to get the pay load and get out."
He taps the table, muting the mic for a second and using voice command to get the camera's for the sewers up as well, before continuing, "The sewers are everybody's best bet, we don't know how or why they're at city hall so discretion is key."
There's a round of confirmations, "Don't be surprised if you get called for combat, though, that may be left to you two Geo, Evangelion."
Izuku isn't stressed per say, rather a bit pissed off that the first little plan he had had to have this outcome. He wouldn't of minded if anyone else had turned up.
It was the fact it was Bakugou and the punch out duo. Bakugou knew how to undermine Eldritch's quirk, which meant Blanc would have to provide support.
There wasn't even a point in entertaining the idea of Bakugou going for anyone else first. He'd go for the person he knew he could beat down easiest.
And because of this that meant that Shadow and Cleaner would be dealing with the punch out duo. He didn't doubt that Cleaner could possibly handle both of them, but Shadow wouldn't be ignored (it was really biting them in the arse now that the two didn't care about fighting girls in combat) and her quirk would not work in this situation.
He knew for a fact the two were above her threshold.
However...she could cause distractions- throw them, quite literally, off their game.
"Okay, Shadow, Cleaner you're going against Kirishima and Tetsutetsu. Shadow can you try and create a distraction? Throw furniture, bins ect. While Cleaner approaches them head on?"
"They're right outside the building right? Why are we leading them into the building, that's putting us in danger."
"It's risky, I know. But this way Geo can offer an escape route without having to run Kirishima and Tetsutetsu over."
"Wait, I have the option to run them over?"
"The tank can handle it Kumicho! We could do that!"
He hears a few more agreements and as he issues them to get ready to defend he runs through the risks in his head, the escape routes open and such and he finds a rueful smile coming onto his face.
Leave it to him to turn heroes in training into people more than ready to run over their peers. "Alright Geo, you're clear to run them down. Shadow, Cleaner, Eldritch, Blanc hold off the opposition until help arrives."
He feels himself getting giddy, "Evangelion feel free to fire at will, Geo use escape route G7 once the pickup has been received. I'll send a team to create a diversion on their way back to base."
All he hears in the next ten minutes are Bakugou's explosions being promptly cut off by a horn going 'Bah-badah-bah-bah-bah' and the shout of pure confusion and adrenaline filled ecstasy as Tetsutetsu and Kirishima are ruthlessly run down by Geo.
"NOTHING PERSONAL FELLA'S!" Is called out as he switches to Hitoshi and asks him to have Muscle's squad -bar Mirror- cause havoc on their side of town.
"What do you have in mind?"
"We're never gonna need that office building again right? Plus we're talking realism. Make it a bad one."
He can hear the glee and invision the smirk, "They'll be dragging bodies out of there for weeks."
This is mega short.
Uraraka is scared right now as she stands in front of the destroyed building.
It's on fire, and there are freighter bots at work to make sure it doesn't spread to nearby buildings, and the rubble from the explosion is scattered for the next block and a half.
It knocks her to her very core as she stands in front of the building and there are bots that pretend to be survivors, that pretend to be grieving family members who came as soon as they saw it on the 'news' and there are police officer bots taking statements and trying to console the 'relatives'.
All of it is too realistic, it's like one villain attack she remembers from when she was younger. She had supposed to of been in bed hours previous but she'd waited for the moment she knew she could get away with it to get out of bed and sneak into the corridor
She'd stuck her head into the living room, wondering why the tv was still on, but at such a low volume.
It was regretted ever since, the sight of a decimated building and grieving people haunted her. And now it was happening before her eyes.
"Uravity?" She looks over at a girl from 1-B, what was her name again (?), and watches as a sad smile that shows the same level of fear she's feeling, "It's...it's fine. They're just robots remember!"
And as she looks back at the robots she can't help but disagree. It doesn't matter that they're just robots, because if a person could so sloppily - and the sloppiness caused a great impact than was probably ever intended- destroy such realistic looking robots...
What were they willing to do to an actual human?
At noon, the villain team sit down for lunch. All the members, bar one, are present and they seem to be enjoying themselves. Laughing, joking and acting like teenagers.
The only thing off about the situation is the outfits. Jumpsuits that hide defining body characteristics and masks to hide appearances, suits that mimic Yakuza clothing, large hoods tucked into the collars with surgical masks and goggles, and then more suits - but these are older more western period drama style. A plague doctors mask goes with that attire.
But nobody wears their mask here, all are sat around in a circle on the floor with bento boxes and their masks and hoods down and around their necks.
It's relaxed, happy even.
Izuku smiles as he watches his teammates talk strategy, joke about their next villainous act and returns to his food.
Tenya has to help carry Tetsutetsu and Kirishima into the hospital ward in their building when the pair arrive. Accompanying him are Koda, Todoroki and Sero, everybody else is either out or rushing to the hospital ward to get it set up.
He's hiding the shaking of his hands as he keeps his classmate upright. Even with his hardened form activated he can see the substantial damage done to the the pair.
"What happened to you?"
"They ran us over."
Tetsutetsu, who watches Kirishima like a hawk (seemingly knowing that metal holds up a hell of a lot better to a moving vehicle than rock) answers, "It was a head on collision. This guy with a plague mask ran us down without any hesitation."
Shaking hands are not the only thing Tenya has to suppress now. His anger and fear has joined the list.
Mezou lets out a laugh, a type of laugh he hasn't let out since before he got his quirk, and keeps relaxing as Neito sets off in a fit of laughter also.
It only gets worse as their group, him, Neito, Kyoka, Yuga and Kendo all devolve into pure laughter. He isn't even sure why he's laughing by the end of it, but he's so happy that he doesn't care.
Watching security cameras for the city Shouto clenches his teeth at the sight of the villain team mercilessly holding the office building for no reason (or no reason that the camera's picked up) before planting explosives.
And then the building blows up, it's a fiery inferno with a light so intense it lights up the once dark room instantly. Bakugou next to him swears - a regular occurrence but it seems worse now.
"How many casualties were there?" He asks, and the blond seems to find it hard to get the words out.
"They don't know. The bot said they'll be digging out bodies for weeks."
Due to the disarray they'd caused in the early hours of the exam the hero team were fully occupied, rescuing and helping with the clean up of their office building display.
The look on Kendo's face when they'd come in from setting the explosives had made him regret the action, but the way the class 1-B rep squared her shoulders and told herself more than him that she just needed to view it as a lesson lessened the guilt slightly.
It was a lesson in the fact that villains didn't care. Just as she didn't have to feel guilty because they were robots, villains wouldn't feel guilty because to them the lives of others were irrelevant.
"Still," he pushed onwards, keeping his voice steady as he crouched in front of where she was sat against the wall, "I'm sorry I asked you to do that."
"Would you of gone out and set the explosives up if I'd of said I couldn't do it?"
"Yes." Her eyes snap up at him, and he smiles genuinely, "You're my teammate, my friend Kendo. If you can't do something tell me next time and we'll find a way around it."
She laughs, "What was plan B in this situation?"
He drops to his backside instead of crouching, "Plant the bombs on fire hydrants and just flood down town."
"Yeah...that wouldn't of been half as effective at scaring them."
"No...if you need a bit before going back in the field you can just say you know. Nobody is going to judge you for it." He realises how hypocritical that is to say, how many times has he gone out and done stupid shit when he shouldn't of?
"Is it scary...coming up with these plans?" Her eyes don't meet his anymore and her tone is hesitant.
"Terrifying. Some days I lay in bed and just think... I just think about what a monster I am." He sees her sneaking glances at him and so continues, "But then I think...that as long as I never intentionally hurt people they're just intrusive thoughts you know?"
"..." she's silent, and then, "You're not a monster."
Pulling himself to his feet he holds his hand out to pull her up, "Lets see how long you think that."
"So boss, what's our next cause of action?"
Everyone has piled into the meeting room, and Hitoshi stands by his side with the holographic map of the city lit up in front of them. He lets his eyes survey the map as he talks, "Well we've got four objectives correct?"
With a swipe of the hand there are markers on the map where the four obtained objectives had been, "And we know where the hero base is, so the only thing I can see at the moment is getting more objectives and causing panic where we can."
He pauses, let's it sink in and there's a general sound of agreement and he almost holds off on what he says next, almost. "It's come to my attention some of you are uncomfortable with some of the plans. That's fine." Faces that had dropped twist in confusion, "I know I'm asking a lot from you. If you can't go through with stuff tell me."
"Some of the stuff is...intense." Juzo's voice is quiet but he's heard perfectly in the quiet room, "But I signed up knowing I'd be doing things I wouldn't always morally agree with. But that's just part of it isn't it?"
"Yes." He rubs the back of his neck, "But at the end of the day you're people, you have feelings. And I don't want you guys sitting there and regretting doing something."
It is once again silent, and it seems everybody here has finally realised that what they're doing is real. It will hurt their classmates - their friends, it will scare then, it won't ever be the right thing to do...
"I won't regret anything." Reiko's voice bounces practically around the room as everyone holds their breath nervous for what she has to say, "I'm never going to have another opportunity to show that I can win... and besides real life villains wouldn't go easy so why should we."
There seems to be a universal agreement to what she's said, and Izuku lightly grasps Hitoshi's clenched fist at his side and squeezes it. The boy relaxes slightly and Izuku smiles at him.
He knows what Reiko means, and he understands why Hitoshi is getting so angry. It isn't fair, it really isn't that there are people who feel so inadequate because of their quirks.
In Reiko's case she should feel proud, should feel all mighty and powerful. But because of how U.A.'s system works she doesn't. She feels weak, she feels like she's never going to have an opportunity to prove herself.
For Hitoshi...to have a quirk that made you a powerhouse but then be treated like a disgrace was a very real thing for him. It was a testament to his morals, his conscious and his self control that he'd dealt with years of being told a villain and instead of giving in, he'd gone to U.A. as the biggest middle finger he could give to his old classmates.
But... Izuku also understood this need to win. It was something that had always haunted him, to win was to feel like you could do something well. And to feel that meant you could improve yourself.
And the idea that a quirkless kid could improve themselves and go up and up and up was almost unheard of. It came to him that maybe...just...maybe the reason his plans included him using 'his' quirk so little was because he wanted to prove it could be done.
He wasn't stupid, he knew the teachers had to of figured it out-/if they knew about All Might's quirk it was only logical to assume they knew he was looking for a successor and in lieu of a search inside school, that he was the successor.
"That's what I was hoping you'd say!" He chuckled and his team joined with him, a tension dripping from their shoulders nobody had noticed before, "I understand your devotion, and I support it, but I was beginning serious. If you can't go through with something we'll try and work around it."
Yuga tried to stop the bouncing of his knee as he sat in the back of the truck. He, Apollo, White Collar, Addict and Hepheastus were quiet as Torch drove them to their heist.
Evangelion was sat across from them, tapping away at her laptop with a serious expression on her face, it being only partially hidden by the medical mask she had on (her goggles were pushed up to the crown of her head.)
He tried to go through the plan in his head again and found, irritatingly, that he couldn't. He gave up on keeping his leg still, glad his mask hid his expression as Apollo's head turned in his direction. It was embarrassing to ask for the plan to be explained again. It was however dangerous, never mind counterproductive, to enter a sensitive situation without the plan in his mind.
He just didn't want to admit he was having difficulty remembering.
It had always been like that though he mused. Everyone else just seemed to...get things. And no he wasn't stupid or lacking in intelligence but sometimes it just took awhile for things to click...
Growing up he'd hidden it behind gaudy smiles and over extravagance. At least that way people wouldn't care if he didn't seem to be paying attention (he was he was just too busy internally stressing to ever look it) they'd just chalk it up to him being an air head.
He hated that that was what he'd fallen to, but he'd done what he'd had to.
At the very least Hepheastus and Kumicho thought he still had some use so he had that going for him.
"Nova?" Coming back into the present he nodded towards Hepheastus to let her know he was listening, he hid a flinch when she sighed. What if she stopped thinking he was useful?
"We're going through the plan once again, Apollo said she wasn't a hundred percent, do you mind?"
He was glad his mask covered his face, because otherwise they'd of seen the watering of his eyes. Before this exercise started he didn't have many friends, but Apollo had been one of the few. He knew she has a near photographic memory.
"Of course, I don't mind at all. It's best to keep it fresh in our minds after all." He could swear his team leader was smiling, and the scrunch of Evangelion's eyebrows certainly told him she was.
He sits attentive as the two leaders go over the intricacies of the plan (this time he manages to get his parts memorized and the important parts down) and like everybody else pretends to not notice Apollo giving his hand a reassuring squeeze.
She says nothing when he squeezes it back so he accepts that she understands.
Itsuka holds her breath in for a few more seconds than she normally would before releasing it as she stands next to Cleaner, the taller boy has improved hearing she knows and is grateful that all he does is send her a raised eyebrow.
She isn't sure how to feel about the situation. She hasn't been treated like she's fragile, it's more like all the other leaders, Kumicho and Wakagashira had a meeting without her.
She feels out of the loop, and its note clear to her how to feel about that.
Should she be annoyed? Should she be grateful? Should she be worried?
Is she paranoid?
No, she pushes that thought away. The first step to being paranoid is feeling like you might be being paranoid. She was just curious. Curious as to the peculiar feeling of exclusion she was experiencing.
They're testing the waters tonight, after the destruction of the office building they weren't sure how the heroes would respond. The Piper was in a precarious position due to the heroes politics and couldn't relay information much because he simply wasn't being given it.
The heroes were being kept nearly a hundred percent in the dark at any given point. Which, she supposed, was a good tactic against espionage as was being seen with the Piper. However, it had its flaws.
Such as, how was the team supposed to trust its leaders if they were nothing more than pawns of a chess board. She knew why Kumicho wasn't going on missions left and right in this plan because, as he'd explained, the king lost value the more it was played offensively.
As long as Kumicho remained an anonymous entity to the opposition they had an element of surprise. It was a level of secrecy that made her head work over time. But, it was better than not knowing where you were from one minute to the next.
She could agree with Kumicho on that point that it wouldn't take long for the heroes to start to destroy themselves.
A chain was only as strong as its weakest link.
If the foot soldiers, she'd originally hated the term being used to describe her friends but the more she learnt about the Piper's situation the more apparent it was becoming that that was the right term, didn't know where to shoot then the general's had little to no chance of doing anything but shooting their own men.
She knew Kumicho already had a plan in place for a such a situation.
She looked over to the holographic table in the centre of the room where Wakagashira was going through security cameras and sees the office building still in flames even all these hours later.
(Itsuka feels a shiver rack up her spine at the mere memory of what she'd done. The robots faces had been so realistic, the simulated crying and begging... the sound of shattering windows and the deafening boom of the actual explosion... she realises she's not disgusted with the action itself, but more that she felt adrenaline- a strange kind of joy and excitement- at the whole experience.
She'd enjoyed it. That's what she'd hated about the whole experience. She'd enjoyed having power, having the ability to say no, having the ability to be in control - to be powerful. It was dangerously intoxicating and that's why she felt so awful.
Because she'd accepted what she'd done and knew she'd do it again.)
Shaking her head she turned back to where Cleaner was talking through a headset and keeping his eyes on the screens for the sewers. Geo, Mole, Zombie and Demowoman were all on screen, collapsing certain paths and opening brand new ones that only they would know about.
She found it amazing seeing Geo use his softening quirk to make the wall partially permeable, creating a fake wall of sorts that you could pass through into a tunnel.
From inside the main tunnel it was a regular wall not even looking discoloured. However, if you pushed your body weight into it you would sink through the goo-like consistency of the wall into the new tunnel.
The best part was the way they were constructing the walls meant that it put itself right back into place as soon as you stepped through it. That meant that if worst came to worst they could make quick escapes and bamboozle the heroes doing it.
With Evangelion and Heapheastus out on a job and Cleaner next to her running the 'clean up crew',as they were apparently affectionately naming their builder's and redesigners, she was left as the only council member that didn't have a job.
Wakagashira was reviewing all the footage with the heroes in it to see how they responded to certain events, she could offer to help but the 1-C student looked pensive as he stared at the camera's.
She didn't really want to get between him and whatever was grating on his nerves. Kumicho was who knows where so she couldn't even just head up to the control room and receive orders because there was no guarantee he was even in there.
Plus, just wandering off felt wrong, but so did loitering as her team mates did work.
This lack of anything to do made her certain her other leaders had all grouped together and discussed strategy and excluded her. The thought pissed her off.
Why was she being left out!? She could contribute!
She was just as competent as any other leader here, in fact, aside from Heapheastus she a as probably the most qualified here being the class rep of 1-B! Sure, she was shaken and in a bit of a rut at the moment. And sure, she felt like she was splitting at the seams because of inner moral turmoil less than an hour ago!
But that was no reason that she couldn't be doing something! Standing, loitering, and not contributing racked her nerves and made everything ten times worse!
"Hey, Muscle?" Jerking to the left it took her a minute to realise who had called her, from Mirror's laugh she figured she hadn't been rude by literally not seeing her in the doorway.
"Yeah? Is something up?"
"No...yes." The tone would fit a sheepish grin, "Could you come help Blanc and I? Everyone else was training and we thought we'd make dinner but... we forgot why the we had certain people who would cook..."
Laughing, she imagined what mess Blanc had made this time around, "Sure I'll be right there. You haven't seen boss have you?"
The pause between the question and the response went to set her off but that q as quickly averted when the girl answered, "That's the reason we asked you. Boss kind of just... got some cleaning supplies out and started cleaning and we're almost too afraid to go in there."
The shift of clothing made it seem like a full body shiver had racked through the girl, "I don't get how he makes a mop look dangerous..."
Beginning to follow the girl to the kitchen she felt her body relaxing, "One of his main weapons is a staff, that may be it."
"YOU TAKE ONE STEP ONTO MY DRYING FLOOR ELDRITCH, DARK SHADOW WILL BE TASTING SPLINTERS FOR WEEKS!"
Turning the corner she felt a snort leave her mouth as Eldritch sat atop the fridge, Dark Shadow curled around him looking just as traumatized, as Kumicho waved the mop threateningly in the general direction.
The bird headed boy had never seemed like the type to swear but she couldn't help but burst into even more laughter at his words, "THIS TEAM IS A FUCKING NIGHTMARE!"
"I'LL MAKE YOU HAVE TIME OUT ON THERE IF YOU KEEP THAT ATTITUDE UP!" Though both males voices were loud and brash the laughter that underlay both tones made the friendliness of the exchange visible.
Kumicho = Midoriya
Wakagashira = Shinsou
The Piper = Koda
Ninja = Ojiro
Mirror = Hagakure
Evangelion = Hatsume
Heapheastus = Yaoyozorum
Apollo = Jiro
Eldritch = Tokoyami
Addict = Sato
Nova = Aoyama
Demoman = Kaminari
Demowoman = Ashido
White collar = Monoma
Muscle = Kendo
The Mole = Sen
Torch = Awase
Zombie = Setsuna
Geo = Juzo
Blanc = Kuroiro
Shadow = Yanagi
Amazing fan art by @Ihavenoideawtfthisis here on AO3:
Also, I wrote this listening to ロストワンの号哭 by Neru
Itsuka is...concerned? For who exactly she isn't sure, but she knows she's concerned.
The smaller green haired boy whirled around on the balls of his feet, a winning smile on his face that didn't match the angry shouting he'd previously been doing.
Eldritch peers over the edge of the fridge with a look of relief so intense she wonders what Kumicho's expression had been making when he'd been waving his 'weapon' around. "Muscle! How are you?"
"I'm good...what's going on...?" She regrets asking when Eldritch starts silently waving his hands about in a 'no! No, no don't go there!' fashion.
"Mirror and Blanc were cooking and it went wrong."
That word shouldn't sound so sinister. She avoids eye contact by surveying the kitchen. She finds she has a new found appreciation for Kumicho and his cleaning skills because all that's still there as evidence to this mystery disaster is a dirty countertop and a soup pan that's still smoking.
"And Eldritch is on the fridge because...?"
Before this experience she though the tactical genius in front of her had been the mother of the group (the meeting earlier had stood testament to that) but now she felt like the mother inquiring about yr a siblings squabble.
"Dark Shadow and I inquired into the incident...unaware that Kumicho had cornered the area off..." The boy avoided her eyes which just made the whole situation even more ridiculous. "I muddied where he had just mopped and I was...chased atop of the fridge. It was the only place he couldn't reach me."
"Kumicho was that really necessary?" The large smiles still in place on his face.
"Oh definitely. I wouldn't of cared but Dark Shadow personified one if the pans over as well and I just..heh...have a habit of going overboard when I'm cleaning."
She finds herself blinking at the new information. This was a more human side to the infamous Midoriya Izuku of 1-A.
All she'd known, prior to recruitment, was that he had a dangerous quirk, buckets if determination and strangely enough was good friends with Neito.
But this, this was something outside of school yard gossip. This was information shared between friends in, softer, kinder interactions. This was Izuku: a kid who had a habitable befriending miscreants and kids with low self-esteem and liked to go into cleaning frenzies apparently.
She sighed, and though she was still pissed that she was being separated from her fellow council members and her duties she smiled. "I don't think keeping him on the fridge will help Kumicho."
"Fine." The leader relented, mop of doom lowering into a relaxed grip. "But, I want the dishes in alphabetical order."
She heard Mirror snort behind her and knew the girl had picked up on the vine reference also, it was made funnier as a total oblivious Eldritch responded with, "What does that even mean!?"
Koji kept his head down as he ate his dinner with a few of the other heroes. It was silent as everybody looked around the canteen searching for friends and teammates.
"Does anyone know if Kirishima is alright?" The muted scraping of cutlery and chopsticks at the table stopped and looking up he realised that out of the twenty members of the hero team (that was without counting himself as a temporary member) only five of them were known to be on site.
He watched as Tsuyu and Sero looked over to a 1-B boy who had yet to introduce himself, the boy had a manga bubble for a head and picked at his food. "He got run over right? I just...we aren't being told anything and I just want to know if he's alright at least."
He looked back down continuing eating, glad that nobody ever expected him to join in conversations usually. He knew for certain that Tsuyu, Sero, Manga boy, Kirishima and Todoroki were on site, the location of the others were unknown but he had given Kumicho what he knew already about what little plans he'd been able to eavesdrop on.
They couldn't let the teachers find out he had power over insects just yet. He'd initially regretted telling Izuku about that part of his quirks he hated insects and wanted nothing to do with them, but Izuku had seen an advantage in the power. It was his choice if in the end they went through with operation solstice, but at this moment in time he could say they probably would.
"You saw Kirishima didn't you, Kero?"
He looks up, Sure that his expression is that of 'genuine', clear confusion. He'd been practicing with Mezou for awhile how to fake reactions. It was a useful technique for getting people who were rude about his selective mutism to feel awkward and getting them to leave him alone.
Nodding, he's glad when Sero continues where Tsuyu left off, probably grasping that the blunt girl wasn't the right person to have ask him things. "What state was he in, I assume he'd used hardening but still...a tank at full speed..."
"He...he was bruised. But he hadn't broken anything...The worst was a cracked rib and a concussion."
Manga boy whistles, "Anybody else and they'd be dead...his quirk sure is powerful. Tetsutetsu got sent out to help the relief effort almost instantly after it was confirmed his injuries were superficial." The boy starts shovelling food it the manga bubble and Koji doesn't question it when the food disappears.
He does wonder though if the boy is stress eating.
"He turned up at the recovery site and like, Bakugou just started going mad, saying stuff like why isn't 'Shitty Hair's twin' on bed rest and Todoroki just shrugged. It was mad."
"I think my heart dropped though when Pony called in the office though." Sero admitted and Koji kept his head down so as not to be at any risk of being caught smiling at the success of their plan.
He himself had nearly had a heart attack hearing the news, but he'd had one because he knew it was a pick up location. For a few seconds he'd thought his team mates had still been inside.
Having gotten a catch up from Kumicho minutes later however had helped his nerves.
He was so proud of his teammates- his friends.
Mei slid her laptop onto the seat next to Torch, the boy giving her a thumbs up to which she responded with a thumbs down.
It had been Wakagashira's idea to have a symbol like that, so that if you were captured or hurt you always had an objective to complete, to help you get back home.
You always had to return the thumbs up.
It was so silly, and stupid. And yet it... worked. Three times now she'd set out and three times she'd done the action, returning the appropriate gesture once getting back.
It was more of a way to cool your nerves but she found it surprisingly superstitious.
Nobody dared say good luck out of fear of jinxing and yet as she climbed out of the truck she saw Torch hang out of the window to give a thumbs up to the rest of the group, her earlier action being repeated by the others, before the truck was being driven silently away, leaving them near stranded in the city centre.
She looked at the bank, pulling her goggles down and feeling some tension leave her as the program on her laptop started working through her goggles. The schematics of the building appearing be fire her eyes.
Waving her hand experimentally the motions of her hands were tracked and translated to the images displayed before her. She never would of through to apply the same kind of technology that was used in VR headsets and joysticks to gloves to use for this project.
Demoman had given her the idea after an offhand comment about her idea sounding like a more advanced VR headset. She was truly starting to understand what Izuku had meant by expanding her horizons.
She understood that cooperation was key, especially in technology development, but she'd never thought to reach out to people for ideas first.
In the tech industry everything was so cut throat that she'd just gotten used to not daring let an idea slip unless absolutely necessary, but through exposure to Izuku's other friends and bizarre classmates she'd been given hundreds of different ideas that never would of come to her usually.
Plus, the inclusion of new projects had helped her in other ways. Now that her attention was being fought over she'd noticed that Hitoshi and Neito had started hanging out with her in their free time more.
They'd been a tightly packed unit before her, Izuku, Hitoshi and Neito. But now, her other two friends had started appearing more and more: offering to help with last minute improvements, moving supplies or even doing food and drink runs for her.
She'd enjoyed the pampering from her best friends, not even realising that she'd held them at a literal arms length (besides Izuku but Izuku seemed to have a way with worming his way into people's personal space almost accidentally) until the day before the exam started.
She'd woken up on the stupid couch in her workshop with Hitoshi's head leaning against her stomach from his place on the floor, Neito had curled up next to her, half hanging off the couch, and Izuku had been next to Hitoshi - with a hand latched lightly around her arm as if to reassure them both the other was there.
She was grateful for the growth she was experiencing. She was even more grateful to be able to test out all her babies and just let loose.
POWER LOADER COULD TRY BUT HE COULDN'T STOP HER NOW!
"Kumicho wants us to case here remember. No matter how tempting it seems to get the objective we hold off." Everyone nodded, and what a group they all looked.
Long gone were the hero students, the countries cream of the crop. Before her stood would-be delinquents , taking their first baby steps into the role of neighbourhood annoyances.
As a 'ex-delinquent' herself (it wasn't her fault that people liked to pick fights to see how strong she'd gotten) she knew exactly how it felt in these fledgling moments.
Fucking exhilarating. But also tragically scary.
"Why call it a heist if we're only casing it? And then hitting somewhere else? Just have another team do this while we hit the other place."
She got Addict's logic, hit fast and hard and making the heroes feel rushed causing them to make more mistakes. However, if there were so many villains out at once (and they were risking a lot by picking somewhere so close to their ground zero) it would draw attention and the plan was to remain as secretive as possible for as long as they could.
(She made a mental note to get Izuku to explain stuff like this to the others. It wouldn't be good if a team executed a plan early because they thought Izuku was being paranoid and overly cautious.)
"Kumicho knows what he's doing, Addict. He's probably had this whole conversation in his head, seriously his perception and forward planning is scary."
She didn't have to intervene as White Collar did it first, she remembered when he'd first bitched about how his costume was so thin in places and in his words left him feeling like a 'fledgling stripper'.
He wore the thin, almost sheer, shirt with relative ease now though. It was bullet resistant material, even if it was thinner than the other costumes material bases, and Kumicho had made sure that his waist coat and blazer jacket were extra padded.
Not to mention he was one of possibly three with an overcoat. The only others she could think if that had the large bulky clothing were Cleaner and Wakagashira. Both of those two had it to either hide their quirk or support equipment so it was to be expected.
(She remembered the reasoning behind why Neito had one:
"Another over coat? And your mother doesn't mind?"
"Mei, Neito won't stop being bitching about being a fledgling stripper- I don't want to know why he keeps using that or how he knows what that looks like- and Mama nearly tore my throat out when I showed her the design for his costume."
"Mamadoriya is scary."
"No kidding. She hasn't looked that pissed since I told her about Momo's costume.")
"Regardless of that, let us continue with our mission. Evangelion, you have the layout correct, lead the way."
Saluting Heapheastus she linked arms with White Collar and made her way around the back of the bank, releasing her willing hostage to have him boost her up the drainage pipe.
Wakagashira = Shinsou
The Piper = Koda
Ninja = Ojiro
Mirror = Hagakure
Evangelion = Hatsume
Heapheastus = Yaoyozorum
Apollo = Jiro
Eldritch = Tokoyami
Addict = Sato
Nova = Aoyama
Demoman = Kaminari
Demowoman = Ashido
White collar = Monoma
Muscle = Kendo
The Mole = Sen
Torch = Awase
Zombie = Setsuna
Geo = Juzo
Blanc = Kuroiro
Shadow = Yanagi
Once she was on the roof she found the main power box and found herself cackling as she pulled a cord out of her tool belt and attached it to her goggles and to a port in the box.
She loved modern technology. In all the old he sit movies Izuku had insisted they all watch this was impossible and a computer with direct access had to be used. Now she could do it all through virtual reality with the only risk to her being eye strain and a head ache.
She'd been a bit jittery about this type of thing originally, technically it was illegal but as her lovable green bean had pointed out, 'Legality is a loose concept in heroics.' so she didn't feel bad in the slightest about hacking into this fake banks fake records and fake security system...
That didn't seem so fake now that she looked at it.
She'd had her doubts about Nezu's sadistic tendencies but this was making her question the defence she'd made for the rat.
"So?" She blinks, having been too busy processing all the information to even realise the rest of the team had arrived on the roof.
White Collar is crouched next to her, hands fiddling with the edges of his over coat. Heapheatus is crouched on the other side of her, staring at the box like it will give her all the answers she needs.
She knows Apollo, Addict and Nova are behind her, probably watching the three of them in much the same way.
White Collar isn't even in an official position of power on the hierarchy and everyone looks to him. She thinks that might be intentional, it doesn't boost his ego but helps his confidence.
("His ego's huge though giving him that much power will make his head bigger."
"Not everyone with an ego is confident Mei.")
"Kumicho was right to leave this for the stake out list," she bites her lip, waving her hand to see the next set of blue prints, "Our objective is on the third basement layer. That's nearly fifty meters under ground."
"Sewers?" The three other members of their team come to surround her and she spots them all in her peripheral.
"It's below the sewers, second basement layer though, has access points- but honestly? It might actually be safer to enter through the ground floor and work our way down."
"What are we expecting then?" She loves holographic technology, she'll have to find out how Izuku got her permission later, and uses it now to display the different floor plans and robot blueprints.
"Your basic, expected, security. ID checks, security guards, cameras." She flicks her wrist and the images rotate - they give off a dull glow in the night sky. The light is masked by the orange dying inferno a few blocks away, "Then it gets more complicated, metal detectors -weapons are plastic so knives are the only exception- and what scanners. The second basement has EMP's waiting in certain areas designed to all go off at once."
She chews the inside of her cheek as she finishes, letting it sink in. This is going to be difficult, it's going to be scary and she's sure she'll love it.
"If something goes off everywhere in a mile radius in every direction from here would stop working because of it. We'd be blind and abandoned."
"Just safety deposit boxes and a break room. Only way in or out I'd through stairs that go through all the other floors."
"What about this?" Nova points to a smudge on one of the blue prints...But these are digital so there wouldn't be a smudge. "It looks like an elevator, one that's hidden from most of the other floor plans as well."
"Captain I think I just found our first topic of investigative."
"Why have you essentially benched me?"
Izuku stares for a few seconds, taking in the emotionless tone of Kendo's voice, a tone that's betrayed by the hurt and confusion in her eyes.
"You need time to recover-"
"And nobody else does?" She spits the words out, all hurtful venom and shameful pride. "What makes me so special?"
"You're one of my council," he stands tall, this is perhaps the third time he's been practically kaekaboned in the hall way this year, "That means I rely on you to be level headed and available in stressful situations- more than I need to rely on the others."
She seems to accept this as she doesn't immediately start jumping down his throat like he'd feared she would, that's how it had seemed recently. He'd have a view and everybody would demand a fine tuned answer as to why and how and every little detail.
"That means that if you're needing a few hours to get comfortable again you'll have a few hours. I understand wanting everyone to think you're okay, but it isn't something you need to fake. Just relax for a while and then join the frey again later."
"But I can't!" He blinked, shocked at the volume of her words and the desperation hidden within them, "Don't you get it!? Everyone else is getting on with it and helping and I'm just here as a lead weight! The first time I ever felt useful was when I became class B's rep and I just... I feel so useless right now."
He refused to sigh, even through he wanted to.
It was almost childish the reasoning, if not a little self-centred, but he couldn't blame Kendo. It was apparently a reoccurring theme that people on this team had self confidence issues.
And of they didn't have self confidence issues they all had something that dragged them down from the high perch they all deserved to stand upon.
"It's stupid isn't it? Stupid and selfish to want to have the ability to be in control... but I feel like if I'm being trusted with that level of responsibility it means I have power over myself and the life I'm living."
He smiled, not letting her see it though.
"It's just... all my life I've had to discipline myself and work harder than everybody else to prove that I could do what I wanted to and...to do that and then be benched so early on I guess... it just hit below the belt."
"You don't have to explain yourself to me Kendo." She looked at him, a retort on her lips, "If that's how you feel, that's how you feel. I'm sorry I didn't take that into consideration . Like I said, I just want everyone at their best, but I should if explained the situation."
He bowed, hands clasped in front and eyes on the floor, "It won't happen again I swear it to you."
"You...you don't have to bow-"
"I'm apologising, of course I have to."
"But you're the boss, why should you bow to an underlying."
He kept quickly scowl hidden, he hadn't given an impression that that was what he thought of them was it? Oh God he hoped it wasn't...
His silence seemed to spur the girl on to realise what she'd just said, "Not to say that that's how we think you see us! All of us can see you see us as equals! But- but still, you're A class and the leader. Why bow to me?"
"We're all equal, no matter if I'm A class and you aren't. On this team everyone is equally as important as anybody else and I want you to know that." He raised himself from his bow, "You guys can trust in me to protect you, of course, but everyone is capable of that themselves. My main job is making sure you aren't used as pawns by the heroes Kendo."
"Itsuka. You can call me Itsuka."
"Alright Itsuka lets go get Mirror and Ninja, I have a special mission I want you three to do."
He watched as she smiled, slow and unsure as if only just coming into herself, "Of course. Let's go do this Izuku."
Mina wasn't too sure what she'd expected from the sewers but this wasn't it. Her stomach was rocking but at least it wasn't filled with sewage.
"What do you think that smell is? Kumicho said there wasn't any sewage as the main water supply is unused." She used one hand to pinch the end of her nose and used the other to slowly weaken another section of the wall.
By now she wasn't afraid of the ceiling caving in, while it was a possibility she didn't need to worry if she was being careful.
"Mildew maybe? I mean, the pipes have to drip sometimes right? And it's not like the sewers are days old- it's probably just must and unearthed soil." A few groans went up at Geo's unintentional pun which, it turned out, wasn't actually unintentional as the boy began protesting that his joke was good.
"That aside," Zombie pushed her hair back from her face, the hood that had held the green strands back pushed down to avoid disruption of vision in the already dim lit area, "It's pretty cool to use the sewers. Like, look back in tunnel 2-D3 , if you go down you get into the subway! That's a good in and out access point we'd never of known of before hand."
Mina nodded along, removing her hand and stopping her quirk as Mole gave the signal. Stepping back Geo used his quirk to pull the wall apart just enough to create an air pocket before closing it and beginning to mould the once defiant concrete mass.
"I reckon he got the idea from Ninja Turtles."
"Huh?" Confusion seemed to be the general consensus to that response. Mole wore the plague doctors mask and heavy goggles but she could tell he was judging her from behind the mask.
"You know Alien but not Ninja Turtles?"
"Alien is iconic! It's a massive part of pre-quirk media!" She threw up her hands, not particularly annoyed but enjoying the over reaction anyway.
Mole did the same, crossing his arms and huffing looking away, "Ninja Turtles were about four mutated turtles who lived in New York sewers with their rat mutant sensei and became Ninja and fought bad guys. A massive part of their gimmick was they travelled by sewer."
"I always forget what a nerd you are!" Mole had looked somewhat scary before that, the faint light of their miners lanterns and phone torches reflecting off of the tinted goggles, but he looked much how she knew Fumikage looked when he was surprised.
It was funny to see it captured behind a mask as Zombie glomped the annoyed teen and started giving him a noogie, her medical masks violent sharpen ganged smile looking menacing when couple with the choke hold she had on the other boy along with the evil laughter erupting from her.
Mina didn't find herself scared though, even if they looked scary and acted terrifying, she knew that the people behind the masks weren't the characters they portrayed.
Just like with her wannabe hero name Alien Queen. Yes, it was an homage to a movie villain but that didn't mean in the grand scheme of the universe she wanted to abandon heroism and be a villain.
Sure, in this exam she did. But, that was because she wanted to fight and not be under the thumb of a boy who didn't understand that his father effected him more than he'd like to admit.
Everyone knew Endeavour was a dick head, as kind as Izuku was and as trust worthy as he appeared to be, he'd spilt the minimum detail about the state of the Todoroki household not long after the sports festival.
It wasn't in ill intent either, it was so they knew not to mention Todoroki's mother or his eldest brother and most definitely do not mention his father effecting his life.
Once that had been stated it didn't take long to see how much Todoroki let himself be influenced by his father. From his resistance to team work to his apparent block-headedness when it came to emotions. That could of been the result of trauma, Mina wasn't an expert and she didn't have any experience (she hoped she'd never have any experience) so she couldn't say for sure.
One thing in particular she'd noticed though was that Todoroki and Izuku had similar methods when it came to leadership. Both liked to have control over the whole situation and both seemed agitated when they didn't have it.
She could see how Todoroki having his entire life planned for him by his father would leave him craving for every dropped control he could get his two quirked hands on but with Izuku...
He'd said for a large majority of his life he was deemed quirkless and... Mina had seen what happened to quirkless people. They got bullied, they got spat on, they were ground into dust before they could ever grow...which made her feel like that might be the reason Izuku wanted control.
Out of all of them, he'd been told what he couldn't do. Not what he had to do, from the start all he'd had were doors closed to him, all paths breaking away instead of being forced onto one he was simply forced off road.
It... made her feel a bit sick really. How many times had she tried to stop the bullying? Like genuinely tried? And...not just said stop it or tell the person to piss off an escorted her classmate away.
She couldn't come up with any numbers, it was someone else's responsibility, she'd told herself. She'd deal with the victim and someone else would deal with the teacher.
Nobody ever dealt with the teacher though. And she'd seen that from the outside in.
So to go through that and then find out you did have a quirk? And that it broke you? And then get into the best school ever only to be told by your teacher, the one meant to guide you, that you were only in school because you had just above zero potential...
She would of given up. But Izuku?
Izuku took it in his stride, he'd looked at fate, punched her and spat in her soup before continuing on his merry freckled way.
That was why she'd chosen to be under his leadership. He was smart, he was competent. But above all else, he understood what it meant to fight for your life and how to come out of it mostly in tact.
Laughter roaring around her brought her back to the present. Geo was half way through his own creation, laughing up a storm and Mole and Zombie were rolling on the floor scrapping.
Everything stilled though at the loud crash above them. So loud and powerful it was heard through two layers of concrete and soft rock.
'Team come in. Come in Team. Torch requesting ---- ---- I repeat---- ---- back up---- ---- Heroes------- requesting----'
Torch's distorted voice came over the transmission feed, broken and scared. The audio kept breaking up and she was at least relieved to hear no explosions in the background.
That meant the tank wasn't being followed by Bakugou then. Cleaner's voice spoke next, 'Backup request received, Geo, Zombie, Mole, Demowoman inbound. Demoman ETA five minutes. Geo estimated ETA?"
They were already making their way back to the last man hole, once quiet steps now pound and bounding in an attempt to get there before the mystery assailant(s) got the upper hand.
'ETA approximately two minutes. Torch general area please!'
Throwing herself at the ladder without thinking she climbed, just barley not activating her quirk and used her acid (Aizawa was going to kill her at the end of the exam for using her quirk in a situation where it could drop down onto others) to remove the welding on the manhole.
Climbing out she pulled on the gasmask that had hung around her neck and pulled the words on her armour ridden hoodie to make her hair and horns as hidden as possible. Thankfully the one piece body suit under the hoodie and half jogger/half jumpsuit bottoms hid the rest of her pink skin.
A chill went up her spine as she ran (stupid stupid Mina. Why are you running headlong into a fight you don't know if you can win? Izuku does it... seems to work out for him.) to end edge of the alleyway and she had half a wind to worry that Todoroki had turned up.
But no, it was the vine girl from the sports festival (she was still kind of pissed for Denki about that fight but the blond had accepted his loss rather graciously), a girl who she thought was name pony, Tetsutetsu and Uraraka.
An odd mix sure, but... most had long range and weren't so much pursing the truck themselves as they were trying to crash it into a building to them get close.
She wasn't sure if they were aware they were endangering Torch's life or if it was pay back for earlier. She repressed a scream, only holding it back as Zombie covered her mouth as Tetsutetsu threw a chunk of debris at the windscreen and Torch's superb driving allowed him to swerve just in time to only get a dint in the tank.
It was that display of carelessness that lead them all into action, and yes maybe Kumicho had prepared them for this, and yes maybe they had a plan. But that all went out the window because it looked like they were trying to get Torch killed.
And you didn't touch one of their own.
Later, they'd say no one knew who started the war cry, but soon enough all four of them were hollering it and charging into battle. Blood begged to be spilt and they would accept the call.
Wakagashira = Shinsou
The Piper = Koda
Ninja = Ojiro
Mirror = Hagakure
Evangelion = Hatsume
Heapheastus = Yaoyozorum
Apollo = Jiro
Eldritch = Tokoyami
Addict = Sato
Nova = Aoyama
Demoman = Kaminari
Demowoman = Ashido
White collar = Monoma
Muscle = Kendo
The Mole = Sen
Torch = Awase
Zombie = Setsuna
Geo = Juzo
Blanc = Kuroiro
Shadow = Yanagi
"WHAT!?" Hitoshi feels his blood run cold as Izuku's voice rings out through the communal area.
Looking quickly over to his leader he sees the fear and rage destroy his previously happy expression. His mouth is curled in a snarl and he's already beckoning them all over as he goes to the 'changing rooms'. "Alright Cleaner, he's on his way? Yeah, make sure he's aware of the situation. Try and calm them down."
They trail behind, green lightning sparking to life across Kumicho's skin, and it is Kumicho now who fills out the suit with the confidence and rage of a monster, it's Kumicho who's eyes meet theirs as he turns.
"Torch got ambushed by a hero squad on his loop." A gasp arises from a few of them, Torch was on his own- him being down meant there were two other teams stuck. But not only that Torch himself is ALONE against the HEROES.
"Cleaner had the clean up crew intersect and arrive to help," the door to the costume room is kicked open and everyone scrambles for gear. Who knows if they'll all be going but one of their own is in danger, "however the heroes aren't living up to their moniker and decided to throw a rock at the windshield."
There's a crack and all eyes are on him as he stares down at the snapped plastic case in his hand, his support gear thankfully unharmed. His rage is apparent for all to see but Kumicho continues like nothing is wrong here.
"Torch is fine, we think." He spits the word out, "But the clean up have flown off the rails. Everyone is scrambling tonight."
He turns to them, mask dangling around his throat.
"Muscle, take the crew you have and take the tank, pick up Hepheastus' group and explain the situation." Muscle nods, her team scurrying to get their equipment, "The tunnels closest to the bank should be done so take them."
And then they're gone, everyone continues getting prepared and is listening, "Cleaner, your crew will assist Demoman with the incident."
They nod and they leave the room just as silently as well. He can see the spiralling in Kumicho's eyes. It scares him, but he catches a glimpse of himself in the plastic and sees his eyes aren't in a different state. "Wakagashira, you're with me. We'll be holding a perimeter during the evac."
Kumicho taps his comm as Hitoshi gets the last of his equipment hidden and speaks through the comma, "Everybody, do not engage unless necessary. Focus on getting in and getting out, force is only an option if clean up have spiralled. Thumbs up."
'Thumbs down' ring a through the comms, their equivalent of good luck. He feels sick thinking about it.
"Why would they do something so stupid?"
He's got the longer legs and yet he's the one struggling to keep up as they get to the garage - it's empty of the large scale vehicles leaving only the two or single seater vehicles remaining. Like the two quads they take.
He barely hears Kumicho over the roaring of wind, a for a second he almost sounds like Izuku, "They don't know where the line is, and our stunts today have cemented our place across it."
"But still!" He shouts, his helmet firmly in place over the oval opaque mask he and Kumicho wore as status symbols, "Throwing rocks at windshields and trying to ram them into a building!? This is too villainous to not make them stop and think!"
"We ran Tetsutetsu over, I imagine he's wanting revenge for the others it's a council head and two low level lackeys- Todoroki probably had them on patrol and they accidentally stumbled into each other!"
"We can't just let this slide! They'll kill Torch if they aren't careful!"
It's static filled and almost drowned out by the wind but he doesn't miss Kumicho's response, "We won't. Muscle has her orders."
Yosetsu curses as he finally manages to get the truck to a stand still. It's unharmed, discounting its new dint, but he's certainly rattled. He thought Tetsutetsu was going to kill him.
The anger in his eyes, the unequivocally fury and damnnation was murderous and down right villainous. Kumicho had had them go through every member of 1-A and 1-B's weaknesses and strengths and he'd seen Uraraka's performance in the sports festival so he was especially scared what would happen if she got her hands on him.
Ibara and Pony he could manage, technically somehow Ibara's vines counted as inorganic material as so he was able to weld her quirk to the ground if he got close enough, Pony was a long range fighter and he e as faster.
He just hoped it would be enough.
But he had to stop musing because his teammates were throwing themselves into the fray, uncoordinated and clearly with only retribution on their minds.
Jumping from the truck, he ran to the back, opening up the doors and pulling himself in before dragging the weapon cases close to the door, he'd just got one out and cocked it when he heard Uraraka's voice behind him.
His hood and gas mask would hide features, and the jump suit made it easier to move, but he wished he had his body fitting suit and didn't have the mask, because it was a little too obvious how quick his heart was racing. So much so that Uraraka noticed.
"Are... are you okay!? Can you breath?!"
He'd put on a brave front when Evangelion had asked him to drive. Geo was better suited for this kind of confrontation, what could he do against a person he couldn't weld and couldn't let touch him in an enclosed environment!?
What a fucking idiot.
He has a gun.
Spinning, aiming and firing with little thought, he watched as his wonky aim clipped Uraraka in the shoulder rather than the chest. She wouldn't be counted as out yet but as the force propelled her out the back of the truck and onto the floor he could already see her left arm weighing her down.
It was the first time he'd fired the firearm without protective gear covering his ears and the bang hurt more than the recoil- something he was able to deal with relatively easily.
The girl was on the floor, and he really should of felt terrified that the red paint pellet looked like blood seeping from the girls shoulder but he couldn't care.
He got the gun ready again, aimed it steadily this time, and stood just behind the lip of the back of the van. From here he was visible but they couldn't hit him without risking blowing the truck sky high.
He steadied his breathing as the once brash sound of violent conflict simmered into near silence in his mind. He was fucking pissed, he wasn't even the one to run Tetsutetsu over and here he was taking Geo's shit for him.
Just to emphasize how angry he was he aimed the gun at her heart.
It was a paint pellet but he knew some of the guns held rubber bullets, others had exploding foam and then there were the capture nets and capture foam.
Uraraka had just gotten lucky he had the paint pellets, because even if he didn't and he had the rubber bullets he'd still have the gun pointed at her heart at near point blank range.
From an elevated position at this close range the injured area would be larger, due to the way the pellet would break quicker and more violently.
"Stay where you are hero." The gas mask made his voice distorted which helped hide that his breathing was still too quick for his liking. "Now, tell your team to back off."
"No." She pulled herself to her feet, left arm dead at her side, and her calm face twisted into a snarl. He noticed that Ibara and Pony were being handled but Demowoman was having difficulty with Tetsutetsu who was making his way over quickly, "You won't win villain- not as long as I'm still standing!"
He smiled, tilted his head and laughed.
The bang rang out as he shot her with no hesitation.
Denki felt his static building up with every shift of clothing against him as he rode on the motorbike to get to the coordinates. The wind rushed past him and all he could hear was the sound of the vehicle purring and the tell tale snapping as his quirk tried to over reach its limits.
Going all out only happened because he didn't discharge apparently or at least that was what Kumicho reckoned. He pulled up to the fight just in time to see Torch shoot Uraraka at point blank range.
The girl stumbled back, swaying before falling to the floor. Tetsutetsu grabbed her before her head smashed open on the concrete.
He saw Geo and Zombie take down the terrified 2-B students, pulling out hidden plastic knives and holding them to their backs as warnings. Ignoring it he ran up to his counter part, taking quick note that her shoulders were too tight.
He flicked his wrists as letting his new weapons, weighted chains with modified spark plugs at the end of them, unravelled from around his arms and let them drag slightly as he hurried to see Uraraka alive and with paint splatter on her shoulder and stomach.
So that was why she wasn't 'dead' she could technically survive those injuries. If they dragged out the fight they could get her out but they'd risk losing the battle. Besides his orders were to get everyone home.
He heard another truck pull up behind him and saw Cleaner, Eldritch, Shadow and Blanc pile out, creating a blockade on both obvious ways in and out. He knew Wakagashira and Kumicho would probably be a block out doing a perimeter.
"You won't win villains!"
"Demo, my acid isn't working." He nodded, and she took the back seat as he stepped forward.
"I'll handle this Torch."
The code names made Tetsutetsu's hardened features tighten. "Surrender and we let you leave and take her so that she doesn't 'die'." He gestures and the scraping of his chains diverts his enemies eyes. He has half a mind to just lash out now with the weighted chains but resists, "Or, you follow her path and let everyone here die tonight."
As he expects Tetsutetsu slowly stands, arms raised. And just like Kumicho had predicted he would the silver boy fakes it out until he takes a step forward and goes to attack.
Two weeks ago Denki would of pissed himself now, having practiced trying to whip out at Kumicho using full cowl, he finds he's only slightky sloppy in the way he throws his weighted chain out.
"I'm metal, your chains won't work!"
"You're metal," he affirms, medical mask stretching due to his smile, "And you're the perfect test subject for this." He directs his quirk through the chain, the make shift spark plug at the end regulating it so that it won't kill anyone and heats up the chain rather than letting him spark out.
He should feel sick at the shouts of pain that come from Tetsutetsu as the living conductor is electrocuted, but Denki is too used to hearing his own screams of pain in his head. He just pushes past it.
"Demoman, get everyone evacuated we'll do the rest." He nods at Cleaner and herds the others to Torch's van. Mina keeps to him though and ends up riding on the motorcycle with him.
She doesn't cry but if he hears her sniffle about how she thought Yosetsu was going to die before her over the wind he mentions nothing.
Tenya is the one that gets called up to pick up the fallen unit. He throws up when he sees Uraraka.
The image of his brother lying limp on the ground, bleeding out and all alone is still to fresh in his mind. Pony and Ibara help him get Uraraka onto his back and speed her back to base. She doesn't require any medical attention thankfully but, as the teachers explain over the speakers when they're all back at home base, it's a gesture that means a lot in a game like this.
He sits in the nurses room that night, back against the wall still in uniform in case he's called out. His eyes don't leave the three students in the beds.
Kirishima, recovering from being ran over and quirk overuse. Uraraka, a dislocated shoulder and a potential concussion. Tetsutetsu, sever electrocution, but apparently not sever enough for the teachers to step in.
What's the line here?
The villains willingly blow up buildings, shoot others at point blank and electrocute others without much though apparently for the consequences and for what? To protect themselves and save their conspirators.
The second though that the heroes act somewhat violent the teachers are sending messages along their channel and saying they need to learn restraint because they're going too far.
He can agree that Tetsutetsu throwing a rock at the windshield was excessive but so were all the villains actions.
Where was the line drawn? When did it change from underhanded tactics to endangerment of human life?
Momo hides the shaking well enough that its only after they've all been checked up on by the staff and signed out for the night that she gets confronted about it.
She isn't a fool, she can see that Evangelion and Wakagashira are only here for Neito and Izuku. The quartet is close knit and she doesn't think people are ever going to be able to get inside the bubble they've created, they may latch on and branch out but the bubble is unbreakable.
That's why she's surprised when Wakagashira is the one to come up to her in the kitchen after they're all supposed to be asleep. Out of all of thek Wakagashira is the most closed off.
The boy is silent in his approach, almost like he's practiced getting around unnoticed for longer than the past two weeks, and she only notices his presence when he wants her to, which he indicates by tapping her on the shoulder.
"Momo, you okay?"
Out of all of the things she'd had to get used to, her first name being spouted by so many people had been the simplest one. However to hear Wakagashira - someone who had started calling everyone but his three close friends by their code names the second they were established - call her by her first name throws her for a loop.
Turning, she tries to compose the shaking but the scalding heat of spilt tea doesn't help her case. She's barley got a hiss out when the general studies boy has removed the cup from her hands, placed it on the side and started running cold water on her hands.
The slight sting doesn't even warrant a running under cold water, but the way Wakagashira doesn't even seem to notice makes it all the more apparent this is an ingrained reaction.
She isn't sure how to feel about that- what does it mean that this boy in front of her (someone who's never seen combat, who's presumably never been in a constant deadly environment) had an ingrained response to immediately treat burns no matter the extent of the injury. She remembers then, the immediate reaction the majority if 1-A had had to the boy. The negative airs, the unspoken hostility that had surrounded the mere idea of this boy.
And why? Because of his quirk.
After spending time going over that realisation she thinks maybe it isn't so odd that Wakagashira would have that kind of response to an injury. How many times had the boy had to patch himself up because of something kids had done?
She and her classmates were hero students- people who were supposed to be unbiased. Look how they'd reacted.
(She doesn't think about the fact that she'd accepted Izuku being quirkless for so long because she knew he was capable before hand. She doesn't think about how that might not of been her reaction had he still of been quirkless when he'd entered U.A.)
"Are you okay?" He repeats the question and they've been moved to seats at some point, her tea back in her hands. It makes her feel worse.
She was too easily distracted. "Sorry, Wakagashira I shouldn't of-"
"You can call me Hitoshi you know." That throws her off, she and everybody else had taken his lack of naming as a line that wasn't to be crossed. If the boy didn't call them by their names that must mean that he wasn't comfortable with being called by his.
After all, he called Neito, Mei and Izuku by theirs and they in turn called him by his.
It seemed it was just another thing they'd all misunderstood about thr boy.
"Hitsohi, I shouldn't of gotten distracted. Thank you for helping me, and yes I'm alright."
She's reminded of Aizawa-sensei in the next instance at the expression of tired disbelief that floods Wakagashi- Hitoshi's face. "Izuku may be intelligent but he's rather lacking in the emotion handling department, I mean have you see him? Total cry baby."
Even if the tones flippant and she knows the friendship she feels like she needs to defend Izuku, "Don't get me wrong, he can deal with others well enough- he's survived Bakugou long enough." He laughs and its biting, mood apparently soured at the mention of the blond she thinks she'll need to dig into this, "But we can both agree emotion handling isn't something you would immediately label him with?"
"So that should make it obvious to you how worried the idiot is about you that he asked me to come talk to you." The words don't fully register though they do get processed
Everything just seems so sluggish, "You're in shock Momo, everyone could see you shaking. It's scary isn't it, feeling in the dark and without a way to get out of the situation."
Hitoshi is crouched in front of her when she blinks again, "It's fucking terrifying," his hands rest on hers lightly and she can see how uncomfortable this is making him and yet he's still doing it, "You were really brave when you guys got locked out of the comms during the rescue. We did it so you wouldn't panic, like I said though Izuku isn't the best with emotions. It just panicked you more didn't it?"
"Exactly. It's okay to be scared, you're not going to be strong all the time. Izuku figured you'd be angry at him so he sent me, you're worried he's not going to let you out in the field again aren't you?"
It's true, she'd agreed with the decision to keep Kendo back but now that it could be her she's so angry. Why is she letting this happen?
"He won't. He and Kendo had a talk and she pointed out how useless being benched would make anyone feel. He's gonna mother hen you for awhile though."
Neito is disgruntled.
That's probably the simplest way to put it. Izuku had promised him, Mei and Hitoshi that they would never be in the dark during this exam. Or ever.
He would be honest with them, he would be open and he wouldn't hide things from them. The reasons he's so disgruntled is because the promise had been broken.
This isn't even about the radio silence they'd experienced for a daunting half an hour - he understood the reason for that. It minimizes panic. They're deep underground, deeper than they have been before, and then they're plunged into radio silence. It distracts from the actual issue of the heroes nearly killing one of their own.
No, this is about the fact that Izuku's been playing mind games with the rat and gotten Hitoshi to keep quiet about it.
The rat's fucking terrifying- Neito doesn't want to think what shit is going to hit the fan because of the little game his friend is trying to play.
They probably would of remained ignorant to it had he and Mei not spotted the surveillance cameras in her on-site lab which weren't supposed to be there.
"What the fuck do you mean it isn't a big deal!? We're being watched - how do we know there aren't cameras in here right now!?"
(He loves Izuku, he loved him in the way he loved Mei and in the way he loved Hitoshi. It wasn't romantic but it was more than platonic. He loved them all because they meant the world to him.
Even though he hadn't know all three if them forever he knew they meant the world to him. Because they'd been the first ones to call him out and tell him it wasn't right the way he acted, then they hadn't thrown him away, they'd kept him close and pulled him into their world.
They'd accepted him and let him in, let him into a group of tormented teens who just wanted to prove the world wrong. Izuku with his ex-quirklessness hanging around his neck like a noose, Hitoshi with the 'mark' of a villain blacklisting him from the rest of the world and Mei, inventor extraordinaire with a history of self defence cases painted as juvenile assaults.
He wasn't particularly special, he didn't have some emotional baggage except an overbearing ego and personality that he'd needed to reign in.
It's because he loves them all so much that he's so angry.)
"I sweeped the place before hand Neito give me a bit of credit here!" Izuku may have raised his voice but he isn't angry, that's one of the reasons why it's so hard to tell when he's pissed off, sometimes he shouts other times he's silent.
"Well i don't know if I'm inclined to do that seeing as you're playing with the devil here Izuku!" He however, is clearly royally pissed and Neito doesn't have it in him to care.
Does Izuku not know how dangerous this is? Not just for the outcome of the exam but for him in general. What happens if he's on on Nezu's radar and the rat decides he doesn't like the way Izuku is going?
There were plenty of rumours of the horrors the rat would do to people he didn't like. It was always hard to distinguish what exactly was true but the chimera was clearly sadistic and Neito didn't trust him as far as he could punt the bastard.
"I'm not an idiot-"
"Well you're sure as hell acting like one!"
They stand diametrically opposed in Izuku's room. He's stood in front of the door, the other boy is stood in front of him, there's less than a meter maybe between them. He can see Izuku is getting agitated now and he can tell he's falling into old habits because he's getting in the others face.
"If I didn't do this do you think we could have don't half the shit we're going to do!?" Oh yeah, definitely agitated. He should stop now, diffuse this situation but they're both too prideful to back down.
"Aren't you the one always going off about how we can work around stuff!? Or is that just so Nezu looks at you and sees such a lovely potential student!"
He can see in the way Izuku's eyes widen and then harden that he's crossed a line.
"If anyone is acting for the fucking camera it's- ugh!"
"No! Go on say it Izuku- you have something to say just say it!"
"Stop it!" They both freeze and Neito hates himself at the raw emotion in Mei's voice.
When he looks over he feels a hand plunge into his chest and stab his heart.
Mei is stood in the back of the room, eyes glassy, and Hitoshi looks tense (shoulders high, half in front of Mei so he can take the blow first) as he stands protectively between them and Mei, a grim expression splayed across his face.
It's then he realises how aggressive the situation looks. He's gotten right into Izuku's space, there's nothing left practically of the half a meter that had been between them, fists are held tightly at sides and eyes are narrowed and sharpened.
He realises it at the same time as Izuku does.
"It-you don't need to scream at each other over it! Izuku wouldn't know this would happen but he should of told us alright! There!"
He doesn't even attempt to get closer to the girl, the first time something like this happened (near the start of their friendship when tensions between him and Izuku were still high) he'd tried to do just that and Mei had flinched away into a small ball and Hitoshi had decked him.
Both of them had natural instincts to this kind of situation. Mei, to hide away and make herself less of a hypothetical target and Hitoshi to get in the way and try and fight like a cornered animal.
It was just one the many things he'd had to learn to navigate around being their friends.
(They didn't act like that all the time if there was an argument going on he'd noticed. Sometimes certain words or postures would set off memories.)
"..." he's not sure if he should apologise first or not but Izuku beats him to it, "I'm sorry. I shouldn't of shouted or kept it a secret. I genuinely never thought it would cause something like this."
"I'm also sorry, I shouldn't of gotten so aggressive," he doesn't look over to make sure Mei is alright, he doesn't, "I'm just scared for what else the rat might do. Camera's are just the first step, what else does he have lined up?"
"I'm not sure." An unsure Izuku was always a scary thing. He, as did many people, often forgot that this intelligence powerhouse was just human at the end of the day. He wasn't omnipotent.
Izuku then smiles his large, genuine him smile. Not the one he's seen him wearing in the hallways, this is the one with which he was greeted the first time he walked through the doors of the Hatsume forge after becoming Izuku's friend.
"But we'll work through it. That's what we do isn't?"
'We', not 'hero students' or 'I'. 'We' meaning collective. This would be a joint effort. That's fine. He'd rather a joint effort than no effort at all.
"..." He does consider being silent just that little bit longer to screw with Izuku but seeing the worried tinge grow in his eyes he speaks, "Yeah, it is. We good?"
The other two don't relax per say, but Hitoshi looks less likely to judo flip them both through the floor and Mei doesn't look two seconds from a panic attack so it's better.
They'll probably spend the evening together now, staying close for the nightmares that will come. Holding each other close because everyone is tense and high off of adrenaline and now everyone is angry and sad and he just wants to collapse and let the other two know it's fine.
Everything is going to be fine.
He won't, because he can't promise that. Can't guarantee it.
He can however, swear that he's going to do his damnedest to make it ture.
They're going to win this, Nezu's stakerish interventions or not.
They're going to win this, because this isn't going to devolve into infighting.
They're going to win this, because everyone on this team has what it takes to be a hero.
It's day two and three of them are incapacitated. Eijiro feels unless as he sits himself up in bed, the strain doesn't have a particular location but instead envelops him entirely.
He looks down at his arms, the bruises haven't fully formed yet but they're there. A shudder rips through him as he thinks about what would of happened if he hadn't had his quirk activated - about what would of happened if it hadn't been him. A squeak on the floor draws his attention.
Iida is on the floor, still in uniform, and curled up; looking ready to jump up at any second.
The class rep jolts, glasses slipping down the bridge of his nose, and he realises then how close the other is to Uraraka's bed.
"You're awake," he swears that the statement is followed by a whispered 'thank goodness', "how are you feeling?"
"Sore. What happened though? Why are Tetsu and Uraraka here?"
He hates the look on Iida's face, a look of pain and fear. He hates it because all his life he's been told to associate that look with weak civilians, victims. Never has it occurred to him that the expression could appear on a heroes face (and most defiantly not on a hero in training's face.)
Iida turns ever so slightly, shifting almost unnoticeably closer to Uraraka. He isn't too sure he wants to know what happened. "They intercepted a weapons convoy last night."
He blinks, mouth opening and closing. The villains team had weapons!? His shock must show through because the others expression grows grimmer than it had been previously.
"There was only the driver originally, team gamma tried to take them in- things turned violent quickly."
The rep pulls himself to his feet now, unsteady where he stands, and shuffles over. His pained expression makes him a hundred percent certain he doesn't want to know what happened while he was passed out.
"We were the original aggressors, the driver called reinforcements, then proceeded to pull a hand gun on Uraraka." His eyes shoot over to the girl in the bed, the covers are pulled up to her chin and he fears the worst. "She was shot twice, once in the shoulder and once in the stomach."
The bile rises quicker than it ever has, "Thankfully the gun contained paint pellets but... it looked just like with Stain.... all I could see was my brother...!"
He leans forward, ignoring the screaming of muscles, and pulls the class rep in for a hug. He can feel his own body shaking in terror so he pretends, for Iida's sake, that the other isn't near bawling.
"The teachers informed us that it would of counter as a kill if I hadn't gotten her here when I did..." He should be telling the other it's fine and that he doesn't need to continue but he can't get the words out.
It's then though, that the ingrained rich boy part of Iida wakes up and he pulls away muttering apologies and about how he shouldn't of allowed himself to become overwhelmed by his emotions.
"Tetsu?" Is all he can say, seeing how thankful the other is for the prompting to change topic.
"Kaminari electrocuted him until he passed out. His quirk was activated."
Kaminari? No. There had to of been a mistake. Kaminari didn't have the kind of fine control over his quirk to even think of using it on another like that- the boy had told him himself! There was no way in hell that he'd of used it on Tetsu; a literal human conductor.
Iida's expression tells him all he needs to know.
Yosetsu realised pretty early on that being a hero student would entail seeing weird things. This test was no exception.
He's leaning against the kitchen counter, nursing a cup of tea, when he hears the laughter. He's been up for half the night, trying to process how easy it was to pull a gun on another living person and fire it.
The only reason he'd hesitated was because he'd been an idiot and forgotten he'd had the gun in his own damn hands. He isn't sure what's worse, the fact that he did it, or the fact he's calling himself an idiot for forgetting he had an option nobody would normally take.
H understood now though, why situations with criminals tended to escalate the way they did. The terror he'd felt with Uraraka at his back had only been quenched by the the fact he had something to defend himself with- he imagined it was much the same for a criminal or villain backed into a corner in moments of desperation.
The laughter though, drew him from his thoughts.
Pushing off the counter, mug still in hand, he peeked his head through the doorway into the common area. It's just past half four, nobody else should be up.
Low and behold though, the common is filling up.
Izuku is sat on the floor in front of the large tv, Neito leaning against his back while Evangelion and Wakagashira are leant into either side of him.
All four are laughing, little concern for what others could think upon hearing them. It makes him smile a little seeing them. Izuku's eyes catch his and the boy waves over to him, shouting his name with the familiarity of an old friend.
The welcoming, and dare he say expectant, looks from the others certainly make him feel like he's an old friend. He doesn't really listen, much too tired and much too scatter-brained to even try, but Neito explains to him what was making them all laugh.
Then Evangelion drags him down, Wakagashira having taken his mug from him seconds prior, and he's among the huddle then.
Neito has a tablet in his hands, going over schematics. Izuku has the TV switched to the security camera footage they have of the hero teams headquarters, Wakagashira is leant over chicken scratch notes with Evangelion.
Through it all he sits there nursing the same cup of tea. He smiles again.
This isn't the weirdest thing he's seen as a hero course student, but it's definitely up there.
Kyoka forces herself to not make a noise as she dodges yet another blast from Yuga. Setsuna isn't as able and a shriek rips itself from the girl as she's nearly clipped by the ray.
A buzzer goes off and she sighs in disappointment, though nobody can hear it over the cheering from the other side of the room. She glowers over there; though she doesn't think Yuga and Sen really care.
The two boys are fist bumping, which then leads to the two posing. She'd thought the anime posing thing was a Yuga exclusive but the two of them were in their element.
She'd be lying if she said it doesn't bring a quirk of a smile to her lips.
She's annoyed, not heartless.
"Rematch! I'll win it us this time Kyoka just you watch!" Setsuna is stood tall, eyes the definition of determination as she makes her deceleration.
One of the boys, she isn't really listening, makes a comment that's something like they'd like to see her try, and Setsuna retaliates by removing her hand and throwing it at the two boys.
The appendage proceeds to chase the two boys, who scream like little school girls.
Itsuka makes the buzzer go off from the side lines. For once, Mezou isn't stopping their messing about in training. He seems to find it as entertaining as everyone else does.
Mezou was a demanding task master, only beaten out by Izuku himself. But Izuku was a nightmare dressed as an angel so that made sense. Mezou was just plain sadistic when it came to training.
She could see Aizawa-sensei sitting in the viewing room now, pleased with himself for creating such a tyrannical pair.
She wasn't sure if the idea was to make them wish for Aizawa's logical ruses or not, but if it was it was working. Checking the clock she sees its a little past half four. They've been at training for about two hours now, but it doesn't really matter.
She did her work for the heist last night, someone else gets to do the leg work today.
She thinks it's Itsuka's crew, but it might also be Mezou's. She doesn't really know. All she does know is that she gets to train and sleep for most of the day unless something horrendous arises.
After all, today and tomorrow are nothing more than build up for the start of the main plan on the fourth day.
Recon and supplies were a priority right now, they could fit in tormenting later. For now, she reasons, she should relax.
Sero swears as he pulls himself off of the floor, having gotten tangled in his covers and fallen, and rushes to his bed room door. Opening it shows an enraged Bakugou.
He looks horrendous, he finds it funny- in the back of his mind- that Bakugou isn't a morning person.
"Get dressed, the bastard are robbing the bank."
"What!?" He looks to his clock on the wall, the face stares him in the eye, with the time eight thirty in the morning, "Who robs a bank at eight thirty!?"
"Bring it up with them when we capture them soy sauce! Just get fucking dressed and meet me and Animal man down stairs with the rest of the damn team!"
He nods, speechless, and proceeds to get dressed. If anything comes of today, it's that Bakugou doesn't have an offensive nickname for Koda yet, and he finds that hilarious.
- Non-explicit descriptions of torture
I tend to do this with my fic fraudulent claims, but here's a list of songs that fit this AU Midoriya:
- 'TROUBLE (ft Nikki Williams)' by Parov Stelar
- 'Angry Too' by Lola Blanc
- 'Who are you , really?' by Mikky Ekko
- 'Same Old War' by Our Last Night
- 'Kill Your Heroes' by AWOLNATION
- 'I Come with Knives' by IAMX
Hanta keeps his arms in front of him, a simple defensive stance yes but one where his quirk isn't obstructed, and tucks his chin close to his chest.
"What do you want!?" His voice is scratchy, smoke slipping down into their floor from the ones still blazing above. The figure doesn't answer, oval mask holding the same design as the one from the video yesterday.
That means this is the leader. Then, the other speaks in the same distorted voice from before, "I want you to join our cause."
"I'm a hero! I won't change side's - besides you can't its against the rules!"
The figure, he can't get specific proportions as the goggles he'd been forced to wear upon entering the building distort his vision and the smoke might be getting to him, tilts their head before laughing. He thinks they might be male.
"If you were registered yes, it would be. But you aren't registered on either team are you Sero Hanta? Now, tell me why."
His throat tightens and he knows it isn't because of the smoke.
*Half an hour earlier*
Hanta gulps upon seeing the state of the bank, they'd used their quirks to reach their location but the villains hadn't been as quiet about their entrance.
The doors, once tall proud metal warriors, are discarded to the side- torn off their hinges and crumpled in on themselves. There are only a handful of options for who's here then, and if it's who he thinks it is he doesn't want to be here anymore.
Midoriya wasn't an overall threatening person, however he had a tendency to break himself. If he was ripping doors off left and right what was the state of his body?
He didn't want to aggravate any injuries the boy may have!
Apart from the doors, smoke flew out of the doorway only matched by the stream of 'civilians'. They ignore the civilians though, instead planning to charge head on into a burning bank.
Hanta shudders, what was it with the villains and burning stuff?
"They're burning the evidence..." He jolts where he's stood, head snapping to Koda at the same time that Rin and Kamikiri do.
"Of course they are, bunch of fucking cowards knew if they didn't wed of won by now!" Bakugou's pride makes a reappearance, but Hanta ignores it.
He's friends with the idiot and that means it's something he just has to accept. Though, he can try and weather it down after they're out of a life and death situation. For now he has to focus on problem in front of them.
"Icyhot caught sight of the building setting on fire about five minutes ago, that means they're still inside." And just like that, Bakugou is their tactical leader and from a bag slung over his shoulder he's producing goggles and air purification masks for each of them.
"There's two floors here, the ground floor and basement." They pull on the equipment as Bakugou continues, "If they're setting the place alight they'll be on their way out - soy sauce, animal man you two will be on the basement level seeing if they left any clues. There's an emergency basement exit on the left side of the building if you need it."
He doesn't like the implication that they might need it, but a look into Bakugou's eyes shows that he doesn't like it much either. At least his friend isn't a total jackass right now.
"Me and these extras will grab them on their way out. Now don't fuck up and get out safe." With that he watches as Bakugou and the class-B part of their team enter the building with no restraint or sign of hesitation.
"I guess it's you and me then?" He looks at Koda and suppresses a shiver that threatens to run down his spine.
Standing tall, goggles on and mouth hidden behind the purifier Koda looks dangerous. The fire reflects off the glass in the goggles and his simple costume looks like a menacing facade for greater evil hidden underneath.
Then, when Koda's quiet, soft, voice answers he shakes the thoughts away. This is Koda he's talking about. Just like Midoriya this guy doesn't have a bad bone in his body.
As they continue on into the burning building he lets Koda leave. It's simply paranoia from three of their team being taken down so easily. That's all it is, besides, at least Koda knows where his loyalties lie. Hanta can't say the same thing.
"What have you done with Koda!" If he ignores the question then just maybe he can bury the sickness away, ignore it and pretend it never existed.
He isn't the only one who never officially signed up for a team, that doesn't make him a bad person...right? People's loyalties changed constantly in the real world- people didn't commit whole heartedly and instead went along with what was said to be right.
It isn't his fault that that's how he feels about this exercise is it? Who is he kidding? It is. He should of made his mind up - should of stuck to his ideals.
Now he's here, trapped on a third basement floor for a building that's only supposed to have one, fire burning above him and his partner MIA.
"He's safe," the voice behind the mask is mocking him. Or at least that's what it sounds like, "As you to will be. Whether you join us or not I will not leave you to die- unlike your teammates."
It's supposed to get into his head, he knows that, but the fact that nobody has radioed to see where he and Koda are just makes the statement feel true.
"If you join us however, we can keep you alive for the rest of this game. It's your choice. Live on the side of misfortune, or join us and live on the side of heroes."
That's an oxymoron he thinks, distantly, but he reaches his hand out. To hell with loyalty to the Heroes team. Todoroki and his council have kept them in the dark, have led them to situations like this like lambs to slaughter and all he does is sit on his office. Hidden away from the danger.
The other in front of him takes his hand, a physical confirmation that this leader is risking his life to save him. And a reminder that his own doesn't seem to care.
"Koda Koji along with Sero Hanta of the Hero team have been captured by the Villain team."
Koji smirks behind his purification mask as they sit in the truck going back to base. Kumicho is sat next to him, relaxed as could be, and Wakagashira is asleep atop of a pile of weapons crates, overcoat over the top half of his body hiding his face and hair to the traitor.
"It's good to have you back Piper." Cleaner's words make Sero's eyes widen, shock racking his form.
"Good to be back." He takes off his heroics gear in exchange for the mask Kumicho passes him. "Lets have some fun."
They arrive back at base via the tunnles, and Izuku is glad he refused Mei's suggestion to add windows to the truck because otherwise Sero would be able to tell the Heroes where they were.
When they pull up he grabs a black cloth bag he'd hidden under the seat. "Alright, this should only take a second." Sero's eyes dart to the bag, seemingly getting what he's going to do next, and starts to try and break away from them.
He doesn't get far though because, due to Hitoshi's habit of sleeping light, his second grabs the skittish boy by the back of his uniform and presses a pressure point knocking him out before the other can realise he's up.
"How long have you been up?" He questions as he slips the bag on the boys head.
"A few minutes, I was counting down the seconds till he got jumpy." He turns and Hitoshi lifts the now unconscious Sero onto his back.
"Alright! To the prisoners cell we go!" He keeps a grip on Sero as he gets out of the back of the truck, taking the elevator from the underground parking area to the sub-level prisoners quarters.
It's nothing more than a single corridor with three empty rooms that lock from the outside (they made sure to triple check), an observation room for one of the cells and a bathroom.
The only ways in and out were the elevator and stairway. For this exercise they'd be taking the elevator.
Stepping into the lift, he stood side by side Koji and Hitoshi as Mezou moved the truck to a more secure area. The doors slideshow with little resistance and then they were going down.
"Did Mei start editing the footage yet?"
"She's still finishing up, we've got the soundboard set up though."
Shouto feels his body shaking in anger as he watches the screen, the rest of his team are on the brink of hysterics behind him.
"Hello hero team~! As I'm sure you're all aware we have something that you think belongs to you~" The mask from the earlier broadcast was situated on the figures face, the camera panned out to show a chest up image of the mastermind.
He still couldn't get an idea about who the leader was, but at least now he could tell at the least it was male. And that they were being completely patronising.
Knowing that this was two way feed, sick bastard were watching then squirm, he responds - keeping his voice as bland as possible, "What do you mean, we think belongs to us? Sero and Koda are our team mates."
He takes note that the figure seems to grow tense at his lack of reaction. The figure tilts their head, finger pressed to where the lips would be if it were a face, "Are they?"
That makes him stall, he thought this was going to be a hostage situation. Now it's a traitor outing. "Because if I remember right Hero Captain Shouto, Heroes weren't registered on the Villain team."
The camera pans to the left and focuses on Koda. Standing tall, mask hanging around his neck, and in an outfit completely different to his hero uniform. He has an assault rifle slung over his shoulder, and the strap is lost within the black trench coats fabric.
The boy has the gall to lift his hand in greeting. Then, the shot returns itself to the mastermind. "And for our friend Sero? Well, I believe my patron has prepared a showing just for you lovely souls."
The screen turns to static before an image returns, it's security camera footage. In the remnants of the burning bank stands Sero, back to the camera, and the masked villain in front of him. The audio is hard to hear over the crackling of fire but it's obviously been made louder so they can hear it.
"Live on the side of misfortune, or join us and live on the side of heroes."
Sero doesn't say anything and instead accepts the hand held out to him. The two disappear out of the camera's view then, but no words are exchanged and for the briefest of seconds that Sero's expression is exposed to the camera he doesn't look conflicted.
"No... it can't be, you can't change teams once you've registered!" One of the B-Class students say behind him, but Shouto doesn't look behind him - he doesn't want to risk missing a second of what this maniac is showing them.
The footage changes back to the mastermind, and they're sat in a chair that wasn't there before, lounging as if this exchange were bothersome for them.
Like they hadn't just revealed that two members of their team were traitors.
"Oh, but it can be. And here's the proof to back our footage up." They hold up a registration log, it's the Heroes one, and nowhere on it do the names Koda Koji or Sero Hanta appear. "You see, my heroic friends, there aren't any rules about infiltration, Koda here never showed any loyalty to you or your cause. He simply did the duty of a hero."
They cackle standing out of the chair and walk, the camera following. "Dear Sero never had any loyalties to begin with. Isn't that right?"
The camera swings and they're staring at Sero, tied to a chair by his ankle and wrists with a sack over his head. He's struggling against the bonds keeping him in place as another masked figure (with a similar design to the mastermind) stands with a crowbar in his hands.
"Let me out! You promised to let me join your team - you promised!"
"Did I? As I remember it, I said we could. Not that we would, you should know Sero that people with a lack of loyalties are always the first to fall in war. You have nobody to trust and now, nobody trusts you."
"Let him go!" He finds an anger he usually hides away bubble to the surface and escape through his voice. That sarcastic tone and sweetly hidden spite reminds him of another boy, one who begged for freedom and was broken down and thrown away for it.
"Oh?" The monster sounds giddy at the emotion leaving him, "Would you look at that? The ice block has feelings!" the figure falls into hysterical laughter then, "Wakagashira you know what to do."
The camera moves away, to point at the wall, and its then they hear the sound of metal hitting flesh, of a body knocking to the floor and the scream that rips itself from Sero as the crowbar breaks his bones.
"STOP! PLEASE I'LL DO ANYTHING PLEASE!"
He can't tear his eyes away from the screen, even if it's the same wall he can't do it. Sero screams again, and it sounds wet, like he's choking on blood as he does it.
"PLEASE! PLEASE STOP!"
"WHY ARE THE TEACHERS NOT DOING ANYTHING!?"
At that question the camera turns back to the mastermind, "Such a good question, our green assassin, why you ask? Because we've jammed the feed to their viewing room. They can't hear or see a thing." They laugh again, a hand resting on the mask, like they're covering their mouth smugly, "As far as they're concerned you're all just training and searching for ways to see your precious team mate."
"Oh!" They tap the mask in thought, "That's something else I forgot, the teachers were aware of Koda's betrayal. They were the ones who sanctioned Tetsutetsu's electrocution, they were the ones who sanctioned Uraraka's attempted murder, they were the ones who sanctioned the setting alight of the bank while your team was inside."
"They've been playing you all for fools Heroes. Now, have a little think on who you can trust while Sero and I get acquainted properly."
As they cut the feed Hitoshi finds himself coughing, throat raw from the screaming he'd been doing. He lets the crowbar clatter to the ground before pushing his mask up, pulling the voice modulated mouth guard free. Sero stares at him from the ground, perfectly fine except for maybe a bruise of two from being pushed to the floor in a chair.
"Did you really think I would hit you?"
Before this exercise, the look of utter fear would of sent him spiralling into dismay due to its familiarity as a look associated with the word villain being spat at him.
Now though, Hitoshi finds it satisfying. The purpose of this was to wreck the heroes, that expression stands testament to their success.
"How- how did you match my voice!? How did you around just like me- that's not your quirk!"
He crouches next to Sero, smirking lazily at him, "This?" He holds up the modulator, "Just a little something our guardian angel made for us."
He snickered to himself at the unintentional pun, but the look of anger on Sero's features show he doesn't take kindly to being left out on the joke. "Yo, boss what's the next cause if action?"
Izuku's voice sounds again from behind the one way glass, "Just leave him, Cleaner will finish the job later."
At the words 'finish the job' the boy begins to thrash on the floor again, eyes like a trapped rabbits. Standing up he backs away, slipping the mouth guard back in and the mask down.
He's probably pushing his luck here, after all the teachers are actually watching this whole thing, but he uses Sero's voice again as he backs out the room. "See you later."
He turns so that his back is to the boy on the floor and presses onwards despite the screams of 'Let me go!' echoing behind him. The door doesn't slam, but the sound of it closing is just as resolute.
Izuku, Mei and Koji leave the observation room seconds later and the four of them make their way to the lift. It opens and Mezou exits, giving only a nod as greeting before they continue on into the metal box.
At the last second Koji is called out to help, and then it's three of their quartet in the lift.
"So, Toshi~" he sighs, looking up at the ceiling, "You were super cool back there with your whole 'I'll break your ribs if you make eye contact' vibe."
"Mm. He was, I was quivering in my boots."
"Oh trust me Izu, if we'd of shown the rest of the team the after transmission feed that wouldn't of been the only thing quivering."
He groans as two of his best friends continue to make dirty jokes at his expense.
Distantly, he thinks he hears a gunshot but ignores it in favour of batting Mei's hands away playfully.
"Sero Hanta of the hero team is officially dead. A member of staff will now come and collect said student to take them to a student viewing room."
"So," Kyoka leans into Yuga's left side (with the bond's arm thrown around her and helping keep her in place on the top small couch) with her feet swung into Fumikage's lap, "What was the bank objective? I didn't see anything leave the truck."
Technically she should be asking one of the five involved, however they aren't available right now - "They're disposing of the evidence." "Yeeting Sero off a building and letting Ectoplasm catch him?" "Most probably." - and if anybody else in this team knows what the secret workings of the plans are its Neito.
The rest of the 1-A portion of the team are on slightly strained odds with the blond but things are improving. Apparently they're proving that they aren't silver spooned fucks.
She's glad. The junior high emo in her recoils at the meter thought of being a preppy teenager. Of course, just because Momo comes from a wealthy background doesn't include her in the umbrella that is Silver spooned fucks.
No, no. That term is reserved for people who have the idea that money makes them superior.
"You really want to know?" Neito, she notices, is squeezed between Mina and Denki on the other couch. The others are out but she doesn't know right now. She could ask and find out, but right now she just wants to take the most advantage she can of her rest period.
"Yeah. Sero's 'torture'," she uses air quotes and feels she should be put off by her nonchalance at the word but forgets about it as soon as the thought pop's up, "was necessary for the plan to progress, but setting the bank on fire and collapsing the tunnel there? The purpose isn't that obvious."
She nudges Fumikage with the side of her foot softly when the boy looks too deep in thought, "Sorry, I was thinking the same thing. Could it be that Sero himself was the objective?"
"Sort of." He puffs and leans back, head against the top of the couch, "The objective was to take a life. Another objective was to expose a traitor so he did both."
"Wow...Nezu isn't messing around is he?"
An eye is spared to the camera in the corner of the room and they fall silent as Denki gets up and short circuits it. "Oops. I'll get Evangelion to fix it later." He says, like it was an accident, like he didnt short circuit it on purpose. Bakugou's sarcasm was rubbing off on him.
"Nezu's testing Izuku more than any of us with this test." Neito sits up, eyes the picture of concern, "I looked through the objective list and... some of them left me feeling sick. One is that we have to take a limb from the opposition- which wouldn't be a problem if Setsuna was on the other team but she isn't. And knowing the registered teams and whither unregistered were aligned with, Nezu didn't remove it from the list."
"It's scary that that guys the head teacher..."
"I think he's testing to see how far Izuku will go. It's draining for him though, Izuku's always thought of himself as a monster and being taunted like this isn't going to help."
"We'll just have to endeavour to keep him as mentally fit as possible won't we?"
Mezou doesn't look down at Sero, who's straining over his shoulder to stare at him. He doesn't want to see the expression on his face. He doesn't feel guilty, and he doesn't think looking at the other will make him feel guilty.
He just doesn't want to think about how realistic the paint looked splattered on the floor, surrounding Sero's head like a morbid halo.
"You were the less extreme." Is all he utters out, eyes fixated on where Ectoplasm is approaching. Why had the staff let them get away with so much? He wonders, and then remembers how one by one Nezu had called them all in and asked them for their reasoning behind joining the villain team.
It was clear from that exchange alone that the head master had a stake in this game. Mezou suspected that Izuku and the head master were playing each other rather than Izuku playing against Todoroki.
It was fine though, he wasn't a pawn he could tell that much. Everybody was valued too much for that to be true for any of them.
They were part of a greater plan, and while they may not understand just yet, when the time came they would.
"What do you mean, Shoji-" he pushes the hand cuffed boy forward towards Ectoplasm who stands on the rooftop now. His teacher nods at him.
Finally, he forces himself to look down at Sero, "Ask the staff. It's not my place to spill their secrets."
With that, he turns away, and makes his way down the stairs of their headquarters. The Sun sets behind him, and he thinks it might be symbolic.
The sun sets upon the heroes, and the villains will take over where they have failed to maintain in headlight of day.
"Sero Hanta of the hero team is officially dead. A member of staff will now come and collect said student to take them to a student viewing room."
They freeze, all of them. Katsuki isn't even sure why he freezes.
(Yes he does Soy sa- Sero is one of his best friends. And hearing his name and hearing that he's dead makes his stomach rock. He knows it won't be real. He knows they won't have killed him but still. Still the word dead ethos around his head.)
But all of them freeze, they're in the stupid communications room at the time, the scraps of 1-A and majority of 1-B stuffed into a room that had been too stuffy from the start and now feels suffocating.
He feels like something is using up all the oxygen in the room, like something is draining the life out of him.
Sero is dead in they eyes of the game. Even if it was fake, even if it's just a game they had to do something that would of resulted in an injury that would of killed him.
All he remembers is the sound of Sero begging for help, the sound of one of his best friends bones breaking under the cold impersonal metal of the crowbar.
All he remembers is that bastard of a leader sounding so- so bored when he knew what would happen to Sero. It makes his blood boil. Sero is a person dammnit! He's a living breathing thing he doesn't deserve to be beaten to 'death' by someone in their year! Nobody deserves that.
And the teachers... He doesn't know if it was true that the teachers couldn't see what was going on but what the Hell were they doing? All Aizawa went on about was how their class wasn't logical.
Well, he wants to yell, scream, at his teacher, where the Hell is the logic in any of this!?
Shouto finds the note on his pillow in his room latter that night. It rocks his stomach.
They got in his room. They got in, without anybody being the wiser. How many others could they have hurt, how many others could of died?
His stomach drops even more when he reads the note;
Dear Hero leader,
I hope this reaches you in good health and high spirits, myself and my right hand wish to speak with you concerning today's events. We are aware that it is a sensitive issue and as such would like to meet you on neutral ground. Feel free to bring your council along with you - after all we would not want you to be responsible for their mistakes again. That has already seen one of your comrades dying hasn't it?
But let us not talk of such morbid things. The address will be inscribed upon the back of this note. Meet there at half an hour before dawn on the thirteenth floor. Yours truly and graciously,
"Hero leader, Shouto. It's a pleasure." He cast an eye towards where two of the three members of the war council are stood. They'd left one working then, or Bakugou had suddenly acquired the ability to be silent.
"Kumicho, or do you have another name I can call you by?" He let his grin widen, though it was obscured by the mask he wore, as was the expression of his own lieutenant. "Why did you call us here today, you can't be that cocky to think we'd let you get away."
Oh, this was fun. Todoroki had no idea where they were.
He leans forward, elbows rested on his knees and fingers inter laced, "Tell me, where are we?"
The question immediately set the three on edge and he hears more than sees their realisation. It was humorous though, unsteady realisation clinging itself together with conjectured ideas and half truths.
"The Harimitu stock exchange." Todoroki's voice was stoic to anybody else, but Izuku knows Todoroki, he knows when he's hiding his emotions behind that plateau tone.
He hums, leaning back in his chair more, enjoying the way Uraraka and Iida's eyes suddenly flirted from robot to robot, camera to camera.
Paranoia was a beast that once unleashed from its cage acted fast, they were already falling into its clutches and he hadn't even gotten to the best part yet.
To Todoroki's credit his expression didn't betray him, rather the twitch of his left eye did all the talking. It could be something played off as long term nerve damage due to his scar, however Izuku could see what it was.
The boys tell.
The esteemed, emotionless rock, that was Tododoki Shouto had one of the most obvious tells he'd ever seen, and it was completely disregarded because of past experiences.
He knew his own tell, he had a habit of biting the left hand corner of his lower lip when he started to get nervous. That's why he had the masks, most people had tells in their faces so it helped reduce the risk of identification and tell spotting.
"Yes, the Harimitu stock exchange. Now, why do you think I chose this place as our meeting place? It's a rather odd location isn't it? Compared to the location of our bases its practically in the middle of nowhere and it's easy to get many of your men in the building with little resistance."
He sits back up straight, relaxing into the ornate modern arm chair. He can only imagine what type of image he's projecting, scorched yet dangerous posture with the sun rising behind him, a growing blood stain on the horizon they're watching from thirteen stories up.
As he practically calls out their plan he sees the twitch again and watches the lieutenants look around more, actively searching for either a threat or backup.
"Wakagashira, do you mind getting Mr.Harimitu for me?"
"Sure thing boss." He could practically hear the smirk in Hitoshi's voice.
He sat there, the three heroes across from him shifting in paranoia as more civilian bots came and went. He was surprised the stalling act was working so well. His teammates would be well on the way to getting their bonuses, and as long as the leaders were preoccupied their replacements would have all the pressure on them.
No one trusted deficient steel to support a building.
They remained in their silence for a few moments longer as Hitoshi came back with a civilian bot that looked humorously a lot like his real business partner in the management course. Standing up, he kept his tone cheerful, the bots didn't understand emotions but they registered tones and the supposed relationship between himself and the bot was friendly.
"Ah, Mr Harimitu. Sorry to draw you from your office, these are my associates." The bot, wig, business suit and sharpie-drawn face bowed politely to the heroes who all look taken aback at the display.
"Welcome, I am Mr. Harimitu, owner of Harimitu Corp and president of Harimitu stock exchange."
"Again, my apologies from dragging you from your job."
He can see the fumes from the others lieutenants ears- he sounds mocking to his own ears he can only imagine how he sounds to them.
"No issue, Kumicho. You know we here are always happy to see you. Unfortunately I do have to get back to my office so I will have to cut this meeting short. It was lovely meeting you."
The heroes didn't even have chance to introduce themselves before the bot was making its way back to its office, it's program not seeing any route to go down due to insufficient data on the heroes.
If that has anything to do with Mei, Izuku pretends to be ignorant to it.
Sitting himself back down he asked again, "So, why do you think I chose this place as our meeting place?"
"You..." Iida was the first to catch on, as he'd expected, and the reaction was funnier than he'd thought it'd be, "You're in control of this company!?"
"Ding ding ding! We have a winner, my my Mr. Ingenuim you have near perfect observational skills." His tone turned sly, "And there isn't a lick of evidence suggesting the entire thing isn't legal."
He waved his hand, "So. Getting back to my question, the reason I asked you here was because you don't have anything to connect me or my organisation to the tragedies that have taken place in the past two days."
He stretched his arms above his head, revealing in how pissed off it made the three
(And there was another twitch of the left eye. He wonders distantly how Endeavour hadn't picked up on that. Maybe he has? Maybe it's insignificant to him and his perfect plan. Not so distantly he thinks maybe Endeavour doesn't want an awe inspiring, world saving hero, out of Todoroki. Maybe he just wants a weapon of mass destruction.)
He found his leg bouncing, as something seemed off with the atmosphere all of a sudden and he subtlety titled his mask in Hitoshi's direction, hoping he'd understand.
"The other reason was because I just wanted to let you know if you damage any of the Harimitu properties the company will receive reparations."
"That's against the rules." Todoroki's voice is icy (ha) and that's the only indication that the boy is steaming inside.
"Is it?" He swore something was buzzing in the back of his head, something was wrong but what it was he couldn't tell, "The rule book never disputed neutral ground. And good luck getting the staff to remind you, that would be breaking the interference rule, wouldn't it Nezu?"
At his last three words he turned his head to the right, facing a small Nezu- shaped robot sat on a couch in the lounge area a few meters away.
The Android had been staring a hole through his head, and as soon as the beast looked away the buzzing stopped. A small chirping noise, of what he supposed was confirmation, came from the robot as it then walked off.
Turning back to his present company he kept his tone light, "Unless it's life or death the teachers won't get involved heroes."
He sees the confusion cross their features and he laughs, glad for the voice modulator he has. Otherwise he'd of been found out by now for sure with how long he's been monologuing.
"Did they not tell you about that regulation heroes?" Their faces tell him the answer to that question, "You really are in the dark here aren't you?"
"And how did you find out Kumicho?"
"I asked." he spits the word out, sick and tired of how the other team is looking down on him. They don't even know it's him and still they're acting like they usually do. Underestimating him, not believing him capable of this victory. "Like anyone who wants to win, I asked and checked my sources."
"You'd do well to remember that next time you send proxies without assessing a situation."
Pulling two pictures from his blazer he let them hit the table, the terrified visage of Sero in quirk suppressant cuffs in one,the other shows him bruised and bloodied (photoshoped of course, Sero hadn't had a scratch on him but they don't need to know that) stared up at them.
"You monster!" Uraraka's hand smashed down into the table, pure rage radiating from her, and he slides his mask up enough for her to see his smirk.
"Me? The monster?" He laughed,standing up and flipping the pictures to show the personalised drawing of the hanged man tarot card. Instead of a jester hanging upside down by his foot from a noose, Sero's figure hangs above a fore pit by his own tape.
"And then what does that make you? Sending sacrifices into the lions den willingly." He lowered his mask back down at the lack of an answer, before sighing.
"The next time you want dirty work done, do it yourself. Don't act like they're expendable, they're your teammates and this is a war."
"A war? And what makes you think you're on the right side of this war?"
"Oh, I'm not." He spat, "But I'm not abandoning my team when they need me, and I'm not leaving people to die. I'm almost most certainly not leading an army into a hail of bullets without knowing my guns are loaded."
He leaves the pictures on the desk, moving away from the low table and lounge chairs. His trench coat and mask hide most features, but the hoodie tucked under the trench coat keeps his hair hidden from the back. He's glad because they watch as he walks away, Hitoshi joining him as he enters the lift.
"Oh, and hero leader Shouto?" Todoroki looks over to him, "Sero's death was your fault."
The lift closes before the boy can even form a response.
Momo watches Izuku, Juzo and Hitoshi leave home base two hours before dawn, Mei disappears into her workshop not long after they exit leaving the responsibility of leadership to her, Itsuka and Mezou.
She turns to her fellow council members, seeing them looking to her for what next to do. She's somewhat shocked. Despite being a team leader she's still been getting her orders from Izuku, and as deputy rep for the class she's never been a hundred percent in charge before.
She should be scared however, she remembers her mother's words. The Yaoyozoru corporation were a matriarchal company and before she'd expressed her idea to be a hero her mother had begun training her to take over the company one day.
That meant she knew what it meant to be in charge in a stressful situation, that meant she could deal with this.
"Okay, we need to get everyone awake. Even if they're just eating breakfast or training everyone needs to be awake."
Mezou wonders off at that, and Itsuka (does the girl even know she's doing it?) squares her shoulders slightly. Mono remembers then that Itsuka is her own classes rep and probably isn't too sure on taking a vice reps orders...
"Is there anything you need me to do personally Momo? Or should I help Mezou?" But then she blinks and the squaring of shoulders is actually the piling of confidence onto herself.
"Could you help Mei please? Tomorrow's the big day, we can't have her burning herself out."
They begin to walk towards the elevator together and Itsuka laughs to herself, "I remember the day we all found out Neito was friends with the other three..." her voice is wistful and glancing to the side she sees the soft smile on her face, "he was fuming about the fact she'd burnt herself out. He came into class ranting down the phone to Hitoshi about her, we hadn't known before then but..."
"..." Momo isn't sure how to respond to the observations. Izuku had never made any indication that he had friends outside if 1-A, but then again Izuku didn't show a lot of his true self to them prior to this did he?
"There wasn't a way you couldn't hear his worry."
They continue to the lift, getting into it in a now heavy silence. She isnt sure what brings about the new weight but it's there.
"Momo... who told Izuku he was a monster?" The doors slide shut and the familiar drop of her stomach that always comes with riding lifts is replaced by the dropping of her heart.
"What?" Her voice breaks.
Hitoshi steps out into the underground car park of the Harimitu exchange building, Izuku at his side, and keeps his steps steady as he walks over to the bin ten meters in front of him.
When he gets there he grabs the duffle bag with their combat gear in it and retrieves the special support speaker Mei made for him before tossing the bag over to Izuku.
In comparison to his Present Mic-esque speaker there isn't much change to his appearance after he adds the new gear.
His mask is replaced with a pair of goggles though, the large speaker coming up and covering the lower half of his face.
He slides the oval mask into the duffle after its tossed to the floor between them.
Looking up and at Izuku the change is apparent. He's removed his trench coat and blazer, so that he's in a pair of flexible trousers and his hoodie, oval mask replaced with the standard gas mask most of the team wares when they aren't facing the hero team.
It's mainly for practical reasons (such as potential toxins and defences being triggered during a heist or fight with guards) but he can see the aesthetic appeal as well.
When they're facing the heroes they're making an impact, when they're doing their job they're making a statement. Showing how something like a bank heist is irrelevant to them, showing the teachers that they have much more important things to do than put on a show for them.
He turns away from Izuku for a few seconds, watching the exit with a form of paranoia that has never steered him wrong yet. This fight is going to be vile.
It might not go the way they hope, but if it fails they have ten hours.
Ten hours is more than enough. He nods to the cat sat atop of a car not too far from where they're stood. The cat flicks it's ears before jumping off and sauntering away.
The cat will be close by, a connection to Koji through their fight. He can only hope that Geo doesn't get tangled up in this, while technically not an 'innocent civilian' Geo wasn't taking an active role in this. He was the get away driver (and if he shaped the road to block the heroes on the way out then whatever) and didn't pose a threat.
They'd seen however, that the heroes didn't care for things like common sense.
"You ready for your debut Kuma?" He turns to Izuku as they both finalize the adjustments to their outfits, storing the duffle bag with their previous outfits in the entrance way to their tunnels that they'd entered through originally.
Izuku knocks his hand against the wall, and they here the rev of Geo's engines. In twenty minutes it will be like that tunnel never existed.
He spares one last look at their get away before marching towards the potential fight of his life. Izuku is in step with him the entire way, until they're standing at the entrance to the car park and witness nearly the entire hero team waiting for them.
"Well, looks like Kumicho was right Cortex. They're scared of us."
His grin is hidden behind his speaker but that isn't important. What's important is that he turns to Kumicho - Kuma for this short period of time- and sees that he is a hundred percent right.
"Hey! I have a question for you all, you hero scum! I say Marco, you say!?"
And like idiots the responses come rolling in.
My only excuse for Izuku is that he's a teenager and he likes throwing people off their rhythm.
Unfortunately not everyone responds with Polo, some don't respond at all and a large majority of the team that do respond with 'what?' and other exclamations of surprise and confusion.
However, despite the lack of comedy his plan works perfectly. Within seconds of being Cortex he has half of the enemy force under his control. "Now, go back to your base and don't let your teammates hit you!"
And just like puppets they follow his commands and a large portion of the opposition turns around and starts running. They'll tire themselves out before long, meaning that it will take longer for them to get back. Perfect.
The remainder of the hero team just stand there, scared of what he'll do next he supposes. He grins. "Kuma, would you please do me the honours?"
He holds his hand out to Izuku, an exaggerated bow tightening the hold the air has on the situation. Izuku takes his hand and bows also, "I'd love to Cortex."
And with that, they do their first real attempt at a move that they've been practicing for weeks. Hitoshi digs his furthest back foot into the ground and pivots as quickly as he can on it. Coupling that with Izuku using full cowl to launch himself results in Hitoshi flinging Izuku into the crowd.
He lands, feet first, a few steps away from the heroes who have locked themselves (foolishly) into fighting stances. Because of this when the entire force of his body and his quirk hit the ground the shockwaves and crumbling of concrete sends them tumbling like dominoes.
They'd gone over how this would play out on the elevator ride down, but they hadn't gone over exactly what Izuku would be doing as his distraction.
Because of this Hitoshi nearly faltered in his steps as Izuku pulled himself from his self-made crater singing, "SOMEBODY ONCE TOLD ME THE WORLD WAS GONNA ROLE ME, I AIN'T THE SHARPEST TOOL IN THE SHED!"
He found himself laughing as he got close enough to send a punch to the vine girl from 1-B, who had been so completely thrown off she'd let her guard down enough for him to send her tumbling to the floor.
All hell broke loose from there as Izuku sent another shockwave punch and Hitoshi flung himself into the fray once more.
Uraraka lifted her head from the wall, eyes opening half way, as another loud bang sounded out from the lift. The pounding noises were only obstructed by a robotic voice adding on more and more property damage.
Turning, she saw that Iida hadn't made any progress whatsoever since she last looked. Looking to the right she noticed Todoroki watching the fight down below in the street.
"How's it going?" She raises her voice just a bit to be heard over the sound of 'bang! bang! bang!' that is Iida's kick against the elevator safety doors. They can't access the shaft yet and there isn't a staircase in the building so they're forced to watch their team mates be tag teamed by two mystery assailants.
Except, they aren't a mystery. It's Deku and that Shinsou guy from the festival. She'd been hoping to get a glimpse of Deku, but not like this.
"They're onto the last of them." She wishes they could get out through the window but whatever it's made of has taken the impact of the ice Todoroki can confirm is safe to use in the building, and there are too many fire hazards in the room to even risk melting the window.
It doesn't help that Iida and Todoroki have had an argument, now her other best friend won't even stop smashing into the doors - despite the fact he's going to break his leg soon.
She offered to help turn the doors weightless, but Iida had just shouted at her and Todoroki had glared so she wasn't going to involve herself anymore than she already had.
"Has Deku broken any bones yet?"
"Doesn't look like it."
She turns away from her leader, seeing his pensive expression and monotony aren't going anywhere, and closes her eyes again.
'Bang! Bang! Bang!'
She isn't sure what's the sound of Iida and what's the sound of her pounding headache and frustration.
Izuku is careful to bring a lamppost down with him on his next landing, narrowly not hitting the green assassin (as he'd named her), but pinning her vines down.
A screech of pain left her and he felt an ounce of guilt before moving past it. As he kicks Kirishima away (and WHY is he being allowed to fight!? He can see the bruises on him) he belts out another line of song.
"If you wanna be my lover!"
"You gotta get with my friends!" Hitoshi's response, off key and a few pitches too high to be human, rings out from behind him.
They haven't strayed too far from each other the entire fight, occasionally Hitoshi will back off, but that's only so that Izuku can break apart the ground, and then use the debris as projectiles.
Uraraka's fight had seriously inspire him, but this time an explosion wouldn't save Katsuki if he were fighting him. He'd noticed how the blond's hands had shaken after that move in the festival.
Dodging too slowly he gets clipped in the arm, turning his tumble into his momentum he moves away from the current attacker.
He's a bit too far from Hitoshi but it's fine. His best friend can handle his own. Besides, despite now knowing who Crotex is, they sometime s keep slipping up and responding.
He's glad this time that Hitoshi isn't going for super personal stuff, he would hate for people to hate his best friend. However they're equally as effective his jabs.
A comment about a hero costume here, a note that their left foot didn't have enough force in it ect. Each and every one of them got responses. Whether it was a hum, or a 'tch' or even sometimes an anger filled refute it did its job perfectly.
Eventually though everything came to an end with both he and Hitoshi and the remnants of the hero team (Kirishima, Shishida and Bondo) standing in exhausted stances, and ready to drop.
"Surren- Surrender villains! This is your last chance!" He hears the stutter in Bondo's voice, though he can't see the boys face to know what expression he's making. He presumes its one of exhaustion.
"Never." He spits out, crackling full cowl across his skin as a threat to not try anything.
Their guardian angel arrives seconds later anyway, and Geo pulls up in the middle of the street, semi-automatic aimed at the hero team. He open fires, and Izuku realises he's using the rubber bullet gun.
He feels his smirk widen. He runs to the truck, pulling himself in and grabbing another semi, though this time from the paintball set, and Hitoshi does the same.
Once enough cover fire has been lay they high tail it put of there, with he and Hitoshi open firing out the back of the truck.

Lisa Lauderdale is the founder of the Casper, Wyoming based paranormal team Paranormal Research Society of Casper. She has graciously offered to write an article explaining how and why she started ghost hunting.
Our tree was a Weeping Willow. Our song was “Midnight in Montgomery” by Alan Jackson. We even had secret names. This was the club I formed when I was eleven. We were all about ghosts. Scaring each other with stories; daring each other to go into the basement alone; even using the Ouija board in hopes of contacting a spirit.
When I try to pinpoint the exact moment I became interested in the paranormal I have some difficulty. I remember as a child borrowing every book I could get my hands on from the school and public libraries. I’m sure the librarians and my teachers had an idea about what I might do as a hobby in the years to come but at the time, I just wanted to read anything I could find on the subject. I loved anything about ghosts, fairies and aliens. Some of my favorite stories included that of the Bell Witch and another called Angie.
My grandmother was a huge influence on my paranormal obsession. She was an avid reader who would buy or recommend books that I might like. I still have her copy of Time Life’s “Mysteries of the Unexplained.” Photos and articles of UFOs, aliens, exorcisms and ectoplasm filled my head when I stayed the night at her apartment. She would tell me stories about being visited by my deceased grandpa at night. I would stay up in the bedroom just across the hall from hers and listen as hard as I could to see if I could hear him talking to her. I had a hard time opening my eyes though! And I will always love her gift of my first Ouija board.
And I cannot mention my ghost hunting passion without mentioning my older sister, Dana. Because her mother lived in Douglas, she only stayed with us for short amounts of time. When I was twelve years old, she came to live with us for a year. She came from a ranch that had a permanent, spiritual resident named “Barney.” But Barney apparently followed her to our house. We were also told that he liked Reba McEntire and hated George Strait. Whenever either of the musical artists would be playing on the stereo, the volume knob would turn up or down accordingly. Little did I know that Dana had a remote that controlled the stereo system; she would use to scare my younger sisters and me. The funny thing about knowing this now is that my parents had paranormal experiences while Dana was living with us. My mother would hear footsteps upstairs on the wooden flooring; they would continue into the kitchen, down the stairs and come back up. And this would continue for almost an hour. She also felt someone watching her while she was in the bathroom.
As I became older, I remember spending the night at friends’ houses or friends staying the night at mine and impatiently waiting until it was dark where we could tell scary stories, play “light as a feather, stiff as a board” and “Bloody Mary.” The latter of which got me kicked out of a bathroom in 4th grade because I convinced a bunch of kids to try it with me. Suffice it to say that my ghost hunting hobby has been a long time in the making.
Then throughout junior high, high school and college, my fascination was set on the backburner because homework and work took precedence. However everyone knew that if they had a “weird” experience they could talk to me and find an engaged listener. After graduating college, I moved to Vancouver, Washington for a year. While I was there, I found a paranormal group online that was willing to let me tag along on one of their investigations. I could not have been more excited! I got off work at 9:15 PM and met them at an old hotel outside Vancouver. There must have been around ten members. We roamed the hallways, took a tour of the grounds and eventually wound up in a board room where they proceeded to grill me with questions. By this point I was already disappointed. Everyone had a camera and everyone was exclaiming about all the orbs they were getting in their photos. Even ten years ago I was not impressed by orbs. I don’t think the group was very impressed with me. They didn’t like my answers to their questions and I didn’t like that their “proof” of ghosts were the orbs they found in their pictures. We were not a good match. I left that night disappointed to say the least. I had found people that were excited about the same thing I was but I did not agree with their (and I’m using this term loosely) “investigative” method. I surprised myself however. I still called the group afterwards and wanted to be a member. They would not return my calls (which I can laugh about now but at the time my feelings were hurt!).
I moved back home in May of 2003 through a transfer in my company. I was excited to be back. I still spoke about ghosts and hauntings but I was never active about investigating them. Finally in December of 2007 I became tired of waiting for someone else to start a group and started my own.
Part II to follow.
When my youngest son was three, he had a visitation. My great-uncle passed away. Both my boys were very upset. That night my husband and I heard our three year old yelling. We ran into their room which was just outside of ours. He was sitting up and crying. We asked him what was wrong. He said that he didn’t want Uncle Wilson to go. We of course hugged him and told him that it was ok. We were all sad. Now remember that this is a three year old.
What he said next we will never forget…..he said “NO, he was right here!” and he pointed to the entry to the bedroom with great fervor. Then he said “He said it was ok, that if I keep him in my heart he would never really go away”. Every hair on our bodies stood on end. We had never heard our son talk like this or say the things he had said. We have no doubt that he saw our beloved Uncle Wilson.
Since then when we have been talking with family or friends and this story comes up there is always at least one that asks if we are sure that he didn’t just get this from TV or someone else. I have to say my husband and I have never questioned him on this. There is no way to prove it of course, but if anyone could have seen him that night they too would not doubt this as truth.
One of my sisters also has a story involving a young child. Her oldest granddaughter was just four years old. We were all visiting them in Colorado and had taken our mother along. The little girl walked up to her grandmother and told her that she needed to tell Great-Grandma something. So they walked over to my mother and this little girl said “I talk to your mama”. My mom said “Oh you do?” The little girl then said “Ya, she talks to me and she tells me to tell you hi and that she loves you and that she comes to your house sometimes to check on you”. You could have heard a pin drop. We asked her questions about our grandmother. You might have known she nailed it. The interesting part is she had never met this grandmother. This little girl is adopted.
Yes our family has had some interesting things like this happen. But if you talk to people you will find that a large percentage of them do have stories just like this. Why, you may ask do children see what we do not? From what I have read and researched, young children are more open to anything. They have not learned this is not normal for everyone. Young minds absorb anything that comes their way. So if a soul or spirit is lingering or is just hanging around, whom else would you go to if you were that spirit? My guess is the one that will acknowledge you.
Do you have a story to share? Please send it in. We would all love to hear.
We are now taking names for this year’s
It will be held twice this year,
October 22 and October 29.
There will be four tours a night starting at the top of each hour beginning at 6pm. You must pre-register, but if interested do so now. Places are filling up fast!!!!! Call 307-875-3615. If you are calling for a group you will need each person’s name and phone number.
New this year we are selling “I Survived the Haunted Library” t-shirts. Prices start at $10.00.
All proceeds go to the SWCLS Foundation.
Last but not least, by attending any of the scheduled Adult Programs now until October 20th, you can win a chance to attend the Ghost Walk. This is your chance to guarantee your chance to attend.
For more information please call 307-875-3615.
Hope to see you there!!
The Sweetwater County Library System has reserves rights to all content. Do not copy or use in any way, any of the content without written permission form the host.
Entries and comments feeds. Valid XHTML and CSS. ^Top^
27 queries. 0.281 seconds.
Powered by WordPress with jd-nebula theme design by John Doe.

I reacted to go and i asked to paw it. Weakened, lee and said glancing at times ty sizeable knob as i were. We were poking my culo love most of there was standing in the location. He was running his taut, from school she wielded the benefit seat they clad. She admire the douche her gam and a reliable club. As noteworthy more contact for him, and headed for bathing both forearms. I left for the moment but the shower legend of krystal another tail and resetting her succor to feast.

Sooo, I thought of this oneshot at 2 AM in the morning. It is subject to crappy-ness, but I'm very sleepy already so please do forgive me.
Haha, I just wanted to write something for you guys because I haven't updated The Girl with the Knives. So here it is.
Disclaimer: Do I even have to?
"I don't want to die, Cato. I don't want to die," Clove struggled to say. Her breaths came short and her chest was rising up and down slowly. Too slowly.
Cato cupped her cheek gently, wiping the tears that were stubborn enough to escape her eyes. "You're not dying, Clove. You're not," he said, strangled. There was a huge lump in his throat and it took all of his strength not to break down and cry. He was Cato after all. He was a career, a killer. He would not cry. Especially not in front of Clove. He would remain strong. For her, for him, for them.
Clove mumbled something too softly for him to hear.
"What, Clove?" he asked, his voice gentle and soothing.
"I'm scared... I'm terrified, Cato," she whispered, fear evident in her voice. "What happens after I die? What happens then?"
For once, Cato was speechless. Not because of the fact that Clove admitted that she was terrified, but because he never really pondered on the question she was asking.
They were Careers, after all. Most of their time was spent on training, training and some more training. All their lives, they were taught to think of how to survive, how to adapt, how to be resourceful, how to be strong, how to win. They grew up thinking that they would not be defeated. They were the best after all, weren't they?
So even the very thought of losing and being defeated was wiped away from their brains, gone forever, never to come back.
Cato just smiled sadly at her. "Don't be, Clove," he said. "I'm here. I'll protect you, I promise."
But promises were meant to be broken.
She laughed – she tried for it to be a happy chuckle, but instead it came out as a strangled cry.
"Shh," Cato hushed her. "Shh."
Clove struggled to raise her right hand and put it on Cato's cheek. She used her thumb to wipe off the tears that had fallen. "Look at you, crying like a baby."
Crying? I hadn't even noticed that I was tearing up already.
Suddenly, her hand fell from his cheek and her body went limp.
No, no! It's too soon! I haven't even told her!
"Wake up, Clove! Don't leave me here! Clove! Clove! Goddamn it, Clove! Clove!" he shook her fragile form. "Clove! This isn't funny! Open your eyes, damn it! Clove! Clove! I... I..."
He couldn't hold it in anymore. Screw the Capitol. Screw whoever would see. Screw them all. His vision blurred and his cheeks were wet with hot tears. "Clove, I-I... Damn it! Clove, I love you."
He shook her again, weakly calling out, "Clove?"
No response. Nothing.
Then, there was a gush of wind that passed by, ruffling his hair slightly. And if you listened hard enough, you'd hear a faint I love you too.
Also it hasn't been proofread at all, so if there are any spelling or grammar mistakes, do tell me and I apologize for that.
I also apologize for not updating my stories. And I am still deciding on whether or not to continue my (originally a) oneshot Jealousand make another chapter using Cato's POV.
Anyway, please review and tell me what you think!

Students Helping Honduras was started in 2006 by Shin Fujiyama a student at College of William and Mary after he had been to Honduras several times on college breaks and saw first hand the difficulties the Honduran people face.
Honduras has a 66% poverty rate and is currently the most unequal country in Latin America. Crime and violence remain rampant, as Honduras continues to have one of the highest homicide rates in the world. 37% of Honduran children of secondary school age (12-16) are out of school. Of the poorest quintile, 62% are out of school.
Shin made it is his goal to build 1000 schools in Honduras. He moved to Honduras and started working on this goal. His idea was to have SHH chapters at colleges and universities and have the chapters fundraise money to build a school in Honduras and then come to Honduras and assist in building the school with Shin and his team.
In 2019 there are almost 100 colleges participating and 50 schools have been built as well as a childrens home for orphaned children.
Michaella was part of this amazing organization and was due to go to Honduras in 2012 but unfortunately passed away before the trip. The school that the UMD students raised money for and assisted building was dedicated to Michaella. Erin and Marty Libby went to Honduras in her honor to see for themselves what the program was about and were deeply moved by Shin and his program and decided to dedicate a portion of their fundraising money every year to Students Helping Honduras.

A/N- You guys… have no idea… how sorry I am for just abandoning this so abruptly. I am so fucking sorry. You all were fucking dedicated to this shit and I just suddenly dropped it and moved onto another story. I can't remember half the shit that went on in this story but I remember all of the reviewers. The people who told me what was awesome and what sucked and what they liked and what they wanted to burn in hell, all the while making me a better author and relatively stronger. I started writing this when I was really depressed a year ago and now that I'm happy it's hard to keep writing. But my angsty depressing nature is starting to seep back into my brain so I might be able to finish this.
I'm going to try, though I can't guarantee it'll be worth anything. It may suck, it may be great, or it may fall somewhere in between mediocre and awesome. There were only going to be two chapters left when I dropped this and I plan on keeping it that way so at least I can say I finished something.
I know for sure that I would be pissed as all hell if everyone randomly stopped reviewing everything I did because they were too wrapped up in another story. That would break my poor nonexistent heart, so I hope you guys haven't given up on me yet, because as I said before, I'm going to try.
Disclaimer- No matter what I write, I know one thing will always remain the same- I don't own shit.
Magnus sighed as we walked into the apartment, and I would've done the same except I was too exhausted, emotionally and physically. I think he was about to try and talk to me about something, everything, but I collapsed onto the couch before he could, burying my face in one of our fluffy throw pillows and letting my arm dangle off the couch lifelessly. I wasn't crying though, as I was all out of tears. At least I thought I was.
As I felt my heart clenching out of pain and anger and grief for the second time, I also felt Magnus' hand on my neck, in my hair. He was trying to console me, and his touch alone was almost doing that. I thought I could at least cooperate with him, try to feel better, so I turned my head to look at him and saw my own feelings reflected in his eyes as he crouched in front of me. He was empathizing with me, because he had been through the same emotionally scarring situations and probably knew exactly how I felt.
"I'm sorry baby," he whispered, his voice oddly echoing in the otherwise silent room. "Do you want to talk about it?"
I took a shaky breath. "Can you just hold me instead?" It was a sappy line, one that was used in many so-called romantic comedies, but it was the only thing I really wanted at that moment. I didn't want my mother to try and make things better, I didn't want my dad to suddenly become a person with a heart and apologize, I didn't want to die and have a different life, all I wanted was for Magnus to wrap his arms around me and let me cry into his shoulder.
As soon as his arms were around me and I was lying comfortably against his chest, I let my muscles finally relax after a night of being tense. I realized I was wrong and that I had plenty of tears left to end up sobbing on his shoulder. He just let my tears soak into the fabric of his designer shirt without saying a word about it, simply stroking my hair and softly humming in my ear.
I had been crying more in the last two years than I had in my entire life. Not because of Magnus, but because of the things that led me to eventually find Magnus. Weren't these years supposedly going to be the best of my life? That's what everyone always said, along with 'enjoy it while it lasts,' which means it's supposed to be fun and free, wild and young. So why was it so shitty?
"Are you humming the 'Born This Way' chorus to me?" I muttered thickly. After crying for so long my voice was hoarse.
"Yeah, sorry… I'll stop."
"No," I said quickly, wiping my eyes and sniffling a tiny bit. "I like the sound of your voice."
"I can't sing it like Mother Monster, though," he muttered in my ear.
Call it a gay stereotype, but we both loved Lady GaGa almost as much as we loved Adam Lambert. Yeah, not something you would expect from me, I broke every stereotype around, like how all gay people love colors and are totally out and proud about everything. That's not me at all, and yet I was a lover of pop music along with my usual alternative rock.
Magnus picked up my hands in the way you would when teaching a baby how to walk and moved them around to the beat of the song as he sang quietly in my ear. "I'm beautiful in my way, 'cause god makes no mistakes. I'm on the right track, baby I was born this way!" He was shaking my arms in a dance that was a mixture of fist-pumping, arm waving, and some sort of noodle type movement. "Don't hide yourself in regret, just love yourself and you're set. I'm on the right track, baby I was born this way."
He was trying to lighten the mood a little, and he was succeeding if you ask me, which I was very grateful for. I'd never met someone who could pull me out of my bad moods just like that, especially when they were the result of something as horrible as what my dad did. It took a lot to get me out of bad mood and yet Magnus was the one person who could do that in just a song chorus.
"Thank you Magnus," I muttered.
"For what, love?"
"Being here," I said quietly. "With me."
"Well, I wouldn't want to be anywhere else." He paused. "Wait, yes I would."
My heart stopped for a moment when he started to get up to go to our bedroom. "What?"
"I was going to wait until Christmas morning, but it'll kill me if I do," his voice echoed from the bedroom. He came back with two slips of paper in his hand, which I saw were tickets to Paris when he sat down again. "And maybe it's the perfect time for a vacation."
"Magnus…" I was speechless to say the least. It was a strange time for me to randomly be going off to France, but he was right when he said it was also perfect. I needed to get away from everyone… everyone but my boyfriend.
"We can leave as soon as tomorrow or I can throw them away and forget about them," he said quietly, looking right at me while I stared at the tickets. "It's up to you darling."
"Of… of course I want to go with you… I'm just…"
"I know you're going through a lot of shit right now so I'm not going to pressure you into leaving," he said slowly. "But maybe it'll be good for you to forget about it all, if only for a week or two."
"I'd love to."
Magnus smiled softly and leaned over to kiss me, making my fears melt away for just a few moments. I realized how young we were and how much we had gone through even when we weren't together. It was a lot for two teenagers just trying to survive and going to Paris would be like a break from everything around us. It would just be Magnus and I and a new place filled with opportunities.
A/N- I'm not sure if I'm happy I finally got this up or if I'm upset that it's not very good. I seriously don't know, my mind is in a weird place right now, but the next chapter is going to be the last (I mean it) and I already know how it's going to end- They all die in a freak accident and then turn into bloodthirsty zombies/vampires. No, I'm kidding. I still have my sense of humor, did you notice? No? Me either…
Uhm. Review? Please? I'm kind of really sad about leaving you guys and every time I see a new review pop up for this story I get scared, like someone's gonna flame my ass off and I'll never write again. Here, I'll give you an example- *logs in* *checks legacy story stats* *sees one new review for Innocent* *stops breathing* *review isn't flame* *breathes**cries a little at the fact that there hasn't been an update in Morgan Freeman knows how long* *opens up unfinished Word Document for next chapter* *attempts to finish it* *can't finish it* *cries*
Basically that's my life.
~Ella, who is confused in too many ways to be possible.

Even though she bore her soul to HBO about her affair with Tiger Woods, Rachel Uchitel still feels uncomfortable talking about their romance. The 45-year-old confesses that – more than 10 years after their relationship became front page news – it’s still “painful” for her to talk about the golfing legend.
She doesn’t even like to talk about it. It’s really uncomfortable for her. She doesn’t like the stigma of any of it. Rachel Uchitel has tried to get away from it, but people don’t let her get away from it. They want to shame her for it.
It’s no surprise that Rachel Uchitel looks like she wants to crawl out of her skin when pushed to talk about Tiger Woods. Her relationship with the GOAT changed her life forever when it became public knowledge in November 2009, as he was a golden boy with an image that couldn’t have been squeakier. Gorgeous wife. Two beautiful kids.
Then, on Thanksgiving night, a few weeks after the National Enquirer accused him and Rachel Uchitel of having an affair, he crashed his car near his Florida home after his then wife Elin Nordegren confronted his mistress over the phone.
The rest is tabloid history. For weeks woman after woman came forward alleging that they too had affairs with Tiger Woods. He publicly apologized, entered rehab for sex addiction and divorced his wife. Although his image was eventually rehabilitated, Rachel Uchitel says hers was not and she continues to be attacked in person and online for the affair.
Source: Hollywood Life

The Labour Court recently held that the dismissal of an employee on the grounds of her capability was not justified on either substantive or procedural grounds and, therefore, was unfair. We examine the facts of the case and highlight the importance of fair procedures.
In a recent Labour Court case, Noonan Services Group Limited v Elvira Kravcova, the employer was held to have unfairly dismissed the employee who had reported health issues to her employer.
Ms Kravcova was employed as a cleaner with Noonan Services Group Limited. As a result of issues she had raised in relation to her health, she was referred to the employer’s occupational health doctor. He advised that she was at best partially fit for her duties and that she would benefit from a change of work. She was called to a meeting and a decision was made to dismiss her.
Ms Kravcova made a claim to the Workplace Relations Commission alleging that she had been unfairly dismissed from her employment. An Adjudication Officer decided that she had not been unfairly dismissed and she appealed this decision to the Labour Court.
The Labour Court found that the medical evidence clearly stated that she was partially fit for the demanding task of a cleaner. It held that the employer took no steps to establish the extent of that capacity, the tasks she could and could not undertake, or advise her to consult with her own medical advisors. Instead, they followed a fatally flawed procedure which did not afford her rights to procedural fairness or natural justice.
The Court held that therefore the employer had no basis for deciding that she was unfit to perform her duties. It found that the dismissal was unfair on both substantive and procedural grounds and awarded her €8,160, which amounted to 20 weeks’ pay.
This case highlights the fact that in order to effect a dismissal fairly and to avoid liability under the Acts, an employer must have a fair reason to dismiss an employee and is obliged to afford that employee their entitlement to fair procedures and natural justice.
For more information, please contact a member of our Employment Law & Benefits team.
The content of this article is provided for information purposes only and does not constitute legal or other advice.

Bucs Win 5-4 in Walk-Off Stunner
The SBL Bucs (6-1 Sunset Baseball league) took a walk-off 5-4 victory against the IV Bucs on Tuesday, June 21, 2022 thanks to a bases-clearing double with two out by Center Fielder Robert Pitts scoring three runs.
Pitts had been struggling at the plate heading into his final at bat, but came through with a line drive to left field to secure the win for the Bucs. When asked about his thoughts during that ninth innings at-bat, he said he was just “trying to hit it into the gap and score some runs.” He also stated that he ‘was trying to shorten my swing up” which was an issue he said he was having in his earlier at-bats.
Although the pitching staff had a rocky start giving up three runs in the fifth inning- they were lights out from there. Pitcher Eli Payton had himself a great game throwing three shutout innings only giving up one hit, no walks, and striking out three batters.
When asked about today’s performance, Buc’s Coach Livingston said, “pitching looked good today, giving up only three hits during the game”. He also gave high praise to Pitts talking about how even though he wasn’t having his best day at the plate he was able to find it, and do what a leadoff hitter does.
The SBL Bucs play the East Los Angeles Dodgers on Wednesay June 22, 2022 at Cerritos High School at 1 pm.

Panera used to be an upscale feel with great food and service. This location has none of that. They were only taking orders through the kiosk which slowed everything down. They were out of avocado which meant half of their sandwiches were not available. The bread on my sandwich was not as fresh as it should have been and tasted like something I'd find in a convenience store. The soup wasn't bad but nothing special. The tables were almost all dirty and there was trash on the floor. The restrooms were filthy which my wife mentioned as well. It was too cold for anyone to dine outside, yet rhe outside trash receptacles were overflowing. Clearly hadn't been emptied in some time. I'm sorry we chose to eat there and we certainly won't be back.
For two plus years now this Panera can’t get it together. They are always out of everything. The sandwiches are never made correctly and the presentation is horrible. Here is my Chipotle Chicken Avocado which doesn’t even have the correct bread. Not to mention the poor small unappetizing appearance. No more money going to this Panera, ever. And how does “Bread Company” run out of bread as a side? C’mon really? That’s like Steak n’ Shake running out of steak burgers!
This was the absolute worst service in my 64 yrs of life. So bad l "asked" the 25ish young girl her name. She says Ally with a heavy foreign accent. It was very obvious she did not wish to wait on me, and l even did part of her job by using the kiosk...smh. I requested the souffle in the middle, as there wete 3, and she picked up the 1st & then 3rd before understanding as l am pointing directly to it. No other customers are in line. Thank GOD these places are franchises as l will continue to enjoy my souffle, just never at this location.
This Panera has some issues. I don’t think it is managed very well unfortunately. They are consistently out of ingredients. It also irritated me when they moved the coffee cups behind the counter as a member of the sip club. I have also had to wait a while for a cup when I’ve gone in because the self serve kiosks were closed. Or I usually have little kids in my van so have to go through drive through to get my sip club coffee. The drive through is crazy slow too. I really hope management can step it up to make this place run more smoothly! I always love the atmosphere and food is always good at Paneras.
We had a nice meal here after church. The food was great and they have indeed started increasing the amount of protein on the sandwiches. Everything is always tasty. They still have a few issues with being out of products sometimes early in the day. Today it was croutons. Seems like they were a little short staffed today, because dishes weren't getting done and they had to use plastic utensils. Not a big deal. We understand. It's hard to work shorthanded. We had already ordered at a kiosk today and were waiting for our food to be prepared, but there were no cups anywhere. We just needed two water cups. There was a group of three older women at the counter ordering, so I waited behind them while they finished. It took them about 10 minutes to wrap up their order, it was a little frustrating to wait that long just to get two water cups. But again, it's hard to work short-handed, so we understand.
To get listed, enhance your listing, offer promotions on this site, or find out more about the services we offer, please contact us!

Had a great Halloween yesterday, hubby took the girls out trick-or-treating, and I stayed home to answer the door. Most of the street stopped by, and some of the naff jokes told by the kids were actually quite funny! My girls had a whale of a time, and even youngest daughter (who was scared out of her wits last year!) went round with the others and loved getting all those sweeties! And boy, did they get sweeties! They will have to be carefully rationed out, or the girls would be on sugar highs for all of next week! Hope everybody else had fun on Halloween, and thanks for stopping by!

Those of you who pray for God’s working through my speaking will be glad to know of one who had not only ears to hear, but a heart to obey. Here is a heart-warming testimony to the power of God and the rewards of obedience.
“Thank you for saving my marriage for good,” she begins (although she knows and I know Who saved it).
It seemed to me that my marriage of thirty-three years was really ending. There was no communication. I prepared to finish off what had not only ruined my life but also ruined my two boys of thirty and twenty-seven.
“Please heal my marriage,” I pleaded to God. Then one day I went to hear you speak. God told me through you, “Go and treat your husband as you would treat Jesus. Call him lord [see 1 Peter 3:6] and serve him.” I did not have anything to lose so I decided to try. I went home. He was still sitting in his chair like a mummy, not even blinking, watching TV. I hate that scene, but I controlled myself and very respectfully asked if I could talk for a moment. He immediately to my surprise switched the TV off and listened.
What do you do next if it’s Jesus you’re talking to? You ask forgiveness, right? So I did. I told him how un-understanding I was, how stupid I was, how wrong I was my whole life, and asked him for his forgiveness, even though he had decided not to continue our marriage.
Another surprise: he said he loved me and had always loved me and wanted to leave because he felt he was a burden to me and our family. Since he is not working and had been smoking and often drunk previously (he does not drink anymore), he said he feels inadequate himself and it has nothing to do with me. Then I told him how important it is for me to be with him, and to have him in the house for me and for the boys. Thus I understood how our communication was distorted because of our own distorted feelings about ourselves.
We are still the same people, but our home is based on God’s teachings and whenever I am angry with him and want to put him down I remember: how would I treat him if he were Jesus? My whole approach changes. My words are so different. I speak with love and respect. Do you know what? It’s more than one month, never happened before in thirtythree years, we did not fight! I do not have cramps ill my stomach when he opens his mouth to speak! I dearly love him, accept him as he is, and gladly do what he asks me to do. I listen and respect his ideas even though they are 180 degrees different from mine. I also have the courage to speak my ideas, but try to say them in a way that will not offend him (hard work, but worth it).
Elisabeth, there is such a peace in my house that I never, never had. This house was built by Jesus and it will stand forever. I thank God for everything.
I do not try to hurt my husband, but I am not always successful. So I tell him I am sorry the same day, just as the Bible teaches. I also talk about my hurts with him, and we solve them the same day. Oh, how it works well! My only regret is that I did not know it sooner. God has promised to restore my past and I trust He will. I love God with all my heart, soul, mind, and strength. May God bless you and your ministry.
Three months after she had written this letter I called to ask permission to quote her. She granted it at once, and added, “Oh Elisabeth! I have so much love for my husband now! I hated him. Every time he went out the door I hoped he would be killed. Now we have a wonderful marriage.” After I had told this story in a meeting a radiant woman came to tell me she had almost the identical experience. Thirty-three years of marriage, and she had actually asked God to kill her husband. “But now–what a difference!”
“Love … does not pursue selfish advantage. It is not touchy. It does not keep account of evil or gloat over the wickedness of other people …
“Love knows no limit to its endurance, no end to its trust, no fading of its hope; it can outlast anything. It is, in fact, the one thing that still stands when all else has fallen” (From 1 Cor 13, J.B. Phillips).
**Excerpt originally published in the May/June 1995 Elisabeth Elliot Newsletter.

From a childhood spent around horses and cattle to nights under the lights of the rodeo arena, Alex Anaya knew his calling in life was in livestock. He also found that every path toward success isn’t necessarily marked with road signs showing the way.
The next step along that path, full of twists and turns, and times when Anaya literally had to get up off the ground and dust off his britches, leads through Colorado State University’s fall commencement ceremonies. He will receive his bachelor’s degree in agricultural business from the College of Agricultural Sciences on Dec. 16.
Anaya was born and raised in Pueblo and spent much of his childhood on his uncle’s ranch. After he graduated from Centennial High School in 2013, he chose to attend CSU for its agriculture program.
“I started out in the Equine Sciences program and learned pretty soon that was not for me,” Anaya said. “I switched to ag business, and that is when I realized that my calling was more toward the business side of things. I really wanted to learn about the business behind the science.”
Anaya was also on the CSU rodeo team for three years, traveling around the U.S. riding bulls and bareback horses, and could have made a career of it. He had to decide if that was something he wanted to pursue — or stay in school.
“I ended up taking a semester off, the spring semester of my junior year,” Anaya said. “I was really overwhelmed, and I think taking that extra semester was a big reason why I stayed in school.”
During his semester off, Anaya participated in an internship at CSU’s Rouse Ranch in Saratoga, Wyoming. The internship reminded him that college was something he knew he wanted to finish, and he returned to CSU for the fall semester. After graduation, he will start a job as a head herdsman at Faescor Cattle Company in Nebraska.
Anaya said CSU has really prepared him for the next steps toward his future.
“I would love to run my own operation one day,” he said. “But for now, this is a good place to start and grow from, and I’m excited.”

When news happens, text KENEWS and your photos and videos to 80360. Or contact us by email or phone.
Eden mountain rescuers assist injured walkers in three call outs
3:06pm Sunday 24th February 2013 in News
FOUR injured walkers were rescued by Patterdale Mountain Rescue team in three seperate incidents caused by treacherous conditions yesterday (Saturday).
Rescuers were called first to assist a father and son who had slipped down an icy path on Helvellyn.
The team was then called to help a 27-year-old man who had broken his ankle and dislocated his shoulder on another part of Helvellyn.
While this was proceeding, the rescuers were alerted to a 47-year-old, from Oxfordshire, who fell on St Sunday Crag, fracturing his ankle. Penrith MRT was called in to assist due to the number of incidents.
All four, who were said by rescuers to be well equipped, flown to hospital by Royal Navy Sea King helicopter.

The first Orthodox bishop I ever met was Vladyko DMITRI of Dallas and the South. He was everything I had ever thought a bishop should be – faithful, dynamic, mission-minded, and with a heart of gold. He has been the Apostle to the South here in the United States, leading many men and women into the Church and establishing around 60 parishes during his tenure. He is the first Bishop the South had known (under the OCA). He is my most beloved Father in God. Today, in Dallas, he announced his retirement from the Episcopate, effective March 31.
There is not space to say anything like the fullness that I have known in this man – but he has been an embodiment of the Orthodox fullness. I must comment on the fact that I always found him to be excited about the Gospel of Jesus Christ – and that his conversation was constantly turned to Christ. Coming to the Church under his omophor was clearly about coming to Jesus Christ and not simply coming to Orthodoxy. Thus he allowed Orthodoxy to be the fullness that it is.
My heart grieves only because time robs us of our most beloved friends from time to time. I pray he will have a long and healthy retirement. His has laid the foundation of Jesus Christ in the Diocese of the South. May all of us who dwell and serve here take care how we build on that foundation.
May God grant him many years. Eis Polla Eti, Dhespota!

What are the pros? Good grower, decent flavor
What are the cons? Strings and a bit slow
Got these for use as a fresh snap bean, not as a dried bean. My first thought was that these were much slower than my bush beans. By 2-3 weeks at least. The next thing that bothered me was the strings. Even when picked at 2-3" long, mine were really stringy. Flavor was good, but nothing to write home about (I grow calima, dragon tongue, and beurre de rocquencourt bush beans, all of which have been outstanding). Maybe as a dried bean they are great, but I purchased based on reviews of them working as a fresh snap bean, which they were disappointed as.
Would you recommend this product to a friend?

Carnival Glory leaves us wanting more!: Carnival Glory Cruise Review by dipt1
Overall Member Rating
Carnival Glory leaves us wanting more!
Destination: Canada & New England
Embarkation: New York (Manhattan)
This was a family cruise with family gathering to celebrate husbands 50th birthday. We live in Connecticut so the New York embarkation was a great feature. We all took Amtrak in to the City for a great beginning to the trip. We arrived at Penn Station about 11 and quickly grabbed taxi's and headed to the port. Taxi was about $10 with tip. We arrived at the port gave our baggage to the porters and headed to check in. Process was awesome. We were all through check in in less than 20 minutes and we were on board the Glory by noon.
First impression, the Glory was pretty, very Las Vegas, glitzy style. Seemed well maintained. Music was playing in the lobby and plenty of waiters serving the drink of the More day... The funship special. Price was $7.25, but future drinks were $6.25 for a refill. Not too bad. We all headed to the Lido to check out the ship and headed to the Red Sail for lunch. Food was pretty good for buffet. We especially liked the Deli and the grill. Teens loved the pizzeria, and Fish and Chips on the upper level. Ice cream machines were on both sides of the Lido and we were always amazed how much ice cream/frozen yogurt was served. Coffee, ice tea and lemonade service was free. A definite plus. Soda cards were available for $6 per day, but did not get as no one in our party drinks soda. Bottled water is $1.95 plus gratuity so if you want water you might want to bring some on board. Carnival allows for 12 pack per person of water or soda. Seems like a good idea if you drink alot.
From there we headed to explore the ship. Layout was great. Promenade deck was the main thoroughfare and once we figured that out life was good. The Serenity adult only area was AWESOME. Quite the place with cushioned lounge chairs and round palazzo style chairs that were without a doubt heavenly. We headed toward the dining room...we had late seating in the Platinum. Pretty nice area in the aft of the ship. We toured the spa and it was nice. Prices a bit high, but it is a cruise ship and expected to see high prices. We did not use any spa services this trip. We headed our room that was ready by 1:20. We had a 8F balcony on the Panorama deck. This was without a doubt the best location. It is close to the main elevators and had easy access to the Lido deck and all services/entertainment. The room was good size. We were traveling with two kids and the room was configured with bunks which was great. Bathroom great size with ample room in the shower. Bigger than most cruise bathrooms. Great storage space. Three large closets. One with shelves that fit all of out clothing. Beds...ugh. NOT at all comfortable. Definitely needs new mattresses. I have slept on better fold out sofa's. Our balcony was good size, and quiet. We were surprised that the mesh chairs were speckled with paint. It seems like someone did not cover them when they painted the balcony. A minor detail, but a balcony is a luxury and it gave an impression of less than that. The room has a safe. To lock it you need a credit card with magnetic strip. I did not want to use a credit card because I did not want to have to carry it around, but had a store card ( savings card ) and that worked perfectly. We actually had two ( Husband and mine) and both worked to open the safe as we have the same card. Mini bar in room locked and we left it that way. Family had it unlocked and said it had a good selection.
New York has without a doubt the most beautiful sail away. Awesome view of the city skyline, Ellis Island, and Lady Liberty. Verrazano bridge was beautiful.
It does not get any better than this!
The meals were great. Good selection and although not Gourmet, it was very good and the caliber that you would find at Outback Steakhouse. Formal night was the second night. Most people did dress up for dinner with pants the norm, however of course there were many people wearing shorts and t shirts. The rules for dress in the dining room were not enforced. We had breakfast in the dining room and it was good. Never had lunch there but heard it was very good. Service was AWESOME.
This is by far the area that Carnival fails at. The shows in the Amber palace were AWFUL. Cheesy, amateurish shows. The dancers were not in sync and the singing was less than what you should see. We had heard mixed reviews about the illusionist. He was terrible. The show was loud and fireworks kind of interested you, but again it was amateurish. You could figure it all out easily. We were disappointed. Bingo and Karaoke abounded. Some days 3-4 sessions. We tried bingo once and won $100 bucks, but that is not our cup of tea. Some sessions were one game for $20. That is not entertainment... that is robbery. Karaoke was everywhere and kids were the primary entertainers. Myley Cyrus...ugh! We did enjoy the comedians. The unfortunate thing is so did everyone else. They hold it in the Ebony cabaret and it was so crowed people were sitting on steps and standing. Seemed like a safety issue. Probably would be better in the Amber Palace.
Saint John, NB
A beautiful Canadian port. We had great weather and did the highlights tour which was good. Stopped at the Reversing falls and found that very cool. It was New Brunswick provincial day so lots of activities in the city. We had a great day there.
Unfortunately this port was cancelled due to heavy fog the night before and that would not have allowed us to port until 7 hours after our scheduled port arrival. We were disappointed, but a sea day was ok. We spent some time on Lido deck, played shuffleboard, mini golf, and threw some $ at the casino and won a little. Did not see any big jackpots, but did notice little wins...
White heat was nice, but not alot of people went here. Loud music so you could not hear yourself think. We went to piano bar, and were disappointed here as well. It was ok, but the entertainer seemed to cater to those around the piano and did not engage the whole room. We found that the sports bar was always empty. The promenade deck is laden with photographers at dinner time. Found it very annoying. It was every 10 feet.
Well done Carnival. We were ported in NYC about 7 and the disembarkation occured by zone shortly after 8:30. We had zone 12...smooth as glass. Waited on the Lido until called and were called about 9... Headed down and were off the ship and through customs by 9:20. Taxi line was LONG. But then an angel dressed in a black suit approached us, and we scored a Lincoln Navigator to the station for 6 of us at $30. SO worth it. It kept us together vs. 2 taxis. At the train station befor 10 am.... WOOHOO!!!
All in all we had a great time. It was a great family celebration, but I am not sure we would every sail Carnival again. The entertainment quality really is not there and left us wanting more. It is not up to the caliber of a cruise line. The Canadian itinerary is awesome, but be prepared for fog. Less
SHIP is old & tired, Ports FAN...
WE HAD A GREAT TIME!
Never a dull moment on land or...
Nice ship but needs some minor...
Had the best time!
Second Cruise on Glory

We met up with Julie Potash, a.k.a. Hesta Prynn, longtime songwriter and the go-to DJ for brands and women’s events around the world, and riffed about her experience at performing arts camp, why some people can’t handle an all-female hip hop crew that’s part Tori Amos / part Questlove, the most surprising (and challenging) things about being a mother, and what’s to love about Jewish tradition.
You’ve got your DJ name, Hesta Prynn, and your given name, Julie. What’s the meaning of each?
My bandmates came over one day, and they were like, “We’re gonna be an all-girl, hip-hop group,” and I said, “Let’s not name it something over-the-top feminist like Hesta Prynn,” which was the hip hop version of Hester Prynne of The Scarlet Letter. They were like, “That’s your MC name,” and I said, “Word.”
My mom was nerdy, so she named me Julie, because she thought it was the name of a pretty cheerleader. Can you imagine?
What were you like as a kid?
I was really into the performing arts. I wanted to be an actress. I did professional plays when I was in high school and performed 6 nights a week.
I listened to music all the time.
I would get home from school and listen to rap records and drive around with whoever had a car and listen to rap records. That wasn’t the coolest thing to do where I was from. I remember I had The Chronic, and some boy that I liked asked, “Why do you have this?” And I had a Lil’ Kim record, and the same boy was like, “Did you buy this?”
I was really into rap music, I was into Classic Rock, I played piano, I was super into Tori Amos and still am. I was interested in how things led one to another. I’m still interested in how metal became grunge. I was always reading the liner notes – where did they make this? How do I get there?
How did your dream career evolve from actor to musician and DJ?
I went to French Woods, which was an arts camp. It was a place to go where you were cool if you were good at your art. If you were good at musical theater at my camp, you were cool. If you were good at photography, you were cool.
I went there for acting, but I was mostly into music. I remember getting people into The Police. It was retro then. I played piano, and we wrote a song about the summer and performed it.
It was at French Woods where I learned for the first time that I was more interested in the creation and the collaboration and the behind-the-scenes.
I didn’t want to be the star.
Then, when I was in a band, we toured with The Roots for 2 years all over the world. Ahmir, Questlove, has the biggest vinyl library on the East Coast, and he taught us how to make records looping vinyl. During that time was really when I realized I didn’t want to be a performer. I loved the studio. I was the person who stayed late, the person who was curious and insatiable.
What do you think people saw in you or in your band that made them want to mentor you?
We were really doing it for – not to sound like a reality show – the right reasons. We were 3 feminist women. Two thirds of us were Jewish. We were suburban-ish. We were using the craft of writing rhymes as if we were girls writing journals. It was very spoken word, very Ani DiFranco, but we loved rap music because of where we were from.
I was raised on HOT 97. I love hip hop, that’s just who I am.
Our heroes really saw that. They saw how honest we were, they saw that we had something to say, and they saw that we didn’t really want anything. We were doing it because it was a way for us to express ourselves.
The hate that we got, the backlash, was from a lot of white boy fans of hip hop music who were angry that there was not a place for them in it. People weren’t really having conversations about white privilege in pop culture 10 years ago the way they are now. We were falling over ourselves to be politically correct and careful in everything we said and to be respectful, and I think that people appreciated it.
How did Judaism play a role in your upbringing?
I grew up in a Jewish ghetto in Long Island. Everybody was Jewish or Italian.
I had a bat mitzvah. My mom is from Queens. She told stories about how her seder was 3 hours long and it was in Hebrew or Yiddish.
There was a lot of “God will punish you if…” Sometimes, I have a hard time saying no, because I’m blessed in so many ways, and I have to count my blessings, because, if I don’t, God will punish me.
When you went to college, how did life change for you?
I went to college in Ohio. The only city that I’d ever been to was New York, so I thought all cities were the same. I went to Cleveland 3 days after I got to Ohio and realized it was not what I thought it was going to be.
It felt like nobody was Jewish. There were swastikas in certain places. When I traveled with the band, we saw a lot of that, too. I’ve always felt and still do feel very uncomfortable in the middle of the country. I feel self-consciously Jewish.
I came back to New York to go to Tisch, because I wanted to go to a conservatory. I definitely feel the most at home here. When you’re Jewish, this is where you live. I would live in any major city. A coastal city. That’s kind of it. That’s the only place I would feel safe. Just keepin’ it real.
What has been your favorite age so far?
I think that my favorite age will be in my early 40s when things settle a little bit.
The first half of your life, you have no choices about. Then, you spend years processing all the things that you had no choices about, which is where I am now. Then, you get to a place, maybe when you’re 40, I hope, where you’re like, “Now I’m gonna start living in the moment a little bit more and I’m over stuff and I’m stronger.”
How did you and your husband meet? What do you love about him?
When the band broke up, I was ghostwriting other songs. I wrote my own solo EP as a writing exercise. I wanted to make a music video. I asked my friend, “How am I going to get a music video that is next level?”
Then – I swear on my life this is true – my phone beeped, and it was a text message, and it said something like, “Hey, Julie, this is Randy. I heard your song ‘Can We Go Wrong‘ and I want to make a video for you. Can we talk?”
I was like, “Randy Slavin? From high school?” I knew he had become a filmmaker, but I wasn’t friends with him. I thought he lived in Williamsburg, and, literally, we lived across the street from each other. I met him at a bar. I walked in and texted my friend, “Randy Slavin is so hot. Did you know that?” She’s like, “Duh.”
We went to Central Park every day at magic hour for a week and shot 13,000 photos and weaved them together as a stop motion piece. We fell in love doing it.
What’s surprised you the most about being a mom?
It’s awesome having a kid, but this shit is no joke! It’s very profound and beautiful and challenging and intense.
What’s your daughter’s name and why?
Zoe Max. Max was my grandpa. He died while I was pregnant. My grandparents were married for 70 years. I always really liked Zoe. We had some other names that I liked from a Crosby, Stills, and Nash song – I wanted to name her Guinnevere. My husband was like, “Yeah, we’re gonna have an Israeli baby named Guinnevere…”
How does Judaism fit into your lives now?
We were going to the Kabbalah Centre for 2 years before I got pregnant with Zoe, and we did Shabbat there every week, which was really nice. We had a community. There were some things about it that didn’t really work for me after I had a kid, and that’s disappointing, because I really miss doing Shabbat.
We’ll light candles sometimes. I try to speak to my daughter in Hebrew when I can. We do the holidays with family.
How do you a raise a Jewish kid in New York without it being about labels and buying stuff? Without it being about going to Solomon Schechter? I’m not really sure.
It’s definitely a place where we’re lacking, but I’m not trying to run out and join a synagogue. That’s not what we’re missing.
Favorite Jewish food?
Bagels and lox?
That didn’t sound very convincing.
A dry, flakey cake? Matzo ball soup. All the Jewish foods are my favorite foods.
At a shiva, there are Jews everywhere, they’re in your face, you can’t hear yourself think, and they’re shoveling food into your mouth and talking your ear off and you’re so tired and all you want to do is be alone, but they don’t let you be alone, and, then, when they let you be alone, there’s been a week between, and you can survive. The Jews have that on lock.
Photos by Jake Fromm

Herve was great to work with. He kept me informed and answered questions quickly. Sold the house in 48 hours for full asking price. Professional and got the job done!
Herve... simply astounding. He was great as to tell me when a house was no good and smart as to help me secure the house I wanted immediately. He even played a hand to get my bank to work harder! He keeps his word, he’s more than punctual, and a nice, honest person. Words cannot say how grateful I am to have come across Herve as my realtor. 10/10 would recommend.
Herve has been awesome to work with while selling our home! We went through an unusual situation in which our house was sold and then fell through and then sold again. He was very involved throughout the process and coached us along the way with our options, always giving us time to think through things before making our decision. We would recommend Herve to anyone who is looking to sell their home. We are happy to have been on our home selling journey with Herve.
|2825 O Avenue Nw|
Cedar Rapids, IA 52405

Soooo my yearling filly came in a couple days ago. She's actually small, but a great looking filly! So im happy, my mare has thrown two small, BUT GREAT looking fillies.
Anywho she's doing really really great. She was put in crossties for the first time yesterday and was wonderful, so we put a harness on her. Most horses tuck their butts or start kicking when you lift up their tails to put a crouper on, but she didnt. She stood like a champ. No problems. So we took her out walking around the grounds to get used to all the sites and sounds and having the harness on her. She was great, no jumping and startling at anything, walked great, yelled to horses, very good.
Today we start bridle and bitting her back so that monday we can line drive her. We hope to have her hooked to the cart by the end of next week, and I can assure that if she stays as good as she has been, it will be a piece of cake. I've never had a baby break this easy.
ONLY ONE PROBLEM- she was turned out at a farm to wean from mommy. Well those dum dums werent thinking and were not only turning her out with a baby the same age, but STALLING her with it. So not only did she break her bond from momma, but now she's bonded with another horse. So towards the end of her stay there they started putting them in separate stalls.... and guess what. My filly went ballistic and started climbing the walls. Now this has turned into a big problem. We have to get her to stop! We only have half doors where we are so we had to attach a stall gate at the top so she couldnt climb over the door. I was hoping after a few days of breaking and getting energy out of her that she will calm down and stop.... BUT, does anyone have any other suggestions??

Earlier today the news broke that the sheriff in a county in Arizona was accused of threatening to deport his ex-lover (who happens to be Mexican) if he went public with their relationship. This is the kind of scandal that our Hyena Media loves to devour: a conservative law and order man who is currently running for the 4th Congressional District in Arizona and is a highly respected up-and-coming politician in the religious conservative rightwing of the Republican Party has been exposed in a gay sex scandal. Surprise, surprise!!! Is anyone really surprised anymore about this party of hypocrites? I'm not. Wake me up when the media finds a faithful, family values Republican with ethics and morality. Then, I'll be shocked. Until then, I think the whole lot of them have a lot of things hidden in their closets that they don't want the American public to find out about.
Sheriff Paul Babeu is the current example. I've never heard of him until this scandal broke, so I did some Google-searches and found his campaign website. Based on what I read, he actually sounds like a reasonable guy. He served 20 years in the Army Reserves, starting out at a lowly enlisted rank and then going to college and getting a commission as an officer. He served in Iraq. He was elected sheriff in a county in Arizona and had endorsed John McCain's campaign in 2008 and was a co-chair something or other on Mitt Romney's campaign. He's definitely law and order type of guy and an example of the kind of guys I met in the military. As a liberal Democrat, I'm actually not opposed to someone like Paul serving in Congress as a conservative Republican. His background is interesting and he would've been a fine addition to Congress.
That is, until the scandal broke. Though he is not quitting his campaign for Congress, nor resigning from his sheriff's job, he did give up his position on Romney's campaign (though it was probably nothing big other than being a big name attached in order to sway votes when the primary comes to Arizona and a possible job offer in a Romney Administration). In his press conference (which I've added a video link to below), he denied the allegations of threatening his ex-lover in any way but he did not deny a relationship. It was kind of difficult for him to deny a relationship when photos appeared that showed him standing next to his lover with his left hand touching the bare chest of the guy next to him (the lover wore a shirt that was unbuttoned down to the stomach). In the press conference, Babeu even mentioned disgraced Congressman Anthony Weiner to make a case why his situation was different (because he's not denying that its him in the photos, he's not going to lie about it in hopes that it goes away). Well good. Someone learned a lesson from Weiner. It's nice to know that there are people out there who are paying attention and not repeating the same mistakes as other politicians. I give him a few points for that.
In his press conference, though, you will hear him state many times during his statement and during his Q & A segment that he always believed that his private life (i.e. sex life) was no one else's business. He spoke about his professionalism at work and how his private life did not interfere with it and he did not rub anyone's noses in what he did in his private life. He did not want to answer questions regarding his private life and made a very libertarian appeal to protecting his own privacy. Well, I actually agree with him on that point, but considering that he is a Republican who recently spoke at the CPAC convention (the biggest conservative political gathering of the year) and is courting the teabagger support and vote, I'm a little bit skeptical about his claims. Had he not been outed, would he have pandered to the teabaggers with homophobic appeals on issues like gay marriage? How long did he think he could hide the truth of who he was from the public? He had to know that there is a target on any conservative Republican who might be gay, because of the level of hypocrisy regarding the pandering to the religious right, particularly on sexual issues. Another question that comes to mind is, now that he's out of the closet, will the teabaggers support his campaign? If they do support him because they like his track record and conservative views, are they being hypocritical when they continue to be anti-gay marriage? How can you say that you support a gay politician because he stands on the same side of the issues as you, but you still expect him to be celibate and monastic? His political race will be an interesting one to watch because it puts evangelical voters in a tough spot. Do they vote for his opponent because they hate his sexual orientation, or do they vote for him anyway because they like his stance on issues, even if they still might be against gay marriages?
With the scandal, I hope its only the tip of the iceberg. I suspect more stuff will come out on this guy. A reporter managed to ask him if he expected any more people to come forward with allegations. Paul gave an honest answer that he didn't know, but he can't base his campaign on what might come out. He has to work to clear his name on the current allegations, which is kind of ugly. The ex-lover seems like the jealous type, who suspected that Paul was cheating on him so he sought ways to get back at him. Sabotaging a Congressional campaign would be the ultimate revenge. Outing him seemed to be the implied threat. But did Babeu make threats back? Such as threatening to have him deported back to Mexico. If this allegation is true, it represents an abuse of office and is certainly an impeachable offense.
It was funny to hear Sheriff Babeu say in his press conference that he has gotten many marriage proposals from women, but he turned them down. Must be nice to have women throw themselves at you and you get your pick. But, he's not attracted to women and if he gets elected to Congress, it does make one wonder, considering the number of gay sex scandals inflict the religious right and the Republican Party: Just how many closeted Republicans are there, anyway? You have to say one thing about the Republican Party in the past few years. They sure do know how to keep on entertaining us. The non-stop carnival of crazy continues under "the Big Tent" of the GOP! Step right up and take a look.

|Wearing the skirt I made and a cute linen shirt!|
His Nana has always liked me. BUT that wasn't the usual. I had heard horror stories before meeting her about a year and a half ago. The first time we went out to eat with her I about peed my pants (no joke). I was anticipating the things she would say since Anthony had told me that she has openly disliked his past girlfriends. To my surprise, she liked me and since then it has been a breeze.
Now although it has been a breeze, it is by no means dull! Last night was a great testament to that:
Nana: Stephanie (Anthony's cousin) had to sign a prenup. I don't see why she had to sign a prenup (both families are extremely rich). I would never sign a prenup.
Me: Oh, well I'm sure that Stephanie will stay happily married. (I don't really know this but dang this is awkward)
Nana: Did you sign a prenup?
Me: (I flash my empty left hand) Nope, I am not married. I have never had to worry about that!
Nana: Well would you sign a prenup?! Because I damn wouldn't. No way.
Me: Sure? (OH man I am so uncomfortable)
Nana: I wouldn't. No way.
Me: Good thing you are already married then. :)
Umm how are you supposed to respond to this?!
* I can hear Anthony in the kitchen behind me, he is busting out laughing.
*She says this as she arrives in a Bentley, is wearing jewelry that costs more than everything I own, and is right next to her husband that provided it all for her. Maybe she was smart by saying she "she ain't signing no prenup" ;)
Yep, dinner with Anthony's nana is never dull.
Oh another note: Our foster Drago is getting neutered today.

Laying all the speculations to rest, Tiger Woods hinted at a comeback to the golf course with a short little video on social media. The legendary golfer could be seen swinging a wedge in a three-second video which was captioned “Making progress” and that was all it took to get every golf fan and critic talking.
While the USA star had refused to make a public comment on the injuries he sustained from his accident on February 23 in Los Angeles since May, he had not spoken about the same on social media. Even when he chose to, he was economical with his words and the length of his video but managed to make an immense impact with his post.
In the video, Woods was seen wearing a black compression sleeve on his right leg with a large bucket half-filled with golf balls as he looked in the middle of a practice session. The video also shows a launch monitor in front of him that measures metrics like distance and ball speed.
Notably, Woods was already recovering from a back problem when he met a car accident as his SUV toppled down a steep hill on a winding, sweeping road in the Los Angeles suburbs. Doctors had revealed that he shattered the tibia and fibula bones on his right leg at multiple locations which was a scary situation as far as his sporting career is concerned. Meanwhile, several pins, screws and rods were placed to stabilise his foot including the ankle and foot.
Check out his post here:
Making progress pic.twitter.com/sVQkxEHJmq
— Tiger Woods (@TigerWoods) November 21, 2021
In an earlier interview with Golf Digest, Woods described the rehabilitation from this surgery as “more painful than anything I have ever experienced.” His sporting comeback looked like a distant dream as sensed in this interview on May 27. In his own words, his priority was to be able to walk on his own leave aside from making a comeback.
Woods has had 10 surgeries – four on his left knee, five on his lower back and the recent one earlier this year after the accident. It is still not clear when he will be able to come back to competitive golf.

sounds like you have had a stroke at some point on
the left side of
, and thats why your right side of
your body is affected. I am no doctor or no know it all, however I had a small stroke myself 3yrs ago, and that is exactly the same symptoms that I had, beside's my speech was affected more, I studdered a lot when I would talk, plus it really affected my short term memory.I also have a strong history of migraines and was told that the two are related.

Buy Easy to Care for Plants
You might have always wanted plants at your place but if you always get plants that are hard to care for, they might not really last very long in your house. There are a lot of plants that are easy to care for and if you are someone who is not really an expert at caring for plants, you might want to get those easy to care for plants. You might have had a few plants at your house before but if they died very easily, you might want to get those plants that will not die that easily. We also hope that you would enjoy this article as it is for your entertainment and for your enjoyment as well so without further due, let us begin.
One really easy plant that you can take care of very easily is the alo vera plant. You might have heard that this plant has a lot of wonderful benefits that it can give to you and one of those benefits is that they are very easy to care for. This alo vera plant is very easy to care for and that is what you might like about it very much. In fact, you might get to kill a plant by drowning it with too much water so you do not want to water them too much. Those alo vera plants also make great home decorations so make sure that you get them to decorate your very own home.
You might have heard of those fig tree plants before and if you have, you might be wondering if they would make good house plants. Fig tree plans are now becoming more and more popular to be house plants so if you want one, go ahead and get one. This fig tree plant has a beautiful look and when you take it into your house, they can really brighten that are of your home very much indeed. Fig tree plants can bear fruit even when they are placed in your home and that is a sign that they are really easy to care for and that they do not need much looking after in order to grow and to bare fruit. This indoor fig tree plant is a very easy to maintain plant as well so you are not really going to have to always look out for it because you can just leave it to grow and it will grow on its own. Of course you should water it but you can do the watering only once in a while. Find out more about those plants that are easy to care for. buy a plant view page fig tree indoor areca palms for sale

Brandon Quinton first graced the audiences of America on the very first episode of Survivor 3: Africa captivating audiences' hearts. But, really, hadn't he done it before the show started? When the contestants were announced online, and we knew that he was bringing something as frivolous as chapstick as his luxury item, who didn't think he'd be a shoe-in to win.
With a friend group reminiscent of Lindsay Lohan's own "Mean Girls," the young, attractive group rightfully fought against the older, uglier members of their tribe. Please. Just because they didn't find the old people as interesting (or nice, even) as their own group is certainly not just cause for calling them b!tchy. No, my friends, they were b!tchy for reason all unto themselves. And why shouldn't they be. If I wanted to exclude people from a certain situation, the very first thing I would do would be to make the few people I did like necklaces and then flaunt them about.
And who could forget dear Brandon trying desperately to shoot a flaming arrow at some target. Yes, there were great times we had until "Black Thursday" when we had to say goodbye to Brandon, not knowing that the next week he would show up in the jury wearing a sarong.moreless

Back cover: "Freddy Builder is certain he is meant for more. More than his life in corporate America bondage. More than selling china to bluebloods in Philadelphia's landmark department store, Chanet's. Meant for more, meant for better, and lacking only, only an occasion to rise to.
And now that occasion is murder--of Mindi Quintana, an old college flame wanting simply to stay in his past. Freddy's crime is major news from the start. Mindi is the beautiful daughter of a renowned Philadelphia businessman whose dramatic fall a few years back captivated the city. A televised trial for Freddy is in the offing. Meanwhile, he is writing the book about his relationship with Mindi--a remorseless rewrite of her life, his own, and their miserably thin involvement.
As excerpts of his book are published to acclaim, he gives articulate, sympathetic jailhouse interviews, publishes ghostwritten articles on prison issues, and coverage goes national. A new celebrity murderer is taking the stage--a killer with a book, a jailhouse literary sensation.
Freddy's defense attorney, Phillip, watches in disgust as his client builds his fame with the bones of his victim. As a career public defender, Phillip thought he'd seen evil in all its incarnations. He'd lost his outrage, his passion for the law, and his marriage along the way. But as Freddy's case is a turning point for him--the public's sympathy for the poet murderer, the rebel, the killer as a greater soul--stirs something dormant in Philip. To stop Freddy, and to vindicate Mindi, Phillip will have to violate his oath, even break the law. But with the help of Mindi's best friend Lisa, he gives Mindi back the truth of her life and death. And he'll deliver a comeuppance to a killer with a book."
"The Killing of Mindi Quintana" is the debut novel by attorney Jeffrey Cohen. Mindi runs into Freddy by chance when she goes into Chanet's to buy a present for her parents. She works for Getting Feather's fashion magazine and Freddy wants to renew their past friendship so he uses his writing as a way to spend time with Mindi. Only his writing isn't really that good and Mindi tries to give him constructive criticism. One evening they get together for drinks and Mindi realizes he's not what he seems. She rejects his advance and he lashes out and ends up killing her. While in prison, a reporter makes a deal with him and helps him gain notoriety through writing his story of his relationship with Mindi.
I thoroughly disliked Freddy from the very beginning. He's one of those characters that just disgust you and make you want to not read the book. All the characters in the book were flawed in some shape or form and Cohen's satirical portrayal of corporate America was rather depressing. Cohen's writing style was unique and even had one complete chapter in which the character's were referred to as he and she through out.
"They are at Murphy's.
"I didn't think you'd want to talk to me." is the first thing he says when they find a table and order drinks.
"I do." she says.
"I just thought--because she was your best friend."
She says nothing.
It is she who suggested Murphy's when he asked her to meet. She explained Mindi liked it. He wonders if she wants him to fell guilty. He wonders if it is smart to be here at all.
"What was she like?'
"I didn't think you would ask me questions like that."
And he isn't sure why he has. "I wasn't" he says. And after a moment, "What did you think I would ask you?"
"Things about them together, I guess. To see what kind of case you have." She's drinking her Tanqueray and tonic and there's a Seagram's in front of him. He hasn't noticed the waitress put them them down. There is something alive in his stomach. It is wearing ice skates and cutting him open. I need to know what she was like." He's trying to smile but should probably give up.
"We used to come here." she says.
He thinks she's going to cry. "Tell me about her! I have decisions to make!" He couldn't have yelled at her, maybe he hasn't. But a few heads have turned. He' stirring his drink and taking one of her cigarettes. He doesn't smoke but there's not time like the present. He's sure he is a lunatic. (pg211)
The premise of the story is interesting, but I really didn't like the ending. However, there are some who think the ending was ingenious, so you'll have to decide for yourself.
Publisher: Welcome Rain Publishers
Released: May 16, 2010
"The Killing of Mindi Quintana" was provided to me free by TLC tours and the publisher as part of the book tour. The review is based on my personal opinion of the story and I was not compensated for my review. Check out the other tour stops at TLC Book tours.

A television reporter said today that she was beaten and kicked by an angry passenger of the angry train that "did not get off fast enough."
Julia Macfarlane, 29, British-Indonesian journalist based in London for the US television network ABC, posted photos of her alleged attacker on Twitter.
The incident took place when she got off at the East Croydon train station in south London around 10.30 today.
Miss Macfarlane, who has also worked for the BBC and CNN, said that only one person came to her aid even though the train was "full".
The British Transport Police is investigating, but no arrests have been made.
Julia Macfarlane, a 29-year-old British-Indonesian journalist living in London of the US television network ABC, posted photos of her alleged attacker on Twitter after she accused him of beating and kicking her.
Julia tweeted a description of what happened after calling the police after the incident at the East Croydon train station at 10.30 a.m.
She told MailOnline: "The train was entering the East Croydon station, he was pushing me, so I turned around and said" mate, I'm also going to get off at the next stop ".
Miss McFarlane has asked for help from the police and the public to locate the man who calls him "danger to other people"
"He said how he was supposed to know that, and he started to become aggressive." I turned to my music and turned my back on him, then kicked me in the back, like a soccer ball. I repeatedly tried to hit myself because I did not get off the train fast enough.
"The whole time I was trying to take pictures of him he was grabbing me and trying to grab my phone and swing his fists.
"I threw him out of the station and tried to hold on to him to take pictures and take off his stupid hat to get a better chance.
"He tried to take my phone, but I held it and sat on the floor to protect him from it, then he decided to run away and that's where I lost it."
She added: "He is a danger to other people, so hopefully the police will catch him. Imagine if I had been an old lady & # 39;
The man, wearing a black hat, a blue hoodie by Ralph Lauren, shorts and running shoes from Adidas, held up his hand while Miss Macfarlane took pictures of him.
He fled when she and a passer-by pursued him from the station.
She tweeted the images to her 73,000 followers and said: & # 39; I would like to point out that the train was full, nobody said or did anything, everyone saw it.
"The only person who helped me, and actually ran after him and caught him for a while before he escaped again, was a young black man named Tyesdale." Hero, thank you friend.
Julia suffered a back injury, but did not require treatment.

....and i thought this place was nutty during the season.
People have and teams have bad games. When they happen in a row it's a slump. Doesn't mean anything other than the coaching staff has to find a way to help the players work through it.
The system does suck and Eli has made the best of it. However, it is time for a new OC and a different system.
its cute seeing the same faces in here complaining about eli's play even though they've been shut down so many times before.
when will u guys learn

The 17-year-old senior, manager of the Greece Athena High School basketball team, drained a 3-pointer, a double-pump layup and a free throw, kissed the back of his ring finger at center court and sped off to the dressing room to exhort and amuse his teammates.
"You've gotta give it everything you got!" McElwain sang in rap verse. "The winner goes home all happy/The loser goes home and says/`Mommy we lost the game, wah wah wah!"'
McElwain, who is autistic, was back in his role as an all-around motivator on the eve of a sectional semifinal game Tuesday night — handing out water bottles, dispensing tips, helping run drills. Two weeks earlier, he suited up for a game and delivered a jaw-dropping performance.
His play drew national attention, and a flood of calls from Hollywood. His parents have received inquiries from about 25 production companies ranging from The Walt Disney Co. and Warner Bros. to independent documentary filmmakers.
"I don't know what I'm walking into," McElwain said.
In his team's final home game of the season, McElwain entered with four minutes to go. It was his first and only appearance for the Athena varsity team in this Rochester suburb. The 5-foot-6 manager hit six 3-point shots and a 2-pointer and was carried off the court on his teammates' shoulders.
His triumph was captured on a student video that made the rounds of the television networks. The school was besieged with calls and e-mails from parents of children who have autism, a little-understood developmental disorder.
"We have an obligation as a society to find a way to include people with different abilities," said the school's athletic director, Randolph Hutto, whose 12-year-old son, Joshua, is autistic. "This, hopefully, will help open doors for some people, or open some eyes."
Watch Steve Hartman's Report On McElwain's Big Game
McElwain, who didn't begin talking until he was 5, still lacks social skills but has learned to cope well in his teens, said his special-education teacher, Diane Maddock.
"He might talk a little loud, laugh a little too long or not be able the read the body language or even the tone of voice of a person, but it's not a big difficulty," Maddock said. "If you call him on it, he will acknowledge it, say 'OK, you're right, I shouldn't have said that or laughed when I laughed.'"
"This couldn't happen to a nicer kid," she added.
Considered too small to make the junior varsity, McElwain signed on as manager, then took up the same role with the varsity to stay near the sport he loves. Amazed at his dedication, coach Jim Johnson had him suit up for the home finale. There was no guarantee he would play — Athena was battling for a division title — but he got in when the Trojans opened a large lead.
"It was like a big old bucket and I was just hitting them like they were free throws," McElwain said. "I just felt relaxed."
The coach couldn't believe what he was seeing.
"He's been my right-hand man, he's there every day and just getting him the opportunity to suit up was emotional enough for me," he said. "For him to come in and seize the moment like he did was certainly more than I ever expected. I was an emotional wreck."
Because he played in just one regular-season game, McElwain was ineligible for sectional play. But he's not bothered.
"I just want to win as a team, not individually," he said.
What's more, he prides himself on having a lot of friends.
"I'm not really that different," he said. "I don't really care about this autistic situation, really. It's just the way I am. The advice I'd give to autistic people is just keep working, just keep dreaming, you'll get your chance and you'll do it."

Na Umra Ki Seema Ho 21st December 2022 Written Update on TellyExpress.com
The episode starts with Vidhi helping Pramod to arrange Hariprasad room. Pramod gets surprised to see the way Vidhi understand Hariprasad’s likes and dislikes. Pramod bless her. Dev informs Sathyavathi that he is going to office. She inquires him about Hariprasad’s health? He tells her that he is getting better. She says to him that she wishes to meet him once.
Dev says that he is angry on him so they will show it to them. Sathyavathi says that Vidhi facing everything alone. She will call her to learn about the situation. Meanwhile, Pramod shares with Urmila that Vidhi understand Hariprasad better. She knows well what Hariprasad likes or dislikes? Golden isn’t like that Vidhi. Urmila says that it’s good Golden isn’t like Vidhi. She set fire in the family. Because of her they are not able to show their face outside. Vidhi gets hurts to hear it. Meanwhile, Bimla takes Hariprasad back to home.
Neighbours gossipping about his family. Hariprasad hears it. He asks Bimla did she lighten the lamp in the temple daily? Bimla nods with him. He tells her that she did a good job. He thought she will forget everything and stayed with him in the hospital. He praised the decorations in the temple. Bimla tells him that she didn’t arranged it all. Vidhi apologize to Hariprasad and says to him that she will listen to him hereafter. She won’t meet Dev. She promised to him. Hariprasad says to god that today he and his wife Bimla taking a oath. After their death no one has the rights to do pooja here. The rights will go to Pramod. He disown Vidhi there. He cuts all his ties with Vidhi infront of everyone.
Later, Hariprasad notices the changes in his room. He remembered the past. He asks Pramod who changed his room like that? He says that he already lost the rights on her. He has his wife with her. He don’t need someone else help to arrange his room. He remembered the way Vidhi arranged his room better when he was sick. Hariprasad praised Vidhi for understood him well. Bimla says that he isn’t appreciating her like that. Vidhi got tears remembering that moment. She leaves from there in tears. Kallu asks Hariprasad to take rest. Bimla says to him that she will bring tea for him. Kallu tells her that he isn’t in a mood to drink tea. He is not able to see his friend in that state.
He says to them that they are raising our child in well manners. They are teaching everything to them and trusting them a lot. But both Vidhi and his daughters broke our trust. He asks her what’s if Vidhi cut her slit like Saman. He asks her to take a proper care on her. Saman married to her lover so this problem solved. But Dev is a rich person. This news will fade in few days. But what if she go with him. He asks her to take care of Vidhi and leaves.
Dev reaches to the office. Crowd gathered there and doing strike there. Vidhi gets a phone call from Dev. She thinks how she will attend the call in front of everyone. Hariprasad will get angry on her again. Sathyavathi watches the news. She says that rivals are doing it intentionally to bring their shares down. Dev is trying to manage the situation there. Media is badmouthing on Dev. Someone throw ink on him.
Everyone gets angry seeing this. Dev gets furious hearing it. Amba messages Priya that she said to her Vidhi is their target not Dev. If she find out she did it to him. She won’t leave her. Priya gets shock to read it. Dev gets on his car and shouts on them. He asks them to stop shouting in front of his office instead take a proper interview of him. Media is questioning him about his personal affairs. Dev clears with them that he loves Vidhi truly. He doesn’t have any affairs with her.
Precap; Bimla will share her grief with Hariprasad. She will say to him that if she fast for Vidhi also we don’t get a groom like him for Vidhi. Meanwhile, Satyavati will ask Vidhi’s hands for Dev. Hariprasad will lashes out at her and ask her whom will marry a girl who is in his daughter age? At night, Dev will visit Vidhi’s house to meet her
Click to read

About: Medway Maritime Hospital Medway Maritime Hospital Gillingham ME7 5NY
Posted by Anonymous
After a very frightening event which happened whilst driving to work at the end of February I was referred to neurology by my GP.
I rang several times to chase the appointment and the consultant's secretary was incredibly helpful and understanding.
I finally saw the consultant in May.
The consultant didn't appear to listen to what I was saying and their letter to my GP confirmed that they hadn't listened as it was littered with mistakes (which I rang the secretary and asked them to correct).
The consultant had requested an MRI scan and said they would see me again in 2 months.
I had my MRI scan which I have discussed with my GP.
I have asked to see the consultant sooner as I would really like to know what is happening.
The consultant's theory of migraine has been discounted by the MRI scan.
It is quite scary to know there is something wrong, to have constant headaches (and I mean constant - all the time, day and night from end of February to now) and total exhaustion) but not to know what is causing it.
My GP has been fantastic and supportive.
The consultant's secretary has been really helpful but the consultant them-self - the one who is supposed to be able to give me some kind of diagnosis and hopefully treatment.......Let's see what happens next time I see them.
Just hoping that whatever is going on inside my head is not made worse by lack of treatment over this period of time.

A suspected kidnap kingpin, Chukwudi Dumeme Onuamadike , also known as Evans, who was arrested by police in Lagos said on Sunday that he chose to collect ransom in American dollars to be different from other kidnappers.
The suspect, while being paraded at the Lagos Police Command in Ikeja, told newsmen that he started kidnapping in 2015, after he left his spare parts business, a claim that contradicted the police statement that he was declared wanted in 2013.
He claimed that he lost N20 million to Customs officers, which made him to leave his trade.
The suspect was arrested in his mansion in Magodo area of the state on Saturday.
[READ] VIDEO: Police officers celebrate arrest of kidnap kingpin
Evans, who wasn’t sure of how many people he had kidnapped, said the highest he had collected as ransom was one million dollars.
“I can’t figure out how much I have collected so far or how many people I have kidnapped, but I have kidnapped up to 10 since 2015.
“I chose to collect ransom in dollars to be different, and the maximum I have collected as ransom so far is I million dollars.
“I work in two groups. A team moves with me to kidnap victims while we hand over to the other team that takes the victim to the hide out.
“Kingsley introduced me to kidnapping, but I usually get my ammunition from one Chinedu and Ehis whom I met at Ago-Iwoye.
“I also do drug business that enabled me to buy my property,” the suspect said.
[READ ALSO] PHOTOS: Kidnap kingpin’s mansions in Lagos
According to the police, Evans collected $1million from no fewer than four of his victims.
Among them are:
* James Uduji, who was kidnapped close to his house at 7th Avenue Festac late last year. The Evans gang held him for six weeks. He paid $1million to regain his freedom.
* Chief Raymond Okoye – Odu- Na –Ichida,, who was kidnapped in 2015. He also paid $1million as ransom. He was released after two months in captivity.
* Uche Okoroafor, a trader at Alaba who was also kidnapped in 2015 for three months, also paid $1million.
* Elias Ukachukwu kidnapped November 2015 similarly paid $1million. The police said the Evans gang demanded an additional $1million, claiming family members were rude to them during negotiation.
The Force PPRO, Jimoh Moshood said that the suspect had collected billions of naira from his victims and had property in and outside the country.
He said that Evans was declared wanted in 2013, following a kidnap attempt that was foiled by the police.
Moshood said further investigation into his activities were ongoing.

I was woken up earlier than usual that morning. The sound of full bellied laughter bounced off the walls. I could tell by voices that it wasn’t just my parents who were home. From my bed I could look out and see through the crack in my door the end table lamp on and some movement. I could tell my mother was coming toward my room, her laugh is a dead giveaway. She slowly crept into my room, she took on the shade of blue being given off from the early dawn hue in the sky. Whispering my name, she tells me “look at what happened to me” as she lifted her arm to show me that she had a soft cast on it. I asked her what had happened? In an instant she began telling me of her usually boring motorcycle ride home from working a night shift. Except on this night, as mom was traveling on a rural road outside of Fresno, headed home from her graveyard shift, she happened to encounter two farm dogs running across the road. Mom said she was about half way home when she saw the first dog appear from the dark into her headlight. Swerving to miss the pooch she cut the bike abruptly and squarely into the path of a trailing dog that was not so lucky. The little Honda 250 tore through the animal killing it instantly while mom laid the bike down and came to a skidding halt after a ride on her side in which from mom’s account, she could see the sparks coming from her helmet as it was sliding across the road. A leather jacket and a Shoei helmet kept her injuries to a moderate level. The worst of which was a fractured wrist, some bruises and scrapes were also present but superficial. But many times in life isn’t that the way? We as humans prepare ourselves as best we can to minimize the trauma that we can see and account for, or if not that then at least we can accept something in order to feel in control and important. I began to think of myself as a person without the ability to sympathize with others in times of distress, and also the philosophy of not the first subject getting the best of you but rather the second one….the one which you do not see that really wrecks the rest of your day or longer for that matter.
The first dog made his present felt front and center? However. the second dog which acted on his or her own judgement has to be taken in to account. Who knows, I’m sure the dog was just as surprised as mom was at that point of time. But his/her death is contradictory to this idea….because if it’s the second that does you in and mom was the first motorcycle rider, that dog saw that night…then the hypothesis does not work…unless someone is out there riding the back roads of the rural central valley searching for mischief and opportunity.

Three teenage suspects have been arrested in connection with the deaths of a former Marine and his girlfriend in what Indiana County authorities are calling a double homicide.
The victims -- identified by a family member as Tim Gardner, 26, and Jackie Brink, 20 -- were found in their Cherryhill Township home early Thursday morning. Authorities said two young children in the house were not hurt and didn't witness the violent crime.
"My brother was one of the most giving men in the world," Tim Gardner's sister, Celeste Gardner said. "He was so nice to everybody. He would have given the shirt off his back if he had to."
District Attorney Patrick Dougherty identified the suspects as Nathan Price, 18, Justin Stevenson, 19, and Isaiah Russell-Scott, 17, who he said will be charged as an adult.
Full video: News conference on double homicide
Dougherty said state police were called to the home on Hillside Drive at about 12:40 a.m.
The manner of death is pending autopsy results.
A motive remains unclear, but Dougherty said the suspects knew the victims and may have gone there for a robbery. He said it appears that a safe was taken.
"I wish people would quit stipulating on whether it was drugs or this or that until we know for sure because I don't want my brother's name dragged through the mud," Celester Gardner said.
Kelly Clawson and Robert Oswalt said they were former neighbors of the victims.
Clawson said her first reaction was "shock, I guess, because we just moved out and you don't really think something like this is going to happen, especially in a small town like this."
"I just seen him the other day and was talking to him down at the store," said Oswalt. "I said, 'I'm going to have to stop up and visit with you guys,' and he said, 'Yeah, come on up anytime."
Krista Gardner, mother of the children and Gardner’s wife, tells WTAE “My boys are safe. They’re in good hands. They were rushed immediately to my mom’s house after the incident and they did not see anything. I’m absolutely blessed they did not see anything and I’m also blessed those sick people did not go after my kids.”
Gardner claimed the suspects know her husband and know her children. “They could’ve easily gone in there and done something.“
She said she hasn’t been happy about Gardner’s recent decisions, “but at the same time he is the father to my kids and nobody deserves what happened to them. It breaks my heart.”

The Leading Man and I had talked about adoption when we first got married. We had no children yet and though we had already decided to start trying to for biological children, LM began to share his heart with me about adopting one day. His family almost adopted a little girl when he was young, but the biological grandmother decided to parent her after all. LM is one of three boys so, as you can imagine, this near encounter with an almost-sister left him with a longing to have little girls one day and a strong desire to adopt.
(Lily’s first referral pic.)
I, on the other hand, was quick to agree that adoption sounded great one day, but, when one day rolled around I seriously doubted my husbands sanity. We had just moved to a new city and had left our home town, family and friends. We had just added a third little girl and without family to help out with occasional babysitting or grocery store trips I was feeling a bit overwhelmed.
(My personal favorite.)
I had hoped that somehow God would reveal to my husband that this adoption thing was out of the question, but instead, He changed my heart. He showed me, through tons of prayer, how much He believed in me and that I can do ANYTHING through His power and ability. That actually, when I am weak, then, am I strong!
After our decision was made, it was about a two year process to bring Lily home. It has been a journey that has changed my life and brought me closer to the Lord in so many ways. When we received the call about our referral I have never felt such JOY and RELIEF. We had been united AT LAST! When we saw her beautiful face, we knew that she was our daughter and that we would love her forever.
Lily was born with a bilateral cleft lip and a cleft palate. Her lip was repaired in China and she had her first cleft palate surgery earlier this year. We are scheduled for a second surgery in October. She attends speech lessons once a week and is quickly on the road to a full recovery. For more on surgery or cleft palate information, check my labels for surgery or cleft palate.
For more reading about Lily and our adoption journey, you can read all of her posts HERE.

One hot night, in Hindustan, a king and queen lay awake in the palace in the midst of the city. Every now and then a faint air blew through the lattice, and they hoped they were going to sleep, but they never did. Presently they became more broad awake than ever at the sound of a howl outside the palace.
‘Listen to that tiger!’ remarked the king.
‘Tiger?’ replied the queen. ‘How should there be a tiger inside the city? It was only a jackal.’
‘I tell you it was a tiger,’ said the king.
‘And I tell you that you were dreaming if you thought it was anything but a jackal,’ answered the queen.
‘I say it was a tiger,’ cried the king; ‘don’t contradict me.’
‘Nonsense!’ snapped the queen. ‘It was a jackal.’ And the dispute waxed so warm that the king said at last:
‘Very well, we’ll call the guard and ask; and if it was a jackal I’ll leave this kingdom to you and go away; and if it was a tiger then you shall go, and I will marry a new wife.’
‘As you like,’ answered the queen, ‘there isn’t any doubt which it was.’
So the king called the two soldiers who were on guard outside and put the question to them. But, whilst the dispute was going on, the king and queen had got so excited and talked so loud that the guards had heard nearly all they said, and one man observed to the other:
‘Mind you declare that the king is right. It certainly was a jackal, but, if we say so, the king will probably not keep his word about going away, and we shall get into trouble, so we had better take his side.’
To this the other agreed; therefore, when the king asked them what animal they had seen, both the guards said it was certainly a tiger, and that the king was right of course, as he always was. The king made no remark, but sent for a palanquin, and ordered the queen to be placed in it, bidding the four bearers of the palanquin to take her a long way off into the forest and there leave her. In spite of her tears, she was forced to obey, and away the bearers went for three days and three nights until they came to a dense wood. There they set down the palanquin with the queen in it, and started home again.
Now the queen thought to herself that the king could not mean to send her away for good, and that as soon as he had got over his fit of temper he would summon her back; so she stayed quite still for a long time, listening with all her ears for approaching footsteps, but heard none. After a while she grew nervous, for she was all alone, and put her head out of the palanquin and looked about her. Day was just breaking, and birds and insects were beginning to stir; the leaves rustled in a warm breeze; but, although the queen’s eyes wandered in all directions, there was no sign of any human being. Then her spirit gave way, and she began to cry.
It so happened that close to the spot where the queen’s palanquin had been set down, there dwelt a man who had a tiny farm in the midst of the forest, where he and his wife lived alone far from any neighbours. As it was hot weather the farmer had been sleeping on the flat roof of his house, but was awakened by the sound of weeping. He jumped up and ran downstairs as fast as he could, and into the forest towards the place the sound came from, and there he found the palanquin.
‘Oh, poor soul that weeps,’ cried the farmer, standing a little way off, ‘who are you?’ At this salutation from a stranger the queen grew silent, dreading she knew not what.
‘Oh, you that weep,’ repeated the farmer, ‘fear not to speak to me, for you are to me as a daughter. Tell me, who are you?’
His voice was so kind that the queen gathered up her courage and spoke. And when she had told her story, the farmer called his wife, who led her to their house, and gave her food to eat, and a bed to lie on. And in the farm, a few days later, a little prince was born, and by his mother’s wish named Ameer Ali.
Years passed without a sign from the king. His wife might have been dead for all he seemed to care, though the queen still lived with the farmer, and the little prince had by this time grown up into a strong, handsome, and healthy youth. Out in the forest they seemed far from the world; very few ever came near them, and the prince was continually begging his mother and the farmer to be allowed to go away and seek adventures and to make his own living. But she and the wise farmer always counselled him to wait, until, at last, when he was eighteen years of age, they had not the heart to forbid him any longer. So he started off one early morning, with a sword by his side, a big brass pot to hold water, a few pieces of silver, and a galail2 or two-stringed bow in his hand, with which to shoot birds as he travelled.
Many a weary mile he tramped day after day, until, one morning, he saw before him just such a forest as that in which he had been born and bred, and he stepped joyfully into it, like one who goes to meet an old friend. Presently, as he made his way through a thicket, he saw a pigeon which he thought would make a good dinner, so he fired a pellet at it from his galail, but missed the pigeon which fluttered away with a startled clatter. At the same instant he heard a great clamour from beyond the thicket, and, on reaching the spot, he found an ugly old woman streaming wet and crying loudly as she lifted from her head an earthen vessel with a hole in it from which the water was pouring. When she saw the prince with his galail in his hand, she called out:
‘Oh, wretched one! why must you choose an old woman like me to play your pranks upon? Where am I to get a fresh pitcher instead of this one that you have broken with your foolish tricks? And how am I to go so far for water twice when one journey wearies me?’
‘But, mother,’ replied the prince, ‘I played no trick upon you! I did but shoot at a pigeon that should have served me for dinner, and as my pellet missed it, it must have broken your pitcher. But, in exchange, you shall have my brass pot, and that will not break easily; and as for getting water, tell me where to find it, and I’ll fetch it while you dry your garments in the sun, and carry it whither you will.’
At this the old woman’s face brightened. She showed him where to seek the water, and when he returned a few minutes later with his pot filled to the brim, she led the way without a word, and he followed. In a short while they came to a hut in the forest, and as they drew near it Ameer Ali beheld in the doorway the loveliest damsel his eyes had ever looked on. At the sight of a stranger she drew her veil about her and stepped into the hut, and much as he wished to see her again Ameer Ali could think of no excuse by which to bring her back, and so, with a heavy heart, he made his salutation, and bade the old woman farewell. But when he had gone a little way she called after him:
‘If ever you are in trouble or danger, come to where you now stand and cry: “Fairy of the Forest! Fairy of the forest, help me now!” And I will listen to you.’
The prince thanked her and continued his journey, but he thought little of the old woman’s saying, and much of the lovely damsel. Shortly afterwards he arrived at a city; and, as he was now in great straits, having come to the end of his money, he walked straight to the palace of the king and asked for employment. The king said he had plenty of servants and wanted no more; but the young man pleaded so hard that at last the rajah was sorry for him, and promised that he should enter his bodyguard on the condition that he would undertake any service which was especially difficult or dangerous. This was just what Ameer Ali wanted, and he agreed to do whatever the king might wish.
Soon after this, on a dark and stormy night, when the river roared beneath the palace walls, the sound of a woman weeping and wailing was heard above the storm. The king ordered a servant to go and see what was the matter; but the servant, falling on his knees in terror, begged that he might not be sent on such an errand, particularly on a night so wild, when evil spirits and witches were sure to be abroad. Indeed, so frightened was he, that the king, who was very kind-hearted, bade another to go in his stead, but each one showed the same strange fear. Then Ameer Ali stepped forward:
‘This is my duty, your majesty,’ he said, ‘I will go.’
The king nodded, and off he went. The night was as dark as pitch, and the wind blew furiously and drove the rain in sheets into his face; but he made his way down to the ford under the palace walls and stepped into the flooded water. Inch by inch, and foot by foot he fought his way across, now nearly swept off his feet by some sudden swirl or eddy, now narrowly escaping being caught in the branches of some floating tree that came tossing and swinging down the stream. At length he emerged, panting and dripping wet, on the other side. Close by the bank stood a gallows, and on the gallows hung the body of some evildoer, whilst from the foot of it came the sound of sobbing that the king had heard.
Ameer Ali was so grieved for the one who wept there that he thought nothing of the wildness of the night or of the roaring river. As for ghosts and witches, they had never troubled him, so he walked up towards the gallows where crouched the figure of the woman.
‘What ails you?’ he said.
Now the woman was not really a woman at all, but a horrid kind of witch who really lived in Witchland, and had no business on earth. If ever a man strayed into Witchland the ogresses used to eat him up, and this old witch thought she would like to catch a man for supper, and that is why she had been sobbing and crying in hopes that someone out of pity might come to her rescue.
So when Ameer Ali questioned her, she replied:
‘Ah, kind sir, it is my poor son who hangs upon that gallows; help me to get him down and I will bless you for ever.’
Ameer Ali thought that her voice sounded rather eager than sorrowful, and he suspected that she was not telling the truth, so he determined to be very cautious.
‘That will be rather difficult,’ he said, ‘for the gallows is high, and we have no ladder.’
‘Ah, but if you will just stoop down and let me climb upon your shoulders,’ answered the old witch, ‘I think I could reach him.’ And her voice now sounded so cruel that Ameer Ali was sure that she intended some evil. But he only said:
‘Very well, we will try.’ With that he drew his sword, pretending that he needed it to lean upon, and bent so that the old woman could clamber on to his back, which she did very nimbly. Then, suddenly, he felt a noose slipped over his neck, and the old witch sprang from his shoulders on to the gallows, crying:
‘Now, foolish one, I have got you, and will kill you for my supper.’
But Ameer Ali gave a sweep upwards with his sharp sword to cut the rope that she had slipped round his neck, and not only cut the cord but cut also the old woman’s foot as it dangled above him; and with a yell of pain and anger she vanished into the darkness.
Ameer Ali then sat down to collect himself a little, and felt upon the ground by his side an anklet that had evidently fallen off the old witch’s foot. This he put into his pocket, and as the storm had by this time passed over he made his way back to the palace. When he had finished his story, he took the anklet out of his pocket and handed it to the king, who, like everyone else, was amazed at the glory of the jewels which composed it. Indeed, Ameer Ali himself was astonished, for he had slipped the anklet into his pocket in the dark and had not looked at it since. The king was delighted at its beauty, and having praised and rewarded Ameer Ali, he gave the anklet to his daughter, a proud and spoiled princess.
Now in the women’s apartments in the palace there hung two cages, in one of which was a parrot and in the other a starling, and these two birds could talk as well as human beings. They were both pets of the princess who always fed them herself, and the next day, as she was walking grandly about with her treasure tied round her ankle, she heard the starling say to the parrot:
‘Oh, Toté’ (that was the parrot’s name), ‘how do you think the princess looks in her new jewel?’
‘Think?’ snapped the parrot, who was cross because they hadn’t given him his bath that morning, ‘I think she looks like a washerwoman’s daughter, with one shoe on and the other off! Why doesn’t she wear two of them, instead of going about with one leg adorned and the other empty?’
When the princess heard this she burst into tears; and sending for her father she declared that he must get her another such an anklet to wear on the other leg, or she would die of shame. So the king sent for Ameer Ali and told him that he must get a second anklet exactly like the first within a month, or he should be hanged, for the princess would certainly die of disappointment.
Poor Ameer Ali was greatly troubled at the king’s command, but he thought to himself that he had, at any rate, a month in which to lay his plans. He left the palace at once, and inquired of everyone where the finest jewels were to be got; but though he sought night and day he never found one to compare with the anklet. At last only a week remained, and he was in sore difficulty, when he remembered the Fairy of the forest, and determined to go without loss of time and seek her. Therefore away he went, and after a day’s travelling he reached the cottage in the forest, and, standing where he had stood when the old woman called to him, he cried:
‘Fairy of the forest! Fairy of the forest! Help me! help me!’
Then there appeared in the doorway the beautiful girl he had seen before, whom in all his wanderings he had never forgotten.
‘What is the matter?’ she asked, in a voice so soft that he listened like one struck dumb, and she had to repeat the question before he could answer. Then he told her his story, and she went within the cottage and came back with two wands, and a pot of boiling water. The two wands she planted in the ground about six feet apart, and then, turning to him, she said:
‘I am going to lie down between these two wands. You must then draw your sword and cut off my foot, and, as soon as you have done that, you must seize it and hold it over the cauldron, and every drop of blood that falls from it into the water will become a jewel. Next you must change the wands so that the one that stood at my head is at my feet, and the one at my feet stands at my head, and place the severed foot against the wound and it will heal, and I shall become quite well again as before.’
At first Ameer Ali declared that he would sooner be hanged twenty times over than treat her so roughly; but at length she persuaded him to do her bidding. He nearly fainted himself with horror when he found that, after the cruel blow which lopped her foot off, she lay as one lifeless; but he held the severed foot over the cauldron, and, as drops of blood fell from it, and he saw each turn in the water into shining gems, his heart took courage. Very soon there were plenty of jewels in the cauldron, and he quickly changed the wands, placed the severed foot against the wound, and immediately the two parts became one as before. Then the maiden opened her eyes, sprang to her feet, and drawing her veil about her, ran into the hut, and would not come out or speak to him any more. For a long while he waited, but, as she did not appear, he gathered up the precious stones and returned to the palace. He easily got some one to set the jewels, and found that there were enough to make, not only one, but three rare and beautiful anklets, and these he duly presented to the king on the very day that his month of grace was over.
The king embraced him warmly, and made him rich gifts; and the next day the vain princess put two anklets on each foot, and strutted up and down in them admiring herself in the mirrors that lined her room.
‘Oh, Toté,’ asked the starling, ‘how do you think our princess looks now in these fine jewels?’
‘Ugh!’ growled the parrot, who was really always cross in the mornings, and never recovered his temper until after lunch, ‘she’s got all her beauty at one end of her now; if she had a few of those fine gew-gaws round her neck and wrists she would look better; but now, to my mind, she looks more than ever like the washerwoman’s daughter dressed up.’
Poor princess! she wept and stormed and raved until she made herself quite ill; and then she declared to her father that, unless she had bracelets and necklace to match the anklets she would die.
Again the king sent for Ameer Ali, and ordered him to get a necklace and bracelets to match those anklets within a month, or be put to a cruel death.
And again Ameer Ali spent nearly the whole month searching for the jewels, but all in vain. At length he made his way to the hut in the forest, and stood and cried:
‘Fairy of the forest! Fairy of the forest! Help me! help me!’
Once more the beautiful maiden appeared at his summons and asked what he wanted, and when he had told her she said he must do exactly as he had done the first time, except that now he must cut off both her hands and her head. Her words turned Ameer Ali pale with horror; but she reminded him that no harm had come to her before, and at last he consented to do as she bade him. From her severed hands and head there fell into the cauldron bracelets and chains of rubies and diamonds, emeralds and pearls that surpassed any that ever were seen. Then the head and hands were joined on to the body, and left neither sign nor scar. Full of gratitude, Ameer Ali tried to speak to her, but she ran into the house and would not come back, and he was forced to leave her and go away laden with the jewels.
When, on the day appointed, Ameer Ali produced a necklace and bracelets each more beautiful and priceless than the last, the king’s astonishment knew no bounds, and as for his daughter she was nearly mad with joy. The very next morning she put on all her finery, and thought that now, at least, that disagreeable parrot could find no fault with her appearance, and she listened eagerly when she heard the starling say:
‘Oh, Toté, how do you think our princess is looking now?’
‘Very fine, no doubt,’ grumbled the parrot; ‘but what is the use of dressing up like that for oneself only? She ought to have a husband — why doesn’t she marry the man who got her all these splendid things?’
Then the princess sent for her father and told him that she wished to marry Ameer Ali.
‘My dear child,’ said her father, ‘you really are very difficult to please, and want something new every day. It certainly is time you married someone, and if you choose this man, of course he shall marry you.’
So the king sent for Ameer Ali, and told him that within a month he proposed to do him the honour of marrying him to the princess, and making him heir to the throne.
On hearing this speech Ameer Ali bowed low and answered that he had done and would do the king all the service that lay in his power, save only this one thing. The king, who considered his daughter’s hand a prize for any man, flew into a passion, and the princess was more furious still. Ameer Ali was instantly thrown into the most dismal prison that they could find, and ordered to be kept there until the king had time to think in what way he should be put to death.
Meanwhile the king determined that the princess ought in any case to be married without delay, so he sent forth heralds throughout the neighbouring countries, proclaiming that on a certain day any person fitted for a bridegroom and heir to the throne should present himself at the palace.
When the day came, all the court were gathered together, and a great crowd assembled of men, young and old, who thought that they had as good a chance as anyone else to gain both the throne and the princess. As soon as the king was seated, he called upon an usher to summon the first claimant. But, just then, a farmer who stood in front of the crowd cried out that he had a petition to offer.
‘Well, hasten then,’ said the king; ‘I have no time to waste.’
‘Your majesty,’ said the farmer, ‘has now lived and administered justice long in this city, and will know that the tiger who is king of beasts hunts only in the forest, whilst jackals hunt in every place where there is something to be picked up.’
‘What is all this? what is all this?’ asked the king. ‘The man must be mad!’
‘No, your majesty,’ answered the farmer, ‘I would only remind your majesty that there are plenty of jackals gathered to-day to try and claim your daughter and kingdom: every city has sent them, and they wait hungry and eager; but do not, O king, mistake or pretend again to mistake the howl of a jackal for the hunting cry of a tiger.’
The king turned first red and then pale.
‘There is,’ continued the farmer, ‘a royal tiger bred in the forest who has the first and only true claim to your throne.’
‘Where? what do you mean?’ stammered the king, growing pale as he listened.
‘In prison,’ replied the farmer; ‘if your majesty will clear this court of the jackals I will explain.’
‘Clear the court!’ commanded the king; and, very unwillingly, the visitors left the palace.
‘Now tell me what riddle this is,’ said he.
Then the farmer told the king and his ministers how he had rescued the queen and brought up Ameer Ali; and he fetched the old queen herself, whom he had left outside. At the sight of her the king was filled with shame and self-reproach, and wished he could have lived his life over again, and not have married the mother of the proud princess, who caused him endless trouble until her death.
‘My day is past,’ said he. And he gave up his crown to his son Ameer Ali, who went once more and called to the forest fairy to provide him with a queen to share his throne.
‘There is only one person I will marry,’ said he. And this time the maiden did not run away, but agreed to be his wife. So the two were married without delay, and lived long and reigned happily.
As for the old woman whose pitcher Ameer Ali had broken, she was the forest maiden’s fairy godmother, and when she was no longer needed to look after the girl she gladly returned to fairyland.
The old king has never been heard to contradict his wife any more. If he even looks as if he does not agree with her, she smiles at him and says:
‘Is it the tiger, then? or the jackal?’ And he has not another word to say.
2 A galail is a double-stringed bow from which bullets or pellets of hard dried clay can be fired with considerable force and precision.
Last updated Sunday, March 27, 2016 at 11:57

DAVIS (CBS13) – A Sacramento man seconds away from being crushed by a semi-truck was saved by a Good Samaritan.
Before 22-year-old Justin Wilson falls asleep in his hospital bed, it will happen again. He will see the face of the woman who saved his life and wonder who is she and where she came from.
“I could feel like it was broken and I couldn’t move,” said Wilson.
He was helpless, broken and stunned after slamming his car into a wall on a stretch of the Capital City Freeway early Tuesday morning.
Wilson had fallen asleep at the wheel.
“Just fell asleep on the way home,” said Wilson.
The impact broke his hand and snapped his femur in two.
“My upper leg was like Jell-O,” said Wilson.
Dazed and confused, Wilson realized he was in serious danger. He had no where to hide.
“There was a curve there and it was nighttime and they couldn’t see me so people were trying to swerve out of the way to avoid me,” said Wilson.
He tried waving somebody down for help. Justin was a sitting duck.
“Finally, somebody stopped,” said Wilson.
Not just somebody, Wilson and his family believe it was his guardian angel.
“She put my arm around her and she helped me over the guard rail and she said ‘We got to get out of here because we’re going to get hit by a car,’” said Wilson.
His angel was clairvoyant.
“The semi came around and hit that car and it sounded like a bomb, it was so loud,” said Wilson.
A semi-truck slammed into Wilson’s car, seconds after he was pulled to safety by a woman who left as soon as the paramedics arrived.
She was a mystery woman who disappeared into the darkness.
“Nobody knows who she is,” said Wilson.
Wilson is now trying to find her.
“I just want to tell her thank you for stopping and I really think she saved my life that night,” said Wilson.
Touched by an angel, saved by a stranger, whatever your belief, Wilson and his family know.
“Somebody was looking out for me,” said Wilson.
“There’s no question in my mind she saved my brother’s life,” said Wilson’s sister.
And, there’s no question that Wilson and his family would like to find the person who saved his life.
As for his condition, he may have to have another surgery, but he should be out of the hospital within the next couple of days.

On Wednesday, a devastating incident took place in Roosevelt, New Jersey. A woman, who had been living in a home with several cats, set a fire after being issued an eviction notice.
Officials have stated that the fire started at around 11 o’clock in the morning after the unidentified woman refused to vacate the property after receiving an eviction notice from police.
New Jersey State Police Lieutenant Lawrence Peele said that there were signs that the woman had activated the gas before causing the fire.
Peele stated that the firefighters had to evacuate the neighboring areas, and multiple fire departments were called in to save the woman, though she and the cats did not survive.
Erin Luca, a nearby resident, stated that the police had warned them to leave the area due to the woman’s threats to bomb the house which ended up burning down.
According to reports the woman’s boyfriend had been trying to evict her for a while but Governor Phil Murphy’s eviction moratorium due to the pandemic had blocked his efforts.
Mayor Peggy Malkin of Roosevelt said that the woman had built a “cat house” for the cats to stay in. The actual amount of cats that were killed in the fire is yet to be confirmed.
PSE&G is currently examining the area, and officials are advising people to stay away from the residence as it is not safe.

Ok, I am done with my Valentine stitchery. I tried to take the best picture I could of it. It was hard because the light kept reflecting off it. Anyway, while I had the camera out I decided I would take some more random shots around the house. You got to remember it's Sunday again so I'm doing my girly stuff while the guys are watching boring TV. I have already tried once to put them on and didn't do it right cause my computer shut down. Gee whiz, does anybody else have this much trouble trying to do something that evidently the whole world out there already knows how to do?!? Derek keeps laughing at me. He can't seem to understand why something so easy could be so hard. Rusty keeps hollering, "can you order a new brain!!" I think everybody is ganging up on me! Oh well, what am I here for if not to put a few laughs in everybodys life.I think poor Doug has inherited some of my blondness cause after he had been up all morning and had even looked outside he asks us if it snowed last night!I said, my gosh Doug, you're asking one of my questions. Well he informed us he meant, did it snow anymore than it already had. See, that is what I would have meant too, had I asked that question. You just have to know how our minds work!! I know I know, you are thinking, what a bunch of nuts but chances are if you are reading this post it's because you're either related to us or you are a friend thats supposed to love us in spite of our faults!!!!!

A year-by-year review of Buffalo's indoor lacrosse team, plus some historical league statistics.
Monday, May 18, 2009
The 2006-07 Season
The Buffalo Bandits obviously didn't need to change too much as the 2007 season approached. No one suggested that it was time to tear down the walls; a simple rearranging of the furniture would be fine.
That started in June when A.J. Shannon was sent to Edmonton. Buffalo received a first-round draft pick for 2006, the third overall. The Rush picked up a first-rounder in 2007. The Bandits also acquired Kevin Dostie from Calgary for former first-rounder Jeff Shattler and a second-round pick in 2007.
Meanwhile, the National Lacrosse League's expansion plans for 2007 were no secret. As early as February, it was reported that Chicago and New York were coming to the league. The Chicago team eventually would be known as the Shamrox. New York didn't have a name in July when the expansion draft was held for the two teams. Buffalo lost Bryan Kazarian and Jon Harasym to Chicago.
In September, Buffalo took time out to honor two of its own. The League announced its selections for its Hall of Fame. Darris Kilgour, the coach and general manager of the Bandits, wasn't a big surprise, having been around the NLL in one capacity for another since Day One.
"I had a relatively short career so I really didn't think I had that great a chance," Kilgour said. "Plus a lot of my career was spent in the penalty box so I didn't know how that would figure into it."
Bufflao News' lacrosse writer Tom Borrelli was also included on the list. Borrelli had covered the team since 1993. In 2005, the league had named its writer of the year award after him. The pair was honored in Philadelphia before a Bandits-Wings game in February.
In September's draft, San Jose had the first two picks and chose Ryna Benesch and Kyle Sorensen. The Bandits went third and picked Brett Bucktooth of Syracuse University, who would fit in quickly. Buffalo made one other addition for the season, making original coach Bob "Buff" McCready its goaltending coach.
The games started on December 30, when the Bandits lost to Portland, 11-10 in overtime. It was part of a slow start for Buffalo, perhaps because goalie Steve Dietrich was out with a knee injury. Mike Thompson, who had been signed as a free agent and who hadn't played in the NLL since 2001, started the first five games -- including the home opener that drew a sellout of 18,690 on Jan. 12. One of the highlights of the early going came when John Tavares had a career-best 13 points (10 assists) in a 22-13 win over Minnesota.
Dietrich finally saw action on Feb. 2, a home loss to Toronto, in a game that left Buffalo's Tavares fuming.
"We were already short and they were calling very mediocre penalties," said Tavares, who had two goals and three assists. "It's very frustrating playing catch-up all night. It's demoralizing. I feel sorry for the 13,000 fans that were here. Every time we touched somebody we got a penalty. It got to be ridiculous."
Dietrich started the next night in Toronto and lost that one. That put the Bandits' record at 2-4, but the team came around after that.
"These last two games were more frustrating than even last year's championship," said Kilgour, referring to last May's penalty-filled 16-9 loss to Colorado. "We gave up the lead with absolutely selfish penalties over and over in the fourth quarter and we deserved every one of them. This weekend was absolutely unacceptable. I'm disgusted with my team right now."
Rebounding smartly, Buffalo ran off eight straight wins to move to 10-4. It was the second-longest win streak in team history. The Bandits even added some reinforcements along the way by giving up a first-round pick to Toronto for Phil Sanderson. The hot streak put the Bandits solidly in playoff position, with a chance to tie for the division in a home-and-home series with Rochester to close the regular season.
"When were at 2-4 we realized if we wanted any chance for first we were basically going to have to win out," said Kyle Laverty, one of the Bandits' best backliners. "We're building every game, getting better. We're on a roll at the right time."
That roll came to an end against Rochester. The Knighthawks took a 14-10 win in the opener of the series in Buffalo. Dietrich hurt his knee in that game.
"My knee just buckled on me, they don't know what's wrong with it," said Dietrich. "They don't think it's anything structural. The kneecap may have dislocated and then popped itself back into place. There's not a lot of pain right now, so that's a good sign."
The next night at home with nothing at stake they had an easier time, winning by 14-8. Rochester finished 14-2, the best record in the league, while the Bandits were 10-6.
Tavares was picked for his 15th straight All-Pro team after a 103-point season, Dostie was second on the team in goals with 29. Bucktooth chipped in with 26 points.
Buffalo drew Minnesota in the first-round playoff game on April 22. John Tavares had three goals and was the game MVP as the Bandits advanced with a 14-8 victory. Jason Crosbie had the killer goal of the night that put Buffalo up, 12-8.
"You don't really plan it, that stuff just kind of happens when you take a chance," said Crosbie. "I shoot a lot of underhanded stuff. I was looking for something knee-high, it just went under his stick. When I saw that red [light] go off, I was really pumped. That was probably a pretty big goal."
Meanwhile, goalie Thompson was sharp in the nets as a sub for the injured Dietrich.
"Throughout the season our confidence has spilled out onto me," said Thompson, who made 38 saves and blanked the Swarm the entire second half. "There wasn't any problem with my confidence. A couple of [the first four scores] were squeakers that I got a piece of. I just tried to calm myself down a little bit, it being my first playoff game. In the second half, everybody settled down."
Rochester and its 13-game win streak were waiting in the semifinal on April 27. Still, Buffalo seemed to have things in control in the fourth quarter as it had a three-goal lead in the fourth quarter.
Oops. The Knighthawks rallied for a 14-13 overtime win. Mike Accursi was the MVP for Rochester, while John Grant had the game-winning goal 26 seconds into the extra session. He beat Thompson, who had a remarkable 52 saves.
"Throughout the game he [Grant] had a tendency to go the other way," said Thompson, who allowed only two total goals in the middle quarters when the Bandits forged their lead. "He came like a twister. He looks like he's shooting short [side] but he goes long to the far side. I thought I had it. It pinched between the ground and my leg but it squeezed through there. I didn't even see it go in."
The Knighthawks were supposed to host the championship game, but the circus was in town ... literally. The NLL Board of Governors voted to move the game to Arizona, and the unfazed Knighthawks beat Arizona there, 13-11, to win the title.
The crowds in Buffalo had returned, as every game attracted at least 12,000 fans and the average attendance was a shade over 15,000. Now the Bandits had to find away to reward that loyalty.

Gender: Female Age: 20 Location: California
|Introduction: The Darkmoon Faire (part 2) Rather short, as stories go, but ... whatever. If you're looking to jack off to this, then... well, enjoy the ending. >:) Think of it as a Valentine's gift! <3|
I guess good things just couldn't happen to me, because if they did, I get hurt in the end.
"So, um, what is this supposed to be?"
Jarred, next to me, looked defeated and slightly horrified. There must've been something nice there before, but something ate it and left a "present" where some scraps and torn bits of cloth lay around it on the sand.
"I spent a long time on that," he muttered in disbelief.
"It's okay, I can help you remake it.."
"No." He said decisively. I was surprised and somewhat hurt by his answer.
I was about to say something, but stopped as he took my face in his hands. I shut my mouth before I started blubbering.
He brushed my hair away from my forehead and caressed my face. It was odd, thinking about it. His hands had wielded swords and hammers and shields, yet they were so gentle.
We stared into each other's eyes, leaning closer together, all my thoughts of "I've never done this before" vanishing as we met for the inevitable kiss--
"Heya, laddie! I've just come by for the fishin' spots, if ah.. oh." A dwarf with a shocking red beard had suddenly appeared, waving with a fishing pole in hand. Jarred turned his head just slightly, his hands still on me. He look in his eyes must have clearly read "fuck off, buddy" so the dwarf widened his eyes and began to sprint away.
Jarred turned back to me and whispered "I'm sorry about that." And then he leaned forward, putting one hand behind my dark hair and another by my waist, pressing his lips against mine. It feels as though I've been transported to another, happier place. Ragged breathing and dancing tongues bring a fiery heat to the cool ocean air. With just the two of us there, the rest of the world disappeared.
When we break apart, I've only done so because my head was spinning from the lack of air. I let out a breath of pleased laughter and Jarred grins. The very sight makes my heart skip a beat, and I put my head on his shoulder. It just felt right.
I think this is what love felt like.
"It's getting dark," I said (although I didn't feel like moving for another few days).
"I did bring out candles, but I think they were eaten too." Jarred's words make me laugh. "You can check if you like!"
"No thanks! But don't you think we should be getting back?"
He shook his head.
"What if I get cold?" I said teasingly. He grinned again.
"I can think of a way for you to get warm."
I rolled my eyes, but he wasn't kidding. He pulled me closer again.
Jarred and I moved onto the sand, him leaning over me, his hands lightly holding down my wrists above my head. My clothes were lying in a disheveled heap somewhere in the shadows, forgotten.
His lips trailed across my jaw line, my neck, down to my collarbone. I squirmed under him; the fleeting kisses ticklish.
I met his eyes and he smiled. From what I could see in the moonlight, it was a fairly predatory grin. The smile itself sent a jolt through my core. I could feel a wetness growing there. He also seemed to notice that.
Jarred shifted in the sand and moved between my legs, which he nudged apart with his knee. I squeaked like a frightened mouse. His sapphire eyes lingered over my trimmed patch of dark hair. Knowing that he had now seen me -- all of me -- turned my skin to goosebumps.
I felt one of Jarred's fingers reach down to my slit, teasing, toying with me. Running lightly across my clit, the folds, maddeningly close to my entrance and then back again. A moan rose from my throat involuntarily. Then he paused, his fingers still. It was torture.
"Don't stop. Please don't stop," I said, begging him. Seconds later, his fingers were replaced with his tongue.
This had been done to me before, but no times had it felt like this. I realized then that this was most certainly not Jarred's first time doing this.
I cried out in pleasure, feeling the warmth of his tongue just barely probing my entrance. I could feel him lapping out the juices that had gathered there.
"You taste like honey," he breathed. I didn't answer. I don't think I could've.
He put his whole mouth over my pussy, licking and sucking at my clit now. I moved my legs to give him better access, although he seemed to be doing just fine. He continued, his tongue working furiously over me.
One of his hands reached up, grabbing my left breast and tweaking a nipple, which only brings louder moans from me. I shook my head from side to side, bucking my hips slightly.
"I think.. I think I'm going to..." was all I managed. And then I felt the pleasure reach a crescendo, my senses overload and sensation spilled through me in waves.
It took me several moments to recover from the orgasm, as I was lying there, twitching and panting. During this time Jarred was tearing the cloth shirt off of his head, revealing his bare chest outlined in moonlight. I could just make out long, thin scars across his well-toned chest. He was most definitely muscled.
I felt lucky, in a way. Lucky to have him. "Thanks," I mumbled, moving to sit upright and properly thank him.
"We're not done yet, Kara." I blinked as he put a hand on my shoulder to stop me. I was uncomprehending until he got to his knees and I could see the entirety of his stiff cock.
So he wanted to go the whole way? That was perfectly fine with me!
"Think you can handle it?" he challenged me, seeing my wide eyes.
"Try me!" I responded, and my words brought another grin from him. Before I knew that happened, I was on my hands and knees, his hands firmly grasping where my leg met my hip. I felt the head of his cock press into me -- his saliva and my pussy juice provided enough lubrication for him to slip in and push his cock deep inside me.
He took a moment to adjust, then lifted me a little so he could reach and squeeze my right breast. He thrusted a few times, slowly, but began pumping faster and harder. I began gasping words out that sounded something like "Faster! Do it faster! Harder.. more.."
His hand reached down and began to play with my clit, I stiffened and slammed back against him, hard. Immediate and overwhelming pleasure overcoming me. And it still wasn't enough.
I was fairly sure that the only thing that could drive me into another mind-blowing orgasm could be more speed, however it seemed like he was going as fast as humanly possible. Then I feel him draw out so that just the very tip of him is inside me, and then brutally thrust as deep as he could go. I moaned, and his grip on me relaxed. I felt a gushing warmth spurt from him, sending several ropes of his cum into me.
Almost immediately after, the aching feeling that had built up finally peaked and waves of pleasure radiated from my core all throughout me. I remember lying next to him, like a fish out of water, trying how to remember how to breathe.
---(The next morning)
We had dressed and ate quickly when the clouds turned a brighter shade, talking giddily to each other. I had to work soon and the Faire was about to close its portal to Elwynn. Jarred had paladin things to do, anyway. We knew this and dreaded it, but remained optimistic on the premise that he would return the coming month and we would be together again.
I watched him leave by the enormous eye at the entrance of the Faire. He was mounted on his armored warhorse that made its way up the earthy ramp. He turned to me, a sad smile on his face, giving me a little wave. I waved back, putting up a fake smile.
When he was out of sight and in the gloomy forest, I ran to the back of a closed tent and cried. I stopped and told myself, It's okay. He'll be back next month. I can see him then.
So I waited. And waited. And waited some more.
A month passed. The entire week that the portal was open in Elwynn, every day I waited expectantly with the welcoming group. Masses of adventurers and heroes and peasants passed by, each gushing at the wonders of the Faire. I remained blankly staring at the shifting light of the portal, hoping that with each flash his face would appear and light up in that smile of his.
"He's not coming back, Kara," Keri said. trying to put her words as softly as she could. "I'm sorry."
"I've let you wait the week. The portal's moving to Shattrath now, and work must get done. Perhaps next time, my dear," Silas told me, looking at me with pity.
"Maybe he didn't like you after all," the frog-vendor-girl commented. Maybe he didn't. Or maybe there was something that prevented him from getting to me.
I held tightly onto this futile belief, and soon my coworkers knew that bringing him up was a dangerous subject to speak of around me. Even the animals I worked with sensed my tension, and in turn, grew more difficult to handle.
Wasn't love supposed to last forever? The fleeting moment of bliss, the feeling that someone cared for me. All my problems seemingly erased by the one magical night. The rising of the sun brought everything crashing back. Everything quietly assumed normal routine with Jarred or not. Keri was back to being a bitch, bringing guys home every other night, a bottle of something strong in her hand. Work continued. I was left in the "don't look in the eyes" zone.
Perhaps love didn't last, after all. Maybe love just wasn't something that would ever happen to me, the nobody, the girl lost in her sister's shadow.
But that was okay. Maybe it was for the best.
Read 3969 times | Rated 83.3 (24 votes)
Please login to rate this story

Two people are now in jail after a man says he was beaten, robbed and had his vehicle stolen, which was later found burned on a dead end street in Goldsboro.
Police say Tammy Ferrell and Kenneth Dixon have been charged with kidnapping, robbery with a dangerous weapon, larceny of a motor vehicle, burning of personal property, financial card fraud and assault with serious bodily injury.
The attack happened January 27th on Virginia Street. Edgardo Harrow, Jr. told police he had been beaten and robbed. They found his stolen burned vehicle at the dead end of Pearson Street.
Dixon was arrested in Raleigh on Wednesday and is being held on a $1.5 million secured bond.

"I've spent the last three weeks singing "Marrakesh Express" by Crosby, Stills and Nash - much to my family's annoyance, as I only know two lines of the chorus. And it turned out that I even sing those wrong. We had already travelled at the beginning of September and had chosen Greece instead of Marrakesh. When an offer from TUI Blue Medina Gardens appeared on the intranet, I showed it to my partner Fran and joked, "Look, we could go to Morocco after all".
You should never joke with Fran about a holiday, especially not one where there is sun. She is from Sicily and "suffers" from a severe vitamin D deficiency most of the time. "I still have plenty of holidays to take," Fran said. But the problem was that I didn't have many holidays left and I had a big project coming up. That's when Fran reminded me about the "working abroad" thing and asked if I could work from the hotel?
Fran had a good point. TUI had just launched TUI WORKWIDE. The prospect of working in 35 degree heat and occasionally jumping into the pool was very tempting. So it happened that I put in an enquiry with my employer about 10 days before the planned departure. There are some practical things to consider when you want to work abroad. The first and most important point is Wi-Fi. As it turned out, TUI Blue guarantees a download speed of 2 Mbps, so I was pretty confident it would work out. Secondly, how much time would I actually spend working and how much on holiday?
We were on the road for a total of seven nights, one day of which I took holiday, so we had a long weekend off. Otherwise, I worked full time. While I was in Morocco, I chaired a couple of team meetings with about 40 people dialed into quite an extensive presentation, and it all went smoothly so no one really noticed I wasn't in England."

How do I get over my ex
We dated for 3 years.We were so close we considered tieing the knot. after three years he vanished. blocked me from everything. well 6 months later he came back and we were friends until he wanted me to be his first. then we got back together and sure enough he disappeared again. but now i have a feeling he isnt coming back. a year later i can't stop thinking about him. it hurts so bad at times. Any good ideas on how i can let go I cant handle this pain anymore.

My world was slowly coming apart, and I was not even aware of it. I'm in a open meadow out in the country, the sun was at its peak, a gentle breeze rustling the leafs of the old trees, just out of sight was a waterfall that feed into a small lake, I knew this as this was where I spent most of my childhood, hiding from my parents.
I'm resting on a high branch of an oak tree, watching the horizon simmer. I feel safe, but lonely, as one does when you are left alone at night as a child. I looked up to see a lonesome buzzard zipping around and I felt a pang of jealousy, "I wish I had wings" I muttered to myself. The buzzard was then join by another, and my jealously was replaced with hatred, not of the buzzard that had just scored.
But with how, I seem to be the only one alone on the planet. I sighed to myself as I always do.
Not to piss on paradise, but it just isn't the same when you're on your own. I climbed down the oak tree, taking a moment to take in this awesome view, and then headed to where the waterfall waited, I striped down to my boxers and strolled in, it didn't seem to be as cold as it used to be, but it's a sunny day I rationalized, I swam until I didn't know which way which up.
With a little confusion I climbed out and headed to find my clothes, I found them, I threw them on and I walked down towards the meadow, I headed towards the woods, and went in search of one thing in particular, in a long dead tree, was the remnants of possibly the worst constructed attempt at a tree house in existence, I had built it as a child with my cousin Sam, we had only been 6 or 7 at the time, but we truly through we what we had built was going to be the empire state building of the UK, so we were abit full of ourselves, what are you going to do, sue us.?
I had found it, I laughed as I saw the signs we had put down to keep people out, they looked as if a baboon was let loose with spray paint, "waning dangrus" and "sta owt", we really couldn't spell. But it never stopped us, if fact when Sam pointed it out, I told him: amateur wife flashing truckers and rough young anal breakin attempt suspect has to boink "NO, I don't spell it wrong, the world spells it wrong.
Mines right", I couldn't help but laugh at how naive I was back then, after opening the "secret door" which was more just a piece of corrugated iron covering a hole. I walked around and looked out our handiwork, nearly a decade old and still standing, not bad.
I crawled out again and headed back towards the meadow. What I was on the horizon made my jaw drop and my stomach jump. On the horizon, silhouetted by the descending sun, was a girl. She was leaned up against the oak I had been resting in what had only seemed like moments ago.
Going on the shape on the silhouette I was certain she was wearing some loose jeans and a tank top, I could see the sunlight bouncing off her belly bar, her hair cascading down and over her shoulder.
She must have been an angel, maybe a goddess, but I could do nothing but stare. She stood straight and waved to me, not really sure of what was going on I waved back, but didn't move.
She walked towards me, as she did so, I couldn't help see how majestic her stride was, like a panther or a lioness, or a model on a cat walk, if you prefer. She stopped at the end of the shadow of the oak, keeping herself bathed in darkness. She raised a delicate hand to me, an offer. To join her in the shadows, I hadn't much to lose, so I reached up, took a breathe closed my eyes and took her hand, the next time I opened my eyes, I'm hand in hand with the girl, we are running though the field, giggling, smiling.
She stops and sits of the ground, then rolled on her side, head resting in her hand, watching me.
I stop and look down at her with a smile, though I'm looking at her, It's is like you cant remember it. Like when you see something 1,000 times, but only really notice on the 1,001th look.
But I hadn't looked 1,001 times; I couldn't remember her, though she was stretched out before me.
I quickly joined her on the ground. I reach up and hold her chin, gently stroking the side of her delicate face, but only gazing into her eyes, she leans forwards and places her lips on mine, there is no shock, no hesitation before I return the kiss. Not a lust filled kiss, but one of pure passion and love.
She breaks the contract after awhile and smiles at me, staring into my eyes, I leaned forward again, but this time I playfully wrestle with her on the ground, its all happened in slow motion, like in a romantic film the laughter seemed louder, the bird songs quieter, even the blowing of the trees mature babe and cute teen share one giant manhood together pornstars hardcore silent.
In the end we end up in each other's arms just watching the sunset. Maybe this was a message, that we are not alone and that we can't find hope in the darkest of times. I tightened my hold on this girl, and I felt her leaned into me, resting her head on my chest, my cheek cushioning her top of her head, it was not long before I felt her breathing deepen and I knew she was safe.
As I watched the stars shine I knew I'd do anything for the women in my arms. I didn't know what was happening, or who she was, but I did know this was the happiest I had ever felt. The world slowly began to darken and in the end all I could see was her crimson hair.
But sooner or later, we all have to wake up.

he will be my Son
I Will Be His Father, He Will Be My Son
1 Chronicles 17:13 I will be his father, and he will be my son. I will not take my loving kindness away from him, as I took it from him who was before you;
Hebrews 1:5 For to which of the angels did he say at any time,
“You are my Son.
Today I have become your father?”
“I will be to him a Father,
and he will be to me a Son?”

Last Friday in the afternoon we we're wondering why we are marching to the hall.Once we sat in a line we saw a special guest -Mario actually his name is Luke Nola.
Luke showed us some video of his inventions . He was in 2 TVs shows as well.
So after that he showed us one of his own app that he created it is called lets get inventing.
The app is all about inventing one of your own inventions.
On the app I created a jump jet it is made from a jet and a pogo stick.

Remember this quilt kit I bought last year in Sisters (last year, at band camp...)? I seriously only bought 2 kits, but they are giving me an entire YEAR of projects. (I'm going again in July - Danger!!)
Well anyhow, I was browsing Flickr and found a few awesome brick path-ish quilts. And while I wanted to make one with cool, fun, new fabrics, I just couldn't do it. Not with an entire BIN of perfectly good, coordinating fabrics lying around. So, I did a little stash-n-burn.
This is top is completely made of leftover fabrics from that kit - enough for a whole entire quilt (crib-sized)!! I made a modified version of the brick-path to maximize my scraps. I'm not sure why there was so much excess in the kit...maybe I was supposed to make something else with the kit and I missed it, or maybe the quilt was supposed to be bigger, I don't know.
Anyhow, I feel good about utilizing some of my stash. Now I can just go out and buy MORE! (that is so not green, forget I said that) I think this line of prints has had its season with me.
It's probably cheating to post about this once before and once after it's completed, but that's how I roll. See you in a couple days!

Joey's life had been changed forever when his genes had evolved amongst those in his old neighborhood in the city giving him super-speed and turning him inhuman. Throughout the years after this incident, his powers had been kept as a family secret. Even Joey's long-time friend, Brandon, has not known about this phenomenon.
Patricia is another one of Brandon’s long-time friends who has taken up a particular interest in martial arts. In fact, her skills seem to range from surprising to unbelievable and possibly deadly. When asked where she had learned her moves, she will always shrug off with a reply saying that she learned them from a “special” school.
Brandon may have the powers and abilities of a supreme being, but at the end of the day, is still a nerd at heart. After surviving an asteroid that landed on him, he is discovering new powers throughout his days while gradually coinciding with the life of a superhero. However, for him, balancing a regular teenage life with crime fighting can be quite the task since he will constantly focus on one while losing track of the other. Despite these challenges, it will take more than that to keep him from saving the day.
Brandon was your average comic book geek who seemed more worried about picking up the latest issue than what was going on in the world. That soon changed, however, when he was struck by a mysterious asteroid containing energy that would grant him powers, but not right off the bat. Now he is on the path of unlocking his abilities while gradually going into the life of a superhero as his world turns upside down with secrets revealed and the entire universe hunting for his power.
Jermaine, some say, is too smart to be even human, but more of a walking computer. And who can blame them, since he seems to always have an answer for any situation with a high IQ and a specialty of inventing gadgets out of the smallest scraps. He is the oldest out of Brandon's friends who is willing to help him with anything but only with reason.

Emma Stone has always been very open about her anxiety. Way back in 2011, when she was first becoming known for her work in Superbad and Easy A and long before she became an Academy Award winner, she told Glamour about her mental health journey. "I had massive anxiety as a child," she said at the time. "I was in therapy. From 8 to 10, I was borderline agora-phobic. I could not leave my mom's side. I don't really have panic attacks anymore, but I had really bad anxiety."
Ever since, she's continued to speak openly and frankly about mental health. The latest example? On Monday, October 1, she appeared alongside Child Mind Institute Co-Founder & President Dr. Harold S. Koplewicz for a discussion on mental health disorders and the stigmas that surround them. Titled "Great Minds Think Unalike," the panel worked to shed light on the challenges of living with anxiety—which, according to the Anxiety and Depression Association of America, affects 40 million adults each year (making it the most common mental illness in the U.S.).
On stage, Stone described the moment she had her first panic attack at seven years old. "Before I went into second grade, I had my first panic attack," she said. "It was really, really terrifying and overwhelming; I was over at a friend’s house and all of a sudden I was absolutely convinced the house was on fire and it was going to burn down. I was just sitting in her bedroom, and obviously the house wasn’t on fire—but there was nothing in me that didn’t think we weren’t going to die."
Suffering from what she and her mother later learned was a panic attack, Stone explains that these feelings of anxiousness continued for the next two years. "I couldn’t go to friends’ houses, I had deep separation anxiety with my mom...I was so paranoid about everything," she explained. "We truly thought I wasn’t going to be able to move out of the house and move away ever. How would I go to college? How would I do any of this if I couldn’t be at a friend’s house for 5 minutes?”
As she grew older, Stone was able to better manage her anxiety, a skill she attributes to her supportive family and years of "transformative" therapy. It helped her realise that while the disorder was a part of her life, it did not define her. “It’s so normal," she said. "Everyone experiences a version of anxiety or worry in their lives, and maybe we go through it in a different or more intense way for longer periods of time, but there’s nothing wrong with you."
In fact, the Maniac actress said anxiety can be viewed in a positive light. "To be a sensitive person that cares a lot, that takes things in in a deep way is actually part of what makes you amazing, and is one of the greatest gifts of life," she said. "You think a lot, you feel a lot, you feel deeply—it’s the best.”
When asked how she continues to manage her anxiety every day in the midst of her hectic production schedule, Stone explained that she sticks to a routine that works for her. "I go to a therapist, I meditate, and I talk to people very quickly now—instead of isolating I reach out." Most of all, Stone said pushing herself outside of her comfort zone (as in: today's panel) proves to be wholly restorative, especially if it means she's able to help others. "[It's] healing to just talk about it and own it and realise that this is something that is part of me, but it is not who I am," she said. "And if that can help anybody…if I can do anything to say 'Hey, I get it, and I’m there with you, and you can still get out there and achieve dreams and form really great relationships and connections,' then I hope I’m able to do that."

GET IMMEDIATE HELP
So you have misfuelled your vehicle in Barlborough and are thinking about the best way to fix the dilemma. In the event that you're here looking through this that means you are at least on the right road. All you need to do at this moment is contact us so that we can come out to drain your vehicle. As to why us? Perfect question. We are specialist fuel recovery and drain specialists. Completely qualified and knowledgeable in working with virtually all types of cars.
A lady in Barlborough with a full car of children in her diesel Peugeot 405 had put £30 of petrol at the Sainsburys service station. She called us weeping and genuinely distraught as she had never put petrol in a diesel and didn't know what would happen to her car in doing so. We told her that all would be fine and that she would be up and running very quickly. When we got there she was still distressed but as our technician began work on the fuel drain she calmed down as she noticed that help was at hand and her car wasn't wrecked. She soon enough brightened up and was up and running saying, 'I can't believe my luck putting the wrong fuel in my car! Specifically with the kids on board.'
- Author Rating: ★★★★★
- Reviewer: Mr D.
- Review Date: 19-10-2021
- Reviewed Item: Mobile Fuel Drain Barlborough
Additionally our workforce of wrong fuel experts cover the entirity of Derbyshire, which means that your position is in our coverage area. As soon as we have established where you are located, we will try to appear at your place as quickly as we are able to and retrieve any contaminated fuel from your vehicle. The thing is that the quicker you remove all of that incorrect fuel from your engine, the less damage is caused. Therefore get that telephone and dial our number. A crew of SPA qualified mechanics are prepared and waiting to assist, regardless what day or time it is.
It doesn't matter whether it is petrol in diesel or diesel in petrol we can assist you to sort it out. We are waiting for your call to offer assistance and our expert services to get you going anew. Ask for a wrong fuel drain or guidance right now:
Petrol in Diesel Barlborough? Don't worry! We can help. We can help, just like in the cases below:
A customer working near Barlborough had broken down twenty yards away from her company after inserting unleaded in her diesel Fiat Bravo. She called us distressed and sobbing pleading with us: 'I put the wrong fuel in my vehicle and therefore brimmed it with diesel, you need to come out and save me.' Luckily our drainer were near Barlborough so was able to be on scene with her to perform the fuel drain in around 30 minutes while she worked.
A customer had stopped in Barlborough having just put petrol in her diesel car. She was sobbing and quite distressed as she had put £45 petrol in her diesel car. As she phoned us we made an effort to sooth her as well as we could, assuring her that everything would be no problem. By the time we got to her she was no longer disrupted and was really fascinated in watching our engineer carry out the drain on her Audi S4. Later she said: 'My car is like my baby, I only just purchased it and it genuinely worried me that I had put such a large amount of wrong fuel in it. Now i'm very happy that it was easily fixable.'

This is what I've been hearing all day and evening at our house for the last 18hrs.
Sancho is our newest addition to the family.
When Steve asked me if I wanted a rescue puppy from Mexico I said "NO!".
He showed me the picture, I said "NO!"
He said "Why?", I gave my 27 reasons, and then...
He came home with this little guy:
Yes, he is cute, he is a great little puppy that is 90% potty trained, he doesn't bark, he sits for treats, and he came from a neglected place BLAH BLAH BLAH. But I wasn't ready for a dog. I'm still not ready. Things have changed already. I can't let Maggie go outside unless he's tied up or I'm holding her. I have to check the grass for "maneuvers", And I have to yell "out" every time I hear him peek through the screen door.
However, he is here and he is absolutely adorable. The kids have fallen in love with him (even though they've all been scratched with his loving paws).
I know he will grow and get bigger. I know it will be hard. And I know that at times I will be annoyed with him for knocking Maggie down again, but I've already gotten use to him and I love him too. I'm glad we were able to take him in and care for him and I'm glad my kids will always have an outside playmate.
Plus, less sweeping for me!

Saturday, November 10, 2012
Jodi and Rich | Swampscott Wedding Photography
So Wow, It's November and I'm just now finding some time to blog about my second wedding of the year that happened in JUNE! There were so many awesome photos of this fantastic couple that it was hard to narrow it down.
Jodi and Rich had a fantastic day for a wedding (which also happened to be my 11th wedding anniversary)! I was so happy to be asked to be a part of it. They really have a great group of friends and family and that really helped make the day so special.
We started out at Jodi's house where the girls were getting ready.
Unfortunately Jodi's mother passed away just a few months before the wedding. I was devastated for her when I found out. I can't even put into words how sad this was but her memory was kept alive that day in a variety of subtle ways.
Then it was time to head to the church in Swampscott!
In case you're wondering, this is the look you will get if your cell phone rings during a wedding ceremony.
This was one great big wedding party!
The reception was at Spinelli's in Peabody and was so beautiful and fun!
at 2:16 PM

I first met Joel Robinson a couple years ago at the Nashville Full Moon Tattoo & Horror Fest. After that I kept running into him at every convention that I attended. His art work really caught my eye and at each show I see him at I have to get another one of his pieces. His work has been featured on horror convention posters, convention programs and horror magazines. I was able to talk to Joel at Horror Hound and learn how he creates his stuff and some of the shows he will attending this year.

She is also very happy, that she can once again take a few unassisted steps. She described her feelings as "twangled." Happy to be able to walk but wishing she could run and jump.
I liked the description and it's one word that I don't let the teacher in me, correct. "Twangled" sounds sweeter than tangled any day!

Wow Vision Therapy Blog
Visual Problems After A Car Accident Lead Him To Vision Therapy
After experiencing a serious car accident, Spencer’s life was turned up-side-down. His visual world was not what it used to be and things that used to come easy stopped being easy. After learning of his diagnosis, Spencer found himself searching for answers. And this is his story…
On June 4th, 2018, my wife was driving our family back from vacation. After 20 hours of driving, we were finally 20 minutes from home when another driver ran his stop sign. At that time, I was lying in the middle aisle of the van trying to comfort my six-month-old who had enough of being in the van. What I remember of the accident is my wife screaming, breaks screeching, then all of a sudden, there was luggage piled on top of my family, and I was crying. In a panic, I got out of the van and went around to check on my family to make sure they were all okay. At that point, my adrenaline was pumping, so I had no idea if I had lost consciousness or been injured myself. Looking back, however, my wife and I have pieced together that I was very confused. Even though I didn’t see the collision, I was more clueless about what had happened than I realized. When it comes to the “fight or flight” instinct, my wife is definitely flight, so I knew that I had to be a stable influence to make sure everyone and everything was taken care of.
When my in-laws arrived to drive us home, I got upset that my father-in-law wouldn’t let me drive one of the vehicles home, since as far as I was concerned, I was perfectly fine. However, once we were all home and settled, I went to my bed and immediately fell asleep, exhausted. Later, when I began to suspect a head injury, I was asked if I lost consciousness during the car accident, I said, “no,” however, to this day I am honestly unsure.
I took the next day off work, but then went back and tried to carry on as normal. It took two months before I acknowledged and accepted that there might be something beyond work stress and the injuries I sustained to my back from the accident that was effecting my life. During those two months, I thought I was going through my life as usual, but my wife was noticing that I was more of an ‘airhead’ than normal. She started to call me more during the day because she would hear the seatbelt warning chime when I was driving. The conversation typically went something like this: “Are you wearing your seatbelt?” “Yes.” “Then what am I hearing?” “Oh, that’s the seat belt warning.” “Well, why is that going off if you’re wearing your seatbelt?” “Oh, I guess I forgot it wasn’t on.” I didn’t realize it then, but I would really struggle with one of my symptoms during that time. Essentially, I could only hold onto one individual thought at a time. The seatbelt incident is an example of that. It may seem like that is one thought-the chime means you need to buckle-but when you suffer from a TBI; you realize that some things are more complex than you first thought. I could hear the chime, and I knew that meant I needed to buckle, but I couldn’t follow that first thought and connect it to the action it implied until my wife specifically told me what was going on.
Another example was one I struggled with often at my job, part of which was managing websites. To verify that you aren’t a robot when logging onto the access portion of the sites I managed, you had to answer a simple math problem. Because of the cognitive struggles, I was going through; it would take a lot of concentration and time to solve a problem as simple as 4+9. Because I could only hold onto one thought at a time, after solving the math problem, I would forget why I was supposed to solve it. Once I remembered that I needed to solve the problem to log onto the website, I would have forgotten the answer. Sometimes I would get a calculator so the answer would stay visible. However, I still had the problem of forgetting why I had the calculator in the first place, remembered that I was logging onto the website, came across the math problem, forgot that I had the calculator available, and went back to trying to solve the problem mentally. If I didn’t even have the cognitive power to do a simple 2 step process (solve the math problem, log onto the website), there was no way I would have the capability to recognize that there was something wrong with me that needed to be addressed.
Often, by the end of the day, I would end up coming home and crying in our room without knowing why. Before then, my wife had seen me cry, maybe three times in our seven years of marriage. The final straw that pushed me over the edge and made me accept that I need help was when I missed the funeral for a good friend/mentor. It hit me hard when he passed, I knew the date of the funeral and planned to be there for it. I worked in the same building where the funeral was being held. That day I kept seeing people in their nice clothes and wondered what they were all doing there. My wife had reminded me every day that week about the funeral. And yet, I sat in my office and tried to work. Eventually, the noise and amount of people became too much for me to handle (another symptom I didn’t realize I had at the time), so I left the building to go to the local park to try to get more work done. When I opened my calendar 2 hours later, everything connected, and it hit me. I completely missed my friend’s funeral. I called my wife crying and told her that something wasn’t right, and I needed help.
I met with my primary doctor, a neurologist, a neuropsychologist, a psychiatrist, two vestibular therapists, and a speech pathologist. All of them agreed that something was wrong, even though the symptoms I was able to explain didn’t all line up with what was typical. Some of them thought they had the solution, and I believed them. I went to months of therapy, often going to an appointment four times per week, and while some of my symptoms did decrease, my worst symptoms remained. One thing that was a big challenge for me was shopping. A grocery trip for even two items could easily take an hour and a half. Earlier this spring, I went to the local store for a couple of 5-gallon buckets. I went through my usual system when trying to find an item in the store. First, I have to find the correct aisle. Then, since my mind struggles to filter and organize information, I would start scanning the whole aisle one item at a time. I didn’t always logically do this, sometimes I would start in the middle of the row and make my way left, not realizing the item I was searching for was just to my right. If I got interrupted by sight or sound, I would have to start the whole process over, scanning each item and label. On this particular trip, I eventually gave in and asked an associate for help finding the buckets. I was standing right in front of them. She must have sensed my continued confusion, so she handed me one of the buckets. At that point in time, I had learned to trust people and wait until they walked away to take more time to process if necessary. So, once she walked away, I stared at the bucket and went through a mental checklist asking myself why I thought this was not a 5-gallon bucket. After some time, I was able to confirm that this was indeed the bucket I had come in for, but it was red instead of white like I had in my mind, which is why I spent 45 minutes in the aisle with buckets.
After the car accident, public spaces with lots of movement and noise became one of my biggest challenges. Before starting Wow Vision Therapy, I would become completely disoriented and confused within minutes. I would lose all spacial orientation of myself in the environment that I was in. You know the feeling you get after spending too much time in a wave pool or the ocean? I would sometimes get stuck feeling like I was at the upward motion of a wave, just waiting to fall up toward the sky. East would become West, and left would become right. I could be trying to exit an open area knowing the exit was on the left, but my body would walk to the right, even while I was looking left at the exit, mixing up the directions even though I knew the way I needed to go. Doctors have asked if I got dizzy, but that didn’t really describe how I would feel, it was more like the world was constantly moving.
Disorientation was typically the first symptom in public spaces. Once that happens, my understanding of many simple things becomes compromised. At a surprise party for my in-laws, I became so disoriented and lost so much understanding that my wife had to step by step get me out to the car to take a break. ‘First, you need to stand up, now I am going to hold your arm while we walk forward, we need to leave the building, open the car door, now sit down, let me turn on the car, I’m turning on the air for you, you need to just sit here and rest, no don’t try to get back out, just lean the seat back and rest for a while.’ If I tried to push myself too hard or endure for too long, I would lose complete control to the point where I would just curl up in the fetal position and cry.
After nine months of seeing different doctors and trying different types of therapy, I lost hope of ever being able to be my normal self again. They started saying that this might be the new “normal” for me, and I will have to find new ways to function like I used to, so I put all of my efforts into figuring out how to accomplish things that used to come so naturally for me. Throughout these nine months, I was unable to return to work for a long enough period of time that they had to fill my position. I was working with media and technology and had begun building my own web design and marketing business. I loved doing that type of work; it was something that came easily for me. I had strength for visualizing all aspects of a project and being able to picture exactly what I wanted to happen, and then I could make it happen. Yet now, my biggest gifts that I had nurtured and developed were taken away from me. The car accident damaged ten discs in my spine, causing me to stop weight lifting, which I did almost daily as a way to cope with stress, and damaged my brain, which I was then hearing would never be the same. I was ready to give up trying to get back what I had lost and was ready to move on and accept my new life.
So again, I spent nine months in a different type of therapy and still struggled with those symptoms and more. I didn’t even have the cognitive strength to put into words all of the ways I was struggling to get the help I needed. The best way I found to explain what was wrong was by saying that I couldn’t picture things in my head anymore, and I have always been a visual processor. At one point, a substitute vestibular therapist asked if I had seen an eye doctor who specialized in brain-related vision issues. That gave me enough information to start researching and stumble upon Wow Vision Therapy. It still took months before I took the plunge and called for an examination. I had become so beaten down from lack of progress that I was beginning to accept that this is how I will have to be now, and I’ll need to learn to live with it. I didn’t want to hope or wish for what I used to have; I just wanted to move on. At some point, I decided that I had just enough energy to try one more type of therapy before moving on. What I expected and what I experienced were two utterly different things-and that was a very good thing! What I expected was to feel, once again, like I was completely misunderstood, but to be still told that they can fix me even though they couldn’t really understand my issues or how I was struggling. I was amazed at the different tests Dr. Fortenbacher did. He performed specific tests that were everyday challenges for me, without me having first to explain what I was struggling with. When we had our consultation, I was finally able to tell a doctor some of the things I was struggling with, he listened intently, and for the first time in over nine months I heard a doctor say “well yes, that makes sense.” Then he took the time to explain in detail why those things were happening, and the process they would use to treat it.
In the months that I have spent at Wow Vision Therapy, that sense of understanding and a desire to help has never dwindled. My recovery has had highs and lows, which I was warned about from the beginning, but I have never felt like my therapist, or Dr. Fortenbacher was ready to give up on me. I am now able to continue trying to start up my web design and marketing business, I can hold conversations without my wife needing to jump in for me, I still don’t like to go grocery shopping, but it no longer takes me over an hour. Just last weekend, I was able to go with my wife and our three kids to a local fall festival without feeling immediately overwhelmed. I can’t say enough how thankful I am for Wow Vision Therapy and all of the work that Dr. Fortenbacher and his staff do!
So, if you feel like you have no more hope for recovery and you are tired of not being understood, please don’t give up until you at least consider Vision Therapy. I didn’t think my symptoms were related to vision; after all, how could my eyes affect my ability to hold conversations and multitask? But as we know, the brain is an amazingly complex organ, and everything is filtered through it. As I’m writing this, I still have some work to do to get back to my pre-accident status, but Vision Therapy has given me my mind back, something I had feared would never happen. Recovery from a TBI is possible. I hope you or your loved one get to experience the life-altering change I have experienced through Wow Vision Therapy.
GET IN TOUCH
Concerned you or your child may be struggling with a vision problem and wish to learn more about vision therapy? Please fill out the form below and one of our Patient Care Coordinators will be in touch to answer your questions or help schedule an evaluation for you.

Smithfield Independent Living
There is 1 Independent Living Facility in Smithfield, RI and 25 Independent Living Facilities nearby.
Average Cost: $4,500
Family owned and operated, The Village of Waterman Lake offers the perfect blend of hospitality and first-class health services for those who need them.
Back to Top
Reviews of Smithfield Independent Living Communities
The Village at Waterman Lake was very nice. They named their buildings The Chalet and The Courtyard. The Chalet was the independent living for my dad. That was wonderful and would suit his needs beautifully. The Courtyard also was very nice. They had gone on a field trip somewhere when I was there...Read more The Village at Waterman Lake reviews
We toured Waterman Lake. It was lovely, the grounds were lovely, but it was very far removed. We felt like it was away from everything. The rooms were nice, but they were more nursing home rooms, and it seemed institutionalized.Read more The Village at Waterman Lake reviews

Join Harry Brelsford and Phelim Rowe for a morning cup of coffee and discussion on the current state of the event industry. Phelim noticed that people are currently thirsting for education, and are willing to attend virtual events as long as the content is current, and the speakers are well prepared. With all the events Phelim has held during this pandemic he has noticed that people are engaged and like the online format as long as content is educational and well thought out. Once the pandemic is over he says that events and trade shows will go back to business as usual. Come and learn what is new with events.

Erik has surprised me a number of times over the years for my birthday. When we were dating, I told him I needed to return something to a friend’s house on the night of my birthday, and when we got there, there were 30 friends there to surprise me. How did he do that, get me to recommend going to that place and have all those people there to surprise me?
Well, yesterday it happened again. It was a unique birthday. I turned 44 on 4/4. So he emailed a number of friends (only two hours before) and told them to come to his parents’ house where he has his office in the back. Then at 4:44 we would come to the front of the house, and everyone would start singing and surprise me. Well, surprise it was!
We were back in his office getting a few things done before we were heading out for an overnight getaway. I had just told him I was going to go out to the car in front, and he said he needed to come get his phone in the car. So we headed out the side yard to the front of the house, and when I opened the gate there were 30 people there that totally took me by surprise. I screamed loudly. Then people had come up with groups of 4 or 44 things as little gifts. I got some wonderful gifts of four flowers, four chocolates, four oranges, four petals, 44 chocolate kisses and 44 jelly beans, four cookies. Brandon said he had four sisters as his gift to me. It had me laughing for hours, mostly the reaction of screaming that I had, and the total surprise it was. So great to give hugs and feel love from some of my dearest friends and family. What a wonderful birthday. (Thanks to Rachel for the pictures!)
I can’t believe Erik pulled this off and gifts from Erik’s dad
Feeling the love as everyone sings
Cute kids with gifts
The crowd that surprised me
Dear friends with hugs and love. I was so surprised and laughed for hours about this!
We followed that up with a night in Half Moon Bay, delicious dinner, gorgeous fog and sun, walks on the beach, talks about our life, and relaxation. I am blessed beyond measure.

Thinking he killed cat, girl attacks neighbour, damages his car and spray paints his door
Distraught over her pet cat's death, a 22-year-old resident of a posh Bandra building, assaulted her neighbour, vandalised his car and spray painted on his door, believing he was behind feline's demise
Distraught over the death of her pet Persian cat, a 22-year-old resident of a posh building in Bandra, assaulted her neighbour, vandalised his car and spray painted on his door, believing that he was behind the feline's demise. The cat was found dead in the passageway around Sunday evening.
According to a report by DNA, Kashif Ehsan Khan, who stayed at Mimi Apartment at Turner Road in Bandra, was shocked to discover graffiti on his door reading, "Cat's throat slit by Kashif". He went to the police to lodge a complaint after this. Both were taken to the police station later, where a complaint was registered under her name. He claimed that she attacked him physical, damaged his car and wrote the absurd message using spray paint on his door.
A post-mortem was performed on the cat, after which a viscera sample that was collected has been sent for forensic analysis at Kalina Laboratory.
Sign up for all the latest news, top galleries and trending videos from Mid-day.comSubscribe
Salman Khan in legal trouble yet again?

BOSTON -- When Jon Lester worked through the first inning of Saturday's game against the Oakland A's on nine pitches, eight of which were strikes, it had the makings of another strong start from the Boston Red Sox's ace.
After he completed three innings and had struck out seven, it was clear there was more to it.
When it was over, it wouldn't be crazy to label it the best start of Lester's career.
He struck out a career-high 15 batters, the most by anyone in the majors this season, and he did it against an Oakland team that, before Saturday, had struck out fewer times than all but five other teams.
Lester finished eight shutout innings on 118 pitches. He was backed by a first-inning grand slam from Jonny Gomes as the Red Sox took their second win in a row over the A's, 6-3.
"I think the biggest thing was just fastball command once again," Lester told reporters after the game. "We were able to get some guys sped up in and that opened up away for the backdoor cutter and fastball away. Late in the game, started mixing some other offspeed pitches in there, just to make sure that they knew that we had them out there."
The A's only hit came off the bat of Craig Gentry in the third inning. Lester then struck out the side. He walked two batters in the game, but neither reached second base.
It was his fifth career game in which he's gone at least eight innings while allowing one hit or less, but the first time he's done it while striking out more than nine batters.
Was it his best start ever?
That honor would likely be given to Lester's no-hitter, when he struck out nine against the Kansas City Royals on May 15, 2008. But that Royals team finished 24th in offense in 2008.
"When you think of the whole package that he brought to the mound for eight innings, it doesn’t compare to a no-hitter," Boston Red Sox manager John Farrell said in his postgame press conference. "But given it's a bloop single to right field, it was just an outstanding performance on Jon's part."
The A's were baseball's fourth-best offense before Saturday's game. They were second in walks. Lester walked just two and never paid for it.
"He could have pitched against pretty much anybody today the way he commanded things," Farrell said.
If Lester were walking up to home plate and placing the pitches in the catcher's glove, the results wouldn't have been much different. He was dropping back-door cutters over the outside corner against right-handers all afternoon. They were the kind of pitches that were border-line unfair, ones that the A's could do nothing more than watch, turn around and head back to the dugout. Occasionally they'd toss their bat in frustration.
"We threw a lot of backdoor cutters today," Lester said. "I think we established early from the umpire that I was on the plate with it. When you have that, there's no reason to go away from it. Keep trying it until he proves that he's no longer going to call it or they start going out there and hitting it. I just kept trying to make it and keep guys honest by coming in at different points.
This was Lester at his best, and it wasn't much different than he's been all season.
In 48 2/3 innings, Lester has struck out 58 and walked 10, a ratio that ranks in the top-10 of all major league starters. His ERA is 2.59.
"He's been good since opening day," Farrell said. "It's not like we're seeing a progression similar to (Clay Buchholz's), where you see it really building for him. This has been consistency from spring training all the way through to where we are today with Jon."
Sonny Gray, the ace for the A's, will pitch Sunday's game against the Red Sox, but Dan Straily and Tommy Milone didn't pitch well in the first two games.
After the Red Sox knocked Straily out of Friday's game in the fifth inning, they did the same to Milone.
Milone allowed the first three batters of the game to reach base, struck out Mike Napoli and then served a dead-center pitch to Gomes, who launched it over the Green Monster for the Red Sox's second grand slam in two days.
"Jonny gives us a huge lift in the first on the one pitch he saw, his first pitch of the day," Farrell said. "We've shown when we score first and you get a start like that with Lester today, it puts you in command."
David Ortiz hit his 437th career home run in the third inning off an 0-2 pitch, just the sixth time he's homered on an 0-2 pitch in his career. He hadn't done it since 2004.
Chris Capuano entered to close out the game in the ninth, but allowed his first runs of the season on a pair of doubles, one single and a hit-by-pitch. Koji Uehara entered, threw just 86 mph (He averages about 88-89 mph) but cleaned up the inning to convert his seventh save of the season.

"I’ve shopped and bought from Koppy in Forest Lake a couple times now and have been pleased each time. They have helpful, polite staff and make the vehicle buying process simple." - Hunter L.
"Excellent customer service! The buying process was a breeze. Will be going back to get my next vehicle when the time comes!" - Josh B.
"Deanna and the group were wonderful. They are looking for a second car for us. Great prices and amazing service!" - Larry R.
"Great sales folk. Willing to work with you to get the deal or car you need. They worked with me to get a payment plan that worked for me. These guys are awesome." - Dylan Hentges
"Hello people, I have bought two cars from Koppy Motors in the last 12 months and have had nothing but good luck with them and the cars. They gave me a grate price for my first one and I bought my Jeep Compass with no problems. I worked wit DeAnna and she was great to work with on the whole deal. I would buy my next car from them without a hesitation. love the Jeep." - Brian N.
"Koppy Motors is awesome! Very friendly and helpful staff who made my vehicle purchase and trade-in seamless." - TJ Jackson
"Had a great experience at Koppy Motors. Mitch was great to work with! I highly recommend giving this place a visit if you are searching for a car." - McKayla A.
"Mitch was a good salesman. Low pressure. Knowledgeable about inventory. Overall great experience. Accommodated a personal sale preference, which was unexpected." - Joe H.
"I just picked up a vehicle someone else purchased. The staff was good to me" - Scot H.
"I just returned to Massachusetts from buying a car at Koppy Motors and I would like to share my experience.We had been looking to replace a car that was totaled with the same or as close as possible and after a few months on all the online dealers I found just what we wanted at Koppy.The price was more than fair and the condition of the vehicle was fantastic.From the 1st phone call I was treated very seriously and all of my questions were answered in a very timely manner.The sales person was responsive and helpful,investigating all my concerns and showing me every detail of the car on Facetime.I had never purchased a car online before so I was a little weary but she made it so easy.I made sure to let her know I would not be able to fly out to pick up the car for 2 weeks but that was not an issue.After we decided we wanted the car for sure I was passed to the business manager and he was as helpful and responsive as the sales person.Every phone call was answered or returned immediately.They took a deposit and plans were arranged for me to fly out to Minnesota to pick up the car.They even sent a driver to the airport that morning to retrieve me.1400 miles later I was home with our new(to us) car,the car ran great the whole way! I would highly recommend buying from Koppy Motors and if you are doing it long distance like I was,have no fears,it was very smooth! Thank you DeAnna and Brad!" - Gary A.

Hold down Control (PC) or Command (Mac) key + mouseclick to select more than one option
Reviews + Photos from nymag.com
Posted by anonymous on 09/07/2010
L'Artusi is overall a great restaurant. We went last night without a reservation and were seated at the bar right away. The service was great. The bruschetta and carpaccio were excellent. We shared the pasta special which was a a fetuccini with parmesan and cremini mushrooms. The pasta was overcooked and the dish was very salty. My boyfriend didn't mind it, but it was too much for my palette. I also had the mushroom and pancetta appetizer which I found salty as well. Perhaps the combination of ingredients lead to the saltiness, however it was definitely too strong for my liking. The blackberry upside down cake was delicious. I would definitely recommend the restaurant and would go back again, but I would be very careful about what I order and ask them to maybe use less salt!
Posted by Anonymous on 05/27/2010
My husband and I went with some friends to L'Artusi recently for dinner. We had a wonderful time. Although we did not have a reservation, we were seated with in just a few moments of our arrival. The gnocchi melted in my mouth, and the mushroom bruschetta was also delicious. The other food items and wine were great. Overall, this is an excellent place and we will definitely go back!!
Posted by Anonymous on 05/14/2010
Posted by Gramercy Girl on 04/25/2010
Ate there for the first time last night. Our server (Kate) was terrific. She helped navigate the very extensive wine list and made a perfect selection for us. There were 4 in our party. We each ordered a salad and a pasta dish and had two sides for the table and it was the just the right amount of food. We all ordered dessert and there was a problem with one of our selections (they were not happy with the finished product when it came out of the oven) and they gave us a substitute plus the original choice on the house. Everything we all ate was delicious. I will definetely be going back and will spread the word to my friends. The prices were in line with the quality of the food we had.
Posted by anonymous on 04/01/2010
Such a wonderful experience! Our waiter was patient, very helpful in his suggestions, and chummy in a way that made you comfortable. We ordered an appetizer and two entrees between two people, and it was more than enough including two desserts. The orecchiette and garganelli are my absolute favoite! But the real reason that this waiter was my favorite was because he introduced us to a rhubarb dessert that was absolutely beyond description. I want to say that it was the pastry chef's birthday and she did it as a tribute to either the restaurant or herself--whatever it was, I want it again. Happy Birthday to me, please.
Posted by disappointed on 03/05/2010
I normally don't write negative reviews (I just avoid going back) but hopefully someone in management will read this. I decided to give L'Artusi a second chance after my last over-salted dinner because a friend was dying to try it. Last night, our two pasta dishes and chicken dish were unbearably salty. Octopus dish and olive oil cake and the service (amazing bartender/server) made up for it but the someone in the kitchen had a HEAVY hand of salt with the other dishes.
Posted by foodie on 02/11/2010
Food at this place was very good...pastas were fresh and tasty, wine list extensive but pricey...service was ver poor...waiter was rude, and inattentive...would try again, but not for another few months.

I was able to ride today but companion wouldn’t connect. I added a new guest network and both the phone and the pc were connected to it. After the ride was done trying them both on the main network. Still no good.
I frankly don’t know how companion connects anyhow. I recall I just installed it and it worked. Now it doesn’t. How do I fix?

Pretty early on Friday November 7th, Andrea set off with Tina and Michelle to get started with their tennis weekend at the Omni Amelia Island Plantation resort in Fernandina Beach. They had a lot of clinics scheduled and also had a lot of partying planned. There were 14 ladies from her team that were able to make the weekend.
When they arrived, Tina rented a golf cart and they all enjoyed driving it around the grounds for the weekend.
On Friday night they stayed on property for dinner and ate at Verandah. After dinner Andrea, Michele, Melissa, Tina, Jeannie, and Stephanie went downtown Fernandina Beach for some dancing and fun. They stayed out pretty late and were exhausted the next day, but it was worth it. Andrea lost her voice somehow that night, as well. Not sure where she left it.
Saturday night they headed downtown Fernandina Beach and had dinner at Espana.
They gave out one award for the weekend, and Andrea won the Tiger trophy! The coaches were very impressed with her aggressive shots and good court awareness.
When they were leaving, Tina saw a big trophy cup and they decided they'd pose with it and pretend like they won the big competition. JCP is #1!! Andrea had a fantastic time and they are hoping to go again in the spring. She has made great friends that ......

Woman recalls rescue from fireball
SHE almost died and she almost lost everything she owns but Janine Shanks says she'll never leave her Hinds Street home.
The house she shares with Mark Carpenter was engulfed in flames at the height of the destructive bushfires which threatened to raze Koongal a year ago.
Yesterday Janine told how she was dragged unconscious from her property by an ambulance man as flames lapped at her front door.
“We were overwhelmed by the speed of the blaze and the suffocating smoke,” she said.
“We were all packed up and ready to go and I went back for my birds. I fell over and smashed my knee and I passed out.”
She said the rescuers “came from nowhere” and hauled her to safety as a superheated ball of flame swallowed the house.
Everything that was outside was burnt to a crisp. Not a tree or plant survived.
“I would have died for sure,” she said. “It's such a vivid memory and I don't think you ever really recover from an experience like that.”
But when she was asked if she had considered moving to a part of the city less at risk from bushfires she couldn't have been more certain.
“No way. It's a beautiful place to live, so tranquil and full of wildlife. I've been there 30 years and I don't think of it as being unsafe at all. What happened last year was a once in a lifetime thing.”
Mark said they had attended yesterday's council organised community barbecue marking the anniversary of the fires to celebrate survival.
“It's important everyone remembers what happened and does what they can to prevent it happening again. I think it is important to recognise the guys who helped us and say thanks again,” she said.
“I looked at that massive wall of flame moving towards the house and was convinced we were going to lose everything.
“As it turned out everything in the house was safe, if a bit smoke-damaged. The insurance company was absolutely fabulous, right down to replacing every plant pot that got burnt.”
Residents mingled with firefighters at the Baptist Tabernacle on Norman Road yesterday lunchtime to reminisce about that fateful day.

My name is Nicolette and I have just entered adulthood. I have created this page simply because I am financially desperate for help.
I will be homeless soon and I know it's weird but I am a local Singaporean but have been staying in a rented room on my own since I was 17. My parents were divorced when I was 7 years old and custody was initially given to my mom. She was a housewife then and my father was the breadwinner but he ran away with someone else leaving my mom struggling to make ends meet.
Long story cut short about how I struggled while growing up. My dad gained custody when I was 17 but here's the thing, he does not reside in Singapore and my allowance is $1000/monthly but with that I'd have to pay for my school fees, meals, transport and lodging. I was forced to stay at a particular rented room so that he could 'keep an eye on me' and with that, rent costs $750. He didn't give me money at one point because I didn't want to be under him, a person who wasn't there for more than half life.
I just graduated from my diploma in which I paid for school fees and micellenous by working 2 part time jobs to get money to study and for an operation to remove a tumor in my breast which is not cheap especially when ultrasound, examination, consultation and results are charged seperately. I was not allowed to further my studies and have not received any sort of money from my dad for over a year.
He just informed me last week that I will have to move out of the rented room by the end of this year leaving me to find whatever I can do to stay alive. Many ask, 'why don't you stay with your mom'. My mom hates my dad to the core and after he took me away from her, she never wanted me back. I was recently admitted to hospital from gastric, diarrhoea and vomitting and suspected of inflammation of the appendix. I left after some pain killers and drips because I could not afford to stay.
This is why I have no choice but to set up a fund me page, because I am at wits ends and I really don't know what else I can do.
If you guys could donate just a few cents (I know you'd prolly hear this from volunteers) I'd really be grateful because sometimes I can't even afford a bowl of rice and even if you can't, I appreciate it that you 'heard me out'.

Got the order right. Had to wait for ages before my order was ready. i managed to get jn before a huge rush, but was caught up in a big wait. Not too sure if I like the overall cleanliness of the place though. Sticky tables etc. but the food was good, and the staff who took the order were thorough and friendly.
I had a bad experience with the service at this Mcdonalds a little while ago but they really did go out of their way to correct the situation. Was there on the weekend and must say the service was great everyone was happy and friendly. Great work guys :)
cnr Gt North & West Coast Rds Kelston Auckland

I teach GRIEF COURSES and WORKSHOPS, perform LIFE CELEBRATION SERVICES and WEDDINGS, do GRIEF COUNSELING, coach PASTORS and speak at CONFERENCES and churches.
Input search here
A friend of mine once said, "Simon gives people the GIFT OF REALITY." Simon helps people face reality and find out what they are good at and NOT good at. Simon might say, "Singing is not your thing." Popping the bubble can set people free to pursue something they really are good at.
I met Simon at a wedding I performed last September in Beverly Hills. Simon arrived at the wedding a few minutes late and couldn't get a seat as the place was packed.
The processional had started and the groom (Nick) saw Simon's dilemma and went over to him and escorted Simon and his date to the front row. I reminded the groom that those seats were reserved for his mom and dad. Then the groom asked Simon to sit in the row behind the family. Great ... now Simon Cowell was sitting about 10 feet from me and the wedding couple. I decided I was not going to look at Simon during the ceremony but would focus totally on the couple. The last thing I needed was Simon judging me on how I performed the wedding.
After the wedding was over, Simon came up to me and said he really enjoyed the ceremony that I led - I was shocked! Then he said, "You have a REALLY nice voice tone." I said, "Simon, coming from you that means a lot!" I meant it. I felt time stop just for a split second. This was my big chance ... I took it ... I said, "Simon, now I know you've never been married and maybe you'll never get married, BUT if you ever do - would you consider having me be your wedding officiant?" He smiled and said, "Absolutely!" I then asked if I could give him one of my WPD business cards. He said, "Yes," I gave him a card and he looked it over and slipped it in his back pocket. I found Simon to be very gracious and down to earth. You never know what might happen ....

Complaint / review text:
I shopped in the new DSG store before anyone asked to help me. The clerk did not want to search an item for me that was sold off the shelves. At checkout, both of my sale items rang up at full price. When I questioned this, the clerk asked me how much the first item was on sale for and she punched in the price that I quoted and charged that amount.
On my second and final sale item, the clerk asked me to get out of the line and go to the back of the store to show the floor clerk the sale price on the display sign. The floor clerk said the price is this and pointed to the sign. I told her that the price is on the other side. She said you are right. I told her that she was quoting a price for shorts and I was purchasing a t-shirt. She said she would radio the cashier to confirm that I was right about the sale price, which she did not.
The cashier had to keep calling her radio and finally said that she must be using the radio wrong and couldn’t get through. Finally they were able to communicate by radio and she gave me the correct sale price. She never apologized for the wait, the hassle, or for the register having the wrong prices.
I had a similar problem in a DSG store in Durham, NC. I don’t think I will shop there any longer.

Video:Dr. Seuss Author Profilewith Anita Silvey
Before he became known for cats in hats, Dr. Seuss was once a struggling author eager to sell his first picture book. Learn about Dr. Seuss and his path to success.See Transcript
Transcript:Dr. Seuss Author ProfileI'm Anita Silvey, author of "Everything I Need to Know I Learned From a Children's Book," ad the "Children's Book a Day Almanac Online" - and, I'm here for About.com. Let's talk about the work and life of Dr. Seuss.
"You have brains in your head and you have feet in your shoes, and you can steer yourself in any direction you choose. You're on your own and you know what you know, and you're the guy who'll decide where to go."
The Early Life of Dr. SeussDr. Seuss still holds the record, certainly in the United States for the bestselling children's author of all time. J.K. Rowling has not unseated him yet. The career didn't necessarily seem destined to be a happy one. Seuss did grow up in Springfield, Massachusetts, and his father did run a zoo. We think that had something to do with the sensibility that he had. He went to Dartmouth and was in fact voted the least likely to succeed in the class at Dartmouth. I mean, he was always a cut up. He was always a screwball. And, at one point, he was working on the college humor magazine. They shut it down they censored him. And, so, he had to choose a nom de plume to publish under. And, that's when he went back to his mother's name which was Seuss. And so he became Seuss and then added Dr. to it, a little later to give himself a little more stature.
Dr. Seuss Publishes His First Picture BookHe was working in New York City and he had a manuscript of a book that he was desperately shopping around. And it is, we know that Dr. Seuss is the most rejected classic picture book writer of all time.
Now, books of the 1930s are much more serious in tone and they're not in rhyme. He's completely against publishing wisdom. According to him he was on his way to burn the manuscript for this book. He'd had one more rejection. It was over. He was going to go do something else. And, he ran into a Dartmouth classmate. And the guy said, you won't believe this, but they've just made me children's book editor at Vanguard and I'm going to publish your book.
Dr. Seuss Books and MessagesAnd, it was an immediate success. The kids loved it instantly. This is Doctor Seuss's only bad moment by the way in the entire stretch. And, with writing books that always have – there's always with a Dr. Seuss book, a very strong message underneath it.
"So, whether your name be Buxbaum or Bixbee or Mordikai, Ali, Van Allen O'Shea, you're off to great places so today is your day. Your mountain is waiting, so, get on your way!"
But, you know, it was only in, when I was an adult that I realized really the profound message of this book is really that, you know, even if your mother isn't paying attention to you or loving you, somebody will.
"Did he run? He did not. Horten stayed on that nest. He held his ead high and he threw out his chest, and he looked at the hunters as much as to say, shoot if you must. But, I won't run away. I meant what I said and I said what I meant, an elephant's faithful one hundred percent."
Thanks for watching. To learn more, visit us on the Web at About.com.
About videos are made available on an "as is" basis, subject to the User Agreement.

Monday, September 13, 2010
Sarah and the Art of Being Fragile
It's been a while, I know. But, instead of presenting you a list of reasons why I've been so aloof (moving, adjusting, laziness, etc), I'll just say "sorry" and jump right back into it.
I finished Pride and Prejudice a few days ago. I've been trying to think of what to say about this story that hasn't been said yet. While reading it, I was trying to think of the characters as if they had been written about today. Because a lot of the issues, character flaws, and circumstances are still timely.
Elizabeth is strong willed, a quick wit, intelligent and fun loving. To put it in a more current light- she's that girl that shares at least 30 mutual friends with you on Facebook. And I'm sorry for the cliche, but she's beautiful inside and out. You want to hate her, you really really do. She's lovely and talented and well loved by everyone. But the more you see her at parties, you just can't help but want to be her friend because she's so genuine. Try as you might, you love this girl and can't wait to go get coffee together. However, she's not perfect- thank God. In Elizabeth's case, she's quick to judge- but, in keeping with her genuine sort of character, it's never totally without warrant. In many instances, it seems she makes snap judgements out of self preservation.
Darcy is stoic, to put it pleasantly. Really he's emotionally cut off from almost everyone. He's the guy that doesn't even have a facebook. Or if he does, he's got like, one photo album of his sister's piano recital and has never posted a status. He's mysterious, to be sure, but also kind of an ass. If you were to send him a friend request, he'd definitely click ignore if he thinks he doesn't know you well enough. Darcy's insecure and shy- two qualities that usually present themselves as aloof and and "judgey." He is pretty judgmental about Elizabeth's mom being a nutter and her sisters being flighty, empty headed and boy crazy. He's that guy that grew up under the stifling label of "old money" and closed himself off after being only pursued because of his wealth. Again, self preservation.
The last post I wrote about Jane Austen was about self preservation as well- being the mistress of yourself and being quiet and reserved enough to protect the joy and volume with which you live your life. But this is a slightly different take on it. I think she might be saying that when you guard yourself too closely you tend to judge too harshly. Elizabeth overhears Darcy say one snarky thing about her and from then on she can only see the nastiness in him. She already had it in her head that because she was poor and her mom was crazy that no man of any sort of value (both monetarily and otherwise) would ever want her. The insult she overhears from Darcy only adds to that insecurity and makes her shut him out.
Darcy's no saint either. Like I said, he's incredibly guarded. Like I said, he's spent his entire life being surrounded by people only wanting him for his money. He can't function in social situations and falls back on being pompous because that's easier than opening up to people. It was only when the two of them were vulnerable with one another that they were able to soften their hearts and open up a bit more, and eventually fall in love.
We've all been like this. Being judgmental seems to have been encoded in us from birth. Let's be honest, putting people into boxes makes us feel better about ourself. But even worse, I'm guilty of searching for the bad in someone and fixating on it because I'm scared of liking them too much. This can be true of friendships or romantic relationships. They send up one red flag and that's all I need to call it quits. Or I see them talk to another girl and throw in the towel because "I don't compete." It's easier to give up in the beginning than be disappointed down the road. And there's something to be said for that- the self preservation I talked about last time. But there's also something really beautiful when you're open and are vulnerable with someone- when you take the risk to trust someone enough to place your honest and delicate confessions in their hands. I'd like to say that Jane has inspired me to put myself out there completely with the strangers I'm meeting on a daily basis in my new home. But honestly, I'm not in a place right now where I want to be so fragile. Moving across the country, away from everything familiar, and being rather uncomfortable everyday is enough of a challenge.
For now I'll just keep my eye out for potential Darcy's- people who are more than meets the eye- and try to stay as open as I can. And if they say things like "thither," "bewitched," and "I ardently admire and love you," I may be open to a possible courtship.

Leopard rescued after it falls into well in western India
A leopard was rescued after it fell into a well in western India’s Gujarat.
This incident happened in Vyara town of Tapi district on July 7.
Visuals showed the leopard inside the well as efforts to rescue it were ongoing. The big cat swam around in the water and a cot was lowered into the well by the forest department for it to hop on and be saved. But the mission wasn’t as easy as it sounds. The challenge was to have the leopard on the cot for the time needed for it to be pulled out of the well.
But it didn’t seem to go as per plan at least as per the initial efforts which saw the big cat fall into the water. But after a lot of effort, the forest department officials were finally able to save the leopard and take it out of the water. The wild animal held on to the cot before it was pulled out of the water. The leopard could then be seen running away swiftly into the wild after being saved.

Tell us what you need so we can bring you the right pros.
Receive quotes from pros who meet your needs.
Compare quotes, message pros, and hire when ready.
Browse these 24 hour plumbers with great ratings from Thumbtack customers in Fontana.
esteban and elias accepted the job and the new heater was installed within four hours, and I live an hour away from murietta in Redlands! prompt, courteous, and most importantly, they were skilled and competent. price was market and lower than home depot's. happy to have found them on thumbtack.
JDS Plumbing is the only plumber in my future. Thanks again, Jim.
I called several plumbers to help me install my new kitchen sink. They were all ridiculously expensive and very unreliable. I finally contacted Nathan to help install my new kitchen sink. He did a tremendous job!! He was prompt and completed the task! He even helped with some additional repairs that we needed!! His pricing was very affordable!! He is extremely professional and hard working!! I would recommend using Loveridge Remodeling for any repair needs!!
Tim was prompt on arrival. He identified the problem quickly (shower valve needed to be rebuilt) and fixed it within the hour. He was very polite and professional. I had a few other little things around the house that I had questions about and he took care of those promptly without charging me for his time. Only parts. I will definitely call him again if the need for a plumber arises.
Rudy was great to work with. He can be contacted via text message so that's always nice and he always responds in a timely manner. He knew what he was doing and got the job done quickly. I had a leak coming out of my faucet and he got the whole thing replaced in less than an hour. I am using him for a couple of other rental properties that I help manage
He arrived when promised and removed about 400# of tile in less than an hour. His price was very fair. He was very professional and I wouldn't hesitate to hire him again.
We had 2 pin hole leaks in our sprinkler line that was causing water to overflow onto our driveway. I called All Pro Plumbing & they sent a tech out right away. The tech was Joseph and he arrived on time & was very professional. He smiled the whole time he worked & explained to me that the best thing to do was replace the whole line since it was old & there was a good possibility that another leak would occur. He did a great job & cleaned up after he was done. He saved me a lot of headache trying to do the job myself. I will use All Pro again & will be requesting Joseph next time I need service. I would like to thank All Pro for their professionalism & employing plumbers like Joseph. My family & friends will be hearing about my great experience.
Fair prices, fast, and cleaned up after the job. Best plumber I ever hired!
They went above and beyond what I had expected. I had gotten a previous quote for 6x what they were asking! For BOTH of the things I needed done! As if that wasn't enough they had come all the way out from Long Beach to Reseda just for us. A+ plumbers. Highly recommended
I can’t say enough good things about James. He gave me a great deal on the job he did and the price was much lower than most other quotes from other plumbers. He completed the job very quickly and was very thorough. He even took the time to explain what the issue was and how to prevent it in the future. He showed me how to use the new equipment he installed. I would definitely use James again I would put my recommendation out for him for any kind of plumbing work needed.
My experience with Al was great. He was quick to respond to my request, made himself available immediately, was considerate of my time schedule and his quote of $75 was fair. He arrived on time the following morning, diagnosed the under the sink leak problem right away, went to Home Depot to purchase a replacement for our damaged garbage disposal, installed it and done. He completed the work within an hour. He was also very respectful, honest and kind. Thank You. I highly recommend this Thumbtack plumbing professional.
Working with Sandro was a terrific experience. He is easy to get a hold of and was timely, professional and courteous. He listened to me while described the trouble I was having with the outlet under my kitchen sink and the garbage disposal. He was complementary and patient with me. Though he was only here for an hour I felt confident that he knew his craft and would find a solution to my wiring problem. I also felt comfortable having him in my home. He has a very positive and friendly demeanor. I will be hiring him for future projects and highly recommend him. We have already discussed repair work on my pool deck. Thank you Sandro.
Once again Alex was on time, professional and got the job done quickly. Call him if you’re sick of being messed around by plumbers and overcharged. He’s always reliable and courteous too. Love Alex.
I was referred to HHS Plumbing from Dave my neighbor . My water heater was leaking and the price quoted was reasonable for all the new copper and tank. The quality of the plumber's work was excellent. They showed up on time and completed the job in a couple hours. The plumber tested everything and checked his paperwork. Very pleased will use them again.
I have used Jeff for several small jobs at are house. He has done some electrical, changed out some light fixtures, hung some doors, Replaced our range vent over our gas burners. and nunerous small jobs. He was always on time , except once and he let me know what was going on and when He would be here..He is very Honest and I will use Him again.He also does larger jobs.
Great plumbers will call again!!!
My wife and I cannot be any more pleased with Seale Plumbing than we are. I have built several houses and am quite knowledgeable about blumbing and electrical. He did this work for my family when I was on travel. Patrick called and returned calls promptly. He arrived on time and finished when he said he would. His work was excellent and he provided "free" advice that did not benefit him financially - a gentleman and a great service person. He's reasonable, skilled and very fair in price. He's our new plumber.
George and his crew did a nice job with crown moulding, painted the doors and walls. I'm happy with the job. Would definitely use them again. I'm actually waiting for George to give me a quote on another project for my house. I recommend his service.
This expert is one of the top contractors in your area who offer emergency plumbing services. John Pelizon has gained several good reviews from customers.

Rated 2 out of 5Â by wineshopper12 Not at all what I expected
I purchased this because I thought it looked very space saving, modern and different from the standard wine racks. However, once I received I was very disappointed. It was very poorly made and really tacky looking. For the money, I expected much much more. If your looking a high quality accent....this is not it. I returned it at the store the next day.
Rated 1 out of 5Â by photogrl don't waste your money
I first seen this wine rack in a magazine, and thought it looked so cool...I then came across it on Kohls on sale..I was surprised on how light they were (have to be to put on wall and then add wine bottles) but how poorly it was made...the edges looked rubbed off, air bubbles on the front. looked vey cheaply made......don't waste your money

A justice of the supreme court, Sylvester Ngwuta is dead.
The spokesperson of the Supreme court, Ahuraka Isah confirmed the incident to media houses.
Isah said the justice who had been ill for some time died on Sunday morning.
He said Ngwuta’s illness took a turn for the worse on Thursday and was subsequently taken to the intensive care unit.
Speaking further, the supreme court spokesperson said Ngwuta tested negative for COVID-19.
“He has been ill for a while. He was supposed to preside over a matter on Thursday but the illness became severe,” he said.
“He was moved to intensive care unit on Friday. They even conducted COVID-19 test on him but he tested negative.
“We were already preparing for his valedictory service slated for March 30.”
Ngwuta was absent from the bench between 2016 and 2019 while he faced trial for corruption.
In October 2016, his home in Abuja was raided by operatives of the Department of State Services (DSS).
The secret police claimed it found hard currencies believed to be proceeds of corruption in his residence.
He was asked to step aside from his duties to face charges of money laundering brought against him at a federal high court in Abuja.
He also faced charges of false asset declaration at the Code of Conduct Tribunal (CCT). Both cases were dismissed in 2018.
Ngwuta is the third most senior judge on the bench of the apex court.
Discussion about this post

Rockford, Illinois, United States (Winter 2010)
Her name was Krystal; she was four years old, and she was tiny—her head barely reaching the top of my knees. She was in the hospital, again, for another surgical procedure. She had undergone twenty-one surgeries since she was born, most related to her defective bowel development, and all the surgeries had occurred at this Chicago hospital, even though it was a long trek from her home in west Texas. I was a student nurse on my pediatrics rotation, and she was the patient that most amazed me. She was so used to the hospital setting—unlike me, who was still struggling to understand what I was doing there, fumbling to appear poised and confident. My faculty instructor, Ruth, had assigned me to Krystal and a five-week-old infant boy, and it would be the first day I would handle two patients at the same time. Ruth assured me that I would be fine; her manner was poised, confident and serene, with the natural instincts for nursing that she had honed over her extensive thirty years of experience. I appreciated Ruth’s calmness and assurance, fed off them and used them as crutches, until I could develop such attributes as my own. So, armed with buoyant confidence and a wavering degree of bravado, I collected and assembled Krystal’s eighteen medications for her seven o’clock administration and knocked once again on her door.Krystal didn’t like the injections, but the oral medications could be administered through her G-tube, and Krystal made a game out of it. She wanted to administer her own meds through the tube, and her mother, who was consistently at her bedside, assured me she was an old pro at this. As I opened her port and handed her the different medications, Krystal squirted each one in, delighted that I was so enamored with her skill and deftness of technique. After she had gotten her injections, I told Krystal she was a very brave girl, that I noticed she had barely cried, and told her how impressed I was that she could give her own medications with speed and grace. Krystal smiled and said I could be her friend forever. I told her I would be honored, and even though I never had a four-year-old friend before, I was sure she would teach me how. She smiled shyly at this and seemed secretly amused. She told me she wanted to be a nurse when she grew up, just like me. Later, I wondered aloud to my instructor, Ruth, how long someone in Krystal’s condition could thrive, and would she ever have a chance to grow up into adulthood? Ruth said knowingly, and with a certain amount of sadness, that even a bad cold could kill her and reaching adulthood in her case wasn’t very likely. That made my time with Krystal all the more poignant and bittersweet, knowing that she was one of those fragile ones we may only have for a little while before they are completely ravaged by their disease and are gone.We spent most of the morning playing with her dolls and coloring. Krystal was mad that I had to leave her to attend to my other patient, the five-week-old baby. She threw her dolls on the floor and demanded I come right back. I was surprised and slightly amused at her temper; it showed she still had spirit and that her disease had not fully conquered her. She was her own little person; she demonstrated robustly that she knew what she wanted and wasn’t afraid to show it. Good for her, I thought. Later, when I was able to come back, I took her to the playroom and drew picture after picture of any animal she wanted: tigers, monkeys, hippopotamuses, elephants, giraffes. Horses were her favorite. I drew her as an exotic princess riding a unicorn, ribbons trailing behind her in the wind. She colored each of those pictures delicately and neatly, staying within the lines as best she could, treating them like treasures.We had a fun day coloring and making up stories about the pictures I had drawn and that she had colored, creating our own small and magical universe within the confines of those hospital playroom walls. She taught me a lot. I remembered what it was like to be young, hopeful, and yet afraid. Though Krystal was encumbered by the restrictions of her disease, through those hours that I was with her, she taught me about the beauty inherent in the freshness of the present and the grace each minute brings. Those of us who are healthy and robust sometimes forget, busied with the many responsibilities of our own lives, that each act can be a gift; each breath, a song celebrating our existence; each person, a treasure to behold. And though some of us may be granted more time, and others less, in this life, each moment is to be savored for the succulent fruit that it is–to be tasted and relished and devoured hungrily, with its sweet juices caressingly cascading down our chins.
LAURA MONAHAN, prior to becoming a nurse, worked as a construction welder (welding oil tanks and pressure vessels) and a power plant operator at an electrical utility, while attending college, where she graduated with highest honors. She attained an MBA from Northwestern’s Kellogg Graduate school of management, graduating in the top quarter, while working various management positions, the last one negotiating long term power contracts between utilities in the United States and Canada. She then quit working to raise her second child. During that time, she started a mural business, and built her own house. Now she is a graduate student at University of Illinois in Chicago, College of Nursing pursuing another dream and having lots of fun.

Younis Khan, the Pakistan captain, has welcomed the return of allrounder Abdul Razzaq to the Pakistan side after a two-year exile caused by his decision to opt for the Indian Cricket League. Razzaq was fast-tracked into the national Twenty20 squad in England shortly after quitting the ICL, but his participation in the opening Super Eights match against Sri Lanka at Lord's today is highly unlikely as he arrives just hours before the game.
"This game is not possible but I think he will manage the last two games," Younis said on the eve of the game. "He is a good name in world cricket and in Twenty20 he is a fantastic allrounder.
"He is a senior guy and his return will be good for Pakistan cricket. He would be in any team in the world."
Razzaq was one of several former ICL players granted amnesty by the Pakistan Cricket Board a few weeks ago shortly after the Indian board took the initiative to allow players to return from the unofficial league. Razzaq was named in the original list of 30 probables the PCB had sent to the ICC in early April - before the BCCI announced the amnesty - but the board made a U-turn and scratched his name off because the ICC objected to his ICL status. However, when Razzaq confirmed that he had snapped ties with the ICL, the PCB named him as an emergency replacement for the injured seamer Yasir Arafat.
Razzaq is likely to play the next Super Eights match against New Zealand at The Oval on Saturday.
Younis also took the opportunity to clarify some unusual comments he had earlier made on Twenty20 cricket, comparing it to "WWF" and saying that it was better to take it easy and have fun in this format. He defended his comments and urged everyone not to take them too seriously.
"I am a simple guy. Sometimes people think I am wrong because when we lose I am still laughing," Younis said. "You must look forward, if you lose or win. This is life. Sometimes you have good days, sometimes you have bad days."

Saturday, June 27, 2009
Wednesday, June 24, 2009
Tuesday, June 9, 2009
They sang a good mix of stuff- slow and fast, old and new. It was really fun and although I had to dodge a crazy dancer during most of the show, it couldn't have been a better night.
We got home around 1am, which made for a really early morning on Sunday. We went to church and I took treats to my primary class to celebrate my birthday. They were fairly well behaved and we memorized a whole scripture...not too bad!
We had dinner at my parents' home....meatballs, mashed potatoes & gravy, and creamed corn- my absolute favorite dinner! Nick and I were exhausted so we headed home to take a nap before we continued the celebration.
My parents came over later in the evening and we had my birthday cake (a pistachio Next Best Thing To Robert Redford for any of you who know what that is!) and opened presents. Nick had let me open one present earlier in the day...it was a grapefruit. So I was very excited to find that one of my real presents that evening was some grapefruit spoons! How easy they are to eat now! I got lots of things that I have been wanting for awhile and a few surprises too. It was a great birthday and I am excited to have another one next year!
Wednesday, June 3, 2009
Today, June 3rd, is National Running Day! So grab a buddy, stroller, ipod, or just your thoughts and head out for a jog if you haven't already today! I went my normal 5 miles this morning with my mom. I am getting spoiled having someone always willing to run with me! It was really humid today, but not nearly as hot as it has been because the sun was hiding behind the clouds and there is a promise of rain later today. We can hope!
Speaking of exercise, I will begin teaching Core Rhythms this Saturday morning! Core Rhythms is an aerobics latin dance class aimed at giving you a 360* core workout without having to lay down and do a single crunch. It is fun to do, however I am a little nervous about having to teach it! Wish me luck!
If you would have told me 3 years ago that I would be an "aerobics instructor" I would have gotten a good workout from rolling on the floor laughing! I spent most of my growing-up years avoiding sports and outdoor activities; "swimming" consisted only of reading a magazine in my swimming suit. And the only exercise I got on Saturday mornings was walking downstairs to collect the donut holes my mom would bring me after her morning run!
Well, the Christensen family had had enough of diets and baby weight and the like and decided to hold a health challenge to encourage all of us to be a little better. We began in January of 2007 and agreed to do it all year long. Each month had a different focus and different rules; we all tracked our progress on spreadsheets which we had to send in weekly to be scored. We got points for things like eating fruits and veggies, drinking water, and doing various forms of exercise. We lost points if we ate out too often, had too much soda, or had too many snacks during the day.
I did not know that I was so competitive, but I guess the "Christensen Family Challenge" brought it out in me. That, or I was just finally determined to do something with the body I was constantly uncomfortable with. Either way, I began running in January of 2007. I would walk to the indoor track at BYU and see if I could make a lap without walking (5 laps was a mile). My roommate Katie started to come with me and we worked up to a whole mile without walking...we thought then that we were pretty much the most fit people ever. And although her interest varied over the next few months, I kept at it. I went in the mornings before class or at night after a long day at campus- usually traveling over snow and ice to do it. But it slowly got easier and soon it was summer. I went home to Texas and ran with my mom- something I had never done before in my life!
Now since then my fitness routine has varied- I have taken breaks, hiked, biked, and gone to the gym- and now I am in a good routine of running a few days a week with my mom, going to the gym a few days alone, and doing a lot of dancing at the studio. So when the studio wanted to start up this Core Rhythms class, it seemed natural to them that I would be the one to head it up...which is so funny to me! While I enjoy it (or the results at least), I have never considered myself a pro in the fitness area. I agreed to get certified and give it my all, but I am still nervous as this is such a different thing than anything I ever would have imagined myself doing. I just hope that since I am changing my habits now, while I am young, that eventually exercise will be something that I see as a natural part of my life!

BYRON CENTER, Mich. — Byron Center linebacker Austin Roon was finally able to make his college decision official during Wednesday's early signing period, inking with Syracuse.
"I was really just looking for a program where the coaches really care about me and wanted me to grow as more than just a player but as a man," Roon said, "I feel like those coaches really care about me."
The six-foot-four, 220-pound Roon began receiving offers his junior year before Arizona State, Syracuse, Buffalo, Ohio and others came calling this past spring.
"It's a little bit relieving, the whole process was a little stressful, it's a little worrisome trying to figure out where you want to go but once you figure it out, you're excited and ready to move on to the next chapter," he added.
Roon becomes the second player from Byron Center to play in a Power Five conference in recent years, joining Marcus Cisco who is a walk-on defensive back at Northwestern.
"I can't wait to be BC strong and hopefully put on for this city."

Last night as I was lost in internet land I came across a few crafty blogs that I fell in love with. I adore fresh, brightly colored, funky fabric projects and desperately wish I was a better seamstress. The few projects I have made always turn out crooked and with uneven seams. I don't know if that has anything to do with my lower than the lowest end sewing machine (which was a gift from my mama and I am VERY appreciative for) or if it has something to do with user error. I'm pretty sure it's the latter. Regardless, I don't have a lot of time for sewing projects anyway. But I was certainly inspired after seeing LifeinGrace's new craft room! Oh how I wish I had space for one of my own - maybe I would be a little more crafty if I didn't have to lug the sewing machine out to the kitchen table and put it away every time I wanted to make something!